===== Internet Archive OCR: cu31924079584821_djvu.txt =====


Cornell University 
Library 



The original of tliis bool< is in 
tine Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924079584821 



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE OF INDIA 

The Hindu Religious Year 

M. M. UNDERHILL, B.Litt. 



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE OF INDIA 



EDITED BY ^^= .r- 

J. N. FARQUHAR, M.A., D.Litt., S^H°° 

LITERARY SECRBIARY, NATIONAL COUNCIL, YODNG MEN'i 2^^='^ 
CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATIONS, INDIA, BURMA AND CEYLON; <(y 



11^ 



NICOL MACNICOL, M.A., D.Litt. i^B° 



iC\J 
:0) 



ALREADY PUBLISHED \ ^m^ 

THE VILLAGE GODS OF SOUTH INDIA. By the Bishop" 

OF Madras. 

THE AHMADlYA MOVEMENT. By H. A. Walter, M.A. \^ 

THE CHAMARS. By G. W. Briggs, M.Sc, Cawnpore. 

VOLUMES UNDER PREPARATION 

THE VAISHlilAVISM OF PA^DHARPUR. By Nicol Mac- 
NicoL, M.A., D.Litt., Poona. 

THE CHAITANYAS. By M. T. Kennedy, M.A., Calcutta. 

THE gRl-VAISHlJIAVAS. By E. C. Worman, M.A., Madras. 

THE RAMANANDIS. By C. T. Groves, M.A., Fyzabad. 

KABlR AND HIS FOLLOWERS. By F. E. Keay, M.A., 
Jubbulpore. 

THE DAdOPANTHIS. By W. G. Orr, M.A., B.D., Jaipur. 

THE ViRA SaIVAS. By W. E. Tomlinson, Mangalore, 
and W. Perston, Tumkur. 

THE TAMIL ^AIVA SIDDHANTA. By Gordon Matthews, 
M.A., B.D., Madras, and J. S. MasilXmani, B.D., Pasumalai. 



THE BRAHMA MOVEMENT. By ManilAl C. Parekh, B.A., 
Rajkot, Kathiawar. 

THE RAMAKRISH^A MOVEMENT. By J. N. C. Ganguly, 
B.A., Calcutta. 

THE KHOJAS. By W. M. Hume, B.A., Lahore. 

THE MAlAS and MADIGAS. By the Bishop of Dorwakai,, 
P. B. Emmet, B.A., Kurnool, and S. Nicholson, Cuddapah. 

THE DHEDS. By Mrs. Sinclair Stevenson, M.A., D.Sc., 
Rajkot, Kathiawar. 

THE MAHARS. By A. Robertson, M.A., Poena. 

THE BHILS. By D. Lewis, Jhalod, Panch Mahals. 

THE BHANGIS. By H. D. Griswold, M.A., Ph.D., Saharanpur. 

THE CRIMINAL TRIBES. By O. H. B. Starte, I.C.S., 
Bijapur. 



EDITORIAL PREFACE 

The purpose of this series of small volumes on the 
leading forms which religious life has taken in India is 
to produce really reliable information for the use of all 
who are seeking the welfare of India. Editor and 
writers alike desire to work in the spirit of the best 
modern science, looking only for the truth. But, while 
doing so and seeking to bring to the interpretation of 
the systems under review such imagination and sym- 
pathy as characterize the best stady in the domain of 
religion to-day, they believe they are able to shed on 
their work fresh light drawn from the close religious 
intercourse which they have each had with the people 
who live by the faith herein described ; and their study 
of the relevant literature has in svery instance been 
largely supplemented by persistent questioning of those 
likely to be able to give information. In each case the 
religion described is brought into relation with Chris- 
tianity. It is believed that all readers in India at least 
will recognize the value of this practical method of 
bringing out the salient features, of Indian religious 
life. 



PRINTED AT 

THE WESLEYAN MISSION PRESS, 

MYSORE. 



THE RELIGIOUS LIFE OF INDIA 
THE 

Hindu Religious Year 

BY 

M. M. UNDERHILL, B.Litt.. 

naSik 



ASSOCIATION PRESS 

(Y.M.C.A.) 
S, RUSSELL STREET, CALCUTTA 

HUMPHREY MILFORD 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

LONDON. NEW YORK, TORONTO. MELBOURNE, BOMBAY, 

MADRAS AND CALCUTTA 

1921 



DEDICATED 

TO 

A. S. H. 



PREFACE 

A FEW years ago I published a small book under the 
name of The Hindu Year: a Primer on the Hindu Calendar 
of Maharashtra, It consisted of the Calendar which 
forms Chapter VII of the present book, with very short 
comments in the form of footnotes. 

It was pointed out by several readers at the time 
that there was room for a much fuller book on the same 
subject, which, while dealing in detail with customs in 
Maharashtra, should describe the festivals common to 
the whole of Hindu India, and so prove useful to a much 
wider circle. An attempt to do this has been made in 
the present book. 

A mere list of feasts is unsatisfactory. Some attempt 
to trace customs back to their sources is necessary. 
The study of Anthropology in India still leaves large 
fields untouched, and much yet remains to be done. 
But in Chapters III to VI, the existing feasts have 
been related in each case to what I believe to be their 
origins, whether Sun worship with resultant Seasonal 
feasts. Moon worship with resultant Monthly feasts. 
Planet worship, the worship of Siva and Vishnu, or the 
worship of Animistic deities. 

Chapter I deals with the Hindu method of reckoning 
time, Chapter II with Auspicious and Inauspicious 
seasons, while Chapter VIII applies only to Maharashtra, 
being a list, with notes, of the principal Religious Fairs 
of the country. 



8 PREFACE 

It would be interesting and useful if similar lists of 
local fairs, descriptions of local variations in the obser- 
vance of the main Hindu festivals, and an account of 
purely local feasts could be drawn up for each province 
in India, and it is hoped that there may be forthcoming 
those able and willing to undertake these tasks. 

Apart from such local details, the festivals, as 
described in the present book, are, I believe, common 
to the whole of Hindu India. 
March, 1921. 

Nasik, India. M. M. Undeehill. 



CONTENTS 

Chap. Page 

Preface . . . . . . . . . . 7 

I. On Eras and other Divisions of Time 

Kalpa-Pralaya — Yuga — Eras — Luni-Solar Year 
— Intercalary and Deleted Months — Formation 
of the Month — Lunar Days — Solar Days — Inter- 
calary and Deleted Days — Eclipses — Cycle of 
Jupiter .. .. .. ..13 

II. On Auspicious and Inauspicious Seasons 

Uttarayana and Dakshinayana — Light and 
Dark Halves of the Month — VaiSakha — Sam- 
kranti Days — Intercalary Month. Days of the 
Week — Rainy Season. Other Occasions, e.g. 
Movements of Jupiter — Ardhodaya — Kapila 
Shashthi — Somavati — Eclipses — Akshayya 3rd — 
Various Tithi . . . . . . . . 30 

III. On Solar and Seasonal Festivals 

Sun Worship. Solar Festivals, i.e. Samkranti 
Days — New Year's Day — Itu Puja — Sundays in 
Sravana, in ASvina — Days in Rainy Season. 
Seasonal Festivals, i.e. Holi — Madana 13th — 
Narali Purnima — GaneSa 4th — Gauri Piiia— 
Dasara — Kojagari PiJrnima — Dipavali — Yugadi 
— Chandana Yatra . . ' . . . . . . 38 

IV. On Lunar and Planetary Festivals 

Moon Worship — Amavasya and ^iirnima — 
Parvan Days — Vinayaki 4th and Sa&kashta 4th 
— Somavati — Light Half 2nd — Mondays. ' Star 
and Planet Worship — Mercury — Jupiter — Venus 
—Saturn— Rishi Sth . . . . . . 66 

V. On Vishnu and Siva Festivals 

Vishnu Worship — 10 Avatara Anniversaries — 24 
EkadaSI Days. Siva Worship— 24: Sivaratri— 
MahaSivaratri— Mondays— 4th and Sth Tithi— 



10 CONTENTS 

Skanda — Tripuri Pijrnima — Maunya vrata— 
Ghanta Karna Piija— Kala Bhairava. Vishnu 
and Siva WorsMfi—V aikantha. 14th— Harihara 
Yatra— Dattatreya Purnima . . . . . . 75 

VI. On Festivals arising from Animistic Sources 
■ Goddess and Tutelary Deity Worship — Gaun 
3rd — Dagahara — Varuni — Brahmaputrasnana — - 
Sita 9th— Shashthi Devi— ASoka 6th— Aranya 
6th— Shashthi— khas 6th— Sitala Devi— Female 
Energy Worship — Rambha 3rd — Radha _8th — 
Annapurna 8th — Kali Piija — Jagaddhatrl — 
Ambuvachi— Lakshmi — Durga— Haritalika and 
Uma 4th — Bhavanyutpatti — Varada 4th — 
Pithori — Khandoba — ViSvakarma Puja — Vyasa 
PGja. 

Spirit Worship — Sraddha — Mahalaya — Chautha 
Bharani — Avidhava 9th — Ghata 14th — Sarva- 
pitri piirnima — Matamaha — Ashtaka — Bhishma 
8th— Bhflta 14th. 

Animal Worship — Cows and Oxen — Govatsa 12th 
— Gopa 8th — Bahula — Vasu Barasa — Gopada 
— Pola— Bendfira — Pongal. Monkeys — Hanu- 
man . Snakes — Naga People — Legendary Snakes 
— Ananta 14th— Naga 5th— ManasaSth— Arand- 
hanam. 

Worship of Plants and Inanimate Things — 
Trees — Cocoanuts — Grasses — Vat Piirnima — 
ASoka 8th — Tulasi Wedding — Salagrama — 
Knotted Threads— Sravana Purnima — Pavitra- 
ropana — Rakshabandhana . . . . . . 99 

VII. Chart of Foregoing Monthly Festivals 136 

VIII. Principal Religious Fairs of Maharashtra 
Religious Pairs and Pilgrimages — Alphabetical 
List of Fairs— Details of Fairs— Dates by Months 160 

Index . . . . . . . . . . 180 



ABBREVIATIONS USED IN QUOTING 
AUTHORITIES 

Sacred Books of the East .. . . . . S.B.E. 

„ „ ,, ,, Hindus .. .. S.B.H. 

Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics . . .. E.R.E. 

Encyclopcedia of Indo-Aryan Research .. .. E.I.A.R. 

The Indian Antiquary .. .. .. .. l.A. 

The Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society . . J.R.A.S. 

Feasts and Holidays of Hindus and Mohammedans 

(Imperial Record Depart, of Calcutta) . . .. F. & H. 

Aryotsava Prakdia, by G. R. Sharma . . . . Sharma 

Mardthi -English Dictionary, by MoleswoTth .. Molesworth 

The Hindu Year, by M. M. Underbill . . . . Hindu Year 

Hindu Holidays and Ceremonials, by B. A. Gupte. . Gupte 

Popular Religion and Folk-Lore of North India, by 

W. Crooke . . . . . . . . . . Crooke 

The History and Chronology of the Myth-making 

^^ff, by J.F.Hewitt.. .. .. .. Hewitt 

yaishnavism, Saivism and Minor Religious 

Systems, by Sir R. G. Bhandarkar . . . . Bhandarkar 

"The Lunar Year," by Sir W. Jones, in Asiatic 

Researches, III . . . . . . . . Lunar Year 

The Religions of India, by A. Bartli (trans. J. 

Wood) .. .. .. .. .. Barth 

The Imperial Gazetteer . . . . . . . . Imp. Gaz. 

The Bombay Gazetteer . . , . . , Bom. Gaz. 



CHAPTER I 

ON ERAS, AND OTHER DIVISIONS OF TIME 

In order to understand the system of appointing 
feasts, fasts, and other religious ceremonies, for certain 
days, it is necessary to get a grasp of the Hindu 
method of reckoning time. Various measures of time 
are used, e.g. Age, Era, Solar and Lunar Year, Solar 
and Lunar Month, Solar and Lunar Day, and Divisions 
of a Day. 

Again, one must understand the rules for adjusting 
solar and lunar time. 

Therefore these matters are first dealt with. 

Kalpa and Pralaya. Hindus conceive the lapse of 
infinite time as broken into vast recurrent periods, known 
as Kalpa and Pralaya, i.e. Existence and Dissolution. 
During a Kalpa the world and all its inhabitants exist, 
while during a Pralaya the world and all beings are in a 
state of invisible and unconscious dissolution. 

When the world is reproduced, at the beginning of a 
Kalpa, all beings and things are at their very best, but 
during the course of the Kalpa they gradually worsen 
and decay, until at the close nothing is possible but the 
Wank dissolution of , Pralaya. This steady process of 
degradation is then vividly represented by the division 
of the period into four ages, each succeeding age mark- 
ing a great fall in virtue, capacity and happiness, as 
compared with the preceding age. These four ages, 
yugas, are named from dice, the first being the four, 
the second the three, the third the two, the last 
the ace ; and the time each lasts is in proportion to 



14 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

these figures. The unit is taken as being 1,200 divine 
years. The relation of divine to human time is repre- 
sented in this table : 

1 solar year = 1 day and nightof the gods. 

30 days of the gods = 1 month of the gods = 30 solar years. 
12 months of the gods =; 1 year of the gods = 360 solar years. 

Thus the original scheme of the Kalpa seems to 
have been : 

The Ages Years of the Gods Solar Years 

1. The Krita yuga i.e. the 4 = 4,800 = 1,728,000 

2. The Treta yuga i.e. the 3 :^ 3,600 = 1,296,000 

3. The Dvapara yuga i.e. the 2 = 2,400 = 864,000 

4. The Kali yuga i.e. the ace = 1,200 = 432,000 

Each yuga is said to begin when the Sun, the Moon, 
Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn are all at the 
initial point of the ecliptic. 

Later, the scheme was further elaborated. The 
four ages taken together were called a Mahayuga or 
Great Age ; and a Kalpa was held to cover a thousand 
Mahayugas ; so that the length of a Kalpa came to be 
4,320,000,000 solar years. 

We are said to be living at present in the Kali yuga, 
hastening downwards in degradation to utter dissolution. 
The age is believed to have run some 5,020 of the- 
432,000 years of its total course. 

Eras, There are several eras reckoned among 
Hindus at the present day, but the great majority 
follow one of two,^ either the §aka or the Samvat (or 
Samvatsara) . 

The Samvat^ is popularly believed to have been 
established by one,' Vikramaditya, King of Ujjain, to 
commemorate his victory over the Saka kings in the 
year 3044 of the Kali yuga (57 B.C.). Hence the 
.current year (A.D. 1921) is, according to Samvat 
reckoning, 1977. Professor Kielhorn,^ however, states 

» Institutes of Vishnu, S.B.E., VII, p. 77, etc. 

> Book of Indian Eras, p. 47 ff. So also Molesworth, fmH. 

» /.^., XX, p. 399. 



Eras, and other divisions op time is 

that the era was known until at least the eighth century 
A.D. as " the Malaya time, or era," and that no mention 
of any king Vikramaditya is met with earlier than 
A.D. 842, the 898th year of the era, and that, 
consequently, it cannot either have been established 
by, or invented to commemorate the memory of, any 
such king. 

His theory is that, as the Vikrama-samvat year 
began in the autumn, at the time when kings renewed 
their campaigns, it became known as the " Vikrama 
kala," i.e. "the time of prowess," and was described 
as such by poets. Later on, the true origin having been 
forgotten, people invented a mythical king, Vikrama- 
ditya, to account for the name of the era. 

Dr. Fleet^ says the era started in 58 B.C., in the 
reign of the Kushan king, Kanishka, was established as 
an era by his successor, and accepted by the Malava 
people ; but Dr. Vincent Smith^ says that King Kani- 
shka, from numismatic evidence, almost certainly may 
be placed from A.D. 120 to 125, and cannot there- 
fore have been the founder of the Vikrama era. 

On the other hand, Mr. K. P. Jayaswal,' writing as 
lately as April, 1918, insists on the historicity of 
Vikrama, who took captive, and ended the rule of, 
Nahapana, the Saka king of popular tradition, which 
the New Jaina datum places at 58 B.C. The question, 
therefore, of the origin of the Vikrama-samvat era 
cannot be said to be solved. 

The ^aka era, again, is said to date from a king 
Salivahana,* ruler of the Saka people, and founded in 
A.D. 78. Hence the current year (A.D. 1921) is Saka 
1843. But there were more than one king of this name 
and possibly the era was not founded by any one of 
them. Dr. Fleet^ merely says that the Saka era was 
founded in A.D. 78, by a king of Kathiavar and Ujjain, 
and Dr. Vincent Smith® describes the Saka people as a 



' Imp. Gas., II, p. S. " Early Hist, of India, p. 225. 

' I.A., XL VII, p. 112. * Book of Indian Eras, p. 47. 

• Imp. Gaz., II, p. 14. " Imp. Gaz., II, p. 288. 



16 THE 4IINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

tribe who immigrated into Seistan and North India, 
where they founded a dynasty between 100 B.C. and 
A.D. 50. 

The common Hindu Paiichanga, or calendar, follows 
the Saka reckoning, but the use of the different eras to 
compute the date of any given year is not so confusing 
as might be supposed. The names, order, etc., of 
months and days occurring within the year are not 
affected, and it is a simple matter to affix the name of 
the era followed before any quoted date. For example, 
April 9, 1921, might be quoted either as "Saka 1843 
Chaitra Suklapaksha Pratipada," or as " Sam vat 1977 
Chaitra," etc. 

The Luni-Solar Year, or Samvatsara. From early 
years the Aryans appear to have reckoned time by both 
sun and moon. In the Institutes of Vish^iu^ and in 
Manu's Code^ are found references to both sun and moon 
as determining days and hours for the observance of 
fasts and other religious rites. And it appears that 
two modes of computing the space of a year were 
recognised, one being measured by the time taken by 
the sun to pass through the twelve signs of the zodiac, 
the other being the somewhat shorter year, consisting 
of twelve lunar months (about 354 days). 

The two systems were united into one, the present 
luni-solar or Samvatsara year, about 1181° B.C. The 
first day of the solar year is the day of the entry of 
the sun into the zodiacal sign Mesha (Aries) at the 
Vernal equinox, and the actual beginning of the 
civil and religious year is, in general, dated from 
the new moon immediately preceding that day. The 
old Vikrama-samvat year began with the autumn 
equinox. 

The year consists of twelve lunar months, with an 
intercalary month inserted about every two and a half 
years (for which see below), so that, although no one 
year coincides as to the number of days with a year of 

» S.B.E., YU, pp. 77, 240, etc. ' S.B.E., I, p. 64. 
' Chronology Tables, V, Taflankar and Sarasvati. 



ERAS, AND OTHER DIVISIONS OF TIME 17 

the Christian era, the variation and periodical correction 
cause a close approximation to it. 

The ecliptic is divided into twelve solar mansions, or 
_R^i i, identical with the signs of the zodiac known to 
theWest; and_al go into twenty- sevfii ijmigr mansions, 
or astpjisms..lmown3g, Nai^^ftatra. Benllev'^ sa^'tKe^ 
formation of these lunar mansions was the most ancient 
of Hindu astronomical calculations. The nakshatra 
are not all egual in size, some consist of only one or two 
stars. Chitra the fourteenth consists of one star only, 
i.e. Spica. Each rasi contains two or three nakshatra. 
There is also a short interposed interval, known as 
Abhijit,^ between the twenty-first and twenty-second 
nakshatra, for the moon's duration in each nakshatra is 
slightly in excess of one day. Abhijit gathers up the 
month's daily excess. Some old authorities give twenty- 
seven nakshatra, some twenty-eight. 

The sun completes its (apparent) -journey through 
the heavens in one year, passing through one rasi and 
about two and a quarter nakshatra each month. The 
moon's (apparent) journey through the heavens is much 
quicker, the whole being completed in a single month. 
It follows that the moon travels through just more 
than one nakshatra every solar day, becoming full in a 
different nakshatra each month, and the present names 
,of the months are formed from the nakshatra in which 
the moon was full in the year of the institution of the 
present luni-solar year. 

Lunar names for the months are in more general use, 
although the solar names (from the zodiacal signs) are 
met with sometimes. The table given below shows 
the relation of solar and lunar months to the nakshatra. 
The year begins with the new moon of Chaitra, which 
immediately precedes the entry of the sun into Mesha, 
and which takes its name from the fourteenth 
nakshatra, Chitra. 

* Historical Viezti of Hindu Astronomy, p. 1. 
" Thibaut, "Astroaomie," E.I.A.R., p. 23. 



18 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



Solar 

1. Mesha (Aries) 

2. Vrishabha (Taurus) 

3. Mithuna (Gemini) 

4. Karka (Cancer) 

5. Simha (Leo) 

6. Kanya (Virgo) 

7. Tula (Libra) 

8. VriSchilca (Scor.) 

9. Dhanu (Sagitt.) 

10. Makara (Capri.) 

11. Kumbha (Aqua.) 

12. Mina (Pisces) 



Lunar 
Chaitra 
Vaigakha 
Jyeshtha 

Ashadha 

Sravana 

Bhadrapada 

ASvina 

Karttika 
MargaSirsha 
Pausha 
Magha 

Phalguna 



Nakskatra 
( 14th Chitra 
(ISth Svati 
S 16th ViSakha 
tl7th Anuradha 
J 18th Jyeshtha 
1 19th Maa ■ 
f20th Purva Ashadha 
\ 21st Uttara Ashadha 
land(Abhijit) (Balance) 
( (Abhijit) 22nd Sravana 
1 23rd Dhanishtha 

24th Satataraka 

2Sth Purvabhadrapada 

26th Uttarabhadrapada 

27th RevatI 

1st A§vini 

2nd Bharant 
f3rd Krittika 

4th Rohini 
iSth MrigaSiras 
(6th Ardra 
(7th Punarvasu 
1 8th Pushya 
\ 9th ASlesha 
\ 10th Magha 

{11th Piirva Phalguni 
12th Uttara Phalguni 
13th Hasta 



Nakshatka and English Equivalent Stars^ 
Nakskatra No. of Stars 

1. Asvini 3 a or P 

2. Bharani 3 

3. Krittika 6 

4. Rohini S 

5. MrigaSiras 3 

6. Ardra 1 

7. Punarvasu 4 

8. Pushya 3 

9. ASlesha 5 
10. Magha 5 



Chief Star 
Arietis 
u, Muscae 

Tauri (Pleiades) 

Tauri (Aldebaran) 

Orionis 

Orionis 

Geminorum 

Cancri 

Cancri or e Hydrae 

Leonis (Regulus) 



• Colebrooke, Miscell. Essays, II, p. 321 ff.; and Brahma 
Gupte. 



ERAS, AND OTHER DIVISIONS OF TIME 



19 



Nakshatra ho. 


. oi Stars 


Chief Star 


11. Purva PhalgunJ 


2 


8 


Leonis 


12, Uttara 


2 


|8 Leonis (Denebola) 


13. Hasta 


5 


y or S 


Corvi 


14. Chitra 


1 


a 


Virginis (Spica) 


IS. Svati 


1 


a 


Bootis (Arcturus) 


16. ViSakha 


4 < 


.i, X or I 


Librae 


17. Anuradha 


4 


8 


Scoripionis 


18. Jyeshtha 


3 


a 


Scorpionis (Antares) 


19. Mula ' 


11 A,yori) 


Scorpionis 


20. Purva Ashadha 


2 


8 


Sagittarii 


21. Uttara 


2 


(7 or T 


Sagittarii 


22. (Abhljit) 


3 


a 


Lyrae 


23. Sravana 


3 


a 


Aquilae (Altair) 


24. Dhanishtha 


4 


a 


Delphini 


25. Satabhisha 


100 


A 


Aquari 


26. PHrva Bhadrapada 


2 


a 


Pegasi 


27. Uttara 


2 


o or V 


Andromedae 


28. Revati 


32 


^ 


Pisciuin 



Intercalary and Deleted Months. The nakshatra are 
not all of the same extent, and the motion of the moon 
varies. Also the time taken by the sun in passing 
throug|i a zodiacal sign varies. It, therefore, sometimes 
happens that two new moons occur, or that no new 
moon occurs, within a solar month. The latter event 
is much more rare than the former, occurring only once 
or twice in a century, while the former occurs about 
once every two and a half years. 

The entry of the sun into a zodiacal sign is called a 
Samkranti. If a new moon occurs immediately after 
a saiiikranti, a second new moon may occur immediately 
before the following samkranti. And since each solar 
month takes the name of the immediately preceding 
lunar month, a difficulty of nomenclature arises, for 
two new moons have occurred since the last samkranti. 
In such a case, the former of the two months under 
consideration is called an Adhika (extra) month, the 
latter taking the customary name. 



20 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



The following diagram^ illustrates what occurred in 
the Samvatsara 1973 (beginning March 24th, 1917). 



(Adhikn I 
Bhidrapnda J- Bliidreipada Wvlni 




Q - 6un 

9 « N«v M09n 



ADHIKA MASA 

The adhika month is sometimes called Malamasa 
(unclean month), and is considered unpropitious. For 
all religious purposes it is considered a mensis non. 
The only cases in which a malamasa is recognised as 
having a status of its own are : (1) When it occurs as 
Adhika Chaitra. The year then begins with the new 
moon of Adhika Chaitra, not with that of Chaitra proper. 

(2) Whenit occurs as Adhika" Jyeshtha the Dasahara 
must be kept in Adhika, not in ordinary Jyeshtha. 

(3) The Kokila worship (Chap. VI, p. 117) is only 
performed in an Adhika Asha^ha month. 

(2) Alex. Cunningham^ records that he has only 
met with one inscription in an intercalary month. 
Inscriptions relating to grants of land, etc., would bear 
the date of the day the grant was made, usually on a 
festival. The absence of such malamasa dates points 
to the fact that festivals do not occur in such a month. 

At rare intervals, the sun being in perigee, and a 
lunar month being at its longest, it may happen that a 
new moon immediately precedes a sainkranti, and that 
the following samkranti occurs before the moon is 



* Hindu Year, p. 4. " Shanna, p. 63. 

° Book of Indian Eras, p. 5. 



ERAS, AND OTHER DIVISIONS OP TIME 



21 



again new. In such a case the name of the first of the 
two lunar months* is deleted, and it is called a Nija or 
(more commonly) a Kshaya month.- It has been aptly 
said: "The lunar months are doors to the. Indian 
calendar, but the solar months are hinges on which the 
doors move. In the year 1 B.C. there is no new 
moon between the two saihkranti at 246"3192d. and 
275'636d. {i.e. between Makara saiiikranti and Kumbha 
samkranti) and therefore the lun^r month which has 
no hinge to turn on is shut ; this fact is expressed by 



f Pau«lm 



Al 




KSHAYA MAS A 



Q» Bun 



saying that Pausha lunar month is Kshaya, or sup- 
pressed! '"' 

The diagram on this page illustrates the above. 

When a Kshayamasa occurs, the actual number of 
lunar months in the year is always completed to twelve 
or thirteen, as one, or two, intercalary months will 
occur in the same year. 

The last Kshayamasa was in §aka 1744 (A.D. 1822), 
it will next occur in gaka 1885 (A.D. 1963).^ 

Formation, of the Month. From the earliest times 
the month has been regarded as consisting of two parts 



• So Pillai and also Joshi's Hundred Year PancMiiga. 
' Pillai, Indian Chronology, p. 8. 
' Bom. Gaz., XVIII, p. 241. 



22 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

or Paksha, called the Suklapaksha (light half), and 
Krishnapaksha (dark half). The word paksha means 
a wing, and calls up a mental picture of the new, or full, 
moon as the body of a bird, with the waxing and waning 
periods outspread on either side, as wings. In some 
parts of India the month begins with the light half, on 
the day following the new moon, and ends with the day 
of the following new moon, which closes the dark half. 
This is known as the Amanta system, and is current 
in South India, Bengal and Maharashtra ; this system is 
followed in the present book. In Hindusthan and 
Telingana the Purnimanta system is followed. This 
starts with the dark half, the day after the full moon, 
and ends with the day of the succeeding full moon. 

One curious inconsistency arises from the use of the 
Purriimanta system. The month beginning with the dark 
half, the new moon occurs in the middle of the month. 
So that in the case of the month Chaitra, the first month 
of the year, its first half lies in the preceding year ; for 
the Amanta system is used throughout India in 
reckoning the beginning of the Samvatsara. 

The two systems are illustrated in the following 
diagram, which also shows the modern manner of 
reckoning an intercalary month : 

0=full moon 
Amanta • =3new moon 

Margasirsha Adhlka Pausha Pausha 



Light halfOdark half* Light half O dark half • Light halfO dark half • 



Margasirsha Adhika Pausha Pausha Magha 

Puriiimdnta 

It will be seen from the above that the light halves 
of the months are always known by the same names 
under both Amanta and PSrnimanta systems, but that 
the names of the dark halves differ. 

Ceremonies appointed for a certain day will be held 
on the same day all over India, but the name by which 
the day is designated will differ according to the 
system followed. For example, if Makara Saihkranti 
occurs on the second of the light half of Pausha, it 
would be described in both systems as Pausha sukla- 



ERAS, AND OTHER DIVISIONS OP TIME 23 

paksha dvitiya, but if it occurred on the second of the 
(amanta) dark half of Pausha, it would be described 
by followers of the Piirnimanta system as Magha 
krishna paksha dvitiya. 

The Surya Siddhanta, dealing with Aryan astronomy 
and believed^ to have been known from the fourtlror 
fifth century A.D., followed the Amanta system, but gave 
a curious method of placing the intercalary month, 
embedding it, as it were, in the middle of the normal 
month whose name it shared, as follows : 

Chaitra _ Adhika Vaisakha 

Vaisakha ,- "^ Vaisakha 



Light halfO dark half* Light half O dark half • Light half O dark half « 



Lunar Days, or Tithi. A lunar month consists of 
30 lunar days, or Tithi, subject to intercalation or 
expunging when related to solar days. 

The moon^ has an (apparent) path of 360° round 
the sun, hence one tithi equals 12°, the amount of a tithi 
is therefore a constant, but owing to the eliptical form of 
the moon's orbit it takes a varying time to travel the 
requisite 12°, and the duration of a tithi is therefore a 
variable, the variation amounting to about four and a half 
hours. 

Solar Days, or Divasa. The Hindus recognise nine 
"planets" or Graha, viz. Siirya, Ravi or Aditya 
(Sun), Chandra or Soma (Moon), Mangala or Bhauma 
(Mars), Buddha or Saumya (Mercury), Guru or 
Brihaspati (Jupiter), Sukra (Venus), Sani (Saturn), 
Rahu (ascending node), and Ketu (descending node). 

The week of seven days named from the planets, 
which is in use in Europe, is also used in India. The 
origin of this institution is of considerable importance. 

The seven days' week is a very old institution, being 
found in Israel, Babylonia and Egypt in pre-Christian 
centuries. India may, therefore, have known and used 
it. But the naming of the seven days of the week 

• Sanskrit Literature, A. A. Macdonell, p. 43S ; Imp. Gaz., 
II, p. 265. 

' Indian Calendar, Sewell and Dikshit, p. 3 n. 



24 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

from the planets is not very old ; for it arose in Egypt 
in the second century B.C. from Greek astrology. 

The order of the planets among the Greeks was as 
follows: (1) Saturn, (2) Jupiter, (3) Mars, (4) Sun, 
(5) Venus, (6) Mercury, (7) Moon, being the order of 
their seeming distance above the earth, beginning with 
the highest. When the planets were first ustid astro- 

logically, they 
were applied to 
the hours of the 
day as Lords, 
i^jupiten Saturn being 
Lord of the 
first hour, 
Jupiter of the 
second, and so 
on. 

Mtrcuryif^ <— / — \ - X \ ^Mara WhcU thlS 

system became 
common in 
Egypt, where 
a seven days' 
week was in 
THE LORDS OF THE DAYS usc, someone, 

noticing that 
there werfe seven planets and seven days in the week, 
conceived the idea of making each planet the Lord of 
one day of the week. Necessarily Saturn, the iirst 
planet, became the Lord of the first day of the week. 
But being also Lord of the first hour of the day, he was 
Lord of the eighth, fifteenth and twenty-second hours 
of the day as well. If then we reckon on, we find that 
the twenty-fifth hour, i.e. the first hour of the following 
day, falls under the rule of the Sun, and, therefore, Sun- 
day follows Saturn-day. A similar calculation fixes the 
Lords of the other days, as is shown by the diagram. 
We thus reach a week which runs Saturday, Sunday, 
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday. 

The new planetary week, beginning with Sunday, 
came into use, in the Roman Empire, seemingly in the 




ERAS, AND OTHER DIVISIONS OF TIME 2^ 

second century A.D., and probably as a result of the 
popularity of Sun worship at the time. The order of 
the planetary days remained unchanged. 

Here are the Indian names of the days of the week 
in accordance with the system : 

Sunday (Sun-day) Ravi or Adityavara 

Monday (Moon-day) Chandra or Somavara 

Tuesday (Mars-day) Mangala or Bhaumavara 

Wednesday (Mercury-day) Buddha or Saumyavara 

Thursday (Jupiter-day) Brihaspat or Guruvara 

Friday (Venus-day) Sukravara 

Saturday (Saturn-day) Sanivara 

Fleet argues that the usage did not arise in India 
until about A.D. 400. For this conclusion he relies 
mainly on inscriptions. This view is combated by 
Indians ; and Professor Keith believes these _planetary 
names were known to the Buddhist writer, Aryadeva, 
who cannot be dated later than the third century. It 
seems clear that we can say that no mention in Hindu 
literature is likely to be earlier than the third century, 
but we cannot go further. 

All of these Graha are believed to have a special 
influence on the days named from them, and on the 
lives of men born under them. Sunday, Saturday and 
Tuesday are considered very inauspicious days, Saturn 
being considered the son of the Sun. The remaining 
four days, under the influence of the Moon, Mercury (the 
son of the Moon), Jupiter and Venus, are auspicious. 

A solar day is divided into eight watches, or Prahara, 
of about three hours' duration, and into Ghatika, Pala, 
and Vipala, the relation of which to the Western hours, 
minutes and seconds is given below : 

60 prativipala (not used) = 1 vipala = '4" 
60 vipala =1 pala = 24" 

60 pala' = 1 ghatika = 24' 

60 ghatika = 1 divasa = 24 hours 

= 1 day and night 
fV 

The exact point of time for performing certain 
ceremonies at weddings, etc., lias to be calculated with 

' From Pal^ = a straw, i.e. a very small thing. 



26 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



minute care, or the auspicious moment may be missed. 
The modern Hindu almost universally uses the Western 
system of calculating by hours and minutes, for the 
ordinary purposes of life, and a watch or clock is found 
in most well-to-do houses. But for timing religious 
ceremonies the Hindu system is in general use, the 
equivalent for the clock, or hour-glass, being the metal 
bowl with a hole pierced in it, floating on water. As 
the water enters the bowl, the latter settles down 
lower and lower, until, 'at the exact close of a ghatika, 
the bowl sinks. "Ghatika" was originally the name 
of the bowl. Later it came to be applied to the period 
of time taken for the bowl to fill with water and sink. 

Intercalary and Deleted Tithi. Just as the Hindu 
calendar intercalates or deletes the names of occasional 



O a 



O^ Beginning of Olvasa c 
0. » „ Tlth. " 




(7th J 



em 

A 



o 



KSHAYA TITHI 



lunar months, owing to the impossibility of making 
lunar and solar time correspond, so, and for -the same 
reason, intercalary and deleted tithi are met with. It 
should be borne in mind, however, that it is merely a 
matter of nomenclature. The thirty tithi of each month 
in reality run their full and consecutive course. 

The civil day is a solar one, reckoned from sunrise 
to sunrise, and for ordinary purposes of life it is 
practically impossible to use any but the natural solar 
day. But the tithi is a lunar division of time, and 
occupies from day to day various spaces in the solar 
day or divasa. It may begin at 4.0 p.m., and end during 



ERAS, AND OTHER DIVISIONS OF TIME 27 

the following afternoon. Temple priests or others 
wholly given up to following the observances of their 
religion can and do regulate their lives and actions by 
the tithi, but the ordinary man is obliged to regulate 
his by the solar day. A fairly satisfactory plan has 
been evolved by which the tithi and divasa may be made 
more or less to correspond. It is as follows : 

The tithi beginning before, or at, sunrise, is coupled 
with that divasa, and the tithi beginning after sunrise 
(unless it ends before the next sunrise) is coupled with 
the following divasa. But if a tithi beginning after 
sunrise on one morning ends before sunrise on the 
following morning, it cannot be coupled with any divasa 
and is therefore deleted or Kshaya. 

The diagram on page 26 will explain the foregoing. 
It illustrates the Kshaya 7th of Asha(Jha krishna- 
paksha samvat 1975 (July 19-20, 1919). 

If, on the other hand, a tithi begins immediately 
before one sunrise and ends after the following sunrise, 
the name of the tithi is coupled with both divasa 
involved, so that two tithis of the same designation 
appear. The former of the two is known as Adhika 
or Vriddhi. The diagram on page 28 illustrates the 
Adhika 8th of Bhadrapada suklapaksha samvat 1975 
(Sept. 2-3, 1919J. 

As the tithi is normally a trifle shorter than the 
divasa, kshaya occurs more frequently than vriddhi. 
Kshaya usually occurs about twelve times in a year, and 
vriddhi about seven times. 

It will be seen at once that difiticulties may arise as 
to the day of observance of certain rites prescribed for 
any particular tithi. If a tithi should extend from 
1.0 p.m. on one divasa until 12.45 p.m. the next divasa, 
it becomes a nice point which of the two divasa should 
be given over to festivities. Many and minute rules 
have been drawn up to guide the priests in determining 
what pronouncement to make in such a case. Popular 
opinion has decided roughly that if a tithi begins at any 
time before noon, the current divasa is the festive day, 
if after noon, the following divasa. But it is not 



28 



THE HINDU RELIGIOaS YEAR 



uncommon to find part of the community keeping one 
divasa, and part the foUowitig divasa as a festival day, 
while the more well-to-do, who can afford it, will be 
keeping both. 

It is customary for groups of men and women to 
gather on the day of the new year (Chaitra suklapaksha 
pratipada), to listen to the recitation o£ the new 
Panchanga by an astrologer. 

Legendary Origin of Eclipses.^ When, in the begin- 
ning, gods and demons, having by churning the milky 







VRIDDHI TITHI 



ocean produced immortality-giving Amrita, the gods 
were drinking it, a demon in the guise of a god made 
his way among them and began to drink likewise. 
The sun and moon discovered him and told Vishnu. 
The amrita had not yet descended the demon's throat, 
so that he had not yet become wholly immortal, when 
Vishnu severed his head from his trunk. The head 
became Rahu and the tail Ketu, both of whom 
proceeded to the planetary heavens, and have ever 
since been pursuing the sun and moon to have their 
revenge. 

An eclipse marks the temporary success of Rahu and 
Ketu over their enemies ; they have caught and swallow- 



Adi Parva, of Mahabharata. 



ERAS, AND OTHER DIVISIONS OF TIME 29 

ed them. But they are forced to disgorge again and 
the eternal chase is renewed. 

The Cycle of Jupiter. It was realised in the Vedic 
period that a full solar year could not be made to corres- 
pond with a twelve lunar-month year, nor a thirty solar 
day month with a thirty lunar-day month. The Paita- 
maha Siddhanta gives five years as the yuga or cycle 
of the sun and moon, in which time the sun completes 
five years of 366 days, and the moon sixty-two months 
of thirty tithi, each tithi corresponding to 29if solar 
days ; that is sixty ordinary months and two adhika 
months, arranged as follows : 

Months Adhika month Months Adhika month Months 
30 , 1 , 30 , 1 _ 62 

days •" day ' days ' day days 

88S^A -f 29^8 + 885^1 + 29if = 1830 days 

2i years 2i years := 5 years 

This five-year cycle, combined with the twelve-year 
cycle of Jupiter's progress through the zodiac, makes 
what is known as the sixty-year cycle of Jupiter. 



CHAPTER II 

ON AUSPICIOUS AND INAUSPICIOUS 
SEASONS 

The Auspicious seasons may be enumerated as 
under : 

1. The Uttarayana, or northward progress of the sun, 

from the winter to the summer solstice, i.e. Pausha to 
Ashadha. 

2. The Light half of each month, from new to full moon. 

3. The month of Vaisakha. 

4. The Sarhkranti days. 

5. The Days under the rule of the Moon, Mercury ,Jupiter, and 

Venus, i.e. Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday. 

6. " The three and a half lucky times,' " i.e. Dasara (ASvina 

gukla tenth), Dipavali (Karttika Sukla first), Varsha- 
pratlpada (Chaitra §ukla first), and NagapanchamI 
(Sravana Sukla fifth). 

The Inauspicious seasons, generally speaking, are as 
under : 

1. The Dakshinayana, or southward progress of the sun, 

from the summer to the winter solstice, i.e. Ashadha 
to Pausha. 

2. The Dark Aa// of each month, from the full to the new 

moon. 

3. The Intercalary or Adhika month (See Chap. I, p. 26). 

4. The Days under the rule of the Sun, Mars, and Saturn, 

i.e. Sunday, Tuesday and Saturday. 

5. The Rainy season, i.e. the four months from Ashadha 

gukla tenth to Karttika Sukla tenth. 

I. The Uttarayana and Dakshiriayana. It is the 
natural instinct of all men to welcome that half of the 
year when the sun's warmth and the length of the days 

» Molesworth, tll^cfl'l gf€. TheNagapanchamiis the "half' 
and has only a qualified auspiciousness. 



AUSPICIOUS AND INAUSPICIOUS SEASONS 31 

are increasing ; and to have a certain feeling of de- 
pression during the other half, when light and warmth 
are daily decreasing, and the sun appears to be with- 
drawing himself from the world. To this instinct is 
doubtless attributable the pronouncement that the 
Uttarayana and Dakshinayana were respectively 
auspicious and inauspicious seasons. The lucky period^ 
was known as a "god's day" and the unlucky as a 
" god's night." Again.^thesunwhenmovingnorthwards 
was said to " guard the gods," and when southwards to 
" guard the fathers." The path to the south was taken 
by the spirits of the dead. 

Of course, the difEerence between the sun's position 
at the winter and summer solstices would be much 
more marked in the Aryans' former home of a higher 
latitude than India than in Central and Southern India.- 

In the Bhishma and Anusasana Parvas of the 
Mahabharata is given the well-remembered story of 
the mortal wounding of the sage, Bhishma, during the 
Dakshinayana, and his determination to live until the 
sun turned northwards. He lived, although transfixed 
with arrows, for fifty-eight nights, and died just after the 
Uttarayana had set in. 

2. The Light and Dark Halves of the Month. As 
in the case of the sun, the period of the moon's 
waxing appeals to man's natural instinct as being 
a happier season than that of its waning. After the 
hot Indian day a man likes to sit out in the cool air and 
talk with his friends. Once the full moon day is past, 
the moon rises later and later at night, and very soon, 
as far as the ordinary man is concerned, it is a " moon- 
less night," for the moon does not rise until after he 
has gone to sleep. 

Manu's Code* pronounces the dark half to be a day 
of the Manes (the dead), for work, and the light half 
to be their night for sleep. 

• Institutes of Vishnu, S.B.E., VII, p. 77. 
' Satapatha Brahmana, S.B.E., XII, p. 289. 
» S.B.E.,'XXV, p. 67. 



32 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

Thus the spirits ^are most active, and likely to 
influence men during the dark half, the unlucky time. 
Possibly it was for this reason that the season set 
apart for performing the memorial service for the 
departed is in the dark half of the month Bhadrapada, 
and at every new moon, the darkest day of the 
month. 

The Kaushttaki Upanishad} says that the spirits of 
all who die go first to the moon, and that whereas those 
who die in the light half ' ' delight the moon with their 
spirits," those who die in the dark half are sent on to 
be born again, and the Vishnu Purina^ says that the 
moon " nourishes the gods in the light fortnight ; the 
pitri in the dark fortnight." To this day men are 
apprehensive of dying in the dark half, and feel happier 
as to the state of their deceased relations if they died 
in the light half. 

Very few festivals or religious fairs are held in the 
dark half of the month, the exceptions being almost 
entirely those in honour of Siva, the Terrible, or of one 
of his manifestations. 

3. The whole of the month Vaiiakha is considered 
auspicious, and is specially devoted to Krishna worship. 
The Tulasi and Pippal trees should be watered daily, 
three baths should be taken, stories of Krishna should 
be read and presents given to Brahmans. 

4. _ The Samkranti days (see Chap. Ill) are very 
auspicious for giving alms and for bathing, especially 
those at the solstices and equinoxes. 

5. The Intercalary- month is also known as the 
" unclean month " (see Chap. I, p, 20). This idea' of 
the unlucky nature of these months dates back to Vedic 
times, when the ordinary months were called "deva" 
(gods), and the intercalary when it occurred " asura " 
(demon). Marriages and thread ceremonies are not 
held in such a month. 



' S.B.E., I, p. 274. 

' H. H. Wilson's trans., II, p. 303. 

• R. Shamashastry, in I. A., XLI, pp. 30, 45, 294. 



AUSPICIOUS AND INAUSPICIOUS SEASONS 33 

6, Days of the Week. From very old times the 
Sun, Saturn (his son), and Mars have been believed 
to exert a malefic influence, while the Moon, Mercury, 
Jupiter and Venus exert a beneficent one over the days 
of which they are the lords. Varahamihira^ in his 
Brihajjatakam pronounced Mercury, in himself, a 
neutral, but malefic or benefic in his influence as he is 
in conjunction with the other planets. The common 
folk of India to-day prefer not to undertake any new 
enterprise on a Sunday, Tuesday or Saturday (see the 
Marathi proverb, ^ vjf-^| ^ ijrPnK, " The day not to do 
a thing is Saturday ")." 

Monday is perhaps the most lucky day of all ; while 
Saturday is the most unlucky. The legend of the 
infant Ga^iesa losing h^s head from the glance of Saturn 
falling upon him is well-known, while Dr. Crooke^ 
records that an epidemic of smallpox, which broke out at 
Jessore in A.D. 1817, was accounted for by its occurring 
in a month containing five Saturdays. 

One puzzling circumstance is that Tuesday, one of 
the unlucky days, bears the name Mangala (fortu- 
nate). It has been suggested that this, nomenclature 
may be due to the old-established fear of calling an 
unlucky thing -by an unlucky name, the mere utterance 
of which may bring misfortune. Hence the covert 
reference to an ill-omened thing by the name " the 
fortunate one," well understood by the hearer. 

The red colour of Mars, and his consequent tradi- 
tional connection with the idea of war and bloodshed are 
sufficient to have established him as a planet of ill-omen. 
Nor is it difficult to understand why the slow-moving 
(i.e." lazy") Saturn should be considered of ill-omen. 
But why the Sun, who is also worshipped as the 
vivifier and giver of good things, should share in this 
their unpopular characteristic is difficult to understand. 
Jupiter and Venus, by their brilliance and beauty, 

> H. P. Chatterjee's trans., S.B.H., p. 40. 
' Marathi Proverbs, Manwaring, p. 145- 
» Crooke, I, p. 130. 



34 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

would establish themselves as beneficent, and the 
Moon^ is believed to hold the seed of all life, from 
whom it is gathered by the gods and presented to 
mankind. 

Most of the planets seem to be considered malefic 
towards women. According to tradition^ in some parts 
of India, it is unlucky for a girl to come of age on a 
Sunday, Monday, Tuesday or Saturday, or she will 
either become a widow, lose her children, commit 
suicide, or become a bad character, according to the day. 
Wednesday and Friday are only partially lucky for her, 
as she will bear only daughters if she comes of age on 
either of these days. Her only really lucky day is 
Thursday. If she comes of age on that day she will 
become the mother of sons. 

7. The Rainy Season. This is reckoned from 
Ashadha sukla tenth to Karttika sukla tenth, and is 
known as the Chaturmasa (four months). It is less a 
period of actual inauspiciousness than a season when it 
behoves men to walk very carefully and to be punctilious 
over their religious observances ; for Vishnu is understood 
to have retired to the bottom of the ocean for a four- 
months' sleep, leaving the world without his close 
protection. (The Karttika Mahatmya says that the 
giant, Saiikasura, carried away the Vedas to the bottom 
of the sea, and it took Vishnu four months to recover 
them). No marriages or thread ceremonies are per- 
formed during/ this period ; brides of less than a year's 
standing return to their parents' house, and many 
people leave the regions south of the Godavari river 
(the boundary of Ravana's kingdom) , to live in Rama's 
kingdom north of that river. 

The probable explanation of the matter is that this 
is the season of heavy rain, unsuitable for travelling, 
or for holding the processions which accompany 
marriages and other ceremonies. The law^ forbidding 

-- ' KausMtaki Upanishad, S.B.E., I, p. 274. 
" Bom. Gas., XVIII, p. 240. 
" Sacred Xaws of the Aryas, S.B.E., II, p. 191. 



AUSPICIOUS AND INAUSPICIOUS SEASONS 35 

an ascetic to change his residence during this season 
probably had a connection with the inconvenience of 
doing so. Again, the tradition^ in North India that it is 
unlucky to mend the roof thatch in the rainy season is 
easy to understand. It is also considered unlucky" to 
eat certain things, as, for instance, lemons, many-seeded 
fruit, certain kinds of lentils and roots, also to drink 
any milk from a copper pot, or spilt water ; which 
things have probably been found to be inimical to 
health during the wet season. 

8. Other Occasions. Besides the auspicious and 
inauspicious seasons enumerated above, a number of 
occasional days are noticed as being good or evil. For 
instance : 

(i) The period between 11.0 p.m. and 3.0 a.m. 
is inauspicious for holy works ; and is known as "the 
time of sin." 

(ii) If the planet Jupiter' is visible together with 
the full moon, it is an occasion of good omen. Merit 
acquired by almsgiving, or fasting, on that night is 
imperishable. 

(iii) Siinhastha, or the year when Jupiter is in the 
sign Siihha (Leo), is inauspicious for marriages and 
thread ceremonies, which must not be performed unless 
at a shrine of Sambhu, but auspicious for bathing in the 
Godavari. 

(iv) Kanyagata, or the year when Jupiter is in the 
sign Kanya (Virgo), is very auspicious for marriages, 
thread ceremonies and bathing in the Krishna river. 

(v) The day of Jupiter's entry into the sign Kumbha ^ 
(Aquarius) is auspicious for bathing in the Ganga and 
Jamna rivers. 

(vi) Ardhodaya,* or the occurrence of the five follow- 
ing events at one time, which only happens once 
in twenty to twenty-five years, is a time of great 
auspiciousness. All water is sacred, and all Brahmans 

' Crooke, II, p. 300. "" Sharma, p. 104. 

" Institutes of Vishnu, S.B.E., VII, p. 157. 
* F. & H., p. 6. 



36 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

as holy as Brahma. Therefore there is great merit in 
bathing and almsgiving. The five are : 

{a) Sunrise coinciding with a new moon, (6) the 
sun being in Makara, (c) the moon being in nakshatra 
Sravana, {d) on a Sunday, (e) in the month Pausha. 

Professor Kielhorn^ quotes an inscription referring 
to the very auspicious character of Ardhodaya : 

"At the auspicious time of the Ardhodaya in (the 
month) Pausha of the year Sadharana, which was the 
Saka year 1352." 

(vii) Kapila Shashthi, or the simultaneous occur- 
rence of the six following events, is very auspicious for 
almsgiving. It only occurs about once in every sixty 
years, and is so rare that it has come to be used in a 
proverbial sense as an improbable event (cp. " a blue 
moon "). 

The six events are : 

(a) The month Bhadrapada, {b) the dark half sixth, 
(c) on Tuesday, ((f) joined with nakshatra RohinI, 
(moon), (^) the sun in nakshatra Hasta, (/) at the 
yoga Vyatipata, and all these must occur during the 
daytime. It last occurred on October 12, 1912. 

There is a legend^ to the effect that the sage Narada, 
longing for married happiness, was transformed into 
a woman, and bore sixty sons, one in every consecutive 
year. At the end of that time, having implored Vishnu 
for retransformation, he again became a man, and the 
sixty sons were appointed regents of the years of the 
sixty years' cycle, at the beginning of which Kapila 
Shashthi occurs. This sixty years' cycle synchronises 
with the cycle of Jupiter (see Chap. I, p. 29). 

(viii) Somavati, or the new moon falling on a 
Monday, is auspicious for almsgiving. 

(ix) Grahana, or eclipse, whether of sun or moon, 
is very auspicious, while if a solar eclipse occurs on a 
Sunday, or a lunar eclipse on a Monday, the occasion is 

> I.A., XXV, p. 34S. > Gupte, p. 97. 



AUSPICIOUS AND INAUSPICIOUS SEASONS 37 

called Chudamani (crest-jewel), ue. prominent, and 
the merit obtained is imperishable. 

(x) Akshayya Third (Vaisakha sukla third), if it 
falls on a Wednesday and the moon is in Rohiiji, is 
especially auspicious. 

11. Certain tithi also are considered auspicious for 
alms-giving, alms given on these" days being productive 
of very great merit, i.e. the fourth sukla or krishna, 
when falling on a Tuesday. The seventh sukla, if it 
falls on a Sunday or coincides with a samkranti. The 
eighth, if it falls on a Wednesday. The eleventh, if it 
is joined with the nakshatra Punarvasu. The twelfth 
is auspicious under many conditions, e.g. if it follows 
two successive elevenths, if it precedes two successive 
fifteenths, if it is joine<^ with certain nakshatra, etc. 

Professor Kielhorn^ quotes an inscription showing 
the cumulative fo'rce of many inauspicious periods 
coinciding in a single point of time : 

"In the evil year Kshaya, in the wretched second 
Vaisakha, on a miserable Tuesday, in the fortnight 
which was, the reverse of bright, on the fourteenth day, 
the unequalled store of valour, Devaraj, alas ! met with 
death. How, O Yama, can fate be averted ? " 

' I.A., XXV, p. 346. 



CHAPTER III 

ON SOLAR AND SEASONAL FESTIVALS 

Sun worship was general in the Vedic period, and 
to-day it is found in India in the daily morning repetition 
of the Gayatri by the Brahman, and of the phrase 
" Siirya Narayana" by the peasant; in the universal 
celebration of the Makara Samkranti or winter solstice, 
and in certain other observances. 

The sun appears in Vedic times as Siirya, Aditya, 
etc. He rides in a chariot drawn by seven horses, or 
by one seven-headed horse, and he changes his chariot 
for a new one at the beginning of each year. The 
Puranic legend^ of Vishnu, in his dwarf incarnation, 
covering the earth, sky and heavens in three steps, is 
generally believed to be a. reference to the course of 
the sun through the divisions of the universe. 

At the present day shrines" and images of the sun 
are rare, but temples exist in some places, the two most 
important being those at Kanarak, near Puri, and at 
Gaya. 

In Sankaracharya's time' (eighth to ninth century 
A.D.) there were six recognised sects of sun worship- 
pers, worshipping the rising sun as Brahma, the noon_ 
sun as Siva, the setting sun as Vishnu, etc., but no such 
division is known at the present day ; the pious Brahman* 
meditates on all three gods as he repeats his Gayatri at 
sunrise. 

» Vedic Mythology, A. A. Macdonell, E.I.A.R., pp. 37-39. 

" Crooke, I, pp. 5, 6. 

" Crooke, I, p. 6. 

* Daily Practice of the Hindus, Srisa Chandra Vasu. 



HULiAK AiNi-y oE/^ov/iixii^ FESTIVALS 39 

I. The Solar Feasts and Observances in the present 
day are : 

1. The Samkranti days, more e'Bpecially the Makara 
Samkranti of the North and West of India, correspond- 
ing with the Pongal of the South. 

At the entry of the sun into each zodiacal sign he is 
worshipped by some, by others only -at his entry into 
the four signs, Makara (Capricornus), Mesha (Aries), 
Karka (Cancer), and Tula (Libra), marking respec- 
tively the winter solstice, vernal equinox, summer 
solstice, and autumnal equinox ; and of these four the 
first is by far the most widely observed. 

(i) The Makara Samkrayiti?- This occurs about 
the twelfth or thirteenth of January, and falls some time 
in the month Pausha. The holiday lasts for three days, 
and is a time of family reunions, feasting, bathing, and 
general rejoicing. Almsgiving is also practised, and 
a present is given to the family priest. It is most 
auspicious. 

In Bengal it synchronises with the rice harvest, and 
special rice cakes are eaten, children wear necklaces of 
sugar "birds, with which on the following day crows 
and other birds are fed. On the first day a shred of 
straw is tied to furniture and cooking pots to ensure 
prosperity. 

A large fair is held at Allahabad, many pilgrims 
going to bathe there at the junction of the Ganga and 
Jamna rivers, many others going to the mouth of the 
Ganga, where offerings are also made to the ocean. 

In Maharashtra, besides almsgiving and bathing, the 
following practices are observed : 

(a) Sugared sesamum seed is given to all members 
of the family, and to friends, with the words : f^o^o5 
sqr ^ ^t^ ( ' ' Eat sweet sesamum and speak to me 
sweetly"), to ensure the absence of quarrelling through- 
out the year. Sesamum oil is burned in the lamps, 
offered to Sankara, and rubbed on the body before 
bathing. 

» F. &II.,p.SS. 



40 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

This use of sesamum may be due to the belief that 
it is able to ward off evil spirits. The following 
dictum on the use of sesamum occurs in the Maha- 
bharata : ' ' The gift of sesame seeds^ is a very superior 
gift. It produces everlasting merit. . . . The gift of 
sesame at Sraddha is applauded. . . . One should, on the 
day of full moon of Vaisakha, make gifts of sesame unto 
the Brahmans. They should also be made to eat and to 
touch sesame on every occasion that one can afford." 

{d) Women desiring children secretly drop a cocoa- 
nut into some vessel in a Brahman house. This is known 
as sj^j^cTiRS (secret fruit). 

(c) Like the foregoing and following, another 
custom to secure children is to smear five pitchers with 
lime and red lead, and give them to five women of one's 
married friends, especially to brides. 

(d) A woman throws two cocoanuts into a neigh- 
bour's house and begs foy two in exchange, saying, ^^ eqi 
TFtrT ^ (" Take a toy and give a child "). 

(«) Gifts of two lamps and two mirrors are made 
by women to Brahmans, and betel nut and spices to 
their wives. 

(/) No handling of cowdung is permitted on the 
chief feast day, i.e. the middle one of the three, so, as 
this is the staple fuel of the country, all cooking must 
be done the previous day. 

In Southern India this day is called Pongal (from a 
Tamil word, meaning "Is it boiling ? "), the first day 
of the Tamil year. New pots are bought in which 
rice in fresh milk is boiled, and according as the milk 
takes a shorter or longer time to boil, the year will be 
prosperous or the reverse. Hence it is eagerly watched 
by the family. 

The South India cattle feast, called Pola in the West 
(see Chap. VI, p. 118), is held at Pongal, on the third 
day. Cows and oxen are sprinkled with saffron water 
and worshipped by the men. 

' AnuSasana Parva, Pratap Chandra Roy's trans., p. 348. 



SOLAR AND SEASONAL FESTIVALS 41 

With this festival may be coupled that known as : 

(ii) Makari Saptami, BhUskart Saptami or Ratha 
Saptaml, which, according to some calendars, occurs on 
the seventh day after the entry of the sun into Makara 
(Capricornus), and according to others on a fixed day, 
namely, the seventh of the light half of Magha. 

The chief rite for this day is to bathe (if possible in 
the Ganga) at sunrise, placing on the head a platter of 
seven arka leaves, with a small lamp upon it, while 
prayers are being said mentally to the sun. The platter 
and lamp are afterwards set afloat on the water, and 
gifts of food, clothing or money made to a Brahman, 
while a picture of the sun in his seven horse chariot is 
made and worshipped with red sandal paste, red flowers, 
etc. This rite is to secure freedom from sickness or 
sorrow for the year. 

Originally^ the seventh of each month (both halves) 
was kept for sun worship. Now the seventh dark half 
has gone out of use. Sun offerings should be of eight 
kinds, viz. water, milk, curds, ghi, sesamum, mustard 
seed, rice and kusa grass. 

The legend runs that a former Kshatriya king had a 
son who was weakly, and on consulting the sages he 
learned the cause to be that in a former birth his son 
had despised Brahmans, and not bestowed charity on 
them, nor worshipped the gods, especially the sun. If 
this were done in his present life, it -would be accepted 
as expiation, and he would grow strong. Hence the 
custom arose. 

It is kept by both men and women. 

(iii) MaMvishuva SaiHkranti. (Vishuva = First 
point of Aries or Libra.) There are the vernal and 
autumnal equinoxes, when the sun enters the signs Mesha 
(Aries) and Tula (Libra), in the months Chaitra and 
Aivina. The Mesha samkranti is largely observed in 
North India by bathing in the Ganga. Elsewhere it and 
the Tula samkranti are not very generally observed. 

• "Religifeus Festivals of Hindus," H. H. Wilson, Miscell. 
Essays, p. 26. ' 



42 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

2. New Year s Day, Dhvajaropana or Gudhi Padava. 
This falls on the first day of the light half of Chaitra. 
As explained in Chapter I, the actual new year, begin- 
ning on the Mesha saihkranti, is not kept as the 
beginning of the civil year, as it does not necessarily 
coincide with a new moon day. The civil year begins 
from the new moon immediately preceding the Mesha 
samkranti, and is a day of holiday making and rejoicing. 
It is marked by two customs in addition to the usual 
bathing and visiting friends, vie. 

(i) The erecting of a pole (Dhvaja or Gu^hi). 
This is crowned by a new garment, usually a woman's 
bodice or robe, and a brass drinking pot, and may be 
thrust out from a window, or tied to a neighbouring 
tree or to the roof. 

(ii) The eating of leaves of the nim tree. 

With regard to the first custom there is a legend 
that Indra gave a standard to one of his devotees, 
variously called King Vasu or Uparichara, wherewith 
to worship him, but the explanation seems to require 
as much elucidation as the custom. 

Washburn Hopkins^ places this festival at the end 
of the rains and beginning of that new year reckoned 
from the new moon of "Saumya masa," and others 
say it celebrates the birth of the first of Narada's sixty 
sons (see Chapter II, p. 36). Another explanation of 
the pole is that this day celebrates the return of Rama 
and Sita to Ayodhya after the defeat of Ravana, and his 
joyful reception by his subjects. This, again, is no real 
"explanation. The popular idea is that it is done ' ' to 
bring luck," and the origin has evidently been forgotten. 

With regard to the second custom, it is popularly 
believed to be very beneficial to the health to eat nim 
leaves. The tree is sacred to the dieease goddesses, 
especially to Sitala (the smallpox goddess), so that 
eating a few leaves on the auspicious first of the year 
would be considered a precaution against illness during 
the year.' 

» Epic Mythology, E.I.A.R., p. 125. 



SOLAR AND SEASONAL FESTIVALS 43 

3. Itu Puja} From Karttika full moon to Marga- 
sirsha full moon. (Bihar, all Karttika.) 

The word Itu has been derived from Mitra — the 
Sun. This puja is performed every Sunday for a 
month by women in Bengal. Libations of water are 
offered in small pots to the sun, and afterwards they 
are immersed in a river or tank. 

An old legend tells the usual tale of a family in want 
and trouble restored to prosperity and happiness 
through the performance of this sun worship by a 
daughter. 

4. Every Sunday in Sravana the sun is worship- 
ped. 

5. The entry of the sun into the nakshatra Hasta 
(orGaja). 

This occurs about the month Asvina, at the close of 
the rainy season. It can only be observed properly by 
the rich, as the correct ceremony includes the gift (to 
a Brahman) of a golden elephant, on which are seated 
golden figures of Siva, Gauri his wife, and Ganesa 
their son ; also a golden image of Gauri on an elephant 
should be worshipped. The., ceremony is called 
Gajagauri vrata. 

6. SvasHka Vrata. On every evening during the 
four months of the rainy season some women draw a 
Svastika (an ancient symbol of good luck) , and worship 
it ; and at the close of the season they present a 
Brahman with a gold or silver plate, on which the same 
symbol appears. 

Whether the svastika was, or was not, a sun-symbol 
has not been decided by scholars, but it certainly is 
connected with the sun in the minds of Maharashtra 
women, and the above vrata is a form of sun worship. 
See Enthoven, I. A., XL, Supplement, p. 15. 

II. We now come to the Seasonal Festivals, regulated 
by the sun, but in which objects other than the sun are 
worshipped. 

^ F.&H„'p.ZQ. 



44 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



1. The Holt, Holika, or Huta^ani ; on the full 
moon of Phalguna. 

This is a very popular festival, and has its roots in 
the worship of the sun, now well on its northward 
course, and bringing the welcome burning heat. Any 
attempt to get to the real origin brings one up against 
a variety of legends, which by their very number and 
variation prove that they 'themselves are but the 
results of endeavours on the part of different people to 



LEFT HAND OR FEMALE 
SVASTIKA 



RIGHT HAND OR MALE 
SVASTIKA 



Note. — The Right hand Svastika is that almost always used. 
[Svasti4-ka=" may it be well "+agent for bringfing to pass.] 



explain an already existing custom. The following 
are some of these legends : 

(a) There was a demoness, Phun^a or Holika, 
who used to eat the children of a certain village ; and 
was eventually scared away permanently- by the blowing 
of horns and the use of obscene language.^ {Note in 
this explanation there is no trace of sun worship. ) 

(b) Tripurasura's son Tarakasura, growing power- 
ful, so tormented the gods that they decided to send 
Kamadeva, the god of love, to Siva, to induce him to 
destroy their persecutor. Siva, at his devotions, was so 
angry at the interruption that his glare of wrath burnt 
Kamadeva to ashes, whereupon the watching hosts of 

» Sharma, p. 266 ; F.&H.,^.^. 



SOLAR AND SEASONAL FESTIVALS 45 

spirits burst into mocking and evil words. ^ (Here we 
get the reference to fierce heat, as in the three follow- 
ing legends.) 

(c) Hiranyakasipu, a demon, the father of Holika 
and Pralhada, incensed by his son's devotion to Vishnu, 
commanded his daughter Holika to take her brother on 
her lap and burn him to death, but by Vishnu's inter- 
position Holika was burnt and Pralhada escaped unhurt.'' 

(d) Holika, the sister of Saihvat, burnt herself on 
her brother's pyre. 

(e) Holika was a goddess who could only be appeased 
by fire. 

From the confusion of these and other legends two 
'things emerge : firstly, that some one was burnt ; and, 
secondly, that obscene language was used and a loud 
noise was^ made, and on these points may be noticed 
Dr. Crooke's conclusion^ that the festival is prpbably 
very ancient, having been taken over by the Aryans 
from the aborigines, that it may signify tJie burning of 
the old year to usher in the new, and that the use of 
indecent words may be to repel the evil spirits who 
might check fertility in man, animals or crops. It 
seems to be established that evil spirits* were believed, 
in primitive times, to be warded off by indecent acts or 
words, or by horn-blowing, drum-beating, or other loud 
noise. 

Five different practices are combined in the Konkan, 
between the Western Ghats and the sea, where the 
people are more devoted Holi-keepers than any others 
in India. 

(a) The burning of a bonfire on the full moon night 
after an all-day fast. From the first or second day of 
the month boys begin collecting, begging or stealing 
wood, cowdung cakes, and any other fuel, and on the 

• Sharma, p. 266. 

' " Folklore of Gujerat," R. E. Enthoven, I.A., XL VI. 

' Crooke, II, 321. i 

« " Spirit Basis of Belief and Custom," I.A., XXIV, p. 263. 

„ , XXV, p. 36. 

Golden Bough, II, pp. 162-63. 



46 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

fifteenth day the bonfire is built round a branch of 
plantain or castor oil tree, towns will have a bonfire in 
almost every street, villages at least two or three, 
built by the difEerent castes. The fire is kept up all 
night, and in some places is not allowed to die out until 
the fifteenth day of the dark half. Men and boys dance 
round it, srnearing themselves with the ashes, and 
singing. 

(d) Singing of songs, celebrating Krishna's love 
episodes with the herdswomen, beating of drums, and 
blowing of horns, shouting-of obscene words t« passers 
by, especially to women, and uttering a loud cry while 
beating the mouth with the hand. This is called 
"Bombne," and is peculiar to this festival. This 
particular side of the festival is confined chiefly to the 
lower castes, it is obnoxious to the educated and more 
refined, who are endeavoiuring — with considerable 
success — to suppress it. It is now possible for respect- 
able women to go about without being insulted and 
molested, as it was not even ten years ago. 

(c) Throwing coloured liquid and powder over one 
another and passers by. This should really be confined 
to the Ranga panchami day on krishna fifth, but, like the 
shouting and singing, it is carried on from before the 
full moon till about the sixth or seventh of the dark 
half. Small tin syringes and bamboo blow-pipes are 
used, and although indiscriminate colour throwing is 
being strongly suppressed, yet the custom is kept up 
by families in theii; own houses and coprtyards. 

(d) Dancing, by men and boys of the lower castes, 
a dance peculiar to this feast, resembling some of the 
old English folk-dances. A band of about "two dozen 
will go round a town, on the days before the full moon, 
to collect money with which to keep the feast. 

(c) The practice of touching low-caste people by 
Brahmans and others of high caste. This is done on 
the day after the full moor^ the day called f^ f%^ ^pn 
(" Touch, touch, Simga^ or Phalguna"), and is believed 

• An alternative name for the month. 



SOLAR AND SEASONAL FESTIVALS 47 

to lead to immunity from disease. A purificatory bath 
must be taken after the defilement. 

Sharma^ quotes an ancient authority as follows : 

i\oS[^\ 5^ f^l 3i^Mi|<!J| ^ q5^ Wf %^ 3RRfT anf^t^^ 

("By the touching of the low-caste on the second 
day of Holi, followed by bathing, all kinds of illness 
are destroyed.") 

Mention should also be made of the necklaces of 
yellow and white sugar medallions given to children at 
the feast. 

In Madras the bonfire is omitted, and both there 
and in Bengal the swinging of Krishna's image, in a 
small swing, is substituted, to celebrate the return of 
spring and the vivifying power of the sun, and the 
season of love. 

Another spring festival is that of 

2. Madana trayodait, Kama trayodaSt, or AnaAga 
irayodaii, on Chaitra sukla thirteenth. 

Madana and his wife. Rati, are the god and goddess 
df love. Madana is the friend of Vasanta, the Spring, 
i.e. love is associated with the spring season. His 
banner bears the sign of Makara, the sea monster, 
which is considered to be the emblem of love, and he 
plays on the vina or lute. The pair are worshipped 
with flowers and dancing. This is a North India 
festival, not kept in Maharashtra, where its place is 
taken by the revels of the Holi in the previous month. 
The reason for this may be that the hot weather begins 
nearly a month earlier in the West and South than in 
the North. 

Note? The Vailvadeva sacrifice, for producing and sustain- 
ing life, was performed in old times on the Phalguna full moon. 
A distinct connection can be traced between this sacrifice (and 
its object) and the modern spring festivals. 

Another Seasonal festivarl is kept on the Malabar and 
Konkan coast : 

' P. 251. « Satapatha Brahmana, S.B.E., XII, p. 383. 



48 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

3. Narali purntma, or Cocoanut Full Moon, at 
Sravana full moon. From this date the south-west mon- 
soon is supposed to abate, and coasting trade can be 
resumed. The Portuguese Government remits all 
customs on boats entering Goa harbour on this day. 
It is essentially a traders' festival, and has become 
established through popular custom, not through any 
classic authority. At evening the worshippers assemble 
on the shore and worship the sea with mantras, throwing 
in ofiEerings of cocoanuts, Sharma^ says, as an offering 
to the " Food-giving goddess of the water "; others'* say 
to Varuna. 

4. Ganesa chaturthi. This holiday, on Bhadrapada 
sukla fourth, has been included among the seasonal festi-" 
vals, as there seems to be a distinct connection between 
Ganesa and the harvest of the early crops, pointed out 
by recent writers. Sharma' says that the fate of the 
later crops being uncertain, depending as they do on 
whether the latter rain is good or not, it is exceedingly 
important to worship the Remover of Difficulties at this 
time of year. 

The older ideas about him are various. He* had no 
place in Vedic literature, nor in the Ramayana or the 
older Puranas, and he only later became identified with 
the Ganas, or attendants on Siva. 

Bhandarkar' says the Ganesa cult was established 
between the fifth and eighth centuries A.D., and offers 
no solution of the genesis of his elephant head. Crooke' 
believes he was imported into Hinduism from a 
primitive indigenous cult, possibly he was an ancient 
Dravidian sun-god. 

Popular legends make him the son of Siva and 
Gauri, born to destroy an elephant-headed demon and 
free the human race from his tyranny. Some say he 
was born with an elephant's head, others, more 
generally, that he was born a normal child, but lost his 

' P. 132. » " Hinduism, 'i-^.j?.^., p. 686 fif. " P. 185. 

* Religious Thought and Life in India, Monier Williams, p. 216, 
' Bhandarkar, E.I.A.R., p. 147; E.R.E., II, p. 807. 

• Crooke, I, p. 111. 



SOLAR AND SEASONAL FESTIVALS 49 

head through the glance of ill--omened Saturn falling 
upon him, the first animal who could be found to supply 
the deficiency being an elephant. 

His elephant head and his vehicle, the rat, are usually 
taken to be emblems of his prudence, sagacity and 
forethought. He is by nature malignant, but may be 
rendered benignant by propitiatory rites. His name 
is placed at the head. of any writing, and he should be 
worshipped before beginning any new undertaking. 

If a merchant becomes bankrupt,^ he announces it 
by turning his Ganesa image upside down, either as a 
sign that the god has deserted him, or in anger for his 
-having done so. 

He is worshipped by men, women and children, of 
all castes and sects, and has been adopted as the patron 
god of schoolboys and students, and also of a new -cult 
of Nationalism. 

Two distinct elements can be seen in his worship 
as practised in the present day : 

(i) The whole family rises at dawn, anoints with 
oil and bathes, and then puts on holiday clothes, 
jewellery, etc. At noon an image of the god, either of 
gold, silver or clay, is brought and placed in a booth, 
or on a platform, decorated with lamps and mirrors. 
(A new plaster image is often bought annually, and 
consecrated, and is thrown into water at the close of the 
festival.) It is worshipped with offerings of diirva 
grass, flowers and many mantras. At the close the 
officiating Brahipan priest is given his fee, and he and 
the whole famil^and neighbours sit down to a feast. 
In the evening lighted lamps are waved round the god's 
image, and hymns are sung before it. The holiday 
is prolonged for five, seven, ten, or even twenty-one 
days, according to the desire and the means of the 
family. Puja is done three times daily, and on the last 
day cocoanuts are broken before the image, and 
prayers for his blessing on the family are offered. 

Jf 

' Myths o{ Hindus and Buddhists, Sister Niyedita and Ananda 
Coomaraswainy, p. 19. 

4 



so THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

The image (if of clay or plaster) is then thrown into 
water, or (if of metal) restored to its place in the 
house. It is customary to keep an image of Ganesa 
in a niche in the living room. This festival is unique 
in one respect — the first day, rather than the last, is 
the greatest day. 

(ii) Within recent years a new; element has crept 
into Ganesa worship in the towns of Maharashtra. 
The growing interest of students- in politics, and the 
adoption of Ganesa as their patron god, have united to 
connect him closely with the national movement. This 
is strengthened by the fact that his worship is per- 
formed by all castes and sects. His name is derived 
from Gana = a crowd, hence "populace," and he is 
called "Lord of the people." The legend of his 
slaying the elephant-headed demon, Gajasura, is inter- 
preted to the worshippers, who are coming to his 
temples in increasing numbers, as being the deliverance 
of the people from their national oppressor. 

Bands of students and schoolboys form processions 
through the streets, and the whole of the festival is 
given a strong political significance similar to that of 
the Sivaji-venerating element in the Dasara(q.v. p. 57). 

The connection of Ganesa with the moon is given in 
Chap. IV. 

5. Gaurl iestival^ on the seventh, eighth and ninth 
of Bhadrapada sukla. This goddess, the wife of Siva and 
mother of Ganesa, is considered the goddess of harvest 
and protectress of women. Her festival, chiefly observed 
by women, closely follows that of her son, when the 
early crops are ripe and the later require rain. 
Although she is popularly sometimes confused with 
Durga or Kali, yet she is quite distinct, being the 
survival, from pre-Aryan times, of another deity. 

Her festival, celebrated especially in Maharashtfa, 
consists of three parts : 

(i) On the first day a bundle of aghada (wild 
balsam) is brought into the^ house, and in the evening 

» Sharma, p. 196 fif.; Bom. Gas., XVIII, p. 248; Gupte,p.78 £E. 



SOLAR AND SEASONAL FESTIVALS SI 

is wrapped in a silli cloth, placed in the lap of an 
unmarried girl and worshipped with mantras. Lucky 
marks, such as the svastika and Gauri's footprint 
(origin of the "cone" pattern worked on Indian 
shawls, and from them introduced to England), are 
drawn in powder on the floor. The girl who carries 
the bundle representing Gauri is regarded as her agent 
for movement and speech, and is led by the women of 
the house from room to room, in each being seated on 
a stool, and haying lamps waved round her. 





(in) 

MODERN SYMBOL FOR LAKSHMl'S FOOTPRINT, SHOWING 
KVOLDTION FROM PROBABLE ORIGINAL FORM. 

Note. — The left footprint is the more generally used. 

In each room she is asked : ' ' What have you 
brought"; and she answers, according to the nature of 
each room : "Treasure to fill a city," " Delicious food," 
"Beautiful children," and so on. The women reply: 
"Come on golden feet, and stay forever." This is 
believed to bring good fortune to each room. The 
bundle is then placed on, a stool, offered sweets, milk, 
etc., and the night is spent by young girls in singing 
before her. 

Her husband, Siva, is supposed to have followed her 
secretly, and is represented by a pot of rice and 
a cocoanut hidden under a fold of her cloth. 

On the second day she is offered food, and 
worshipped, and at noon a big feast is held. At night 



52 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

again there is singing before her, and sometimes 
dancing in her praise. 

On the third day she is put into a siirpa, or 
winnowing tray, and carried by a woman servant to 
a stream or tank. The woman is told not under any 
conditions^ to look behind her as she goes. At the 
stream the plants are taken from the cloth and thrown 
into the water, the siirpa and cloth are brought hiome, 
and the festival is over. 

(ii) An important piece of ritual is this : the 
woman-servant must bring home from the bank of the 
stream a handful of gravel, which is thrown over the 
house to bring_luck, and over the trees to protect them 
from vermin, after being worshipped. 

(iii) On the middle day of the festival women take 
lengths of cotton, sixteen times their own height, fold 
them into skeins, and lay them before the goddess for 
her to bless. Some castes put the skeins, with pieces 
of cocoanut and new grain, into new earthenware pots, 
and stack them up with an image of Gauri in a tray on 
the top. On the third day the skeins are taken up, 
folded into shorter lengths, tied with seven or sixteen 
knots (versions vary), worshipped, and fastened by 
each woman round ■ her own neck, to be worn 
until Asvina krishna eighth, or until a propitious day 
occurs. 

The necklets are then removed, worshipped with 
offerings of sesamum seeds and rice, and either thrown 
into water or buried in some field or other cultivated 
ground. 

Sometimes lucky necklets are made out of diirva 
grass, instead of cotton, and the day is known as Dilr- 
vdshtami. 

The customs connected with this festival are very 
old, and the legend which is told, purporting to be its 
origin, is less old than the customs, and is to the effect 
that a poor Brahman, unable through poverty to keep 
it, by entertaining an unefpected guest, in_the form of 
an old woman, was blessed by. her with miraculous gifts 
of cows and food, and on her departure was told to 



SOLAR AND SEASONAL FESTIVALS _ S3 

keep this festival each year to retain her favour. She 
was then discerned to be Gauri herself. 

Gupte suggests that the custom of bringing gravel 
from the river refers to the alluvial riverside soil as the 
original seat of the crops ; tha't the old woman of the 
legend and the young girl of modern custom indicate the 
departure of the old and the coming of the new season ; 
the lay figure of aghada indicates the dead body of the 
old season ; and the sixteen knots, and other use of the 
same number in connection with the cotton skeins, points 
to the sixteen weeks of the growth to harvest of the rice 
crops. 

6. The Navaratra, Durga Puja. or DasarH festival. 
This festival lasts for the first ten days of the light 
half of Asvina, occurring too at the time of the autumn 
equinox, and is really compounded of four separate 
feasts ; i.e. (i) the Sarasvati feast from the seventh to 
ninth ; (ii) the Lalita feast on the fifth ; (iii) the Durga 
feast from the first to tenth ; and (iv) the Victory feast 
on the tenth. 

These four will be examined separately, although 
the distinctions between them are becoming confused in 
the popular mind; and the whole period is kept as 
though it were due to but one cause. 

(i) The Sarasvati puja.^ (The same as the Bengal 
Sri panchami, Magha fifth.) Sarasvati appears in the 
?.igveda as a river goddess,^ in the Brahmanas she is 
identified with Vach (speech), and in the later myths 
and to-day is considered the wife of Brahma, the 
patroness of letters, and the goddess of wisdom and 
speech, from which position she is being by degrees 
ousted by Ganesa (see above, pp. 49, 50). But these 
three days are her own. 

On the first day, Asvina sukla seventh, when the 
moon enters the nakshatra Mula, all the sacred books 
in the house are collected, an image of the goddess is 
placed on the top of the pile of them, and her spirit 
is summoned into it with mantras. 

» Sharma, p. 215 f. ' Vedic Mythology, E.I.A.R., p. 87. 



S4 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

On the second day she is worshipped and on the 
third her spirit is dismissed, after a gift of money has 
been ofEered to her and presented to the presiding 
priest. 

So in Southern and Western India ; in Bengal these 
days are given to Durga worship. 

(ii) Lalita^ or Up&ngalalita panchaml. (Asvina 
sukla fifth.) This is hardly known outside Maharashtra. 
The legend goes that Lalita was the patron goddess of 
a town, Upanga, and that by worshipping her on this 
day the inhabitants gained great prosperity. Her 
festival is confused in the popular mind with those 
of Durga and Sarasvati. 

(iii) Durga puja? (Asvina sukla first to tenth.) 
Durga has become identified with the pre-Aryan Kali 
of Bengal since Puranic times. She is considered the 
wife and female counterpart of Siva, as Sarasvati and 
Laks.hmT are of Brahma and Vishnu. 

In Bengal, animal sacrifices are offered to her, and it 
is well-known that human sacrifice would be offered 
except for the restraining hand of the law. Quoting 
from the Bhavishya Purana, Sir W. Jones writes : " The 
head of a slaughtered man^ gives Durga one thousand 
times more satisfaction than that of a buffalo." 

In other parts of India the conception of her is less 
fierce, and offerings of flowers, fruit, etc., are all that 
are made^ She is worshipped during the first ten 
days of Asvina, special days being the eighth (her 
customary monthly day), and the tenth, the day of 
Victory, the name Vijaya being applied alike to her 
victory over the buffalo demon Mahishasura and to 
Rama's victory over Ravana. 

The legend goes that a demon so troubled the earth 
that the inhabitants appealed to the gods, who sent 
Durga, the eight-armed world-mother, to fight with 
him. She fought for ten days, and overcame and slew 



Sharma, p. 215 ; also Molesworth, etc. 
Sharma, p. 212 f. ; also F. & H., p. 20. 
Asiatic Researches, III, p. 257. 



SOLAR AND SEASONAL FESTIVALS 55 

him on the tenth. Except on the tenth day no reference 
is made to this event in the daily worship offered to 
her, which is as under : 

Each day, after anointing with oil, a ceremonial bath 
must be taken, both morning and evening. Only one 
meal is to be eaten, and the goddess must be worship- 
ped three times in the day, with flowers, lamps and 
the recitation of mantras. 

In Bengal, household images of Durga are used, but 
in other parts these are rarely seen, an earthenware jar 
being substituted, in which various grains are put. A 
thread is wound about it, and it is marked with a lucky 
symbol in red. A tray placed on the top receives the 
offerings. On the eighth day women perform a 
ceremony of burning incense in a saucer, placing it 
three times alternately in their palms and on their 
heads ; and at midnight the goddess is worshipped 
with lamps. 

In Maharashtra it is chiefly a women's festival, 
bands of women going daily to worship at a' Durga 
temple, if one is accessible, otherwise they worship at 
home ; but in Bengal it is as«iuch a men's as a women's 
festival. 

The celebrations on the tenth day are so mixed, in 
modern times, with those of the Rama Victory festival, 
that it is almost impossible to disentangle them. It is 
doubtful whether any further ceremony than the final 
dismissal of the spirit of the goddess belongs properly 
to the Durga festival. 

(iv) Vijaya daiamt or Dasara. ( Asvina sukla tenth. ) 
Several legends are given to explain the origin of 
this festival, of these the two most popular are : («) 
That it was the day^ on which Rama, having propitiat- 
ed Durga, who helped her devotee Ravana, by longer 
prayers and better offerings than his enemy's, won her 
over to his side, and was by her enabled to kill Ravana ; 

Note. — Tbe explanation given for commemorating this event 
in the autumn rather than at the spring Rama festival in Chaitra, 

* Mahabharata, Vana Parva. 



S6 THE HtNDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

is that Rama began praying to Durga in the autumn, but did not 
gain merit suflScient to kill Ravana until the following spring. 

and {b) That the five Pandava brothers, having 
completed their year's service in disguise, unrecognised, 
in Virata's palace, took their arms from their hiding 
place in the Sami tree, and proceeded to battle against 
their cousins, the Kauravas, whom they ultimately 
defeated. 

Both legends, therefore, point to this as a day on 
which to celebrate victory, and to make military 
displays. 

Four or five separate observances are followed on 
this day, which is a men's, not a women's, festival : 

(a) The sami tree^ (Mimosa suma) is worshipped, 
and its leaves are distributed to friends under the name 
of " gold," that is, the gift of such a leaf is supposed to 
be as valuable as a gift of gold, and is sometimes called 
a putali or medal. In many places, where the sami 
tree is not procurable, the more common apta 
(Bauhinia) is substituted. In some districts an ear of 
newly ripe grain is also given, under the name of 
silver. 

(d) A bull buffalo is sacrificed, some say in memory 
of Durga' s victory, some in memory of Rama's, at a 
special spot outside the village, in the evening, to 
preserve the village from sickness. The animal is 
selected a month beforehand and fattened. The right 
to perform the sacrifice is hereditary. -The head of the 
buffalo should be severed at a single ,blow, and the 
carcass should be buried at the spot. 

(c) The village bounds are visited by the men and 
boys, who cross into neighbouring territory, after 
which they return home with g'reat rejoicings, to be 
greeted by their women on the house threshold, holding 
trays containing lamps, rice, supari nut, and red lead, 
which they wave round the heads of the men. 

(d) The implements of a man's trade or profession, 
or the insignia of his office, are worshipped by him. 

' Mahabharata, Virata Parva. 



SOLAR AND SEASONAL FESTIVALS 57 

Hence, everything pertaining to war, e.g. cannon 
elephants, guns, horses, etc., are worshipped by the 
military castes, and incidentally war is glorified in the 
eyes of all. 

(e) In Maharashtra, a Sivaji cult is developing. 
The Dasara day is kept in his memory, men and boys 
parade the roads crying: "Sivaji ki jai," and it is 
evident that this day is considered the one par 
excellence on which to celebrate the spirit of national- 
ism. 

Writing in 1901, Washburn Hopkins^ said that Sivaji 
was then developing into a god, his complete deification 
was only a question of time, and the Census Report of 
1901 mentions a temple to Sivaji at Malvan, Ratnagiri 
district. It is safe to say that Sivaji has already become 
the patron god of war. 

Now, probably, the unifying element, which binds 
into what is practically one festival the various sectional 
feasts in honour of the different deities described above, 
is its seasonal character. 

The rainy season is practically over, the early crops 
are ripe for harvesting, and in ancient days kings were 
starting their winter campaigns, for roads were becom- 
ing dry and traversable. The present day harmless and 
rather pointless crossing of the village boundary into 
neighbouring territory, known as RlWlni, is doubtless the 
survival of ^ftiTtPFT (breaking boundary) of marauding 
chieftains; the home coming with presents of "gold," 
that of the return with the spoils of the raid ; and the 
joyful reception by the women, that of gratitude at their 
safe return. ■ 

The buffalo sacrifice, too, is a survival of ancient 
times, for it was a well-known custom to sacrifice some 
animal to propitiate the harvest gods who protect 
the villages. Hewitt^ considers it the celebration of 
the autumn equinox, which falls in Asvina, the buffalo 
being a year-god, standing for the Indra of the 
B^igveda. 

' India Old and: New, p. 105. ' Hewitt, pp. 224, 349. 



58 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

In Nasik (Bombay), about the year 1909, owing to 
a dispute between rival claimants for the right of per- 
forming the buffalo sacrifice, it was omitted on Dasara 
day. An outbreak of cholera the following hot weather 
was attributed to the omission, and much indignation 
was felt that a private feud had been allowed, to lead to 
public suffering. A special sacrifice was made at the 
Holi festival, and representations of buffaloes' heads, 
together with obscene words, were painted on walls all 
over the town. This points to the sacrifice as being 
unconnected with either Durga or Rama, but with the 
propitiation of older, village gods. The later worship 
of Rama, Sarasvati, and /Durga was combined with the 
old seasonal sacrifice, and the story of the fight of the 
last-named with a demon in buffalo form was invented 
to fit in with the existing custom. 

7. /^ojagarf,^ ivn moon. (Asvina sukla fifteenth.) 
This harvest festival is kept at Asvini full moon. It 
is also called Navanna (new food), and from this 
day the new grain of the recent harvest may be eaten. 
Since Lakshmi, wife of Vishnu, has come to be regarded 
as the bringer of good fortune, and arbitrary in her 
bestowal of favours, she is to be worshipped this night, 
when she is believed to be abroad, and a light must be 
shown outside the house, otherwise she may refuse to 
pause and give her blessing. For the same reason 
everyone must keep awake all night( lest the careless 
man who sleeps fail to win her blessing. The rule that 
the night should be spent in playing dice (typical of 
the uncertainty of fortune), and that cocoanut milk 
(typical of fertility) should be drunk at midnight, are 
both, probably, precautions and aids to keeping awake. 

There is a legend of a king who had an iron 
image of Alakshmi (Ill-fortune, the reputed sister of 
Lakshmi) in his palace. He grew gradually poor and 
troubled. Through the diligence of his wife's worship 
of Lakshmi, at the Kojagari full moon, the iron image 

» I/indu Year, p. 20 ; F. df //., i8; Sharm4, 222 f.; Gupte, p. 



SOLAR AND SEASONAL FESTIVALS 59 

melted away, and good fortune returned. Hence the 
worship was established. 

Here, again, the night of rejoicing at the harvest 
moon was the original feast, the introduction of Lakshmi 
a later addition. 

Note.— 

In North India a similar feast is held on MargaSirsha : full moon. 

,, South India ,, ,, ,, Pausha : „ ,, 

,, parts of the Deccan ,, ,, ,, „ Magha : ,, „ 

8. Lakshmt puja and Dipavali. (Asvini krishna 
thirteenth to Kar ttika sukla second. ) This festival is, like 
Dasara, compounded of some five different festivals, viz. 
(i) worship of wealth; (ii) the celebration of Vishnu's 
victory over the demon Naraka ; (iii) Lakshmi worship ; 
(iv) the celebration of Vishnu's victory over the demon 
Bali ; and (v) the expression of brotherly and sisterly 
affection. These will all be described separately. 

(i) Dhana trayodait (Wealth, thirteenth). This 
occurs on the thirteenth of Asvina krishna, the first 
day of the Dipavali festival. All must begin the day 
with bathing after anointing with oil. The special 
observances for this day chiefly concern merchants, 
who close their yearly accounts, sweep and tidy their 
shops aAd offices, and, having collected all their account 
books, together with a pile, of silver coins, worship them 
and Lakshmi, the giver of wealth. Turmeric and red 
lead are freely smeared over the coins, as the many 
stained rupees in circulation after the festival bear 
witness. The women are engaged in scouring the 
house and cooking-pots, preparing cakes and sweet- 
meats for the five days' holiday, hanging garlands over 
doorways, elaborately decorating the ground before the 
door with lucky patterns in fine flour, etc. 

Schools are closed from the preceding day, and boys 
let off squibs and crackers in the streets and courtyards, 
although this belongs properly to the following days of 
festival. Lamps are lighted from this evening and 
kept burning throughout the five nights. 

(ii) Naraka chaturdail (Hell fourteenth). (See 
also Chapter VI, p. 116). On this second day of the 



60 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

festival is celebrated the destruction of Narakasura by 
Vishnu. One account says that in Ijis Krishna incarna- 
tion he fought witt and killed the demon, and another, 
the Bhavishyottara Purana, gives as origin the well- 
known Bali story, as under :' 

King Bali, by his devotion to Siva, had gained so 
much merit and power that he used it to trouble gods 
and men. Therefore Vishnu became incarnate as a 
dwarf, Vamana, and went to King Bali in the guise of 
a mendicant, asking, as alms, as much ground as he 
could cover in three steps. The boon being granted, he 
assumed a huge form, and took three strides, with the 
first covering the earth, with the second the heavens, 
and with the third treading Bali down into the nether 
regions (Naraka or hell). Thereafter, relenting for 
having treated Bali harshly, Vishnu granted him the 
kingdom of Naraka, and three days annually to reign 
on earth wherever no lamps were lighted. 

Naturally, therefore, men light lamps in every build- 
ing, to avoid falling again under Bali's power. 

A connection evidently arose in men's minds between 
this Bali, King of hell, and Yama, Lord of the dead, for 
we find another legend attributing this festival to another 
cause, viz. the tradition that where lamps are shown, 
the deceased forefathers of that household will see the 
light, and, being released from Yama's clutches, rise and 
proceed to Heaven, i.e. ^\ (Indra's abode). Therefore 
offerings are made to Yama. 

Vi'sT-r Note. — Sir W. Jones' says that the lights are to guide spirits 
of kinsmen who have died'abroad, or in battle, to Yama's halls. 

Again, a legend^ is told that once, on th« birth of a 
son to King Haima, his death from snake bite was 
prophesied to occur on the fourth day after marriage. 
In order to cheat fate, the boy was carefully kept in a 
snakeproof suite of rooms, built on an island in the 
river Yamuna. 

But on the fateful day a snake was produced from 
King Raima's sneeze, and the boy was bitten and died. 

' Asiatic Researches, III, p. 25 f. ' Sharma, p. 223. 



SOLAR AND SEASONAL FESTIVALS 61 

At so sorrowful an event even Yama's messengers, 
who came to carry away the boy's spirit, felt pity, and 
asked their lord if nothing could be done to avert such 
calamities. 

Yama said that the lighting of lamps every evening, 
from Asvina krishna thirteenth to Karttika suklu second, 
would avert a violent death. 

The ceremonies for this day are two, vis. 

(a) Very special bathing after anointing with oil, 
followed by putting on new clothes. A Maharashtra 

saying is, ^^ =^f^% f^l^oyTrrt ^wt ^ "^m^^ m ^RT ^. 
(■" On Naraka fourteenth Lakshmi {i.e. beauty] dwells 
in oil and Ganga {i.e. cleanliness] in water.") 

Even the poorest manage to obtain some new 
garment for this day. 

(d) Lighting lamps in every house and Vaishnava 
temple. The rich have costly illuminations, the poor 
at least one small lamp. Squibs, crackers and more 
elaborate fireworks are lighted. 

It is a time for family reunions, rejoicing and 
feasting, a significanl name for it in Maharashtra being 
=^ f^ (vulgarly, " Chewing day ")• 

(iii) Lakshmi puja. (Asvina new moon.) On this 
third and middle day of the festival Lakshmi is 
worshipped in the evening, after an all-day fast. A 
small altar is prepared, and such images of gods as 
the household possesses are placed upon it, with 
Lakshmi in the place of honour. Fruit and flowers are 
offered with mantras, and afterwards the family feast 
and continue the rejoicings of the previous day. 

Note. — In Bengal- Kali is worshipped, with a clay figure, 
instead of Lakshmi, whose place, and that of Sarasvatl, she has 
practically taken. 

Some, on this day, offer propitiatory worship, with 
black offerings, to Alakshmi, goddess of adversity, to 
induce her to keep away. 

(iv) Dipavalt proper, or Baliworship day. (Karttika 
lukla first.) In some parts of India this is the first day 
of the year, and it is kept as such by traders all over 



62 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

the country, who open their new account books this 
day. Besides this custom four others are found, vis. 

(a) Bali himself is worshipped in Maharashtra, in 
compensation, it is said, for having lost his kingdom. 
A representation of him is made and offerings of fruit, 
flowers, etc., are given, the following verse being 
sung: f^rftST «nft I ^f^ TT^ ^ ("May all troubles 
depart and Bali's kingdom come ").^ The same verse 
is also sung by bands of men of the non-caste races, 
who go about begging. 

The wish expressed in this verse is not compatible 
with the rejoicings at Bali's defeat, and the lighting of 
lamps on purpose to keep clear of him, and, as it is 
more common among the low-castes, Manwaring^ 
is probably right in ascribing it to the Siidras, whose 
champion, King Bali, was against the overbearing higher 
castes. If this is correct, we have the interesting sight 
of a festival kept by the descendants of two parties to a 
long-ago struggle, both camps celebrating both prota- 
gonists on successive days. 

(^) A tug-of-war is held between high-caste and low- 
caste men, holding the ends of a pole wrapped in darbha 
grass. (This is another sign of the probability of an 
inter'Caste feud as origin. It is not much observed now- 
adays. ) 

(c) In Bengal Bali worship is unknown, and in its 
place we have the launching, on a stream, by women 
and girls, at twilight, 6f small saucers containing each 
a lamp. If the lamp founders, or drifts ashore again, 
the year will bring misfortune ; but if it floats safely 
downstream, the year will be happy. 

(rf) Cow and bullock worship. The animals are 
washed, fed, and adorned with garlands, etc., then 
worshipped and led round the village, and on coming 
home lighted lamps are waved round them to ward 
off evil spirits. (See Pola and Bendiira, Chap. VI, 
p. 118.) 

* Marathl Proverbs, Manwaring, p. 137. 
» Ibid. 



SOLAR AND SEASONAL FESTIVALS 63 

(v) Yama or Bhaublja dvitlya. (Karttika sukla 
second. ) This is the last day of the festival. The daily 
bathing, anointing with oil and lighting of lamps con- 
tinues, but to-day's chief feature is the exchange of 
amenities between brothers and sisters, to celebrate 
Yama's dining with his sister Yamuna. Every man and 
boy must dine to-day in his sister's house ; failing a 
sister a cousin is considered an equivalent. In exchange 
for the feast provided, he is expected to make a present 
of clothing, coin or jewellery, according to his means. 
Since Yama is believed to have shut up his house this 
day while visiting his sister, no one dying to-day will 
have to go to Yama's abode. 

Besides this custom, some worship Yama at noon, 
making offerings to his image, and those who have the 
opportunity bathe in the river Yamuna (Jamna). 

With this day the festival ends. 

The Dipavali is considered the special festival of 
the Vaisya caste, as the Rakhi purnima, the Dasara and 
the Holi are of the Brahman, Kshatriya and SMra 
castes. It was the new year of former days,^ referred 
by some to the King Vikramaditya round whom so 
much controversy rages (Chap. I, p. 15), and the begin- 
ning of the Samvat era called by his name. Some 
say it celebrates the crowning of Rama on his return 
from Lanka. And as this same reason is one of those' 
given for the rejoicings on the present new year (Chaitra 
first), it adds to the proof that this was a seasonal, i.e. 
a new year festival. 

The modern Hindu considers it symbolic of the 
-triumph of the light of knowledge over the darkness of 
ignorance. 

The Yugadi. (Anniversaries of the beginnings of 
the Yuga.) Four days in each year are appointed as 
anniversaries of the four Yuga of the present world-age 
(Chap. I, p. 14). These differ slightly in different 
parts of India. The days are as under : 



Gupte, /./4., XXXII, p. 237. 



64 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

F. & H. and Bombay Panchanga, 

Lunar Year etc. 
Satya (Krlta) 

Yuga began Vaigakha Su. third Karttlka Su. ninth 

Treta " , Karttika Su. ninth VaiSakha Su. third 
Dvapara „ Bhadra.kri. thirteenth Magha new moon. 

Kali „ Magha full moon Bhadra. kri. thirteenth 

On all of these days one should bathe in some sacred 
river, give alms to Brahmans, and ofEer sesamum seed 
and water to the spirits of the departed. This water 
offering is called Tarpana, 

The Treta and Dvapara Yugadi are not much 
observed. To keep the Treta properly an empty gourd 
should be filled with gold, silver, or jewels, and given 
to a Brahman, to procure a place in heaven. The Kali 
Yugadi, on Magha full moon, is kept as a bathing 
festival throughout North India ; but the greatest of the 
four is the Satya Yugadi, the beginning of the Satya 
Yuga, and consequently of the present world-age. This 
day is known as Akshayya^ tritiya, and is kept through- 
out India on Vaisakha sukla third, even in Maharashtra, 
where it is not counted as the anniversary of the Satya 
but of the Treta Yuga. 

To bathe this day, and to give fans, umbrellas and 
money to Brahmans is believed to earn imperishable 
(akshayya) merit. The performance -of it is con- 
sequently very popular. If it occurs on a Wednesday, 
especially if the moon is in the Rohini nakshatra, it is 
even more auspicious. Fresh cold water is put in a 
vessel, and in the water camphor, myrrh, supari nuts, 
coins, flowers, sacred rice and diirva grass. A cocoanut 
is placed on the top, and the whole is garlanded, 
worshipped, and given to a Brahman with a tulasi leaf. 
This ceremony is known as Udakumbhadana (myrrh- 
pot-gift). 

In Bengal and Orissa a flower festival is held at thi^ 
time and lasts for three weeks. It is called 

Chandana Yatra, and flowers and fans, scented with 
sandal (chandana) oil are presented to Brahmans. At 

» Hindu Year, p. 10 ; Gup^e, p. S ; Sharma, p, 34. 



SOLAR AND SEASONAL FESTIVALS 65 

Puri, the image of Madanamohana, substituted for that 
of Jagannatha, is daily taken out to the Narendra tank, 
put in a boat, and taken round with music. It is also 
anointed with oil and bathed. 

At the sraddha performed in the last half of 
Bhadrapada (see Chap. VI, p. 114), the meal and 
offerings are considered to be given less to the 
Brahman, who acts as medium, than to the spirits of the 
departed. On Akshayya third, the person of the 
medium is much more to the fore. The cool water and 
sacred rice are given for the departed, but the fan and 
umbrella, and especially the coin in the water-pot, are 
for the living recipient. This day comes at the 
beginning of the hot season, and it is evidently believed 
that the dead still continue to feel heat and thirst. 

The Gauri celebrations, which began on Chaitra sukla 
third (see p. 100) , end to-day ; Gauri is believed to 
return to her husband's house after a month's holiday 
in her parents' home. Many woipen in Maharashtra 
give a final party to their friends, when a present of 
halad-kunku (i.e. turmeric and red lead powder) is 
handed to each guest. 



CHAPTER IV 

ON LUNAR AND PLANETARY FESTIVALS 

I. Moon Worship 

Moon worship was as iiatural to primitive man as 
sun worship ; and although the moon had not that 
effect upon'the seasons and harvests which caused the 
sun to be recognised as so great an influence in human 
life, yet its greater visibility, its mysterious waxing 
and waning, and the variation in the time of its nightly 
appearance, all united to make it an object of study and 
reverence. ^ 

In Vedic and post-Vedic times the moon, as' an 
object of worship, was inferior to the sun (Hopkins^ 
says, it was " never a god of much importance"), but 
some believe that in the yet earlier days of the Aryans, 
before the immigration into India, moon^ and star 
worship preceded sun worship, and the tracing of the 
moon's path through the nakshatra was the earliest 
developed side of Hindu astronomy. 

During Vedic times, ^ and afterwards increasingly, 
the moon came to be identified with the plant Soma, 
from which was extracted the drink of the gods (itself 
immortalised) . The grounds for this identification are 
not clear. They are indicated in passages in the Sata- 
patha Brahmana,* in which the belief is expressed that 
on the night of new moon he visits the earth. 

"When he is not seen that night either in the East 
or in the West, then he visits this world ; and here he 
enters into tlie waters and plants. . . . Having coUect- 

» Epic Mythology, E.I.A.R., p. 89. " Hewitt, pp. 3S1-S2. 
» Vedic Myth, E.I.A.R., p. 104. ' S.B.E., XII, p. 176, 



LUNAR AND PLANETARY FESTIVALS 67 

ed him from water and plants [via the milk of cows 
who have eaten him] , he, being reproduced from liba- 
tions, becomes visible in the Western sky." 

Again, the Petersburg Dictionary gives ij = a drop 
(applied to soma) and i^ — spark (applied to the moon). 
Hence both were called by the same name, which pos- 
sibly was one cause leading to their final identification. 

As was to be expected, many legends grew as 
explanations of the monthly waxing and waning of the , 
moon, and of its occasional eclipse. 

With regard 'to the former, the two most popular 
are that in the Satapatha Brahmana,^ i.e. that the moon 
waxes till the full, while approaching the sun, when it is 
seized, eaten and sucked dry, and then thrown out to begin 
to swell again, and the later^ one to the effect that the 
twenty-seven nakshatras were wives of the moon, of 
whom Rohini was his favourite. His devotion to her 
aroused the jealous anger of the other twenty-six, who 
caused him to be attacked by consumption. Through 
austerities and worship he recovered, temporarily, from 
his sickness, only to be attacked anew every month, as 
soon as health is established. 

The legend of the origin of eclipses, whether solar 
or lunar, has been given above (p. 28). 

1. Amavasya (new moon) and Purnima (full moon) . 
In Vedic times the full moon, new moon, and eclipse 
days were ordained as whole-day fasts, or at most. as 
one-meal days. On the full moon, sacrifices of rice, 
soma, sweet and sour milk were offered to Agni-Soma, 
and on the new moon to Indra-Agni, and there seems 
reason to believe these were originally animal or even 
human sacrifices, very elaborate and requiring two days 
for their observance. 

Oldenberg says that these new and full moon sacri- 
fices, both of which he connects with Indra, do not 
imply that Indra worship had any connection with the 

' S.B.E., XII, p. 182. 

" Epic Mythology, E.I.A.R., p. 89. 

' Religion des Veda (Prof. V. Henry's trans., p. 376). 



68 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

pliases of the moon, which was merely a dial noting the 
hours at which honour should be paid to this most 
powerful of the gods. So that these bi-monthly sacri- 
fices were not originally moon worship at all. 

The reason for the fast is variously given. The 
Satapatha Brahmana^ says that the performance of the 
sacrificial rite necessitates the presence of the gods : 
" Now, as it would tsven be unbecoming for him to take 
food, before men (staying with him as his guests) have 
eaten, how much more would it be so, if he were to take 
food before the gods (who are staying with him) have 
eaten; let him, therefore, take no food at all." 
Apastamba' gives a different reason : " During the 
day the sun protects, during the night the moon. 
Therefore, on the new moon night one must protect 
oneself by rites, purity, etc., especially as the spirits of 
the Fathers, who live in the moon, awake' on the new 
moon day and are most active, and likely to influence 
men. 

All who make any claim to orthodoxy, fast and 
worship the moon on new and full moon days at the 
present time. There is also a custom in Maharashtra 
of plucking a thread from an old, garment, and throwing 
it towards the new moon, as an offering, in the hope 
that he will grant a new garment. This is called the 
Dasi vahana, or new moon offering. 

The origin of the name Amavasya (from Ama = 
together, at home, and vas = to dwell) has been 
explained to mean, either that the sun and moon. are 
dwelling together at that time, or that (see above) the 
moon is dwelling with water and plants on the earth. 
Many of the Seasonal and other festivals are held on 
new or full moon days. 

2. Parvar^ days. The sixth, eighth, and tenth of 
each half month were known as Parvan days, on which 
fasting and chastity were to be observed, but they are 
disregarded to-day by the ordinary Hindu. 

» S.B.E., XII, p. 5. S.B.E. 



■., XII, p. 5. 5.5.£.,II,p. 94. 

Lqws of Manu, S.B.E., III, p. 45, 



LUNAR AND PLANETARY FESTIVALS 69 

3. Vinayaki (Obstacle remover) Santkashta (Diffi- 
culty) days. 

The moon is worshipped by some on the fourth of 
every light and dark half, a fast being kept all day 
until after dark. But this custom is becoming merged 
in Ganesa worship, the devotees of whomr fast on 
these same days, worshipping him in the dark half at 
moon-rise ; the names too, " Obstacle Remover " and 
" Difficulty," refer to him, not to the moon. 

Another instance of the connection between Ganesa 
and the moon is the fact that on Ganesa chaturthi^ (Bha- 
drapada sukla fourth) it is thought most inauspicious to 
see the moon. If one sees it by accident, he throws stones 
on to the roof of a neighbour's house, in order to draw 
abuse upon himself, and so avert the evil. This custom 
is so prevalent that the day is sometimes called ^il^ ^sf 
("Stone-throwing fourth"), and the Marathi expression, 
^HHt ^ TTf'f ("To see the fourth day moon "), is an 
equivalent for suffering calamity. 

The legend is that the moon once laughed at seeing 
Ganesa fall off his rat steed, which so much incensed the 
elephant-headed god that he cursed the moon and 
all who ever beheld it. Relenting later, he removed 
the curse, except for this one night in the year. 

The object of drawing down abuse -by stoning 
a house roof is that, being under a curse and liable 
to calamity, it is better to court a light one, deliberately, 
without delay, than to go in fear of a heavy one falling 
unexpectedly ; also that bad language scares away evil 
spirits (see p. 45). 

4. Somavati.^ A new moon falling on a Monday is 
a day specially to be observed by fasting and bathing, 
since great merit accrues from so doing. Besides bathing 
one should wear a silk garment, keep silence, and 
circumambulate a pippal tree one hundred and eight 
times. Gold, jewels and fruit should be offered to the 
tree, and afterwards given to a Brahman. Cotton and 
radishes (both white) must not be touched. Ordinary 

» Sharma, p. 80. ' Gupte, p. 159 ; Hindu Yedr, p. 7. 



70 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

people do not observe this last, but they will lay fruit 
at the foot of a pippal tree. 

5. Light half second. This day in every month is 
sacred to the moon, and is to be worshipped on it. 

6. All Mondays. The moon, besides becoming 
identified with the plant Soma, became closely con- 
nected with. Siva, and both are worshipped on Mon- 
days. 

II. Star ok Planet Worship 

This is not very common and occurs chiefly in the 
month of Sravana. The pole star is, however, an 
object of worship at weddings, by the bride and bride- 
groom. 

1 and 2. Mercury^ and Jupiter are worshipped on 
all the Wednesdays and , Thursdays respectively of 
Sravana, of which days they are the lords. They are 
worshipped in the morning with garlands. If grain is 
desired, figures of these planets are drawn on the corn- 
bin; if wealth, '*pn the store-chest ; and it is hoped the 
desire will find fulfilment. 

3. Venus^ is worshipped on Fridays in Sravana. 
Although the planet Sukra is considered by Hindus 
masculine, not feminine, yet it is interesting to note that 
Sukra worship has become merged in Lakshmi worship, 
and that the Sravana Friday fast (until 4.0 p.m.)- is 
performed with a view to obtaining benefits from that 
goddess. 

4. Saturn^ is worshipped on all Sravana Saturdays, 
with the object of obtaining wealth. These days are 
known as Sampat Sanivara (wealth Saturdays), and 
a special rite is performed, i.e. a platfrom is erected 
at±he foot of a pippal tree, and on it a picture of Saturn 
is drawn, resembling the traditional figure of Yama, 
with noose and cudgel, and seated on a buffalo. The 
tree is circumambulated, and black offerings are made, 

' Gupte. 

' Gupte, pp. 48, 50-54 ; Bom. Gaz., XVIII, p. 241. 

' Gupte. 



LUNAR AND PLANETARY FESTIVALS 71 

such as black salt, charcoal, or a buffalo. Aa iron 
ring may also be worn to propitiate the god. 

The worship of Hanuman or Mafuti, the monkey 
god, is becoming" combined with that of Saturn. 
Enthoven^ says, that in the Konkan Sampat Sanivara 
is kept as' a whole-day fast, and offerings are made, 
with the object of gaining wealth, to Maruti, not to 
Saturn. (So also the Bombay Gazetteer.) 

No trace is found of the Mars worship on the 
Sravana Tuesdays which would be expected, but Tues- 
days are devoted to the worship of Gauri. Again, all 
Mondays are devoted to the worship of Siva more than 
to that of the moon. 

The following table shows the trend at the present 
day to substitute other deities for those of the lords of 
the week days : 

'*• 
Sunday Sun worship 

Monday Moon „ (decreasing) Siva worship (increasing) 
Tuesday Mars ,, (died out) Gaurl ,, (established) 
Wednesday Mercury ,, 
Thursday Jupiter „ 

Friday Venus ,, (decreasing) Lakshml ,, (increasing) 
Saturday Saturn ,, Hanuman,, 

5. J^ishi panchami^ (Seers' fifth), or Prayaichii 
(Atonement). Bhadrapada sukla fifth. 

On this day and on Sravana full moon (see p. 133) 
stars, other than the planets, are worshipped ; the single 
survival (excepting the pole star worship at weddings, 
see p. 70) of what is likely to have been common in 
ancient days. In Vedic times the spirits of certain 
departed great seers of the earth were believed to 
inhabit certain of the stars, the most famous being the 
Seven of the North, i.e. the seven brightest stars of 
the constellation Ursa Major^. Later, the seers became 
identified with the stars they inhabited. 

The seven worshipped on Rishi fifth are as under : 
Kasyapa, Atri, Bharadvaja, Visvamitra, . Gautama, 

' Folklore of Konkan, I.A., XLIII, p. 21. 

' Hindu Year, pp. 18, 34 ; Molesworth, ykl'h'ft. 



72 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

Jamadagni and Vasishtha ;^ or Kratu, Pulaha, Pulastya, 
Atri, Angirasa, Vasishtha and Mariehi.^ With whom is 
usually associated Arundhati, the wife of Vasishtha 
(the fainter star close to the middle one of the "bear's 
tail"). 

This is a women's festival, and worship is offered to 
atone for unwitting sin committedby reason of impurity. 
At least two legends with regard to it are current. 

(i) A woman, through neglecting the laws regarding 
impurity, became reborn as a dog, her husband as an ox, 





.ArundhatT 














#VaBlsrithB 

Of 

Jamadagni 


•Aftgtrasa 
or 
Gautama 


Atrl 
• or 

Vltfvftmltra 






Kmtu 

Of 

Kasyai 




' 




• or 
BaradvBJa 






0puiatui 

Of 

Atrl 


THE 


SHVEN OB 


■ THE NORTH ("GREAT 


*') 


BEAR 





for he also had sinned, although unconsciously, through 
having eaten food cooked by her. They lived in the 
home of their married son. The day on which the son 
was to perform their sraddha arrived, and the daughter- 
in-law was cooking the food to be offered to the Brahman 
guests. While she was out of the room, a snake in the 
roof dropped poison in the cooking pot, and the dog, to 
save her son from the charge of murder which would attach 
to him if his guests ate the food and were poisoned, 
defiled the food. When the daughter-in-law returned 
and saw the dog with its head in the dish, she was 
very angry, -and drove it from the house with blows 
and curses. The dog took refuge in the ox's stall, and, 
the cup of their suffering being now full, their plea to 

» Sharma, p. 194 ; Enthoven, I.A., XL, p. 26. 
' Colebrooke, Asiatic JRes., IX, p. 323, etc. 



LUNAR AND PLANETARY FESTIVALS 73 

the gods for the gift of speech was granted, and they 
told their story to their son. He consulted a priest as 
to means for releasing his parents from their degraded 
condition. The priest explained the rites to be per- 
formed by the daughter-in-law, upon the observance of 
which the parents, becoming released, repaired to 
heaven. The daughter-in-law, fearful of incurring a 
similar fate, continued the rite annually, and the custom 
became established. 

(ii) The widowed daughter of a religious teacher, 
living with her parents, while resting one day after 
hard work, fell into a deep sleep, and was transformed 
into a heap of worms. Her father, distressed, sought 
in meditation the cause of this transformation, and it 
was revealed to him that in her former life she had 
defiled the cooking pots, by using them when she 
should have remained apart, owing to impurity. 

The only possible expiation was for her mother to 
keep the 5.ishi fifth as ordained, on her daughter's be- 
half. This being done, the girl was released from the 
curse, and from the sin. 

In both legends the cause of the drastic punishment 
was the same, and the dread of a similar fate is 
felt very really to-day ; so that the rites are care- 
fully observed. A woman, who is prevented from 
observing it on the appointed day, must do so on Vamana 
Dvadasi, a week later. 

The ceremonies are performed at noon. A woman 
must offer a mantra to the aghada plant, clean her teeth 
with a twig one hundred and eight times, and bathe, if 
possible in a stream, dipping one hundred and eight 
times, otherwise at home, pouring one hundred and . 
eight potsful of water over herself. The previous 
anointing is to be with sesamum oil, dried myrobalan 
dust, and earth, and she must drink paiichagavya.^ 
Afterwards she should assemble with other women, and 
worship the seven seers as follows : 

' The five products of the cow, vis. milk, curds, ghl, dung, 
and urine. 



74 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

Lucky symbols are drawn in colour on a board, on 
which is placed a copper vessel filled with clean water 
and wrapped in a new cloth. Then eight small heaps 
of rice are made (for the seven and Arundhati), and on 
each heap is put a supari nut or a pavitra, i.e. a ring 
made of darbha grass. Coins,, perfume, flowers and 
rice are put in the pot, and all these are worshipped 
with mantras. Afterwards the officiating priest receives 
presents and his fee, and gives his blessing. 

On this day nothing grown from bullocks' labour 
must be eaten. An onion must be bitten into and then 
thrown into a stream. 

Some say this should be repeated every year, others 
that it will suffice if performed for any seven successive 
years. The point which remains shrouded in obscurity 
is the connection between the seven seers and a woman's 
impurity. 



CHAPTER V 

ON VISHNU AND SlVA FESTIVALS 

I. Vishnu Festivals 

1. The Avatara (incarnations) . Vishnu was a Vedic 
god ; and the legend of his covering earth and sky in three 
stTrides is more than once mentioned in the Rigveda. At 
a later date, he received the great epithet Narayana, an 
early divine name connected with the creation. When 
the epic poems were turned into Vaishnava scriptures, 
probably in the second century B.C., Krishna, the hero of 
the Mahabharata, and Rama, the hero of the Ramayana, 
were declared to be incarnations of Vishnu. 

Thereafter the theory developed rapidly, many 
semi-divine beings found in the earlier literature 
being reinterpreted as incarnations of Vishnu. Even 
Buddha became an incarnation, sent into the world 
by Vishnu to deceive evil men into accepting the 
false faith Buddhism ! All Hindus recognize ten in- 
carnations of Vishnu, but among certain groups of 
Vaishnavas as many as thirty-nine are acknowledged 
and worshipped. 

Festival days are appointed in honour of these 
incarnations ; and those in honour of Rama and 
Krishna are observed all over India. The days in 
honour of the Man-lion, Dwarf, and Rama-with-the-axe 
are much less observed, whUe the three first and the 
two last are not noticed, except by priests and the 
ultra-orthodox. 

Vishnu is considered the protector and preserver of 
men, beneficent and kind. The ten incarnations are 
as follows :■ 



76 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

(i) Maisyavaiara or Fish incavnation. Chaitra sukla 
third. The earliest form of this legend^ occurs in the 
Satapatha Brahmana, where Manu, the ancestor of the 
human race, is drawn through the waters of the deluge 
in a boat, by a fish, to a place of safety. No mention is 
there made of the identity of the fish with Vishnu. 

(ii) Kurmavatara or Tortoise incarnation. Vaisakha 
sukla fifteenth. The Puranic story^ goes that at the churn- 
ing of the milky ocean by demons and gods, Vishnu, 
assuming the form of a tortoise, took Mount Meru, the 
churning post, on his back, as the earth was beginning to 
sink, and supported it. The Satapatha Brahmana^ says 
that Prajapati assumed a tortoise form to create living 
beings. The figure of a tortoise, carved in the stone 
pavement, is not uncommon outside Vishnu temples* 

(iii) Varahavatara or Boar incarnation. Bhadrapada 
sukla third. In the B^igveda* both Indra and Vishnu are 
connected with the slaying of a boar, although neither is 
identified with the animal. In the Satapatha Brahmana^ 
reference is made to a boar lifting up the earth, and "he 
was her lord Prajapati." The incarnation theory appears 
in the Ramayana, and in several of the Puranas. The 
Puranic story is that the earth being in danger of 
destruction through a great deluge, Vishnu became a 
boar, and upheld it on his tusks. The modern inter- 
pretation is that the boar is Sacrifice personified, i.e. 
that by which the world is raised to a spiritual level 
from the ocean -of evil. 

(iv) Nrisimhavatara or Man-lion incarnation. Vai- 
sakha sukla fourteenth. The Puranic story* is that 
Pralhada, son of Hiranyakasipu, a demon king, was an 
earnest devotee of Vishnu. His father tried in vain to 
turn him from his devotion, but he was preserved in all 
attempts on his life and continued his prayers, insisting 
on the existence and immanence of Vishnu. • Eventually 

> Myth. Studies in R. V., A. A. Macdonell, J.R.A.S., XXVII, 
p. 166. 

" Bhag. Pu., I, pp. 3-16. » S.B.B., XII, p. 216. 

• I, 61-7, and VIII, 77-10. ■ S.B.E., XLIV, p. 4S1. 

• Bhag. Pu., VII, 8-12. 



VISHl^U AND SIVA FESTIVALS 77 

Hiranyakasipu challenged his son to prove the presence 
of Vishnu in a certain pillar, whereupon Vishnu, in a 
shape half man half lion, sprang from the pillar and killed 
him. 

Those who observe this day^ must take only one 
meal on the thirteenth and bathe at noon on the 
fourteenth. In the evening the officiating priest must 
make a heap of rice, wheat, or other grain, placing on 
it a pot of water, and on that a tray containing a gold 
image of Nrisimha, which is to be worshipped. A vigil 
is observed all that night, next morning the image is 
again worshipped, and given to the priest, after the 
spirit has been dismissed from it. 

The use of the golden image precludes the general 
observance of this rite, and the day is not very much 
remembered, although the legend is a favourite one, 
and constantly quoted as proof of the immanence of 
God in inanimate things. 

At Puri the image of Jagannatha is covered with 
flowers, and wears a lion's face mask on this day. 

These first four incarnations are believed to have 
occurred in the first or Satya yuga of our present 
world-age. 

(v) Vamanavatara or Dwarf incarnation. Bhadrapada 
sukla twelfth. The legend of this incarnation has already 
been given (p. 60). Vishnu became Vamana in order 
to destroy Bali. The story is found in the Ramayana,^ 
and a slight reference to it is made in the Satapatha 
Brahmana^ (" Vishnu was a dwarf"). The modern 
explanation is that the merit Bali gained by piety and 
devotion was cancelled by the sin of pride. But popular 
sentiment is inclined to be on the side of Bali, and 
Vamana is not a favourite god. The word " vamana " 
means, when applied to anyone, a cheat^or deceiver. 

Those who observe this day* fast on the eleventh 
and worship the god at noon. A water vessel, 
in which are flowers, rice, etc., is placed on a heap 

* Sharma, p. 52. » I, 32. 

" S.B.E., XII, p. 59. * Sharma, p. 201 ; Hindu Year, p. 18, 



78 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

of grain, and covered with a tray containing rice 
in which is stood an image of Vamana, in the dress of 
a mendicant. This is worshipped with mantras. A 
vigil must be kept all night, one must bathe at dawn on 
the twelfth and repeat the previous day's worship,; 
afterwards a feast is held. The observance, where 
followed, is chiefly by women, it may be seen among 
the Deccani Brahmans, and one feature is the inviting 
of a young Brahman boy, whose thread ceremony has 
been performed but who is still unmarried, to the feast. 
He is considered the personification of Vamana (pro- 
bably on account of his short stature), and is given 
presents of a loin-cloth, shoes, an umbrella, and a 
mendicant's stafE. 

(vi) Paramramavatara or Rama-with-the-axe incar- 
nation. Vaisakha sukla third. The legend of this incar- 
nation is fotind in the Mahabharata.^ He was the fifth 
son of the sage, Jamadagni, and his wife Renuka, and at 
his father's command killed his mother, who had fallen, 
through envy, from the high estate of her - pious 
ascetic life. This murder was not considered a crime, 
but rather an act of filial piety, which was rewarded 
by Jamadagni' s restoring Renuka to life, releasing 
her from her sin, and granting Parasurama long life 
and invincibility. This double boon enabled him to 
carry out the purpose of his birth, viz. the extermina- 
tion of the Kshatriya race. Their king, Kartavirya, 
had made a raid on Jamadagni's forest dwelling, 
and carried off the calf of his cow which provided the 
milk for his oblations. Jamadagni killed Kartavirya, 
whose sons retaliated by killing Jamadagni. So the 
feud arose, and the whole Kshatriya caste incurred 
Parasurama's anger. With his famous axe "thrice 
seven times did he clear the earth of the Kshatriya 
caste." Having exterminated them, "and finding no 
place for himself and his BrShmans on the Konkan 
shore, he demanded land from the sea.^ On being 

' Vana Parvan. 

» Enthoven, I.A., XLIV, p. 25 ; Folklore of Konkan. 



VISHl^U AND giVA FESTIVALS 79 

refused, he strung his bow to shoot back the sea, but 
the arrow feW short and he reclaimed but a narrow 
^trip of land. 

He is also credited with having cleft the Brah- 
makund gorge with his axe, to set free the Brahma- 
putra river. ^ . He finally retired to the Mahendra 
mountain, where he still lives. 

The legend probably commemorates an old feud 
leading to constant warfare between Brahmans and 
Kshatriyas. Parasurama's worship is not at all general, 
being chiefly observed in the Konkan, where his battles 
are reputed to have taken place. He is the special 
diety of the Chitpavana Brahmans (Konkanastha), and 
is worshipped at Chipluna, and wherever a temple is 
dedicated to him, on the evening of Vaisakha iukla 
third. 

(vii) Ramachandr avatar a. Chaitra sukla ninth to 
eleventh. The story of Rama is too well known to need 
inclusion here. He was a popular epic hero before he 
came to be considered a Vishnu incarnation. Hermann 
Jacobi^ points out that in Books H to VI of the Rama- 
yana there is no suggestion of divinity about him. He 
was the human hero-prince, and only in Books I and 
Vn, admittedly not earlier than the second century 
A.D., is the theory of his divinity put forward. Rama 
worship has thus existed from that date ; and there is a 
fair amount of mediaeval Rama literature, shewing that 
the god was continuously popular ; but his great vogue 
in North India dates from Ramananda of the fifteenth 
century, and from the poet Tulsi Das of the sixteenth 
century, who wrote his Ramayana in the Hindi tongue that 
all might read it. Since then Rama worship has been 
very widespread ; the places associated with his life are 
places of pilgrimage, and his birthday is a day of great 
rejoicing at all his temples. For the first nine days of 
Chaitra^ readings from the Ramayana are given, and at 
noon on the ninth his birth is announced to the 

' Anderson, J.R.A S., XXXII, p. 791. 

« Incarnation (Indian), E.R.E., VII, p. 193. 

' Hindu Year, p. 8 ; Sharma, p. 20. 



80 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

assembled crowds before the temple, and in some 
places the small image of a baby is displayed. 

On the ninth, called Ramanavami, a fast is kept, and 
a vigil on the succeeding night. His image, with that 
of his wife Sita and his brother Lakshmana, is wor- 
shipped in every home with mantras. 

Rejoicing, bathing and feasting mark the second day 
of the festival, which if kept aright will cleanse even 
from the sin of Brahmanicide. The feast in Maha- 
rashtra is prolonged until midnight of the eleventh, car 
processions being held at the larger temples on that day 
at evening. 

The above fifth, sixth and seventh incarnations are 
believed to have occurred in the second or Treta yuga 
of the present world-age. 

(viii) Krishnavatara. Sravana krishna eighth. This 
is the only incarnation celebrated in the dark half of a 
month ; the name of the god, ' ' the dark one, " is probably 
the reason for this. As stated above, the identifying of 
Rama and Krishria, the heroes of the Epics, with Vishnu 
and Narayana, was the starting-point of the Vishnu 
incarnation theories. 

Barth* identifies Krishna with an " Indian Hercules," 
whose worship Megasthenes found in the Ganges valley 
in the third century B.C., and agrees that he is probably 
the most ancient of the incarnations. The story of 
Krishna^s birth and childhood is, like that of Rama's, 
too well known to need insertion here. It is found in 
the Mahabharata'^ and some of the Puranas, and 
numerous legends have grown up about him. Bhandar- 
kar' says that the stories of his boyhood in Gokula 
were unknown until about the- beginning of the 
Christian era. 

Krishria worship has existed continuously in the 
Vaishnava sects from the second century B.C., but was 
immensely strengthened by the great popularity of 
Vaishnava Bhakti from A.D. 900 onward. The Marathi 

' Religions of India, trans. Wood, p. 168. 

' Vana Parvan, V. 

« Bhandarkar, E.I.A.R., pp. 36, 37. 



VISHlSfU AND SlVA FESTIVALS 81 

poets, from Jnanadev (thirteenth century) to Tukaranx 
(seventeenth century), in Western India ; Nimbarka, in 
the North ; Vallabha (fifteenth century) , in the South ; 
and Chaitanya, in Bengal, all developed Krishna, Krish9a- 
Radha or Krishna-Rukmini worship, of which the 
purest form was the last, Rukminl being regarded as his 
wife, Radha as his mistress. 

He is believed to have lived at the close of the 
third or Dvapara yuga of our present world-age ; the 
beginning of the Kali yuga dating from -the day of his 
death. 

To keep the festival aright,^ on the seventh of the 
dark half an elaborate presentation of the birth-room 
should be made, with images of Devaki and the infant 
Krishna, in gold, brass, plaster, etc., also one of Yasoda 
with her girl baby, who was exchanged with Krishna 
to preserve the latter from death at the hands of his 
uncle Kamsa. At midnight Krishna is to be worshipped 
with mantras. A complete fast is to be kept, during 
the whole of the eighth tithi, irrespective of the hour of 
the solar day or night at which it begins or ends. 

On the morning of the eighth one should bathe in cold 
water, if possible in a stream, after anointing with oil. 
At the close of the f a^t the image is thrown into water, 
if of clay, etc., or returned to the image cupboard of the 
house if of metal, the spirit having been dismissed 
from it. 

This festival is more popular in the North than the 
South. 

Other Krishna festivals, besides that of his birthday, 
are kept, especially at Puri, the site of the famous 
temple to him under the name of Jagannatha. The 
largest and best known is : 

w (a) Ratha yatra,^ or Chariot fair. Ashadha sukla 
second. The preparation for this festival begins in the 
previous month with the bathing festival, known as the 
Sndna yatra, on Jyeshtha full moon, when the images 
of Jagannatha (Krishna), his brother, Balabhadra 

» Sharma, p. 148. ' F. & H., p. 68. 



82 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

Balarama, and sister, Subhadra, are taken from the 
temple to a high platform outside, where they can be 
seen from the road. One hundred and eight pitchers 
of water from a special well, drawn only on this day, 
are brought and used in bathing the images before 
sunrise. This celebrates the descent of the Jagannatha 
image to earth. 

The chariot procession celebrates the setting out of 
Krishna and Balarama to Mathura from Gokula, to kill 
their uncle, Kainsa. The three images mentioned above 
are taken in procession from the temple to the garden 
house, one and a half miles away. It is believed that 
whoever catches a glimpse of Jagannatha on the way 
will be saved from rebirths. Immense crowds attend, 
and the question of whether death beneath the wheels of 
the car is due to self-immolation or accident, is still an 
open one. 

The images remain at the garden house until 
Ashadha sukla tenth, when the return procession (Punar- 
yatra or Uttararatha yatra) takes place. Car processions 
are held at this time wherever there is a Jagannatha 
temple. 

(6) Swinging- festivals^ are also held in honour of 
Krishna, in different parts of India, at different times. 
The Hindola or Jhulana yatra is held from Sravana 
sukla eleventh to fifteenth in North India. A swinging 
platform is made for the occasion, and decorated with 
flowers and hangings. Every night Krishna and Radha 
are placed on it and swung, to dancing and singing of a 
special metre the "hindola." The object is to please 
Krishna, and therefore gain from him merit, wealth, and 
pleasure. 

The Pushpadola is a swinging festival, held in 
Orissa, in the month Phalguna, coinciding with the Holi 
festival in other parts of India. 

(c) Govinda dvadait, on Phalguna sukla twelfth, 
celebrates Krishna's life as a cowherd. He is wor- 
shipped this day in Bengal under his name of Govinda. 

" F. &H., p. 37. 



VISHlilU AND giVA FESTIVALS 83 

(d) Govardhana pratipada, on Karttika sukla first. 
(In Konkan on Asvina krishna fourteenth. ) ' On this day 
Krishna is believed to /have held up the Govardhana 
mountain to protect the cowherds from Indra's wrath in 
the form of torrential rain. Hence he is worshipped, 
by the Vallabha sect, by their making on this day a 
large heap of rice, or cowdung, or vegetables, repre- 
senting the mountain, in memory of him. 

((f) Rasa yatra, from Karttika sukla tenth to fif- 
teenth. During these days his life with the herds- 
women, or Gopis, is celebrated. 

(ix) Buddhavatdra. Asvini sukla tenth. Gautama 
Buddha, the founder of Buddhism, which was originally 
a reform sect of Hinduism, has been given a place 
among the ten incarna,tions, as a great religious teacher, 
who could not be overlooked. 

Hinduism did not, however, succeed in retaining- 
Buddhism within its borders, and this incarnation day 
is wholly disregarded, and only noted in calendars. 

(x) Kalkyavatara. Sravana sukla sixth. Tliis incar- 
nation, known also as Nishkalaiikavatara (Stainless), 
is yet to come, although the month and day is already 
determined. In the Vana Parvan of the Mahabharata 
the coming of Kalki is foretold as a time when 
righteousness shall ■ be re-established, and men shall 
reform from the depravity of the present Kali age, 
giving way to a race which shall follow the laws of the 
Satya yuga. 

" When sun and moon and Tishya (nakshatra 
Pushya) and Jupiter are in one mansion, the Krita age 
shall return." 

Although this day is not celebrated, and not even 
always noted in calendars, there exists a real expecta- 
tion of a coming incarnation who shall be a reformer of 
religion and society. 

These two last avatara are in the fourth, or 
Kali yuga, of the present world-age. i 

2. The Ekadaii days, sometimes called Haridini 
(Hari's days) . Besides the ten days appointed (but not 
all regarded) for worship of Vishnu under the form of 



84 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

his various incarnations, two^days in every month, vim. 
the eleventh of each half, are appointed as strict fasts 
in his honour, preceded by a partial fast on the tenth, 
and followed by an all-night vigil. - These fasts should 
be kept from a man's eighth to his eightieth year, i.e. 
during his whole life from initiation. Women may 
keep the fasts provided they do so with their father's 
or husband's consent. 

Attention is directed, on each of these twenty-four 
days, to some reason why the fast should be kept, or to 
some benefit accruing from it, and failure to observe it 
is considered a sin. It has been suggested that, as 
Saivism grew in strength and popularity, several days 
in each month being kept in honour of Siva or of his 
wife Durga, the Vaishnavas, to strengthen their position, 
appointed these two days monthly for Vishnu worship. 

Professor Wilson^ points out that the extravagant 
veneration in which the fast is held "demonstrates its 
sectarian character, and consequently its more modern 
origin." The Mahabharata^ notes the merit gained by 
fasting on the twelfth tithi, combined with Vishniu 
worship, and the Vishnu Purana^ gives both the eighth 
and the twelfth tithi as sacred to Vishnu. The former 
day has now been dropped, and, the eleventh has been 
substituted for the twelfth. 

The popular idea as to the origin is as follows : — 
Siva,* being propitiated by the worship of a demon, 
Mridumanya, promised him invincibility in battle and 
immunity from death except at the hands of a woman 
not born of woman. Whereupon Mridumanya began to 
harass the gods, who appealed to Vishnu, Siva and 
Brahma for help. The three retired to a cave on 
a mountain, where, through fasts and meditation, they 
hoped to devise a means of helping without breaking 
Siva's oath. 

As rain was falling at the time, their fast was also 
accompanied by an involuntary bath. Crowded as they 

> Miscellaneous Essays, p. 29. « AnuSasana Parva. 

• WUson's trans., I, xx, 67. « Sharma, p. 100, etc. 



VISHJIU AND SIVA FESTIVALS 85 

were in the cave, from their breath was produced a 
woman, who joined battle with the demon and slew 
him. The grateful immortals worshipped her and 
inquired her name, which she gave as Ekadasi ( [the 
spirit of] the eleventh), saying that everyone who 
bathed and fasted on all eleventh tithi should be 
delivered from sin and sorrow. This institution dates 
from Puranic times. 

The eleventh day of the light halves of Ashadha 
and Karttika (the beginning and end of the four 
months' rainy season) are especially important, being 
known as Mahaikadasi (great elevenths). 

On the eleventh of Ashadha, Vishnu is believed to 
retire beloy/ the ocean for his four months' sleep, and 
on the eleventh of Karttika to awake and return. 

The whole twenty-four days are very generally 
kept throughout Maharashtra, jvhere — the barrier 
between Vaishnava and Saiva being very slight — 
followers of Siva are not uncommonly found to be 
keeping the same fast in his honour. 

The names of the twenty-four Ekadasi days, and 
the legends attaching to them, are as under : 

Chaitra light halt^ Kamadaikadasl (Wish-granting 
eleventh). Lalita Gandharva was changed by his Naga 
lord into a demon, for failing to sing properly^ His wife, 
Lalita, learned from a sage that by propitiating Vishnu 
by fasting on Chaitra sukla eleventh, she could acquire 
such merit as, being transferred to her husband, would 
effect his release. She observed it and gained her 
desire. 

Cliaitra dark halt. Varuthinyekadaii (Equipped 
[with merit] eleventh). Whoever will keep the fast 
of this day, will gain as much merit as the gift of a 
thousand cows would procure ; i.e. he is fully equipped 
with sufficient merit to balance all possible sins. 

Vaisakha light half. Mohinyekadaii (Temptation 
eleventh) . Dhrishtabuddhi, son of Dhanapala Vaisya, 



Year. 



TBis section chiefly from the li^dli^^f^ iq^|^4j^ and Hindu 



86 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

squandered all his money on evil living. He was 
turned out of doors by his father and finally banished 
by the king. Wandering desolate in a forest, he found 
a sage who showed him how, by observing this fast, 
to become free from his former temptations and 
regain his lost wealth. 

Vaisak/ia dark half. Aparaikudasl (Unequalled ele- 
venth). The merit which can be gained by keeping 
this fast is equal to all that can come from purificatory 
bathing and giving of alms. Hence it is unequalled in 
value. 

Jyeshtha light halt; NirjalaikadaH (Waterless 
eleventh). Bhimasena, one of the five Pandava 
brothers, was a great eater, and found it impossible to 
keep the ekadasi fasts^. The sage Vyasa told him for 
his comfort that if he would keep this single fast once, 
rigidly abstaining even from water, either for drinking 
or bathing, he could gain as much merit as by observing 
the whole twenty-four. He is reported to have fasted 
only this once in all his life, in order to gain success in 
the battle against the Kauravas. 

Jyeshtha dark half. Yoginyek&daii (Austere ele- 
venth). Kubera, lord of wealth, and devotee of Siva, 
had a gardener whose duty was to supply him with 
flowers for his worship. One day, the flowers not 
being forthcoming, Kubera found his gardener neglect-' 
ing his work in order to spend time with his beautiful 
wife. For this fault the wretched man was cursed to 
become a leper. After much suffering, he learnt from 
a sage the merit obtainable by keeping this fast, and 
through practising austerities on this day he was freed 
from the curse. 

Ashadha light half. SayinyekadaSi (Sleeping ele- 
venth). In King Maghata's reign a severe famine 
came on the earth, no rain having fallen for three years. 
The king and all his subjects gathered together and 
asked advice from a sage. He advised them to keep 
this day's fast, praying for Vishnu's help. As a result 
of following this advice, heavy rain fell and the famine 
was over. 



VISHNU AND Siva festivals 87 

This day celebrates Vishnu's retiring beneath the 
ocean for his four months' sleep, and is one of the two 
great ekadasi, which must be observed by all 
Vaishnavas as follows. A strict fast must be kept from 
noon on the tenth until the early morning, before sun- 
rise, on the twelfth. Both intervening nights should be 
spent in meditating on Vishnu and singing his praises. 
Early on the eleventh one should bathe, if possible in 
a sacred river, and worship some form of Vishnu. In 
the evening an image of Vishnu must be worshipped 
with flowers and water, with mantras, and then arrang- 
ed in a recumbent position, as if for sleep. Presents, 
according to one's ability, must be given to Brahmans. 

Ashadha dark half. Kumikaikadasl (Wish- granting 
eleventh). If anyone, having a great desire unfulfilled, 
will obsefve this day's fast, keeping the desire 
constantly in mind, the merit obtained will be sufficient 
to grant the desire. 

Sr&vana light half. Putradaikadasi (Son-giving 
eleventh) . King Mahijit was sonless, and consequently 
he, his wife, and his subjects were much distressed. 
They all went to consult a sage who, by most rigorous 
austerities, had come to know past, present and future. 
He told them that the lack of a son was due to the 
king, in his former birth as a Vaisya merchant, having 
once drunk water on a Jyeshtha sukla twelfth. This 
demerit could, however, be cancelled if in the present 
birth he fasted on Sravana sukla eleventh. He did so, 
and a son was born. 

Note. — This points to the transition from the twelfth to the 
eleventh day, and also suggests that the twenty-four days were 
not instituted simultaneously as fasts. The Jyeshtha fast was 
older than the Sravana one. 

Sravana dark halt. Ajaikadasl (Illusion eleventh). 
This deals with the well-known story of King 
Harischandra, who fell upon evil days, lost his wife 
and son and kingdom, and was condemned to wash the 
burial clothes of corpses at the burning ghat. In 
depression and despair, he was meditating suicide when 
Gautama found him, and told him of the merit obtain- 



88 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

able by keeping this fast. Following Gautama's advice, 
he overcame his ill fate, finally regaining wife, son and 
happiness. 

Bhadrapada light half. Par ivar tiny ekadait (Turning 
eleventh). Vishnu, after two months' sleep, turns from 
one side to the other, and continues his slumbers. He 
is worshipped at sunset, his image being turned from 
lyingi on the left to the right side. The observances for 
this dayl merge into those of Vamana dvadasi (see p. 77). 

Bh&drapada dark halt. IndraikddaH (Indra's 
eleventh). King Indrasena was a devotee of Vishriu. 
One day the sage Narada appeared, bearing a message 
from Indrasena's father in Yamaloka {i.e. in 
the first abode of the dead after death, not neces- 
sarily a place of suffering). The message was to the 
effect that, though not unhappy, he wished to go on 
to greater happiness in^ Svarga {i.e. Indra's 
heaven), which could be managed through his son 
Indrasena's help. Narada proceeded to say that, by the 
king's keeping a fast on this day, bathing at dawn and 
at noon, and watching at night, Vishnu would be suffi- 
ciently propitiated to grant merit sufficient to effect the 
desired transfer. King and subjects kept the fast, with 
the wished-for result. 

A^vina light half. Pas&hkuSaikadaii (Noose and 
goad eleventh) . Yama, lord of the departed, comes to 
fetch the dying with a noose and goad to snare their 
spirits. But whoever will keep this fast will be enabled 
to escape him and proceed straight to Indra's heaven. 

Aivinadark halt. Ramaikada^l (Joyful eleventh). 
Sobhana, the son-in-law of King Muchukunda, at his 
wife Chandrabhaga's wish, abstained from food and 
water on this day, in spite of much suffering, and 
attained to great joy in Svarga. 

Karttika light halt. Prabodhinyekadail (Awaking 
eleventh). This day marks the end of Vishnu's four 
months' sleep, and is the second of the two great 
ekadasi. The celebrations are closely connected with 
those of the Tulasi marriage on the following day 
(p, 129), and are not completed until then, but a 



vismjiu AND Siva festivals 89 

special custom is practised in Maharashtra, called the 
Avalibhojana or Vanabhojana (picnic under an Avail 
tree or in a wood) . The Avail or Erhblica myrobalan 
is sacred to Vishnu. On this day, or any day between 
the tenth and the fifteenth, the members of a family, 
and friends, will assemble, and go (sometimes with 
music), to an Avail tree, possibly in a grove outside 
the town or village. Arrived there, they sprinkle the 
roots with water, wind a thread about it, and worship 
it with mantras and circumambulation. After this, 
they sit under it for a picnic meal, and return home in 
the evening.. 

This is a popular festival among women and 
children. Those who have laid their Vishnu image 
to rest, restore it to-day to an upright position. The 
image from some temples is carried to a tank or river 
and invoked to awake. It is then carried back with 
rejoicings. 

This day marks the end of the rainy season, and the 
return to a more open-air life. 

Karttika dark half.^ Utpattyekadasi (Creation- 
celebrating eleventh). The legend attaching to this 
day is So similar to that given in explanation of the 
institution of the ekadasi fasts, that it suggests a 
common origin. Vishnu created a female manifestation 
of himself, in order to slay the demon Mura, and gave 
her as a boon the honour of becoming the guardian 
spirit of the elevenths, saying that whoever would 
serve her, i.e. fast on the day bearing her name, should 
have his favour. 

MargaMrsha light half. MokshadaikadaH (Release- 
giving eleventh. King Vaikhanasa dreamed that his 
father was in Naraka (hell), beseeching his son to 
release him. The king consulted some sages, who 
confirmed the story of his father's present suffering as 
a result of evil done during his lifetime. They advised 
the king "and his subjects to observe a fast on this day, 
and use the accumulated merit obtained to release the 
former king from his present state. This was accom- 
plished successfully. 



90 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

Mdrgaiirsha dark half. Saphalaikada&i (Fruitful 
eleventh). Lumpaka, the ne'er-do-well son of King 
Mahishmat, was banished from court and took up his 
abode in a forest. Becoming: exhausted one day, he was 
unable to rise to procure food or water, and so kept an 
involuntary fast. He found some fruit, but, being 
unable to eat it, he laid it at the foot of a pippal tree, 
i.e. he made an offering to Vishnu. The day happened to 
be Margasirsha krishna eleventh, and all unknowingly he 
had kept the law. Therefore Vishnu accepted him, his 
sufferings became fruitful, and he attained to Svarga. 

Pausha light half. Putradaikadaii (Son-giving 
eleventh). Similar to the Sravana sukla eleventh 
legend, is the one connected with this day. King Suketu, 
virtuous though sonless, observed this fast, and was, in 
consequence, blessed with a son. 

Pausha dark hall. Shattilaikadaii (Six Sesamum 
eleventh). On this day sesamum should be used in six 
ways, vis. (i) thrown into water used for bathing, (ii) 
pounded and rubbed on the body, (iii) eaten (six oply), 
(iv) thrown into one's drinking water, (v) given as 
alms to Brahmans, (vi) sacrificed to the gods. 

The Brahma Purana says that Yama created sesamum 
seeds this day, after a long penance, to obtain purifica- 
tion for sin. 

Magha light half. Jayaikudasi (Triumphant 
eleventh). At Indra's court a Gandharva (semi-divine 
singer), Pushpavan, failed to please him by his dancing 
and singing, as most of his attention was directed to his 
wife, Pushpavati. Indra became so angry with them 
both that he condemned them to roam as demons in the 
under-world. There they endured great sufferings, 
and were unable, one Magha sukla eleventh to take any 
food, being much exhausted. Vishnu accepted their 
fast, and delivered them from the curse. Indra met 
them as they rose triumphantly to heaven, but had no 
power to enforce his curse against Vishnu's blessing. 

Note. — Here is interesting evidence of the supercession of 
Indra by Vishnu. The power of the latter had become greater 
than that of the former when the above legend was established. 



VISHl^m AND SIVA FESTIVALS 91 

Magha dark half. Vijayaikadaii (Victorious 
eleventh). When Rama gained the news that his lost 
wife, Sita, was in Lanka, he set off to rescue her, but 
reaching the sea could find no means of getting across. 
He took advice and was told to keep this" day's fast, by 
which he gained the power of effecting a crossing. 

Phalguna light half. Amalakyekadasi (AmalakI 
eleventh). King Chaitraratha once kept a_ fast and 
worshipped Parasurama under an Amalaki or Avail tree. 
This being on this day was added to his list of merit. 

Phalguna dark halt. Papamochanyekadasl (Sin- 
freeing eleventh). A beautiful Apsara, Maiijughosha, 
in Kubera's garden, once distracted the thoughts of the 
sage Medhavi from his devotions by her beautiful 
singing. For this he cursed her. She was freed from 
the curse, and from the sin of which it was the cause, 
by keeping this fast. 

II. Siva Festivals 

We now come to the days dedi&ted to Siva. He 
is the post-Vedic development of the Rudra of the 
Rigveda,^ and has many of Rudra's attributes, e.g. he 
is associated with mountains, is blue-throated, clothed 
in a skin, has a fierce and terrible side to his nature, etc. 
Rudra was the storm-god, and the blue throat probably 
refers to the blue-black thunder cloud of the advancing 
storm. In the Siva legends it becomes the result of 
drinking the poison, churned from the milky ocean, 
which otherwise would have destroyed the human race. 
He is considered both the Creator and Destroyer of 
men, and is a god to be feared. He is known under 
various names, the chief being Sankara, Sambhu and 
Mahadeva. 

He is believed to have appeared on earth in man's 
form from time to time, his best-known manifestation 
being that of Kala Bhairava (q.v., p. 96). But there 
is no such well-defined or well-developed theory of 

» Vedic Mythology, E.I.A.R., pp. 4, 74, etc.; Bhandarkar, 
p. ISS. 



92 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

successive incarnations as in the case of Vishnu. Villa- 
gers will, not infrequently, describe a local deity, per- 
haps unknown throughout the rest of India, as " Maha- 
deva's avatara." 

There seems to have been a certain amount of 
rivalry between worshippers of Vishnu and Siva in 
early days, although Hopkins^ believes the earlier 
passages of the Mahabharata show that at first they 
were not very antagonistic ; but in later times a great 
spirit of enmity grew up between the two sects, each 
trying to establish precedence over the other ; and 
occasionally, even to-day, feeling runs high, although 
the tendency now is towards greater amity. 

Dr. Farquhar^ draws attention to an interesting 
sect, the Bhagavatas, who worshipped both gods, insist- 
ing on their equality. Inscriptions show that the sect 
existed in the first half of the sixth century A.D., and 
members of it are still to be found in South India. 
Traces of this Harihara worship are noted in Chap. VIII 
(pp. 152, 159, 160). 

Although pictures and images of Siva are not 
uncommon, yet they are practically never used for 
worship. All his temples and shrines contain instead 
his emblem, the Linga, and almost invariably the image 
of a bull is found outside the shrine, and is venerated 
only less than the emblem itself. The bull is regarded 
as the symbol, above all others, of generative power, 
hence his association with Siva. 

Bhandarkar^ believes the use of the linga, as an 
emblem of Siva, was introduced after the Aryan 
immigration into India, being taken from aboriginal 
worship. Gradually becoming adopted by the lower 
castes, who were in closer touch with the aboriginal 
tribes, it became finally accepted by all classes as the 
emblem of Siva. The earlier passages in the Maha- 
bharata* do not refer to Siva as a phallic god, but in 

> Epic Mythology, E.I-^.R., p. 221. 

" Outline of Religious Literature of India, p. 142 ff. 

' Bhandarkar, E.I.A.R., p. 115. 

' Epic Mythology, E.I.A.R., p. 221. 



viSHijru AND Siva festivals 93 

later passages he is said to be pleased with the offering 
of phallic worship. 

The special Siva days are : 

1. The thirteenth tit hi of each hall-month} Thf 
light half thirteenth is called Pradosha (late even- 
ing). The evening is sacred to Siva, who is worship- 
ped at sunset. A fast must be kept until the stars 
appear. The dark half thirteenth is called Siva- 
ratri (Siva's night), and the same rule applies as to 
Pradosha. Both are observed throughout Maharashtra. 
They correspond to Vishnu's ekadasidays. 

The Sivaratri of Magha is the chief day in the year 
for his worship. It is called Mahaiivaratri (the great 
night of Siva) . 

The legend attached to it is very popular, as fol- 
lows :' A hunter,^ a man of bad character, going out 
to hunt one day, which happened to be Magha krishna 
thirteenth, passed a Siva temple, and saw a number of 
people worshipping the linga, singing, calling out 
" Siva, Siva," etc. Mockingly the hunter imitated their 
cries, and without his knowledge, or desire, the very 
utterance of the god's name on that holy day removed 
some of his sins. He killed nothing that day, and had 
to keep an involuntary fast. As night came on, through 
fear of wild beasts, he climbed into a tree, which 
happened to be a bel tree (the wood-apple, sacred to 
Siva), but was unable to sleep, owing to the cold ; thus 
keeping an involuntary vigil.- Not only so, but 
shivering and shaking, he dislodged a number of bel 
leaves, which fell, together with moisture, from the tree, 
on to a stone Siva lihga beneath, i,e. he involuntarily 
offered bel leaves and cool water to the god. The 
cumulative merit of all these involuntary acts not only 
released him from past sins, but caused his reception 
into Siva's abode of Kailasa. 

This legend, while not offering any solution of the 
origin of the fast and worship, which was already 

» Hindu Year, p. 607. 

' Skanda Pnrana and Siva Purana 



94 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

accepted as established, furnishes very substantial 
reasons why it should be persisted in, and is always 
quoted to show the very real and great benefits 
accruing to the man who keeps it. 

To keep this Sivaratri^ properly, a fast must be 
observed for a complete tithi, not during the day only, 
as in the ordinary Sivaratris ; and at every third hour 
during the night the linga must be worshipped, with 
offerings of ketaki flowers and bel leaves, and bathed 
in succession with milk, curds, ghi and honey. On the 
morning of the fourteenth one must bathe, after anoint- 
ing with sesamum oil, worship the linga with mantras 
and with recitations of Siva's thousand names and 
offerings of one thousand or one hundred and eight bel 
leaves. Afterwards the fast may be broken. 

Fairs are held at this festival at the twelve great 
linga temples of India. Lists vary, but the following 
are usually given :" 



i. 


RameSvara 


(near Cape Comorin). 


ii. 


Mahakala 


(Ujjain). 


iii. 


Kedaranatha 


(Gharval). 


iv. 


ViSvanatha 


(Benares). 


V. 


Omkaranatha 


(on river Narmada) .' 


vi. 


Vaidyanatha 


(Bengal). 


vii. 


BhimaSankara 


(source of river Bhima, near Poona). 


viii. 


Somanatha 


(Kathiavar). 


ix. 


Tryambaka 


(source of river Godavarl, nearNasik). 


X. 


Mallikarjuna 


(Karnatic). 


xi. 


Naganatha 


(Nizam's Territory). 


xil. 


DhrishmeSvara 





2. Each Monday is devoted to Siva worship by the 
orthodox. Women desiring children sometimes fast 
every Monday for a year. 

3. The eighth tithi of each half is indirectly dedicated 
to Siva, in that the light half eighth is Durgashtami 
(Durga's eighth), she being Siva's wife, and the dark 
half eighth is Kalashtami (Kala's eighth), Kala or Kala 
Bhairava being a manifestation of Siva. 

» F. & H., p. 75 ; Sharma, p. 262. 

" So Molesworth and E.R.E., X,^.U;F.&H. differs slightly, 
giving only 10. 



VISHIsru AND §IVA FESTIVALS 95 

4. In the same way the iourth tithi ot each halt is 
indirectly dedicated to Siva, being d^ys for propitiating 
his son Ganesa. The light and dark fourths being 
called, respectively, Vinayaki and Samkashta chaturthi. 
The latter, especially, is regarded as a day for fore- 
boding evil, an unlucky day. 

Bhandarkat^ considers Ganesa worshippers a Saiva 
sect, established very late, between the fifth and eighth 
centuries A.D. But the god of the fourth tithi, although 
now identified with Ganesa of the elephant head, seems 
to have had originally a connection with the moon, as 
these were moon worship days. Is it possible that, on 
account of the feud between Ganesa and the moon no 
one dare worship the latter withput also propitiating the 
former, who is known to be malicious ? 

5. Skanda or Karttikeya, the patron of war, another 
son of Siva, is worshipped on Karttika sukla fifth, or new 
moon. He^ was extensively worshipped in ancient 
times. Now we find him but rarely mentioned. His 
day is observed in Bengal, where a twenty-four hours' 
fast is kept, and he is worshipped at each of the four 
night watches ; but his cult is chiefly to be met with in 
the South. 

6. Tripurl purnima. Karttika full moon. This 
day is, next to Mahasivaratri, the greatest day in the 
year for Siva worship. The legend attached to it 
has various forms, the earliest of which seems to be 
that in the Mahabharata^ which says there were three 
demons, lords of three cities, of gold, silver and iron, 
respectively, who united in harassing the gods. The 
gods appealed to Rudra, who defeated the demons and 
burnt their cities. The popular account is that there was 
but one demon, Tripuri, lord of three cities of gold 
(heaven), silver (earth), and iron (hell), whose 
ruler he iiad become through the power of his 
austerities, and whose inhabitants he tormented. 



■ Bhandarkar, E.I.A.R,, p. 147. 

■ ,, „ „ „ p. ISO. 
• Drona Parva. 



96 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

Neither Brahma nor Vishnu was strong enough to 
overcome him, but Siva eventually, after three days' 
fight, killed him on the full moon of Karttika, which 
was thereupon instituted as a day of triumph. 

One should bathe this day, if possible in the Ganga, 
and give presents of lamps to Brahmans. At sunset 
lamps are lighted and placed in all Siva temples, and in 
the houses of all who keep this festival. Prayers are 
made, chiefly by women, before the lamps, which are 
kept burning all night. Th% day is sometimes called 
Karttika Diparatna (The jewelled lamp of Karttika). 

Note. — A sacrifice, known as Sakamedhah, was performed in 
ancient times, on Karttika full moon, in order to gain .victory over 
enemies, and may have been the origin of this festival. 

7. Maunya vrata (silent worship) is paid to Siva 
on Bhadrapada sukla first. Men alone perform the 
worship, in sUence, but the whole family remains 
silent throughout meals, and the women when cooking. 

8. Ghantakarna pilja, on Phalguna krishna fifteenth, 
is allied to Siva worship. This is a Bengal festival. 
Ghantakarna, one of the attendants on Siva, is 
worshipped under the form of a water-jar, with fruit 
and flowers. This is believed to be a prevention of 
disease. * 

9. Kala Bhairava is worshipped, as a manifestation 
of Siva, on every dark eighth, and particularly on the 
darkeighth of Karttika. Some class him among the 
pre- Aryan gods, ^ Crooke identifying him with Kshetra- 
pala (Protector of fields), which hardly seems 
compatible with his fierce, terrible nature. He is 
believed to be black, riding by night on a black horse, 
accompanied by a black dog. His chief temple is at 
Benares, and those of his devotees who die there are 
believed to undergo expiatory punishment, known as 
Bhairavi yatana, and then proceed immediately to final 
bliss; such are known as Rudra pisacha (Rudra's 
spirits) . Other men, on dying, fall into Yama's hands, 
and have to return to the earth in successive births. 

• Bom. Gas., XVIII, p. 289 ; Dravidians, E.R.E., V, p. 1, 



visHi!iu AND Siva festivals 97 

Three festivals now remain under the Vishnu-Siva 
head, of which two are in honour of both gods, and the 
third in honour of the Triad. 

1. Vaikuntlia ckaturdaii. Karttika sukla fourteenth. 
The legend attached to this day is that in the Krishna 
incarnation, Vishnu went to Kasi (Benares), to bathe 
in the Manikarnika pool, and to worship Visvesvara by 
the offering of one thousand lotus flowers. Siva 
secretly stole one of the flowers, and Krishna, unable 
to find it, or procure another, and unwilling to leave 
his worship incomplete, took one of his own eyes to 
replace the lost lotus and finished his worship. This 
devotion so pleased Siva, that he appointed this day to 
be observed by all, worshipping Vishnu and bathing 
in the Manikarnika pool in the morning, and himself in 
the evening. Those who worship Vishnu will attain to 
. his heaven, i.e. Vaikuntha. 

Hence it is a day when both sects worship both 
gods, a large pilgrimage attended by many taking place 
in the sacred pool in Beaares. 

2. Harihara yatra. Karttika full moon. Hari = 
Vishnu, and Hara = Siva. The Hariharanatha temple at 
Sonepur, at the junction of the Gandaki with the Ganga, 
is one of the oldest temples in'India, said to have been 
built by Rama on his way to win his bride. At this 
festival many pilgrims assemble for bathing and 
worshipping both great gods. 

3. Dattatreya purnima. Margasirsha full moon. 
The birth of this god is recorded as follows : 

Vishnu,^ Siva and Brahma determined to test the 
virtue of Anusuya, wife of the R.ishi Atri, went to her 
house during her husband's absence, as mendicants, and 
demanded a meal. , When she brought it they impogfed 
impossible conditions on her as the price of their eating 
it, saying that if she refused to comply they would 
starve, and the guilt of murder would lie upon her. 
The poor woman felt that the laws of hospitality 
compelled her to comply, but the power of her 

,' Sharma, p. 246. 



98 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

virtue was such that at the moment of her appearance 
before them they were changed into three infants. 
On Atri's return she told him the whole story, and 
his wisdom discerned in the babies the three gods of the 
triad. 

At his prayer they appeared in their original forms, 
and declared themselves satisfied alike with his devotion 
and his wife's virtue, granting as a reward the gift of the 
three babies to the childless couple. The Brahma baby 
was named Chandra, but soon left them to go and live 
in the moon ; the Siva baby was named Durvasa, and 
left home to lead a wandering pilgrim's life. The third 
baby, Vishnu, was named Dattatreya,^ and became the 
representative of the three. 

Some say that as only the Vishnu third of the triad, 
remained in Dattatreya, he cannot rightly be regarded 
as representing the three, but the usual practice is to 
fast on this day, and to worship Dattatreya in the- even- 
ing, as representing the three great gods in his own 
person. 

Worshippers may belong to any caste or sect. His 
temples are few and he is not much known outside 
Western India. Monier Williams^ believes the story 
to have become attached to a holy Brahman living 
about the tenth century A.D., who became deified after 
his death. Various tales about him are current, e.g. he 
became a mendicant, travelling daily to Benares for his 
morning ablutions, to Kolhapur for his afternoon food- 
begging, and to the Sahyadri range for his rest at night. 
Hence two Marathi proverbs have arisen : (^xiR^Nl ^ilt 
(" Dattatreya's pilgrimage"), meaning the movements 
of a person who is constantly travelling ; and ^ ^^ ^ 
("To come, having played Dattatreya"), meaning to 
appear in time to profit by the fruits of others' 
labours. 

' Adopted son of Atri. 

' Religious Thought and Life in India, p. 267. 



CHAPTER VI 

ON FESTIVALS ARISING FROM ANIMISTIC 
SOURCES 

A GOOD deal of the worship in modern India is 
traceable to very ancient pre-Aryan sources, or, where 
not actually traceable, the reasons for believing it 
originated in Nature or Animistic worship are sufficiently 
strong for considering it a survival of animism. 

In this chapter such worship is dealt with under 
four heads : 

(1) Goddess and tutelary deity worship ; (2) Spirit 
worship; (3) Animal worship; and (4) Worship of 
plants and inanimate things. 

I. Goddess and Tutelary Deity Worship 

Lecturing before the British Association in 1919, 
Dr. Crooke spoke of the widespread "mother" cults 
in India, vis. Mother Earth (with which snake worship 
is closely connected ; see p. 121) , the Jungle Mothers, 
Deified Women, and Elemental Deities. Most of the 
modern Hindu goddesses seemed to hav£ originated 
from these primitive deities of the aboriginal inhabi- 
tants of India. 

And we find to-day that all over India some 
"mother" is the tutelary deity of the village. Some 
of these, as the Mariai, Jokhai, etc., of Maharashtra, 
are still worshipped locally under their ancient names ; 
some of them, as far back as the Epic Period, became 
identified with the wiyes of the greater gods, and much 
of theLakshmi, Durga, etc., worship of to-day is derived 
from the worship formerly offered to some "mother." 



100 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

Major West^ identifies the present-day Mahalakshml, 
worshipped at Kolhapiir under the name of Ambabal, 
with a pre- Aryan goddess. 

In Vedic times the wives of the gods were of 
but slight importance, and in the ?.igveda^ were not 
objects of worship, but towards the end of that period, 
as the immigrant Aryans became better acquainted 
with the aboriginal goddesses of the country, they 
increased in popularity. Hermann Jacobi^ dates the 
identification of the Bengal mother goddess with Durga, 
wife of Rudra-&va, at the end of the Vedic period. 
And Yudhisthira's song of praise to her, in the 
Mahabharata,* calling her also Kali, the slayer of the 
buffalo demon, shows that she had won her place as 
Siva's wife at the time when that was composed. By 
deriving the name Kali from Kala (time), Brennand' 
believes her to have been originally the goddess of 
Time, the Insatiable, the Devastator of countries, and 
the Bringer of famines, wars and pestilence. 

Again, Sita, wife of Rama, who was born of a 
furrow, is said by Jacobi^ to have (apparently) been " a 
chthonic deity before she became an epic heroine," 
and she only finally became regarded as an incarnation 
of Lakshmi, because her husband Rama had become so 
of Vishnu. 

To come now to the actual festivals held in honour 
of these " mothers" and other goddesses. 

(i) Gauri trittya. Chaitra sukla third to Vaisakha 
sukla third. Gauri, the giver of harvest, has been 
already mentioned in a previous chapter (p. SO), but 
this festival celebrates her as the patron goddess of 
women, who alone observe it. She is believed to 
spend a month now at her parents' home. (See Chap. 
Ill, p. 65.) 

1 I.A., X, p. 245. 

' Monier Williams, Religious Life and Thought, p. 14. 

= Durga, E.R.E., V, p. 119. 

* Virata Parva. 

• Hindu Astronomy, p. 140. 

° Incarnation, E.R.E., VII, p. 194. 



FESTIVALS ARISING FROM ANIMISTIC SOURCES 101 

These twO' aspects of Gauri indicate two former 
deities, both of whom have come to be identified with 
Siva's wife. 

' The feast is commonly kept among Maharashtra 
BrShman women. It is less observed in the North, and 
unknown in Bengal. On the third, or some following 
day, the unwidowed women of any household clean the 
house, bathe, and erect in the best room a platform, or 
a series of platforms, in pyramidal form, at the top of 
which is placed an image of Gauri, while on the tiers 
below her are gathered all the ornaments the house 
contains, such as images of other deities, pictures, relig- 
ious or secular, shells, even English dolls and cheap china. 
Invitations are sent to neighbours, who on their arrival 
receive a present of turmeric, fruit, flowers, etc., and the 
red lead mark of happiness is made on their foreheads, 
and scented oil is rubbed on their hands. 

No worship is at this time performed, the function 
is purely social, but at night prayers for an unwidowed 
life are ofiEered before the platform, also sometimes 
there is singing and dancing. 

Gauri, again, is worshipped every Tuesday in 
Sravana, by girls, for five successive years after 
marriage. The girl bathes at dawn, and then proceeds 
to worship her Gauri image with flowers, fruit, scent, 
and holy grass, with mantras, to preserve the life of 
her husband, i.e. to preserve her own happiness as an 
unwidowed woman till death. She also gives cocoanuts 
and toilet articles to her mother (if unwidowed), and 
she must fast all day and keep a vigil all the following 
night. \ 

(ii) DaiaharS, or Gangoisava.^ Jyeshtha sukla first 
to tenth. The " Destroyer of ten," or Ganga festival, 
if observed according to rule, will destroy the ten chief 
sins of the one who observes it. These ten are : Harsh 
speech, false speech, slander, clamour, theft, injury, 
adultery, covetousness, evil thoughts, foolish obstinacy. 
(This festival, through similarity of sound, is often 

' Hindu Year, p. 12 ; Sharma, p. 57. 



102 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

confused with the Dasara. The two are quite distinct, 
and should not be so confused.) 

The observance consists chiefly of bathing at dawn, 
on each of the ten days, if possible in the Gaiiga, 
but otherwise in some other sacred river, such as 
the Krishna, Veni, Godavari, Narmada, etc. At the time 
of bathing mantras must be said, and the bather, stand- 
ing up to the waist in water, must dip ten times. Those 
who can afford it are also expected to worship a gold or 
silver image of Ganga, also to give ten measures of 
grain and ten cows to ten Brahmans, and feast them 
and their wives. 

Some people make flour images of river-dwellers, 
fish, frogs, crocodiles, etc., also of geese and crane, and 
send them floating down the river. It is unmistakably 
an ancient festival to the river goddess, and takes place 
immediately before the rainy season, when it is hoped 
she will be replenished. The favourite places of 
pilgrimage are Hardvara and Prayaga (Allahabad). 

The legend^ purporting to explain the festival is that 
one, Sagara, had performed so many horse sacrifices to 
Vishnu, and had gained so much merit thereby, that the 
performance of a single one more would have made 
him dangerously powerful. Indra, therefore, stole the 
horse prepared for the next sacrifice, to prevent its 
being performed. In searching for the horse, one of 
Sagara's 60,000 sons falsely accused the sage Kapila of 
having stolen it. The sage in anger sent fire out of 
his eyes and burnt them all to ashes. Later, repent- 
ing, he said they could be restored to life by Ganga 
water falling on them. 

For two generations Sagara's descendants worshipped 
Ganga, until in the third generation she became 
appeased by the prayers of Bhagiratha, and consented to 
descend to the earth from her dwelling in the Himalaya 
mountains. And, lest her fall should rend the earth, Rudra- 
Sankara received her on his head, from which, after 
ten days, she descended to earth, passing Hardvara, 

' Mahabharata, Vana Parva and Ramayana. 



FESTIVALS ARISING FROM ANIMISTIC SOURCES 103 

Prayaga, and other places, and making thetti holy. As 
she reached the spot where the ashes of Sagara's sons 
were lying (the mouth of the Ganges), they immedi- 
ately received life. 

This festival is exceptional, in that ii it occurs in a 
a year with an Adhika Jyeshtha month, it is to be held 
in the Adhika, not in the normal, Jyeshtha month. 
(See Chap. I, p. 20.) 

(iii) Varum. Chaitra krishna thirteenth, or Phalguna 
krishna thirteenth. This is another Ganga bathing 
festival, to be observed, in order to acquire merit, when 
the moon enters the Satataraka nakshatra. If the 
Ganga is not available, another sacred river may be 
substituted. . 

{vj) Brahmaputra snana. Chaitra sukla eighth. A 
similar bathing festival^ is held in connection with 
the Brahmaputra river. It is held all along the north 
bank, especially at Nangalbandha in Dacca. The story 
goes that Parasurama (see p, 78) bathed in this river, 
to cleanse himself from the sin of killing his mother, 
Renuka, and then cut a way for it ta flow through the 
mountains. But it united with the river Sitalakshya, 
which aroused his anger, and he took away its holiness 
except for this one day of the year. The spirit of this 
river is male, which is very unusual. 

(v) Sita Navami.^ Vaisakha sukla ninth. This 
festival is very little observed, which is strange, seeing 
that Sita is the most popular heroine in India. The 
day is kept in Bengal, and as she is by tradition born 
of the earth, her worship on this day is productive of 
equal merit with the giving away of land in charity. 

(vi) Shashthi Devi. Shashthi (the sixth) is con- 
sidered a malevolent female deity, who injures new- 
born infants and their mothers, unless propitiated, 
about the sixth day after a birth. Now, the incidence 
of puerpural fever in the mother, or of tetanus in 
either mother or child — and both diseases are very 
common in India — occurs about the sixth day after a 

' F. <y/f.,p. 11. ' F.&H.,p.73. 



104 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

birth. There can be, therefore, little doubt of the 
origin of the dreaded goddess. 

She is always propitiated with gifts and prayers by 
all women and their female friends after the birth of 
a child, but certain days are set apart as well, varying in 
different parts of India, but always on a sixth tithi, for 
her special worship, z'zs'. 

{a) Asoka shashthi^ (Sorrow-free sixth). Chaitra 
sukla sixth. Northern India. The goddess is invoked to 
ensure the well-being of children. Women drink water 
in which six flower-buds of the asoka tree have been 
steeped. 

The legend^ says that a certain sage found an 
infant at his door, whom he adopted and brought up." 
At her marriage to a prince, he gave her some asoka 
seeds, telling her to scatter them on the ground as she 
went to h^r husband's house, and an avenue of trees 
would grow up, down which she could come to find him, 
if at any time she needed help. Later on, disaster 
befell her family : one morning all the sons and their 
wives were found dead. The queen remembered the 
promise, and fled down the asoka avenue, at the end of 
which she found the sage, who gave her some holy 
water, which, being sprinkled on the dead bodies, 
restored them all to life. 

(i) Aranya shashthi^ {¥o^&%t^\yX\3^ . Jyeshtha sukla 
sixth. Bengal and South India. Women walk in the 
jwoods to-day, eating only fruit, and taking fans and other 
offerings to a Shashthi shrine, in the hope of having 
strong and beautiful children. 

{c) Shashthi. Jyeshtha sukla sixth. Western India. 
The legend^ runs that a woman stole food in her father- 
in-law's house, and blamed the cat, who, in revenge, 
carried ofiE all her children as soon as they were born, to 
Shashthi. The woman appealed to the goddess for 
mercy, and was told to make an image of the cat, with 

' F. &H.,'p.1. 

' Gupte, p. 211. 

■ Lunar Year, p. 283 ; F. & H., p. 70. 

♦ Gupte, p. 212. 



FESTIVALS ARISING FROM ANIMISTIC SOURCES 105 

rice-flour and water and a charm of thread. The cat 
and the goddess were to be worshipped, and the charm 
bound on the child's wrist, and it would be safe. She 
must eat only fruit and drink only milk on the day of 
worship. 

A black cat is always associated with Shashthi, and 
must never be beaten. 

(d) Khas shashthi. Pausha sukla sixth. A fast is kept 
on this day, followed by worship of the goddess who is 
so much feared, in order to preserve the life of children. 

(vii) Sitala Devi (The cool one). This is an- 
other disease goddess, particularly associated with 
small-pox, and her images and shrines are among the 
commonest in India. Whether through a similar mental 
process to that which led to naming the unlucky planet 
Mars, " The lucky one " (see Chap. II, p. 33), or some 
other cause, her name stands in contrast to the burning 
fever she brings to her victims. During small-pox 
epidemics she is propitiated by anxiqus mothers, but, 
as in the case of Shashthi (with whom she is occasionally 
identified), there are special days appointed for her 
worship, i.e. <^' 

(a) Sitala shashthi, on Magha sukla sixth, in Bengal. 

(,b) Sitala saptaml, on Sravana krishna seventh, in 
Gujarat. 

(f) ^italashtami, on Phalguna krishna eighth, in 
Northern India. 

{d) And a big fair to her, on Vaisakha full moon, 
at Kelve, Thana district (Bombay). 

Her worship is unusual in one particular. She will 
accept the prayers and offerings of widows, if mothers, 
on behalf of their children. During the day of her 
worship one must abstain from all hot, or cooked, food 
and drink. One reason given for this is that she comes 
and rolls on the hearth, and must not get burned, so 
that no cooking can be done. The real reason is more 
likely to be the longing for cold water on the part of 
small-pox patients. 

Cviii) Worship of Female Energy under differing 
names. The worship of woman, as such, is general all 



106 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

over India, degenerating sometimes, as in the Radha 
worshipping Vallabhacharya sect into obscene rites, 
but tinder other conditions less objectionable. A 
number of minor festivals, and some of more impor- 
tance, can be gathered together under this heading, i.e. 

(a) Rambhatr.ittya. Jyeshtha sukla third. Northern 
India. This goddess was the beautiful woman who, like 
Lakshmi, was produced at the churning of the milk 
ocean. She is worshipped in Northern India by women 
on this day. 

(3) Radhashtami.^ Bhadrapada sukla eighth. Bengal. 
Radha, the favourite mistress of Krishna, is worshipped 
by men on this day as the Ichchha sakti (Energy of 
desire). It is believed that to worship her with 
flowers, fruit, and jewels, at noon, fasting, is pleasing 
to Krishna. Esoteric explanations of her name and 
history are given. 

(c) Annapurnashtamt.^ Chaitra sukla eighth. Nor- 
thern India. Annapiirna (Wealth of food) is worshipped 
as the giver of food, and therefore sustainer of life. 
The centre of her worship is her famous temple at 
Benares, where her image is regarded as representing 
Primeval Energy, 

(</) Kalipuja^ Karttika new moon. Bengal. She 
is worshipped to-day as representing Primeval Energy. 
This day commemorates her dance, which was destroy- 
ing the earth, until Siva threw himself under her feet, 
and she found herself treading on her husband and 
stopped in shame. The story is explained esoterically 
as the awakening of the human soul to the realisation 
of its origin from God, forgotten in the tumult of 
human emotions. 

(if) Jagaddhatrt* JagadambCL, or Kumari puju. 
Karttika sukla ninth. Bengal. On this day woman is 
worshipped as "World mother," the destroyer of 
armies of giants, who threaten to extirpate the human 
race. Jagaddhatri is summoned into her image in the 

'■ F. & H., p. 64. ' F.& H., p. 4. 

' F. & H., p. i2. *F.&JI.,p.39. 



FESTIVALS ARISING FROM ANIMISTIC SOURCES 107 

morning, worshipped at noon, and again in the evening, 
after which her spirit is dismissed, and the image 
consigned to water in the usual way. 

(/) An Unmarried Brahman girV" is worshipped 
as Female Energy, in Maharashtra, on the second or 
third day of the Navaratra ( Asvina sukla first to tenth) . 
Offerings of oil, ribbons, clothes, flowers, etc., are made 
to her. This is kept chiefly by women. 

(ix) Ambuvachi^ JyeshthaorAshadhakrishna tenth 
to thirteenth. Bengal. "Mother Earth" is considered to 
be unclean during these four days. No ploughing, sowing 
or cooking is to be done, nor a journey undertaken. 
On the fourth day stones, representing her, are set up, 
bathed and garlanded, and the earth is again clean. 

This occurs immediately before the rainy season. 
The rain is understood to cause Mother Earth to 
become pregnant, and in due course she brings forth 
grain crops. 

(x) and (xi), Lakshmi and Durga worship, in connec- 
tion with the seasons, has already been dealt with in 
Chapter III,, but besides the special days devoted 
to their worship by both sexes, they receive much wor- 
ship from women at different times, the worship 
offered being probably a survival of that given to 
female deities in primitive times. 

(x) Lakshmi is worshipped besides Dipavali new 
moon and Kojagari full moon, in the bright halves of 
Chaitra, Bhadrapada and Pausha, in Bengal on the 
Thursdays, and in Maharashtra on the Fridays. On 
these days no money is parted with. A corn measure 
or a basket is filled with grain, garlanded, covered with 
a cloth and worshipped. 

On Ashadha new moon' she is worshipped by 
women under the form of lamps. The legend is that 
a young girl found a ring lost by the king, and 
asked as her reward that on this new moon night all 
houses in the city should be darkened, save only hers, 
in which she and her family lighted" all the lamps they 

' Sharraa, p. 213. ■ Lunar Year, p. 285. • Gupte, p. 122. 



108 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

could muster. That night Lakshmi, looking for 
shelter, went straight to the house whence all the light 
proceeded, and lavished -on the inmates the whole of 
her gifts. 

Women collect all the lamps in the house, and 
worship them in the name of Lakshmi. This night is 
sometimes called "The Little Dipavali." 

Note. — No bells may be used in Lakshmi worship, nor bamboo 
flute in that of Durga. 

(xi) Under the head of Durga worship may be 
classed the women's feast of (a) Haritalika on Bhadra- 
pada sukla third for Parvati worship, which has the 
same origin as, and may be classed with, the Bengal 
festival of Uma cJiaturthi. Jyeshtha sukla fourth. 

The legend,^ from the Bhavishyottara Purana, is 
as follows : 

Parvati, also known as Uma, the daughter of 
Himachala, had from a child vowed to marry none 
other than Siva. When, therefore, on coming of age, 
she was told that her father, on Sage Narada's advice, 
had promised her to Vishnu, she was very indignant. 
Taking one companion she ran away into the forest, 
and on a river bank made three sand lingas, which she 
worshipped, remaining all night awake, singling the 
praises of Siva. Being gratified, the great god appeared 
to her, and promised to grant her any request she 
might make. She asked that she might become his 
wife, to which he agreed, and again became invisible. 
After their night of vigil, Parvati and her maid lay 
down to sleep in the morning, and were found by her 
father, who was so much relieved to find her safe, that 
he consented to let her have her wish. 

This very human story makes a great appeal to 
Indian women, most of whom are married in childhood, 
some against their inclination,; and the observance of 
this day, by unmarried girls, is very general. 

Married women, too, keep it, not with the hope of 
securing the most acceptable husband, which is their 

' Sharma, p. 166. 



FESTIVALS ARISING FROM ANIMISTIC SOURCES 109 

young sisters' object, but in order to secure unwidowed 
liappiness. To neglect it is to court widowhood, loss 
of sons or wealth, and finally hell. 

A woman keeping this festival must bathe at dawn, 
after anointing with oil, then, having brought sand 
from a stream of clean water, she must make four 
lingas, i.e. three for Siva as Parvati did, and one for 
Parvati herself. These must be worshipped with 
flowers and mantras. At the close, an offering must be 
made to some unwidowed woman. No water must be 
drunk all day, and only plantains eaten. A vigil must be 
kept at night, and the ceremony is closed at sunrise next 
morning by a gift of flowers, turmeric, etc., to the god. 

{,b) Bhavanyutpatti. Chaitra sukla eighth. The 
birthday of Bhavani, or Parvati, is kept on this day by 
women. They bathe, and worship her image. A 
similar festival to the above. 

(c) Varada chaturtht. (Boon-giving or Husband- 
giving fourth.) Magha sukla fourth. The goddess 
Varada is sometimes identified with Uma, or with 
Gauri, and is worshipped in Bengal, chiefly by women, 
to secure offspring. Flowers, lights, scarlet or saffron 
threads, and gold bangles are offered. 

Note. — "Vara" may mean either a boon or a husband. 
Some take one meaning, some the other. 

(xii) Pithori^ Sravana new moon. This is a pro- 
pitiatory festival to the seven chief goddesses and the 
sixty-four yogini or divine attendants on Durga, kept by 
unwidowed married women, to gain children and to 
preserve their unwidowed state. It is not kept as 
regularly as some of the other goddess-worshipping 
festivals, but a woman who has lost children will keep 
it, to gain other children who shall be long-lived. The 
name is derived from Pitha (flour), of which the images 
are made. 

The legend belonging to it is as under : 
A woman, named Videha, gave birth to a child every 
Sravana new moon, which was also the anniversary of 

» Hindu Year, p. 17 ; Sharma, p. 159. 



110 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

the death of her parents-in-law, when their sraddha 
was to be performed; and each year, owing to the 
impurity of child-birth occurring in the house, the^ 
sraddha was unavailing, and, Owing to the destruction^^ 
of the' sraddha, the new-born child died. 

At last, the family, growing tired of the annual 
occurrence, drove Videha from the house one year with 
her new-born child, which died in her arms in the 
forest the same day. She took shelter in the shrine of 
a goddess, to which the sixty-four yogini also came at 
dusk, bearing offerings of jewels, fruit and supari nuts. 
When they had offered their gifts at the shrine, they 
asked: "Is there any other guest (arf^) present?" 
At this Videha came forward, and announced herself 
as an Atithi, but unclean owing to the birth and sub- 
sequent death of her child. She also told of the death 
of all her former children, and pleaded for the boon of> 
long life for any others which might be born to her. 
The yogini took pity on her, and granted her request, 
and she went home comforted. 

In course of time she became the mother of eight 
sons, who all attained to manhood. 

The woman who keeps this festival must fast on 
the new moon day, and having bathed must take a cloth, 
on which are drawn lucky symbols, and place on it eight 
water pitchers (representing Videha's eight sons). 
Upon the pitchers she must t)lace a tray containing images 
(of gold, if possible) of the seven great goddesses, viz. 
Brahmi, Mahesvari, Kaumari, Vaishnavi, Varahi, Indrani 
and Chamunda, and near these, on the ground, sixty-four 
rice-flour images or supari nuts (representing the sixty- 
four yogini) , whom she invokes by name. 

Then she worships water pots, goddesses and yogini, 
with mantras and the usual offerings of flowers and 
fruit. After doing so she must ask: "Is any other 
guest present ? " and a boy of the family must answer : 
"I (name) am present"; whereupon she gives him 
cakes and other food. The ceremony ends with a 
present to the priest, and a meal with one or more 
unwidowed Brahman women. 



FESTIVALS ARISING FROM ANIMISTIC SOURCES 111 

This rite is not always performed with the complete- 
ness described above. Many women are satisfied with 
writing the names of the sixty-four yogini on the house 
wall, worshipping them, and giving a feast to the children. 

(xiii) Khandoba or Khanderao. Margasirsha sukla 
first to sixth. This is the guardian god of the Deccan. 
Monier Williams^ believes him to have been "probably a 
deification of some powerful raja or aboriginal chieftain, 
who made himself useful to the Brahmans. ' ' The legend 
is that a giant, Manimalla (or two, Mani and Malla), 
formerly troubled the earth, and that Khandoba — or Siva 
taking his form — after a six days' battle, overcame and 
slew him. Hence, one of his names is Mallari (Malla+ 
ari = Enemy of Malla) . His chief temples are at Jejuri 
and Gudguddapiir (see Chap. VHI, p. 154), where 
his devotees assemble for this festival, especially 
on the -last day, known as Champa shashti. Boys, 
called Vaghya, and girls, Murali, were formerly dedi- 
cated to him, and even now the practice of marrying 
girls to him is not unknown, although it h^s been made 
illegal to do so. He is worshipped with offerings of 
turmeric, bel fruit, onions and other vegetables. 

Hook-swinging was formerly practised during the 
festival, but the custom has now been stopped by law. 

(xiv) ViSvakarma puja? Bhadrapada new moon. 
Bengal. Visvakarma is the tutelary god of artisans, 
being the architect of the gods, and also the repairer of 
their weapons injured in battle. He is worshipped in 
the form of a pitcher, before which are placed the tools 
and other implements of work of his worshipper. 

The day is an artisans' holiday, and is spent in games 
and feasting. 

(xv) Vyasa puja? Karttika full moon. Vyasa, the 
reputed compiler of the Vedas, is to be worshipped 
to-day, and in his name all regular expounders of the 
Puranas also. A similar day is Ashadha full moon, 
known as Guru puja, when every student worships his 

'■ Heligious Life and Thought in India, p. 266. 

» F. & H., p. 83. 

* F.& H. ; Hindu Year, pp. 14, 21. 



112 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

own teacher, and in villages, if a Guru is non-existent, 
the chief Brahman living there is regarded as a suitable 
substitute. 

II. Spirit Worship 

This custom, in the form of offerings to the dead, or 
rather, offerings to the living in the name of the dead, 
is of great antiquity in India. It probably arose from 
the custom, almost universal among primitive people, 
of providing food and clothing for the spirits of the dead. 
The recently dead are spoken of as Preta (ghosts; 
literally, "One who has gone before"). Due offerings 
made by their heirs raise them ta the status of Pitri 
(fathers) by providing them with a body, until they 
gain an earthly one again, in their next re-birth. 

A man should make these offerings, by the rite 
called sraddha, to his ancestors, up to, and including, 
the third generation. "After three generations (the 
preta) loses its identity and is named no more at the 
sacrifice, becoming simply one of the Fathers."^ 

The Dharmasindhu^ gives ninety-six occasions in the 
year upon which sraddha should be performed regularly, 
including the twelve new moons, twelve saihkranti, and 
four yugadi, also the fifteen days of the dark half of 
Bhadrapada, the five Ashtaka, and forty-eight other 
occasions. The Markandeya Purana' makes most of 
these optional, retaining as compulsory the twelve new 
moons and three Ashtaka. The* Satapatha Brahmana 
gives, as the reason for performing sraddha on new 
moon days, that the moon has come to earth, i.e. that 
Soma, the food of the gods and the departed, is un- 
obtainable on that day, therefore the spirits will be 
without food unless the worshipper provides it. 

Popular custom at the present time rules that a man 
must perform the rite on that day in the dark half of 

' Hopkins, India Old and New, p. 102. 

' Quoted in Mandlik, What India Can Teach Us, p. 296. 

' XXXI, 20. 

* S.B.E., XII, p. 362. 



FESTIVALS ARISING PROM ANIMISTIC SOURCES 113 

Bhadrapada corresponding to the day of decease, and 
on the anniversary of the decease, to which the more 
devout add four Ashtaka. The low castes perform it 
only on the last day of Bhadrapada, and for one 
generation only. 

There is, besides the idea of giving aid to the spirits 
of the departed, some hope of reward for the living in 
the performaiice of this rite, for we read : - " The 
Pitris,^ when delighted with sraddhas, bestow long life, 
wisdom, wealth, knowledge, svarga, final emancipation 
from existence, and joys and sovereignty." Again, 
we find that sraddha performed on different days will 
be productive of differing benefits to the performer.^ 
There is, therefore, every inducement to keep this 
memorial of the dead. 

Only a Brahman may eat the meal provided for the 
spirits, so that, in the case of the lower castes, a 
Brahman cook must be employed to prepare it. It is 
not considered very becoming to the dignity and position 
of a Brahman to attend as guest at a sraddha, except 
among relations. People of Brahman caste, therefore, 
when possible, arrange the performance of the rite 
within the limits of their own family clan. Those of 
lower caste invite some Brahman who is not over punc- 
tilious about matters of good form. 

The fceremony is performed as follows : Invitations 
are sent to as many Brahman men as correspond to the 
number of the dead it is desired to commemorate, and, 
a meal being prepared, a leaf plate is laid for each 
guest. Darbhg, grass is spread about each seat and 
plate. The after part of the day (as the latter half of 
the month) belongs particularly to the spirits, therefore 
the meal must take place after noon. When all are 
seated, the sacrificer invokes the gods, and then— per- 
mission being obtained from the chief Brahman guest— 
the spirits. The spirits now being present are offered 

'. Markendeya Pu, X_XXII, 38. 

' Sacred Laws of Aryas, S.B.E., 11, p. 140; Institutes of 
Vishnu, S.B.E., VII, p. 24, etc. 

8 



114 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

sesamum and water, to which kusa grass, flowers and 
fruit are sometimes added. As the ofiEerings are held 
up, each spirit in turn is named as recipient/ 

The meal is then brought in and served to the guests, 
both serving and eating being conducted in silence, the 
sacrificer meanwhile mentally repeating mantras. It 
is believed that the spirits receive food and nourish- 
ment through the medium of the actual partaker. 

The meal finished, balls of rice are offered to the 
spirits. These balls are not eaten by the guests, but 
are thrown into fire, or given to a cow. The spirits 
are then dismissed, afterwards the gods, and the 
ceremony is complete. The meal usually consists of 
rice, curds, etc., cooked with plenty of ghi, for "the 
satisfaction of the manes, if food is mixed with fat, is 
greater and lasts a longer time."^ 

Note.— The sacred cord, usually worn over the left shoulder 
and under the right arm, is shifted to the right shoulder during 
the performance of Sraddha.' 

It will be seen that the rite consists of two distinct 
parts : (i) The offerings of water, sesamun seeds and 
rice, which are not partaken of by the guests, and 
(ii) a substantial meal, which is. 

The sixteen days on which sraddha for personal 
ancestors is performed are as follows : 

(i-xv) Bhadrapada krishnd first to ftfieetitkmchisive. 
This period is known as the Mahalaya, Pitripaksha 
or Aparapaksha. The sun at this time is in the Rasi 
Kanya (Virgo), and the belief is that at the moment 
of the entrance, the spirits leave the house of Yama, 
and come down to occupy the houses of their 
descendants. Every Hindu should make at least one 
visit to Gaya, to perform sraddha there, but, for the 
sake of the many who cannot do this, it has been 
decreed that a Mahalaya sraddha is equal. in merit to 
one performed at Gaya. 

^ Crooke, I, p. 180, etc. 

' Sacred Laws of the Aryas, S.B.E., II, p. 141. 

• datapaths Brahmana, S.B.E., XII, p. 361, etc., etc. 



FESTIVALS ARISING FROM ANIMISTIC SOURCES US 

During this fortnight special days to note are : 

(a) Chautha bharani or Bharant panchaml, being 
the fourth or fifth day. On this day the rite is done 
for one who has died within the past year. 

{b) Avidhava navaml (Unwidowed ninth), in 
memory of a woman who has died before her husband.' 
Widowers invite one or more Brahman women as their 
guests. — 

(f) Ghata chaturdasl or Ghayala chaturdaSl (Vio- 
lence fourteenth), in memory of one who has died, in 
battle or otherwise, a violent death. 

{d^ Sarvapitri amavasya (All Fathers' new 
moon), the greatest of the fifteen days, upon which 
it is imperative that a sraddha be performed, with at 
least one Brahman guest, by all who have not pre- 
viously done so. All ancestors are remembered on 
this day. The very low castes give balls of flour or 
rice to the crows, who are believed to be the spirits of 
the departed. 

(xvi) M&tCLmaha or Dauhitra (Mother's father, 
or, conversely, Daughter's son). The dark half 
celebrations are closed with a sraddha on this the first 
day of the succeeding month, Asvina. A boy must 
perform it in memory of his maternal grandfather. 

Besides the above, on four days known as the four 
Ashtaka (Eighth days) offerings are made, but 
there is much confusion as to who are supposed to be 
the recipients.^ Visvadeva, the Sun, Agni, Prajapati, 
Night, the Nakshatra are all mentioned. These four 
days are : 

(i) Margasirsha krishna eighth. 

(ii) Pausha krishna eighth, known as Pushpashtaka, 
as flowers (pushpa) are ofEered. 

(iii) Magha krishna eighth, known as Mamsashtaka, 
as the flesh (mamsa) of goats or- deer is offered. 

(iv) Phalguna krishna eighth, known as Sakashtaka, 
as green herbs (saka) are offered. 

^ F. if H.; and Hillebrandt, Ritual Literatur, E.I.A.R., 
p. 95. 



116 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

On two other days sraddha are performed for other 
than personal ancestors, vis. 

(i) Bhtshmashtamt.^ Magha sukla eighth. This 
is the anniversary of the death of Bhishma, one of 
the great heroes of the Mahabharata, and kinsman 
alike of the Pan^avas and the Kauravas. He had, made 
a vow of celibacy, in order that his stepmother's 
children should have no rival but succeed to their 
father's inheritance. But the stepmother proved child- 
less, and therefore there were no descendants tcf 
perform Bhishma' s sraddha, which they would have 
done in place of the sons whom he had so nobly forgone. 

So the whole nation, including men of all castes, 
were enjoined to perform this rite to his memory, at 
noon, on the anniversary of his death, offering water, 
sesamum and boiled rice. 

Refiexly, the sins of a whole year committed by a 
man who observes this command will be expiated 
thereby. 

This custom is dying out, but still exists in places. 

(ii) Bhuta or Naraka chaturdaii. (Ghost or Hell 
Fourteenth.) Asvina krishna fourteenth. (See also 
Chap. Ill, p. 59). On this day offerings of water and 
sesamum are made to Yama, after bathing at dawn; 
fourteen sorts of herbs are eaten, and fourteen lamps 
are lighted in the evening, to deliver from the fear of 
hell. 

Yama or Pitripati^ (Lord of the Fathers) was in 
early times believed to be the first of mortals to die, 
and to him in his abode of Yamaloka in the South the 
spirits of all proceeded. All who died went first to him, 
afterwards going on to heaven or hell. Yamaloka was 
not necessarily a place of suffering, see e.g. the legend 
of Indra (Chap. V, p. 88), but in later mythology he 
became more closely associated with the terrors of 
death, and Yamaloka became synonymous with Naraka 

» F. & H., p. 9. 

' Vedic Mythology, A. A. Macdonell, E.I.A.R.,v. 171. 
Epic Mythology, Washburn Hopkins, E.I.A.R., p. 107. 



FESTIVALS ARISING FROM ANIMISTIC SOURCES 117 

(hell). By propitiating him on this day it is hoped to 
escape from suffering when one's spirit goes to him. 

III. Animal Worship 

The chief animals worshipped in India to-day are 
cows and oxen, monkeys and snakes. Horses are 
worshipped on Dasaraday in the Deccan (see p. 57), but 
this is more for their connection with war than for 
themselves. Again, dogs are worshipped in connection 
with Kala Bhairava, but this is only a local custom. 
Also,^ when an intercalary Ashadha occurs, women daily 
during the intercalary month worship the kokila (a 
species of cuckoo) , but this is in memory of Sati, wife 
of Siva, who destroyed herself in the sacrificial fire of 
her father, Daksha, having quarrelled with him, and for 
defiling the holy fire was changed into a kokila. There 
is nothing sacred about the bird itself. 

The worship of the first-named three classes is 
common throughout all India. 

(i) Cow and Ox Worship. Originally cattle" were not 
considered sacred. In Vedic times they were killed for 
food. In the Aitareya Brahmana instructions are given 
for celebrating the visit of a king by eating beef. 

But their usefulness and value to an agricultural 
people became the cause of their first being considered 
too valuable, then too sacred, to be killed, and they 
became, by easy stages, objects of worship. By 
Manu's time they were established as sacrosanct, aild 
their worship has not decreased with time. 

At the same time the bull has come to be con- 
sidered the symbol of fertility, and his worship is closely 
connected with that of the Siva emblem. 

Most Brahman households possess at least one cow, 
which is regarded almost as a member of the family. 
To touch her in passing is purifying, and to mark her 
forehead with the red circle denoting the happy 
unwidowed state is very common. Cow's milk may 

' Gupte. ' Crooke, II, p. 227. 



118 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

be drunk from the hands of one of lower caste, its purity 
being beyond defilement. 

Certain days are appointed for cow-worship,* and 
certain others for that of the farm and draught bullocks, 
as under : 

(a) Govatsa dvadali, Asvina krishna twelfth ; Maha- 
rashtra. Govatsa dvadast, Sravana krishna fourth ; 
Gujarat. Gopashtami, Karttika sukla eighth; Maha- 
rashtra. Bahula, Sravana krishna fourth ; Bengal. 
VasU barasa, Vsakha saiukla first and Jyeshtha sukla 
second ; Eastern Bengal. 

On these days cows and their calves are worshipped, 
chiefly by women, offerings of food are made to them, 
and their foreheads are marked with the red lead circle. 
No woman must touch wheat, milk, curds, whey or ghi 
on the day of worship. 

(.b) Cow's footprints, called Gopada, are drawn on 
the earth near a temple or tank, and worshipped by 
women daily during the four months. 

(c) Pola, Sravana or Bhadrapada new moon ; Deccan. 
Bendura, Ashadha sukla thirteenth or Karttika sukla first; 
Konkan. Pongal, Makara Samkranti ; Southern India. 

On these days bullocks are given a rest from work, 
and are feasted, as a thanksgiving for their labour. They 
are also worshipped. Details of the ceremony vary 
with the district, but a procession of bullocks, adorned 
with tassels, garlands, paint, etc., is a feature in all. 

This festival is not of great antiquity, and is not 
mentioned in Vedic or post-Vedic literature. It is 
chiefly a farmers' festival, held at the harvesting of the 
staple grain of the district, which explains the variation 
in the date at which it occurs. Pious -' Brahmans, 
however, will sometimes make earthen images of 
bullocks and worship them at this time. The con- 
nection with the harvest is shown in the Marathi 
proverb, inEfif anS ^|^^ i^ (In Magha water [at the 
roots], at Bendura fruit). 

The Maharashtra custom is to wash the animals and 
anoint them with oil in the morning, paint their horns 
and adorn them with gilt, or coloured paper, and put 



FESTIVALS ARISING FROM ANIMISTIC SOURCES 119 

tassels and brass ornaments on the tips. Hand prints 
are marked on their bodies and marigold garlands put 
round their necks. The sara or horn-encircling rope is 
renewed. Each family worships its own . animals, at 
home, sometimes by circumambulations. They are then 
taken out in the evening to join the others in a proces- 
sion through the village, led by the headman's bullocks. 

(ii) Monkey Worship. This worship is in the 
popular mind due to the help given by the monkey tribe 
to Rama, in his search for, and rescue of, Sita. 

It is -evidently a relic from very ancient times, 
earlier than the epic legend which to-day is believed to 
account for it. The aboriginal tribes who helped King 
Rama in his battles became, later, identified with the 
monkeys, who were already worshipped, possibly 
on account of their strange likeness to men. 

With regard to Hanuman, the monkey-hero of the 
Ramayana, Crooke^ says he is the survival of a 
Dravidian god ; Monier Williams^ says he is a "poetical 
deification" of some aboriginal tribe-leader, who helped 
Rama in his wars against Ravana ; and Sir Alfred Lyall' 
writes : " It seems as if hero-worship and animal- 
worship had got mixed up in the legend of Hanuman." 

Throughout India monkeys are considered sacred, and 
are worshipped, monkey temples existing in many 
places, but one special day is devoted to Hanuman, viz. 
Hunumajjayantt (Hanuman's birthday), Chaitra full 
moon. 

This day is very generally observed throughout 
Maharashtra, especially by members of the Ramdas sect. 
Temples and isolated shrines and images are common 
all over the Deccan, where he is usually called Maruti, 
from a legend to the effect that his father was the wind- 
god, Maruta. His mother was Anjani, and her son was 
given as a boon by Uma for prayers made to her. 

The favourite legend about Hanuman, related to his 
worshippers on this day, is that of his leap from India 

' Dravidians, E.R.E., V. 

" Religious Life of the Hindus, p. 220. 

• Asiatic Studies, p. 13. 



120 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

to Lanka (Ceylon), and his discovery there of Sita in 
Ravana's palace garden ; and of his building .the rock- 
bridge to enable Rama and his army to cross the 
channel. 

Another legend, equally well known, is that at his 
birth he saw the red sun, newly risen, and leaped up to 
reach it, thinking it a fruit. He soon discovered his 
mistake, but was able to strike down Rahu, whom he 
found about to swallow the sun. Pictures of this Ipap 
in mid air are very widespread, and are worshipped in 
the house oii his birthday. 

Worship is also offered at any one of his shrines, in 
the morning, the worshipper having risen before dawn, 
and bathed. 

Note. — Hanuman is one of the seven Chiranjiva, i.e. 
Immortal ones.* 

(iii) Snake Worship.^ Much has been written on 
this subject, and general modern opinion is that it was, 
probably, not known to the Aryan immigrants. There 
is no trace of it in the ^^igveda, where Ahi is a noxious 
animal, slain by Indra. But the Aryans found it all over 
the land, and by degrees incorporated it into Hinduism ; 
for the Yajurveda teaches reverence for snakes ; Manu 
grants them the honour of descent from himself ; and in 
the Puranas and Epic^we find them installed as a semi- 
divine race. Arjuna, the most famous of the five 
Pandava brothers, married Ulupi, a snake-woman, and 
Krishna, in the Bhagavadgita, identifies himself with 
Ananta. 

There still exists a very persistent belief in a race 
of Nagas or snake-people, who lived in Epic times and 
earlier, and - whose women were of great beauty, 
intermarrying with gods and men. 

» I.A., XL, p. SS. 

» Dravldians, W. Crooke, E.R.E., V ; Crooke, II, p. 123 f. ; 
Religion des Veda, Oldenberg, trans. Henry, p. 57 f. ; Code of 
Manu, I, 37 (S.B.E., XXV, p. IS); Brdhnmnism and Hinduism, 
Monier Williams, p. 323 ; Bom. Gaz., XVIII ; Imp. Gaz., II, 
p. 217 ; " Snake and Tree Worship," Fergusson ; S.B.E., XXIX, 
pp. 129, 201. 



FESTIVALS ARISING FROM ANIMISTIC SOURCES 121 

Certain tribes and castes to-day, ue. the Nhavis of 
the Deccan, the Kurs of Chota Nagpur, and some of 
the Mysore princely families, claim descent from the 
Nagas, holding themselves, in the case of the first- 
named, superior to any other caste on the strength of 
it. This claim to superior rank is not, however, allow- 
ed by members of other castes. Some think the origin 
of this belief lies in the former existence of a race of 
Scythians with a snake as their national emblem, who 
settled jn India either before or after the immigration 
of the Aryans. 

The first mention of these Naga people is found in 
the Sutras. The Grihya Sutra enjoins the worship of 
"Celestial, Aerial and Terrestrial serpents" by a 
householder on Sravana full moon. 

There is a close connection between snakes and 
"earth-mothers," as is natural, seeing that snakes 
live chiefly in holes in the ground ; and many people 
consider them guardians of hidden treasure. 

Their worship is also connected with the desire for 
longevity and fertility, as is seen from certain legends 
and customs, e.g. that quoted by Monier Williams, 
that earth from a snake hole, if put into the mouth 
daily, will cause fertility. 

Crooke traces the evolution 'of a snake into a deity 
through three stages, from the natural fear and aver- 
sion in which they were first held, to the harmless 
house snake's becoming identified with the spirit of an 
ancestor, returned in another form to live in the 
familiar spot, then snake-charmers became regarded 
as wizards, then as priests, and but a short step was 
necessary to the identification of snakes with gods. 
Most Hindus will not kill even a poisonous snake, they 
fear revenge from the rest of its tribe. 

Some dozen snakes are known to legend and are 
worshipped to-day, including, among the best known, 
SesAa, the thousand-headed, living below the world, 
on whom Vishnu reclines during his four months' 
sleep ; Ananta (the Endless), who encircles the 
earth, and symbolises eternity, and is sometimes 



122 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

looked upon as a manifestation of Vishnu ; Vasuki, 
who became the churning-rope at the churning of 
the 'milky ocean by gods and demons; Takskaka, the 
lord of the snake-people, against whom Janamejaya 
waged a war of extermination ; Kaliya, the river snake, 
subdued by Krishna after several days of struggle in 
the depths of the Yamuna ; but older than all these, 
and more worshipped, is Manasa, " the mother 
snake-goddess of the early village founders."^ 

Snake images, usually representing cobras, are 
found under trees and by the roadsides everywhere, and 
the passers-by bow to them. Besides this occasional 
worship, special snake festivals are held, as under : 

(a) Ananta chaturdaJi.^ Bhadrapada or Alvina 
sukla fourteenth. On this day the snake Ananta. is 
worshipped as symbolising Vishnu, with oflEerings of 
flowers. It is a man's festival only, and is rapidly 
losing its character of a snake worship day and 
becoming a Vishnu worship day. The legend attached 
to it is about a certain Susila, who was taught a 
means of obtaining any desire she might have by 
worshipping pitchers of water, while dressed in red 
garments, afterwards binding a red silk cord on her 
wrist. This ceremony is supposed to have been 
taught to the Pandavas by Krishna, to enable them 
to gain their great desire of overcoming the Kauravas, 
and it is practised to-day by those who have some 
personal wish which they dpsire fulfilled. 

The ritual prescribed is as follows : The worshipper 
must bathe in the morning and fast. At noon a copper 
vessel must be filled with clean water, and draped with 
garments, and darbha grass must be taken and twisted 
into ihe form of a snake. In a clear space a square 
altar of rice must be made, upon which the copper 
vessel is placed, with the grass snake image before it. 
Both are then worshipped with lengthy mantras and 
offerings of fourteen kinds of fruit. A red silk cord, 

> Hewitt, p. 356. 

' Sharma, p. 206 ; Hindu Year, p. ■i8;F.& H., p. 3. 



FESTIVALS ARISING FROM ANIMISTIC SOURCES 123 

composed of fourteen threads and in which fourteen 
knots are tied, is then taken, worshipped and fastened 
round the right wrist. 

This ceremony, if performed for fourteen years in 
succession, will give long life and fulfill- any desire. 
Every year a new cord is assumed, the old one being 
given, with a fee and presents, to the officiating priest. 

(b) Naga panchaml} Sravana sukla fifth, or, less 
commonly, Margasirsha sukla fifth. This day celebrates 
the return of Krishna from the Yamuna after having 
overcome the big river snake Kaliya. Krishna had fallen 
into the river from a tree overhanging the bank, into 
which he had climbed to fetch a ball which had lodged 
there while he was playing with the herdspeople. His 
return with the snake was received with joy, the herds- 
men ofiEering Kaliya milk in gratitude for his not having 
harmed their favourite, Krishna. And so the festival 
was instituted. 

Another legend says that a man, ignorant of the 
festival, while ploughing on this day killed a nest of 
young snakes. The mother snake, ip revenge, in the 
night bit the man and all his family, except one 
married daughter lining in another village. Having 
killed all but this daughter, the mother snake set out 
for that village to" kill her also. But the girl, knowing 
of the festival, had put out a dish of appetising food, 
which the snake tasted, and which gratified her so 
much that she not only refrained from killing the girl, 
but gave her a healing lotion to sprinkle on the bodies 
of the parents and other children, whereby they were 
all restored to life. After this, the festival became 
general. 

It is observed by keeping a fast from noon on the 
fourth, and bathing at dawn on the fifth, after which 
either an earthen image of a cobra or a picture must be 
worshipped ; by placing saucers of milk near known or 
suspected snake holes, as' an offering ; and by rigidly 
abstaining from digging, ploughing or otherwise 

» Sharma, p. 110. 



124 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

disturbing the earth, whereby snakes might be injured. 
Women also abstain from grinding, pounding rice, and 
even from slicing vegetables. In the after part of the 
fifth feasts are held, and giving of presents and holiday- 
making are general. 

If, within a month of this festival, a snake bites 
anyone who has kept the law of offering milk, etc., on 
this day it may be killed without mercy or fear of 
retaliation. Its life is forfeit, on account of its 
ingratitude. 

In Maharashtra the festival is a'favourite one with 
the women of the agricultural castes. They meet in 
bands, and dance in rings, afterwards worshipping the 
earthen snake image made for this occasion and set up 
in the village. 

(c) Manasa pdhchami^ Ashadha krishna fifth. 
Bengal, Northern and Southern India. 

Manasa is the third of the legendary snake deities 
which have special days appointed for their worship. 
Manasa combines in herself the properties of one of the 
mother-earth-guardians, and of the snakes. She is not 
found in the classic list of the nine big snakes, vis. 
Vasuki, Ananta, Sesha, Takshaka, Kaliya, Padmanabha, 
Kambala, Sankhapala, and Dhritarashtra," but she is 
even more popular than they in Northern India. She 
is not worshipped in Maharashtra. 

There are no less than four legends about her, which 
are repeated to worshippers on this day : 

(fl) While Vishnu and the other gods were 
sleeping, during the four rainy months, Manasa kept 
watch in a snuhi tree to protect men — as the legend 
adds — from snake bite. 

Here we see her guardian-mother nature uppermost, 
and it possibly gives a clue to her becoming identified 
with the snakes. She was the protectress of mankind, 
guarding them from their most dangerous enemy 
during the rainy months. Hence she became the queen 

' F. (S* //., p. 57 ; Lunar Year, p. 287. 
» Molesworth, AM\<\ ; Sharma, p. 117. 



FESTIVALS ARISING PROM ANIMISTIC SOURCES 125 

of snakes, atile to control their actions, hence the 
snake-queen-goddess. 

(6) In Southern India the story goes that a boy, 
gathering ketaki flowers for his sister, was bitten by a 
cobra and died. His sister, by worshipping Manasa on 
this day, was able to persuade her to restore the boy to 
life, so that the day which began in mourning ended in 
joy and feasting. 

(c) A certain merchant refused to worship Manasa, 
who in revenge killed all his sons in turn, by allowing 
her subjects to bite them. The last son was bitten 
on the day of his marriage to a pious girl, named 
Vehula The bride refused to give up the body for 
burning, but put it on a raft, and, crouching beside it, 
pushed out into the stream of a big river. Here 
they drifted for many days, the girl exposed to 
cold and heat, hunger and thirst, but never ceasing to 
implore Manasa to relent and restore her husband. 
Her prayers and austerities proved too powerful to 
resist, and at length Manasa took pity on the poor little 
bride, and restored her husband to life on an Ashadha 
krishna fifth. 

In both of these two last legends we have the belief 
that persons dead from snake bite can be restored to 
life. There are probably instances, giving rise to such 
legends, of apparent death from this cause, which prove 
to be cases of suspended animation only, the bitten 
person ultimately recovering. 

{d) A girl, unpopular with her husband's family, 
was carried ofE by Manasa to her underground palace, 
where she lived for some time in great happiness and 
prosperity with the Naga people, who adopted her as 
one of themselves. 

On her return to the upper earth she was not 
ashamed of her snake kindred, but acknowledged them. 
This so much gratified them, that they loaded her and 
her husband's family with treasure, and guaranteed 
their prosperity as long as snake worship was regularly 
obsetved by them. Needless to add, the girl became a 
great favourite and her future happiness was insured. 



126 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

Here we see the connectioil traced between the 
snake tribe and buried treasure discovered by a girl. 
It was assumed that she must have, been given treasure 
by the guardians of it, and so the legend was evolved. 

The observances for this day are similar to those in 
the Deccan on Naga panchami, with the addition, in 
the United Provinces, of the following custom : For 
seven days before the festival, i.e. from Ashadha sukla 
fourteenth, gram, pulse and wheat are steeped in water. 
On the krishna fifth a wisp of grass is taken, twisted 
into snake form, dipped into the water in which is the 
grain, and given as an oflEering to the snakes. 

Here the coimection between the snake tribe and the 
fertility of the crops is obvious. Another day for 
Manasa worship is 

Arandhanam. Bhadrapada (or Asvina) new moon. 
Bengal. On this day no cooking may be done. The 
oven is painted with rice powder, and a branch of the 
hedge plant called Manasa is put in it. The snake 
goddess is worshipped. 

This rite connects snake wjjrship with household 
prosperity. 

In some parts of India^ Manasa worship appears to 
have a place in the Dasahara observances. 

IV. Worship of Plants and Inanimate Things 

Many trees and other plants are objects of worship. 
The Pippal, in which the ghosts of young Brahman boys 
are believed to live, and which is considered a symbol 
of Vishnu ; the Bel, or wood-apple, sacred to Siva, 
and not to be used for firewood except by Brahmans ; the 
Sami, worshipped at the Dasara; and the Cocoanut, 
often used in worship as the symbol of fertility. 
Besides these, the Kuia, Dursa and Darbha grasses are 
all sacred, and used in many ceremonies. Of the last 
named the Pavitra or ring is made, worn by a priest 
and worshippers during certain rites ; and Diirva is 

' F.& H.,-^.\h. 



FESTIVALS ARISING FROM ANIMISTIC SOURCES 127 

used in the Durvashtami rite on Bhadrapada sukla 
eighth (Chap. Ill, p. 52). 

But a few trees have a special day set apart for 
their worship, as under : 

(i) Vai purnima^ Jyeshtha full moon (new moon). 
Western (Northern) India. This day, sometimes 
called Vat Savitri, is kept over a good part of India, 
being observed very strictly in the Deccan, where 
frequently three days, the thirteenth, fourteenth and 
fifteenth, are kept. 

The legend giving rise to it, according to popular 
belief, is the well-known story from the Mahabharata'' 
of Savitri and Satyavan, which is more Icrved by the 
women of India than any other, saving perhaps that of 
Sita. 

Savitri chose as her husband the ill-fated Satyavan, 
son of a king who had been driven into exile on account 
of blindness. Having been told that her husband 
would die a year after marriage, Savitri spent the last 
three days of that year in fasting and prayer. On the 
last day she accompanied Satyavan on a woodcutting 
expedition. 

When he became overcome with weariness and. 
approaching death, she sat down under a Vat (banyan) 
tree, with his head in her lap, and awaited the coming 
of Yama with his noose to catch and bear away her 
husband's spirit. Then follows the story of how she 
leaves her husband's body to the care of the tree, and 
persistently follows Yama, over rough ground, through 
forests and across mountains, in his journey with 
Satyavan's spirit to his abode in the South. 

Time after time Yama tries to ,make her turn back, 
offering one boon after another, viz. her father-in-law's 
restored sight and kingdom, the prosperity of her own 
parents, etc. But nothing will induce her to leave her 
husband's spirit. Finally, Yama promises her the boon 
of one hundred sons, whereupon she claims her husband's 

» F. ■& H., p. 71 ; Sharma, p. 67 ; Hindu Year, pp. 12, 32. 
' Pativrata Mahatmya. 



128 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

restoration to life as the only possible means of the 
boon's fulfilment, and Yama is forced to consent. Then 
comes the sudden finding of herself and the sleeping 
Satyavan again under the friendly Vat tree, his awaken- 
ing to life, and the fulfilment of all Yama's promises. 

The tree does not play an important part in the tale, 
but is the principal object of worship at the memorial 
festival, which is observed by married women only, 
men, widows and children having no part in it. 

A fast is ordained, and very religious women keep it 
for three days, as Savitri did ; all must keep it for at least 
one day. In the house a picture of a Vat tree, Savitri, 
Yama and Satyavan is drawn with sandal paste and rice 
flour on the floor or wall, and, where possible, gold 
images of the prince and his wife are set in a tray of 
sand. The pictures and images are worshipped, with 
mantras and offerings of Vat leaves. Out of doors the 
tree is worshipped with mantras, and a thread is wound 
about it, while offerings of copper coins and fruit are 
made. The due performance of these rites is believed 
to insure long life to one's husband. Women greet each 
other with, "^FIT <HlfMt ft" (Become as Savitri). 

Gupte^ believes the festival to be a Nature myth, 
typifying the annual marriage of Earth (Satyavan)' to 
Nature (Savitri). The Earth dies every year, but is 
revivified by the powers of Nature. 

The choice of a Vat tree is likely to be due to ancient 
worship of this tree, typifying, by its aerial roots 
which finally take root in the ground, becoming new 
tree trunks while still part of the parent tree, the con- 
tinuity of life. 

(ii) Aiokashtamt.^ Chaitr a sukla eighth. This day 
coincides with the Brahmaputra bathing festival (see 
p. 103), but the asoka tree worship is quite distinct 
from the river worship, and is confined to women only. 
It also appears to be quite distinct from the Asoka 
.sixth, two days earlier, for securing the welfare of 
children (see p. 104), in connection with which there 

" P, 246. » F. <Sf H., p. 7 ; Lunar Year, p. 277. 



FESTIVALS ARISING FROM ANIMISTIC SOURCES 129 

is no tree worship, the use of the flowers being 
apparently due to the name A+ soka = the Absence of 
Sorrow (the same as the Aduhkha ninth on Bhadrapada 
ivkla ninth given in some calendars.) 

_ The legend is that Ravana, having carried ofE Sita, 
wife of Rama, imprisoned her in a grove of asoka trees, 
where she continually prayed for deliverance and restora- 
tion to her husband. Hanuman, the monkey-god, 
searching for her, saw her praying under an asoka 
tree on this day, and took the news of her where- 
abouts to Rama, so that he was able to rescue her. 
In memory of this event women now worship the 
tree on this day, embracing it, and eating its leaves, to 
secure immunity from sorrow, especially that of becom- 
ing widows. Both festivals, on the sixth and the eighth, 
are probably due to the name of the tree. 

(iii) Tulasi vivaha} (Tulasi Wedding.) Karttika 
sukla eleventh and twelfth. 

The tulasi plant is to be found growing in the 
courtyard of most Brahman houses, in a brick or plaster 
pedestal, called the Vrindavana. It is worshipped every 
evening by the women of the house, who circumambu- 
late it, carefully water it, place a lamp at its foot by night, 
etc. All Hindus, of whatever caste, venerate it where 
they do not actually worship. No gardener will cut or 
uproot it, but the leaves may be plucked by day (not 
after dark) for offerings. 

The day set apart for its special worship is the day 
of, or following, the close of Vishnu's four months' 
sleep, when he is married to the tulasi plant. The 
legends referring to it are two : , 

(a) Lakshmi averted trouble from mankind by 
slaying a demon, and remained on earth in the form of 
this plant to be a tangible object of man's worship. 
The favourite legend is, however, the following : 

(5) Vrinda, wife of Jalandhara, was renowned for 
her beauty and virtue, the latter being so great that it 

> Bom. Gaz., XVIII, p. 2S3 ; Sharma, p. 235 ; Hindu Year, 
pp. 2?, 35. 

9 



130 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

gave power to her husband, insomuch that Siva, who 
wished to kill him, could not obtain_the mastery over 
him. Finding his only hope of overcoming the husband 
was to destroy the wife's virtue, Siva persuaded Vishnu 
to betray her, which he was only able to compass 
by going to her in the likeness of her husband. 

When she found she had been deceived, Vrindabuilt 
a pyre and immolated herself upon it. Jalandha^avalso 
was killed by Siva. But Vishpu had fallen in love with 
Vrinda, and was so much distressed at her death that he 
refused to be comforted until the gods planted a tulasi 
shrub, and summoned her spirit into it. Since then she 
is believed to come into the shrub every evening, for 
the night, leaving it in the morning. This is the reason 
why the leaves must not be plucked after sunset. 

On the day preceding that of the festival (which 
may be celebrated on any day between the eleventh and 
the fifteenth, though usually on the twelfth) the 
vrindavana is cleaned and painted and garlanded, while 
fruit and flowers and all things% necessary for the 
ceremony are made ready. On the wedding day a fast 
is kept till evening, when, having bathed and assumed 
white garments, the officiating priest brings some 
emblem of Vishriu to the plant. This may be an image 
of Vishnu, Balarama, or Krishna, but is frequently the 
salagrama stone (see p. 131). 

Both the emblem and the plant are washed with 
warm water and the five amrita (a mixture of milk, 
curds, ghi, honey and sugar). Men's clothing, a sacred 
cord, and sandal paste are offered to Vishnu, and 
turmeric, red lead, the marriage neck-thread, etc., to 
Vrinda, with mantras. Then, as in actual marriages, 
a shawl is held between the two, the officiating priest 
repeats mantras, and, at a signal, the shawl is dropped 
and rice showered upon the pair." The Vishnu emblem 
is made to touch the plant, a lamp is waved round them 
for luck, and the marriage is complete. The priest 
receives a wedding fee and a feast is held. 

This festival is observed chiefly, but not entirely, 
by women. 



FESTIVALS ARISING FROM ANIMISTIC SOURCES 131 

Noie.—Monier Williams^ jquotes the following verses, showing 
the very great reverence in which the tulasi plant is held : 

" I adore that tulasi in whose roots are all the sacred 
places of pilgrimage, in whose centre are all the deities, 
and in whose upper branches are all the Vedas." 

(iv) The ^alagramc^ is a black stone found in the 
river Gan^aki in Nepal, sometimes pierced with holes, 
believed to be the work of a legendary worm known 
as Vajakita. Some say the real stone should be an 
ammonite, others that it may merely bear the impres- 
sion of one. 

It is sacred to Vishnu, as he is believed to live in it. 
No orthodox Vaishnava house is without one as an 
object of worship. It takes the place of a Vishriu 
image at the will of the worshipper, and is frequently 
used in the marriage with the tulasi plant (as above). 

One authority states that it was Vrinda's hair only 
which became that plant, her body became the river 
Gandaki, which gives the connection between the plant 
and the stone. 

The use of the stone to represent Vishrm was not 
known even as late as Epic times, but it has come to be 
more than a symbol of him. He is believed to be 
immanent in it. 

(v) Knotted Thread Worship. Three festivals 
reiflain, all kept on Sravana full moon, when knotted 
threads are the object of reverence and worship. The 
wearing of threads as charms, on neck or wrist, enters 
into many ceremonies (see Ananta fourteenth, p. 122; 
Kala Bhairava, p. 96, etc. ) , and, as is well known, the 
wearing of the sacred cord by members of the three 
upper castes dates back to Vedic times. Directions 

" Religious LUe of the Hindus, y.Z33. ^ 

^ Original Inhabitants of India, Oppert, p. 356 ; I.A., XXV 

p. 146 ; Epic Mythology, Hopkins, E.I.A.R., p. 209 ; Bartli, trans' 

Wood, p. 262. 



132 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

as to initiation and the subsequent wearing of the cord 
are met with frequently in Vedic literature. 

Students of folklore trace the custom back to fear of 
evil spirits, the sacred thread, like the magic circle 
known to many primitive people, being believed to 
form a barrier which demons cannot cross. Campbell* 
states that knots are tied for the same purpose, as a 
knot is circular in shape. In support of this theory a 
few customs may be quoted : 

A thread is wound round a pippal tree believed to be 
inhabited by the spirit of a Brahman boy. The 
Kayats^ of Khandesh remove their sacred cord when 
they wish to get drunk, resuming it when they- are 
again sober. In both these cases the thread is considered 
a barrier : in the first it is used to prevent the ghost 
from leaving the tree to annoy women (its favourite 
objects of torment) , and in the second it is removed so 
that the spirit inhabiting the intoxicating drink may 
not be prevented from entering the man's body, or 
from leaving it afterwards. Again, the marriage 
neck-string is broken when a woman's husband dies, not 
to signify the breaking of the marriage, which is still 
considered real and binding, but possibly that her 
husband's spirit may not be prevented from visiting 
her." 

When a thread or cord is held in so much veneration 
as has been indicated above, it is but a short step to the 
actual worship of the thread itself, which is the 
result in the India of to-day. 

(a) Sravanl purnima.* On this day all Brahmans 
must renew the sacred cord which they constantly 
wear. The ordinance appears to be that only students 
of the Vedas should renew the cord, as the day is 
sometimes called ?.ig-Yaju Sravaiji, but as a matter 
of custom all who have been initiated and wear the 
cord do so. 

» Spirit Basis, etc., I.A., XXIV, p. 131. 
' Bom. Gaz., XII, p. SS. 
■ Cp. Spirit Basis, etc., I.A., XXIV, p. 131. 
* Hindu Year, p. 16; Sharma, p. 127. 



FESTIVALS ARISING PROM ANIMISTIC SOURCES 133 

Rising at dawn, the Brahman must bathe and don 
white garments, then join a company of others in a 
temple court, or other wide, convenient place. Each is 
attended by his family priest, but the prayers and 
ceremonies are conducted in the name of all, by one 
leading priest, sitting on an earthen platform before 
them. He begins by worshipping Gariesa, to ensure 
success, and then builds a sacrificial fire and performs 
the daily sacrifice enjoined on all Brahmans. Later he 
places eight supari nuts, or eight darbha grass rings, 
on a tray, representing the seven Rishis and Arundhati 
(see Chap. IV, p. 72) , and worships them with mantras 
and offering of flowers, the assembled men and boys 
bowing before them. 

Each then eats two balls of flour and nlilk^' takes off 
his old cord, and casts it into the sacrificial fire. Then 
each gives the new cord (of cotton, in a three-fold 
twist), with which he has come provided, to his own 
priest, repeating ten Gayatris over it. It is then put 
on. There follows the worship of Brahma, the casting 
of scented flowers-and sacred rice into the fire, and the 
giving of presents to the priests, and the ceremony 
is over. 

(,6) Pavitraropana.^ On the same day Pavitras or 
Ponvates are made. These are rings, wristlets or 
necklets made from strands of cotton thread, of 
Varying lengths, with a varying number of twists and 
of knots, e.g. the best Ponvate is nine- stranded, with 
one hundred and eight twists and twenty-four knots, 
and reaches to the knees, another may have twelve 
twists and twelve knots, etc. 

The required number having been made, they are 
collected and sprinkled with Panchagavya (see p. 73 
footnote), washed, and consecrated with mantras. 
They are then worshipped, and afterwards offered to 
different gods. Onp is usually wound round a Siva 
linga ; another laid at Vishnu's feet, a third given to the 
family priest, etc. Vaishijavas of all castes and both 

' Sharma, p. 129. 



134 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

sexes are required to ofler a ponvate every year to 
Vishnu. A vigil should be kept all the succeeding 
night, and sometimes the ceremony is repeated on the 
following day. 

{c) Rakshs}^ or Rakhl bandkana. Closely allied to 
the preceding ceremony, and possibly a popular form 
of it among the commoner people, is the custom of 
binding a silk thread, with tinsel ornament, on to the 
wrist of another, to preserve him from evil. Mothers 
frequently bind them on their children's arms, wives on 
their husbands, sisters on their brothers. 

The legend is that, while men and gods were 
still under Bali's tyranny, before Vishnu took the 
Vamana incarnation, Indrani, wife of Indra, procured 
such a thread from Vishnu, and tied it round Indra's 
wrist, whereby he became protected from Bali.^ 

While tying it one should say the following 
mantra : 

^ j^TWfq^''^^ T^ ITT =^ in =^ II 

(" That by which the great, strong, demon-king Bali 
was bound, with that I too bind thee. Oh ! amulet, do 
not slip off.") 

' Hindu Year, pp. 16, 33 ; Sharma, p. 132. 
^ See Chap III, p. 60. 



CHAPTEIl VII 

CHART OF FOREGOING MONTHLY FESTIVALS 





CHAITRA 




Suklapaksha 




Light halt 


Chap. 


\ Dhvajaropana or Nava- 


Standard raising or New 




varsharambha 

2 - 

3 (a) Gauri tritlya 




Year 


m 




Gaurl's second 


VI 


(4) Matsya jayanti 




Fish birthday 


V 


4 Vinayaki chaturthi 




Vinayaka's fourth 


IV, V 


S Sri panchami (see 


Ma- 






gha Su. fifth) 




Goddess' fifth 


III 


6 («) Skanda shashthi 




Skanda 's sixth 


V 


(6) AS oka shashthi 

7 — 

8 (a) DurgashtamI 




Sorrow-free sixth 


VI 




Durga's eighth 


V 


(i) Bhavanyutpatti 




Bhavani's creation 


VI 


(c) Annapurna 




Harvest -mother 


VI 


(d) ASokashtamI 




Sorrow-free eighth 


VI 


(*) Brahmaputra snana 




Brahmaputra -bathing 


VI 


9 Rama navami or Rama 






jayanti 

10 — 

11 KamadaikadaSi 

12 — 

13 (a) Mad ana trayodaSi 




Rama's birthday 


V 




Wish-granting eleventh 


V 


or 






Ananga puja 




Love-god's thirteenth 


in 


(6) Pradosha 

14 — 

15 (a) Hanumaj jayanti 




Evening fast 


V 




Hanuman's birthday 


VI 


(*) Piirnima 




Full moon 





On ^11 Thursdays worship of Lakshmi (Bengal), 

On all Fridays „ „ „ (Maharashtra). 



CHART OP FOREGOING MONTHLY FESTIVALS 137 





CHAITRA 


1 


Kfishnapaksha 


Dark half 


2 

3 

4 


Samkashta chaturthi . 


. Difficult fourth 


S 
6 


— 


— ^ 


7 


— 


— 


8 


Kalashtami 


. Black eighth 


9 


— 


— 


10 


— 





11 


VaruthinyekadaSi 


. Equipment eleven 


12 


— 





13 (a) Varuoi (see also Phal. 
kri. thirteenth) 


. Bathing festival 


(*) 


Sivaratri 


. Siva's night 


14 


— 





IS 


Amavasya 


. New moon 



CAafi. 



IV, V 



V 

VI 
V 



138 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 





VAI^ 


Iakha 






SuklapaHha 


LisM half 


Chap. 


1 

2 
3 


Vasu barasa 


Cow worship 


VI 


(a) Kritayugadi (or Tret a- 
yugadi) 


Anniversary of Krita 
Treta) yuga 


(or 

III 




(4) Akshayya tritiya 


Unperishing third 


III 




(c) ParaSurama jayanti . . 


Rama-with-the axe birthday V 




(rf) Gauri piJja samapti .. 


End of Gauri worship 


VI 


4 
5 
6 
7 
8 


Vinayaki chaturthi 


Vinayaka's fourth 


iy,v 


Durgashtami 


Durga's eighth 


V 


9 


Sita jayanti 


Sita's birthday 


VI 


10 


— 


— 




11 


MohinyekadaSi 


Temptation eleventh 


V 


12 


— 


— 




13 


Pradesh a 


Evening fast 


V 


14 


Nrisimha jayanti 


Man-lion birthday 


V 


IS (a) Kvirma jayanti 


Tortoise birthday 


V 




(*) Pushpadola 


Flower swinging 


V 




(c) Purnima 


Full moon 





chart of foregoing monthly festivals 139 
vaiSakha 

Krishnapaksha Dark half Chap. 



IV, V 

V 

V 
V 



1 

2 


— ~ 


— 


3 
4 
S 
6 
7 
8 
9 


Sariikashta chaturthi . 


. DifiScult fourth 


— 


— 


Kalashtami 


. Black eighth 


10 
11 

1 o 


AparaikadaSi 


Unequalled ele\ 


1^ 
13 


Sivaratri 


. Siva's night 


14 


— 


/ 


15^. 


Amavasya 


. New moon 



140 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



JYESHTHA 


Suklapaksha 


Light half Chap. 


1 DaSahara or Gangotsav 
rambha 


a- Beginning of DaSahara or 

Ganga festival VI 


2 Vasfl barasa 


Cow worship VI 


3 Rambha tritiya 


Rambha's third VI 


4 (a) Vinayaki chaturthi 


Vinayaka's fourth IV. V 


(b) Uma 
S — 
6(a) Shashthidevi 


Urna's fourth VI 


Goddess of the sixth VI 


(6) Aranya shashthi 

7 — 

8 Durgashtami 

9 — 

10 DagaharaorGangotsava 
samapti 


Forest sixth VI 


Durga's eighth V 


I End of Dagahara or Ganga 

festival VI 


11 NirjalaikadaSi '. . 

12 — 

13 (fl) Pradosha 


Waterless eleventh V 


Evening fast V 


(*) Savitri pujarambha . 


Beginning of Savitri worship VI 


IS (a) Vat purnima or Va 
Sav til 


t Vat tree full moon, or Sa- 

vitri's Vat day VI 



(*) Purnima 



FuU moon 



CHART OF FOREGOING MONTHLY FESTIVALS 141 



JYESHTHA 



1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 



Kfishnapaksha 



Samkashta chaturthi 



KalashtamI 

Ambuvachyarambha 
YoginyekadaSi 



Dark half 



Difficult fourth 



Chap. 



IV, V 



11 

12 — 

13 (a) ^ivaratri 
(A) AmbuvachI samapti 

14 — .. — 

15 (a) Vat Savitri (N. India) . . Savitri's Vat day 
(b) Amavasya . . New moon 



Black eighth 

Beginning of Mother 
Earth's impurity 

Austere eleventh 

Siva's night 

End of Mother Earth's 
impurity 



VI 
V 

V 
VI 

VI 



142 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



ASHADHA 



, , Suklapaksha 

1 — 

2 Ratha yatra 

3 — 

4 Vinayaki chaturthi . 

5 — 

6 - 

7 — 

8 Durgashtami 
q 


Light half 


Chap. 


. Chariot festival 


V 


. Vinayaka's fourth 


IV, V 


. Durga's eighth 


V 


3 

10 Punaryatra 


. Chariot return festival 


V 


11 (a) Chaturmasarambha . 


. Beginning of the Four Months 

II. V 


(4) Sayanyekada§i 


. Sleeping eleventh 


V 


12 — , 


— 




13 (a) Pradosha 


. Evening fast 


V 


(d) Bendiira 


. Cattle festival 


VI 


14 - 


— 




IS (a) Vyasa piija 


. Vyasa worship 


VI 


(6) PiJrnima 


. Full moon 





CHART OF FOREGOING MONTHLY FESTIVALS 143 



ASHADHA 
Krishtiapaksha Dark half Chap. 

1 — 

2 ■ — 

3 — 

4 Samkashta chaturthi 

5 Manasa panchaml 

6 — 

7 — 

8 Kalashtami 



10 Ambuvachyarambha 

11 Kamikaikadagi 

12 — 

13 (a) ^ivaratri 

{b) AmbuvachI samapti 

14 — 

15 (a) Dipa puja 
(i) Amavasya 



Difficult fourth 
Manasa's fifth 



IV, V 
VI 



Black eighth V 

Beginning of Mother 

Earth's impurity VI 

Wish-granting eleventh V 

Siva's night V 

End of Mother Earth's 

— [impurity VI 

Lamp vrorship VI 

New moon 



144 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



^RAVANA 



Suklapaksha 

1 — 

2 — 

3 — 

4 Vinayaki chaturthi 


Ligkt\fial{ 


Chap. 


. Vinayaka's fourth 


IV, V 


S Naga paSchami 


. Snakes' fifth 


VI 


6 Kalki jayanti 

7 — 

8 Durgashtami 

9 — 
10 — 


. Kalki's birthday 


V 


. Durga's eighth 


V 







11 (a) PutradaikadaSI 


. Son-giving eleventh 


V 


(*) Jhulana or Hindola 
yatrarambha 


Beginning of the swinging 
festival V 


12 — 


— 




13 Pradosha 


. Evening fast 


V 


IS (o) Narall pBrnima 


. Cocoanut full moon 


- Ill 


(6) Jhulana' yatra samapti 


End of swinging festival 


V 


(t) Sravani 


. Renewing of cord 


VI 


(rf) Pavitraropana 


. Worship of threads 


VI 


(«) Raksha or Rakhi 
bandhana 


. Tying on lucky threads 


VI 


All Sundays, worship of t 
,, Mondays, ,, i 
„ Tuesdays, ,, C 
„ Wednesdays, ,, 1 
,, Thursdays, ,, J 
„ Fridays, „ \ 
,, Saturdays, „ £ 


le Sun 

siva 

jauri 

ilercury 

upiter 

^enus or Lakshmi 

atum or Hanuman , , 


IV 
IV 
IV 
IV 
IV 
IV 
IV 



CHART OF FOREGOING MONTHLY FESTIVALS 14S 





gRAVANA 




Krishnapaksha 
1 — 


Dark halt 


Chap. 


2 — .. — 

3 — .. — 

4 (a) Samkashta chaturthi . . Difficult fourth 


IV, V 


(4) Govatsa and B a 
chaturthi 

S — 


hula 

. . Cow and calf worship 


VI 


6 — 

7 Sitala saptam! 


. . Sitala's seventh 


VI 


8 (a) Kalashtami 


. . Blaclc eighth 


V 


(6) Krishna jayanti Gokula- Krishna's birthday, Gokula 

'shtaml, or Janma- or Birth eighth V 
shtami . . 


9 — 


— 




10 — 


. . 




11 AjaikadaSi 


. . Illusion eleventh 


V 


12 — 


— 




13 Sivaratri 


. . Siva's night 


V 


14 — 


— 




IS (fl) Pithorl 


. . Flour-image day 


Vl 


(«) Pola 


. . Cattle holiday 


VI 


(c) Amavasya 


. . New moon 




All Sundays worship of the Sun 
„ Mondays „ „ Siva 
„ Tuesdays „ „ Gauri 
„ Wednesdays „ „ Mercury 
„ Thursdays „ „ Jupiter 
„■ Fridays „ ,, Venus and Lakshmi 
„ Saturdays „ ,, Saturn and Hanuman 


IV 
IV 
IV 
IV 
IV 
IV 
IV 



10 



146 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



BHADRAPADA 



Suklapaksha 
Maunya vrata 



1 

2 — 

3 (a) Varaha jayanti 
((^) Haritalika 

4 (a) Vinayaki chaturthl 

(A) Ganega cliaturthi or 
Dagadi chautha 

5 Rishi panchami or 

PrayaSchit 

6 — 

7 Gauryavahana saptami 

8 (a) DurgashtamI 
(6) Gauri puja 
(c) Durvashtami 
(a!) Radhashtami 



9 
10 
11 

12 
13 
14 
IS 



Gauri visarjana navami 

Parivartini or 
Pargvaikadaii 

Vamana jayanti 

Pradosha 

Ananta chaturdaSI 

Purnima 



Light half Chap. 

Silent worship V 

Boar birthday V 

Parvati's festival VI 
Vinayaka 's fourth IV, V 

GaneSa's or Stoning fourth IV 

Rishi's fifth or Atonement IV 

Gauri summoning seventh III 

Durga's eighth V 

Gauri worship. Ill 

Diirva grass eighth III 

Radha's eighth VI 

Gauri dismissing ninth III 

Turning eleventh V 

Vamana's birthday V 

Evening fast V 

Ananta 's fourteenth VI 
Full moon 



All Thursdays, worship of Lakshmi (Bengal) 
,, Fridays, ,, ,, (Maharashtra) 



CHART OF FOREGOING MONTHLY FESTIVALS 147 



BHADRAPADA 
Krisknapaksha Dark half Chap. 



1 

2 


Mahalaya or Apara- 
paksha 


Abode of Spirits or Un- 
equalled Half 


VI 


3 

4(a) 


Samkashta chaturthi . 


. Difficult fourth IV, V 


(*) 


Chautha Bharani 


. Recently deceased's fourth 


VI 


5 
6 


Bharanl panchami 


fifth 


VI 


7 
8 


Kalashtaml 


. - Black eighth 


V 


9 


Avidhava navami 


. Unwidowed ninth 


VI 


10 


— 


— 




11 


IndraikadaSi 


. Indra's eleventh 


V 


12 
13(a) 


^ivaratri 


. Siva's night 


V 


(*) Dvapara (or Kali) 
yugadi 


Anniversary of the Dvapara 
(orKali)yuga 


III 


14 


Ghata or Ghayala 
chaturdaSi 


. Violent death fourteenth 


VI 


IS (a) Sarvapitri 


. All fathers' day 


VI 


(6) 


Pola 


. Cattle festival 


VI 


(.c) 


Arandhana 


. Snake worship 


VI 


(d) Vigvakarmapuja 


. ViSvakarma worship 


VI 


(e) Amavasya 


. New moon 





148 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



ASVINA 




Suklapaksha 


Lizht half 


Chap. 


1 (a) Matamaha or Dauhitra 


Mothers' fathers' day 


VI 


(b) Durga pujarambha or 
Navaratrarambha . . 

2 — 


Beginning of Durga or 
nine nights' festival 


III 


3 — 

4 VinayakI chaturthl . . 


Vinayaka's fourth 


IV, V 


5 Lalita or Upangalalita 

paja 
K 


Lalita worship 


III 


7 Sarasvatyavahana 


Sarasvati summoning 


III 


8 (a) Durgashtaml 


Durga's eighth 


V 


(*) Sarasvati pflja 


SarasvaH worship 


III 


9 Sarasvati visarjana . . 


Sarasvati dismissal 


III 


10(a) Durga pflja samapti .. 


End of Durga worship 


III 


(b) Dasara or Vijaya daSami 


Dasara or Victory tenth 


III 


(c) Bauddha jayanti 


Buddha's birthday 


V 


11 PaSankufiaikadaSi 

12 — 

13 Pradosha 


Noose and goad eleventh 


V 


Evening fast 


V 


14 Atlanta chaturdaSi 


Ananta's fourteenth 


VI 


IS (a) Kojagari purnima 


First fruits' full moon 


HI 


(6) Pflrnima 


Full moon 





CHART OF FOREGOING MONTHLY FESTIVALS 149 



aSvina 





Krishnapaksha 


1 


— 


2 


— 


3 


— 


4 


Samkashta chaturth 


S 


— 


6 


— 


7 


— 


8 


Kalashtami 


9 


— 


10 


— 


11 


RamaikadaSi 


12(a) 


Govatsa dvadaSi 


(*) 


Guru 


13 (a) Dhana trayodaSi 


(.6) 


Sivaratri 


14(a) 


Naraka or Bhuta 

chaturdaSi 


(.6) 


Govardhana ,, 


IS (a) 


Lakshmi puja 


(6) Arandhana 


(c) Amavasya 



Dark half 



Chap. 



IV, V 



Difficult fourth 



Black eighth 



Joy eleventh V 

Cow and caM twelfth VI 
Teacher-worshipping twelfth VI 

Wealth thirteenth III 

Siva's night V 

Hell or Demon foiirteenth III 

Govardhana fourteenth V 

Lakshmi worship III 

Snake worship VI 
New moon 



, Gajagauri vrata occurs during the latter half of ASvina 
(seep. 43). 



ISO 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



KARTTIKA 



Suklapaksha 



Light half 



1 (a) Dipavali or Bali 

pratipada 
(i) Govardhana pratipada 
(c) Bendura 

2 Bhaubija or Yama 

dvitiya 

3 — 



VinayakI chaturthi 

Skanda or Karttikeya 
pancbami 

Chhat puja (Bihar) . 



4 
5 

6 

7 — 

8 (a) Durgashtami 
(6) Gopashtami 

9 (a) Treta (or Satya) 

yugadi 
{b) Jagaddhatrl or 

Jagadamba (Bengal) 
{c) Kushmanda navami 

(Maharashtra) 

10 Rasa yatrarambha 

11 PrabodhinyekadaSi 

12 (o) Tulasi vivaha 
(i) Chaturmasa samapti 

13 Pradosha 

14 Vaikuntha chaturdaSi 

15 (a) Rasa yatra samapti 
(*) Tripuri purnima 
(c) Harihara yatra 
(rf) Vyasa piJja 
{e) Itu piajarambha 
(/■) Piirnima 



Lamp festival or Bali first 
Govardhana first 
Cattle festival 



Chap. 

Ill 

V 

VI 



Brothers' or Yama's second III 

Vinayaka's-fourth IV, V 

Skanda's or Kar. fifth V 

Sun worship III 

Durga's eighth V 

Cows' eighth VI 

Anniversary of Treta or 

Satya jniga III 

World-mother's day VI 

Gourd ninth 

Beginning of Rasa festival V 

Awaking eleventh V 

Tulasi wedding VI 

End of the Four Months V 

Evening fast V 

Vishnu's heaven fourteenth V 

End of Rasa festival V 

Tripuri's full moon V 

Vishnu-§iva festival V 

Vyasa worship VI 

Beginning of Itu worship III 
Full moon 



On all Sundays, worship of the Sun (Bihar). 



CHART OF FOREGOING MONTHLY FESTIVALS ISl 



KARTTIKA 



Krishnapaksha 



Samkashta cbaturthi . 



Dark half 



1 
2 
3 
4 

5 — 

6 — 

7 — 

8 (a) Kalashtami 

(i) Kalabhairava jayanti . 

9 — 

10 — 

11 UtpattyekadaS: 

12 — 

13 Sivaratri 

14 — 

15 (a) Kali puja 

(4) Skanda or Karttikeya 
puja 

{c) Amavasya 



Difficult fourth 



Chap. 



IV, V 



Black eighth V 

Black Bhairava's birthday V 



Creation eleventh V 

Siva's night V 

Kali worship VI 

Skanda or Kar. worship 
New moon 



All Sundays, worship of the Sun (Bengal). 



152 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



margaSirsha 

Suklapaksha Light half Chap. 



1 


— 


— 




2 
3 
4 


— 


— 




Vinayaki chaturthi . 


. Vinayaka's fourth 


IV, V 


5 


Nag a panohami 


. Snakes' fifth 


VI 


6 

7 


Champa shashthi 


. Champa's sixth 


VI 


8 
g 


Durgashtami 


. Durga's eighth 


V 


10 





__ 




11 


MokshadaikadaSi 


. Release-giving eleventh 


V 


12 


— 


— 




13 


Pradosha 


. Evening fast 


V 


14 


— 


— 




IS (a) 


Itu puja samapti 


. End of Itu worship 


V 


(6) Dattatreya jayanti 


Dattatreya 's birthday 




(^) 


Purnima 


. Full moon 





All Sundays, worship 'of the Sun (Bengal) 



CHART OF FOREGOING MONTHLY FESTIVALS 153 



MARGAglRSHA 



1 


Krishnapaksha 


Dark half 


Chap. 


2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8(a) 


Samkashta chaturthi . 


. Difficult fourth 


IV, V 


Kalashtami 


. Black eighth 


V 


(«) 


Ashtaka 


. First of the eighth days 


VI 


9 


— 


c 




10 


— 


; - ] 




11 


SaphalaikadaSi 


. Fruitful eleventh / 


V 


12 


— 


/ 




13 


^ivaratri 


. Sivafs night 


V 


14 


— 


— 




IS 


Amavasya 


. New moon 





1S4 



THE HINDU RELICJIOUS YEAR 





PAUSHA 




1 

2 
3 
4 
5 


- Suklapaksha 


Light half 


Chap. 


- Vinayaki chaturthi . 


. Vinayaka's fourth 


IV, V 


6 
7 


Champa shashthi 


. Champa's sixth 


VI 


8 
9 


DurgashtamI 


. Durga's eighth 


V 


10 





_ 




11 


PutradaikadaSI 


. Son-giving eleventh 


V 


12 


— 


— 




13 


Pradosha 


. Evening fast 


V 


14 


— 


— 




IS 


Purnima 


. Full moon 





Makara Samkranti and Pongal occur some time during Pausha HI 



On all Thursdays, worship of Lakshmi (Bengal) 
„ Fridays, ,, ,, (Maharashtra) VI 



CHART OF FOREGOING MONTHLY FESTIVALS ISS 

PAUSHA 
Krishnapaksha Dark half Chap. 



1 

2 
3 


— 


— 


__ 


I 


4 
S 
6 
7 
8(a) 


Saihkashta chaturtW . 


. Difficult fourth IV, V 


Kalashtami 


. Black eighth V 


9 
10 


Ashtaka 


. Second of the eighth days VI 








11 


ShattilaikadaSi 


. Six sesamum eleventh V 


12 





— 


13 


Sivaratri 


. Siva's night V 


14 


— 


— 


IS 


Amavasya 


. New moon 



156 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



MAGHA 




Suklapaksha 

1 — 

2 — 

3 — 

4 (o) Vinayaki chaturthi 


Light half 


Chap. 


. . Vinayaka's fourth 


IV, V 


{b) Varada 


. Husband (or boon) 






granting fourth VI 


S Sri paSchaml (Bengal) Sarasvati's fifth 


III 


6 :^itala shashthi 


. . gitala's fifth 


VI 


7 Makari, Bhaskara 






or Ratha saptami 


. Sun's chariot seventh 


VI 


8 (a) Durgashtami 


. Durga's eighth 


V 


(b) BhIshmashtamI 
9 — 


. Bhishma's eighth 


VI 


10 — 

11 JayaikadaSI 


. Triumphant eleventh 


V 


12 Varaha jayanti 


. Boar birthday 


V 


13 Pradosha 

14 — 


. Evening fast 


V 


IS (a) Kali yugadi 


. Anniversary of Kali yuga 


III 


(A) Purnima 


. Full moon 





CHART OP FOREGOING MONTHLY FESTIVALS 157 



MAGHA 



Krishnapaksha 

1 — 

2 — 

3 — 

4 Samkashta chaturthi . 

5 — 

6 — 

7 — 

8 (a) Kalashtami 


Dark half 


Chap. 


. Difficult fourth 


IV, V 


. Black eighth 


V 


(b) Ashtaka 
9 — 
10 — 


. Third of the eighth days 


VI 


__ 




U VijayaikadaSi 


. Victorious eleventh 


V 


12 — 


— 




13 MahaSivaratri 


. Great night of Siva 


V 


14 — 


— 




IS (a) Dvaparayugadi 
(Maharashtra) 


Anniversary of Dvapara 
yuga 


III 


(6) Amavasya 


. New moon 





158 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



PHALGUNA 
Suklapaksha Light half 



Chap. 



1 

2 


— 


— 




3 


, 


\ I 




4 
S 
6 


Vinayald chaturthi 


. Vinayaka's fourth 


IV, V 


7 
8 
g 


Durgashtami 


. Durga's eighth 


V 


10 


— 


I 




11 


AmalakyekadaSI 


. Amalaki eleventh 


V 


12 


Govinda dvadaSI 


. Govinda's twelfth 


V 


13 


Pradosha ' 


. Evening fast 


V 


14 


— 


*~~ -*v 




IS (a) 


Holi, Holika or HutaSan 


i Bonfire festival 


III 


(6) Purnima 


. Full moon 





CHART OF FOREGOING MONTHLY FESTIVALS 159 



PHALGUNA 




Krishitapaksha 


Dark half 


Chap. 


1 Chandala sparSa 

2 — 


. Touching the untouchables III 


3 — 

4 Samkashta chaturthi . 


. Difficultjourth 


IV, V 


5 Ranga panchami 

6 - 


. Colour throwing fifth 


ni 


7 — 

8 (a) Kalashtami 


. Black eighth 


V 


(b) Sitalashtami 


. Sitala's eight 


VI 


(c) Ashtaka 
9 - 
10 — 


. Fourth of the eighth days 


VI 







11 PapamochinyekadaSI . 

12 - 

13 (a) givaratri 


. Sia-freeing eleventh 


V 


. Siva's night 


V 


(6) Varum 


. Bathing festival 


VI 


14 — 


— 




IS (a) Ghantakarana puja . 


. Ghantakarana vsrorship 


V 


(4)Amavasya 


. New moon 





CHAPTER VIII 

PRINCIPAL RELIGIOUS FAIRS OF 
MAHARASHTRA 

Religious Fairs and Pilgrimages were apparently 
vinknown in Vedic times. No mention is made of them 
in the Rigveda, nor in the Brahmanas, nor in the Code of 
Manu, etc. From the time of the Mahabharata, accord- 
ing to Barth/ pilgrimages began to be made. By that 
time the old animistic belief in spirits dwelling in 
certain spots had led to the belief that the spots them- 
selves were sacred, or auspicious. 

As the local animistic cults were gradually absorbed 
into Hinduism, so the practice of worshipping local 
deities, at their respective dwelling places, became a 
recognised side of the religious life of the Hindus. 

Religious fairs at certain noted places attract pil- 
grims from all over India, e.g. that at Hardvara at the 
Mesha Samkranti, and those held on Mahasivaratri at 
the twelve famous Linga shrines ; but each province, or 
racial division, of India has its own fairs, to attend 
which is not only a pleasure and recreation, but also a 
duty, productive of religious merit 

A list of some one hundred of the principal fairs held 
in Maharashtra is subjoined. At all of these the atten- 
dance ranges from two thousand up to twenty thousand 
or more ; and some idea may be gathered from the 
list — which is not by any means exhaustive — of the hold 
which these religious fairs have on the life of ths 
country. 

• Jieligions of India (trans. Wood), p. 277. 



PRINCIPAL RELIGIOUS FAIRS OF MAHARASHTRA 161 



There are several causes, any one or more of which 
may lead to the institution of a religious fair at a 
certain place. 

(a) The spot, itself may be noteworthy, as being the 
source or mouth of a famous river, the peak of an 
isolated hill, or of the highest hill in a range, etc. In 
such a case the shrine or temple now found at the 
site is more modern than the worship offered there, 
and is usually believed to enshrine the guardian spirit 
of the spot. 

(6) The fair may be in memory of some devotee 
or saint connected with the placf . At the present day 
the saint will be found to be at one of the stages on the 
road to complete deification. 

ic) The spot may be the reputed site of an event 
described in some old legend of the gods. The hero of 
the legend is then the object of worship. 

(,d) The temple or shrine^ itself, rather than the 
site, may be the object of the pilgrimage, as being 
very old, wealthy, large, or that of a popular deity, 
etc. 

In the following description of places, an indication 
has been made in each case, to show which cause, or 
combination of causes has led to the religious fair 
being held there : 



Adivra 


. Ratnagiri District 


AgaSi 


. Thana 


Akhalkop 


. Satara 


) V 


Alaadi 


. Poona 


^. 


Ambamath 


. Thana 




Avasa 


. Kolaba 




Bahe 


. Satara 




Bahule 


)i 




Banpuri 


J, 




Bhimsagiri 


. Kolhapur State 


BhlmaSankar 


. Poona District 


Bhudargad 


. Kolhapur State 


Chandur 


. NaSik District 


Chaphal 


. Satara ,, 


Chatarsingh 


. Poona ,, 


Chaul 


. Kolaba 


Chinchvad 


. Poona ,, 


Uehu 


■ • u 


M 



11 



162 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



Devgad (Haregvar) 
Dhamankhed 

Dhom 

Dongargaon 

Gharapuri ( Elephanta Is . ) . 
Godchi 

Golgeri 

Gudguddapur(Devargud) . , 

Hingne Khurd 

Hippargi 

Ilkal 

Jambrug 

Jejuri 
' LJotiba's hill 

Kanheri 

KankeSvar 

Karle hill 

Karmala 

KelSi - 

Kelvb 

Khodsi 

Kodoli 

Kole 

Kolhapiir 

Kolvadi 

LakshmiSvarl 

Madha 

Mad hi 

MahabaleSvar 

Mahalakshmi hill 

MahalingpiJr 

Maheji (Chinchkhed) 

Malanggad 

Mandhardev 

Mhasa 

Mhasvad 

Mohol 

Morgaon 

Naitala 

Nargund 

Narsingpur 

NaSik 

Natepute 

Nimbdara 

Nirmal 

Nirvangfir 

Otur 

Pal . . ;; 

PandharpiJr 



Janjira 


State 


Poona 


District 


Satara 


^ 


Ahmadnagar 


", 


Thana 


^ 


Kolhapiir 


State 


BIjapiir 


District 


Dharvar 


District 


Poona 




Bijapur 


>■ 


Thina 


" 


Poona 




Kolhapiir 


State 


Thana 


District 


SangaJi 


State 


Poona 


District 


^olapiir 


„ 


Ratnagiri 


tl 


Thana 




Kolhapfir 


State 


Satara 


District 


Kolhapur 


State 


Poona 


District 


Miraj 


State 


Solapiir 


District 


Ahmadnagar' 


)) 


Satara 




Thana 


- 


Mudhol 


State 


Khandesh 


District 


Thana 




Satara 




Thana - 




Satara 




Solapiir 


)i 


Poona 




Nagik 




Dharvar 




Satara 




NaSik 




!§olapiar 


][ 


Poona 




Thana 




Poona 


)J 


Satara 


" 


Solapiir 


,, 



PRINCIPAL RELIGIOUS PAIRS OP MAHARASHTRA 163 



Pandu Lena 

Parola 

Parunde 

Pedhe (Chiplun) 

Pimpalgaon Budruk 

Prakash 

Pura 

■Rajapur 

Ranjaiigaon 

Sahapur 

Sajgaon 

Sajjangad (Parli) 

SangameSvar 

SaiigameSvar 

SangameSvar 

SankSi 

SaptaSring 

Sindgi 

Singnapur 

Sirale 

Sonari 

Takari 

Talegaon Dhamdere 

Terdal 

Tilse 

Tryamdak 

Tnljapur 

Vadi Narsimha 

VajreSvari 

Vani 

VelneSvar 

Vir 

Adivra (d).. A well-known temple to Mahakali 
(unusual in Western India) , with a fair from Asvina sukla 
second to tenth. 

Agaii (a). Near the mouth of 
Siirya rivers. A fair is held on 
eleventh at Bhavanisankara's temple 
spot is believed to cure skin diseases. 

Akhalkop (c). A temple of Dattatreya, at this his 
birthplace, with models of his footprints. There is 
also a mask which is carried in procession, in a 
palanquin, at festivals. Fairs are held on Margasirsha 
full moon, and on Asvina krishna twelfth, and a very 
special one on Magha krishna fifth. 



Nagik 


District 


Khandesh 


M 


Poona 


It 


Ratnagiri 




Khandesh 


») 


Poona 


>1 


Ratnagiri 




Poona 


ti 


Poona 




Thana 


>> 


Satara 


) ) 


Bijapur 


) 1 


Khandesh 


• > 


Ratnagiri 




Kolaba 


I) 


NaSik 




Bijapur 


M 


Satara 




Solapur 


»» 


Satara 


f I 


Poona 




Sangali 


State 


Thana 


District 


NaSik 


iy 


Ahmadnagar 


H 


Kolhapur 


State 


Thana 


District 


Nagi'k 


jj 


Ratnagiri 


,, 


Poona 


1 1 



the Vaitarna and 

Karttika krishna 

Bathing at this 



164 THE HINDU RELfGIOUS YEAR 

Alandi (6). The site of the tomb and temple of 
Dnyanesvar, Marathi poet and saint (see Tryambak), 
A large fair is held on Karttika krishna eleventh and 
pilgrimages are made on every dark eleventh in the year. 
A tree called Ajanavriksha in the temple court is said 
to have sprung from his staff, and to be the only one 
of its kind on earth. 

Ambarnath (d) . A very old shrine of Ambaresvar 
Mahadeva, with an inscription dated Saka 982 (A.D. 
1060) . A fair is held on Mahasivaratri, 

Avasa (d). A snake festival is held at this noted 
snake shrine, with dancing, on Karttika sukla fourteenth. 
The devotees hold canes tipped with images of snakes. 

Bs/ie (c, d) . A temple of Sri Rama Linga, interest- 
ing as being a former shrine of the Vishnu-Siva 
worshipping Bhagavatas. The story is that Rama on 
his wanderings visited this Siva shrine, and worshipped 
the linga, since when his name has been associated 
with Siva's at the worship there. Fairs are held on 
Pausha new moon and on Chaitra sukla ninth. 

Bahule (d). A temple of Bahulesvara Mahadeva, 
with a liiiga. Fairs are held on Mahasivaratri and on 
Sravana Mondays. 

Banpuri (d). A temple of Siva, under the name of 
Naikba. A large fair is held on Asvina sukla tenth. 

Bhimsagiri (d). A temple to Bhima, one of the 
Pandava brothers. A fair is held from Magha krishna 
thirteenth to Phalguna sukla fifth. 

Bhimamhkara (a, c, d) . The source of the Bhima 
river, and site of one of the twelve lihgas of India. 
A large fair is held on Mahasivaratri. A local legend is 
to the effect that Siva was fatigued after his fight with 
the demon Tripurasura, and the sweat from his brow 
became a river, at the request of his devotee Bhimak, 
king of Oudha. The place is, however, popularly associ- 
ated with Bhima the Pandava. 

Bhudargad (d) . A temple to Bhairava, with a fair 
from Magha krishna first to tenth. 

Chandur (a). A hill-fort near Manmad. A fair in 
honour of Khaij^oba is held on Pausha full moon. 



PRINCIPAL RELIGIOUS FAIRS OP MAHARASHTRA 165 

Chaphal (6). A temple to Ramdas Svami (the 
religious preceptor of Sivaji) and Maruti. A large 
fair is held on Chaitra sukla ninth. 

Chatarsingh (a, b) . A four-peaked hill near Poona. 
The legend is that a banker used devoutly to make 
an annual pilgrimage to Saptasring Devi (q.v.), 
but when he grew too old to undertake it, the goddess 
permitted him, and others since him, to worship her 
on this hill instead; which is done on Asvina sukla 
ninth. 

Ckaul {a, d). K steep hill on the coast, at the 
mouth of the Kundalik river. It has been noted for 
many centuries, certain inscriptions of the second 
century A.D. referring to it. Near the top is a sjirine 
and image of Dattatreya, and a great fair is held for 
three days from Margasirsha full moon. 

Chinchvad {b,c). The site of a Ganesa temple which 
became famous through a devotee named Moroba. 
For his devotion the god condescended to dwell incar- 
nate in him and his heirs. The line of " Deva " 
continued for seven generations, the last one dying 
childless in A.D. 1810. Members of the Deva clan still 
live here. A fair in honour of the Seven is held from 
Margasirsha krishna sixth to ninth. 

Dehu (^). The birthplace of Tukaram, one of the 
great Maratha poet saints, who lived in the seventeenth 
century A.D., and gave his life to the worship and 
hymning of Vithoba, the god at Pandharpur (q.v. ) . His 
spirit is believed still to live in the shrine. A large fair 
is held on Phalguna krishna second to fifth. The local 
Vithoba temple is visited on all t^e twenty-four ekadasi 
days in the year. 

Devgad or HareSvara (d) . ^ A temple of Kala 
Bhairava, where it is believed that all sickness due to 
evil spirits may be cured. Fairs are held on Maha- 
sivaratri and on Karttika sukla eleventh to fifteenth. 

DMmankhed (d) . A Khandoba temple, with fairs on 
Magha and Chaitra full moons. 

Dkom {a, d). Near the source of the Krishna river. 
It is full of temples, of which the two chief are to 



166 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

Mahadeva, whose fair is on Vaisakha full moon, and to 
Narsimha, whose fair is on the preceding day. 

Dongargaon (d) . A Mahadeva temple with a fair on 
the third Sravana Monday. 

Gharapuri {Elephanta Island {a, d). An island in 
Bombay Harbour, with rock temples of Hindu origin. 
It contains the famous Trimiirti, the three-headed 
representation of the Hindu triad. A large fair to 
Siva is held on Mahasivaratri. 

Godchi (d). A temple to Virabhadra, at which a large 
fair is held on Margasirsha full moon, chiefly attended 
by Lingayats (a Saiva sect). 

Golgeri {d). A temple to Golalisvara with a linga. 
A large fair is held from Chaitra fuU moon to new moon. 

(rudguddapur or Devargud (c) . This marks the site 
of the fight between Khandoba and the giant Malla 
(see Chap. VI, p. 111). His fifteen-foot bow is still 
shown in the temple, whose attendants are believed to 
be the descendants of Khandoba' s dog-attendantSr and 
are called Vaghya. At the two days' fair, held at the 
Dasara festival, Asvina sukla tenth and eleventh, these 
men bark, and behave as dogs, and are fed from begging 
bowls placed on the ground. Vows are sometimes paid 
by childless parents, to devote their children, if given, 
to Khandoba's service : a son to become a Vaghya, a 
girl a Murali or temple woman. (See also under Jejurl.) 

Hingne Khurd (d). A well-known Vithoba temple; 
A fair is held on Ashadha sukla eleventh, also on 
Karttika sukla eleventh, the beginning and end of the 
Four Months. 

Hippargi (d) . An old temple to Kalmesvara, reported 
tohavebeenbuiltby Jamadagni (father of P'arasurama) . 
A fair is held in Asvina. 

Ilkal (d). An image of the goddess Bansankari in 
an open shrine. A fair is held on Pausha full moon. 

Jamb rug {a). A cave temple dedicated to Gambhir- 
nath. Fairs are held on Bhadrapada fuU moon, and at 
Dasara. 

Jejuri (d). A famous place of pilgrimage to two 
Khandoba temples. (This god is also known as Bahiroba 



PRINCIPAL RELIGIOUS FAIRS OF MAHARASHTRA 167 

Mallari and Martand.) Four large fairs are held 
annually. It is the centre of the Khandoba worship in 
the Deccan, and Vaghya and Murali dedications are 
made. (See also Giidguddapur.) The four fairs are 
held on Margasirsha sukla fourth to seventh, Pausha 
sukla twelfth to krishna first, Magha sukla twelfth to 
krishna first, and Chaitra sukla twelfth to krishna first. 

Jotiba's Hill {a, c)-. A hill .near Kolhapiir. The 
legend states that Jotiba, a manifestation of Siva, 
fought with and defeated two demons, Kolhasura and 
Ratnasura, who lived on this hill and harassed the 
neighbourhood. On Chaitra full moon a large fair is 
held, when Jotiba is married to one, Yamai, in an adja- 
cent temple, the former being represented by a brass 
image, and the latter by a stone. 

Kanheri (a). Old Buddhist hill caves, not far from 
Bombay. The two largest figures are now worshipped 
as Bhima, one of the five Pandava brothers. Fairs are 
held on Karttika sukla eleventh and on Mahasivaratri. 

Kankeivara (d). An old and richly carved temple 
containing a linga'. A great fair is held at Pausha full 
moon, when gods from the neighbouring villages are 
borne in palanquins to pay their respects to the lord 
of Kahka. 

Karle (a) . A well-known rock temple of Buddhist 
origin not far from Poona. A figure of Ekvira Bhavani 
is cut in the rock. She is the family goddess of the 
Koli caste, and is possibly older even than the Buddhist 
caves, some identify her with the Dravidian goddess 
Akka Aveyar. Fairs are held on Chaitra sukla eight 
and fifteenth. 

Karmala (d). A temple of a goddess called Bhavani 
or Ambabai. A fair is held from Karttika full moon 
to krishna second. 

^elsi (a). At the mouth of the Kelsi river, near 
Ratnagiri. There are two temples, to Durga, and to Sri 
Ramji, and a fair is held during Chaitra on Rama ninth. 

Kelve (d). A great festival of Sitala.Devi, whose 
shrine is here, i's held on Vaisakha full moon. Women 
whose children have smallpox bring and lay them on the 



168 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

temple threshold, or a woman will put chains on her 
hands and feet and circumambulate the temple. 

Khodsi {d). A temple to the village god Kshetrapal 
and his wife jogesvarl. A fair is held in Chaitra. 

Kodoli (d). A temple to the god Dattatreya (rather 
rare) . A small fair is held on Magha krishna fifth., 

Kole (.b). In the latter part of the eighteenth 
century A.D., one, Ghadge Bova, lived here, a devotee 
of Vithoba. A Vithoba temple was built in Ghadge's 
memory, and a fair is held on Magha sukla fifth. 

Kolhapur (d). Two well-known temples to Vithoba 
and Ambabai. The former has fairs on Asha^ha and 
Karttika sukla elevenths, and the latter a large one on 
Asvina sukla fifth (see Chap. VI, p. 100). 

Kolvadi (c) . The site of the shrine to Mhasoba, the 
buffalo to whom the poet-saint Dnyanoba taught the 
the Vedas, in order to confound Brahman enemies. A 
fair is held on Chaitra sukla eleventh. 

LakshmlSvara (d) . A temple, said to be one thousand 
years old, to Somesvara. A fair is held on Vaisakha 
sukla tenth. 

Madka (d). A temple to Devi (Parvati), a fair is 
held on Asvina full moon. 

Madhi (6). The shrine of a Musalman-Hindu saint, 
known both as Shah Ramzan Mahi Savar and as Kan- 
hoba. A great fair in his honour, attended by pilgrims 
of both religions, is held on Phalguna krishna fifth. 

Mah&balesvar (a). The source of the Krishna river 
Three chief temples are to Mahabalesvara (Siva), 
Krishnabai (the Krishna river), and Atibalesvara 
(Vishnu). The two first have special fairs from 
Magha krishna twelfth to eighteenth, and Phalguna sukla 
first to fifth respectively. Krishnabai has a second, small, 
fair from Asvina sukla first to tenth. Also she has a 
special and great fair in Kanyagata year, on the entry 
of Jupiter into the sign Virgo. 

Mahalakshml Hill (a) . A temple to Lakshmi is at the 
foot of the hill, which is almost inaccessible. A fifteen 
days' fair is held from Chaitra fuU to new moon. On the 
full moon night the temple priest, who is also the head- 



PRINCIPAL RELIGIOUS FAIRS OF MAHARASHTRA 169 

man of the village, climbs the hill by a way known only 
to himself and his heir, and fixes a flag staff on the top, 

Mahalingpur {d). A temple to Mahalingesvara. A 
large fair is held from Bhadrapada sukla tenth to full 
moon. 

Mahejt or Chinchkhed (5). A Kumbi woman saint, 
named Maheji, living early in the seventeenth century 
A.D., is reported to have buried herself alive at this 
place. A temple has been built in her honour. A fair 
is held on Pausha full moon. 

Malanggad ia, b). A large rock-hill, not far from 
Bombay, called from its shape the " Cathedral Rock." 
The tomb of a Musalman saint, named Haji Abd-ul- 
Rehman, is on the hill. A fair is held on Magha full 
moon. 

Mandhardev (d) . A very old temple to Kalubai, 
the patron deity of the village. Her two silver masks 
are carried in procession at her fair on Pausha full 
moon. 

Mhasa (d). A shrine of Khamba linga. A fair, 
which is said to be the oldest in the district, is held 
from Pausha full to new moon. 

Mhasvad {d). A temple of Sidnath and his wife 
Jogai. A large fair is held on Margasirsha sukla first, 
when masks of the two are driven in a car procession. 

Mohol(d). A temple to Nilkanthesvara. A fair is 
held from Vaisakha sukla fourth to sixth. 

Morgaon{,b, c) . The original temple of Gaiiesa, where 
he was worshipped by Moroba, until Ganesa came to live 
with him at Chinchvad (see p. 153). A fair is held 
from Bhadrapada sukla fourth to Asvina sukla tenth. 

Naitala (d) . A temple to Matoba. A fair is held 
from Pausha sukla fourteenth to krishna fourth. 

Nargund (d). A temple to Vefikatesa. A large fair 
is held'from Asvina full moon to krishna eleventh. 

Nursing fiilr (a) . The junction of the Bhima and Nira 
rivers. There is a temple to Lakshmi. A fair is held 
on Vaisakha sukla fourteenth and fifteenth. 

Naiik {a, c, d). This is a place of pilgrimage owing 
to several causes. 



170 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

(i) It is near the source of the Godavari river. 
The river goddess has a fair at Gora Rama's temple on 
Jyeshtha sukla tenth. 

(ii) The present Kala Rama temple is built on the 
supposed site of the forest dwelling of Rama, Lakshmana, 
and Sita, from which the last named was carried off 
by Ravana. 

A^ofe.— The Markandeya (LVII, 34, 35), Vayu (XLV,112-114), 
andMatsya (CXII, 37-39) Puranas identify PaSchavatI with the 
modern Na§ik. 

A great fair, with car procession, is held on Rama 
jayanti, Chaitra sukla ninth to eleventh. 

(iii) It has a noted temple to Tilbhandesvara. Fairs 
are held at it on Mahasivaratri, and on Vaikuntha 
fourteenth (Karttika sukla fourteenth). 

(iv) There is a temple to Somesvara on the Godavari, 
a few miles above the town, at which a fair is held on 
every Monday in Sravana. 

Natepute (d). Two old temples to Gaurisafikara and 
Parvatisvara. Pilgrims en route to or from Singnapur 
(q.v.), attend a fair held at Gaurisankara's temple on 
Chaitra sukla eighth. 

Nimbdari {d) . A shrine to Renuka Devi, mother of 
Parasurama, an unusual object of worship. A fair in 
her honour is held on Chaitra full moon. 

Nirmal (a, i). Tradition says that the death (in the 
ninth century A.D.) of Sankaracharya occurred here. 
But since he is known to have died in Kashmir, 
and some twenty-seven followers have assumed his name 
during the subsequent six hundred and fifty years, in all 
probfcbility one of these is commemorated. 

I^tfial lake is mentioned in the Skanda Purana as 
being a holy place of pilgrimage. A fair is held from 
Karttika krishna eleventh to Margasirsha sukla third. 

Nirvangij- (c) . Once, when Mahadeva and his bull 
Nandi were on their way to the shrine at Sihgnapur 
(q.v*)^ithey stayed for rest at Nirvangir. Nandi so 
likedv,^^ spot that after having visited Singnapur he 
returne3 there to live. This is the local legend, and 
all pilgrims on their way to Singnapiir must pause here 



PRINCIPAL RELIGIOUS FAIRS OF MAHARASHTRA 171 

to make obeisance to Nandi's image. They pass 
through about Chaitra sukla fourth. 

Otur {d). A temple to Kapardikesvara. A fair is 
held on the last Monday of Sravana. 

Pal (d). A well-known temple of Khandoba. A 
great fair is held from Pausha sukla twelfth to full 
moon, when the marriage of the god is celebrated. 

Pandharpur {b, c, d) . One of the most famous shrines 
in Western India, and centre of the worship of Vithoba 
(the name is supposed to be a corruption of Vishnu) 
regarded as Krishna. The image is very old, inscriptions 
show that it was known and reverenced in the thirteenth 
century A.D. The legend goes that a worshipper of 
Krishna, a man named PundaKk, was so (Jevoted to his 
aged parents that once, when Krishna himself came to 
vi^ him, he kept the god waiting while he attended to 
his father's wants. This piety so greatly pleased 
Krishna that he took up his abode permanently in the 
Vithoba image. There seems little doubt that Vithoba 
worship was first established by one Pundalik. It 
became the centre of the Bhakti revival from the 
thirteenth to the seventeenth centuries A.D., and 
celebrated for the poet-saints who wrote in praise of 
the god (see Alandi, Dehu, etc.). Though now this 
shrine is considered a Vaishnava one entirely, it was at 
one time certainly a shrine of the Vishiju-Siva worship- 
ping Bhagavata sect, the high crown on the head of the 
image being a Siva linga. 

Two great fairs are held, at_the beginning and end 
of the Four Months, i.e. from Ashadha sukla tenth to 
full moon, and Karttika sukla tenth to full moon. Also 
a fair is held on Dasara night, Asvina sukla tenth, when 
torchlight processions are held, and devotees dance on a 
large slab (Ttl%W) before Vithoba. 

There is also a temple to Pundalik, who is considered 
divine. A fair in his honour is held on Margasirsha 
krishna tenth to new moon. 

Pandu Lena {a) . Rock caves of Buddhist origin, near 
Nasik, now the centre of the cult of the worship of the 
five Parwjava brothers. The largest Buddha figure in the 



172 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

caves is worshipped under name of Dharmaraja. A large 
fair is held during Sravana, pilgrims visiting the caves 
on each Monday of the tsonth, especially on the third. 
Parola (d) . A temple containing an image of Gaijesa 
and attendant devi, know as Jhapata Bhava's temple. 
A fair is held during Vaisakha. 

Parunde{d). A shrine of Sri Brahmanath Deva(very 
rare). A fair is held on Ashadha krishna eleventh. 

Pedhe or Chiplun (c) . This is the supposed site of 
Parasurama's driving back the sea (see Chap. V, p. 
78). He has a temple here, and is the patron god of the 
Chitpavana Brahmans. A fair is held on Akshayya 
tritiya, Vaisakha sukla third. 

Pimpalgaon Budruk (d). A very fine old Hariha- 
resvara temple, to Vishnu (Hari) and Siva (Hara). 
Another relic of the Vishnu-Siva worshipping Bhaga- 
vata sect. A fair is held during Pausha. 

Prakash {d). On the Gomi river. A temple to 
Gautamesvara Mahadeva (rare), a fair is held during, 
the Siiiihastha year. 

Pura (a). At the source of the Kukdi river. A 
temple of Kukdesvara with a linga is there, and the 
copper mask of a man's face used at festivals. A fair 
is held on Mahasivaratri. 

Rajapur (d). A Vithoba temple. Fairs are held on his 

special days, viz. Ashadha and Karttika sukla elevenths. 

Ranjangaon {d) . A well-know temple to Ganesa. A 

fair is held on his special day, vis. Bhadrapada sukla 

fourth. 

Rati (d). A temple to Tukai Devi. A fair is held 
on Magha sukla ninth. 

Shahapur {d) . The real site of the fair is the village 
Waphe, half a mile away, with a holy tank and temples 
to Maruti, Tryambakesvara, and Bhavanisankara. Fairs 
are Ijeld at Mahasivaratri and Holi. 

Sajgaon (,6). A legend says that a devotee of 
Vitholaa, living at this placcf-grew too old to make his 
former annual pilgrimage to Pan^harpur, but the god 
appeared to him in a dream, and said he might also be 
found at Sajgaon. The devotee therefore built a Vithoba 



PRINCIPAL RELIGIOUS FAIRS OP MAHARASHTRA 173 

shrine, and a fair is held there from Karttika sukla 
tenth to krishna tenth. 

Sajjangad or Parli (a, b). A hill fort near Satara, 
and residence of Ramdas Svami, the famous preceptor 
of the Maratha chief Sivaji. It is said that if a message 
was received by him summoning him to Satara, he 
covered the distance, about six miles, in a single stride. 
His fair is held from Magha krishna first to tenth. 

Sangamesvara {Bijapur) (a, d). At the junction of 
the Malprabha and Krishna rivers. A temple, here is 
noted for having an image of Siva (very rare), as well 
as a lifiga, both of which are worshipped. A fair is 
held on Mahasivaratri. 

Sangamesvara {Kfuindesh) {a). At the junction of 
the Gadad and Arunavati rivers. A Mahadeva temple. 
A fair is held on Mahasivaratri. 

Sangamesvara {Ratnagiri) («). At the junction of 
the Sastri, Alkanda, and Varuna rivers. A fair is held 
on Magha new moon. 

Safiksl Fort or Badr-ud-din Kills, («, b). The legend 
is that a Musalman saint, named Badr-ud-din, came from 
Mecca with some follows in the twelfth century A.D., 
and captured the fort. An annual fair in his memory 
is held on Pausha full moon and the following week. 

SaptaSring (a). A high many-peaked hill riot far 
from Nasik. The presiding deity is known as Sapta- 
sririginivasini Devi. Her fair is held from Chaitra full 
moon to krishna seventh. The headman of Burigaon 
village, at the foot of the hill, climbs to an almost 
inaccessible peak on the night of the full moon, and 
plants a flag (see Mahalakshmi hill). 

Sindgl (d) . A five days' fair is held here at the time 
of the I(Iakara Saihkranti, at which time the marriage 
of Sangamesvara and Parva'ti is performed, the two 
being represented by the village Accountant (a Brah- 
man), and the Headman (a Lirigayat). 

SingnUpur (d) . A famous place of pilgrimage to a 
large Mahadeva temple. The god's mask is carried in 
procession at the fair, which is held on Mahasivaratri, 
and also from Chaitra sukla fifth to fifteenth. 



174 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

Sirale (a). The site of a gigantic tamarind tree, 
the trunk of which is scored with lines and cracks. By 
the side of the tree has been built a temple to Gorakh- 
nath, a manifestation of Siva, who is supposed to have 
stuck a stick in the ground, from which the tree sprung, 
and to have afterwards scored it with writing in an 
unknown tongue. A fair is held from Chaitra krishna 
eleventh to new moon. 

This is also a centre for snake worship.' A fair is 
held on Naga paiichami, when snakes are caught and 
worshipped, afterwards being set free. 

' On the following day, i.e. Sravana sukla sixth, a fair is 
held in memory of a banker, Sirala Seta, once king for 
one and a quarter hours. An earthen image of him is 
made and worshipped, women dancing round it. It is 
then thrown into a tank or well.- 

SonUri {d). A temple of Bhairavanath. A fair is 
held from Chaitra krishna eighth to fifteenth. 

Takari (a) . A cave temple to Kamalbhairi. A fair 
is held from Mahasivaratri for three days. The image 
is carried in a palki throughout the chief night, in 
procession. 

Talegaon Dhamdhere (6) . An ascetic living in Sivaji's 
time, named Nath, lived here. A temple was built to 
his memory, and a fair is held there on Mahasivaratri. 

Terdal (d). A temple to Prabhu Svami. A fair, 
attended by members of the Lingayat sect, is held on 
the last Monday of Sravana. 

Ttlse id). A temple with a natural linga. A fair is 
held for a month, from Mahasivaratri to Holi. 

Tryambaka (a, b, d). Three causes combine to make 
this place a noted pilgrimage : 

(i)- It is the source of the Godavari river, and a 
very large fair is held in Simhastha year, on the entry 
of the planet Jupiter into the sign Leo. 

(ii) It is one of the sites of the twelve noted lingas 
of India. Fairs are held at the Siva temple on Tripurl 
full moon and on Mahasivaratri, 

(iii) It is the death place of Nivrittinath, Maratha 
poet-saint, who lived in the latter part of the thirteenth 



PRINCIPAL RELIGIOUS FAIRS OP MAHARASHTRA 17S 

century A.D. He and his two brothers, Dnyanesvara 
and Sopandeva, and their sister Muktabai, are now 
considered to have been incarnations of Siva, Vishntf, 
Brahma and Lakshmi. 

Models of his footprints are kept in the shrine, and 
■a great fair is held on Pausha krishna eleventh. 

Tuljapur{a). One of the Sivanera Hill caves, not far 
from Ahmadnagar. One of the caves has been taken 
over for the worship of Bhavani. A large fair is held 
on Vaisakha full moon. A dance peculiar to the place, 
named the Gondhala dance, is danced by the temple 
women. The place does not bear a good name. It is 
one of the three and a half holy places on which the 
limbs of Parvati fell when her corpse was cut up by 
Vishnu's discus. 

Vadi Narsimha {a, b, c) . Near the junction of the 
Krishna and Panchgahga rivers. It has a temple to 
Dattatreya, who is said to have vanished from the world 
at this spot. The place takes its name from Narsimha 
Sarasvat, a devotee of Dattatreya (some say his 
incarnation), who lived here for some years in the 
sixteenth century A.D., and was believed to be able to 
cure diseases caused by evil spirits. Svami Nairayana 
the eighteenth century reformer, is also said to have 
lived here for twelve years. 

Fairs are held for a month from Magha sukla fifth 
and from Asvina krishna twelfth. 

Vajreivari (a) . On the Tansa river. There are hot 
springs here, supposed to be the blood of a demon 
slain by the goddess of the spot, "the Thunderbolt 
Goddess." A fair is held during Chaitra. 

Vani (a). Near the foot of Saptasring hill (q.v.). 
The hill goddess condescends to be worshipped here by 
those who, from old age or other infirmity, are unable 
to climb the hill. The fair is on Chaitra krishna eighth. 

Velnesvara {a). Near the mouth of the Sastri river. 
A large and famed fair is held on Mahasivaratri. 

Vtr (d) . Near Jejuri. The shrine of Mhaskoba, a 
local god, whose devotees perform a sword dance before 
him. The fair is from Magha full to new moon. 



176 THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 

DATES OF THE AFOREMENTIONED FAIRS 

CHAITRA 



Light half 




Dark kali ' 


4th . . Nirvangir 


1st . 


. Vanl 


Sth . . Singnapflr 






8th . . Karle 


Sth . 


. Sonari 


, , . . Natepute , 






9th (Rama) . . Bahe 






„ .. Chaphal 






. . KelSi 






..NaSik 






11th . . Kolvadi 


11th . 


. girale 


12th . . Jejuri 






ISth (full moon) Dhamankhed.. 


14th . 


. VajreSvari 


,, . . Golgeri 






.. Jotiba 






,, . . Mahalakshml 






„ . . Nimbdari 






,, . . SaptaSring 




Also during the 
month at Khodsi 



VAISAKHA 



3rd (Para«u- 






rama) 


Pedhe 




4th 


Mohol 




10th 


LakshmlSvari 




14th (Nrisimha) 

II • 


Narsingpur 
Dhom 




ISth 

II ^ 


Tuljapur 




" 


?;elve 


Also during 
month at Parola 



JYESHTHA 
10th . . NaSik 

ASHADHA 

10th . . Pandharpur 

llth(Sayani) .. Hingne Khurd 11th .. Parunde 

, , . . Kolhapur 

„ .. Rajapur 



PRINCIPAL RELIGIOUS FAIRS OP MAHARASHTRA 177 





SEAVANA 




Light half 


All Mondays . 


. Pandu Lena 


»i »i 


. SomeSvara 


3rd „ 


. Dongargaon 


Last „ 


. Otur 


i> >i 


. Terdal 


5th_(Naga 




Panchami) . 


. Sirale 


6th 


. 



Dark half 



BHADEAPADA 



4th (GaneSa 
chaturthi) . . Morgaon 
,, . . Ranjangaon 

10th . . Mahalingpur 

ISth (full moon) Jambrug 



.ASVINA 



1st . . MahabaleSvara 






2nd . . Adivra 






Sth (Lalita) . . Kolhapur 






9th (Sarasvati) Chatarsingh 






10th (Dasara) . . Banpuri 






,, . . Gudguddapur 






. . Jambrug 






,, . . PandharpiJr . . 


12th . 


. Akhalkop 


ISth (full moon) Madha 


12th . 


. VadiNarsimha 


,, .. Nargund 




Also during the 
month at Hip- 
pargi. 

12 



178 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



KAETTIKA 



Light halt 

10th. . . Pandharpur 

.. Sajgaon 
Hth(Prabodhini) Hingne Khurd 
,, .. Kaaheri 

I , . . Kolhapur 

>, .. Rajapur 

- „ . . Devgad 

14th(Viaikuntha) NaSik 
,1 . . Avasa 

lSth(Tripuri full Tryambaka 
moon) .. 
I > . . Sajgaon 



Dark halt 



11th . . Aland! 
11th . . Nirmal 
11th . . AgaSi 



MARGASIRSHA 



1st . . Mhasvad 

4th . . Jejuri 

ISth (full moon) Akhalkop 
„ . . Godchi 

. . Chaul 



6th . . Chinchvad 



PAUSHA 



11th . . (Shattila) Tryambaka 
ISth .. (new moon) Bahe 



12th ..Jejuri 

..Pal 
14th . . Naltala 

ISth (full moon) Chandur 
. . Ilkal 
. . Maheji 
. . Mandhardev 
. . Mhase 
. . KankeSvara 
. . SankSi Fort 



At Makara Samkranti at Sindgi 

Also during the month at Pimpalgaon Budruk 



PRINCIPAL RELIGIOUS FAIRS OP MAHARASHTRA 179 





MAGHA 






Light half 




Dark half 


5th 


. . Kole 


1st 


. Sajjangad 


J, 


. . Vadi Narsidiha 


1st 


. Bhudargad 


gth 


. . Roti 


Sth 


. Akhalkop 


12th 


. . Jejuri 


Sth 


. Kodoli 






10th to 13th. 


. Ambarnath 






)l l» • 


. Sahapur 
. Tilse 






f ) M ■ 


. NaSik 






12th 


. Nirvangir 






13th and 14th Pandharpur 






MahaSivaratri Bahule 






J) 


. Bhimsagiri 








. BhimaSankara 






M 


. Gharapuri 






1) 


. Kanheri 

. Mahabalegvara 

. Pura 

. SangameSvara 

(BijapiJr) 
„ (Khandesh) 
,, (Ratnagiri) 

. Singnapur 






)> 






_ 


: Takari 








. Talegaon Dhamd- 








here 






)> 


. Tryambaka 


ISth (full 


moon) Dhamankhed . 


I) 


. VelneSvara 


II 


. . Mallauggad . 
.. Vir 


" 


. Devgad 



13 



INDEX 



A BHIJIT, 17, 18, 19 
**■ Aborigines, 45, 99 
Adhika (Intercalary month), 

17, 19, 20, 22, 29, 30, 32, 103, 

117 
Adhika tithi, 27 
Aditya, 23, 38 
Adityavara, 24 
Adivra, 161, 163, 177 
Aduhkha navami, 129 
AgaSi, 161, 163, 178 
Ages of the gods, 13 ' 
Aghada pl&nt, SO f, 73 
Agni, lis 
Agni-Soma, 67 
Ahi, 120 

Ahmadnagar, 175 
AjaikadaSI, 87, 14S 
Akhalkop, 161, 163, 177, 178, 

179 
Akka Aveyar, 167 
Akshayya tritiya, 37, 64 f, 138, 

172 
Alakshmi, S8, 61 
Aland!, 161, 164, 171, 178 
Aldebaran, 18 
Alkanda River, 173 
Allahabad, 39, 102 
Almsgiving, 32, 3S, 37, 39, 86 ; 

see also Presents 
Altair, 19 
Amalaki, see Trees 
Amalakyekadafii, 91, 1S8 
Amanta, 22 

Amavasya, see Moon, new 
Ambabal, 100, 167, 168 
AmbareSvar, 164 
Ambarnath, 161, 164, 179 
AmbuvachI, 107, 141, 143 
Amrita, 28, 130 
Ananga trayodaSi, 47, 136 
Ananta, 120, 121, 122, 124 



Ananta chaturdaSI, 122 f, 131, 
146, 148 

Angirasa, 72 

Animal Sacrifice, see under 
Sacrifice 

Animal Worship, 117 ff 

Animistic festivals, 99 ff 

Anjani, 119 

AnnapHrnashtami, 106, 136 

Anointing, oneself, 49, h%, 59,' 
61, 63, 81, 94, 109; other 
object, 65 

Antares, 19 

Anuradha, 18, 19 

Anusiiya, 97 f 

AparaikadaSi, 86, 139 

Aparapaksha, 114, 147 

Apsara, 91 

Apta, iftf-Trees 

Aquarius, see Kumbha 

Arandhana, 126, 147, 149 

Aranya shashthi, 104, 140 

Arcturus, 19 

Ardhodaya, 35 f 

Ardra, 18, 19 
-Aries, see Mesha 

Arjuna, 120 

Arunavati River, 173 

ArundhatI, 72, 133 

Aryadeva, 24 

Aryans, 16, 31, 45, 66, 92, 100, 

_ 120, 121 

Ashadha, 18, 20, 26, 30, 34, 81, 

82, 85, 86, 87, 107, 111, 117, 

118, 123, 125, 126, 142, 143, 

166, 168, 171, 172, 176 

Ashtaka, 112, 113, 115, 153, 155, 

157, 159 
ASlesha, 18, 19 
ASokashtaml, 128, 136 
ASoka sliashthT, 104, 128, 136 
Asterisms, see Nakshatra 



INDEX 



181 



ASvina, 18, 30, 41, 43, S2, 53, S4, 
55, 57, 58, 59, 61, 83, 88, 107, 
lis, 116, 118, 122, 126, 148, 
149, 163, 164, 165, 166, 168, 
169, 171, 175, 177 

ASvini, 18 

Atibale§vara, 168 

Atonement day, see Rishi pan- 
chami 

Atri, 71, 72, 97 

Auspicious Seasons, 25, 30 ff, 

_ 39, 64 

Avail, see Trees 

Avail bhojana, 89 

Avasa, 161, 164, 178 

Avatara, of Siva, 91, 175 ; of 
Vishnu, 75 ff, 175 ; Buddha, 
75, 83, 148 ; Kalki, 83, 144 ; 
Krishna, 75, 80, 96, 145 ; 
Kiirma, 76, 138 ; Matsya, 76, 
136 ; Nrisimha, 75, 76, 138, 
166, 176 ; ParaSurama, 75, 78, 
91, 103. 138 ; Ramachandra, 
75, 79, 136 ; Vamana, 75, 77, 
134, 146, 166, 170, 172, 176 ; 
Varaha, 76, 146 

Avidhava navami, 115, 147 

Ayodhya, 42 

DADR-UD-DiN KILLA, 173 

" Babylonia, 24 

Babe, 161, 164, 176, 178 

Bahiroba, 166 

Bahula, 118, 145 

Bahule, 161, 164, 179 

BahuIeSvara, 164 

Balarama, 82, 130 

Bali king, 59 f, 77, 134, 150 

Balsam, see Aghada 

Banpuri, 161, 164,177 

BanSankari, 166 

Bathing, oneself, 32, 35, 36, 
39, 41, 42, 49, 55, 59, 61, 63, 
64, 69, 73, 77, 78, 80, 81, 84, 
85,-86, 87, 88, 94, 96, 97, 101, 
102, 103, 109, 110, 116, 120, 
122, 123. 133, 159; other 
object, 65, 82, 94 

Bel, see Trees 

Benares, 94, 98, 106 



Bendura, 62, 118, 142, ISO 

Bengal, 22, 39, 43, 47, 53, 54, 
55, 61, 64, 81, 82, 94, 95, 96, 
100, 101, 103, 104, 105, 106, 
107, 108, 109, 111, 118, 124, 
126, 136, 146, 150, 151, 152, 
154, 156 

Bhadrapada, 18, 27, 48, 50, 64, 
76, 77, 88, 96, 106, 107, 108, 
111, 118, 122, 126, 127, 128, 
146. 147, 166, 169, 172 

Bhadrapada dark half, 34, 36, 
.65, 112 f 

Bhagavadgita, 120 

Bhagavata sect, 92, 164, 171, 
172 

Bhagiratha, 102 

Bhairava Kala, 91, 96, 117, 131, 
151, 164, 165, 174 

Bhairava yatana, 96 

Bhakti revival, 80, 171 

Bharadvaja, 71 

Bharani, 18_ 

Bharani panchaml, 115, 147 

Bhaskari saptami, 41,- 156 

Bhaubija dvitiya, 63, 150 

Bhauma, 23 

Bhaumavara, 24 

Bhavani, 109, 167, 175 

Bhavani Sankara, 163, 172 

Bhavani utpatti, 109, 136 

Bhima River, 94, 164, 169 

Bhimak King, 164 

BhimaSankara, 94, 161, 164, 179 

Bhimasena (or Bhima) , 86, 164, 
167 

Bhimsagiri, 161, 164, 179 

Bhishma, 31, 116 

Bhlshmashtami, 116, 156 

Bhudargad", 161, 164, 179 

Bhuta chaturdagi, 116, 149 

Bihar, 150 

Boar incarnation, see Avatara, 
Varaha 

Bombay, 58, 105, 166, 167, 169 

Bombne, 46 

Bonfire, 45 f, 158 

Brahma, 13, 36, 38, S3, 54, 84, 
96, 97, 98, 133, 175 

Brahma kunda, 79 , 



182 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



Brahmanas, 53, 160 
Brahmanicide, 80 
Brahmaputra River, 79, 103, 128 
Brahmaputra snana, 136 
Brahmi, 110 
Brihaspati, 23 
Brihaspatvara, 24 
Buddha, 23, 83, 171, 172 
Buddha, birthday, 148 
Buddhavara, 24 
Buddha, Incarnation, see 

Avatara 
Buddhism, 83 
Buddhist temples, 167, 171 
Burigaon, 173 

(CALENDAR, 16, 21, 26, 41, 83 

^^ Cancer, see Karka 

Capricornus, see Malcara 

Cat, 104, lOS 

Cattle worship, 40, 62, 117 f, 142, 
145, 147, 149, ISO 

Census report, 57 

Chaitanya, 81 

Chaitraj 16, 18, 20, 22, 23, 28, 
30, 41, 42, 47, 56, 65, 76, 79, 
85, 100, 103, 104, 106, 107, 
109, 119, 128, 136, 137, 164, 
165, 166, 167, 168, 170, 171, 
173, 174, 175, 176 

Chaitraratha King, 91 

Champa shashthi, 111, 152, 153 

Chamunda, 110 

Chandala sparSa, 46 f , 159 

Chandana yatra, 64 

Chandra, 23, 98 

Chandrabhaga, 88 

Chandravara, 24 

Chandflr, 161, 164, 178 

Chaphal, 161, 165, 176 

Chatarsingh, 161, 165, 177 

Chaturmasa, see Rainy season 

Chaturyuga, IS' 

Chaul, 161, 165, 178 

Chautha bharani, 115, 147 

Chhat piija, 150 

Children, means to obtain, 40, 
87, 90, 94, 101, 121 

Chinchkhed, 162, 169 

Chinchvad, 161, 165, 169, 178 



Chipluna, 79, 163, 172 

Chitpavana Brahmans, 79, 172 

Chitra, 17, 18, 19 

Chota Nagpur, 121 

Chudamani, 37 

Churning 'Milky Ocean, 28,76, 

91, 106, 122 
Circumambulation, 69, 70, 89, 

119, 129, 168 
Civil day, 17 
Civil year, 17, 42 
Clock, 26 
Cocoanut, 40, 49, 51, 64, 101, 

126 
Cocoanut full moon, 48, 144 
Comorin, Cape, 94 
Cord, see Thread 
Curse, 69, 86, 90, 91 
Cycle, Jupiter's, 29, 36 
Cycle, Sun and Moon's, 29 

r)ACCA, 103 

'-' Dagadi chautha, 146 

Daksha,117 / 

Dakshinayana, 30, 31 

Dancing, 46," 47, 52, 101, 174, 175 

Darbha, see Grass 

Dark half, see Krishna paksha 

DaSahara, 20, 101, 126, 140 

Dasara, 30, SO, 53, 55 f , 63, 102, 

117,126,148, 166, 171, 177 
DaSI vahana, 68 
Dattatreya, 97, 163, 165, 168, 

175 
Dattatreya birthday, 1S2 
Danhitra, 115, 148 
Day, Lunar, see Tithi 
Day, Solar, see Divasa 
Days of week, 33 f 
Dehu, 161, 165, 171 
Deccan, 78, 111, 117, 118, 119, 

121, 126, 127, 167 
Deleted days, see Kshaya 
Demons, 28, 32, 44, 45, 54, 58, 

59, 76, 84, 89, 90, 95, 100, 122, 

129, 132, 167, 175 
Denebola, 19 
Deva, 165 
Devaki, 81, 82 
DevarguB, 162, 166 



INDEX 



183 



Devgad, 162, 165, 178, 179 
Dhamankhed, 162, 165, 176, 179 
Dhana trayodaSI, 59, 149 
Dhanapala, 85 
Dhanishtha, 18, 19 
Dhanu, iS 
Dharmaraja, 172 
Dhom, 162, 3^65, 176 
DhrishmeSvar^, 94 
DhrishtabuddM, 85 
Dhritarashtra; 124 
Phundha, 44 
Dhvajaropana, 42, 136 
DifiBculties, see GaneSa 
Dipavali, 30, 59 f, 107, ISO 
Dipavali, little, 108, 143 
Divasa, 23 f, 26 
DnyaneSvara, or Dnyanoba, 

164, 168, 175 
Dongargaon, 162, 166, 177 
Dravidlan, 48, 119, 167 
Durga, SO, 56, 58, 84, 90, 100, 

107, 109, 167 
Durga piJja, 53 f , 108, 148 
Durgashtami, 136, 138, 140, 

142, 144, 146, 148, 150, 1S2, 

154, 156, 158 
Durva, see Grass 
Durvashtami, 52, 127, 146 
Durvasa, 98 
Dvapara, see Yuga 
Dwarf, see Avatara, Vamana 

PARTH-MOTHERS, 99, 121, 

*-• 124, 150 

Eclipse, 28, 36, 67 

Egypt, 24 

EkadagI days, 83 f, 93, 16S 

Ekvira Bhavani, 167 

Elephanta Island, see Gharapuri 

Elephant-headed god, see 

GaneSa 
Epics', 120 

Epic period, 120, 131 
Equinox, autumnal, 17, 32, 39, 

41, S3, 57 
Equinox, vernal, 16, 32, 39, 41 
Eras, 14 f 

Era, Christian, 17, 80 
Europe, 24 



PAIRS, religious, 32, 97, 160 ff 

*■ Fasting, 35, 67, 68, 69, 70, 

71, 77, 80, 81, 84 ff, 93, 94, 

95, 101, 105, 106, 110, 122, 
123, 127, 128 ; see also EkadaSi 
days 

Fathers, see Pitri 

Feasting, 39, 51, 61, 78, 80, 111, 

124 
Female energy, 105 ff 
Fish incarnation, see Avatara 

Matsya 
Four months, see Rainy 

season 
Friday, 24, 30, 34, 70, 71, 107, 

136, 144, 145, 146, 154 

pADAD River, 173 

^-' Gaja, see Hasta 

Gajagaurl vrata, 37, 149 

Gajasura, 50 

Gambhirnatha, 166 

Gana, 48, 50 

Gandaki River, 97, 131 

Gandharva, 85, 90 

GaneSa, or Ganapati, 33, 48 ff, 

53, 69, 95, 133, 165, 169, 172, 

177 
GaneSa chaturthi, 48, 69, 146 
Ganga River, 35, 39, 41, 61, 80, 

96, 97, 102, 103 
Gangotsava, 101 f, 140 
Gauri, 48, SO, 65, 71, 109 
Gauri festivals, SO ff, 100, 136, 

138, 144, 145, 146 
Gauri footprint, 51 
GaurTSankara, 170 
Gautama, see Buddha 
Gaya, 38, 114 
Gayatri, 38, 133 
Gemini, see Mithuna 
Ghadge Bova, 168 
Ghanta karna puja, 96, 159 
Gharapuri, 162, 166, 179 
Gharval, 94 
Ghata or Ghayala chaturdaSi, 

115, 147 
Ghatika, 25, 26 
Ghats, 45 
Gifts, see Presents 



184 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



Goa, 48 

Godavairi River, 34, 35, 94, 102, 
170, 174 

Gods and goddesses, unspeci- 
fied, 28, 32, 34, 41, 44, 54, 58, 
73, 95, 100, 122, 124, 130, 134, 
175 

Gods' age, 13 

Gods' day and night,- 14, 30 

Gods' month, 14 

Gods' year, 14 

GodchT, 162, 166, 178 

Goddess woiship, 98 S 

Gokula, 80, 82 — 

Gokulashtaml, 145 

GolaliSvara, 166 

Golgeri, 162, 166, 176 

Gomi River, 172 

Gondhala, 175 

Gopada, 118 

Gopashtami, 118, ISO 

Gopis, 83 ■ 

Goraknath, 174 

Govardhana chaturdaSi, 149 

Govardhana mountain, 83 

Govardhana pratipada, 83, ISO 

Govatsa chaturthi, 145 

Govatsa dvadaSi, 118, 149 

Govinda, 82 

Govinda dvadaSi, 82, 158 

Graha, 23f 

Grahana, see Eclipse 

Grass, darbha, 62, 74, 113, 122, 
126, 133 

Grass, durva, 52, 64, 126, 146 

Grass, kuga, 41, 114, 126 

Greeks 24 

Gudguddapur, 111, 162, 166, 
167, 177 

Gujarath, 105, 118 

Guru, planet, 23 

Guruvara, 24 

Guru (teacher) puja. 111, 149 

LJAIMA, King, 60 

* * Haji Abd-ul-Rehman, 1'69 

Hanuman, 71, 119, 129, 144, 

145, 172 
Hanuman jayanti, 119, 136 
Hara, 97 



Hardvara, 102, 160 
HareSvara, 162, l65 
Hari, 97 
Haridini, 83 
Harihara natha, 97 
Harihara worship, 92, 97, 172 
Harihara yatra, 97, 150 
HariSchandra, King, 87 
Haritalika, 108, 146 
Harvest, 58, 100, 118, 148 
Harvest, early crops, 48, 50, 57 
Harvest, goddess of, 50 
Harvest rice, 39, S3 
Hasta, 18, 19, 36, 43 
Himachala, 108 
Himalaya mountains, 102 
Hindola yatra, 82, 144 
Hindustan, 22 
Hingne Khurd, 162, 166, 176, 

178 
Hippargi, 162, 166, 177 
Hiranyakaiipu, 45, 76 
Holi, Holika or HutaSani, 44 f, 

47, 58, 63, 82, 158, 172, 174 
Horse sacrifice, 102 
Horse worship, 57, 117 
Hours, Lords of, 24-25 
Hour glass, 26 

ICHCHHAgakti, 106 

* Ilkal, 162, 166, 178 

Images, 38, 43, 47. 49, SO, 53, 
55, 58, 61, 63, 77, 78, 79, 80, 
81, 82, 88, 89, 92, 101, 102, 
105, 106, 109, 110,^18, 122, 

123, 124, 128, 131, 165, 166, 
167, 171, 173, 174 

Inanimate objects, worship of, 

126 ff J 

Inauspicious seasons, 30 £E 
Incarnations, see Avatara 
India, Central, 31 
India, North, 35, 39, 41, 47, 64, 

79, 81, 82, 101, 104, 105, 106, 

124, 141 

India, South, 22, 31, 39, 40, 47, 
54, 81, 92, 95, 104, 118, 124, 
125 

India, Western, 39, 47, 54, 81, 
98, 104, 163, 171 



INDEX 



185 



IndiraikadaSI, 88, 116, 147 
Indra, 42, 57, 76, 83, 90, 102, 

120, 134 
Indra's heaven, see Svarga 
Indra-Agni, 67 
Indranl, 110, 134 
Indrasena, King, 88 
Intercalary month, see Adhika 
Intercalary tithl, 26 
Israel, 24 
Itu puja, 43, 150, 151 

JAGADAMBA, or Jagaddhatrl, 
106, ISO 
Jagannatha, 65, 77, 81, 82 
Jalandhara, 129 f 
Jamadagni, 72, 78, 166 
Jambrug, 162, 166, 177 
Jamna, see Yamuna 
Janamejaya, 122 
Janmashtami, 145 
January, 30 
Jar, «e Pitcher 
JayaikadaSi, 90, 156 
Jayasval, 15 
Jejurl, 111, 162, 166, 175, 176 

178, 179 
Jessore, 33 
Jhapata Bhava, 172 
Jhulana Yatra, 82, 144 
Jogai, 169 
Jogegvari, 168 
Jokhai, 99 

Jotiba's hill, 162, 167, 176 
Jungle mothers, 99 
Jupiter, 14, 23, 24, 25, 30, 33, 35, 

70, 71, 83, 144, 145, 168, 174 
Jupiter, cycle of, 29, 36 
Jyeshtha, 18, 20, 81, 86, 87, 101, 

102,' 104, 106, 107, 108, 118, 

127, 140, 141, 170, 176 
Jyeshtha, 18, 19 

J/^AILASA, 93 

"^ Kala, see Bhairava 

Kalashtami, 137, 139, 141, 143, 

145, 147, 149, 151, 153, 155 

157, 159 
Kali, 50,54, 61, 100, 106 
Kali puja, 151 



Kaliya, 122 fE 

Kali yuga, see Yuga 

Kalki, see Avatara 

Kalki, birthday, 144 

KalmeSvara, 166 

Kalpa, 13 f 

Kalubal, 169 

Kamadeva, 44 

KamaikadaSi, 85, 136 

Kamalbhairi, 174 

Kama trayoda§I, 47 

Kambala,_124 

KamikaikadagJ^87, 143 

Kamsa, 81 

Kanarak, 38 

Kanheri^ 162, 167, 178, 179 

Kanhoba, 168 

Kanishka, King, 15 

KankeSvara, 162, 167, 178 

Kanya, 18, 35, 114, 168 

Kanyagata, 35, 168 

KapardikeSvara, 171 

Kapila, 102 

Kapila shashthi, 36 

Karka, 18, 39 

Karle Hill, 162, 167,176 

Karmala, 162, 167 

Karnatic, 94 

Karttika, 18, 30, 34, 43, 59, 61, 
63, 64, 83, 85, 111, 118, 128, 
150, 151, 163, 164, 165, 166, 
167, 168, 170, 171, 172, 173, 
178 

Karttika diparatna, 96 

Karttikeya, 95, 151 

Karttikeya paS(;hamt, ISO 

Kashmir, 170 

KaSi, see Benares 

Kagyapa, 71 

Kathiavar, 94 

Kathiayar, King of, 16 

Kaumari, 110 

Kauravas, 56, 86, 116, 122 

Kayats, 132 
Kedaranatha, 94 
Kelili, 162, 167, 176 
Kelve, 105, 162, 167, 176 
Ketaki flowers, 94 
Ketu, 23; 28 
I Khamba linga, 169 



186 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



Khanderao, or Khandoba, 111, 

164,' 16S, 166, 167, 171 
Khandesh, 132 
Khas shashthi, 105 
Khodsi, 162; 168, 176 
Knots, 131 ff 
Kodoli, 162, 168, 179 
Kojagarl full moon, 58, 107, 148 
Kokila worship, 20, 117 
Kole, 162, 168, 179 
Kolhapiir, 98, 100, 162, 167, 168, 
' 176, 177, 178 
Kolhasura, 167 
Kolvadi, 162, 168, 176 
Konkan, 45, 47, 71, 78, 83, 118 
Kratu, 72 
Krishna, 32, 45, i\ 60, 80 f, 106, 

■l20,' 122, 123, 130, 171 
Krishna, birthday, 145 
Krishna paksha, 22 f , 30, 31, 80, 

85, 86, 87, 88, 93, 137, 139, 141, 

143, 145, 147, 149, 151, 153, 

155, 157, 159, 176, 177, 178, 

179 
Krishna River, 35, 102, 165, 168, 

'173, ■ 175 
Krishna, see also Avatara 
Krita yuga, see Yuga 
Krittika, 18 
Kshaya day, 19, 26 
Kshaya month, 21 
Kshaya year, 37 
Kshatriya, 41, 63, 78 
Kshetrapala, 96, 168 
Kubera, 86, 99 
Kukdi River, 172 
KukdeSvara, 172 
Kumari, 106 
Kumbha, 18, 21, 35 
Kundalik River, 165 
Kflrma, see Avatara 
Kurma, birthday, 138 
Kurs, 121 
KuSa, see Grass 
Kushan, King, 15 
Kushmanda navami, 150 

I AKSHMANA, 80, 170 
*-" Lakshmi, 54, 61, 99, 106, 
107, 129,168, 169, 175 



Lakshmi, piija, 58 ff, 70, 71, 

107 f , 136, 144, 145, 146, 149, 

154 
LakshmiSvarl, 162, 168, 176 
Lalita, 85 

Lalita, 53, 54, 85, 148, 177 
Lamps, 40, 41 59, 62, 63, 96, 

116, 150 
Lamps, in worship, 49, 55, 60, 

61, 96, 107, 129, 143 
Lamps, waving, for luck, 49, 

51, 56, 62 
Lanka (Ceylon), 63, 91, 120 
Leo, see Simha 
Libra, see Tula 
Light half, see Sukla paksha 
Liiiga, 92, 93, 94, 133, 166, 167, 

169, 171, 172, 173, 174 
Linga Temples, Twelve, 94, 160, 

164, 174 
Lingayat sect, 166, 173, 174 
Lumpaka, 90 
Lunar days, see Tithi 
Lunar mansions, 17 
Lunar months, 18, 19, 2b 
Lunl solar year, 16 f, 17 

|\/JADANA Mohana, 65 
*** Madana trayodaSi, 47, 136 
Madha, 162, 168, 177 
Madhi, 162, 168 
Madras, 47 
Magha, 18, 19 

Magha, 18, 22, 4;, S3, 64, 90, 91, 

93, 105, 109, 115, 116, 118, 156, 

157, 163, 164, 165, 167, 168, 

169, 172, 173, 175, 179 

Maghata, King, 86 

MahabaleSvar, 162, 168, 177, 

179 
Mahabharata, 28 n, 31, 40, 75, 
78, 80, 83, 84, 92, 95, 100. 116, 
127, 160 
Mahadeva, see Siva 
Mahaikada£i, 85, 88 
Hahakala, 94 
Mahakali, 163 
MahalakshmT, 100 
Mahalakshmi hill, 162, 168, 173, 
176 



INDEX 



187 



Mahalaya, 114, 147 
MahalingeSvara, 169 
Mahaingpur, 162, 169, 177 
Maharashtra, 22, 39, 43, 47, 50, 

S4, 55, 57, 61, 62, 64, 65, 68, 

80, 85, 89, 93, 99, 101, 107, 

118, 119, 124, 136, 146, 150, 

154, 157, 160 S 
MahaSivaratri, 93, 95, 157, 160, 

164, 165, 166, 167, 170, 172, 

173, 174, 175, 179 
Mahavishtjva Samkranti, 41 
Mahayuga, 14 
Maheji, 162, 169, 178 
Maheidra mountain, 79 
MaheSvarl, 110 
Mahijit^87 
Mahishasura, 54 
Mahishmat, 90 
Makara, 18. 36, 41, 47 
Makara Samkranti, 21, 23, 38, 

39 f, 118, 154, 173, 178 
Makari saptami, 41, 156 
Malabar, 47 
Malamasar 20 
Malanggad, 162, 169, 179 
Malava time, 15 
Malla, 166 
Mallari_, 111, 167 
Mallikarjuna, 94 
Malprabha River, 173 
Mai van, 57 
Mamsashtaka, 115 
Manasa, 122, 124 f 
Manasa panchami, 124 f, 143 
Mandhardev, 162, 169, 178 
Manes, see Pitri 
Mangala, 23 
Mangalvara, 25 
Manikarnikapool, 97 
Ma^imalia, 111 
Manjughosha, 91 
Man-lion, rifif Avatara, Nrisimha 
Manmad, 164 
Manu, 76 

Manu, Code of, 16, 31, 160 
MargaSirsha, 18, 22, 43, 89, 90, 

97, 111, lis, 123, 152, 153, 163, 

165, 166, 167, 169, 170, 171, 

178 



Marial, 99 

M-arichi, 72 

Marriage ceremony, 25, 32, 34, 

35, 70, 71, 129 f, 171„173 
Mars, 14, 23, 24, 25, 30, 33, 71 
Martand, 166 
Maruti, see Hanuman 
Matamaha, 115, 148 
Mathura, 82 
Matoba 169 
Matsya, see Avatara 
Maunya vrata, 96, 146 
Mecca, 173 
Medhavi, 91 
Megasthenes, 80 
Mercury, 14, 23, 244, 25, 30, 33, 

70, 71, 144, 145 
Merit, gaining of, 37, 40, 69,86, 

87, 88, 89, 91, 93, 102, 103, 160 
Meru mountain, 76 
Mesha, 16, 18, 39, 41, 42 
Mhasa, 162, 169, 178 
Mhaskoba, 175 
Mhasoba, 168 
Mhasvad, 162, 169, 178 
Mina, IS 
Mithuna, 18 
Mitra, 43 

MohinyekadaSi, 85, 138 
Mohol, 162, 169, 176 
MokshadaikadaSi, 89, 152 
Monday, 24, 30, 33, 34, 36, 69, 

70, 71, 94, 144, 145, 164, 166, 

170, 171, 172, 174, 177 
Monkey god, see Hanuman 
Monkey worship, 117, 119 f 
Monsoon, 48 

Month Adhika, 17, 19, 20, 22, 29 
Month Kshaya or Nija, 19, 24 
Month, Lunar, 17,'l8, 19, 20, 22, 

31 
Month, Solar, 18, 19 
Moon, 14, 16, 17, 23, 24, 25, 28, 

30, 33, 34, 83, 
Moon worship, 66 ff, 95 
Moon, full, 31, 40, 44, 47, 48, 

58, 64, 67, 68, 71, 95, 96, 107, 

111, 119, 127, 136, 138, 140. 

142, 144, 146, 148, 150, 152 

154, 156, 158, 164, 165, 166 



188 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 173, 
174, 17S, 176, 177, 178, 179 

Moon, new, 16, 19, 21, 36, 42, 
66, 67, 68, 95, 96, 107, 109, 
111, 112, 118, 126, 137, 139, 
141, 143, 145, 147, 149, 151, 
153, 155, 157, 159, 164, 166, 

168, 171, 173, 174, 175 
Morgaon, 162, 169, 177 
Moroba, 165, 169 
"Mother" cults, 99 t, 143 
Mridumanya, 84 
Mrigagirasa, 18 
Muchukunda, King, 88 
Muktabai, 175 

Mula, 18, 19, 53 

Mura, 89 

Murali, 111, 166, 167 

MAGANATHA, 94 

^^ Naga paSchami, 30 n, 

123 f, 144, 152, 174, 177 
Naga people, 85, 120 f , 125 
Nahapana, 15 
Naikba, 164 
Naitala, 162, 169, 178 
Nakshatra, 17, 18, 1&, 36, 37, 43, 

53, 64, 66, 67, 83, 103, 115 
Namdeva, 81 
Nandi, 170 
Nangalbandha, 103 
Narada, 36,-42, 88, 108 
Naraka, 59, 89 
Naraka chatiirda§i, 59 ff, 116, 

149 
Narakasura, 59 
Narali purnima, 48, 144 
Narayana, 75, 80 
Narendra tank, 65 
Nargund, 162, 169, 177 
Narmada River, 94, 102 
Narsimha Sarasvat, 175 
Narsingpur, 162, 169, 176 
NaSik, 58, 94, 162, 169 f, 171, 

173, 176, 178, 179 
Natepute, 162, 170, 176 
Nath, 174 

National Movement, 49, 50, 57 
Navanna, 58 
Navaratra, 53 fE, 107, 148 



New Year's Day, 28, 42, 63, 136 
Nepal, 131 
Nhavis, 121 
NilkantheSvara, 169 
Nim, see Trees 
Nimbarka, 81 
Nimbdari, 162, 170, 176 
Nira River, 169 
NirjalaikadaSi, 88, 140 
Nirmal, 162, 170, 178 
Nirvangir, 162, 170, 176, 179 
Nivrittinath, 174 
Nishkalanka, see Avatara 

Kalki 
Nizam's territory, 94 
Nrisimha, see Avatara 
Nrisimha, birthday, 138 

OBSCENE words, 44, 45, 46, 
58,69 
Ocean, see Churning 
Omkaranatha, 94 
Orissa, 64, 82 
Otur, 162, 171, 177 

DADMANABHA, 124 

^ Paitamaha Siddhanta, 29 

Paksha, 22 f 

Pal, 162, 171, 178 

Pala, 25 

PaSchagavya, 73, 133 

Panchanga, 16, 28 

PaSchavati, 170 

PaSchganga River, 175 

Pandavas, 55, 86, 116, 120, 122, 

164, 167, 171 
Pandharpiir, 162, 165, 171, 172, 

176, 177, 178, 179 
Pandu Lena, 163, 171, 177 
PapamochanyekadaSi, 91, 159 
ParaSurama, see Avatara 
Parivartinyekada§i, 88, 146 
Parli, 163, 173 
Parola, 163, 172, 176 
Parunde, 163, 172, 176 
Parvan days, 68 
Parvati, 108 f, 168, 173, 175 ^ 
Parvati worship, 146 
ParvatTSvara, 170 
PaSankuSaikadaSi, 88, 148 



INDEX 



189 



Pausha, 18, 21, 22, 23, 30, 36, 
39, 90, lOS, 107, lis, 154, 155, 

164, 166, 167, 169, 171, 172, 
173, 175, 178 

Pavitra, 74, 126, 133r 
Pavitraropana, 133 f , 144 
Pedhe, 163, 172, 176 
PhSguna, 18, 44, 47, 82, 91, 96, 
103, 105, lis, 158, 159, 164, 

165, 168 

Phallic worship, 79 ; see also 

Linga, 
Pilgrimages, iec Fairs, religious 
Pimpalgaon Budruk, 163, 172, 

178 
Pippal, see Trees 
Pisces, see Mlna 
Pitcher, 40, 82, 110 
Pitcher as god or goddess, 55, 

73, 96, 111, 122 
Pithori, 109, 145 
Pitri, 32, 60, 64, 65, 68, 112 f 
Pitri paksha, 114 
Pitfi pati, 116 
Planets, 14, 23 f, 33 f 
Planets worship, 70 flf 
Plant worship, 126 fiE 
- Pleiades, 18 
Pola, 40, 62, 118, 145, 147 
Pole star, 70, 71 
Pongal, 39, 40, 118, 154 
Ponvate, 133 f 
Poona, 94, 165, 167 
Portuguese government, 48 
Prabhii Svami, 174 
PrabodhinyekadaSI, 88, 150, 178 
Pradosha, 93, 136, 138, 140, 

142ri44, 146. 148, 150, 152, 

154, 156, 158 
Prahara, 25 
Prajapati, 76, 115 
Prakasha,. 163, 172 
Pralaya, 13 
Pralhada, 45, 76 
Pratipada, 28 
Prativipala, 25 
Prayaga, 102, 103 
PrayaSchit, see Rishi pancham! 
Presents, to Brahmans, 32, 40, 

41, 43, 64, 65, 69, 87, 90, 96, 



102 ; to Priests, 39, 49, 54, 74, 
77, 110, 123, 133 ; to Others, 
56, 63, 65, 78, 85, 101, 109 

Proverbs, 33, 39, 40, 47, 61, £2, 
69, 98, 118, 128 

Pulaha, 72 

Pulastya, 72 

Punarvasu, 18, 19, 37 

Punaryatra, 82, 142 

Pundalik, 171 

Pura, 163, 172, 179 

Puranas, 48, 76, 80, 111, 120 ; 
Bhagavata, 76 ; Bhavishya, 
54, 60, 108 ; Brahma, 90 ; 
Matsya, 170 ; Markandeya, 
112, 170 ; Skanda, 170 ; Vayu, 
170 ; Vishnu, 31, 84 

Puranic period, 54, 85 

Purl,38^65, 77, 81 

Purnima, see Moon, full 

Piirnimanta, 22 

Purva, Ashadha, 18, 19 

Piarva, Bhadrapada, 18, 19 

Piirva, Phalguni, 18, 19 

Pushpadola, 82, 138 

Pushpashtaka, 115 

Pushpavan, 90 

Pushpavati, 90 

Pushya, 18, 19, 83 

PutradaikadaSI, 87, 90, 144, 154 

DADHA, 81, 82, 105, 106 

*^ RadhashtamI, 146 

Rahu, 23, 28, 120 

Rainy season, 30, 34, 35, 43, 57, 
85, 89, 107, 118, 121, 124, 142, 
150, 166, 171 

Rajapur, 163, 172, 176, 178 

Rakhi, or Raksha, 63, 134, 144 

Rama, 42, S4, 55, 56, 58, 63, 75, 
79, 91, 97, 100, 119, 120, 129, 
164, 170 

Rama Gora, 170 

Rama Kala, 170 

Rama, see also Avatara, Rama 

Rama navami, 79, 136, 167, 170, 
176 

Rama's kingdom, 34 

Rama-with-the-axe, see Ava- 
tara, ParaSurama 



190 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



Ratnaikadagi, 88, 149 

Ramananda, 79 

Ramayana, 48, 75, 76, 77, 79, 

119 
Rambha tritiya, 105, 140 
Ramdas sect, 119 
Ramdas Svami, 165, 173 
Ramegvara, 94 
Ranga panchatni, 46, 159 
Ranjangaon, 163, 172, 177 
Rasa yatra, 83, 150 
RaSi, 17 S, 114 
Rat, 49 

Ratha saptam!, 41, 156 
Ratha yatra, 81 f , 142 
Rati, 47 

Ratnagiri, 57, 167, 173 
Ratnasura, 167 
Ravana, 42, 54, 55, 56, 119, 120, 

129, 170 
Ravana 's kingdom, 34 
Ravi, '23 
Ravivara, 24 
Regulus, 19 
Renuka, 78, 103, 170 
Revati, 18, 19 
Rice, as ofEering, 64, 65, 74, 77, 

114, 115, 116, 133 
Rigveda, 53, 57, 75, 76, 120, 160 
Rishi, seven, 71, 133 
Rishi panchami, 71, 146 
Rohini, 18, 36, 37, 64, 67 
Roman Empire, 25 
Roti, 163, 172, 179 
Rudra, 91-95 
Rudra pisacha, 96 
Rudra-Siva, 100, 102 
Rukhmini, 81 

SACRIFICE, 47, 54, 56, 57, 
58, 67, 76, 90, 96, 102, 133 
Sagara, 102 
Sagittarius, see Dhanu 
Sahapur, or6hahapur, 163, 172, 

179_ 
Sahyadri mountains, 98 
Salva, 85, 95, 166 
Sajgaon, 163, 172, 178 
Sajjangad, 163, 173, 179 



Saka Era, 14 f , 36 
Saka, King, 15 
Sakamedhab, 96 
Sakashtaka, 115 
Salagrama, 130 f 
Salivahana, King, IS 
Sambhu, see Siva 
Sami, see Trees 
Samkashta days, 69, 95, 137, 

139, 141, 143, 145, 147, 149, 

151, 153, 155, 157, 159 
Samkranti days, 19, 20, 30, 32, 

37, 38, 39 ff, 41, 42, 112, 160 
Sampat Sanivara, 70, 71 
Samvat Era, 14, 45, 63 
Samvatsara, 14., 16, 20, 22 
Sangamegvara, 163, 173, 179 
Sani, ^ee Saturn 
Sanivara, 24, 70, 71 
Sankara, see Siva 
Sankaracharya, 38, 170 
Sankasura, 34 
Sankhapala, 124 
Sankgi, 163, 173, 178 
SaphalaikadaSi, 90, 153 
SaptaSring, 163, 173, 175, 176 
Saptagring devi, 165, 173, 175 
Sarasvati, 54, 58, 61 
Sarasvati puja, 53, 148, 156, 177 
Sarvapitri, 115, 147 
Sastri River, 173, 175 
Satataraka, or Satabhisha, 18, 
, 19, 103 
Satapatha Brahmana, 66, 76, 

77, 112 
Satara, 173 
Sati, 117 
Saturday, 24, 30, 33, 34, 70, 144, 

145 
Saturn, 14, 23, 24, 25, 30, 33, 

49, 70, 71, 144, 145 
Satyavan, 127 f 
Satya yuga, see Yuga 
Saumya,'23, 42 
Saumya vara, 24 
Savitri and S. piija, 127 f, 140 
Sayanyekadagi, 86, 142, 176 
Scorpio, see Vrigchika 



INDEX 



191 



Scythians, 121 

Seasonal festivals, 43 flE 

Seers, see Rishi 

Sesamum, 39,40,52, 64, 90, 114, 

116, ISS 
Sesha, 121, 124 
Shah Ramzan Mahisavar, 168 
ShattilaikadaSi, 90, 155 
Shashthi devi, 103 f, 140 
Sicliness, to prevent or cure, 41, 

46, 56, 96, 104, 105, 163, 165, 
^ 167, 175 
Sidnatha, 169 
Siiiiha, 18, 35, 174 
Simhastha, 35, 172, 174 
Sindgi, 163, 173, 178 
SingnapHr, 163, 170, 173, 176, 
,179 

Sirale, 163, 174, 176, 177 
Sirale Sete, 174 
Sita, 42, 80, 91, 100, 103, 119, 

120, 127, 129, 170 
SIta, birthday, 103, 138 
Sitala devI, 42, ;I0S, 167 
Sitala saptami, 105, 145 
Sitala shashthi, 105, 156 
SitalashtamI, 105, 159 
Sitalakshya River, 103 
Siva, 32, 35, 38, 44, 48, 50, 51, 

60, 70, 71, 84, 85, 86, 97, 98, 

106, 108, 111, 117, 126, 130, 

133, 164, 166, 167, 168, 170, 

173 174 175 
Siva 'ratri', 93 f, 137, 139, 141, 

143, 145, 147, 149, ISl, 153, 
, 155, 157, 159 

Siva worship, 91 fiE, 117, 144, 
^ 145, 164 

Sivajl, 54, 57, 165, 173, 174 
Sivaji worship, 50, 57 
Sivanera hill, 175 
Skanda, 95, 151 
Skanda panchaml, 150 
Skanda shashthi, 136 
Skeins, see Thread 
Small-pox, 33, 105, 167 
Small-pox goddess, see Sitala 

devi 
Snake bite, 60, 123, 124, 125 



Snake worship, 99, 117, 120 fE, 
144, 147, 149, 152, 164, 174 ; 
see also Naga people 

Snana yatra, 81 

Sobhana, 88 

Solar day, see Divasa 

Solar, festivals, 38 ff; mansions, 
17 ; month, 18, 19 ; year, 13, 
14, 29 

Solstice, summer, 14 n, 30, 31, 
32,39 

Solstice, winter , 14 n, 30, 31, 32, 
38, 39 

Soma, 23, 66, 70, 112 

Somavara, 24 

Somanatha, 94 

Somavati, 36, 69 

Somegvara, 168, 170, 177 

Sonari, 163, 174, 176 

Sonepur, 97 

Sopandeva, 175 

Spica, 17, 19 

Spirits, 31, 40, 45, 62, 68, 69, 71, 
96, 132, 160, 165, 175 

Spirits worship, 112 £E, 147 

Spring, 47, 56 

Sraddha, 40, 65, 72, 110, 112 f 

Sravana, 18, 19 

Sravana, 18, 30, 36, 43, 70, 71, 
80, 82, 83," 87, 90, 101, 105, 
109, 118, 123, 144, 145,' 164, 
166, 170, 171, 172, 174, 177 

^ravana purnima, 48, 71, 121, 
132,144 

Sri Brahmanath, 172 

Sri panchami, 53, 136, 156 

Sri Ramji, 167 

Sri Rama Linga, 164 

Stars, English names, 18, 19 

Star worship, 66 £E 

Subhadra, 82 

Sudra?, 62, 63 

Suketu, King, 90 

Sukla paksha, 22 f, 30, 31, 85, 
86, 87, 88, 93, 107, 136, 138, 
140, 142, 144, 146 148, 150, 
152, 154, 156, 158, 176, 177, 
178, 179 



192 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



Sukra, 23, 70 ; see also Venus' 

Sukravara, 24 

Sun, 14, 16, 17, 23, 24, 25, 28, 30, 

33, 83, lis 
Sunday, 24, 30, 33, 34, 36, 37, 71, 

144, 145, ISO, 151, 152 
Sun rise, 27, 36, 87, 109, 120 
Sun worship, 38 ff, 41, 43, 66, 71, 

144, 145, 150, 151, 152, 156 
Surya, 23, 38, 43 
Surya River, 163 
SuSila, 122 
Sutras, 121_ 
Svami Narayana, 175 
Svarga, 60, 88,' 90 
Svastika, 43, 44, 51 
Svati, 18, 19 
Swinging festivals, 47, 82, 144 

fAKARI, 163, 174, 179 
* Taksliaka, 122, 124 
Talegaon Dhamdhere, 163, 174, 

179 
Tamil, 40 
TansaRiver, 175 
Tarakasura, 44 
Tarpana, 64 
Taurus, see Vrishabha 
Telingana, 22' 
Terdal, 163, 174, 177 
Thana, 105 
Thread, as charm, 52, 55, 89, 

105, 109, 122, 128, 131 f 
Thread ceremony, 32, 34, 35, 

78 
Thread, Sacred, 114, 130, 132, 

144 
Thread worship, 131 f, 144 
Three and a half lucky times, 

30 
Three and a half holy places, 

175 
Thursday, 24, 30, 34, 70, 71, 

107, 136, 144, 145, 146, 154 
TilbhandeSvara, 170 
Tilse, 163, 174, 179 
Time of sin, 35 
Tishya, 83 
Tithi, 23, 26 f 
Tithi, 4th, 95 



Tithi, 8th, 96 

Tithi, 11th, j^^EkadaSi days 

Tithi, 13th, 93 if _ 

Tortoise, see Avatara, KiJrma 

Trees, Ajanavriksha, 164; Apta, 
56 ; ASoka, 104, 128 f ; Avail, 
89 ; Amala'ki, 91 ; Bel (wood- 
apple), 93, 94, 126 ; Nim, 42 ; 
Pippal, 32, 69, 70 ; garni, 56, 
126 ; Tamarind, 174 ; Tulasi, 
32, 64, 129 f ; Vat, 127 f ; 
Vatpurnima, 140, 141 

Treta yuga, see Yuga 

Trimilrti, 166 

Tripurasura, 44, 164 

TripurT piJrnima, 95, ISO, 174, 
178 

Tryambaka, 94, 163, 164, 174, 
178, 179 

TryambakeSvara, 172 

Tuesday, 24, 30, 33, 34, 36, 37, 
71, 101, 144, 145 

Tukal, 172 

Tukarama, 81, 165 

Tula, 18, 39, 41 

Tulasi, see Trees 

Tulasi marriage, 88, 129 f , 150 

Tuljapiir, 163, 175, 176 

Tulsidasa, 79 

Tutelary deities, 99 

riDAKUMBHADANA, 64 
^ Ujjain, 94 
Ujjain, King of, IS, 16 
Ulupl, 120 
Uma, 108, 109, 119 
Uma chaturthi, 108, 140 
Unclean month, see Adhika 
United Provinces, 126 
Upanga,j54 

Upangalalita, see Lalita 
Uparichara, King, 42 
Ursa Major,- see Rishi seven 
UtpattiyekadaSi, 89, 151 
Uttara AshSdha, 18, 19 
Uttara Bhadrapada, 18, 19 
Uttara Phalguni, 18, 19 
Uttara ratha yatra, 82 
Uttarayana, 30, 31 



INDEX 



193 



\/ACH, S3 
^ Vadi Narsimha, 163, 175, 

177, 179 
Vaghya, 111, 166, 167 
Vaidyanatha, 94 
Vaikhanasa, King, 89 
Vaikuntha-<;haturdagT, 97, 150, 

170, 178 
Vaigakha, 18, 22, 30, 32, 37, 40, 

64, 76, 78, 79, 85, 86, 100, 103, 

105, 118, 138, 139, 166, 167, 

168, 169, 172, 175, 176 
Vaishnava, 75, 80, 85, 171 
Vaishnavi, 110 
VaiSnadeva sacrifice, 47 
Vaisya caste, 85, 87 
Vaitarna River, 163 
Vajaki'ta, 131 
VajreSvari, 163, 175, 176 
Valabhadra, 81 
Vallabha, 81 
VaUabha sect, 83, 106 
Vamana, 38, 60, 73, 77 f 
Vamana dvada^i 88, 146 ; see 

also Avatara 
Vanabhojana, 89 
VanI, 163, 175, 176 
Varada, 109, 156 
Varaha, see Avatara 
Varaha, birthday, 146, 156 
Varahamihira, 33 
Varahi, 110 
Varshapratipada, 30 
Varuna, 48 
Varuna River, 173 
Varuni, 103, 137, 159 
Varuthinyekadagi, 85, 137 
Vasanta, 47 
VaSishtha, 72 
Vasu, king, 42 
VasiSbarasa, 118, 138, 140 
VasukI, 122, 124 
Vat, see Trees 
Vedas, 34, 120, 131, 168, see 

also Rigveda 
Vedic literature, 48, 118 
Vedic period, 29, 32, 38, 66, 71, 

100, 117, 131, 160 
Vehula, 137 
VelneSvara, 163, 175, 179 



Veni River, 102 

VenkateSa, 169 

Venus, 14, 23, 24, 25, 30, 33, 70, 
71, 144, 145 

Victory, Day of, see Vijaya 

Videha, 109 f 

Vigil, 77, 78, 80, 84, 87, 88, 93, 
94, 95, 101, 108, 109, 133 

VijayaikadaSI, 91, 157 

Vijaya daSml, 53 ff, 148 

Vikramaditya, 15, 63 

Vinayaki days, 68, 95, 136, 138, 
140, 142, 144, 146, 148, 150, 
152, 154, 156, 158 

Vipala, 25 

Vir^l63, 175, 179 
Virata, 56 
Virbiiadra, 166 _ 
Virgo, see Kanya 
ViSakha, 18, 19 

Vishnu, 28, 36, 38, 45, 54,58,59, 
84,' 85, 90, 96, 102, 108, 126, 
130, 131, 133, 168, 171, 175 
Vishnu, during rainy season, 34, 

85,87,88,121,124,129 
Vishnu incarnations, 5^^ Avatara 
Vishnu worship, 75 ff, 122 
Vishnu-Siva worship, 97 f, 164, 

171, 172 ; see Harihara 
Vishuva, 41 
ViSvadeva, 115 
ViSvakarma, 111 
ViSvakarma piaja, 147 
ViSvamitra, 71 
ViSvanatha, 74 
ViSveSvara, 97 

Vithoba, 165, 166, 168, 171, 172 
Vriddhi, 27 
Vrinda, 129 f 
Vrindavana, 129 
VrxSchika, 18 
Vrishabha, 18 
Vyatipata, 36 
Vyasa, 86, 111 
Vyasa puja, 142, ISO 

VY7APHE, 172 

** Water, consigning image 
to, 49, 81, 107 



194 



THE HINDU RELIGIOUS YEAR 



Water oflfering to pitri, 64, 65, 
114, 116 

Wealth worship, 59 

Wedding, see Marriage cere- 
mony 

Wednesday, 24, 30, 34, 37, 64. 
70, 71, 144, 145 

Western Ghats, 45 

Women, lucky and unlucky 
days, 34 

Women, festivals, 43, 50, 55, 78, 
89, 100, 103 S 

Women, deified, 99 

YAMA, 37, 60, 61, 62, 63, 70, 
* 88, 90, 96, 114, 116, 127 f, 

150 
Yamaloka, 63, 88, 116 
Yamai, 167 

Yamuna, 35, 39, 60, 63, 122, 123 
YaSoda, 81 



Year, civil, 17 ; gods', 14 ; luni- 

solar, 16 f ; religious, 17 
Yoga, 36 
Yogini, 109 f 
YoginyelcadaSi, 86, 141 
Yudhisthira, 100 
Yuga, Krita or Satya, 13, 14, 

64, 77, 83 
Yuga, Treta, 13, 14, 63, 80; 

Dvapara, 14, 63, 81 ; Kali, 13, 

14, IS, 63, 81, 83 ; of Sun and 

Moon, 29 
Yugadi, 63 f, 112 
Yugadi Krita (Satya), 138, 

150 
Yugadi Treta, 138, ISO 
Yugadi, Dvapara, 147, 157 ; 

Kali, 147, 156 

7ODIAC, Signs of, 16, 17 „ 18, 
^ 29,39 *^ 



