===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.24786.The-General-Principles-Of-Hindu-Jurisprudence_djvu.txt =====




‘gqgore jian? lectures, 1909 


The 

General Principles 

of 

Hindu Jurisprudence 





gqflotre cfftnu ^Lectures, 1909 


The 

General Principles 

of 

Hindu Jurisprudence 


By 

Priyanath Sen, M.A., D.L., 

Tagore Law Professor, Premchand Roychand Scholar, Vakil, Calcutta High Court 
and sometime Member of the Faculty of Law and Board of Studies 
in Law of the Calcutta University. 



Published by 

The University o*f Calcutta 
1918 < 



PRINTED BY -A TUI. CHANDRA B11ATTACITARYY A 


AT THE CALCUTTA UNIVERSITY PRESS. SENATE HOUSE 


CAH I'TT \ 



Dr. Priyanath Sen 


A Short Life Sketch* 

Priyanat.li Sen was the second son of Babu Dinanath 
Sea Sarkar, a member of a, Vaidya family of great respec- 
tability in Eastern Bengal. lie was born on Sunday the 
2nd February 1873, (the day of the Saras wati Fuja), in 
village Japsa in the District of Fa rid pur, in the ancestral 
family dwelling house which has now been washed away 
by the erratic Padnia. From a very early age, he showed 
signs of uncommon intelligence, and his father, who had 
been himself a teacher by profession and a Sanskrit sehoTar 
of some attainments, did all he could with his limited 
means to impart a sound education to the hoy. Priyanath 
passed the Middle English Examination from the school 
of his native village, and by his special proficiency in 
English won the prize awarded by llaja Sur;ja Kumar 
ltoy of Rajhari. He then joined the Dacca Collegiate 
School, from which institution he passed the Entrance 
Examination of the Calcutta University in .1880 and 
obtained a first grade junior scholarship. lie next, came 
to the metropolis and joined the Presidency College. At 
the F.A. Examination of 1 Si) 1 he headed the list of 
successful candidates and carried off the Duff scholarship 
for science, as also the Cwalior gold medal. lie passed 
the B.A. Examination of 1 8l»d with first class Honours 
in .Sanskrit and second class Honours in Philosophy. 
His relative' position amongst all the candidates of the 
>car was first, and he obtained the Burdwan scholarship 

’ Reprinted <l>v kind |><?rm issdou ) from llie Calcutta i/U'v jounm!. 
lO C. L. J., Vol. 37-30. 



VI 


A SHOUT UFK SKETCH 


and the Eslian scholarship, each of Rs. 50 per month, 
lie was also awarded the Radhakanta gold medal for 
proficiency in Sanskrit. At the M.A. Degree Examin-* 
ation in 1894, he was placed first in the first class in 
Philosophy and obtained the University gold medal and 
prize. Meanwhile, he had been invited by the University, 
to be a candidate for the Government .of India scholar- 
ship tenable in England, but* he declined the offer on 
account of the opposition of his mother to whom he was 
always deeply devoted. In 1S90, he passed the B.L. 
Examination iu the first division, and having served his 
articles of clerkship with Babu Baikunthanath Das, was 
enrolled as a Vakil of the High Court on the 7th Septem- 
ber 1897. About this time ltai Jotindranath Chowdhurv 
< ... * 
of Taki offered through the Bangiya Sahitya Par is had, 

a prize of Its. 500 for the best essay in Bengali on Adwai- 
tavada. Priyanat-h had studied Vedanta Philosophy criti- 
cally from the original sources, and at the request ot his 
father, competed for the prize which was eagerly sought 
after by pundits who had specially studied the Vedanta 
for years. The prize was equally divided between him 
and a well-known teacher of Vedanta Philosophy, Pundit 
Durgaeharan Vedanta Sankhal irtha. II is essay named 
Adwaitavada Viehara, which was subsequently published 
in Dacca in August 1897, shows great acuteness of argu- 
ment and clearness of presentation. . In 1899, Priyanat-h 
won the Premchand Roycliand Studentship, the Blue 
Ribbon of the University as also the Mouat Medal. In 
February 190*3 Priyanath submitted to the University 
his thesis on the Philosophy of Vedanta as required 
by the Regulations for the Studentship. It was examined 
by Mahamahopadhyay Mahesh Chandra iS T ayaratna and 
Babu Kalicharan Banurj ji who reported “ that it bore ample 
evidence of special investigation and was in particular a 



A SHOUT LIFE SKETCH V» 

thoughtful contribution to Yedantic Apologetics.” In 
•1904 Priyanath i>assed the examination for Honours in 
Law, and on the strength of a thesis on the Interpreta- 
tion of Negative Precepts of Hindu Law, he was 
admitted in 1905 to the Degree of Doctor of Law. In 
August 1908, the Senate appointed him Tagore Professor 
of Law, and the subject he chose for his lectures was 
the General Principles of Hindu Jurisprudence of which 
he had made a special study in the original Sanskrit. He 
then submitted to the University a complete manuscript 
copy of the lectures, but did not live to deliver them, as 
he died on Monday, the lStliof October, 1909. Since 1907 
he had been a member of the Faculty of Law and of the 
Board of Studies in Law of the University, and he hacl 
on several occasions acted as one of the examiners for the 
B.L. Examination. 

From the establishment of the Calcutta Law Journal 
he had been one of its editors and took great interest in the 
success of the undertaking. In the first volume (p. 9//), 
he contributed a paper on the Interpretation of Promise 
which attracted the notice of Sir Frederick Pollock and 
was commented upon in the Law Quarterly Review 
Vol. XXI, p. 219 as an indication “that the sub tel ty of 
Hindu Lawyers is amply capable of finding a new field 
in the Common Law.” To the third volume he contri- 
buted (p. l/i) a paper on Acceptance of an offer by Post. 
The fourth Volume (pp. 21//, 27//, .*15//, 63//, 75//) contains 
his thesis on the Interpretation of Negative Precepts in 
Hindu Law. These papers are all characterised by great 
learning and acuteness, and arc models of contribution 
on legal subjects. 

Dr. Priyanath Sen, at the time of his death, had been a 
member of the profession for twelve years, and had earned 
the reputation of being an able and tjpuditc lawyer. After 



A S licit T LIJ’E !SKET< H 


vm 

the usual struggle of the junior, lie had latterly been 
gaining a sure footing in the ranks of the leaders, and if 
he had been spared, a place in the very front rank of the 
profession or a seat on the J udieial Bench would have been 
only a question of time. He was scrupulously fair as an 
advocate, and was held in high regard by all members of 
the profession who had the pleasure to know him. Ilis 
early death is an irreparable loss to the country, and we 
are not likely to get for years to come another man of liis 
type — the modest and accomplished scholar of unblemished 
character. 


Nine long years have elapsed since the talented author 
of these lectures passed away. During this period there 
have been many difficulties in the way of their publication. 
Shortly after t lie manuscript of the fiist four lectures had 
been sent to the University Press, the Press together with 
the manuscript was destroyed by a fire which broke out 
in an unexplained manner. Fortunately, the first draft 
prepared by the author was in existence, and the manuscript 
was restored with considerable difficulty. Almost equal 
difficulty was felt in identifying the original texts men- 
tioned in the lectures. The entire work has been seen 
through the press by Babu Asiranjan Chatterjee, M.A., B.L., 
and Babu Sailcndranath Chatterjee, M.A., B.L., two of 
the Professors of the University Law College. They have 
also drawn up the full Index which finds a place at the end 
of the volume. 


October 0 , 191 -V 


A. M. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Lecture I. 

Introduction 

Lecture II. 

Ownership : its nature and 1 ho modes of its 
acquisition 

Lecture 111. 

Transfer of ownership 

Lecture IV. 

The Law of Prescription 

Lecture V. 

The Law of Succession 

Lecture Vf. 

The Law of Pledge 

Lecture VII. 

The Law of Bailments and other Incorporeal 
Rights 

* Lecture VIII. 

Law relating to Parental and Quasi-Pa rental 
Relationship 

Lecture IX. 

Law relating to Marital and Quasi-Marital 
Relationship 


Page. 

1-38 

39-64 

6o-l()2 

103-121- 

I 25-1 7 ~> 

1 76-206 

207-229 

230-266 

267-292 



X 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Lecture X. 

The Law of Dominical Relation and the Law 

Pagb. 

of Defective Status in general 

Lecture XI. 

293-30? 

The Law of Contractual Obligation 

Lecture XII. 

302-334 

The Law of Torts and the Law of Crimes . . , 

Lecture XIII. 

835-360 

Adjective Law 

Lecture XIV. 

361-373 

Concluding Remarks 

374-378 


w 



Appendix A. 


Some recent decisions 

on Interpretation 

379-383 


Appendix B. 


List of texts quoted 

... 

384-417 

Index ... 

• • • » * 

418-450 

Errata ... 


451 



TABLE OF CASES CITED 


Page 

Appovier v. Ram Subba Aiyar, 11 M.I.A., 89 ... 146 

Balasu G-urulingaswami v. Balusu Rama- 
lakshmamma, L. R. 26 I. A. 118 ; I. L. R. 

22 Mad. 398 j3C.W. N. 439 ... fi, 247, 250 

Bhupatinath Smritirtha v. Ramlal Maitra, 

(1909) 10 C. L. J. 355 ; 14 C.W.N. 18 ... 81 

Collector of Madura v. Mootoo Ramaliuga, 12 

M.I.A.397 ... ... ... 20, 23, 247 • 

Jagat Tarini Dasi v. Nabagopal Chaki, I.L.R. 

34 Cal. 305 ... ... ... 812 

Jogeschandra Bandyopadhyay . Jouabali 

Bepari, 7 C. W.N. 871 ... ... 247 

Kripasindhu Mookerjee >’■ Annadasundari Devi, 

I. L. R., 35 Cal. 34 ... ... 312 

Lakshman Dada Naik r. Ramchandra l)ada 
Naik, I. L. R. 5 Bom. 61 ; L. R. 7 I. A. 

181 ... ... ... 153 

Nagendra Nandini Dassi r. Benoykrislma Dev, _ 

(1902) 1. L. R. 30 Cal. 521 ... ... 81 

Parbatikumari r. Jagadischandra, I.L.R. 29 

Cal. 433 ... .. ... 23 

Promothanath Ray >’■ Nagendrabala Oliaudliu- 

rani, (1908) 12 C. W.N., 808 ... SI 

Rao Bulwant Sing /-. Ki.shori, Ij. R. 25 l.A. 

54; I.L.R. 26 All. 2(57 ... ... 6, 133 

Rojamoyee Dasee v. Trailokya Mohini Dasee, 

(1901) I. L. R. 29 Cal. 260 


81 



XII 


TABLE OK ('ABBS CITED 


Page. 


Samiadatiappa v. Shivbasawa, (1907) I.Ij.R. 

31 Bom. 354 ..." ... 

Shibachandra Ghosh r. ltussickehandra Neoghy, 
Fult. 36 

Soorendranath v. Mt. Heeramonee, 12 M.I.A. 
91 ... 

Surajbansi Koer v. Sheopersliad Sing'll, I.Li. tt. 
5 Cal. 148 

Tagore v. Tagore, 9 B. L. R. 399 ; 18 W. R. 
359 

Upendra Lial Baral v. Hem chan dra Baral, 
(1897) I. L. It. 25 Cal. 405 ... 


309 

178 


23 


153 

80 

81 



THE 


General Prineiples of Hindu Jurisprudence. 

LEeTURE I. 


INTRODUCTION. 

The province of law is the establishment of rules for 
the regulation of human conduct; amidst the diversity of 
inclinations and desires, so as to reconcile and harmonise 
the wishes of the individual with the interest of the 
community in which ultimately the interest of the indivi- 
dual is also involved; it curtails the fictitious freedom 
of unregulated desires by subordinating the particular 
nature of individual men to the discipline of the commu- 
nity acting upon universal rational principles, and thereby 
gradually tends to bring about the higher freedom which 
consists in the dependence of the indi vidual on the dictates 
of reason, which, while governing the community, is also 
his. It may be that this conception of the aim of law 
is not consciously recognised at the outset, but there 
can hardly be any doubt that the various systems of law 
exhibit, on a careful analysis, so many efforts towards 
the realisation of the end indicated above at different 
stages of development. In so far as the conditions of 
different societies and the stages through which they 
have passed are not exactly similar, these systems of law 
which they have severally evolved are more or less 
dissimilar to one another; yet the unity of human 


Province of 
law. 



2 


INTRODUCTION. 


General Juris- 
prudence and 
Particular Juria- 
jfl*u deuce. 


constitution and the universality of human reason concur 
in producing an essential similarity in all those systems 
which exhibits itself to a scientific observer amidst the 
diversity of details. It is the province of general or 
abstract jurisprudence to analyse and systematise these 
essential elements underlying the infinite variety of 
legal rules without special reference to the institutions 
of any particular country. ‘The proper subject of general 
or universal jurisprudence/ says Austin, ‘ is a description 
of such subjects and ends of laws as are common to all 
systems, and of those resemblances between different 
systems which are bottomed in the common nature of 
man/ Jurisprudence, however, becomes particular or 
concrete, when it takes its data from a particular system 
of law, and exhibits the essential ideas and principles, 
which go to constitute jurisprudence proper, — not in an 
abstract form, but coloured and shaped, as it were, by 
the concrete details of that particular system. It does 
not, it is true, enter into a discussion of all the complex 
rules which enter into the composition of the actual 
system of law on which it has its basis, but, while exhi- 
biting the essential conceptions of law, if does not altoge- 
ther isolate them from the concrete shapes which they 
have assumed in that particular system, owing to the 
particular line of evolution through which it has passed 
and the particular stage of development which it has 
attained. Identical social needs have been met by 
different communities in different ways; but, in as much 
as the needs are the same, and the forces which work for 
their removal are similar in their character, the 
differences in detail conceal within them a deeper unity. 
General Jurisprudence or Jurisprudence proper, concerns 
itself to exhibit these elements of unity irrespective of 
their historical or geographical adjuncts; concrete 



Introduction. 'I 

Jurisprudence, having reference to a particular system of 
law, exhibits what shapes those elements have assumed 
by reason of the characteristic development of that 
system under the influence of historical and other parti- 
cularising accidents. 

It is not necessary for me, in this connection, to consi- 
dor the view advocated by certain jurists, that the term 14 
‘ Particular J urisprudence ’ is a misnomer, and that the 
principles of Jurisprudence, in so far as they are scientific 
truths at all, are always general and of universal applica- 
tion ; the subject of my proposed lectures being ‘ The 
General Principles of Hindu Jurisprudence/ all that is 
at present necessary for me to enquire is what the expres- 
sion ‘Hindu Jurisprudence’ must be taken to imply as 
distinguished from general or abstract Jurisprudence 
having no special reference to any particular system of 
positive law. Now, it will follow from what I have al- 
ready stated about the scope and methods of Particular 
Jurisprudence, that the aim and object of a dissertation 
on Hindu Jurisprudence must be the examination and 
ascertainment of the Hindu conceptions about the general 
topics of Jurisprudence as unfolded in the works of 
Hindu lawgivers of recognised authority, with a view' 
to exhibit the characteristic development of the Hindu 
Law in relation to the essential conceptions and principles 
common to all systems of law. 'Hindu Jurisprudence 
may therefore, be regarded as Hindu Law viewed from 
the standpoint of Jurisprudence, or as Jurisprudence 
reflected through the medium of Hindu Law. It will 
perhaps be better to explain my meaning by an illustra- 
tion : Ownership, for instance, is one of the fundamental 
juristic conceptions common to all systems of law, 
and it is the function of Jurisprudence to explain 
its character and determine the conditions under which 



4 


INTRODUCTION. 


it may be acquired, transferred, or extinguished; abstract 
jurisprudence discharges this function without special 
reference to any particular system of law ; it analyses 
the constituent elements of ownership as a juristic concep- 
tion, and considers and systematises the conditions of its 
acquisition, transfer, and extinction. Now, Hindu Juris- 
prudence also would do the very same thing, but not 
without reference to the Hindu system of law ; it would 
take notice of the line of evolution which the Hindu Law 


Importance of 
t ho study of 
liimluilurispru' 
donee. 


has pursued and the extent of development which it has 
attained ; it would analyse and exhibit how Ownership 
has been understood by the Hindu jurists; it would 
examine and classify the conditions under which, accord- 
ing to the Hindu Law, it could be acquired, transferred, 
or extinguished ; and, if necessary, it would seek to indi- 
cate, as far as possible, what position the Hindu Law is 
entitled, in this reference, to occupy in the evolution of 
juristic conceptions. As with ownership, so with other 
fundamental juristic conceptions; and, furthermore, our 
study would not confine itself to the substantive branch 
of Hindu Law alone, but must also pass under review 
the adjective branch thereof. 

Having thus briefly indicated the character and scope 
of the subject of our discourse, it may not be out of place 
to say a word or two about the importance of the study 
which we have thus undertaken. “Hindu Law,” says Mr. 
Mayno, 1 “has the oldest pedigree of any known system of 
jurisprudence, and even now it shows no signs of decrepi- 
tude. At this day it governs races of men, extending 
from Cashmere to Cape Comorin, who agree in nothing 
else except their submission to it. No time or trouble 
can be wasted, which is spent in investigating the origin 
and development of such a system, and the causes of its 


* Preface to the first Edition of Maine’s Hindu Law. 



' iNTKODUCTlOK. 


k 

influence.” At the same time, it must bo remembered, 
that ^though so ancient, it cannot, in all its departments, 
be pronounced to be very familiar to any of us : owing 
to altered conditions of the Hindu community, a consider- 
able portion of it does not at all attract the attention of 
a practising lawyer, and, whatever its intrinsic antiquarian 
and theoretic interest may be, it will not be an exaggeration 
to say that it has practically remained a sealed book to 
most of us. “The law,” says Dr. Chose, “which moved the 
-admiration of Sir William Jones has ceased, in one sense, 
to be living law, and must be sought at the present day, 
not in our books of report, but in the texts of our sages, 
and in the writings of the successive Jurisconsults by 
whom Hindu law was gradually moulded into system;” 1 
and, as he further observes, “Legal antiquities ought to 
engage our special attention as India offers a rich and 
varied field for such enquiries. The harvest has long 
been ripening for the sickle, but as yet, to our reproach, 
the reapers are few in number, and that wealth of mate- 
rials which should be our pride is now our disgrace.”- It, 
therefore, gives me unfeigned pleasure to find that the 
Calcutta University has been pleased to prescribe ‘The 
General Principles of Hindu Jurisprudence’ as one of the 
subjects for the Tagore Law Professorship ; and who 
knows that, if properly pursued, it may not furnish at 
least some materials for the fulfilment of l)r. G hose’s pre- 
diction that “Hindu Law will, at no distant date, render the 
same service to Jurisprudence that Sanskrit has already 
done to the sister science of Philology.” 

W c cannot, at the same time, shut our eyes to the 
immense difficulties which lie in our way in pursuing 

1 Dr. Rash Bcliary 0 hose’s Law of mortgages, 4th Edn. p. 33. 

■ Do. p. 63. 


lHftu*ulti< 
the study of 
Hindu Jurispru- 
dence. 



6 


INTRODUCTION. 


(i) due to the 
peculiar charac- 
ter of the Hindu 
DharntiUHHtmS' 


this study. In the first place, the Hindu Dharma-nastras, 
which rire the principal sources of Hindu Law, dp not 
confine themselves to the enunciation of juristic rules 
for the guidance of human conduct; ceremonial rules 
moral and religious injunctions, and strict legal precepts 
are found mingled up, and no clear line of demarcation is 
uniformly maintained, so as to keep them separate, and 
prevent a confusion of ideas in minds not sufficiently 
familiar with the rules of logic and canons of construction 
by which they have to be discriminated from one another. 
This difficulty in the study of Hindu Law and the proper 
understanding thereof has been very forcibly pointed out 
by their Lordships of the Judical Committee of the Privy 
Council, in the case of Sri Balto.su Ourulinfjaswami v. Sri 
Balutm liiiiwtlaksliviumviii -,' 1 where their Lordships observe 
as follows : — “Their Lordships had occasion in a late case 
to dwell upon the mixture of morality, religion, and law in 
in the Smritis: Kao Biol want Stuff v. Ki short. They had 
to decide whether a prohibition on alienation of property 
away from a man's family, certainly based on religious 
grounds, had a purely religious or also a legal bearing. 
They then said : — ‘All these old text-books and commen- 
taries are apt to mingle religious and moral considerations, 
not being positive laws, with rules intended for positive 
laws. In the preface to his valuable work on Hindu 
Law, Sir William Macnaghten says: ‘It by no means 
follows that because an act has been prohibited it should 
therefore be considered as illegal. The distinction between 
the vinculum juris and the vinculum pudftvw is not 
always discernible.’ They now add that the further study 
of the subject necessary for the decision of these appeals 
has still more impressed them with the necessity of great 


1 I L* R. 22 Mad. 308, at p. 415. 



INTRODUCTION. 


7 


caution in interpreting texts of mixed religion, morality, 
and law, lest foreign lawyers accustomed to treat as law what 
they find in authoritative books, and to administer a fixed 
legal system, should too hastily take for strict law precepts 
which are meant to appeal to the moral sense, and should 
thus -fetter individual judgment in private affairs, should 
introduce restrictions into Hindu Society, and impart to 
it an inflexible rigidity, never contemplated by the origi- 
nal lawgivers.” It is impossible not to recognise that 
there is considerable force in the above observations, and 
that a student of Hindu Jurisprudence must critically 
examine and discriminate the precepts intended to have 
a strict legal bearing as distinguished from those having 
merely a moral or a religious application. At the same 
time, it must not be forgotten that the complete abstrac- 
tion of the legal rules from their moral and religious ad- 
juncts may sometimes be calculated to throw into the shade 
their real character, and invest them with an altogether 
foreign garb, and that this must especially be the case 
with regard to some of the most important ceremonies 
of our domestic life, such as marriage and adoption, which 
with us have both a religious and a secular aspect. On 
the whole, therefore, it seems to me that in order to be 
properly studied and understood, the legal rules must bo 
separated but not completely detached and isolated from 
their moral and religious adjuncts, especially in those oo cjuc to tiie 

cases where the ceremonies to which the legal rules relate j U JJ^ 

partake of both a religious and a secular character. In 1 ' r,l(icm ’°‘ 
the second place, besides the above difficulty arising from 
the peculiar Character of the Hindu Dharma-.sastras, there 
is another due to the peculiar character of the science of 
jurisprudence itself. Jurisprudence, as we have it, is 
pre-eminently a Western science ; it had its founda- 
tion in the Homan Law, which, for the first time among 



8 


INTRODUCTION. 


(iii) a third 
difftiMilty due 
to uiUHivtainty 
i>f chronology. 


the Western nations, reduced legal rules to order and 
coherence, and throughout its development, its divisions 
and classifications have been modelled on the divisions 
and classifications of the Roman Law. The result is that 
in the study of Jurisprudence, whatever may be the 
- sj^stcm of law which furnishes us with materials fof the 
same, we start with certain preconceived ideas about and 
a pre-arranged scheme of classification for juristic concep- 
tions borrowed from the Roman Law. This works well 
enough so long as we confine our attention to the Western 
systems of law, for they have all, more or less, been based 
upon and influenced by the Roman Law; but to approach 
the study of Hindu Law with an expectation to find the 
exact counterparts of the ideas and classifications referred 
to above, may not always prove equally convenient or 
successful. In order to be properly appreciated and 
understood, Hindu Law must, therefore, be studied from 
within, with such light as it itself affords and under such 
guidance as we may receive from a study of analytical 
and comparative Jurisprudence as regards the points on 
which we should bestow our special attention ; and when 
in this way we succeed in grasping the fundamental 
conceptions and principles contained therein, we may 
proceed to arrange and systematise them with reference 
to similar topics in other systems of law, and compare 
and note striking points of similarity or contrast when- 
ever such comparison may be instructive or interesting. 
While on this point, there is yet another difficulty which 
occurs to us; Hindu Law has had a development of its 
own, and whatever the orthodox assumption may be, it 
can scarcely be conceived that the Hindu Jurisprudence 
furnishes an exception to the general law of evolution, 
and that there the same conceptions and the same rules 
have prevailed from almost the dawn of human civilisa- 



INTRODUCTION. 9 

Lion up to relatively modern times ; the question, however, 
is, how far is it possible to trace the course of gradual 
development in Hindu juristic ideas ? Now, I have often 
thought that there is nothing so uncertain as ' Hindu 
chronology, and the researches of modern antiquarians 
in.this direction have given rise to so many hopelessly 
d i vergenb conclusi ons and haphazard generalisations, 
that one may be excused if one feels considerable hesi- 
tation in relying upon their conjectures in any case. The 
only way, therefore, out of the difficulty, is to apply, with 
adequate caution and circumspection, the critical method 
of enquiry upon the materials furnished by our lawgivers 
with a view to discover in them, as far as possible, under 
the light furnished by comparative jurisprudence, the re- 
cord of the onward march of juridical ideas along the line 
of progressive evolution ; in pursuing this enquiry we 
should avoid the error of extremes ; on the one hand, we 
should not rashly rush into conjectures which are not 
fully warranted by the evidence available to us, and, on 
the other hand, we should not allow ourselves to be 
overawed by the phantoms of superstition which may 
stand in our way, under various subtle disguises, and 
endeavour to keep us fastened to the prejudices of 
the past. 

Having observed upon the importance of the sub- 
ject, of our discourse and some of the difficulties which 
one must Encounter in its study, I think it will not be 
now out of place to enquire what are the sources of Hindu 
Law. The character of our subject requires such a pre- 
liminary enquiry, and I must pursue it although the sub- 
ject lias been so often discussed that I may not have 
much new information to impart. As it has been often 
noticed that the expression ‘sources of law’ is not al- 
together free from ambiguity, I may at once make it clear 
2 


Sources of 
Hindu Law. 



Fourfold iiuii- 
cch of 1 dharnm * 
according to the 
Hindu S^gcH. 


(i) Tlic Vedas. 


Dextrine of re* 
vclation. 


10 INTRODUCTION. 

that I take the expression ‘sources of Hindu Law* to lie- 
note what Vijnaneswara calls^TR^f %g, i.e. f the sources 
from which our knowledge of that law must be derived. 
The question, therefore, is, what are the sources to which 
we must refer in order to obtain a knowledge of 
Hindu Law ? 

Now, as we all know, there are, according to the 
Hindu sages, four indices by reference to which 1 dharina * 
or approved conduct may be ascertained. Thus Mann 
declares, — ‘The Veda, the Smriti, the usage of good men. 
and what is agreeable to one’s soul, the wise have de- 
clared these to be the fourfold indices of ‘dharina’ or 
approved conduct.’ 1 The word ‘dharnui’ used in 
this passage no doubt covers a wider field than posi- 
tive law, but the latter, according to the Hindu concep- 
tion, has no existence apart from the former, for positive 
law is but a portion of the sacred law which, by reason 
of its peculiar character arid the exigencies of the 
community, is enforced by the king. That being so, 
it is only proper that we should examine how far the four 
indices enumerated above may be regarded as the sources 
of positive law as understood and obeyed by the Hindus. 

(1) The Vedas — There can be no doubt that every 
Hindu lawyer must admit that theoretically the Vedas 
must be regarded as the primary authority on all ques- 
tions relating to the proper conduct of a man, including 
questions falling within the sphere of positive law, 
wherever any guidance may be obtained from them with 
reference to such questions. The authority of Vedic 
texts containing precepts for the regulation of human 
conduct is founded on direct revelation ; the wisdom of 

1 mw ^ i 

qenigfini ms; i *3; i ^ u 



INTRODUCTION. 11 

those precepts and their authoritative character are 
fundamental assumptions of Hindu Law which are not to 
be questioned or tested by the application of sceptical 
reasoning. I have elsewhere tried to explain the theo- 
retical basis of this view in these words: “The 
sphere of revelation has reference to two kinds of 
topics: (l ) that which is ( ftr* ) and (2) that which 
ought to be done ( ). The Vaidika Philoso- 
phers of India maintain that with regard to the latter 
topic the usual secular sources ot knowledge (Le. observa- 
tion and inference) must necessarily be imperfect, for the 
rightness or wrongness of an action is not one of its 
sensible characters that can be directly perceived ; and 
moreover, if in ascertaining the ethical character of an* 
action one has to refer to its result, even then the short- 
coming of observation and inference is apparent, for 
although they may enable a person to measure 
approximately the effect of an action so far as it exhibits 
itself during the short span of a man’s life, there remains 
an illimitable region beyond which they cannot encompass 
within their range. This shortcoming, then, has to be 
mended by reference to the Vedas which contain injunc- 
tions and prohibitions indicating what actions should be, 
performed and how they should be performed.” 1 But 
whatever the theory may be, practically we derive very 
little light from the Vedas in regard to any question of 
positive law. As Babu Golap Chandra Sarkar points out: 
“The >$Yubi contains very little of lawyers law ; they 
consist of hymns, and deal with religious rites, true 
knowledge, and liberation. There are, no doubt, a few 
passages containing an incidental allusion to a rule of 
law or giving an instance from which a rule of law may 


Practical va 
luc of the Vcdus 
on questions of 
positive law. 


4 <!. h. J. 22 it. 



12 


INTRODUCTION. 


» (ii) The Sinritis. 


be inferred.’ 11 For all practical purposes, therefore, we 
must refer to the Smritis or Dlwma-sastras for t the 
ascertainment of positive law. 

(2) The Smritis or Dharma-^lstras — Theoretically the 
authority of the Dharma-s&stras is derivative in its 
character. Not containing a direct record of the revela- 
tion, it is advanced that they embody the purport of 
Vedic texts as recollected by the sages who were their 
authors, and it is contended that even where the Vedic 
texts corresponding to the precepts contained in the 
Smritis are not expressly found, it must be inferred that 
they did exist but have now been lost owing to the 
frailty of human memory or some ot her cause of a similar 
nature. Hence Jaimini declares, ‘the Smritis having 
been compiled by sages who were also the reposi- 
tories of the revelation, there arises an inference that 
they an' founded on the Nruti or revelation, and should 
therefore be regarded as authoritative. But if there be 
conflict, the precept of the Smriti must be disregarded, 
since the inference arises only when there is no such 
conflict.- But however that may be, practically, as I 
have already pointed out, recourse can very seldom be 
had tq Vedic texts on any question of positive law, and 
the Smritis must be regarded as constituting the principal 
source of a lawyer’s law. 

There are numerous Smritis ascribed to the author- 
ship of different sages, and twenty of these have been 
enumerated in the well-known text of Yajnavalkya 
which runs as follows : — ‘Mann, Atri, Vishnu, Hslrita, 

3 Hindu Law, 3rd Edition, p. 11. 

- ^fq qr W tout i \ \ \ i 

fqftq *qu**rfh it ^ ^ ^ i 



INTRODUCTION. 


13 


YAjnavalkya, Angiras, Usanas, Yarna, Apastamba, 

Samva^tta, Kilty Ay an a, Brihaspati, ParAsara, VyAsa, 

Samkha, Likhita, Daksha, Gautama, $AtAtapa, and 
Vasishtha are the compilers of Dharma-sAstras .’ 1 But 
these are not all, for, as the Mitakshara points out, the 
enumeration is not exhaustive, so that compilations of 
Baudhayana, Narada and others are also regarded as 
authoritative Dharma-sAstras. Theoretically all these 
Pharma-sAstras are of equal authority, for all of them are 
supposed to have .been based on the pronouncements of the 
Vedas; a superior position, however, is, by universal con- 
sensus, accorded to the Institutes of Manu; so'Brihaspati 
declares, ‘The first rank (among the lawgivers) belongs to conflict am- 
Manu, as he embodied the true sense of the Yedas in his how Reconciled, 
work ; that Smriti (or text of law) which is opposed to the 
tenon r of the law of Manu is not approved’.- It may 
naturally be expected that there being so many Smritis 
their pronouncements would not always be found to agree, 
but apparent conflict would be found to exist among 
them. The possibility of such conflicts is recognised even 
by the Smritis themselves, although commentators make 
every possible effort to reconcile conflicting texts and har- 
monise them into one consistent whole, it being an 
established rule of construction that no conflict should be 
admitted to exist where it is possible to find an interpre- 
tation which would explain away the apparent conflict 

8 3*i*TM*u»i3n?T jrreT*} i 

wqfaqCtm ?n *t mro ii irofa: n 



14 


INTRODUCTION. 


Tho jiliici 
rcnsnn in 
tioinsun of 
iTCll liUV. 


and make the whole thing consistent. It is not necessary, 
in this place, to advert in any detail to the various ways 
in which commentators try to reconcile conflicting texts ; 
sometimes, out of two conflicting texts, the one which is 
more rigid is pronounced to be more commendable, and 
the laxer one is treated as meant for those who are unfit 
to abide by the strict rule ; sometimes they are reconciled 
as having different spheres of application, the texts being 
turned and twisted in interpretation with a view to enable 
them to stand together without- contradiction, and so on ; 
and we shall meet with examples of these ingenious 
devices in the subsequent parts of our discourse. The 
modern method of explaining the existence of these con- 
flicting texts by referring them to different periods in the 
evolution of legal ideas is, for obvious reasons, not gener- 
ally recognised, although instances of variation in legal 
rules with the progress of time, or rather, as the Hindu 
lawyer would prefer to put it, with the progressive de- 
generation of human capacities, are not altogether un- 
known, the most glaring assertion of such a variation 
being contained in the text of Parana nx declaring that ‘the 
Dharmax of men vary in the several Yugas in keeping 
with the character of each Yaga ’. 1 When, however, the 
conflict cannot thus bo easily explained away, it seems 
L tho that the sages contemplated that preference should be 
given to the view which is more consonant with reason ; 
so Narada says, ‘In a case of conflict between Dharma- 
sastras, that which is consonant with reason should be 
adopted as the proper course But later common- 


a ?T<?t i 

^ uuf i tout: * u: * i * i 

* 3 qftnpr ft fafa: i uht?: i * « o i 



15 


* fNTKODUCTlOX. 

# tutors explain this by saying that it is not meant by texts 
like the # above that in a case of conflict between two texts 
of Dharma-s&stras one should judge by the exercise of 
his independent reason which one should be preferred, 
but that he should exercise his reason with a view to 
reconcile the two texts by interpreting them in such a 
way that they may stand together without contradiction 
Thus Viramitrodaya, referring to the text of Yaj naval kva, 
‘In a case of conflict between Smritis, reason prevails 
according to usage’, 1 observes, k Xh° import of the above 
text is that the Smrifci which accords with reason prevails 
over another which does not accord with it, and therefore 
the one which does not accord with reason should be ex- 
plained as having a different import.’- It may be observed 
that this view of the commentators maintaining that the 
proper function of reason in the domain of sacred law is to 
explain away apparent conflicts and reconcile and harmonise 
the various texts of 1 )harma-sastras, ami not to assume a 
superior and independent position and adjudge the relative 
merits of conflicting texts, is but a logical corollary from 
the- assumption that the sages who were the lawgivers 
were infallible and they truly reproduced the purport of 
the Vcdic texts of which they were the repositories, and 
it- seems to be in keeping with the spirit of Haim’s dec- 
laration, T)y >S'ruti (revelation) is meant the Veda, by 
Smriti (tradition) the Institutes of the sacred law: 
these two must 'not be called into question in any matter, 
•since from these two the sacred law shone forth. 
Every twice-born man, who, relying on the science of 
dialectics despises these two sources is fit to be cast out 

1 i i m it n 

i j stf'i * 



16 


INTRODUCTION. 


by the virtuous as the scorner of the Veda’ 1 . The place 
of reason in the domain of sacred law is, therefore, accord- 
ing to the commentators, a circumscribed and subordinate 
one, its function being to ascertain the real meaning of 
the various pronouncements of Dharma-$astras and har- 
monise them with one another, and never to supersede 
their place, subvert their authority, or sit as an arbiter 
between them. It may not be quite safe to speculate 
upon a subject like this, but it seems to me that in this 
extreme reverence towards each and every pronouncement 
of the Dharma-s&stras and the curtailment of the scope of 
reason in relation thereto, the commentators display a 
return to the earlier rigidity and stricter orthodoxy of 
Manus time from which later lawgivers, such as Yaj naval - 
kya, Narada, and Brihaspati, wore prepared to allow a 
qualified departure. 


(Hi) establish* 
eel usRgt*. 


lfmv far un- 
til *»ri t a 1 i v e 
when in conflict 
with Sinrlti. 


(3) Sadacharas, or the. established usages of good men 
furnish a supplementary criterion for ascertaining the 
nature of approved conduct. There is, however, a dispute 
as to whether such usage can at all prevail as evidence of 
commendable conduct, when it conflicts with an express 
text of Smriti. The leading commentators seem to be of 
opinion that in a case like this the express text must, 
prevail, and the reason they assign is this : — An established 
usage not supported by any available text of Smriti still 
raises the presumption that there must have been some 
text of Smriti at the basis of the usage which has now been 
lost or forgotten ; this presumption is, however, rebutted 


ir TOff* ii 

St i 



INTRODUCTION. 


17 


when we find an express text of Smriti condemning the 
conduct. The basis of the presumed propriety being thus 
gone* it follows that the prevalent usage can no longer be 
supported as proper. In support of this proposition, I may 
refer to the discussion contained in one of the Adhikaranas 
of M&dhavsich&ryya’s Jaiminiya-nyilya-niAM-vistara, which 
runs as follows : — “In Southern India, there is a custom 
among the learned of marrying one's maternal uncle’s 
daughter. This custom being in conflict with an express text 
of Smriti prohibiting such marriage, the question arises 
whether it can be accepted as good evidence (of conduct 
approved by sacred law) or not. It may be contended that 
it is good evidence like other established usages, but that 
is not correct because it is opposed to Smriti. The weight 
attached to the usage of the learned arises from the in- 
ference that it is based on Smriti (although an express 
text may not be traceable), but when there is an express 
text opposed to the usage, the inference must give way”. 1 

It should, however, be observed that this view does not 
imply that an established usage, where it conflicts with 
an express text of Smriti, should be condemned by the 
king. The condemnation proceeds from the broader 
standpoint of Dfutrma which has a religious reference, 
but by reason of the existence of the established usage, 
conduct in consonance with it must be tolerated though 
not approved by the king. Thus Brihaspati expressly 
declares : — “Local, tribal, and family customs wherever they 
prevail from before must be respected ; otherwise, the 
subjects become agitated, popular disaffection springs up, 

1 41 ftrcrqT*; * *u *rar i 

XIJL-t %/L . *pi*I*t *t«it 3 m it IrfMta 

% % S <TT, * 1 





a 

VJ 

r_T; 

O 

UJ 

a 



3 



IKTKODUCTIOX. 

and the strength and the treasury (of the Government) 
suffer in consequence ; (then giving certain instances of 
customs condemned by the Smritis, Brihaspati proceeds 
to observe), by such a conduct those (who pursue it) do 
not render themselves liable to expiation or punishment”; 1 
and commenting upon these passages, the Viramitrodaya 
observes as follows : — “The author of Madanaratna says 
that the prescription of punishment and expiation for 
the performance of such acts in other Smritis applies to 
localities other than those specified in these texts. 
We arc, however, of opinion that the visible harm such 
as popular discontent spoken of in the text indicates 
that the king should in no way inflict any punishment in 
such a ease ; but the absence of expiation has been spoken 
of with reference to social intercourse, and not with re- 
ference to purity in the life to come, for which latter pur- 
pose expiation is of course requisite, so that there arises no 
conflict with other Smritis. When conduct opposed to 
Sruti and Sinriti extends over an entire locality, the 
sinfulness of the conduct loses its force of obstructing 
social intercourse (through excommunication), but its 
force of causing hell (/>. misery after death) remains in 
tact, because oil a consideration of the preamble, the 
purpose of the texts quoted above being fitly fulfilled on 
ascribing this much of meaning to them, it is improper 
to imagine. an absolute want of guilt; hence it has been 
said by A'pastamba : ‘Local, tribal, and family customs are 
authoritative when they are not opposed to sacred law \ 
In the text, viz. 4 those who follow customs handed down 

1 ^ sra iwfikn: » 

qisofteu: JT5TT; tootswit ii 

. # * * * 



*XTROimCTION f . 


through successive generations and acted upon , by* pre- 
decessors incur no guilt thereby ; not <so with Lothfer 
people*, the expression ‘inrir no guilt/ means ;. 4 do[ not be- 
come liable to excommunication and punishment from 
king*; otherwise, it becomes difficult to avoid ^conflict 
between these two texts.” 1 .-.U *■_, *■ 

The introduction of political considerations is A very 
noticeable feature of those texts, and the oOmmcntator 
therefore contends that although these considerations may 
be sufficient to induce the. king not to punish those who 
follow these established usages condemned by the 
Dhanna-sAstras, and although by reason of their wide 
prevalence no (piestion of social ostracism can . possibly 
arise as a punishment for infraction of ^Astric injunctions, 
yet, in so far as they are opposed to express directions of 
Dharnm-*As.ras, they can at best be tolerated but not. 
approved. The conclusion, therefore, is that such cus- 

toms or usages wherever they exist must be. tolerated and 
recognised in the administration of justice, but mnfef not 
be recognisfMi as affording any index of ‘Rharma’ or edm- 
mendable conduct and encouraged as such. Their Lord- 
ships of the Privy Council have laid down in the case of 

-* h ... _ 

fafa i cni ?iqff n qnrSr 

*r i ssq^Kqfaqfaqrmfiis- 

qr*r*qqm* *n%, i ^qswq%qft^fwq< 4 qmaq 

'RHqpftanfr i qnqqwqfflln- 

wwfafn i qr<q*mnaT: i 

?T qq sffit prfrfiT i »T q «t- 

gftsro: i qj*rer*rel^q qqqqt: qq«iTfqfta: s*rft*rr: i 

ffrfaftqq: isii; 



20 


INTRODUCTION. 


Collector of Madtrni v. Mootoo Jtamalinga* that ‘Under 
the Hindu system of law, clear proof of usage will,out- 
weigh the written text of the law.’ There can be little doubt 
that for all practical purposes this statement is correct 
enough, although it may require some qualification, as 
indicated above, from a standpoint outside the scope of 
positive law. All that their Lordships should, therefore, 
be taken to lay down is that an act or transaction in 
consonance with an established usage cannot be treated 
as illegal or void of legal effect merely because it trans- 
gresses a written text of Dharma-sdstra, and the posi- 
tion thus understood cannot possibly be doubted or 
assailed. 

It should be mentioned that besides local, tribal, and 
family customs, the existence of special customs among 
commercial classes was also recognised, and the king was 
enjoined to give due weight to them in actions involving 
their consideration. 

On the whole, therefore, it follows that besides the 
Dharma-s&stras, established usages may be regarded as 
affording a supplementary source of Hindu Law, but it 
need hardly be observed that being essentially circums- 
cribed and variable in their character, they cannot be 
of much assistance in a discussion on the general prin- 
ciples of Hindu Jurisprudence which must principally bo 
gathered from the Dharma-s&stras themselves. 

(i») seti-utio- (4) A'tma-tushri, or self-satisfaction — is also men- 
tiofied as an index of ‘Dharma’ or commendable conduct. 
It is, however, explained that this criterion should only 
be resorted to when no gnidance can be obtained from 
the Dharma-sdstras themselves, and a man has to choose 
between alternative courses of action according to his 
own lights. So a passage ascribed to Qarga declares that 

* V2 Mon. I. A. :m, al p. 436, 



INTRODUCTION. 


21 


self-satisfaction is the guiding principle among optional 
alternatives. 1 It need hardly be stated that this cri- 
terion has nothing to do with any question of positive 
law; it is not an external objective standard at all, but is 
an internal ethical standard by reference to which one 
should* settle one's line of action among several courses 
left open by the Sdstras. 

Having thus passed under review the four sources 
from which, according to Manu, the knowledge of “Dharma” 
may be obtained, we find that the Smritis and the es- 
tablished usages may, for all practical purposes, be regard- 
ed as the two principal sources of positive law. Besides 
these we should also mention the Puni?ias which are often 
cited by commentators and writers of Nibandhasas author- 
ities on questions of Hindu Law. 

(5) The Pur&uas — There are numerous works known 
as Pur&rais among which eighteen are called ‘Mah£purd?ias’ 
or principal Pura/ias. Curiously enough, all of them are 
ascribed to the authorship of VyAsa, though there can 
be no doubt that they belong to different periods and bear 
unmistakable marks of not being the works of the same 
author. They generally start with a mythical account of 
the origin of the creation, and then proceed to record the 
history of various ancient families interspersed with my- 
thological stories and sectarian disputes; jurisprudence is 
not a subject with which they are directly concerned, 
but incidentally they sometimes deal with questions of 
law, and are cited by later commentators and writers 
on Hindu Law as authorities on such questions, although 
it is recognised that they can never be allowed to override 
the Smritis but mulst yield to the superior authority of 
the latter, if any conflict be found to exist between 
them. 


the Punt- 

i»UH. 



(vi) C-omnieu* 

tarics Htid 

\n.5iu.U»as. 


The growth of 
different Scho- 
ols in Hindu 

|jRW, 


22 INTRODUCTION . 

The above review, however, is not exlmastive, for it 
only deals with what may be called the original v sources 
of Hindu Law* and it is necessary to enquire how they 
were supplemented in later times, when -people would no 
longer accord the dignity of a direct lawgiver to any of 
their contemporaries. This brings us to the commentaries 
and \\ibandhas' (compendia) written by learned writers of 
more recent times. 

(G) Commentaries and Nibandhas — As it has been 
already indicated, in the course of the development of 
Hindu Law there came a time when the producti ve period, 
if I may say so, was succeeded by a critical period. The 
criticism of commentators and Nibandhakaras, however, 
could not, for obvious reasons, be of an avowedly aggres- 
sive character ; the authority of the Dharina-s/tstras they 
did not and could not possibly disown, and their task 
consisted in interpreting them and reconciling their 
pronouncements whenever any apparent conflict* stared 
them in the face. The task was no doubt a difficult, 
one ; the original sources of the law remained constant 
of which no portion could be discarded as unaubhoritative, 
or improved upon as erroneous or defective; conflicts 
between their pronouncements had to be explained away 
and reconciled; and beyond these there , were perhaps 
the demands of a progressive time which had to be met 
not by the introduction of avowed innovations but by 
ingenious interpretation working upon old materials. It 
need hardly be said that these writers could not lay claim 
to any independent authority ; their pronouncements 
were authoritative only in so far as they were deemed to 
correctly interpret the original sources, and any body was 
free to show that they were wrong. But it so happened 
that when the views of a particular writer, who, by reason 
of his superior scholarship and sanctity of life, com main-let! 



ismoDticTios. 


m 

the reverence of the people of a particular locality, got 
*m firm hold upon those people and began to mould 
their lives and institutions, the chances of those views 
being easily shaken off diminished from day to day, and 
at last there came a time when his interpretations might 
be said # to have almost superseded the original authorities 
on which they were based, although theoretically this 
could never be and no commentator could, as of right, 
claim to have said the last word on any disputed question 
of law. It was in this way that different schools sprang 
up recognising the superior authority of different com- 
mentaries and compendia within the regions governed by 
them, and at the present moment one need not feel much 
reluctance to endorse the view of the Privy Council, as 
stated in- the case of Coll re! or of Madura v. Mootoo 
Rauvdintja Sa llmpathtf* that the duty of a Judge who 
is under the obligation to administer Hindu Law “is not 
s<> much to enquire whether a disputed doctrine is fairly 
doducible from the earliest authority, as to ascertain 
whether it has been received by the particular school 
which governs the District with which he has to 
deal,” with- this qualification, which has been laid down in 
other eases, that a family, which lias migrated from one 
Province to another, continues to be governed by the law 
as it obtains in the Province from which it has migrated 
unless and until it. either expressly or impliedly adopts 
the law of its* new domicil.” The importance of corn- 
montaries and Nibandhas of recognised authority there- ^ 1 iVi i\V{ i, a 
fore stands on a double basis ; in the first place, they 
collect and harmonise the diverse texts of Dharma-sastras 
bearing on various topics of law, and in the second place, 

1 12 Moo.i.A. 307 at p. 43t». 

<x See Suoreiulranalh r. Ml# Heeniuiuiiee 1*2 Moo, 1. A. yi ; I’urbuU 
Ku mar i >\ Jugadfa Ch under LliiR 29 CaL 433.- 



The wurcuK of 
authority of the 
Hindu Law, 


Dhanna- wliat 
it mean#, A)id 
whence it deri- 
ve* its author* 
ity. 


24 iNTROUlJCTlOK. 

the interpretations which’ they put upon them acquire a 
sort of independent authority in the particular Provinces 
specially governed by them. In the part which com- 
mentators have thus played in the development of Hindu 
Law, it is difficult to discriminate how far established 
usages have tinged the interpretations which they have 
put upon the texts of Dharma-sastras, and how far their 
interpretations themselves have moulded and modified 
those usages ; all that can be safely surmised is that there 
must have been interaction between the two, so that inter- 
pretations influenced by usages did, in their turn, 
influence the usages themselves. However that may be, 
the conclusion at which we arrive from the above discus- 
sion is that the main sources to which reference must be 
made by ‘a student of Hindu Jurisprudence are the 
Dharma-s&stras and their expositions in the recognised 
commentaries and treatises of later writers. 

Having thus discussed the question as to what are the 
sources from which we must seek to obtain materials for 
the treatment of our subject, I now proceed to trace the 
sources from which the Hindu Law derives its authority 
or imperative character. I have already indicated that 
the Hindu Law-givers included legal rules, as well as 
moral and religious precepts, within the broader con- 
ception of ‘Dharma.’ Etymologically, the word ‘Dharma’ 
signifies that which supports and sustains ; from the 
standpoint of the individual, it supports and sustains him 
through the temptations and vicissitudes of life, and from 
the standpoint of the community at large, it is the source 
of its solidarity and strength ; nay, the Taittiriya sruti 
declares, ‘it is the support of the entire world .’ 1 There 
can be no doubt that this broad conception of ‘Dharma’ 
was the result of a reflective generalisation which must 

1 vqif firm awul HfUBt l 



. t NTH OT)U OTION . Zb 

have been preceded by the enunciation and recognition of 
concrete rules of action, and in the Vedie age of Hindu 
Society these rules of action demanded obedience on the 
score that they were grounded on direct revelation. In 
this way such a connection was established between the 
i(b»a of ‘Dharma’ and revelation, that even in the age of 
the Dharma-xsistras, which succeeded the Vedie age, the 
sages, who did not claim to be the recipients of direct 
revelation justified the precepts laid down bv them on the 
ground that they also were ultimately based on or deducible 
from the precepts of the Vedas, and Jairnini, the author 
of the Mimansa aphorisms, declared that ‘revelation being 
the root: of Dliarma, whatever is not (directly or indirectly) 
J>ased on revelation need not be attended to / 1 But as V 
have indicated, implicit obedience to an external mandate, 
however hallowed it may be by the reverence due to 
revelation, cannot proceed very long without being followed 
by a rational reflection. My natural inclinations impel 
me to proceed one way; the -vastras command me to follow 
another ; why should I follow the latter course in prefer- 
ence to the former ? The question must have suggested 
itself very earlv in the evolution of Aryan thought and the 
answer was afforded by the differentiation between the 
pleasurable and the good. So, in the Ka/hopanishad we 
find, f TBe good is different, the pleasurable is different; 
they both induce a man to diverse kinds of activities ; 
among the two, he who takes up t he good attains welfare, 
but he who selects the pleasurable misses it / 2 It will thus 
appear that two different but interconnected ideas clustered 
around the term l)harma,(l) foundation on revelation, and 

- w* % w ^ ti 

^ i st WrmV ti 

4 


Coniioctiori 
botwwn IJhnr- 
him. juul ri‘ volu- 
tion. 


Tbo i<lou of Um> 
K«k*1. 



26 


lNTTtOTHTCTIOX. 


How Mhurmn’ 
contain* ily 
h unction within 
itself in the ccr- 
luintv that it-N 
obedience will 

loU l to H’rll'.in*, 


(3) conduciveness to true welfare, and both these ideas are 
conveyed in the definition of Jai mini, c Dhamia is that 
object of welfare which is indicated by an injunction.’ 1 
The final end of ‘Dharma’ indicated above is distinctly set 
forth by Yasish/ha where he says that lifter studying' the 
Vedas, enquiry should he made about ‘Dharma’ with a view 
to the ultimate attainment: of permanent welfare (salva- 
tion) ; knowing it and regulating one’s conduct accordingly, 
the virtuous becomes most commendable in this life or after 
death’ ; 2 and Ka>/ada in bis Yaueshika Aphorisms expressly 
defines ‘Dharma’ as the source from which welfare and 
eventually salvation are realised.’ :l 

The above discussion will make it; clear that according 
to the Hindu ideas ‘dharma’ or sacred law contains its 
Authority within itself; the king is not superior to it, but, 
like other human beings, is subject to it. It is authoritative 
because its observance is conducive to welfare and ultimately 
to salvation, and its violation is reprehensible because that 
is sure to load to misery. Within the sphere of sacred law, 
t he king h is his own function which is partly general and 
partly special in its character ; it is general in so far as it 
is his duty to obey the law himself like other individuals, 
and it; is special in so far as, unlike other individuals, it is 
his duty to enforce its obedience in others to a certain 
extent. The Law is supreme; the will of the king is not 
its originator, and its sanction is not derived from any 
extrinsic or accidental agency, for it contains its sanction 
within itself in the certainty that obedience to law will lead 
to welfare and its violation to misery. It may, however, 

' W. I 

m a\ « 

3 wi»: i 



I NT ItOb t X-T I O NT . 


)17 


lie asked whence does this certainly arise Is it fo 
be supjHDsed that the law represents commands issuing from 
God whose will upholds them by attaching dm? reward or 
punishment to actions in conformity with or in violation 

of those commands ? No doubt this mav scorn to be the 

* « 

most natural standpoint, but, in fact, the Mimansakas who 
may be said to have dealt with the Philosophy of the Law 
did not introduce divine intervention in order to explain 
the fruition of human actions j they maintained that every 
action had an invisible force which subsisted even after the 
cessation of the action, and brought about the due conse- 
quence either in this life, or, at any rate, in the life to 
come. This invisible force was designated bv them as 
Apurva, which is thus explained by Mr. Colebrooke than 
whom no European writer had better understood the true 
spirit of Hindu Legal Philosophy. “The subject-,” says 
Mr. Colebrookc, “which most engages attention throughout 
the MJinansa, recurring at ('very turn, is the invisible or 
spiritual operation of an act of merit. The action ceases, 
yet the consequence does not immediately arise • a rirt- 
meautime subsists unseen, but efficacious to connect the 
consequence with its past and remote cause, and to bring 
about;, at a distant period or in another world, the relative 
effect. That unseen virtue is termed JptJrr>i s being a 
relation superinduced, W heforr possessed.” , By the 
introduction of this theory of Apurva or invisible force, the 
Mimansakas sought to escape from the admission of a 
Aw iw utar/titm which they considered to be unnecessary 
or untenable. This has led some to suppose that the 
Mmiansa system of Jaimini was atheistic in its character, 
but Madhavaeharyya in his •Vamkara Yiyaya maintains 
tliat it was not JaiminPg intention to deny the existence of 
Hod, but merely to show that the nonscriptural arguments 
advanced by the Vai-veshikas t*> establish his existence 


WhiMt'.V 

Uiis certainty 

arise 


Tile theory of 


Was the • Mf- 
system 
atheistic V 



I X T HO I > l : ITlO X. 


:l S 

were in themselves insufficient and inconclusive. However 
that may be, this impersonal conception of the law bases 
its obligatory character upon the inscrutable authority 
ascribed to the *astras, as explained abovt*, and operates 
upon human will by maintaining that .vnstric injunctions 
and prohibitions show us the true way and give us the 
sure warning* that; tlie adjustment of our actions in 
accordance with them will lead to welfare and their 
violation to its reverse. 1 

Having thus traced the source of the authoritv of 
,, . . Hindu law in the sanction which it carries ahum- with it. 

How . positive 

n!os (IshV’iI’u,;,' let us now consider how that portion of it which may be 
niu-saniiHiopjii characterised as jK»sit i ve. law, and with which we arc more 
?m j u m* /i' *i 1 s ' ' * M directly concerned in the treatment of our subject, differen- 

tial rs itself from tin* other portions which deal with 
ceremonial rules and moral ami religions in junctions. The 
true explanation of this is to he found in the special 
function of the King in the Hindu polity. While the law 
directs an individual to do certain things and a void certain 
others, it directs the King in addition to his other duties 
to take steps that the law may be respected and obeyed, 
and to mete out punishment to those who in violation of 
the law iullict injury upon others ; the positive law may 
be said to comprise that portion of the law the violation 
of which calls for the interposition of the King- in order to 
provide an adequate remedy to the injured party, or 

1 li may he mhleil in i.liis eonneri inn linil- the Ssimkhyu mjsUoii 
mrreocl with. bill tli*.' Vmhiuut iliJTrre<l From flu* Mmmosa theory 
ivaroVilmg l f |< • ailmiasihilily of deju-sehMire on «li\im». eaiisafiou in 
tin* fruition of human iirtions. M;i«lini.viii.*li;ir\ > a in his 
oominentaries on the l\*i r.-isi ra .Stnrif i fries to ivurmicilr the Veihmtie 
ami tin* Munansakn doctrines In m;i -i ijl(.:j iuintr that the ;i ppu rent, conflict 
hot ween them, on this question should he uiw.lersl.ooil us due to i lie 
tli ITi* rent aims ami snipes of those- t wo systems. 

. \ fa*tnfasi«tni tirrawrawfi ) 



iNTKODl CTIOK. 29 

chastise the delinquent for his transgression, or, in other 
words, it is that portion of the law which is enforced by 
the King-. So Yajiiavalkya declares, — “if a person, 
molested by others in a way which contravenes the Smriti 
or established usage, complains to the King, that gives 
rise *lo a topic for a judicial proceeding,” 1 and this 
implies three eharaederistic elements, ri:., (1) transgression 
of law as laid down in the Smriti or established by usage, 
(2) injury to some one other than the transgressor, and 
(:>) intervention of the King in his judicial capacity. If 
these elements are duly considered, I hope it will he found 
that the .Hindu conception of positive law was not very 
different- from the modern or Austinian conception thereof, 
in the first place it emphasises that Maw was added 
because of transgressions' ; in the second place it shows 
that intervention of the King is called for because and in 
so far as these transgressions cause injury to people other 
than the transgressors ; and in the third place it indicates 
t hat whether the I ransgression he of some rule of action 
laid down in the Sniritis or of some established usage, 
in either case it is the intervention of the King, who 
is the protector of the people and dispenser of justice, 
that converts religious or customary law into positive 
law. The only points of difference between the Hindu 
view and modern or Austinian view are, that while 
according to the latter view, law, in its normal form, 
consists of * commands issuing from the King, and t he 
duly of enforcing the same is a self-imposed duty, accord- 
ing to the former view, the law issues from a source superior 
to the King, and the duty of enforcing the same is Cast 
upon him from above, so that the infliction of punishment 

wrwwfSR WMmfGirr. q*; i 

I! 

$ 


Tlim* i'liHnwtc 1 - 
risfic rlomentN 
involve*! in thr 
ooiwopt ion of 
positive law. 


The Hindu eon- 
crplioii comp- 
ared w-ith the 
Aust iitian. 



ivritoiii -mo\. 


T*h»* placr of 
iidimnist.mt ion 
of justice in Mu* 
functions of u 
1! inriti Kiiiff. 


30 

is iliSt.fl I regarded as a Dhanna. as indicated in (lie 
well-known text of Mann, “penalty keeps the people Antler 
control, penalty protects them, penalty remains awake 
when people are asleep, so the wise have recognised punish- 
ment itself as a form of Dhanna-.” 1 

It may be noticed that there is a wide-spread idea, from 
which even well-known writers and reputed scholars are not 
entirely free, that the main function of Oriental limpires 
was the gathering of taxes and the levying of armies, and 
that they seldom concerned themselves with the enforcing 
of legal rules; but so far as India was roneorned, a study 
of its ancient institutions, as disclosed in the works of the 
sages, at once demonstrates that nothing could be farther 
from the truth, for such a view really reverses the true 
order of things. According to the Hindu conception, it 
was the protection of the people, and not 1 lie collection of 
taxes, that was regarded as the principal duty of the King, 
and the administration of justice was one of the principal 
means to keep the people in order and to protect them in 
the proper enjoyment of their rights ; of course the King 
had a right to collect taxes, but the right involved a corres- 
ponding* obligation to afford protection to those who paid 
them, and whoever failed to discharge the obligation while 
enjoying the advantages of the right was condemned in no 
doubtful terms, 'finis Alanu declares: “a King who with- 
out protecting his subjects collects revenue from them may 
be said to be the collector of all the impurities to which 
they are subject ; M - to the same effect is the; following text 
of Yiijnavalkya, which lays down that 'whatever sin the 


1 w: snfa v*\r. toi: i 

aimfir *r*sr‘ ii 

*«wtarwr wwwm ii 



introduction; 


31 


people coimnit being unprotected by the King, half of that 
goes to the Kino* since lie takes revenue from them.” 1 It 
was, Muis, one of the principal duties of the King to ad- 
minister justice among his people, for administration of 
justice and maintenance of order go hand in hand, and one 
cannot conceive the one without the other. It was not, 
however, his function to legislate except in minor matters 
of local or temporary importance ; the general body of the 
law was contained in the sastras, and their exposition was 
in the hands of learned Bralmmans who, by reason of 
their piety and intellectual eminence, were specially lilted 
for the task. This is not the place to pause and eonsider 
how far this bifurcation of functions wa§ conducive to the 
welfare of the community, but it certainly kept up the idea 
of sacredness which the Hindus attached to their law as 
emanating from a higher wisdom and not originating from 
the* lial of the royal will, although enforced by the tempo- 
ral power which was vested in the King. 

Having thus considered the source from which the .,,^7^ 
Hindu Law derives its authority, 1 will next endeavour to !,l< ‘ 
fix the limits of my subject by laying down an orderly 
scheme of discussion. The subject is a vast one, and it is 
apparent- that, it cannot be conveniently treated without 
appropriate arrangement and division. Let. us, therefore, 
consider how best we can arrange and divide the subject of 
our discourse. I have already stated that the sphere of 
^ l>ha^na , , as, dealt with in the Dharma-sastras, includes a 
good deal more than positive law which furnishes the sub- 
ject-matter of jurisprudence; it may, therefore, be reason- 
ably inferred that t he c lassification of ‘Dliarrna’, taken in 
its broadest sense, as given bv the commentators is not 

trsn: i 

twrawtrs' smnn ii 



32 


INTUOIM'CTION. 


likely to serve the purpose of an adequate olassi I i cation for 
positive law. Take, for instance, the sixfold division of 
Dharma as stated by Medhatithi in his commentaries on 
the Institutes of Mann and by Vi jfiiineswara in his commen- 
taries on the Institutes of Yajnavalkya: The six divisions 
of ‘Dbai-ma’ are: — (1) or duties peculiar .to tin? 

several castes, (2) or duties relating to the 

several stages of life, (3) or duties appropriate 

to the several castes in relation to the several stages of life, 
(I) or duties of special quality arising from special 

position, (f>) or secondary duties arising, for 

instance, from t lu* nonpei formaline of primary duties, and 
(0) or duties of general obligation, and it is 

apparent that this classification is not at all appropriate to 
ntii 1 purpose, being based upon a principle of division which 
cannot; be adapted to jurisprudence. In the Institutes: of 
Yajnavalkya we find ssprercuang or chapter on positive 
law separated from or chapter on rituals and 

JTI'TWTTWHISI or chapter on expiation ; this division has the 
merit of discriminating positive law which has to 
be administered or enforced by the King in his 
judicial capacity from other topics discussed in the Dharma- 
sastras, and is calculated to save a. student of 
Hindu jurisprudence from a good deal of confusion ; it 
must, however, be remembered that the chapter on rituals 
is not completely foreign to jurisprudence as there are 
certain rituals, such as marriage and adoption, which 
create juristic relations and thereby produce, in an indirect 
way, certain juristic results. The main question, however, 
is how to divide the subject-matter of positive law so as 
to base thereon an orderly treatment of the general 
principles of Hindu jurisprudence. I 11 considering this 
question, one primary distinction at once suggests itself 
to us, viz., the distinction between substantive law and 
adjective law, awl it is a distinction which was recognised 



INTKODICTION. 


38 


by our jurists, who dealt with adjective law under the 
head as distinguished from the 

different topics of substantive law which were treated after 
it. in the order of discussion. For mir purposes, however, 
1 propose to deal with substantive law before 1 take up tho 
discussion of adjective law, for some knowledge of the 
former division seems to be a necessary preliminary to 1 lie 
proper understanding of the latter. The next question is, 
how to divide the sphere of substantive Law itself ; it 
appears that the principal commentators and writers on 
Hindu law, who have dealt with positive law as a separate 
and relatively independent branch of study, have generally 
followed the division of Ionic# of litigation ns given by 
Maun in the following passage : - “ Of these forms of 
action, the first is the recovery of debts ; the others are, 
(2) deposit, (8) sale bv one who is not. the owner, 
(4) partnership, (o) resumption of gift, (G) nonpayment, of 
wages, (7) transgression of compact, (S) rescission of 
purchase and sale, (V>) dispute between the master and 
the herdsman, (JO) boundary -dispute, (II) personal 
violence, (12) verbal abu.^e (including defamation), 
(18) theft (iueliuling other cog-note eases involving deceit), 
(14) violent crimes involving the use of force (such as 
robbery), ( 15) seduction of women (including adultery), 
( I G) mutual duties of husband and wife, (17) partition of 
heritage, and (lb) gambling and betting, — these are the 
eighteen topics on which litigation rests ; ,,J and Hrihaspati 

1 frawu d i 

^RT*f <sifeTsJR; i 

fqqre: ^TTOT^it: it 

ftirara i 



INTKnUIJOTTOX. 


U 

said that “ those wlio wen? true examiners would find 
those eighteen topics enumerated in the Dharma-siistras. at 
the rout of every possible litigious dispute, thereby 
implying that on careful analysis all seemingly different 
causes of action might be resolved into these. No doubt 
it. was early recognized that in the diversity of human 
transactions the eighteen topics mentioned above were 
capable of being subdivided into numerous branches as 
Narad a and Katyayna expressly declared, but the eigb teen- 
fold division was in the main retained with very little 
modification, perhaps the only modification which is worth 
mentioning being the introduction of a chapter dealing 
with nonservice bv one who has accepted service, and of 
another dealing with miscellaneous obligations towards the 
king which did not readily come under any of the topics 
enumerated above, and for the violation of which the king, 
of bis own motion, might call the transgressor to account:. 
On the whole, therefore, it must be. admitted that the 
division of the subject-matter of substantive law into 
eighteen topics, as indicated above, has the sanction of 
antiquity and general recognition, but one cannot fail to 
observe licit it does not bear the impress of any scientific 
principle of classification, but represents an enumeration 
of certain causes of action apparently taken at random, 
but, in all probability, chosen and grouped together because 
they frequently arose at that period of social evolution in 
which it was first introduced ; when, however, it was 
adopted by Nlaim and sanctioned by his great authority, it: 
tended to become stereotyped and was accepted by 
subsequent law-givers without much modification. It, 
therefore, follows that a logical and systematic discussion 


1 enfa i 

Sr ft?* «nfNqn: ii 



I M’TtuiU f Tlu\. 


35 


*>f juristic* principle's ran not. conveniently follow the division 
a.nfl arrangement of topics indicated above, although the 
enumeration of causes of action contained therein may 
serve' lilt; purpose of a useful historical landmark showing 
the nature- of tin* dispute's that used to come up before a 
Court of Justice' in those remote days, and may even be so 
explained as to include w ithin its scope all possible legal 
disputes that may arise at any time*. I am thus called 
upon to outline for myself a convenient method 

of arranging 1 he topics of law treated by the lawgivers 
in order that I may adopt it f«»r the purpose of an 
orderly discussion of ihe principles of Hindu 
jurisprudence, and this I will now proceed to 

do. 1 have already noticed the striking distinction 
between the substantive law and the adjective law, and 
stated that in the* order of treatment t lie former branch 
should find a place be fort' the latter. ! haline next with 
the substantive law, one is at once reminded of ilu* distinc- 
tion drawn b\ the Roman jurist- between the law of 
things (jus quod ad res perl im*t ) and the lavs' of persons 
(jus quod ad personas pert i net) including* within the latter 
branch what the German • writers call 4 Familien-recht ’ or 
the law of the family moaning thereby that portion of the 
substantive law which deals with the special rights and 
obligations arising* from special conditions of family 
relationships, and I propose to adopt il as a, very eon venient , 
thong'll not a so.ient ifically accurate, principle of elassilica- 
tion. It should, however, he noted that then* lias existed 
some doubt as regards the positions of (lie law* of succession 
and of the law of obligation* within this scheme ; as 
# regards the law of succession, inasmuch as succession is 
one of the. modes of acquisition of ownership, I consider it. 
proper to include it. within the pari dealing with the law 
of things, although being founded on personal relationship # 



86 


INTRODUCTION. 


it may have some affinity to the law of persons, and 
as regards the law of obligations I prefer to class it apart. 
To these must be added the law of crimes, which, being 
regarded as a part of the public law', is generally considered 
to be outside the abovementioned divisions ; I am, however, 
disposed to think that as the law of crimes bears a strong 
affinity to the law of torts which, although generally 
regarded as a part of the law of obligations, was not, 
under the Hindu law, sharply discriminated from the same, 
it may not be inconvenient to- separate the law of torts 
from the law of obligations and discuss it along with the 
law of crimes, thereby confining the law of obligations to 
rights and duties arising from contracts as distinguished 
from delicts or wrongs. In the result, the divisions thus 
obtained may be arranged as follows : — 

A. Substantive law: — (l) The Law of things dealing 

with (a) ownership, (A) pledge, (e) various 
kinds of bailment, and (d) such other rights 
over things as are not included in the above. 

(2) . The law of persons dealing with (/) the law of 

special status or conditions which may be 
distinguished as (a) parental and quasi - 
parental, (b) marital and quasi-marital, and 
{c) dominical, arid ( ii) the law of defective 
status of condition arising out of infancy, 
insanity, etc. 

(3) The law of contractual obligations dealing, for 
instance, with recovery of debts, recovery of 
wages, partnership, suretyship, and transgres- 
sion of compact. 

(4) . The law of torts and the law of crimes. 

B. Adjective Law : — Including the law of procedure, 

the law r of evidence, and the law of sanctions 
and remedies. 



IXTIfOLMT(.TION\ 


37 


Acting upon this arrangement of topics, 1 may divide 
and distribute the proposed course of lectures in the 
following way:— 

Lecture II. — Ownership: its nature and the modes 
of its acquisition. 

Lecture III. — Transfer of ownership (including the 
law of gift and the law of sale). 
-The law of prescription. 

-The law of succession. 

-The law of pledge. 

-The law of bailments and other incor- 
poreal rights. 

Lecture VI 1 1 — The law relatiug to parental and 
quasi -paren t a 1 re 1 alio 1 1 s h i p . 

Lecture IX. — The law relating to marital and quasi- 
m a r i ta 1 re 1 at i ons h i p . 

Lecture X. — The law of dominical relation, and the 
law of defective status in general. 
Lecture XL — The law of contractual obligations. 
Lecture XI L. — The law of torts and the law of crimes. 
Lecti: i; e XII L — Adjective law. 


Lecture IV.- 
Lecture V.- 
Lecture VI.- 
Lecture VII- 


Lectcrk XIV.- 


-Conc 1 ud i ng remarks. 


Having thus outlined the scheme of my future lectures, 
I propose to conclude my introductory observations. 1 have 
not attempted in this lecture to anticipate any of the 
discussions which will be elaborated in their proper places 
in the following lectures, for, the introduction of inadequate 
accounts of subjects which will be fully treated afterwards 
is not only superfluous, but may also be productive of 
wrong impressions. All that I can at present do is to 
express a confidence that whoever will patiently follow the 
account of Hindu Jurisprudence, as contained in the 
following* pages, will be convinced that much of the hostile 
aspersion that lias been cast against Hindu Law by 


Concluding 

remarks. 



38 


INTRODUCTION* 


some able but ill-informed critics is the result of ignorance 
and prejudice acting and reacting upon each other. I do 

f j» 

not, of course, mean to assert that Hindu Jurisprudence 
was in all respects as perfect as one could desire, but 1 
hope to be able to show that, in the main, it will not com- 
pare unfavourably with even the most developed system 
of ancient Jurisprudence, the Roman. The assertion may 
seem to be somewhat too bold, but I do not see any 
intrinsic improbability about it and I hope that those, who 
know anything about the contributions of the Hindu 
mind in other dspartments of knowledge, will not meet 
it with irrational scepticism. As regards those who go 
into raptures at the bare mention of the Twelve Tables, 
but shake their heads at the mention of the name of Manu, 
and talk about ‘feeble civilization’ and ‘cruel absurdities’ 
without feeling the absurdity of criticising upon a subject 
which they had no opportunity to study, 1 am content to 
leave them to their convictions, and to the satisfaction 
which they derive from the same. 



LECTURE II 


Ownership : its nature and the modes of its 

ACQUISITION. 

Iii the previous lecture I have explained the scope of 
Hindu Jurisprudence, and set forth a scheme for the 
discussion of the various topics which require consideration. 
The first of these topics is ownership, which is acknow- 
ledged on. all hands to bo one of the fundamental juristic 
conceptions common to all systems of law. I will, there- 
fore, endeavour to place before you in this lecture an ex- 
position of the conception of ownership as understood by 
the Hindu Jurists, and also explain some of the modes 
in which it could be acquired according to the Hindu 
Law-givers. 

In analysing the conception of ownership, we at once 
see that it is based upon the distinction between persons 
and things, and implies a certain peculiar kind of relation 
between them ; this relation, whatever its exact character 
may be, is capable of being viewed from two different 
stand-points ; on the one hand, we may start with the 
‘persons’ in whom a bundle of rights constituting 
ownership inheres in relation to particular things ; on 
the other hand, we may take up the 'things 9 as they are, 
and view them as subject to a special kind of control from 
particular individuals, which makes us regard those 'things 9 
as the property of those individuals. The idea which 
underlies the conception of ownership (^Tfira) on the 
one hand and the conception of property (^Sf) on the other. 


Ownership 
what it 
means. 


Difference 
between 
ownership 
and property. 



40 


OWNBESHIV. 


Siromani’fi 

'VIAW 


is fundamentally the same, so that they may be regarded 
as mutually inter-dependent correlatives connoting two 
different aspects of the same identical relation ; owner- 
ship, therefore, may be said to inhere in persons in 
relation to things in so far as they are objects of owner- 
ship, and property may be said to characterise thirfgs in 
so far as they stand related to persons who are their 
owners. 

^ The distinction and inter-connection pointed out above 
between the conceptions of ownership and 

property (^) is, I need hardly say, fully recognised and 
explained by Hindu Jurists with their usual analytical 
' subtlety, and they point out that the correct logical 
: $/ff- of comprehending them both is to regard thp one as 
the determinant of the other, so that if you start with 
ownership as a peculiar condition of the person in whom 
it inheres, it should certainly be regarded as having a 
determinate character in so far as it is related to the 
thing which thereby becomes the property of that person ; 
* for ownership in the abstract has no meaning apart from 
its object. This inter-relation between the conceptions 
of ownership and property is characterised by Hindu 
Jurists as mutual determination. (fHw fwrar *rra), 

I have introduced this discussion at the outset in 
order to make it clear that an exposition of one of these 
two conceptions necessarily explains the other, in as much 
as they are but two aspects of the same idea, just as 
fatherhood and sonship which designate the same relation- 
ship viewed from opposite sides. 

Having thus explained the inter-relation between 
the conceptions of ownership and property, I will next 
proceed to explain what is meant by them. But before 
I do so, it may not be out of place to observe that although 
ownership inheres in the person, and property in the thing 



OWNERSHIP. 


41 


in relation to the owner, neither of them can, in the 
opinion of Sirornani, he regarded as falling within the 
classification of categories* ( q^TO ) recognised by the 
Vaiseshikas ; an exhaustive enumeration and exposition 
of these categories is beyond the scope of these lectures 
and Ido not propose to undertake this task; it will be 
sufficient to point out that what is chiefly meant hy this 
remark is that ‘ownership* <»n the one hand, and ‘property* 
on the other, represent a superinduced relation between 
the person who owns and the thing that is owned not 
included within the essential attributes, which characterise 
the person and the thing respectively ; so that they cannot 
be regarded as attributes (t/mtax) of either the person or 
the thing, lienee arises the necessity of admitting an 
additional category ( q^: ) supplementing 
the sevenfold division of the Vaiseshikas, to indicate 
that the conception of ownership or property is an out- 
come of social evolution which clothes the persons with a 
bundle of rights in relation to things which are objects of 
ownership. It is, however, unnecessary to enter into the 
intricacies of these discussions which can be properly 
understood only by those who are sufficiently acquainted 
with the Hindu Philosophical systems, and I merely 
indicate them as testifying to the deep logical insight 
with which the Hindu Jurists pursued these discussions ; 
it may be easy to scoff at these niceties, but it is not quite 
so easy to 'understand them or to help admiring the 
subtlety of logical acumen displayed by those who 
introduced them. 

Leaving behind these logical niceties, I will now r 
proceed to explain what the term property ( ) signifies, 

* sssfann ww \ 


Recognised 
definition of 
property. 



AccoL-Aiii^ - to 
{Snkrisliua 
Tarkalunk ur. 


Controversy 
about the 
view that 
property is 
exclnsi voly 
indicated by 
Sastras- 
Jimuta- 
vaharia and 
Vijnanes- 
wura. 


OWNERS H \ P. 

or in oilier words, what is mount when it is said that a 
particular tiling is the* property of a particular person. 
Srikrishna Tarkalankaia in his commentary on Dayabhaga 
says that according to tho old established explanation it 
signifies (itn>s for free disposal as indicated by the 
Sast-ra.* If you analyse this definition, you will at *. once 
find that it consists of two distinct elements which may 
be treated separately, viz. (1) that the idea of property 
is exclusively indicated by the Sastra ( ), 

and (2) that it. signifies fitness for fret; disposal by fhe 
person who owns it I will now proceed 

to deal with these* two elements separately. 

(1) According to some Hindu Jurists the idea of 
property is exclusively indicated bv Sastras and ownership 
can only be acquired in the modes recognised 
by them. This view is advocated by Dharcswara, 
Jimutavahana and their followers. On tin* other hand 
Yijnaneswara and his followers maintain that the idea of 
property lias its basis on popular recognition without any 
dependence on Sastras, the object of the rules laid down 
in the Sastras about the modes of acquisition of ownership 
being to collect and prescribe those means of acquisition 
recognised by popular usage that are regarded as commend- 
able and as such worthy of being pursued. This latter 
view is denominated as *>., the doctrine that 

property lias its basis on popular recognition. It is not: 
possible within the? short scope of this lecture to enter 
into a detailed examination of this remarkable controversy, 
and all that I can attempt to do is to present, before you 
an idea of the controversy with some of the arguments 
advanced by the disputants in support of their respective 
opinions. The real point in the controversy resolves itself 

* TO; l 



OWNERSHIP. 


43 


into Mi is : 'there are certain modes of acquiring ownership 
recognised hv the people on all hands ; they are also the 
modes laid down in the Sastras as leading to ac(piisitioii 
of ownership; now, the question is which is prior? 
l)o the Sastras merely summarise the modes of acquisition 
of ownership which they find already recognised in popular 
usage, or does the popular usage merely follow and give 
effect to the Sastric rules laying down the conditions for 
the acquisition of ownership? Dhareswara and Jiniuta- 
vahana advocate the latter view, while Vijnaneswara and 
Mitra Misra maintain the former. 1 need hardly say that 
1 feel inclined to give preference to the former view as 
more consonant wit h reason and common sense ; let us, 
however, examine some of the objections advanced in 
opposition to this view. 

(ft) It has been objected that if ‘tit ness for free disposal’ 
is what, according (o you, characterises the conception 
of property without any reference to the Sastric rules 
regulating the acquisition of ownership, then, how is it 
that you do not ascribe ownership to the thief over the 
stolen articles which are as much within his control as any 
other thing acquired by honest means? It will not do to 
say that the thief cannot freely dispose of the stolen 
articles for fear of detection and consequent punishment, 
for even an honest owner cannot dispose of his property in 
any way he likes, in as much as his power of free disposal 
is to some extent limited by Sastric injunction, as for 
instance, he cannot set fire to his own house so as to burn 
the houses of his neighbours; in either ease the exercise 
of the power of free disposal is in practice limited to some 
extent, but the power is there, and no one can stop its 
exercise provided the person is prepared to pay the penalty 
for the same. The shortest answer, however, to this 
objection seems to be that it is altogether erroneous io 


Objection io 
Vijimnosw- 
uni's view. 

(//) “Fitness 
for Free dis- 
posal” is not 
a sound test. 



OWNERSHIP. 


(/>) Sastriu 
rnlng buuumc 
u nnoucssai'v. 


* 1*4 


assume that popular usage recognises the thief as the 
owner of the stolen articles, so that it is unnecessary to 
seek the assistance of Sastric injunctions to establish that 
theft causes no transfer of property, although the real 
owner, so long as he is unable to trace the articles, loses 
his control, over them ; if this loss of control argued* loss 
of ownership, you might as well maintain that a person 
who left his home and went to a distant land, thereby 
lost his ownership over everything which he left behind 
him. 

(/>) It may, however, be asked that if the different 
modes of acquisition of ownership are recognised in 
popular usage without any reference to Sastric rules, then 
why is it that the Sastras quite unnecessarily lay down 
those rules prescribing various modes in which ownership 
can be acquired ? Surely, it is not reasonable to suppose 
that the Sastras would undertake the quite unprofitable 
task of repeating without any purpose what is otherwise 
well-known to the people, so that those who assert that the 
various modes of acquisition of ownership are developed 
out of popular usage and recognised by the people without 
any reference to the Sastras must explain the object 
which those rules are calculated to serve, and thereby 
justify their insertion into the Sastras. To this it may he 
replied that it cannot be said that even a. hare collection 
of rules which we find recognised by popular usage is 
altogether unprofitable, for a scientific presentation 
of such rules is not without its value, aud it is widely 
recognised that a good portion of what is called positive 
law consists of rules collected from popular usage set forth 
in well-defined and systematic forms. Moreover, it may 
be pointed out that a specification in the Sastras of some 
of the rceogniswl modes of acquisition of ownership does 
not amount to a mere useless repetition of what is already 



OW.VElvSHir. 


4b 


recognised by popular usage, for if serves the useful 
purpose of enunciating the approved methods of acquisition 
of ownership, and thereby indirectly reprobates those other 
methods of acquiring property which are opposed to 
directions contained in the texts of the Sastras, — in other 
words, although these texts may not exhaustively 
enumerate the methods ot acquiring property which are 
to be gathered from popular usage, yet they may have as 
their object the useful end of regulating human conduct 
by indicating what courses may be pursued, and thereby 
indirectly suggesting what courses should not be pursued 
by people belonging to the several castes in their endeavour 
to acquire property. 

To illustrate this view, Vi ram it rod ay a refers to the rule 
laid down in the Sastras that a man should take his food 
with his face turned towards a particular direction ; this 
does not signify that whoever violates this rule does not, 
enjoy his meal or satisfy his hunger, but it merely indicates 
that an infringement of the rule is not conducive to 
welfare; similarly, when the Sastras point out certain 
modes of acquiring property and give specific directions 
about them, it docs not follow that ownership will not arise 
unless those directions are strictly complied with, but all 
that may be inferred is that a violation of those directions 
is not proper, and should be avoided as far as possible. In 
other words, acquisition of ownership is not- an outcome of 
Sastrie injunctions ; they are not creative, if I may use the 
expression, but are partly illustrative and partly regulative 
in their character. 

Having thus answered the objections of the other side, 
the supporters of the doctrine that the growth of owner- 
ship is an outcome of social evolution and not a deduction 
from Sastrie injunctions urge* that the very fact that the 
conception of ownership is not confined to the people who 



OWNERSHIP- 


i% Fitness for 
free disposal” 
special Mi^ui* 
ficancc of the 
word “ fit- 
ness.” 


46 

wco^i i isc the authoritative dm rue tel ol the t^R,sti%s 
furnishes a strong* argument in support of their Jtotfitioii • 
this argument seems, at the first sight to be almost 
unanswerable, but it may perhaps be replied that although 
there are people who do not revere the Sastras prevalent 
among us, yet they have got some authoritative Works 
among them which supply them with their law, so that 
the controversy discussed above does not become impossible 
even with them. Understood in this wider sense, the 
controversy appears to resolve itself into a question 
regarding the relative priority between the unwritten rules 
about the acquisition of property evolved by the popular 
mind and observed in popular usage, and the written rules 
inculcated and systematised in authoritative works on 
positive law. AY hen we come to consider the question 
carefully from this stand-point, it seems difficult to deny 
that in the order of evolution the unwritten ruies evolved 
by the popular mind occupy a prior position, al. hough 
they may be subsequently moulded and modified by written 
works of acknowledged authority, and this seems to bo 
the opinion more widely recognised among the Hindu 
Jurists. I have already mentioned that Vijnaneswara and 
bis followers, such as Mitra Misra, advocate this view; I 
may also add that renowned Mimansakas, such as Guru, 
Kumariia Swami and Partlnisarathi Misra are also of the 
same opinion. 

(&) Having discussed the first of the alleged charac- 
teristic elements in the definition of property mentioned 
above, 1 now pass on to consider the second element, ri,:. 

‘ fitness for free disposal. ’ It is important to notice in 
this connection tin* special significance of the word ‘ fitness’ 
used as a part of the above definition ; it is not denied 
that in actual practice it is found that the disposition of 
property by the owner is not absolutely capricious, but is 



OWXEKSIHP. 


47 


regulated to some extent by the motives furnished hy the 
eontl&l exercised by the King utnl by the Sustrie 
itrj unctions ; still tin's admission does not militate against 
the view that. the term 4 property* connotes fitness for free 
disposal ; for although my dealing with my property may 
not he absolutely unfettered by the considerations indicated 
above, yet that does not imply that 1 have not got the 
power to deal with my property in any way 1. like, or, to 
put it in another way, that, my ‘ property’ is not, by its 
very nature, liable to be disposed of* by me according to 
my will. Hence the \ iramitrodaya observes that if an 
unrighteous man disposes of his property in a way 
prohibited by the Sastras, he may he committing a sin by 
reason of his violation of the prohibition, but it cannot be 
said that his action is not an exercise of his proprietary 
right ; or, to look at- the matter from another stand-point, 
although a man may, and usually does, refrain from 
dealing with his property in a way prohibited by the 
Sastras, it cannot, be said that, his proprietary right did not 
extend to invest him with the power of acting according 
to his pleasure in relation to his property, provided he was 
prepared to undergo ihe penalty consequent upon the 
infraction of the Sastric prohibition. Hence it follows 
that although in practice one’s dealings with one’s property 
are regulated hy various considerations, yet the wonl 
‘ property' in its fullest sense connotes fitness for free 
disposal bjr the owner, and ownership implies, to borrow 
an expression of Dr. Holland, a plenary control over its 
object. To illustrate this view the V iramitrodaya 
mentions the simile of a seed which contains within it the 
capacity to germinate and be converted into a sprout; this 
capacity may, in individual cases, be impeded by 

extraneous causes, but still it cannot be said that the 
capacity was not there and the seed was not, by its very 



4R 


OWNBltATUP. 


nature, fit for developing into the shape of a young plant ; 
similarly an owner may not actually exercise-, his 
power of dealing with his property unrestrained by the 
extrinsic considerations of prudence and propriety, but that 
does not show that lie was not invested with the power of 
disposing of his property according to his inclination, or 
that the term ‘property* did not eon note ‘fitness* for free 
disposal by the owners. A practical application of this 
characteristic element in the conception of property will be 
found in the oft-quoted dictum of Jinmtavahana that ‘a fact 
cannot be altered by a hundred texts’ ; a father, according 
to Jimutavahaua, is the full owner ol* his property and 
his sons do uot acquire any co-ownership with him by 
reason of their birth ; now there are certain texts which 
prohibit the father from alienating certain kinds of his 
property without the consent of his sons ; but this prohibi- 
tion, argues Jimutavahaua, cannot have the effect of 
invalidating an alienation by the father in violation thereof, 
because the alienation becomes operative by reason of the 
ownership which inheres in the father to the exclusion of 
his sons, and ‘a fact*, he says, ‘cannot be altered by a 
hundred texts/ 

Austin i« 11 While explaining the conceptions of ‘ownership’ and 

propertv- 011 ,f ‘property’ according to the Hindu Jurists, one cannot- help 
rniiij-mred. being struck by the similarity <>f their views on this point 
with those of some of the eminent western writers 
on modern Jurisprudence. Thus, in his lectures on 
Jurisprudence, Austin points out that “in the Ins- 
titutes of Gains and Justinian, the right of property or 
dominion is not defined at all. Things are described ; the 
modes of acquiring property in them are described ; 
servitudes ai-e deS^ibedL ; but of . tfie right of property or 
dominion no direct description^ given”, arnljie himself 
defines the term property or dominion as Iteing ‘‘applicable 



OWNERSHIP. 


49 


to any right which gives to the entitled party an indefinite 
povfer or liberty of using or dealing with the subject.” 

(Lecture XL\III). Similarly, Dr. Holland defines owner- 
ship as ‘a plenary control over an object', but he points out 
at the same time that in accordance with the maxim ‘sic 
iitefe tuo ut alienum non laedas’, it must always be 
enjoyed in such a way as not to interfere with the rights 
of others. (Chap. XI). It is hardly necessary to point out 
how closely these definitions approach the view of the 
Hindu Jurists which 1 have tried to lav before you in the 
foregoing exposition. The resemblance is not confined 
merely to the definitions, but also extends to the limitation 
indicated in the latter part of the passage quoted from Dr. 
Holland's Jurisprudence, for this limitation is ultimately 
reducible to the control exercised by the king and by the 
Sastric injunctions, which is fully recognised by the Hindu 
Jurists, as already pointed out. On the whole, therefore, 

I may trust that I shall not he accused of an idle pride in 
the merits of these discussions introduced by the Hindu 
Jurists, if I affirm that in point of logical subtlety and 
analytical skill they have scarcely been excelled even by 
the most modern exponents of Western Jurisprudence. 

It will be seen that in the above exposition of the Q ualifietJ 
conceptions of ownership and property I have taken those property, 
terms in their strictest sense ; it must not, however, be 
thought tljat the Hindu J arista did not. acknowledge that 
the unfettered power of using or dealing with one's own 
property, which constitutes ownership in the strictest sense, 
is susceptible, under special circumstances, of being 
limited or circumscribed to various extents, for, as a matter 
of fact, the Hindu Law does recognise the^ existence of 
qualified ownership or ^i*CMMrty, ailfl tH^^Ves friction upon 
the r igl ^ pi free disposal %ay even go s d? far as almost 
to deprive ihe owner of his right of alienating the property 

r 7 ■ 



50 


OWNERSHIP. 


Sri kri slum's 
view. 


according to his choice. Thus, a Hindu widow succeeding 
to the property ol* her deceased husband cannot ordinarily 
alienate that property except under certain special 
contingencies, which, for the sake of conciseness, are 
described by the expression ‘legal necessity’. Now, is not 
the widow the owner of the property ? No doubt*, she 
is, but her ownership does not, fully correspond to the 
idea which I have tried to explain above, hut is ordinarily 
limited to the right of enjoyment of the usufruct without 
detriment to or destruction of the corpus ; hence this kind 
of qualified property is said to imply fitness for enjoyment 
(*WMTftr ^<3 ) as distinguished from fitness for free 
alienation. 

So also Srikrishna Tarkalankara expressly recognises 
the existence of various concurrent rights to one and the 
same thing vested in different persons provided there he no 
incompatibility in the co-existence of such righfs. He 
thus distinguishes between property of the same kind and 
property of different kinds, and maintains that the 
existence of the properly of one kind in a particular person 
is incompatible with, and so excludes, the concurrence of 
the same kind of property in another person iffa 

), where as there is no such incompatibility 
in the co-existence of different kinds of property in relation 
to the same thing residing in different individuals. This 
position involves the admission of diverse rights inhering 
in different persons constituting different fragments of the 
totality of rights comprised by ownership taken in its 
strictest sense ; when we use the term ‘property* in relation 
to cases of this description, it is no doubt used in a qualified 
sense ; still the question may arise as to who should be 
regarded as the true owner of the thing, for, in strict legal 
parlance one of these persons should be treated as being 
the owner, and the other should be regarded as being 



OWNERSHIP. 


hi 


invested with rights over the object in the ownership of 
the tjprraer. In most cases, the solution of this question 
is not found to be beset with much difficulty, for we can 
generally trace the mode in which these subordinate 
elements of ownership constituting * jura in re alicna 9 have 
been, carved out and transferred to different, individuals, 
while the residuary right of ownership has remained where 
it was. There may, however, be cases where the question 
may not be altogether free from doubt or difficulty ; as ail 
instance, I may refer to the interesting discussion about 
the nature of king's right in the soil within his dominion, 
which is owned and occupied by private individuals. The 
discussion is contained in the V iswajidadhikarana of the 
Mimansa, aud the more widely recognised opinion seems 
to be that the private individuals are the true owners of 
the soil, the title of the king* being generally limited to 
the right, of collecting revenue from them. Niiakantha 
in his Yyavaharamavukha and Srikishna Tarkalankara in 
his commentary on the Dayabhaga seem to endorse this 
view and regard the hhovinihu (Landlords) as the real 
owners of the soil * held by them, while -they ascribe to 
the king merely the right to collect revenue from the land- 
lords as representing his proper share of the produce of 
the soil to which he becomes entitled by reason of the 
protection which he affords to them in the peaceful 
enjoyment of their property. Jagannath, however, seems 
to contend* that, looking at the origin of the proprietary 
right, this limited conception of the right of the sovereign 
is not justifiable ; he maintains that if ownership primarily 
arose from first occupation, it would be more reasonable to 
suppose that the sovereign being the stronger party, would 
have the prevalent rigid, such rights as the subjects 
possessed, being permissive in their character, and termi- 
nable at his option liy the withdrawal of the permission 


The nature 
king’s ri^b 
in the soil. 

Mimansa. 


Xilukuutha. 
Sri Krishna. 


Jagamiath. 



52 


ownership. 


at the end of the year. It is thus curious to observe that 
the more modern view gives a greater latitude to the rights 
of the sovereign as opposed to the rights of the people, 
and it may not be unreasonable to presume that this was 
to some extent due to the influence of foreign domination 
which liad effected an alteration in the conception of 
sovereignty among the Hindus. The perplexity felt by 
Jagannatha was, however, mainly due to his attempt to go 
to the root of the matter, and determine how originally 
the rights of the sovereign came to co-exist with the rights 
of the subjects ; and none of the various hypotheses which 
suggested themselves appeared to him to be altogether free 
from difficulty. If the ownership of the subject arose from 
occupancy, he argues, why could not the sovereign prevent 
it by his superior power, or if it was due to a giant from 
the sovereign, what was the exact character of the grant? 
Questions of this kind are essentially speculative and are 
not at all easy to solve, so that the better course seems to 
be to coniine our enquiry to the actual state of the ideas 
prevalent in a particular society at a particular stage of its 
evolution -; gyad' looking at the question from this stand- 
point, it seems that among the Hindus the property of the 
sovereign to the soil within bis dominion in the occupation 
of private owners had at an early period been confined to 
tlic right of realising a certain share of the produce as 
revenue, as a recompense for the protection afforded by 
him. The view of Jagannatha that the private owners 
might be regarded as if they were so many lessees from 
year to year finds very little support from the Dharma- 
sastras which, although they dilate upon the diviue 
character of the sovereign and the reverence due to "his 
position, do not furnish any basis for maintaining* that, he 
was the absolute master of his territory, free to deal with 
the lands within his dominion in any way he liked to the 



OWNERSHIP. 


53 


prejudice of the settled rights of his subjects. It must, 
however, be understood that 1 am not here speaking of 
king’s private lands over which he had complete and 
absolute control; it may also be that with regard to lands 
within his dominion which had not been appropriated by 
private owners as their own, his right was supreme and 
superseded the claim of his subjects ; but as regards lands 
under private ownership his right was limited by the 
concurrent rights inhering in private owners. How 
and why the right: of the sovereign came to be limited in 
this way it is very difficult to explain, and I think it 
ought to be enough for us to take note that it was so. 
"This earth”, says Jagannatha, "is the cow which grants 
every wish; she affords property of a hundred various 
kinds (inferior, if the owner need the assent of another 
proprietor — superior, if his right precede assent); while she 
deludes a hundred owners, like a deceiving harlot, with 
the illusion of false enjoyment ; for, in truth, there is no 
other lord of this earth but one, the Supreme Lord.” 

Having thus explained the correlated conceptions of 
ownership arid properly according to Hindu Jurists, I now 
proceed to deal with some of the means of acquisition 
of ownership recognised in the Dharmasastras. I have 
already stated that the enunciation of these means con- 
tained in the Dharmasastras w r as not meant to be ex- 
haustive ; hence we find different law-givers giving different 
lists which do not exactly agree. Thus Manu declares: 1 
'There are seven virtuous means of acquisition of wealth,— 
inheritance, gain, purchase, conquest, application (of 
wealth), employment of work and acceptance of gifts from 

1 wr fkrmm wm aiw: wft *ra: i 

flstar: qr&frra v* * il Manu X 115. 

* * * • 


Sastric means 
of acquisition 
of ownership* 


Manu. 



54 


OWNEltSHJP. 


Gautama. 


Narada. 


Enumeration 
of means not 
exhaustive. 


proper persons.’ Gautama gives almost the same list with 
a little modification when he says that ownership arises 
from succession, purchase, partition occupation (of un- 
appropriated property) and finding (of hidden treasures 
or the like), to which may be added acceptance of gifts in 
the case of Brahmins, conquest in the case of Kshat^Yas, 
commerce and agriculture in the case of Yaisyas, and 
wages of labour in the case of Sudras . 1 Narada enters 
into a little more detail, and says that there are twelve 
different modes of acquiring wealth of which three are 
general (/.<?., open to all castes), and the rest are peculiar 
to the several castes. Succession, gifts of affection, and 
marriage presents received with the wife, — these are 
common to all the castes. There are three special 
sources of acquiring wealth in the cafe of Brahmins which 
are free from stain, r/:., acceptance of free gifts, perfor- 
mance of priestly duties and receipts from disciples ; 
similarly there are three special sources of wealth in the 
case of Kshatrij’as, viz., revenue, gains of war and penalties 
of law ; so the Yaisyas acquire wealth in three distinct 
ways, viz., through agriculture, herdsmnnship and com- 
merce ; and the Sudras gain wealth by serving the afore- 
said three castes. These specific modes of acquiring wealth 
are proper for the several Castes, and any contravention is 
reprehensible unless forced by pressing necessity. It is 
hardly necessary *to point out that although the Dharma- 
sastras lay down certain modes of acquiring property as 
specially appropriate to a particular caste, it is not thereby 
implied that any contravention of these directions will in any 
way affect the growth of ownership ; for instance, if a 
Brahmin instead of following the usual avocations of 
his own caste takes up those of a Vaisya and becomes 


Gautama Chapter X. 



OWNERSHIP. 


bb 

a cultivator, it must not be understood that the produce 
of ht agriculture will not be his own, for, to adopt the 
terse and at »-he same time significant expression of 
Jimutavahana, ‘a fact cannot be altered by a hundred 
texts.* The real meaning of these rules is that such conduct 
as Ifads to a confusion of functions among the several 
castes is reprehensible unless justified by pressing neces- 
sity and ought to be avoided as much as possible. 

I will now proceed to deal with some of the specific 

modes of acquisition of ownership indicated above, and Mod ® 8 .of 

acquisition of 

among these the first that requires consideration is the ownership, 
one by which ownership is acquired in respect of a thing 
which had no previous owner. This is indicated by the 
word parigvaha which literally means appropriation and is 
explained in the Viramitrodaya as signifying the appro- 
priation of previously unappropriated property such as Parigraha or 
straw, water, logs of wood, etc., from a forest which is occupatl °* 
open to the public as not being under the ownership of 
any particular individual. 1 The explanation above quoted 
does not limit the extent of parigraha or first appropriation 
as a means of acquisition of ownership, but indicates 
that it can only be effective in respect of things which 
are not already under the ownership of somebody else and 
that at the time when the Viramitrodaya was written, 
the other, and if I may say so, older examples of its 
operation had become obsolete. It will perhaps be under- 
stood that' in speaking of these examples, I am referring 
to the acquisition of ownership in a wild animal by the 
person whose arrow strikes it down, and in a previously 
unappropriated field by the person who first reclaims it 
and makes it fit for cultivation. I have said that these 

: ^TNirc; i Viramitrodaya on Partition. 

* * 



56 


OWNERSHIP. 


Mann. 


examples had become obsolete in the days of the Virami- 
trodaya ; but this is**saying very little, for, as it seegos to 
me, they had become ^obsolete even in the days of Mann. 
Thus in one passage Manu says, “Those who were versed 
in the ancient lore regarded this earth as the wife of 
its first king Prithu, and they declared that the field 

belonged to him who reclaimed it and the (hunted) 

animal, to him whose arrow struck it down. 1 ” In this 
passage Manu distinctly traces the origin of ownership 
to what is called ocev patio in Roman Law, and 
the way in which he puts it indicates that this 

was a view which was handed down to him from 

the past, but had very little practical application in his 
days when settled ownership was the rule and creation of 
first ownership in things which had no previous owner was 
only heard of in ancient traditions ; it is therefore quite 
natui*al that we find very little upon this subject in the works 
of our law-givers beyond the enunciation of the general 
rule indicated above. It may, however, be interesting to 
notice that in the case of a hunted animal, Manu ascribes 
ownership to the person whose arrow first strikes it down, 
and the ownership of the land where the game is killed 
does not seem to affect the question. This seems to resemble 
the Roman Law which lays down that it is immaterial 
whether a man takes wild beasts or birds upon his own 
ground or that of another, and to differ from the English 
Law which does not seem to ascribe ownership to a tres- 
passer who kills game on another person’s land. 

I have already pointed out that Manu declared that 
according to ancient tradition ownership in a field belonged 
to him who first reclaimed it and brought it under culti- 


tWf fSfWt ft?: i 

WWW HIT- TO It Manu IX 44. 



OWNERSHIP. 


57 


vation. Sir William Markby, however, observes that “we 
find an example of occupancy without ownership in. the 
(so-called) Institutes of Manu. The ownership of culti- 
vated land (as distinguished from the homestead and the 
pasture attached thereto) is not mentioned in that work ; 
aud as there are no rules as to how such land is to be 
disposed of when the family breaks up, it seems clear that 
when that book was written it was not owned but only 
occupied/’ I must confess that I find it extremely difficult 
to follow these observations, and it seems to me quite 
clear that there is no foundation for them. Manu dis- 
tinctly speaks of the ownership of cultivated lands, and 
says that, according to ancient tradition, it arose originally 
from the reclamation of previously unappropriated waste 
lands ; he further declares that as between the person to 
whom the field belongs and another who sows his seeds in 
it, the crops belong, to the former, in the absence of a 
special contract under which both may become sharers in 

the produce , 1 a proposition which may be compared 

to the well-known maxim e quicquid pi anted nr nolo solo 
ecrlit . In fact, Manu speaks more often about the 
ownership of cultivated fields than about the ownership of 
homestead and pasture grounds. I may, therefore, take 
this opportunity to warn you once for all against accepting 
upon trust the remarks of foreign writers upon Hindu 
Law, who, however eminent and able they may be in other 
respects, had very little first-hand knowledge of the subject 
of their discussion. I need hardly say that I have the 
highest respect for the spirit of research which these 

1 ipnfq^: i 

1 1 ^ 11 * \ 

> ' ' 

^rr ftaft 'erfSrar ^ i < i a.? 


8 



58 


OWNERSHIP. 


Adhitjama. % 
finding of 
treasure; 
troves. 


Shares of the 
king and the 
- finder. 


Treasure- 
trove not 
reft-imllius 


Comparison 
with rules of 
Roman and 
English Ln \\\ 


writers have evinced, but the materials at their command 
have often been of a very limited character, and very Jew 
of us, T am sorry to say, have* taken the trouble to pursue 
their enquiries and correct their mistakes where necessary. 

The next topic to which I will now turn is *rfWR or 
the finding of hidden treasures or the like, of which the 
owner is unknown . 1 The law regarding treasure- trove is 
thus stated by Yajnavalkya : — If the king discovers the 
treasure-trove, then he will take half and distribute the 
other half among Brahmans; if a learned Brahman finds 
it, then he may keep the whole himself ; in other eases, 
the king will give one-sixth to the finder, and take the rest 
himself ; but if the finder does not bring the fact to the 
notice of the king, then he will, on coming to know of it, 
extract the whole and also punish the finder. To this 
Mitakshara adds, on the authority of Manu, that even in 
such a case if the real owner comes forward and establishes 
his title, the king will restore the treasure to him after 
retaining one-sixth or one-twelfth for himself, or, according 
to Nilakantha one-fourth for himself and one-twelfth for 
the finder. This latter direction clearly indicates that a 
treasure-trove must not be regarded as a reft nullim , for 
although it may have remained unclaimed for a long time, 
still that cannot have the effect of extinguishing the title 
of the real owner; at the utmost it can give rise to a 
presumption of abandonment which, however, is capable of 
being rebutted by the real owner. 

It. may be interesting to compare these rules with those 
of the Roman Law and of the English Law upon the 
subject. According to the Roman Law, if any treasure 
was found by the owner of the land where it lay concealed, 
he could keep the whole of it himself ; if another person 
found it, the finder and the owner of the land divided it 


janftrara frort: wfir: i i 



OWNERSHIP. 


59 


equally. According to English Law, however, neither the 
finder nor the owner of the land had any interest in it, 
but it belonged entirely to the crown, and it was an offence 
not to give notice of its discovery. I may be wrong, but it 
strikes me that, taken as a whole, the rules laid down in 
th§ Hindu Law reconcile the rights of the king to un- 
claimed property within his dominion with the natural 
expectations of the finder, which both the Roman Law 
and the English Law fail to do. 

I may mention that there is a clear distinction between 
treasure-trove and articles lost by the owner and found by 
a stranger; the distinction consists in this, that in the 
case of the former all hope of tracing the owner is lost, 
while in the case of the latter it is not so. Hence, in the 
case of lost articles found by a stranger, the Hindu Law 
directs that the king must detain them in safe custody for 
some time awaiting the appearance of the owner to claim 
them ; if, however, nobody appears within that time to claim 
those articles, then the king may appropriate them for 
his own use after making over one-fourth to the finder. 
The period of detention is differently given, somewhere 
as one year and somewhere as three years, and the 
difference is reconciled by laying down that where the 
owner appears within one year he will get his articles 
back without any deduction, but where ho comes forward 
after one year and within three years, the king will retain 
a small Share as a charge for the detention out of which he 
will make over one-fourth to the finder. Here the 
Mitakshara adds a note that if the owner comes forward 
even after three years, and establishes his claim, the king 
shall restore the articles or their equivalents to him, for 
title, according to the Mitakshara, cannot be lost by mere 
lapse of time. It is not necessary to consider the rules 
laid down upon the subject in the western legal systems, 


Difference 
between fcrea* 
surc-troves 
and articles 
lost by one 
and found by 
another.'" 


Refinement 
introduced in 
Mitakshara. 



60 


OWNERSHIP. 


Bijita : or 
conquest of 
war. 

Not red 
nwlliub 
<*ts in Roman 
Law. 


Extent of 
right of con 
quest : 
private pro- 
perty not in- 
terfered 
with. 


but it may be said without hesitation that the rules of [the 
Hindu Law indicated above are on the whole as just 'and 
equitable as any that are to be found in the western systems 
of Law. 

I will next consider fafacf or conquest as a source of 
acquisition of property. According to the Roman Law 
the property of the enemy was regarded as ren tmlliins, so 
that the victorious party could deal with it in any way 
they liked. Pressed to its fullest extent it leads to the 
conclusion that even the property of private individuals in 
a conquered country can be freely disposed of by the 
conquering state, and no private rights can be set up 
against it. Our Hindu Law, however, did not recognise 
this fiction which is founded upon the assumption that 
the institution of private property falls into abeyance 
upon the outbreak of hostilities and explains a simple 
fact by what is less simple and less easily under- 
stood. According to the Hindu Law, conquest is an 
independent source of acquisition of ownership, and we 
need not seek to explain it by introducing the fiction that 
the ownership of the conqueror arises from a sort of 
‘oecupatio’ in relation to the enemy’s property which, so 
far as the conqueror is concerned is to be regarded as no 
body’s property. Then further, the conquest, according 
to the Hindu Law, did not sweep away all private rights, 
its only effect being to invest the victorious king with the 
rights (and, I may acid, with the obligations also) of the 
vanquished king, so that although the former might claim 
full ownership in the exclusive property of the latter, his 
right, so far as the property of the subjects were concerned, 
did not extend to anything more than the right of collect- 
ing revenue from them. So, Srikrishna Tarkalankara 
distinctly says that the property ( ) of a particular kind 

only excludes the property of the same kind (inhering in 



OWNERSHIP. 


■61 

others), which implies that a kiug by his conquest acquires 
only tfhe right of receiving revenue from the subjects 
of the conquered territory in relation to property lying 
within it which has devolved upon them by inheritance 
or otherwise 1 , and Yajnavaikya broadly enjoins that 
‘a king bringing under his control a foreign territory 
becomes subject to the very same duties as are cast upon 
him in protecting his own state/ Referring to the fact 
that the rules which International Jurisprudence derives 
from the positions of Roman Law, indicated above, ‘ have 
sometimes been stigmatised as needlessly indulgent to the 
ferocity and cupidity of combatants,’ Sir Henry Maine 
observes that 'those who pass such strictures are unacquainted 
with the history of wars/ and ' are consequently ignorant 
how great an exploit it is to command obedience for a 
rule of any kind / that may be quite true ; but the end of 
law is, I suppose, to curb and control the natural passions 
of men, and we may sometimes be too prone to assume 
that they do not admit of any further regulation than 
what we already tiud ; at any rate we may be justly proud 
that the Hindu Law was less indulgent to the fei&eity 
and cupidity of combatants and Sir Henry Maine, when 
he talked glibly of the ‘feeble civilization’ of the Hindus 
might well have taken notice of this. 

ipjfar or application of already existing property 
a source of new acquisition. Thus, if a field produces crops 
or a domestic animal bears offspring, the produce in each 

wftqro: i 

s i 


Prtnjoju : or 
application of 
pre-existing 
property. 

' Accent io* in 
Roman Law. 



62 


OWXEfcSHIP. 


Fruits of 
animals and 
produce of 
and accessions 
to land be- 
long to the 
owner of the 
animal and 
the land. 


Exception. 


Comparison 
with Homan 
Law. 


case belongs to the owner of the field or the animal unless 
there has been some previous agreement modifying the 
general rule. This corresponds to what is called ‘ accessio 3 
in the Roman Law. 

An analogous instance is furnished by what is called 
alluvion. The rules of the Hindu Law upon the«subject 
seem to have been these : — if a river which flows between 
two villages and forms the boundary between them 
encroaches upon one bank and attaches newly formed 
land to another, then the owner of the bank on which the 
formation takes place becomes entitled to it as an accretion 
to his property; this sort of gain is characterised by 
Brihaspati as a gain due to good fortune; he also lays 
down an exception to the rule, and says that where by 
the force of the current of a stream a field with crops 
standing on it is detached from the main land, there the 
rights of the original owner remain unaffected by the 
change ; on this the Viramitrodaya observes that the 
exception only applies to the standing crops and after 
they are reaped the rule of accretion holds good ; where, 
however, there is no question; of accretion and the rivei 
after having inundated the lands on its bank again recedes, 
there, Narada says, the former ownership continues over 
its old site, its position being determined, in the absence 
of old land marks, by inference based upon other evidence. 
It will be observed that these rules clearly recognise the 
acquisition of land by right of contiguous accretion, and 
nothing depends, so far as this right is concerned, on the 
gradual or sudden nature of the change, which, according 
to the English Law and the rules introduced in India by 
Regulation XI of 1825, seems to furnish the guiding 
principle on this question. An accession to one's land by 
the recession of the river was treated as if it were a gift 
made by the river due to the good luck of the riparian 



OWNERSHIP. 63' 

owner, and it made no difference whether it came all on a 
sudden, or gradually by slow and imperceptible advanced 
The Roman Law also does not seem to have recognised 
this distinction, and a careful comparison will show that 
the rules laid down in that system upon this subject have 
many points of resemblance to those indicated above. 

foealing with the question of accession one is reminded 
of the question also discussed in the Roman Law of the 
extent of the right of a person building a house upon the 
land of another with his own materials. On this, Narada 
lays down that a person who pays rent to the owner of the 
land and lives there by building a house upon it, may, 
when he is required to leave the land, take away the 
materials with which he built the house ; where, however, 
no rent was paid, and there was no special contract about 
the removal of the materials, there the builder of the house 
being evicted from the land cannot take the materials 
away with him, and must leave them behind for the owner 
of the land. These rules are, on the whole, fair and 
reasonable, for the only case where the builder of the house 
loses the materials is where he did not pay for the occupa- 
tion of the land and erected the house without the consent 
of the owner of the land and without entering into any 
previous understanding with him regarding the future 
disposal of the house or its materials ; in such a case it 
may well be presumed that the builder knowingly accepted 
the risk of losing the house and its materials on his eviction 
from the land ; at any rate these provisions are less severe 
than those of the English Law which bv a somewhat 
stringent application of the maxim c quicquid plantatnr 
solo solocedit y allow the land-owner to sweepoff everything 
that is attached to his land. 

Here I propose to conclude the present lecture. Among 
the other sources of acquisition of ownership, or 


Karma yoga or 
employment 
of work. 



64 


OWNERSHIP. 


employment of work does not. require any special treatment, 
the receipt of remuneration for work done being generally 
the result of a sort of contractual obligation to which I 
will devote one of my future lectures. The next three 
lectures will be devoted to the law bearing upon some of 
the most important sources of what I may call derivative 
acquisition of ownership, viz., the law of transfer, fhe^law 
of prescription, and the law of succession. 



LECTURE III 


Transfer of Ownership. 

„ In this lecture I propose to deal with the law of 
transfer of ownership by a voluntary act on the part of 
the owner. Prescription, which also effects a transfer of 
ownership, but is based not upon an act but upon an 
omission of the owner, will be discussed in the next lecture ; 
and Succession, which does not depend upon any voluntary 
act or omission on the part of the previous owner, will be 
treated in the lecture after that. 

In dealing with voluntary transfer of ownership, we 
come across two distinct types of it, sale and gift, and 
they typify all acts of translation of ownership by the act 
of the owner with or without consideration. Where the 
owner parts with his ownership for a consideration, i.c., in 
exchange for some substantial benefit conferred or promised 
to be conferred, the act amounts to an act of sale ; where, 
however, there is no such consideration, the act of the 
owner in palling with his property is an act of gift. A 
little consideration will shew that these two transactions 
(/.<*., gift and sale) have a common basis* in both, the 
transfer is a voluntary one and proceeds from an act of 
the previous owner intended to effectuate a translation of 
ownership from him to some body else*, and hence it is but 
natural that many of the principles which govern them 
must lie common to them both. I shall therefore begin 
with the simpler of the two transactions, v iz. y an act of 
gift, and discuss the principles bearing upon it, and I 
shall then supplement the discussion by dealing with those 
peculiar incidents of an act of sale which reejuire separate 
consideration. 

9 


Difforenco 
bol.woon gift 
and aalc. 



66 


TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 


Gift: its 
definition. 


Essentials of 
a valid gift. 


Gift . — Gift may be* defined as the renunciation of 
property in favour of a sentient being having the fesult 
of extinguishing the ownership of the donor and creating 
ownership in the donee. ( 33 

arpft ^ we analyse this definition, it 

will be found that it is required that there must be a 
doner, a donee, a proper object of gift, and a transaction 
involving certain formalities. Let us now consider, what, 
according to the Hindu Law, are the essentials of a valid 


Formalitios : 


Can owner- 
ship arise 
without ac- 
ceptance of 
gift ? 


Jimutavaha- 
na’s view. 


Nature of ike transaction and Us attendant formalities . — 
I have stated that a gift involves a renunciation of 
property on the part of the donor in favour of another 
person. But is mere renunciation on the part of the donor 
sufficient to iu vest the person, in whose favour the renun- 
ciation is made, with ownership of the property given 
without a corresponding act on his part accepting the gift, 
or, to put it shortly, is ownership transferred to the donee 
without, acceptance ? The question is not free from 
difficulty, as it has formed the subject of a well-known 
controversy between the Dayabhaga and the Mitakshara 
Schools. Jimutavahana maintains that property is not 
created by acceptance on the part of the donee, but by 
gift on the part of the donor, and he argues that if it had 
been otherwise, then, since the root da signifies the 
extinction of ownership in one and creation of ownership 
in another, the acceptor would have been called the donor ; 
it is true that the Sanskrit word for acceptance is 
which signifies the reduction into one’s property of a 
thing which was not so before, but it implies no more 
than this that though property had already arisen from 
the act of gift, still it is now by the act of the donee 
subsequently recognising it for his own, rendered liable to 
free disposal. TJie argument, which I have tried to 



TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 


67 


summarise above, is based upon th(§ peculiarities of Sanskrit 
Grammar, and I cannot hope to be able to make it clear 
to those of you who are not sufficiently acquainted with 
the niceties of that language ; moreover, it does not seem 
to me to be at all conclusive, for, as Viramitrodaya has 
sho\^n, it is not at all impossible to explain the grammati- 
cal construction of the word ‘^Tcrf which means a donor, 
without accepting the proposition that transmutation of 
ownership takes place even before the acceptance of the 
gift. The real bone of contention seems to be this : 
the donor being the owner of the property, it ought to be 
taken that he has got the right to devest himself of that 
ownership without the concurrence of any body else ; but 
can he at the same time invest the donee with ownership 
without his concurrence? Now, in eases where gift and 
acceptance, take place simultaneously, the problem suggested 
above creates no practical difficulty, for the two acts being 
concurrent and simultaneous, it makes no practical difference 
whether you say that it is the acceptance which following 
upon the gift causes the transmutation of ownership or that 
it is the gift which transfers the ownership from the donor 
to the donee ; but the acceptance following upon it takes 
the ownership up, so to say, and makes it subject to deter- 
minate enjoyment. Where, however, there is a clear inter- 
val between the gift by the donor and the acceptance or 
non-acceptance of it by the donee, as the case may bo, the 
question assumes practical importance, and requires definite 
solution. Now, according to Jimutavahana, ownership is 
transferred to the donee by the very act of the donor, but 
it is liable to be defeated by the refusal of the donee to 
accept the gift, or to be perfected by his acceptance thereof, 
so that in the interval between the gift and its acceptance 
or non-acceptance, as the case may be, the donee is vested 
with an inchoate ownership which is either perfected or 



Mituksliara 

view. 


Objection 
npiiiist Dnya- 
bhtitfu view. 


68 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 

defeated on the donee either accepting or refusing to accept 
the gift. Vijnaneswara and his followers, however, afire of 
opinion, that although the donor may, by his act, divest 
himself of ownership over a particular property, he cannot, 
at his option, invest another person with ownership without 
the consent of the latter, so that in the interval between 
the gift and its acceptance or non-acceptance the object of 
gift does not become the property of the donee. The prin- 
cipal objection against the former view is that at the time 
when the gift is made, it cannot be pronounced for certain 
whether the donee will or will not accept the gift, so that 
the completion of the transfer of ownership hinges upon an 
uncertain contingency at that time, and if that be so, why 
should you say that the gift alone is sufficient to cause a 
transmutation of the ownership from the donor to the 
donee? Does not your own position involve that the gift 
is not the sole cause of the transfer, but 3iK VTWUf (or 
antecedent absence of acceptance, which implies subsequent 
acceptance), to use the language of the Naiyayikas, is also 
an auxiliary cause ? And if you accept this, is it not 
better to avoid this sort of circuitous exposition and admit 
that the donee is not invested with ownership until he 
accepts the gift ? The real difficulty of the latter view 
seems, however, to be this ; — the donor can, by the act of 
gift, divest himself of the ownership over the property 
given ; if by that act the donee is not invested with owner- 
ship, in whom does the ownership inhere during the interval 
between the gift and its acceptance or non-acceptance by 
the donee ? Does it become a res nullius , so as to become 
liable to be appropriated by any person who may choose to 
take possession of it ? To this Viramitrodaya replies, that 
this difficulty does not really arise, for although the donor 
may lose his ownership in so far as it involves the right 
of free disposal, he does not lose his right of custody 



TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 69 

( q ftwrftera ) which prevents any one besides 

the ddhee from taking possession of it; otherwise, by 
assuming that the donee becomes the owner although he 
may know nothing about the gift, you are forced to admit, 
in case of his ultimate refusal to accept, that the ownership 
did arise only to be extinguished upon this refusal, an 
admission which would involve the fault of complexity of 
assumptions (affal). I need not, however, attempt to 
decide upon the relative merits of these two views ; it is 
enough for my purpose that I have given you an idea of 
the difference that exists between the Dayabhaga and the 
Mitakshara Schools upon this question, and I hope, 1 have 
also incidentally shown what amount of logical subtlety 
these Hindu Jurists brought to bear upon discussions of 
this kind. 

Acceptance, as Mitakshara points out, may be of three 
kinds, mental, verbal, and corporeal : mental acceptance 
consists of a determination of the mind regarding the 
property as one’s own ; verbal acceptance is that mental 
state which finds expression in such words as e this is mine ’ 
or the like, intimating the acceptance of the gift ; corporeal 
acceptance in constituted by the assumption of possession 
or some sort of corporeal control over the object of 
gift denoting the mental acceptance of the gift. In 
the case of movable property, the three kinds of acceptance 
explained abpve may take place at once, but in the case 
of immovable property, there can be no corporeal accept- 
ance without some enjoyment of the produce, which 
cannot often take place all at once ; hence the question 
may arise whether a gift can become complete without 
corporeal acceptance, or in other words, without assumption 
of possession, which, in the case of land, involves at least 
some little enjoyment of its produce. Dealing with this 
question Mr. Maync observes that 1 few propositions have 


Throe kin (in 

Of UCCCp* 

lance. 


Can a gift be- 
come com- 
ploto without 
c or p o real 
acceptance ? 



70 


TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 


been laid down with more confidence than the doctrine 
servatioii8 b ^at un ^ er Hindu Law a gift is invalid without possession/ 
‘Yet/ he correctly points out, ‘ Hindu Law, properly so 
called, appears to lay little stress on any such as specially 
applicable to gifts’. He then extracts a passage from 
view explain Mitakshara to shew what its position really is, and \ think 
ed * I may also quote that passage here in order to enable you 

to see whether the position that gift is invalid without 
possession is itself valid. After remarking that acceptance 
may be of three kinds, and explaining them in the way 
already stated by me, the author of Mitakshara goes on to 
observe that ‘in the case of land, as there can be no 
corporeal acceptance without eujoyment of the produce, 
it must be accompanied by some little! possession other- 
wise/ says he, ‘the gift, sale or other transfer is not com- 
plete. A title, therefore, without corporeal acceptance 
consisting of the enjoyment of produce, is weaker than a 
title aecompained by it or with such corporeal acceptance. 
But such is the ease only where, of these two, the priority 
is undistinguisbable ; but when it is ascertained which is 
first in point date, and which is posterior, then the simple 
prior title affords the stronger evidence. Or the inter- 
pretation may be as follows : — 

‘Evidence is said to consist of documents, possession, 
and witnesses/ This having been premised as the 
general rule, the texts ‘a little is more powerful than 
possession unaccom pained by hereditary succession’ and 
‘where there is not the least possession, there a title is not 
sufficient/ have been propounded to point out to which the 
superiority belongs, where the three descriptions of 
evidence meet/ The above extract makes it quite clear 
that in. the opinion of Vijnaneswar delivery of possession 
was not absolutely essential to constitute a valid gift, but 
itJs necessary to remember that a gift unaccompanied by 



TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 


71 


possession is of a very risky kind, because, in a case of 
conflict between two apparent titles, in the absence of any 
.evidence to the contrary, that which is accompained by 
possession must prevail. 

It seems to me that the position indicated above with 
regard* to the relation between transfer of ownership and 
delivery of possession is eminently logical and reasonable ; 
the transfer of ownership is the result of the manifestation 
of intention on the part of the transferor to part with the 
ownership in prcsenli in favour of another who thereupon 
accepts the situation, agrees to become the owner, and 
does, by the combined effect of renunciation (<sn*r) on the 
one hand and appropriation (^ftanT) on the other, become 
the owner. Assumption of possession and enjoyment of 
usufruct are not factors essentially requisite to complete 
the transfer of ownership, but they are acts indicative of 
an existing ownership which they seem to presuppose. It 
is true that a transfer of ownership unless coupled with 
or followed by a transfer of possession is a very risky 
affair ; in the first place, the transfer of ownership in such 
a case is often very difficult to prove • in the second place 
this state of things, if it continues for some time, may 
very naturally give rise to a presumption that the person 
who has not got possession must have parted with any 
title that he might have acquired, and in the third 
jdace, in a ease of conflicting claims, in the absence 
of any other test, the title which is coupled with 
possession must prevail ; yet it cannot be doubted that 
delivery of possession need not be a necessary condition 
to the transfer of ownership which can be accomplished 
even without it by the co-ordinated desire of the 
transferor and the transferee ; and a system of law 
which perceived the real relation between the two 
things, and viewed them in their truo light must be 



72 


TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 


Roman Law 
compared. 


admitted to have advanced very far in the development 
of juristic ideas. 

It may be mentioned in this connection that according 
to the Roman Law property could not be transferred by 
mere agreement unless it was accompained by delivery of 
possession; ‘Traditionibus et usucapionibus, non mudis'practis 
dominia tranferentus.' (Codex Just, iv 3,20). According to 
Mahomedan Law too, there can be no gift without 
delivery of seisin, and it is difficult, as Sir W. Markby 
observes, to say when the idea of transferring ownership 
without transferring possession became familiar in modern 
law. ‘To some minds,’ says he, ‘it can scarcely be said 
to be familiar still.' Thus he points out that ‘Ilcineccius 
solemnly declared it to be a universal maxim of law that 
there can be no acquisition of ownership without tradition, 
and, an English lawyer, Mr. Serjeant Manning, has made 
a similar assertion' ; it is therefore highly interesting to 
notice that more than a thousand years ago our Hindu 
Jurists correctly grasped the true relation between aliena- 
tion and transfer of possession which has escaped the 
analysis of even some of the modern European lawyers ; 
the inability to conceive transfer of ownership without 
delivery of possession betrays an imperfect power of 
abstraction from which the subtle minds of the Hindu 
Jurists were entirely free. 

I shall now turn to the other formalities of a transfer 
proscribed by the Hindu Law. It does not Appear that 
with regard to the transfer of movable property, any 
particular formality was required beyond what has been 
already mentioned ; but with regard to land the Mitalcshara 
quotes an anonymous text which lays down that ‘land 
passes by six formalities; by consent of co-villagers, of 
kinsmen, of neighbours and of heirs, and by gift of gold 
and water'; in explaining this text the Mitakshara says 



TRANSFEE OF OWNERSHIP. 


78 


‘that the consent of the co-villagers is required for the 
publicity of the transaction, since it is provided that 
‘acceptance of a gift, especially of land, should be public ; 
but the transaction is not invalid without their consent, and 
the approbation of neighbours (residing near the boundary) 
serves*to obviate any dispute concerning the boundary 9 ; as 
regards the other formalities, I shall explain their purpose 
according to the Mitakshara after I have done with these. 

Turning, then, to the consent of the co-villagers and 
of the neighbours, I may observe that the grounds on 
which their requirement is explained by the Mitakshara 
cannot be said to be far-fetched or unreasonable ; it is but 
natural that one should desire that the transfer of the 
most important property which one could possess should 
be attended by certainty and notoriety, and for that pur- 
pose nothing could be better than to require that at the 
time of the transfer the consent of the co-villagers and 
of the neighbouring land-holders sh onld be obtained so as 
to give publicity to the transaction, as well as to obviate 
the chance of a future dispute. Mr. Mayne, however, 
suggests that these requirements might probably be the 
relics of a still older system in which ‘the rights of a 
family in their property were limited by the rights of 
others outside the family’. It is not at all easy to specu- 
late upon a subject like this with any amount of con- 
fidence, but if we consider the formalities of a 
‘mancipation under the Roman Law which was the mode 
of conveyance by which Res Mancipi including land and 
some other commodities very highly valued by the early 
Romans were transferred before Justinian allowed its 
place to be taken by tradition or delivery of possession, and 
compare them with the requirements of Hindu Law as 
noticed above, we may trace a certain amount of resemblance 
between the two systems which may no^ be altogether 
10 


Other 

formalities 

Consent of 
co- villagers 
and 

neighbours. 



74 


TRANS* ER OF OWNERSHIP. 


accidental. Referring to the requirement of five witnesses 
besides the actual parties in a Roman Mancipation, Sir 
Markby’s William Markby observes that the number is, he thinks, 
observations. q 10 t to be referred to the imperfection of oral testimony, 
but to the requirement that the transfer should take place 
in the presence of and be consented to by the community 
at large, whom these five persons may be taken to re- 
present 9 ; it cannot be said that a similar interpretation 
cannot be placed upon the original requirement of the 
consent of the co-villagers and the neighbouring land- 
owners as laid down in the text cited above ; but, however 
that may be, it is quite clear that that interpretation had 
long been forgotten in the days of the Mitakshara, and 
the explanations which that book furnishes are those which 
suggest themselves to one who lives is a progressive society 
which has outlived the stage of communal ownership. 

Turning next to the requirement of the consent of 
kinsmen and heirs, it will be observed that kinship and 
heirship may or may not involve co-ownership; where the 
heirs and kinsmen are not co-owners, their consent, says 
the Mitakshara, is required for the facility of the transaction 
by obviating the possibility of any future dispute about 
the character of the property and the nature of the right 
of the transferor; in such a case the transferor has full 
power of alienation and the transaction is consequently 
valid even without the consent of those kinsmen ; Apararka 
goes further and says that the object of requiring the 
consent of such kinsmen is to indicate that where they are 
not unfit or indifferent, an alienation of immovable property 
should be made in their favour and not in favour of 
strangers. 1 Where, however, the heirs and kinsmen whose 

1 fwir s 



TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 


75 


consent is desiderated are co-owners, the effect of the absence 
of thit consent will depend upon the nature of the 
co-ownership which, as it is well-known, is differently 
conceived by the Mitakshara and the Dayabhaga Schools 
of Hindu Law. As I propose to discuss the subject more 
fully in a future lecture, I refrain from dwelling upon it 
at this place beyond pointing out that the conception of 
joint ownership of the members of an undivided family 
under the Mitakshara school is fundamentally different 
from that under the Dayabhaga School, and the result is 
that while an alienation of the joint property or any' por- 
tion thereof by a Mitakshara co-parcener without the 
consent of the other co-parceners is generally regarded as 
invalid, a similar alienation by a Dayabhaga co-parcener is 
regarded as valid and operates to the extent of the share 
which belongs to that individual according to the Daya- 
bhaga conception of joint ownership. 

The next formality that requires consideration is the 
gift of gold and water accompanying an act of alienation of 
immovable property. One would have wondered what it 
meant, were it not for the explanation furnished by the 
Mitakshara which runs as follows : ‘Since the sale of 
immovables is forbidden (“In regard to the immovable 
estate, sale is not allowed ; it may be mortgaged by 
consent of parties interested”) ; and since donation is 
praised ("JBoth he who accepts land and he who gives it 
are performers of a holy deed and shall go to a region of 
bliss”) ; if a sale must be made, it should be conducted for 
the transfer of immovable property in the form of a gift, 
delivering with it gold and water (to ratify the donation)*. 
It may here be interesting to pause for a moment and 
consider the special significance of the explanation given 
above, for it illustrates the tenacity with which old for- 
malities cling to their existence even after the ground of 


Gift of gold 
and water : its 
significance. 
Mitakshara 
explanation. 



^RAttSF^R OF OWNERSHIP. 


Sale 

assimilated 
to gift : its 
parallel in 
the Roman 
Mancipation, 


*6 

their origin has ceased to exist. Under the early Hindu 
Law it seems that a sale of immovable property was not 
allowed to be made, but a gift of it for spiritual benefit 
of the doner was not similarly restrained, but was on the 
other hand commended as a meritorious act ; hence when 
under the growing exigencies of the community a sale of 
land came to be tolerated, it was not yet looked upon as 
altogether free from stain ; and was made to resemble in 
its form an act of free gift ; this purpose was served by the 
accompaniment of gift of gold and water by the vendor 
which symbolised, as it were, the ratification of a gift. 
Gradually, however, it has fallen into disuse, and nobody 
would have known anything about it but for the passage 
in the Mitakshara to which I have referred above. 

This assimilation of a sale to an act of gift has got its 
parallel in the Roman Mancipation, but there it was not a 
sale that was assimilated to a gift, but a gift was made 
to resemble an act of sale. The formalities of mancipation 
are thus described by Gains : “Mancipation is effected in 
the presence of not less than five witnesses who must be 
Roman citizens of the age of puberty, and also in the 
presence of another person of the same condition, who holds 
a pair of scales, and hence is called lib ripens. The pur- 
chaser taking hold of the thing says and affirms 'this thing 
is mine, ex jure Quintium , and it is purchased by me with 
this piece of copper and these scales’. He then strikes the 
scale with the piece of money, and gives it to the seller as 
a symbol of the price”. It will be remembered that under 
the early Roman Law, till the modification introduced by 
Justinian lies Mancipi including solum Italicum could 
only be transferred by the formalities of a mancipation ; 
what, then, do these formalities signify ? I have already 
indicated the original purpose which the presence of 
the five witnesses was perhaps designed to fulfil ; 



'tRAMSFKfi, OF OWNEfiSMlF. 


11 


but wliat was the significance of the presence of that 
peculfttr personage, the Libripens, with his pair of 
scales, and what did the ceremony of # striking the scales 
with a copper coin symbolise ? It seems pretty clear that 
the ceremonies described above closely simulated an actual 
sale with the accompaniment of payment of price ; the 
Libripens was there with his pair of scales to weigh, as it 
were, the coins payable as price, and the striking of the 
scale with a piece of money was emblematic of their pay- 
ment ; the question is, why, when no sale was actually 
in contemplation, as in the case of a gift or of that particu- 
lar form of testamentary devise which was known as the 
testament per aes et Hiram , did the ceremonies simulate 
those of an actual sale including the payment of price ? 
The explanation seems to be this : free alienation of im- 
movable property was not favoured by any system of 
ancient law, but in course of time the old restraints on 
alienation were gradually relaxed in order to meet the 
demands of a progressive community undergoing social 
and economic modifications ; it however so happened that 
the course pursued by one community in gradually remov- 
ing the old impediments to alienation did not always agree 
with that followed by another, although both were ulti- 
mately moving towards one and the same destination. I 
have already explained that under the Hindu Law the 
first movewas made in favour of an act of gift, which 
being regarded as a pious act was excepted from the 
general restraint on alienation of immovable property, and 
gradually, when a sale for price came to be tolerated, it 
appeared, as far as possible, under the garb of a gift ; 
under the Roman Law, however, the course of transition 
seems to have been different ; there the first exception 
seems to have been made in favour of a sale for valuable 
consideration, and when gradually other kinds of alienation 



Difference 
set forth 
above 
indicates 
different lines 
of progress 
towards free 
alienation. 


78 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 

began to be introduced, they simulated in outward appear- 
ance a sale for price, and that appearance was kept up, 
even when its original significance had been forgotten, by 
the presence of the libripens with his pair of scales and 
the striking of the scales with a piece of copper which 
served to symbolise the payment of price although no 
payment was actually intended. The difference above set 
forth, therefore, indicates different lines of progress towards 
free alienation ; among the Hindus the first step was taken 
in favour of pious gifts ; among the Romans sales for 
price furnished the first exceptions ; and when gradually 
the old trammels came to be further relaxed, among the 
Hindus a sale was assimilated to an act of gift, while 
among the Romans gift was made to resemble an act of 
sale. It will be unprofitable to speculate why the course 
of transition towards free alienation took different direc- 
tions in the two communities, but it may, I think, be 
truly observed that the line of transition in each case was 
in perfect harmony with the genius of the race. Be that 
as it may, I shall not be wrong if 1 say that whatever the 
original significance of these formalities might have been, 
they gradually came to be regarded as non-essential, and 
their prescription was explained in the way indicated above, 
as being intended either to give greater publicity to the 
transaction, or to ensure security from future dispute, or to 
lay down merely moral injunctions not touching the validity 
of the transaction ; in short they were treated as directory 
and not as mandatory ; and provided the donor was the 
owner of the thing, had the necessary capacity to make a 
gift of it, and acted freely, the non-observance of any of 
these formalities would not in any way invalidate the 
transfer on the principle succinctly set forth in Jimutava- 
hana’s dictum that f a fact cannot be altered by a hundred 
texts’, a principle which must not be taken to be a 



TEANSFEE OF OWNERSHIP. 


79 


peculiar doctrine of the Bengal School, but is a doctrine 
equally resognised by all the schools of Hindu Law. 

I have so long considered how far the validity of a gift 
depends upon the nature of the transaction including its 
attendant ceremonies ; I now propose to pass under review 
the otfier factors of a valid gift. A complete gift implies 
the existence of two parties, vie., a donor and a donee ; 
the donor gives the property and the donee accepts the 
gift and it is the conjunction of gift and acceptance that 
completes the transfer of ownership from one to the other. 
Hence it has been said that in order that there may be a 
valid gift the donee must be a sentient being in existence 
at the time of the gift. This rule has not been laid down 
in so many words by any Hindu Law-giver, but it is a 
deduction from the definition of a gift which I have given 
above, as well as from the fact that no gift can be com- 
plete without acceptance. You will remember that I have 
defined a gift as the renunciation of property in favour of 
a sentient being having the result of extinguishing the 
ownership of the donor and creating ownership in the 
donee ; this necessarily implies that there must be a 
sentient being whom the donor intends to benefit by his 
gift and in whom the ownership becomes vested upon the t 
extinction of the ownership of the donor by his own 
renunciation ; moreover, the completion of the transfer of 
title depends upon the acceptance of the gift by the donee, 
and this cannot possibly take place unless he be a sentient 
being in existence ; therefore the gift must be made in 
favour of a being who has got the capacity to accept, and 
in as much as such a capacity can only be attributed to a 
sentient being in existence, it follows that the donee must 
be a sentient being in existence at the time of the gift ; 
the rule was authoritatively laid down by the Judicial 
Committee of the Privy Council in the celebrated care of 


Donee must 
be a sentient 
being in 
existence. 



80 


TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 


Tagore vs. Tagore (9 B. L . R. 399 ? s. e. 18 W. R. 359) 
and has ever since been scrupulously followed. It Should 
be noted that the rule insists on the existence of the donee 
as a sentient being capable of accepting the gift at the 
time of the gift, and not at any future time ; for instance 
it is not open to me to make a gift of my property in 
favour of the son who may be born to A in future, so as 
to enable the son so born to take the property under the 
gift at the time when he comes into existence ; it will be 
easy to understand this if we remember that a gift operates 
in prcesenti to divest the owner of liis ownership and to 
invest the donee with the same, which cannot take place 
unless the donee is already in existence ; for, to suppose 
that the donor has lost his ownership while no one else 
has been invested with it will be to reduce the object 
of gift to the condition of a res nullius which may be 
appropriated by any one at his pleasure ; in fact to speak 
of a gift in favour of a person who at the moment does 
not exist and therefore in future may or maj r not exist 
involves a contradiction in terms, and a gift in favour of 
a person who may come into existence in future can 
amount to nothing more than a promise to make a gift 
when the occasion will arise in future by that person 
really coming to exist ; a gift, it must be understood, is 
a complete conveyance and not a mere promise to convey, 
and that being so, the requirement that the donee must 
be a sentient being in existence at the date of the gift 
is but a logical deduction from the very nature of the 
transaction. There is very little trace of the existence 
of testamentary power under the Hindu Law, save and 
except the rule laid down by Katyayana that in certain 
cases a promise to give made by a father which he has 
not been able to carry out during his life time must be 
fulfilled by the son after his death ; but when gifts by 



TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 


81 


wfji gradually came into use, it was but natural to apply 
to them the analogies of the law of a gift inter vivo$. 
< The Law of Will/ says the Privy Council, ‘has grown up, 
so to speak, naturally, from a law which furnishes no 
analogy but that of gifts and it is the duty of a tribunal, 
dealing with a case new in the instance, to be governed 
by the established principles and the analogies which have 
heretofore prevailed in like case*. lienee applying the 
principle applicable to a gift inter vivos to the case of a 
testament, it has been held that no one can take under a 
will unless he be in existence at the death of the testator 
which is the time from which the will comes into operation. 
There are, however, two apparent exceptions to this rule, 
viz., the cases of an infant child in its mother's womb and 
a son adopted after the death of the testator under an 
authority from him ; but these are not real exception, 
since such persons are by a fiction of law considered to 
have been in existence at the death of the testator and 
are thus capable of taking from him. The exceptions, 
therefore, really prove the rule. It is, b^Tever, possible to 
carry the rule too far, and an extreme application of it 
is to be found in certain decisions of the Calcutta High 
Court* which have laid down that a gift to an idol, which 


Apparent 
exceptions 
referrable to 
a fiction of 
law. 


An extreme 
application 
of the rule. 


* Upon dr a Lai Baral r. Hem Chandra Baral, (1897) I. L. Jt. 25 
Cal. 405 ; Rqjomoyee Dasee r. Troiloklio Mohint Dasee, (1901) I.L.R. 
29 Cal. 26Q ; N apron dra Nandini Dassi r. Binoy Krishna Deb (1902) 
1. L. H. 30 Cal. 521 ; Promothanath ltoy r. Nagendrabalft Chaudhurani 
(1908) 12 C. W. N. 808. 

Note. Since these lectures were written a Full Bench of the 
Calcutta High Court has overruled those decisions and held that the 
rule which requires that for the validity of a gift, the relinquishment 
must be in favour of a sentient being does not apply to bequests to 
trustees for the establishment of an image and the worship of a Hindu 
deity after the testator’s death. Sec Bhu pat math Smrititirtha v. 
Ham Lai Maitra, (1909) 10 C. L, J. 355, s. c., 14 0. W. N, 



: 'vowifSSisiStMt:; ’ ' 

is inert in exiete 

been directed to be consecrated after his ; death is invalid,: 
though .the deity; to be represented , by the idol is alwaykin 
existence. The’ ground' of these decisions isthat there 
eould be no gift to the deity as such, and- as regardsthe 
idol, it could not be the recepient of a gift befp^p its 
consecration, so that in the absence of a duly consecrated, 
idol at tbe time of the testator’s death the gift could . not; 
take, effect .and the property would vest in the person 
who could take it if there were no dedication at all. To 
this it may be replied that it is difficult to understand 
why it should be taken that there can be no dedication of 
property to the deity as such, for, in fact the dedication 
to an idol is really a dedication to the diety, the idol being 
no more than the visible image through which the-deity is 
supposed specially to manifest itself by. reason of the 
ceremonies of consecration ; hence, when a person, dedicates 
a property to an idol to he consecrated and established, at 
a particular place, the dedication is really in favour of the. 
ever-existent deity subject > to the direction .that its 
worship should be carried on at that place and through 
the image to be consecrated and established there; the 
establishment and consecration of the image does not bring 
into existence a new deity who did not formerly exist; but 
jt merely gives, as it were, a local habitation to the deity in 
order to facilitate the worship of those who require the help 
of symbols to aid their devotion ; it is therefore wrong to 
apply the analogy of a gift to an 'unborn person 
to the dedication of property to the deity coupled 
with the direction that the worship should be carried on 
by establishing an image of the deity at a particular place 
and consecrating the same ; if any analogy were required, 
we might liken a dedication kind; to the gif t of 

preperty to an existing individt^„'^^qbndit»bn; 



T&AmtEK OF OWr»R9ffIK 5® 

gfft effect when and so long fur ^ 

reside at a particular place ; in such a ease it could not 
be saidthatthegrft would be invalid because at the date 
of ■flieV gift; the individual was not residing at that plkce, 
and the Only; result would be to postpone the enjoyments bf 
the : pisopetky '' tintU- 1 . he .began to reside there ; similarly » 
dedication to the deity cannot fail on the ground that 
before the consecration of the image there was no recipient 
of the gift to validate the transaction, and all that, can be 
said is that the intention of the testator cannot be 
effectuated aiid the object of the endowment cannot he 
fulfilled until the consecration of the image upon which 
the dedication takes a definite shape and the property 
becomes liable to regular disposal for the purposes of the 
endowment ; just as it is the duty of the trustee to carry 
on the worship, so also it is his duty in a Case like this to 
establish and consecrate the image for the purpose of 
worship, for the worship cannot commence according to 
the intention of the testator until the image has been 
consecrated and established, but in no way can the dedica- 
tioh fail on the ground that the donee was not in existence 
at the death of the testator. It is quite possible that cases 
may be found where the dedication clause is not very 
happily worded, but we must look to the substance of the 
thing with a view to give effect to the intention of the 
testator and not to defeat it by drawing metaphysical 
distinctions* too subtle to* grasp. 

^Having gone so far, I shall next proceed to consider 
the remaining conditions of a valid gift, and in doing 80 CTmd ft io na nf 
it will not perhaps be out of place to follow the Hindh « 
law-givers in „th£ distinctions drawn by them . between 
(what .ia .fit to be given), wfu (what; is unfit to be 
gw^n), (what has been irrevocably given), - , and 

^^ giyen, is, in contemplation of law, not 



84 miKs m&:m 


THyi *1 

Things fit to 
ba given. 

Adeya: 
Things not 
fit to be given. 



Following these divisions, we find that ; ■ 

is regarded as fit to be given when it is the pi^jHeW^ bf 
the donor , and there is no prohibition -hi-lbe 
make a gift of it. Conversely, unfitness to be the object 
of a gift may arise from either want of title in the donor 
or existence of prohibition in the Sastras. As examples 
of things which are not fit to be given by reason of want 
of title in the donor, mention is made of pledges, deposits 
and things borrowed or otherwise obtained on trust ; in 
these cases, the person in. possession is not the owner of 
the thing, and a gift made by him will not only be 


infruetuous, but will also render him liable to punishment. 
As regards sons and wives, they are also declared unfit to 
be given away by their fathers and husbands respectively, 
but there is a difference of opinion as to whether this is so 
by Ireason of want of ownership in the father and the 
husband or on account of the Sasfcrie prohibition, which, 
in spite of ownership, condemns the gift as improper. 
I abstain from entering into the details of the controversy 
at this place, as I propose to deal with it in toy lectures 
dealing with parental and marital relationships. Barring 
these, there are certain other instances in which a gift is 
prohibited although there can be no question of absence 
of ownership; they are these : (1) gift of a thing which 
is the common property of the donor and other persons, 
(2) gift of property without keeping enough for the 
maintenance of the family, (3) gift of entire property 
when there axe children to be provided for, and (4) gift 
to one, of a thing which has been previously promised to 
another. 


As regards things which do not belong exclusively to 
the donor, it is clear ti t although the donor has owner- 
ifeip in them,- his absolute, but i limited 

■ hy the eo-<equal ownership el ; others jy 



to g^ve them away, and if he loes, it catiBot 
operate to other • .own^vu' -;U^3K;'iBii|ia!g^,-'- 

however, be asfeed whether in such a ease the donee tniy 
sot step into the shoes of the donor and claim, not the 
entire property^which the donor had certainly no power 
to give, but a share which the donor might have claimed 
as his own ; the answer to this question will depend npon 
the conception of co-ownership in each case, and as there 
is a well-known difference about this matter between the 
Dayabhaga and the Mitakshafa Schools, I reserve the 
point for a future lecture in which I shall tty to explain 
this difference and deduce the necessary consequences 
therefrom. 

As regards the rule that the extent of a person's gift 
should not be such as to deprive his family of the means 
of subsistence* it seems to be nothing more than a moral 
or religious injunction and the excess of the limit thus 
laid down cannot be a ground for holding the gift invalid. 
Jirautavahana expressly says so* and the opinion seems to 
be in consonance with the reason of the rule. 

A similar interpretation should also be placed upon the 
prohibition of the gift of the entire property when there 
are sons to be provided for, unless we follow Apararka in 
maintaining that the prohibition is meant to apply to cases 
where there are sons who compose an undivided family 
with their father and are thus co-owners with him. 

Lastly, the direction that a thing which has been 
promised to one should not be given to another seems also 
to belong to the same class and not to affect the viridity 
of a transaction, ? 

On the whole* therefore, the conclusion at which we 
arrive is that it is only when a thing is declared un^ 
be given by reason of want of title in the donor, that the 
if m&le^ does *not pass any title* because theJ$noe 



$§ T1UNSFEE OF OWKB»8Hm 

himself 'had none to convey. Where, however* the donor 
is the owner of the property, a gift of it will convey a 
valid title in spite of any prohibition that the Sagtrag may 
have laid down. It is true that there are certain texts which 
lay down that both the giver and the acceptor of a thing 
declared unfit to be given render themselves liable to 
punishment, and some commentators argue therefrom that 
such a gift is liable to be revoked and the thing restored ; 
but having regard to the general principles of transfer of 
ownership, I think it will be going too far to say that 
although the owner makes a gift of his own property* no 
title will pass, simply because the Sastras have condemned 
such a gift as improper. It is therefore important to 
distinguish between the two classes of objects unfit to be 
given, the unfitness being due either to want of title in 
the donor .or to a mere prohibition in the Sastras ; in the 
former case, the gift, if made will be invalid and infruc- 
tuous ; in the latter case, the gift will be legally operative, 
but the act will be regarded as sinful and the parties to it 
will also render themselves liable to punishment from tha 
king. Jagannatha seems to support this view. ‘That a 
thing may not be given/ says he, ‘denotes that the gift 
is attended with sin, for this form of speech bears the 
sense of the imperative. It does not denote that the gift 
is a void act ; were it so, it would not differ frorn a 
void donation ; and full dominion would not be noticed 
under this title of f what may not be given’. If it be said 
this title is intended to show punishment for such . gifts 
it iir answered, this form of prohibition implying offence, 
the offender should be punished. Thus the gift of things 
whichare enumerated among those which m&y not be 
given is punishable ; gifts enumerated aniong those which 
are void are utterly null’.. The same conclusion wilj 
Ibllo^r from the ^^$64 of 



vnwsmmi of owNEBsaaop. 87> 

ownership, as 'has ;Tieen^‘explamed ; :ia-'- the last ^lectjire, 
follows, # according to the more widely recognised -view, 
the popular usage ; and gift and sale being among the 
means recognised by * popular usage as causing a transfer; 
of ownership, all that can be legitimately required from 
the legal stand point to create a valid transfer are that the 
transferor should have full dominion over the property, 
that he should otherwise have full capacity to enter into 
a legal transaction, and that the transaction itself should 
be properly and legally performed ; these conditions being 
fulfilled, the title will pass, notwithstanding any prohibi- 
tion laid down in the Sastras which can only operate upon 
the will of the transferor and the transferee by reason of 
the sanction attached to it in the form of punishment 
from the king, or at any rate, of misery in the life to come 
which is the inevitable result of the transgression of 
Sastric injunctions ; beyond this the force of the prohibi- 
tion cannot go according to the well-known canon of 
construction tersely summed up by Jimutavahana in the 
dictum ‘a fact cannot be altered by a hundred texts.’ 

Having thus discussed what are and what are not fit 
to be given, let us. now pass on to what the Hindu Law:; 
considers as irrevocably given. These are indicated in the 
following text of Narada 1 : they who know the law of gifts 
declare that things once delivered as the price of goods sold, 
as wages, for the pleasure (of hearing poets, musicians ot 
the like), from natural affection, as a return for a benefac- 
tion, as a nuptial gift to a bride or her family, and through 
regard for religious merit, cannot be* resumed. It will 
he observed that in each of these cases there is some sort 
of consideration, whether valuable or riot, to support the 

g wrtMi Pig; n 


Vatta : 

Irrevocable 

gifts. 



A d<itta : 

Void gifts. 


88 twmwm of own«eship. 

gift/ and a gift wee made under these eirmmstanoes saanot 
be revoked, v 

Last of all let us consider those gifts which are 
absolutely void and are treated as if they wore not made. 
Narada gives sixteen instances of void gifts : 'what has 
been given by men oppressed with fear, anger, of intense 
grief ; or as a bribe, or in jest, or by mistake, or through 
any fraudulent practice ; what has been bestowed by a 
minor, an idiot, a person under duress, one whose mind is 
unsettled by disease, one intoxicated, or insane ; what 
has been given in Consideration that the donee will do 
some' service in return (which, however, he has not per- 
formed) ; what has been given through ignorance to a 
bad man who pretended to be good, or for a righteous 
undertaking (where none was really contemplated) ; these 
(though given) are declared as not given. 1 A considera- 
tion of these instances will shew that the grounds on which 
the gifts fail are reducible to two main heads, (1) want of 
capacity of the donor, and (2) want of reality and freedom 
of the act of gift. Under the first head will come such 
temporary disabilities as minority, insanity, or want of 
freedom ; under the second head we may consider the case 
where there is no veal intention to make a gift, as when 
it is made in jest, and the cases where the gift is induced 
by coercion, fraud, mistake or misrepresentation. In all 
these cases the law declares that there is no real gift, but 

1 wvu g w nifhf < 

irifapiftw xrfh m ufarn: » 



TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 89 

only a semblance of gift ; and therefore the transaction is 
void of legal effect and the donor is entitled to revoke the 
gift and get the things given restored to him* The 
operation of the rules laid down above is not limited 
to the case of a gift, but they have a wider application; 
thus Manu delares that ‘a gift induced by force, 
possession taken by force, and docu ment obtained by 
force, in short everything brought about by force should 
be regarded as null and void 1 9 ; similarly, € a pledge, a sale 
and a gift and acceptance induced by fraud, and wherever 
there is a condition which comes to light. ; in all these 
cases the transaction is to be rescinded ’. 9 The last portion 
of the above text as explained by Mitakshara lays down 
the law about contingent and conditional transfers ; it 
says that € wherever a pledge, sale, or a gift and accep- 
tance is made subject to a future condition as its adjunct, 
there, on the disappearance of that adjunct, the pledge, 
the sale, or the gift, as the case may be, shall be liable to 
be rescinded , 8 which means that where the operation of a 
transfer is made dependent upon the continued accom- 
paniment of a certain condition, there the condition 
disappearing the operation of the transaction shall also 
cease to exist. For instance, if I give my property to 
you on condition of your supporting . a certain religious 
institution, the gift will be rescinded on your ceasing to 
do so, inasmuch as the gift was not absolute, but subject 




^tirrwi i 


jjfmror : 






:ftO .TRANSFUSE OF OWNERSHIP. 

to a condition as the auxiliary cause of its continued 
operation, which being gone, it could no longer continue 
to operate. I do not know how it may strike you, but it 
seems to me that these rules and the distinctions on which 
they are based exhibit a deep logical insight, a marked 
development of juristic ideas, and a high moral standard of 
which we, as the distant descendants of those who laid 
them down, may justly be proud. 

On the whole the conclusion seems to be that where 
the gift is made by a person without the ownership or 
without, the requisite capacity to make a gift by reason 
of some disability whether of a temporary or of a more 
enduring character, or where the act of gift is not a real 
act, having been made in jest, or is not a free act by 
reason of its having been induced by coercion, fraud, 
misrepresentation or mistake, there the gift will be 
invalid and inoperative ; otherwise, a gift, when made, 
will be valid and operative, although in certain cases 
a gift made in contravention of Sastric prohibitions 
based on grounds other than those enumerated above 
will render the parties to the transaction liable to 
punishment from the king, apart from misery in the life to 
come which is the general sanction attached to Sastric 
prohibitions. 

I have stated that a gift made by a person suffering 
from disease is generally regarded as invalid on the ground 
that such a man is not in a proper frame of mind to 
weigh his act and come to a right decision about it; this 
is, however, subject to an exception in favour of pious 
gifts, for Katyayana says r What a man has giveu 
or promised for a religious purpose, whether in health or 
in sickness, must be given $ and if he has died without 
giving it, his son shall doubtless be compelled to deliver 



TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 91 

it / 1 So we see that not only will a gift actually made 
for pious purposes be supported as valid, but even a promise 
made for sucli purposes will be enforced against the 
promisor, if he be living, and against his sons, if he be' 
dead. The obligation thus cast upon the son to carry out 
the premise made by the father before his death has been 
supposed to contain the germ of a testamentary bequest 
aud on the basis of such texts M. Gibelin has maintained 
that the Hindu will was of indigenous growth and 
not an European invention. However that may be, 
it is at any rate clear that the obligation so imposed 
upon the son was not regarded as a mere moral 
obligation, but as a legal obligation specifically enforceable 
by the king. 

This brings us, by a natural transition to the question. 
How far is a voluntary promise enforceable against the 
promisor himself? Mr. Mayne says that it is a general 
principle common to all systems of law that a voluntary 
promise cannot: be euforccd, though the voluntary act 
when completed is irrevocable ; it seems that this statement 
is not stictly accurate so far as the Hindu Law is con- 
cerned, for according to that system a promise made with 
a view to help the promisee in the performance of some 
religious or pious act which he has already begun is 
binding and enforceable as a debt due by the promisor. 
Thus H%rita says ‘ whatever has been promised 
in words, but not performed in deed with a view to 
help the promisee in the performance of some meri- 
torious act is a debt both in this world and in the 


to : * . 


Is a 

voluntary 
promise of 
gift ' 

enforceable ? 



TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 

next* 1 So also Katyayana says that ‘whoever having volun- 
tarily promised a gift to a Brahmana for religious merit 
afterwards refuses to give, shall be made to carry out his 
promise as if it were a debt, and shall also be liable to 
punishment.’ 2 It is therefore clear that according to the 
Hindu Law, the promise of a gift, though voluntarily 
made, was enforceable as a debt when it was made either 
to a Brahmana for religious merit or with a view to help 
the performance of some meritorious act. Mr. Mayne 
says that ‘it is quite certain that no promise to confer a 
future benefit upon a priest, however holy, would be enforced 
by the secular courts’. That may be so, but then the courts 
would not be administering the Hindu Law as it is, but 
merely giving effect to a doctrine of the English courts 
of Equity erroneously supposed to involve a principle 
common to all systems of law. It will be seen that the 
Hindu Law does not lay down that every voluntary 
promise of a gift is enforceable ; it is when the gift is 
voluntarily promised to a pious Brahmana who counts 
upon such gifts for his subsistence, or when it is promised 
in furtherance of a pious act in which the promisee is 
engaged, that the promise is declared enforceable by the 
court as if it were a debt incurred by the promisor; 
and Gautama expressly enjoins that ‘a gift, though promis- 
ed, should not be made to an unrighteous man/ 3 It seems 
to me that understood in this limited sense, the rule of 

1 3T^ht i 

wi*ii tot *r ii 

In the above translation, I have followed the explanation given in 
Viramitrodaja. 

* s: ufojjsi sftnnr i 

n xw it 



TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 


93 


Hindu Law is not unreasonable or unjust; on the other 
hand, to allow a man to create expectations without in- 
curring any obligation to fulfil them can hardly be 
regarded as just and proper, especially when the person 
who is lured by such false hopes is a pious Brahmaua, or 
a person engaged in the performance of some meritorious 
act, who would naturally adjust his expenses with reference 
to the assurance received. There can be no doubt that 
such a conduct would, ever)' where, be regarded as morally 
reprehensible, and the Hindu Law only made the legal 
rule conform to the moral in recognising certain excep- 
tions to the general rule that 'a voluntary promise can 
never be enforced \ 

You wall remember that I have already pointed out Validity of i 
that according to the Hindu sages, a thing promised to fe^r promise 
one is not fit to be given to another ; you now see that to another, 
in certain cases a voluntary promise may be legally en- 
forced ; but you must not understand that a mere promise 
does, in any case, confer a title upon the promisee without 
an actual gift. Hence if a man gives to a person what 
he has promised another, the gift will not be invalid, and 
the thing cannot be recovered from the donee : although, 
under certain circumstances, the first promisee may pursue 
his remedy personally against his promisor and recover the 
equivalent of the gift from him on the principle already 
explained. This is not only clear on the general principle 
of transfer of ownership which 1 have already explained, 
but is also supported by the fact that even in those cases 
where a promise is declared to be binding, the obligation 
is likened to a debt, which indicates that the promisee ha£ 
no title to the thing itself, but merely a personal rigi^; 
against the promisor. 

I have so long dealt with the principles applicable to the 
ease of a gift, and you will easily understand how most of 



Principles 
common to 
sale and gift. 


Effect of 
purchase 
from a person 
who is not 
the real 
owner. 


£F4 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 

them are equally applicable to the ease of a sale. Thus, in 
order that a sale may be valid, it is necessary that the 
vendor should have full dominion over the property sold, 
that he should have full legal capacity to enter into the 
transaction, and that the transaction itself should be real, 
and not brought about by fraud, or coercion, or the like. 
It. is needless to reiterate these principles which have been 
fully explained in relation to a gift, and it is also needless 
to impress upon you that such prohibitions, as are to be 
found in the Sastras but are not based upon any of the 
grounds indicated above, would generally be so interpreted 
as to make out that their violation would not affect ihe 
validity of the transaction. In these respects, the rules 
laid down, and the distinctions set forth in the case of a 

gift would mut-ali* mutandis hold good in the case of a sale. 

I shall now proceed to discuss some supplementary rules 
having special reference to the Law of Sale. 

I have stated that a pure baser from a person who is 
not the owner cannot confer any title upon the purchaser 
although he might have bouafule bclived that his vendor 
had a real title to pass. What then is to happen if the 

real owner comes forward and claims the tiling? The 

procedure to be followed by a Court when a claim of this 
description, comes before it for adjudication is thus explained 
by Mitakshara : The claimant must in the first instance 
establish his title to the thing and explain how it got out 
of his hands. On his succeeding to prove a subsisting title, 
the purchaser will be called upon to produce his vendor, and 
when the vendor appears, the contest will go on between him 
and the claimant ; thereupon if the claimant succeeds in 
establishing his claim, then he will recover the property, 
and the purchaser will get back his price from his vendor 
who will also render himself liable to punishment from 
the king ; in the converse case, the unsuccessful claimant 



TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 


95 


will not only fail to get the property, but will himself be 
punished for bringing forward a false claim. If, however, 
the purchaser fails to produce his vendor, then he will not 
only lose the property, but shall also be required to 
prove the bonafides of his purchase in order to exculpate 
himself. This rule, however, is subject to certain 
exceptions ; for, as Katyayana has laid down, if the 
purchaser proves that ho purchased the property from 
market overt or to the knowledge of King’s officers, or 
openly from a place where the vendor cannot he traced, 
or the vendor is dead, then, the claimant, although he is 
the real owner, shall get back the property on payment of 
half its price to the purchaser. 1 These exceptions are 
justified on the ground that the owner loses half the price 
because somehow or other the property got. out of his 
1 lands, and the purchaser loses half as he had the mis- 
fortune to purchase from one whom he cannot trace or 
produce before the court, although there could be no 
question about the bona fid ex of his purchase, so that both 
being equally blameless and equally unfortunate, it is but 
meet that the loss should be equally distributed between 
the two. On the other hand, where the purchaser fails 
to prove the bonafides of his purchase, for instance, where 
he purchased in secret, without publicity, from doubtful 
character, at an inadequate price, or at an improper time, 
there he shall he liable to punishment as if lie were a thief, 
the presumption being that he must have purchased with 
the knowledge that there was something wrong about it. 
I need not dilate upon this subject any further, as I believe 
I have stated enough to show that the rules of the Hindu 


Purchase in 
the market 
overt and in 
the presence 
of King's 
officers. 


Purchaser 
when liable to 
punishment. 


fwn jprarcra: i 



TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP, 


Owner’s duty 
io bring a 
thief to the* 
notice of the 
king. 


Rescission of 
sale. 


Law upon the subject are on the whole well-considered 
and reasonable. I should, however, add that it was con- 
sidered to be the duty of the owner to bring a theft to the 
knowledge of the king, and if he remained satisfied on 
merely getting back the property without bringing the 
matter to the notice of the king, he would render 
himself liable to be punished with a fine , 1 a rule which 
is based upon the recognition of the interest of the com- 
munity as something distinct, from the interest of the 
individual which it is the duty of every individual to 
subserve. 

The next topic that deserves a brief consideration is 
the rescission of sale. It often happens that after a 
purchase we begin to repent of the bargain either because 
the thing purchased proves to be worse than what we took 
it to be or because the price we paid appears to be too 
high ; the question is whether there ought not to be any 
remedy for it. On the one hand, it may be said that one 
ought to take proper care before the transaction is com- 
pleted and that once the bargain is struck there can no 
longer be any help for it ; on the other hand, it seems to be 
very hard that in no case should the purchaser be allowed 
to cancel the purchase and get out of the transaction 
which he had concluded under a misconception about its 
nature and advantages. 

There can be no doubt that much may be said in support 
of the former view that a purchaser makes the purchase 
at his risk and should not be allowed to complain after 
the bargain is once concluded, but at the same time it 
must be observed that commercialism need not be the sole 
guiding principle of a community and an actual hardship 

^ qrg n wi nvm: i 



TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. S>7 

should be relieved in so far as it can be done without 
tinjustfy entailing equal or greater injury to others. It 
is therefore highly interesting to find that the Hindu Law 
attempted to reconcile the interest of private purchasers 
with the interest of trade by laying down certain 
rules Which without sacrificing the certainty of trade by 
allowing excessive and belated interference with concluded 
transactions provided some protection against being 
entrapped into and held fast by hasty and inconsiderate 
bargains. The rules were these : in every ease the 
purchaser, unless he had previously examined the thing 
purchased with a view to ascertain their quality and ap- 
proved of them upon such examination, was entitled to a 
certain period to examine them, and if within that period it 
was found that the thing was defective he could return it to 
the vendor and recover the price from him. The period 
allowed for examination was viewed according to the nature 
of the object sold ; thus three flays were allowed for the 
examination of a milch-cow, five days for the examination of 
a horse, ami seven days for that of precious stones such as 
pearls, diamonds and the like. If however, the purchaser 
had before the purchase examined the thing to be pur- 
chased, and approved of it, then he could not afterwards 
complain and have the sale rescinded on the ground that 
there was a defect which had escaped his examination. 1 
You will observe that what has been stated above related 
to the rescission on the ground of discovery of defect after 
the completion of the purchase without previous examina- 
tion, and the rule upon the subject does not seem to me 
to be at all unreasonable or unjust • those of you who 
have any doubt upon it will I hope think otherwise, when 

1 mu vm' trfNru urnutau: i 

ufNrrfiwt sfW it uncs: i 

W 


Conditions 

rescission. 



98 


TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 


Time of 
completion 
of sale: 
non-delivery 
of Articles 
sold. 


you will have more frequertt occasions to purchase things 
like those mentioned above. Apart, however, from any 
examination or discovery of defect, the Hindu Law allowed 
a further indulgence to the purchaser; it granted him a 
period of grace within which to return the thing purchased, 
a sort of foetus penitential, so to say, if* he repented* of the 
bargain and desired to rescind the sale ; the period allowed 
was, however, very short, being the first day to get back 
the full purchase money, and the second and third days to 
recover . 1 It should also be mentioned that the right to 
return could not be availed of if the article sold had been 
soiled or otherwise injured by use, although it might 
appear to have been defective . 2 Considering, then, all 
these rules together subject to the limitations indicated 
above, it seems to me impossible to say that they do not: 
deserve serious consideration, although I do not know of 
any other system of law in which similar rules have 
prevailed. 

I shall now say a few words about the completion of 
sale and the effect of non-delivery of articles sold. A 
purchase ordinarily becomes completed on the payment of 
the price, unless the payment is deferred by a special 
contract between the parties, the result, therefore, is that 
where the price has not been paid, the vendor is free to 
sell to another in the absence of a special contract to the 


pwrg: *mtwrErsrpwra*[ tt 

3 atfftsfiFtrcn: wgtwin 



TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 9 $ 

contrary . 1 When the sale has been completed by the 
payment of the price, the seller is bound to deliver the 
article sold to the purchaser, and on refusal will be compelled 
to deliver together with proper compensation. Various 
rules have been laid down for measuring the compensation 
in each* case, of which the following may be specially 
noticed ; if the price of the article has fallen down in the 
interval, then the seller shall be compelled to deliver the 
articles sold together with such compensation as will make 
up for the reduction in the price ; where, the price has 
remained constant, there nothing more than ordinary 
interest will be charged ; where, however, the price has 
gone up there the compensation will be measured by the 
profit which the seller has reaped after this improper 
refusal to deliver. These rules are to be understood to 
refer to the case of a purchaser belonging to the same 
locality as the vendor ; where the purchaser has come from 
a different country with a view to send the article there, 
in that case the price that prevails in that country must 
be taken into account in measuring the compensation. 

As regards loss or deterioration of the articles sold 
while lying in the hands of the seller the law stands thus : 
If the seller did not deliver the articles although the 
purchaser asked for their delivery, then any subsequent 
loss or deterioration, even if it arises from an act of King 
or an act of God over which the seller has no control, 
must fall upon him for the non-delivery was due to his 
default . 2 Conversely if the purchaser did not take delivery 





to 

ntfawn wren: 11 tow?; \ 


Compensation 

for 

non-delivery. 


Liability for 
deterioration 
or loss after 
demand. 



100 


TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP 


Yiramitro- 

daya. 


Smriti 

Chandrika. 


although the seller expressed his readiness to deliver, then 
any loss arising from an act of King or an act of God 
must be suffered by the purchaser, for it he who 
defaulted in taking the delivery . 1 Of course, if the loss 
arises from some wilful act of the seller, this rule will not 
apply and he will be responsible for the same. It ijiay be 
mentioned that when a thing is burnt by fire or stolcp by 
thieves the loss is generally regarded as one due to an act 
of God. So far the position is quite clear : the loss will 
fall upon the party owing to whose default the thing 
remained in the hands of the seller, except of course where 
the loss itself was caused by one of the parties to the transac- 
tion. A doubt, however, arises as to what should be the 
rule, when previous to the loss, there had been neither 
any demand for delivery on the part of the purchaser, nor 
any offer to deliver on the part of the seller. Viramitrodaya 
says that the text of Yajnavalkya, referred to above, makes 
the seller responsible when he had failed to deliver the 
thing sold upon demand from the purchaser, which indicates 
that in the absence of such previous demand, the seller 
cannot be held responsible for any loss or deterioration 
arising from an act of King or an act of God, but it then 
proceeds to quote* without any apparent disapproval the 
opinion of the a.uthor of Smriti Chandrika to the effect 
that where after the completion of purchase, neither the 
purchaser has asked for delivery nor the seller has offered 
to deliver the thing sold and it is lost or injured under 
those circumstances, there the loss will be equally divided 
between the seller and the purchaser in as much as owing 
to the negligence of the one to offer and of the other to 


* fro ii i 



TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. iOl 

demand delivery, there has been default on both the 
sides . u 

It irqgr be interesting to compare with these provisions 
some of the provisions of the Homan Law bearing upon 
similar questions. According to the Roman Law also, a 
sale dees not become complete and the property does not 
pass* from the seller to the buyer, until the buyer has 
paid the price to the seller, or satisfied him in some way or 
other, except where the seller has accepted the credit of 
the buyer in which case, the property becomes immediately 
the property of the buyer. You will find that so far, the 
Roman Law is in complete accord with the Hindu Law. 
The Roman Law however recognises a contract of sale, as 
distinguished from a completed sale and lays down that 
the contract is formed as soon as the price is agreed upon, 
although the title may not be transferred until the payment 
of the price; as a corollary from this, it further lays down, 
that from the moment of the completion of the contract on 
the parties having agreed on the price, all the risks 
attaching to the thing contracted to be sold falls upon the 
purchaser, although the thing lias not yet been delivered 
to him ; and similarly, he also becomes entitled to all the 
ail vantages which rnay accrue and be attached to that 
thing. Now, looking at these provisions as a whole, it 
does not seem to me that either in point of subtlety, or in 
point of reasonableness or logical consistency, the Hindu 
Law suffers from a comparison with Roman Law. 

I have stated that according to the Hindu Law, a mere 
verbal agreement does not, in the absence of a special 
contract, preclude the owner from dealing with some other 
intending purchaser. It is, however, otherwise, where the 


i 


mwf\i * ?n *f ^ wfatf 





Ilinda and 
Roman Law 
compared. 



Effect of 
payment of 
earnest 
money- 


Priority in 
cases of gift 
and sale. 


102 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP. 

verbal agreement has been followed by payment of earnest 
money ; for, in that case, it has been laid down, that" if the 
intending purchaser refuse to complete the purchase 
within proper time, he shall forfeit the earnest money ; 
while on the other hand, if the seller refuse to complete the 
sale, he shall have to return not only the earnest money, 
but also to pay an equal sum as compensation . 1 Curiously 
enough, these provisions completely coincide with those of 
the Roman Law as modified by Justinian. It is stated in 
the Institutes of Justinian that ‘if earnest has been given, 
then, whether the contract was written or unwritten, the 
purchaser, if he refuse to fulfil it, loses what he has given 
as earnest, and the seller, if he refuse, has to restore double’; 
and on this Mr. Sandars comments that ‘the arra were 
either signs of a bargain having been struck, or consisted 
of an advance of a portion of the purchase money. 
Justinian gave? these deposits a new character by making 
them the measures of a foreit in case either party wished 
to recede from this bargain, it being open to either party 
to retract if he eliose to incur his foreit/ 

It now remains to me to close this lecture by pointing 
out that both in cases of gift, and sale, the prior in time 
prevails for it has been said that ‘in all litigious disputes 
the subsequent act prevails, but in case of pledge, acceptance 
(of a gift) and purchase, the prior act is more forcible’." 
The reason of this is quite plain, for once a transfer has 
been made the transferor has lost his interest and is quite 
incompetent to interfere with the right of the transferee. 

1 i 

toWw* it 



LECTURE IY 

The Law of Prescription. 

In* this lecture, I propose to deal with the Hindu Law 
of Prescription, or the effect of Jong possession without 
any opposition from the true owner. The plain meaning 
of the text of Yajnavalkya bearing upon this question 
seems to be that ‘he who sees his land being enjoyed by 
a stranger for twenty years, and his personal chattel for 
ten years without asserting his own right, loses them ’. 1 
You will observe that in order to have the effect mention- 
ed by this text, the possession must have been held by 
the stranger to the knowledge of the owner, but without 
any protest or opposition from him ; it is the concurrence 
of the presence of knowledge with the absence of opposi- 
tion on the pari of the owner that attaches to the adverse 
possession when it has continued for a certain length of 
time, the effect of extinguishing the right of the previous 
owner ; and either of these elements being wanting, the 
resulting consequence will not arise. It therefore follows 
that, whatever the length of possession may be, it will 
be of no avail if the owner was not aware of it, or being 
aware, asserted his title, and opposed the possession of 
the stranger. You will also notice that the period required 
for ripening the prescription is longer in the case of 
immovable property than in the ease of movables, being 
twenty years in the former case, and ten in the latter, a 
difference evidently due to the greater value and import- 
ance of land. These elements in the constitution of the 


Prescription 

adverse 

possession* 


Text of 
Yajnavalkya. 


Elements of 
prescription. 


1 i 

'ft*! ipwiprup l| 



Controversy. 


Mitakshara 

view. 


Usufruct is 
lost but not 
title. 


104 THE LAW OF PltESCltlPTrON. 

rule being understood, the question arises, what is the 
effect? One thing seems to be clear, w:., that the effect 
spoken of is extinctive in its character as indicated by the 
word which means loss or deprivation ; words used 

in the texts of other lawgivers to which I may have 
occasion to refer are also of similar import ; we may 
therefore take it, that by adverse possession of the requi- 
site character, the owner loses, or, in other words, is 
deprived of something; but the question is, what that 
something is. I may tell you at once that our jurists are 
not all agreed upon this point, and a remarkable controversj' 
full of subtle distinctions, has clustered around it. I shall 
try to give yon some idea of this controversy and of the 
different opinions that were maintained by the different 
jurists. 

The* author of Mitakshara seeks to place a very 
narrow construction upon the text cited above, and the 
effect of prescription, according to him, is very limited in 
its character ; he argues that omission to assert one's title 
cannot legitimately be regarded as a cause of the extinc- 
tion of that title; similarly, mere enjoyment, whatever 
its duration may be, cannot be regarded as a source of 
title, since it is not recognised as such in popular usage, 
and a text of Narada has declared that ‘the king shall 
punnish a person who enjoys another's property without 
any title as if he were a thief, although he may have 
done so for hundred years 1 he therefore concludes that 
the loss (ypfa) spoken of in the text means not the loss of 
the property itself, but of the usufruct enjoyed by the 
person in adverse possession, so that the owner shall not 
be entitled, after the prescribed period, to recover the 


1 q**i«wtTOfg 



THE LAW OF PRESCRIPTION. 


105 


profits already appropriated by the person in possession 
whom he* has allowed to do so with his eyes open and 
without any opposition ; but that the title to the property 
itself and the right to recover the same shall remain intact, 
since title cart not he lost by mere lapse of* time in asserting 
it. . 

On the other hand, the authors of Kalpasutra, Ratna- 
kara, Smrititatwa and Smrit.ichandrika maintain that 
adverse possession for the prescribed period and fulfilling 
the required conditions does extinguish the title of the 
owner so kept out of possession, not only to the usufruct 
hut also to the property itself ; they argue that there is 
no sufficient ground to limit the scope of the text by 
putting an unnatural and strained meaning upon its words 
in the way indicated above ; when Mitakshara admits that 
after the prescribed period the usufruct is lost to the 
owner, it mav he asked — whv is it so lost? To this 
question, there art? two possible answers, for it may either 
he said that the loss is the condign consequence of the 
owner’s own fault in omitting to protest against the 
possession 'which was being enjoyed before his eyes 
or it may be advanced, that the text of the Sastra being 
there, it is unnecessary to grope for any other basis than 
that furnished by the text itself ; now, as regards the 
former alternative, it may be observed that it does not 
sufficiently explain the rule, for, if the loss of the usufruct 
was the natural consequence of the owner’s own default in 
omitting to oppose the possession of the stranger, what is 
the reason for fixing upon twenty years or ten years to entail 
that consequence ? Did not the fault due to the owner’s 
own default exist even before the completion of the pres- 
cribed period, and, if so, how can the prescription be 
sufficiently explained from the reason of the rule without 
recourse to the authority of the text ? It being then 
H 


Kalpn sutra ; 
Ifatiuikara ; 
Smrititatwa 
and Smriti- 
chawlrika. 


Extinctive 
proscription 
title also is 
lost. 



106 


THE LAW OF PRESCRIPTION. 


conceded that ultimately there can be no escape from 
falling back upon the authority of the text, the Question 
arises whether we should interpret that text according 
to its obvious and natural import, or turn and twist 
it with a view to make it fit in with a preconceived 
idea that property cannot be lost by mere non-enjoyment, 
whatever its duration may be. The authors mentioned 
above therefore maintain that adverse possession of the 
nature described in the text already explained extinguished 
the title of the owner kept out of possession not only to the 
usufruct but also to the property itself. 


Bliavadeva’s 

view. 


Doctrine of 
presumption. 


Pradipakara’s 

emendation. 


Between these two extreme views there are certain 
intermediate positions which may now be briefly indicated 
and explained. Bhavadeva maintains that adverse posses- 
sion for the prescribed period to the knowledge of and 
without any opposition from the owner has the effect of 
raising a presumption that the owner must have abandoned 
the property, which being taken up by the possessor, he 
acquires a title to it by a sort of appropriation of a 

thing which is for the time without an owner. His 
conclusion, therefore, practically coincides with the last 
mentioned view, but it is arrived at in a somewhat round- 
about way; for, according to his contention, the extinction 
of title of the previous owner is not the direct result of 
adverse possession for the prescribed period suffered by him 
without opposition, but is the result of abandonment which 
is presumed from that adverse possession ; the loss of title, 
therefore, is, according to this view, inferential, the infer- 
ence being propped up by the presumption of abandonment 
which, as it arises from the text quoted above, must be 
taken to be irrebuttable in its character. Pradipakara also 
accepts this view, but with a little emendation ; he says 
that the presumption arises from adverse possession extend- 
ing over the prescribed period coupled with the impossibility 



THE LAW OF PRESCRIPTION. 107 

of ascribing non-resistance to mere indifference or good- 
naturcdness of the owner, and the character of the 
presumption is that the owner has cither transferred the 
thing to the person in possession or has abandoned it in his 
favour, it being unnecessary to select between the two. 
The rest! difficulties of this doctrine of irrebuttable pre- 
sumption are why should the presumption at all arise, 
and at all events, why should it be irrebuttable? As 
Viramitrodaya very pertinently points out, ten years or 
twenty years is not too long a time to be beyond all human 
recollection, and when no body recollects any transfer in 
favour of the possessor, or any abandonment by the previous 
owner, the inference arises that no such thing took place, 
since otherwise, it would have been remembered ; hence the 
presumptions, on which reliance has been sought to be 
placed by Bhavadeva and the author of Pradipa, do not 
really arise and their doctrines cannot be seriously 
sustained . 1 If in order to escape from these difficulties, it 
becomes necessary to say that the presumptions do arise, 
and they cannot be rebutted by reason of the text cited 
above, then is it not better to avoid the circumlocution, and 
say plainly that the loss of title rests solely on the authority 
of that text ? The doctrine of presumption, therefore, 
seems to be either untenable or unnecessary, and it can 
only serve as a specimen of the ingenuity displayed by 
Hindu jurists, in drawing fine distinctions in order to 
arrive at a desired conclusion. 

The real difficulty in the way of accepting the doctrine 
of extinctive or translative prescription arises from the 
view which seems to have been widely recognised that title 

wft Profit twwifaftr i ifa ? 


Criticism of 
the doctrine 
of presump- 
tion. 


Criticism of 
the doctrine 
of extinctive 
prescription. 



Yachaspati’s 

view. 


Apararka’s 

solution. 


108 THE LAW OF PRESCRIPTION. 

cannot be extinguished by mere adverse possession . without 
the consent or concurrence of the real owner; hence 
Vijnaneswara attempted to explain the text of Yajnavalkya 
by arguing that the loss (^Tfa) spoken of there referred to 
the loss of the usufruct already enjoyed, but he does so, as 
I have alredy pointed out, by putting a somewhat strained 
interpretation upon the words of the text. Vachaspati 
endeavoured to dispose of the question in a somewhat 
different way ; the text of Ya jnavalkya and similar other 
texts, he contended, were designed to point out the risk of 
indifference in asserting one’s title to a property which is 
being enjoyed by another, and lienee to impress upon Hie 
owner the duty ol* preserving with eare the evidence of his 
title by asserting it in proper time; this view reduces the 
rule of prescription to a rule of evidence, but the obvious 
objection to it is that it renders the prescription of deiinih* 
periods (ten years and twenty years) superfluous, since it 
cannot be said that the risk is anv the loss before tlu* 
completion of those periods. 

Apararka seeks to escape from these difficulties by 
maintaining that what has been laid down in the text.- 
about the loss of property has been stated from the stand- 
point of positive law administered by the Courts, but it 
does not. indicate the real direction which the property takes 
under those circumstances. This, he says, is supported by 
the text of Mann declaring that 'if a person, not being an 
idiot or a minor, allows his property to be enjoyed by 
another, then his title to it breaks down and the person in 
enjoyment succeeds in litigation h 1 hence all that can be 
said is that after the lapse of the prescribed period the 
court will not: help the owner in getting back the property 



10 9 


THE LAW OF PRESCRIPTION. 

from the person in possession* but his title is not losi ; 
and if the person in possession* out. of conscientious scruples 
or moral compunction, returns the property, title and 
possession again meet in the same individual, and the 
original condition is restored. It. will appear that Apararka 
thus "reduces the rule into a rule of limitation of action, 
but he also has *not consistently maintained the distinction 
between a rule of: limitation which is meant; for the 
guidance of the court, and a rule of prescription which 
operates by extinguishing the title itself. 

There is a text of Brihaspati which lays down that 
'when a person has been in possession continuously for 
thirty years without any interruption that possession will 
not be afterwards disturbed 1 . 1 Viramitrodaya reconciles 
this with the text of Yaj naval kya by holding that the rule 
of twenty years applies where the owner has not asserted 
his title in opposition to the person in possession, but the 
thirty years 1 rule applies where in spite of verbal protest, 
the adverse possession has been continuously maintained. 

On a perusal of the discussions which have centred 
round this remarkable controversy, one cannot but be 
struck by the splendid development of juristic ideas which 
they evince ; the arguments advanced display a clear con- 
ception of the problem, great logical acumen in drawing 
distinctions and dealing with them, and a high moral 
standard which hesilates to invest the man in possession 
with ownership when that possession had its origin in 
wrong. Sir William Markby therefore betrays a very 
insufficient knowledge of the Hindu Law of Prescription 
when in a footnote in the chapter on Proscription in his 
Klement-s of Law, he smnewhat superciliously observes— 

1 TOramtii ijfarw-n fwifMt t 

ftfsrsftfoi faf^sn to 


Viramitro- 
daya roomi- 
n' Ins tho texts 
of Hrihaspati 
and Yajna- 
valkya. 


Comments 
upon the 
controversy. 



110 


THU LAW OF F RESCRIPT! OX. 


‘Kvun in a system so little advanced as the ancient Hindu 
Law, the advantages of a just title are recognised. The 
Mitakslmra lawyers would allow a right to he gained in 
twenty years, but only if the party already held under 
a title which though defective was just.’ Tt is apparent 
that Sir William Mark by knew very little of the* Hindu 
Law of Prescription, and that little not correctly, and yet 
we are sorry to observe that he could not introduce his casual 
observations without a King upon the ancient Hindu Law. 
For this, however, we ourselves are partly responsible ; 
since, while foreign jurists, in spite of their many dis- 
advantages, have nut of a pure spirit of research directed 
their attention to these subjects, no matter with what 
success, we ourselves ha\c simply looked on. 

As regards the controversy itself, it seems to me thal 
the texts themselves laid down not merely a rule of limita- 
tion or a rule of evidence, but a rule of extinction of title 
by operation of law. The text prescribing punishment for 
wrongful possession, although that possession may have 
continued for a very long time, is not really in conflict 
with the other lexis laying down definite periods for ex- 
tinction of title by prescription, for a. man may be punish- 
able for the original trespass even after a long lapse of time 
apart from any question regarding the civil rights of the 
parties and the* civil remedies of the original owner. 
AVlien, however, in course of Line, the constructive period 
was followed by the critical period of Hindu Jurisprudence, 
and the Philosophical Jurists wh<» took up the discussions 
began to enquire into the theoretical basis of prescription, 
they were beset with doubt's and difficult ios and in the 
result, different jurists tried to solve them in different 
ways. The foundation of this difficulty is not far to seek, 
for, theoretically, one might find it difficult- to understand 
why an existing right should be destroyed by mere non- 



THE LA.W OF PRESCRIPTION. Ill 

assertion of it for a certain length of time, or how possess- 
ion, which was wrongful, could, by mere continuance, change 
its character and become rightful after a certain period. 
It is remarkable that a study of the modern European 
Jurisprudence discloses a similar controversy and a similar 
disinclination to regard title as capable of being totally lost 
through dispossession. Sir Henry Maine’s remarks on this 
question are so instructive and interesting that I can not 
resist the temptation of quoting them here ru 
■' Prescriptions,” says he, “were viewed by the modern law- 
yers, first with repugnance, afterwards with reluctant 
approval.* * * This tardiness in copying one of the most 
famous chapters of Homan Law, which was no doubt 
constantly read by the majority of European lawyers, the 
modern world owes to the iniluenoe of Canon Law. The 
ecclesiastical customs out of which the Common Law 
grew, concerned as they were with sacred or quasi-saered 
interests, very naturally regarded the privileges which 
they conferred, as incapable of being lost through disuse 
however prolonged ; and in accordance with this view, the 
spiritual jurisprudence when afterwards consolidated, was 
distinguished by a marked leaning against Prescriptions. 
It was the fate of the Canon 1 jaw, when held up by the 
clerical lawyers, as a pattern to secular legislature, to have a 
peculiar influence on first principles. It gave to the bodies 
of custom which were formed throughout Europe far 
fewer express rules than did the Roman Law, but then it 
secerns to have communicated a bias to professional opinion 
on a surprising number of fundamental points and the 
tendencies thus produced progressively gained strength as 
each system was developed. One of the dispositions it 
produced was a disrelish for presumptions, but; I do not 
think that this prejudice would have operated as power- 
fully as- it has done, if it had not fallen in with the 


Similar 
conl.mversy 
in Euro}»ojin 
Jurisi>ru- 
i|i»ncn. 

Sir Ilor.ry 
AJaim*. 


.Ill Rimma: r »t 
Canon Law. 



TJie spmiln- 
tive basis of 
preHc.Tipt.mii - 
a point, of 
intcrsot in 
France and 
lb -mi any 
even now : 


not ho in 
England. 


]12 TUB LAW OF I* K ESC IM PTI ON . 

doctrine of t lie scholastic jurists of the realist sect, who 
taught that, whatever turn actual legislation might lake, 
a rujhty how long so ever neglected, w:is in point of' fact 
indestructible. The remains of this state of feeling still 
exist. Wherever the philosophy of law is earnestly dis- 
cussed, questions respecting the speculative bas,is of 
prescription art* always hotly disputed • and it is still a 
point of the greatest interest in Erance and Germany, 
whether a person who has been out of possession for a 
series of years is deprived of his ownership as a penalty for 
his neglect, or loses it through the summary interposition 
of the law in its desire to have a Jim* lit tun”. English 
lawyers do not seem t*» have been much perplexed by these 
theoret ical difficulties ; the bent of English mind 1ms 
always been practical and not speculative ; they make the 
law, and leave the philosophy of law to take care of itself. 

1 may wind up this part of the discussion by saying 
a few words upon the Roman Law of Prescription. Before 
Justinian's time, the operation of possession in perfecting 
one’s title wa.s known as usucapion; the periods provided for 
the operation of usucapion were very shout, being one 
year in the ease of movables and two years in the case of 
immovables within mhua Uulinm ; moreover, to have this 
effect, possession must have commenced bond Jidr, and 
r.v junta co ft st i , t.r., in some recognised method of acquiring 
property insufficient to create title by reason of some 
defect in form under the peculiar rules of Roman Law 
which required the peculiar ceremonies of mancipation 
for the transfer of Res Mancipi. The necessity of show- 
ing jejita amts a and the shortness of the periods prescribed 
for the operation of usucapion clearly prove that it: was 
at lirst used as a rude device to escape from the embarras- 
monts created by a crude system of conveyance ; and hence 
when under Justinian’s legislation, tradition took up the 



THE LAW OF PRESORJ FTIOX. 


113 


place of mancipation, usucapion was also superseded by 
prescription with the periods for its operation considerably 
lengthened : from one year to three years in the ease of 
movables, and from two years to twenty years or ten years 
in the ease of lands wherever situate, according as the 
adverse possession was held against a person present in the 
province or absent therefrom. Thus modified, the pres- 
cription under the Roman Law very much approached the 
prescription under the Hindu Law. There wen 1 , however, 
a few points of difference ; in the first place, the period 
laid down for the operation of prescription in the case of 
movables was shorter under the Roman Law than under 
the Hindu Law; in the second place, the Hindu Law does 
not seem to have allowed the rule of prescription to operate 
against an absent owner who knew nothing about the 
adverse possession ; in the third place, where the possession 
had no bona fulr beginning, a still longer period, r/r., thirty 
years, seems to have been mpiiml under the Roman Law 
to ripen the prescription which went under the name of ■ 
prmcripfin [onf/issimi femporis, a provision with which we 
may compare the rule of the Hindu Law that when the 
adverse possession was not free from verbal protest, a 
period of three? years was necessary to put a stop t*» future 


Tho Hindu 
and Homan 
HyfttfunK 
compared. 


disturbance of that possession. On the whole, the two 
systems exhibit accidental resemblances of a striking 
character, and where they differ, 1 can not say that the 
Hindu Law suffers from the comparison. As regards the 
theoretical difficulties of prescription, they do not seem to 
have perplexed the Roman Jurists who allowed usucapion 
to be transferred into proscription by the mandate of the 
legislator when the cumbrous formalities of transfer were 
swept away to make room for simpler methods. 


I shall now pass on to consider some of the exceptions totVXwU- 
to the applicability of the rule of prescription. They are prescript^ 



114 


THIS LAW OF P R ESC ill FTION. 


their princi- 
ple. 

Similar 
exceptions in 
ottier systems* 


mostly summed up in the text of Yajnavalkya which lays 
down tliat the rule applies except in the eases of pledges, 
boundaries, trust deposits, the wealth of idiots and infants, 
sealed deposits, and the property of a king, a woman, or a 
priest versed in the Vedas . 1 The principles on which these 
exceptions are based are not peculiar to the Hindi? Law 
aiid similar exceptions are also to be found in other systems 
of Jurisprudence. Thus with regard to property entrusted 
to another by way of a pledge or a trust, so long as the 
pledge or trust continues there can be no prescription 
against, the owner ; this is on the principle that derivative 
possession does not induce proscription, and although in 
the case of a pledge for custody (and not for use) and a 
trust deposit the pledges and the bailee exceed their power 
in using or enjoying those things, still such enjoyment or 
use does not make thoir possession a verse against the 
owner who entrusted the things with them, the only 
difference that it makes being that he becomes entitled to 
compensation for the unauthorised use of his things in 
violation of the agreement under which possession was 
derived. There can be no prescription against a minor or an 
idiot, because he is unable to protect his own interest and 
should, therefore, be protected by the law ; similar pro- 
tection is also afforded to women by reason, as Mitakshara 
puts it of tlieir ignorance and want of forwardness 
( ) with the exceptions made in favour of a 

King and a learned Brahmin we may, compare the maxim 
‘ nullum tempos oecurrit regi aut ecclcsise,’ and the 
Mitakshara justifies them on the ground that the King by 
reason of his numerous avocations, and the learned Brahmin 
by reason of his absorption in spiritual studies and conse- 
quent inattention to secular concerns of life may be 

WTfq I 



THE LAW OF PRESCRIPTION. 115 

unmindful of the possession held adversely against them, 
and should, therefore, be exempted from the operation of 
prescription. As regards the exception in the case of 
encroachment overstepping intermediate boundary, the 
Mitakshara says that in as much as boundaries are easily 
ascertainable by reference to permanent boundary marks it 
is not unlikely that one may look with indifference upon 
an encroachment by the neighbour, and hence omission to 
protest should not entail the consequence which attaches 
itself to unexplained negligence in asserting one's claim ; 
you will understand that this explanation proceeds upon 
the view held by the Mitakshara that what the owner loses 
by adverse possession is not the property itself, but the 
usufruct, and that the loss is a sort of penalty for the 
owner's laches in opposing the possession in proper time, 
so that any excuse for non-op position will furnish a ground 
tor not enforcing the penalty ; the explanation, however, 
nmy not, seem to be adequate on the view that prescription 
is a cause of loss of title in the property itself, and it may 
be suggested that the real explanation may bo that 
encroachment in a neighbouring Held by overstepping the 
intermediate boundary is calculated to be of such a fitful 
character that it may not often attract attention and is not 
always capable of prevention, so that such acts ought to be 
regarded as isolated acts of tresspass and should not be 
allowed to ripen iuto a prescriptive title. Besides these 
exceptions, it was also laid down that there could be no 
prescription when the possession was permissive, being 
allowed through affection for a kindred or the like : 1 the 
reason is that in a case like this, possession cannot be 
regarded as adverse. On the whole it may be safety 
asserted that the exceptions are all eminently reasonable, 


i *3 1 



He 


THE LAW OF PRESCRIPTION, 


Possession as 
evidence of 
title. 


Yajnavalkya. 
II eroditary 
possession : 
what it 
means. 


and they are founded on principles which have been 
adopted more or less in all systems of Jurisprudence. 

There is another question discussed in Hindu Law 
relating to the effect of long possession which is so very 
similar to the question so long discussed that it is not 
impossible for one to overlook ♦ the distinction between 
the two and confuse them with each other. The question 
is this : possession, as far as it goes, is evidence of title, 
for in the absence of evidence to the contrary, it should be 
presumed that the man in possession is the owner of the 
thing posscsesd; blit in as much as it is not unusual to find 
possession without title, and title without possession, 
bare proof of possession does not ordinarily exclude an 
enquiry into the question of title: and if it can be shown 
by independent evidence that the possession is not founded 
on title, then ordinarily the title will prevail over such 
possession. The question, therefore, arises whether under 
any eireumsl ances evidence of possession can supersede the 
necessity of an enquiry, so as to entitle the person in 
possession to rely upon it alone as evidence of his title 
without recourse to any other evidence. This question has 
been answered by our lawgivers, and I shall attempt to 
explain their position as briefly as T can. 

Yajnavalkya declares that Title preponderates over 
possession unless the latter be hereditary / 1 This means 
that if a person proves his possession over a property, but 
cannot show how lie acquired it, and another, although 
not in possession, proves his title by showing that he 
acquired the property in some recognised way oJ: acquiring 
ownership, such as sale, gift, etc., then the title so proved 
must prevail over possession unless such possession is 
shown to he hereditary, being in fact a continuation of 


1 mnaiimi i 



THE LAW OP PRESCRIPTION. 117 

ancestral possession. The exception made in favour of here- 
ditary possession indicates that such possession supersedes 
an enquiry into title, but it raises the question what 
hereditary possession means. Now there are texts to the 
effect that in order to have the desired effect, possession 
must have continued through three generations in the past. 

So Narada says, that where possession has continued Nnrada 
through three generations in the past including the father, 
it cannot be disturbed even if it was wrongful ; 1 and 
according to a text of Yyasa, possession extending over y yaKfl 
one generation means possession for twenty years, so that 
possession for three generation means possession for at least 
sixty years / 2 Apararka however cites an anonymous text ^T ),,l ’ ar ^ a 
which lays down that possession for one generation should be 
taken to extend over thiity-Jivc years/* The real significance 
of these texts is thus sought to be explained by the author 
of the Mitakshara ; he says that, the crucial distinction is utitakshara 
between possession which had its beginning within living 
human memory, and possession which extends beyond that, 
so that possession extending over three previous generations 
really imports possession from time immemorial ; he argues 
that when possession had its beginning within living 
memory, if may not be impossible to show that it was not 
founded on any valid title, whereas in a ease of 
immemorial use, you eon not say that it had no valid 
origin, since that origin is not within living human 
recollection, and that being so in this latter case all 

1 wmrfa tor ^ ferfa: t 

a sptffa gw *<nfen \ 

m it 

* ^ 5T to: i 

wfa iftof t it 



Conclusion 


11 S THE LAW OE ElllSSCKlETlOtf. 

further enquiry into the question of title is practically 
superseded, and nothing remains to be done but 
to support the existing possession as incontestable and 
incapable of being lawfully disturbed. This position is 
supported by the text of Katyayana which clearly explains 
the ground of the rule ; it says that, in a ease of dispute 
about land, where possession had its beginning within living 
memory possession, accompanied by title has to be sought 
after, but where itis extended beyond human memory, there 
in as much as it is impossible to be certain about absence 
of title, possession descending through three generations 
must prevail. 1 That mere continuance of possession 
through three generations is not conclusive and is really 
meant, to stand for a period beyond human recollection 
appears from the fact that, under extraordinary circums- 
tances this may be compassed within a much shorter period 
so as to take the case out of the reason of the rule as 
explained in the text of Katyayana cited above. The ut- 
most extent of human life, and therefore the extreme range 
of human memory is said by Mitakshara. according to a 
text of the Veda, to be hundred years, but the real test 
must be understood to be furnished by the limits of living 
human memory which must be regarded in each particular 
case. The conclusion therefore seems to be this : under 
ordinary eircumtances, mere possession does not exclude an 
enquiry into title, for possession may lie with one person ami 
title with another ; where, however, that possession has 
descended through three previous ancestors, it was thought 
that to render proof of title was superfluous, and some 
lawyers laid down that such possession, even if shown to 
be wrongful, could not bo disturbed ; this period was 

i 

zmm « 



THE LAW OF PRESCRIPTION. 


119 


elated bv some sages to cover sixty years, and there is one 
*text, which, if genuine, would make it cover one hundred 
and five years. It was perhaps considered, as the text of 
Katyayana would seem to indicate, that when possession 
continued through three successive generations, it could very 
well be regarded as having its origin beyond living human 
memory. The Mitakshara then takes its stand upon the 
reason of the rule, and contends that mere passing through 
th ive generations is not necessarily conclusive, for it is not 
inconceivable that under extraordinary circumstances such a 
thing may happen within a comparatively short time ; 
lienee, it concludes that it is only when the origin of 
possession is lost in obscurity by reason of its having 
commenced beyond living human recollection that enquiry 
into the question of title is superseded and possession, 
standing alone, justifies itself ; for in such a case the 
p resumption is that possession lias, as a matter of fact, 
followed title. 

Even then it allows that such presumption is not 
absolutely irrebuttable, a qualification which flows logically 
from the doctrine that possession is never an equivalent 
of title, but only presumptive evidence thereof ; but this 
concession to logical consistency seems to be inconsistent 
with the text of Narada cited above, which shows that in 
such a case, the existing possession cannot be disturlnjd 
even it shown to be wrongful. On any view, the practical 
result is almost indentical ; in a ease where possession lias 
come down from time immemorial, it is not merely nine 
points, but ten points of title, and even when it had its 
origin within living recollection and enquiry into title is not 
therefore superseded, evidence of title being equally 
balanced, possession must prevail. 

1 hope you will now understand why I have kept this 
discussion into the effect of enjoyment from time 



Similar 
doctrines in 
other 
systems. 


Savigny. 


Viittel. 


120 THE LAW OF PRESCRIPTION. 

immemorial quite %part from the discussion into the effect 
of enjoyment of a particular character and for a certain 
definite period in extinguishing the title of the real owner. 
Apart from the doctrine of the Mitakshara School that 
in no case can possession for a definite period having its 
beginning within living recollection extinguish the real 
owner’s right to any thing more than the usufruct already 
enjoyed, there is, even on a thorough recognition of 
the doctrine of extinctive prescription, this difference in 
principle between the two doctrines that enjoyment from 
time immemorial supersedes an enquiry into title by 
raising an almost irrebuttable (if not absolutely irrebuttable) 
presumption of lawful origin, while adverse possession for 
the prescribed period when its fulfils certain conditions 
operates by extinguishing the old title and thereby 
substituting a new title in its place. 

It will now be interesting to compare with this doctrine 
of Hindu Law, similar doctrines in other systems of 
Jurisprudence. Thus it will be found that the doctrine of 
immemorial enjoyment lias been recognised in public law, 
and is thus stated by Savigny : — ‘when a condition of 
things has lasted so long that the present generation never 
knew any other, and their forefathers knew no other, then 
it must be assumed that this condition of things is so 
bound up with the convictions, feelings, and interests of 
the nation that it cannot be disturbed/ Yattcl in his Law 
of Nations subscribes to the same doctrine, when he says 
that in addition to ordinary prescription ‘there is another 
called immemorial, because it is founded on immomorial 
possession, the origin of which is unknown or so deeply 
involved in obscurity as to allow no possibility of proving 
whether the possessor has really derived his right from 
the original proprietor or received the possession from 
another/ 



THE LAW OF PRKSCKJ PTIOX. 


121 


As regards the Homan Law, Sir William Markby points 
out that ‘Sa vigny considers 1 lmt in the Roman Law the 
principle of time immemorial applied only to three* kinds 
of right# — rim vicirialeH- rights connected with the prevention 
of Hoods ; and rights connected with the supply of water. 
He seems to think that it was as being matters of public 
concern that the principle of time immemorial was applied 
to these rights. The notion of the Roman lawyers 
seems to have been that in regard to a thing V /{■///* we mm tun 
rr tastes exceilit* if the public were interested in it, they 
ought to treat the ease in the same way as if a let had 
authorised it. As regards the length of time which would 
be considered time immemorial, * e/ij/is contrarri von ext at 
wnaoriftS The € eoutrarii me at aria 3 seems to mean a reeollee- 
tion of the time when no such right existed. If there is a 
me atari a of this, any presumption in favour of the right is 
excluded. And the result of two passages in the Digest upon 
the subject appears to be that if any person comes forward 
and can say, either from his own recollection or from the 
information of others speaking from their own recollection 
that the thing was at one time illegal, the presumption 
will be excluded. But more ancient information than this 
as to any illegality would not be suflicient. One may 
ask why in the Rornj .11 Law, the doctrine of immemorial 
enjoyment was not applied to corporeal things ; 1 cannot 
answer the <pu;stion with any amount of confi lenee, but 1 
may be permitted to suggest that it was perhaps so, 
because the rule of prescript in lonyissiwi teiaporis would, on 
thirty year’s (lossession, make the possessor completely 
secure against any future disturbance by the previous 
owner, so that recourse to the doctrine of ‘ immemorial 
enjoyment J would hardly be necessary in such a case, while 
uuder the Hindu Law by reason of the doubt which lias ex- 
isted regarding the recognition of the doctrine of extinctive 
1(5 



Kni'liuli L:nv 


Littleton 


.1 ntroilnction 
of the 

presumtion of 
log'll origin. 

The first year 
of the rcitm 
of Richard I. 


Hi TUB LAW OF PRESCRIPTION. 

proscription and also by reason of the limitation under 
which alone it can be* applied, the doctrine of ‘immemorial 
enjoyment’ cannot be regarded as similarly superfluous. 
1 may, however, venture to observe that the tp test ion of 
necessity or superfluity does not necessarily exclude 
considerations of logical consistency, and the foundation 
of the doctrine of ‘immemorial enjoyment* being what it 
is, I do not quite see how the Roman Lawyers could, with 
a strict regard for the underlying principle, limit its 
application to a few incorporeal rights. 

Turning now to the English Law, we find that it was 
very early recognised that long continued enjoyment of 
an incorporeal right urc n (peaceably), rtre c-irn (openly), 
and v//v prreario (as of right) would establish the right. 
In explaining long enjoyment, Lord Coke says that it has 
reference to ‘the time given by law, which in England 
is the time whereof there is no memory of man to the 
contrary.* Sir William Markby points out that Littleton 
identified prescription and enjoyment from time immemorial, 
that he did not base its operation upon the presumption of 
a legal title, and that he assumed time immemorial to 
mean Mu* time whereof there was no memory of man to 
the contrary. The English lawyers following Littleton 
also adopted time immemorial as the basis of their law ; 
but they at the same time (in this respect not following 
Littleton) adopted the principle that enjoyment from 
linn* immemorial was not a mode of acquisition, but only 
afforded a presumption of legal origin ; but it so happened 
that shortly after the enactment of the statute of West- 
minister in 1275, the English lawyers came to hold that 
nothing was beyond human memory which had its 
beginning since the time of Richard 1, A.D. 118th 
The result was that the protection afforded by English Law 
to long enjoyment was very slender, and gradually as the 



THE LAV OE VRESCIM VTION. 


U8 

time which had elapsed since the time of Richard I became iiK-ouvoni- 

Jonger and longer, the protection so afforded became ut T,K 

almost shadowy and ineffectual. Hence the Judges, about 

the end of the eighteenth century, tried, by a sort of 

fiction, to afford an ample protection to long enjoyment, 

by introducing the presumption of a modern lost grant ; 

but it was, at all events, as Sir William Markby calls it, 

a clumsy legal iiction which lias now been almost, though 

not altogether, superseded by the provisions of the 

Prescription Act, also called Lord Tenterden’s Act, making 

the presumption of legal origin conclusive after an enjoy- rivsumpiiui 

• ill . .. *1*1 of i« tuorlnrii 

incut oi twenty years, pro v Kit'd Inc enjoyment Jiilhls certain lust. ^mnt. 

conditions which I need not here explain. “The Act”, says Sir 

William Markby, “does not make the prescription or the 

English Law any thing different from what it was before. 

It does not do away with the presumption of a legal origin. 

Nor does it even apply to all kinds of jura in yv a fit mi, but 

only to those mentioned in the Ael. The protection of other 

rights remains as Indore, and juries arc still often gravely 

asked to presume that grants have been lost which no one 

believes ever to have exist ed.’’ 

This, then. i> the condition of the English Law, and , 

M liniu .'Hid 

if wo compare with this the doctrine of ihe Hindu Law, Emvli.-liL.-.w 
which 1 have tried to explain above, it seems to me ’ 1,1 * IM 

quite clear that the Hindu Law will not suffer from the 
comparison. It basics the protection afforded to long 
possession or enjoyment on a presumption ol its legal 
origin, and then correctly traces the real foundation of 
the presumption in the continuity of the possession iron* 
time immemorial, Ihen, in determining what Mime 
immcmoriaP means, it does not fall into the error, it not 
the folly, of the English Law, of fixing upon a fixed point 
of time as the limit of living human recollection, although 
time flows, as it has always done and the distance from 



124 


THE LAW OF PRESCRIPTION. 


that fixed point increases every day, so that the protection 
sought to be afforded gradually dwindles away ; then, 
again, in as much as the principle on which the Pule is 
based is of universal application, the Hindu Law does not 
limit its application to this or that right, but allows it 
to have its full scope and operation wherever the reason 
of the rule applies. After this short comparative review 
I leave it to others to say whether the Hindu Law of 
Prescription does not deserve the serious attention of every 
student of historical and comparative jurisprudence ; and 
whether, in many of its features, it does not compare very 
favourably with some of the most advanced systems of 
western law ; it is unfortunate that the subject has not, 
up to the present moment, been studied with the proper 
amount of care ; otherwise, I doubt not, it would have 
demonstrated how wonderfully the influence of universal 
reason permeating human institutions bridges over the 
gulf of time * and space, and produces similarity of the 
most extraordinary kind. 



LECTURE V 


The Law of Succession. 

The subject of the present lecture is the Law of Succes- 
sion. It will be readily understood that I do not propose to 
enter into a discussion of the details of the subject; my only 
aim is to explain some of the fundamental principles which 
furnish the key to the understanding of the law of succes- 
sion as unfolded by the Mitakshara and the Dayabhaga 
Schools; these principles when properly understood, will 
elucidate how and in what respects the Mitakshara and the 
Dayabhaga Schools differ from each other, and the 
elucidation of these differences will, I hope, clear up much 
that seems to be obscure to a student who, without being in- 
itiated into the secret which gives, as it were, an entrance 
into the interior of the shrine, merely tries to gather as much 
information as he can by peeping from outside. Knowledge 
of isolated details so long as they are not deduced from 
and connected with their underlying principles is, however, 
as slippery as it is confusing, and it is better to have a 
tirm grasp over a few fundamental principles than to collect 
mechanically a mass of disjointed details. 

1 have used the word 'succession* to describe the 
subject matter of the present lecture, but, I • am afraid, 
that the word has been somewhat loosely used, since, as 
you will see, we shall have to deal not only with acquisition 
of ownership through kinship after the cessation of the 
interest of the last holder, but also with acquisition of 
ownership through the same source along with the last 
holder. Speaking generally, therefore, we may say that 
the scope of the present lecture is to deal with acquisition 


The scope of 
the present 
lecture. 



THE LAW OF StTCCESSrOX. 


what it 
moans ? 
According to 
the Mitak sh- 
am. 


According to 
lh« Duya- 
blut^a. 


The two deli- 
nit ion 8 com- 
pared. 


This furnish- 
es one of the 
fundamental 
distinctions 
between the 
two schools. 


126 

of ownership through kinship to the last holder indepen- 
dently of any voluntary act on his part designed to have 
this effect. 

The word used to denote property which has devolved 
upon a person in this manner is sw. The Mitakshara 
explains this term as signifying ‘the wealth which becomes 
the property of another solely by reason of his kinship to 
the owner * 1 and the word ‘solely* (*CT) is intended 
to exclude the co-operation of any other cause such 
as a gift or a sale on the part of the owner and to 

Jay stress on the fact that it is the relationship alone that 
determines the accrual of ownership. The Dayabhaga, on 
the other hand, defines the term as signifying ‘the wealth 
in which property, dependent on kinship to the former 
owner, arises upon the cessation of his ownership thereof.* 
On a comparison of the two definitions, you will observe 
that according to the Mitakshara, it is not absolutely 
necessary that the ownership of a person must cease in 
order that his kinsmen may step into his shoes and acquire 
ownership in his property, but that, according to the 

Dayabhaga, the cessation of the ownership of a person 

is a condition precedent to the acquisition of ownership by 
*his kinsman by virtue of the relat ionship that exists between 
them. The difference between the Dayabhaga and the 
Mitakshara doctrines, which forms one of the fundamental 
distinctions between the two shools governed by those two 
works, therefore, consists in this : according to the 

Dayabhaga, ownership to a person** property by virtue of 
kinship to that individual arises only when that pcrsou*s 
ownership comes to an end which happens usually on his 
death, so that before this, no one, however close his 


fauTOTT i srsrwr I 



THE LAW OF SUCCESSION. 


127 


relationship to the owner may be, can claim to have 
acquired an owner's right to the property which still belongs 
to his relation; heirship, according to the Dayabhaga, is, 
therefore, succession in the strict sense of the term by 
reason of kinship to the former owner, or to be more 
precise, of kinship to and survival of the former owner $ 
according to the Mitakshara, on the other hand, there 
are certain relations who, at the moment of their birth, 
acquire ownership in the property of their relations, so that 
the accrual of ownership does not, in their case, depend upon 
the cessation of the ownership of the previous owners, 
but they? along with their relations, the previous owners, 
become co-owners in the same property, thus, in their ease, 
it may be said that it is their birth that is the cause of the f 
accrual of their ownership, and hence this doctrine has been 
designated as or the doctrine of acquisition of 

property by birth, as distinguished from the Dayabhaga roilt,aHted to 
doctrine which, for contrast, may be characterised as 
nwrn? or the doctrine of the acquisition of owner- 
ship upon the demise of the last owner. 

You must, however, remember that even, according to Acquisition of 
the Mitakshara, the acquisition of property by birth is bi^th^owfur 
limited only to a very few relations, riz. y the son and other* ifc 
direct male descendants of the owner. The Mitakshara 


in .speaking of the relations who thus acquire a co- 
ownership by their very birth makes mention of sons 
and grandsons, but the Virarnitrodaya explains that 
the great-grandsons also are included in the same 
category ; beyond these the principle of acquisition of 
co-ownership by birth does not extend ; as regards other 
relations they succeed in the same ways as heirs under the 
Dayabhaga School upon the demise of the previous owner. 
Upon this distinction between the two classes of relations 
is founded the Mitakshara classification of 5TO into the two 


Tho distinc- 
tion between 
unobstructed 
and obstruc t* 
ed heritage. 



The digtinc- 
tiou 1ms no 
place in the 
Dayabha^a. 


128 THE LAW OF SUCCESSION. 

divisions of (unobstructed) and mfom (obstructed). 

The classification is thus explained in the Mitakshara : 
‘ The wealth of the father or the paternal grand-father 
becomes the property of his sons or grandsons, in right of 
their being his sons or grandsons ; and that is a devolution 
of property not subject to obstruction. But property 
devolves upon parents, (or uncles) brothers and. the rest, 
upon the demise of the owner, if there be no male issue ; 
and thus the actual existence of a son and the survival of 
the owner, are impediments to the succession ; and on 
their ceasing, the property devolves upon the successor in 
right of his being uncle or brother. This is an inheri- 
tance subject . to obstruction. 1 The characteristic 
difference between the two classes is therefore this, that in 
a case falling under the former class title arises immediate- 
ly upon the birth of the kinsman so that nothing can 
impede its accrual, while, in a case falling under the latter 
class the accrual of title is merely contingent upon the 
non-existence of an heir belonging to a superior class and 
the survival of the claimant on the demise of the previous 
owner ; so that there being these impediments to the 
succession it cannot be said until the demise of the last 
^pwner whether the title in question will or will not arise. 
You will at once understand that this distinction between 
devolution of property * subject to obstruction 9 and ‘ not 
subject to obstruction * has no place in the doctrine of the 
Dayabhaga School, for according to it neither the son nor 
any other kinsman acquires any title by birth, so that until 
an owner dies no one can say who will succeed to his 
property and, therefore, even the succession of the son is 
liable to be obstructed by the survival of the father ; thus 
the result is, that if you choose to employ the expression 


1 Mitakshara Chap. I. Sec. 1, 3. 



THE LAW OF SUCCESSION. 


129 


‘succession* under the Dayabhaga School, it must always be 
regarded as TOffuro (liable to obstruction.) 

I have explained that according to the Mitakshara, the 
son acquires co-ownership with the father from the 
moment of his birth. It may, however, be asked whether 
this is limited to the ancestral property in the hands of 
the father which has devolved upon him as unobstructed 
property from his paternal ancestors or also extends over 
other kinds of property of the father including property 
inherited by him from persons other than his paternal 
ancestors and his self-acquisition. Mr. Mayne says 'that 
all property which a man inherits from a direct male 
ancestor, not exceeding three degrees higher than himself, 
is ancestral property, and is at once held by himself in 
coparcenary with his own issue. But where he has 
inherited from a collateral relation, as for instance from a 
brother, nephew, cousin, or uncle, it is not ancestral 
property ; consequently his own descendants are not 
coparceners with him *. 1 Similarly he maintains, that 
property inherited by a man from a female or through 
female, not being ancestral property as explained above, 
partakes of the same character as property inherited from 
a collateral ; and with regard to father's self-acquisition# 
he says that en-m-termini it does not belong to the 
co-heirs. 2 ^ Now, it seems to me that this statement of the 
Mitakshara law is not strictly accurate, although the 
^accuracy, such as it is, may not make much difference in 
the result. As I understand the Mitakshara, the right 
acquired by a son by birth in the property of his father is 
not limited to any particular kind of property, but extends 
over all the property of the father, however, acquired. 


To wliat 
kind* of 
father's pro- 
perty does 
the jaeculiar 
Mitakshara 


doctrine 
apply P 


Mayno*8 

view. 


The opinion 
criticised. 


1 Mayne’s H indu Law p. 344. 
3 Mayne ’ h Hindu Law p. 451. 

17 




130 


THIS LAW (W SUCCESSION. 


Nature of 
sou’s interest 
in father’s 
ancestral 
property ami 
in father’s 
own acquisi- 
t ions. 


Thus after an elaborate discussion on the maintainability of 
the doctrine that property arises by birth, the Mitakshara con- 
cludes that therefore (/'.<?., on the grounds already set forth) 
it is certain that property in the paternal as well as grand 
paternal (q?n^) estate arises by birth ; 1 now in this passage 
the separate mention of paternal and grand-paternal (/.<?., 
ancestral) estates as being both subject to the accrual of 
son’s right by birth implies, that the son acquires his right 
hy birth in all the properties of his father whether it be 
ancestral or not, and this conclusion is further strengthened 
by the fact, that in winding up the discussion, the 
Mitakshara says that ‘although property arises by birth in 
paternal as well as grand -paternal (ancestral) estate, we 
shall mention a distinctive peculiarity in dealing with the 
text “land acquired by grand-father etc ., 99 the peculiarity so 
promised t<> be subsequently stated being, that in regard to 
property derived from the grand-father, the father’s right 
of free alienation is restrained by the eo-oqual co-ownership 
of the sou, while in regard to the properties acquired by 
the father himself (whether by collateral succession or 
any other mode of acquisition) the son has no right to 
object to the father’s alienation but must acquiesce therein. 
The distinction thus stated does not, as Mr. Mavne seems 
to think, indicate that the son’s right by birth is limited 
only to the ancestral property in the hands of the father, 
but it only shows that although the right extends over all 
the properties of the father, yet the son cannot oppose an 
alienation by the father except in the ease of ancestral 
property. This is made quite clear by the following 
passage in the Mitakshara ; “consequently the difference 


1 TWITOf fowt if ^|cc|^ I 

The translation of this passage by Mr. Colebrooke * therefore 
it is a settled point, that property in the internal or ancestral estate is 
by birth’ may be misleading. 



181 


THE LAW OF SUCCESSION. 

is this : although he has a right by birth in his father’s 
and in grand father’s property, still, since lie is dependent 
on his father in regard to the paternal estate and since the 
father has a predominant interest as it was acquired by 
himself, the son must acquiesce in the father's disposal of 
his own acquired property; but -since, both have* indiscri- 
minately a right in the grand father's estate, the son has a 
power of interdiction (if the father he dissipating the 
property).” It maybe that this recognition of ownership 
in the son while he has no power to cont rol the action of 
the father either by restraining him from alienating the 
property or by forcing him to come io ;i partition is not 
of much value ; still it is none the less important to have 
a clear and correct idea of the scope of the doctrine which 
1 am so long seeking to explain, together with such quali- 
fications as it may be subject to. My conclusion, then, i«, 
that the right which a soli acquires by birth in his father's 
property is not limited to ancestral property alone, blit 
extends over the entire property of the father, although the 
extent of the right is not everywhere the same hut depend* 
on the nature of the property. 

What has been stated above with regard to the father’s 
power of alienation without the concurrence «>f the son may 
suggest that the father is absolutely free to dispose of his 
self-acquired property in any way he likes, and that so far 
as the ancestral property is concerned hi* lias no power of 
alienation except with the consent of the son. Both these 
propositions, however, seem to require qualification, the 
first with regard to self-acquired immovables, and the 
second with regard to ancestral movables. As regards the 
self-acquired immovable property of the father, you have 
observed that in a passage which I have* cited from 
Mitakshara it is stated generally that “since he is dependent 
on his father in regard to the paternal estate, and since the 


Father's 
pow»?r of 
ulicimtion 
.without the 
concurrence 
of the k 0118- 
how far it 
extends ; 


Self 

acquired 
immovable 
property : 
Can the 
father 

alienate it at 



132 


THE LAW OF SUCCESSION. 


his pleasure 
without the 
concurrence 
of the sous ? 


Conflicting 
texts : how 
they can be 
reconciled. 


father has a predominant interest as it was acquired by 
himself, the son must acquiesce in the father's disposal of 
his own acquired property ; ,M this would seem to indicate 
that the father can dispose of his self-acquired property, 
whether it be movable or immovable, in any way he likes, 
and the soil must acquiesce in it ; there is however an 
earlier passage which seems to lay down a different rule, 
for it is there stated that ‘the father is subject, to the 
control of his sons and the rest in regard to the immovable 
estate, whether acquired by himself or inherited from his 
father or other predecessor, since it is ordained. ‘Though 
immovable or bipeds have been acquired by a man himself, 
a gift or sale of them should not be made without conven- 
ing all the sons. They who are born, and they who are 
yet unbegotten, and they who are still in the womb, require 
the means of support, no gift or sale should, therefore, be 
made.”- There is thus an apparent con diet between these 
two passages, and the question is liow to reconcile them; 
the most obvious way of reconciling them is to read the 
special rule having relation to the father's immovable 
property as an exception to the general rule regarding the 
father's acquired property of all kinds, so that the father's 
uncontrolled right of alienation will, on this interpretation, 
be restricted to properties other than immovable. This 
view seems to find support from the Viramitrodaya, if 
says that ‘although the ownership of the sons and 
grandsons in the property of the father and the grandfather 
arises by birth alone, still by reason of the texts previously 
stated, the sons being dependent on the father, with respect 
to the father's self-acquired property, and the father 
being entitled to superiority on account of his being the 
acquirer, the sons must give their assent to the disposal 


1 Mitakshara Chap. I. Sec?. V. 10. 
8 Mitaksharu Chap. 1. See. I. 27. 



THE LAW OP SUCCESSION'. 


133 


by the father of his self -acquired property excepting land 
and slaves, by reason of the previously cited text, namely 

‘ immovables and bipeds, etc.* 1 and in another passage 

it is pronounced that “of immovable property, whether 
ancestral or self-acquired, the father may make gift and 
the like only with the consent of the sons by reason of 
the text previously cited, viz . — ‘Immovable and bipeds, 
although acquired by a man himself, shall not be gifted 
away or sold without the consent of all the sons/ 2 It 
has, however, been decided by the Privy Council in the 
ease of Rao Balwant Singh vx. Rani Kishori 3 that the 
jrassage in which the Mitakshara prohibits the alienation 
of his self-acquired immovable property by the father 
without the assent of the sons merely lays down a rule, 
founded on moral and religious considerations, which carries 
with it no legal obligation. Referring to the apparent conflict 
in the Mitakshara, their Lordships observe that ‘all these 
old text-books and commentaries arc apt to mingle religious 
and moral considerations, not being positive laws with 
rules intended for positive laws/ If; is, as their Lordships 
think, the most reasonable inference that the precepts in 
Mita. I Sec. I, belong to the former class of precepts, and 
of sections t and 5 to the latter. Now lam quite free 
to admit that the text c Immovable bipeds etc. ’ on which 
the Mitakshara relics in support of its position that: a father 
should not dispose of his self-acquired immovable property 
without the assent of his sons has the appearance of being 
a moral or religious injunction, since the maintenance of 
children born and unborn which is brought forward as a 
ground for the prohibition seems to suggest that the 
precept is directory and not mandatory in its character ; 


Decision of 
the Privy 
Council in 
Rao Balwant 
Sinjjh ret. Rani 
Kishori. 


The (incision 
considered. 


1 Viraniitrodaya Chap. 11, Pt. 1, J7. 

2 Viramitrodaya Chap. II, Pt. I, 22 . 

3 25 LA. 54 , S.C, 28 All 287. 



184 THK LAW OK SUCCESSION. 

at the same time it may be pointed out- that in Chapter 
I, Sec- I, the Mitakshara specially refers to several 
directions relating to alienation of property and expressly 
declares that any violation of them will not in any way 
affect the validity of the transaction and explains the 
purposes for which they were introduced ; this will appear 
from paragraphs 81 and 3 2 where the Mitakshara discusses 
the formalities of alienation of immovable property to whieli 
I have already referred in my last lecture, and from 
paragraph 30 which deals with the requirement of the 
consent of separated kinsmen and points out that ‘among 
separated kindred, the consent of all tends to the facility 
of the transaction, by obviating any future doubt whether 
they be separate or united ; it is not required on account 
of sufficient power in the single ownin ’ ; and the transaction 
is consequently valid even without the consent of the 
separated kinsmen* ; so it is abundantly clear that, in 
writing Chapter I, Sec. I, the author of the Mitakshara 
was not unmindful of the distinction that exists between 
the rules ‘intended for positive laws’ and the rules not 
so intended, and in the very section he points out how 
several rules deducible from the texts of the Dharmasastras 
should not be treated as ‘intended for positive laws/ and 
would not, if not complied with, affect the validity of the 
transaction : that being so, is it at all unreasonable to 
presume that if he had not considered it essential for the 
validity of the transaction that the sons should consent 
to the alienation of father’s self-acquired immovable 
property, he would have expressly said so, just as he did 
in relation to the consent of separated kinsmen, co-villagers, 
and neighbours ? Moreover, the expression used in the 
Mitakshara viz. 9 ‘subjection to the control of the son and 
the rest ( ) to denote the limitation of the 

father's power of alienation does not seem to indicate a 



TIBS LAW OK SUCCESSION , 


135 


mere moral rule but a real limitation of power intended 
to have a legal bearing. It is, therefore, not at all clear 
that the way in which their Lordships of the Privy Council 
have attempted to reconcile the apparent coufliet between 
the two passages in the Mitakshara is correct, and 1 am 
not sure that they have not departed from the strict 
Mitakshara law under a misconception that the distinction 
between a legal rule and a moral or religious recommenda- 
tion was not quite familiar to it, a misconception which is 
all the more inexplicable because in the very section with 
which they were concerned {viz., Chap. I, Sec. I) there is 
ample evidence to show that the distinction was full}' 
recognised and its importance clearly appreciated by the 
author. Tt may, however, be asked that if the consent of 
separated kinsmen, co-villagers, and neighbours be regarded 
as non-essential, why should the consent of the son with 
reference to the present question be not treated in the same 
light? It seems to me that there is a very reasonable 
answer to this question and it is this ; the consent of 
separated kinsmen, co-villagers and neighbours could not 
he required on account of any sort or ownership that they 
could claim in the property to be t ransferred, for in fact 
they had none, and as the transferor had thus full 
dominion over the property an alienation by him would on 
the principles explained by me in the last lecture, pass a 
good title without that consent ; the Mitakshara, therefore, 
explains the requirement of the consent in these cases on 
the ground that it was either required to give a greater 
publicity to the transaction or to prevent the possibility of 
a future dispute ; the son, however, acquires by birth an 
interest in the property of the father, and this, as I have 
explained above, is not limited to ancestral property but 
also extends over the self-acquired property of the father 
apparently, therefore, irj the absence of any special ground 



186 


TUB LAW OK SUCCESSION. 


the father cannot be said to have absolute dominion over 
his self-acquired property in as much as the son has, also, 
acquired an interest therein from the moment of his britli , 
hence, the consent of the latter to an alienation by the 
father of such property cannjt, on ordinary principles, be 
regarded as non-essential, unless it be possible to assign 
some special ground for considering otherwise; t ho 
Mi talcs hara howevqr, says that in the case of self-acquired 
proprety of the father such a special ground does exist 
since by reason of the dependence of the son on him, and 
also in view of the predominant interest which he has in 
his self-acquired property, the son cannot oppose an aliena- 
tion by him of such porperty, but should rather acquiesce 
therein ; now, it may be, here, observed that the Mitaksliara 
docs not say that the consent of the son is not at all 
necessary, but points out that in as much as it is the duty 
of the son to give his consent in such a case, he cannot 
oppose the transaction on the ground that his consent has 
not been obtained ; with regard to immovable property, 
however, a distinction may very well be drawn, and it 
may be fairly contended that in as much as the Sastras 
prohibit an alienation by the father without the son’s 
consent, the latter may legitimately withhold his consent 
to a dissipation by the father of his immovable property 
although he may have acquired it himself, and by the 
reason of co-ownership which the son has acquired from his 
birth this consent cannot be regarded as non-essential to 
the validity of the transaction. This position is further 
strengthened by the fact that in the Mitaksliara as well as 
in the Viramitrodaya the dependence of the father in 
making an alienation of immovable property, whether 
ancestral or self-acquired, is laid down in one and the same 
sentence 1 and it would be opposed to the well-known 

fonts vm ^ gsifs i 

Mitaksliara. Chap. I. Sec. I. 27. 



THE LAW Ol- SUCCESSION. 


137 


canon of construction t hat a word once pronounced can 
convey only one meaning 1 to maintain that it moans one 
thing when the property is ancestral, and another when it 
is .self-acquired, nay, the Vi ram it today a expressly declares 
that ‘ with regard to immovable property, whether self- 
acquired or inherited from the* father or the ancestor, the 
dependence on the sons &c., is alike.’ - It should not be 
considered that the acceptance of this position would 
obliterate all distinction between self-acquired and ancestral 
immovable property in the hands of the father, for, apart 
from anything else, the son has a right to call ujkhi the 
lather to come to a partition with regard to the latter 
property and not with regard to the former. 

Let us now turn to the case of ancestral movables in 
regard to which the proposition that the father has no 
right to alienate ancestral property without the consent of 
the son seems to require qualification. The qualification is 
founded upon the text of Narada declaring that ‘ the father 
is master, even of all gems, pearls, and corals; but neither 
the father nor the grandfather is so of the entire 
immovable property.’ n This seems to indicate that the 
power of the father over ancestral movables is only 
limited as Mr. Colchrooke said, by his own discretion and 
by a sense of spiritual responsibility; it has, however, 
been suggested that since Vijnancswara, referring to the 
lather’s power of alienating such properly says that alt hough 
property in the paternal as well as grand -paternal (ancestral) 

1 si*?: i 

Yiramitrodaya. Chap l. 30. 

forn Wq: I 
q sj ftrai fanror: n 

18 


Power ol* the 
ful her over 

ancestral 
movables. 



138 


THE LAW OF SUCCESSION. 


estate? arises by birth, still the father lias an independent 
power in the disposal of effects other than immovables for 
necessary acts of duty, and for purposes prescribed by texts 
of the Sastras such as gifts through affection, support of 
the family, relief from distress, and so forth / 1 it should 
be taken that the lather has no absolute power of disposing 
of movables at his own discretion, but only for the pm- 
j>oses, indicated in the above passage. The question is 
not free from difficulty; it may be said, on the one hand, 
that this would be putting a narrow construction upon 
the passage cited from the Mitakshara, for, the purposes 
enumerated in that passage are merely illustrative, and 
they refer, as the passage stands, to self-acquired movables 
also, in relation to which the father's power of free dis- 
posal cannot be possibly gainsaid ; moreover, it may hr 
pointed out that the text of Narada does not impose any 
limitation upon the father's control over movables, and 
no limitation can possibly be deduced from it ; and the 
Viramitrodaya in one place says without any qualification 
that as regards gems, pearls, etc., though inherited from the 
grand-father, the father alone has independence by reason 
of the previously cited texts, viz., the father is master of 
all the gems, pearls and corals, &<\ a On the other hand, 
the text of Yajnavalkva that the ownership of father and 
son is similar in land which was acquired by the grand- 
father, in a corrody, and in chattels (which belonged to 
him), and the commentary of the Mitakshara based on 
this text that since both (/>., father and son) have 
indiscriminately a right in the grand-father's estate the 
son has a power of interdiction created a difficulty in 
adopting the above view. Under the circumstances the 
best way of reconciling these conflicting considerations is 

1 Atitn. Clmp. J. Sec. 1. 27. 

* Viramitrodaya, Chap. II, part 1, See. 17. 



THE LAW OF srcCESSIOK. 


130 


to hold that the father has the power of alienating ancestral 
movables at. his discretion, but if he begins to dissipate 
them the son has the right to object on the basis of his 
co-equal ownership. The explanation of Nilakanta that 
the independence of the father in relation to gems, pearls, 
and corals, &e., relates only to ‘the wearing and other use 
of car-rings, etc., but does not extend to gift or other 
alienation M is opposed to the Mitakshara, and cannot be 
held to eonlain a correct exposition of the Mitakshara 
view. 

The Dayabhaga, however, h ms lies all these distinctions 
aside by holding that the father, so long as he is alive, 
is the absolute owner of all his property whether ancestral 
or self-acquired, and the son does not acquire any owner- 
ship by his birth but only upon the extinction of the 
father’s ownership either by his death or in any other 
wav. The absolute ownership of the father being thus 
established it follows, on the principles which I have 
explained in the last lecture, tlmt he can alienate his 
property at his discretion, and the texts which seem to 
require the concurrence of the sons or of anybody else 
in certain eases are all explained as laying down mere 
moral or religious injunctions. Thus after maintaining 
that the consent of divided or undivided kinsmen required 
b.V the t ext of Yvasa in the alienation of immovable 
property is merely directory and its absence does not invalid- 
ate the transaction, Jiinutavahana goes on to sav “an 
likewise other texts such as 4 Though immovables and 
bipeds have been acquired by a man himself a gift or sale 
them xftovhl not. hr uuulr by him without convening 
all the sons ’ must be interpreted in the same maimer. 

here the words ‘should he made’ must be understood. 

J V. Muy Chap. V. See. 1 . 


The 

Dnynfihft'rn 
brushes nil 
these 

flint i net ions 
aside. 


Eat hers 
power of 
alienation 
under tho 
iJayabhapi. 


Prohibitory 
texts Ho not. 
alTncst Lhu 
validity of 
the 

t r.-msuct ion. 



The 

position.® 

pti minimised : 

Mitukshuru 


Dayabhaga 


Ts there 
any 

recognition 

of 

Htfll 

full- 

]iroj rty 
filin’ iy hit- 
lift-i 
Mu* 

Day m !>ha"a V 


140 THE LAW Ot StJCCESSlOK. 

Therefore, since it is denied that a gift or sale should 
he made, the precept is infringed by making one. But 
the gift or transfer is not well ; for a fact cannot hr 
altered by a hundred texts.” 1 

To sum up the discussion, we lind that according to 
the Mitakshara the son, upon his birth, acquires an interest 
in the property of his father, whether it be ancestral or 
self-acquired ; with regard to ancestral property, the 
interest so acquired is so far equal to that of the father, 
that it entitles him to call upon the father to come to a 
partition, and with regard to immovable property it gives 
him the further right to control an alienation by the 
father without his consent. According to the Dayabhaga, 
on the other hand, the son does not become co-owner with 
the father during his lifetime, since his ownership arises 
only upon the extinction of the father’s ownership ; he, 
therefore, can not corn pel tin* father to partition the 
property with him, and the latter is free to give or sell the 
property without his consent. 

Does the Dayabhaga, then, recognise no interest what- 
soever in the son in the father's property before succession 
opens out to him on the extinction of the father’s owner- 
ship* either upon his demise or otherwise ? It appeal* 
that, even according to the Dayabhaga, the father may, 
at his option, divide his property among himself and his 
sons, and in doing so, although he may distribute his sell- 
acquired property in any way he likes, he cannot make 
an unequal distribution among the sons, of the ancestral 
immovable property, corrody and slaves, and he cannot 
also withhold them altogether from the sons by refusing 
to give them any share whatsoever or by retaining more 
than a double share for himself. Thus referring to the text 
of Yajnavalkya, "The ownership of lather and son ^ 

1 Dayabhaga. Chapter II. Sees. 2U ami MO. 



THE LAW OK SUCCESSION. HI 

similar in land which was acquired by his father, and in a 
corrody and in chattels/ 1 Jimutavahana explains that 
chattels must mean slaves, and goes on to say that “the 
meaning of the text may be as set forth by Dharcswara, 
“a father, occupied in giving allotments at his pleasure, 
has equal ownership with his sons in the paternal grand- 
father's estate. He is not privileged to make an unequal 
distribution of it, at his choice, as lie is in regard to his 
own acquired wealth. So Vishnu says, “When a father 
separates his sons from himself, Ins will regulates the 
division of his own acquired wealth. But, in the estate 
inherited from the grand-father, the ownership of father 
and son is equal. This is very clear. When the father 
separates his son himself he may, by his own choice, give 
them greater or less allotments, if the wealth were acquired 
by himself ; hut not so, if it were property inherited from 
the grand- fa tlier ; Ix'causc t hey have an equal right to it. 
The father has not in such case an unlimited discretion." 
From these and other passages it is perfectly clear that 
although Jimutavahana repudiated the theory that property 
arose from birth, he allowed to the sons at least so much 
interest in ancestral property as would place a restraint 
upon the unlimited discretion of the father in distributing 
that property, if he, at his option, chose to distribute it. 
Referring to this restraint Mr. Mayne observes that “in 
the very chapter in which he (Jiuifitavahana) lays down 
that the absolute ownership of the father enables him to 
deal with his ancestral property as he likes, he also Jays 
down that if he chooses to distribute it, lie must do so 
upon general principles of equity, and cannot even for 
himself, reserve more than a double share, lie affirms 
for one purpose the very ownership by birth which In* 
denies for another.” It may, perhaps, be going too far to 
say that the recognition of this restraint upon the father's 



142 


THE LAM' OK SUCCESSION, 


Thr* position 
of 1 lie hoi i 
uompiiriHl to 
that of 
ani h e redes 
in the 

Roman Law. 


Striking 
roHonihjaiuvs: 
What they 
soem to 
inilinito. 


absolute discretion in distributing ancestral property 
amounts to the admission of a qualified ownership in the 
son in respect of such property even during the lifetime 
of the father, for to speak of ownership without the least 
rig hi of enjoying the usufruct except at the option of 
another may seem to involve a contradiction in terms ; 
it may, however, be said without any impropriety that 
the limits imposed upon the absolute discretion of the 
father in distributing the ancestral property in any way 
he likes to the prejudice of the sons show that the Daya- 
bhaga admitted that they hail an interest in that class of 
father’s property even during his lifetime which might be 
of importance under certain contingencies. The position 
thus accorded to the sons may be compared to that of mi 
hernias under the Roman Law ; they were children and 
grand-children in the power of the deceased who on his 
death became -mi juris , and with regard to them, it is 
slated, in the Institutes of Justinian, that they are -vti 
hernias “ because they are family heirs, and even in the 
lifetime of their father, are considered owners of the 
inheritance in a certain degree .” 1 It may also be remarked 
that just as under the Roman Law grand -children cannot 
be regarded as *tu heretics unless their father has ceased 
to he sues here*, in the lifetime of his father, having 
been either cut off by death, or otherwise freed from 
paternal authority, so, under the Dayabhaga. law also, 
the grand-sons cannot claim to share the inheritance 
with their uncles unless their father has died or otherwise 
become incapable of inheriting during the lifetime of his 
father. Resemblances like t hese are so startling and there 
are so many of them to be found in almost all the different 
branches of jurisprudence that one often wonders how they 
came about, unless the ancestors of the two people (the 

1 JiistitiiO's Lib. I I, Tit. XJX, 2, 



THE LAW OF SUCCESSION, 143 

Romans and the Hindus) had at one time, inhabited the 
same country and been governed by the same institutions 
which they carried with them in their migrations to shape 
the further development of their legal ideas. Comparative 
Jurisprudence, when properly studied, thus supports the 
conclusions of Comparative Philology, and it is because 
the Hindu Jurisprudence has not been studied with that 
amount of care which has been bestowal upon the study 
of the Sanskrit language, that we do not as yet possess 
sufficient materials to guide our researches and help us in 
our conclusions. 

I will now turn to the next great distinction between 
the Mitakshara and the Dayabhaga Schools. This relates 
to the devolution of property on the death of a member 
of a joint family. According to the Dayabhaga the 
position of a deceased owner as the member of a joint 
family docs not make any difference whatsoever for the 
puri>osos of succession to the property left by him as 
a part of the joint family property ; the person who is 
entitled to succeed will he determined in the usual way, 
and as regards that it would have made no difference if 
instead of being a member of an undivided joint family he 
had been separated from his coparceners before his death. 
The Mitakshara law, however, proceeds upon entirclj’ 
different principles ; according to that system to quote the 
words of Mr. Mayne ‘there is no such thing as succession, 
properly so called, in an undivided family. The whole 
body of such a family, consisting of males and females, 
constitutes a sort of corporation, some of the members of 
which are coparceners, that is, persons who on partition 
would be entitled to demand a share, while others are only 
entitled to maintenance. In Malabar and Canara, where 
partition is not allowed, the idea of heirship would never 
present itself to the mind of any member of the family. 


Distinction 
rojmrdintf the 
devolution of 
property on 
the deal Ji of a 
mom her of a 
joint, family 
between the 
Dayahhntfu 
and the 
Mitakshara 
Schools. 
Dayuhhai'u. 


Mitukaliara. 



144 


THE LAW OK SUCCESSION. 


Each person is simply entitled to reside and be maintained 
in the family house, and to enjoy that amount of affluence 
and consideration which arises from his belonging to a 
family possessed of greater or less wealth. As he dies out 
his claims cease, and as others are born their claims arise. 
But the claims of each spring from the mere fact of their 
entrauce into the family, not from their taking the place 
of any particular individual. Deaths may enlarge the bene- 
ficial interest of the survivors, by diminishing the number 
who have a claim upon the common fund, just as birth 
may diminish their interests by increasing the number of 
claimants. But although the fact that A is the child of 
B introduces him into the family, it does not give him any 
definite share in the property, for B himself has none. 
Nor upon the death of B does he succeed to anything, for 
B has left nothing behind to succeed to. Now in evoiy 
part of India where the Mitakshara prevails the position 
of an undivided family is exactly the same, except that 
within certain limits each male member has a right to 
claim a partition, if he likes. But until they elect, to do 
so, the projHjrty continues to devolve upon the members of 
the family for the time being by survivorship and not by 
succession. The position of any particular person as son, 
grand-son, or the like, or one of many sons or grand-sons, 
will be very important when the time for partition arrives; 
because it will determine the share to which ho is then 
entitled. But until that time arrives he can never say, 1 
am entitled to such a definite portion of the property ; 
because the next year the proportion in which he 
would have « right to claim on a division might be much 
smaller, and the year after much larger, as births or 
deaths supervene \ 1 The above extract contains a clear 
exposition of the devolution of joint family property 


* Mnyno’s Hindu Law, page 333. 



THE LAW OF Sl'CCESSfOX. 


145 


under the Mitakshara law upon the death of one of its 
members. The difference between the Dayabhaga and the 
Mitakshara on this question being thus understood, let us 
see how far it can be deduced as the logical result of the 
corresponding difference between the Dayabhaga and the 
Mitakshara conceptions of co-ownership in undivided 
property. This difference will be made evident from a 
comparison of the definitions of partition or severence of 
co-ownership ( fWHT ) as given in the Dayabhaga and 
Mitakshara respectively. The Dayabhaga defines partition 
in the following manner : “Partition consists in mani- 
festing ( or in particularising ) by f lu 4 (fasting of lots or 
otherwise, a property which had arisen in lands or chattels, 
hut which extended only to :i portion of them, and which 
was previously unascertained, being unfit for exclusive 
appropriation, because no evidence of any ground of dis- 
crimination existed. Or partition is a special ascertainment 
of property, or making of it known ( as inhering in a 
particular share with reference to a particular person )” 1 . 
The Mitakshara, on the other hand, says that “Partition 
( or severence of co-ownership ) is tin; adjustment of 
divers rights regarding the whole, by distributing them or 
particular portions of the aggregate.” - The difference 
between the two views, therefore, consists in this : 
according to the Dayabhaga, each of the undivided copar- 
ceners has ownership, not over the entire joint property, 
hut only over particular portions thereof which becomes 

* Dayabhaga Chap. 1. Sees 8 & 0. 

fw*r: i CTnrort farm: ( fata 

brsfqcTfjy faitaf*reeta *m: tfir ) * 

* Mitakshara Chap. 1. Sees. 1, 4. fanuitffa 1J fasfmfafai 

19 


How fur tho 
difforoneo 
can bo 
deduced 
from tin* 
correspon- 
ding diffe- 
rence rogar* 
ding tlu*. 
co i ico p turn 
of co-owmT' 
ship in an 
undivided 
family: 
Severonee 
of co-nwn( , v- 
sliip as do- 
linod in tho 
Dayabhaga. 


Tin* Mita- 
kshara de- 
finition. 


Tho deffe- 
ri •m.*o ex- 
plained. 

RI3rfw.«S»5|*s- 

*1? 





146 THE LAW OF SUCCESSION. 

manifest when upon partition these several portions are speci- 
fically allotted to the several coparceners, so that at no 
time does the ownership of one among several coparceners 
extends over the whole of the joint property but it always 
extends over a part, unascertained and undefined before 
partition, and ascertained and particularised after it. This 
doctrine, is therefore known as nitfaugmu? or the doctrine 
of ownership in a part. According to Mitakshara, on the 
other hand, the ownership of each coparcener in an 
undivided family extends over the whole of the joint 
property, and each part thereof, although to borrow the 
words of Lord Westbury in Appovier’s case, ‘no indivi- 
dual member of that family, while it remains undivided 
can predicate of the joint and undivided property that he, 
that particular member, has a certain definite share/ 1 
The result is that each co-owner is deemed to be the 
owner of the whole, in the same manner as other co-owners 
are also owners of the whole, the ownership of the one 
without excluding the co-ownership of the others. This 
view is known as or the doctrine of owner- 

ship in the whole. 

The difference between the conceptions of ownership 
indicated above, has sometimes been expressed by saying 
that a Dayabhaga coparcener holds the property in quasi- 
severalty as if he were a tenant in common, whereas a 
Mitakshara coparcener holds the entire property and every 
part of it as if lie were a joint tenant. It is unnecessary 
to pause and consider how far these descriptions are 
strictly accurate, for the analogies, as far as they go, are 
not likely to be misleading. What I am at present 
concerned with is to consider how far the difference 
between the Dayabhaga and the Mitakshara as regards 


i Appovior vs. Ram Snbba Aiyar 11 Moo. 1. A. 89. 



THE LAW OE SUCCESSION. 


U7 


the devolution of joint property upon the demise of one of 
the co-owners can be said to be a legitimate deduction 
from the difference in the conception of co-ownership 
explained above. Giving the matter rny best consideration 
I am inclined to think that although it cannot be said that 
thedoctrine of survivorship is necessarily bound up with the 
peculiar conception of co-ownership maintained by the 
Mitakshara School in as much as that conception is not 
necessarily inconsistent with the course of succession laid 
dowu by the Dayabhaga, yet it must be admitted that there 
is a very close affinity between the Mitakshara conception 
of co-ownership and the dot-rine of survivorship as well as 
between the Dayabhaga conceptions of co-ownership and 
the devolution of property by succession. The reasons why 
1 say so are these : you will remember that according 
to the Mitakshara conception of co-ownership each 
undivided co- parcener is the owner of the whole joint 
property. So that if one of them dies out while others 
remain, it does not create, if I may use the expression, 
a void to be tilled up by a successor ; the surviving* 
co-parceners were from before the owners of the entire 
property, and no change is created by the death beyond 
the disappearance of a co-owner, who, when alive, was 
entitled to be maintained out of the family funds 
and to claim a share on partition. The doctrine of survivor- 
ship therefore, readily chimes in with a conception of 
oo-ownership of this description, and I may almost say that 
it is incompatible with the conception of co-ownership as 
explained in the Dayabhaga, for if the co-owners held the 
property in quasi-severalty, the most natural consequence 
would be that one of them being dead he would bo 
followed by a successor as heir who would step into his 
shoes and occupy the same position as he did and if by a 
coincidence another co-owner becomes entitled to the 


.Reluiioti of 
the doctrine 
of mirvivor- 
ahip with 
the Mitu- 
ksluuu and 
the Daya- 
bhitjk'u eoii- 
eeptmiiH of 
tMMiwtiur- 
ship. 



148 


THE h\Vt OF SUCCESSION. 


The tvanai * 
tion from the 
conception of 
cu-own unship 
to the- course 
of devolution 
lniil down in 
each school is 
nat ural ; hut 
is it ubsolul.e- 
Jy necessary ? 


Riitfhu- 
naiulftn’s 
criticism of 
the Daya- 
bhii^it con- 
ceptions of 
co-owncrsiiip 
and partition. 


Srikrishiii 

Tarksi- 

Jankaia’s 

view. 


inheritance lie would come in as a successor and not as a 
survivor. The natural transition from the conception of 
co-ownership to the course of devolution laid down in 
each school is therefore abundantly clear; still i cannot 
say that the transition, though natural, is absolutely 
necessary, and my reasons are these. You are aware that 
Ragliunaudaua, the author of Payatatta, is one of the 
most celebrated exponents of the Payabhaga doctrine; 
similarly, Nilakantha, the author of Vyavahara Mayukha, 
is in the main a follower of the Mitaksara School ; yet, 
although they do not depart from the course of devolution 
laid down by the leading authorities of the School to 
which they belong, they do differ from their masters as 
regards the conception of the interest of a co-parcener in 
an undivided family, for in this point Raghunamlaiiu 
controverts the position of Jirnutavahana while Nilakantha 
supports the same. Thus referring to the Pnyabhaga 
deiinitions of partition Kaghunandan objects that ‘ the 
deli ni lion is not accurate for how may it be certainly 
known since no text declares it, that the lot for each 
person, falls precisely on the article which was already 
his V and gives his own definition of partition as * u 
distributive adjustment, by lot ov otherwise, of the 
property of relatives vested in them over the whole wealth, 
in right of the same relation, upon the extinction of the 
former owner’s property/ S'rlkri^hna. Tarkillankara also, 
after making a faint, attempt to repel the objections ol 
Raghunandana, proceeds to observe without any comment 
that Ilarinat h, Vijfianes'vara, Vaehaspati Misra and their 
followers controvert the doctrine of Payabhiiga and 
summarise their reasons for doing so, and hence Jagannatha 
has inferred that Raghunandana's opinion is indirectly 
admitted even by S'jikrislma. On the other hand 
Nilakantha observes that the prior undefined ownership of 



ttiK Law of sttccfcs&lojf. 


149 


many brothers, &c., is defined (and made known) by 
partition. According to some, by the extinction of prior 
joint ownership extending over the whole property, a 
particular ownership is created in portions of it ; but, the 
idea of extinction of a prior ownership and the creation 
of a new one, involves (the logical fault of) cumbrous n ess ; 
(it is better, therefore, to conclude) that the particular 
ownership which was created in a portion was (only) marie 
known by partition as inhering in a particular thing. 1 
Yon will understand that I am not here concerned to 
consider the logical merit of these conflicting opinions, 
for the conclusion which I wish to deduce from their 
existence is, as ] have already indicated, that although the 
doctrine of survivorship Hows naturally from the 
Mitakshara conception of co-ownership it is not impossible 
for a supporter of the Dayabhilga. succession to adopt that 
conception, and that one who adopts the Dayabbaga 
conception of co-ownership may also on the basis of 
specific authority, acknowledge the line of devolution 
pointed by the Mitakshara in the case of the demise of a 
co-parcener of an undivided family. It cannot however, 
be gainsaid that in the fitness of things the Mitakshara 
conception of co-ownership in an undivided family paves 
the ground if 1 may use the expression, for the doctrine of 
survivorship, while the I )ayabhaga conception is naturally 
antagonistic to it. 

The next question that .1 propose to discuss is the 
power of alienation of joint property by an undivided 
co-parcener. You may anticipate from the difference that 
I have pointed out hot ween the Mitakshara and the 
Dayabhaga conceptions of co-parcenevy property, that the 
power of an undivided co-parcener in a Mitakshara family 


Nilaknntlia 
adopt b the 
DaynblmtfM 
conception of 
co-ownership 


C/onclusioriK 
deduced from 
the above. 


Power of 
alienation 
ii rid i vidi 
oo-pfireon 
difference 
between ill 
t)aynhlm<r;i 
and the 
Mitakslmni. 
Schools. 


1 Vyavahara May ukha, Chap. IV, Sec. I. 



150 


THE LAW. OE SUCCESSION. 


The 

Mitakshara 

view. 


to alienate joint family property is not likely to be the 
same as that of an undivided eo-parcener in a Dayabhaga 
family. So long as the family continues joint no 
Mitakshara co-parcener can say that he has got a definite 
share in the joint property ; it is true that he has got an 
interest in the whole of the joint property, but his interest 
is limited by the co-equal interest of the other co-parceners. 
That being so, it follows that one co-parcener cannot 
alienate either the whole or any portion of the joint 
property without infringing the rights of the other 
co-parcener, for there is not a single item of property in 
which one co-parcener can claim title to the exclusion of 
the others. Therefore, according to the strict Mitakshara 
doctrine an undivided co-parcener has no right to alienate 
any portion of the joint property without the concurrence 
of the others, and if he does, it will be invalid in toto for 
the alienor cannot say that he has got a definite share to 
the extent, of which the alienation may hold good, although 
it may be invalid as to the rest. Thus in the chapter 
dealing with the rescission of gifts, the Mitakshara lays 
down that joint property lias been declared unfit to be 
given in the same way as pledges, trusts, deposits, etc., 
on the ground that it is not the property of the donor, 
meaning thereby that the donor has not got absolute 
dominion over it , 1 and it will follow from the principles 
explained by me in the last lecture that an alienation 
of such property must be treated as invalid ; the 
matter is also made quite clear where the Mitak ara 
referring to the text f separated kinsmen as those who are 
unseparared are equal in respect of immovables * goes on to 

1 Slfarwfa HVSV TO 

arfiftrai i 

innwir nmvn i 



THE LAW OF SUCCESSION. 


151 


explain that ‘among un separated kinsmen the consent of all 
is indispensably requisite, because no one is fully empowered 
to make an alienation since the estate is common ; but 
among separated kindred the consent of all tends to the 
facility of the transaction, by obviating any future 
doubt whether they be separate or re-united ; it is not requ- 
ired on account of any want of suffiicient power in the 
single owner ; and the transaction is consequently valid 
even without the consent of the separated kinsmen/ 1 
and commenting upon the same text the Viramitrodaya 
observes that ‘although the ineompetency without the 
consent of the others, is settled by reason of the co-equality 
of ownership, in joint property of undivided eo-parccners, 
still the same is here particularly mentioned in respect of 
immovable property for the purpose of extolling its worth ; 
but as regards the separated eo-parccners what is said in 
this text is for the purpose of facility of proof in case of 
dispute/ 1 The position is, therefore fully established that 
an alienation by an undivided co-parcener without the 
consent of the other co-parceners is not valid. To this 
limitation upon the power of a single co-parcener there is an 
exception based upon the text ‘even a single individual 
may conclude a donation, mortgage, or sale of immovable 
property during a season of distress, for the sake of the 
family, and specially for pious purposes/ w hich is explained 
by the Mitakshara to mean that 4 while the sons and 
grand-sons are minors and incapable of giving their consent 
to a gift and the like or while brothers are so and continue 
unseparated ,* even one person who is capable, may conclude 
a gift, hypothecation, or sale of immovable property, if a 
calamity affecting the whole family require it, or the 
support of the family render it necessary or indispensable 


Exception tci 
the restric- 
tion on alie- 
nation. 


1 Mitaksara, Chap. 1, Sec. I, 30, 



152 


THE LAW OF SUCCESSION. 


J uilieial 
departure 
from the 
strict Mifcu- 
ksliara view. 


duties, such as the obsequies of the father or the like, make 
it unavoidable . 991 

What has been stated above represents the strict Mita- 
kshara Law, but our courts have departed from it to 
various extents principally on equitable considerations 
although all the High Courts have not proceeded to the 
same extent. On such considerations, all the High Courts 
have held that the interest of an undivided co-pareener 
may be seized and sold in execution of a decree, obtained 
against him and the purchaser may enforce his right by 
coming to a partition and obtaining definite properties to 
the exclusion of the other co-parcener. As regards the 
position of an alienee for valuable consideration, where the 
purchase was made without the aid of the Court, all the 
Courts are not similarly agreed. Thus, the Bombay and 
Madras High Courts have held that an alienation for valu- 
able consideration should be held valid to the extent of the 
share which the alienor would have received on partition, 
so that the alienee may sue for partition, and thus obtain 
possession of the share to which he had become entitled by 
his purchase. On the other hand, the Calcutta and the 
Allahabad High Courts seem to stick to the strict doctrine 
of the Mitakshara Law and maintain that a voluntary 
alienation of joint property by an undivided co-parcener 
whether for valuable consideration or not is invalid, but 
even there, in some cases, the Court, in setting aside the 
alienation, has enforced the equities in favour of the alienee 
in such a manner as to bring about exactly the same result 
as is worked out by the Bombay and Madras doctrine. As 
regards alienations without consideration all the Courts 
seem to be agreed that an undivided co-parcener can not 
dispose of the joint property even to the extent of the share 


1 Mitaksara, Chap. I, Section I, 28 & 29, 



THE LAW OF SUCCESSION. 


153 


which he would receive on partition, and as the alienee, 
being volunteer, can not put forward any equitable 
considerations, no indulgence should be shown to him. It 
is not within the province of these lectures to discuss the 
various decisions in so fur as they are based upon principles 
extraneous to the Hindu Law, and I may point out that it 
has been acknowledged by their Lordships of the Judicial 
Committee in the cast* of Suraj Biuisi Koer v. Sheopersad 
Singh 1 that c there can be little doubt that all such 
alienations, whether voluntary or compulsory are inconsistent 
with the strict theory of a joint and undivided Hindu 
family; and the law as established in Madras and Bombay 
has been one of gradual growth, founded upon the equity 
which a purchase for value lias, to be allowed to stand in 
his vendor’s shoes, and to work out his rights by means of a 
partition and these observations have been repeated by 
them in the subsequent case of Laksmaii Dada Naik /*. 
Ramchandra Dada Naik.* I may, however, observe 
that it is somewhat dilficult to understand how a person, 
who knowingly purchases a property inalienable under the 
law, can have much reason to complain when he finds 
that lie can not reap any benefit under it, and the difficulty 
of allowing him any relief on strict principles of the 
Hindu law becomes almost insuperable when it is 
remembered that Mann declares that lit; who gives pro[>erty 
declared unfit to be given and he who receives it are both 
liable to punishment as if they wen; thieves ,” 11 and a 
purchase, with full knowledge of the circumstances, is as 

1 I. L. 11. 5 Cal. 148 (l«G.) 

* T. L. It. 5 Horn. 01 S. C. 7 f.A. 18] . 

Hsr^fei i 

mwt nrsHH tt 


20 



Tho right of 
a Dayabhaga 
co-parcuiinr 
to alionate 
hi« own 
share ex- 
plained. 


Texts to the 
contrary how 
reconciled. 


154 THE LAW OP SUCCESSION. 

much within the reason of the condemnation as the 
acceptance of a gift ; our Courts have, however, thought 
fit to hold otherwise, and thus lent a helping hand to the 
diverse influences already at work in undermining the 
integrity of a joint family under the Mitakshara law. 

The position of an undivided co-parcener under the 
Dayabhaga is, as already explained somewhat different, 
for his interest, according to the peculiar doctrine of 
Jimiitavahana, does not extend over the whole joint pro- 
perty but only over a part which is only defined and made 
manifest by a subsequent partition ; therefore, it is possible 
for a Dayabhaga co-parcener to say, even before partition, 
that he has got a definite share in the joint property 
although it cannot be allocated before a partition actually 
lakes place. This being the Dayabhaga conception of 
co-ownership in an undivided family it follows that it is 
open to a Dayabhaga eo- parcener* to transfer his own share 
in the joint property, and such a transfer will be valid even 
without the concurrence of the other co-parceners who 
cannot legitimately interdict an alienation of what is not 
their own. Thus Jimutvlihana expressly says that ‘ It 
should not be alleged, that by the text of Vyasa (A single 
co-parcener may not without consent of the rest, make a 
sale or gift of the whole immovable estate, nor of what; is 
common to the family. Separated kinsmen, as those who 
are unseparated are equal in respect of immovables for one 
has not power over the* whole, to give, mortgage or sell 
it) one person lias no power to make a sale or other 
transfer of such property. For here also (in the very 
instance of land held in common) as in the case of other 
goods, there equally exists a property consisting in the 
] lower of disposal at pleasure. But the texts of Vyasa, 
exhibiting a prohibition, are intended to show a moral 
offence, since the family is distressed by a sale, gift or 



THE LAW OF SUCCESSION. 


155 


other transfer which argues a disposition in the person to 
make an ill use of his power as owner. They are not 
meant to invalidate the sale or other transfer. 1 The 
position of the Payabhaga upon this point is clearly 
explained by Srlkrisna Tarkalarikai in the 111b Chapter 
of his Payacrama .Samgraha headed ‘ the discussion 
whether common property is or is not lit to be given by 
one/ In this chapter he first of all points out that there 
are certain lawyers who contend that one co-parcener has 
no right to dispose of any portion of the joint property 
and then explains that this view is founded upon the 
doctrine of co-equal right in the whole according to which 
all co-parceners have property in the entire property and 
lienee a gift, a sale or any other sort of transfer made by 
one would be invalid. But says lit 1 ‘ this cannot be correct 
since the author of Payabhaga has refuted the doctrine of 
co-equal right in the whole for want of sufficient basis. 
Hence the author of Payabhaga after quoting the text of 
Vyasa and raising the dispute on the authority of that 
text that one has no right to make a gift or sale, &c., 
resolves that dispute by maintaining that even here (/'.«?., in 
the case of common property) property which consists in 
the fitness of free disposal exists just as well as in the case 
of other goods, so that, the text (of Vyasa) merely exhibits 
a prohibition for the purpose of indicating a moral offence, 
since the family is distressed by a sale which argues a 
disposition in the person to make an ill use of his power 
as owner, but is not meant to invalidate the sale or other 
transfer. Since there is nothing like common property in 
the sense that it is common to several owners, such a thing 
being unreal, commonness means no more than undivided- 
ness, and, therefore, in as much as property exists in the 
so-called common property even before partition, there is 

1 Duyabhaga, Chapter 11, 27 and 2b. 


SrikriKlma’s 
exposition of 
the Day.'i- 
bhngn view. 



Grnnml of 
the diutiof-ion 
between iho 
t.wo schools. 


Gan a 
Dayahha^ii 
co-parvcMier 
nlicimtc the. 
tiro joint 
oporty, ui 
io out in? 
[divided 
roperty oi 
of Uk nt 
irnperty Y 


156 Til K LAW OF SUCCESSION. 

nothing to hinder a person from giving or otherwise 
transfering his own share, and this is the intention of the 
author of the Dayabhaga who maintains the doctrine of 
property in parts. The whole of this discussion furnishes 
a striking specimen of the way in which the peculiar 
doctrine of the Dayabhftga School concerning the concep- 
tion of co-ownership in an undivided property is carried to 
its logical consequence, and the basis of the difference 
regarding the right of alienation of an undivided co- 
parcener between the Dayabhaga and the Mitaksara 
Schools is clearly explained. It shows that the decision of the 
question really hinges upon the existence or non-existence 
of full dominion over the property to be transferred, and 
where it exists no amount of prohibition in the Sustras can 
invalidate the transfer since as Jimutavahana asserts 'a fact 
cannot be altered by a hundred texts 9 a dictum which is 
not: a peculiar text of the Dayabhaga School, but is a 
recognised principle of Hindu Jurisprudence founded upon 
strict logic and good sense and practically adopted bv the 
Mitakshara in dealing with the requirement.- of the consent 
of divided kinsmen and the like. 

Having thus shown that according to the Dayabhaga 
School an undivided co-parcener can alienate his own share 
in the joint property, we are called upon to consider how 
far he can alienate the entire joint family property or one 
entire undivided property out of the joint family property. 
Now in dealing with the question we can at once say that 
such a t ransaction cannot be entirely valid, since no one 
can transfer what was not his own. This follows from the 
general principles already explained by me and is also 
cofirmed by the following passage in the Dayabhaga. 
" Donation is complete then only when the owner^ cons- 
cious that the thing is his, relinquishes it with a view to 
its becoming the property of another person, and that 



tHE LAW OF SUCCESSION. 


15 ? 

other person is sensible of the property apprehending ( this 
is become mine ’ ; but that cannot occur in respect to 
common goods, and therefore common property is pro- 
nounced unfit to be given .” 1 It must be understood that 
the above criticism applies to an attempted alienation of 
the entire joint property since an individual co- parcener 
cannot possibly deal with it as his own, and also of one 
entire property since it can be ascertained before a parti- 
tion actually takes place that it will be allotted to the 
share of the alienor; hence, in such a case, it is impossible 
for the alienee to be conscious that the property sought to 
be transferred is his to the exclusion of the other co-par- 
ceners, and the alienee also cannot appropriate it with 
the consciousness that it is become his simply by the act 
of the alienor without the concurrence of those co-parceners. 
The conclusion, therefore, is that such an alienation cannot 
be valid as it stands and the only question that remains 
to be considered is whether some effect should not be 
given to it by holding it effectual to the extent of the 
share of the alienor. Jagannath in his Digest quotes the 
opinion of Vachaspati Bhat.Tacharyya to the effect that 
if the whole of the joint property be* sold by one of the 
parceners, the sale is not valid so far as regards the shares 
of the other parceners, but is valid so far as regards the 
seller’s own share, and he says that this opinion may be 
admitted upon the reason of the law. 5 * 

Turning next to the question of' succession proper the 
most noticeable distinction between the Mitakshara and 
the Dayabhaga Schools relates to the position of cognates 
in the order of succession. According to the Mitakshara, 
all agnates *.<?. relations who trace their connection exclu- 
sively through males are entitled to inherit in preference 


Can such 
an alienation 
bo regarded 
as partially 
valid Y 
Answer 
suggested by 
Vachaspati 
jJlmtla- 
clmryya. 

< I not ed by 
Jagannath. 


The position 
of cognates : 
Difference 
between the 
Mitakshara 
and the 
Diiyabhagn 
Schools. 

The 

Mitakshara. 


1 lbiyabhaga, Chap. XIII. 8. 

2 Colebrook’s Digest, Vol. 1 1, p. 58. 



The 

position of 
a daughter’s 
son. 


Suggested 
explanation 
for the 
peculiar 
favour shown 
to him. 


15S THJfi LAW OF SUCCESSION. 

to cognates or relations through a female, with the only 
exception of a daughter's son, who although a cognate, 
occupies a very high position in the order of succession 
coming just after the daughter and before the parents. 
It may also be remarked that the peculiar favour shown 
to a daughter’s son has been considered to be a somewhat 
later introduction. If we look to the Dharma-Sastras we 
find that the peculiar position of a daughter’s son is not 
recognised by all, and even in the text of Yajnavalkya 
enumerating the heirs of a man dying without a male 
issue he is not specially mentioned, so that YijfianeSvara 
is constrained to fall back upon the particle (5) and argue 
that by the import of the* particle f also ' (5) the daughter’s 
son succeeds to the estate on failure of daughters ; 1 
among the Commentators also Apararka does not accord 
any special position to a daughter’s son, so that he can only 
come in as a bamlhu after all the agnates, however remote, 
are exhausted. Mr. Mayne, therefore, suggests that the 
explanation for the peculiar favour shown to a daughter’s 
son “ is to be found in the old practice of appointing a 
daughter to raise up issue for a man who had none. The 
daughter so appointed was herself considered as equal to 
a son. Naturally her son was equivalent to a grand-son, 
and as the merits of son and grand-son are equal, he 
ranked as a son. Consequently, we find him enumerated 
among the subsidiary sons, and taking a very high rank 
among them, generally second or third. Subsequently 
the appoinment of a daughter to raise up issue for the 
father became obsolete, but the fact of the nearness of 
daughter and daughter’s son remained, and their natural 
claim to succession on the ground of mere consanguinity 
recommended itself for general acceptance.”- The expla- 


1 Mitiiksara, Chap. IT, Seu. II. 6. 
3 Mayne’s Hindu Law p. 704. 



THE LAW OF SUCCESSION. 159 

* 

nation is very plausible and, in all probability furnishes 
a correct account of the way in which the exceptional 
position came to be accorded to a daughter’s son ; but 
however that may be, it is certain that with this single 
exception no cognate can ever succeed in preference to 
an agnate to the property of his deceased relation* Jimu- 
tavahana, however, does not recognise the rule that agnates 
must always succeed in preference to cognates, and settles 
the order of succession by the application of a new 
principle, viz., the principle of spiritual benefit; the 
result of the application of this principle is that 
apart from a daughter’s son who has a peculiar position 
accorded to him by specific texts in the Dharma 
Sastras, other cognates are, to borrow Mr. Mayne’s 
expression, ‘ sifted in and out; among the agnates, heirs in 
the female line frequently taking before very near sapindas 
in the direct male line, on the principle of superior religions 
efficacy ’. 1 This result is attained mainly on the interpreta- 
tion which Jimutavahana puts upon two texts of Manu which 
run as follows : — ‘ To three must libations of water be made, 
to thres must offerings of food (pinda) be presented, 
the fourth in descent is the giver, but the fifth has no 
concern with them : To the nearest sapinda the inheritance 
belongs ; after that the distant; kinsman (sakulya) shall be 
the heir, or the vedie preceptor, or the pupil.’ Relying on 
these texts, Jimutavahana argues tha*: in as much as at the 
time of the Parvana SrSddha a person presents funeral 
cakes not only to his three paternal ancestors, but also to 
his three maternal ancestors, therefore in addition to the 
agnatic sapindas a person* may also have certain cognatic 
sapindas being allied with them by the presentation of a 
common funeral cake, and these sapindas, although 
cognates, will succeed in preference to sakulyas including 

1 Maine's Hindu Law, p. 689, 


Thu 

Dayahhaga : 
the principle 
of spiritual 
benefit. 


Result of its 
application. 


Mann's text : 
how ex plained 
and applied 
by Jimutu- 
viihana. 



160 


THE LAW OF SUCCESSION, 


agnates beyond three degrees according to the Hindu mode 
of computation and some of them, viz., the daughter's sons 
of the three paternal ancestors will, on the analogy of the 
succession of one's own daughter's son, succeed even in 
preference to some agnatic sapindas the father's daughter's 
son succeeding before the paternal grand-father and the 
rest, and so on. Thus after laying down that e on failure of 
the descendants of the father down to the great-grand-son, 
it must be understood that the succession devolves on the 
father's daughter’s son in like manner as it descends to the 
owner's daughter's son ' and that ‘ the succession of the 
grand-father's and great-grand -father's lineal descendant 
including the daughter's son must he understood in a similar 
maimer according to the proximity of the funeral offering, * 
since? the reasons stated in the text < for even the son of a 
daughter delivers him in the next world like the son of a 
son' is equally applicable and the daughter’s sons of his 
father and the rest transport his manes over the abyss by 
offering oblations in which he may participate', 1 JimutavFihana 
goes on to observe that on failure of these persons since 
the maternal uncle and the vest present oblations to these 
maternal ancestors of the deceased beginning with his 
maternal grand-father which the deceased hirnself was bound 
to offer, therefore the property should devolve on the 
maternal uncle and the rest, for it, is by means of wealth 
that a person may become giver of oblations 2 and he 
ultimately sums up the discussion by saying that a kinsman 
whether sprung from the family of the deceased though 
of different male descent as his own daughter's son or his 
father's daughter's son or sprung from a different family 
as his maternal uncle or the like being allied by a common 
funeral cake on account of their presenting offerings to 


1 Dayabhiiga, Chap. XI, Sec. vi. 0. 

5 Dayabhuga, Chap. XI, Sec. vi t 13. 



THK LAW (VF SUCCRSSIOX. 


161 


the three ancestors in the paternal and the maternal family 
of the deceased owner, is a sapiuda ; and the text (To them 
must libations of water be made &c.) is intended to 
propound the succession of such kinsmen, and the subse- 
quent passage (To the nearest sapiuda ete.) must be ex- 
plained as discriminating them according to their degrees of 
proximity. But on failure of kin in this degree, the 
distant kinsman (Sakulya) is successor. 1 In this way by 
the application of the doctrine of spiritual benefit, as 
interpreted by him, Jimutavilhana makes room for a 
number of cognates to succeed even in preference to many 
agnates, while, according to the Mitakshara, none of them 
excepting the daughter’s son of the deceased owner, would 
have any place until all the agnates however remote, are 
completely exhausted. The principle of spiritual benefit is 
therefore a characteristic guiding principle in the Daya- 
bh&ga law of succession, although it cannot be said to be 
the sole guiding principle in as much as it is introduced 
apparently with the object of interpreting ami corroborat- 
ing specific texts of the Dharma Sastras, and supplement- 
ing them where necessary, but not with the design of 
subverting the authority by substituting an independent 
principle in their stead ; otherwise, as Srikrislma Tarka- 
lankar points out, a stranger who throws the bones of the 
deceased into the Ganges, or presents funeral cakes to his 
departed spirit at the holly shrine of Gaya might, on the 
ground of superior spiritual benefit, claim his property eveu 
in preference to his relations.- On the other hand, the 
characteristic principle of t he Mitakshara law of succession 
is the principle of propinquity with this most important 


* Dayubhaga, Chap. XL, See. v'i. liJ & 21. 

8 nter wfltsrr tm nrraT- 

Srikrishna’s Commentary on Diiyabliagu Chap. XI. Sec. vi. tttt. 

* *■ 


Difference 
between the 
two schools 
summarised. 


How far the 
principle of 
spiritual bene* 
tit is a guiding 
principle in 
the Duya- 
bhaga law of 
succession — 
explained. 


The principle 
of propin- 
quity, the 
guiding 
principle of 
the Mitaksha- 
ra law of 
succession. 



162 


THE LAW Ob' SUCCESSION'. 


is the princi- 
ple of spiri- 
tual benefit 
ever recog- 
nised in the 
Mitakshum 
School y 


Preference of 
agnates in 
other sys- 
tems of Juris- 
prudence, 

The Roman 
Law. 


qualification that no cognate excepting a (laugher’s sou 
can succeed in preference to an agnate \ and even this 
qualification may be regarded not as an exception to the 
principle of propinquity, but rather as an illustration thereof 
in as much as under the peculiar organisation of the 
ancient Aryan family it was natural to regard an agnate 
as a nearer kinsman than a cognate, although on a mere 
computation of the degrees it might appear to be otherwise. 
The principle of spiritual benefit is not even mentioned by 
the Mitaksliara in determining the order of succession, 
although the Yiramitrodaya formulates and makes use of 
it in finding a position for the great-grandson among the 
direct male descendants of the deceased on whom the 
property devolves before t ie wi iow and the rest can claim 
the succession. 1 At all events, it is never brought forward 
to abrogate the superior position undoubtedly accorded by 
the an ient lawgivers to the agnates in preference to the 
cognates with the single exception of a daughter’s son. 
We may, therefore, say that the main distinction between 
the Dayabhaga and the Mitaksliara lies in the fact that 
the Mitaksliara does not depart, from the ancient rule 
which gives preference to an agnate in the order of suc- 
cession except in the case of a daughter’s sou, while the 
Davabhaga by introducing the principle of spiritual benefit 
and putting a novel interpretation upon if makes room 
for a large number of cognates and sifts 1 hem in and out 
among the agnates, so that many agnates who under the 
Mitaksliara would have an undoubtedly superior position, 
arc postponed to them. 

This preference of agnates over cognates in the scheme 
of succession had its parallel in other systems of Juris- 
prudence. If we look to the history of the Roman law, 
we find that the law of the Twelve Tables recognised only 


1 ViramitrodayH, Chap. XV II. Pt. 1. Sec. iii. 



TltE LAW OV SUCCESSION. 


163 


the succession of (I) S/ti heretics, (2) Agnates, (3) genti- 
les; cognates liad no place under this scheme, so that 
if there were no gentiles, the inheritance would lapse to 
the state rather than go to the cognates. This law 
appears all the more peculiar when we take into account 
the complication due to emancipation being regarded as 
a Capitis item i tut Ho and hence involving a severance of the 
tie of agnation, so that even emancipated sons were looked 
upon as strangers to the family and had thus no share in 
the inheritance. This resulted in such a disparity between 
the line of succession laid down by the rules of the civil 
law and the direction of the natural affection of the owner, 
that the Praetor had to intervene to remove some of the 
glaring anomalies by granting what was called JUmontm 
possess io to various classes of relatives who could not be 
the heirs under the strict civil law. To this divergence 
between the law of succession and the promptings of 
natural affection, Sir Henry Maine attributes the horror 
of intestacy that prevailed among the Romans. ‘.Every 
dominant sentiment/ says he, ‘of the primitive Romans was 
entwined with the relations of the family. But what was 
the family? Tlic; law defined it one way — natural affection 
another. In the conflict between the t wo, the feeling we 
would analyse grew up, taking the form of an enthusiasm 
for the institution by which the dictates of affection were 
permitted to determine the fortunes of its objects / J and 
he explains that the feeling did not die out with the 
improvements introduced by the Praetors, for, ‘every body 
conversant- with the philosophy of opinion is aware that 
the sentiment by no means dies out, of necessit y, with the 
passing out of the circumstance which produced it/ 1 2 

1 Maine's Ancient Law, p. 222. 

* Maine's Ancient Law. p. 222. 



i64 


THE LAW OE succession. 


Why tho 
seeming 
anomaly 
involved in 
the general 
preference 
of agnates 


However that may be, even in the time of Gaius the 
order of succession was (1) sui lieredes, (2) agnates and 
(3) cognates, so that cognates could not inherit before the 
agnates. At last Justinian by his 118th and 127th Novels 
completely modelled the laws of intestate succession by 
abolishing the difference between agnates and cog atcs and 
creating a new order of succession under which speaking 
broadly the descendants succeeded first, the ascendants next, 
and last of all the collaterals according to nearness of 
kinship. It will appear from the above review that the 
preference of agnates in the Mitakshara law of succession 
has nothing unusual or extraordinary in it. Indeed, as 
Sir Henry Maine observes, ‘there are few indigenous 
bodies of law belonging to the Com muni ties of the Indo- 
European Stock, which do not exhibit peculiarities in the 
most ancient part of their structure which are clearly 
referable to agnation.’ 1 The Mitakshara law was, however, 
free from the peculiar anomalies of the early Homan Law 
due to emancipation being regarded as a capitis deminutio 
involving the severance of the tie of agnation. In this 
respect the Mitakshara law was less unnatural or anoma- 
lous than the early Roman taw, for it, cannot be supposed 
that the result: ascribed to emancipation by what Sir Henry 
Maine calls ‘ legal pedantry ’ had its counterpart in the 
natural affection of the parents, for as he truly points out 
‘enfranchisement from the father's power was a demonstra- 
tion, rather than a severance, of affection — a mark of 
grace and favour accorded to the best beloved and the most 
esteemed of children.’ 3 As for the general preference of 
agnates over cognates in the scheme of succession it seems 
that there were reasons why the seeming anomaly involved 
in this was not very keenly felt bv the Mitakshara Hindus. 

' Maine'* Ancient Law, y>. loO. 

5 Maine's Ancient Law, p. 222. 



$tt£ LaW OF SUCCESSION. 


165 


In the first place, the rule that in the ease of joint un- 
divided property the interest of a deceased co-percener 
passes not by succession but by survivorship would in 
many cases prevent the question of precedence from arising 
and striking the sensibility of the persons concerned as 
something very unnatural ; in the second place, even where 
the question did arise, as in the case of a divided family, 
the close ties created by living under the peculiar organi- 
sation of the Hindu family system which was mainly agnatic 
would take away the point from the exclusion of the 
cognates by the agnates ; and lastly in the very few cases 
where a result would ensue from the operation of the 
rule of succession altogether inconsistent with the natural 
affection of the owner of the property, the system of 
adoption would serve the very same purpose as the system 
of making a testament under the Roman law. In Bengal, 
the Dayabhaga practically obliterated the distinction bet- 
ween divided and undivided property by maintaining a 
a conception of joint ownership which was very 
much laxer than that of the Mitiikshara ; the idea that 
co-owners hold their shares in quasi-severalty which they 
can dispose of at their pleasure bespeaks a disruption of 
the close ties of the old joint family system, and this, in the 
fitness of things, had its concomitant in the altered course 
of succession abandoning the almost unqualified preference 
given to agnates over cognates. Mr. Mayne, therefore, 
seems to have struck the true note when referring to the 
difference between the Mitiikshara and the Dayabhaga, 
he observed that ‘much was of course due to the natural 
progress of Society. A race so full of commercial activity 
as the Hindus who were settled along the lower course of 
the Ganges would find their growth cram pled by the 
Procustean bed of ancient traditions’ 1 but I am not prepared 


WRB not 
keenly felt 
l>v the 
Mitakshara 
Hindu*. 


T i ovation 
In* Bengal 
nol 

explained. 


Mr. Moyne's 

explanation 

considered. 


1 Mayne 'a Hindu Law. p.d20. 



166 


THE LAW OF SUCCESSION. 


The influence 
of Brahma- 
nism : how far 
it furnisher 
an explana- 
tion for the 
altered course 
nf succession 
laid down l»y 
the 

Dayahhnga. 


to go along with him when he says that ‘ Brahmanism 
was rampant among the law writers of Bengal,’ and that 
‘it was this influence which completely remodelled the law 
of inheritance in that Province by applying tests of 
religious efficacy which were of absolutely modern intro- 
duction.’ 1 It is true that in Bengal the law of inheri- 
tance was remodelled by giving a better position to a 
certain number of cognates in the scheme of succession ; 
it is also true that this result was achieved by applying 
the doctrine of religious efficacy measured in a peculiar 
way which seems to have been an innovation ; but 1 do 
not think that the formulation of the doctrine of religious 
efficacy, the peculiar interpretation put upon it, and its appli- 
cation to determine the order of succession were at all dictated 
by the influence of Brahmanism ; on the other hand, I 
agree with Babu ( I olapehandra Sarkar when he says that 
‘the doctrine appears to have been introduced by the author 
of the Dayabhagha as a mere pretext for assigning in the 
order of succession a higher possition to some dear and near 
cognates who, under the Mitakshara, are all postponed even 
to the most distant agnates, — a pretext similar to that under 
which the Praetor Urbanus of Rome recognised the heri- 
table rights of the cognates’ ; otherwise there is no reason 
for supposing that the influence of Brahmanism was 
more keenly felt in Bengal than iu the sister provinces of 
Mithila and enarcs. Mr. May no himself says that while 
the influence of Brahmanism was more powerful in Bengal 
than in Southern and Western India, it must have been 
less powerful than in Benares which he characterises as 
the very hot-bed of Brahmanism ; assuming that to be so, 
does it not follow that neither the decay nor the vigour of 
Brahmanical influence could determine a peculiar develop- 
ment of the law of succession as that which took place in 

* Maync’a Hindu Law, p. 328. 



THE LAW OK SUCCESSION. 167 

Bengal, but that other influences were at work which 
differentiated Bengal from the other Provinces? I am 
convinced that it was the gradual disruption of the old 
joint family system in Bengal owing to the operation of 
social and economical influences that diverted the natural 
affection of the people into new channels, and when this 
took place it became difficult to stick to the old scheme 
of succession which directed the devolution of property in 
a way inconsistent with it. The altered direction of the 
popular feeling, therefore, demanded that there should be 
a corresponding alteration in the law; and when Jimuta- 
vahana took the matter up, he found that there was only 
one way of doing it ; he could not legislate, but had only 
to interpret the existing law, and the expedient hit upon 
by him to get a number of cognates interspersed among 
the agnates in the line of succession was to bring forward 
the doctrine of spiritual benefit on the authority of 
Manu’s text, ‘To three must libations of water be made 
etc.’ by putting upon it an interpretation which would 
suit his purpose, and when the doctrine was once intro- 
duced, lie could not but carry it to some thing like its 
logical cousequenees, for a H indu jurist was nothing if 
not logical. It is, therefore, a mistake to suppose that a 
sister’s son, for example, was introduced before a paternal 
uncle in the order of succession because the Brahmanieal in- 
fluence that prevailed in Bengal assigned to the former 
superior religious merit than to the latter, but it was lie- 
cause owing to the disintegration of the old family system a 
sister’s son came to occupy a better ]>osition in the affec- 
tion of his maternal uncles than he formerly did that it 
became necessary to re-adjust the old order of succession in 
older to give him a higher place therein ; and when this 
had to be done, the doctrine of spiritual benefit was 
availed of as a means to an end, because it furnished a 


The gradual 
disruption 
of the old 
family 

ay atom : how 
it explains 
altered cause 
of fUK'cssion. 



Principles 
common to 
both the 
schools. 

The 

exclusion of 

females 

unless 

admitted by 
virtue of 
special texts. 


168 THE LAW OF SUCCESSION. 

consistent theory, had a chance of standing the test of 
criticism and controversy and was at the same time, not 
repulsive to the' sentiments of the people. The highly 
artificial character of the arguments which Jimutavahana 
was forced to use to establish that the maternal uncle and 
other relatives connected through the mother confer spirtiual 
benefit upon the deceased owner in order to make room 
for them before the Sakalyas (or distant agnates) at once 
demonstrates that he was not so much anxious for the 
repayment of actual religious merit as for giving a better 
place in the line of succession to a class of cognates whose 
claims, for other reasons, he wanted some how to advance; 
otherwise, it would have been the easiest thing for him 
to show that agnates, although they may belong to the 
class of sakulyas, conferred more spiritual benefit upon the 
deceased than a maternal relation could possibly do. 

The principles to which 1 now wish to draw your 
attention are common to both the Dayabhanga and the 
Mitakshara Schools, although here and there there may 
be differences in detail. The first of these principles to 
which I will advert is the exclusion of females unless 
admitted by virtue of special texts. The Dliyabhaga 
expressly recognises the principle on the authority of the 
text of Baudhayana, and explains that the succession of 
the widow and certain other women does not contradict this 
rule in as muck as they take under special texts. 1 It is 
true that the Mitaksara does not in so many words lay 
down this principle, but the general outline of the 
Mitaksara scheme of succession clearly indicates its 
recognition and the Viromitrodaya and the Smriti ChandrikS 
both expressly lay down the rule in unhesitating terms. 
It appears from the authorities relied on in support of this 
position, that it is as old as the Vedas, and it is even 


1 Diiyabhaga Chap. XI ? See. 6-11, 



THK If AAV OI' SUCCESSION. 


Itf9 


doubtful whether in ancient times it was not even more 
stringently exclusive than we at present find it to be. 
Thus in dealing with succession to inales, the Vi ram it rod aya 
says, “ As for the text of the Smriti, namely, — ‘Therefore 
women are devoid of the senses and incompetent to inherit/ 
and for the text of Mann 1 leased upon it, namely — ‘ Indeed 
the rule is that women are always devoid of the senses 
and incompetent to inherit/ these are both to he inter- 

preted to mean to refer to those women whose might of 
inheritance has not been expressly declared. ilaradat.ta 
also has explained (those texts) in this very way, in his 
Commentary on the Institutes of Cfautama called MitFik- 
sliara. But some (Commentators) say that the term 
‘incompetent to inherit’ implies censure only, by mason of 
its association with the term ‘devoid of the senses’. This 
is not tenable, because it cannot but he admitted that the 
portion, namely, ‘incompetent to inherit’ is prohibitory 
and not condemnatory,” 1 and in another passage dealing 
with succession to Stridhaiia property he reiterates the 
same opinion and says : * Hut the daughter-in-law and 

others (of the same sex) are entitled to food and raiment 
only ; for the nearness as a Sa pi in la. is of no force when it 
is opposed by express texts.’ Since a text of the Sruti 
declares, — '‘Therefore women are devoid of the senses 
and incompetent to inherit ’,- — and a text of Maiiu, founded 
upon it, says — ‘Indeed the rule is that, devoid of the 
senses, and incompetent to inherit, women are useless’ — 
the conclusion arrived at by the author of fSmriti Candrika 
Haradatta, and other Southern Commentators, as well as 
by all the Oriental commentators such as Jirniitavahana, is 
that those women only are entitled to inherit whose right 
of succession has been expressly mentioned in such texts as 
— ‘The wife and the daughters also etc.’ hut that others are 

1 V i ram it rod aya, Chnjj. 1JI, Ft. I . Sw, 13. 

t> 



A corollary 
from the 
position of a 
female in tlie 
organisation 
of the ancient 
Aryan 
Society. 


Admission of 
sister in the 
line of 


170 TIIK LAW Of Sl’CCESsMON. 

certainly excluded from taking heritages by the texts of 
the Sruti and of Maim/ 1 This makes it perfectly clear 
that; the principle of the exclusion of females was recog- 
nised on all hands, and had been so recognised from a 
very ancient time. It was indeed a corollary from the 
position of a female in the organisation of the ancient 
Aryan Society ; there her position was one of life long 
dependence. So Mann says: — 'The father protects a 
woman in her childhood, the husband during her youth, 
the son in old age ; a woman has no right to indepen- 
dence that being her position, it was quite natural that she 
could not take the inheritance, and the few cases in which 
she was called to do so seem to have been subsequent 
concessions made for special reasons in favour of a few 
very near relations such as wife, daughter, mother and 
the like. 1 do not here propose to enter into a discussion 
as to how the right of each of these female relatives grew 
up, as the point has been elaborately discussed by MY. 
Mayne in Chapter XVII of his valuable work on Hindu 
Law, but L may point out in passing as it may be interes- 
ting to you that, even the right of the widow to inherit 
her deceased husband’s property was not for a long time 
clearly recognised and that the celebrated dramma 
Abhijnllini Sakuntalam of Kalidasa contains an indication 
of this where the king, being reported that a certain 
merchant was dead without any issue so that, his estate 
should escheat to the Crown, directs an enquiry as to 
whether any of his widows was onciente, an enquiry which 
would have been unnecessary if a widow could take the 
property in her own right. 5 

The Yyavahara Mayukha which is recognised as an 
authority in Bombay admits the claim of a sister, and gives 

1 Viramitrodaya Chap. V, PL JI, 15. 

= Abhijuana Sakuntalam, Act VI. 



THE LAW OF SUCCESSION. 171 

her a very high position in the line of succession, viz,, after 
the grand -mother and before the grand -fat her. This it 
does on the ground that she is a gotraja being born 
in the family of the propositus, although she may 
be transferred to another gotra l>y marriage, and as 
such entitled to inherit in order of propin<|uity. The 
way in which the Bombay High Court lias admitted 
other females into the line of succession does not seem to 
me to be based on any intelligible principle but must- be 
rested on special custom and the analogy of the reason- 
ing employed by the Mayukha in admit t in g the sister's 
right.. The Madras High Court, also while professing to 
follow the Mitakshara has admitted the claim of a number 
of females to inherit as bandhus, but this position is hardly 
justified by the Mitakshara and clearly contrary to Smriti 
Chandrika which is au undoubted authority of the southern 
school- ; these decisions, therefore, exhibit a clear departure 
from the law as originally laid down by the sages and 
interpreted by the authoritative commentators. 

The conclusion, therefore, at which we arrive is that 
both the Dayabhilga and the Mitiiksara recognise the 
principle of the exclusion of females from inheritance 
unless admitted by special texts with this diforcnce that 
in the ease of the property of au undivided co-parcener no 
question of succession can properly arise under the Mita- 
ksara I jaw by reason of the operation of the rule of 
suvivorship and hence women who can only take by way 
of succession cannot claim the same, while under the 
Dayabhaga Law which makes no distinction between the 
properties of divided and undivided co-parcencrs for the 
purposes of inheritance, women inherit both kinds of 
property in exactly the same way, a difference which as I 
have already sought to explain, is connected with a corres- 
ponding difference in the conception of co-ownership, the 


succession 
by ilie 
Vyavahara 
Wnyuklia. 


How the 
Hombay 
High Court 
has made 
room 
for other 
females 


The course 
adopted by 
f lu; Madras 
High Court 
Is it justified 
by the 
Ali Oi k sura V 


The 

conclusion. 


The 

difference 
between 
the; two 
schools 



Exclusion 

from 

inheritance 
(Grounds of 
exclusion 
classified. 


The point 
of time 
at which 


172 THE LAW OF SUCCESSION, 

result, perhaps of a disintegration of the ancient joint 
family system in Bengal owing to the operation of social 
and economic causes to which I need not here advert. 

Exclussion from inheritance : — Under the Hindu Law 
there are several grounds for exclussion from inheritance, 
and they may be broadly divided into three classes : (1) 
Physical disease or deformity of a certain type, (2) Mental 
incapacity, and (8) Moral or religious disqualification. 
Under the first division may be mentioned, congenital 
blindness and deafness, dumbness, lameness, i inpotency, 
leprosy and other incurable virulent diseases ; insanity 
and idiocy are causes of* exclusion coming under the second 
division of mental incapacity ; commission of a vice lead- 
ing to excommunication, being born of a father who has 
been so excommunicated, assumption of the order of ascetics 
and unchastity in the cast? of a widow are moral and 
religious disqualifications which exclude a person’ from 
inheritance. As regards physical deformity the text of 
Manu clearly shows that blindness and deafness must, be 
congenital to be a bar to inheritance, and that being so it 
is difficult to see why the same condition should not be 
attached to other physical deformities such as dumbness 
and lameness. As regards moral or religious disqualifica- 
tions they are sometimes expiable, and when so expiated 
cannot, be a ground for disinherison. The disqualification, 
however, is in any case personal, so that the son of a dis- 
qualified person may inherit the property although the 
father cannot, and moreover, the persons so excluded from 
inheritance become entitled to maintenance except when 
the exclusion is due to the commission of a sin leading to 
excommunication, or to being born of a father so excom- 
municated. Having thus indicated the causes of exclusion 
from inheritance the next question is what is the point of 
time at which the cause must exist in order that the effect 



THE LAW OF SUCCESSION. 


173 


>raay follow. As regards the Dayabhaga, there can be no 
difficulty for succession opens out, according to it, on the 
extinction of the ownership of the previous owner and that 
is the moment at which the disability must exist in order 
to shut out a person otherwise entitled to inheritance. 

The Milakshara, however, lays down that it is the exis- 
tence of the disqualification at the moment of the division 
of the property that excludes a person from getting his 
share, but one already separated from his co-heirs is not 
deprived of his allotments by the subsequent accrual of 
any disqualifying defect and what is more, it goes oil to 
say that the removal of the defect, even after the partition, 
will entitle the person so freed from the disqualifying 
cause to have the partition re-opened and get his share in 
the property. 1 It does not seem that according to the 
Dayabhaga the devolution of inheritance can be disturbed 
by reason of the subsequent removal of the disqualifying 
defect, for in the absence of express aut hority an inheritance 
must remain where it has fallen. 

This brings us to the consideration of two principles 
which have often been pronounced to he principles of 
Hindu Law, tv*., (I) that succession can never remain in 
abeyance and (:2) that an estate mice vested cannot he 
divested. 

As regards the principle that succession can never 
remain in abeyance, it is not a principle founded upon any 
special text, but is a logical deduction from the conception 
of succession. According to the Hindu Law title by 
succession arises without any reference to the volition of 
any individual by the operation of a rule of law, and 
since this rule comes into operation at once on the extinc- 
tion of the previous ownership, it follows that there cannot 


the ground 
of exclusion 
must exist 
in order to 
lead to the 
exclusion 
The position 
according 
to the 
Dayabhaga 
According 
to the 
Mitak^hnra. 


Subsequent 
removal of 
disqualifica- 
tion: its 
effect. 


Two other 
principles 
oft on pro- 
nounced to 
be principles 
of Hindu 
Law. 


Succession 
can never 
remain in 
abeyance. 

A logical 
deduction 
from the 
conception of 
succession. 


Mitak$hara Chap. II . Sec. X. (1 and 7. 



174 


THE LAM' OF SUCCESSION. 


Difference 
from the 
llonmn Law. 


An estate 
once voHtod 
oannot he 
divested. 

Not a special 
principle of 
the Hindu 
Law. 

Nor of univer- 
sal applica- 
tion. 


Exceptions 


be any interval between the extinction of the interest ofc 
the predecessor and the accrual of the interest of the 
successor, for, were it otherwise, then during the 
interval the property would be reduced to the condition of 
a res nnlliu In this respect, therefore, it differs from 
the Roman Law according to which acceptance of the 
inheritance by the heir, except in the case of a sum herm 
who was on that account called here* uecatmrim , was a 
condition of the estate being vested in him ; the result of 
this was, as Sir William Markby points out, that 'there 
was a space of time, very often a considerable one, during 
which, whatever the theory might be the interitance did 
in fact belong to no one. This difficulty was partly got 
over by the doctrine of 'relation back’ as it is called, that 
is to say, the heir, though he was not really heir before he 
accepted, yet, when he accepted, was treated exactly as if 
he had succeeded immediately on the death of the owner. 
Still the difficulty remained, that in the interval the 
inheritance was vacant, which might give rise to practical 
inconveniences which no fiction could remedy .” 1 

As regards the other principle that an estate once 
vested cannot be divested, I do not see why it should be 
regarded as a special principle of the Hindu Law. When 
an estate once vests in a person, it must follow from the 
universal principle of reason that, there cannot be an effect 
without a cause, that it; cannot be divested unless a 
sufficient ground for it supervene, and it may be observed 
that under the Hindu Law there are occasions on which 
an estate once vested is actually divested, although, it 
must be admitted, that, such occasions are exceptional in 
their character. 

Thus the birth of a posthumous son, the adoption of 


1 Mtirkby 's Elements of Law, Chap* XVI II. 



THE LAW OK SUCCESSION. ]7.‘i 

a sou by a widow after the death of her husband, and the 
removal of disqualification of an heir even alter the 
distribution of property under the Mitakslwa Law 
furnish instances where property once vested in one person 
is divested and passes to another. Of course, when no 
such ground exists the property must remain where it 
lies, simply because there is nothing to remove it, so that 
the high-sounding proposition that ‘an estate once vested 
cannot be divested’ really amounts to nothing more than 
this, that a person who acquires an ownership remains 
owner until for some sufficient reason he ceases to be an 
owner. 

The lecture has already become too long, and here 1 
^ lose it with the hope that although the details of the 
subject can only be gathered from text-books specially 
dealing with the same, the principles explained above will 
place them in their true light and afford a. rational basis 
for taking a connected view of the whole. 


The basis of 
the principle 
explained. 



LECTURE YI 


Pledge 
treated as a 
security for 
the re-pay- 
irient of a 
debt. 


Two taodos 
of ensuring 
the confi- 
dence of a 
creditor. 

Pledge 
creates a 
real right. 


Pledge (’'nfr) 
defined. 


Division of 
pledges. 


The Law of Pledge. 

In the last fouj lectures I have dealt with ownership 
and the various modes of its acquisition whether original 
or derivative. In the present lecture I propose to discuss 
the Hindu Law of Pledge. The Hindu lawyers deal with 
this subject in connection with recovery of debt, for a 
giving of pledge, according to ,%em, is a form of 
furnishing security for the repayment of debt, or, in 
other words, it is a mode of ensuring the confidence of the 
creditor. So Narada says, ‘surety and pledge, these are the 
two sources of ensuring the confidence of the creditor / 1 
Among the two I propose to deal with the law of pledge 
at tli is place, because the giving of a pledge involves, as 
you will find, the transfer of an interest in property in 
favour of the creditor which under certain circumstances 
matures into full ownership, and thus creates a real right 
as distinguished from a right corresponding to a mere 
personal obligation, so that in logical order of sequence the 
discussion of this subject should come immediatly after the 
discussion of the transfer of full ownership with which I 
was busy so long. 

The ordinary Sanskrit equivalent of the word pledge is 
which is thus defined in the Mitaksliara : “Whatever 
is placed under the control of the creditor by the debtor 
as a security for the thing lent to him is called, 
an adhi .” 2 If may be of various kinds : So 

• 

*nfir. i fimrou i mmvm i. 



THE LAW OF PLEDGE. 


177 


Narada first divides it into two "lasses viz., (i) that 
redeemable within a definite time ami (ii) that given for 
an indefinite period until the repayment of the debt, and 
these two classes are again divided into two, in as much 
as they may be either for custody or for use. ! Brihaspati 
gives a somewhat different classification ; lie begins by 
saying that a pledge is of four kinds, and then goes on to 
specify &n eight-fold division viz, (1) movable, (2) im- 
movable, (3) for custody, (4) for use, (5) discretionary 
(i. e. without a time limit) (0) with a fixed time limit, 
(7) evidenced by a document, and (8) evidenced merely 
by witnesses. 2 This apparent inconsistency is reconciled 
by Smriti Chandrika by saying that although the divisions 
actually enumerated are eight yet the principal divisions 
are feigr as enumerated in the text of Narada, in as much as 
they are productive of important consequences, while the 
remainder of the classification, being of minor importance, 
may safely be ignored ; on the other hand, the Kritya- 
Kalpataru makes a very ingenious suggestion which, to 
my mind, affords a more acceptable solution of the puzzle: 
it says, that although the divisions enumerated are eight 
in number, j et the classification is really four-fold since 
the principles of classification are four viz, (1) nature of 
the property pledged, (2) form of the pledge, (3) time 
relation and (4) nature of the evidence bj^ which the 
pledge is supported ( vwk wm ). 

According to the nature of the property a pledge 
is either movable or immovable ; according to the form 

1 ^nfafaRre? iRjifa— srt i wrq- 

sw i 

* * ufarowi wmrw. b ^ . 

stawgfw * Stawro * srefa*; uuifw 

23 


Four-fold 
division by 
Narada. 


Eight-fold 
division by 
Brihaspati. 


The two 
classifications 
how reconci- 
led by Smriti 
Chandrika. 


By Krifcya- 
Kttlpafcaru. 


The princi- 
ples of classi- 
fication. 



178 


THE LAW OF FLEDGE. 


Conld there 
be a pledge 
without 
delivery of 
possession P 


Shibohandra 

Ghosh 

t*. 

Rhssick* 

chandra 

Neoghy. 


Mr. Justice 

Grant’s 

judgment. 


Dr. Ghosh's 
criticism. 


it is either for custody or for use ; according to time- 
relation it is either with or without a time-limit ; and 
according to the nature of the evidence it is either suppor- 
ted by a document or merely by witnesses. The way in 
which the differences indicated by these divisions affect the 
incidents of the pledge will be pointed out later on. 

It will be seen from the classification given above that 
although a pledge is distinguished into a pledge for custody 
and a pledge for use, there is no suggestion of a third class, 
viz., a pledge which is not accompanied by possession. 
This raises the question whether under the Hindu Law 
there could be a pledge without the accompaniment of 
delivery of possession, or, in other words whether the very 
nature of the transaction did not involve the transfer of 
possession from the pledgor to the pledgee as an element in 
its constitution. The question was raised before the late 
Supreme Court of Calcutta in the case of Shibachandra 
Ghosh v . Russickchandra Neoghy 1 and the majority of 
the court held that whatever might have been the case 
in early times, the later Hindu Law recognised the validity 
of a pledge although unaccompanied by possession, and 
they relied in support of this conclusion upon some of the 
texts of Hindu Law as well as upon tlie general usage of the 
country. Mr. Justice Grant, however, was of a different 
opinion, and held that delivery of possession was necessary 
to the validity of a pledge in Hindu Law and that this was 
also in conformity with the general principles of natural 
law. The argument of Mr. Justice Grant, in so far as it is 
based upon a consideration of the so-called law of nature, 
is somewhat difficult to follow, for, as Dr. Ghosh points 
out, “if it were not for the peculiar views about the law 
of > nature so widely prevalent at the time, Mr. Justice 


x Fult. 36, 



THE LAW OP PLEDGE. 


179 


Grant could hardly have failed to perceive that the Hindu 
Law might have been developed in course of time in the 
same manner as the Roman Law was developed by the 
introduction of hypothecation”. 

The element of truth which it probably contains, 
although expressed in a somewhat obscure language, is 
that having regard to the purpose for which a pledge was 
required, viz., ensuring the confidence of the creditor, it was 
not likely that a pledge unaccompanied by possession 
would, in the early stages of society, meet that end so 
that in the order of evolution, the recognition of hypothe- 
cation is a later juridical phenomenon than the prevalence 
of pledges accompanied by possession. 

But, then, just as in the later Roman Law, the altered 
conditions of the time led to the recognition of hypotheca- 
tion unaccompanied by possession as a valid transaction, 
so it is not at all unlikely in the nature of things, that a 
similar transition should also lake place in the later Hindu 
Law; on the other hand, if the growth of hypothecation was 
a natural growth detnmined by circumstances which 
might appear anywhere, it would be only reasonable to 
expect that its recognition would not be confined to a 
particular system of laws, but find a place in other 
systems as well. Prima facie, therefore, we cannot attach 
much importance to this sort of a priori speculation, and the 
real question is whether upon the evidence available to us 
we can say that the Hindu Law did recognise the validity 
of a pledge unaccompanied by possession. On giving the 
matter my best consideration I have come to the conclusion 
that our Dharma Sastras do not contain much evidence of 
the prevalence of a hypothecation ; on the other hand the 
scheme of the. law bearing upon the subject and the rights 
and obligations arising under it all go to show that a pledge 
involved the placing of a property of the debtor under the 


Element: of 
truth in the 
aforesaid 
judgment. 


The question 
discussed : 
arguments 
pro and 
contra. 

Arguments 
for an answer 
in the nega- 
tive : 



180 


. THE LAW OF PLEDGE. 


' * 

Etymological 
meaning of 
the word 


The division 
of a pledge 
into two 
classes 

^uud^rnr. 

Nature of the 
rights and| 
obligations. 


Was hypothe- 
cation likely 
to be regarded 
as a sufficient 
security ? 
Disadvan- 
tages of hypo- 
thecation : 


control of the creditor as a security for the payment of the 
debt. In support of this position, I may begin by referring 
to the definition of ‘adhi* which I have already placed 
before you, for it shows that the term denotes a thing 
placed under the control of the creditor in order to ensure 
his confidence, and indeed the etymology of the word 
fsrtfir ), supports this definition ; in the second 
place the division of a pledge into two classes, e.g., 

( for custody ) and ( for use ) suggests the same con- 
clusion, for the recognition of hypothecation will require 
the admission of a third class of pledge which is neither for 
custody iftuf nor for use in the third place the 

various rights and obligations of the pledgor and pledgee 
to which I will presently advert contemplate the pledgor 
parting with his possession at the time of creating the 
pledge. It seems to me that it is hut natural that this 
should be so, for what is hypothecation but an agreement 
on the part of the debtor to hold his property as a security 
for the fulfilment of his engagement to repay the loan, 
and could it under ordinary circumstances be sufficient to 
ensure the confidence of the creditor? It is practically one 
promise (viz., to hold the property as a security) on the top 
of another (viz., to repay the loan) and if it could be relied 
on, why not the bare promise to repay ? It may be said 
that a hypothecation creates a qualified right in the proper- 
ty hypothecated in as much as it gives you a right to sell 
the property under certain circumstances; that is quite 
true, but it must be remembered that the right can only 
be exercised if the debtor retains the property, for, if he 
sells it off to a hona fide purchaser, the situation will be 
this, that if you allow the hypothecation to prevail, the 
honest purchaser is defrauded and deprived of his property 
without any fault of his own; while if you do not, the hypo- 
thecation practically loses the whole of its value. These 



THE LAW OF PLEDGE. 


Ml 


disadvantages of hypothecation are so palpable that I am 
not quite sure that a Hindu creditor would not have reposed 
.more confidence in a solemn promise exacted from the 
debtor, such as is involved in what is called a pledge of reli- 
gious merit wvr according to one of its interpre- 
tations, whereby the debtor, for instance, says to his 
creditor “until I repay the loan I will not bathe in the 
Ganges” or “the benefit of my ablution in the Ganges 
shall accrue to you,” than in a security like this, and to 
this stage of feeling a*e to be attributed the text of Yajna- 
valkya, “By the acceptance of a pledge is its validity main- 
tained” 1 and the text of Narada attributed by Jagannatha 
to Vyasa, “Pledges are declared to be of two sorts, immove- 
able and moveable, and both are valid when there is actual 
enjoyment, and not otherwise” 2 . All these considerations, 
therefore, combine to show that in the early Hindu Law 
a pledge without the accompaniment of delivery of posses- 
sion was not usually recognised. Let us now consider the 
evidence which lias been supposed to indicate the 
existence and recognition of a hypothecation under the 
Hindu Law. In his work on the Law of Mortgage, Dr. 
Ghosh quotes a passage from the Mitakshara. in support 
of the position that in the mature Hindu Law the rule 
requiring tradition had fallen into disuse, and that :i real 
right, whether by mortgage or sale, could be created by a 
mere expression of the intention of the parties. The 
passage cited is one to which 1 have already had occasion 
to draw yoiu* attention in another connection. It is this : 
“The acceptance of gold, cloths, etc. being completed by 


Yajnaval- 
kya*s text. 

Narada's text 


Arguments 
in favour of 
an answer in 
the affirma- 
tive consi- 
dered. 


A passage 
from Mi taka* 
hara cited by 
Dr. Ghosh. 


1 i 

* wifircs fiffw: ntm: wrratwini wit i 

jfaroft win: nftarrc wtwnni nr«wln tin tWwaten: t 



182 


THE LAW OF PLEDGE. 


True import 
of the 
passage. 


The passage 
does not 
solve the 
qnestion. 


the ceremony of bestowing water, and falling therefore 
under either of the means, may be designated as a three- 
fold acceptance; but in the case of land as there can be 
no corporeal acceptance without enjoyment of the produce, 
it must be accompanied by some little possession ; other- 
wise the gift, sale, or other transfer is not complete. A 
title, therefore, without corporeal acceptance, consisting of 
the enjoyment of the produce, is weaker than a title 
accompanied by it or with such corporeal acceptance. But 
such is the case only, when of these ■ two the priority is 
undistinguishable, but when it is ascertained which is 
first in point of time and which is posterior, then the 
simple prior title affords the stronger evidence .” 1 I am 
afraid that this passage does not support the conclusion for 
which it is sought to be used. It is true that it shows 
that tradition is not necessary to complete a transfer of 
property, but that it is of importance only when a question 
of relative superiority arises between two transactions 
where priority in time cannot be ascertained and it does 
not affect the other question whether from the very nature 
of a pledge delivery of possession by the debtor to the 
creditor is not one of its constituent elements. The fact 
is that the above observations were made by Yijnaneswara 
in connection with the question of acceptance ; acceptance, 
he says, may take either of three forms ; it may be mental, 
verbal or corporeal, and in order that the acceptance of a 
transfer may be complete it is not absolutely necessary 
that it should take the corporeal form’; although, in so far 


1 (rhoshe on Mortgage, p. 40. The first part of the translation is 
somewhat inaccurate ; it should ran thus : Since in the case of gold 
cloths etc., it it possible to take hold of the thing immediately after 
the ceremony of bestowing water, acceptance in all the three forms 
(t.c., mental verbal and corporeal) completely takes place $ but in the 
oase 6f land &e. ;1 



THE LAW OF PLEDGE. 


188 


ad corporeal acceptance, which involves an assumption of 
possession, and in the case of land, some enjoyment of 
usufruct, is more tangible and easily demonstrable, it 
determines the relative superiority between two transfers 
where priority in point of time cannot be clearly ascer- 
tained. It therefore follows that in so far as assumption 
of possession may be regarded as a part of acceptance, it 
is not really indispensable; but it does not follow that 
delivery of possession can be dispensed with even when 
the very nature of the transaction involves it as one of 
its constituent elements. I am, therefore, of opinion that 
the above observations were made by Vijnaueswara in 
connection with a transfer of ownership such as a gift or 
a sale, and not in relation to a pledge, and that so far as 
this latter transaction is concerned, the question whether 
it does not involve delivery of possession by the debtor to 
the creditor as one of its constituent elements* is not at 
all affected by it. To put the same matter in another 
form : suppose a debtor offers a pledge and the creditor 
accepts it; the contract is complete without any delivery 
of possession, since acceptance is not necessarily corporeal, 
but the question remains whether the creditor is not 
entitled to demand possession : if a pledge involve delivery 
of possession as one of its constituent elements, he is ; but 
if it do not, the pledge is a mere hypothecation of the 
Roman Law, and lie is not. The question whether the 
Hindu Law recognised a transaction of the latter kind does 
not find any solution from the passage quoted above, nor 
is there any other passage in the Mitakshara to show that 
it did. There is a text attributed by Jagannatha to Brihas- 
pati which is sometimes cited in support of the recognition 
of a pledge without possession. It runs thus : “Of him 
who does not enjoy a pledge, nor possess it, nor claim it on 
evidence, the written contract for that pledge is nugatory, 


What the 

question 

really 

amounts to. 


No trace of 
hypothecs* 
tion in the 
Mitakshara. 


A text of 
Brihaspati 
quoted by 
Jagannatha. 



184 


THE LAW OF FLEDGE!. 


This also does 
not lead to 
any definite 
conolusion. 


Dr. Ohose^ 
argument 
based on the 
etymology 
of the word 
handhaka. 


The argu- 
ment not 
conclusive. 


A different 
etymological 
meaning at- 
tributed to 
the word by 
Jagannatha. 


like a bond when the debtor and witnesses^ have deceased.” 
This seems to me to lay down a rule of evidence, and is . 
besides of such a doubtful import that it does n rt lead to 
a definite conclusion as to whether there could be a pledge 
without possession. It must also be remembered that 
Brihaspati divides a pledge with reference to its form into 
two classes, viz., pledge for custody and pledge for use, and, 
that being so, it becomes difficult to infer that in the text 
quoted above he recognises a third class of pledge which 
is neither for custody nor for use. Referring to the use 
of the word bandhaka to designate a pledge, Dr. Ghosh 
suggests that “change from ad/d to bandhaka marks the 
progress from a pledge with possession to a pledge not 
followed by delivery or in other words to hypothecation.” 
This suggestion is based by him upon the etymology of 
the two words for he says that while the word adhi signi- 
fies bailment, bandhaka , the word now in familiar use 
among the Hindus, like lien in the English law, imports 
merely a tie or nexus. 1 There may be a good deal in this 
suggestion, but, with all deference, I am bound to point 
out that an argument upon the etymology of a Sanskrit 
word is seldom conclusive, for it is often quite 
possible for a Sanskritist to give it a different turn. Thus 
with reference to the etymology of the word bandhaka 
Jagannatha says : c bandha ’ is derived in the passive form, 
“that which is bound or pledged (b' din/ ale)”. A male 
slave or the like, being bound or confined is then unable 
to perform service for his master ; a horse also being bound 
or tied, is then unfit for his owner’s use. By acceptation, 
the sense of the word c band/ha ’ is a thing remaining in 
the creditor’s possession by an agreement on the part of 
the debtor in this form, i this chattel shall remain in 


1 Ghosh' on Mortgage, p. 42. 



THE LAW OP PLEDGE. 


185 


tliy possession so long as I do not repay the money*. 
Accordingly it is said by eminent logicians that 'the 
meaning of words is apprehended by grammar, by 
analogy, by dictionaries, by original instruction, and by 
practice or acceptation ’. 1 It is plain that if this interpre- 
tation be accepted, the etymology of the word landha 
instead of supporting Dr. Ghose’s theory really goes 
against it. It must also be remembered that Brihaspati 
begins his discussion of the law of pledge by saying that 
“an Sdhi is also called a bmdka and it is of four different 
kinds " 9 and in many texts of Hindu Law the two words 
are used as synonymous. I am, however, disposed to 
think, on other grounds, that the suggestion that “the 
change from ad hi to bandftaha marks the progress from a 
pledge with possession to a pledge not followed by delivery 
or in other words to hypothecation" is not without 
f jundation, and what is more, it also helps us to mark out 
the several stages in the transition from the former to the 
latter, and this I shall presently try to show. In doing 
this I shall first place before you indisputable evidence 
to show that a pledge without possession was recognised 
by the later Hindu Law, and I shall then try to explain 
the causes which determine! its recognition and reconstruct 
the several stages through which the transition, in all 
probability, came about. There is a text of K&tySyana 
whioh dealing with the priority between two pledges says, 
u If a pledge, a sale, or a gift of the same thing be made 
before witnesses to one man, and by a written instrument 
to another the writing shall prevail, because one 
transaction only can be maintained ". 8 Commenting 

1 Colebrook’a Digest, vol. 1, p 145. 

* wjwnir. « * ftnwgfw ■ 

wflwii f«iwj fNewmwaM 
24 - 


The two 
words ‘fidhi* ' 
and * bandha' 
sometimes 
used as 
synonymous. 


How the 
suggested 
transition 
can be 
worked out. 


Evidence to 

show that a 

pledge 

without 

delivery of 

possession 

was 

recognised 
by later 
Hindu Law, 



186 


THE LAW OF PLEDGE. 


Jagannatha’s 
comments on 
Katyayana’s 
text. 

Halayudha’s 


The value of 
this opinion 
to show that 
hopotheoa- 
tion prevailed 
in Bengal* 

A passage 
from Raghu- 
nandana’s 
Dayatattva 
supports the 
conclusion. 


upon this Jagannatha observes that “ HalSyndha says if 
there be no occupancy but a writing exists duly attested 
and so forth, the writing shall prevail because it is the 
best evidence of a transaction ; it shall establish the 
mortgage. It is hereby intimated that if there be written 
and verbal contracts, a mortgage is not of course invalid 
for want of occupancy.” 1 Now HalByudha, as you are 
perhaps aware, was the chief judge in the reign of 
Lakshmana Sen, one of the Sen Kings of Bengal, and 
his opinion may be regarded as quite conclusive regarding 
the prevalence of hypothecation at least in Bengal . 2 A 
few centuries after this, Raghunandan, who is known as 
the Smarta Bhattacharyya in Bengal and whose work 
known as Ashtavinsati-taltva at present - regulates the 
ceremonial law of that Province, writes in his Dlyatattva : 
“ Thus also if the pledge be not redeemed by reason of 
death or the like of the seller or donor, it may be 
redeemed by the buyer or donee, because a right equal to 
that of the former owner has been generated by the sale 
or gift. In such a case if a dispute arise as to the source 
of the right, then the buyer or other donee “( who is 
admitted as such) is required to prove his possession, and 
not the commencement of his title .” 8 This passage 
among other things clearly shows that acccording to 
Raghunandana there could be a pledge without possession 
and that such a pledge was prevalent in his days. We 

1 Oolebrooke’s Digest, p. 221. 

a Halayudha thus described the successive offices held by bim under 
Lakshmana Sen in his Brahmana Sarvasva : — 

dW*r ipt storofiwwrera i 
3 wrf h falf>ni< i 

* Dayatattva translated by Babn Golapchandra Sarkar, p. 82. 



THE LAW OP PLEDGE. 


187 


may, therefore, safely conclude that the system of hypothe- 
cating property without delivering possession of it to 
the creditor was prevalent in Bengal at least from the 
time of the Sen kings, and it seems to me that there are 
reasons why such a form of mortgage should find a readier 
acceptance in Bengal than anywhere else. A pledge, as 
you have seen, may either be movable or immovable; 
now, in the case of movable property the transfer of 
possession from the debtor to the creditor may not cause 
much inconvenience, but in the case of immovable proper- 
ty it may often prove to be a source of inconvenience to 
both the parties ; for the creditor, on the one hand, may 
often be unwilling to undertake the trouble of cultivating 
or making other profitable use of the land, and the debtor 
also may, on the other hand, be diffident regarding the 
honesty or capacity of the creditor ; it is, therefore, quite 
natural that in a province where pledges of immovable 
property frequently take place, the people should, sooner 
or later, hit upon the expedient of introducing a system 
of mortgage which would not require the debtor to part 
with possession of the property ; now, as 1 have already 
explained in another place, transfers of immovable property 
were likely to be more frequent in Bengal than anywhere 
else where the MitSkshara law with its peculiar res- 
traints on alienation especially of immovable property 
prevailed, and the necessity for raising a loan and that 
speedily, would also be more frequent there by reason of 
the commercial activity of the people who settled along 
the lower course of the Ganges ; it is, therefore quite 
natural that these circumstances should combine to produce 
a modification of the original law under which a pledge 
necessarily involved deliveiy of possession of the property 
pledged by the debtor to the creditor. I must not, how- 
ever, be understood to say that hypothecation was unknown 


Why 

hypotheca- 
tion shonld 
find a readier 
acceptance in 
Bengal ? 


Evidence of 
prevalence 
of hypothe- 
cation out- 
side Bengal. 



,188 


THE LAW OF PLEDGE. 


< outside the province of Bengal ; on the other hand there is 
clear evidence of its prevalence to be found in works 
regarded as authoritative in other provinces: thus in 
M^yakbaT VySvahSra Mayukha Nilakantha referring to a text of 
Brihaspati in which the two words ddhi and bandha are 
used together so as to signify that different meanings 
- must be attached to them says that the word bandha may 
be taken to mean an agreement of this form, viz., “I 
shall not make a gift, sale, pledge, or other disposition of 
this house or field, or other property until the debt I owe 
you is cleared off;” 1 and this is an explanation which 
clearly marks off a hypothecation from a pledge accom- 
* pained by possession, and supports the suggestion of Dr. 
Ghose that the word bandhaka as distinguished from ddhi 
was taken hold of to introduce a new kind of mortgage 
which gradually did away with the requirements of deli- 
very of possession without which there could be no pledge 
under the older law. * 


Successive 
stages in the 
transition to 
hypotheca- 
tion. 


A text of 
Brihaspati 
distinguish- 
ing between 
ddhi and 
bandha . 


Having thus shown that the later Hindu Law discloses 
the recognition of a form of mortgage which did not 
involve transfer of possession, I shall now attempt to trace 
the successive stages which led to this transition. I have 
stated that the word bandhaka has in many texts been used 
in the same way as ddln to denote a pledge with the 
accompaniment of delivery of possession so that the two 
words may be taken as synonymous expressions ; there is, 
however, a text of Brihaspati in which distinction seems to 
have been drawn between them in so far as it says that “a 
creditor should give a loan either attested by a document or 
in the presence of witnesses after obtaining an ddhi or a 





THE LAW OP PLEDGE. 189 

■ '* ' 

bandkaka of adequate value or a reliable surety/’ 1 Here 
the use of the two words ad hi and banilha conjunctively 
'suggests that they are employed in different senses, and 
the Viramitrodaya in explaining this quotes a text of 
NSrada which says that the word banilha signifies a property 
placed in the hands of a friend for the confidence of the 
creditor. a Now, it seems to me that this marks off the first 
stage in the transition from a pledge with delivery of 
possession to the creditor to a hypothecation in which the 
debtor retains the possession of the property for* here, al- 
though the debtor parts with his possession, it is not the 
creditor but somebody else in whose hands the property is 
placed in order that he may produce it in case the debtor 
cannot fulfil his engagement to pay off the debt. The next 
stage in the transition is reached when the third party 
who played the part of a stake-holder, so to say, is trans- 
formed into a surety for the production of the pledge when 
the creditor becomes entitled to demand its production. 
That this transformation did actually take place appeal's 
from the fact that while Yajnavalkya describes three 
classes of sureties, viz., for appearance, for trust, and for 
payment , 3 other lawgivers have noticed a distinct class of 
surety, pi;., a surety for the production of the pledge who is 
sometimes described as a surely for the production of the 
debtor's property ( irfrui) and sometimes, more 

precisely, as a surety for the production of the pledge taken 
( TOfaWT TTfinj) • I shall deal with these classifica- 
tions more fully in a future lecture, but I simply 
mention them here to show that when a 

1 w *t wnff i 

* Pwqt w fasroqr: «ro*. 

• lift mfroiai Pretax i 


A text of 
Narada to 
explain the 
distinction 

quoted by 

Yiramitro- 

daya. 


The first 
stage in the 
transition ; 
property 
placed in the 
hands of a 
third party# 


The second 
stage : the 
Btake-holder 
transformed 
into a surety 
for the pro- 
duction of 
the pledge. 




180 


THS LAW OF FLEDGE. 


The last 
stage in the 
transition : 
The 

intervention 
of a third 
part y dis- 
pensed with. 


Importance 
of the tran- 
sition : what 
it demons- 
trates. 


pledge was allowed to be placed in the possession of a 
third person instead of the creditor nothing was more 
natural than that that person should gradually be permitted 
to exercise his discretion to keep it in the possession of the 
debtor provided he took upon himself the responsibility 
and risk of standing a surety for its production at the 
proper time and this was what actually took place in the 
Hindu Law. When we have reached this stage, it is not 
at all difficult to conceive that there should be a further 
relaxation and that ultimately the debtor should be allowed 
to retain the pledge in his possession on his own under- 
taking not to alienate it in any way without; being required 
to procure a surety to ensure the production of the pledge 
in case he failed to discharge his debt in proper time ; 
when we arrive at this stage we get what is called hypo- 
thecation, and I have already shown that the later Hindu 
Law furnishes ample evidence of its recognition. 

The above account of the way ii which the necessity 
of making over the property pledged to the creditor was 
gradually shaken off furnishes a curious instance of the 
manner in which old order slowly changes yielding place 
to the new without abruptness and without any seeming 
compulsion, but moved and guided along the line of least 
resistance by the impetus supplied by the altered conditions 
of the society and the exigencies created thereby, and it 
is only one among numerous instances of gradual modifica- 
tions introduced into the Hindu Law in response to the 
demands of time and the growing necessities of the 
society. I therefore, venture to affirm that the critic who 
pretends to see nothing in the Hindu Law but a stagnant 
mass of archaic rules knows not what he says, and shows 
that he himself has got a stagnant mind. 

Having thus explained to you the nature of a pledge 
under the Hindu Law, I shall now shortly discuss the 



THE LAW OF PLEDGE. 191 

rights and obligations arising from the transaction. Yon 
will remember that a pledge may either be for a definite period 
or without any period previously fixed, and it may again 
be either for custody or for use. The incidents of a 
pledge vary according to its nature with reforenee to 
these distinctions. Thus, in the case of a pledge given 
upon the definite understanding that it must be redeemed 
within a definite time, the pledgor loses his right to 
redeem if he fails to carry out his undertaking, and in 
this respect it does not make any difference whether the 
pledge was one for mere custody or for use. Where, 
however, no such period is fixed by contract, there if the 
pledge be merely for custody so that the pledgee cannot 
get anything out of it in satisfaction of his debt, the 
pledgor loses his right to redeem when the amount of 
interest accruing due reaches its extreme limit allowable 
under the Hindu Law, which usually happens when the 
debt doubles itself ; for the Hindu Law does not ordinarily 
allow accummulation of interest exceeding the principal. 
The principle underlying this seems to be that a creditor 
should not be compelled to stay his hands when the debt 
ceases to carry interest while the pledge being merely for 
custody does not bring any satisfaction. In either case, 
however, the law allows a period of grace which usually 
extends to two weeks, so that the debtor can get his 
property released by paying off the debt within that time, 
although he has failed to pay off the debt within the 
period fixed by the contract, or allowed the interest to 
accummulate up to the m iximum limit. 1 On the other 
hand, where the pledge is for use and no period is fixed by 

wrer wfl front’ i 


Rights of the 
pledgee. 


Pledge for a 
definite 
period: no 
redemption 
after the 
expiry of the 
period. 

Pledge 
without a 
period fixed. 


When the 
right of 
redemption 
ceases, if the 
pledge be 
for mere 
custody. 


Period of 
grace. 


Pledge for 
use without 
a definite 
period fixed: 
no forfeiture. 



A farther 
distinction 
in regard to 
a pledge for 


The usufruct 
may be 
enjoyed in 
lieu of 
interest; 
or it may go 
to satisfy the 
principal as 
well. 

The duty of 
the pledgor 
in the former 
case. 

No forfeiture 
in the latter 
case. 


A pledge of 
this latter 
class is 
known as 

and 

resembles 
the vivum 
vadium 
of the old 
English Law. 

Improvement 

or 

deterioration 
of the pledget 
its effect. 


192 THE LAW 0? PLEDGE. 

contract upon the expiry of which the pledge shall Ibe 
forfeited, there no -forfeiture can take place, and the 
pledgor is free to redeem and get back the property at any 
time he likes . 1 Then, again, there is a further distinction - 
to be observed in regard to a pledge for use, for the 
pledgee may be let into possession either on the under- 
standing that the usufruct shall be enjoyed in lieu of 
interest, or on the understanding that besides the interest 
the principal also shall be satisfied out of the usufruct. 
In the former case where the usufruct is enjoyed in lieu of 
interest, it will be the duty of the pledgor to pay off the 
principal cither within the time limited by the contract, if 
there lx? any, or at any time he chooses, if there be no 
fixed time limit, in order to get back the property in liis 
possession. In the latter case where the principal also is 
to be satisfied oub of the usufruct it follows from the 
very nature of the contract that there cannot be any 
forfeiture, and the pledgor shall get back his property on 
the expiry of the term fixed by the contract, if there be 
any, or on the principal with interest being satisfied out of 
the usufruct, if there be none. This latter class of 
usufructuary mortgage in which the debt is liquidated from 
the usufruct was popularly known as WWlfk or a pledge 
that exhausts the debt, and, as Dr. Ghose points out, it 
resembled in many points the vivum vadium of the old 
English law. The Mitakshara, however, lavs down a 
special rule on the authority of a text of Brihaspati that 
if in such a case after the pledgee has been let into 
possession of the property, it unexpectedly acquires an 
additional value or deteriorates from its previous condition 


*ufV: nwfW irfk * titatt.i 

^profit i 



THE LA W OP PLEDGE. 


193 


then tlie increase or the decrease in the usufruct shall, in 
the absence of a contract to the contrary, be taken into 
account in estimating the amount payable to redeem the 
property, so that the debtor shall have to pay less than the 
principal in the one case and more than the principal in 
the other. Those, then, being the conditions for 
foreclosure, it follows that the pledgor is entitled to get 

back his property on the satisfaction of the v amount 

payable by him at any time before the foreclosure becomes 
absolute on the expiry of the period of grace allowed by 
the law, and it is laid down that if the pledgee refuse to 
release the property in such a case he shall be liable to 
punishment as if he were a thief. There is, however, one 
exception to this rule, viz., that where a usufructuary 
mortgage is given upon the definite understanding that 
it will be redeemed at a particular time there it cannot be 
redeemed before the close of the term even if the 

debtor wishes to get back the property on paying the 

amount due to the creditor without waiting till the end 
of the term unless the creditor agrees to forego his strict 
rights to retain the property in his possession for the full 
period originally agreed upon. It, thus, appears that the 
Hindu Law, while protecting with care the rights of the 
mortgagor to get back his property at the proper time, 
cannot be accused of showing an undue indulgence to him 
so as to enable him to get out of the terms of the contract 
into which he entered with open eyes. 

Those, then, being the conditions of foreclosure under 
the Hindu Law, it remains to be considered whether under 
that law, the creditor, could under any circumstances sell 
the property pledged in order to obtain satisfaction of his 
debt. It appears that under the Hindu Law, the right of 
sale was given to the pledgee as an exception to the right 
of foreclosure, that is to say, where, except in the case of 
25 


When the 
pledgor gets 
back his 
property. 


Pledgee 
bound to 
release thd 
property 
upon 

satisfaction 
of the debt 
before the 
foreclosure 
becomes 
absolute. 

An exception 
to the rule in 
the case of a 
usufructuary 
mortgage for 
a definite 
period. 


When can 
the creditor 
sell the 
property 
pledged ? 


The right of 
sale given as 
an exception 
to the right 
of 

foreclosure. 



1&4 


THE LAW OT PLEDGE. 


Two special 
kinds of 
pledge : 

’tfire Wt 

and 

*«TCW OT. 


a usufructuary mortgage without a fixed time limit which 
is incompatible with both a foreclosure and a sale, the 
creditor would otherwise be entitled to foreclose the 
mortgage, it would be open to him to sell the property 
mortgaged, if he were prevented from exercising the right 
of foreclosure by reason of a contract to that effect or 
some rule of law prohibiting a foreclosure and entitling the 
creditor* to his money. There are two special kinds of 
pledges in which the law lays down that there can be no 
foreclosure and the creditor must take his money including 
such interest as he is entitled to. Those pledges are 
known as (pledges of good faith or according 

to another interpretation, pledges of religious merit) and 
OTCTWl (pledges of solemn promise). A pledge is said 
to be a pledge of good faith when there is a great 
difference between the value of the pledge and the money 
borrowed whether it be in favour of the creditor or in 
favour of the debtor, since such a pledge must be taken 
to have been given or taken in reliance upon the good 
faith of the creditor in the one case and of the debtor 
in the other. In a case of this description there will be 
no foreclosure, but the creditor will be entitled to sell the 
property pledged to recover his money at the proper time. 
The expression *fw w*r may also mean a pledge of 
religious merit whereby the debtor stipulates that he shall 
not perform a particular act of religious merit or if he 
performs it the benefit of it shall accrue to the creditor 
until he repays the debt. In such a case also there will be 
no forfeiture since a forfeiture does not amount to a 
fulfilment of the stipulation and the creditor shall 
take the money by the sale of the pledge, if any, given 
along with the stipulation. A pledge of solemn promise 
is a pledge < given by the debtor with a solemn promise 
to repay the debt and not to allow the pledge to be taken 



THF LAW Ot PLEDGE. 


195 


iu satisfaction of the debt. Here, also, there will be no 

foreclosure since the solemn promise mentioned above 

implies a contract that there will be no foreclosure; in 

consequence, the creditor will be entitled to sell the pledge in 

case he cannot otherwise obtain satisfaction. The practical The rules 

result of these rules, therefore is, that the right of sale 

arises, when in a case otherwise, fit for foreclosure, the 

right to foreclose is expressly or impliedly debarred by a 

contract between the parties, or where there is- such a 

difference between the value of the pledge and the amount 

due to the creditor that it would entail great hardship lf 

either upon the creditor or upon the debtor to have the s* 1 ®* there 

( remains a 

debt wiped off by the forfeiture of the pledge. It need hardly surplus, the 

be said that it is laid down that where the pledge is sold corned en* 
and there remains a surplus after the satisfaction of the titled to it. 
debt the debtor becomes entitled to the surplus, but it But what 
may be observed that our lawgivers do not expressly say fiiuI^jSSt 0 ? 
anything about the liability of the debtor to make good 
the deficiency if the sale-proceeds do not fully satisfy the 
debt. With reference to this omission, Dr. Ghose remarks, 
with his usual raciness, that “ like a similar omission in 
the English Pawn Brokers Act, it may be regarded as an 
indirect compliment to the proverbial shrewdness which 
establishes the kinship of the worthy brotherhood of money- 
lenders all the world over.”. As regards the method of Method of 
carrying out the sale, the creditor must of course give due the^ahf ° Ut 
notice of his intention to the debtor, but if he is dead or 
cannot be found then the creditor has the power to sell the 
pledge even in his absence, in the presence of witnesses, or 
may keep it at a public ( place for ten days after having 
fixed the price; if within that time the debtor does not come 
forward and discharge the debt, then the creditor shall 
have his debt satisfied out of it and the surplus if any, 
shall bb made over to the debtor’s kindreds or in th^c* 



196 


A pledge 
created a 
real right. 


The Mitak- 
shara sup- 
ports this 
position. 


THE LAW OF PLEDGE. 

absence to the king . 1 Katy&yana, however, says that in 
such a case the creditor should sell the pledge after produ- 
cing the pledge before the king and 'obtaining his permis- 
sion and the surplus sale-proceeds will remain with the 
king for the benefit of the debtor . 2 You ; will thus see that 
the Jiindu Law does not omit to lay down rules for the 
proper conduct of the sale to ensure that the intei’est of the 
debtor may not be unjustly sacrificed to serve the purpose 
of the creditor. As regards the time when the right of sale 
becomes capable of being exercised, it is the same as in the 
case of foreclosure and I need not repeat the rules which 
I have already explained in that connection. 

You will observe from the rights of the mortgagee 
noticed above that the giving of a pledge created a real 
right and also furnished what is called a real security. It 
created a real right because the creditor when a pledge 
was given became invested with an interest in the property 
pledged which under certain conditions and on the expiry 
of a certain period would either ripen into full ownership 
or entitle him to sell the property without the concurrence 
of the debtor; this right, therefore, is a right in the property 
itself as distinguished from the right corresponding to the 
-debtor's personal liability to pay. The Mitakshara expressly 
supports this position when it says that “ the giving of a 
pledge is well -recognised among the people as a. conditional 

towt ***Ti3B*f i 

sftarenj i i 

* OTim ot* * w i 

wrens: * ferret fs&r *ftr ^mi \ 

■ ■ ■■ •• V- ; 

TOOT l 



this law of pledge. 11$ 

$ame Wextihction of property, and the acceptance %f a 
pledge as a conditional cause of acquisition of property, 
so that after the debt has doubled or the stipulated time 
has arrived the right to satisfy the debt ceased, and by 
virtue of the text of Y3j naval kya which is being commen- 
ted ujwn the debtor’s righ^^ extinguished for ever, and 
the creditor’s ownership becomes absolute . ■” So also the 
security furnished by a pledge under the Hindu Law was 
what is called a real security, for it not only operated -upon 
the will of the debtor to induce him to pay off the debt 
in so far as he was kept out of possession of the property 
given in pledge, or at all events restrained from making 
free dispositions of it so long as the iebt was not discharged, 
but it, at the same time, placed in the hands of the creditor 
sufficient tangible means of obtaining satisfaction quite 
independent of the wishes or ability of the debtor. 4 
security, as far as one can see, may become a real or subs- 
tantial security to the creditor in three ways: — (L) through 
authority to enjo\ r , (&) through authority to foreclose, and 
(8) through authority to sell, and it has been shown that 
all these authorities were recognised and conferred by the 
Hindu Law upon pledges in proper cases according to the 
intention of the parties ami the nature of the pledge. 
That this was the state of the Hindu Law in its more 
developed form admits of no doubt whatsoever, but it has 
been supposed that in the days of Mann the pledgee had 
nfo more than a bare right of detention, and reliance is 
placed rn support of this position upon the text of Manu, 
“ However long the time may be neither an assignment 
nor a sale of pledge can be made.” 1 This, however, 
is explained by the Mitakshara with reference to 
the context to refer to a pledge for use, and I 


Tkesecimty 
furnished^ 
a pledge was 
a real secu- 
rity’. 


Was It so fn. 
the days of * 
Mantr? 



198 


Power to 
create a 
sub- 
mortgage : 


How far 
limited ac- 
cording to 
Viramitro- 
daya. 


Doubts 
thrown by 
Medhatithi 
and Govinda- 
raya. 


How met by 
the Mita- 
kshara. 

Kulluka 

Bhatta's 

criticism* 


Power to 
demand fresh 
security or 
payment of 
the mouey in 
certain cases. 


THE LAW OF PLEDGE. 

cannot say that the interpretation is far-fetched and 
unreasonable. 

It appears that the pledgee had also a right to create 
a sub-mortgage, and the Viramitrodaya says that this 
would follow a fortiori from the existence of the right to 
sell, for a creditor having a right to sell * would only be 
acting with leniency if he were to realise his money by 
creating a sub-mortgage. It, however, lays down on the 
authority of a text of PrajSpati that a sub-mortgage cannot 
be created for rn >re than the principal money due by the 
debtor ; the reason of this rule seems to be that otherwise 
the sub-mortgagee might become entitled to demand more 
upon his mortgage than what the mortgagee could demand 
from the mortgagor by reason of the rule and the Hindu 
Law prohibiting accummulation of interest beyond a certain 
limit bearing a certain proportion to the principal, usually 
equal to it, so that there would arise a conflict between 
the rights of the mortgagor and the sab-mortgagee. 
I may however, mention that Medhatithi and Govindaraya 
in their commentaries on the Institutes of Manu seem 
to throw a doubt on the right of the mortgagee to create 
a sub-mortgage on the authority of the text of Manu 
quoted above. I have already cited the interpretation put 
by the Mitakshara upon that text which gets rid of the 
objection by limiting its application to the case of a usufruc- 
tuary mortgage. I may also mention that Kullukabliatta, 
another principal commentator on the Institutes of Manu, 
observes that the interpretation of Medhatithi and Govinda- 
raya is contrary to the approved usage in all the provinces, 
since it is usual to mortgage land and other properties 
mortgaged at another place. 1 It may be noticed that the 

— r .r r ! u- ! . ‘ j.-jhh ' W 

1 . *rt. 3.B&3&3 SiiCTm WSv:. ^ sjnSs. .wfNw 

t 



THE LAW OK PLEDGE. 


199 


pledgee has the right to demand fresh security or in the 
alternative, payment of the mortgage debt on the deter- 
mination, loss or destruction of the pledge without 
the fault of the pledgee owing, as our lawgivers put it, 
to an act of the king or an act of God, 1 and the Vira- 
mitrodaya here puts a note to explain that an act of the 
king means a wanton act of oppression proceeding from 
the king not due to any fault of the creditor. As 
Dr. Ghose remarks, our lawgive :s appear to “ speak some- 
what bluntly of the acts of the king and not of the king’s 
enemies, probably because the casuistry which treats the 
king’s own acts as those of his enemies was too subtle for 
the unsophisticated Hindu Jurists,” and he compares this 
rule with that to be found in Article 2131 of the French 
Code which says : " In like manner in case the present 
movables or immovables, subjected to mortgage, have 
perished or sustained deterioration in such manner that 
they have become insufficient for the security of the 
creditor, the latter shall be permitted either to sue 
immediately for repayment or to obtain an additional 
mortgage.” It may also be compared with the pro- 
visions of Section 68 of the Transfer of Property Act 
which lays down : ‘ Where by any cause other than the 
wrongful act or default of the mortgagor or mortgagee, 
the mortgaged property has been wholly or partially des- 
. troyed, or the security is rendered insufficient as defined 
in Section 66, the mortgagee may require the mortgagor 
to give him within a reasonable time another sufficient 
security for his debt, and if the mortgagor fails so to do, 
may sue him for the mortgage-money.” The wonder is 
how the human reason bridges over the gulf of time and 

to Htqwrcto mq 


Similar rule 
in the French 
Code. 


Compared to 
Sec. 68 of the 
T. P. Act. 



m 


THU LAW OF PLKDCKB. 


Rights of the 
pledgor, and 
consequent 
duties of the 
pledgee. 


Duty to use 
proper care. 


Dutynot to 
use a pledge 
for custody. 


Duty to 
return the 
pledge when 
the debt has 
been paid off. 


space and arrives, at similar results by a process whieb is 
entirely its own. 

Having passed under review the various rights of the 
pledgee under the Hindu Law I shall now $ay*a few words 
about his duties towards the pledgor. Shortly stated 
they may be described as (1) duty to use proper care 
in keeping and using the pledge, (2) duty not to use 
or enjoy the pledge when it has been given merely for 
custody, and (8) duty to return the pledge on satisfaction 
of the debt either out of the usufruct or from payment 
made by the pledgor. If the pledgee out of negligence 
spoils or destroys the thing placed under his care, then it 
will be his duty to make good the loss by restoring the 
thing to its former condition in the first case and by return- 
ing its price in the second, and if the pledge were for use 
so that the interest were to be satisfied out of it, then 
the pledgee would not be able to claim any interest from 
the pledgor by reason of the deterioration or destruction of 
the pledge, for he was himself responsible for it. Then, 
again, when the pledge has been totally destroyed, the 
pledgee cannot claim the principal without paying the 
price of the pledge as a compensation, and in a case where 
the pledge is very valuable, so as to be more precious than 
the principal and the interest payable to the pledgee put 
together, the pledgor may even claim the balance. When 
the pledgee in violation of the compact uses a pledge 
placed in his hands merely for custody it will work a 
forfeiture of the interest, and the Mitakshara takes care 
to note that this will happen although the interest may 
exceed the usufruct because the pledgee has infringed, the 
compact. 1 As regards the duty to return the pledge 

1 it sf%: for - 

wi t g ift fore* » wmm: i 

to to* nfir rfrabm wnforor* i 



THE LAW OF FLEDGE. 201 

when the debt has been paid off, I dealt with it 
before ; I may here add that if the pledgee be absent then 
the debtor is to pay the money to the members of his 
family, and take back the pledge from them ; if, however, 
no person be available who can return the pledge, 
then the money being tendered, the interest will cease 
to run. 

The next question to which I will advert relates to the 
right of the pledgor to sell or mortgage the pledge. 
As the ownership of the pledgor is not affected by his 
giving the property in pledge, it follows that he can sell it 
subject to the rights of the pledgee. On such a sale the 
purchaser steps into the shoes of the pledgor and can 
redeem the pledge as his vendor could have done. If 
any authority were needed, the passage I have quoted 
from the Dayatattva is an express authority on 
this point. As regards the right to create a second mort- 
gage, it seems to me that it did not exist at least under 
the earlier Hindu Law, and that would be so, because as 
I have already pointed out, the earlier Hindu Law did 
not recognise a pledge which did not involve delivery of 
possession, and one thing could not be placed in possession 
of two persons. Hence Katyayana declares, that if a person 
pledges a property to two individuals, then the first 
transaction shall prevail, and the pledgor shall be punish- 
able like a thief 1 and a text of Vishnu prescribes the 
n&ture of punishment to be inflicted on the offending 
pledgor. Referring to the latter test Dr. Ghosh observes 
that the test seems only to point to a fraudulent second 
mortgage executed by the debtor without disclosing the 
first mortgage, and that no exception could be taken to 

etH urn’ i 

25 


Payment 
how to be 
made if the 
pledgee be 
absent. 


Bight of the 
pledgor to 
seU or morfc. 
gage the 
property 
pledged. 

His owner* 
ship not 
affected by 
the pledge. 


Gould he 
create a 
second 
mortgage? 
The question 
discussed. 


Dr. Ghosh's 
view. 



This is 
doubtful/ 


The Mitak. 
shara view. 


it may be 
that a second 
mortgage was 
gradually 
recognised 
as valid. 


202 THE LAW OP PLEDGE* 

the second mortgage honestly created by the debtor. It 
must, however, be observed that under the Hindu Law so 
long as it required possession to be delivered to the pledgee, 
a debtor could not possibly create a second inortgage 
with honesty except with the connivance and consent of the 
first mortgagee and hence the texts penalising the creation 
of a second mortgage are found to be general in their 
terms, without any qualification and thus indicate the 
invalidity of such a transaction. That this was the 
Mitakshara view appears from a passage in which the 
author commenting upon the text of Yajnavalkya, “ In 
the case of a pledge, an acceptance of a gift, or a purchase, 
the prior in time prevails M1 says “ If it be said that this 
text is superfluous because when a property has been 
pledged, the owner's right in it (to pledge it again) being 
wanting a second pledge is impossible, and that similarly 
of a property either given or sold, no second gift or sale 
can be validly made, it is answered that this is no 
real objection because the text is really founded upon 
reason to show that if a person by reason of a clouded 
intellect or greed create a second mortgage, etc., although 
he lias no right to do so, then the first shall prevail.” This 
shows that, according to the Mitakshara, since after the 
creation of the first mortgage the mortgagor ceases to have 
the right to create a second, the second mortgage created, 
without the right, cannot be valid. It may, however, be 
that when in course of time the necessity of delivery of 
possession came to be dispensed with, the creation of 
a second mortgage ceased to be amenable to the same 
objections as before and gradually came to be regarded 
as valid subject to the superior rights of the first 
mortgagee, and it may be contended, tha,t when a gift 





THE LAW OP PLEDGE. 


.208 

ora sale of mortgaged property subject to the mortgage 
was regarded as valid, as appears from the passage quoted 
from - tbe Dayatattva of Raghunandana, it would follow 
a fortiori that a second mortgage could not be treated as 
invalid. I feel that these considerations raise a presump- 
tion that a second mortgage was gradually recognised as 
valid under the Hindu Law, but I must confess that I can 
not be quite sure about this when I find that the Viramitro- 
daya which is a comparatively modern work says, “ Where a 
person having pledged *a field to one, on taking a loan 
from him, again takes a loan from another on pledging the 
same property there the field shall be held (under mortgage) 
by the first person, and not by the second ; and a similar 
rule shall apply to an acceptance of a gift and a purchase, 
the reason being the obstruction of ownership (in the 
case of a pledge) and the removal of ownership (in the 
other cases) due to the completion of the previous transac- 
tion.” It is, therefore, not unlikely that the difficulties 
of adjusting the rights of successive mortgagees which 
prove so embarassing to an English lawyer was unknown 
to the Hindu lawyers who insisted on the much simpler 
rule that a second mortgage created without redeeming 
the first could not be valid. Of course, if the first mort- 
gagee were to be paid off out of the money raised on the 
second mortgage, there would be no difficulty, since in 
that case the second mortgage would practically be the 
fi«st, but if the debtor were not so disposed there would 
not be much injustice in debarring him from creating 
a second mortgage at all; at all events it would save 
the court from a good deal of confusion if not prevent a 
•good deal of fraud. I shall now turn to the rules laid 
down in the Hindu law to determine which among several 
mortgages shonld prevail. The general rule of course is 
that in the case of pledges just as in other transfers, the 


Even this is 
doubtful. 

Cf.-Vira- 

mitrodaya. 


Priority Qf 
mortgages. 


The general 
rale : prior in 
point of time 
prevails. 



But prior 
from what 
standpoint P 

Priority by 
reference to 
possession ; 
see Vira- 
mitrodaya. 


Dr. Ghose*s 
view doubted 


Mitakshara 
in agreement 
with Vira- 
mitrodaya. 


204 THE LAW OP PLEDGE. 

first in time prevails. But then there is this peculiarity in 
the case of pledges, that the priority in point of time 
is of no avail if the prior mortgagee has not obtained 
possession while the subsequent mortgagee has done. So 
the Viramitrodaya says : ' If an unrighteous debtor 

obtains loans from two creditors by pledging the same 
property, then the priority shall be determined 
by reference to possession. So says Vishnu : “If two 
men to whom the same property has been pledged 
enter into a contest, he shall win who has obtained poss- 
ession if it were not obtained by'force .” 1 Dr. Ghose, 
however, supposes that in the Mitakshara 'priority is 
determined not by possession, but by the order iu which 
the mortgages have been made, possession by the mort- 
gagee being material only when it cannot be ascertained 
which of two competing mortgages was prior in order 
of time \ 2 I venture to presume that he says so on . the 
authority of the passage in the Mitakshara which I have 
already quoted from his book in a previous part of 
my discussion, and as I have there attempted to show 
that the passage had reference to a transfer of ownership, 
by a gift or a sale, and not to a pledge at all. I hope 
I shall be able to settle this point by referring you to the 
passage in the Mitakshara which directly deals with 
the question of priority of pledges and appears to be in 
agreement with the rule quoted by me from Viramitro- 
daya. Commenting upon the text of Yajnavalkya “By 
the acceptance of a pledge is its validity maintained/’ 
Vijnaneswara observes as follows : — “The taking of a 
pledge becomes complete by its acceptance which means 
enjoyment, whether it be a pledge for use or for custody not 

1 wtPlfwK firaSnt to 1 
*m \ m i ftny n w 

Ghose on Mortgage, p. 68. 



THE LAW OP PLEDGE, 


205 


by m6re witnesses or document nor by mere intention. Thus 
Narada says ‘Pledges are declared to be of two sorts, im- 
movable and movable, and both are valid when there is 
actual enjoyment, and not otherwise. The result of this is 
as follows : — it has been said that, ‘in the case of a pledge, an 
acceptance or a purchase, the prior prevails/ here the transac- 
tion ending in acceptance (as explained above) being prior, 
prevails, but if it be wanting in acceptance then although 
prior, it does not prevail ” To obviate possible mistakes 
I should mention that the word enjoyment used in this 
connection is explained by the Viramitrodaya to mean 
bringing under one’s own control in the case of a 
pledge for custody and enjoyment of the usufruct in 
the case of a pledge for use. 1 Similarly Apararka 
explains the word acceptance in the text of Yajnavalkya 
by saying that it extends to the enjoyment of the usu- 
fruct in the case of a pledge for use and to putting it 
into the store-room in the case of a pledge for custody. 2 
It is, therefore, clear that according to the Mitakshara, 
priority of the mortgage without possession is of no 
avail if the subsequent mortgage succeeds first in getting 
possession provided it was obtained without force or fraud. 
The fact is that the Hindu lawyers of the Mitakshara 
School never went so far as to hold that in the case of 
a pledge the delivery of possession was immaterial even 
for the purpose of determining priority between two 
transactions. It is also laid down that when two pledges 
are created contemporaneously then he who first obtains 
possession secures the better title. This is similar to 
the rule of the Roman Law noticed by Dr. Ghose under 
which if a debtor pledge his property to two persons at 


Gf. Apararka. 


Conclusion. 


Priority 
when the 
transactions 
are contem- 
poraneous. 

Similar rale 
in the Homan 
Law. 


1 


wtauft win: wtatfl wwwiw: i 

wTNrcw w wfarwl wfr trfw wnwnft 3 wiwrunr 1 



What if 
possession is 
sought at 
the same 
time P 

Special rules 
when the 
above consi- 
derations do 
not apply. 


The Hindu 
Law of pledge 
logical and 
reasonable. 


‘A Model of 
good sense 
and logical 
•consistency.* 


806 THIS LAW OF PLEDGE* 

the same time and one of them happened to be in possession 
, he could claim preference over the others. If, however, 
in each a case both come to take possession daring the 
same day, then they must divide the pledge among 
them. When these considerations do not arise, there are 
certain special rules laid down to determine the priority 
between two transactions. Thus a mortgage created by a 
document is declared fit to prevail over a parol mortgage 
merely supported by witnesses, and even among mort~ 
gages created by documents, the document in which 
the mortgaged property is clearly defined prevails over 
one in which it is not so defined and is consquently left 
as imperceptible as the subtle element. If these special 
considerations do not apply, the general rule will, of course, 
hold good and the mortgage which is prior in point 
of time must prevail. 

I will, now, conclude my review of the Hindu Law 
of pledge. It would no doubt be interesting to compare 
with this the Law of Mortgage in some of the Western 
systems, but as the lecture has already become long 1 
cannot permit myself any such lengthy digression at this 
place. 1 may, however, venture to affirm that the Hindu 
law of pledge is on the whole eminently logical and 
reasonable, and I hope that whoever will study it with 
care, and without prejudice due to preconceived ideas 
which often blur the vision of able but unsympathetic 
readers, will be disposed to agree with I)r. Ghose that it 
is “a model of good sense and logical consistency/’ Nay 
I may go further and say that whatever its imperfections 
may be, we need not be ashamed to place it side by side 
with any system of law bearing upon the subject* 



LECTURE VII 


The Law op Bailments and other 
Incorporeal Rights. 

In the present lecture I propose to deal with the Hindu 
law of bailments and other incorporeal rights not already 
discussed. A bailment differs from a p’edge in so far 
as in the case of a bailment property belonging to a person 
is placed under the control of another out of trust 
reposed in that person and not as a security for the 
performance of any obligation cast upon the owner. It. 
follows from this that the rights of a bailee over the 
thing bailed are much more limited than the rights of 
a pledgee over the pledge, since those peculiar rights 
which arise from the relation of creditor and debtor in 
the latter case cannot arise in the former. Still it cannot 
be denied that the bailee does, by the act of bailment, 
acquire certain rights over the thing placed under his 
custody, and it is because these rights constitute what a 
Hindu lawyer would call qualified property appropriate 
for keeping the thing in safe custody that I 

propose to discuss the subject at this place as a part of the 
law of things instead of postponing its discussion to give 
it a plafce in the law of contract. 

Speaking of the Hindu law of bailments, Sir William 
Jones, who being an accomplished lawyer as well as a 
Sanskritist, was competent to express an opinion on the 
subject, has said : “It is pleasing to remark the similarity, 
or rather identity, of those conclusions, which pure 
unbiassed reason in all ages and nations seldom fails to 
draw, in such judicial enquiries as are not fettered and 


How a bail- 
ment differs 
from a pledge. 


Why the sub- 
ject is treat- 
ed here as a 
part of the 
law of things. 


Sir William 
Jones on the 
Hindu law of 
bailments. 



208 


THIS LAW OF BAILMENTS. 


manacled by positive institution ; and although the rules 
of the pundits concerning succession to property, the 
punishment of offences , and the ceremonies of religion are 
widely different from ours, yet in the great system of 
contracts , and the common intercourse between man and 
man, the Pootee of the Indians and the Digest of the 
Romans are by no means dissimilar.” The truth of these 
remarks will, I hope, appear from the following short 
account of the Hindu law of bailments. 


Different 
kinds of baiU 
m exits. 


There are several different kinds of bailments 
mentioned by our lawgivers, but their incidents are 
almost identical. The words Prtta (nikshepa) and 
(nyfisa) are often used to denote bailments in general, 
but they have also been used to denote special kinds of 
deposits. Thus the word (nikshepa) in its special 
sense means an open deposit made in the presence of the 
bailee after showing him the nature and quantity of the 
thing deposited ; the word (ny&sa) signifies an open 
and ascertained deposit entrusted in the absence of the 
bailee with the members of his family ; the word wqfafir 
(upanidhi), on the other hand, means a deposit under 
a sealed cover of which the nature is consequently not 
disclosed to the bailee ; besides these, there is the term 
VSTfilN (anvfihita) which means a bailment for delivery, 
that is to say, a deposit made over by the depository to 
another saying ‘a certain person deposited this with me, 
and you shall deliver it to him/ inform (y&chitaka) which 
means a loan for use, (silpinyasa) which means 

a deposit with an artist, for instance, of gold with a 
goldsmith in order that be may make ornaments with it for 
the depositor, and (pratiny&sa) which means a 

mutual bailment, that is, a deposit made in return for a 
deposit received. Out of these, the distinctions, which it 
jmy be useful to retnember, are those between open and 



THE LAW OP BAILMENTS. 


200 


ascertained deposits and scaled deposits, and between 
deposit-#? for safe custody, loans for use, and deposits 
with an artist, because these distinctions are based on 
real differences in the character of bailments, and they 
also give rise to some differences in the 'rights and 
liabilities of the parties. In the main, however, the 
incidents of these various kinds of bailments are veiy 
much the same. 

The acceptance of a bailment is always an oAerous 
undertaking ; and it seldom brings benefit to the bailee^ 
for except in the cases of a loan for use where the bailee 
gets the benefit of using the thing for his own purposes, 
and perhaps also of a deposit with an artist where the 
bailment is a part of an entire transaction which is 
profitable to the artist, the bailee accepts the risk of 
keeping the deposit safe without getting any tangible 
benefit in return. Brihaspafci, therefore, extols such 
an act as an act of merit, and says that whoever accepts 
a trust-deposit and keeps it with care does as meritorious 
an act as one who gives shelter to a person seeking 
protection, but, at the same time, he gives the warning 
that the destruction of a deposit out of negligence or 
greed is sinful as well as a source of disgrace, and one 
should, therefore, either refuse to accept a bailment, or 
having accepted it preserve it with care and return it 
as soon as asked to do so . 1 But apart from these religions 
afid moral considerations, the acceptance of a trust-deposit 


TOTHTOf: 3‘w: i 


Grounds of- 
bailee's obli- 
gations. 



£ 10 ’ THE LAW OF BAILMENTS. 

creates certain legal obligations supported bv legal 
sanctions. It. is not necessary for a. Hindu lawyer to try 
to resolve this simple fact, fit., the accrual of legal 
obligations on the acceptance of a trust-deposit, into 
something fiber than that, for he has not got to meet 
the difficulty of squaring it with the doctrine of consider- 
ation by bringing forward an artificial explanation such 
as that of an eminent English judge who had to contend 
that efen in a gratuitous bailment there is a consideration, 
because the owner's trusting the bailee with the goods 
is a sufficient consideration to oblige him to a careful 
management. It is much simpler to say, as Brihaspati 
does, that you may not accept a bailment at all, but. if 
you do, the very fact of your acceptance places you 
under certain responsibilities, for then, you must preserve 
it with care and return it on the first demand. Stated 
shortly, it is the trust accepted by the bailee which is the 
ground of his obligations, and not any consideration 
proceeding from the bailor in reposing the trust in him. 


Duties of the 
bailee. 

Duty to take 
proper care. 


Measure of 
proper care 
according to 
the Hindu 
law. 

The usual 
test. 


Bailee riot 
responsible 
for loss 


I shall now proceed to explain the duties of the bailee 
on accepting the bailment and the penalties for their 
breach. The first duty of the bailee is to preserve the 
property placed in his hands with proper care, and if the 
property, while in his hands, is lost or destroyed for want 
of such care, he must compensate the bailor. 

The measure of proper care which the Hindu law 
requires from the bailee is the care which he exercises for 
his own goods, so that the usual test is, that, if along 
with the goods entrusted with the bailee, his own goods are 
also lost or destroyed, then the loss must be suffered by the 
bailor without complaint, for he ought not to expect more 
care from a gratuitous bailee than what that person 
exercises for bis own goods. Similarly, the bailee cannot 
be hetd responsible when the loss or destruction of the 



THE bAW OK BAILMENTS. 


an 

property entrusted to his eare happens through an agency 
aver which he had no coutrol, that is to say, as our law* 
givers succinctly put it, through au act of the king or an 
act of God^ I have had occasion to refer to these two 
expressions in dealing with the law of pledge ; an act of 
God means such unforeseen accidents as tire, Hood, etc. ; 
an act of the king means a wantou act of oppression 
proceeding from the king ; our lawgivers, you will thus 
observe, did not pretend to think that the king could do 
no wrong, and they had not learnt the sophistry of 
describing the king’s own acts, when they were wrong, 
as the acts of his enemy. 1 should also mention that in 
regard to a bailment, theft was placed by our lawgivers 
in the same category as an act of God, so that if the 
property deposited was lost by theft, the bailee was 
exempted from liability in the same way as if the property 
had been destroyed by fire or carried away by Hood. It 
may, however, be observed that while exonerating the 
bailee from responsibility when along^ with the property 
deposited, the property of the bailee was lost or destroyed, 
or when the loss or destruction resulted from an act of 
the king or an act of God including theft, the Hindu 
lawgivers were acute enough to perceive that a dis- 
honest bailee, if so disposed, could create, an apparent 
excuse with an eye to his own benefit by fraudulent 
means. Hence, Narada, when saying that the loss 
fajls upon the bailor when his goods are lost or 
destroyed along with the goods of the bailee, or 
when it arises from au act of the king or an act of God, 
m the same breath adds the qualification : “ provided it 
does not arise from the tortuousness of the bailee.” 1 It 

1 we utsSn ** ** * » 

Pmq ****** 


arising from 
an act of the 
king or an 
act of God. 


Theft placed 
in the same 
category as 
an act of 
God. 


Bailee not 
exonerated 
when 
apparent 
excuse was 
created by 
him by 
fraudulent 
derice. 



m 


TUB LAW Of BAILMENTS. 


As regards 
the quanta tn 
of care 
required, 
it made no 
difference 
whether the 
bailment was 
gratuitous or 
it was a loan 
for use. 

A special rule 
applicable to 
a bailment 
for mere 
custody. 


will thus appear that the bailee is relieved from respon- 
sibility on account of loss or destruction of the thiug 
deposited when it happens in spite of his exercising the 
proper amount of care, or through what wq, may call, 
adopting an expression from the Roman Law, a via major ; 
therefore, if charged for the loss or destruction of the 
deposit, it will be a sufficient defence for the bailee if he 
can show that he exercised as much care over it as over 
his own things, or that the loss or destruction was due 
to an extraneous agency over which he had no control.. 

As regards the quantum of care required, it does not 
appear that it made any difference in the Hindu Law 
whether it was a case of a gratuitous bailment for mere 
custody or of a loan for use, for in each case the measure of 
proper care was the same, being the amount of care which 
the bailee used to bestow upon his own property. In the 
case of a bailment for mere custody in which the benefit 
was entirely on the side of the bailor, there was a special 
rule, which, I think, did not apply to the case of a loan 
for use, to the effect that if a bailor, being aware that 
the bailee used to lose his owu goods from carelessness, still 
chose to entrust him with his own goods, then he could 
not hold the bailee responsible even if he lost them out 
of carelessness, for in such a case it should be presumed 
that the bailor knowingly accepted the risk of the goods 
deposited being lost by the carelessness of the bailee. 
The text of Katyayana on which this rule is based/ 
although cited by the Viramitrodaya, is uot noticed by 
the author of the Mitakshara and some other commen- 
tators, but I do not think that this can be regarded as 


fWMteS fwr irar x* w win i 



THE LAW Oh BAILMENTS* 


213 


a sufficient ground for regarding it as spurious, for it is 
not unusual to find some commentators citing more 
texts than others ; and, moreover, the text itself is not only 
not inconsistent with the general rule that one should 
use as much care in protecting things entrusted to him 
as he does in relation to his own property, but may, in 
one sense, be said to be almost a deduction from that rule, 
since, a person, who is, to the knowledge of the bailor, 
careless about his own property, may be excused if he 
proves no better about the property of the bailor placed 
in his hands, and the bailor himself cannot complain, for 
he ought to have expected as much. However that may 
be, the general rule seems to be that the Hindu law 
requires that the bailee should exercise as mueh care in 
protecting things entrusted to him as he does in relation 
to his own property, and he cannot be held responsible for 
the loss or destruction of the thing deposited simply 
because some one more careful than himself might have 
avoided or averted it. 

Comparing these provisions, then, with those of the 
Roman law, we find that aeeordiug to that system the 
extent of responsibilty was not the same in the cases of 
a loan for use and a bailment for mere custody. Thus, 
with reference to a loan for use, which is known as 
commodalum under the Roman law, it is stated in the 
Institutes of Justinian that “ he who lias received a thing 
"lent for his use, is indeed bound to employ his utmost 
diligence in keeping and preserving it ; nor will it suffice 
that he should take the same care of it, which he was 
accustomed to take of his own property, if it appear that a 
more careful person might have preserved it in safety ; 
but he has not to answer for loss occasioned by superior 
force or exlraordinary accident, provided the accident is 
not due to any fault of his.;” on the other hand, with 


The general 
rule 

summarised. * 


Some distinc- 
tion drawn by 
the Homan 
law not recog*, 
nised by the 
Hindu law. 



214 


THE LAW 0 F BAILMENTS. 


Rales of the 
Hindn lair 
compared 
with the pro- 
visions of the 
Roman law, 
and the 
former 
sought to be 
justified* 


reference to a deposit, by which is meant a gratuitous 
bailment for mere custody, it is there stated that “a person 

with whom a thing is deposited is only answer* 

able if he is guilty of fraud; and not for a mere fault, such 
as carelessness or negligence; and he cannot, therefore, 
be called to account if the thing deposited, being carelessly 
kept, is stolen. For he who commits his property to 
the care of a negligent friend should impute the loss to 
his own want of caution.” 1 It will thus appear that in 
the case of a loan for use the Roman Law seems to require 
more care to be exercised by the bailee than the Hindu 
Law, whereas in the case of a gratuitous deposit it seems 
to require less. The provisions of the Roman Law seem 
to have been based on the following considerations : a 
person who takes a loan of a thing for use ( commodatum ) 
derives some benefit from the loan, while the lender does 
not get any, for the transaction is entirely gratuitous ; 
hence the Roman Law ordains that in such a case the 
borrower must use extreme care to keep the thing safe ; 
on the other hand, in the case of a bailment for mere 
custody (i depositum ), the benefit is entirely on the side of 
the depositor, and hence the bailee should not be held 
responsible unless lie is guilty of fraud. Turning now to 
the Hindu law, we find that the standard of care required 
is not an abstract standard, but a concrete and relative 
standard which makes allowance for the differences in 
human capacities provided there is no wilful default. It 
may be pointed out that in the case of partnership 
(societas), the Roman law allows that the fault of a partner 
in dealing with partnership properties 'is not to be measur- 
ed by a standard of the most perfect carefulness possible, 
and that it is sufficient that be should be as careful of 
things belonging to the partnership as he is of his own 


* Institutes Lib : III. Titi XIV. 



THE 1*4 W OF BAILMENTS. 


215 


property, for he who accepts as partner a person of careless 
habits has only himself to blame / 1 Now, having regard 
to this argument, may we not say that a person does not 
usually lend his property gratuitously for use to another 
man unless there exists some sort of friendship or close 
acquaintance between them, and, that being so, the lender 
ought to know whether the borrower is ordinarily of care- 
ful habits or not, and, if knowing that, he thinks it fit to 
accommodate his friend, he ought not to complain if his 
friend takes as much care of the articles lent as he does 
of his own things, and no more ? I cannot, therefore, 
say that the standard laid down by the Hindu law is 
unfair or unjust, and if any body be not satisfied with it, 
there is nothing to prevent him from entering into a 
special contract before he lends his things. As regards a 
mere deposit, the Roman Law holds the depositary liable 
only for fraud, and any amount of carelessness on his part 
is excused on the ground that ‘he who commits his 
property to the care of a negligent friend should impute 
the loss to his own want of caution/ It seems to me that 
the rule of the Hindu law is on this point more reason- 
able and just. The ground set forth above to justify the 
rule of the Roman law assumes that the depositor is 
aware of the careless habits of the depositary, but he 
could only be aware of this, if the depositary had, on 
previous occasions, been found careless about his own 
things ; in such a case, Katyayana’s text quoted by me 
shows that even the Hindu law made an exception to the 
general rule. But in other cases, where the depositor, 
judging from the previous habits of the depositary, could - 
not know that the latter was peculiarly careless about his 
own things, it. would not be unreasonable to require that 
having accepted a deposit the depositary should take as 

1 Institutes Lib. III. Tit. XXV. 



216 THE TAW OF BAILMENTS. 

much care of it- as he did of his own things ; at all events, 
in a case like this, the ground that ‘he who commits his 
property to the care of a negligent friend should impute 
the' loss to his own want of caution* cannot apply, and the 
rule of the Roman law must be defended, if possible, on 
some other ground than what the Institutes suggest. The 
idea which really pervades the rule of the Roman law 
seems to be that whoever takes charge of another’s' pro- 
perty without any remuneration or other kind of benefit 
need not take as much care of it as he does of his own, or, 
at any rate, he ought not to be held accountable if he does 
not ; nay, the rule goes to the length of absolving the 
depositary altogether from all responsibility for mere 
carelessness, for he cannot be held responsible for anything 
short of fraud. It seems to me that the standard laid 
down by the Hindu law that a person should take as 
much care of things entrusted to him as he does of his 
own is more consonant with our moral sense than the rule 
of the Roman law ; as the Hindu lawgivers point out, you 
may not accept a bailment if you like, but if you do, you 
should not make any distinction between your own property 
and the property so committed to your care. A person, 
who after taking charge of another’s property without 
demur afterwards bestows very little care upon it 
simply because it is not his own, may be absolved from 
responsibility by the technical rule of the Roman law, but 
will, I hope, be not similarly absolved by the moral con- 
sciousness of any civilised community. It may be said 
that legality and morality do not often agree ; that may 
be true but there can be no harm, if, in a case like this 
they do. As regards the rule that a bailee cannot be held 
accountable if the loss or destruction of .the property 
results from some uncontrollable external agency, both 
the Hindu and the Roman systems agree, and, as 



ML W OF BAILMENTS, 


217 


I -duijl show, *h#Fe nfe resemblances in other respects 
also. 

Turning, now, to the Common Law of EWland, it P«>vi«iona of 
■ ” * the English 

appears from the luminous account given by Mr. Justice Common taw 

Holmes that the liability of the bailee was originally much POTO P* WM, ‘ 
more rigorous than under either the Hindu law or the 
Roman law. The old Common Law rule was that when 
the bailor’s goods were placed in the bailee’s hands, the 
latter was bound to hold the former harmless, and if the 
goods were lost, it was no excuse to say that they were 
stolen without his (the bailee’s) fault. Thus, it was laid 
down in the case of Southcote v. Bennet that delivery to 
a bailee chargeth him to keep at his peril, and it was no 
plea that he was robbed, and Lord Coke added “That fo 
hep and to keep safely are one and the same thing/’ It 
should be observed that Southcote’s case did not recognise 
any distinction between a paid and an unpaid bailee, 
although in a subsequent case Popham C. h sought to 
draw a distinction between the two, and differentiate the 
extents of their liability. Gradually, however, the rigour 
of the old Common Law has been relaxed, but a remnant 
of it still lingers in the special liability of the inn-keepers 
and common carriers, which is now supposed to be an 
exception introduced by the custom of the realm, hut is 
regarded by Mr. Justice Holmes to be a survival of ancient 
law regarding the general liability of the bailee. How- 
ever that may be, the overthrow of the rule deducible 
from Southcote’s case may be said to date from the deci- 
sion in Coggs v. Bernand, in which Lord Holt, being 
under the impression that the common law of bailment 
was derived from the Roman law, assimilated it, as far 
as possible, to the rules laid down by that system. In 
that case Lord Holt distinguished between bailees for 
reward exercising a common calling and other bailees, and 

28 



Different 
degrees of 
blame- • 
worthiness 
and different 
standards 
of compen- 
sation based 
thereon. 


218 THU LAW OF BAILMENTS. 

held that the bailees of the former class incurred a special 
liability by reason of their exercising a common calling 
for remuneration, but, at the present day, the principle 
of common employment has been given up, and the special 
liability is only confined to common carriers and inn- 
keepers, which remains, as Mr. Justice Holmes puts it, 
as a merely empirical exception from the general doctrine, 
in so far as they cannot claim any immunity unless they 
can make out that the loss or damage was due to an act 
of God or an act of the public enemy. That being the 
history of the English Common Law, it seems to me that 
the ancient Hindu law regarding the liability of the bailee 
was much more reasonable than the ancient Common 
Law. Indeed, as Mr. Justice Holmes points out, the 
peculiarity of the old English law upon the point was due 
to a peculiarity of procedure under which the remedy for 
wrongful appropriation by a third person of property 
committed to the care of a bailee was exclusively in his 
hands, and hence he was held responsible to the bailor 
whether the loss or destruction of the property was due to 
his fault or not ; in course of time, the right to sue was 
extended to the bailor, but the old view regarding the 
strict liability of the bailee still lingered, until the law 
was gradually changed and assimilated to the Roman law. 

Let us now revert to the main subject of our discus- 
sion. I have explained the grounds on which a bailee 
may claim immunity from liability on account of loss or 
destruction of the property placed in his hands. Where 
these grounds do not exist, the bailee is liable to compen- 
sate the bailor for his loss ; but it ought to be mentioned 
that the Hindu law recognises that the bailee may not he 
equally blamable in every case. Thus the loss or des- 
truction of the property committed to the' care of the 
bailee for which he is accountable may arise in either of 



THE LAW OF BAILMENTS. 


219 


three ways : (1) The bailee may have consumed the pro- 
perty himsejf ; (2) he may have allowed it to be lost or 
destroyed through his negligence ; or (3) the loss or des- 
truction may have happened through a mistake on his part 
which ought not to have occurred. In the first case, the 
property is said to have been wfwH (consumed), in the 
second, (neglected), and in the third wwmrfinr (des- 

troyed through mistake). It is apparent that you cannot 
impute the same amount of blame to the bailee in these 
cases, and, taking this into consideration, the Hindu law has 
adjudged that the measure of compensation payable by 
the bailee should vary according to the extent of blame 
imputable to him. Thus, it has been laid down that 
where the bailee has himself consumed the property 
placed in his hands, he shall have to pay its price together 
with interest ; where it has been lost or destroyed through 
his negligence, he shall have to pay a sum equal to its 
price (without interest) ,* and where the loss is attributable 
to a culpable mistake on his part the compensation shall 
amount to a little less than its proper value, 1 allowing, 
according to the Mitakshara, a deduction of one fourth. Apart 
from this, a person who consumes a property committed to 
his care, or uses it for his own profit without the permission 
of the owner renders himself liable to punishment. It 
may be added that in the case of a doposit delivered un ier 
a sealed cover, the bailee is not at all responsible if some- 
how or other it becomes spoiled within the cover, but he 
becomes liable if he breaks the seal and uses any part of 
the deposit for his own purpose. 


fan**! strfnfir www 


Measure of 
compensa- 
tion in each 
case. 


Punishment 
for breach 
of trust. 



Duty to 
return the 
deposit on 
demand. 


After 
demand, 
bailee res- 
ponsible for 
loss however 
it may arise. 


Exception to 
tlje obliga- 
tion to 
return on 
demand. 


220 THE LAW OF BAILMENTS. 

The. next duty of the depositary is to return the 
thing deposited as soon as asked to do so ; if he fails to 
do so, then he becomes answerable for any subsequent loss 
of the "deposit even if it happens from an act of the 
King or an act of God; 1 in other words, although a depo- 
sitary cannot ordinarily be held liable for the loss of the 
deposit if it be due to some uncontrollable agency, yet 
this defence ceases to be available to him if at the time 
when the demand was made for the return of the deposit 
he could have returned it but did not do so without any 
excuse ; iu such a case it was the duty of the depositary 
to return the deposit as soon as he was asked to do so, and 
if he omitted to do it, he did so at his peril, so that no 
excuse based upon any subsequent accident could he listen- 
,ed to. Vyasa, however, remarks that if the loss arises 
from an act of the king or act of God, the depositary 
should not be called upon to pay more than the price as 
compensation, and this, as the Viramitrodaya observes, 
is proper, since it would l*e hal’d to force him to pay more 
when his only fault was the delay in returning the deposit 
after demand. To this rule requiring the bailee to return 
the thing committed to his care as soon as a demand is 
made, the Hindu Law recognises an exception in the case 
of a loan for use, for it lays down that if a person obtains 
a thing from another for using it on a particular occasion, 
or for a particular period of time, then he cannot be held 
guilty if he does not return the thing before that parti- 
cular occasion or within that particular period of time, 
when his work is half-finished although the lender asks 

1 w: i 

witifT WWMSRDf * I . 

tWSPWBH TOW Wft WWW W-WWiq , * 



.THE LA W OF BAILMENTS. 


Ui 


for its return . 1 Curiously enough, the Ron; an Law also 
recognises a similar distinction, for while it lays down 
that a depositor may reclaim the deposit whenever he 
pleases, a commodam a lender for use) must wait for 
the expiration of the time agreed on. The Hindu Law, 
however, attaches an exception to the above exception, for it 
says that if it so happens that some work of the lender will 
suffer if he has to wait till the expiration of the time agreed 
on, then the borrower should return the thing borrowed 
although hie work has only been half finished . 2 This 
seems reasonable, since in the case of a gratuitous loan it is 
but fair that the work of the lender should not suffer even 
at the cost of some inconvenience to the borrower. In 
the case of articles deposited with an artist in order that he 
may exercise his workmanship upon it, the artist should 
complete his work within the appointed time ; if he does 
not, then he shall be responsible for a subsequent loss 
however it may arise ; moreover, if the article is damaged 
during the progress of the work, then, if it happens owing 
to some defect in the article, the artist shall not be 
responsible for it ; but it will be otherwise, if the damage 
is due to some fault on the part of the artist. 

As regards the manner of returning a deposit, it is 
laid down that it should be returned in the same way as 
it was taken. Thus, when a property has been deposited 
by a certain person, it is the duty of the bailee to return 
it to him, and Brihaspati takes care to add that the bailee 


1 srfe i 

fwr w win i 


A similar 
rule in the 
Roman Law. 


An exception 
to the ex- 
ception. 


Special rules 
regarding a 
deposit with 
an artist. 


The manner 
of returning 
a deposit. 

Duty to 
return to the 
bailor, and 
not to any 
other claim- 
ant. 



m 


THE LAW OV BAILMENTS, 


Compare 

bailor's 

estoppel. 


Bailor being 
dead, the 
thing may 
be returned 
to his heirs 

Ordinarily 
the bailee 
may return 
the deposit 
whenever 
he ohooses. 
Exception to 
this rule. 


Duties how 
enforced by 
the king. 


should not make it over to any person other than the 
bailor, although he may claim to be the owner of the thing, 
nor even to the sons or other close relations of the bailor, 
so long as he is alive. 1 This corresponds to the principle 
of estoppel applicable to the case of a bailment as laid down 
in sec. 116 of the Indian Evidence Act. Then, again, where 
there has been a mutual deposit, the return should also be 
mutual. 2 Wheu, however, the bailor is dead, the bailee 
should return the deposit to the heirs of the deceased bailor, 
but if there be several such heirs, the return should be 
made in the presence of all of them. 

As in the case of a gratuitous bailment, the bailee does 
not derive any benefit from the task undertaken by him, 
he is ordinarily free to return the thing deposited at any 
time he pleases, even before the bailor asks for it ; but 
then, where the deposit was made out of fear for some 
anticipated danger, the bailee should not, if he were aware 
of the motive which induced the deposit, return it until 
the danger was over. Such a return is called premature 
and the bailee who makes such a return against the 
wishes of the bailor renders himself liable to be punished 
with a fine, if, in consequence, the bailor suffers any loss. 

In a proper case, and at the proper time, the king will 
enforce the return of the deposit, if the bailee do not return 
it of his own accord, and, furthermore, he who denies a 
deposit made with him and he who falsely claims to have 


1 wnfqtf ftfam 3* TO i 

to* nsmro * f* rotroft u 

<s rafe fr to® tot ssrorroftt *r w narrow ifir «[fh- 

wfe *n * f, wroft rowiWh *nsraft i f*%* rorron i 

9 froter*: irot fro to *t i 

f** TO TOWTOt TOTTOT TOTTO: It 



THE LAW OF BAILMENTS. 


228 

made a deposit with another and demands its return should 
both be punished by the king. 

1 shall now give a short account of some incorporeal 
rights recognised by the Hindu Law which have not found 
a place in the discussions contained in this and the previ- 
ous lectures, and with this I shall conclude this lecture as 
well as the Part dealing with the Law of Things. We 
do not find any lengthy discussion about these rights in the 
Hindu Law, and I shall, therefore, content myself with 
merely indicating their nature as disclosed in the works on 
Hindu Law. 

The first right of this kind to which I may advert is the 
right of pasturage. The importance of this right to an 
agricultural people can hardly be denied, and hence we 
find our lawgivers making provisions for the maintenance 
of pasture-grounds in or around every village which may 
be used by the villagers in general for grazing their cattle 
on. So Yajnavalkya declares that in every village there 
should be land set apart for pasturage either by the 
common consent of the villagers, or by a special order of 
the king. 1 This seems to imply that if the villagers 
could not agree among themselves, then the king should 
interfere and compel the villagers to make proper provision 
for pasturage by setting . apart sufficient land for that 
purpose. The proper measure of the land which ought to 
be set apart for this purpose is also stated by YSjnavalkya, 
for he says, that betweeu a village and the culturable fields 
a space measuring four hundred cubits should be reserved 
for grazing purpose ; in the case of a *K hariata* (which 
according to one interpretation means a village inhabited 

iisuibw i 

otbj: aftrcmn: i 


Some incor- 
poreal 
rights. 


llight of 
pasturage. 


Land set 
apart for 
pasturage by 
the common 
consent of 
the villagers 
or by a 
special order 
of the king- 


Extent of 

pasturage- 

ground. 



It was kept 
in the form 
of a belt or 
enolosnre 
aronnd the 
Tillage. 


Sir Henry 
Maine's view 
that it 
famishes an 
indication of 
communal 
ownership. 


Tbp 

explanation 

given by 

Yajfiavalkya 

presupposes 

individual 

ownership. 


5544 THB LAlr OF ^AILMElfTS. 

by many artificers and husbandmen, and according to 
another interpretation means a village abounding in thorny 
shrubs) the space left should measure eight hundred 
cubits, and in the case of a city, sixteen hundred cubits . 1 
From a text of Manu bearing upon this point, it seems 
that the space for pasturage used to be kept in the from 
of a belt or enclosure around the village on all sides which 
separated the inhabited portion of the village from the 
cultivated lands attached to it ; 9 and it was utilised by 
all the villagers for grazing their cattle on. Those who 
have read Sir Henry Maine's ‘Village Communities' will re- 
member how he makes use of the custom of setting apart 
pasture-lands for the common use of all the villagers in 
support of his theory that individual ownership has 
gradually grown out of communal ownership or joint 
ownership of the whole community. I cannot say that 
there may not be a good deal in this argument, but I 
should point out that the explanation given by YSjna- 
valkya presupposes individual ownership as distinguished 
from joint ownership of all the villagers over all the lands 
of the village ; for he says that ‘lands are set apart for 
pasturage by the wish of the whole village or by the 
control exercised by the king / 3 a position which seems 
to me to be incompatible with the supposition that all the 
lands in and around the village belonged jointly to all the 
villagers, for, if it were so, it would be unnecessary to 


1 qfNvfr nt ? t 

* qfhrrtt nvrm mf[ i 



THE LAW OF BAILMENTS. 225 

specialise the fact that a common past ure-ground was set 
apart by the commoa consent of all the villagers, or, 
when that could not be secured, by the special interference 
of he king > Of course, it may be said, and I consider 
this to be a very plausible hypothesis, that originally the 
custom of setting apart some lands for pasturage at the 
outskirts of the village had its basis on communal 
ownership, but that when in Ynjiiavalkya’s time that 
kind of ownership had been superseded by individual 
or rather family ownership, the only explanation 
which he could put forward to account for the 
existence of these common pasture-grounds was that 
they must have been set apart either by the common 
consent of the villagers or by an older from the king ; 
but what I wish to impress upon you is that our Dharma 
Sastras had long out-grown the stage of communal owner- 
ship, so that even in explaining phenomena which might 
be considered to be relics of the old system, they proceeded 
upon the assumption of a new order of things based upon 
a new system of holding lands. 

Let us now turn our attention to the right of way. 
The primary d ; stinction which we have got to consider 
with reference to this subject is between public way and 
private way. The right of way over private lands is 
recognised in a text of Samkha and Likhita which is 
thus explained and amplified by the Vlramitrodaya : 
^whoever constantly passes through a field or by its side 
should not be obstructed * f It is not stated how long this 
user must continue in order to render its obstruction 
improper, but I take it that the user must be long enough 
and frequent enough to be considered a constant and 
customary user in order to make it improper on the part 
of the owner to interfere with it. A public way is divided 
into three classes : BWI (highway), (public 

89 


Conclusion. 


Bight of way 

Private way 
and public 
way. 

Evidence of 
the recogni- 
tion of 
private right 
of way. 


There kindaof 
public way. 



226 


Duty not to 
obstruct a 
public way. 


THE LAW OF BAILMENTS. 


thoroughfare), and (king’s highway). A toe* 

(highway) is defined as the way over, which men and 
beasts pass and repass without interruption, . and it is 
declared that no one should obstruct it in any way. 1 A 
public thoroughfare ( ) is described as the way over 

which all people without any distinction pass and repass 
at all times, and a king’s highway ( TOmrf ) is said to 
be a way which is ordinarily open to the public at parti- 
cular hours, but may be closed by the king's officers at 
other times. 2 It, however, appears from a text of 
Samkha and Likhita that a king’s highway should not 
be so closed as not to leave room enough for the turning 
of a chariot. It is not unlikely that the power reserved 
for the king’s officers to stop a king's highway at certain 
periods was intended to enable them to collect tolls from 
the frequenters of the way at those times, but this is a 
mere guess and I cannot lay much stress upon it. It is 
declared that 'no one should by throwing filth or making 
a platform, a ditch, an aqueduct, or eaves of a house 
obstruct a public thoroughfare, a place of worship, and a 
king’s highway’, 3 and whoever does so renders himself 
liable to punishment. It may be curious to notice that 
Manu declares that whoever discharges excrement on a 
highway save under extreme necessity shall be liable to 
pay a fine, and also to remove the filth, but in the case of 
a person under distress, an old or a pregnant woman, and 


1 wroifa apn ffa wwPwftui: i 
tor* * fprfwq n 

* to 9* rarfa m i 

wfafofT * naprdt II qnanw: 

8 w wu w w r i 

qfeg r PT tisroroH* u 



THE LAW 01’ BAILMENTS. 


m 


a boy , it is directed that the fine should be remitted for 
a warning. 

Besides these, there are certain other incorporeal rights, 
chiefly appurtenant to the tenement occupied by a person, 
which, according to the Hindu Law, must not be interfered 
with. Thus, it has been declared that the particular 
mode of enjoyment of a house and its doors, and of a 
market, or the like, dating from the first entry by the 
enjoyer must not be disturbed ; so also, a window, an 
aqueduct, a raised platform, and the eaves of a house must 
be allowed to remain as they have existed from the very 
beginning, but an intermediate structure interfering with 
another person’s enjoyment of his own lands may be 
objected to. Similarly, a right of support for one’s 
existing structure seems to have been recognised in the 
direction that no one should so act as to endanger the 
foundation of another’s house. It is also laid down that 
no one should open a window overlooking, or a new water- 
course discharging its water into, another’s house ; of 
course, when they have existed from before they may 
remain as they are. The prohibition to open a new 
window overlooking another’s house seems to have been 
based on the right of privacy of the owner of an adjacent 
house. 

I think I have said enough to give you an idea 
of the variety of rights recognised by the Hindu 
"Law regulating the relations between owners of 
adjacent lands. I shall now give you some instances 
where certain interferences with another’s proprietary right 
are permitted by the Hindu Law in consideration of 
greater benefit expected to arise therefrom both to the 
owner and to his neighbours. Thus Yajfiavalkya says : 

* an embankment which is beneficial to the people should 
not be prohibited by the owner of the soil, . where the 


Some other 
incorporeal 
rights 

appurtenant 
to a 

tenement, 

and 

regulating 

relations 

between 

owners of 

adjacent 

lands. 


Certain 

peculiar 

interferences 

with 

another's 
proprietary 
right allowed 
by the Hindu 
Law. 

Digging well 
and raising 
embankment 
on another's 
field. 



228 


THE LAW OF BAILMENTS. 


Cultivation 
of another’s 
land, the 
owner being 
dead, long 
absent, or 
otherwise , 
unable to 
till it. 


inconvenience is slight, and similarly, a well which occupies 
a little space, and supplies abundance of water / 1 To 
the same effect is the text of Narada which runs as 
follows : ‘a reservoir in the middle of another man’s field 
shall not be objected to by the owner, if the benefit is 
great and the damage small, since profit is to be desired 
even at the cost of a trifling loss / 2 It is, however, 
directed that before raising the embankment or excavating 
the well Jthe permission of the owner of the soil should, 
if possible, be obtained. 

I shall now conclude this lecture by mentioning to you 
some peculiar rights recognised by the Hindu Law which 
may seem to us strange, but were allowed in ancient time 
as being suitable to the condition of the people in those 
days, and not opposed to their feelings and sentiments. 
Thus, if the owner of a field was dead, long absent, or 
otherwise incapable of cultivating it, then a stranger might, 
unless prohibited from doing so, till the field and appropriate 
the produce ; if, in the meantime, the owner returned or 
otherwise recovered his capacity, and demanded the land 
back, then he was required to pay to the stranger the 
expenses incurred by him for preserving the land from 
turning into a waste ; and, if he were unable to pay the 
same, then the stranger could keep the land in his possession 
until he could recoup himself from the usufruct; but even 
during this time the owner was to recieve a certain portion 
of the produce as his share, and the remainder was to be 
taken by the cultivator in satisfaction of the expenses 
incurred and labour bestowed by him. It may be said 


1 * fWsStssraws n rwr. i 

* sfbfirsia i 



TUB LAW OF BAILMENTS. 


229 


that if I allow my land to lie waste, it is no body else's 
business to interfere with it ; that may, iudeed, be our 
modern idea, but having regard to the condition of the 
people in ancient time, I cannot say that the legalisation 
of this sort of action, which was not prejudicial to the 
interest of the owner, but was rather beneficial to him 
was improper or unreasonable. The last right which I 
shall mention was the right accorded to a person belonging 
to the twice-born classes to take fuel and fruits and flowers 
for the performance of religious rites from another 
person's land ; but in the case of fruits there was this 
limitation that they could not be taken from trees which 
were enclosed by the owner within fences. These minor 
rules may not have much value to a student of modern 
law, but 1 mention them here, in order to show the spirit 
in which they were conceived by the sages and obeyed by 
the people. 


Bight to tale, 
fuel and fruit 
from trees • 
not enclosed.. 



LECTURE VIII 


Law relating to Parental and Qijasi- 

PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 


The subject- 
matter of 
this end the 
tvrofollow* 
ing lectures 
indicated.' 


Different 
kinds of sons 
primary and 
secondary. 


Twelve 
kinds of 
sons. 


In this and the two following lectures I propose to 
deal with the various rights and obligations which arise 
between two persons by reason of their being related to 
each other, the relationship being of a more or less 
durable character and giving rise to what has been 
described as status or legal condition, as distinguished 
from rights and obligations entirely regulated by mutual 
agreement which exhausts itself as soon as those rights 
and obligations are fulfilled. The present lecture will be 
confined to the discussion of the law relating to parental 
and quasi-parental relationship. 

Our Dharma-Sastras make mention of various des- 
criptions of sons. One of them is called the primary 
and the others secondary (iffar). It is unnecessary to enter 
into anything like a detailed examination of the various 
kinds of sons so described, since most of these classes of 
secondary sonship, excepting one or two, have long 
become obsolete. It may, however, be not altogether 
useless to try to explain the principles on which these 
various classes of persons were given the positions of a son 
under the ancient Hindu law, for, it seems to me that the 
somewhat peculiar rules bearing upon the subject must 
appear anomalous to those who do not appreciate those 
principles. The persons who were accorded the position of a 
son were chiefly the following : (1) a son begotten by the 
father upon his lawfully wedded wife^W; (&) the son 
of an appointed daughter, or, according to another view, 
the daughter herself treated by special appointment as a 



PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 881 

son (iftWi $*) ; (8) the eon begotten by a stranger upon 
a man’s wife through appointment (Snji) ; (4) the eon 
secretly conceived in the husband’s house from a man 
other than the husband ; (5) the son of a damsel 

; (6) the son taken with the bride being in his 
mother’s womb at the time of her marriage ; (7) 

the son of a twiee-married woman (tfhw*) ; (8) the son 
given in adoption by his father or mother (tcw) j (9) the 
son bought from his parents (jfru); (10) the son, who, 
being an orphan, is taken in adoption with his own 
consent (ffPw) ; (11) the son who, being bereft of parents 
or abandoned by them, presents himself to another saying, 
‘Let me become they son’ sw); aud (12) the 
son cast off by his natural parents and taken by another 
(wnFiw). Of these the first alone was recognised as the 
son in the proper sense of the term, and the second also 
was regarded as almost equal to him in rank having no 
stain in blood, and being, at the same time, an offspring 
of the pei son regarded as the father ; besides these two, 
the others were sons only in a secondary sense, and were 
more or less held in disfavour. 

It would be a mistake to suppose that the recognition 
of sonship in all these cases implied an equality of status 
or that they were supposed to confer an equal amount of 
spiritual benefit upon their so-called father with the 
‘ aurasa 9 son, for Manu himself declares ; “A person who 
wishes to cross the darkness of the future would 
through sons of an inferior class obtains the same 
sort of result as a person who wishes to cross a 
stream by an ill -constructed vessel.” 1 I do not, of course, 
deny that in the absence of a son of the primary kind, 

wnpi i *13: 1 


Recognition 
of sonship 
in all these 
cases did 
not imply 
equality of 
status. 


Principles 
underlying 
the recogni- 
tion, 


Hr, Mayne’s 
view 

criticised. 


232 PABBNTA h BXLATIONSHIP. 

these inferior sons could/ to some extent, occupy his 
place, and stand as a substitute for him, ‘just as/ to 
quote the words of Brihaspati, ‘in the absence of 
clarified butter, oil often takes its place but, it seems 
to be absurd to suppose that the recognition of all 
these persons as sons was solely due to the intense desire 
of an ancient householder to have a son at any cost. 
Such an explanation may possibly account for the 
recognition of sonship in a case of adoption, whether it 
be in the dattaka, kritrima , or hrita form, and also in 
a case of appointment to raise an issue upon another's 
wife, but in the other cases, I can scarcely conceive 
that the recognition of sonship was due to an anxiety 
which prevailed in ancient time to have a son in any 
shape and at any cost. Who can ever think that the 
affiliation, for instance, of a damsel's son either to her 
father, or after her marriage to her husband, or of a 
son begotten upon a woman either before or after her 
marriage by a stranger to the husband of that woman 
was guided by considerations of benefit, secular or 
spiritual, to be conferred upon the so-called father, 
although he had no connection with the paternity of the 
child ? I can not, therefore, agree with Mr. Mayne when 
he says that the true solution of the problem, how these 
came to be regarded as his sons, is to be found in the 
indispensableness of a son to an ancient Aryan householder 
which would lead to every contrivance being exhausted to 
procure one, and that the relations between the sexes in 
early times were such that neither delicacy nor sentiment 
would stand in the way . 1 No doubt the customs of 
adoption and appointment had their origin in the desire 
to have a male child to perpetuate the lineage and offer 


\ Mayne’s Hindu law, 8fch Ed. p. 83. 



PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 


233 

funeral oblations, but, even then, the practice of appoint- 
ment was condemned by Manu in no doubtful terms. 
Thus, he says, * no widow should be authorised by regenerate 
men to beget children by other persons, for those that 
authorise her to conceive by other men violate the eternal 
law ; such appointment is nowhere mentioned in the Vedic 
texts on marriage, nor is the remarriage, of widows men- 
tioned in the law relating to marriage ; this practice, fit 
only for brutes, and condemned by learned regenerate men, 
was introduced among men while Vena held the sovereign 
sway; he, ruling the whole world and eminent among 
the royal saints, produced confusion of tribes while his 
intellect was perverted by passion ; since then, the virtuous 
censure him, who, through clouded intellect, authorises a 
widow to have intercourse with a man for the sake of 
progeny/ As regards the duty of a woman to remain 
faithful to her lord even after his death, the same sage 
has declared, * Let her rather emaciate her body by living 
upon pure flowers, roots, and friuts, but let her not, when 
the husband is dead, even pronounce the name of another 
man , ; 1 and again : * Longing for the unparalleled virtue 
of those who are constant to one husband, she should 
continue till death, forgiving all injuries, observing 
strictly the rules of continence, and foregoing all sensual 
pleasure ; many thousand bachelor Brahmins have ascend- 
ed the celestial regions without leaving any issue ; like 
those lifelong students, a chaste woman leading a life of 
austerities after the death of her husband, goes to heaven 
though destitute of sons ; a woman who being covetous 
for offspring proves faithless to her husband, brings 
disgrace on herself in this world, and becomes excluded 
from the regions of her lord in the next / 2 I should like 

1 Manu, V 157. 

« Manu, V 158. 


80 



The theory 
of paternity 
according to 
the ancient 
Hindu Law : 
principles 
regulating 
the 

determination 
of patria 
potestas as 
indicated by 
the 

enumeration 
of subsidiary 
sons. 


Paternity 
through 
dominion 
over the 
mother of 
the child. 


PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 

to know where fidelity to the husband is enjoined in 
stronger term - and its violation more severly condemned 
than in the texts quoted above, and I am not prepared to 
hold that, if the anxiety to have a son were the only 
motive, the recognition of sonship in some of the instances 
noticed above would not have been condemned hy Manu 
qn these grouuds alone. The problem suggested hy Mr. 
Mayne must, therefore, at least in part be susceptible of 
another explanation, and it seems to me that he himself 
comes very near to it when, in the next paragraph, he 
proceeds to explain the theory of paternity among the 
Hindus. According to the ancient conception of family 
relationship among the Aryans, a child must he under the 
patria polestas of some individual, and this was not con- 
fined to the case of a legitimate child, born in lawful 
wedlock and lawfully begotten upon its mother by her 
husband ; the question, therefore, arose : how, in any other 
case, should it be determined as to who was the person 
under whose patria potestaz a particular child stood ? The 
answer to this question was furnished by the enumeration 
of subsidiary sons indicated above. It will be found from 
an examination of the different descriptions of sonship 
given above, that it arose in either of two ways: 
(l) through dominion over the mother of the child j 
and (2) through transfer of patria poiestas from the natural 
parents either by gift or sale, or by the consent of the 
child when freed from the patria poteztaz of the parents 
either by reason of their being dead, or by reason of their 
having cast him off. I have no leisure to dwell indivi^ 
dually upon each of the eases of secondary sonship 
enumerated above, but, I hope, it will not be at all difficult 
for you to see that my explanations meet every one of 
them. That the husband of a woman becomes invested 
with patria potesiaz over the son of that woman although 



PARENTAL REL ATIONSH IP • 235 

he may not have been the real prooreator of the 
child is supported by Manu on the analogy of ownership 
over the produce of a field, when the field belonged 
to one and the seed was sown by another. “ Unless 
there be a special agreement, ” says he, “ between the 
owners of the land and of the seed, the crop belongs clearly 
to the land-owner, for the receptacle is more important 
than the seed,” and he concludes that a similar rule should 
apply in the case of a child, and it should belong to him 
who had marital property in the mother and not to the 
actual procreator when he happened to be a stranger. 
As regards the system of adoption in its various forms, 
}'Ou will observe that it was essential that some bow or 
other the jpatria potestas of the natural father should cease, 
and this condition being satisfied it made no difference 
whether the adoption was due to a desire on the part of the 
adopter to perpetuate his lineage, as in dallaka , krUrima , 
and krita forms of adoption, or on the part of the child 
to obtain protection from danger or destitution due to 
the death of or abandonment by the natural father, as in 
swaya>r.datta and apaviddha forms of adoption. It, there- 
fore, seems to me that the problem suggested above as to 
how the various kinds of sonship came to be recognised 
by the TJ/iarma-mdtas admits of an easy solution, if we 
remember that they really exemplified the rules by which 
the question of patria potent an had to be determined under 
the earlier Hindu law, and this becomes all the more 
clear from the fact that a son born of an unmarried woman 
was regarded as the son of the father of that woman so 
long as she continued unmarried, but of her husband when 
she passed under his control upon marriage, a position 
which can be rationally explained only upon the view 
already indicated that sonship, in such a case, meant no 
more than subjection to the patria polentas of an 


Paternity 
through 
transfer of 
pair in 
potent an. 



Gradual 

curtailment 

of this wider 

conception 

of paternity 

and the 

consequent 

curtailment 

in the list of 

irregular 

sons. 


At present 
only two 
descriptions 
of sons are 
generally 
recognised : 
aurasa and 
dattaka. 

Kritrima 
form of 
adoption 
still prevails 
in Mithila. 


236 PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 

individual although paternity, in the strict sense of the 
term, could not be predicated of him. 

In course of time, however, this wider and somewhat 
peculier conception of paternity gradually dwindled away, 
and in consequence, most of these kinds of irregular sons, 
iE I may use the expression, became obsolente. So 
Parasara who professes to lay down the law for the Kali 
Yuga in particular recognises only four kinds of sons, viz., 
aurasa (the truly legitimate son), kshelraja (the son of a 
wife by appointment), datta (the son given), and kritrima. 
(the son made ). 1 In the Paurattic age this list was 
further curtailed, and it was declared that the wise men 
had, in the beginning of the Kali Yuga , solemly prohi- 
bited certain practices, including among them the recog- 
nition of various classes of sons besides Aurasa and 
Dattaka , for the protection of the people, and that such 
a resolution arrived at by the virtuous carried as much 
authority as a text of the Yeda itself . 2 The result, 
therefore, is that at the present day there are only two 
kinds of sons recognised by the Hindu law, viz., Aurasa 
aud Dattaka, save that in Mithila, in deference to old 
established usage, the kritrima form of adoption is also 
regarded as valid, and this is reconciled with the above 
rule by construing the word € datta \ to include Kritrima 
as well.® 

# * * 

WflITfq wm' n 



PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. &$\7 

Along with the limitations thus introduced, the An important 
conception of sonship has undergone an important change, conoeption ^ 6 
and now a son means primarily a truly legitimate son a* sonship: 
begotten by the father upon his lawfully wedded wife, 
and an adopted son is assimilated to him by a legal 
fiction that upon the ceremonies of adoption having taken fiction, 
place, he is, by reason of the mysterious force of those 
ceremonies, to be treated as if reborn in the family of the 
adopter, a fiction, which, as you are aware, has given rise 
to certain rules limiting the choice of an adopted rson so 
as to prevent that fiction from appearing unnatural. Legitimate 
From this altered conception of sonship it follows that sequent 
legitimatio per mfmqnem matrimonium, which was recog- matrimonium 
nised by the Roman Law, can no longer be recognised recognised, 
in the Hindu law, for he alone is ati aurastt (or truly 
legetimate) son who is begotten by the father upon his 
lawfully wedded wife . 1 It may, however, be remarked 
that the necessity for such a rule can hardly be felt among 
the Hindus, because among them a girl is ordinarily 
married at an age when she cannot have the physical 
capacity for child-bearing, and the Sastra* enjoin upon 
the guardians to see that she is given in marriage at such 
an age. 

Turning now to adoption, I may remind you that I 
have already explained the difference between the dattaka 
and the kritrima forms of adoption, and pointed out that 
the kritrima form prevails only in Mithila, and nowhere 
else. The really important form of adoption from the 
stand point of the modern Hindu law is, therefore, the 
dattaka, and I* shall say only a few words about it as the 
scope of my subject will not permit a fuller discussion. 

ffrarritaq hr 11 



238 PABBNTAL RELATIONSHIP. 

V, 

JDattafc* It has often been asked, can there be a valid adoption 

adoptoi : without the performance of religious ceremonies ? The 

answer to this question must depend upon the conception 
ceremonies. of subsidiary sonship according to the Hindu law, and 

Difference of 8,8 this conception has, as' I have already indicated, 

tacedtoitB lin< i ier g 0|ie an important change, it is not at all 

root. surprising that different opinions have been entertained 

about it. I have stated that originally the recogni- 
tion of a person as a subsidiary son meaut no more 
than that the person was treated as subject to the patria 
poleitas of his so-called father, and an act of adoption 
took effect by transferring the patria potesta* from the 
natural to the adoptive father ; viewed from this stand- 
point it would follow that the formalities of adoption 
would not require anything more than gift and acceptance, 
the gift by the natural father extinguishing his patria 
polestax, and the acceptance by the adoptive father 
investing him with it. Hence, at that stage of the Hindu 
law, the performance of any religious ceremony could not 
be treated as absolutely essential for the change of status 
involved in an act of adoption, and we, therefore, find 
that in the definition of an adopted son, as given in the 
Institutes of Manu, hardly any stress is laid on the 
performance of any religious ceremony such as datta- 
homa. 1 This conception of sonship has, however, been 
now substantially given up, so that according to the 
orthodox view, an act of adoption is no longer regarded 
as mere transference of the patria potestas to the adoptive 
father, but is supposed to involve the creation of a certain 
non-sen suo us relation by virtue of the mysterious force 
attached to the performance of the sastric ceremony. 


1 utui ft?n vt wfir: swroft \ 
ptwi if W: 



PAEBSFTAL MLATIOKSHI*. 299 

A physical aot carries with it certain physical const* 
quences ; a secular transaction produces certain secular 
effects; but beyond these, they cannot go; so that 
if you want to maintain that the creation of son ship 
by an act of adoption involves something more than the 
mere production of certain secular rights and obliga- 
tions, it becomes incumbent upon you to admit that the 
transaction itself must be somehow more than secular, 
and as it is the performance of the accompanying religions 
ee&monies which alone can stamp it with a higher 
character, they become an essential part of the entire 
transaction. You will perhaps understand this position 
better, if I try to elucidate the distinction by an illustra- 
tion. Take, for instance, the ceremony of consecrating 
an image, and contrast with it that of consecrating the 
site of a building ; in the former case, so long as the 
ceremony is not duly performed, the super-sensuous attribute 
ascribed to the image does not arise, and the idol cannot 
be regarded as anything more than a block of wood or a 
slab of stone which has taken a certain shape ; but in 
the latter ease, the main purpose of building a bouse 
being physical, the non-performance of the ceremony of 
consecrating its site cannot possibly affect the fulfilment of 
that purpose, the only object of performing the ceremony 
being to invoke the blessing of God on the eve of occupying 
the house. It is, therefore, natural that when sonship 
created by an act of adoption came to be regarded 
as having a higher than secular aspect, the Brahmanieal 
writers, such as the authors of Dattaka Ghandrika and 
Dattaka Mimansa, who adopted this standpoint, could no 
longer treat the performance of Datta-homa as non-essential. 
With them an act of adoption had too aspects : in its 
secular aspect, it consisted of gift and acceptance which 
could only result in transferring the boy from the parental 


Two Myehr 
of m am 
ada pti on. 



240 


PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 

dominion of the donor to that of the donee ; but, in so 
far as adoption was supposed to establish a certain non- 
sensuous religious relation carrying with it certain religious 
and juristic consequences, it could only be reached by the 
due performance of the religious ceremonies prescribed. 
According to this view, therefore, the father by giving 
his son to another without the accompaniment of religious 
ceremonies can perhaps make the son a slave to the 
latter, provided he has got the necessary authority to 
make such a gift, but in order to create filial relation with 
a person who is not the natural father, so as to make the 
boy competent to take part in the religious ceremonies 
in his adoptive family as a member thereof, the religious 
rites, prescribed by the Sastras, for adoption must be 
duly performed. I am aware that this question has given 
rise to a good deal of controversy in our courts, and 
decisions of a more or less conflicting character have been 
Standpoint passed ; I am not here concerned to deal with those 
Hindu Law dicisions in detail, but I may be permitted to point out 
that if tlie standpoint of the later Hindu law be not 
brushed aside as an innovation, it seems to me difficult 
to escape from the logical consequences of that position 
which would make the performance of religious ceremonies 
an essential part of an act of adoption. 


Other conse- 

a lienees of 
lie altered 
standpoint. 


Construction 
of negative 
precepts in 
Hindu Law. 


The acceptance of the view that adoption is an act 
which depends for its effectiveness on Satiric sanction 
must also give rise to certain other important consequences, 
for the construction of negative or prohibitory precepts 
depends mainly upon the character of the act to which 
those precepts are attached. The rules bearing upon the 
subject and the distinctions on which they are based have 
been fully explained by me in a series of articles which 1 
contributed, sometime ago to the Calcutta Law Journal f On 



PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 


241 


the interpretation of negative precepts in Hindu law/ 1 and 
I must refer you for fuller information to those articles. 
A negative precept, by which I mean a precept contained in 
the Sastras calculated to dissuade people from following a 
particular course of action, is, as I have there explained, 
capable of being differently construed, and the interpreta- 
tion has, in each case, to be selected with great care in 
accordance with recognised principles of logic laid down 
and explained by the Mimansakas. Following these prin- 
ciples, we find that sometimes a negative precept amounts 
to nothing more than a mere prudential admonition designed 
to emphasise the pernicious character of the prohibited 
course of action by reason of its natural visible consequences 
which prudence, apart from any sastric injunction, would 
induce us to avoid ; sometimes it is construed as laying 
down a sastric prohibition in the proper sense 

of the term, supported by the sastric sanction indicat- 
ing that its violation is sinful, and therefore calculated to 
bring about misery either in this life or in the life to come, 
through an invisible force appertaining to a forbidden 
action, unless expiated by the performance of proper 
penance ; and, sometimes, it has to be read as limiting 
the scope of some positive injunction to which it is 
attached, and thereby defining the conditions under which 
alone the latter can be validly fulfilled, so that the per- 
formance of the act enjoined without regard to and in 
violation of the negative precept so construed would 
import such an essential defect or imperfection as would 
render the whole thing infructuous and incompetent to 
produce the desired effect. A negative precept of the first 
kind is said to import a prohibition having a visible end 
in view ( Jrftnfa ) ; when it belongs to the second 

•kind, it is said to contain a prohibition having a non-visible 


Different 
modes of 
construing 
negative 
precepts, and 
the principles 
governing the 
same. 


1 Calcutta Law Journal, Vol* IV, pp. 21*, 27*, 35*, 03^ and 75*. 

31 



242 PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 

end in view or a prohibition based upon 

the sastras in the strict sense (srefa ; when, however, 

it falls under the third class, it is said to be an 
excluding clause limiting the scope of the positive injunc- 
tion to which it is related or attached It is 

apparent, that from the standpoint of positive law, a 
negative precept of this last class has the most important 
consequences, and, therefore, whenever we come across a 
negative precept it behoves us to enquire whether or not, 
it belongs to this class. Now, on this enquiry the nature 
of the act or ceremony to which the negative precept 
relates has a very important bearing, and a little considera- 
tion will enable you to see why this should be so. In the 
case of an act having a merely secular object, the attain- 
ment of that object depends upon the fulfilment of its 
secular conditions, and any rule laid down in the sastras in 
such a case must either be a reiteration of those secular 
conditions which does not lend any additional weight 

to them beyond what they otherwise possess, or amount to 
a sastric prohibition (vfbw) implying that its violation is 
sinful but does not affect the validity of the transaction. 
It is> however, otherwise with a religious act or ceremony 
which depends for its effectiveness on a sastric injunction, 
for in such a case the validity of the transaction rests on 
the fulfilment of that injunction, and here the question at 
once arises whether a negative precept laid down in the 
Sastras should be construed as a mere prohibition (vfbw) as 
explained above, or as a qualifying clause limiting the scope 
of the • injunction for, in the latter case, the 

infringement of the precept will entail the consequence of 
invalidating the transaction itself. Take for instance, the 
performance of a sraddha which is a ceremony of this 
character ; there is a positive precept chat it should be 
performed at the new moon ; on the other hand, there is a 



PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 


243 

negative precept that it should not be performed at night; 
now reading these together, what is the inference ? It 
may either be that the performance of the sraddha at 
night, provided the other conditions are satisfied, is not 
iufmetuous, but the performer becomes a sinner by trans- 
gressing the prohibition; or, it may be, that such a 
performance is to be treated as void, because the negative 
precept curtails the scope of the positive injunction, so that 
it is no performance of the ceremony according to the true 
import of the Sastras. Now, as I have elsewhere explained, 
the latter interpretation should, according to the rules of 
construction, be accepted, as correct, and, in fact, in the 
absence of clear and insuperable objections to the contrary, 
a negative precept attached to a positive precept, where 
both are based on the Sastraa, should, as far as possible, be 
so construed as to make the former limit the scope of the 
latter, so that both ma^ have equal effect given to them. 
It will be difficult, at this place, to give an exposition of 
the grounds on which this conclusion has been arrived at, 
and I must refer you for fuller information to my articles 
in the Calcutta Law Journal to which I have already 
referred. You will thus sec that the construction of 
negative precepts bearing on the law of adoption must, to 
a great extent, turn upon our conception of the nature of 
an act of adoption ; if it be regarded as a secular act having 
only certain secular consequences, we shall have to apply 
onfe set of principles to construe those precepts ; whereas, 
if it be treated as a religious ceremony bringing in its 
train, among other consequences, the creation of an invisible 
property (ww) by which the son of one man becomes 
converted, as it were, into the son of the adopter, 
and invested with the right of performing religious 
ceremonies in the adopter’s family, a consequence which 
could not possibly be reached by a mere, secular 


Their bearing 
on some of 
the questions 
relating to 
the law of 
adoption. 



Authority to 
f^ghre and 
' authority to 
receive a sou 
in adoption 
in the case of 
a woman. 


Can a woman 
take an adop- 
ted .son with- 
out her hus-; 
band’s per- 
mission ? 
Different 
ways of 
answering 
the question 
indicated. 


3.44 FAfflBKTAL thLATIOKSHlP. 

act unaided by the mysterious force belonging to the 
fulfilment of a Sfefcric injunction according to the mode 
prescribed by the Sastras, the question of construing those 
precepts will be governed by a different set of principles 
guided by different considerations. Bearing these dis- 
tinctions in mind, and remembering the altered conception 
of an act of adoption noticed above according to which it 
depends for its effectiveness on the Sastric injunction, let 
us consider how far some of the precepts bearing upon the 
subject affect the validity of an adoption. 

Let us take the text of Vasishtha : c A woman should 
neither give nor accept a son in adoption except with the 
permission of her husband V This raises two questions: 
(1) Can a woman take an adopted son to her husband 
without his permission? (£) Can she give her son in 
adoption without her husband’s permission ? 

As regards the first question, a little consideration will 
show that there are several different ways of looking at 
the precept, (a) For instance, you may say that the text 
indicates that a woman has ordinarily no power to take 
a son in adoption, but that authority given by her 
husband entitles her to act on his behalf, so that, where 
that authority is wanting, the power to adopt does not 
at all arise. The result of adopting this view would be 
to make an adoption hy a woman without her husband's 
permission absolutely invalid. (6) From another stand- 
point, you may say that a woman has the right to take 
a son in adoption, and that the text of Vasishtha does not 
impose a new limitation upon it, but merely expresses 
the ordinary limitation upon woman's power of free action 
by reason of the control exercised upon her by her 
husband so long as he is alive. According- to this view. 



PABBNTAL RBLATION9HIP. fS4& 

aa adoption by a woman without her husband’s assent so 
long as he is alive and capable of giving consent may be 
invalid! but when he is deadj his control over her being 
withdrawn, she can make an adoption, and the utmost 
that can be required of her is that she should obtain the 
assent of the male relative on whom she is thm dependent. 
This explanation reduces the precept to a mere reiteration 
( ) of the secular rule deducible from the general 

dependence of a woman, and has been virtually adopted 
by the Viramitrodaya when it says : " The meaning of 
the words 1 except with the assent of her husband* is that 
while the husbaud is alive, a son should not be adopted 
by the wife acting independently in the absence of the 
husband's permission ; but when the husband is dead, 
the assent of those alone is required on whom she is 
then dependent. Oq this view, the prohibition appears 
to have a merely visible (secular) basis. Therefore, 
although the husband be dead without giving permission 
to adopt, still an adoption by the widow is not invalid/’ 1 
(c) Yet another way of construing the precept is to hold 
that the prohibition it contains is a Sastrie prohibition, in 
the proper sense of the term, deriving its authority from 
the SSstra, and then the question will be on what is the 
authority of a woman to take a son in adoption based ? 
If you say, it is also based upon the Sastra, then the 
affirmative rule granting the power, and the negative rule 
curtailing its scope, being both derived from the same 




irnft tfhifn *»rfrwr wwinr *r 



qftsvrtm *rafn irftflro i 
ymqr Hwrkr sfiww i 




Different 
views held 
by the 
different 
schools. 


248 PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 

source, the negative precept must be construed as tpsjTO* 
and an adoption in violation thereof must be treated as 
invalid. If, on the other hand, you maintain that a 
woman has got the power to take a son in adoption 
independently of any Sastric sanction, then the prohibition 
must be treated as a indicating that its violation is 
sinful but does not affect the validity of the adoption. 

These, then, being the possible standpoints, I do not 
think myself called upon to discuss which of them 
represents the correct view ; in fact, the object with which 
I have indicated them is not so much to enable you to 
eome to a definite conclusion regarding the question, but 
to illustrate the manner in which the interpretation of a 
precept varies with a slight alteration in the standpoint 
from which one approached the question. As the law now 
stands, it is agreed on all hands that during the life time 
of the husband the wife cannot adopt to him without his 
express sanction, but differences have arisen regarding the 
power of a wuihw who seeks to adopt a son to her deceased 
husband. 

According to the Bengal School, authority given by 
the husband is operative even after his death, and an 
adoption by the widow in pursuance of such authority is 
valid ; when no such authority exists, no adoption can be 
validly made. 

The Bengal doctrine has been applied to cases governed 
by the Benares School, although the Viramitrodaya which 
is regarded as an authority in Benares maintains a different 
position. 

In Mithila, the assent of the husband must be given 
contemporaneously with the adoption by the wife, which 
being impossible in the case of an adoption by a widow, 
no such adoption can be validly made. 



PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP* 


247 


In Southern India, the assent of the kinsmen may 
take the place of that of the husband according to the 
decision of the Judicial Committee in the Ramnad case * 1 

According to the Mah&r&stra School, the text requiring 
the sanction of the husband applies only to an adoption 
made in the husband's life time, and is not to be taken to 
restrict the widow's power to do that which the general 
law prescribes as beneficial to her husband's soul. 

Next, let us consider whether a woman can give her Can a woman 

son in adoption without authority from her husband. It hTadoption 

seems to be clear that she cannot do so, so long as the authority 

husband is alive and capable of according sanction. The ^mher ? 

prohibition contained in Vasishtha's text should be 

construed as imperative, and the sanction of the husband 

takes the case out of it, being what may be called a 

Efirre* (remedy), so that in the absence of such sanction 

the adoption falling within the scope of the prohibition 

must be deemed as invalid. But, then, how far does this 

prohibition extend ? Does it apply also in the case of a 

widow giving her son in adoption ? It has been held by Calcutta 

our courts that it does not, so that a widow is free to give decision on 

9 . . the P° in k 

her son in adoption, unless, of course, she was distinctly 
prohibited by the husband to do so . 2 * There is no doubt 
that both Dattaka Chandrika and Dattakft Mim&ns& which 
are recognised as authoritative treatises on the law of 
adoption support this view ; and, although, as observed by 
their Lordships of the Judicial Committee in Balusu Guru- 
lingaswami v. Balusu Ramalakshmamma , 8 caution is 
required in accepting their glosses where they deviate from 
or add to the Smritis, it is very much doubtful whether 

1 Collector of Madura v. Mootoo Ramalinga, 12 Moo. I. A. 440* 

■ Jogeshohandra Bandyopadhyay v, Tonabali Bepari, 7 C.W.N. 871. 

* 8 C.W.N. 439. 



Difficulties 
of the view. 


24$ PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 

our courts will be prepared, in any future case, to reconsider 
the question and reject the opinion supported by them as 
incompatible with a correct and logical interpretation of 
the text bearing upon the point, for the authority of ,these 
two works was not, in their Lordships' opinion, open to 
examination, explanation, criticism, adoption, or rejection 
like a scientific treatise on European Jurisprudence. I 
must, however, confess that I find it difficult to reconcile 
this view with the view which prevails in Bengal and 
Benares Schools that a widow cannot make a valid adoption 
to her deceased husband without an authority given by him 
during his life time, or with the Mithila doctrine that she 
cannot make any such adoption at all, for I fail to under- 
stand how the text of Vasishtha < Let not a woman give 
or accept a son without her husband’s sanction ' can be 
interpreted in one way in the case of a gift and in another 
way in the case of an acceptance; it seems that if the 
aforesaid text does not apply to a widow with regard to 
a gift, it should receive a similar interpretation with 
regard to an acceptance also, for the two portions of the 
text are so collocated, that they should be held to have 
an exactly similar scope. Dattaka MimansS tries to get 
over this difficulty by arguing that the text of Manu — 
i A son equal (in caste) and affectionately disposed whom 
his father or mother (or both) give with water at a time 
of distress is known as the dattaka son / 1 indicates that 
both parents are equally competent to give a son in adop- 
tion ; but it is open to the comment that the above text 
only contains a definition of the adopted son, and does not 
negative the position that the power of the mother should 
be held to be limited by the conditions imposed by the text 


uwn wmf qvtf i: srrerofc i 



PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 


249 


of Vasishtha referred to above. Dattaka Chandrikft 
adopts a somewhat curious argument in support of the 
widow’s power of gift when it says that an absence of 
prohibition is tantamount to a sanction ; it may not be 
altogether illogical for the author of Dattaka ChandrikS 
to maintain this position seeing that he does not say that 
a widow has no power to accept a son in adoption without 
express authority from her husband ; but for one who 
maintains that express authority from the husband is 
requisite in order to empower a widow to take a son in 
adoption, that position is absolutely impossible, for it can 
scarcely* be argued that husband’s sanction should be 
implied when his widow is giving his son away although 
it cannot be held to exist when she is taking a son in 
adoption for the benefit of his soul. It is, however, useless 
to dilate upon this topic- any further, for positive law 
does not always develop itself in a strictly logical way, 
and our Courts are not likely to retrace their steps when a 
particular point has been settled by judicial decisions on 
the basis of authoritative treatises dealing with the same. 

The next point on which I may say a few words is 
the validity of the adoption of an only son. Yasishtha’s 
text prohibiting such an adoption runs as follows : * But 
let not a person give or accept an only son, for he is for 
the continuance of the line of his forefather .’ 1 Now 
in order to determine the correct import of this 
precept, one has to remember what I have explained more 
fully in my articles ‘On the interpretation of negative 
precepts in Hindu Law/ that the construction of a negative 
precept depends principally on the character of the act or 
ceremony to which it relates ; whatever might have been 
the real character of an act of adoption in ancient time, 


Adoption of 
an only son. 

Vasistha's 
text : how it 
should be 
construed. 





A decision 
of the Privy 
Council has 
settled the 
law in a 
different 
way. 


Adoption of 
the eldest 
son : 

prohibition 
should be 
treated as 
merely re- 
oommenda- 
atory. 


250 PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 

there can be little doubt that now-a-days it is looked upon 
as an act which takes effect by virtue of a Sastric injunction 
(stWiffH) and not merely in pursuance of a secular inclina- 
tion (tunffH), and if this conception be accepted as correct, 
I think the prohibition contained in Vasishtha's text 
must, on the acknowledged principles of construction, be 
construed as curtailing the scope of the injunction 

authorising gift or acceptance of a son, in order to avoid 
the eightfold defects incidental to the admission of an 
option (firara) which would result from the adoption of a 
different construction. It. would be tiresome to go through 
the grounds on which these principles of construction are 
based, and it would not also be possible for me to repeat 
the reasons which have induced me not to accept the 
proposition that a negative precept supported by the 
assignment of a reason must be construed as a mere 
having no obligatory force. Those who are curious to know 
more about the subject will, I hope, find fuller information 
from my articles in the Calcutta Law Journal to which I 
have already referred. However that may be, the validity of 
the adoption of an only son has been firmly established by 
the decision of the Privy Council in the case of Balusu 
Gurulingaswami v. Balusu Ramalakshmamma , 1 and 
any further discussion can only have an academic interest. 

As regards the adoption of the eldest son, the prohibi- 
tion against it is merely inferntial, being deduced by the 
commentators from the superior merits of such a son as 
described by Manu. It, therefore, stands to reason that 
such a prohibition should be treated as merely recommen- 
datory, its purpose being to dissuade the parents from 
giving away the most meritorious of all the sons ; if, 
however, the parents choose to disregard the admonition 

' 1 L. R. 26, I.A. US : I. L. R., 22 M 308. 



PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 251 

and give the eldest son in adoption , the adoption will 
undoubtedly be valid, for the Dharmasastras have hot 
the same, and the scope of a Sastric 1 vidhi 9 can only be 
curtailed by a Sastric prohibition. 

Referring you for fuller information about the details 
of the law of adoption to treatises specially dealing with 
the subject, 1 now pass on to consider the extent of 
patria potestas under the Hindu Law, and compare the 
same with that under the Roman Law. 

Speaking of the Roman Law, Mr. Sandars says: 
* The patria potestas differed originally little, if at all, 
from the dominica potestas . If the sense of the owner- 
ship was not so complete in the former, it was 
probably limited more by natural feeling than by law. 
The father could sell, expose, or put to death his children. 
Time, however, ameliorated the position of the child, and 
all that was left was a power to inflict moderate chastise- 
ment, and to sell at the time of birth in cases of 
extreme necessity. Constantine condemned the father 
who killed his child to the punishment of a parricide. 
The sale of a child was in general fictitious, and only 
formed the mode by which the child was released 
from the father’s power/ 1 Turning, now to the Hindu 
Law, we find that Manu says that a father had no 
right to do any thing more than inflict moderate chastise- 
ment upon his son only as a punishment for an offence 
using a string or a light rattan, and taking care to strike 
on the back and never on the head ; 2 and Gautama says 


1 Institutes, Lib; I; Tit. IX; 

9 hiSitjot fttwT *nni w Hte*: * 

1TO* wot i i c i # 


Extent of 
the patria 
potestas 
under the 
Hindu Law 


Power over 
the person 
of the son 
under the 
Roman Law. 


The Hindu 
Law 

compared : 
limited 
power of 
chastisement. 



258 


PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 


Power of 
gift and 
sale : 
different 
views 
indicated. 

Among the 
text-writers. 


that chastisement should not ordinarily be corporeal and 
infliction of bodily punishment in the mode mentioned 
above should only be resorted to in extreme cases, and 
even then light string or rattan should be used, any 
violation whereof would be punishable by the king . 1 These 
minute rule* and the prescription of punishment for their 
infringement show that from very early times the power 
of a Hindu father over the person of the son was circums- 
cribed within very narrow and reasonable limits. He 
did not posses anything like the power of life and death 
at least from Manuks time, and it is doubtful if he ever 
had it. We need not, therefore, grudge the pride which 
Justinian seems to feel when he says: “The power 
which we have over our children is peculiar to the citizens 
of Borne ; for no other people have a power over their 
children such as we have over ours .” 2 As regards 
the power of gift and sale, the authorities seem to 
be somewhat in conflict, indicating, as I think, 
a gradual change in the law restricting the power 
of the father within very narrow limits. Thus, Yasishtha 
says that in as much as the son springs from the corporeal 
particles of the parents, they are the causes of his being, 
and so they have the power to give, sell, or cast him 
away . 8 On the other hand, both Ysjnavalkya and Narada 
include a son among objects unfit to be given 4 and the 
latter adds that these should not be given even under 


i 

s 

s 




Institutes* Lib. I; Tit. IX. 2. 

TOftfircrcnw : i*r: wHfiwftfira* : i 
^ bto f«wrasnShj urat i farft wro: i 
n* i 

TOJTOtf: 


4 



PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. .$68 

extreme distress . 1 Katy&yana takes an intermediate 
position and says that no gift or sale should be made of 
sons against their wishes, but at a time of distress this 
may be done/ otherwise not . 2 There being thus an 
evident conflict among the text-writers, it is not at all 
surprising that there should be a similar diversity 
of opinion among the commentators. Thus, commenting 
on the text of YSjnavalkya declaring that a soil and certain 
other objects are unfit to be given, Vijnftneswara observes 
that this does not indicate absence of ownership, since 
ownership does exist over a son, a wife, the entire property, 
or what has been promised to another, although these 
have been declared as unfit to be given . 3 On the other 
hand, Nilakantha says that the father cannot claim owner- 
ship over the son in the same way as he claims ownership 
over the offspring of his cattle, since his wife is not his 
property in the same way as the cattle is ; moreover, it 
ape&rs from the sixth chapter of the Purva MlmSusS that 
although in a Yiswajit sacrifice the sacrificer should give 
his whole property away, yet the daughter, the son, and 
the like should not be given, which indicates that the 
father has no ownership over his son ; and, therefore, it 
has been concluded by Misra in Tantravarttaka that the 
gift of a son in adoption is a gift only in a secondary 

srcuitrre i 

zrt fro* mn i 

**r*ret *r i i 

3 ftmro j t iuwPw w r w t i 


Among the 
Commenta- 
tors. 



‘254 PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 

sense . 1 J Irautav&hana also seems to bold this opinion, 
when he says : “ Neither is it true that th-» son is the pro- 
perty of his father, for the contrary has been shown under 
the head of gift of a whole estate. The term 
* acquis tion * would, therefore, be metaphorical in regard 
to son .” 9 Commenting upon this passage, Raghunan- 
dana argues that the father has no property in the 
son, but that a gift in adoption is allowable in as much 
as it is not a real gift, but a mere semblance of it entitling 
the son to perform the funeral ceremonies of the adopter, 
and this indicates that gift in no other form could be 
made. On the other hand, Srlkrishna TarkalamkSira 
suggests that the father has property in the son, but his 
power of making a gift or a sale is limited in the way 
stated in the text of K&ty&yana, and fettered by conditions 
prescribed therein. The Viramitroday* suggests a some- 
what different solution, for it says that the texts prohibit- 
ing the gift of a son were meant to refer to the gift of an 
only son, as such a gift would result in the extinction of 
lineage of the donor, but when he had more sons than one 
the conditions under which a gift or a sale of a son may 
be made are laid down in the text of Ksty Syria referred to 
Conclusions above . 8 What, then, are the conclusions that we can 
summarised, derive from these conflicting opinions ? It seems that a 
gift in adoption has always been regarded as valid except 
in the case of an only son, and that although at first, there 
might not have been much difference between it and any 
other form of gift, gradually there grew up the idea 
that it was a gift of a peculiar kind, and strictly speaking 
a gift only in a secondary sense. It also appears that just 


1 Vyavaharamaytikha, Ch.N., Sec. 1. 

* Dayabhaga. Oh. II, Sec. 67. 

* aftt farter:, y W OW l PW T IHTWt I 



PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 5156 

as a gift in adoption began to be looked upon as something 
different in kind from an ordinary gift, the gift of a son for 
any other purpose, and the sale of a son, both came to be 
regarded as improper acts on the part of the father, if not 
absolutely beyond his authority. So it has come to pass 
that although originally a gift or a sale of a son had, in all 
probability, been allowed as an exereise of paternal autho- 
rity, gradually it has fallen into disuse, and all that is 
now left to him is the right to give his son in adoption 
when he has more sons than one, and many commentators 
even deny that he has ownership over the son. In other 
words, although in remote past a gift or a sale of a son 
was not perhaps regarded as beyond the scope of paternal 
authority, that state of the law has long been changed, and 
it is no longer regarded as permissible cither on the ground 
that it is condemned by the Sad rax or on the ground, as 
some commentators put it, that this condemnation pre- 
supposes that the father has no such ownership over the son 
as would entitle the former to give or sell the latter away, 
barring, of course, a gift in adoption which is supposed to 
stand on a different footing. That there was a time when 
a gift or a sale of a son was not regarded as beyond the 
power of the father may be shown by quoting one or two 
instances from our ancient books. The sale of a son is illus- 
trated by the story of Sunahseplia whom king Harischandra 
bought from his father Ajlgartha for the completion of a 
certain sacrifice ,• he was saved from the peril by the 
sage Visvamitra whose protection he begged by offering 
himself as a son. This story indicates that originally 
the father had a right to sell his son although the practice 
came subsequently to be disapproved. Similarly, the 
right of a father to make a gift of his son otherwise than 
in adoption ’finds some support from the story of 
Nachiketas related in the Kathopanisad ; there it is 


Indications 
that there 
was a time 
when a gift 
or a sale of a 
son was not 
regarded as 
beyond the 
power of the 
father. 



256 


PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 


Subsequently 
these 
practices 
came to be 
eschewed. 


Extent of 
patria. poteitas 
in other 
respects. 
Bights to 
control son’s 
marriage 
under the 
Roman Law. 


No such 
right seems 
to exist 
under the 
Hindu Law. 


recited that VSjasravasa performed the Visvajit sacrifice 
and gave away his entire property, but this did not satisfy 
his son Nachiketas who thought that gift of half-starved 
cattle and the like could not be an act of much merit ; so 
he asked his father, ‘ Father, to whom art thou going to 
give me?' The father at first did not give any reply, but 
being irritated by his repeated importunities said, ‘ I give 
you to death.’ The son acting upon this sought the abode 
of Death, and obtained from him spiritual instruction. 
This, no doubt, is a sort of introduction to the main 
theme of the Upanisad, and we are not called upon to 
treat it as an authentic record of actual facts, but, at all 
events, it indicates that the gift of a son was not, perhaps, 
conceived to be altogether beyond the power of the father# 
However that may be, you have seen how these practices 
subsequently came to be eschewed, no matter whether this 
was due to a Sftstric prohibition in the proper sense of the 
term, or to an alteration in the conception about the extent 
of the father’s rights over the son, so that under the later 
Hindu Law a father could not ordinarily sell his son or 
give him away except in adoption. 

Having dealt with the rights of the father over the 
person of his son, let us now turn to the extent of patria 
potest, an in other respects. We find that under the Roman 
Law, the marriage of a son under power was completely 
under the control of his father. Tims, the consent of the 
paterfamilias was a condition precedent to the validity 
of such a marriage, and the absence of such consent 
rendered the marriage absolutely void, so that not even 
subsequent consent could ratify it . 1 Under the Hindu Law, 
I am not aware of any text requiring the consent of the 
father for the validity of the marriage of his son ; on the 


Institutes, Lib v» Tit x. 



PARENT* X RELATIONSHIP. 


257 


other hand, in as much as it is the bridegroom who 
accepts the gift of the bride, it is his consent that is 
essential for the completion of the gift and the creation of 
the marital relationship. Of course, now-a-days it is not 
unusual to find that the father really controls his son’s 
marriage, and the latter signifies his consent, and accepts 
the bride almost as a matter of course following the wishes 
of the former; but I do not think that the law casts 
upon the son any obligation to be guided entirely 
and exclusively by the wishes of the father in a matter 
like this beyond the general moral obligation to obey the 
parents. Moreover, even so early a lawgiver as Apas- 
tamba clearly saw that the free consent of the bridegroom 
was % not a negligible factor when he laid down that 
marriage becomes propitious when both the mind and the 
eyes of the bridegroom become attached to the bride . 1 No 
doubt, besides this there are other considerations which 
ought to regulate the selection of a bride, and these cannot 
always be properly weighed by a young man who cannot 
often be expected to take a cool and sober view of the 
whole situation, so that the practice which now prevails 
in many parts of India, of the father selecting the bride 
for his son cannot be condemned as absolutely unreasonable 
or unsuitable to the condition of the society in which we 
live, but it is a matter for sincere regret that in the selection 
of a bridegroom or a bride, we do not often pay much 
heed to the rules laid down in the Sastras, and allow 
ourselves to be led away by sordid and unworthy considera- 
tions. This, however, is a mere digression, and what I 
really want to impress upon you is that the power of the 
father, utider the Roman Law, to control the marrige of his 
son was more extensive than under the Hindu Law. 



33 


i 



Bight of 
holding 
separate 
property. 

Under the 
early Boro an 
Law, 


Exceptions 

gradually 

introduced. 


Caatreruse 

pecuMwm. 


Quasu 

castrenae 

peculium. 

Peculium 

adventitium. 


258 PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 

■ V ■ 

It also appears that as regards the right of holding 
separate property during the lifetime of the father. The 
provisions of the Hindu Law were much more favourable 
to the son than those of the Roman Law. The filius 
familiar could not, under the strict Roman Law as it 
originally stood, hold any property as his own, and the 
father was entitled to take the whole of the son's 
acquisition without any exception. This state of the law 
. continued unaltered for a pretty long time, and the changes 
that have been subsequently introduced have been slow 
in coming and gradual in their character. The first 
exception was that introduced in the early years of the 
Empire in favour of acquisitions of soldiers in service, 
which were withdrawn from the control of the father 
under the name of castreme peculium, doubtless as a 
reward for military service and an incentive for martial 
enterprise. The next stage was the extension of a similar 
privilege to acquisitions made by certain civil functionaries 
by virtue of their office which were called quasi-caslrense 
peculium . Shortly after this Constantine introduced another 
kind of peculium called peculium adventitium by which the 
father’s absolute control over property which his son had 
inherited from his mother was taken away. The furthest 
point in these modifications was reached when Justinian 
included under peculium adventitium acquisitions from other 
sources as well, and enacted that unless the acquisitions of 
the son were derived from the father’s own property, € the 
father shall have the usufruct but the son shall retain the 
ownership, so that another may not reap the profit of that 
which the son has gained by his labour or good fortune .’ 1 
Even in this final form, we find that the property which 
the son acquired with the help of his father’s fortune 


1 Institutes Lib. II, Tit. IX. 



PAB.BNTAL RELATIONSHIP. 259 

became absolutely the property of tbe father, and as to the 
rest, with the exception of castreme peculium and quasi- 
cattreme peculium, the usufruct belonged to the father, 
though the ownership was left to the son. Sir ■ Henry 
Blaine, therefore, truly observes that 'even this, the 
utmost relaxation of the Roman patria potestas left it 
for ampler and severer than any analogous institution of 
the modern world.’ I shall now attempt to show that 
the Hindu Law has long been much more favourable to 
the rights and privileges of the son than the Roman Law 
in its maturest shape. The only text which seems to 
deny to the son the right to hold separate property during 
the lifetime of the father is the text of Manu which says : 
“4hree persons, viz., a wife, a son, and a slave are declared 
to have no wealth of their own; the wealth which 
they earn is of the man to whom they belong.” 1 
It is true that later commentators have almost unani- 
mously explained this text as implying not want of 
ownership in regard to property acquired, but merely 
want of free and unfettered control over the pro- 
perty so acquired by reason of the dependent condition of 
the acquirers, in order to make it consistent with other 
texts recognising their separate ownership. 3 I am not, 
however, quite certain that it might not really be an echo 
of a still more ancient rule under which the head of the 
family had almost an absolute control over property 
acquired by its subordinate members' However that may 
be, it is quite clear that under the Hindu Law the power 
of a son to acquire property for himself was very early 
recognised, although other members of the family, and 

* *n3rrgirci wnbn: i 

- * 9ee DSjrhbhiga, Ohap. 1, 16 ; Vyavakara Mayiikha, Qh&p. Ill, 40. 


The Hindu 
Law much 
more 

favourable to 
the eon. 



<260 


PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 


especially the father, bad under certain circumstances a 
right to claim a share in the property so acquired. . The 
right of other members of the family to a- share was 
limited to . the property which was acquired , with 
the aid of joint funds; but the father according to 
Father’s right JTmutavShana, was entitled to a share in every case, however 
JTmntavahana the property might have been acquired. JlmutavShana 
sums up his opinion in these words : u The father has a 
• moiety of the goods acquired by the son at the charge of 
his estate; the son who made the acquisition has two 
shares; and the rest take one a piece. But, if the father’s 
estate have not been used, he has two shares ; the acquirer 
as many; and the rest are excluded from participation/’ 1 
The text on which Jlmutavihana bases his view that the 
father takes a share in property acquired by his son without 
According the aid of paternal estate is explained in the Viramitrodaya 
Mitakshara in a different way, so as to make it applicable only to cases 
where the paternal estate is used in the acquisition of the 
property by the son, 2 so that in this respect the Dayabhaga 
seems to extend the father’s right even further than the 
Mitakshara School. Besides, as you are aware, the son, 
according to the Mitakshara School, acquires from the 
very moment of his birth an interest in the property of his 
father, which gives him, in the case of ancestral property, a 
right to demand a partition and obtain a separate allotment 
free from any control which the father might otherwise 
exercise. It, therefore, follows that as regards proprietary 
privileges the position of a son under the Hindu Law is 
much more advantageous than under the Roman Law even 
in its most advanced form. 

Eeoiprooal Prom the rights, let us now turn to the duties. It is 

duties of the ° t , 

father and the duty of the father to maintain the son so long as he is 
.the son. . : 


1 Dayabhaga, Chapter II, 71. 

* Viramitrodaya (Sarkar’s Edition) Chapter II, part 1, section 12. 



MUXTAL RELATIONSHIP. 


im 


young and incapable of supporting himself; he is not, 
however, bound to pay off his son’s debts unless they .were 
incurred according to his direction, or for family purposes 
under extreme necessity ; he may also render himself liable 
by subsequent ratification of the debt by a promise to pay 
it himself . 1 On the other side, the son must maintain his 
parents when they become old and infirm ; 9 the mother 
.also gets a share on partition among her sons in lieu of her 
maintenance. The son lies under an obligation to pay the 
debts incurred by the father, when the latter is dead or 
absent from the countiy for twenty years, or otherwise per- 
manently incapacitated to pay them himself ; in such a case 
it is the duty of the son to clear off the debts with interest, 
even if he has not got from the father assets sufficient 
for the purpose. The duty extends to the grandson, but 
in the absence of assets he need not pay more than the 
principal; the great grandson need not pay anything 
unless of course he is in possession of assets which belonged 
to the great grandfather who had contracted the debt. 
There are, however, certain well-known exceptions to the 
liability of the son to discharge his father’s debts ; these are 
based upon the character of the debt and the way in which 
it was incurred. Thus it has been laid down that “the 
son is not compellable to pay sums due by his father for 
spirituous liquors, for losses at play, for promises made to 
unrighteous persons without consideration, or under the 


Duty to 
maintain. 


Duty to pay 
off other's 
debts. 


Exception. 



swsnt fast *r i 

i w«wi: 

f qgfr t fiw ftn w \ 

•rt *n wt jref ftreraifam i nres: i 

itfh qretmfri 9*: fire: 1 

wart »rn*n 1 



Duty to pay 
off fathers 
debt when 
enforceable. 


■ M2, PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP* 

influence of lust or wrath or sums for which he was liable 
as a surety, or a fine, or a toll, or the balance of either /’ 1 
The principle underlying these exceptions seems to be 
' that when the claim of the creditor is so devoid of merit 
as to have no moral consideration to support it, or when 
: it is founded upon a ground which was entirely personal 
to the deceased debtor, the law does not cast any obligation 
upon the son to satisfy the same. In some of these cases, 
as, for instance, in the case of a promise made to an 
unrighteous person without any legal or moral consideration, 
even the promisor himself may not incur any legal obligation; 
in others, as for instance in the case of a fine, or an obliga- 
tion incurred by reason of having stood a surety for the 
appearance of another, the liability is of such a personal 
character that it dies with the death of the person so 
liable, and does not extend to his heirs ; and in the rest 
as for instance in the case of sums payable for wine 
or women, the immoral character of the debt justifies 
the immunity of the son from liability. It should 
be mentioned that the duty to pay off the father's debt 
does not create an enforceable obligation until the son 
attains majority, and so the creditor's right to sue him is 
till then postponed . 8 This indulgence shown to the 
infant children of a deceased debtor might, sometimes, 
cause a little inconvenience to the creditor, but it was 
calculated to save many families from utter ruin against 
which our modern law makes no provision whatsoever, and 

wfiiwtf wiwW i svwfh i 

* ■HHWwvftw i 

vnfhj fafipn fi * 



PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. £83 

there was the compensating advantage that the son was. 
required, on attaining majority, to pay off the debt 
irrespective of the amount of assets left by the father. 

In regard to daughters, it was the duty ot the 
father to maintain and educate them, and give them 
in marriage before they attain puberty to suitable 
bridegrooms . 1 On the death of the father the duty 
devolves upon the brother or the then head of the 
family whoever he may be. As regards the persons who s 
are authorised to dispose of a girl in marriage, Yajnavalkya 
says : “ The father, the paternal grandfather, the brother, 

a sakulya or member of the same family, and the mother ; 
in default of one previously mentioned the next in 
order, if sui juris , is to give a damsel in marriage .” 2 
Vishnu introduces the maternal grandfather before the 
mother ; in other respects his list agrees with that given 
above. Where no su h person is alive, the girl must . 
seek a husband for herself ; if, however, there is a guardian 
whose duty it is to give her in marriage, but he neglects 
to do so, then the girl is to wait for three years after 
attainment of puberty, and then may choose a husband 
for herself ; it is, however, laid down that when a girl 
acts in this way, she must not take away with her orna- 
ments which she had received from her parents or brother. 
It must not, however, be supposed that because the Sastras 
enjoin the father to give his daughter in marriage before 
she attains puberty, it must be done at any cost without 
any regard for proper qualification in the bridegroom to be 


1 WBjf 


firmw war wf*mr i 


wwnw qjSpnft nafiro: i 


Duty to- 
wards 
daughters. 


Persons au- 
thorised to 
dispose of a 
girl in mar- 
riage. 


When the 
girl may 
seek a hus- 
band for 
herself. 



264 


PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 


Litigation 
between fa- 
ther and 
•on. 


Bon'e delicts. 


selected ; “it is far better,” says Manu, “that the girl 
should remain unmarried in her father’s house until she 
dies, than that she should anywise be given in marriage to 
a worthless man/’ 1 

There is a text which seems to prohibit litigation 
between a father and his son, 2 but the Mitakshara ex- 
plains this to mean that such a litigation should be dis- 
couraged as far as possible, but points out that there may 
be occasions on which it may be allowed in order to secure 
thein in the proper enjoyment of their mutual rights and 
obligations. Wherever a person is molested or a right is 
infringed in contravention of the written law or established 
usage, there arises a cause of action which the court 
cannot refuse to entertain whatever the relationship 
between the parties may be, although between close rela- 
tions such as father and son, preceptor and pupil, master 
and slave, and husband and wife, such a litigation should 
be discouraged, and attempt should be made to bring 
about an amicable settlement as far as possible. It seems 
that under the Roman Law, a father and the son under 
his power laboured under a mutual incapacity to sue each 
other, and I am not quite sure that the text referred to 
above does not indicate that at one time the Hindu Law 
also imposed a somewhat similar limitation. 

As regards delicts, there was a peculiar rule in the 
Roman Law by which the father was made liable for the 
wrongful acts of his children, but he could escape from the 
liability by surrendering the person of the delinquent to 


1 I 

* . gftrfaw firg: gw gnfwrat: i 
finratat htwQ ? foiftri 



fcABMTAt IlfcLATtONSfilP. 


205 

the injured party. The practice had become obsolete in 
Justinian’s time, and he disapproved its application to 
children, although in the case of slaves a similar rule still 
applied, 1 No trace, of this primitive conception of delin- 
quency and its^ retribution is to found in the Hindu Law. 

The relation between the Vedic preceptor and his pupil 
was very iclose in ancient time. In default of kinsmen, 
one could inherit the property left by the other. 
Besides, during the period of instruction, whatever the 
pupil acquired by his own exertions had to be offered 
to the preceptor who, in his turn, imparted the instruction 
without any pecuniary remuneration and also maintained 
the pupil at his own house. The pupil bad also to 
render implicit obedience to the preceptor, and do his 
good in every possible way. M As regards the power of 
chastisement, it was limited in the same way as in the 
case of father and son. 

The relation between an instructor aijd his apprentice was 
almost contractual, but on account of its peculiar character 
I have thought it fit to deal with it here. An apprentice 
is a person who, with the consent of his relations, enters 
into an engagement for a fixed term to learn a particular 
art from the instructor, and lives with him for that purpose. 
He cannot desert the instructor without his fault within 
the period agreed upon, and, if he does so, may be forced 
„ to go back to the instructor and reside with him according 
to the engagement to the end of the term. On his part, 

1 Institutes Lib. IV. Tit. VIII. 

* gw* i 

frhromftfW ttfNmww wHrfw: n towj: i 

inswifowwii 

84 


Preceptor and 

pupil. 


Instructor 

and 

apprentice. 



266 PARENTAL RELATIONSHIP. 

it is the duty of the instructor to treat the apprentice with 
affection as it he were his own son, and to train him in the 
art by supplying him with fpod. The instructor must not 
make the apprentice do any work other than the one which 
the latter was seeking to learn ; otherwise, the apprentice- 
ship is cancelled, the apprentice becomes free, and the 
instructor becomes pliable to punishment for infringement 
of the compact. The apprentice must serve out the term 
agreed upon, even if he has completely mastered the art 
before the expiry of the period, and any profit that may 
accrue from his work during this period goes to the instruc- 
tor; he may, however, take the wages which his instructor 
may choose to allow on account of his skill, but must not 
enter into any body elsc's service without his sanction. 
These rules are so reasonable and well considered that I can 
scarcely conceive how they can be improved. 



LECTURE IX. 

Law relating to Marital and Quasi-marital 

RELATIONSHIP. 

There are eight different forms of ^marriage mentioned 
in the Dharmashastras of which all but two have now 
become obsolete. It is not, therefore, necessary to enter 
into any lengthy discussion about these obsolete varieties 
of marriage and I do not propose to give anything more 
than a bare outline of their nature and the way in which 
they differed from one another. In the Brahma form of 
marriage,' the girl is given by the father with such orna- 
ments as he can afford to a man whom he voluntarily 
invites and respectfully receives without taking anything 
in return. In the Daiva form, the girl is given by the father 
to a priest who officiates at a sacrifice commenced by him, so 
that although there is no pecuniary return, the perfor- 
mance of the sacrifice may be regarded as some considera- 
tion for the gift. In the Ars/ia form, the father received 
from the bridegroom one pair kine or two pairs for uses 
prescribed by law such as the performance of some 
sacrifice, and not as bride's price, and thus there is 
some consideration for the gift though the father 
does not want to make a profit out of it. In the 
Prajapafya form, the father gives away his daughter 
to a suitor on the distinct understanding that they 
should both perform their civil and religious duties 
together, so that here the father obtains some sort 
of undertaking from the bridegroom who himself 
comes forward as the suitor for marriage. In the Gan- 
dharm form, ft is not the father of the girl who settles 
the marriage, but the bridegroom and the bride arrange 


Different 
kinds of 
marriage. 



Mr. Mayne' a 
comments. 


268 MARITAL RELATIONSHIP. 

it among themselves out of sensual inclination. In the 
Aaura form, the father of the girl accepts money' from 
the bridegroom so that it approaches a sale of the 
girl in consideration of the amount so received. In the 
i Eakshasa form, the bridegroom does not wait for the 
consent of the father or of the girl herself, but takes her 
away by force. In the Paishacha form, the kriJegroom 
fraudulently gets possession of the person of the girl, 
and it is therefore characterised as the basest of all forms 
of marriage. It goes without saying that the first four 
forms of marriage are the most approved, among which 
the first, i.e., the Brahma form is the best ; the Gandharva 
and the Rakshasa forms were tolerated among the 
Kshatriyas, and the Asura also prevailed among the 
Yaisyas and the Sudras although it was much condemned 
as savouring of a sale. The last form, as its very name 
indicates, was condemned in unqualified terms as fit for 
filthy devils and not for men. The ideal type of marriage 
is therefore, the one in which the father of the girl does 
not desire to reap any advantage for himself out of the 
marriage but gives her away freely in pursuance of a 
sacred duty which devolves upon him with such ornaments 
etc., as his means can afford ; in this there is no sordid 
motive on either side, and neither lust nor avarice holds 
its sway. Hence, the Gandharva and the Asura were 
among the disapproved forms of marriage which 
were tolerated among certain people but at the same time 
condemned. Mr. Mayne, however, observes that "no part 
of the Hindu law is more anomalous than that which 
governs their family relations,” for he says that here 
"we find a law of inheritance, which assumes the possibility 
' of tracing male ancestors in an unbroken pedigree extend- 
ing to fourteen generations, while coupled with it is a 
family law, in which several admitted forms of marriage 



MABITAX RELATIONSHIP * 


80f 


are only euphemisms for seduction and rape 9 and in which 
twelve sorts of sons are recognised, the majority of whom 
have no blood relationship to their own father/ 9 1 As 
regards the recognition of twelve sorts of sons, I have 
dealt with its significance in my last lecture, and pointed 
out Idle fallacy of Mr. Mayne’s assumptions. Turning 
now to the recognition of eight kinds of marriage, it seems 
to me that here also Mr. Mayne has failed to appreciate 
the real meaning and purpose of this recognition. His 
remark seems to convey that he understood that the recog- 
nition of the inferior kinds of marriage amounted to a sort 
of legalisation of . the use of for ce or fraud which did not 
involve the creation of any permanent relationship between 
the man and his so-called wife ; otherwise, the difficul- 
ties suggested by him of reconciling it with the possibility 
of tracing male ancestors in an unbroken pedigree extend- 
ing to fourteen generations becomes difficult to understand* 
This, however, was not really so, for a marriage according 
to* the Hindu idea always involved the creation of a per- 
manent tie in whatever manner it might come to take 
plaee. Therefore Madhavacharya points out : " It must 
not be supposed that in these disapproved forms of mar- 
riage beginning with Gandharva, the relationship of 
husband and wife does not arise for want of the ceremonies 
of marriage including the taking of seven steps, because 
although they do not take place at the outset before 
acceptance afterwards they are invariably performed. 
Hence Devala says: u In the forms of marriage beginning 
with Gandharva, the marital rites have again to be 
duly performed in the presence of the fire." It is 
therefore clear that there is no reason to suppose that 
these disapproved forms of marriage involved nothing 
more than a temporary connection which would make 


Criticism of 
his view. 


Religions 

cerempnies 
how far 
essential. 


1 Maine’s Hindu law, p. 73, 




& W) HAB ITAL RELATIONSHIP. 

them incompatible with the tracing: of male ancestors 
in an unbroken line. The only question that may -be 
asked is, why did not our lawgivers at once declare that 
no one who gets hold of a girl by tbe use of force or fraud 
should be able to take advantage of his wrong and why 
did they make it possible for suqh wrongdoers to become 
the husbands of the girls whom they had thus wronged? 
To this question an answer would at once suggest itself 
to those who understand anything about the Hindu senti-. 
ments regarding female chastity; a woman should. not 
only be free from stain but free from all suspicion of any 
stain ; a suspicion that she may have known another man 
even against her inclination might dissuade many people 
from afterwards marrying her ; hence the requirement 
that the wrong-doer should in such a case, afterwards duly 
perform the marital rites and take her as his wife. So 
Madhavacharya points out that “if the ceremonies are not 
performed, the marital relationship does not arise.” So 
Y&sistha and Baudhayana have declared : “When a damsel 
is carried away by force, but is not solemnly married 
according to the religious rite. She may be duly given in 
marriage to another, for there she remains a virgin as 
before .” 1 After this, if any body says that the recognition 

mmnfk * mmm i 

WWuT sn wn rrSr * HI I I may mention that Kamala 

Kara explains this text in a somewhat different way. He says 
that the possibility of giving a girl in marriages to another before the 
performance of the religions rites is common to all kinds of marriages ; 
hence >it would be futile to say so specifically in regard to the Rakshasa 
and tjhe Faishaoha forms ; thorefore, the text should be interpreted dis- 
tributively to mean that in regard to these two forms, in the absence of 
the consent of the girl, she may be given in ra*rijage to another 
Whether the ceremonies have been performed or not. 

„ Jfirnaya Bindhn p. 227. 




MARITAL RELATIONSHIP* 


m 

these of marriages gives a premium to the use* of forge or 
fraud/ 1 shall recommend him to read the severe penalties' pre- 
cribed by the Hindu Law against the culprit who becomes 
guilty of such transgressions, a subject to which I shall 
advert in my lecture upon the Hindu Law of Crimes. 

The only two kinds of marriage that are now in use are 
the Brahma and Amra forms. In the first the father of 
the girl gives her away to a person whom he invites for 
the purpose without taking from him anything in return 
in any shape, and in the second, the father does acbept 
money from the bride-groom as a consideration for the gift. 
It will be noticed that our lawgivers do not at all con- 
template a third contingency in which the intending bride- 
groom may put pressure upon the father of the girl to pay 
him handsomely for the favour of marrying her, no matter 
whether his means allows him to do so or not ; therefore, 
our law givers declared that the father should give away 
his daughter with such ornaments as he can afford 
As regards presents to the bridegroom the 
practice which has unfortunately become only too frequent 
now-a-days of extorting money from the father of the bride 
on the occasion of the marriage does not seem to have 
prevailed in those days. 

Turning now to the two forms of marriage that are now 
prevalent, we find that it consists of two stages, viz., gift 
and acceptance of the bride in marriage, and the per- 
formance of certain religious ceremonies. It will follow 
from the very nature of the marital relationship according 
to the Hindu conception that it can not become complete 
until the religious ceremonies prescribed by the sastras are 
duly performed, .for the production of a peculiar 
non-secular condition involving the creation of a sort of 
spiritual union between the husband and the wife must 
depend upon the -mysterious force of the sastric ceremonies 


Two kinds 
of marriage 
that are now 
in use : how 
they Differ. 


Two stages 
in the 
marriage 
ceremony 

(1) gift an 
acceptance 

(2) perfor- 
mance of 
certain 
religions 
Qremonies. 



272 MARITAL RELATIONSHIP. 


0 conditions of 
a valid 
marriage. 


prescribed for . the purpose and these cannot be possibly 
dispensed with without affecting the validity of the tran- 
saction. I need not, however, labour upon this point at 
this place as I have dealt with it more fully when discuss- 
ing the necessity of the performance of religious ceremonies 
in connection with an act of adoption ; moreover, there is 
express authority in support of this position for it has been 
dec’ared by Manu : " The recital of holy text in connection 
with the joining of the hands of the bride-groom and 
the bride determines the growth of marital relationship. 
These should be deemed by the learned to attain finality in 
the taking of the seven steps . 1 

I may now briefly refer to some of the conditions of a 
valid marriage besides gift and acceptance and the perfor- 
mance of the religious ceremonies. You are aware that 
our Dharmasastras contain various rules for the selection 
of a suitable bride-groom or a bride. Most of these should 
be regarded as what I have called prudential admonitions 
having certain visible ends in view; a violation of any of 
these rules cannot possibly affect the validity of the marriage. 
Take, for instance, the following text of manu : ‘In taking 
a wife, let him avoid the following ten families, be they 
ever so great or rich in kine, goats, asses, money, or grain, 
'viz., one which neglects the sacred rites, one in which no 
male children (are bom), one in which the yeda is not 
studied, one the members of which have thick hair on 
their body, and those which are afflicted by hemorrhords, 
phthisis, dyspepsia or white or black leprosy ’ 8 It cannot be 


mPwrcfiwn *mn fiwit mrowd i 


INtfroig from fbvfir: i nf; mro i 

wmwnfb mwifij dfceulsvrowc i 
sftmro romft iraifa uftswbn i , 
dbffiwl fh'vftQintvfal i 





marital relationship. • 

possibly supposed that a marriage in any of these families 
will be invalid and it must be taken that the sole intention 
of these prohibitions is to warn against the evil consequ3nees 
of such marriages. Hence, Kullfika says “where the 
enunciations of injunction and prohibition have their root 
in visible good and evil consequences as for instance in the 
text c one which neglects the sacred rite’ and so forth, there 
the contravention of the rule does not entail the negation 
of marital relationship.” 1 Leaving these aside as well as 
those prohibitions which import nothing more than 
sinfulness of their violation, let us see if there are rules 
which when contravened, affect the validity of the marriage 
for they alone are important from a juristic standpoint. 

Marriage within the same goira or between families Gotras and 
having the same pramras is prohibited, and the text of 
Vishnu, “one should not marry a wife within the same baBed tbere - 

on 

goira or having the same pravara ” 2 has been interpreted by 
the authoritative commentators as a parguddsa (excluding 
clause), the consequence being that a marriage taking place 
in violation of this text is considered as invalid. It should, 
however, be mentioned that this restrictive rule applies 
only to the twice-born classes, the sudras having no gotras 
of their own, although in Bengal, where traces of rigid 
Brahmanical influence are more visible than anywhere 
else, they profess to have gotras and usually shun inter- 
marriage within their limits. On the other hand, it may 
be that in provinces where the influence of Brahmanism 
has waned to a considerable extent instances may be 

1 W 3*3 * 

urn Oeftwfafe 
4 m msftro me: i 

t «nW foe n • 


35 



274 


MARITAL RELATIONSHIP. 


Prohibited 
degrees in 
marriage. 


found even among twice-born castes of marriages solem- 
nised in violation of the prohibition referred to above, and 
Mr. Mandlik seems to suggest that such practices do 
prevail in his part of the country . 1 To us in Bengal 
some of his statements seem to be somewhat startling ; 
but however that may be, an orthodox Hindu Lawyer 
cannot allow the prevalence of such transgressions to 
derogate from the authority of sastric injunction, although 
it is quite probable that the existence of a full-grown 
usage in violation of a distinct sastric injunction may 
make our courts reluctant to declare that a marriage 
solemnised in conformity to such usage is invalid in view 
of the very serious consequences which such a declaration 
would involve. 

Different sages have laid down different rules on the 
subject of prohibited degrees for marriage. I do not 
propose to discuss these apparently divergent texts and 
to try to reconcile them if possible. Babu Golapchandra 
Sarkar observes that there is so much divergence 
between the sages as well as between the commentators 
on this subject that it would not be safe to enforce their 
views as binding rules of conduct. The observation is no 
doubt forcible, and as he points out different usages prevail 
among different classes and in different localities in respect 
of this matter. I may, however, be permitted to observe 
that prohibitions on this head cannot absolutely melt into 
the air, and there is perhaps everywhere a well-understood 
narrower limit which furnishes, so to say, an irreducible 
minimum and must not be transgressed ; if this limit be 
overstepped, it will not only lower the position of the 
transgressing parties, but the marriage itself will be invalid 
according to the general principle of construction which 
I have elsewhere explained. 


1 Mandlikfa Vyavahara Mayukha Appendix IV. 



MARITAL RELATIONSHIP. 


275 


Turning now to the general condition of women, we 
find it stated that it is one of dependence. 'While young 
she remains under the control of her father, after marriage 
under the control of her husband and, on his death under 
the control of her sons \ she does not deserve complete 
independence at any time’. 1 It may be mentioned that 
if she becomes a widow without sons, her husband’s 
kinsmen are preferred over her father’s kinsmen to watch 
after her interest and protect her in every way ; if there 
be no one to look after her in either line, the duty then 
devolves upon the king. 

Let us now consider the nature and extent of the 
husband’s control over his wife. I have already stated that 
Nilkantha denies that the husband has ownership over the 
wife,, though Vijnaneswar allows that he has. It is, however, 
universally recognised that his rights are limited in several 
particulars. As regards the power of chastisement, it is 
limited in the same way as the power of the father in 
relation to his son, moreover, Mann has declared, 11 Divine 
blessing abides in that household where female members 
receive due honour ; where they are not honoured, no act or 
ceremony bears its proper fruit ; that family perishes in no 
time where the female members pass their days in sorroiv, 
it prospers all along the line where they do not. Blessed 
is that family without fail in which the husband is always 

fart qftan: Hvrfawfh dfa*t i 

twfhr h*t wnPf trra: t hs i<i« 
wwt fart fart ufa gung 
WHfatmsfa *r wrto' iifai-twn: ■ 


Dependence 
of women. 


Nature and 
extent of 
husband’s 
control. 

Limited 
power over 
the person of 
the wife. 


Dependence 
of women 
does not 
import any 
degradation. 





Power of gift 
and sale : how 
far it existed.. 


No divorce 
allowed. 


270 MARITAL RELATIONSHIP, 

pleased with his wife and the wife with her husband .” 1 
w The good fortune of the family rests in them for they 
keep up the line, all honour is due to them ; they are the 
lights of the household, the females and the fortune of the 
household — there is no distinction between the two .” 2 It is, 
therefore, a great mistake to suppose that the declar&ion 
of the perpetual dependence of women imports any degra- 
dation ; it is only meant as a measure for their protection, 
for they are by nature weak and unable to bear the 
turmoils of the world and stand against its tenors and 
temptations without guidance and control. 

As regards the power of the husband to dispose of the 
wife by gift or sale, you have already seen that Yajnavalkya 
and other sages enumerate a wife among objects unfit to 
be given ; whether this is so because the husband is not 
the owner of the wife as Nilkautha maintain?, or because 
the sastras, in spite of his ownership prohibit such 
an act, is not of much consequence. Manu has also 
declared that a wife cannot be detached from her 
husband either by sale or by abandonment, implying that 
the marital tie cannot be severed in auy way being in- 
alienable by its very nature . 8 It also follows from the 
above that the Hindu Law does not recognise a divorce 

1 w un i 

fc -S » _ C 

totow qrar: Taw. i 

si wfwswiHi i 

vgft wromT iiiiaar i 

afara * fnsi arretm - i ianui!c®i<®i 

* Harare *rewwi: <j«iraWs<?lJra: i 

farer. ft>re ires *r fWWHar aran i 

* a f»r^t fawfat i i«i»< *rg: «tia< i 



MARITAL RELATIONSHIP, 


277 

meaning thereby the severance of a marriage already 
completed under the law. Then, again, it is laid 
down that the abandonment of a guiltless wife is 
punishable by the King. She is entitled to be properly 
maintained by the husband so long as she remains 
faithful to him and even in a case of faithlessness, 
the law declares that she should be provided with a bare 
pittance for her subsistence. In a case where the husband 
abandons his wife without any fault on her part he should 
be directed to take her back, and on non-compliance should 
be made to yield a third of his fortune to her ; when, 
however the husband is so poor that deprivation of a third 
part of his fortune would be extremely hard, he should be 
made to provide her with proper maintenance. 

On her part, it is the duty of the wife to remain 
faithful and obedient to her husband. Even when the 
husband dies, the duty is not at an end ; ‘let her rathei 
emaciate her body by living upon pure flowers, roots, and 
fruits, but let her not, when the husband is dead, even 
pronounce the name of another man \ so says Mann, ‘and 
longing for tfie unparalleled virtue of those who remain 
steadfast to one husband, let her lead a life of austerity 
observing strictly the rules of continence and foregoing 
all sensual pleasures until she dies. 1 It would seem 
to follow from the above, as well as from the distinct 
text f a second husband of a good woman is no 
where prescribed V 2 that Maim did not approve of 

*13 wwnfa wfifa *jto3 

nt «r4r q* qafcrt \ * 3 : nuu«t»5 

* *i fWtere wftot 1 **3*. 

tpRj (aroft ufafwt 3i1j3f w: i 


Abandon* 
m©nt of a 
guiltless wife 
punishable. 


Duty of the 
wife to 
remain faith- 
ful and 
obedient to 
her husband. 

Duties of a 
widow. 


Controversy 
about widow 
re-marriage. 



278 


MARITAL RELATIONSHIP. 


a widow remarriage ; aud as the authority of Manu 
is regarded as supreme among the Hindu law-givers it 
has been contended that the remarriage of a widow 
is not sanctioned by the Hindu Law. So commenting 
upon the above text Kulluka saj r s 'that being so, the 
second marriage of a woman is also prohibited’. You 
are, however, aware that this question gave rise to a 
memorable controversy between Pandit Iswaracliandra 
Vidyasagar who contended mainly on the authority of 
a text of Parasara that a window marriage was permis- 
sible under the Hindu Law and his opponents who 
controverted that position. The text of Parasara which 
is also to be found in Narada-Smriti is to the following 
effect. 'Another husband is ordained of woman in five 
calamities, namely, if the husband be unheard of, or be 
dead, or adopt the order of an ascetic, or be impotent, or 
become an outcast ’ 1 I need hardly say that the opponents 
of widow marriage tried to explain this text away by 
maintaining that it did not refer to the remarriage of 
a woman who has been duly married to another by the 
performance of the solemn rites prescribed %y the sastras, 
since, as Manu has declared, 'the remarriage of a widow 
has never been spoken of in the ordi nances about 
marriage ,’ 2 but that it referred to a case where there 
has been a mere bethrothal not followed by the perform- 
ance of the ceremonies which conclude the marriage and 
ereate the marital tie. Then, again, it was contended that 
even if the above interpretation be not accepted as correct 
still the prohibition contained in the Adi Purana shows 
that the practice must, at any rate be eschewed in the 

qfaw) \ 

9 farofwTytf fiprant^ s*: i 



MARITAL RELATIONSHIP. 


279 


Kali age ; 1 and lastly it was assorted that whatever might 
be the view of: Parasara or Narada, their authority could 
not prevail over that of Manu who prohibited widow 
remarriage; and that having regard to the fact that Narada 
expressly concerned himself with laying down the possitive 
law, his sanction would only show that the practice 
should not be forbidden and punished by the King and 
not that it should be regarded as consonant with the sacred 
law. On the other hand the suppoters of widow-marriage 
maintained that the text of Parsara did legalise the re- 
marriage of a woman duly married to another under the 
circumstances mentioned therein, and that inasmuch 
as Parasara expressly professed to lay down the law 
especially for the Kali age, his pronouncement should be 
regarded as especially authoritative at the present period ; 
as regards the text of Manu, they contended that the 
laudation of the virtues of a chaste widow simply set forth 
an ideal, and did not amount to a prohibition of widow 
re-marriage ; otherwise the text i when a woman being 
forsaken by her husband, or becoming a widow voluntarily 
marries again and gives birth to a son, that, son is called 
Paunarbhaba (or the son of re-marriage) ; if she takes 
the second husband when her first marriage was not 
consummated, or really returns to the iirst husband after 
having gone over to another, then with him the marital 
ceremonies may again be solemnised / 3 would be 

wix qrmra" \ 

srrcan i 

gw » 

%T T 



When the 
wife becomes 
liable to pay 
her husband’s 
debts. 


Husband’s 
liability to 
pay his 
wife’s debts. 


Polygamy : 
how far sanc- 
tinned by the 
Hindu Law. 


£&0 MARITAL RELATIONSHIP. 

irreeoncibable with that position. I hope from the above 
statement you will be able to form some idea regarding the 
nature of the controversy and the arguments advanced 
on each side ; it is not possible for me to proceed further 
and weigh the arguments on each side for that would 
entail an amount of discussion which I cannot undertake 
at. the present moment having regard to the limits within 
which I must, confine myself. I may, however, say this 
without fear of much contradiction that the system of 
widow re-marriage has never found favour among the 
Hindus, and it was never in vogue at least among the 
higher castes. 

As regards the liability of the wife to pay her husband’s 
debts, it only arises when she acknowledges the liability 
and takes it upon herself, or when she incurs the debt 
jointly with her husband ; otherwise, she is not liable 
to pay the debt. 1 Similarly the husband also is 
not liable to pay the wife’s debts, unless they were 
contracted for the family purposes, subject to the 
exception that certain tradesmen, who cannot carry 
on theii trade without the assistance of their wives 
are liable to pay off the debt incurred by them, since as 
Yajnavalkya puts it, their livelihood is dependent on their 
wives. 2 

I have stated above that a wife was directed to remain 
constant to her husband even after bis death, but the 
husband was not required to stick to a single wife, for 

pfoTOfroi t* tot *n TO wq prt i 
to prd tn ton srgwfa « 

TOTOfir. I TOTTO TOTO?J I 
TO** TOT^ UfafTOl TOT^ftfTOTTOi: I NTOTTO: I 



MARITAL RELATIONSHIP. 


m 


polygamy was not prohibited by the Hindu Law. You 
may, however, be aware that the late Pandit Isvarochandra 
^idyasagara contended that the Hindu law did not make 
it optional with the husband to take as many wives as he 
liked, but that his choice in this respect was regulated by 
certain conditions, such as the first wife proving barren or 
giving birth to merely female children and so forth . 1 His 
position was, however, assailed by others, the chief among 
whom were the late Pandit Taranath Tarkavac haspati , and 
the late Kaviraj Gangadhar Kaviratua. They pointed out 
that the grounds for a second marriage prescribed in the 
texts might be regarded as justifying causes but could 
not be taken to control the right of a man to contract 
a second marriage; otherwise the various well known 
instances of polygamy to be found in the sastras, as 
Kaviraj Gangadhar Kaviratua pointed out, have to be 
pronounced as opposed to the sastras, since there is 
nothing to show that they had been contracted on any 
of the grounds so’ specified ; it was also shown that there 
were many indications in the Institutes of Mann, as well 
as in other Dharma Sliastras, the polygamy was permissible 
under the law apart from the existence of any special 
cause. Here, also, I don’t propose to enter into the details 
of the controversy but I may say that Parnlit Vidyasagara 
did not seem to have succeeded in establishing his position ; 
moreover, it would scarcely have been of much practical 
moment even if he had, for, does not Manu say that you 
may take a second wife at once :) if the first be 
guilty of using towards you unpleasant words? 

It is, however, worthy of notice that it is laid down 
that in case a man marries a second time during the 

1 winriisf i 

sft i i<W 

36 


S«ccmd 
marriagrt by 
a man during 
big wi£o*b life 



282 


MARITAL RELATIONSHIP. 


time: hus- 
bands duty 
towards the 
first wife on 
such occasion. 


The apparent 
anomaly in 
permitting 
polygamy 
and prohibi- 
ting widow- 


life time of his first wife he should pay to the first wife as 
much as he spends on the second marriage, or, if she has 
already received some property as her pecnlimn , as much 
as would render this equal to the amount spent over the 
second marriage j 1 So that she may have no reason to 
complain that she has been altogether neglected. More- 
over, Manu declares that "when the husband marries a 
second time owing to the ill-health of the first wife, 
although she is attached to him and is, otherwise, 
of good character, he should first obtain the assent of 
that wife and must not slight her in any way 
It is, therefore, apparent that although the Hindu Law 
sanctioned polygamy, it at the same time took care that 
it should be attended by as little violence to the feelings 
of the first wife as possible, and that, she should receive 
some pecuniary provision on such an occasion. At the 
same time it was provided that if the first wife being 
irritated at the second marriage of her husband, leave his 
house out of auger, then she may either be restrained from 
doing so or, if the husband so chooses, may be renounced 
in the presence of the whole family . 3 

I am free to admit, that one may think it somewhat 
anomalous that a man should be permitted to have more 
than one wife while a woman should be enjoined to remain 


R? iftf&r i 

i i 

•twto g i ng: i<ie* 

grcr gftnft ?ig: lei** 



MARITAL RELATIONSHIP. 


288 


constant to her husband even after his death, and it may 
even be suggested that this only shows that how those 
who had the making of law in their hands turned it to 
their advantages ; the anomaly, however, ceases to be in- 
explicable if we keep in our mind the peculiar constitution 
of an ancient Hindu family ; whenever a new member 
entered into it either by adoption or by marriage, he or she 
became at once so deeply engrafted into the family that 
the severance of the tie became almost an impossibility ; 
thus when a man married, the wife on her introduction 
into the family became a limb, as it were, of an orgaittcd 
whole, and she could not cut herself off simply because 
her husband, who introduced her into the family, and with 
whom, of course, she was more closely connected than with 
any body else, departed from this world ; he might be dead 
but the family did not die and she remained as much a 
part of it as before. Therefore, during the solemnisation 
of the marriage ceremony, the husband pointed out to the 
wife the pole-star, as a symbol of constancy, and she 
prayed “ as this star is constant, so may I be constant 
in my husband’s family. ” The same considerations, 
however, did not apply to the case of the husband ; he 
was not, by the marriage, transferred into another 
family, and if the perpetuation of lineage or other grounds 
required that he should take another wife, he could do so, 
and the result would be the introduction of yet another 
member into the family without in any way involving its 
disruption. I do not, of course, deny that the possibility 
for a man to contract more than one marriage was some- 
times abused, but that was due to social causes which I 
cannot, here, stop to discuss ; and it cannot also be doubted 
that this has been followed by a re-action so that nowa- 
days monogamy is almost the rule and polygamy an 

exception. 


marriage 
sought to 
explained, 



284 


MARITAL RELATIONSHIP. 


Capacity of 
a wife to 
hold separate 
property 
under the 
Hindu Law. 


Woman’s 

peculuim. 


Turning now to the capacity of a wife to hold separate 
property, I may at once say that this is allowed under the 
Hindu Law. I have already adverted to one kind of such 
property, viz*, that given by the husband to his first wife 
at the time when he takes another wife as a sort of solatium 
for her wounded feelings and it is known as ^rrfwsfiraf. 
Besides this, she may acquire property in other ways as 
well, principally through gifts made by the father, the 
husband, or their relations whether at the time of her 
marriage or not. It is not necessary for mo to refer to the 
various classes of these properties, for all that I am at 
present concerned to show is that the Hindu Law does not 
impose any bar in the way of a wife owning separate pro- 
perty, although a text of Maun to which I have already 
referred in another connection would seem to show that the 
husband used at all events to exercise some control over it. 
I have also shown that she may inherit property from 
some of her relations, although the right of inheritance in 
the case of a female is hemned in by limitations within a 
very narrow sphere. 

Now, in one sense, all these kinds of property, in so far 
as they belong to a woman, may he characterised as 
stridhana or woman’s property using the expression in its 
literal noil-technical meaning and the Mitakshara has 
adopted this view in other commentaries, however, the 
word has been used in a more restricted sense denoting only 
that class of a woman’s property which she has the right 
to give, sell or use independently of her husband’s control . 1 2 
However that may be, let us see in what cases and to 
what extent the Hindu Law allowed the wife to hold and 


1 Mitakshara, Cli. II, Sec XI, 203. 

* Dayabliaga — Ch. IV, Roc. 1, 18. 



MARITAL RELATIONSHIP. 285 

enjoy property independently of her husband’s control. It 
appears that in two cases the husband has more complete 
control over his wife's acquisitions than in the rest; for 
as laid down in the text of Katyayana, ‘ the wealth which 
a woman earns by the exorcise of her skill in mechanical 
arts or receives as affectionate presents from persons not 
related to her becomes at once subject to her husband’s 
control / 1 and Jimutavahana explains that he has a right 
to take it, although there be no distress to compel him to 
adopt this course. The reason why the Hindu Law allowa 
to the husband an exceptional degree of control over these 
two kinds of his wife’s acquisitions is not perhaps 
difficult to surmise; to allow a wife to earn wealtli for 
herself by the exercise of mechanical arts is calculated 
to create in her a desire to devote her time in a way anta- 
gonistic to her duty towards her husband for her own 
special benefit, and to permit her to accept presents from 
those not related to her and appropriate them herself 
without any restriction may tend to bring about an un- 
desirable inclination to seek the good graces of those with 
whom perhaps she ought not to have any concern ; hence 
the Hindu Law very wisely provided by placing the property 
so acquired absolutely under the control of her husband, 
that in neither way should the wife be permitted to make 
any profit for herself. On the other hand, affectionate 
presents received by a woman from her husband or parents 
or their relations are known as mndayika and 

over those she has absolute control with this exception, viz,, 
that in the case of immovable property received as a gift 
from the husband she has no right of alienation, not only 
so long as the husband is alive but even after his death, 
unless, of course, the husband himself chooses to invest her 
with the right by express declaration to that effect. It has 

1 nut «rfw iftaiNwwtT: i 


Power to hold 
property 
independently 
of husband’s 
control : how 
far limited. 


or 

gifts from 

affectionate 

kindred. 



Husband's 
right over 
wife's pecu- 
lium. 


286 MARITAL RELATIONSHIP. 

been laid down that snlka 1 or the gratuity for the receipt 
of which a girl is given in marriage and *snn or the profits 
arising from other properties belonging to her are 
absolutely at her disposal and thus constitute a part of her 
peculium . 

Having thus indicated the nature of the properties 
which go to constitute a woman’s peculium, let us see in 
what relation she stands to her husband with regard to 
them. Ordinarily the husband has no right to take any 
part of his wife's peculium without her consent ; if he 
does so, by force, then he must be compelled to restore it 
to the wife together with interest, and shall also be 
punished for the transgression ; if, however, the husband 
expends his wife's peculium for his own purposes after 
having obtained her consent, even then he should repay 
it without interest when he is in a fit position to do so 
but if he takes another wife in supercession of her, then 
although the property might have been taken with her con- 
sent and duly bestowed out of affection, the King shall and 
force him to restore the same at once, without any prejudice 
to her right to obtain from him such maintenance as 
she is otherwise entitled to.* There is, however, this 
exception to the husband's incapacity to take his wife's 
property, viz., that if he have no means of subsistence 
without it as in a famine or other distress, then he 
may take it even without her consent. So Yajnavalkya 
declares : “A husband is not liable to make good the 
property of his wife taken by him in a famine or for the 
performance of some indispensable duty, or during illness 
or while under restraint (for payment of a debt or the 

1 The word Snlka has been variously explained. I have here 
adopted that meaning which seems to me to give the most important 
significance of the word. 

* See Dayabhaga — Chap. IV. Sec. 1. 24. 



MARITAL RELATIONSHIP. 


287 


like).” I have already pointed out that a woman can 
dispose of her peculium in any way she likes, and except 
in the case of gifts made by her husband 
this even includes the right of free alienation. It is, 
however, doubtful whether an alienation made by the wife 
without her husband's assent can be regarded as valid ; 
no doubt, her proprietary right includes the power of 
alienation, but in so far as she herself is not absolutely 
independent and stands in need of protection, it seems to 
be required that at least in the case of immovable pro- 
perty, the assent of the husband to the transaction should 
be obtained. Thus, Katyayana says : u Gift, pledge or 
sale of fields, houses, or slaves made by dependent persons 
does not become perfect without the assent of those on 
whom they are dependent /' 1 This may, however, be 
regarded as controlled by another text in which Katyayana 
declares that, in regard to mndayika property the inde- 
pendent control of women is ever acknowledged both in 
respect of donation and of sale according to their wishes 
even in the case of immovables.- Beading, therefore, the 
two texts together the proper conclusion seems to be that 
with regal'd to this class of property the husband is not 
entitled to withhold his consent if the act of alienation 
is a free act on the part of the wife not induced by force 
or fraud. 

Among other legal consequences of a marriage it 
has sometimes been stated that the wife, by virtue 

1 w aroint faarar. i 

*n«n?w wi i 


Alienation 
by a woman 
of her 
peculium. 

In it 

permissible 
without her 
husband’s 
assent P 


Wife’s co- 
ownership 
in husband’s 



288 


MARITAL RELATIONSHIP. 


of the marital tie, becomes co-owner with her husband 
in everything that belongs to him. The question 
is discussed in several of the commentaries on the 
Dayabhaga, where it is pointed out that the right of 
the wife arises without in any way interfering with the 
full ownership of the husband and ceases with the 
extinction of that ownership. The recognition of this 
right has, therefore, very little practical value, in as much 
as it neither fetters the freedom of the husband to deal 
with the property according to his pleasure, nor invests 
the wife with an independent control over it. But still 
it is not absolutely nominal ; hence the Mitakshara points 
out that the text of Apastamba declaring this co-owner- 
ship also indicates the purpose for which it is recognised 
when it states that by reason of this co-ownership no 
theft can be imputed to the wife if she expends her 
husband’s property for occasional acts of charity or the 
like during his absence, and it may also be said that it 
finds a partial recognition in the direction that when the 
husband voluntarily distributes his wealth among his sons, 
the »wife should also get an equal share . 1 

Having thus far discussed the position of a wife uuder 
the Hindu Law, let us compare this with her position 
under the lioman Law. Turning to this we find that 
originally under the Roman law the wife had very little of 
personal or proprietary independence. This and the way in 
which she gradually extricated herself out of it are very 
clearly explained by Sir Henry Maine. He says : “Ancient- 
ly, there were three modes in which marriage might be 
contracted according to Roman usage, one involving a 
religious solemnity, the other two, observance of certain 
secular formalities. By the religious marriage, or con~ 


fant'srci mxn' i 



MABtTAtr RELATIONSHIP. 


28 & 


* 0 *, by the higher form of civil marriage, which 
was called coemption and by the lower form, which was 
termed nsus 3 the husband acquired a number of rights 
over the person and property of his wife which were on 
the whole in excess of such as are conferred on him in 
any system of modern Jurisprudence. But in what 
capacity did he acquire them? Not as husband, but as 
father. By the confarreation, coemption, and usus, the 
woman passed in manum virt, that is, in law she became 
the daughter of her husband. She was included in his 
patria poleslas. She incurred all the liabilities springing 
out of it while it subsisted and surviving it when it had 
expired. All her property became absolutely liis, and 
she was retained in tutelage after his death to the guardian 
whom he had appointed by will. These three ancient 
forms of marriage fell, however, gradually into disuse, 
so that at the most splendid period of Roman greatness, 
they had almost entirely given piece to a fashion of 
wedlock old apparently, but not hitherto considered 
reputable — which was founded on a modification of the 
lower form of civil marriage. "Without explaining the 
technical mechanism of this institution now generally 
popular, 1 may describe it as amounting in law to a little 
more than a tempo rary deposit of the woman by her family. 
The rights of the family remained unimpaired, and tin- 
lady continued in the tutelage of guardians whom her 
parents had appointed and whose privileges of control 
overrode in many material respects, the inferior authority 
of her husband. The consequence was that the situation 
of the Roman female, whether married or unmarried 
became one of great personal and proprietary 
independence . ” 

It thus appears that originally' the position of a 
Roman wife was one of complete subordination involving 

37 



MARITAL RELATIONSHIP. 


290 


a very considerable curtailment of personal and proprietary 
rights, and although subsequently she freed herself from 
these liabilities, the result was brought about by a 
relaxation of the marital tie. 


Proprietary 
incapacity 
imposed 
upon a 
married 
woman by 
the English 
Law. 


I may also remind you that the proprielary incapacity 
imposed upon a married woman by the English Common 
Law was at least equally stringent. It has been thought 
that this was duo to the influence of the Canon Law 
which introduced the notion that husband and wife 
constituted, as it were, a single person, so that the very 
legal existence of the wife, as a distinct person, was 
almost suspended during her coverture, rendering her 
incapable of holding any separate property or asserting 
any right not only against him but also against others 
without his concurrence. Hence the husband could net 
make any grant in her favour, because this would involve 
that she had a separate legal existence, and for the same 
reason she could not bring any action for redress against 
any body without the concurrence of her husband Of 
course, these disabilities were subsequently ve :y much 
modified by the intervention of the Court of Equity even 
before the enactment of the Married Women’s Property 
Act, but I am more concerned to point out. to you what the 
state of the pure English Common Law was with reference 
to this matter, and upon this Sir Henry Maine observes : 
“I do not know how the operation and nature of the ancient 
patria potestas can be brought so vividly before the mind 
as by reflecting on the prerogatives attached to the husband 
by the pure English Common Law, and by recalling the 
rigorous consistency with which the view of a complete 
legal subjection on the part of the wife is carried by it ; 
where it is untouched by Equity or statutes, through every 
department of rights, duties and remedies/’ 



MARITAL RELATIONSHIP. 


291 


On the whole, therefore, the position of a wife under the 
Hindu Law seems to have been much better than under 
the Roman or the English law. It allowed her greater 
personal freedom than the Roman Law and larger proprie- 
tary rights than either system, while at the same time, 
care was taken to afford her such protection as her 
comparative weakness would naturally demand, and it is 
remarkable that the gradual growth of rights and the 
removal of her disabilities did not. in any way involve any 
slackening of the marriage tie. 

As regards litigation between husband and wife, this 
was allowed by the Hindu Law when requisite, although 
it was directed that: this should be discouraged as much as 
possible. In this respect also it was more liberal than the 
English Common Law which disallowed such litigation 
until it was modified by Statute, 45 and 4(5 Viet. C. 75. 

It need hardly be said that betrothal is quite distinct 
from marriage, the former being a men? promise to be 
followed by the latter, which alone produces the marital 
tie. It is, of course, the duty of father or other guardian 
of the girl from whom the promise emanates to fulfil it 
in due course, but our law -givers direct that it is permissible 
to annul a betrothal if a better suitor becomes available. 1 
If, however, the promisor refuses to keep his promise 
without any excuse, such as the discovery of some defect 
in the bride-groom, lie renders himself liable to be punished 
by the King. 2 On his turn the bride-groom may even 


The position 
of a wife un- 
der the Hindu 
Law seems to 
have boon 
much better. 


Li tigation 
between 
husband and 
wife. 


Botrothal : 
its effect. 


When revo- 
cable and 
when not. 


^t^ sfwt w? , st i 

*nswsra: i fan? i u 
?sn n stsst ttw ? *rt i 

Tm i *nr? i . 



292 


MARITAL RELATIONSHIP. 


after the betrothal refuse to marry a girl when his consent 
was obtained by fraud or false pretences or when it is 
discovered that the girl was suffeiing from some defect, 
and it is distinctly declared that when the guardian of the? 
girl secured the consent of the suitor without disclosing 
some defect to which she was subject, it is only proper 
that the attempt of that false man should be rendered 
abortive . 1 In the absence of any justifying cause, a suitor 
is not free, after the betrothal, to withdraw from his 
promise to marry, and if he attempted to do so, the King 
should control him and compel him to marry the girl even 
against his will . 2 Such then was Hindu Law; but to 
compel a man to marry a girl against his will must be 
owned to be a somewhat dangerous experiment, and it is 
not very much to be regretted that our courts have refused 
to specifically enforce a contract of marriage holding that 
the only remedy in such a case is by an action for damages. 
If may, however, be pointed out that a refusal to marry 
after betrothal without any just cause casts an unmerited 
slur upon the girl, and to allow a man, in such a case, to 
escape by merely paying damages for the breach of the 
promise for which the guardian of a Hindu girl seldom 
comes to court seems to let him off Hither too easily 
especially when it is remembered how often such refusals 
proceed from mere greed for money which is altogether 
foreign to the sacred character of the Hindu matrimonial 
relationship. The spirit of commercialism is, however, 
an incident of our modern material civilisation, and what 
cannot be cured must, therefore, be endured. 




t 


2 



LECTURE X. 


The Law op Dominical Relation and the 
Law op Defective Status in General. 

‘Slavery* says Justinian, ‘is an institution of the law Justinian on 
of nations, by which one man is made the property of s,B ' ery ‘ 
another, contrary to natural right/ 1 Whatever this may 
mean, it is at any rate clear that in the days when this 
was written there was hardly any nation known to the 
Romans which did not give any countenance to slavery. 

In the Hindu Law also we find discussions relating to an 
institution very similar to it. 

The word according to Katyayana, etymologically Meaning of 
signifies a person who being free voluntarily gives himself ^ 
away to another. 2 It is not, therefore, unlikely that 
originally slavery, or rather what corresponds to it in the 
Hindu law, arose from a voluntary surrender of oneself 
to another by a fret; than with a view to obtain 
subsistence and protection in lieu of services to be rendered 
by him. If he offered himself as a son, he became what 
has been called a son self-given ; if, on the other hand, 
he could not possibly expect to secure 1 his high status, 
and yet was in sore need of subsistence and protection, 
he offered himself unconditionally and thus became a slave. 

We shall, however, see that this was not the only mode 
in which a person could become a slave. The difference Difference 
between a slave and an ordinary servant is thus explained XvTauAn 

' Institutes, Lib I, Tit III. 

ffa f m i 



294 


LAW OF DOMINICAL ABLATION. 


ordinary 

servant. 


Seven kinds 
of slaves 
according to 
Manu. 


Fifteen kinds 
of slaves 
according to 
Narada. 


How slavery 
conld be 
ontracted. 


in Smriti Chandrika ; both a servant and a slave work for 
another, but the formef while working for his master also 
earns an independent livelihood of his own, but the latter 
works absolutely for the master abandoning all sources 
of separate and independent earning for himself. The 
dependence of the former is, therefore, only partial, while 
that of the latter is absolute. 

There is a text of Manu enumerating seven kinds of 
slaves, or rather seven distinct modes in which slavery 
could arise ; according to this a man could become a slave 
when he was made a captive in war, or offered himself 
in slavery for subsistence or was bom of a slave woman or 
transferred by a former master by sale, or gift, or received 
by inheritance from the former master or made a slave as 
a punishment by an act of law . 1 Narada gives a longer 
list mentioning fifteen kinds of slaves ; these were : one 
born in the house (of a slave woman), one purchased, one 
received in donation, one ved by inheritance, one 
maintained in a season of dearth, one pledged by the 
master, one released from some heavy liability, one cap- 
tured in war, one won at a wager, one who surrenders 
himself saying I am become thine, one who having become 
an ascetic breaks the rules of the order, one who surrenders 
himself in slavery for a fixed term, one who does so in 
consideration of receiving food and raiment, one who is 
rendered a slave by attachment to a slave girl, and lastly 
one who sells himself. Now leaving out of consideration 
the particular modes that are derivative in their character, 
we find that at its origin slavery could arise from capture 
in war or form birth of a slave woman, from attachment to 
a slave girl, from infraction of the rules of the ascetic order, 





LAW OF DOMINICAL RELATION. 295 

from self-surrender to slavery for some sort of considera- 
tion, and lastly by way of penalty through an order of 
court. 

Turning now to the special rules regulating subjection 
to slavery we find it broadly laid down that a Brahmin could 
never become a slave of another, and as regards others 
a person belong to a higher caste could not be a slave 
of another belonging to a lower caste. Then, again, a 
person who after having become an ascetic breaks the rules 
of the order only makes himself a slave of the king by 
way of punishment for the transgression. 

As regards emancipation from slavery, it. appears that 
slavery was generally terminable in its character on the 
fulfilment of certain conditions except when it arose from 
birth, or from purchase, gift, or succession from the 
previous master, or when the person had reduced him- 
self to this condition by selling himself for a price. 
Thus a captive in war could emancipate himself by 
paying ransom for his release, one who became a slave 
for subsistence could free himself by repaying the expenses 
incurred, one who was attracted by attachment to a slave 
girl became free as soon as he gave her up and subjection 
to slavery for a definite period ceased upon the expiry of 
that period. It is not necessary to enter into details, 
but it seems that slavery was not terminable except at 
the option of the master only when it arose from birth 
of a slave-woman, or was contracted voluntarily in con- 
sideration of a price received from the master. Nilkantha 
even doubts whether a person could become a slave f rom 
the very moment of his birth so as to bo unfit for 
emancipation except at the option of the master, for 
according to hfm his mother could not, and consequently 
Ids position could not be worse than hers. This may, 


Special rales 
regulating 
slavery : no 
Brahmin 
could he a 
slave of 
another. 

One belong- 
ing to a 
higher caste 
could not bo 
held as a 
stave. 

H mancipa- 
tion from 
slavery : 


Conditions 
of emancipa- 
tion . 



296 


LAW 01? DOMINICAL RELATION. 


Emancipation 
at the option 
of the master: 
No limit im- 
posed upon 
such emanci- 
pation as in 
the Roman 
Law. 

Savin? the 
life of the 
master 
emancipated 
the slave 
and entitled 
him to a 
share of the 
master’s 
property. 

Formalities 
of manumis- 
sion. 


Master be- 
getting a 
child upon 
his female 
slave must 
emancipate 
her with the 
issue. 

A person 
forcibly made 
a slave or 
purchased 
from a 


however, be a refinement due to advancement of ideas 
which did not exist in ancient time. Apart from these, all 
kinds of slaves became free at the option of the master, 
and there was no limit imposed upon the master’s right to 
emancipate the slave as wc find in the Roman Law, 
Then, again, a slave who saved the life of his master from 
some impending danger became at once free, and what 
is more, obtained a share in his property as if he were his 
son , 1 a provision which shows that with the Hindu, 
gratefulness was not confined to mere words, but found 
solid recognition in substantial legal rules. The formalities 
of manumission when the master desired to emancipate 
his slave were very simple, even much simpler than under 
the Roman Law. All that was required was that the 
master desiring to emancipate his slave should take from 
his shoulder a pitcher tilled with water and break it down, 
sprinkle water on his head together with flower and rice, 
and saying three times ‘ thou art no longer a slave’ let him 
proceed towards the east. It is impossible to conjecture 
what these formalities meant unless they were intended 
to give publicity and add impressiveness to the transaction 
add invest it with a solemnity preventing future repudiation. 
It was also directed that when a master begets a child 
upon his female slave he must emancipate her with the 
issue. It may further be mentioned that it was clearly 
laid down that a person forcibly made a slave or purchased 
as a slave from a thief who had kidnapped him could 
not properly be regaided as a slave, so that the king 
should at once release him from all restraint , 2 a provisiou 


ran i i 



LAW OF DOMINICAL ABLATION. 


297 


which shows that the Hindu Law did not tolerate subjec- 
tion to slavery when it had its beginning* in force or 
fraud. 

As regards the condition of a slave, 1 think the pro- 
visions of the Hindu Law bearing upon it were on the 
whole much more humane than under the Roman Law. You 
are perhaps aware that under the ancient Roman Law the 
master had the power of life and death over his slaves. 
‘Slaves 9 says Justinian, ‘are in the power of masters/ a 
power derived from the law of nations : for among all 
nations it may be remarked that masters have the power 
of life and death over their slaves, and that everything 
acquired by the slaves is acquired for the master.’ 1 This 
power of using unrestrained violence was subsequently 
curtailed, .and it is stated that Constantine only permitted 
moderate corporeal chastisement to he inflicted upon the 
slave, and Justinian in the Code retains this enactment. 
Turning to the Hindu Law we do not find any trace of 
the master having the power of life and death over his 
slaves ; on the other hand Manu distinctly laid down that 
the master's authority to meet out even moderate chastise-^ 
ment was subject to limitations in the same way as the 
father’s power to chastise his son, and any violation of 
these limitations was punishable by the king. As regards 
rights of property, a slave, no doubt, could non acquire 
any property for himself, during his subjection to slavery, 
but his former property did not pass to his master and 
he could buy his emancipation through the same. Then, 
again, although ordinarily the master had the power of 
transferring his slave to another, yet it was declared that 
a master who wanted to sell his female slave devoted to 
him without any fault on her part and against her wishes 

1 Institutes Lib I, Tit VIII. 


thief did not 
really become 
a slave. 


Position of a 
slave under 
the Hindu 
Law 

Power of life 
and death 
nndor the 
anciont 
Roman Law. 


The Hindu 
Law was 
much more 
humane. 


A. Hlave could 
not acquire 
projiorty for 
hirnself, but 
his formor 
property did 
not pads to 
tb*> master. 


Limits npon 
the master’s 
right of 
soiling a 
female slave. 


38 



Transaction 
entered into 
by a slave 
except under 
direction 
from tho 
master was 
void. 

Not so, if lie 
acted for tho 
protection of 
his master’s 
family in 
distress ; in 
»ucha case 
the master 
should rati- 
fy the same. 
Other sour- 
ces of defec- 
tive status : 

(1) causing 
exclusion 
from 

inheritance. 

(2) barr- 
ing freedom 
in transac- 
tions. 

Causes that 
impede free* 
dom in ente- 
ring into ju- 
ral transac- 
tions, 

(a) infancy, 

(b) depen- 
dence, 

(c) mental 
aberration. 

Mental abe- 
rration caus* 
ing tempo- 
rary want of 
freedom. 


298 LAW OF DOMINICAL RELATION. 

should be punished unless he acted under extreme distress. 1 
So, after all, the Hindu Law did not regard a slave as mere 
chattel but as a human being capable of having feelings 
and sentiments which should not be needlessly outraged 
or deliberately ignored. 

If follows almost as a corollary from the dependent 
position of a slave that a transaction entered into by liirr^ 
except when he acted under the direction of his master 
should be treated as void; it was, however, directed that if he 
did anything for the family of his master at a time of 
distress, the master should satisfy the same and be bound 
by the obligation created in that manner. 

Besides slavery, there are various other sources that give 
rise to a def etive status. Speaking broadly these may 
perhaps be divided into two classes, viz., (I) those causing 
exclusion from inheritance, and (2) those barring freedom 
in transactions. The subject of exclusion from inheritance 
has already been treated in a previous lecture, and it would 
be superfluous to revert to it. I, therefore, turn to the 
second branch of the enquiry relating to the causes that 
impede a person’s freedom in entering into jural transac- 
tions. I am inclined to think that speaking generally 
these may be resolved into infancy, dependence and mental 
aberration. It will be remembered that in dealing with 
the law relating to the Transfer of Property I have shown 
that according to the Hindu Saslras a gift made by a 
person under the influence of sudden fear, or uncontrollable 
rage or lust or the like is invalid, because he is not then 
in a proper frame of mind. Narada says that such people 

fkm 

' M \ 

tm wiuw: 



LAW OF DOMINICAL RELATION. 


299 


are for the time lieing besides themselves, and therefore, 
although independent, their actions should be regarded 
as void by reason of the temporary want of freedom. 1 
A temporary disability of this sort, cannot, however, 
be regarded as creating a defective status which implies 
something more permanent ; when this becomes more 
permanent, we practically get what is called insanity, and 
a person afflicted with it becomes incapable of entering 
into any legal transaction. Dependence implies subjection 
to superior control, the nature of such dependence in the 
case of sons, wives and slaves has already been explained 
It goes without saying that there are various degrees of 
such dependence ; it being in fact relative in its character, 
thus, it has been said that a king is independent, the 
subjects are dependent on him, the preceptor is independent, 
his pupils are dependent ou him, and the head of the family 
is independent, and the other members are dependent 
on him. It would be an unprofitable task to dwell on the 
exact amount and character of the control exercised in each 
of these cases ; suffice it to say that in every instance there 
is involved some amount of limitation upon the unfettered 
freedom of action of the person who occupies the inferior 
or subordinate position. 

Turning now to infancy, we find that it is divisible 
into two sections. Till the eighth year, ahoy is, for all legal 
purposes comparable to a child in its mother's womb ; after 
this till the sixteenth year he is described as adolescent, 
lmt by reason of immaturity is regarded as incapable 

Km* qftaro %in«roftfiRn: 11 


Insanity. 


Dependence: 
different gra- 
des of depen- 
dence. 


Infancy • 
period in* 
fancy. 



300 


LAW OP DOMINICAL RELATION. 

of entering into any legal transaction ; when this limit 
is passed he becomes free and sui juris but when his 
parents are living he is not absolutely free from their 
control . 1 Minority, therefere, under the Hindu Law 
extends till the sixteenth year. Mr. Mayne, however, 
points out that there was a difference of opinion as to 
whether this age was attained at the begining or at the 
end of the sixteenth year. ‘The Hindu writers', he" 
says, ‘seem to take the former view and this was 
always held to be the law in Bengal.* The latter point 
is stated to be the rule in Mithila and Benares and was 
followed in Southern India and apparently in Bombay .’ 2 
The difference of opinion is no doubt attributable to the 
ambiguity of the particle ‘ ' which means until and 

may, therefore, refer to either limit. Having regard to 
the context, the best interpretation seems to me to lead to the 
conclusion, that minority extends till the end of the 
sixteenth year, although Srikrishna Tarkalankara in his 
commentary on the Dayabhaga appears in one place to 
take the opposite view . 3 The main point of difference 
between the position of an infant within his eighth 
year, and a minor who is above eight but below sixteen 
years, in age is that the former is even exempted from 
criminal liability while the latter is not, unless he is 
incapable of discriminating between right and wrong; 
as regards freedom to enter into civil transactions they 
are both on the same footing. 

1 wn i 

qrcNt i \ 

® May n©s Hindu Law, p. 272. 

* *ptth ara'fro wan: i 

www mtiv© i 



LAW OP DOMINICAL RELATION, 301 

As regards the guardianship of a minor, the father, 
of course, has the first claim, after him comes the mother 
and if neither be alive, the elder brother takes the place . 1 
In the case of a girl, the guardianship, after her marriage, 
passes to the husband. Ultimately, the King is the 
guardian of all, and Manu enjoins that when a boy has 
neither father, nor mother, he should take steps to protect 
the property of the boy until he attains majority and 
returns from the house of his preceptor to take charge of 
it himself . 2 


uqftfa fqm fta RTCTO l 
to usitsf i 

i 

urn w i i 


Guardianship 
of a minor. 



Place of 
contract 
in the Hindu 
Law. 


LECTURE XI. 

The Law or Contractual Obligations. 

It is remarkable that in the Hindu Law we do not 
find any distinct treatment of contracts in general as 
distinguished from the several more important kinds of 
contract which are separately discussed as giving rise to 
liabilities enforceable by the court. This is to some 
extent due to the fact that in our Dharmasastras as well 
as commentaries aud nihati&ha, ft grounded on them the 
treatment of the positive law has followed in its order 
and arrangement the classification given by Manu and 
other lawgivers of the topics of litigation or forms of 
action ; the result was that the different subjects were 
presented not so much from the standpoint of the positive 
rights arising from various transactions as from the stand- 
point of the transgressions furnishing causes of action to 
be taken cognisance of by the court. The enquiry of the 
Hindu jurists was, therefore, directed not so much to 
analyse wliat a contract in the abstract may be taken to 
be, as to determine in what ways, the various kinds of 
contractual obligations may be broken and what are the 
remedies for the same. This method of treatment may, 
no doubt, fail to satisfy the theoretical demands of an 
analytical jurist, but it was sufficient for the purposes 
of a practical lawyer who is more concerned with decision 
of disputes than with analysis of abstract conceptions. 
Yet, it must be confessed that to us who are more 
conversant with the English Law of Contract in its present- 
shape than with the history of its growth this may seem 
to be a very conspicuous shortcoming, but if we look 
back we fm<J that there is not much to be startled at. 



THE LAW OF CONTRACTUAL OIJLICATIONS. 


303 


and that the Hindu Law of Contract was as developed as 
most other systems of ancient law. "Taking English 
Courts’, says Sir F. Pollock who is one of the pre-eminent 
authorities on the subject, "and the remedies they 
administered as they were about the middle of the 
thirteenth century (for it is needless to go further back 
for our present purpose), we find that what we should 
call elaborate contracts or covenants, and of sufficiently 
various kinds, can be annexed to grants of lands and 
interests in land, but there is very little independent law 
of contract, and if by a law of contract- we mean a law 
which enforces promises as such, it can hardly be said 
that there is any at all. Still less t here is any theory 
or system of the law. 11 radon, so far as he has a 
system, copies Azo of Bologna with variations due partly 
to misunderstanding and partly to the impossibility of 
contradicting the actual English practice. Hut the only 
classification for which the practical English lawyer cares 
is a classification of forms of action, processes and 
remedies. 1 ’ It was, in fact, the modern doctrine of con- 
sideration which cemented together the different forms of 
action, and through the action of assumpsit which was subse- 
quently introduced moulded the different branches of the 
law of contract into one organic whole. Turning to the 
Roman Law, as it existed in the days of Justinian, there 
also we find that the only forms of consensual contracts, 
in which alone obligation was attached at once to the 
consensus or mutual consent, were four in number : viz., cm- 
ptio venditio or sale, focalio condnctio or letting and hiring, 
socicfas or partnership, and wand-alum or a particular kind 
of agency, and every one of these was recognised by the 
Hindu Law from a very early time. I, therefore, need 
not make any apology for presenting to you a short account 


Devolopm ent 
of the law 
of contract in 
England. 


Character of 
th< Homan 
Law of 
coi tract in 
the days of 
Justinian. 


} Pollock’s Law of Contract, p. 135. 



Nonpayment 
of debt : Debt 
universally 
acknow- 
ledged 
to be one of 
the earliest 
forms of 
contract. 


A loan may 
be of two 
kinds : 
secured and 
unsecured. 

The latter 
divisible 
into two 
kinds. 

A debt 
involves two 
elements. 

Primary 
source of the 
obligation. 


304 THE LAW OF CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 

of the Hindu Law of contractual obligations in the way 
in which it was treated by the Hindu lawyers themselves 
without attempting to clothe it in a foreign mask. 

Nonpayment of debt is the first .among the eighteen 
topics of litigation mentioned by Mann. Liability to 
pay a debt is acknowledged on all hands to be one of the 
earliest forms of contractual obligation. It corresponds 
to what is called mutunm in the Roman Law being a 
form of real contract iq which the obligation is founded 
upon the delivery of a thing giving rise to a liability to 
repay. In the English law also, debt with convenant 
formed the two earliest forms of contract and the enforce- 
ment of a mere promise through the intervention of the 
doctrine of consideration was only a subsequent growth. A 
loan according to the Hindu Law, may be of two kinds : 
secured or unsecured ; it is said to be secured when the 
creditor receives a pledge for its satisfaction or when 
another person stands as a surety for the debtor. An 
unsecured loan, in its turn, may be evidenced by a written 
document or merely attested by witnesses. A debt, it 
will be observed, involves two elements : (1) receipt of 
a benefit, and (2) existence of an express or implied 
promise to repay; the primary source of the idea of obliga- 
tion attached to the taking of a loan was the receipt of 
the benefit which carried with it the duty to repay ; this 
is indicated bj r certain texts in which obligations to 
do certain acts in return for benefits received were 
assimilated to the conceptions of . a debt and 
its satisfaction even without the accompaniment of 
any promise on the part of the person who received 
those benefits. Thus the Taittiriya Sruti declares that 
a Brahman at the moment of his birth becomes indebted 
in three ways ; he discharges his debt to the* gods by the 
performance of sacrifices, to the ancestors by procreating 



THK LAW Of CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 305 

children (to continue the line and offer funeral oblations), 
and to the sages (who went before him) by learning the 
Vedas . 1 I do not, of course, mean to say that these were 
debts in the legal sense of the term, or the obligations 
imposed were legal obligations enforceable by the king ; 
the object with which I mention these is simply to show 
that the characteristic element which is taken hold of in 
* extending the term 'debt* to these cases is the receipt of 
benefit which engenders a corresponding duty to make 
some sort of return, thereby indicating that the receipt of 
a benefit raises the idea of a moral obligation to repay. 
This moral obligation is, however, transformed into a 
legal obligation, when the benefit is conferred on an express 
or implied undertaking to repay, such an underlying being 
presumed when there is nothing to ^ show that the person 
who conferred the benefit meant to bestow it as a free gift 
without an eye to a return. Such an obligation was not 
made to depend upon the accompaniment of any formality 
as in a Roman nextim or stipulation, the receipt of the 
benefit being itself sufficient to furnish a sufficient founda- 
tion for the same, and as such it evinces at least some 
amount of ethical and juridical advance over that class of 
archaic rules which attach more importance to the form 
than to the substance of a legal transaction. 

A debt arose not only from a loan of money but also 
from a loan of other things. The difference between this 
and a loan for use corresponds to that between mutuum 
and eommodatum under the Roman Law. In the case of 

q i uwtf t ft 5 snspu: 
ftfir: W i 

• vmn faw. i 

*m, ^ it « 


Tho obliga- 
tion not de- 
pendent on 
the accom- 
paniment of 
any forma- 
ality. 

This shows' 
a consider- 
able ethical 
and juridical 
advance. 

Loanof money 
and loan of 
other things. 

Diffcmce 
between a 
debt and a 
loan for use : 


39 



Cf. the differ, 
enoe between 
nratum and 
eommodatum 


Interest on 
loan, condem- 
nation of 
msury. 


Still it is not 
illegal, 


306 THE LAW Oi' CONTB ACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 

a debt the thing lent became the property of the debtor 
and he could use it or consume it just as he liked, being 
liable to return to the creditor not the exact thing lent, 
but only an equivalent of it ; while in the case of a loan 
for use, the property remained with the lender and the 
borrower was bound to restore the identical thing after 
having used it for the purpose for which it was lent. 

A debt often carries with it a liability to pay interest 
upon the amount lent. If we look back, we find 
that our ancient Dharrnasastras severely condemned 
the practice of taking interest upon a loan. Thus Vasistlia 
says ‘Destruction of foetus and extortion of interest were 
weighed in the balance ; whereupon the destroyer of the 
foetus went upon the scale and the usurer fell down / 1 
and this figuratively expresses the sage’s opinion that the 
extortion of interest which sucks the life blood, so to say, 
of living men is even more reprehensible than the destruc- 
tion of foetus which has not yet seen the light of day ; but 
even he, while so strongly denouncing the practice as 
immoral, cannot declare it to be illegal, for, in view perhaps 
of the prevalent practice, he, with evident regret, concedes 
its legality by saying apparently with much reluctance ‘or 
let it be paid to that sinner who is lost to all virtuous acts / 2 
Similarly both Manu and Narada disapprove of the practice 
at least when it becomes extortionate though their disappro- 
val is certainly couched in less severe language ; 3 thus Narada 
classes it as a means of acquisition of a mixed character 
being partly white (pure) and partly black (impure), and 
it is allowed to be a legitimate means of livelihood for a 

if* ^ 

IT qufMI » 

if* forafaftn 



THB LAW OF CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS* 807 

Vaisya belonging to the third or commercial class among 
the Hindus. The conclusion seems to be that it was 
tolerated within certain limits, but not regarded as a 
respectable or a commendable act. 

There are several different kinds of interest men* 
tioned in the Dharmasastras. In some cases the 
. rate of interest is limited by the law, in others it 
is fixed by special contract between the parties ; 
such interest may either be simple or compound; and 
sometimes, the enjoyment of the property pledged represents 
the interest taken. Leaving out of consideration the last 
class of cases, we find that ordinarily the rate of interest 
was fixed by the law; as to this it appears that the rate 
of interest varied according to the amount of risk incurred 
by the creditor ; thus an unsecured debt carried a higher 
rate of interest than a secured debt ; moreover, the rate of 
interest also varied according to the caste of the debtor ; 
one belonging to a higher caste being liable to pay at a 
lower rate than one belonging to a lower caste. 
Then, again, when the lending of the debt involved 
exceptional risk as for instance where the debtor intended 
to undertake a journey through a forest, or a sea-voyage 
after taking the loan, the creditor was considered entitled 
to claim interest at a higher rate than was ordinarily 
allowed in consideration of his incurring the risk of losing 
even the principal itself. Apart from interest limited 
by the law, the rate of interest could also be fixed by a 
special contract made by the parties ; but here a rate 
exceeding the ordinary rate limited by the law would not 
be valid unless the debtor, in a case of urgency at a time 
of distress, expressly stipulated to pay it . 1 Jagannatha here 

1 g m i 

fast si g soften i 

won » » 


Different 
kinds of 
interest. 
Interest limi- 
ted by law, 
and interest 
fixed by 
special con- 
tract. 

Simple and 

compound 

interest. 

Hate of in- 
terest fixed 
by the law 
vairod aocor 
ding to the 
risk incurred; 

and also 
according 
to tho caste 
of the debtor. 


Exceptional 
risk entitled 
tho creditor 
to claim 
special rate 
of interest. 


Interest fixed 
by special 
contract. 

A rate 
exceeding 
the usual 
rate whon 
allowed# 



Interest in 
the absence 
of a definite 
contract 
when 
allowed. 

The question 
discussed. 


8Q8 THE LAW OP CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS* 

remarks that the mention of the time of distress in the 
text of Katyayana is only illustrative, so that, according 
to this interpretation Katyayana only declares invalid that 
interest which has been promised through compulsion: 
this is an instance of the manner in which commentators 
bring texts into conformity with the existing practice. 
It is, however, remarkable that the Hindu Law allowed the 
creditor to charge interest under certain circumstances 
even in the absence of a definite contract in that respect. 
Thus Vishnu laid down that when a person took a loan 
without interest promising to repay it within a definite 
period, but did not fulfil that promise within the limited 
time out of avarice, then the debt would carry interest 
from after the expiry of that period. 1 Where, however, 
there was no definite period of repayment fixed by the 
contract, even there after the expiry of an interval of six 
months according to Narada, and a year according to 
Vishnu, the creditor could charge interest at the legal 
rate ; but even then Katyayana said that interest should 
not run until there had been a previous demand. 2 There 
are also certain other texts which seem to lay down the 
following propositions: (1) a person who goes abroad 
to a different country without returning what he has 
borrowed shall be liable to pay interest after the expiry 
of one year ; (2) if ho does so after the lender has demanded 
the return of the loan, it will carry interest after the 
expiry of three months ; and (3) when the borrower does 
not leave the country, but still fails to return the loan 

wrsFfrftu ireHF i i 



THE LAW OF CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 309 

upon demand, he shall be made to pay interest although 
there is no contract for it from after the date of such 
demand. Summing up these diverse provisions we find 
that where there is no contract for the payment of interest 
but there is a fixed period within which the loan is 
promised to be repaid, the loan will carry interest 
after the expiry of that period without payment; this 
much is perfectly clear ; it is, however, own to doubt 
as to when the creditor becomes entitled to claim interest 
when there is neither any contract to pay interest, nor 
any fixed period to repay the debt; with reference to this 
question we find that there are certain texts which lay 
down that interest should run after the expiry of certain 
stated intervals ; on the other hand, the text of Katyayana, 
referred to above, suggests that interest should ran on the 
failure of the debtor to pay on demand whenever that 
demand may be made. Now, there are two ways of 
looking at these provisions : you may read these conditions 
conjunctively so as to require a previous demand as well 
as the expiry of the given interval of time in order to 
entitle the creditor to charge interest upon the unsatisfied 
loan, or you may read them distributively so as to hold 
that interest commences to run upon non-payment of 
the debt in either case. Apparently the Mitakshara has 
adopted the latter construction; and Mr. Justice Chandra- 
varkar acts upon the view in the case of Saunadanappa vs, 
Shivbasawa , 1 where he lays down that it was an incident 
annexed to every contract of debt by the Hindu Law 
that interest, though not stipulated for, should run on it 
in the event of non-payment after demand, from the date 
of such demand. But there are certain other commen- 
tators who, as Jagannatli points out, maintain that when 
a loan is taken without any contract to pay interest, then 

1 (1907) I. L. K. 31 Bom, 351 , 



How this 
illustrates 
the gradual 
relaxation of 
the extreme 
aversion 
against the 
practice of 
taking 
interest. 


Protection 
against 
usury : 


310 THE LAW OP CONTHAOTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 

if the debt be not paid off upon demand, it shall bear 
interest if the debtor remains in the country, after one 
year from the date of the loan and not before, according 
to the text of Vishnu ; 1 Apararka and Kamalakara reduce 
this period to six months on the authority of the text 
of Narada referred to above. It is not at all necessary 
for our purpose to attempt to choose between these different 
interpretations, but it is undoubtedly interesting to notice 
how the extreme aversion against the practice of taking 
interest as disclosed in the text of Vasishtha comparing it 
with one of the most heinous crimes gradually lost its in- 
tensity, until ultimately interest under certain circum- 
stances, came to be allowed even where there had been 
no previous stipulation to pay the same. 

This shows that mere detestation of a practice cannot 
possibly stop its growth against economical laws based 
upon the ordinary human impulse of serving one's own 
interest by taking advantage of the needs and wants of 
other people; one may admire the man who having 
money enough to spare lends it to his neighbour who 
stands in need of it without requiring anything motfe than 
a return of the sum lent, but benevolence is not so strong 
a motive as can be ordinarily counted upon to induce a man 
to part with his money readily to meet the crying needs 
of other people even when its return at the proper time 
may be practically assured. Hence arises the need of some 
other incentive which is supplied quite naturally by allow- 
ing the creditor to claim interest ; you cannot, therefore, 
do away with the practice without causing the greatest in- 
convenience to the community, and all that the law may 
and should attempt to do is to regulate it in such a manner 
as to prevent extortionate and unconscionable bargains. 
This latter end is, to some extent, subserved by the rules, 


1 Colobrooke’s Digest, Vol. I, p. 74, 



THE LAW 01 ' CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 311 

already indicated, limiting the rate of interest within 
reasonable limits except under special circumstances, but 
the ‘Hindu Law went further, and prescribed a maximum 
beyond which interest recoverable at a particular moment 
could not go. Thus in the ease of a loan in cash it was 
directed that the amount recoverable at a particular moment 
could not exceed twice the amount of the principal , 1 or in 
other words, accumulation of interest exceeding the prin- 
cipal could not be allowed ; with regard to other objects of 
loan different limits were similarly prescribed ; it must be 
understood that the creditor could by realising smaller 
sums as interest on several different occasions collectively 
recover more than the principal on account of interest; the 
real mischief against which the rules were directed was the 
accumulation of interest beyond a certain limit, so as to 
make it too burdensome for the debtor to clear it off. 

It is conceivable that at one time when people were 
more simple than at present, these measures had the desired 
effect of saving debtors from the clutches of usurers ; but it 
is very doubtful how far they can be effective against that 
wily edass of present day money-lenders who, with their 
proverbial shrewdness, may find out various loopholes or 
invent various devices to evade the restraints imposed by 
them. As you are perhaps aware, these rules forbidding 
the accumulation of interest beyond a certain limit are still 
administered in Bombay as well as by the High Court of 
Calcutta on its original side under the name of the rule of 
Damdupat, but I am not aware that this has had any 
striking effect in stemming the tide of usury in the city of 
Calcutta or the Province of Bombay. When the debtor 
tenders payment, interest upon the loan ceases to run, 
provided the tender is kept good by the debtor by deposit- 
ing the amount with a third person in case the creditor 


Maximum 
amount of 
interest 
allowed 
under the 
law : the rule 
of Damdupat. 


Tender stops 
the running 
of interest; 
but the 
tender must 
be kept good. 



Debt, if 
unpaid, bow 

rnn.Hanrl • 

(1) by 
recourso to 
litigation, 

(2) without 
recourse to 
litigation. 


81 Si THE LAW OF CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 

refuses to accept the same. 1 It is remarkable that in the 
case of Jagat Tarini Dasi v . Nabagopal Chaki 2 as well as 
iu the judgments of the majority of the Full Bench in the 
case of Kripasindhu Mukherjee t\ Annadasundari Devi 3 
it has been laid down that a tender must be kept good 
m order to stop the running of interest. Mr. Justice 
Mookerjee relied upon a number of English and American 
authorities to establish this proposition ; it is curious to 
observe that he might as well have pointed out that the 
rule of the Hindu Law was almost similar in its import. 

The ways in which a debt, when unpaid, was allowed 
to be recovered were somewhat peculiar. Speaking broadly, 
these could be brought under two heads : (1) by recourse 

to litigation, and (£) without recourse to litigation. There 
was nothing very peculiar in the former of these modes ; 
the creditor having recourse to litigation had to establish 
his claim before the court if the debtor did not admit 
the liability of his own accord, whereupon the court 
passed a decree which was enforced through the agency of 
the king's officers by compelling the debtor to carry out the 
directions contained therein ; the details of the procedure, 
being a part of the adjective law, will be discussed in the 
Lecture dealing with that subject. The means of realising 
a debt otherwise than by recourse to litigation, that were 
sanctioned by law in former times, are indicated in the 
following text of Manu : “ By d/tarma (the use of inoffensive 
persuasion or mediation of friends), by suit in court, by artful 
management, or by distress, a e reditor may recover the pro- 

1 ^ mmi: 

^ ifij \ 

■wm wtfrt ^ *m: qrfafa i fkM- 

irpppif N3T hto* sftrfrfa i 

* I.L.R., 35 04 34. 


* I. L. R. 34 Cal. 305. 



THE LAW QV CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 


313 


perfcy lent, and fifthly, by force .” 1 You will observe that in 
this text besides seeking the assistance of court by bring- 
ing a suit, four other means of obtaining satisfaction of a 
debt are mentioned ; these extra judicial methods involve 
varying degrees of pressure exercised upon the debtor in 
order to induce him to pa}' off the debt ; thus in the first 
which was called d/iarma reliance was placed upon moral 
persuasion or intervention of friends involving the mini- 
mum of external compulsion ; in what was called artful 
managements^), the creditor had recourse to a little hit of 
stratagem to get back what was lent by him as for example 
where with an artful design he borrowed a thing of his 
debtor or withheld a thing deposited by him and thus 
compelled payment of the debt; a case like this occupied 
an intermediate position between mere moral persuasion 
and forcible coercion to repay the debt. ; the third method 
of recovering a debt without litigation was what lms been 
called and this has been explained by some io 

mean distress of the chatted belonging to the debtor and 
by others to signify constant attendance at the house of 
the debtor without taking any food until the debtor gets 
rid of the vexation by paying off the debt, or, in other 
words, what is known in common parlance as sitting 
Ulhnrna 9 at the door of the debtor ; the last of these 
measures was the use of force, as for instance, the forcible 
confinement of the debtor or the like with a view to 
enforce the payment of the debt The enumeration of 
these private or extrajudicial methods of obtaining the 
repayment of a loan in connection with positive law scorns 
to signify no more than this, that if in a proper case the 
creditor employs any of these means for the recovery of his 

debt, he is not to be prohibited or punished by the king ; 

- . » __ - T 

40 


Extra-judicial 
methods of 
obtaining 
satisfaction. 


What the 
enumeration 
of these 
methods 
implies. 



When 

litigation 

must be 
resorted to. 


A creditor 
using force, 
when law 
enjoins 
litigation, 
becomes 
liable to 
punishment 
and also loses 
the debt. 

Penalty 
when the 
debtor 
compels the 
creditor to 
buo by 
raising false 
pleas and 
claiming 
litigation. 


314 THE LAW Oi CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 

on the other hand, Ya.jnavalkya says that if the debtor 
being so treated in a just case complains to the king, he 
shall not only obtain no relief, but shall also be made to 
pay off the debt and be even fined for lodging an improper 
complaint . 1 The law, therefore, sanctions these private 
methods of enforcing payment of a debt without recourse 
to litigations but then, there is this important reservation 
which must not be lost sight of, viz., that the creditor 
must not take the law into his own hands if the debtor does 
not admit the creditor’s claim, or disputes its amount or 
character, or, iu any way, demands a trial by court, for, in 
these predicaments, it becomes the duty of the creditor to 
go to court, obtain its decision, and secure satisfaction 
through it. A creditor who under such circumstances uses 
force to compel the debtor to pay, becomes liable to punish- 
ment and also loses the debt ; 2 for the same law that 
sanctions the use of force under certain circumstances 
when the debtor does not dispute the creditor’s claim and 
insists upon judicial determination, also lays down that 
litigation must be resorted to when the debtor demands 
the same ; but in order to discourage fruitless appeal to 
litigation it provides that if a debtor compels the creditor 
to sue by raising false pleas and claiming judicial deter- 
mination by court knowing that there is no real defence, 
he should be ordered not only to satisfy the debt established 
by evidence before the court, but also to pay a penalty 

1 JR* OTRRtf I 

N 

*r i 

<ntw' i snrurft: i 



THE LAW OF CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS, 315 

imposed with reference to his capacity, for unnecessarily 
dragging the matter into court . 1 

It may, here, be observed that although the use of force 
subject to the reservation pointed out above, was sanctioned 
in order to enable the creditor io recover the debt, yet the 
Hindu Law did not intend that force should be used upon 
the debtor as a sort of punishment for his failure to repay 
the loan, but only with a view to obtain satisfaction of the 
claim. Thus, it was laid down that a debtor, when found 
unable to pay off the debt, should be made to work it off 
by performing services for the creditor suited to his 
capacity, provided he did not belong to a higher caste; and 
it was only when he was unwilling or unable even to 
render such services that lie should be kept confined in 
order that he might feel the necessity of somehow paying 
off the debt . 2 Then, again, it was further prescribed that 
even in exacting services from the debtor in satisfaction of 
the debt, the creditor should take care not. to impose a 
work altogether unsuitable to the social position of the 
debtor ; you must not think that this was a mere moral 
recommendation, for as Katyayana declared, if a creditor 
without applying to the king were to make his debtor 
perform degrading work, then lie should be punished with 
fine, and the debtor absolved from liability. n 

1 sqsq4|9fM^[ flWTpR!«T N I 

3 3IT OTfrr TfiKW' T l 

TOmt iresNt mzwTzn i i 

•■spar 

<0 \ 

* sfe taw««nfeg *hih i 

TOT JUfT "jar I I 


Obtaining 
satisfaction 
by making 
the debtor 
work for the 
creditor : 
limits npon 
this 

method. 



Payment by 
instalment. 


Extrajudicial 
method of 
obtaining 
satisfaction 
in other sys- 
tems of law. 


Manus 
injeotio and 
Pignoris 
oapio. 


81‘6 THE LAW OF CONTltACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 

There can, therefore, be no doubt that the use of force 
was meant as an extreme measure to be resorted to on rare 
occasions when the debtor dishonestly withheld payment 
without any just excuse, and even then it was hemmed in 
by a number of conditions and limitations which took 
away much of its apparent offensiveness. As regards a 
debtor who was really unable to pay the debt all at once 
by reason of poverty, it was declared that he should he 
allowed to pay by instalments ;* and even when the creditor 
found it inconvenient and injurious to his interest to wait 
further by reason of the interest having reached the maxi- 
mum limit allowed by the law, the debtor should be called 
upon to renew the bond in the event of his inability to 
pay it off instead of being oppressed with a demand which 
he was unable then to meet. 

The power given to the creditor of realising his debt 
otherwise than by litigation may seem to be somewhat 
peculiar to our modern minds, but it had its parallel in 
other ancient systems of law. The fate of an insolvent 
debtor under the Twelve Tables is too well-known to require 
repetition, but those who sneer at the Hindu Law without 
stopping to enquire what it really contains may well be 
reminded of the humanity of that particular provision by 
which if there were several creditors they might cut off the 
debtor's body and divide it among them as if they were 
so many cannibals who could obtain satisfaction from the 
flesh and blood of the debtor. Leaving that aside, two of 
the early Roman methods of levying execution against a 
judgment debtor, viz, mantis inject to and pignoris capio 
by which the person or the property of the judgment 
debtor could be seized by the creditor as a pledge for the 
payment of the debt have been regarded as modifications 



the law oj? contractual obligations. 


817 


of proceedings which had originally been wholly extraju- 
dicial but were, with the growth of the power of the courts, 
gradually superseded by judicial seizure, the intervention of 
the court serving the useful purpose of preventing unjust 
or unnecessary violence and introducing older and regularity 
into the proceedings. Even the curious contrivance of compel- 
ling payment by sitting at the door of the debtor without 
taking any food had its parallel in the ancient Irish method 
of fasting upon a debtor described by Sir Henry Maine 
in his Early History of Institutions. 1 At the same time, 
it seems to be clear that the power which the Hindu Law 
accorded to the creditor of taking independent steps for 
enforcing the payment of the debt without the interven- 
tion of the court was so subjected to limitations and 
surrounded by safeguards as to afford ample protection to 
the debtor from unjust oppression, for apart from anything 
else, no creditor was, as we have seen, allowed to resort to 
extrajudicial methods when the debtor claimed that the 
controversy should be settled by a judicial trial. 

In the contemplation of the Hindu Law, the duty 
of the debtor to pay off the debt was absolute, so the 
creditor being dead, the payment should be made to his 
sons or other heirs and if no such person be found who is 
entitled to claim the amount as the heir of the deceased, 
then the debtor should pay the amount: to a llrabmin or 
throw the same into water. a The idea underlying this 
latter direction seems to be that a debt once incurred 
imposes a sort of burden upon the debtor that can only 
he discharged by repayment ; so that the death oi the 

* Lecture II, pp. 30 ami 40. 


Irish method 
of fasting 
upon iv 
debtor. 


Duty to pay 
off the debt 
absolute. 



818 


THE LAW OF CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 


Liability of 
the heirs of 
the debtor. 


Method of 
paying off 
a debt : evi- 
dence of pay- 
ment how 
it should ho 
obtained. 


creditor without leaving 1 any heir, although it may put. 
an end to the legal obligation, does not displace the 
burden altogether, for apart from the existence of any 
individual who can legally enforce repayment, there is this 
imperative and absolute duty that you must not retain 
what is not your own. 

As regards the liability to pay the debt after the 
demise of the debtor, I have already explained in a 
previous lecture how the son and grandson of the debtor 
become fastened with the liability although they may not 
have inherited from the debtor assets sufficient for its 
discharge. The details of the rule together with its 
limitations having been stated there, it is unnecessary to 
repeat them at this place. Besides, the son and the 
grandson, the liability of other heirs depends upon the 
possession of assets and is limited to the extent of those 
assets. Failing these, a person who takes the widow of the 
deceased debtor lias been declared liable to discharge the 
debt. 1 Considering, then, the provisions indicated above it 
seems that on the whole the Tlindu Law is neither unduly 
hard upon debtors nor unnecessarily indulgent to creditors ; 
even the restrictions on excessive usury cannot said to be 
unreasonable or unsuitable to the circumstances of the 
country. 

As regards the method of paying off a debt, it 

is laid down that the mode of payment should in 

general correspond to the mode in which the debt was 
contracted. Thus when the debtor executed a document 
on taking the loan, a part payment of the debt should 

be endorsed on its back, and in the event of full 

payment the document should either be torn or a separate 

1 ft* otto * i 

g'sftroi ft*ft*r: i i 



THE LAW OF CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 819 

document of release obtained from the creditor, if, however, 
the document is not forthcoming, then a receipt, in a 
case of part-payment, and a release, in the case of full 
satisfaction, should be taken from the creditor; where 
even this is not possible, there the payment should be 
made in the presence of witnesses so as to obviate, as far 
as possible, the chances of a future dispute. Similarly 
a debt contracted in the presence of witnesses should be 
repaid in the presence of witnesses and preferably of those 
who were witnesses to the original transaction. These 
minute directions are, at all events, interesting as showing 
the cautious shrewdness of those who laid them down. 

As regards the order in which debts should be paid, 
we lind that Brihaspati saj’s that a person should pay his 
father's debts, which lie is liable to pay, prior to his own 
and his grand-father's debts even before those of his father. 1 
As regards one's own debts, they should be paid in the 
order in which they were contracted, subject to the excep- 
tion that a debt contracted from a Hrahman should he paid 
first, and a debt payable to the king should be paid next 
in preference to other debts irrespective of their position 
in point of time. 2 It is also laid down that if a creditor 
can make out that a particular article was purchased with 
the money borrowed from him, then he has a preferential 
charge over that article for the payment of that loan. 3 

The payment of a debt may be secured in two 
ways, (1) by giving a pledge, and (2) by furnishing a 

1 ffwi’ d ^ i 

Ndt: qraws y** to i i 

* i 

tot g Jrrerom ; qvfmmv. i 

* mi 5^1® n<mT wfci fwTtfn i 

?rer ’wm i ^irrawr: i , 


Order of 
paving off 
the debts: 
father's debt 
should bo 
paid, before, 
ones own, 
and grand- 
father's debt 
before the 
father's. 

Debts should 
bo ]>aid in 
the order in 
which they 
wore taken. 

Exceptions iti 

favour of tho 

king and 

learned 

Brahmins. 

Another 

exception. 

Law of 
Suretyship. 



Different 
kinds of 
sureties. 

Three classes 
of sureties 
mentioned 
by 

Yajnavnlkya. 

Brihaspati 
adds a 
fourth: 
special 
significance 
of this fourth 
class in 
explaining 
the growth 
of hypotheca- 
tion. 


320 THE LAW OF CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 

I 

surety. The subject of pledge lias been discussed in 
one of my previous lectures. I now propose to give a 
brief account of the Hindu Law of Suretyship. A person 
may stand as a surety for another in several ways; 
hence our lawgivers mention several distinct kinds of 
sureties ; thus Yainavalkya speaks of three kinds of sureties; 
(1) sureties for appearance, (2) sureties for confidence 
and (3) sureties for payment. J Brihaspati adds a fourth 
class which is very similar to the third, the distinction 
being, that whereas a surety for payment promises that he 
will himself pay off the debt, if the debt or fails to make 
the payment, a surety belonging to this class only under- 
takes to produce the property of the debtor out of which 
the creditor may obtain satisfaction, and not to make the 
payment out of his own funds.* The character of these 
different kinds of sureties is summed up by Brihaspati 
in two lines : "One says, C 1 undertake to show him,' the 
other says, 'he is a good man/ the third says ‘I shall pa y 
off the money*, and the last says ‘1 shall produce his 
goods*. 3 " It will be at once understood that a surety of 
the first mentioned kind merely undertakes to ensure the 
appearance of the person for whom he stands as a surety, 
and nothing more ; a surety for confidence gives a good 
character to a man who relying on it secures the confidence 
of another and thus obtains something (say a loan) which 
he would not have otherwise obtained ; a surety for 
payment definitely undertakes to pay if the perssn for 
whom he stands surety fails to discharge his obligation ; 

1 jnfiwnaf fireWr \ qvtnmr. \ 

* 5$% ira 9 5T% WW<hwn | 

iran*: aftrq: S’rMtfafa: i vrofr: i 

8 mqrftfa wiwrtf ssrafaj i 



THE LAW OK CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 321 

a surety for production of debtor’s goods only takes upon 
'himself to produce the goods of the debtor on the latter’s 
default to pay off the debt. 

You will remember that in one of my previous lectures 
1 have explained how this last class of suretyship 
furnished an insight into the course of transition through 
which, in all probability, hypothecation or pledge un- 
accompanied by delivery of possession gradually came to be 
recognised ; for, to my mind, a pledge, where the pledgor is 
allowed to retain the property pledged in his possession, on 
furnishing a surety, who undertakes to produce it in case the 
pledgor fails to discharge his liability at the proper time, 
furnished an intermediate stage between a pledge accom- 
panied by delivery of possession and a mere hypothecation. 
As I have discussed this point at length in that lecture, it 
is unnecessary to dilate upon it any more at this place. 
To the four classes of sureties mentioned above, llarita 
adds a fifth viz., that of sureties for safety, or to be more 
literal, sureties who undertake to keep out of fear. 1 It 
will be at once seen that this exactly corresponds to that 
class of sureties which a man may be called upon to furnish 
under the Criminal Procedure Code, for instance, sureties to 
keep the peace, or sureties for good behaviour. 

It should, here, be remarked that the obligation in- 
curred by a surety is a personal obligation, and hence the 
liability arising therefrom is coniiined to him alone, so that 
on his death it does not pass to his son or grandson. 
Consequently it has been broadly stated that neither a 
son nor a grandson is liable to discharge an obligation in- 
curred by a person in his capacity as a surety for another. 

i inints TOitfe Kfaajs i 

qkfaftesr: i 
41 


Harita 
mentions 
a fifth class 
correspon- 
ding to 
sureties for 
good 

behaviour. 


When the 
obligation 
incurred by 
a surety 
extends to 
his son or 
grandson. 



32 2 THE LAW Off CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 

This is, however, subject to the exception that when a 
person becomes surety for the payment of a debt by under* 
taking that in the event of the debtor not paying it off, 
he will himself make the payment, his position is 
so far assimilated to that of an ordinary debtor 
as to render his sons (but not his grand-sons) bound 
by the obligation. So Yajnavalkya declares, ‘ When ^ 
a surety for appearance or a surety for confidence 
is dead, his sons are not liable to discharge the obligation, 
but it is otherwise in the case of a surety for payment / 1 
The position of a surety who undertakes to produce the 
goods of the debtor on the failure of the latter to pay off 
the debt is somewhat anomalous, but seeing that, as 
Viramitrodaya observes, there is not much difference 
between a surety of this class and a surety for payment 
it will not perhaps be unreasonable to maintain that the 
same rule should apply to both the cases . 2 A text of 
Brihaspati seems to make the point quite clear for it 
distinctly states that while the liability of the surety does 
not extend to his son when the surety was a surety for 
appearance or for confidence, it does so extend in the other 
two cases, viz., when the surety undertook either to pay 
off the debt or to produce the goods of the debtor in the 
failure of the latter to discharge his obligation . 3 It 
should, however, be observed that even where the son of 
the surety becomes liable to carry out the obligation 

1 vrofiratsfipn i 





i 



THE LAW OF CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 828 

incurred by his father, the liability only extends to make 
good the principal and not the interest ; the grandson is 
nowhere held liable in such a case . 1 All these rules are 
subject to the exception that where a surety obtains a 
pledge to ensure his safety, there the creditor is entitled 
to realise his claim including the interest from the pledge 
even if the surety be dead. B 

Turning, now, to the method of enforcing the claim 
against a surety, we find it laid down, that a creditor 
should not deal oppressively with him, but should allow 
him to discharge his liability slowly without hurrying 
him on to ruin . 3 It is unfortunate that considerations 
like these which did not escape our ancient lawgivers do 
not, often, attract the attention or draw the sympathy of 
our modern courts. Where there arc several sureties in 
the same transaction, the liability arising therefrom should 
be distributed among them, and each held liable to the 
extent of his proportionate share ; but when each of them 
has undertaken to take the entire responsibility upon 
himself independently of the other sureties so as to resemble 
the position of a single debtor it is optional with the 
creditor to proceed against any of them . 4 


gw nnfa hh i wraw*r: i 

<ffa: g?r: i 

^r mr ^ft g n giwiftfir fen: i *ir: i 
nn srcg i 

few fq?ropnw*iTff g?f: i mmm: i 

ww’ *vn\: « swfa: \ 


Sureties 
should not be 
oppressed. 


Several 
sureties — 
their 

respective 

liabilities 

how 

determined, 



Remedy of 
the surety 
against the 
debtor. 


Contracts of 
service and 
letting on 
hire : 

compared to 
locatio 
conductio of 
the Roman 
Law. 


Wages of 
service : how 
fixed and 
when to be 
paid. 


324 THE LAW OF CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 

When a surety has been compelled to make any payment 
in discharge o£ his obligation, he has of course the right to 
recover the same from the debtor. *- It is, however, laid 
down that where the suvety has suffered considerable 
hardship in meeting the creditor’s claim, there he becomes 
entitled to recover from the debtor double the amount 
that he has paid, 2 for it is but meet that he should obtain, 
some compensation for his suffering on account of the 
debtor’s default. 

Contracts of service and letting on hire : Commentators 
treat these two subjects together under the topic of 
non-payment of wages. The connection between the 
two is obvious, and it is remarkable that, under the 
Roman Law locdio conduct io or letting out on hire 
included locatio conductio re-rum , when a person let a 
thing and another hired it, as well as locatio conductio 
o per arum y when a person let his services and another 
hired them. The price or consideration for services 
is called or (wages), while the consideration for 
letting a thing is called or | 

Wages depend upon contract and have to be paid 
before, in the middle of, or after the w >rk as agreed 
upon. 8 In the absence cf a contract fixing the 
amount of wages, the employe is entitled to remuneration 
which varies according to the nature of the services 
rendered. If the employe trangivsses the direction of 
his employer regarding, for instance, the time or 

1 uwro Sfa si^T faftproufer m g i 

wfawwfagt ftgnr' i fc 

g W «5t uftfafaug i wrcs; i 



THE LAW OF CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 


825 


place at which his services should be rendered and 
thereby causes loss to the business in which he is 
employed, then he shall not be entitled to get his full 
wages but only as much as the master thinks it fit to 
bestow; if, however, he brings in more profit by reason of 
his superior knowledge regarding the mode of his work, then 
the employer should give him something in addition to the 
fixed wages by way of rewards notwithstanding his omission 
to follow the exact directions with which lie was supplied . 1 
If several persons, being employed upon the same work 
fail to complete it by reason of the illness of some of them 
or for some other unavoidable accident of a like nature, 
then they should be paid severally according to the extent 
of work done by each, the amount to be paid being settled 
and apportioned according to the verdict of an arbitrator. 
If a person, having been engaged to do a work, falls ill 
before its completion, then he shall complete it after being 
restored to health, and no deduction shall he made from 
the fixed wages by reason of the* delay since it arose from 
circumstances over which lie had no control; on the other 
hand, if a man omits to complete a work which he has 
undertaken, although lie is quite able to do it, and thus 
leaves it unfinished, then he shall not be entitled to claim 
even a part of the wages agreed to be paid Jor the work. 4 - 
Similarly, if a person enters into a service for a definite 
term but gives it up before the end of the term, then 
he shall not get any portion of the wages unless he can 
show that he left the service owing to the fault of the 
employer, such as the use of abusive language towards the 

. 1 wrra ^ sftscfamsw sftswn i 

«■ 


A pportion- 
ment of 
wages when 
allowed. ' ■ ■ 


Incomplete 
performance : 
how it affocta 
tho right to 
remunera- 
tion. 



886 


THE LAW OF CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 


Refusal after 
engagement 
to work how 
dealt with. 


Lobs or 
destruction of 
any article 
belonging to 
tho employer 
its effect — 

(1) When duo 
to negligence. 

(ii) When 
due to an 
accident. 

(iii) When 
caused 
deliberately 
out of spite. 


employe without any fault on his part 1 , if, however, it 
can be shown that it was owing to the employer’s fault that 
the employe left the service, then he shall be entitled to 
claim remuneration quantum meruit in proportion to the 
work already done ; 2 on the other hand, if the employer, 
on his part, dispenses with the services of the employe 
without any fault of his before the completion of the 
period of engagement, then the employe shall be entitled 
to get full remuneration for the entire period without any 
deduction, and Vishnu adds that the king may even impose 
a small fine on the employer for having dismissed the 
employe without any excuse. 3 . It is also laid down that a 
man, who being engaged in a service, refuses to work 
without any excuse, shall not only be compelled to return 
the wages which he may have received in advance, but 
shall also be liable to be punished with a fine if he refused 
after having accepted wages from the employer; if, 
however, no wages were previously paid, then the employer 
alone shall be entitled to compensation for the incon- 
venience sustained by him on account of the improper 
breach of the contract of service. 

If an employe injures or destroys any article belonging 
to the employer and placed under his (tare, out of negligence, 
he shall have to pay compensation for the same ; but if 
the injury or destruction resulted from an accident, he is 
not answerable for the loss . 4 A text of Brihat Maim 
goes further, and lays down that where the employe 
deliberately causes the loss out of spite, there he shall have 

1 mmmjm i nwc. i 

^ 5*n?r ironrrar Tnrp«ra i tfa far. i 

4 sifaro wr i tfa far. 



THE LAW OF CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 


327 


to recoup the amount of the loss twice over by reason of 
his gross misconduct . 1 

If a servant having agreed to attend a person on a 
journey refuses at the last moment, and thereby causes an 
impediment to the journey, he shall have to pay twice the 
wages agreed to be paid to him as a compensation for the 
inconvenience caused to the employer ; 2 in other cases causing 
less inconvenience, the amount of compensation shall be 
less. If a person takes a servant with him, but abandons him 
in the way while he is exhausted or ill, or omits to provide 
him with subsistence for three days in succession, then he 
shall be liable to be punished by the king with the first 
amercement . 3 If a servant does a wrong act according to 
the direction of the master and for his purposes, then the 
master shall be held responsible for the same . 4 

Principles which regulate payment by a hirer are 
similar in their character to those which govern the 
payment of wages by an employer. Thus, whoever 
having hired a carriage or a horse fails to take it, shall 
have to pay one-fourth of the fare as compensation ; 
but once the hirer takes it away, he shall have to pay the 
full fare, although after having proceeded half way, he 
may be able to dispense with it for the rest of the 
journey ; nay, it does not even matter whether the hirer 
uses the vehicle or animal, for if he takes it, he must pay 

1 uh Mf^nfirrwj ***3; i 

6 ajSfercfa wsm s: i 

urajrrcr wro i tfir nrww. i 

4 fafltpr.wi writ n: i 


Compensa- 
tion for 
spooi&l incon- 
venience 
caused by 
refusal to 
fulfil an 
agreement 
of service. * 

Master’s duty 
towards the 
servant. 


Liubilityjof 
the master 
for a wrong 
done by the 
servant. 


Letting on 
hire. 



A few 
remarks on 
the principles 
indicated by 
the rales 
stated above. 


328 TUB LAW OB CONTll ACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 

the fare, and so long as he does not return it he shall have 
to pay. So also with regard to hiring of houses, shops, 
&c. ; so long as possession is not redelivered, the hirer shall 
have to pay the rent. 

If we now turn round for a moment, and consider 
the principles that underly the rules summarised above, 
we find that here the law recognises an obligation arising 
out of mere mutual agreement even without the accom- 
paniment of the payment or delivery of a thing as in 
the case of a debt ; the distinction corresponds to that 
between real and consensual contracts of tlie Itoman Law, 
and indicates a further ethical advance. The basis of the 
obligation rests on the reciprocal reliance caused by the 
agreement and the inconvenience that would arise from the 
failure of one of the parties to perform his part ; compen- 
sation for breach of the obligation, therefore, ordinarily 
varies with the amount of inconvenience undergone ; yet the 
moral aspect of the question is not also altogether lost sight 
of, for the law recognises the distinction between breaches of 
duty arising from accident, negligence and deliberate 
obstinacy or spite. It is also noticeable that the Hindu 
Law recognises that where there is an entire contract, it 
must be performed in its entirety ; failure to perforin a 
part in such a case disentitles the performer from claiming 
remuneration in proportion to the work done, unless, of 
course, the default arose from circumstances over which 
he had no control or was due to the fault of the employer 
himself. On the other hand, if the employer dispenses 
with the services of the employe before a contract of this 
kind is completely carried out without any fault of the 
latter, then the full amount of wages agreed upon for the 
performance of the entire work shall have to be paid. 
There can hardly be any doubt that a clear comprehension 
of the principles which led to the formulation of 



. Til* LAW OR CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 


829 


these distinctions indicates a great advance in juristic 
ideas. 

Societas or partnership constituted a distinct class of 
consensual contracts under the Roman Law. The subject 
is discussed by the Hindu Lawyer* under the head of 
which literally signifies an undertaking 
by a combination of people working together. The 
development of this branch of law defining the rights 
and obligations of partners to one another indicates a 
considerable amount of social, moral, and economical 
ildvance, and it is interesting to observe that the subject 
has attracted the attention of our law givers from a very 
early period. 

The share of a partner in the profits or losses of the 
partnership business depends either upon the amount of 
capital supplied by him or upon the terms of the agreement 
under which the partnership was started ; 1 in other words 
when there is a special contract defining the shares of 
the partners, the profits or losses arising out of the partner- 
ship transaction must be distributed accordingly, but where 
there is no such contract the share of each partner will be 
in proportion to the amount of capital supplied by him. The 
partners should cany out the work of partnership, according 
to agreement with perfect good faith towards one another, 
and one who has acted fraudulently and thereby cheated 
his co-partners should be cast out of the partnership and 
deprived of his share in the profits. One partner may act 
for all by common consent, and then his acts and deeds 
shall be binding upon others, as if they were the acts and 
dieeds of all the partners. When the work of the partner- 
ship has been divided amongst the several partners 

wmiM itfwt *srwT$' i 

42 - " ; 


Partnership. 


lights and 
obligations 
of the 
partners. 



THE LAW OK CONTRACTUAL OBLISAflONS. 


330 


according to their shares, one who is unable to do his part 
himself must have it done by an agent. If partnership 
goods are lost by accident, the loss will be borne by all 
the partners in accordance with their shares ; but if the loss 
arises through the negligence of one of. the partners, or by 
reason of his ignoring the prohibition of other partners 
or acting without their approval, it must be borne by him 
alone . 1 On the other hand, if a partner undergoes extra 
trouble to save the partnership goods from accident, he 
should be paid extra something for his additional work. 
When there is a work incidental to the partnership business 
which must be clone by all the partners together, one who 
refuses to join must account for the consequent loss ; for 
example, if, in order to recover a debt from a person who 
is indebted to the partnership, it is necessary that all 
the partners should join in making the demand or bringing 
a suit, but one of them refuses to join and consequently 
the money cannot be realised, the loss must be compensated 
by the partner who occasioned it by his improper conduct. 


Gambliug 
and betting. 


The practice 
was serverely 
condemned 
by Munn. 


Laying of wagers is what characterises all kinds of 
gambling and betting. When it accompanies some sort of 
play with inanimate objects such as dice and turns upon 
the result thereof, it is called (gambling) ; when, on 
the other hand, it turns upon the result of some sort of 
contest between animate beings, as for example, on the 
race-course it is called qprpra (betting). The practice was 
severely condemned by Manu who prescribed that the 
king should inflict corporal punishment upon those who 
are themselves guilty of it or induce others to join in it ; 
gambling and betting, he said, were no better than open 
theft, so that the king should take special care to 



WWt iff ffwfk; i 



THE LAW OF CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 881 

prevent them and prohibit them throughout the kingdom . 1 
Gradually, however, this extreme rigour of prohibition 
was relaxed, and the practice surrounded by certain safe- 
guards was legalised and even protected by the king. This 
divergence from the ancient rule laid down by Manu is 
noticed by Briliaspati who observes as follows : “ Gambling 
was prohibited by Manu as it strikes against truth, purity 
and wealth ; but others hav£ sanctioned it when licensed 
by payment of a tax to the king ; it should be presided 
over by a person entrusted with the duty of superintending 
the transaction in order to ensure the detection of fraud 
and sharp practice / 9 2 The position of the superintendent 
was akin to that of a licensed gambling-house-kceper. 
He was called upon to collect the share of the king, and 
was also entitled to obtain a share for himself. The 
gambler could recover the wager only when the gambling 
had taken place in an open assembly presided over by such 
a person, and the king had received the prescribed share, 
otherwise not; and if found guilty of sharp practices, he 
was liable to be branded and banished from the land . 3 

Transgression of compact is another title of 

litigation. The word does not mean a contract, but a 


1*5:1 

sn*Sr‘ ?wc w*rtgn: i frwfa; i 
3 STB Bsftpnwt sfatwrot I 

*r g i sfg 

TTm qfo nfas ten : i flTtrron; i 


Gradual 
relaxation 
of tho 
pohibition. 


Conditions 
under which 
it could bo 
practised. 


Transgression 
of compact. 



332 THE LAW OF CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 


Rales of 
association 
mast e 
obeyed. 


Constitution 
of an 

association. 


Appointment 
of an 
executive 
committee. 


compact. When a body consisting of a number of indivi- 
duals arrives at a certain resolution, it is the duty of every- 
one belonging to that particular body to abide by it, and 
the infringement of such a resolution furnishes a ground 
of action. These resolutions may be arrived at by the 
common consent of the members or may proceed from the 
king who establishes that particular body with certain 
specific directions. In the result, therefore, we may take it 
that the rules of an association must be observed by i$s mem- 
bers provided they are not opposed to the sacred law ; and 
directions of the king establishing an institution must similar- 
ly be observed. 1 An association was usually composed of 
men engaged in a common undertaking or connected by a 
community of interest or opinion; it was directed that they 
should appoint from among themselves two, three or five 
persons to form a sort of executive committee; these persons 
were called advisers of the association (^3^ fesrauft) or thinkers 
of business The names indicate that they were 

to constitute a sort of advisory board or an executive 
committee of the association to settle the line of action and 
carry it into execution, and it was laid down that their 
directions should be obeyed by the general members of the 
association. 2 It is interesting to notice the attributes which 
according to our lawgivers qualified a man to occupy 
such a position of trust; thus Brihaspati laid down that 
those who are spiteful, prone to lust or wrath, bashful, lazy, 
timid, greedy, too old, or too young should not be allowed 
into the executive committee which should be composed 
of persons who are pure, aware of the sacred law as 


«r 


iftar: to wraf : i 

TO TOTONt TOrafWTOlftlW'. I FTOlfif: I 



THE LAW OF CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. SS8 

unfolded in the Vedas, expert in action, possessed of self- 
control, born of a good family, experienced in business, 
and guided by high principles. 1 Penalties were prescribed 
to enforce obedience to the rules of an association and the 
directions of its committee by the members of that associa- 
tion ; and it was further directed that the delegates of an 
association approaching the king should be received by him 
and treated with due respect, honoured with suitable 
presents, and allowed to depart with their mission fulfilled. 2 
All these rules and directions bear clear indications 
of a high stage of civilisation and they go to show 
that the existence of representative associations and 
their claim to respect and recognition even from the king 
were fully acknowledged by the Hindu Law ; let us not, 
therefore, too readily fall into the delusion of thinking that 
institutions like these are entirely foreign to the Indian 
soil, but remember that foreign impact has, in many points, 
retarded rather than helped the natural evolution of our 
normal life. 

I now propose, before I close the present lecture to 
say a few words on the law of agency. Apart from the 
rules regulating the appearance by agents in a litigation 
with which I shall have to deal in discussing the adjective 
law, we find it broadly laid down by Narada that if a 
person employs another in an undertaking, whatever is 
done' by the latter shall be binding on the former/ and 

*r wT&rr. wrwfawran: i 

wtfore tow. i *rwfa: i 
» 

TOWitohwk: tjwfron Nffafar: \ i 

^ wfara# i w: i 

TOrof town nttot i 


Delegates of 
an association 
approaching 
the king 
should b# 
received and 
treated with 
due honour. 

What these 

rules 

indicate. 


Agency. 



Concluding 

remark. 


884 THE LAW OF CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS. 

Brihaspati adds that an act of the agent whether it leads 
to profit or loss, expenditure or income, must be accepted 
by the principal as binding, and he must not quarrel with 
it whether in or outside the country . 1 Besides this, it is 
pointed out by Manu that even dependent members may, 
when circumstances so require, enter into transactions to 
meet the needs of the family which it will be the duty of 
the head of the family not to disturb, although he may 
not have previously authorised them so to do ;* in a case of 
this description, there arises what we may call an agency 
of necessity which the head of the family is called upon to 
ratify. 

On the whole we may safely say that although the law 
of contract is a branch of municipal law which has received 
fuller development in comparatively modern times in com- 
munities thoroughly influenced by commercial activities, the 
Hindu Law bearing upon it is amply sufficient to meet the 
requirements of a simple society working out its destiny in 
a peaceful line of evolution. 

1 tout uugm *4r‘ i 

rrer i iwfh: i 

8 3T5«^ e sw?Wsfq I 



LECTURE XU 


The Law op Torts and the Law op Crimes. 

Sir Henry Maine says : “The penal law of ancient 
communities is not the law of crimes, it is the law of 
wrongs, or to use the English technical word, of torts. 
The person injured proceeds against the wrorig-doer by an 
ordinary civil action, and recovers compensation in the 
shape of money-damages if he succeeds.” In illustrating 
this thesis, he points out that under the Homan Law 
offences which we are accustomed to regard exclusively 
as crimes were exclusively treated as torts, and not theft 
only, but assault and violent robbery were associated 
with trespass, libel and slander ; all alike gave rise to an 
obligation or vinculum juris, and were all requited by a 
payment of money ; be also shows that the old Germanic 
Law was similar in its character and provided money 
compensation eveu for homicide. It will perhaps be 
interesting to consider whether or not the ancient Hindu 
Law exhibited similar characteristics. It seems to me 
that in the Hindu Law punishment of crimes occupied a 
more prominent place than compensation for wrongs ; and 
the mere payment of compensation to the individual 
injured, when the injury inflicted was at all serious in its 
character, was seldom regarded as sufficient to meet the 
ends of justice ; of course, under certain circumstances 
the wrong-doer was compelled to compensate the person 
wronged, but the compensation was generally levied in 
addition to and not in substitution for the penalty which 
it was considered to., be the duty of the kityg to impose. 


Sir H. 

Maine's 

observations 

on tbo penal 

law of 

ancient 

communities. 


Do they hold 
f^ood in 
regard to the 
ancient 
Hindu Law P 


In the Hindu 
law 

punishment 
of crimes 
occupied a 
more 

prominent 
placo than 
compensation 
for wrongs ; 
of. the 
penalties . 



cf. the 

procedure. 


336 THE UW OF TOUTS AND THE LAW OE CRIMES. 

'A king/ says Manu, 'who punishes those who do not 
deserve to be condemned and fails to punish those who 
deserve punishment becomes infamous and is ultimately 
doomed^ to hell / 1 Neither theft, nor violence, nor any 
other form of serious injury to person or property could 
be condoned on mere payment of compensation to the 
party injured but it was regarded as the duty of the king 
to punish the culprit for his offence against the law. It 
may, therefore, be safely pronounced that the penal law 
of the Hindus was the law of crimes in the strict sehse, 
and the law of torts occupied a comparatively subordinate 
and less important position in that system. Then, further, 
even apart from the nature of the penalty peculiar to the 
criminal law that was administered by the Hindus there 
was another characteristic element in the procedure to be 
adopted in relation to a criminal act which showed that 
the distinctive feature of a crime as opposed to a mere 
private injury was not at all lost sight of ; for we find that 
whereas it was generally directed that neither a king nor 
his officers should create or foster litigation of their 
own accord 2 but should ordinarily refuse to take cognisance 
of a cause of action without a complaint from the person 
aggrieved, yet cases of frauds and the various other forms 
of crimes furnished exceptions to the general rule, for them 
it was directed that the king should take cognisance of 
them even without a complaint ; 3 nay, the king was directed 
to employ officers to obtain information of crimes 


2 wk wnwra i 

8 curate TOftr vntaWT t 

TOfhnyrai it Prow; i 



THIS LA.W Ob' TOUTS A.ND THK LA.W OF CHIMBS. 337 

committed within his dominion, and bring* them to his 
notice to ensure the punishment of the culprits . 1 It is, 
thus, apparent from the above considerations, that although 
our lawgivers did not expressly say so, they condemned a 
crime not so much because it involved an infringement 
of a private right, but because it imperilled the security 
and the tranquillity of the people at large. 

Bearing in mind the distinction which has been 
indicated above between a tort and a crime it will at once 
be seen that the same act may be a tort as well as a crime. 

When the act is looked upon from the stand }x>int of 
the individual injured and the reparation allowed to the 
injured party is compensation, it is treated in the light 
of a tort; when, pn the other hand, it is looked upon 
as a transgression of sacred law which endangers the security 
of the community and is as such, visaed with punishment 
without reference to any reparation to the individual who 
was specially injured, it is treated as a crime. It is no 
doubt true that wo do not find our lawgivers to have 
explicitly contradistinguished the two aspects set forth 
above, still the difference in penalties and procedure which 
they have prescribed indicates that they clearly realised 
in what way the criminal asjwct of an act differed from 
its aspect as a civil wrong. I shall, therefore, make no 
apology for trying to give you some idea about that portion 
of the Hindu Law which corresponded with what in 
England is called the Law of Torts. 

Torts. 

You are perhaps aware that under the English, law of 
torts, there is such a thing as injuria zinc damnum, for 
• 

1 qr?>n^t'stnt i 

vm Tiai i * 9$iv<r: n \ 


The same act 
may be a tort, 
as well ns a 
crime. 

How far the ■ 
distinction 
between a 
tort and a 
crime was 
realised by 
the Hindu 
law -givers* 


Injuria mine 
damnum. Is it 
recognised by 
the Hindu 
Law? 


43 



888 THE LAW t>F TORTS AND THE LAW OF CRIMES. 

a person may obtain compensation for an infringement of 
bis rights although he may not have sustained any 
substantial damage in the shape of a definite temporal 
disadvantage. As Holt C. J. said in a passage of his 
judgment in Ashby v. White, which is remarkable 
for the force and terseness of its diction, f a damage 
is not merely pecuniary, but q,n injury imports a damage,, 
when a man is thereby hindered of his right. As in an 
action for slanderous words, though a man does not lose 
a penny by reason of the speaking of them, yet, he shall 
have an action. So if a man gives another a cuff on the 
ear, though it cost him nothing, no, not so much as a little 
diachylon , yet he shall have an action as it is a personal 
injury. So a man shall have an action against another 
for riding over his ground, though it do him no damage ; for 
it is an invasion of his property and the other has no right 
to come there/ It seems that the Hindu Law did not 
take such a rigorous view of civil liability as to allow 
pecuniary compensation for a mere infringement of a 
private right when it was not accompanied by some 
tangible disadvantage involving a pecuniary loss, in other 
words, it did not recognise that a complainant could be 
entitled to damages although he might not have sustained 
any real damage. No doubt, if the act amounted to a 
violation of private rights and thus constituted an in- 
fringement of the sacred law, the offender would generally 
be liable to be punished for his transgression ; but it is one 
thing to punish the offender for his delinquency and 
thereby maintain the sacredness of law and the inviolability 
of private rights and quite another thing to grant com- 
pensation to a person who has not sustained any actual 
damage requiring compensation. Hence, r we find that 
although slander and adultery were crimes for which the 
offenders w^re liable to be punished by the king, stil 1 



r tills LA mr OF TORTS AND THE LAW OF CHIMES. . 3(J9 

they were not regarded as private wrongs to be recompensed 
by; the. payment of damages to tbe party aggrieved. It 
may be quite true that many a man prizes his honour more 
than his purse, but our lawgivers were not imbued with 
that commercial spirit which could induce them to place 
a money value upon everything so as to make an attack 
on one’s honour or reputation reparable by payment of 
pecuniary compensation. On' the whole, it seems to me that 
under the Hindu Law no pecuniary compensation could be 
recorded unless the injury involved or was accompanied 
by actual pecuniary damage. 

Injury to person. It appears that for the use of 
personal violence, the offender noi only rendered himself 
liable to punishment as a criminal, but the person whom 
he had hurt could also recover compensation for the injury 
sustained ; the compensation seems lo have been granted 
not only in view of the expenses which the sufferer might 
have incurred to recover from the effect of the violence, 
but also as a solatium for the pain inflicted upou him . 1 It 
is, however, remarkable that for an assault in the narrower 
sense ( i.e for mere menace) no compensation seems to have 
been provided for although it was punishable as a crime. 

Injury to property. Whoever caused hurt to a domestic 
auimai belonging to another became liable to compensate 
the owner of the animal for the consequent loss.- The 
liability arose whether the animal died or lived, although 
the measure of damages would not be the same in the two 
cases. Similarly, whoever cut or otherwise destroyed trees 
&c. bearing fruits or yielding some sort of produce, subjected 

srSfes » 

• wrttrffewc fv qfrsrci: i wrow: i 

wycrttfi w, • 


Injury to 
purson. 


No compensa* 
tion for more 
menace. 


Injury to 

property- : 

Trespass 

against 

domestic 

animals. 

Cutting trees 
and destroy* 
ing crops. 



Conversion. 


Restoration 
of stolen 
property. 

Compensa- 

tion. 


340 TftE LAW or fours AND THIS LAtr ok CRIMES. 

himself to the liability of compensating the owner for his 
loss, the measure of compensation being the value of the 
usufruct lost by the owner during the time necessary for 
him to grow similar trees yielding similar produce . 1 In 
the same way, on the destruction of crops by catt le the owner 
of the cattle became liable to pay damages to the owner of 
the field . 2 If, however, the field were situated by the side 
of a public way, or at the outskirts of a village, and were 
not surrounded by enclosures, then the owner of cattle 
straying into it did not incur any liability ; as in such a 
case it was the duty of the owner of the field to take the 
precaution of having it surrouuded by fences 2 , for, ! as 
Katyayana puts it, it is difficult to restrain cattle when once 
they have obtained the taste of crops . n This exception, 
however, did not hold good if the keeper deliberately had 
another’s crops destroyed by his cattle or recklessly allowed 
them to stray into another’s land for a long time without 
restraint, for it was intended to meet only cases of 
accidental destruction which the owner of the crops had 
not taken due care to prevent. On the whole we may 
take it that trespass upon another’s property causing 
damage was regarded as a wrong for which the trespasser 
was held liable to pay compensation. 

Conversion. Besides injury to property, conversion of 
another’s property to one’s own use was, also, a wrong for 
which the rightful owner could claim compensation from 
the wrongdoer. Thus, take the case of a thief who stole 
another’s property. The property if it could be laid hold 
of was restored to the owner ; but if it were lost and could 
not be recovered, the thief when apprehended was made 

2 MpW TH ftltaW I \ 



THE LAW OF TORTS AND THE LAW OF CRIMES. 341 

to pay the price to compensate the owner apart from 
any penalty which might be imposed as a punishment 
for the crime. It is, however,* remarkable that in as 
much as it was conceived to be the duty of the 
the king to protect the property of his people, if the king 
could not restore stolen articles to or recover their price 
for the owner by apprehending the thief, it was deemed to 

9 

be his duty to pay the price to the owner out- of his ! own 
treasury, and in his turn he could recover the same from 
the village officers, who by reason of their negligence, were 
accountable for the thief’s escape . 1 The subject of conver- 
sion by a bailee has been discussed in a former lecture and 
need not be repeated at this place. In this way the idea 
of the responsibility of the king and his officers to protect 
the property of the people was not allowed to degenerate 
into mere empty words, and the security of private property 
was ensured. 

Fraud. A person cheated 'by fraud was entitled to 
damages. For instance, if a seller showed an article 
without defect, and then deceitfully made over a different 
article which was defective, the purchaser became entitled 
to compensation, which might even extend to double the 
price paid by him ; 2 if, however, it was not deliberately done, 

1 sri wtari sri vnMPrwrafl i 

Safari irarnn » wi 

stfTOri *sfrir it suTfcfa i fanmrt i 

vganfiraw' srrit fwi i TO: i 

# wifa fmrig srairorfaiN i 


Duty of the 
king to 
indemnify. 


Frond? 



Nuisance. 


Grimes. 


Nature of 
the penalties 
prescribed. 


Different 
kinds of 
punishment. 


S42 TliJfi LAW OF TOUTS AND TtiB LAW 0* CRIMES. 


only the sale was to be rescinded without enforcing the 
payment ^>f compensation. 

Nuisance. A nuisance might affect a private indivi- 
dual or the public in general. As an instance of the 
former we may cite the case of the construction of privies 
etc., very dose to another's dwelling house so as in inter- 
fere with his comfort and convenience. In either case, the 
offending person was forced to remove the nuisance, and' 
also reudered himself liable to punishment. 

Crimes. 


Let us now turn to the law of crimes which, as I have 
said, occupied a more prominent place io our Hindu sys- 
tem. One of the main characteristics of a crime is that 
it makes the offender liable to be punished by the king. 
I shall, therefore, begin with making a few observations 
on the nature of penalties prescribed by the Hindu Law, 
and some of the general principles on which they were 
meted out to the offenders. Punishment inflicted under 
the Hindu Law had various degrees and assumed various 
forms in order to be rendered quite flexible and keep due 
proportion to the enormity of the offence. I propose, 
therefore, at the outset to say a few words about the 
different kinds of punishment prescribed by the Hindu 
Law, and some of the principles on which they were 
directed to be administered. Yajnavalkya speaks of four 
classes of punishment, viz., censure, rebuke, pecuniary 
punishment, and corporal punishment, and says that these 
should be used either separately or jointly according to 
the nature of the crime . 1 Of these, mere censure Was the 
lightest form* of punishment and rebuke came after it; 


W'tmmv i kwwr irwRi i 



THE feAMT OF TORTS AND THE LAW OF CRIMES. 843 

pecuniary punishment included fine and forfeiture of 
property and corporal punishment included imprison- 
ment! banishment, branding, cutting off offending limbs, 
and lastly death sentence. It. goes without saying that 
the measure of punishment depended chiefly on the gravity 
of the offence; if the offence be not very serious, the 
# punishment must be light, while if the offence lie serious 
the punishment must be severe too. But besides this, our; 
lawgivers mentioned several factors which ought, in their 
opinion, to be taken into consideration in order to deter- 
mine the due measure of penalty to be inflicted for a 
crime. Thus Yajnavalkya says that the king should inflict 
punishment upon those who deserve the same after ascer- 
taining and taking note of (the nature of the) offence, the 
time and the place (of th * offence), and the strength, age, 
avocation and wealth (of the culprit ) 1 ; and the Mitakshara 
commenting upon this text adds, that along with these 
the questions whether the offence was committed with or 
without deliberation and whether it was the first offence or 
a repetition of the offence should be taken into considera- 
tion in passing the sentence . 8 In another text dealing 
with punishment for theft the same sage declares that the 
punishment should vary according to the value of the 
articles stolen ; and the place and the time (of the offence) 
as well as the age and the strength (of the offender) should 
be taken into consideration in passing the sentence. * Here 

1 TOTOTOM TOTOifroi I 

TO: 1 TOTO II 

i tttoV i 

a m\ wnrorjwfair * * 

Irorvn i 

fronsr to:*t% wWfa i 

2HTOTOT: I m qroiWl I 


Measure of 
punishment 
varies 

according to 
the gravity of 
the offence. 

Other factors 
to be taken 
into 

consideration 
in meting 
out 

punishment. 


a 



Importance) 
of these 
considera- 
tion*. . . 


344 THE LAW OF TORTS AND THE LAW OF CRIMES. 

also the Mitakshara observes that the elements for consi- 
deration thus set forth are but illustrative, since it is not 
possible to enumerate exhaustively the various causes 
determining the severity or the lightness of a sentence, 
they being really endless. Similarly Vasishtha lays 
down that punishment should he inflicted for injury 
and abuse having special regard to the locality, the 
time, the virtues, the age, the learning and the situation, 
and he adds that it should also be regulated according 
to the Sastras, and previous precedents . 1 It is not 
possible for rne to enter into a close examination of the 
elements indicated above, which, in the opinion of our 
ancient lawgivers, should regulate the exact measure of 
punishment: to be inflicted in each case. I may, however, be 
permitted to observe that the principles thus laid down 
presuppose a considerable advance of juristic ideas in the 
field of Criminal Law ; in the first place, one may recollect 
that in many systems of Law punishments for many 
offences were rigidly and, if I may say so, almost inflexibly 
fixed and no extrinsic consideration could be laid hold 
of to modify them. One might suppose that the elimina- 
tion of all extrinsic considerations in passing the 
sentences maintained the equality and uniformity of the 
punishment ; but such is not really the case, for equality 
which does not take any notice of personal equations is 
not real equality but a mere semblance of the same, and 
considerations of time and place, and of the surrounding 
circumstances ought not to be lost sight of in awarding 
due punishment in each particular case. As a matter of fact 
it cannot be denied that our modern judges do take most of 
these elements into consideration in passing a sentence but 

Pram snw ffanforitror: » 

i *fw: i 



THE law of touts and the law of crimes. 345 

for want of enunciation of specific principles upon the 
subject, the matter does not often receive the amount of 
attention it "deserves, and sentences passed often bear, 
within certain limits, the appearance of haviug been dicta- 
.ted by caprice rather than by an intelligent- application of 
rational principles. It is, therefore, highly interesting to 
observe that our ancient lawgivers acutely analysed and 
emphasised the principal considerations which ought to be 
taken into account in determining the due measure of 
punishment to be inflicted in each particular case, while 
even many a modem judge does not seem to have a clear 
or systematised idea about them. In the second place the 
application of these principles afforded a practical method 
of modulating the sentences prescribed bylaw so as to make 
them pliable enough to meet the just ice of each case without 
departing from the theoretical rigidity of the Sastras. 

It must, however, be conceded that at least in one 
respect the admission of extrinsic considerations to influ- 
ence the nature and extent of punishment, seems to have 
been carried rather too far. It will be readily understood 
that I am here referring to the rules of Hindu Law 
making difference in caste a determining factor in inflict- 
ing punishment for au offence. Tims, it was directed that 
a Brahman should never be subjected to corporal chastise- 
ment, however grave the offence might be. 1 He could, 
however, be for very serious offences imprisoned or put in 
chains, and even branded and banished from the country 
under marks of ignominy and disgrace.- It cannot, there- 

1 war «rjr. i 

aware i i 

snftsfa— arrow vrafa wftnr * 

9 g,wt r*t r\m vm » vn\ 
afTOtSft— ? 

RTfawro: rrto ^ i 

44 


Difference of 
caste as a 
determining 1 
factor in 
inflicting-.* 
punishment. 



How far this 
can bo justi- 
fied. 


346 the uw or torts and the law ok chimbs. 

■ ♦ ' 

fore, be said that a Brahman enjoyed absolute immunity 
from severe punishment in any shape, only lie could not 
be subjected to certain forms of bodily punishment. 1 
do not propose to endeavour to justify this distinction, but 
having regard to the peculiar organisation of the ancient 
Hindu society one may not find it difficult to understand 
the nature of the influences which led to its recognition. 
Besides this, it will also be found that apart from the* 
special exemption of Brahmans from certain forms of 
bodily punishment, difference in caste also gave rise to a 
difference in the measure of punishment in yet another 
way, for ordinarily a person belonging to a higher caste 
was generally subjected to a lighter punishment than one 
belonging to a lower caste for an ofFence of an apparently 
similar description. Thus a person belonging to a lower 
caste abusing or assaulting a person belonging to a higher 
caste was subjected to a heavier punishment than a person 
belonging to a higher caste found guilty of a similar 
offence in relation to a person belonging to a lower easte. 
This may . to some extent be accounted for on the ground 
that in cases where insult or indignity was a constituent 
element of the offence, the punishment was to be severe 
when the delinquent, belonged to a lower caste in relation 
to the complainant, for the outrage proceeding from the 
former against the latter made the insult more keenly felt 
and consequently deserved to be put down with a heavier 
punishment. It should, however, be remarked that it 
would be a mistake to suppose that this was the universal 
rule and that for every offence punishment increased in 
severity according to the inferiority of caste of the culprit. 
Thus, we find, that in cases where the ofFence was an out- 
come of moral depravity, but did not involve insult to the 
complainant as an element to be taken into* consideration 
in measuring the enormity of the crime, a person belonging 



THE tAW OF TOETS AND THE LAW OF CHIMES. 347 

to a higher caste who had less excuse for the same was 
generally imposed a heavier punishment. Thus dealing 
with punishment for theft, Mann said that aSudra knowing 
what is right and wrong should get eight times the punish- 
ment liable to be inflicted on one ignorant of the same; 
a Vaishya having a similar knowledge sixteen times ; a 
. Kshatriya, similarly situated thirty-two times; and a 
Brahmin sixty-four times or even full hundred times, 
or one hundred and twenty-eight times since he knows 
what is right and what is wrong . 1 The Hindu Law 
cannot, therefore, be accused of showing unmixed or unquali- 
fied partiality towards people belonging to higher castes in 
the administration of criminal justice. It is also remark- 
able that our lawgibers distinctly declared that no one, 
however closely he might he related to the king, should, if 
found transgressing the law, be exempted from due punish- 
ment; so Yaj naval kya says, * no one who has I ransgressed 
the law is exempt from punishment, by the king, he he a 
brother, a son, an object of worship (such as a preceptor), 
a father-in-law or a maternal uncle '; 2 nay, Manu declares 
that where an ordinary man is punishable with a line of 
one k&rsh&pana, the king (committing the offence) should 
punish himself with thousand times the amount , 3 and the 
commentators say that he should distribute the sum among 

1 tottops fafftwn i 

g htm srfifrnr ^ i» 

STEWPT ^ mfqMcf I 

fopn it ^rg: **. ii *nj: 

8 *m\ i 

3 surrot msmt *r*r; 1 


Mo on© 
exempt from 
punialiment. 



S48 THE LAW OP TORTS AND * THE LAW OP CRIMES. 

Brahmins. It would not, therefore, be quite eorreet to 
say that the Hindu Law pf crimes was characterised by 
uniform partiality towards people belonging to higher 
castes and occupying loftier positions, although it cannot 
be denied that it gave formal recognition to the doctrine 
that difference in caste should, in manner indicated above, 
be a determining factor in fixing the due measures of 
punishment. I am quite aware that in working out the 
details the doctrine has been carried so far as to lead to 
directions which sometimes seem to be revolting to our 
modern idea of justice, equity, and good conscience; I do 
not propose to justifj’ those directions, for whatever the 
explanation may be I do not: think that they can be abso- 
lutely justified. 

At the same time while condemning these inequalities 
sanctioned by law, one ought not to forget that so long as 
inequalities exist, the law cannot ignore them altogether, 
nor am I quite sure that it ought always to ignore them. 
If we look around, do we not find that even in spite of our 
vaunted civilisation relics of the old tendency to take a 
light view of offences committed by people in high position 
do often appear in actual practice? It may be that this 
tendency may sometimes carry us too far and work evident 
injustice, but it cannot be said that within certain limits 
it may not be founded on sound principles ; for as I have 
shown above, in eases where insult to the complainant is 
an ingredient of the offence, the ofFender, when he occupies 
a lower station in life in relation to the complainant, really 
commits a graver offence than what we could impute to 
him if the position wore reversed ; moreover punishment, 
which is apparently' the same, may affect different persons 
quite differently by reason of differences in their previous 
habits of life, and external and internal * environments. 
With these general observations, I shall now proceed to say 



TH® LAW OP TORTS AND THE LAW OF CRIMES. 849 

a few words on some of the important heads of crime under 
the Hindu Law. 

TOtTOWor verbal abuse. This is one of the principal 
kinds of offence under the Hindu Law. It lias been 
divided into three classes — (cruel), (indecent) 

and iff* (severe). It may be observed that truth is 
no defence in a case of verbal abuse, although falsehood 
may be regarded as aggravating the offence, for the gist 
of the offence consists in the intentional insult which the 
complainant suffers from the accused. Thus, Mann de- 
clares that a man who calls another one-eyed or lame or 
the like even with truth is liable to be fined . 1 Nothing 
can be finer than this solicitude on the part of our lawgivers 
to prevent a man from wilfully or recklessly wounding the 
feelings of another by improper and uncalled for abuse. 
In inflicting punishment for verbal abuse the relative 
position of the parties owing to social rank and quality, 
should, as I have already indicated, be taken into consi- 
deration . 2 It is also laid down, that when a jierson 
threatens personal injury to another, then if the; person so 
threatening be incapable of carrying out the threat, he 
should be punished with a fine ; but if he be capable of 
inflicting the injury, then in addition to the fine, he should 
also be compelled to find sureties for his future good 
behaviour . 3 

to' www wfq i 

to mfq i|TO n w 

TOHPQTO WTW TOWfaJWTWT: I 

snsraw: i i 

*raww: pfin-pi sro: g i 

giTWWBJ: > 1 


Vorhakbm 
Three o)am6b 
of the 
offence. 

Truth is no 
defence. 


Relative 
position of 
the parties 
should ho 
considered 
in inflicting 
punishment. 

Sureties for 
good 

behaviour, 

'when 

required. 



Personal 
violence. 
Three 
different 
degrees of 
the offence. 


Punishment 
varied with 
t he relative 
position of 
the parties. 


mm or 

deliberate 

and 

aggressive 

violence. 


Difference 

between 

mm 


850 THE LAW OP TOUTS AND THE LAW OF CRIMES. 

mmm or personal violence constituted another head 
of crime under the Hindu Law. It was laid down that 
usually it had three different degrees : wvi faw (mere 
menace, or assault in the narrower sense of the term) 
(battery), and wnwr (causing of wound). It 
may also be mentioned that use of criminal force in any 
form, for instance by throwing ashes, &c., on another’s 
body, came within this offence. Here also punishment varied 
with the relative position of the parties, the use of criminal 
force by a person belonging to a lower caste to one belong, 
ing to a higher caste being regarded as a graver offence 
than in other cases. 

HTW — The word mm a generic term comprising 
various offences having the common characteristic of being 
attended with or accompanied by the use of force . 1 In 
its broader sense, therefore, it included certain offences 
which would also come under other descriptions of offences, 
but in its restricted sense it was used to denote certain 
specific offences such as mischief, robbery, murder, etc., 
characterised by deliberate and aggressive violence. Under- 
stood in this way, it differentiates itself from theft and 
kindred offences ( vfa ) by the clement of force which 
enters into its composition ; the spring of action from 
which such an offence proceeds is passion or rage, wh areas 
in cases of theft and other kinds of offences the spring 
of action is avarice ; to put it shortly offences of the former 
kind are violent ^and aggressive in their character, while 
offences of the latter kiud are generally secretive in their 
nature. Hence, the Mitakshara points out that although a 
mm (nr violent offence) involves either theft, or verbal 
abuse, or personal violence, or outrage of the modesty of a 

mm fast a dr i 

Wffasrfwifaret I *1K?: 



THE LA W OF TORTS AND THE LAW OF CRIMES, 351 


woman as an element in its constitution yet it differentiates 

itself from them by the adjunct of aggressive violence 

which gives it a peculiar shape, and this differentiation 

marks out that the offence should be visited with a heavier 

punishment. 1 There are three different degrees of this degrees 

kind of offence TO (of the first degree), ii&m (inter- 

mediate) and (grave), and different degrees of punish- 

* inent were prescribed as appropriate to them. It. was Wlien^Boveral 

also laid down that if several persons combined in striking coixlbine 

another, they should be visited with double the ordinary another how 

punishment, and furthermore he who struck at the vital *ko»ld 
1 'be punished. 

part was to receive the severest sentence. In a ease of 
WITH in the narrower sense, as distinguished from 3WTOV 
and difference in caste did not lead to any difference 

in sentence, but this must be understood as subject to the 
general rule, that a Brahmin could never he capitally 
punished, although in a proper ease lie might be chained 
or imprisoned, or banished from the country branded with 
marks of disgrace. 


igfftfcwir — This expression signifies offences against 
female modesty including seduction, adultery and rape. 
These offences are divided into three classes with reference 
to the means used bv the man, — for the offence may be 
committed by force, or fraud, or from mutual amorous 
desire. 2 Then, again, amorous criminal intimacy has three 
degrees according to the extent of the improper conduct. 


OffoUCCH 

against 

female 

modesty. 


Divided into 
three classes 


svrf*nn»m . fanrarr i wunirr'im i 
wrgtf *hnN fairerri t 

tg ii 

vi twi i 



Extent of the 
improper 
conduct 
should be 
considered 
in inflicting 

punishment r 

as well as 
the relative 
position of 
the man and 
the .woman* 


When the 
woman is 
punishable, 
and how far. 


wr- 
its primary 
stricter 
sense. 


# 52 ' THE LAW OF TORTS AND THE LA^ OF CRIMES. 

It goes without saying that the offence is greater when" it 
is committed by the use of force or fraud without the free 
consent of the woman, than when the woman out of free 
will surrenders herself. Then, again, in either case the 
extent of the improper conduct may differ, for the criminal 
intimacy may not always be equally complete/ Other things 
being equal the gravity of the offence varies according to 
the relative position of the man and the woman ; thus 
when the woman belongs to a superior caste the off mce is 
graver than when the man and the woman are of the same 
caste or the woman belongs to an inferior caste. When 
the criminal intercourse proceeds from mutual amour the 
woman is also punishable, for in such a case she is not 
absolutely free from guilt ; but in consideration perhaps of 
the fact that usually the first overture proceeds from the 
man, and the woman by reason of her weak nature ulti- 
mately succumbs to the allurement, our lawyers lay down 
that her punishment should be half of that of the man. 
Brihaspati, however, provides for an exceptional case and 
says that where a woman follows a man to his hbiise and 
there allures him by soft touches, etc., there she shall receive 
higher punishment than the man, 1 the usual condition of 
things being here reversed. 1 mention these little matters 
only to show how shrewd our law-givers were, and how 
boldly they faced the realities of the world without being 
overcome by that sort of false sentimentalism which has 
influenced some of our modern systems of law to absolve a 
woman altogether from guilt in a case of adultery. 

— In its primary stricter sense the word signified 
theft., i.e., taking away the property of another without 

WftW SIWn TOTCN*: Wf: II 



THE LAW OF TOUTS AtfD THE LAW OF CRIMES. 858 

his consent not by the use of force but of deceit. Accord- 
ing to the value of the articles stolen, theft may be divided 
into three classes : paltry theft ( ^ ), theft of ordinary 
magnitude ( and theft of precious things ( wto ). 
The word is, however, also used in a wider and 
more comprehensive sense to denote every offence against 
# property which springs from, avarice and is carried out 
by fraud and deceit. It will be understood that this 
involves an extension of the primary signification of the 
word to cover analogous offences characterised by slyness 
as distinguished from aggresiveness and violence. Taken 
in this sende, theft has been divided into two kinds: 
open theft (irwui)* and concealed theft 1 These 

two expressions may remind a student of the Homan Law 
of the distinction drawn in that system between manifest 
and non-manifest: theft ; but though the expressions are 
similar, the distinction between open and concealed theft 
in the Hindu Law is in no way identical with the distinc- 
tion between manifest and non-manifest theft of the Homan 
Law. The distinction drawn by t he Roman Law was founded 
on the place or time of arrest of the offender ; the manifest 
thief was he who was caught in the act or on the spot or 
at least with the thing stolen on him before be had 
transported it to its destination ; in any other case the 
theft was called non-manifest, so that if the thief had once 
reached his destination and was afterwards taken with the 
thing stolen on him, he was not a manifest thief : this 
distinction was at one time of serious practical moment, 
for according to the Twelve Tables a manifest thief was 
condemned to death, while a non-manifest thief was only 
compelled to refund double the value of what he had 
stolen. The distinction between open theft and concealed 

1 firPrer: i 


Divided into 
threo classes 
according to 
the value of 
tho stolen 
property. 
Wider sense 
of the term. 


It coveis 
offences 
analogous to 
theft. 

Open and 
concealed 
theft : 

not to be 
confused with 
manifest and 
non-manifest 
tli eft of the 
Homan Law 



Concealed 
theft, what it 
meant. 

Open theft, 
what it 
included. 


Here 

superiority of 
caste of the 
offender not 
an extenua- 
ting cir- 
cumstance ; 
but it rather 
aggravated 
the offence. 


Enumeration 
of crimes not 
exhaustive. 


854 " THE LAW OF TORTS AKD THE LAW OF CRIMES* 

theft under the Hindu Law was based on a nice discrimina- 
tion; by the expression concealed theft was meant theft in 
the proper sense Of the word where property is dishonestly 
taken away from another's possession without his consent: 
by clandestine means; open theft, on the other hand 
meant quite a different thing for it signified the taking 
away of another’s property with his consent obtained by 
questionable means, and thus it included cheating under 
various pretences, taking of bribes and breach of trust. In 
illustration of the highly refined moral conception of the 
Hindu lawyers it may be mentioned that a quack who 
professes to be a physician without proper medical training 
and thus takes money from patients on false pretences, a 
tradesman who in selling a cheap article makes it look like 
a valuable one and thereby deceives women and boys, and 
a person who falsely wears the garb of a religious mendi- 
cant and then imposes uj>on the credulity of other people 
and does them harm ; all t hese persons were declared to be 
as culpable as thieves and punishable as such. It has 
already been indicated that in the case of theft and other 
kindred offences superiority of caste was not regarded as 
an extenuating circumstance ; it is true the punishment 
varied with the caste of the offender, but it varied in. the 
reverse order, since the moral depravity which these 
offences indicate was less excusable in a man of a superior 
caste than in a low-caste offender. 

I have now said a few words on each of the principal 
divisions of crimes under the Hindu Law. It must not, 
however, be supposed that these exhaust the list of crimes 
recognised by the Hindu Law ; in fact the various forms 
which a particular type of offence may assume are too 
numerous to beexhausted by enumeration, and our lawgivers 
are fully cognisant of it ; thus speaking of the two divi- 
sions of theft and other kindred offences into open and 



THE LAW OF TORTS AND THE 1,AW OK CRIMES. 855 

concealed, Brihaspati went on to observe that these again 
might take a thousand different shapes according to the diffe- 
rences in intellect, capacity and artifice of the 'offenders/ 
indicating that you may classify offences into different 
groups according to their common characteristics, but you 
cannot exhaustively enumerate their different varieties. I 
, may now add a few words cm some minor offences not in- 
cluded in the above. We have already seen that trespass 
on others* goods, and encroachment on another's land were 
both regarded as offences in so far as they wore punishable 
with fines. Similarly causing nuisance at a. public place 
was regarded in the light of an offence, and punished as an 
offence. In short, if we are entitled to generalise from 
these and other instances, we may say that the intentional 
causing of injury in any form to the person or property of 
another person by the use of force or fraud was treated as 
an offence and regarded as punishable by the king. 

There is yet another class of offences winch deserves 
more than a passing notice ; 1 mean offences against 
public justice. A witness, who gives false evidence, 
not only commits a sin, but also renders himself 
liable to punishment as a criminal. Similarly, a 
person who having knowledge about a matter in contro- 
versy refuses to give evidence is as much a sinner as 
a false witness and should be punished in the same 
way* 2 The production of fraudulent and forged document 
in support of one's claim was another offence belonging to 
this group and it appeals that a person who falsely 
impugned a genuine document as a forgery was also 
deemed to be an offender of the same type. Corruption in 

•i 

*r TCTfVf w. i 
ft ii snn*wij: i 


A few minor 
offences. 


Trespass. 


l*ublic 

nuisance. 


Offences 
against 
public 
j UMlicc : 
giving fills© 
evidence. 

Refusal to 
give 

evidence. 

Production 
of fraudulent 
and forged 
documents. 
Falsely 
impugning 
a genuine 
document. 
Corruption 
in a judge. 



350 ’ THE LAW OF TORTS AND THE LAW OF CRffMES. 


Taking 
bribes by a 
judge. 


Omission to 
bring certain 
offences to 
the notice of 
the king. 


Negligence ; 
when it 
amounts to 
an offence. 


a judge was very strongly condemned. So Yajnavalkya 
says that each member of a court of justice wbo out of 
partiality, or avarice, or fear acts against the law, should 
be made to suffer twice the punishment inflicted upon the 
person who loses the action . 1 When, however, the 
judge works injustice by taking bribe from a litigant, 
the king should confiscate his property and banish him 
from the place.- It may also be mentioned that omission 
to bring certain offences to the notice of the king’s officers 
was also made punishable. All these rules indicate a high 
stage of mo tali ty and a lofty conception regarding proper 
administration of justice, and we can only wonder at the 
extraordinary ignorance of those who maintain that the 
Hindu kings paid very little attention to the administration 
of justice within their realm. 

Negligence, also, under certain circumstances amounted 
to an offence. Thus causing injury to men or animals by 
rash or negligent driving was an offence and rendered the 
offender punishable. In a case of rash driving it was the 
driver who committed the offence and was punishable as 
such, bud in a case of negligence the employer might also 
be liable to punishment if he had employed an unskilful 
man, and the negligence was a consequence of want of 
skill . 3 


wt: wrwji: faroftyj*’ ^ h 

^ fafW 

arsn forest i 

aqre: * fheftrete*: i i 

* 

I 



the law of torts and the law of crimes. 857 

A person, who abets the commission of an offence or 
hellos the offender by giviug him shelter and food, or does 
not prevent the offence while having the power to do so, is 
regarded as a participator in the crime and liable to punish- 
ment according to the circumstances of the case. The 
texts bearing upou the point have been quoted in connec- 
tion with the group of offences designated by the term BHRT 
(violent ofieuces), but I think, the principles are applicable 
with necessary modifications to other offences also, and it is 
expressly stated by Yajuavalkya that a person who know- 
lingly helps a thief by giving him food, shelter, fire, water, 
advice, materials and expenses renders himself liable to the 
highest amercement. An infant who is incapable of 
differentiating right from wrong is exempted from criminal 
liability. There is a text which says that an infant within 
the eighth year is similar to a child in its mother's womb , 1 
implying that he cannot be held responsible for his act. 
We find in the Mahabharata that the sage Auimiindavya 
says that an infant within the t welfth year from birth cannot 
incur any sin as he has no knowledge of the rules of proper 
conduct, and to this the sage adds two years more, and 
declares that he will establish the rule that no one should 
incur a. sin for anything done by him within fourteen years 
of age , 2 Naturally this latter rule seems to carry the 
exemption a little too far, and Nilkantha in his commentary 

wmj : swt ’sf u: xrre*Tfwn?r firu: » 

*rcrtf% vTwmfaront wfkvfa \ 
wf wwiffsN *r mrraftrefai: * 

* * * 

mfwrfit i 

i i 


Abetment. 
Accessories 
to a crime. 


Exemption 
from 
liability. 
Infancy as 
an excuse 



Bight of 

private 

defence. 


A few 

exceptions to 
criminal 
liability 
for theft. 


Caution 
required of 
the king in 
dealing with 
crimes. 


358 THE LAW- OF TORTS AND THE LAW OF CRIMES. 

taxes his ingenuity to get out of it by laying stress on the 
reason of the rule and declaring that in fact the exemption 
from responsibility extends so long as the infant cannot 
discriminate between right and wrong and no definite age- 
limit can be prescribed to meet every case. 1 

Our lawgivers fully recognised the right of private 
defence and a person who ip defence of bis person or 
property, replied the aggressor by force was exonerated 
from offence, and in extreme cases the right extended to 
causing the death of the aggressor even if he might be a 
Brahmin. 

While dealing with the subject of exemption from 
criminal liability, it may not be out of place to mention a 
few exceptions to criminal liability for theft. It is laid 
down by Mann that a traveller, who finding himself short of 
provisions, takes a small quantity of edibles from another’s 
field does not deserve to be punished on that accouut. 
This is no doubt founded on the principle that a petty 
offence committed under pressure whereby nobody suffers 
much ought to be excused. We also meet with a some- 
what bolder rule, undoubtedly conceived in a spirit of 
humanity, that it is allowable for a man who had nothing 
to eat for six consecutive meals, to take from another even 
without his consent enough to provide him with food for a 
day without looking for the morrow. * 

I have already stated that Manu declares that a king 
who condemns the innocent and absolves the guilty 
subjects himself to great disgrace and goes to hell. If 

* qrowStfa dtaw’ 5<s- 

mqfiwww vwiflpjufu: ■ 

* wfwwn i 
xpww fwn%*r wuW-fNw»iiw: « 



THB tAW OF TOMS AND THF5 LAW OF CRIMES. Sftft 

unwarily ha imposes penalty unjustly, he should expiate 
himself by distributing among Brahmins thirty times the 
amount which be has so realised. 

I shall now conclude the present lecture by making a 
few observations on the end of punishment according to the 
conceptions of our ancient lawgivers. I have already 
, observed that according to Manu one of the primary objects 
of punishment is the protection of the people. ' Penalty/ 
says he/' keeps the people under control, penalty protects 
them,- penalty remains awake when people are asleep, so the 
wise have regarded punishment as a dharma or a source of 
righteousness / 1 

According to this view the end of punishment is to 
ensure the protection of the people by creating a motive for 
desisting from crimes, for as Manu points out ' people are 
kept in check by punishment, for it is difficult to 
find a man who by nature sticks to the path of 
virtue and this world is enabled to afford sources of 
enjoyment through fear of punishment/- Besides this, 
there is yet another aspect of punishment, viz., as a source 
of purification of the culprit himself. So Manu says, 
'men who are guilty of crimes being condemned by the 
king become pure and go to heaven in the same way as 
good and virtuous men/* I am disposed to think that 
the two ends of punishment indicated above manifest a 
very high ideal regarding the end of criminal justice ; and 

w; infer asn: w'wfbwfir i 

W. i w wf u m: 

*wf fe » 

fv wm W amfrm w 

\ 

fwr qroPr *rmi: i 

•s 

Mren: qiforonftr i *«5: n«« 


Expiration 
for inflicting 
unjnst 
sentence. 

End of 
punishment 
according 
to the Hindu 
Law. 


Protection 
of the 
people. 


Punishment 
as a source 
of purification 
of the culprit. 



860 THE LAW OF TOFTS AND THE LAW OF CRIMES. 

it' is a source of gratification to me that our lawgivers, so 
far as I am aware, do not give any countenance to the view 
that the function of a court of justice in administering 
criminal law is to exact the vengeance which the complain- 
ant may feel disposed to demand. Time has changed and 
conditions of people have changed along with it, so that 
punishments which at one time seemed to be just and 
proper may now appear to be too severe, but the ideal of 
punishment held out by our ancient lawgivers docs not 
seem to require any revision though centuries have rolled by. 



LECTURE XIII. 


Adjective Law. 

„ In this lecture, I shall endeavour to place before you a 
short account of the adjective law according to the Hindu 
Sastras.** In doing so, I shall try to give you some idea 
regarding the constitution of courts, the procedure followed 
in adjudicating upon litigious disputes, and the evidence 
by which the parties were permitted to substantiate their 
claim or defence. 

Referring to the constitution of Courts, we find that 
primarily it was conceived to be the duty of the king to 
administer justice by hearing litigious disputes. In doing 
so, he was directed to take the assistance of councillors 
who were to act as assessors or advisers of the king. As 
regards their qualifications, it was declared that they should 
be learned in the Vedas, acquainted with the sacred law, 
addicted to truth, and impartial towards friend and foe ; 1 
and their number should be either three, live or seven, the 
reason for insisting upon an odd number perhaps being 
that in a ease of difference of opinion guidance might be 
obtained from the opinion of the majority. When, however, 
the king could not himself preside over the deliberations of 
the Court by reason of other avocations, it was directed 
that lie should appoint a Judge to act as his delegate along 
with the. councillors. The Judge so appointed was called a 
trnrfaqrer and it was directed that, he should be possessed 
of self-contr jl, belong to a respectable family, be impartial, 

1 fin*: i 

•4> 

rorr vm: ^ 3 »i*n: n 

46 • 


The subject 
introduced. 


Constitution 
of Courts. 

King, the 
supreme 
judge. 
Councillors. 

Their 

qudliticnliotJ. 


Delegation of 
the duty to 
administer 
justice to a 
Judge. 

His 

qualification. 



Where other 
people 
present in 
court could 
give out their 
opinion. 


862 ADJKfcTIVE tAW. 

temperate, firm, fearful for the future, virtuous; attentive 
and free from passion . 1 He should be selected, if possible, 
from among the Brahmans, or at all events from the 
Kshatriyas or the Vaisyas;. but ...never should a Sndra be 
appointed to such a post. It may here be mentioned that 
besides the Councillors selected and apj>ointed by the king 
in order to assist in the deliberations of the Court, it was 
declared that other people versed in the law who attend tlu" 
court should, if occasion arises, give their own opinion 
ou a disputed point of law to prevent a perversion of 
justice; nay it was pointed out that even silence may 
become culpable in such a case, for Maim declares that 
you must not enter the assembly or must speak out what is 
proper, for a man becomes a sinner who, under those 
circumstances, either preserves silence or speaks falsely. - 
It must not he supposed that this implies that every 
person who happened to be present in the court was 
entitled to prattle to his hearts' content on any disputed 
question arising in any judicial proceeding ; the above 
remarks only applied to those who were versed in the law, 
and, as such, had a recognised position in the judicial 
assembly, although they did not hold any appointment as 
an adviser of the court. As regards an ordinary visitor 
the rule of Narada held good, viz., that in a litigious 
dispute, one who has no appointed function should not say 
anything, and one who lias should say what is proper 
without any leaning towards either party . 3 

wnfNr’ vfwvfjg# wtvrafw i wm*. i 
a wm uSvsn ' nynsq vt wss i 

vrfi? w 

3 mfiigSN i 

fwgww 5 wwmfiri w i : t 



adjective law. 


363 


There was, however, this difference between the fane- Distinction 
tion of a duly appointed councillor and that of a learned nation of* 
lawyer who gave his opinion as, what we may call, awicm 
curiae; a councillor was, by reason of his post, a member duly 
of the court, and it was his duty to oppose a king if he councilor* 
wanted to proceed illegally, by remonstrating with him, 
since those councillors who follow a king, pursuing the 
path of injustice become participators in his act . 1 On the 
other hand, the duty of a lawyer who held no post ended 
when he gave out his opinion, and it was no part of his 
business to remonstrate with the king if he did not want to 
follow it. 

Besides the ordinary Court of Justice, of which the Local courts 
• • . . of 

constitution has been explained above, it has been declared authority. 

that families, corporations, and communities may also be 

charged with the decision of judicial proceedings. It must, 

however, be understood that these could only decide 

disputes which came within their special province, being 

disputes relating to matters which, from their very nature, 

fell within their special knowledge, for instance, disputes 

regarding trade and other local concerns. These local Gradation of 

..... courts, and 

courts had a sort of delegated authority within their right of 
limited spheres, but their decisions were subject to appeal a Pl ieMrl - 
in the following order ; a case having been decided by a 
family, an appeal, lay to the corporation, by a- corporation 
to the community, and by a community to the officers 
appointed by the king, or in other words, to the court 
properly constituted to try all disputes. Narada adds 
that a decision arrived at by the king's court from which 
the king is absent is appealable to the king himself. 

Having thus explained the constitution of courts, and 
their gradation, together with the consequent right of p rocedureB 

1 <**nt a nfq ^ mrra* i 



364 


ADJECTIVE LA W. 


Complaint : 
No litigation 
without 
complaint. 


Who were 
entitled to 
lodge a 
complaint. 


Exception in 
the case of a 
crime. 


Mode of 
lodging a 
complaint. 

Mode of re- 
cording a 
complaint. 


If the com- 
plaint dis- 
closed a cause 
of action, the 
defendant 
was to bo 
summoned. 
Modo of sum- 
moning a 
defendant. 
Personal at- 
tendance 
when dispen- 
sed with. 


appeal, I now proceed to deal with the procedure to be 
followed in deciding a litigious dispute. 

As I have already stated no civil action could be taken 
cognisance of except on a complaint. It is directed that 
neither the king nor his Officers should foster litigation by 
starting an action without a complainant, and, moreover, 
no complaint should be taken notice of when it proceeded 
from a person altogether Unconnected with the person * 
aggrieved. Narada adds that a person, who comes to the 
court with a complaint which docs not concern him, with- 
out being related to the person aggrieved as brother, father, 
son, or duly appointed agent should be punished. Of 
course, as I have already shown, this limitation does not 
apply to the case of a crime, for the king may and should 
take notice of it even without a complaint. 

As regards the mode of lodging a complaint, it is laid 
down that the complainant should appear before the court 
in all humility, and state the facts constituting his grie- 
vance, and his statement would be taken down accurately 
by an officer of the court called jfr g ra r or writer. The 
king, or the judge, as the case may be, and the councillors 
may then put any questions that they think proper in order 
to elucidate the complaint, and when they have been ans- 
wered, the whole should be taken into consideration in order 
to see whether the complaint discloses any proper cause of 
action ; if it does, then the defendant should be summoned 
to appear through an officer of the court appointed for the 
purpose called or by issuing a summons duly s rved 

by the court. It is, however, laid down that there are 
certain persons who may not be summoned to appear per- 
sonally before the court, meaning thereby that they may 
be allowed to appear through an agent ; as instances of 
persons who were so exempted from personal attendance 
we may mention persons in great distress, persons con 



ADJKCTIVE LAW. 


865 


stantly engaged in the performance of religious cremonies, 

. persons who would suffer great loss if they were compiled 
to appear, persons suffering from grief, engaged in kings* 
business, or busily employed in some auspicious ceremony, 
those who are intoxicated, insane or otherwise deranged in 
mind as well as those who are dependent on others such as 
servants, young women, &c. It is unnecessary to endea- 
vour to go through the whole catalogue of the persons 
exempted from personal appearance in the manner stated 
above, for I hope the examples already given will indicate 
the principles on which tin* exemption was based. It may, 
however, be interesting to add that besides those already 
mentioned, a bridegroom who was about to be engaged in 
the marriage, a soldier about to start on an expedition, and 
an emissary from another king were excused from personal 
attendance at least for the time. It should be understood 
that the exemption spoken ol* above relates to ordinary 
litigation, for when the charges are very grave the king 
may summon even those who are sick causing them to be 
conveyed slowly in carriages, and oven an ascetic who has 
repaired to forest may be called in such a manner as not 
to arouse his anger. It should also be added that persons 
charged with any of the serious offences should not be 
allowed to appear through an agent, and then personal 
attendance must be insisted on. A person who being duly 
summoned disobeys the summons without any excuse 
should be punished with a fine. I may now turn to a 
somewhat peculiar procedure recognised by the Hindu Law 
to ensure the attendance of a defendant. Tliis was called 
or the imposing of legal restraint. It could be 
resorted to by a person about to prefer a complaint, when 
he found that his adversary was not paying any heed to 
his claim or*was evading it, by way of imposing a restraint 
on the freedom of the defendant until the arrival of the 


Punishment 
for (UhoIkn 
dieiico of 
summons. 


or the 
imposing 
of legal 
restraint. 



Ponr kinds 
of legal 
restraint. 


When it coaid 
not be im- 
posed. 


Wilfnl viola- 
tion of legal 
restraint 
properly 
imposed 
was punished, 
as well as - 
imposition 
of legal 
restraint 
without 
proper 
gronnds. 
Procedure to 
be followed 
when the 
defendant 
entered ap- 
pearance. 


$66 ADJECTIVE LAW* 

summons from the court. The legal restraint which could 
be bo imposed was fourfold ; locals temporary, inhibition 
from going abroad/ and from the pursuit of a particular 
work or occu[>ation ; thus the intending complainant could 
say to his adversary, ‘ I am going to complain against you 
at once, and the summons will come, do not leave this 
place until it comes, or do not engage yourself in any other 
work for an hour or two, or do not leave the country so as 
to avoid the process, or do not follow a particular occupa- 
tion so long as we do not settle our dispute before the court 1 . 
Almost the same persons who arc exempted from personal 
attendance in a court are also declared to be unfit to be 
detained by the imposition of what I have celled legal 
restraint. It was also laid down that any person who was 
so situated that it would be most inconvenient for him to 
have his freedom of movement interfered with, should not 
be subjected to any legal restraint by the intending com- 
plainant in anticipation of the complaint and the consequent 
issue of process from the court. A person who wilfully 
violated a legal restraint properly imposed rendered himself 
liable to be punished, and on the other hand, a person who 
imposed a legal restraint without proper grounds and under 
circumstances which did not justify its imposition made 
himself liable to penalty. When the defendant enters 
appearance, the complainant is called upon to repeat his 
complaint in the presence of the defendant, when he does 
so it is again taken down and that forms the plaint in the 
case. On this occasion, the complainant is required to go 
more into details so as to make his charges quite specific, 
and definite as regards time, place, and so forth, and the 
manner in which the cause of action arose. Any serious 
discrepancy between the complaint as originally lodged 
and the plaint as recorded in the presence of the adversary 
may prove fatal to the cause. 



ADJECTIVE LAW. 


S67 


A proper declaration of complaint should be significant, 
. technically precise, comprehensive, unwavering, direct, une- 
quivocal, conformable to the original complaint, not opposed 
to well-known facts, consistent, clear, susceptible of proof, 
concise and yet not deficient in meaning, and consistent, 
with local and temporal conditions. A plaint should be 
rejected as containing a mere semblance of a true and 
proper complaint, if the declaration on which it is based 
is unnatural, or discloses no injury to the complainant, or 
is unmeaning, frivolous, unsusceptible of proof, or at 
variance with possibility. A plaint which is not altogether 
inadmissible but is wanting in precision or otherwise defec- 
tive, may be allowed to be amende 1 at any time before the 
defendant has put in his answer, but no amendment can be 
allowed afterwards, for otherwise there may arise what is 
called the fault of inability to stay ( ^43 «n ) ; since if you 
allow an amendment of the declaration after the answer, 
the defendant may ask to put in a supplementary answer, 
which may be followed by a fresh amendment of the 
decla.ation to be met by a fresh answer, and so on. So 
Narada says that * a declaration may be amended until the 
answer is given in, but being stopped by the answer, the 
corrections must cease/ 

When the plaint has been properly and correctly 
recorded, the defendant is to be called upon to answer to 
the charge laid against him. The defendant may, if 
necessary, obtain an adjournment for putting in his 
answer, but in cases of certain specified offences he 
should be called upon to submit his answer at once. Just 
as the complaint is recorded in the presence of the defen- 
dant, so the answer, in its turn, is taken down in the 
presence of^the complaint, the utility of confronting the 
two parties when they unfold their eases being obvious. The 
answer should meet the grounds raised by the complaint 


Character of 
a proper de- 
claration of 
complaint. 


Whon the 
plaint should 
be rejected. 


Amendment 
of plaint 
wlieu allowed 


Defendant’s 

answer. 

Adjournment 
for answer 
when granted 
and when 
not. 

Answer 
should be 
taken clown 
in tlio 
presence 
of the com- 
plainant. 
Qualities of a 
proper 
answer. 



368 


ADJECTIVE LAW. 


Four kinds 
of answers. 


Nature of tlie 
answer 
affected the 
future course 


and he substantial, unhesitating, clear, consistent, 
and free from prolixity and yet not obscure. An answer 
may assume either of four forms ; ‘ a confession, a denial, a 
special exeeption and a plea of former judgment {res 
judicata) are the four sorts of answer/ 1 says Katyayana. 
There is no difficulty in understanding what a confession 
and a denial mean. A special exeeption, which is also called 
a plea of justification ( wqftirc*) is thus defined by Narada, 
‘ where the defendant admits the allegations recorded by 
the plaintiff as true, but urges reasons (in denial of the 
liability), the pi & so taken is called a special exception . 3 ' l 
Thus, virtually, it amounts to what may be called a plea of 
confession and avoidance, in as much as here the defendant 
admits at least partially, if not wholly, the allegations made 
by the plaintiff, but at the same time avers additional fa ts 
and brings forward reasons why notwithstanding the 
admission, the plaintiff's case should fail. A plea of res 
judicata has been thus defined by Harita, “ when the 
defendant avers that the matter in controversy was the 
subject of a former litigation between him and the plaintiff 
when the latter was defeated, the plea is a plea of former 
judgment (or res judicata) ”. 

You will now see how the nature of the answer affected 
the future course of the litigation. A judicial proceeding, 


fwrareura ^ i 

^^ra mww. 



AltfECflVE LAW. 369 

according to the lawgivers, ordinarily consists of four steps 
or stages, viz,, the complaint, the answer, the trial, and the 
deliberation followed by the decree. 1 When the answer 
amounts to an admission of the claim, there is no further 
need of any trial, and the decree follows at once ; in other 
eases, after the answer has been duly recorded, there arises 
the necessity for a trial. Tl^ere the question is, who should 
begin ? As to this, the rule is that when the answer 
amounts to a denial, it is the duty of the complainant to 
begin and substantiate his claim by adducing evidence ; in 
the other two cases, the defendant must begin and subs- 
tantiate his defence. 2 When the answer is of a complex 
character, its component parts should be separately taken 
into consideration, and the mode of trial in its consecutive 
stages should be regulated according to the nature of the 
pleas constituting the answer. 

When the answer has been duly taken down, and it has 
been determined which of the parties is to begin, he is to 
be called upon to state the evidence by which he proposes 
to substantiate his case. Yajnavalkya says that a compe- 
tent surety should be taken from each party for the 
satisfaction of the judgment, if it goes against him ; if 
a party be unable to furnish a competent surety, steps 
should be taken to ensure his attendance during the trial. 
Counter-charge against the complainant should not be 
taken cognisance of until the completion of the trial of 

1 wn farntrawra \ 

vaneirfan 11 

2 f*rff ft* 

a N 

flfircnt *r w *??<t ii 

fwnrnrw TS»rn i 
47 


of litigation. 
Four stops in 
a litigation. 


Trial — who 
should 
begin 9 
This depends 
on the nature 
of the plea. 


Fhi rest y for 
the 

an t iafact ion 
of the 
judgment. 


Counror- 
nltitrgo not 
to be taken 
cognisance 



ADJECTIVE LAW. 


<rf until Lite 


completion 
of the trial 
of the 


^original 

oomplamt. 

Exceptions. 


Production 
of evidence. 


Five persons 
liable to lose 
their cause. 


Alteration 
of the case 
originally 
sot up when 


370 

the original complaint. 1 This restriction is, of course, 
confined to a retort not having a tendency to refute the 
original complaint. Apart from this, in prosecutions for 
verbal abuse, personal violence, or other violent offences, 
recrimination is allowable so that the person complained 
against may without having refuted the charge, recriminate 
his accuser ; this, the Mitaksliava explains, is allowed not 
for the sake of carrying on two* distinct proceedings simul- 
taneously but because the counter-charge, if made out, may 
serve as an extenuation leading to a mitigated punishment. 
It is hardly necessary to say that when the original charge 
has been tried out, there is nothing to prevent the person 
complained against from preferring a counter-charge against 
the complainant and demanding a trial of the same. 

When the parties have duly recorded their complaint 
and answer, and the court has determined which party 
should begin, the trial commences with the party called 
u))on to begin adducing evidence in support of his case, 
and after him the opposite party similarly adduces his 
evidence before the eoii-t. The following five persons 
are liable to lose their cause : a person who having his case 
recorded in one way afterwards sets up a new case, a 
person who evinces his aversion to the trial by refusing 
to help its progress, a person who fails to appear at the 
time of the trial, a person who being called upon to answer 
keeps silent, and lastly a person who absconds with a vietf 
to avoid the process of the Court. - 

The Mitakshara however explains on the authority of 
another text of Narada that a verbal error involving an 

wfc i romr. » 

wfastowMftsr irafirotaShT i snww: i 
fi pCT C l 



ADJECTIVE LAW. 871 

alteration of the case originally set up is not fatal in civil 
actions ; should it appear in actions brought for reduction, 
for debt or for landed property, the plaintiff is to be 
amerced, but it does not annul his claim. From the 
specification of civil actions, it may ha inferred that in the 
case of a criminal prosecution such an abandonment of the 
case as originally laid is fatal, to the charge. A litigation 
once started should not be compromised except with the 
sanction of the court. 

Evidence is said to consist of documents, possession and 
witnesses ; in the absence of all these, a divine test is 
presented. Documents are of two sorts, official and 
private. Possession becomes evidence by giving rise to a 
presumption of title. When the one adduces human 
evidence and the other appeals to a divine tost., the king 
will proceed to examine the human evidence, and will not 
have recourse to divine test. A decision by divine test is 
allowable only in the absence of human evidence. This 
is the general rule. But in the investigation of a capital 
offence or assault and battery, and in all cases of 
violence committed long ago, both witnesses and 
divine test may be had recourse to. The proof of 
established custom among people of the same township 
or tribe depends on documentary evidence. There 
neither divine test nor witnesses are available. So 
also, in cases relating to pathways, roads, enclosures and 
watercourses, possession affords the weightiest proof. 

Witnesses are twofold ; a witness appointed, and a 
witness unappoiuted ; an appointed witness is one nomi- 
nated to give testimony ; an unappointed witness is one 
not so appointed. The minor divisions of these two classes 
of witnesses need not be referred to. Reliable witnesses 
generally possess the following qualities : " religious, 
generous, of respectable family, addicted to veracity r lovers 


fatal to the 
action, and 
when not . 


Compromise. 


Different 
kinds of 
evidence. 

Two kinds of 
documents. 

Possession. 

A division 
by divine 
test when 
allowable. 


Proof of 

established 

custom. 

Whore 

possession 

affords the 

weightiest 

proof. 

Two kinds 
of witnesses. 


Qualities of 
a reliable 
witness. 



872 


ADJECTIVE LAW. 


Characteris- 
tics exhibited 
by an . 
untruthful 
witness. 


Formal 
validity of 
a document. 

Mode of 

examining 

witnesses. 


Burden of 
proof rests 
on him who 
sets up an 
affirmative 
oaso. 


Ordeals. 


Deliberation 
and decision. 


of virtue, candid, having offspring, wealthy, conformer to 
traditional and written law, and in number three An 
untruthful witness generally- exhibits the following 
characteristics : he constantly shifts his position, licks the 
corners of his lips, his forehead sweats and his counte- 
nance continually changes colour ; his mouth dries 
up and he falters in his speech and very often 
contradicts himself ; he does not look up or is slow in 
returning answers and contorts his lips ; such a person who 
exhibits an unnatural aspect either in body, mind, words or 
action is esteemed false, whether putting forward a claim 
on his account, or giving evidence in another’s cause. 

The formal validity of a document depends on the 
usage of the country. 

The witnesses should be made to depose having been 
placed near the plaintiff and defendant. Having called 
the witnesses, the judge shall place them on their oath 
and then interrogate them about the case. The proof 
of a negative is dependent on the establishment of 
an affirmative, and the establishment of an affirmative 
is not dependent on the proof of a negative. Hence 
the burden of proof lies upon him who sets up an affir- 
mative case. 

An ordeal is not like human evidence confined to an 
affirmative only, but it extends indiscriminately both to 
affirmatives and negatives. There are several distinct 
forms of ordeal prescribed in the books, but I do not think 
it will serve any useful purpose to discuss how they were 
administered. It must be remembered that they were to 
be avoided where other kinds of evidence were forth- 
coming. y 

When both the parties have adduced their evidenoe it 
becomes the duty of the court to deliberate and decide 



ADJECTIVE tAW. 873 

which party should succeed; on such deliberation, the 
judgment follows embodying the decision of the court. 
The winning party then obtains what has been called 
gfsitp* or decree; this document embodies a summary of 
the pleadings, of the evidence adduced by the parties, of 
the court's deliberation thereon, and of the law applicable 
to the case as determined by the court . 1 It -bears the 
signature of the judge and the mark of the royal seal. 

A decision obtained by false evidence is liable to be set 
aside on review. Similarly a decision obtained by fraud or 
force is liable to be vacated on proof that it was so obtained. 
So also, a litigation with women or with persons not in 
sound state of mind by reason of intoxication, insanity, 
disease, extreme distress infancy or intimidation is in- 
effectual and cannot produce any binding effect. A trial 
held during night or within closed doors or outside juris- 
diction is void and so liable to be annulled. 

When a judgment has been pronounced by a proper 
court, it becomes the duty of the king to enforce it by the 
exercise of his administrative powers. 

By protecting people in the proper enjoyment of their 
rights, by punishing the delinquent and by exculpating 
the innocent, the king pleases the whole world, and himself 
attains fame, victory and heavenly bliss. 

i nrnrour' trfN ^ « 
vra h# i *rre: 

X. x 


Judgment. 


Dm* roe : 
what it 
should 
contain. 


Review. 

Grounds for 
vacating a 
previous 
judgment. 


Enforcement 
of the docreo. 



LECTURE XIY 


* 

Sxoellenoe 
of Hindu 

Jurisprudence 


Concluding Remarks, 

In concluding my introductory lecture I ventured to 
assert that although Hindu Jurisprudence might not 
in all respects be as perfect as one could desire, still I 
hoped to be able to show that, in the main, it would not 
compare unfavourably with even the most developed system 
of ancient Jurisprudence, the Roman. After having briefly 
reviewed most of the principal topics of jurisprudence as 
dealt with by the Hindu Jurists, I feel that what I said 
there was not dictated by any undue partiality towards 
my national system, and I repeat my conviction that what- 
ever may be the views of those self-styled critics who 
somehow or other start with a prejudice against every- 
thing Hindu, an honest investigator will not hesitate 
to endorse my assertion as founded on truth. More than 
four score years ago, Sir Francis Macnaghten said 
speaking of the Hindus : “ The merit of having been 

the founders of their own jurisprudence cannot he denied 
to this people ; and those who are at all conversant with 
the decisions of our own courts will acknowledge the 
analogy which exists between some of their doctrines, and 
some of the texts which I have cited from the Hindu Law. 
Where this is not to be found, a comparison may in several 
instances be made without disadvantage to the Hindus”; 
»nd yet when he wrote in the above strain the materials 
phieh he had in his hands were far from being complete. 
Since then critics have come and gone who have not 
lesitated to sneer at the -Hindu Law without caring to 



CONCLUDING REMARKS. 


375 


descend into particulars and almost assuming that advanced 
judicial ideas could have no place outside certain local 
limits- 

It may not, therefore, be useless to recapitulate some 
points of excellence which characterized the Hindu Law as Comprehend 
developed by the sages and the commentators. In the 
, first place, we may be permitted to observe that in point of 
comprehensiveness the Hindu Law in its various branches 
occupies a; fairly high place among the systems of ancient 
jurisprudence. Its conception of legal liability is broad 
and perspicuous, and although it has generally retained the 
eighteen divisions of the topics of litigation as described by 
Maim, that has not in any way stinted its growth or 
prevented it from embracing within its range the various 
aspects* of juridical relations which the complexity of 
human affairs may usually being about. 

In the second place, the administration of justice Loftiness^ 
according to the Hindu system was evidently actuated by icloa1 ' 
a bigli sense of duty, and it is impossible to deny that our 
lawgivers ever carried in their mind a. very lofty ideal 
regarding the function which they had to discharge. They 
were uot merely guided by an idea of temporary expe- 
diency, but were moved by the higher idea of f ’ which 
in one of its phases looks upwards to revelation and in 
another looks forward to the permanent welfare of the 
entire sentient world. 

In the third place, whatever else you may say, no one Logical 
can complain that our lawgivers were lacking in logical con- 
sistency. The Hindu mind has ever been eminently logical ; 
subtlety o£ discrimination, analytical skill, and logical 
accuracy in defining legal conceptions have always been its 
delight ; amf it has never enunciated a principle without 
perceiving what it really involves and the deductions which 



876 % CONCLUDING BIHAR t&* 

logically follow from it. Whoever knows anything about 
the manner in which legal topics have been discussed 
by the commentators, and the way in which, even at the 
present day, orthodox students of Hindu Law carry on 
their discussions on disputed questions, will not feel any 
hesitation in endorsing what I say. However high the 
position of a Hindu scholar may be, no opinion of his will 
carry any weight with an orthodox lawyer unless it stands 
the test of logical scrutiny applied according to the refined 
rules of ratiocination explained by Gautama and the logi- 
. cians of his school, and the subtle principles of interpre- 
tation laid down by Jaimini and his followers. Read? the 
work of any commentator, and you will find that at every 
step he has felt that ipse-dixitism will not do ; he must 
justify his position against all possible controversy and 
avoid logical blunder and inconsistency. 


Reasonable* 
nofiB, and * 
regard for 
the interest 
of the 
community. 


Lastly, our lawgivers have also taken care that the 
rules laid down by them may not be unreasonable and 
detrimental to the interest of the community at large. 
LaW, exists for the benefit of the people ; it is a manifesta- 
tion of the eternal Reason that rules this universe, and it 
justifies itself by being conducive to the welfare of the 
people who are governed by it. The king cannot over- 
ride it ; the judges cannot dispute its authority ; and the 
people are bound to obey it not merely because it has the 
support of temporal authority, but because it draws its 
inspiration from the fountain of supreme wisdom. It 
must not be supposed that I mean to maintain that there 
is no rule of Hindu Law which to a modem mind may 
seem to be unreasonable ; I have already indicated that 
Jhe disparity of punishment according to difference of 
caste seems to us to be at least to some extent unjust and 
unreasonable ; but I venture to affirm that mere errors in 
detail can furnish no reason for iguorirtg the guiding 



CONCLUDING HEM ARKS. 377 

principle which actuated oui* law-givers in enunciating and 
expounding the law. 

It has been remarked that our ancestors were mere 
dreamers ; but we who are more asleep than awake can 
hardly discriminate what is a dream and what is not. It 
is no doubt true, and we should feel proud of it, that our 
forefathers meditated upon the potentialities of existence 
beyond the world with an earnestness unsurpassed in the 
history of philosophy ancient or modern ; but surely that 
did not make them forget the concerns of worldly life, 
for nothing human was alien to them ; in medicine, which 
has as its aim the alleviation of human suffering by curing 
the distempers of our physicial organism, the system in- 
troduced by them even now commands the admiration of 
the scientific world ; in the Held of jurisprudence also their 
labours were equally well-directed and equally successful; 
but unfortunately circumstances intervened which retarded 
its growth and at the present day very few among us feel 
any curiosity to enquire what it was like, and how far it 
was developed ; nay, there are people who even seem to enter- 
tain serious doubts regarding its existence. It was there- 
fore, with a heavy sense of responsibility that I took upon 
myself the task of presenting a short but systematic 
exposition of some of the important principles of Hindu 
Jurisprudence in its several divisions and sub-divisions. 
Having regard to the novelty and the importance of the 
subject a more elaborate discussion would not, perhaps, 
have been out of place ; but travelling as I was over a long 
deserted ground I could not afford to run the risk of tiring 
out the patience of those who might be following me. 

Here, then, I conclude my lectures. I am aware that 
to a mere practising lawyer a study of the topics discussed 
by me in tliese lectures may not appear to be profitable to 
any considerable exent; but I venture to expect that to a 
48 


Practical 
insight of our 
law- givers: 
they were 
not mere 
dreamers. 


Conclusion. 



878 CONCLUDING REMARKS* 

; ’ ' 

student of scientific jurisprudence it will not appear to be 
altogether valueless. Success in the profession depends 
upon a combination of various conditions and influences 
which arc not all within our control ; many strive for it 
and a few succeed. But whether we succeed or fail in the 
pursuit of professional reputation, let us not forget that 
we have a higher duty to perform, a higher ideal to have 
in view, and a higher inspiration to be guided by. 

Who is there among us who will not feel a thrill of 
pleasure and a sense of mental and moral elevation to be 
reiniuded that we also had a brilliant past, and that the 
wisdom of our forefathers has left its traces in the various 
branches of learning not excluding even those which some 
nations profess to be specially their own ? Who is there 
among the studeuts of Jurisprudence who will not feel a 
keen curiosity to get an insight into the conceptions and 
principles of a system of Jurisprudence which to say the 
least of it, is as old as the Homan ? And, above all, who is 
there, who will not be moved to see the manifestation of 
one universal reason which unfolds itself amidst the diver- 
sity of_ details through unexpected similarities of legal 
conceptions, rules and institutions ? The sun arose in the 
east aud travelled towards the west, and it is the 
same light which illumines the whole world ; supercilious 
observers may think that 'east is east, and west is west, 
and never the twain shall meet/ but deeper insight into the 
institutions of the different countries discloses that it is 
the same universal reason which permeates the universe, 
and its touch makes the whole world kin. 



APPENDIX A. 


SOME RECENT DECISIONS ON THE 
INTERPRETATION OF HINDU L AW TEXTS. 


/. Gangadhar Bagla v. I lira Lai Bagla , (1916) S3 C.L.J. 
373. 

A special text or statute forming an exception to a 
general text or statute should be construed strictly and 
applied only to cases falling clearly within it. 

Where a Hindu widow governed by the Mitakshara 
School of Law, dies without issue leaving stridhan 
property, an adopted son of her husband taken in conjunc- 
tion with another wife and a son of her husband born of 
the womb of a third wife inherit, as her husband’s 
sapindas, her stridhan property, in equal shares. 

Briddha Gautama lays down the general rule that an 
adopted son endowed with excellent qualities and an after 
born sou are equal sharers. Va&ishtha introduces an 
exceptional rule with regard to the inheritance to father’s 
property, viz., “if after he has been adopted, a legitimate 
son be born, then the datfaka shall obtain a fourth share.” 

It was held, that this exception must not be extended to 
property inherited from step mother. 

“Consequently we should not extend its application to 
cases not only not comprised strictly within its letter, but 
undoubtedly beyond its true spirit : in this connection we 
may bear in mind that Hindu jurists, quite as much as 
English jurists (Ebbs v. Bouluois (1875) L. R. 10 Ch. 



880 APPENDIX A 

App. 479 (484) ; Co. tiitt. 299a) recognise the well- 
known canon of interpretation that a special text or statute 
forming an exception to a general text or statute should 
be construed strictly and applied only to the cases falling 
clearly within it ; the Mitakshara itself recognises the 
principle that where an exception exists to a general rule, 
the exception should be confined within the strictest 
limits, so as not to encroach uhduly upon the rule : Gangu 
v . Chandra (1907) I. L. K. 32 Bom 275 ; Anandi v. Hari 
(1909) I. Jj. R. 33 Bom 404 ; Dattaka Chandrika Sec. V. 
27 ; Mitakshara on Prayaschitta, Ed. Moghe, p. 292 ; 
irari t 

Per Mookerjee, J. pages 387-388. 

2. Rant chandra Mart and tYaiter and or*, vs. Yinayak 

Venkatexh Kothekar and anof/ter , (1914) m Z0C\ />. /. 57-7 
P . C\ 

The Hindu Law contains its own principles of exposi- 
tion, and questions arising under it cannot be determined 
on abstract reasoning or analogies borrowed from other 
systems of law, but must depend for their decision on the 

rules and doctrines enunciated by its own law-givers and 
recognised expounders. 

The questions were, that, whether the expression 
‘bandhu’ would be confined ouly to those three classes of 
hkiuna gotra sapindas that were mentioned in the 
Mitakshara, or whether any new class of heirs can be 
introduced under it ; and secondly whether the word 
sapinda should be understood in a wide sense to include 
every person related by particles of the body, or whether 
it should be understood in a restricted sense, so as exclude 
from inheritance every one related through females beyond 
the fifth degree, and every one related through males 
beyond the seventh degree. 



APPENDIX A 


381 


Held, first,' that the classes specified by Vijnaneswara 
cannot be added to ; aud the case of Giridharilal Roy r. 
Government of Bengal, 12 M. 1. A. 448, is jio authority for 
the extension. 

Held, further, that the relation of sapinda ceases for 
purposes both of marriage and of inheritance after five 
degrees in case of relationship through females. 

“The limitation of five degrees clearly applies and can 
only apply to the bitin na //otro sapimhis. But it is 
contended that this limitation is confined to prohibition in 
respect of marriage. As has already been observed, a part of 
the limitation appears to have been applied to the succession of 
samanagofra sapindas : their Lordships are unable 
to see on what principle it can be said that the other 
part relative to kinsmen who are equally sapindos but 
belong to a different gotra or sons must be restricted to 
matrimonial affinity. 

* -x- * 

In the absence of any authoritative text, their Lord- 
ships do not see their way merely on abstract reasoning 
to displace a view of the law which has received the recog- 
nition of the Courts in India and which the District Judge, 
ati officer of great experience and learning says is 
accepted by “ public opinion.” 

Per Mr. Ameer Ali. Pages 008 and 009. 

3 . Prana ?i nakuma r Bone v. Saratnani Ghosh (7 908) (7.Z/.7?. 

36 Gal . 86. Brett , Mitra and Cove, JJ. 

On a difference of opinion between Justices Brett and 
Coxe, the cage was referred to Mitra, J., who agreed 
with Brett J. 

The question was whether under the Dayabhaga 
School of ifindu Law, the son or the married daughter 
is the preferential heir to the mother’s aymttnka stndhana. 



382 : APPENDIX ' A ' ' ■ ' 

The decision depended upon the meanings of the 
expression kanya given by Jim utayahana in connection 
with his quotation from Mann in Ch IV, Sec. 2, Para 
16. It appears that Srikrishna and Raghunandan use 
the term as meaning daughter generally. But from 
Cha}). V of the Dayabhaga it is clear that Jimuta- 
vahana used it in the sense of an unmarried daughter. 

In such a conflict of opinions, that of Jimutavahana 

4. Bhnpatinath Smrititirlha v. Itamtal Mai fra {1909) 

I.L.R. 3 7 Cal . 128 F.B Sir Lawrence Jenkins C.J., 

Stephen^ Mookerjee> Coop and Chatterjee JJ. 

The principal question referred to the Full Bench 
was “Does the principale of Hindu Law, which invalidates 
a gift other than to a sentient being capable of accept- 
ing it, apply to a bequest to trustees for the establish- 
ment of an image and the worship of the Hindu deity 
after the testator’s death and make such a 'bequest 
void ?” 

Held on a construction of the expression 

9 (Dayabhaga Cli. I. Para 21) and comments 
thereon, read with Shoolapani’s and Raghunandana’s 
discussions as to the nature of Sradh and gift, &c., that 
the above principle of Hindu Law does not apply to 
such a bequest. 

“ The view that no valid dedication of property can 
be made bv a will to a deity, the image of which is not 
in existence at the time of the death of the tastator, 
is based upon a double fiction, namely, first, that a Hindu 
deity is for all purposes a juridical person, and secondly, 
that a dedication to the deity has the same charac- 
teristics and is subject to the same restrictions as a 
gift to a human being. The first of these propositions 



APPENDIX A 3g3 

.is too broadly stated, and the second is inconsistent 
with the first principles of jurisprudence.” 

Per Mookerjee J. Page 161. 

“ The Hindu Law recognises dedications for the 
establishment of the image of a deity and for the main- 
tenance and worship thereof. The property so dedica- 
ted to a pious purpose is placed c ■ tra-commercinm and is 
entitled to; special protection at the hands of the soverc-* 1 
ign whose duty it is to intervene to prevent fraud and 
waste in dealing with religious endowments.” Per Mooker- 
jee J. Page 161. 



APPENDIX B. 


| List of Sanskrit texts quoted in the book. 

• 8 * 

S TEXT Reforeaco. 


' *kimk: firainam: i 

**?rogf** Tn^: *tto 3 iw wm » 

1 TOfafa^i*hwrcrTOtJ&%fs^T: i 

annua qn<quRgTO & ii 

miwuw -HTfa foni 

snumqt arftre^r srfairenRtTOT: n 

2 iq. mTOH* i 

TOgfeuffaT m m wf?nmrw3 n 

i *p$ gwgilq&ra arai srotut i 
to grfisfJr **nt yiTOg q w i; ii 

3 f fwsmtfafaiwa: i 

1 surag a*TTO!TO: i 


Manu II, 12 


Purva 
Mimauaa 
]. ii. 2&3. 


Yajna- 

valkya 

1.4A6 


Vrihaspati, 
cited by 
Kulluka on 
Ifanu 1. 2. 


Para sera 
I. 21 


N&radR 
I. 40 


Yajua- 
ralkya 11.21 


2 





qffifaqatfft- an w t gc re ^ -w??^iT^q^TO?:-TOR 
*W i 


Viramitro- 


daya, 

Vyavahara. 



APPENDIX ' B. 


885 


I vf?R i 

3 ^linsmtat^Tirat n 

stswiN' 3 * 3 % ^g^T’grT^inff^sr; i 
«n%^r n 

3t WRpr faaTWTft fs5^1T: *U?T*iqT I 
«TO^T^IT5rimTe5f W^TOPIRl II 

*T3^IT ajftl ^?9T WTWT Tl<5maT pi 

%3T3nf?r ^ % vfcr.rar trqfwn: i 
TO* n ura^tar. hsit: n 

3RitrcFanW?i a*r sftcra wf?r i 

* * # * * 

nTJTfg’fTPT^^T: u 


Manu II. 
10,11. 


Jaimini'ii 
Ny ay am ala, 
I. iii- 5. 


Vrihaspati, 
II. 28-31. 


mqfs’rrswsrp- 

*T3 , rosranrc f* 

nwnralwif^i^ftw^i^T^i ?ra 
*i sn^i m i HTqfartTtfr^ v&'WK faxrc: i 
tresrtarssvra nraf^ft ^ i 

zi^asirpwf-^r^^f^-fsi^r^^ sHwnafa- 

«nr*?T, si^«rlwnwxf i 
< q q ?BiT tnSn^i^rr-%cTT^4^r ? it?%frf^f»i'iqu^ 
q^rar ^qivrre-qrsR^gfw^Tii i *r?nw 
%umg **^ t* r %ai-^Tfa-ir^q&r-^raro-*faTOi: 
nunrft^ i w qi^TuiHT: i 

n im $4 Sat i *t 


4 9 



APPENDIX B, 


21 1 

24 1 

26 1 

2 

26 } 

>* 2 

i» 3 

28 

20 1 

80 1 

„ 2 

81 1 


traywprm q i *iwy<raftq 

wwft) q rerefofra t gwftqrc: WTfqfa fw: n 

qqrfw% i 


Viramitro- 

daya, 

Vyayahara. 

Garga cited 
by Kulluka 
on Mann, 
II. 6. 


qwffqarct mra: nfwwi i 

» _ ..a, . . . 

ww*#qtswg&r iq: i n sSwwir gytr 
faqfrr. n wft:wmriyqT*iw uafq i ftaa- 
rafig v * qqt i 


Narayan 

TJpanishad. 

Purva 
Mimansa. 
I. i. 3. 

Kathopati- 

shad. 

I. ii. 


qte w^e<ut si?Twfr; i 

wm: gqqfwwqqia a^f^WTer i 
TrmT aigfasa atfSiw: vwqdt 
vqfa ihq W[ fafim aw i 

^wnts«jqqf*i:%r*farw: a aw: i 
fqqWlfq^Sw cT^eWTai*IT7t 
wifwTwfw^r: al: i 

f^yqfh wqvrc: aq f% ii 

5W*n% qsn:e^i: yw qqifurofa i 
^W. yag srrufw qw aw fq§qar. ii 

wrfaqrc wanpi qf%q^«r*nftftnf i 

% 

?WTf: edrdtarprt awwRrarfnai‘ u 

TOnnwi: fqnwq vm\ i 

qwTW 5?qa^f awra n *m$\ n 


Purva 

Mimania. 

II. i. 


Vasistha 

I. 


Vaisasikha 

Sutras. 


Ya.jna- 

valkya,II.5. 


Ifanu, 
YII. 18. 


Mauu, 
VIII. 808. 


Yajua- 

valkya, 

I, 337. 



APPENDIX B. 


387 


33 1 


n i 

41 1 

42 

53 1 

55 1 

56 1 

57 1 


g fc ffl ra fairqts^nfafaw. i 

* » 

tiwsN ssrfn^: 1 

m*ifa?ircn«r*Jift ^nfwroqV. 11 

^RTfirar^ w *n^r 1 

*\v *NN wfntre^g ^ 11 
^ftWrfwm fitni^i ^ ^ i 
tRPPErei^frflTf*T 11 

tRr*rer?*mif*r anroiwrf^ifa * 1 
■rgk % fa^r ti^^n: 11 


Mann, 
VIII. 4-7. 

Vrihasp&ti. 
cited in 
Vira. on 
Vyavaliara- 
pad a. 


■%s$ apu^pen^i wtto ^rfw^^F 1 
wrera^isnwTO: rerwr: ^tPaaT*. 11 

n^fsrfasitnre^ ajrertrfarafafa sw 1 


Karikabalt, 

1 . 2 . 

Srikriahna 
on Daya* 
bhaga, 1.5. 


^ra f^rmnin wtt srw: ^"r w, 1 
ttoPt: sqyfwnr * 11 

nfore: 

^qfc q to i yf«rlf *nSrt 1 

wusNNw jwrawt 11 

trc*w wiftw*. 1 

snsifef «na^r «r -ru*^ ^ 11 

•fwsnwcnTOT^nf sten* 1 

rrehi wtf»r^ w & ^ ^ * 


Manu x.llfi. 

Vira. on 
Partition 
I. 13, 

G. Sark&r's 
Edn. 


Manu, 
IX. 44. 


Manu, 
IX. 49. 


Maim, 
IX. 53. 



APPENDIX B. 


^rfkniftsifTrr^TfjTsir^r firarref: mf?r: i 

^rsrrafa^ ttFft ^srr^Wcsr fertfa i 
tfh SKT'^T^T crTlfsr^ ^crfvTT^TScT^f^rjTR^^' 
?R»nsTfWT5RT^ srsTf^iT irg^tra: sncq^irr-. 
qiftOn$ic€t<V}(^: i 

q t*W sjq* q&: I 

q$q Ifc^Rlfrfcf qCTI? q*T qq*{ || 

qT*nf*qt*qg favrir^ <?rqiqg qq$ q»q qq 
srrq^frqqrqwqT’qf fa?u% qTs?q«r: i 

q^n^tf ^WffT qqrqqrT^q: I 

qsNlWingTO^ ^Tf’ II 

^r^Trsg Hq^qafiqrtqqqfSqm i 
, q^^Tqq*teTq-qr«nq^^qtqq: 11 
qnra?j^T^ff^i’TT-JT i t?t^iTrrq^rwcr»f i 
sr’ttI' wrrq qrerf?? rrfasTiir^ir q q^ u 
qqiq qrqfrr<q# qn^r wr qqrqgq i 
qf rT *» T5fqW|5TI??TTfjTf?T flc^rT II 


^n^rT* q^fTfm qqp? qqfaifiqcr I 
qstfs* q^iffqRqkfirTT^ *rg?;sri^ 11 

qtqTqqqfqtfilff qtqqiqfff?rq? i 
zm qrrqqfq qsq^ qcjqsq fgfqgqTshr H 


Vira. 

I. 13 

G. Sarkar’s 
Edn, 


Srikrislu.a 
on Day a* 

bhaga, , 


Y ajna- 
v alky a, 
I. 342. 


Ap;» rarka. 
Ch iptf‘1- on 
D.it-t M-prn- 
dutiika. 


Na-radn, 
IV. 8. 


Narada, 
TV. 9.10,11 


Manu, 

VIII. 108. 


Mftiru. 

VIII. 16G. 



APPENDIX [J. 


g» ^l^f^cn fWif^r^r hr 11 

5tt‘ qTfqq qqjqnT’ing i 
qiunggiiRT hr htoi: i 

tafjTrHQTT^ri: mz\ | 

5TRH qgqffirWFT SfiHT^T HmifecR | 
«^^«?prifrn?€T% q*qq ii 

W. qfqgsr qi'gRTfq qftq^ I 
H HTHHTcT tJSSRRHg II 

H ^UTHI 

qf^qtqftHH TrspJHq; | 

qfq^TmqqTg s&H ftsTMT HH HTO<T. I 
^nfirgfTR q ^ i g q*z#?ng wti wg i 

Tf?T WV qt RHRT^5fT¥5f]H 1 
qfqqqj qW7= Hg HHTHfH’J'HR II 

wm qqq q^irn infW g«Rtqri: i 
q?faifw?m ssM fg#gHH%ggn: u 
qfoqpgRH q: qR g’Hpr *nq?iqiqt i 
fqgg: qfetqq irnfawronfawig « 
fqq%fs qjjmgffctafrwnftgi 

fqgnr g sratqsfe wn ^gt^ngii 

qftgwsg q^R: fqre^tf i 
qqtqqfqqgqitri fq*g Hwiggn: « 


889 


Mil. 1112 . 


Katynyami 
eitod in Mit. 
on Yuj. [I. 
170 . 

IT until 
cited in Vir. 
on Datta- 
pt-udiuiika. 

Katvnynna, 
cited in V. 
Mnyiikiia, 
on Dnrci- 
prad.'inik.'i . 

(iauttiTnn. 


Kiiiyayuiui. 
f’iJ.O<i HI 
Vim. on 
Asuituiiln ■ 
kr:i\ a. 


V nj na- 
val kva, 

1 1 172. 


N nr a da, 
IX. 4. 


Nnritda, 
IX. 2. 


Vara da 
IX. :i 


Narada. 
JX- 7 



390 


APPENDIXES. 


Nurmi*. 

vni im. 


99 1 


2 


100 1 


101 1 


102 1 


2 


103 1 


104 1 


trojrsr wa^ffr' a: i 





ffaroisi *\ *r: 3fq1 i 

s TjqT^r ireftst fawgyfsirq^cn n 


^?n^T #oTT * STfsTrf, fqSficrrq* *mfq?t, 
^TcrftTraq^q5RT^ ^ot: toi ^rfa: i **??- 
fSnpwtewnfrcfa i 


qai w re g ^t ^ ^stre i 

TOWf?!!? flftqJTT^?T»3^ci: II 

wnrafFi ^4 f^w trf^rqt^ i 

*nr q^sqwr^rn: ^mnr^sq^t^msfinpm: i 


ir£(*ll fw%3 ^Wf^PTTT f^qT | 

’STT^ ufaww g«srTg q^’fTTT: H 

mantsf *J*t fssjfo ?nfwl i 

qrwr gssruTHTqT ?sraif&»rt ii 

’Sprtq^sg 5qt g^Sf afipg^mTOfa i 
’frt^sr rj rntf ^^tcrfa: u 

^'fr'sEn^rrw^trai *fr*qrgq<?r?m 
wsarq^wraf rest g^nfgsiii??fnnwqf^i%, 


Yji juji. 

\-;il I. \ ;t 
11. 2.V. ;. 


Narailii. 

V1J1.U 


»Srnrii i 
Cli:iiidrik:i 


Y\ ;ik:i 


Y il jllii . 
Il.'llL'. 


Viratnitro- 

<laya. 


Ya jniJ, 

11-22. 


Yajt.ii 
11. 2 J. 


Nn-nula, 
I .17 


107 l 



AmsNinx n. 


Ml 


t%- f^TfatqvsteisrHrafq 

V vJ 



s ^ 

qrqqfqgroqqifqfei n?rgr«nR^Rcsfgini i 

\ira. on 
poRsoKftion. 

IiW 

1 qra?9^9t*i^r fairer i 

Mann, 


ww? sJiWT’ur wtan a9*wlfeT n 

• 

VUI. 148. 

109 

» 

1 9*2119919 99TW 1 

Vrihanpati. 


rl^ET ^fT 9fsrqT999 II 

oil im{ in Vir. 
on fihukti. 

114 

1 9if9^9tqf9#q9f9T9q9f99T i 



99mf9fa^99rt^f99T9T *^?fa n 

Vaj. 11.20. 

IU» 

' gs*9i9if9 * srafti *9199 ii 

Man u, 

VI 11. U6 

un 

1 9T99tS«lfo9t 9T»ITfS9l iJSSfsfiWTfiltl 1 

Yuj. 11 27 

• 

117 

1 qpirittaifq sr^gsr ftm i 

Nnra-ila 


*1 ^c^JTqrafi^T‘ ?fiWif9<j99T9rf*i it 

I. 91. 

H7 

2 wftr ftufmmT 9Hf99l9n99i99l i 

V y« «n. 
cited in 


gfk; 9i qr^qt^f^gnnq fVm^qt it 

Vir. on 
lihukti. 

U7 

3 faqfatft q fergqri 9 ai^^ w: i 

A notiyinou* 
cilod by 


Wfa q^f^sjsg qtqqt 9t9 99|q « 

Apar&rka. 

MS 

1 9n^q»T% fsFSn VtfT. 9T991 1 



99iriTS39«T9iqT^ **n^ fwg^qniwT # 

Narada,l.89 



392 

26 1 

130 ] 

136 1 

137 l 
187 2 

137 3 

146 i 

145 2 

150 1 


APPENDIX B. 

^Tqsps?5T qqq fafirar- 

*rafa agqtf i 

^CTTR# q 5T«nSl2r ^ST»{ I 

qnqtg ^rrf^af fcnjTfqqm q gonfqqT?*r- 

I 

qa^qfiri; sjsq: qgr^r ^ra«rf?r qfo i 

g facnfe ^uhih q 

H?nfqqrc:q5ei;r g^r*tw i 

wf^aTrqqrarrei fam qg: i 

g qsrer q fam q u 

qqr^flqiTi^q gfwwTqiqqrgw ^cstto 
f¥*lW5n*Un^THTqiT qwfqqrsHwreTq*ci9T 
*rsiq%?rcsr gfeanqimf^r sq^*r ftwnt: 
faijiN VT3R ^fq^ItR qT fqwm: l (gqqfqirq 

fqqfaaisffqitafqssrq fqna: ^ar^r:) i 

fqvTFftqnr ^qg^qfqqqrqrqqaiqinqiqt 
q^cff^ajg sqq^Tqsffl; i 

^ qqnf^qiqq qT^ggTqinsqifwqqTfqq- 
qrrfqqiqTT^fqqqTOt q^TqT«qi%q?q qrfht^qt 
qfsrag i 

q^q qg ^lfq qgT%q «q^fq I 

qiq«ft 'ft<q^Tifr ^Ta?r qt'fwqnfqg h 


Mit.aks.Sifsj-., 
( >n Pnrrjj j (ll . 


M it akphfir.i. 
on Purtitii,-,. 

Mil. f. t.2T. 
*w in 

Cole)»rookr, 


Nvnv:t 

Vira. 1. fti. 
(f. .Sn-Mfi'- 
Ivin. 


Vn jn:i \ n i 
k\';i r il.fi i 
in J.Jjiyn 
Ijlnimi . 

I I L'-J. 


Dnynl • h;iL';i. 
J. 8&9. 
ftfi in 

CoJnbi'ooko. 


Mit. T. 4. 


Mit. 01: 
Yaj.ll, i?5. 


Manu cili J ti 
in Vira. on 
Dnt-t.n 
nradani.^ 


153 8 





A i’l’KVDi.V li. 

oU;j 

w\ 

o 

ssrRnjsiar ^srfq 




w wswfatrirffiTsrTsi fqt^- 

SriknVInta 

cm 



^Tgrt ^rahTOnfirenrofa: i 

Ua yu 

XL vi.3.1. 

I7<> 

• 

I 

firsrere^ ww ^ i 

Niinid.i,. 

1. 117 

170 

2 

snfiwfrr fasarera *re- 




^R^wp^sfafsFsm, s 5TT'lt?fH ^fri ^nfa; 1 

Mil. on 

Ysi.j . II. 57. 

177 

1 

^arifa *r feist fe«*sw: i 




qraqrratqs?ra sTststsm^rm u 




StplfefeH: 5tft SUSt WfeHscnafeq 1 

Xanuln. 

J. 121. 

177 

2 

snfewsraTiptra: *r s i 




sjswwTwrife sfeitwtiwlfe ^ i 

VriluiHpafci 



siiNesr.^rrsfew ^^T^ftsssifssrst n 

cited. inVira, 
on Adhi. 

181 

1 

5 *rfe: ^t^FT’diTc^ fafe: t 

Vuj. II. OO 

1S1 

2 

’sifeg fefes: sra: ^isfr ^w^ist i 




fafewitwresTfe wfet sstfeast^ssT 1 

Narad a 

L 13!#. 



sttsmit wfe:^Nnc: »rt*sfeT qramtn: i 

Vira. 

I So 

2 

*nhdw: ^rai^ais. ^sitturggfeq: i 

V rili aspal, i 
cited in 




Vira. on 
Adhi. 

18u 

3 

feqtst sfe stqssife!®?i a* 1 * 

Katyayan* 
cited in 



SqffejSTfe^Pg qNsWfWTtWW*^ » 

Vira. on 
Adhi. 


50 



394 


APPENDIX B. 


im 2 

J ss 

isp i 

J 89 

ISP 3 

:nu i 

IPS i 

ne l 


^€Tqfaw?T^m^gtiq ffeR i 

*rw tt^^^rnr^f%5?rgnqT5f5nTT?iw: > 

^fr it 

qT^TRqraN «r sit«re *zw%?n^e*t'T 

nftgw siltetlfe q*T cfT I 

%^TTT^F ^nfafTCT ^HW ^T I 

fa%tit fira^^rr wt f«nanrcir:^pr. 
ww infawT^ fanfare i 

* 

f%T^ ijwt Vflswir ■ 

qararw vr^tisn^ iraW i 

^Tfq-.qwfeg*' ^ qf^ si i 

qfT% 3Rra#tfHS3^ URWtsqt «T sjsgfa H 

»jqsT#SWf^ c % i 

sjoqanlly fasfitwfa wiM n 
^rrairisjwg qsorre^swsfq i 
'Rnng^tr wit sz^rtr^^h 


Halayudhii. 


VyavtUuira • 
inayukha, 
on Riuad;m. 


V rili hi: pat 
cited in 
Vira. on 
Hi n a dun 

Kara da 
riiod in 
Vira. on 
Niksliopa 


Ynj. ll o- 


Vyasa A 
Vrihas 
cited in 
Vira. on 
Adlii. 


Yaj. II. 68, 


Vrihaspati 
cited in 
Vira. on 
Adlii. 



M*PE\hI\ IS. 


l‘J<5 2 

’srwTn i 

>* 

TTTI^rrr: * fa iff q *fa qR^T II 

*rir Wniqii 

Katyayaim 
citod in 
Vira. on 
Adlii. 

197 # 

•f^rr' : ^ fasfqri 

Alan n. 
VIM. M3. 

198 1 

*m q ^^aT^fsr^igTTfqft^: ranfftar?i 

Kulhika. 
on Maim 
VIM. 1 13 

199 1 

Trat^iusnfa roftntfinmraiq i 
fl3n«g|giqihraj ’qswmra^ wtq n 

Yriluispnii 
iniud in 
Vim. on 
Adlii. 

200 1 

qttmftmtftsft sfa: ^ftqqfits^wiiq^ i 
sret^qt faore^ ii 

Yaj. JJ. .VJ. 


^swtwtq wr^rfa ^nsifawriq i 

j 

Mil. on 
six me. 

»»! 1 

• 

^rtfer^r sftw^tqi 

q£t: *ra ?iwm h 

iCu-tyiiyniui. 
i.iicd in 
Vira. oa 
Adlii, 

202 I 

*ttwt qfaiw *?«iTq 

Yaj. II 23. 

204 l 

qqtf^fam ^nfwr fa^T q?T ^ i 
qsnqqrn: fmfa^rr « 

V i-djmi 
»ril.* i d i 

V i rn . « 
Adlii 

20r» ] 

qtqjTqt Wtn: *£fafRt Wt**WT qpsfHtq: 1 

Vim, 
on Ad iii 


vrn^mrcqqsiq^r i 



APPK\I)1X b. 


39ti 

- w 1 333^ hw t i 

Tf^ri^ m^nmt ^btr niN *R:<«n 3 ?i 11 
MtT^ btortsit: tr^r gw^si? 1 
ftkr utrrm^nt ^*ni n 

vm $5 srenq; 3i?rf 3Tf3?ratra^ n 

211 1 stsifa * ^ifgsi: 1 

ritt ^rfersranftfi 11 

2,2 1 ^TToTT s^fasNsg ^Tm *ra fafafafrrll 
^s^farerfasnttsfa Brftm n 

219 1 wf^Tf I 

,f%f%^R *?\W. ^HlfsqW^R^lftTrf II 

220 1 srasrwnc trorokfro: 1 

3 rwt?n tffa^wn^Finsm ipi^row. 1 

^r?f%^rwT- 

•sn^fcnq i 

221 1 srfe st 1 

3Tf%<Ttst§i^r 3fal*nra 3 Q ^Tt33 | 

221 2 ^T 3 nWtrf%g 3^3 ^nftrat vrci 1 

^ihh I ^iw^irgRsftmei 1 


Yrih»»]>fy.i 
cited in 
Yirn. on 
Xikfchepa. 


K aracla 
cit ed in 
Vira. on 
Nikshepa 


Karynyaita 
cited in 
Vim, on 
Nik&hcpa. 


Kntynynnii 
cited in 
Mit. on 
Viij. 1 f. 0(» 


Yyasa 
cited cm 
NiksViejm i't 

Vira* 


Katyaynnii 
cited in 
Vira. on 
Xikahep**' 


Katya rana 
cited in 
Vira. on 
S iksbepM - 



APPKNrnx it. 


^TTftrpf sroTfafa i 

m* 7m ?i|?r *f i reraJrH n 

^hiiRw*u*s srer ^nfqcT^og^1% *r 

U^^JrlT | 

’SfrT ^frT^f^Sfrrat, IRWert 5^T?lfwf?I 

SPSHTld II 

fasrt^re: w?it artt^t fasr ^ sri i 
f?m qq TT^icT^r Jim^ra^Tw. u 

aTTtr^RT tt5p*$*i m i 


Vrihaspjiti 
filial in 
Tiro, on 
Nikshupn. 


Vink on 
Nikahopik 


Mann 
VII 1. li>5 


Yaj. 11. 1GK, 


ng:«r?r qftwTft 


wqg i 


¥Tr?f *i9zto ^n^nnr^r n 

ngism ufterct ww ^ara i 

UTfl^IT »JjRtTT5T^^ WT I 

wwunfa *i*n ifa tnqwfwlw. i 

W-H'i ^ Tteaspg %5|fag | 

ism gf*n: ifa urnfar * qg^ra: i 

*rfsifa*T sht qrrei Tiswm: *? s'qra u 

^«i^R;^«3nwn^r^f5ranfe!w: i 

’qgqragwT^rswTqlg * rreirg ii 

si tg: *wpwn*w: i 

trofftr urg ^q: qsreqr: n 


Y.m j. M. H»T. 

Maim Vi.Il 
* U157 

Yaj. 11.100. 

Vriliaspati 
ritfd ill 
Vi ru, dii 
tiinumvailu. 


K a f v ay»n: 
i iti.'il in 


Nil rail a 
riled in 


V VI. I ’>G 



;}9 S 

APl'KVmX 13. 


12^8 2 

q?irq^r qv£ g %?jq ufqfqsqq i 



^rf?r ii 

Xiiraila, 
XI. 17 

231 1 

qreq TORnvtfa fit: sref i 



ms*i qnsrcuitfq fit: q5rpc*qrr: n 

Manu. 
IX. mi 

236 1 

qfasr: irqqqq q^r: srfiqqr: gq: i 

Manu, IX. 
159 

2 

^ % v'i # # # 



, onf*f qtqrgnjq qrqftift *r?Tqrfar: i 

A flit v a 

Parana 

«Mtml ;>. 


fqqfgqifq ararift aqwigetqr gt: 

1 '(lvaliu- 
tau vji. 


ggqqrfq qraqi qgqir tqqqqqg n 


„ 3 

^Wig Srfqq^Ttqqqwrr | 

Dati aka 
Mimansa. 

237 I 

*q itq q^Tqrqj ^qgqnqqfq q i 


« 

qwt*q fqwT^qiq gw’ qqgqrfqrq n 

Maim IX. 

238 1 

qrqT (qm WT qqJT?if qqfi: gqJTTqfq i 

H)l> 


q^sr qtfqqpr' q wqt qfqg: gq: n 

Maim. IX. 
16S 

244 1 

si qt ?3nq qfq^^tqiqT ^nqqig- 



WTqTqqw: l 

Yasisl ha. 
Ch. XV. 

24T» 1 

q’trfr #qfq quiqi quqsqjq qqgqqt q— 



gwtar»ftq *fq qTnggTqiqjqq<qWi : i 



gtg qfwg qgqi?:qqn«qqgqfqtqTtf%qT i 



qq qfq 52T®qT «qfq qfqtggr 1 qqnq • 



qWTgibjqsfq q=qfr qT&qT qwqnfqqrcw 

V ii« • 

C< art ’’’ 


• qfw ii 

la. JNlSiJ . 

Krin,l I . i * - 



24S I 


249 1 


201 


252 1 


251* I 


APPENDIX «. 

jtt^t fcrm m ssnm swfe: i 

* 5 * *]f?rwg# *r %$1 ^fsw: pr: u 

sreinif p* ufasititaTVT st % *h?trto 

psnri i 

■» 

wi^npiw *rcnr fir^t «nm ^ ttte*: i 
uraimraT^nsn: *ri ii 

^jfto srffr^r ^rrmi# 5*re^ ii 

fa**rfs!f«?:«lWSrifr ?gg%^f^5«lT«ni7a^WlT- 
*T*utei ^ mw. i 

pr: ?nmfasfsrffl s erar: i 
?rer^n?fT5 ! rf^^<5rTJig wmfirafr vmiw. n 

$fZ*9Tfe*tiss{ ^5T ?TWTS?T I 
*TU?^fa ^ 3WRRSI sfesTT | 

^?ipsrrfTi^T^n *rerssi’lrRf?[^4 ii 

fsrarcriN^isi^ ifari: i 

^rer: para s^rcraiapira ^ 5Wn i 
*rni?pn% na^ref ^ f«rara v* ^ i 
mm st mrira *fn srraif wwt ii 

^iwr stsp^qtfitaaraTOTsifa: j 


399 


Mann, IX. 
H)S 


Vnsishtlm. 


Mann, VII] 
299, 300. 


(iuutama. 


Viisisf bn. 
Ch. XV. 


Y«j. 11. 17*. 


X arm la IV. 
4,o. 


K at ay van a 
cited in 
Smriti- 
Chaiidrika. 


Apablaniba 



400 


AITENDIX I*. 


2511 1 


2(U 1 


262 l 


2 


263 1 


2 


264 I 


WRqnrsra qq xjsttw*ti: w?!t: i 

qqfaq^fqT q*q?f «^T7JW5T II 

M 

iuxl l)j 
Jiinut.v 
vnhnna. 

ww gqaq ftrar q ^fwfqqqra: i 
%q itfa^fT q?siT? q*r«aqgwtfqq n 

Katvavinin 
cited in 
Vira. t.n 
l > ratil)lin, 

fqg^faqrqrqT grz«rw?:wTq wt i 
ui wi um Sr# gq?q qqfqqi 1 

ssfr q TrrmfcmfT qivqtm^rr %rt: fans: i 
qiqsiTqrsm gfcST wnw qgrqqtH n 

Xar.'ulfi 

cited in 

A r ifc'si-. on 

I ’rat ibtm. 

qrafasr sqrqiq qrm?stq qfqqq i 
inftwT^r qwmtfN git qqiqqq n 

Vriliuspali 

-mnH^Qf^lTnr fqqqfq*q g?fq* | 

qn#g fsfqstT %q qqgqT%qrqT i 

KalyayanH 
cited in 
Viramitro* 
daya. 

Srqpqs qisrctqT firqqtqifqqqrr: i 
%qr q*iq qq*qq*rf*qqT 1 


fqrTT fcRTmfMmT ^Tfwr 5R*it riqr 1 
Soqtaq: gsbrofr iraf?w: m: n 

Yaj. J. 6S 

qmFnmRWTfr fq*q *itqfqmq<qfq i 

N v s> 

qirsqT qq^Tf gqqtsnq Sffqfqq n 

Mami, IX. 
89 


fpfcfaro fqg:g$ qwra lit: ^nfiwqqt: « 
fqftirsfq frtq^qi sqqirift *rf*parfq n 


2 



APPENDIX IJ. 


gTOqrejqreta ^nvanara TOifai: i 
*n5?reraq^*r qn* ol fakirs 11 
f*?r fwqrqtfw TRt^n^nra^^fw: n 

mftnr^f^wiT tpbtt faq?r i 

*fcrr fsrerg u 

*reroifa *frs5nfg^gis5T7T: i 

%iW<gi* r ^^rnf^f ir^nfa qfbraiirT n 
’SfafsRtf i 

TOnTOTssrgwrf?f^f3irf8^5iiTf>f ^ » 

%ert g*ff «gw^tq*|3r%, fqfqfafcrif«*R 
?RTI ^srf^afirfk, W&TcSTIWW: I 

Sf ^TJTrat «W VTT^rt 


fafll qftWTT W’fTT am I 
St ujmft t wt «t qit ^rT?nsrc*nrfk ii 
!pfT ?<3rfd qT3: i 


^irgqrssrt farnfsrcri qfaiprr^i i 
*r*n% trrawm «r ^tpuctt 11 


qrar ^ w ^q?n: i 

qwn^l *T ^i^rarq^n: fsprr: u 


■ait^f^r smrot *m fqsnq^ns^ciirwf i 
* sft’qfSa g q§m q%q ?ff% i 


401 


Yuj. f. 
26,27. 


Mann, VIII. 
227. 


Mann, III. 
6. 


Kullwka on 
Maim, 111. 


Vasishthn. 


Maim, IX..'? 


Yaj. I. fto. 



402 APNSNDIX li. 

snarer wrtf vreT *n£u srl^re i 

qfwre f tfsrar qr^nw ?ra I wc* H 

7li 2 B5Hra *remreT: gsTT^rr srsfftre: i 
f%ra: fcnra nig ^ ftftitsfcnro: n 

«r fsrigrafosmteri wttwt&t 'fasr^re i 


277 1 etnwsg rTtf^l 3«T«ijSWM:W: I 

?rg srpfnfq ?i^taTcT treft- ire ii 
cantor *rcqn<|^Tsm fancusrereifarrl i 
nt *rerq?Nt cfn^ret tiw^ttost ii 

.■ 2 sf fertfere re^sn i 

Tre^ *f*T gsrWcqnfq Tfil I 


27S 1 


'sre sj?f nsrfire wt^c * trfsre tret i 
trf?OTt faitaff ii 


st fqqrrffqTjTf it firegit^i gn: i 


^Tfrer: g*re§re nta* rreT i 

OTT v*3 ST gmftf S^TSWTqf || 

OT qsu m tffa&raTT faw TTT ^re^TT I 
^qr?^cT gswcST n qtsnre ^re i 
*t %^«rqtfsr: sreTrerrecTifireT i 

qtswqsr h?tt m g*r: n^TFrcrefa n 


Maim, III. 
56,57,60. 


Manu, IX. 
26. 


Manu, IX. 
46. 


Manu, V. 
157,158. 


Mann, V. 
162. 

Kulluka 
on the 
above. 


Paraaarn. 
JV. 2ft. 


Manu. 


Adipurana. 


Manu, IX. 
175,176. 



ii. 

2M» i fW(T ^«TT <?T | 

^ WrT ?ISW ?fP?TrT ^ ^TgiT#n 

., i *itmiffi5fsirsrera T*nffsm*ratfw i 

ck 

^ ^nHrfcf^Twt u 

* ^ 

ns i i sraarre^sfa^TT^ ?sto g ^rrnrsn: i 

t?SlT3$ ?T3J^rfqwfe^ II 

2ks i ^nn^iftpfefro *m*[ i 

^ ^Tf‘ ^frTrT II 

• 2 *t wg fvm wn %c i 

^^rdTf^TTSn ^T^fTT^T g II 

” 3 g sri^rnt fsnr^^f^riT i 

m TO jafafo ran =n p«f# « 

-*sr, 1 utri fstgcj^j gfgTr‘ qtc2TT%^ ^5?TfT: I 
wtt: vt^tTp! 5p*" 3 TOflraf n 

VJ 

- s7 1 5T ?iwtei: < 

*r^irP33»m:f%f^ wrsrcpnT^f^ h 

TCrffNri ^t?!^i qtr^fsr?i i 

%ff% site ^nqV’gfq it 


403 


Yaj. 1 1, 411 


Y nj. 11. is 


Mann. TX.8I 


Yaj. II. 1-18 


Ma tm, IX. 8- 


Mami,IX. 8 » 


Kaiya v:mu, 
i • s I < ■ « I in 
I )a ya filni^.'L. 


Kal va va.uu. 

ciiml in 
V irarnit l'-i- 
vi.< \ a. 


Katynyaita, 

• ‘i I i*i I in 
I.)a va Mia^a. 



4(H 


.UM’EXMX H. 


1 i 

crfrmfq II 

,. 2 ^ett 5?tt^st ?r: qr»srt *r ?n i 

292 i zrg qnsri w*ri^T^rirqT^^ i 

*iwrfk?i«r $ 3 n?t ^rs?n^Tfj^T»i 5 T: u 

,. 2 uf?n2^i g n: qremstTgqeSrc i 

*fa%JWfntTtsfq tq, II 

293 2 ^TTgr^fn: ii 


294 1 


296 1 


298 1 


299 1 


«rsrrent vra^ret ^rotitaf'nit i 
qtf^m fiK^ ^rer?ri*isr: ii 

* sINt wnwrann?! i 

^WRSHfJ. ¥ H^MTJT «RT?I ^ II 


^RTOWTlfwwtm g ^ ^T^SflT q*fT^ I 
TT5TT jfNfsra^l^- fir ^«s37f U 


f%wtariTf«if vr^fi .srTwf fa^gfar^fn i 
w: ^ nT?*n^ f%?m & » 


^rT^rsfti f% ggqn&’ f^n^gwfTT *rcr. i 

^T»T5fi^Tf»T^rlT'rTWr?J5g^qtff?|T' I 
*T*wtf*TTO-*hn^irafH*mr ii 


Vnj. I . or,. 


Na rada., 
XI T. 32. 


Manu,JX.73 


Katyayana 
cited in V. 
Mayuklia <>n 
Slavery etc. 


Mam 
VTT1. 41 5. 


Narada. 
V. 30. 


Narad a, 

IV. :ss. 


Katyuyana 
cited in 
Vira. on 
Slavery, 


Narada. 
1. 40. 


Xurnda. 
1. 41. 



APPHX1UX 11. 


405 


300 1 3TOW I 

qra n 

^ ^ Nnradii, 

uw anwmr: ^cw. towict i n 1.35,30. 


.. 3 . 

301 i 


sraTHaUWSTO SI^nifT: q^sjqqfafaqisrcrcRi: II 


Srikrishna 

on 

Dayabhapt, 
111. 1. 17 


*rat*fcj fam ^tot*! 1 

*rmt torit wrm ri^ntg tpfer: 1 


Nuradfi 
ritvd in 
Vila. on 
Kmnpwin, 


qi^roTfcqr 1 

*n*?T * *3 U<ptjtt§ttT mswratasbcrq: h 


Mum, 
VIII. 37 


300 i smmRt f% I straw:, fafira^: 

warn 1 srawstw qjfa Ot ?riN $%wr. tmm- 
faawt: 1 mr wr w^wt s: vrsn srawirt w 11 


?f^ra «^j^fsrT^ g«nn wn^t-ra^ 1 

wftrarc ^w^tt cFt^rt wiwfqwtwqqTri w i v^i^um. 

• Cs si s 


qtm m afr^Haraiw qrcta% 1 
straw. wfwt ?nfa sfsr^q toiwwci i 

wi«g w»htw nmmstwrarT 11 x. u< 

307 i wfw^w g m ^ffcrefawT wwtqrfwtm 1 

. ,. ~ Vrihuipli 

*ittsttTwgtwT faar wt 3 qimm 1 cited i„ 

^ V iva, on 

W*t*li qrrfrm irfiRsraasjT wwww 11 Hina<l! ‘"- 



406 

308 1 


311 1 

312 1 

313 1 

314 1 


APPENDIX B. 

ifr sz lte n ** igk' »sft m*w*{ \ 

sr ^nrinvir. n 

sr iff: wtfa^TTisrt wsnqrTftm 1 
^sn^nf?:rwtat' srn^redrrfesrtft ii 

grHr ^w^Trf?T?TW umfafecnfirfa i 


Stfir^r’ sr w?r arc* irfainf^nt i 


S sTTWf^r ^rai^T^m I 


7m ^ utttw^k:— ^ imisr ?r sirpTfa agar 
aganir w i waiusr^Trxm <i?p?ng a$ir ^ ^ 
at i *f?n Tnaw^nfaafnfa fa§awsnan*ift 
ufe ^r f sr^ E ?T^T VT3Tfgggrf%ftf?T 

akftnrr^a: i 

aara saareitsr ^ftareftasr ^ i 

agai q^%sf a#* ^ ii 

I nrt STORT^ sr aHit ^qifwt?TI 

^mSTOWt SI^ h^st | 

ats$*j a?r asfwsr S5nu^if^?f | 

TpSfTTT n 

sr tfasr: faFURT^ anspgsr i 

irafa a3m: v 


Vishnu 
cited in 
same. 


Naraita, 

T. 108 

9 

Viskifti, 
cited in 
Yiiii i on 
Rinadan. 

Katyayana, 
cited in 


Mnnu, 
VIII. 151 


Viraniitro- 

dayn. 


Mann, 
VI II. 41) 


Yaj. II. 40 


Katyayana, 
cited in V. 

Mayukhn 
on Rinadan. 


Vrihaspati, 
cited in 
Vira, on 

Pratiblm. 



Al'IVENDIX 11. 


40 / 


316 1 

*resqsjr«RTT^ SR-^WST fqmfari I 
^cnhrfaqrsn£ *rfwri: ii 

Mm nu, 
V11J. 51 

2 

?> 

**r^isirWifT ^rntto qnir i 

^scnft w^RT»nt qqspt « 

Katyn van a, 
cited in 
Vira, on 
Riiiadan, 

• 

*nr qf4np?^rm#t utsnfirenr 

qrqf%s^qTHi^fjT3rfirf%?f wfa- 

^fassnat n 

Smriti- 

Chandrikn. 

„ 3 

m^irorfgvroi qreran*3g i 

TTT¥5n^ qsfo'n'g^frf ^fwqr: II 

Katyayana, 
cited in 
Vira, on 
Riuadnn. 

316 1 

qrnafaq^raTg i 
anisnrerenp^rer. qn% qnd.trat^ * 

Namdn, 

1, 161 

317 2 

u^tg r *r$w. ^5 ^ ^ wfeprraqr: 

?t?t ?i*i€«i«qg fafa^gii 

Naradn f 
i, 113 


^wraitg ftp* i 

Frajapati* 

318 1 

fwenn^w ^TWt^tfqg^T^^rsR i 
H^ts^peTfs^ 5 * H’erefcra farfsrc: i 

Yaj. II. 61 

319 1 

fa?rr g*ire4 i 

wit: RTim^r gj$r* $«iW *nr ii 

Vrihaapati , 
cited in 
Vira, on 
Rinadau, 

» 2 

g sriw’ml'w « 

Yaj. 11,41 


.1 



408 


APPJSNDiX tt. 


€TW WgmgT Sift* tt I 

i i TOwfiiftfa sttot **r arrow h 


Katyayana, 
cited in 
Vira, on 
same, 


320 1 


5#* wait ufTTHTSi fwftwt 


Yaj. U. r,;j 


„ 2 

TOt wart wsfaronut tot i 

• 

’wgiwwm:: wft»j: smi nttfgfw: i 

Vriliasgati, 
cited in 
Vira, on 
Pratibhu, 

„ 3 

*n%wrt ^araTwffir grqfrenwtiTOtg i 

Vrihaspati, 
cited in 
same. 

321 *t* 

*rat wart sit TOW&rt wrot i 
u^wrg wwnts wratfa wfwjjrw: i 

ilarita 
cited in 
same, 

322 t 

TOTOftnjtra ajawTarfwsfftsfir wt i 
*t itqs * i w: ftsm: n 

Yaj. 11. 54 

., 2 

WfgtWtaaf^ wfw*pr^fw«r*iwr, stowtto, 
^rt, wifrorarf frotwt i ^raTww^Taft-w^tfii- 
wnta i wfa i 

Vira. 

., 3 

■wret g frot srot iiTOmntfipi to i 

TOrdg fro^wit tt fror mntt tot ii 

Vrihasputi, 
cited in 
Vira, oil 
Pratibhu. 

323 2 

WTfroranwd ttrofasf a g ggwrfag i 
gwwrrfw wr wnr ^stw trfror n 

Katyayana, 
cited in 
same. 


wrt wm*nr shr: wifrowpirl to: ! 
aa'TOi tg TOftr g a grunffl* frow: n 

Vyasa, 
cited in 
same. 




APPENDIX B. 

409 

<23 2 

igltat wq? nw ^aiiirer i 

ffcnfaaT v*imintrai: ^rmsw i?i: n 

Katyayana, 
cited in 
same. 

.. 3 

*nw*r«rte*taT: ^iiapr, *r-. *r: i 

Vrihaspati, 
cited in 
same. 

„ * 

isrtli^sr. qfcgqm* i 
iRf^EWTf^Ri vrftqro it 

Yaj. 11. 65 

<24 1 

wtir ifa q^?r‘ fqf*Ri«jfi5R *r g i 

Katynyana, 
cited in 
Vira. on 
same. 

,. 2 

qjfw^T sfh»f% f^r qffl^Tq%q u 

Nam da, 

1. 121 

„ 3 

*frmq SlR gaTSm 1 

*rrit mfoeft g qRtnft qfefqfa?i ii 

Narada, 
VI. 2 


325 i %«f qrrere atsntaroTw qtRTOT i 

?rar ^Tfw*i*aE*5tsfferaf %*i wSsfaSi n 

„ 2 asftamrff: *r qrrc$a » 

q 7\m %?f ^PSqnRJTfa 2R^: II 

326 l gBT%35 HT5R qT^nC^sfonRTgqR I 

” 2 ^nfw^tqr^qww^ amps-iiraiynn i 


\nl 11.195. 


Mann, 
VIII. 217 

Naracla, 
cited in 
Vira. on 
Non 

payment cf 
wages. 

Narada, 
in Ham e. 


3 vmriraj* qnt srara nw qnA Vishnu, 

^ cited iu 

%q Vg$ S^TRI, TRRRR \ sau,e ' 

Vishnu, 

4 nft^ir gftRpqm |qtqqi?n ^ ii c »nwT 

52 



410 


appendix b. 


327 1 


n 2 


.. 3 




4 


329 1 


380 1 


381 1 


if 


2 


is 



VrihatManu 
cited in 
same. 

msriit f^ptri *rf?i i 

Yaj II. 197 

<5T^ qfir 9: ^I3ff €t*TTr?TOW «TT 1 

impn^ ijar ’cnS sraswciTsra^ ii 

Katyayana, 
cited in 
same. 

iRT?n fafagar:^ HVttt faswf* m i 
trohrof ?r?ntrc:r§?n?i it 

Vrihaspati, 
cited in 
same. 

atranN ?rf%3if ^rwrilr ^ irsSrcrt i 
?iwm^ um 3T n 

Yaj. I1.2K0 

*rf»rffst *n4raro itot^ • 

iwr m^CTOit u 

Vriliaspati, 
cited in 
Vira. on 
Partner- 
ship 

WT*l$<1TTHfcti£r u^w-mn^ | 

natadr wfvrairv^ wtq, i 

Mann, 

IV. 223 

wra*riw ttut *tw firamfei n 

Manu, 

IX. 221 

ftftf ngin aanltTOiunf i 

^fvrarrfafa* wtk‘ aaiRYPtfQir. u 

Vrihaspati 
cited in 
Vira- on 
Dyuta. 

urn 5?qfh^T w*t ufatr ifiwist i 
fan *rafa% * g i 

tnrr ^fajrfasfan: fsnftrfrctto n 

Yaj. Ii. 
201,202 


3 



AlVlMfiNDIX B. 

fqqraqtffqftilq mg qurfmft i 

ftsfaqqq f*wr q»tft nsaaq «n 'i 

fir qq; trer *r wrnsiT: qijqffqqi'qq: i 
*re*i 3qi qmqfrnrorfqfw: n 

fqffq^t sjrarfaq; a!TftaT«T*nffcq: i 
$*trfa§* frqtq q qrr&rr: q<(3iPq*iqf: i 
qs'qft q^frcn: qwi: fratssr. i 

qsNfrSniifanq qt?&TO wrfTRT: 11 

qnmnn i 

^iswTq^ir. nftafa: i 

fqqrerchtj qT qfat^rfarei **. i 

curd qn^r qr^rat qtrrfqffa h 

Tjrnm ?t«\§kt qo&* qnwraw qnitqq i 
^§| qi fq^l qi m*\ n* fq«jq%l II 

fT7iqiisT3Wtftsfci ssrqqTT I 

*n fq%$ qi H ^TT-ft q II 

qqigrnU ttsit qqsriqqnqqwqn i 
qranfit K'g qTs ft fq *k<* 4N it^f?r n 

ftanS^ *&* TO Tl*T qiw ^W- I 

«qnf«! qnreiqta qqifa i 

qnalnnfq^ftqTqqqqifq^fqqT n 


411 


Yaj. II, 185. 

Vrilmspati, 
cited in 
Vira. on 
Breach of 
Contract. 


VriluiBjmti, 
cited in 
ainne. 


Yaj. II. 189 


Muraiia. 


VriluiHpati, 


Mhiiii, 

VIII 167 


Maim, 
VIII. 128 


Manu, 
VIM. 43 


VitamuHa, 



4*12 APPENDIX B. 

337 1 «r: i 

.T» w t ,^ H> « p n wT s ssmn: n 

339 i g *rarr irarcqifci i 

wm h 

» 2 ’sra SfrwSteram: s^srnrenr^isiT 

340 i *ra?prarf fwi’g msrqiNft qref ^rw?t < 

.. s trftnrarfaifanft * fsqjS » 

- 3 $;%»i faf»rciSr*r sraiwgwT n 

3*1 i %u ^ftarisssf Trsn q r prcqw g \ 

*r*sff snmjtfa fafen* ?rar ?tto n* ii 

*T?WRrntsm7f ?3jf ^jqfq^ *! SRfftfw, ?IST- 
*ran ^k*n *r*fsrar tot- 

arpi *tr^ ^Nfornri ^?rtr«rcqnq; i 

„ 2 f5n|W safari g w. mraf?i: i 
s ?rot fiprs i g n 

*qfl^wr-fjraRf g | 

342 i *PT^yT q*^wt q^^nn i 

9t«JT 5S^n: €W^TT ?TT IFWnfWtfsfc | 


Katy ay ana, 
Vishnu, 

Taj. IT. 161 
Vaj. II. 162 
Katynyana. 

Yaj. II. 36 

Mit. on 
Yaj, II. 272. 

Narada, 
VIII. 7 

Viramitro- 

daya. 

Yaj- 1. 367 



413 


Yaj. I. 368, 

Mit, on 
same. 


Yaj/ II. 275. 

§*qfra-q^qiTOT5T-fq»qf$*T- 
si qfiwcrr: ii 

qrfrotfcnr i 

TOtsii Jfiwun* «r to srwtrtrlfa ii 

imtsfq— »i sn^ 5rra<m wqffl qrofan i Yama. 

3JHg qa*q TOT TT3WST TOTTO?t I 

sTTTOtifq— frrr^w 5 ? sww i. Nnrtula# 

qi?IT3 , enfi7WTl r . TOFJT TTf ««T q || 

tototo^s 55^ #ir wqf?r fqrfwf 1 
trftHro g Isqur qrft’sT^ ^ ll 
3n*H«r fwanfq>H 1 

' Manu, VII, 

f*?pin ^t qfs^flTsnpr^TT w 11 837,33s 

%rfq «n?n qi *a*jftwr?ptsfa at.i 
stt^it 5titt i\^fm Wfirefa* wn^a^ 1 - 858 

qrttW aaw: uraat m; \ 

aa ^T5Tt vtfusrc: «nroRj Man m m 


APPENDIX 1J. 


vamwTM tot? qnsr qqrosnfa at r 
TOr.qr^rq froRT ^rg 11 



*tPFwrw^T?«rqT% qiTOt ?rr: 1 
TOrqnwnsjfar qrfqpsT n 



4H 


APPENDIX B. 


349 1 

sfi’ptf iiTOsniT ^rftf flsrTfSrvi 1 

?i^nfq ^ airi^q^n^ h 

Mann, VIII 1 
274 

n ^ 

gritaf it 

Ynj, II, 206 

„ 3 

*roarg ^wata: tam?t i 

7\m*m: iifng# ^ro:%?W g ti 

Ynj. 11, 209 

350 1 

*r*wf fiircpf sr 4 ^faPas^fiHT: i 

Narada, 

XIV. 1 

351 1 

^Mfei*r^QT^^*nr%3- 
srwmwfa sRr^TC*wtmfaat firetf i 



^*!5ifawpar ^f^it¥rai*r i 

Hit. on 
Yaj. H, 230 

„ 2 

. ^rtr^ *‘w»r fairerrcftrataa i 

Vrihaspati 
cited in 
Vim. on 


% g g^taag^rnsi ii 

Stri- 

sangrahn. 

352 1 

»s**n*rar *u *nft n#twr i 

^rmihrcr *n 3 wit *>wn$^T:*|iTr » 

Vrihnspnti, 
cited in 
same. 

353 1 

irarmramsirmT^ *re»Rif% fw:TOm: i 

Vribnspati, 
cited in 

355 1 

ntn ^riinqirparTftr: uftnsrn^ torw i 

VrihnnpHti, 
cited in 
ssime. 


2 




Ynj. II. 77. 



APPhKIUX fi. 


+15 


856 i Ttaramraranafa twsrcmfs^rrfrir: i . 

wa: i«rsr fasT?rfs*F!r ii 

ass 2 ssrrasnSr izftemmwz fafawi i 

„ a U5r giti ui^w g i 

?r»**Tnt fwsraf f%sm i 

wiTOre*%?TH: « 

357 i to wstst ire: WflT5*prcT%is. i 

„ 2 ^rat f% ti^faatftf i 

«! arfir«»c5ra^sw ^ transfer I fipi: i 

trafei ^Tmn*sra€t% ^qi#t3r?ri i 
* vrf^fa untf u 

ass i *3i*n^¥ urairoNii i 

Hwfafc i^jmqfwiTOnTO^wif^ 
m<ng*rftr: i 

„ 2 ?f|qr vm HWTf«! ttfrom i 
vs^pf-fasi^r ^5jf ^sfafr^q; u 

359 i >w:«nf% w.*«it sw twifkrofa i 
<?w; ^hs muffi ^ w fa^f *t: » 


Vnj. II. 4 


Vjrasa, 
cited itr 
Vira. 
Prakirna* 
Kan da. 


Manu, VIII, 
203,294, 


Maha- 
bharata 
Adi par va, 
108 . 


Nilakantha, 


Mann, VII, 
18 



41# 

APPENDIX n. 


839 * 

gsmt f* i 

zfrirfk sroitnro wnz « 

ManttjYIIT, 

22 

„ 8 

«r?t Hunt* wfwt: i 
JMrar: ^RRnfarr a*T » 

Manu VIII, 
318 

Ml 1 

s^rei: 'TOstf**: i 

mn wre^: #natf faff fat ^ %wn: ii 

Yaj. IT. 2. 

Nil 

3T*f WWSW3#»T8frt 1 

iwawH wtasrfg&i n 

Katyay&na, 
cited in 
Mit, on Yaj. 
11. 6. 

>' * 

wart *r Rt«sr #aro #i • 

*i$*8[ *w^ wfn forfeit ii 

Manu, 
VIII. 13. 

s 

snfagifa #*rer srcwrt 3 r«ps* i 
ftgiN ij 3M ^nranfarr ws: n 

Narada, 
ch. II, 
Procedure 
1. 

*68 1 

ftsffraiTfiwqiaiuftvwto: * **q: « 

Narada. 

868 1 

^ra^mt’fr w ww«i^4i ?w i 

Katyayana 
cited in 
Mit. on 
Yaj. II. 7. 

» 9 

*rf#4n fafaat stsa: wsrarf qf# ?t tot i 
wfu #w«i inspTOs^i *apf n 

Narada 
cited in 
Mit. on 
Yaj. 11. 7. 


*ferg9 gmfr# wi?: qawa|^r#T i 
fa%qfafn^ynq. inwjMiiii: ^nti^rrt' h 

Marita cited 
in Vira. on 
Pleadings. 



APPENDIX B. 

waiwflnwria ggarg R^qm^ : » 

m^rroqnr ’^nfr g trarirf f¥§ $?tf?ircri i 
fWtift yb rr S l 3 *r *t » 


ewrt: wfmuifa: i 

*rf*d n»mfi T^$r *W jnsrfvnfmi^ » 

faa it ft %wn?n fa*m; i 
^mpnro^rrat ^ i 


^tTncftranroT? 
f «wg«ffiiqmre enw«r t 
*rauN smwsfasNft?!. n 


4 i r 


T rih&spati 
cited in 
Vim.. 


Harita cited 
in 

M it/ on 
Yaj.11.8. 


Vaj. 1 1. 10. 


V»j. Tl. 0. 


Narad a, on 
Procedure 
Ch. II. 33. 


Vya*a. 



INDEX 


Abetment — 

of an offence, how punished, .157, 

Accessio — 

prayoga a mode of acquisition of property corresponding to Roman, 
61,62. 

Accessories— 

to a crime, who are, 357. 

Adatta — or void gifts, 

instances of, 88. 

Katya yana on, 90. 

.Manu on, 89. 

Mitakshara on, 89. 

Narad a on, 88. 

Adeya — 

‘thiugs unfit to he given called, 84. 

Apararka on, 85. 

Dayabhaga on, 85, 87. 

Jagannatlia on, 86. 

Mitakshara on, 85. 

Amir— (See Fledge) — 
defined, 176. 

how distinguished from Bandhnka by Brihaspati, 188. 
is sometimes synonymous with Bttndhaka , 185. 
its change to Bandhaka , 184. 
its etymological meanings, 180. 

Narad a’ s view of, 189. 

stages of its transition into Bandhaka, 189, 190. 

Yajuavalkya’s text on, 181. 

Aihiigama — 

described as the finding of hidden treasure, 58. 

Hindu Law of, compared to Roman and Khglish Law, 58. 
shares of the King and the tinder in, 58. 
treasure, nob res nullius, 58. 

Am Purana — 

on widow remarriage, 278. 

Adjective Law — (see Procedure). 

Adjournment — 

when allowed to defendant t,o answer complaint, 367. 

Adopted son, (See Adoption, Son) — 
assimilated to aurasa son, 237. 

Adoption — 

authority to give and take a son in, 244. 
dattaka form of, 238. 



INDEX 


419 


eldest son, of, 250. 

if valid when made by woman without her husband's permis- 
sion, 244. 

kritri ma form of, 230. 

necessity of religions ceremonies in, 238. 

only son, of, 249. 

two aspects of an act of, 239. 

Agency, 333-334. 

Agnates — 

.difference between Daynhhagu and Mitakshara regarding preference 
of, over cognates, l<>5. 

general preference .of, over cognates bv Mitakshara, Hi t. 
preference of, in other systems of Jurisprudence, 102-1134. 
their position in a classification of the heirs under the Roman 
Law, 103-104. 

Alienation — 

by a creditor of property pledged, 193. 
children, if subject to the power of, 252 

father's power of, of ancestral and self acquired property, 131-132. 

under the Dayabhnga, 139. 
by a woman of her pec u limn, 285. 
father’s power over ancestral movables, 137. 

Privy council on father's power of, 133. „ 
undivided coparioener’s power of, 149-151. 
restraints on 151. 

judicial departure from the strict law regarding, 152. 

AiitrvroN and Dilution, (> 2. 

Amendment — 

of plaint, when allowed, 307 
Ami (US C IT HI AN - 

functions of, 302-303. 

A no i has — 

us a compiler of smriris, 13. 

Answer — 

adjournment for. when to bo granted, 307. 

defendant’s, should be taken in rim presence of the complai- 
nant, 307 

defendant’s when to bo called for, 307. 
four kinds of, 308. 

nature of, affected the future course of litigation, 309: 
qualities of a proper, 307. 

Apakarka- 

his solution of the riiflioulty created by the theory ot prescription 
in Yajnavalkya’s text., 117. 

on the consent of kinsmen and heirs to an alienation of immovable 
property, its object, 74. 

on the period after which interest will mu ii there is no contract 
to pay interest, 310. 

on the position of daughter’s son in the order of succession, 158. 
on the prohibition of the gift of cut ire property where there ar$ 
$oua to be provided for, 85. 



420 


INDEX 


A hiVTAUBA — 

»•> *t com pi lor of Sniriti, 13. 

on customs, authority of, when opposed to Srnti and Sinriti, 18. 
on free consent in marriage, 257. 

irrEAL — 

right of, from decisions of local courts, 363. 
iFFOVUR'g CASK, 146 . 

Appbbnticb — 

relation of, to instructor, 265. 

Apubva — 

theory of, the, 27- 

Absha — 

marriage, description of, 267. 

Association — # 

appointment of executive committee of, 332. 
constitution of, 332. 

delegates of an, how to be recived by the king, 383. 
rnles of, mast be obeyed, 332. 

rules relating to, indicates a high stage of civilization, 333. 

Asta Vinsati Tattva — (See Raghunandana). 

Atma Tusti — 

self satisfaction or, 20-21. 

Ax&i — 

as a compiler of Smritis, 12, 

Austin — 

his conception of positive law, 29. 

his conception of property, 46. 

on general or universal jurisprudence, 2. 

Bailbb 

duties of 210-220. 

to return the deposit on demand, 220* 
to take proper care, 210. 
grounds of obligatious of, 209. 

Bailment — 

different kinds of 208. 
differs from a pledge, how, 207. 
for mere custody, rule of, 212. 

Hindu law of, compared with Knglish common law, 217* 

Hindu and Homan law of, 213-214. 

Bacdhatana — 

as a compiler of dharmasastra, 13 

exclusion of females from inheritance on, 168 

necessity of religious ceremonies in marriage on, 270 

Bengal school, — 

(sec Dayabhaga), 79 
Betting and Gambling — 

(See Oamblig) 



INDEX. 


42 1 


Bhabadkva* — 

on prescription, his doctrine of presumption. lort 
IUjjta — 

conquest of war or, 00 

HONBUM POSSESS lO, 

Brahma— 

description of , form of marriage, 207 

Bjrihaspati 

action, on the form of 33-84 

adhi and bandha, distinguished 'hy, 188 

agent, act of, binding on principal, according to, 334 

alluvion, on, 02 

association, on, the appointment of an executive committee of, 332 
association, on, the qualifications of the members of, 332*333 
debt, son’s liability to pay father’s, before his own according to, 319 
established usage, conduct consistent with effect of. according to, 
17-18 

gambling, conditions under which allowed, according to, 331 
interest, on the rate of, fixed by contract, 307 
offences against female modesty, classified by, 361 

partner, liability of, to make good the firm’s loss caused by his 
negligence, on, 330 

pledge, eight fold division of, according to, 177 
pledge, without possession, on, 183 
prescription, views of, cm, 109 

reason, place of, in the domain of sacred law, according to, 16 
servant’s wrongs, liability of the master for, according to, 327 
smritis, as a compiler of, 18 
sons, subsidiary, on, 232 

sureties, liability of the sou of, according to, 322 
sureties, four kinds or, mentioned by, 320 

sureties, description of the characteristics of the several kinds of, 
by, 320 

sureties, oppression of, prohibited by, 323 
Burden of proof — 

rests on him who sets up an affirmative case, 372 
Canon Law, 111 
Capitis dkninutio, 163 
Care — 

to be taken by a bailee, 212 
Caste — 

to be considered in indicting punishment, 345 
Ceremonies — 

necessities of, in marriage, 269-272 
religions, necessity of, in adoption, 238 
Coonates — 

position of. Daughter’s son — 
according to Jimutavabana, 159*160 
according to Manu, 159 

according to Yajnavalkya, Vijnaueshwar and Apararka, 158 



42 A 


INDEX. 


according to Mayne, the reason for the favour shown to, 15b 
Dajrabhaga, views of, relating to, 159-161 
Mitakshara, views of, relating to, 157-158 

Coke, r.oitn — 

on the English law of prescription, 122 
COLEBROOKK — 

apurva, theory of, explained by, 27 
on father’s power over ancestral movables, 137 

Common law — 

English, compared to Hindu and Roman Law regarding bailment, 
217 

Commentaries — 

importance of, 23-24 
nature of, 22 

Compact, or Sambita — (See contract) 

forming an association, 332 
result of transgression of, 332 
what it meanB, 331 

Compensation — 

for blame worthiness of a pledgee, 219 
Complainant, (See Complaint)-— 

answer of the defendant to be taken in the presence of, 3G7 
Complaint — 

amen <1 m ent of, 367 
character of a proper, 367 
defendant's answer to, 367 

defendant, was to be summoned when cause of action disclosed 
by, 364 

mode of recording a, 364 
no litigation without-, 364 
who entitled to lodge a, 364 

Compromise — 

not valid, if without court’s sanction, 371 
Con str fction — 

of negative precepts, in Hindu Law, 240 
Contract — 

absence of, to pay interest, 308,310 
agency, of, 333 

compared to locatio condnctio of Roman Law, 324 

gambling and betting, of, 330 

its* place in Hindu Law, 302 

letting on hire, of, 327 

partnership, of, 329 

service, of, 324-329 

Conversion, (See Tort), 340 
Co-ownership — 

difference between Dayabhaga and . Mitakshara conceptions of, 
145-147 

N irakatft ha V’ View of, 149 



1NDKX. 


4*3 


Raghunandana on Dayabhaga conception of, 148 
Srikrishnu Tarkalanknr’s view of, 148 

CoUKl'ILTiOK — 

distinction between, and amicus curiae, 363 
qualifications of, 361 

their position in tho constitution of courts, 361 
Courts — 

appeal from the decision of local, 363 
constitution of, 361 
gradation of, 363 
local, of limited authority, 363 
Creditor, (See Debt)— • 

Brahmin, to be. first paid, 319 

extra-judicial modes of obtaining satisfaction, t v, 313 

liis charge on articles purchased with money borrowed from him, 379 

liable to discharge debt ou taking the debtor’s widow, 318 

liability of using force, when law enjoins litigation, 314 

when may obtain satisfaction, by making debt* work for, 316 

Crime, (See Offence, Criminal liability ) — 

Accessories to a, 357 

caution required of king in dealing with, 358 
considerations in awarding punishment for, 34-3 
different kinds of, 349-357 

difference of caste determining the amount of punishment for, 345 

infancy, as an excuse for, 357 

nature of the penalties prescribed for, 343 

punishments for, different kinds of, 342 

punishment for measure of, according to the gravity of the offence, 
343 

position of the parties, to lie considered, in indicting punishment, 
349 

Crimixat, Liability — 

abetment, 357. 

accessories to a crime, 357, 

exemption from liability, 347.. 357. 

enumeration of crimes, not exhaustive, 354. 

considerations in awarding punishment, 343. 

caste, if determines punishment, 345-349. 

measure of . pun ish ment, 343 . 

negligence when criminal, 356. 

nature of penalties, 342. 

offence against public justice, 355 

public nuisances, 355. 

private defence, right of, 358. 

punishment, kinds of, 342. 

theory of punishment, 359. 

trespass, 355. 

OrsToM, (See Kstablished usage) — 
as a source of Dharma, 16 

authoritative, when, according to Apastamba, 11 
BrihaspaAi on, 17 

of marrying maternal uncle’s daughter, in southern- India. *17 
Privy Council on, 20 



4U 


index 


I)AirA — 

fong of marriage, described, 267 

Dakska — 

as a compiler of Dliarma Sastra, IS 
Damoupat, rale of, 3ll 
Das A, (See slave)— 

Datta — 

irrevocable gifts called, in Hindn Law, 87 
Narada indicates what is, 87 

Datta k a ClIAXmtlKA — 
on Datta Homa, 239 

on widow’s power to give a son in adoption, 247-249 
Dattaka mimansa — 
ou Datta Homa, 239 

on widow's power to give a son in adoption, 247-249 
Datta Homa — 

how far essential ro adoption, 238,239 
Daughter — 

duty of the father towards 263. 
when may she choose her husband, 263 . 

Daughter's son — 

bis position in tlio order of succession 
according to Apararka, 1 58. 
according to «limutavahna, 159-160. 
according to Vijnaneswara, 158. 
according to Yajnavalkya, 158. 

Mann’s text regarding, how explained and applied bv Jimtitarahana, 
159. 

Mayne on, 158. 

Data — 

classification of, into unobstructed and obstructed, 127. 
meaning of, according to Mitakshara and Dayabhaga, 126. 
the two definitions of, compared, 126. 

Databhaga — 

coparcener's right to alienate his own share according to, 154. 
coparcener's right to alienate joint property according to, 156-157. 
conception of co-owuership of adopted by Nilkantha, 149. 
conception of co-ownership of criticism by Kaghunandana, 148. 
devolution of joint property on the death, of a coparcener, according 
to, 143. 

gift without acceptance, validity of, according to, 66, 67. 
gift without acceptance, view of, objections against, 68-69. 
gift in adoption, on the significance of, 254. 

Mitakshara, how differs from, about coparcener’s power of aliena- 
tion 149-154. 

about devolution of joint property on the death of a member 143- 
144. 

regarding conception of co-owncrship, 145-147. 
regarding principles of succession, 126-128. 



INDEX. 


425 


nature of king’s right in tho soil, according io, 51. 

order* of succession, position c.f a cognate in, according to 150-161. 

on father’s alienation during the life of the sons, 130-142. 

on father’s right to son’s acquisitions, 260. 

on tlio consent of kinsmen and heirs regarding alienation of 
property, 75. 

on adeya. or things not tit to be given, 85. 
partition, conception of, criticised by Brikrislma, 148. 
property, defined by, commented on by Srikrishna, 42. 
son’s right during the father’s life time, sometimes recognised by, 
140-14-2. 

son has no right in the property during father's life, according to 
139-140. 

spiritual benefit, the doctrine of, according to, 161. 
succession, altered course of, laid down by, how explained by the 
gradual disruption of the old family system, 167, 168. 
succession, course of, laid down by : influence of Brahmanism, 160. 
succession, law of, according to, 125-126. 

view of, regarding coparcener’s alienation, explained by Srikiishna, 
155. 

Datakbama Samghaha — 

explains the Payubhaga view of the coparcener’s power t:> alienate 
his share, 155. 

Dayatattva — 

gif t in adoption, significance of, according to, 254. 

how differs from the Payubhaga regarding concept ion of th > inter* 
est of a coparcener, 148. 
on pledge without possession ti Hen gul, 186. 

Debt — 


Brahmin’s, should bo paid first, 316. 

duty to pay, absolute nndor Hindu Law, 317. 

elements of, 304. 

evidence of payment of, how obtained, 318. 

extrajudicial methods of obtaining satisfaction of, 313. 

heirs of debtor, when to pay, 318. 

how differs from a Joan for use, 305. 

how realized if unpaid, 312. 

instalments, payment of, bv, 316. 

interest on, not illegal, but usury condemned, 3<ib. 

lost to the creditor if he improperly uses force, 314. _ ^ 

Maun and Yujnavalkya oil extrajudicial modes ot realizing, *11 3, 3.14. 
mode of paying off, to correspond with the mode in which it was 

contracted, 318. .. , r ..... 

non-payment of, a topic of litigation mentioned by Mann, 364. 
order of payment of 319. 
secured in two ways, 316. 
source of the idea of obligation in, 304-305. 


1>ebtob, (See Debt, Creditor) — 

duty of heirs of, to pay debt, 318. 

Irish method of fasting upon, 317. 
raising fajse plea* bow penalised, 314. 
remedy of surety against, 324. 
should pay Brahmin's debt first, 319. 
when may pay by instalments, 316. 

. when to work fc»r the creditor to satisfy the 


del t, 315, 


54 



426 


INDEX* 


DECREE — 

enforcement of 373. 
what it should contain, 373. 

DEFENDANT 

his answer, 367. 

legal restrains! imposed to ensure the attendance of, 365. 
personal attendance of, when dispensed with, 364. 
procedure to be followed when appearance entered by 366. 
punished for disobedient of summons, 365. 
summoned if cause of action disclosed by complaint, 364. 

Deliberation and Decision, 372. 

Deficit — 

father not responsible for son’s 264. 

DEVATiA 

on religious ceremonies in marriage, 201). 

Deya, 84. 

Dhareswara — 

his view that pioperty is exclusively indicated by Sastras, 42, 43. 
on the recognition of son’s right in ancestral property in father’s 
life time, 141. 

Dh&rma, 17, 19, 24, 31 and 32. 

connection of, with revelation, 25. 
contains its sanction within itself, 26. 
meaning and derivation of, 24-25. 

Dharna — 

sitting at the door of the debtor, 313. 

DoCTttTNR of Spiritual Benefit, {see Spiritual Benefit). 

Document — 

formal validity of, 372. 

two kinds of, official and public, 371. 

Duty — 

Brahmin’s threefold, declared by Taittiriya Sruti, 304 

debtor’s, to pay off debt, absolute, 317. 

father’s, towards his daughters, 263. 

husband’s, to pay off wife’s debts, 280. 

husband’s, on his marrying a second wife, 281-282. 

highway, not to obstruct a, 226. 

of the heirs of a debtor to pay off his debt, 318 

reciprocal, of father and son, 260. 

son's, to maintain his father, 261. 

son’s, to pay off his father’s debts, 261. 

wife’s, to pay her husband’s debts, 280. 

wife's, to remain faithful and obedient, 277» 

Employer, {see contract of service, servant). 

Established usage — 

Apastamba on, 18. 

authority of, when in conflict with Smritis, 16-17. 

Brihaspati on, 17. 

Privy Council on, 20. 

sadachara or, a source of Dharma, 16, 20*. 



INDEX. 


427 


EVIDENCE 

different kinds of, 371. 
production of, 370. 

FAMrLZAN-BECHT, 35. 

Father — 

consent of, necessary for son’s marriage, 250. 
duties of, towards children, 26 1, 203. 

extent of his power of alionatiou* without concurrence of sons 
131-139. 

factum valet, doctrine of, in connection with power of alienation 
of, 140. 

has he power to give or sell a son, 252*253. 

Vasistha's answer in the affirmative, 252. 

Yajnavalkya and Narada's answer in the negative, 252. 

Katy ana’s middle position, 253. 
liability of, for sou’s delicts, 264, 
litigation of, with son, 204. 

Mitakshara doctrine of right by birth, applies to what property of, 129. 
May no’s view on the subject, 129. 
his opinion criticised, 129. 
power of, over ancestral movables, 137-139. 
power of, over self-acquired immovables, 131-139. 
power of, to alienate under the Mitakshara, 140, 131-139. 
power of, to alienato under the Dayabliaga, 139, 140. 
power of, over the person and property of the son, 251, 254-259. 

Privy council on the Mitakshara doctrine regarding the power 
of, 133. 

the decision considered, 133-136. 
right of, to son's acquisitions, 260. 

Fraud, ( see Tort), 341 
Gaius— 

on formalities of mancipation, 76. 
on prefcjrence of agnates, 154. 
on property, 5 48. 

Gambling and Betting — 

conditions under which practised, 330. 
distinguished, 330. 

gradual relaxation of the prohibition relating to, 331. 
laying of wagor, is a characteristic of, 330. 
practice of, severely condemned by Mann, 330. 

Gan mi a kva — 

form of marriage, described, 267. 

Garga — 

on self satisfaction, 20, 21. 

Gautama — 

as a compiler of Smriti, 13. 

on father's right to chastise a son, 251. 

on the enforceability of a voluntaiy promise of gift, 92. 

on the me&ns of acquisition of ownership, 54. 

Geblin, M. — 

view of, about indigenous growth of Hindu Law, 91. 



42$ lNDlik. 

Ghosh Da. — 

liis prediction about Hindu Law, 5 

his view, how priority in a pledge is determined, doubted, 204. 
on hypothecation, 181 . 

on pledgor’s right to create a seeoud mortgage, .201 . 
on Sibchandra Ghosh t>. Itassikeliandra Nundy, ljT8. 
view. of, regarding bandhalca , considerc-'d, 184, 185. 

Gift — 

conditions of a valid, 79-011 
Harita, 01. 

Gautama, 02. 

Katyayana, 02. 

Mayne, 01, 02. 
defined, 00. 

differs from sale, how, 05, 

essentials of a valid, 60. 

from affectionate kindred to women, 285. 

minor formalities of, 78-76. 

of a son by father, 252. 

of ft wife by husband, 270. 

principal formalities of, 00-72. 

validity of a gift to one after promise to another, 93. 
voluntary promise of a gift, if enforceable, 91-95. 

Golapcu.vnora Sarkar, (see Sarkar). 

Govindaraja — 

on the right of a mortgagee to create a sub-mortgage, 198. 
Guardianship, {see minor). 

of a minor, 301. 

Guru — 

, on whether property is exclusively indicated by tlie Sasbras, 46. 
Halayudha — 

on prevalence of hypothecation in Bengal, 186. 

Harixath, 148. 

Harita — 

as a compiler of Suiritis, 12. 

enumerates fiv© classes of sureties including one corresponding 
to surety for good behaviour, 321. 
enforceability of a voluntary promise of gift, 91. 

HrritactIS, (see Daya) — 

Dayabhaga knows no distinction between obstructed and unobs- 
tructed, 128-39. 

decisiou of the Privy Oouncil on, criticised, 133-39. 
distinction between obstructed and unobstructed, 127. 

Mit&kshara classification of, 129-32. 

Hindu Law — 

complaints in, 364,07. 

comprehensiveness and consistency of, 375-76. 
constitution of courts in, 301. 
evidence, different kinds of, in, 371. 
excellence of, 374. 



ifcDii* 


WJ 

litigation in, four steps of, 369. 

procedure under, 361-73. 

qualifications of a judge, according to, 361. 

schools of, growth of, 22*23. 

sources of, 9, 

sources of authority of, 24* 

tort and crime, how far distinguished, 337. 

Holland — 

defines ownership, 49. 

view of, as to what ownership implies, 47. 

HU8BAKD 

character of, in the different kinds of marriage, 267,268. 

duty of, towards first wife when he marries a second, 281, 282. 

lias no power of divorce, 276. 

liability of, to pay his wife’s debt, 280, 

liability of when he abandons his wife, 277. 

litigation of, with his wife, 291. 

nature of his control over the person of his wife, 275. 
nature of control over the property of bis wife, 285,28(3. 

Hypothecation — 

disadvantages of, 180. 

evidence of, prevalence of, in Bengal, 187. 

evidence to prove recognition of, in later Hindu Law, 185. 

Katyayana’s view, 185, 

Jagannatlia’s vie>v, 186. 

Halayudha’s view, 186. 

evidence of, prevalence of, outside Bengal, 187. 

Mitakshara, no trace of, in, 187. 
stages in the transition to, 188. 
reason why, readily accepted in Bengal, 187. 

Vyavahara Mayukha on, 188. 

INCORPOREAL RIGHT 

appurtenant rights, a kind of, 227. 
pasturage, a kind of, 223. 

exteut of pasturage, 224. 
private and public, 225, 

Manu on nuisance on highway, 226. 
three kinds of way, 225,26. 
way, a kind of, 225. 

INHERITANCE (see Succession). 

Injuria sine damnum — 

if recognised by the Hindu Law r , 337. 

Injury to person, (sue Tort). 

Injury to property, (see Tort). 

Institutes — 

Justinian’s : 

on the effect of payment of earnest money in a contract of sale, 

102 . 

on stfi heredus in Roman Law, 142. 

Manu’s (see Manu). 

Yajnaralkya’s (see Yajnnvulkya). 



430 


INDEX 


Interest — 

caste of debtor, cause pf special rate of, 307. 
different kinds of, 307. % 

exceptional risk, cause of special rate of, 307. 

extreme aversion , against the practice of taking, gradually 
relaxed, 310. 

exhorbitant, not allowed when, 307. 

fixed by contract, 307. 

limited by law, 307. 

maximum amount, of, 311. 

not illegal, in itself, 306. 

tender stops the running of, 311. 

usurious, condemned, 306. 

when allowed in the absence of contract, 309. 

Narada, 308. 

Katyayana, 308. 

Vishnu, 308. 

Jagaxkatiia — 

t 

Adeya, what, according to, 8G. 
on bandha :, 184. 

on the Dayabhaga conception of co-ownership, 148. 
on Katyayana’s text on priority between pledges, 186. 

„ sovereign's night in the soil, according to, 51-53. 

JjlMIXI — ** * 

authority of Smritis, according to, 12. 
defines dharma, 26>. v 
his system, how atheistic, 27. 

theory of apurva, 27. 

view of, on revelation as a root of dharma, 25. 

Jimutavahana — (see Dayabhaga) — 

co-parcener* s right to alienate his share, according to, 154. 
factum valet , doctrine of, applied to— 

alienation of property, 78, 156. 
adeya, 87. 

acquisition of ownership, modes of, 55. 

father*s power to give or sell a son, according to, 254. 
father's right to son's acquisition, according to, 260. 
gift, extent of the right of, according to, 85. 
gift, in adoption, significance of, 254. 
gift withont acceptance, 66,67,68. 

son’s right in father's property during his lifetime, how far 
recognised by, 141. 

spiritual benefit, doctrine of, application of, 159-61, 167-168. 
validity of a transaction, how affected by prohibitory, texts, 139. 
view that property is exclusively indicated by Sastras, 42-43. 

Jones, Sir William, 5. 

on the Hindu law of bailments, 207. 

Judge— 

conception of, 355. 
king* the supreme, 361. 
qualifications of, 361. 
taking of bribes by, 356. 



INDEX 


4a 1 


JUDGMENT — 

when to be pronounced, 373. 
vacating a previous, grounds dtif, 372. 

Jurisprudence — 

general and particular, 2. 

Hindu Jurisprudence, 

difficulties in its study, 5-9. 
importance of its study 3-4. 
what it means 3. 

Just a Causa, 112. 

Justinian — 

effect of his legislation on the -Homan law of prescription, 112-113. 
effect of payment of eartiest money in mile in Roman law, 102. 
intestate succession, laws ofi modelled by, 104. 
master’s power over slaves, according to, 297. 
on property, 48. 
on slavery, 293. 

reform of the mode of Roman conveyance, 73. 

Roman law of contract, in the days of, 303. 

Kalpasutra — 

on the extinction of usufruct, and title by adverse possession, 105. 
Kamalakara — 

on the necessity of religious ceremonies in marriage, 270. 
on the period after which interest will run,' *ff there is no contract 
to pay it, 310. * 

Kan ad a — 

dharma as the source of welfare and salvation on, 20. 

Karma yoga, 63. 

K A Til OPA NISH A DA 

on the idea of the good, 25. 

Katyayana — 

as a'compiler of Sinriti, 13. 

answers to be made by defendant, four kinds of, mentioned 

by 368 - 

creditor’s charge on articles purchased with money borrowed from 
him, on, 319. 
dasa, meaning of, 293. 
eighteen topics of litigation, on, 34. 
father’s power to sell or give his son, on, 252, 253. 
gift for religious purposes, on, 90-92. 

gift by a person suffering from disease, validity of, according 
to, 90. 

hereditary succession, the meaning of, on, 118,119. 

interest on debt, on, 308. 

liability of a creditor using force, on, 314. 

liability of a creditor making the debtor perform degrading work, 
on, 315. 

market overt, effect of purchase at, according to. 95. 
priority between pledges, on, 185. 
qualifications of a judge, according to, £62. 

right of a creditor to realise his claim if surety be dead, on/ 32o, 



32 


JNDKX 

son of a surety, liability of, according’ to, 323. 
stridhana, on, 285. 

surety, remedies of against the debtor, on, 324. 
testamentary power under Hindu Law, on, 80. 

two* fold liability of an offender — to punishment-, to pay compensa- 
tion, according to, 339, 

voluntary promise of a grift, the enforceability of, on, 92. 

King — 

councillors when to oppose, 363. 

duty of in respect of thieves, 34J. 

judicial capacity of, 29, 32. 

liability of, to protect subjects, Jft. 

positive law, intervention of, in, 30. 

officers of, in market overt, 95. 

punishment of, when commits offence, 347. 

right of, in the Boil, 51-53. 

share of, in adhigama, 58. 

supreme judge, 361. 

treatment by, of association, 333. 

Kritrima — 

form of adoption, prevails in Mithila, 236. 

Krittakalpataru — 

reconciles the class! fi cation of pledges by Narada and Brihasp&ti, 
177- 

Kulluka bhatta — 

interpretation of texts on prohibitions in marriage, 273. 

Manu's text regarding mortgagee’s power to create a sub- 
mortgage, 198. 
widow-remarriage, 278. 

Kumarilabwami— 

acquisition of property, on, 46. 

Law — 

province of, 1. 

Hindu Law (see Hindu law) — 
its sources, 9. 

growth of different schools in, 22, 23. 
sources of authority of, 24. 

positive law 

how differs from moral rules, 28. 
elements involved in the conception of, 29, 

.Hindu conception compared with the Austinian, 29. 

liKGAIt RESTRAINT — 

four kinds of, 366. 

imposed on defendant to ensure his attendance, 365. 
improper imposition of, punished, 366. 
wilful vi -lation of, punished, 366. 

LOTTING ON HIRE (SEE CONTRACT)— 

principles regulating the contract of, 327. 

principles of, indicate great advance in juristic ideas, 329. 

LIRRIPRNS, 76, 77, 



IXDKX 


433 


LlKlIITA — 

as a compiler of Smriti 13. 
on right of tvay, 325, 320. 

Litigation— 

four steps in, 309. 

compromise of, not. allowed unless with court’s sanction, 371. 
started with a complaint, 304. 

Littleton— 

on the law of prescription in England, 122. 

MacN4«hten, Siu William, 0. 

IIadanaratna— 

on the authority of usages, IS. 

Mad h avac harya y a — 

necessity of religious ceremonies in marriage, according to, 209, 
270. 

usages, authority of, according tu, 17 

views of, on the atheistic nature of the Mimunsa system, 27. 
Mahapuranas, 21. 

Maine, Sir Henry - 

communal ownership its indication in Hindu law, 221. 
contracting a marriage, ancient Roman modes of, 288 . 
fasting upon a creditor, Irish method of, described, 317. 
married woman’s proprietary incapacities, 200. 
penal law of ancient communities, observations of : hew far held 
good in regard to ancient Hindu law, 335. 
proscription in European Jurisprudence, his observations on, 111* 
right of conquest, extent of, 01. 
succession in Roman law, on the principle of, 103, 1 0-1. 

Mancipatio, 73. 

Mandlik, V.N.— 

on practices contrary to Saslric prohibitions relating to marriage, 
274. 

Manning, Serjeant— 

on transfer of ownership without delivery in modern law, 72. 

Man it— 

as a compiler of Smriti, 12, 13. 

acquisition of wealth, several means of, according to, 53. 

action, forms of, on, 33, 34. 

adafta, or void gifts, on, 811. 

adhiyama, or finding of treasure- trove, on, 58. 

agency, — implied, on, 339. 

bride, choice of, on, 272. 

condemns a king who does not punish a criminal, 330. 
criminal liability for theft, exception to, according to, 358. 
dharma, the fourfold indices of, on, 10. 
eighteen topics of litigation, on, 302. 304. 
end of pnnishment on, 359. 

first wife, treatment of, by husband, when he marries a second on 
tho ground of her ill-heallh, nccordiug to, 282. 
gambling and betting condemned by, 331. 

55 



434 


INDEX 


interest, extortionate, disapproved by, 306. 
t marriage, religious ceremonies in , 272. 
master’s authority to chastiBe slaves, on, 297. 
negligence amounting to an offence, on, 356. 
nuisance in high way, on, 226. 
pasturage, on, 224. 
paternity, on, 235. 

parigraha , or occupation, as a mode of acquisition of ownership, on, 
56-57. 

penalty, as an element in the conception of positive law, on, 30 
pledge in the days of, 397. 

property declared unfit to bo given, alienation of, on, 153. 
positive law, intervention of #ho king as an element of, according, 
to, 30. 

practice of appointment, on, 233. 
prescription, law of, on, 108. 
prohibitions in marriage, on, 272. 
realisation of debt, modes of, according to, 312. 
slaves, seven kinds of, mentioned by, 294. 

son’s right to hold separate property during father’s lifetime, on. 
259. 

spiritual benefit conferred by an atirasa son, 231. 
spiritual benefit, text of, on, 159, 167. 

theft, greater punishment for, to members of higher castes, 347. 
verbal abuse, truth is no defence in, according to, 349. 
widow-remarriage, disapproved by, 278. 
widow, duties of, aocording to, 233, 277. 
wives, treatment of, by husband, according to, 275. 
work by a servant, incomplete performance of, how affects his 
remuneration, according to, 325. 

Markby, Sib W— 

occupancy without ownership in Manu’s institutes, on, 57. 

ownership without possession, 72. 

prescription, English law of, 122-123. 

prescription, Hindu law of, 109-110. 

prescription, Koman law of, 121. 

witnesses, number of, in a Roman mancipation, 74. 

Market overt, 95. 

Marriage— 

betrothal in, effect of, 291. 

capacity to give a girl in f 273. 

ceremonies in, Mami on, 272. 

ceremony of, two stages in, 271. 

conditions of a valid, 272-275. 

consent of parties to, 257. 

different kinds of. 267. 

divorce not allowed in, 276. 

father’s consent in. effect of want of, 256. 

husband, choice of, in, when may be made, 263. 

kinds of, now prevalent, 271. 

prohibited degrees in, 274. 

prohibitions based on gotras and pravaras, 273. 

widow’s, controversies on, 277-280. t . 

Master— 

duty of, towards servant, 327. 



I.NDKX 


485 


Mayne, J.D. — 

• consent of co-villagers and neighbours on a transfer of property, *73. 

Dayabhaga recognition of son’s right in father’s property during 
his lifetime, 141. 

Dayabhaga doctrine of spiritual benefit, result of, ou the order of 
succession, 159. 

explanation of the altered course of succession laid down in the 
Dayabhaga, by, 165-160. 

gift without corporeal acceptance, his observations on the completion 
of., 69-70. 

. Hindu Jurisprudence, importance of the study <»f, 4. 

Mitakahara joint family, principle^ governing, explained by, 143, 

Mitakshara succession, position of daughter’s son in, explained by, 
158. 

Mitakshara doctrine of son’s co-ownership with father from birth, 
on the application of, 1 20, 130. 

subsidiary sons, recognition of, by Hindus, explained by, 232. 

theory of paternity explained by, 234. 

view of, regarding anomalous nature of Hindu family relations 269. 

voluntary promise, enforceability of, against- the promisor himself, 
91,92. 

Measure, of— 

care to be taken by a bailee 212-218. 

compensation payable by a bailee for want of care, 219. 

Mediiatithi — 


on the right of a mortgagee to create a sub-mortgage, 198. 
ou the six-fold division of dharma, 32. 

Mimansakas, 46. 

Mimaksa System - 


Apurva, theory of, significance of, according to, 27. 
dharma, its connection with revelation, in, 25. 
king’s right to the soil, nature of, in, 51. 

Minor — 

period of minority, 299. 
guardianship of, 301. 

Misra— 

on the significance of gift in adoption, 254. 
Mitakshara — 


acceptance, different kinds of, 69. 
adatta, -on, 89, 
adeya, on, 85. 

adhigama, or finding or treasure-trove, on, 58. 

alienation, accompanied by gift of gold and water, according to, 

75,76. , 

articles lost by one and found by another, effect oi, considered 
by, 59. ( 

Ap&stamba’s text declaring wife's co-ownership in husband s 
property, considered by, 288. 

birth, right by, of a son to his father’s property, on, 127, 129, 231, 
26°. 

cognates, position of, according to, 157, 158. 


daughter's son, 158. . 

co-ownership, conception of, how differs from that in Dayabhaga, 
146-147. 



436 


INDEX 


consent of co-villagers to alienation, if necessary, according to, 73. 
Consent of kinsmen and heirs to ^alienation, if necessary, according 
to, 74, 75. 

day a, on, 126. , 

Dayabliaga, how differs from, regarding devolution of a deceased 
coparcener’s interest, 143-145. 
dharma-sastras. compilers of, enumerated by, .13. 
extinctive prescription, on, 105, 110. 

father’s power of alienation of family property without son’s consent 
considered, 131-136, 138, 130. 

father’s power to give or sell his son, according to, 253. • 

gift without acceptance, validity of, according to, 68. 
gift without corporeal acceptance, validity of, according to, 60, 70. 
heritage, obstructed or unobstructed, according to, 120-128. 
hypothecation, no trace of, in, 183. 

king’s duty, when thefts are undetected, according to, 341. 

ownership, formalities in the transfer of, according to, 72, 73. 

partition, defined by, 145. 

partition and co-ownersliip, on, 145-147. 

pledge creates a real right, how far, according to, 196. 

priority in pledge, according to, 204. 

pledgee’s power to create a sub-mortgage according to, 198. 
pledgor’s power to create a. second mortgage, according to, 202. 
possession, hereditary, on, 117-120. 
prescription, on, 114. 115. 

prescription, text of Yajnavalkya regarding, construed in, 104. 
propinquity, principle of, 161, 162. 

punishment, how awarded when offence is repeated, 343. 
purchase from one not the veal owner, effect of, according to, 94. 
son, position of, during lifetime of the father, according to, 131-140. 
spiritual benefit, principle of, not mentioned by, 162. 
succession, principle of— how differs from Dayabhaga, 126-128. 
undivided coparcener, power of alienation, according to, 150, 151. 
exception to the restrictions on alienation, 151. 
judicial departure from the strict Mitnkshara view, 152-103. 
wife, husband’s ownership over, recognised by, 275. 

Mitra Misra — 

on sastric modes of acquisition of ownership, 43-40. 

Xachiketas — 

story of, its bearing on the law of adoption, 256. 

Naiyaikas, 68. 

Narada— 

accession, law of, on, 62-63. 

acquisition of ownership, sastric means of, on, 54. 
adhi and bandha , distinction between, according to, 189. 
adatta or void gift, on, 88. 
agency, on, 333. 

caste, determining the amount of punishment, on. 345. 
councillors, their duty to oppose king, if he proceeds illegally, .363. 
datta or irrevocable gifts, ori , 87. 
dharma sastras, compiler of, 13. , 

debt, payment of, by instalments, according to, 316. 
debtor’s duty to pay debt absolute, according to, 317. 
enumerates five classes of persons liable to lose their cause, 370, 
father’s power over ancestral property, on, 137-138, 



INDEX 


437 


father’s power to give or sell his son, on, 252. 
hereditary possession, on, 117, 119. 
interest extortionate, disapproved by, 806. 
long user, effect of, on extinction of* usufruct, on, 104. 
pledges, divisions of, on, 177. 
pledge, natnro of, according to, 176. 
pledges, delivery of possession in, on, 181. 
proprietary right, interference with, on, 228. 
reason, place of, in the domain of sacred law, 14, 16. 
stahaaa , defined by, 350. 

servants, time for payment of wages of, on, 324. 
servant, leaving service before end of term forfeits wages, 326. 
slave, fifteen kinds of, mentioned by, 294. 
surety’s right to recover debt 

from the debtor, when compelled to pay, 324. 
topics of litigation, division or, 31. 

visitors expressing an opinion in a litigious dispute, 362. 

NEC VI, NKC CLAM, NKC PKKCARIO, 122. 

Negative precepts — 

construction of, 240. 

Negligence — 

when amounts to an offence, 356. 

Nibandhas-- 

importance of, 23, 24. 

Ni lea nth A< — (see Vyavaha ra MaynkhaV 

adhi and bandhnku , differentiated by, 188. 
ndhigama , or finding of treasure trove, on, 58. 
co-ownership ami partition, conception of, 148. 
father’s power over ancestral movables, on. 139. 
lather’s power to sell or give his son, 252, 
husband’s ownership over wife, according to, 275, 276. 
king's right to the soil, nature of, according to, 51 . 

Nirnaya Sinuhu— ( see Kamalakara). 

Nuisance — ( see tort). 

Occu patio, — (see Parigraha) 56. 

Offence — ( see Crime and Punishment). 

against fomale modesty, 351. 

divided iuto three classes, 351 . 
against public justice, 355 

corruption of ft judge, 356. 
giving false evidence, 355. 
production of a false document, 355. 
aggravated when t.ho offender is of superior caste, 354. 
exemption from liability for, 357. 
minor, 355. 

negligence, when it amounts to, 356. 
personal violence, a'kind of, 350. 
tahasha a kind, 350. 
theft or steyn, a kind of, 352. 

divided into threefclasses, 353. 
verbal abuse, a kind of, 349. 

Ordeal, 372. 



488 


INDEX 


Ownership— 

communal, Sir H. Maine, on its indication in Hindu Law, 224. 
differs from property, 39-40. 

Siromani’s view, 40-41. 
king’s right in the soil, nature of, 53-53. 

Jagannatha, Mimansa, Nilakantha, Srikrislma on, 51. 
meaning of, 39. 

modes of acquisition of 55-64, 127. 

adhigama , or finding of treasure trove, 58. 
birth, 127. 

bijita or conquest of war, 60. 
karmayoga or employment of wofk, 63. 
parigraha or occupatio of Roman law, 65. 
prayoga or application of pre-existing property, 61. 
recognised by Sastras, 53, 54. 

Gautama, 54. 

Manu, 53. 

Narada, 64. 

Parthasaratlii, *16. 

qualified owership, 49. 

Srikrishna Tarkalankur on, 50. 

Paisacha — 

form of marriage, description of, 268. 

Parental Relationship, 230-264. 

Parasara — 

asu compiler of Smriti, 13-14. 
kinds of sons, on, 236. 
widow’s remarriage, on, 278. 

Parigraha — 

* a mode of acquisition, 55, 

Parthasarathi Misra — 

on Sastric modes of acquisition of ownership, 4G. 

Partition — 

conception of co-ownership, 147-149. 
difference between the two schools, 145. 147. 

Raghunandana’s criticism of the Davabhaga conception of, 148. 
severence of co-ownership, 145. 

Partnership — 

what it signifies, 329. 

rights and duties of partners, 329. 

P ARYAN A Ska DOHA, 149. 

Pasturage — 

extent of land for, 223. 

Manu on extent of land for, 224, 
right of, 223. 

Yajnavalkya’s text on, 224. 

Paternity — 
theory of, 234. 

through dominion over child’s mother, 234. 
through transfer of patria potestas, 235. 



INDKX 


439 


Fatria potertas - 

extent of, under Hindu law, 234, 251, 250. 
father’s power to gives or sell son, 

Jimutavahana, on, 254. 

Katy ay ana’s middle course, 253. 

Narada on, 252. 

Nilakantha, on, 253. 

Purvamimansa, on, 253. 

Raghunandana, on, 254. 

Srikrishna, on, 254. 

Tantravarttaka, 253. 

Vasistha’s view of, 252, 

Yajnavalkya, 252. * 

Paukarruava, 279. 

PECtTLTUM — 

alienation of, by woman, 28 7. 
husband’s right over wife, 286. 

Katyayana on, 285. 

Mitaksliara on, 284. 

Saudaika, 285. 
woman’s, 284. 

Penalty — (see Punishment). 

Personal violence — (see Offence, Crimo). 

different degrees of the offence of, 350. 

Plaint — (see Complaint). 

amendment of, 367. 
when to be rejected, 367. 

Pledge — 

bailment, how differs from, 207. 
creditor’s right to sell, 193. 
definition of, 176. 

delivery of possession in, 178, 179, 185. 
divisions of, 176, 180, 

N&rada, 176. 

Vrihaspati, 176* 

duties of the pledgee in, 200, 201. 
for a definite period, 191. 
for no fixed period, 191. 
for use, 1.91, 192. 
forfeiture of, 192. 

Hindu law of, logical and reasonable, 206- 
improvement or deterioration of, 192. 
kinds of, 194. 
methods of sale in, 195. 
nature of, creates a legal right, 196-197, 
period of, grace in, 191. 
power to create a submortgage, 198. 
views of commentators, 198. 
parallel in French code, 199. 
principles of classifications of, 177. 
rights of pledgor and pledgee in, 200, 201, 191. 
vivum vadium , when resembles, 192. 



440 


INDEX 


Pledgee — ( see Pledge). 

his duty, 2CO, 201, 193. 
his ri^htB, 191. 

Pledgor — (see Pledge). 

his right to sell or mortgage, 200, 201, 

Dr. Ghosh’s view, 201. 

Mitakshara view, 202. 

Viramitrodaya on, 202. 

Polygamy — 

anomaly of permitting, while prohibiting widow-remarriage, 
explained, 282, 283. 

how far sanctioned by Hindu law, 286-281 
controversy over the question, 281 
Haim’s text sanctioning, 281 

Positive law — 

characteristic clement of, 29. 

Hindu conception of, compared with the Anstinian, 29. 
moral and religious injunctions, how differ from, 29. 

Possession — 

as evidence, 371 

delivery of, if necessary in a pledge. 178 

hereditary, 

its meaning, 116-1 19 
commentators on, 117-119 
Hindu and English law compared, 123-124 
similar doctrine in other systems, 120-122 
when affords the weightiest proof, 37l 

Pradipakara — 

on the doctrine of prescription, 106, 107 
Pr/japatya — 

form of marriage described, 267 
Prayoga — 

a mode of acquisition of ownership, 67 
Precepts — 

construction of negative, 240 
Preceptor — 

his relation to pupil, 265 
Prescription — 

controversy round, 104-110 
Apararka, 108, 109 
Bhabadeva, 106, 107 
Brihaspati, 109 
Kalpasutra, 105 
Mann, 108 

Mitakshara, 104, 105 
Narada, 104 
Pradipakara, 106, 107 
Ratnakara, 105 
Sir W. Markby, 109, 110 



INDEX 


Ml 


Smriticba ndrika, 105 
Smrititattwa, 105 
Vachaspati, 108 
Viramitroclaya, 107, 109 
doctrine of presumption, 106 
extinctive prescription, 105 

exceptions to the applicability of proscription, 115, 1 14 
Hindu ami Homan law of, compared, 115 
its elements : text of Yajnavalkya, 105 
similar controversy in TSnropoaii Jurisprudence. Ill, 1 11! 
Priority — 

Apararlca on, 205 * 

Dr- Ghosh's view on, doubted. 204 
meaning- of, 204 

Mitnkshara and Viramitrodaya on, 204 
of mortgages, 205 

Homan and Hindu law compared, 205 
Privy Council — 
on custom, 20 
Private wekkno — 

right of, how far, recognised in Hindu law. 558 
right of, when extended to t he cm using of death, 255 

Pit oce I JURE — 

adjournment, 367 
ammendment of pleading, 367 
answer, 367 
•appeal, 363 
burden of proof, 372 
complaint, 364 
compromise, 371 
councillors, function of. 361 
constitution of courts, 361 
e outi torch a r go , 369 
decree, what to contain, 373 
evidence, 370, 371 
execution of decree, 373 
four steps in, 369 
gradation of court, 363 
judgment, 373 
law of, 361 -373 
ordeals, 372 

plaint when rejected, 367 

personal attendance when dispensed with, 361 
review, 373 
witnesses, 371-372 
Proof — 

burden of, 372 
Property — 

Austinian conception of, compared with Hindu, 48, 49 
definition of. 41, 42 _ 

devolution of, on the death of a member of a joint family 143-146 
objections to Vijnaneswara’s view regarding, 43. 44 
view of Jimutavahana regarding, 42, 43 

56 



442 


INDEX 


Pnori nquity— 

principle of, 101 
Public justice — 

offences against, 355 
PUBLIC NL1SANCK, 355 

Punishment — 

as a source of purification of the culprit, 357 
different kinds of, 342 

difference; of caste determining nature and amount of, 845 
end of, according to Hindu law, 359 

extent of improper conduct to be (considered in inflicting, 352 
factors to be considered in awarding, 343. 

Hindu law not partial in awarding, 347. 

how awarded when several persons combine in striking another, 
351. 

measure of, varies acco-ding to the gravity of the offence, 343 
<. relative position of parties to be considered in inflicting, 349. 
women, adultery of — for, 352. 

Pupil — 

Ids relation Ip preceptor, 205. 

Pu HA NAS, 21, 22. 

Purchase — 

from a person not the real owner, 94 
in the presence of King’s officers, 95 

P UR V AMI M A NS A 

on the father’s power to give or sell his son, 252 
on Viswujit sacrifice, 253 

Qualified property — (see Ownership) 

Srikrislinn Turkalankara’s recognition of, 50 
Quasi-parkntal relationships, 205-205 
Raghunan dana — (see Dayatattva) 

criticism of Deyabliaga doctrine of co -ownership and partition by, 
148 

Hakshasa — 

form of marriage described, 208 
Ratnakara — 

on the law of prescription, 105 
Reason — 

place of, in sacred law, 15-10 
Res mancipi, 73, 70, 112 

Res nullius, 68, 60, 08, 80 
Review, 373 
Right — 

father’s — over the son’s person, 251 
father’s — to give or sell a son, 252-253 
commentators on, 253, 254 
Katyayaua on, 253 



1XDKX 


4|:i 

Naradn on, 252 
Nilakantlm on, 253 
Purvamitnausa on, 253 
V asiat ha on, 252 
Yajnavnlkya on, 252 
father's — to sou's acquisition*, 280. 
girl’s — to seek her own husband, 283 
husband's — over his wife’s person, 275 
» » »» property, 28b 

interference with another's proprietary — . 227 
cultivation of another's land. 228 
digging well in another's land, 227 
pasturage, — of, 22 $ * 

private defence,— of , in Hindu law, 358 
proprietary — ,or dominion, 48 

Gaius, 48 
Justinian, 48 

son’s — to hold separate property, 258 

twice-born, — of, to take fuel and fruits from trees not enclosed, 223 
way, — of, 225 

wife, — of, to her peculiuni, 28*1-280 
Homan law — 

compared with Hindu law regarding the extent of /• ntiru }>ofextas, 
251,250-280. 

com |>ared with Hindu law regarding the father's liability for 
son's delicts, 205 

differs front Hindu law regarding bailment, 2L3, 214 
Saiiach Ate a- ■ (established usage) 

bow far ant boritative, when in conflict with Smriti, 10-2<J 
Saham — (see (’rime, Offence) 

difference between and s/rtja, 25 <> 
its meaning, 350 

Sale — 

children, — of, 252 

effect of — , in different circumstances, 94, 95 
effect of non-delivery of article sold, in, 98, 99. 
effect of payment of earnout money in, 102 
gift, how differs from, 05 

liability for deterioration or loss after demand in, 99. HHJ. 
principles common to gift and — 94 
rescission of, conditions of, 98, 97 
wife, power of — of, 278 
Samkaka Vijaya, 27 
Sam k ha— 

as compiler of Smrili, 13 
on right of way. 225, 228 

Samvarta — 

as compiler of Smriti, 13. 

San daks - 

comments on Justinian regarding the effect ol earnest nioiioj in 
sale, 102. 



IN f >KX 


444 . 

Bark a k. ( Gu lapeliau d r»v Bastri) — 

his view regarding divergence of opinions among sages ou prohibited 
degrees in marriage considered, 274. 

Batata pa — 

as compiler of Smriti, 13. 

S avion Y — 

prescription in Roman law, on, 120, 121. 

Self-satisfaction (See Atma-tusti, 20, 21). 

Service — ( contract of) 

its connection with contract of letting on hire, 324 
loss of employer’s articles in, effect of, 326 
wages of, how fixed and when paid, 324 

Servant — (see Service) 

liability of, to pay compensation when lie causes loss, 326, 327 
' master’s duty towards, 327. 
master’s liability for wrong done by, 327 

►Si ROMAN 1 — 

ownership and propeity, view of, on, 40, 41. 

Sister — 

position of, in. the law of succession, 170. 

Slave — 

Brahmin, if could become, 295. 
differs from an ordinary servant, 294. 
emancipation of, at master’s option, 296. 
emancipation of, conditions for, 295-96. 
how made, 294. 

kinds of, Manu and Narad a on, 294. 

' master’s right over female, 297. 

one forcibly made, or purchased from a thief, not made, 296. 
position of, 297- 

property, if could be acquired by, 297. 
saving a master’s life, effect of, 290. 
special rules relating to, 294. 
transaction of, validitj’ of, 298. 

Slavery- - 

defective status, a form of, 298. 
emancipation from, 295, 
its prevalence in Hindu law, 293. 
mode of contracting, 294. 
special rules relating to, 295. 

Smriti Chanprika — 

classification of pledges according to, 177. 

females, exclusion of, from inherits ijce, according to, 168. 

liability for loss of purchased articles before delivery, on, 100. 

prescription, law of, on. 105. 

slave and servant distinguished by, 293. 

S m kit i Tatt v a — 

ou the law of prescription, 105, 



INDEX 


445 


Son — 

duties of, towards the father, 2(5 1 . 
eldest, adoption of, 250, 
father, if liable for delicts of, 205. 

father, if can alienate without concurrence of, 13 l-l 39. 
father, power of, over, 251, 25(5-259. 
kinds of, 230. 

Pnrasara on, 230. 

kinds of, recognised at present, 230 
kritrinia, 236. 

litigation of, with father, 204. 

"nature of interest of, in ancestral property ami father’s acquisi- 
tions, 130*131. * 

only, adoption of, 249. 

position of, compared to that of mm htrmlcs in Roman law, 142-1441. 
right of, in father’s property during his life, if recognised hy 
Dayabhagu, 140-142. 
separate property, right or, to hold, 258. 

Sonsjeup (see son) — 

legit hnntia per mtbseqnvns nmiriniouium recognised, 237 

Mayne’s view regarding, 232. 

principle underlying recognition of, 232. 

Spiritual benefit — 
principle of, 1(51. 

recognition by Mitakshara of, 1(52. 

Skikrishn a Tahk a la nka it a — 
definition of property, on. 42. 

Dayabhagu concept ion of co-ownership ami ]»nrtit ion , on, 1-1, S. 

Dnyublmgu view of alienation by a co- parcener, on. 155. 

extent of right of conquest, on, 00-0 I . 

gift in adoption, significance of, nceoiding io, 254- 

king’s right to the soil, nature of, on, 51. 

qualified property on, 50. 

spiritual benefit — effect of rigid application of, according to, Hit. 
Sruti (see Taittiriya Sruti, and Vedas) — 
contents of, 11,12. 

established usage, extent of the authority of, when opposed to, 18. 
place of reason in, 15. 

Status (defective) — 
classification of, 208. 
how arises : 

on dependence, 299. 
on iufaucy, 299. 
on insanity, 299. 
on slavery, 298. 
its period, 299. 

Stkya (see Theft) 

Stkidhana (see Peculiutn, ami Woman) — 
husband’s right over wife’s, 28(5. 

Katyayana on, 285. 

Mitakshara on, 28 1. 

Salka, if is, 280. 



INDEX 


446 

Succession (soe Day a, Dayabhaga, Father, Son, Mitakshara, etc.) 

agnates, preference of, in, 162. 
birth, right by in, 127. 
cognates, position of, 157- 

difference between the two schools, 126, 127, 143, 161. 

estate once vested can not be divested, how far true, 174. 

exclusion from, ground of, 172-174. 

exclnsion of females, from, 168. 

females, position of, in, 170. 

innovation of the Bengal school, 165, 167. 

influence of Brahmanism, in the law of, 160. 

position of the daughter’s son, 158. 

position of the sister’s son, 170. 

spiritual benefit, principle of, 159, 162. 

survivorship, 147. 

Sulk a — 

described, 286. 
if is stridhana, 286. 

Summons — 

issued on the defendant when, 364. 
punishment for disobedience of, 365. 

SUNABH El'll a — 

story of, bearing on the law of adoption, 255. 

Surety 

character of several kinds of, 320. 
good behaviour, for, 321. 
grandson of, not liable, 323 
kinds of — 

Brihaspati, on, 320. 

Harita, on, 321. 

Yttjnavalkya, on, 320. 

obligation of, when extends to son and grandson, 321-322 
oppression of, not allowed, 323. 
remedy- of, against the debtor, 324. 

sous of, liable for principal, but not for interest, 323 

S ntvivofiBH i r — 

doctrine of, 146-148. 

Taittiriya Sruti — 
on dharma, 24. 

three-fold dut}’- of a Brahmin declared by, 304. 
Tantarvarttaka — 

on fat1ier v a power to give or sell a son, 253. 

Tendeii- 

Mookerjee, J M on, 312. 

must be kept good, 312. 

stops the running of interest, 311. 

Ten ter urn’s Act — 

on the presumption of a modern lost grant, 123. 



N HEX 


U7 

filKFT (8 try a) 

an an act of God, 211 
described, 352. 

differentiated from 8a ha an, 350. 
different classes of, according t o the value, 353. 
exceptions to criminal liability for, 358. 
primary and stricter sense of, 352. 

Tort — 

conversion, u kind of, 340. 

distinction between crime and, iF recognised by Hindu law, 337. 
e fraud, a kind of, 341. 
injury to person, a kind of, 330* 
injury to property, a kind of, 330. 
nuisance, a kind of, 342. 
same act may be a crime and, 337. 

Tiua j, — 

burden of proof in, 372. 
four kinds of answers in, 308. 
who should begin in a, 300. 

Trespass — 

against domestic animal, 330. 
nature of, 355. 

Twelve Tables- - 

preference? of agnates in, 102. 

UNDIVI DKJ> CO PA UCENG U 

alienation by, of bis own share under Dayabhaga, 154. 
alienation of joint- property or part by, under Dayabhaga, 150-157. 
difference between Dayabhaga and Mitakshara, 140-157. 
grounds of the distinction, 150. 

judicial departure from the Mitakahara view regarding, 152-154. 
Mitakahara conception of, 150-152. 

Srikrishnn’s exposition of the Dayabhaga conception of, 155. 

Usage — ( see Custom) 

if valid when opposed to the Smritin, IS. 

I'SANAS 

as a compiler of Smriti, 13. 

Usury (see Interest) — 

condemned by the dharimi-sustras, 3tH>. 

] no lection against, 310. 

Vacuaspati — 

alienation of joint property l» 3 ' a Dayabhaga coparcener, on, 157. 
Dayabhaga conception of co-ownership and partition, on, 148. 
extinctive prescription, doctrine of, on, 108. 

Vaiseshika — 

categoris recognised in, 41, 

dharma as the source of welfare recognised in, 20. 

Vabibhtha — • 

adoption of an only son, on, 249. 
as a compiler of Smriti, 13. 



448 


loS’PEX 


dharmn as the source of welfare recognised by, 26. 
facer’s power over son, on, 252. 

marriage, religious ceremonies in, necessity of according to 272. 
punishment, considerations in meting out, according to, 344. 

Ionian, power of, to adopt, according to 244-247. 

Vattel — 

on the law of prescription, 120. 

Vedas (see Sruti) — 

doctrine of revelation, 10, 11. 
limit of human memory on possession in, 118. 
practical value of, on questions of positive law, 11-12, 
principle of exclusion of females recognised in, 168. 

Vekbal abuse — 

three classes of, 349. 

truth no defence to thf3 offence of, 349. 

V idyasagah (Pandit Iswarchandra) — 
on remarriage of widow, 278-281. 

ViJNAKJBSWARA (see Mitaksham) — 

criticism of the doctrine of extinctive prescription by, 108. 
daughter’s son, position of, in the order of succession, according 
to, 158. 

father’s power over ancestral movables on, 137. 

father’s power to give or sell his son, 252. 

gift without acceptance, if valid, according to, 08-71. 

property, idea of, according to, 42, 43, 40. 

sources of Hindu law, moaning of, according to, 10. 

Vika mi tboda y a — 

adoption, gift in, significance of, according to, 251. 
alienation by an undivided coparcener, on, 151. 
alluvion and diluvion, on, 62. 

bandhet how differs from adhi according to, 189. 
birth, right by, on 127. 

damages if recoverable by one defraude , according to, 341. 

father’s power over son’s acquisitions, on, 260. 

females, exclusion of, from succession, according to, 168. 

fitness for free disposal on, 47. 

gift without acceptance, validity of, on, 67-69. 

mortgages, priority of, on, 204. 

mortgagee, power of, to create a sub-mortgage on, 198, 

nature of sastric rules for acquisition of ownership, on, 45. 

occupation or parigraha , on, 55. 

presumption, doctrine of, criticised by, 107. 

reason, place of, in tho domain of sacred law, according to 15. 

right of way, on, 226. 

second mortgage, on 203 

seller, liability of, for loss before and after demand, on, 100, 
spiritual benefit, doctrine of, on, 162. 
surety, kinds of, and liability of, on, 322. 

texts regarding rights of father and son, noticed by, 132, J33, 
136-138. * 

usages, how far recognised, when in conflict with sastras, according 
to, 18. 



INDEX 


4*49 


Vishnu — 

as a compiler of Smriti, 12. 
interest on loan, on, 308. 
liability of employee for loss, on, 326. 
marriage prohibitions on, 273. 

marriage, persons who can give a girl in, according to, 263. 
son’s right in father’s property during his life-time, on, 141. 
VlSWAJlDADHIKARANA, 51. 

Vyasa — 

as a compiler of Smriti, 13. 

alienation without conseut. of kinsmen, on, 139, 164, 165. 
contents of a decree, on, 373. 
hereditary possession, on, 117. 
judge, taking of bribes by, on, 356. 

PurauAB, ascribed to, 21. 

surety, sons and grandsons of, liability of, according to, 323. 
Vyavahara Mayckiia (see Nilakantha) — 

handful , meaning of, or, 188. 
coparcener, interest of, according to, 148. 
king’s right to the soil on, 51. 

Wager (see Gambling and Betting). 

Wages — 

apportionment of, when allowed, 325. 
defined, 324. 
how fixed, 324. 

incomplete performance of service, how affects, 326. 

Way — 

duty not to obstruct, 226. 
evidence of existence of right of, 225. 
right of, 225. 

Sfuiklia, Likhitu and Viramitrodya on, 226. 
three kinds of, 225. 

Widow (see Wife, Woman). 

controversies relating to remarriage of, 277-280. 

Mann’g text, 277. 

Kulluka’s comment thereon, 278. 

Para sara and Naradn’s texts, 278. 

Vidyasagar’s view, 278. 
duties of, 277. 

Wife — 

abandonment of, 277. 
alienation by, of her peculium, 287. 
co-ownership of, in her husband’s property, 287 
divorce of, not allowed* by Hindu law, 277. 
duties of, 277-280. 

husbands* power over the person of, 275-276. 
liability of, to pay husband’s debt, 280 
litigation of, with husband, 291. 
peculium. of, 284-287. 

position of, in Hindu and Homan law compared, 288*291 . 

57 



450 


INDEX 


Witnesses — 

characteristics of untruthful, 372. 
kinds of, 371. v 
modes of examining, 372. 
qualities of reliable, 371. 

Woman (see Wife, Widow) — 

adopt, if competent to, without her husband’s permission, 244. 
decisions on her power to adopt, 247. 
dependence of, texts on, 275. 
duties of, when wife, 277-280. 
when widow, 277. 

nature and extent of husband’s control over, 275-278. 
position of, in the law of succession, 168, 170. 
slave, 296. 

YAJNAVAI.KYA — 

adhigama , on : shares of king and finder, 58. 
association, rules of, violations of, on, 332. 

association, mode of treatment by king, of the delegates of, accord- 
ing to, 333. 

authorship of Smritis enumerated by, 12. 
compiler of Smriti, 13. 

complainant, counter-charge against, on, 369. 
conquest, right of, extent of, on, 61. 
dharma classified by, 32. 
daughter’s son, position of, on, 158. 

debt, extra-judicial modes of realising, according to, 314. 

debts, order of payment of, according to, 319. 

evidence, refusal to give, on, 355. 

father, if can give or sell his son, according to, 252, 

father’s power over ancestral movables, according to, 138, 140, 141. 

gambler guilty of sharp practices, liability of, 331, * 

liability of all for transgressions of law, on, 347. 

liability of husband to return wife’s property, 286 

liability of seller for loss or deterioration after demand, 100, 

pledge, on, 181. 

partner’s rights and liabilities of, according to, 329, 
pasturage, on, 2 24, 

person anthorised to give a girl in marriage on, 263. 
possession, hereditary, on, 116. 
positive law, conception of, on, 29-31, 
prescription, texts on, of, 1.03, 108, 109, 114. 
proprietary right, interference with, on, 227, 
punishment, different kinds of, on, 342. 

punishment, considerations in inflicting, according to, 349, 

reason, domain of, in sacred law, on, 15-16. 

servant's, liability of, to compensate master, on, 327, 

servants, when entitled to special reward, according to, 325. 

sureties for good behaviour, on, 349, 

surety, heir of, liability of, on, 322, 

sureties, kinds of, mentioned by, 320. 

stolen articles, kiug’s duty to indemnify citizens for, according to, 
341, 

Yama — 

compiler of Smriti, 13, 

punishment of Brahmins for serious offences, 345, 



N. B. For a 
texts given in 

Page 


ERRATA. 

thoroughly corrected version of 
the Footnotes, see Appendix A. 


the Sanskrit 


n 

)> 


a 


)? 


)> 


70 

line 

21, after 

point insert of 

}} 


26, for 

little read title 

72 


6, „ 

nmdis practis „ midis pactis 

111 

fj 

16, „ 

Common „ Canon 

112 

t) 

21, ,, 

shout „ short 

118 

» 

Cl o 

three „ thirty • 

140 

a 

3, 

well „ null 

146 


22, „ 

ownership „ co-ownership 

156 

> j 

31, „ 

eofirmed „ confirmed 

164 


5, „ 

modelled „ remodelled 

165 

,, 

31, „ 

Procustean ,, 'Procrustean 

169 

3) 

6, ,, 

beased „ based 


j) 

'•>, „ 

might „ right 

174 


12, „ 

i n ter i tancc , , i n lit l it ance 

217 


29, „ 

Bernand „ Bernard 

231 

,, 

27, 

would ,, world 

236 

jj 

6, „ 

obsoleute „ obsolete 

244 


25, „ 

hy „ by . 

250 

yy 

20, „ 

inferntial „ inferntial 

255 

,, 

12, after in insert the 

258 

iy 

2, for 

father. The read father, the 

259 


7, ,, 

for ,, far 

272 

j» 

27, „ 

heiporrhortls „ hemorrhoids 

284 

}} 

19, ,, 

hemned •> hemmed ' 

286 

)9 

19, omit and 

292 

j f 

18, for 

if u 

304 

ff 

8, ' „ 

nm turn n „ mutuum 

318 

» 

22, after eauuot tnwrl be 







