===== Internet Archive OCR: hindumythologyve00wilk_djvu.txt =====

.VJ 


Ganesa. 


Lakshmi. 


DURGA. 


Sarasvati. 


Kartikeya. 


HINDU    MYTHOLOGY, 


VEDIC   AND   PURANIC. 


BY 

W.  J.  WILKINS, 

OF   THE 

LONDON    MISSIONARY    SOCIETY, 
CALCUTTA. 


ILLUSTRATED. 


CALCUTTA: 

THACKER,   SPINK   &   CO.,  GOVERNMENT   PLACE. 

Bombay:   THACKER    &   CO.,   LIMITED. 

London  :  W.   THACKER   &   CO.,   87,   NEWGATE   STREET. 

1882. 


LONDON  : 

PRINTED    BY    WILLIAM    CLOWES    AND    SONS,     LIMITED, 

STAMFORD   STREET   AND  CHARING  CROSS. 


PREFACE. 


On  my  arrival  in  India,  one  of  my  first  inquiries  was  for  some 
full  and  trustworthy  account  of  the  mythology  of  the  Hindus  ; 
but  though  directed  to  various  works  in  which  some  informa- 
tion of  the  kind  desired  was  to  be  found,  I  sought  in  vain  for 
a  complete  and  systematic  work  on  this  subject.  Since  then 
two  classical  dictionaries  of  India  have  been  published,  one  in 
Madras  and  one  in  London  ;  but  though  most  useful  books  of 
reference,  they  do  not  meet  the  want  that  this  book  is  intended 
to  supply.  For  some  years  I  have  been  making  notes  with  the 
intention  of  arranging  them  in  such  a  way  that  any  one  with- 
out much  labour  might  gain  a  good  general  idea  of  the  names, 
character,  and  actions  of  the  principal  gods  of  Hinduism.  It 
should  be  noticed  that  this  work  does  not  profess  to  contain 
new  translations  of  the  Hindu  Scriptures,  nor  to  give  very  much 
information  that  is  not  to  be  found  scattered  in  many  other 
books.  In  a  few  cases  original  extracts  have  been  made  ;  but, 
generally  speaking,  my  work  has  been  to  collect  and  arrange 
translations  ready  to  hand.  It  has  been  my  earnest  endeavour  to 
give  a  fair  and  impartial  account  of  these  deities,  as  far  as  possible 
in  the  very  words  of  the  sacred  books  ;  such  an  account  as  I 
should  expect  an  honest-minded  Hindu  to  give  of  God  and  His 
works  from  a  careful  study  of  the  Bible.  I  have  honestly  striven 
to  keep  my  mind  free  from  prejudice  and  theological  bias,  and 
wishing  to  let  the  sacred  books  speak  for  themselves,  have  re- 
frained   from  commenting   on  the  passages   quoted,    excepting 

a  2 


viii  Preface. 

in  cases  where  some  explanation  seemed  necessary.  I  have 
not  selected  those  texts  which  describe  the  darker  side  only 
of  the  Hindu  gods,  nor  have  such  been  altogether  suppressed. 
Though  I  must  confess  there  was  much  met  with  that  could 
not  be  reproduced,  I  may  assert  with  confidence  that  an 
honest  effort  has  been  made  to  give  a  truthful  account  of  the 
things  commonly  believed  by  millions  of  our  Hindu  fellow- 
subjects. 

In  order  to  render  the  work  more  interesting  and  instructive, 
a  number  of  illustrations  of  the  principal  deities  have  been 
introduced.  Most  of  them  have  been  copied  from  pictures  drawn 
by  the  Hindus  themselves,  and  which  may  be  seen  in  the 
houses  of  the  people.  No  attempt  has  been  made  to  idealise 
them  ;  they  are,  what  they  profess  to  be,  faithful  representations 
of  the  designs  of  Hindu  artists.  For  their  kindness  in  making 
these  drawings  from  the  original  highly  coloured  pictures,  I  am 
very  greatly  indebted  to  my  friends  the  Rev.  A.  J.  Bamford, 
B.A.,  and  Messrs.  H.  T.  Ottewill  and  C.  A.  Andrews,  B.A. 

By  the  introduction  of  a  full  index  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  this 
work  will  serve  as  a  classical  dictionary  of  India  ;  whilst  the 
classification  of  the  gods  will  enable  the  student  to  obtain  a 
general  view  of  Hindu  mythology,  and  of  the  relation  in  which 
one  deity  stands  to  others.  And  as  many  legends  are  given  at 
some  length,  the  book  can  hardly  fail  to  be  interesting  to  the 
general  reader,  who  may  not  have  time  or  opportunity  to  refer 
to  the  sacred  writings  from  which  they  are  taken.    . 

A  word  of  explanation  respecting  the  classification  of  the 
deities  is  called  for.  It  will  be  noticed  that  some  of  those 
described  as  belonging  to  the  Vedic  Age  appear  under  the  same 
or  other  names  in  the  Puranas  ;  whilst  others  spoken  of  as  belong- 
ing to  the  Puranic  Age  have  their  origin,  traceable  indeed  with 
difficulty  in  some  cases,  in  the  Vedas.  The  Vedic  gods  are  those 
whose  description  is  chiefly  to  be  found  in  the  Vedas,  and  whose 
worship  was  more  general  in  the  Vedic  Age  ;  the  Puranic  are  those 
who  are  more  fully  described  in  the  Puranas,  and  whose  worship 
was  more  general  in  the  Puranic  Age.  Any  very  rigid  classifica- 
tion it  would  be  impossible  to  make. 


Preface. 


IX 


The  following  are  the  principal  works  from  which  materials  for 
this  volume  have  been  taken  : — 

'Original  Sanskrit  Texts.'  5  vols.  J.  Muir,  D.C.L.,  LL.D. 
London,  1868. 

'The  Vishnu  Purana.'     H.  H.  Wilson.     London,  1840. 

1  The  Ramayana  of  Valmiki.'  R.  T.  H.  Griffiths.  Benares, 
1870. 

'  Indian  Wisdom.'     Monier  Williams.     London,  1875. 

'Ancient   and  Hindu  Mythology.'     Col.  Kennedy.     London, 

1831. 

'A  View  of  the  History,  Religion,  and  Literature  of  the 
Hindus.'     Rev.  W.  Ward.     Serampore,  181 8. 

'  Hindu  Pantheon.'     Col.  Moor. 

'Manual  of  Buddhism.'     Rev.  R.  S.  Hardy.     London,  1853. 

'Classical  Dictionary  of  India.'     J.  Garrett.     Madras,  1871. 

'  Classical  Dictionary  of  Hindu  Mythology,  &c.'  John 
Dowson.     London,  1879. 

'  Chambers's  Cyclopaedia.'     Prof.  Goldstiicker's  Articles. 


Calcutta,  February  1882. 


W.  J.  w. 


V 

CONTENTS. 


PART   I.— THE  VEDIC   DEITIES. 

PAGE 

Chap.      I.— The  Vedas 3 

II. — The  Vedic  Gods  generally 7 

III.— Dyaus  and  Prithivi IO 

IV. — Aditi  and  the  Adityas 14 

V.— Agni 18 

VI.— Sun  or  Light  Deities— 

1.  Surya 25 

2.  PUSHAN 3° 

3.  MlTRA  AND   VARUNA 31 

4.  The  Asvins 37 

5.    USHAS •  •  .40 

VII.— The  Storm  Deities— 

1.  Indra 45 

2.  Indrani 53 

3.  Parjanya 54 

4.  Vayu 55 

5.  The  Maruts 57 

VIII.— Soma 59 

IX.— TVASTRI   OR   VlSVAKARMA 64 

X.— Yama 67 


J> 


JJ 


?> 


PART  II.— THE   PURANIC   DEITIES. 

Chap.      I.— The  Puranas 77 

II. — Brahma 80 

III.— Brahma 84 

Sarasvati 91 


53 


Xll 


Contents. 


PAGE 


Chap.    IV. 


>> 


V.- 


-Vishnu 

Lakshmi    

-The  Incarnations  or  Avataras  of  Vishnu- 
i.  The  Matsya  or  Fish  Avatara 
2.  The  Kurma  or  Tortoise  Avatara. 
The  Varahar  or  Boar  Avatara 
The  Nrisingha  or  Man-Lion  Avatara 
The  Vamana  or  Dwarf  Avatara    . 
The  Parasurama  Avatara 
The  Rama  Chandra  Avatara 
The  Krishna  Avatara 
8a.  The  Balarama  Avatara 
9.  The  Buddha  Avatara 
The  Kalki  Avatara 
Jagannath 
Chaitanya. 
Kamadeva 


J- 

4. 
5. 

6. 

7- 
8. 


10. 


» 


V 


» 


?J 


1J 


VI.— Siva  . 

Panchanana 
VII.— Uma  . 

Parvati     . 

DURGA 

The  chief  Forms  of  Durga 

1.  Durga     . 

2.  Dasabhuja 

SlNGHAVAilNI. 

Mahishamardini    . 
Jagaddhatri  . 
Kali 

muktakesi 
Tara 

Chinnamustaka 
Jagadgauri  . 
Pratyangira  . 
Annapurna 
Ganesajanani 
Krishnakrora 
VIII.— Sons  of  Siva  and  Parvati— 

1.  Ganesa 

2.  Kartikeya 
IX.— The  Puranic  Account  of  the  Creation 

X. — The  Puranic  Divisions  of  Time    . 


3- 

4. 

5- 
6. 

7- 
8. 

9- 
10. 

11. 

12. 

13- 
14. 


Contents. 


Xlll 


PART    III.— THE    INFERIOR   DEITIES. 


Chap.      I. — The  Divine  Rishis — 


i, 


3- 


?> 


II. 

III. 


Bhrigu 
pulastya 

PULAHA 

4.  Kratu 

5.  Angiras 

6.  Marichi 
Atri   . 
Daksha 
Vasishtha 
Narada 

-KUVERA 

-The  Demigods 
i.  sugriva 
2.  Hanuman 
Nala  . 

NlLA    . 
SUSHENA 


7- 

8. 

9- 

10. 


3- 
4- 
5- 


OF   THE    RAMAYANA- 


?) 


>> 


jj 


IV. — The  Demigods  of  the  Mahabharata 
V. — The  Planets — 

1.  Ravi,  or  Surya 

2.  Chandra,  or  Soma    . 
Mangala    . 
Budha 
Vrihaspati 

6.    SUKRA 

7.  Sani    .... 

8.  Rahu  and  Ketu 
■The  Asuras 
Jalandhara 
-Sacred  Animals  and  Birds 

Garuda  .... 

Jatayus  and  Sampati    . 

-Ganga        .... 


3' 
4- 
5- 


VI 


VII.- 


VIII. 


IX.— Sacred  Trees 


PAGE 
30I 

305 
306 

306 

306 

307 
307 
309 
315 
317 
321 

326 

332 
336 

339 
339 
342 

360 
360 
360 
360 
361 
361 
362 
363 
364 
367 
373 
374 
379 
383 
39 T 


XIV 


Contents. 


Chap.     X. — Miscellaneous  Minor  Deities— 
i.  Shitala 

2.  Manasa 

3.  SastI  . 

4.  The  Shalgrama 

5.  The  Dhenki 

6.  Ka?    Who? 
-Superhuman,  though  not  Divine  Beings— 

1.  Apsarasas,  Gandharvas,  and  Kinnaras 

2.  Rakshasas 


„       XI. — 5 


PAGE 

394 
395 
397 
397 
399 
399 

401 
403 


INDEX 


405 


lUsCISfflf 


•■\iMF 


KMim 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS. 


PAGE 


From  Moor's  t  Hindu  Pantheon 


55 


5? 


From  a  native  picture 


Durga  and  other  Deities.     From  a  native  picture       {Frontispiece) 
Agni. 

SURYA. 

Varuna. 

Indra. 

Vayu. 

Yama. 

Brahma. 

Sarasvati. 

Vishnu. 

Lakshmi. 

The  Matsya  Avatara. 

The  Kurma  Avatara. 

The  Nrisingha  Avatara. 

The  Vamana  Avatara. 

The  Parasurama  Avatara. 

The  Rama  Chandra  Avatara. 

Ravana. 

The  Krishna  Avatara. 

Krishna  slaying  Bakasura. 

Krishna  holding  up  Mount  Govard- 

dhana. 
Radha  worshipping  Krishna  as  Kali 
Balarama. 

Buddha.  Drawn  from  an  image  in  Ceylon  by  Rev.  A.  J.  Bamford,  B.  A. 
Buddhist  Temple  and  Dagoba  at  Kelaniya,  Ceylon.     Original 

sketch  by  Rev.  A.  J.  Bamford.  B.A. 
Buddha.     Draw  from  an  image  in  Ceylon  by  Rev.  A.  J.  Bamford,  B.A 
Kalki.  From  a  native  picture 

Jagannath. 
Kamadeva. 


J? 


•>•> 


55 


55 


55 


55 


55 


55 


55 


55 


55 


55 


55 


55 


55 


55 


55 


55 


19 

26 

32 

45 
55 
67 
84 
92 

99 
108 

114 

120 

125 

131 
136 

142 

155 
166 

172 

174 
177 

185 
188 

189 
194 
205 
208 
213 


XVI 


List  of  Illustrations. 


Siva  slaying  Kamadeva. 

Siva. 

Siva  Temple  at  Benares 

Har-Hari. 

Siva  slaying  an  Asura. 

Panchanana. 

Siva  and  Parvati. 

Parvati  worshipping  the  Linga 


From  a  native  picture 


5> 


From  a  photograph    . 
From  a  native  picture 


» 


5) 


From  Moor's  '  Hindu  Pantheon 


» 


>> 


J5 


From  Moor's  '  Hindu  Pantheon  ' 
From  a  native  picture 


5J 


5J 


Dasabhuja.  From  a  native  picture 

Jagaddhatri.  „ 

Kali. 

Kali  dancing  on  Siva. 

Annapurna. 

Ganesa. 

Kartikeya. 

Daksha. 

SUGRIVA. 

Monkeys  constructing  the  Bridge  at  Lanka. 

Hanuman.  From  Moor's  '  Hindu  Pantheon  ' 

Arjuna  shooting  at  the  Fish.  From  a  native  picture 

Battle  of  the  Kurus  and  the  Pandavas.  „ 

Garuda.  From  Moor's  '  Hindu  Pantheon  ' 

Jatayus.  From  a  native  picture 

Ganga.  „ 

Shitala.  From  a  native  picture 

Manasa. 

Sasti. 

Sacred  Trees.  Drawn  from  Nature  by  the  Rev.  A.  J.  Bamford,  B.  A.  : — 

Soma- plant 

The  Tulsi 

The  Bel  . 

Banyan  Tree    . 
Fig  Tree 

The  Lotus 

The  Nim. 

Pipal  Leaves     . 


?> 


PAGE 
214 
218 
219 
229 
232 
236 
242 
245 
251 
257 
258 
259 
265 
267 
276 

309 
326 

328 

333 
348 
352 

374 
380 

333 
394 
395 
397 

60 
300 

39o 
39i 
393 

400 

411 
412 


The  tail-pieces  are  taken  from  drawings  of  Hindu  temples  and  decorations 
in  the  works  of  RAM  Raz,  Rajendralala  Mitra,  FERGUSSON,  and 
others. 


PART  I. 


THE   VEDIC   DEITIES. 


B 


HINDU     MYTHOLOGY. 


THE  VEDIC  DEITIES. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE  VEDAS. 

BEFORE  speaking  of  the  Vedic  Deities,  it  is  necessary  that 
something  be  said  concerning  the  Vedas  themselves,  the  source 
of  our  information  respecting  these  deities.  The  root  of  the 
word  is  vid}  "  to  know  :"  hence  the  term  Veda  signifies  knowledge ; 
and  as  at  first  these  books  were  not  written,  it  signifies  know- 
ledge  that  is  heard,  or  orally  communicated.  The  Vedas  are 
not  supposed  to  be  the  work  of  a  single  person,  but  it  is  believed 
that  they  were  communicated  to  a  number  of  Rishis  or  saints, 
who  in  their  turn  transmitted  them  to  their  disciples. 

The  instruction  contained  in  these  writings  is  said  to  have 
been  breathed  forth  by  God  Himself.  At  other  times  it  is  said 
to  have  issued  from  Him  like  smoke  from  fire.  Sometimes  the 
Vedas  are  said  to  have  sprung  from  the  elements.  The  accounts 
of  their  origin  differ  in  form,  but  agree  in  teaching  that  they 
were  the  direct  gift  of  God  to  man  ;  and  hence  they  are  regarded 
with  the  greatest  veneration.     They  are  the  special  property  of 

B    2 


4  The  Vedic  Deities. 

the  Brahmans.  As  early  as  Manu  (700  B.C.)  it  was  regarded  as 
a  most  grave  offence  for  a  single  word  of  these  divinely  given 
works  to  be  heard  by  a  man  of  a  lower  caste. 

The  Vedas  are  four  in  number  :  of  these  the  Rig-Veda  is 
probably  the  oldest,  then  the  Yajur-Veda,  then  the  Sama-Veda, 
and  last  of  all  the  Atharva-Veda.  Each  of  these  Vedas  consists 
of  two  main  parts  :  a  Sanhita,  or  collection  of  mantras  or  hymns  ; 
and  a  Brahmana,  or  ritualistic  precept  and  illustration,  which 
stands  in  somewhat  the  same  relation  to  the  Sanhita  as  the 
Talmud  to  the  Law.  Attached  to  each  Brahmana  is  an  Upani- 
shad,  containing  secret  or  mystical  doctrine.  The  Sanhita  and 
Brahmana  are  for  men  generally  ;  the  Upanishads  are  for  the 
more  philosophical  inquirers.  Of  these  Sanhitas,  the  "Rig- Veda 
Sanhita,  containing  one  thousand  and  seventeen  hymns,  is  the 
oldest  and  most  important ;  whilst  the  Atharva-Veda-Sanhita  is 
generally  held  to  be  the  most  recent,  and  is  perhaps  the  most 
interesting.  Moreover,  these  are  the  only  two  Vedic  hymn-books 
worthy  of  being  called  separate  original  collections  ;  "*  the  others 
being  almost  entirely  made  up  of  extracts  from  the  Rig- Veda. 

The  Sanhitas  of  three  of  the  Vedas  are  said  to  have  some 
peculiarity.  "  If  a  mantra  is  metrical,  and  intended  for  loud 
recitation,  it  is  called  Rich  (from  rich,  praise),  whence  the  name 
Rig- Veda  ;  i.e.  the  Veda  containing  such  praises.  If  it  is  prose 
(and  then  it  must  be  muttered  inaudibly),  it  is  called  Yajus  (yaj, 
sacrifice,  hence,  literally,  the  means  by  which  sacrifice  is  effected)  ; 
therefore  Yajur-Veda  signifies  the  Veda  containing  such  Yajus. 
And  if  it  is  metrical  and  intended  for  chanting,  it  is  called 
Saman  [equal]  ;  hence  Saman  Veda  means  the  Veda  containing 
such  Samans.  The  author  of  the  Mantra,  or,  as  the  Hindus 
would  say,  the  inspired  '  Seer,'  who  received  it  from  the  Deity,  is 
termed  its  Rishi ;  and  the  object  with  which  it  is  concerned  is  its 
devata — a  word  which  generally  means  a  '  deity,'  but  the  mean- 
ing of  which,  in  its  reference  to  mantras,  must  not  always  be 
taken  literally,  as  there  are  hymns  in  which  not  gods  or  deified 
beings,  but,  for  instance,  a  sacrificial  post,  weapons,  &c,  invoked, 


*  (. 


Indian  Wisdom,'  p.  9. 


The  Vedas. 


are  considered    as  the  clevata."  *     It  is  generally  believed  that 
the  Brahmanas  are  much  more  recent  than  the  Sanhitas. 

The  Veoas  have  not  come  down  to  the  present  time  without 
considerable  dispute  as  to  the  text.  As  might  have  been 
expected,  when  this  teaching  was  given  orally,  discrepancies 
arose.  One  account  mentions  no  less  than  twenty-one  schools 
(Sakhas)  of  the  Rig- Veda  :  another  gives  five  of  the  Rig- Veda, 
forty-two  of  the  Yajur-Veda  ;  mentions  twelve  out  of  a  thousand 
of  the  Saman-Veda,  and  twelve  of  the  Atharva-Veda.  And  as 
each  school  believed  that  it  possessed  the  true  Veda,  it  anathe- 
matized those  who  taught  and  followed  any  other  version.  The 
Rig- Veda  Sanhita  that  has  come  down  to  the  present  age  is  that 
of  one  school  only,  the  Sakala  ;  the  Yajur-Veda  is  that  of  three 
schools  ;  the  Sama-Veda  is  that  of  perhaps  two,  and  the  Atharva- 
Veda  of  one  only. 

"The  history  of  the  Yajur-Veda  differs  in  so  far  from  that  of 
the  other  Vedas,  as  it  is  marked  by  a  dissension  between  its  own 
schools  far  more  important  than  the  differences  which  separated 
the  school  of  each  [of  the]  other  Vedas.  It  is  known  by  the 
distinction  between  a  Yajur-Veda  called  the  Black— and  another 
called  the  White — Yajur-Veda.  Tradition,  especially  that  of 
the  Puranas,  records  a  legend  to  account  for  it.  Vaisampayana, 
it  says,  the  disciple  of  Vyasa,  who  had  received  from  him  the 
Yajur-Veda,  once  having  committed  an  offence,  desired  his 
disciples  to  assist  him  in  the  performance  of  some  expiatory  act. 
One  of  these,  however,  Yajnavalkya,  proposed  that  he  should 
alone  perform  the  whole  rite  ;  upon  which  Vaisampayana, 
enraged  at  what  he  considered  to  be  the  arrogance  of  Yajna- 
valkya, uttered  a  curse  on  him,  the  effect  of  which  was  that 
Yajnavalkya  disgorged  all  the  Yajus  texts  he  had  learned  from 
Vaisampayana.  The  other  disciples,  having  been  meanwhile 
transformed  into  partridges  {tittiri),  picked  up  these  tainted  texts 
and  retained  them.  Hence  these  texts  are  called  Taittiriyas. 
But  Yajnavalkya,  olesirous  of  obtaining  Yajus  texts,  devoutly 

*  Goldstiicker,  art.  "  Vedas,"  Chambers's  Cyclopaedia. 


6 


The  Vedic  Deities, 


prayed  to  the  Sun,  and  had  granted  to  him  his  wish, — '  to  possess 
such  texts  as  were  not  known  to  his  teacher.' "  *  And  thus 
there  are  two  Yajur-Vedas  to  this  day  ;  the  Black  being  con- 
sidered the  older  of  the  two. 

As  to  the  date  of  the  Vedas,  there  is  nothing  certainly  known. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  they  are  amongst  the  oldest  literary 
productions  in  the  world  ;  but  as  to  when  they  were  composed 
all  is  conjecture.  Colebrooke  seems  to  show  from  a  Vaidick 
Calendar,  that  they  must  have  been  written  before  the  14th 
century  B.C.  Some  assign  to  them  a  more  recent,  some  a  more 
ancient  date. 


Goldstiicker,  art.  "  Vedas,"  Chambers's  Cyclopaedia. 


si 


i 


■  L.J 


(     7     ) 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE   VEUIC    GODS    GENERALLY. 

YASKA  (probably  the  oldest  Commentator  on  the  Vedas)  gives 
the  following  classification  of  the  Vedic  gods  : — "  There  are  three 
deities,  according  to  the  expounders  of  the  Vedas  :  Agni,  whose 
place  is  on  the  earth  ;  Vayu  or  Indra,  whose  place  is  in  the  air  ; 
and  Surya,  whose  place  is  in  the  sky.  These  deities  receive 
severally  many  appellations,  in  consequence  of  their  greatness 
or  of  the  diversity  of  their  functions."  *  In  the  Rig- Veda  itself 
this  number  is  increased  to  thirty-three  :  "  Agni,  the  wise  god, 
lends  an  ear  to  his  worshippers.  God  with  the  ruddy  steeds, 
who  lovest  praise,  bring  hither  those  three-and-thirty."  This  is 
the  number  commonly  mentioned,  though  it  is  by  no  means 
easy  to  decide  which  are  the  thirty-three  intended,  as  the  lists 
of  the  gods  vary  considerably  ;  whilst  in  another  verse  it  is  said, 
that  "  three  hundred,  three  thousand,  thirty-and-nine  gods  have 
worshipped  Agni." 

These  deities  are  spoken  of  as  immortal,  but  are  not  said  to 
be  self-existent  beings  ;  in  fact,  their  parentage  in  most  cases 
is  given,  though  the  various  accounts  of  their  origin  do  not 
agree  with  each  other,  as  found  in  different  parts  of  the  Vedas. 
Agni  and  Savitri  are  said  to  have  conferred  immortality  upon 
the  gods  ;  whilst  it  is  taught  that  Indra  obtained  this  boon  by 
sacrifice.  An  interesting  account  is  given  in  the  '  Satapatha 
Brahmana '  t  of  the  means  by  which  the  gods  obtained  immor- 
tality,  and  superiority   over  the   Asuras  or    Demons.     All  the 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  p.  S.  t  Ibid.  iv.  54-62. 


8'  The  Vedic  Deities. 


gods  were  alike  mortal,  all  were  equal  in  power,  all  were  alike 
sons  of  Prajapati  the  Creator.  Wishing  to  be  immortal,  they 
offered  sacrifices  liberally,  and  practised  the  severest  penance  ; 
but  not  until  Prajapati  had  taught  them  to  offer  a  particular 
sacrifice  could  they  become  immortal.  They  followed  his 
advice,  and  gained  the  desired  boon.  Wishing  to  become 
greater  than  the  Asuras,  they  became  truthful.  Previously 
they  and  the  Asuras  spoke  truthfully  or  falsely  as  they  thought 
fit  ;  but  gradually  they  ceased  from  lying,  whilst  the  Asuras 
became  increasingly  false :  the  result  was,  that  the  gods  after 
protracted  struggles  gained  the  victory.  Of  the  gods,  originally, 
all  were  alike  in  power,  all  alike  good  ;  but  three  of  them 
desired  to  be  superior  to  the  rest,  viz.  Agni,  Indra,  and  Surya. 
They  continued  to  offer  sacrifices  for  this  purpose  until  it  was 
accomplished.  Originally  there  was  not  in  Agni  the  same- 
flame  as  there  is  now.  He  desired,  "  May  this  flame  be  in  me," 
and  offered  a  sacrifice  for  the  attainment  of  this  blessing,  and 
obtained  it.  So  Indra  increased  his  energy,  and  Surya  his 
brightness. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  each  of  the  gods  in  turn  is  regarded  by 
the  worshipper  as  superior  to  all  the  others  ;  and  in  the  Vedas 
this  superlative  language  is  employed,  and  the  identical  epithets 
are  given  indiscriminately.  Professor  Max  Miiller  says : 
"  When  these  individual  gods  are  invoked,  they  are  not  con- 
ceived as  limited  by  the  power  of  others,  as  superior  or  inferior 
in  rank.  Each  god,  to  the  mind  of  the  supplicants,  is  as  good 
as  all  the  gods.  He  is  felt  at  the  time  as  a  real  divinity,  as 
supreme  and  absolute,  in  spite  of  the  limitations  which,  to  our 
mind,  a  plurality  of  gods  must  entail  on  every  single  god.  All 
the  rest  disappear  for  a  moment  from  the  vision  of  the  poet,  and 
he  only  who  is  to  fulfil  their  desires  stands  in  full  light  before 
the  eyes  of  the  worshippers.  ...  It  would  be  easy  to  find,  in 
the  numerous  hymns  of  the  Rig- Veda,  passages  in  which  almost 
every  single  god  is  represented  as  supreme  and  absolute." 

The  will  of  these  gods  is  sovereign  ;  no  mortal  can  thwart 
their  designs.  They  exercise  authority  over  all  creatures.  In 
their  hands  is  the  life  of  mortals.     They  know  the  thoughts  and 


The  Vedic  Gods  generally. 


intentions  of  men  ;    and  whilst  they   reward  their  worshippers, 
they  punish  those  who  neglect  them. 

Professor  Williams  says,*  "  that  the  deified  forces  addressed 
in  the  Vedic  hymns  were  probably  not  represented  by  images 
or     idols    in    the    Vedic    period,    though    doubtless    the    early 
worshippers   clothed  their  gods  with  human  forms  in  their  own 
imaginations."     Professor  Max  Miillerf  speaks  more  positively  : 
"  The  religion  of  the  Veda  knows  of  no  idols.     The  worship  of 
idols  in  India  is  a  secondary  formation,  a  later  degradation  of  the 
more  primitive  worship  of  ideal  gods."     The  guarded  language 
of  Professor  Williams  seems  to  be  better  suited  to  the  facts,  as 
far  as  they  are   known,   for    Dr.   BollensenJ   speaks    quite    as 
strongly  on   the   other  side.     He  writes  :   "  From   the  common 
appellation   of  the  gods  as  divo  naras,    '  men   of  the  sky,'   or 
simply  naras,  '  men,'  and  from  the  epithet  nripesas,  '  having  the 
form  of  men,'  we  may  conclude  that  the  Indians  did  not  merely 
in    imagination    assign  human  forms  to    their   gods,    but    also 
represented  them  in  a  sensible  manner.     Thus  a  painted  image 
of  Rudra  (Rig- Veda,  ii.  33,  9)  is  described   'with  strong  limbs, 
many-formed,  awful,  brown  ;  he  is  painted  with  shining  colours.' 
"  Still  clearer  appears  the  reference  to  representations    in    the 
form  of  an  image.     '  I  now  pray  to  the  gods  of  these  (Maruts).' 
Here  it  seems  that  the  Maruts  are  distinguished  from  their  gods, 
i.e.  '  their  images.'  "     "  There  is  in  the  oldest  language  a  word, 
'  Sandris,'  which  properly  denotes  '  an  image  of  the  gods.' 

We  shall  now  proceed  to  the  consideration  in  detail  of  the 
deities  as  described  in  the  Vedas. 

*  '  Indian  Wisdom,'  p.  15.  f  '  Chips  from  a  German  Workshop,'  i.  38. 

t  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  453. 


io  The  Vedic  Deities. 


CHAPTER  III. 

DYAUS    AND    PRITHIVI. 

The  general  opinion  respecting  Dyaus  (Heaven)  and  Prithivi 
(Earth)  is  that  they  are  amongst  the  most  ancient  of  the  Aryan 
deities  :  hence  they  are  spoken  of  in  the  hymns  of  the  Rig- Veda 
as  the  parents  of  the  other  gods.*  They  are  described  as 
"  great,  wise,  and  energetic  ;"  those  who  "  promote  righteousness, 
and  lavish  gifts  upon  their  worshippers."  And  in  another  place 
they  are  said  to  have  "  made  all  creatures,"  and  through  their 
favour  "  immortality  is  conferred  upon  their  offspring."  Not 
only  are  they  the  creators,  but  also  the  preservers  of  all 
creatures ;  and  are  beneficent  and  kind  to  all.  In  other 
passages  Heaven  and  Earth  are  said  to  have  been  formed  by 
Indra,  who  is  declared  to  transcend  them  in  greatness,  whom 
they  follow  "  as  a  chariot  follows  the  horse."  They  are  de- 
scribed as  bowing  down  before  him  ;  as  trembling  with  fear  on 
account  of  him  ;  and  as  being  subject  to  his  control.  Again 
they  are  said  to  have  been  formed  by  Soma  ;  and  in  other 
verses  other  deities  are  said  to  have  made  them.  This  con- 
fusion of  thought  respecting  the  origin  of  these  gods  led  very 
naturally  to  the  question  being  asked  in  other  hymns,  "  How 
have  they  been  produced  ?     Who  of  the  sages  knows  ?  " 

There  seems  to  be  considerable  ground  for  the  opinion  that 
Indra  gradually  superseded  Dyaus  in  the  worship  of  the  Hindus 
soon  after  their  settlement  in  India.  As  the  praises  of  the 
newer  god  were  sung,  the   older    one   was    forgotten  ;    and    in 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  23. 


Dyaus  and  Prithivi.  I  I 

the  present  day,  whilst  Dyaus  is  almost  unknown,  Indra  is 
worshipped,  though  in  the  Vedas  both  are  called  the  god  of 
Heaven.  The  following  statement  of  Professor  Benfey*  gives  a 
natural  explanation  of  this  : — "  It  may  be  distinctly  shown  that 
Indra  took  the  place  of  the  god  of  Heaven,  who,  in  the  Vedas, 
is  invoked  in  the  vocative  as  Dyauspitar  (Heaven  -  father). 
This  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  this  phrase  is  exactly  reflected 
in  the  Latin  Jupiter,  and  the  Greek  Zeu-pater  as  a  religious 
formula,  fixed,  like  many  others,  before  the  separation  of  the 
languages.  When  the  Sanskrit  people  left  the  common  country 
(where  for  them,  as  well  as  for  other  kindred  tribes,  the  brilliant 
radiance  of  heaven  appeared  to  them,  in  consequence  of  the 
climate  there  prevailing,  as  the  holiest  thing)  and  settled  in 
sultry  India  (where  the  glow  of  the  heavens  is  destructive,  and 
only  its  rain  operates  beneficially),  this  aspect  of  the  Deity  must 
have  appeared  the  most  adorable,  so  that  the  epithet  Pluvius, 
in  a  certain  sense,  absorbed  all  the  other  characteristics  of 
Dyauspitar.  This  found  its  expression  in  the  name  In-dra,  in 
which  we  unhesitatingly  recognise  a  word  (which  arose  in  some 
local  dialect,  and  was  then  diffused  with  the  spread  of  the 
worship)  standing  for  Sind-ra,  which  again  was  derived  from 
Syand,  '  to  drop.'  The  conceptions  which  had  been  attached  to 
Dyaus  were  then  transferred  to  Indra."  The  opinion  that  Indra 
has  taken  the  place  of  Dyaus  is  now  pretty  generally  believed, 
and  certainly  the  above  explanation  appears  to  be  very  natural. 

Of  Prithivi  we  hear  again.  The  '  Vishnu  Purana'*  gives  the 
following  account  of  her  birth  : — There  was  a  king  named  Vena, 
notorious  for  his  wickedness  and  neglect  of  religious  duties. 
When  the  Rishis  of  that  age  could  bear  with  his  impiety  no 
longer,  <»  they  slew  him.  But  now  a  worse  evil  happened; 
anarchy  prevailed,  and  they  felt  that  a  bad  king  was  better 
than  none  at  all.  Upon  this  they  rubbed  the  thigh  of  Vena,  and 
there  came  forth  a  black  dwarf,  like  a  negro  in  appearance. 
Immediately  after  his  birth  this  dwarf  asked,  "  What  am  I  to 
do?"       He    is    told,    "Nislda"   (sit  down),   and  from   this    his 


Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  iS.  t  Page  103. 


12  The  Vedic  Deities. 

descendants  are  called  '  Nishidis  '  unto  this  day.  The  corpse  was 
now  pure,  as  all  sin  had  left  it  in  this  black  body.  The  right 
arm  was  then  rubbed,  and  from  it  there  came  a  beautiful  shining 
prince,  who  was  named  Prithu,  and  reigned  in  the  place  of  his 
father.  Now  during  his  reign  there  was  a  famine.  Earth  would 
not  yield  her  fruits,  and  great  distress  prevailed.  Prithu 
said,  "  I  will  slay  the  Earth,  and  make  her  yield  her  fruits." 
Terrified  at  this  threat,  the  Earth  assumed  the  form  of  a  cow, 
and  was  pursued  by  Prithu  through  space,  even  to  the  heaven 
of  Brahma.  At  length,  weary  with  the  chase,  she  turned  to 
Prithu  and  said,  "  Know  you  not  the  sin  of  killing  a  female  that 
you  thus  try  to  slay  me  ? "  The  king  replied  that,  "  when  the 
happiness  of  many  is  secured  by  the  destruction  of  one  malig- 
nant being,  the  death  of  that  being  is  an  act  of  virtue."  "  But," 
said  the  Earth,  "  if,  in  order  to  promote  the  welfare  of  your 
subjects,  you  put  an  end  to  me,  whence,  best  of  monarchs, 
will  thy  people  derive  their  support  ?  "  Overcome  at  length,  the 
Earth  declared  that  all  vegetable  products  were  old,  and  de- 
stroyed by  her,  but  that  at  the  king's  command  she  would  restore 
them  "  as  developed  from  her  milk."  "  Do  you  therefore,  for  the 
benefit  of  mankind,  give  me  that  calf  by  which  I  may  be  able 
to  secrete  milk.  Make  also  all  places  level,  so  that  I  may  cause 
my  milk,  the  seed  of  all  vegetation,  to  flow  everywhere  around." 

Prithu  acted  upon  this  advice  of  the  Earth.  "  Before  his 
time  there  was  no  cultivation,  no  pasture,  no  agriculture,  no 
highway  for  merchants  ;  all  these  things  (or  all  civilization) 
originated  in  the  reign  of  Prithu.  Where  the  ground  was  made 
level,  the  king  induced  his  subjects  to  take  up  their  abode.  .  .  . 
He,  therefore,  having  made  Swayambhuva  Manu  the  calf, 
milked  the  Earth,  and  received  the  milk  into  his  own  hand,  for' 
the  benefit  of  mankind.  Thence  proceeded  all  kinds  of  corn 
and  vegetables  upon  which  people  now  subsist.  By  granting 
life  to  the  Earth,  Prithu  was  as  her  father,  and  she  thence 
derived  the  patronymic  appellation  Prithivi." 

In  a  note  Professor  Wilson  adds,*  the  commentator  observes 

*  '  Vishnu  Parana,'  p.  104. 


Dyaus  and  Pritiiivi. 


13 


that  "  by  the  '  calf,'  or  Mann  in  that  character,  is  typified  the 
promoter  of  the  multiplication  of  progeny  ;"  Manu,  as  will  be 
seen  in  the  account  of  the  Creation,  being  regarded  by  some  of 
the  Puranas  as  the  first  parent  of  mankind.  This  legend,  with 
considerable  variation,  is  found  in  most  of  the  Puranas  ;  Soma, 
Indra,  Yama,  and  others  taking  the  place  of  Manu  as  the  calf  ; 
whilst  Prithu's  place  as  the  milker  is  taken  by  the  Rishis,  Mitra, 
&c.  In  the  same  note  Professor  Wilson  says  :  "  These  are  all 
probably  subsequent  modifications  of  the  original  simple  alle- 
gory, which  typified  the  earth  as  a  cow,  who  yielded  to  every 
class  of  beings  the  milk  that  they  desired,  or  the  object  of 
their  wishes." 

It  should  be  noticed  that,  later  on  in  the  '  Vishnu    Purana,' 
Prithivi  is  said  to  have  sprung  from  the  foot  of  Vishnu. 


14  The  Vedic  Deities. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

ADITI  AND  THE  ADITYAS. 

ADITI  has  the  honour  of  being  almost  the  only  goddess 
mentioned  by  name  in  the  Rig- Veda,  as  the  mother  of  any  of 
the  gods  ;  but  it  is  by  no  means  an  easy  task  to  delineate  her 
character,  as  the  most  contradictory  statements  are  made 
concerning  her.  She  was  invoked  as  the  bestower  of  blessings 
on  children  and  cattle  ;  and  she  is  clearly  declared  to  be  the 
mother  of  Varuna,  and  other  deities,  sometimes  eight,  sometimes 
twelve  in  number.  She  is  supposed  to  be  the  impersonation  of 
"  infinity,  especially  the  boundlessness  of  heaven,  in  opposition 
to  the  finiteness  of  earth."  Another  supposition  is  that  Aditi  is 
the  personification  of  "  universal,  all-embracing  nature  or  Being." 
This  latter  idea  seems  to  be  the  more  correct  from  the  following 
verses,*  where  a  man  about  to  be  immolated  says,  "  Of  which 
god,  now,  of  which  of  the  immortals  shall  we  invoke  the  amiable 
name,  who  shall  give  us  back  to  the  great  Aditi,  that  I  may 
oehold  my  father  and  my  mother  ? "  Whatever  may  have  been 
intended  by  the  poets  to  be  expressed  by  this  name,  or  whatever 
may  have  been  the  precise  power  personified  by  Aditi,  she  is 
connected  with  the  forgiveness  of  sin.  Thus  :  "  May  Aditi  make 
us  sinless."  "  Aditi  be  gracious,  if  we  have  committed  any  sin 
against  you."  "  Whatever  offence  we  have,  O  Agni,  through 
our  folly  committed  against  you,  oh,  most  youthful  god,  make  us 
free  from  sins  against  Aditi."  "  Whatever  sin  we  have  committed, 
may  Aditi  sever  us  from  it."  f 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  45.  f   Ibid.  v.  46,  47. 


Aditi  and  the  Adityas.  15 

In  the  account  of  the  Creation  given  in  the  Rig- Veda,  Aditi 
is  said  to  have  sprung  from  Daksha,  and  in  the  same  verse 
Daksha  is  called  her  son.  There  is  also  a  reference  to  her  other 
sons.  In  the  '  Vishnu  Purana  '  we  have  no  less  than  three  some- 
what differing  accounts  of  the  origin  of  Daksha,  the  father  of 
Aditi.  In  the  first  account,  Daksha's  name  appears  amongst 
the  mind-born  sons  of  Brahma  ;  and  in  this  connection  he  is 
said  to  have  had  twenty-four  daughters,  but  Aditi  is  not  men- 
tioned as  one  of  them.  In  the  second  account  of  Daksha,  Aditi 
is  said  to  have  been  one  of  his  sixty  daughters,  and  was  given  in 
marriage  to  Kasyapa,  by  whom  she  had  twelve  sons,  the  Adityas. 
Elsewhere  we  read  that  Vishnu,  when  incarnate  as  the  Dwarf, 
was  a  result  of  this  marriage.  In  the  third  account  of  Daksha, 
Aditi  is  again  mentioned  as  his  daughter,  and  the  mother  of 
Vivasat  (the  Sun).     The  sons  of  Aditi  are  termed 


THE   ADITYAS. 

This  name  signifies  simply  the  descendants  of  Aditi.  In  one 
passage  in  the  Rig-Veda  *  the  names  of  six  are  given  :  Mitra, 
Aryman,  Bhaga,  Varuna,  Daksha,  and  Amsa.  In  another 
passage  they  are  said  to  be  seven  in  number,  though  their 
names  are  not  given.  In  a  third  verse  eight  is  the  number 
given  ;  but  "  of  the  eight  sons  of  Aditi  who  were  born  from  her 
body,  she  approached  the  gods  with  seven,  and  cast  out  Mart- 
tanda  (the  eighth)."  f  As  the  lists  of  names  of  these  sons  given 
in  different  parts  of  the  Vedas  do  not  agree  with  each  other,  it 
is  difficult  to  know  who  were  originally  regarded  as  Adityas. 
Judging  from  the  number  of  hymns  addressed  to  them,  some 
of  these  deities  occupied  a  conspicuous  position  in  the  Vedic 
Pantheon  ;  whilst  others  are  named  once  or  twice  only,  and 
then  in  connection  with  their  more  illustrious  brethren.  In  the 
'  Satapatha  Brahmana,'  and  the  Puranas,  the  number  of  the 
Adityas  is  increased  to  twelve.     In  addition  to  the  six  whose 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  54.  t  Ibid.  v.  49 


16  The  Vedic  Deities. 

names  are  given  above,  the  following'  are  also  described  in  some 
hymns  of  the  Rig- Veda  as  the  offspring  of  Aditi  :  Surya,  "  as  an 
Aditya  identified  with  Agni,  is  said  to  have  been  placed  by  the 
gods  in  the  sky  ;  "  *  Savitri,  and  Indra  too,  is  in  one  passage 
addressed  as  an  Aditya  along  with  Varuna  and  the  Moon.  In 
the  Taittiriya  texts,  the  following  eight  are  described  as 
Adityas  : — Mitra,  Varuna,  Aryaman,  Amsu,  Bhaga,  Indra,  and 
Vivasvat  (Surya). 

Professor  Roth  sayst  of  these  deities  :  "  In  the  highest  heaven 
dwell  and  reign  those  gods  who  bear  in  common  the  name  of 
Adityas.  We  must,  however,  if  we  would  discover  their  earliest 
character,  abandon  the  conceptions  which  in  a  later  age,  and 
even  in  that  of  the  heroic  poems,  were  entertained  regarding 
these  deities.  According  to  this  conception,  they  were  twelve 
Sun-gods,  there  being  evident  reference  to  the  twelve  months. 
But  for  the  most  ancient  period  we  must  hold  fast  to  the  primary 
significance  of  their  names.  They  are  inviolable,  imperishable, 
eternal  things.  Aditi,  Eternity,  or  The  Eternal,  is  the  element 
which  sustains  them,  or  is  sustained  by  them.  The  eternal  and 
inviolable  element  in  which  the  Adityas  dwell,  and  which  forms 
their  essence,  is  the  celestial  light.  The  Adityas,  the  gods  of 
this  light,  do  not  therefore  by  any  means  coincide  with  any  of 
the  forms  in  which  light  is  manifested  in  the  universe.  They  are 
neither  the  sun,  nor  moon,  nor  stars,  nor  dawn,  but  the  eternal 
sustainers  of  this  luminous  life,  which  exists  as  it  were  behind 
these  phenomena." 

As  noticed  above,  the  text  of  the  Rig-Vedas  says,  J  "  Of  the 
eight  sons  who  were  born  from  the  body  of  Aditi,  she  approached 
the  gods  with  seven,  but  cast  away  the  eighth."  In  the  com- 
mentary, the  following  explanation  of  this  circumstance  is  given  : 
— "  The  eighth  son  was  deformed.  His  brothers,  seeing  his  de- 
formity, improved  his  appearance.  He  was  afterwards  known 
as  Vivasvat  (the  Sun).  From  the  superfluous  flesh  cut  off  his 
body  an  elephant  was  formed  :  hence  the  proverb,  '  Let  no  man 


*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  54.  t  Ibid.  v.  56. 

X  Ibid.  v.  49. 


Aditi  and  the  Adityas. 


17 


catch  an  elephant,  for   the  elephant  partakes  of  the  nature  of 
man.' " 

According  to  a  passage  quoted  in  Chapter  II.*  from  the 
■  Satapatha  Brahmana,'  Agni,  Indra,  and  Surya  obtained  supe- 
riority over  the  other  gods  by  means  of  sacrifice.  By  whatever 
means  this  position  was  attained,  it  is  certain  that  these  were 
the  most  popular  deities  of  the  Vedic  Age.  Agni  stands  in 
a  class  by  himself;  but  with  Indra  and  Surya  there  are 
other  deities  closely  associated,  and  possessing  very  similar 
attributes.  Nearly  the  whole  of  the  more  conspicuous  Vedic 
deities  may  be  classified  as  follows  : — I.  Agni,  the  god  of  Fire  ; 
II.  Sun  Gods,  or  gods  of  Light  ;  and  III.  Storm  Gods,  or  those 
associated  with  Indra. 

*  Page  8. 


1 8  The  Vedic  Deities. 


CHAPTER  V. 
AGNI. 

Agxi,*  the  god  of  Fire,  is  one  of  the  most  prominent  of  the 
deities  of  the  Vedas.  With  the  single  exception  of  Indra,  more 
hymns  are  addressed  to  him  than  to  any  other  deity.  Professor 
Williams  gives  the  following  spirited  description  of  Agni :  — 

"  Bright,  seven-rayed  god,  how  manifold  thy  shapes 
Revealed  to  us  thy  votaries  :  now  we  see  thee 
With  body  all  of  gold  ;  and  radiant  hair 
Flaming  from  three  terrific  heads,  and  mouths, 
Whose  burning  jaws  and  teeth  devour  all  things. 
Now  with  a  thousand  glowing  horns,  and  now 
Flashing  thy  lustre  from  a  thousand  eyes, 
Thou'rt  borne  towards  us  in  a  golden  chariot, 
Impelled  by  winds,  and  drawn  by  ruddy  steeds, 
Marking  thy  car's  destructive  course  with  blackness."  f 

Various  accounts  are  given  of  the  origin  of  Agni.  He  is  said  to 
be  a  son  of  Dyaus  and  Prithivi ;  he  is  called  the  son  of  Brahma, 
and  is  then  named  Abhimani ;  and  he  is  reckoned  amongst  the 
children  of  Kasyapa  and  Aditi,  and  hence  one  of  the  Adityas. 
In  the  later  writings  he  is  described  as  a  son  of  Angiras,  king  of 
the  Pitris  (fathers  of  mankind),  and  the  authorship  of  several 
hymns  is  ascribed  to  him.  In  pictures  he  is  represented  as  a 
red  man,   having  three  legs   and  seven   arms,   dark   eyes,   eye- 

*  Brihaspati  and  Brahmanaspati  are  generally  regarded  as  being  identical 
with  Agni.  Nearly  the  same  epithets  are  applied  to  them,  with  this  ad- 
ditional one — of  presiding  over  prayer  ;  although  in  some  few  passages  they 
are  addressed  as  separate  deities. 

t  '  Indian  Wisdom,'  p.  18. 


Agni. 


19 


brows  and  hair.  He  rides  on  a  ram,  wears  a  poita  (Brahmanical 
thread),  and  a  garland  of  fruit.  Flames  of  fire  issue  from  his 
mouth,  and  seven  streams  of  glory  radiate  from  his  body.  The 
following  passage,  for  every  sentence  of  which  Dr.  Muir*  quotes 
a  text  from  the  Vedas,  gives  a  good  idea  of  the  character  and 
functions  of  this  deity  in  the  Vedic  Age. 


AGNI. 


Agni  is  an  immortal  who  has  taken  up  his  abode  with  mortals 
as  their  guest.  He  is  the  domestic  priest  who  rises  before  the 
dawn,  and  who  concentrates  in  his  own  person  and  exercises  in 
a  higher  sense  all  the  various  sacrificial  offices  which  the  Indian 
ritual  assigns  to  a  number  of  different  human  functionariesT/  He 
is  a  sage,  the  divinest  among  the  sages,  intimately  acquainted 
with  all  the  forms  of  worship  ;  the  wise  director,  the  successful 


Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  119  flf. 


C   2 


20  The  Vedic  Deities. 


accomplishes  and  the  protector  of  all  ceremonies,  who  enables 
men  to  serve  the  gods  in  a  correct  and  acceptable  manner,  in 
cases  where  they  could  not  do  this  with  their  own  unaided  skill. 
He  is  a  swift  messenger,  moving  between  heaven  and  earth, 
commissioned  both  by  gods  and  men  to  maintain  their  mutual 
communication,  to  announce  to  the  immortals  the  hymns,  and  to 
convey  to  them  the  oblations  of  their  worshippers  ;  or  to  bring 
them  (the  immortals)  down  from  the  sky  to  the  place  of  sacrifice. 
He  accompanies  the  gods  when  they  visit  the  earth,  and  shares 
in  the  reverence  and  adoration  which  they  receive.  He  makes 
the  oblations  fragrant  ;  without  him  the  gods  experience  no 
satisfaction. 

Agni  is  the  lord,  protector,  king  of  men.  He  is  the  lord  of 
the  house,  dwelling  in  every  abode.  He  is  a  guest  in  every 
home  ;  he  despises  no  man,  he  lives  in  every  family.  He  is 
therefore  considered  as  a  mediator  between  gods  and  men,  and 
as  a  witness  of  their  actions  ;  hence  to  the  present  day  he  is 
worshipped,  and  his  blessing  sought  on  all  solemn  occasions,  as 
at  marriage,  death,  &c.  In  these  old  hymns  Agni  is  spoken  of  as 
dwelling  in  the  two  pieces  of  wood,  which  being  rubbed  together 
produce  fire  ;  and  it  is  noticed  as  a  remarkable  thing  that  a 
living  being  should  spring  out  of  dry  (dead)  wood.  Strange  to 
say,  says  the  poet,  the  child,  as  soon  as  born,  begins  with 
unnatural  voracity  to  consume  his  parents.  Wonderful  is  his 
growth,  seeing  that  he  is  born  of  a  mother  who  cannot  nourish 
him  ;  but  he  is  nourished  by  the  oblations  of  clarified  butter 
which  are  poured  into  his  mouth,  and  which  he  consumes. 

The  highest  divine  functions  are  ascribed  to  Agni.  Although  in 
some  places  he  is  spoken  of  as  the  son  of  heaven  and  earth,  in 
others  he  is  said  to  have  stretched  them  out ;  to  have  formed 
them,  and  all  that  flies  or  walks,  or  stands  or  moves. '  He  formed 
the  sun,  and  adorned  the  heaven  with  stars.  Men'  tremble  at 
his  mighty  deeds,  and  his  ordinances  cannot  be  resisted.  Earth, 
heaven,  and  all  things  obey  his  commands.  All  the  gods  fear, 
and  do  homage  to  him.  He  knows  the  secrets  of  mortals,  and 
hears  the  invocations  that  are  addressed  to  him. 

The  worshippers  of  Agni  prosper,  are  wealthy,  and  live  long. 


'   AGNI.  2  I 

He  watches  with  a  thousand  eyes  over  the  man  who  brings  him 
food,  and  nourishes  him  with  oblations.  ,  No  mortal  enemy  can 
by  any  wondrous  power  gain  the  mastery  over  him  who  sacrifices 
to  this  god.  He  also  confers  and  is  the  guardian  of  immortality. 
In  a  funeral  hymn,  Agni  is  asked  to  warm  with  his  heat  the 
unborn  (immortal)  part  of  the  deceased,  and  in  his  auspicious 
form  to  carry  it  to  the  world  of  the  righteous.  He  carries  men 
across  calamities,  as  a  ship  over  the  sea.  He  commands  all  the 
riches  in  earth  and  heaven  ;  hence  he  is  invoked  for  riches,  food, 
deliverance,  and  in  fact  all  temporal  good.  He  is  also  prayed  to 
as  the  forgiver  of  sins  that  may  have  been  committed  through 
folly.  All  gods  are  said  to  be  comprehended  in  him  ;  he  sur- 
rounds them  as  the  circumference  of  a  wheel  does  the  spokes. 

The    main   characteristics    of    this    deity   are   taught   in   the 
following  verses  by  Dr.  Muir  :* — 

"  Great  Agni,  though  thine  essence  be  but  one, 
Thy  forms  are  three  ;  as  fire  thou  blazest  here, 
As  lightning  flashest  in  the  atmosphere, 
In  heaven  thou  flamest  as  the  golden  sun. 

"It  was  in  heaven  thou  hadst  thy  primal  birth  ; 
By  art  of  sages  skilled  in  sacred  lore 
Thou  wast  drawn  down  to  human  hearths  of  yore, 
And  thou  abid'st  a  denizen  of  earth. 

"  Sprung  from  the  mystic  pair,f  by  priestly  hands 
In  wedlock  joined,  forth  flashes  Agni  bright  ; 
But,  oh  !  ye  heavens  and  earth,  I  tell  you  right, 
The  unnatural  child  devours  the  parent  brands. 

"'But  Agni  is  a  god  ;  we  must  not  deem 
That  he  can  err,  or  dare  to  comprehend 
His  acts,  which  far  our  reason's  grasp  transcend  ; 
He  best  can  judge  what  deeds  a  god  beseem. 

"  And  yet  this  orphaned  god  himself  survives  : 
Although  his  hapless  mother  soon  expires, 
And  cannot  nurse  the  babe  as  babe  requires, 
Great  Agni,  wondrous  infant,  grows  and  thrives. 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  221. 

f  The  two  pieces  of  wood  from  which  fire  is  produced. 


22  The  Vedic  Deities,  i 

"  Smoke-bannered  Agni,  god  with  crackling  voice 

And  flaming  hair,  when  thou  dost  pierce  the  gloom 
At  early  dawn,  and  all  the  world  illume, 
Both  heaven  and  earth  and  gods  and  men  rejoice. 

"In  every  home  thou  art  a  welcome  guest, 
The  household  tutelary  lord,  a  son, 
A  father,  mother,  brother,  all  in  one, 
A  friend  by  whom  thy  faithful  friends  are  blest. 

"  A  swift-winged  messenger,  thou  callest  down 

From  heaven  to  crowd  our  hearths  the  race  divine, 
To  taste  our  food,  our  hymns  to  hear,  benign, 
And  all  our  fondest  aspirations  crown. 

"  Thou,  Agni,  art  our  priest  :  divinely  wise, 
In  holy  science  versed,  thy  skill  detects 
The  faults  that  mar  our  rites,  mistakes  corrects, 
And  all  our  acts  completes  and  sanctifies. 

"  Thou  art  the  cord  that  stretches  to  the  skies, 

The  bridge  that  scans  the  chasm,  profound  and  vast, 
Dividing  earth  from  heaven,  o'er  which  at  last 
The  good  shall  safely  pass  to  Paradise. 

"  But  when,  great  god,  thine  awful  anger  glows, 
And  thou  revealest  thy  destroying  force, 
All  creatures  flee  before  thy  furious  course, 
As  hosts  are  chased  by  overpowering  foes. 

"  Thou  levellest  all  thou  touchest ;  forests  vast 

Thou  shear'st,  like  beards  which  barber's  razor  shaves  ; 
Thy  wind-driven  flames  roar  loud  as  ocean's  waves, 
And  all  thy  track  is  black  when  thou  hast  past. 

"  But  thou,  great  Agni,  dost  not  always  wear 

That  direful  form  ;  thou  rather  lov'st  to  shine 
Upon  our  hearths,  with  milder  flame  benign, 
And  cheer  the  homes  where  thou  art  nursed  with  care. 

"  Yes  !  thou  delightest  all  those  men  to  bless 
Who  toil  unwearied  to  supply  the  food 
Which  thou  so  lovest ; — logs  of  well-dried  wood, 
And  heaps  of  butter  bring,  thy  favourite  mess. 


Agni.  23 

"  Though  I  no  cow  possess,  and  have  no  store 
Of  butter,  nor  an  axe  fresh  wood  to  cleave, 
Thou,  gracious  god,  wilt  my  poor  gift  receive  : 
These  few  dry  sticks  I  bring  ; — I  have  no  more. 

"  Preserve  us,  lord  ;  thy  faithful  servants  save 

From  all  the  ills  by  which  our  bliss  is  marred  ; 
Tower  like  an  iron  wall  our  homes  to  guard, 
And  all  the  boons  bestow  our  hearts  can  crave. 

"  And  when  away  our  brief  existence  wanes, 

When  we  at  length  our  earthly  homes  must  quit, 
And  our  freed  souls  to  worlds  unknown  shall  flit, 
Do  thou  deal  gently  with  our  cold  remains. 

"  And  then,  thy  gracious  form  assuming,  guide 
Our  unborn  part  across  the  dark  abyss 
Aloft  to  realms  serene  of  light  and  bliss, 
Where  righteous  men  among  the  gods  abide." 

"  In  a  celebrated  hymn  of  the  Rig-Veda,  attributed  to  Visish- 
tha,  Indra  and  the  other  gods  are  called  upon  to  destroy  the 
Kravyads  (the  flesh-eaters),  or  Rakshas,  enemies  of  the  gods. 
Agni  himself  is  a  Kravyad,  and  as  such  takes  an  entirely  differ- 
ent character.  He  is  represented  under  a  form  as  hideous  as  the 
beings  he,  in  common  with  the  other  gods,  is  called  upon  to 
devour.  He  sharpens  his  two  iron  tusks,  puts  his  enemies  into 
his  mouth,  and  devours  them.  He  heats  the  edges  of  his  shafts, 
and  sends  them  into  the  hearts  of  the  Rakshasas."  * 

"  In  the  Mahabharata,  Agni  is  represented  as  having  exhausted 
his  vigour  by  devouring  too  many  oblations,  and  desiring  to 
consume  the  whole  Khandava  forest,  as  a  means  of  recruiting  his 
strength.  He  was  [at  first]  prevented  from  doing  this  by  Indra  ;  ' 
but  having  obtained  the  assistance  of  Krishna  and  Arjuna,  he 
baffled  Indra,  and  accomplished  his  object."  f 

According  to  the  Ramayana,  in  order  to  assist  Vishnu  when 
incarnate  as  Rama,  Agni  became  the  father  of  Nila  by  a  monkey 
mother  ;  and  according  to  the  '  Vishnu  Purana,'  he  married  Swaha, 
by  whom  he  had  three  sons, — Pavaka,  Pavamana,  and  Suchi. 

*  Dowson,  '  Dictionary  of  Hindu  Mythology.'  f  Dowson,  s.  v. 


24 


The  Vedic  Deities. 


Agni  has  many  names  ;  those  more  generally  known  are  the 
following : — 

Vahni,  "  He  who  receives  the  horn,  or  burnt  sacrifice." 
Vitihotra,  "  He  who  sanctifies  the  worshipper." 
Dhananjaya,  "  He  wTho  conquers  (destroys)  riches." 
Jivalana,  "  He  who  burns." 
Dhumketu,  "  He  whose  sign  is  smoke." 
Chhagaratha,  "  He  who  rides  on  a  ram." 
Saptajihva,  "  He  who  has  seven  tongues." 


**o 


(     25     ) 


CHAPTER  VI. 

SUN  OR  LIGHT  DEITIES. 

I.    SURYA. 

SURYA  and  Savitri  are  two  names  by  which  the  Sun  is 
addressed  in  the  Vedic  hymns.  Sometimes  the  one  name  is 
used  exclusively,  sometimes  they  are  used  interchangeably, 
and  sometimes  they  are  used  as  though  they  represented  quite 
distinct  objects.  It  is  supposed  that  Savitri  refers  to  the  sun 
when  invisible  ;  whilst  Surya  refers  to  him  when  he  is  visible  to 
the  worshippers.  This  at  any  rate  gives  some  reason  for  the  two 
names  being  employed,  though  it  may  not  explain  the  case 
satisfactorily  in  every  instance. 

Although  the  hymns  in  which  Surya  is  addressed  are  not  very 
numerous,  his  worship  was  most  common  in  the  olden  time,  and 
has  continued  to  the  present  hour.  It  is  to  him  that  the 
Gayatri,  the  most  sacred  text  of  the  Vedas,  is  addressed  at  his 
rising  by  every  devout  Brahman.  Simple  in  its  phraseology, 
this  short  verse  is  supposed  to  exert  magical  powers.  It  is 
as  follows  : — 

"  Let  us  meditate  on  that  excellent  glory  of  the  divine  Vivifier  ; 
May  he  enlighten  (or  stimulate)  our  understandings."  * 

As  a  specimen  of  the  language  employed  in  some  of  the  later 
writings  in  reference  to  this  verse,  read  the  following  few  lines 
from  the  '  Skanda  Purana  : ' — "  Nothing  in  the  Vedas  is  superior 
to  the  Gayatri.    No  invocation  is  equal  to  the  Gayatri,  as  no  city 


*  t 


Indian  Wisdom,'  p.  20. 


26 


The  Vedic  Deities. 


is    equal    to  Kasi  (Benares).      The    Gayatri    is    the    mother   of 

the  Vedas,  and  of  Brahmans.     By  repeating  it  a  man  is  saved. 

By  the  power  of  the 
Gayatri  the  Kshetriya 
(Warrior  caste)  Vish- 
vamitra  became  a 
Brahmarsi  (Brahman 
saint),  and  even  ob- 
tained such  power  as 
to  be  able  to  create  a 
new  world.  What  is 
there  indeed  that  can- 
not be  effected  by  the 
Gayatri?  For  the 
Gayatri  is  Vishnu, 
Brahma,  and  Siva,  and 
the  three  Vedas."  * 
With  promise  of  such 
blessing,  it  is  not  to  be 
wondered  at  that  the 
worship  of  Surya 
should  continue. 

The  following  trans- 
lation |  of  hymns  from 

the  Rig-Veda  gives  a  fair  specimen  of  the   language  used   in 

addresses  to  Surya  : — 

"  Behold  the  rays  of  Dawn,  like  heralds,  lead  on  high 
The  Sun,  that  men  may  see  the  great  all-knowing  god. 
The  stars  slink  off  like  thieves,  in  company  with  Night, 
Before  the  all-seeing  eye,  whose  beams  reveal  his  presence, 
Gleaming  like  brilliant  flames,  to  nation  after  nation. 
With  speed,  beyond  the  ken  of  mortals,  thou,  O  Sun  ! 
Dost  ever  travel  on,  conspicuous  to  all. 
Thou  dost  create  the  light,  and  with  it  dost  illume 


SURYA. 


*  Kennedy's  '  Hindu  Mythology,'  p.  345. 
t  '  Indian  Wisdom,'  p.  19. 


Sun  or  Light  Deities— Surya.  27 

The  universe  entire  ;  thou  risest  in  the  sight 

Of  all  the  race  of  men,  and  all  the  host  of  heaven. 

Light-giving  Varuna  !  thy  piercing  glance  dost  scan, 

In  quick  succession,  all  this  stirring  active  world, 

And  penetrateth  too  the  broad  ethereal  space, 

Measuring  our  days  and  nights,  and  spying  out  all  creatures. 

Surya  with  flaming  locks,  clear-sighted  god  of  day, 

Thy  seven  ruddy  mares  bear  on  thy  rushing  car. 

With  these,  thy  self-yoked  steeds,  seven  daughters  of  thy  chariot, 

Onward  thou  dost  advance.     To  thy  refulgent  orb 

Beyond  this  lower  gloom,  and  upward  to  the  light 

Would  we  ascend,  O  Sun  !  thou  god  among  the  gods." 

Surya,  as  we  have  already  noticed,  is  regarded  as  a  son  of 
Aditi ;  at  other  times  he  is  said  to  be  a  son  of  Dyaus.  Ushas 
(the  Dawn)  is  called  his  wife,  though  in  another  passage  he  is 
said  to  be  produced  by  the  Dawn.  Some  texts  state  that  he  is 
the  Vivifier  of  all  things  ;  whilst  others  state  that  he  was  formed 
and  made  to  shine  by  Indra,  Soma,  Agni,  and  others. 

From  the  character  ascribed  to  Savitri  in  some  hymns,  it 
seems  more  natural  to  regard  him  as  the  sun  shining  in  his 
strength,  and  Surya  as  the  sun  when  rising  and  setting.  Savitri 
is  golden-eyed,*  golden-handed,  golden-tongued.  He  rides  in  a 
chariot  drawn  by  radiant,  white-footed  steeds.  He  illuminates 
the  earth  ;  his  golden  arms  stretched  out  to  bless,  infusing  energy 
into  all  creatures,  reach  to  the  utmost  ends  of  heaven.  He  is 
leader  and  king  in  heaven  ;  the  other  gods  follow  him,  and  he 
it  is  who  gives  them  immortality.  He  is  prayed  to  for  deliver- 
ance from  sin,  and  to  conduct  the  souls  of  the  departed  to  the 
abode  of  the  righteous. 

In  the  Puranic  Age,  Surya  sustains  quite  a  different  character. 
He  is  there  called  the  son  of  Kasyapa  and  Aditi.  He  is  de- 
scribed as  a  dark-red  man,  with  three  eyes  and  four  arms  :  in 
two  hands  are  water-lilies  ;  with  one  he  is  bestowing  a  blessing, 
with  the  other  he  is  encouraging  his  worshippers.  He  sits  upon 
a  red  lotus,  and  rays  of  glory  issue  from  his  body.  In  addition 
to  the  daily  worship  that  is  offered  to  him  by  the  Brahmans  by 


*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  162  fif. 


28  The  Vedic  Deities. 

the  repetition  of  the  Gayatri,  he  is  worshipped  once  a  year  by 
the  Hindus,  generally  on  the  first  Sunday  in  the  month  of 
Macrh  ;  and  in  seasons  of  sickness  it  is  no  uncommon  thing  for 
the  low-caste  Hindus  to  employ  a  Brahman  to  repeat  some  verses 
in  honour  of  Surya,  in  the  hope  that  the  deity  thus  propitiated 
will  effect  their  recovery. 

In  the  'Vishnu  Purana'*we  find  the  following  account  of  Surya. 
He  married  Sangna,  the  daughter  of  Visvakarma  ;  who,  after 
bearing  him  three  children,  was  so  oppressed  with  his  brightness 
and  glory,  that  she  was  compelled  to  leave  him.  Before  her 
departure,  she  left  Chhaya  (Shadow)  in  her  place.  For  years 
Surya  did  not  notice  this  change  of  wife.  But  one  day,  in  a  fit 
of  anger,  Chhaya  pronounced  a  curse  upon  Yama  (Death),  a  child 
of  Sangna's,  and  this  curse  took  effect.  Surya  knew  that  no 
mother's  curse  could  affect  her  offspring,  and,  Avondering  how  it 
was  that  Chhaya's  curse  was  not  harmless,  he  came  to  know  that 
his  wife  had  forsaken  him,  leaving  this  other  woman  in  her  place. 
Through  the  power  of  meditation,  Surya  found  Sangna  in  a  forest 
in  the  form  of  a  mare  ;  and,  in  order  that  he  might  enjoy  her 
society,  changed  himself  into  a  horse.  After  a  few  years,  they 
grew  tired  of  this  arrangement,  and  returned  in  proper  form  to 
their  own  dwelling.  But  in  order  that  his  presence  might  be 
bearable  to  his  wife,  his  father-in-law,  who  was  the  architect  of 
the  gods,  ground  the  Sun  upon  a  stone,  and  by  this  means  re- 
duced his  brightness  by  one-eighth.  The  part  thus  ground  from 
Surya  was  not  wasted.  From  it  were  produced  the  wonder- 
working discus  of  Vishnu,  the  trident  of  Siva,  the  lance  of 
Kartikeya  (the  god  of  war),  and  the  weapons  of  Kuvera  (the 
god  of  riches). 

The  '  Bhavishya  Purana '  says,  "  Because  there  is  none  greater 
than  he  {i.e.  Surya),  nor  has  been  nor  will  be,  therefore  he  is  cele- 
brated as  the  supreme  soul  in  all  the  Vedas."  Again,  "  that 
which  is  the  sun,  and  thus  called  light  or  effulgent  power,  is 
adorable,  and  must  be  worshipped  by  those  who  dread  succes- 
sive births  and  deaths,  and  who  eagerly  desire  beatitude."     In 


*  Book  III.  chap.  ii. 


Sun  or  Light  Deities — Surya.  29 


the  '  Brahma  Purana '  *  is  a  passage  in  which  the  sun  is  alluded 
to  under  twelve  names,  with  epithets  peculiar  to  each,  as  though 
they  were  twelve  distinct  sun-deities  : — 

"  The  first  form  of  the  sun  is  Indra,  the  lord  of  the  gods,  and 
the  destroyer  of  their  enemies  ;  the  second,  Dhata,  the  creator  of 
all  things  ;  the  third,  Parjanya,  residing  in  the  clouds,  and  show- 
ering rain  on  the  earth  from  its  beams  ;  the  fourth,  Twasta,  who 
dwells  in  all  corporeal  forms ;  the  fifth,  Pushan,  who  gives 
nutriment  to  all  beings  ;  the  sixth,  Aryama,  who  brings  sacrifices 
to  a  successful  conclusion  ;  the  seventh  derives  his  name  from 
almsgiving,  and  delights  mendicants  with  gifts  ;  the  eighth  is 
called  Vivasvan,  who  ensures  digestion  ;  the  ninth,  Vishnu,  who 
constantly  manifests  himself  for  the  destruction  of  the  enemies 
of  the  gods  ;  the  tenth,  Amshuman,  who  preserves  the  vital 
organs  in  a  sound  state  ;  the  eleventh,  Varuna,  who,  residing  in 
the  waters,  vivifies  the  universe  ;  and  the  twelfth,  Mitra,  who 
dwells  in  the  orb  of  the  moon,  for  the  benefit  of  the  three  worlds. 
These  are  the  twelve  splendours  of  the  sun,  the  supreme  spirit, 
who  through  them  pervades  the  universe,  and  irradiates  the 
inmost  souls  of  men." 

Surya  is  said  to  have  Aruna  (Rosy),  the  Dawn,  as  his  charioteer ; 
who  was  the  son  of  Kasyapa  and  Kadru. 

According  to  the  Ramayana,  Sugriva,  the  king  of  the  monkey 
host  which  assisted  Rama  in  his  great  expedition,  was  a  son  of 
Surya  by  a  monkey:  according  to  the  Mahabharata,  the  hero 
Kama  also  was  the  son  of  this  deity  ;  and  when  he  was  in  the 
form  of  a  horse,  he  became  father  of  the  Asvins,  and  communi- 
cated the  white  Yajur-Veda. 

When  speaking  of  the  planets,  Surya  will  be  noticed  again 
under  the  name  of  Ravi. 

Among  the  many  names  and  epithets  by  which  this  deity  is 
known,  the  following  are  the  most  common  : — 

Divakara,  "  The  Maker  of  the  day." 

Bhaskara,  "The  Creator  of  light." 

Vivaswat,  "  The  Radiant  one." 

*   Kennedy's  '  Hindu  Mythology,'  p.  349. 


30  The  Vedic  Deities. 

Mihira,  "  He  who  waters   the   earth  ;"  i.e.  he  draws    up  the 
moisture  from  the  seas  so  that  the  clouds  are  formed. 
Grahapati,  "  The  Lord  of  the  stars." 
Karmasakshi,  "The  witness  of  (men's)  works." 
Martanda,  "A  descendant  of  Mritanda." 


2.  PUSHAN. 

Pushan  is  the  name  of  a  sun-god  to  whom  some  hymns  are 
addressed  exclusively,  and  whose  praise  at  other  times  is  sung 
in  connection  with  that  of  Indra,  &c.  In  these  hymns  the 
character  of  this  deity  is  not  very  clearly  defined.  He  is  said  *  to 
behold  the  entire  universe  ;  is  addressed  as  the  guide  of  travellers 
and  the  protector  of  cattle.  He  is  called  upon  to  protect  his 
servants  in  battle,  and  to  defend  them  as  of  old.  He  is  invoked 
in  the  marriage  ceremonial,  and  asked  to  take  the  bride's  hand, 
to  lead  her  away,  and  to  bless  her  in  her  conjugal  relations.  He 
is  said  also  to  conduct  the  spirits  of  the  departed  from  this  world 
to  the  next.  In  one  text  he  is  called  "  the  nourisher,"  as  Vishnu 
in  later  times  was  called  "  the  preserver."  By  far  the  greater 
number  of  prayers  addressed  to  him  seem  to  refer  to  him  as  the 
guide  and  protector  of  travellers,  both  along  the  ordinary  jour- 
neys of  life  and  in  the  longer  journey  to  the  other  world  ;  and 
as  he  is  said  to  be  constantly  travelling  about,  he  is  said  to  know 
well  the  road  by  which  they  have  to  go. 

The  following  is  a  specimen  of  the  hymns  addressed  to 
Pushan  in  the  Rig- Veda : — "  Conduct  us,  Pushan,  over  our 
road  ;  remove  distress,  son  of  the  deliverer ;  go  on  before  us. 
Smite  away  from  before  us  the  destructive  and  injurious  wolf 
which  seeks  after  us.  Drive  away  from  our  path  the  waylayer, 
the  thief  and  the  robber.  Tread  with  thy  foot  upon  the  burning 
weapons  of  that  deceitful  wretch,  whoever  he  be.  O  wonder- 
working and  wise  Pushan,  we  desire  that  help  of  thine  wherewith 
thou  didst  favour  our  fathers  !    O  god,  who  bringest  all  blessings, 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  171  ff. 


Sun  or  Light  Deities — Mitra  and  Varuna.     21 


and  art  distinguished  by  thy  golden  spear,  make  wealth  easy  of 
acquisition  !  Convey  us  past  our  opponents  ;  make  our  paths 
easy  to  travel ;  gain  strength  for  us  here.  Lead  us  over  a 
country  of  rich  pastures  ;  let  no  new  trouble  (beset  our)  path. 
Bestow,  satiate,  grant,  stimulate  us  ;  fill  our  belly.  We  do  not 
reproach  Pushan,  we  praise  him  with  hymns  ;  and  we  seek  riches 
from  the  wonder-working  god."  *  "  May  we,  O  Pushan  !  meet 
with  a  wise  man  who  will  straightway  direct  us  and  say,  '  It  is 
this.'  May  Pushan  follow  our  kine  ;  may  he  protect  our  horses  ; 
may  he  give  us  food  ....  Come  hither,  glowing  god,  the  deliverer, 
may  we  meet."  f 

In  the  Puranas  Pushan  occupies  a  far  less  exalted  position. 
It  seems  almost  like  a  burlesque  to  see  him  who  in  the  Vedas 
is  reverently  approached  as  the  giver  of  good  to  his  worshippers, 
described  as  being  obliged  to  feed  upon  gruel,  because  his  teeth 
have  been  knocked  out  of  his  mouth.  The  earliest  form  of  the 
legend  describing  this  event  is  found  in  the  Taittiriya  Sanhita. 
Rudra  not  being  invited  to  a  great  sacrifice  that  Daksha,  his 
father-in-law,  was  celebrating,  shot  an  arrow  which  pierced  the 
sacrificial  victim.  Pushan  ate  part  of  this  victim,  and  it  broke 
his  teeth.  In  describing  Daksha,J  a  full  account  of  this  sacrifice 
will  be  given.  In  the  'Vishnu  Purana'  Pushan  appears  as  one 
of  the  Adityas. 


3.    MITRA   AND   VARUNA. 

These  two  deities  are  most  frequently  named  together  in  the 
hymns  ;  Varuna  is  often  addressed  alone,  but  Mitra  very  seldom. 
The  idea  of  the  older  commentators  was  that  Mitra  represented 
and  ruled  over  the  day,  whilst  Varuna  was  ruler  of  the  night. 
"  Varuna  is  sometimes  visible  to  the  gaze  of  his  worshippers  ; 
he  dwells  in  a  house  having  a  thousand  doors,  so  that  he  is  ever 
accessible  to  men.     He  is  said  to  have  good  eyesight,  for  he 


* 


Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  175.  f  Ibid.  v.  177. 

%  Part  III.  chap.  i. 


The  Vedic  Deities. 


knows  what  goes  on  in  the  hearts  of  men.  He  is  king  of  gods 
and  men  ;  is  mighty  and  terrible  ;  none  can  resist  his  authority. 
He  is  sovereign  ruler  of  the  universe."  "  It  is  he  who  makes 
the  sun  to  shine  in  heaven  ;  the  winds  that  blow  are  but  his 
breath  ;  he  has  hollowed  out  the  channels  of  the  rivers  which 


VARUNA. 


flow  at  his  command,  and  he  has  made  the  depths  of  the  sea. 
His  ordinances  are  fixed  and  unassailable ;  through  their  opera- 
tion the  moon  walks  in  brightness,  and  the  stars,  which  appear 
in  the  nightly  sky,  vanish  in  daylight.  The  birds  flying  in  the 
air,  the  rivers  in  their  sleepless  flow,  cannot  attain  a  knowledge 
of  his  power  and  wrath.     But  he  knows  the  flight  of  the  birds 


Sun  or  Light  Deities — Varuna.  $3 

in  the  sky,  the  course  of  the  far  travelling  wind,  the  paths  of 
ships  on  the  ocean,  and  beholds  all  the  secret  things  that 
have  been  or  shall  be  done.  He  witnesses  men's  truth  and 
falsehood."* 

The  following  is  a  metrical  version  of  one  of  the  hymns  of  the 
Rig- Veda  as  given  by  Dr.  Muir :  f — 

"  The  mighty  lord  on  high  our  deeds  as  if  at  hand  espies  ; 
The  gods  know  all  men  do,  though  men  would  fain  their  deeds  disguise  : 
Whoe'er  stands,  whoe'er  moves,  or  steals  from  place  to  place, 
Or  hides  him  in  his  secret  cell,  the  gods  his  movements  trace. 
Wherever  two  together  plot,  and  deem  they  are  alone, 
King  Varuna  is  there,  a  third,  and  all  their  schemes  are  known. 
This  earth  is  his,  to  him  belong  those  vast  and  boundless  skies, 
Both  seas  within  him  rest,  and  yet  in  that  small  pool  he  lies. 
Whoever  far  beyond  the  sky  should  think  his  way  to  win, 
He  could  not  there  elude  the  grasp  of  Varuna  the  king. 
His  spies  descending  from  the  skies  glide  all  this  world  around  ; 
Their  thousand  eyes,  all  scanning,  sweep  to  earth's  remotest  bound. 
Whate'er  exists  in  heaven  and  earth,  whate'er  beyond  the  skies, 
Before  the  eye  of  Varuna  the  king  unfolded  lies. 
The  secret  winkings  all  he  counts  of  every  mortal's  eyes  ; 
He  wields  this  universal  frame  as  gamester  throws  his  dice. 
Those  knotted  nooses  which  thou  fling'st,  O  god  !  the  bad  to  snare, 
All  liars  let  them  overtake,  but  all  the  truthful  spare." 

Professor  Roth  says  of  this  hymn,  "  There  is  no  hymn  in  the 
whole  Vedic  literature  which  expresses  the  divine  omniscience  in 
such  forcible  terms ; "  and  certainly  it  would  not  be  an  easy  task 
to  find  in  any  literature  a  passage  to  surpass  it  in  this  respect. 

The  affairs  of  men  are  under  his  control ;  he  is  asked  to 
prolong  life,  to  punish  transgressors  ;  and  a  hope  is  held  out 
that  the  righteous  shall  see  him  reigning  in  the  next  world  in 
conjunction  with  Yama,  the  ruler  of  the  spirit-world.  Varuna 
in  fact  has  attributes  and  functions  ascribed  to  him  in  the  Vedas, 
of  a  higher  moral  character  than  any  other  of  the  gods  ;  and 
therefore  men  call  upon  him  for  pardon  and  purity.  "  Re- 
lease us,"  they  say,  "  from   the    sins  of  our  fathers,  and    from 


Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  58  fif.  t  Ibid.  v.  64. 

I) 


34  The  Vedic  Deities. 

those  which  we  have  committed  in  our  own  persons."  And 
again  :  "  Be  gracious,  O  mighty  god,  be  gracious.  I  have  sinned 
through  want  of  power  ;  be  gracious." 

In  the  hymns  addressed  to  Mitra  and  Varuna  together,  almost 
the  same  terms  are  employed  as  when  Varuna  is  addressed  alone. 
Both  are  spoken  of  as  righteous,  and  as  the  promoters  of  religion. 
They  are  said  to  avenge  sin  and  falsehood. 

In  the  Vedic  literature,  though  Varuna  is  not  regarded  chiefly 
as  the  god  of  the  ocean,  as  he  is  in  the  later  writings,  but  rather, 
as  the  above  hymns  show,  as  one  of  the  gods  of  light,  yet  there 
are  passages  which  describe  him  as  being  connected  with  the 
waters  of  the  atmosphere  and  on  the  earth,  which  afford  some 
foundation  for  the  later  conceptions  of  his  kingdom.  Thus,  for 
instance,  we  read,  "  May  the  waters  which  are  celestial,  and  those 
which  flow ;  those  for  which  channels  are  dug,  and  those  which 
are  self-produced  ;  those  which  are  proceeding  to  the  ocean,  and 
are  bright  and  purifying,  preserve  me !  May  those  (waters)  in 
the  midst  of  which  King  Varuna  goes  .  .  .  preserve  me  !  "  *  In 
other  places  he  is  said  to  dwell  in  the  waters  as  Soma  does 
in  the  woods.  Professor  Roth  gives  a  probable  explanation  as 
to  the  manner  in  which  Varuna,  who  was  originally  the  god 
of  the  heavens,  came  to  be  regarded  as  the  god  of  the  ocean. 
He  says  :  f  "  When,  on  the  one  hand,  the  conception  of  Varuna 
as  the  all-embracing  heaven  had  been  established,  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  observation  of  the  rivers  flowing  towards  the 
ends  of  the  earth  and  to  the  sea  had  led  to  the  conjecture 
that  there  existed  an  ocean  enclosing  the  earth  in  its  bosom, 
then  the  way  was  thoroughly  prepared  for  connecting  Varuna 
with  the  ocean." 

In  the  Brahmana  of  the  Rig- Veda  J  is  an  interesting  legend 
showing  that  probably  human  sacrifices  were  at  one  time  offered 
to  Varuna.  A  certain  king  named  Harischandra  had  no  son. 
Being  greatly  distressed  on  this  account,  as  a  son  is  necessary 
to  the    due    performance  of  the  -  funeral  ceremonies,  the    king, 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  73.  f  Ibid.  v.  75. 

J  '  Indian  Wisdom,'  p.  29. 


Sun  or  Light  Deities — Varuna.  35 

acting  upon  the  advice  of  Narada  the  sage,  went  to  Varuna, 
saying  : — 

"  Let  but  a  son  be  born,  O  king  !  to  me, 
And  I  will  sacrifice  that  son  to  thee." 

Varuna  heard  the  prayer,  and  granted  a  son.  When  the  boy 
grew  up,  his  father  told  him  of  the  vow  he  had  made  ;  but 
unfortunately  the  son  was  not  willing  to  be  sacrificed,  and 
left  his  home.  Varuna,  not  being  at  all  pleased  at  the  non- 
fulfilment  of  the  king's  vow,  afflicted  him  with  dropsy.  For 
six  years  the  boy  wandered  in  the  forest  ;  at  length,  happening 
to  meet  with  a  poor  Brahman  with  his  three  sons,  the  prince 
proposed  to  purchase  one  of  them  to  offer  to  the  god  as  a 
substitute  for  himself.  The  father  could  not  give  up  his  first- 
born, the  mother  would  not  yield  her  youngest  ;  the  middle  one 
was  therefore  taken.  The  prince  then  returned  home,  taking 
with  him  the  Brahman's  son.  At  first  the  king  was  delighted 
at  the  prospect  of  being  able  to  keep  his  promise  to  the  deity  ; 
but  a  difficulty  now  arose  as  to  who  would  slay  the  boy. 
After  some  time,  on  the  consideration  of  a  large  present  being 
made  to  him,  the  boy's  father  consented  to  do  this.  The 
boy  was  bound,  the  father  ready  to  strike,  when  the  boy  asked 
permission  to  recite  some  texts  in  praise  of  the  gods.  Of  course 
this  was  granted  ;  and  as  a  result  the  deities  thus  lauded 
were  so  pleased  with  the  boy's  piety,  that  they  interceded  with 
Varuna  to  spare  him.  Varuna  granted  their  request,  suffered 
the  boy  to  live,  and  Harischandra  recovered  from  his  sickness. 

In  the  Puranas  Varuna  is  described  as  the  god  of  the  ocean. 
After  a  great  conflict  between  the  powers  of  heaven  and  earth, 
when  order  was  again  restored,  the  '  Vishnu  Purana '  records  the 
position  assigned  to  the  various  deities.  In  that  account  Varuna 
is  said  to  rule  over  the  waters.  In  the  same  Purana  we  read 
that  an  old  Brahman  named  Richikawas  most  anxious  to  obtain 
in  marriage  a  daughter  of  King  Gadhi,  who  was  really  an  incarna- 
tion of  Indra.  Gadhi  refused  to  give  his  daughter  to  Richika  ex- 
cept on  one  condition  :  that  he  would  present  him  with  a  thousand 
fleet  horses,  each  having  one  white  ear.      Horses  of  this  colour 

D  2 


36  The  Vedic  Deities. 


were  special  favourites  of  Indra  ;  all  horses  sacrificed  to  him 
having  this  peculiarity.  The  Brahman  is  said  to  have  propitiated 
Varuna,  the  god  of  the  ocean,  who  gave  him  the  thousand  steeds, 
by  means  of  which  he  was  able  to  obtain  the  princess  in  marriage. 

Varuna  is  represented  in  pictures  as  a  white  man  sitting  upon 
a  fabulous  marine  monster  called  a  makara.  This  animal  has 
the  head  and  legs  of  an  antelope,  and  the  body  and  tail  of  a  fish. 
In  his  right  hand  he  carries  a  noose.  He  is  worshipped  in 
seasons  of  drought,  and  by  fishermen  as  they  cast  their  nets,  but 
nowadays  no  images  of  him  are  made. 

The  following  legend  is  found  in  the  '  Padma  Purana.'  *  On 
one  occasion  Ravana  was  travelling  to  his  home  in  Ceylon, 
carrying  with  him  a  stone  linga,  the  emblem  of  Siva.  He  was 
desirous  of  setting  up  the  worship  of  Siva  there,  and  was  taking 
this  image  from  the  Himalayas  for  that  purpose.  But  the 
gods,  fearing  he  would  grow  too  powerful  through  his  de- 
votion to  Siva,  wished  to  frustrate  his  purpose.  Siva  in  giving 
this  stone  to  Ravana  made  him  promise  that  wherever  it  first 
touched  the  ground,  after  leaving  Siva's  abode,  it  should  there 
remain.  Aware  of  this  fact,  the  gods  tried  to  induce  him  to 
rest  it  upon  the  earth  before  he  reached  Ceylon.  At  last  it 
was  agreed  that  Varuna  should  enter  Ravana's  body,  so  that, 
in  attempting  to  free  himself  from  him,  he  might  be  compelled 
to  loose  his  hold  of  the  linga.  Accordingly  Varuna  entered 
Ravana,  and  caused  him  such  intense  pain  that  he  could 
scarcely  bear  it.  When  he  was  thus  suffering,  Indra,  in  the  form 
of  an  old  Brahman,  passed  by,  and  offered  to  take  hold  of  the 
stone.  No  sooner  did  Ravana  entrust  it  to  him,  than  he  let  it 
fall  to  the  ground.  It  is  said  that  it  sank  through  the  earth, 
the  top  of  it  being  visible  at  Baidyanath  in  Birbhum  to  this  day. 
The  river  Khursu  is  said  to  have  taken  its  rise  from  Varuna 
when  he  left  Ravana  at  this  place  ;  and  as  a  result,  the  Hindus 
will  not  drink  of  its  waters. 

Although  Varuna  is  described  in  the  Vedas  as  a  holy  being, 
according  to  the  teaching  of  the  Puranas,  his  heaven  is  a  place 


*  '  Ward  on  the  Hindoos,'  i.  57. 


Sun  or  Light  Deities — The  Asvins.  37 

of  sensual  delights.  He  sits  with  his  queen  Varum  on  a  throne 
of  diamonds  ;  Samudra  (the  sea),  Ganga  (the  Ganges),  and  the 
gods  and  goddesses  of  different  rivers,  lakes,  springs,  &c,  form 
his  court.  And  stories  are  told  of  conduct  the  very  opposite  of 
what  would  be  expected  in  one  who  once  was  addressed  in  such 
language  as  is  addressed  to  him  in  the  Vedic  hymns.  He  is 
said,  conjointly  with  Surya,  to  have  been  enamoured  of  Urvasi, 
a  nymph  of  Indra's  heaven,  by  whom  they  had  a  son  named 
Agastya,  one  of  the  most  eminent  of  Hindu  ascetics. 

Varuna  is  also  known  as  Prachetas,  the  wise  ;  Jalapati,  the 
lord  of  water  ;  Yadapati,  the  lord  of  aquatic  animals  ;  Amburaja, 
the  king  of  waters  ;  PasI,  the  noose-carrier. 


4.    THE   ASVINS. 

From  the  hymns  addressed  to  these  deities  it  is  not  at  all  easy 
to  know  who  or  what  they  are.  Yaska,  the  commentator  of  the 
Vedas,  deriving  the  name  from  a  root  meaning  "  to  fill,"  says 
they  are  called  Asvins  because  they  pervade  everything,  the  one 
with  light,  the  other  with  moisture.  Another  commentator  says 
they  are  called  Asvins  because  they  ride  upon  horses.  Some 
say  that  by  them  heaven  and  earth  are  indicated  ;  others  that 
they  are  day  and  night ;  others,  again,  that  they  are  the  sun  and 
moon.  Professor  Roth  says,  "They  hold  a  perfectly  distinct 
position  in  the  entire  body  of  the  Vedic  deities  of  light.  They 
are  the  earliest  bringers  of  light  in  the  morning  sky,  who  hasten 
on  in  the  clouds  before  the  Dawn  and  prepare  the  way  for  her." 
In  some  hymns  they  are  said  to  be  sons  of  the  sun  {vide  Surya)  ; 
in  others  are  called  children  of  the  sky  ;  in  others,  again,  as  the 
offspring  of  the  ocean.  They  seem  to  represent  the  transition 
from  night  to  morning, — night  when  it  is  passing  into  day. 

The  Asvins  are  said  to  have  had  Surya,  the  daughter  of 
Savitri,  as  their  common  wife.  She  chose  them,  as  her  life  was 
very  lonely.     Her  father  had  intended  her  to  marry  Soma  ;  but 


* 


Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  235. 


^8  The  Vedic  Deities. 


o 


as  the  gods  were  anxious  to  obtain  so  beautiful  a  bride,  it  was 
agreed  that  they  should  run  a  race,  Surya  being  the  prize  of  the 
winner.  The  Asvins  were  successful,  and  she  ascended  their 
chariot.*  In  another  passage  Soma  is  said  to  have  been  her 
husband  ;  the  Asvins  being  friends  of  the  bridegroom. 

The  Asvins  are  regarded  as  the  physicians  of  the  gods  ;  and 
are  declared  to  be  able  to  restore  to  health  the  blind,  the  sick, 
the  lame,  and  the  emaciated  amongst  mortals.  They  are  the 
special  guardians  of  the  slow  and  backward  ;  the  devoted  friends 
of  elderly  women  who  are  unmarried.  They  are  said  to  preside 
over  love  and  marriage,  and  are  implored  to  bring  together 
hearts  that  love.f 

A  number  of  legends  are  found  illustrating  the  power  of  the 
Asvins  in  healing  the  sick  and  assisting  those  in  trouble,  from 
which  we  learn  that  they  could  restore  youth  and  vigour  to  the 
aged  and  decrepit  ;  they  rescued  a  man  from  drowning,  and 
carried  him  in  safety  to  his  home.  The  leg  of  Vispala  that  was 
cut  off  in  battle,  they  replaced  by  an  iron  one.  At  the  request 
of  a  wolf,  they  restored  sight  to  a  man  who  had  been  blinded 
by  his  father,  as  a  punishment  for  slaughtering  a  hundred  and 
one  sheep,  and  giving  them  to  the  wolf  to  eat.  They  restored 
sight  and  power  to  walk  to  one  who  was  blind  and  lame.  As 
a  result  of  these  and  other  similar  legends,  the  Asvins  are 
invoked  for  "  offspring,  wealth,  victory,  destruction  of  enemies, 
the  preservation  of  the  worshippers  themselves,  of  their  houses 
and  cattle." 

The  following  legend  of  the  cure  they  effected  on  Chyavana, 
from  the  '  Satapatha  Brahmana,'  J  will  illustrate  the  peculiar 
features  of  the  work  of  the  Asvins  : — Chyavana,  having  assumed 
a  shrivelled  form,  was  abandoned  by  his  family.  Saryata  with 
his  tribe  settled  in  the  neighbourhood  ;  when  his  sons  seeing  the 
body  of  Chyavana,  but  not  knowing  that  it  was  a  human  being, 
pelted  it  with  stones.  Chyavana  naturally  resented  this,  and 
sowed  dissension  amongst  the  family  of  Saryata.  Unable  to 
learn  the  cause  of  this,  Saryata  inquired  of  the  shepherds  near 


Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  236.  f  Ibid.  v.  234.  t  Ibid.  v.  250. 


Sun  or  Light  Deities — The  Asvins.  39 

if  they  had  seen  anything  that  could  account  for  it  ;  they  told 
him  that  his  sons  had  insulted  Chyavana.  Saryata  knowing 
that  it  was  the  Rishi  who  had  caused  the  quarrels  amongst 
his  sons,  took  his  daughter  Sukanya  in  his  chariot,  and,  apolo- 
gising for  what  had  been  done,  gave  his  daughter  as  a  peace- 
offering. 

Now  the  Asvins  were  in  the  habit  of  wandering  about 
the  world  performing  cures,  and,  seeing  Sukanya,  they  were 
delighted  with  her  and  wished  to  seduce  her.  They  said,  ft  What 
is  that  shrivelled  body  by  which  you  are  lying  ?  leave  him  and 
follow  us."  She  replied  that  whilst  he  lived  she  would  not 
leave  the  man  to  whom  her  father  had  given  her.  When  they 
came  to  her  a  second  time,  acting  on  her  husband's  suggestion 
she  said,  "  You  speak  contemptuously  of  my  husband,  whilst  you 
are  incomplete  and  imperfect  yourselves,"  and,  only  on  condition 
that  they  make  her  husband  young  again,  will  she  consent  to  tell 
them  in  what  respect  they  are  imperfect  and  incomplete.  Upon 
this  they  tell  her  to  take  her  husband  to  a  certain  pond  ;  after 
bathing  there,  he  came  forth  with  his  youth  renewed.  Sukanya 
tells  the  Asvins  that  they  are  imperfect  because  they  have 
not  been  invited  to  join  the  other  gods  in  a  great  sacrifice  that 
was  to  be  celebrated  at  Kurukshetra.  The  Asvins  proceed  to 
this  sacrifice,  and,  asking  to  be  allowed  to  join  in  it,  are  told 
that  they  cannot  do  so,  because  they  have  wandered  familiarly 
among  men,  performing  cures.  In  reply  to  this,  the  Asvins 
declared  that  the  gods  were  making  a  headless  sacrifice.  The 
gods  inquiring  how  this  can  be,  the  Asvins  reply,  "  Invite  us  to 
join  you,  and  we  will  tell  you."     To  this  the  gods  consented. 

In  another  account  of  this  legend,  it  is  said  that,  as  the  Asvins 
were  physicians,  they  were  consequently  unclean  ;  hence  no 
Brahman  must  be  a  physician,  or  he  is  thereby  unfitted  for  the 
work  of  a  priest ;  but  as  the  work  of  the  Asvins  was  necessary, 
they  were  purified,  and  then  allowed  to  join  with  gods.  They 
then  restored  the  head  of  the  sacrifice. 

Professor  Goldstiicker  *  says,  "  The  myth  of  the  Asvins  is  one 

*  Chambers's  '  Cyclopaedia.' 


40  The  Vedic  Deities. 

of  that  class  of  myths  in  which  two  distinct  elements,  the 
cosmical  and  the  human  or  historical,  have  gradually  become 
blended  into  one.  .  .  .  The  historical  or  human  element  in  it, 
I  believe,  is  represented  by  those  legends  which  refer  to  the 
wonderful  cures  effected  by  the  Asvins,  and  to  their  perform- 
ances of  a  kindred  sort  ;  the  cosmical  element  is  that  relating  to 
their  luminous  nature.  The  link  which  connects  both  seems  to 
be  the  mysteriousness  of  the  nature  and  effects  of  light  and  of 
the  healing  art  at  a  remote  antiquity.  It  would  appear  that 
these  Asvins,  like  the  Ribhus,  were  originally  renowned  mortals, 
who,  in  the  course  of  time,  were  translated  into  the  companion  - 
ship  of  the  gods." 

5.   USHAS. 

This  goddess,  representative  of  the  Dawn,  is  a  favourite  object 
of  celebration  with  the  Vedic  poets,  and  "  the  hymns  addressed 
to  her  are  among  the  most  beautiful — if  not  the  most  beautiful — 
in  the  entire  collection."  *  She  is  described  as  the  daughter  of 
the  Sky,  has  Night  for  her  sister,  and  is  related  to  Varuna.  She 
is  at  times  spoken  of  as  the  wife  of  the  Sun  ;  at  other  times 
Agni  is  given  as  her  lover  ;  the  Asvins  are  her  friends.  Indra  is 
at  one  time  regarded  as  her  creator ;  at  another  time  he  assumes 
a  hostile  position,  and  even  crushed  her  chariot  with  his 
thunderbolt. 

Ushas  is  said  |  to  travel  in  a  shining  chariot  drawn  by  ruddy 
horses  or  cows.  Like  a  beautiful  maiden  dressed  by  her  mother, 
a  dancing  girl  covered  with  jewels,  a  gaily-attired  wife  appearing 
before  her  husband,  or  a  beautiful  girl  coming  from  her  bath, 
she,  smiling  and  confiding  in  the  irresistible  power  of  her  at- 
tractions, unfolds  her  bosom  to  the  gaze  of  the  beholders.  She 
dispels  the  darkness,  disclosing  the  treasures  it  concealed.  She 
illuminates  the  world,  revealing  its  most  distant  extremities. 
She  is  the  life  and  health  of  all  things,  causing  the  birds  to  fly 
from  their  nests,  and,  like  a  young  housewife,  awaking  all  her 


*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  181.  t  Ibid.  v.  194. 


Sun  or  Light  Deities  — Ushas.  41 

creatures,  sends  them  forth  to  the  pursuit  of  their  varied  occupa- 
tions. She  does  good  service  to  the  gods,  by  causing  the  wor- 
shippers to  awake,  and  the  sacrificial  fires  to  be  lighted.  She  is 
asked  to  arouse  only  the  devout  and  liberal,  while  she  allows 
the  niggardly  to  sleep  on.  She  is  young,  being  born  every  day  ; 
and  yet  she  is  old,  being  immortal,  wearing  out  the  lives  of  suc- 
cessive generations,  which  disappear  one  after  another,  whilst  she 
continues  undying.  The  souls  of  the  departed  are  said  to  go  to 
her  and  to  the  sun. 

In  the  following  lines  *  will  be  found  the  main  teaching  of  the 
Vedas  respecting  this  goddess  : — 

"  Hail,  ruddy  Ushas,  golden  goddess,  borne 
Upon  thy  shining  car,  thou  comest  like 
A  lovely  maiden  by  her  mother  decked, 
Disclosing  coyly  all  thy  hidden  grace 
To  our  admiring  eyes  ;  or  like  a  wife 
Unveiling  to  her  lord,  with  conscious  pride, 
Beauties  which,  as  he  gazes  lovingly, 
Seem  fresher,  fairer  each  succeeding  morn. 
Through  years  and  years  thou  hast  lived  on,  and  yet 
Thou'rt  ever  young.     Thou  art  the  breath  and  life 
Of  all  that  breathes  and  lives,  awaking  day  by  day 
Myriads  of  prostrate  sleepers,  as  from  death, 
Causing  the  birds  to  flutter  in  their  nests, 
And  rousing  men  to  ply  with  busy  feet 
Their  daily  duties  and  appointed  tasks, 
Toiling  for  wealth,  or  pleasure,  or  renown." 

In  the  following  verses  by  Dr.  Muir  |  we  have  a  still  more  vivid 
picture  of  this  goddess  as  represented  in  the  Vedic  hymns  : — 

"  Hail,  Ushas,  daughter  of  the  sky, 
Who,  borne  upon  thy  shining  car 
By  ruddy  steeds  from  realms  afar, 
And  ever  lightening  drawest  nigh  ; — 

"  Thou  sweetly  smilest,  goddess  fair, 
Disclosing  all  thy  youthful  grace, 
Thy  bosom  bright,  thy  radiant  face, 
And  lustre  of  thy  golden  hair  ; — 

*  '  Indian  Wisdom,'  p.  20.  t  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  196. 


4-  The  Vedic  Deities. 

"  She  shines  a  fond  and  winning  bride, 
Who  robes  her  form  in  brilliant  guise, 
And  to  her  lord's  admiring  eyes 
Displays  her  charms  with  conscious  pride  ; — 

"  Or  virgin  by  her  mother  decked, 

Who,  glorying  in  her  beauty,  shows 
In  every  glance  her  power  she  knows 
All  eyes  to  fix,  all  hearts  subject  ; 

"  Or  actress,  who  by  skill  in  song 

And  dance,  and  graceful  gestures  light, 
And  many-coloured  vestures  bright, 
Enchants  the  eager,  gazing  throng  ; 

"  Or  maid  who,  wont  her  limbs  to  lave 

In  some  cold  stream  among  the  woods, 
Where  never  vulgar  eye  intrudes, 
Emerges  fairer  from  the  wave  ; — 

"  But  closely  by  the  amorous  Sun, 

Pursued  and  vanquished  in  the  race, 
Thou  soon  art  locked  in  his  embrace, 
And  with  him  blendest  into  one. 

"  Fair  Ushas,  though  through  years  untold 
Thou  hast  lived  on,  yet  thou  art  born 
Anew  on  each  succeeding  morn, 
And  so  thou  art  both  young  and  old. 

"  As  in  thy  fated  ceaseless  course 
Thou  risest  on  us  day  by  day, 
Thou  wearest  all  our  lives  away 
With  silent,  ever-wasting  force. 

"  Their  round  our  generations  run  : 
The  old  depart,  and  in  their  place 
Springs  even  up  a  younger  race, 
Whilst  thou,  immortal,  lookest  on. 

"  All  those  who  watched  for  thee  of  old 
Are  gone,  and  now  'tis  we  who  gaze 
On  thy  approach  ;  in  future  days 
Shall  other  men  thy  beams  behold. 


Sun  or  Light  Deities — Ushas.  4 


-> 


"  But  'tis  not  thoughts  so  grave  and  sad 
Alone  that  thou  dost  with  thee  bring, 
A  shadow  o'er  our  hearts  to  fling  ; — ■ 
Thy  beams  returning  make  us  glad. 

"  Thy  sister,  sad  and  sombre  Night, 
With  stars  that  in  the  blue  expanse, 
Like  sleepless  eyes,  mysterious  glance, 
At  thy  approach  is  quenched  in  light  ; — 

"  And  earthly  forms,  till  now  concealed 
Behind  her  veil  of  dusky  hue, 
Once  more  come  sharply  out  to  view, 
By  thine  illuming  glow  revealed. 

"  Thou  art  the  life  of  all  that  lives, 

The  breath  of  all  that  breathes  ;  the  sight 
Of  thee  makes  every  countenance  bright, 
New  strength  to  every  spirit  gives. 

"  When  thou  dost  pierce  the  murky  gloom, 
Birds  flutter  forth  from  every  brake, 
All  sleepers  as  from  death  awake, 
And  men  their  myriad  tasks  resume. 

"  Some,  prosperous,  wake  in  listless  mood, 
And  others  every  nerve  to  strain 
The  goal  of  power  or  wealth  to  gain, 
Or  what  they  deem  the  highest  good. 

"  But  some  to  holier  thoughts  aspire, 
In  hymns  the  race  celestial  praise, 
And  light,  on  human  hearths  to  blaze, 
The  heaven-born  sacrificial  fire. 

"  And  not  alone  do  bard  and  priest 

Awake  ; — the  gods  thy  power  confess 
By  starting  into  consciousness 
When  thy  first  rays  suffuse  the  east ; 

"  And  hasting  downward  from  the  sky, 
They  visit  men  devout  and  good, 
Consume  their  consecrated  food, 
And  all  their  longings  satisfy. 


44 


The  Vedic  Deities. 


"  Bright  goddess,  let  thy  genial  rays 
To  us  bring  store  of  envied  wealth 
In  kine  and  steeds,  and  sons  with  health, 
And  joy  of  heart,  and  length  of  days." 

In  the  later  writings  we  find  merely  the  name  of  Ushas.  The 
people  lost  much  of  their  poetic  fire  ;  hence  the  more  human 
and  practical  deities  caused  the  more  poetical  ones  to  pass  into 
oblivion.  Some  of  the  figures  in  the  preceding  extracts  are  most 
beautifully  drawn.  The  changing  colours  of  the  dawn  are  com- 
pared to  the  many-coloured  robes  of  the  dancing-girl ;  the  golden 
tipped  clouds  that  appear  ere  the  sun  shines  in  his  strength,  are 
like  the  jewels  of  a  bride  decked  for  her  husband  ;  whilst  the 
quiet  modesty  of  the  dawn  herself  is  like  a  shy  maiden,  conscious 
indeed  of  her  beauty,  entering  society  under  the  protection  of 
her  mother.  And  from  the  last  four  lines  of  the  metrical  sketch 
it  will  be  noticed,  that  she  was  believed  to  be  able  to  bestow 
upon  her  worshippers  cattle,  horses,  sons,  health,  joy,  and  length 
of  days. 


(     45     ) 


CHAPTER  VII. 

THE  STORM  DEITIES. 


I.    INDRA. 

As  was  noticed  previously,  Indra,  together  with  Agni  and  Surya, 
by  means  of  sacrifice  obtained  supremacy  over  the  other  gods  ; 
and  if  we  may  judge  from  the 
number   of   hymns    addressed 
to  him  in  the  Vedas,  he  was 
the  most  popular  deity. 

He  is  the  god  of  the  firma- 
ment, in  whose  hands  are  the 
thunder  and  the  lightning ;  at 
whose  command  the  refreshing 
showers  fall  to  render  the  earth 
fruitful.  When  it  is  borne  in 
mind  that  in  India  for  months 
together  the  earth  is  exposed 
to  the  scorching  rays  of  the 
sun,  sometimes  without  a  single 
shower,  so  that  it  is  impossible 
for  the  fields  to  be  ploughed  or 
the  seed  to  be  sown,  it  will  not 
be  regarded  as  wonderful,  that 
the  god  who  is  supposed  to 
bestow  rain  should  frequently 

be  appealed  to,  and  that  the  most  laudatory  songs  should  be 
addressed  to  him.     To  the  poetic  minds  of  that  age,  the  clouds 


INDRA. 


46  The  Vedic  Deities. 

that  the  winds  brought  up  from  the  ocean  were  enemies  who 
held  their  treasures  in  their  fast  embrace  until,  conquered  by 
Indra,  they  were  forced  to  pour  them  upon  the  parched  soil. 
And  very  naturally  when,  in  answer  to  the  cry  of  his  worshippers, 
the  genial  rains  descended,  and  the  earth  was  thereby  changed 
from  a  wilderness  to  a  garden,  songs  of  thanksgiving  and  praise, 
couched  in  the  strongest  terms,  were  addressed  to  him.  The 
attributes  ascribed  to  him  refer  principally  to  his  physical  supe- 
riority ;  and  the  blessings  sought  from  him  are  chiefly  of  a 
temporal  rather  than  a  spiritual  character. 

Indra  is  not  regarded  as  an  uncreated  deity.  In  some  hymns 
he  is  spoken  of  as  the  twin-brother  of  Agni,  and  therefore  the 
son  of  Heaven  and  Earth  ;  whilst,  in  other  hymns,  heaven  and 
earth  are  said  to  have  been  formed  by  him.  Although  his 
parents  are  often  referred  to,  it  is  but  seldom  that  they  are 
named  ;  and  when  they  are  named,  it  is  not  always  that  the 
same  parentage  is  given.  He  is  the  king  of  the  gods  ;  and  in 
post-Vedic  ages,  it  is  taught  that  his  reign  extends  for  a  hundred 
divine  years  only  ;  at  the  end  of  which  time  he  may  be  super- 
seded as  king  by  some  other  of  the  gods,  or  even  by  man,  if  any 
be  able  to  perform  the  severe  penance  necessary  to  obtain  this 
exacted  position. 

In  pictures,  Indra  is  represented  as  a  man  with  four  arms  and 
hands  ;'•  in  two  he  holds  a  lance,  in  the  third  a  thunderbolt, 
whilst  the  fourth  is  empty.  He  is  often  painted  with  two  arms 
only, ,  and,  having  eyes  all  over  his  body,  is  then  called  Sahas- 
raksha  (the  thousand-eyed).  He  is  generally  depicted  as  riding 
upon  the  wonderful  elephant  Airavata,  who  was  produced  at  the 
churning  of  the  ocean,*  carrying  a  thunderbolt  in  his  right  hand 
and  a  bow  in  his  left.  In  the  Vedic  Age  his  worship  was  far 
more  popular  than  it  is  at  present.  He  is  no  longer  the  prin- 
cipal deity,  but  chief  of  the  inferior  gods  only. 

The  position  and  attributes  of  Indra  as  taught  by  the  Vedas 
will  be  seen  from  the  following  description,  abbreviated  from 
that  given  by  Dr.  Muir  :  f — 


*     Q 


See  Part  II.  chap.  iv.  p.  109.  f  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  126. 


The  Storm  Deities — Indra.  47 

"  Come,  Indra,  come,  thou  much  invoked, 
Our  potent  hymn  thy  steeds  has  yoked. 
Friend  Indra,  from  the  sky  descend, 
Thy  course  propitious  hither  bend. 
But  Indra,  though  of  us  thou  thinkest, 
And  our  libations  gladly  drinkest, 
We,  mortal  men,  can  only  share 
A  humble  portion  of  thy  care. 
We  know  how  many  potent  ties 
Enchain  thee  in  thy  paradise. 
Thou  hast  at  home  a  lovely  wife, 
The  charm  and  solace  of  thy  lite. 
Thou  hast  a  ceaseless  round  of  joys 
Which  all  thy  circling  hours  employs  ; 
Joys  such  as  gods  immortal  know, 
Unguessed  by  mortals  here  below." 

Being  invoked  by  mortals,  Indra  is  born.     The  Sky  and  the 
Earth  trembled  at  his  appearance,  and  the  Sky  exclaimed  : — 

"  Thy  father  was  a  stalwart  wight  ; 
Of  most  consummate  skill  was  he, 
The  god  whose  genius  fashioned  thee." 

Immediately    after    his    birth    the    god     gave     unmistakable 
evidence  of  his  divinity.     Grasping  his  weapons,  he  cried, — 

"  Where,  mother,  dwell  those  warriors  fierce, 
Whose  haughty  hearts  these  bolts  must  pierce  ? " 

Borne  in  his  chariot,  hastened  by  the  prayers   of  his  people, 
the  god  appears. 

"  Yet  not  one  form  alone  he  bears, 
But  various  shapes  of  glory  wears, 
His  aspect  changing  at  his  will, 
Transmuted,  yet  resplendent  still. 
In  warlike  semblance  see  him  stand, 
Red  lightnings  wielding  in  his  hand." 

Ready  prepared  for  him  is  a  feast,  the  principal  attraction  of 
which  is  the  Soma  juice.*     Indra  was  particularly  fond  of  this 

*  See  chap.  viii. 


48  The  Vedic  Deities. 

intoxicating  drink.  It  is  a  most  strange  circumstance  that, 
whilst  the  Hindus  of  the  present  day  are  prohibited  from  the 
use  of  intoxicants,  Indra  is  described  as  being  addicted  to  the 
Soma  ;  whilst  the  drink  itself  is  deified  and  worshipped  as  a  god. 
Indra  on  his  arrival  is  invited  to  quaff  the  invigorating  cup  :  — 

"  Thou,  Indra,  oft  of  old  hast  quaffed 
With  keen  delight  our  Soma  draught. 
All  gods  the  luscious  Soma  love, 
But  thou  all  other  gods  above. 
Thy  mother  knew  how  well  this  juice 
Was  fitted  for  her  infant's  use. 
Into  a  cup  she  crushed  the  sap, 
Which  thou  didst  sip  upon  her  lap. 
Yes,  Indra,  on  thy  natal  morn, 
The  very  hour  that  thou  wast  born, 
Thou  didst  those  jovial  tastes  display, 
Which  still  survive  in  strength  to-day." 

Indra,  after  singing  the  praises  of  the  Soma  juice,  drinks  the 
proffered  cup,  and  as  a  result  is  most  graciously  disposed  to- 
wards the  worshippers,  ready  to  give  whatever  they  ask.  When 
thus  strengthened  by  the  draught,  he  goes  forth  to  meet  the 
great  enemy  he  came  to  conquer.  This  enemy  is  Vrittra 
(Drought).  And  in  the  conflict  and  victory  are  seen  the  peculiar 
blessings  to  the  earth  and  man  that  Indra  is  able  to  grant. 
Vrittra  is  thus  described  : — 

"  He  whose  magic  powers 
From  earth,  withhold  the  genial  showers  ; 
Of  mortal  men  the  foe  malign, 
And  rival  of  the  race  divine  ; 
Whose  demon  hosts  from  age  to  age 
With  Indra  war  unceasing  wage  ; 
Who,  times  unnumbered  crushed  and  slain, 
Is  ever  newly  born  again, 
And  evermore  renews  the  strife 
In  which  again  he  forfeits  life." 

The  battle  is  described  at  length  ;  in  which  we  have  a  graphic 
description  of  the  commencement  of  the  rainy  season,  with  the 
severe  thunderstorms  which  usually  accompany  this  change  of 
the  seasons.     At  last  the  conflict  is  over : 


The  Storm  Deities — Indra.  49 


"  And  soon  the  knell  of  Vrittra's  doom 
Was  sounded  by  the  clang  and  boom 

Of  Indra's  iron  shower. 
Pierced,  cloven,  crushed,  with  horrid  yell, 
The  dying  demon  headlong  fell 
Down  from  his  cloud-built  tower." 

As  a  result  of  this  victory  of  the  god,  the  rains  descend,  and 
the  earth  is  made  fruitful : — 

"  Now  bound  by  Sushna's  spell  no  more, 
The  clouds  discharge  their  liquid  store  ; 
And  long  by  torrid  sunbeams  baked 
The  plains  by  copious  showers  are  slaked  ; 
The  rivers  swell,  and  seawards  sweep 
Their  turbid  torrents  broad  and  deep. 
The  peasant  views  with  deep  delight, 
And  thankful  heart,  the  auspicious  sight. 
His  leafless  fields,  so  sere  and  sad, 
Will  soon  with  waving  crops  be  clad  ; 
And  mother  Earth,  now  brown  and  bare, 
A  robe  of  brilliant  green  will  wear." 

After  this  blessing  has  been  received,  the  sun  shines,  and  earth 
again  is  bright ;  the  gods  come  with  their  congratulations  to  their 
king,  and  men  present  their  thanksgivings. 

Such  was  Indra  in  ancient  times  ;  and  though  worshipped  still, 
he  occupies  a  very  inferior  position  in  the  present  age.  As 
mentioned  previously,  according  to  the  teaching  of  the  later 
books,  his  rule  over  the  gods  continues  for  a  hundred  divine  * 
years  ;  at  the  expiration  of  which  time  he  may  be  superseded  by 
another  god,  or  even  by  a  man.  The  Puranas  teach  that,  in 
each  age  of  the  world,  a  different  being  has  enjoyed  this  position. 
In  the  '  Vishnu  Purana  'f  is  the  following  story  of  a  man  raising 
himself  to  the  throne  of  Indra. 

There  was  a  war  between  the  gods  and  demons ;  both  parties 
inquired  of  Brahma,  which  would  be  victorious.  Brahma  replied, 
"That  side  for  which  Raji  (an  earthly  king)  shall  take  up  arms." 

*  See  Part  II.  chap.  x.  f  Book  IV.  chap.  ix. 

E 


50  The  Vedic  Deities. 

The  demons  first  called  upon  Raji  to  invoke  his  aid.  He 
promised  to  assist  them,  provided  they  would  make  him  their 
Indra.  They  replied  that  they  could  not  promise  this,  as  Prah- 
lada  was  Indra  already.  The  same  condition  was  proposed  to 
the  gods,  to  which  they  consented,  and  Raji  became  their  Indra. 
He  then  fought  for  them,  and  conquered.  Upon  this,  Indra 
bowed  down  before  him,  and,  placing  Raji's  foot  upon  his  head, 
said,  "  Thou  hast  preserved  me  from  a  great  danger.  I  acknow- 
ledge thee  as  my  father :  thou  art  king  over  all ;  I  am  thy  son." 
Raji,  however,  was  contented  to  remain  as  king  on  earth,  and 
appointed  Indra  to  continue  as  his  representative  on  the  throne 
of  heaven.  On  the  death  of  Raji,  his  sons  wished  to  become 
kings  of  heaven.  This  Indra  opposed,  but  was  compelled  to 
yield.  After  a  time,  being  sad  because  deprived  of  his  share  in 
the  sacrifices  of  mortals,  Indra  met  with  his  spiritual  preceptor 
Vrihaspati,  and  asked  him  for  a  morsel  of  the  sacrificial  butter. 
The  teacher  replied  that,  had  Indra  applied  to  him  earlier,  he 
would  not  have  been  reduced  to  such  straits  ;  but  "  as  it  is,"  he 
said,  "  I  will  regain  your  sovereignty  in  a  few  days."  Upon  this 
he  commenced  a  sacrifice,  with  the  special  purpose  of  obtaining 
power  for  Indra.  The  result  of  this  was,  that  Raji's  sons  were 
led  into  sin  ;  they  became  enemies  of  the  Brahmans,  despised 
the  Vedas,  and  neglected  their  religious  duties.  When  thus 
weakened,  Indra  fell  upon  and  slew  them. 

The  most  effectual  way  by  which  a  mortal  could  obtain  the 
position  of  Indra  was  by  the  sacrifice  of  a  hundred  horses  ;  and 
as  will  be  seen  in  the  account  of  Ganga,  Indra  did  not  object  to 
play  the  part  of  a  thief,  so  as  to  prevent  the  completion  of  the 
sacrifice  by  which  he  was  to  be  deprived  of  his  sovereignty. 
The  most  common  and  generally  successful  method  by  which 
these  ambitious  mortals  were  frustrated  in  their  design,  was  by 
his  sending  down  some  celestial  nymphs,  called  Apsaras,  who 
'  by  their  beauty  distracted  the  thoughts  of  the  devotees,  and  so 
rendered  them  unfit  to  offer  this  great  sacrifice. 

In  the  'Vishnu  Purana,'*  there  is  a  legend  of  a  great  conflict 

"  Book  V.  chap.  xxx. 


The  Storm  Deities — Indra.  51 

between  Indra  and  Krishna,  in  which  Indra  is  overcome. 
Krishna,  accompanied  by  his  wife  Satyabhama,  visits  Indra  in 
his  heaven.  On  her  arrival  there,  this  lady  was  most  anxious  to 
obtain  possession  of  the  Parijata  tree,  which  was  produced  at  the 
churning  of  the  ocean,  and  planted  in  Indra's  heavenly  garden. 
This  tree  was  beautiful  in  form,  was  adorned  with  lovely  and 
sweet-scented  flowers,  and  bore  most  luscious  fruit.  The 
flowers  had  this  virtue,  that,  worn  in  the  hair  by  a  wife,  they 
enabled  her  to  retain  the  love  of  her  husband  ;  whilst  those  who 
ate  the  fruit  of  this  tree  could  remember  what  had  occurred  in 
their  previous  states  of  existence.  At  the  request  of  his  wife, 
Krishna  took  the  tree,  and  placed  it  upon  Garuda,  his  wonderful 
bird-vehicle.  Immediately  there  was  an  uproar  in  heaven  ; 
but  though  Indra  and  his  attendant  deities  tried  to  prevent  the 
removal  of  this  tree,  they  could  not  do  so.  Krishna  caught  the 
thunderbolt  of  Indra  in  his  hand,  and,  returning  home  unhurt, 
planted  the  tree  in  his  garden. 

The  Ramayana  has  a  story  showing  that  Indra  was  believed 
to  have  been  guilty  of  the  grossest  immorality — the  seduction  of 
the  wife  of  his  spiritual  teacher.     He  is  said  to  have  visited  the 
house  of  Gautama  during  his   absence,  in  the  form  of  a  sage, 
hoping  to  be  mistaken,  by  the  preceptor's  wife,  for  her  husband. 
But  although  Ahalya  knew  him  to  be  Indra,  she  yielded  to  his 
wishes.     As  Indra  was  about  to  leave  the  house,  Gautama  re- 
turned, and,  knowing  what  had  happened,  cursed  the  god  and 
also  his  wife.     Indra    in    consequence   lost  his    manhood  ;  and 
Ahalya  was  doomed  to  live  for  many  years  invisible  in  a  forest, 
until  Rama  should  meet  her  there  and  restore  her  to  her  former 
state.*     Another  account  of  this  curse  of  Gautama  was,  that 
Indra    was    compelled    to    carry    about    with    him    a    thousand 
disgraceful  marks  upon  his  body,  that  all  seeing  might  know  the 
great    sin   of  which    he   had    been   guilty.     At    Indra's   earnest 


One  result  of  this  sin  of  Indra  was  the  fact  that  a  son  of  Ravana,  who 
ruled  in  Ceylon,  was  able  to  carry  him  off  as  a  captive,  when  that  king  made 
war  upon  the  gods  ;  and  it  was  not  until  Brahma  promised  immortality  to 
this  warrior,  that  he  consented  to  release  Indra.  Brahma  gave  this  prince 
the  name  of  Indrajita  (conqueror  of  Indra). 


E    2 


52  The  Vedic  Deities. 

request  these  were  changed  from  their  original  form  into  eyes  ; 
which  by  the  ignorant  were  regarded  as  an  indication  of  his 
omniscience. 

The  heaven  of  Indra  must  not  be  passed  over  without  notice, 
as  it  is  there  that  the  good  on  earth  hope  to  go  for  a  time,  as  a 
reward  of  their  holy  lives.  To  go  to  Svvarga,  as  his  heaven  is 
named,  is  not  the  highest  happiness  a  man  can  obtain,  because 
he  cannot  remain  there  for  ever.  When  his  allotted  years  of 
happiness  there  are  over,  he  must  return  to  earth  and  live  other 
lives,  until  he  becomes  perfect  and  fit  to  enjoy  the  highest  felicity — 
absorption  into  the  Divine  Being.  The  '  Vishnu  Purana '  *  says  : 
"  Not  in  hell  alone  do  the  souls  of  the  deceased  undergo  pain  : 
there  is  no  cessation  even  in  heaven  ;  for  its  temporary  inhabitant 
is  ever  tormented  with  the  prospect  of  descending  again  to  earth. 
Again  must  he  be  born  upon  earth,  and  again  must  he  die. 
Whatever  is  produced  that  is  most  acceptable  to  man  becomes 
a  seed  whence  springs  the  tree  of  sorrow." 

The  home  of  Indra  is  situated  on  Mount  Meru.f  It  has 
beautiful  houses  for  its  inhabitants  to  inhabit ;  and  the  splendour 
of  its  capital  is  unequalled  in  the  universe.  Its  gardens  are 
stocked  with  trees  that  afford  a  grateful  shade,  yield  the  most 
luscious  fruits,  and  are  adorned  with  beautiful  and  fragrant 
flowers.  Most  beautiful  nymphs  (Apsaras)  charm  the  happy 
inhabitants,  whilst  choristers  and  musicians,  unrivalled  in  the 
universe,  discourse  sweet  music.  The  city  was  built  by  Visva- 
karma.  It  is  eight  hundred  miles  in  circumference,  and  forty 
miles  high.  Its  pillars  are  diamonds  ;  its  palaces,  thrones,  and 
furniture,  pure  gold. J 

In  Bengal  this  deity  is  worshipped  one  day  in  each  year.     His 

*  Book  VI.  chap.  v. 

f  Meru  is  a  fabulous  mountain,  supposed  to  be  the  centre  of  the  earth.  It 
is  believed  to  be  somewhere  to  the  north  of  the  Himalayas.  The  heavens  of 
the  other  gods  are  situated  somewhere  in  its  vicinity.  From  the  fact  that 
they  regarded  heaven  to  be  near  their  former  home,  it  would  seem  that  the 
I  ndo- Aryans  retained  pleasant  recollections  of  the  place  whence  they 
migrated  ;  or  perhaps  the  inaccessibility  of  these  mountains  was  a  reason 
for  heaven  being  placed  on  their  summits. 

t  '  Mahabharata,'  quoted  by  Ward,  ii.  36. 


The  Storm  Deities — Indrani.  53 

image  is  made  of  mud,  prettily  painted  ;  on  the  day  after  it  has 
been  worshipped  it  is  cast  into  the  river.  At  the  commencement 
of  a  sacrifice,  too,  he  is  invoked,  in  the  hope  that  he  will  convey 
the  prayers  and  offerings  to  the  deity  specially  worshipped  at 
that  time,  or  that  he  will  conduct  the  deity  into  the  presence  of 
the  worshippers.  In  seasons  of  drought  special  offerings  are 
made  to  him  in  some  parts  of  the  country,  that  through  his 
power  the  clouds  may  pour  their  streams  upon  the  parched 
country. 

The  more  common  of  Indra's  other  names  are  the  following : 
— Sakra,  the  able  one ;  Divapati,  the  lord  of  the  gods  ;  Bajrl,  he 
who  wields  the  thunderbolt ;  Vritraha,  the  destroyer  of  Vritra  ; 
Meghavahana,  he  who  rides  on  the  clouds  ;  Mahendra  ;  Swarga- 
pati,  the  lord  of  heaven. 

2.    INDRANI. 

Of  Indrani,  the  wife  of  Indra  (called  also  Sachi),  very  little  is 
said.  In  the  Rig- Veda  *  we  read,  "Among  all  females  Indrani  is 
the  most  fortunate  ;  for  her  husband  shall  not  at  any  future  time 
die  of  old  age."  This  may  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  Indrani 
is  wife  to  all  who  may  successively  attain  to  the  throne  of  Indra. 
There  is  always  some  one  ruling  in  heaven  ;  the  office  is  perpetual, 
and  as  she  is  the  wife  of  the  reignin  king,  whoever  he  may  be, 
her  husband  can  never  die  of  old  age.  Though  kings  may  come 
and  go,  she  continues  queen.  She  is  said  to  have  a  son,  Chitra- 
gupta  by  name,  who  was  born  of  a  cow  ;  for,  owing  to  a  curse 
pronounced  by  Uma,  none  of  the  goddesses  could  become  a 
mother.  She  practised  austerities,  in  order  that  she  might  not 
be  childless  ;  and  by  means  of  this  expedient  her  desire  was 
gratified.  At  the  birth  of  this  child,  the  reputed  mother  suffered 
all  the  pains  attendant  on  childbirth,  and  was  able  to  nurse  the 
child  when  born. 


Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  82. 


54  The  Vedic  Deities. 


3.    PAR  J  ANY  A. 

There  are  a  few  hymns  addressed  to  this  deity  in  the  Rig- Veda  ; 
but  from  the  character  and  functions  ascribed  to  him,  it  is 
difficult  to  see  wherein  he  differs  from  Indra.  Professor  Roth  * 
says,  "Taking  a  review  of  the  whole,  we  find  that  Parjanya  is  a 
god  who  presides  over  the  lightning,  the  thunder,  the  rain,  and 
the  procreation  of  plants  and  living  creatures.  But  it  is  by 
no  means  clear  whether  he  is  originally  a  god  of  the  rain,  or 
a  god  of  the  thunder."  In  another  essay  he  says,  Parjanya 
is  "  the  god  of  the  thunderstorms  and  rain,  the  generator  and 
nourisher  of  plants  and  living  creatures.  Seeing  that  the  hymns 
addressed  to  this  deity  are  so  very  similar  to  those  sung  to 
Indra,  may  not  Parjanya  (whose  name  signifies  one  acting  for 
4  another ')  be  merely  another  name  for  Indra  ? "  In  these 
hymns  are  the  following  passages,!  all  of  which  are  in  perfect 
harmony  with  those  in  honour  of  Indra: — "Laud  Parjanya, 
worship  him  with  reverence  ; — the  procreative  and  stimulating 
fructifler.  .  .  .  He  splits  the  trees  ;  he  destroys  the  Rakshasas 
(cloud  demons  who  withhold  the  rains  ?).  The  whole  creation  is 
afraid  of  his  mighty  stroke  ;  even  the  innocent  man  flees  before 
the  vigorous  god,  when  Parjanya  thundering  smites  the  evil- 
doers. Like  a  charioteer  urging  forward  his  horses  with  a  whip, 
the  god  brings  into  view  his  showery  scouts.  From  afar,  the 
lions'  roarings  arise  when  Parjanya  charges  the  clouds  with  rain. 
The  winds  blow,  the  lightnings  fall,  the  plants  shoot  up,  the 
heaven  fructifies  ;  food  is  produced  for  all  created  things  when 
Parjanya,  thundering,  replenishes  the  earth  with  moisture. 
Raise  aloft  thy  vast  water-vessel,  and  pour  down  showers  ;  let 
the  discharged  rivulets  roll  on  forward,  moisten  the  heaven  and 
earth  with  fatness  ;  let  there  be  well-filled  drinking-places  for 
the  cows." 

In  all  this  there  is  not  a  single  idea  that  was  not  expressed  in 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  142.  f  Ibid.  v.  140. 


The  Storm  Deities — Vayu. 


55 


the  hymns  to  Indra  noticed  previously.  In  the  Puranas  Indra  is 
generally  styled  the  king  of  the  gods  ;  whilst  Parjanyais  spoken 
of  as  the  ruler  over,  and  as  dwelling  in,  the  clouds. 


4.  VAYU. 

Another  of  the  storm-gods  is  Vayu,  the  god  of  the  winds. 
He  is  often  associated  with  Indra,  and  is  regarded,  equally 
with  him,  as  representing  or  ruling  over  the  atmosphere.  He 
won  the  race  for  the  first  draught  of  the  Soma  juice  ;  and,  at 
Indra's  request,  allowed  him  to  have  a  quarter  of  it.  He  does  not 
occupy  a  very  prominent  position  in  the  Vedic  hymns.  In  one 
passage*  we  read,  "The  two  worlds  (heaven  and  earth)  gene- 
rated him  for  wealth."  This  may  be  intended  to  teach  his 
parentage ;  and  Dr.  Muir  says 
that  he  is  not  aware  of  any  other 
passage  where  his  parentage  is 
declared.  He  is  said  to  be  the 
son-in-law  of  Tvastri ;  but  here 
a  difficulty  occurs :  only  one 
daughter  of  Tvastri  (Visva- 
karma)  is  mentioned,  and  as  was 
noticed  in  the  account  of  Surya, 
he  was  said  to  be  husband  of 
this  girl. 

Vayu  is  described  f  as  being 
most  handsome  in  form  ;  one  who 
moves  noisily  in  a  shining  car, 
drawn  by  a  pair  of  red  or  purple 
horses.  At  times  the  number  of  horses  is  increased  to  ninety- 
nine,  a  hundred,  or  even  a  thousand.  This  latter  number 
would  probably  be  employed  during  a  cyclone.  He  is  seldom 
mentioned  in  connexion  with  Maruts  (storm-deities),  though  in 


VAYU. 


Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  140. 


f  Ibid.  v.  143. 


e 6  The  Vedic  Deities. 


one  place  he  is  said  to  have  begotten  them  by  the  rivers  of 
heaven. 

Another  name  for  Vayu  in  the  Vedas  is  Vata.  The  praise 
of  Vata  is  sung-  in  the  following  hymn  :  * — "  (I  celebrate)  the 
glory  of  Vata's  chariot ;  his  noise  comes  rending  and  resounding. 
Touching  the  sky,  he  moves  onward,  making  all  things  ruddy  ; 
and  he  comes  propelling  the  dust  of  the  earth.  The  gusts  of 
air  rush  after  him,  and  congregate  upon  him  as  women  in  an 
assembly.  Sitting  along  with  them  on  the  same  car,  the  god 
[Indra]  who  is  king  of  this  universe  is  borne  along.  Hasting 
forward,  ...  he  never  rests.  Friend  of  the  waters,  first-born, 
holy,  in  what  place  was  he  born  ?  His  sounds  have  been  heard, 
but  his  form  is  not  (seen)." 

In  a  later  age,  when  it  was  thought  necessary  to  connect  the 
heroes,  whose  exploits  are  sung,  with  the  gods,  Vayu,  or  Pavan 
as  he  is  then  called,  is  said  to  have  had  a  son  Hanuman,  by  a 
monkey  mother.  Hanuman  played  a  most  conspicuous  part  in 
Rama's  expedition  in  search  of  Sita.  In  the  Mahabharata,  Bhima 
(the  Strong),  one  of  the  bravest  of  the  warriors  whose  history  is 
given  there,  is  also  said  to  be  a  son  of  Vayu.  Kunti,  the  mother 
of  Bhima,  had  a  boon  granted  as  a  reward  of  her  devotion,  that 
she  could  obtain  a  child  by  any  of  the  gods  she  might  wish. 
As  her  husband,  owing  to  a  curse,  could  not  become  a  father, 
she  employed  this  charm,  and  so  Vayu  became  the  father  of 
Bhima. 

Vayu  or  Pavan  (the  Purifier)  is  represented  in  pictures  as  a 
white  man  riding  upon  a  deer,  and  carries  a  white  flag  in  his 
hand.     In  the  Puranas  he  is  said  to  be  son  of  Aditi. 

Other  names  by  which  this  deity  is  known  are  the  following  : — 
Anila,  breath  ;  Marut,  air  that  is  necessary  to  life  ;  Sparsana,  he 
who  touches  ;  Gandhavaha,  he  who  carries  odours. 


Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  146. 


The  Storm  Deities — The  Maruts.  57 


5.  the  maruts. 


In  one  passage  in  the  Rig- Veda  these  gods  are  said  to  be 
one  hundred  and  eighty  in  number  ;  in  another  text,  twenty- 
seven  is  the  number  given  ;  whilst  in  the  Puranas  they  are 
said  to  be  forty-nine.  In  the  Vedas  they  are  called  the  sons 
of  Rudra.  They  are  the  companions  of  Indra  ;  at  times  they 
worship  him,  and  thus  acknowledge  his  superiority ;  at  others  they 
seem  to  assert  their  inherent  power,  and  remind  Indra  of  the  aid 
they  have  given  him.  They  are  addressed  in  the  following 
strain :  * — "  Spears  rest  upon  your  shoulders,  ye  Maruts ;  ye  have 
anklets  on  your  feet,  golden  ornaments  on  your  breasts,  lustre  in 
your  ears,  fiery  lightnings  in  your  hands,  and  golden  helmets 
placed  on  your  heads."  They  are  armed  with  golden  weapons 
and  lightnings  ;  dart  thunderbolts,  gleam  like  flames  of  fire,  and 
are  borne  along  with  the  fury  of  boisterous  winds.  They  split 
Vritra  (Drought)  to  pieces,  are  clothed  with  rain,  create  darkness 
during  the  day,  water  the  earth,  and  avert  heat.  They  cause 
the  earth  and  the  mountains  to  quake.  They  were  accustomed 
to  the  use  of  the  soma  ;  and  were  appealed  to,  to  bring  healing 
remedies,  which  are  described  as  abiding  in  the  (river)  Sindhu,  the 
seas,  and  the  hills. 

In  the  'Vishnu  Purana'f  we  find  quite  a  different  account  of 
the  Maruts.  They  are  said  to  be  the  sons  of  Kasyapa  and  Diti. 
Diti  having  lost  her  children,  propitiated  her  husband,  who 
promised  her  a  boon.  She  asked  that  she  might  have  a  son  of 
irresistible  prowess  and  valour,  who  should  destroy  Indra.  The 
Muni  promised  to  grant  this  request  on  one  condition.  "You 
shall  bear  a  son,"  he  said,  "  who  shall  slay  Indra,  if  with  thoughts 
wholly  pious,  and  person  entirely  pure,  you  carefully  carry  the 
babe  in  your  womb  for  a  hundred  years."  Diti  accepted  the 
boon  with  this  condition.  Indra  hearing  of  this,  tried  his  best  to 
distract  her  mind,  and  so  prevent  the  birth  of  this  wonderful 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  147  ff.  t  Book  I.  chap.  xxi. 


ss 


The  Vedic  Deities. 


child.  When  ninety-nine  years  had  passed,  an  opportunity 
offered  itself.  Diti  retired  to  rest  one  night  without  having 
washed  her  feet,  and  thus  violated  a  rule  of  ceremonial  purity. 
Indra  availed  himself  of  this  neglect,  and  was  able  to  accom- 
plish his  purpose.  With  his  thunderbolt  he  cut  the  embryo 
into  seven  parts.  The  child  thus  mutilated  cried  bitterly ;  and 
though  Indra  tried,  he  was  unable  to  console  it.  Being  incensed 
at  their  obstinacy  in  crying,  he  cut  each  of  these  seven  parts  in 
seven,  and  thus  formed  the  forty-nine  Maruts.  Their  name  was 
given  to  them  from  the  words  "  ma  rodih  "  (weep  not),  used  by 
Indra  when  trying  to  quiet  them  ;  and  they  became  subordinate 
deities — the  associates  of  the  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt. 


(     59     ) 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

SOMA. 

SOMA,  according  to  the  Vedic  hymns,  is  the  god  who  "  repre- 
sents and  animates  the  juice  of  the  Soma*  plant."  He  was  the 
Indian  Bacchus.  Not  only  are  all  the  hymns  of  the  ninth  book 
of  the  Rig-Veda,  one  hundred  and  fourteen  in  number,  besides  a 
few  in  other  places,  dedicated  to  his  honour,  but  constant  refer- 
ences occur  to  him  in  a  large  proportion  of  other  hymns,  f  In 
some  of  these  hymns  he  is  extolled  as  the  Creator,  or  Father  of  the 
gods.  Evidently  at  that  time  he  was  a  most  popular  deity.  Indra, 
as  was  stated  before,  was  an  enthusiastic  worshipper  of  Soma. 

The  following  lines  will  show  the  warmth  of  feeling  that  was 
cherished  towards  him  : — 

"  This  Soma  is  a  god  ;  he  cures 
The  sharpest  ills  that  man  endures. 
He  heals  the  sick,  the  sad  he  cheers, 
He  nerves  the  weak,  dispels  their  fears  ; 
The  faint  with  martial  ardour  fires, 
With  lofty  thoughts  the  bard  inspires  ; 


*  The  Soma-plant  of  the  Rig- Veda  is  the  Asclepias  acida  of  Roxburgh, 
It  is  a  creeping  plant,  almost  destitute  of  leaves.  It  has  small  white  fragrant 
flowers  collected  round  the  extremities  of  the  branches.  Roxburgh  says 
that  it  yields  purer  milky  juice  than  any  other  plant  he  knows  ;  and  that 
this  juice  'is  mild,  and  of  an  acid  nature.  The  tender  shoots  are  often 
plucked  by  native  travellers.  It  grows  on  hills  of  the  Punjab,  in  the  Bolan 
Pass,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Poona,  &c.  In  the  Brahmana  of  the  Rig- 
Veda  (Haug's  Translation),  is  a  most  interesting  account  of  the  Soma 
sacrifice.  This  is  occasionally  made  in  the  present  day,  but  very  few  priests 
are  now  acquainted  with  the  ritual  of  this  once  celebrated  sacrifice. 

t  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  258. 


6o 


The  Vedic  Deities. 


The  soul  from  earth  to  heaven  he  lifts  ; 
So  great  and  wondrous  are  his  gifts, 
Men  feel  the  god  within  their  veins, 
And  cry  in  loud  exulting  strains  : 
'  We've  quaffed  the  Soma  bright, 

And  are  immortal  grown  ; 
We've  entered  into  light, 

And  all  the  gods  have  known. 
What  mortal  now  can  harm, 

Or  foeman  vex  us  more  ? 
Through  thee,  beyond  alarm, 


Immortal  god,  we  soar 


5  3)  * 


From  the  Vedas  the  following  account 
of  Soma  is  derived.f  In  some  passages 
the  plant  is  said  to  have  been  brought 
from  a  mountain  and  given  to  Indra  ;  in 
others,  King  Soma  is  said  to  have  dwelt 
amongst  the  Gandharvas,  a  race  of 
demi-gods  that  form  the  choir  in  Indra's 
heaven.  The  gods,  knowing  the  virtues 
of  this  king  or  plant — for  the  two  terms 
seem  to  be  indiscriminately  applied — 
wished  to  obtain  it.  Not  knowing  how 
to  get  it,  Vach  (the  goddess  of  speech) 
said,  "The  Gandharvas  are  fond  of 
women;  let  me. go,  and  I  will  obtain  it 
for  you."  The  gods  said,  "  How  can  w*e 
spare  you  ?  "  She  replied,  "  Obtain  the 
god ;  and  I  will  then  return  to  you, 
whenever  you  may  want  me." 
Another  account  of  this  affair  is,  that  whilst  the  gods  were 
living  on  earth,  Soma  was  in  the  sky.  Wishing  to  possess  it, 
they  sent  Gayatri  (a  name  of  Brahma's  wife  or  daughter)  to 
fetch  it.  She  went  in  the  form  of  a  bird,  and  was  returning  with 
it,  when  the  Gandharvas  seized  it,  and  only  gave  it  up  when  the 
goddess  Vach  went  amongst  them  as  narrated  above. 


SOMA-1LANT. 


Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  130. 


t  Ibid.  v.  263  ff. 


Soma.  6i1 

When  Soma  was  brought  to  the  gods,  there  was  a  dispute  as 
to  who  should  have  the  first  draught.  It  was  decided  that  a  race 
should  be  run  ;  the  winner  to  have  the  first  taste.  Vayu  first 
reached  the  goal,  Indra  being  second.  Indra  tried  hard  to  win, 
and  when  near  to  Vayu  proposed  that  they  should  reach  the  goal 
together,  Vayu  taking  two-thirds  of  the  drink.  Vayu  said,  "  Not 
so!  I  will  be  the  winner  alone."  Then  Indra  said,  "  Let  us  come  in 
together,  and  give  me  one-fourth  of  the  draught  divine  !  "  Vayu 
consented  to  this,  and  so  the  juice  was  shared  between  them.* 

Soma  is  said  to  have  had  thirty-three  wives,  the  daughters  of 
Prajapati ;  of  these  Rohini  was  the  favourite.  Being  dissatisfied 
with  the  partiality  shown  to  their  sister,  the  other  wives  returned 
to  their  father.  Soma  asked  that  they  might  return  to  him  ; 
the  father  consented  to  restore  them,  provided  Soma  would 
promise  to  treat  them  all  alike.  Soma  promised  to  do  this  ;  but, 
failing  to  keep  his  promise,  was  smitten  with  consumption  for 
breaking  his  word. 

In  the  verses  descriptive  of,  or  songs  in  praise  of  Soma,  the 
actual  juice,  and  the  god  supposed  to  dwell  in  it  and  to  be  mani- 
fested by  it,  are  not  at  all  distinct.  All  the  gods  drink  of  it  ; 
and  Soma,  the  god  in  the  juice,  is  said  to  clothe  the  naked  and 
heal  the  sick.  Many  divine  attributes  are  ascribed  to  him.  He 
is  "  addressed  as  a  god  in  the  highest  strains  of  adulation  and 
veneration.  All  powers  belong  to  him  ;  all  blessings  are  be- 
sought of  him,  as  his  to  bestow."  He  is  said  to  be  divine, 
immortal,  and  also  to  confer  immortality  on  gods  and  men.  "  In 
a  passage  where  the  joys  of  paradise  are  more  distinctly  antici- 
pated and  more  fervently  implored  than  in  most  other  parts  of 
the  Rig- Veda,  Soma  is  addressed  as  the  god  from  whom  the  gift 
of  future  felicity  is  expected.  Thus  it  is  there  said,  "  Place  me, 
O  purified  god,  in  that  everlasting  and  imperishable  world, 
where  there  is  eternal  light  and  glory.  O  Indu  (Soma),  flow  for 
Indra !  Make  me  immortal  in  the  world  where  Vaivasvata  lives, 
where  is  the  universal  sphere  of  the  sky,  where  those  great 
waters  flow."  t 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  144.  t  Ibid.  v.  266. 


62  The  Vedic  Deities. 


In  later  years  the  name  Soma  was,  and  still  is,  given  to  the 
moon.  How  and  why  this  change  took  place  is  not  known  ;  but 
in  the  later  of  the  Vedic  hymns  there  is  some  evidence  of  the 
transition.  In  the  following  passage  Soma  seems  to  be  used  in 
both  senses, — as  god  of  the  intoxicating  juice,  and  as  the  moon 
ruling  through  the  night.  "By  Soma  the  Adityas  are  strong; 
by  Soma  the  earth  is  great  ;  and  Soma  is  placed  in  the  midst  of 
the  stars.  When  they  crush  the  plant,  he  who  drinks  regards  it 
as  Soma.  Of  him  whom  the  priests  regard  as  Soma  (the  moon) 
no  one  drinks."  *  In  another  passage  this  prayer  is  found : 
"  May  the  god  Soma,  he  whom  they  call  the  Moon,  free  me." 
Again,  "  Soma  is  the  moon,  the  food  of  the  gods."  "  The  sun 
has  the  nature  of  Agni,  the  moon  of  Soma." 

In  the  '  Vishnu  Purana '  we  read,  "  Soma  was  appointed 
monarch  of  the  stars  and  plants,  of  Brahmans  and  of  plants,  of 
sacrifices  and  of  penance."  In  this  Purana  we  have  quite  a 
different  account  of  the  origin  of  Soma  ;  but  it  must  be  borne  in 
mind,  that  in  this  account  Soma  refers  only  to  the  moon.  At 
the  time  the  '  Vishnu  Purana '  was  written,  intoxicants  were 
strictly  forbidden  ;  hence  Soma,  as  the  god  of  the  Soma  juice, 
was  no  longer  known  and  praised.  According  to  that  Purana,J 
Soma  was  the  son  of  Atri,  the  son  of  Brahma.  He  performed 
the  Rajasuya  sacrifice,  and  from  the  glory  thence  acquired, 
and  the  immense  dominion  with  which  he  had  been  invested, 
became  so  arrogant  and  licentious,  that  he  carried  off  Tara,  the 
wife  of  Vrihaspati,  the  preceptor  of  the  gods.  In  vain  Vrihaspati 
sought  to  recover  his  bride  ;  in  vain  Brahma  commanded,  and 
the  holy  sages  remonstrated.  In  consequence  of  this  there 
was  a  great  war ;  the  gods  with  Indra  on  the  one  side  trying  to 
recover  Tara  ;  Soma  with  the  demons  on  the  other.  At  length 
she  appealed  to  Brahma  for  protection,  who  thereupon  com- 
manded Soma  to  restore  her.  On  her  return,  Vrihaspati  finding 
she  was  pregnant,  refused  to  receive  her  until  after  the  birth  of 
the  child.     In  obedience  to  his  orders,  the  child  was  immediately 


Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  271.  f  Book  I.  chap.  xxii. 

t  Book  IV.  chap.  vi. 


Soma. 


63 


born  ;  who  being  wonderful  in  beauty  and  power,  both  Vrihaspati 
and  Soma  claimed  him  as  their  son.  Tara  being  referred  to, 
was  too  much  ashamed  to  speak.  The  child  was  so  indignant 
at  this,  that  he  was  about  to  curse  her,  saying,  "  Unless  you 
declare  who  is  my  father,  I  will  sentence  you  to  such  a  fate  as- 
shall  deter  every  female  from  hesitating  to  speak  the  truth."  On 
this  Brahma  again  interfered,  pacifying  the  child,  and  saying  to 
Tara,  "Tell  me,  my  child,  is  this  the  child  of  Vrihaspati  or 
Soma  ? "  "  Of  Soma,"  she  said,  blushing.  As  soon  as  she  had 
spoken,  the  lord  of  the  constellations,  his  countenance  being 
bright,  embraced  his  son  and  said,  "  Well  done,  my  boy ;  verily 
thou  art  wise  ;"  and  hence  his  name  was  Budha.* 

*  This  Budha,  son  of  Soma,  and  regent  of  the  planet  Mercury,  must  not 
be  confounded  with  Buddha,  the  teacher  whose  tenets  are  held  by  the 
Buddhists  of  the  present  day.  The  two  beings  have  nothing  in  common  ; 
and  the  names  are  identical  only  when  one  or  other  of  them  is  misspelt  or 
mispronounced. 


64  The  Vedic  Deities. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

TVASTRI  OR  VISVAKARMA. 

TVASTRI,  or  as  he  is  called  in  the  later  works,  Visvakarma,  is 
the  architect  and  workman  of  the  gods — the  Hindu  Vulcan. 
The  heavenly  palaces  were  formed  by  him,  and  the  warlike  gods 
arc  indebted  to  him  for  their  wonder-working  weapons.  He 
sharpens  the  iron  axe  of  Brahmanaspati  (Agni),  and  forges  the 
thunderbolts  of  Indra.  He  is  more  intimately  associated  with 
men  ;  he  forms  husband  and  wife  for  each  other  from  the  womb, 
and  blesses  the  married  couple  with  offspring.  This  accounts 
for  the  fact  that  the  wives  of  the  gods  are  his  most  constant 
companions.  He  made  the  world  and  all  that  is  in  it  ;  and  he  is 
the  protector  of  the  creatures  he  has  made.  He  shares  with  the 
other  gods  in  the  sacrifices  offered  by  mortals.* 

Tvastri  is  in  several  passages  connected  with  the  RlBHUS. 
These  were  sons  of  a  man  named  Sudhanvan  ;  who,  owing  to 
their  great  skill  in  working,  obtained  immortality  and  divine 
honours.  The  Ribhus  made  Indra's  chariot  and  horses ; 
also  by  their  great  austerities  restored  their  parents  to  youth. 
They  are  spoken  of  as  the  pupils  of  Tvastri.  It  was  through 
their  making  into  four  a  single  sacrificial  cup  that  Tvastri  had 
made,  that  they  became  divine.  This  exhibition  of  skill  was 
made  at  the  command  of  the  gods,  and  exaltation  to  deity  was 
the  promised  reward.  Tvastri  was  very  angry  at  their  success  ; 
and,  ashamed  of  being  seen,  hid  himself  amongst  the  women.  It 
is  said  that  he  even  tried  to  slay  his  pupils.     According  to  other 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  224. 


TVASTRI    OR    VlSVAKARMA.  65 

accounts,  he  admired  their  skill  and  was  pleased  at  its  result. 
Tvastri  was  the  father-in-law  of  Vivasvat  (the  Sun). 

Indra  is  occasionally  described  as  being  in  a  state  of  hostility 
towards  Tvastri  and  his  son  Visvarupa,  and  ultimately  caused 
the  death  of  both.  This  Visvarupa  had  three  heads,  called  re- 
spectively, the  Soma-drinker,  the  Wine-drinker,  and  the  Food- 
eater.  He  declared  in  public  on  one  occasion,  that  the  sacrifices 
should  be  shared  by  the  gods  only ;  but  in  private  he  said  the 
Asuras  (demons)  should  share  them  too.  And  as  it  is  customary 
only  to  keep  promises  that  are  privately  made,  Indra  was  afraid 
that  the  Asuras,  obtaining  a  share  of  the  sacrifices,  would  be  so 
strengthened  by  them  as  to  be  able  to  overthrow  his  kingdom  ; 
he  therefore  cut  off  the  heads  of  Visvarupa  with  his  thunderbolt. 
The  three  heads  were  turned  into  birds  :  the  Soma-drinker  became 
a  Kapinjala  (a  Francoline  partridge),  for  Soma  was  of  a  brown 
colour ;  the  Wine-drinker  became  a  Kalavinka  (sparrow),  be- 
cause when  men  are  intoxicated  they  make  a  noise  like  a  sparrow  ; 
the  Food-eater  became  a  Tittiri  (partridge),  which  consequently 
has  a  great  variety  of  colour,  for  its  body  appears  to  be  sprinkled 
with  ghl  and  honey.  Tvastri,  enraged  because  Indra  had  slain 
his  son,  made  a  libation  to  the  gods,  but  did  not  invite  Indra  to 
partake  of  it.  Indra,  noticing  this  slight,  took  by  force  the  vessel 
containing  the  Soma  juice,  and  drank  it.  But  he  took  more  than 
was  good  for  him.  Tvastri,  being  angry,  broke  off  the  sacrifice, 
and  used  the  few  drops  of  Soma  left  to  give  effect  to  a  curse. 
He  employed  the  right  formula  to  accomplish  the  death  of 
Indra,  but  unfortunately  laid  stress  upon  the  wrong  word.  He 
said,  "Thou  of  whom  Indra  is  the  enemy,  flourish."  As  he  used 
the  words  accented  so  as  to  produce  this  sense,  Indra  slew  him. 
Had  he  said,  "  Flourish,  enemy  of  Indra,"  he  would  have  slain 
Indra,  instead  of  being  slain  by  him.* 

In  the  Puranas,  Tvastri  appears  under  the  name  of  Visvakarma. 
In  the  'Vishnu  Purana'  he  is  styled  "the  author  of  a  thousand 
arts,  the  mechanist  of  the  gods,  the  fabricator  of  all  ornaments, 
the  chief  of  artists,  the  constructor  of  the  self-moving  chariots  of 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  232. 


66 


The  Vedic  Deities. 


the  deities,  by  whose  skill  men  obtain  subsistence.  Though  not 
named  as  an  Aditya  in  the  Vedas,  he  is  generally  reckoned  as 
one  in  the  Puranas.  In  other  places  he  is  called  a  son  of 
Brahma.  In  pictures  he  is  represented  as  a  white  man  with 
three  eyes.  In  his  right  hand  he  carries  a  club.  He  wears  a 
crown,  and  is  adorned  with  a  necklace  and  bracelets  of  gold. 
lie  is  worshipped  once,  twice,  thrice,  or  four  times  each  year, 
according  to  the  devotion  of  his  worshippers.  Nowadays,  no 
images  of  this  deity  are  set  up  ;  each  man  worships  the  imple- 
ments of  his  trade,  as  the  representatives  of  Visvakarma.  The 
carpenter  bows  down  to  his  hammer,  saw,  &c. ;  the  bricklayer  to 
his  trowel  ;  the  peasant  to  his  plough  ;  the  student  to  his  books  ; 
the  clerk  to  his  pen.  When  the  worship  is  over,  the  day  is  spent 
in  feasting  and  enjoyment. 


(     67     ) 


CHAPTER  X. 


YAMA. 


Yama,  the  judge  of  men  and  king  of  the  unseen  world,  was  the 
son  of  Vivasvat  (the  Sun)  and  Saranya,  the  daughter  of  Tvastri ; 
and  was  born  before  Saranya  had  become  afraid  of  her  glorious 
husband.  He  was  twin-brother 
of  Yami,  and,  in  the  opinion  of 
Professor  Roth,  they  were  re- 
garded as  the  primeval  pair  from 
whom  the  human  family  has 
sprung.  In  another  verse  of  the 
Rig- Veda,  they  are  described  as 
the  offspring  of  the  heavenly 
choristers,  the  Gandharvas.  As 
there  were  no  others  to  perpet- 
uate the  race,  Yami  entreated 
Yama  to  become  her  husband. 
She  urged  the  fact  that  Tvastri 
had  formed  them  as  man  and 
wife  in  the  womb  ;  and  there- 
fore it  was  useless  for  him  to 
refuse  her  request,  as  none  can 
act  contrary  to  the  ordinances 
of  Tvastri.  But  Yama  was  firm,  and  resisted  her  overtures  on 
the  ground  that  it  was  monstrous  for  those  who  are  preachers 
of  righteousness  to  act  unrighteously. 


YAMA. 


* 


Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  289. 


F   2 


The  Vedic  Deities. 


Yama  was  the  first  of  mortals  who  died,  and,  having  discovered 
the  way  to  the  other  world,  is  the  guide  of  those  who  depart  this 
life,  and  is  said  to  conduct  them  to  a  home  which  is  made  secure 
for  them  for  ever.  He  is  a  king,  and  dwells  in  celestial  light  in 
the  innermost  sanctuary  of  heaven.  He  grants  bright  homes  to 
the  pious  who  dwell  with  him.* 

"  In  the  Rig- Veda,  Yama  is  nowhere  represented  (as  he  is  in 
the  later  mythology)  as  having  anything  to  do  with  the  punish- 
ment of  the  wicked.  Nevertheless  he  is  still  to  some  an  object 
i  if  terror.  He  is  said  to  have  two  insatiable  dogs,  with  four  eyes 
and  wide  nostrils,  which  guard  the  road  to  his  abode,  and  which 
the  departed  are  advised  to  hurry  past  with  all  possible  speed. 
These  dogs  are  said  to  wander  about  among  men  as  messengers, 
no  doubt  for  the  purpose  of  summoning  them  to  the  presence  of 
their  master,  who  in  another  place  is  identified  with  death,  and 
is  described  as  sending  a  bird  as  the  herald  of  doom."  f 

•'  When  the  remains  of  the  deceased  have  been  placed  upon 
the  funeral  pile,  and  the  process  of  cremation  has  commenced, 
Agni,  the  god  of  Fire,  is  prayed  not  to  scorch  or  consume  the 
departed,  not  to  tear  asunder  his  skin  or  his  limbs,  but,  after  the 
flames  have  done  their  work,  to  convey  to  the  fathers  the  mortal 
who  has  been  presented  to  him  as  an  offering.  Leaving  behind 
on  earth  all  that  is  evil  and  imperfect,  and  proceeding  by  the 
paths  which  the  fathers  trod,  invested  with  a  lustre  like  that  of 
the  gods,  it  soars  to  the  realms  of  eternal  light  in  a  car,  or  on 
wings,  and  recovers  there  its  ancient  body  in  a  complete  and 
glorified  form  ;  meets  with  the  forefathers  who  are  living  in 
festivity  with  Yama  ;  obtains  from  him,  when  recognised  by  him 
.1-  one  of  his  own,  a  delectable  abode,  and  enters  upon  more 
perfect  life,  which  is  crowned  with  the  fulfilment  of  all  desires, 
passed  in  the  presence  of  the  gods,  and  employed  in  the 
fulfilment  of  their  pleasure."  J 

In   this  kingdom,  over  which  Yama  reigns,  friends  meet  with 
their  departed  friends, — husband  with  wife,  children  with  parents, — 

*   Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  284.  f  Ibid.,  v.  302. 

X"  Ibid.,  v.  302  ff. 


Yama.  69 

and  together  live  in  a  state  of  blessedness,  free  from  all  the  evils 
and  infirmities  that  belong  to  the  present  life.  And  as  the  gods 
are  described  as  enjoying  all  the  pleasures  that  are  common  to 
men  on  earth,  there  is  the  clearest  evidence  that  the  kingdom  of 
Yama,  the  abode  of  the  departed,  is  not  at  all  less  sensual  than 
the  present  world  ;  and  when  mortals  have  been  privileged  to 
enter  this  happy  land,  they  become  objects  of  veneration  to 
their  descendants  still  living,  and  joyfully  partake  of  the  ob- 
lations they  offer  to  them. 

In  the  following  lines  Dr.  Muir  *  has  given  an  epitome  of  the 
teaching  of  the  Vedas  respecting  Yama  : — 

"  To  great  King  Yama  homage  pay, 
Who  was  the  first  of  men  that  died, 
That  crossed  the  mighty  gulf  and  spied 
For  mortals  out  the  heavenward  way. 

*  *  *  * 

"  By  it  our  fathers  all  have  passed  ; 

And  that  same  path  we  too  shall  trace, 
And  every  new  succeeding  race 
Of  mortal  men,  while  time  shall  last. 

"  The  god  assembles  round  his  throne 

A  growing  throng,  the  good  and  wise — 
All  those  whom,  scanned  with  searching  eyes, 
He  recognises  as  his  own. 

"  Departed  mortal,  speed  from  earth 

By  those  old  ways  thy  sires  have  trod  ; 
Ascend,  behold  the  expectant  god 
Who  calls  thee  to  a  higher  birth. 

*  *  *  * 

"  And  calmly  pass  without  alarm 

The  four-eyed  hounds  that  guard  the  road 
Which  leads  to  Yama's  bright  abode  ; 
Their  master's  friends  they  dare  not  harm. 

"  All  imperfections  leave  behind  : 

Assume  thine  ancient  frame  once  more, — 
Each  limb  and  sense  thou  hadst  before, 
From  every  earthly  taint  refined. 


Muir,  0.  S.  T.,  v.  327. 


The  Vedic  Deities. 


"  And  now  with  heavenly  glory  bright, 
With  life  intenser,  nobler,  blest, 
With  large  capacity  to  taste 
A  fuller  measure  of  delight, 

"  Thou  there  once  more  each  well-known  face 
Shalt  see  of  those  thou  lovedst  here  ; 
Thy  parents,  wife,  and  children  dear, 
With  rapture  shalt  thou  soon  embrace. 

"  The  father,  too,  shalt  thou  behold, 
The  heroes  who  in  battle  died, 
The  saints  and  sages  glorified, 
The  pious,  bounteous  kings  of  old. 

"  The  gods  whom  here  in  humble  wise 

Thou  worshippedst  with  doubt  and  awe. 
Shall  there  the  impervious  veil  withdraw 
Which  hid  their  glory  from  thine  eyes. 

"  The  good  which  thou  on  earth  hast  wrought, 
Each  sacrifice,  each  pious  deed, 
Shall  there  receive  its  ample  meed  ; 
No  worthy  act  shall  be  forgot. 

"  In  those  fair  realms  of  cloudless  day, 
Where  Yama  every  joy  supplies, 
And  every  longing  satisfies, 
Thy  bliss  shall  never  know  decay." 

In  the  Puranas  Yama  is  called  the  judge  of  men,  and  is  said 
to  rule  over  the  many  hells  in  which  the  wicked  are  made  to 
suffer.  Thus  the  '  Padma  Purana'  says  :  "Yama fulfils  the  office 
of  judge  of  the  dead,  as  well  as  sovereign  of  the  damned  ;  all  that 
die  appearing  before  him,  and  being  confronted  with  Chitragupta 
the  recorder,  by  whom  their  actions  have  been  registered.  The 
virtuous  are  then  conveyed  to  Swarga  (Indra's  heaven),  whilst  the 
wicked  are  driven  to  the  different  regions  of  Naraka  (hell)."  *  In 
the  'Vishnu  Purana'  the  names  of  the  different  hells  are  given,  and 
il  is  there  stated  that  "  there  are  many  other  fearful  hells  which  are 
the  awful  provinces  of  Yama,  terrible  with  instruments  of  torture 


*  i 


Vishnu  Purana,'  p.  207,  note- 


Yama.  7 1 

and  fire."  In  the  same  Purana  *  it  is  said  that  "  all  men  at  the 
end  of  their  existence  (life)  become  slaves  to  the  power  of  Yama, 
by  whom  they  are  sentenced  to  painful  punishments."  Inquiry 
is  then  made  as  to  how  men  can  be  free  from  his  authority.  The 
answer  is  that  "  Yama  is  the  lord  of  all  men,  excepting  the  wor- 
shippers of  Madhusudan  (Vishnu).  Worship  him  in  one  of  his 
many  forms,  and  Yama  can  exert  no  authority  over  you." 

According  to  the  popular  ideas  now  prevailing,  Yama  is 
represented  as  a  green  man,  clothed  in  red  garments.  He  has  a 
crown  on  his  head,  and  a  flower  in  his  hair  ;  is  armed  with  a 
club,  and  rides  upon  a  buffalo.  He  is  regularly  worshipped  once 
a  year ;  and  daily  a  little  water  is  poured  out  to  him.  For  a 
whole  month  each  year  unmarried  girls  present  offerings  to  him 
in  the  hope  that  he  will  provide  them  with  a  husband  ;  and  that, 
having  granted  this  boon,  he  will  not  recall  his  gift,  and  leave 
them  widows.  In  his  presence  the  good  and  evil  deeds  of  the 
departed  are  weighed  :  according  to  the  turn  of  the  scale,  the 
soul  goes  to  heaven  or  hell.  The  soul  is  believed  to  reach  Yama's 
abode  in  four  hours  and  forty  minutes  ;  consequently  a  dead 
body  cannot  be  burned  until  that  time  has  passed  after  death. 

In  the  'Bhavishya  Purana'  the  following  legend  of  Yama's 
marriage  is  found.  He  was  exceedingly  pleased  with  a  girl 
named  Vijaya,  a  Brahman's  daughter.  When  first  she  saw  him 
she  was  greatly  alarmed,  both  at  his  appearance  and  on  his 
telling  her  who  he  was.  At  length  he  allayed  her  fears  ;  and 
although  her  brother  tried  to  dissuade  her,  she  consented  to 
become  his  wife.  On  her  arrival  at  Yama's  abode,  he  particularly 
cautioned  her  against  going  into  the  southern  quarter  of  his 
kingdom.  After  a  time,  thinking  he  must  have  another  wife 
there,  her  curiosity  overpowered  her,  and  she  went  into  the 
forbidden  region,  and  was  greatly  distressed,  as  she  saw  the 
wicked  suffering  great  torment.  Amongst  other  sufferers  was 
her  own  mother.  Meeting  Yama  there,  she  tried  to  obtain  her 
mother's  release.  Yama  declared  that  this  could  not  be  granted 
unless  some  one  then  living  on  earth  would  perform  a  certain 

*  '  Vishnu  Purana,'  p.  286. 


-2  The  Vedic  Deities. 


sacrifice,  and  transfer  the  merit  of  the  act  to  the  poor  woman 
then  suffering.  After  some  difficulty,  some  one  was  found  willing 
to  perform  this  act  of  self-sacrifice,  and  Yama's  mother-in-law 
released. 

Stories  are  told  in  the  Puranas  to  the  effect  that  the  worship- 
pers of  Vishnu,  if  only  they  have  repeated  the  name  of  that 
deity  during  their  lifetime,  though  it  be  merely  when  teaching 
it  to  a  parrot,  or  in  death  merely  utter  it,  when  there  may  be 
no  thought  of  worship,  are  free  from  the  power  of  Yama  ;  that 
messengers  from  this  deity  will  rescue  them  from  the  power  of 
the  king  of  hell,  and  convey  them  to  happier  worlds. 

It  is  very  strange  to  notice  how  the  character  of  Yama's  rule 
and  kingdom  has  entirely  changed  in  the  conceptions  of  the 
Hindus.  According  to  the  Vedas,  the  pure  and  good  went  with 
gladness  to  Yama's  realm  of  light  ;  now,  as  taught  in  the 
Puranas,  it  is  the  wicked  who  are  sent  to  him  for  punishment. 

In  the  Mahabharata*  is  a  most  interesting  story,  showing 
that  sometimes  Yama  is  propitious  to  prayer,  and  will  allow 
those  who  have  entered  his  abode  to  return  to  earth. 

A  princess  named  Savitri  loved  Satyavan,  the  son  of  an  old 
hermit,  but  was  warned  by  a  seer  to  overcome  her  attachment, 
as  Satyavan  was  a  doomed  man,  having  only  one  year  to  live. 
Savitri  replies : 

"  Whether  his  years  be  few  or  many,  be  he  gifted  with  all  grace 
Or  graceless,  him  my  heart  hath  chosen,  and  it  chooseth  not  again." 

They  were  married,  and  the  bride  strove  to  forget  the 
prophecy  ;  but  as  the  last  day  of  the  year  approached,  her 
anxiety  became  irrepressible.  She  exhausted  herself  in  prayers 
and  penances,  hoping  to  stay  the  hand  of  the  destroyer,  yet  all 
the  while  dared  not  reveal  the  fatal  secret  to  her  husband.  At 
last  the  dreaded  day  arrived,  and  Satyavan  set  out  to  cut  wood 
in  the  forest.  His  wife  asked  leave  to  accompany  him,  and 
walked  behind  her  husband,  smiling,  but  with  a  heavy  heart. 
Satyavan  soon  made  the  wood  resound  with  his  hatchet,  when 


*  i 


Indian  Wisdom,'  p.  395. 


Yam  a.  73 

suddenly  a  thrill  of  agony  shot  through  his  temples,  and,  feeling 
himself  falling,  called  out  to  his  wife  to  support  him. 

"  Then  she  received  her  fainting  husband  in  her  arms,  and  sat  herself 
On  the  cold  ground,  and  gently  laid  his  drooping  head  upon  her  lap  : 
Sorrowing,  she  called  to  mind  the  sage's  prophecy,  and  reckoned  up 
The  days  and  hours.     All  in  an  instant  she  beheld  an  awful  shape 
Standing  before  her,  dressed  in  blood-red  garments,  with  a  glittering  crown 
Upon  his  head  ;  his  form,  though  glowing  like  the  Sun,  was  yet  obscure, 
And  eyes  he  had  like  flames,  a  noose  depended  from  his  hand  ;  and  he 
Was  terrible  to  look  upon,  as  by  her  husband's  side  he  stood 
And  gazed  upon  him  with  a  fiery  glance.     Shuddering  she  started  up, 
And  laid  her  dying  Satyavan  upon  the  ground,  and,  with  her  hands 
Joined  reverently,  she  thus  with  beating  heart  addressed  the  shape  ; 
'  Surely  thou  art  a  god  ;  such  form  as  thine  must  more  than  mortal  be  ! 
Tell  me,  thou  god-like  being,  who  thou  art,  and  wherefore  art  thou  here  ? ' '; 

The  figure  replied  that  he  was  Yama,  king  of  the  dead  ;  that 
her  husband's  time  was  come,  and  that  he  must  bind  and  take 
his  spirit. 

"  Then  from  her  husband's  body  forced  he  out,  and  firmly  with  his  cord 
Bound  and  detained  the  spirit,  clothed  in  form  no  larger  than  a  thumb. 
Forthwith  the  body,  reft  of  vital  being  and  deprived  of  breath, 
Lost  all  its  grace  and  beauty,  and  became  ghastly  and  motionless." 

After  binding  the  spirit,  Yama  proceeds  with  it  towards  the 
quarter  of  which  he  is  guardian, — the  south.  The  faithful  wife 
follows  him  closely.  Yama  bids  her  go  home  and  perform  the 
funeral  rites  ;  but  she  persists  in  following,  till  Yama,  pleased 
with  her  devotion,  grants  her  any  boon  she  pleases,  except  the 
life  of  her  husband.  She  chooses  that  her  husband's  father,  who  is 
now  blind,  may  recover  his  sight.  Yama  consents,  and  bids  her 
now  return  home.  Still  she  persists  in  following.  Two  other 
boons  are  granted  in  the  same  way,  and  still  Savitri  follows 
closely  on  the  heels  of  the,  king  of  death.  At  last,  overcome  by 
her  constancy,  Yama  grants  a  boon  without  exception.  The 
delighted  Savitri  exclaims  : 

"  '  Nought,  mighty  king,  this  time  hast  thou  excepted  :  let  my  husband  live  ; 
Without  him  I  desire  not  happiness,  nor  even  heaven  itself ; 
Without  him  I  must  die.'    '  So  be  it,  faithful  wife,'  replied  the  king  of  death  : 
'  Thus  I  release  him  ; '  and  with  that  he  loosed  the  cord  that  bound  his  soul." 


74 


The  Vedic  Deities. 


Amongst    the    many  names    by  which  Yama  is  known,  the 
following  are  the  most  common  : — 

Dharmaraja,  "  King  of  righteousness." 

Pitripati,  "  Lord  of  the  fathers." 

Samavurti,  "He  who  judges  impartially." 

Kritanta,  "  The  finisher." 

Samana,  "  The  leveller." 

Kala,  "  Time." 

Dandadhara,  "  He  who  carries  the  rod." 

Sraddhadeva,  "The  god  of  funeral  ceremonies." 

Yaivasvata,  "The  son  of  Vivasvata." 

Antaka,  "  He  who  puts  an  end  to  life." 


» 


m 

OB 


PART    II. 


THE    PURANIC   DEITIES. 


// 


THE    PURANIC    DEITIES. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE    PURANAS. 

The  chief  sources  of  information  respecting  the  popular  forms 
of  Hinduism  are  the  two  great  Epics — the  Ramayana  and  the 
Mahabharata — and  the  Puranas,  or  "  old  traditional  stories," 
eighteen  in  number.  It  is  believed  that  the  Epics  were  originally 
composed  not  later  than  B.C.  500  ;  though  the  Ramayana  was 
probably  cast  into  its  present  form  about  B.C.  300,  and  the  Mahab- 
harata about  B.C.  200.  Each  of  these  books  is  of  immense  bulk, 
and  the  same  stories  reappear  in  them  again  and  again.  Yet  to 
this  day  they  retain  a  firm  hold  of  the  faith  and  veneration  of  the 
mass  of  the  people  of  India.  Nor  is  this  to  be  wondered  at  when 
we  read  such  words  as  these,  often  repeated  in  these  works  :  "  He 
who  reads  and  repeats  this  holy  life-giving  Ramayana  [or  the 
Mahabharata],  is  liberated  from  all  sins,  and  exalted  with  all  his 
posterity  to  the  highest  heaven." 

Though  it  is  difficult  to  determine  the  date  of  the  Puranas,  it  is 
believed  that  hone  of  them  are  older  than  the  8th  century  a.d. 
That  they  are  considerably  later  than  the  two  great  Epics  is 
evident  from  the  fact  that  many  who  are  described  in  the  Epics 
as  men  and  heroes  only,  in  the  Puranas  are  said  to  be  divine 
beings.  These  books  differ  largely  from  the  Vedas  in  this  respect, 
that  whilst  the  Vedas  treat  of  the  religion  common  to  the  Hindus 
of  that  period,  all  of  whom  worshipped  the  same  deities,  each 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


Purana  is  concerned  with  some  one  god  whose  excellences  are 
extolled,  whilst  others  are  spoken  of  in  a  depreciatory  manner. 
Generally  a  certain  measure  of  respect  is  shown  to  all  the  gods 
of  the  Pantheon  ;  yet  the  particular  deity  to  whose  praise  the 
Purana  is  devoted,  is  said  to  be  supreme ;  the  others  being 
rei -arded  as  emanations  from  or  incarnations  of  this  one.  Now 
Brahma,  now  Siva,  now  Vishnu  or  some  of  his  many  incarna- 
tions, is  the  great  god,  whose  will  is  that  all  men  should  wor- 
ship him. 

The  Puranas  may  be  classified  as  follows  : — 

I.  Those  which  are  devoted  to  the  praise  of  Brahma ;  viz.  the 
Brahma,  the  Brahmanda,  the  Brahmavaivarta,  the  Markandeya, 
the  Bhavishya,  and  the  Vaman. 

II.  Those  which  relate  to  Vishnu ;  viz.  the  Vishnu,  the 
Bhagavata,  the  Naradiya,  the  Garuda,  the  Padma,  and  the 
Varaha. 

III.  Those  which  are  chiefly  connected  with  Siva;  viz.  the 
Siva,  the  Linga,  the  Skanda,  the  Agni,  the  Matsya,  the  Kurma. 
For  the  Agni  Purana  another  called  the  Vayu  is  sometimes 
substituted. 

These  Puranas  are  the  authority  for  nearly  the  whole  of  the 
popular  Hinduism  of  the  present  day.  They  are  largely  read  by 
the  people.  Parts  of  some  and  the  whole  of  others  have  been 
translated  into  the  vernaculars  from  the  Sanskrit  ;  and  where 
the  people  cannot  read,  it  is  a  common  practice  for  their  Gurn  or 
Teacher  to  read  to  them  a  few  lines,  and  explain  it  to  them  at 
his  periodic  visits.  By  this  means  the  contents  of  these  books 
arc  widely  known. 

The  fact  that  each  Purana  is  devoted  to  the  praise  of  some 
special  deity,  who,  according  to  its  teaching,  is  supreme,  whilst 
deities  described  in  other  Puranas  in  equally  extravagant  language 
arc  slighted,  and  in  some  cases  even  their  worship  is  forbidden, 
proves  that  these  books  must  have  been  written  at  different 
times  ;  and  probably  by  those  who  were  ignorant  of  what  others 
had  written.  And  yet  the  popular  belief  is  that  they  were  all 
the  work  of  the  great  sage  Vyasa,  the  arranger  of  the  Vedas  and 
the  Mahabhfirata. 


The  Puranas. 


79 


The  ideal  Purana — and  the  Vishnu  Purana  approaches  more 
nearly  to  this  ideal  than  any  other — should  treat  of  five  chief 
topics:* — "I.  The  creation  of  the  universe;  II.  Its  destruction 
and  re-creation  ;  III.  The  genealogy  of  gods  and  patriarchs  ; 
IV.  The  reigns  and  periods  of  the  Manus  (rulers  over  long  periods 
of  time) ;  and  V.  The  history  of  the  two  great  races  of  kings,  the 
Solar  and  the  Lunar."  The  Puranas,  as  at  present  known,  do  not 
generally  approach  to  this  ideal ;  some  treating  of  some  of  these 
subjects  only,  others  containing  much  extraneous  matter.  Great 
discrepancies,  too,  are  found  in  the  different  genealogies.f 

In  describing  the  Puranic  deities,  I  shall  follow  the  common 
order.  The  Hindus  speak  of  the  three  great  gods — •Brahma, 
Vishnu,  Siva.  These  form  what  is  often  spoken  of  as  the  Hindu 
Triad.  After  giving  an  account  of  each  of  these  deities  and  their 
consorts,  I  shall  describe  those  who  are  regarded  as  their  incar- 
nations, or  descendants  ;  and  then  proceed  to  speak  of  those 
who  have  not  any  formal  connection  with  any  of  them.  It  will 
be  seen  that  most  of  the  principal  deities  are  connected  with  one 
or  other  of  these  three. 


*  Wilson's  preface  to  the  '  Vishnu  Purana.' 

t  For  an  outline  of  the  contents  of  the  different  Puranas,  see  Introduction 
to  Wilson's  c  Vishnu  Purana.' 


So  The  Puranic  Deities. 


CHAPTER  II. 

BRAHMA.* 

Brahma  is  regarded  as  the  Supreme  Being,  the  God  of  gods  ;  of 
whom  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva  are  manifestations.  It  is  true 
that,  in  some  verses  of  the  Vedas,  attributes  that  are  ascribed  to 
him  are  also  ascribed  to  other  deities,  and  in  some  parts  of  the 
Puranas  certain  incarnations  are  said  to  be  identical  with  the 
supreme  Brahma ;  nevertheless  it  is  certain  that  Brahma  is 
regarded  by  the  Hindus  (for  which  opinion  there  is  abundant 
authority  in  their  Scriptures)  as  the  Supreme  God, — the  origin  of 
all  the  others,  and  of  whom  they  are  manifestations.  Thus  we 
read  in  the  '  Atharva-Veda  :  '* — "  All  the  gods  are  in  (Brahma) 
as  cows  in  a  cow-house.  In  the  beginning  Brahma  was  this 
[universe].  He  created  gods.  Having  created  gods,  he  placed 
them  in  these  worlds,  viz.  Agni  in  this  world,  Vayu  in  the 
atmosphere,  and  Surya  in  the  sky.  And  in  the  worlds  which 
are  yet  higher,  he  placed  the  gods  which  are  still  higher.  Then 
Brahma  proceeded  to  the  higher  sphere  "  [which  is  explained  by 
the  commentator  to  mean  the  Satyaloka,  the  most  excellent  and 
limit  of  all  the  worlds].  "The  gods  were  originally  mortal  ; 
but  when  they  were  pervaded  by  Brahma,  they  became  im- 
mortal." In  the  '  Taittiriya  Brahmana '  it  is  said:  "Brahma 
generated  the  gods,  Brahma  (generated)  this  entire  world. 
Within  him    are    all   these  worlds.     Within   him    is  this  entire 


It  will  he  noticed  that  the  tinal  vowel  in  the  name  of  this  deity  is  short, 
whilst  in  that  of  his  first  incarnation  it  i>  long. 
t  Muir,  0.  S.  T.,  v.  387  ff. 


Brahma.  8i 


universe.  It  is  Brahma  who  is  the  greatest  of  beings.  Who 
can  vie  with  him  ?  In  Brahma,  the  thirty-three  gods  ;  in 
Brahma,  Indra  and  Praj&pati  ;  in  Brahma  all  things  are  con- 
tained as  in  a  ship."        ^^| 

Prof.  Monier  Williams  says  :* — "  Only  a  few  hymns  of  the 
Vedas  appear  to  contain  the  simple  conception  of  one  divine 
self-existent,  omnipresent  being  ;  and  even  in  these,  the  idea 
of  one  god  present  in  all  nature  is  somewhat  nebulous  and 
undefined."  Further  on  he  says  :  "  In  the  Purusha  Sukta  of  the 
Rig- Veda,  the  one  spirit  is  called  Purusha.  The  more  common 
name  in  the  later  system  is  Brahman,  neuter  (nom.  Brahma), 
derived  from  the  root  brih,  'to  expand,'  and  denoting  the  univer- 
sally expanding  essence,  or  universally  diffused  substance  of  the 
universe  .  .  .  Brahman,  in  the  neuter,  being  '  simple  infinite  being ' 
— the  only  real  eternal  essence — which,  when  it  passes  into  actual 
manifested  existence,  is  called  Brahma  ;  when  it  develops  itself 
in  the  world,  is  called  Vishnu  ;  and  when  it  again  dissolves  itself 
into  simple  being,  is  called  Siva  ;  all  the  other  innumerable  gods 
and  demi-gods  being  also  mere  manifestations  of  the  neuter 
Brahman,  who  is  eternal." 

In  the  '  Vishnu  Purana '  f  Brahma  is  translated  as  "  abstract 
supreme  spirit."  Later  on  %  the  question  is  asked,  "  How  can 
creative  agency  be  attributed  to  Brahma,  who  [as  abstract  spirit] 
is  without  qualities,  illimitable,  and  free  from  imperfection  ? ' 
The  answer  is,  that  "  the  essential  properties  of  existent  things 
are  objects  of  observation,  of  which  no  foreknowledge  is 
attainable  ;  and  creation  and  hundreds  of  properties  belong  to 
Brahma  as  inseparable  parts  of  his  essence,  as  heat  is  inherent 
in  fire."  The  Purana  goes  on  to  say  that  creation  is  effected 
through  the  agency  of  Brahma,  the  first  manifestation  of 
Brahma  ;  and  then  declares  that  Vishnu  is  one  with  Brahma. 

Again,  this  Purana  §  says :  "  There  are  two  states  of  this 
Brahma, — one  with,  and  one  without  shape  ;  one  perishable,  one 
imperishable  ;  which  are  inherent  in  all  beings.    The  imperishable 

*  '  Indian  Wisdom,'  p.  12.  t  Page  2. 

\  Book  I.  chap.  iii.  §  Page  157. 

G 


82  The  Puranic  Deities. 


is  the  supreme  being  ;  the  perishable  is  all  the  world.  The 
blaze  of  fire  burning  in  one  spot  diffuses  light  and  heat  around  ; 
so  the  world  is  nothing  more  than  the  manifested  energy  of  the 
supreme  Brahma  ;  and  inasmuch  as  the  light  and  heat  are 
stronger  or  feebler  as  we  are  near  to  the  fire  or  far  off  from  it, 
the  energy  of  the  supreme  is  more  or  less  intense  in  the 
beings  that  are  less  or  more  remote  from  him.  Brahma,  Vishnu, 
and  Siva  are  the  most  powerful  energies  of  God  ;  next  to  them 
are  the  inferior  deities  ;  then  the  attendant  spirits  ;  then  men  ; 
then  animals,  birds,  insects,  vegetables  ;  each  becoming  more 
and     more    feeble    as   they    are    farther    from    their    primitive 


source." 


The  '  Vishnu  Purana  '  *  gives  the  following  derivation  of  the 
word  Brahma  : — It  "  is  derived  from  the  root  vriha  (to  increase), 
because  it  is  infinite  (spirit),  and  because  it  is  the  cause  by 
which  the  Vedas  (and  all  things)  are  developed."  Then  follows 
this  hymn  to  Brahma  : — "  Glory  to  Brahma,  who  is  addressed 
by  that  mystic  word  (Ovi)^  associated  eternally  with  the  triple 
universe  (earth,  sky,  and  heaven),  and  who  is  one  with  the  four 
Vedas.  Glory  to  Brahma,  who  alike  in  the  destruction  and 
renovation  of  the  world  is  called  the  great  and  mysterious  cause 
of  the  intellectual  principle  ;  who  is  without  limit  in  time  or 
space,  and  exempt  from  diminution  and  decay.  .  .  .  He  is  the 
invisible,  imperishable  Brahma  ;  varying  in  form,  invariable  in 
substance  ;  the  chief  principle,  self-engendered  ;  who  is  said  to 
illuminate  the  caverns  of  the  heart ;  who  is  indivisible,  radiant, 
undecaying,  multiform.  To  that  supreme  Brahma  be  for  ever 
adoration." 

In  perfect  harmony  with  this  teaching  of  the  '  Vishnu  Purana' 
is  the  common  belief  of  the  Hindus.  No  phrase  is  more  commonly 
used  by  them  when   speaking   of  the  divine  being  than  this  : 

•  Page  273. 

f  This  word  occurs  at  the  commencement  of  prayers  and  religious 
ceremonies.  It  is  so  sacred  that  none  must  hear  it  pronounced.  Originally 
the  three  letters  {a  u  in)  of  which  if  is  formed  typified  the  three  Vedas  ; 
afterwards  it  became  a  mystical  symbol  of  the  three  deities — Brahma, 
Vishnu,  Siva. 


Brahma. 


83 


"God  (Brahma)  is  one  without  a  second."  The  word  used  by 
them  for  God  as  distinguished  from  his  manifestations  is 
Brahma  ;  and  when  charged  with  Polytheism,  and  of  violating 
the  primary  law  respecting  the  unity  of  God,  they  reply  that 
Brahma,  Vishnu,  Siva,  &c,  are  only  manifestations  of  the 
supreme  Brahma.* 


*  The  Theistic  sect  that  arose  in  Bengal  during  the  present  century,  for  a 
long  time  gloried  in  the  name  Brahmo  Somaj  ;  i.e.  the  Society  that  wor- 


shipped the  supreme  Brahma  or  God. 


\.?Ay  v,v  va'.y  \,y.\  .Yv.\:a  at^ia  \i\jjj2Ji>li:jj^jjuuu^jilj^^i/uu.'JUj: 


a 


G    2 


84 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


CHAPTER  III. 

BRAHMA   AND    SARASVATI. 
BRAHMA. 

BRAHMA,  the  first    of  three   great    Hindu   gods,   is   called  the 
Creator  ;  he  is  the  father  of  gods  and  men,  Prajapati,  the  lord 

of  creatures.  As  nearly  all  the 
sacred  writers  seem  to  regard  it 
as  a  duty  to  describe  the  work  of 
creation  as  performed  by  this 
god,  and  as  each  account  differs 
in  detail  from  the  others,  it  is  a 
perfectly  hopeless  task  to  attempt 
to  give  a  harmonised  statement 
gathered  from  them  all.  I  shall 
therefore  give  Manu's  *  account  of 
it,  which  is  largely  founded  upon 
the  teaching  of  the  Vedas,  though 
considerably  mixed  up  with  more 
modern  views. 

"  This   universe  was  enveloped 
in  darkness — unperceived,    undis- 
tinguishable,    undiscoverable,    un- 
knowable, as  it  were,  entirely  sunk 
in    sleep.       The    irresistible    self- 
existent  lord,  undiscerned,  creating  this  universe  with  the  five 
elements,   and   all   other   things,  was  manifested  dispelling  the 
gloom.     He  who  is  beyond  the  cognizance  of  the  senses,  subtile, 


IlKAHMA. 


*     < 


Dharma  Shastra,'  chaps,  i.-v.,  written  about  800  B.C. 


Brahma.  85 


undiscernible,  eternal,  who  is  the  essence  of  all  things,  and  in- 
conceivable, himself  shone  forth.  He,  desiring,  seeking  to 
produce  various  creatures  from  his  own  body,  first  created 
the  waters,  and  deposited  in  them  a  seed.  This  (seed)  became 
a  golden  egg,  resplendent  as  the  sun,  in  which  He  himself 
was  born  as  Brahma,  the  progenitor  of  all  worlds.  The  waters 
are  called  nardh,  because  they  are  the  offspring  of  Nara  ;  and 
since  they  were  formerly  the  place  of  his  movement  (ayand), 
he  is  therefore  called  Narayana.*  Being  formed  by  that  First 
Cause,  undiscernible,  eternal,  which  is  both  existent  and  non- 
existent, that  male  is  known  in  the  world  as  Brahma.  That 
lord  having  continued  a  year  in  the  egg,  divided  it  into  two 
parts  by  his  mere  thought."  f  In  the  Mahabharata,  and  some 
of  the  Puranas,  Brahma  is  said  to  have  issued  from  a  lotus  that 
sprung  from  the  navel  of  Vishnu. 

The  egg  referred  to  above  is  thus  described  in  the  '  Vishnu 
Purana  : '  J — "  Its  womb,  vast  as  the  mountain  Meru,  was  com- 
posed of  the  mountains,  and  the  mighty  oceans  were  the  waters 
which  filled  its  cavity.  In  that  egg  were  the  continents,  seas,  and 
mountains  ;  the  planets  and  divisions  of  the  universe ;  the  gods, 
the  demons  and  mankind.  Brahma  is  said  to  be  born  ;  a  familiar 
phrase  to  signify  his  manifestation."  This  wonderful  egg,  after 
the  Creator  had  inhabited  it  for  a  thousand  years,  burst  open, 
and  Brahma  by  meditation  commenced  the  work  of  creation. 
Seeing  that  the  earth  was  sunk  beneath  the  waters,  he  assumed 
the  form  of  a  boar,§  and,  diving,  raised  it  upon  his  tusks.  After 
this,  Brahma  continued  the  work  of  creation. 


*  According  to  the  '  Brahma  Purana,'  another  name,  Apava  (who  sports  on 
the  waters),  is  given  Brahma,  which  has  a  similar,  though  not  an  identical 
application  with  Narayana.  Apava,  according  to  that  Purana,  divided  him- 
self into  two  parts,  male  and  female,  from  whom  proceeded  Vishnu,  who  in 
his  turn  created  Viraj,  who  brought  the  first  man  into  the  world.  Wilson 
says,  "  According  to  the  commentator  on  this  passage,  the  first  stage  was  the 

creation  of  Apava,  or  Vishistha,  or  Viraj  by  Vishnu,  through  the  agency  of 
Brahma  ;    and  the  next  was  the  creation  of  Manu  by    Viraj." — Dowson, 
s.  v.  Apave.  f  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  iv.  31.  %  Page  18. 

§  In  later  writings  Vishnu,  in  a  special  incarnation,  is  said  to  have 
accomplished  this  work. 


86  The   Puranic  Deities. 


In  pictures  Brahma  is  represented  as  a  red  man  with  four 
heads,  though  in  the  Puranas  he  is  said  to  have  had  originally 
five.  He  is  dressed  in  white  raiment,  and  rides  upon  a  goose. 
In  one  hand  he  carries  a  staff,  in  the  other  a  dish  for  receiving 
alms.  A  legend  in  the  '  Matsya  Purana'  *  gives  the  following 
account  of  the  formation  of  his  numerous  heads  : — "  Brahma 
next  formed  from  his  own  immaculate  substance  a  female  who 
is  celebrated  under  the  names  of  Satarupa,  Savitri,  Sarasvati, 
Gayatri,  and  Brahmani.  Beholding  his  daughter,  born  from  his 
body,  Brahma  became  wounded  with  the  arrows  of  love,  and 
exclaimed,  '  How  surpassingly  lovely  she  is  ! '  Satarupa  turned 
to  the  right  side  from  his  gaze ;  but  as  Brahma  wished  to 
look  after  her,  a  second  head  issued  from  his  body.  As  she 
passed  to  the  left,  and  behind  him,  to  avoid  his  amorous  glances, 
two  other  heads  successively  appeared.  At  length  she  sprang 
into  the  sky  ;  and  as  Brahma  was  anxious  to  gaze  after  her 
there,  a  fifth  head  was  immediately  formed.  Brahma  then  said 
to  his  daughter,  '  Let  us  produce  all  kinds  of  animated  beings, 
men,  Suras  (gods),  and  Asuras  (demons).  Hearing  this,  she 
descended,  and  Brahma  having  espoused  her,  they  withdrew  to  a 
occluded  spot  where  they  dwelt  together  for  one  hundred  divine 
years  ;  f  at  the  expiration  of  which  time  was  born  Manu,  who  is 
also  called  Swayambhuva  and  Viraj."  J 

The  following  legend  §  occurs,  with  some  variations,  in  se- 
veral Puranas,  showing  why  Brahma  was  deprived  of  his  fifth 
head  : — 

"  Once  when  they  were  assembled  on  the  top  of  Meru,  the 
holy  sages  having  saluted  Brahma,  requested  him  to  declare  the 
true  nature  of  the  godhead  ;  but  the  Creator,  influenced  by  the 

*  Kennedy's  'Hindu  Mythology,'  p.  317. 

t  Sec  Part  II.  chap.  x. 

j  The  l  Bhagavata  1'urana'  says  there  was  another  son  from  this  marriage, 
named  Priyavrata.  Being  dissatisfied  with  the  work  of  the  Sun  because  he 
illuminated  only  one-half  of  the  world  at  a  time,  he  followed  him  seven  times 
in  a  flaming  chariot  of  equal  velocity,  like  another  sun,  and  thus  turned  night 
into  day.  Brahma  stopped  him.  The  ruts  made  by  his  chariot  wheels  be- 
came the  seven  oceans  ;  and  thus  the  seven  continents  were  made. — Dowson. 

§   Kennedy's  '  Hindu  Mythology,'  p.  273. 


Brahma.  87 


delusion  of  Mahesha  (a  demon),  and  his  mind  obscured  by  spiritual 
darkness,  asserted  his  own  pre-eminence,  and  said  :  '  I  am  the 
womb  of  the  universe,  without  beginning  or  end,  and  the  sole 
and  self-existent  lord  ;  and  he  who  does  not  worship  me,  shall 
never  obtain  beatitude.'  On  hearing  this,  Kratu,  a  form  of 
Narayana  (Vishnu),  smiled  and  said  :  '  Hadst  thou  not  been 
misled  by  ignorance,  thou  wouldst  not  have  made  an  assertion 
so  contrary  to  truth  ;  for  I  am  the  framer  of  the  universe,  the 
source  of  life,  the  unborn,  eternal  and  supreme  Narayana  ;  and, 
had  I  not  willed  it,  creation  would  not  have  taken  place.' 

"Thus  Vishnu  and  Brahma  disputed,  and  at  length  they 
agreed  to  allow  the  matter  to  be  decided  by  the  Vedas.  The 
Vedas  declared  that  Siva  was  creator,  preserver,  destroyer. 
Having  heard  these  words,  Vishnu  and  Brahma,  still  bewildered 
by  the  darkness  of  delusion,  said,  '  How  can  the  lord  of  goblins, 
the  delighter  in  graveyards,  the  naked  devotee  covered  with  ashes, 
haggard  in  appearance,  wearing  twisted  locks  ornamented  with 
snakes,  be  the  supreme  being  ? '  The  incorporeal  Prana  (Life), 
then  assuming  a  form,  said,  '  This  is  not  the  real  form  of  Siva  ; 
but  when  united  to  his  energy,  he  sometimes,  under  the  figure 
of  Rudra,  delights  himself  in  various  illusive  sports.'  But  even 
these  words  dispelled  not  the  spiritual  darkness  of  Vishnu  and 
Brahma  ;  when  suddenly  appeared  between  them  a  wondrous 
effulgence  filling  the  heavens,  earth,  and  mid-air.  In  the  midst 
of  this  they  beheld  a  human  form,  vast,  uncreated,  of  a  dark  hue, 
holding  in  his  hand  a  trident  and  a  rosary,  and  wearing  a  serpent 
for  a  Brahmanical  thread.  On  seeing  whom,  the  fifth  head  of 
Brahma  glowed  with  anger  and  said  :  '  I  know  thee  well,  O 
Chandra  Shekera,  for  from  my  forehead  didst  thou  spring,  and 
because  thou  didst  weep  I  called  thee  Rudra.  Hasten  then  to 
seek  the  refuge  of  my  feet,  and  I  will  protect  thee,  O  my  son  ! ' 
At  these  proud  words  of  Brahma,  Siva  was  incensed  ;  and  from 
his  anger  sprang  into  existence  a  terrific  form  (Bhairava),  whom 
he  thus  addressed  :  '  Chastise  this  lotus-born  ! '  No  sooner  did 
Bhairava  receive  this  order,  than  instantly  he  cut  off  the  head  of 
Brahma  with  the  thumb  of  his  left  hand.  That  member  which 
had  committed   the  fault   received  punishment ;    and  therefore 


88  The  Puranic  Deities. 

Brahma  was  deprived  of  his  fifth  head."     Upon  this  Vishnu  and 
Brahma  praised  Siva. 

In  another  part  of  the  same  Purana  *  is  another  legend,  giving 
a  somewhat  different  account  of  this  circumstance  : — 

"  Formerly  all  things  movable  and  immovable  having  been 
destroyed,  nought  remained  but  one  boundless  ocean  ;  nor  fire, 
nor  air,  nor  sun,  nor  atmosphere,  nor  stars,  nor  planets,  nor  light, 
nor  earth,  nor  heaven,  nor  gods  nor  demons  existed  then  ;  and  all 
was  involved  in  impenetrable  darkness.  One  being  alone,  Maha 
Kala  (Siva),  pervaded  all  space  ;  wrho  being  desirous  of  creation, 
churned  his  left  arm  with  his  right  forefinger  ;  when  issued  a 
bubble,  which  increasing  in  size  became  an  egg  resembling  gold. 
This  egg  Maha  Kala  divided  with  his  hand  ;  of  the  upper  part 
he  formed  the  heavens,  and  of  the  lower  half  the  earth,  and 
in  the  centre  of  it  appeared  Brahma  with  five  heads  and  four 
arms,  to  whom  Maha  Kala  thus  said,  '  Through  my  favour  effect 
creation  : '  having  thus  spoken,  he  disappeared. 

"  Brahma  having  then  considered  in  what  manner  he  could 
accomplish  this  object,  propitiated  this  lord  Bhava  with  a 
severe  tapas  (meditation),  and  in  consequence  received  from  him 
the  four  Vedas,  and  was  thus  enabled  to  become  the  Creator. 
But  as  Siva  had  not  revealed  himself,  Brahma  continued  his 
tapas,  in  order  that  he  might  behold  that  god.  Siva  was 
propitiated  ;  but,  still  invisible,  thus  said,  '  O  Brahma,  choose 
whatever  boon  thou  choosest ! '  Brahma  craved  that  Siva  would 
become  his  son.  Siva  replied  :  '  Propitiated  by  thy  piety,  I  will 
become  thy  son  under  the  form  of  Rudra  ;  but  as  thou  hast 
craved  a  boon  which  ought  not  to  have  been  asked,  I  shall  on 
this  account  hereafter  cut  off  one  of  thy  heads.  Nevertheless, 
though  thou  shalt  afterwards  possess  but  four  heads,  yet  as  thou 
hast  been  formed  by  me,  from  my  own  substance  which  is  that 
Brahma,  shalt  thou  in  remembrance  of  this  circumstance  be 
denominated  Brahma.  Also  from  my  becoming  thy  son,  shalt 
thou  be  called  Pitamaha  (the  great  father). 

1  Brahma  having  obtained  both  a  boon  and  a  curse,  proceeded, 


*  Kennedy's  '  Hindu  Mythology,'  p.  276. 


BrahmA.  89 


in  order  to  effect  creation,  to  sacrifice  to  that  fire  which  had 
sprung  from  his  own  effulgence  ;  and  from  the  heat,  perspiration 
collected  on  his  forehead.  In  wiping  this  off  with  a  small  piece 
of  wood,  a  drop  of  blood  fell  into  the  fire,  from  which  by  the 
will  of  Siva  sprang  Rudra,  of  a  dark  hue,  with  five  heads,  ten 
hands,  and  fifteen  eyes  ;  having  a  serpent  for  his  Brahmanical 
thread,  wearing  twisted  locks,  and  the  moon  on  his  head,  and 
clothed  in  the  skin  of  a  lion.  Having  seen  such  a  son,  Brahma 
was  delighted,  and  bestowed  on  him  various  appellations. 
Brahma  having  created  various  classes  of  beings,  they  all  adored 
him,  except  Rudra  ;  to  whom  Brahma  said,  '  Why  dost  thou  not 
also  adore  me  ? '  Rudra  replied,  '  I  worship  none  other  than  that 
effulgence  from  which  I  sprang ! '  Having  thus  spoken,  he 
departed  to  Siva's  abode.  But  Brahma  from  the  impurity  of  his 
nature  became  immersed  in  spiritual  darkness,  and  thought  that 
it  was  by  his  own  power  alone  that  he  had  effected  creation,  and 
there  was  no  other  god  equal  to  him.  His  fifth  head  also  having 
read  the  Vedas,  which  the  other  four  heads  had  delivered, 
acquired  a  splendour  which  neither  Suras  (gods)  nor  Asuras 
(demons)  could  endure." 

The  '  Padma  Purana  '  *  thus  concludes  this  stoiy  :  "  Unable 
therefore  to  approach  or  behold  it,  they  determined  to  apply  to 
Siva  for  relief.  Being  propitiated  by  them,  Siva  granted  their 
request,  and  proceeded  with  them  to  where  Brahma.remained  in- 
flated with  pride.  On  seeing  Siva,  Brahma  did  not  pay  him  the 
customary  hpnours.  Siva,  seeing  Brahma's  fifth  head  inflicting 
distress  on  the  universe  by  its  effulgent  beams,  brighter  than  a 
thousand  suns,  approached  him  and  said,  '  Oh  !  this  head  shines 
with  too  much  splendour,'  and  immediately  cut  it  off  with  the 
nail  of  his  left  thumb,  with  as  much  ease  as  a  man  cuts  off  the 
stem  of  a  plantain  tree." 

The  Mahabharata  says  that  Siva  did  not  actually  cut  off 
Brahma's  head  on  this  occasion,  but  was  only  prevented  from 
doing  this  through  the  intercession  of  the  gods.  It  was  because 
of  his  attempting  to  seduce  his  own  daughter  that  Siva  decapi- 


Kennedy's  '  Hindu  Mythology,'  p.  276. 


90  The  Puranic  Deities. 


tated  him.  This  crime  was  attempted  when  in  a  fit  of  intoxica- 
tion ;  hence  Brahma  pronounced  a  curse  upon  the  gods  who 
should  hereafter  drink  spirits. 

In  the  passages  just  quoted,  Brahma  is  represented  as 
worshipping  Siva  for  his  own  special  benefit ;  in  the  '  Vishnu 
Purana,'  *  he  is  described  as  joining  with  gods  and  men  in  the 
worship  of  this  same  deity,  and  as  officiating  as  priest  on  that 
occasion.  And  in  another  part  of  the  Purana  f  is  the  following 
hymn  addressed  to  Vishnu  by  Brahma  : — "Thou  art  the  common 
centre  of  all,  the  protector  of  the  world,  and  all  things  exist  in 
thee.  All  that  has  been,  or  will  be,  thou  art.  There  is  nothing 
else  but  thee,  O  lord  ;  nothing  else  has  been,  or  will  be.  Thou 
art  independent,  and  without  beginning."  The  object  of  this 
laudation  was  to  induce  Vishnu  to  save  the  earth  from  its  load 
of  sorrow  ;  in  answer  to  it,  Vishnu  appeared  on  earth  as  Krishna. 

At  the  present  time  Brahma  is  not  largely  worshipped  by  the 
Hindus.  "  The  Brahmans  in  their  morning  and  evening  worship 
repeat  an  incantation  containing  a  description  of  the  image  of 
Brahma  ;  at  noon  they  present  to  him  a  single  flower  ;  at  the 
time  of  burnt-offering,  glil  is  presented  to  him.  In  the  month  of 
Magh,  at  the  full  moon,  an  earthen  image  of  him  is  worshipped, 
with  that  of  Siva  on  his  right  hand,  and  Vishnu  on  his  left."  % 
Brahma  as  Creator  is  supposed  to  have  finished  his  work  ;  hence 
excepting  in  one  place,  viz.  at  Pushkara  in  Ajmlr,  there  is  no 
temple  to  this  god  now  existing.  It  is  evident  that  for  centuries 
the  worship  of  Brahma  has  not  been  common,  from  the  fact  that 
in  the  '  Skanda  Purana '  §  is  an  indelicate  legend,  in  which  the 
charge  of  falsehood  is  proved  against  him,  and  is  given  to 
account  for  the  fact  that  his  worship  had  ceased.  It  concludes 
as  follows  :— "  Since  thou  hast  childishly  and  with  weak  under- 
standing asserted  a  falsehood,  let  no  one  henceforth  perform 
worship  to  thee." 

The  Mahabharata  says  that  Brahma's  heaven  is  eight  hundred 
miles  long,  four  hundred  wide,  and  forty  high.     Narada  declared 


*    Page  102.  f  Page  496. 

\  Ward,  ii.  30.  §  Kennedy's  '  Hindu  Mythology,'  p.  271. 


Sarasvati.  91 


himself  incompetent  to  describe  it.  In  two  hundred  years  he 
could  not  mention  all  its  excellences.  He  said  that  it  contained 
in  a  superior  degree  all  the  excellences  of  the  other  heaven  ;  and 
that  whatever  existed  in  the  creation  of  Brahma  on  earth,  from 
the  smallest  insect  to  the  largest  animal,  was  to  be  found  there. 

In  the  later  mythology,  a  deity  named  Dhata  (the  Creator), 
who  in  the  Rig-Veda  has  no  very  clearly-defined  powers,  but  is 
there  said  to  operate  in  the  production  of  life  and  the  preser- 
vation of  health,  is  identified  with  Prajapati,  or  Brahma  ;  and 
in  the  sense  of  "  maker,"  the  term  is  also  applied  to  Vishnu  and 
Krishna.     Sometimes  he  is  said  to  be  a  son  of  Brahma.* 

In  addition  to  the  names  of  Brahma  already  referred  to,  the 
following  are  those  most  commonly  known  : — 

Atmabhu,  "The  self-existent." 

Paramesthi,  "  The  chief  sacrificer."  He  as  the  first  Brahman 
performed  all  the  great  sacrifices  of  the  Hindu  religion. 

Lokesha,  "  The  god  of  the  world." 

Hiranyagarbha,  "  He  who  came  from  the  golden  Qgg.'* 

Savitripati,  "  The  husband  of  Savitri." 

Adikavi,  "The  first  poet." 


SARASVATI. 

Brahma's  wife  is  Sarasvati,  the  goddess  of  wisdom  and  science, 
the  mother  of  the  Vedas,  and  the  inventor  of  the  Devanagari 
letters.  She  is  represented  as  a  fair  young  woman,  with  four  arms. 
With  one  of  her  right  hands  she  is  presenting  a  flower  to  her 
husband,  by  whose  side  she  continually  stands  ;  and  in  the  other 
she  holds  a  book  of  palm-leaves,  indicating  that  she  is  fond  of 
learning.  In  one  of  her  left  hands  she  has  a  string  of  pearls, 
called  Sivamala  (Siva's  garland),  which  serves  as  a  rosary  ;  and 
in  the  other  is  a  damanv,  or  small  drum.  She  dwells  on  earth 
amongst  men,  but  her  special  abode  is  with  her  husband  in 
Brahmaloka. 

*  Dowson,  s.  v. 


92 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


Sarasvati  having  been  produced  from  Brahma,  was  regarded  as 
his  daughter ;  hence  her  union  with  him  was  said  to  be  criminal 

by  the  other  gods.  Sometimes  she 
is  called  the  wife  of  Vishnu,  but 
this  difficulty  is  explained  by  a 
legend.*  "  Sarasvati,  by  the  stan- 
dard mythological  authorities,  is 
the  wife  of  Brahma.  The  Vaish- 
navas  of  Bengal  have  a  popular 
legend  that  she  was  the  wife  of 
Vishnu,  as  were  also  Lakshmi  and 
Ganga.  The  ladies  disagreed, 
Sarasvati,  like  the  other  type  of 
learned  ladies,  Minerva,  being 
something  of  a  termagant ;  and 
Vishnu,  finding  that  one  wife  was 
as    much   as    even    a    eod    could 


manage,  transferred  Sarasvati  to 
Brahma  and  Ganga  to  Siva,  and 
contented  himself  with  Lakshmi 
alone. 
"  Sarasvati  is  a  goddess  of  some  though  not  of  very  great  im- 
portance in  the  Vedas.  .  .  .  She  is  celebrated  both  as  a  river  and 
a  goddess.  She  was  primarily  a  river  deity,  as  her  name,  '  the 
watery,'  clearly  denotes  ;  and  in  this  capacity  she  is  celebrated 
in  a  few  separate  passages.  Allusion  is  made  in  the  hymns,  as 
well  as  in  the  Brahmanas,  to  sacrifices  being  performed  on  the 
banks  of  this  river,  and  of  the  adjoining  Drishadvati  ;  and  the 
Sarasvati  in  particular  seems  to  have  been  associated  with  the 
reputation  for  sanctity  which  .  .  .  was  ascribed  to  the  whole  region 
called  Brahmavartta,  lying  between  these  two  small  streams, 
and  situated  immediately  to  the  westward  of  the  Jumna.  The 
Sarasvati  thus  appears  to  have  been  to  the  early  Indians  what 
the  Ganges  (which  is  only  twice  named  in  the  Rig-Veda)  is  to 
their  descendants.  .  .  .  When  once  the  river  had  acquired  a  divine 


SARASVATI. 


Wilson's  Works,  ii.  187. 


Sarasvati.  9 


n 


character,  it  was  quite  natural  that  she  should  be  regarded  as 
the  patroness  of  ceremonies  which  were  celebrated  on  the  margin 
of  her  holy  waters,  and  that  her  direction  and  blessing  should 
be  invoked  as  essential  to  their  proper  performance  and  success. 
The  connexion  into  which  she  was  thus  brought  with  sacred  rites 
may  have  led  to  the  further  step  of  imagining  her  to  have  an 
influence  on  the  composition  of  the  hymns  which  formed  so 
important  a  part  of  the  proceedings,  and  of  identifying  her  with 
Vach,  the  goddess  of  speech.  At  least  I  have  no  other  explana- 
tion to  offer  to  this  double  character  and  identification.* 

"  Sarasvati  is  frequently  invited  to  the  sacrifices  along  with 
several  other  goddesses,  who,  however,  were  never,  like  her,  river 
nymphs,  but  personifications  of  some  department  of  religious 
worship,  or  sacred  science.  She  is  frequently  invoked  along  with 
other  deities. 

"  In  many  passages  where  she  is  celebrated,  her  original  cha- 
racter is,  as  I  have  intimated,  distinctly  preserved.  Thus  in  two 
places  she  is  mentioned  along  with  rivers,  or  fertilizing  waters :  '  Ye 
opulent  waters,  command  riches  ;  ye  possess  excellent  power 
and  immortality  ;  ye  are  mistresses  of  wealth  and  progeny  ;  may 
Sarasvati  bestow  this  vitality  on  her  worshipper.'  And  she  is 
mentioned  with  the  other  well-known  streams  which  are  there 
named,  the  Sindhu,  Ganga,  &c.  In  another  place  she  is  said  to 
'  surpass  all  other  rivers,  and  to  flow  pure  from  the  mountains  to 
the  sea.'  In  other  places  she  is  called  upon  to  '  descend  from  the 
sky,  from  the  great  mountain  to  the  sacrifice  ;'  and  is  supplicated 
to  combine  with  the  spouses  of  the  other  gods,  to  afford  secure 
protection  to  the  worshippers:  ...  It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  in 
any  of  the  passages  in  which  Sarasvati  is  invoked,  even  in  those 
where  she  appears  as  the  patroness  of  holy  rites,  her  character  as 
a  river  goddess  is  entirely  left  out  of  sight.  .  .  . 

"  In  the  later  mythology,  as  is  well  known,  Sarasvati  was 
identified  with  Vach,  and  became  under  various  names  the  spouse 
of  Brahma,  and  the  goddess  of  wisdom  and  eloquence,  and  is 
invoked   as    a   Muse.     In  the    Mahabharata    she  is   called  the 


Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  339. 


94  The  Puranic  Deities. 


mother  of  the  Vedas,  and  the  same  is  said  of  Vach  in  the  Tait- 
Brah,  where  she  is  said  to  be  the  wife  of  Indra,  to  contain  within 
herself  all  worlds,  and  to  have  been  sought  after  by  the  Rishis 
who  composed  the  Vedic  hymns,  as  well  as  by  the  gods  through 
austerity."  * 

In  the  Puranas,  Sarasvati  is  spoken  of  under  other  titles.  A 
verse  in  the  '  Matsya  Purana '  gives  authority  for  the  belief  that 
one  goddess  only  is  intended,  though  she  is  called  by  several 
names  :  "  Brahma  next  formed  from  his  own  immaculate 
substance  a  female,  who  is  celebrated  under  the  names  of 
Satarupa,  Savitri,  Sarasvati,  Gayatri,  and  Brahmanl."  In  the 
following  legend  from  the  '  Skanda  Purana,'  f  though  by  Savitri 
Sarasvati  is  intended,  Gayatri  represents  some  other  person  who 
became  a  second  wife  of  Brahma.  Iswara  (Siva)  is  addressing 
Devi  (Parvati)  : — 

"  Listen,  O  Devi,  and  I  will  tell  you  how  Savitri  forsook 
Brahma,  and  he  in  consequence  espoused  Gayatri.  The  Vedas 
have  declared  the  great  advantages  which  are  derived  from 
sacrifice,  by  which  the  gods  are  delighted,  and  therefore  bestow 
rain  upon  the  earth.  .  .  .  To  secure  therefore  the  verdure  and 
vitality  of  the  three  worlds,  I  perform  sacrifices ;  and,  in 
imitation  of  me,  sacrifices  are  performed  by  gods  and  men.  For 
the  same  purpose  Brahma  and  his  wife  Savitri,  the  immortals, 
and  the  holy  sages  repaired  to  Pushkara  ;  but  when  all  the 
preparations  had  been  made,  with  all  due  rites  and  ceremonies, 
for  performing  the  sacrifices,  Savitri,  detained  by  some  house- 
hold affairs,  was  not  in  attendance.  A  priest  accordingly  went 
to  call  her ;  but  she  replied,  '  I  have  not  yet  completed  my 
dress,  nor  arranged  several  affairs.  Lakshmi,  and  Bhavani,  and 
Ganga,  and  Svaha,  and  Indrani,  and  the  wives  of  the  other  gods 
and  of  the  holy  sages,  have  not  yet  arrived,  and  how  therefore 
can  I  enter  the  assembly  alone  ? ' 

"  The  priest  returned,  and  thus  addressed  Brahma  :  '  Savitri 
is  engaged  and  will  not  come  ;  but  without  a  wife  what  advan- 
tage can  be  derived  from  these  rites  ? '     The  god,  incensed  at 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  337  {{.  f   Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Mythology,'  p.  320. 


Sarasvati.  95 


the  conduct  of  Savitri,  thus  spoke  to  Indra  :  '  Hasten,  and,  in 
obedience  to  my  order,  bring  a  wife  from  wherever  you  can  find 
one.'  Indra  proceeded  accordingly  ;  and  as  he  passed  hastily 
along,  he  saw  a  milkmaid,  young,  beautiful,  and  of  a  smiling 
countenance,  carrying  a  jar  of  butter.  He  seized  her  and 
brought  her  to  the  assembly  ;  when  Brahma  thus  spoke  :  '  O 
gods  and  holy  sages,  if  it  seem  good  unto  you  I  will  espouse  this 
Gayatri,  and  she  shall  become  the  mother  of  the  Vedas,  and  the 
cause  of  purity  to  these  worlds  !  '  Upon  this  Brahma  was  united 
to  Gayatri,  who  was  led  into  the  bower  of  the  bride,  and  there 
arrayed  in  silken  garments,  and  adorned  with  the  costliest 
ornaments. 

"  At  this  time  Savitri,  accompanied  by  the  wives  of  Vishnu, 
Rudra,  and  the  other  gods,  came  to  the  place  of  sacrifice.  Seeing 
the  milkmaid  in  the  bride's  bower,  and  the  priests  engaged  in  the 
performance  of  the  sacred  rites,  incensed  with  anger,  she  thus  ad- 
dressed Pitamaha  :  '  O  Brahma  !  hast  thou  conceived  so  sinful 
an  intention  as  to  reject  me,  who  am  thy  wedded  wife  ?  Hast 
thou  no  sense  of  shame,  that  thus,  influenced  by  love,  thou  com- 
mittest  so  reprehensible  an  act  ?  Thou  art  called  the  great 
father  of  gods  and  holy  sages,  and  yet  thou  here  publicly  actest 
in  a  manner  which  must  excite  the  derision  of  the  three  worlds. 
But  how  can  I  now  show  my  face  ;  or,  deserted  by  my  husband, 
call  myself  a  wife  ? '  Brahma  replied  :  '  The  priests  informed 
me  that  the  time  for  the  sacrifice  was  passing  away,  and  that  it 
could  not  profitably  be  performed  unless  my  wife  were  present, .  . . 
and  Indra  having  brought  that  Gayatri,  Vishnu  and  Rudra  gave 
her  in  marriage  to  me.  Forgive,  therefore,  this  one  act,  and  I 
will  never  again  offend  thee  ! ' 

"  On  hearing  these  words,  Savitri  exclaimed,  '  By  the  powers 
which  I  have  obtained  by  the  performance  of  tapas,  may  Brahma 
never  be  worshipped  in  temple  or  sacred  place,  except  one  day 
in  each  year.  .  .  .  And,  Indra,  since  thou  didst  bring  that  milkmaid 
to  Brahma,  thou  shalt  be  bound  in  chains  by  thine  enemies,  and 
confined  in  a  strange  country  ;  and  thy  city  and  station  shall  be 
occupied  by  thine  enemies.'  Addressing  Vishnu,  she  said, 
'  Since  thou  gavest  her  in   marriage  to  Brahma,  shalt  thou,  in 


c>6  The  Puranic  Deities. 


consequence  of  Bhrigu's  curse,  be  born  amongst  men,  and  shalt 
endure  the  agony  of  having  thy  wife  ravished  from  thee  by  thine 
enemy ;  and  long  also  shalt  thou  wander,  the  humble  keeper  of 
cattle ! '  To  Rudra  she  said  :  '  By  the  curse  of  the  holy  sages, 
shalt  thou  be  deprived  of  thy  manhood  ! '  To  Agni  :  '  Mayest 
thou  be  a  devourer  of  all  things,  clean  and  unclean  !  '  To.  the 
priests  and  Brahmans  :  '  Henceforth  shall  ye  perform  sacrifices 
solely  from  the  desire  of  obtaining  the  usual  gifts  ;  and  from 
covetousness  alone,  shall  ye  attend  temples  and  holy  places  ; 
satisfied  only  shall  ye  be  with  the  food  of  others,  and  dissatisfied 
with  that  of  your  own  houses  ;  and  in  quest  of  riches  shall  ye 
unduly  perform  holy  rites  and  ceremonies  ! ' 

"  Having  pronounced  these  curses,  Savitri  left  the  assembly, 
and  was  accompanied  for  a  short  distance  by  Lakshmi  and  the 
other  goddesses,  when  they  all  declared  their  intention  of  return- 
ing. On  hearing  this,  Savitri  was  incensed,  and  thus  addressed 
them  :  '  Since  you  now  forsake  me,  O  Lakshmi  !  mayest  thou 
never  remain  stationary  in  one  place  ;  *  and  mayest  thou  always 
abide  with  the  vile,  the  inconstant,  the  contemptible,  the  sinful, 
the  cruel,  the  foolish,  and  the  barbarian !  And,  Indrani,  when 
Indra  incurs  the  guilt  of  Brahmanicide  by  slaying  Tvastri's  son, 
then  shall  Nahusha  acquire  his  kingdom,  and,  desirous  of  obtain- 
ing thee,  shall  exclaim,  "  Am  I  not  Indra  ?  why  then  does  not 
the  young  and  lovely  Indrani  wait  upon  me  ?  If  I  do  not 
obtain  her,  I  will  slay  all  the  gods."  Thou  on  learning  his  wishes 
shalt  remain  in  thy  house  immersed  in  grief,  and  borne  down  by 
the  weight  of  my  curse  ! '  Savitri  then  pronounced  this  curse  on 
the  wives  of  the  gods  collectively  :  '  May  you  all  remain  barren  ; 
and  may  you  never  enjoy  the  pleasure  of  having  children  ! ' 
Vishnu  then  tried  in  vain  to  appease  her." 

After  Savitri's  angry  departure  from  the  assembly,  Gayatri 
modified  the  curses  that  had  been  pronounced.  She  promised 
all  kinds  of  blessing,  including  final  absorption  into  him,  to  all 
the  worshippers  of  Brahma.  Though  Indra  be  bound,  his  son 
should   release   him.     Though  Vishnu  lost  his  wife,   he  should 

*   Lakshmi  is  the  goddess  of  fortune. 


Sarasvati. 


97 


regain  her.  Though  Rudra  be  deprived  of  his  manhood,  the 
Linga  as  his  representative  should  be  universally  worshipped. 
Though  men  made  gifts  to  the  Brahmans,  it  would  be  because 
they  reverenced  them  as  gods.  And  though  the  goddesses  could 
not  have  children  of  their  own,  this  fact  would  not  cause  them 
regret. 

The  '  Padma  Purana '  gives  a  happier  termination  to  this  story. 
Vishnu  and  Lakshmi,  at  Brahma's  request,  followed  Savitri  when 
she  left  the  assembly,  and  induced  her  to  return.  On  re-entering, 
Brahma  asked  what  she  wished  him  to  do  with  Gayatri.  Savitri 
was  too  bashful  to  speak  ;  whereupon  Gayatri  threw  herself  at  her 
feet.  Savitri  raised  her,  and  embracing  her  said  :  "  A  wife  ought 
to  obey  the  wishes  and  orders  of  her  husband  ;  for  that  wife  who 
reproaches  her  husband,  who  is  complaining  and  quarrelsome, 
and  instead  of  being  his  life,  deprives  him  by  her  conduct  of 
length  of  years,  shall,  when  she  dies,  most  assuredly  go  to  hell. 
Considering  this,  the  virtuous  wife  will  do  nothing  displeasing  to 
her  husband  ;  therefore  let  us  both  be  attached  to  Brahma." 
"  So  be  it,"  said  Gayatri ;  "  thy  orders  will  I  always  obey,  and 
esteem  thy  friendship  precious  as  my  life.  Thy  daughter  am  I, 
O  goddess  !     Deign  to  protect  me  ! " 

In  a  legend  in  the  'Varaha  Purana,'  Sarasvati  is  addressed  as 
Gayatri,  Sarasvati,  Maheshvari  (one  of  the  names  of  Parvati), 
and  also  Savitri.  Her  most  common  name  is  Sarasvati,  by 
which  name,  as  the  goddess  of  learning,  she  is  regularly  wor- 
shipped once  a  year. 


H 


98  The  Puranic  Deities, 


CHAPTER  IV. 

VISHNU  AND  LAKSHMI. 

VISHNU 

VlSHNU  is  called  the  second  person  of  the  Hindu  Trimurti,  or 
Triad  :  but  though  called  second,  it  must  not  be  supposed  that 
he  is  regarded  as  in  any  way  inferior  to  Brahma  ;  in  some  books 
Brahma  is  said  to  be  the  first  cause  of  all  things,  in  others 
it  is  as  strongly  asserted  that  Vishnu  has  this  honour  ;  while 
in  others  it  is  claimed  for  Siva.  As  Brahma's  special  work 
is  creation,  that  of  Vishnu  is  preservation.  In  the  following 
passage  from  the  '  Padma  Purana,'  it  is  taught  that  Vishnu  is  the 
supreme  cause,  and  also  that  his  special  work  is  to  preserve : — "  In 
the  beginning  of  creation,  the  great  Vishnu,  desirous  of  creating 
the  whole  world,  became  threefold  ;  Creator,  Preserver,  Destroyer. 
In  order  to  create  this  world,  the  Supreme  Spirit  produced  from 
the  right  side  of  his  body  himself  as  Brahma  ;  then,  in  order  to 
preserve  the  world,  he  produced  from  his  left  side  Vishnu  ;  and 
in  order  to  destroy  the  world,  he  produced  from  the  middle  of 
his  body  the  eternal  Siva.  Some  worship  Brahma,  others 
Vishnu,  others  Siva  ;  but  Vishnu,  one  yet  threefold,  creates,  pre- 
serves, and  destroys  :  therefore  let  the  pious  make  no  difference 
between  the  three." 

The  essence  of  the  teaching  of  the  '  Vishnu  Purana '  is  given 
in  a  few  lines.*  "  Listen  to  the  complete  compendium  of  the 
Purana  according  to  its  tenor.  The  world  was  produced  from 
Vishnu  ;  it  exists  in  him  ;  he  is  the  cause  of  its  continuance  and 
cessation  ;  he  is  the  world."     Immediately  afterwards  is  a  hymn 


*  i 


Vishnu  Purana,'  p.  607. 


Vishnu. 


99 


to  him  which  commences  as  follows  : — "  Glory  to  the  unchange- 
able, holy,  eternal,  supreme  Vishnu,  of  one  universal  nature,  the 
mighty  over  all  ;  to  him  who  is  Hiranyagarbha  (Brahma),  Hari 


VISHNU. 


(Vishnu),  and  Sankara  (Siva) ;  the  Creator,  Preserver,  and 
Destroyer  of  the  world."  As  will  be  noticed  later  on,  Siva  is 
commonly  called  Mahadeva  (the  great  god)  ;  yet  by  his  wor- 
shippers Vishnu  is  generally  called  Narayana,  when  they  think 
of  him  apart  from  his  incarnations,  though  originally  this  was  a 
name  of  Brahma  ;  and  very  frequently  Vishnu  is  indicated  by 
the  word  Ishwar  (God),  as  though  he  were  tlie  God. 

"  The  word  Vishnu  in  the  Puranas  is  generally  said  to  be  de- 
ll 2 


ioo  The   Puraxic  Deities. 


rived  from  the  root  vis  (to  enter)  ;  entering  in  or  pervading  the 
universe,  agreeably  to  the  text  of  the  Vedas  :  '  Having  created 
that  (world),  he  then  afterwards  enters  into  it.'  According  to 
the  '  Matsya  Purana,'  the  name  alludes  to  his  entering  into  the 
mundane  egg  ;  according  to  the  '  Padma  Purana,'  to  his  entering 
into  or  combining  with  Prakriti,  as  Purush  or  spirit."  * 

In  the  '  Bhagavata  Purana'  f  is  the  following  legend  to  show 
the  superiority  of  Vishnu  : — "  Once  when  the  holy  sages  were  per- 
forming a  sacrifice  on  the  banks  of  the  Sarasvati,  a  dispute  arose 
amongst  them  as  to  which  of  the  three  gods  was  greatest.  They 
sent  Bhrigu,  the  son  of  Brahma,  to  ascertain  this  point.  He  first 
went  to  the  heaven  of  Brahma,  and,  desirous  of  discovering  the 
truth,  entered  his  court  without  paying  him  the  usual  honours. 
Incensed  at  this  disrespect,  Brahma  glowed  with  anger  ;  but  re- 
collecting that  it  was  caused  by  his  own  son,  he  assuaged  the 
fire  of  wrath  which  had  risen  in  his  mind.  Bhrigu  then  pro- 
ceeded to  Kailasa ;  and  when  Maheshwara  (Siva)  gladly  hastened 
to  embrace  him  as  a  brother,  he  turned  away  from  the  proffered 
embrace.  Enraged  at  such  misconduct,  the  god,  seizing  his 
trident,  prepared  to  kill  the  divine  sage ;  but  Parvati  fell  at  his 
feet,  and  by  her  words  appeased  the  anger  of  her  lord.  Bhrigu 
next  went  to  Vishnu's  heaven,  and  kicked  the  god's  breast,  as  he 
lay  slumbering  in  the  lap  of  Lakshmi.  The  lord,  rising  from  his 
couch,  and  bowing  respectfully  to  Bhrigu,  thus  addressed  him  ; 
'  Welcome  to  thee,  O  Brahman  !  Be  seated  for  a  little,  and 
deign  to  excuse  the  fault  which  through  ignorance  I  have  com- 
mitted [in  not  performing  duties  due  to  a  guest],  and  the  hurt 
which  your  tender  feet  must  have  received ! '  Having-  thus 
spoken,  he  rubbed  the  feet  of  Bhrigu  with  his  own  hands,  and 
added,  'To-day  am  I  a  highly  honoured  vessel,  since  thou,  O 
lord  !  hast  imprinted  on  my  breast  the  dust  of  thy  sin-dispelling 
feet'  When  Vishnu  had  finished  speaking,  Bhrigu  was  so 
affected  by  these  benevolent  words,  that  he  was  unable  to 
reply,  and  departed  in  silence,  whilst  tears   of  devout  emotion 


'Vishnu  Purana,'  p.  3,  note, 
f   Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Mythology,'  p.  240. 


Vishnu.  ioi 

rushed  from  his  eyes.  On  his  narrating  his  adventures  to  the 
saints  on  the  banks  of  the  Sarasvati,  their  doubts  were  imme- 
diately dispelled  ;  they  believed  Vishnu  to  be  the  greatest  of 
the  three  gods,  because  he  was  exempt  from  impatience  and 
passion." 

In  the  '  Padma  Purana '  *  Siva  is  represented  as  admitting 
Vishnu's  superiority  to  himself.  Addressing  his  wife,  he  says  : 
"  I  will  acquaint  thee  with  the  real  essence  and  form  of  Vishnu  : 
know  then  that  he  is  in  truth  Narayana,  the  Supreme  Spirit, 
and  Parabrahma  (the  great  Brahma),  without  beginning  or 
end,  omniscient,  and  omnipresent ;  eternal,  unchangeable,  and 
supremely  happy.  He  is  Siva,  Hiranyagarbha,  and  Surya ;  he 
is  more  excellent  than  all  the  gods,  even  than  I  myself.  But 
it  is  impossible  for  me,  or  Brahma,  or  the  gods  to  declare 
the  greatness  of  Vasudeva,  the  originator  and  lord  of  the 
universe." 

In  the  '  Varahar  Purana '  f  the  special  work  of  Vishnu  as 
preserver  is  described  : — "  The  supreme  god  Narayana  having 
conceived  the  thought  of  creating  this  universe,  considered  also 
that  it  was  necessary  that  it  should  be  protected  after  it  was 
created  ;  'but  as  it  is  impossible  for  an  incorporeal  being  to 
exert  action,  let  me  produce  from  my  own  essence  a  corporeal 
being,  by  means  of  whom  I  may  protect  the  world.'  Having 
thus  reflected,  the  pre-existing  Narayana  created  from  his  own 
substance  an  ungenerated  and  divine  form,  on  whom  he  be- 
stowed these  blessings  : — '  Be  thou  the  framer  of  all  things,  O 
Vishnu  !  Be  thou  always  the  protector  of  the  three  worlds,  and 
the  adored  of  all  men.  Be  thou  omniscient  and  almighty  ;  and 
do  thou  at  all  times  accomplish  the  wishes  of  Brahma  and  the 
gods.'  The  Supreme  Spirit  then  resumed  his  essential  nature. 
Vishnu,  as  he  meditated  on  the  purpose  for  which  he  had  been 
produced,  sank  into  a  mysterious  slumber  ;  and  as  in  his  sleep 
he  imagined  the  production  of  various  things,  a  lotus  sprang 
from  his  navel.  In  the  centre  of  this  lotus  Brahma  appeared  ; 
and  Vishnu  beholding  the  production  of  his  body  was  delighted." 

*  Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Mythology,'  p.  246.  f  Ibid. 


i02  The  Puranic  Deities. 


In  pictures  Vishnu  is  represented  as  a  black  man  with  four 
arms  :  in  one  hand  he  holds  a  club ;  in  another  a  shell ;  in  a  third 
a  chakra,  or  discus,  with  which  he  slew  his  enemies  ;  and  in  the 
fourth  a  lotus.  He  rides  upon  the  bird  Garuda,  and  is  dressed 
in  yellow  robes. 

The  following  description  of  Vaikuntha,  the  heaven  of  Vishnu, 
is  from  the  Mahabharata.*  It  is  made  entirely  of  gold,  and  is 
8o,oco  miles  in  circumference.  All  its  buildings  are  made  of 
jewels.  The  pillars  and  ornaments  of  the  buildings  are  of 
precious  stones.  The  crystal  waters  of  the  Ganges  fall  from  the 
higher  heavens  on  the  head  of  Druva  ;  from  thence  into  the 
hair  of  the  seven  Rishis  ;  and  from  thence  they  fall  and  form  a 
river.  Here  are  also  five  pools  containing  blue,  red,  and  white 
lotuses.  On  a  seat  glorious  as  the  meridian  sun,  sitting  on  white 
lotuses,  is  Vishnu  ;  and  on  his  right  hand  Lakshmi,  who  shines 
like  a  continued  blaze  of  lightning,  and  from  whose  body  the 
fragrance  of  the  lotus  extends  800  miles. 

This  deity  is  worshipped  not  only  under  the  name  and  in  the 
form  of  Vishnu,  but  also  in  one  of  his  many  incarnations. 
Whenever  any  great  calamity  occurred  in  the  world,  or  the 
wickedness  of  any  of  its  inhabitants  proved  an  unbearable 
nuisance  to  the  gods,  Vishnu,  as  Preserver,  had  to  lay  aside  his 
invisibility,  come  to  earth  in  some  form,  and,  when  his  work  was 
done,  returned  again  to  the  skies.  There  is  no  certainty  as  to 
the  number  of  times  he  has  become  incarnate.  Some  Puranas 
describe  ten  Avataras  ;  some  mention  twenty-four  ;  and  some- 
times, they  say,  they  are  innumerable.  Ten  is  the  commonly 
received  number,  and  these  certainly  are  the  most  important 
ones.  They  will  be  considered  in  order.  Of  these  ten,  nine 
have  already  been  accomplished  ;  one,  the  Kalki,  is  still  future. 
'  Some  of  these  Avataras  are  of  an  entirely  cosmical  character  ; 
others,  however,  are  probably  based  on  historical  events,  the 
leading  personage  of  which  was  gradually  endowed  with  divine 
attributes,  until  he  was  regarded  as  the  incarnation  of  the  deity 
itself."     In  the  '  Matsya  Purana  'f  is  the  following  legend,  which 


Ward,  ii.  14.  t  Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Mythology,'  p.  244. 


Vishnu.  103 

gives  a  reason  for  the  manifold  and  varied  appearances  of  this 
deity  : — 

"  The  Asuras  (demons,  lit.  Non-Suras)  having  been  repeatedly 
defeated  by  the  Suras  (gods),  and  deprived  of  all  share  of  the 
sacrifices,  were  meditating  to  withdraw  from  the  unavailing 
contest,  when  Sukra,  their  preceptor,  determined  to  propitiate 
Siva  by  a  severe  tapas,  and  procure  from  him  a  charm  by  means 
of  which  they  could  conquer.  Having  left  them  for  this  purpose, 
the  Asuras  said  amongst  themselves,  '  As  our  preceptor  has  laid 
aside  his  arms  and  assumed  the  ascetic  dress,  how  shall  we  be 
able  to  gain  a  victory  over  the  Suras  ?  Let  us  seek  refuge  with 
the  mother  of  Kavya  (Sukra),  and  endure  this  distress  till  he 
shall  return;  and  then  let  us  fight!'  Having  thus  resolved,  they 
hastened  to  Kavya's  mother,  who,  protecting  them,  said,  '  Fear 
not !  remain  near  me,  and  no  danger  shall  approach  you  !  ' 

"  The  Suras,  seeing  the  Asuras  thus  protected,  were  about  to 
attack  them,  when  the  goddess  in  anger  thus  addressed  Indra  : 
'  If  thou  desist  not,  I  will  deprive  you  of  the  sovereignty 
of  heaven.'  Alarmed  at  her  angry  words,  and  dreading  her 
magic  power,  Indra  was  yielding  to  her  desire,  when  Vishnu 
appeared  and  said  to  him, '  Yield  not,  for  I  will  assist  you  ! '  The 
goddess  observing  that  Indra  was  protected  by  Vishnu,  angrily 
said,  '  Now  let  the  contending  foes  behold  how  the  power  of  my 
devotions  shall  subdue  both  Indra  and  Vishnu.'  Finding 
themselves  likely  to  be  overcome,  they  asked  each  other,  '  How 
shall  we  liberate  ourselves  from  this  difficulty  ? '  Indra  then 
said  to  Vishnu,  '  Hasten  to  conquer  before  she  has  finished  her 
invocations,  or  we  shall  be  defeated  ! '  Then  Vishnu,  considering 
the  detriment  that  must  be  incurred  by  the  gods  should  the 
mother  of  Kavya  bring  her  incantations  to  a  successful  issue, 
deemed  that  the  slaying  of  a  woman  under  such  circumstances 
was  allowable,  seized  his  discus,  and  smote  off  her  head. 
Bhrigu,  seeing  this  horrid  deed  of  the  slaughter  of  a  woman  and 
the  death  of  his  wife,  was  violently  incensed,  and  thus  cursed 
Vishnu :  '  Since  thou  hast  knowingly  murdered  a  woman, 
thou  shalt  be  born  seven  times  amongst  men  ; '  he  afterwards 
somewhat  modified  its  force  as  he  said,  'but  each  birth  shall 


104  The  Puranic  Deities. 


be  for  the  advantage  of  the  world,  and  for  the  restoration  of 
justice.' 

"  It  is  interesting  to  know  the  character  of  the  tapas  (penance) 
by  which  Sukra  hoped  to  gain  power  over  the  gods.  He  was  to 
imbibe  the  smoke  of  a  fire  of  chaff  with  his  head  downwards  for 
a  thousand  years.  He  accomplished  this  difficult  feat,  and  by  it 
so  pleased  Siva,  that  he  gave  him  many  boons,  including  that  of 
superiority  over  the  gods.  But  the  Asuras  did  not  profit  long 
by  this  penance  of  their  preceptor,  as  they  were  deceived  by 
the  preceptor  of  the  gods,  who,  assuming  Sukra's  form,  gave 
them  bad  advice,  which  they  followed  to  their  hurt." 

In  the  'Vishnu  Purana'  *  the  benefits  to  be  hoped  for  from  the 
worship  of  Vishnu  are  taught.  The  question  is  asked,  "  By  what 
acts  can  men  free  themselves  from  Yama  ? "  The  reply  given  is 
that  which  was  once  told  by  a  holy  Muni  who  recollected  his 
former  births,  and  by  whom  "what  was,  and  what  will  be,  was 
accurately  told."  "  Yama,  beholding  one  of  his  servants  with  a 
noose  in  his  hands,  whispered  to  him  and  said,  '  Keep  clear  of 
the  worshippers  of  Madhusudana  (Vishnu).  I  am  lord  of  all 
men,  the  Vaishnavas  (worshippers  of  Vishnu)  excepted.  I  was 
appointed  by  Brahma  to  restrain  mankind,  and  regulate  the 
consequences  of  good  and  evil  in  the  universe.  But  he  who 
worships  Hari  is  independent  of  me.  He  who  through  holy 
knowledge  diligently  adores  the  lotus-foot  of  Hari  is  released 
from  all  the  bonds  of  sin,  and  you  must  avoid  him  as  you  would 
fire  fed  with  oil.'  And  again  :  'He  who  pleases  Vishnu  obtains 
all  terrestrial  enjoyments,  heaven,  and  a  place  in  heaven  ;  and 
what  is  best  of  all,  final  liberation  :  whatever  he  wishes,  and  to 
whatever  extent,  whether  much  or  little,  he  receives  it  when 
Achyuta  (the  undecaying  one)  is  content  with  him.' " 

The  means  by  which  the  favour  of  this  god  is  to  be  obtained 
are  then  explained  : — "  The  supreme  Vishnu  is  propitiated  by  a 
man  who  observes  the  institutions  of  caste,  order,  and  purificatory 
practices  ;  no  other  path  is  the  way  to  please  him.  He  who 
offers  sacrifices,  sacrifices  to  him  ;  he  who  murmurs  prayer,  prays 


Pp.  287-290. 


Vishnu.  105 

to  him  ;  he  who  injures  living  creatures,  injures  him  :  for  Hari  is 
all  things.  Kesava  is  most  pleased  with  him  who  does  good  to 
others  ;  who  never  utters  abuse,  calumny,  or  untruth  ;  who  never 
covets  another's  wife  or  another's  wealth,  and  who  bears  ill-will 
towards  none  ;  who  never  beats  nor  slays  any  animate  or  inanimate 
thing  ;  who  is  ever  diligent  in  the  service  of  the  gods,  of  the 
Brahmans,  and  of  his  spiritual  preceptor  ;  who  is  ever  desirous  of 
the  welfare  of  all  creatures,  of  his  children,  and  of  his  own  soul  ; 
in  whose  pure  heart  no  pleasure  is  derived  from  the  imperfec- 
tions of  love  and  hatred.  The  man  who  conforms  to  the  duties 
enjoined  by  scriptural  authority  for  every  caste  and  condition  of 
life  is  he  who  best  worships  Vishnu  ;  there  is  no  other  mode." 

Of  all  the  deities  now  reverenced  in  India,  Vishnu  in  his  many 
forms  has  perhaps  the  largest  number  of  worshippers  ;  and  the 
account  of  his  life  and  the  praises  presented  to  him  occupy  a 
very  large  portion  of  the  later  Hindu  Scriptures.  This  pre- 
eminence was  certainly  not  recognised  in  the  Vedic  Age,  as  the 
following  passage  will  show  : — 

"In  the  Rig- Veda  are  the  following  verses  : — 'May  the  gods 
preserve  us  from  the  place  from  which  Vishnu  strode  over  the 
seven  regions  of  the  earth.  Vishnu  strode  over  this  [universe]  ;  in 
three  places  he  planted  his  step  [the  world  or  his  step]  was 
enveloped  in  his  dust.  Vishnu,  the  unconquerable  preserver, 
strode  three  steps.'  *  In  these  verses  there  is  probably  the 
germ  of  the  Dwarf  Incarnation,  and  also  of  the  attribute  of 
Preserver.  The  interpretations  of  two  commentators  of  the 
three  strides  of  Vishnu  are  as  follows  : — One  regards  him  '  as 
a  god,  who,  in  what  are  called  his  three  strides,  is  manifested 
in  a  threefold  form  as  Agni  on  earth,  as  Indra  or  Vayu  in  the 
atmosphere,  and  as  the  Sun  in  heaven  ; '  f  the  other  interprets 
Vishnu's  three  strides  as  'the  rising,  culmination,  and  setting  of 
the  sun.'  "  } 

Vishnu,  in  the  Rig- Veda,  is  said  "  to  have  established  the 
heavens  and  the  earth  ;  to  contain  all  the  world  in  his  strides  ; 
to  have,  with  Indra,  made  the  atmosphere  wide,  stretched  out  the 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  iv.  63.  f  Ibid.  iv.  78  ff.  t  Ibid. 


io6  The  Puranic  Deities. 


worlds,  produced  the  Sun,  the  Dawn,  and  Fire  ;  to  have  received 
the  homage  of  Varuna  ;  whilst  his  greatness  is  described  as 
having  no  limit  within  the  ken  of  present  or  future  beings.  The 
attributes  ascribed  to  Vishnu  in  some  of  these  passages  are  such, 
that  if  the  latter  stood  alone  in  the  Rig- Veda,  they  might  lead 
us  to  suppose  that  this  deity  was  regarded  by  the  Vedic  Rishis 
as  the  chief  of  all  the  gods.  But  Indra  is  associated  with  Vishnu 
even  in  some  of  those  texts  in  which  the  latter  is  most  highly 
magnified  :  nay,  in  one  place,  the  power  by  which  Vishnu  takes 
his  three  strides  is  described  as  being  derived  from  Indra  ;  in 
another  text,  Vishnu  is  represented  as  celebrating  Indra's  praise  ; 
whilst  in  another  verse,  Vishnu  is  said  to  have  been  generated 
by  Soma.  It  is  also  a  fact  that  the  hymns  and  verses  which  are 
dedicated  to  the  praises  of  Indra,  Agni,  &c,  are  extremely 
numerous,  whilst  the  entire  hymns  and  separate  verses  in  which 
Vishnu  is  celebrated  are  much  fewer  .  .  .  Vishnu  is  introduced  as 
the  subject  of  laudation  among  a  crowd  of  other  divinities,  from 
which  he  is  there  in  no  way  distinguished  as  being  in  any  respect 
superior.  From  this  fact  we  may  conclude  that  he  was  regarded 
by  those  writers  as  on  a  footing  of  equality  with  the  other  deities. 
Further,  the  Rig- Veda  contains  numerous  texts  in  which  the 
Rishis  ascribe  to  Indra,  Varuna,  and  other  gods,  the  same  high 
and  awful  attributes  and  functions  which  are  spoken  of  in  other 
hymns  as  belonging  to  Vishnu  ...  If  then  we  look  to  the  large 
number  of  texts  in  which  some  of  the  other  gods  are  celebrated, 
and  to  the  comparatively  small  number  of  those  in  which  Vishnu 
is  exclusively  or  prominently  magnified,  we  shall  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  latter  deity  occupied  a  somewhat  subordinate 
place  in  the  estimation  and  affections  of  the  ancient  Rishis."  * 

Amongst  the  thousand  names  of  Vishnu,  the  following,  in 
addition  to  those  already  given,  are  most  commonly  known  : — 

Madhusudana,  the  destroyer  of  Madhu  ;  and  Kaitabhajit,  the 
conqueror  of  Kaitabha.  These  two  demons  sprung  from  Vishnu's 
car  as  he  lay  asleep  on  the  serpent  Sesha  at  the  end  of  a  Kalpa,f 
and  were  about  to  destroy  Brahma,  who  was  on  the  lotus  which 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  iv.  98.  f  See  Part  II.  chap.  x. 


Lakshmi. 


107 


sprung  from  Vishnu's  navel,   when  this   deity  slew  them,  and 
hence  obtained  these  names  :  — 

Vaikunthanath,  "  The  Lord  of  Paradise." 

Kesava,  "  He  who  has  excellent  hair." 

Madhava,  "  Made  of  honey  ;  or  a  descendant  of  Madhu." 

Swayambhu,  "  The  self-existent  one." 

Pitamvara,  "  He  who  wears  yellow  garments." 

Janarddana,  "  He  who  causes  the  people  to  worship." 

Vishvamvara,  "  The  protector  of  the  world." 

Hari,  "  The  Saviour ;"  lit.  he  who  takes  possession  of. 

Ananta,  "  The  endless." 

Damodara,  "  Bound  with  a  rope." 

Mukunda,  "  The  deliverer." 

Purusha,  "  The  man,"  or  "  The  spirit." 

Purushottama,  "The  supreme  man  or  spirit." 

Yajneswara,  "  The  lord  of  sacrifice." 

LAKSHMI. 

Lakshmi,  or  very  commonly  Sri,  is  the  wife  of  Vishnu,  and 
under  various  names  appears  in  this  relation  in  his  various 
incarnations.  "As  the  lord  of  the  worlds,  the  god  of  gods, 
Janarddana  descends  amongst  mankind  in  various  shapes,  so 
does  his  coadjutor  Sri.  Thus  when  Hari  was  born  a  dwarf,  the 
son  of  Aditi,  Lakshmi  appeared  from  the  lotus  as  Padma,  or 
Kamala  ;  when  he  was  born  as  Rama  (Parasurama)  of  the  race 
of  Bhrigu,  she  was  Dharani  -;  when  he  was  Raghava  (Rama),  she 
was  Sita  ;  and  when  he  was  Krishna,  she  was  Rukmini.  In  the 
other  descents  of  Vishnu  she  was  his  associate.  If  he  takes  a 
celestial  form,  she  appears  as  divine  ;  if  a  mortal,  she  becomes 
a  mortal  too,  transforming  her  own  person  agreeably  to  whatever 
character  it  pleases  Vishnu  to  assume."  * 

There  are  two  somewhat  contradictory  accounts  of  her  origin  ; 
the  'Vishnu  Purana '  explains  this.f  "The  divinities  Dhata  and 
Vidhata  were  born   to    Bhrigu  by  Khyati,  as  was  a   daughter 

*  '  Vishnu  Purana,'  p.  80.  f  Page  59. 


ioS 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


Sri,  the  wife  of  Narayana,  the  god  of  gods."     The  question  is 
asked,  "  It  is  commonly  said  the  Sri  was  born  from  the  sea  of 

milk,  when  it  was 
churned  for  ambrosia ; 
how  then  can  you  say 
that  she  was  the 
daughter  of  Bhrigu 
and  Khyati  ? "  In 
answer  to  this  ques- 
tion, a  most  elaborate 
account  of  her  virtues 
"  Sri,     the 


is 


given 


bride  of  Vishnu,  the 
mother  of  the  world, 
is  eternal,  imperishable ; 
as  he  is  all-pervading, 
so  she  is  omnipresent. 
Vishnu  is  meaning,  she 
is  speech ;  Hari  is 
polity,  she  is  prudence  ; 
Vishnu  is  understand- 
ing, she  is  intellect ;  he 
is  righteousness,  she  is 
devotion ;  Sri  is  the 
earth,  Hari  is  its  sup- 
port. In  a  word,  of  gods,  animals,  and  men,  Hari  is  all  that  is 
called  male  ;  Lakshmi  is  all  that  is  termed  female  ;  there  is 
nothing  else  than  they."  Later  on*  we  read,  "  Her  first  birth 
was  as  the  daughter  of  Bhrigu  and  Khyati ;  it  was  at  a  subse- 
quent period  that  she  was  produced  from  the  sea,  at  the  churning 
of  the  ocean  by  the  demons  and  the  gods." 

The  account  of  the  churning  of  the  ocean,  to  which  frequent 
reference  is  made  in  the  Hindu  Scriptures,  is  found  in  the 
Ramayana,  and  several  of  the  Puranas  ;  though  there  are  some 
discrepancies,  they  agree  in  the  main.     The  reason  for  this  great 


LAKSHMI. 


*     t 


Vishnu  Purana,'  p.  80. 


Lakshmi.  109 


act  is  as  follows :  * — A  saint  named  Durvaras,  a  portion  of  Siva, 
was  travelling,  when  he  met  a  celestial  nymph  with  a  sweet- 
smelling  garland,  which  at  his  request  she  gave  to  Durvaras. 
Excited  with  the  scent,  he  was  dancing,  when  he  met  Indra, 
seated  on  his  elephant.  To  please  the  mighty  god,  the  saint 
presented  him  with  the  garland,  who  placed  it  upon  his  elephant's 
head.  The  elephant  in  his  turn  becoming  excited,  seized  the 
garland  with  his  trunk  and  threw  it  upon  the  ground.  Durvaras, 
seeing  his  gift  slighted,  cursed  the  god  in  his  anger,  and  told  him 
that  his  kingdom  should  be  overwhelmed  with  ruin.  From  that 
time  Indra's  power  began  to  wane ;  for  though  he  sought  for- 
giveness, the  Brahman's  anger  was  not  to  be  appeased.  As  the 
effects  of  the  curse  were  experienced  by  the  gods,  they,  fearing 
they  should  be  overcome  by  the  Asuras,  fled  to  Brahma  for  help. 
He  told  them  he  could  not  assist  them  ;  that  Vishnu  alone  could 
do  this,  whom  he  advised  them  to  seek.  Brahma  conducted 
them  to  Vishnu  ;  and,  having  lauded  Vishnu,  caused  him  to 
lend  a  willing  ear  to  their  request.  In  the  following  lines,! 
put  into  verse,  from  the  '  Vishnu  Purana,'  we  have  their  prayer, 
Vishnu's  advice  and  its  result : — 

"  The  gods  addressed  the  mighty  Vishnu  thus, — ■ 
'  Conquered  in  battle  by  the  evil  demons, 
We  fly  to  thee  for  succour  ;  soul  of  all, 
Pity  and  by  thy  might  deliver  us  ! ' 
Hari,  the  lord,  creator  of  the  world, 
Thus  by  the  gods  implored,  all  graciously 
Replied,  '  Your  strength  shall  be  restored,  ye  gods, — 
Only  accomplish  what  I  now  command  : 
Unite  yourselves  in  peaceful  combination 
With  these  your  foes  ;  collect  all  plants  and  herbs 
Of  diverse  kinds  from  every  quarter  ;  cast  them 
Into  the  sea  of  milk  ;  take  Mandara, 
The  mountain,  for  a  churning  stick,  and  Vasuki, 
The  serpent,  for  a  rope  ;  together  churn 
The  ocean  to  produce  the  beverage — 
Source  of  all  strength  and  immortality — 
Then  reckon  on  mine  aid  :  I  will  take  care 


*  i 


Vishnu  Purana,'  Book  I.  chap.  ix.  f  '  Indian  Wisdom,'  p.  499. 


]  jo  The  Puranic  Deities. 


Your  foes  shall  share  your  toil,  but  not  partake 

In  its  reward,  or  drink  th'  immortal  draught.' 

Thus  by  the  god  of  gods  advised,  the  host 

United  in  alliance  with  the  demons. 

Straightway  they  gathered  various  herbs,  and  cast  them 

Into  the  waters  ;  then  they  took  the  mountain 

To  serve  as  churning-staff,  and  next  the  snake 

To  serve  as  cord,  and  in  the  ocean's  midst 

Hari  himself,  present  in  tortoise  form, 

Became  a  pivot  for  the  churning-staff. 

Then  did  they  churn  the  sea  of  milk ;  and  first 

Out  of  the  waters  rose  the  sacred  cow — 

God-worshipped  Surabhi — eternal  fountain 

Of  milk  and  offerings  of  butter  ;  next, 

While  holy  Siddhas  wondered  at  the  sight, 

With  eyes  all  rolling,  Varuni  uprose — 

Goddess  of  Wine.     Then  from  the  whirlpool  sprang 

Fair  Parijata,  tree  of  Paradise,  delight 

Of  heavenly  maidens,  with  its  fragrant  blossoms 

Perfuming  the  whole  world.     Th'  Apsarasas, 

Troop  of  celestial  nymphs,  matchless  in  grace, 

Perfect  in  loveliness,  were  next  produced. 

Then  from  the  sea  uprose  the  cool-rayed  moon, 

Which  Mahadeva  seized  ;  terrific  poison 

Next  issued  from  the  waters — this  the  snake-gods 

Claimed  as  their  own.     Then  seated  on  a  lotus 

Beauty's  bright  goddess,  peerless  Sri,  arose 

Out  of  the  waves  ;  and  with  her,  robed  in  white, 

Came  forth  Dhanvantari,  the  gods'  physician. 

High  in  his  hand  he  bore  the  cup  of  nectar — 

Life-giving  draught — longed  for  by  gods  and  demons." 

On  Sri's  appearance  the  sages  were  enraptured,  the  heavenly- 
choristers  sang  her  praises,  and  the  celestial  nymphs  danced 
before  her.  Ganga  and  the  other  sacred  streams  followed  her, 
and  the  heavenly  elephants  took  up  their  pure  waters  in  golden 
vessels  and  poured  them  upon  her.  The  sea  of  milk  pre- 
sented her  with  a  wreath  of  unfading  flowers  ;  and  the  artist  of 
the  gods  decorated  her  with  lovely  ornaments.  Thus  bathed, 
attired,  and  adorned,  the  goddess,  in  the  presence  of  the 
gods,  cast  herself  upon  the  breast  of  Hari,  and,  reclining 
there,    gazed    upon   the  gods,  who  were   enraptured  with   her 


Lakshmi.  I  I  I 


Siva  was  most  violent  and  wished  to  possess  himself  of  her. 
From  the  demons  she  turned  away  ;  hence  they  were  miserable. 
Seeing  the  cup  of  nectar,  they  tried  to  seize  it,  when  Vishnu, 
assuming  the  appearance  of  a  beautiful  woman,  attracted  their 
attention,  whilst  the  gods  quaffed  the  divine  cup.  The  re- 
sult was  that  in  the  conflict  which  followed  the  gods  were 
successful. 

The  following  account  of  Sri  is  from  the  Ramayana  : — 

"  When  many  a  year  had  fled, 
Up  floated,  on  her  lotus  bed, 
A  maiden  fair,  and  tender-eyed, 
In  the  young  flush  of  beauty's  pride. 
She  shone  with  pearl  and  golden  sheen, 
And  seals  of  glory  stamped  her  queen. 
On  each  round  arm  glowed  many  a  gem, 
On  her  smooth  brows  a  diadem. 
Rolling  in  waves  beneath  her  crown, 
The  glory  of  her  hair  rolled  down. 
Pearls  on  her  neck  of  price  untold, 
The  lady  shone  like  burnished  gold. 
Queen  of  the  gods,  she  leapt  to  land, 
A  lotus  in  her  perfect  hand, 
And  fondly,  of  the  lotus  sprung, 
To  lotus-bearing  Vishnu  clung. 
Her,  gods  above  and  men  below 
As  Beauty's  Queen  and  Fortune  know."  * 

As  noticed  in  this  last  extract,  Lakshmi,  or  Sri,  is  regarded  as 
the  goddess  of  Love,  Beauty,  and  Prosperity.  When  a  man  is 
growing  rich,  it  is  said  that  Lakshmi  has  come  to  dwell  with 
him  ;  whilst  those  in  adversity  are  spoken  of  as  "  forsaken  of 
Lakshmi."  In  pictures  she  is  painted  as  a  lady  of  a  bright 
golden  colour,  seated  on  a  lotus,  with  two  arms. 

"  The  name  of  Lakshmi  as  that  of  a  goddess  does  not  occur 
in  the  Rig-Veda,  though  the  word  itself  is  found  in  its  signifi- 
cation as  prosperity."  | 

*  Griffiths's  Ramayana,'  i.  204.  t  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  iv.  348. 


I  12 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


Lakshmi  is  known  also  by  the  following  names : — 
Haripriya,  "  The  beloved  of  Hari." 

Padma,  "  The  Lotus,"  and  Padmalaya,  "  She  who  dwells  on  a 
lotus." 

Jaladhija,  "The  ocean-born." 
Chanchala,  "  The  fickle  one." 
Lokamata,  "The  mother  of  the  world." 


n3 


CHAPTER  V. 

THE  INCARNATIONS  OR  AVATARAS  OF  VISHNU. 

I.    THE   MATSYA   OR   FISH  AVATARA. 

The  earliest  account  of  what  was  afterwards  regarded  as  an  in- 
carnation of  Vishnu  is  found  in  the  '  Sathapatha  Brahmana.'  It 
will  be  noticed  that  though  in  this  passage  a  wonderful  fish  is 
described,  it  is  not  said  to  have  been  an  incarnation  of  any  of  the 
gods.  The  Mahabharata  says  that  Brahma  assumed  this  form  ; 
whilst  the  Puranas  teach  that  the  fish  here  spoken  of  was 
Vishnu.  This  transfer  of  work  from  one  deity  to  another  is  not 
a  matter  of  much  surprise,  as  we  remember  how  frequently  it  is 
declared  that  all  the  various  gods  are  but  forms  of  one  supreme 
being.  "  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  Manu  here  referred  to  is 
regarded  as  a  progenitor  of  the  human  race,  and  is  represented 
as  conciliating  the  Supreme  Being  by  his  piety  in  an  age  of 
universal  depravity."     Here  is  the  passage  referred  to  above  :  * 

"  There  lived  in  ancient  time  a  holy  man 
Called  Manu,  who,  by  penances  and  prayers, 
Had  won  the  favour  of  the  lord  of  heaven. 
One  day  they  brought  him  water  for  ablution  ; 
Then,  as  he  washed  his  hands,  a  little  fish 
Appeared,  and  spoke  in  human  accents  thus  : 
1  Take  care  of  me,  and  I  will  be  thy  saviour.' 
'  From  what  wilt  thou  preserve  me?'  Manu  asked. 
The  fish  replied,  '  A  flood  will  sweep  away 
All  creatures  ;   I  will  rescue  thee  from  that.' 
'  But  how  shall  I  preserve  thee  ?'  Manu  said. 
The  fish  rejoined,  '  So  long  as  we  are  small, 

*  '  Indian  Wisdom,'  p.  32. 


"4 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


THE    MATSYA    AVATAKA. 


We   are   in   constant   danger   of 

destruction, 
For  fish  eat  fish  ;  so  keep  me  in 

a  jar. 
When  I  outgrow  the  jar,  then  dig 

a  trench, 
And    place   me   there  ;    when    I 

outgrow  the  trench, 
Then  take  me  to  the  ocean, — I 

shall  then 
Be    out    of    reach     of    danger.' 

Having  thus 
Instructed      Manu,     straightway 

rapidly 
The   fish   grew  larger ;    then  he 

spake  again  : 
'  In   such    and  such  a   year   the 

flood  will  come  ; 
Therefore  construct  a  ship,  and 

pay  me  homage. 
When  the  flood  rises,  enter  thou 

the  ship, 
And    I    will    rescue    thee.'      So 

Manu  did 
As  he  was  ordered,  and  preserved 

the  fish, 
Then  carried  it  in  safety  to  the 

ocean  ; 
And   in   the   very   year   the    fish 

enjoined 


He  built  a  ship,  and  paid  the  fish  respect, 
And  there  took  refuge  when  the  flood  arose. 
Soon  near  him  swam  the  fish,  and  to  its  horn 
Manu  made  fast  the  cable  of  his  vessel. 
Thus  drawn  along  the  waters,  Manu  passed 
Beyond  the  northern  mountain.     Then  the  fish, 
Addressing  Manu,  said,  '  I  have  preserved  thee  ; 
(  Uiickly  attach  the  ship  to  yonder  tree  ; 
But,  lest  the  waters  sink  from  under  thee, 
As  fast  as  they  subside,  so  fast  shalt  thou 
Descend  the  mountain  gently  after  them.' 
Thus  he  descended  from  the  northern  mountain. 
The  flood  had  swept  away  all  living  creatures  ; 
Manu  alone  was  left.' 


The  Matsya  or  Fish  Avatara.  i  i  5 

The  account  from  the  Mahabharata  which  now  follows    has 
also  been  put  into  verse  by  Professor  Monier  Williams  :* — 

"  Along  the  ocean  in  that  stately  ship  was  borne  the  lord  of  men,  and  through 
Its  dancing,  tumbling  billows,  and  its  roaring  waters  ;  and  the  bark, 
Tossed  to  and  fro  by  violent  winds,  reeled  on  the  surface  of  the  deep, 
Staggering  and  trembling  like  a  drunken  woman.      Land  was  seen  no 

more, 
Nor  far  horizon,  nor  the  space  between  ;  for  everywhere  around 
Spread  the  wild  waste  of  waters,  reeking  atmosphere,  and  boundless  sky. 
And  now  when  all  the  world  was  deluged,  nought  appeared  above   the 

waves 
But  Manu  and  the  seven  sages,  and  the  fish  that  drew  the  bark. 
Unwearied,  thus  for  years  on  years  the  fish  propelled  the  ship  across 
The  heaped-up  waters,  till  at  length  it  bore  the  vessel  to  the  peak 
Of  Himavan  ;  then  softly  smiling,  thus  the  fish  addressed  the  sage  : 
'  Haste,  now,  to  bind  thy  ship  to  this  high  crag.     Know  me,  the  lord  of  all, 
The  great  Creator  Brahma,  mightier  than  all  might,  omnipotent. 
By  me,  in  fishlike  shape,  hast  thou  been  saved  in  dire  emergency. 
From  Manu  all  creation,  gods,  Asuras,  men,  must  be  produced  ; 
By  him  all  the  world  must  be  created — that  which  moves  and  moveth  not.'' 

The  typical  Puranic  account  of  this  Avatara  is  that  of  the 
'  Bhagavata  Purana'  which  is  given  by  Sir  William  Jones  in  the 
'  Asiatic  Soc.  Res.'  f  With  this  the  accounts  in  the  other  Puranas 
agree  in  the  main  :  some  are  more  condensed,  others,  as  the 
'  Matsya  Purana,'  are  considerably  extended  ;  for  it  was  as  the 
fish  was  guiding  the  vessel  in  which  Manu  was  saved  that 
Vishnu,  in  this  form,  is  said  to  have  dictated  the  whole  of  that 
Purana.  All  the  Puranas  agree  in  regarding  the  fish  as  an  in- 
carnation of  Vishnu,  and  not  of  Brahma.  Now  follows  the 
account  from  the  Bhagavata  : — 

"  Desiring  the  preservation  of  herds,  Brahmans,  genii,  and  vir- 
tuous men, — of  the  Vedas,  of  law,  and  of  precious  things, — the 
Lord  of  the  Universe  assumes  many  bodily  shapes  ;  but  though 
he  pervades,  like  the  air,  a  variety  of  beings,  yet  he  is  himself 
unvaried,  since  he  has  no  qualities  subject  to  change.  At  the 
close  of  the  last  Kalpa  there  was  a  general  destruction,  occa- 

*  '  Indian  Wisdom,'  p.  394.  f  Vol.  i.  230  ft 

I    2 


n6  The  Puranic  Deities. 


sioned  by  the  sleeping  Brahma,  whence  his  creatures  in  different 
worlds  were  drowned  in  a  vast  ocean.  Brahma  being  inclined  to 
slumber,  desiring  repose  after  a  lapse  of  ages,  the  strong  demon 
Hayagriva  came  near  him,  and  stole  the  Vedas,  which  had  flowed 
from  his  lips. 

"  When  Hari,  the  preserver  of  the  universe,  discovered  this  deed 
of  the  prince  of  the  Danavas,  he  took  the  shape  of  a  minute  fish, 
called  Saphari.     A  holy  king  named  Satyavrata  then  reigned, — 
a  servant  of  the  spirit  which  moved  on  the  waves  ;  and  so  devout, 
that  water  was  his  only  sustenance.     He  was  the  child  of  the 
Sun,  and  in  the  present  Kalpa*  is  invested  by  Narayana  with 
the  office  of  Manu  (i.e.  the  progenitor  and  lord  of  men),  by  the 
name  of  Sraddhadeva,  or  the  god  of  obsequies.     One  day  as  he 
was  making  a  libation  in  the  river  Kritamala,  and  held  water  in 
the  palm  of  his  hand,  he  perceived  a  small  fish  moving  in  it. 
The  King  of  Dravira  immediately  dropped  the  fish  into  the  river, 
together  with  the  water,  which  he  had  taken  from  it  ;  when  the 
Saphari  thus  addressed  the  benevolent  monarch  :  '  How  canst 
thou,  O  king,  who  showest  affection  to  the  oppressed,  leave  me 
in  this  river  water,  where  I  am  too  weak  to  resist  the  monsters 
of  the  stream,  who  fill  me  with  dread  ? '     He,  not  knowing  who 
had  assumed  the  form  of  a  fish,  applied  his   mind  to  the  preser- 
vation of  the  Saphari,  both  from  good- nature  and  from  regard  to 
his  own  soul  ;  and,  having  heard  his  very  suppliant  address,  he 
kindly  placed  it  under  his  protection  in  a  small  vase  full  of  water  ; 
but  in  a  single  night  its  bulk  was  so  increased,  that  it  could  not 
be  contained  in  the  jar,  and  thus  again  addressed  the  illustrious 
prince  :  '  I   am   not   pleased  with  living  miserably  in  this  little 
vase  ;  make  me  a  large  mansion,  where  I  may  dwell  in  comfort.' 
The  king,  removing  it  thence,  placed  it  in  the  water  of  a  cistern  ; 
but  it  grew  three  cubits  in  less  than  fifty  minutes,  and  said,  '  O 
king!    it  pleases  me  not  to  stay  vainly  in  this  narrow  cistern  ; 
since  thou  hast  granted  me  an  asylum,  give  me  a  spacious  habi- 
tation.'    He  then   removed   it  and   placed  it   in   a  pool,  where, 
having  ample  space  around  its  body,  it  became  a  fish  of  consider- 

*  See  Part  II.  chap.  x. 


The  Matsya  or  Fish  Avatara.  i  i  7 

able  size.  '  This  abode,  O  king,  is  not  convenient  for  me,  who 
must  swim  at  large  in  the  waters  ;  exert  thyself  for  my  safety, 
and  remove  me  to  a  deep  lake ! '  Thus  addressed,  the  pious 
monarch  threw  the  suppliant  into  a  lake,  and,  when  it  grew  of 
equal  bulk  with  that  piece  of  water,  he  cast  the  vast  fish  into  the 
sea.  When  the  fish  was  thrown  into  the  waves,  he  thus  again 
spoke  to  Satyavrata  :  '  Here  the  horned  sharks  and  other 
monsters  of  great  strength  will  devour  me  ;  thou  shouldest  not, 
O  valiant  man,  leave  me  in  this  ocean.' 

"  Thus  repeatedly  deluded  by  the  fish,  who  had  addressed  him 
with  gentle  words,  the  king  said,  '  Who  art  thou  that  beguilest 
me  in  that  assumed  shape  ?  Never  before  have  I  seen  or  heard 
of  so  prodigious  an  inhabitant  of  the  waters,  who,  like  thee,  has 
filled  up  in  a  single  day  a  lake  a  hundred  leagues  in  circum- 
ference. Surely  thou  art  Bhagavat,  who  appears  before  me  ; 
the  great  Hari,  whose  dwelling  was  on  the  waves  ;  and  who  now, 
in  compassion  to  thy  servants,  bears  the  form  of  the  natives  of 
the  deep.  Salutation  and  praise  to  thee,  O  first  male,  the  lord  of 
creation,  of  preservation,  of  destruction  !  Thou  art  the  highest 
object,  the  supreme  ruler,  of  us  thy  adorers,  who  piously  seek 
thee.  All  thy  delusive  descents  in  this  world  give  existence 
to  various  beings  ;  yet  I  am  anxious  to  know  for  what  cause 
that  shape  has  been  assumed  by  thee.  Let  me  not,  O  lotus- 
eyed,  approach  in  vain  the  feet  of  a  deity  whose  perfect  bene- 
volence has  been  extended  to  all  ;  when  thou  hast  shown  us  to 
our  amazement  the  appearance  of  other  bodies,  not  in  reality 
existing,  but  successively  exhibited.' 

"  The  lord  of  the  universe,  loving  the  pious  man  who  thus 
implored  him,  and  intending  to  preserve  him  from  the  sea  of 
destruction  caused  by  the  depravity  of  the  age,  thus  told  him 
how  he  was  to  act :  '  In  seven  days  from  the  present  time,  O 
thou  tamer  of  enemies  !  the  three  worlds  will  be  plunged  in  an 
ocean  of  death  ;  but,  in  the  midst  of  the  destroying  waves,  a 
large  vessel  sent  by  me  for  thy  use  shall  stand  before  thee. 
Then  thou  shalt  take  all  medicinal  herbs,  all  the  varieties  of 
seeds,  and  accompanied  by  seven  saints,  encircled  by  pairs  of 
brute  animals,  thou  shalt  enter  the  spacious  ark,  and  continue  in 


1 1 S  The  Puranic  Deities. 

it  secure  from  the  flood,  on  one  immense  ocean  without  light, 
except  the  radiance  of  thy  holy  companions.  When  the  ship 
shall  be  agitated  with  an  impetuous  wind,  thou  shalt  fasten  it 
with  a  large  sea  serpent  on  my  horn  ;  for  I  will  be  near  thee, 
drawing  the  vessel,  with  thee  and  thy  attendants.  I  will  remain 
on  the  ocean,  O  chief  of  men,  until  a  night  of  Brahma  *  shall  be 
completely  ended.  Thou  shalt  then  know  my  true  greatness, 
rightly  named  the  Supreme  Godhead  ;  by  my  favour  all  thy 
questions  shall  be  answered,  and  thy  mind  abundantly  instructed.' 
"  Hari,  having  thus  directed  the  monarch,  disappeared  ;  and 
Satyavrata  humbly  waited  for  the  time  which  the  ruler  of  our 
senses  had  appointed.  The  pious  king  having  scattered  toward 
the  east  the  pointed  blades  of  the  grass  darbha,  and  turning  his 
face  towards  the  north,  sat  meditating  on  the  feet  of  the  god, 
who  had  borne  the  form  of  a  fish.  The  sea,  overwhelming  its 
shores,  deluged  the  whole  earth,  and  it  was  soon  perceived  to  be 
augmented  by  showers  from  immense  clouds.  He,  still  medi- 
tating on  the  command  of  Bhagavat,  saw  the  vessel  advancing, 
and  entered  it  with  the  chiefs  of  Brahmans,  having  carried  into 
it  the  medicinal  plants,  and  conformed  to  the  directions  of 
Hari.  The  saints  thus  addressed  him  :  '  O  king,  meditate  on 
Kesava  ;  who  will  surely  deliver  us  from  this  danger,  and  grant 
us  prosperity.'  The  god  being  invoked  by  the  monarch,  ap- 
peared again  distinctly  on  the  vast  ocean  in  the  form  of  a  fish, 
blazing  like  gold,  extending  a  million  of  leagues,  with  one 
stupendous  horn  ;  on  which  the  king,  as  he  had  been  before 
commanded  by  Hari,  tied  the  ship  with  a  cable  made  of  a  vast 
serpent,  and,  happy  in  his  preservation,  stood  praising  the  de- 
stroyer of  Madhu.  When  the  monarch  had  finished  his  hymn, 
the  primeval  male,  Bhagavat,  who  watched  for  his  safety  on  the 
greater  expanse  of  water,  spake  aloud  to  his  own  divine  essence, 
pronouncing  a  sacred  Purana  [the  '  Matsya  Purana '],  which  con- 
tained the  rules  of  the  Sankhya  philosophy  ;  but  it  was  an  in- 
finite mystery  to  be  concealed  within  the  breast  of  Satyavrata  ; 
who,  sitting  in  the  vessel  with  the  saints,  heard  the  principle  of 

*  Sec  Part  II.  chap.  x. 


The   Kurma  or  Tortoise  Avatara.  119 


soul,  the  Eternal  Being",  proclaimed  by  the  preserving  power. 
Then  Hari,  rising  together  with  Brahma  from  the  destructive 
deluge,  which  was  now  abated,  slew  the  demon  Hayagriva,  and 
recovered  the  sacred  books." 


2.  THE  KURMA  OR  TORTOISE  AVATARA. 

This  incarnation  was  necessitated  by  the  fact  that  the  gods 
were  in  danger  of  losing  their  authority  over  the  demons.  In 
their  distress  they  applied  to  Vishnu  for  help,  who  told  them  to 
churn  the  sea  of  milk  that  they  might  procure  the  Amrita,  or 
water  of  life,  by  which  they  would  be  made  strong,  and  pro- 
mised to  become  the  tortoise  on  which  the  mountain  Mandara 
as  a  churning  stick  should  rest.  As  a  full  account  of  this 
operation  has  been  already  given  when  describing  Lakshmi,  who 
was  one  of  its  chief  products,  there  is  no  necessity  to  repeat  it 
here.  A  few  additional  particulars  will  be  found  in  the  following 
extract  from  the  'Vishnu  Purana:'* — 

"  Hari  having  been  entreated  to  help  the  gods,  thus  spoke  :  '  I 
will  restore  your  strength.  Do  you  act  as  I  enjoin.  Let  all  the 
gods  and  Asuras  cast  all  sorts  of  medicinal  herbs  into  the  sea  of 
milk,  and  together  churn  the  ocean  for  ambrosia,  depending  on 
my  aid.  To  secure  the  assistance  of  the  Daityas,  you  must  be 
at  peace  with  them,  and  engage  to  give  them  an  equal  share  of 
your  associated  toil  ;  promising  them  that  by  drinking  of  the 
Amrita  .  .  .  they  shall  become  mighty  and  immortal.  I  will  take 
care  that  the  enemies  of  the  gods  shall  not  partake  of  the 
precious  draught ;  they  shall  only  share  in  the  labour.'  " 

The  gods  entered  into  an  arrangement  with  the  Asuras,  and 
together  they  made  the  necessary  preparations.  "  The  assembled 
gods  were  stationed  by  Krishna  at  the  tail  of  the  serpent  Vasuki 
(the  churning  rope),  and  the  Daityas  and  Danavas  at  its  head 
and  neck.  Scorched  by  the  flames  emitted  from  his  inflated 
hood,  the  demons  were  shorn  of  their  glory  ;  whilst  the  clouds, 

*  Page  73. 


I  20 


The  Puranic  Deities, 


driven  by  his  breath  towards  his  tail,  refreshed   the    gods    by 
vivifying  showers.     In  the  midst  of  the  milky  sea,  Hari  himself, 

in    the    form    of    a    tortoise, 
served    as    a    pivot    for    the 
mountain,  as  it  was  whirled 
around.     The  holder  of  the 
mace  and  discus  was  present 
in  other  forms  amongst  the 
gods  and  demons,  and  assisted 
to  drag  the  monarch  of  the 
serpent  race  ;  and  in  another 
vast  body  sat  upon  the  sum- 
mit of  the  mountain.     With 
one    portion    of  his    energy, 
unseen  by  gods  and  demons, 
he     sustained     the     serpent 
king  ;    and  with  another  in- 
fused vigour  unto  the  gods." 
Such  is  the  account  of  this 
incarnation     of     Vishnu    as 
taught  by  the  Puranas  ;  but 
in    the   earlier  books,  where 
the    probable    origin   of  this 
legend  is  found,  it  is  Brahma, 
and  not  Vishnu,  that  is  said 
to  have  assumed  the  form  of 
a   tortoise.     In   the  '  Satha- 
patha    Brahmana '  are  these 
words :     "  Having    assumed 
the  form  of  a  tortoise,  Prajapati  (Brahma)   created   offspring. 
That  which  he  created,  he  made ; "    hence   the  word    Kurma. 
Kasyapa  means  tortoise;    hence  men  say,   "All  creatures  are 
descendants  of  Kasyapa.     This  tortoise  is  the  same  as  Aditya." 
As  the  worship  of  Brahma  became  less  popular,  whilst  that  of 
Vishnu    increased    in   its  attraction,  the  names,  attributes,  and 
works  of  the  one  deity  appear  to  have  been  transferred  to  the 
other. 


THE    KURMA    AVATARA. 


The  Varahar  or  Boar  Avatara.  121 


3.  THE  VARAHAR  OR  BOAR  AVATARA. 

There  is  the  same  conflicting  account  of  this  as  of  the  two 
preceding  incarnations  ; — the  older  books,  and  some  of  the  more 
modern  ones,  describing  it  as  an  Avatara  of  Brahma  ;  and  some 
of  the  modern  books  and  popular  belief  regarding  it  as  the  work 
of  Vishnu.  There  is,  however,  this  distinction,  that  "  in  the 
former,  the  transformation  of  the  deity  into  a  boar  has  appa- 
rently a  purely  cosmical  character,"  the  earth  being  immersed  in 
the  ocean.  Brahma,  the  Creator,  in  the  shape  of  a  boar,  raised 
it  on  his  tusk  ;  "  whereas,  in  the  latter,  it  altogether  represents 
the  extrication  of  the  world  from  a  deluge  of  iniquity  by  the 
rites  of  religion."  * 

The  first  mention  of  this  incarnation  is  in  the  'Taittiriya 
Sanhita,'  f  and  is  as  follows  : — "  The  universe  was  formerly 
water,  fluid.  On  it  Prajapati  (Brahma)  becoming  wind,  moved. 
Becoming  a  boar,  he  took  it  up."  In  harmony  with  this  is  a  verse 
in  the  '  Taittirya  Brahmana :' — "This  universe  was  formerly  water, 
fluid.  With  that  (water)  Prajapati  practised  arduous  devotions 
(saying),  '  How  shall  this  universe  be  (developed)  ? '  He  beheld 
a  lotus  leaf  standing.  He  thought,  'There  is  something  on  which 
this  rests.'  He  as  a  boar — having  assumed  that  form — plunged 
beneath  towards  it.  He  found  the  earth  down  below.  Breaking 
off  (a  portion  of)  her,  he  rose  to  the  surface."  In  the  '  Sathapatha 
Brahmana '  J  there  is  a  similar  reference,  but  there  the  boar  is 
called  "  Emusha."  Formerly  the  earth  was  only  of  the  size  of  a 
span.     A  boar  called  Emusha  raised  her  up. 

Dr.  Muir  §  gives  two  accounts  of  this  incarnation  from  two 
recensions  of  the  Ramayana.  In  one,  which  he  considers  the 
older,  it  is  said  that  Brahma  assumed  the  form  of  a  boar ;  in  the 
other,  Vishnu  in  the  form  of  Brahma  is  said  to  have  accomplished 
this  work.  The  alteration  of  the  text  is  very  noticeable.  "  All 
was  water  only,  in  which  the  earth  was  formed.      Thence  arose 

*  Goldstiicker,  Chambers's  Cyclopaedia,  s.  v.  Vishnu. 

t  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  i.  52.  -J  Ibid.,  iv.  33.  §  Ibid. 


122  The  Puranic  Deities. 

Brahma,  the  self-existent,  with  the  deities.  He  then  becoming 
a  boar,  raised  up  the  earth,  and  created  the  whole  world  with  the 
saints  his  sons."  So  far  the  probably  older  recension.  In  the 
later  one  we  read,  "  All  was  water  only,  through  which  the  earth 
was  formed.  Thence  arose  Brahma,  the  self-existent,  the  im- 
perishable Vishnu.  He  then,  becoming  a  boar,  raised  up  this 
earth  and  created  the  whole  world." 

In  the  following  account  from  the  'Vishnu  Purana'*  it  will  be 
noticed  that,  as  in  the  last  quotation  from  the  Ramayana,  it  was 
Vishnu  in  the  form  of  Brahma  who  became  a  boar.  As  the 
earlier  writers  had  declared  this  to  have  been  Brahma's  work,  it 
was  necessary  to  identify  Vishnu  with  him. 

"  Tell  me  how  at  the  commencement  of  the  present  age,  Nara- 
yana,  who  is  named  Brahma,  created  all  existing  things.  At  the 
close  of  the  last  age,  the  divine  Brahma,  endowed  with  the  quality 
of  goodness,  awoke  from  his  night  of  sleep,  and  beheld  the  uni- 
versal void.  He,  the  supreme  Narayana,  .  .  .  invested  with  the 
form  of  Brahma,  .  .  .  concluding  that  within  the  waters  lay  the 
earth,  and  being  desirous  to  raise  it  up,  created  another  form  for 
that  purpose.  And  as  in  the  preceding  ages  he  had  assumed  the 
shape  of  a  fish,  or  a  tortoise,  so  in  this  he  took  the  form  of  a 
boar.  Having  adopted  a  form  composed  of  the  sacrifices  of  the 
Vedas  for  the  preservation  of  the  whole  earth,  the  eternal, 
supreme,  and  universal  soul  plunged  into  the  ocean."  In  a 
note  on  this  passage  in  the  '  Vishnu  Purana,'  by  Professor  Wilson, 
it  is  stated  that,'  according  to  the  '  Vayu  Purana,'  the  form  of  a 
boar  was  chosen  because  it  is  an  animal  delighting  in  water  ;  but 
in  other  Puranas,  as  in  the  Vishnu,  it  is  said  to  be  a  type  of  the 
ritual  of  the  Vedas,  for  which  reason  the  elevation  of  the  earth 
on  the  tusks  of  a  boar  is  regarded  as  an  allegorical  representation 
of  the  extrication  of  the  world  from  a  deluge  of  sin,  by  the  rites 
of  religion. 

The  earth,  bowing  with  devout  adoration,  addressed  the  boar 
as  he  approached  in  a  hymn  of  great  beauty,  in  which  she 
reminds  him  that  she  sprang  from  him,  and  is  dependent  on  him, 

*  Page -27  ff. 


The  Varahar  or  Boar  Avatar  a.     123 

as  in  fact  are  all  things.  Being  thus  praised,  "  The  auspicious 
supporter  of  the  world  emitted  a  low  murmuring  sound,  like  the 
chanting  of  the  Sama-Veda  ;  and  the  mighty  boar,  whose  eyes 
were  like  the  lotus,  whose  body  was  vast  as  the  Nila  mountains, 
and  of  the  dark  colour  of  the  lotus  leaves,  uplifted  upon  his  ample 
tusks  the  earth  from  its  lowest  regions.  As  he  reared  up  his 
head,  the  waters  that  rushed  from  his  brow  purified  the  great 
sages,  Sanandana  and  others  residing  in  the  sphere  of  the  saints. 
Through  the  indentations  made  by  his  hoofs,  the  waters  rushed 
into  the  lower  worlds  with  a  thundering  noise.  Before  his  breath, 
the  pious  denizens  of  Janaloka  (abode  of  men)  were  scattered, 
and  the  Munis  sought  for  shelter  amongst  the  bristles  upon  the 
body  of  the  boar,  trembling  as  he  rose  up  supporting  the  earth, 
and  dripping  with  moisture.  Then  the  great  sages  Sanandana 
and  the  rest,  residing  continually  in  the  sphere  of  the  saints,  were 
inspired  with  delight,  and  bowing  lowly,  they  praised  the  stern- 
eyed  upholder  of  the  earth." 

Before  noticing  the  hymn  of  these  saints,  in  which  the  boar  is 
identified  with  the  various  parts  of  worship,  we  can  gather  a 
little  more  information  from  the  other  Puranas  respecting  the 
dimensions,  &c,  of  this  animal.  The  Vayu  says,  "  The  boar  was 
ten  Yojanas  *  in  breadth,  and  a  thousand  Yojanas  in  height  ;  his 
colour  was  like  a  dark  cloud,  and  his  roar  like  thunder.  His 
bulk  was  vast  as  a  mountain  ;  his  tusks  were  white,  sharp,  and 
fearful  ;  fire  flashed  from  his  eyes  like  lightning,  and  he  was 
radiant  as  the  sun.  His  shoulders  were  round,  fat,  and  large  ; 
he  strode  along  like  a  powerful  lion  ;  his  haunches  were  fat, 
his  loins  slender,  and  his  body  smooth  and  beautiful."  With 
this  the  Matsya  agrees.  The  Bhagavata  describes  the  boar  "  as 
issuing  from  the  nostrils  of  Brahma  ;  at  first  of  the  size  of  a 
thumb,  and  presently  increasing  to  the  size  of  an  elephant."  This 
Purana  adds  a  legend  of  the  slaying  of  Hiranyaksha,  who, 
in  a  former  birth,  was  a  doorkeeper  of  Vishnu's  palace.  He 
having  refused  admission  to  a  number  of  Munis,  so  enraged 
them,   that  they  cursed   him  ;    in  consequence  of  this   he  was 

*  A  Yojan  is  at  least  four  miles  and  a  half ;  some  reckon  it  at  nine  miles. 


124  The  Puranic  Deities. 


re-born  as  a  son  of  DIti.  When  the  earth  sunk  in  the  waters, 
Vishnu  was  seen  by  this  demon  in  the  act  of  raising  it. 
Hiranyaksha  claimed  the  earth,  and  defying  Vishnu,  they  fought, 
and  the  demon  was  slain. 

Now  follow  the  hymns  to  the  Varahar  as  sung  by  the  saints  : 
"  Triumph,  lord  of  lords,  supreme !  Kesava,  sovereign  of  the 
earth . .  .  cause  of  production,  destruction  and  existence.  Thou  art, 
O  god  !  there  is  none  other  supreme  condition  than  thou.  Thou, 
lord,  art  the  person  of  the  sacrifice  ;  thy  feet  are  the  Vedas  ;  thy 
tusks  are  the  stake  to  which  the  victim  is  bound  ;  thy  teeth  are 
the  offerings  ;  thy  mouth  is  the  altar ;  thy  tongue  is  the  fire  ; 
and  the  hairs  of  thy  body  are  the  sacrificial  grass.  Thy  eyes, 
O  omnipotent !  are  day  and  night ;  thy  head  is  the  seat  of  all — 
the  place  of  Brahma  ;  thy  mane  is  all  the  hymns  of  the  Vedas  ; 
thy  nostrils  are  all  oblations.  O  thou,  whose  snout  is  the  ladle  of 
oblation  ;  whose  deep  voice  is  the  chanting  of  the  Sama-Veda  ; 
whose  body  is  the  hall  of  sacrifice  ;  whose  joints  are  the  different 
ceremonies  ;  and  whose  ears  have  the  properties  of  both  volun- 
tary and  obligatory  rites  ;  do  thou,  who  art  eternal,  who  art  in 
size  a  mountain,  be  propitious  .  .  .  raise  up  this  earth  for  the 
habitation  of  created  beings  !  " 

"  The  supreme  being  thus  eulogised,  upholding  the  earth, 
raised  it  quickly,  and  placed  it  on  the  summit  of  the  ocean,  where 
it  floats  like  a  mighty  vessel,  and,  on  account  of  its  expansive 
surface,  does  not  sink  beneath  the  waters."  This  seems  rather 
to  contradict  the  common  notion  of  the  Hindus,  that  the  earth 
rests  upon  the  back  of  a  tortoise  ;  and  that  earthquakes  are  the 
result  of  the  tortoise  changing  the  foot  on  which  he  stands,  when 
weary. 

4.    THE    NRISINGHA   OR   MAN-LION   AVATARA. 

In  the  account  of  the  preceding  incarnation,  it  was  stated 
that  Vishnu,  ere  he  raised  the  earth  on  his  tusk,  slew  a  demon 
named  Hiranyaksha.  This  Daitya  had  a  brother  named 
Hiranyakasipu,  who,  the  'Vaya  Purana'  says,  had  obtained  a 
boon  from  Brahma,  that  he  should  not  be  slain  by  any  created 


The  Nrisingha  or  Man-Lion  Avatara. 


"5 


being ;  the  '  Kurma  Purana'  adds,  excepting  Vishnu.  When  there- 
fore his  pride,  fostered  by  his  supposed  immunity  from  danger, 
had  led  him  to  great  excesses,  so  that  his  death  was  desired  both 


7frn  J!uiat~*  •■« 


THE    NRISINGHA    AVATARA. 


by  gods  and  men,  Vishnu  descended  in  the  form  of  a  living 
being,  half-man  and  half-lion,  and  so  neither  man  nor  animal, 
and  slew  him.  By  the  assumption  of  this  form  the  letter  of 
Brahma's  promise  was  kept.  As  the  story  of  this  demon's 
hatred  of  Vishnu,  arising  from  the  fact  that  that  deity  had  slain 
his  brother,  and  of  the  wonderful  efficacy  of  the  worship  of 
Vishnu,  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  narratives  in  the  Puranas, 


126  The  Puranic  Deities. 

it  is  given  at  some  length.  It  is  taken  mostly  from  the  'Vishnu 
Purana.'  * 

"  Hiranyakasipu,  the  son  of  Diti,  had  formerly  brought  the 
three  worlds  under  his  authority,  confiding  in  a  boon  bestowed 
upon  him  by  Brahma.  He  had  usurped  the  sovereignty  of 
Indra,  and  exercised  himself  the  functions  of  the  sun,  of  air,  of 
the  lord  of  waters,  of  fire,  and  of  the  moon.  He  himself  was 
the  god  of  riches  ;  he  was  the  judge  of  the  dead  ;  and  he 
appropriated  to  himself  without  reserve  all  that  was  offered  in 
sacrifice  to  the  gods.  The  deities,  therefore,  flying  from  their 
seats  in  heaven,  wandered,  through  fear  of  the  Daitya,  upon  the 
earth,  disguised  in  mortal  shapes.  Having  conquered  the  three 
worlds,  he  was  inflated  with  pride,  and,  eulogised  by  the  Gand- 
harvas,  enjoyed  whatever  he  desired." 

This  demon  had  a  son  named  Prahlada,  who  was  a  most 
devout  worshipper  of  Vishnu,  whom  his  father  hated  most 
intensely.  "  On  one  occasion  Prahlada  came,  accompanied  by 
his  teacher,  to  the  court  of  his  father,  and  bowed  himself  before 
his  feet  as  he  was  drinking.  Hiranyakasipu  desired  his  prostrate 
son  to  rise,  and  said  to. him,  '  Repeat  in  substance  and  agreeably 
what  during  the  period  of  your  studies  you  have  acquired.' 
Prahlada  said,  '  I  have  learned  to  admire  him  who  is  without 
beginning,  middle,  or  end,  increase  or  diminution  ;  the  impe- 
rishable lord  of  the  world,  the  universal  cause  of  causes.'  On 
hearing  these  words,  the  sovereign  of  the  Daityas,  his  eyes  red 
with  wrath  and  lips  swollen  with  indignation,  turned  to  the 
preceptor  of  his  son,  and  said,  '  Vile  Brahman  !  what  is  this 
preposterous  commendation  of  my  foe  that,  in  disrespect  to  me, 
you  have  taught  this  boy  to  utter  ? '  The  preceptor  denies  the 
charge,  and  Prahlada  himself  replies,  '  Vishnu  is  the  instructor  of 
the  whole  world  ;  what  else  should  any  one  learn  or  teach,  save 
him,  the  supreme  spirit  ? '  '  Blockhead  ! '  exclaimed  the  king, 
'  who  is  this  Vishnu,  whose  name  you  thus  reiterate  so  im- 
pertinently before  me,  who  am  the  sovereign  of  the  three 
worlds?'     'The  glory  of  Vishnu,'   replied   Prahlada,   'is   to  be 


*  Page  126  ff. 


The  Nrisingha  or  Man-Lion  Avatara.         127 


meditated  upon  by  the  devout  ;  it  cannot  be  described  ;  he  is 
the  supreme  lord,  who  is  all  things,  and  from  whom  all  things 
proceed.'  The  king  threatens  death  ;  but  the  son  says,  '  Vishnu 
is  the  creator  and  protector  not  of  me  alone,  but  of  all  human 
beings,  and  even,  father,  of  you.'  The  father  can  bear  this  no 
longer,  so  orders  his  son  to  return  to  his  preceptor's  house. 

Prahlada  is  taken  away,  but  after  a  time  is  sent  for  again. 
When  requested  to  recite  some  poetry,  he  commenced  to  sing  the 
praises  of  Vishnu,  which  so  exasperated  the  king,  that  he  cried 
out,  "  Kill  the  wretch  !  he  is  not  fit  to  live  who  is  a  traitor  to  his 
friends,  a  burning  brand  to  his  own  race."  Upon  this  the 
attendants  rush  upon  Prahlada  with  their  weapons,  and,  though 
hundreds  struck  him,  none  could  injure  him.  His  father  then 
entreated  him  to  desist  from  praising  Vishnu  ;  but  this  the  son 
would  not  do,  as  he  said  he  had  no  fear,  "  as  long  as  his  im- 
mortal guardian  against  all  dangers  was  present  in  his  mind." 

"  Hiranyakasipu,  highly  exasperated,  commanded  the  serpents 
to  fall  upon  his  disobedient  and  insane  son,  and  bite  him  to 
death.  The  serpents  did  their  worst,  but  Prahlada  felt  them 
not.  The  snakes  cried  out  to  the  king,  '  Our  fangs  are  broken  ; 
our  jewelled  crests  are  burst ;  there  is  fever  in  our  hoods,  and 
fear  in  our  hearts  ;  but  the  skin  of  the  youth  is  still  unscathed. 
Have  recourse,  O  king  of  the  Daityas  !  to  some  other  expedient.' 

"  The  young  prince  "  (by  his  father's  orders)  "  was  then  assailed 
by  the  elephants  of  the  skies,  as  vast  as  mountain  peaks  ;  cast 
down  upon  the  earth,  and  trampled  on  and  gored  by  their  tusks  ; 
but  he  continued  to  meditate  on  Govinda,  and  the  tusks  of  the 
elephants  were  blunted  against  his  breast. 

"  Failing  in  this,  the  king  said,  '  Let  fire  consume  him  ;  and 
do  thou,  deity  of  the  winds,  blow  up  the  fire,  that  this  wicked 
wretch  may  be  consumed.'  And  the  Danavas  piled  a  mighty 
heap  of  wood  around  the  prince,  and  kindled  a  fire  to  burn  him, 
as  their  master  had  commanded.  But  Prahlada  cried,  '  Father, 
this  fire,  though  blown  by  the  winds,  burnetii  me  not  ;  and  all 
around  I  behold  the  face  of  the  skies,  cool  and  fragrant  with 
beds  of  lotus  flowers.' 

"  The  Brahmans  now  interceded  with  the  king  on  the  prince's 


1 28  The  Puranic  Deities. 

behalf,  promising  either  to  teach  him  to  recant  his  errors,  or  to 
find  some  means  of  accomplishing  his  death  ;  but  instead  of 
profiting  by  their  instructions,  he  spends  his  time  in  speaking 
to  all  about  him  of  the  glory  of  Vishnu  and  the  happiness  of  his 
worshippers.  They  informed  the  king  of  their  failure  to  bring 
the  prince  to  a  right  state  of  mind  ;  whereupon  the  cooks  are 
ordered  to  mix  poison  with  his  food.  But  this  expedient  wras 
futile,  as  the  others  had  been.  The  Brahmans  now  reason  with 
him,  and  try  to  show  him  that  it  is  the  chief  duty  of  a  son  to 
honour  his  father ;  but  their  sophistry  is  unsuccessful.  They 
remind  him  that  they  had  promised  to  use  incantations  to 
accomplish  his  death.  This  menace  he  meets  with  these  words  : 
1  What  living  creature  slays  or  is  slain  ?  What  living  creature 
preserves  or  is  preserved  ?  Each  is  his  own  destroyer  or  pre- 
server as  he  follows  evil  or  good.'  Enraged  by  this  reply,  they 
now  produce  a  magical  female  figure,  enwreathed  in  a  flame  of 
fire,  whose  tread  parched  the  earth,  and  who  struck  Prahlada 
upon  the  breast.  Her  blow  fell  harmless  upon  him  ;  but  turning 
towards  the  Brahmans,  she  slew  them  all,  and  disappeared. 
In  answer  to  the  prince's  prayer,  they  were,  however,  restored 
to  life,  and,  having  blessed  Prahlada,  they  departed,  and  told  the 
king  all  that  had  happened. 

"  Having  sent  for  his  son,  Hiranyakasipu  inquired  again,  by 
what  magical  art  he  was  able  thus  to  protect  himself.  Prahlada 
said  that  it  was  not  by  magic  at  all,  but  simply  by  the  in- 
dwelling of  Vishnu  that  he  was  able  to  ward  off  evil  ;  and 
further  that  the  same  power  was  within  the  reach  of  all  who 
would  trust  him.  The  king,  enraged  at  this  avowal,  '  com- 
manded his  attendants  to  cast  his  son  from  the  summit  of  the 
palace  where  he  was  sitting,  and  which  was  many  Yojans  in 
height,  down  upon  the  tops  of  the  mountains,  where  his  body 
would  be  dashed  to  pieces  against  the  rocks.  Accordingly  the 
Daityas  hurled  the  boy  down,  but  as  he  fell  cherishing  Hari  in 
his  heart,  Earth,  the  nurse  of  all  creatures,  received  him  gently 
in  her  lap,  thus  entirely  devoted  to  Kesava,  the  protector  of  the 
world." 

Hiranyakasipu,  seeing  that  this  fall  had  not  injured  his  son  in 


The  Nrisingha  or  Man-Lion  AvatAra.        129 

any  way,  asks  Samvara,  the  mightiest  of  enchanters,  to  try  his 
hand  ;  but  though  he  puts  forth  all  his  skill,  the  boy  remains 
unhurt.  After  this,  the  prince  goes  again  to  his  preceptor's 
house,  where  he  is  instructed  in  politics.  When  his  education 
in  this  science  was  completed,  he  is  taken  to  the  king  for 
examination  ;  but  on  being  questioned  as  to  his  mode  of 
government,  he  admits  that  though  he  has  been  instructed  in 
these  subjects,  he  does  not  approve  of  what  his  teachers  had 
said,  and  again  sings  the  praises  of  Vishnu.  His  father,  "  burning 
with  rage,  exclaimed,  '  Bind  him  with  strong  bands  and  cast  him 
into  the  ocean.  Death  is  the  just  retribution  of  the  disobedient.' 
The  Daityas  bound  the  prince  with  strong  bands,  as  their  lord 
had  commanded,  and  threw  him  into  the  sea.  As  he  floated  on 
the  waters,  the  ocean  was  convulsed  throughout  its  whole  extent, 
and  rose  in  mighty  undulations,  threatening  to  submerge  the 
earth.  When  Hiranyakasipu  observed  this,  he  commanded  the 
Daityas  to  hurl  rocks  into  the  sea,  and  pile  them  closely  on  one 
another,  burying  beneath  their  incumbent  mass  him  whom  fire 
could  not  burn.  .  .  .  *  Here,  since  he  cannot  die,  let  him  live  for 
thousands  of  years  at  the  bottom  of  the  ocean,  overwhelmed  by 
mountains.'  This  was  done.  But  Prahlada  was  uninjured. 
His  mind  was  filled  with  thoughts  of  Hari,  and  he  came  to 
recognise  his  real  identity  with  Vishnu.  .  As  soon  as  Prahlada, 
through  the  force  of  contemplation,  had  become  one  with 
Vishnu,  the  bands  with  which  he  was  bound  burst  instantly 
asunder.  Prahlada,  after  hymning  the  praises  of  Vishnu,  again 
returns  to  his  father,  who  no  sooner  saw  him,  than  he  kissed 
him  on  the  forehead,  embraced  him,  and  shed  tears,  and  said, 
'  Dost  thou  live,  my  son  ? '  " 

For  a  time  there  was  complete  reconciliation  between  them. 
And  only  in  a  very  cursory  manner  does  the  '  Vishnu  Purana ' 
allude  to  the  death  of  Hiranyakasipu.  After  speaking  of  the 
reconciliation  between  the  father  and  son,  without  any  intimation 
of  further  dispute,  it  goes  on  to  say  :  "  After  his  father  had 
been  put  to  death  by  Vishnu  in  the  form  of  the  man-lion, 
Prahlada  became  the  sovereign  of  the  Daityas."  In  the  Bhagavat 
we  are  told  that  Prahlada  had  said  that  Vishnu  was  in  him,  in 

K 


130  The  Puranic  Deities. 

his  father;  in  fact  was  everywhere.  "  Hiranyakasipu  says,  'Why, 
if  Vishnu  is  everywhere,  is  he  not  visible  in  this  pillar  ? '  Being 
told  that  Vishnu,  though  unseen,  was  really  present  there,  he 
struck  the  pillar,  saying,  '  Then  I  will  kill  him.'  Immediately 
Vishnu,  in  the  form  of  a  being,  half-man  and  half-lion,  came 
forth  from  the  pillar,  laid  hold  of  Hiranyakasipu  by  the  thighs 
with  his  teeth,  and  tore  him  up  the  middle.  Brahma's  boon  to 
this  Daitya  king,  as  a  reward  of  his  religious  observances,  was 
that  no  common  animal  should  destroy  him,  that  he  should  die 
neither  in  the  day  nor  night,  in  earth  or  in  heaven,  by  fire,  by 
water,  or  by  the  sword.  This  promise  was  kept  in  the  letter, 
for  it  was  evening  when  Vishnu  slew  him  ;  and  this  is  neither 
day  nor  night.  It  was  done  under  the  droppings  of  the  thatch, 
and  this,  according  to  a  Hindu  proverb,  is  out  of  the  earth,  and 
he  was  not  killed  by  a  man  or  any  common  animal."  * 


5.    THE   VAMANA   OR   DWARF   AVATARA. 

The  four  Avataras  that  have  been  described  are  said  to  have 
occurred  in  the  Satya-yuga,  or  age  of  Truth,  corresponding  with 
the  golden  age  of  classic  writers  ;  it  was  in  the  Treta-yuga,  or 
second  age,  that  this  incarnation  is  supposed  to  have  occurred. 
It  is  not  easy  to  see  how  this  belief  could  be  formed  ;  for 
certainly,  if  the  story  of  Prahlada  be  regarded  as  a  true  picture 
of  the  Satya-yuga,  it  was  not  very  far  superior  to  the  present, 
the  last  and  worst  of  all. 

This  incarnation  as  a  dwarf  was  undertaken  to  regain  heaven 
to  the  gods.  Bali,  the  grandson  of  Prahlada,  was  king  of  the 
three  worlds  ;  Vishnu  appears  before  him  as  a  dwarf,  and  asks  a 
boon.  The  king  grants  him  what  he  asks, — all  the  land  he  can 
step  over  in  three  strides.  Vishnu  places  one  foot  in  heaven, 
and  one  on  the  earth,  and  at  once  regains  the  whole  for  the  gods. 
The  '  Skanda  Purana '  f  gives  the  following  legend  as  the  reason 
of  this  incarnation. 

Ward,  ii.  7,  8.  f  Kennedy's  '  Hindu  Mythology,'  p.  363. 


The  Vamana  or   Dwarf  Avatara. 


131 


In  the  battle  between  the  gods  and  Asuras  for  the  possession 
of  the  Amrita  produced  at  the  churning  of  the  ocean,  the  demons 
were  defeated.  Bali 
prepared  a  costly 
sacrifice  in  order  that 
he  might  regain  his 
power.  As  he  pre- 
sented his  offerings  to 
the  sacred  fire,  he  ob- 
tained  from  it  a 
wondrous  car  drawn 
by  four  white  horses, 
a  banner  displaying  a 
lion,  and  celestial 
armour  and  weapons. 
The  sacred  rites  being 
finished,  Bali  raised  a 
large  army,  and  in  his 
newly-acquired 
chariot  went  and  laid 
siege  to  Amravati, 
the  capital  of  Indra's 
heaven.  The  gods  in 
terror  turned  to  their 
preceptor  for  advice  ; 
who  told  them  that 
their  enemies  had 
been  rendered  invin- 
cible by  penance.  On 
hearing  this,  they  were  greatly  alarmed,  and  Indra  besought 
Vrihaspati  to  tell  them  what  should  be  done.  His  advice  was 
that  they  should  forsake  Amravati,  assume  other  forms,  and  find 
a  home  elsewhere.  The  gods  obeyed  ;  Indra  became  a  peacock, 
Kuvera  a  lizard,  &c,  in  which  disguises  they  went  to  the  hermitage 
of  Kasyapa,  to  whom  they  related  their  misfortunes.  On  hearing 
their  story,  the  sage  immediately  desired  his  wife  Aditi  to  per- 
form a  severe  penance,  in  order  that  she  might  induce  Vishnu  to 

K  2 


THE    VAMANA    AVATAKA. 


1  o- 


The    Puranic   Deities. 


become  her  son,  that  through  him  the  gods  might  be  restored 
to  heaven. 

As  the  origin  of  this  incarnation  is  probably  found  in  the 
metaphorical  language  of  the  Vedas,  it  will  be  well  to  consider 
the  teaching  of  the  Hindu  Scriptures  as  far  as  possible  in 
chronological  order. 

It  seems  clear  that  the  legend  just  quoted  from  the  '  Skanda 
Purana '  was  written  as  an  answer  to  the  question  why  Vishnu 
had  appeared  in  this  form.  In  the  Rig-Veda  *  the  germ  of  the 
story  is  found  :  "  Vishnu  strode  over  this  [universe]  ;  in  three 
places  he  planted  his  step."  This  passage  is  interpreted  by  the 
commentators  in  various  ways.  One  thought  "that  the  triple 
manifestation  of  the  god  in  the  form  of  fire  on  earth,  of  lightning 
in  the  atmosphere,  and  of  the  solar  light  in  the  sky  was  intended 
in  this  hymn."  Another  understands  the  three  steps  of  Vishnu 
to  represent  "the  different  positions  of  the  sun  at  his  rising,  his 
culmination,  and  his  setting."  According  to  him,  therefore, 
Vishnu  is  simply  the  sun.  Frequently  in  the  Rig- Veda  the  term 
"  wide-stepping  "  is  applied  to  Vishnu,  an  evident  allusion  to  his 
three  steps. 

In  the  '  Sathapatha  Brahman,'  f  the  simple  statement  respecting 
Vishnu's  strides  assumes  a  larger  form.  "The  gods  and  the 
Asuras,  who  both  sprung  from  Prajapati,  strove  together.  Then 
the  gods  were  worsted ;  and  the  Asuras  said, '  This  world  is  now 
certainly  ours !  Let  us  divide  this  earth,  and  let  us  subsist 
thereon.'  The  gods  heard  of  it  and  said,  '  The  Asuras  are 
dividing  the  earth  :  come,  we  will  go  to  the  spot  where  they  are 
dividing  it ! '  Placing  at  their  head  Vishnu,  the  sacrifice,  they  pro- 
ceeded [thither],  and  said,  '  Put  us  with  yourselves  in  possession 
of  this  earth;  let  us  have  a  share  of  it.'  The  Asuras  grudg- 
ingly said,  '  We  will  give  you  as  much  as  this  Vishnu  can  lie  upon.' 
Now  Vishnu  was  a  dwarf.  The  gods  did  not  reject  this  offer. 
They  placed  Agni  in  the  East,  and  thus  they  went  on  toiling 
and  worshipping.    By  this  means  they  acquired  the  whole  earth." 

The    next    form    of  this    legend    is    that    of  the  Ramayana. 


Muir,  O.  S.  T.?  iv.  63-156.  f  Ibid. 


The  Vamana  or  Dwarf  Avatara.  133 

Visvamitra,  a  sage,  addressing  Rama,  tells  him  the  story. 
"  Formerly  Bali,  the  son  of  Virochana,  after  conquering  the  chief 
of  the  gods,  enjoyed  the  empire  of  the  three  worlds,  intoxicated 
with  the  increase  of  his  power.  When  Bali  was  celebrating  a 
sacrifice,  Indra  and  the  other  gods  addressed  Vishnu  in  this 
hermitage  [saying],  'That  mighty  Bali  is  now  performing 
sacrifice  ;  he  who  grants  the  desire  of  all  creatures  ;  the 
prosperous  lord  of  the  Asuras.  Whatever  suppliants  wait  upon 
him  he  bestows  on  them  whatever  [they  wish].  Do  thou  take 
the  form  of  a  dwarf,  and  bring  about  our  highest  welfare. 
[Kasyapa  now  appears,  and,  after  praising  Vishnu,  asks  a  boon, 
that  Vishnu  will  be  born  as  the  son  of  Aditi  and  himself.]  Thus 
addressed  by  the  gods,  Vishnu  took  the  form  of  a  dwarf,  and,  ap- 
proaching the  son  of  Virochana,  begged  three  of  his  own  paces. 
Having  obtained  three  paces,  Vishnu  assumed  a  miraculous  form, 
and  with  three  paces  took  possession  of  the  world.  With  one 
step  he  occupied  the  whole  earth  ;  with  a  second,  the  eternal 
atmosphere  ;  and  with  a  third,  the  sky.  Having  assigned  to  the 
Asura  Bali  an  abode  in  Patala  (the  infernal  region),  he  gave  the 
empire  of  the  world  to  Indra." 

The  notice  of  this  Avatara  in  the  Mahabharata  is  not  lengthy. 
Vishnu  is  represented  as  foretelling  it  to  Narada.  "  The  great 
Asura  Bali  shall  be  indestructible  by  all  beings,  including  gods, 
Asuras,  and  Rakshasas.  He  shall  oust  Indra  ;  and  when  the 
three  worlds  have  been  taken  by  Bali,  and  Indra  put  to  flight, 
I  shall  be  born  in  the  form  of  the  twelve  Adityas,  the  son  of 
Kasyapa  and  Diti.  I  will  then  restore  his  kingdom  to  Indra, 
reinstate  the  gods  in  their  several  positions,  and  place  Bali  in 
Patala." 

The  '  Vishnu  Purana '  barely  notices  this  event,  but  it  is  fully 
described  in  the  Bhagavata.  The  question  is  there  asked,  "  Why 
did  Hari,  the  lord  of  creatures,  ask,  like  a  poor  man,  three  pieces 
of  land  from  Bali  ?  And  why,  when  he  had  obtained  his  object, 
did  he  bind  him  ?  And  why  was  an  innocent  being  bound  by 
the  lord  of  sacrifice  ? "  The  answer  given  is  as  follows  : — After 
Bali  had  been  killed  by  Indra,  he  was  restored  by  the  Brahmans 
of  the  race  of  Bhrigu,  who  consecrated  him  for  supreme  dominion, 


134  The  Puranic  Deities. 


and  performed  a  sacrifice  to  obtain  it  for  him.  He  then  sets  out 
for  Amravati  as  before  narrated  ;  and  Indra  is  told,  when  he 
applies  to  his  preceptor  for  advice,  that  Bali  had  obtained  this 
power  "  by  virtue  of  the  Brahman's  sacrifice  ; "  and  that,  save 
by  Hari,  he  is  unconquerable.  "  He  now  reaps  the  fruit  of 
Brahmanical  power;  through  contempt  of  these  same  Brahmans 
he  shall  perish  with  all  his  descendants." 

The  gods  forsake  their  capital,  which  is  occupied  by  Bali. 
Aditi,  the  mother  of  the  gods,  is  distressed  as  she  sees  the  condi- 
tion of  her  children  ;  and  acting  upon  the  advice  of  her  husband, 
propitiates  Vishnu,  wrho  says  :  "  I  shall  with  a  portion  of  myself 
become  thy  son,  and  deliver  thy  children.  Wait  upon  thy 
husband,  the  sinless  Prajapati,  virtuous  female,  meditating  upon 
me,  who  in  this  form  abide  within  him."  Aditi  followed  the 
advice  of  the  god  ;  and  Kasyapa  knew  by  meditation  that  a 
portion  of  Hari  had  entered  into  him.  In  due  time  the  son  was 
born,  and  became  a  dwarfish  Brahmanical  student. 

As  the  Bhrigus  are  performing  a  sacrifice  for  Bali  on  the  banks 
of  the  Narmada  river,  this  dwarf  visits  Bali  at  Indra's  heaven. 
"  Acquainted  with  his  duty,  Bali  placed  upon  his  head  the 
auspicious  water  with  which  the  Brahman's  feet  had  been 
washed,  and  said,  '  Welcome  to  thee,  O  Brahman  !  What  can 
we  do  for  thee  ?  Ask  of  me,  student,  whatever  thou  desirest. 
Son  of  a  Brahman,  I  conclude  thou  art  a  suppliant  ;  ask  a  cow, 
pure  gold,  an  embellished  house,  food  and  drink,  a  Brahman's 
daughter,  flourishing  villages,  horses,  elephants,  and  carriages." 
The  dwarf  concludes  a  speech  with  the  semblance  of  moderation 
as  follows  :  "I  ask  from  thee  a  small  portion  of  ground,  three 
paces  measured  step  by  step.  I  desire  no  more  from  thee.  A 
wise  man  incurs  no  sin,  when  he  asks  [only]  as  much  as  he 
needs."  The  king,  though  astonished  at  the  smallness  of  the 
request,  takes  a  vessel  of  water  in  his  hand,  and  is  about  to  con- 
firm the  gift  ;  when  his  preceptor,  seeing  through  Vishnu's  device, 
tries  to  dissuade  his  pupil.  In  a  long  speech  he  tries  to  show  that 
rather  than  be  left  homeless  it  would  be  better  for  him  to  break 
his  word.  But  the  king  persists  in  fulfilling  his  promise;  even 
though  cursed  by  his   preceptor  for  doing  so.     With  two  steps 


The  Parasurama  Avatara.  135 

Vishnu  strode  over  the  universe  ;  there  was  nowhere  for  him  to 
take  a  third. 

The  gods  congratulate  Hari  ;  Bali  is  bound  by  Garuda,  and 
then    reproached    by   Vishnu    for    not    fulfilling    his    promise. 
"  Asura,  three  paces  of  ground  were  given  to  me  by  thee  ;  with 
two  paces  the  entire  world  has  been  traversed  ;  find  a  place  for 
the  third.     As  thou  hast  not  given  what  was  promised,  it  is  my 
pleasure  that  thou  shouldst  dwell  in  the  infernal  regions.     That 
man  falls  downward  who,  after  promising  a  Brahman,  does  not 
deliver  to  him  what  he  had  solicited.     I  have  been  deluded  by 
thee."     Bali  offers  his  head  as  a  place  for  Vishnu's  foot,  saying, 
"  I  fear  not  the  infernal  regions  so  much  as  a  bad  name."     Bali 
goes  to  Patala,  and  is  there  visited  by  his  grandfather  Prahlada. 
First  Vishnu's  wife  and  then  Brahma  intercede  with  Vishnu  on 
his  behalf,  who  in  reply  promises  that  Bali  shall  again  become 
Indra  ;  but  that  in  the  meantime  he  must  dwell  in  Sutala,  where 
"  by  my  will,  neither  mental  nor  bodily  pains,  nor  fatigue  nor 
weariness,  nor  discomfiture,  nor  diseases  afflict  the  inhabitants." 
Bali  gladly  left  Patala,  and  went  to  Sutala,  to  wait  until  the 
time  came  when,  in  accordance  with  the  promise  of  Vishnu,  he 
should  again  rule  over  gods  and  men. 

The  Hindus  declare  that  Vishnu  gave  Bali  the  choice  of 
going  to  heaven,  taking  with  him  five  ignorant  people,  or  of 
p-oine  to  hell  with  five  wise.  He  chose  the  latter,  for  there  is  no 
pleasure  anywhere  in  the  company  of  the  ignorant ;  a  bad  place 
with  good  company  being  preferable. 


6.    THE   PARASURAMA   AVATARA. 

The  incarnation  of  Parasurama,  or  Rama  with  axe,  was 
undertaken  by  Vishnu  for  the  purpose  of  exterminating  the 
Kshattriya,  or  Warrior   caste,*   which  had   tried   to    assert   its 


*  There  are  four  chief  castes  or  jatis  of  Hindus  :  the  Brahman,  or  Priestly  ; 
the  Kshattriya,  or  Warrior  ;  the  Vaisya,  or  Merchant  ;  and  the  Sudra,  or 
Servant.  These  four  classes  are  now  commonly  said  to  have  sprung  re- 
spectively from  the  head,  arms,  thighs,  and  feet  of  the  Creator,  though  there 


'3« 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


authority  over   the   Brahmanical.     Twenty-one  times   Rama  is 
said  to  have  cleared  the  earth   of  these  men,   but   by  various 

means  some  few  were  pre- 
served who  were  able  to 
perpetuate  the  race.  It 
will  be  noticed  that  the 
scene  of  Vishnu's  exploits 
in  this  Avatara,  and  in 
those  also  which  follow  it, 
was  the  earth  ;  and  not,  as 
in  those  preceding,  the 
abode  of  the  gods. 

The  following  legend  of 
the  birth  of  Parasurama  is 
from  the  'Vishnu  Purana.'* 
A  man  named  Gadhi,  who 
was  himself  an  incarnation 
of  Indra,  had  a  daughter 
named  Satyavati.  Rich- 
ika,  a  descendant  of 
Bhrigu,f  demanded  her  in 
marriage.  The  king  asked 
from  the  decrepit  old 
Brahman  a  thousand  fleet 
white  horses,  each  having 
one  black  ear,  as  a  wedding 


present.  These  horses 
were  obtained,  by  the  help 
of  Varuna,  and  the 
Brahman  received  the  hand 
of  the  princess. 

In    order    to    effect    the 
birth  of  a  son,  Richika  pre- 
pared a  dish  of  rice,  barley,  and  pulse,  with  butter  and  milk,  for 


THE    PARASUKAMA    AVATARA. 


is  good  reason  for  the  belief  that  in  the  olden  time  no  such  ideas  of  the 
divine  origin  of  caste  prevailed. 

*  Page  400.  f  Sec  Part  III.  chap.  i. 


The  Parasurama  Avatara.  137 


his  wife  to  eat,  and,  at  her  request,  consecrated  a  similar  mixture 
for  her  mother,  by  partaking  of  which  she  should  give  birth  to  a 
prince  of  martial  prowess.  Leaving  both  dishes  with  his  wife, 
after  carefully  describing  which  was  for  herself  and  which  for 
her  mother,  the  sage  went  away  into  the  forest.  When  the 
time  for  eating  the  food  came,  the  queen  said  to  Satyavati, 
"  Daughter !  all  children  wish  their  children  to  be  possessed 
of  excellent  qualities,  and  would  be  mortified  to  see  them 
surpassed  by  the  merits  of  their  mother's  brother.  Give  me, 
therefore,  the  mess  your  husband  has  set  apart  for  you,  and  you 
eat  that  which  was  intended  for  me.  The  son  which  it  is  in- 
tended to  procure  for  me,  is  destined  to  be  the  monarch  of 
the  whole  world  ;  whilst  that  which  your  dish  will  give  you 
must  be  a  Brahman,  alike  devoid  of  affluence,  valour,  and 
power."  Satyavati  consented  to  this  proposal,  and  they  ex- 
changed messes. 

On  Richika's  return,  perceiving  what  his  wife  had  done,  he 
said,  "  Sinful  woman !  what  hast  thou  done  ?  I  see  thy  body 
of  a  fearful  appearance.  Thou  hast  eaten  of  the  consecrated 
food  that  was  prepared  for  thy  mother  ;  thou  hast  done  wrong. 
In  that  food  I  had  infused  the  properties  of  power,  and  strength, 
and  heroism  ;  in  thine,  the  qualities  suited  to  a  Brahman — 
gentleness,  knowledge,  and  resignation.  In  consequence  of 
having  reversed  my  plans,  thy  son  shall  follow  a  warrior's 
propensities,  and  use  weapons,  and  fight,  and  slay.  Thy  mother's 
son  shall  be  born  with  the  inclinations  of  a  Brahman,  and  be 
addicted  to  peace  and  piety."  Satyavati  hearing  this,  fell  at  her 
husband's  feet,  and  asked  that  she  might  not  have  such  a  son  as 
he  had  described  ;  "  but  if  such  there  must  be,  let  it  be  my 
grandson,  and  not  my  son."  The  Muni  relented,  and  said,  "  So 
be  it."  Accordingly  in  due  time  she  gave  birth  to  a  son 
named  Jamadagni,  who  married  Renuka,  and  had  by  her  the 
destroyer  of  the  Kshattriya  race,  Parasurama,  who  was  a  portion 
of  Narayana,  the  spiritual  guide  of  the  universe. 

This  is  all  we  find  about  Parasurama's  work  in  the  'Vishnu 
Purana.'  The  story  of  his  exploits  is  told  at  length  twice  over  in 
the  Mahabharata,  and  is  found  in  the  Bhagavata,  Padma,  and 


1 3S  The  Puranic  Deities. 

Agni  Puranas.  The  following  account  is  from  the  Mahab- 
harata.* 

Jamadagni  (the  son  of  Richika,  whose  birth  was  just  described) 
having  married  Renuka,  "  conducted  the  princess  to  his  her- 
mitage, and  she  was  contented  to  partake  in  his  ascetic  life. 
They  had  four  sons,  and  then  a  fifth,  who  was  Jamadagnya 
(Parasurama),  the  last,  but  not  the  least,  of  the  brethren.  Once 
when  her  sons  were  all  absent  gathering  the  fruits  on  which  they 
fed,  Renuka,  who  was  exact  in  the  discharge  of  all  her  duties, 
went  forth  to  bathe.  On  her  way  to  the  stream  she  beheld 
Chitraratha,  the  prince  of  Mrittikavati,  with  a  garland  of  lotuses 
on  his  neck,  sporting  with  his  queen  in  the  water,  and  she  felt 
envious  of  their  felicity.  Defiled  by  unworthy  thoughts,  wetted, 
but  not  purified  by  the  stream,  she  returned  disquieted  to  the 
hermitage.  Beholding  her  fallen  from  her  perfection,  and  shorn 
of  the  lustre  of  her  sanctity,  Jamadagni  reproved  her,  and  was 
exceeding  wroth. 

"  Upon  this,  her  sons  came  from  the  wood,  and  each  as  he 
entered  was  successively  commanded  by  his  father  to  put  his 
mother  to  death  ;  but,  amazed  and  influenced  by  natural  affec- 
tion, neither  of  them  made  any  reply  ;  therefore  Jamadagni 
cursed  them,  and  they  became  idiots.  Lastly  Rama  returned 
to  the  hermitage,  when  the  mighty  and  holy  Jamadagni  said 
to  him,  '  Kill  thy  mother,  who  has  sinned  ;  and  do  it  without 
repining.'  Rama  accordingly  took  up  his  axe  [this  was  the 
Parasu,  or  axe,  which  Siva  had  given  him]  and  struck  off  his 
mother's  head  ;  whereupon  the  wrath  of  Jamadagni  was  assuaged, 
and,  pleased  with  his  son,  said:  'Since  thou  hast  obeyed  my 
commands,  and  clone  what  was  hard  to  be  performed,  demand 
from  me  whatever  blessing  thou  wilt,  and  thy  desires  shall  be 
fulfilled.'  Kama  begged  these  boons  :  the  restoration  of  his 
mother  to  life,  with  forgctfulncss  of  having  been  slain,  and 
purification  from  all  defilement  ;  the  return  of  his  brothers  to 
their  natural  condition  ;  and  for  himself,  invincibility  in  single 
combat,  and  length  of  days.     All  these  did  his  father  bestow. 


*  i 


Vishnu  Purana,5  note  p.  401  ;  and  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  i.  447. 


The  Parasurama  Avatara.  139 

"  It  happened  on  one  occasion  that,  during  the  absence  of  the 
Rishi's  sons,  the  mighty  monarch  Karttavirya,  the  sovereign  of 
the  Haihaya  tribe,  endowed  by  the  favour  of  Dattatreya  *  with 
a  thousand  arms,  and  a  golden  chariot  that  went  wheresoever  he 
willed  it  to  go,  came  to  the  hermitage  of  Jamadagni,  where  the 
wife  of  the  sage  received  him  with  proper  respect.  This 
Karttavirya,  by  reason  of  his  strength,  had  greatly  oppressed 
the  gods,  Rishis,  and  all  creatures.  The  gods  and  Rishis  applied 
to  Vishnu,  who,  with  Indra,  devised  the  means  of  destroying 
him.  The  king,  inflated  with  the  pride  of  valour,  made  no 
return  for  the  hospitality  of  the  Rishi's  wife  ;  but  carried  off  with 
him  the  calf  of  the  milch  cow  of  the  sacred  oblation,  and  cast 
down  the  tall  trees  of  the  hermitage." 

In  the  Ramayana  is  an  account  of  the  wonderful  cow  whose 
calf  this  king  stole.  When  commanded  by  her  owner,  on  the 
occasion  of  the  visit  of  a  king  to  the  hermitage,  to  supply  the 
varied  wants  of  the  great  multitude  which  accompanied  him, — 


i.  i 


The  cow  from  whom  all  plenty  flows, 
Obedient  to  her  saintly  lord, 
Viands  to  suit  each  taste  outpoured. 
Honey  she  gave,  and  roasted  grain, 
Mead  sweet  with  flowers,  and  sugar-cane. 
Each  beverage  of  flavour  rare, 
And  food  of  every  sort,  were  there  : 
Hills  of  hot  rice,  and  sweetened  cakes, 
And  curdled  milk,  and  soup  in  lakes. 
Vast  beakers  flowing  to  the  brim 
With  sugared  drink  prepared  for  him  ; 
And  dainty  sweetmeats,  deftly  made, 
Before  the  hermit's  guests  were  laid.' 

"  When  Rama  returned,  his  father  told  him  what  had 
happened  ;  and  seeing  the  cow  in  distress,  he  was  filled  with 
wrath.  Taking  up  his  splendid  bow,  he  assailed  Karttavirya, 
and  overthrew  him  in  battle.  With  sharp  arrows  Rama  cut  off 
his  thousand  arms,  and  he  perished.       The  sons  of  Karttavirya, 

*  A  Brahman  saint  in  whom  a  portion  of  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva  was 
incarnate. 


140  The  Puranic  Deities. 

to  avenge  his  death,  attacked  the  hermitage  of  Jamadagni  when 
Rama  was  absent,  and  slew  the  pious  and  unresisting  sage,  who 
called  repeatedly,  but  fruitlessly,  upon  his  valiant  son.  Rama 
deeply  laments  his  father's  death,  performs  the  last  obsequies, 
and  lights  the  funeral  pile.  He  then  made  a  vow  that  he  would 
extirpate  the  whole  Kshattriya  race.  In  fulfilment  of  which  he, 
with  remorseless  and  fatal  rage,  singly  destroyed  the  sons  of 
Karttavirya  ;  and,  after  them,  whatever  Kshattriyas  he  en- 
countered, Rama  slew.  Thrice  seven  times  *  did  he  clear  the 
earth  of  the  Kshattriya  caste.  After  he  had  cleared  the  world 
of  Kshattriyas,  their  widows  came  to  the  Brahmans,  praying  for 
offspring.  The  religious  Brahmans,  free  from  any  impulse  of 
lust,  cohabited  with  these  women,  who,  in  consequence,  brought 
forth  valiant  Kshattriya  boys  and  girls." 

In  another  passage  in  the  Mahabharata  it  is  taught  that  it  was 
in  consequence  of  the  curse  of  a  sage  named  Apava,  that  Rama 
was  able  to  kill  Karttavirya.  The  king  had  permitted  Agni  to 
devour  the  hermitage  of  this  Rishi,  who  in  revenge  declared 
that  his  thousand  arms  should  be  cut  off  by  Parasurama. 

In  the  Ramayana  is  an  interesting  legend  in  which  Parasurama, 
himself  an  incarnation  of  Vishnu,  is  described  as  meeting  with 
Rama  Chandra,  the  following  avatara  of  this  same  deity,  and  in 
which  the  superiority  of  Rama  Chandra  is  declared.!  "  As  King 
Dasaratha  was  returning  to  his  capital  with  Rama  (Chandra), 
he  was  alarmed  by  the  ill-omened  sounds  uttered  by  certain 
birds.  The  alarming  event  indicated  was  the  arrival  of  Para- 
surama. He  was  fearful  to  behold,  brilliant  as  fire,  and  bore  his 
axe  and  a  bow  on  his  shoulder.  Being  received  with  honour, 
he  proceeded  to  say  to  Rama,  the  son  of  Dasaratha,  that  he  had 
heard  of  his  prowess  in  breaking  the  bow  produced  by  Janaka, 
and    had    brought    another    which    he    asked    Rama    to    bend, 


*  The  reason  why  Parasurama  had  to  perform  his  work  so  many  times 
was  this  : — Some  Kshattriya  children  were  hidden  from  his  rage  amongst 
the  other  castes,  and  in  time  grew  up  to  be  warriors.  It  was  when  his 
work  was  effectually  accomplished,  and  there  was  not  a  single  Kshattriya 
man  kit,  thai  their  widows  resorted  to  the  Brahmans,  as  noticed  above. 

f  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  iv.  175. 


The  Parasurama  Avatara.  141 


and    to    fit    an    arrow  on    the  string ;    and    offered,   if   he    suc- 
ceeded   in    doing   so,   to   engage    with    him    in    single    combat. 
Parasurama  went  on  to  say  that  the  bow  Rama  had  broken  was 
Siva's  ;  but  that  the  one  he   now  brought  was  Vishnu's.     The 
gods  then  made  a  request  to  Brahma,  desiring  to  find  out  the 
strength  and  weakness  of  Siva  and  Vishnu.     Brahma   created 
enmity  between   the  two.     A  great  fight  ensued.     Siva's  bow 
of  dreadful  power  was  relaxed,  and  the  three-eyed  Mahadeva 
was  arrested  by  a  muttering.     The   gods  were   appeased,   and 
judged  that  Vishnu  was  superior.     Parasurama  then  said,  'This 
bow    I    offer   you    to    bend    is    Vishnu's.'      Again,    challenged 
by  Parasurama,    Rama    snatches    the    bow,  bends    it,    and    fits 
an  arrow  to  the  string ;  but  tells  his  challenger  that  as  he  is 
a  Brahman  he  will  not  slay  him,  but  that  he  will  either  take 
away  his  superhuman  capacity  of  movement,   or  deprive  him  of 
the  blessed  abodes  he  had  gained  by  austerity.     Parasurama 
entreats  that  his  power  of  movement  may  not  be  taken  from 
him,  but  consents   that   his  blissful  abodes  may  be  destroyed. 
'  By  bending  this  bow,'   he  said,    '  I   recognise  thee  to  be  the 
imperishable  slayer  of  Madhu,  the  great  lord.'     Rama  shoots  the 
arrow,  and  destroys  Parasurama's  abodes." 

The  only  explanation  of  this  strange  legend  seems  to  be  the 
one  that  is  commonly  received  by  Oriental  scholars,  that  the 
passages  in  the  Epic  poems  which  speak  of  Rama  as  an  in- 
carnation of  Vishnu  are  interpolations  of  a  later  date  than  the 
original  poem  ;  and  this  interview  of  Parasurama  with  Rama 
was  introduced  for  the  purpose  of  giving  a  quasi-divine  sanction 
to  the  teaching  of  these  interpolations.  If  Parasurama,  an 
admitted  incarnation  of  Vishnu,  acknowledge  that  Rama  was 
superior  to  himself,  what  stronger  proof  could  be  given  that 
Rama  too  was  divine  ? 


T42 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


7.    THE   RAMA   CHANDRA   AVATARA. 

In  Northern  India  this  is  perhaps  the  most  popular  of  all  the 
incarnations  of  Vishnu,  and  certainly  the  Ramayana,  in  which 
his  history  is  found,  contains  some  of  the  most  beautiful  legends 


•t4    4k„  -.4 


'»»W'f/ 


mf^\4^lBi  M^» 


THE  KAMA  CHANDRA  AVATARA. 


in  the  whole  of  the  sacred  writings  of  the  Hindus.  The 
Ramayana  is  very  largely  occupied  with  the  story  of  Rama's 
life,  and  the  Indian  poets  have  found  in  its  legends  subjects  for 
their  most  attractive  poems.  A  whole  volume  might  easily  be 
written,   giving    a  biography  of  this   most    popular    hero;    we 


The  Rama  Chandra  Avatara.  143 

must,  however,  content  ourselves  with  the  merest  outline  of  his 
doings. 

Mr.  Griffiths,  in  the  preface  to  his  translation  of  the  Ramayana, 
says,  "  The  great  exploit  and  main  subject  of  the  Epic  is  the  war 
which  Rama  waged  with  the  giant  Ravan,  the  fierce  and  mighty 
King  of  Lanka  or  Ceylon,  and  the  dread  oppressor  of  gods  and 
nymphs,  and  saints  and  men."  "  The  army,"  to  borrow  the  words 
of  Gorresio,  "which  Rama  led  on  this  expedition  was,  as  appears 
from  the  poem,  gathered  in  great  part  from  the  region  of  the 
Vindhya  hills  ;  *  but  the  races  which  he  assembled  are  repre- 
sented in  the  poem  as  monkeys,  either  out  of  contempt  for 
their  barbarism,  or  because  at  that  time  they  were  little  known 
to  the  Sanskrit-speaking  Hindus.  The  poet  calls  the  people 
whom  Rama  attacked  Rakshasas.  Rakshasas,  according  to  the 
popular  Indian  belief,  are  malignant  beings,  demons  of  many 
shapes,  terrible  and  cruel,  who  disturb  the  sacrifices  and  re- 
ligious rites  of  the  Brahmans.  It  appears  indubitable  that  the 
poet  of  the  Ramayana  applied  the  hated  name  of  Rakshasas 
to  an  abhorred  and  hostile  people,  and  that  this  denomination 
is  here  rather  an  expression  of  hatred  and  horror  than  a  real 
historical  name."  The  account  of  Rama  which  follows  is 
taken  from  the  translation  of  the  Ramayana  in  verse  by  Mr. 
Griffiths. 

Dasaratha,  the  King  of  Ayodha,  being  childless,  determined  to 
make  an  asvamedh,  or  horse  sacrifice,  to  obtain  a  son.  It  was 
necessary,  in  order  to  make  an  acceptable  asvamedh,  that  the 
horse  destined  for  sacrifice  be  allowed  to  wander  at  will  for  a 
whole  year,  as  a  sign  that  the  authority  of  its  owner  was 
acknowledged  by  the  neighbouring  princes.  The  people  loved 
their  king,  and  during  his  reign  were  very  prosperous  ;  but  owing 


*  It  is  a  strange  though  real  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  the  underlying 
history  of  the  hero  that  to  this  day  the  aboriginal  tribes  inhabiting  the 
Vindhya  hills  have  many  legends  relating  to  the  life  of  Rama  and  Sita, 
although  they  are  not  Hindus,  and  know  but  little  of  Hinduism.  These 
people  are  not  at  all  like  the  Hindus  in  appearance.  They  are  black,  have 
curly  hair  and  thick  lips,  not  at  all  unlike  the  more  degraded  of  the  African 
races. 


i44  The  Puranic  Deities. 


to  the  want  of  a  son,  the  happiness  of  king  and  subjects  was 
incomplete.  The  sacrifice  therefore  was  determined  on,  the 
place  of  sacrifice  fixed,  the  horse  set  free,  and  the  king  being  en- 
couraged by  the  Brahmans  to  proceed  with  the  ceremony,  the 
neighbouring  princes  were  invited  to  attend  and  great  pre- 
parations made.  At  length  the  sacrifice  was  completed,  and  the 
presiding  Brahman  said  to  Dasaratha  : 

"  Four  sons,  O  monarch,  shall  be  thine, 

Upholders  of  the  royal  line.* 
*  *  *  * 

Another  rite  will  I  begin, 
Which  shall  the  sons  thou  cravest  win, 
When  all  things  shall  be  duly  sped 
And  first  Atharva  texts  be  read."  f 

The  gods  were  all  assembled  as  the  saint  performed  this  rite, 
to  whom  he  said  : 

"  For  you  has  Dasaratha  slain 
The  votive  steed,  a  son  to  gain  ; 
Stern  penance  rites  the  king  has  tried, 
And  in  firm  faith  on  you  relied. 
And  now  with  undiminished  care 
A  second  rite  would  now  prepare. 
But,  O  ye  gods,  consent  to  grant 
The  longing  of  your  suppliant."  % 

The  gods,  pleased  with  the  Brahman's  prayer,  led  by  India, 
went  to  Brahma,  and  poured  forth  in  his  ear  their  united 
petition,  in  which  they  mention  the  great  work  they  wished 
Rama,  as  one  of  Dasaratha's  sons,  to  perform  : 

"  O  Brahma,  mighty  by  thy  grace, 
Ravan,  who  rules  the  giant  race, 
Torments  us  in  his  senseless  pride 
And  penance-loving  saints  beside. 
For  thou,  well-pleased  in  days  of  old, 
Gavest  the  boon  that  makes  him  bold, 
That  gods  nor  demons  e'er  should  kill 
His  charmed  life,  for  so  thy  will. 


nths's  '  Ramayana,'  i.  Si.  f  Ibid.  i.  82.  ±  Ibid.  i.  S3. 


The  Rama  Chandra  Avatara.  145 

We,  honouring  that  high  behest, 
Bear  all  his  rage,  though  sore  distrest. 
That  lord  of  giants,  fierce  and  fell, 
Scourges  the  earth,  and  heaven  and  hell. 
Mad  with  thy  boon,  his  impious  rage 
Smites  saint  and  bard,  and  god  and  sage. 
The  sun  himself  withholds  his  glow, 
The  wind,  in  fear,  forbears  to  blow  ; 
The  fire  restrains  his  wonted  heat 
Where  stands  the  dreaded  Ravan's  feet, 
And,  necklaced  with  the  wandering  wave. 
The  sea  before  him  fears  to  rave. 
Kuvera's  self,  in  sad  defeat, 
Is  driven  from  his  blissful  seat. 
We  see,  we  feel,  the  giant's  might, 
And  woe  comes  o'er  us  and  affright. 
To  thee,  O  lord,  thy  suppliants  pray 
To  find  some  cure  this  plague  to  stay."  * 

To  this  request  Brahma  makes  answer : 

"  One  only  way  I  find 
To  slay  this  fiend  of  evil  mind. 
He  prayed  me  once  his  life  to  guard 
From  demon,  god,  and  heavenly  bard, 
And^spirits  of  the  earth  and  air  ; 
And  I,  consenting,  heard  his  prayer. 
But  the  proud  giant,  in  his  scorn, 
Recked  not  of  man  of  woman  born. 
None  else  may  take  his  life  away, 
But  only  man  the  fiend  may  slay."f 

Upon    this    Vishnu    appears,    is    gladly    welcomed    by    the 
assembled  gods,  and  asks  what  request  they  have  to  make  : 

"  King  Dasaratha,  thus  cried  they, 
Fervent  in  penance  many  a  day, 
The  sacrificial  steed  has  slain, 
Longing  for  sons,  but  all  in  vain. 
Now,  at  the  cry  of  us  forlorn, 
Incarnate  as  his  seed  be  born. 
Three  queens  has  he  ;  each  lovely  dame 
Like  Beauty,  Modesty,  or  Fame. 

*  Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  i.  83.  t   Ibid-  i-  84. 

L 


146  The  Puranic  Deities. 


Divide  thyself  in  four,  and  be 

His  offspring  by  these  noble  three  ; 

Man's  nature  take,  and  slay  in  fight 

Ravan,  who  laughs  at  heavenly  might  : 

This  common  scourge,  this  rankling  thorn, 

Whom  the  three  worlds  too  long  have  borne."  * 

Vishnu  asks  why  he  is  necessary  to  effect  their  deliverance. 
Being-  told  of  Brahma's  promise  to  Ravan,  he  consents  to  be 
born  as  man,  and  promises  to  slay  the  giant  and  his  family. 

Not  long  after  this,  a  messenger  comes  from  Vishnu,  laden 
with  a  golden  vase  of  nectar,  which  he  gives  to  the  king  ;  at  the 
same  time  telling  him  to  give  it  to  his  queens,  and  assuring  him 
that 

"  They  the  princely  sons  shall  bear, 
Long  sought  by  sacrifice  and  prayer."! 

To  Queen  Kausalya  the  king  gave  half  the  nectar,  who 
through  it  became  the  mother  of  Rama ;  the  other  half  he  gave 
to  his  other  wives,  who  in  consequence  became  mothers  too, — 
Kaikeya  bore  Bharat,  and  Sumitra  gave  birth  to  Lakshman  and 
Satrughna. 

Before  leaving  heaven,  Vishnu  asked  the  gods,  for  whose 
benefit  he  was  about  to  undertake  this  work,  to  assist  him,  and 

they  did  so  : 

"  Helps  in  war  to  lend  him  aid, 
In  forms  that  change  at  will  arrayed  ; 
Each  god,  each  sage  became  a  sire, 
Each  minstrel  of  the  heavenly  quire, 
Each  faun,  of  children  strong  and  good."  % 

The  names  of  some  of  the  leaders  who  assisted  Rama  in 
answer  to  his  prayer  to  the  gods  run  as  follows  : — 

"  Bali,  the  woodland  hosts  who  led, 
High  as  Mahendra's  lofty  head, 
Was  Indra's  child.     That  noblest  fire. 
The  Sun,  was  great  Sugriva's  sire. 


Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  i.  S5.  f  Ibid.  1.  89.  X  Ibid.  1.  93. 


The  Rama  Chandra  Avatara.       147 

Tara,  the  mighty  monkey,  he 

Was  offspring  of  Vrihaspati  : 

Tara,  the  matchless  chieftain,  boast 

For  wisdom  of  the  Vanar  host. 

Of  Gandhamadan,  brave  and  bold, 

The  father  was  the  Lord  of  gold. 

Nala  the  mighty,  dear  to  fame, 

Of  skilful  Visvakarma  came. 

From  Agni,  Nila  bright  as  flame, 

Who  in  his  splendour,  might,  and  worth, 

Surpassed  the  sire  who  gave  him  birth. 

The  heavenly  Asvins,  swift  and  fair, 

Were  fathers  of  a  noble  pair, 

Who,  Dwivida  and  Mainda  named, 

For  beauty  like  their  sires  were  famed. 

Varun  was  father  of  Sushen  ; 

Of  Sarabh,  he  who  sends  the  rain  [Parjanya]. 

Hanuman,  best  of  monkey  kind, 

Was  son  of  him  who  breathes  the  wind  ; 

Like  thunderbolt  in  frame  was  he, 

And  swift  as  Garud's  self  could  flee. 

These  thousands  did  the  gods  create, 

Endowed  with  might  which  none  could  mate, 

In  monkey  forms  that  changed  at  will, 

So  strong  their  wish  the  fiend  to  kill."  * 


xe> 


In  due  time  the  four  sons  of  Dasaratha  were  born  ;  and  from 
infancy  the  strongest  affection  existed  between  Rama  the  first- 
born and  Lakshman,  and  between  Bharat  and  Satrughna. 

When  Rama  was  about  sixteen  years  of  age,  a  saint  named 
Visvamitra  came  to  Dasaratha's  court,  asking  his  assistance 
against  two  demons,  named  Maricha  and  Suvahu,  who  were 
commanded  by  Ravana  to  annoy  him,  and  prevent  the  com- 
pletion of  any  sacrifice.  At  first  the  king  pleaded  the  youth- 
fulness  of  his  son  as  an  excuse  for  refusing  to  allow  him  to 
undertake  a  work  so  arduous  ;  but  at  length  his  scruples  were 
overcome,  and  Rama  with  the  faithful  Lakshman  set  out  for  the 
hermitage.  When  the  travellers  reached  the  banks  of  the  Sarju, 
the  saint  gave  Rama  two  spells  which  he  was  to  employ  whilst 


Grifnths's  '  Ramayana,1  i.  93. 

L   2 


148  The  Puranic  Deities. 


bathing,  and  which  were  so  to  affect  him  that  he  should  have  no 
equal  in  heaven  or  hell  : 

••  Xone  in  the  world  with  thee  shall  vie, 
O  sinless  one,  in  apt  reply, 
In  knowledge,  fortune,  wit,  and  tact, 
Wisdom  to  plan,  and  skill  to  act."  * 

On  their  journey  to  the  hermitage  they  visit  various  places  of 
importance,  and  Visvamitra  beguiles  the  time  with  numerous 
legends  ;  he  also  bestows  on  Rama  various  arms  and  powers. 
On  reaching  the  end  of  their  journey,  for  six  days  and  nights 
they  have  to  watch  for  the  demons  ;  when  the  sacrifice  was 
about  to  end,  these  disturbers  of  the  hermitage  appear,  and 
are  conquered  by  Rama,  and  their  attendants  by  Lakshman. 
The  saint,  addressing  Rama,  says  : — 

"  My  joy,  O  prince,  is  now  complete  : 
Thou  hast  obeyed  my  will ; 
Perfect  before,  this  calm  retreat 
Is  now  more  perfect  still."  f 

Next  morning  the  hermits  tell  Rama  that  King  Janaka  of 
Mithila  J  has  arranged  for  a  sacrifice  to  which  they  are  invited. 
Rama  is  asked  to  accompany  them,  and  is  induced  to  do  so  by 
the  mention  of  a  wonderful  bow  in  possession  of  the  king,  which 
no  one  was  able  to  bend.  The  bow  was  a  gift  from  Siva,  as  a 
reward  for  sacrifice.  On  the  way  to  Mithila  they  pass  through 
a  grove,  in  which,  unseen  by  gods  and  men,  Ahalya,  the  wife  of 
Gautama  the  sage,  had  been  undergoing  penance  for  countless 
ages,  on  account  of  her  adultery  with  Indra.  Though  the  god 
came  to  her  in  the  form  of  her  husband,  she  saw  through  his 
disguise,  yet  did  not  resist  his  overtures.  Her  husband  con- 
demned her  to  live  unknown  in  the  forest  until  Rama  should 
liberate  her.  Her  hour  of  release  had  now  come; — Rama  sees 
her,  touches  her  feet,  and  the  curse  being  at  an  end,  her  husband 
receives  her  back. 

Griffiths's  *  Ramayana,'  i.  125.  f  [bid.  i.  156.  X  Tirhoot. 


The  Rama  Chandra  Avatara.  149 

In  due  time  they  reach  Mithila.     The  princes  are  introduced 

to  the  king,  who  gives  them  a  hearty  welcome,  and  narrates  the 

history  of  the  world-famed  bow  they  have  come  to  see.    He  tells 

them  it  was  the  bow  with  which  Siva,  when  angry  at  not  being 

invited  to  Daksha's  sacrifice,  wrought  such  havoc  amongst  the 

assembled  gods.     It  was  held  by  successive  monarchs  of  his  line 

as   a   mark  of  sovereignty,  and  as  a  means  of  defence  against 

their  foes. 

"  This  gem  of  bows, 
That  freed  the  God  of  gods  from  woes, 
Stored  by  our  great  forefathers,  lay 
A  treasure  and  a  pride  for  aye."  * 

One  day,  as  Janaka  was  ploughing,  an  infant  sprang  from  the 
ground  whom  he  named  Sita  (a  furrow),  on  account  of  her  secret 
birth.  In  the  '  Uttara  Kanda  '  f  is  a  legend,  the  object  of  which  is 
to  show  that  Sita  is  another  form  of  Lakshmi,  and  that  it  was 
she  who  wished  to  accomplish  the  death  of  Ravana.  "  Ravana 
in  the  course  of  his  wanderings  comes  to  the  Himalayas,  where 
he  meets  with  a  young  woman  of  marvellous  beauty,  named 
Vedavati,  dressed  in  ascetic  garments,  and  living  the  life  of  a 
devotee.  He  speaks  of  love  ;  but  she  indignantly  rejects  his 
overtures,  saying  that  it  was  her  father's  wish  she  should  wed 
Vishnu,  and  that  she  had  wed  him  with  her  heart.  Ravana 
presses  his  suit,  assuring  her  that  he  is  superior  to  Vishnu.  She 
says  that  none  but  he  would  contemn  that  deity.  Ravana  replies 
by  touching  her  hair.  Being  very  indignant  at  this,  she  declares 
that  she  will  enter  the  fire  (die)  before  his  eyes.  Before  doing 
so,  she  says,  -  Since  I  have  been  insulted  in  the  forest  by  thee, 
who  art  wicked-hearted,  I  shall  be  born  again  for  thy  destruction. 
For  a  man  of  evil  design  cannot  be  slain  by  a  woman  ;  and  the 
merit  of  my  austerity  would  be  lost  if  I  were  to  launch  a  curse 
against  you.  But  if  I  have  performed,  or  bestowed,  or  sacrificed 
aught,  may  I  be  born  a  virtuous  daughter — not  produced  from 
the  womb — of  a  righteous  man.'  She  then  entered  the  blazing 
fire.     It  was  she  who  was  born  as  the  daughter  of  King  Janaka. 

*  Grifhths's  '  Ramayana,'  i.  278.  f  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  iv.  458. 


150  The  Puranic  Deities. 


The  mountain-like  enemy  (Ravana),  who  was  virtually  destroyed 

before  by  her  wrath,  has  now  been  destroyed  by  her,  after  she 

had  associated  herself  with  Vishnu's  superhuman  energy." 

Regarding  the  child  thus  mysteriously  found  to  be  other  than 

of  mortal  birth,  to  all  suitors  for  her  hand   Janaka  gave   one 

reply  : 

"  I  give  not  this  my  daughter  ;    she 
Prize  of  heroic  worth  shall  be."  * 

She  was  to  be  the  wife  of  him  who  could  bend  the  wonder- 
working bow.  Many  of  the  neighbouring  princes  had  tried,  but 
failed.     And  now  Janaka  says  : 

"  This  heavenly  bow,  exceeding  bright, 
These  youths  shall  see,  O  anchorite. 
Then  if  young  Rama's  hand  can  string 
The  bow  that  baffled  lord  and  king, 
To  him  I  give,  as  I  have  sworn, 
My  Sita,  not  of  woman  born.r  f 

The  bow  is  brought,  and  Rama  is  invited  to  try  his  strength. 
He  takes  it  up  easily  in  his  hand,  and  as  he  was  drawing  the 
string,  it  snapped  in  two,  to  the  wonder  and  fright  of  the 
beholders.  Rama  thus  becomes  the  successful  suitor  of  Sita, 
and  messengers  are  despatched  to  invite  his  father  to  the 
wedding.  His  two  brothers  also  come  ;  and  not  only  Rama 
and  Sita  are  united,  but  his  three  brothers  are  wedded  to  three 
daughters  of  Janaka.  They  then  return  home  and  live  in 
happiness  and  prosperity. 

After  a  time  King  Dasaratha  wishes  to  abdicate  in  favour  of 
Rama  his  firstborn.  When  he  had  fixed  upon  a  suitable  time, 
the  old  man  sends  for  his  son,  and  enjoins  him  to  prepare  him- 
self for  the  great  event,  by  passing  the  night  in  holy  exercises. 
When  the  people  hear  of  the  king's  intention,  they  are  delighted  ; 
the  city  is  illuminated,  and  they  spend  the  night  in  festivities. 
In  the  meantime  a  servant  goes  to  Kaikeya,  the  mother  of 
Bharata,  and  succeeds  in  exciting  her  jealousy  of  Rama  to  such 

*  Griftiths's  'Ramayana,'  i.  279.  t  Ibid.  i.  280. 


The  Rama  Chandra  Avatara.       151 

an  extent,  that  she  retires  to  the  room  of  discontent  and  there 
mourns  her  lot.     The  king  visits  her,  when  she  says  to  him  : 

"  Now  pledge  thy  word,  if  thou  incline 
To  listen  to  this  prayer  of  mine."  * 

Ignorant  of  what  her  petition  is,  the  king  foolishly  promises 
to  grant  it,  before  it  is  expressed.  She,  calling  the  gods  to 
witness  the  promise  and  oath  of  her  husband,  reminds  him  that 
on  an  occasion  of  great  danger  she  alone  had  stood  by  him,  and 
that  he  then  promised  her  a  boon.  She  now  requested  the 
fulfilment  of  that  vow  ;  or, 

"  If  thou  refuse  thy  promise  sworn, 
I  die  despised  before  the  morn,"  f 

and  concludes  her  address  by  asking  that  her  son  be  installed  as 
Prince  Regent,  and  Rama  be  sent  to  live  a  hermit's  life  in  the 
forest  for  fourteen  years. 

The  king  is  almost  mad  with  grief  at  this  request,  bat,  being 
bound  by  word  and  oath,  is  compelled  to  comply.  The  city  is 
in  tears  that  but  yesterday  was  bright  with  joy ;  and  the 
ceremony  that  was  arranged  for  Rama  is  performed  in  favour 
of  Bharata,  much  against  his  will.  Rama  tried  to  persuade  Sita 
to  allow  him  to  proceed  to  the  forest  alone  ;  but  to  this  she  will 
not  for  a  moment  consent.  The  interview  between  them  on  this 
occasion  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  and  touching  incidents  in 
the  whole  story.  She  despises  difficulties  and  dangers  and  dis- 
comforts, if  she  is  with  her  husband  ;  and  avers  that  death  would 
be  preferable  to  separation.  Lakshman's  entreaty  to  accompany 
them  is  very  touching  too  : 

"  I  heed  not  homes  of  god  on  high, 
I  heed  not  life  that  cannot  die  ; 
Nor  would  I  wish,  with  thee  away, 
O'er  the  three  worlds  to  stretch  my  sway."  % 

At  length  Rama,  Sita,  and  Lakshman  depart  amidst  the 
tears  of  the  whole  city.  When  they  reach  the  forest  Dandaka, 
they  seek  a  quiet  spot,  and  settle  down  at  last  at  Chitrakuta. 

*  Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  i.  373.  f  Ibid.  i.  375.  $  Ibid.  ii.  94. 


I  ^2 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


Dasaratha  dies  of  grief  a  short  time  after  their  departure,  and 
the  city  is  again  flooded  with  tears.  Bharata  seeks  the  exiles, 
with  the  intention  of  bringing  Rama  home  to  occupy  the  throne, 
but  to  this  Rama  will  not  consent.  Bharata  therefore  continues 
to  rule  in  Rama's  stead,  whom  he  always  regards  as  the  rightful 
king,  and  takes  with  him  a  pair  of  Rama's  shoes,  which  are 
exposed  to  view  on  state  occasions,  to  indicate  that  Bharata  is 
acting  only  as  Viceroy. 

The  three  meet  with  many  adventures  in  the  forest,  as  they 
live  the  life  of  ascetics.  One  day  they  see  an  immense  giant, 
named  Viradha,  clothed  in  a  tiger's  skin,  and 

"  Three  lions,  tigers  four,  ten  deer, 
He  carried  on  his  iron  spear."  * 

This  giant,  taking  Sita  aside,  threatens  to  kill  and  eat  her  ; 
but  after  a  time,  changing  his  mind,  proposes  to  keep  her  ;  and, 
thinking  that  he  is  acting  generously  towards  Rama,  offers  to 
allow  him  to  go  off  unharmed.  At  length  they  fight ;  but  as  the 
giant  is  proof  against  their  weapons,  he  takes  up  Rama  and 
Lakshman  upon  his  shoulders,  and  runs  away  with  them  ; 
from  which  position,  they  each  succeed  in  cutting  off  one  of 
his  arms  ;  when  the  giant  falls,  weak  from  loss  of  blood  ;  and 
seeing  that  their  weapons  cannot  deprive  him  of  life,  they  bury 
him  alive.  After  this  adventure,  they  reach  a  hermitage  ;  and 
Rama  becomes  the  protector  of  hermits  throughout  the  district. 

When  ten  years  of  his  forest  life  was  past,  Rama  sets  off  for  the 
hermitage  of  Agastya,  a  man  who  had  gained  great  merit  by  his 
austerities,  where  they  build  a  cottage,  but  are  not  able  to  live  in 
peace  long.  As  Rama  and  Sita  are  sitting  together  under  a  tree, 
a  giantess  named  Suparnakha,  the  sister  of  Ravan,  passes  by, 
and  falls  madly  in  love  with  Rama. 

••  She,  grim  of  eye  and  foul  of  face, 
Loved  his  sweet  glance  and  forehead's  grace  ; 


*  Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  iii.  5. 


The  Rama  Chandra  Avatara.       153 

She  of  unlovely  figure,  him 

Of  stately  form  and  shapely  limb  ; 

She  whose  dim  locks  disordered  hung, 

Him  whose  bright  hair  on  high  brows  clung."  * 

The  giantess  questions  Rama  as  to  the  reason  of  his  being  in 
the  forest ;  he  gives  her  a  full  account  of  himself  and  Sita,  and 
then  inquires  who  she  may  be.  She  says  she  is  Ravan's  sister, 
and  openly  avows  her  love  : 

"  This  poor  misshapen  Sita  leave, 
And  me,  thy  worthier  bride,  receive. 
Look  on  my  beauty,  and  prefer 
A  spouse  more  meet  than  one  like  her  ; 
I'll  eat  that  ill-formed  woman  there  ; 
Thy  brother,  too,  her  fate  shall  share. 
But  come,  beloved,  thou  shalt  roam 
With  me  through  all  our  woodland  home."  f 

Rama,  smiling,  told  her  that  as  he  was  married  he  could  not 
accept  her  kind  offer,  but  advised  her  to  try  his  brother.  She 
acts  upon  this  advice  ;  but  Lakshman  sends  her  back  to  Rama. 
Thinking  that  Sita  was  the  chief  obstacle  to  the  attainment  of 
her  wishes,  she  was  about  to  slay  her  ;  Rama  prevented  her  from 
doing  this,  and  Lakshman  cut  off  her  nose  and  ears.  She  then 
fled  to  her  brother  Khara,  whose  anger  she  roused  by  the  tale  of 
her  mutilation,  who  sent  fourteen  giants,  giving  them  strict 
orders  to  kill  Rama,  Sita,  and  Lakshman.  These  are  quickly 
slain  by  Rama.  Khara  is  terribly  angry  as  he  hears  of  the 
death  of  his  giants  ;  and,  quickly  raising  an  army  of  14,000 
warriors,  goes  against  his  foes.  Rama,  single-handed,  destroyed 
them  nearly  all. 

One  of  these  giants,  named  Akampan,  rushed  off  to  inform 
Ravan  of  the  catastrophe.     Ravan,  intensely  angry,  asks  : 

"  Who  is  the  wretch  shall  vainly  try 
In  earth,  heaven,  hell  from  me  to  fly  ? 
Vaisravan,  Indra,  Vishnu,  He 
Who  rules  the  dead,  must  reverence  me  ; 


*  Grifhths's  '  Ramayana,'  iii.  80.  t  Ibid.  iii.  8: 


i54  The  Puranic  Deities. 


For  not  the  mightiest  lord  of  these 

Can  brave  my  will,  and  live  at  ease.  .  .   . 

With  unresisted  influence,  I 

Can  force  e'en  Death  himself  to  die."  * 

He  then  asks  particulars  of  the  fight,  and  determines  to  go 
himself  and  avenge  his  sister.  The  messenger  informs  him  that 
it  is  useless  for  him  to  attempt  to  conquer  Rama  by  force,  and 
advises  him  rather  to  carry  off  Sita  ;  for, 

"  Reft  of  his  darling  wife,  be  sure 
Brief  days  the  mourner  will  endure."  f 

Ravan  orders  his  chariot,  starts  off  alone  to  Maricha,  and  asks 
his  assistance,  who  dissuades  him  from  attempting  to  fight  with 
Rama  ;  but  soon  afterwards  Suparnakha,  with  her  mutilated  face, 
arrives  at  Lanka,  and,  appearing  before  Ravan,  again  arouses  his 
indignation.     As  he  sat  on  his  throne  he  is  thus  described  : — 

"  A  score  of  arms,  ten  necks,  had  he, 

His  royal  gear  was  brave  to  see  ; 

His  stature  like  a  mountain  height, 

His  arms  were  strong,  his  teeth  were  white. 
*  *  *  * 

"  Ten  thousand  years  the  giant  spent 
On  dire  austerities  intent  ; 
And  of  his  heads  an  offering,  laid 
Before  the  Self  existent,  made."  J 

The  giantess  retells  her  tale,  which  excites  her  brother's  anger 
afresh.  He  immediately  sets  forth  again  for  the  hermitage  of 
the  fiend  Maricha,  and  asks  him  to  assist  him  in  his  exploit  by 
assuming  the  form  of  a  golden  deer  with  silver  spots,  by  which 
Sita's  attention  would  be  attracted. 

"  Doubt  not  the  lady,  when  she  sees 
The  wondrous  deer  among  the  trees, 
Will  bid  her  lord  and  Lakshman  take 
The  creature  for  its  beautv's  sake." 


Grifnths's  '  Ramayana,'  iii.  143.  f   Ibid.  +  Ibid.  iii.  14S. 


The  Rama  Chandra  Avatara. 


155 


Maricha,  remembering  the  power  of  Rama  when  as  a  mere 
boy  he  went  to  assist  the  hermit  Visvamitra,  and  how  he  him- 


RAVANA. 


self  was  wounded  by  him,  again  tries  to  dissuade  Ravan.  But 
this  time  he  cannot  prevail,  and  there  is  not  much  choice  left 
him,  for  Ravan  declares  : 

"  Thy  life,  if  thou  the  task  essay, 
In  jeopardy  may  stand  ; 
Oppose  me,  and  this  very  day 
Thou  diest  by  this  hand."  * 


Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  iii.  185. 


156  The  Puranic  Deities. 

Maricha  assumes  the  form  of  a  deer,  and,  proceeding  to  the 
vicinity  of  the  hermitage,  attracts  the  attention  of  Sita,  who 
becomes  anxious  to  possess  it.  Rama,  leaving  Lakshman  to 
guard  the  home,  goes  in  pursuit,  and  shoots  it.  As  the  fiend 
was  dying,  assuming  Rama's  voice,  he  cried  out  loudly  enough 
to  be  heard  by  his  wife  and  brother,  "  Ho,  Sita  !  Ho,  Laksh- 
man ! '  They  imagining  that  some  evil  had  come  to  Rama, 
Lakshman  hurried  towards  the  spot  whence  the  cry  proceeded  ; 
whilst  Ravan,  who  was  waiting  near,  seized  the  opportunity  to 
carry  off  the  defenceless  Sita.  The  demon  did  his  best  to  induce 
her  to  yield  herself  an  easy  prey  ;  but  though  she  struggled  hard, 
and  cried  for  help  to  all  who  came  near,  none  were  able  to  deliver 
her.  Held  in  his  magical  car,  they  reached  Lanka,  where  she 
was  placed  in  one  of  Ravan's  palaces.  He  tried  both  by  kind 
words  and  fearful  threatenings  to  win  her  love  ;  but  kindness  and 
cruelty  were  equally  ineffective.  To  comfort  her,  Brahma  sent 
Indra,  who  managed  to  elude  the  vigilance  of  her  guards,  and 
assured  her  of  the  sympathy  of  the  gods,  and  of  the  fact  that  all 
would  yet  be  well  with  her  husband  and  herself. 

Whilst  this  was  happening  at  Lanka,  Rama  was  almost  mad 
with  grief.  When  Lakshman  came  to  him  after  the  deer  was 
slain,  he  feared  some  great  evil  had  happened  ;  and  on  their 
return  to  the  cottage,  as  Sita  was  not  to  be  found,  his  anguish 
was  intolerable.  He  wandered  about  calling  upon  the  trees, 
mountains,  and  rivers  to  tell  him  what  had  happened  to  his  loved 
one  ;  but  they  were  silent  as  the  grave.  A  vulture  at  the  point 
of  death,  who  had  fought  with  Ravan  on  Sita's  behalf,  informs 
him  of  her  capture  by  the  great  fiend.     (See  Part  III.  chap,  vii.) 

In  their  wanderings,  the  brothers  meet  with  a  giant  named 
Kabandha,  who,  owing  to  a  curse,  had  to  wear  the  hideous  form 
in  which  he  now  appeared,  until  Rama  should  cut  off  his  arms. 
As  he  was  running  away  with  the  brothers,  they  fulfilled  this  con- 
dition of  the  curse,  as  there  was  no  other  way  of  escape  for  them  ; 
but  on  learning  who  they  were,  he  was  delighted,  and  asked  them 
to  burn  his  body  in  order  that  he  might  regain  his  proper  form 
and  ascend  to  heaven.  As  they  committed  him  to  the  flames,  he 
assumed  a  heavenly  shape,  and,  when  in  the  air,  told  them  where 


The  Rama  Chandra  Avatara.       157 


Sita  was  taken,  and  advised  them  to  seek  the  help  of  Sugriva, 
the  King  of  theVanar*  (Monkey)  tribes,  as  only  through  his  aid 
could  they  recover  her.  Acting  upon  this  advice,  they  proceed 
to  Pampa,  Sugriva's  home  ;  where  the  sight  of  the  beauty  of 
the  lake  causes  Rama's  lamentations  to  burst  forth  afresh  : 

"  By  sights  like  these  of  joy  and  peace, 
My  pangs  of  hopeless  love  increase."  f 

When  Sugriva  saw  the  brothers,  imagining  them  to  be  friends 
of  his  brother  Bali,  by  whom  he  had  been  deprived  of  his 
throne,  he  was  greatly  alarmed,  and  sent  Hanuman  to  learn 
who  they  were,  and  why  they  had  come.  When  Hanuman 
learns  the  object  of  their  visit,  knowing  they  would  assist  his 
master  to  regain  his  kingdom,  he  promises  Sugriva's  help,  and, 
taking  them  upon  his  shoulders,  hurries  off  with  them  into  the 
presence  of  the  Vanar  king.  A  league  is  made  immediately,  and 
after  Rama  had  promised  that  the  usurper  Bali  should  fall  that 
day,  Sugriva  says  of  Sita  : 

"  Yea,  though  in  heaven  the  lady  dwell, 
Or  prisoned  in  the  depths  of  hell, 
My  friendly  care  her  way  shall  track, 
And  bring  thy  ransomed  darling  back."  £ 

Sugriva  produces  a  robe,  bracelets,  and  anklets  that  fell 
from   Sita  as  she  was  being  carried  off  by  Ravan  ;  the  anklets 

*  Siva  had  foretold  that  Rama  would  obtain  the  aid  of  the  monkeys  for 
the  destruction  of  Ravan,  when  the  demon  was  travelling  in  the  Himalayas. 
Siva  appeared  to  him  as  a  dwarf,  and  tried  to  prevent  him  from  travelling 
along  a  certain  road.  Ravan  disregarded  the  prohibition,  and  contemptuously 
asked  who  Siva  was,  to  give  an  order  that  no  one  should  pass  that  way  ;  he 
also  ridiculed  the  monkey-like  appearance  of  the  dwarf.  Nandeshwara 
(Siva)  replied,  that  monkeys  in  appearance  and  power  would  be  produced  to 
destroy  Ravan  and  his  family.  In  order  to  show  his  power,  Ravan  raised 
the  mountain  in  his  arms  ;  but  Siva  pressed  it  down  with  his  toe,  and 
crushed  Ravan  in  his  arms,  until  he  cried  out  with  pain,  and  not  until  he  had 
propitiated  Siva  for  a  thousand  years  did  he  release  him  ;  and  when  he  re- 
leased him,  he  said  that  his  name  should  be  Ravan,  from  the  cry  (Rava) 
which  he  uttered. 

f  Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  iv.  6.  t  Ibid.  iv.  37. 


1 58  The  Puranic  Deities. 

Rama  recognises  as  having  belonged  to  his  wife,  and  is  greatly 
comforted  as  Sugriva  tells  him  that  though  at  present  unable  to 
inform  him  where  Sita  has  been  taken,  he  will  certainly  be  able 
to  obtain  this  information,  and  assist  him  in  his  attempt  to  rescue 
her.  Sugriva  then  narrates  the  story  of  his  quarrel  with  his 
brother  Bali,  but,  ere  he  believes  that  Rama  can  materially 
assist  him,  tests  the  wonderful  bow  of  the  hero  ;  and  was 
greatly  astonished  as  he  saw  an  arrow  Rama  discharged  pierce 
through  seven  palm-trees  in  line,  pass  through  a  hill  behind 
them,  and,  after  traversing  six  subterranean  worlds,  return  to 
the  quiver.  The  Vanar  king,  seeing  he  has  no  common  ally, 
goes  forth  fearlessly  against  his  brother  ;  and  in  the  fight,  when 
Sugriva  was  getting  worsted,  Rama  sends  an  arrow  which  slays 
Ball  This  was  regarded  by  the  dying  man  as  an  act  of  gross 
injustice,  because  Rama  slew  him  without  informing  him  who 
he  was  ;  had  this  been  done,  he  would  gladly  have  assisted  him 
in  his  quest  for  Sita. 

Sugriva,  on  the  fall  of  his  brother,  re-ascends  the  throne,  but 
is  so  fully  occupied  with  the  pleasures  of  his  position  as  to  forget 
the  promise  of  help  he  had  given  Rama,  by  whose  prowess  his 
dominion  had  been  regained,  until  Hanuman,  ever  faithful  to 
Rama's  cause,  reminds  him  : 

"  The  realm  is  won,  thy  name  advanced, 
The  glory  of  thy  house  enhanced  ; 
And  now  thy  foremost  care  should  be 
To  aid  the  friends  who  succoured  thee."  * 

But  this  reminder  of  his  duty  is  insufficient  to  arouse  the  king 
from  his  selfish  enjoyment ;  it  was  not  until  Rama  sends  a 
strong  message  by  Lakshman  that  he  is  fully  alive  to  his  duty. 
When,  however,  he  does  move,  it  is  to  collect  a  mighty  army. 
< )f  the  troops  collected  for  this  enterprise  it  is  said  : 

"  Thousands,  yea,  millions  shall  there  be 
Obedient  to  their  king's  decree. 


Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,5  iv.  149. 


The  Rama  Chandra  Avatara.       159 


Fierce  bears  and  monkey  troops  combined, 
And  apes  of  every  varied  kind, 
Terrific  in  their  forms,  who  dwell 
In  grove  and  wood  and  bosky  dell. 


»j  * 


The  king,  when  his  vast  army  was  collected,  gave  instructions 
to  each  leader  of  a  division,  as  to  the  limits  of  the  district  he  was 
to  search  for  the  lost  princess  ;  but  as  Ravan  was  believed  to  have 
gone  towards  the  south,  Hanuman's  district,  special  instruction 
was  given  to  him  ;  and  Rama  entrusted  him  with  a  ring  that,  if 
successful  in  discovering  Sita,  he  could  show  as  a  proof  that  he 
was  a  messenger  from  her  husband.  For  a  long  time  the  search 
was  fruitless,  and  would  have  been  given  up  as  hopeless,  but  for 
Hanuman's  encouragement  to  persevere  ;  when  fortunately  they 
meet  with  the  vulture  Sampati,  brother  of  Jatayus,  whom 
Ravan  slew  as  he  attempted  to  prevent  him  from  carrying  off 
Sita,  and  who  was  the  first  to  put  Rama  on  the  right  track  for 
obtaining  his  wife.  This  Sampati,  hearing  that  Ravan  had 
slain  his  brother,  was  most  anxious  to  avenge  his  death,  and 
willingly  rendered  all  the  assistance  he  could.  He  informs  the 
seekers  that  Sita  is  at  Lanka. 

"  A  hundred  leagues  your  course  must  be, 
Beyond  this  margin  of  the  sea  ; 
Still  to  the  south  your  way  pursue, 
And  there  the  giant  Ravan  view."  f 

But  here  a  difficulty  occurred  :  there  was  a  hundred  leagues  of 
water  to  be  crossed  ;  who  could  make  such  a  leap  ?  Hanuman 
aeain  comes  to  the  front  and  declares  : 


*&' 


"  Swift  as  a  shaft  from  Rama's  bow, 
To  Ravan's  city  I  will  go."  % 

According  to  his  promise,  Hanuman  made  this  marvellous 
spring,  and,  after  meeting  with  various  adventures,  reaches 
Lanka,  diminishes  in  size  until  he  is  no  bigger  than  a  cat,  passes 
through  the  city  unnoticed,  and  finally  reaches  the  Asoka  grove 
where  Sita  was  confined,  just  in  time  to  witness  an  unsuccessful 

Griffiths's  *  Ramayana,'  iv.  188.         t  Ibid.  iv.  254.         $  Ibid.  iv.  280. 


i6o  The  Puranic  Deities. 


attempt  of   Ravan  to  induce  his  lovely  captive   to    forget   her 

husband,  and  become  the  bride  of  her  captor.      Ravan's  parting 

words  to  Sita  on  this  occasion  were  not  very  love-inspiring  ;  he 

declared  that  unless  within  two  months  she  consented  to  become 

his  bride, 

••  My  cooks  shall  mince  thy  limbs  with  steel, 
And  serve  thee  for  my  morning  meal."  * 

When  she  is  alone,  Harm  man  addresses  her.  At  first,  on 
hearing  a  monkey  speak,  she  imagines  herself  dreaming  ;  but 
the  sight  of  her  husband's  ring  convinces  her  that  the  strange 
messenger  is  a  friend,  and  she  is  delighted  to  hear  all  he  has  to 
tell: 

"  '  Thou  bringest  me,'  she  cried  again, 
1 A  mingled  draught  of  bliss  and  pain  : 
Bliss  that  he  wears  me  in  his  heart, 
Pain  that  he  wakes  and  weeps  apart.' "  f 

Though  Hanuman  had  found  Sita,  and  offered  to  carry  her  on 
his  shoulders  to  her  long-lost  husband,  a  difficulty  arose  ;  she 
feared  that  in  rising  to  the  height  which  so  long  a  leap  necessitated 
she  might  be  giddy,  and  feel  it  to  be  necessary  to  lay  hold  of 
him  ;  but  of  her  own  free  will  she  would  on  no  account  whatever 
so  much  as  touch  the  limbs  of  living  man  except  those  of  her 
husband.  Instead,  then,  of  availing  herself  of  the  monkey's 
offer,  she  prefers  to  remain  where  she  is  for  the  present,  and 
simply  sends  back  a  kind  message  to  Rama,  with  a  gem  to 
assure  him  that  she  has  received  his.  Hanuman  does  not  care 
to  return  without  having  effected  some  injury  on  his  foe  ;  he 
therefore  destroys  the  grove  and  a  temple,  and  slays  several  of 
Ravan's  heroes.  At  length  he  is  made  captive.  When  taken 
before  Ravana,  he  confesses  that  he  is  a  messenger  from  Rama 
to  Sita,  and  earnestly  advises  her  restoration.  This  so  ex- 
asperates the  giant  that  he  would  have  slain  him  but  for  the 
fact  that  an  envoy's  life  is  sacred.  Some  of  Ravan's  people, 
however,  set  fire  to  his  tail,  from  which  he  does  not  experience 
any  pain,  but  manages  to  set  fire  to  the  city  in  several  places. 

*  Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  iv.  334.  f  Ibid.  iv.  365. 


The  Rama   Chandra  Avatara.  161 

When  Hanuman  had  completed  his  work  in  Lanka,  he  made 
a  return  leap  to  India,  placed  Sita's  gem  in  Rama's  hand,  and 
told  him  all  that  had  transpired  in  Ravan's  capital.  The  prince 
was  delighted  as  he  heard  of  his  wife's  constancy  ;  but  as 
the  difficulty  of  transferring  an  army  from  the  mainland  over  a 
hundred  leagues  of  sea  seemed  impossible  to  surmount,  he  was 
almost  in  despair  of  seeing  her  again.  Sugriva,  more  practical 
and  fuller  of  resource,  says  : 

"  Thy  task  must  be 
To  cast  a  bridge  across  the  sea, 
The  city  of  our  foe  to  reach, 
That  crowns  the  mountain  bv  the  beach  : 
And  when  our  feet  that  isle  shall  tread, 
Rejoice  and  deem  thy  foeman  dead."  * 

The  army,  which  had  remained  some  distance  away,  now 
marches  to  the  sea-shore,  and  Rama  is  very  curious  to  learn  by 
what  means  so  vast  a  bridge  can  be  built.  He  in  his  anguish 
calls  upon  the  sea  to  withdraw  and  allow  his  followers  to  march 
across  as  on  dry  land  ;  but  although  the  Ocean  will  not  grant  this 
prayer,  he  does  assist  with  his  advice,  as  he  tells  him  to  enlist 
the  services  of  a  tribe  of  Dasyas  (servants),  who,  together  with 
the  monkey  host,  construct  a  bridge  in  five  days.  No  sooner  is 
this  completed  than  the  troops  march  across,  Rama  being 
carried  by  Hanuman,  and  Lakshman  by  Angad  ;  and  though 
Ravan  hears  of  their  approach,  and  the  spies  he  sends,  terrified 
at  the  appearance  of  the  invading  army,  counsel  him  to  yield, 
he  obstinately  refuses,  and  at  last  the  attack  upon  his  city 
is  made. 

After  fierce  fighting,  with  considerable  loss  on  both  sides. 
Rama  and  Lakshman  are  dangerously  wounded  by  Indrajit,  a 
son  of  Ravan  ;  but  on  some  wonderful  herbs  being  applied  to 
them  by  Garuda,  the  marvellous  bird  of  Vishnu,  they  are 
restored.  A  second  time  they  fall,  and  are  again  restored  by 
herbs  which  Hanuman  fetched  in  an  incredibly  short  space  of 
time  from  the  Himalayas.     At  last  Rama  and  Ravan  meet  face 

*   Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  v.  3. 

M 


1 62  The  Puranic  Deities. 

to  face  ;  when  Rama's  destructive  arrows  seem  to  have  met  with 
a  foe  as  wonderful  as  themselves : 

"  Straight  to  its  mark  the  arrow  sprang, 
And  from  the  giant's  body  shred, 
With  trenchant  steel,  the  monstrous  head. 
There  might  the  triple  world  behold 
The  severed  head  adorned  with  gold. 
But  when  all  eyes  were  bent  to  view, 
Swift  in  its  stead  another  grew."  * 

Acting  on  the  advice  of  Matali,  Rama,  tired  of  this  fruitless 
toil,  launched  an  arrow  "  whose  fire  was  kindled  by  the  Almighty 
Sire,"  which  pierced  the  giant's  heart  and  laid  him  dead  at  his 
feet,  whereupon  Hanuman  is  sent  to  assure  Sita  of  the  death  of 
her  captor,  and  in  a  few  hours  she  is  sent  carefully  in  a  litter  by 
Vibhishan,  the  brother  and  successor  of  Ravan.  This  litter 
Rama  causes  to  be  opened,  that  the  Vanars  may  see  his  wife's 
face,  as  he  says  : 

"  A  woman's  guard  is  not  her  bower, 
The  lofty  wall,  the  fenced  tower  : 
Her  conduct  is  her  best  defence, 
And  not  a  king's  magnificence."  f 

This  speech  struck  terror  in  the  hearts  of  all  around,  and  Sita 
especially  is  almost  heartbroken  as,  instead  of  the  warm  and 
loving  welcome  she  had  anticipated,  he  coolly  tells  her  : 

"  Lady,  at  length  my  task  is  done, 

And  thou,  the  prize  of  war,  art  won. 

*  *  *  * 

"  If  from  my  home  my  queen  was  reft, 
This  arm  hath  well  avenged  the  theft ; 
And  in  the  field  has  wiped  away 

The  blot  that  on  my  honour  lay. 

*  *  *  * 

"  But,  lady,  'twas  not  love  for  thee 

That  led  mine  army  o'er  the  sea. 

*  *  *  * 

"  I  battled  to  avenge  the  cause 
Of  honour  and  insulted  laws. 

*   Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  v.  254.  f   Ibid.  v.  271. 


The  Rama   Chandra  Avatara.  i6t, 


j 


My  love  is  fled,  for  on  thy  fame 
Lies  the  dark  blot  of  sin  and  shame  ; 
And  thou  art  hateful  as  the  light 
That  flashes  on  the  injured  sight. 
The  world  is  all  before  thee  :  flee  : 

Go  where  thou  wilt,  but  not  with  me. 

*  *  *  * 

"  For  Ravan  bore  thee  through  the  sky, 
And  fixed  on  thine  his  evil  eye  ; 
About  thy  waist  his  arms  he  threw, 
Close  to  his  breast  his  captive  drew ; 
And  kept  thee,  vassal  of  his  power, 
An  inmate  of  his  ladies'  bower."* 

Hearing  these  cruel  and  unexpected  words,  Sita  makes  a  most 
pathetic  appeal,  in  which  she  vehemently  asserts  her  innocence  ; 
but  as  there  are  no  signs  of  relenting  in  her  husband,  she  wishes 
to  die,  or  to  prove  her  innocence  by  the  fire-ordeal,  and  asks 
Lakshman  to  prepare  a  funeral  pile : 

"  I  will  not  live  to  bear  this  weight 
Of  shame,  forlorn  and  desolate. 
The  kindled  fire  my  woes  shall  end, 
And  be  my  best  and  surest  friend."  f 

Lakshman  performs  this  sad  office ;    and  when  all  is  ready, 

she   walks    round    it,    and   before  entering    the   fire,  addresses 

Agni : 

"  As  this  fond  heart,  by  virtue  swayed, 
From  Raghu's  son  has  never  strayed, 
So  universal  witness,  Fire, 
Protect  my  body  on  the  pyre. 
As  Raghu's  son  has  idly  laid 
This  charge  on  Sita,  hear  and  aid."  J 

Having  made  this  appeal  to  Agni  to  proclaim  her  innocence, 
she  enters  the  fire.  The  gods,  at  once  descending  from  heaven 
in  their  glory,  address  Rama,  saying  : 

"  Couldst  thou,  the  Lord  of  all,  couldst  thou, 
Creator  of  the  worlds,  allow 

*  Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  v.  273.  f  Ibid,  v.  276.  X  Ibid.  v.  277. 

M    2 


164  The  Puranic  Deities. 


Thy  queen,  thy  spouse  to  brave  the  fire, 
And  give  her  body  to  the  pyre  ? 
Dost  thou  not  yet.  Supremely  Wise, 
Thy  heavenly  nature  recognise?"* 

Rama  frankly  confesses  that  he  believes  himself  to  be  only  a 
mortal  ;  Brahma  tries  to  enlighten  him,  as  he  assures  him  that  he 
is  Vishnu  incarnate  for  the  purpose  of  slaying  Ravan,  and  that 
Sita,  whom  his  cruel  conduct  had  driven  into  the  fire,  was  no 
other  than  Lakshmi,  his  celestial  spouse.  In  confirmation  of 
this,  Agni  appears  in  the  fire,  and,  taking  Sita  by  the  hand, 
conducts  her  to  her  husband,  and  declares  her  to  be  pure  and 
spotless.  Rama  receives  her  with  the  greatest  joy,  and  states 
that  he  was  certain  of  her  innocence  all  along,  but  that  as  others 
might  have  doubted  her,  he  had  caused  her  to  pass  through  this 
crdeal. 

Dasaratha,  the  father  of  Rama,  now  descends  from  heaven,  and 
tells  him  that  even  in  that  happy  place  he  had  been  sad  to 
witness  the  sorrows  of  his  beloved  son.  Indra  next  appears,  and, 
at  Rama's  request,  brings  back  to  life  the  many  Vanars  who  had 
perished  in  his  cause  ;  and  then  other  gods  thank  Rama  for  the 
relief  he  has  given  them  by  the  death  of  Ravan.  When  these 
congratulations  are  over,  Rama,  Sita,  and  Lakshman  mount  a 
magic  car,  lent  him  by  Vibhishan,  in  which  in  a  single  day  they 
travel  from  Lanka  to  his  own  city.  On  arriving  near  it,  Hanu- 
man  is  sent  to  inform  Bharat  of  their  return  ;  and  the  joy  this 
intelligence  gives  to  the  faithful  Bharat,  who  has  continued  to 
reign  as  viceroy  and  not  as  king,  and  to  the  citizens  generally, 
is  indescribable.  Rama  quickly  assumes  his  position  as  king, 
and  the  people  enjoy  unexampled  prosperity  : 

"  Ten  thousand  years  Ayodha,  blest 
With  Rama's  ink-,  had  peace  and  rest. 
No  \\id<»w  mourned  her  murdered  mate, 
No  house  was  i\ er  desolate. 
The  happy  land  no  murrain  knew, 
'I  Ik-  ilo,  ks  and  herds  increased  and  grew, 


Griffiths'a  '  Ramayana,'  v.  278. 


The  Rama  Chandra  Avatara.  165 


The  earth  her  kindly  fruits  supplied, 
No  harvest  failed,  no  children  died. 
Unknown  were  want,  disease,  and  crime, 
So  calm,  so  happy  was  the  time."  * 

This  state  of  universal  happiness  does  not  continue  for  ever. 
People  in  the  city  have  doubts  regarding  the  purity  of  their 
queen,  which  at  length  reach  the  ears  of  Rama,  who,  taking  ad- 
vantage of  a  wish  of  Sita  to  see  once  again  a  hermitage,  sends  her 
to  live  an  ascetic  life.  When  her  twin  sons  born  there  come  of 
age,  she  sends  them  to  their  father's  court,  who,  on  seeing  them, 
deeply  feels  the  injustice  he  had  done  their  mother,  and  deter- 
mines at  any  cost  to  reinstate  her  as  his  queen.  On  her  arrival 
he  asks  her  to  assert  her  innocence  before  the  assembled  court  ; 
but  even  Sita  could  not  bear  this.  She  calls  to  the  earth  which 
gave  her  birth  to  give  her  a  home  ;  the  earth  opened  her  arms,  and 
received  her  into  her  bosom.  Rama  after  this  grows  tired  of  life  ; 
when  Time  visits  him  and  informs  him  that  his  work  is  done. 
Hearing  this,  the  good  king  goes  to  the  bank's  of  the  sacred  stream, 
whence,  forsaking  his  body,  he  ascends  to  his  home  in  heaven. 

Rama,  to  a  vast  number  of  Hindus,  is  not  merely  the  King  of 
Ayodha,  whose  history  is  so  pathetically  told  in  the  Ramayana  ; 
nor  the  Benefactor  of  Gods,  as  he  slew  their  enemy,  Ravan  ;  but 
is  their  Saviour  and  Friend.  As  the  dead  are  carried  to  the 
river-side  to  be  burned,  the  friends  repeatedly  cry :  "  Rama, 
Rama,  Satya  Nama ; "  i.e.,  "  Rama  Rama,  the  true  name." 
Probably  this  is  owing  to  the  fact  that  in  his  life  his  power  of 
intercession  for  the  dead  was  great  ;  whilst  his  kindness  to  and 
care  for  his  followers  were  such  as  to  encourage  men  to  trust  in 
him.  He  is  said  to  have  taken  the  whole  of  the  inhabitants  of 
his  beloved  city  Ayodha  to  Brahma's  heaven  without  their  suffer- 
ing death.  At  his  intercession  Ravan's  spies  were  saved  ;  and 
the  Vanar  hosts  that  had  fallen  were  restored  to  life.  He 
entreated  his  father  Dasaratha  to  remove  the  curse  which  he  had 
pronounced  upon  Kaikeya,  the  mother  of  Bharata,  through  whose 
unkindness  Rama  had  been  exiled. 

*  Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  v.  314. 


i66 


The  Puraxic  Deities. 


8.    THE    KRISHNA   AVATARA. 

Professor  Goldstiicker  says  *  that  this  "  is  the  most  interesting 
incarnation  of  Vishnu,  both  on  account  of  the  opportunity  which 
it  affords  to  trace  in  Hindu  antiquity  the  gradual  transformation 
of  mortal  heroes  into  representatives  of  a  god  ;  and  on  account 


TJIli    KRISHNA    AVATAKA. 


of  the  numerous  legends  connected  with  it,  as  well  as  the  in- 
fluence which  it  exercised  on  the  Vaishnava  cult.  In  the 
Mahabharata,  Krishna— which  literally  means  '  the  black  or  dark 
one' — is  sometimes  represented    as   rendering  homage  to  Siva, 


*   Chambers's  Cyclopaedia,  s.  v. 


The  Krishna  Avatara.  167 

and  therefore  acknowledging  his  own  inferiority  to  that  deity, 
or  as  recommending  the  worship  of  Uma,  the  consort  of  Siva, 
and  as  receiving  boons  from  both  these  deities.  In  some  pas- 
sages, again,  he  bears  merely  the  character  of  a  hero  endowed 
with  extraordinary  powers,  and  in  others  his  divine  nature  is 
even  disputed  or  denied  by  adversaries,  though  they  are 
eventually  punished  for  this  unbelief.  As  the  intimate  ally  of 
Arjuna,  he  claims  the  rank  of  the  supreme  deity ;  but  there  are 
other  passages,  again,  in  the  Mahabharata  in  which  the  same 
claim  of  Siva  is  admitted,  and  an  attempt  is  made  at  compro- 
mising their  rival  claims,  by  declaring  both  deities  one  and  the 
same.  Sometimes,  moreover,  Krishna  is  in  this  Epos  declared 
to  represent  merely  a  very  small  portion — 'a  portion  of  a 
portion/  as  it  is  called — of  the  divine  essence  of  Vishnu.  In  the 
Mahabharata,  therefore,  which  is  silent  also  regarding  many 
adventures  in  Krishna's  life  fully  detailed  in  the  Puranas,  the 
worship  of  Vishnu  in  this  incarnation  was  by  no  means  so 
generally  admitted  or  settled  as  it  is  in  many  Puranas  of  the 
Vaishnait  Sect ;  nor  was  there  at  that  period  that  consistency  in 
the  conception  of  a  Krishna  Avatara,  which  is  traceable  in  the 
later  works." 

In  the  '  Prem  Sagar,'  the  Hindi  version  of  the  '  Bhagavata 
Purana,'  is  the  following  account  of  the  object  of  this  incarnation. 
A  king  of  Mathura,  named  Ugrasena,  had  a  beautiful  wife,  who 
was  barren.  One  day,  when  walking  in  a  wood,  she  lost  her 
companions  ;  and  when  alone,  a  demon  becoming  enamoured  of 
her  assumed  her  husband's  form,  and  as  a  result  a  son  was  born, 
who  was  named  Kansa.  When  a  mere  child  Kansa  manifested 
a  most  cruel  disposition — his  great  delight  being  to  catch  and 
kill  children — and  he  grew  up  to  be  a  source  of  sorrow  to  his 
father,  family,  and  country.  He  advised  his  father  to  give  up 
the  worship  of  Rama,  the  god  of  his  race,  and  to  call  in  secret  only 
on  Mahadeva  (Siva).  His  father  replied  with  sorrow:  "Rama 
is  my  lord,  and  the  dispeller  of  my  grief  ;  if  I  do  not  worship  him, 
how  shall  I  as  a  sinful  man  cross  over  the  sea  of  the  world  ? ' 
Kansa  hearing  this  dethroned  his  father,  and  having  usurped  his 
place  issued  a  proclamation  throughout  his  dominions  forbidding 


1 68  The  Puranic  Deities. 


men  to  worship  Rama,  and  commanding  them  to  reverence  Siva  ; 
and  his  tyranny  at  length  became  so  unbearable,  that  the  earth, 
assuming  the  form  of  a  cow,  went  to  Indra  and,  complaining  of  all 
this,  said  :  "  Evil  spirits  have  begun  to  commit  great  crimes  in  the 
world  ;  in  dread  of  whom  Religion  and  Justice  have  departed  ;  and 
if  you  will  permit  me,  I,  too,  will  abandon  the  world,  and  descend 
into  the  lower  regions."  Indra  hearing  this  went  in  company 
with  the  other  gods  to  Brahma,  to  see  what  redress  could  be 
afforded.  Brahma  conducted  them  to  Siva,  who,  in  his  turn,  con- 
ducted them  to  Vishnu  ;  and  reminding  him  of  the  deliverance  he 
had  afforded  to  gods  and  men  in  his  previous  manifestations,  they 
induce  him  a^ain  to  become  a  man  for  the  destruction  of  Kansa. 
The  gods  and  goddesses,  delighted  at  this  assurance  of  help, 
promise  also  to  forsake  their  heavenly  homes  that  they  may  be 
his  companions  during  his  earthly  sojourn  ;  and  Vishnu  himself 
arranges  that  Lakshman,  who  in  the  Rama  incarnation  had  been 
his  brother  and  constant  and  most  faithful  companion,  and 
Bharata  also  and  Sutraghna,  should  accompany  him  ;  and  that 
Sita,  under  the  name  of  Rukmini,  should  be  his  wife. 

The  '  Vishnu  Purana,'*  from  which  most  of  the  following  legends 
are  taken,  gives  a  somewhat  different  account  of  Vishnu's  reply. 
Krishna  was  the  incarnation  of  "  a  part  of  a  part  of  the  supreme 
being."  When  entreated  to  become  incarnate,  "  the  supreme 
lord  plucked  off  two  hairs,  one  white  and  one  black,  and  said  to 
the  gods,  '  These  my  hairs  shall  descend  upon  the  earth,  and  shall 
relieve  her  of  the  burden  of  her  distress  ! '  "  The  white  hair  was 
impersonated  as  Balarama,  and  the  black  as  Krishna.  "  The 
Asuras  shall  all  be  destroyed.  This  my  black  hair  shall  be 
impersonated  in  the  eighth  conception  of  Devaki,  the  wife  of 
Vasudeva,  who  is  like  a  goddess,  and  shall  slay  Kansa,  who  is 
the  demon  Kalanemi."  f 


*    Hook  v. 

f  It  should  be  noticed  here  that  a  commentator  says  on  this  passage  that 
the  statement  that  two  hairs  of  Vishnu  became  incarnate  must  not  be  taken 
literally,  but  that  the  work  to  be  done  by  him  on  this  occasion  was  so  small 
that  it  could  easily  have  been  effected  by  two  hairs.  In  Krishna,  Vishnu 
himself  was  manifested. 


The  Krishna  Avatara.  169 


When  Vasudeva  and  his  wife  Devaki  were  being  driven  by  King 
Kansa  in  a  chariot,  "  a  voice  in  the  sky,  sounding  loud  and  deep 
like  thunder,  addressing  Kansa,  said,  '  Fool  that  you  are,  the 
eighth  child  of  the  damsel  you  are  now  driving  shall  take  away 
your  life ! ' "  Kansa  hearing  this  drew  his  sword,  and  was  about  to 
slay  Devaki  ;  but  Vasudeva  interposed,  saying,  "  Kill  not  Devaki, 
great  warrior !  Spare  her  life,  and  I  will  deliver  to  you  every 
child  she  may  bring  forth."  Kansa,  being  appeased  with  this 
promise,  spared  the  lady,  but  to  prevent  any  mistake  placed  a 
guard  by  day  and  night  over  their  apartments  ;  and  as  child 
after  child  was  born,  it  was  given  up  to  him  and  slain. 

Kansa  was  under  the  impression  that  he  had  destroyed 
Devaki's  children,  but  this  was  not  the  case  ;  these  children  were 
really  others  (children  of  Hiranyakasipu,  whom  Vishnu  slew  as 
the  Man-Lion),  brought  from  the  nether  regions  at  Vishnu's 
command  by  Yoganindra,  "  the  great  illusory  energy  of  Vishnu," 
and  lodged  in  Devaki's  womb  in  order  that  the  cruel  Kansa 
might  be  overreached.  Vishnu  said  to  this  goddess  :  "  Go,  Nidra 
(Sleep),  to  the  nether  regions,  and  by  my  command  conduct 
successively  six  of  their  princes  to  be  conceived  by  Devaki. 
When  these  shall  have  been  put  to  death  by  Kansa,  the  seventh 
conception  shall  be  formed  of  a  portion  of  Sesha  (the  serpent- 
deity),  who  is  part  of  me  ;  and  this  you  shall  transfer  before  the 
time  of  birth  to  Rohini,  another  wife  of  Vasudeva,  who  resides 
at  Gokula."  This  child  was  Balarama.  "  The  report  shall  run 
that  Devaki  miscarries.  I  will  myself  become  incarnate  in  her 
eighth  conception  ;  and  you  shall  take  a  similar  character  as  the 
embryo  offspring  of  Yasoda  (wife  of  a  herdsman  named  Nanda). 
In  the  night  of  the  eighth  of  the  dark  half  of  the  month  Nabhas 
I  shall  be  born  ;  and  you  will  be  born  on  the  ninth.  Impelled 
and  aided  by  my  power,  Vasudeva  shall  bear  me  to  the  bed  of 
Yasoda,  and  you  to  the  bed  of  Devaki.  Kansa  shall  take  you 
and  hold  you  up  to  dash  you  against  a  stone  ;  but  you  shall 
escape  into  the  sky,  where  Indra  shall  meet  and  do  homage  to 
you  through  reverence  of  me." 

When  Devaki  gives  birth  to  her  eighth  son,  Vasudeva  takes 
the   child,    and,    eluding   the    vigilance    of  the   guards,   hurries 


170  The  Puranic  Deities. 

through  the  city,  with  the  serpent  Sesha  following.  On  reach- 
ing the  river  Yamuna,  which  he  has  to  cross,  though  ordinarily 
it  was  both  wide  and  deep,  it  assists  him  in  his  flight,  the  water 
only  rising  to  his  knees.  Just  as  he  reaches  Nanda's  house, 
Yasodfi  had  given  birth  to  her  child,  which  Vasudeva  seizes, 
and,  leaving  Devaki's  child  in  its  place,  returns  to  his  prison 
home,  and  manages  to  re-enter  unobserved.  Soon  after  this 
the  cry  of  the  new-born  child  being  heard  by  the  guard,  Kansa 
is  quickly  informed  of  its  birth,  and,  rushing  into  the  room, 
seized  and  dashed  it  against  a  stone.  But  fate  was  too  strong 
for  him.  Immediately  the  child  touched  the  ground,  "  it  rose 
into  the  sky,  and,  expanding  into  a  gigantic  figure,  having  eight 
arms,  each  wielding  some  formidable  weapon,  laughed  and  said 
to  Kansa,  'What  avails  it  thee  to  have  hurled  me  to  the  ground? 
He  is  born  that  shall  kill  thee,  the  mighty  one  amongst  the 
gods,  who  was  formerly  thy  destroyer.' '  The  reference  of  the 
last  sentence  as  taught  by  other  Puranas  is  to  the  fact  that 
Kansa  was  no  other  than  Kfilanemi,  whom  Vishnu  had  slain 
when  incarnate  as  Rama. 

Greatly  alarmed  by  the  unexpected  frustration  of  his  plans, 
Kansa  collects  his  friends,  and,  addressing  them,  said  :  "  The 
vile  and  contemptible  denizens  of  heaven  are  assiduously 
plotting  against  my  life  ;  they  dreading  my  prowess,  I  hold 
them  of  no  account.  Have  I  not  seen  the  king  of  the  gods, 
when  he  had  ventured  into  the  conflict,  receiving  my  shafts  upon 
his  back,  and  not  bravely  upon  his  breast  ?  Now,  it  is  my 
determination  to  inflict  still  deeper  degradation  upon  these 
evil-minded  and  unprincipled  gods.  Let  therefore  every  man 
who  is  notorious  for  liberality  (in  gifts  to  gods  and  Brahmans), 
every  man  who  is  remarkable  for  his  celebration  of  sacrifices, 
be  put  to  death  ;  that  thus  the  gods  shall  be  deprived  of  the 
means  by  which  they  subsist.  The  goddess  who  has  been  born 
as  the  infant  child  of  Devaki  has  announced  to  me  that  he  is 
again  alive  who  in  a  former  being  was  my  death.  Let  therefore 
active  search  be  made  for  whatever  young  children  there  may 
be  upon  earth,  and  let  every  boy  in  whom  there  are  signs  of 
unusual  vigour  be  slain  without  remorse."     Soon  after  this,  as 


The  Krishna  Avatara.  171 

he  feared  nothing  more  from  them,  he  released  Vasudeva  and 
Devaki  from  their  confinement,  and,  in  dread  of  meeting  his 
great  enemy,  withdrew  into  the  inner  apartments  of  his  house. 

On  regaining  his  liberty,  Vasudeva  speedily  sought  out 
Nanda,  who  of  course  was  unaware  of  the  change  of  children 
effected  by  Vasudeva,  and,  after  congratulating  him  on  the  birth 
of  a  son,  suggested  the  advisability  of  his  returning  home  ;  as, 
having  paid  his  taxes,  there  was  nothing  to  detain  him  in  the 
city.  He  feared  lest  the  spies  of  Kansa  should  notice  the 
peculiar  excellences  of  the  child,  and  destroy  him  according  to 
Kansas  order.  At  the  same  time  he  brought  his  other  child 
by  Rohini  (Balarama),  and  placed  him  under  the  care  of  Nanda 
to  be  brought  up  as  his  own  child.  By  this  means,  as  Rama 
and  Lakshman  were  inseparable  companions  in  the  previous  in- 
carnation, Krishna  and  Balarama  were  as  intimately  connected 
in  this. 

The  herdsman  Nanda  and  his  family  had  not  been  long 
settled  at  Gokula  before  efforts  were  made  to  destroy  the 
infant  Krishna.  A  female  fiend  named  Putana,  the  sucking  of 
whose  breast  was  instant  death  to  an  infant,  came  by  night,  and, 
taking  the  child  in  her  arms,  offered  him  her  breast.  Krishna 
seized  it  with  both  hands,  and  sucked  with  such  violence  that 
the  hideous  being  roared  with  pain,  and  giving  way  in  every 
joint  fell  down  dead.  The  villagers  hearing  the  shrieks  rushed 
into  the  house  to  see  what  was  the  matter.  Yasoda  waved  a 
cow's  tail  brush  over  him,  whilst  Nanda  put  dried  cow-dung 
upon  his  head,  and,  placing  an  amulet  on  his  arm,  besought 
Vishnu  to  protect  the  child. 

There  are  many  legends  connected  with  his  boyhood,  which 
teach  his  extraordinary  power.  On  one  occasion,  when  a  mere 
infant,  lying  under  Nanda's  wagon,  he  cried  for  the  breast,  and 
being  impatient  because  his  mother  did  not  come  quickly, 
kicked  the  wagon  over,  to  the  great  astonishment  of  the  by- 
standers. He  and  Balarama  played  with  and  tormented  the 
calves  to  such  an  extent,  that  Yasoda  became  quite  angry  ;  and 
to  prevent  its  repetition  tied  Krishna  to  a  heavy  wooden  mortar 
in  which  corn  is  threshed,  and  went  on  with  her  work.     Krishna, 


K- 


The  Puraxic  Deities. 


trying  to  free  himself  from  this,  dragged  it  until  it  became 
wedged  fast  between  two  Arjuna  trees,  and  with  a  strong  pull 
the  trees  were  uprooted.  The  people,  astonished  because  the 
trees  fell  when  no  storm  was  blowing,  thought  the  place  must 
be  unlucky  and  moved  away  to  Vrindavana.  The  Bhagavata 
says  that  these  trees  were  two  sons  of  Kuvera,  the  god  of  riches, 
who,  owing  to  a  curse  of  the  sage  Narada,  were  thus  metamor- 
phosed, and  that  it  was  for  the  purpose  of  liberating  them  that 

Krishna  accomplished 
this  feat.  Krishna  and 
Balarama,  "  the  guar- 
dians of  the  world,  were 
keepers  of  cattle  in  the 
cowpens  of  Vrinda- 
vana," until  they  were 
seven  years  of  age, 
during  which  years,  ac- 
cording to  the  'Bhaga- 
vata Purana,'  the  boys 
were  full  of  childish 
tricks  :  stealing  butter 
from  the  neighbouring 
cowherds  appears  to 
have  been  their  favourite 
pastime. 

In  the  '  Bhagavata 
Purana'  there  are 
legends  also  of  attempts 
being  made  by  Kansa 
to  rid  himself  of  his 
dreaded  foe.  One  day 
a  demon  was  sent  who 
hoped  to  surprise  him 
when  wandering  with 
the  cattle  in  the  woods  ; 
but  the  boy,  seeing  through  his  disguise,  seized  him  by  the  foot, 
swung  him  round  his  head  and  dashed  him  so  violently  on  the 


KRISHNA    SLAYING    TAKASCKA. 


The  Krishna  Avatara.  173 

ground  that  he  immediately  died.  The  next  day,  another 
demon,  assuming  the  form  of  an  immense  crane,  seized  Krishna 
with  his  bill ;  but  he  became  so  hot  that  the  crane  'immediately 
released  him  :  Krishna  then  crushed  its  beak  under  his  foot. 
Yet  another  came  as  an  immense  serpent,  and  swallowed  Krishna 
and  some  of  his  companions,  the  cowherds,  with  their  cows  ;  but 
he  was  no  sooner  in  the  reptile's  stomach  than  he  expanded 
himself,  and  burst  open  his  prison.  Krishna  was  not  always 
defending  himself;  often  he  greatly  benefited  his  companions. 
When  Brahma  stole  some  calves,  and  carried  off  the  boys  who 
tended  them,  Krishna  made  other  calves  and  other  boys,  so  that 
the  theft  was  never  known  by  the  cowherds. 

We  now  return  to  the  narrative  of  the  '  Vishnu  Purana.'  The 
river  Yamuna  was  the  home  of  the  serpent  Kaliya,  who  made 
its  waters  boil  with  the  fires  of  passion,  so  that  the  large  trees 
on  its  banks  were  blighted  by  its  fumes,  and  birds  were  killed 
by  its  heat.  Krishna,  seeing  how  his  friends  at  Vrindavana  were 
inconvenienced  by  this,  plunged  into  the  stream,  much  to  the 
dismay  of  the  cowherds,  and,  after  challenging  the  serpent  to 
fight,  was  about  to  slay  him,  but  moved  by  the  intercession  of 
the  lady  serpents  allowed  him  to  live  on  condition  that  he 
and  his  family  forsook  the  Yamuna,  and  took  up  their  abode 
in  the  sea. 

On  one  occasion  Krishna  wished  to  annoy  Indra.  Seeing 
the  Gopas  (cowherds)  preparing  to  worship  the  giver  of  rain,  he 
dissuaded  them  from  it,  and  urged  them  to  worship  instead  the 
mountain  that  supplies  their  cattle  with  food,  and  their  cattle 
that  yield  them  milk.  Acting  upon  this  advice,  they  presented 
to  the  mountain  Govarddhana  "  curds,  milk,  and  flesh."  This 
was  merely  a  device  by  which  Krishna  himself  diverted  the  wor- 
ship of  Indra  to  himself;  for  "upon  the  summit  of  the  moun- 
tain Krishna  presented  himself,  saying,  '  I  am  the  mountain,' 
and  partook  of  much  food  presented  by  the  Gopas  ;  whilst  in  his 
own  form  as  Krishna  he  ascended  the  hill  along  with  the  cow- 
herds, and  worshipped  his  other  self."  Having  promised  them 
many  blessings,  the  mountain-person  of  Krishna  vanished. 
Indra,  being  greatly  incensed  at  the    disregard  shown   him  by 


*74 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


Nanda  and  others,  sent  great  floods  to  destroy  them  and  their 
cattle  ;  but  Krishna,  raising  the  mountain  Govarddhana  aloft  on 
one  hand,  held  it  as  an  umbrella  and  sheltered  his  friends  from 


KRISHNA    HOLDING   Ul'   MOUNT   GOVARDDHANA. 

the  storm  for  seven  days  and  nights.  Indra  then  visited  Krishna 
and  praised  him  for  what  he  had  done  ;  and  his  wife  Indrani 
entreated  Krishna  to  be  a  friend  of  their  son  Arjuna. 

Krishna  did  not   by   any  means  confine  his   attention   to  the 
wants  of  the  cowherds  amongst  whom  he  spent  his  early  days. 


The  Krishna  Avatara.  175 

On  one  occasion  Satrajit,  a  worshipper  of  the  Sun,  who  had 
received  from  his  lord  a  magnificent  jewel  named  Syamantaka, 
came  to  visit  Krishna  at  Dwaraka,  adorned  with  his  jewel,  which 
shone  so  brightly  that  the  inhabitants  thought  the  Sun  himself 
was  present.  It  was  a  most  marvellous  gem,  for  its  possessor 
received  through  it  "  eight  loads  of  gold  daily,  and  was  free  from 
all  fear  of  portents,  wild  beasts,  fire,  robbers,  and  famine  ; "  but 
there  was  this  strange  condition  attached  to  its  possession  : 
"  although  it  was  an  inexhaustible  source  of  good  to  a  virtuous 
person,  when  worn  by  a  man  of  bad  character  it  was  the  cause  of 
his  death."  Thinking  it  possible  that  Krishna,  on  learning  the 
excellences  of  the  gem,  might  wish  to  keep  it,  Satrajit  gave  it 
to  his  brother  Prasena.  This  brother  went  to  hunt  in  the  forest 
having  the  gem  with  him,  when  he  was  killed  by  a  lion.  Jam- 
bavat,  the  king  of  the  bears,  seeing  the  gem  in  the  lion's  mouth, 
killed  him  and  took  possession  of  it  himself.  When  Prasena  did 
not  return  as  he  was  expected,  the  Yadavas  (Krishna's  tribesmen) 
began  to  think  that  Krishna  had  slain  him.  To  convince  them 
of  his  innocency,  taking  with  him  a  number  of  his  brethren,  he 
traced  the  horse  upon  which  Prasena  rode  to  the  place  where 
the  lion  met  and  slew  its  rider,  and  was  acquitted  of  all  blame  in 
the  matter.  He  then  followed  Jambavat  to  his  cave,  and  finding 
the  bear-prince  Sukumara  playing  with  the  gem,  Krishna  en- 
tered and  fought  with  his  father  the  king  for  twenty-one  days  ; 
but  as  no  tidings  of  him  reached  his  home  at  Dwaraka,  his  friends 
concluded  that  he  must  be  dead  ;  and  by  the  performance  of  his 
funeral  ceremonies,  the  food  and  water  offered  for  this  purpose 
supporting  him  during  his  lengthened  conflict,  enabled  him  to 
overcome  Jambavat,  who  gave  him  his  daughter  Jambavati  to 
wife  ;  with  whom  he  returned  home  in  triumph,  carrying  the  gem 
with  him,  which  he  restored  to  Satrajit,  and  received  from  him 
his  daughter  Satyabhama.  This  gem,  after  causing  several  other 
disputes,  was  finally  given  to  a  good  king,  Akrura.  Krishna  con- 
fessed that  as  he  had  16,000  wives  it  was  not  possible  for  him  to 
retain  it ;  and  also  that  his  wife  Satyabhama  would  not  comply 
with  the  conditions  imposed  upon  its  possessor. 

The  Gopis  (wives  of  the  cowherds)  are  represented  as  being 


i  76  The  Puranic  Deities. 

madly  in  love  with  Krishna.  As  he  and  Balarama  played  the 
flute,  they  came  to  play  and  dance  with  them  ;  but  as  all  these 
women  could  not  hold  Krishna's  hand  as  they  danced,  he  multi- 
plied himself  into  as  many  forms  as  there  were  women,  each 
woman  believing  she  held  the  hand  of  the  true  Krishna.*  On 
one  occasion  he  watched  the  Gopis  as  they  went  to  bathe  in  the 
Yamuna  river,  and,  stealing  their  clothes,  sat  in  a  tree  and  re- 
fused to  restore  them  up  until  each  came  in  the  form  of  a  suppliant 
with  uplifted  hands  to  fetch  them.  The  Bhagavata  teaches  that 
these  women,  impelled  though  they  were  by  passion  to  seek 
Krishna,  obtained  through  him  final  emancipation  from  sin. 
"  In  whatever  way  a  man  may  worship  him  he  will  obtain  deliver- 
ance. Some  knew  and  sought  him  as  a  son,  some  as  a  friend, 
some  as  an  enemy,  some  as  a  lover,  but  in  the  end  all  obtained 
the  blessing  of  deliverance  and  emancipation." 

Amongst  all  these  women  Krishna's  favourite  was  Radha,  the 
wife  of  Ayanagosha.  Her  sister-in-law,  seeing  them  together, 
told  her  brother  of  his  wife's  misconduct,  and  Radha  was  in  fear 
lest  he  should  murder  her  ;  when  however  she  communicated  her 
fears  to  her  lover,  he  reassured  her,  as  he  told  her  that  when  her 
husband  came,  he  (Krishna)  would  transform  himself  into  Kali, 
and  her  husband,  instead  of  seeing  her  with  a  lover,  would  find 
her  engaged  in  worshipping  a  goddess.  Her  husband  happening 
to  come  soon  after  this,  and  finding  her  so  employed,  joined 
with  her  in  the  worship  of  Krishna  in  the  form  of  Kali.  It 
is  Radha  whose  name  is  ever  associated  with  Krishna  in 
hymns,  songs,  prayers,  and  pictures  ;  at  this  day  all  the  wives 
of  this  deity  are  forgotten,  but  Radha  is  worshipped  along 
with  her  lover. 

As  Krishna  was  dancing  on  one  occasion  with  these  women, 
a  (Union  named  Arishta,  in  the  form  of  a  fierce  bull,  savagely 
attacked  him.  Krishna  quietly  waited  its  approach,  and,  seizing 
him  as  an  alligator  would  have  done,  held  him  by  the  horns 
whilst   he   pressed  his  sides  with  his  knees  ;  he  then  wrung  his 


*   It  is  this  incident  in  Krishna's  history  which  is  celebrated  yearly  at  the 
Rasajattra. 


The  Krishna  Avatara. 


177 


throat  as  if  it  had  been  a  piece  of  wet  cloth,  and  at  last  tearing 
off  his  horns  beat  him  to  death  with  them. 

After  some  years  Kansa  is  informed  of  Krishna's  existence, 


RAUHA    WORSHIPPING    KRISHNA    AS    KALI 


and,  as  we  have  noticed  above,  sent  various  demons  to  slay  him  ; 
but  as  these  efforts  failed,  the  king  determined  on  a  grand 
scheme  by  which  he  hoped  to  rid  himself  of  his  dreaded  foe. 
He  accordingly  sent  Akrura,  one  of  the  few  good  men  in  his 
kingdom,  with  a  most  polite  invitation  to  Krishna  and  Balarama 
to  visit  him  at  his  capital,  to  witness  some  athletic  sports  ;  and,. 

N 


i  78  The  Puranic  Deities. 

in  the  hope  that  they  being  off  their  guard  would  fall  an  easy  prey, 
ordered  a  demon  named  Kesin,  in  the  form  of  a  horse,  to  attack 
them  on  the  road.  But  Krishna  is  more  than  a  match  for  the  fiend  ; 
he  meets  the  horse  and  fearlessly  thrusts  his  hand  in  its  mouth, 
and,  causing  it  to  swell,  bursts  the  horse  into  two  parts  :  hence 
one  of  Krishna's  many  names  is  Kesava,  the  slayer  of  Kesin. 

Akrura,  having  told  Krishna  of  the  ill-feeling  of  Kansa  and  of 
the  plots  that  have  been  made  against  his  life,  and  being  greatly 
encouraged  with  the  assurance  that  in  three  days  Kansa  and  his 
adherents  would  be  slain,  takes  his  leave  of  the  guests  when 
they  approach  the  city  of  Mathura.  Entering  the  city  unattended, 
and  dressed  as  poor  country  people,  they  meet  with  a  washerman 
of  Kansa  at  work,  whom  they  first  annoy  by  throwing  the  clothes 
on  the  ground,  and,  when  he  expostulates  with  them,  kill  him, 
and  robe  themselves  in  some  of  Kansa's  garments.  Seeing  the 
gaily-dressed,  strong,  and  good-looking  young  men,  a  flower- 
seller  presents  them  with  some  of  his  choicest  flowers  ;  for  his 
generosity  Krishna  bestows  rich  blessings  upon  him  in  this  life 
and  promises  heaven  after  death.  After  this  they  meet  with  a 
deformed  girl  named  Kubja,  carrying  ointments  and  perfumes  to 
the  palace  ;  who,  when  asked  by  Krishna,  gives  him  some  at 
once,  for  which  kindness  her  deformity  is  cured,  and  she  is  made 
beautiful  and  then  invites  the  brothers  to  her  home. 

The  day  following  was  fixed  for  the  sports  they  had  come  to 
witness.  The  lists  were  prepared,  the  trumpets  sounded,  and  two 
fierce  wrestlers  were  commanded  by  fair  means  or  foul  to  slay 
Krishna  and  his  brother  ;  and  in  case  they  should  fail  to  do  this, 
an  enormous  elephant  was  in  readiness  to  trample  them  to  death. 
But  wrestlers  and  elephant  were  themselves  slain.  Seeing  his 
grand  scheme  so  signally  fail,  the  king  lost  his  temper  and  called 
out  loudly  to  his  guards  to  slay  the  youths  ;  instead  of  this,  how- 
ever, Krishna  rushed  upon  and  slew  the  king  in  the  midst  of  the 
assembly,  and  falling  at  the  feet  of  his  father  and  mother,  Vasu- 
deva  and  Devaki,  placed  Ugrasena,  Kansa's  father,  upon  the 
throne,  and  with  his  brother  took  up  his  abode  at  Mathura. 

Krishna  is  of  immense  service  to  the  people  of  Mathura,  for 
very  soon  after  his  arrival  there,  Jarasandha,  Kansa's  father-in-law 


The  Krishna  Avatara.  179 


attacks  them,  and  is  beaten  eighteen  times  by  his  prowess. 
When  the  people  were  almost  exhausted  with  these  protracted 
struggles,  a  new  enemy  appears  in  Kalayavana,  King  of  the  Ya- 
vanas,  who  wish  to  try  their  strength  with  the  Yadavas  under 
Krishna.  He,  thinking  that  by  having  two  enemies  to  contend 
with  at  once  the  people  would  be  exhausted,  prepared  a  new  city, 
so  strong  that  women  could  protect  it,  to  which  he  conducted  the 
inhabitants  of  Mathura.  No  sooner  had  he  made  the  people 
secure  than  he  went  forth  unarmed  and  alone,  and  attracted  the 
attention  of  the  King  of  the  Yavanas,  whose  army  still  surrounded 
Mathura.  Krishna,  seeing  the  king  following  him,  entered  a 
cave,  and  concealed  himself  there ;  the  king  seeing  a  man  lying 
at  its  entrance,  thinking  it  must  be  Krishna,  kicked  it,  and  in  an 
instant  became  a  heap  of  ashes.  The  secret  of  his  destruction 
was  this  :  a  man  named  Muchukunda  had  received  as  a  boon 
from  the  gods,  the  power  to  sleep  for  a  long  period,  with  this 
condition  attached,  that  whoever  should  awake  him  should  be 
instantly  consumed  by  fire  emanating  from  his  body.  Unwit- 
tingly the  King  of  the  Yavanas  kicked  him  and  received  the 
penalty  of  his  ignorance  ;  whilst  Krishna  escaped,  and  seized 
the  army  and  treasures  thus  left  without  an  owner. 

Amongst  many  others,  Krishna  fell  in  love  with  Rukmini,  the 
daughter  of  Bhismaka,  King  of  Vidhabha  (Berar)  ;  but  her 
brother  Rukmin  hated  him,  and  refusing  to  give  his  consent,  at 
the  advice  of  Jarasandha,  she  was  betrothed  to  Sisupala.  This 
Sisupala  was  no  other  than  Hiranyakasipu  and  Ravan,  whom  in 
previous  incarnations  Vishnu  had  slain.  On  the  eve  of  the 
wedding  Krishna  carries  off  Rukmini,  who  was  another  form  of 
Lakshmi,  Sita,  &c,  leaving  Balarama  and  other  friends  to  take 
care  of  themselves  ;  and  when  Rukmin  follows  him  with  an 
immense  army,  Krishna  easily  destroys  his  followers,  and,  but 
for  the  intercession  of  Rukmini,  would  have  killed  his  brother- 
in-law  too. 

Soon  after  this  occurrence,  Indra  pays  a  visit  to  Krishna,  to 
enlist  his  sympathy  and  help  against  Naraka,  King  of  Pragjyo- 
tisha,  who  was  inflicting  all  kinds  of  evil  upon  all  creation. 
"  Carrying  off  the  maidens  of  the  gods,  saints,  demons  and  kings, 

N    2 


i  So  The  Puranic  Deities. 

he  shuts  them  up  in  his  own  palace.  He  has  taken  away 
Varuna's  umbrella,  the  celestial  nectar-dropping  earrings  of  my 
mother  Aditi,  and  now  demands  my  elephant."  Krishna  at  once 
consents  to  help,  marches  off  to  meet,  the  king,  conquers  all  his 
forces,  slays  Naraka  and  obtains  the  stolen  property,  for  which 
on  its  restoration  he  receives  the  thanks  of  its  owners.  In  the 
women's  apartment  he  finds  16,100  damsels,  and  "  at  an  auspicious 
moment  received  the  hands  of  all,  according  to  the  ritual,  in 
separate  houses;  16,100  was  the  number  of  the  maidens,  and 
into  so  many  forms  did  the  foe  of  Madhu  multiply  himself;  so 
that  each  of  the  damsels  thought  he  had  wedded  her  in  his 
single  person,  and  he  abode  severally  in  the  dwelling-place  of 
each  of  his  wives.  It  was  as  a  present  from  Uma,  the  wife  of 
Siva,  that  he  received  these  wives." 

There  was  once  a  severe  conflict  between  Krishna  and  Siva. 
Aniruddha,  a  grandson  of  Krishna,  was  enamoured  of  Usha,  a 
daughter  of  Bana,  one  of  Siva's  worshippers,  whom  he  secretly 
visited.  Being  caught  on  one  of  these  secret  visits  by  Bana's 
guard,  the  prince  was  imprisoned,  and,  as  the  king  would  not 
release  him,  Krishna  attacked  him  ;  but  Siva  and  his  son 
Kartikeya  fought  for  Bana.  After  severe  fighting,  as  Siva  sat 
down  weary  in  his  car,  and  Kartikeya  had  fled  from  the  field, 
Krishna,  tired  of  using  ordinary  weapons,  let  fly  his  wonderful 
discus,  which  never  failed  of  accomplishing  his  wish,  and  cut  off 
the  hundred  arms  of  Bana.  As  he  was  about  to  throw  it  a  second 
time,  Siva  came  and  interceded  for  the  life  of  his  friend  ;  to  whom, 
in  granting  his  request,  Krishna  said  :  "You  are  fit  to  apprehend 
that  you  are  not  distinct  from  me  ;  that  which  I  am,  thou  art." 

As  Krishna  was  marching  towards  Sonitapura,  the  city  in 
which  his  grandson  was  confined,  as  narrated  above,  a  strange 
enemy  met  him.  "  Fever,  an  emanation  from  Maheshwara  (Siva), 
having  three  feet  and  three  heads,  fought  desperately  with 
Krishna  in  defence  of  Bana.  Baladcva  (Balarama),  upon  whom 
his  ashes  were  scattered,  was  seized  with  burning  heat,  and  his 
eyelids  trembled  ;  but  lie  obtained  relief  by  clinging  to  the  body 
of  Krishna.  Contending  thus  with  the  divine  holder  of  the  bow, 
the  Fever  emanating  from  Siva  was  quickly  expelled  from  the 


The  Krishna  Avatara.  181 

body  of  Krishna  by  Fever,  which  he  himself  engendered. 
Brahma,  beholding  the  impersonated  malady,  bewildered  by  the 
beating  inflicted  by  the  arms  of  the  deity,  entreated  the  latter  to 
desist,  and  the  foe  of  Madhu  refrained,  and  absorbed  into  himself 
the  Fever  he  had  created.  The  rival  Fever  then  departed,  saying 
to  Krishna  :  "  Those  who  call  to  memory  the  combat  between  us 
shall  be  exempt  from  febrile  diseases." 

Krishna  was  not  without  a  rival.     A   man  named   Paundraka 
professed  that  he  was  the  true  incarnation  of  Vishnu,  and  that 
Vasudeva  (son   of  Vasudeva)  was  a  pretender.     The   King  of 
Benares  was  induced  to  believe  in  this  false  Krishna,  and  at  his 
request  sent  an  order  for  Krishna  to  come  and  do  him  homage, 
and   at  the  same  time  to  bring  with  him    his    discus  and    all 
insignia  of  office.     Krishna  did  not  hesitate  for  a  moment.     Set- 
ting off  next  day,  he  destroyed  the  army  of  his  rival  in  a  moment, 
and  addressing  Paundraka  himself  said  :  "  You  desired  me  by  your 
envoy  to  resign  to  you  all  my  insignia  :  I  now  deliver  them  to 
you.     Here  is  my  discus,  here  my  mace,  here  is  Garuda  ;  let  him 
mount  upon  thy  standard."     The  discus  did  its  work,  the  enemy 
of  Krishna  was    cut   to   pieces ;  but    as    the    Raja   of  Benares 
continued  to  fight,  his  head  was  cut  off,  and  fell  in  the  city.     The 
people   cried  in  their  distress  to  Siva,  and,  in  answer,  a  fierce 
female   form   came    from    him    to   their   help ;    but  the   discus, 
obedient  to  Krishna's  command,  pursued  her  into  the  city,  where 
it  was  attacked  by  the  whole  army ;  its  radiancy,  unfortunately, 
was  such  that  it  consumed  the  whole  city  in  which  the  magic 
form  of  Siva  had  hid  herself. 

When  Krishna  had  finished  his  work  on  earth,  when  he  had 
destroyed  demons  and  wicked  men,  especially  Kansa,  the  time 
came  for  him  to  return  to  heaven  ;  but  before  his  departure, 
owing  to  a  curse  pronounced  by  some  Brahmans,  it  was  necessary 
that  the  Yadava  race  from  which  he  sprang  should  pass  away. 
This  curse  was  the  result  of  an  insult  offered  by  some  Yadu 
boys  to  Narada  and  other  Rishis  when  engaged  with  their 
devotions.  These  boys,  as  a  joke,  dressed  up  a  son  of  Krishna, 
named  Samba,  as  a  woman,  and  taking  him  to  the  Rishis  asked, 
"  What  child  will  this  female  give  birth  to  ?  "     The  Rishis  being 


182  The  Puranic  Deities. 


angry  said,  "  She  will  bring  forth  a  club  which  shall  crush  the 
whole  Yadava  race."  According  to  this  word  of  the  Rishis,  a 
club  came  from  Samba's  belly,  which  King  Ugrasena  ordered  to 
be  ground  to  powder  and  thrown  into  the  sea.  But  the  dust 
that  fell  on  the  shore  became  rushes,  and  a  small  part  of  the 
club,  like  a  lance  head,  could  not  be  broken  :  this  part,  when 
thrown  into  the  sea,  was  swallowed  by  a  fish,  which  was  caught 
by  a  fisherman,  and  the  lance  head  was  made  into  an  arrow 
point  by  a  huntsman  named  Jara. 

A  messenger  from  the  gods  now  visited  Krishna,  telling  him 
that,  as  his  work  was  done,  he  should  ascend  to  his  home  :  this  he 
was  quite  willing  to  do  ;  but  wishing  to  save  his  race  from  the 
threatened  destruction,  advised  the  Yadavas  to  forsake  their 
city  and  go  to  Prabhasa.  By  this  advice  he  unintentionally 
hastened  their  end  ;  for  on  reaching  the  sea-shore  they  indulged 
in  liquor  and  began  to  fight  amongst  themselves,  and  for  arms 
seized  the  rushes  which  sprang  from  the  dust  of  the  fatal  club 
that  came  from  Samba.  Krishna  and  Balarama  trying  to  make 
peace  between  the  combatants  only  led  to  their  swifter  de- 
struction, until  at  last  the  two  brothers  were  left  alone  of  their 
race.  Whilst  sitting  and  talking  on.  the  banks  of  a  river,  a 
serpent  crawled  out  of  Balarama's  mouth — the  serpent  Sesha,  of 
which  he  was  an  incarnation,  and  so  his  end  was  come.  Krishna, 
left  alone,  was  meditating,  with  his  foot  upon  his  knee,  when  the 
hunter  Jara,  armed  with  the  fatal  arrow,  passed  by,  and  taking 
Krishna  for  a  deer,  shot  him,  and  thus  his  death  was  unwittingly 
caused  by  the  last  part  of  the  cursed  club.  Jara,  seeing  his 
mistake,  fell  at  Krishna's  feet  and  asked  forgiveness,  to  whom 
Krishna  said  :  "  Fear  not  thou  in  the  least.  Go,  hunter,  through 
my  favour  to  heaven,  the  abode  of  the  gods."  Immediately  a 
celestial  car  appeared,  in  which  the  hunter  ascended  to  heaven  ; 
and  Krishna  abandoned  his  mortal  body. 

In  this  account  of  Krishna  we  have  followed  the  'Vishnu 
Purana/with  which  the  Bhagavata  agrees  ;  though  the  latter  has 
many  additional  legends,  similar  to  those  given  above.  The 
writers  of  these  Puranas  have  no  doubt  regarding  his  divinity  ; 
a  large   part    of  these    books  being  occupied  with  praises  and 


The  Krishna  Avatara.  183 


d 


prayers  addressed  to  him  as  supreme.  In  the  Mahabharata, 
however,  Krishna  is  little  more  than  a  great  hero,  excepting  in 
those  passages  which  are  believed  to  be  of  much  later  origin  than 
the  body  of  the  book.  By  the  writers  of  that  age  Krishna  is 
described  as  a  worshipper  of  Siva,  from  whom  he  received  the 
chief  blessings  he  enjoyed. 

Amongst  the  references  to  Krishna  in  the  Mahabharata  are 
the  following  :* — "  Krishna  then  reverenced  Siva  with  voice,  mind, 
understanding,  and  act;"  i.e.  when  he  accompanied  Arjuna  to 
Siva's  abode  to  beg  heavenly  weapons.  Siva  replies  :  "  I  have 
been  duly  worshipped  by  Krishna,  wherefore  no  one  is  dearer  to 
me  than  Krishna."  In  a  hymn  Krishna  thus  praises  Siva  :  "  I 
know  Mahadeva,  and  his  various  works  of  old.  For  he  is  the 
beginning,  middle,  and  end  of  (all)  creatures."  Bhisma  says  : 
"  Through  his  devotion  to  Rudra,  the  world  is  pervaded  by  the 
mighty  Krishna.  This  Madhava  performed  austerities  for  a  full 
thousand  years,  propitiating  Siva,  the  god  who  bestows  boons." 
It  was  through  propitiating  Siva  that  Krishna  had  a  son  by 
Jambavati ;  from  him  he  received  the  discus  Sudarsana,  and  from 
him  he  received  eight  boons,  to  which  Uma  added  eight  others  : 
among  the  eight  granted  by  Siva  were  "  a  hundred  hundreds  of 
sons,"  and  by  Uma  sixteen  thousand  one  hundred  wives.  Ac- 
cording to  Krishna,  Siva  "is  the  most  excellent  of  beings  in  the 
three  worlds."  "  As  he  is  the  greatest  of  gods,  he  is  called 
Mahadeva,  since  he  constantly  prospers  all  men  in  all  their  acts  : 
seeking  their  welfare  (Siva),  he  is  called  Siva." 

The  following  legend  will  show  that  the  belief  in  Krishna's 
divinity  was  not  by  any  means  common  when  the  Mahabharata 
was  written.  When  King  Yudhishthira  offered  a  sacrifice,  it 
was  proposed  that  Krishna,  as  the  greatest  chief  present,  should 
receive  the  presents  that  were  made.  Sisupala  strongly  objected 
to  this,  and  supported  his  objection  by  a  recital  of  Krishna's 
misdeeds.  Krishna  listened  partially  for  a  long  time,  but  at 
last  declared  that  the  time  had  come  when  he  must  slay  his 
detractor.     He  said,  "  I  have  promised  to  forgive  him  a  hundred 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  iv.  184. 


1 S4  The  Puranic  Deities. 

offences — he  has  now  offended  more  than  a  hundred  times  ;"  and 
then  the  never-failing  discus  did  its  work.  In  other  passages  of 
the  Mahabharata,  Siva  praises  Krishna  in  almost  as  extravagant 
language  as  that  employed  by  Krishna  to  him  ;  but  this  atti- 
tude of  Krishna  is  so  thoroughly  opposed  to  his  general  position 
throughout  the  poem,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  these 
passages  were  introduced  when  the  worship  of  Krishna  had  to  a 
large  extent  superseded  that  of  Siva. 

Krishna,  as  described  in  the  Mahabharata,  was  not  above 
employing  deception,  and  leading  others  to  do  it  too.  On  one 
occasion  during  the  great  war  between  the  Kurus  and  Pandavas, 
the  Pandavas  were  in  great  distress,  owing  to  the  bravery  and 
skill  of  a  Kuru  chief  named  Dronacharjya.  This  chief  had  a 
son  whom  he  deeply  loved,  named  Ashwatthama  ;  and  it  was 
thought  that,  if  a  report  could  be  spread  to  the  effect  that  this 
son  was  slain,  his  father  would  be  too  distressed  to  fight. 
Dronacharjya  at  last  heard  the  rumour,  but  refused  to  believe  it 
unless  Yudishthira  confirmed  it.  At  first  the  good  king  refused 
to  speak  an  untruth  ;  but  at  Krishna's  suggestion  he  repeated 
the  words  "  Ashwatthama  is  dead,"  meaning  in  his  own  mind  an 
elephant  of  that  name,  yet  wishing  the  father  to  understand 
them  of  his  son.  The  trick  succeeded  ;  but  the  king  as  a 
punishment  for  his  prevarication  had  to  endure  the  sight  of  the 
lost  in  hell,  as  he  was  being  conducted  to  heaven. 

Amongst  Krishna's  many  names  the  following  are  the  most 
common  : — 

Gopal,  "  The  Cowherd." 

Gopinath,  "The  Lord  of  the  Milkmaids." 

Mathuranath,  "The  Lord  of  Mathura." 


8a.  the  balarama  avatara. 

According  to  some  accounts  of  Vishnu's  incarnations, 
Balarama  is  the  eighth;  Krishna  in  that  case  not  being  called 
an  incarnation,  but  an  appearance  of  the  deity  himself;  whilst, 
according  to  others,  the  two  brothers  together  form  the  eighth, 


The  Balarama  Avatara. 


185 


Krishna  having  been  produced  from  a  black  and  Balarama  from 
a  white  hair  of  Vishnu.  As  they  were  constant  companions 
during  their  stay  on  earth,  many 
of  the  exploits  in  which  Balarama 
shared  have  already  been  narrated 
in  speaking  of  Krishna.  There 
are  a  few  legends,*  however,  re- 
ferring chiefly  to  Balarama. 

Balarama  is  an  incarnation  of 
the  serpent  Sesha,f  who  himself 
was  part  of  Vishnu,  and  thus  is 
said  to  be  "  a  part  of  a  part "  of 
that  deity.  When  appealed  to  by 
the  distressed  gods  to  appear  on 
earth  to  save  them  from  their 
oppressor  Kansa,  Vishnu  a  year 
before  his  own  birth  transferred,  bv 
means  of  Yoganindra,  the  embryo 
of  Balarama  from  Devaki  to  Rohini, 
another  wife  of  Vasudeva,  residing 
at  Gokula,  to  save  it  from  the 
cruel  anger  and  fear  of  Kansa,  who 
had  ordered  the  destruction  of 
Devaki's  children  as  soon  as  they 
were  born,  through  whose  eighth  son  it  had  been  predicted  that 
he  would  meet  with  his  death.  When  about  a  year  old,  this 
child  was  placed  under  the  care  of  a  herdsman  named  Nanda 
and  his  wife  Yasoda,  the  reputed  parents  of  Krishna,  that  the 
two  boys  might  be  brought  up  together  ;  Vasudeva,  on  the  night 


BALARAMA. 


*  '  Vishnu  Purana,'  Book  V. 

t  Sesha  (the  end),  or  Ananta  (endless),  the  serpent  deity,  has  a  thousand 
heads,  and  forms  the  couch  on  which  Vishnu  reposes  during  the  intervals  of 
creation.  The  world  is  said  to  rest  on  the  head  of  Sesha,  who  stands  upon  a 
tortoise  ;  when,  therefore,  the  tortoise  moves  his  feet,  or  Sesha  yawns,  earth- 
quakes result.  It  was  this  serpent  that  formed  the  rope  at  the  churning  of 
the  ocean  :  and  by  fires  that  issue  from  his  body  the  world  is  destroyed  at 
the  end  of  each  age,  or  Kalpa.  He  is  sometimes  called  a  son  of  Kasyapa 
and  KadrUj  a  daughter  of  Daksha. 


1 86  The  Puranic  Deities. 


of  Krishna's  birth,  having  carried  him  to   the  house   of  Nanda, 
and  substituted  him  for  the  infant  daughter  of  these  people. 

Balarama  was  second  only  to  Krishna  in  the  possession  of 
miraculous  powers.  One  day,  as  he  was  with  the  young  cow- 
keepers  in  a  wood,  his  companions  asked  him  to  shake  some 
fruit  trees  belonging  to  a  demon  named  Dhenuka,  that  they  might 
enjoy  the  fruit.  As  he  was  complying  with  this  request,  the 
demon,  in  the  form  of  a  monster  ass,  appeared  ;  and  as  he  tried 
to  kick  Balarama,  the  hero  seized  him  by  his  hind  legs,  swung 
him  round  his  head,  and  threw  him  to  the  ground  with  such  force 
that  he  died  immediately  :  the  dead  body  Balarama  threw  to  the 
top  of  a  palm  tree,  and  the  demon's  relatives  who  came 
to  his  rescue  received  similar  treatment  at  his  hands.  After 
Dhenuka's  death,  his  orchard  became  a  favourite  spot  of  the 
cowherds.  Whilst  the  boys  were  playing  there,  a  demon  named 
Pralamba  came  in  the  form  of  a  boy,  and,  joining  them  in  their 
game,  persuaded  Balarama  to  get  upon  his  shoulders.  No  sooner 
had  he  mounted  than  the  demon  ran  off  with  him,  and  feeling 
the  hero  to  be  heavy  he  increased  his  bulk  until  he  became  like 
a  mountain  in  size,  causing  Balarama  to  tremble  with  fear,  and 
to  call  upon  Krishna  for  help.  Krishna,  reminding  him  of  his 
divine  nature,  says:  "Calling  to  memory  who  thou  art,  O  being 
of  illimitable  might,  destroy  the  demon  yourself.  Suspending  a 
while  your  mortal  character,  do  what  is  right."  Balarama,  acting 
upon  this  advice,  squeezed  the  demon  with  his  knees,  and 
pommelled  him  with  his  fists  so  fiercely  that  he  fell  down 
dead.  When  boxing  with  Kansa's  wrestler  in  the  lists  at 
Mathura,  he  managed  easily  to  slay  his  antagonist. 

After  Balarama  had  dwelt  for  some  time  in  Dwaraka,  a  city 
Krishna  had  provided  for  the  safety  of  the  people  of  Mathura, 
Krishna  sent  him  to  Vraja  to  see  their  old  friends  the  herdsmen, 
with  whom  they  had  been  brought  up  as  boys.  During  his  stay 
there,  Varuna,  addressing  Varuni  his  wife,  said  :  "  Thou,  Madira, 
art  ever  acceptable  to  the  powerful  Ananta  (Sesha)  ;  go  therefore 
and  promote  his  enjoyments."  Thus  ordered  by  her  husband, 
she  took  up  her  abode  in  a  Kadamba  tree  in  the  forest  of 
Vrindavana.     Balarama,    in    his    walks  smelling   the    pleasant 


The  Balarama  Avatar  a.  187 

fragrance  of  the  liquor  produced  from  that  tree,  resumed  his 
ancient  passion  for  strong  drink.  Whilst  in  a  state  of  intoxication 
caused  by  this  juice,  he  called  to  the  river  Yamuna  to  come  to 
him  that  he  might  bathe  in  her,  and,  when  she  refused,  threw 
his  ploughshare  into  the  stream,-  and  dragging  her  towards  him, 
made  her  follow  him  wherever  he  went,  until,  his  anger  being 
appeased,  he  set  her  free. 

On  his  return  to  Dwaraka,  after  this  visit  to  his  friends,  he 
married  Revati,  daughter  of  King  Raivata.  This  king,  wishing 
to  obtain  a  suitable  husband  for  his  daughter,  repaired  to 
Brahma  for  advice,  who,  expatiating  on  the  glories  of  Vishnu, 
detained  his  suppliant  in  heaven  for  ages.  On  returning  to  the 
earth,  he  was  surprised  to  find  that  during  his  long  absence  men 
had  deteriorated  in  goodness,  size,  and  strength ;  but  following 
Brahma's  counsel,  he  went  to  Dwaraka,  and  offered  his  daughter 
as  wife  to  Balarama,  who  accepted  the  offer.  Balarama  was 
astonished  at  her  immense  height,  but  by  the  use  of  his  plough- 
share, however,  managed  to  reduce  her  to  a  proper  size.  On 
one  occasion,  as  Balarama  and  Devaki  were  together,  they  were 
greatly  annoyed  by  a  demon  named  Dwivida,  who  had  the 
power  to  assume  various  forms.  He  came  as  a  monkey,  and  being 
a  source  of  annoyance  to  gods  and  men,  chiefly  through  interrupt- 
ing the  sacrifices,  was  felled  by  a  blow  of  Balarama's  heavy  fist. 

Though  the  brothers  Krishna  and  Balarama  were  generally 
the  best  of  friends,  there  was  once  a  most  violent  quarrel  between 
them.  A  man  named  Satadhanwan  was  suspected  of  stealing 
a  most  valuable  jewel.*  Krishna  and  Balarama  pursuing  him, 
came  to  a  part  of  the  country  where  the  roads  were  so  bad  that 
the  horses  could  not  drag  the  chariot ;  Balarama  therefore  re- 
mained with  the  chariot,  whilst  Krishna  followed  the  supposed 
thief  on  foot.  When  within  reach,  the  never-missing  discus  was 
thrown,  and  the  man  fell  headless,  but  the  gem  was  not  to  be 
found.  On  Krishna's  return  to  the  chariot  without  the  jewel, 
believing  that  he  had  stolen  it,  Balarama  "  flew  into  a  violent 
rage,  and  said  to  Vasudeva  :  '  Shame  light  upon  you  to  be  thus 

*  For  a  fuller  account  of  this  jewel,  see  p.  175. 


iSS 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


greedy  of  wealth  !  I  acknowledge  no  brotherhood  with  you. 
Here  lies  my  path  ;  go  whither  you  please,  I  have  done  with 
you,  with  Dvvaraka,  with  all  our  house.  It  is  of  no  use  to  seek 
to  impose  on  me  with  thy  perjuries."  Balarama  proceeded 
to  Videha,  where  for  three  years  he  remained  the  guest  of 
King  Janaka,  until  his  anger  was  appeased,  when,  acknow- 
ledging that  he  had  misjudged  his  brother,  he  returned  to 
his  home  at  Dwaraka. 

When  Krishna's  work  on  earth  was  done,  and,  except  the 
two  brothers,  their  whole  race  had  in  fulfilment  of  a  curse  been 
destroyed,  as  they  were  talking  under  a  tree,  a  serpent  glided 
from  Balarama's  mouth  and  made  its  way  to  the  sea,  leaving 
the  body  lifeless,  whilst  Krishna  soon  afterwards  fell  pierced 
by  the  arrow  of  a  huntsman  who  mistook  him  for  a  deer. 


9.    TrtE   BUDDHA   AVATARA. 


D  H  A. 


This    incarnation    of    Vishnu    is 
"originally  foreign  to  the  cycle  of 
the  Avataras  of  Vishnu,  and  there- 
fore is  only  briefly  alluded    to   in 
some  of  the  Puranas.     Where  this 
is  done,  the    intention    must    have 
been  to  effect  a  compromise  between 
Brahmanism    and    Buddhism,    by 
trying  to  represent   the    latter   re- 
ligion as    not    irreconcilably    anta- 
gonistic to   the  former."  *    Colonel 
Kennedy,f  on  the  other  hand,  argues 
that    the  Buddha   of  the   Puranas 
and    Buddha    the    founder   of  the 
Buddhist  system   of  religion    have 
nothing  in  common  but  the  name, 
and  that  the  attempted  identifica- 
tion   of  these    two    is    simply    the 


Goldstiickcr.  Chambers's  Cyclopaedia. 


f  'Hindu  Myth.'  p.  248. 


The  Buddha  Avatara. 


189 


work  of  European  scholars,  who  have  not  been  sufficiently  care- 
ful to  collect  information,  and  to  weigh  the  evidence  they  have 


BUDDHIST   TEMPLE   AND   DAGOBA   AT    KELANIYA,   CEYLON. 

had   before   them.      There   can   be   little    doubt   that    Colonel 
Kennedy's  view  is  untenable.    Seeing  the  bitter  antagonism  that 


1 90  The  Puranic  Deities. 

existed  between  the  advocates  of  the  rival  systems,  it  need 
occasion  no  surprise  that  full  accounts  of  Buddha  are  not  to  be 
found  in  Brahmanical  books,  nor  that  the  meagre  accounts  that 
are  there  should  try  to  represent  him  as  a  most  despicable 
character.  The  Brahmanical  writers  were  far  too  shrewd  to 
admit  that  one  who  could  influence  men  as  Buddha  did  could  be 
other  than  an  incarnation  of  deity  ;  and  as  his  influence  was  in 
favour  of  teaching  opposed  to  their  own,  which  was  for  a  time 
prohibited  throughout  the  country,  they  cleverly  say  that  it  was 
to  mislead  the  enemies  of  the  gods  that  Buddha  promulgated 
his  doctrine,  that  they,  becoming  weak  and  wicked  through  their 
errors,  might  fall  an  easy  prey. 

The  Puranic  account  of  Buddha  will  be  given,  supplemented 
by  further  particulars  of  his  life  and  work  from  Buddhist 
writings. 

In  the  '  Bhagavata  Purana '  *  are  only  four  short  passages 
respecting  Buddha.  "  At  the  commencement  of  the  Kali-yuga 
will  Vishnu  .become  incarnate  in  Kikata,  under  the  name  of 
Buddha,  the  son  of  Jina,  for  the  purpose  of  deluding  the  enemies 
of  the  gods."  "  The  Undiscernible  Being,  having  assumed  a 
mortal  form,  preached  heretical  doctrines  in  the  three  cities 
founded  by  Maya  (and  in  Kasi),  for  the  purpose  of  destroying, 
by  deluding  them,  the  enemies  of  the  gods,  steadfast  in  the 
religion  prescribed  by  the  Vedas."  "  Praise  to  the  pure  Buddha, 
the  deluder  of  the  Daityas  and  the  Danavas."  "By  his  words, 
as  Buddha,  Vishnu  deludes  the  heretics." 

In  the  Skanda,t  the  legend,  of  which  the  Bhagavata  gives  but 
the  merest  outline,  is  more  fully  given.  There  was  a  dire 
famine  in  the  earth,  owing  to  the  failure  of  the  rains  for  six 
successive  years  ;  on  this  account  Brahma  in  great  distress 
visited  a  prince  named  Ripanjaya,  and  told  him  that  if  he 
would  become  king,  the  gods  would  serve  him,  and  his  name 
should  be  changed  to  Divodasa.  On  asking  why  he  is  chosen 
lu  fore  nil  others,  Brahma  tells  him  :  "  All  other  kings  are  wicked, 
and  the   gods  will   not   shower  rain  upon  the  earth  unless  you 


*  i 


Hindu  Myth.'  p.  250.  f   Ibid.  p.  423. 


The  Buddha  Avatara.  191 

accept  the  government."  Divodasa  accedes  to  Brahma's  request 
on  condition  that  that  deity  would  assist  him  and  that  all  the 
other  gods  would  forsake  the  earth,  so  that  he  might  reign  with- 
out a  rival,  and  be  the  only  one  who  could  confer  happiness 
on  men.  Brahma,  in  fulfilling  this  condition,  with  some  diffi- 
culty persuaded  Siva  to  forsake  Kasi  (Benares),  his  favourite 
dwelling-place. 

Divodasa  fixed  his  throne  at  Kasi,  where  for  8000  years  he 
ruled  with  the  greatest  benefit  to  men  ;  but  the  gods  being 
jealous  of  his  power  went  to  Vrihaspati,  their  preceptor,  and, 
whilst  they  spoke  well  of  the  effects  of  the  king's  government, 
complained  that  he,  and  not  the  gods,  were  benefited  by  it. 
Siva  especially  was  annoyed  at  his  enforced  absence  from  Kasi ; 
for  although  he  sent  several  times  to  make  inquiries  about  its 
inhabitants,  his  messengers  were  too  happy  on  earth  to  return 
to  their  lord  in  heaven.  Vishnu,  accompanied  by  Lakshmi  and 
Garuda,  at  Siva's  request,  "  then  proceeded  to  Kasi,  a  little  to 
the  north  of  which  he  formed  by  his  divine  power  a  pleasant 
abode  named  Dharmakshetra,  and  there,  attended  by  his  lovely 
spouse,  did  he  reside  under  the  form  of  Buddha,  while  Lakshmi 
became  a  female  recluse  of  that  sect.  Garuda  also  appeared 
under  the  name  of  Panyakirti,  as  a  pupil  with  a  book  in  his 
hand,  and  attentively  listening  to  the  delusive  instructions  of  his 
preceptor  (Buddha),  who  with  a  low,  sweet,  and  affectionate 
voice  taught  him  various  branches  of  natural  and  supernatural 
religion." 

Vishnu,  as  Buddha,  taught  that  "  the  universe  was  without  a 
creator ;  it  is  false  therefore  to  assert  that  there  is  one  universal 
and  Supreme  Spirit,  for  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Rudra,  and  the  rest 
are  names  of  mere  corporeal  beings  like  ourselves.  Death  is  a 
peaceful  sleep :  why  fear  it  ? "  He  further  taught  that  "  we 
should  guard  as  our  own  life  the  life  of  another  ;  that  pleasure 
is  the  only  heaven,  and  pain  the  only  hell,  and  liberation 
from  ignorance  the  sole  beatitude.  Sacrifices  are  acts  of 
folly."  Through  the  exertions  of  Panyakirti,  these  doctrines 
soon  spread  throughout  the  city ;  whilst  Lakshmi  deluded  the 
women   by  teaching  them   to   "  place   all   happiness   in   sensual 


192  The  Puranic  Deities. 


pleasures  ;  as  the  body  must  decay,  let  us,  before  it  becomes 
dust,  enjoy  the  pleasures  which  it  gives.  The  distinction  of 
castes  has  been  vainly  imagined."  As  Lakshmi  gave  numerous 
boons  to  her  disciples,  her  influence  was  great,  and  her  teaching 
spread  widely. 

As  a  result  of  the  dissemination  of  these  doctrines  in  the 
city,  Divodasa  became  dispirited,  to  whom  Vishnu  in  the 
form  of  a  Brahman  now  appeared,  and  hears  from  him  an 
account  of  his  troubles,  and  the  expression  of  a  wish  to  resign 
his  crown.  The  king  mentions  a  number  of  cases  in  which 
virtuous  men  have  had  to  suffer,  owing  to  the  power  of  the  gods, 
and  inquires  how  he  can  obtain  final  beatitude.  Vishnu  informs 
him  that  he  has  acted  unwisely  in  compelling  Siva  to  forsake 
Kasi,  and  advises  him  to  consecrate  an  image  of  Siva,  by 
worshipping  which  he  will  obtain  the  fulfilment  of  his  desires. 
Divodasa  follows  this  counsel,  inaugurates  his  son  as  king,  and, 
as  he  is  worshipping  the  Linga  he  had  set  up,  Siva  appears  and 
conducts  him  to  Kailasa  (Siva's  heaven).  It  is  the  common 
belief  of  the  people  in  the  west  of  India,  that  when  Vishnu  had 
effected  the  apostasy  of  Divodasa,  having  been  prevailed  upon 
to  terminate  the  propagation  of  his  heretical  opinions,  he  dis- 
appeared in  a  deep  well  at  Gya. 

The  following  legend  from  the  '  Siva  Purana  '  *  gives  another 
reason  for  the  rise  of  Buddhism.  A  famous  Rishi  named  Gau- 
tama, with  his  virtuous  wife  named  Ahalya,  performed  during 
a  thousand  years  a  severe  tapas  (penance)  in  the  southern 
country  near  the  mountain  Brahmadri.  During  this  time  there 
was  a  severe  drought,  to  remove  which,  Gautama  worshipped 
Varuna  for  six  months  with  great  fervour,  when  the  deity, 
appearing,  promised  to  grant  any  boon  that  should  be  asked. 
Gautama  asked  for  rain,  but  Varuna  said,  "  How  can  I  transgress 
the  divine  command  ?  Ask  some  boon  which  it  is  in  my  power 
to  grant."  Gautama  then  asked  that  Varuna  would  cause  a 
surpassingly  beautiful  hermitage  to  appear,  shaded  from  the 
sun  by  fragrant   and  fruit-bearing  trees,   where    holy  men  and 


Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Myth.'  p.  253. 


The  Buddha  Avatara.  193 

women  by  holy  meditation  shall  be  liberated  from  pain,  sorrow, 
and  anxiety  ;  "  and  as  thou  art  lord  of  water,  let  it  enjoy  a 
perennial  fountain."  Varuna  granted  this  request,  and  the 
hermitage  of  Gautama  became  "the  loveliest  on  the  terres- 
trial orb." 

One  day  as  the  disciples  of  Gautama  went  to  the  fountain  some 
Brahman  women  tried  to  prevent  them  from  drawing  water  until 
they  had  filled  their  own  pots.  Ahalya  going  herself  was  sub- 
jected daily  to  the  same  annoyance:  the  Brahman  women 
would  not  allow  her  to  draw  water  before  they  had  themselves 
obtained  all  they  required.  These  women,  not  satisfied  with 
annoying  the  ascetics,  complained  to  their  husbands  of  the 
unkind  treatment  they  alleged  they  had  received  from  Ahalya. 
Their  husbands  resorted  to  Ganesa  for  advice,  who  being  pleased 
with  their  devotion  promised  a  boon  ;  they  asked  that  Gautama 
might  be  made  to  leave  his  hermitage  without  their  incurring 
the  sin  of  driving  him  away.  To  this  Ganesa  reluctantly 
consented  ;  and  in  order  to  effect  this  object  Ganesa  transformed 
himself  into  a  poor  debilitated  cow,  and  walked  into  a  field  of 
rice  where  Gautama  was  standing  and  began  to  eat  the  grain. 
The  sage,  knowing  nothing  of  this  disguise,  took  up  a  straw  and 
tried  to  drive  the  cow  away  ;  no  sooner  did  he  touch  it  than  it 
fell  down  dead.  Having  incurred  the  enormous  guilt  of  killing 
a  cow,  the  poor  man  had  to  leave  the  neighbourhood. 

Gautama  and  his  wife  removed  to  a  distance  ;  but  until  he 
had  expiated  his  sin,  they  could  not  perform  any  acceptable 
worship.  Gautama  seeks  the  Brahmans,  and  asking  how  he  can 
be  free  from  his  crime,  is  told  to  walk  round  the  mountain  of 
Brahma  a  hundred  times  ;  bathe  in  the  Ganges,  and  consecrate 
and  worship  ten  million  images  of  Siva.  As  he  is  worshipping 
Siva,  the  deity,  delighted  with  the  man's  earnestness,  appears, 
informs  him  of  the  trick  by  which  Ganesa  had  driven  him 
from  the  hermitage,  and  brings  the  Ganges  so  near  that  he  can 
bathe  in  it  easily.  Tradition  says  that  Gautama  was  so 
disgusted  with  the  conduct  of  the  Brahmans  that  he  separated 
himself  from  their  communion,  and  established  a  new  system  of 
religion,  which  for  a  time  eclipsed  Brahmanism. 

O 


194 


The  Puraxic  Deities. 


The  following  extracts,  giving  an  account  of  Buddha,  are  from 
the  '  Lalita-Vistara,'*  a  Buddhist  work  from  which  M.  Barthelemy 

St.  Hilaire  has  taken  the  materials 
for  his  work  '  La  Boudda  et  sa 
Religion.' 

"Buddha,  or  more  correctly  The 
Buddha — for  Buddha  is  an  appel- 
lative, meaning  enlightened — was 
born  at  Kapilavastu,  the  capital 
of  a  kingdom  of  that  name, 
situated  at  the  foot  of  the  moun- 
tains of  Nepal,  north  of  the  present 
Oude.  His  father,  the  King  of 
Kapilavastu,  was  of  the  family  of 
the  Sakyas,  and  belonged  to  the 
clan  of  the  Gautamas.  His 
mother  wras  Mayadevi,  daughter 
of  King  Suprabuddha,  and  need 
we  say  that  she  was  beautiful,  as 
he  was  powerful  and  just? 
Buddha  was  therefore  by  birth  of  the  Kshattriya,  or  warrior  caste, 
and  he  took  the  name  of  Sakya  from  his  family,  and  that  of 
Gautama  from  his  clan,  claiming  a  kind  of  spiritual  relationship 
with  the  honoured  race  of  Gautamas.  The  name  of  Buddha,  or 
The  Buddha,  dates  from  a  later  period  of  his  life,  and  so  probably 
does  Siddhartha  (he  whose  objects  have  been  accomplished), 
though  we  are  told  that  it  was  given  him  in  his  childhood.  His 
mother  died  seven  days  after  his  birth,  and  the  father  confided 
the  child  to  the  care  of  his  deceased  wife's  sister,  who,  however, 
had  been  his  wife  even  before  the  mother's  death.  The  child 
grew  up  a  most  beautiful  and  most  accomplished  boy,  who  soon 
knew  more  than  his  masters  could  teach  him.  He  refused  to 
take  part  in  the  games  of  his  playmates,  and  never  felt  so  happy 
as    when    he    could    sit    alone,   lost   in   meditation   in   the   deep 


BUDDHA. 


shadows  of  the  forest.     It  was  there  that  his  father  found  him 


.Max  Muller,  '  Chips,'  vol.  i.  p.  210  ft. 


The  Buddha  Avatara.  195 

when  he  had  thought  him  lost ;  and,  in  order  to  prevent  the 
young  prince  from  becoming  a  dreamer,  the  king  determined 
to  marry  him  at  once.  When  the  subject  was  mentioned  by  the 
aged  ministers  to  the  future  heir  to  the  throne,  he  demanded 
seven  days  for  reflection,  and,  convinced  at  last  that  not  even 
marriage  could  disturb  the  calm  of  his  mind,  he  allowed  the 
ministers  to  look  out  for  a  princess.  The  princess  selected 
was  the  beautiful  Gopa,  the  daughter  of  Dandapani.  Though 
her  father  objected  at  first  to  her  marrying  a  young  prince  who 
was  represented  to  him  as  deficient  in  manliness  and  intellect, 
he  gladly  gave  his  consent  when  he  saw  the  royal  suitor 
distancing  all  his  rivals  in  feats  of  arms  and  power  of  mind. 
Their  marriage  proved  one  of  the  happiest,  but  the  prince 
remained,  as  he  had  been  before,  absorbed  in  meditations  on  the 
problems  of  life  and  death.  ■  Nothing  is  stable  on  earth,'  he 
used  to  say,  '  nothing  is  real.  Life  is  like  the  spark  produced 
by  the  friction  of  wood.  It  is  lighted  and  is  extinguished — we 
know  not  whence  it  came  or  whither  it  goes.  It  is  like  the 
sound  of  a  lyre,  and  the  wise  man  asks  in  vain  from  whence  it 
came  and  whither  it  goes.  There  must  be  some  supreme 
intelligence  where  we  can  find  rest.  If  I  attained  it,  I  could 
bring  light  to  man  ;  if  I  were  free  myself,  I  could  deliver  the 
world.'  The  king,  who  perceived  the  melancholy  mood  of  the 
young  prince,  tried  everything  to  divert  him  from  his  specula- 
tions ;  but  all  was  in  vain.  Three  of  the  most  ordinary  events 
that  could  happen  to  any  man,  proved  of  the  utmost  importance 
in  the  career  of  Buddha. 

"  One  day,  when  the  prince  with  a  large  retinue  was  driving 
through  the  Eastern  gate  of  the  city  on  the  way  to  one  of  his 
parks,  he  met  on  the  road  an  old  man,  broken  and  decrepit. 
One  could  see  the  veins  and  muscles  over  the  whole  of  his  body  ; 
his  teeth  chattered,  he  was  covered  with  wrinkles,  bald,  and 
hardly  able  to  utter  hollow  and  unmelodious  sounds.  He  was 
bent  on  his  stick,  and  all  his  limbs  and  joints  trembled.  'Who 
is  this  man  ? '  said  the  prince  to  his  coachman.  '  He  is  small 
and  weak,  his  flesh  and  his  blood  are  dried  up,  his  muscles  stick 
to  his  skin,  his  teeth  chatter,  his  body  is  wasted  away  ;  leanin 

O  2 


196  The  Puranic  Deities. 

on  his  stick,  he  is  hardly  able  to  walk,  stumbling  at  every  step. 
Is  there  something  peculiar  in  his  family,  or  is  this  the  common 
lot  of  all  created  beings  ? ' 

" '  Sir,'  replied  the  coachman,  '  that  man  is  sinking  under  old 
age,  his  senses  have  become  obscure,  suffering  has  destroyed  his 
strength,  and  he  is  despised  by  his  relations.  He  is  without 
support  and  useless,  and  people  have  abandoned  him,  like  a 
dead  tree  in  a  forest.  But  this  is  not  peculiar  to  his  family.  In 
every  creature  youth  is  defeated  by  old  age.  Your  father,  your 
mother,  all  your  relations,  all  your  friends,  will  come  to  the  same 
state  :  this  is  the  appointed  end  of  all  creatures.' 

"  '  Alas  ! '  replied  the  prince, '  are  creatures  so  ignorant,  so  weak 
and  foolish,  as  to  be  proud  of  the  youth  by  which  they  are  in- 
toxicated, not  seeing  the  old  age  which  awaits  them  ?  As  for  me, 
I  go  away.  Coachman,  turn  my  chariot  quickly.  What  am  I,  the 
future  prey  of  old  age — what  have  I  to  do  with  pleasure  ? '  and 
the  young  prince  returned  to  the  city  without  going  to  the  park. 

"Another  time  the  prince  was  driving  through  the  Southern 
gate  to  his  pleasure  garden,  when  he  perceived  in  the  road  a 
man  suffering  from  illness,  parched  with  fever,  his  body  wasted, 
covered  with  mud,  without  a  friend,  without  a  home,  hardly  able 
to  breathe,  and  frightened  at  the  sight  of  himself  and  the 
approach  of  death.  Having  questioned  his  coachman,  and 
received  from  him  the  answer  which  he  expected,  the  young 
prince  said  :  '  Alas  !  health  is  but  the  sport  of  a  dream,  and  the 
fear  of  suffering  must  take  this  frightful  form.  Where  is  the  wise 
man,  who,  after  having  seen  what  he  is,  could  any  longer  think  of 
joy  and  pleasure  ? '  The  prince  turned  his  chariot,  and  returned 
to  the  city. 

"  A  third  time  he  was  driving  to  his  pleasure-garden  through 
the  Western  gate,  when  he  saw  a  dead  body  on  the  road,  lying  on 
a  bier  and  covered  with  a  cloth.  The  friends  stood  about  crying, 
sobbing,  tearing  their  hair,  covering  their  heads  with  dust, 
striking  their  breasts,  and  uttering  wild  cries.  The  prince,  again 
calling  his  coachman  to  witness  this  painful  scene,  exclaimed : 
4  Oh  !  woe  to  youth,  which  must  be  destroyed  by  old  age !  Woe 
to   health,    which  must    be  destroyed    by    so    many    diseases ! 


The  Buddha  Avatara.  197 


Woe  to  this  life,  where  a  man  must  remain  for  so  short  a  time  ! 
Then  betraying  for  the  first  time  his  intentions,  the  young  prince 
said,  'Let  us  turn  back,  I  must  think  how  to  accomplish  deliverance.' 

"  A  last  meeting  put  an  end  to  his  hesitation.  He  was  driving 
through  the  Northern  gate  on  the  way  to  his  pleasure-gardens, 
when  he  saw  a  mendicant  who  appeared  outwardly  calm,  subdued, 
looking  downwards,  wearing  with  an  air  of  dignity  his  religious 
vestment  and  carrying  an  alms-bowl. 

"  '  Who  is  this  man  ? '  asked  the  prince. 

"'Sir,'  replied  the  coachman,  'this  man  is  one  of  those  who 
are  called  bhikshus  or  mendicants.  He  has  renounced  all  plea- 
sures, all  desires,  and  leads  a  life  of  austerity.  He  tries  to  conquer 
himself.  He  has  become  a  devotee.  Without  passion,  without 
envy,  he  walks  about  asking  for  alms.' 

"  'This  is  good  and  well  said,'  replied  the  prince.  'The  life 
of  a  devotee  has  always  been  praised  by  the  wise.  It  will  be 
my  refuge,  and  the  refuge  of  all  other  creatures.  It  will  lead  us 
to  a  real  life,  to  happiness  and  immortality.'  With  these  words, 
the  young  prince  turned  his  chariot  and  returned  to  the  city. 

"  After  having  declared  to  his  father  and  his  wife  his  intention 
of  retiring  from  the  world,  Buddha  left  his  palace  one  night  when 
all  the  guards  that  were  to  have  watched  him  were  asleep.  After 
travelling  the  whole  night,  he  gave  his  horse  and  his  ornaments 
to  his  groom,  and  sent  him  back  to  Kapilavastu.  'A  monument,' 
remarks  the  author  of  the  '  Lalita-Vistara,'  '  is  still  to  be  seen  on 
the  spot  where  the  coachman  turned  back.'  Hiouen  Thsang  saw 
the  same  monument  at  the  edge  of  a  large  forest,  on  his  road  to 
Kusinagara,  a  city  now  in  ruins,  and  situated  about  fifty  miles 
E.S.E.  from  Gorakpore. 

"  Buddha  first  went  to  Vaisali,  and  became  the  pupil  of  a 
famous  Brahman,  who  had  gathered  round  him  300  disciples. 
Having  learnt  all  that  the  Brahman  could  teach  him,  Buddha 
went  away  disappointed.  He  had  not  found  the  road  to  salva- 
tion. He  then  tried  another  Brahman  at  Rajagriha,  the  capital 
of  Magadha  or  Behar,  who  had  700  disciples,  and  there,  too,  he 
looked  in  vain  for  the  means  of  deliverance.  He  left  him,  followed 
by  five  of  his  fellow-students,  and  for  six  years  retired  into  soli- 


198  The  Puranic  Deities. 


tudc,  near  a  village  named  Uruvilva,  subjecting  himself  to  the 
most  severe  penances,  previous  to  his  appearing  in  the  world  as  a 
teacher.  At  the  end  of  this  period,  however,  he  arrived  at  the 
conviction  that  asceticism,  far  from  giving  peace  of  mind  and 
preparing  the  way  to  salvation,  was  a  snare  and  a  stumbling- 
block  in  the  way  of  truth.  He  gave  up  his  exercises,  and  was  at 
once  deserted  as  an  apostate  by  his  five  disciples.  Left  to  him- 
self, he  now  began  to  elaborate  his  own  system.  He  had  learned 
that  neither  the  doctrines  nor  the  austerities  of  the  Brahmans 
were  of  any  avail  for  accomplishing  the  deliverance  of  man,  and 
ft  >r  freeing  him  from  the  fear  of  old  age,  disease,  and  death.  After 
long  meditations  and  ecstatic  visions,  he  at  last  imagined  that  he 
had  arrived  at  that  true  knowledge  which  discloses  the  cause,  and 
thereby  destroys  the  fear,  of  all  the  changes  inherent  in  life.  It 
was  from  the  moment  when  he  arrived  at  this  knowledge  that  he 
claimed  the  name  of  Buddha  the  enlightened.  Buddha  hesitated 
for  a  time  whether  he  should  keep  his  knowledge  to  himself  or 
communicate  it  to  the  world.  Compassion  for  the  sufferings  of 
man  prevailed,  and  the  young  prince  became  the  founder  of  a 
religion,  which  after  more  than  2000  years  is  still  professed  by 
455,000,000  of  human  beings. 

"  The  further  history  of  the  new  teacher  is  very  simple.  He 
pr<  >ceeded  to  Benares,  which  at  all  times  has  been  the  principal  seat 
of  learning  in  India,  and  the  first  converts  he  made  were  the  five 
fellow-students  who  had  left  him  when  he  threw  off  the  yoke  of 
the  Brahmanical  observances.  Many  others  followed,  but  as  the 
'  Lalita-Vistara'  breaks  off  at  Buddha's  arrival  at  Benares,  we 
have  no  further  consecutive  account  of  the  rapid  progress  of  his 
doctrine.  From  what  we  can  gather  from  scattered  notices  in 
the  Buddhist  canon,  he  was  invited  by  the  King  of  Magadha, 
Bimbi  ara,  to  his  capital,  Rajagriha.  Many  of  his  lectures  are 
represented  as  having  been  delivered  at  the  monastery  of 
Kalavataka,  with  which  the  king  or  some  rich  merchant  had 
presented  him  ;  others  on  the  Vulture  Peak,  one  of  the  five  hills 
which  surround  that  ancient  capital. 

"  Three  of  his  most  famous  disciples — Sariputra,  Katyayana, 
and  Maudgalyayana — joined  him  during  his  stay  in  Magadha, 


The  Buddha  Avatara.  199 

where  he  enjoyed  for  many  years  the  friendship  of  the  king.  The 
king  was  afterwards  assassinated  by  his  son  Ajatasatru,  and  then 
we  hear  of  Buddha  as  settled  for  a  time  at  Sravasti,  north  of  the 
Ganges.  Most  of  Buddha's  lectures  were  delivered  at  Sravasti, 
the  capital  of  Kosala,  and  the  King  of  Kosala  himself,  Prasenagit, 
became  a  convert  to  his  doctrine.  After  an  absence  of  twelve 
years,  we  are  told  that  Buddha  visited  his  father  at  Kapilavastu, 
on  which  occasion  he  performed  several  miracles,  and  converted 
all  the  Sakyas  to  his  faith.  His  own  wife  became  one  of  his 
followers,  and,  with  his  aunt,  offers  the  first  instance  of  female 
Buddhist  devotees  in  India. 

"  We  have  fuller  particulars  again  of  the  last  days  of  Buddha's 
life.  He  had  attained  the  good  age  of  threescore  years  and  ten, 
and  had  been  on  a  visit  to  Rajagriha,  where  the  king  Ajatasatru, 
the  former  enemy  of  Buddha  and  the  assassin  of  his  own  father, 
had  joined  the  congregation,  after  making  a  public  confession  of 
his  crimes.  On  his  return  he  was  followed  by  a  large  number  of 
disciples,  and  when  on  the  point  of  crossing  the  Ganges,  he  stood 
on  a  square  stone,  and  turning  his  eyes  back  towards  Rajagriha, 
he  said,  full  of  emotion,  '  This  is  the  last  time  that  I  shall  see  that 
city.'  He  likewise  visited  Vaisali,  and,  after  taking  leave  of  it,  he 
had  nearly  reached  the  city  of  Kusinagara,  when  his  vital  strength 
began  to  fail.  He  halted  in  a  forest,  and,  while  sitting  under 
a  Sal  tree,  he  gave  up  the  ghost,  or,  as  a  Buddhist  would  say, 
entered  into  Nirvana." 

The   following  verses  by  Dr.  Muir  *  are  a  translation  of  part 

of  the  '  Lalita-Vistara,'  from  which  the  quotations  given  above 

were  made : 

"On  Himalaya's  lonely  steep 

There  lived  of  old  an  holy  sage, 
Of  shrivelled  form,  and  bent  with  age, 
Inured  to  meditation  deep. 

"  He — when  great  Buddha  had  been  born, 
The  glory  of  the  Sakya  race, 
Endowed  with  every  holy  grace, 
To  save  the  suffering  world  forlorn — 

*  O.  S.  T.,  ii.  496. 


200  The  Puranic  Deities. 

"  Beheld  strange  portents,  signs  which  taught 
The  wise  that  that  auspicious  time 
Had  witnessed  some  event  sublime, 
With  universal  blessing  fraught. 

"  The  sky  with  joyful  gods  was  thronged  : 
He  heard  their  voice  with  glad  acclaim 
Resounding  loudly  Buddha's  name, 
While  echoes  clear  their  shouts  prolonged. 

"  The  cause  exploring,  far  and  wide 
The  sage's  vision  ranged  ;  with  awe, 
Within  a  cradle  laid,  he  saw 
Far  off  the  babe,  the  Sakyas'  pride. 

"  With  longing  seized  this  child  to  view 
At  hand,  and  clasp,  and  homage  pay, 
Athwart  the  sky  he  took  his  way 
By  magic  art,  and  swan-like  flew  ; 

"  And  came  to  King  Suddhodan's  gates  ; 
And  entrance  craved — '  Go,  royal  page, 
And  tell  thy  lord  an  ancient  sage 
To  see  the  king  permission  waits. 


"  The  page  obeyed,  and  joined  his  hands 
Before  the  prince,  and  said — '  A  sage 
Of  shrivelled  form,  and  bowed  with  age, 
Before  the  gate,  my  sovereign,  stands, 


u  i 


And  humbly  asks  to  see  the  king.' 
To  whom  Suddhddan  cried — '  We  greet 
All  such  with  joy  ;  with  honour  meet 

The  holy  man  before  us  bring  ! 

"  The  saint  beside  the  monarch  stood, 

And  spake  his  blessing — 'Thine  be  health, 
With  length  of  life,  and  might,  and  wealth  ; 
And  ever  seek  thy  people's  good.' 

'•  With  .ill  due  forms  and  meet  respect 
The  king  receivi  d  the  holy  man 
And  bade  him  sit  ;   and  then  began  — 
'  Great  sage,  I  do  not  recollect 


The  Buddha  Avatara.  201 

"  '  That  I  thy  venerable  face 

Have  ever  seen  before  ;  allow 
That  I  inquire  what  brings  thee  now 
From  thy  far  distant  dwelling-place.' 


a  i 


a  . 


To  see  thy  babe,'  the  saint  replies, 
'  I  come  from  Himalaya's  steeps.' 
The  king  rejoins,  '  My  infant  sleeps  ; 

A  moment  wait  until  he  rise.' 

Such  great  ones  ne'er,'  the  Rishi  spake, 
'  In  torpor  long  their  senses  steep, 
Nor  softly  love  luxurious  sleep  ; 

The  infant  prince  will  soon  awake.' 


"  The  wondrous  child,  alert  to  rise, 
At  will  his  slumbers  light  dispelled. 
His  father's  arms  the  infant  held 
Before  the  sage's  longing  eyes. 

"  The  babe  beholding,  passing  bright, 
More  glorious  than  the  race  divine,  - 
And  marked  with  every  noble  sign, 
The  saint  was  whelmed  with  deep  delight ; 

"  And  crying — '  Lo  !  an  infant  graced 
With  every  charm  of  form  I  greet ! ' 
He  fell  before  the  Buddha's  feet, 
With  fingers  joined,  and  round  him  paced. 

"  Next  round  the  babe  his  arms  he  wound, 
And  '  one,'  he  said,  '  of  two  careers 
Of  fame  awaits  in  coming  years 
The  child  in  whom  these  signs  are  found. 


..  . 


..  . 


If  such  an  one  at  home  abide, 

He  shall  become  a  king,  whose  sway 
Supreme  a  mighty  armed  array 

On  earth  shall  'stablish  far  and  wide. 

If,  spurning  worldly  pomp  as  vain, 
He  choose  to  lead  a  tranquil  life, 
And  wander  forth  from  home  and  wife, 

He  then  a  Buddha's  rank  shall  gain.' 


202  The  Puranic  Deities. 

"He  spoke,  and  on  the  infant  gazed, 
When  tears  suffused  his  aged  eyes  ; 
His  bosom  heaved  with  heavy  sighs  ; 
Then  King  Suddhodan  asked,  amazed  — 

" '  Say,  holy  man,  what  makes  thee  weep 
And  deeply  sigh  ?  Does  any  fate 
Malign  the  child  await? 
May  heavenly  powers  my  infant  keep  !  ' 

" '  For  thy  fair  infant's  weal  no  fears 

Disturb  me,  king,'  the  Rishi  cried  ; 
'  No  ill  can  such  a  child  betide  ; 
My  own  sad  lot  commands  my  tears. 

"'In  every  grace  complete,  thy  son 

Of  truth  shall  perfect  insight  gain, 
And  far  sublimer  fame  attain 
Than  ever  lawgiver  has  won. 

"  '  He  such  a  wheel  of  sacred  lore 
Shall  speed  on  earth  to  roll, 
As  yet  hath  never  been  in  motion  set 
By  priest,  or  sage,  or  god  of  yore. 

"  '  The  world  of  men  and  gods  to  bless, 
The  way  of  rest  and  peace  to  teach, 
A  holy  law  thy  son  shall  preach  — 
A  law  of  stainless  righteousness. 


a  i 


By  him  shall  suffering  men  be  freed 

From  weakness,  sickness,  pain,  and  grief; 
From  all  the  ills  shall  find  relief 

Which  hatred,  love,  illusion  breed. 


"  '  His  hands  shall  loose  the  chains  of  all 

Who  groan  in  earthly  bonds  confined  ; 
With  healing  touch  the  wounds  shall  bind 
Of  those  whom  pain's  sharp  arrows  gall. 

"'  His  words  of  power  shall  put  to  flight 
The  dull  array  of  leaden  clouds 
Which  helpless  mortals'  vision  shrouds 
And  clear  their  intellectual  sight. 


U  I 


a  . 


The  Buddha'  Avatara.  203 


By  him  shall  men,  who,  now  untaught, 
In  devious  paths  of  error  stray, 
Be  led  to  find  a  perfect  way — 

To  final  calm  at  last  be  brought. 

But  once,  O  king,  in  many  years, 
The  fig-tree  somewhere  flowers,  perhaps  ; 
So,  after  countless  ages  lapse, 

A  Buddha  once  on  earth  appears. 


"  '  And  now,  at  length,  this  blessed  time 
Has  come  :  for  he,  who  cradled  lies 
An  infant  there  before  thine  eyes, 
Shall  be  a  Buddha  in  his  prime. 


a  c 


a  i 


Full,  perfect  insight  gaining,  he 
Shall  rescue  endless  myriads  tost 
On  life's  rough  ocean  waves,  and  lost, 

And  grant  them  immortality. 

But  I  am  old,  and  frail,  and  worn  ; 
I  shall  not  live  the  day  to  see 
When  this  thy  wondrous  child  shall  free 

From  woe  the  suffering  world  forlorn. 

'Tis  thus  mine  own  unhappy  fate 

Which  bids  me  mourn,  and  weep,  and  sigh 
The  Buddha's  triumph  now  is  nigh, 

But,  ah  !  for  me  it  comes  too  late  ! ' 


"  When  thus  the  aged  saint,  inspired, 
Had  all  the  infant's  greatness  told, 
The  king  his  wondrous  son  extolled, 
And  sang,  with  pious  ardour  fired  : — 


n  . 


a  t 


Thee,  child,  th'  immortals  worship  all, 
The  great  Physician,  born  to  cure 
All  ills  tnat  hapless  men  endure  ; 

I,  too,  before  thee  prostrate  fall  ! ' 


"  And  now — his  errand  done — the  sage, 
Dismissed  with  gifts  and  human  due, 
Athwart  the  ether  swanlike  flew, 
And  reached  again  his  hermitage." 


204  The  Puranic  Deities. 


Buddhism,  the  system  of  religion  taught  by  Buddha,  starts 
with  the  doctrine  common  to  it  and  Hinduism  of  the  transmigra- 
tion of  souls.     It  then  goes  on  to  say  that  pain  and  pleasure  are 
simply  the  result  of  Karma  (works),   no   notice  whatever  being 
taken  of  the  existence  or  non-existence  of  God.     It  assumes  that 
existence  is  and  must  be  miserable  ;  and  that  the  highest  conceiv- 
able good  is  to  obtain  entire  exemption  from  existence.     Death 
does  not  necessarily  bring  this  exemption  ;  it  may  be  but  an 
entrance    into  a   worse  form  of  it  than  is  at  present  endured. 
Buddha's   four  "  Sublime    verities,"   containing  the    gem  of  his 
system,  are  as  follows  : — The  first  is  that  pain  exists  ;  the  second, 
that  desire  is  the  cause  of  pain  ;  the  third,  that  pain  can  be  ended 
by  Nirvana,  or  exemption  from  existence,  annihilation  ;  the  fourth 
shows  the  way  that  leads  to  Nirvana.     The  great  thing  is  to  get 
rid  of  desire,  and  when  this  is  accomplished,  the  soul  is  ready  for 
complete  Nirvana,  and  a  man  dying  in  this  state  will  not  again 
be  born.     He  taught  the  evil  of  caste  distinctions,  and  all  who 
embraced  his  tenets  became  members  of  a  great  brotherhood. 
Instead  of  the  painful  mortifications  and  costly  sacrifices  by  which 
the  Hindus  were  compelled  to  make  expiation  for  sin,  he  taught 
that  confession  and  promise  of  amendment  were  all  that  was 
necessary.     Its   moral    code   is  one  of  the  most  perfect  in   the 
world  :  and  the  spring  of  all  virtue  is  Maitri,  which  can  only  be 
translated  as  charity  or  love.     "  It  does  not  express   friendship, 
or  the  feeling  of  particular  affection  which  a  man  has  from  one 
or    more    of  his    fellow-creatures,    but    that    universal    feeling 
which  inspires  us  with  good-will  towards  all  men  and  constant 
willingness  to  help  them."* 

There  is  one  peculiarity  of  the  followers  of  Buddha  as  com- 
pared with  the  Hindus,  viz.  the  preservation  of  and  veneration 
for  relics  of  their  founder.  With  the  exception  of  a  legend 
stating  that  Krishna's  bones  were  placed  in  the  image  of 
Jagannath,  and  another  teaching  that  Vishnu  cut  the  dead  body 
<>f  Sati  into  fifty-one  parts,  each  of  which  is  now  enshrined  in  a 
temple,  we  have  no  record  of  relics  being  preserved  by  the  Hindus. 

*  Burnouf,  quoted  by  Max  Miiller,  '  Chips,'  i.  222. 


The  Kalki  Avatara. 


205 


But  the  Buddhists  profess  to  have  most  carefully  preserved  parts 
of  their  great  leader,  and  it  was  to  enshrine  these  that  Dagobas 
were  built ;  a  representation  of  one  of  the  most  celebrated  of 
these  in  Ceylon  is  given  at  page  189.  One  of  Buddha's  teeth  is 
believed  to  be  preserved  in  it  ;  in  others  a  single  hair  is  said  to 
be  preserved.  These  Dagobas  are  not  themselves  used  as 
temples,  though  in  some  cases  they  form  part  of  buildings 
that  have  been  used  for  worship. 


10.    THE   KALKI    AVATARA. 


This  incarnation,  unlike  those  already  described,  has  yet  to 
be  made  ;  it  is  the  expression  of  a  hope  that  he  who  has  so 
frequently  visited  the  earth  to 
restore  order  and  happiness  will 
come  again  to  inaugurate  a 
reign  of  universal  goodness, 
peace,  and  prosperity.  When 
Vishnu  in  the  form  of  Krishna 
reascended  to  heaven,  the  Fourth 
or  Kali  Yuga  commenced,  which, 
as  its  name  implies,  is  an  age 
of  impurity  and  dissension.  In 
the  'Vishnu  Purana' the  character 
of  this  age  is  vividly  described 
in  words  that  seem  prophetic. 
At  its  termination  Vishnu  is  ex- 
pected to  come  again,  bearing 
the  name  Kalki,  to  put  an  end 
to  wickedness,  and  establish  a 
kingdom  of  righteousness  similar 
to  the  First  or  Krita  Yuga — the 
age  of  Truth.  These  four  ages,  in  the  same  order  and  with  the 
same  characteristics,  will  again  and  again  be  experienced  until 
the  final  end  of  all  things  shall  come.     The  following  extract 


KALKI. 


2o6  The  Puranic  Deities. 


from  the  '  Vishnu  Purana  '  *  will  give  an  idea  of  the  evils  of  the 
present  age,  which  Kalki  is  to  remove. 

In  Magadha  a  sovereign  named  Viswasphatika  will  establish 
tribes  ;  extirpate  the   Kshattriya   race  ;   elevate  fishermen,  bar- 
barians, Brahmans,  and   other  castes  to  power  ;  whilst  Sudras, 
outcasts,  and  barbarians  will  be  masters  of  the  Indus,  Darvika, 
Chandrabhaga,  and  Kashmir.      "The  kings  will  be  'of  churlish 
spirit,    violent    temper,    and     ever    addicted    to    falsehood    and 
wickedness.     They  will  inflict  death   on  women,  children,  and 
cows  ;  they  will  seize  the  property  of  subjects,  be  of  limited 
power,  and   will,  for  the   most   part,  rapidly  rise  and  fall ;  their 
lives  will  be  short,  their  desires  insatiable,  and  they  will  display 
but  little  piety.     The  people  of  various  countries  intermingling 
with  them  will  follow  their  example  ;  and  the  barbarians  being 
powerful   in   the   patronage   of  princes,  whilst  purer  tribes  are 
neglected,    the     people   will   perish.      Wealth    and    piety   will 
decrease  day  by  day,  until  the  world  shall  be  wholly  depraved. 
Property  alone  will  confer  rank,  wealth  will  be  the  only  source 
of  devotion,  passion  will  be  the  sole  bond  of  union  between  the 
sexes,  falsehood  will  be  the  only  means  of  success  in  litigation, 
and   women   will   be   objects    merely   of    sensual   gratification. 
Earth  will  be  venerated  only  for  its   mineral  treasures  {i.e.  no 
spot  will   be  peculiarly   sacred)  ;    the  Brahmanical  thread  will 
constitute  a  Brahman  ;  external  types  will  be  the  only  distinc- 
tions of  the  several  orders  of  life,  dishonesty  will  be  the  universal 
means  of  subsistence,  weakness  will  be  the  cause  of  dependence, 
menace  and  presumption  will   be  the  subterfuge    for    learning, 
liberality  will  be  devotion,    simple  ablution  will  be  purification 
(i.e.  gifts  will  be  made  from  the  impulse  of  ordinary  feeling,  not 
in   connexion  with  religious  rites  or  as  an  act  of  devotion,  and 
ablution  will  be  performed  for  pleasure  or  comfort,  not  religiously 
with    prescribed    ceremonies   and  prayers).     Mutual   assent  will 
be  marriage,  fine  clothes  will  be  dignity,  and  water  afar  off  will 
be   esteemed   a   holy   spring.     The   people   unable    to    bear    the 
heavy  burdens  imposed  upon  them  by  their  avaricious  sovereigns 

*  Page  62  2. 


The  Kalki  Avatara.  207 

will  take  refuge  among  the  valleys,  and  will  be  glad  to  feed 
upon  wild  honey,  herbs,  roots,  fruits,  flowers,  and  leaves  ;  their 
only  covering  will  be  the  bark  of  trees,  and  they  will  be  exposed 
to  cold  and  wind,  and  sun  and  rain.  No  man's  life  will  exceed 
three-and-twenty  years.  Thus  in  the  Kali  Age  shall  decay 
flourish,  until  the  human  race  approaches  annihilation.'  It  is 
rather  strange  that  the  condition  of  men  in  what  appeared  to 
the  writer  of  this  Purana  as  the  most  miserable  he  could  imagine, 
where  their  dress  was  bark  and  their  food  consisted  of  roots  and 
fruits,  was  in  the  earliest  ages  regarded  as  the  most  desirable. 
It  was  thus  the  old  Rishis  lived,  who  are  held  in  the  greatest 
esteem. 

"  When  the  practices  taught  by  the  Vedas  and  the  institutes 
of  law  shall  nearly  have  ceased,  and  the  close  of  the  Kali  Age 
shall  be  nigh,  a  portion  of  that  divine  being  who  exists  of  his 
own  spiritual  nature  in  the  character  of  Brahma,  and  who  is  the 
beginning  and  the  end,  and  who  comprehends  all  things,  shall 
descend  upon  the  earth.  He  will  be  born  in  the  family  of 
Vishnuyasas,  an  eminent  Brahman  of  Sambhal  village,  as  Kalki, 
endowed  with  the  eight  superhuman  faculties.  By  his  irre- 
sistible might  he  will  destroy  all  the  Mlechchhas  (outcasts), 
thieves,  and  all  whose  minds  are  devoted  to  iniquity.  He  will 
then  re-establish  righteousness  upon  earth  ;  and  the  minds  of 
those  who  live  at  the  end  of  the  Kali  Age  shall  be  awakened 
and  be  made  pellucid  as  crystal.  The  men  who  are  changed  in 
virtue  of  that  particular  time  shall  be  as  the  seeds  of  human 
beings,  and  shall  give  birth  to  a  race  who  shall  follow  the  laws 
of  the  Krita  Age,  or  Age  of  Purity." 

In  the  descriptions  of  Kalki,  and  in  pictures,  he  is  represented 
as  a  white  man  riding  upon  or  bowing  down  before  a  white 
horse,  and  with  a  sword  in  his  hand  :  he  is  the  purifier  of  the 
present  degenerate  age,  and  the  restorer  of  purity  and  goodness. 


208 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


JAGANNATH. 

This  deity  is  not  reckoned  as  one  of  the  Avataras  of  Vishnu 
in  the  Puranic  lists  ;  but  though  tradition  declares  him  to  be 
an  appearance  of  Vishnu  himself,  and  not  the  incarnation  of  a 
portion  of  his  essence,  there  is  considerable  reason  for  doubting 
whether  originally  Jagannath — the  Lord  of  the  World — had  any 
connexion  with  Vishnu  ;  the  probability  being  that  he  was  the 

local  divinity  of  some  now  un- 
known tribe,  whose  worship  was 
engrafted  into  Hinduism  ;  and  the 
new  god  when  admitted  into  the 
Pantheon  was  regarded  as  another 
manifestation  of  Vishnu.  There  are 
several  legends  professing  to  ac- 
count for  the  form  in  which  he  is 
worshipped,  and  for  the  peculiar 
sanctity  of  Puri,  the  chief  place  of 
his  worship.  There  is  a  peculiaritv 
too  in  the  phraseology  employed 
by  the  people  who  visit  his  shrine  : 
they  speak  of  going  to  see  Jagan- 
nath, not  to  worship  him  ;  and  it 
is  the  sight  of  the  image  as  he  is 
being  bathed,  or  drawn  in  his 
ponderous  car,  that  is  so  eagerly  desired  as  a  means  by  which  sin 
in  the  worshipper  is  destroyed. 

Professor  Goldstiicker  *  gives  the  following  legend  from  the 
Ain-i-Akbari,  in  which  some  of  the  ordinary  notions  of  the 
people  respecting  Jagannath  are  described.  A  king  desirous  of 
founding  a  city  sent  a  learned  Brahman  to  select  a  proper  site. 
The  Brahman  after  a  long  search  reached  the  sea-shore,  and 
there  saw  a  crow  diving  into  the  water,  which  having  washed  its 
body  made  obeisance  to  the  sea.      Understanding  the  language 


JAGANNATH. 


Chambers's  Cyclopedia,  s.  v. 


Jagannath.  209 

of  birds,  he  learned  from  the  crow  that  if  he  remained  there  a 
short  time,  he  would  comprehend  the  wonders  of  the  land.  The 
king,  apprised  of  this  occurrence,  built  a  large  city,  with  a  temple, 
on  the  spot  near  where  the  crow  had  appeared.  One  night  the 
Raja  in  a  dream  heard  a  voice  saying  to  him  :  "  On  a  certain  day 
cast  thine  eyes  on  the  sea-shore,  when  there  will  arise  from  the 
water  a  piece  of  wood  52  in.  long  and  18  in.  broad  :  this  is  the  true 
form  of  the  deity  ;  take  it  up  and  keep  it  hidden  in  thine  house 
seven  days,  and  in  whatever  shape  it  shall  then  appear,  place  it 
in  the  temple  and  worship  it."  The  Raja  acted  upon  the  advice 
given  to  him  in  this  dream  ;  and,  when  he  had  set  up  the  image 
received  from  the  sea,  called  it  Jagannath,  which  performed  many 
miracles,  and  became  the  object  of  worship  of  all  ranks  of  people. 
Ward  *  gives  a  somewhat  fuller  account.  When  Krishna  was 
accidentally  shot  by  the  hunter  Jara,  his  bones  were  left  by  him 
to  rot  under  the  tree  where  he  died,  until  some  pious  person 
collected  them  and  placed  them  in  a  box,  where  they  remained, 
until  Indradhumna,  a  king  who  was  earnestly  striving  to  pro- 
pitiate Vishnu,  was  directed  to  form  an  image  and  place  in  it  these 
bones,  with  the  assurance  that  he  would  afterwards  obtain  a  rich 
reward  for  his  religious  deeds.  When  Indradhumna  wished  to 
follow  his  advice,  he  prayed  to  Visvakarma  to  assist  him  by 
making  the  image  ;  the  architect  of  the  gods  consented  to  do 
this,  but  was  most  careful  in  explaining  to  the  king  that  if  any 
one  looked  at  him,  or  in  any  way  disturbed  him  whilst  he  was  at 
work,  he  would  immediately  desist,  and  leave  the  image  in  an 
unfinished  state.  The  king  at  once  promised  to  observe  this 
condition,  and  Visvakarma  commenced  his  work.  In  one  night 
he  raised  a  grand  temple  in  the  blue  mountains  of  Orissa  ;  and 
was  working  at  the  image  in  the  temple,  when  after  restraining 
his  impatience  for  fifteen  days,  the  king  foolishly  tried  to  see  the 
god  at  work,  who  at  once  discontinued,  as  he  had  said,  and  the 
image  was  left  with  a  most  ugly  face,  and  without  hands  or  feet. 
The  king,  being  exceedingly  grieved  as  he  saw  the  result  of  his 
curiosity,  went  in  his  distress  to  Brahma,  who  comforted  him  with 

*  Vol.  ii.  163. 


2io  The  Puranic  Deities. 


the  promise  that  he  would  render  the  image  famous  in  its  present 
form.     The  king  invited  the  gods  to  be  present  at  its  inaugura- 
tion ;  Brahma  himself  officiated  as  priest,  gave  eyes  and  a  soul 
to  the  god  ;    and  thus  the  fame  of  Jagannath  was  completely 
established.    The  original  image  of  this  deity  is  closely  copied  in 
other  places  besides  Puri ;  by  his  side  there  is  generally  an  image 
of  Krishna's  favourite  brother  Balarama,  and  his  sister  Subhadra. 
The  following  is  translated  from  a  Bengali  account  of  Jagan- 
nath : — Narayana  (Vishnu)  and  his  wife  having  taken  up  their 
abode  in  the  blue  mountains  of  Orissa,  where  he  was  known  by 
the  name  of  Nilmadhava,  was  visited  by  great  numbers  of  gods 
and  men,  and  the  neighbourhood  obtained  the  name  of  Mokshya- 
khettra  (the  field  of  emancipation  from  births).     A  king  named 
Indradhumna,  a  son  of  the  Sun,  a  devout  worshipper  of  Vishnu, 
being  anxious  to  pay  a  visit    to    Nilmadhava,  before  starting, 
sent  Vidyapati,  the  brother  of  his  family   priest,   to  learn  the 
way  to   Orissa,  that  he  might  act  as  guide  ;  who  on  his   return 
:_rave  such  an  account  of  all  that  he  had  seen  that  the  kin<j  was 
more  anxious  to  go  than  ever.     Having  made  his  arrangements, 
taking  his  family  with  him,  the  king  went  under  the  guidance  of 
Vidapati,  but  was  most  grievously  disappointed  to  learn  on  his 
arrival  there,  that  the  god  had  withdrawn  himself  from  public 
gaze.     As  he  cried  with  sorrow  and  vexation,  a  voice  from  the 
sky  reached  his  ear  :  "  As  you  cannot  see  Nilmadhava,  make  a 
wooden  image  and  worship  that  ;  Narayana  will  inhabit  it,  and 
by  the  sight  of  the  image  you  and  others  will  obtain  final  eman- 
cipation."    The  king  followed  this  advice  ;  as  he  was  preparing 
to  make  the  image,   Narayana   himself,  in  the  form   of  an  old 
Brahman    named  Visvakarma,  came  and    offered    to   form    the 
image  in  fifteen  days.     The  offer  was  accepted,  and  within  the 
specified  time  the  image  of  Jagannath,  with  those  of  his  brother 
and  sister,  was  made. 

The  peculiarity  of  the  worship  of  Jagannath  is  that  his  image 
is  not  only  worshipped  in  its  proper  temple,  but  three  days  each 
year  is  exposed  to  public  view.  On  the  first  of  these  days, 
called  the  Suan  jattra  (Bathing  Festival),  the  idol  is  taken  from 
its  shrine,  and  on  a  lofty  platform,  in  sight  of  vast  multitudes, 


Chaitanya.  2  I  I 


bathed  by  the  priests.  This  exposure  is  supposed  to  be  produc- 
tive of  a  cold,  so  that,  ten  days  after,  the  Rath  jattra  (Car 
Festival)  is  held  ;  when  the  image  is  placed  iti  an  immense  car 
made  and  reserved  expressly  for  this  purpose,  and  taken  to  the 
temple  of  any  god  which  happens  to  be  near,  for  a  change  of  air. 
The  car  is  drawn  by  the  excited  crowd  ;  the  poorer  and  more 
ignorant  people  believing  that  it  is  a  meritorious  act  to  assist 
in  dragging  it.  After  remaining  a  week  in  this  place,  the  third 
festival  (the  Return)  is  held,  at  which,  with  somewhat  diminished 
fervour,  the  idol  is  dragged  back  to  its  home.  Puri  is  the  place 
where  it  is  believed  this  deity  is  seen  with  greater  benefit  to  the 
worshippers  ;  but  it  is  considered  that  there  is  almost  as  much 
religious  merit  obtained  by  seeing  and  assisting  to  draw  his  car 
in  places  nearer  home.  Every  town  and  almost  every  large 
village  has  its  own  car  ;  and  with  the  promise  of  so  desirable  a 
gift — -salvation  from  sin — it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  there- 
should  be  a  great  wish  to  see  this  deity. 


CHAITANYA. 

Chaitanya  is  commonly  believed  by  his  followers  to  have  been 
an  incarnation  of  Vishnu  ;  and  as  he  lived  in  historical  times, 
about  300  years  ago,  it  is  interesting  to  notice  how  a  human 
being  came  to  be  regarded  as  divine.  He  is  worshipped  in 
Nadiya  in  Bengal,  and  it  is  a  singular  fact  that  at  his  shrine  there 
is  a  very  small  image  of  Krishna,  of  whom  he  was  a  disciple  and 
apostle,  whilst  the  image  of  Chaitanya  is  large  and  conspicuous. 
The  Hindus  say  that,  amongst  the  many  incarnations  of  Vishnu, 
four  are  most  important.  The  first,  in  the  Satya-yuga,  called 
the  Suklavarna  (the  white),  was  Ananta  ;  the  second,  in  the  Treta- 
yuga,  called  the  Raktavarna  (the  red),  was  that  of  Kapiladeva  ; 
the  third,  in  the  Dwarpara-yuga,  called  the  Krishnavarna  (the 
black),  was  Krishna  ;  and  the  last,  in  the  Kali-yuga,  called  the 
Pitavarna  (the  ^yellow),  was  Chaitanya. 

The  founder  of  the  sect,  of  which  Chaitanya  was  the  most 
illustrious  member,  was  a  Brahman  named  Adaitya,  who  lived 
at  Santipore  in  Bengal.     Another  leader,  named  Nityananda,  was 

P  2 


212  The  Puranic  Deities. 

born  at  Nadiya  a  short  time  before  Chaitanya.  Chaitanya's 
father  was  a  Brahman,  named  Jagannath  Misra  ;  his  mother's 
name  was  Suchi  ;  their  first  son,  Visvambhara,  was  a  religious 
mendicant.  When  their  renowned  son  was  born,  his  mother 
was  rather  old  ;  and  as  her  child  seemed  weak,  in  accordance 
with  a  custom  which  prevailed  in  those  times,  he  was  hung  in  a 
basket  on  a  tree  to  die.  Adaitya  happening  to  pass  by  the 
house  as  the  child  lay  in  the  basket,  and  imagining  that  he 
might  be  the  incarnation  of  deity  he  was  expecting,  and  which 
he  had  foretold,  wrote  with  his  foot  in  the  soft  earth  the  incan- 
tation employed  at  the  initiation  of  a  disciple  into  the  mysteries 
of  the  worship  of  Krishna.  The  mother  receiving  this  incanta- 
tion took  the  child  down  from  the  tree,  who  immediately  took 
kindly  to  his  food,  which  he  had  before  neglected,  and  showed 
signs  of  strength  and  vigour. 

Chaitanya  made  great  progress  in  learning  ;  at  sixteen  he 
married  Vishnupriya,  with  whom  he  lived  until  he  was  forty- 
four  years  of  age,  when  he  was  persuaded  by  Adaitya  and  other 
mendicants  to  renounce  his  poita  (Brahmanical  thread)  and  join 
them  in  their  religious  life.  Leaving  home,  parents  and  wife, 
he  went  to  Benares,  and  many  thought  him  guilty  of  a  great 
crime  in  forsaking  a  large  family  that  was  dependent  upon  him 
for  support.  On  his  arrival  at  that  city,  he  began  to  form  a  new 
sect,  or  perhaps  it  would  be  more  correct  to  say  that,  as  he  still 
called  them  Vaishnavas,  or  the  followers  of  Vishnu,  he  induced 
those  who  were  followers  of  other  gods  to  join  in  the  worship  of 
Krishna.  The  main  tenets  of  his  teaching  wrere  these  :  that  men 
should  renounce  a  secular  life,  and  spend  their  time  in  visiting 
shrines  ;  abandon  the  distinctions  of  caste  and  eat  freely  with 
all  who  joined  their  sect,  whatever  their  caste  might  be  ;  honour 
the  name  of  Vishnu,  and  exercise  bhakti  (or  trust)  in  that  god 
as  the  means  of  salvation.  He  allowed  widows  to  remarry  ; 
forbade  the  eating  of  flesh  and  fish,  and  the  worshipping  of  those 
deities  to  whom  animal  sacrifices  were  offered  ;  and  further, 
that  his  disciples  should  not  hold  fellowship  with  those  who 
orfered  such  sacrifices.  It  is  a  curious  coincidence  that  about 
the  same  time  that  Luther  was  preaching  salvation  by  faith  in 


Kamadeva. 


213 


Europe,  Chaitanya  in  India  was  giving  prominence  to  the  truth 
that  salvation  was  to  be  obtained  through  faith  (bhaktf)  in  Krishna. 
From  Benares  Chaitanya  went  to  Puri,  the  great  shrine  of 
Jagannath,  where  he  proclaimed  his  doctrines  to  the  many 
pilgrims  he  met  there  ;  and  whilst  there,  it  is  said  that  he 
obtained  four  additional  arms.  Adaitya  and  Nityananda  re- 
mained for  some  years  in  Benares  doing  similar  work  ;  but  after 
a  time  they  returned  to  the  secular  state,  and  their  descendants 
are  greatly  respected  by  the  members  of  this  sect.  It  is 
reckoned  that  about  one-fifth  of  the  Hindus  of  Bengal  are 
followers  of  this  teacher.  Immoral  women  generally  profess  to 
be  his  disciples,  as,  being  expelled  from  their  own  caste,  it  is 
only  by  this  means  that  they  can  obtain  funeral  rites. 


KAMADEVA. 

Kamadeva,  the  Indian  Cupid,  is  generally  regarded  as  the 
son  of  Vishnu  and  Lakshmi,  under  the  forms  of  Krishna  and 
Rukmini,  but  he  is  also  described 
in  some  places  as  a  son  of  Brahma. 
The  latter  account  of  his  origin 
arises  probably  from  the  following. 
In  the  '  Rig- Veda,'*  Kama  is  de- 
scribed as  the  first  movement  that 
arose  in  the  One,  after  it  had  come 
into  life  through  the  power  of 
fervour  or  abstraction.  In  the 
'  Atharva-Veda,'  this  Kama  or  de- 
sire, not  of  sexual  enjoyment,  but 
of  good  in  general,  is  celebrated 
as  a  great  power  superior  to  all 
the  gods,  and  is  supplicated  for 
deliverance  from  enemies.  According  to  one  hymn  in  the  '  Rig- 
Veda,'  Kama  is  worshipped  and   said  to  be  unequalled  by  the 


KAMADEVA. 


Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  402. 


214 


The  Puraxic  Deities. 


gods  ;  according  to  another,  he  is  the  god  of  sexual  love,  like 
the  Eros  of  the  Greeks,  and  Cupid  of  the  Latins.  In  the  latter 
aspect  he  is  thus  addressed  :  "  May  Kama,  having  well  directed 
the  arrow,  which  is  winged  with  pain,  barbed  with  longing,  and 
has  desire  for  its  shaft,  pierce  thee  in  the  heart."  And  it  is  in 
this  character  that  he  appears  in  the  Puranas. 

Kama  is  known  in  Hindu  Mythology  as  the  victim  of  Siva's 
anger.     A  demon  named  Taraka,  having  greatly  distressed  the 


SIVA    SLAVING    KAMADEVA. 


ids,  it  was  said  that  only  a  son  of  Siva  could  deliver  them  ; 
but  in  consequence  of  his  intense  grief  at  the  loss  of  his  wife 
Sati,  Siva  had  become  insensible  to  love.  The  gods  therefore 
instigated  Kama  to  wound  him  with  his  arrows,  and  at  last  his 
efforts  proved  successful,  just  as  Parvati  (Sati  in  a  new  form) 
was  near,  who  at  once  captivated  the  stricken  deity.  Angry 
with  Kama  for  his  presumption,  he  caused  a  flame  to  issue  from 
his    third    eye,    which    consumed    to    ashes    the    god    who    had 


Kamadeva.  215 


interrupted  his  devotions.  In  the  '  Vamana  Purana'*  is  a  lengthy 
account  of  the  effect  of  Kama's  arrows  on  Siva.  The  god  thus 
wounded  could  find  no  rest.  He  threw  himself  in  the  Kalindi 
river,  but  "  the  waters  were  dried  up  and  changed  into  blackness  ; 
and  ever  since  its  dark  stream,  though  holy,  has  flown  through 
the  forest  like  the  string  that  binds  a  maiden's  hair."  And  as 
he  wandered  about  from  place  to  place,  the  wives  of  the  saints 
in  the  forest  of  Daruvanam  forsook  their  homes  and  followed 
him.  This  led  their  husbands  to  curse  Siva,  who,  being  enraged 
at  the  evil  Kama  had  done  to  him,  consumed  him. 

The  Bhagavata  f  continues  the  story  as  follows: — Rati,  the 
wife  of  Rama,  being  almost  mad  with  grief  at  the  loss  of  her 
husband,  entreated  Parvati  to  intercede  with  Siva,  that  he  might 
restore  him  to  life.  Parvati  encourages  her  by  showing  how 
her  wish  will  be  gratified.  "  He  will  be  born  as  the  son  of  Sri 
Krishna,  and  his  name  will  be  Pradyumna.  A  demon  named 
Sambara  will  carry  him  off  and  cast  him  into  the  sea.  Having 
entered  the  body  of  a  fish,  he  will  appear  in  the  food  of  Sambara. 
Go  and  take  up  your  abode  in  the  house  of  Sambara,  and  when 
your  husband  arrives,  take  him  and  bring  him  up  ;  eventually 
he  will  slay  Sambara,  and  will  live  happily  with  you."  Acting 
on  this  advice,  Rati  became  a  servant  in  the  house  of  the 
demon. 

From  the  '  Vishnu  Purana  '  J  we  gather  the  completion  of  this 
story  :  When  Pradyumna  was  but  six  days  old,  he  was  stolen 
from  the  lying-in  chamber  by  Sambara,  terrible  as  death  ;  for 
the  demon  knew  (having  been  told  by  the  sage  Narada)  that 
Pradyumna,  if  he  lived,  would  be  his  destroyer.  Sambara  cast 
him  into  the  sea,  the  haunt  of  the  huge  creatures  of  the  deep. 
A  large  fish  swallowed  the  child,  but  he  died  not,  and  was  born 
again  from  his  body  :  for  that  fish  was  caught  by  the  fishermen, 
and  delivered  by  them  to  the  great  Asura,  Sambara.  His  wife 
Mayadevi  [  the  Bhagavata  says,  servant],  the  mistress  of  his 
household,  superintended  the  operations  of  the  cooks,  and,  when 
the  fish  was  cut  open,  saw  a  beautiful  child. 

*  Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Myth.'  f  Ibid.  %  Page  574. 


216  The  Puranic  Deities. 


Whilst  the  was  wondering  who  this  could  be,  and  how  it  came 
there,  Narada  came  to  satisfy  her  curiosity,  and  said  to  the 
graceful  dame  :  "  This  is  the  son  of  him  by  whom  the  whole 
world  is  created  and  destroyed  ;  the  son  of  Vishnu,  who  was 
stolen  by  Sambara  from  the  lying-in  chamber,  and  tossed  by 
him  into  the  sea,  where  he  was  swallowed  by  the  fish.  He  is 
now  in  thy  power ;  do  thou,  beautiful  woman,  tenderly  rear  the 
jewel  of  mankind."  Thus  counselled  by  Narada,  Mayadevi  took 
charge  of  the  boy,  and  carefully  reared  him  from  childhood,  being 
fascinated  by  the  beauty  of  his  person.  The  affection  became 
still  more  impassioned  when  he  was  decorated  with  the  bloom 
of  adolescence.  The  gracefully-moving  Mayadevi,  then  fixing 
her  heart  and  eyes  upon  the  high-minded  Pradyumna,  gave  him, 
whom  she  regarded  as  herself,  all  her  magic  and  illusive  arts. 

"  Observing  these  marks  of  passionate  affection,  the  son  of 
Krishna  said  to  the  lotus-eyed  Mayadevi  :  '  Why  do  you  indulge 
in  feelings  so  unbecoming  the  character  of  a  mother  ? '  To  which 
she  replied  :  '  Thou  art  not  a  son  of  mine  ;  thou  art  the  son  of 
Vishnu,  whom  Kala  Sambara  carried  away  and  threw  into  the 
sea  ;  thou  wast  swallowed  by  a  fish,  but  wast  rescued  by  me 
from  its  belly.  Thy  fond  mother  is  still  weeping  for  thee.'  When 
the  valiant  Pradyumna  heard  this,  he  was  filled  with  wrath,  and 
defied  Sambara  to  battle.  In  the  conflict  the  son  of  Madhava 
slew  the  hosts  of  Sambara.  Seven  times  he  foiled  the  delusions 
of  the  enchanter,  and,  making  himself  master  of  the  eighth, 
turned  it  against  Sambara  and  killed  him.  By  the  same  faculty 
he  ascended  into  the  air,  and  proceeded  to  his  father's  house, 
where  he  alighted,  along  with  Mayavati,  in  the  inner  apartments. 
When  the  women  beheld  Pradyumna,  they  thought  it  was 
Krishna  himself.  Rukmini,  her  eyes  dimmed  with  tears,  spoke 
tenderly  to  him,  and  said  :  '  Happy  is  she  who  has  a  son  like  this, 
in  the  bloom  of  youth.  Such  would  be  the  age  of  my  Pradyumna, 
if  he  were  alive.  Who  is  the  fortunate  mother  adorned  by  thee  ? 
And  yet  from  thy  appearance,  and  from  the  affection  I  feel  for 
thee,  thou  art  assuredly  the  son  of  Ilari.' 

"At  this  moment  Krishna  and  Narada  arrived  ;  and  the  latter 
said  to  Rukmini :    '  This   is  thine  own  son,  who  has  come  hither 


Kamadeva.  217 


after  killing  Sambara,  by  whom  when  an  infant  he  was  stolen. 
This  is  the  virtuous  Mayavati,  his  wife,  and  not  the  wife  of 
Sambara.  Hear  the  reason.  When  Manmatha  (Kama),  the 
deity  of  love,  perished,  the  goddess  of  beauty,  desirous  to  secure 
his  revival,  assumed  a  delusive  form,  and  by  her  charms  fascinated 
the  demon  Sambara,  and  exhibited  herself  to  him  in  various 
illusory  enjoyments.  This  thy  son  is  the  descended  Kama  ;  and 
this  is  the  goddess  Rati  his  wife.'  " 

Kama  is  usually  represented  as  a  beautiful  youth,  holding  in 
his  hands  a  bow  and  arrows  of  flowers.  He  travels  about 
through  the  three  worlds  accompanied  by  his  wife  Rati,  the 
cuckoo,  the  humming-bee,  spring  personified,  and  gentle  breezes. 
Although  in  Bengal  no  images  are  made  to  represent  him,  he  is 
worshipped  at  the  time  of  marriage,  and  happiness  in  the  married 
state  and  offspring  are  sought  for  from  him.  And  part  of  the 
hymn  referred  to  above  from  the  '  Atharva-Veda '  is  contained 
in  the  Hindu  marriage  ritual. 

Kama  has  many  names  indicative  of  the  influence  he  is 
supposed  to  exert  amongst  men.  Amongst  others  may  be 
mentioned  : — 

Madan,  "  He  who  intoxicates  with  love." 

Manmatha,  "  He  who  agitates  the  mind." 

Mara,  "He  who  wounds." 

Pradyumna,  "  He  who  conquers  all." 

Ananga,  "  He  who  is  without  a  body." 

Kushumesu,  "  He  whose  arrows  are  flowers." 


2l8 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


CHAPTER  VI. 


SIVA. 

Siva  is  the  third  person  of  the  Hindu  Triad.     As  Brahma  was 

Creator,  Vishnu  Pre- 
server, in  order  to 
complete  the  system, 
as  all  things  are  sub- 
ject  to  decay,  a 
Destroyer  was  neces- 
sary ;  and  destruction 
is  regarded  as  the 
peculiar  work  of  Siva. 
This  seems  scarcely 
in  harmony  with  the 
form  by  which  this 
deity  is  represented, 
but  it  must  be  re- 
membered that,  ac- 
cording to  the  teach- 
ing of  Hinduism, 
death  is  not  death  in 
the  sense  of  passing 
into  non-existence, 
but  simply  a  change 
into  a  new  form  of 
life.  He  who  destroys, 
therefore,  causes 
beings  to   assume 

new  phases  of  existence — the  Destroyer  is  really  a  re-Creator; 

hence  the  name   Siva,  the    Bright  or   Happy   One,   is  given   to 


SIVA. 


. 


Siva. 


219 


•!/■    / 


2  2o  The  Puranic  Deities. 


him,  which  certainly  would  not  have  been  the  case  had  he  been 
regarded  as  the  destroyer  in  the  ordinary  meaning  of  that  term. 

In  the  later  Hinduism,  as  taught  in  the  Epics  and  Puranas, 
Siva  plays  a  most  important  part,  several  books  having  been 
written  for  the  special  purpose  of  celebrating  his  praise  ;  yet 
his  name  even,  as  that  of  a  god,  does  not  occur  in  the  Vedas. 
But  in  order  to  gain  for  him  greater  reverence  amongst  men,  he 
is  declared  to  be  the  Rudra  of  the  Vedas.  In  some  passages 
in  the  Vedas,  Rudra  is  identified  with  Agni  ;  yet  "the  distinctive 
epithets  applied  to  Rudra  in  the  Rig-Veda  appear  sufficiently 
to  prove  that  he  was  generally  discriminated  from  Agni  by  his 
earl\'  worshippers."  * 

"  Between  the  texts  from  the  Brahmanas  relative  to  Rudra, 
and  the  earliest  descriptions  of  the  same  deity  which  we  discover 
in  the  Epic  poems,  a  wide  chasm  intervenes,  which,  as  far  as  I 
am  aware,  no  genuine  ancient  materials  exist  for  bridging  over. 
The  Rudra  of  the  Mahabharata  is  not  indeed  very  different  in 
his  general  character  from  the  god  of  the  same  name  who  is 
portrayed  in  the  Satarudriya,  but  in  the  later  literature  his  im- 
portance is  immensely  increased,  his  attributes  are  more  clearly 
defined,  and  the  conceptions  entertained  of  his  person  are 
rendered  more  distinct  by  the  addition  of  various  additional 
features  and  illustrated  by  numerous  legends.  Instead  of  re- 
maining a  subordinate  deity,  as  he  was  in  the  Vedic  Age,  Rudra 
has  thrown  Agni,  Vayu,  Surya,  Mitra,  and  Varuna  completely 
into  the  shade  ;  and  although  Indra  still  occupies  a  prominent 
place  in  the  Epic  legends,  he  has  sunk  down  into  a  subordinate 
position,  and  is  quite  unable  to  compete  in  power  and  dignity 
with  Kin  Ira,  who,  together  with  Vishnu,  now  engrosses  the  almost 
exclusive  worship  of  the  Brahmanical  world."  f 

In  the  following  texts  from  the  Vedas, J  referring  to  Rudra, 
will  be  seen  the  germs  of  some  of  the  legends  found  in  the  later 
books  concerning  Siva  : — "  What  can  we  utter  to  Rudra,  the 
intelligent,  the  strong,  the  most  bountiful,  which  shall  be  most 
pleasant   to  his  heart,  that  so  Aditi   may  bring   Rudra's  healing 


Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  iv.  404.  +  Ibid.  %  Ibid.  iv.  299  ff. 


Siva.  221 

to  our  cattle,  and  men,  and  kine,  and  children  ?  We  seek  from 
Rudra,  the  lord  of  songs,  the  lord  of  sacrifices,  who  possesses 
healing  remedies,  his  auspicious  favour ;  from  him  who  is 
brilliant  as  the  sun,  who  shines  like  gold,  who  is  the  best  and 
most  bountiful  of  the  «"ods."  "  We  invoke  with  obeisance  the 
ruddy  boar  of  the  sky,  with  spirally  braided  hair,  a  brilliant 
form."  "  Far  be  from  us  thy  cow-slaying  and  man-slaying 
weapon."  In  the  same  hymn  Rudra  is  called  the  father  of  the 
Maruts  or  Storm-gods  ;  to  explain  which  the  commentator 
introduces  a  legend  of  a  later  date  which  is  found  in  the  account 
of  the  Maruts.  (Part  I.  chap,  vii.)  In  another  hymn  Rudra  is 
thus  addressed  :  "  Thou  fitly  holdest  arrows  and  a  bow ;  fitly 
thou  [wearest]  a  glorious  necklace  of  every  form  [of  beauty]." 
The  name  Siva  may  have  been  connected  with  Rudra  from  a 
verse  in  the  Vajasaneyi  recension  of  the  white  'Yajur  Veda,' 
wherein  Rudra  is  thus  addressed  :  "  Thou  art  gracious  (Siva) 
by  name."  *  Other  epithets  which  are  afterwards  extended  into 
legends,  are  seen  in  a  prayer  in  the  same  Veda  :  "  Shine  upon 
us,  dweller  in  the  mountain,  with  that  blessed  body  of  thine 
which  is  auspicious."  f  "  May  he  who  glides  away,  blue-necked 
and  red-coloured,  be  gracious  unto  us."  "  Reverence  to  the  blue- 
necked,  to  the  thousand-eyed,  to  the  bountiful,  and  to  the  lord 
of  spirits,  and  to  the  lord  of  thieves." 

In  the  following  account  of  Rudra's  birth,  he  is  identified  with 
Agni : — "  The  lord  of  beings  was  a  householder,  and  Ushas  (The 
Dawn)  was  his  wife.  A  boy  was  born  (to  them)  in  a  year.  The 
boy  wept.  Prajapati  said  to  him,  '  Boy,  why  dost  thou  weep, 
since  thou  hast  been  born  after  toil  and  austerity  ? '  The  boy 
said  :  '  My  evil  has  not  been  taken  away,  and  a  name  has  not 
been  given  to  me.  Give  me  a  name.'  Prajapati  said,  'Thou  art 
Rudra.'  Inasmuch  as  he  gave  him  that  name,  Agni  became  his 
form,  for  Rudra  is  Agni.  He  was  Rudra  because  he  wept  (from 
rud,  to  weep)."  %  This  account  of  the  birth  of  Rudra  agrees 
with  that  of  the  Vishnu  and  Markandeya  Puranas,  and  to  some 
extent  with  that  of  others. 

*  Muir,  0.  S.  T.,  iv.  322.  f  Ibid.  p.  326.  %  Ibid.  iv.  341 


-,-,-> 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


It  is  impossible  to  give  a  connected  account  of  the  life  of  this 
deity.  His  career  has  not  a  definite  character  like  an  Avatara 
of  Vishnu,  where  it  was  possible  to  give  a  history  of  his  birth, 
life,  and  death  ;  though  he  often  appeared  on  earth  in  human 
form,  and  dwelt  frequently  at  his  favourite  city,  Benares,  his  home 
being"  at  Kailasa  on  the  Himalayas.  All  that  can  be  done  is  to 
give  a  few  of  the  many  legends  found  in  the  sacred  books,  in  which 
his  character  and  works  are  described,  by  which  we  may  learn 
the  idea  of  the  age  in  which  they  were  written  respecting  Siva. 

Rudra,  according  to  the  Ramayana,  married  Uma,  the  daughter 
of  Daksha,  who  appears  in  various  stages  of  the  life  of  Siva  as 
Parvati,  Durga,  Kali,  &c.  Fearing  that  the  children  of  such 
parents  would  be  most  dangerous  to  live  with,  the  gods  entreated 
Siva  and  Uma  to  live  a  life  of  chastity  :  to  this  they  consented, 
but  the  request  came  too  late  to  prevent  the  birth  of  Kartikeya. 
Uma  then  declared  that  the  wives  of  all  the  gods  should  be 
childless.  Rudra  took  a  prominent  position  amongst  the 
gods  at  the  churning  of  the  ocean  ;  he  drank  the  poison  as 
nectar  that  was  produced  before  the  Amrita,  which  caused 
his  neck  to  become  dark-coloured, — hence  one  of  his  names  is 
Xilkanta,  "the  blue-necked." 

As  Uma  was  sitting  with  her  husband  in  their  home  on  Mount 
Kailasa,  seeing  the  gods  pass  by  in  their  chariots,  she  was  told 
that  they  were  proceeding,  at  her  father's  invitation,  to  take  part 
in  a  great  sacrifice  that  he  was  about  to  make.  As  Siva  had 
offended  him,  he  was  not  invited  by  his  father-in-law.  The 
'  Bhagavata  Purfma '  *  gives  the  cause  of  this  slight  upon  Siva  : 
"  On  one  occasion  the  gods  and  Rishis  were  assembled  at  a 
sacrifice  celebrated  by  the  Prajapatis.  On  Daksha's  entrance, 
all  rose  to  salute  him  excepting  his  father  Brahma  and  Mahadeva 
(Siva).  Daksha,  after  making  his  obeisance  to  Brahma,  sat  down 
by  his  command,  but  was  offended  at  the  treatment  he  received 
from  Siva.  Seeing  him  previously  seated,  Daksha  did  not  brook 
this  want  of  respect  ;  but  looking  at  him  obliquely  with  his  eyes, 
as  if  consuming  him.  thus  spake  :  '  Hear  me,  ye  Brahman  Rishis, 


*  Muir,  0.  S.  T.,  iv.  37S  ft. 


Siva. 


223 


with  the  gods  and  the  Agnis,  while  I,  neither  from  ignorance  nor 
passion,  describe  what  is  the  practice  of  virtuous  persons.  But 
this  shameless  being  (Siva)  detracts  from  the  reputation  of  the 
guardians  of  the  world — he  by  whom,  stubborn  as  he  is,  the 
course  pursued  by  the  good  is  transgressed.  He  assumed  the 
position  of  my  disciple,  inasmuch  as,  like  a  virtuous  person,  in 
the  face  of  Brahmans  and  of  fire,  he  took  the  hand  of  my 
daughter  who  resembled  Savitri.  This  monkey-eyed  [god], 
after  having  taken  the  hand  of  [my]  fawn- eyed  [daughter],  has 
not  even  by  word  shown  suitable  respect  to  me,  whom  he  ought  to 
have  risen  and  saluted.  Though  unwilling,  I  yet  gave  my  daughter 
to  this  impure  and  proud  abolisher  of  rites  and  demolisher 
of  barriers,  like  the  word  of  a  Veda  to  a  Sudra.  He  roams 
about  in  dreadful  cemeteries,  attended  by  hosts  of  ghosts  and 
sprites,  like  a  madman,  naked,  with  dishevelled  hair,  wearing  a 
garland  of  dead  men's  [skulls]  and  ornaments  of  human  bones, 
pretending  to  be  Siva  (auspicious),  but  in  reality  Asiva  (in- 
auspicious), insane,  beloved  by  the  insane,  the  lord  of  Bhutas 
(spirits),  beings  whose  nature  is  essentially  darkness.  To  this 
wicked-hearted  lord  of  the  infuriate,  whose  purity  has  perished, 
I  have,  alas  !  given  my  virtuous  daughter,  at  the  instigation  of 
Brahma.'  Having  thus  reviled  Siva,  who  did  not  oppose  him, 
Daksha,  having  touched  water,  incensed,  began  to  curse  him  : 
'  Let  this  Bhava  (Siva),  lowest  of  the  gods,  never  at  the  worship 
of  the  gods  receive  any  portion  along  with  the  gods  Indra, 
Upendra  (Vishnu),  and  others.' 

"  Daksha  then  left  the  assembly.  After  his  departure  a 
follower  of  Mahadeva  pronounced  a  curse  upon  him,  and  the 
Brahmans  who  sympathised  with  him  :  '  Let  Daksha,  brutal,  be 
excessively  devoted  to  women,  and  have  speedily  the  head  of  a 
goat.  Let  this  stupid  being  continue  to  exist  in  this  world  in 
ceremonial  ignorance  !'  Upon  this,  Bhrigu  (a  brother  of  Daksha, 
and  a  Rishi)  launched  a  counter-curse  upon  the  followers  of 
Siva  :  '  Let  those  who  practise  the  rites  of  Bhava  be  heretics 
and  opponents  of  the  true  Scriptures.  Having  lost  their  purity, 
deluded  in  understanding,  wearing  matted  hair  and  ashes  and 
bones,  let  them  undergo  the  initiation  of  Siva,  in  which  spirituous 


224  The  Puranic  Deities. 


liquors  arc  the  deity.'  Hearing  this  imprecation,  Siva  and  his 
followers  left  the  assembly,  while  Daksha  and  the  other  Praja- 
patis*  celebrated  for  a  thousand  years  the  sacrifice  in  which 
Vishnu  was  the  object  of  veneration." 

The  enmity  thus  commenced  between  Siva  and  Daksha  con- 
tinued ;  and  in  consequence,  at  the  great  sacrifice  made  when 
he  was  appointed  chief  of  the  Prajapatis  by  Brahma,  Siva  was 
not  invited,  and  Uma  was  greatly  grieved,  as  her  husband  told 
her,  "  The  former  practice  of  the  gods  has  been  that  in  all 
sacrifices  no  portion  should  be  divided  to  me.  By  custom, 
established  by  the  earliest  arrangement,  the  gods  lawfully  allot 
me  no  share  in  the  sacrifice."  The  Mahabharata  then  says  that 
"  Siva  goes  with  his  attendants,  and  puts  an  end  to  the  sacrifice, 
which,  taking  the  form  of  a  deer,  is  followed  by  Siva  into  the 
sky.  A  drop  of  perspiration  falls  from  his  forehead,  from  which 
a  fire  proceeds,  out  of  which  a  formidable  being  is  born,  Jvara 
(Fever),  which  burns  up  the  other  things  prepared  for  the 
sacrifice,  and  puts  to  flight  the  gods.  Brahma  now  appears  to 
Siva,  promises  that  the  gods  shall  henceforth  give  Siva  a  share 
in  the  sacrifices,  and  proposes  that  Jvara  shall  be  allowed  to 
range  over  the  earth. 

The  Bhagavataf  gives  a  more  lengthy  and  different  account 
of  the  termination  of  Daksha's  sacrifice.  Sati  (Uma)  was  most 
anxious  to  attend  her  father's  sacrifice,  and  though  her  husband 
tried  to  dissuade  her,  she  "disregards  his  warning  and  goes  ;  but, 
being  slighted  by  her  father,  reproaches  him  for  his  hostility  to 
her  husband,  and  threatens  to  abandon  her  corporeal  frame  by 
which  she  was  connected  with  her  parent.  She  then  voluntarily 
gives  up  the  ghost.  Seeing  this,  Siva's  attendants,  who  had 
followed  her,  rush  on  Daksha  to  slay  him."  This  is  prevented, 
and  Siva's  followers  are  put  to  flight  ;  but  when  Siva  heard  of 
Sati's  death,  being  greatly  angered,  "  from  a  lock  of  his  hair 
which  he  tore  out,  a  gigantic  demon  arose  (named  Virabhadra), 
whom   he  commanded  to   destroy   Daksha  and    his    sacrifice." 


*  The  Prajapatis,  seven,  ten,  or  twenty-one  in  number,  according  to  various 
authorities,  are  the  fathers  of  the  human  race.        f  Muir,  O.  S.  T..  iv.  382. 


Siva.  225 

This  was  accomplished  ;  for  he  plucked  out  Bhrigu's  beard,  tore 
out  Bhaga's  eyes,  knocked  out  Pushan's  teeth,  and  cut  off 
Daksha's  head.  In  their  distress,  the  gods,  resorting  to  Brahma 
for  advice,  are  advised  to  propitiate  Siva,  to  accomplish  which 
they  resort  to  Kailasa,  where  they  see  Siva  "  carrying  the  linga 
desired  by  devotees,  ashes,  a  staff,  a  tuft  of  hair,  an  antelope's 
skin,  and  a  digit  of  the  moon,  his  body  shining  like  an  evening 
cloud."  Siva  in  part  relents,  and  allows  Daksha  to  have  a  goat's 
head  :  the  sacrifice  is  completed,  and  Vishnu  gives  an  address 
in  which  he  shows  that  he  is  the  supreme  deity,  and  that  the 
troubles  of  his  worshippers  arise  from  imagining  themselves  to 
be  different  from  him.  Daksha  worships  Siva,  and  Uma,  who 
had  voluntarily  given  up  herself  to  the  flames,  and  thus  become 
a  Satiy  was  re-born  as  Parvati,  being  the  daughter  of  Himavat, 
the  god  of  the  Himalayas  and  Mena. 

Siva  adopted  the  garb  and  lived  the  life  of  an  ascetic,  and, 
though  generally  worshipped  under  the  form  of  the  Linga,  he 
"is  represented  in  human  form,  living  in  the  Himalayas  along 
with  Parvati,  sometimes  in  the  act  of  trampling  on  or  destroying 
demons,  wearing  round  his  black  neck  a  serpent  and  a  necklace 
of  skulls,  and  furnished  with  a  whole  apparatus  of  external 
emblems,  such  as  a  white  bull  on  which  he  rides,  a  trident,  tiger's 
skin,  elephant's  skin,  rattle,  noose,  &c.  He  has  three  eyes,  one 
being  in  his  forehead,  in  allusion  either  to  the  three  Vedas,  or 
time  past,  present,  and  future.  He  has  a  crescent  on  his  forehead, 
the  moon  having  been  given  to  him  as  his  share  of  the  pro- 
ducts of  the  churning  of  the  ocean.  Again  Mahadeva,  or  the  great 
deity  Siva,  is  sometimes  connected  with  humanity  in  another  per- 
sonification, very  different  from  that  just  noted,  viz.  that  of  an  aus- 
tere ascetic,  with  matted  hair,  living  in  a  forest  and  teaching  men 
by  his  own  example,  first,  the  power  to  be  obtained  by  penance 
(tapas),  mortification  of  the  body,  and  suppression  of  the  pas- 
sions ;  and,  secondly,  the  great  virtue  of  abstract  meditation,  as 
leading  to  the  loftiest  spiritual  knowledge,  and  ultimately  to  union 
or  actual  identification  with  the  great  spirit  of  the  universe."  * 

*  '  Indian  Wisdom,'  p.  325. 

O 


226  The  Puranic  Deities. 


The  following  legend  from  the  '  Vamana  Purana  '*  describes  the 
ordinary  life  of  Siva  as  an  ascetic.  Devi  (Parvati),  oppressed 
with  violent  heat,  thus  addressed  her  lord  :  "  O  Isha !  the  heat 
increases  in  violence  :  hast  thou  no  house  to  which  we  might 
repair,  and  there  abide,  protected  from  the  wind,  the  heat,  the 
cold  ? "  Sankara  replied  :  "I  am,  O  lovely  One,  without  a  shelter, 
a  constant  wanderer  in  forests."  Having  thus  spoken,  Sankara 
with  Sati  remained  during  the  hot  season  under  the  shade  of 
trees  ;  and  when  it  was  passed,  the  rainy  season  with  its  dark- 
clouds  succeeded.  On  beholding  which,  Sati  said  to  Siva : 
"  Heart-agitating  winds  do  blow,  O  Maheshwara,  and  rush- 
ing torrents  roar  ;  let  me  entreat  thee  to  build  a  house  on 
Kailasa,  where  I  may  abide  with  thee  in  comfort."  Siva  replied  : 
"  O  my  beloved,  I  have  no  riches  for  the  erection  of  a  house,  nor 
am  I  possessor  of  aught  else  than  an  elephant's  skin  for  a 
garment,  and  serpents  for  my  ornaments."  The  soul  of  Siva, 
having  heard  these  harsh  words,  seemingly  true,  but  devoid  of 
truth,  was  alarmed,  and  looking  on  the  ground  with  bashfulness 
and  anger,  said :  "  Then  say,  O  Sambhu,  how  can  we  pass  in 
comfort  the  rainy  season  under  the  shade  of  trees  ?  "  Siva 
replied :  "  With  our  bodies  covered  with  a  cloud,  O  lovely  One, 
shall  the  rainy  season  pass  without  any  rain  falling  on  thy  tender 
frame."  Having  thus  spoken,  Hara  (Siva)  stopped  a  cloud,  and, 
with  the  daughter  of  Daksha,  fixed  his  abode  within  it,  and 
hence  has  he  since  been  celebrated  in  heaven  under  the  name  of 
Jimula-Kitu  (he  whose  banner  is  a  cloud).  When  the  rains  were 
i  >vcr,  they  took  up  their  abode  on  Mount  Mandara. 

The  home  life  of  Siva  and  his  spouse  does  not  appear  to  have 
been  of  the  happiest.  As  they  could  each  bestow  gifts  upon 
their  worshippers,  it  sometimes  happened  that  the  one  wanted  to 
bless  those  whom  the  other  wished  to  curse.  In  the  Ramayana 
And  Mahabharata f  is  an  account  of  a  dispute  between  them  in 
connexion  with  the  struggle  between  Rama  and  Ravana.  In 
the  earlier  part  of  the  contest,  Rama  being  unable  to  overthrow 
his   enemy  because  of  the  assistance  afforded  him  by  Siva,  the 

*  '  Hindu  Myth..'  p.  293.  f  Ward,  ii.  179. 


Siva.  227 

gods  whom  Ravana  had   oppressed  went,  with   Rama  at  their 
head,  to    ask  Siva  to  withdraw   his    help.     Siva    consented    to 
accompany  them  on  the  seventh  day  of  the  conflict,  to  witness 
the  destruction  of  their  foe.     Durga  (Parvati)  severely  reproached 
her  husband,  asking  how  he  could  witness  the  destruction  of  his 
own  worshipper,  a  worshipper  who  had  stood  praying  to  him  in 
the    most    sultry  weather  surrounded  by   four  fires  ;    who   had 
continued  his  devotions  in  the  chilling  cold,  standing  in  water  ; 
and   had   persevered  in   his   applications  standing  on  his  head, 
amid  torrents  of  rain.     She  then  poured  forth  a  torrent  of  abuse, 
calling  him  a  withered  old  man,  who  smoked  intoxicating  herbs, 
lived  in  cemeteries   and  covered  himself  with  ashes,  and  asked 
if  he  thought  she   would   accompany  him  on   such   an   errand. 
Siva  now  gets  angry,  and  reminds  his  wife  that  she  was   only  a 
woman  and  therefore  could  know  nothing  ;  and  further  that  she 
does  not  act   like  a  woman,  because  she  wandered  about  from 
place  to  place,  engaged  in  war,  was  a  drunkard,  spent  her  time 
in  the  company  of  degraded  beings,  killed  giants,  drank  their 
blood,  and   hung  their  skulls  around  her  neck.     Durga  became 
so  enraged  at  these  reproaches,  that  the  gods  were  frightened, 
and    entreated    Rama  to   join   them   in  supplication  to  her,  or 
Ravana  would  never  be  destroyed.     He   did    so  ;   she   became 
propitious,    and    consented    to    the   destruction  of    the    demon. 
Durga  is  represented  in  the  Sivopakhyana  as  being  exceedingly 
jealous  because  her  husband,  in  his  begging  excursions,  visited 
the  quarters  of  the  town  inhabited  by  women  of  ill-fame,  and 
in  the  Ramayana   is  an  account  of  a  terrible  quarrel  between 
them  because  Parasurama  beat  Kartikeya  and  Ganesa. 

In  the  '  Vamana  Purana  '  *  is  a  legend  explaining  why  Siva 
adopted  the  dress  and  habits  of  a  religious  mendicant.  Formerly, 
when  all  things  had  been  destroyed,  and  nought  remained  but 
one  vast  ocean,  that  lord  who  is  incomprehensible  (Brahma)  re- 
posed in  slumber  for  a  thousand  years.  When  the  night  had 
passed,  desirous  of  creating  the  three  worlds,  the  skilled  in  the 
Vedas,  investing  himself  with   the  quality  of  impurity,  assumed 


Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Myth..'  p.  296. 

Q  2 


228  The  Puranic  Deities. 

a  corporeal  form  with  five  heads  (Brahma).  Then  also  was  pro- 
duced from  the  quality  of  darkness  another  form  with  three  eyes 
and  twisted  locks,  and  bearing  a  rosary  and  a  trident.  Brahma 
next  created  Ahankara  (consciousness  of  individual  existence), 
which  immediately  pervaded  the  nature  of  both  gods  ;  and  under 
its  influence  Rudra  said  to  Brahma,  "  Say,  O  lord,  how  earnest 
thou  hither,  and  by  whom  wert  thou  created  ? "  Brahma  asks 
in  return,  "  And  where  have  you  come  from  ?  "  The  result  is  a 
terrible  quarrel,  in  which  Siva,  inflamed  with  anger,  cut  off  the 
fifth  head  of  Brahma,  which  had  uttered  the  boastful  words. 
But  when  Siva  tried  to  throw  the  head  to  the  ground,  it  would 
not  fall,  but  remained  in  his  hand.  Brahma  then  created  a 
giant  to  slay  Siva  in  his  weakened  state,  caused  by  the  sin  of 
injuring  Brahma,  the  father  of  Brahmans,  to  escape  from  whom 
Siva  fled  to  Benares.  The  particular  sanctity  of  Benares  arises 
from  the  fact  that  it  was  there  that  Siva  became  absolved  from 
his  sin,  and  was  therefore  freed  from  the  dissevered  head  of 
Brahma,  which  as  a  penance  he  was  doomed  to  carry  with  him 
wherever  he  went.  It  was  in  his  attempt  to  get  free  from  the 
sin  of  Brahmanicide  that  Siva  became  a  wandering  mendicant. 

The  ordinary  name  by  which  Siva  is  known  is  Mahadeva,  the 
great  god  ;  the  origin  of  this  is  taught  in  the  Mahabharata.* 
The  Asuras  had  a  boon  bestowed  on  them  by  Brahma,  that  they 
should  have  three  castles  which  should  be  "  destructible  only  by 
the  deity  who  should  be  able  to  overthrow  castles  by  a  single 
arrow."  Owing  to  this  defence,  they  become  most  hateful  to  the 
other  gods,  who,  in  their  distress,  went  to  Brahma,  who  conducts 
them  to  Mahadeva.  Siva  tells  them  that  he  alone  cannot 
destroy  these  castles,  but  that,  with  the  aid  of  half  his  strength, 
they  themselves  would  be  able  to  overcome  their  enemies.  They 
answered  that  they  could  not  sustain  half  his  strength,  but  pro- 
posed that  he  should  undertake  the  work  aided  by  half  their 
strength.  Mahadeva  consented  to  this,  and  by  this  means  be- 
came stronger  than  all  the  gods,  and  was  thenceforward  called 
Mahadeva.     Notwithstanding  this,  in  the  account  of  Parasurama 

*  Muir,  ().  S.  T.,  iv.  223. 


Siva. 


229 


a  legend  is  given  in  which  Vishnu's  superiority  to  Siva  is  shown  ; 
whilst  in  the  Puranas  devoted  to  Siva's  praise  it  is  distinctly 
affirmed  that  Brahma  and  Vishnu  are  inferior  to  him. 

The  unity  of  the  various  deities  is  taught  in  the  following 
legend:* — As  Lakshmi  and  Durga  were  sitting  together  in  the 


HAR-HARI. 


presence  of  Siva,  Lakshmi  contended  that  her  husband  (Vishnu) 
was  greater  than  Siva,  because  Siva  had  worshipped  him.     As 


*  Ward,  ii.  190. 


230  The   Puranic   Deities. 


they  were  conversing  Vishnu  himself  appeared,  and,  in  order  to 
convince  his  wife  that  he  and  Siva  were  equal,  entered  the  body 
of  Siva,  and  they  became  one.  Another  form  of  this  story  is 
found  in  the  '  Skanda  Purana.'  *  Siva  asked  Vishnu  on  one 
occasion  to  assume  the  form  of  a  beautiful  woman,  as  he  did 
at  the  churning  of  the  ocean,  to  attract  the  attention  of  the 
Asuras  whilst  the  gods  drank  the  Amrita.  Vishnu  consenting 
to  do  this,  Siva  became  excited  and  sought  to  embrace  her. 
As  Vishnu  ran  away,  Siva  followed  ;  and  though  Vishnu  resumed 
his  proper  form,  Siva  clasped  him  so  tightly  that  their  bodies 
became  one,  and  the  name  Har-Hari  is  given  to  the  deities  thus 
united. 

Siva  is  always  represented  as  having  a  third  eye,  situated  in 
the  middle  of  his  forehead  ;  the  reason  of  this  peculiarity  is  given 
in  the  Mahabharata.f  As  Siva  was  seated  on  the  Himalayas, 
where  he  had  been  engaged  in  austerities,  Uma,  attended  by  her 
companions  and  dressed  as  an  ascetic,  came  up  behind  him  and 
playfully  put  her  hands  over  his  eyes.  The  effect  of  this  was 
tremendous.  Suddenly  the  world  became  darkened,  lifeless,  and 
destitute  of  oblations.  The  gloom,  however,  was  as  suddenly  dis- 
pelled, by  a  great  flame  which  burst  from  Mahadeva's  forehead, 
in  which  a  third  eye,  luminous  as  the  sun,  was  formed.  By  the 
fire  of  this  eye  the  mountain  was  scorched,  and  everything  upon 
it  consumed.  Uma  hereupon  stood  in  a  submissive  attitude 
before  her  husband,  when,  in  a  moment,  the  Himalaya,  her  father, 
was  restored  to  his  former  condition. 

Each  god  is  represented  as  having  special  fondness  for  some 
bird  or  aminal,  on  which  he  is  supposed  to  travel,  and  which 
therefore  is  called  his  Vahan  or  vehicle.  The  bull  is  Siva's  ;  and 
the  image  of  Nandi  is  seen  in  front  of  many  of  the  shrines  sacred 
to  Mahadeva.  Owing  probably  to  this  circumstance,  a  curious 
custom  prevails,  similar  in  many  respects  to  the  setting  loose  of 
the  scapegoat  by  the  Israelites.  At  the  death  of  a  follower  of 
Siva,  if  his  friends  are  pious  and  can  afford  it,  they  set  a  bullock- 
loose,  and  allow  it  to  wander  at  will.     By  the  Hindus  generally 

*  Ward,  ii.  190.  t  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  iv.  269. 


Siva.  231 


it  is  considered  a  meritorious  act  to  feed  these  sacred  bulls,  and 
a  sin 'to  injure  them.  In  country  places  many  of  these  animals 
are  to  be  seen,  and  they  become  a  great  nuisance  to  the  culti- 
vators into  whose  fields  they  wander  ;  and  though  they  do  much 
damage,  as  they  have  no  owner,  no  compensation  can  be  ob- 
tained. If  a  man  were  specially  devout,  or  his  friends  eminently 
pious,  as  many  as  seven  bulls  are  set  loose  at  his  decease.  The 
idea  seems  to  be  this  :  as  Siva  was  delighted  with  Nandi,  he  will 
graciously  receive  into  his  presence  those  on  whose  behalf  these 
bullocks  are  given. 

As  Siva  himself  lived  the  life  of  an  ascetic,  and  practised 
severe  penance,  it  is  believed  that  a  similar  life  is  pleasing  to 
him  now  ;  hence  many  of  the  Saivites,  or  followers  of  Siva, 
practise  great  austerities,  and  resort  to  cruel  rites  as  a  means  of 
gaining  his  favour.  Wandering  throughout  India  are  tens  of 
thousands  of  Sanyasis,  or  pilgrims,  who  subsist  upon  charity, 
and  expose  themselves  to  cold  and  heat,  in  the  belief  that  their 
life  is  pleasing  to  this  deity.  Some  of  them  inflict  upon  them- 
selves great  physical  pain  by  retaining  their  arms  or  legs  in  one 
posture  for  years  ;  others  allow  the  thumb-nail  to  grow  through 
their  finger  ;  others  gaze  into  the  sun  until  they  become  blind 
others  again  impose  a  vow  of  silence  upon  themselves,  until  at 
length  they  cannot  speak.  At  certain  festivals  held  in  honour  of 
Siva,  the  lower  orders  of  the  people  used  to  swing  from  bamboos 
hanging  by  iron  hooks  forced  into  their  bodies,  whilst  others 
threw  themselves  from  a  height  upon  sharp  knives  ;  but  at  the 
present  time  these  cruel  practices  are  prohibited  by  the  Govern- 
ment. At  these  times  an  intoxicating  drug  made  from  hemp  is 
freely  indulged  in  ;  the  authority  for  this  practice  being  the  life 
of  Siva,  as  described  in  the  Puranas.  As  Krishna  is  believed  to 
be  pleased  with  songs  and  dances,  not  always  of  a  highly  moral 
character,  Siva  is  believed  to  delight  in  the  cruel  and  drunken 
practices  of  his  ignorant  worshippers. 

The  following  extract  from  the  Bhagavata,  descriptive  of  Siva's 
appearance  and  conduct,  countenances  much  that  now  forms 
part  of  Siva's  worship.  Coming  to  the  conclusion  that  one  of 
his  worshippers  was  in  distress,  Siva  "  assumed  half  the  body  of 


J  1  o 

-  J- 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


Parvati,  fastened  his  matted  hair,  rubbed  his  body  over  with 
ashes,  ate  a  large  quantity  of  hemp,  swallow-wort,  and  thorn- 
apple  ;    and  wearing  a  Brahmanical  thread   composed  of  white 


SIVA    SLAYING   AN'   ASURA. 


snakes,  clad  in  an  elephant's  hide,  with  a  necklace  of  beads  and 

a  garland  of  skulls,  riding  upon  Nandi,  accompanied  by  ghosts, 

•blins,  spectres,  witches,  imps,  sprites  and  evil  spirits,  Bholonath 

came   forth.     On   his   forehead  was   the   moon  ;    he  placed  the 


Siva.  233 

Ganges  on  his  head,*  and  his  eyes  were  very  red.  His  most 
destructive  weapon  was  a  trident :  with  this  he  slew  the  foe  who 
was  obnoxious  to  his  follower. 

Though  Siva's  appearance  is  repeatedly  described  in  the 
Puranas,  and  in  pictures  he  is  often  represented  in  the  human 
form,  it  is  by  the  Linga  that  he  is  almost  universally  worshipped. 
This  image,  from  its  appearance,  does  not  suggest  anything 
offensive  to  those  unacquainted  with  its  symbolic  meaning  ;  and 
though  some  writers  speak  of  its  being  innocuous  to  the  Hindus 
themselves,  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  acquainted  with  the 
legends  which  account  for  its  being  the  recognised  symbol  of 
Siva,  to  see  and  worship  it  without  impure  thoughts  being 
suggested  by  it,  it  being  intended  to  represent  both  the  male 
and  female  reproductive  organs. 

Several  legends  are  given  to  explain  how  the  Linga  came  to 
be  the  representative  of  Siva ;  the  probability  is  that  it  was  an 
object  of  worship  of  some  aboriginal  tribe,  incorporated  into 
Hinduism.  The  '  Padma  Purana  '  f  teaches  that  it  was  the  result 
of  a  curse  pronounced  by  Bhrigu.  When  Bhrigu  was  sent  by  the 
sages  to  discover  who  of  the  three  gods  was  the  greatest,  he  came 
to  Siva's  abode,  and  wishing  at  once  to  enter  was  prevented  from 
doing  so  by  a  doorkeeper,  who  informed  him  that,  as  his  master 
was  with  Devi  his  wife,  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  enter  at 
present.  After  waiting  for  some  time,  the  sage's  patience  being 
exhausted,  he  said  :  "  Since  thou,  O  Sankara !  hast  treated  me 
with  contempt,  in  preferring  the  embraces  of  Parvati,  your  forms 
of  worship  shall  be  the  Linga  and  Yoni." 

The  Vamana  J  makes  it  the  result  of  a  curse  pronounced  by  a 
number  of  sages.  When  Sati  died  at  Daksha's  sacrifice,  Siva 
wandered  about  from  place  to  place  like  a  madman,  mourning 
her  absence.  He  travelled  from  hermitage  to  hermitage,  but 
could  find  no  rest.  When  the  hermits'  wives  saw  him,  they  fell  in 
love  with  him  and  followed  him  from  place  to  place  ;  their  husbands 

*   See  Ganga,  Part  III.  chap.  viii. 
f  Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Myth.,'  p.  301. 
I  Ibid.  p.  299. 


234  The   Puranic  Deities. 

being  incensed  at  this,  cursed  the  god,  and  by  this  means  de- 
prived him  of  his  manhood.  A  great  commotion  through  the 
world  followed,  so  that  Brahma  and  Vishnu  interceded  with  the 
hermits  on  his  behalf,  who  consented  to  withdraw  their  curse  on 
condition  that  Siva  should  be  represented  by  the  Linga ;  and 
thus  it  became  an  object  of  worship  to  gods  and  men. 

As  a  specimen  of  the  legends  by  which  the  worship  of  Siva 
under  this  form  is  inculcated,  I  give  the  following  extract  from 
the  '  Siva  Purana.'*  A  Rakshas  named  Bhima,  having  obtained 
invincible  might  as  a  boon  from  Rama,  commenced  exerting  his 
newly-acquired  power  by  attacking  the  King  of  Kamrupa. 
Having  conquered  the  king,  and  seized  his  kingdom  and  riches, 
he  placed  him  in  chains  in  a  solitary  prison.  The  king,  being 
eminently  pious,  notwithstanding  his  confinement,  continued 
daily  to  make  clay  figures  of  the  Linga,  and  to  worship  Siva 
with  all  the  prescribed  rites  and  ceremonies.  Meanwhile  the 
Rakshas  continued  his  conquests,  and  everywhere  abolished 
religious  observances  and  worship  enjoined  in  the  Vedas.  The 
gods  being  reduced  by  his  power  to  great  distress,  appealed  to 
Siva  for  help,  and  propitiated  him  by  the  worship  of  clay  Lingas. 
Sambhu  assured  them  that  he  would  effect  the  destruction  of 
their  enemy  by  means  of  the  King  of  Kamrupa,  then  a  prisoner. 
At  this  very  moment  this  king  was  engaged  in  profound  medi- 
tation before  a  Linga,  when  one  of  the  guards,  seeing  him  thus 
occupied,  went  and  informed  the  Rakshas  that  the  prisoner 
was  performing  some  improper  ceremonies  in  order  to  injure  him. 
I  [earing  this,  the  monster,  enraged,  seized  his  sword,  and  hasten- 
ing to  the  prison,  thus  addressed  the  king  :  "  Speak  the  truth, 
and  tell  me  who  it  is  that  thou  worshippest,  and  I  will  not  slay 
thee  ;  otherwise  I  will  instantly  put  thee  to  death  !  " 

The  king,  placing  firm  reliance  on  the  protection  of  Siva,  un- 
dauntedly replied  :  "  In  truth,  I  worship  Sankara  ;  do  then  what 
thou  pleasest !  "  The  Rakshas  asked  :  "  What  can  Sankara  do 
to  me  ?  I  know  him  well,  that  he  was  once  obliged  to  become  the 
servant  of  my  uncle  (Ravana);  and  thou,  trusting  in  his  power, 


*   Kennedy,  'Hindu  Myth.,'  p.  310. 


Siva.  235 

didst  endeavour  to  conquer  me  ;  but  defeat  was  the  result  of  thy 
attempt.  However,  until  thou  showest  me  thy  lord,  and  con- 
vincest  me  of  his  might,  I  shall  not  believe  in  his  divinity  !  "  The 
king  replied  :  "  Vile  as  I  am,  what  power  have  I  over  that  god  ? 
But  mighty  as  he  is,  I  know  he  will  never  forsake  me  !  To  which 
the  Rakshas  said  :  "  How  can  that  delighter  in  ganja  and  inebria- 
tion, that  wandering  mendicant,  protect  his  worshippers  ?  Let 
but  thy  lord  appear,  and  I  will  immediately  engage  with  him  in 
battle."  He  then  ordered  the  attendance  of  his  army ;  and 
reviling  the  king,  the  mighty  Rakshas,  smiting  the  Linga  with 
his  sword,  said,  laughing  :  "  Now  behold  the  power  of  thy  lord  ! ' 
Scarcely  had  his  sword  touched  the  Linga  than  Hara  issued  from 
it,  and  exclaimed  :  "  Behold,  I  am  Iswara  (god),  who  appears  for 
the  protection  of  his  worshipper,  on  whom  he  always  bestows 
safety  and  happiness  ;  now  learn  to  dread  my  might ! "  Siva  then 
attacked  the  Rakshas,  and,  with  the  glory  which  issued  from 
his  third  eye,  consumed  him  and  his  army  to  ashes. 

Siva  is  said  to  have  a  thousand  names  ;  in  addition  to  those 
already  mentioned  the  following  are  most  common  : — 

Maheshwara,  "  The  great  god." 

Ishwar,  "  The  glorious." 

Chandrashekara,   "  He  who  wears   a  half-moon   on   his  fore- 
head." 

Bhuteswara,  "  Lord  of  Bhuts,  or  goblins." 

Mritunjaya,  "  He  who  conquers  death." 

Srikanta,  "  He  whose  neck  is  beautiful." 

Smarahara,  "  The  destroyer  of  Smara  or  Kamdeva." 

Gangadhara,    "  He   who    holds    Ganga   (the    Ganges)    in    his 
hair." 

Sthanu,  "  The  everlasting." 

Girisha,  "  The  lord  of  the  hills." 

Digambara,  "  He  who  is  clothed  with  space  (naked)." 

Bhagavat,  "  The  lord." 

Isana,  "  The  ruler." 

Mahakala,  "  The  great  time." 

Tryambaka,  "  The  three-eyed." 


236 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


panchAnana. 


This  is  a  form  of  Siva  in  which  he  is  represented,  as  his  name 
teaches,  with  five  faces  ;  the  appearance  of  his  body  and  the 
ascetic's  dress  being  the  same  as  in  his  ordinary  forms.  It  is 
under  this  name  that  prayers   for  recovery  from   sickness   are 


PANCHANANA. 


addressed  to  Siva  as  the  physician  or  healer.  In  places  where 
there  is  no  temple  or  image  of  this  deity,  worship  is  offered  to 
him  before  a  shapeless  stone,  painted  red,  placed  under  a  tree. 
This  is  a  very  common  form  of  worship  in  the  villages  of  Bengal. 


Panchanana. 


237 


There  are  some  shrines  of  Panchanana  that  have  acquired  con- 
siderable celebrity,  to  which  women  resort  to  obtain  the  gift  of 
children  and  other  blessings.  In  times  of  sickness  offerings  are 
made  to  this  deity  without  scruple,  though  the  sufferer  is  not 
ordinarily  a  worshipper  of  Siva.  In  cases  of  epilepsy  it  is  the 
common  belief  that  the  victim  is  possessed  by  Panchanana,  and 
offerings  are  made  to  induce  him  to  depart ;  and  it  is  believed 
that  recovery  is  the  result  of  the  god's  departure. 


2;S  The  Puranic  Deities. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

UMA. 

L'ma  is  the  name  by  which  the  consort  of  Siva  is  first  known. 
In  the  various  sacred  books  she  appears  in  many  forms,  and  is 
known  by  many  names  ;  but  as  there  are  legends  giving  the 
circumstances  connected  with  the  names  and  forms  more  gene- 
rally known,  these  will  be  given  as  far  as  possible  in  chrono- 
logical order. 

When  Devi  (the  goddess)  appears  as  Uma,  she  is  said  to  be 
the  daughter  of  Daksha,  a  son  of  Brahma.  Her  father  was  at 
first  very  unwilling  that  his  daughter  should  marry  a  mendicant, 
but  his  scruples  were  overcome  by  the  persuasion  of  Brahma. 
As  Siva  is  styled  Mahadeva,  Uma  is  frequently  called  simply 
Devi.  At  this  period  of  her  existence  she  is  also  called  Sati,  in 
allusion  to  the  fact  that  when  her  father  slighted  her  husband  bv 
not  inviting  him  to  the  great  sacrifice  he  made,  she  voluntarily 
entered  the  sacrificial  fire  and  was  burned  to  death  in  the 
presence  of  the  gods  and  Brahmans  ;  or,  according  to  another 
account,  was,  under  the  same  circumstances,  consumed  by  her 
own  glory.  The  name  Sati  means  "the  true  or  virtuous  woman," 
and  is  given  to  those  widows  who  enter  the  funeral  pile  of  their 
husbands,  and  undergo  a  voluntary  death,  by  being  burned  with 
his  corpse.  Ambika,  another  name  of  Uma,  in  one  of  the  earliest 
books,  is  said  to  be  the  sister  of  Rudra  ;  and  yet  in  the  later  oiks 
she  is  declared  to  be  his  wife. 

"  The  earliest  work,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  in  which  the  nameof 
Uma  appears,  is  the  Talavakara,  or  Kena  Upanishad.  In  the 
third  section  of  that  treatise  it   is  mentioned  that  on  one  occasion 


Uma.  239 

Brahma  gained  a  victory  for  the  gods.  As  however  they  were 
disposed  to  ascribe  the  credit  of  their  success  to  themselves, 
Brahma  appeared  for  the  purpose  of  disabusing  them  of  their 
mistake.  The  gods  did  not  know  him,  and  commissioned  first 
Agni,  and  then  Vayu,  to  ascertain  what  this  apparition  was. 
When,  in  answer  to  Brahma's  inquiry,  these  two  gods  repre- 
sented themselves,  the  one  as  having  power  to  burn  and  the 
other  to  blow  away  anything  whatever,  he  desired  them  to  burn 
and  blow  away  respectively  a  blade  of  grass  ;  but  they  were 
unable  to  do  this,  and  returned  without  ascertaining  who  he 
was.  Indra  was  then  commissioned  to  find  out  whom  he  could 
be.  '  So  be  it,'  he  replied,  and  approached  that  being,  who 
vanished  from  him.  In  the  sky  he  came  to  a  woman,  who  was 
very  resplendent,  Uma  Haimavati.  To  her  he  said,  'What  is 
this  apparition  ? '  She  said,  '  It  is  Brahma  ;  in  this  victory  of 
Brahma  exult.'  By  this  he  knew  that  it  was  Brahma.  The  com- 
mentators on  this  passage  declare  that  Uma  means  'knowledge,' 
and  speak  of  Uma  as  the  impersonation  of  '  divine  knowledge.' "  * 

Professor  Weber f  says:  "As  in  Siva,  first  of  all  two  gods, 
Agni  and  Rudra,  are  combined,  so  too  his  wife  is  to  be  regarded 
as  a  compound  of  several  divine  forms  ;  and  this  becomes  quite 
evident  as  we  look  over  the  mass  of  her  epithets.  While  one 
set  of  these,  as  Uma,  Ambika,  Parvati,  Haimavati,  belong  to  the 
wife  of  Rudra,  others,  as  Kali,  carry  us  back  to  the  wife  of  Agni  ; 
while  Gauri  and  others  perhaps  refer  to  Nirriti,  the  goddess  of  all 
evil."  And  he  adds  :  "  The  most  remarkable  instance  of  this  is  to 
be  found  in  the  Mahabharata,  in  the  hymn  of  Yudhishthira  to 
Durga,  where  he  calls  her  Yasoda,  Krishna,  'born  in  the  cowherd 
family  of  Nanda,'  'sister  of  Vasudeva,'  'enemy  of  Kansa,'  and 
as  'having  the  same  features  as  Sankarshana.' '  Some  such  ex- 
planation is  certainly  necessary  when  we  see  that  Kali  is  said  to 
be  the  same  as  Uma,  the  embodiment  of  "  heavenly  wisdom." 

In  the  following  passage  from  the  Ramayana,|  Uma  is  said 
to  be  the  daughter  of  Himavat  and  Mena  ;  the  two  forms  of 
Uma  and  Parvati  being  confounded  in  the  writer's  mind.     "To 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  iv.  420.  f  Ibid.  iv.  425.  ±  Ibid.  iv.  430. 


240  The  Puranic  Deities. 


Himavat,  the  chief  of  mountains,  the  great  mine  of  metal,  two 
daughters  were  born  in  beauty  unequalled  upon  earth.  The 
daughter  of  Meru,  Mena  by  name,  the  pleasing  and  beloved 
wife  of  Himavat,  was  their  slender-waisted  mother.  Of  her  was 
born  Ganga,  the  eldest  daughter  of  Himavat,  and  his  second 
daughter  was  Uma,  who,  rich  in  austere  observances,  having 
undertaken  an  arduous  rite,  fulfilled  a  course  of  severe  austerity. 
This  daughter  Uma,  distinguished  by  severe  austerity,  adored 
by  the  worlds,  the  chief  of  the  mountains  gave  to  the  matchless 
Rudra.  These  were  the  two  daughters  of  the  king  of  the 
mountains  ;  Ganga,  the  most  eminent  of  rivers,  and  Uma,  the 
most  excellent  of  goddesses." 

The  Harivansa*  mentions  three  daughters  of  Himavat  and 
Mena,  but  Ganga  is  not  amongst  them.  "Their  (Pitris)  mental 
daughter  was  Mena,  the  eminent  wife  of  the  great  mountain 
Himavat.  The  king  of  the  mountains  begat  three  daughters 
upon  Mena,  viz.  Aparna,  Ekaparna,  and  Ekapatala.  These 
three  performing  very  great  austerity,  such  as  could  not  be 
performed  by  gods  or  Danavas,  distressed  [with  alarm]  both  the 
stationary  and  the  moving  worlds.  Ekaparna  (one  leaf)  fed 
upon  one  leaf.  Ekapatala  took  only  one  patala  (Bignonia)  for 
her  food.  One  (Aparna)  took  no  sustenance  ;  but  her  mother, 
distressed  through  maternal  affection,  forbade  her,  dissuading 
her  with  her  words  u  ma  (oh  don't).  The  beautiful  goddess, 
performing  arduous  austerity,  having  been  thus  addressed  by 
her  mother,  became  known  in  the  three  worlds  as  Uma.  In 
this  manner  the  contemplative  goddess  became  renowned  under 
that  name.  All  these  three  had  mortified  bodies,  were  dis- 
tinguished by  the  force  of  contemplation,  and  were  all  chaste, 
and  expounders  of  divine  knowledge.  Uma  was  the  eldest  and 
most  excellent  of  the  three.  Distinguished  by  the  force  derived 
from  deep  contemplation,  she  obtained  Mahadeva  [for  her 
husband]." 

Several  of  the  names  under  which  Uma  is  now  known  and 
worshipped  are  to  be  found  in  the  older  writings  of  the  Hindus, 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.j  iv.  432. 


Parvati.  241 

though  at  that  time  they  did  not  refer  to  Siva's  wife.  Uma,  as 
we  have  already  seen,  was  "  Wisdom  ; "  Ambika  was  a  sister  of 
Rudra;  Durga  "in  a  hymn  of  the  Taittiriya  Aranyaka  is  an 
epithet  of  the  sacrificial  flame  ;  and  Kali,  a  word  which  occurs 
in  the  Mandaka  Upanishad,  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  seven 
flickering  tongues  of  Agni,  the  god  of  fire."* 

Uma  is  called  the  mother  of  Kartikeya,  and  in  a  certain  sense  of 
Ganesa  too  ;  but  it  is  not  at  all  clear  whether  it  was  really  as  Uma 
or  in  her  succeeding  birth  as  Parvati  that  she  had  these  children. 

The  '  Kurma  Purana '  f  has  an  account  of  Uma's  creation  which 
takes  us  a  stage  anterior  to  her  birth  as  a  daughter  of  Daksha. 
"  When  Brahma  was  angry  with  his  sons  for  adopting  an  ascetic 
life  [and  refusing  to  perpetuate  the  human  race],  a  form  half 
male  and  half  female  was  produced  from  that  anger,  to  whom 
Brahma  said, '  Divide  thyself/  and  then  disappeared.  The  male 
half  became  Rudra,  and  the  female,  at  the  command  of  Brahma, 
became  the  daughter  of  Daksha  under  the  name  of  Sati,  and 
was  given  in  marriage  to  Rudra  ;  and  when  she  subsequently 
gave  up  her  life  on  being  treated  with  disrespect  by  her  father, 
she  was  born  a  second  time  as  the  daughter  of  Himavat  and 
Mena,  and  named  Parvati." 

It  should  be  noticed  that  although  Uma  is  called  the  wife  of 
Siva,  it  is  understood  that  she  represents  the  energy  or  active 
power  of  that  deity  ;  she  assumed  a  body  in  order  that  she 
might  be  united  to  him  in  due  form  :  in  like  manner  Vishnu's 
energy  became  incarnate  in  Lakshmi,  Sita,  &c. 


PARVATI. 

The  goddess  in  this  form  is  the  constant  companion  of  her 
husband,  but  few  independent  actions  are  ascribed  to  her.  In 
the  Puranas  Siva  and  Parvati  are  generally  represented  as 
engaged  in  making  love  to  each  other,  or  (rather  a  singular 
change)  as  seated  on  Mount  Kailasa  discussing  the  most  abstruse 

*  Goldstticker,  Chambers's  Cyclopaedia,  s.  v.  Uma. 
f  Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Myth.'  p.  329. 


242 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


questions  of  Hindu  philosophy.  Occasionally,  however,  quarrels 
arose  between  them,  as  e.g.  when  Siva  reproached  her  for  the 
blackness  of  her  skin.     This  taunt  so  incensed  her  that  she  left 


SIVA    AND    1'AKVATI. 


him,  and,  repairing  to  a  deep  forest,  performed  a  most  severe 
course  of  austerities,  until  Brahma  granted  her  as  a  boon  that 
her  complexion  should  be  golden,  and  from  this  circumstance 
she  is  known  as  Gauri.* 


Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Myth.'  p.  334. 


Parvati.  243 

The  following  legend  from  the  'Varaha  Purana'*  describes  her 
origin.    Brahma  when  on  a  visit  to  Siva  on  Mount  Kailasa  is  thus 
addressed  by  him  :   "  Say  quickly,  O  Brahma,  what  has  induced 
you  to  come  to  me  ?  "  Brahma  replies  :  "  There  is  a  mighty  Asura 
named  Andhaka  (Darkness),  by  whom  all  the  gods,  having  been 
distressed,  came  for  protection,  and  I  have  hastened  to  inform 
you  of  their  complaints."     Brahma  then  looked  intently  at  Siva, 
who  by  thought  summoned  Vishnu  into  their  presence.     As  the 
three  deities  looked  at  each  other,  "from  their  three  refulgent 
glances  sprang  into  being  a  virgin  of  celestial  loveliness,  of  hue 
cerulean,  like  the  petals  of  a  blue  lotus,  and  adorned  with  gems, 
who  bashfully  bowed  before  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva."     On 
their  asking  her  who  she  was,  and  why  she  was  distinguished 
by  the  three  colours  black,  white,  and  red,  she  said :  "  From  your 
glances  was  I  produced  ;  do  you  not  know  your  own  omnipotent 
energies  ? "     Brahma,  then  praising  her,  said  :  "  Thou  shalt  be 
named  the  goddess  of  three  times  (past,  present,  and  future),  the 
preserver  of  the  universe,  and  under  various  appellations  shalt 
thou  be  worshipped,  as  thou  shalt  be  the  cause  of  accomplishing 
the  desires  of  thy  votaries.     But,  O  goddess,  divide  thyself  into 
three  forms,  according  to  the  colours  by  which  thou  art  distin- 
guished."    She  then,  as  Brahma  had  requested,  divided  herself 
into  three  forms  ;  one  white,  one  red,  and  one  black.     The  white 
was  "  Sarasvati,  of  a  lovely  felicitous  form,  and  the  co-operator 
with  Brahma  in  creation  ;  the  red  was  Lakshmi,  the  beloved  of 
Vishnu,  who  with    him  preserves  the  universe  ;  the  black  was 
Parvati,  endowed  with  many  qualities  and  the  energy  of  Siva." 
In  the  preceding  legend  it  was  narrated  how  Parvati,  originally 
black,  became  golden-coloured. 

The  'Vaivarta  Purana '  f  relates  the  circumstance  which  led  to 
the  re-appearance  on  earth  of  Uma,  who  had  sacrificed  herself 
and  became  a  Sati,  under  the  form  of  Parvati.  Siva,  hearing  of 
the  death  of  his  wife,  fainted  from  grief;  on  his  recovery  he  has- 
tened to  the  banks  of  the  river  of  heaven,  where  he  beheld  "the 
body  of  his  beloved  Sati,  arrayed  in  white  garments,  holding  a 

*  Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Myth.'  p.  209.  t  Ibid.  p.  331. 

R   2 


244  The  Puranic  Deities. 

rosary  in  her  hand,  and  glowing  with  splendour  bright  as 
burnished  gold.  No  sooner  did  he  see  the  lifeless  form  of  his 
spouse,  than,  through  grief  for  her  loss,  his  senses  forsook  him." 
When  he  revived,  gazing  on  her  beautiful  countenance,  with 
tears  in  his  eyes  and  sorrow  in  his  voice,  he  thus  addressed  her : 
"  Arise,  arise,  O  my  beloved  Sati !  I  am  Sankara,  thy  lord ;  look 
therefore  on  me,  who  have  approached  thee.  With  thee  I  am 
almighty,  the  framer  of  all  things,  and  the  giver  of  every  bliss ; 
but  without  thee,  my  energy !  I  am  like  a  corpse,  powerless  and 
incapable  of  action  :  how  then,  my  beloved,  canst  thou  forsake 
me  ?  With  smiles  and  glances  of  thine  eyes,  say  something 
sweet  as  amrita,  and  with  the  rain  of  thy  gentle  words  sprinkle 
my  heart,  which  is  scorched  with  grief.  Formerly,  when  thou 
didst  see  me  from  a  distance,  thou  wouldst  greet  me  with  the 
fondest  accents  ;  why  then  to-day  art  thou  angry,  and  wilt  not 
speak  to  me,  thus  sadly  lamenting  ?  O  lord  of  my  soul !  arise. 
O  mother  of  the  universe  !  arise.  Dost  thou  not  see  me  here 
weeping  ?  O  beauteous  One !  thou  canst  not  have  expired. 
Then,  O  my  faithful  spouse  !  why  dost  thou  not  honour  me 
as  usual  ?  And  why  dost  thou  thus,  disobedient  to  my  voice, 
infringe  thy  marriage  vow  ?  " 

"  Siva,  having  thus  spoken,  raised  the  lifeless  body,  and  in 
the  anguish  of  separation  pressed  it  to  his  bosom,  and  kissed  it 
again  and  again.  Lip  to  lip,  and  breast  to  breast,  Sankara 
clasped  the  corpse  of  his  beloved  ;  and,  after  frequent  faintings, 
arose,  and,  pressing  Sati  closely  to  his  bosom,  rushed  forward 
maddened  with  grief.  Like  a  man  deprived  of  his  senses,  the 
preceptor  of  the  universe  wandered  over  the  seven  dzuipas,  until, 
exhausted  by  fatigue  and  anguish,  he  fell  down  in  a  swoon  at  the 
foot  of  a  banyan  tree.  The  gods,  seeing  Siva  in  this  state,  were 
greatly  astonished,  and,  accompanied  by  Brahma  and  Vishnu, 
hastened  to  the  spot  where  he  lay.  Vishnu  placed  the  head  of 
the  fainting  Siva  on  his  bosom  and  wept  aloud  ;  after  a  little 
time  he  encouraged  his  friend  by  saying,  '  O  Siva  !  recover  thy 
senses,  and  listen  to  what  I  say.  Thou  wilt  certainly  regain 
Sati,  since  Siva  and  Sati  are  as  inseparable  as  cold  from  water, 
heat  from  fire,  smell  from  earth,  or  radiance  from  the  sun ! ' 


Parvati. 


245 


"  Hearing  these  words,  Siva  faintly  opened  his  eyes,  bedewed 
with  tears,  and  said  :  '  O  form  of  splendour  !  who  art  thou  ? 
Who  are  these  that  accompany  thee  ?  What  is  thy  name,  and 
what  are  their  names  ?  Who  am  I,  and  where  are  my  at- 
tendants ?  Where  art  thou  and  these  going  ?  Where  am  I, 
and  where  proceeding  ? '  As  Vishnu  heard  these  words  he 
wept,  and  his  tears,  uniting  with  those  of  Siva,  formed  a  lake, 
which  hence  became  a  famous  place  of  pilgrimage.  Vishnu  at 
length  calmed  Siva,  who,  delighted  with  his  words,  beheld  Sati, 


PARVATI    WORSHIPPING   THE    LINGA. 


seated  before  him  in  a  gem-adorned  car,  accompanied  by 
numerous  attendants,  arrayed  in  costly  garments,  resplendent 
with  ornaments,  her  placid  face  being  irradiated  with  a  gentle 
smile.  The  anguish  of  separation  ceased,  and  joy  filled  his  soul 
as  Sati  thus  addressed  him  :  '  Be  firm,  O  Mahadeva !  Lord  of 
my  soul  !  In  whatever  state  of  my  being  I  may  exist,  I  shall 
never  be  separated  from  my  lord  ;  and  now  have  I  been  born 
the  daughter  of  Himavat  in  order  to  become  again  thy  wife  : 
therefore  no  longer  grieve  on  account  of  our  separation.'  Having 
thus  consoled  Siva,  Sati  disappeared." 


246  The  Puranic  Deities. 


In  another  chapter  of  the  same  Purana  we  have  an  account  of 
their  reunion.*     "  Sati  soon  obtained  another  birth  in  the  womb 
of  Himavat's   wife  ;    and   Siva,  collecting  the  bones  and  ashes 
from  her  funeral  pile,  made  a  necklace  of  the  bones,  and  covered 
his  body  with  the  ashes,  and  thus  preserved  them  as  memorials 
of  his  beloved.     Not  long  after  this,  Sati  was  born  as  the  daughter 
of  Mena,  excelling  in  beauty  and  virtue  all  created  beings,  and 
she  grew  up  in  her  mountain  home  like  the  young  moon  increas- 
ing to  its  full  splendour.    Whilst  still  a  girl,  she  heard  a  voice  from 
heaven,  saying,  '  Perform  a  severe  course  of  austerity,  in  order  to 
obtain  Siva  for  a  husband,  as  he  cannot  otherwise  be  obtained.' 
Parvati,  proud  of  her  youth,  smiling  disdainfully  at  this  instruc- 
tion, thought  within  herself:  'Will  he  who,  on  account  of  the 
grief  he  felt  for  my  having  formerly  consumed  myself,  not  accept 
me  as  his  spouse  when  redolent  of  life  ?    And  how  can  disjunction 
exist  between  those  who  have  been  predestined  from  their  first 
being  to  be  husband  and  wife  ? '     Confident  in  her  youth,  love- 
liness,  and   numerous  attractions,  and  persuaded   that   on   the 
first  mention  of  her  name  Siva  would  be  anxious  to  espouse  her, 
Parvati  did  not  seek  to  gain  him  by  the  performance  of  austerity, 
but  night  and  day  gave  herself  to  joyous  sports  with  her  com- 
panions."    Her  hopes,  however,  were  disappointed.     She  had  to 
perform   most  severe  penance  before  she  was  reunited   to   her 
husband  ;    and  it  was  only  by  the  assistance  of  Kamadeva,  who, 
at  the  instigation  of  the  gods,  wounded  him   with   his   arrows 
as  he  was  engaged  in  meditation,  whilst  Parvati  was  seated  in 
front  of  him,  that  her  wish   was   gratified.     Siva   at   first  was 
anything  but  grateful  for  this  interference  ;  he  rewarded  Kama 
by  destroying  him  with  a  flame  of  glory  that  issued  from  his 
third  eye. 

In  a  Bengali  account  of  Durga,  a  legend  is  given  from  a  later 
book  than  the  Purana  from  which  the  above  extract  was  taken, 
to  the  following  effect : — Siva  began  to  dance  in  a  most  frantic 
manner  when  he  raised  the  dead  body  of  Sati  in  his  arms.  The 
earth    trembled    beneath    the    weight    of    such    a    load  ;    when 

*  Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Myth.'  p.  334. 


Parvati.  247 

Vishnu,  fearing  there  would  be  an  utter  destruction  of  the 
universe  if  this  were  allowed  to  continue,  let  fly  his  wonder- 
working discus,  and  cut  the  body  into  fifty  -  one  pieces. 
These  fell  in  different  places,  a  leg  here,  a  hand  there  ;  but 
wherever  a  part  touched  the  earth,  the  spot  became  sacred, 
an  image  of  the  goddess  was  set  up,  and  a  temple  erected  to 
her  honour,  which  pilgrims  visit  as  shrines  to  this  day.  The 
renowned  temple  at  Kali  Ghat,  near  Calcutta,  is  said  to  possess 
the  big  toe  of  the  left  foot  ;  and  the  principal  shrines  of  Parvati 
are  believed  to  contain  a  relic  of  her  body. 

Parvati  is  represented  in  pictures  as  a  fair  and  beautiful 
woman,  with  no  superfluity  of  limbs.  Few  miraculous  deeds  are 
said  to  have  been  wrought  by  her.  It  is  when  she  appears  as 
Durga,  Kali,  &c,  that  she  is  said  to  manifest  her  divine  powers, 
and  to  exhibit  a  very  different  spirit  from  that  which  appears  in 
her  as  Parvati.  Hence  the  supposition  that  these  were  originally 
distinct  deities  ;  though  now  they  are  believed  to  be  one  and 
the  same. 

DURGA. 

We  have  now  to  speak  of  the  consort  of  Siva  in  a  very 
different  character  from  that  in  which  she  appeared  as  Uma 
and  Parvati.  In  those  forms,  though  the  wife  of  Siva,  she  acted 
as  an  ordinary  woman,  and  manifested  womanly  virtues  ;  as 
Durga  she  was  a  most  powerful  warrior,  and  has  been  incarnate 
under  many  names  for  the  destruction  of  demons  who  were 
obnoxious  to  gods  and  men. 

She  obtained  the  name  Durga  because  she  slew  an  Asura 
named  Durga,  the  name  of  the  goddess  being  the  feminine  form 
of  the  demon's  name.  The  '  Skanda  Purana '  *  gives  the  following 
account -of  this  occurrence.  Kartikeya,  being  asked  by  Agastya, 
the  sage,  why  his  mother  was  called  Durga,  says :  "  A  giant 
named  Durga,  the  son  of  Ruru,  having  performed  penance  in 

*  Ward,  ii.  83. 


248  The  Puranic  Deities. 

favour  of  Brahma,  obtained  his  blessing",  and  grew  so  mighty 
that  he  conquered  the  three  worlds,  and  dethroned  Indra  and 
the  other  gods.  He  compelled  the  wives  of  the  Rishis  to  sing 
his  praise,  and  sent  the  gods  from  heaven  to  dwell  in  the  forests, 
and  by  a  mere  nod  summoned  them  to  reverence  him.  He 
abolished  religious  ceremonies  ;  Brahmans  through  fear  of  him 
gave  up  the  reading  of  the  Vedas  ;  rivers  changed  their  course  ; 
fire  lost  its  energy,  and  the  terrified  stars  retired  from  sight.  He 
assumed  the  shape  of  the  clouds,  and  gave  rain  whenever  he 
pleased  ;  the  earth  through  fear  yielded  an  abundant  harvest, 
and  the  trees  flowered  and  gave  fruit  out  of  the  proper  season." 

The  gods  in  their  distress  appealed  to  Siva.  Indra,  their  king, 
said,  "  He  has  dethroned  me  ! '  Surya  said,  "  He  has  taken 
my  kingdom  ! '  Siva,  pitying  them,  desired  Parvati  to  go  and 
destroy  this  giant.  She,  accepting  the  commission  willingly, 
calmed  the  fears  of  the  gods,  and  first  sent  Kalaratri  (Dark 
night),  a  female  whose  beauty  bewitched  the  inhabitants  of  the 
three  worlds,  to  order  the  giant  to  restore  things  to  their  ancient 
order.  The  giant,  full  of  fury,  sent  some  soldiers  to  lay  hold 
of  Kalaratri  ;  but  by  the  breath  of  her  mouth  she  reduced  them 
to  ashes.  Durga  then  sent  30,000  other  giants,  who  were  such 
monsters  in  size  that  they  covered  the  surface  of  the  earth.  At 
the  sight  of  these  giants,  Kalaratri  fled  through  the  air  to  Parvati, 
followed  by  the  giants.  Durga,  with  100,000,000  chariots, 
120,000,000,000  elephants,  10,000,000  swift-footed  horses,  and 
innumerable  soldiers,  went  to  fight  Parvati,  on  the  mountain 
Vindhya.  As  soon  as  the  giant  drew  near,  Parvati  assumed  1 000 
arms,  and  called  to  her  assistance  different  beings,  and  produced 
a  number  of  weapons  from  her  body  (a  long  list  of  these  is  given 
in  the  Purana).  The  troops  of  the  giant  poured  their  arrows  on 
Parvati  sitting  on  the  mountain  Vindhya,  thick  as  the  drops  of 
rain  in  a  storm  ;  they  even  tore  up  the  trees,  mountains,  &c, 
and  hurled  them  at  the  goddess,  who  threw  a  weapon  which 
carried  away  many  of  the  arms  of  the  giants.  Durga  hurled  a 
flaming  dart  at  the  goddess,  which  she  turned  aside  ;  another 
being  sent,  she  stopped  it  by  a  hundred  arrows.      He  then  sent 


DURGA.  249 

an  arrow  at  Parvati's  breast ;  this  too  she  repelled,  and  also  two 
other  weapons,  a  club  and  a  pike.  At  last  Parvati  seized  Durga 
and  set  her  left  foot  on  his  breast,  but  he,  disengaging  himself, 
renewed  the  fight. 

The  beings  whom  Parvati  caused  to  issue  from  her  body  then 
destroyed  all  the  soldiers  of  the  giants.  In  return  Durga  sent  a 
dreadful  shower  of  hail,  the  effect  of  which  Parvati  counteracted 
by  an  instrument  called  Sosuna.  The  giant  now  assumed  the 
shape  of  an  elephant  as  large  as  a  mountain,  and  approached  the 
goddess,  but  she  tied  his  legs,  and  with  her  nails,  which  were  like 
scimitars,  tore  him  to  pieces.  He  then  arose  in  the  form  of  a 
buffalo,  and  with  his  horns  cast  stones,  trees,  and  mountains, 
tearing  up  the  trees  by  the  breath  of  his  nostrils.  Parvati  next 
pierced  him  with  her  trident,  when  he  reeled  to  and  fro,  and  re- 
nouncing the  form  of  a  buffalo  assumed  his  original  body  as  a 
giant,  with  a  thousand  arms,  and  weapons  in  each.  Approaching 
Parvati,  she  seized  him  by  his  thousand  arms,  and  carried  him  into 
the  air,  whence  she  threw  him  to  the  ground  with  fearful  force. 
Seeing  that  this  fall  had  not  injured  him,  she  pierced  him  in  the 
breast  with  an  arrow,  when  blood  issued  from  his  mouth  in 
streams,  and  he  died.  The  gods  were  delighted,  and  soon 
regained  their  former  splendour. 

Another  account  of  the  origin  of  Durga  is  found  in  the 
Chandi,  a  part  of  the  'Markandeya  Purana.'*  Mahisha,  king  of 
the  giants,  at  one  time  overcame  the  gods  in  war,  and  reduced 
them  to  such  a  state  of  want  that  they  wandered  through  the 
earth  as  beggars.  Indra  conducted  them  to  Brahma,  and  then 
to  Siva  ;  but  as  these  gods  could  render  no  assistance,  they 
turned  to  Vishnu,  who  was  so  enraged  at  the  sight  of  their 
wretchedness,  that  streams  of  glory  issued  from  his  face,  from 
which  there  came  forth  a  female  figure  named  Mahamaya 
(another  name  of  Durga).  Streams  of  glory  issued  also  from 
the  faces  of  the  other  gods,  which  entered  Mahamaya  ;  in  con- 
sequence of  which  she  became  a  body  of  glory,  like  a  mountain 


*  Ward,  ii.  88. 


250  The  Puranic  Deities. 

of  fire.  The  gods  then  handed  their  weapons  to  this  female, 
who  with  a  frightful  scream  ascended  into  the  air,  slew  the  giant, 
and  gave  redress  to  the  gods. 

Another  account,  differing  in  some  details,  is  found  in  the 
'  Vamana  Purana.'  *  When  the  gods  had  sought  Vishnu  in  their 
distress,  he,  and  at  his  command  Sankara,  Brahma,  and  the 
other  gods,  emitted  such  flames  from  their  eyes  and  countenances 
that  a  mountain  of  effulgence  was  formed,  from  which  became 
manifest  Katyayini,  refulgent  as  a  thousand  suns,  having  three 
eyes,  black  hair,  and  eighteen  arms.  Siva  gave  her  his  trident, 
Vishnu  a  discus,  Varuna  a  conch-shell,  Agni  a  dart,  Vayu  a  bow, 
Surya  a  quiver  full  of  arrows,  Indra  a  thunderbolt,  Kuvera  a 
mace,  Brahma  a  rosary  and  water-pot,  Kala  a  shield  and  sword, 
Visvakarma  a  battle-axe  and  other  weapons.  Thus  armed,  and 
adored  by  the  gods,  Katyayini  proceeded  to  the  Vindhya  hills. 
Whilst  there  the  Asuras  Chanda  and  Manda  saw  her,  and  being 
captivated  by  her  beauty  they  so  described  her  to  Mahisha,  their 
king,  that  he  was  most  anxious  to  obtain  her.  On  asking  for  her 
hand,  she  told  him,  she  must  be  won  in  fight.  He  came,  and 
fought ;  at  length  Durga  dismounted  from  her  lion,  and  sprang 
upon  the  back  of  Mahisha,  who  was  in  the  form  of  a  buffalo, 
and  with  her  tender  feet  so  smote  him  on  the  head  that  he  fell 
to  the  ground  senseless,  when  she  cut  off  his  head  with  her 
sword. 

In  pictures  and  images  Durga  is  represented  as  a  golden- 
coloured  woman,  with  a  gentle  and  beautiful  countenance.  She 
has  ten  arms  ;  in  one  hand  she  holds  a  spear,  with  which  she  is 
piercing  the  giant  Mahisha  ;  with  one  of  her  left  hands  she  holds 
the  tail  of  a  serpent,  with  another  the  hair  of  the  giant  whose 
breast  the  snake  is  biting  ;  her  other  hands  are  filled  with  various 
weapons.  Her  lion  leans  against  her  right  leg,  and  the  giant 
against  her  left.  The  images  of  Lakshmi,  Sarasvati,  Kartikeya, 
and  Ganesa  are  frequently  made  and  worshipped  with  that  of 
Durga.     The  frontispiece  is  a  representation  of  Durga  and  the 

*   Kennedy,  'Hindu  Myth.' p.  335. 


DURGA. 


251 


other  goddesses  and  gods,  as  they  are  made  in  Bengal  at  the 
time  of  the  great  autumnal  festival. 

In  Bengal  the  worship  of  this  goddess  forms  the  most  popular 
of  all  the  Hindu  festivals  ;  it 
continues  for  three  days,  and  is 
the  great  holiday  of  the  year. 
At  this  season,  as  at  Christmas 
in  England,  the  members  of  the 
family  whom  business  detains 
from  home  during  the  year  re- 
turn ;  and  with  the  worship  of 
Durga  is  associated  all  that  is 
bright  and  cheerful.  Sacrifices 
of  buffaloes  and  goats  are  made 
to  her  ;  feasting,  singing,  and 
dancing  are  continued  through 
the  greater  part  of  the  night. 
Her  chief  festival  is  in  the 
autumn,  but  she  is  also  wor- 
shipped, though  not  so  gener- 
ally, in  the  spring.  The  reason 
of  this  as  taught  in  a  Bengali 
account  of  Durga  is  as  fol- 
lows : — Ravana  was  a  devout 
worshipper  of  Durga,  and  had  the  Chandi  read  daily  ;  when 
therefore  Rama  attacked  him,  the  goddess  assisted  her  servant. 
It  was  in  the  spring  that  Ravana  observed  her  festival  Rama, 
seeing  the  great  help  his  enemy  received  from  his  devotion  to 
this  goddess,  began  himself  to  worship  her.  This  was  in  the 
autumn.  Durga  was  delighted  with  the  devotion  of  Rama,  and 
at  once  transferred  her  aid  from  Ravana  to  him. 

Durga.  is  said  to  have  assumed  ten  forms  for  the  destruction  of 
two  giants,  Sumbha  and  Nisumbha  ;  the  '  Markandeya  Purana ' 
describes  these  incarnations  in  the  following  order: — 1.  As 
Durga  she  received  the  message  of  the  giants  ;  2.  As  Dasabhuja 
(the  ten  armed)  she  slew  part  of  their  army  ;  3.  As  Singhavahini 


DASABHUJA. 


252  The  Puranic  Deities. 

(seated  on  a  lion)  she  fought  with  Raktavija  ;  4.  As  Mahisha- 
mardini  (destroyer  of  a  buffalo)  she  slew  Sumbha  in  the  .form 
of  a  buffalo  ;  5.  As  Jagaddhatri  (the  mother  of  the  world)  she 
overcame  the  army  of  the  giants  ;  6.  As  Kali  (the  black  woman) 
she  slew  Raktavija  ;  7.  As  Muktakesi  (with  flowing  hair)  she 
overcame  another  of  the  armies  of  the  giants  ;  8.  As  Tara  (the 
saviour)  she  slew  Sumbha  in  his  own  proper  shape  ;  9.  As  Chin- 
namustaka  (the  headless)  she  killed  Nisumbha  ;  10.  As  Jagad- 
gauri  (the  golden-coloured  lady  renowned  through  the  world) 
she  received  the  praises  and  thanks  of  the  gods.* 

The  great  conflict  for  success  in  which  Durga  assumed  so 
many  forms  is  described  as  follows  in  the  '  Markandeya  Purana.'t 
At  the  close  of  the  Treta  Age,  two  giants,  named  Sumbha  and 
Nisumbha,  performed  religious  austerities  for  10,000  years,  the 
merit  of  which  action  brought  Siva  from  heaven,  who  discovered 
that,  by  these  works  of  extraordinary  devotion,  they  sought  to 
obtain  the  blessing  of  immortality.  Siva  reasoned  long  with 
them,  and  vainly  endeavoured  to  persuade  them  to  ask  for  any 
other  blessing  than  immortality.  Being  denied,  they  entered 
upon  more  severe  austerities,  which  they  continued  for  another 
thousand  years,  when  Siva  again  appeared,  but  refused  to  grant 
what  they  asked  for.  They  now  suspended  themselves  with  their 
heads  downwards  over  a  slow  fire,  till  the  blood  streamed  from 
their  heads,  and  continued  thus  for  800  years.  The  gods 
began  to  tremble,  lest,  by  performing  such  rigid  acts  of  holiness, 
they  should  be  supplanted  on  their  thrones.  The  king  of  the 
gods  called  a  council,  and  imparted  to  them  his  fears  ;  they 
admitted  that  there  was  great  ground  for  fear,  but  asked  what 
was  the  remedy. 

"  Acting  upon  the  advice  of  Indra,  Kandarpa  (the  god  of  love), 
with  Rambha  and  Tilatama,  the  most  beautiful  of  the  celestial 
nymphs,  were  sent  to  fill  the  minds  of  the  giants  with  sensual 
desires.  Kandarpa  letting  fly  his  arrow  wounded  them  both  ; 
upon  which,  awaking  from  their  absorption,  and  seeing  two 
beautiful   women,  they  were  taken   in  the  snare,  and  abandoned 

*  Ward,  ii.  101.  f   Ibid.  p.  98. 


DURGA.  253 

their  devotions.  With  these  women  they  lived  for  5000  years  ; 
after  which  they  began  to  think  of  the  folly  of  renouncing  their 
hopes  of  immortality  for  the  sake  of  sensual  gratifications.  They 
suspected  that  this  must  have  been  a  contrivance  of  Indra  ; 
and,  driving  back  the  nymphs  to  heaven,  renewed  their  devotions, 
cutting  the  flesh  off  their  bones,  and  making  burnt  offerings  of  it 
to  Siva.  Thus  they  continued  for  1000  years,  till  they  became 
entire  skeletons  ;  when  Siva  again  appeared  and  bestowed  upon 
them  this  blessing — that  in  riches  and  strength  they  should  excel 
the  gods. 

"  Being  thus  exalted  above  the  gods,  they  began  to  make  war 
upon  them.  After  various  successes  on  both  sides,  the  giants 
became  everywhere  victorious  ;  and  Indra  and  the  gods,  reduced 
to  a  most  deplorable  state  of  wretchedness,  solicited  the  inter- 
ference of  Brahma  and  Vishnu.  They  referred  them  to  Siva, 
who  declared  that  he  could  do  nothing  for  them.  When,  how- 
ever, they  reminded  him  that  through  his  blessing  they  had 
been  ruined,  he  advised  them  to  perform  religious  austerities  to 
Durga.  They  did  so  ;  and  after  some  time  the  goddess  ap- 
peared, gave  them  her  blessing,  and,  disguising  herself  like  a 
common  female  carrying  a  pitcher  of  water,  passed  through 
the  assembled  gods.  She  then  asked  them  whose  praise  they 
were  chanting.  Whilst  speaking,  she  assumed  her  proper  form, 
and  replied,  '  They  are  celebrating  my  praise.' 

"This  new  goddess  now  disappeared,  and  ascended  Mount 
Himalaya,  where  Chanda  and  Manda,  two  of  Sumbha  and 
Nisumbha's  messengers,  resided.  As  these  messengers  wandered 
over  the  mountain,  they  saw  the  goddess,  and  being  exceedingly 
struck  with  her  charms,  which  they  described  to  their  masters, 
advised  them  to  engage  the  affections  of  this  female,  even  if 
they  gave  her  all  the  glorious  things  which  they  had  obtained  in 
plundering  the  heavens  of  the  gods. 

"  Sumbha  sent  Sugriva  as  messenger  to  the  goddess,  to  inform 
her  that  the  riches  of  the  three  worlds  were  in  his  palace  ;  that 
all  the  offerings  which  used  to  be  presented  to  the  gods  were  now 
offered  to  him,  and  that  all  these  offerings,  riches,  &c,  would  be 
hers,  if  she  would   come  to  him.     The  goddess  replied  that  this 


254  The  Puranic  Deities. 

offer  was  very  liberal,  but  that  she  had  resolved  that  the  person 
whom  she  married  must  first  conquer  her  in  war,  and  destroy  her 
pride.  Sugriva,  unwilling  to  return  unsuccesful,  still  pressed  for 
a  favourable  answer,  promising  that  he  would  engage  to  conquer 
her  in  war,  and  subdue  her  pride  ;  and  asked  in  an  authoritative 
strain  :  '  Did  she  know  his  master,  before  whom  none  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  worlds  had  been  able  to  stand,  whether  gods, 
demons,  or  man  ?  How  then  could  she,  a  female,  think  of  resisting 
his  offers  ?  If  his  master  had  ordered  him,  he  would  have  com- 
pelled her  to  go  into  his  presence  immediately.'  She  agreed  that 
this  was  very  correct,  but  that  she  had  taken  her  resolution,  and 
exhorted  him,  therefore,  to  persuade  his  master  to  come  and  try 
his  strength  with  her. 

tl  The  messenger  went  and  related  what  he  had  heard  from 
this  female.  On  hearing  his  account  Sumbha  was  filled  with 
rage,  and  without  making  any  reply  called  for  Dhumlochana,  his 
commander-in-chief,  and  gave  him  orders  to  go  to  Himalaya  and 
seize  a  certain  goddess  (giving  him  particulars),  and  bring  her 
to  him,  and,  if  any  attempted  to  rescue  her,  utterly  to  destroy 
them. 

"  The  commander  went  to  Himalaya,  and  acquainted  the  god- 
dess with  his  master's  orders.  She,  smiling,  invited  him  to 
execute  them.  On  the  approach  of  this  hero,  she  set  up  a 
dreadful  roar,  by  which  he  was  reduced  to  ashes.  After  which 
she  destroyed  the  army  of  the  giant,  leaving  only  a  few  fugitives 
to  communicate  the  tidings.  Sumbha  and  Nisumbha,  infuriated, 
sent  Chanda  and  Manda,  who  on  ascending  the  mountain  per- 
ceived a  female  sitting  on  an  ass,  laughing.  On  seeing  them 
she  became  enraged,  and  drew  to  her  ten,  twenty,  or  thirty  of  their 
army  at  a  time,  devouring  them  like  fruit.  She  next  seized 
Manda  by  the  hair,  cut  off  his  head,  and,  holding  it  over  her 
mouth,  drank  the  blood.  Chanda,  on  seeing  the  other  comman- 
der slain  in  this  manner,  came  to  close  quarters  with  the  goddess. 
But  she  mounted  on  a  lion,  sprang  on  him,  and,  despatching  him 
as  she  had  done  Manda,  devoured  part  of  his  army,  and  drank 
the  blood  of  the  slain. 

"The  giants  no   sooner  heard  this  alarming  news  than  they 


DURGA. 


255 


resolved  to  go  themselves,  and  collecting  their  forces,  an  infinite 
number  of  giants,  marched  to  Himalaya.  The  gods  looked 
down  with  astonishment  on  this  army,  and  all  the  goddesses 
descended  to  help  Mahamaya  (Durga),  who,  however,  soon  de- 
stroyed her  foes.  Raktavija,  the  principal  commander  under 
Sumbha  and  Nisumbha,  seeing  all  his  men  destroyed,  encoun- 
tered the  goddess  in  person.  But  though  she  covered  him  with 
wounds,  from  every  drop  of  blood  which  fell  to  the  ground  arose 
a  thousand  giants  equal  in  strength  to  Raktavija  himself.  Hence 
innumerable  enemies  surrounded  Durga,  and  the  gods  were  filled 
with  alarm  at  the  amazing  sight.  At  length  Chandi,  a  goddess 
who  had  assisted  Kali  in  the  engagement,  promised  her  that  if 
she  would  open  her  mouth  and  drink  his  blood  before  it  fell  to 
the  ground,  she  (Chandi)  would  engage  the  giant,  and  destroy 
the  whole  of  his  strangely-formed  offspring.  Kali  consented, 
and  this  commander  and  his  army  were  soon  despatched. 

"  Sumbha  and  Nisumbha,  in  a  state  of  desperation,  next  engaged 
the  goddess  in  single  combat,  Sumbha  making  the  first  onset. 
The  battle  was  inconceivably  dreadful  on  both  sides,  till  at  last 
both  the  giants  were  slain,  and  Kali  sat  down  to  feed  on  the 
carnage  she  had  made.  The  gods  and  goddesses  chanted  the 
praises  of  the  celestial  heroine,  who  in  return  bestowed  a 
blessing  on  each." 

It  seems  scarcely  correct  to  speak  of  these  forms  of  Durga  as 
incarnations  ;  they  are  rather  epithets  descriptive  of  her  appear- 
ance or  method  of  fighting  at  different  times  during  the  great 
conflict.  There  is,  however,  so  great  a  difference  in  appearance 
and  character  between  Parvati  and  Kali  that  it  is  not  easy  to 
regard  them  as  the  same  being  ;  yet  Durga,  whilst  represented  as 
a  warrior  fully  armed,  has  the  calm  features  and  golden  colour  of 
the  goddess  in  her  earlier  manifestation.  It  certainly  appears  to 
be  a  reasonable  hypothesis  that  Kali  was  originally  altogether 
distinct  from  Uma  or  Parvati. 

In  the  following  hymn  of  Arjuna  to  Durga  in  the  Mahabha- 
rata*  her  many  names  are  mentioned  : — "  Reverence  be  to  thee 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  iv.  432. 


2^6  The  Puranic  Deities. 


Siddha-Senani  (generaless  of  the  Siddhas),  the  noble,  the  dweller 
on  Mandara,  Kumari  (Princess),  Kali,  Kapali,  Kapila,  Krishna- 
pingala.  Reverence  to  thee,  Bhadrakali ;  reverence  to  thee,  Maha 
Kali,  Chandi,  Chanda,  Tarini  (deliveress),  Varavarini  (beautiful- 
coloured).  O  fortunate  Kalyayani,  O  Karali,  O  Vijaya,  O 
Jaya  (victory),  younger  sister  of  the  chief  of  cowherds  (Krishna), 
delighting  always  in  Mahisha's  blood !  O  Uma,  Sakambhari, 
thou  white  one,  thou  black  one!  O  destroyer  of  Kaitabha!  Of 
sciences,  thou  art  the  science  of  Brahma  (or  of  the  Vedas),  the 
great  sleep  of  embodied  beings.  O  mother  of  Skanda  (Kartikeya), 
divine  Durga,  dweller  in  wildernesses  !  Thou,  great  goddess,  art 
praised  with  a  pure  heart.  By  thy  favour  let  me  ever  be 
victorious  in  battle.'  In  another  verse  of  this  same  book  she  is 
said  to  dwell  perpetually  in  the  Vindhya  hills,  and  "  to  delight  in 
spirituous  liquors,  flesh,  and  sacrificial  victims." 

The  statement  that  Durga  was  the  younger  sister  of  Krishna 
refers  to  the  fact  that  it  was  she  who  took  Krishna's  place  in 
Devaki's  womb  after  Vasudeva  had  carried  the  infant  Krishna  to 
Nanda,  and  whom  Kansa  attempted  to  destroy  by  dashing  her 
against  a  stone  immediately  after  her  birth.  Krishna  promised, 
if  she  would  take  his  place  as  Devaki's  child,  "  becoming  assimi- 
lated to  him  in  glory,  she  would  obtain  an  eternal  place  in 
the  sky,  be  installed  by  Indra  amongst  the  gods,  obtain  a  per- 
petual abode  on  the  Vindhya  mountains,  where  meditating  upon 
him  (Vishnu)  she  would  kill  two  demons,  Sumbha  and 
Nisumbha,  and  would  be  worshipped  with  animal  sacrifices."* 

THE  CHIEF  FORMS  OF  DURGA. 

i.  DURGA  received  Chanda  and  Manda,  the  messengers  of 
the  giants  ;  they,  struck  with  her  beauty,  spoke  so  rapturously 
of  her  to  their  lords  that  Sumbha  sent  her  an  offer  of  marriage 
by  Sugriva. 

2.  DASAi;iiuJA,t  the  ten-handed,  destroyed  Sumbha's  army 
under  the  commander-in-chief  Dhumlochana.     Of  these  troops 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  iv.  34.  t  Sec  illustration,  p.  251. 


The  chief  Forms  of  Durga. 


257 


only  a  few  fugitives  escaped,  to  carry  the  news  of  their  defeat  to 
their  master. 

3.  SINGHAVAHINI  (riding  on  a  lion)  fought  with  Chanda  and 
Manda,  and  has  four  arms  only.  She  drank  the  blood  of  the 
leaders,  and  devoured  a  large  part  of  their  troops. 

4.  MAHISHAMARDINI  (the  slayer  of  Mahisha)  slew  Sumbha 
as  he  attacked  her  in  the  form  of  a  buffalo.  She  had  eicht  or, 
according  to  other  accounts,  ten  arms.  There  is  little  to  distin- 
guish the  account  of  this  form  from  that  of  Durga. 

5.  JagadDHATRI  (the  mother  of  the  world)  destroyed  an- 
other army  of  the  giants  ;  is  dressed  in  red  garments,  and  is 
seated  on  a  lion.     She,  too,  has 

four    arms    only,    and    is    very  SiLL/'// 

similar  to  Singhavahini  ;  the 
difference  being  in  the  weapons 
she  wields.  As  Singhavahini, 
she  carries  a  sword  and  spear, 
and  with  two  hands  is  en- 
couraging her  worshippers  ;  as 
Jagaddhatri,  she  carries  a 
conch-shell,  discus,  bow  and 
arrow.  In  all  the  above  forms 
she  is  represented  as  a  fair, 
beautiful,  gentle-looking  lady. 

6.  Kali  (the  black  woman), 
or,  as  she  is  more  commonly 
called  Kali  Ma,  the  black 
mother,  with  the  aid  of  Chandi, 
slew  Raktavija,  the  principal 
leader  of  the  giant's  army. 
Seeing  his  men  fall,  he  attacked 
the  goddess  in  person  ;  when 
from  every  drop  of  blood  that  fell  from  his  body  a  thousand 
giants  equal  in  power  to  himself  arose.  At  this  crisis  another 
form  of  the  goddess,  named  Chandi,  came  to  the  rescue.  As 
Kali  drank  the  giant's  blood  and  prevented  the  formation  of 
new  giants,  Chandi  slew  the  monster  herself. 

S 


JAGADDHATRI. 


2<8 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


Kali  is  represented  as  a  black  woman  with  four  arms  ;  in 
one  hand  she  has  a  sword,  in  another  the  head  of  the  giant  she 
has  slain,  with  the  other  two  she  is  encouraging  her  worshippers. 
For  earrings  she  has  two  dead  bodies  ;  wears  a  necklace  of 
skulls  ;  her  only  clothing  is  a  girdle  made  of  dead  men's  hands, 
and  her  tongue  protrudes  from  her  mouth.     Her  eyes  are  red  as 

those  of  a  drunkard,  and  her 

.  i  -.  \  \  i  / .- .   m  face     and     breasts    are    be- 

.  \ .  \\\  \  I  \  I  //////  ?  smeared   with   blood.        She 

stands  with  one  foot  on  the 
thigh,  and  another  on  the 
breast  of  her  husband.  This 
position  of  Kali  is  accounted 
.'  for  by  the  fact  that,  when  her 
victory  over  the  giants  was 
won,  she  danced  for  joy  so 
furiously  that  the  earth 
trembled  beneath  her  weight. 
At  the  request  of  the  gods 
Siva  asked  her  to  desist,  but 
as,  owing  to  her  excitement, 
she  did  not  notice  him,  he  lay 
down  amongst  the  slain.  She 
continued  dancing  until  she 
caucfht  sight  of  her  husband 

KALI.  °  ° 

under  her  feet  ;  immediately 
she  thrust  out  her  tongue  with  shame  at  the  disrespect  she 
had  shown  him. 

In  the  'Adhyatma*  Ramayana,'f  is  a  legend  giving  quite  a 
different  origin  of  Kfili ;  the  object  of  the  writer  evidently  being 
to  enhance  the  glory  of  Sita,  by  showing  that  Kali  was  but  a 
form  that  she  had  assumed.  On  Rama's  return  from  the  de- 
struction of  Ravana,  he  was  boasting  of  his  prowess,  when  Sita 
smiled  and  said  :  "You  rejoice  because  you  have  slain  Ravana 
with   ten  heads,  but  what   would  you   say  to  a   Ravana  with  a 

There  are  four  reccensions  of  the  Ramayana  :  Valmiki's,  Vyasadcva?s, 
the  Adhuta,  and  the  Adhyatma.  f  Ward,  ii.  116. 


The  chief  Forms  of  Durga. 


259 


thousand  ? "  "  Destroy  him  too,"  said  Rama.  Sita  advised 
him  to  remain  at  home  ;  but  he  collected  his  army  of  monkeys, 
and  with  his  wife  and  brothers  set  off  for  Satadwipa  to  meet  this 
new  Ravana.  Hanuman  was  despatched  to  discover  the  re- 
sidence of  the  monster,  and  to   gather  all  the  information  he 


KALI    DANCING    ON    SIVA. 


could  about  him,  and  on  his  return  Rama  went  to  the  attack. 
The  giant  regarded  the  army  of  his  assailant  as  so  many 
children.  He  shot  three  arrows.  One  of  these  sent  all  the 
monkeys  to  their  home  at  Kiskindha  ;  a  second  drove  the  giants 
and  demons  to  Lanka  ;  whilst  the  third  despatched  the  soldiers  to 
Ayodha,  Rama's  capital.     Rama  was  thunderstruck  as  he  found 

S  2 


260  The  Puranic  Deities. 

himself  alone,  and,  imagining  that  all  his  forces  were  destroyed, 
began  to  weep.  Sita,  laughing  at  her  husband,  assumed  the 
terrific  form  of  Kali,  and  furiously  attacked  the  thousand-headed 
Ravana.  The  conflict  lasted  ten  years,  but  at  length  she  slew 
the  giant,  drank  his  blood,  and  began  to  dance  and  toss  about 
the  limbs  of  his  lifeless  body.  Her  dancing  shook  the  earth 
to  its  centre  ;  but  not  until  Siva  lay  on  the  ground,  and  her 
attention  was  called  to  the  disrespect  she  was  showing  him, 
could  she  be  prevailed  upon  to  desist.  Thus  Siva  saved  the 
universe  ;  and  Sita,  assuming  her  proper  form,  went  home  with 
Rama  and  his  brothers. 

The  '  Skanda  Purana'  *  explains  that  Chandi,  who  came  to  the 
rescue  and  assisted  Kali  in  the  destruction  of  Raktavija,  was  a 
form  of  Devi,  assumed  on  another  occasion  for  the  destruction  of 
Chanda.  It  is  interesting  to  see  that  these  leaders  of  Sumbha's 
army  reappear,  although  they  were  slain,  and  their  blood  was 
drunk  by  Singhavahini.  Two  Asuras,  named  Chanda  and 
Manda,  through  a  boon  received  from  the  divine  mothers,  be- 
came so  powerful  as  to  subdue  the  three  worlds.  The  gods  be- 
sought Devi,  who  appeared  to  them  under  the  form  of  Chandi, 
to  deliver  them  ;  she  replied,  "  that  she  could  do  nothing  for 
them  until  she  had  propitiated  Siva."  To  accomplish  this  she 
retired  to  a  forest,  and  whilst  engaged  in  worship  Siva  first  ap- 
peared, under  the  form  of  a  vast  Linga,  and  then,  in  answer  to 
Chandi's  prayer,  revealed  himself,  and  in  answer  to  her  praises 
thus  addressed  her :  "  O  goddess  !  Thou  art  celebrated  in  the 
three  worlds  as  Parasakti  (the  energy  of  the  supreme  being). 
Wherever  thou  art,  there  am  I  ;  and  wherever  I  am,  there  is 
Chandika.  There  is  no  difference  between  us.  What  shall  I  do 
for  you  ?  '  Chandi  replies  :  "  Formerly  I  slew  Chanda  and  Manda 
in  battle  ;  but  they  have  been  born  again  as  mighty  Asuras,  and 
have  oppressed  the  three  worlds.  It  is  therefore  to  be  enabled 
to  destroy  them  that  I  seek  thy  protection."  Siva  promises 
his  help,  and  sends  her  in  the  guise  of  a  messenger  to  challenge 
them  to  fight.     They  accept  the  challenge  and  are  slain  by  Siva. 

*   Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Myth.,'  p.  338. 


The  chief  Forms  of  Durga.  261 


The  '  Linga  Purana'*  seems  to  teach  that  Kali,  though  pro- 
duced by  Parvati,  was  yet  distinct  from  her.  Formerly  a  female 
Asura  named  Daruka  had  through  devotion  obtained  such  power 
that  she  consumed  like  fire  the  gods  and  Brahmans.  But  as  she 
was  attended  by  a  host  of  female  Asuras,  Vishnu  and  the  gods 
feared  to  attack  her,  lest  they  should  be  guilty  of  the  great  sin 
of  slaying  a  woman.  Siva  is  then  appealed  to,  who,  addressing 
Devi,  said  :  "  Let  me  request,  O  lovely  One !  that  thou  wouldst 
effect  the  destruction  of  this  Daruka."  Parvati,  having  heard 
these  words,  created  from  her  own  substance  a  maiden  of  black 
colour,  with  matted  locks,  having  an  eye  in  her  forehead,  bearing 
in  her  hand  a  trident  and  a  skull  ;  she  was  of  aspect  terrible  to 
behold,  was  arrayed  in  celestial  garments,  and  adorned  with  all 
kinds  of  ornaments.  On  beholding  this  terrific  form  of  darkness, 
the  gods  retreated  in  alarm.  Parvati  then  created  innumerable 
ghosts,  goblins,  and  demons  ;  attended  by  these,  Kali,  in  obe- 
dience to  her  order,  attacked  and  destroyed  Daruka. 

Maurice  f  gives  another  account  of  Kali  :  "  The  origin  of  this 
singular  deity  is  perfectly  in  union  with  her  life  and  history. 
Arrayed  in  complete  armour,  she  sprang  from  the  eye  of  the 
dreadful  war-bred  goddess  Durga,  the  vanquisher  of  demons  and 
giants,  at  the  very  instant  that  she  was  sinking  under  their 
united  assaults.  Kali  joining  her  extraordinary  powers  to  those 
of  her  parent,  they  renew  the  combat  and  rout  their  foes  with 
great  slaughter." 

The  'Markandeya  Purana 'J  makes  Kali  to  be  a  production  of 
Lakshmi.  The  origin  of  all  things  is  Maha  Lakshmi,  who 
visibly  or  invisibly  pervades  and  dwells  in  all  that  is.  Separating 
from  herself  the  quality  of  darkness,  she  gave  origin  to  a  form 
black  as  night,  with  dreadful  tusks  and  large  eyes,  and  holding 
a  sword,  a  goblet,  a  head  and  a  shield,  and  adorned  with  a 
necklace  of  skulls.  She  is  distinguished  by  the  names  of 
Mahakali,  Ekavira,  Kalaratri,  and  other  similar  appellations. 
Then   from  the  quality  of  purity  she   produced  Sarasvati.     As 

*  Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Myth.,'  p.  337.  t  '  Indian  Antiquities,'  ii.  184. 

t  Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Myth.,'  p.  210. 


262  The  Puranic  Deities. 

soon  as  they  were  formed,  Maha  Lakshmi  thus  addressed 
Mahakali  and  Sarasvati !  "  Let  us  from  our  own  forms  produce 
twin  deities."  She  then  generated  a  male  and  female,  named 
Brahma  and  Lakshmi  ;  in  the  same  manner  Mahakali  produced 
Siva  and  Sarasvati,  and  Sarasvati  produced  Gauri  and  Vishnu. 
Maha  Lakshmi  then  gave  in  marriage  Sarasvati  to  Brahma, 
Gauri  to  Siva,  and  Lakshmi  to  Vishnu. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  human  sacrifices  were  formerly 
offered  to  Kali,  though  now  they  are  forbidden  both  by  British 
law  and  the  Hindu  Scriptures  ;  the  prohibition  in  Hindu  books, 
however,  is  in  a  more  recent  class  of  books  than  those  in 
which  they  were  ordained.  In  the  '  Kalika  Purana,'  *  from  which 
the  following  extracts  are  made,  nothing  could  be  clearer  than 
the  instruction  regarding  this  cruel  practice.  Siva  is  addressing 
his  sons  the  Bhairavas,  initiating  them  in  these  terrible  mysteries. 

"  The  flesh  of  the  antelope  and  the  rhinoceros  give  my  beloved 
(Kali)  delight  for  five  hundred  years.  By  a  human  sacrifice, 
attended  by  the  forms  laid  down,  Devi  is  pleased  for  a  thousand 
years  ;  and  by  the  sacrifice  of  three  men,  a  hundred  thousand 
years.  By  human  flesh  Kamakhya,  Chandika,  and  Bhairava, 
who  assume  my  shape,  are  pleased  a  thousand  years.  An  ob- 
lation of  blood  which  has  been  rendered  pure  by  holy  texts,  is 
equal  to  ambrosia  ;  the  head  and  flesh  also  afford  much  delight 
to  Chandika.  Blood  drawn  from  the  offerer's  own  body  is  looked 
upon  as  a  proper  oblation  to  the  goddess  Chandika. 

"  Let  the  sacrificer  repeat  the  word  Kali  twice,  and  say,  '  Hail, 
Devi !  goddess  of  thunder ;  hail,  iron-sceptred  goddess ! '  Let 
him  then  take  the  axe  in  his  hand,  and  again  invoke  the  same 
by  the  Kalaratri  text,  as  follows !  '  Let  the  sacrificer  say,  Hrang, 
Hrang!  Kali,  Kali !  O  horrid-toothed  goddess  !  Eat,  cut,  destroy 
all  the  malignant  ;  cut  with  this  axe  ;  bind,  bind  ;  seize,  seize  ; 
drink  blood  !  Spheng,  spheng !  secure,  secure.  Salutation  to 
Kali.'  The  axe  being  invoked  by  this  text,  called  the  Kalaratri 
Mantra,  Kalaratri  herself  presides  over  the  axe,  uplifted  for  the 
destruction  of  the  sacrificer's  enemies. 

*  Moor's   '  Hindu  Pantheon,'  144  ff. 


The  chief  Forms  of  Durga.  263 

"  Different  mantras  (or  forms)  are  used  in  reference  to  the 
description  of  the  victim  to  be  immolated.     If  a  lion,  this  : — 

"  '  O  Hari !  who  in  the  shape  of  a  lion  bearest  Chandika,  bear 
my  evils  and  avert  my  misfortunes.  Thy  shape,  O  lion  !  was 
assumed  by  Hari  [in  the  Nrisingha  incarnation  of  Vishnu]  to 
punish  the  wicked  part  of  the  human  race  ;  and  under  that  form, 
by  truth,  the  tyrant  Hiranykasipu  was  slain  !  ' 

"Females  are  not  to  be  immolated,  except  on  very  particular 
occasions  ;  the  human  female  never. 

"  Let  princes,  ministers  of  State,  councillors,  and  vendors  of 
spirituous  liquors  make  human  sacrifices,  for  the  purpose  of 
attaining  prosperity  and  wealth.  Let  the  victim  offered  to  Devi, 
if  a  buffalo,  be  four  years  old  ;  and  if  human,  twenty-five.  On 
these  occasions  this  is  the  mantra  to  be  used  :  '  Hail !  three-eyed 
goddess,  of  most  terrifying  appearance,  around  whose  neck  a 
string  of  human  skulls  is  pendent ;  who  art  the  destroyer  of  evil 
spirits  ;  who  art  armed  with  an  axe  and  a  spear,  salutation  to 
thee  with  this  blood.' 

"  An  enemy  may  be  immolated  by  proxy,  substituting  a  buffalo 
or  a  goat,  and  calling  the  victim  by  the  name  of  the  enemy 
through  the  whole  ceremony,  thereby  infusing,  by  holy  texts, 
the  soul  of  the  enemy  into  the  body  of  the  victim  ;  which  will 
when  immolated  deprive  the  foe  of  life  also.  On  this  occasion, 
let  the  sacrificer  say  :  '  O  goddess  of  horrid  forms  !  O  Chandika  ! 
Eat,  devour  such  an  one  my  enemy.  Consort  of  fire  !  salutation 
to  fire.  This  is  the  enemy  who  has  done  me  mischief,  now 
personated  by  an  animal — destroy  him,  O  Mahamari !  ' ': 

A  great  variety  of  regulations  and  invocations,  rites,  &c,  are 
laid  down  for  the  performance  of  sanguinary  offerings,  whether 
the  immolation  of  a  victim,  or  an  offering  of  the  sacrificer's  own 
blood,  or  burning  his  flesh.  Until  very  recent  times  com- 
monly, and  in  some  quiet  places  even  now,  at  certain  festivals,  the 
worshippers  cut  their  flesh  and  burn  their  bodies  in  order  to 
please  this  cruel  deity.  It  is  said  that  before  the  Thugs  set  out 
on  their  murderous  projects  they  first  sacrificed  to  Kali  to  obtain 
her  blessing ;  and,  on  their  return,  paid  a  portion  of  the  spoils 
as  an  offering  for  her  help. 


264  The  Puranic  Deities. 


7.  MUKTAKESI  *  (having  flowing  hair)  destroyed  another  part 
of  the  giant's  forces.  In  appearance  there  is  little  to  distin- 
guish her  from  Kali:  she  has  four  arms;  holds  a  sword  and 
a  helmet  in  her  left  hands,  and  with  her  right  she  is  bestowing 
a  blessing  and  dispelling  fear.  She,  too,  is  standing  upon  the 
body  of  her  husband. 

8.  TARA  (the  saviour)  slew  Sumbha,  and  holds  his  head  in 
one  hand  and  a  sword  in  another.  Her  appearance,  too,  is 
similar  to  that  of  Kali.     She   must    not    be    confounded   with 

l.inl,  the  wife  of  Vrihaspati  ;    or  Tara,  the  wife  of  Bali,   the 
A  sura  king. 

9.  CHINNAMUSTAKA  (the  beheaded)  slew  Nisumbha,  the 
other  giant.  It  is  evident  from  her  appearance  that  she  found 
her  task  rather  difficult,  for  her  head  is  half-severed  from  her 
body.  She  is  painted  as  a  fair  woman,  naked,  and  wearing  a 
garland  of  skulls,  standing  upon  the  body  of  her  husband. 

10.  J.VGADGAURI  (the  yellow  woman  [renowned]  through  the 
world)  received  the  thanks  and  praises  of  the  gods  and  men 
t'»r  the  deliverance  she  wrought  ;  in  her  four  hands  she  holds  a 
conch-shell,  a  discus,  a  club,  and  a  lotus. 

Images  are  made  of  Durga  at  different  seasons  of  the  year 
in  nearly  all  of  these  ten  forms,  and  various  blessings  are  sought 
from  her  by  her  worshippers.  In  addition  to  these  she  is  wor- 
shipped under  other  names  ;  some  of  the  more  generally  known 
will  now  be  given.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  Hindus 
who  worship  Durga  in  some  of  her  forms,  and  the  other  female 
deities,  when  they  represent  the  Sakti,  or  energy  of  their 
husbands,  are  called  Saktas,  and  form  a  class  distinct  from 
the  Hindus  generally.  An  exception,  however,  must  be  made 
in  respect  to  Sarasvati,  Lakshmi,  and  the  autumnal  worship 
Durga;  this  particular  form  of  worship  being  common  to 
almost  ;ill   j  [indus. 

1  1.  PRATYANGIRA  (the  well-proportioned  one).  Of  this  form 
of  Durga  no  images  arc  made,  but  at  night  the  officiating 
priest,  wearing  red  clothes,  offers  red  flowers,  liquors,  and  bloody 


Ward,  ii.  101-117. 


The  chief  Forms  of  Durga. 


26=; 


sacrifices.  The  flesh  of  animals  dipped  in  some  intoxicating 
drink  is  burned  ;  the  worshipper  believing  that  the  flesh  of  the 
enemy  for  whose  injury  the  ceremony  is  performed  will  swell,  as 
the  flesh  of  the  sacrifice  swells  in  the  fire. 

12.  ANNAPURNA  (she  who  fills  with  food)  is  represented  as 
a  fair  woman,  standing  on  a  lotus.  In  one  hand  she  holds 
a  rice  bowl,  and  in  the 
other  a  spoon  used  for 
stirring  rice  when  it  is 
being  boiled.  Siva,  as  a 
mendicant,  is  receiving 
alms  from  her.  She  is  the 
guardian  deity  of  many 
Hindus,  who  have  a  pro- 
verb to  the  effect  that  a 
sincere  disciple  of  this 
deity  will  never  want  rice. 
It  is  in  connexion  with 
this  form  of  Durga  that 
the  '  Linga  Purana'  *  gives 
a  legend  explaining  an 
image  called  Ardhanari- 
shwara,  which  represents 
Siva  and  Durga  as  to- 
gether forming  one  body. 
Siva  as  a  mendicant  sup- 
ported his  wife  and  chil- 
dren by  begging  ;  but  on 
one  occasion,  owing  to  his 
use  of  intoxicating  herbs, 
he  was  unable  to  go  his 
rounds.  Durga  told  him 
there  was  nothing  in  the  house  to  eat  ;  half  the  previous  day's 
contributions  they  had  eaten ;  Ganesa's  rat  and  Kartikeya's 
peacock  having  finished  the  rest.     Siva  then  went  out  to  beg,  and 


ANNAITRNA. 


Ward,  ii.  187. 


266  The  Puranic  Deities. 

Durga  started  for  her  father's  house  with  the  children,  but  was 
met  by  Narada,  who  advised  her,  as  Annapurna,  to  lay  an  em- 
bargo on  all  the  food  of  the  houses  where  Siva  asked  for  alms. 
The  result  of  this  was  that  no  one  would  give  him  anything.  Na- 
rada meeting  with  Siva  advised  him  to  go  home  ;  Annapurna 
met  him  at  the  door,  and  so  pleased  him  by  giving  him  food,  that 
he  pressed  her  to  his  breast  with  such  force  that  they  became 
one  body. 

13.  GANESAJANANI  (the  mother  of  Ganesa)  is  worshipped 
with  her  infant  in  her  arms. 

14.  KkiSHNAKRORA  (she  who  holds  Krishna  on  her  breast). 
When  Krishna  fought  with  the  serpent  Kaliya  in  the  river 
Yamuna,  he  was  bitten,  and  in  pain  called  upon  Durga  for  help. 
She  heard  his  cry,  and,  by  suckling  him  from  her  breast,  restored 
him  to  health. 

This  list  might  be  almost  indefinitely  enlarged.  From  the 
number  of  her  names,  it  is  evident  she  is  largely  worshipped  in 
North  India  ;  and  from  the  number  of  Hindus  bearing  some  one 
or  other  of  her  names,  it  is  certain  that  she  is  most  popular.  It 
is  a  common  custom  for  the  Hindus  to  give  their  children  names 
indicating  the  god  or  goddess  through  whose  favour  they  are 
believed  to  have  been  given,  and  certainly  Durga  seems  to  have 
had  a  part  in  the  bestowal  of  a  very  large  proportion  of  the 
children  in  Bengal.  "By  the  favour  of  Kfili,  or  Durga,  or  Tara," 
is  expressed  in  the  names  of  multitudes,  and  every  day  witnesses 
the  payment  of  vows  made  to  this  goddess  when  some  desired 

■od  is  granted,  or  threatened  evil  averted. 


(     267     ) 


CHAPTER  VIII. 
SONS  OF  SIVA  AND   PARVATI. 

I.    GANESA. 

Ganesa  is  said  to  be  the  elder  son  of  Siva  and  Parvati,  but 
the  Puranas  that  de- 
scribe his  origin  dif- 
fer very  considerably 
in  their  narratives  of 
this  event.  Sir  W. 
Jones  says  *  that 
"Ganesa,  the  Indian 
god  of  Wisdom, 
has  the  same  cha- 
racteristics as  Janus 
of  the  Latins.  All 
sacrifices  and  re- 
ligious ceremonies, 
all  serious  composi- 
tions in  writing,  and 
all  worldlv  affairs  of 
importance  are  be- 
gun by  pious  Hindus 
with  an  invocation  to 
Ganesa  ;  a  word  com- 
posed of  Isa,  the  governor  or  leader,  and  gana,  a  company 
(of  deities).      Instances  of  opening  business  auspiciously  by  an 


GANESA. 


*  '  Asiatic  Researches,'  i.  227. 


268  The  Puranic  Deities. 

ejaculation  to  him  might  be  multiplied  with  ease.  Few  books 
are  begun  without  the  words,  'Salutation  to  Ganesa;'  and  he 
is  first  invoked  by  Brahmans  who  conduct  the  trial  by  ordeal, 
or  perform  the  ceremony  of  the  homa  or  sacrifice  to  fire."     M. 

nnerat  represents  him  as  highly  revered  on  the  coast  of 
Coromandel,  where,  according  to  him,  "the  Indians  would  not  on 
any  account  build  a  house  without  having  placed  on  the  ground 
an  image  of  this  deity,  which  they  sprinkle  with  oil  and  adorn 
every  day  with  flowers.  They  set  up  his  image  in  all  their 
temples,  in  the  streets,  in  the  high  roads,  and  in  the  open  plains 
at  the  foot  of  some  tree,  so  that  persons  of  all  ranks  may  invoke 
him  before  they  undertake  any  business,  and  travellers  worship 
him  before  they  proceed  on  a  journey."  What  is  true  of  the 
Coromandel  coast,  is  true  of  most  parts  of  India  so  far  as  the 
worship  of  this  deity  is  concerned. 

"  Ganesa  is  the  Hindu  god  of  Prudence  and  Policy.  He  is  the 
reputed  eldest  son  of  Siva  and  Parvati  (the  'Padma  Purana'  alone 
declares  that  he  was  the  actual  child  of  these  deities),  and  is  re- 
presented with  an  elephant's  head — an  emblem  of  sagacity — and 
is  frequently  attended  by,  or  is  riding  upon,  a  rat.  He  has 
generally  four  hands,  but  sometimes  six,  or  eight,  or  only  two."  * 
lie  is  always  described  as  being  very  corpulent  ;  and  pictures  or 
images  of  him  are  seen  over  the  doors  of  most  shopkeepers.  It 
is  not  easy  to  see  why  Ganesa  has  become  so  universally 
worshipped,  as  there  are  few  if  any  legends  in  the  Puranas 
attesting  his  divine  power. 

The  '  Brahmavaivarta  Purana 'f  gives  the  following  account 
of  his  birth  : — "  Parvati,  after  her  marriage  with  Siva,  being  with- 
out a  child,  and  very  desirous  to  obtain  one,  is  advised  by  her 
husband  to  perform  the  Panyakavrata.  This  is  the  worship  of 
\  ishnu,  to  be  begun  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  bright  fortnight 
of  Magha,  and  continued  for  a  year,  on  every  day  of  which 
flowers,  fruits,  cakes,  vessels,  gems,  gold,  &c,  are  to  be  presented, 
and  a  thousand  Brahmans  icd  ;  and  the  performer  of  the  rite  is 
to  observe  most  carefully  a  life  of  inward   purity,  and  to  fix  his 


Moor's  '  Hindu  Pantheon,'  p.  169.  f  Wilson's  Works,  iii.  103. 


Ganesa.  269 

mind  on  Hari  (Vishnu).  Parvati  having,  with  the  aid  of  Sanat 
Kumara,  as  directing  priest,  accomplished  the  ceremony  on  the 
banks  of  the  Ganges,  returns  after  some  interval,  in  which  she 
sees  Krishna,  first  as  a  body  of  light,  and  afterwards  as  an  old 
Brahman,  come  to  her  dwelling.  The  reward  of  her  religious 
zeal  being  delayed,  she  is  plunged  in  grief,  when  a  viewless  voice 
tells  her  to  go  to  her  apartment,  where  she  will  find  a  son  who 
is  the  lord  of  Goloka,  or  Krishna,  that  deity  having  assumed  the 
semblance  of  her  son  as  a  recompense  for  her  devotions. 

"  In  compliment  to  this  occasion,  all  the  gods  came  to  con- 
gratulate Siva  and  Parvati,  and  were  severally  admitted  to  see  the 
infant.  Amidst  the  splendid  cohort  was  Sani,  the  planet  Saturn, 
who,  although  anxious  to  pay  his  homage  to  the  child,  kept  his 
eyes  stedfastly  fixed  on  the  ground.  Parvati  asking  him  the 
reason  of  this,  he  told  her  that,  being  immersed  in  meditation 
upon  Vishnu,  he  had  disregarded  the  caresses  of  his  wife,  and, 
in  resentment  of  his  neglect,  she  had  denounced  upon  him  the 
curse  that  whomsoever  he  gazed  upon  he  should  destroy.  To 
obviate  the  evil  consequences  of  this  imprecation,  he  avoided 
looking  any  one  in  the  face.  Parvati,  having  heard  his  story, 
paid  no  regard  to  it,  but,  considering  that  what  must  be  must 
be,  gave  him  permission  to  look  on  her  son.  Sani,  calling  Dharma 
to  witness  his  having  leave,  took  a  peep  at  Ganesa,  on  which  the 
child's  head  was  severed  from  his  body,  and  flew  away  to  the 
heaven  of  Krishna,  where  it  re-united  with  the  substance  of  him 
of  whom  it  formed  a  part. 

"  Durga,  taking  the  headless  trunk  in  her  arms,  cast  herself 
weeping  on  the  ground,  and  the  gods  thought  it  decent  to  follow 
her  example,  all  except  Vishnu,  who  mounted  Garuda,  and  flew 
off  to  the  river  Pushpabhadra,  where,  finding  an  elephant  asleep, 
he  took  off  his  head,  and,  flying  back  with  it,  clapped  it  on  to  the 
body  of  Ganesa  ;  hence  the  body  of  that  deity  is  crowned  with 
its  present  uncouth  capital.  On  the  restoration  of  Ganesa  to 
life,  valuable  gifts  were  made  to  the  gods  and  Brahmans  by  the 
parents,  and  by  Parvati's  father,  the  personified  Himalaya.  The 
unfortunate  Sani  was  again  anathematized,  and,  in  consequence 
of  Parvati's  curse,  has  limped  ever  since. 


2-q  The  Puranic  Deities. 


"  In  another  part  of  this  same  Purana,  further  particulars  are 
eriven  somewhat  at  variance  with  the  above.  Siva,  offended  with 
Aditya  (the  sun),  slew  him,  and  although  he  restored  him  to  life 
incurred  the  wrath  of  the  sage  Kasyapa,  who  doomed  his  (Siva's) 
son  to  lose  his  head.  The  elephant  whose  head  was  placed  upon 
Ganesa's  body  was  Indra's  elephant,  which  was  decapitated 
because  Iridra  threw  over  his  neck  the  garland  of  flowers  which 
the  sage  Durvasas  gave  him,  and  the  disrespect  of  which,  with 
the  consequent  degradation  of  Indra,  is  noticed  in  various 
Puranas,  although  in  all  other  respects  with  different  results. 
Indra  was  no  loser  of  an  elephant  by  this  transaction,  as  Vishnu, 
moved  by  the  prayers  of  his  wife,  gave  him  another  in  place  of 
that  which  he  took  away. 

"  Ganesa  has  only  one  tusk,  and  hence  is  called  Ekadanta. 
The  reason  of  this  is  as  follows : — Parasurama,  who  was  a 
favourite  disciple  of  Siva,  went  to  Kailasa  to  visit  his  master. 
< )n  arriving  at  the  inner  apartment,  his  entrance  was  opposed 
by  Ganesa,  as  his  father  was  asleep.  Parasurama  nevertheless 
urged  his  way,  and,  after  a  long  dialogue,  the  twTo  came  to  blows. 
Ganesa  had  at  first  the  advantage,  seizing  Parasurama  in  his 
trunk,  and  giving  him  a  twirl  that  left  him  sick  and  senseless. 
( )n  recovering  Rama  threw  his  axe  at  Ganesa,  who,  recognising  it 
as  his  father's  weapon — Siva  having  given  it  to  Parasurama — 
received  it  with  all  humility  upon  one  of  his  tusks,  which  it  im- 
mediately severed,  and  hence  Ganesa  has  but  one  tusk.  Par- 
vati  was  highly  incensed  at  this,  and  was  about  to  curse  Rama, 
when  Krishna,  of  whom  he  was  a  worshipper,  appeared  as  a  boy 
and  appeased  her  indignation.  Brahma  is  said  to  have  promised 
that  her  son  should  be  worshipped  before  the  other  gods.  This 
result  of  his  contest  with  Rama  was  in  consequence  of  a  curse 
pronounced  upon  him  by  the  sage  Tulasi,  with  whom  he  had 
quarrelled." 

\\  e  have  quite  a  different  account  of  the  origin  of  Ganesa  in  the 

Matsya  Purana.'*     When  Parvati  was  bathing,  she  took  the  oil 

.md  ointments  used  at  the  bath,  together  with  the  impurities  that 

*   Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Myth.,'  p.  353. 


Ganesa.  2  7 1 

came  from  her  body,  and  formed  them  into  the  figure  of  a  man, 
to  which  she  gave  life  by  sprinkling  it  with  the  water  of  the 
Ganges.  This  figure  had  the  head  of  the  elephant.  The  '  Siva 
Purana'  relates  that,  after  giving  Ganesa  life,  Parvati  placed  him  at 
her  door  to  prevent  intrusion  .whilst  she  was  bathing.  On  his  re- 
fusal to  allow  Siva  to  enter,  a  struggle  ensued,  in  which  that  deity 
cut  off  Ganesa's  head  ;  but  when  Parvati  showed  her  husband  that 
it  was  by  her  orders  that  the  door  was  closed,  and  wept  because 
of  the  loss  of  her  son,  Siva  ordered  the  first  head  that  could  be 
found  to  be  brought  to  him  :  this  happened  to  be  an  elephant's, 
which  he  fitted  to  the  headless  trunk  and  resuscitated  his  son. 

In  the  '  Varaha  Purana  '  *  Ganesa  is  said  to  have  been  produced 
by  Siva  alone.  "  The  immortals  and  holy  sages  observing  that 
the  actions  which  they  or  others  commenced,  whether  good  or 
bad,  no  difficulty  occurred  in  accomplishing  them,  consulted 
together  respecting  the  means  by  which  obstacles  might  be 
opposed  to  the  commission  of  bad  actions,  and  then  repaired  to 
Siva  for  counsel,  to  whom  they  said  :  '  O  Mahadeva  !  God  of 
gods,  three  eyed,  bearer  of  the  trident,  it  is  thou  alone  who 
canst  create  a  being  capable  of  opposing  obstacles  to  the  com- 
mission of  improper  acts.'  Hearing  these  words,  Siva  looked 
at  Parvati,  and  whilst  thinking  how  he  could  effect  the  wishes 
of  the  gods,  from  the  splendour  of  his  countenance  there  sprang 
into  existence  a  youth  shedding  radiance  around,  endowed  with 
the  qualities  of  Siva,  and  evidently  another  Rudra,  and  cap- 
tivating by  his  beauty  the  female  inhabitants  of  heaven. 

"  Uma  seeing  his  beauty  was  excited  with  jealousy,  and  in  her 
anger  pronounced  this  curse  :  '  Thou  shalt  not  offend  my  sight 
with  the  form  of  a  beautiful  youth  ;  therefore  assume  an 
elephant's  head  and  a  large  belly,  and  thus  shall  all  thy  beauties 
vanish.'  Siva  then  addressed  his  son,  saying  :  '  Thy  name  shall 
be  Ganesa,  and  the  son  of  Siva ;  thou  shalt  be  chief  of  the 
Vinayakas  and  Ganas  ;  success  and  disappointment  shall  spring 
from  thee  ;  and  great  shall  be  thine  influence  amongst  the  gods, 
and  in  sacrifices  and   all  affairs.     Therefore  shalt  thou  be  wor- 

*  Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Myth./  p.  353. 


272 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


shipped  and  invoked  the  first  on  all  occasions,  or  otherwise  the 
object  and  prayers  of  him  who  omits  to  do  so  shall  fail'  " 

The  origin  and  purpose  of  Ganesa's  existence  are  more  fully 
taught  in  the  Skanda.*  Siva  addressing  Parvati  says  :  "  During 
the  twilight  that  intervened  between  the  Dwarpara  and  Kali 
Yugas,  women,  barbarians,  Sudras,  and  other  workers  of  sin 
obtained  entrance  to  heaven  by  visiting  the  celebrated 
shrine  of  Someswara  (Somnath).  Sacrifices,  ascetic  practices, 
charitable  gifts,  and  all  the  other  prescribed  ordinances  ceased, 
and  men  thronged  only  to  the  temple  of  Siva.  Hence  old  and 
young,  those  skilled  in  the  Vedas  and  those  ignorant  of  them, 
and  even  women  and  Sudras,  ascended  to  heaven,  until  at  length 
it  became  crowded  to  excess.  Then  Indra  and  the  gods, 
afflicted  because  thus  overcome  by  men,  sought  the  protection 
of  Siva,  and  thus  addressed  him  :  '  O  Sankara !  by  thy  favour 
heaven  is  crowded  with  men,  and  we  are  nearly  expelled  from 
it.  These  mortals  wander  wmerever  they  please,  exclaiming,  "  I 
am  the  greatest,  I  am  the  greatest  ;"  and  Dharmaraja  (Yama), 
beholding  the  register  of  their  good  and  evil  deeds,  is  lost  in 
astonishment.  The  seven  hells  were  intended  for  their  re- 
ception ;  but,  having  visited  thy  shrine,  their  sins  have  been 
remitted,  and  they  have  attained  to  a  most  excellent  future  !  ' 
Siva  replied  :  '  Such  was  my  promise  to  Soma,  nor  can  it  be 
infringed  ;  all  men,  therefore,  who  visit  the  temple  of  Someswara 
must  ascend  to  heaven  ;  but  supplicate  Parvati,  and  she  will 
contrive  some  means  for  extricating  you  from  this  distress.' 

"  The  gods  then  invoked  Parvati  in  laudatory  strains  : 
'  Praise  be  to  thee,  O  supreme  of  goddesses  !  Supporter  of  the 
universe,  praise  be  to  thee,  who  createst  and  destroyest  !  Grant 
us  thy  aid,  and  save  us  from  this  distress  ! '  Having  heard  the 
prayer  of  Indra  and  the  gods,  thou,  O  goddess  !  wert  moved 
with  compassion  ;  and  gently  rubbing  thy  body,  there  was 
produced  a  wondrous  being  with  four  arms  and  an  elephant's 
head,  and  then  thou  didst  thus  address  the  gods  :  '  Desirous 
of  your  advantage,  have  I  created  this  being,  who  will  occasion 


Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Myth.,'  p.  354. 


Ganesa.  2  7 


~l 


obstacles  to  men,  and,  deluding  them,  will  deprive  them  of  the 
wish  to  visit  Somnatha,  and  thus  shall  they  fall  into  hell' 
Hearing  this,  the  gods  returned  to  their  homes  delighted. 

"The  Elephant-faced  then,  addressing  Devi,  said  :  'Command, 

0  lovely  goddess  !  what  shall  I  now  do  ? '     Thou  didst  reply  : 

1  Oppose  obstacles  to  men's  visiting  Somnatha,  and  entice  them 
to  give  up  such  a  purpose  by  the  allurements  of  wives,  chil- 
dren, possessions,  and  wealth.  But  from  those  who  propitiate 
thee  with  the  following  hymn,  do  thou  remove  all  obstacles, 
and  enable  them  to  obtain  the  favour  of  Siva,  by  worshipping 
at  his  shrine  at  Somnatha  :— "  Om,  I  praise  thee,  O  lord  of 
difficulties !  The  beloved  spouse  of  Siddhi  (knowledge)  and 
Buddhi  (understanding)  ;  Ganapati,  invincible,  and  the  giver  of 
victory  ;  the  opposer  of  obstacles  to  the  success  of  men  who  do 
not  worship  thee !  I  praise  thee,  O  Ganesa  !  The  dreadful 
son  of  Uma,  but  firm,  and  easily  propitiated  !  O  Vinayaka  ! 
I  praise  thee !  O  elephant-faced,  who  didst  formerly  protect 
the  gods,  and  accomplish  their  wishes,  I  praise  thee!"  Thus,' 
continued  Parvati,  'shalt  thou  be  praised  and  worshipped.'  And 
whoever  previously  invokes  the  god  Vinayaka,  no  difficulties 
shall  impede  the  attainment  of  his  purposed  object,  and  a  most 
beneficial  result  shall  he  derive  from  sacrifices,  pilgrimages,  and 
all  other  devotional  acts." 

The  following  extract  from  the  '  Ganapati  Upanishad '  *  is  a 
specimen  of  the  addresses  to  Ganesa  used  by  the  Ganapatyas  :  t 
"Praise  to  thee,  O  Ganesa  !  Thou  art  manifestly  the  truth  ; 
thou  art  undoubtedly  the  Creator,  Preserver,  and  Destroyer, 
the  Supreme  Brahma,  the  eternal  Spirit.  I  speak  what  is  right 
and  true  ;  preserve  me  therefore,  when  speaking,  listening,  giving, 
possessing,  teaching,  learning  ;  continually  protect  me  everywhere. 
By  thee  was  this  universe  manifested  ;  for  thou  art  earth,  water, 
fire,  air  and  ether.  Thou  art  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Rudra.  We 
acknowledge  thy  divinity,  O  Ekadanta !  and  meditate  on  thy 
countenance  ;  enlighten,  therefore,  our  understanding.     He  who 

*   Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Myth.,'  p.  493. 

f  Hindus  of  whom  Ganesa  is  the  supreme  object  of  worship. 

T 


274  The  Puranic  Deities. 

continually  meditates  upon  thy  divine  form,  conceiving  it  to 
be  with  one  tooth,  four  hands,  bearing  a  rat  on  thy  banner,  of 
a  red  hue,  with  a  large  belly,  anointed  with  red  perfumes,  arrayed 
in  red  garments,  worshipped  with  offerings  of  red  flowers, 
abounding  in  compassion,  the  cause  of  this  universe,  imperishable, 
unproduced  and  unaffected  by  creation,  becomes  the  most  ex- 
cellent of  Yogis.  Praise,  therefore,  be  to  thee,  O  Ganapati. 
Whoever  meditates  upon  this  figure  of  the  'Atharva  Siras ' 
(the  name  of  the  Upanishad  of  which  the  Ganapati  forms  a  part) 
never  will  be  impeded  by  difficulties,  will  be  liberated  from  the 
rive  great  sins,  and  all  lesser  ones  ;  and  will  acquire  riches,  the 
objects  of  his  desires,  virtue  and  final  beatitude." 

Ganesa  is  said  to  have  written  the  Mahabharata  at  Vyasa's 
dictation.  In  the  Adiparva  of  that  book  it  is  said  that  when  the 
sage  was  about  to  compose  that  great  work,  Brahma  advised 
him  to  ask  Ganesa  to  become  his  amanuensis.  Vyasa  gave  a 
few  difficult  sentences  to  puzzle  him,  which  to  this  day  the 
composer  only  and  his  disciple  Suka  have  been  able  to  under- 
stand. As  Ganesa  paused  occasionally  to  think  out  the  meaning 
of  what  he  was  writing,  Vyasa  composed  other  difficult  passages. 

In  recent  times  there  has  been  a  supposed  incarnation  of 
Ganesa,  whose  descendant  and  representative  was  visited  by 
Captain  E.  Moor  during  the  present  century.  The  following  is 
his  account  of  that  visit :  * — "  Muraba  Goseyn  was  a  Brahman 
of  Poona  who  by  abstinence,  mortification,  and  prayer,  merited 
above  others  the  favourable  regards  of  the  Almighty.  Ganapati 
accordingly  vouchsafed  to  appear  to  him  at  Chinchoor  in  a 
vision  by  night  ;  desired  him  to  arise  and  bathe  ;  and,  whilst  in 
the  act  of  ablution,  to  seize  and  hold  sacred  to  the  Godhead  the 
first  tangible  substance  that  his  hand  encountered.  The  god 
covenanted  that  a  portion  of  his  Holy  Spirit  should  pervade  the 
person  thus  favoured,  and   be  continued  as  far  as  the  seventh 

neration  to  his  seed,  who  were  to  become  successively 
hereditary  guardians  of  this  sacred  substance,  which  proved  to 
be  a  stone,   in  which   the    god  was   understood    as    mystically 


Asiatic  Researches,  vii.  381. 


Ganesa.  275 

typified.     This  type  is  duly  reverenced,  carefully  preserved,  and 
has  ever  been  the  constant  companion  of  the  sanctified  person 
inheriting    with    it    the    divine    patrimony.     This    annunciation 
happened  about  A.D.  1640;  and  at  the  time  Captain  Moor  visited 
the  place,  the  sixth  descendant  was  the  representative  of  the  Deity. 
"  It  does  not  now  appear  what  was  the  precise  extent  of  the 
divine  energy  originally  conceded,  but  it  is  inferred  to  have  been 
a  limited  power  of  working  miracles,  such  as  healing  sickness, 
answering  the  prayers  of  pious  suppliants,  and  the   faculty  of 
foretelling  future  events.     These  gifts  were  enjoyed  in  a  more 
extensive  degree  by  the  earlier  representatives  of  the  god  ;  but 
the  person  whom  Moor  saw  professed  to  have  performed  several 
miracles.      The  third  in  descent  is  reported  to  have  performed  a 
wonderful  work.     It  was  in  his  time  that  the  Moghul  army  of 
Hyderabad  so  successfully  invaded  the  Mahratta  country.     After 
plundering  and  burning  Poona,  a  party  proceeded  to  Chinchoor, 
the  residence  of  this  Deity,  to  lay  it  under  contribution.     To  this 
the   Deo  refused  to  submit,   confiding   in   the   divine  influence 
wherewith  he  was    invested.      The    Mussulmans    derided   such 
superstition,  and  with  a  view  of  rendering  it  ridiculous  offered 
to  send  a  Nuzur  (present)  to  the  Deo.     The  offer  was  accepted, 
the  Deo  betook  himself  to  prayers,   and    the    insulting   bigots 
deputed    certain    persons    to    see  the   result,    as    apparently   a 
decorous  and  appropriate  present  was  given.     It  consisted  how- 
ever of  cow's  flesh,  an  abomination    in   the   eyes  of  a   Hindu. 
When  the  trays  were  uncovered,  they  were  greatly  astonished  to 
find  that,  instead  of  the  cow's  flesh,  the  trays  were  filled  with  the 
finest  and  most  sacred  flowers  of  the  Hindus.     The  Mussulmans, 
seeing  this,  recognised  the  finger  of  God  in  the  transaction,  and 
so  struck  were  they  with  the  reality  of  the  miracle  that  a  valuable 
grant  of  land  was  made  to  the  Deo,  which  his  temple  enjoys  to 
this  day." 

The  Deo  eats,  sleeps,  marries,  and  lives  the  life  of  an  ordinary 
mortal ;  and  though  he  is  regarded  as  a  fool  in  worldly  matters, 
he  is  worshipped  as  a  god.  On  special  occasions  his  actions  and 
movements  are  most  carefully  watched,  as  they  are  the  transient 
manifestations  of  the  divine  will,  and  are  regarded  as  prophetic. 

T    2 


276 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


Thus,  e.g.,  on  a  particular  night,  should  he  remain  in  peaceful 
repose,  national  repose  is  predicted  ;  should  his  slumbers  or  his 
waking  moments  be  disturbed,  national  calamities  are  expected. 
If  he  start  wildly  from  his  seat,  seize  a  sword,  or  make  any 
warlike  movement,  war  is  expected. 


2.    KARTIKEYA. 

Kartikeya,  the  god  of  war,  and  generalissimo  of  the  armies  of 
the  gods,  though  called  the  younger  son  of  Siva  and   Parvati, 

according  to  most  of  the 
Puranic  legends,  is  their  son 
only  in  the  sense  that  they 
formed  him.  Brahma  arranged 
for  his  birth  in  answer  to  the 
prayers  of  the  gods  for  a  com- 
petent leader  of  their  forces. 
The  Ramayana*  says  :  "  While 
Siva,  the  lord  of  the  gods,  was 
performing  austerities,  the  other 
deities  went  to  Brahma  and 
asked  for  a  general  in  the  room 
of  Mahadeva,  who,  it  seems,  had 
formerly  acted  in  that  capacity. 
1  He,'  said  they,  'whom  thou 
didst  formerly  give  as  a  leader 
of  our  armies  (Mahadeva),  is 
now  performing  great  austeri- 
ties, along  with  Uma.'  Brahma 
says  that  in  consequence  of  the 
curse  of  Uma  no  son  could  be 
born  of  any  wives  of  the  gods, 
but  that  Agni  should  have  a 
son  by  the  river  Ganga,  who  should  be  their  general." 


KAIM  IKliYA. 


Muir,  O.  S.  T.j  iv.  364. 


Kartikeya.  277 


In  the  following  extract  from  the  Mahabharata*  is  an  ex- 
planation of  the  statement  in  the  preceding  paragraph  that  Agni 
was  to  be  the  father  of  this  god.  Kartikeya  has  just  been 
installed  as  general,  when,  "  the  god  whose  banner  is  a  bull  (Siva), 
arriving  with  his  goddess,  paid  him  honour,  well  pleased. 
Brahmans  call  Agni  Rudra,  consequently  he  (Kartikeya)  is 
the  son  of  Rudra.  Having  seen  him  thus  honoured  by  Rudra, 
all  the  deities  consequently  call  him,  who  is  the  most  ex- 
cellent of  the  gifted,  the  son  of  Rudra.  For  this  child  was 
produced  by  Rudra  when  he  entered  into  fire.  Skanda  (Kar- 
tikeya), that  most  eminent  deity,  being  born  of  Agni,  [who  was] 
Rudra,  and  from  Svaha(Uma)  [and]  the  six  wives  [of  the  Rishis], 
was  the  son  of  Rudra." 

This  quotation  will  be  more  intelligible  after  reading  what 
precedes  it  : — "  Indra  being  distressed  at  the  defeat  of  the  armies 
of  the  gods  by  the  Danavas,  is  meditating  on  this  subject,  when 
he  hears  the  cry  of  a  female  calling  for  help,  and  asking  for  a 
husband  to  protect  her.  Indra  sees  that  she  has  been  seized  by 
the  demon  Kesin,  with  whom  he  remonstrates  ;  but  the  demon 
hurls  his  club  at  Indra,  who,  however,  splits  it  with  his  thunder- 
bolt. Kesin  is  disabled  in  the  next  stage  of  the  combat,  and 
goes  off.  Indra  then  finds  out  from  the  female  that  her  name 
is  Devasena  (army  of  the  gods),  that  she  has  a  sister  named 
Daityasena  (army  of  the  Daityas),  and  that  they  are  both 
daughters  of  Prajapati.  She  wishes  Indra  to  find  for  her  a 
proper  husband,  who  shall  be  able  to  overcome  all  the  enemies 
of  the  gods.  Indra  takes  Devasena  with  him  to  Brahma,  and 
desires  him  to  provide  her  with  a  martial  husband  ;  and  Brahma 
promises  that  a  helpmate  of  that  description  shall  be  born. 
It  happened  that  Vasishtha  and  other  Rishis  had  been  offering 
a  sacrifice,  whither  the  gods,  headed  by  Indra,  proceeded  to 
drink  the  Soma-juice.  Agni,  too,  being  invoked,  descended  from 
the  region  of  the  sun,  entered  into  the  fire,  received  the  oblations 
of  the  Rishis,  and  presented  them  to  the  gods. 

"  Issuing  forth  [from  the  fire],  he  beheld  the  wives  of  these 


Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  iv.  350. 


278  The  Puranic  Deities. 

great  [Rishis]  reclining  in  their  own  hermitages,  and  sweetly 
sleeping,  resembling  golden  altars,  pure  as  beams  of  the  moon, 
like  to  flames  of  fire,  all  wonderful  as  stars.  Perceiving  that  his 
senses  became  agitated,  beholding  the  wives  of  the  Rishis,  Agni 
was  overcome  with  desire.  Again  and  again  he  said  :  '  It  is  not 
proper  that  I  should  be  thus  agitated ;  they  are  not  in  love  with 
me.  Entering  into  the  domestic  fire,  I  shall  gaze  upon  them 
close  at  hand.'  Entering  the  domestic  fire,  touching,  as  it  were, 
with  his  flames,  all  of  them,  and  beholding  them,  he  was  de- 
lighted. Dwelling  thus  there  for  a  long  time,  fixing  his  atten- 
tion on  these  beautiful  women,  and  enamoured  of  them,  Agni 
was  overcome. 

"Agfiii  failing  to  obtain  the  Brahmans'  wives,  resolved  to 
abandon  his  corporeal  form,  and  went  into  the  forest.  Then 
Svaha,  the  daughter  of  Daksha,  first  fell  in  love  with  him.  This 
amorous  and  blameless  goddess  for  a  long  time  sought  for  his 
weak  point,  but  could  not  find  any.  But  being  aware  that  he 
had  gone  into  the  wood,  and  that  he  was  really  disturbed  by 
desire,  the  amorous  goddess  thus  reflected  :  '  I,  who  am  distressed 
with  love,  will  take  the  forms  of  the  seven  Rishis'  wives,  and  will 
court  the  affection  of  Agni.  By  doing  so  he  will  be  pleased, 
and  I  shall  obtain  my  desire.'  Assuming  first  the  form  of  Siva, 
the  wife  of  Angiras,  the  handsome  goddess  went  to  Agni,  and 
thus  addressed  him  :  '  Agni,  thou  oughtest  to  love  me,  who  am 
disturbed  with  love  for  thee  ;  if  thou  wilt  not  do  so,  look  upon 
me  as  dead.  Agni,  I,  Siva,  the  wife  of  Angiras,  have  come,  sent 
by  virtuous  women.'  Agni  replied:  'How  dost  thou,  and  how 
do  the  other  beloved  wives  of  the  seven  Rishis,  know  that  I  am 
distressed  with  love  ?'  " 

Agni  was  not  able  to  resist  the  temptation.  After  the  inter- 
view, lest  the  wives  of  the  Rishis  should  be  blamed  for  their 
misconduct  if  she  happened  to  be  seen  in  their  form,  she  assumed 
the  figure  of  Garuda,  the  bird  of  Vishnu,  and  unnoticed,  as  she 
thought,  flew  from  the  forest.  She  visited  Agni  a  second  time 
as  the  wife  of  another  Rishi,  and  so  on  until  she  had  paid  six 
visits.  The  germs  obtained  from  Agni  she  deposited  in  a  golden 
reservoir,  which,  "  being  worshipped  by  the  Rishis,  generated  a 


Kartikeya.  279 


son.  Kumara  (Kartikeya)  was  born  with  six  heads,  a  double 
number  of  ears,  twelve  eyes,  arms,  and  feet,  one  neck  and  one 
belly. 

"  Kartikeya  marries  Devasena.  The  six  Rishis'  wives,  his 
mothers,  afterwards  come  to  him,  complaining  that  they  had 
been  abandoned  by  their  husbands,  and  degraded  from  their 
former  positions,  and  asking  him  to  secure  their  admission  into 
paradise  (Swarga).  When  Skanda  had  done  what  was  gratifying 
to  his  mothers,  Svaha  said  to  him  :  '  Thou  art  my  genuine  son. 
I  desire  the  love  difficult  to  obtain  which  thou  givest.'  Skanda 
then  asked  her  :  '  What  love  dost  thou  desire  ? '  Svaha  replied  : 
'  I  am  the  beloved  daughter  of  Daksha,  by  name  Svaha.  From 
my  childhood  I  have  been  enamoured  of  Agni ;  but,  my  son, 
Agni  does  not  thoroughly  know  me,  who  am  enamoured  of  him.' 
Skanda  replied :  '  Whatever  oblation  of  Brahmans  is  introduced 
by  hymns,  they  shall  always,  goddess,  lift  and  throw  it  into  the 
fire,  saying  Svaha  (happiness).  Thus,  O  beautiful  goddess, 
Agni  shall  dwell  with  thee  continually.'  Then  Brahma  Pra- 
japati  said  to  Skanda  :  '  Go  to  thy  father  Mahddeva,  the  vexer  of 
Tripura.  Thou,  unconquered,  hast  been  produced  for  the  good 
of  all  worlds  by  Rudra,  who  had  entered  into  Agni,  and  Uma, 
who  had  entered  into  Svaha.'  " 

The  allusion  to  Rudra's  entering  into  Agni  is  explained  in  the 
Ramayana.  The  gods,  fearing  that  the  descendants  of  such  a 
pair  as  Siva  and  Parvati  would  be  too  dreadful  to  live  with, 
entreated  those  deities  not  to  have  offspring.  Siva  consented,  but 
Uma  being  angry,  declared  that  as  she  could  not  have  children 
the  other  goddesses  should  suffer  similar  deprivation.  Un- 
fortunately, the  gods  came  too  late  to  prevent  the  production  of 
Kartikeya  ;  the  germ  from  which  he  was  born  having  been  re- 
ceived by  the  earth.  Agni  and  Vayu  entered  it,  and  deposited  it 
with  Ganga,  the  sister  of  Uma,  and  thus  this  deity  was  produced. 

The  '  Siva  Purana'*  gives  a  different  account  of  his  origin,  and 
teaches  that  he  was  produced  to  effect  the  destruction  of  Tarika. 
This    demon,    who   was    King    of  Tripura,    was    "exceedingly 


Moor's  i  Hindu  Pantheon,'  p.  51. 


280  The  Puranic  Deities. 


ambitious  and  oppressive.  He  forced  Brahma,  by  his  penance 
and  austerities,  to  promise  him  any  boon  that  he  should  demand. 
Among  his  austerities  he  went  through  the  following  series, 
each  of  the  eleven  specific  mortifications  continuing  ioo  years  : — 
I.  He  stood  on  one  foot,  holding  the  other  and  both  hands  up 
toward  heaven,  with  his  eyes  fixed  on  the  sun.  2.  He  stood  on 
one  great  toe.  3.  He  took  only  water  as  sustenance.  4.  He 
lived  similarly  on  air.  5.  He  remained  in  water.  6.  He  was 
buried  in  the  earth,  but  continued  as  under  the  last  infliction,  in 
incessant  adoration.  7.  The  same  in  fire.  8.  He  stood  on  his 
head.  9.  He  hung  on  a  tree  by  his  hands.  10.  He  bore  the 
weight  of  his  body  on  one  hand.  II.  He  hung  on  a  tree  with 
his  head  downwards.* 

"  Such  merit  was  irresistible,  and  Indra  and  a  host  of  demi-gods, 
alarmed  lest  their  sovereignty  should  be  usurped  through  the 
potency  of  this  penance,  resorted  to  Brahma  for  consolation. 
Brahma,  however,  said  that,  although  he  could  not  resist  such 
austerities,  he  would,  after  rewarding  them  by  granting  the  boon 
demanded,  devise  a  method  of  rendering  it  ultimately  inoffensive 
to  them. 

"  The  demand  by  Tarika  was  that  he  should  be  unrivalled  in 
strength,  and  that  no  hand  should  slay  him  but  that  of  a  son  of 
Mahadeva.  He  now  became  so  arrogant  that  Indra  was  forced 
to  yield  to  him  the  white  eight-headed  horse  Ukhisrava  ;  Kuvera 
gave  up  his  thousand  sea-horses  ;  the  Rishis  were  compelled  to 
resign  the  cow  Kamdhenu,  that  yielded  everything  that  could  be 
wished.  The  Sun  in  dread  gave  no  heat,  and  the  moon  in  terror 
remained  always  at  full.  The  winds  blew  as  he  dictated,  and,  in 
short,  he  usurped  the  entire  management  of  the  universe. 

'  Narada  prophesied  the  marriage  whence  should  arise  the 
deliverer  of  the  world  ;  but  at  first  Mahadeva  could  not  be 
influenced  with  the  passion  of  love.  Indra  persuaded  Kama  to 
lie  in  ambush,  and  contrived  that  Parvati  should  be  seen  by  Siva 
while  engaged   in    the   amiable   and   graceful   act   of  gathering 


Many  of  these  forms  of  penance  are  resorted  to,  with  some  modifications, 
at  the  present  time  ;  these  devotees  may  be  seen  at  Benares,  and  other 
shrines. 


Kartikeya.  281 


flowers,  wherewith  to  decorate  his  image.  Kama,  accompanied 
by  his  wife  Rati  (Desire),  and  his  bosom  friend  Vasantu  (the 
Spring),  took  his  aim,  and  launched  an  arrow  at  Mahadeva,  who, 
enraged  at  the  attempt  (to  interrupt  his  devotion),  reduced  Kama 
to  ashes  by  a  beam  of  fire  that  issued  from  his  third  eye.  At 
length,  however,  by  ardent  devotion  and  austerities,  Parvati  pro- 
pitiated Siva,  and  the  deity  consented  to  espouse  his  persevering 
devotee." 

For  some  time  after  their  marriage,  as  there  was  no  child  born 
to  them,  the  distressed  and  disappointed  deities  who  had  been 
anxiously  expecting  a  deliverer,  renewed  their  lamentations  and 
complaints. 

"Agni  arrived  in  the  presence  of  Mahadeva,  having  been 
deputed  to  express  the  desires  of  the  other  gods,  that  he  would 
provide  them  with  a  son,  who  should  destroy  Tarika.  Siva  had 
just  left  his  wife,  and  Agni,  assuming  the  form  of  a  dove,  received 
from  Mahadeva  the  germ  from  which  Kartikeya  arose.  Unable 
to  carry  this  further,  he  let  it  fall  into  the  Ganges,  on  the  banks 
of  which  river  arose  a  boy,  beautiful  as  the  moon,  and  bright  as 
the  sun,  who  was  called  Agnibhuva  (produced  from  Agni), 
Skanda,  Kartikeya,  &c.*' 

"  It  happened  that  six  daughters  (the  Pleiades)  of  as  many 
Rajas,  coming  to  bathe,  saw  the  boy,  and  each  called  him  her 
son  ;  and,  offering  the  breast,  the  child  assumed  to  himself  six 
mouths,  and  received  nurture  from  each  ;  whence  he  is  called 
Sasthimatriya  (having  six  mothers).  But  in  fact  the  child  had 
no  mother,  for  he  came  from  his  father  alone.  In  course  of  time 
a  conflict  ensued  between  Kartikeya  and  Tarika,  in  which  the 
demon  was  slain." 

A  story  is  told  showing  how  Kartikeya  was  outwitted  by  his 
brother  Ganesa.  As  the  two  brothers  fell  in  love  with  two 
ladies  named  Siddhi  and  Buddhi,  it  was  agreed  that  whoever 
should  first  travel  round  the  world  should  have  them.  Ganesa 
proved  by  his  logical  talents  and  aptness  at  quotation  that  he 
had  done  this,  and  obtained  the  prize  long  before  his  brother 
returned  from  his  weary  pilgrimage,  to  the  disquiet  of  both 
families  when  Ganesa's  sophistry  was  discovered. 


282 


The  Puranic  Deities. 


We  have  still  another  account  *  of  the  origin  of  Kartikeya  : 
"Siva  emitted  sparks  of  fire  from  his  eyes,  which,  being  thrown 
into  the  lake  Saravana,  became  six  infants,  who  were  nursed  by 
the  wives  of  the  Rishis,  who  are  seen  in  the  sky  as  the  Pleiades. 
When  Parvati  saw  these  children,  she  was  transported  with  their 
beauty,  and  embraced  all  of  them  together  so  forcibly  that  their 
six  bodies  became  one  ;  while  their  six  heads  and  twelve  arms 
remained." 

Kartikeya  is  better  known  in  South  India  under  the  name 
of  Subramanya.  The  '  Skanda  Purana  '  gives  a  full  account  of 
his  war  with  Sura,  and  relates  how  he  was  sent  by  his  father  to 
interrupt  Daksha's  sacrifice  ;  and  how,  at  the  instigation  of  the 
latter,  he  was  delayed  on  his  journey  by  beautiful  damsels,  who 
entertained  him  with  dance  and  song.  Hence  it  is  the  prac- 
tice for  dancing  girls  who  are  attached  to  the  pagodas,  to  be 
betrothed  and  married  to  him  ;  and,  though  allowed  to  prostitute 
themselves,  cannot  re-marry. 

*  Garrett's  '  Classical  Dictionary  of  India.' 


283 


CHAPTER  IX. 

THE  PURANIC  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  CREATION. 

BEFORE  passing  on  to  the  inferior  deities,  an  account  of  the 
creation  will  be  given.  It  is  not  at  all  easy  to  give  a  consistent 
account  from  the  Hindu  Scriptures,  because  the  imaginations  of 
the  writers  seem  to  have  run  wild  on  this  subject  ;  not  having 
any  authority,  each  writer  has  written  what  seemed  good  to 
himself.  As  in  the  accounts  of  the  deities,  the  germs  of  what 
occupies  a  large  space  in  the  more  recent,  are  found  in  the 
older  books.  The  following  hymn  from  the  Rig- Veda  *  describes 
the  primal  condition  of  things  before  the  creative  power  of  the 
Deity  was  exercised  : — 

"  There  was  neither  aught  nor  naught,  nor  air,  nor  sky  beyond. 
What  covered  all  ?     Where  rested  all  ?     In  watery  gulf  profound  ? 
Nor  death  was  then,  nor  deathlessness,  nor  change  of  night  and  day. 
The  One  breathed  calmly,  self-sustained  ;  nought  else  beyond  it  lay. 

"  Gloom,  hid  in  gloom,  existed  first — one  sea,  eluding  view. 
That  One,  a  void  in  chaos  wrapt,  by  inward  fervour  grew. 
Within  it  first  arose  desire,  the  primal  germ  of  mind, 
Which  nothing  with  existence  links,  as  sages  searching  find. 

"  The  kindling  ray  that  shot  across  the  dark  and  drear  abyss — 
Was  it  beneath  ?  or  high  aloft  ?     What  bard  can  answer  this  ? 
There  fecundating  powers  were  found,  and  mighty  forces  strove — 
A  self-supporting  mass  beneath,  and  energy  above. 

"  Who  knows,  who  ever  told,  from  whence  this  vast  creation  rose  ? 
No  gods  had  then  been  born — who  then  can  e'er  the  truth  disclose  ? 
Whence  sprang  this  world,  and  whether  framed  by  hand  divine  or  no — 
Its  lord  in  heaven  alone  can  tell,  if  even  he  can  show." 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  v.  356. 


284  The  Puranic  Account 


This  hymn  contains  perhaps  the  earliest  speculations  of  the 
Hindus  respecting  the  creation  that  have  come  down  to  us  ;  and 
the  wise  conclusion  was  arrived  at  that  God  alone  knew  how  the 
world  came  into  being.  But  as  time  went  on  this  confession  of 
ignorance  did  not  satisfy  the  cravings  of  the  human  mind  :  hence 
succeeding  ages  sought  by  its  conjectures,  which  are  given  with 
the  assurance  of  exact  knowledge,  to  throw  light  upon  the 
unknowable. 

The  next  quotation  is  from  the  'Purusha  Sakta  '  of  the  Rig- 
Veda,  which  from  its  thought  and  language  is  generally  believed 
to  be  of  much  later  origin  than  the  preceding  hymn. 

"  Purusha  has  a  thousand  heads,  a  thousand  eyes,  a  thousand 
feet.  On  every  side  enveloping  the  earth,  he  overpassed  (it)  by 
a  space  of  ten  fingers.  Purusha  himself  is  this  whole  (universe), 
whatever  has  been  and  whatever  shall  be.  He  is  also  lord  of 
immortality,  since  (or  when)  by  food  he  expands.  All  existences 
are  a  quarter  of  him,  and  three-fourths  of  him  are  that  which  is 
immortal  in  the  sky.  With  three-quarters  Purusha  mounted 
upward.  A  quarter  of  him  was  again  produced  here.  From 
him  was  born  Viraj  ;  and  from  Viraj,  Purusha.  When  the  gods 
performed  a  sacrifice,  with  Purusha  as  the  oblation,  the  spring 
was  its  butter,  the  summer  its  fuel,  and  the  autumn  its  (accom- 
panying) offering.  From  that  universal  sacrifice  were  provided 
curds  and  butter.  From  that  universal  sacrifice  sprang  the  Rich 
and  Saman  verses,  the  metres  and  the  Yajush  ;  from  it  sprang 
horses  and  all  animals  with  two  rows  of  teeth,  kine,  goats  and 
sheep.  When  (the  gods)  divided  Purusha,  into  how  many  parts 
did  they  cut  him  up  ?  The  Brahman  was  his  mouth,  the 
Raj  any  a  was  made  his  arms,  the  being  (called)  Vaisya  was 
his  thighs,  and  the  Sudra  sprang  from  his  feet.  The  morn 
sprang  from  his  soul  (manas),  the  sun  from  his  eye,  Indra  and 
Agni  from  his  mouth,  and  Vaya  from  his  breath.  From  his 
navel  arose  the  air,  from  his  head  the  sky,  from  his  feet  the  earth, 
from  his  ear  the  (four)  quarters  ;  in  this  manner  (the  gods) 
formed  the  worlds."  * 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  i.  9. 


of  the  Creation.  285 


Now  follows  an  extract  from  the  '  Satapatha  Brahmana,' 
which  gives  the  words  used  at  the  creation.  "  (Uttering) 
'bhuh,'  Prajapati  generated  this  earth.  (Uttering)  'bhuvah,'  he 
generated  the  air  ;  and  (uttering)  '  svah,'  he  generated  the  sky. 
This  universe  is  co-extensive  with  these  worlds.  Saying 
1  bhuh,'  Prajapati  generated  the  Brahman;  (saying)  ' bhuvah,'  he 
generated  the  Kshattra  ;  (and  saying)  '  svah,'  he  generated  the 
Vis.  All  this  world  is  as  much  as  the  Brahman,  Kshattra, 
and  Vis.  (Saying)  'bhuh,'  Prajapati  generated  himself;  (saying) 
'bhuvah,'  he  generated  offspring;  (saying)  'svah,'  he  generated 
animals.    This  world  is  so  much  as  self,  offspring,  and  animals."  * 

The  '  Taittiriya  Brahmana  '  says,  "  This  entire  (universe)  has 
been  created  by  Brahma,"  and  gives  an  account  of  the  creation 
of  the  Asuras,  Pitris  (or  fathers),  and  gods.  "Prajapati  desired 
'  May  I  propagate.'  He  practised  austerity.  His  breath  became 
alive.  With  that  breath  (asu)  he  created  Asuras.  Having 
created  the  Asuras,  he  regarded  himself  as  a  father.  After  that 
he  created  the  fathers  (pitris).  That  constitutes  the  fatherhood 
of  the  fathers.  Having  created  the  fathers,  he  reflected.  After 
that  he  created  men.  That  constitutes  the  manhood  of  men. 
He  who  knows  the  manhood  of  men  becomes  intelligent.  To 
him,  when  he  was  creating  men,  day  appeared  in  the  heavens. 
After  that  he  created  the  gods."  f 

The  '  Satapatha  Brahmana '  relates  the  creation  of  men  and 
animals.  "  Prajapati  was  formerly  this  (universe)  only.  He 
desired  :  '  Let  me  create  food,  and  be  propagated.'  He  formed 
animals  from  his  breaths,  a  man  from  his  soul,  a  horse  from  his 
eye,  a  bull  from  his  breath,  a  sheep  from  his  ear,  a  goat  from  his 
voice.  Since  he  formed  animals  from  his  breaths,  therefore  men 
say,  'The  breaths  are  animals.'  The  soul  is  the  first  of  breaths. 
Since  he  formed  a  man  from  his  soul,  therefore  they  say,  '  Man 
is  the  first  of  the  animals  and  the  strongest.'  The  soul  is  all  the 
breaths  ;  for  all  the  breaths  depend  upon  the  soul.  Since  he 
formed  man  from  his  soul,  therefore  they  say,  '  Man  is  all  the 
animals  ;'  for  all  these  are  man's."  J 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  i.  17.  f  Ibid.,  i.  23.  t  Ibid.,  i.  24. 


286  The  Puranic  Account 


In  another  passage  this  Brahmana  gives  quite  a  different 
account.  Purusha,  as  the  soul  of  the  universe,  was  alone. 
Hence  "he  did  not  enjoy  happiness.  He  desired  a  second.  He 
caused  this  same  self  to  fall  asunder  into  two  parts.  Thence 
arose  a  husband  and  wife.  From  them  n  en  were  born.  She 
reflected  :  '  How  does  he,  after  having  produced  me  from  himself, 
cohabit  with  me  ?  Ah  !  let  me  disappear  ! '  She  became  a  cow, 
and  the  other  a  bull ;  from  them  kine  were  produced.  The  one 
became  a  mare,  the  other  a  stallion  ;  the  one  a  she-ass,  the  other 
a  male  ass.  From  them  the  class  of  animals  with  undivided  hoofs 
was  produced.  The  one  became  a  she-goat,  the  other  a  he-goat ; 
the  one  an  ewe,  the  other  a  ram.  From  them  goats  and  sheep 
were  produced.  In  this  manner  pairs  of  all  creatures  whatsoever, 
down  to  ants,  were  created."  * 

Again  this  Brahmana  says:  "Prajapati  created  living  beings. 
From  his  upper  vital  airs  he  created  the  gods  ;  from  his  lower 
vital  airs,  mortal  creatures."  f 

Manu's  account  of  the   creation   most  probably  follows    the 

preceding  one  in  order  of  time  ;  and  it  will  be  noticed  that  he 

has  developed  some  germs  of  thought  expressed  there.     "  He 

(the  self-existent)  having  felt  desire,  and  willing  to  create  various 

living  beings   from  his  own   body,  first  created  the  waters,  and 

threw  into  them  a  seed.     That  seed   became  a  golden  egg,  of 

lustre  equal   to  the  Sun  ;  in  it  he  himself  was  born  as  Brahma, 

the  parent  of  all  the  world.     The  waters  are  called  narah,  for 

they  are  sprung  from  Nara  ;  and  as  they  were  his  first  sphere  of 

motion  (ayana-path),  he  is  therefore  called  Narayana.     Produced 

from  the  imperceptible,  eternal,  existent  and  non-existent  cause, 

that  male  (purusha)  is  celebrated  in  the  world  as  Brahma.     After 

dwelling  for   a  year   in  the  egg,  the  glorious  being,  by  his  own 

contemplation,  split  in  twain.  .  .   .   Having  divided  his  own  body 

into  two  parts,  the  lord  (Brahma)  became,  with  the  half  a  male, 

and  with  the  half  a  female  ;  and  in  her  he  created  Viraj.     Know, 

O  most  excellent  twice-born  men,  that  I,  whom  that  male  Viraj 

himself  created,  am  the  creator  of  all  this  world." 

*   Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  i.  26.  f    Vishnu  Purana,5  p.  31. 


of  the  Creation.  287 


The  Puranas  enter  very  minutely  into  the  details  of  the 
creation.  This  is  one  of  the  specified  topics  of  which  a  Purana 
ought  to  treat.  The  first  Book  of  the  '  Vishnu  Purana  '  is  largely 
filled  with  the  accounts  of  this  work.  In  his  preface  *  to  the 
translation  of  the  'Vishnu  Purana,'  Wilson  says  :  "  The  first  book 
of  the  six  into  which  the  work  is  divided  is  occupied  chiefly  with 
the  details  of  creation,  primary  and  secondary  ;  the  first  explain- 
ing how  the  universe  proceeds  from  Prakriti,  or  eternal  crude 
matter  ;  the  second,  in  what  manner  the  forms  of  things  are 
developed  from  the  elementary  substance  previously  evolved, 
or  how  they  reappear  after  their  temporary  destruction.  Both 
these  creations  are  periodical,  but  the  termination  of  the  first 
occurs  only  at  the  end  of  the  life  of  Brahma  ;  when  not  only  all 
the  gods  and  other  forms  are  annihilated,  but  the  elements  are 
again  merged  into  primary  substance  ;  besides  which  one  only 
spiritual  being  exists  :  the  latter  takes  place  at  the  end  of  every 
Kalpa,  a  day  of  Brahma,  and  affects  only  the  forms  of  inferior 
creatures  and  lower  worlds,  leaving  the  substance  of  the  universe 
entire,  and  sages  and  gods  unharmed." 

The  account  in  the  '  Vishnu  Purana '  was,  according  to  that 
authority,  "  originally  imparted  by  the  great  father  of  all 
(Brahma)  in  answer  to  the  questions  of  Daksha  and  other 
venerable  sages,  and  repeated  by  them  to  Purukutsa,  a  king 
who  reigned  on  the  banks  of  the  Narmada."  f  "  Who  can 
describe  him  who  is  not  to  be  apprehended  by  the  senses  ?  He 
is  Brahma,  supreme,  lord,  eternal,  unborn,  imperishable.  He 
then  existed  in  the  form  of  Purusha  and  of  Kala.  Purusha 
(Spirit)  is  the  first  form  of  the  supreme  ;  next  proceeded  two 
other  forms,  the  discreet  and  indiscreet  ;  and  Kala  (time)  was 
the  last.  These  four — Pradhana  (primary  or  crude  matter), 
Purusha  (Spirit),  Vyakta  (visible  substance),  and  Kala  (time) — 
in  their  due  proportions,  are  the  causes  of  the  production  of 
the  phenomena  of  creation,  preservation,  and  destruction.  The 
supreme  Brahma,  the  supreme  soul,  the  substance  of  the 
world,  the  lord  of  all  creatures,  the  universal  soul,  the  supreme 


*  t 


Vishnu  Purana,'  p.  39.  f   Ibid.  p.  9. 


8  The  Puranic  Account 


ruler  Hari  (Vishnu),  of  his  own  will  having  entered  into  matter 
and  spirit,  agitated  the  mutable  and  immutable  principles,  the 
season  of  creation  having  arrived,  in  the  same  manner  as  fra- 
grance affects  the  mind  from  its  proximity  merely,  and  not  from 
any  immediate  operation  upon  mind  itself;  so  the  supreme 
influenced  the  elements  of  creation."  * 

After  giving  an  acconnt  of  the  creation,  or  rather  the  evolution 
of  the  elements,  the  '  Vishnu  Purana  '  f  goes  on  to  say  :  "  Then 
(the  elements)  ether,  air,  light,  water  and  earth,  severally  united 
with  the  properties  of  sound,  and  the  rest  existed  as  distinguish- 
able according  to  their  qualities  as  soothing,  terrific,  or  stupify- 
ing  ;  but  possessing  various  energies,  and  being  unconnected, 
they  could  not  without  combination  create  living  beings,  not 
having  blended  with  each  other.  Having  combined,  therefore, 
with  one  another,  they  assumed,  through  their  mutual  associa- 
tion, the  character  of  one  mass  of  entire  unity  ;  and  from  the 
direction  of  spirit,  with  the  acquiescence  of  the  indiscrete 
principle,  intellect,  and  the  rest,  to  the  gross  elements  inclusive, 
formed  an  egg,  which  gradually  expanded  like  a  bubble  of  water. 
This  vast  egg,  compounded  of  the  elements,  and  resting  on  the 
waters,  was  the  excellent  natural  abode  of  Vishnu  in  the  form 
of  Brahma  ;  and  there  Vishnu,  the  lord  of  the  universe,  whose 
essence  is  inscrutable,  assumed  a  perceptible  form,  and  even  he 
himself  abided  in  it  in  the  character  of  Brahma.  Its  womb, 
vast  as  the  mountain  Meru,  was  composed  of  the  mountains  ; 
and  the  mighty  oceans  were  the  waters  that  filled  its  cavity. 
In  that  egg  were  the  continents  and  seas  and  mountains,  the 
planets  and  divisions  of  the  universe,  the  gods,  demons,  and 
mankind. 

"  Affecting  then  the  quality  of  activity,  Hari  the  lord  of  all, 
himself  becoming  Brahma,  engaged  in  the  creation  of  the 
universe.  Vishnu,  with  the  quality  of  goodness  and  of  im- 
measurable power,  preserves  created  things  through  successive 
,  until  the  close  of  the  period  termed  a  Kalpa  ;  when  the 
ime    mighty    deity,    invested     with    the   quality    of  darkness, 


*  . 


Vishnu  I'm-; in; i,'  i>.  15.  f  Page  18. 


of  the  Creation.  289 


assumes  the  awful  form  of  Rudra,  and  swallows  up  the  universe. 
Having  thus  devoured  all  things,  and  converted  the  world  into 
one  vast  ocean,  the  supreme  reposes  upon  his  mighty  serpent 
couch  amidst  the  deep :  he  awakes  after  a  season,  and  again,  as 
Brahma,  becomes  the  author  of  creation." 

The  Purana  next  gives  an  account  of  the  creation  in  the 
present  Kalpa  or  age.  This  is  a  secondary  creation,  for  water 
and  the  earth  also  are  already  in  existence  ;  it  is  not  creation 
in  its  proper  signification,  but  the  change  of  pre-existing  matter 
into  the  forms  we  now  see.  Vishnu  knew  that  the  earth  lay 
hidden  in  the  waters  ;  he  therefore,  assuming  the  form  of  a  boar,* 
raised  it  upon  his  tusks. 

In  answer  to  a  request  for  a  full  account  of  the  creation  of 
gods  and  other  beings,  the  following  passages  occur :  f — "  Created 
beings,  although  they  are  destroyed  (in  their  original  forms)  at 
the  periods  of  dissolution,  yet,  being  affected  by  the  good  or  evil 
acts  of  former  existence,  are  never  exempted  from  their  con- 
sequences ;  and  when  Brahma  creates  the  world  anew,  they  are 
the  progeny  of  his  will,  in  the  fourfold  condition  of  gods,  men, 
animals,  and  inanimate  things.  Brahma  then,  being  desirous  of 
creating  the  four  orders  of  beings — termed  gods,  demons,  pro- 
genitors, and  men — collected  his  mind  into  itself. 

"  Whilst  thus  concentrated,  the  quality  of  darkness  pervaded 
his  body,  and  thence  the  demons  (the  Asuras)  were  first  born, 
issuing  from  his  thigh.  Brahma  then  abandoned  that  form  which 
was  composed  of  the  rudiment  of  darkness,  and  which,  being 
deserted  by  him,  became  night.  Continuing  to  create,  but  as- 
suming a  different  shape,  he  experienced  pleasure,  and  thence 
from  his  mouth  proceeded  the  gods.  The  form  abandoned  by 
him  became  day,  in  which  the  good  quality  predominates  ;  and 
hence  by  day  the  gods  are  most  powerful,  and  by  night  the 
demons.  He  next  adopted  another  person  (form)  in  which  the 
rudiment  of  good  men  also  prevailed  ;  and  thinking  of  himself 
as  the  father  of  the  world,  the  progenitors  (or  Pitris)  were  born 
from  his  side.     The  body,  when  he   abandoned  it,  became  the 

*   See  ante,  p.  121.  f  'Vishnu  Purana,'  p.  30. 

U 


2qo  The  Puranic  Account 


ndhya,  or  evening  twilight.  Brahma  then  assumed  another 
person,  pervaded  by  the  quality  of  foulness  ;  and  from  this,  men 
in  whom  foulness  (or  passion)  predominates,  were  produced. 
<  juickly  abandoning  that  body,  it  became  the  dawn.  At  the 
appearance  of  this  light  of  day  men  feel  most  vigour  ;  whilst  the 
progenitors  arc  most  powerful  in  the  evening. 

"  Next  from  Brahma,  in  a  form  composed  of  the  quality  of 
foulness,  was  produced  hunger,  of  whom  anger  was  born  ;  and 
the  god  put  forth  in  darkness  beings  emaciated  with  hunger,  of 
hideous  aspect  and  with  long  beards.  These  beings  hastened 
to  the  deity.  Such  of  them  as  exclaimed,  '  Oh  preserve  us,'  were 
thence  called  Rakshasas  (from  Raksha,  to  preserve)  ;  others  who 
cried  out,  '  Let  us  eat,'  were  denominated  from  that  expression 
Yakshas  (from  Yaksha,  to  eat).  Beholding  them  so  disgusting, 
the  hairs  of  Brahma  were  shrivelled  up,  and  first  falling  from  his 
head  were  again  renewed  upon  it  ;  from  their  falling  they  became 
serpents,  called  Sarpa  (Srip,  to  creep),  from  their  creeping,  and 
Ahi  (from  Ha,  to  abandon),  because  they  had  deserted  the  head. 
The  creator  of  the  world,  being  incensed,  then  created  fierce 
beings,  who  were  denominated  goblins,  Bhutas,  malignant  fiends, 
and  caters  of  flesh.  The  Gandharvas  (choristers)  were  next 
born  :  imbibing  melody,  drinking  of  the  goddess  of  speech,  they 
were  born,  and  hence  their  appellation. 

"The  divine  Brahma,  influenced  by  their  material  energies, 
having  created  these  beings,  made  others  of  his  own  will.  Birds 
he  formed  from  his  vital  vigour  ;  sheep  from  his  heart ;  goats 
from  his  mouth;  kine  from  his  belly  and  sides;  and  horses, 
elephants,  sarabhas,  gayals,  deer,  camels,  mules,  antelopes, 
and  other  animals  from  his  feet  :  whilst  from  the  hairs  of 
his  body  sprang  herbs,  roots,  and  fruits."  In  this  manner 
all  things  are  said  to  have  sprung  from  Brahma  ;  they  were 
with  him  in  the  egg:  hence  this  is  an  account  of  evolution, 
rather  than  of  creation.  The  creation  of  man,  as  divided  into 
four  i  ,  is  described  in  this  Purana,  in  similar  terms  to  those 

in  Mann. 

Following  this  is  the  account  of  the  mind-born  sons  of  Brahma 
—  Bhrigu,  Daksha,  and  others — nine  in  number,  who  became  the 


of  the  Creation. 


291 


progenitors  of  men.  *  Next  "  Brahma  created  himself  as  Manu 
Swayambhu,  born  of,  and  identical  with,  his  original  self,  for 
the  protection  of  created  beings  :  and  the  female  portion  of 
himself  he  constituted  Satarupa,  whom  austerity  purified  from  the 
sin  (forbidden  nuptials)  and  whom  the  divine  Manu  Swayambhu 
took  to  wife."  After  this  follows  a  long  account  of  the  de- 
scendants of  these  mind-born  sons  ;  and  it  is  then  shown  how 
by  the  production  of  the  Amrita  at  the  churning  of  the  ocean 
the  gods  obtained  immortality,  and  the  work  of  creation  for 
this  age  was  complete. 

With  some  variations  this  is  the  story  of  the  creation  as  told 
in  the  Puranas  ;  though  in  some  prominence  is  given  to  parts 
that  are  only  lightly  touched  upon  here,  whilst  some  incidents 
are  more  fully  described  here  than  in  some  of  the  other  Puranas. 

*  See  Part  III.,  chap.  i. 


(J    2 


2Q2  The  Puranic  Divisions  of  Time. 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE  PURANIC  DIVISIONS  OF  TIME. 

THE  three  main  divisions  of  time  employed  in  the  Hindu 
Scriptures,  are  YUGAS,  MANVANTARAS,  and  Kalpas.*  These 
will  now  be  described. 

There  are  four  Yugas,  which  together  extend  to  12,000  divine 
years.     Their  respective  duration  is  as  follows  : — 

The  Krita  Yuga        =  4,800  divine  years. 
The  Treta  Yuga       =  3,600      „         „ 
The  Dvapara  Yuga  =  2,400      „         „ 
The  Kali  Yuga  =  1,200      „         „ 

"  One  year  of  mortals  is  equal  to  one  day  of  the  gods."      As 
360  is  taken  as  the  number  of  days  in  the  year : 

The  Krita  Yuga        =  4,800  x  360  =  1,728,000  years  of  mortals. 
The  Treta  Yuga        =  3,600  x  360  =  1,296,000 
The  Dvapara  Yuga  =  2,400  x  360  =     864,000 
The  Kali  Yuga         =  1,200  x  360=    432,000 

One  Mahay uga,  or  age,  including  all  the  four  lesser  Yugas, 
therefore,  being  12,000  divine  years  =  4,320,000  years  of 
mortals.  "  A  thousand  such  Mahay ugas  are  a  day  of  Brahma." 
and  his  nights  are  of  equal  duration  ;  a  Kalpa,  therefore,  or 
I  lay  of  Brahma  extends  over  4,320,000,000  ordinary  years. 
'Within  each  Kalpa  14  Manus  reign;  a  Manvantara,  or  period 
of  a  Manu,  therefore,  is  consequently  T'.r  part  of  a  Kalpa,  01- 
day  of  Brahma. 

•  \  1  linn  Pur; an;  1, '  Book  i.  chap,  iii.,  and  Book  vi.  chap.  i. 
+  Muir,  < ).  S.  T.,  i.  43. 


11 

11 

11 

11 

11 

11 

The  Puranic  Divisions  of  Time.  293 


"  In  the  present  Kalpa,  six  Manus,  of  whom  Swyambhuva  was 
the  first,  have  already  passed  away  ;  the  present  being  Vaivasata. 
In  each  Manvantara  (period  of  a  Manu),  seven  Rishis,  certain 
deities,  an  Indra  and  a  Manu,  and  the  kings,  his  sons,  are  created 
and  perish.  A  thousand  systems  of  the  four  Yugas  occur  coin- 
cidentally  with  these  fourteen  Manvantaras,  and  consequently 
about  71  systems  of  four  Yugas  elapse  during  each  Manvantara, 
and  measure  the  lives  of  the  Manus  and  the  deities  of  the  period. 
At  the  close  of  this  day  of  Brahma,  a  collapse  of  the  universe 
takes  place,  which  lasts  through  a  night  of  Brahma,  equal  in 
duration  to  his  day,  during  which  period  the  three  worlds  are 
converted  into  one  great  ocean,  when  the  lotus-born  god  (Brahma), 
expanded  by  his  deglutition  of  the  universe,  and  contemplated 
by  the  Yogis  and  gods  in  Janaloka,  sleeps  on  the  serpent  Sesha. 
At  the  end  of  that  night  he  awakes  and  creates  anew. 

"  A  year  of  Brahma  is  composed  of  the  proper  number  of  such 
days  and  nights,  and  a  hundred  of  such  years  constitute  his 
whole  life.  The  period  of  his  life  is  called  Para,  and  the  half  of 
it  Pararddha,  or  the  half  of  a  Para.  One  Pararddha,  or  half  of 
Brahma's  existence,  has  now  expired,  terminating  with  the  great 
Kalpa,  called  the  Padma  Kalpa.  The  now  existing  Kalpa,  01- 
day  of  Brahma,  called  Varahar  (or  that  of  the  boar),  is  the  first 
of  the  second  Pararddha  of  Brahma's  existence.  The  dissolution 
which  occurs  at  the  end  of  each  Kalpa,  or  day  of  Brahma,  is  called 
naimittika,  incidental,  occasional,  or  contingent."  * 

The  dissolution  of  existing  beings  is  of  three  kinds  :  "  inci- 
dental, elemental,  and  absolute."  |  The  first  is  naimittika, 
occasional,  incidental,  or  Brahmya,  as  occasioned  by  the  intervals 
of  Brahma's  days  ;  the  destruction  of  creatures,  though  not  of 
the  substance  of  the  world,  occurring  during  the  night  The 
second  is  the  general  resolution  of  the  elements  into  their 
primitive  source,  or  Prakriti,  the  Prakritika  destruction,  and 
occurs  at  the  end  of  Brahma's  life.  The  third,  the  absolute  or 
final,  Alyantika,  is  individual  annihilation,  Moksha,  exemption  for 
ever  from  future  existence. 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  i.  45.  f  '  Vishnu  Purana/  p.  630,  note. 


294  The  Puranic  Divisions  of  Time. 


The  process  of  destruction  is  described  as  follows  : — 

"  At  the  end  of  a  thousand  periods  of  four  ages  the  earth  is  for 
the  most  part  exhausted.  A  total  death  then  ensues,  which  lasts 
a  hundred  years,  and  in  consequence  of  the  failure  of  food  all 
beings  become  languid  and  exanimate,  and  at  last  entirely  perish. 
The  eternal  Vishnu  then  assumes  the  character  of  Rudra,  the 
destroyer,  and  descends  to  reunite  all  his  creatures  with  himself. 
He  enters  into  the  seven  rays  of  the  sun,  drinks  up  all  the  waters 
of  the  globe,  and  causes  all  moisture  whatever,  in  living  bodies  or 
in  the  soil,  to  evaporate,  thus  drying  up  the  whole  earth.  The 
seas,  the  rivers,  the  mountain-torrents,  and  springs  are  all  exhaled, 
and  so  are  all  the  waters  of  Patala,  the  regions  below  the  earth. 

"  Thus  fed,  through  his  intervention,  with  abundant  moisture, 
the  seven  solar  rays  dilate  to  seven  suns,  whose  radiance  glows 
above,  below,  and  on  every  side,  and  sets  the  three  worlds  and 
Patala  on  fire.  The  three  worlds,  consumed  by  these  suns,  become 
rugged  and  deformed  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  their 
mountains,  rivers,  and  seas  ;  and  the  earth,  bare  of  verdure  and 
destitute  of  moisture,  alone  remains,  resembling  in  appearance  the 
back  of  a  tortoise.  The  destroyer  of  all  things,  Hari,  in  the  form 
of  Rudra,  who  is  the  flame  of  time,  becomes  the  scorching  breath 
of  the  serpent  Sesha,  and  thereby  reduces  Patala  to  ashes.  The 
great  fire,  when  it  has  burnt  all  the  divisions  of  Patala,  proceeds 
to  the  earth  and  consumes  it  also.  A  vast  whirlpool  of  eddying 
flame  then  spreads  to  the  region  of  the  atmosphere  and  the  sphere 
of  the  gods,  and  wraps  them  in  ruin.  The  three  spheres  show  like 
a  frying-pan  amidst  the  surrounding  flames,  that  prey  upon  all 
movable  or  stationary  things.  The  inhabitants  of  the  two  upper 
spheres,  having  discharged  their  functions  and  being  annoyed  by 
the  heat,  remove  to  the  sphere  above,  or  Maharloka.  When  that 
becomes  heated,  its  tenants,  who,  after  the  full  period  of  their 
stay,  are  desirous  of  ascending  to  higher  regions,  depart  for  the 
Janaloka."  * 

The    'Vfiyu  Purana  '  f  gives  more    explicit    teaching   on  this 
subject. 

*  'Vishnu  Purana/  p.  631.  t  Ibid.  p.  632,  note. 


The  Puranic  Divisions  of  Time.  295 


"  Those  sainted  mortals  who  have  diligently  worshipped  Vishnu 
and  are  distinguished  for  piety,  abide  at  the  time  of  dissolution 
in  Maharloka,  with  the  Pitris,  the  Manus,  the  seven  Rishis,  the 
various  orders  of  celestial  Spirits  and  the  gods.  These,  when  the 
heat  of  the  flames  that  destroy  the  world  reaches  to  Maharloka, 
repair  to  Janaloka  in  their  subtile  forms,  destined  to  become  re- 
embodied  in  similar  capacities  as  their  former,  when  the  world  is 
renewed,  at  the  beginning  of  the  succeeding  Kalpa.  This  con- 
tinues throughout  the  life  of  Brahma  ;  at  the  expiration  of  his 
life  all  are  destroyed ;  but  those  who  have  then  attained  a 
residence  in  the  Brahmaloka,  by  having  identified  themselves  in 
spirit  with  the  Supreme,  are  finally  resolved  into  the  sole  existing 
Brahma." 

The  '  Vishnu  Purana '  *  continues  as  follows  :  "  Janarddana,  in 
the  person  of  Rudra,  having  consumed  the  whole  world,  breathes 
forth  heavy  clouds.  Mighty  in  size  and  loud  in  thunder,  they 
fill  all  space.  Showering  down  torrents  of  water,  these  clouds 
quench  the  dreadful  fires  which  involve  the  three  worlds,  and 
then  they  rain  uninterruptedly  for  a  hundred  years  and  deluge 
the  whole  world.  Pouring  down  in  drops  as  large  as  dice,  these 
rains  overspread  the  earth,  and  fill  the  middle  region  and  inun- 
date heaven.  The  world  is  now  enveloped  in  darkness,  and  all 
things,  animate  and  inanimate,  having  perished,  the  clouds  con- 
tinue to  pour  down  their  waters  for  more  than  a  hundred  years." 

The  four  Yugas  mentioned  above — viz.,  the  Krita,  Treta,  Dva- 
para,  and  Kali — have  characteristic  qualities.  The  Krita  is  the 
golden,  the  Kali  the  iron  age.  The  Mahabharata  f  gives  these 
characteristics  very  distinctly.  Hanuman,  the  monkey-god,  is  the 
speaker,  describing  the  four  ages  to  Bhlmasena,  one  of  the  Pandus. 

"  The  Krita  is  that  age  in  which  righteousness  is  eternal.  In 
the  time  of  that  most  excellent  of  Yugas  (everything)  had  been 
done  {Krita),  and  nothing  (remained)  to  be  done.  Duties  did 
not  then  languish,  nor  did  the  people  decline.  Afterwards 
through  (the  influence  of)  time,  this  Yuga  fell  into  a  state  of 
inferiority.      In    that    age   there   were    neither   gods,    Danavas, 

*  Page  633.  f  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  i.  144. 


296  The  Puranic  Divisions  of  Time. 

Gandharvas,  Yakshas,  Rakshasas,  nor  Pannagas  ;  no  buying  and 
selling  went  on,  no  efforts  were  made  by  men  ;  the  fruit  (of  the 
earth  was  obtained)  by  their  mere  wish  ;  righteousness  and 
abandonment  of  the  world  (prevailed).  No  disease  or  decline 
of  the  organs  of  sense  arose  through  the  influence  of  age  ;  there 
was  no  malice,  weeping,  pride,  or  deceit ;  no  contention,  no 
hatred,  cruelty,  fear,  affliction,  jealousy,  or  envy.  Hence  the 
Supreme  Brahma  was  the  transcendent  resort  of  these  Yogins. 
Then  Narayana,  the  soul  of  all  beings,  was  white.  In  that  age 
were  born  creatures  devoted  to  their  duties.  They  were  alike 
in  the  object  of  their  trust,  in  observance,  and  in  their  knowledge. 
At  that  period  the  castes,  alike  in  their  functions,  fulfilled  their 
duties,  were  unceasingly  devoted  to  one  deity,  and  used  one  for- 
mula (mantra),  one  rule  and  one  rite.     They  had  but  one  Veda. 

"  Understand  now  the  Treta,  in  which  sacrifice  commenced, 
righteousness  decreased  by  a  fourth,  Vishnu  became  red  ;  and 
men  adhered  to  truth,  and  were  devoted  to  a  righteousness 
dependent  on  ceremonies.  Then  sacrifices  prevailed,  with  holy 
arts  and  a  variety  of  rites.  In  the  Treta  men  acted  with  an 
object  in  view,  seeking  after  reward  for  their  rites  and  their  gifts, 
and  no  longer  disposed  to  austerities,  and  to  liberality  from 
(a  simple  feeling  of)  duty.  In  this  age,  however,  they  were 
devoted  to  their  own  duties  and  to  religious  ceremonies. 

'In  the  Dvapara  age  righteousness  was  diminished  by  two 
quarters,  Vishnu  became  yellow,  and  the  Veda  fourfold.  Some 
studied  four  Vedas,  some  three,  others  two,  and  some  none  at 
all.  The  Scriptures  being  thus  divided,  ceremonies  were  cele- 
brated in  a  great  variety  of  ways  ;  and  the  people,  being  occupied 
with  austerity  and  the  bestowal  of  gifts,  became  full  of  passion 
(rajasi).  Owing  to  ignorance  of  the  one  Veda,  Vedas  were 
multiplied.  And  now,  from  the  decline  of  goodness  (Sattva), 
few  only  adhered  to  truth.  When  men  had  fallen  away  from 
goodness,  many  diseases,  desires,  and  calamities,  caused  by 
destiny,  assailed  them,  by  which  they  were  severely  afflicted, 
and  driven  to  practise  austerities.  Others,  desiring  enjoyments 
and  heavenly  bliss,  offered  sacrifices.  Thus,  when  they  had 
reached  the  Dvapara,  men  declined  through  unrightousness. 


The  Puranic  Divisions  of  Time. 


297 


"  In  the  Kali,  righteousness  remained  to  the  extent  of  one- 
fourth  only.  Arrived  in  that  age  of  darkness,  Vishnu  became 
black  ;  practices  enjoined  by  the  Vedas,  works  of  righteousness, 
and  rites  of  sacrifices  ceased.  Calamities,  diseases,  fatigue, 
faults,  such  as  anger,  &c,  distresses,  anxiety,  hunger,  fear,  pre- 
vailed. As  the  ages  revolve  righteousness  again  declines  ;  when 
this  takes  place,  the  people  also  decline.  When  they  decay,  the 
impulses  which  actuate  them  also  decay.  The  practices  generated 
by  this  declension  of  the  Yugas  frustrate  men's  aims.  Such  is 
the  Kali  Yuga,  which  has  existed  for  a  short  time.  Those  who 
are  long-lived  act  in  conformity  with  the  character  of  the  age." 
In  the  '  Bhishmaparvan '  there  is  a  paragraph  in  which  it  is  said 
that  "  Four  thousand  years  are  specified  as  the  duration  of  life 
in  the  Krita  Yuga,  three  thousand  in  the  Treta,  and  two  thousand 
form  the  period  at  present  established  on  earth  in  the  Dvapara. 
There  is  no  fixed  measure  in  the  Tishya  (Kali)."  * 

It  should  be  noticed  that  the  immense  duration  of  the  ages  as 
quoted  above  from  the  '  Vishnu  Purana,'  is  peculiar  to  the  Puranas. 
In  the  text  of  the  Mahabharata  "  no  mention  is  made  of  the 
years  comprising  the  different  Yugas  being  divine  years,"  f 
though  the  earlier  books  certainly  favour  far  more  extravagant 
notions  of  chronology  than  those  with  which  Western  nations  are 
familiar. 


Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  i.  148. 


t  Ibid. 


PART  III. 


THE    INFERIOR   DEITIES 


^' 


THE   TULSI. 


(     30i 


THE    INFERIOR   DEITIES. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE   DIVINE  RISHIS. 

I.    BHRIGU. 

"  WHEN  Brahma  wished  to  populate  the  world,  he  created 
mind-born  sons,  like  himself ;  viz.  Bhrigu,  Pulastya,  Pulaha, 
Kratu,  Angiras,  Marichi,  Daksha,  Atri,  and  Vasishtha  :  these  are 
the  nine  Brahmas  or  Brahmarishis  celebrated  in  the  Puranas."  * 
Originally  seven  were  mentioned  in  the  Mahabharata ;  but  the 
lists  found  in  different  parts  of  that  Epic  do  not  agree  with 
each  other.  These  seven  are  supposed  to  be  visible  in  the  Great 
Bear,  as  their  wives  shine  in  the  Pleiades.  These  Brahmarishis 
are  also  called  Prajapatis  (lords  of  offspring),  Brahmaputras  (sons 
of  Brahma),  and  Brahmanas.  The  'Vishnu  Purana  '  teaches  that 
Bhrigu  married  his  niece  Khyati,  a  daughter  of  Daksha,  who  bore 
to  him  Sri  or  Lakshmi  ;  but  as  it  was  the  common  belief  that  she 
was  one  of  the  products  of  the  churning  of  the  ocean,  the  reciter 
of  the  Purana  is  asked  to  explain  this  discrepancy.  The  substance 
of  his  answer  was,  that  "of  gods,  animals,  and  man,  Hari  is  all 
that  is  called  male,  Lakshmi  is  all  that  is  termed  female." 

In  his  account  of  the  creation,  Manu  mentions  ten  Maharishis 
as  having  been  created  by  himself,  one  of  whom  is  Bhrigu,  who 
in  his  turn  created  seven  other  Manus,  from  whom  all  that  is  has 
sprung,  f     The  Mahabharata  says  :  "  Six  great  Rishis  are  known 

*  '  Vishnu  Purana/  p.  49.  t  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  i.  36. 


302  The  Inferior  Deities. 

as  the  mind-born  sons  of  Brahma  ; "  but  Bhrigu  is  not  named 
amongst  them.  In  another  passage  it  describes  him  as  a  son 
of  Varuna,  but  Brahma  is  there  identified  with  Varuna.  At  a 
sacrifice  at  which  Brahma  officiated,  a  portion  of  Varuna  was 
thrown  into  the  sacrificial  fire,  whence  there  arose  three  men 
endowed  with  bodies.  Bhrigu  sprang  first  from  bhrik  (the 
blazing  of  the  fire),  Angiras  from  the  cinders,  and  Kavi  from 
a  heap  of  ashes.  The  god  called  Mahadeva,  Varuna,  and 
Pavana,  claimed  these  three  as  his  own.  Agni  and  Brahma 
also  claimed  them.*  It  was  agreed  that  Bhrigu  was  Varuna's 
son.  Agni  received  Angiras,  and  Brahma  took  Kavi.  In 
another  part  of  that  poem  it  is  said  :  "  We  have  heard  that 
the  great  and  venerable  Rishi  Bhrigu  was  produced  by  Brahma 
from  fire  at  the  sacrifice  of  Varuna."  f  The  '  Bhagavata  Purana  ' 
says  that  "  he  sprang  from  the  skin  of  the  Creator  ; '  and  the 
Mahabharata,  in  another  verse,  declares  that  "  the  venerable 
Bhrigu,  having  split  Brahma's  heart,  issued  forth." 

At  the  great  sacrifice  of  Daksha,  to  which  Siva  was  not 
invited,  Bhrigu  officiated  as  priest ;  and  because  he  reviled  that 
god  and  his  followers,  and  justified  Daksha  in  slighting  him,  he 
suffered  the  loss  of  his  beard. 

The  Mahabharata  gives  a  legend  of  Bhrigu,  cursing  Indra. 
The  Indra  of  that  age,  named  Nahusha,  being  filled  with  pride, 
lost  the  benefit  of  his  previous  good  works,  and  in  his  presump- 
tion caused  the  Rishis  to  carry  him  about.  When  it  came  to 
Agastya's  turn  to  carry  him,  Bhrigu  said  to  him,  "  Why  do  we 
submit  to  the  insults  of  this  wicked  king  of  the  gods  ?  "  Agastya 
replied  that  none  of  the  Rishis  had  cursed  Nahusha,  because  he 
had  received  as  a  boon  the  power  to  subject  to  his  service  any 
on  whom  he  fixed  his  eye  ;  but  that  at  the  same  time  he  was 
quite  ready  to  act  upon  any  suggestion  Bhrigu  might  make. 
Bhrigu  then  told  him  that  he  had  been  sent  by  Brahma  to  take 
vengeance  on  Nahusha,  who  would  that  very  day  attach  Agastya 
to  his  car  and  kick  him  ;  but  incensed  at  this  insult,  he  (Bhrigu) 
would  by  a  curse  condemn  the  oppressor  to  become  a  serpent. 

*  Aluir,  O.  S.  T.,  i.  445.  f   Ibid. 


Bhrigu.  303 

The  mighty  Nahusha  summoned  Agastya  from  the  banks  of 
the  Sarasvati  to  carry  him.  The  glorious  Bhrigu  then  said  to 
Maitravarum  (Agastya)  :  "  Close  thy  eyes,  whilst  I  enter  into  the 
knot  of  thy  hair ! '  With  the  view  of  overthrowing  the  king, 
Bhrigu  entered  into  the  hair  of  Agastya,  who  stood  motionless 
as  a  stock.  Nahusha  came  to  be  carried  by  Agastya,  who 
desired  to  be  attached  to  the  vehicle,  and  agreed  to  carry  the 
king  of  the  gods  wherever  he  pleased-  Nahusha  attached  him, 
but  Bhrigu  in  Agastya's  hair  did  not  venture  to  look  at  him, 
knowing  his  power  of  subduing  by  a  glance.  Agastya  did  not 
lose  his  temper  ;  even  when  urged  by  a  goad,  he  remained  un- 
moved. The  king  at  last  kicked  him  ;  when  Bhrigu,  invisible  in 
the  hair  of  Agastya,  became  enraged,  and  violently  cursed  him  : 
"  Since,  fool,  thou  hast  in  thine  anger  smitten  the  great  Muni  on 
the  head  with  thy  foot,  therefore  become  a  serpent,  and  fall 
swiftly  to  the  earth."  *  Thus  cursed  by  the  invisible  Bhrigu, 
Nahusha  fell  to  the  earth  ;  had  the  sage  been  seen  by  Indra,  he 
would  have  been  unable  to  punish  the  oppressor. 

Bhrigu  on  another  occasion  cursed  Agni.  The  Mahabharata 
says  : — -A  woman  named  Puloma  was  betrothed  to  a  demon  ; 
Bhrigu,  seeing  her  beauty,  married  her  according  to  Vedic  rites, 
and  carried  her  off  secretly.  The  demon,  by  the  aid  of  Agni, 
discovered  the  bride's  hiding-place,  and  took  her  away  to  his 
home.  For  rendering  the  demon  aid  in  the  search,  Bhrigu,  cursing 
Agni,  said,  "  From  this  day,  you  shall  eat  everything."  Agni 
asked  Bhrigu  why  he  had  cursed  him,  seeing  that  he  had  spoken 
the  truth,  and  that  in  doing  this  he  had  simply  done  his  duty  ; 
and  reminded  him  that  "when  a  person  is  asked  a  question,  and 
intentionally  speaks  what  is  false,  he,  with  seven  preceding  and 
seven  succeeding  generations,  is  cast  into  hell ;  and  that  he  who 
withholds  information  is  equally  guilty."  He  goes  onto  say:  "  I, 
too,  can  curse,  but  respecting  Brahmans  restrain  my  anger.  I 
am  really  the  mouth  of  the  gods  and  ancestors.  When  ghl  is 
offered  to  them,  they  partake  of  it  through  me  as  their  mouth  ; 
how  then  can  I  be  said  to  eat  everything  ?  "    Bhrigu  hearing  this 

*  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  i.  314. 


-> 


04  The  Inferior  Deities. 


consented  to  modify  his  curse,  by  saying  that,  "  as  the  Sun  by 
his  light  and  heat  purifies  all  nature,  so  Agni  should  purify  all 
that  passed  through  him." 

Bhrigu  is  said  to  have  performed  a  most  wonderful  deed  ;  the 
transforming  of  a  Kshattriya  king  into  a  Brahman.  The 
Mahabharata*  gives  the  following  account  of  this  unique  work  : — 
'•  Divodasa,  King  of  Kasi  (Benares),  was  attacked  by  the  sons  of 
Vitahavya,  and  all  his  family  slain  in  battle.  The  afflicted 
monarch  therefore  resorted  to  the  sage  Bharadvaja,  who  per- 
formed for  him  a  sacrifice,  in  consequence  of  which  a  son  named 
Pratardana  was  born  to  him.  Pratardana,  becoming  an  accom- 
plished warrior,  was  sent  by  his  father  to  take  vengeance  on  the 
Yitahavyas.  Vitahavya  had  now  to  fly  to  another  sage,  Bhrigu, 
who  promised  his  protection.  The  avenger  Pratardana,  however, 
followed,  and  demanded  that  the  refugee  should  be  given  up. 
Bhrigu,  the  most  eminent  of  religious  men,  filled  with  compassion, 
said:  'There  is  no  Kshattriya  here;  all  these  are  Brahmans.' 
Hearing  this  true  assertion  of  Bhrigu,  Pratardana  was  glad,  and, 
gently  touching  the  sage's  feet,  rejoined:  'Even  thus,  O  glorious 
saint,  I  have  gained  my  object,  for  I  have  compelled  this  king 
to  relinquish  his  caste.'  This  Vitahavya,  by  the  mere  word  of 
Bhrigu,  became  a  Brahman  Rishi,  and  an  utterer  of  the  Vedas." 

The  names  of  nineteen  Bhrigus  are  given  in  the  '  Matsya 
Parana,'  who  are  said  to  be  composers  of  hymns  ;  Bhrigu  himself 
being  one  of  the  narrators  of  the  Mahabharata.  Professor  Rothf 
speaks  of  the  Bhrigus  as  a  class  of  mythological  beings,  who 
belonged  to  the  aerial  or  middle  class  of  gods.  They  were  the 
discoverers  of  fire,  and  brought  it  to  men.  He  adds  that  this 
race  has  also  a  connexion  with  history,  as  one  of  the  chief 
Brahmanical  families  bears  this  name,  and  allusions  are  made  to 
this  fact  in  the  hymns  of  the  Rig- Veda. 

In  the  Ramayana  there  are  not  many  references  to  Bhrigu  ; 
he  is  there  called  a  Maharishi  ;  and  Rama  is  induced  to  slay  a 
female  demon  by  the  remembrance  that  Vishnu  slew  Bhrigu's 
wife  when  she  aspired  to  Indra's  throne.     He  is  the  saint  whom 

*  Muir,  0.  S.  T.,  i.  229.  t  Ibid.  i.  442. 


PULASTYA.  305 


the  childless  wives  of  Sagar  worshipped  in  order  to  obtain  a  son  ; 
and  he  gave  to  one  lady  one,  to  the  other  sixty  thousand. 
Parasurama  was  one  of  his  most  illustrious  descendants. 

2.    PULASTYA. 

Pulastya,  another  of  Brahma's  mind-born  sons,  is  reverenced 
because  it  was  through  him  that  the  Puranas  were  made  known 
to  men.  The  reason  of  his  being  regarded  as  the  Revealer  of 
Scripture  is  taught  in  the  '  Vishnu  Purana,'  *  where  the  narrator 
Parasara,  in  answer  to  a  question  addressed  to  him  by  his  disciple 
Maitreya,  says  :  "  You  recall  to  my  mind  what  was  of  old  narrated 
by  my  father's  father  Vasishtha.  I  had  heard  that  my  father 
had  been  devoured  by  a  Rakshas,  employed  by  Visvamitra : 
violent  anger  seized  me,  and  I  commenced  a  sacrifice  for  the 
destruction  of  the  Rakshasas  ;  hundreds  of  them  were  reduced 
to  ashes  by  the  rite,  when,  as  they  were  about  to  be  entirely  extir- 
pated, my  grandfather  Vasishtha  thus  spake  to  me:  'Enough, 
my  child  ;  let  thy  wrath  be  appeased  ;  the  Rakshasas  are  not 
culpable  :  thy  father's  death  was  the  work  of  destiny.'  " 

Parasara  ceased  from  his  sacrifice,  and  his  grandfather  was 
pleased ;  then  Pulastya  coming  said  to  him  :  "  Since,  in  the  vio- 
lence of  animosity,  you  have  listened  to  the  words  of  your  pro- 
genitor, and  exercised  clemency,  you  shall  become  learned  in 
every  science.  Since  you  have  forborne,  even  though  incensed, 
to  destroy  my  posterity,  I  will  bestow  on  you  another  boon  ;  you 
shall  become  the  author  of  a  summary  of  the  Puranas,  shall  know 
the  true  nature  of  the  deities,  and  your  understanding  through 
my  favour  shall  be  perfect  and  free  from  doubts."  Parasara 
relates  the  Purana  as  told  him  formerly  "  by  Vasishtha  and  the 
wise  Pulastya." 

Pulastya  married  Prithi,  a  daughter  of  Daksha,  by  whom  he 
had  a  son,  the  sage  Agastya ;  the  Bhagavata  calls  his  wife 
Havisbhu,  whose  sons  were  Agastya  and  Visravas,  the  father  of 
Kuvera,  Ravana,  and  other  Rakshasas. 

*  Page  4. 

X 


306  The  Inferior  Deities. 

The  reason  of  Parasara's  attack  upon  the  Rakshasas  is  given 
in  a  legend  in  the  Mahabharata.  King  Kalmashapada,  meeting 
with  Sakti  (Parasara's  father)  in  a  narrow  path  in  a  forest, 
wished  him  to  get  out  of  his  way.  This  the  sage  refused  to  do  ; 
whereupon  the  king  thrashed  him  with  his  whip  ;  in  return  Sakti 
cursed  him,  and  he  became  a  cannibal  Rakshas.  When  in  this 
form,  the  king  killed  and  ate  Sakti  and  all  the  other  sons  of 
Vasishtha.  Sakti's  wife  being  pregnant  at  the  time  of  his  death, 
Parasara  was  born  soon  after  and  brought  up  with  his  grand- 
father. When  he  grew  up,  he  commenced  the  slaughter  of  the 
Rakshasas,  but  was  restrained  by  Vasishtha,  Pulastya,  and  others. 

3.    PULAHA. 

This  Rishi  does  not  figure  largely  in  -Hindu  mythology.  He 
married  a  daughter  of  Daksha  named  Kshama  (Patience),  by 
whom  he  had  three  sons. 

4.    KRATU. 

Kratu  is  no  more  widely  known  than  Pulaha.  He  married 
Sannati  (Humility),  another  daughter  of  Daksha,  by  whom  he 
had  "  sixty  thousand  Balakhilyas,  pigmy  sages  no  bigger  than 
the  joint  of  the  thumb  ;  chaste,  pious,  and  resplendent  as  the  rays 
of  the  sun."  * 

5.    ANGIRAS. 

Angiras  is  famed  as  the  author  of  several  hymns  of  the  Rig- 
Veda.  He  first  married  Smriti  (Memory),  by  whom  he  had  four 
daughters,  and  afterwards  he  married  Swaddha  (Oblation)  and 
Sati,  also  Daksha's  daughters.  His  so-called  daughters,  the 
Pratyangirasa  Richas,  are  thirty-five  verses  addressed  to  presiding 
divinities.  There  is  some  ambiguity  in  the  use  of  his  name  ;  it 
comes  from  the  same  root  as  Agni,  of  which  deity  it  is  used  as  an 
epithet ;  it  is  also  used  of  Agni's  father,  and  is  the  name  of  a  son 
of  Agneya,  Agni's  daughter.  Angiras  is  supposed  to  have  been 
associated  with  Bhrigu  in  introducing  fire-worship  into  India. 


'  Vishnu  Parana, '  p.  83. 


Marichi,  Atri.  307 


6.    MARICHI. 

Marichi  is  better  known  through  his  descendants  than  from 
any  work  of  his  own,  his  most  illustrious  child  being  Kasyapa, 
as  a  son  of  whom  Vishnu  came,  in  his  incarnation  as  a  dwarf. 
Amongst  Kasyapa's  thirteen  wives  were  Diti  and  Aditi,  who  by 
him  became  the  mothers  of  gods.  "  There  were  twelve  celebrated 
deities  in  a  former  age  called  Tushitas,  who,  on  the  approach  of 
the  present  period,  or  during  the  reign  of  the  last  Manu  Chak- 
shusa,  said  amongst  themselves,  '  Come,  let  us  quickly  enter 
into  the  womb  of  Aditi,  that  we  may  be  born  in  the  next 
Manvantara,  for  thereby  we  shall  again  enjoy  the  rank  of  gods  ;' 
and  accordingly  they  were  born  the  sons  of  Kasyapa,  the  son 
of  Marichi  by  Aditi ;  thence  named  the  twelve  Adityas,  whose 
names  were  Vishnu,  Sakra,  Aryaman,  Dhuti,  Tvastri,  Pushan, 
Vivasvat,  Savitri,  Mitra,  Varuna,  Ansa,  and  Bhaga."  * 

An  explanation  of  the  fact  that  gods  undergo  successive  births 
is  found  in  the  'Vayu  Purana.'  In  the  beginning  of  the  Kalpa, 
twelve  gods,  named  Jayas,  were  created  by  Brahma  as  his 
deputies  and  assistants  in  creation.  They,  lost  in  meditation, 
neglected  his  commands,  on  which  he  declared  that  they  should 
be  reborn  in  each  Manvantara  until  the  seventh. f  The  writer  of 
the  '  Vishnu  Purana  '  tries  to  explain  this  fact :  "  These  classes  of 
divinities  are  born  again  at  the  end  of  a  thousand  ages  according 
to  their  own  pleasure,  and  their  appearance  and  disappearance 
are  spoken  of  as  birth  and  death  ;  but  they  exist  age  after  age  in 
the  same  manner  as  the  sun  sets  and  rises  again." 

By  his  wife  Diti,  Kasyapa  had  two  sons,  Hiranyakasipu  and 
Hiranyaksha,  whom  Vishnu,  here  said  to  be  the  son  of  her 
sister  Aditi,  became  incarnate  to  destroy  ;  these  mortal  enemies 
were  therefore  cousins. 

7.  ATRI. 

Atri  was  the  author  of  many  Vedic  hymns,  especially  those 
"  praising  Agni,   Indra,  the  Asvins,  and  the  Viswa-devas."     He 

*  'Vishnu  Purana,'  p.  122.  f  Page  123. 

X    2 


^oS  The  Inferior  Deities. 


married  Anasuya,  who  bore  him  Durvasas,  the  sage  who  was 
slighted  by  Indra.  Soma,  the  moon,  is  said  to  proceed  from  the 
eyes  of  his  father  Atri. 

When  this  sage  and  his  wife  were  old,  they  received  a  visit 
at  their  hermitage  from  Rama,  Sita,  and  Lakshman,  who  were 
then  wandering  from  place  to  place : — 

"He  came  to  Atri's  pure  retreat, 
Paid  reverence  to  his  holy  feet, 
And  from  the  saint  such  welcome  won 
As  a  fond  father  gives  his  son."  * 

Atri,  in  introducing  his  wife  to  his  illustrious  guests,  thus 
describes  her : — 

"  Ten  thousand  years  this  votaress,  bent 
On  sternest  rites  of  penance,  spent ; 
She,  when  the  clouds  withheld  their  rain, 
And  drought  ten  years  consumed  the  plain, 
Caused  grateful  roots  and  fruits  to  grow 
And  ordered  Ganga  here  to  flow  ; 
So  from  their  cares  the  saints  she  freed, 
Nor  let  these  checks  their  rights  impede. 
She  wrought  in  heaven's  behalf,  and  made 
Ten  nights  of  one,  the  gods  to  aid."  f 

Anasuya  then  joins  with  her  husband  in  welcoming  the  exiles 
to  their  hermitage,  and,  delighted  with  the  princess,  tells  her  to 
ask  a  boon.  As,  however,  Sita  appeared  to  want  nothing  par- 
ticular, the  aged  saint  said  : — 

"  My  gift  to-day 
Thy  sweet  contentment  shall  repay  : 
Accept  this  precious  robe  to  wear, 
Of  heavenly  fabric,  rich  and  rare  ; 
These  gems  thy  limbs  to  ornament, 
This  precious  balsam  sweet  of  scent. 
O  Maithil  dame  !  this  gift  of  mine 
Shall  make  thy  limbs  with  beauty  shine, 
And,  breathing  o'er  thy  frame,  dispense 
Its  pure  and  lasting  influence. 


Griffiths's  '  Ramayana/  ii.  468.  f   Ibid.  ii.  473. 


Daksha. 


309 


This  balsam,  on  thy  fair  limbs  spread, 
New  radiance  on  thy  lord  shall  shed, 
As  Lakshmi's  beauty  lends  a  grace 
To  Vishnu's  own  celestial  face."  * 


8.    DAKSHA. 

Daksha,  the  father  of  Uma,  the  consort  of  Siva,  has  attained 
pre-eminence  amongst  his  brethren  largely  through  the  great- 
ness    of    his    son-in-law. 
He  too  is  a  mind-born  son  >V^ 

of  Brahma  ;  or,  according  -^ 
to  other  accounts,  sprang 
from  the  thumb  of  his 
father.  He  is  one  of  the 
chief  Prajapatis.  Before 
speaking  of  Daksha,  as  the 
term  Prajapati  is  of  fre- 
quent occurrence,  it  will 
not  be  out  of  place  here 
to  describe  the  position  of 
these  beings. 

The  term  Prajapati 
means  a  lord  of  creatures  ; 
the  Prajapatis,  therefore, 
are  regarded  as  the  pro- 
genitors of  mankind.  The 
word  is  used  in  much  the 
same  manner  as  Patriarch 

in  the  Christian  Scriptures.  Sometimes  Brahma  alone  is  intended 
by  the  term  Prajapati  ;  he  is  the  "lord  of  creatures  ; "  sometimes 
it  is  employed  for  the  first-formed  men  from  whom  the  human 
race  sprung.  The  word  was  originally  employed  as  an  epithet  of 
Savitri  and  Soma,  as  well  as  of  Hiranyagarbha,  or  Brahma.  It 
afterwards,    however,    came   to    denote   a   separate    deity,   who 


DAKSHA. 


Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  ii.  474. 


-io  The  Inferior  Deities. 


appears  in  three  places  in  the  Rig- Veda.  Prajapati  is  sometimes 
identified  with  the  universe,  and  described  (in  the  same  way  as 
Brahma,  or  entity,  or  non-entity  are  in  other  places)  as  having 
alone  existed  in  the  beginning,  as  the  source  out  of  which  cre- 
ation was  evolved  :  "e.g.,  Prajapati  was  this  universe  ;  Vach  was 
a  second  to  him.  She  became  pregnant,  she  departed  from  him, 
she  produced  these  creatures.  She  again  entered  into  Praja- 
pati." *  Yet  at  the  same  time  he  is  "  sometimes  described  as 
only  a  secondary  or  subordinate  deity,  and  treated  only  as  one  of 
thirty-three  deities." 

By  the  time  Manu  wrote,  creation  had  come  to  be  regarded  as 
the  special  work  of  Brahma,  hence  the  term  Prajapati  is  applied 
to  him  in  the  Dharmasastra,  and  in  the  later  writings  it  is  given 
to  those  who  sprang  from  him,  and  carried  on  his  work  of  popu- 
lating the  world. 

The  Mahabharata  gives  two  distinct  accounts  of  the  origin  of 
Daksha  :t — "  Daksha,  the  glorious  Rishi,  tranquil  in  spirit,  and 
great  in  austere  fervour,  sprang  from  the  right  thumb  of  Brahma. 
From  the  left  thumb  sprang  the  great  Muni's  wife,  by  whom  he 
begot  fifty  daughters."  "  Born  with  all  splendour,  like  that  of 
the  great  Rishis,  the  ten  sons  of  Prachetas  (another  Prajapati) 
are  reputed  to  have  been  virtuous  and  holy,  and  by  them  the 
glorious  beings  (trees,  plants,  &c.)  were  formerly  burnt  up  by  fire 
springing  from  their  mouth.  From  them  was  born  Daksha 
Prachetasa  ;  and  from  Daksha,  the  parent  of  the  world,  (were 
produced)  these  creatures.  Cohabiting  with  Virini,  the  Muni 
Daksha  begat  a  thousand  sons  like  himself,  famous  for  their 
religious  observances."  In  the  Harivansa,  Vishnu  is  identified 
with  Daksha.  At  the  end  of  a  thousand  Yugas  the  Brahmans 
of  a  previous  age,  "perfect  in  knowledge  and  contemplation, 
became  involved  in  the  dissolution  of  the  world.  Then  Vishnu 
sprung  from  Brahma,  removed  beyond  the  sphere  of  sense, 
absorbed  in  contemplation,  became  the  Prajapati  Daksha,  and 
formed  numerous  creatures."  % 

Fuller  particulars  of  Daksha's  origin  we  find  in  the  'Vishnu 

*   Mmr,  ().  S.  T.,  v.  390.  f   Ibid.  i.  224.  %  Ibid.  i.  153. 


Daksha.  7  I  I 


J 


Purana.'*  "  From  Brahma,  continuing  to  meditate,  were  born 
mind-engendered  progeny,  with  forms  and  faculties  derived  from 
his  corporeal  nature,  embodied  spirits  produced  from  the  person 
of  that  all-wise  deity.  But  as  they  did  not  multiply  themselves, 
Brahma  created  other  mind-born  sons  like  himself,  viz.  Bhrigu, 
&c.  Considerable  variety  prevails  in  this  list  of  Prajapatis, 
but  the  variations  are  of  the  nature  of  additions  made  to  an 
apparently  original  enumeration  of  but  seven,  whose  names 
generally  occur.  The  names  mentioned  in  all  the  Puranas  make 
up  altogether  seventeen.  The  simple  statement  that  the  first 
Prajapatis  sprang  from  the  mind  or  will  of  Brahma  has  not 
contented  the  depraved  taste  of  the  mystics,  and  in  some  of  the 
Puranas,  as  the  Bhagavata,  Vayu  and  Linga,  they  are  said  to  be 
derived  from  the  body  of  their  progenitor;  Bhrigu  from  his  skin, 
Marichi  from  his  mind,  Atri  from  his  eyes,  Angiras  from  his 
mouth,  Pulastya  from  his  ear,  Pulaha  from  his  naval,  Kratu  from 
his  hand,  Vasishtha  from  his  breath,  Daksha  from  his  thumb, 
and  Narada  from  his  lips.  They  do  not  exactly  agree,  however, 
in  the  [description  of  the  places]  whence  these  beings  proceed."  f 
The  i  Vishnu  Purana '  J  also  speaks  of  Daksha  as  a  son  of  the 
Prachetasas,  and  gets  over  the  difficulty  by  the  statement  that 
he  was  born  first  as  a  son  of  Brahma,  and  afterwards  as  the  son 
of  the  Prachetasas.  These  progenitors  of  Daksha  were  the  sons 
of  a  mighty  patriarch  named  Prachinaverhis,  so  called  "  from  his 
placing  upon  the  earth  the  sacred  grass  pointing  to  the  East." 
At  the  termination  of  a  season  of  rigid  penance,  he  married 
Savarna,  the  daughter  of  the  ocean,  who  had  by  him  ten  sons, 
styled  Prachetasas,  who  were  skilled  in  military  science  ;  "they 
all  observed  the  same  duties,  practised  religious  austerities,  and 
remained  immersed  in  the  bed  of  the  sea  for  ten  thousand  years." 
The  reason  for  this  prolonged  penance  was  the  fact  that  their 
father  had  been  enjoined  by  Brahma  to  increase  the  human 
family.  In  harmony  with  his  promise  of  obedience,  he  told  his 
sons  that  the  performance  of  severe  penance  was  the  best  way 
of  fulfilling  Brahma's  order  ;  "  for  whoever  worships  Vishnu,  the 


Page  49.         f  Wilson  in  note,  p.  49,  'Vishnu  Purana.'         %  Page  116. 


312  The  Inferior  Deities. 


bcstower  of  good,  attains  undoubtedly  the  object  of  his  desires  : 
there  is  no  other  mode." 

As  the  sons  were  immersed  in  the  ocean,  intent  on  the 
worship  of  Vishnu,  that  deity  appeared  to  them,  and,  hearing 
their  request,  said  :  "  Receive  the  boon  you  have  desired  ;  for  I, 
the  giver  of  good,  am  content  with  you."  Whilst  the  Prachetasas 
were  absorbed  in  their  devotions,  "  the  trees  grew  and  over- 
shadowed the  unprotected  earth,  the  people  perished,  the  winds 
could  not  blow,  the  sky  was  shut  out  from  view  by  the  boughs, 
and  mankind  unable  to  labour  for  ten  thousand  years.  When 
the  sages  saw  this,  wind  (which  tore  up  the  trees)  and  flames 

which  then  consumed  them)  issued  from  their  mouths,  and  the 
forests  were  soon  cleared  away.  Soma,  the  sovereign  of  the 
vegetable  world,  seeing  nearly  all  the  trees  destroyed,  went  to 
the  patriarchs  and  said :  '  Restrain  your  indignation,  and  listen 
to  me.  I  will  make  an  alliance  between  you  and  the  trees. 
Prescient  of  futurity,  I  have  nourished  this  maiden,  the  daughter 
of  the  woods.  She  is  called  Marisha,  and,  as  your  bride,  she 
shall  be  the  multiplier  of  the  race  of  Druva.  From  a  portion  of 
your  and  my  lustre  the  patriarch  Daksha  shall  be  born,  who, 
endowed  with  a  part  of  me  and  composed  of  your  vigour,  shall 
be  resplendent  as  fire,  and  shall  multiply  the  human  race.'  " 

Soma  then  informs  the  brothers  respecting  Marisha's  origin. 
u  There  was  formerly  a  sage  named  Kandu,  eminent  in  wisdom 
and  austerity,  on  the  banks  of  the  Gomati.  Indra  sent  the 
nymph  Pramlocha  to  divert  the  sage  from  his  devotions  :  they 
lived  together  for  150  years,  during  which  time  the  Muni  was 
given  up  to  pleasure.  The  nymph  at  the  close  of  this  period 
asked  leave  to  depart,  but  the  Muni  entreated  her  to  continue 
with  him.  And  though  at  the  end  of  several  centuries  she 
preferred  the  same  request,  again  and  again  she  was  asked  to 
remain. 

1  On  one  occasion,  as  the   sage  was    going  forth   from  their 
cottage  in  a  great  hurry,  the  nymph  asked  where  he  was  going. 

The  day,'  he  replied,  'is  drawing  fast  to  a  close.  I  must 
perform  the  Sandhya  worship,  or  a  duty  will  be  neglected.' 
The   nymph   smiled   mirthfully  as   she   rejoined:  'Why  do  you 


Daksha.  313 


talk,  grave  sir,  of  this  day  drawing  to  a  close  ;  your  day  is  a  day 
of  many  years,  a  day  that  must  be  a  marvel  to  all  :  explain  what 
this  means.'  The  Muni  said  :  '  Fair  maiden,  you  came  to  the 
river-side  at  dawn.  I  beheld  you  then,  and  you  entered  the 
hermitage.  It  is  now  the  revolution  of  evening,  and  the  day  is 
gone.  What  is  the  meaning  of  this  laughter  ?  Tell  me  the 
truth.'  Pramlocha  answered  :  '  You  say  rightly,  venerable  Brah- 
man, that  I  came  hither  at  morning  dawn,  but  several  hundred 
years  have  passed  since  the  time  of  my  arrival.  This  is  the 
truth.'  "  She  informed  him  that  they  had  lived  together  nine 
hundred  and  seven  years,  six  months,  and  three  days.  The 
Muni  sees  now  that  the  nymph  must  have  been  sent  by  Indra 
purposely  to  interrupt  his  devotions,  and  deprive  him  of  the 
divine  knowledge  he  had  desired.  And  though  very  angry  with 
her  at  first,  he  bids  her  depart  in  peace,  as  he  says,  "  The  sin  is 
wholly  mine." 

"  Thus  addressed  by  the  Muni,  Pramlocha  stood  trembling, 
whilst  big  drops  of  perspiration  started  from  every  pore,  till  he 
angrily  cried  to  her,  *  Begone,  begone  ! '  She  then,  reproached 
by  him,  went  forth  from  his  dwelling,  and,  passing  through  the 
air,  wiped  the  perspiration  from  her  person  with  the  leaves  of 
the  trees.  The  nymph  went  from  tree  to  tree,  and  as  with 
dusky  shoots  that  crowned  their  summits  she  dried  her  limbs, 
which  were  covered  with  moisture,  the  child  she  had  conceived 
by  the  Rishi  came  forth  from  the  pores  of  her  skin  in  drops  of 
perspiration.  The  trees  received  the  living  dews,  and  the  winds 
collected  them  into  one  mass.  '  This,'  said  Soma,  '  I  matured  by 
my  rays,  and  gradually  it  increased  in  size,  till  the  exhalation 
that  had  rested  on  the  tree-tops  became  the  lovely  girl  named 
Marisha.  The  trees  will  give  her  to  you,  Prachetasas  ;  let  your 
indignation  be  appeased.  She  is  the  progeny  of  Kandu,  the  child 
of  Pramlocha,  the  nursling  of  the  trees,  the  daughter  of  the  wind 
and  moon.'  " 

Soma  then  informs  the  Prachetasas  that  Marisha,  in  her 
previous  birth,  was  the  widow  of  a  prince,  but  left  childless. 
She  therefore  earnestly  worshipped  Vishnu,  who  told  her  to 
desire  some  boon.     She  replied :  "  I  pray  thee  that  in  succeed- 


->i4  The  Inferior  Deities. 


j 


ing  births  I  may  have  honourable  husbands,  and  a  son  equal  to 
a  patriarch  among  men,  ....  and  may  I  be  born  out  of  the 
ordinary  course."  Vishnu  promised  her  :  "  In  another  life  you 
shall  have  ten  husbands  of  mighty  prowess,  and  renowned  for 
glorious  acts  ;  and  you  shall  have  a  son  magnanimous  and  valiant, 
distinguished  by  the  rank  of  a  patriarch,  from  whom  the  various 
races  of  men  shall  multiply,  and  by  whose  posterity  the  universe 
shall  be  filled.  You,  virtuous  lady,  shall  be  of  marvellous  birth, 
and  delighting  the  hearts  of  men."  Thus  having  spoken,  the 
deity  disappeared,  and  Soma  informs  his  hearers  that  it  was  this 
princess  who  was  born  as  Marisha. 

"  Soma  having  concluded,  the  Prachetasas  took  Marisha,  as  he 
had  enjoined  them,  righteously  to  wife,  relinquishing  their  in- 
dignation against  the  trees,  and  upon  her  they  begot  the  eminent 
patriarch  Daksha,  who  had  (in  a  former  life)  been  born  as  the 
son  of  Brahma.  This  great  sage,  for  the  furtherance  of  creation 
and  the  increase  of  mankind,  created  progeny.  Obeying  the 
command  of  Brahma,  he  made  movable  and  immovable  things, 
bipeds  and  quadrupeds,  and  subsequently  by  his  will  gave  birth 
to  females,  ten  of  whom  he  bestowed  on  Dharma,  thirteen  on 
Kasyapa,  and  twenty-seven,  who  regulate  the  course  of  time,  on 
Soma  (the  moon).  Of  these  the  gods,  the  Titans,  the  snake  gods, 
cattle  and  birds,  the  singers  and  dancers  of  the  courts  of  heaven, 
the  spirits  of  evil  and  other  beings,  were  born.  From  that 
period  forward  living  creatures  were  engendered  in  an  ordinary 
manner  ;  before  the  time  of  Daksha,  they  were  variously  pro- 
pagated by  the  will,  by  sight,  by  touch,  and  by  the  influence 
of  religious  austerities  by  devout  sages  and  holy  saints." 

Daksha's  first  attempts  at  populating  the  world  were  un- 
successful. A  thousand  sons  were  born  to  him  by  Asikni,  but 
these  were  induced  by  Narada  not  to  propagate  offspring.  A 
thousand  other  sons  by  the  same  wife  were  born,  who  also  were 
advised  by  Narada  not  to  be  troubled  with  children.  The  Pra- 
japati,  incensed,  cursed  Narada,  and  proceeded  to  create  sixty 
daughters  by  Asikni,  whom  he  gave  to  various  husbands,  by 
whom  they  had  children.  At  length,  when  a  time  of  peace  and 
prosperity  prevailed  on  the  earth,  and  the  gods  had  their  proper 


Vasishtha.  315 


places  assigned  to  them,  to  Daksha  was   given  the  position  as 
chief  of  the  Prajapatis,*  progenitors  of  mankind. 


9.    VASISHTHA. 

Vasishtha,  together  with  Pulastya,  is  said  to  have  narrated  the 
'Vishnu  Purana,'  and  he,  too,  is  believed  to  have  been  the  writer 
of  many  of  the  Vedic  hymns.  It  was  he  who  allayed  the  anger 
of  Parasara  when  that  sage  was  trying  to  extirpate  the  Rakshas 
race,  because  one  of  their  kings  had  slain  his  father.  He  is  said 
to  have  been  the  Vyasa,  or  arranger  of  the  Vedas,  in  the  eighth 
Dvapara  Age  ;  this  work  of  arranging  having  a  different  agent  in 
each  age. 

Vasishtha  served  as  the  family  priest  of  several  kings.     One  of 

these,  named  Saudasa,  when  out  hunting,  seeing  a  couple  of  tigers 

shot  one  of  them  with  an  arrow.     It  happened  that  these  tigers 

were  really  Rakshasas,  for,  as  the  one  shot  by  Saudasa  was  dying, 

it  assumed  a  fiendish  shape  ;  the  other,  threatening  vengeance, 

disappeared.     Not  long  after  this,  as  the  king  was  engaged  in  a 

sacrifice,  Vasishtha  being  out  of  the  room,   the  Rakshas    who 

escaped,  assuming  the  form  of  Vasishtha,  came  to  the  king  and 

said  :  "  Now  that  the  sacrifice  is  ended,  give  me  something  to  eat ; 

let  it  be  cooked,  and  I  will  presently  return."    The  Rakshas  next 

transformed  himself  into  the  cook,  and,  having  prepared  a   dish 

of  human  flesh,  brought  it  to  the  king.     When  the  real  Muni 

entered,  the  king  offered  him  the  dish  ;  but  he  discovered,  by  the 

force  of  meditation,  that  it  was  human  flesh  that  was  presented 

to  him.     Indignant  at  this  insult,  cursing  the  king,  he  said  :  "  Your 

appetite  shall  be  excited  by  similar  food  to  that  now  offered  me." 

The  king  was  astonished  at  this  outburst  of  anger,  and  Vasishtha, 

seeing  this,  by  further  meditation  discovered  the  whole  trick  ;  but 

as  he  could  not  recall  entirely  the  effects  of  his  curse,  he  modified 

it  so  that  it  was  to  work  for  twelve  years  only.t     It  was  this 

*  For  further  particulars  respecting  Daksha  see  the  account  of  Siva,  where 
the  story  is  told  of  his  decapitation,  and  a  goat's  head  being  given  to  him. 
f  'Vishnu  Purana,'  p.  381. 


3 1 6  The  Inferior  Deities. 


same  king  who  was  cursed  by  Vasishtha's  son  Sakti  to  become  a 
Rakshas,  and  who,  when  in  that  state,  devoured  the  sage  who 
cursed  him. 

Vasishtha  also  cursed  a  king  named  Nimi.  As  this  king  was 
about  to  commence  a  sacrifice  that  was  to  continue  for  a  thousand 
years,  he  sent  to  ask  Vasishtha  to  officiate  as  priest  ;  but  as  the 
Muni  was  engaged  in  a  similar  work  for  Indra,  he  could  not 
assist  Nimi  for  the  next  five  hundred  years.  When,  however, 
Vasishtha  left  the  court,  the  king  proceeded  with  his  sacrifice, 
engaging  Gautama  as  priest.  As  soon  as  his  engagement  was 
over  with  Indra,  the  sage,  coming  to  conduct  Nimi's  sacrifice, 
found  another  priest  had  been  appointed,  and  was  so  angry  that 
he,  cursing  the  king,  declared  that  he  should  cease  to  exist  in  a 
bodily  form.  On  learning  what  was  done,  the  king  pronounced 
a  similar  curse  upon  the  sage.  Both  curses  took  effect ;  but  as 
Vasishtha's  spirit  became  united  to  the  spirits  of  Mitra  and 
Varuna,  when  these  deities  were  smitten  with  the  beauty  of 
the  nymph  Urvasi,  the  spirit  of  the  sage  fell  from  them,  and 
he  became  again  incorporated  through  her."  *  A  verse  in  the 
Rig- Veda  ascribes  Vasishtha's  birth  to  Mitra  and  Varuna, 
in  harmony  with  the  legend  just  quoted:  —  "Thou,  O 
Vasishtha,  art  a  son  of  Mitra  and  Varuna,  born  a  Brahman 
from  the  soul  of  Urvasi.  All  the  gods  placed  in  the  vessel 
thee,  the  drop  which  had  fallen  through  divine  contem- 
plation." 

There  are  stories  of  great  quarrels  between  this  sage  and 
Visvamitra,  who  was  anxious  to  obtain  the  position  of  priest  to 
Saudasa,  which  was  held  by  Vasishtha.  At  another  time,  when 
he  was  priest  to  Harischandra,  he  was  so  greatly  incensed  at  the 
treatment  the  king  had  received  at  Visvamitra's  hands  that  he 
cursed  him,  and  he  became  a  crane.  His  rival  returned  the 
compliment,  and  he  too  became  a  bird.  In  this  form  the  sages 
fought  so  violently  that  it  was  necessary  for  Brahma  to  come  to 
pacify  them.  The  great  cause  of  unpleasantness  was  the  fact 
that  Visvamitra  was  a  Kshattriya  by  birth,  who,  by  penance  and 


*  i 


Vishnu  Purana,'  p.  388. 


Narada.  317 


various  rites,  had  obtained  admission  into  the  Brahmanical  caste. 
Previous  to  his  exaltation,  he  was  a  great  king ;  and  being  de- 
sirous of  possessing  a  wonderful  cow  that  belonged  to  Vasishtha, 
which  had  the  power  to  grant  whatever  her  owner  desired,  as 
he  could  not  overcome  the  Brahmans,  owing  to  their  superhuman 
power,  he  sought  to  raise  himself  to  equality  with  them,  and  at 
length  his  efforts  were  crowned  with  success. 


10.    NARADA. 

Narada's  name  is  not  found  in  the  list  of  Brahma's  sons  in  the 
'Vishnu  Purana,' yet  he  is  generally  regarded  .as  one,  though, 
according  to  some  authorities,  he  had  a  different  origin.  He  is 
the  messenger  of  the  gods,  and  is  often  described  as  imparting 
information  that  was  only  known  to  them.  It  was  he  who  per- 
suaded the  sons  of  Daksha  not  to  beget  offspring,  and  who  was 
accordingly  cursed  for  his  interference  ;  it  was  he  who  informed 
Kansa  of  the  approaching  birth  of  Krishna,  which  led  that  king 
to  slay  the  children  of  Vasudeva  :  hence  his  common  name  is 
Kalikaraka,  the  strife-maker,  and  in  modern  plays  he  is  intro- 
duced as  a  spy  and  marplot.  The  name  Narada  is  employed 
as  a  term  of  abuse,  as  descriptive  of  a  quarrelsome,  meddling 
person. 

"A  distinguished  son  of  Brahma,  named  Narada,  whose 
actions  are  the  subject  of  a  Purana,  bears  a  strong  resemblance 
to  Hermes  or  Mercury.  He  was  a  wise  legislator,  great  in  arts 
and  arms,  an  eloquent  messenger  of  the  gods,  either  to  one 
another  or  to  favoured  mortals,  and  a  musician  of  exquisite 
skill.  His  inventing  the  vina,  or  Indian  lute,  is  thus  described  in 
the  poem  entitled  '  Magna  ' :  '  Narada  sat  watching  from  time  to 
time  his  large  vina,  which,  by  the  impulse  of  the  breeze,  yielded 
notes  that  pierced  successively  the  regions  of  his  ear,  and  pro- 
ceeded by  musical  intervals.'  The  Law  Tract,  supposed  to  have 
been  revealed  by  Narada,  is  at  this  hour  cited  by  Pundits,  and 
we  cannot  therefore  believe  him  to  have  been  the  patron  of 
thieves,  though  an  innocent  theft  of  Krishna's  cattle,  by  way  of 


2i8  The  Inferior  Deities. 


putting  his  divinity  to  the  test,  he  strangely  imputed,  in  the 
■  Bhagavata  Purana,'  to  his  father  Brahma."  * 

The  accounts  of  Narada's  origin  vary  considerably.  According 
to  the  Bhagavata,  he  was  the  third  incarnation  of  Vishnu.  Manu 
declares  that  he  was  one  of  the  Maharishis  whom  he  created  at 
the  beginning  of  the  age.  Moorf  quotes  as  follows:  "Brahma 
said  :  '  Rise  up,  Rudra,  and  form  man  to  govern  the  world.' 
Rudra  obeyed  ;  but  the  men  he  made  were  fiercer  than  tigers, 
having  nothing  but  the  destructive  quality  in  their  composition. 
Anger  was  their  only  passion.  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Rudra 
then  joined  their  different  powers,  and  created  ten  men  whose 
names  were  Narada,"  &c.  The  '  Siva  Purana '  teaches  that  Narada 
sprang  from  the  thigh  of  his  father :  "  Brahma,  in  view  of 
peopling  the  world,  produced  four  beings,  who,  being  refractory, 
caused  their  parent  to  weep.  To  comfort  him,  Siva,  in  the 
character  of  Rudra,  issued  from  a  fold  in  his  forehead  with  five 
heads  and  ten  arms,  and,  endowing  Brahma  with  additional 
might,  he  (Brahma)  produced  Bhrigu  and  the  seven  Rishis,  and 
after  that  Narada  from  his  thigh."  t 

In  another  birth  Narada  was  the  son  of  Kasyapa§  and  a 
daughter  of  Daksha.  Daksha  was  greatly  incensed  when  he 
dissuaded  the  Prajapati's  sons  from  peopling  the  world,  and 
declared  that  he  should  not  have  a  resting-place  ;  hence  his 
wandering  nature. 

On  one  occasion  Narada  was  cursed  by  his  own  father,  and 
also  cursed  Brahma  in  return.  "  Brahma  exhorted  his  son 
Narada  to  take  a  wife,  and  assist  in  peopling  the  world. 
Narada,  who  was  a  votary  of  Krishna,  becomes  angry,  affirms 
that  devotion  to  that  god  is  the  sole  way  to  attain  felicity,  and 
denounces  his  father  as  an  erring  instructor.  Brahma,  in  reply, 
curses  Narada,  and  dooms  him  to  a  life  of  sensuality,  and 
subjection  to  women.  Narada  pays  back  the  imprecation  as 
follows:  Wretch!  become  no  object  of  adoration:  how  shall 
any  one  be  devoted  to  the  forms  of  thy  worship  ?     Thou  shalt 

Sir  W.  Join    .  •  \  .  Res.,'  i.  264.  f  'Hindu  Pantheon/  p.  91. 

X  Moor,  '  Hindu  Pantheon/  p.  7S.  §  '  Vishnu  Purana,' p.  116. 


Narada.  319 


without  doubt  lust  after  her  who  is  no  fit  object  of  thy  desires  !  ' 
Through  this  curse  of  Narada,  the  creator  of  the  world  ceased  to 
be  an  object  of  worship.  Beholding  the  beauty  of  his  daughter, 
he  ran  after  her.  Narada  having  made  obeisance  to  his  lotus- 
born  father,  forsook  his  Brahmanical  body,  and  became  a 
Gandharva,*  a  chorister  of  Indra's  heaven." 

In  the  Mahabharata,  Narada  figures  as  a  religious  teacher  ; 
and  in  the  '  Uttara  Kanda '  of  the  Ramayana  is  a  specimen  of 
his  teaching.*  A  Brahman,  carrying  the  dead  body  of  his  son, 
came  to  the  door  of  Rama's  palace  at  Ayodha  ;  and  bewailing 
his  loss,  as  he  himself  was  unconscious  of  any  fault,  he  believed 
it  to  be  owing  to  some  misconduct  on  the  part  of  the  king. 
Rama  summoned  his  councillors,  when  the  divine  sage  Narada 
spoke  as  follows :  "  Hear,  O  king,  how  the  boy's  untimely 
death  occurred  ;  and,  having  heard  the  truth  regarding  what 
ought  to  be  done,  do  it."  The  story,  briefly  told,  is  as  follows  : 
"A  presumptuous  Sudra,  paying  no  regard  to  the  fact  that  during 
the  age  in  which  he  lived  the  prerogative  of  practising  self- 
mortification  had  not  descended  to  the  humble  class  to  which 
he  belonged,  had  been  guilty  of  seeking  to  secure  a  store 
of  religious  merit  by  its  exercise.  Rama,  after  considerable 
search,  comes  upon  a  person  who  was  engaged  in  the  manner 
described  by  Narada.  The  Sudra  avows  his  caste,  and  his 
desire  to  conquer  for  himself  the  rank  of  a  god,  by  the  self- 
mortification  he  was  undergoing.  Rama  instantly  cuts  off  the 
offender's  head  ;  the  gods  applaud  the  deed,  and,  having  been 
encouraged  by  them  to  ask  a  boon,  Rama  requests  that  the 
Brahman's  boy  may  be  resuscitated.  He  is  informed  that  he 
was  restored  to  life  the  very  moment  that  the  Sudra  was 
slain." 

Narada  was  the  friend  and  companion  of  Krishna,  and  was 
famed  for  his  musical  talents,  but,  becoming  presumptuous  on 
account  of  them,  he  emulated  the  divine  strains  of  Krishna,  who 
severely  punished  him  for  his  presumption  by  placing  his  vina 

*  '  Narada  Pancharatna.'     Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  preface,  iv.  p.  6. 
f  Ibid.  i.  117. 


320  The  Inferior  Deities. 


in  the  paws  of  a  bear,  when  it  emitted  sounds  far  sweeter  than 
those  of  the  minstrelsy  of  the  mortified  musician.  Krishna 
played  many  practical  jokes  on  his  friend ;  on  one  occasion  he 
went  so  far  as  to  metamorphose  him  into  a  woman.* 

Great  honour  is  given  to  Narada  because  he  is  said  to  have 
revealed  to  Valmiki  the  '  Ramayana,'  which  opens  as  follows  : — 

"  To  sainted  Narad,  prince  of  those 

Whose  lore  in  words  of  wisdom  flows, 

Whose  constant  care  and  chief  delights 

Were  scripture  and  ascetic  rites, 

The  good  Valmiki,  first  and  best 

Of  hermit  saints,  these  words  addressed  : 

'  In  all  the  world,  I  pray  thee,  who 

Is  virtuous,  heroic,  true  ? 

Firm  in  his  vows,  of  grateful  mind, 

To  every  creature  good  and  kind  ? 

Bounteous  and  holy,  just  and  wise, 

Alone  most  fair  to  all  men's  eyes  ? 
*  *  *  * 

Grant,  saint  divine,  the  boon  I  ask, 
For  thee,  I  ween,  an  easy  task, 
To  whom  the  power  is  given  to  know 
If  such  a  man  breathes  here  below. 
Then  Narad,  clear  before  whose  eye 
The  present,  past,  and  future  lie, 
Made  ready  answer  ! '  "  f 

Narada  proceeds  to  narrate  the  life  of  Rama  to  Valmiki,  who 
feels  that  the  task  of  writing  down  what  was  told  him  is  too 
great  a  work  for  his  powers,  until  Brahma  himself  appears,  and 
encourages  him  to  proceed  : 

"  Then  come,  O  best  of  seers,  relate 
The  life  of  Rama,  good  and  great  ; 
The  tale  that  saintly  Narad  told 
In  all  its  glorious  length  unfold."  J 


*  Moor,  •  Hindu  Pantheon,'  p.  205. 

t  Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  i.  3.  %  Ibid.  i.  22. 


(     32i      ) 


CHAPTER  II. 

KUVERA. 

KUVERA,  the  god  of  riches,  does  not  occupy  a  very  conspicuous 
position  in  the  mythology  of  the  Hindus.  No  images  or  pictures 
of  him  are  to  be  had,  though  he  is  frequently  referred  to  in  the 
Ramayana  as  the  lord  of  gold  and  wealth.  "  Brahma  had  a 
mental  son  named  Pulastya,  who  again  had  a  mental  son  named 
Gaviputra  Vaisravana  (Kuvera).  The  latter  deserted  his  father, 
and  went  to  Brahma,  who  as  a  reward  made  him  immortal,  and 
appointed  him  to  be  the  god  of  riches,  with  Lanka  for  his  capital, 
and  the  car  Pushpaka  for  his  vehicle.*  This  car  was  of  immense 
size,  that  moved  at  its  owner's  will  at  a  marvellous  speed  ; 
Ravana  took  it  by  force  from  Kuvera,  at  whose  death  it  was 
restored  by  Rama  to  its  original  possessor. 

"  Pulastya  being  incensed  at  this  desertion  (of  his  son  Kuvera) 
reproduced  the  half  of  himself  in  the  form  of  Vaisravas,  who 
looked  upon  Vaisravana  with  indignation.  The  latter  strove  to 
pacify  his  father,  and  with  this  view  gave  him  three  elegant 
Rakshasis  to  attend  on  him  :  Pushpotkata,  who  had  two  sons, 
Ravana  and  Kumbhakarna  ;  Malini,  who  bore  Vibhlshana  ;  and 
Raka,  who  bore  Khara  and  Suparnakha.  These  sons  were  all 
valiant,  skilled  in  the  Vedas  and  observers  of  religious  rites, 
but,  perceiving  the  prosperity  of  Vaisravana,  were  filled  with 
jealousy.  Excepting  Khara  and  Suparnakha,  they  began  to 
practise  austerities  to  propitiate  Brahma,  and  at  the  end  of  a 
thousand  years  Ravana  cut  off  his  own  head  and  threw  it  as  an 


*  t 


Mahabharata  :'   Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  iv.  481. 


;22  The  Inferior  Deities. 


oblation  into  the  fire.  Brahma  appeared  to  put  a  stop  to  their 
austerities,  and  to  offer  them  boons  (except  that  of  immortality). 
He  ordained  that  Ravana  should  have  heads  and  shapes  at  will 
and  be  invincible,  except  by  men  ;  that  Kumbhakarna  should 
enjoy  a  long  sleep.  Having  obtained  these  powers,  Ravana 
expelled  Vaisravana  from  Lanka.  Kuvera  retired  to  Ganda- 
mardana.  Ravana  having  been  installed  as  king,  and  begun  to 
exercise  his  power  tyranically,  the  Rishis  resort  to  Brahma,  who 
promises  that,  as  Ravana  could  not  be  killed  by  gods  or  Asuras, 
the  four-armed  Vishnu,  the  chief  of  warriors,  should  by  his 
(Brahma's)  appointment  descend  to  earth  for  his  destruction."* 

The  Ramayana  (Uttara  Kanda)f  makes  Kuvera  the  grandson, 
not  the  son,  of  Pulastya.  In  the  Krita  Yuga  the  pious  Pulastya, 
being  teased  with  the  singing  and  dancing  of  different  damsels, 
proclaimed  that  any  one  of  them  whom  he  saw  near  his  hermitage 
should  become  a  mother.  This  threat  had  not  been  heard  by 
the  daughter  of  Trinavindu,  who  came  near  the  hermitage,  and 
incurred  Pulastya's  threatened  punishment.  Her  father,  on 
learning  her  condition,  gave  her  as  wife  to  Pulastya,  and  she 
bore  him  a  son  named  Visravas  ;  who,  becoming  a  sage,  married 
a  daughter  of  the  Muni  Bharadvaja,  whose  son  Brahma  named 
Vaisravana  (Kuvera).  He  performed  austerities  for  thousands 
of  years,  and  received  as  a  boon  from  Brahma  that  he  should  be 
the  god  of  riches,  and  one  of  the  guardians  of  the  world.  At 
the  suggestion  of  his  father  Visravas,  he  took  possession  of 
Lanka  for  his  abode,  which  was  formerly  built  by  Visvakarma 
for  the  Rakshasas,  who  through  fear  of  Vishnu  had  recently 
forsaken  it. 

A  Rakshas  prince  named  Sumali  who  had  been  driven  to 
Patala,  happening  to  visit  the  earth,  saw  Kuvera  travelling  in 
his  chariot  to  visit  his  father.  This  leads  him  to  devise  a  plan 
by  which  he  might  regain  his  former  position.  He  sends  his 
daughter  Kaikasi  to  woo  Visravas  ;  she  is  kindly  received  and 
bei  omes  the  mother  of  Ravana,  Kumbhakarna,  Suparnakha  and 
\  ibhishana.     When   Kaikasi  saw  the  splendour  of  Kuvera,  she 


Muir,  0.  S.  T.,  v.  483.  t  Ibid.  iv.  488. 


KUVERA.  323 


urges  Ravana  to  resemble  him  in  glory  ;  who,  in  order  to  effect 
this,  undergoes  most  severe  austerities  for  a  thousand  years,  when 
Brahma  grants  him  as  a  boon  invincibility  against  all  beings 
more  powerful  than  men,  and  other  gifts.  Kuvera  on  Ravana's 
demand  yields  the  city  of  Lanka. 

It  was  noticed  above  that  Kuvera  was  one  of  the  guardians  of 
the  world  ;  these  are  commonly  said  to  be  four  in  number. 
Rama,  speaking,  mentions  their  names  : 

"  May  he  whose  hands  the  thunder  wield  [Indra], 
Be  in  the  East  thy  guard  and  shield: 
May  Yama's  care  the  South  befriend, 
And  Varuna's  arm  the  West  defend  ; 
And  let  Kuvera,  Lord  of  Gold, 
The  North  with  firm  protection  hold."  * 

When  eight  guardians  are  spoken  of,  the  additional  four  are 
these  : — Agni  has  charge  of  the  South-East,  Surya  of  the 
South- West,  Soma  of  the  North-East,  and  Vayu  of  the 
North-West. 

Kuvera  is  called  the  King  of  the  Yakshasas, — savage  beings 
who,  because  the  moment  they  were  born  said,  "  Let  us  eat,"  were 
called  Yakshasas.  These  beings  were  ever  on  the  watch  for 
prey,  and  ate  those  they  slew  in  battle. 

Throughout  the  Ramayana  there  are  brief  references  to 
Kuvera  as  the  giver  of  riches,  and  also  to  the  beauty  of  his 
palace  and  gardens.  Thus  Bharadvaja  the  sage,  desirous  of 
giving  Rama  and  Lakshman  a  fitting  reception,  said  : 

"  Here  let  Kuvera's  garden  rise, 
Which  far  in  Northern  Kuru  lies  ; 
For  leaves  let  cloth  and  gems  entwine- 
And  let  its  fruit  be  nymphs  divine."  A 

His  garden  is  a  place  "  where  the  inhabitants  enjoy  a  natural 
perfection,  attended  with  complete  happiness,  obtained  without 
exertion.  There  is  there  no  vicissitude,  nor  decrepitude,  nor 
death,  nor  fear  ;  no  distinction   of  virtue  and  vice,  none  of  the 

*  Griffiths'^  '  Ramayana,'  ii.  20.  t  Ibid.  ii.  358. 

Y    2 


-> 


24  The  Inferior  Deities. 


inequalities  denoted  by  the  words  'best,'  'worst,'  and  'inter- 
mediate,' nor  any  change  resulting  from  the  succession  of  the 
four  Yugas.  There  is  neither  grief,  weariness,  anxiety,  hunger, 
nor  fear.  The  people  live  in  perfect  health,  free  from  every 
suffering,  for  ten  or  twelve  thousand  years."  *  As  Sugriva  was 
sending  forth  his  armies  to  search  for  Sita,  he  thus  speaks  of 
this  garden  to  Satabal,  the  leader  of  the  army  of  the  North  : 

"  Pursue  your  onward  way,  and  haste 
Through  the  dire  horrors  of  the  waste, 
Until  triumphant  with  delight 
You  reach  Kailasa's  glittering  height. 
There  stands  a  palace  decked  with  gold, 
For  King  Kuvera  wrought  of  old, 
A  home  the  heavenly  artist  planned, 
And  fashioned  with  his  cunning  hand. 
There  lotuses  adorn  the  flood 
With  full-blown  flower  and  opening  bud, 
Where  swans  and  mallards  float,  and  gay 
Apsarasasf  come  down  to  play. 
There  King  Vaisravan's  self,  the  lord 
By  all  the  universe  adored, 
Who  golden  gifts  to  mortals  sends, 
Lives  with  the  Guhyakas.J  his  friends."  § 

As  Rama  and  Lakshman  were  wandering  in  the  forest,  they 
were  attacked  by  a  giant  named  Viradha  ;  but  as  they  could  not 
slay  him  with  their  weapons,  they  buried  him  alive,  and  as  a 
result  he  regained  his  proper  form.  Formerly  Kuvera  had 
cursed  him,  for  "  loving  Rambha's  charms  too  well,"  to  assume 
the  hideous  form  in  which  Rama  met  with  him,  and  the  only 
relief  Kuvera  would  give  him  was  : 

"  When  Rama,  Dasaratha's  son, 
Destroys  thee,  and  the  tight  is  won, 
Thy  proper  shape  once  more  assume, 
And  heaven  again  shall  give  thee  room."|| 

When  Ravana  had  risen  to  the  summit  of  his  power,  he  made 
the  gods  perform  various  offices   in  his  house:  thus   Indra  pre- 

'  Bhagavata  Purana  :  ■  Muir,  <  >.  S.  T.,  i.  492.     f  Nymphs  of  Paradise. 
<  guardians  ol  treasures.  §  Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  iv.  24. 

II    Ilml.  iii.  14. 


KUVERA. 


325 


pared   garlands,   Agni  was  his  cook,  Surya  gave  light  by  day 
and  Chandra  by  night,  and  Kuvera  became  his  cash-keeper. 

Kuvera  married  Yakshi  or  Charvi  ;  and  two  of  his  sons, 
through  a  curse  of  the  sage  Narada,  became  trees,  in  which 
condition  they  remained  until  Krishna  when  an  infant  uprooted 
them.  Narada  met  with  them  in  a  forest,  bathing  with  their 
wives,  in  a  state  of  intoxication.  The  wives,  ashamed  of  them- 
selves, fell  at  Narada's  feet  and  sought  for  pardon  ;  but  as  their 
husbands  disregarded  the  presence  of  the  sage,  they  suffered  the 
full  effects  of  his  curse. 


326 


The  Inferior  Deities. 


CHAPTER  III. 


THE  DEMIGODS  OF  THE  RAMAYANA. 


I.    SUGRIVA. 

Over  the  mighty  leaders  of  the  Monkey  army  associated  with 

Rama  in  the  destruction  of 
Ravana  was  King  Sugriva. 
When  Vishnu,  before  leaving 
heaven  to  become  incarnate  as 
Rama,  asked  the  gods  to 

"  Make  helps,  in  war  to  lend  him 

aid, 
In    forms    that     change    at    will 

arrayed, 
Of  wizard  skill  and  hero  might, 
Outstrippers  of  the  wind  in  flight, 


»* 


SUGRIVA. 


they  consented,  and  "  begot  in 
countless  swarms  brave  sons 
disguised  in  sylvan  forms."  Of 
Sugriva  it  is  said, 

"  That  noblest  fire, 
The  Sun,  was  great  Sugriva's  sire."f 

When  Rama  finds  this  King- 
of  the  Monkeys,  he  was  an 
exile,  having  been  driven  from 
his  throne  by  his  brother  Bali. 


Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  i.  92. 


t  Ibid.  i.  93. 


SUGRIVA.  327 

Kabandha,  a  giant  slain  by  Rama,  gives  the  following  descrip- 
tion of  the  king  to  the  wandering  hero  : — 

"  O  Rama,  hear  my  words  and  seek 
Sugriva,  for  of  him  I  speak. 
His  brother  Bali,  Indra's  son, 
Expelled  him,  when  the  fight  he  won. 
With  four  great  chieftains,  faithful  still, 
He  dwells  on  Rishyanuka's  hill. 

3fE  5f"  *P  SfS 

Lord  of  the  Vanars,  just  and  true, 
Strong,  very  glorious,  bright  to  view, 
Unmatched  in  counsel,  firm  and  meek, 
Bound  by  each  word  his  lips  may  speak, 
Good,  splendid,  mighty,  bold  and  brave, 
Wise  in  each  plan  to  guide  and  save. 
His  brother,  fired  by  lust  of  sway, 
Drove  forth  the  king  in  woods  to  stray  ; 
In  all  thy  search  for  Sita,  he 
Thy  ready  friend  and  help  will  be."  * 

Rama  discovers  his  retreat,  hears  the  story  of  his  wrongs, 
promises  to  slay  Bali  the  usurper,  and  assist  Sugriva  to  regain 
his  throne ;  Sugriva  on  his  part  solemnly  promises  to  aid  Rama 
in  his  search  and  to  enable  him  to  release  Sita  from  Ravana's 
bonds.  Rama  very  soon  fulfils  his  part  of  the  compact.  He 
marches  with  Sugriva  and  the  others  to  Bali's  city  ;  Sugriva 
challenges  Bali  to  fight,  and  just  as  he  is  getting  the  worst  of  it, 
Rama  lets  fly  his  arrow,  which  gives  Bali  his  mortal  wound. 
Ere  this  chief  dies,  he  strongly  reproves  Rama  for  slaying  one 
who  had  never  harmed  him,  and  for  slaying  him  too  in  a  secret 
and  cowardly  manner.     He  asks  : 

"  What  fame,  from  one  thou  hast  not  slain 

In  front  of  battle,  canst  thou  gain, 

Wliose  secret  hand  has  laid  me  low, 

When  madly  fighting  with  my  foe  ? 
*  *  *  * 

I  held  that  thou  wouldst  surely  scorn 
To  strike  me  as  I  fought  my  foe, 

*  Grifnths's  '  Ramayana,'  iii.  337. 


3-^S 


The  Inferior  Deities. 


SUGRIVA.  329 

And  thought  not  of  a  stranger's  blow. 
But  now  thine  evil  heart  is  shown, 
A  yawning  well,  with  grass  o'ergrown. 
Thou  wearest  virtue's  badge,*  but  guile 
And  meanest  sin  thy  soul  defile."  f 

Rama  reminds  Bali  that  Fate  had  ordained  his  death,  against 
which  it  was  useless  to  contend,  with  which  statement  Bali 
agrees,  and,  withdrawing  all  his  unkind  words,  asks  for  Rama's 
forgiveness. 

On  the  death  of  Bali,  Sugriva  is  again  installed  as  King  of 
the  Vanars,  and  Rama  gives  him  four  months  for  the  enjoyment 
of  his  long  lost  wife  and  kingdom.  At  its  expiration,  as  Sugriva 
appeared  to  be  so  absorbed  with  pleasure  as  to  forget  his  engage- 
ment to  assist  Rama,  Lakshman  reminds  him  of  his  duty  in  no 
measured  terms.  At  length  the  order  is  given  to  collect  the 
forces,  when  an  army  of  countless  numbers  of  monkeys,  bears, 
&c,  go  forth  in  search  of  Sita,  who,  it  is  discovered,  is  somewhere 
in  the  southern  district  over  which  Hanuman  is  supposed  to 
rule,  who  after  diligent  inquiry  learns  her  whereabouts.  The 
army  marches  to  the  sea-shore  ;  a  bridge  connecting  the  island 
of  Lanka  (Ceylon)  with  the  mainland  is  erected  by  Nala,  and 
the  attacking  army  surrounds  the  city.  No  sooner  were  they  in 
sight  of  the  city  of  the  foe  than 

"  Up  sprang  Sugriva  from  the  ground, 
And  reached  the  turret  at  a  bound. 
Unterrified  the  Vanar  stood, 
And  wroth,  with  wondrous  hardihood, 
The  king  in  bitter  words  addressed, 
And  thus  his  scorn  and  hate  expressed  : 
'  King  of  the  giant  race,  in  me 
The  friend  and  slave  of  Rama  see. 
Lord  of  the  world,  he  gives  me  power 
To  smite  thee  in  thy  fenced  tower.' 
While  through  the  air  his  challenge  rang, 
At  Ravan's  face  the  Vanar  sprang, 
Snatched  from  his  head  the  kingly  crown, 
And  dashed  it  in  his  fury  down. 

*  The  dress  of  a  hermit.  t  Grifhths's  l  Ramayana,'  iv.  91. 


330  The  Inferior  Deities. 


Straight  at  his  foe  the  giant  flew, 
His  mighty  arms  around  him  threw, 
With  strength  resistless  swung  him  round, 
And  dashed  him  panting  to  the  ground. 
Unharmed  amid  the  storm  of  blows, 
Swift  to  his  feet  Sugriva  rose. 
Again  in  furious  fight  they  met  ; 
With  streams  of  blood  their  limbs  were  wet, 
Each  grasping  his  opponent's  waist."  * 

They  continue  to  fight  with  uncertain  result  until  Ravana  calls 
to  his  aid  his  magical  arts  : 

"  But  brave  Sugriva,  swift  to  know 
The  guileful  purpose  of  his  foe, 
Gained  with  light  leap  the  upper  air, 
And  breath,  and  strength,  and  spirit  there  ; 
Then,  joyous  as  for  victory  won, 
Returned  to  Raghu's  royal  son."  f 

In  the  course    of  the  great  fight,  a   giant   named   Kumbha- 

karna,  a  brother  of  Ravana,  came  forth  from  the  city  and  did 

great  execution  amongst  the  Vanar  host,  devouring  his  victims 

as  fast  as    they  were   slain,    though    numbered    by  thousands. 

Some    idea   of  the   size  of  this  monster  may  be  gained    from 

the  fact  that 

"  There  was  no  respite  then,  no  pause  : 
Fast  gaped  and  closed  his  hell-like  jaws  : 
Yet  prisoned  in  that  gloomy  cave, 
Some  Vanars  still  their  lives  could  save  ; 
Some  through  his  nostrils  found  a  way, 
Some  through  his  ears  resought  the  day."  J 

Bali's  son  Angad  tried  to  rally  the  Vanar  host,  but  he  was  soon 
"  dashed  senseless  on  the  ground."  Hanuman  had  already  been 
severely  wounded  by  the  monster.  And  now  he  attacks  Sugriva, 
who  hurled  a  hill  at  him,  but 

"  The  giant's  chest  the  stroke  repelled."  § 
This  compliment  the  monster   returns  by    throwing   his  spear, 

*  Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  v.  121.  t  Ibid.  v.  122. 

%  Ibid.  v.  197.  §  Ibid.  v.  198. 


•  UGRIVA.  33I 


which  Hanuman  caught  as  it  flew,  and  broke  it  across  his  knee. 

Then 

"  At  Sugriva's  head  he  sent 
A  peak  from  Lanka's  mountain  rent. 
The  rushing  mass  no  might  could  stay  : 
Sugriva  fell,  and  senseless  lay. 
The  giant  stooped  his  foe  to  seize, 
And  bore  him  thence,  as  bears  the  breeze 
A  cloud  in  autumn  through  the  sky."  * 

The  giant  enters  Lanka  with  his  captive,  and  is  greatly  lauded 
by  the  people  ;  but  his  triumph  was  of  short  duration,  for 

"  By  slow  degrees  the  Vanars'  lord 
Felt  life,  and  sense,  and  strength  restored. 
He  heard  the  giant's  joyful  boast  : 
He  thought  upon  his  Vanar  host. 
His  teeth  and  feet  he  fiercely  plied, 
And  bit  and  rent  the  giant's  side, 
Who,  mad  with  pain  and  smeared  with  gore, 
Hurled  to  the  ground  the  load  he  bore. 
Regardless  of  a  storm  of  blows, 
Swift  to  the  sky  the  Vanar  rose, 
Then  lightly,  like  a  flying  ball, 
High  overleapt  the  city  wall."  f 

Lakshman  tried  to  slay  this  monster  ;  but  it  was  left  for  Rama 
to  finish  the  work,  whose  arrows  cut  off  limb  after  limb,  and  at 
last  severed  head  from  body.  After  his  death,  two  brothers, 
Nikumbha  and  Kumbha,  came  forth  to  do  battle  for  their  chief. 
Sugriva  seized  Kumbha  and  hurled  him  into  the  sea ;  on  his 
reaching  the  shore,  he  struck  Sugriva  such  a  blow  on  his  chest 
that  he  broke  his  own  wrist  with  the  shock.  Sugriva  returned 
the  blow  by  another  beneath  the  neck,  which  proved  fatal. 
His  brother  now  attacked  Sugriva : 

"  And  red  with  fury  flashed  his  eye. 
He  dashed  with  mighty  sway  and  swing 
His  axe  against  the  Vanar  king  ; 
But  shattered  on  that  living  rock, 
It  split  in  fragments  at  the  shock. 

*   Griffiths's  l  Ramayana,'  v.  199.  f  Ibid. 


332  The  Inferior  Deities. 

Sugriva,  rising  to  the  blow, 
Raised  his  huge  hand  and  smote  his  foe, 
And  in  the  dust  the  giant  lay, 
Gasping  in  blood  his  soul  away."  * 

Sugriva  and  his  heroic  army  continued  faithful  to  their  king's 
promise  until  Rama's  victory  was  won,  though  death  had  con- 
siderably thinned  their  ranks  ;  but  this  loss  was  made  good  as, 
in  answer  to  Rama's  prayer,  Yama  gave  up  the  whole  of  the 
Vanars  who  had  died  in  the  struggle.  When  Rama  was 
about  to  return  home  in  the  magic  car,  Sugriva  asked  that  he 
and  the  Vanar  chiefs  might  accompany  him  to  his  capital. 
Their  request  being  granted,  they  took  part  in  the  installation 
of  Rama  as  king,  and  received  from  that  grateful  monarch 
rich  presents  as  a  reward  for  their  faithful  service. 


2.    HANUMAN. 

Hanuman,  on  the  whole  the  most  useful  of  the  Monkey  leaders 
of  the  expedition  to  Ceylon,  was  the  son  of  Vayu,  by  a  Vanar 
or  monkey  mother.     His  birth  is  thus  described  : 

"  An  Apsaras,  the  fairest  found 
Of  nymphs,  for  heavenly  charms  renowned, 
Sweet  Punjikasthala,  became 
A  noble  Vanar's  wedded  dame. 
Her  heavenly  title  heard  no  more, 
Anjana  was  the  name  she  bore, 
When,  cursed  by  gods,  from  heaven  she  fell, 

In  Vanar  form  on  earth  to  dwell. 

***** 

In  youthful  beauty  wondrous  fair, 
A  crown  of  flowers  about  her  hair. 
In  silken  robes  of  richest  dye, 
She  roamed  the  hills  that  kiss  the  sky. 
Once  in  her  tinted  garments  dressed, 
She  stood  upon  the  mountain  crest. 


*  Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  v.  229. 


Hanuman. 


The  god  of  wind  beside  her  came, 
And  breathed  upon  the  lovely  dame  ; 
And  as  he  fanned  her  robe  aside, 
The  wondrous  beauty  that  he  eyed, 
In  rounded  lines  of  breast  and  limb, 
And  neck  and  shoulders,  ravished  him 
And  captured  by  her  peerless  charms, 
He  strained  her  in  his  amorous  arms. 


HANUMAN. 


Then  to  the  eager  god  she  cried, 

In  trembling  accents,  terrified  : 

'  Whose  impious  love  has  wronged  a  spouse 

So  constant  to  her  nuptial  vows  ? ' 

He  heard,  and  thus  his  answer  made  : 

'  Oh,  be  not  troubled,  nor  afraid. 

But  trust,  and  thou  shalt  know  ere  long 

My  love  has  done  thee,  sweet,  no  wrong. 

So  strong,  and  brave,  and  wise  shall  be 

The  glorious  son  I  give  to  thee  ; 


1  1 
00 


4  The  Inferior  Deities. 


Might  shall  be  his,  that  nought  can  tire, 
And  limbs  to  spring  as  springs  his  sire.' 
Thus  spoke  the  god  :  the  conquered  dame 
Rejoiced  in  heart  nor  feared  the  shame."  * 

At  length  the  son  was  born.  When  a  child,  seeing  the  sun 
rising,  and  thinking  it  to  be  the  fruit  of  a  tree,  he  sprang  up 
three  hundred  leagues  to  clutch  it.  On  another  occasion  Indra 
let  a  bolt  fly  at  him  which  caused  him  to  fall  violently  on  a  rock. 
The  fall  shattered  his  cheek,  and  hence  the  name  Hanuman, 
the  long-jawed  one,  was  given  to  him.  His  father  seeing  this 
became  angry,  and  the  breezes  ceased  to  blow,  until  the  gods 
in  terror  came  to  appease  Vayu  :  Brahma  promised  that  this 
boy  should  not  be  slain  in  battle,  and  Indra  declared  that  his 
bolts  should  never  injure  him  more. 

This  Monkey  leader  rendered  most  valuable  service  to  Rama. 
It  was  he  who  discovered  Sita's  abode,  and  carried  a  message 
to  her  from  Rama.  It  was  he  who  set  fire  to  Lanka  and  caused 
fear  to  enter  the  hearts  of  the  Rakshasas  dwelling  there.  It 
was  he  who  bore  Rama  on  his  shoulders  as  he  crossed  over 
from  India  to  Lanka.  Hanuman  thus  speaks  of  his  wondrous 
power : 

"  Sprung  from  that  glorious  Father,  I 

In  power  and  speed  with  him  may  vie. 

A  thousand  times,  with  airy  leap, 

Can  circle  loftiest  Meru's  steep  : 

With  my  fierce  arms  can  stir  the  sea 

Till  from  their  beds  the  waters  flee, 

And  rush  at  my  command  to  drown 

This  land  with  grove  and  tower  and  town. 

I  through  the  fields  of  air  can  spring 

Far  swifter  than  the  feathered  king, 

And  leap  before  him  as  he  flies 

On  sounding  pinions  through  the  skies. 

I  can  pursue  the  Lord  of  Light 

Uprising  from  the  eastern  height, 

And  reach  him  ere  his  course  be  sped, 

With  burning  beams  engarlanded."  f 


Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  iv.  272.  f  Ibid.  iv.  275. 


Hanuman.  335 


All  these  powers  he  devoted  to  the  service  of  Rama  ;  for, 
when  that  hero  and  his  brother  were  wounded  in  the  fight,  and 
nothing  else  could  restore  them,  Hanuman  fled  to  the  Hima- 
layas from  Ceylon,  and  returned  almost  immediately  with  the 
medicinal  herbs  that  grew  there,  though,  on  reaching  the  hills, 
he  had  some  difficulty  *  in  finding  them  : 

"  But  when  he  thought  to  seize  the  prize, 
They  hid  them  from  his  eager  eyes. 
Then  to  the  hill  in  wrath  he  spake  : 
'  Mine  arm  this  day  shall  vengeance  take 
If  thou  wilt  feel  no  pity,  none, 
In  this  great  need  of  Raghu's  son.' 
He  ceased  :  his  mighty  arms  he  bent, 
And  from  the  trembling  mountain  rent 
His  huge  head,  with  the  life  it  bore, 
Snakes,  elephants,  and  golden  ore. 
O'er  hill  and  plain  and  watery  waste 
His  rapid  way  again  he  traced, 
And  mid  the  wondering  Vanars  laid 
His  burden,  through  the  air  conveyed. 
The  wondrous  herbs'  delightful  scent 
To  all  the  host  new  vigour  lent. 
Free  from  all  darts,  and  wounds,  and  pain, 
The  sons  of  Raghu  lived  again  ; 
And  dead  and  dying  Vanars,  healed, 
Rose  vigorous  from  the  battle-field."  f 

Hanuman  is  described  in  the  'Uttara  Kanda'  of  the  Ramayana,| 
as   a   being    possessed    of  great   learning.     "  The  chief  of  the 

*  In  seeking  for  these  leaves,  Hanuman  was  exposed  to  considerable 
danger.  Kalanemi,  an  uncle  of  Ravana,  was  promised  the  half  of  the  king- 
dom, if  he  would  slay  Hanuman.  To  effect  this,  he  went  to  the  Himalayas 
and,  disguised  as  a  devotee,  invited  Hanuman  to  eat  with  him.  Hanuman 
refused  ;  but  on  entering  a  tank  near,  a  crocodile  seized  his  foot.  This 
reptile  Hanuman  dragged  out  of  the  tank  and  killed  it,  from  whose  body 
a  lovely  Apsaras  arose,  whom  Daksha  had  cursed  to  live  in  that  form  until 
her  release  was  accomplished  by  Hanuman.  This  nymph,  in  gratitude  for 
his  kindness,  warned  Hanuman  of  his  danger.  The  monkey  god  went  to 
Kalanemi,  and  telling  him  that  he  saw  through  his  disguise,  took  him  by  the 
feet,  and  whirled  him  through  the  air  to  Lanka,  where  he  fell  before  the 
throne  in  Ravana's  palace. 

t  Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  iv.  225.  J  Muir,  O.  S.  T.,  iv.  490. 


336  The  Inferior  Deities. 

monkeys,  measureless,  seeking  to  acquire  grammar,  looking  up 
to  the  sun,  bent  on  inquiry,  went  from  the  mountain  where  the 
sun  rises  to  that  where  he  sets,  apprehending  the  mighty 
collection.  The  chief  of  the  monkeys  is  perfect  :  no  one  equals 
him  in  the  Shastras,  in  learning,  and  in  ascertaining  the  sense  of 
the  Scriptures.  In  all  sciences,  in  the  rules  of  austerity,  he  rivals 
the  preceptor  of  the  gods." 

Rama  himself  thus  speaks  of  Hanuman's  knowledge  of  the 
Scriptures,  when  he  came  to  the  exile  as  Sugriva's  envoy  : 

"  One  whose  words  so  sweetly  flow, 
The  whole  Rig  Veda  needs  must  know, 
And  in  his  well-trained  memory  store 
The  Yajush  and  the  Saman's  lore. 
He  must  have  bent  his  faithful  ear 
All  grammar's  varied  rules  to  hear. 
For  his  long  speech  how  well  he  spoke  ! 
In  all  its  length  no  rule  he  broke."  * 

To  this  day  Hanuman  is  regarded  as  divine,  and  in  some 
parts  of  India  is  largely  worshipped.  Living  monkeys  are 
regarded  as  his  representatives  :  hence  many  temples  swarm  with 
them,  and  it  is  regarded  as  a  meritorious  act  to  feed  them,  and 
a  sacrilegious  act  to  injure  them. 


3.    NALA.f 

Nala,  another  of  the  monkey  chiefs,  was  a  son  of  Visvakarma  ; 
and  as  the  son  of  the  architect  of  the  gods,  the  builder  of  their 
beautiful  cities,  and  the  forger  of  their  wonder-working  weapons, 
as  might  have  been  expected,  his  work  was  of  a  similar  nature 
to  that  for  which  his  illustrious  parent  was  celebrated.  When 
the    army  reached   the    sea,    and  the    difficulty  of  crossing    to 

*  Grimths's  '  Ra.ma.yana,'  iv.  25. 

f  This  Nala  must  not  be  confounded  with  another  person  of  the  same 
name,  whose  history  is  given  in  the  Mahabharata.  Nala  of  the  Mahabha- 
rata  was  King  of  Nishadha,  the  husband  of  Damayanti,  whom  he  obtained 
in  marriage,  although  Indra,  Agni,  Varuna,  and  Yama  were  amongst  the 
suitors  for  her  hand. 


Nala.  m 

Lanka  presented  itself,  as  Rama  was  preparing  to  shoot  one  of 
his  mighty  arrows  to  dry  up  the  ocean,  the  Sea  Deity  pre- 
sented himself,  amidst  a  great  commotion  of  the  elements,  and 
thus  addressed  him  : 

"  Air,  ether,  lire,  earth,  water,  true 
To  Nature's  will,  their  course  pursue  ; 
And  I,  as  ancient  laws  ordain, 
Unfordable  must  still  remain. 
Yet,  Raghu's  son,  my  counsel  hear  : 
I  ne'er  for  love,  or  hope,  or  fear, 
Will  pile  my  waters  of  a  heap, 
And  leave  a  pathway  through  the  deep. 
Still  shall  my  care  for  thee  provide 
An  easy  passage  o'er  the  tide, 
And  like  a  city's  paven  street 
Shall  be  the  road  beneath  thy  feet."  * 

His  first  word  of  advice  was  this,  that  Rama,  instead  of 
shooting  at  the  sea,  should  direct  his  arrow  towards  the  North, 
to  destroy  a  race  of  demons  who  were  hateful  to  him,  and  then 
he  went  on  to  say : 

"  Now  let  a  wondrous  task  be  done 
By  Nala,  Visvakarma's  son, 
Who,  born  of  one  of  Vanar  race, 
Inherits  by  his  father's  grace 
A  share  of  his  celestial  art. 
Call  Nala  to  perform  his  part, 
And  he,  divinely  taught  and  skilled, 
A  bridge  athwart  the  sea  shall  build."  f 

Nala  declares  that  he  has  the  will  and  power  to  accomplish 
this  great  and  necessary  work  ;  and,  as  an  encouragement  to 
Rama  to  believe  that  he  will  complete  it,  said  : 

"  My  mother,  ere  she  bore  her  son, 
This  boon  from  Visvakarma  won  : 
'  O  MandarT,  this  child  shall  be 
In  skill  and  glory  next  to  me.' 


*  Grifnths's  '  Ramayana,'  v.  66.  t   Ibid.  v.  67. 

Z 


The  Inferior  Deities. 


But  why  unbidden  should  I  fill 
Thine  ear  with  praises  of  my  skill  ? 
Command  the  Vanar  hosts  to  lay 
Foundations  for  the  bridge  to-day."* 

Rama   trusts  Xala's  skill,   and   orders    the   Vanars   to   brin^ 
materials  for  the  bridge  : 

'•  Up  sprang  the  Vanars  from  their  rest, 
The  mandate  of  the  king  obeyed, 
And  sought  the  forest's  mighty  shade. 
Uprooted  trees  to  earth  they  threw. 
And  to  the  sea  the  timber  drew. 

^F  ^F  ^F  *1* 

With  mighty  engines  piles  of  stone 

And  seated  hills  were  overthrown  : 

Imprisoned  waters  sprang  on  high, 

In  rain  descending  from  the  sky  : 

And  ocean  with  a  roar  and  swell 

Heaved  wildly  when  the  mountains  fell. 

Then  the  great  bridge  of  wondrous  strength 

Was  built,  a  hundred  leagues  in  length. 

Rocks,  huge  as  autumn  clouds,  bound  fast 

With  cordage  from  the  shore,  were  cast, 

And  fragments  of  each  riven  hill, 

And  trees  whose  flowers  adorned  them  still. 

Wild  was  the  tumult,  loud  the  din, 

As  ponderous  rocks  went  thundering  in. 

Each  set  of  sun,  so  toiled  each  crew, 

Ten  leagues  and  four  the  structure  grew  ; 

The  labours  of  the  second  day 

Gave  twenty  more  of  ready  way, 

And  on  the  fifth,  when  sank  the  sun, 

The  whole  stupendous  work  was  done. 

O'er  the  broad  way  the  Vanars  sped, 

Nor  swayed  it  with  their  countless  tread."  f 


( rrirHths's  ■  Ramayana,'  v.  68.  f  Ibid. 


NlLA,    SUSHENA.  339 


4.    NILA. 

This  chief  is  said  to  have  sprung  from  Agni,  and  is  described 
as 

"  Bright  as  flame, 
Who  in  his  splendour,  might,  and  worth, 
Surpassed  the  sire  who  gave  him  birth."  * 

Though  thus  eulogized,  no  very  special  feats  of  his  are 
recorded  in  the  Ramayana.  He  held  a  post  of  honour  as  the 
leader  of  a  division  of  the  army,  and  his  special  work  appears 
to  have  been  to  provide  sentries,  and  generally  to  guard  the 
forces  of  Sugriva  from  the  sudden  attacks  of  the  enemy.  As 
the  son  of  Agni  he  was  able  to  see  clearly,  and  by  his  watchful- 
ness rendered  good  service. 


5.    SUSHENA. 

Varuna  aided  Rama  by  the  gift  of  this  leader,  who  was  the 
father  of  Tara,  the  wife  of  Bali,  Sugriva's  brother  and  the  usurper 
of  his  throne.  To  him  was  given  the  command  of  the  army  of 
the  West.     Sugriva,  addressing  him,  said  : 

"  Two  hundred  thousand  of  our  best 
With  thee,  my  lord,  shall  seek  the  West."  f 

After  searching  in  vain  for  traces  of  the  missing  princess, 
he  and  the  other  unsuccessful  leaders  returned  to  Rama  and 
Sugriva,  and  said  : 

"  On  every  hill  our  steps  have  been, 
By  wood,  and  cave,  and  deep  ravine  ; 
And  all  the  wandering  brooks  we  know, 
Throughout  the  land  that  seaward  flow, 


*  Grifnths's  'Ramayana,'  v.  94.  f  Ibid.  iv.  208. 

Z    2 


1 


40  The  Inferior  Deities. 


Our  feet  by  thy  command  have  traced 
The  tangled  thicket  and  the  waste, 
And  dens  and  dingles  hard  to  pass 
For  creeping  plants  and  matted  grass."  * 

Th«  >ugh  they  could  not  learn  the  exact  spot  where  Sita  was 
hidden,  they  discovered  that  she  had  been  carried  towards  the 
nth,  the  quarter  under  Hanuman's  special  charge,  and  thus 
nsiderably  narrowed  the  sphere  of  the  quest.  In  the  great 
encounter  with  the  foe,  Sushena  did  good  service ;  for  when 
Rama  and  Lakshman  were  overcome  by  Indrajit's  magical  noose, 
Sugriva  and  his  comrades  were  greatly  distressed.  The  Vanar 
king,  however,  being  aware  that  Garuda  could  release  them 
from  the  spell  by  which  they  were  bound,  told  Sushena,  when 
they  regained  their  strength  and  senses,  to  fly  with  them  to 
Kishkindha  hermitage,  where  they  could  dwell  in  safety,  whilst 
he  himself  fought  against  Ravana,  and  rescued  the  royal  lady. 
Then  Sushena,  as  the  physician,  said : 

"  Hear  me  yet  : 
When  gods  and  fiends  in  battle  met, 
So  fiercely  fought  the  demon  crew, 
So  wild  a  storm  of  arrows  flew, 
That  heavenly  warriors,  faint  with  pain, 
Sank  smitten  by  the  ceaseless  rain. 
Vrihaspati,  with  herb  and  spell, 
Cured  the  sore  wounds  of  those  who  fell, 
And,  skilled  in  arts  that  heal  and  save, 
New  life  and  sense  and  vigour  gave. 
Far,  on  the  milky  ocean's  shore, 
Still  grow  those  herbs  in  boundless  store  ; 
Let  swiftest  Vanars  thither  speed 
And  bring  them  for  our  utmost  need. 
Let  Panas  and  Sampati  bring, 
For  well  the  wondrous  leaves  they  know 
That  heal  each  wound  and  life  bestow. 
B  side  that  sea,  which,  churned  of  yore, 
The  Amrit  on  its  surface  bore, 


Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  iv.  224. 


SUSHENA. 


341 


Where  the  white  billows  lash  the  land, 
•     Chandra's  fair  height  and  Drona  stand. 
Planted  by  gods,  each  glittering  steep 
Looks  down  upon  the  milky  deep. 
Let  fleet  Hanuman  bring  us  thence, 
Those  herbs  of  wondrous  influence."  * 

These  plants  were  brought  by  Hanuman  ;  the  wounded  re- 
covered and  fought  with  renewed  vigour. 


Grimths's  '  Ramayana/  v.  152. 


n 


42 


CHAPTER  IV. 

THE  DEMIGODS  OF  THE  MAHABHARATA. 

As  these  heroes  are  so  intimately  connected  with  each  other,  a 
separate  account  of  each  would  necessitate  frequent  repetition  ; 
they  will  therefore  be  noticed  together,  in  a  brief  outline  of  the 
main  story  of  the  Mahabharata.* 

In  the  fifth  generation  from  Soma  (the  Moon),  the  progenitor 
of  the  Lunar  race,  who  reigned  at  Hastinapur,  came  two  sons, 
Puru  f  and  Yadu  ;  from  whom  proceeded  two  branches  of  the 
Lunar  line.  In  the  account  of  Krishna  and  Balarama,  who 
were  born  in  the  Yadu  tribe,  we  have  seen  the  end  of  that 
branch  of  the  family.  Sixteenth  from  Puru,  the  founder  of  the 
other  branch,  came  Bharata,  from  whom  India  takes  its  name, 
Bharatvarsha  (the  country  of  Bharata),  in  the  present  day. 
Twenty-third  from  Bharata  came  Santanu.  This  Santanu  had 
two  sons,  Bhishma,  by  the  goddess  Ganga  (the  Ganges),  and 
Yichitravlrya,    by    Satyavati.J     Satyavati   had    a    son    named 

This  account  of  the  Mahabharata  is  taken  in  an  abbreviated  form  almost 
entirely  from  Lecture  XIII.  of  Monier  Williams's  '  Indian  Wisdom.' 

\n  interesting  story  is  told  of  Puru.  His  father,  Yayati,  married  Deva- 
:i.  daughter  of  Sukra,  the  preceptor  of  the  Daityas.  Her  husband  loving 
her  servant  Sarmistha  also,  Puru  was  born  as  their  youngest  son.  The  wife 
being  highly  indignant  at  the  unfaithfulness  of  her  husband,  returning  to  her 
father's  home,  so  excited  the  old  priest  that  he  cursed  Yayati  with  old  age  ; 
bul  afterwards  consented  to  withdraw  this  curse  provided  one  of  his  sons 
would  bear  it  for  him.  They  all  refused  to  do  this  excepting  Puru.  As  a 
reward  for  his  piety,  his  father  disinherited  his  other  sons,  and  made  Puru 
le  heir  to  his  dominions. 

Satyayati  was   the   daughter   of  an  Apsaras  named  Adrika,  who  was 

ndemned  to  live  on  earth  in  the  form  of  a  fish.     Parasara,  a  sage,  met 

her  daughter  as  he  was  crossing  the  river  Yamuna,  and  Vyasa  was  the  result. 


The  Demigods  of  the  Mahabharata.         343 


Vyasa  before  her  marriage  with  Santanu  ;  so  that  Bhishma, 
Vichitravirya,  and  Vyasa  were  half-brothers.  Bhishma  became 
a  Brahmacharl  {i.e.,  took  a  vow  of  celibacy).  Vyasa  retired  to 
the  wilderness  to  live  a  life  of  contemplation,  but  promised  his 
mother  that  he  would  obey  her  in  everything. 

Now  it  so  happened  that  Vichitravirya  died  childless,  and 
Satyavati  was  therefore  obliged  to  ask  her  son  Vyasa  to  marry  the 
childless  widows.  The  result  was  that  the  one  wife,  Ambika,  had 
a  son  who  was  born  blind,  named  Dhritarashtra.  This  blindness 
is  said  to  have  been  caused  by  the  fact  that  Vyasa,  coming  in 
from  his  ascetic  life,  was  so  repulsive  in  appearance  that  Ambika 
kept  her  eyes  closed  all  the  time  he  remained  with  her.  The 
other  wife,  named  Ambalika,  had  a  son  who  was  born  of  a  pale 
complexion,  and  named  Pandu  ;  this  paleness  was  the  result  of 
the  fear  that  Vyasa  caused  to  the  mother.  Satyavati,  not 
satisfied  with  either  of  these  children,  wished  for  another  and 
perfect  child.  But  Ambika,  dressing  up  one  of  her  slaves,  sent 
her  to  Vyasa  in  her  stead  ;  the  result  was  that  this  girl  had  a 
son  who  was  called  Vidura.  After  fulfilling  his  mother's 
commands,  Vyasa  returned  to  his  ascetic  life  in  the  forest. 

Bhishma,  the  uncle  of  these  children,  conducted  the  govern- 
ment of  Hastinapur  in  their  name  during  their  minority,  and 
their  education  was  also  entrusted  to  him.  Dhritarashtra, 
though  blind,  is  described  as  excelling  the  others  in  strength  ; 
Pandu,  as  being  skilled  in  the  use  of  the  bow  ;  and  Vidura,  as 
pre-eminent  in  virtue  and  wisdom. 

When  the  boys  came  of  age,  Dhritarashtra  was  disqualified 
for  the  throne  by  reason  of  his  blindness  ;  Vidura  could  not  be 
king  because  his  mother  was  a  Sudra  ;  Pandu  was  therefore 
installed  as  king.  Dhritarashtra  married  Gandhari  (also  called 
Saubaleyi,  or  Saubali),  daughter  of  Subala,  King  of  Gandhara. 
Pandu    married    Pritha    (or    Kunti),    the    adopted    daughter    of 


He  was  born  on  an  island  of  the  river,  and  hence  he  had  the  name  Dvvai- 
payana  (who  moves  on  an  island).  Vyasa  is  said  to  have  been  the  arranger 
of  the  Vedas,  the  compiler  of  the  Mahabharata  and  the  Puranas,  and  the 
founder  of  the  Vedanta  system  of  philosophy. 


J 


_j._j.  The  Inferior  Deities. 


Kuntibhoja.  This  Pritha,  "one  day,  before  her  marriage,  paid 
such  respect  and  attention  to  a  powerful  sage  named  Durvasas, 
a  °'uest  in  her  father's  house,  that  he  gave  her  a  charm,  and 
taught  her  an  incantation,  by  virtue  of  which  she  might  have  a 
child  by  any  god  she  liked  to  call  into  her  presence.  Out  of 
curiosity,  she  invoked  the  Sun,  by  whom  she  had  a  son  who  was 
born  clothed  in  armour.  But  Pritha,  fearing  the  censure  of  her 
relatives,  deserted  her  offspring,  after  exposing  it  in  the  river.  It 
was  found  by  Adhirata,  a  charioteer,  and  nurtured  by  his  wife 
Radha  ;  whence  the  child  was  afterwards  called  Radheya, 
though  named  by  his  foster-parents  Vasushena.  When  he  was 
grown  up,  the  god  Indra  conferred  upon  him  enormous  strength, 
and  changed  his  name  to  Kama."  He  is  also  called  Vaikartana, 
being  the  son  of  Vikartana  (the  Sun). 

Pandu,  at  his  uncle  Bhishma's  request,  next  marries  Madri, 
sister  of  Salya,  King  of  Madra.  Soon  after  this  marriage,  Pandu 
undertook  a  great  campaign,  and  extended  his  kingdom  to  the 
dimensions  it  had  reached  in  the  time  of  his  great  ancestor 
Bharata.  He  then,  with  his  two  wives,  retired  to  the  woods,  that 
he  might  indulge  in  his  passion  for  hunting.  The  blind  Dhrita- 
rashtra, with  Bhishma  as  regent,  ruled  in  his  stead. 

Dhritarashtra  had  a  hundred  sons.  The  story  of  their  birth  is 
as  follows  : — "  One  day,  the  sage  Vyasa  was  hospitably  entertained 
by  Queen  Gandhari,  and  in  return  granted  her  a  boon.  She 
chose  to  be  the  mother  of  a  hundred  sons.  After  two  years 
she  produced  a  mass  of  flesh,  which  was  divided  by  Vyasa  into 
a  hundred  and  one  pieces,  as  big  as  the  joint  of  a  thumb.  From 
these,  in  due  time,  the  eldest,  Duryodhana,  was  born.  The 
miraculous  birth  of  the  remaining  ninety-nine  occurred  in  due 
course.  There  was  also  one  daughter,  named  Duhsala."  These 
s<»ns  of  Dhritarashtra  are  generally  called  "The  Kurus,"  or 
Kauravas. 

Pandu's  children  were  of  divine  origin.  This  circumstance 
happened  in  the  following  manner: — Pandu,  as  noticed  above, 
was  addicted  to  hunting.  One  day,  he  ''transfixed  with  five 
arrows  a  male  and  female  deer.  These  turned  out  to  be  a 
certain  sage  and  his  wife,  who  had  assumed  the  form  of  these 


The  Demigods  of  the  Mahabharata.         345 


animals.  The  sage  cursed  Pandu,  and  predicted  that  he  would 
die  in  the  embraces  of  one  of  his  wives.  In  consequence  of  this 
curse,  Pandu  took  the  vow  of  a  Brahmachan,  gave  all  his  property 
to  the  Brahmans,  and  became  a  hermit." 

Upon  this,  Pritha,  his  wife,  with  his  approval,  employed  the 
charm  and  incantation  given  to  her  by  Durvasas,  and  had  three 
children  :  by  the  god  Dharma,  Yudhishthira  ;  by  Vayu,  Bhima  ; 
and  by  Indra,  Arjuna.  Madri,  the  other  wife  of  Pandu,  was 
now  anxious  to  have  children,  and,  acting  on  the  advice  of 
Pritha,  she  thought  of  the  Asvins,  who  appeared  to  her  ac- 
cording to  her  wish,  through  whom  she  became  the  mother 
of  twin  sons,  Nakula  and  Sahadeva.  Soon  after  this,  Pandu, 
forgetting  the  curse  of  the  sage,  died  in  the  embraces  of 
his  wife  Madrl,  who  was  burned  with  the  dead  body  of  her 
husband. 

Pritha  and  the  five  children,  generally  known  as  the  Pandus, 
or  Pandavas,  now  returned  to  Hastinapur,  and  informed  Dhrita- 
rashtra  of  the  death  of  his  brother ;  he  seemed  to  be  deeply 
moved  by  the  event,  and  the  Pandus  were  allowed  to  live  with 
his  own  sons,  the  Kurus. 

But  even  when  the  cousins  were  children,  enmity  arose,  and 
on  one  occasion  the  jealousy  of  Duryodhana  was  excited  to  such 
a  pitch  that  he  tried  to  poison  Bhima,  and,  when  under  its  effect, 
threw  him  into  the  water.  "  Bhima,  however,  was  not  drowned, 
but  descended  to  the  abode  of  the  Nagas  (or  serpent  demons), 
who  freed  him  from  the  poison,  and  gave  him  a  liquid  to  drink 
which  endued  him  with  the  strength  of  ten  thousand  Nagas. 
From  that  moment  he  became  a  second  Hercules."  Several 
schemes  were  formed  for  the  destruction  of  the  Pandus,  but 
without  success.  » 

"The  characters  of  the  five  Pandavas  are  drawn  with  much 
artistic  delicacy  of  touch,  and  maintained  with  general  consis- 
tency throughout  the  poem.  The  eldest,  Yudhishthira  (the  son 
of  Dharma,  virtue),  is  the  Hindu  ideal  of  excellence — a  pattern 
of  justice  ;  calm,  passionless  composure  ;  chivalrous  honour  and 
cold  heroism."  As  the  name  implies  (firm  in  battle),  "he  was 
probably  of  commanding  stature  and  imposing  presence.     He 


;46  The  Inferior  Deities. 


is  described  as  having  a  majestic  lion-like  gait,  with  a  Welling- 
ton-like profile  and  long  lotus-eyes. 

"Bhima  (the  son  of  Vayu)  is  a  type  of  brute  courage  and 
strength  ;  he  is  of  gigantic  stature,  impetuous,  irascible,  somewhat 
vindictive,  and  cruel  even  to  the  verge  of  ferocity,  making  him, 
as  his  name  implies,  '  terrible.'  It  would  appear  that  his  great 
strength  had  to  be  maintained  by  plentiful  supplies  of  food,  as 
his  name,  Vrikodara,  *  wolf-stomached,'  indicates  a  voracious 
appetite  ;  and  we  are  told  that  at  the  daily  meals  of  the  five 
brothers,  half  of  the  whole  dish  had  to  be  given  to  Bhima.  But 
he  has  the  capacity  for  warm,  unselfish  love,  and  is  ardent  in  his 
affection  for  his  mother  and  brothers. 

"Arjuna  (the  son  of  Indra)  rises  more  to  the  European 
standard  of  perfection.  He  may  be  regarded  as  the  real  hero  of 
the  Mahabharata,  of  undaunted  bravery,  generous,  with  refined 
and  delicate  sensibilities,  tender-hearted,  forgiving,  and  affec- 
tionate as  a  woman,  yet  of  superhuman  strength,  and  matchless 
in  arms  and  athletic  exercises.  Nakula  and  Sahadeva  (sons  of 
the  Asvins)  are  both  amiable,  noble-hearted,  and  spirited.  All 
five  are  as  unlike  as  possible  to  the  hundred  sons  of  Dhrita- 
rashtra,  who  are  represented  as  mean,  spiteful,  dishonourable,  and 
vicious."  Kama  (the  son  of  the  Sun),  though  half-brother  of 
these  five  Pandus,  in  the  great  conflict  is  a  valuable  ally  of  the 
Kurus  ;  though  in  character  he  is  entirely  their  opposite.  "  He 
exhibited  in  a  high  degree  fortitude,  chivalrous  honour,  self- 
sacrifice,  and  devotion.  Especially  remarkable  for  a  liberal  and 
generous  disposition,  he  never  stooped  to  ignoble  practices,  like 
his  friends,  the  Kurus,  who  were  emphatically  bad  men." 

The  cousins  were  educated  together  at  Hastinapur  by  a 
Brahman  named  Drona  ;  all  were  instructed  in  arms,  but  Arjuna, 
'  by  the  help  of  Drona,  who  gave  him  magical  weapons,  excelled 
all."  Both  Bhima  and  the  Kuru  Duryodhana  learnt  the  use  of 
the  club  from  their  cousin  Balarama ;  Pritha,  Bhlma's  mother, 
was  a  sister  of  Vasudeva,  and  therefore  aunt  of  Krishna.  When 
their  education  was  completed,  a  tournament  was  held,  in  which 
the  youths  displayed  their  skill  in  archery  ;  in  the  management 
of  chariots,  horses,  and    elephants  ;    in  sword,  spear,  and  club 


The  Demigods  of  the  Mahabharata.         347 


exercises,  and  in  wrestling.  "  Arjuna,  after  exhibiting  prodigies 
of  strength,  shot  five  arrows  simultaneously  into  the  jaws  of  a 
revolving  iron  boar,  and  twenty-one  arrows  into  the  hollow  of  a 
cow's  horn,  suspended  by  a  string."  When  he  had  accomplished 
this  feat,  Kama  came  and  did  precisely  the  same  deeds  of  skill, 
and  challenged  Arjuna  to  single  combat ;  but  as  he  could  not  tell 
his  parentage,  he  was  not  considered  worthy  to  enter  the  lists 
with  the  royal  youth. 

After  this  tournament  was  over,  Yudhishthira  was  installed  as 
heir  apparent,  and  soon  made  his  name  even  more  famous  than 
his  father's  had  been.  The  people  wished  Yudhishthira  to  be 
crowned  king  at  once,  but  the  Kurus  tried  hard  to  prevent  it. 
First  of  all,  the  Pandus  and  their  mother  were  sent  to  a  house  at 
Varanavata,  in  which  a  quantity  of  combustible  materials  was 
placed,  with  the  intention  of  burning  the  whole  family.  The 
Pandus  were  informed  of  this  by  Vidura  and  escaped ;  the 
man  who  conducted  them,  and  a  woman  with  her  five  sons, 
whom  Bhima  had  led  there  in  a  state  of  intoxication,  being  con- 
sumed instead.  By  this  device,  the  Kurus  were  under  the  im- 
pression that  their  plan  had  been  successful.  The  brothers,  with 
their  mother,  now  hastened  to  the  woods,  where  Bhima  slew  a 
giant  named  Hidimba,  and  then  married  his  sister. 

By  the  advice  of  Vyasa  they  now  went  to  live  in  the  city  of 
Ekachakra,  disguised  as  mendicant  Brahmans.  Near  this  city 
was  a  Rakshas  named  Vaka,  who  compelled  the  citizens  to  send 
him  a  dish  of  food  daily,  and  the  messenger  who  took  it  was 
devoured  as  the  daintiest  morsel  of  the  whole.  One  day  it 
happened  that  the  turn  came  to  a  Brahman  to  supply  the 
Rakshas  with  a  meal.  The  man  determined  to  go  himself,  but 
his  wife  and  daughter  each  asked  to  be  allowed  to  go  with  him. 
Lastly,  the  little  son,  too  young  to  speak  distinctly,  in  prattling 
accents  said,  "  Weep  not,  father ;  sigh  not,  mother."  Then, 
breaking  off  and  brandishing  a  pointed  spike  of  grass,  he  ex- 
claimed, "With  this  spike  will  I  slay  the  fierce,  man-eating 
giant."  Bhima,  overhearing  this,  offered  to  go  ;  he  went,  and 
killed  the  giant. 

After  this  occurrence,  Vyasa  appeared  to  his  grandsons,  and 


4S 


The  Inferior  Deities. 


w 


< 

H 
O 

o 


D 
•— > 

< 


The  Demigods  of  the  MahabhArata.         349 

informed  them  that  Draupadi,  the  daughter  of  Drupada,  King  of 
Panchala,  was  destined  to  be  their  common  wife.  This  girl,  in  a 
former  birth,  was  the  daughter  of  a  sage,  and  had  performed  a 
most  severe  penance  in  order  that  she  might  have  a  husband. 
Siva  was  pleased  with  her  devotion,  and  said :  "  You  shall  have 
five  husbands  ;  for  five  times  you  said,  '  Give  me  a  husband.'  " 
When  the  brothers  returned  from  Draupadi's  Svayambara  (a 
tournament,  in  which  the  princess  chose  for  herself  a  husband), 
Arjuna  having  been  selected  from  amongst  many  suitors  on  ac- 
count of  his  skill  in  archery,  their  mother,  hearing  their  footsteps, 
and,  fancying  they  were  bringing  alms,  said,  "  Divide  it  amongst 
yourselves."  The  word  of  a  mother  could  not  be  set  aside,  so 
Vyasa  showed  them  that  it  was  appointed  that  Draupadi  should 
be  the  wife  of  each.  At  this  tournament  Arjuna  displayed 
his  great  skill  in  the  use  of  the  bow,  by  piercing  a  fish 
that  was  suspended  in  the  air,  without  looking  directly  at  the 
object ;  he  saw  its  image  only  reflected  in  a  pan  of  water  on 
the  ground. 

Vyasa,  seeing  the  discrepancy  between  this  conduct  of  the 
five  brothers  having  a  wife  in  common  and  that  which  prevailed 
in  his  day,  explains  it  by  the  fact  that  Arjuna  was  really  a 
portion  of  the  essence  of  Indra,  and  all  his  brothers  portions  of 
the  same  god,  whilst  Draupadi  herself  was  a  form  of  Lakshmi ; 
and  therefore,  as  the  five  brethren  were  parts  of  Indra,  there  was 
no  impropriety  in  their  having  but  one  wife.  It  is  a  fact  to  be 
noticed,  that  to  this  day  polyandry  prevails  amongst  some  of 
the  hill-tribes  of  India.  Draupadi  is  said  to  have  had  a  son  by 
each  of  the  brothers,  and  the  brothers  had  other  wives  besides 
Draupadi.  It  was  noticed  above  that  Bhima  married  Hidimba. 
Arjuna  married  Krishna's  sister,  Subhadra,  and  also  a  serpent- 
nymph  named  Uludi,  and  Chitrangada,  daughter  of  the  King  of 
Manipura. 

When  the  Pandus,  by  their  marriage  with  Draupadi,  had  allied 
themselves  with  the  King  of  Panchala,  they  threw  off  their 
disguise,  and  their  uncle  Dhritarashtra  divided  the  kingdom  :  to 
his  sons  he  gave  Hastinapur ;  to  the  Pandus  a  district  near  the 
Yamuna  (Jumna),  called    Khandavaprastha.       Here  they  built 


3^0  The  Inferior  Deities. 


Indraprastha  (Delhi),  and,  under  Yudhishthira,  their  kingdom 


grew 


Arjuna  wandered  in  the  forest  alone  for  twelve  years,  in 
fulfilment  of  a  vow,  and  there  met  with  Krishna,  who  invited  him 
to  Dwaraka,  where  he  married  Subhadra.  Krishna  was  invited 
to  a  great  festival  in  honour  of  the  inauguration  of  Yudhishthira 
as  sovereign.  Acting  on  Narada's  advice,  Bhishma  proposed  that 
an  oblation  should  be  made  to  the  best  and  strongest  person 
present,  whom  he  declared  Krishna  to  be.  Sisupala  objected, 
and,  as  he  reviled  Krishna  openly,  Krishna  struck  off  his  head 
with  his  discus. 

After  this,  a  festival  was  held  at  Hastinapur,  to  which  the 
Pandus  were  invited.  Yudhishthira  was  induced  to  play;  and 
having  staked  his  kingdom,  his  possessions,  and,  last  of  all, 
Draupadi,  lost  everything.  A  compromise  was  effected.  Duryo- 
dhana  was  made  ruler  over  the  wrhole  kingdom  for  twelve  years  ; 
whilst  the  Pandus  with  Draupadi  were  to  live  in  the  forest  for 
the  same  period,  and  to  pass  the  thirteenth  year  under  assumed 
names,  in  various  disguises.  Whilst  enjoying  this  forest  life, 
Arjuna  went  to  the  Himalayas  to  perform  severe  penance  in 
i  >n  ler  to  obtain  celestial  arms.  "  After  some  time,  Siva,  to  reward 
him  and  prove  his  bravery,  approached  as  a  Kirata,*  or  wild 
mountaineer,  at  the  moment  that  a  demon  named  Muka,  in  the 
form  of  a  boar,  attacked  him.  Siva  and  Arjuna  shot  together  at 
the  boar,  which  fell  dead,  and  both  claimed  to  have  hit  him  first. 
This  served  as  a  pretext  for  Siva  to  have  a  battle  with  him. 
Arjuna  fought  long  with  the  Kirata,  but  could  not  conquer  him. 
At  last  he  recognised  the  god,  and  threw  himself  at  his  feet, 
when  Siva,  pleased  with  his  bravery,  gave  him  the  celebrated 
weapon  Pasupata,  to  enable  him  to  conquer  Kama  and  the  Kuru 
princes  in  war." 

In  the  thirteenth  year  of  exile  the  Pandus  journeyed  to  the 
court   of    King   Virata,    and    entered    his    service    in    disguise. 


'I  lie   Kir.it. 1 5  wire  mountaineers,  or  foresters.     In  the  Ramayana  they 
di  ;<  ribed  as  "islanders,  who  eat  raw  flesh,  live  in  the  waters,  and  are 
men-tigers." 


The  Demigods  of  the  Mahabharata.         351 

Yudhishthira  called  himself  a  Brahman,  and  took  the  name  of 
Kanka.  Arjuna  called  himself  Vrihanala,  and,  pretending  to  be 
a  eunuch,  adopted  a  sort  of  woman's  dress,  and  taught  music  and 
dancing.  One  day  when  Virata  and  four  of  the  Pandus  were 
absent,  Duryodhana  and  his  brother  attacked  Virata's  capital,  and 
carried  off  some  cattle.  Uttara,  the  king's  son,  followed  them, 
having  Arjuna  as  his  charioteer.  When  they  came  in  sight  of  the 
enemy,  Uttara's  heart  failed  him.  Arjuna  changed  places  with 
him,  having  told  him  who  he  was.  This  gave  him  courage,  the 
Kuru  army  was  defeated,  and  the  stolen  cattle  reclaimed.  Arjuna 
asked  Uttara  to  keep  the  secret  of  his  real  character  for  the 
present  A  short  time  afterwards,  at  a  great  assembly  called  by 
Virata,  the  Pandus  took  their  places  amongst  the  princes,  and 
were  welcomed  heartily  by  the  king. 

A  council  of  princes  was  soon  held,  at  which  Krishna  and 
Balarama  were  present,  to  consider  how  the  Pandus  could  regain 
their  possessions.  Some  were  for  immediate  war  ;  Krishna  and 
Balarama  urged  that  attempts  at  negotiation  should  first  be 
made.  This  advice  was  acted  upon,  but  without  result.  In  the 
meantime,  Krishna  and  his  brother  returned  to  Dwaraka.  Not 
long  after  his  arrival  at  his  capital,  Duryodhana,  the  Kuru  prince, 
visited  Krishna  to  ask  his  aid  in  the  coming  struggle  ;  and  on  the 
same  day,  Arjuna,  the  Pandu  prince,  arrived  there  for  the  same 
purpose.  And  "  it  happened  that  they  both  reached  the  door  of 
Krishna's  apartment,  where  he  was  asleep,  at  the  same  moment. 
Duryodhana  succeeded  in  entering  first,  and  took  up  his  station 
at  Krishna's  head  ;  Arjuna  followed,  and  stood  reverently  at 
his  feet."  Krishna,  on  awaking,  first  saw  Arjuna  ;  and  when 
the  cousins  mentioned  the  object  of  their  visit,  he  gave  the  right 
of  choice  to  Arjuna.  He  offered  himself  to  one  side,  but  said  he 
should  not  himself  fight ;  and  to  the  'other  side  his  army  of  a 
hundred  million  warriors.  Arjuna  at  once  chose  Krishna,  and 
Duryodhana  was  delighted  with  the  prospect  of  having  Krishna's 
immense  army  on  his  side.  Duryodhana  then  asked  Balarama's 
aid,  but  was  informed  that  both  the  brothers  had  decided  to  take 
no  active  part  in  the  conflict.  Krishna,  however,  consented  to  act 
as  Arj una's  charioteer,  and  joined  the  Pandus  at  Virata's  capital. 


The  Inferior  Deities. 


y. 
< 


is. 

D 


O 


The  Demigods  of  the  Mahabharata.  ^^ 


3D  J 


Fresh  negotiations  were  commenced,  and  Krishna  himself  went 
as  mediator  to  the  Kurus  ;  but  although  in  the  assembly  he 
assumed  his  divine  form,  and  "  Brahma  appeared  in  his  forehead, 
Rudra  on  his  breast,  the  guardians  of  the  world  issued  from  his 
arms,  and  Agni  from  his  mouth," — although  the  other  gods  were 
visible  in  and  about  his  person,  his  attempt  at  reconciliation  failed. 
War  was  determined  on  between  the  cousins.  Bhishma  was 
made  the  commander-in-chief  of  the  Kuru  army  ;  and  Dhrishta- 
dyumna,  son  of  Drupada,  was  leader  of  the  Pandus.  Vyasa 
offered  to  give  sight  to  Dhritarashtra,  to  enable  him  to  witness  the 
conflict,  but,  as  the  blind  man  declined  the  offer,  Vyasa  gave  to 
his  charioteer,  Sanjaya,  the  faculty  of  knowing  everything  that 
took  place,  made  him  invulnerable,  and  bestowed  on  him  the 
power  to  transport  himself  by  a  thought  to  any  part  of  the  field 
of  battle. 

The  armies  met  on  Kurukshetra,  a  plain  to  the  north-west  of 
the  modern  Delhi,  and  we  are  told  that  "monstrous  elephants 
career  over  the  field,  trampling  on  men  and  horses,  and  dealing 
destruction  with  their  huge  tusks  ;  enormous  clubs  and  iron 
maces  clash  together  with  the  noise  of  thunder  ;  rattling  chariots 
dash  against  each  other  ;  thousands  of  arrows  hurtle  in  the  air, 
darkening  the  sky  ;  trumpets,  kettledrums,  and  horns  add  to  the 
uproar  ;  confusion,  carnage,  and  death  are  everywhere." 

The  Pandus  are  described  as  performing  prodigies  of  might. 
Arjuna  killed  five  hundred  warriors  simultaneously,  covered  the 
plain  with  dead,  and  filled  rivers  with  blood  :  Yudhishthira 
"  slaughtered  a  hundred  men "  in  a  mere  twinkle :  Bhlma 
annihilated  a  monstrous  elephant,  including  all  mounted  upon  it, 
and  fourteen  foot-soldiers  besides,  with  one  blow  of  his  club  : 
Nakula  and  Sahadeva,  when  fighting  from  their  chariots,  cut  off 
heads  by  the  thousand,  and  sowed  them  like  seed  upon  the 
ground.  Of  the  weapons  employed,  about  a  hundred  are 
named  ;  and  the  conch  shell  which  served  as  the  trumpet  of 
each  leader  had  its  distinct  name,  as  had  also  the  weapons  of 
each  of  the  chiefs. 

The  first  great  single  combat  was  between  Bhishma  and 
Arjuna,  which  resulted  in  Bhishma  being  so  transfixed  with  arrows 

2  A 


;-i  The  Inferior  Deities. 


that  "there  was  not  a  space  of  two  fingers'  breadth  on  his 
whole  body  unpierced.  Bhishma  falling  from  his  chariot,  his 
body  could  not  touch  the  ground,  surrounded  as  it  was  by 
countless  arrows,  reclining  as  it  were  on  an  arrowy  couch.  He 
had  received  from  his  father  the  power  of  fixing  the  time  of  his 
own  death,  and  now  declared  that  he  intended  retaining  life  till 
the  sun  entered  the  summer  solstice.  All  the  warriors  on  both 
-ides  ceased  fighting  that  they  might  view  this  wonderful  sight 
and  do  homage  to  their  dying  relative.  As  he  lay  on  his  arrowy 
bed,  his  head  hanging  down,  he  begged  for  a  pillow7,  whereupon 
the  chiefs  brought  him  soft  supports,  which  the  hardy  old  soldier 
sternly  rejected.  Arjuna  made  a  rest  for  him  with  three  arrows, 
which  Bhishma  quite  approved  ;  and  soon  afterwards  asked 
Arjuna  to  bring  him  water.  Arjuna  struck  the  ground  with  an 
arrow,  and  forthwith  a  pure  spring  burst  forth,  which  so 
refreshed  Bhishma  that  he  called  for  Duryodhana,  and  begged 
him,  before  it  was  too  late,  to  restore  half  the  kingdom  to  the 
Pandavas." 

Drona,  the  tutor  of  the  princes,  is  appointed  to  take  the 
command  of  the  Kuru  army  after  the  fall  of  Bhishma;  and  a 
number  of  single  combats  are  described.  Bhima's  son  by  the 
Rakshasi  Hidimba  is  slain  by  Kama  ;  Drupada's  son,  Dhrishta- 
dyumna,  the  leader  of  the  Pandus,  overcomes  Drona;  Drona 
being  a  Brfihman,  when  overpowered  by  his  foe,  voluntarily  laid 
down  his  life,  and  is  conducted  to  heaven  "in  a  glittering  shape 
like  the  sun,"  to  save  Dhrishtadyumna  from  the  enormous  crime 
of  killing  a  Brahman.  Kama  was  now  made  leader  of  the 
I  irus  in  place  of  Drona.  Bhima  next  slew  Duhsasana,  and, 
remembering  how  this  prince  had  insulted  Draupadi,  he  drank 
the  blood  of  his  fallen  foe.  Arjuna  next  slew  Kama,  and  Salya, 
King  of  Madra,  was  appointed  to  fill  the  vacant  post.  Bhima 
challenges  Salya,  and  the  following  is  the  account  of  their 
encounter : — 

"  Soon  as  he  saw  his  charioteer  struck  down, 
Straightway  the  Madra  monarch  grasped  his  mace, 
And  like  a  mountain,  firm  and  motionless, 
Awaited  the  attack.     The  warrior's  form 


The  Demigods  of  the  Mahabharata.         355 

Was  awful  as  the  world-consuming  fire, 

Or  as  the  noose-armed  god  of  death,  or  as 

The  peaked  Kailasa,  or  the  Thunderer 

Himself,  or  as  the  trident-bearing  god, 

Or  as  a  maddened  forest  elephant. 

Him  to  defy  did  Bhlma  hastily 

Advance,  wielding  aloft  his  massive  club. 

A  thousand  conchs  and  trumpets,  and  a  shout, 

Firing  each  champion's  ardour,  rent  the  air. 

From  either  host,  spectators  of  the  fight, 

Burst  forth  applauding  cheers  :  '  The  Madra  king 

Alone,'  they  cried,  '  can  bear  the  rush  of  Bhlma  ;  ' 

'  None  but  heroic  Bhlma  can  sustain 

The  force  of  Salya.'     Now  like  two  fierce  bulls 

Sprang  they  towards  each  other,  mace  in  hand. 

And  first,  as  cautiously  they  circled  round, 

Whirling  their  weapons  as  in  sport,  the  pair 

Seemed  matched  in  equal  combat.     Salya's  club, 

Set  with  red  fillets,  glittered  as  with  flame, 

While  that  of  Bhlma  gleamed  like  flashing  lightning. 

Anon  the  clashing  irons  met,  and  scattered  round 

A  fiery  shower  ;  then,  fierce  as  elephants 

Or  butting  bulls,  they  battered  each  the  other. 

Thick  fell  the  blows,  and  soon  each  stalwart  frame, 

Spattered  with  gore,  glowed  like  the  Kinsuka, 

Bedecked  with  scarlet  blossoms  ;  yet  beneath 

The  rain  of  strokes,  unshaken  as  a  rock, 

Bhlma  sustained  the  mace  of  Salya,  he 

With  equal  firmness  bore  the  other's  blows. 

Now,  like  the  roar  of  crashing  thunder-clouds, 

Sounded  the  clashing  iron  ;  then,  their  clubs 

Brandished  aloft,  eight  paces  they  retired, 

And  swift  again  advancing  to  the  fight, 

Met  in  the  midst  like  two  huge  mountain  crags 

Hurled  into  contact.     Nor  could  either  bear 

The  other's  shock  ;  together  down  they  rolled, 

Mangled  and  crushed,  like  two  tall  standards  fallen." 

Yudhishthira  then  fought  with  and  eventually  slew  Salya. 
After  suffering  continual  reverses,  the  Kurus  rallied  for  a  final 
charge,  which  led  to  so  great  a  slaughter,  that  only  four  of  their 
leaders,  Duryodhana,  Asvatthaman  (son  of  Drona),  Kritavarman, 
and  Kripa  remained,  whilst  "nothing  remained  of  eleven  whole 
armies."      Whereupon    Duryodhana   resolved   upon    flight,    and 

2  a  2 


^;6  The  Inferior  Deities. 


35 


taking  refuge  in  a  lake,  by  his  magical  power  supported  it  so  as 
to  form  a  chamber  round  his  body."  The  Pandus  discovered  his 
retreat  ;  but  when  taunted  by  them,  he  told  them  to  take  the 
kingdom,  as,  his  brothers  having  all  been  slain,  he  had  no 
pleasure  in  life.  At  last,  enraged  by  the  sarcasms  of  his  cousins, 
he  came  forth  and  fought  with  Bhlma,  from  whom  he  received 
his  death-wound.  The  remaining  three  Kuru  chiefs  left  their 
wounded  companion  and  took  refuge  in  a  forest. 

Whilst  resting  under  a  tree  at  night,  Asvatthaman,  seeing  an 
owl  approach  stealthily  and  kill  numbers  of  sleeping  crows,  the 
thought  occurred  to  him  that  in  this  manner  he  might  destroy 
the  Pandu  army.  Accordingly  he  quietly  entered  their  camp, 
leaving  Kripa  and  Kritavarman  to  watch  the  gates.  Under 
cover  of  darkness  they  slew  the  whole  of  the  army  :  the  Pandu 
princes  and  Krishna,  happening  to  be  stationed  outside  the 
camp,  alone  escaped.  These  three  then  return  to  Duryodhana, 
and  tell  him  what  they  had  done.  Hearing  their  narrative,  his 
spirit  revived  for  a  moment ;  he  thanked  them,  bade  them  fare- 
well, and  expired. 

The  funeral  obsequies  of  this  chief  are  performed,  and 
Yudhishthirais  installed  as  King  of  Hastinapur.  But  he  is  most 
unhappy  as  he  thinks  of  the  great  slaughter  that  has  taken  place. 
Acting  on  Krishna's  advice,  he  and  his  brothers  visit  Bhishma, 
who  was  still  lingering  on  his  "  spiky  bed."  For  fifty-eight  nights 
he  had  lain  there,  and  ere  his  departure  gave  utterance  to  a 
series  of  most  lengthy  didactic  discourses,  after  which  his  spirit 
ascended  to  the  skies. 

As  Yudhishthira  was  entering  the  capital  in  triumph,  an 
incident  occurred  to  lessen  his  joy  in  victory.  A  Rakshas 
named  Charvaka,  disguised  as  a  Brahman,  met  him  and  re- 
proached him  for  the  slaughter  he  had  caused;  but  the 
Brahmans,  discovering  the  imposture,  consumed  the  Rakshas 
to  ashes  witli  the  fire  of  their  eyes.  Yet  even  now  the  spirit 
<>f  the  king  is  not  at  rest.  He  therefore,  after  a  little  time, 
resigns  his  kingdom,  and,  together  with  his  brothers  and 
Draupadi,  starts  on  his  journey  towards  Indra's  heaven  on  Mount 
Meru. 


The  Demigods  of  the  Mahabharata.         357 


"  When  the  four  brothers  knew  the  high  resolve  of  King  Yudhishthira, 
Forthwith  with  Draupadi  they  issued  forth,  and  after  them  a  dog 
Followed  ;  the  king  himself  went  out  the  seventh  from  the  royal  city, 
And  all  the  citizens  and  women  of  the  palace  walked  behind  ; 
But  none  could  find  it  in  their  heart  to  say  unto  the  king,  '  Return.' 
And  so  at  length  the  train  of  citizens  went  back,  bidding  adieu." 

These  went,  "  bent  on  abandonment  of  worldly  things  ;  their 
hearts  yearning  for  union  with  the  Infinite."  In  their  journey 
they  reach  the  sea,  and  there  Arjuna  cast  away  his  bow  and  quiver. 
At  last  they  came  in  sight  of  Mount  Meru,  and  Draupadi  "lost 
hold  of  her  high  hope,  and  faltering  fell  upon  the  earth."  One 
by  one  the  others  fall,  until  only  Yudhishthira,  Bhlma,  and  the  dog 
are  left.  Bhlma  cannot  understand  why  such  pure  beings  should 
die  :  when  his  brother  informs  him  that  Draupadi's  fall  was  the 
result  of  her  excessive  affection  for  Arjuna  ;  that  Sahadeva's  death 
was  the  result  of  pride  in  his  own  knowledge  ;  that  Nakula's 
personal  vanity  was  his  ruin,  and  that  Arjuna's  fault  was  a 
boastful  confidence  in  his  power  to  destroy  his  foes.  Bhlma 
now  falls,  and  is  told  that  the  reason  of  his  death  is  his 
selfishness,  pride,  and  too  great  love  of  enjoyment.  Yudhishthira, 
left  alone  with  the  dog,  is  walking  on : 

"  When,  with  a  sudden  sound  that    rang   through  earth  and  heaven,  the 
mighty  god 
Came  towards  him  in  a  chariot,  and  he  cried,  '  Ascend,  O  resolute  prince.' 
Then  did  the  king  look  back  upon  his  fallen  brothers,  and  addressed 
These  words  unto  the  Thousand-eyed  in  anguish  :  '  Let  my  brothers  here 
Come  with  me.     Without  them,  O  god  of  gods,  I  could  not  wish  to  enter 
E'en  heaven  ;  and  yonder  tender  princess  Draupadi,  the  faithful  wife, 
Worthy  of  endless  bliss,  let  her  come  too.     In  mercy  hear  my  prayer. 


>  11 


Indra  informs  him  that  the  spirits  of  Draupadi  and  his  brothers 
are  already  in  heaven,  but  that  he  alone  is  permitted  to  enter 
heaven  in  bodily  form.  The  king  asks  that  the  dog  may 
accompany  him.  But  as  this  is  refused,  he  declines  to  go  alone. 
Indra  says  :  "  You  have  abandoned  your  brothers  ;  why  not 
forsake  the  dog  ? ,:  Yudhishthira  replies  :  "  I  had  no  power  to 
bring  them  back  to  life  :  how  can  there  be  abandonment  of  those 
who  no  longer  live  ?  "     It  now  appears  that  the  dog  was  no  other 


3d 


~,S 


The  Inferior  Deities. 


than  his  father  Dharma  in  disguise  ;  who,  assuming  his  proper 
form,  enters  heaven  with  him. 

On  entering  heaven,  though  Duryodhana  and  his  cousins  are 
there,  as  he  does  not  see  Arjuna  and  the  rest,  he  declines  to 
remain  without  them.  An  angel  accompanies  him  to.  the  hell 
where  they  are  supposed  to  be,  and  he  there  hears  their  voices 
calling  upon  him  for  help.  He  therefore  bids  the  angel  depart, 
preferring  rather  to  suffer  with  his  brethren  than  to  be  in  heaven 
without  them.  As  soon  as  his  resolution  is  taken,  the  scene 
suddenly  changes,  and  it  appears  that  this  was  simply  a  trial  of 
his  faith.  He  bathes  in  the  heavenly  Ganges,  and  in  heaven, 
with  "  Draupadi  and  his  brothers,  he  finds  the  rest  and  happiness 
that  were  unattainable  on  earth." 


(     359     ) 


CHAPTER   V. 

THE  PLANETS. 

"  At  the  great  festivals  of  the  Hindus  a  small  offering  is  made 
to  all  the  planets  at  once  ;  but,  excepting  on  these  occasions, 
they  are  never  worshipped  together.  They  are,  however,  frequently 
worshipped  separately  by  the  sick  or  unfortunate  who  suppose 
themselves  to  be  under  the  baneful  influence  of  one  or  other  of 
them.  At  these  times  they  are  worshipped  one  after  the  other 
in  regular  succession."  *  Seven  of  the  planets  give  names  to 
the  days  of  the  week  ;  the  other  two  represent  the  ascending 
and  descending  nodes.  Surya  and  Chandra  (Soma)  have 
already  ,been  noticed  at  length  amongst  the  Vedic  Deities  ;  they 
are  again  described  briefly  along  with  the  planets,  under  the 
names  they  bear  in  this  connexion. 

"  To  Surya  or  Ravi  are  offered  in  the  burnt  sacrifice  small 
pieces  of  the  shrub  arka  (Asc/epias  giganticd)  ;  to  Chandra  those 
of  the  paldsa  {Butea  frondosd)  ;  to  Mangala  (Mars)  those  of  the 
khudiru  {Mimosa  catec/m)  ;  to  Budha  (Mercury)  those  of  the 
aparmarga  (AcJiryranthes  asperd)  ;  to  Vrihaspati  (Jupiter)  those 
of  asvattha  (Ficus  religiosd)  ;  to  Sukra  (Venus)  those  of  the  urum- 
bara ;  to  Sani  (Saturn)  those  of  the  Sami  {Mimosa  albidd) 
to  Rahu  (the  ascending  node)  blades  of  Durva  grass  ;  and  to 
Ketu  (the  descending  node)  blades  of  K?isa  grass."  f 

"  The  image  of  Surya  is  a  round  piece  of  mixed  metal,  twelve 
fingers  in  diameter ;  of  Chandra,  a  piece  like  a  half-moon,  a 
cubit  from  end  to  end  ;  of  Mangala,  a  triangular  piece  six  fingers 

*  Ward,  ii.  70.  t  Ibid. 


^»6o  The  Inferior  Deities. 


in  width  ;  of  Budha,  a  golden  bow  two  fingers  in  breadth  ;  of 
Vrihaspati,  a  piece  like  a  lotus  ;  of  Sukra,  a  square  piece  of 
silver  ;  of  Sani,  an  iron  scimitar ;  of  Rahu,  an  iron  makara 
(a  fabulous  animal,  half  stag  and  half  fish)  ;  and  of  Ketu,  an  iron 
snake."* 

i.  Ravi  (the  Sun),  hence  Ravibara  (Sunday),  is  the  son  of 
Kasyapa  and  Aditi.  Though  as  Surya  he  is  daily  worshipped, 
as  Ravi  he  is  only  worshipped  at  the  greater  festivals.  "  The 
1  Jyotish-tatwa,'  a  great  work  on  astrology,  says  that  if  a  person 
is  born  under  the  planet  Ravi,  he  will  possess  an  anxious  mind, 
be  subject  to  disease  and  other  sufferings,  be  an  exile,  a  prisoner, 
and  suffer  the  loss  of  wife,  children,  and  property."  f 

2.  Chandra  or  Soma,  hence  Somavara  (Monday).  "  If  a 
person  be  born  under  the  planet  Soma,  he  will  have  many  friends  ; 
will  possess  elephants,  horses,  and  palanquins  ;  be  honourable 
and  powerful  ;  will  live  upon  excellent  food,  and  rest  on  superb 
couches."  A  race  of  kings  are  said  to  be  the  descendants  of 
Soma,  by  his  wife  Rohini  (the  Hyades),  who  are  called  the 
children  of  the  moon. 

3.  Mangala,  hence  Mangalavara  (Tuesday),  is  represented  as 
a  red  man  with  four  arms  riding  on  a  sheep  ;  he  wears  a  red 
necklace  and  clothes  of  the  same  colour.  "  If  a  person  be  born 
under  the  planet  Mangala,  he  will  be  full  of  anxious  thoughts, 
wounded  with  offensive  weapons,  imprisoned,  oppressed  with 
fear  of  robbers,  fire,  &c,  and  will  lose  his  lands,  trees,  and  good 
name."     This  deity  is  identical  with  Kartikeya. 

4.  BUDHA,J  hence  Budhavara  (Wednesday),  was  the  son  of 
Soma  by  Tara,  the  wife  of  Vrihaspati,  the  preceptor  of  the  gods. 
At  his  birth,  on  the  confession  of  his  mother  that  he  was  Soma's 
son,  her  husband  reduced  her  to  ashes.  Brahma  afterwards 
raised  her  to  life,  and,  being  purified  by  the  fire,  her  husband 
received  her  back.  Samudra  (the  Sea),  incensed  at  his  son  for 
the  great  crime  of  dishonouring  his  preceptor's  wife,  disinherited 


Ward,  ii.  71.  f  Page  72. 

This  Budha  must  not  be  confounded  with  Buddha,  the  Incarnation  of 
Vishnu. 


The  Planets.  -;6i 


him  ;  but,  owing  to  his  sister  *  Lakshmi's  influence,  part  of  his 
sin  was  removed,  and  he  became  bright  as  the  moon  when  three 
days  old  ;  and,  through  her  intercession  with  Parvati,  he  was 
restored  to  heaven,  by  being  placed  on  Siva's  forehead,  who,  thus 
ornamented,  went  to  a  feast  of  the  gods.  Vrihaspati  on  seeing 
Chandra  again  in  heaven  was  greatly  incensed,  but  was  appeased 
on  Brahma's  declaring  that  the  lascivious  god  should  be  excluded 
from  heaven  and  placed  amongst  the  stars  ;  and  that  the  sin 
which  had  obscured  his  glory  should  remain  for  ever.  "  If  a 
person  be  born  under  the  planet  Budha,  he  will  be  fortunate, 
obtain  an  excellent  wife,"  &c. 

5.  VRIHASPATI,  hence  Vrihaspativara  (Thursday),  was  the 
preceptor  of  the  gods,  and  is  regarded  as  identical  with  Agni,  as 
almost  the  same  epithets  are  applied  to  both  in  the  Vedic  hymns. 
In  later  times  he  is  said  to  be  a  Rishi,  a  son  of  Angiras.  "  If  a 
person  be  born  under  this  planet,  he  will  be  endowed  with  an 
amiable  disposition,  possess  palaces,  gardens,  lands,  and  be  rich 
in  money  and  corn.  He  will  possess  much  religious  merit,  and 
have  all  his  wishes  gratified.  Brahmans,  however,  will  not  be  so 
fortunate  as  those  of  other  castes,  for  Vrihaspati  being  a  Brahman 
does  not  wish  to  exalt  those  of  his  own  caste." 

6.  SUKRA,  hence  Sukravara  (Friday),  was  the  son  of  Bhrigu. 
He  was  the  preceptor  and  priest  of  the  demons,  and  blind  in  one 
eye.  The  reason  of  this  affliction  is  told  in  the  following  legend  : 
When  Vishnu,  in  the  Dwarf  Incarnation,  went  to  Bali,  King  of 
the  Daityas,  to  solicit  a  blessing,  Sukra,  as  Bali's  preceptor, 
forbade  the  king  to  give  him  anything.  The  king  being  de- 
termined to  give  what  was  asked,  it  was  the  duty  of  the  priest 
to  read  the  customary  formula  and  to  pour  out  water  from  a 
vessel  as  a  ratification  of  the  gift.  Sukra,  anxious  to  prevent  his 
master  from  giving  what  was  asked,  as  he  foresaw  that  it  would 
prove  his  ruin,  entered  the  water  in  an  invisible  form,  and  by  his 
magical  powers  prevented  it  from  falling.  Vishnu,  aware  of  the 
device,  put  a  straw  into  the  vessel,  which,  entering  Sukra's  eye, 


*  Soma  (the  Moon)  and  Lakshmi  were  produced  together  at  the  churning 
of  the  ocean.  / 


^62  The  Inferior  Deities. 


o-ave  him  so  much  pain  that  he  could  remain  there  no  longer  ; 
so  the  water  fell,  the  gift  was  ratified,  and  Sukra  lost  an  eye. 
"  If  a  person  be  born  under  the  planet  Sukra,  he  will  have  the 
faculty  of  knowing  things  past,  present,  and  future.  He  will 
have  many  wives,  a  kingly  umbrella  (an  emblem  of  royalty),  and 
other  kings  will  worship  him." 

Sukra  is  said  to  have  possessed  the  power  of  raising  the  dead, 
as  the  following  legend*  shows: — Devajani,  the  daughter  of  Sukra, 
was  deeply  in  love  with  Kacha,  the  son  of  Vrihaspati  and  a 
pupil  of  her  father,  who  had  been  sent  to  Sukra  for  the  express 
purpose  of  learning  from  him  the  incantation  for  raising  the  dead. 
One  day  Devajani  sent  Kacha  to  gather  flowers  from  a  wood 
belonging  to  some  giants,  who  had  on  previous  occasions  eaten 
him  ;  but  Sukra,  by  the  above  incantation,  had  restored  him  to 
life.  The  giants  now  resolved  to  make  Sukra  himself  eat  the 
boy  ;  for  which  purpose,  when  they  caught  him  in  the  forest, 
they  cut  him  into  small  pieces,  boiled  him  in  spirits,  and  invited 
Sukra  to  an  entertainment.  As  Kacha  did  not  return  with  the 
flowers,  Devajani  with  many  tears  told  her  father  that,  if  he  did 
not  restore  her  lover,  she  would  certainly  destroy  herself.  Sukra 
learned  by  the  power  of  meditation  that  he  had  eaten  the  boy  ; 
but  did  not  know  how  to  restore  him  to  life,  without  the  attempt 
being  fatal  to  himself.  At  length,  whilst  the  boy  was  in  his 
stomach,  he  restored  him  to  life,  and  then  taught  him  the 
incantation  he  was  so  wishful  to  learn.  Kacha,  tearing  open 
Sukra's  stomach,  came  forth,  and  immediately  using  the  wonder- 
ful incantation  restored  his  teacher  to  life. 

7.  Sani,  hence  Sanivara  (Saturday),  is  said  to  be  the  son  of 
Surya,  and  Chhaya,  the  servant  whom  his  wife  Savarna  sub- 
stituted for  herself ;  or,  according  to  other  accounts,  he  sprang 
from  Balarama  and  Revati.  He  is  represented  as  a  black  man, 
clothed  in  black  garments,  riding  on  a  vulture,  with  four  arms. 
'  If  a  person  be  born  under  the  planet  Sani,  he  will  be  slandered, 
his  riches  dissipated,  his  son,  wife,  and  friends  destroyed  ;  he  will 
live  at  variance  with  others  and  endure  many  sufferings."     Many 

*  Ward,  ii.  71. 


The  Planets.  363 


stories  are  told  of  his  evil  influence,  consequently  the  Hindus  are 
under  fear  of  evil  from  this  planet.  It  was  Sani  who  was  said  to 
have  burnt  off  Ganesa's  head. 

8.  Rahu  (the  ascending  node)  was  the  son  of  Vrihaspati  and 
Sinhika.  He  is  described  as  a  black  man,  riding  on  a  lion.  "  If 
a  person  be  born  under  the  planet  Rahu,  his  wisdom,  riches,  and 
children  will  be  destroyed  ;  he  will  be  exposed  to  many  afflictions 
and  be  subject  to  his  enemies."  According  to  the  popular  notions 
of  the  Hindus,  at  the  time  of  an  eclipse  Rahu  devours  the  sun 
and  moon  ;  hence,  as  soon  as  an  eclipse  is  noticed,  the  people 
make  a  dreadful  noise,  shouting,  blowing  horns,  and  beating 
drums,  to  cause  Rahu  to  restore  these  luminaries.  The  reason 
of  this  custom  is  probably  found  in  the  following  story  : — Rahu 
was  originally  an  Asura  or  giant,  who  took  his  present  form  at 
the  churning  of  the  sea.  When  the  gods  and  demons  churned 
the  ocean,  Surya  and  Chandra,  who  were  sitting  together,  hinted 
to  Vishnu,  when  the  Amrita  appeared,  that  one  of  the  demons 
had  tasted  it.  Vishnu  immediately  cut  off  the  head  of  the 
offender ;  but  as  he  had  drunk  of  the  water  of  life,  neither  head 
nor  trunk  could  perish.  The  head,  taking  the  name  of  Rahu, 
and  the  trunk,  that  of  Ketu,  were  placed  in  heaven  as  the 
ascending  and  descending  nodes,  and  leave  was  granted,  as  a 
means  of  revenge  on  Surya  and  Chandra,  that  on  certain 
occasions  Rahu  should  approach  these  gods  and  render  them 
unclean,  so  that  their  bodies  at  these  times  become  thin  and 
black.* 


*  Ward,  ii.  Si. 


The  Inferior  Deities. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

THE  ASURAS. 

I  N  the  Puranas  and  other  of  the  later  writings  of  the  Hindus, 

and    also   in    the    popular  mind,   the  Asuras   are  powerful  evil 

beings  ;  in  translations  the  word  is  represented  by  such  terms  as 

demons,  giants,  &C.     As  the  Suras*  were  the  gods,  the  A-suras 

were  not -gods,   and  therefore  the  enemies  or  opponents  of  the 

In  the  Vedas  the  name  Asura  is  applied  more  frequently 

the  gods  themselves  than  to  their  enemies,  whilst  it  is  also 

i  wry  much  in  the  same  manner  as  in  the  later  writings.     In 

the    Rig-Veda,  Varuna  is  accosted  as  follows  : — "  King  Varuna 

has  made  a  highway  for  the  sun  to  go  over.     O  thou  wise  Asura 

and  king,  loosen  our  sins!'      Again:  "The  all-knowing  Asura 

tablished  the  heavens,  and  fixed  the  limits  of  the  earth.     He 

the  supreme  ruler  of  all  worlds.     These  are  the  works  of 

Varuna."    "Asura  stands   for  the   Supreme   Spirit,"  in  another 

and    "also    as  an  appellative  for  Prajapati  or  creation's 

l<>rd."      Again  and  again  Varuna  alone,  and  also  in  conjunction 

with  Mitra,  is  called  an  Asura.    "All  the  Vedic  ^ods  have  shared 

same  title,   not    excepting   even  goddesses."     "  Varuna  was 

all-knowing  Asura,   Prajapati    the  Supreme   Being;    Indra, 

M.irut  .  Tvastri,  Mitra,  Rudra,  Agni,  Vayu,  Pushan,  Savitri, 

Parjanya,  tin-  sacrificial  priests,  were  all  Asuras.     In  fine,  Deva 

>d)  and   Asura  were  synonymous  expressions  in  a  multitude 


inally  the  Shims  were  .1  H.iss  of  inferior  deities   connected  with 
the  t(  nn  was  <  mployed  t<>  signify  the  gods  generally. 
t  !"•  Banerjea, '  Bengal  Mag.,' April  1H80.  J  Ibid. 


The  Asuras.  365 


On  the  other  hand,  in  the  Rig- Veda,  Indra  is  the  destroyer  of 
Asuras.  "  The  same  Veda  which  speaks  of  the  Asuras  as 
celestial  beings  supplies  its  readers  also  with  the  Mantras,  by 
means  of  which  Devas  overcame  Asuras.  The  texts  which  are 
condemnatory  of  the  Asuras  as  impure  and  ungodly  are  far  less 
in  number  than  those  which  recognise  the  term  as  applicable  to 
gods  and  priests."  Dr.  Banerjea,  in  the  most  interesting  and 
ingenious  article  from  which  the  above  extracts  are  made, 
suggests  a  means  of  reconciling  these  contradictory  uses  of  the 
word  "  Asura."  Before  the  Indo-Aryans  arrived  in  India,  they 
had  lived  in  close  proximity  to  the  Persians,  the  original  wor- 
shippers of  fire.  "What  could  be  more  natural,"  he  asks,  "than 
that  the  Asura-Pracheta,  or  Asura-Viswaveda  of  the  one  branch, 
was  but  the  translation  of  the  Ahura- Mazda  (the  Wise  Lord, 
according  to  the  '  Zend-Avesta ')  of  the  other  branch  ;  and  that 
the  word  '  Ahura,'  which  the  one  used  in  a  divine  sense,  would 
become  a  household  word  in  the  other  branch,  in  the  same 
sense  ;  "  the  word  "  Ahura  "  being  changed  into  "  Asura,"  in  a  way 
common  to  many  other  words.  He  then  goes  on  to  say,  that  as 
"Assur"  was  the  term  used  in  Assyria  for  the  Supreme  Lord, 
and  the  Assyrians  were  for  some  time  the  rulers  of  the  Persians, 
it  was  natural  that  this  word  should  find  its  way  into  Persia  ;  the 
only  change  being  this,  that  the  Persians  added  Mazda  (wise  or 
good)  to  the  term  "Assur,"  and  the  Indo-Aryans  received  it  from 
them.     So  much  for  the  good  use  of  the  term  "  Asura." 

But  the  word  "Assur"  was  not  only  used  for  the  Supreme 
Lord,  it  also  represented  the  Assyrian  nation,  his  worshippers, 
who  were  most  cruel  in  their  treatment  of  their  foes  ;  and  as, 
later  on,  the  bitterest  hatred  is  known  to  have  existed  between 
the  Indo-Aryans  and  the  Persians,  the  followers  of  Ahura-Mazda, 
Dr.  Banerjea  concludes  that  owing  to  the  cruelties  perpetrated 
by  the  Assyrians  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  hatred  cherished 
towards  them  by  the  Persians  on  the  other,  the  branch  of  the 
Aryan  family  that  migrated  into  India  brought  with  them  very 
bitter  feelings  towards  Assur  (the  Assyrian  people)  and  Ahuri 
(the  belongings  of  Ahura);  and  thus  the  term  "Asura,"  which  at 
one  time  was  considered  a  becoming  epithet  for  the  Supreme 


,6  Tin:  Inferior  Deities. 


B  tag,  became  descriptive  only  of  those  who  were  the  enemies 

of  the  gods. 

Whatever  be  the  cause  of  it,  there  is  no  doubt  that  at  the 
present  ddv,  and  throughout  the  later  writings  of  the  Hindus,  the 
term  "  Asura  '  is  used  only  for  the  enemies  of  the  gods.  In 
the  '  raittirya  Sanhita'*  we  read  "that  the  gods  and  Asuras 

ntended  together,  and  that  the  former,  being  less  numerous 
than  the  latter,  took  some  bricks,  and  placing  them  in  a 
proper  position  to  receive  the  sacrificial  fire,  with  the  formula, 
•Thou  art  a  multiplier,' they  became  numerous."  In  the  '  Sata- 
patha  Brahmana't  it  is  said  that  "the  gods  and  Asuras,  both 
descendants  of  Prajapati,^  obtained  their  father's  inheritance, 
truth  and  falsehood.  The  gods,  abandoning  falsehood,  adopted 
truth  ;  the  Asuras,  abandoning  truth,  adopted  falsehood.  Speak- 
ing truth  exclusively,  the  gods  became  weaker,  but  in  the  end 
became  prosperous  ;  the  Asuras,  speaking  falsehood  exclusively, 
became  rich,  but  in  the  end  succumbed."  The  gods  tried  to 
sacrifice,  but  though  interrupted  at  first  by  the  Asuras,  at  length 
succeed,  and  so  became  superior  to  the  Asuras.  Another  legend 
in  the  same  book  teaches  that  the  Asuras,  when  offering  sacrifices, 
placed  the  oblations  in  their  own  mouths,  whilst  the  gods 
gave  their  oblations  to  each  other  ;  at  length  Prajapati  giving 
himself  to  them,  sacrifice,  which  supplies  the  gods  with  food, 
became  theirs. 

Although  there  were  frequent  wars  between  the  gods  and 
Asuras,  the  Suras  were  not  averse  to  receive  the  aid  of  the. 
Asuras  at  the  churning  of  the  ocean;  and  some  of  the  Asuras 
were  not  inferior  in  power  and  skill  to  the  gods.  Bali,  one  of 
their  number,  is  worshipped  by  the  Hindus  on  their  birthday; 
and  Jalandhara  conquered  in  battle  even  Vishnu  himself;  Indra 
and  the  other  gods  fled  before  him,  and  Siva,  unaided,  could  not 
troy  hiin.  Rahu  is  an  Asura,  and  it  was  to  destroy  some  of 
these  mighty  beings  who  distressed  the  gods,  that  Durga  and 


I  '•  S.    I'.,  v.   15.  f    Ibid.  iv.  60. 

'  lhabharata  says  the  Asuras  were  the  elder,  the  gods  the  younger, 


The  Asuras — Jalandhara.  367 


Kali  had  to  put  forth  their  strength.  In  the  constant  wars 
between  these  rivals,  Sukra,  the  preceptor  of  the  Asuras,  was 
frequently  called  to  resuscitate  the  fallen.  The  following  story 
of  Jalandhara  from  the  Uttara  Khanda  of  the  '  Padma  Purana'* 
will  illustrate  the  teaching  of  the  later  Hindu  Scriptures 
respecting  the  Asuras. 

JALANDHARA. 

The  story  of  Jalandhara's  birth  and  life  was  narrated  by 
Narada  to  the  Pandavas  to  encourage  them  when  they  were  in 
distress  on  account  of  their  misfortunes.  He  reminds  them 
that  adversity  and  prosperity  come  to  all  :  Rahu,  who  swallows 
the  sun,  is  the  same  Rahu  whose  head  was  severed  from  his 
body  by  Vishnu  ;  and  the  valiant  Jalandhara,  the  son  of  the 
Ocean  and  the  river  Ganges,  who  on  one  occasion  conquered 
Vishnu,  was  himself  slain  by  Siva.  The  mention  of  this  fact 
excites  the  curiosity  of  his  hearers ;  and  in  answer  to  their 
inquiry  about  him,  Narada  gives  the  following  history. 

Indra  and  the  other  gods,  arriving  at  Siva's  home  on  Mount 
Kailasa  to  pay  him  a  visit,  informed  the  bull  Nandi,  the  chief 
of  Siva's  attendants,  that  they  had  come  to  amuse  his  master 
with  song  and  dance.  Siva  invites  them  to  enter,  and,  being 
delighted  with  their  music,  tells  Indra  to  ask  a  boon,  who,  in  a 
defiant  tone,  asks  that  he  might  be  in  battle  a  warrior  like  Siva 
himself.  The  boon  is  granted,  and  the  gods  depart.  No  sooner 
have  they  left  than  Siva  asks  his  attendants  if  they  had  not 
noticed  Indra's  haughty  tone,  when  immediately  there  stood 
before  him  a  form  of  anger,  black  as  darkness,  who  said  to  Siva, 
"  Give  me  thy  similitude,  and  then  what  can  I  do  for  you  ?  " 
Siva  tells  him  to  incorporate  himself  with  the  river  of  heaven 
(Ganga),  form  a  union  between  her  and  the  Ocean,  and  conquer 
Indra. 

In  obedience  to  Siva's  command,  Ganga  left  the  skies,  and 
becoming  united  to  the  Ocean,  from  them  a  son  proceeded,  at 

*  Kennedy,  '  Hindu  Myth.,'  p.  456. 


18  The   Inferior  Deities. 


whose  birth  the  earth  trembled  and  wept,  and  the  three  worlds 

inded  with  noise.     Brahma  coming  to  inquire  the  cause  of 

this  commotion,  and  asking  to  see  the  child,  Ganga  lays  it  in  his 

lap.  when  it  seized    his  head,  and  would  not    loose  it  until  its 

ther  opened  its  hand.       Brahma,  admiring  the  child's  strength, 

id,  "  From  his  holding  so  firmly,  let  him  be  named  Jaland- 
hara,"  and  bestowed  upon  him  this  boon,  that  he  "should  be 
unconquered  by  the  gods  and  enjoy  the  three  worlds." 

falandhara's  boyhood  was  full  of  wonders.  Borne  up  by  the 
wind,  he  flew  over  the  ocean  ;  his  pets  were  lions  which  he  had 

mght  ;  and  the  largest  birds  and  fishes  were  subject  to  him. 
When  he  grew  up  to  manhood,  at  Sukra's  request,  his  father 
withdrew  the  sea  from  Jambadwipa,  the  residence  of  holy  men, 
which  became  his  home,  and  bearing  his  name  has  become 
celebrated.*  Maya,  the  architect  of  the  Asuras,  there  built  him 
a  beautiful  city,  his  father  installed  him  as  king,  and  Sukra  gave 
him  the  charm  by  which  he  could  raise  the  dead  to  life.  He 
married  Vrinda,  the  daughter  of  an  Apsaras  named  Swarna,  and 
-m  after  his  wedding  made  war  upon  the  gods. 

In  order  t<>  lead  to  a  conflict,  he  sent  a  messenger  to  Indra, 
whom  lie  found  "surrounded  by  three  hundred  and  thirty-three 
millions  of  deities,"  to  demand  the  restoration  of  the  moon,  the 
Amrita,  elephant,  horse,  gem,  tree,  and  other  things  of  which  he 
-iid   Indra  had  robbed  him,  at  the  churning  of  his  uncle,  the  Sea 

Milk  ;  and  also  to  resign  Swarga.  As  Indra  refuses  to  accede 
to  this  request,  Jalandhara  raises  an  army  of  warriors  having  the 
heads  of  horses,  elephants,  camels,  cats,  tigers,  and  lions,  with 
which    Indra's  abode  is    soon    surrounded.      The  crods    in    their 

tremity  resort  to  Vishnu  for  aid. 

mi   Vishnu's   arrival   the   battle    commences.     Multitudes  are 

lain  on   both   sides,  but   the  gods,  when  wounded,  resort  to  the 

mountains,  where  they  find  herbs  which  quickly  restore  them. 

At     length    the   greater   gods    and    the    leaders   of   the    Daityas 

nally  engage;  when    Indra  falls  insensible,  Rudra  is  taken 

prisoner,  and   Kuvera  Is  laid  low  bv  a  blow  of  a  mace.     After 


The  present  Jullunder. 


The  Asuras — Jalandhara.  369 

this,  the  tide  turns  in  favour  of  the  gods.  When  Indra  struck 
Bali,  the  most  costly  gems  dropped  from  his  mouth  ;  he  therefore 
asked  for  his  body,  and  with  his  thunderbolt  cut  it  into  many 
parts.  "  From  the  purity  of  his  actions,  the  parts  of  his  body 
became  the  germs  of  the  various  gems.  From  his  bones  came 
diamonds,  from  his  eyes  sapphires,  from  his  blood  rubies,  from 
his  marrow  emeralds,  from  his  flesh  crystals,  from  his  tongue 
coral,  and  from  his  teeth  pearls." 

Indra  being  in  his  turn  attacked  by  Jalandhara,  Vishnu  comes 
to  the  rescue  ;  and  though  the  Asuras  attack  him  in  immense 
numbers,  and  the  sky  is  dark  with  their  arrows,  Vishnu  over- 
throws them  as  if  they  were  leaves.  One  of  their  number,  named 
Shailaroma,  losing  his  head,  seized  hold  of  Garuda,  when 
immediately  the  severed  head  rejoined  his  body  ;  Garuda  seeing 
this  wonderful  event,  flew  off  with  his  master.  Jalandhara  was 
prevented  from  following  him  far,  as  he  had  to  call  in  the  aid  of 
Sukra  to  restore  his  warriors  to  life. 

Hearing  that  the  soldiers  of  the  gods  were  also  restored  to  life 
through  using  herbs  obtained  from  an  island  called  Drona, 
situated  in  the  Sea  of  Milk,  he  asked  his  uncle  to  submerge  it. 
Being  deprived  of  this  means  of  restoration,  they  appealed  to 
Vishnu,  who,  attacking  Jalandhara,  was  laid  low  by  the  Daitya, 
and  would  have  been  slain  but  for  Lakshmi's  intercession  with 
her  cousin.  In  return  for  his  life  Vishnu  promised  to  remain  near 
the  Sea  of  Milk.  Jalandhara,  having  now  conquered  the  gods, 
enjoyed  peace  and  happiness. 

The  gods,  however,  being  expelled  from  heaven,  and  deprived 
of  sacrifices  and  the  Amrita,  did  not  long  remain  contented  with 
their  lot.  They  went  together  to  Brahma,  who  conducted  them 
to  Siva,  whom  they  found  "  seated  on  a  throne  and  attended  by 
myriads  of  devoted  servants,  naked,  deformed,  curly-haired, 
with  matted  locks  and  covered  with  dust."  On  Brahma  stating 
the  case  for  the  gods,  Siva  declared  that,  if  Vishnu  had  been 
unsuccessful  in  fighting  the  demon,  it  was  impossible  that  he 
alone  could  overcome  him  ;  he,  therefore,  advised  that  the  gods 
should  unite  to  form  a  weapon  by  which  their  common  enemy 
might  be  destroyed.     Acting  on  this  advice,  the  gods,  glowing 

2   B 


70  The  Inferior  Deities. 


with  anerer  darted  forth  volumes  of  flames,  to  which  Siva  added 
the  consuming  beams  of  his  third  eye.  Vishnu,  too,  when  sum- 
moned, added  his  flame  of  anger,  and  asked  Siva  to  destroy 
the  Daitya,  excusing  himself  from  the  task  on  the  ground  that 
falandhara  was  a  relative  of  Lakshmi.  Visvakarma  and  the 
deities  were  alarmed  as  they  saw  the  glowing  mass  ;  but  Siva, 
placing  his  heel  on  it,  whirled  round  with  it,  and  formed  it  into 
the  discus,  called  Sudarsana,  which  sent  forth  such  fiery  beams 
that  the  srods  cried  out  "Preserve  us."  Brahma's  beard  was 
scorched  as  he  took  it  into  his  hand, — "such  is  the  result  of 
♦  •tiering  a  gift  to  a  blockhead  ;  "  but  Siva  hid  it  under  his  arm. 

Narada  informed  Jalandhara  of  the  intended  attack  of  Siva, 
and,  enlarging  on  Parvati's  beauty,  excited  him  to  attack  her 
husband  that  he  might  win  her.  With  this  object  he  sent  Rahu 
as  an  ambassador,  to  summon  Siva  to  submission.  On  his  arrival 
at  the  court  the  envoy  delivered  his  master's  message  to  Siva, 
in  the  form  of  Panchanana,  who  did  not  deign  to  speak  ;  but  the 
snake  Vasuki,  falling  to  the  ground  from  his  hair,  began  to  eat 
s  rat.  Seeing  this,  Kartikeya's  peacock  made  such  an 
awful  noise  that  the  snake  disgorged  the  rat  and  returned  to 
his  proper  place.  Lakshmi  then  entered  the  assembly  with  a 
1  of  Amrita,  with  which  she  resuscitated  Brahma's  fifth  head 
that  was  in  Siva's  hand  ;  the  head  rolling  on  the  ground  uttered 
most  boastful  language,  until  myriads  of  hideous  forms  from 
Siva's  locks  quieted  it.  Rahu,  seeing  all  this,  asked  Siva  to  for- 
sake his  wife  and  children  and  live  a  mendicant's  life.  At  a  sign 
from  Siva,  Nandi,  the  bull,  showed  him  the  door;  this  was  the 
answer  vouchsafed  to  his  illustrious  master's  demand. 

War  being  determined  on,  Jalandhara  marched  first  to 
Kailasa  ;  but  finding  that  Siva  had  forsaken  it  and  taken  up  a 
position  on  a  mountain  near  Lake  Manasa,  he  surrounded  the 
mountain  with  his  troops.  Nandi  marches  against  them,  and 
spread  destruction  "like  the  waters  of  the  deluge;"  reserves, 
ho  r,  being    brought   up,   the  army  of  the   gods  suffers  loss. 

Parvati,  hearing  that    her  sons,  Ganesa  and  Kartikeya,  are  hardly 
ed,  urged   her  husband  to  go  in   person  and  put  forth   his 
y.    though    not    to   expose   himself  unnecessarily.       Before 


The  Asuras — Jalandhara.  371 

leaving  home,  Siva  carefully  warned  Parvati  to  be  on  her  guard 
during  his  absence,  as  it  was  possible  the  Daitya  in  some 
disguise  might  visit  her  ;  after  this,  accompanied  by  Virabhadra 
and  Manibhadra,  two  forms  of  his  anger,  he  went  to  the  field  of 
battle.  When  the  conflict  between  the  Daityas  and  the  atten- 
dants of  Siva  had  continued  for  some  time,  Jalandhara  devised  a 
plan  by  which  he  hoped  to  succeed  more  easily  than  by  fighting. 
Giving  his  own  form  and  the  command  of  his  troops  to  a 
chief,  the  Daitya  king  assumed  the  form  of  Siva,  changed 
Dunvarana  into  Nandi,  and,  taking  the  heads  of  Ganesa  and 
Kartikeya  under  his  arms,  hastened  to  Siva's  abode.  Seeing 
this,  Parvati  was  overwhelmed  with  grief  ;  but  having  some  doubt 
of  his  being  the  real  Siva,  she  hid  herself  and  would  not  listen 
to  his  overtures  of  love.  To  make  certain  of  his  identity,  she 
caused  one  of  her  attendants  to  assume  her  form  and  visit  the 
Daitya,  who,  returning  with  the  information  that  he  was  not 
the  true  Siva,  Parvati  hid  herself  in  a  lotus,  and  her  companions 
were  changed  into  bees  which  hovered  around  her. 

In  the  meantime  Vishnu  had  been  more  successful  with 
Vrinda,  the  wife  of  Jalandhara.  In  the  guise  of  a  Brahman,  he 
made  a  hermitage  near  her  palace,  and  caused  her  to  dream  that 
she  saw  her  husband's  head  severed  from  his  body,  his  flesh 
eaten  by  wild  animals,  and  his  eyes  plucked  out  by  vultures. 
Distracted  with  this  dream,  in  a  high  fever  she  rushed  into  the 
forest,  where  an  Ogress  met  her,  ate  her  mules,  and  was  about 
to  attack  her,  when  the  Brahman  came  to  her  rescue.  On 
reaching  the  hermitage,  Vishnu  induced  her  to  enter,  changed 
himself  into  the  form  of  her  husband,  and  there  they  lived 
together  for  some  time.  At  length  Vrinda,  seeing  through  the 
disguise,  cursed  Vishnu,  telling  him  that,  as  he  had  wronged 
Jalandhara,  he  would  himself  be  wronged,  and,  having  purified 
herself  from  her  sin,  died.  Her  body  was  burned,  her  mother 
collected  the  ashes,  and  threw  them  into  the  Ganges.  The 
forest  in  which  she  was  burned  has  ever  since  borne  the  name  of 
Vrindavana,*  near  Mount  Govardhana. 

*  Brindaban. 

2    B    2 


-.  -  -> 


The  Inferior  Deities. 


landhara,  hearing  of  his  wife's  deception  and  death,  was 
mad  with  rage  ;  and,  leaving  the  neighbourhood  of  Parvati's 
home,  returned  to  the  field  of  battle.  By  Sukra's  power  his  dead 
he  ..ere  restored  to  life,  and  a  grand  final  charge  was  made. 

length  Siva  and  Jalandhara  personally  fight ;  after  a  desperate 
encounter,  in  which  the  Daitya  employs  various  magical  powers, 
Siva  cut>  off  his  head,  but  it  is  no  sooner  severed  than  it  resumes 

place.        iva  in  his  extremity  summons  to  his  aid  the  female 

or  energies  of  the  gods,  Brahmi,  Vaishnavi.  and  the  rest, 

who  think   up  the  blood  of  the  giant,  and  with  their  aid  Siva 

succeeds  in  destroying  him,  and  the  gods  regain  their  kingdom 

and  \>         si<  >ns. 


0/ J 


CHAPTER  VII. 

SACRED  ANIMALS  AND  BIRDS. 

SOME  of  the  animals  regarded  as  sacred  have  already  been 
mentioned  in  connexion  with  the  deities  to  whom  they  are 
specially  dear,  and  in  whose  worship  they  participate.  They  are 
regarded  as  the  Vahans,  or  vehicles,  upon  which  these  gods  and 
goddesses  travel.  Thus  Indra  rides  upon  the  elephant  Airavata  ; 
Siva  on  the  bull  Nandi ;  Yama  on  a  buffalo  ;  Durga,  as  Sing- 
havahini,  on  a  lion,  as  Durga  on  a  tiger  ;  Agni  on  a  ram  ;  Vayu 
on  an  antelope  ;  Ganesa  on  a  rat,  and  Sasti  on  a  cat.  Virabhadra, 
the  emanation  of  Siva  which  destroyed  Daksha's  sacrifice,  rode 
on  a  dog,  and  Kamadeva  travelled  either  on  the  monster  Makara 
or  a  parrot.  The  jackal  is  regarded  as  a  representative  of  Durga, 
who  in  this  form  assisted  in  preserving  Krishna,  on  the  night 
of  his  birth,  from  Kansa's  anger.  Monkeys,  as  representatives 
of  Hanuman,  are  very  commonly  worshipped  ;  the  dog,  though 
worshipped  by  some,  by  others  is  regarded  as  unclean. 

Amongst  birds,  the  goose  is  the  Vahan  of  Brahma,  the 
peacock  that  of  Kartikeya,  Sani  rides  upon  a  vulture ;  the 
Brahmani  kite  is  said  to  be  a  form  of  Durga,  and  the  Khanjana, 
or  wag-tail,  represents  Vishnu,  because  the  mark  on  its  throat  is 
thought  to  resemble  the  Shalgrama  ;  the  owl,  too,  is  worshipped 
at  the  festivals  of  Kartikeya,  Brahma,  and  Lakshmi.  Garuda, 
the  Vahan  of  Vishnu,  and  Jatayus  and  Sampati,  the  vultures 
who  assisted  Rama,  will  be  described  separately. 

•The  cow,  though  not  regarded  as  the  Vahan  of  any  deity,  is 
worshipped  too.  Brahma  is  said  to  have  created  cows  and 
Brahmans  at  the  same  time ;  the  Brahman  to  officiate  at 
worship,  and  the  cow  to  provide    milk,  ghi,   &c,   as    offerings, 


374 


Tin:  Inferior  Deities. 


whilst  cow-dung    is   necessary  for  various  purifying  ceremonies. 

Regular  worship  of  the  cow  takes  place  yearly,  at  which  similar 

remonies  arc  performed  to  those  which  are  employed  at  the 

rsliip  of  images;  the  horns  and  bodies  of  the  cows  are  painted, 

and  they  are  then  bathed  in  the  rivers.     Some  people  are  said  to 

ship  the  cow  daily. 


GARUDA. 

inula  or  Superna  is  a  mythical  being,   half-man   and  half- 
.    the    Vahan  of  Vishnu.     Though   not   strictly  divine,  he 

appears  frequently  in  all  Vishnu's 
exploits,  and,  being  worshipped 
together  with  his  lord,  it  is  neces- 
sary to  give  some  description  of 
his  birth  and  deeds. 

When  Daksha's  sons  refused 
to  people  the  world,  he  produced 
sixty  daughters,  thirteen  of  whom 
he  gave  to  Kasyapa  the  sage  ;  of 
these,  two  come  into  prominence 
in  connexion  with  Garuda. 
"  Vinata  bore  him  two  celebrated 
sons,  Garuda  and  Aruna :  the 
former,  also  called  Superna,  was 
the  king  of  the  feathered  tribes, 
and  the  remorseless  enemy  of  the 
serpent  race."  Aruna  became 
famous  as  the  charioteer  of  the 
Sun.  "  The  progeny  of  Kadru 
(the  other  sister)  were  a  thousand 
powerful  many-headed  snakes,  of 

mmeasurable    might,    subject    to   Garuda."*     The    mother    of 
aid  t,,   have   laid   an   egg;    hence  her  son  assumed  a 

bird-like  form. 

Another  legend  makes  «  Garuda  the  son  of  Kasyapa  and  Diti. 


. 


*  i 


Vishnu  Purana,'  p.  1 19. 


Garuda.  375 

This  all-prolific  dame  laid  an  egg,  which,  it  was  predicted,  would 
yield  her  a  deliverer  from  some  great  evil.  After  the  lapse  of 
five  hundred  years,  Garuda  sprang  from  the  egg,  flew  to  Indra's 
abode,  extinguished  the  fire  that  surrounded  it,  conquered  its 
guards,  and  bore  off  the  Amrita,  which  enabled  him  to  liberate 
his  captive  mother.  A  few  drops  of  the  immortal  beverage 
falling  on  some  Kusa  grass,  it  became  eternally  consecrated  ; 
and  the  serpents  greedily  licking  it,  so  lacerated  their  tongues 
with  the  sharp  grass,  that  they  have  ever  since  remained  forked. 
But  the  boon  of  immortality  was  ensured  to  them  by  their 
partaking  of  the  Amrita."  *  "  As  soon  as  Garuda  was  born,  his 
body  expanded  till  it  touched  the  sky  ;  the  other  animals  were 
terrified.  His  eyes  were  like  the  lightning.  The  mountains" 
were  driven  away  with  the  wind  caused  by  the  flapping  of  his 
wings.  The  rays  which  issued  from  his  body  set  the  four 
quarters  of  the  world  on  fire  ;  the  affrighted  gods  imagining  that 
Garuda  must  be  an  incarnation  of  Agni,  resorted  to  that  deity 
for  protection."  | 

Garuda  is  the  mortal  enemy  of  snakes.  His  mother  Vinata 
quarrelled  with  her  sister,  Kadru,  the  mother  of  the  snakes, 
respecting  the  colour  of  the  horse  that  was  produced  at  the 
churning  of  the  ocean  ;  since  that  time  there  has  been  constant 
enmity  between  their  descendants.  On  the  occasion  of  his 
marriage,  the  serpents,  alarmed  at  the  thought  of  his  having 
children  who  might  destroy  them,  made  a  fierce  attack  on  him  ; 
but  the  result  was  that  he  slew  them  all,  save  one,  which  he  has 
ever  since  worn  as  an  ornament  round  his  neck.  To  this  day 
superstitious  Hindus  repeat  the  name  of  Garuda  three  times 
before  going  to  sleep  at  night,  as  a  safeguard  against  snakes. 

The  following  legend  from  the  Mahabharata  %  gives  the 
accounts  of  his  liberating  his  mother  from  servitude,  and  of  his 
appointment  as  the  Vahan  of  Vishnu.  His  mother,  having  lost 
her  wager  with  her  sister  respecting  the  colour  of  the  sea- 
produced  horse,  was  reduced  to  servitude  to  the  serpents,  who, 
being  anxious  to  become  immortal,  promised  to  liberate  her  on 

*  Moor's  '  Hindu  Pantheon,'  341.         f  Ward,  ii.  200.         %  Ibid.  ii.  201. 


»76  The  Inferior  Deities. 


n  that  her  son  Garuda  should  bring  them  Chandra 
(the  Moon),  whose  bright  spots  arc  filled  with  Amrita.  Before 
irting  on  this  expedition  he  went  to  his  mother  for  food,  who 
advised  him  to  go  to  the  sea-shore  and  gather  whatever  he  could 
find,  but  entreated  him  to  be  most  careful  not  to  eat  a  Brah- 
man ;  adding,  "  Should  you  at  any  time  feel  a  burning  sensa- 
tion in  your  stomach,  be  sure  you  have  eaten  a  Brahman." 

receiving   this    warning,    he   set    off    on    his   journey. 

ing   through   a  country  inhabited   by  fishermen,  he  at  one 

inspiration  drew  in  houses,  trees,  cattle,  men,  and  other  animals. 

it  among  the  inhabitants  swallowed  one  was  a  Brahman,  who 

ised  such  an  intolerable  burning  in  his  stomach  that  Garuda, 

unable  to  bear  it,  called  in  the  greatest  haste  for  him  to  come 

The    Brahman    refused    unless    his    wife,    a   fisherman's 

lighter,  might  accompany  him.     To  this  Garuda  consented. 

I'm. suing  his  journey,  Garuda    met  his  father    Kasyapa    (he 

shines  as  the  Pole  Star),  who  directed  him  to  appease  his  hunger 

.1  certain  lake  where  an  elephant  and  tortoise  were  fighting. 

The  tortoise  was  eighty  miles  long,  and  the  elephant  one  hundred 

and  sixty.     Garuda  with  one  claw  seized  the  elephant,  with  the 

other  the  tortoise,  and  perched  with  them  on  a  tree  eight  hundred 

high.      But  the  tree  was  unable  to  bear  the  ponderous 

weight,  and,  unhappily,  thousands  of  pigmy  Brahmans  were  then 

worshipping  on  one  of  its  branches.     Trembling  lest  he  should 

oy  any  of  them,  he  took  the  bough  in  his  beak,  continuing 

to    hold  the  elephant  and  tortoise  in  his  claws,  and  flew  to  a 

mountain  in  an  uninhabited  country,  where  he  finished  his  repast 

OH  the  tortoise  and  elephant. 

'    iruda  having  surmounted  astonishing  dangers,  at  last  seized 

the   moon    and    concealed    it   under   his  wing.      On   his    return, 

however,  being  attacked  by  Indra  and  the  gods,  he  overcame  all, 

epting   \  ishnu.      Even   Vishnu  was  so  severely  put  to  it  in 

t,    that   he    came  to  terms  with   Garuda,  made  him 

immortal,  and   promised   him   a  higher  seat  than  his  own  ;  while 

pari   Garuda  became  the  Vahan  or  carrier   of  Vishnu. 

n;   Vishnu  rides  upon  Garuda,  while  the  latter,  in  the 

sha]     of  afl  ig,  sits  at  the  top  of  Vishnu's  car. 


Garuda.  377 

In  the  Ramayana  Garuda  is  represented  as  doing  great  service 

to  Rama  and  his  followers,  and  his  powers  and  peculiarities  are 

repeatedly  referred  to.     Thus,  in  the  description  of  Hanuman   it 

is  said,  that 

"  Like  thunderbolt  in  frame  was  he, 
And  swift  as  Garud's  self  could  flee."  * 

In  like  manner  it  is  said  of  two  heroes  : 

"  Sugriva,  offspring  of  the  Sun, 
And  Bali,  Indra's  mighty  one, 
They,  both  endowed  with  Garud's  might, 
And  skilled  in  all  the  arts  of  fight, 
Wandered  in  arms  the  forest  through, 
And  lions  and  snakes  and  tigers  slew."f 

When  Ansuman  found  the  ashes  of  the  sixty  thousand  sons  of 
Sagar,  J  who,  owing  to  Kapila's  curse,  had  been  destroyed,  and 
was  in  distress  because  he  could  obtain  no  water  with  which  to 
offer  oblations  for  the  dead,  he  sees  their  uncle — 

"  King  Garud,  best  beyond  compare, 
Of  birds  who  wing  the  fields  of  air. 
Then  thus  unto  the  weeping  man 
The  son  of  Vinata  began  : 
'  Grieve  not,  O  hero,  for  their  fall, 
Who  died  a  death  approved  of  all.'  "§ 

Garuda  then  tells  Ansuman  that  if  he  can  succeed  in  inducing 
Ganga  to  descend  from  heaven,  and  with  her  streams  to  touch 
these  ashes,  the  dead  shall  return  to  life,  and  finally  ascend  to 
Indra's  heaven. 

In  the  description  of  the  city  of  Ayodha,  when  Rama  had  gone 
into  the  forest,  is  a  reference  to  Garuda's  antipathy  to  snakes  : 

"  The  city  wore 
No  look  of  beauty  as  before — 
Like  a  dull  river  on  a  lake 
By  Garud  robbed  of  every  snake."  || 

In  the  following  lines  is  an  account  of  Garuda's  resting  on  a 

*  Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  i.  94.  f  Ibid.  i.  96.  %  See  Ganga. 

§  Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  i.  186.  ||   Ibid.  ii.  167. 


1 


The  Inferior  Deities. 


tree  when  he  was  carrying  off  the  elephant  and  the  tortoise  as 
narrated  above.  Ravana,  impelled  by  the  accounts  of  Sita's 
beaut}',  goes  to  see  her,  and  on  his  journey 

••  He  saw  a  fig-tree  like  a  cloud, 
With  mighty  branches  earthward  bowed. 
It  stretched  a  hundred  leagues,  and  made 
For  hermit  bands  a  welcome  shade. 
Thither  the  feathered  king  of  yore 
An  elephant  and  tortoise  bore, 
And  lighted  on  a  bough  to  eat 
The  captives  of  his  taloned  feet. 
The  bough,  unable  to  sustain 
The  crushing  weight  and  sudden  strain, 
Loaded  with  sprays  and  leaves  of  spring, 

Gave  way  beneath  the  feathered  king. 

*  *  *  * 

The  feathered  monarch  raised  the  weisrht 

O 

Of  the  huge  bough,  and  bore  away 

The  loosened  load  and  captured  prey. 

*  *  *  * 

His  soul  conceived  the  high  emprise 
To  snatch  the  Amrit  from  the  skies. 
He  rent  the  nets  of  iron  first, 
Then  through  the  jewel  chamber  burst, 
And  bore  the  drink  of  heaven  away 
That  watched  in  Indra's  palace  lay."* 

In  the  great  conflict  with  Ravana,  as  Rama  and  his  brother 
were  wounded  and  well-nigh  dead,  owing  to  a  flight  of  serpents 

nt  by  [ndrajit,  Garuda  appeared  to  restore  them,  and  thus 
enabled  them  to  carry  on  the  Avar.  His  approach  and  work  are 
thus  described  : 

"The  rushing  wind  grew  loud, 
Red  lightnings  flashed  from  banks  of  cloud. 
The  mountains  shook,  the  wild  waves  rose, 
And,  smitten  by  resistless  blows, 
I  Uprooted  fell  each  stately  tree 
That  fringed  the  margin  of  the  sea. 
All  life  within  the  w. iters  feared  : 
rhen,  .i,  the  Vanars  gazed,  appeared 


( Jriffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  iii.  162. 


Garuda.  379 

King  Garud's  self,  a  wondrous  sight, 

Disclosed  in  flames  of  fiery  light. 

From  his  fierce  eye  in  sudden  dread 

All  serpents  in  a  moment  fled  ; 

And  those  transformed  to  shafts,  that  bound 

The  princes,  vanished  in  the  ground. 

On  Raghu's  sons  his  eyes  he  bent, 

And  hailed  the  lords  omnipotent. 

Then  o'er  them  stooped  the  feathered  king, 

And  touched  their  faces  with  his  wing-. 

His  healing  touch  their  pangs  allayed, 

And  closed  each  rent  the  shafts  had  made. 

Again  their  eyes  were  bright  and  bold  ; 

Again  the  smooth  skin  shone  like  gold."  * 

For  this  great  work  of  restoration  Rama  expressed  his  gra- 
titude, whereupon  Garuda  replied : 

"  In  me,  O  Raghu's  son,  behold 
One  who  has  loved  thee  from  of  old. 
Garud,  the  lord  of  all  that  fly, 
Thy  guardian  and  thy  friend  am  I. 
Not  all  the  gods  in  heaven  could  loose 
These  numbing  bonds,  this  serpent  noose, 
Wherewith  fierce  Ravan's  son,  renowned 
For  magic  arts,  your  limbs  had  bound. 
Those  arrows  fixed  in  every  limb 
Were  mighty  snakes,  transformed  by  him. 
Bloodthirsty  race,  they  live  beneath 
The  earth,  and  slay  with  venomed  teeth." 

Garuda  is  represented  in  pictures  and  sculpture  in  various 
ways.  Sometimes  he  has  the  head  and  wings  of  a  bird,  with  a 
human  body  ;  sometimes  he  has  a  bird's  claws  ;  and  at  others 
he  has  a  human  face,  and  the  body  of  a  bird. 


JATAYUS   AND    SAMPATI. 

Garuda  had  two  sons,  named  Jatayus  and  Sampati,  who  also 
assisted  Rama.  As  he,  Lakshman,  and  Sati  reached  the  hermit- 
age in  the  forest  where  they  intended  to  remain,  they  saw  "  a 

*   Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  v.  153. 


3So 


Tin:  Inferior  Deities. 


mi  vulture,  of  size  and  strength  unparalleled."    Struck  with 

earance,  Rama  inquired  who  he  was,  when  Jatayus  in- 
ned  them  of  his  parentage,  and  offered  to  be  their  friend: 

"  Thy  ready  helper  will  I  be 
And  guard  thy  house,  if  thou  agree  : 
When  thou  and  Lakshman  urge  the  chase, 
By  Sita's  side  shall  be  my  place."  * 


J.VI  AVIS. 


T]  fer  was  accepted  ;  and  when  Rama  saw  the  stag  which 

nt  to  attract  him  from  his  home,  he  went  after  it  with 


Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  iii.  68. 


Jatayus  and  Sampati.  381 


the  greater  sense  of  security  because  Jatayus  was  there  to  guard 
his  wife.     When  Ravana  seized  Sita,  she  cried  out  to  Jatayus  : 

"  Oh  see,  the  king  who  rules  the  race 
Of  giants,  cruel,  fierce,  and  base  ! 
Ravan,  the  spoiler,  bears  me  hence, 
The  helpless  prey  of  violence."  * 

Jatayus  first  tries  by  reasoning  to  lead  Ravana  to  restore  Sita 
to  her  home,  and  warned  him  that  death  would  result  from  his 
act  of  violence.  When,  however,  neither  advice  nor  threats 
availed,  he  prepared  to  fight : 

"  With  clash  and  din  and  furious  blows 

Of  murderous  battle  met  the  foes  : 

*  *  *  * 

Then  fierce  the  dreadful  combat  raged, 
As  fiend  and  bird  in  war  engaged, 
As  if  two  winged  mountains  sped 
To  dire  encounter  overhead."  f 

Jatayus  succeeded  in  breaking  Ravana's  bow,  but 

"  A  second  bow  soon  armed  his  hand, 
Whence  pointed  arrows  swift  and  true 
In  hundreds,  yea,  in  thousands,  flew."  % 

The  giant's  arrows  wounded  the  vulture  ;  the  vulture  in  return 
threw  darts  which  injured  Ravana,  struck  the  steeds  of  the 
chariot,  and  broke  the  chariot  itself  ;  whilst  with  his  beak  and 
claws  he  tore  the  coachman  to  pieces.  Ravana  descended  from 
his  chariot  and  fought  on  foot  ;  but  gradually  the  strength  of 
Jatayus,  who  was  weak  with  age,  gave  way.  Ravana,  therefore, 
re-ascends  the  chariot  and  is  about  to  fly  through  the  air,  when 
the  vulture  a  second  time  intercepts  his  flight,  and 

"  Swooped  down  upon  the  giant's  back  : 
Down  to  the  bone  the  talons  went  ; 
With  many  a  wound  the  flesh  was  rent."  § 

*  Griffiths's  '  Ramayana/  iii.  230.         f  Ibid.  iii.  236.         %  Ibid.  iii.  237. 

§  Ibid.  iii.  240. 


Tin:  Inferior  Deities. 


[atayus  was  able  to  tear  off  the  ten  left  arms  of  Ravana,  but 
unfortunately  others  grew  to  replace  them.  At  length  Ravana 
seizes  his  sword,  and.  after  giving  the  vulture  a  mortal  blow, 
hurries  off  with  Sita  to  Lanka. 

When  Rama  and  Lakshman  commence  their  search  for  Sita, 
they  come  upon  the  dying  bird,  and,  seeing  the  marks  of  blood 
upon  him,  at  first  think  that  he  has  been  guilty  ;  but,  after  hear- 
ing from  him  the  story  of  Ravana's  visit  and  flight,  they  see  the 
bird  expire  and  perform  his  funeral  rites. 

In  their  search,  reaching  the  sea-shore,  but  still  ignorant  of 
Sita's  whereabouts,  some  of  their  monkey  followers  see  an  im- 
mense vulture,  weak  with  age,  who,  hearing  them  mention  J  atayus' 
name,  inquires  of  his  welfare.  When  told  that  he  had  been 
slain  by  Ravana,  the  vulture  informs  them  that  this  victim  of 
the  giant  was  no  other  than  his  own  brother  ;  and  in  revenge 
ts  them,  by  informing  them  where  Ravana  and  Sita  were  at 
that  moment.  He  told  them  that  he  had  Garuda's  power  to  see 
immense  distances,  and,  mounting  into  the  sky,  saw  Lanka,  and 
told  the  Vanar  chiefs  that  the  object  of  their  search  was  there. 
I  baring  this,  Hanuman  was  despatched  to  communicate  with 
Sita.  and  to  assure  her  of  Rama's  coming  to  rescue  her. 


0°J 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


GANGA. 


Ganga  (the  Ganges),  the  chief  of  the  sacred  streams  of  India, 

whose  waters  are  said  to  have  the  power  of  cleansing  from  all 

past,  present,  and  future  sins, 

is   believed   to  be  divine,  and 

the  account  of  her  birth  and 

appearance  on  earth  forms  an 

interesting     episode     in      the 

Ramayana.     The  story  is  told 

to  Rama  by   the  hermit  Vis- 

vamitra,  as  he  was   travelling 

with    Rama    and    his   brother 

Lakshman.     As  soon  as  they 

reach  the  banks  of  the  sacred 

stream, 

"  They   bathed,  as   Scripture  bids, 
and  paid 
Oblations  due  to  god  and  shade." 

As  soon  as  they  were  seated, 

Rama  said  : 

"  O  saint,  I  yearn 
The  three-pathed  Ganga  s  tale  to 
learn. 

Thus  urged,  recounted  both 

The  birth  of  Ganga  and  her  growth  : 

'  The  mighty  hill  with  metals  stored, 

Himalaya,  is,  the  mountains'  lord, 

The  father  of  a  lovely  pair 

Of  daughters,  fairest  of  the  fair. 

Their  mother,  offspring  of  the  will 

Of  Meru,  everlasting  hill, 


GANGA. 


The   Inferior  Deities. 


Menu,  Himalaya's  darling,  graced 

With  beauty  of  her  dainty  waist. 

( ranga  was  cider-born  ;  then  came 

The  fair  one  known  by  Uma's  name. 

Then  all  the  gods  of  heaven,  in  need 

Of  Ganga's  help  their  vows  to  speed, 

To  great  Himalaya  came  and  pruyed 

The  mountain  king  to  yield  the  maid. 

He,  not  regardless  of  the  weal 

Of  the  three  worlds,  with  holy  zeal 

His  daughter  to  the  Immortals  gave — 

( ranga,  whose  waters  cleanse  and  save, 

Who  roams  at  pleasure,  fair  and  free, 

Purging  all  sinners,  to  the  sea. 

The  three-pathed  Ganga  thus  obtained, 

The  gods  their  heavenly  homes  regained.' "  * 

The  sage  next  tells  Rama  that  there  was  a  mighty  King  of 
Ayodha  named  Sagara, f  who,  being  childless  and  most  anxious 

have  a  son,  propitiated  the  saint  Bhrigu  (or,  according  to  other 
accounts,  hi-  grandson)  by  penances  extending  over  a  hundred 
At   length  the  saint,  pleased  with  Sagar's  worship,  said  : 

"  •  From  thee,  O  Sagar,  blameless  king, 
A  mighty  host  of  sons  shall  spring, 
And  thou  shalt  win  a  glorious  name, 
Which  none,  O  chief,  but  thou  shalt  claim  ; 


*  ( irimths's  '  Ramayana,'  i.  171. 

f  S  i's  birth  w.is  supernatural.     His    father  Bahu,    King  of  Ayodha. 

cpelled    from    Ins    kingdom.      The    mother    of    Sagara    accompanied 

r   husband  to  the  forest,  but,  owing   to  a  poisonous  drug  having   been 

by  .1    rival   wife,  she  could  not  bring  forth  her  son,  with  whom 

had  been  pregnant  for  seven  years.    When  her  husband  died,  she  wished 

1  with  lu-»  body  ;  but  this  was  prevented  by  a  sage  named  Aurva. 

wh  red  her  that  her  son  would  yet  be  born,  and  grow  up  to  be  a  mighty 

king.     When  In:  was  born,  Aurva  gave  him  the  name  Sagara  (Sa,"with," 

1.   "poison*').     Aurva  himself  was    also    born    in    an    extraordinary 

\   king  named    Kritavirya  was  very  liberal  to  the  Bhrigus,  and 

through  his  Liberality  they  became  rich.     His  descendants  being  poor,  they 

:    help  of   tin-    Bhrigus.     On  this  being   refused  them,  they    made   an 

1  mii  (In.  Brahmans  of  this  family,  slaying  all  they  could   find,  even 

tildren   in  the   womb.      One  woman  concealed    her  unborn  child  in   her 

tin  I  hi    K  ihattriya  >,  hearing  of  this,  tried  t<>  slay  him,  but  he  issued  from 

1   with    mch   lustre  that   he   blinded    his  persecutors.     And 
bom  from  the  thigh    uru)  of  his  mother,  he  was  called  Aurva. 


Ganga.  385 


One  of  thy  queens  a  son  shall  bear, 
Maintainer  of  thy  race  and  heir  ; 
And  of  the  other  there  shall  be 
Some  sixty  thousand  born  to  thee.'"  * 

Hearing  this,  the  wives  are  anxious  to  know  which  of  them 
is  to  have  the  one  son,  and  which  the  multitude  ;  but  this  the 
Brahman  leaves  them  to  decide.  Kesini  wishes  for  the  one  son  ; 
and  Sumati  is  pleased  with  the  prospect  of  having  sixty  thousand. 

"  '  Time  passed.     The  elder  consort  bare 
A  son  called  Ansuman,  the  heir. 
Then  Sumati,  the  younger,  gave 
Birth  to  a  gourd,  O  hero  brave, 
Whose  rind,  when  burst  and  cleft  in  two, 
Gave  sixty  thousand  babes  to  view. 
All  these  with  care  the  nurses  laid 
In  jars  of  oil  ;  and  there  they  stayed, 
Till,  youthful  age  and  strength  complete, 
Forth  speeding  from  each  dark  retreat, 
All  peers  in  valour,  years,  and  might, 
The  sixty  thousand  came  to  light.' "  f 

After  a  time  King  Sagara  determined  to  make  an  Asvamedha 
or  horse  sacrifice.  Preparations  for  this  are  accordingly  made, 
and  Prince  Ansuman,  the  son  of  the  elder  wife,  is  appointed 
by  the  king  to  follow  the  horse  set  apart  for  the  sacrifice  ; 
for,  according  to  the  ritual,  the  horse  was  to  be  set  free,  and 
allowed  for  a  whole  year  to  wander  wherever  it  would.  Indra 
knowing  the  great  merit  that  Sagar  would  obtain  by  this 
sacrifice,  and  fearing  that  he  might  even  lose  his  crown, 

"  Veiling  his  form  in  demon  guise, 
Came  down  upon  the  appointed  day, 
And  drove  the  victim  horse  away."  J 

The  officiating  priest,  being  aware  of  this,  cries  out : 

"  Haste,  king  !  now  let  the  thief  be  slain  ; 
Bring  thou  the  charger  back  again  ; 
The  sacred  rite  prevented  thus 
Brings  scathe  and  woe  to  all  of  us." 

*  Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  i.  174.         f  Ibid.  i.  175.         J  Ibid.  i.  177. 

2   C 


6  The   Inferior  Deities. 


King  Sagar,  incited  by  the  Brahman,  urges  his  sons  to  search 
until  they  find  the  stolen  horse : 

••  Brave  sons  of  mine,  I  know  not  how 
These  demons  are  so  mighty  now  ; 
The  priests  began  the  rites  so  well, 
All  sanctified  with  prayer  and  spell. 
If  in  the  depths  of  earth  he  hide, 
Or  lurk  beneath  the  ocean's  tide, 
Pursue,  dear  sons,  the  robber's  track  ; 
Slay  him  and  bring  the  charger  back. 
The  whole  of  this  broad  earth  explore, 
Sea-garlanded  from  shore  to  shore  ; 
Yea,  dig  her  up  with  might  and  main, 
I  mil  you  see  the  horse  again."  * 

The  sons  commence  their  search.  Each  digs  a  league  in 
depth,  and  by  this  means  they  reach  the  centre  of  the  earth  ; 
but  cannot  see  the  horse.  Alarmed  at  their  destructive  work, 
the  gods  repair  to  Brahma,  and  tell  him  what  is  happening, 
lie  cheers  them  with  the  information  that  Vishnu,  in  the  form 
of  Kapila,  will  protect  the  Earth,  his  bride,  and  that  these  sons 
ir  will  be  consumed  to  ashes.  The  gods,  encouraged 
by  these  words,  repair  to  their  home  and  patiently  wait  for 
deliverance 

After  digging  sixty  thousand  leagues  into  the  earth  without  ob- 
taining  any  tidings  of  the  horse,  the  princes  return  to  their  father, 
asking  what  can  be  done.     Sagar  commands  them  to  dig  on,  and 

•.tin tie  their  search  until  the  horse  is  found.     At  length  they 

"  Saw  Vasudeva  (Vishnu)  standing  there, 
I  n  Kapil's  form  he  loved  to  wear  ; 
And  mar  the  everlasting  God 
The  victim  charger  cropped  the  sod. 
They  saw  with  joy  and  eager  eyes 
The  fancied  robber  and  the  prize, 
.\n<l  on  him  rushed  the  furious  band, 
Crying  aloud,  '  Stand,  villain  !      Stand  !' 


Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  i.  177. 


Ganga.  387 

'  Avaunt !  avaunt  !  ?  great  Kapil  cried, 
His  bosom  flusht  with  passion's  tide  ; 
Then,  by  his  might,  that  proud  array 
All  scorched  to  heaps  of  ashes  lay."  * 

Hearing  no  news  of  his  sons,  the  king  became  anxious,  and 
sent  his  grandson  Ansuman  to  look  after  them.  He  inquires 
of  all  he  meets  on  the  earth,  and  is  encouraged  by  the  informa- 
tion that  he  shall  certainly  bring  back  the  stolen  horse.  At 
length  he  reaches  the  spot  where  his  brothers  were  consumed, 
and  is  overwhelmed  with  grief  at  their  fate.  At  this  moment 
his  uncle  Garuda  appears  and  consoles  him,  saying  : 

"  Grieve  not,  O  hero,  for  their  fall, 
Who  died  a  death  approved  of  all. 
Of  mighty  strength  they  met  their  fate 
By  Kapil's  hand,  whom  none  can  mate. 
Pour  forth  for  them  no  earthly  wave, 
A  holier  flood  their  spirits  crave. 
If,  daughter  of  the  Lord  of  Snow, 
Ganga  would  turn  her  stream  below, 
Her  waves,  that  cleanse  all  mortal  stain, 
Would  wash  their  ashes  pure  again. 
Yea,  when  her  flood,  whom  all  revere, 
Rolls  o'er  the  dust  that  moulders  here, 
The  sixty  thousand,  freed  from  sin, 
A  home  in  Indra's  heaven  shall  win. 
Go,  and  with  ceaseless  labours  try 
To  draw  the  goddess  from  the  sky. 
Return,  and  with  thee  take  the  steed; 
So  shall  thy  grandsire's  rite  succeed."! 

The  prince  takes  the  steed  ;  the  sacrifice  is  completed,  and 
for  30,000  years  King  Sagar  was  thinking  how  he  could  induce 
Ganga  to  come  down  from  heaven.  At  length,  not  having  suc- 
ceeded in  forming  a  successful  plan,  the  monarch  himself  went 
to  heaven.  Ansuman  reigned  in  his  stead,  who,  in  his  turn, 
tried  to  find  some  means  of  liberating  his  brothers.  His  son 
Dilipa  also  made  a  similar,  but  equally  unsuccessful,  effort.  It 
was  given  to  Dilipa's  son  Bhagirath  to   accomplish  this   work. 

*  Griffiths's  '  Ramayana,'  i.  183.  f  Ibid.  i.  186. 

2    C   2 


Tin:   Inferior  Deities. 


[rath  had  no  son.     He,  in  order  to  obtain  this  boon,  and 
to  free    his  kinsmen    from    their    sad  fate,  practised   most 
lusterities,  until  at  length  Brahma  said  : 

••  Blest  monarch,  of  a  glorious  race, 
Thy  fervent  rites  have  won  my  grace. 
Well  hast  thou  wrought  thine  awful  task  : 
Some  boon  in  turn,  O  hermit,  ask."  * 

To  which  Bhagirath  replies  as  follows: 

"  Let  Sagar's  sons  receive  from  me 
Libations  that  they  long  to  see. 
Let  Ganga  with  her  holy  wave 
The  ashes  of  the  heroes  lave, 
That  so  my  kinsmen  may  ascend 
To  heavenly  bliss  that  ne'er  shall  end. 
And  give,  I  pray,  O  god,  a  son, 
Nor  let  my  house  be  all  undone." 

1     this  the  god  replies  : 

"  As  thou  prayest,  it  shall  be. 
Ganga,  whose  waves  in  Swarga  (Heaven)  flow, 
Is  daughter  of  the  Lord  of  Snow. 
Win  Siva  that  his  aid  be  lent 
To  hold  her  in  her  mid  descent, 
For  earth  alone  will  never  bear 
These  torrents  hurled  from  upper  air."  f 

Brahma  then  re-ascended   to  the   skies;    but   Bhagirath    re- 
mained for  a  whole  year 

"  With  arms  upraised,  refusing  rest, 
While  with  one  toe  the  earth  he  prest." 

Siva,    pleased    with    this  devotion,  promised    to    sustain    the 
>f  the  descent    of   the  waters  on  his  head  ;    but  Ganga 
was  n<»t  at  all  pleased  when  commanded  to  descend  to  earth  : 


U    ( 


He  calls  me,'  in  her  wrath  she  cried, 
"  Anil  all  my  flood  shall  sweep 
And  whir]  him  in  its  whelming  tide 
To  lull's  profoundest  deep.'" J 


Griffiths's  *  Ramayana,'  i.  190.  |  Ibid.  %  Ibid.  i.  193. 


Ganga.  389 

Siva,  however,  was  a  match  for  the  wrathful  deity.  He  held 
her  in  the  coils  of  his  hair  until  her  anger  abated,  and  then  she 
fell  into  the  Vindu  lake,  from  whence  proceed  the  seven  sacred 
streams  of  India.  This  lake  is  not  known  ;  and  of  the  seven 
streams  mentioned,  two  only  are  familiar  to  geographers,  the 
Ganges  and  the  Indus.  One  branch  of  this  stream  followed 
Bhagirath  wherever  he  went.  On  the  way  the  waters  flooded 
the  sacrificial  ground  of  Jahnu,  a  saint.  In  his  anger  he  drank 
up  its  waters,  and  Bhagirath's  work  seemed  to  be  fruitless.  But 
at  the  intercession  of  the  king  and  Brahma,  the  saint  allowed 
the  waters  to  flow  from  his  ears.  From  this  fact  one  of  the 
many  names  of  Ganga  is  Jahnavi,  or  daughter  of  Jahnu.  At 
length  Bhagirath  reached  the  ocean,  and  descending  to  the 
depths  where  Sagar's  sons  were  lying,  Ganga  followed  until  her 
waters  touched  the  ashes,  when, 

"  Soon  as  the  flood  their  dust  bedewed, 
Their  spirits  gained  beatitude, 
And  all  in  heavenly  bodies  dressed 
Rose  to  the  skies'  eternal  rest."  * 

As  a  reward  for  his  meritorious  work,  Brahma  said  to  him : 

"  Long  as  the  ocean's  flood  shall  stand 
Upon  the  border  of  the  land, 
So  long  shall  Sagar's  sons  remain, 
And,  god-like,  rank  in  heaven  retain. 
Ganga  thine  eldest  child  shall  be, 
Called  from  thy  name  Bhagirath!."  f 

As  a  consequence  of  faith  in  this  legend,  one  of  the  most 
frequented  places  of  pilgrimage  in  India  is  Sagar  Island,  the 
place  where  the  river  Ganges  and  ocean  meet. 

In  addition  to  the  Ganges,  there  are  many  other  rivers 
regarded  as  sacred  by  the  Hindus  ;  the  worship  of  these,  and 
bathing  in  them,  being  productive  of  almost  as  great  blessings 
as  are  to  be  obtained  from  Ganga  herself.  Some  of  these  are 
considered  as  males  and  some  as  females.     The  following  is  not 

*  Grimths's  '  Ramayana,'  i.  196.  f  Ibid.  i.  197. 


The   Inferior  Deities. 


complete  list,  but  it   contains  the  names  of  the  rivers   most 

merally  known. 

Male  rivers  : — The  Sona  and  the  Brahmaputra. 

Female  rivers  : — The  Godavarl,  the  Kaverl,  the  Atreyl,  the 
Karaloya,  the  Bahuda,  the  GomatI,  the  Sarayu,  the  Gandaki, 
the  Varahi,  the  CharmanwatI,  the  Shatadru,  the  Vipasha,  the 

utaml,  the  Karmanasha,  the  Airavati,  the  Chandrabhaga,  the 
Vitasta,  the  Sindhu,  the  Krishna,  the  VetravatI,  the  Bhairava.* 


Ward,  ii.  217. 


THE    BEL. 


391 


CHAPTER    IX 


SACRED  TREES. 


SEVERAL  trees  are  regarded  as  sacred  ;  they  being  repre- 
sentative of,  or  peculiarly  dear  to,  some  of  the  deities.  It  is  a 
meritorious  act  to  plant  and  water  them,  and  such  is  the  respect 
cherished  for   them,  that  even  their  withered  branches  are  not 


THE    BANYAN    TREE. 


allowed  to  be  burnt.  The  same  ceremonies  are  observed  at 
the  planting  of  these  trees,  or,  when  they  have  been  taken  care 
of  for  some  time,  at  their  consecration,  as  are  observed  at  the 
setting  up  of  an  image.  The  following  are  the  names  of  the 
sacred  trees  : — 

The   Asvatta,    or   Pipul    Tree     (Fiats     religiosd),    sacred   to 
Vishnu. 


/2  Tin:   Inferior  Deities. 


The  Yata,  Banyan  or  Indian  Fig  Tree  *  (Ficus  Indica),   also 

red  to  Vishnu. 

The  Yilva,   or  Wood-apple,  or  Bel  Tree  f  {&gk  Marmelos), 
red  to  Siva. 

The  Vakula  (Mimusops  Elengi). 
The  Haritaki  {Terminalia  chebuld). 

The  Amalaki,  or  Etnblic  Myrobalans  (Phyllanthus  emblicd). 
The  Nimba,  or  Nim  Tree  %  (Melia  azadirachta). 
The  Tulsi  §  (Ocintutn  gratissimum  or  sanctum). 
The  Tulsi  is   very  commonly   worshipped  by  the  followers  of 
Vishnu  ;   and  the  plant  is    most  carefully  tended  as  his  repre- 
sentative.     Every  morning  the  ground  near  it  is  cleaned  with 
a -dung  and  water  ;  at  night  a  lamp  is  hung  near  it.     During 
th  i  hottest  months  of  the  year,  a  vessel  of  water  is  hung 

over  it  so  that  it  can  constantly  receive  moisture.     When  the 
plant  dies,  it  is  cast  into  the  river,  as  an   idol  which  has  been 
worshipped  would  be  when  the  worship  is  concluded.     When  a 
person  is  dying,  it  is  a  common  custom  to  plant  a  sprig  of  Tulsi 
near  his  head.      The  origin  of  the  worship  of  the  Tulsi  is  said 
be    the    following: — A    woman    named     Tulsi     engaged    in 
ligious   austerities    for   a  long  period,   and   asked  as    a   boon, 
that  she  might  become  the  wife  of  Vishnu.     Lakshmi,  hearing  of 
this,  cursed   her,   and  changed  her  into  the   plant  which  bears 
her  name.     Vfehnu,  however,  comforted    his    follower  with    the 
surance  that  he  would  assume  the  form  of  the  Shalgrama,  and 
ntinue  mar  her. ||     The  Vayu  and  the  Padma  Puranas  teach 
that  the  Tulsi  was  one  of  the  products  of  the  churning  of  the 
in. 
In   addition   to  these  trees  should    be  mentioned  the  Durva 
(Agrostis   linearis)   and    Kusa   grass   (Poa  cynosuroides\ 
vhich  form  part  of  the  offerings  made  to  the  gods;    as  do  all 
ves  or  flowers  of  most  of  the  trees  previously  mentioned. 
II"    Mahabharata  has  a  legend  accounting  for  the  sacredness  of 
Kusa        iss.     When  Garuda  brought  some  of  the  Amrita 


t  Sec  p.  390.  X  See  p.  411 

p.  400-  Ward,  ii.  204. 


Sacred  Trees. 


393 


from  the  moon  to  give  to  the  Nagas,  or  serpent  deities,  as  the 
price  to  be  paid  for  his  mother's  release  from  servitude,  Indra 
tried  to  induce  him  not  to  give  it  to  them  lest  they,  becoming 
immortal,  should  oust  him  from  his  throne.  Garuda  would  not 
consent  to  this  arrangement,  but  told  Indra  that  after  it  was 
eiven  to  the  snakes  he  could  steal  it  from  them.  Garuda  there- 
fore  placed  the  Amrita  in  a  vessel  on  the  grass,  and  whilst  the 
Nagas  were  bathing,  Indra  stole  it.  They,  thinking  that  the 
ambrosia  must  be  on  the  Kusa  grass,  licked  it  ;  the  sharp  grass 
slit  their  tongues,  and  hence  the  serpents'  tongues  are  forked  ; 
and  the  grass,  having  been  touched  by  the  Amrita,  is  holy. 


THE    FIG  TREE. 


394 


Miscellaneous  Minor  Deities. 


CHAPTER  X. 


MISCELLANEOUS  MINOR  DEITIES. 


I.    SHIT  ALA. 


SHITALA  is  the  Bengali  name  for  the  small-pox,  and  for   the 
deity  who   is  supposed  to  have  charge   of  that    disease.      The 

meaning  of  the  word  is  "  She 
who  makes  cold."  This  god- 
dess is  represented  as  a  gold- 
en-complexioned  woman  sit- 
ting on  a  lotus,  or  riding  on 
an  ass,  dressed  in  red  clothes. 
Before  an  image  of  this  kind, 
or  more  commonly  a  pan  of 
water  merely,  Shitala  is  wor- 
shipped  in  the  hope  that  she 
will  preserve  her  worshippers 
from  this  dire  disease. 

In  the  spring  of  the  year  the 

Hindus  were  in  the  habit  of 

inoculating  their  children  who 

were  about  two  years  of  age  ; 

on  which  occasion  the  Brahman 

who  performed  the  operation 

presents  to  render  Shitala  propitious,  and  promised  in  case 

>rk  was  successful  to  give  still  greater  gifts.     At  the  close 

operation  the  flowers  that  were  presented  to  the  goddess 

'1  in  the  hair  of  the  child  as  a  charm.     On  behalf  of 

afflicted    with   small-pox,  offerings  are  made    daily;   and 


:J 


Ufe 


ALA. 


Man  as  a. 


395 


when  the  patient  is  thought  to  be  dangerously  ill,  he  is  placed 
in  front  of  an  image  of  Shitala,  bathed  in,  and  given  to  drink, 
water  that  has  been  offered  to  her.  Beggars  go  about  with  a 
stone,  partly  gilded,  which  they  teach  is  sacred  to  Shitala,  and, 
singing  her  praises,  receive  presents  from  the  superstitious.* 


2.    MANASA. 

Manasa  is  the  sister  of  Vasuki,  the  King  of  the  Snakes  ;  the 
wife  of  Jaratkaru,  a  sage  ;  and  being  the  'Queen  of  the  Snakes  is 
regarded  as  the  protectress  of 
men  from  those  reptiles.  An- 
other name  by  which  she  is 
known  is  Vishahara,  "the  de- 
stroyer of  poison."  Generally 
offerings  are  made  to  her  with- 
out any  image  being  made,  a 
branch  of  a  tree,  a  pan  of  water, 
an  earthen  snake  being  her  re- 
presentatives ;  when  her  image 
is  made,  it  is  that  of  a  woman 
clothed  with  snakes,  sitting  on 
a  lotus,  or  standing  upon  a 
snake.  A  song  founded  upon 
the  following  story  concludes 
the  worship  of  this  deity. 

A  merchant  named  Chanda 
not  only  refused  to  worship 
Manasa,  but  professed  the  pro- 
foundest  contempt  for  her.  In 
process  of  time  six  of  his  sons 

died  from  snake-bites.     To  avoid  a  similar  fate,  his  eldest  son 
Lakindara  dwelt  in  an  iron  house  ;  but  Manasa  caused  a  snake 


MANASA. 


Ward,  ii.  139. 


,6  Miscellaneous  Minor  Deities. 

enter  through  a  crevice,  which  bit  him  on  his  wedding-day 
and  caused  his  death  too.  His  widow,  however,  escaped,  and 
went  weeping  to  her  mother-in-law,  who,  with  the  neighbours, 
vainly  tried  to  induce  Chanda  to  propitiate  the  goddess  through 
wl  influence  so  much  evil  had  come  to  the  family  ;  Manasa 
herself   urged  his  friends    to    prevail    upon    him   not  to   remain 

hostile  to  her.      At  last  he  so  far  yielded  to  their  wishes  as 

throw  a  single  flower  with  his  left  hand  towards  her  image, 
which  so  delighted  her  that  she  restored  his  sons  to  life,  and 
from  that  time,  as  men  came  to  know  of  her  power,  her  worship 
has  become  celebrated.* 

The  Mahabharata  gives  the  following  particulars  regarding 
her  marriage.  Jagatakaru,  her  husband,  was  an  eminent  sage, 
who  had  practised  great  austerities,  bathed  in  all  the  holy  tanks, 
abstained  from  matrimony,  and,  as  a  result  of  his  penance  and 
fasting,  had  a  dry  and  shrivelled  body.  In  the  course  of  his 
wanderings,  coming  to  a  place  where  he  saw  a  number  of  men 
hanging  from  a  tree  with  their  heads  downwards  over  a  deep 
abyss,  with  a  rat  gnawing  at  the  rope  by  which  they  were  sus- 
pended, he  learned  that  they  were  his  own  ancestors,  doomed  to 
endure  this  misery  because,  their  children  being  dead,  they  had 
no  one  to  release  them  (i.e.  by  performing  certain  religious 
ceremonies)  ;  and  he,  who  by  having  a  son  might  have  set  them 
free,  was  given  up  to  a  life  of  austerity  and  refused  to  marry. 
When  they  are  told  that  Jagatakaru  is  the  man  through  whose 
abstinence  they  are  suffering,  they  entreat  him  to  marry  and 
ecure  their  deliverance.  He  consents  to  do  so  on  condition  that 
parents  of  the  girl  he  marries  give  her  to  him  willingly. 
Vasuki  hearing  of  this,  offers  his  sister  to  the  sage,  who  marries 
her  and  has  a  son  named  Asika.  This  son  effected  the  deliver- 
ance <»l  hi-  ancestors,  and  also  rendered  good  service  to  the 
nt   race  in  saving  them  from  destruction  when  Janamejaya 

ma,!  :         rifice  of  snakes,  and  was  wishful  to  exterminate 

m. 


Ward,  ii.  142. 


Sasti — The  Shalgrama. 


397 


3-    SASTI. 

Sasti  is  peculiarly  the  goddess  of  married  women  ;  she  is  the 
giver  of  children,  assists  at  childbirth,  and  is  the  guardian  of 
young  children.  She  is  re- 
presented as  a  golden-com- 
plexioned  woman  with  a  child 
in  her  arms,  riding  upon  a  cat ; 
hence  no  Hindu  woman  would 
under  any  circumstances  injure 
that  animal,  lest  she  should 
offend  this  goddess  and  be 
made  to  suffer  for  it.  Six 
times  a  year  festivals  in  honour 
of  Sasti  are  held  ;  in  addition 
to  which,  women  who  have 
lost  all  their  children  by 
death  worship  her  monthly. 
When  a  child  is  six  days  old, 
the  father  worships  her  ;  and 
when  three  weeks  old,  the 
mother  presents  offerings  to 
her.  The  ordinary  represen- 
tative of  Sasti  is  a  stone  about 
the  size  of  a  man's  head  placed 

under   a    Banyan   tree,  which    is    decorated   with    flowers,    and 
offerings  of  rice,  fruit,  &c,  are  made  to  it.* 


SASTI. 


4.    THE   SHALGRAMA. 

By  the  worshippers  of  Vishnu,  the  Shalgrama  is  regarded  as  a 
most  sacred  object.  It  does  not  derive  its  sacredness  from 
certain  consecrating  rites,  as  images  and  other  representatives  of 
deities,   but  is   believed   to   be    inherently  holy.     It  is  a  black 


*  Ward,  ii.  143. 


Miscellaneous  Minor  Deities. 


nmonite,  though  the  Hindus  declare  it  is  a  stone,  found  in 
Mount  Gandakl  in  Nepal.  The  popular  belief  is  that  in  this 
mountain  there  are  multitudes  of  insects  which  perforate  the 
and  they  when  perforated,  falling  into  the  river  Gandaka, 
are  taken  out  by  means  of  nets.  The  more  common  ones 
are  about  the  size  of  a  watch,  and  their  price  varies  according  to 
their  size,  hollowness,  and  inside  colouring,  according  to   which 

culiarities  special  names  are  given.     For  the  rarer  kinds  as  much 

Rs.  2000  are  given  ;  and  when  it  is  remembered  that  it  is  believed 
that  the  p  -T  of  one  of  these  ammonites,  and  a  shell  called 

1  lakshinavarta  [i.e.  a  shell  whose  convolutions  are  towards  the 

in),  caw  never  be  poor,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  large 

prices  should  be  paid  for  them.     As  it  is  also  believed  that  in 

parting  with  them  they  invite  misfortune,  it  is  natural  that  those 

p<  should  wish  to  retain  them  ;    to  sell  them  for  gain 

arded  as  a  most  dishonourable  deed. 

A  reason  for  the  sacredness  of  the  Shalgrama  is  found  in  the 
•  Bh  Lgavata  Purana.'  Sani  commenced  his  reign  with  a  request 
t<>  Brahma  t<>  become  subject  to  him;  Brahma  referred  him  to 
Vishnu,  who  asked  him  to  call  upon  him  the  next  day.  When 
he  called,  finding  that  Vishnu  had  transformed  himself  into  a 
mountain,  he  became  a  worm  named  Vajrakita,  and  afflicted 
Vishnu  for  twelve  years.     At  the  expiration  of  that  time  Vishnu 

umed  his  proper  shape,  and  ordered  that  henceforth  the  stones 

this  mountain  (Gandakl)  should  be  worshipped  as  represen- 
tative^ of  himself.* 

The  Brahmans  usually  worship  Vishnu  in  this  form  in  their 
daily  puja  at  home.  In  the  hot  season  a  vessel  of  water  is 
suspended  over  the  Shalgrama,  and  the  water  continually 
on  it  keeps  it  cool  ;  another  vessel  is  placed  under  it 
l"  tch  the  water,  which  is  drunk  in  the  evening  by  the  wor- 
The  marks  of  it  arc  shown  to  men  when  dying,  in  the 
1<  lief  that  the  concentration  of  the  mind  on  them  at  this  time 
will  ensure  the  soul  a  safe  passage  to  Vishnu's  heaven.t 


'»nit  of  the  origin  of  the  worship  of  the  Shalgrama,  see 
t'w  •  I  -j-  Ward,  ii.  221. 


The  Dhenkt— Ka  ?    Who  ?  399 


5.    THE   DHENKT. 

The  Dhenki  is  a  log  of  wood  fixed  to  a  pivot,  used  for  husking 
rice,  pounding  bricks  to  powder,  &c.  It  is  generally  worked  by 
women,  who,  by  standing  on  the  one  end,  raise  it  to  a  certain 
height  and  then  let  it  fall  by  its  own  weight.  It  is  said  to  be 
the  Vahan  or  vehicle  of  Narada,  and  it  is  believed  that,  owing 
to  a  blessing  pronounced  upon  it  by  him,  it  became  an  object 
of  worship.  A  religious  teacher,  when  initiating  a  disciple 
into  the  mysteries  of  Hinduism,  told  him  to  say,  "  Dhenki, 
Dhenki."  Narada,  hearing  this,  was  delighted,  and  coming  upon 
his  Vahan  gave  him  another  incantation  by  which  he  became 
perfect  and  was  admitted  into  heaven.  It  is  worshipped  at  the 
time  of  marriage,  at  the  investiture  of  a  son  with  the  Poita  or 
Brahmanical  thread,  at  the  ceremony  of  giving  rice  to  a  child 
and  on  other  festive  occasions.  At  the  close  of  the  last  century 
a  Raja  of  Naladanga  is  said  to  have  spent  Rs.  300,000  in  cele- 
brating the  worship  of  the  Dhenki. 


6.  KA  ?  WHO  ? 

The  Athenians  were  not  alone  in  worshipping  the  "  Unknown 
God."  "The  authors  of  the  Brahmanas  had  so  completely 
broken  with  the  past,  that,  forgetful  of  the  poetical  character  of 
the  hymns  (of  the  Vedas),  and  the  yearning  of  the  poets  after 
the  unknown  god,  they  exalted  the  interrogative  pronoun  itself 
into  a  deity,  and  acknowledged  a  god,  Ka  ?  or  '  Who  ? '  In  the 
1  Taittiriya  Brahmana,'  in  the  '  Kanshltaki  Brahmana,'  in  the 
'  Tandya  Brahmana,'  and  in  the  '  Satapatha  Brahmana,'  wherever 
interrogative  verses  occur,  the  author  states  that  Ka  is  Prajapati, 
or  the  lord  of  creatures.  Nor  did  they  stop  here.  Some  of  the 
hymns  in  which  the  interrogative  pronoun  occurred  were  called 
Kadvat,  i.e.  having  kad  or  quid.  But  soon  a  new  adjective  was 
formed,  and  not  only  the  hymns,  but  the  sacrifices  also,  offered 
to  the  god,  were  called   Kaya,  or  '  Who-ish.'     At  the  time  of 


40  o 


Miscellaneous  Minor  Deities. 


Panini  (the  great  grammarian),  this  word  had  acquired  such 
atimacy  as  to  call  for  a  separate  rule  explaining  its  formation. 
J.  tmmentator  here  explains  Ka  by  Brahman.  After  this, 
we  can  hardly  wonder  that  in  the  later  Sanskrit  literature  of  the 
Puranas,  Ka  appears  as  a  recognised  god,  with  a  genealogy  of 
his  own,  perhaps  even  a  wife  ;  and  that  in  the  laws  of  Manu  one 
<>f  the  recognised  forms  of  marriage,  generally  known  by  the 
name  of  the  Prajapati  marriage,  occurs  under  the  monstrous 
title  of  Kaya."  In  the  Mahabharata  Ka  is  identified  with 
1  taksha,  and  in  the  '  Bhagavata  Purana'  it  is  applied  to  Kasyapa, 
probably  on  account  of  their  similarity  to  Prajapati. 


Max  M tiller j  quoted  in  Dowson's  '  Classical  Dictionary,'  s.  v.  "  Ka?" 


THE    LOTUS. 


(     4oi     ) 


CHAPTER  XI. 

SUPERHUMAN,  THOUGH   NOT  DIVINE  BEINGS. 

I.    APSARASAS,   GANDHARVAS,    AND    KINNARAS. 

The  Apsarasas  are  nymphs,  the  Gandharvas  singers  of  Indra's 
heaven,  and  the  Kinnaras  human  beings  with  horses'  heads,  who 
form  the  band  in  that  of  Kuvera.  The  Apsarasas  are  not 
prominent  in  the  Vedas,  but  Urvasi  and  a  few  others  are 
mentioned.  In  Manu  they  are  said  to  be  the  creations  of  the 
seven  Manus.  In  the  Epic  poems  they  become  prominent,  and 
the  Ramayana  and  the  Puranas  attribute  their  origin  to  the 
churning  of  the  ocean.  It  is  said  that  when  they  came  forth 
from  the  waters,  neither  the  gods  nor  the  Asuras  would  have 
them  for  wives,  so  they  became  common  to  all.  They  have  the 
appellations  "wives  of  the  gods,"  and  "daughters  of  pleasure." 

"  Then  from  the  agitated  deep  up  sprung 
The  legion  of  Apsarasas,  so  named 
That  to  the  watery  element  they  owed 
Their  being.     Myriads  were  they  born,  and  all 
In  vestures  heavenly  clad,  and  heavenly  gems  ; 
Yet  more  divine  their  native  semblance,  rich 
With  all  the  gifts  of  grace,  of  youth  and  beauty. 
A  train  innumerous  followed  ;  yet  thus  fair, 
Nor  god  nor  demon  sought  their  wedded  love  ; 
Thus,  Raghava  !  they  still  remain — their  charms 
The  common  treasure  of  the  host  of  heaven." 

"  In  the  Puranas  various  ganas  or  classes  of  them  are  men- 
tioned; the  'VayuPurana'  enumerates  fourteen,  the  'Hari  Vansa  ' 
seven.  They  are  again  distinguished  as  being  daivika,  *  divine,'  or 
laukika,  'worldly.'  The  former  are  said  to  be  ten  in  number, 
and  the  latter  thirty-four,  and  these  are  the  heavenly  charmers 

2  D 


2      Superhuman,  though  not  divine  Beings. 


who  fascinated  heroes,  as  Urvasi,  and  allured  austere  sages  from 

their  devotions  and  penances,  as  Menaka  and    Rembha.      The 

Kasi   Khand'  says  there  are  thirty-five  millions  of  them,  but 

ily  one  thousand  and  sixty  are  the  principal.  The  Apsarasas, 
then,  are  fairylike  beings,  beautiful  and  voluptuous.  They  are 
the  wives  or  mistresses  of  the  Gandharvas,  and  are  not  prudish 
in  the  dispensation  of  their  favours.  Their  amours  on  earth 
have  been  numerous,  and  they  are  the  rewards  in  Indra's 
paradise  held  out  to  heroes  who  fall  in  battle.  They  have  the 
power  of  changing  their  forms  and  give  good  luck  to  whom  they 
favour."  * 

The  '  Vishnu  Purana '  t  says  that  the  Gandharvas  were  the 
offspring  of  Brahma.  "The  Gandharvas  were  next  born,  im- 
bibing melody  ;  drinking  of  the  goddess  of  speech,  they  were 
born,  and  thence  their  appellation  (gam  dhayantah,  *  drinking 
speech  ')."     The  same  Purana  J  makes  them  the  descendants  of 

isyapa  and  Arishta,  and  Brahma  is  said  to  be  their  grandsire. 
The  Tad  ma  Purana'  speaks  of  them  as  the  children  of  Vach.  Ac- 
cording to  the  'Vishnu  Purana/  the  'Gandharvas,  called  Mau- 
neyas  (or  sons  of  the  Muni  Kasyapa),  who  were  sixty  millions 
in  number,  had  defeated  the  Nagas  or  snake  gods,  and  seized 
upon  their  most  precious  jewels  and  usurped  their  dominion." 
The  snakes  resorted  to  Vishnu  for  help,  who  informed  them  that 
he  would  enter  into  Purukutsa  and  then  destroy  the  Gandharvas. 
The  Nagas  sent  their  sister  N armada,  the  personified  river 
N  irbudda,  to  ask  the  aid  of  Purukutsa,  who  succeeded  in  her 

>rk,  and  the  Gandharvas  were  destroyed.  As  a  reward  the 
is  gave  this  power  to  Narmada,  that  whoever  worshipped 

r  and  called  upon  her  name  should  be  safe  from  the  poison  of 
snakes  and  all  other  poison  too. 

In  the  'Satapatha  Brahmana/  and  the  Puranas,  is  a  story  of 
l'u ni ravas  and  the  Apsaras  Urvasi  which  will  give  some  idea  of 
the  character  of  these  beings  in  Hindu  Mythology.  Urvasi  was 
compelled  to  leave  heaven   owing  to  the  imprecation  of  Mitra 

d  Varnna.     She  was  seen  and  loved  by  Pururavas,  the  son  of 

Jl  f  Page  41.  t  Page  150- 


Rakshasas.  403 


Budha  by  the  daughter  of  Manu,  and  agreed  to  live  with  him  on 
certain  conditions.  She  said :  "  I  have  two  rams  which  must 
always  remain  near  me  day  and  night  ;  you  must  never  be  seen 
by  me  undressed,  and  I  must  eat  only  ghi,  or  clarified  butter." 
The  inhabitants  of  heaven  were  anxious  for  Urvasi's  return,  so 
the  Gandharvas  came  by  night  and  stole  her  rams  ;  as  Pururavas 
in  his  attempt  to  rescue  them  rushed  into  Urvasi's  room  un- 
dressed, a  flash  of  lightning  filled  the  room,  and  being  seen  by 
the  nymph,  the  condition  under  which  she  consented  to  remain 
with  him  being  broken,  she  returned  to  heaven.  Pururavas  was 
distracted  at  the  loss  of  his  bride,  and  wandered  about  searching 
for  her ;  when  he  found  her,  she  promised  to  meet  him  yearly 
and  present  him  with  a  son.  After  five  annual  visits  she  told 
him  that  if  he  would  offer  a  sacrifice  with  the  express  object  of 
gaining  her,  his  effort  would  be  successful.  He  made  the  attempt, 
became  a  Gandharva,  and  gained  eternal  possession  of  her  love. 

2.    RAKSHASAS. 

These  formidable  beings  form  a  prominent  feature  in  Hindu 
legend.  They  are  all  Brahmans,  yet  are  described  as  cannibals. 
Parvati  gave  to  the  whole  tribe  the  power  to  arrive  at  maturity 
the  moment  they  were  born.  They  had  the  power  of  assuming 
any  form  at  will  ;  and  we  read  of  them  now  as  horses,  now  as 
buffaloes,  now  as  tigers.  Some  of  them  had  as  many  as  a 
hundred  heads.  Amongst  the  more  noted  of  these  beings  was 
Ravana,  Rama's  foe;  and  his  relatives  Kumbhakarna,  Vibhishena, 
Indrajit,  &c. 

Kumbhakarna,  the  brother  of  Ravana,  immediately  he  was 
born,  stretched  forth  his  arms  and  gathered  everything  into  his 
mouth  that  he  could  reach.  At  one  time  he  seized  five  hundred 
nymphs  from  Indra's  heaven  ;  at  another  time  the  wives  of  a 
hundred  sages,  and  cows  and  Brahmans  innumerable.  Brahma 
threatened  to  destroy  him,  unless  he  became  more  moderate  in 
his  demands  ;  he,  therefore,  commenced  a  life  of  austerity  that 
continued  for  ten  thousand  years,  which  terrified  the  gods  lest  he 
should  have  power  to   swallow  up    everything,  gods  and   men 

2  D  2 


404      Superhuman,  though  not  divine  Beings. 

included.     In  their  distress  they  appealed  to  Brahma,  who  caused 
irasvati  to  enter  Kumbhakarna  and   induce  him  to  ask  as  a 
■  'ii  that  he  might  sleep  eternally.      This  plan  was  successful. 
But   the    friends  of  the   Rakshasas  were   not   pleased  with  the 
result,  and  asked  Brahma  that  he  might  awake  for  a  day  at  the 
end    of   each   half-year  and    eat  as  much  as  he  wished.      This 
request  was  acceded  to.     His  house  in  Lanka  is  said  to  have 
been    20,000    miles    long  ;    but    Lanka    itself,  according  to    the 
Ramayana,  was  only  800  miles  in  circumference.* 
The  Rakshasas  "  have  been  classified  as  of  three  sorts,  one  as 
-et  of  beings  like  the  Yakshas,"  or  supernatural  attendants  on 
K.u\era,  the  god   of  wealth, — these  were  harmless  and  inoffen- 
sive beings  ;  another  as  a  sort  of  Titans,  or  enemies  of  the  gods  ; 
and  lastly,  in  the  common  acceptation  of  the  term,  demons  and 
fiends  who   haunt    cemeteries,  disturb    sacrifices,  harass   devout 
men,  animate  dead  bodies,  devour  human  beings,  and  vex  and 
afflict    mankind    in    all    sorts    of    ways.       These    last    are    the 
Rakshasas,  of  whom  Ravana  was  chief;  and  according  to  some 
authorities,    they    are    descended,    like    Ravana    himself,    from 
Pulastya.      According  to   other   authorities,  they   sprang   from 
Brahma's  foot.    The  '  Vishnu  Purana '  makes  them  descendants  of 
Kasyapa  and  Khasa,  a  daughter  of  Daksha,  through  their  son 
Rakshas  ;   and  the  Ramayana  states  that  when  Brahma  created 
the  waters,  he  formed  certain  beings  to  gnaw  them  who  were 
led   Rakshasas.     It    is    thought   that    the  Rakshasas    of  the 
Epic  poems  were  the  rude  barbarian  races  of  India,  who  were 
subdued  by  the  Aryans.f 

The  name  Bhuta  is  given  to  a  similar  class  of  beings  who  are 
the  attendants  of  Siva  :  hence  Bhuta  Natha,  Lord  of  Spirits,  is  one 
1  >f  Siva's  many  names  ;  and  the  term  Pisachas  is  applied  to  a  class 
if  possible  more  offensive  than  the  Rakshasas  described  above. 

*  W'.ud,  li.  [48.  t  Dowson,  s.  v. 


INDEX, 


Adikavi,  a  name  of  Brahma,  91 

Aditi,   character   and   attributes  of,   14 ; 

resorted  to  for  pardon,  14  ;  origin  of, 

1 5  ;  her  distress  at  the  affliction  of  the 

gods,    134;   the  mother  of  Vishnu  as 

_  the  Dwarf,  1 34 

Adityas,  the,  15  ;  description  of,  16 
Agni,  description  of,  18  ;  origin  of,  18  ; 
Vedic  attributes  of,  19  ff .  ;  a  Rakshas, 
23  ;  consumes  a  forest,  23  ;  the  father 
of  Nila  and  others,   23  ;    the  reputed 
father  of  Kartikeya,    278  ;  cursed   by 
Bhrigu,  303 
Ahalya,  the  wife  of  Gautama  the  Sage, 
seduced  by  Indra,  51  ;  released  from 
her  husband's  curse,  148 
Airavata,  Indra's  elephant,  373 
Ambika,  a  name  of  Uraa,  238 
Amburaja,  a  name  of  Varuna,  37 
Amravati,  the  capital  of  Indra's  heaven, 

134 
Ananga,  a  name  of  Kamadeva,  217 

Ananta,  a  name  of  Vishnu,  107 

Anasiiya,  the  wife  of  Atri,  308 

Angiras,  a  son  of  Brahma,   306 

Anila,  a  name  of  Vayu,  56 

Animals,  sacred,  374 

Annapurna,  a  name  of  Durga,  265 

Ansuman,  a  son  of  Sagar,  385  ff. 

Antaka,  a  name  of  Yama,  74 

Apava,  a  name  of  Brahma,  85 

Apsarasas,  the,  401 

Ardhanarishwara,   a   form    of  Siva   and 

Parvati  united,  265 
Arjuna,  son  of  Indra,  345  ;   character  of, 

346  ;  fights  with  Siva,  350 


Asuras,    the  dispute  between  them  ami 
the  Suras  or  gods,  132  ;  description  of, 

364  ;   word    used  in  different    senses, 

365  ;  why  this  difference  of  meaning, 
366 

Asvamedha,  or  horse  sacrifice,  385 
Asvins,  the,  description  of,   37  ;    marry 

Surya,  37  ;  physicians  of  the  gods,  38  ; 

legends  of  cures  by  them,  38 
Atmabhu,  a  name  of  Brahma,  91 
Atri,  a  son  of  Brahma,  307 


B. 


Bajri,  a  name  of  Indra,  53 

Balarama,  incarnation  of  Vishnu,  184  ff.  ; 
also  of  Sesha,  185 

Bali,  the  Daitya  king,  slain  by  Vishnu  as 
the  dwarf,  130  ff .  ;  a  monkey  chief,  a 
son  of  Indra,  147  ;  an  Asura  chief  slain 
by  Indra,  369 

Bali,  a  Vanar  king,  the  usurper  of 
Sugriva's  throne,  157 

Bhadrakali,  a  name  of  Durga,  256 

Bhagavata,  a  name  of  Siva,  235 

Bharata,  the  brother  of  Rama,  147 

Bhaskara,  a  name  of  Surya,  29 

Bhi ma,  a  son  of  Vayu,  345  ;  character  of, 
346  ;  conflicts  of,  354 

Bhishma,  a  son  of  Ganga,  343  ;  com- 
mander-in-chief of  the  Kuru  army,  353 

Bhrigu,  a  son  of  Brahma,  visits  heaven, 
100  ;  origin  of,  301  ;  priest  at  Daksha's 
sacrifice,  302  ;  curses  Indra,  302  ;  also 
Agni,  303  ;  changes  a  Khsattriya  into 
a  Brahman,  304 

Bhuta,  404 

Bhuteswara,  a  name  of  Siva,  235 


406 


Index. 


ihma,  the  supreme  deity,  80  ;  deriva- 
tion of  the  name,  Si  ;  hymn  to,  82 
Brahma,   the  Creator,  84  ;  called  Nara- 
yana,  85  ;  formation  of  his  five  heads, 
;  why  deprived  of  his  fifth  head,  86  ; 
ships   Siva,  90  ;  his  worship  now 
ceased,  90;  cursed  by  his  son  Xarada, 
3.8 
Brahmana,  defined,  4 
Brahmanaspati,  a  name  of  Agni,  18 
Bridge,  building  of  the,  to  Lanka,  338 
Brihaspati,  a  name  of  Agni,  18 
Buddha,    incarnation    of    Vishnu,    188  ; 
was  this  liuddha  the  founder  of  Bud- 
dhism? iSS;   Puranic  account  of,    190 
if.;  Lalita-Vistara  account  of,  199   ff. ; 
relics  of  Buddha  preserved,  205 
Budha,  one  of  the  planets,  360 


<  liaitanya,  incarnation  of  Vishnu,  211 
Chanchala,  a  name  of  Lakshmi,  112 

<  lhanda,  a  demon  slain  by  Durga,  250 
Chandi,  a  form  of  Durga,  255 

<  handra,   one  of  the  planets,   360  :    see 
also  Soma. 

ndrashekara,  a  name  of  Siva,  235 

<  'hlugaratha,  a  name  of  Agni,  24 
Chhaya,  28 

<  liinnamustaka,  a  name  of  Durga,  264 
Chitragupta,  son  of  Indrani,  53 
Chyavaoa,  a  Sage  cured  by  the  Asvins,  38 

<  !ivilization,  origin  of,  12 

'  plenty,  the,  139 
'    eation,  the,  Manu's  account  of,   86; 
\  edic,  283  ;  Puranic,  287  ff. 


D. 


I  l  iksha,  a  son  of  Brahma,  309  {[. 
I  I  mm, Lira,  a  name  of  Vishnu,  107 
I  fendadhara,  n  name  of  Vama,  74 
ibhuja,  ;i  name  of  Durga,  256 
ha,  the  father  of  Rama,  143  {{. 
J);;  tribe  who  I  to  build  the 

bridge  to  Lanka,  [6] 
I  >attatreya,  ;i  Sage,  139 

iki,  mother  of  Krishna,  168  n~. 
me  of  Uma,  23S 


Dhananjaya,  a  name  of  Agni,  24 
Dharmaraja,  a  name  of  Varna,  74 
Dhata,  a  name  of  Brahma,  91 
DhenkI,  the  Vahan  of  Narada,  399 
Dhenuka,   an  Asura  slain  by  Balarama, 

1S6 
Dhritarashtra,  the  father  of  the   Kurus, 

344 
Dhumketu,  a  name  of  Agni,  24 
Digambara,  a  name  of  Siva,  235 
Discus  of  Vishnu,  how  formed,  28 
Diti,  the  wife  of  Kasyapa,  57 
Divakara,  a  name  of  Surya,  29 
Divapati,  a  name  of  Indra,  53 
Divodasa,  the  king  of  Benares  misled  by 

Vishnu  as  Buddha,  191  » 

Draupadi,  the  wife  of  the  Pandus,  349 
Drona,  the  preceptor  of  the  Kurus  and 

Pandus,  346 
Durga,  a  demon  slain  by  Durga,  248 
Durga,  248  ft;  when  worshipped,   251  ; 

her  names,  256 
Duryodhana,    the    ruler    of   Hastinapur, 

350 

Dyaus  and  Prithivi,  the  most  ancient  of 
the  Vedic  gods,  10  ;  Dyaus  superseded 
by  Indra,  10 ;  Puranic  account  of 
Prithivi,  11 


E. 

Ekadanta,  a  name  of  Ganesa,  270 
Ekavira,  a  name  of  Kali,  261 


Flood,  the,  account  of,  from  Mahabha- 
rata,  113  ;  account  of,  from  Bhaga- 
vata,  115 


G. 

Gandharvas,  the,  402 

Gandhavaha,  a  name  of  Vayu,  56 

Ganesa,  267  ;  birth  of,  268  ff.  ;  object 
of  his  birth,  272  ;  hymn  to,  273  ; 
writer  of  the  Mahabharata,  274;  re- 
cent incarnation  of,  274  ;  outwits 
Kartikeya,  281 

Ganesajanani,  a  name  of  Durga,  266 


Index. 


407 


Ganga,     daughter    of    Himalaya,    383  ; 

brought  to  earth  by  Bhagirath,  389 
Gangadhara,  a  name  of  Siva,  235 
Garuda,  the  vehicle  of  Vishnu,  acts  as  a 
disciple  of  Vishnu   as   Buddha,    191  ; 
birth  of,   374;  enemy  of  snakes,  375; 
renders    service    to    Rama,   377  ;    en- 
courages  Ansuman    to    seek    for    his 
uncles,  387 
Gautama,  Indra's  spiritual  guide,  51  ;  a 

name  of  Buddha,  192 
Gayatri,  the,  quoted,  25 ;  praise  of,  25  ; 

a  wife  of  Brahma,  94 
Girisha,  a  name  of  Siva,  235 
Gopal,  a  name  of  Krishna,  184 
Gopinath,    ,,  ,,         ,,      184 

Grahapati,  a  name  of  Surya,  30 
Guardians  of  the  world,  the,  323 


H. 


Hanuman,    the  ally  of  Rama,    158  ff  .  ; 

his  birth,  332,  and  work,  334  ff. 
Hari,  a  name  of  Vishnu,  107 
Haripriya,  a  name  of  Lakshmi,  112 
Harischandra,  35 
Hidimba,  wife  of  Bhima,  347 
Hiranyagarbha,  a  name  of  Brahma,  91 
Hiranyakasipu,     the     demon     slain     by 

Vishnu  in  the  Nrisingha  incarnation, 

124  ;  a  son  of  Kasyapa,  307 
Hiranyaksha,  the  demon  slain  by  Vishnu 

in  the  Boar  incarnation,  124  ;  a  son  of 

Kasyapa,  307 


Indra,  attributes  of,  45  ;  appearance  of, 
46  ;  Vedic  account  of  birth  of,  47  ;  in- 
vited to  drink  of  the  Soma,  48  ;  his 
conflict  with  Vrittra,  48  ;  legend  of  a 
mortal  raised  to  the  position  of  Indra, 
49  ;  conflict  between  Indra  and  Krish- 
na, 51  ;  immortality  of,  51  ;  heaven  of, 
described,  52  ;  quarrels  with  Tvastri 
and  Visvarupa,  65  ;  outwitted  by  Krish- 
na, 173  ;  cursed  by  Bhrigu,  302 

Indrajit,  a  son  of  Ravana,  161 

Indrani,  the  wife  of  Indra,  53 

Isana,  a  name  of  Siva,  235 

Ishwar,      ,,  ,,        235 


J- 

Jagaddhatri,  a  form  of  Durga,  257 
Jagadgauri,         ,,  ,,         264 

Jagannath,    an   incarnation    of    Vishnu, 

208  ff. 
Jaladhija,  a  name  of  Lakshmi,  112 
Jalandhara,    an    Asura,    the   son   of  the 
Ocean  and  Ganga,    367  ;    his  conflict 
with  Indra,   368  ;   overcomes  Vishnu, 
369  ;  assumes  the  form  of  Siva,  371  ; 
robbed  of  his  wife  by  Vishnu,   371  ; 
slain  by  Siva,  372 
Jalapati,  a  name  of  Varuna,  37 
Jamadagni,    the    father   of  Parasurama, 

137 
Jamadagnya,  a  name  of  Parasurama,  1 38 

Janarddana,  a  name  of  Vishnu,  107 
Jatayus,  a  vulture  who  fought  with  Ra- 
vana, 156,  380  ff. 
Jaya,  a  name  of  Durga,  256 


K. 


Ka  ?  399 

Kabandha,  a  giant  slain  by  Rama,  156 

Kaitabhajit,  a  name  of  Vishnu,  106 

Kala,  a  name  of  Yama,  74 

Kalanemi,  a  demon  attacked  by  Hanu- 
man, 335 

Kalaratri,  a  name  of  Kali,  261 

Kali,  a  form  of  Durga,  257  ;  assumed  by 
Sita,  260  ;  regarded  as  a  distinct  deity, 
261  ;  human  sacrifices  offered  to  her, 
262 

Kali  Yuga,  description  of,  206 

Kalki  Avatara  of  Vishnu,  205 

Kalpa,  explanation  of,  292 

Kalyayani,  a  name  of  Durga,  256 

Kamadeva,  213 

Kandarpa,  a  name  of  Kamadeva,  252 

Kansa,  the  Asura  Krishna  came  to  slay, 
167  ff. 

Kapali,  a  name  of  Durga,  256 

Kapila,       ,,  ,,         256 

Kapila,  a  form  of  Vishnu,  386 

Karali,  a  name  of  Durga,  256 

Karmasakshi,  a  name  of  Surya,  30 

Kama,  a  son  of  Surya,  344  ;  character 
of,  346 

Kartikeya,  276  ff. 


40S 


Index. 


virva,  a  Kshattriya  king  slain  by 
139 
K  a  Sage,  the  father  of  Garuda, 

.  a  name  of  I  hirga,  250 
.  a  name  of  Vishnu,  105 
Kctu,   the    descending    node,   376:   see 

i    ihu. 
K  .    be,   ;oi 

..  a  son  ol  Brahma,  306 
Kr  .    incarnation    of    Vishnu,    166  ; 

this  Avatara,  167  ;  saved  by 
:  stroys  l'utana,  171  ; 
releases  the   sons  of  Kuvera  from   a 
.    1  -  _•  ;    destroys   the    1  iakasura, 
1;       oul      :-  India,  173;  restores  the 
mantaka,    175  ;   beloved  by 
the    <  ■■  ipis,     170  ;    protects     Radha, 
.  -  Audita,    i7<>,    Kesin,  and 
Kai.   ..    17.S;   relieves  Mathura,    179; 
Naraka,    1S0  ;    fights  with 
.  1S0;  destroys  Fever,  181  ;  over- 
-  a  rival  Krishna,  1S1  ;  his  death, 
rences  to  him  in  the  Maha- 
rata,    183  ;  a  deceiver,   184;  visits 
Hastinapur,  352  ft'. 
Kridmakrora,  a  name  of  Durga,  266 
Kritanta,  a  name  of  Yama,  74 
Kuii:    n,  a  name  of  Durga,  256 
Kumlihakarna.  a  Rakshas,  403 

ma,  incarnation  of  Vishnu,  119 
KuruN  the  sons  of  Dritarashtra,  344  ff. 
:.  a  name  of  kamadeva,  217 
Kuvera,  the  god  of  riches,  321 


nan,  the  brother  of  Kama,  147 
1  -:  107  ;  tin-  churning  of 

th(     product,  of  this 
1  1  ription   of  Lakshmi 

:.   .   Ill 
'  .  h0M    formed,  28 

!  Lai  diini,    112 

name  of  Brahma,  91 


M. 


of  Kai  adeva,  217 

Of  Vi   Imu,    107 


Mahabharata,    the    great    war    of    the, 


-->  ^  ^» 


ff. 


Mahadeva,  a  name  of  Siva,  228 
Mahakala,  a  name  of  Siva,  235 
Mahamari,  a  name  of  Kali,  263 
Mahamaya,  a  name  of  Durga,  249 
Mahendra,  a  name  of  Indra,  53 
Maheshwara,  a  name  of  Siva,  235 
Mahisha,  a  demon  slain  by  Durga,  250 
.Mahishamardini,  a  name  of  Durga,  257 
Manasa,  the  goddess  of  snakes,  395 
Manda,  a  demon  slain  by  Durga,  250  ff. 
Mangala,    one  of  the  planets,  360 :    see 

also  Kartikeya. 
Manmatha,  a  name  of  Kamadeva,  217 
Manu,    visited   by    Brahma    as    a    fish, 

Manvantara,  292 

Mara,  a  name  of  Kamadeva,  217 

Maricha,  a  hermit  who  assisted  Ravana, 

154  ff. 
Marichi,  a  son  of  Brahma,  307 
Martanda,  a  name  of  Surya,  30 
Marut,  a  name  of  Vayu,  56 
Maruts,  the,  57. 

Mathuranath,  a  name  of  Krishna,  184 
Matsya  Avatara,  the,  113 
Meghavahana,  a  name  of  Indra,  53 
Mihira,  a  name  of  Surya,  30 
Mitra  and  Varuna,  31 
Mritunjaya,  a  name  of  Siva,  235 
Muktakesi,  a  name  of  Durga,  264 
Mukunda,  a  name  of  Vishnu,  107 


N. 

Nakula,  a  son  of  the  Asvins,  345 

Nala,  the  builder  of  the  bridge  to  Lanka, 

336 
Nanda,    the    foster-father    of    Krishna, 

170  ff. 
Nandi,  Siva's  bull,  373 
Narada,   a  son  of  Brahma,   317  ff. ;  bis 

appearance  at    the  court  of  Vudhish- 

thira,  350;  his  advice  to  Jalandhara, 

37o 
Narayana,  a  name  of  Brahma,  85  ;  also 

of  Vishnu,  99 
Nlla,  a  son  of  Agni,  339 
Nilmadhava,  a  name  of  Vishnu,  210 
Nisumhha,     a    giant    shun    by    Durga, 

252 

Nrisingha  Avatara,  the,  124 


Index. 


409 


o. 

Ocean,  the  churning  of  the,  108 
Om,  explanation  of  the  word,  82 


P. 


Padma,  a  name  of  Lakshmi,  112 
Padmalaya,     ,,  ,,  112 

Panchanana,  a  form  of  Siva,  236 
Pandu,  the  father  of  the  Pandus,  345  ff. 
Panyakirti,  a  name  of  Garuda,  191 
Paramesthi,  a  name  of  Brahma,  91 
Parasakti,  a  name  of  Durga,  260 
Parasurama  Avatara,  the,  135;  his  birth, 

137;  meeting  with  Rama  Chandra,  140 
Parijata  tree,  the,  51 
Parjanya,  a  storm  deity,  54 
Parvati,    wife   of   Siva,    241  ;    how   she 

became  fair,  242  ;  why  she  reappeared 

on  earth,  243 
Pasi,  a  name  of  Varuna,  37 
Pavan,  a  name  of  Vayu,  56 
Penance,  forms  of,  280 
Pisachas,  the,  404 
Pitamvara,  a  name  of  Vishnu,  107 
Pitripati,  a  name  of  Yama,  74 
Planets,  the,  359 
Prachetas,  a  name  of  Varuna,  37 
Prachetasas,    the    reputed     parents     of 

Daksha,  311 
Pradyumna,  a  name  of  Kamadeva,  215 
Prahlada,the  son  of  Hiranyakasipu,  126  ff. 
Prajapati,  the  term  explained,  309 
Prithi,  wife  of  Pulastya,  305 
Prithivi :     see    Dyaus ;    also   as    sprung 

from  the  foot  of  Vishnu,  13 
Prithu,  father  of  Prithivi,  12 
Pulaha,  a  son  of  Brahma,  306 
Pulastya,       ,,  ,,         305 

Puranas,  the,  77 
Purusha,  a  name  of  Vishnu,  107 
Purushottama,     ,,         ,,        107 
Pushan,  a  sun-god,  30 


R. 

Rahu,  the   ascending   node,  363  ;     am- 
bassador to  Siva  for  Jalandhara,  370 
Raji,  an  earthly  king  who  became  Indra, 

49 
Rakshasas,   the,  cloud  demons,   54  >  c^e" 
scription  of,  403 


Rama   Chandra    Avatara,    the,    142  ff  . ; 

why  this  incarnation  was  made,  144  ; 

his    divine    assistants,    147  ;     releases 

Ahalya   from   a  curse,    148  ;    marries 

Sita,  150;  is  taught  that  he  is  divine 

by  Brahma,  164  ;  worshipped  Durga, 

251. 
Rati,  wife  of  Kamadeva,  215  ff. 
Ravana,  a  Rakshas,  143  ;  his  destruction 

foretold    by     Sita,     149  ;     his    birth, 

321 
Ravi,  360  :  see  also  Surya. 
Revati,  wife  of  Balarama,  187 
Ribhus,  the  pupils  of  Tvastri,  64 
Richika,    grandfather    of    Parasurama, 

136 
Rivers,  the  sacred,  390 
Rudra,   his   quarrel   with    Brahma,    87  ; 

origin  of,  89  :  see  Siva. 
Rukmini,  the  wife  of  Krishna,  168 


S. 


Sagara,  Asvamedha  of,  384  ff. 

Sahadeva,  a  son  of  the  Asvins,  345 

Sakambhari,  a  name  of  Durga,  256 

Sakra,  a  name  of  Indra,  53 

Salya,  a  leader  in  the  Pandu  war,  354 

Samana,  a  name  of  Yama,  74 

Samavurti         ,,         ,,  74 

Sambhu,  a  name  of  Siva,  226 

Sampati,  159,  379 

Samvara,  129  ;  a  demon  that  carried  off 

Kamadeva,  215 
Sangna,  wife  of  Surya,  28 
Sanhita,  definition  of  a,  4 
Sani,  a  planet,  362 
Sankara,  a  name  of  Siva,  226  ff. 
Santanu,  father  of  Bhishma,  342 
Saptajihva,  a  name  of  Agni,  24 
Sarasvati,  the  wife  of  Brahma,  91  ff. 
Sasti,  397 

Sati,  a  name  of  Qma,  238 
Satrughna,  the  brother  of  Rama,  147 
Satyavan,    a  hermit  restored    to  life   by 

Yama,  72 
Savitri,  wife  of  Satyavan,  72  ;  a  name  of 

Sarasvati,  94  :  see  also  Surya. 
Savitripati,  a  name  of  Brahma,  91 
Sesha,  the  serpent  deity,  169  ;  incarnate 

in  Balarama,  185 
Shalgrama,  the,  397 
Shitala,  394 


4io 


Index. 


Siddha-Senani,  a  name  of  Durga,  256 
Singhavahini,      ,,         ,,         ,,       257 
>ita,  origin  and  previous  birth  of,  149  ; 
rejected  by  her  husband,   163  ff.  :    see 
Rama. 

.  a,  worshipped  by  Brahma,  90  ;  fore- 
tells the  destruction  of  Ravana,  157; 
overcome  by  Krishna,  180;  the  de- 
stroyer, 21S  ;  identified  with  Kucha, 
220,  and  with  Agni,  221  ;  marries 
Uma,  222  ;  slighted  by  Daksha,  222  ; 
destroys  the  sacrifice,  224 ;  an  ascetic, 
226  ;  reason  for  this,  227  ;  why  called 
Mahadeva,  228  ;  origin  of  his  third 
eve,   229  ;  represented  by  the  Linga, 

233 
S   :na,  description  of,  59  ;  how  the  plant 

was  brought  to  earth,  60  ;  his  marriage, 
61  ;    identified     with    the    moon,    62 ; 
seduces  Tara,  62  :  see  also  Chandra. 
Sparsana,  a  name  of  Vayu,  56 
Sraddhadeva,  a  name  of  Yaraa,  74 
Sri,  a  name  of  Lakshmi,  107 
Srikanta,  a  name  of  Siva,  235 
Sthanu  ,,  „     235 

Subhadra,  sister  of  Krishna,  349 
Subramanya,  a  name  of  Kartikeya,  282 
Sngriva,  king  of  the  Vanars,  29,    157, 

326  IT. 
Sukanva,  wife  of  Chyavana,  38 
Sukra,  the  preceptor  of  the  Asuras,  103  ; 

a  planet,  361 
Sumbha,  a  giant  slain  by  Durga,  252  {{. 
Suparnakha,  a  sister  of  Ravana,  152  ff. 
Superna,  a  name  of  Garuda,  374 
Surya,   an   Aditya,    16 ;    hymns   to,    26  ; 
origin  of,  27  ;  his  marriage,   28  ;  be- 
comes a  horse,  28  ;  names  of,  29  ;  his 
children,  29  :  see  also  Ravi. 
Surya,  wife  of  the  Asvins,  37 
Sushna,  a  name  of  Vrittra,  49 

rga,  India's  heaven,  52 
Swargapati,  a  name  of  Indra,  53 
Swayambhu,  a  name  of  Vishnu,  107 


T. 

ttiriyas,  origin  of  the,  5 
I'M,  a  monkey  leader,  147;  a  name  of 
I  'urga,  2('  1 
L,  wife  of  Vrihaspati,  62 
'I  araka,  a  demon,  214 

Tarini,  a  d; •  of  I  >urga,  256 

I  "lie,  divisions  of,  293 


Trees,  sacred,  390 

Trident  of  Siva,  the,  how  produced,  28 

Tryambaka,  a  name  of  Siva,  235 

Tulsi,  a  sacred  plant,  392 

Tvastri  or  Visvakarma,  64 


U. 

Uma,  the  wife  of  Siva,  238  ff. 
Ushas,  origin  and  attributes  of,  40 


V. 


Vahans  of  the  gods,  the,  373 
Vahni,  a  name  of  Agni,  24 
Vaikunthanath,  a  name  of  Vishnu,  107 
Vaisravana,  a  name  of  Kuvera,  321 
Vaisravas,  a  name  of  Pulastya,  321 
Vaivasvata,  a  name  of  Yama,  74 
Vaka,  an  Asura  slain  by  Bhlma,  347 
Vamana  incarnation,  the,  130 
Vanars,  the  Monkey  tribe,  157,  326  ff. 
Varahar  incarnation,  the,  121 
Varuna  and  Mitra,  31  ;  characteristics  of, 

33  ;  human  sacrifices  offered  to,   34  ; 

worshipped  in  seasons  of  drought,  36  ; 

refuses  to  accede  to  Rama's  prayer,  337 
Vasishtha,  a  son  of  Brahma,  315 
Vasudeva,  the  father  of  Krishna,  168  ff. 
Yata,  a  name  of  Vayu,  56 
Vayu,  a  storm-god,  55 
Vedas,  the,  3  ;  their  number,  names,  and 

divisions,  4  ;  recensions  of,  5 
Vedavati,  a  name  of  Sita,  149 
Vedic    deities,     7  ;    how     they    became 

superior    to    the   Asuras,    7,    and    to 

other  deities,  8 
Vijaya,  a  name  of  Durga,  256 
Virabhadra,  an  emanation  of  Siva,  371 
Viradha,  a  giant  slain  by  Rama,    152  ; 

cursed  by  Kuvera,  324 
Vishnu,   the    Preserver,   98 ;   superiority 

over  other    gods,    100 ;    admitted    by 

Siva,  101  ;  his  work.  101  ;  reason  for 

his  incarnations,    103 ;    benefits    from 

the  worship   of,    104 ;    conquered    in 

battle  by  Jalandhara,  171 
Vishvamvara,  a  name  of  Vishnu,  107 
\  isvakarma  :  see  Tvastri.     The  maker  of 

the  image  of  Jagannath,  209 
Visvamitra,  a  hermit,  147 
VisvaiTipa,  a  son  of  Visvakarma,   65 


Index. 


411 


Vrihaspati,  the  preceptor  of  the  gods, 
191  ;  one  of  the  planets,  361 

Vyasa,  aRishi,  343;  father  of  Pandu,  &c., 
347  ;  miraculous  powers  of,  353 


Y. 


Yadapati,  a  name  of  Varuna,  37 
Yajneswara,  a  name  of  Vishnu,  107 


Yakshas,  the,  404 

Yakshi,  wife  of  Kuvera,  325 

Yama,  origin  of,  67  ;  his  kingdom,  68  ; 

marriage,   71  ;  interview  with  Savitri, 

72 
Yoganindra,     the    energy    of    Krishna, 

169 
Yudhishthira,    a    son    of  Dharma,   345  ; 

character  of,  345  ;  king  of  Hastinapur, 

356  ;  enters  heaven,  358 
Yugas,  the  four,  293 


THE    NIM  TREE. 


PI  PAL   LEAVES. 


DATE  DUE                           1 

*S» 

-U " ■'—' 

GAYLORD 

PRINTED  IN  U.S    A. 

