===== Internet Archive OCR: fablesproverbsfr00wilkuoft_djvu.txt =====

Mess^^  George  Routledge  &   Sons 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2007  with  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


http://www.archive.org/details/fablesproverbsfrOOwilkuoft 


BALLANTYNE,  HANSON  AND  CO.,  EDINBLRGM 
CttANDOS  STREET.  LONDON 


FABLES   AND    PROVERBS 


3from  the  ^aneMt 


BEING  THE 


HITOPADESA 


TRANSLATED   BY 


CHARLES   WILKINS 


IFITff  AN  INTRODUCTION  BY  HENRY  MO  RLE  Y 

M..D.,    PROFESSOR  OF   ENGLISH   LITERATURE   AT 
I'MVEKSITV  COLI.EGK,   LONDOX 


SECOND  EDITION 


LONDON 
GEORGE     ROUTLEDGE     AND     SONS 

BROADWAY,    LUDGATE  HILL 

NEW     YORK:    9    LAFAYETTE    PLACE 

1886 


/iv-j  I 


MORLEY'S     UNIVERSAL     LIBRARY 


1.  SherUatCs  Plays. 

2.  Plays  from  Mali  ere.  By 

English  Dramatists. 

3.  Marlcnue's    Faiistiis   and 

Goethe's  Faust. 

4.  Chronicle  of  the  Cid. 

5 .  Rabelais^  Gargantiia  and  ih e 

Heroic  Deeds  of  Pantag>  uei, 

6.  The  Prince.     J3y  Maciiia- 

VELLI. 

7.  Bacon^s  Essays. 

8.  Defoe's  Journal   of  the 

Plague  Year. 

9.  Locke  on  Civil  Government 

and  Filmcr's  ^Tatriarcha." 

1 0.  Butler's  Analog  v  ofRelig  ion . 

11.  Dry  den's  Virgil. 

12.  Scott's    Demonology  and 

Witchcraft. 

13.  Herriclis  Hespcrides. 

14.  Coleridge's  Table-Talk. 

15.  Boccaccio's  Decameron. 

16.  Sterne's  Tristram  Shandy. 

17.  Chapman's  Homer's  Iliad. 

18.  Aledianial  7 ales. 

19.  Voltaire's  Condide^  and 

yohnsons  Rassclas. 


20.  Plays  and  Poems.    By^EN 

JONSON. 

21.  Leviathan.     By  ThomaS 

HOBBES. 

22.  Hudibras.     By  SAMUEL 

P>UTI.ER. 

23.  Lieal  Covimomvealths, 

24.  Cavendish's  Life  of  Wolsey. 
25     &  26.     Don  Quixote.     In 

Two  Volumes. 
2  7 .  Burlesque  Plays  and  Poems. 

28.  Dante's  Divine  Comedy. 

Longfellow's  Translation. 

29.  Golds7)tith's  Vicar  of  Wake- 
pield.  Plays,  and  Poems. 

30.  Fables  and  Proverbs  from 

tht  Sanskrit.     {Hitopadesa.) 

31.  Charles  Lamb's  Essays  of 

Elia. 

32.  The  History  of  Thomas 

Ellivood. 

33.  Etn  rson's  Essays,  &c. 

34.  Southey's  Life  of  Nelson. 

35.  De    Quinciy's    Confess :ons 

0/  an  Opitan-Eater,  ifc. 

36.  Stories  of  Ireland.   By  M  i  s 

Edgeworth. 

37.  Aristophanes 


Marvels  of  clear  type  and   general  neatness."— Z)rt/7y  Telegraph. 


INTRODUCTION. 


In  the  family  of  languages  to  which  English  belongs,  the  Indo- 
European  Family,  Sanskrit  is  eldest  brother.  The  parent 
language  was  spoken  in  a  remote  prehistoric  time  by  a  people 
living  somewhere  about  the  five  rivers  of  the  Punjaub.  By 
migrations  of  that  people  westward  there  were  afterwards 
established  all  the  nations  of  the  Iranian,  Slavonic,  Celtic, 
Teutonic  and  Classical  stocks.  The  parent  language,  Aryan, 
has  itself  long  since  been  lost  ;  but  its  words,  subjected  to  regular 
varieties  of  change,  have  passed  into  many  lands.  Additions 
have  been  many,  but  those  words  of  which  the  roots  are  common 
to  us  all,  bear  witness  to  the  common  origin  of  the  chief  nations 
of  Europe,  and  to  their  brotherhood  with  races  now  in  India. 

Descendants  of  that  remote  prehistoric  Aryan  people,  who  re- 
mained in  India  and  were  less  remote,  but  also  prehistoric,  spoke 
Sanskrit.  They  left  in  their  own  tongue  sacred  books  by  which 
Sanskrit  was  established  as  a  classical  language.  It  was  cultivated 
by  the  religious  orders  and  used  as  the  language  in  which  all 
high  religious  teaching  was  enshrined.  Thus  its  grammar  was 
studied  and  preserved,  and  the  language  itself,  first  born  of  the  old 
Aryan,  has  been  maintained  in  its  purity  until  this  day.  As  the 
vernacular  speech  of  a  living  people,  applied  to  all  their  common 
daily  wants,  Sanskrit  has  not  been  used  within  the  memory  of 
man,  but  in  some  parts  of  India  the  vernacular  does  not  differ 
from  it  very  greatly. 

The  oldest  Sanskrit  books  are  at  the  fountain-head  of  European 
literature.  These  are  the  four  Vedas,  regarded  as  the  source  of 
all  other  Sastras  or  sacred  books.  The  Vedas  are  written  in 
an  Iambic  measure  of  eight  syllables,  and  the  earliest  of  them 
have  been  assigned  by  Sir  William  Jones  to  a  date  as  early  as 
1 500  years  before  Christ.  The  word  Veda  means  knowledge,  but 
though  names  of  authors  of  the  several  parts  were  preserved, 
the  whole  was  taken  to  mean  inspired  knowledge,  "the  self- 
evident  word  proceeding  out  of  the  mouth  of  God,  this  is  the 
Veda."     The  first  of  the  Vedas,  called  Rig  from  a  word  meaning 


6  INTRODUCTION, 

praise,  expresses  the  relations  between  man  and  God.  The 
second,  called  Yajur,  from  a  word  meaning  worship,  contains 
instructions  upon  ceremonial.  The  third,  called  Sama,  from  a 
word  signifying  a  prayer  arranged  for  singing,  contains  pieces 
arranged  as  chants.  Atharva,  the  fourth  Veda,  less  ancient  than 
the  rest,  contains  forms  of  imprecation,  prayers,  hymns,  and  fifty- 
two  theological  treatises  called  Upanishads.  Atharvan  is  referred 
to  in  it  as  a  king  appointed  by  Brahma  to  protect  inferior  beings. 
There  are  also  detached  Upanishads  which  are  regarded  as  of 
less  authority  than  the  fifty-two  contained  in  the  Atharva- 
Veda.  The  Upanishads,  or  argumentative  parts  of  the  Vedas, 
are  regarded  as  forming  the  J  nana,  or  philosophical  part  of  the 
sacred  books,  and  theological  argument  is  based  on  these ;  the 
parts  devoted  to  pure  teaching  of  the  religious  system,  its 
customs,  sacrifices,  ceremonies,  form  the  Brahmanas  ;  and  the 
prayers  and  hymns  in  each  Veda  constitute  its  Sanhita.  Thus, 
with  regard  to  this  matter  the  Vedas  are  said  to  contain  Brah- 
manas, Jnana  and  Sanhita.  The  Brahmanas  recognize  a  three- 
fold Veda,  not  reckoning  the  fourth,  and  derive  the  third  from 
the  first,  the  Rig- Veda,  which  teaches  that  there  is  one  only 
supreme  God,  a  pure  spirit  dwelling  in  eternal  rest  and  silence, 
who  is  All,  and  in  All.  He  is  the  supreme  Brahma,  who  created 
the  world  by  three  manifestations  drawn  from  himself,  and 
named  Brahmd,  Vishnu,  Siva,  originally  united  in  one  essence, 
so  that  "  the  great  One"  became  known  as  one  Person  and  three 
gods.  Brahmd,  represents  Creation,  Vishnu  Preservation,  and 
Siva  Destruction.  Of  Vishnu,  the  Preserver,  there  have  been 
nine  Avatars  or  Incarnations,  the  first  six  were  in  the  golden 
age  of  the  world,  the  seventh  was  as  Rama,  the  eighth  as 
Krishna,  the  ninth  as  Buddha.  The  tenth,  in  which  he  will 
appear  as  a  white  horse,  is  yet  awaited.  In  his  last  Avatar,  as 
Buddha,  Vishnu  promoted  scepticism  to  the  end  that  the  giants, 
wanting  faith,  might  cease  to  obtain  by  prayer  the  powers  that 
they  misapplied. 

The  time  during  which  the  Vedas  were  produced  extended 
over  centuries,  with  periodic  changes  of  style,  and  has  been 
divided  into  four  periods,  the  last  of  which,  from  600  to 
200  B.C.,  was  the  period  of  Sutra  literature.  Sutra  means  a 
string,  and  stands  for  a  literature  of  short  sayings  strung  to- 
gether, by  teachers  who  studied  brevity,  and  of  whom  it  was 
said,  in  their  own  proverbial  way,  that  an  author  rejoiceth  in  the 
economizing  of  half  a  short  vowel  as  much  as  in  the  birth  of  a 
son. 

There  were  drawn  from  the  four  Vedas  four  Upa- Vedas,  One 
was  on  Medicine  from  the  Rig- Veda ;  one  on  Music  from  the 
S^ma-Veda  ;  one  on  Arms  and  Implements  of  War,  from  the 
Yajur-Veda  ;  and  one  on  sixty-four  Mechanical  Arts,  from  the 
Atharva- Veda.     The  Upa- Vedas  are  now  lost. 


INTRODUCTION  f 

Also  there  were  six  \  edangas,  or  limbs  of  the  Veda,  treating 
severally  of  six  sciences  needed  for  interpretation  of  the  sacred 
books.  They  were  Pronunciation,  Grammar,  Prosody,  Expla- 
nation of  difficult  words  or  phrases,  Religious  Ceremonial,  and 
Astrology.  To  these  were  added  four  Upangas  or  additional 
limbs  ;  History  (the  Purana) ;  Logic  (the  Nyaya)  ;  Moral  Philo- 
sophy (the  Mimansa)  ;  and  Jurisprudence  (the  Dharma-Sastra). 

The  earliest  of  these  sacred  writings,  in  their  earliest  period, 
were  preserved  only  by  oral  tradition.  They  continued  to  live 
in  the  persons  of  men  of  the  sacred  caste,  and  thus  different 
texts  or  versions  of  the  Vedas,  known  as  Sakhas,  were  preserved 
in  different  Charanas  or  schools  of  the  Brahmans,  who  pre- 
served the  books  in  memory.  A  name  for  a  Brahman  settlement 
was  a  Parishad.  It  was  said  that  "four  or  even  three  able  men 
from  among  the  Brahmans  in  a  \'illage  who  know  the  Veda  and 
keep  the  sacrificial  fire,  form  a  Parisliad."'  Members  of  different 
Parishads  might  be  associated  in  one  school  or  Charana. 

Of  the  Law  Books,  or  Dharma-Sastras,  the  most  ancient  and 
most  famous  is  that  known  as  the  "  Institutes  of  Manu,"  first 
translated  into  English  by  Sir  William  Jones.  Manu  was  fabled 
to  be  the  son  of  Brahma,  to  have  preserved  the  Vedas  from 
destruction  in  the  Hindoo  deluge,  and  to  have  given  in  that 
Book  of  Laws  an  abstract  of  their  contents. 

The  Indians  had  also  six  Darsanas,  or  systems  of  philosophy, 
all  seeking  the  highest  good  in  eternal  happiness,  and  all  accept- 
ing the  authority  of  the  Vedas  but  interpreting  them  variously. 
The  six  systems  are  essentially  three.  One,  the  Nyaya,  brings 
knowledge  in  through  the  five  channels  of  the  senses  ;  one,  the 
Sankhya,  looks  to  the  emotions,  and  seeks  the  sources  of 
pleasure,  pain,  and  the  neutral  state  of  indifference,  in  which 
states  alone  it  holds  external  nature  to  consist;  one,  the 
Vedantin,  seeks  only  to  determine  what  Is  or  Is  Not.  Besides  the 
philosophy  of  the  Darsanas,  there  were  the  teachings  of  several 
sects  ;  among  which  the  most  important  in  their  influence  on 
thought  was  that  of  the  Buddhists,  chief  opponents  of  the 
Brahmans.  Their  founder,  Buddha  Sakya  Muni,  began  his 
teaching  at  an  uncertain  date,  but  it  prevailed  in  India  and 
Ceylon  in  the  third  centuiy  before  Christ,  and  was  introduced 
into  China  A.D.  6i.  Though  the  Brahmans  finally  prevailed  in 
India,  the  Buddhists  hevld  their  own  in  Ceylon,  Burmah  and 
China.  They  denied  the  existence  of  the  One  First  Cause 
represented  by  the  Brahma  who  gave  forth  Brahmd,  Vishnu  and 
Siva  to  create,  preserve,  destroy  ;  One  who  is  All  in  All,  and 
of  whom  all  forms  of  divinity — Indra,  the  Heavens  with  his 
thunderbolt  and  thousand  eyes ;  Surya,  the  sun  ;  Agni,  fire  ; 
Pavana,  wind ;  Varuna,  ocean — are  manifestations.  Not  less 
were  the  elements  of  human  life  and  death  such  manifestations 
of  the  God  in  all, — Ganasa,  wisdom,  perfecter  of  work  ;  Lakshmi, 


8  INTRODUCTION. 

goddess  of  prosperity,  fomied  by  the  churning  of  the  sea  ;  Saras- 
wati,  goddess  of  learning  ;  and  Yama,  judge  of  the  dead. 

Epic  and  dramatic  poetry  form  also  a  part  of  Sanskrit  litera- 
ture. The  two  great  Sanskrit  epics  are  the  Ramdyana,  or 
Adventures  of  Rama  (one  of  the  incarnations  of  Vishnu),  and 
the  Maha-bharata  ;  both  of  them  less  ancient  than  the  Vedas, 
but  both  so  old  that,  like  the  Vedas,  they  were  long  preserved 
by  oral  tradition  before  they  were  committed  to  writing.  The 
Maha-bhdrata  is  in  eighteen  books,  containing  altogether 
220,000  lines,  and  is  a  collection  of  national  legends.  In  old 
Indian  legend  there  were  two  dynasties  of  the  north ;  those  of 
the  Sun,  those  of  the  Moon.  Rama,  the  hero  of  the  Ramdyana, 
was  of  the  line  of  the  Sun  ;  Bhdrata,  the  hero  of  the  chief  story 
in  the  Maha-bharata,  was  of  the  line  of  the  Moon. 

The  Bhagavad-Gita  is  an  episode  in  the  Maha-bhdrata,  a 
divine  song  in  the  form  of  a  calm  dialogue  on  eighteen  subjects 
held  between  Krishna,  the  eighth  Avatar  of  Vishnu,  and  his 
pupil  Arjuna,  while  tumult  of  battle  raged  around  them. 

The  great  dramatist  in  Sanskrit  literature  was  Kalidasa, 
author  of  the  Sakuntala.  The  oldest  known  collection  of 
Fables  is  the  Pancha-Tantra,  a  collection  into  Five  Tantras  or 
sections,  which  is  represented  by  the  book  now  in  the  reader's 
hand,  The  Hitopadesa,  or  Friendly  Instructor,  in  four  books. 
The  purpose  of  its  interwoven  fables  and  maxims  was  to  present, 
in  a  way  likely  to  win  and  keep  attention,  a  system  of  good 
counsel  for  right  training  of  a  prince  in  all  the  chief  affairs  of 
life.  It  comes  to  us  from  a  far  place  and  time  as  a  manual  of 
worldly  wisdom,  inspired  throughout  by  the  religion  of  its  place 
and  time.  There  are,  in  fact,  so  far  as  concern  the  great  forces 
of  Nature,  but  accidental  differences  between  the  cities  of  men 
or  the  ant-hills  of  to-day  and  yesterday.  When  allowance  has 
been  made  for  some  real  progress  in  civilization,  as  in  the 
recognition  of  the  place  of  women  in  society,  every  fable  in  the 
Hitopadesa  can  still  be  applied  to  human  character  ;  every 
maxim  quoted  from  the  wise  men  of  two  or  three  thousand 
years  ago,  when  parted  from  the  local  accidents  of  form,  might 
find  its  time  for  being  quoted  now  in  church,  at  home,  or  upon 
'Change. 

H.  M. 

Seltcmhci;  1885. 


TRANSLATOR'S   PREFACE. 

The  following  translation,  begun  and  completed  this 
summer  during  a  temporary  residence  at  Bath,  is  a 
faithful  portrait  of  a  beautiful  work,  which  in  the 
opinions  of  many  learned  men,  natives  and  Europeans, 
with  whom  I  had  the  honour  to  converse  upon  the 
subject  before  I  left  Bengal,  is  the  Sanskrit  original 
of  those  celebrated  fables,  which  after  passing  through 
most  of  the  Oriental  languages,  ancient  and  modern, 
with  various  alterations  to  accommodate  them  to 
the  taste  and  genius  of  those  for  whose  benefit  or 
amusement  they  were  designed,  and  under  different 
appellations,  at  length  were  introduced  to  the  know- 
ledge of  the  European  world  with  a  title  importing 
them  to  have  been  originally  written  by  Pilpay,  or 
Bidpai,  an  ancient  Brahman ;  two  names  of  which, 
as  far  as  my  inquiries  have  extended,  the  Brahmans 
of  the  present  times  are  totally  ignorant.  Sir 
William  Jones,  whose  surprising  talents  are  ever 
employed  in  seeking  fresh  sources  of  knowledge,  and 
promoting  their  cultivation,  in  an  elegant  discourse 
delivered    by    him    the    26th     of    February,     1786, 


10  TRANSLATORS  PREFACE, 

since  ni}-  return  from  India,  at  a  meeting  of  the 
Society  for  inquiring  into  the  History,  civil  and 
natural,  the  Antiquities,  Arts,  Sciences,  and  Literature 
of  Asia,  expresses  his  sentiments  upon  this  subject 
in  the  following  words  : — 

"Their  (the  Hindoos)  Niti-Sastra,  or  System  of 
Ethics,  is  yet  preserved,  and  the  fables  of  Vishnu- 
Serma,  whom  we  ridiculously  call  Pilpay,  are  the 
most  beautiful,  if  not  the  most  ancient,  collection  of 
Apologues  in  the  world.  They  were  first  translated 
from  the  Sanskrit  in  the  sixth  century,  by  Buzer- 
chumihr,or  ''bright  as  the  sun,"  the  chief  physician,  and 
afterwards  the  Vizier  of  the  great  Anushirwan,  and 
are  extant  under  various  names  in  more  than  twenty 
languages,  but  their  original  title  is  Hitopadesa,  or 
'•'amicable  instruction  ;"  and  as  the  very  existence  of 
i^sop,  whom  the  Arabs  believe  to  have  been  an 
Abyssinian,  appears  rather  doubtful,  I  am  not  disin- 
clined to  suppose  that  the  first  moral  fables  which 
appeared  in  Europe  were  of  Indian  or  Ethiopian 
origin." 

Granting  the  Hitopadesa  be  the  work  it  is  supposed 
to  be,  to  save  the  learned  reader  the  trouble  of  re- 
ferring to  other  books  to  trace  its  history,  I  have 
here  brought  all  I  have  collected  upon  the  subject 
under  one  view. 

The  learned  Eraser,  in  his  catalogue  of  Oriental 
manuscripts,  under  the  article  Ayar  Danish,  speaks 


TRANS  LA  TOR'S  PREFA  CE.  1 1 

thus :  "  The  ancient  Brahmins  of  India,  after  a 
great  deal  of  time  and  labour,  compiled  a  treatise 
(which  they  called  Kurtuk  Dumnik*)  in  which 
were  inserted  the  choicest  treasures  of  wisdom,  and 
the  perfectest  rules  for  governing  a  people.  This 
book  they  presented  to  their  Rajahs,  who  kept  it 
with  the  greatest  secrecy  and  care.  About  the  time 
of  Mahommed's  birth,  or  the  latter  end  of  the  sixth 
century,  Noishervan  the  Just,  who  then  reigned  in 
Persia,  discovered  a  great  inclination  to  see  that  book  : 
for  which  purpose  one  Burzuvia,  a  physician,  who 
had  a  surprising  talent  in  learning  several  languages, 
particularly  the  Sanskrit,  was  introduced  to  him  as 
the  properest  person  to  be  employed  to  get  a  copy 
thereof.  He  went  to  India  ;  where,  after  some  years' 
stay,  and  great  trouble,  he  procured  it.  It  was  trans- 
lated into  the  Pehluvi  language  by  him,  and  Buzr- 
jumehr  the  Vizier.  Noishervan  ever  after,  and  all  his 
successors,  the  Persian  kings,  had  this  book  in  high 
esteem,  and  took  the  greatest  care  to  keep  it  secret. 
At  last  Abu  Jaffer  Mansour  zu  Nikk\',  who  was  the 
second  Khaliff  of  the  Abassi  reign,  by  great  search 
got  a  copy  thereof  in  the  Pehluvi  language,  and 
ordered  Iman  Hossan  Abdal  Mokaffa,  who  was 
the  most  learned  of  the  age,  to  translate  it  into 
Arabic.     This  prince  ever  after  made  it  his  guide, 

*  The  Karattaka  and  Damanaka  of  the  following  work. 


1 2  TRANS  LA  TOR'S  PREFA  CE. 

and  not  only  in  affairs  relating  to  the  government, 
but  in  private  life  also. 

"  In  the  year  380  of  the  Hegira,  Sultan  Mahmud 
Ghazi  put  it  into  verse.  And  afterwards,  in  the  year 
515,  by  order  of  Bheram  Shah  ben  Massaud,  that 
which  Abdal  Mokaffa  had  translated  was  retranslated 
into  Persic,  by  Abul  Mala  Nasser  Allah  Mustofi  ; 
and  this  is  that  KuHla  Dumna  which  is  now  extant. 
As  this  latter  had  too  many  Arabic  verses  and  obsolete 
phrases  in  it,  Molana  Ali  ben  Hossein  Vaez,  at  the 
request  of  Emir  Soheli,  keeper  of  the  seals  to 
Sultan  Hossein  Miiza,  put  it  into  a  more  modern 
style,  and  gave  it  the  title  of  Anuar  Soheli. 

"  In  the  year  1002,  the  Great  Moghol  Jalal  o' 
Din  Mahommed  Akbar  ordered  his  own  secretary 
and  vizier,  the  learned  Abul  Fazl,  to  illustrate  the 
obscure  passages,  abridge  the  long  digressions,  and 
put  it  into  such  a  style  as  would  be  most  familiar  to 
all  capacities  ;  which  he  accordingly  did,  and  gave 
it  the  name  of  Ayar  Danish,  or  the  Criterion  of 
Wisdom." 

Iwom  other  sources  I  have  drawn  the  following 
conclusions: — That  in  the  year  1709,  the  Kulila 
Dumna,  the  Persian  version  of  Abul  Mala  Nasser 
Allah  Mustofi  made  in  the  515th  year  of  the  Hegira, 
was  translated  into  PVench  with  the  title  of  "  Lcs 
Conseils  et  les  Maximes  dePilpay,  Philosophe  Indien, 
sur   les   divers    Ktats  de  la  Vie."     This   edition    re- 


TRANSLA  TORS  PRE  FA  CE.  13 

sembles  the  Hitopadesa  more  than  any  other  I 
have  seen,  and  is  evidently  the  immediate  original 
of  the  English  "  Instructive  and  entertaining  Fables 
of  Pilpay,  an  ancient  Indian  Philosopher,"  which  in 
1775  had  gone  through  five  editions. 

The  Anuar  Soheli  above  mentioned,  about  the 
year  1 540  was  rendered  into  the  Turkish  language  ; 
and  the  translator  is  said  to  have  bestowed  twenty 
years'  labour  upon  it.  In  the  year  1724,  this  edition 
M.  Galland  began  to  translate  into  French,  and  the 
four  first  chapters  were  then  published ;  but  in  the 
year  1778  M.  Cardonne  completed  the  work  in  three 
volumes,  giving  it  the  name  of  **  Contes  et  Fables 
Indiennes  de  Bidpai  et  de  Lokman ;  traduites  d'Ali 
Tchelebi-ben  Saleh  auteur  Turk." 

If  the  Hitopadesa  of  Vishnu-Serma  be,  as  we 
have  every  reason  to  conclude,  the  prototype  of  the 
several  compositions  which  have  been  mentioned,  its 
age  is  tolerably  ascertained  to  be  upwards  of  eleven 
hundred  years.  Few  Sanskrit  books  bear  either 
the  name  of  the  real  author  or  the  date  of  the  year 
in  which  they  were  written  ;  and  it  is  to  circum- 
stantial evidence  we  must  generally  trust  for  the 
proof  of  either. 

In  executing  this  work  I  have  scrupulously  adhered 
to  the  text ;  and  I  have  preferred  drawing  a  picture  of 
which  it  may  be  said — "  I  can  suppose  it  a  strong  like- 
ness, although  I  am  unacquainted  with  the  original/' 


14  TRANS  LA  TOR'S  PRE  FA  CE. 

to  a  flattering  portrait,  where  characteristic  features, 
because  not  altogether  consonant  to  European  taste, 
must  liave  been  sacrificed  to  the  harmony  of  com- 
position. 

CHARLES  WILKINS. 


Queen's  Square,  Bloomsbury, 
isi  November ^  1787. 


CONTENTS. 


Author's  Introduction 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE  ACQUISITION  OF  A   FRIEND. 

FABLE 

I.  The  story  of  the  pigeons,  the  crow,  the  mouse,  the  tortoise^ 
and  the  deer        .... 
II.  The  traveller  and  the  tiger 

III.  The  deer,  the  jackal,  and  the  crow  . 

IV.  The  blind  jackal,  the  cat,  and  the  birds 
V.  The  history  of  Hiranyaka  the  mouse 

VI.  The  old  man  and  his  young  wife 
VII.  The  huntsman,  the  deer,  the  boar,  the 

jackal  ..... 

VIII.  The  Rajah's  son  and  the  merchant's  wife 
IX.  The  jackal  and  the  elephant 


CHAPTER  II. 
THE  SEPARATION  OF  A  FAVOURITE. 
I.  The  story  of  the  bull,  the  two  jackals,  and  the  lion 


II.  The  ape  and  the  wedge 

J 1 1.  The  thief,  the  ass,  and  the  dog  .... 

IV.  The  lion,  the  mouse,  and  the  cat       ...         . 

V.  The  poor  woman  and  the  bell  ..... 

VI.  The  adventures  of  Kandarpaketu,  comprising  the  story  ct 

the  cowkeeper,  the  barber,  and  their  wives;  and  the 

history  of  the  merchant  whose  avarice  occasioned  the 

loss  of  all  his  wealth 


99 
107 
108 
124 
127 


^34 


i6 


CONTENTS 


FABLE  PAGE 

VII.  The  farmer's  wife  and  her  two  gallants      .         .         .         .140 
VIII.  The  crow,  the  golden  chain,  and  the  black  serpent     .        .     142 

IX.  The  lion  and  the  rabbit 143 

X.  The  partridges  and  the  sea        .        .        .        ,        ,        .152 


CHAPTER    III. 

OF  DISPUTING. 
I.  The  history  of  the  geese  and  the  peacocks 
II.  The  birds  and  the  monkeys 

III.  The  ass  dressed  in  a  tiger's  skin 

IV.  The  elephants  and  the  rabbits 
V.  The  goose  and  the  crow    . 

VI.  The  Varttaka  and  the  crow 
VII.  The  wheelwright  and  his  wife 
VIII.  The  blue  jackal 

IX.  The  man  who  sacrificed  his  own  son 
X.  The  barber  who  killed  a  beggar 

CHAPTER  IV. 

OF   MAKING  PEACE. 
I.  Continuation  of  the  history  of  the  geese  and  the  peacocks 
II.  The  tortoise  and  the  two  geese 

III.  The  three  fish 

IV.  The  merchant  and  his  artful  wife       .... 
V.  The  boobies  and  weasel 

VI.  The  mouse  and  the  hermit 

VII.  The  booby  and  the  crab 

VIII.   The  Brahman  who  brake  the  pots  and  pans 

IX.  The  two  giants 

X.  The  Brahman  and  his  goat 

XI.  The  camel,  the  crow,  the  tiger,  and  the  jackal  . 

XII.  The  old  serpent  and  the  frogs 

XIII.  The  Brahman  and  his  weasel 


168 
171 
173 
175 
181 
182 
183 
193 
205 
212 


227 
228 
229 
230 
232 
236 
237 
240 
242 
251 

2.53 
257 

266 


The    Hitopadesa 

FABLES  AND  PROVERBS. 


AUTHOR'S   INTRODUCTION. 

Reverence  io  Ganes  !  * 
Reverence  to  Saraswatce  !  f 

*  May     the     completion,    through     the  mercy    of 

Dhoorjatee,t  on  whose   head    is   planted  a  crescent 

among  the  frothy  streams  of  Janhavee,§  be  for  the 
edification  of  the  worthy ! 

*  Tiie  god  of  prudence  and  policy. 

t  The  goddess  of  harmony  and  the  arts. 

+  One  of  the  titles  of  Seeva,  the  Deity  in  his  destroying  quality. 
The  word  s^'gnifies,  he  who  weareth  his  hair  bound  about  hi:  head  in  the 
form  of  a  tiara,  as  it  is  now  worn  by  those  penitents  who  are  known  in 
India  by  the  name  of  Yogees  or  Sanyasees. 

§  A  name  of  the  river  Ganga,  or  the  Ganges,  as  it  is  erroneously 
called.  This  river  is  supposed  to  flow  from  the  hair  of  Seeva.  The 
truth  seems  to  be,  that  Seeva  is  the  name  of  the  mountain  in  which  is 
the  source  of  that  river  ;  for  amongst  other  epiihets  usually  given  to 
that  Deity,  is  found  that  of  Geereesa,  Lord  of  mountains ;  and  his 
consort  is  commonly  called  Doorga,  a  place  of  difficult  access,  and 
Parvatee,  a  patronymic  formed  from  parvata,  a  mountain. 


i8  THE  HITOPADESA : 

*  This  work,  entitled  Hitopadesa,*  afifordeth 
elegance  in  the  Sanskrit  t  idioms,  in  every  part 
variety  of  language,  and  inculcateth  the  doctrine  of 
prudence  and  policy. 

'  The  wise  man  should  study  the  acquisition  of 
science  and  riches,  as  if  he  were  not  subject  to  sick- 
ness and  death ;  but  to  the  duties  of  religion  he 
should  attend,  as  if  death  had  seized  him  by  the 
hair. 

*  Knowledge  produceth  humility;  from  humility 
proceedeth  worthiness  ;  from  worthiness  riches  are 
acquired  ;  from  riches  religion,  J  and  thence  happi- 
ness. 

*  Of  all  things  knowledge  is  esteemed  the  most 
precious  treasure ;  because  of  its  incapacity  to  be 
stolen,  to  be  given  away,  or  ever  to  be  consumed. 

^  Knowledge  introduceth  a  man  to  acquaintance  ; 
and,  as  the  humble  stream  to  the  ocean,  so  doth  it 
conduct  him  into  the  hard-acquired  presence  of  the 
prince,  whence  fortune  floweth. 

*  A  compound  of  /u'/a,  health,  welfare,  u/a,  a  preposition,  implying 
poximit)\  and  desa  signifying  a  shcnvin^  or  pointing.  The  common 
acceptation  of  the  word  is  tiseful,  or  beneficial,  instruction. 

+  The  learned  language  of  the  Brahmans  is  so  called.  It  is  a  com- 
pound of  san  (the  m  of  sam  being,  by  rule,  changed  to  «,  before  a 
dental  s  ;  as  the  m  of  the  Latin  com  before  the  same  letter  in  the  word 
construction),  a  preposition  signifying  completion,  and  skrila  (for  krita\ 
donf,  made,  finished. 

X  According  to  our  mode  of  thinking  this  seems  odd  ;  but  where 
religion  consists  in  sacrifices,  and  other  expensive  ceremonies,  a  poor 
man  hath  but  a  sad  chance  of  providing  for  his  future  happiness. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  19 

'■  There  are  two  species  of  knowledge  in  use :  the 
knowledge  of  arms,  and  the  knowledge  of  books. 
The  first  is  the  scoff  of  the  wise,  whilst  the  last  is  for 
ever  honoured. 

*  As  the  impressions  made  upon  a  new  vessel  are 
not  easily  to  be  effaced,  so  here  youth  are  taught 
prudence  through  the  allurement  of  fable.' 

This    work    is    divided    under    four    heads : — The 
Acquisition    of    a    Friend.      The    Separation    of    a  ^ 
Favourite.     Of  Disputing^  Of  making  Peace.    And 
it  is,  chiefly,  drawn  and  written  from  the  Tantra  and 
other  Sastras.* 

On  the  banks  of  the  river  Bhageeratheet  there  is  a 
remarkable  city  called  Pataneeputra,!  where  there 
was  formerly  a  Rajah,  endued  with  every  noble 
quality,  whose  name  was  Sudarsana.§  One  day  he 
heard  the  two  following  verses,  as  they  were  re- 
peating by  some  one  : 


*  The  translator  has  reason  to  suppose  that  these  words  extend  only 
to  the  maxims,  which  are,  in  the  original,  in  verse,  and  are  known  to  be 
quotations  from  other  authors ;  particularly  from  the  Mahabharat,  the 
Smreetee-sastra  of  Manoo,  the  Geeta,  and,  as  the  author  himself  says, 
the  Tantra-sastra. 

+  The  river  Ganges. 

:J:  An  ancient  name  for  the  city  which  i^  now  called  Patna. 

§  All  the  proper  names  throughout  this  work  are,  like  this,  signifi- 
cant, They  have  an  awkward  appearance  when  translated,  which  is 
the  reason  so  few  have  been  rendered  into  English.  The  names  of  per- 
sons in  India  are,  to  this  day,  all  significant,  and,  for  the  most  part, 
derived  from  tlte  Sanskrit. 


20  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

*  He  who  is  not  possessed  of  such  a  book  as  will 
dispel  many  doubts,  point  out  hidden  treasures,  and 
is,  as  it  were,  a  mirror  of  all  things,  is  even  an 
ignorant  man. 

*  Youth,  abundant  wealth,  high  birth,  and  inex- 
perience, are,  each  of  them,  the  source  of  ruin. 
What  then  must  be  the  fate  of  him  in  whom  all  four 
are  combined  ? ' 

The  Rajah  had  no  sooner  heard  these  lines  than 
he  began  to  consider,  with  an  afflicted  heart,  the 
situation  of  his  sons,  who  were  yet  unacquainted  with 
books,  and  wandering  in  the  paths  of  error. 

*  What  benefit  is  there  in  a  son  who  is  neither 
learned  nor  virtuous  !  Or,  of  what  use  is  a  sightless 
eye  }     Such  an  eye  is  but  pain  ! ' 

'Again : 

*  He  is  truly  born,  by  whose  birth  his  generation 
is  exalted  ;  or  else,  who  is  there  in  this  transitory 
life,  who  being  dead,  is  not  born  again  } '  * 

So  it  is  said  : 

*  Of  the  child  unborn,  the  dead,  and  the  fool,  the 
two  first,  and  not  the  last,  are  the  least  to  be 
lamented  ;  for  the  two  first  cause  but  a  transient 
sorrow,  whilst  the  last  is  an  eternal  plague.' 

*  The  leader,  in  this  and  similar  passages,  will  not  fail  to  recollect 
tliat  it  is  a  Hindoo  who  speaks,  fully  persuaded  of  the  rtietempsychosis. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  21 

Again  : 

'One  chid  of  genius  is  a  blessing;  not  so  even  a 
hundred  fools.  A  single  moon  dispelleth  darkness 
better  than  a  host  of  stars. 

*  The  child  of  him,  whose  trarsgressicns  are 
expiated  by  penances  performed  at  places  of  holy- 
pilgrimage,  should  be  obedient,  prosperous,  virtuous, 
and  happy.' 

And  it  is  said  also  : 

*  An  influx  of  riches,  and  constant  health;  a  wife 
who  is  dear  to  one,  and  one  who  is  of  kind  and 
gentle  speech ;  a  child  who  is  obedient,  and  useful 
knowledge,  are,  my  son,  the  six  pleasures  of  life. 

*A  father  who  contracteth  debts  is  an  enemy,  and 
a  mother  false  to  her  bed  ;  a  beautiful  wife  is  an 
enemy;  an  ignor.ant  son  is  an  eneny. 

*  Learning  to  the  inexperienced  is  a  poison ;  eating 
upon  a  full  stomach  is  a  poison  ;  the  society  of  the 
vulgar  is  a  poison  ;  a  young  wife  to  an  old  man  is  a 
poison. 

*A  man  is  respected,  even  for  the  merits  of  his 
son.  Let  the  cane*  of  the  bow  be  ever  so  clean, 
deficient  in  other  qualities,  what  will  it  do  } 

*  In  the  original  ilie  word  which  is  translated  cane  (vangs)  signifies, 
not  only  a  bamboo^  of  wliich  ihey  make  their  bow?,  but  also  a  race  or 
family.  The  Hindoo  authors  are  but  too  apt  to  play  upon  words,  and 
are  always  happy  to  apply  a  term  that  has  two  meanings  diametrically 
opposite,  which  is,  very  often,  exceedingly  perplexing  to  a  translator. 


52  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

Alas !  my  son,  that  so  many  nights  have  sweetly 
passed  away,  and  thou  art  still  untaught ;  wherefore, 
in  the  society  of  the  learned,  thou  sinkcst  hke  an  ox 
in  the  mire. 

Then  how  shall  these  my  sons  be  now  rendered 
accomplished  ?  when  it  is  said, 

'  The  agC;,  the  actions,  the  wealth,  the  knowledge, 
and  even  the  death,  of  every  one  is  determined  in  his 
mother's  womb. 

'The  determined  fate  of  all  beings,  let  them  be 
ever  so  great,  inevitably  happeneth.  Nakedness  is  the 
fate  of  Neelakant,*  and  of  Harif  sleeping  on  a  great 
serpent. 

*What  is  not  to  be,  that  is  not  to  be  ;  if  it  be  to 

*  One  of  the  titles  of  Seeva. 

t  liari  is  one  of  the  titles  of  Vishnu,  the  Deity  in  his  preserving 
quality.  Nearly  opposite  Sultan-gunge,  a  considerable  town  in  the 
])rovince  of  Bahar  in  the  East  Indies,  there  stands  a  rock  of  granite, 
lorming  a  small  island  in  the  midst  of  the  Ganges,  know  n  to  Europeans 
by  the  name  of  fAe  rock  of  Jehangiieery,  which  is  highly  worthy  of  the 
traveller's  notice  for  a  vast  number  of  images  carved  in  relief  upon 
every  part  of  its  surface.  Amongst  the  rest  there  is  Hari,  of  a  gigantic 
size,  recumbent  upon  a  coiled  serpent,  whose  heads,  which  are  nume- 
rous, the  artist  has  contrived  to  spread  into  a  kind  of  canojiy  over  the 
sleeping  god  ;  and  from  each  of  its  mouths  issues  a  forked  tongue, 
seeming  to  threaten  instant  death  to  any  whom  rashness  might  prompt 
to  disturb  him.  The  whole  figure  lies  almost  clear  of  the  block  on 
which  it  is  hewn.  It  is  finely  imagined,  and  executed  with  great  skill. 
The  Hindoos  are  taught  to  believe,  that  at  the  end  of  every /-rt/^fl  (crea- 
tion or  formation),  all  things  are  absorbed  in  the  Deity,  and  that  in  the 
interval  of  another  creation  he  reposeth  himself  upon  the  serpent  sesha 
(duration),  who  is  also  called  anaiita  (endless).  The  allegory  is  too 
plain  to  require  any  further  explanation. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  23 

come  to  pass,  it  cannot  be  otherwise.  This  reasoning 
is  an  antidote.  Why  cloth  not  the  afflicted  drink 
of  it  ? ' 

But  such  are  the  idle  sentiments  of  certain  men 
who  admit  not  of  works  ;  for, 

'Whilst  a  man  confideth  in  providence,  he  should 
not  slacken  his  own  exertions  ;  for  without  labour  he 
is  unworthy  to  obtain  the  oil  from  the  seed. 

*  Fortune  attendeth  that  lion  amongst  men  who 
exerteth  himself.  They  are  weak  men  who  declare 
fate  the  sole  cause. 

'  Subdue  fate,  and  exert  human  strength  to  the 
utmost  of  your  power ;  and  if,  when  pains  have  been 
taken,  success  attend  not,  in  whom  is  the  blame  ? 

*  As  the  chariot  will  not  move  upon  a  single 
wheel ;  even  so  fate  succeedeth  not  without  human 
exertion. 

'  It  is  said,  fate  is  nothing  but  the  deeds  com- 
mitted in  a  former  state  of  existence ;  wherefore,  it 
behoveth  a  man  vigilantly  to  exert  the  powers  he  is 
possessed  of.* 

*  As  the  potter  formeth  the  lump  of  clay  into  what- 

*  To  enable  the  reader  to  comprehend  this  verse,  and  many  similar 
passages,  it  is  necessary  to  inform  him  that  many  of  the  Hnidoos  be- 
lieve this  to  be  a  place  of  rewards  and  punishments,  as  well  as  of  pro- 
bation. Thus  good  and  bad  luck  are  the  fruit  of  good  and  evil  deeds 
committed  in  a  former  life.  To  prevent  the  latter  in  a  future  life,  it 
hehoz'cth  a  man,  &c. 


24  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

ever  shape  he  liketh,  even  so  may  a  man  regulate  his 
own  actions.'* 

Again  : 

*  Ahhough,  in  the  story  of  the  crow  and  talf  fruit, 
one  was  seen  to  have  found  a  treasure  before  him, 
fate  of  itself  did  not  present  it :  some  exertion  was 
still  expected. 

*  Good  fortune  is  the  offspring  of  our  endeavours, 
although  there  be  nothing  sweeter  than  ease.  The 
deer  are  not  wont  to  precipitate  themselves  into  the 
mouth  of  the  sleeping  lion. 

*  The  boy  who  hath  been  exercised  under  his 
parents  care,  attaineth  the  state  of  an  accomplished 
man  ;  but  the  child  becometh  not  a  Pandit  whilst  in 
the  state  he  dropped  from  the  womb. 

*  That  mother  is  an  enemy,  and  that  father  a  foe, 
by  whom  not  having  been  instructed,  their  son  shincth 
not  in  the  assembly ;  but  appeareth  there,  like  a 
booby  among  geese.  | 

*  This  verse  is  connected  with  that  which  precedes  it,  and  seems  to 
imply,  that  we  have  it  in  our  power  to  secure  prosperity  in  a  future 
birth. 

■f  The  translator  never  saw  the  story  alluded  to.  Probably  it  is  some 
fable,  where  a  foolish  crow  expected  the  fruit  here  mentioned,  and  which 
is  that  of  the  fan  palmira,  should  come  to  him,  rather  than  that  he  who 
saw  it  at  a  distance,  should  exert  himself  to  possess  it. 

X  The  bird  here  called  a  booby  (in  the  original  vaka),  is  of  the  stork 
species,  and  the  emblem  of  stupidity,  as  tlu  goose  is  of  eloquence  and 
tiegance,  amongst  the  Hindoo  poets.  Saraswati,  their  goddess  of 
Harmony,  has  her  goose,  as  Minerva  her  owl. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  25 

*Men  deficient  in  learning  shine  not,  although  they 
may  be  possessed  of  youth  and  beauty,  and  of  a  noble 
race.  They  are  like  the  flower  Kinsuk,  destitute  of 
fragrance. 

*  A  fool,  too,  may  shine  in  the  assembly,  dressed  in 
fine  garments  ;  but  the  fool  shineth  no  longer  than  he 
holdeth  his  tongue.' 

The  Rajah  having  thus  meditated  for  a  while,  con- 
vened a  council  of  Pandits,  whom  he  addressed  in  the 
following  words  : — "  Ye  learned  men,  attend  !  Is 
there  a  man  to  be  found  who  shall,  by  precepts  drawn 
from  Neeti-Sastras,*  be  able  to  perfect  the  birth  of  my 
sons,  who  are  yet  uninformed,  and  constantly  wander- 
ing in  the  paths  of  error  t     For, 

'As  a  piece  of  glass,  from  the  vicinity  of  gold, 
acquireth  the  colour  of  a  topaz  ;  so  a  fool  may  derive 
some  consequence  from  the  presence  of  a  wise  man.' 

Again : 

'  The  mind  is  depraved  by  the  society  of  the  low  ; 
it  riseth  to  equality  with  equals ;  and  to  distinction 
with  the  distinguished.' " 

Of  this  assembly  there  was  a  great  Pandit  by  name 
Vishnu-Sarma,t  well  versed  in  the  principles  of  all 

*  Systems  of  morality  and  policy- 

+  Pandit  is  an  honorary  title  given  to  learned  Brahmans.  A  doctor 
of  the  Hindoo  laws.  A  Hindoo  philosopher.  It  is  not  easy  to  detei*- 
mine  whether  Vishnu-Sarma  was  really  the  author,  or  only  the  com- 


26  THE  HITOPADESA : 

the  Neeti-Sastras,  as  it  were  another  Vrihaspati,*  who 
replied  : — "  These  young  princes,  O  mighty  Rajah  ! 
being  the  offsprings  of  an  illustrious  race^  are  capable 
of  being  instructed  in  the  Neeti-Sastras  ;  but 

•  Labour,  bestowed  on  nothing,  is  fruitless  :  v/ith 
infinite  pains  a  booby  will  not,  presently,  talk  like  a 
parrot. 
"^  *  In  a  noble  race,  levity  without  virtue  is  seldom 
found.  In  a  mine  of  rubies,  when  shall  we  find 
pieces  of  glass  ? ' 

Wherefore,  I  will  engage,  that  in  the  space  of  six 
months,  I  will  render  thy  sons  well  acquainted  with 
the  doctrines  of  the  Neeti-Sastras." 

The  Rajah  then  respectfully  said  : 

^;!U-r|%-^^'^  "Even  a  reptile,  when  attached  to  a  flower,  may 
mount  upon  the  head  of  the  holy  ;  even  a  stone, 
when  set  up  and  consecrated  by  the  great,  attaineth 
divinity. 

For  it  is  said, 

'  As  a  thing  on  the  eastern  mountains  shineth  by 
the  presence  of  the  sun  ;  so  one  of  humble  birth, 
even,  may  be  enlightened  by  the  allurements  of  good 
books. 

piler  of  these  fables  ;  but  it  is  wortliy  of  observation  that  the  firahmans 
themselves  know  nothiug  of  Pilpay,  to  whom,  we  are  told,  the  Persians 
fct tribute  them. 
*"  The  preceptor  of  the  good  spirits,  and  the  planet  Jupiter, 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  V 

*  Men  of  good  or  evil  birth  may  be  possessed  of 
good  qualities ;  but,  falling  into  bad  company,  they 
become  vicious.  Rivers  flow  with  sweet  waters  ;  but, 
having  joined  the  ocean,  they  become  undrink- 
able.' 

Then  be  thou  an  example  to  these,  my  sons,  for 
the  acquisition  of  virtue."  Having  said  this,  he 
respectfully  delivered  his  sons  into  the  charge  of 
Vishnu -Sarma  ;  and  that  learned  Pandit,  soon  after, 
seized  the  opportunity,  when  they  were,  for  amuse- 
ment, sitting  together  upon  the  terrace  of  their 
father's  palace,  to  introduce  his  advice  to  the  young 
princes  in  the  following  lines  : 

*  Learning  to  a  man  is  a  name  superior  to  beauty  ; 
learning  is  better  than  hidden  treasure.  Learning  is 
a  companion  on  a  journey  to  a  strange  country ; 
learning  is  strength  inexhaustible.  Learning  is  the 
source  of  renown,  and  the  fountain  of  victory  in  the 
senate.  Learning  is  a  superior  sight ;  learning  is  a 
livelihood  ;  and  a  man  in  this  world  without  learning 
is  as  a  beast  of  the  field. 

'A  country  deprived  of  the  Ganges  is  smitten;  a 
family  without  learning  is  smitten  ;  a  woman  without 
a  child  is  smitten  ;  a  sacrifice  without  the  Brahman's 
rights  is  smitten. 

*  Wise  men  pa^s  their  time  in  amusements  drawn 


28  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

from  the  works  of  the  poets ;  whilst  fools  squander 
theirs  in  useless  pursuits,  sloth,  or  riot.' 

"  For  your  amusement,  therefore,"  said  he,  "  I  am 
going  to  relate  some  curious  stories  of  a  crow,  a 
tortoise,  and  other  animals.'" 


(    29    ) 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE  ACQUISITION   OF   A   TRIEND. 

Vishnu-Sarma  then  told  the  young  princes  to 
attend,  and  said, — The  present  subject  to  be  discussed 
is,  ''  The  Acquisition  of  a  Friend ; "  to  which  these 
following  lines  are  an  introduction  : 

I  Vise  a)  id  sincere  friends ,  although  poor  and  desti- 
iiiie  of  implements,  may  speedily  effect  our  purposes  ;  as 
in  the  instances  of  the  crozv,  the  tortoise,  the  deer,  and 
the  mouse. 

The  young  princes  demanded  how  this  was  ;  and 
Vishnu-Sarma  related  as  follows  : 

FABLE  I. 

On  the  banks  of  the  river  Godavaree  there  was  a 
Salmalee*  tree,  to  whose  spreading  branches  birds  of 
various  species  were  wont  to  flock  from  every  quarter, 
to  roost.  Early  one  morning,  w^hen  darkness  was 
dispersing,  and  the  moon,  whose  emblem  is  the  flower 
Kumudini-nayaka,t  was   reclining  upon   the  summit 

*  The  silk  cotton  tree,  commonly  called  scemal. 
+  A  species  of  lotus  which  blossoms  only  in  the  night. 


30  THE  HITOPADESA : 

of  the  mountain  Charama,  a  certain  crow,  whose 
name  was  Laghupatanaka,*  being  awake,  chanced  to 
espy  a  fowler  coming  that  way,  who  appeared  to  him 
an  another  angel  of  death.  Having  regarded  him, 
and  considered  for  a  moment,  he  said  to  himself, — 
This  unwelcome  visit  happeneth  to  day  very  early, 
and  I  know  not  what  may  be  the  consequence.  So, 
pondering  upon  what  he  saw,  he  was  seized  with  a 
panic,  and  flew  out  of  the  way  ;  for, 

'  A  thousand  occasions  for  sorrow,  and  a  hundred 
for  fear,  day  by  day  assail  the  fool ;  not  so  the  wise 
man.' 

Yet  it  is  said  that  men  of  the  world  must  absolutely 
act  according  to  these  lines  : 

*  Every  time  we  rise,  great  fear  is  to  be  appre- 
hended ;  for,  to-day,  of  death,  sickness,  and  sorrow, 
who  knoweth  which  may  fall  upon  us  ? ' 

The  fowler,  having  first  strewed  some  rice  upon 
the  ground,  spread  his  nets  ;  and  whilst  this  was 
transacting,  it  happened  that  Chitra-greeva,t  the 
chief  of  a  flock  of  pigeons,  was  in  the  air  flying  about 
with- his  attendants.  He  saw  the  grains  of  rice  upon 
the  ground  ;  and  perceiving  that  his  flock  showed  an 
inclination  to  partake  of  them,  he  addressed  them 
thus  : — Beware,    my    friends  !      Whence,   think  you, 

*  Light-flier.  t  Moiley-neck. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  31 

should  rice  be  produced  in  a  place  like  this,  void  of 
inhabitants  ?  Let  this,  therefore,  be  investigated  ; 
for  I  conceive  no  good  can  come  of  it,  lest  we  should 
experience  a  fate  similar  to  what  is  mentioned  in  the 
following  lines  : 

A  traveller y  through  licst  of  gold ^  being  plunged  into 
an  inextricable  mire,  is  killed  and  devoured  by  an  old 
tiger. 

How  did  this  happen  ?  demanded  the  pigeons,  and 
their  chief  related  as  follows  : 


FABLE   II. 

As  I  was  travelling  on  the  southern  road,  once 
upon  a  time,  I  saw  an  old  tiger  seated  upon  the  bank 
of  a  large  river,  with  a  bunch  of  kusa*  grass  in  his 
paw,  calling  out  to  every  one  who  passed, — Ho  !  ho  ! 
traveller,  take  this  golden  bracelet.  But  every  one 
was  afraid  to  approach  him  to  receive  it.  At  length, 
however,  a  certain  traveller,  tempted  by  avarice,  re- 
garded it  as  an  instance  of  good  fortune ;  but,  said 
he,  in  this  there  is  personal  danger,  in  which  we  are 
not  warranted  to  proceed. 

*  Confidence    should    not    be    put    in    rivers ;    in 

*  A  species  of  grass  esteemed  sacred  by  the  Brahmans,  and  used  in 
most  of  their  religious  ceremoiiies.  The  lion  in  this  fable  is  made  to 
hold  it  in  his  paw,  to  appear  Lke  a  devotee,  and  to  begot  confidence;  ' 


32  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

animals  which  have  claws  or  horns;  in  men  with 
weapons  in  their  hands  ;  nor  in  women  ;  nor  in  those 
of  royal  birth. 

*  It  is  not  good  to  pass  by  that  we  dislike,  even  to 
gain  that  which  we  like ;  for  the  water  of  life  be- 
cometh  mortal  when  mixed  with  a  poison/ 

Yet,  said  he,  there  is  risk  in  every  undertaking,  for 
the  acquisition  of  wealth.     Hence,  it  is  said, 

*  No  man  beholdeth  prosperity  who  doth  not 
encounter  danger ;  but  having  encountered  danger,  if 
he  surviveth,  he  beholdeth  it.* 

This  I  have  considered,  and  now  let  me  ask  thee 
plainly,  where  is  thy  gold  .-*  But  stop,  tigers  eat  men, 
and  the  opinion  of  the  world  is  hard  to  be  defeated  ; 
for, 

'  The  people,  mere  followers  of  one  another,  hold 
up  a  Brahman  who  is  a  cow-killer,  as  example  in  our 
religion.'  * 

I  too,  replied  the  tiger,  have  read  religious  books. 
Hear  what  they  say, 

'  In  granting  and  in  refusing,  in  joy  and  in  sorrow, 
in  liking  and  in  disliking,  good  men,  because  of  their 
own  likeness,  show  mercy  unto  all  things  which  have 
life. 

*  This  senccnce  undoubtedly  alludes  to  some  vulgar  facts  at  the  time 
■well  understood. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  33 

*  As  their  own  lives  are  most  dear  to  them,  so  also 
are  those  of  all  creatures.  Good  men,  because  of 
their  own  likeness,  show  mercy  unto  all  things  which 
have  life. 

*  A  man,  because  of  his  own  likeness,  should  learn 
this  saying  : — As  rain  to  the  parched  field,  so  is 
meat  to  one  oppressed  with  hunger. 

'Charity  is  to  be  given  to  the  poor,  and  is  fruitful. 

0  joy  of  the  house  of  Pandu.'  * 

The  traveller  then  asked  him,  where  was  the 
bracelet ;  and  the  tiger  having  held  out  his  paw, 
showed  it  to  him  and  said, — Look  at  it,  it  is  a  golden 
bracelet.  How  shall  1  place  confidence  in  thee  }  said 
the  traveller ;  and  the  tiger  replied, — Formerly,  in 
the  days  of  my  youth,  I  was  of  a  very  wicked  dispo- 
sition, and  as  a  punishment  for  the  many  men  and 
cattle  I  had  murdered,  my  numerous  children  died, 
and  I  was  also  deprived  of  my  wife  ;  so,  at  present, 

1  am  destitute  of  relations.  This  being  the  case,  I 
was  advised,  by  a  certain  religious  person,  to  practise 
charity  and  other  religious  duties ;  I  am  now  grown 
extremely  devout.  I  perform  ablutions  regularly, 
and  am  charitable.  Why  then  am  I  not  worthy  of 
confidence  "i 


*  This  hemistich,  and  the  preceding  three  verses,  seem  to  belong  to 
the  Mahabharata,  and  to  be  addressed  to  Arjoon,  one  df  the  five  sons  of 
Pandu. 

B 


34  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

'The  study  of  what  is  ordained,*  charity,  morti- 
fications of  the  flesh,  and  sacrifices  ;  fortitude,  for- 
giveness, rectitude,  and  modesty,  form  the  true  way, 
and  are  recorded  the  eightfold  division  of  our  duty. 

'  Of  these,  the  first  class,  consisting  of  four,  is 
attended  to  for  the  sake  of  hereafter  ;  and  the  latter 
class  of  four,  presideth  in  every  great  mind.' 

So  far,  you  see,  continued  the  tiger,  I  have  an 
interest  in  wishing  to  give  away,  to  some  one,  this 
golden  bracelet  from  off  my  own  wrist ;  and  as  thou 
appearest  to  be  rather  a  poor  man,  I  prefer  giving  it 
to  thee  ;  according  to  this  saying : 

*  Make  choice  of  the  poor,  O  son  of  Kuntee,t  ^ind 
bestow  not  thy  gifts  on  others.  Medicine  is  to  be 
administered  to  the  sick ;  for  of  what  benefit  is 
physic  to  those  who  arc  in  health  ?* 

And  thus : 

'The  gift  which  is  to  be  given,  should  be  given 
gratuitously;  in  time,  in  place,  and  to  a  proper 
object ;  and  such  a  gift  is  recorded  a  righteous  gift.' 

Then    go,    and    having    purified  :|:    thyself    in    this 

*  The  study  of  the  divine  law. 

t  Kimtee  is  the  name  of  the  mother  of  three  of  the  five  sons  of 
Paudu.  Probably  this  address  is  to  Arjoon,  the  youngest  of  those 
three. 

t  The  Hindoos  not  only  wash  themselves  after  any  impure  action, 
but  also  before  divine  worship,  and  the  receipt  of  any  exfraor<Unary 
benefit. 


FABLES  AND    PROVERBS.  Z^ 

stream,  take  the  golden  bracelet. — The  traveller  no 
sooner  begins  to  enter  the  river  to  purify  himself, 
than  he  sticks  fast  in  the  mud,  and  is  unable  to 
escape.  The  tiger  told  him  he  would  help  him  out ; 
and  creeping  softly  towards  him,  the  poor  traveller 
is  seized,  and  instantly  exclaims  to  himself, — Alas  [ 
the  career  of  my  heart  is  cut  short  by  fate  ! 

'The  natural  disposition  of  every  animal  con- 
quereth,  and  presideth  over  his  qualifications  ;  for 
from  that  nature  he  passeth  not,  either  for  qualifica- 
tions or  ornamental  accomplishments. 

*  He  readeth  not  the  Dharma-Sastra,^ — is  this  the 
cause  ;  or  doth  he  not  study  the  Vedas  1  t  In  this 
matter  the  natural  disposition  of  his  wicked  spirit  pre- 
vaileth,  even  as  the  milk  of  the  cow  is  by  nature  sweet.  J 

'  What  is  done  for  those  who  have  not  their 
passions  in  subjection,  is  like  washing  the  elephant.§ 
Service  rendered  to  the  unfortunate  is,  for  the  most 
part,  like  knowledge  without  practice.' 

I  did  not  well  in  that  I  placed  confidence  in  one  of 
such  evil  disposition  ;  for  it  is  said, 

*  Books  containing  men's  moral  and  religious  duties,  as  enjoined  by 
I'lC  divine  law. 

'\  The  word  z^<?f/,  orveda^  signifies  knoidcdge  qx  science.  The  sacred 
wiitings  of  the  Hindoos  are  so  distinguished,  of  which  there  are  four 
books. 

X  The  greatest  part  of  this  verse,  in  the  original,  is  so  obliterated 
that  the  translator  is  by  no  means  certain  that  he  has  given  the  mean- 
ing of  his  author. 

§  Washing  the  blackamoor  white. 

B  2 


36  THE  HirOPADESA  : 

'  The  natural,  and  no  other  qualities  should  be  ex- 
amined ;  for  the  natural  qualities  pass  over  all  others, 
and  mount  upon  fhe  head.' 

But  whilst  the  unfortunate  traveller  was  thus 
meditating  on  his  fate,  he  was  devoured  by  the 
tiger.  I  have  said,  therefore,  "  Through  the  lust  of  a 
bracelet,"  &c.,  and  hence  also,  it  is  at  no  time  proper 
to  undertake  anything  without  examination  ;  as  in 
the  following  saying : 

'  Well-digested  food,  a  well-discerning  child,  a 
well-governed  wife,  a  prince  v»ell  served,  a  speech 
well  considered,  and  an  action  well  weighed,  are  not, 
even  in  very  long  time,  attended  by  disagreeable 
consequences.' 

One  of  the  pigeons,  wno  was  of  a  haughty  spirit, 
having  heard  what  had  been  said,  exclaimed,— Ha  ! 
what  is  this  }     Is  it  not  said, 

*  In  times  of  necessity  the  words  of  the  wise  are 
worthy  to  be  observed  ;  by  whose  determination  we 
may  freely  engage  in  all  things,  even  in  eating."^ 

'AH  things  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  our  meat 
and  our  drink,  bear  cause  of  suspicion ;  then  how  is 
forbearance  to  be  exercised,  and  life  to  be  supported  } ' 

Again  it  is  said, 

*  There  is  nothing  a  Hindoo  is  so  scrupulous  about  as  his  eating. 
Even  the  menial  servants  of  Europeans,  who  are  the  very  refuse  of  the 
people,  would  rather  starve  thnn  eat  or  drink  after  their  masters. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  y] 

'These  six — the  peev'sh,  the  niggard,  the  dis- 
satisfied, the  passionate,  the  suspicious,  and  those 
who  live  upon  others'  means — are  for  ever  unhappy.' 

So  having  heard  these  words,  the  whole  flock  flew 
down  upon  the  grain. 

*  Those,  even,  who  possess  very  many  Sastras,  are 
learned  in  the  Vedas,  and  are  the  dispellers  of  doubt, 
experience  trouble,  when  their  reason  is  blinded  by 
avarice. 

'From  covetousness  proceedeth  ill-nature,  and  of 
ill-nature  is  born  stubbornness  ;  from  stubbornness 
is  created  a  delusion  of  reason,*  and  that  delusion  is 
the  cause  of  sin. 

^  The  birth  of  a  golden  deer  is  impossible  ;  never- 
theless Ram  longed  for  the  chase.t  In  times  of 
misfortune,  men's  understandings  even  are  sullied.' 

At   length   they   were   all,  in   consequence   of  their 
covetousness,  confined  by  the  threads  of  the  net ;  and 
they  presently  began  to  lay  the  blame  upon  him,  by 
whose  advice  they  had  descended.     So  it  is  said, 
'A  man  should   not  strive  to  precede  his  fellows; 

*  To  this  delusion  of  reason,  which  in  the  original  is  expressed  by  a 
single  word  {fnoha)  some  Hindoo  philosophers  attribute  all  natural 
images  which  are  presented  to  the  mind  through  the  medium  of  the 
senses  ;  for,  say  they,  remove  this  veil  of  ignorance,  and  it  will  be  found 
that  matter  is  a  mere  phantom. 

"t"  This  passnge  seems  to  relate  to  some  adventure  in  the  wars  of  Ram 
ngainst  Ravan,  the  tyrant  of  Ceylon,  which  are  the  subject  of  a  beauti- 
ful poem,  called  the  "  Ramayana." 


38  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

for,  sliould  the  work  succeed,  the  booty  is  equal,  and 
if  it  fail,  the  leader  is  punished.' 

Chitra-grceva  hearing  their  reproaches,  said,  It  is 
not  his  fault.     It  is  said, 

'To  those  who  are  fallen  into  misfortunes,  what 
was  a  blessing  becometh  an  evil :  to  a  child  in  con- 
finement, its  mother's  knee  is  a  binding  post. 

*  He  who  hath  the  resolution  to  extricate  one  from 
his  misfortunes,  who  is  fallen  into  difficulties  by 
another^s  fault,  is  a  Pandit ;  not  he  who  hesitateth 
about  the  means  he  should  employ  for  the  deliverance 
of  the  distressed.' 

Hesitation,  in  times  of  misfortune,  is  the  mark  of  a 
coward ;  wherefore,  depend  upon  resolution,  and  let  a 
remedy  be  thought  of;  according  to  these  lines: 

*  Fortitude  in  adversity,  and  moderation  in  pros- 
perity ;  eloquence  in  the  senate,  and  courage  in  the 
field;  great  glory  in  renown,  and  labouf  in  study;  are 
the  natural  perfections  of  great  minds.' 

Again  : 

•There  are  here  six  faults,  which  a  man  ought 
to  avoid  :  The  desire  of  riches,  drowsiness,  sloth, 
idleness,  tediousness,  fear,  and  anger.' 

Let  this  be  done  immediately :  Let  us  all,  with  one 
accord,  take  up  the  net  and  fly  away  with  it ;  accord- 
ing to  these  lines : 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS. 


39 


'  Combination  is  best  for  men,  either  with  their 
own  tribe  or  with  strangers  ;  for  even  a  grain  of  rice 
groweth  not  when  divided  from  its  husk. 

'A  combination  even  of  small  things  serveth  an 
occasion.  An  intoxicated  elephant  may  be  bound  with 
a  few  straws,  when  formed  into  a  rope.' 

Having  considered  this,  the  pigeons,  with  one  accord, 
took  up  the  net,  and  flew  away  with  it.  Presently  the 
fowler,  seeing  the  robbers  of  his  net  at  a  great 
distance,  pursued  them  ;  and,  as  he  ran,  these  were 
his  thoughts  : 

*  These  travellers  of  the  air  have  combined  to  rob 
me  of  my  net ;  but  when  they  shall  fall  down,  they 
will  come  into  my  power.' 

But  soon  finding  they  had  passed  the  confines  of  his 
sight,  the  poor  fowler  turned  back  from  the  pursuit. 

The  pigeons  now  demanded  what  was  to  be  done  ; 
and  Chitra-greeva  replied, 

'  A  mother  is  a  friend,  and  a  father  is  a  friend  ;  but 
both  these  are  from  nature  kind  ;  but  there  are  others 
who  are  benevolent  from  casual  motives.' 

Our  friend  Hiranyaka,*  the  noble  mouse,  lives  upon 
the  banks  of  the  Gandakee.f  He  may  be  able  to 
gnaw  our  snare  asunder  with  his  teeth.     Having  con- 


*  Wealthy, 
t  A  river  which  empties  itself  into  the  Ganges  near  Patna. 


40  THE  HirOPADESA : 

sidered  this  proposal,  they  all  flew  to  the  residence  of 
Hiranyaka,  who,  from  his  constant  dread  of  the 
crows,  had  made  himself  a  hole  with  a  hundred 
outlets,  wherein  he  remained  secured,  according  to 
this  verse : 

'  There  was  an  old  mouse,  well  read  in  the  Neeti- 
Sastras,  who,  before  the  approach  of  danger,  kept 
himself  within  a  hole  with  a  hundred  doors.' 

He  was  startled  with  fear  at  the  descent  of  the 
pigeons,  and  stood  silent ;  upon  which  Chitra-greeva 
called  out, — Friend  Hiranyaka  !  what,  wilt  thou  not 
speak  to  us  ?  And  Hiranyaka,  upon  recollecting 
his  voice,  slipped  out  of  his  hole,  and  exclaimed, — O 
how  happy  I  am,  that  my  dear  friend  Chitra-greeva 
is  arrived  ! 

'  There  is  not  in  life  a  man  more  happy  than  he 
who  hath  a  friend  to  converse  with,  a  friend  to  live 
with,  and  a  friend  to  embrace.' 

But  when  he  saw  that  they  were  confined  in  a  net,  he 
stood  amazed  for  a  moment,  and  demanded  what  it 
meant.  Chitra-greeva  replied, — What  else,  my  friend, 
can  it  be,  but  the  effect  of  the  evil  committed  in  a 
prior  exirstence.?  Seeing  thou  art  endued  with  great 
wisdom,  what  was  the  use  of  thy  question  }  For  is  it 
not  said, 

Whatsoever  cometh  to  pass,  either  good  or  evil, 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  41 

is    the   consequence   of  a   man's   own   actions,    and 
descendeth  from  the  power  of  the  Supreme  Ruler. 

*  Sickness,  sorrow,  and  distress  ;  bonds  and  pun- 
ishment to  corporeal  beings,  are  fruit  of  the  tree  of 
of  their  own  transgressions.' 

Hiranyaka  having  heard  these  words,  quickly  ran 
to  gnaw  asunder  the  cords  by  which  Chitra-grecva 
was  confined.  Not  so,  my  friend,  said  Chitra-greeva, 
until  thou  hast  cut  asunder  the  bonds  of  these  who 
are  under  my  protection.  Hiranyaka  then  said,  I  am 
weak,  my  friend,  and  my  teeth  are  but  delicate  ;  how 
then  am  I  able  to  bite  open  the  snares  which  entangle 
them  }  As  long  as  my  teeth  shall  not  break,  so  long 
will  I  gnaw  thy  snares  ;  and  afterwards,  if  it  should 
be  in  my  power,  I  will  divide  the  cords  which  con- 
fine the  rest.  Let  it  be  as  I  say,  replied  Chitra- 
greeva  ;  and  to  the  utmost  of  thy  power  try  to 
subdue  their  bonds  first. 

Those,  said  the  mouse,  who  are  acquainted  with 
the  rules  of  prudence,  do  not  approve,  that  for  the 
preservation  of  those  who  are  under  our  protection, 
we  should  abandon  ourselves. 

'  A  man  should  keep  his  riches  against  accidents, 
and  with  his  riches  he  should  save  his  family  ;  but  he 
should,  on  all  occasions,  save  himself,  both  with  his 
family  and  his  riche?. 

'  Our  lives  are  for  the  purposes  of  religion,  labour, 


A2  THE  HITOPADESA : 

love,  and  salvation.*  If  these  are  destroyed,  what 
is  not  lost  ?  If  these  are  preserved,  what  is  not 
preserved  ? ' 

This  may  be  so,  replied  Chitra-greeva  ;  but  I  am 
not,  by  any  means,  able  to  suffer  the  afflictions  of 
those  who  are  here  under  my  protection. 

*A  wise  man  should  relinquish  both  his  wealth 
and  his  life  for  another.  All  is  to  be  surrendered  for 
a  just  man,  when  he  is  reduced  to  the  brink  of 
destruction.' 

Here  is  another  unparalleled  argument : 

*In  birth,  substance,  and  quaHty,  they  are  like 
unto  me  ;  say  then,  what  will  ever  be  the  fruit  of  my 
superiority } ' 

Again  : 

'  Without  misfortune,  they  will  not  forsake  me ; 
then  I  will  protect  these  who  have  taken  sanctuary 
with  me,  even  with  the  loss  of  my  life. 

'  Why  dost  thou  hesitate  over  this  perishable  body 
composed  of  flesh,  bone,  and  excrements  }  O  my 
friend,  support  my  reputation  ! ' 

Another : 

'  If   constancy  is  to  be  obtained  by  inconstancy, 


*  Union  wiih  the  universal  spirit  of  God,  and  a  final  exemption  from 
mortal  birih. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS,  43 

purity  by  impurity,  leputation    by  the  body,  then, 
what  is  there  which  may  not  be  obtained  ? 

'  The  difference  between  the  body  and  the  qualities 
is  infinite.  The  body  is  a  thing  to  be  destroyed  in  a 
moment,  whilst  the  qualities  *  endure  to  the  end  of 
the  creation/ 

Hiranyaka  having  been  attentive  to  what  had  been 
spoken,  and  being  exceedingly  pleased,  exclaimed, — 
Nobly  !  nobly  !  my  friend.  By  such  generosity  to 
those  who  are  under  thy  protection,  thou  art  worthy 
to  be  elevated  to  the  supreme  command  over  the 
regions  of  the  three  worlds  f  Having  said  this,  Hiran- 
yaka gnawed  asunder  their  bonds  ;  and  when  he  had 
addressed  himself  to  all  in  respectful  compliments  of 
congratulation,  he  said, — Friend  Chitra-greeva,  always 
when  you  see  a  net,  suspect  great  harm  will  come 
of  it ;  and  learn  not  to  think  meanly  of  yourself. 
But,  alas  ! 

'A  bird  who  seeth  her  prey  before  her,  even  at 
the  distance  of  a  hundred  yojan,J  perceiveth  not, 
if  her  time  be  come,  the  snares  which  are  laid  to 
entrap  her. 


*  The  Hindoos  believe  organized  matter  to  be  governed  by  three 
principles,  w^hich  they  term  sattva,  raja,  and  tavia.  The  first  inspires 
truths  the  second  passion^  and  the  third  sin. 

\  Celestial,  terrestrial,  and  infernal  regions. 

+  A  land  measure  of  about  eight  English  miles. 


44  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

'  When  I  behold  in  eclipses  *  the  distress  of  the 
moon  and  the  author  of  day  ;  elephants  and  serpents 
in  confinement,  and  the  worthy  in  indigence ;  alas  ! 
in  my  mind,  destiny  is  all-powerful. 

'  Birds  meet  their  fate  whilst  sporting  in  the  air, 
and  fishes,  by  artful  means,  are  destroyed  from  the 
bottomless  waters  of  the  ocean. 

*  When  laws  are  ill-enforced,  where  are  their  good 
morals  ?  To  whom  is  the  mere  glare  of  the  fire  a 
virtue  ?  Time  t  is  trouble,  and  the  author  of  destruc- 
tion ;  he  seizeth  even  from  afar.' 

The  mouse  having  taught  this,  and  performed  the 
duties  of  hospitality,  Chitra-greeva  took  his  leave,  and 
with  his  flock  departed  for  that  country  his  inclination 
led  him  to  ;  and  Hiranyaka  retired  into  his  hole. 

The  crow,  Laghu-patanaka,  having  been  a  spectator 
of  all  which  had  passed,  now  presently  appeared  and 
called  out — What  ho  !  Hiranyaka  !  Thou  art  worthy 
to  be  praised,  to  be  adored,  and  to  be  a  place  of 
refuge,  throughout  the  three  regions  of  the  world  ! 

*  Behold  how  many  pigeons,  his  friends,  even 
hundreds,  have  been  delivered  by  the  friendship  of  a 
mouse  ! ' 

In  consequence  of  this,  I  too  am  anxious  to  form  a 

*  The  vulgai  opinion  of  the  Hindoos  is,  that  tliese  phenomena  are 
produced  by  a  large  serpent,  or  dragon,  seizing  the  sun  and  moon. 

+  Time  is  coustai.tly  personified  by  the  Hindoo  poets,  and  made  the 
universal  agent  of  death  and  destruction. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  45 

friendly  acquaintance  with  thee.  Then  favour  me  with 
thy  friendship.  Hiranyaka  having  heard  him,  called 
out  from  the  inside  of  his  hole,— Who  art  thou  ?  and  he 
replied,  I  am  a  crow,  and  my  name  is  Laghu-patanaka. 
Hiranyaka,  upon  hearing  who  he  was,  laughing  said, — 
Having  seen  thy  complexion,  like  broken  anjan,"^  a 
beetle,  a  wild  ox,  a  buffalo,  or  a  woman's  hair,  what 
friendship  can  I  have  with  thee  ? 

'The  wise  man  is  united  with  that  in  this  life 
with  which  it  is  proper  he  should  be  united.  I  am 
bread,  thou  art  the  eater.  How  then  can  harmony 
exist  between  us.^* 

As  may  be  seen  in  a  certain  story,  of  which  the 
following  verse  is  the  introduction  : 

Harmony  between  the  food  and  the  feeder  is  the  fore- 
runner  of  misfortune. — A  deer^  through  the  artifice  of  a 
jackal,  is  caught  in  a  s^tare^  hit  is  preserved  by  a  croiv. 

How  did  this  happen  }  demanded  Laghu-patanaka  ; 
and  the  mouse,  Hiranyaka,  related  as  follows  : 

FABLE    III. 
In  Magadha-desaf  there  is  a  forest    called  Cham- 
pakavatee,  and   under  the  branches   of  one  of  the 

*  Crude  antimony,  and  sometimes  lead  ore,  of  which  they  make  a 
collyrium.  These  comparisons  have  a  ridiculous  appearance  in  Eng- 
lish ;  but  the  Hindoos  prefer  the  use  of  noasense  in  their  abuse,  to 
curses  and  blasphemy. 

t  The  country  about  the  city  of  Gya  was  anciently  so  called. 


46  THE  HITOPADESA : 

champaka*  trees  there  dwelt,  In  great  good  fellow- 
ship, a  deer  and  a  crow.  One  day,  as  the  deer,  who 
was  plump  and  fat,  was  freely  roaming  about  the 
woods,  he  was  spied  by  a  certain  jackal,  who  having 
examined  him,  said  to  himself, — Ah  !  with  what  ex- 
quisite pleasure  could  I  feast  upon  his  flesh  ! — Be  it 
so  ;  but  first  let  me  remove  all  suspicion.  So  having 
thus  resolved,  he  advanced  towards  him,  and  said, — 
Peace  be  with  thee,  friend !  Who  art  thou  .?  said 
the  deer.  I  am  Kshudrabudhee,t  the  jackal,  said  he ; 
and  being  without  relations,  I  dwell  here  in  this 
forest,  as  it  were,  like  one  dead  ;  but  now  that  I  have 
fallen  in  with  a  true  friend,  I  am  no  longer  destitute 
of  connections,  and  am  again  entered  into  the  land  of 
the  living  ;  and  henceforward  it  shall  be  my  duty  to 
attend  thy  steps. 

Accordingly,  as  soon  as  the  sun  had  retired  to  the 
western  mountain,  the  jackal  followed  the  deer  to 
his  place  of  residence,  beneath  the  branches  of  the 
champaka  tree,  where  with  him  lived  also  his  friend 
the  crow,  whose  name  was  Su-budhee.+  Upon  seeing 
him,  the  crow  said,  Who  is  this  second  ?  and  the 
deer  replied,  It  is  a  jackal,  who  is  come  here  desirous 
of  our  friendship.     Friend,   said   the  crow,  it  is  not 


*  A  tree  which  bears  a  beautiful  yellow  flower  of  a  very  powerful 
and  agreeable  scent,  known  to  i:uropeans  by  the  name  of  Chamj)ak. 
t  Low-minded,  mean-spirited,  bad-hearted. 
:J;  Well-judging,  good-hearted, 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  47 

proper  to  place  confidence  in  one  who  cometh  with- 
out any  apparent  cause.  It  is  not  well  done,  for  it  is 
said  : 

To  one  whose  family  and  prof ession  are  unknoivn,  one 
shoiUd  not  give  residence:  the  jackal  Jarad-gava  was 
killed  through  the  fault  of  a  cat. 

How  was  this  ?  said  they ;  and  the  crow  related 
as  follows  : 

FABLE   IV. 

On  the  banks  of  the  river  Bhageerathee,  and  upon 
the  mountain  Greedhra-koota,  there  is  a  large  par- 
kattee  tree,  in  the  hollow  of  whose  trunk  there  dwelt 
a  jackal,  by  name  Jarad-gava,  who,  by  some  accident, 
was  grown  blind,  and  for  whose  support  the  different 
birds,  who  roosted  upon  the  branches  of  the  same 
tree,  were  wont  to  contribute  a  trifle  from  their  own 
stores,  by  which  he  existed.  It  so  fell  out,  that  one 
day  a  certain  cat,  by  name  Deerga-karna,*  came 
there  to  prey  upon  the  young  birds,  whom  perceiving, 
the  little  nestlings  were  greatly  terrified,  and  began 
to  be  very  clamorous  ;  and  their  cries  being  heard  by 
Jarad-gava,  he  asked  who  was  coming.  The  cat 
Deerga-karna,  too,  seeing  the  jackal,  began  to  be 
alarmed,  and  so  cried  to  himself, — Oh !  I  shall  cer- 
tainly be  killed,  for  now  that  I  am  in  his  sight,  it  will 

*  Long-€ar. 


^1 J  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

not  be  in  my  power  to  escape !  However,  let  what 
will  be  the  consequence,  I  will  approach  him.  So 
having  thus  resolved,  he  went  up  to  the  jackal,  and 
said, — Master,  I  salute  thee  !  Who  art  thou  ?  de- 
manded the  jackal.  Said  he,  I  am  a  cat.  Ah ! 
wicked  animal,  cried  the  jackal,  get  thee  at  a 
distance;  for,  if  thou  dost  not,  I  will  put  thee  to 
death.  Hear  me  for  a  moment,  replied  puss,  and  then 
determine  whether  I  merit  either  to  be  punished  or 
to  be  killed. 

*  What,  is  any  one,  simply  by  birth,  to  be  punished 
or  applauded."*  When  his  deeds  have  been  scruti- 
nized, he  may,  indeed,  be  either  praiseworthy  or 
punishable. 

'  Men  are  the  same  as  other  animals,  in  eating, 
sleeping,  fearing,  and  propagation.  Reason,  alone, 
is  man^s  superior  distinction.  Deprived  of  reason,  he 
is  upon  an  equality  with  the  brutes.* 

The  jackal  afta-  this  desired  the  cat  to  give  some 
account  of  himself,  and  he  complied  in  the  following 
words  :— I  am,  said  he,  in  the  constant  habit  of  per- 
forming ablutions  on  the  side  of  this  river  ;  I  never 
cat  flesh,  and  I  lead  that  mode  of  Lfe  which  is  called 
}3rahma-charya.*  So,  as  thou  art  distinguished 
amongst  those  of  thy  own  species  noted  for  skill  in 

*  Forsaking  all  worldly  concerns  to  lead  a  godly  life. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  49 

religious  matters,  as  a  repository  of  confidence  ;  and 
as  the  birds  here  are  always  speaking  before  me  in 
praise  of  thy  good  qualities,  I  am  come  to  hear  from 
thy  mouth,  who  art  so  old  in  wisdom,  the  duties  of 
religion.  Thou,  master,  art  acquainted  with  the 
customs  of  life  ;  but  these  young  birds,  who  are  in 
ignorance,  would  fain  drive  me,  who  am  a  stranger, 
away.  The  duties  of  a  housekeeper^  are  thus 
enjoined  : 

*  Hospitality  is  commanded  to  be  exercised,  even 
towards  an  enemy,  when  he  cometh  to  thine  house. 
The  tree  dolh  not  withdraw  its  shade,  even  from  the 
wood-cutter.' 

And  if  there  be  no  bread,  the  stranger  should  be 
entertained  with  kind  words,  and  whatever  can  be 
spared,  as  in  these  lines : 

'  Some  straw,  a  room,  water,  and  in  the  fourth 
place,  gentle  words.  These  things  are  never  to  be 
refused  in  good  men's  houses.' 

And  in  another  verse  it  is  said: 

*  The  Hindoo  divints  ordain  four  modes  of  life,  which  are  tliuj 
denominated: — Brahfna-charya,  GraTia-stha,  Vana-prasfha,  Sannyasa. 
The  followers  of  the  first  mode  live  in  society,  but  are  not  allowed  any 
of  its  pleasures.  Those  of  the  second  are  the  housekeepers,  who  arc- 
enjoined  hospitality  and  every  social  duty.  The  third  mode  is  reiire- 
ment  from  society  into  the  wilderness,  as  the  term  imports.  And  the 
fourth  a  total  forsaking  of  all  worldly  things.  Those  who  prefer  ihe 
latter  mode  are,  for  the  most  part,  wanderers.  In  the  DharamaSastra 
of  Manoo  the  particular  duties  of  each  are  very  fully  treated  of. 


so  THE  HITOPADESA 

*  Tlie  stranger,  who  turneth  away  from  a  house 
with  disappointed  hopes,  leaveth  there  his  own 
offences,  and  departeth,  taking  with  him  all  the  good 
actions  of  the  owner.'* 

Again : 

*  Firet  is  the  superior  of  the  Brahmans,  the  Brah- 
man is  the  superior  of  the  tribes,^  and  the  husband  is 
the  only  superior  of  women  ;  but  the  stranger  is  the 
superior  of  all. 

'  Good  men  extend  their  pity,  even  unto  the  most 
despicable  animals.  The  moon  doth  not  withhold 
the  light,  oven  from  the  cottage  of  a  Chandala/  § 

To  all  this  the  jackal  replied, — Cats  have  a  taste  for 
animal  food,  and  above  is  the  residence  of  the  young 
birds  :  it  is  on  this  account  I  speak  to  thee.  The 
cat  having    touched   her    two    ears,   and    then   the 


*  This  doctrine  is  strongly  inculcated  in  every  Hindoo  system  of 
morality,  and,  seemingly,  with  a  very  powerful  effect ;  for  a  beggar  is 
never  seen  to  turn  away  from  a  door  in  India  with  disappointed  hopes. 

+  This  element,  in  ancient  times,  seems  to  have  been  universally 
deified.  The  Hindoos  are  enjoined  by  those  laws  they  esteem  of  divine 
origin,  at  a  certain  period  to  light  up  a  fire,  which  must  be  produced 
by  the  friction  of  two  pieces  of  wood  of  a  particular  species,  and  to 
keep  it  up  as  long  as  they  live.  With  this  fire  all  their  sacrifices  are 
burnt,  their  nuptial  altar  flames,  and,  finally,  the  funeral  pile  is  kindled. 

X  These  tribes  were,  originally,  only  four :  the  Brahman  (divines), 
Kshclrees  (nobles  and  military),  Visyas  (cultivators  of  the  land,  herds- 
men, merchants,  and  mechanics),  and  Soodras  (menial  servants). 

§  An  outcast.  One  of  the  very  lowest  order  in  society,  employed  in 
all  the  dirty  offices  for  the  four  superior  tribes. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  ^i 

ground,*  exclaimed, — I  who  have  read  books  upon 
the  duties  of  religion,  and  am  freed  from  inordinate 
desires,  have  forsaken  such  an  evil  practice ;  and, 
indeed,  even  amongst  those  who  dispute  with  one 
another  about  the  authority  of  the  Sastras,  there  are 
many  by  whom  this  sentence,  ''  Not  to  kill  is  a  su- 
preme duty,"  is  altogether  approved  ;  as  in  this  verse  : 

*  Tiiose  who  have  forsaken  the  killing  of  all  ;  those 
who  are  helpmates  to  all  ;  those  who  are  a  sanctuary 
to  all ;  those  men  are  in  the  way  to  heaven.' 

Again  : 

'  There  is  one  friend,  even  Religion,t  whoattendeth 
even  in  death  ;  whilst  all  things  else  go  to  decay 
with  the  body. 

'Behold  the  difference  between  the  one  who 
eateth  fleshy  and  he  to  whom  it  belonged  !  The  first 
hath  a  momentary  enjoyment,  whilst  the  latter  is 
deprived  of  existence  ! ' 

So  it  is  said, 

'A  fellow- creature  should  be  spared,  even  by  this 
analogy  :  the  pain  which  a  man  suffereth  when  he  is 
at  the  point  of  death.' 

Hear  this  also : 

'  Who  would   commit  so  great  a  crime  against  a 

*  A  very  expressive  way  of  declaring  abhorrence. 

+  The  original  Avord   {dharnia)  includes  every   moral  and  religious 

duty. 


52  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

poor  animal,  wlio  is  fed  only  by  the  herbs  which 
grow  wild  in  the  woods,  and  whose  belly  is  burnt  up 
with  hunger  ? ' 

The  cat  by  these  means  having  satisfied  him,  he 
remained  in  the  hollow  of  the  tree  with  the  jackal, 
Dud  passed  the  time  in  amusing  conversation  ;  and 
the  jackal  told  the  young  birds-  that  they  had  no 
occasion  to  go  out  of  the  way. — After  this,  when 
many  days  had  passed,  it  was  discovered  that  the  cat 
had,  by  degree.-,  drawn  the  little  birds  down  into  the 
hollow  of  the  tree,  and  there  devoured  them ;  but 
when  he  found  inquiry  was  about  to  be  made  by  those 
whose  young  ones  had  been  eaten,  he  slipped  out  of 
the  hole  and  made  his  escape.  In  the  meantime, 
the  bones  of  the  young  ones  having  been  discovered 
in  the  hollow  of  the  tree  by  the  birds,  who  had  been 
searching  here  and  there,  they  concluded  that  their 
little  ones  had  been  devoured  by  the  jackal,  and  so, 
being  joined  by  other  birds,  they  put  him  to  death. 
Wherefore  I  say, — "  To  one  whose  family  and  profes- 
sion are  unknown,"  &c. 

The  jackal  having  heard  all  this,  replied  in  anger, — 
Hear  me,  thou  fool !  The  first  time  thou  wast  seen 
by  the  deer,  thy  family  and  profession  were  un- 
known. How  is  it,  then,  that  your  mutual  kindness 
and  attention  grow  higher  and  higher  ? 

'/j  ////j"  07ie  of  us,  or  is  he  a  stranger?     Such  is  the 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  53 

enumeration  of  the  ungenerous  ;  but  to  those  by  whom 
liberality  is  practised,  the  whole  world  is  but  as  one 
family.' 

Wherefore,  I  say,  be  thou  my  acquaintance  in  the 
same  manner  the  deer  is.  What  is  the  use  of  all 
these  replies  ?  observed  the  deer.  Let  us  dwell 
together,  and  spend  our  time  happily  in  agreeable 
conversation. 

*  There  is  no  one  the  friend  of  another ;  there  is  no 
one  the  enemy  of  another :  friends,  as  well  as  enemies, 
are  created  through  our  transactions.' 

So,  at  length,  the  crow  said, — Let  it  be  so. 

Early  in  the  morning  they  used  to  go  abroad  to 
those  parts  they  liked  best.  One  day  the  jackal  said 
to  the  deer,  in  great  secrecy, — In  a  particular  part  of 
this  wood,  my  friend,  there  is  a  field  full  of  corn,  to 
which  I  will,  conduct  thee ;  and  which  being  per- 
formed accordingly,  the  deer  used  to  go  there  every 
day  to  feed  upon  the  corn ;  but,  in  time,  this  being 
discovered  by  the  master  of  the  field,  he  laid  snares 
for  him.  After  this,  tl:e  deer  coming  there  again,  and 
being  confined  in  the  snares,  thus  reasoned  to  him- 
self: Who  but  a  friend  can  deHver  me  from  these 
snares  of  the  huntsman,  so  like  the  snares  of  death  "i 
In  the  meantime,  the  jackal,  having  arrived  at  the 
spot,  stopped  short,  and  began  to  consider  what  he 
should  do.    So  far,  said  he,  my  scheme  has  succeeded. 


54  THE  HITOPADESA  ; 

and  by  means  of  these  deceitful  snares,  my  wishes 
will  be  accomplished  in  great  abundance ;  for  when 
he  is  cut  up,  I  shall  get  his  bones  all  covered  with 
flesh  and  blood.  The  deer  was  exceedingly  glad  to 
see  him,  and  called  out  to  him, — Friend  jackal,  pray 
gnaw  my  bonds  asunder,  and  speedily  deliver  me! 

*A  friend  may  be  known  in  adversity,  a  hero  in 
battle,  an  honest  man  in  a  loan,  a  wife  when  riches 
are  spent,  and  a  relation  in  trouble.' 

The  jackal  eyed  the  deer  in  his  confinement  again 
and  again,  and  considered  whether  the  knots  were 
secure.  These  snares,  my  friend,  observed  he,  are 
made  of  leather  thongs,  and  it  being  Sunday,  how  can 
I  touch  them  with  my  teeth?*  But,  if  it  will  suit 
thee,  my  friend^  early  in  the  morning  I  will  do  what- 
ever may  be  thy  wish.  So  having  made  this  proposal, 
he  went  on  one  side,  and  laying  himself  down,  re- 
mained silent. 

In  the  meantime  the  crow,  Subuddhi,  finding  the 
deer  did  not  come  home,  had  gone  about  in  search  of 
him.  At  length  he  found  him  in  this  condition,  upon 
which  he  exclaimed, — What,  my  friend,  is  this  the 
promise  !     Is  this  the  fruit  of  the  word  of  a  friend  ! 


'*  Good  Hindoos  esteem  all  animal  substances  unclean  ;  but,  the 
question  is,  why  the  jackal  was  scrupulous  about  touching  ihem  of  a 
Sunday ;  unless  it  was  out  of  respect  to  the  God  of  day,  after  whom  it 
la  called. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  55 

'  He  who  doth  not  hearken  to  the  voice  of  a  friend 
and  well-wisher  in  adversity,  is  the  deHght  of  his 
enemies.' 

But  where  is  that  jackal  ?  added  the  crow.  Alas  ! 
said  the  deer,  he  is  here  anxiously  waiting  for  my 
flesh !  My  friend,  observed  the  crow,  I  foretold  this 
from  the  beginning. 

*  I  am  not  to  blame :  he  was  not  a  subject  for 
confidence.  From  the  cruel,  even  the  virtuous  have 
cause  for  apprehension.' 

Saying  this,  he  heaved  a  deep  sigh,  and  cried,  O 
deceitful  wretch !  what  hath  been  brought  to  pass  by 
thee,  thou  agent  of  wickedness  ! 

'  How  hard  is  disappointment  in  this  world,  to 
such  as  have  been  deluded  by  fair  words ;  to  those 
who  by  pretended  services  have  been  seduced  into 
the  power  of  their  enemies ;  to  the  hopeful  ;  to  those 
who  have  faith,  and  to  expectants ! 

'A  man  should  forsake  such  a  friend  as  speaketh 
kindly  to  his  face,  and  behind  his  back  defeateth  his 
designs.  He  is  like  a  pot  of  poison  with  a  surface  of 
milk. 

^  O  goddess  Vasudha  !  *  How  supportest  thou 
that  treacherous  man,  who  exerciseth  his  wickedness 
upon  his  innocent  and  confidential  companion  !' 

*  The  earth. 


56  THE  HITOPADESA : 

Is  not  this,  continued  the  crow,  the  character  of 
bad  men  ? 

*A  man  should  not  form  any  acquaintance,  nor 
enter  into  any  amusements,  with  one  of  an  evil 
character.  A  piece  of  charcoal,  if  it  be  hot,  burnefi  ; 
and  if  cold,  it  blackeneth  the  hand. 

*  Although  one  of  an  evil  character  speak  kindly, 
that  is  no  motive  for  his  being  trusted.  The  serpent 
is  ornamented  with  a  gem,*  but  is  he  not  to  be 
dreaded  ? 

*  Before  one's  face,  he  falleth  at  one's  feet ;  behind, 
he  biteth  the  flesh  of  one's  back.  In  one's  ear, 
doth  he  not  softly  hum  his  tunc  with  wondrous  ait ! 
And  when  he  findeth  a  hole,  fearless,  he  boldly 
entereth.  Thus  doth  the  gnat  t  perform  the  actions 
of  a  deceitful  man.' 

About  this  time  the  owner  of  the  field  was  seen 
coming,  with  a  staff  in  his  hand,,  and  his  eyes  red 
wiih  anger.  So  the  crow,  having  considered  what 
was  to  be  done,  said, — Friend  deer,  feign  thy<clf 
dead,  and  stay  quiet  till  I  make  a  noise,  and  then  get 
up  and  run  away  as  fast  as  thou  canst.     The  deer 

*  It  is  a  vulgar  notion  in  India  that  in  the  iicads  of  some  species  ol 
serpents  precious  stones  are  found. 

t  Tlie  word  in  the  original  signifies  a  mosquito,  which,  as  far  as  the 
translator  has  carried  his  observations  since  his  return  to  his  native 
country,  is  no  ways  different  from  the  common  English  gnat,  except 
that  it  makes  a  louder  noise,  and  is  more  venomous. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  57 

was  now  perceived  by  the  master  of  the  field,  whose 
eyes  sparkled  with  joy ;  but  upon  his  approaching 
nearer,  and  thinking  him  dead,  he  exclaimed, — Ha  ! 
thou  art  dead  of  thyse'f  from  confinement,  art  thou? 
and  having  said  so,  he  be^^^an  to  employ  himself  in 
collecting  and  bundling  up  his  snares  ;  and  upon  his 
moving  to  a  little  distance,  the  deer  hearing  the  voice 
of  the  crow,  started  up  in  great  disorder,  and  ran 
away.  The  master  of  the  field,  upon  seeing  this, 
flung  his  staff  at  him,  which,  by  chance,  struck  the 
jackal,  and  so  he  was  killed,  and  not  the  deer.  It  is 
said,  that 

*  A  m^n  reapeth  the  fruit  of  any  extraordinary 
good  or  bad  action  in  the  space  of  three  years^  three 
months,  three  fortnights,*  or  three  days. 

*  Wherefore  I  repeat,  **  Harmony  between  the  food 
and  the  feeder,"  &c.' 

To  all  this  the  crow  replied  : 

'  In  eating  thee,  I  should  not  enjoy  a  plenteous 
meal.     But,  like  Chitra-greeva,  I  live  but  in  thy  life. 

*  Even  amongst  brutes,  confidence  is  perceived  in 
those,  in  whose  every  action  there  is  innocence.  The 
innate  disposition  of  the  good  doth  not  vary  from  the 
principles  of  integrity. 

*  The  Hindoos  have  divided  their  lunar  month  into  what  they  de- 
nominate the  sookla-paksha,  and  the  kreeshna-faksha,  that  is,  the  light 
side  and  the  dark  side  (of  tlie  moon)  ;  tl:e  former  commences  with  the 
new  moon,  and  the  latter  with  the  full. 


58  THE  HITOPADESA  ; 

*  The  mind  of  a  good  man  doth  not  alter,  even 
when  he  is  in  distress  :  the  waters  of  the  ocean  are 
not  to  be  heated  by  a  torch  of  straw.' 

But,  friend  crow,  observed  the  mouse  Hiranyaka, 
thou  art  an  unsteady  and  inconstant  animal,  and  one's 
affections  should,  on  no  account,  be  placed  on  such  a 
character  ;  as  is  declared  in  these  lines  : 

'  A  cat,  a  buffalo,  a  ram,  a  crow,  and  a  man  of 
weak  judgment  are  excluded  from  confidence  :  it  is 
not  expedient  to  put  any  trust  in  them.' 

Besides,  thou  art  on  the  side  of  our   enemies,  and 
on  this  head  they  say, 

'A  man  should  not  enter  into  alliance  with  his 
enemy,  even  with  the  tightest  bonds  of  union.  Water 
made  ever  so  hot,  will  still  quench  fire.' 

And  again  : 

*That  is  not  possible  which  is  impossible.  That 
which  is  possible  is  ever  possible.  A  cart  moveth  not 
upon  the  waters,  nor  a  boat  upon  dry  ground.' 

I  have  heard  every  book  upon  these  subjects,  said 
the  crow  Laghu-patanaka,  nevertheless  my  mind  is 
impressed  with  this  idea,  that  I  must  absolutely  form 
a  friendly  acquaintance  with  thee;  but  if  I  should 
fail,  after  our  separation  I  shall  destroy  myself.  It 
is  said,  that  those  of  evil  character  are  like  an  earthen 
pot— easy  to  be  broken,  but  hard  to  be  rc-united  ; 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  59 

and  that  those  of  a  good  character  resemble  a  vessel 
of  gold,  M'hich,  though  difficult  to  be  broken,  may 
easily  be  joined  again.     It  is  said, 

'  Metals  unite  from  fluxility ;  birds  and  beasts 
from  motives  of  convenience  ;  fools  from  fear  and 
stupidity  ;  and  just  men  at  sight 

'Although  friendship  between  good  men  be  inter- 
rupted, still  their  principles  remain  unaltered.  The 
stalk  of  the  lotus  may  be  broken,  and  the  fibres 
remain  connected. 

*  The  qualities  of  a  friend  should  be,  sincerity, 
liberality,  bravery,  constancy  in  joy  and  sorrow,  recti- 
tude, attachment,  veracity.* 

Whom,  then,  but  thyself  shall  I  find  endued  with 
all  these  ? 

Upon  hearing  this,  Hiranyaka  slipped  out  of  his 
hole,  and  said, — Well,  by  the  immortal  water  of  thy 
words,  I  have  even  ventured  out ;  for  it  is  said, 

*Nor  bathing  with  cool  water,  nor  a  necklace  of 
pearls*  nor  anointing  with  sanders,t  yieldeth  such 
comfort  to  the  body  oppressed  with  heat,  as  the 
language  of  a  good  man,  cheerfully  uttered,  doth  to 

*  Strings  of  beads  formed  of  various  materials  are  universally  worn 
about  the  neck  in  India,  by  men,  women,  and  children. 

t  The  Hindoos  never  wash  in  the  Ganges,  but  they  mark  themselves 
on  the  forehead,  across  the  arms,  and  upon  the  breast,  with  a  kind  of 
pigment  made  of  the  white  species  of  sanders,  or  sandal  wood,  mixed 
with  water,  which  they  suffer  to  dry  on. 


6o  THE  HITOPADESA : 

the  mind.  To  be  surrounded  with  a  good  connection 
is,  amongst  men  of  fair  character,  equal  to  the  charm 
of  attraction.'  * 

And  in  another  place  : 

*  Betraying  a  secret,  insoHcitude,  severity,  insensi- 
bility, anger,  want  of  veracity,  gaming :  all  these  are 
faults  in  a  friend.'' 

But  of  all  these  faults  in  due  order,  not  one  is  to  be 
found  in  thee.     It  is  said, 

*  Eloquence,  and  veracity  of  speech,  are  to  be  dis- 
covered by  conversation  ;  the  being  inimical  with 
inconstancy  or  unsteadiness,  may  be  perceived  at 
sisrht. 

'  The  friendship  of  those  who  are  of  a  pure  and 
gentle  disposition,  acteth  one  way  ;  and  that  of  those 
whose  hearts  are  affected  with  hollowness  and  deceit, 
another.' 

Then,  as  long  as  we  both  shall  live,  so  long  let  this 
our  friendship  be  nourished,  like  that  which  existed 
between  Rama  and  Sugreeva.t 

So  Hiranyaka  having  promised  his  friendship, 
and  entertained  the  crow  with  such  provisions  as  he 


*  What  the  nnture  of  tlie  cliarm  alhided  to  may  be,  the  transhalor  is 
at  a  loss  to  explain. 

t  A  baboon  celebrated  in  the  "  Ramayan,"  or  history  of  Ram,  as  his 
faithful  fiicnd  and  ally,  in  his  wars  against  Ravana,  the  tyrant  of 
Ceylon. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS,  6i 

had,  retired  into  his  hole  ;  and  the  crow  also  retired 
to  his  usual  place  of  abode. 

From  that  time  there  existed  a  mutual  friendship  be- 
tween them.  Day  after  day  passed  away  in  making 
presents  to  one  another  of  provisions,  and  the  like ; 
in  reciprocal  inquiries  after  each  other's  health,  and 
in  amusing  conversation.  One  day  the  crow  said  to 
the  mouse, — Friend  Hiranyaka,  provisions  are  very 
difficult  to  be  procured  in  this  place,  wherefore  I  am 
about  to  abandon  it,  to  repair  to  some  other. 
Hiranyaka  replied, 

*  Teeth,  hair,  nails,  and  the  human  species,  prosper 
not  when  separated  from  their  place.  A  wise  man 
being  informed  of  this,  should  not  totally  forsake  his 
native  home.* 

Friend,  observed  the  crow,  this  is  the  sentiment  of 
w^eak  men  ;  for  it  is  said, 

'  Wise  men,  lions,  and  elephants,  quit  one  place 
and  go  to  another ;  whilst  crows,  weak  men,  and  the 
deer  species,  meet  death  in  the  same  place.' 

Then,  whither  shall  we  go  t  demanded  Hiranyaka. 
They  say, 

*  A  wise  man  moveth  with  one  foot,  and  standeth 
fast  with  the  other.  A  man  should  not  quit  one 
place  until  he  hath  fixed  upon  another.' 

Said  the  crow  :  There  is  a  place  well  thouorht  of. 


62  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

Where  is  it  ?  replied  the  mouse ;  and  the  crow 
replied, — In  Dandakaranya  there  is  a  river  celebrated 
by  the  name  Karpooragow,  where  there  resides  my 
friend,  by  many  years  accumulated  kindness,  a 
tortoise  of  innate  virtue,  whose  name  is  Manthara. 
It  is  said, 

*  In  giving  advice  to  another,  the  experience  of 
every  one  may  be  beneficial;  but  in  religion,  the 
proper  example  of  some  one  of  a  very  exalted  mind.' 

He  will  treat  us,  added  the  crow,  with  a  variety  of 
choice  fish.  Hiranyaka  then  said, — If  I  stay  here, 
what  shall  I  do  ?     It  is  said, 

*A  man  should  abandon  that  country,  wherein 
there  is  neither  respect,  nor  employment,  nor  con- 
nections, nor  the  advancement  of  science.' 

Again  : 

*  A  man  should  not  reside  in  a  place,  wherein  these 
five  things  are  not  to  be  found  :  wealthy  inhabitants, 
Brahmans  learned  in  theVedas,  a*rajah,"^a  river,  and, 
in  the  fifth  place,  a  physician.' 


*  In  the  ancient  Hindoo  government,  before  the  Mussulman  con- 
quest, which  seems  to  have  been  feudal,  this  title  was  granted  by  the 
superior  lord,  who  was  styled  Maha- Rajah  (great  Rajah),  or  Adheeswara 
(superior  lord),  to  the  chiefs  of  the  Kshetree  or  military  tribe  only,  as 
a  reward  for  merit,  or  as  an  appendage  of  office,  with  the  ceremony  of 
sprinkling  consecrated  water  upon  the  head  ;  but  at  present  ihejirman 
of  the  king  of  Delhi  is,  but  too  often,  issued  to  ennoble  collectors  of 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  63 

So  conduct  me  there  also,  added  the  mouse. 

The  crow  accordingly  set  off  with  his  friend,,  and 
as  they  amused  the  time  by  conversing  upon  a  variety 
of  pleasing  subjects,  they  arrived  with  ease  upon  the 
banks  of  the  river.  They  were  perceived  at  a  con- 
siderable distance  by  the  tortoise  Manthara.  He  rose 
to  receive  them,  and  having  first  performed  the  duties 
of  hospitality  to  Laghu-patanaka,  he  next  extended 
them  to  Hiranyaka  ;  according  to  these  lines  : 

'  Whether  a  child,  or  an  old  man,  or  a  youth,  be 
come  to  thy  house,  he  is  to  be  treated  with  respect  ; 
for  of  all  men,  thy  guest  is  the  superior. 

*  Fire  is  the  superior  of  the  Brahmans,  the  Brah- 
man is  the  superior  of  the  tribes,  and  the  husband  is 
the  only  superior  of  women  ;  but  the  stranger  is  thd 
superior  of  all. 

*  Whether  he  who  is  come  to  thy  house  be  of  the 
highest  or  even  of  the  lowest  rank  in  society,  he  is 
worthy  to  be  treated  with  due  respect;  for  of  all  men 
thy  guest  is  the  superior.' 

Friend,  said  the  crow  to  the  tortoise,  pray  pay 
attention  to  this  stranger  ;  for  he  is  the  very  axis  of 
those  who  are  famed  for  virtuous  deeds.  His  name 
is  Hiranyaka,  the  prince  of  mice,  to  celebrate  whose 


revenue,  and  wretches  of  the  lowest  class,  destiaite  of  every  merit  but 
that  of  immense  wealth.  The  term  is  derived  from  a  root  signifying 
to  appear  %vith  splendour. 


64  THE  HITOPADESA: 

great  qualities,  the  chief  of  serpents*  may  sometimes 
have  occasion  to  employ  a  second  thousand  tongues. 
Having  said  this,  he  related  the  story  of  the  pigeon 
Chitra-greeva.  The  tortoise  Manthara,  having  made  re- 
spectful inquiries  after  his  health,  said  to  the  mouse, — 
Be  pleased  to  inform  me  of  thy  motives  for  quitting 
thy  own  uninhabited  wilds ;  and  Hiranyaka  replied, 
I  will  recount  them. 

FABLE  V. 

Be  it  known,  said  he,  that  there  is  a  city  called 
Champakavatee,  where  many  mendicants  are  wont  to 
resort.  Amongst  the  rest  there  was  one  whose  name 
was  Choorakarna.t  This  mendicant,  having  placed  the 
dish  containing  what  was  left  of  the  alms  he  collected 
upon  a  forked  stick  fixed  in  the  wall,  used  to  go  to 
sleep,  whilst  I,  every  day,  contrived  to  jump  from  a 
distance  and  devour  the  hoard.  At  length,  one  day 
his  friend,  another  mendicant,  whose  name  was 
Veenakarna,  came  in,  and  whilst  he  was  engaged  with 
him  talking  over  various  subjects,  Choorakarna,  in 
order  to  frighten  me  away,  struck  the  ground  with  a 
piece  of  bamboo.  This  being  observed  by  Veenakarna, 
he  said, — What,  at  present,  thou  art  inattentive  to  my 


*  The  serpent  Sesh  or  Ananta.     Employing  the  emblem  of  eternity 
with  a  thousand  tongues  in  the  character  of  Fame,  is  not  ill  imagined, 
t  Ring-ear. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  65 

story,    and  employed  about  something  else  ?     It    is 
said, 

*  A  pleasant  countenance,  and  a  mien  without 
pride;  great  attention  to  what  is  said,  and  sweetness 
of  speech  ;  a  great  degree  of  kindness,  and  the  appear- 
ance of  awe  ;  are  always  tokens  of  a  man's  attach* 
ment.' 

So, 

*  Giving  unwillingly,  rendering  void  what  he  did 
before,  disrespectful  behaviour,  unkind  actions,  prais- 
ing others,  and,  by  the  assistance  of  tales,  calumniating 
behind  one's  back,  are  the  signs  of  one  who  is  not 
attached.' 

To  all  this  Choorakarna  replied, — I  am  not  inatten- 
tive to  thy  story.  Behold  what  it  is !  This  mouse  is 
my  plunderer.  He  is  for  ever  devouring  the  meat  I  get 
by  begging,  out  of  that  dish.  Upon  this,  Veenakarna 
having  examined  the  forked  stick  in  the  wall,  said, — 
What,  is  it  this  little  weak-looking  mouse  who  con- 
trives to  jump  so  very  far  >  There  must  be  some 
reason  to  account  for  this ;  as  in  the  subject  of 
these  lines  : 

Without  an  apparent  cause,  a  young  wo7nan  by  force 
draweth  an  old  majt  to  her,  and  kisseth  him.  When  a 
husband  is  embraced  zvithout  affection,  there  must  be 
some  reason  for  it. 

r 


66  THE  HITOPADESA : 

Choorakarna  having  demanded  what  this  meant, 
Vcenakarna  related  the  following  story  : 

FABLE    VI. 

In  the  country  which  is  called  Gowr,*  there  is  a  city, 
by  name  Kowsamvee,  where  dwelt  Chandana-dama,  a 
merchant  of  immense  wealth.  When  in  the  last  stage 
of  life,  his  understanding  being  blinded  by  desire, 
by  the  glare  of  his  riches  he  obtained  for  his  wife 
I.eelavatee,t  the  daughter  of  another  merchant.  She 
was  youthful,  and,  as  it  were,  the  victorious  banner  of 
Makaraketu,t  the  god  of  love ;  so  her  aged  partner 
was  ill  calculated  to  be  agreeable  to  her ;  for, 

'  As  the  hearts  of  those  who  are  pinched  with  cold, 
delight  not  in  the  rays  of  the  moon  ;  nor  of  those 
v/ho  are  oppressed  with  heat,  in  the  beams  of  the 
sun  ;  so  the  heart  of  a  woman  delighteth  not  in  a 
husband  stricken  in  years/ 

Again : 

'  What  name  shall  we  give  to  the  passions  of  men, 
when  their  hairs  are  turned  grey  ;  since  women,  with 
their  hearts  fixed  on  others,  regard  them  as  a  nauseous 


*  The  ancient  city  of  Gowr,  which  Is  now  in  ruins,  was  the  capital  of 
a  province  of  the  same  name,  now  included  in  that  of  Bengal, 

t  Sportive,  wanton. 

t  One  of  the  titles  of  the  Hindoo  Cupid,  who  is  commonly  called 
kama-deva,  the  god  of  love. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  67 

But  her  old  husband  was  exceedingly  fond  of  her  ; 
according  to  these  sayings  : 

*  The  lust  of  wealth,  and  the  hope  of  life,  are  ever 
of  importance  to  man  ;  but  a  youthful  wife  to  an  old 
man  is  dearer  than  life  itself.' 

Nevertheless,  Leelavatee,  through    the    intoxication 
of  youth,  attached  herself  to  a  certain  merchant's  son. 

*  Too  much  liberty  whilst  resident  in  her  father's 
house,  attending  festive  processions,  appearing  in 
company  in  the  presence  of  men  contrary  to  pro- 
priety, the  same  in  byways,  and  associating  with 
women  of  bad  character,  are  the  immediate  destruc- 
tion of  innate  morals.  Sporting  with  their  husbands' 
infirmities,  too,  is  to  women  the  cause  of  ruin.' 

Again  ; 

'Drinking,  keeping  bad  company,  staying  away 
from  her  husband,  gadding  about,  slothfulness,  and 
living  at  another's  house,  are  six  things  injurious  to  a 
woman. 

'  Women,  at  all  times,  have  been  inconstant ;  even 
amongst  the  celestials,  we  are  told.  Happy  is  the 
portion  of  those  men  whose  wives  are  guarded  from 
error ! 

*  Women's  virtue  is  founded  upon  a  modest  coun- 
tenance, precis^  behaviour,  rectitude,  and  the  want  of 
suitors."' 

C  2 


68  THE  HITOPADESA : 

They  say, 

'  Woman  is  like  a  pot  of  oil,  and  man  a  burning 
coal.  A  wise  man  will  not  put  the  oil  and  the  fire 
together. 

'  In  infancy  the  father  should  guard  her,  in  youth 
her  husband  should  guard  her,  and  in  old  age  her 
children  should  guard  her ;  for,  at  no  time,  is  a 
woman  proper  to  be  trusted  with  liberty.' 

One  day,  as  she  was  carelessly  sitting  with  the 
merchant's  son,  in  agreeable  conversation,  upon  a 
sofa  white  as  camphire,  and  fringed  with  strings  of 
gems,  having  unexpectedly  discovered  her  husband 
coming  towards  them,  she  rose  up  in  a  great  hurry, 
seized  him  by  the  hair,  and  eagerly  embracing,  began 
to  kiss  him  ;  whilst  the  gallant  found  means  to  escape. 
But  one  who  saw  this  understood  her  motive,  and 
Leelavatee  was  corrected  by  a  hidden  rod.* 

'Every  book  of  knowledge  which  is  known  to 
Usana,  or  to  Vrihaspati,  is  by  nature  planted  in  the 
understanding  of  women.' 

Upon  the  whole,  I  say,  '*  Without  a  cause  a  young 
woman,"  &c.  And  hence  there  must  be  some  hidden 
cause  for  the  extraordinary  strength  of  this  mouse. 
He  considered  for  a  moment,  and  at  length  deter- 
mined that  the  reason  must  be  in  a  hoard  of  wealth  : 
for, 

*  That  is,  she  was  obliged  to  silence  the  woman  with  hush  money. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  69 

*  In  this  world  the  wealthy  are,  every  one,  every- 
where, and  at  all  times,  powerful.  Riches  are  the 
foundation  of  preferment,  and  an  introduction  to  the 
prince.* 

Having  said  this,  a  spade  was  brought,  and  my 
hole  being  dug  open  by  that  mendicant,  the  hoard 
which  I  had  been  accumulating  for  many  years  was 
carried  away  !  After  this,  day  by  day,  my  strength 
decreased,  and  having  little  power  to  exert  myself,  I 
was  unable  to  procure  even  sufficient  to  support  life  ; 
and  in  this  condition,  as  I  was  fearfully  and  feebly 
skulking  about,  I  was  observed  by  Choorakarna,  upon 
which  he  repeated  the  following  lines : 

'  With  wealth  all  are  powerful ;  from  wealth  a  man 
is  esteemed  learned.  Behold  this  wicked  mouse  !  see 
how  he  is  reduced  to  the  natural  level  of  his  species  ! 

*  Deprived  of  riches,  all  the  actions  of  a  man  of  little 
judgment  disappear,  like  trifling  streams  in  the  sum- 
mer's heat/ 

And  again  : 

'  He  who  hath  riches  hath  friends ;  he  who  hath 
riches  hath  relations ;  he  who  hath  riches  is  a  man  of 
consequence  in  the  world  ;  he  who  hath  riches  is 
esteemed  a  learned  man. 

'  The  house  of  the  childless  is  empty ;  and  so  is 
the  heart  of  him  who  hath  no  wife.     The  mind  of  a 


70  THE  HITOPADESA : 

fool  is  empty ;  and  everything  is  empty,  where  there 
is  poverty.' 

They  say  also, 

*  "Thos^  faculties  are  not  injured."  This  is  a  mere 
saying.  "  That  judgment  is  unimpaired."  That  also 
is  but  an  expression ;  for  the  moment  a  man  is  de- 
prived of  the  comfort  of  riches,  he  is  quite  another. 
Is  not  this  curious  > ' 

Having  heard  all  this,  I  looked  about  me,  and  re- 
solved that  it  would  not,  by  any  means,  be  proper  for 
me  to  stay  there :  neither,  by-the-by,  is  it  proper 
that  I  should  communicate  my  affairs  to  others ;  for, 

*  A  wise  man  should  not  make  known  the  loss  of 
fortune,  any  malpractices  in  his  house;  his  being 
cheated,  nor  his  having  been  disgraced.' 

They  say,  likewise, 

*When  the  frowns  of  fortune  are  excessive,  and 
human  endeavours  are  exerted  in  vain  ;  where,  but  in 
the  wilderness,  can  comfort  be  found  for  a  poor  man 
of  sensibility  ? 

'A  man  of  nice  feelings  willingly  encountereth 
death,  rather  than  submit  to  poverty.  A  fire  mecteth 
extinction,  before  it  will  yield  to  be  cold.' 

Again : 

'  The  fate  of  a  man  of  feeling  is,  like  that  of  a  tuft 


PABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  -ji 

of  flowers,  twofold :  he  may  either  mount  upon  the 
head  of  all,  or  go  to  decay  in  the  wilderness/ 

To  live  despised  is  reprobated  exceedingly.    Hence, 

*  It  is  better  that  the  (funeral)  fire  should  be  blown 
up  by  the  breath  of  life*  of  a  man  deprived  of  riches, 
than  that  he  should  be  solicited  by  the  poor,  when 
destitute  of  the  means  of  relief.' 

Again  :  . 

'  From  poverty  a  man  cometh  to  shame  ;  and  being 
overwhelmed  with  disgrace,  he  is  totally  deprived  of 
power.  Without  power  he  is  oppressed,  and  from 
oppression  cometh  grief.  Loaded  with  grief,  he  be- 
cometh  melancholy ;  and  impaired  by  melancholy, 
he  is  forsaken  by  reason  ;  and  with  the  loss  of  reason, 
he  goeth  to  destruction.  Alas !  the  want  of  riches 
is  the  foundation  of  every  misfortune.'' 

Again  : 

*  It  is  better  to  guard  silence,  than  that  the  words 
which  are  uttered  should  be  untrue.  It  is  better  to 
be  nothing,  than  to  seduce  the  wife  of  another.  It  is 
better  to  abandon  life,  than  to  delight  in  cruel  con- 
versation. It  is  better  to  live  by  begging  one's 
bread,  than  to  gratify  the  mouth  at  the  expense  of 
others.' 


*  Death  itself  is  preferable  to  Ihe  want  of  the  means  of  affording 
relief  to  those  in  distress. 


72  THE  HIJOPADESA  : 

Want  maki:;th  even  servitude  honourable  ;  light,  total 
darkness;  beauty,  deformity;  and  even  the  words  of 
Hari,  with  a  hundred  good  qualities,  crimes.  What 
then,  shall  I  nourish  myself  with  another's  cake  ? 
This  would  be  to  open  a  second  door  to  death. 
For, 

*  When  a  man  is  in  indigence,  picking  herbs  is  his 
philosophy  ;*  the  enjoyment  of  his  wife  his  only  com- 
merce, and  vassalage  his  food.' 

Asrain  : 

'  Death  is  life  to  him  who  is  subject  to  sickness, 
who  hath  been  long  an  exile,  who  liveth  upon  an- 
other's bread,  or  sleepeth  under  another's  roof;  for 
death  easeth  him  of  all  his  pain.' 

Having  considered  all  this,  I  have  again,  through 
covetousness,  made  up  my  mind  to  accept  of  some  of 
thy  provisions.     But  it  is  said, 

'  With  covetousness  reason  departeth :  covetous- 
ness engendereth  avarice ;  and  the  man  who  is 
tormented  with  avarice  experienceth  pain,  both  here 
and  hereafter.' 

Hence,  after  I  had  been  struck  with  the  broken  piece 
of  bamboo  by  Veenakarna,  I  began  to  consider,  that 


*  There  is  no  word  in  the  Sanskrit  which  answers  exactly  to  this 
ttrm      The  original  \'> panditya^  an  abstract  formed  from  pandit. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  73 

the  covetous  were  unhappy,  and  assuredly  their  own 
enemy.     It  is  said, 

'  He  whose  mind  is  at  ease  is  possessed  of  all 
riches.  Is  it  not  the  same  to  one  who^e  foot  is  enclosed 
in  a  shoe,  as  if  the  whole  surface  of  the  earth  were 
covered  with  leather  } ' 

Again  : 

'  Where  have  they,  who  are  running  here  and  there 
in  search  of  riches,  such  happiness  as  those  placid 
spirits  enjoy,  who  are  gratified  at  the  immortal 
fountain  of  happiness  } 

'  All  hath  been  read,  all  hath  been  heard,  and  all 
hath  been  followed  by  him,  who  having  put  hope 
behind  him,  dependeth  not  upon  expectation. 

*  Fortunate  is  the  life  of  that  man,  by  whom  the 
door  of  the  noble  hath  not  been  attended  ;  by  whom 
the  pain  of  sep  iration  hath  not  been  experienced  ; 
and  by  whom  the  voice  of  an  eunuch*  hath  not  been 
heard.' 

Again : 

'To  one,  O  Narada,t  borne  away  by  the  thirst  of 
gain,  a  hundred  Yojana  appear  not  far  ;  even  after 
he  hath  the  treasure  in  his  hand.' 


*  How  greatly  do  the  tastes  of  nations  differ  ! 

t  One  of  the  seven  wise  men,  to  whom  is  aitiibuted  the  invention  of 
the  musical  instrument  called  veena. 


74  THE  HITOPADESA : 

It  is  good,  then,  to  be  entirely  separated  far  from  the 
usual  occasions  of  life. 

'  What  is  religion  ?  Compassion  for  all  things 
v.'hich  have  life.  .  What  is  happiness  ?  To  animals 
in  this  world,  health.  What  is  kindness  ?  A  principle 
in  the  good.  What  is  philosophy?  An  entire  separa- 
tion from  the  world.' 

It  is  said, 

'A  man  may  forsake  one  person  to  save  a  family; 
he  may  desert  a  whole  family  for  the  sake  of  a  village; 
and  sacrifice  a  village  for  the  safety  of  the  community  ; 
but  for  himself  he  may  abandon  the  whole  world.' 

But, 

'  To  those  who  seek  employment,  it  is  esteemed  a 
favour  to  be  an  appendage  only  of  a  great  man's 
station.  The  serpent  Vasukee  *  is  contented  to  feed 
on  air,  whilst  hanging  to  the  neck  of  Hara.t 

'  It  is,  either  water  without  labour,  or  sweet  bread 
attended  by  fear  and  danger.  I  have  examined  this  ; 
and  I  plainly  see,  that  is  happiness  wherein  there  is 
ease.' 

So,  having   considered    all  this,   I    am    come   to   an 
uninhabited  wilderness ;  for, 

*  The  serpent  employed  in  churning  the  ocean  for  the  water  of  life. 

+  One  of  the  titles  of  Seeva,  the  destroying  power  of  the  deity,  wiio 
is  represented  with  a  large  snake  about  his  neck  by  way  of  necklace ;  a 
proper  ornament  for  the  God  of  Terrors. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  75 

*  It  is  better  to  dwell  in  a  forest  haunted  by 
tigers  and  lions,  the  trees  our  habitation,  flowers, 
fruits  and  water  for  food,  the  grass  for  a  bed,  and  the 
bark  of  the  trees  for  garments,  than  to  live  amongst 
relations,  after  the  loss  of  wealth.' 

Wherefore,  as  long  as  the  stock  of  virtue  acquired 
by  birth  shall  last,*  I  will,  with  this  true  friend,  be 
attached  to  thee  by  kind  services  ;  and  by  this  single 
virtuous  act,  I  may  obtain  that  place  in  heaven  which 
is  consecrated  to  friendship.t     They  say, 

*  Of  the  poisonous  tree,  the  world,  two  species  of 
fruit  are  produced,  sweet  as  the  water  of  life  :  poetry, 
whose  taste  is  like  the  immortal  juice,  and  the  society 
of  good  men,' 

Again  : 

*  Society^  faith  in  Kesava,^  and  immerging  in  the 
waters  of  the  Ganges,  may  be  esteemed  three  very 
essential  things  in  this  transitory  world. 

*  Riches  are  as  the  dust  of  the  feet,  youth  hke  the 
rapidity  of  a  river  flowing  down  a  hill,  manhood  like 


*  This  sentence  is  agreeable  to  the  notion,  that  the  joys  of  heaven 
are  to  last  for  a  period  measured  by  our  good  actions  in  this  life. 

t  The  Hindoo  divines  have  divided  heaven  into  different  regions 
which  they  call  lok.  Thus  there  is  the  pitri-l0k,  or  region  of  fathers, 
and  the  matri-lok,  or  region  of  mothers  ;  but  there  is  no  region  allotted 
for  old  maids  and  bachelors :  these  are  obliged  to  renew  their  youth  in 
this  life,  and  try  their  luck  once  more. 

±  One  of  the  names  of  Vishnu  in  his  incarnation  of  Kreeshna. 


7o  THE  HITOPADESA : 

a  drop  of  water,  transient  and  .  unsteady  ;*  and 
human  life  like  froth.  He  who  doth  not  perform  the 
duties  of  religion,  with  a  steady  mind,  to  open  the 
bars  of  Heaven's  gate,  will,  hereafter,  when  smitten 
with  sorrow,  and  bent  down  with  old  age,  burn  with 
the  fire  of  contrition.' 

To  all  this  the  tortoise  Manthara  replied, — Sir.  your 
fault  was  this  :  you  laid  up  too  large  a  stock.  It  is 
said, 

*  Giving  away  is  the  instrument  for  accumulated 
treasures  :  it  is  like  a  bucket  for  the  distribution  of 
the  waters  deposited  in  the  bowels  of  a  well. 

*  He  who,  in  opposition  to  his  own  happiness, 
delighteth  in  the  accumulation  of  riches,  carrieth 
burthens  for  others,  and  is  the  vehicle  of  trouble.' 

Another : 

*  If  we  are  rich  with  the  riches  of  which  we  neither 
give  nor  enjoy,  we  are  rich  with  the  riches  which  are 
buried  in  the  caverns  of  the  earth. 

*  Without  enjoyment,  the  wealth  of  the  miser  is  the 
same  to  him  as  if  it  were  another's.     But  when  it  is 


*  A  cirop  of  water  upon  a  leaf  of  tlie  lotus,  must  be  understood  ; 
agreeable  to  ihe  following  hemistich  engraved  on  a  copper-plate  bearing 
date  fifty-six  years  before  the  Christian  era,  and  which,  about  the  year 
1781,  was  sent  from  India  as  a  present  to  Lord  Mansfield  : 

"Riches  and  the  life  of  man  are  transient  as  drops  of  water  upon  a 
caf  of  the  lotus."— Translated  by  C.  W.  1781. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  yy 

said  of  a  man,  *'  he  hath  so  much,"  it  is  with  difficulty- 
he  can  be  induced  to  part  with  it.' 

They  say, 

'  The  wealth  of  the  miser  goeth  neither  to  the 
celestials,*  nor  to  the  Brahmans,  nor  to  his  kindred, 
nor  to  himself;  but  to  the  fire,  the  thief,  and  the 
magistrate.' 

And, 

'  He  who  eateth  by  measure,  whilst  his  treasure  is 
buried  low  in  the  ground,  is  preparing  for  a  journey- 
to  a  mansion  below.'  t 

So, 

*  Giving  with  kind  words,  knowledge  without  pride, 
heroism  accompanied  by  clemency,  and  wealth  with 
liberality,  are  four  excellences  hard  to  be  found.' 

It  is  said, 

A  Jioard  should  ahvays  be  made  ;  but  not  too  great  a 
hoard.  A  jackal,  through  the  faidt  of  hoarding  too 
mildly  IV as  killed  by  a  bozv. 

How  was  this  .''  demanded  Hiranyaka  ;  and  Man- 
thara  related  the  following  story : 


*  In  sacrifices  and  other  expensive  ceremonies. 

+  The  Hindoos  place  their  hell,  which  seems  to  be  but  for  a  tem- 
porary punishment,  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth. 


78  THE  HITOPADESA  .• 

FABLE  VII. 

A  CERTAIN  huntsman,  by  name  Bhirava,  an  inhabi- 
tant of  Kalyana-kattaka,*  being  fond  of  flesh,  once 
upon  a  time  went  to  hunt  in  the  forests  of  the 
Vindhya  mountains,!  and  having  killed  a  deer,  as  he 
was  carrying  him  away,  he  chanced  to  see  a  wild  boar 
of  a  formidable  appearance.  So  laying  the  deer  upon 
the  ground,  he  wounded  the  boar  with  an  arrow ;  but, 
upon  his.  approaching  him,  the  horrid  animal  set  up  a 
roar  dreadful  as  the  thunder  of  the  clouds,  and 
Wounding  him  in  the  groin,  he  fell  like  a  tree  cut  off 
by  the  axe.  At  the  same  time,  a  serpent,  of  that 
species  which  is  called  Ajagara,  pressed  by  hunger 
and  wandering  about,  rose  up  and  bit  the  boar,  who 
instantly  fell  helpless  upon  him,  and  remained  upon 
the  spot.     For, 

'  The  body  having  encountered  some  efficient 
cause,  water,  fire,  poison,  the  sword, 'hunger,  sickness, 
or  a  fall  from  an  eminence,  is  forsaken  by  the  vital 
spirits.* 

In  the  meantime,  a  jackal,  by  name  Deergha-rava,i 
prowling  about  in  search  of  prey,  discovered  the  deer, 
the  huntsman,  and  the  boar ;  and  having  observed 


*^  Probably  an  ancient  name  for  the  province  we  call  Cattack. 
+  That  chain  which  is  seen  about  Chunar-ghur. 
;  Long-cry. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  79 

t'tion;  wb'iid  to  himself, — Here  is  a  fine  feast  pre- 
and  ror  me. 

'As,  to  corporeal  beings,  unthought-of  troubles 
arrive  ;  so^  in  like  manner,  do  blessings  make  the'r 
appearance.  In  this,  I  think  providence  hatU  ex- 
tended them  farther  than  usual' 

Be  it  SO;  as  long  as  with  their  flesh  I  shall  have  food 
to  eat.  The  man  will  last  me  for  a  whole  month,  and 
the  deer  and  the  boar  for  two  more  ;  then  the  serpent 
will  serve  me  a  day;  and  let  me  taste  the  bow-string 
too.  But,  in  the  first  place,  let  me  try  that  which  is 
the  least  savoury.  Suppose,  then,  I  eat  this  catgut 
line  which  is  fastened  to  the  bow :  saying  so,  he  drew 
near  to  eat  it ;  but  the  instant  he  had  bit  the  gut  in 
two,  his  belly  was  ripped  open  by  the  spring  of  the 
bow;  and  he  was  reduced  to  the  state  of  the  five 
elements.*     I  say,  therefore,  ''A  hoard,"  &c. 

'  That  I  esteem  wealth  which  is  given  to  the  worthy, 
and  what  is,  day  by  day,  enjoyed  ;  the  rest  is  a  reserve 
for  one  knoweth  not  whom.' 

Then,  at  present,  what  is  the  purport  of  this  excessive 
use  of  the  force  of  words  to  exemplify  } 

'  Men  of  philosophic  minds  do  not  long  for  what  is 
not  attainable,  and  are  not  willing  to  lament  what  is 

*  Earth,  air,  fire,  Mater,  ard ether. 


Co  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

lost ;  neither  are  they  wont  to  be  embarrasstv 
of  calamity. 

*  Those  who  have  even  studied  good  books,   mi:, 
still  be  fools.     That  man  is  learned  who  reduceth  his 
learning  to  practice.     That  medicine  is  well  imagined 
which  doth,  more  than  nominally,  restore  the  health 
of  the  afflicted. 

*  The  precepts  of  philosophy  effect  not  the  least 
benefit  to  one  confirmed  in  fear.  To  a  blind  man,  of 
what  use  is  a  lamp,  although  it  be  burning  in  his 
hand  ? ' 

After  all,  added  the  tortoise,  it  is  best  to  be  satis- 
fied in  this  region  of  good  and  evil  destiny. 

I  cannot  agree  to  that,  replied  Hiranyaka  ;  for, 

'  To  a  hero  of  a  sound  mind,  what  is  his  own,  and 
what  a  foreign  country  ?  Wherever  he  halteth,  that 
place  is  acquired  by  the  splendour  of  his  arms.  He 
quencheth  his  thirst  with  the  blood  of  the  royal 
elephant,  even  in  the  forest  which  the  lion  teareth  up 
with  his  teeth,  and  his  claws  the  weapons  of  his  feet.' 

Again  : 

'  As  frogs  to  the  pool,  as  birds  to  a  lake  full  of 
water  ;  so  doth  every  species  of  wealth  necessarily 
flow  to  the  hands  of  him  who  exerteth  himself.' 

Tliey  say, 

'  When  pleasure  is  arrived,  .it  is  worthy  of  atten- 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  8i 

tion  ;  when  trouble  presenteth  itself,  the  same.    Pains 
and  pleasures  have  their  revolutions  like  a  wheel !  ' 

Again  : 

*  Lakshmee  *  herself  attendeth  a  man  in  search  of 
a  residence,  who  is  endued  with  resolut'on,  of  noble 
principles,  acquainted  with  the  rules  of  action,  un- 
tainted with  lav/less  pleasures,  brave,  a  judge  of 
merit,  and  of  steady  friendship.' 

Again  : 

*  A  wise  man,  even  destitute  of  riches,  enjoyeth 
elevated  and  very  honourable  stations  ;  whilst  the 
wretch,  endowed  with  wealth,  acquireth  the  post  of 
disgrace. 

'  One,  although  not  possessed  of  a  mine  of  gold, 
may  find  the  offspring  of  his  own  nature,  that  noble 
ardour,  which  hath  for  its  object  the  accomplishment 
of  the  whole  assemblage  of  virtues.* 

Hear  this,  my  friend,  replied  the  tortoise : 

'  What,  though  thou  wert  rich  and  of  high  esteem, 
dost  thou  yield  to  sorrow,  because  of  thy  loss  of 
fortune  ?  The  risings  and  sinkings  of  human  affairs 
are  like  those  of  a  ball  which  is  thrown  by  the  hand.' 

Observe, 

'  The  shadow  of  a  cloud,  the  satisfaction  of  the 

*  The  goddess  of  good  fortune. 


82  THE  HITOPADESA : 

vulgar,  new  corn,  women,  youth,  and  riches,  are  to  be 
enjoyed  but  for  a  short  time.' 

Again  : 

*  Man  should  not  be  ov^er-anxious  for  a  subsistence, 
for  it  is  provided  by  the  Creator.  The  infant  no 
sooner  droppeth  from  the  womb,  than  the  breasts  of 
the  mother  begin  to  stream.' 

My  friend  : 

'  He,  by  whom  the  geese  were  formed  white, 
parrots  are  stained  green,  and  peacocks  painted  of 
various  hues— even  He  will  provide  for  their  support.' 

Attend  also,  my  friend,  to  these  secrets  of  the  wise 
men  : 

*  How  are  riches  the  means  of  happiness .''  In 
acquiring  they  create  trouble,  in  their  loss  they 
occasion  sorrow,  and  they  are  the  cause  of  endless 
divisions  amongst  kindred  ! 

*  It  were  a  blessing,  for  the  sake  of  virtue,  if  he 
who  hath  a  lust  of  gain  were  deprived  of  desire. 
Where  there  is  a  splashing  of  dirt,  it  is  good  not  to 
meddle,  and  to  keep  far  away. 

*  As  meat  is  devoured  by  the  birds  in  the  air,  by 
the  beasts  in  the  field,  and  by  the  fishes  in  the 
waters ;  so,  in  every  situation,  there  is  plenty. 

'  The  rich  man  hath  cause  of  fear,  from  the 
magistrate,  from   water,  from   fire,  from  the  robber, 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  S3 

not  less  from  his  own  people,  even  as  from  death  the 
living". 

*  In  this  life  of  many  troubles,  what  pain  is  greater 
than  this  ? — desire  without  ability,  when  that  desire 
turneth  not  away  ! 

'  Man  should  consider  this  :  That  riches  are  not 
easily  acquired  ;  when  acquired,  they  are  with 
difficulty  preserved  ;  and  that  the  loss  of  what  hath 
been  acquired  is  like  death/ 

So  also  : 

'Were  the  thirst  of  gain  entirely  forsaken,  who 
would  be  poor  ?  Who  would  be  rich  ?  If  way  were 
given  to  it,  slavery  would  stand  upon  the  head. 

'Whatever  a  man  should  long  for,  from  that  his 
inclination  turneth  away.  He  whose  inclination 
turneth  away  from  an  object,  may  be  said  to  have 
obtained  it.' 

But  why  so  much  upon  this  subject  t  Let  us  beguile 
the  time  together  in  amusing  conversation. 

'  Men  who  are  acquainted  with  their  own  nature, 
pass  their  days,  until  the  period  of  death,  in  gladness, 
free  from  anger,  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  present 
moment,  unmindful  of  the  world,  and  free  from  ap- 
prehension.' 

Again  : 

'  The  life  of  an  animal,  until  the  hour  of  hi-j  death, 


84  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

passeth  away  in  disciplines,  in  elevations  and  depres- 
sions, in  unions  and  separations/ 

O !  thou  art  a  worthy  person,  Manthara,  observed 
the  crow  ;  a  place  of  confidence,  and  a  being  for 
protection  ! 

*  The  good  are  always  ready  to  be  the  upholders 
of  the  good  in  their  misfortunes.  Elephants  even  arc 
wont  to  bear  the  burthens  of  elephants  who  have 
sunk  in  the  mire.' 

So, 

'  The  virtuous  delight  in  the  virtuous  ;  but  he  who 
is  destitute  of  the  practice  of  virtue,  delighteth  not  in 
the  virtuous.  The  bee  retireth  from  the  forest  to  the 
lotus,  whilst  the  frog  is  destitute  of  a  shelter/ 

Again  : 

*  He  is  one  in  this  world  worthy  to  be  praised  of 
mankind,  he  is  a  great  and  a  good  man,  from  whom 
the  needy,  or  those  who  come  for  protection,  go  not 
away  with  disappointed  hopes,  and  discontented  coun- 
tenances/ 

In  this  manner  did  they  pass  their  time  ;  and,  con- 
tented with  their  particular  food,  they  dwelt  happily 
together. 

After  a  while,  one  day  a  certain  deer,  by  name 
Vichitranga,  who  had  been  alarmed  by  some  one, 
came  there  with  his  heart  panting  with  fear,  and  was 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  85 

joined  by  the  rest ;  but  as  they  expected  that  he  was 
pursued  by  something  which  had  been  the  cause  of 
his  apprehensions,  Manthara  went  into  the  water,  the 
mouse  into  a  hole,  and  the  crow  flew  to  the  top  of  a 
tree.  Laghu-patanaka  looked  on  all  sides  ;  and  being 
satisfied  respecting  their  feats,  they  all  joined  com- 
p my  again.  Health!  friend  deer,  said  the  tortoise, 
thou  art  welcome.  Mayst  thou  find  provisions  to  thy 
hearths  desire  in  this  situation  !  May  this  forest  never 
be  rendered  the  property  of  a  master  ! 

To  this  the  deer  Chitranga  replied, — I  was  alarmed 
by  a  huntsman,  and  I  am  come  to  you  for  protec- 
tion. 

'  It  is  declared  by  the  wise  men,  that  the  crime  of 
him  who  shall  forsake  one  who,  through  want  or 
danger,  may  come  to  him  for  protection,  is  the  same 
as  the  murder  of  a  Brahman.' 

And  I  wish  also  to  cultivate  a  friendship  with  you. 
Sir,  said  the  mouse,  your  friendship  with  us  is  accom- 
plished without  much  trouble  ;  for, 

*  Friends  are  said  to  be  of  four  distinctions  :  one's 
own  offspring,  a  connection,  one  descended  from  the 
same  genealogical  series,  and  one  whom  we  may 
have  preserved  from  misfortunes.' 
So  let  us  dwell  together,  added  the  mouse,  without 
distinction. 

The  deer^  upon  hearing  this,  was  rendered  happy 


86  THE  HITOPADESA : 

He  ate  of  what  was  his  usual  food,  and  having  drank 
some  water,  he  laid  himself  down  in  the  shade  of  a 
tree  which  grew  in  the  stream. 

*  Well  water,  the  shade  of  a  Batta  tree,*  a  swarthy 
woman,  and  a  brick  house,  should  be  warm  in  the 
cold,  -and  cool  in  the  hot  season.' 

Friend  deer,  said  the  tortoise  Mantliara,  by 
whom  wert  thou  alarmed  ?  What,  are  there  hunts- 
men coming  to  this  desolate  forest  ?  There  is  some 
very  important  news,  said  the  deer,  which  I  will 
communicate.  In  the  country  which  is  called  Ka- 
linga  t  there  is  a  prince  whose  name  is  Rukman- 
gada.i  He  is  just  returned  from  his  conquests  of 
the  countries  about  him,  and  his  anger  being  alto- 
gether appeased,  he  has  taken  up  his  residence  upon 
the  banks  of  the  river  Chandra-bhaga.  To-morrow 
early  he  has  resolved  to  come  to  fish  in  the  river 
Karphoora.  This  I  overheard  from  the  mouth  of 
one  of  the  sportsmen.  Having  investigated  this 
affair,  so  much  to  be  dreaded,  let  the  necessary 
means  be  pursued  for  our  safety.  The  tortoise  upon 
hearing  these  words  fearfully  exclaimed, — I  will  flee 
to   the   water   for   protection  !      The  crow   and   the 


*  The  Banian  tree. 

t  Probably  the  ancient  name  of  a  district  on  the  coast  of  Coro- 
niandel. 
J  Golden  elephant. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS,  %^ 

deer  said, — Be  it  so.  The  mouse  Hiranyaka  con- 
sidered for  a  moment,  and  said, 

^  When  Manthara  shall  be  in  the  water^  it  will  be 
good  for  him.  It  appeareth  to  me  improper  that  he 
should  be  found  crawling  upon  dry  ground.' 

They  sa}-, 

'  The  strength  of  aquatic  animals  is  the  waters  ; 
of  those  who  dwell  in  towns,  a  castle  ;  of  foot-soldiers, 
their  own  ground  ;  of  princes,  an  obedient  army.' 

But,  friend  Laghu-patanaka,  I  hope  by  this  advice, 
he  will  not  suffer  the  regret  experienced  by  a  certain 
merchant.* 

How  was  this  }  said  they  ; — and  Hiranyaka  re- 
counted as  follows  : 

FABLE  VIII. 

In  the  country  of  Kanya-kubja  there  was  a  Rajah, 
whose  name  was  Veera-sena,t  by  whom  his  royal 
son,  by  name  Tunga-vala,j  had  been  appointed 
Yuva-rajah§  over  the  city  of  Veera-pura.  He  was 
young  and  possessed  of  great  riches.  Once  upon  a 
time,  as  he  was  walking  about  his  own  city,  he  took 

*  The  verse  which  usually  introduces  the  fable,  being  in  this  place 
very  defeciive,  is  omitted. 

+  Whose  troops  are  brave. 

X  From  tiinga,  fierce,  and  vala,  strength, 

5  Literally  Young  Rajah.  Tlie  title  furmcily  borne  by  the  heir 
apparent. 


88  THE  HITOPADESA : 

notice  of  a  certain  merchant's  wife,  who  was  in  the 
very  prime  of  youth,  and  so  beautiful,  that  she  was, 
as  it  were,  the  standard  of  conquest  of  Makara-ketu. 
She  also,  whose  name  was  Lavanyavatee,*  having 
observed  him,  her  breast  was  rent  in  pieces  by  the 
destructive  arrows  of  the  god  of  love,  and  she  gladly 
became  of  one  mind  with  him.     It  is  said, 

•  Unto  women  no  man  is  to  be  found  disagreeable, 
no  one  agreeable.  They  may  be  compared  to  a  heifer 
on  the  pla'n,  that  still  longeth  for  fresh  grass. 

'Infidelity,  violence,  deceit,  envy,  extreme  avari- 
ciousness,  a  total  want  of  good  qualities,  with  im- 
purity, are  the  innate  faults  of  womankind.'  t 

The  young  Rajah  being  returned  to  his  palace, 
with  a  heart  quite  occupied  with  love,  sent  a  female 
messenger  to  her,  to  whose  words  having  attended, 
Lavanyavatee  made  such  a  reply  as  was  calculated 
to  deceive.  Said  she, — I  am  faithful  to  my  husband, 
and  I  am  not  accustomed  even  to  touch  another 
man ;  for, 

*  She  is  not  worthy  to  be  called  a  wife,  in  whom 
the   husband    delighteth    not.     The   husband  is  the 


*  Beautiful. 

t  The  fair  reader  will  please  to  observe  that  this  ?evere  judgment 
of  the  sex  was  probably  written  by  one  under  a  vow  of  perj^etual 
celibacy. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  89 

asylum  of  women ;  and  of  his  honour  the  fire  beareth 
testimony.  * 

'  The  beauty  of  the  Kokila  t  is  his  voice  ;  the 
beauty  of  a  wife  is  constancy  to  her  husband  ;  the 
beauty  of  the  ill-favoured  is  science ;  the  beauty  of 
the  penitent  is  patience. 

*  She  is  a  wife  who  is  clever  in  the  house  ;  she  is 
a  wife  who  is  fruitful  in  children  ;  she  is  a  wife  who  is 
the  soul  of  her  husband  ;  she  is  a  wife  who  is  obedient 
to  her  husband.' 

And  according  to  this  doctrine,  I  make  it  a  rule  to 
do  whatever  the  lord  of  my  life  directs,  without 
examination.  To  this  the  messenger  replied, — It 
is  right  ;  and  Lavanyavatee  observed,  that  it  was 
even  so. 

The  messenger  having  heard  the  whole  of  what 
Lavanyavatee  had  to  say,  reported  it  to  Tungavala, 
who  observed  that  he  would  invite  her  with  that  dear 
husband  of  hers,  and,  in  his  presence,  pay  her  great 
attention  and  respect.  To  this  the  messenger  re- 
plied,— This  is  impracticable.  Let  art  be  used  ;  for 
it  is  said, 


*  lliis  sentence  alludes  to  the  ordeal  by  fire,  which  is  practised,  even 
at  this  time,  in  India. 

+  A  black  bird,  very  common  in  India,  which  sings  in  the  night,  and 
whose  notes  are  as  various  and  melodious  as  the  nightingale's,  but  much 
louder. 


90  THE  HiTOPADESA  : 

That  ivhich  cannot  be  effected  by  force  may  be 
achieved  by  cunning.  An  elephant  was  killed  by  a 
jackal,  by  going  over  a  sivanipy  place. 

How  was  this  ?  demanded  the  Rajah's  son.  And 
the  messenger  related  the  following  story : 


FABLE  IX. 

In  the  forest  Brahmaranya  there  was  an  elephant, 
whose  name  was  Karphooratilaka,*  who  having  been 
observed  by  the  jackals,  they  all  determined,  that  if 
he  could  by  any  stratagem  be  killed,  he  would  be 
four  months  provisions  for  them  all.  One  of  them, 
who  was  exceedingly  viciously  inclined,  and  by 
nature  treacherous,  declared,  that  he  would  engage, 
by  the  strength  of  his  own  judgment,  to  effect  his 
death.  Some  time  after,  this  deceitful  wretch  went 
up  to  the  elephant,  and  having  saluted  him,  said, — 
Godlike  sir  !  Condescend  to  grant  me  an  audience. 
Who  art  thou  .?  demanded  the  elephant,  and  whence 
comcst  thou  }  My  name,  replied  he,  is  Kshudra- 
buddhi,t  a  jackal,  sent  into  thy  presence  by  all  the 
inhabitants  of  the  forest,  assembled  for  that  purpose, 
to  represent,  that  as  it  is  not  expedient  to  reside  in 
so  large  a  forest  as  this,  without  a  chief,  your  High- 


*  Marked  with  white  spots. 

\  Low-minded,  mean-spirited,  bad-hearted. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  91 

ness,  endued  with  all  the  cardinal  virtues,  hath  been 
selected  to  be  anointed  Rajah  of  the  woods. 

It  is  said, 

'  He  who,  by  walking  for  ever  in  the  ways  of  those 
who  are  preferred,  is  exceedingly  pure,  of  a  noble 
mind,  virtuous  and  just,  and  experienced  in  the  rules 
of  policy,  is  worthy  to  be  chosen  master  of  the 
earth.' 

Again  : 

'The  lord  of  the  land,  like  the  clouds,  is  the 
reservoir  of  the  people ;  for  when  the  clouds  fail,  do 
they  not  find  succour  in  their  king  ? ' 

But, 

'  In  this  world,  which  is  subject  to  the  power  of 
One  above,  a  man  of  good  principles  is  hard  to  be 
found  living  in  a  country  for  the  most  part  governed 
by  the  use  of  the  rod. 

'  From  the  dread  of  the  rod,  like  a  woman  of  good 
repute  unto  her  husband,  he  will  repair  for  protection 
even  unto  the  weak  or  unfortunate ;  to  the  sick,  or  to 
the  poor.' 

Then,  that  we  may  not  lose  the  lucky  moment, 
continued  the  jackal,  be  pleased  to  follow  quickly. 
Saying  this,  he  cocked  his  tail  and  went  away.  The 
elephant,  whose  reason  was  perverted  by  the  lust  of 


92  THE  HITOPADESA  .- 

power,  took  the  same  road  as  the  jackal,  and  followed 
him  so  exactly  that,  at  length,  he  stuck  fast  in  a  great 
mire.  O  my  friend  !  cried  the  elephant,  what  is  to  be 
done  in  this  disaster  ?  I  am  sinking  in  a  deep  mire  ! 
The  jackal  laughed,  and  said, — Please  your  divine 
Highness,  take  hold  of  my  tail  with  your  trunk,  and 
get  out !  This  is  the  fruit  of  those  words  which  thou 
didst  place  confidence  in. 

They  say, 

*  As  often  as  thou  shalt  be  deprived  of  the  society 
of  the  good,  so  often  shalt  thou  fall  into  the  company 
of  knaves.* 

After  a  few  days,  the  elephant  dying  for  want  of 
food,  his  flesh  was  devoured  by  the  jackals.  I  say, 
therefore, "That  which  cannot  be  effected  by  force,"  &c. 

The  young  Rajah,  by  the  advice  of  his  messenger, 
sent  for  the  husband  of  Lavanyavatee,  and  having 
treated  him  with  great  marks  of  attention,  took  him 
into  his  service,  and  employed  him  in  the  most 
confidential  affairs.  One  day,  when  the  young  Rajah 
had  bathed  and  anointed  himself,  and  was  clothed  in 
robes  of  gold,  he  said  to  the  husband, — Charudanta,  I 
am  going  to  give  a  feast  to  the  goddess  Gowree,* 

*  Gowree  is  one  of  the  names  of  the  consort  of  Seeva ;  but  as  the 
same  word  means  a  young  woman  (literally,  a  fair  one),  it  will  agree 
better  with  the  context,  if  the  reader  will  be  so  good  as  to  substitute, 
to  the  young  umnan,  instead  of  to  the  goddess  Go^uree. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  93 

which  will  last  for  a  month,  and  this  evening  it  shall 
commence.  Go  then,  and,  just  before  night,  bring  to 
me  a  young  maiden  of  singular  beauty  ;  and  when  she 
hath  been  presented,  she  shall  have  due  respect  paid 
to  her,  according  to  what  is  ordained.  Charudanta 
did  as  he  was  commanded,  and  brought  to  his  master 
such  a  young  woman  as  he  had  described  ;  and  having 
delivered  her,  he  privately  resolved  to  find  out  how 
she  was  treated.  The  young  Rajah,  Tungavala,  caused 
the  young  woman  to  sit  down  upon  a  rich  sofa  ;  and 
having  entertained  her  with  costly  presents  of  cloth 
and  garments,  and  given  her  a  keepsake,  he,  that 
instant,  sent  her  to  her  own  house.  Charudanta 
having  been  a  spectator  of  all  which  had  passed,  said 
to  himself, — This  is  a  man  of  strict  principles,  who 
regardeth  the  woman  of  another  as  his  own  mother. 
So  after  that,  through  the  confidence  created  by  this 
stratagem,  his  mind  being  biassed  by  the  lust  of  gain, 
he  fetched  his  own  wife  and  presented  her  ;  and  the 
young  Rajah  upon  beholding  Lavanyavatee^  the 
delight  of  his  heart,  exclaimed, — Dear  Lavanyavatee! 
whither  art  thou  going  .^  Saying  this,  he  got  up 
from*  his  seat,  and,  quite  forgetful  who  was  present, 
began  to  embrace  her ;  whilst  Charudanta,  the  mise- 
rable husband,  stood  gazing  at  her,  motionless  as  a 
statue.  And  thus  was  a  fool,  by  his  own  contrivance, 
plunged  into  the  greatest  distress.  Now,  I  fear  lest  a 
similar  fate  should  befall  thee,  concluded  the  mouse. 


94  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

Manthara  having  attended  to  what  had  been  said 
by  the  mouse,  in  great  fear  cried  out, — My  friend?, 
I  must  go  for  security  into  the  water.  Saying  this, 
he  marched  away,  and  Hiranyaka  and  the  rest 
followed  him ;  but  they  had  not  gone  far,  before 
Manthara  was  seized  by  a  certain  sportsman,  who 
chanced  to  be  huntin'g  about  in  that  forest,  and  who, 
finding  himself  hungry  and  fatigued,  immediately 
fastened  his  game  to  the  end  of  his  bow,  and  turned 
his  face  towards  home.  The  deer,  the  crow,  and 
the  mouse  were  exceedingly  sorry  for  this  event ; 
and  Hiranyaka  expressed  his  lamentations  in  these 
lines  : 

*  Before  I  have  attained  the  end  of  one  trouble, 
boundless  as  the  great  ocean,  still  a  second  is  ready 
to  succeed  !  How  many  misfortunes  come  upon  me 
for  my  faults  ! 

'  A  friend,  who  is  so  by  nature,  is  the  gift  of  pro- 
vidence.     Such    unfeigned    friendship   is   not   extin- 
guished, even  in  misfortunes. 
r"  *  Men  have  not  that  confidence  in  their  mothers,  in 
Itheir  wives,  sisters,  brothers,  nor  in  their   own  off- 
/  springs,  as  in  one  who  is  a  friend  in  principle.' 

In  this  manner  having  lamented  the  fate  of  the 
tortoise,  the  mouse  continued,  crying  out, — Oh  !  how 
hard  is  my  fate  !  in  the  following  words  : 

*  By   me    have   been    experienced,    even    here,   as 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  9^ 

the  fruits  of  the  state  of  existence,  in  some  cer- 
tain birth,  the  good  and  evil  shut  up  in  time,  which 
are  the  seekings  of  the  offsprings  of  our  own 
works.  " 

'  The  body  is  compounded  with  disorders,  the 
state  of  opulence  with  calamities,  advantages  with 
disadvantages  !  Thus  everything  is  produced  w  ith 
a  companion  who  shall  destroy  it.' 

Having  again  pondered  for  a  while,  he  ex- 
claimed, 

'  By  whom  was  constructed  that  jewel  of  a  word, 
the  monosyllable  FRIEND,  that  dispeller  of  fear,  the 


*  This  verse  is  wiiiten  in  a  kind  of  measure  which  they  call  eendra- 
vajra  (the  lightning  of  the  Gou  of  the  heavens).  The  curious  may  not 
dislike  to  see  it  in  its  original  form  ;  from  which,  and  the  verbal  transla- 
tion, he  may  judge  of  Sanskrit  composition  in  general,  and  find  an 
excuse  for  the  quaintness  of  the  translation  in  some  parts : 

s'.va-karma-santana-veecheshteetanee 
(nv7i<vork-off spring- seekings 
kala-'ntara-'vreetta-soobha-'soobhanee 
time-within-shut-good-not-good 
eehi-'va  dreeshtanee  mayi-va  tanee 
here  even  seen  by  mc  even  those 
janma-'ntaranee-'va  dasa-'phalanee 
birih-'within  as  it  zvere  stage  of  life  fruits. 

The  first  and  second  lines  contain  but  one  compound  word  each  ;  fdt' 
there  is  no  sign  of  either  case,  gender,  or  number,  till  you  get  to  the 
end,  where  there  is  the  termination  of  the  plural  number  in  the  neuter. 
This  manner  of  writing,  which  is  very  common,  is  called  smnasa  (throw- 
ing or  placing  together),  and  is  a  most  happy  mode  for  the  BrahmanSj 
who  are  the  interpreters  of  the  law. 


96  THE  HITOPADESA  t 

harbinger  of  grief,  and  the   confidential   repository  of 
our  joys  ?  * 

But, 

'  A  friend  who  is  a  pleasing  collyrium  to  the  eyes, 
the  deh'ght  of  the  heart,  and  a  vessel  in  which  may 
be  deposited  both  joy  and  sorrow,  is  hard  to  be  found 
by  a  friend. 

*A11  other  friends,  tainted  with  the  lust  of  gain, 
are  everywhere  to  be  found  in  times  of  prosperity  ; 
and  adversity  is  their  touchstone.' 

Hiranyaka  having  in  this  manner  greatly  lamented 
the  fate  of  his  friend,  said  to  the  deer  Chitranga  and 
the  crow, — Let  our  efforts  be  exerted  for  the  deliver- 
ance of  Manthara,  before  the  hunter  departs  from 
the  forest.  Let  us,  said  they,  be  instructed  in  what  we 
should  do.  Let  Chitranga  go  near  the  water,  said 
Hiranyaka,  and  feign  himself  senseless  and  dead, 
and  let  the  crow  appear  as  if  he  were  pecking  at 
him  ;  when  the  hunter,  spying  a  deer,  and  longing 
to  taste  of  his  flesh,  will  be  overjoyed,  and  so  laying 
the  tortoise  upon  the  ground,  will  run  to  secure 
him.  In  the  meantime  I  will  gnaw  asunder  the 
cords  by  which  Manthara  is  confined.  The  deer  and 
the  crow  did  as  they  were  instructed  immediately. 
The  hunter  being  thirsty,  laid  the  tortoise  upon  the 
ground,  and  having  drank  some  water,  sat  down  in 
the  shade  of  a  tree,  when  he  discovered  the  deer  in 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  97 

the  situation  above  described.  He  concluded  that  he 
had  been  killed  by  some  sportsman,  and  pleased 
with  his  good  fortune,  went  towards  him  with  a  knife 
in  his  hand.  In  the  meantime  Hiranyaka  contrived 
to  loosen  the  cords  by  which  Manthara  was  held  ; 
who  finding  himself  at  liberty  made  haste  into  the 
water  ;  whilst  the  deer  seeing  the  huntsman  approach- 
ing, started  up  and  ran  away.  The  huntsman  then 
turned  back,  and  repairing  to  the  foot  of  the  tree, 
and  not  finding  the  tortoise  there,  he  began  to 
reflect  in  this  manner, — I  have  been  served  right, 
said  he,  for  not  having  been  more  circumspect. 

'  He  who  farsaketh  a  certainty,  and  attendeth  to 
an  uncertainty,  loseth  both  the  certainty  and  the 
uncertainty  together.' 

So,  having  said  this,  he  returned  home  dis- 
appointed by  his  own  folly  ;  and  the  tortoise  with 
the  rest  remained  together  in  mutual  happiness. 

The  Rajah's  sons  then  said, — We  have  all  been 
greatly  entertained  ;  and  now  is  completed  what  we 
first  wished  for.  May  every  other  of  your  Highnesses 
inclinations,  replied  Vishnu-Sarma,  be  accomplished 
like  this  ! 

'  May  you,  ye  good  !  find  friends  in  this  world  V 
May  Lakshmee  be  for  ever  to  be  found  !  May 
princes,  resting  upon  their  particular  duty,  govern 
and  protect  the  earth  ! 


98  THEHITOPADESA: 

*May  the  conduct  of  those  who  act  well 
afford  pleasure  to  the  mind !  By  words  alone 
no  one  is  great.  May  he  on  whose  diadem  is 
a  crescent,*  cause  prosperity  to  the  people  of  the 
earth ! ' 


*  Seeva,  the  god  of  good  and  evil  destiny,  who  is  represented  with  a 
crescent  in  the  front  of  his  crown. 


i 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  99 


CHAPTER   II. 

THE   SEPARATION   OF  A   FAVOURITE. 

Having,  sir,  said  the  young  princes,  heard  The 
Acquisition  of  a  Friend,  we  are  now  anxious  to  be 
informed    of    what   respects   The   Separation   of    a 

Favourite. 

Attend  then,  answered  Vishnu- Sarma,  and  you 
shall  hear  concerning  the  Separation  of  a  Favourite, 
of  which  these  lines  are  an  introduction : 

In  a  certain  forest  there  subsisted  a  great  and  in- 
creasing friendship  between  a  lion  and  a  bull,  which 
is  destroyed  by  a  cruel  and  very  envious  jackal. 

How  was  this  .-*  demanded  the  Rajah's  sons ;  and 
Vishnu-Sarma  related  the  following  story : 

FABLE   I. 

On  the  southern  road  is  a  city,  by  name  Ratna- 
vatee,*  where  used  to  dwell  a  merchant's  son,  who 

*  Rich  in  precious  things.    Probably  the  name  was  made  for  the 

occasion. 

B  2 


loo  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

was  called  Varddhamana,*  though  possessed  of  abun- 
dant wealth,  seeing  others  his  relations  very  rich,  his 
resolution  was  that  his  own  greatness  should  still  be 
increased.     They  say, 

'  Greatness  doth  not  approach  him  who  is  for  ever 
looking  down  ;  and  all  those  who  are  looking  high 
are  growing  poor.'t 

Again  : 

*  Even  a  man  who  hath  murdered  a  Brahman  is 
respectable,  if  he  hath  abundant  wealth.  He  may  be 
of  a  race  like  that  of  the  moon,+  still,  if  he  be  without 
riches,  he  will  be  despised. 

*  Lakshmee,  as  a  young  woman  likes  not  an  old  hus- 
band, doth  not  like  to  take  unto  her  one  without 
energy,  the'  idle,  him  who  trusteth  in  fate  alone,  or  the 
man  who  is  become  destitute  by  his  own  extravagance. 

*  Idleness,  the  worship  of  women,  the  being  afflicted 
with  disorder,  a  foolish  partiality  for  one's  own  native 
place,  discontentedness,  and  timidity,  are  six  obstruc- 
tions to  greatness.' 


*  Growing  great,  rich,  or  opulent.  This  is  the  true  name  of  that  city 
and  province  in  Bengal,  which  we  commonly  call  Burdwan. 

+  Whether  this  be  the  literal  meaning  of  the  autlior,  the  translator 
is  not  certain  ;  if  it  be,  he  is  at  a  loss  to  interpret  it  to  his  own 
satisfaction.  [Neither  elated  nor  dejected,  look  straight  at  the  work 
before  you. — H.  M.] 

X  The  Hindoo  genealogists  mention  two  races  from  which  they  boast 
descent:  the  Soorya-bangs^  and  the  Chandra-vafigs ;  that  is,  the  race  of 
the  suftf  and  the  race  of  the  moon» 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  loi 

It  is  also  said, 

'A  man  should  try  to  obtain  what  he  hath  not; 
having  obtained  it  he  should  keep  it  with  care  ;  what 
hath  been  preserved  he  should  increase,  and  being  in- 
creased he  should  give  it  away  at  places  of  holy 
visitation. 

'  He  whose  days  are  passed  away  without  giving 
or  enjoying,  puffing  like  the  bellows  of  a  blacksmith, 
liveth  but  by  breathing.' 

From  the  endeavours  of  one  who  longeth  for  what 
he  hath  not  got,  resulteth  the  acquisition.  Property 
which  hath  been  acquired,  not  being  taken  care  of, 
wastetb  of  itself.  Riches  which  are  not  recruited, 
like  a  coUyrium,*  by  ever  so  small  an  expenditure, 
are  in  time  reduced  to  nothing ;  if  they  are  not  ap- 
propriated, they  are  useless. 

*What  hath  he  to  do  with  wealth,  who  neither 
giveth  nor  enjoyeth  ?  What  hath  he  to  do  with 
strength,  who  doth  not  exert  it  against  the  foe } 
What  hath  he  do  with  the  holy  law,  who  doth  not 
practise  virtue  ?  What  hath  he  to  do  with  a  soul, 
who  doth  not  keep  his  passions  in  subjection } ' 

Again  : 

*  Crude  antimony,  and  sometimes  lead  ore,  ground  to  an  impalpable 
powder,  which  the  people  of  India  put  into  their  eyes  by  means  of  a 
polished  wire  dipped  therein.  They  fancy  it  clears  the  sight,  and 
increases  the  lustre  of  the  eye. 


102  THE  HITOPADESA: 

*  Having  beheld  the  decrease  of  a  collyrium,  and 
the  collected  heap  of  the  white  ant,*  a  man  should 
spend  his  days,  which  are  not  to  be  retarded,  in  acts 
of  charity  and  the  study  of  virtue. 

*  By  the  fall  of  drops  of  water,  by  degrees,  a  pot  is 
filled.  Let  this  be  an  example  for  the  acquisition  of 
all  knowledge,  virtue,  and  riches/ 

These  were  the  cogitations  of  the  merchant ;  who 
accordingly  took  two  bulls,  the  one  called  Sang- 
jeevaka,t  the  other  Nandana,t  and  having  yoked  them 
to  a  cart  loaded  with  sundry  precious  articles,  de- 
parted for  Kasmeera,§  for  the  purpose  of  trade. 

For, 

*What  is  too  great  a  load  for  those  who  have 
strength  ?  What  is  distance  to  the  indefatigable  .? 
What  is  a  foreign  country  to  those  who  have  science  .-* 
Who  is  a  stranger  to  those  who  have  the  habit  of 
speaking  kindly  ? ' 

As  they  were  going  over  the  mountain  which  is 
called  Sudurga,  |i  Sang-jeevaka  fell  down  and  brake 
his  knee ;  seeing  which,  Varddhamana  meditated  in 
this  manner : 

*  These  destructive  insects  raise  cones  of  cemented  earth  of  an 
astonishing  magnitude.  Ihey  are  frequently  seen  in  Bengal  eight  or  ten 
feet  high,  and  of  a  proportionate  bulk. 

t  Living  iooctJier;  alluding  to  his  being  yoked. 

X  Rejoicing. 

§  The  province  of  Cashmefe. 

II  Of  vr-^  difficult  ascent. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  103 

*One  acquainted  with  men  and  manners  may 
exercise  his  endeavours  here  and  there ;  but,  after 
all,  the  fruit  will  be  whatever  is  in  the  will  of  provi- 
dence.'" 

But, 

*  Hesitation  should  be  abandoned  as  the  opponent 
of  every  action  ;  whence,  having  forsaken  hesitation, 
let  success  attend  the  performance.' 

Having  thus  determined,  Varddhamana  quitting 
Sang-jeevaka,  pursued  his  journey ;  and  the  poor 
bull  by  resting  his  whole  weight  upon  three  feet  con- 
trived to  get  up  ;  for, 

'  The  destined  age  of  every  one  defendeth  the 
vitals  of  one  plunged  into  the  water,  fallen  from  a 
precipice,  or  bitten  by  a  serpent.' 

In  a  few  days,  by  feeding  well  upon  what  was 
most  agreeable  to  him,  he  grew  plump  and  full  of 
spirits  ;  and  as  he  wandered  about  through  the  tracks 
of  the  forest,  he  made  a  great  bellowing.  In  this 
same  forest  there  resided  Pingalaka,*  a  lion,  in  the 
full  enjoyment  of  the  pleasures  of  a  dominion 
acquired  by  the  strength  of  his  own  arm  ;  for  it 
is  said, 

'There  is  no  ceremony  of  anointing,  or  inaugura- 
tion, performed  by  the  other  animals  upon  the  lion. 

*  A  word  expressive  of  the  colour  of  a  lion. 


104  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

To  be  head  of  the  beasts  is  the  natural  right  of  him 
who  subdueth  the  kingdom  by  his  prowess.' 

One  day,  the  lion  being  thirsty,  went  to  the  river- 
side to  drink  of  its  waters  ;  when,  hearing  the  bellow- 
ing of  Sang-jeevaka,  a  kind  of  noise  he  had  never 
heard  before,  and  which  to  him  appeared  as  dreadful 
as  the  unseasonable  roaring  of  a  cloud,*  he  turned 
away  without  drinking,  and  went  back  to  his  abode 
trembling  with  fear ;  where  he  stood  silently  medi- 
tating what  it  could  be.  In  this  situation  the  Rajah 
having  been  discovered  by  two  jackals  of  his  council, 
Karattaka  and  Damanaka,t  the  latter  said  to  the 
former, — How  is  this,  my  friend,  that  the  lion, 
although  thirsty,  has  not  drunk  his  usual  draught, 
and  stays  at  home  so  dull  and  dejected  }  Friend 
Damanaka,  replied  Karattaka,  in  my  opinion  we 
ought  not  to  serve  this  same  Rajah  any  longer;  and 
that   being   the    case,  for   what    purpose    should  wc 


*  A  few  years  since  tliere  happened  one  of  these  unseasonable  claps 
of  thunder,  without  the  least  warning,  from  a  single  cloud  that  had  by 
no  means  the  appearance  of  one  of  those  which  threaten  thunder.  The 
lightning  being  attracted  by  the  obelisk  erected  in  Calcutta  to  the 
memory  of  those  who  suffered  in  the  black  hole,  its  shaft  was  greatly 
damaged,  and  a  large  slab  of  marble,  on  which  was  the  inscription, 
burst  from  the  iron  clamps  which  held  it  to  the  bricKWork,  and 
shattered  to  pieces. 

t  These  are  the  original  names  which  the  Peisians,  and,  after  them, 
the  Europeans  have  cornipted  into  Kalila  and  Damna.  The  former 
may  signify  oft:  7i>/to  Lveth  a  reproachful  life,  and  the  latter,  one  u>ho 
chasiis:(h,  correcleth,  tameth. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  105 

investigate  his  motions,  when  we  have  served  him  so 
many  years  and  experienced  nothing  but  trouble  ? 

'  See  what  is  done  in  serving  by  those  slaves  who 
are  covetous  of  wealth  !  And  see  also  what  liberty 
the  body  is  deprived  of  by  those  fools  ! ' 

Again  : 

'Those  who  are  the  dependents  of  another  suffer 
cold,  and  wind,  and  heat,  and  fatigue  !  A  wise  man 
with  a  portion  of  it  could  do  penance  and  be  happy. 

'  So  far  life  is  worth  having :  to  possess  a  liveli- 
hood without  constraint ;  for  if  those  who  dwell  under 
the  authority  of  others  live,  pray  w'.:o  are  the  dead  ? 

*  Work,  go,  fall,  rise,  speak,  be  silent !  In  this 
manner  do  the  rich  sport  with  those  needy  men,  who 
are  held  by  the  grip  of  dependence  ! 

*  Fools  for  the  sake  of  gain  dress  themselves,  and 
dress  themselves  to  become  the  implements  of 
others  ! ' 

Here  is  another  very  particular  picture  of  a 
servant : 

*  He  humbleth  himself  to  be  exalted  ;  for  a  living 
he  expendeth  his  vitals  ;  he  suffereth  pain  to  acquire 
ease.  Who  is  there  so  great  a  fool,  as  he  who 
serveth  ? 

*  If  he  is  silent,  he  is  stupid  ;  if  rich  in  words,  an 
empty    prattler ;    by   patiently   submitting,   he   is   a 


io6  THE  HITOPADESA : 

coward  ;  and  if  he  will  not  suffer  patiently,  for  the 
most  part,  he  is  not  preferred. 

*  Seen  on  one  side,  he  is,  undoubtedly,  sitting 
down ;  and  if  standing  at  a  distance,  he  is  not  to  be 
found.  The  duties  of  servitude  are  extremely  pro- 
found, and  impracticable,  even  to  Yogees.'  * 

What  thou  proposest,  my  friend,  said  Damanaka, 
is  by  no  means  to  be  put  in  practice. 

'  How !  are  not  the  mighty  lords  to  be  diligently 
served  by  thee,  who,  without  delay,  gladly  fulfil  the 
desires  of  the  heart } 

*  When  do  those  without  employ  enjoy  those  ele- 
vated stations  distinguished  by  the  Chamara,t  the 
white  umbrella  spread  upon  a  lofty  pole,  the  horse, 
the  elephant,  and  the  splendid  litter  ? '  % 

Notwithstanding  all  this,  observed  Karattaka,  what 
have  we  to  do  with  this  affair  ?  §  One  should  always 
avoid  meddling  with  other  folks'  business.  See  what 
is  said  upon  this  occasion  : 

The  man  w/w  will  have  to  do  ift  matters  ivith  which 

*  Such  as  by  severe  acts  of  penance,  and  a  total  abstraction,  fancy 
themselves  in  unity  with  the  Supreme  Being. 

t  A  kind  of  whisk  made  of  the  tail  of  a  particular  species  of  cow, 
and  sometimes  of  peacocks'  feathers,  finely  ornamented,  used  to  cliase 
the  flies  away.  In  the  vulgar  dialect  of  Hindostan  this  instrument  is 
called  ckow)'y,  which  seems  to  be  a  corruption  of  the  Sanskrit  term. 

t  The  palanquin,  properly /a/^^v. 

§  The  lion's  returning  from  the  river  without  drinking. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  107 

he  hath  no  htsiness,  may  be  repulsed  and  sleep  upon  he 
ground ;  like  the  ape  ivho  dreiv  out  the  wedge. 

How  was  that  ?  demanded  Damanaka ;  and  he 
related  the  following  story  : 

FABLE  II. 

In  the  country  which  is  called  Magadha,*  Subha- 
danta,  a  man  of  the  Kayastha  tribe,t  had  begun  to 
build  a  theatre  for  an  entertainment.  One  of  the 
carpenters  having  with  his  saw  cut  some  way  through 
a  piece  of  timber,  put  a  wedge  into  the  slit.  A  troop 
of  apes  coming  that  way  in  search  of  their  usual 
food,  one  of  them,  as  if  directed  by  the  wand  of 
Time,  took  hold  of  that  wedge  with  his  two  hands, 
and  sitting  down,  his  lower  parts  hung  within  the 
slit.  At  length,  from  the  natural  giddiness  of  his 
species,  with  great  difficulty  he  drew  out  the  wedge, 
so  that  the  boards  closing,  what  was  between  them 
was  entirely  destroyed,  and  he  deprived  of  his  life. 
Wherefore,  I  say, 

The  man  who  willy  &c. 

For  all  this,  said  Damanaka,  the  concerns  of  the 

*  Probably  the  ancient  name  of  south  Bahar. 

+  The  scribes,  commonly  called  kayis,  of  which  class  are  most  of 
those  employed  by  the  English,  and  other  Europeans,  in  India,  as 
writers  and  accountants,  under  the  titles  Sircar^  Batmian,  Cratmy,  Sec, 
and  they  are  particularly  famous  for  grand  and  expensive  entertainments 
in  honour  of  their  divinities,  which  are  generally  given  in  temporary 
theatres  of  sufficient  capacity  to  contain  many  hundred  spectators. 


io8  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

master  should  certainly  be  looked  into,  even  by  the 
servant.  The  prime  minister,  observed  Karattaka, 
being  employed  in  the  superintendence  of  all  affairs, 
let  him  do  it.  An  inferior  should,  on  no  occasion, 
interfere  with  the  department  of  another  ;  for, 

//e  wJio  shall  meddle  ivith  the  department  of  another ^ 
out  of  zeal  for  the  welfare  of  his  master,  may  repent  ; 
like  the  ass  tvho  ^vas  punished  for  braying. 

Damanaka  inquired  how  that  happened ;  and 
Karattaka  recounted  the  following  story : 

FABLE  III. 

At  Varanasee  *  there  lived  a  washerman,t  whose 
name  was  Karphoora-patta.^:  Once  upon  a  time, 
having  spent  the  evening  until  it  was  very  late  in  the 
agreeable  company  of  a  young  woman,  he  went  to 
bed  fatigued,  and  slept  soundly.  In  the  meantime,  a 
thief  got  in  with  an  intention  to  rob  the  house.  In 
the  court  there  were  an  ass  and  a  dog.  The  ass 
said  to  the  dog,  upon  hearing  the  thief, — This  is 
thy  business  ;  then  why  dost  thou  not  get  up,  and  by 
barking  contrive  to  rouse  thy  master  ?     What  hast 

*  Tlie  city  we  call  Benares,  which  is  a  corruption  of  the  former.  It 
is  a  compound  of  two  words  denoting  the  two  rivulets  which  bound  tliat 
ancient  city. 

+  Washing  is  seldom  performed  by  women  in  India,  except  as  help- 
mates to  their  husbands. 

±  White-cloth. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  109 

thou  to  do  with  my  department  ?  replied  the  dog. 
Thou  knowest  full  well  how  I  watch  and  guard  this 
house,  and  yet  this  master  of  ours  doth  not  consider 
my  merit ;  and  I  am  even  stinted  in  my  allowance 
of  provisions.  Now,  masters  in  general,  without  spy- 
ing some  fault  in  their  servants,  are  not  wont  to 
shorten  their  allowance.  Hear  me,  barbarian  !  *  ex- 
claimed the  ass.  The  dog  species,  from  their  nature, 
are  not  to  be  touched.  But  learn  once  more  what 
is  the  duty  of  a  servant : 

'  Is  he  a  servant,  is  he  a  friend,  who  hesitateth  at 
the  time  of  action }  Should  the  business  be  ruined, 
could  it  be  occasioned  by  a  servant,  or  by  a  friend  } ' 

The  dog  replied, — Hear  me  for  a  moment : 

'Is  he  a  master  who,  at  a  proper  season,  doth  not 
consider  his  servants }  Are  not  they  who  keep  ser- 
vants on  all  occasions  to  cherish  them  }  * 

Do  they  not  also  say, 

*  Dependents  should  have  no  interrupters  in  their 
meals,  in  their  amusements,  in  the  execution  of  their 
duty,  in  their  religious  ceremonies,  nor  in  doing  good 
for  the  sake  of  virtue.'' 

The  ass  in  a  rage  exclaimed, — Villain !  thou  neg- 
lectest  thy  master's  business.  Be  it  so  ;  but  it  is  my 
duty  to  do  something  that  shall  wake  him  ;  for, 

*  The  original  word  is  barbara.     Tliis  is  curious. 


J  lo  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

*  The  sun  should  be  worshipped  on  the  back,  the 
god  of  fire  on  the  belly,  a  master  in  every  way,  and 
the  world  above  without  deceit.' 

Having  repeated  these  lines,  he  began  to  make 
a  great  noise  by  braying;  so  that  the  washerman 
was  alarmed ;  but,  although  exceedingly  drowsy,  he 
got  up  and  gave  the  ass  a  good  beating  with  a 
large  stick.  I  repeat,  therefore,  "  He  who  shall 
meddle/'  &c. 

Observe  :  Our  employment  is  searching  for  game ; 
then  let  us  attend  to  our  proper  business.  But  now  I 
have  considered,  I  think  there  is  not  any  occasion 
for  our  doing  that  to-day  ;  for  there  is  plenty  of 
provisions  for  us,  and  some  to  spare. 

Damanaka,  displeased  at  this  observation,  ex- 
claimed,— What !  Dost  thou  serve  his  Highness,  the 
Rajah,  merely  for  the  sake  of  food  ?  This  is  very 
unwise  ;  as  is  declared  in  these  lines : 

*  By  the  wise  the  patronage  of  princes  is  sought  to 
gain  the  assistance  of  friends,  as  well  as  aid  against 
the  treachery  of  enemies ;  for,  who  doth  not  simply 
fill  his  belly .? ' 

They  say, 

*  Let  him  live,  in  whom  living  many  live.  Doth 
not  even  the  booby  fill  his  belly  with  his  bill  ^ ' 

Observe : 


1 


FABLES  AND  PRO  VERBS.  1 1 1 

'What  man  with  five  Poorans*  is  reduced  to  ser- 
vitude ?  Who  upon  a  parallel  with  riches  is  not  found 
by  riches  ?  f 

'  Mankind  being  by  birth  upon  an  equality,  the 
state  of  servitude  is  reproachful.  He  who  is  not  the 
first  of  his  species,  is  counted  among  those  who  are 
dependents.' 

It  is  said  also, 

*  The  difference  which  is  between  horses,  elephants, 
and  vehicles ;  wood,  stone,  and  cloth  ;  women,  men^ 
and  water,  is  a  very  great  difference.' 

For, 

•A  dog  having  found  a  bone  with  a  few  sinews 
sticking  about  it,  dirty,  loathsome,  and  without  a  bit 
of  meat  upon  it,  is  rendered  exceedingly  happy, 
although  it  be  not  sufficient  to  satisfy  his  hunger/ 

Whilst, 

*  The  lion  permitteth  the  jackal  to  come  near  and 
escape,  and  killeth  the  elephant.  Every  man,  although 
reduced  to  distress,  longeth  for  fruit  suitable  to  his 
strength.' 

*  The  term  pooran  {literally  ancient)  is  given  to  such  Hindoo  books 
as  treat  of  creation  in  general,  wiih  the  particular  genealogy,  and 
history  of  their  gods  and  heroes  of  antiquity.  But  why  the  numbery^z/^ 
is  chosen  in  this  place  is  not  easily  to  be  explained. 

f  "Which  seems  to  signify,  ivhe  may  not  acquire  wealth  if  he  exerts 
himself? 


1 1 2  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

Observe  the  difference  in  the  behaviour  of  him  who 
serveth,  and  of  him  who  is  served : 

*  Shaking  the  tail,  faUing  down  at  the  feet,  and, 
prostrated  upon  the  ground,  looking  up  at  his  face 
and  stomach  :  all  this  the  dog  performeth  to  his  master 
who  feedeth  him.  But  the  noble  elephant  looketh 
boldly,  and  eateth  not,  unless  he  liketh,  with  a 
hundred  kind  entreaties.' 

But, 

*  That  life,  although  it  endure  but  for  a  moment, 
which  is  celebrated  by  mankind,  as  being  attended 
by  knowledge,  valour,  and  renown,  is,  by  those  who 
know  it,  alone  distinguished  by  the  name  of  life.  A 
crow  liveth  a  long  time,  and  a  raven  eateth.' 

For, 

*  How  is  that  brute-like  man  distinguished  from  a 
beast,  whose  understanding  is  void  of  the  power  to 
discriminate  between  good  and  evil,  who  is  destitute 
of  the  many  benefits  of  the  sacred  records,  and  whose 
only  inclination  is  the  filling  of  his  belly  ? ' 

But  what  have  we,  interrupted  Karattaka,  to  do 
with  these  reflections  ;  we,  who  are  of  little  power,  and 
not  the  principal  ?  In  a  very  short  interval  of  time 
a  minister  may  enjoy  the  principal  station,  or  the 
reverse,  replied  Damanaka  ;  for,  they  say, 

'No  one  is,  by  nature,  noble,  respected  of  any  one, 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  113 

nor  a  wretch.     His  own  actions  conduct  him  either  to 
wretchedness,  or  to  the  reverse.' 
Again  : 

*  As  by  repeated  efforts,  a  stone  is  mounted  upon 
the  summit  of  a  hill,  and  instantly  thrown  down  ;  so 
may  we  ourselves,  by  our  virtues  and  our  vices^  be 
elevated  and  cast  down.' 

But  after  all,  observed  Karattaka,  what  is  it  thou 
art  speaking  of.?  The  curious  Story,  replied 
Damanaka,  of  his  Highness  Pingalaka's  returning 
without  drinking,  and  staying  at  home.  What ! 
demanded  Karattaka,  art  fhou  acquainted  with  it } 
Is  there  anything,  said  Damanaka,  unknown  to  a 
wise  man  .?     It  is  said, 

'  A  declared  meaning  is  comprehended  even  by 
brutes  :  horses  and  elephants  understand  when  they 
are  told  ;  but  a  wise  man  findeth  out  even  what  is 
not  declared.  The  advantage  to  be  derived  from 
our  senses  is  to  conceive  what  is  only  signified  by 
another.' 

Then,  I  will  now,  through  the  opportunity  given 
by  his  fears,  turn  the  fault  to  my  own  advantage, 
with  the  superiority  of  wisdom  ;  for, 

*  He  is  a  wise  man  who  knoweth,  that  his  words 
should  be  suited  to  the  occasion,  his  love  to  the 
worthiness  of  the  object,  and  his  anger  according  to 
his  strengrth.' 


1 14  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

Friend,  said  Karattaka,  thou  art  unacquainted  with 
the  ways  of  service. 

'  He  who  entereth  uncalled  for,  unquestioned 
speaketh  much,  and  regardeth  himself  with  satisfaction, 
to  his  prince  appeareth  one  of  a  weak  judgment.' 

How  am  I  therein  ignorant  of  the  ways  of  service, 
demanded  Damanaka  ;  for, 

*  Is  there  anything  of  its  own  nature  beautiful  or 
not  beautiful  ?  The  beauty  of  a  thing  is  even  that 
by  which  it  shineth.* 

*One  of  a  sound  judgment  having  pursued  a  man 
with  those  very  qualities  of  which  he  is  possessed, 
may  presently  lead  him  into  his  power.' 

Again  : 

'  Upon  hearing,  '*  Who  is  here }"  he  should  answer, 
"  I ! — please  to  command."  And  he  should  execute  the 
orders  of  his  sovereign  to  the  best  of  his  abilities.' 

It  is  said, 

*  Disobedience  of  orders  to  the  sovereign,  and 
disrespect  to  the  Brahmans,  is  death  without  the 
application  of  a  knife.' 

Again  : 

'  He  who  is  steady  in  trifling   matters,  wise,  like  a 

*  This  passage  seems  to  imply,  that  beauty  should  be  estimated  by 
good  qualities,  rather  than  by  outward  show. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  1 1 5 

shadow  constantly  in  attendance,  and  who  being 
ordered  may  not  hesitate,  is  a  proper  person  to  dwell 
in  the  court  of  a  prince.' 

Sometimes,  observed  Karattaka,  thy  master  is  dis- 
pleased with  thee  for  thy  unseasonable  intrusions. 
It  is  true^  replied  Damanaka;  nevertheless,  atten- 
dants must,  unavoidably,  make  their  appearance. 
They  say, 

'The  non-commencement  of  anything,  from  the 
fear  of  offence,  is  the  mark  of  a  weak  man.  Who, 
brother,  leaveth  off  eating  entirely,  from  the  dread 
of  indigestion?' 

Observe : 

'The  sovereign  serveth  the  man  who  is  near  him, 
although  destitute  of  learning,  of  no  family,  or  with- 
out acquaintance.  Princes  often,  like  women  and 
vines,  twine  about  him  who  sitteth  by  his  side.'  ^ 

Well,  said  Karattaka,  if  thou  go  there,  what  wilt 
thou  say  to  his  Highness?  Attend,  replied  Dama- 
naka: First  of  all  I  will  find  out  whether  he  is 
attached  to  me,  or  not  attached.  What  signs, 
demanded  Karattaka,  are  there  of  such  a  discovery  ? 
I  will  tell  thee,  said  Damanaka ;  the  signs  of  attach- 
ment are, 

*  This  seems  to  argue  that  princes  are  apt  to  serve  sycophants,  and 
the  panders  of  their  pleasures,  in  preference  to  good  and  learned  men. 


1 1 6  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

'Joy  at  discovering  at  a  distance,  great  attention 
and  respect  in  inquiries,  commending  qualifications 
in  absence,  and  remembering  in  those  things  which 
are  favourites. 

*  Such  knowledge  of  attachment,  even  in  a  servant, 
is  an  addition  to  one's  happiness.  The  marks  of 
attachment,  even  to  a  fault,  are  an  accumulation  of 
virtues. 

'A  wise  man  may  also  discover  these  signs  in  those 
servants  who  are  not  attached  :  squandering  of  time 
in  idleness,  increasing  of  hopes,  and  destroying  the 
fruit.'* 

When  I  have  made  this  discovery,  I  will  declare  what 
my  purpose  shall  be.  Karattaka  then  said, — Not- 
withstanding this,  it  doth  not  behove  thee  to  speak 
until  thou  hast  found  a  proper  opportunity.    For, 

*  Even  Vrihaspati,t  should  he  utter  words  unseason- 
ably, would  incur  contempt  for  his  understanding, 
and  eternal  disgrace.' 

Do  not  be  alarmed,  my  friend,  cried  Damanaka,  I 
shall  not  speak  unseasonably  ;  for, 

*  In  misfortune,  in  error^  and  when  the  time  ap- 
pointed   for   certain    affairs    is    about    to    elapse,    a 


*  Disappointing. 

t  Amongst  other  titles  given  to  this  divinity,  is  tliat  of  Master  of 
Language. 


FABLES  AND  PRO  VERBS.  1 1 7 

servant,  who  hath  his  master's  welfare  at  heart, 
ought  to  speak  unasked.' 

Indeed,  if  I  were  not  to  give  my  counsel  whenever 
I  find  an  occasion,  my  office  of  counsellor  would  be 
useless. 

'The  qualification  by  which  a  man  earneth  his 
bread,  and  for  which  he  is  celebrated  in  the  world, 
should  be  nourished  and  improved.'* 

Then,  peace  be  with  thee  !  for  know  that  I  am 
going,  concluded  Damanaka.  And  may  success 
attend  thy  design  !  replied  Karattaka. 

Damanaka,  accordingly,  repaired  into  the  presence 
of  Pingalaka,  with  hesitation,  as  it  were  ;  but  as  he 
was  discovered  by  the  Rajah  at  some  distance,  he 
entered  with  great  marks  of  respect,  and  having  per- 
formed that  mode  of  prostration  which  is  called 
Ashttangapata,t  he  drew  near  ;  and  the  lion,  stroking 
him  with  his  right  paw,  the  toes  of  which  were  dis- 
tinguished by  ornaments,  accosted  him  in  the  follow- 
ing words,  which  were  preceded  by  a  great  many 
compliments  :  It  is  long  since  I  have  seen  you,  sir ! 

Damanaka  replied  :  I  have  not  the  least  occasion 
to  attend  your  divine  feet ;  nevertheless,  a  servant 

*  This  verse  was  translated  partly  from  conjecture,  the  original  being 
defective  in  several  words. 

+  This  expression  literally  means  falling  down  with  eight  members^ 
which  is  the  most  humble  and  respectful  mode  of  approaching  a  great 
personage  in  India. 


1 1 8  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

should   indispensably  attend  the  presence  at  proper 
times  ;  and  thence  it  is  that  I  am  now  here. 

'  Those  who  are  penetrated  with  the  timid  princi- 
ples of  their  instructors,  despise  the  speeches  of  those, 
when  approaching  the  presence  of  the  sovereign,  by 
whom,  in  wars,  Surabhi,*  of  ponderous  form  and  tall, 
the  earth  everlastingly  to  be  adored,  hath  been 
pierced  by  the  fall  of  a  hundred  weapons.' 

Another  poet  says : 

*  The  man  whose  heart  is  tainted  with  fear,  al- 
though profuse  of  speech,  in  the  presence  of  the  king, 
amongst  learned  men,  or  in  the  company  of  women 
well  inclined  for  a  husband,  is  a  coward.' 

There  is  a  use  for  the  most  trifling  implements ;  as 
is  mentioned  in  these  lines  : 

'  Sovereigns,  O  prince,  have  occasion  even  for 
straws,  and  things  to  rub  the  teeth,  or  pick  the  ears  ; 
but  how  much  more  for  an  able  speaker,  and  a 
dexterous  obviator  of  difficulties  ? ' 

Perhaps    my    noble    master    suspects,    that    being 
oppressed  with  years,  my  understanding  is  lost ;  for, 

*  Those  who  are  possessed  of  good  or  bad  qualities 
are  not  sensible  of  it  themselves.     The  good  traveller 

*  This  name  is  also  given  to  the  cctiU  of  plenty,  and  this  is  the  first 
time  the  translator  lias  seen  it  applied  to  the  earth  ;  but  tlie  earth  may 
well  be  called  the  cow  of  plenty. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS,  119 

doth   not   perceive   that   the    Kastoorika*  hath   any 
enjoyment  of  her  precious  perfume.' 

Nevertheless, 

*  Although  a  gem  may  tumble  at  the  feet,  and  a 
piece  of  glass  be  worn  upon  the  head,  yet,  at  the 
season  of  buying  and  selling,  glass  is  glass,  and  gems 
are  gems. 

*  It  should  not  be  suspected  of  a  man,  whose  life 
hath  been  spent  in  noble  deeds,  that  his  reason  is  lost, 
when  he  is  only  involved  in  trouble.  A  fire  may  be 
overturned,  but  its  flame  will  never  descend.' 

Please  your  divine  Highness,  the  master  should 
conduct  himself  with  distinction  ;  for, 

*  When  the  master  passeth  over  all  alike,  without 
distinction,  then  the  endeavours  of  those  who  are 
capable  of  exertion  are  entirely  lost. 

'  There  are,  O  Rajah,  three  degrees  amongst  man- 
kind :  the  highest,  the  lowest,  and  the  middling  ;  and 
accordingly,  they  should  be  engaged  in  three  degrees 
of  employment. 

'  Servants  and  houses  should  be  suited  to  the 
situation.  A  gem  should  not  be  placed  at  the  feet. 
The  same  is  to  be  understood  of  an  able  man.' 

Thus  : 

*  If  a  gem    be  discovered  at   the   feet,   which    Is 

*  The  musk  deer. 


I20  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

worthy  to  be  worn  in  an  ornament  of  gold,  and  it 
doth  not  complain,*  and  it  doth  not  also  appear  with 
splendour,  he  who  placed  it  there  is  to  be  spoken  to.' 

Observe  : 

'"This  is  a  man  of  judgment,  and  attached;  and 
this  a  giddy  fellow,  and  undisciplined/'  The  chief, 
who  knoweth  how  to  judge  of  servants  in  this 
manner,  is  well  served.' 

They  say : 

*  A  horse,  a  weapon,  a  book,  a  Veena,t  a  speech, 
and  a  man  or  woman,  are,  or  are  not,  to  be  employed, 
when  their  merits  have  been  examined.' 

Again  : 

'  What  is  to  be  done  with  a  faithful  servant  who  is 
without  ability  ;  or  with  an  able  man  who  is  an  oppo- 
nent ?  It  doth  not  behove  thee,  O  Rajah,  to  despise 
either  the  one  or  the  other.' 

For, 

'The  attendants  of  a  prince,  because  of  his  dis- 


*  In  this  expression  the  allegory  seems  to  be  carried  too  far. 

t  An  instrument  of  the  string  kind,  very  much  esteemed  in  India. 
It  is  constructed  of  a  long  piece  of  wood  upon  vihich  a  number  of 
steel  strings  are  strained,  and  which  serves  al?o  for  the  finger-board,  it 
being  furnisl:ed  with  frets  almost  from  one  extremity  to  the  other,  with 
each  end  fixed  horizontally  upon  the  pole  (if  the  expression  be  allowed) 
of  a  large  pumpkin,  or  an  oblate  sphere  of  wood  hollowed  for  the 
I)urpose. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  121 

respect,  grow  thoughtless  ;  and  by  that  example  men 
of  judgment  forbear  to  go  near  him. 

'  When  a  kingdom  is  forsaken  by  its  wise  men,  the 
administration  ceaseth  to  be  efficacious  ;  and  for  want 
of  good  regulations,  the  whole  nation  sinketh  without 
power  to  resist' 

Again  : 

*  Mankind  are  for^  ever  wont  to  respect  him  who 
is  respected  by  the  prince  ;  for  he  who  is  in  disgrace 
with  the  sovereign  is  disrepected  by  all. 

*  What  wise  men  have  declared  proper,  may  be 
received  even  from  a  child.  When  the  sun  is  invisible, 
how  useful  is  the  appearance  of  the  lamp  ! ' 

We  are  your  faithful  servants,  attached  to  your 
Highness's  feet ;  and  we  have  no  other  place  of 
refuge. 

It  is  good,  replied  Pingalaka  ;  but  what  of  all  this, 
Damanaka  ?  Thou  hast  been  for  a  long  time  our 
head  Mantri-putra ;  *  whither,  then,  hast  thou  been 
wandering  in  pursuit  of  vulgar  sayings  }  Thou  art 
now  even  prime  minister. 

Damanaka  then  said. — May  it  please  your  divinity, 
I  am  about  to  propose  a  question  :  What  was  the 
reason  your  Highness,  when  oppressed   with  thirst, 

*  The  literal  meaning  of  this  term  is  Cotmsellor-son  ;  but  the  con- 
text leads  one  to  conclude,  that  the  lion  means  to  say,  he  has  been  a 
long  time  the  principal  of  those  who  are  inferior  to  the  prime  minister. 


122  THE  HirOPADESA  : 

refused  to  drink,  and  now  remains  at  home  in  a  state 
of  amazement  ? 

It  is  well  spoken,  answered  Pingalaka.  How 
pleasant  it  is  to  repose  a  secret  in  a  place  of  con- 
fidence !  I  am  about  to  tell  thee.  Attend  !  Know 
that  this  forest  is  infested  by  some  beast,  before  un- 
known to  us ;  wherefore  it  behoveth  us  to  abandon  it. 
Hast  thou  not  heard  a  strange  loud  noise?  To 
judge  by  his  voice,  the  strength  of  this  monster  must 
be  excessive ! 

Please  your  divinity,  replied  Damanaka,  there  is 
indeed  great  cause  for  apprehension.  We  too  have 
heard  the  voice ;  but  he  is  unworthy  to  be  a  minister 
who,  in  the  first  instance,  adviseth  either  to  quit  the 
field  or  to  fight.  Besides,  your  Highness  has  now  an 
opportunity  to  experience  the  use  of  your  servants  ; 
for, 

*  By  the  touchstone  of  misfortune  a  man  discovereth 
the  quality  of  wife,  relations,  and  servants  ;  and  of  his 
own  strength  and  judgment.' 

It  is  good,  replied  the  lion ;  but  I  am  prevented 
by  my  great  apprehensions. 

Damanaka  having  considered  what  he  should  do, 
at  length  said, — What !  dost  thou  speak  to  us  about 
a  total  abdication  of  the  enjoyment  of  thy  dominions.'* 
I  tell  your  Highness  plainly,  that  as  long  as  I  live,  I 
shall  not  be  afraid  ;  but  it  is  necessary  that  the  minds 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  1^3 

of  Karattaka  and  the  rest  should  be  pacified  also  ;  for 
in  times  of  necessity,  it  is  difficult  to  assemble  people 
together. 

After  that  Karattaka  and  Damanaka  together, 
having  received  their  sovereign's  gracious  commis- 
sion, promised  to  defeat  the  threatened  danger,  and 
departed  accordingly. 

As  they  were  going  along,  Karattaka  said  to 
Damanaka, — Is  the  cause  of  apprehension  possible 
to  be  defeated,  or  not  possible }  Till  this  has  been 
determined,  why  did  we,  in  promising  to  apply  a 
remedy,  accept  of  this  great  appointment }  For  it 
is  said,  that  no  one,  unless  he  hath  the  power  to 
perform,  should  accept  of  any  one's  commission,  and, 
in  particular,  that  of  a  king. 

Observe, 

'  He  is  all-glorious,  on  whose  pleasure  fortune 
waiteth,  in  whose  valour  victory,  and  in  whose  anger 
death. 

*  The  sovereign,  although  but  a  child,  is  not  to  be 
despised,  but  to    be  respected    as    a   man  ;  or  as   a 
\  mighty  divinity,  who  presideth  in  human  form.' 

Damanaka,  laughing,  said, — Hold  thy  peace,  friend ; 
J  am  acquainted  with  the  cause  of  this  fear :  it  is 
only  the  bellowing  of  a  bull,  our  proper  food,  as  well 
as  that  of  the  lion.  If  this  be  the  case,  observed 
Karattaka,  why  were  not  his  Highness's  fears  instantly 


124  THE  HITOPADESA : 

appeased  ?  If,  replied  Damanaka,  they  had  been 
satisfied  immediately,  how  would  this  great  commis- 
sion have  been  obtained  ?     They  say, 

T/ie  master  should  never  be  rejtdered  free  from  appre- 
hension by  his  servants  ;  for  a  servant  having  quieted 
the  fears  of  his  master  may  experience  the  fate  of 
Dadhikarna* 

How  was  that  ?  demanded  Karattaka ;  and  Dama- 
naka related  the  following  story: 

FABLE  IV. 

Upon  the  mountain  Arbuda-sikhara,  there  was  a 
lion,  whose  name  was  Mahavikrama,t  the  tips  of 
whose  mane  a  mouse  was  wont  to  gnaw,  as  he  slept 
in  his  den.  The  noble  beast,  having  discovered  that 
his  hair  was  bitten,  was  very  much  displeased  ;  and 
as  he  was  unable  to  catch  the  offender,  who  always 
slipped  into  his  hole,  he  meditated  what  was  best  to 
be  done ;  and  having  resolved,  said  he, 

*  Whoso  hath  a  trifling  enemy,  who  is  not  to  be 
overcome  by  dint  of  valour,  should  employ  against 
him  a  force  of  his  own  likeness.' 

With  a  review  of  this  saying,  the  lion  repaired  to 
the  village,  and  by  means  of  a  piece  of  meat  thrown 

*  V^liose  ears  are  llie  colour  of  curds  :  white-ear. 
t  Great  courage. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  125 

into  his  hole,  with  some  difficulty  caught  a  cat, 
whose  name  was  Dadhikarna.  He  carried  him  home, 
and  the  mouse  for  some  time  not  venturing  out  for 
fear,  the  lion  remained  with  his  hair  unnipped.  At 
length,  however,  the  mouse  was  so  oppressed  \\'ith 
hunger,  that  creeping  about,  he  was  caught  and  de- 
voured by  the  cat.  The  lion  now  no  longer  hearing 
the  noise  of  the  mouse,  thought  he  had  no  further 
occasion  for  the  services  of  the  cat,  and  so  began  to 
be  sparing  of  his  allowance ;  and,  in  consequence, 
poor  puss  pined  away  and  died  for  want.  Wherefore, 
I  say, — "  The  master  should  never  be  rendered,"  &c. 

After  this  Damanaka  and  Karattaka  advanced  to- 
wards the  bull  Sang-jeevaka;  and  Karattaka  seated 
himself  in  state  at  the  foot  of  a  tree,  whilst  Dama- 
naka addressed  the  bull  in  these  words, — Friend 
bull,  said  he,  he  who  is  sitting  there  is  appointed 
General  for  the  protection  of  these  forests,  by  Rajah 
Pingalaka.  Then  Karattaka  gravely  said, — Come 
here  directly,  or  else  retire  at  a  distance  from  these 
woods,  otherwise  the  fruits  of  thy  disobedience  will 
be  painful.  The  poor  bull,  ignorant  of  the  affairs  of 
the  country  he  was  in,  fearfully  advanced  towards 
Karattaka,  and  made  him  a  profound  reverence.  It 
is  said, 

'Wisdom  .s  of  more  consequence  than  strength. 
The  want    of   it    is  a  state   of    misery.     The    Din- 


126  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

dima*  proclaimeth  this^  sounding,  "  The  miserable  arc 
defeated." 

Sang-jeevaka,  with  a  loud  voice,  said, — What,  O 
General,  am  I  to  do  ?  And  Karattaka  replied, — If  it 
be  thy  wish  to  remain  in  these  forests,  bow  down  to 
the  dust  of  his  Highness's  feet.  Give  me  thy  word, 
that  there  is  no  danger,  said  Sang-jeevaka,  and  upon 
those  terms  I  am  ready  to  go.  These  suspicions, 
observed  Karattaka,  are  unnecessary  ;  for, 

*  The  tempest  never  rooteth  up  the  grass,  which  is 
feeble,  humble,  and  shooteth  not  up  on  high  ;  but 
exerteth  its  power  even  to  distress  the  lofty  trees  ; 
for  the  great  use  not  their  might,  but  upon  the 
great/ 

Saying  this,  leaving  Sang-jeevaka  at  a  litlle  dis- 
tance, they  repaired  unto  the  presence  of  the  lion,  by 
whom  having  been  received  with  attention,  they  made 
their  reverence,  and  sat  down  ;  and  the  Rajah  was 
well  pleased. — Know,  your  Highness,  said  Damanaka, 
we  have  seen  this  animal,  and  he  is  humbled  ;  never- 
theless, he  is  of  amazing  strength  !  According  to 
your  divine  commands,  he  is  desirous  of  visiting  your 
Highness's  feet,  wherefore,  arm  yourself,  and  let  him 
draw  near  ;  for, 


*  A  small  dram  wliich  it  is  supposed  Seeva,   the  destroying  angcl, 
MMll  sound  on  the  last  day,  when  all  things  shall  be  dissolved. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  127 

'The  bank  is  penetrated  by  the  waters,  although 
protected  by  a  charm  ;  friendship  is  broken  by  maH- 
ciousness,  and  a  coward  is  to  be  overcome  by  words 
alone/ 

By  this  it  is  seen  that  one  should  not  be  alarmed 
at  a  mere  sound  ;  for,  it  is  said, 

It  is  not  proper  to  be  alarmed  at  a  vtere  sounds  when 
the  cause  of  that  sound  is  tinknozvn.  A  poor  woman 
obtaineth  consequence  for  discovering  the  cause  of  a 
sotmd. 

The   lion   asked   how   that   was ;  and    Damanaka 
I    recounted  the  following  story  : 

FABLE   V. 

Between  the  mountains  Sree-parvata  there  Is  a 
city  called  Brahma-puree,*  the  inhabitants  of  which 
used  to  believe,  that  a  certain  giant,  whom  they  called 
Ghantta-karna,t  infested  one  of  the  adjacent  hills. 
The  fact  was  thus  :  A  thief,  as  he  was  running  away 
with  a  bell  he  had  stolen,  was  overcome  and  devoured 
by  a  tiger  ;  and  the  bell  falling  from  his  hand  having 
been  picked  up  by  some  monkeys,  every  now  and 
then  they  used  to  ring  it.     Now  the  people  of  the 


*  Thei'e  are  many  places  in  India  called  by  this  name,  which  signifies 
the  city  of  God, 
t  Bell- ear. 


128  THE  HITOPADESA  ; 

town  finding  that  a  man  had  been  killed  there,  and 
at  the  same  time  hearing  the  bell,  used  to  declare, 
that  the  giant  Ghantta-karna  being  enraged,  was 
devouring  a  man,  and  ringing  his  bell ;  so  that  the 
city  was  abandoned  by  all  the  principal  inhabitants. 
At  length,  however,  a  certain  poor  woman  having 
considered  the  subject,  discovered  that  the  bell  was 
rung  by  the  monkeys.  She  accordingly  went  to  the 
Rajah,  and  said, — If,  divine  sir,  I  may  expect  a  very 
great  reward,  I  will  engage  to  silence  this  Ghantta- 
karna.  The  Rajah  was  exceedingly  well  pleased,  and 
gave  her  some  money.  So  having  displayed  her 
consequence  to  the  priesthood  of  the  country,  to 
the  leaders  of  the  army,  and  to  all  the  .  rest  of 
the  people,  she  provided  such  fruits  as  she  con- 
ceived the  monkeys  were  fond  of,  and  went  into 
the  wood;  where  strewing  them  about,  they  pre- 
sently quitted  the  bell,  and  attached  themselves 
to  the  fruit.  The  poor  woman,  in  the  mean- 
time, took  away  the  bell,  and  repaired  to  the  city  ; 
where  she  became  an  object  of  adoration  to  itj 
inhabitants.     Wherefore,  I  say, 

//  is  not  proper  to  be  afraid  of  a  mere  sound,  &e. 

Having     concluded     his     story,    Bamanaka    anc 
Karattaka  brought  Sangjee-vaka,  and  introduced  him 
to  the  lion  ;  after  which  the  bull  resided  in  that  forest 
in  great  good  fellowship. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS,  129 

Some  time  after,  a  brother  of  the  Hon's,  whose  name 
was  Stabdha-karna,*  coming  to  see  him,  Pingalaka 
having  entertained  him,  they  went  forth  to  hunt  for 
prey.  Upon  their  return,  Sang-jeevaka  asked  the 
lion  what  was  become  of  the  flesh  of  the  deer  which 
had  been  kUled  that  day  ;  and  the  Rajah  told  him 
that  Damanaka  and  Karattaka  knew.  Let  it  be 
understood,  said  Sang-jeevaka,  whether  there  is  or  is 
not  any.  There  is  not,  then,  replied  the  lion,  laugh- 
ing. What !  said  Sang-jeevaka,  has  so  much  flesh 
been  eaten  by  those  two  'i  Eaten,  wasted,  and  given 
away,  answered  the  lion ;  and  this  is  what  happens 
every  day.  How  are  such  things  transacted,  de- 
manded the  bull,  without  the  knowledge  of  your 
Highness  }  Why  not  .^  said  the  lion.  Because  it  Is 
not  proper,  observed  the  bull :  for  it  is  said, 

'  A  servant  should  never  do  anything  of  himself, 
without  having  informed  the  sovereign  his  master  ; 
except  it  be  what  he  may  do  to  prevent  a  misfor- 
tune.' 

Again : 

.  *  The  minister  should  be  like  a  Kaniandalu,t  in 
which  there  is  deposited  a  vast  collection.  Of  what 
use  to  a  sovereign  is  a  poor  idle  fool,  or  a  mere 
empty  hull  > 

*  Stiflf-ear. 
+  A  dish  which  beggars  collect  their  alms  in. 


I30  THE  HITOPADESA  ; 

For, 

*  He  is  the  best  minister  who  enrlchcth  the  State 
but  a  Kakinee.*  The  treasury  is  the  vitals  of  him 
who  hath  a  treasury.!  The  animal  spirits  are  not 
the  vitals  of  princes. 

*  P^or  a  man  will  not  arrive  at  the  state  of  being 
respected  by  any  other  means.  When  a  man  is 
destitute  of  riches,  he  is  sometimes  forsaken,  even  by 
his  wife,  and  how  much  more  by  others  ! ' 

What  great  evils  these  are  also  in  a  State  ! 

Observe : 

*  Great  expenditures,  and  the  want  of  inspection  ; 
so,  unlawful  accumulation,  plundering,  and  a  distant 
situation,?  are  called  the  evils  of  the  treasury. 

*The  rich  man  spendeth  like  Visravana,§  who 
squandereth,  according  to  his  inclinations,  his  income 
immediately,  without  regard  to  its  amount.' 

Stabdha-karna,  the  Rajah's  brother,  having  at- 
tended to  these  words  of  the  bull,  declared  liis 
sentiments  as  follows  : 

Hear  me,  brother  ;  it  is  my  opinion  that  these  t 
Karattaka  and  Damanaka^  being   employed  in 


his 

I 


*  A  small  coin  of  the  value  of  twenty  cowries  (small  shells). 
+  A  sovereign, 

X  It  means  probably,  that  when  princes  are  absent  from  the  seat  of 
government,  their  ofTicers  are  apt  to  be  too  prodigal  of  their  treasure. 
§  One  of  the  titles  of  the  Hindoo  god  of  riches. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS,  13T 

superintendence  of  the  affairs  of  peace  and  war,  are 
improper  persons  to  preside  at  the  head  of  the 
treasury.  I  will  just  repeat  what  I  myself  have  heard 
upon  the  subject  of  persons  to  be  employed. 

Attend  then  : 

*  A  priest,  a  soldier,  and  a  relation,  are  not  proper 
to  be  employed  at  the  head  of  affairs.  The  priest, 
even  when  the  object  for  which  he  was  engaged  hath 
been  completed,  refuseth  to  resign. 

*  If  a  soldier  be  employed  in  an  affair,  he  directly 
showeth  his  sword  ;  and  the  relation,  presuming  upon 
his  relationship,  swalloweth  up  all  the  profits. 

'  If  an  old  servant  be  appointed,  he  will  be  fearless, 
even  in  the  commission  of  crimes  ;  and,  in  despite  of 
his  master,  he  may  quit  his  service  without  reproof.     • 

*  One  who  hath  been  useful,  in  offending,  payeth 
no  attention  to  his  offence.  He  maketh  his  services 
a  standard,  under  which  to  plunder  and  destroy. 

'  What  minister  is  inattentive  amongst  riches } 
The  man  forceth  himself  to  be  attached  ;  and  from 
intimacy  *  he  is  for  ever  sure  to  behave  with  insolence 
and  contempt. 

'  A  minister  is  always  incorrigible,  when  he  shall 
be  grown  too  great.  It  is  a  maxim  of  those  who  are 
esteemed  perfect,  that  abundance  is  the  perverter  of 
reason. 

*  Or,  from  acquaintance, 

E  2 


132  THE  HJTOPADESA: 

*  The  man  who  thinketh  of  nothing  but  the  acqui- 
sition of  wealth,  always  devoureth  the  whole  without 
reserve.  The  eagle  and  the  vulture  may  serve  a 
prince  as  examples  of  such  a  minister. 

'Not  taking  the  advantages  which  are  found,* 
concealing  the  expenditure  of  things,  inattention, 
want  of  judgment,  and  the  being  addicted  to 
pleasures,  are  all  faults  in  a  minister. 

'  The  collection  of  the  revenues  is  the  business  of 
the  officers  ;  but  a  constant  circumspection,  the  pay- 
ment of  stipends,  and  of  the  return  for  labour,  are  the 
duties  of  the  sovereign. 

.  *  Until  they  are  pressed,  they  will  not  disgorge 
the  royal  treasures  they  have  embezzled  ;  for  the 
officers  of  revenue,  for  the  most  part,  are  a  corrupt 
class. 

'  And  the  compulsive  power  of  the  sovereigns  of 
the  earth  should  be  exerted  repeatedly  upon  their 
officers ;  for  will  a  piece  of  cloth,  by  being  onc^ 
squeezed,  yield  up  all  the  water  it  may  have  ii 
bibed  ?  * 

'     The   whole   of  this   advice,   concluded    the   lioi 
brother,  should  be  put  in  practice,  as  often  as  ther 
is  found  occasion. 

The  Rajah  then  said, — It  is  even  so,  that  these 
two  are  not  always  ready  to  obey  my  commands. 

*  Not  collecting  the  king's  revenues. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  133 

And  that,  replied  his  brother,  is  at  no  time  becoming 
in  them :  for, 

*  A  sovereign  should  not  forgive  those  who  dis- 
obey his  commands,  although  they  were  his  sons. 
Especially  if  it  be  to  the  hurt  of  the  revenue,  or 
relative  to  anything  he  may  have  fixed  his  heart 
upon.' 

Particularly  as  it  is  declared, 

'  I'he  Rajah  should,  like  a  father,  protect  his  sub- 
jects from  robbers,  from  the  officers  of  government, 
from  the  common  enemy,  from  the  royal  favourites, 
and  from  his  own  avarice.' 

Brother,  continued  he,  let  my  advice  be  followed  : 
We  have  made  our  meal  for  to-day.  Then  let  the 
bull,  Sang-jeevaka,  who  eats  nothing  but  grass  and 
corn,  be  appointed  to  superintend  the  provisions. 

After  that,  he  being  appointed  accordingly,  the 
Hon  and  the  bull  passed  their  time  together  in  great 
mutual  kindness.  But  the  two  jackals,  upon  ex- 
periencing a  relaxation  in  serving  out  the  provisions 
to  the  officers  and  dependents,  began  to  consult 
together  what  was  to  be  done.  It  is  an  evil  of  our 
own  seeking,  said  Damanaka,  and  it  is  not  proper 
to  lament  about  a  misfortune  of  one's  own  making. 

/,  for  having  touched  Swar7ta-rekha  ;  *  the  barber's 

*  Marked  with  lines  of  gold.  There  is  some  degree  of  mystery  in 
this  verse,  which  will  vanish  upon  reading  the  fable. 


134  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

Wife,  for  having  bound  herself ;  the  merchant,  for 
having  attempted  to  steal  a  jewel :  all  these  suffered  for 
their  own  faults. 

How  was  this  ?  demanded  Karattaka  ;  and  Dama- 
naka  related  the  following  stories : 

FABLE  VI. 

In  the  city  which  is  called  Kanchana-pura'^  there  was 
a  Rajah,  whose  name  was  Veera-vikrama.f  Once 
upon  a  time,  as  his  chief  officer  of  justice  was  con- 
ducting a  certain  barber  to  the  place  of  execution,  one 
Kandarpa-ketu,  who  was  a  traveller,  accompanied  by 
a  merchant,  taking  him  by  the  skirt  of  his  garment, 
cried  out, — This  man  is  not  guilty !  How  so  !  said 
the  king's  officers ;  not  guilty,  sayest  thou  ?  Hear 
me  !  said  he,  and  he  immediately  began  to  repeat 
these  lines  : — "  Having  touched  Swarna-rekha,"  &c. 
What  does  this  mean  ?  demanded  the  officers ;  and 
the  traveller  recounted  the  following  adventure  : 

The  king  of  Singhala-dweepa,J  whose  name  is 
Jeemoota-ketu,§  hath  a  son  called  Kandarpa-ketu,|| 
and  I  am  he.  One  day  a  boatman,  who  attended 
in  the  pleasure  gardens,  told  me  that,  on  the  fourth 

*  The  golden  city. 

f  Possessing  the  courage  of  a  hero. 

%  The  island  of  Ceylon. 

§  Jeemoota  signifies  a  cloud,  and  ketu  ^flag. 

II  One  of  the  titles  of  the  Hindoo  Cupid. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  135 

day  of  the  moon,  there  was  to  be  seen  In  the  sea, 

i     which  was  near,  under  what  had  the  appearance  of 

I     the  Kalpa-taru,  or  tree  of  thought,  seated  upon   a 

I     silver  sofa,  ornamented  with  a  fringe  of  precious  gems, 

!     a  certain   nymph  playing  upon  a  Veena,  as  it  were 

!    the  goddess  Lakshmee.*     At  the  proper  time  I  sent 

j    for  the  boatman,  and  getting  into  the  boat,  set  sail 

1    for  the  appointed  place  ;  and  there  I  beheld  a  damsel, 

with  only  one  half  of  her  body  appearing  above  the 

surface   of  the   water.     In    short,   attracted   by   the 

I    beautifulness  of  her  appearance,  I  gave  a  jump  with 

intention  to  catch  her ;  but  failing,  I  laid  hold  of  a 

branch  of  the  tree  of  thought,  and  was  immediately 

transported  to  her  golden  palace  ;  where  I  found  her 

waiting  in  an  apartment  of  gold,  seated  upon  a  bed  of 

the  same  materials,  attended  by  Vidya-dharees.f     I 

no  sooner  saw  her,  than,  spying  me  at  a  distance,  she 

addressed  me  with   respect,,  and  offered  to  be  my 

bride,  to  which  I  consented  with  my  eyes  ;  and  we 

were  immediately  united  by  that  mode  of  marriage 

,  which  is  called  Gandharva-vivaha.J     Her  name  was 

*  The  goddess  of  good  fortune.     But  as  Saraswatee  is  more  pro- 
perly the  goddess  of  harmony,  it  is  apprehended  her  name  should  here 
be  substituted  for  that  of  Lakshmee,  which  probably  is  a  mistake  of  the 
copyist,  who,  in  general,  is  very  ignorant,  and  often  unacquainted  with 
-  every  part  of  the  language  but  the  character. 

f  Literally,  female  holders  of  sa'eitce.     They  are  always  represented 
'as  beautiful  attendants,  and  are  said  to  be  of  divine  origin. 

X  This  kind  of  marriage  requires  nothing  but   the  consent  of  the 
parties,  and  in  ancient  times  was  lawful. 


136  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

Ratna-manjaree,*'  and  she  was  the  daughter  of 
Kandarpa-kelee,t  the  king  of  the  Vidya-dhara.J  One 
day,  as  we  were  in  private  together,  she  said, — Hus- 
band, thou  may  est  enjoy  everything  which  is  here 
according  to  thy  wish,  except  it  be  the  beautiful 
Swarna-rekha,  a  certain  Vidya-dharee,  who  is  not  to 
be  touched  of  any  one.  Some  time  after  this,  at  an 
entertainment,  being  in  a  merry  mood,  I  was  tempted 
to  touch  her,  and  for  my  presumption  she  spurned 
me  with  the  sole  of  her  foot ;  after  which  I  found 
myself  in  this  country;  and,  at  length,  travelling  about 
in  great  distress,  I  chanced  to  discover  this  city,  and 
having  wandered  about  all  day,  I  went  to  sleep  at  the 
house  of  a  certain  cowkeeper.  This  man,  too,  per- 
ceiving the  season  for  the  commission  of  crimes  §  was 
approaching,  prudently  quitted  the  conversation  of 
his  friends,  and  came  home,  where  he  found  his  wife 
planning  evil  with  another  woman.  So,  having  given 
her  a  good  beating,  he  made  her  fast  to  a  post,  and 
went  to  sleep.  About  midnight,  the  other  woman, 
who  was  the  barber's  wife,  returning,  said  to  the  co 
keeper's  wife, — Such  a  one,  burning  with  the  fire 
separation,  is  ready  to  die  for  thee.  Go,  then, 
speak  to  him,  and  return  quickly ;  and  in  the  mca 


*  A  string  of  jewels. 

+  The  sport  of  love. 

:J:  The  plural  of  Vidya-dhara,  iu  the  masculine  gender. 

{  Night. 


in, 

I 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  137 

time  I  will  bind  myself  to  the  post,  and  stay  till  thou 
shalt  come  back.  Things  having  been  thus  managed, 
it  so  fell  out  that  the  cowkeeper  waked.  Why  dost  thou 
not  now  go  to  see  thy  gallant,  my  dear  ?  said  he  ;  to 
which  no  answer  being  made,  he  continued,  saying,-  - 
Pray  who  has  taught  thee  to  be  so  proud,  that  thou 
wilt  not  deign  to  give  me  an  answer  ?  and,  saying  this, 
he  got  up  in  a  great  rage,  cut  off  her  nose,  and  lay 
himself  down  to  sleep  again.  After  a  while,  the  cow- 
keeper's  wife  returning,  asked  her  neighbour  what 
news.  What  news  !  said  she  ;  look  in  my  face,  and  see 
what  news!  The  cowkeeper's  wife  now  takes  her 
place,  and  binds  herself  to  the  post  as  before  ;  and  the 
barber's  took  up  her  nose  and  repaired  to  her  own 
house.  In  the  morning  early,  when  the  barber  was 
hunting  about  for  his  razor  case,  his  wife  said, — Here 
is  a  razor,  putting  one  into  his  hand  ;  but  as  it  did  not 
chance  to  please  him,  he  threw  it  in  a  passion  upon 
the  ground  ;  upon  which  his  wife  seized  the  occasion 
to  cry  out, — Oh !  without  the  least  provocation,  he 
hath  cut  off  my  nose  !  And  away  she  went  to  the 
officer  of  justice. 

In  the  meantime,  the  cowkeeper's  wife,  being 
questioned  by  her  husband,  exclaimed, — Who,  guilty 
wretch,  thinkest  thou,  is  able  to  disfigure  one  so 
innocent  as  1 1  The  eight  guardians  of  the  universe* 
are  acquainted  with  all  my  actions  !     Is  it  not  said, 

*  Eight  deities  supposed  to  guard  eight  points  of  the  heavens. 


138  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

'  The  sun  and  moon,  fire  and  air,  heaven,  earth, 
and  water ;  the  heart,  and  conscience ;  day  and 
night,  with  morning  and  evening ;  justice  and  all, 
are  witnesses  of  a  man's  actions  ? ' 

Then,  let  this  be  the  trial  of  my  innocence  : 

'  Ye  mighty  angels  who  guard  the  universe ! ' 
if  I  am  an  innocent  wife,  let  this  my  countenance 
remain  no  longer  without  a  nose  ! ' 

Now,  said  she,  look  at  my  face !  Accordingly,  her 
husband,  having  brought  a  light,  examined  her  face ; 
and  when  he  beheld  that  it  was  free  from  any 
appearance  of  having  been  wounded,  he  fell  down  at 
her  feet,  and,  with  a  joyful  heart,  released  her  from 
her  confinement,  and  put  her  into  bed.  And  now  I 
have  laid  before  you  all  this,  I  cannot  help  meditating 
upon  the  circumstance  of  the  barber's  wife  having 
bound  herself ;  but, 

*  Every  book  of  knowledge  which  is  known  to 
Usana,*  or  to  Vrihaspati,  is  by  nature  in  th( 
understandings  of  women. 

*  Honey  dwelleth  upon  a  woman's  speech ;  but  ii 
her  breast  there  is  nothing  but  poison.' 

Now  attend  to  the  history  of  the  merchant :  H< 
left  his  own  house,  and  after  an  absence  of  twelve 

*  The  planet  Venus,  and  the  tutor  of  the  evil  spirits. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  139 

years^  he  returned  to  this  city,  having  brought  with 
him,  from  Manasotkantha,*  a  great  many  jewels,  and 
went  to  sleep  at  a  house.  The  mistress  of  the  house 
had  made  a  wooden  image  of  a  certain  spirit,  on 
whose  head  she  had  placed  a  valuable  gem.  This 
being  told  to  the  merchant,  instigated  by  avarice,  he 
got  up  in  the  middle  of  the  night ;  but  just  as  he 
had  put  his  hand  to  the  jewel,  he  was  caught 
between  the  arms  of  the  image,  which  were  hung 
by  wires,  and  squeezed  very  closely,  so  that  he  cried 
out  with  pain.  The  mistress  of  the  house  got  up 
immediately.  Ho,  ho  !  master  merchant !  Thou 
art  come  from  Manasotkantha  !  Then  deliver  all  thy 
jewelsj  or  else  thou  wilt  not  be  released  from  thy 
present  confinement.  In  short,  he  was  helpless,  and 
so  sent  for  all  his  treasures,  and  made  an  offering  of 
them  for  his  enlargement  j  since  which,  having  been 
thus  plundered  of  all  his  wealth,  he  has  joined  our 
party  of  pilgrims. 

The  traveller  having  thus  concluded  the  story  of 
the  merchant,  the  officers  of  justice  released  the  poor 
barber.  I  repeat,  therefore, — "  I  for  having  touched 
the  damsel  Swarna-rekha,"  &c.  Now,  continued 
'Damanaka,  as  this  also  is  an  evil  of  our  own  seeking, 
it  does  not  become  us  to  grieve  about  it.  And 
having  considered  for  a  moment,  he  added, — Friend, 

*  Probably  the  mines  of  Golconda. 


140  THE  HITOPADESA : 

the  friendship  which  subsists  between  them  was 
brought  about  by  me  ;  and,  by  me^  that  friendship 
may  be  dissolved  ;  for, 

*  Skilful  men  make  falsehood  look  like  truth  ;  and' 
those  acquainted  with  the  painter's  art,  make  an  even 
surface  appear  uneven.' 

T/ie  understanding  ivhich,  upon  unexpected  occur  A 
rences,  remaineth  unaffected,  may  pass  through  the] 
greatest  difficulties ;  like  the  farmer^ s  wife  with  her^ 
two  gallants. 

How  was  that  ?  demanded  Karattaka ;  and] 
Damanaka  recounted  the  following  story : 

FABLE  VII. 

At  a  place  called  Dwaravatee,*  a  certain  farmer  hac 
a  beautiful  wife,  who  used  to  keep  company  with  th( 
son  of  the  magistrate  of  the  place ;  according  t< 
these  sayings  : 

*  The  fire   is    never  satisfied  with  the  addition  of  ^ 
fuel,  the  ocean  with  the  influx  of  rivers,  the  angel  of 
death  with  the  mortality  of   all  things   which  have 
life,  nor  a  beautiful  woman  with  the  conquest  of  all 
mankind  ! 

*  Women  are  never   to    be   rendered   faithful  and 

*  One  of  the  names  of  the  place  commonly  called  Dwaraka, 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS,  141 

obedient ;  no,  not  by  gifts,  nor  by  honours,  nor  by 
sincerity,  nor  by  services,  nor  by  severity,  nor  by 
precepts ! 

'  Women  will  presently  forsake  a  husband,  who  is 
possessed  of  every  good  quality  ;  reputable,  comely, 
good,  obsequious,  rich,  and  generous,  to  steal  to  the 
company  of  some  wretch,  who  is  destitute  of  every 
accomplishment  and  virtue !  * 

One  day,  as  she  stood  playing  with  the  magistrate's 
son,  she  happened  to  see  his  father  coming  towards 
them  ;  upon  which,  hiding  the  young  man  in  the 
barn,  she  began  to  amuse  herself  with  the  justice 
himself.  In  the  meantime,  however,  the  husband 
making  his  appearance,  she  hastily  told  the  magis- 
trate to  take  a  stick  In  his  hand,  and  depart  in  a 
hurry,  and  with  his  eyes  flaming,  as  it  were,  with 
anger.  This  being  done  accordingly,  the  farmer  came 
up  to  his  wife,  and  asked  her  what  had  occasioned  the 
justice  to  be  there  in  such  a  passion.  Why,  said  the 
artful  woman,  you  must  know,  that,  for  some  cause  or 
other,  he  is  angry  with  his  son,  who  flying  here  for 
protection,  I  hid  him  in  the  barn  ;  but  the  father 
coming,  and  not  finding  him,  is  gone  away  in  a  rage. 
Saying  this,  she  conducted  her  young  gallant  from 
the  barn,  and  introduced  him  to  her  husband  ; 
according  to  this  saying  : 

*  What  women  eat,  we  are  told,  is  twofold  ;  their 


142  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

cunning  fourfold  ;  their  perseverance  sixfold  ;  and 
their  passions  eightfold.'* 

Wherefore,  I  repeat, — "The  understanding,"  &c. 

Be  it  so,  replied  Karattaka  ;  but  how  will  it  be 
possible  to  dissolve  the  ingrafted  friendship  which  sub- 
sists between  them  ?  Some  artifice  must  be  thought 
of,  replied  Damanaka,  according  to  this  saying : 

T/iat  may  be  effected  by  stratagem-,  which  could  not 
be  effected  by  strcfigth.  A  female  crotv,  by  means  of 
a  golden  chaiUy  caused  the  death  of  a  black  serpent. 

How  was  this  brought  about?  demanded  Karat- 
taka ;  and  Damanaka  told  the  following  story  ; 

FABLE  VIII. 

The  female  companion  of  a  crow  resided  In  a  certain 
tree,  where  she  had  young  ones ;  but  they  were  all 
devoured  by  a  black  serpent,  who  concealed  himself 
in  the  hollow  of  its  trunk.  Now,  finding  herself 
breeding  again,  she  said  to  her  mate, — My  dear,  let 
us  abandon  this  tree  ;  for  we  shall  never  be  able  to 
raise  any  of  our  offsprings,  because  of  that  vile  black 
serpent ;  for^  you  know, 

*  A  bad  wife,  a  false  friend,  servants  who  ^\vt  pert 


*  This  may  be  the  case  in  India,  to  which  the  observation  is  con- 
fined. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  143 

answers,  and  living  in  a  house  infested  by  serpents, 
is  death,  as  it  were,  inevitable.* 

My  dear,  replied  the  crow,  thou  shalt  have  no 
further  cause  to  be  alarmed.  I  have  pardoned  his 
offence  again  and  again;  but  this  time  he  shall  be 
prevented.  How,  husband,  said  the  female,  wilt  thou 
be  able  to  contend  with  one  so  powerful }  Never 
fear,  answered  her  mate : 

He  who  hath  sense  hath  strength.  Where  hath  he 
strength  zvho  wanteth  judgment  f  See  how  a  lion^  when 
intoxicated  with  anger y  was  overcome  by  a  rabbit. 

How  was  that  t  demanded  the  female  ;  and  the 
crow  related  the  following  tale : 

FABLE  IX. 

Upon  the  mountain  Mandara,*  there  lived  a  lion, 
whose  name  was  Durganta,t  who  was  perpetually 
complying  with  the  ordinance  for  animal  immola- 
tion ;  X  so  that,  at  length,  all  the  different  species 
assembled,  and,  in  a  body,  represented,  that  as  by  his 
present  mode  of  proceeding,  the  forest  would  be 
cleared  all  at  once ;  if  it  pleased  his  Highness,  they 
would,  each  of  them  in  his  turn,  provide  him  an 
animal  for  his  daily  food  ;  and  the  lion  gave  his  con- 

*  A  fabulous  mountain. 

t  Hard-to-go-near. 

X  The  Hindoos  still  offer  kids  and  young  buffaloes  in  their  sacrifices. 


144  THE  HITOPADESA : 

sent  accordingly.  So  every  beast  delivered  his  stipu- 
lated provision,  till  at  length,  it  coming  to  the  rabbit's 
turn,  he  began  to  meditate  in  this  manner : — Policy 
should  be  practised  by  him  who  would  save  his  life  ; 
and  I  myself  shall  lose  mine,  if  I  do  not  take  care. 
Suppose  I  lead  him  after  another  lion  }  Who  knows 
how  that  may  turn  out  for  me  ?  Then  I  will  approach 
him  slowly,  as  if  fatigued.  The  lion,  by  this  time, 
began  to  be  very  hungry  ;  so,  seeing  the  rabbit  coining 
towards  him,  he  called  out  in  a  great  passion, — What 
is  the  reason  thou  comest  so  late?  Please  your  High- 
ness, said  the  rabbit,  as  I  was  coming  along,  I  was 
forcibly  detained  by  another  of  your  species  ;  but 
having  given  him  my  word,  that  I  would  return  im- 
mediately, I  came  here  to  represent  it  to  your  High- 
ness. Go  quickly,  said  the  lion  in  a  rage,  and  show 
me  where  this  vile  wretch  may  be  found  !  Accord- 
ingly, the  rabbit  conducted  the  lion  to  the  brink  of  a 
deep  well,  where  being  arrived, — There,  said  the 
rabbit,  look  down  and  behold  him ;  at  the  same  time 
he  pointed  to  the  reflected  image  of  the  lion  in  the 
water ;  who,  swelling  with  pride  and  resentment, 
leaped  into  the  well,  as  he  thought,  upon  his  ad- 
versary ;  and  thus  put  an  end  to  his  life.  I  repeat, 
therefore,  "  He  who  hath  sense,"  &c. 

I  have  attended,  said  the  female,  to  all  this  ;  and 
now,  do  as  thou  shouldst  do  in  this  matter.  Every 
day,  observed    the  crow,  the  king's  son   comes  to 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  145 

bathe  in  the  adjacent  river.  I  mean  to  take  away  a 
golden  chain  he  wears,  when  he  shall  take  it  off,  and 
to  put  it  into  the  hole  where  the  serpent  is  ;  and 
when  those  who  shall  be  employed  to  hunt  after  it 
shall  search  for  it  in  the  hollow  of  the  tree,  and  shall 
see  a  black  serpent,  they  will  presently  destroy  it. 
Some  time  after,  when  the  king's  son  was  bathing  in 
the  river,  the  crow  executed  his  plan  ;  and  the  people 
sent  to  look  after  the  golden  chain  found  it  in  the 
hole,  and  killed  the  serpent.  Wherefore,  I  say,  "  That 
may  be  effected  by  stratagem,"  &c.  If  it  be  so,  replied 
Karattaka,  go,  and  may  thy  ways  be  prosperous  ! 

Damanaka,  accordingly,  went  into  the  presence  of 
Pingalaka  ;  and  having  respectfully  bowed,  he  ad- 
dressed him  in  these  words  :— Please  your  Highness, 
I  am  come  upon  an  extraordinary  piece  of  intelli- 
gence, which,  in  my  opinion,  is  not  auspicious  ;  for, 

'He  who  hath  another's  welfare  at  heart  should, 
in  cases  of  calamity,  erring  from  the  right  path,  or 
when  time  and  opportunity  are  passing  away,  declare 
his  wholesome  counsel,  even  unasked.' 

Again : 

*  The  sovereign  being  a  vessel  for  the  distribution 
of  happiness,  and  not  for  the  execution  of  affairs,  the 
minister  who  shall  bring  ruin  upon  the  business  of  the 
State  is  a  criminal.'  * 

*  Literally,  is  tainted  with  evil. 


1^6  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

They  say,  also,  speaking  of  ministers  : 

'  Cutting  off  the  head,  or  forsaking  life,  is  better 
than  negligence,  from  the  wicked  lust  of  obtaining 
the  station  of  the  master/ 

The  lion  then  graciously  asked  him,  what  it  was 
that  he  wished  to  represent ;  and  Damanaka  re- 
plied,— Please  your  Highness,  this  same  Sang-jeevaka 
is  not  such  a  faithful  servant  to  thee,  but  that  he  can 
speak  disrespectfully  of  thy  three  powers  in  my 
presence  ;  and  I  know  he  has  even  an  inclination  for 
the  sovereignty.  Upon  hearing  these  words,  the  lion 
was  greatly  alarmed,  and  remained  in  silent  astonish- 
ment; whilst  Damanaka  continued  thus  : — Your  High- 
ness, in  dismissing  all  your  ministers,  and  appointing 
this  bull  to  the  superintendence  of  all  affairs,  has  com- 
mitted a  great  error.     It  is  said, 

*When  both  the  sovereign  and  the  minister  are 
very  highly  exalted,  Sree*  standeth  tottering  with 
both  her  legs.  That  female,  by  nature,  being  unable 
to  support  so  great  a  load,  is  obliged  to  forsake  one 
of  the  two/ 

And  again  : 

*  When  a  ruler  of  the  earth  maketh  one  man  the 
prime  and  only  minister  of  his  dominions,  and  weakly 
confidcth  in  him,  he  bccometh  intoxicated  with  power, 

^'  One  of  the  names  of  Lalcshmee,  the  goddess  of  good  forlune. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  147 

and  is  banished  for  negligence.  The  desire  of  liberty 
naketh  an  impression  in  the  breast  of  him  who  hath 
been  expelled  ;  and  at  length,  with  that  wish  of 
liberty,  he  meditateth  the  death  of  his  sovereign/ 

Tliey  say, 

*  It  is  best  to  tear  up  by  the  roots,  a  rotten  tooth, 
a  faithless  servant,  and  a  wicked  minister/ 

And  that, 

*The  sovereign  who  shall  make  fortune  depend 
upon  the  minister,  will,  upon  an  emergent  occasion, 
be  at  a  loss,  like  a  blind  man  without  a  guide.' 

Particularly  as, 

'  A  minister  who  is  grown  too  great  is  never  to  be 
corrected  ;  and  men  who  are  esteemed  perfect  have 
declared  that  exaltation  is  an  intoxicater  of  the 
mind.' 

The  bull  proceedeth  in  every  affair  according  to  his 
own  inclinations  ;  and  your  Highness  knows  what  is 
said  upon  such  an  occasion  : 

'  There  is  not  that  man  in  the  world  who  doth  not 
long  for  fortune  ;  and  who  doth  not  look  at  another's 
wife,  if  beautiful  and  young,  with  a  degree  of  desire 
to  possess  her/ 

The  lion  having  considered  for  a  moment,  replied,— 
'Tis  well ;  but  provided  it  be  as  thou  representest. 


143  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

still  I   have   a   great   regard  for  Sang-jeevaka ;  and 
observe,  that 

*  He  who  is  dear  to  one,  is  dear  even  in  the  very 
commission  of  a  fault.  When  the  materials  of  a 
house  are  burnt,  upon  whose  fire  falleth  disgrace  ? ' 

Please  your  Highness,  said  Damanaka,  that  even 
should  not  be  ;  but  it  is  true,  that 

*The  man  on  whom  the  sovereign  placeth  an 
extraordinary  degree  of  regard  is  the  favourite  of 
fortune;  whether  he  be  a  son,  a  minister,  or  a 
stranger.' 

And  please  to  observe, 

*  To  the  unkind  the  ruin  of  the  worthy  bringeth 
delight.  Fortune  delighteth  to  be  where  there  is  a 
babbler  and  a  listener.'  * 

And   thus   a  primitive   servant  is  neglected,  and  a 
stranger  promoted.     They  say, 

'  A  prince  should  not,  because  of  the  offence  of  an 
old  servant,  entertain  a  stranger,  lest,  between  them, 
dissensions  be  created  in  the  State.' 

Thy  words,  exclaimed  the  lion,  fill  me  with 
astonishment !  Didst  thou  not  thyself  quiet  my 
apprehensions,  and  present  him  to  me  ?  How  then, 
now  he  is  promoted,  can  he  meditate  evil  ? 

*  Or,  w/ier£  there  is  an  eloquent  speaker,  and  one  learned  in  the  dvvine 
laio;  for  the  same  words  will  bear  either  interpretation. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  149 

Please  your  Highness,  said  Damanaka, 

*  The  wicked,  even  whilst  receiving  favours,  incline 
to  their  natural  dispositions,  as  a  dog's  tail,  after 
every  art  of  anointing  and  chafing,  to  its  natural  bend. 

*A  cur's  tail  may  be  warmed,  and  pressed,  and 
bound  round  with  ligatures,  and,  after  a  twelve  years' 
labour  bestowed  upon  it,  still  it  will  return  to  its 
natural  form.' 

Again  : 

'In  gratifying  the  wishes  of  men  of  vicious  princi- 
ples, when  shall  we  find  improvement,  happiness,  and 
purity  ?  If  the  tree  be  poisonous,  the  fruit  is  un- 
wholesome, although  sprinkled  with  the  water  of  im- 
mortality.' 

Wherefore,  I  say, 

*  He  who  doth  not  wish  another's  ruin,  should,  even 
unasked,  speak  to  him  for  his  good.  This  is  a 
supreme  duty,  and  the  contrary  is  the  opinion  of  bad 
men.' 

For  it  is  declared, 

'  He  is  kind,  who  guardeth  another  from  mis- 
fortune ;  that  is  an  action,  which  is  free  from  im- 
purity  ;  she  is  a  woman,  who  can  command  herself ; 
he  is  a  worthy  person,  who  is  much  respected  by 
good  men  ;  he  is  a  minister,  who  doth  not  behave 
with  insolence  and  pride ;  he  is  happy,  who  is  for- 


1 50  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

saken  by  his  passions  ;  that  is  friendship,  which  is 
not  feigned  ;  he  is  a  man,  who  doth  not  suffer  his 
members  and  faculties  to  give  him  uneasiness.'  * 

But  if  when  all  the  inconveniences  respecting  Sang- 
jeevaka  have  been  pointed  out,  your  Highness  does 
not  abandon  him,  there  is  no  blame  in  your  servant. 
It  is  said, 

*  When  a  prince  is  attached  to  his  inclinations,  he 
neither  counteth  the  business  which  should  be  done, 
nor  his  own  benefit.  He  proceedeth  at  liberty, 
wherever  his  passions  lead  him,  like  an  intoxicated 
elephant.  At  length,  when  puffed  up  with  pride,  he 
falleth  into  a  profound  melancholy,  he  throweth  the 
blame  upon  his  servants,  and  doth  not  discover  his 
own  misconduct.' 

To  all  this  the  lion  observed, — 'Tis  said, 

'  One  should  not  lift  the  rod  against  our  enemies 
upon  the  private  information  of  another  ;  but  having, 
by  ourselves,  made  inquiry,  we  may  either  punish  or 
commend.' 

They  say  also, 

*To  seize  and  punish,  before  due  investigation, 
may  tend  to  our  own  destruction.  It  is  like  rashly 
forcing  one's  hand  into  the  mouth  of  a  serpent.' 

*  The  original  of  this  long  verse  is  written  in  a  kind  of  measure  called 
sardoolaveekreereeta^  consisting  of  four  lines  of  nineteen  syllables  each. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS,  151 

It  speaks  plainly ;  nevertheless,  shall  proclamation 
be  made  that  Sang-jeevaka  is  guilty  of  death  ? 

Damanaka,  a  little  confounded  at  this,  replied, — 
Please  your  Highness,  not  so  by  any  means  ;  for  by 
such  procedure  a  breach  is  produced  in  our  secret 
council ;  and  they  say, 

*  Having  sown  the  seed  of  secrecy,  it  should  be 
properly  guarded,  and  not  in  the  least  broken ;  for 
being  broken,  it  will  not  prosper/ 

But, 

'  Time  drinketh  up  the  essence  of  every  great  and 
noble  action,  which  ought  to  be  performed,  and  is 
delayed  in  the  execution.' 

This  being  the  case,  what  hath  been  begun  should 
certainly  be  prosecuted  with  the  utmost  vigour  ;  for, 

'  The  resolutions  of  counsel  are  like  a  timid  warrior, 
who,  although  attended  by  all  his  troops,  beareth  not 
to  stand  long,  for  fear  of  being  defeated  by  the  enemy.' 

But  after  all,  if  when  his  offence  shall  be  proved,  he 
should  be  pardoned,  and  still  retained,  it  will  be 
exceedingly  improper ;  for, 

'  He  who  wisheth  to  keep  a  friend  after  he  hath 
once  offended,  receiveth  death,  as  the  Aswataree  the 
belly.* 

*  The  translator  must  confess  he  is  ignorant  of  what  this  alludes  to. 
The  aswataree  is  a  kind  oif  serpent. 


152  77^.5:  HITOPADESA  : 

'  When  a  bad  man  is  employed  near  one,  whatever 
he  doeth  is  unprofitable.  The  Sakunee  and  the 
Sakata*  may  here  serve  a  prince  for  emblems  of  such 
an  one.' 

Let  me  understand,  said  the  lion,  what  it  is  he 
may  be  able  to  do  against  us ;  and  Damanaka 
replied  in  the  following  lines  : 

No^  knowing  the  nature  of  a  man's  connections,  how 
shall  ive  discover  what  he  is  able  to  do  ?  The  sea  was 
once  got  the  better  of  by  a  simple  partridge.'^ 

How  was  that  ?  demanded  the  lion ;  and  Dama- 
naka related  the  following  story  : 

FABLE  X. 

Once  upon  a  time,  a  female  partridge,  who  resided 
upon  the  sea-shore,  finding  herself  pregnant,  said  to 
her  mate, — My  dear,  pray  let  a  private  place  be 
sought  convenient  for  me  to  be  brought  to  bed  in.  Is 
not  this  where  we  are  a  proper  place  for  that  purpose  } 
demanded  the  partridge.  No,  replied  the  female, 
because  it  is  frequently  overflowed  by  the  tide. 
What !  exclaimed  the  male,  am  I  so  much  less 
powerful  than  the  sea,  that  I  should  suffer  myself  to 
be   insulted,  even   in   my   own   house  t     My  dear ! 

*  The  former  signifies  a  vulture^  and  the  latter  is  a  bird  unknown  to 
the  translator,  and  not  described  in  any  of  his  nomenclatures. 

+  In  the  fables  attributed  to  Pilpay  this  bird  is  called  Geraudi.  The 
name  in  Sanskrit  is  Teeteebha, 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  153 

replied  the  female,  laughing,  there  is  a  great  difference 
between  thee  and  the  sea  ;  otherwise, 

'  He  whose  understanding  can  discern  what  is,  and 
judge  what  should  or  should  not  be  applied  to 
prevent  misfortune,  never  sinketh  under  difficulties,' 

After  this,  however,  and  in  obedience  to  the  com- 
mands of  her  mate,  she  laid  her  eggs  in  the  same 
place ;  and  the  sea,  to  try  the  power  of  the  partridge, 
came  and  carried  them  off  in  triumph  ;  whereupon,  the 
poor  female,  overwhelmed  with  affliction,  said  to  her 
husband, — O  master  of  my  heart,  what  a  misfortune 
has  befallen  us  !  The  sea  has  stolen  all  my  eggs ! 
My  dear,  replied  the  partridge,  do  not  be  alarmed  ; 
but  wait  and  see  what  I  am  capable  of  doing.  So, 
upon  saying  this,  he  assembled  all  the  other  birds, 
and  having  informed  them  of  what  had  happened, 
one  of  them  said, — We  are  not  powerful  enough  to 
contend  with  the  mighty  ocean  ;  but  I  recommend, 
that  at  a  proper  time  we  should  go  in  a  body,  and 
represent  the  affair  to  the  eagle,*  who  will  ease  us  of 
our  troubles.  Having  considered  this  proposal,  they 
all  repaired  into  the  presence  of  the  king  of  birds, 
and  laid  their  grievance  before  him ;  who,  having 
heard  it,  considered  for  a  moment  what  he  should 
do  : — I  will,  said  he  to  himself,  state  the  case  to  the 

*  In  the  original  Garootwanta,  the  bird  of  Vishnu,  otherwise  called 
Garoora. 


1 54  THE  HITOPADESA : 

great  and  mighty  lord,  Narayana,  the  author  of  crea- 
tion, preservation,  and  destruction,*  and  he  will  wipe 
away  our  sorrows.  Accordingly,  the  eagle,  attended 
by  the  rest  of  the  birds,  addressed  their  complaint  to 
Narayana,  saying, — O  Lord !  Even  whilst  thou  art 
master,  the  sea  hath  dared  thus  to  overwhelm  us ! 
The  deity  having  considered  their  complaint,  com- 
manded the  ocean  to  surrender  the  eggs  ;  and  the 
king  of  waters  placed  the  high  decree  upon  his 
crown,  and  delivered  up  the  eggs  accordingly  ;  and 
the  birds  having  gained  what  they  wanted,  returned 
thanks,  and  retired  to  their  own  abodes.  I  repeat, 
therefore,  "  Not  knowing,"  &c. 

'  The  enemy  who  commenceth  hostilities,  without 
having  considered  the  transgression  of  the  law, 
meeteth  a  defeat,  like  the  sea  from  the  partridge.' 

How  shall  we  discover,  said  the  lion,  when  the  bull 
is  maliciously  inclined  ?  Your  Highness,  replied 
Damanaka,  will  know  when  you  shall  behold  him 
coming,  with  those  weapons  the  tips  of  his  horns 
pointed  towards  you,  looking  as  if  alarmed.  Having 
said  this,  he  went  where  Sang-jeevaka  was  ;  and  being 
in  sight  of  him,  he  advanced  by  slow  degrees,  and 
made  himself   appear  as  if  agitated  by  something. 

*  Though  this  attribute  more  particularly  belongs  to  Seeva,  yet  it  is 
common  to  allow  the  same  powers  to  each  of  the  three  persons  of  the 
Hindoo  trinity,  Brahma,  Vishnu  (or  Narayana),  and  Secva,  seeing 
they  mean  but  one  God,  Brahm  or  Brahma, 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  155 

Health  and  happiness  attend  thee  !  said  Sang-jeevaka, 
with  great  marks  of  poHteness.  Alas !  replied 
Damanaka,  where  is  there  any  happiness  for  those 
who  are  in  a  state  of  dependence  ?     For, 

'  The  fortunes  of  those  who  serve  princes  are  in  the 
power  of  others  ;  their  minds  are  never  at  ease  ;  and 
they  have  no  confidence  even  in  their  own  lives ! ' 

Again : 

*  Who,  having  obtained  riches^  is  not  proud  ? 
From  whose  misfortunes  do  the  luxurious  become  so  ? 
"Whose  heart  hath  not  been  tormented  by  women  ? 
Or  who  is  dear  to  a  king  ?  Who  is  there  not  wathin 
the  arms  of  time  ?  What  beggar  ever  arriveth  at 
consequence  ?  Or  what  man  who  hath  fallen  into 
the  snares  of  the  wicked  hath  escaped  in  peace  ? ' 

-  Pray,  friend,  said  the  bull,  inform  me  what  all  this 
means  !  Oh  !  my  friend,  repHed  he,  what  shall  I  say, 
but  that  I  am  very  unfortunate ! 

'  I  am  now  like  one  plunged  in  a  deep  water 
calling  out  for  help,  who  findeth  many  things  hang- 
ing down  to  assist  him,  which  he  neither  quitteth  nor 
taketh  hold  of. 

*  Confidence  in  the  prince,  all  at  once,  ruineth  one 
i  friend  or  other !  What  shall  I  do?  Whither  shall 
;I  go  ?     I  am  fallen  into  a  sea  of  trouble  ! ' 

Having  said  this,  he  heaved  a  deep  sigh,  and  sat 


156  THE  HITOPADESA : 

down ;  then  Sang-jeevaka  desired  him  to  relate, 
more  fully,  the  cause  of  his  uneasiness ;  and  Dama- 
naka  with  great  show  of  secrecy  said, — Although  it 
be  highly  improper  to  abuse  the  confidence  of  one's 
sovereign,  yet,  as  it  was  at  our  instance  thou  earnest, 
it  behoveth  me,  as  I  hope  for  welfare  myself  here- 
after, to  inform  thee  of  what  concerns  thy  own  wel- 
fare. Attend  then  : — His  Highness  is  very  much 
enraged  against  thee,  and  has  declared  in  private, 
that  he  will  have  Sang-jeevaka  killed  ;  and  that  he 
will  treat  his  attendants  with  his  flesh.  The  bull, 
upon  hearing  this,  became  very  sorrowful ;  whilst  the 
artful  Damanaka  cried, — It  is  in  vain  to  be  melan- 
choly ;  rather  let  something  be  pursued  suitable  to 
the  occasion.  Sang-jeevaka  was  thoughtful  for  a 
moment,  and  then  calmly  said, — These  lines  are 
uttered  from  a  pious  mouth  : 

*  Unworthy  to  be  found  by  bad  men,  .sovereigns, 
for  the  most  part,  are  cherishers  of  the  undeserving. 
Riches  are  attendants  of  the  miser  ;  and  the  heavens 
ram  plenteously  upon  the  mountains  ! ' 

What  is  my  own  opinion  }  I  know  not !  nor  is  this 
an  affair  to  be  discovered. 

*  The  unfortunate  man  who  possesseth  splendour 
from  the  glory  of  him  on  whom  he  dependcth,  will 
find  it  as  fatal  as  a  foul  coilyrium  put  into  the  eye  by 
the  hand  of  imprudence,' 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  157 

But  when   I  reflect,  how  hard  is  the  sentence  which 
hath  been  pronounced  against  me ! 

*The  king  hath  been  courted  with  unremitting 
pains  ;  why  then  is  he  not  pleased  ?  Herein  is  the 
wonder  !  This  too  is  a  circumstance  before  unparal- 
leled :  one  whilst  he  is  served  is  about  to  be  an 
enemy ! ' 

Then,  this  may  be  deemed  something  inexplicable  ;« 
but, 

'  The  man  who,  having  discovered  some  unfavour- 
able token,  giveth  way  to  his  passions,  will  certainly 
fail  in  the  pursuit  of  it.  How  shall  one  give  satisfac- 
tion to  him  whose  mind  is  displeased  without  a 
cause  ? ' 

Have  I  offended  the  king  by  taking  grain  ;  or  are 
princes  apt  to  become  enemies  without  sufficient 
cause  ? 

Damanaka  replied, — Thus  it  is  !     Hear  me  : 

'  Some  are  discontented,  even  with  the  assistance 
of  the  whole  body  of  able  men  ;  whilst  others  are 
pleased  when  offences  are  committed  in  their  sight. 
The  duties  of  servitude  are  exceedingly  profound  : 
they  are  impracticable,  even  to  those  who  are  in  the 
habit  of  doing  penance ;  because  those  who  are  not 
servants  for  one  thing  alone,  must  submit  to  be 
directed  by  the  eye  at  the  sovereign's  will.' 


158  THE  HirOPADESA  : 

Again : 

*  Virtues  amongst  those  who  know  what  virtues  are, 
are  virtues ;  but  when  they  meet  with  a  subject 
destitute  of  good  qualities  itself,  they  become  faults.^ 
Rivers  flow  with  sweet  waters ;  but  having  joined  the 
ocean,  they  become  undrinkable. 

'A  hundred  good  actions  are  lost  upon  the  un- 
worthy ;  a  hundred  fine  speeches  are  lost  upon  the 
ignorant ;  a  hundred  good  qualities  are  lost  amongst 
men  who  are  destitute  of  good  qualities  ;  a  hundred 
times  speaking  is  lost  upon  those  who  are  not  inclined 
to  converse  ;  a  hundred  understandings  are  lost  upon 
the  insensible.'  t 

It  is  true,  replied  the  bull,  that 

'  Serpents  are  found  upon  the  sanders  tree ;  in  the 
waters  the  lotus  flowers  with  alh'gators  ;  and  in  the 
midst  of  full  enjoyment  those  who  dispute  about  the 
quality.'  + 

Away  then  with  uninterrupted  happiness  ! 

*  If  the  deserts  were  made  liquid,  and  the  waters 

*  Does  so  much  of  this  verse  mean  that  good  qualities  are  lost  upon 
bad  men  :  are  despised  by  them,  or  that  virtue  is  corrupted  by  bad 
company  ? 

t  It  is  hard  to  determine  what  the  author  intended  by  this  sentence, 
unless  by  the  word  rendered  undcrslamUngs  he  meant  7vise  JuJpiicnls, 
sensible  observations. 

X  By  the  context  this  should  mean,  that  we  find  cause  to  complain, 
even  in  the  midst  of  fruition,  there  being  no  such  thing  as  perfect  hap- 
piness. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS,  159 

rendered   solid ;  I    ask  if  the  former  might  not  be 
passed  in  boats,  and  the  latter  be  called  dry  land.* 

'  He  who  serveth  an  unreasonable  man,  acteth  as 
much  in  vain,  as  he  who  soundeth  a  trumpet  in  the 
ears  of  the  deaf,  or  presenteth  a  mirror  to  the  blind. 

*  The  root  is  infested  by  serpents,  the  flowers  by 
bees,  the  branches  by  monkeys,  and  the  leaves  by 
insects ;  in  short,  there  is  not  a  sanders  tree  which  is 
not  surrounded  by  the  vilest  impurities.'l 

Our  master,  observed  Damanaka,  is  one  of  those 
who  carry  honey  in  their  speech,  and  poison  in  their 
hearts  ;  according  to  this  description  : 

*  He  holdeth  out  his  hands  at  a  distance  ;§  he 
appeareth  with  a  wet  eye  ;  he  relinquisheth  one  half 
of  his  seat ;  he  is  fond  of  close  embracing  ;  his  words 
in  conversing  are  kind  and  gentle  ;  he  bestoweth 
compliments  ;  his  inside  is  naught  but  poison,  whilst 
without  he  is  covered  with  sweets ;  and  he  is  rich  in 
extreme  deceit.  What  name  is  there  for  this  before 
unheard-of  mimic  art,  which  is  inculcated  by  wicked 
men?' 

It  Is  said, 

*  This  verse,  as  connected  with  that  which  immediately  precedes  it, 
seems  to  imply  that  unsullied  happiness  must  not  be  expected  till  the 
order  of  nature  be  reversed. 

t  The  Hindoos  seem  to  have  been  long  acquainted  with  the  ait  of 
constructing  miiTors  of  polished  plates  of  steel. 

X  This  verse  seems  to  have  been  misplaced. 

§  In  the  attitude  of  invitation  ;  joined,  with  the  palms  upwards. 


i6o  THE  HITOPADESA : 

*  The  boat  was  invented  upon  crossing  pieces  of 
water  which  were  difficult  to  pass  ;  the  lamp,  upon 
the  approach  of  darkness ;  the  fan,  upon  a  defect  of 
wind ;  and  injuries,  to  gratify  the  pride  of  men 
blinded  by  intoxication  !  In  short,  there  is  not  any- 
thing in  the  world,  wherein  the  idea  of  invention  was 
not  suggested  by  Providence  *  But,  in  my  opinion. 
Providence  itself  would  fail  in  its  endeavours  to 
prevent  what  passeth  in  the  minds  of  wicked  men.'  f 

How  hard  it  is,  exclaimed  Sang-jeevaka,  that  this 
poor  feeder  upon  grass  and  grain,  should  be  an  object 
worthy  to  be  ruined  by  a  lion  ! 

*  The  disputes  of  two  of  equal  strength  and  fortune 
are  worthy  of  attention;  but  not  of  two,  the  one  great, 
the  other  humble. 

*  What  animal,  being  athirst,  from  its  clearness 
willingly  attemptcth  to  enter  the  sun  when  standing 
upon  the  summit  of  the  western  mountains  ?  The 
bee  flyeth  to  the  lotus.  J 

*  The  original  word  is  ambiguous,  and  might,  with  equal  propriety, 
have  been  interpreted  by  the  term  chance. 

t  The  length  of  this  verse  in  English,  when  compared  with  its 
original,  is  twofold,  the  latter  containing  only  four  lines  of  nineteen 
syllables  each ;  but  as  it  is  hardly  possible  to  express  the  same  idea  clearly 
in  our  language  with  fewer  words,  this  remark  may  serve  to  show  that 
the  Sanskrit  cannot  be  rendered  intelligible  in  the  dialects  of  Europe, 
but  by  a  periphrasis. 

X  This  verse  i«  rather  darkly  expressed.  As  connected  with  what 
precedes  it,  it  may  argue  that,  in  general,  animals  though  ever  so  much 
pressed  by  their  passions  or  appetites,  are  not  wont  to  attack  such  as 
are  stronger  than  themselves. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS,  i6i 

*  Exulting  with  the  rage  of  madness  he  springeth 
upon  the  noble  elephant ;  or  else,  having  quitted  him 
without  pity,  he  is  engaged  by  his  people  amongst 
vagabonds.* 

'  The  tree  is  broken  down  by  the  abundance  of  its 
fruit,  and  walking  groweth  tiresome  to  Sikhandis.t 

*  The  minister  is  like  a  beast  of  burthen,  who  is  led 
by  sweet  words.  Good  qualities  in  a  virtuous  person, 
for  the  most  part,  are  his  enemies. J 

'  Princes,  in  general,  alas !  turn  away  their  faces 
from  a  man  endued  with  good  qualities.  Women, 
too,  often  delight  in  those  who  are  fond  of  delight. 
This  is  a  false  position,  that  virtue  leadeth  to  the 
society  of  men ;  for  mankind,  generally,  do  not 
reckon  this  a  noble  principle.'  § 

It  is  well !  continued  Sang-jeevaka,  addressing  him- 
self to  Damanaka,  this  poor  attendant  is  of  no  esteem 
with  the  Rajah ! 

*  This  verse  is  deficient  in  the  original.  The  meaning  of  it,  as  far 
as  one  can  judge  from  what  remains,  seems  to  be  that  tyrants  are  either 
engaged  in  cruel  wars,  or  else,  under  the  influence  of  parasites,  spend- 
ing their  time  at  home  in  idle  pleasures,  which  is  but  too  common  with 
the  princes  of  Hindostan. 

t  This  word  probably  signifies  peacocks.  The  intention  of  the  verse 
seems  to  be  this, — that  wealth  and  greatness  are  frequently  the  ruin  of 
those  who  possess  them.  The  peacock  is  famous  for  running  fast,  but 
his  superior  agility  sooti  fatigues  him. 

X  From  the  latter  part  of  this  verse  the  former  should  signify  that 
the  minister  who  yieldeth  to  the  opinion  of  his  sovereign,  though  desti- 
tute of  every  good  quality,  is  the  most  likely  to  be  a  favourite. 

§  This  verse,  in  the  original,  is  full  of  blunders.  The  translator 
thinks  his  version  is  according  to  the  author's  meaning. 

F 


i62  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

*  It  is  better  that  the  vulture  should  be  followed  b_y 
geese,  as  ministers  and  attendants  ;  than  that  the 
goose  should  be  pursued  by  the  birds  of  prey  which 
attend  the  offerings  made  to  the  manes  of  the  dead. 
An  attendant  being  angry  may  use  even  a  hundred 
harsh  expressions  ;  but  a  virtuous  man  is  not  to  be 
deprived  of  any  of  his  good  qualities  by  his  feeble 
assistants.'  * 

The  bull  having  again  considered  a  while,  con- 
tinued saying, — I  know  not  by  what  fault  of  mine  the 
Rajah  has  been  injured,  that  he  should  be  at 
variance  with  me!  It  is  best  therefore  to  be  for  ever 
jealous  of  a  prince. 

'  If  ever  the  mind  of  a  king,  which  is  like  a  bracelet 
of  solid  crystal,  is  injured  by  his  minister,  who  is  the 
artist  that  can  repair  it  ?  t 

'  A  thunderbolt,  and  the  power  of  kings,  are  both 
dreadful !  But  the  former  expendeth  its  fury  at  once, 
whilst  the  latter  is  constantly  falling  upon  our  heads.' 

Having  pondered  for  a  while,  he  said  to  Damanaka, 
— It  behoveth  thee,  my  dear  friend,  to  afford  me  such 

*  The  first  period  ending  with  the  word  dc'ad,  as  applicable  to  the 
subject,  seems  to  imply  that  the  poor  bull,  who  was  the  lion's  minister, 
being  by  nature  much  weaker  than  he,  his  master  had  no  real  cause  to 
be  apprehensive  of  danger  from  him.  Tliis  makes  a  distinct  verse  in 
the  original,  and  was  joined  to  the  next  period,  which  is  also  a  com- 
plete verse,  by  mistake. 

t  Does  the  author  of  this  verse  mean  that  offended  princes  are  not 
easily  pacified  ? 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  163 

advice  on  this  fatal  occasion,  as  the  nature  of  the 
case  seems  to  demand.  What  hath  been  the  practice 
of  many,  flourisheth  in  misfortune.  Although  it  be 
as  thou  observest,  replied  Damanaka,  yet  those  ac- 
quainted with  the  rules  of  prudence  say, — "The  loss 
of  one's  own  life,"  &c."^  May  this  happen  to  me, 
exclaimed  Sang-jeevaka,  in  the  field  of  battle  ;  for 
death  would,  in  my  mind,  be  preferable  to  the  im- 
putation of  fear.  At  present  that  doctrine  t  is  not 
suitable. 

*■  Or  dying,  he  obtaineth  heaven  ;  or  having  killed 
his  enemy,  the  enjoyments  of  life.  Both  these  hard- 
to-be-acquired  blessings  are  the  rights  of  heroes. 

*  As  out  of  battle  death  is  certain,  and  in  the  field 
life  doubtful,  the  learned  call  it  "•  the  only  time  of 
battle."  X 

'  When  out  of  battle  he  beholdeth  no  happiness  for 
himself,  the  wise  man  cmbraceth  death  fighting  the 
foe. 

*  In  victory  he  obtaineth  fortune,  and  in  death 
celestial  beauty.  Seeing  that  our  bodies  are  so  very 
fragile,  why  should  we  hesitate  about  dying  in  the 
battle  .? ' 

Let  me  clearly  understand,  my  friend,  how  I  am  to 
discover  when  he  is  determined  to  put  me  to  death. 

*  A  partial  quotation  of  some  well-known  maxim. 

t  Probably  the  doctrine  laid  down  in  the  above  partial  quotation. ' 

X  Dying  sword  in  hand, 

F  2 


i64  THE  HITOPADESA : 

When  the  Rajah  shall  cock  his  tail,  lift  up  his  paws, 
and  look  at  thee  with  his  mouth  open,  replied 
Damanaka,  then  will  be  the  time  for  thee  also  to 
display  thy  prowess. 

'Strong  even  without  vigour,  who  may  not  ex- 
perience the  situation  of  being  defeated  ?  Observe 
how  fearlessly  people  put  their  feet  upon  a  heap  of 
ashes ! ' 

But  it  is  necessary  that  everything  be  conducted  with 
the  greatest  privacy.  Having  said  this,  Damanaka 
went  to  join  Karattaka  ;  who  asked  him  what  was 
effected.  Why,  replied  the  former,  a  reciprocal 
breach  hath  been  effected  between  the  two.  What 
doubt  of  it  ?  cried  Karattaka  ;  for  they  say, 

*  What  a  name  is  relation  amongst  wicked  men } 
Who  will  not  be  angry  when  over  and  above  soli- 
cited }  Who  groweth  satisfied  with  riches }  Who, 
being  attentive,  may  not  be  learned  } ' 

Likewise  : 

'  A  man  is  rendered  miserable  by  artful  people, 
and  prosperous  from  the  greatness  of  his  soul.  What, 
doth  not  a  troop  of  villains  act,  like  the  fire  (whose 
epithet  is  destroyer  of  that  which  is  intrusted  to 
him?)' 

After  this  Damanaka  went  to  the  lion,  and  cried 
out, — Please  your  Highness,  that  vessel  of  iniquity  is 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  165 

coming !  Prepare  thyself,  and  let  him  approach ! 
Having  said  this,  he  caused  the  lion  to  put  himself  in 
the  attitude  before  described ;  and  Sang-jeevaka 
being  arrived,  upon  seeing  the  lion  with  his  counte- 
nance thus  altered,  began  himself  to  display  a  cor- 
responding show  of  defiance.  At  length  there  ensued 
a  furious  battle,  in  which  the  poor  bull  having  been 
killed  by  the  lion,  the  latter  overcome  with  fatigue, 
and  standing,  as  it  were,  full  of  affliction,  exclaimed, — 
Alas !  what  a  cruel  action  have  I  been  guilty  of ! 

'  If  the  dominion  be  enjoyed  by  others,  he  himself 
is  the  vessel  which  containeth  the  fault.  Should  a 
prince  transgress  the  law,  he  is  like  the  lion  after  the 
murder  of  the  elephant.* 

'  The  loss  of  territory,  or  of  a  wise  and  virtuous 
servant,  is  a  great  loss.  The  loss  of  servants  is 
death  to  sovereigns,  and  the  loss  of  empire ;  for 
servants  are  not  easily  to  be  found.' t 

What  novelty  is  this  }  cried  Damanaka.  It  is  very 
musual  for  one  to  lament  having  put  a  faithless 
;nemy  to  death ;  and  indeed  it  is  very  improper  to 
lo  so. 

*  Or  father,  or  if  a  brother ;  or  son,  or  if  a  friend. 


*  The  translator  must  confess  he  is  ignorant  of  what  this  sentence 
lludes  to. 
+  That  is,  good  servants. 


i66  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

be  a  conspirator  against  his  life,  he  should  be  put  to 
death  by  a  prince  who  wisheth  his  own  welfare. 

*  One  acquainted  with  the  principles  of  justice  and 
political  interest,  should  neither  be  hastily  severe; 
nor  ever  ready  to  pardon,  although  money  be  in  the 
hand.     It  is  proper  to  swallow  mercy. 

*  It  is  a  virtue  in  hermits  to  forgive  their  enemies, 
as  well  as  their  friends  ;  but  it  is  a  fault  in  princes  to 
show  clemency  towards  those  who  are  guilty. 

'  There  is  no  other  but  one  expiation  for  him  who, 
from  pride  and  the  lust  of  power,  shall  wish  for  his 
master's  station,  and  that  is  death ! 

*A  meek-hearted  prince,  a  Brahman  who  eateth 
of  all  things  alike,*  an  unruly  wife,  a  bad-principled 
companion,  an  unfaithful  servant,  and  a  presumptuous 
superintendent,  should  all  be  put  away :  they  are 
not  worthy  to  be  tried  seven  times.' 

But  the  following  lines  give  a  very  particular 
picture  of  the  behaviour  of  princes : 

*  The  conduct  of  princes,  like  a  fine  harlot,  is  of 
many  colours  :  true  and  false  ;  harsh  and  gentle ; 
cruel  and  merciful ;  niggardly  and  generous ;  ex- 
travagant in  expense,  and  solicitous  of  the  influx  of 
abundant  wealth  and  treasure.' 


*  Although  the  Brahmans  are  by  no  means  confined  to  a  vegetable  \ 
diet,  as  is  generally  supposed,  still,  like  the  Jews  and  Mussulmans,  they 
are  forbidden  to  taste  of  many  kinds  of  flesh  and  fish. 


i 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  167 

The  lion  having  been  thus  composed  by  the  arts  of 
Damanaka,  at  length  recovered  his  natural  temper  of 
mind,  and  seated  himself  on  his  throne  ;  and 
Damanaka,  with  his  heart  full  of  exultation,  having 
wished  victory  to  the  mighty  king,  and  happiness  to 
all  the  world,  lived  ever  after  according  to  his  wish. 

Vishnu-Sarma,  having  thus  concluded  his  second 
head,  The  Separation  of  a  Favourite,  gave  notice  tc 
the  young  princes  ;  who  declaring  they  were  well 
pleased  with  it,  he  gave  them  his  blessing  and 
repeated  the  following  lines : 

'May  such  a  breach  between  friends  happen  but 
in  the  house  of  your  enemies  !  May  traitors,  day  by 
day,  be  led  by  Time  to  their  destruction !  May  the 
people  be  perpetual  possessors  of  abundance,  and  all 
the  blessings  of  life !  And  may  youth  for  ever  find 
amusement  here  in  this  pleasant  garden  of  fable  I 


i68  IIIE  HITOPADESA  ; 


CHAPTER    III. 

OF  DISPUTING. 

The  time  set  apart  for  hearing  these  stories  being 
arrived,  the  young  pr'nces  reminded  Vishnu-Sarma 
in  these  words  : — Worthy  sir  !  As  we  are  the  sons  of 
a  prince,  it  will  afford  us  very  great  amusement  to 
hear  what  relates  to  Disputing.  And  Vishnu-Sarma 
replied, — If  it  will  give  you  pleasure,  I  will  proceed  to 
recount  what  is  connected  with  that  head,  to  which 
the  following  verse  is  the  introduction  : 

In  a  quarrel  between  the  geese  and  the  peacocks^  in 
which  is  displayed  equal  valonr ;  the  geese,  having 
trusted  them,  are  betrayed  by  the  crows  zuho  were  in  the 
camp  of  the  enemy. 

How  was  this  ?  demanded  the  young  princes  ;  and 
Vishnu-Sarma  related  as  follows  : 

FABLE  I.  f 

In  Karpura-dweepa  *  there  is  a  famous  lake  which 

*  Kai'Poora  signifies  camphirf,  goU,  and  a  particular  tree  commonly 
called  plas  ;  and  dwhpay  an  island.  The  translator  is  ignorant  of  the 
situation. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  169 

is  distinguished  by  the  name  of  the  Padma-nilayaj* 
where  used  to  reside  a  royal  goose,  whose  title  was 
Hiranya-Garbha,t  and  who  had  been  appointed  their 
king  by  all  the  birds  who  are  wont  to  frequent  the 
waters. 

'  If  there  were  no  king,  the  people  would  thence  be 
entirely  ruined  ;  they  would  be  here  like  a  boat  in  the 
water  without  a  pilot. 

^  The  king  protecteth  the  people  ;  and  they  support 
the  greatness  of  their  sovereign.  But  protection  is 
better  than  greatness  ;  for  the  one  cannot  exist  with- 
out the  other.' 

One  day  as  the  royal  goose  was  sitting  upon  a  bed 
of  lotus  flowers  finely  spread,  surrounded  by  his 
attendants,  there  arrived  from  some  distant  country 
a  certain  booby,  wliose  name  was  Deergha-mukha, 
who,  having  made  his  obeisance,  drew  near.  Deergha- 
mukha  !  said  the  king,  thou  art  lately  come 
from  foreign  countries  :  pray  inform  me  what  news. 
Please  your  Highness,  replied  the  booby,  I  have  some 
very  important  news,  anxious  to  relate  which  I  made 
haste  to  come  here.     In  Jambu-dweepa,+  there  is  a 


*  Lotus-habitation. 

t  Gold-belly. 

X  The  habitable  part  of  the  earth,  according  to  the  ancient  Hindoo 
geographers.  Almost  every  preceding  author  has  declared  that  this 
name  is  derived  from  two  words,  the  former  signifying  a  jackal,  and  the 
latter  an  island  or  continent^  into  which  error  they  have  been  led  by  the 


lyo  THE  HITOPADESA : 

mountain  called  Vindhya,  where  reigns  Chitra- 
varna,"*^  a  peacock,  who  is  there  king  of  the  winged 
tribes.  As  I  was  walking  one  day  over  a  place  where 
the  grass  and  underwood  had  been  burnt  down,  I  was 
discovered  by  some  of  his  attendants  who  were  pass- 
ing by ;  and  upon  their  asking  who  I  was,  and 
whence  I  came,  T  replied,  that  I  cariie  from  Karpura- 
dweepa,  that  I  w^as  an  attendant  of  the  royal  goose, 
king  Hiranya-Garbha,  and  that  I  came  there  out  of 
curiosity  to  see  foreign  countries.  They  then  asked 
me  which  of  these  two  countries  I  thought  the  best ; 
and  I  said, — O  what  a  question  is  this !  There  is  a 
vast  difference  between  them  :  Karpura-dweepa  is  a 
heaven  of  a  place !  Then  what  do  you  do  in  such  a 
barren  country  as  this  .-*  Come  away,  and  accompany 
me  into  our  country.  But  upon  hearing  me  talk  in 
this  manner,  they  seemed  to  be  very  much  displeased. 
They  say, 

'  A  draught  of  milk  to  serpents  doth  nothing  but 
increase  their  poison.  Good  counsel  bestowed  upon 
fools  doth  rather  provoke,  than  satisfy  them. 

affinity  of  the  word  Jamboo  to  Jambooka,  this  last  signifying  a  jackal ; 
but  the  truth,  according  to  the  authority  of  Sanskrit  dictionaries  and 
a  definition  found  in  an  original  work  treating  of  that  country,  is  that 
Jamboo  is  the  name  of  a  tree  which  bears  a  fruit  commonly  called 
zamin  or jamin  in  Ilindostan.  The  Hindoo  poets  have  imagined  that 
in  the  centre  of  this  dweepa  (island  or  continent)  there  was  a  tree  of  that 
species  of  an  amazing  size,  whence  it  derived  the  name  of  Jamboo- 
dweepa. 
*  Motley-colour. 


FABLES  AND  PRO  VERBS,  1 7 1 

A  ivise  man  is  worthy  to  be  advised ;  but  an  ignorant 
one  ncver.^  Certai?i  birds,  having  given  advice  to  a 
troop  of  monkeys,  have  their  nests  torn  to  pieces ^  and  are 
obliged  to  fly  away. 

The  royal  goose  demanded  to  know  how  that  was ; 
and  the  booby  repeated  the  following  story  : 

FABLE  II. 

On  the  banks  of  the  river  Narmada,t  upon  a  neigh- 
bouring mountain,  there  was  a  large  Salmalee  tree, 
wherein  certain  birds  were  wont  to  build  their  nests 
and  reside,  even  during  the  season  of  the  rains.  One 
day,  the  sky  being  overcast  with  a  troop  of  thick 
dark  clouds,  there  fell  a  shower  of  rain  in  very  large 
streams.  The  birds  seeing  a  troop  of  monkeys  at 
the  foot  of  the  tree,  all  wet,  and  shivering  with  cold, 
called  out  to  them, — Ho,  monkeys  !  why  don't  you 
invent  something  to  protect  you  from  the  rain  ? 

*We  build  ourselves  nests  with  straws  collected 
with  nothing  else  but  our  bills.  How  is  this,  that 
you,  who  are  blessed  with  hands  and  feet,  yield  to 
such  sufferings  t ' 

*  When  the  learned  Pandit,  under  whom  the  translator  studied  the 
Sanskrit  language  at  their  lioly  city  of  Benares,  used  to  be  reproached 
by  other  Brahmans  for  communicating  the  key  of  their  divine  mysteries 
to  foreigners,  he  constantly  silenced  them  by  repeating  this  hemistich 
in  the  original. 

+  A  river  which  empties  itself  into  the  Gulf  of  Cambay,  commonly 
called  the  Narbada. 


1 72  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

The  monkeys  hearing  this,  and  understanding  it  as 
a  kind  of  reproach,  were  exceedingly  irritated,  and 
said  amongst  themselves, — Those  birds  there,  sitting 
comfortably  out  of  the  wind  within  their  warm  nests, 
are  laughing  at  us !  So  let  them,  as  long  as  the 
shower  may  last.  In  short,  as  soon  as  the  rain  sub- 
sided, the  whole  troop  of  them  mounted  into  the  tree, 
where  tearing  all  the  nests  to  pieces,  the  eggs  fell 
upon  the  ground  and  were  broken.  I  say,  therefore, 
"  A  wise  man  is  worthy  to  be  advised,"  &c. 

Well,  said  the  royal  goose,  what  did  the  birds  say 
after  they  had  heard  this  story  ?  Why,  please  your 
Highness,  they  were  in  a  great  passion,  and  asked, 
who, made  that  same  goose  a  king!  In  answer  to 
which,  I  too,  in  the  anger  which  such  a  question 
created,  cried, — By  whom  was  this  same  peacock 
made  a  king  ?  and,  upon  my  saying  this,  they  tried 
to  kill  me,  and  in  return,  I  displayed  no  little  valour. 

'  An  occasional  dress  to  a  man  is  as  forgiveness 
and  modesty  to  a  woman.    Courage  when  surroundec 
is  like    being   captive    amongst   men   endued    witl 
clemency.'  * 

The  royal  goose  smiling  at  this,  said, 

*A  man  who,  having  well  compared  his  own] 
strength  or  weakness  with  that  of  others,  after  all 


*  This  verse  wants  precision,  but  the  intention  is  clearly  this  :  thj 
an  assumed  character  may  sometimes  serve  one,  instead  of  a  real  one. 


FABLES  AND    PROVERBS,  173 

doth  not  know  the  difference,  is  easily  overcome  by 
his  enemies.' 

A  fool  is  akvays  discove7'ed  if  he  stayeth  too  long ; 
like  the  ass  dressed  in  a  tiger^s  skin,  from  his  voice. 

How  was   this  ?  said   the  booby ;    and   the   royal 
goose  related  the  following  tale  : 

FABLE    III. 

At  Hastinapura*  there  lived  a  certain  dyer,  whose 
name  was  Vilasa.f  He  had  a  jackass  who  was  grown 
exceedingly  weak  by  carrying  burdens  too  great  for 
his  strength,  and,  as  it  were,  almost  at  the  point  of 
death.  In  this  condition  the  dyer  dressed  him  up  in 
a  tiger's  skin,  and  let  him  loose  in  a  field  of  corn  ; 
so  that  the  people  belonging  to  the  field  having 
observed  him  at  a  distance,  ran  away  with  the  idea 
of  its  being  a  real  tiger.  After  a  while,  however,  a 
man  whose  business  was  to  watch  the  field,  having 
dressed  himself  in  a  kind  of  armour  made  of  an  ass*s 
skin,  and  furnished  himself  with  a  bow  and  arrows, 
ventured  to  approach  him ;  and  the  supposed  tiger, 
who  was  now  grown  plump  and  fat,  spying  him  at  a 
little  distance,  and  thinking  it  was  a  female  of  his 
own  species,  began  to  welcome  her  by  setting  up  a 
loud  braying,  and  immediately  trotting  up  before  her. 

*  The  ancient  name  of  llie  city  of  Delhi. 
t  Artful. 


174  THE  HITOPADESA : 

But  the  man  having  discovered  from  his  voice  what 
he  really  was,  the  poor  ass  was  soon  overcome  for 
his  love.  I  say,  therefore,  **A  fool  is  always  dis- 
covered," &c. 

After  that,  said  the  booby,  the  birds  called  out  to 
me, — Rascal !  vile  booby  !  Dost  thou  dare  speak  thus 
slightingly  of  our  sovereign  ?  This  is  not  to  be 
suffered  by  us  presently  !  And,  saying  this,  they 
began  to  attack  me  with  their  bills,  and  to  brave  me 
in  this  manner :— Observe,  thou  stupid  animal!  thy 
goose  is  always  a  soft  spiritless  creature;  although 
he  is  by  no  means  so  very  mild  in  the  government  of 
his  dominions  ;  but  he  is  incapable  of  possessing  as 
much  wealth  as  would  lie  in  the  palm  of  one's  hand  ; 
how  then  shall  he  command  the  universe  ?  As  for 
thyself,  thou  art  like  an  angry  frog ;  but  he  is  thy 
superior.     Hear  this : 

*  A  large  tree,  which  yieldeth  both  fruit  and  shade, 
is  highly  to  be  esteemed ;  but  if  Providence,  per- 
chance, may  have  denied  it  fruit,  by  whom  is  its 
shade  refused  } '  * 

And,  that 

*  Court  should  not  be  paid  to  the  indigent ;  but  to 
him    on    whom    there    is    great   dependence.     The 


*  This  verse,  wliicli  is  certainly  a  beautiful  one,  as  quoted  by  the 
subjects  of  the  peacock,  can  only  be  applicable  to  him. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  i7S 

elephant  obtained  the  title  of  Varunee  from  his 
carrying  water  in  his  trunk.     For, 

'Even  the  greatest  are  reduced  to  littleness,  and 
those  of  abundant  qualities  to  insignificance,  by  the 
properties  of  that  by  which  they  are  opposed ;  like 
the  royal  elephant  in  the  mirror.' 

Besides^ 

Great  things  may  he  effected  by  zvise  counsel^  when  a 
sovereign  enemy  may  he  too  powerful.  Certaiii  rahbits 
ivere  enabled  to  live  in  comfort ^  through  the  policy  of  otie 
of  their  brethren. 

I  asked  them  how  this  was  ?  And  the  birds  related 
as  follows ; 

FABLE  IV. 

Once  upon  a  time,  for  want  of  rain  in  due  season, 
a  troop  of  elephants  being  greatly  distressed  for 
water,  addressed  their  chief  in  these  words : — What 
resource  have  we,  except  in  that  hollow  sinking 
ground  inhabited  by  those  little  animals !  but  de- 
prived of  that  too,  whither,  sir,  blinded  as  it  were, 
shall  we  go  ?  What  shall  we  do  ?  Upon  hearing 
their  complaints,  their  chief,  after  travelling  with  them 
a  great  way,  discovered  a  fountain  of  clear  water. 
But  as  many  rabbits  who  happened  to  be  in  their 

*  A  derivation  from  Varuna,  tlie  Hindoo  Neptune. 


176  THE  HITOPADESA: 

burrows  were  crushed  to  death  under  the  feet  of  so 
many  elephants  trampling  over  their  warren ;  at 
length,  one  of  them,  who  was  called  Silee-Mukha,* 
reflected  in  this  manner: — This  troop  of  elephants, 
oppressed  with  thirst,  will  be  coming  here  every  day 
to  drink,  and,  at  length,  our  whole  race  will  be 
destroyed !  But  an  old  buck,  whose  name  was 
Vijaya,t  said  to  him, — Brother,  don't  be  uneasy  ;  for 
I  am  going  to  prevent  what  thou  dreadest.  Saying 
which,  he  set  off  to  try  how  he  could  oppose  them  ; 
but  as  he  went  along,  he  began  to  consider  how  he 
should  approach  so  formidable  a  troop  ;  for,  observed 
he,  they  say, 

*  An  elephant  killeth  even  by  touching,  a  serpent 
even  by  smelling,  a  king  even  by  ruling,  and  a  wicked 
man  by  laughing  at  one.' 

Wherefore,  I  will  mount  the  summit  of  a  rock  to 
address  the  head  of  the  troop.  This  being  put  in 
execution  accordingly,  the  chief  elephant  asked  him 
who  he  was,  and  whence  he  came.  I  am,  he  replied, 
an  ambassador  sent  here  by  the  god  Chandra.^ 
Declare  the  purport  of  thy  commission,  said  the 
elephant.     Sir,  replied  the  rabbit,  as 


*  This  name  seems  to  imply  a  blockhfad. 
+  Victory. 

X  The  moon,  which  is  esteemed  of  the  masculine  gender  by  the 
Hindoos. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  177 

*  Ambassadors,  even  when  the  weapons  of  war  are 
lifted  up,  speak  not  otherwise  than  for  the  benefit  of 
their  State  ;  and  although  they  speak  boldly  accord- 
ing as  it  is  their  advantage,  they  are  not  to  be  put 
to  death.' 

Then  I  will  declare  what  are  the  commands  of  the 
god  Chandra.  He  bade  me  say,  that  in  driving 
away,  and  destroying  the  rabbits  who  are  appointed 
to  guard  the  fountain  which  is  consecrated  to  that 
deity,  you  have  done  ill ;  for,  said  he_,  they  are  my 
guards,  and  it  is  notorious  that  the  figure  of  a  rabbit 
is  my  emblem.* 

The  head  elephant,  upon  hearing  this  being  greatly 
alarmed,  declared  that  they  had  offended  through 
ignorance,  and  would  never  go  to  the  fountain  again. 
If  this  be  your  resolution,  said  the  ambassador,  go 

*  The  Hindoo  poets  have  imagined  the  moon  as  a  deity  sitting  in  a 
splendid  chariot  drawn  by  two  antelopes,  holding  in  his  right  hand  a 
rabbit.  This  reminds  the  translator  of  what  he  must  ever  mention 
with  extreme  regret.  He  brought  with  him  from  India  a  large  collec- 
tion of  Hindoo  idols,  amongst  which  was  that  of  the  moon  above 
described.  They  were  moulded  under  his  own  inspection  from  a  set 
of  paintings  lent  him  for  that  purpose,  and  cast  in  metal,  and  of  course 
co&t  him  a  great  deal  of  money.  They  were  exceedingly  well  packed, 
and  arrived  safe  at  the  Custom-house,  whence  they  were  removed  to  one 
of  the  Company's  warehouses,  where  they  were  exposed  to  public  sale ; 
but  having  been  bought  in  by  the  proprietor's  directions  and  carried  to 
his  house  for  the  greater  security  in  a  coach,  upon  opening  the  box 
which  contained  them,  to  his  inexpressible  grief  and  mortification,  he 
discovered  that  they  had  all  been  taken  out  of  the  cotton  in  which  they 
had  been  packed,  and  treated  so  rudely  that  not  a  figure  had  escaped 
without  the  loss  of  some  of  its  members. 


178  THE  HITOPADESA  ; 

this  once,  and  make  your  submissions  before  the 
deity  himself,  whom  you  will  see  in  the  fountain, 
quite  agitated  with  anger;  and  when  you  have 
pacified  him,  you  may  depart. — Accordingly,  as  soon 
as  it  was  night,  the  ambassador  Vijaya  having  con- 
ducted the  chief  of  the  elephants  to  the  fountain, 
there  showed  him  the  image  of  the  moon,  trembling, 
as  it  were,  upon  the  smooth  surface  of  the  water ; 
and  when  he  had  made  him  bow  down  to  it,  in  token 
of  submission,  he  said, — Please  your  divinity !  What 
hath  been  done  having  been  done  through  ignorance, 
I  pray  thee  pardon  them  !  and  upon  saying  this,  he 
caused  the  elephant  to  depart.  I  repeat,  therefore, 
"  Great  things  may  be  effected,"  &c. 

After  that,  continued  the  booby,  I  ventured  to  say, 
that  our  king  too  was  powerful  and  valiant,  upon 
which  they  laid  hold  of  me  with  their  beaks;  and, 
asking  me  what  business  I  had  in  their  country,  they 
carried  me  before  their  chief  Chitra-varna  ;  and  when 
they  had  showed  me  to  him,  bowing  to  their  king, 
they  said, — Please  your  Highness,  let  this  guilty 
booby  be  confined  ;  for  he  dares,  even  whilst  he  is 
travelling  in  our  land,  to  treat  with  contempt  your 
royal  feet !  The  king,  in  anger,  demanded  to  know 
whence  I  came  ;  and  they  informed  him,  that  I  was 
the  servant  of  the  goose  Hiranya-garbha,  and  that  I 
came  from  Karpura-dweepa. — After  that,  the  min- 
ister, who  was   a  vulture,  asked   me  who  was  the 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  179 

prime  minister  in  this  country,  and  I  told  him,  a 
Chakra-vaka,*  whose  name  was  Know-all.t  You 
esteem  him,  replied  the  vulture,  because  he  is  your 
countryman  ;  they  say,  indeed, 

*  A  Ling  should  engage  for  his  minister  one  who  is 
a  native  of  his  own  country;  pure  in  all  his  ways, 
and  cleanly  in  his  dress  ;  not  one  who  is  an  outcast, 
addicted  to  idle  pleasures,  or  too  fond  of  women  ; 
but  one  of  good  repute,  who  is  well  versed  in  the 
rules  of  disputation,  is  of  a  firm  mind,  and  expert  in 
raising  a  revenue.'  % 

A  parrot  next  spoke,  and  observed,  that  as 
Karpura-dweepa  was  comprehended  in  Jambu- 
dweepa,  the  authority  of  his  Majesty's  feet  certainly 
extended  over  that  country  also  ;  to  which  the  king 
of  the  birds  replied, — Thus  it  is  ! 

*  Sovereigns,  the  libidinous,  and  children,  with 
madmen,  and  such  as  are  made  vain  by  riches,  are 
over-anxious  for  what  is  not  attainable,  and  how 
much  more  so,  for  what  is  to  be  procured ! ' 

Upon  this,  I  said, — But  that  too  large  a  govern- 
ment do  not  prosper,  our  sovereign  has  a  territorial 
right,  even  over  Jambu-dweepa. — Let  it  be  declared 


*  A    species    of  goose    commonly  called  Brahmanee-goose.     The 
Hindoos  use  no  grease  to  their  wheels. 
t  In  the  original  Sarva-gna. 
%  Literally,  an  upraiser  of  xvealtJi. 


i8o  THE  HITOPADESA: 

how,  said  the  parrot,  and  where  he  will  give  proofs  of 
it !  And  I  replied, — In  battle !  At  this  their  king 
laughing,  said, — Go  to  thy  master,  and  tell  him  to  be 
well  prepared  ;  and  upon  that,  I  desired  him  to  send 
his  own  ambassador  also.  Who  shall  go  ?  said  the 
king  ;  for  an  embassy  such  a  person  is  required  as  is 
described  in  these  lines  : 

'An  ambassador  should  be  a  trusty  servant,  endued 
with  good  qualifications,  pure  in  his  principles,  clever, 
agreeable,  unaddicted  to  fruitless  pleasures,  patient, 
and,  with  all,  a  Brahman*  who  is  well  acquainted 
with  the  moral  and  religious  customs  of  strangers, 
and  the  nature  of  opposition.* 

Although  there  are  many  such  to  be  found,  still  a 
Brahman  is  to  be  preferred  ;  for, 

'  He  acteth  according  to  the  pleasure  of  his  em- 
ployer ;  he  seeketh  not  wealth,  and  doth  not  with- 
draw himself  from  the  presence  of  his  lord,  even  in 
the  hour  of  misfortune.' 

This  being  the  case,  let  the  parrot  go.  Go,  parrot, 
added  the  king,  along  with  this  person  ;  and,  upon 
thy  arrival,  make  known  our  will.  It  shall  be  accord- 
ing to  your  Highness's  commands,  replied  the  parrot ; 


*  This  title  has  not  hitlierto  been  explained.  As  written  in  Sanskrit, 
it  should  be  Brahmana  ;  but,  as  before  observed,  the  final  short  a  is 
often  dropped  in  repeating  proper  names  in  another  language.  It  is  a 
derivative  from  Brahma^  the  Supreme  Being  ;  godly^  divine^  a  divine. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  iSi 

but  this  booby  is  a  vile  animal,  and  I  am  not  used  to 
go  anywhere  with  a  person  of  bad  character.  They 
say, 

*  A  villain  is  sure  to  commit  some  evil  action,  and 
he  succeedeth  amongst  good  men.  Seeta  was  seized 
by  Ravana.*     The  ocean  may  have  bonds.' t 

It  is  7iot  proper  cither  to  sta}\  or  to  go  anyzuhere, 
along  ivitJi  an  evil-disposed  person.  A  goose  suffered 
for  staying  ivith  a  crozv,  and  a  Varttaka  %  for  going 
with  J  dm. 

How  was  this  }  demanded  the  king  ;  and  the  parrot 
recounted  the  following  story  : 

FABLE  V. 

On  a  private  road  in  Oojjayinee  §  there  was  a  large 
Pippala  tree,  ||  where  lived  together  a  goose  and  a 
crow.  Once  upon  a  time,  in  the  cold  season,  a 
traveller  came  there,  and  having  placed  his  bow  and 
his  arrows  safe  away  under  the  tree,  he  went  to  sleep. 
A  few  minutes  after,  the  shade  of  the  tree  passed 
away  from  his  face,  and  presently  it  was  covered  by 
the  scorching  rays  of  the  sun  ;  upon  seeing  which,  the 

*  Seeta  was  the  wife  of  the  god  Ram,  and  Ravana  the  tyrant  of 
Ceylon. 

+  The  ocean  is  bound  or  confined  by  the  dry  land. 

X  Probably  a  sparrow. 

§  The  ancient  city  commonly  called  Ugein. 

II  The  Indian  poplar,  commonly  called  Peepul. 


i82  THE  HITOPADESA : 

goose,  who  was  in  the  tree,  expanded  his  wings,  and 
again  a  shadow  was  formed  as  before.  A  little  while 
after,  in  the  enjoyment  of  a  sound  nap,  the  man 
happening  to  open  his  mouth,  the  crow  muted  into 
it,  and  flew  out  of  the  way.  But  the  man  waking, 
and  seeing  the  goose  upon  the  tree,  concluded  that  it 
was  he  ;  so,  being  in  a  passion,  he  took  his  bow,  and 
with  an  arrow  drawn  home  to  his  ear,  shot  him  dead 
upon  the  spot.  I  say,  therefore,  "  It  is  not  proper 
to  stay,"  &c.  I  will  now  relate  the  history  of  the 
Varttaka,  continued  the  parrot. 


FABLE  VI. 

Once  upon  a  time,  all  the  birds  of  the  air  went  in  a 
body  upon  a  pilgrimage  to  the  seaside  in  honour  of 
the  eagle ;  and  amongst  the  rest,  the  crow  went 
accompanied  by  a  Varttaka.  As  they  flew  along, 
the  crow  repeatedly  stole  and  ate  of  some  curds  out 
of  a  pot  which  a  farmer  was  carrying  upon  his  head  ; 
but  as  soon  as  the  man  put  the  pot  upon  the  ground, 
and  saw  the  crow  and  the  Varttaka  together  in  the 
air,  the  former,  being  guilty,  flew  out  of  the  way  ;  but 
the  latter,  being  but  slow  of  flight,  was  caught  and 
instantly  killed.  I  say,  therefore,  "It  is  not  proper 
either  to  stay,  or  to  go,"  &c. 

I  then  said, — Brother  parrot,  what  is  the  reason 
thou  railest  thus  against  me  ?     I  esteem  thee,  never- 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  183 

theless,  as  the  feet  of  his  Highness  !  Be  it  so,  replied 
the  parrot ;  but, 

'  When  sincere  and  beloved  friends  are  courted  by 
those  of  bad  character,  it  createth  in  me  as  much 
dread,  as  the  sight  of  flowers  out  of  season/ 

Thy  being  a  rascal  is  made  evident  to  me  from  thy 
conversation ;  for  if  there  should  be  any  falling  out 
between  our  two  masters,  thy  tongue  will  be  the 
cause. 

Observe : 

A  fool  zvill  rejoice  and  be  happy,  even  when  offences 
are  committed  before  his  eyes.  A  certain  wheelwright 
put  his  own  ivife  zvith  Jier gallant  upon  Ids  head. 

How  was  that  ?  said  the  king ;  and  the  parrot 
related  the  following  story  : 

FABLE  VII. 

In  Sree-nagara*  there  lived  a  wheelwright,  whose 
name  was  Dull-wit ;  f  who,  though  he  believed  his 
wife  was  false,  had  never,  with  his  own  eyes,  seen 
her  with  her  gallant.  So  he  pretended  that  he  was 
going  out  of  town,  but  after  he  had  gone  a  little  way, 
be  returned  home,  and  privately  hid  himself  under 
the  sofa.     In  the  meantime,  the  gallant,  supposing 

*  Literally,   the  fortunate  city.     An  ancient  name  of  the  city  of 
Patna. 
t  In  Sanskrit,  Manda-mati. 


i84  THE  HITOPADESA : 

the  wheelwright  was  actually  gone  out  of  town,  made 
his  appearance  ;  and,  soon  after,  sat  by  the  wife  upon 
the  sofa ;  where  they  began  to  converse  without 
restraint.  But  just  now,  from  the  feel  of  something 
touching  the  under  part  of  the  sofa,  she  concluded 
that  her  husband  was  beneath,  and  so  was  a-  little 
disconcerted  ;  upon  which  her  friend  said, — What 
is  the  reason  thou  dost  not  enjoy  the  present 
moment  free  from  care  ?  Thou  appearest  as  if  thou 
wert  alarmed  at  something  !  Alas  !  replied  the  art- 
ful woman,  he  who  is  the  lord  of  my  life  is  gone 
abroad  to-day  ;  wherefore  the  city,  though  ever  so 
full  of  inhabitants,  to  me  appeareth  a  mere  desert ! 
Then  is  thy  wheelwright,  said  the  gallant,  a  subject 
worthy  of  all  this  tenderness  ?  he  who  calls  thee  vile  ? 
Villain  !  exclaimed  she,  what  is  this  thou  sayest  ? 
Hear  me ! 

'  She  is  a  virtuous  woman,  who,  when  spoken 
harshly  to,  and  viewed  with  angry  eyes,  appeareth 
before  her  husband  with  a  mild  and  placid  counte- 
nance. 

*  The  regions  of  eternal  happiness  are  provided  for 
those  women,  who  love  their  husbands  the  same  in 
wilderness  as  in  a  city  ;  be  he  a  saint,  or  be  he  a] 
sinner. 

*  A  husband  is  a  woman's  first  ornament,  althougl 
himself  be  unadorned  :  but  when  she  is  without  one 
be  she  ornamented,  she  is  not  adorned.' 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  185 

Thou  art  very  fine,  to  be  sure,  and  hast  the  appear- 
ance of  a  figure  made  up  of  garlands  and  flowers. 
Pray,  do  people  ever  worship  thee  ?  *  My  husband, 
if  he  chooses,  can  sell  me  to  the  gods,  or  give  me  to 
the  Brahmans  ;  f  but  what  of  that  ? 

*  I  live  in  him  living,  and  in  him,  my  beloved,  will 
I  live  when  dead  ;  for  upon  his  death,  to  die  after 
him  is  my  firm  resolve.' 

For, 

*  The  woman  who  foUoweth  her  husband  \  may 
remain  in  heaven  for  a  million  and  a  half  of  years,  or 
for  as  many  as  there  are  hairs  upon  the  body. 

'As  the  snake-catcher  by  force  draweth  up  the 
serpent  from  its  hole ;  so,  having  taken  her  husband, 
she  is  to  be  raised  into  heaven. § 

*  Him  should  she  attend  whilst  living,  and  him 
should  she  sleep  with  when  dead,  to  whom  her  father 

*  As  they  are  wont  to  do  their  idols,  when  adorned  with  garlands, 
and  scented  with  sanders. 

+  By  the  laws  of  Manoo  the  Brahmans  are  allowed  to  marry  three 
wives,  one  from  each  of  the  first  three  tribes.  But  this  sentence  cannot 
allude  to  that ;  it  should  rather  seem  to  refer  to  the  nara-viedka,  or 
human  sacrifice,  not  uncommon  in  the  earlier  ages.  It  is  not  easy  to 
conceive  for  what  other  purpose  this  good  woman  could  be  sold  to  the 
gods,  or  given  to  the  Bj-ahmans. 

X  The  woman  who  voluntarily  burneth  herself  upon  the  funeral  pile 
wiih  the  dead  corpse  of  her  husband  ;  which  is  very  common,  on  the 
banks  of  the  Ganges,  at  this  day. 

§  The  meaning  of  this  verse  seems  to  be  simply  this,  that  the  woman 
who  followeth  her  husband  in  death  will  necessarily  be  raised  into 
heaven. 


i86  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

may  have  given  her,  or  her  brother  according  to  her 
father's  will.'  * 

The  foolish  wheelwright,  upon  hearing  all  these 
fine  speeches,  said  to  himself, — O  what  a  lucky  fellow 
I  am,  to  possess  a  wife  who  can  speak  of  me  with 
such  tender  love  and  affection !  and,  saying  this,  he 
rose  with  the  sofa  and  its  contents,  and  began  to 
dance  for  joy.     I  repeat,  therefore,  "A  fool,"  &c. 

After  this,  continued  the  booby,  as  soon  as  the 
king  had  paid  me  the  usual  compliments,  I  was  dis- 
missed, and  the  parrot  is  coming  behind.     And  now 
that  I  have  apprised  your  Highness  of  all  this,  let 
that    which    is    most    proper    be    pursued.     What 
exclaimed  the  minister  Chakra-vaka,  the  king's  affaii 
have  been  forwarded,  to  the  utmost  of  his  abilities^ 
by  a  booby,  who  happened  to  travel  into  a  foreigt 
country !     But,  please  your  Highness,  he  has  acte( 
according  to  his  nature. 

'  One  may  give  him  a  hundred  instances  from  Holj 
Writ,  that  he  should  not  dispute  ;  still,  it  is  th( 
character  of  a  fool  to  make  a  disturbance  without 
cause.' 

Have  done  with  these  reproachful  sayings  !  sai( 
the  royal  goose,  and  attend  to  what  has  been  rc^ 


*  The  laws  of  Manoo  have  given  the  fathei"  full  authority  over  hifl 
daughters  with  respect  to  marriage. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS,  187 

ported.  Please  your  Highness,  replied  the  minister, 
I  will  speak  to  you  in  private  ;  for, 

*  Those  who  ai  e  aware  of  it  can  interpret  the  mind 
from  the  changes  of  the  eyes  and  other  members ; 
and  even  by  the  report  of  shape  and  complexion.* 

And  upon  this,  the  rest  withdrav/ing,  the  king  and 
his  minister  were  left  by  themselves.  I  think,  said 
the  minister,  that  this  has  been  brought  about  by  a 
spy  sent  by  some  officer  of  our  government.*  They 
say, 

'  A  sick  man  is  the  best  subject  for  a  physician, 
and  an  active  emissary  for  the  officers  of  govern- 
ment ;  fools  are  the  support  of  the  learned,  and  a 
man  of  secrecy  suits  a  king.' 

Let  the  cause  alone,  said  the  king  ;  at  present  it 
should  be  determined  what  ought  to  be  done;  then 
say.  First,  please  your  Highness,  replied  the  minister, 
let  a  spy  be  sent,  and  then  we  shall  learn  the  situa- 
tion of  the  country,  with  its  strength  and  weakness  ; 
for  they  say, 

*  A  prince  should  have  a  spy  to  observe  what  is 
necessary,  and  what  is  unnecessary,  to  be  done  in  his 
own,  as  well  as  in  his  enemy^s  country.  He  is  the 
king's  eye ;  and  he  who  hath  him  not  is  blind.' 

*  Does  he  mean  that  some  officer  of  their  government  had  sent  the 
booby,  of  his  own  authority,  on  purpose  to  pick  a  quarrel  with  the 
subjects  of  the  peacock? 


1 88  THE  HITOPADESA: 

And  let  him  take  a  second  person  with  him,  in  whom 
he  can  confide  ;  whom  he  shall  send  back,  well  di,^ 
guised,  charged  with  such  secrets  as  are  worthy  to  be 
communicated ;  whilst  he  himself  remains  upon  the 
spot 

*  He  should  command  his  emissaries  to  go  dis- 
guised in  company  with  those  penitents,  who  travel 
with  beards  under  pretence  of  studying  in  the  courts 
of  temples^  and  places  of  holy  visitation.'  * 

The  emissary  we  send  should  be  one  who  will  go 
about  privately,  and  who  will  pass  through  land  and 
water  ;  and  I  know  of  no  one,  except  the  booby,  who 
is  endued  with  both  these  requisites ;  wherefore,  let 
him  be  appointed.  In  the  meantime,  let  all  the  in- 
habitants keep  within  our  castle  ;  and,  till  the  mes- 
senger return,  let  profound  secrecy  be  pursued  ;  for, 

'The  deliberations  of  council  are  discovered  if 
heard  by  six  ears,  as  well  as  any  private  information; 
wherefore,  a  king  should  entrust  his  counsels  only  to 
himself  and  a  second  person. 

*  The  injury  which  is  done  to  princes,  from  their 
counsels  being  discovered,  are  not  to  be  repaired,  Sc 
those  who  are  acquainted  with  the  rules  of  policy.' 

Well,  said  the  king,  now   I  have  found  such 

*  Spies  and  private  messengers,  at  this  day,  are  generally  disguis 
as  pilgrims  or  mendicants,  which  characters  are  sacred  in  every  part  of 
India. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  189 

excellent  emissary,  what  next  ?  Your  Highness,  re- 
plied the  minister,  hath  but  to  enter  the  field  of 
battle,  and  victory  will  follow. 

They  were  now  interrupted  by  the  entrance  of  one 
of  the  guards,  who  informed  them,  that  there  was  a 
parrot  waiting  at  the  gate,  just  come  from  Jambu- 
dweepa.  The  king  looked  at  the  minister,  and  the 
minister  said, — Lead  him  into  a  separate  apartment, 
and  some  time  hence  he  may  be  admitted.  Accord- 
ing to  the  commands  of  his  Highness  !  said  the  guard  ; 
upon  which  he  went  away,  taking  the  parrot  with 
him. 

So,  said  the  king,  Discord  is  arrived,  and  is  in 
attendance  !  Yes,  please  your  Highness,  replied  the 
minister  ;  but  discord  is  not  necessity.* 

'  Is  he  a  minister,  or  a  counsellor,  who,  upon  the 
first  alarm,  and  without  due  consideration,  adviseth 
his  sovereign  either  to  commence  hostilities,  or  to 
quit  his  ground  ? 

*  A  wise  man  may  strive  to  conquer,  but  he  should 
never  fight ;  because  victory,  it  is  observed,  cannot  be 
constant  to  both  the  combatants. 

'  A  man  should  never  display  his  bravery  who  I^ 
unprepared  for  battle ;  nor  bear  the  marks  of  de- 
fiance, until  he  hath  experienced  the  abilities  of  his 
enemy. 

*  This  expression  is  fully  explained  by  the  vene  which  follows  it. 


i9(>  THE  HITOPADESA : 

*  Not  more  easily  is  a  house*  supported  by  man- 
kind with  a  prop,  than  great  achievements  from 
trifling  means.     Tiiis  is  the  great  fruit  of  councils.' 

But  when  we  perceive  that  we  are  threatened  with 
war,  let  preparations  be  made  ;  for, 

*  The  field  is  fruitful  from  having  been  cultivated  in 
due  season.  It  is  the  same  with  political  measures  ; 
but  these  too  advance  slowly,  not  instantly,  to 
maturity. 

*  When  the  quality  of  bravery  is  near,  a  great 
man's  terrors  are  at  a  distance.  In  the  hour  of  fhis- 
fortune  such  a  great  man  overcometh  bravery. 

*  Great  warmth,  at  first,  is  the  certain  ruin  of  every 
great  achievement.  Doth  not  water,  although  ever 
so  cool;  moisten  the  earth  > ' 

Besides,  an'  please  your  Highness,  king  Chitra-varna 
is  very  strong ;  and, 

'  There  is  no  ordinance  obliging  us  to  fight  those 
who  are  stronger  than  ourselves.  Such  fighting,  as 
it  were,  with  an  elephant,  is  the  same  as  men's  fight- 
ing against  rocks. 

'  He  is  a  fool  who  turncth  upon  his  opponent, 
before  he  hath  found  a  proper  opportunity.  The 
efforts  of  him,  who  contendeth  with  one  stronger 

*  The  original  x^greevay  the  neck,  which  the  translator  has  presumed 
a  mistake  for  greehtti  a  house. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  191 

than  himself,  are  as  feeble  as  the  exertions  of  an 
insect^s  wings. 

*  A  prudent  soldier,  keeping  within  his  tortoise-like 
shelter,^  niay,  indeed,  sustain  the  force  of  arms  ;  and 
when  CwCasion  may  suit,  he  may  sally  forth  like  an 
enraged  serpent."' 

Please  your  Highness,  attend  to  this  : 

'  One  who  is  master  of  ever  so  little  art  may  be 
able,  on  a  great  occasion,  to  root  up  trees  with  as 
much  ease,  as  the  current  of  a  river  the  reeds  and 
grass.' 

Then  let  this  ambassador,  the  parrot,  be  detained  and 
amused,  until  we  shall  have  put  our  fortifications  m 
good  condition. 

*  A  single  bowman  standing  upon  the  battlements 
fighteth  a  hundred  ;  and  a  hundred,  ten  thousand  : 
wherefore,  a  castle  is  to  be  preferred. 

*  What  sovereign,  whose  country  is  furnished  with 
strongholds,  is  subject  to  defeat  1  The  prince  of  a 
country,  without  strongholds,  is  as  a  man  w^ho  is  an 
outcast  of  his  tribe. 

*  He  should  build  a  castle  with  a  large  ditch  and 
lofty  battlements,  and  furnish  it  with  machines  for 
raising  water ;  and  its  situation  should  be  in  a  wood 
upon  a  hill,  and  where  there  are  springs  of  fresh 
water. 

*  Figuratively,  a  castle  or  fortress. 


192  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

'  It  should  be  spacious,  but  very  uneven ;  and  sup- 
plied with  large  store  of  liquor,  grain,  and  money  ; 
and  with  gates  and  sally-ports  ;  for  these  are  the 
seven  treasures  of  a  castle.'  * 

lit. 
Who,  demanded  the  king,  should  be  appointed  to 

prepare  our  castle  ?     The  minister  replied, 

*  Every  one  should  be  employed  in  that  business 
he  is  best  acquainted  with.  One  who  hath  had  no 
experience  in  civil  affairs,  although  he  may  be  a  good 
soldier,  would  be  at  a  loss  in  business  of  that  kind.' 

Then  let  the  Sarasaf  be  called,  concluded  the 
minister.  This  being  done  accordingly,  and  the 
Sarasa  arrived,  the  king  gave  him  encouragement, 
and  told  him  to  put  the  castle  in  good  order.  The 
Sarasa,  bowing,  replied, — Please  your  Highness,  the 
castle  has  lately  been  well  examined.  There  is  a 
large  reservoir  in  it,  in  the  centre  there  is  an  island, 
in  which  it  is  proper  that  there  should  be  a  store  of 
grain  laid  up. 

*  A  store  of  grain,  O  king!  is  the  best  of  store 
A  gem  cast  into  the  mouth  will  not  support  life. 

*  Of  all  sapid  things,  salt  being  esteemed  the  fii 


*  This  and  the  preceding  verse  form  a  tolerable  picture  of  a  liinc 
fort. 

t  That  beautiful  tall  bird  of  the  stork  species,  commonly  callec 
Syrus. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS,  193 

some  should  be  laid  in ;  for  without  it  the  beard  is 
Sedaubed.'  '^ 

'  Go  then,  said  the  king,  and  attend  to  what  is 
necessary  to  be  done.  Just  now  a  doorkeeper  came 
in,  and  said, — Please  your  Highness,  one  Cloud- 
colour,t  a  crow,  is  just  arrived  from  Singhala- 
dweepa,t  who,  with  his  attendants,  desires  to  behold 
the  foot  of  your  Highness.  A  crow,  said  the  king,  is 
a  wise  bird,  and  a  great  observer  of  things  ;  and  that 
being  the  case,  let  him  be  received.  He  is  so,  replied 
the  minister  ;  but  a  crow  is  a  land  bird,  and  con- 
sequently of  a  different  party  to  us ;  how  then  can 
he  be  received  in  contempt  of  our  own  party  .^  It  is 
said, 

The  fool  who  forsaketh  his  oivn  party,  and  delighteth 
to  dwell  with  the  opposite  side,  may  be  killed  by  them  ; 
as  was  the  case  with  the  blue  jackal. 

How  was  this  \  demanded  the  king ;  and  the 
minister  related  as  follows  : 

FABLE  VIII. 

A  CERTAIN  jackal,  as  he  was  roaming  about  the 
borders  of  a  town,  just  as  his  inclinations  led  him,  fell 

*  This  is  probably  some  vulgar  saying,  which  is  not  always  founded 
upon  truth. 
t  In  the  original,  m^gha-varna. 
X  The  island  of  Ceylon, 

a 


194 


THE  HITOPADESA 


into  a  dyer's  vat  ;*  but  being  unable  to  get  out,  in 
the  morning  he  feigned  himself  dead.  At  length, 
the  master  of  the  vat,  which  was  filled  with  indigo, 
came,  and  seeing  a  jackal  lying  with  his  legs  upper- 
most, his  eyes  closed,  and  his  teeth  bare,  concluded 
that  he  was  dead,  and  so,  taking  him  out,  he  carried 
him  a  good  way  from  the  town,  and  there  left  him, 
The  sly  animal  instantly  got  up,  and  ran  into  the 
woods;  when,  observing  that  his  coat  was  turned 
blue,  he  meditated  in  this  manner  : — I  am  now  of  the 
finest  colour  !  what  great  exaltation  may  I  not  bring 
about  for  myself  ?  Saying  this,  he  called  a  number- 
of  jackals  together,  and  addressed  them  in  the  follow- 
ing words, — Know  that  I  have  lately  been  sprinkled  t 
king  of  the  forests,  by  the  hands  of  the  goddess  her- 
self who  presides  over  these  woods,  with  a  water 
drawn  from  a  variety  of  choice  herbs.  Observe  my 
colour,  and  henceforward  let  every  business  be 
transacted  according  to  my  orders.  The  rest  of  the 
jackals,  seeing  him  of  such  a  fine  complexion,  pros- 
trated themselves  before  him,  and  said, — According 
as  your  Highness  commands  !  By  this  step  he  made 
himself  honoured  by  his  own  relations,  and  so  gained 
the  supreme  power  over  those  of  his  own  species,  as 
well  as  all  the  other  inhabitants  of  the  forests.     But 


*  A  dyer's  vat,  in  Hindostan,  is  a  large  pan  sunk  in  the  ground, 
often  in  the  little  court  before  the  dyer's  house. 
t  The  Hindoos  use  holy  water  instead  of  oil. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  19S 

after  a  while,  finding  himself  surrounded  by  a  levee 
of  the  first  quality,  such  as  the  tiger  and  the  like,  he 
began  to  look  down  upon  his  relations ;  and,  at 
length,  he  kept  them  at  a  distance.  A  certain  old 
jackal  perceiving  that  his  brethren  were  very  much 
cast  down  at  this  behaviour,  cried, — Do  not  despair  1 
If  it  continue  thus,  this  imprudent  friend  of  ours  will 
force  us  to  be  revenged.  Let  me  alone  to  contrive 
his  dowfall.  The  lion,  and  the  rest  who  pay  him 
court,  are  taken  by  his  outward  appearance ;  and 
they  obey  him  as  their  king,  because  they  are  not 
aware  that  he  is  nothing  but  a  jackal :  do  something 
then  by  which  he  may  be  found  out.  Let  this  plan 
be  pursued  :  Assemble  all  of  you  in  a  body  about 
the  close  of  the  evening,*  and  set  up  one  general 
howl  in  his  hearing  ;  and  TU  warrant  you,  the  natural 
disposition  of  his  species  will  incline  him  to  join  in 
the  cry ;  for, 

'  Whatever  may  be  the  natural  propensity  of  any 
one,  is  very  hard  to  be  overcome.  If  a  dog  were 
made  king,  would  he  not  gnaw  his  shoe  straps  ?  * 

And  thus,  the  tiger  discovering  that  he  is  nothing 
but  a  jackal,  will  presently  put  him  to  death.  In 
short,  concluded  the  minister,  the  plan  was  executed) 

*  The  jackals  seldom  make  their  appearance  till  after  sunset,  wheii 
■■^ey  sally  forth  in  large  troops,  and  "  font  retentir  Fair  de  leurs  aboye- 
mens,"  as  the  compiler  of  "Description  Historique  et  Geographique 
de  rinde,"  expresses  it.     Tome  i.  p.  37. 


196  THE  HITOPADESA : 

and  the  event  was  just  as  it  had  been  foretold.    They 
say, 

'  An  intimate  enemy  is  acquainted  with  everything 
which  relateth  to  one  :  our  blemishes,  our  hearts,  and 
our  degree  of  courage.' 

I  repeat,  therefore,  *'  The  fool,"  &c. 

Although  it  be  thus,  replied  the  king,  still  as  he  is 
come  a  great  way,  let  him  appear ;  for  such  is  the 
resolution  of  inquiries  made  respecting  whom  we 
ought  to  entertain.— Please  your  Highness,  said  the 
minister,  the  spy  is  despatched,  and  the  castle  is  put 
in  complete  order,  wherefore  the  parrot  should  receive 
assurances  of  our  pacific  disposition,  and  be  permitted 
to  depart.     But, 

*  As  it  is  possible  that  the  revolutions  of  council 
may  be  defeated  by  the  designs  of  a  sharp  ambas- 
sador, a  sovereign  should  always  regard  him  as  a  spy.' 

After  this  a  council   was  formed,   and   both   the 
parrot  and  the  crow  were  desired  to  attend.     The 
parrot,  with  a  slight   inclination  of  his  head,  seated 
himself  upon  a  stool  which  was  presented  to  him,  and  .j 
then  delivered  his  commission  in  the  following  words  :  d 
— Sir,  the  most  illustrious  Maha-rajah*  Chitra-varna  ? 
commandeth  thee,  Hiranya-garbha,  if  thou  hast  any  ^ 


*  Literally,  great  Rajah.    A  title  in  these  days  by  no  means  confined 
to  men  of  royal  or  even  noble  extraction. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS,  197 

occasion  for  life  or  fortune,  instantly  to  repair  into 
his  presence,  and  prostrate  thyself  at  his  feet ;  or  else, 
to  think  of  retiring  to  live  in  some  other  country  ! 
The  king-,  in  anger,  exclaimed, — Ha  !  have  we  no  one 
about  us  ?  The  crow,  Cloud-colour,  instantly  rose 
up  and  cried  out, — Give  but  the  word,  and  I  will  kill 
this  infamous  parrot !  In  the  meantime,  the  minister, 
who  was  engaged  in  pacifying  the  king,  repeated 
these  lines  : 

'  That  is  not  a  council,  wherein  there  are  no  sages  ; 
they  are  not  sages,  who  do  not  declare  men's  duty ; 
that  is  not  a  duty,  in  which  there  is  not  virtue;  and 
that  is  not  virtue  from  which  fear  approacheth  us.' 

The  law  speaks  thus  :  but,  moreover,  this  parrot  is  a 
Brahman  ;  and  they  say  also, 

*  An  ambassador,  although  he  be  a  barbarian,  is 
not  to  be  put  to  death ;  for  he  is  only  the  mouth  of 
his  master :  no,  not  even  when  the  weapons  of  war 
are  lifted  up  ;  and  how  much  less,  if  he  be  a  Brah- 
man ! 

*  An  ambassador  never  payeth  any  regard  either  to 
his  own  inferiority,  or  others'  superiority  ;  but  under 
the  decree  of  fate,  that  he  is  not  punishable,  he 
speaketh  without  reserve.' 

Upon  hearing  these  maxims,  both  the  king  and  the 
crow  were  pacified  ;  and  the  parrot  got  up  and  went 
away.     But  upon   a  motion  of  the  minister's,  things 


19^  THE  HITOPADESA  i 

having  been  explained  to  him,  he  was  brought  back, 
and  dismissed  with  presents  of  golden  ornaments, 
rich  dresses,  and  the  like. 

The  parrot  returned  to  the  Vindhya  mountains, 
where  paying  his  respects  to  Chitra-varna  his  own 
sovereign,  the  king  no  sooner  perceived  him,  than  he 
called  out, — Well,  parrot,  what  intelligence  hast  thou 
brought  me  ?  What  sort  of  a  country  is  it  ?  Please 
your  Highness,  replied  the  parrot,  the  sum  of  my  in- 
telligence is  this, — Let  preparations  be  made  for  war ! 
As  to  the  country,  it  is  a  portion  of  the  heavenly 
regions  ;  then  how  is  it  possible  to  describe  it  ?  The 
peacock  king,  upon  hearing  this,  sent  for  his  chiefs, 
and  sat  down  to  consult  with  them.  On  the  subject 
of  the  war,  said  the  king,  which  is  presently  to  be 
entered  into,  advise  what  is  proper  to  be  done ;  for, 
again  I  say,  war  is  absolutely  resolved  upon.  They 
say, 

^  Brahmans  are  ruined  when  discontented,  like 
sovereigns  when  contented.  Modesty  is  ruin  to  a 
harlot,  and  immodesty  to  women  of  good  repute.' 

Amongst  the  rest,  there  was  a  vulture  whose  name 
was  Far-see,*  who  arose  and  said, — Please  your  High- 
ness, Fate  would  not  be  idle  in  fighting  with  thee ; 
for, 

*  When  sons,  with  friends  and  attendants,  are  firmly 

*  In  the  original,  doora-darsee. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  ,gg 

attached,  and  in  opposition  to  the  enemy,  then  war 
may  be  commenced.' 

Let  my  minister  observe  what  I  am  about  to  order, 
said  the  king  ;  let  the  services  of  these  my  officers  be 
engaged  by  an  advance  of  a  part  of  their  pay ;  and 
then  let  the  soothsayer  *  be  called,  and  let  him  fix 
upon  a  lucky  moment  t  for  us  to  begin  our  march. 
Yet,  please  your  Highness,  observed  the  minister,  it 
is  not  proper  to  march  rashly  ;  for  they  say, 

*  Those  fools  who  rashly,  and  without  investigation, 
rush  upon  the  forces  of  the  enemy,  will  doubtlessly 
be  embraced  with  the  edges  of  their  swords.' 

Minister,  replied  the  king,  thou  shouldst  not  en- 
deavour to  break  the  force  of  my  ardour.  Tell  me 
rather  how  one  who  wishes  for  conquest  advanceth 
into  the  country  of  the  enemy.  Please  your  High- 
ness, said  the  minister,  this  subject  too  if  pursued 
may  yield  fruit ;  for  they  say, 

'What  is  the  use  of  advice  given  to  a  sovereign- 
according  to  the  authority  of  books,  if  it  be  not  fol- 
lowed ?  A  patient  will  never  recover  his  health 
merely  from  the  description  of  a  medicine.' 

*  The  Hindoos  of  the  present  age  do  not  undertake  any  affair  of 
consequence  without  consulting  their  astrologers,  who  are  always 
Brahmans. 

t  The  lucky  and  unlucky  days  are  generally  pointed  out  in  their 
almanacs,  but  as  these  are  always  written  in  Sanskrit,  none  but  the 
Brahmans  can  explain  them. 


200  THE  HITOPADESA : 

But  as  the  commands  of  majesty  are  not  to  be 
neglected,  I  will  proceed  to  repeat  what  I  have  heard 
upon  the  subject  of  war.  Please  to  attend,  your 
Highness  : 

'  Troops,  with  everything  which  can  make  them  for- 
midable, should  be  stationed  upon  the  rivers,  upon 
the  mountains,  in  the  woods,  in  the  strongholds,  and 
wherever  else  there  is  danger. 

'  The  Adhyaksha*  should  march  before,  accom- 
panied by  the  bravest  men ;  in  the  centre  the 
seragl;o,t  the  swamee,J  the  treasure  chest,  the  maga- 
zines of  provisions,  and  everything  else  which  may 
be  valuable. 

*  On  each  flank  the  horse,  on  the  two  flanks  of  the 
horse  the  chariots,§  on  the  two  flanks  of  the  chariots 
the  elephants,  and  on  the  two  flanks  of  the  elephants 
the  foot.II 

*  In  the  rear  should  march  the  Sena-patilf  occasion- 
ally  encouraging  such   as   seem   to  be  melancholy. 


*  Literally,  overseer.  Probably  an  officer  like  our  quartermaster- 
general. 

t  The  original  word  is  kalatraniy  which  signifies  either  wives  or  a 
place  of  safety. 

X  This  word  in  the  common  acceptation  means  tnaster;  but  in  this 
place,  probably,  either  the  prince,  or  his  commander-in-chief. 

§  Although  these  are  disused  in  battle  at  present,  they  are  constantly 
mentioned  in  their  ancient  books,  as  a  necessary  part  of  an  army. 

II  The  horse,  chariots,  elephants,  and  foot,  are,  in  Sanskrit,  called 
the  four  mem  hers  of  an  army. 

^  Literally,  army -mast  r;  a  gcnc:al. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  201 

And  the  king  should  take  the  field  accompanied  by 
his  counsellors  and  choicest  heroes. 

*  The  uneven  ground,  swampy  places,  and  hills, 
should  be  cleared  by  the  elephants ;  the  plains  by 
the  horse,  the  rivers  by  boats,  and  the  foot  should  be 
employed  everywhere. 

'  Upon  the  arrival  of  the  rains  it  is  best  to  march 
with  elephants  only,  they  say  ;  but  at  other  times, 
with  all  the  four  distinction  of  troops. 

*  Amongst  hills,  and  in  narrow  passes,  it  is  proper 
that  the  chief  should  be  guarded  by  some  of  his  best 
troops  ;  and  the  same  when  he  is  asleep,  with  watch- 
ful care. 

'  The  army  should  strive  to  destroy,  and  distress 
the  enemy  by  rolling  stones  down  from  the  tops  of 
steep  places  ;  *  and  as  soon  as  they  enter  the  enemy's 
country,  the  Attavikat  should  be  formed  before. 

*  Wherever  the  chief  is,  there  should  the  treasure 
chest  be  ;  for  without  treasure  there  is  no  superiority. 
And  some  of  it  should  be  distributed  amongst  the 
principal  officers ;  for  who  will  not  fight  for  one  who 
giveth  freely  ? 

'Man  is  not  a  servant  for  the  man,  but  for  the 
thing.  A  chief's  consequence,  or  insign'ficance,  de- 
pendeth  upon  his  having  wealth,  or  no  wealth. 

*  It  is  common  to  s:e  stones,  formed  round  for  this  purpose,  placed 
upon  the  parapets  of  Hindoo  fortresses,  at  this  day. 

+  These  seem  to  liave  been  hatchet-men  ox  pioneers. 


202  THE  HITOPADESA : 

'  The  troops  should  fight  without  breaking ;  and 
they  should  defend  one  another.  Whatever  military 
stores  there  may  be  should  be  put  in  the  centre  of 
the  ranks. 

*  And  when  the  chief  hath  given  check  to  the 
enemy,  he  should  endeavour  to  distress  the  country. 
Upon  level  ground  he  should  fight  with  chariots  and 
his  horse  ;  and  in  places  overflowed  with  water,  either 
with  boats  or  elephants. 

*  Amongst  trees  and  bushes  he  should  fight  with 
bows  and  arrows ;  and  upon  open  ground,  with 
sword  and  shield.  And  he  should  always  endeavour 
to  destroy,  or  render  useless,  the  enemy's  straw,  corn, 
water,  and  firewood. 

*  He  should  destroy  likewise  their  reservoirs,  their 
ramparts,  and  their  ditches  and  trenches.  The 
chief's  elephants  should  be  the  first  in  the  army,  and 
not  disordered. 

*They  say,  he  who  fighteth  with  elephants  and 
camels,  fighteth,  as  it  were,  with  his  own  arms.  The 
horse  is  the  strength  of  the  army.  The  horse  is  as  a 
moving  bulwark. 

*  Wherefore,  the  chief  who  hath  most  horse  in  a  land 
fight  IS  victorious.  Those  who  fight  mounted  on 
horses  are  hard  to  be  defeated,  even  by  the  hosts  of 
heaven ;  for  let  the  enemy  be  at  ever  so  great  a 
distance,  they  are,  as  it  were,  in  their  hands. 

'  The   chief  employment   for  the  foot  is  fighting, 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  203 

guarding  the  whole  army,  and  clearing  the  roads 
about. 

'  The  best  kind  of  troops  are  declared  to  be  those 
who  are  naturally  brave,  skilled  in  the  exercise  of 
arms,  attached,  inured  to  fatigue,  renowned,  and 
soldier-like. 

'■  Men,  O  prince,  do  not  fight  so  well  in  this  world, 
even  for  very  large  pecuniary  rewards,  as  for  honours 
bestowed  by  their  commander. 

*  A  small  army  consisting  of  chosen  troops  is  far 
better  than  a  vast  body  chiefly  composed  of  rabble ; 
for  when  the  bad  give  way,  the  good  are  inevitably 
broken  in  consequence. 

*  He  who  wishelh  for  victory  should  endeavour  to 
harass  the  enemy  without  distressing  his  own  troops. 
An  enemy's  army  which  has  been  harassed  for  a 
long  time,  may  be  easily  defeated. 

'  There  is  not  a  better  counsellor  than  a  competitor, 
for  the  overthrow  of  an  enemy;  wherefore  great 
pains  should  be  taken  to  raise  such  a  claimant. 

'  Having  entered  into  a  confederacy  with  some  one 
amongst  the  chief's  sons,  or  with  one  of  his  principal 
counsellors,  at  length,  it  will  be  proper,  with  a  firm 
resolution,  to  provoke  him  to  fight. 

'  And  when  a  chief  shall  have  given  him  an  over- 
throw by  means  of  his  nearest  friends,  he  may  put  his 
enemy  to  death.'  * 

*  This  verse  is  defective  in  the  original. 


204  THE  HirOPADESA : 

What  is  the  use  of  saying  so  much  upon  the 
subject  ?  said  the  king,  interrupting  him  : 

*  One's  own  exaltation  is  another's  tribulation,  and 
both,  they  say,  is  policy.  Having  granted  this,  our 
fine  language  is  contradicted  by  our  actions.'* 

The  minister,  smiling  at  this,  replied, — It  is  en- 
tirely so  ;  but, 

*  One  is  lofty,  powerful,  and  a  villain ;  whilst 
another  is  guided  and  restrained  by  moral  laws. 
When  shall  we  find  the  same  superiority  in  light  and 
darkness } '  t 

At  length  the  king  got  up  and  resolved  to  march 
at  the  time  appointed  by  his  astrologer  ;  but  just 
now  the  Purohitai  met  him,  accompanied  by  a  spy, 
and  told  him,  that  king  Chitra-varna  was  almost 
arrived,  and  that  at  present  he  was  near  the  Mala}'a 
mountains;  that  the  construction  of  a  castle  was 
instantly  to  be  resolved,  for  the  vulture  was  a  very 
wise  minister ;  and  that  from  the  tenor  of  his  con- 
versation there  was  reason  to  believe,  that  he  had  a 
spy  even  then  within  the  castle.  To  all  this  the 
minister  replied,  that  if  there  was  a  spy,  it  could  be 
no   one  but  the  crow,  whom  they  had  entertained. 


*  Morality  forbids  us  to  advance  our  fortunes  at  the  expense  of 
others  ;  but  policy  pays  no  attention  to  this  injunction, 
t  Good  and  evil. 
\  Spiritual  guide. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  205 

That  can  never  be,  replied  the  king  ;  for  if  he  had 
been  so,  how  came  it  to  pass  that  he  showed  such 
readiness  to  punish  the  parrot  ?  And  besides,  war 
was  not  resolved  till  very  lately  upon  the  return  of 
their  ambassador  the  parrot.  Nevertheless,  answered 
the  minister,  it  is  proper  to  suspect  one  who  came  to 
us  as  he  did.  True,  replied  the  king,  provided  he  be 
guilty  of  any  improper  action  ;  but, 

'  A  stranger,  if  well-disposed,  is  a  friend  ;  but  a 
friend,  if  ill-disposed  towards  one,  is  a  stranger.  A 
distemper,  although  generated  in  the  body,  is 
malignant;  whilst  a  drug  produced  in  the  woods 
proveth  salutary.' 

King  Subhraka  had  a  servant^  by  name  Veera-vara^ 
who  in  a  very  short  time  offered  up  his  ozvn  son. 

How  was  that }  said  the  minister ;  and  the  king 
related  the  following  tale  : 

FABLE   IX. 

In  former  days  I  used  to  amuse  myself  with  a  certain 
female  of  my  own  species,  whose  name  was  Karpoora- 
manjaree,*  and  who  was  the  daughter  of  the  royal 
gander  Karpoora-keli,  in  a  pleasure  lake  belonging  to 
king  Subhraka.  One  day  a  young  man,  whose  name 
was  Veera-vara,  and   who   proved   to   be  a  Rajah- 

*  White  pearl. 


2o6  THE  HITOPADESA : 

putra*  come  from  some  distant  country,  presented 
himself  before  the  porter  who  stood  at  the  king's 
gate,  and  addressed  him  in  the  following  words  : — I 
am  a  soldier  in  search  of  employment ;  pray  procure 
me  a  sight  of  the  king.  The  porter  went  to  his 
master^  and,  bowing,  told  him  that  there  was  a  soldier 
at  the  gate,  just  arrived  from  some  distant  country, 
who  said  his  name  was  Veera-vara  ;  and  the  king 
commanded  him  to  be  introduced.  Accordingly,  the 
porter  conducted  the  stranger  into  the  presence  of  his 
master ;  to  whom,  respectfully  bowing,  he  addressed 
himself  as  follows  ; — Sir,  if  thou  hast  any  occasion 
for  my  service,  let  my  pay  be  fixed.  The  king  asked 
him,  how  much  ?  and  he  replied,  four  hundred 
suvarnas  t  a  day.  What  weapons  hast  thou .?  de- 
manded the  king.  My  two  arms,  replied  the  soldier, 
and  my  sword,  which  makes  a  third.  This  will  not 
do,  concluded  the  king;  upon  which  the  soldier 
bowedj  and  took  his  leave.  The  minister  happening 
to  be  present,  said, — Please  your  Highness,  give  him 
four  days'  pay,  and  learn  what  sort  of  a  man  he  is, 
and  what  assistance  he  can  be  of.  According  to  the 
minister's  advice,  the  man  being  called  back,  they 
gave  him  Tamboola,J  and  four  days'  pay  in  advance  ; 

*  Literally,  the  son  oj  a  Rajah.  A  warlike  tribe,  commonly  called 
Rajpoots. 

+  Gold  coins. 

X  The  betel  leaf;  but,  in  this  place,  the  whole  composition  com- 
monly called  />azvn  by  the  natives  of  Bengal,  and  /v/^/  by  the  Euro 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS,  207 

to  the  expenditure  of  which  the  king  very  privately- 
attended,  and  found  that  he  gave  one  moiety  to  the 
gods  and  the  Brahmans,  one-fourth  to  the  poor,  and 
spent  the  remainder  in  food  and  amusements  ;  and 
that  after  performing  these  several  praiseworthy 
actions,  he  attended  sword  in  hand  at  the  king^s  gate 
day  and  night,  and  never  went  to  his  lodgings  without 
his  master's  express  permission. 

On  the  fourteenth  night  of  what  is  called  the  dark 
side  of  the  moon,  the  king  heard  a  noise  like  one 
bitterly  crying,  upon  which  he  called  out  to  know 
who  was  waiting  at  the  door,  and  his  faithful  Veera- 
vara  answering  that  he  was  there,  he  ordered  him  to 
pursue  the  crying  which  they  heard ;  so,  saying,  I 
obey  your  Highnesses  commands,  away  he  ran.  In 
the  meantime,  the  king  reflected  in  this  manner  : — I 
have  done  wrong  to  send  this  soldier  away  by  himself 
in  such  a  dark  cloudy  night.  I  will  even  go  too  and 
see  what  is  the  matter.  So  saying,  he  took  his  sword, 
and  thus  followed  till  he  got  without  the  city;  and 
presently  after  he  saw  the  soldier  with  a  female 
endued  with  perfect  youth  and  beauty,  and  richly 
attired,  who  was  weeping.  Who  art  thou,  and  why 
dost  thou  weep  ?  demanded  Veera-vara.  I  am,  said 
the  female,  the  goddess  Sree,*  the  fortune  of  king 

peans,  must  be  understood  ;  which,  every  one  knows,  is  given  in  India 
by  a  superior  as  an  inviolable  token  of  friendship,  favour,  and  pro* 
tection. 

*  The  goddess  of  good  fortune. 


2o8  THE  HITOPADESA : 

Subhraka's  dominions,  who  hath  long  dwelt  happily 
under  the  shadow  of  his  wings  ;  but,  alas  !  I  am  now 
about  to  flee  to  some  other  place  of  refuge.  What, 
O  goddess,  said  the  soldier,  will  induce  thee  to  tarry 
still  longer  here  ?  If,  replied  the  goddess,  thou  wilt 
offer  up  thy  own  son  Sakti-vara,  who  is  distinguished 
by  two-and-thirty  marks,*  to  the  goddess  who  pre- 
sideth  over  the  welfare  of  all  nature,t  then  will  I 
remain  here  for  a  much  longer  period  of  time ;  and 
saying  this,  she  vanished  from  his  sight. 

Veera-vara  now  went  home,  and  called  up  his  son 
and  his  wife,  who  were  both  asleep  ;  who  having  risen 
accordingly,  he  related  to  them  everything  which  had 
passed  with  the  goddess.  His  son,  the  moment  he 
had  concluded,  exclaimed  in  a  transport  of  joy, — O 
how  fortunate  I  am,  who  can  thus  be  the  means  of 
preserving  my  sovereign  and  his  dominions  !  Then, 
O  father,  what  occasion  is  there  for  any  further 
hesitation  or  delay  ;  since  the  assistance  of  this  body 
is  at  all  times  ready  upon  such  an  occasion  as  this  > 
For  they  say, 

*  A  good  man  should  forsake  wealth,  and  even  life 
itself,  for  another.     It  is  good  to  sacrifice  one's  self 

*  Wliat  these  are  the  translator  is  unable  to  explain. 

t  This  long  epithet  is  expressed,  in  the  original,  in  two  words,  sarva 
niatigala^  which  is  one  of  the  titles  of  Bhavanee,  the  consort  of  Seeva. 
In  her  destructive  quality  she  is  called  Kalee  (a  name  derived  from 
Kala,  lime),  and  it  was  to  her,  under  this  image,  that  human  sacrifices 
were  wont  to  be  offered,  to  avert  any  threatened  evil. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  209 

for  a  holy  person  upon  the  approach  of  his  destruc- 
tion.' 

This  simple  saying  belongs  particularly  to  our 
tribe  ;*  then  if  I  am  not  permitted  to  do  so,  by  what 
other  act  will  the  preservation  of  the  prosperity  of 
this  great  country  be  secured  ?  Having  considered 
this  proposal,  they  all  went  to  the  temple  of  the 
goddess  ;  and  when  they  had  worshipped  her  image, 
the  father  Veera-vara  addressed  her  in  these  words  : — 

0  goddess  !  let  Subhraka  our  sovereign  be  prosperous ! 
and  let  this  victim  be  accepted !  Saying  which,  he 
cut  off  his  son's  head.     Thus,  said  he  to  himself,  have 

1  earned  the  wages  which  I  received  from  my 
sovereign  ;  and  now  let  me  pay  the  forfeit  of  my 
son's  life !  and  instantly  he  cut  off  his  own  head. 
His  wife  too,  overpowered  with  grief  for  her  husband 
and  son,  followed  their  example.  The  king,  filled 
with  astonishment  at  the  scene  before  him,  said  to 
himself : 

*  Such  little  animals  as  myself  come  into  life,  and 
die  away  without  end  ;  but  there  never  has  been,  nor 
ever  will  be,  in  this  world  one  like  unto  him  ! ' 

Oh,  I  can  have  no  further  enjoyment  of  these  my 
dominions !  Saying  this,  he  lifted  up  his  sword  to 
cut  off  his  head  also ;  but  on  the  instant,  she  on 
whom  dependeth  the  happiness  of  all,  making  herself 

*  To  the  tribe  of  Rajah-putra,  or  soldiers. 


1  lo  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

evident  under  human  form,  seized  him  by  the  hand, 
and  said, — My  son,  forbear  this  rashness  !  At  present 
thy  kingdom  is  not  subdued  !*  The  king  prostrated 
himself  before  her,  and  said, — O  goddess  !  of  what 
use  to  me  is  dominion,  or  even  hfe  ?  If  thou  hast 
any  compassion  for  me,  O  let  Veera-vara,  with  his 
family,  be  restored  to  life;  or  if  it  be  not  thy  will, 
permit  me  to  pursue  the  path  wherein  I  was  found  by 
thee  !  The  goddess  replied, — I  am  well  pleased  with 
this  thy  noble  generosity  and  tenderness;  then  go 
thy  ways,  and  prosper  ;  and  let  this  man,  his  wife, 
and  son,  all  rise  up  and  live  !  The  king  rendered 
thanks,  and  returned  unobserved  to  an  apartment  of 
his  palace  to  sleep.  Veera-vara  too  being  restored  to 
life,  together  with  his  wife  and  son,  he  conducted 
them  home. 

Veera-vara  being  again  on  guard  at  the  king's 
door,  and  being  questioned  by  him  respecting  the 
person  who  was  heard  crying,  replied,  that  upon  her 
being  seen  she  became  invisible,  and  that  there  were 
no  further  tidings  of  her.t  The  king  was  exceedingly 
well  pleased  at  this,  and  said  within  himself, — What  a] 
praiseworthy  man  he  was,  repeating  these  lines : 

*He  should  speak  kindly,  without  meanness;  he^ 


*  The  goddess  Sree  hath  not  yet  forsaken  thy  domhiions. 

t  From  the  tenor  of  this  period,  it  should  seem,  that  the  king,  when] 
he  followed  Veera-vara,  did  not  go  near  enough  to  observe  all  that] 
passed  with  the  goddess  Sree. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  211 

should  be  valiant,  without  boasting ;  he  should  be 
generous,  shedding  his  bounty  into  the  dish  of  the 
worthy ;  he  should  be  resolute,  but  not  harsh.' 

This  is  the  character  of  a  great  man  !  In  this  there 
is  all ! 

In  the  morning  early  the  king  assembled  a  special 
council ;  and  when  he  had  publicly  proclaimed  the 
proceedings  of  the  night,  he  bestowed  the  govern- 
ment of  Karnatta*  upon  his  generous  deliverer. 
After  this,  concluded  the  royal  goose,  must  every  one 
who  cometh  unasked  be  a  villain?  The  truth  is, 
there  are  three  sorts  amongst  such  too :  good,  bad 
and  indifferent. 

The  minister  replied, 

'Is  he  a  minister  who,  in  obedience  to  his 
sovereign's  pleasure,  payeth  attention  to  what  should 
not  be  done,  as  if  it  were  proper  to  be  done }  It  is 
better  that  the  heart  of  the  master  should  suffer  pain, 
than  that  he  should  be  ruined  by  doing  that  which 
ought  not  to  be  done.' 

Hear  this,  please  your  Highness  : 

The  good  which  hath  been  gained  by  one  ivill  also  be 
gained  by  me.  But  the  barber  who  wished  for  zuealth, 
having  through  his  infatuation  killed  a  beggar ^  is  piU  to 
death  himself. 

*  The  country  we  call  Carnatic, 


212  THE  HITOPADESA : 

How   came  that  about  ?  said   the  king ;  and   the 
minister  related  the  following  story  ; 

FABLE  X. 

In  the  country  of  Ayodhya  *  there  was  a  man,  by 
name  Choora-mani,t  who,  being  exceedingly  anxious 
for  the  acquisition  of  wealth,  offered  up  his  prayers 
with   great   fervour,   to   him  in  whose  diadem  is  a 
crescent ;  t   and  at  length,  one  night,  when  he  had 
been  purified  of  his  sins,  that  deity  appeared  to  him 
in  his  sleep,  and  addressed  him  in  these  words  : — In 
the  morning  early,  having  shaved  thyself,  stand  out 
of  sight  with  a  stick  in  thy  hand  ;  and  when  thou 
shalt  see  a  beggar  coming  into  the  yard,  thou  wilt 
beat  him  with  thy  stick  without  mercy  ;  for  the  said 
beggar  will  have  with  him  a  pot  of  gold,  which  may 
serve  to  make  thee  as  happy  as  thou  canst  wish  for 
the  rest   of  thy  life.     The  instructions  of  the  god 
were  followed,  and  success  attended  ;  but  the  whole 
transaction  having  been  observed  by  the  barber,  who; 
came  to  shave  the  man,  said  to  himself, — Ho,  ho 
this  is  the  way  to  get  money,  is  it  ?     Why  then  maj 
not  I  do  the  same  ?     From  that  moment  the  barberl 
used  every  day  to  conceal  himself  with  a  large  sticky 
in  his  hand,  waiting  for  the  coming  of  a  beggar ;  am 

*  The  province  of  Oude. 

t  Crown-jewel. 

t  One  of  the  titles  of  Seeva. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  213 

at  length,  when  one  came,  he  beat  him  so  unmerci- 
fully, that  he  died ;  and  the  consequence  was,  that 
the  barber  was  put  to  death  by  the  officers  of  justice 
for  the  crime.     I  say,  therefore,  "  The  good,"  &c. 

The  king  replied, 

*  How  is  a  stranger  to  be  found  out  by  the  repeti- 
tion of  a  parcel  of  old  stories,  whether  he  be  one  who 
hath  no  motive,  or  a  friend,  or  one  who  would  betray 
one's  confidence  ? ' 

Let  the  crow  alone,  and  let  us  pursue  what  we  have 
to  do.  Chitra-varna  is  now  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Malaya.  What  is  to  be  done }  The  minister  re- 
plied,— 'Tis  true  he  is  come ;  but  I  have  heard  from 
the  mouth  of  a  trusty  spy,  that  Chitra-varna  hath 
treated  the  wise  counsels  of  that  great  minister  the 
vulture  with  contempt ;  and  therefore  the  fool  may 
be  defeated  ;  for  they  say, 

*  The  enemy  who  is  either  avaricious,  subject  to 
passion,  unruly,  treacherous,  violent,  fearful,  unsteady, 
or  a  fool,  is  easily  to  be  defeated,  we  are  told.' 

Then,  before  he  shall  have  given  orders  to  invest  our 
castle,  let  the  Sarasa  and  other  generals  be  sent  out 
upon  the  rivers,  into  the  woods,  upon  the  mountains, 
and  through  the  passes,  to  destroy  his  forces.  They 
say, 

'  If  an  enemy's  army  be  fatigued  by  a  long  march, 


214  THE  HITOPADESA : 

confined  by  rivers,  hills,  or  forests  ;  terrified  by  the 
apprehension  of  dreadful  fires,*  distressed  by  hunger, 
thirst,  and  the  like  ; 

*  With  their  best  provisions  spoilt,  afflicted  with 
pestilence  and  famine,  not  steady,  not  numerous, 
embarrassed  by  rains  and  winds  ; 

'  Incommoded  by  dirt,  dust,  or  water,  or  destitute 
of  good  quarters  ;  a  prince  may  defeat  it,  and  under 
any  circumstances  like  these. 

*  Or  if  an  enemy  be  found  sleeping  in  the  day, 
from  the  great  fatigue  of  watching  for  fear  of  a 
surprise,  thus  overpowered  for  want  of  rest,  one  may 
at  all  times  easily  defeat  him.' 

Wherefore,  let  these  generals  march  against  the 
forces  of  that  impetuous  peacock,  and  fight  them, 
either  by  day  or  night,  as  they  may  find  it  most 
expedient. 

This  advice  being  executed  accordingly,  the  army 
of  Chitra-varna  was  overthrown,  and  a  great  many  of 
its  principal  leaders  fell  in  the  battle.  Chitra-varna 
was  exceedingly  cast  down  at  this  event,  and  said  to 
his  minister  the  vulture, — Has  this  happened  through 
neglect ;  or  have  I  been  wanting  in  conduct  ? 

*  Never  before  now  was  empire  gained,  thus  to  be 

*  The  armies  of  the  native  princes  of  India,  who  are  seldom  provided 
with  tents,  often  screen  themselves  from  the  inclemencies  of  the  weather 
with  temporary  coverings  of  reeds  or  rushes,  and  their  cantonments  are 
generally  made  of  mats  and  straw. 


FABLES  AND  PRO  VERBS.  2 1 5 

lost !  The  want  of  prudence  destroyeth  fortune,  even 
as  sickness  the  greatest  beauty. 

*  One  who  is  expert  gaineth  fortune  ;  he  who  eateth 
but  what  is  wholesome,  health;  and  the  healthy, 
ease ;  the  diligent,  the  end  of  knowledge ;  and  he 
who  is  well  disciplined,  virtue,  profit,  and  reputation.' 

The  vulture  replied, — Please  your  Highness, 

'  A  king,  although  he  be  not  himself  experienced, 
may,  if  he  has  one  old  in  wisdom  about  him,  deprive 
another  of  his  good  fortune ;  like  a  tree  which 
groweth  by  the  water's  side. 

*  Drinking,  women,  hunting,  gaming,  fondness  for 
dress,  harshness  of  speech,  and  severity,  are  great 
blemishes  in  a  prince. 

'Riches  and  prosperity  are  not  possible  to  be 
acquired  by  such  as  pursue  power  with  sudden 
violence,  nor  by  those  whose  minds  are  at  a  loss  for 
the  means  ;  for  fortune  dwelleth  in  good  conduct  and 
noble  resolution. 

'Betel*  is  pungent,  bitter,  spicy,t  and  sweet ;  it  is 
alkaline  and  astringent ;  it  expelleth  wind,  destroyeth 
phlegm,  killeth  worms,  and  subdueth  bad  smells  ;  it 
beautifieth   the    mouth,  %   removeth   impurities,   and 


*  In  the  Sanskrit,  Tamhula.  The  composition  of  what  Europeans 
call  betel  is  too  genei-ally  known  to  require  a  note. 

+  This  word  was  substituted  by  the  translator  in  the  room  of  0110 
which  seemed  to  him  an  error  in  the  original. 

+  Stains  it  red. 


2 1 6  THE  HITOPADESA : 

kindleth  the  fire  of  love.  Betel,  my  friend,  possesseth 
these  thirteen  qualities,  hardly  to  be  found,  even  in 
the  regions  of  heaven.'  * 

But,  continued  the  vulture,  your  Highness,  trusting 
to  your  own  strength  and  courage,  and  from  mere 
rashness,  paid  no  attention  to  the  counsels  I  laid 
before  you,  and  treated  me  with  harshness  of  speech. 

*  Upon  what  minister  do  not  the  errors  of  conduct 
fall .''  What  sore  arm  is  not  fretted  by  a  garment  of 
hair?t  Whom  doth  not  fortune  make  proud? 
Whom  doth  not  death  destroy?  To  whom  do  not 
the  things  which  women  do,  give  cause  of  great 
uneasiness  ? 

*  A  brave  man  destroyeth  his  enemies,  be  they  ever 
so  great ;  even  as  prudence  overcometh  misfortune, 
an  enlightened  understanding  grief,  the  sun  darkness, 
and  sorrow  happiness.' 

But,  at  that  time,  I  said  within  myself, — This  my 
master  is  certainly  destitute  of  wisdom,  or  else  he 
would  be  guided  by  my  counsels ;  for  they  say, 

*  What  will  the  wise  precepts  of  books  do  for  him 


*  The  translator  is  of  opinion  this  accurate  description  of  the  qualities 
and  properties  of  betel  has  no  business  in  this  place.  [Betel  stands 
metaphorically  for  good  counsel  —  IT.  M.] 

t  When  are  not  the  poor  oppressed?  or,  doth  not  one  mislbrtune 
bring  on  another  ? 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  217 

who  is  destitute  of  natural  wisdom  ?  What  will  a 
mirror  do  for  him  who  hath  no  eyes  ? ' 

And,  for  these  reasons,  I  remained  silent. — The  king, 
upon  hearing  this,  joining  his  hands,  said, — I  agree 
that  the  fault  was  all  my  own.  But,  in  our  present 
distress,  thou  shouldst  instruct  me  how  I  shall  be  able 
to  retreat,  with  the  few  troops  I  have  left,  to  the 
Vindhya  mountains.  The  minister  now  resolved, 
within  his  own  mind,  that  he  ought  to  be  reconciled 
to  his  master,  recollecting  this  saying : 

'  Anger  should  always  be  restrained  in  the  presence 
of  the  gods,  before  one's  master,  sovereign,  or  a 
Brahman  ;  in  a  cowhouse ;  *  and  not  less  where 
there  are  children,  and  aged  or  sick  people/ 

Do  not  be  alarmed !  said  he  to  the  king,  smiling  as 
he  spoke  ;  be  comforted  !    They  say, 

*  The  wisdom  of  ministers  shineth  most  upon  the 
breach  of  concord,  and  when  affairs  are  fallen  into 
confusion.     In  peace,  who  is  not  wise  ? 

'  If  fools  undertake  ever  so  httle,  they  willingly  be- 
come independent ;  whilst  those  who  perform  great 
actions,  and  are  men  of  wisdom  and  experience, 
remain  attached.' 

This  being  the  case,  when  by  thy  valour  thou  shalt 


*  Probably  from  the  danger  of  being  tossed,  rather  than  out  of  respect 
to  those  holy  anhnals. 


2i8  THE  HITOPADESA  ; 

have  penetrated  the  castle  of  the  enemy,  I  will, 
without  delay,  conduct  thee,  together  with  honour^ 
glory,  and  thy  army,  safe  back  to  the  Vindhya 
mountains.  How  shall  this  be  accomplished,  said 
the  peacock  king,  with  so  small  a  force  ?  Please 
your  Highness,  replied  the  vulture,  the  whole  shall 
come  to  pass.  But  as  the  opposite  of  dilatoriness  is 
a  quality  absolutely  necessary  for  a  conqueror  to 
ensure  success,  let  instant  orders  be  given  for  the 
blockade  of  the  enemy's  castle. 

Soon  after  this  resolution,  a  spy  came  to  the  royal, 
goose  Hiranya-garbha, and  told  him  that  the  peacock; 
king,  by  the  advice  of  the  vulture  his  minister,  small  '< 
as  his  army  was,  had  resolved  to  march  and  block  up. 
the  castle  gates.  What  is  to  be  done  now  ?  said  the; 
king.  Let  our  army,  replied  the  minister,  be  divided^ 
into  good  and  bad,  and  let  presents  be  made  to  the' 
whole,  according  to  their  deserts,  of  money,  cloth, 
and  the  like  ;  for  it  is  said, 

'  Fortune  never  forsaketh  the  prince  who  standeth] 
with  an  open  hand  in  the  squares  and  public  places,] 
A  trifle,   thus   acquired,   is    esteemed   far  above 
thousand  pieces  of  gold  found  by  chance  in  the  road. 

*  A  prince  should  be  at  an  extraordinary  expensej 
on  eight  occasions :  at  a  sacrifice,  at  a  wedding,  in! 
times  of  distress,  after  the  overthrow  of  an  enemy,  ini 
any  meritorious  work,  in  entertaining  friends^  upon^ 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  :^I9 

\vomen  who  are  dear  to  him,  and  in  relieving  relations 
who  are  in  want. 

*  A  fool,  from  the  dread  of  ever  so  trifling  expense, 
ruineth  everything  he  undertaketh.  What  wise  man 
would,  from  extreme  scrupulousness,  entirely  forsake 
a  clean  pot  ?  *  ^ 

How,  demanded  the  king;  is  it  proper  to  be  ex- 
travagant on  any  occasion,  when  they  say, — **  A  man 
should  keep  his  riches  against  accidents,'''  &c.  ? 
How  can  one  who  is  fortunate,  said  the  minister, 
meet  with  accidents  ?  Because  fortune  sometimes 
leaves  one,  replied  the  king.  Hoarded  treasure, 
observed  the  minister,  is  often  lost ;  then  away  with 
parsimony,  and  let  thy  brave  soldiers  be  distinguished 
by  gifts  and  honours. 

'  Those  who  have  been  preferred,  and  are  well 
contented  ;  such  as  are  regardless  of  life,  and  have 
been  proved  ;  with  those  of  noble  birth,  who  have 
been  treated  with  marks  of  distinction;  will^  all  of 
them,  be  victorious  over  the  forces  of  the  enemy. 

'  A  trifling  force,  consisting  of  only  five  hundred 
heroes,  who  are  good  soldiers,  well  e^iperienced  in 
the  art  of  war,  and  resolute,  when  formed  into  a  com- 
pact body,  will  beat  a  whole  army  of  their  enemies. 

*The  greatest  qualities  for  a  prince  are>  veracity, 

*  Hindoos  generally  boil  their  food  in  earthen  pots,  which  they  never 
use  a  second  time. 


220  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

courage,  and  generosity.  If  a  sovereign  be  destitute 
of  these,  he  will  certainly  acquire  the  state  of  being 
talked  of  with  contempt.' 

Ministers,  likewise,  should  be  distinguished  and  pro- 
moted ;  for, 

*  He  should  be  employed  in  affairs  of  life  and 
fortune,  with  whom  is  our  protection,  and  with  whom 
is  confided  our  income  and  expense.'  * 

For, 

'The  prince  who  hath  for  his  advisers,  knaves, 
women,  children,  or  fools,  neglecteth  the  purification 
of  imprudence,  and  is  overwhelmed  in  the  hour  of 
necessity.' 

Observe,  your  Highness,  that 

*  The  earth  is  bountiful  unto  him  who  hath  neither 
extreme  joy  nor  anger  in  his  breast,  who  hath  a 
treasure  with  but  little  expense,  and  who  hath 
servants  who  are  always  vigilant. 

'A  prince  who  is  well  furnished  with  treasures,  and 
other  means,  should  never  neglect  or  despise  his 
ministers.' 

For, 

'  When  a  king,  blinded  by  his  rashness,  is  about  to 

*  This  verse,  in  tlie  original,  is  so  full  of  errors  and  consequent 
obscurity,  that  nothing  but  the  context  could  have  discovered  the 
meaning. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  221 

be  overwhelmed  in  the  ocean  of  his  affairs,  a  friendly 
minister  stretcheth  out  his  hand  from  the  dry  land  to 
assist  him.' 

Just  now  the  crow  Cloud-colour  came  in,  and, 
bowing,  criedj — Please  your  Highness,  look  yonder  ! 
The  enemy  is  at  the  gate  anxious  for  battle.  But 
issue  your  commands,  and  I  will  sally  forth  and 
display  my  prowess,  by  w^hich  action  I  shall  pay  the 
debt  I  owe  your  Highness  !  Not  so,  not  so !  replied 
Know-all ;  it  is  by  no  means  proper  to  go  forth  to 
fight ;  if  it  were,  there  would  have  been  no  occasion 
for  our  taking  shelter  in  the  castle. 

*  The  alligator,  matchless  as  he  is,  when  he  quitteth 
the  water,  is  without  power.  Were  even  the  lion  to 
forsake  the  forests,  he  would  doubtless  be  upon  a 
level  with  the  jackal' 

Please  your  Highness,  said  the  crow,  go  yourself,  and 
see  the  battle. 

*  A  king  having  advanced  his  forces,  should  fight, 
overlooking  them  ;  for  who  will  not  truly  act  the  lion 
when  his  master  standeth  over  him  } ' 

After  this,  they  all  marched  to  the  castle  gate,  and 
fought  a  great  battle.  In  the  meantime  Chitra-varna, 
the  peacock  king,  addressed  his  minister  to  fulfil  his 
promise  immediately,  who  replied, — Attend,  please 
your  Highness : 


222  THE  HITOPADESA : 

'  A  fortification  is  declared  to  be  weak,  when  it  is 
unable  to  hold  out  a  long  time,  is  extremely  small, 
and  very  much  exposed  ;  or  when  commanded  by  a 
weak  and  unfortunate  officer.' 

But  seeing  that  is  not  the  case  here, 

*  There  are  four  ways  to  take  a  fort,  which  are 
these:  creating  divisions,  long  blockading,  surprise, 
and  storming.' 

At  present,  only  let  the  battle  be  maintained  to  th< 
utmost  of  our  power,  concluded  the  vulture. 

Early  in  the  morning,  even  before  the  sun  was  uj 
when  the  battle  had  commenced  at  all  the  four  gates 
of  the  castle,  the  crow,  who  was  in  the  inside,  contrived^ 
to  set  fire  to  every  house.    There  was  now  a  confuse^ 
rumour  that  the  enemy  had  got  possession  ;  hearing 
which,  and,  at  the  same  time,  seeing  a  vast  numbel 
of  houses  in  flames,  the  troops  of  the  royal  goose 
with  all  the  private  inhabitants,  fled  to  the  waters  fc 
security  ;  according  to  this  saying : 

'  Whatever  hath  been  well  consulted  and  we| 
resolved,  whether  it  be  to  fight  well,  or  to  run  awaj 
well,  should  be  carried  into  execution  in  due  seasoi 
without  any  further  examination.' 

The  king  having  been  thus  abandoned  by  all  bi 
the  Sarasa,  and  being  by  nature  a  slow  walker,  w; 
made  prisoner  by  the  cock,  who  was  the  peacock' 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  223 

general ;  upon  which  he  addressed  the  Sarasa  in  these 
words : — General  Sarasa,  when  I  shall  be  no  more^  thou 
must  not  destroy  thyself;  but  as  thou  hast  it  still  in 
thy  power  to  make  thy  escape,  then  go  upon  the 
waters,  and,  with  the  will  of  the  Omniscient,  place 
Choora-karna  my  son  upon  the  throne.  O  my  royal 
master,  replied  the  Sarasa,  do  not  talk  thus,  for  it  is 
more  than  I  can  bear.  May  the  king  still  triumph 
over  his  enemies  as  long  as  the  sun  and  moon  shall 
last !  I  will  again  assume  the  command  of  the  castle, 
and  then  let  the  foe  enter  besmeared  with  my 
blood ! 

*A  master  is  hard  to  be  found,  who  is  patient, 
generous,  and  a  judge  of  merit;  or  a  servant,  who  is 
honest,  clever,  and  attached.' 

Attend  to  this,  please  your  Highness:  If  after  having 
quitted  the  field  of  battle  there  were  no  fear  of  death, 
it  would  be  proper  to  go  hence;  but  is  not  death 
inevitable  to  all  things  ?  Besides,  it  would  tarnish  my 
reputation  to  quit  thee  now. 

*  In  this  world,  raised  up  for  our  purification,  and  to 
prevent  our  wandering  in  the  regions  below,*  the 
resolution  to  sacrifice  one's  own  life  to  the  safety  of 
another  is  attained  by  the  practice  of  virtue.* 


*  The  original  word  is  veechee,  which  only  means  a  particular  division 
of  those  regions. 


224  THE  IIITOPADESA  : 

Besides,  thou  art  the  sovereign  and  master,  who  is 
always  to  be  guarded  and  protected. 

*  When  Prakriti  is  forsaken  by  her  lord,  great  as 
she  is,  she  doth  not  survive  it.^  When  life  hath  taken 
its  departure,  though  Dhanwantari  t  be  the  physician, 
what  can  he  do  ? 

*  In  the  sovereign  the  whole  world  openeth  and 
shutteth  its  eyes.  Thus  the  lotus  of  the  waters,  upon 
the  rising  of  the  sun,  reviveth  upon  his  revival. 

'  The  sovereign,  the  minister,  territory,  strongholds, 
treasure,  forces,  and  friends,  are  the  members  of 
government;  also  the  nobles,  and  the  order  of  citizens.' 

But,  of  all  these,  the  sovereign  is  the  principal  mem- 
ber. Here  the  cock  flew  upon  the  royal  goose,  and 
began  to  wound  him  with  his  bill  and  claws ;  but  the 
Sarasa  scieened  his  master  under  his  own  body ;  and 
although  he  himself  was  torn  almost  to  pieces  by  the 
cock's  beak  and  spurs,  he  still  covered  him  till  he  got 
him  safe  into  the  water.  Immediately  after,  the 
Sarasa  pecked  the  cock  to  death ;  but  at  last,  being 
attacked  by  a  large  party  of  birds,  he  lost  his  own 
life.     Chitra-varna,  the  peacock  king,  now  enters  the 


*  To  understand  how  this  verse  is  applicable  to  the  subject,  it  is 
necessary  the  reader  be  informed,  that  by  the  word  Prakriti  (here 
signifying  thai  from  which  all  things  are  7}iade :  Principle, — Nature  per- 
sonified as  a  beautiful  female — the  Hindoo  Eve\  is  meant  the  principal 
meUf  the  nobility. 

+  The  /Escu^apius  of  the  Hindoos. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS-  225 

castle,  and  having  plundered  it  of  everything  that  had 
been  left  in  it,  he  marched  out  again,  saluted  by  his 
followers  with  shouts  of  victory  ! 

The  young  princes  now  said  to  the  Vishnu-Sarma, 
In  our  opinions,  the  Sarasa,  in  having  thus    pre- 
served his  master,  at  the  expense  of  his  own  life, 
was  the  most  virtuous  bird  in  the  army. 

'  Cows  bring  forth  young,  all  of  the  same  shape  as 
their  parents ;  but  few  produce  a  king  of  the  herd 
whose  horns  stroke  his  shoulders.*  * 

May  the  exalted  being,  replied  Vishnu-Sarma, 
who,  of  his  own  accord,  purchaseth  the  regions  of 
happiness  with  his  own  body,  enjoy  them,  and  be 
attended  by  Vidhya-dharees.     They  say, 

'  Such  brave  men  as  shed  their  blood  in  battle  in 
their  sovereign's  cause,  and  such  men  as  are  faithful 
and  grateful  to  their  masters,  are  those  who  go  to 
heaven. t 

'  Whenever  a  hero  is  killed,  surrounded  by  the 
enemy,  he  obtaineth  for  himself  those  regions  which 
are  without  decay;  provided  he  doth  not  show 
cowardice.* 

You  have  now,  sirs,  heard  everything  which  re- 
lates to    Disputing,   concluded  Vishnu-Sarma.     We 

*  Having  long  horns. 

+  For  a  time  measured  by  their  virtues. 

H 


:i25  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

have,  replied  the  young  princes,  and  are  exceedingly 
well  pleased.  May  that  which  follows,  said  Vishnu - 
Sarma,  produce  the  same  effect. 

*  May  no  possessor  of  the  earth  ever  have  occasion 
to  dispute  with  elephants,  horses,  aod  foot  soldiers ! 
May  his  enemies,  defeated  by  the  cleansing  counsels 
of  poHcy,  take  shelter  in  the  caverns  of  the  moun- 
tains 1 ' 


CABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  227 


CHAPTER   IV. 

OF    MAKING    PEACE. 

Now,  said  the  young  princes,  please  to  inform  us  o  f 
what  relates  to  Making  Peace.  Attend  then,  replied 
Vishnu-Sarma ;  this  is  the  introduction  to  it  : 

At  iJie  conclusion  of  a  great  battle^  in  which  the  troops 
of  both  kings  have  suffered,  a  treaty  is  presently  brought 
about  by  the  two  ministers,  the  Vulture  and  the  Chakra^ 
vaka. 

How  was  this  ?  demanded  the  young  princes  ;  and 
Vishnu-Sarma  related  as  follows  : 

FABLE    I. 

The  royal  goose,  after  his  escape,  asked  who  it  wcls 
that  set  fire  to  the  castle  ;  whether  one  of  the  enemy, 
or  some  of  their  own  party?  and  his  minister,  Chakra- 
vaka,  replied, — Please  your  Highness,  that  unneces- 
sary connection  of  yours,  the  crow  Cloud-colour, 
together  with  his  attendants,  is  no  longer  to  be  seen  ; 
wherefore,  I  conclude  that  it  was  contrived  by  him. 
The    king,    after    a    few    moments'    consideration 

H  2 


228  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

exclaimed, — It  is  even  so !  It  is  my  own  evil 
seeking ! 

*  The  fault  shall  be  for  ever  his,  and  no  more  the 
minister's,  by  whom  I  believe  our  affairs,  so  well 
designed  for  our  own  advantage,  were  ruined.' 

They  say,  replied  the  minister, 

*  The  man  who  meeting  with  the  rugged  paths  of 
life,  doth  not  know  that  they  are  evils  of  his  own 
seeking,*  is  no  philosopher. 

He  who  doth  not  pay  due  regard  to  the  advice  of  such 
friends  as  have  his  welfare  at  hearty  may  suffer  for  it ; 
like  t?ie  foolish  tortoise^  who  fell  from  a  piece  of  wood 
and  was  killed. 

How  was  this  ?  demanded  the  king ;  and  his 
minister  related  the  following  story : 

FABLE   II. 

In  Magadha-desa  t  there  is  a  large  piece  of  water 
which  is  distinguished  by  the  appellation  PhuUot- 
pala,t  where  lived  together  for  a  long  time  two 
geese ;  and  they  had  a  tortoise  for  their  friend,  who 
dwelt  with  them.  Some  fishermen  coming  that  way, 
said  to  themselves, — To-morrow  early  we  must  con- 

*  By  the  vices  of  a  former  life. 

t  The  ancient  name  of  the  country  about  Gya. 

X  Relating  to  the  production  of  aquatic  flowers. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  229 

trive  to  catch  some  turtle,  and  other  fish.  This 
having  been  overheard  by  the  tortoise,  he  said, — My 
friends,  you  have  heard  the  conversation  of  these 
fishermen,  then  what  do  you  think  I  had  best  do  ? 
The  two  geese  replied, — We  shall  know  by-and-by 
what  is  fit  to  be  done.  Not  so !  what  is  conceived 
proper,  that  should  be  done  immediately. 

These  tiuo,  Fate-not-come,  and  Wit-against-it-when- 
comey  both  of  them  happily  flourish  ;  whilst  What-zvill-be 
loseth  his  life. 

How  was  that  ?  demanded  the  two  geese  ;  and  the 
tortoise  related  the  following  story : 

FABLE  III. 

Formerly,  in  this  very  piece  of  water,  when  the 
same  danger  threatened  them  as  now  threatens  us, 
it  was  foreseen  by  three  fish.  One  of  them,  whose 
name  was  Fate-not- come,*  said, — I  will  sink  deep  in 
the  water  for  security  ;  and,  saying  so,  down  he  went. 
The  second,  who  was  called  Wit-against-it-when- 
come,t  said, — In  an  aff"air  which  is  about  to  come  to 
pass,  one  should  not  proceed  without  an  authority ; 
now  it  is  said. 


■*  In  the  original,  anagata-vidhata.     It  was  necessary  to  translate  the 
names,  to  save  the  spirit  of  the  fable.  / 
+  In  Sanskrit,  pratyutpanna-mati. 


230  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

He  is  a  ivise  matt  %vho  can  conquer  an  accident  zvhen 
it  happeneth.  A  merchanfs  wife  charged  her  gallant 
with  theft y  before  her  husband'' s  face. 

The  third  fish,  v;ho  was  called  What- will-be,*  asked 
him  how  that  was  ;  and  the  second  fish  related  as 
follows : 

FABLE  IV. 

At  Vikrama-pura  f  there  lived  a  merchant,  whose 
name  was  Samudra-doota,J  and  his  wife,  who  was 
called  Ratna-prabha,§  was  always  amusing  herself 
with  one  or  other  of  the  servants  ;  according  to  these 
sayings : 

They  do  not  carry  their  observations  so  far  as  to 
examine  limbs  and  features ;  for,  whether  handsome 
or  ugly,  it  is  all  the  same  to  them,  provided  he  be 
a  man.' 

Again, 

*  Unto  women  no  man  is  found  disagreeable,'  &c. 

In  another  place  they  say, 

'  A  sacred  law  which  hath  been  ever  so  well  con- 
sidered, is  still  to  be  reconsidered ;  a  king  who  hath 
been  satisfied  is   still  to  be  apprehended ;  a  young 

■'•  In  the  original,  yad-bhavishya. 

t  The  city  of  victory.    A  common  name  of  places. 

•t  Ambassador  of  the  sea. 

\  Gem-splendour. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  231 

woman,  although  in  our  arms,  is  altogether  to  be 
suspected.  What  satisfaction  then  can  there  be  in 
the  sacred  law,  in  princes,  or  in  women  ? ' 

One  day  it  so  fell  out,  that  being  seen  by  her  husband 
kissing  one  of  the  young  men  of  the  house,  she  ran 
instantly  towards  him  and  cried, — My  dear,  this 
servant  must  be  exceedingly  distressed  for  food,  for 
he  has  been  eating  some  camphire  which  I  had 
brought  home  for  thy  use ;  and  even  now  I  have 
smelt  to  him,  and  find  his  breath  scented  with  it ! 

It  is  truly  said, 

*  What  women  eat  is  twofold ;  their  cunning  four< 
fold,'  &c. 

The  servant,  upon  hearing  the  woman  accuse  him 
thus,  appeared  to  be  offended,  and  exclaimed, — What 
man  can  stay  in  a  place  with  such  a  mistress  as  this, 
who  is  every  minute  smelling  the  servants'  mouths  ? 
Saying  which  he  went  away  ;  but  his  master  sent  for 
him  back,  and,  with  some  difficulty,  pacified  him,  and 
induced  him  to  stay.  I  say,  therefore,  "He  is  a 
wise  man,"  &c.  To  this  What-will-be  replied, — That 
is  not  to  be  which  is  not  to  be,  &c. 

Early  in  the  morning  Wit-against-it-when-come, 
being  caught  in  a  net,  feigned  himself  dead,  and 
remained  quiet ;  but  he  was  no  sooner  thrown  out 
of  the  net,  than  he  sprang  into  deep  water,  and  thus 
made  his  escape  ;  whilst  What-will-be  was  taken  by 


232  THE  HITOPADESA  :  - 

the  fishermen,  and  so  lost  his  life.     I   repeat,  there- 
fore, "These  two,  Fate-not  come,"  &c. 

Then,  concluded  the  tortoise,  let  it  be  contrived 
how  I  am  to  get  to  another  lake.  Where,  demanded 
the  two  geese,  will  be  the  advantage  of  thy  going  to 
another  place  }  Pray,  replied  the  tortoise,  only  con- 
trive the  means,  and  I  will  go  through  the  air  along 
with  you.  How,  said  the  geese,  arc  we  to  contrive 
the  means  ?  Why,  observed  the  tortoise,  you  must 
get  a  piece  of  wood,  and  take  each  of  you  one  end 
of  it  in  your  beaks,  from  which  I  can  suspend  myself 
by  my  mouth,  whilst  you  carry  me  along  by  the 
force  of  your  wings.  This  contrivance  will  thus  do, 
replied  the  geese  ;  but, 

One  ivho  is  wise,  in  contriving  the  means,  should 
consider  the  consequence.  Some  foolish  boobies  young 
ones  zvere  dcvotcred  by  a  zveasel*  before  tJieir  faces. 

How  did  that  happen  1  demanded  the  tortoise ; 
and  one  of  the  geese  related  as  follows  : 

FABLE  V. 

In   the   north  there  is  a  mountain   called  Gridhra- 
kootta,  near  which,  on  the  banks  of  the  Reva,t  there 

*  In  the  original,  nakoola  (in  Hindostanee,  nawl  or  noul).  A  saga- 
cious liUle  animal,  not  bigger  than  a  rat,  noted  for  attacking  and  killing 
the  most  venomous  serpents,  after  which  k  always  runs  into  the  thick 
grass,  as  it  is  supposed,  in  search  of  an  antidote. 

+  Perhaps  the  proj  er  name  of  the  river  we  call  the  Rauvee  which 
runs  into  the  Indus. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  233 

used  to  be  many  boobies  in  a  certain  tree ;  and  at 
the  foot  of  the  same  tree  a  serpent  lived  in  his  hole, 
who  used  to  devour  the  young  boobies.  An  old  bird 
hearing  the  lamentations  of  the  afflicted  boobies  for 
the  loss  of  their  little  ones,  addressed  them  in  these 
words  :  You  should  do  thus : — Get  some  fish,  and 
draw  them  along  upon  the  ground  from  the  hole  of  a 
weasel,  as  far  as  the  serpent's  hole,  where  you  will 
leave  them.  Presently,  the  weasels,  attracted  by  the 
scent  of  food,  will  go  to  the  serpent's  hole,  and  thus  he 
is  certainly  to  be  discovered,  and,  from  there  being  a 
natural  enmity  between  them,  thus  to  be  destroyed. 
The  plan  was  accordingly  executed,  and  the  serpent 
was  discovered  and  eaten  by  the  weasels,  as  they  were 
hunting  about  the  hollows  of  the  tree  for  the  fish ; 
but  soon  after,  the  cries  of  the  young  boobies  being 
heard  by  them,  they  mounted  the  tree  and  devoured 
them  also.  We  repeat,  therefore,  said  the  two  geese, 
"One  who  is  wise,  in  contriving  the  means,"  &c.  The 
people  seeing  us  carrying  thee  along  will  cry  out, — 
What  a  curious  sight !  Upon  hearing  which,  if  thou 
makest  any  reply,  thou  wilt  certainly  lose  thy  life ; 
wherefore,  upon  all  accounts,  it  is  best  to  stay  where 
we  are.  I  will  not  speak  a  word,  said  the  tortoise; 
what,  do  you  take  me  for  a  fool } 

In  the  manner  described,  at  length  the  geese  took 
up  the  tortoise,  and  flew  away  with  him,  hanging  to 
the  piece  of  wood ;  and   presently,  being  discovered 


234  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

in  that  situation  by  some  cowkeepers  in  the  fields, 
they  pursued  them,  crying  out, — When  he  falls  down, 
we  will  dress  him  and  eat  him  upon  the  spot.  No, 
said  one  of  them,  let  us  carry  him  home  !  Upon  hear- 
ing which,  the  tortoise  fell  into  a  passion,  to  think 
how  they  intended  to  dispose  of  him  ;  and  whilst  he 
opened  his  mouth  to  say, — You  shall  eat  dust  first ! 
down  he  dropped,  and  was  presently  put  an  end  to 
by  those  herdsmen.  I  therefore  repeat,  "  He  who 
doth  not  pay  a  due  regard  to  the  advice,"  &c.,  con- 
cluded the  minister. 

*  We  should  always  guard  our  speech  ;  for  from 
speaking  ruin  often  ensueth ;  as  in  the  downfall 
of  the  tortoise,  who  was  being  carried  along  by  two 
geese.' 

The  booby,  who  had  formerly  been  sent  as  a  spy, 
having  returned,  addressed  the  royal  goose  in  these 
words: — Please  your  Highness,  at  the  very  beginning 
I  represented  that  it  was  necessary  instantly  to  clear 
the  castle  ;  but  that  not  having  been  done,  this  is  the 
fruit  of  your  neglect ;  and  I  have  learnt  that  the 
burning  of  the  castle  was  effected  by  the  crow  Cloud- 
colour,  who  had  been  employed  for  that  purpose  by 
the  enemy's  minister  the  vulture.  The  king,  sighing, 
said, 

*  He  who  placeth  confidence  in  an  enemy,  either 
from    inclination    or    tiecessity,    awaketh    from  his 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  235 

delusion,  like  one  who  hath  fallen  from  the  top  of  a 
tree  in  his  sleep  ! ' 

And  when  Cloud-colour,  continued  the  spy,  had 
effected  the  burning  of  the  castle,  he  went  to  king 
Chitra-varna  :  who  being  well  satisfied  with  what  he 
had  done,  said, — Let  this  Cloud-colour  be  appointed 
governor  of  Karpura-dweepa ;  for,  it  is  said, 

*One  should  not  forget  the  labours  of  a  servant 
who  hath  performed  his  duty ;  but  should  encourage 
him  with  rewards,  with  our  hearts,  with  our  speech, 
and  with  our  ^y^s,' 

Then  the  vulture,  who  is  the  prime  minister,  con- 
tinued the  spy,  said, — Please  your  Highness,  let  some 
station  be  given  to  him  inferior  to  that  of  the  prin- 
cipal one  ;  for, 

*  How  is  it  possible  to  punish  one  who  hath  been 
raised  to  a  superior  station  ?  The  assistance,  O  king, 
which  is  rendered  to  those  of  low  degree,  is  like 
endeavouring  to  please  bears.* 

A  low  person  should  never  be  placed  in  the  station 
of  the  great. 

One  of  low  degree  having  obtained  a  worthy  station^ 
seeketh  to  destroy  his  master ;  like  the  mouse,  who, 
having  been  raised  to  the  state  of  a  tiger,  went  to  kill 
the  hermit. 


THE  HirOPADESA : 


How  was  that  ?   said  the  peacock  king  ;   and  the 
minister  related  the  following  story  : 


FABLE  VI. 

In  a  forest  of  the  prophet  Gowtama,*  which  is  dedi- 
cated to  acts  of  penitential  mortifications,  there  was  a 
hermit,  whose  name  was  Maha-tapa.  One  day  seeing 
a  young  mouse  fall  from  the  mouth  of  a  crow  near 
his  hermitage,  out  of  compassion  he  took  it  up,  and 
reared  it  with  broken  particles  of  rice.  He  now 
observed  that  the  cat  was  seeking  to  destroy  it ;  so, 
by  the  sacred  powers  of  a  saint,  he  metamorphosed 
his  mouse  into  a  cat ;  but  his  cat  being  afraid  of  his 
dog,  he  changed  her  into  a  dog ;  and  the  dog  being 
terrified  at  the  tiger,  at  length  he  was  transformed 
into  a  tiger.  The  holy  man  now  regarded  the  tiger 
as  no  ways  superior  to  his  mouse.  But  the  people 
who  came  to  visit  the  hermit,  used  to  tell  one  another 
that  the  tiger  which  they  saw  there  had  been  made  so 
by  the  power  of  the  saint,  from  a  mouse ;  and  this 
being  overheard  by  the  tiger,  he  was  very  uneasy,  and 
said  to  himself, — As  long  as  this  hermit  is  alive,  the 
disgraceful  story  of  my  former  state  will  be  brought 


*  The  declared  author  of  a  metaphysical  work  in  the  Sanskrit  lan- 
guage, called  Nyaya-darsana,  the  fir.-t  volume  of  which  is  said  to  have 
been  deposited  in  the  British  Museum. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  237 

to  my  ears ;  saying  which,  he  went  to  kill  his  pro- 
tector;  but  as  the  holy  man  penetrated  his  design 
with  his  supernatural  eye,  he  reduced  him  to  his 
former  state  of  a  mouse.  I  repeat,  therefore,  "  One  of 
low  degree,"  &c.  Please  to  attend  to  this  also,  said 
the  minister : 

A  certain  booby  after  having  devoured  fish  of  every 
size  and  quality ,  at  length  is  killed  from  his  attempting 
a  crab  ont  of  mere  gluttony. 

How  was  that  ?  demanded  Chitra-varna  ;  and  his 
minister  related  the  following  story  : 


FABLE  VII. 

In  the  country  of  Malava  there  is  a  lake  distinguished 
by  the  name  of  Padma-garbha,  where  lived  an  old 
booby,  who,  being  deprived  of  his  former  abilities, 
stood  and  feigned  to  appear  like  one  who  was  troubled 
in  mind ;  in  which  situation  being  observed  by  a  crab 
at  a  distance,  the  latter  asked  him  why  he  stood  there, 
and  did  not  look  for  food.  You  know,  replied  the 
booby,  that  fish  is  what  I  live  upon  ;  and  I  know  for 
certain  that  fishermen  are  coming  to  catch  them  all ; 
for,  as  I  was  looking  about  the  skirts  of  the  next 
village,  I  overheard  the  conversation  of  some  water- 
men upon  that  subject ;  so  this  being  the  case,  I  have 
lost  my  appetite  with  reflecting  that,  when  our  food  is 


233  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

gone,  death  will  soon  follow.  This  being  overheard 
by  all  the  fish,  they  observed  to  one  another  that  it 
was  proper  to  look  out  for  assistance  whilst  they  had 
time;  and,  said  they,  let  us  ask  the  booby  himself 
what  is  best  to  be  done  ;  for, 

'  One  may  better  form  a  connection  with  an  enemy 
who  will  render  one  assistance,  than  with  a  friend  who 
would  do  one  an  injury.  These  two  should  rather  be 
distinguished  according  to  the  good  or  injury  they  do 
to  one.' 

Accordingly,  the  fish  accosted  the  booby,  and  said, 
—Pray,  master  booby,  tell  us  what  means  can  be 
devised  for  our  safety  upon  this  occasion  ?  There  is 
one  way  to  be  safe,  replied  the  artful  booby^  and  that 
is,  going  to  another  pond,  whither  I  am  willing  to 
transport  you.  The  fish,  in  the  greatness  of  their 
fears,  consented  to  this  proposal,  and  their  treacherous 
deliverer  devoured  them  all  one  by  one  as  he  took 
them  out  of  the  water.  At  length,  the  crab  asked  him 
to  take  him  also  ;  and  the  booby,  although  he  had 
never  before  had  any  inclination  to  taste  one  of  his 
species,  took  him  up  with  great  marks  of  respect,  and 
carried  him  ashore ;  when  the  crab  seeing  the  ground 
covered  with  the  bones  of  the  fish  which  the  booby 
had  destroyed,  cried  to  herself, — Alas,  how  unfor- 
tunate !  I  shall  certainly  be  killed  too,  unless  I  can 
contrive    some    means   of    escaping.      Let    me    try 


FABLES  AND   PROVERBS,  239 

immediately    what     the    occasion    requires.       They 
say, 

*  In  times  of  danger  it  is  proper  to  be  alarmed  until 
danger  be  near  at  hand ;  but  when  we  perceive  that 
danger  is  near,  one  should  oppose  it  as  if  one  were 
not  afraid. 

*  When  one  attacked  beholdeth  no  safety  for  him- 
self, if  he  be  a  wise  man,  he  will  die  fighting  with 
his  foe.' 

It  is  also  said,  that 

"  As  out  of  battle  death  is  certain,"  &c. 

The  crab  having  come  to  this  resolution,  he  seized 
the  opportunity,  Avhen  the  booby  stretched  out  his 
neck  to  devour  him,  to  tear  open  his  throat  with  the 
pincers  of  his  claws.  Wherefore  I  repeat,  "  A  certain 
booby,"  &c. 

Attend,  said  the  peacock  king,  to  what  I  have  been 
thinking  of : — That  if  Cloud-colour  be  left  governor 
here,  all  the  choice  things  which  Karpura-dweepa 
produces  may  be  sent  to  us  to  enjoy  in  great  luxury, 
when  we  shall  be  returned  to  the  Vindhya  mountains. 
The  minister,  laughing  at  the  king's  proposal, 
replied, — Please  your  Highness, 

He  who  rejoiceth  over  an  nnaccoinplisJied  design,  may 
meet  with  disgrace ;  like  the  Brahman  who  brake  the 
pots  and  pans. 


240  THE  HITOPADESA : 

How  did  that  happen?  demanded  the  king;  and 
the  minister  related  the  following  story  :  J 

FABLE  VIII. 

In  the  city  of  Devee-kotta*  there  was  a  Brahman 
whose  name  was  Deva-Sarma.t  One  lucky  evening 
he  found  a  curious  dish,i  which  he  took  with  him  into 
a  potter's  warehouse  full  of  earthenware,  and  throw- 
ing himself  upon  a  bed  which  happened  to  be  there,§ 
it  being  night,  he  began  to  express  his  thoughts  upon 
the  occasion  in  this  manner  : — If  I  dispose  of  this 
dish,  I  shall  get  ten  Kapardakas||  for  it;  and  with 
that  sum  I  may  purchase  many  pots  and  pans,  the 
sale  of  which  will  increase  my  capital  so  much,  that 
I  shall  be  able  to  lay  in  a  large  stock  of  cloth  and 
the  like ;  which  having  disposed  of  at  a  great  advance, 
I  shall  have  accumulated  a  fortune  of  aZ-a'^H  of  money. 
With  this  I  will  marry  four  wives  ;  and  of  these  I 
will  amuse  myself  with  her  who  may  prove  the 
handsomest.  This  will  create  jealousy;  so  when 
the  rival  wives  shall  be  quarrelling,  then  will  I,  over- 
whelmed with  anger,  hurl  my  stick  at  them,  thus  ! 
Saying  which,  he  flung  his  walking-stick  out  of  his 

*  The  city  of  the  goddess.     Its  situation  is  forgotten. 

t  The  peace  of  God. 

X  In  the  original,  Saktubhuk-sarava,  a  dish  to  eat  tarts. 

§  It  is  very  common  to  see  a  small  bedstead  in  the  shops  in  India. 

II  Ten  cowries. 

Hi  In  Sanskrit,  laksha.     One  hundred  thousand  (rupees). 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  241 

hand  with  such  force,  that  he  not  only  brake  his 
curious  dish,  but  destroyed  many  of  the  pots  and 
pans  in  the  shop ;  the  master  of  which  hearing  the 
noise,  came  in,  and  discovering  the  cause,  disgraced 
the  Brahman,  and  turned  him  out  of  doors.*  I  have 
said,  therefore,  concluded  the  minister,  "  He  who 
rejoiceth,"  &c. 

At  the  conclusion  of  this  story  the  king  took  the 
vulture  aside,  and  desired  him  to  point  out  what  he 
ought  to  do  ;  and  the  minister  replied, 

'  The  conductors  of  princes  intoxicated  with  power, 
as  well  as  of  wounded  or  restive  elephants,  get  nothing 
but  disgrace !' 

Please  your  Highness,  continued  he,  the  castle  hath 
been  destroyed  by  us  in  the  pride  of  strength ;  or 
rather,  was  it  not  by  a  stratagem  dictated  by  your  own 
glory  ?  No,  repHed  the  king,  it  was  thy  own  scheme. 
If  my  advice  were  to  be  followed,  said  the  minister, 
we  should  now  return  to  our  own  country  ;  for  upon 
the  return  of  the  rainy  season,  should  we  have  to  fight 
the  enemy  again,  with  an  equal  force,  in  their  own 
country,  we  shall  find  it  extremely  difficult  to  retreat 
home  if  we  should  have  occasion.  Then,  for  the  sake 
of  peace  and  glory,  treat  with  the  enemy,  and  let  us 
depart.  We  have  taken  their  castle,  and  gained 
renown.     This  is  the  extent  of  my  opinion. 

*  According  to  the  original,  turned  him  out  of  the  shop. 


1^2  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

*  He  is  the  companion  of  a  prince,  who,  placing  his 
duty  before  him,  payeth  no  regard  to  his  master's 
h'kings  or  dislikings,  and  tells  him  unwelcome  truths. 

'  When  victory  in  the  battle  is  doubtful,  one  should 
wish  to  treat,  even  with  an  equal.  One  should  not 
hesitate  ;  for  thus  Vrihaspati  hath  declared. 

*  Who,  except  a  child,  would  place  his  friends,  his 
army,  his  kingdom,  himself,  and  his  reputation,  in  the 
doubtful  balance  of  a  battle?' 

Besides, 

Soinei'.'^^  the  overthroiv  of  both  happcnetJi ;  fortvere 

not  Stmda  and  Upasunda,  two  giants  of  equal  strength, 

killed  by  one  another  ? 

* 
How  was   that?  said  the   king;  and    the   vulture 

related  the  following  story  : 

FABLE  IX. 

In  former  times  there  were  two  giants,  the  one  called 
Sunda,  and  the  other  Upasunda,  who  wishing  to  con- 
quer the  three  regions  of  the  universe  by  the  great 
exertions  of  their  bodies,  for  a  long  time  petitioned 
the  deity  with  the  crescent  on  his  head  to  be  pro- 
pitious to  their  design.  The  godj  pleased  with  their 
prayers,  told  them  to  ask  a  boon  ;  but  as  the  goddess 
Saraswatce*  had  the  control  of  these  two  of  dreadful 

'••  The  goddess  of  speech,  harmony,  and  the  arts. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  243 

forms,  both  their  original  wish  and  design  were 
changed,  and  at  length  they  said, — If  the  disposer  of 
fortune  be  pleased  with  our  prayers,  give  us,  O 
Supreme  Being,  Parvatee  thy  own  consort !  Accord- 
ingly, the  deity,  although  displeased  at  the  request, 
from  the  absolute  necessity  of  granting  boons  and 
from  a  kind  of  infatuation,*  gave  them  Parvatee. 

Having  obtained  her,  they  were  presently  inflamed 
by  the  beauty  of  her  person,  and  eager  for  the  ruin 
of  the  mother  of  the  universe  ;t  for  they  were  in- 
volved in  the  darkness  of  sin.  But  as  At^?"  were 
jealous  of  one  another,  they  resolved  to  call  upon 
some  man  of  authority  to  determine  which  she 
should  belong  to  ;  and  instantly  the  deity,  her  lord, 
stood  before  them  under  the  disguise  of  a  venerable 
Brahman.  We  have  obtained  this  female,  said  they, 
as  a  boon,  and  wish  thee  to  determine  which  of  us 
she  should  belong  to.     The  Brahman  replied, 

*  A  Brahman  is  respectable  because  he  is  of  a  tribe 
the  first  in  rank,  a  Kshatriya+  for  strength,  and  a 
Visya  §  if  he  be  possessed  of  wealth  and  grain.' 

Now,  seeing  you  two  are  of  the  second,  or  military 
order,  your  duty  is  fighting.  These  words  made  a 
due   impression  upon   their  minds;  they   fell    upon 

*  In  the  original,  moorhata,  the  slate  of  being  foolish, 
t  An  epithet  of  the  gx>ddess  Parvatee. 
X  The  second  of  the  four  grand  tribes  ;  a  soldier. 
§  One  of  the  third  order  in  society  ;  a  merchant. 


244  THE  HITOPADESA : 

each  other,  but  as  they  were  equal  in  strength  and 
courage,  they  died  at  the  same  instant  from  the 
blows  they  received  from  each  other.  I  say,  there- 
fore, one  should  be  inclined  to  treat  even  with  one 
of  equal  force,  concluded  the  vulture.  Hast  thou 
not  told  me  this  before  ?  said  the  king.  What, 
said  the  minister,  did  your  Highness  then  compre- 
hend the  full  extent  of  what  I  said  ?  According 
to  my  opinion,  this  is  not  a  proper  time  for  the 
renewal  of  hostilities.  King  Hiranya-garbha  is  en- 
dued with  those  qualities  which  render  him  a  proper 
person  to  treat  with,  and  not  to  quarrel  with.  They 
say, 

*  There  are  seven  descriptions  with  which  it  is 
deemed  proper  to  form  an  alliance  :  men  of  veracity  ; 
men  of  family  ;  men  of  justice  and  virtue  ;  men  of  low 
degree,  sometimes;  such  as  are  heads  of  a  great 
fraternity  ;  such  as  are  powerful ;  and  those  who  have 
been  successful  in  many  battles. 

*  He  who  formeth  a  connection  with  an  honest  man, 
from  his  love  of  truth,  will  not  suffer  thereby.  And 
the  man  of  family,  it  is  very  certain,  will  not  be 
guilty  of  an  unworthy  action,  even  in  the  defence 
of  Hfe. 

*To  the  strictly  just  and  virtuous  person,  every- 
thing is  annexed.  The  virtuous  man,  from  his  justice 
and  the  affection  he  hath  for  mankind,  is  the  dispeller 
of  sorrow  and  pain. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  245 

*  It  is  expedient  to  form  connections  even  with  one 
of  low  degree,  upon  the  approach  of  our  own  de- 
struction, and  when,  without  his  protection,  a  worthy 
person  might  be  ruined. 

*  He  who  is  the  head  of  a  confederacy  of  brothers, 
from  their  compactness,  is  as  difficult  to  be  rooted 
out  as  a  bamboo*  surrounded  by  impenetrable 
thorns. 

'There  is  no  ordinance  for  our  contending  with  the 
strong  :  the  clouds  never  pass  against  the  wind. 

'  From  the  glory  of  him  who  hath  been  victorious 
in  many  battles,  as  from  the  glory  of  the  son  of 
Jamadagnee,t  all,  at  all  times,  and  everywhere,  is 
enjoyed. 

'  Seeing  he  who  hath  been  victorious  in  many 
battles  meeteth  not  death,  his  enemies  are  captivated 
by  his  glory.' 

Then  1  repeat,  that  the  royal  goose,  being  endued 
with  many  of  these  qualities,  is  worthy  to  be  treated 
with.  The  minister  now  orders  the  booby  to  go  to 
the  enemy's  camp,  and  to  return  with  what  further 
intelligence  he  could  pick  up. 

I  now  wish  thee,  said  the  peacock  king,  to  inform 
me  how  many  there  are  with  whom  it  may  be  im- 

*  In  Sanskrit,  zww^-f^.  They  grow  in  clumps,  and  often  so  closely 
connected  by  their  own  knotted  branches,  that  it  is  with  great  difficulty 
they  can  be  separated. 

+  The  father  of  that  Ram  who  is  said  to  have  destroyed,  in  several 
battles,  all  the  males  of  the  military  order. 


246  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

proper  to  enter  into  an  alliance;  and  the  vulture 
minister  replied, — I  am  about  to  tell  your  Highness, 
repeating  the  following  verses  : 

'  The  young,  the  old,  the  long  afflicted,  and  such  as 
have  been  excommunicated  by  their  tribe ;  the  fearful, 
and  those  whose  followers  are  timid  ;  the  covetous, 
and  those  whose  followers  are  covetous ; 

'  Those  whose  principal  officers  are  void  of  attach- 
ment, he  who  possesseth  too  much  power  in  affairs, 
one  who  in  his  counsels  is  of  many  opinions,  and  he 
who  speaketh  disrespectfully  of  the  gods  or  the 
Brahmans  ; 

'  He  who  is  naturally  unfortunate,  and  he  who  is 
always  consulting  fate;  one  afflicted  with  famine 
and  pestilence,  and  he  who  possesseth  a  disorderly 
army; 

*  One  who  doth  not  stay  in  his  own  country,  one 
who  is  beset  with  many  enemies,  he  who  hath  an  army 
out  of  time,"^  and  one  who  hath  departed  from  the 
true  religion :  these  make  twenty  descriptions  of 
persons, 

'  With  whom  it  is  not  proper  to  enter  into  alliance, 
and  whom  one  should  do  nothing  but  check ;  for  if 
such  as  these  go  to  war,  they  presently  fall  into  the 
power  of  their  enemies. 

*  If  he  be  a  child,  his  people  are  not  ready  to  fight, 

*  Out  of  season,  or  when  there  is  no  occnsion  for  an  army. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS,  247 

because  of  the  insignificance  of  his  nature,  and  the 
inability  of  an  infant  to  pay  the  reward  or  punish,  for 
fighting  or  not  fighting 

'Be  he  one  oppressed  with  age,  or  with  some  tedious 
infirmity,  deprived  of  the  power  of  exertion,  he  is 
inevitably  overcome  of  himself. 

*He  who  hath  been  expelled  by  all  his  kindred  is 
easily  to  be  defeated ;  for  his  relations  too,  out  of 
respect  for  themselves,  are  ready  to  destroy  him. 

*  Be  he  a  coward,  he  himself  will  flee  to  avoid  the 
battle  ;  and  if  his  troops  are  dastards,  they  will  forsake 
him  in  the  field. 

'  The  followers  of  the  covetous  refuse  to  fight, 
because  there  is  no  distribution  of  the  spoils ;  and 
where  the  attendants  are  so,  they  mutiny  for  pay,  and 
murder  their  leaders. 

*  If  the  principal  officers  are  not  attached,  their 
chief  is  forsaken  by  them  in  the  midst  of  the  battle  ; 
and  if  he  be  one  who  hath  too  much  power  in  affairs, 
he  expecteth  superior  attention. 

'  He  who  in  his  counsels  is  of  many  minds,  is 
hateful  to  his  ministers  ;  and  because  of  the  unsteadi- 
ness of  his  mind,  he  is  neglected  by  them  in  his 
necessary  affairs. 

'As  religion  is  always  most  powerful,  so  he  who 
despiseth  the  gods  or  a  Brahman,  of  himself  goeth  to 
naught ;  and  so  doth  he  who  is  smitten  by  fate. 

*  Those  who  first  study  fate,  and  say, — Fate  is  the 


248  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

only  cause  of  fortune  and  misfortune,  terrify  them- 
selves. 

'  He  who  is  surrounded  by  famine  and  pestilence, 
of  himself  yieldeth  ;  and  he  who  hath  a  disorderly 
army,  hath  no  power  to  fight. 

'  One  who  is  out  of  his  own  country  is  defeated  by 
a  very  trifling  enemy :  the  smallest  alligator  in  his 
own  element  gripeth  the  largest  elephant. 

'  He  who  hath  many  enemies  is  like  a  pigeon 
among  kites  :  whatever  way  he  turneth,  he  is  en- 
countered by  misfortune. 

*  If  he  be  one  who  marchcth  his  army  out  of 
season,  he  is  destroyed  by  fighting  against  the 
weather.  He  will  suft'er  like  the  crow,  who,  venturing 
out  at  midnight,  had  his  eyes  picked  out  by  an  owl. 

'  One  should,  on  no  account,  enter  into  any  con- 
nection with  one  who  hath  departed  from  the  faith  ; 
for,  although  he  be  bound  by  treaty,  he  will,  because 
of  his  own  unrighteousness,  break  his  engagement.' 

In  addition  to  all  this,  continued  the  minister,  I 
shall  remind  your  Highness  of  the  following  par- 
ticulars: Uniting,  disputing,  halting,  marching,  sur- 
rendering, separating,  are  denominated  the  "six 
modes."  *  For  the  commencement  of  an  expedition 
the  necessaries  are,  men,  stores,  treasure,  time,  and 
place ;  the  possession  of  which  is  proper,  as  a  pro- 

*  In  the  original,  shadgoona. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  249 

tection  against  misfortune,  as  well  as  for  the  accom- 
plishment of  a  design  :  they  are  called  "  the  secret  of 
five  members/'*  Pacifying,  giving,  dividing,  pun- 
ishing, are  distinguished  by  the  appellation  of  *'  the 
four  means." t  Resolution,  authority,  good  counsel, 
are  denoted  "the  three  powers."  {  Those  sovereigns 
who  attend  to  all  these  things  are  always  victorious ; 
for,  they  say, 

*  The  success  which  is  to  be  acquired  by  those  who 
are  acquainted  with  the  rules  of  policy  and  prudence, 
is  not  to  be  gained  by  the  price  of  abandoning  life  ; 
for  such  knowledge  causeth  irresolution  to  fly  from 
the  body. 

'  He  is  always  possessed  of  riches,  whose  followers 
are  well  attached,  whose  spies  are  concealed,  and 
whose  counsels  are  kept  private  ;  and  he  who  doth 
not  speak  with  unkindness  to  his  fellow-creatures, 
may  govern  the  whole  world  to  the  extremities  of  the 
ocean/ 

But  please  your  Highness,  continued  the  minister, 
although  peace  has  been  proposed  by  that  great 
statesman  the  vulture,  still  his  master  will  net  consent 
to  it,  because  of  his  recent  success.  Then  let  this  be 
done :   The   king   of  Singhala-dweepa,§  the   Sarasa 

*  Panchango-mantra. 

t  Of  concluding  a  war,  is  understood.  In  Sanskrit,  Chatwara-upaya. 

X  Traya-sakti. 

§  Ceylon. 


250  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

Mahabala"*^  is  our  friend  ;  let  him  raise  a  disturbance 
in  Jambu-dweepa,  the  enemy's  country. 

'A  wise  man  having  practised  great  secrecy, 
marching  with  a  well-composed  army,  may  alarm  an 
opponent ;  and  he  who  is  alarmed  will  make  peace 
with  him  with  whom  he  hath  been  at  variance.'t 

The  royal  goose  having  consented  to  this  proposal, 
one  Vichitra  a  booby  was  dispatched  to  Singhala- 
dweepa  with  a  very  private  letter.J 

In  the  meantime  the  spy  returning  from  the 
peacock's  camp,  said, — Please  your  Highness,  attend 
to  what  I  have  to  inform  you  of.  The  vulture 
minister  said  to  the  peacock  king, — Although  Cloud- 
colour  the  crow  was  so  long  in  the  enemy's  castle, 
what  if  he  doth  or  doth  not  know  whether  the  royal 
goose,  Hiranya-garbha,  be  possessed  of  those  quali- 
ties which  are  necessary  towards  our  treating  with 
him }  After  this,  continued  the  spy,  the  peacock 
king  having  called  Cloud-colour  before  him,  asked 
him  what  sort  of  a  character  that  same  royal  goose, 
Hiranya-garbha,  was,  and  what  sort  of  minister  he 
had.  To  this  the  crow  replied, — Please  your  High- 
ness,  Hiranya-garbha  is  as   noble  as  king  Yudhi- 


*  Great-strength. 

+  There  is  such  a  play  upon  words  in  the  original  of  this  verse,  that 
the  translation  is  but  a  faint  resemblance. 

Z  The  original  expression  seems  to  favour  the  idea  of  their  being 
acquainted  with  the  art  of  writing  in  cypher. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  251 

shtira,*  and  a  person  of  great  sincerity  ;  and  as  to 
his  master,  his  likeness  is  nowhere  to  be  discovered. 
If  he  be  as  thou  hast  described  him,  observed  the 
king,  how  was  it  that  he  was  deceived  by  thee  ? 

The  crow  replied, 

'  What  great  ingenuity  is  there  in  deceiving  him 
whose  confidence  one  hath  gained  ?  Is  the  term 
manhood  his  who  mounteth  upon  the  bed,  and 
destroyeth  those  that  are  asleep  ? ' 

Attend,  please  your  Highness, — 1  was  discovered  by 
the  minister  from  the  beginning ;  but  the  king  his 
master,  being  himself  one  in  whom  the  greatest  con- 
fidence may  be  placed,  was  easily  imposed  upon  by 
me  ;  according  to  the  following  saying  : 

He  ivJio^  judging  by  ivhat  passeth  in  his  own  breast, 
believeth  a  knave  to  be  a  person  of  veracity,  is  deceived ; 
as  the  Brahman  zvas  concerning  his  goat. 

Pray  how  was  that  ?  demanded  the  king  ;  and 
the  spy  told  the  following  story  : 

FABLE  X. 

In  the  forest  of  the  prophet  GoWtama  a  certain 
Brahman,  having  determined  to  make  an  offering, 
went   to   a   neighbouring    village   and    purchased    a 

*  Firm  in  battle.     The  name  of  a  king  who  reigned  over  Hinclostan 
upwards  of  four  thousand  years  ngo. 


252  THE  H1T0PADESA: 

goat,*  which  having  thrown  across  his  shoulder,  he 
turned  towards  home.  As  he  was  travelling  along, 
he  was  perceived  by  three  thieves.  If,  said  they,  wc 
could  by  some  artifice  get  the  goat  from  that  man,  it 
would  be  a  great  proof  of  our  address.  Saying  this, 
they  agreed  upon  their  stratagem,  and  executed  it 
in  this  manner  :  They  stationed  themselves  before 
the  Brahman,  and  sat  down  under  the  trees  in  the 
road  which  led  to  his  habitation,  till  he  should  come 
up  to  them.  Soon  after,  he  w^as  accosted  by  one  of 
them  in  this  manner  : — Is  not  that  a  dog  }  Brahman, 
what  is  the  reason  thou  carricst  it  upon  thy  shoulder } 
The  Brahman  replied, — No,  it  is  not  a  dog  ;  it  is  a 
goat,  which  I  have  purchased  to  make  an  offering  of. 
About  a  mile  further  on  he  met  another  of  them, 
who  repeating  the  same  question,  he  took  the  goat 
from  his  shoulder,  and  putting  it  upon  the  ground, 
examined  it  again  and  again ;  and  at  length,  replac- 
ing it  upon  his  shoulder,  he  went  on,  quite  staggered 
as  it  were. 

TJic  minds  even  of  good  men  are  staggered  by  the 
arguments  of  the  wicked ;  but  those  ivho  place  confidence 
in  tliem  may  suffer  by  it ;  like  the  camel  CJdtra-varna. 

The  king  asked  how  that  was  ;  and  the  spy  told 
him  the  following  story  ; 

*  In  the  English  translation  of  the  fables  falsely  attributed  tu  Pilpay, 
p.  206,  it  13  a  fine  fat  sheep ;  which,  by-the-by,  is  an  animal  never 
sacrificed  by  the  Hindoos. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  253 

FABLE   XI. 

In  a  certain  forest  there  was  a  lion  whose  name  was 
Madotkatta,*  and  he  had  three  attendants;  a  crow,  a 
tiger,  and  a  jackal.  One  day,  as  these  three  were 
roaming  about,  they  met  with  a  camel.  They  asked 
him  whence  he  came,  and  whither  he  was  travelling  ; 
and  after  he  had  given  an  account  of  himself,  they 
introduced  him  to  the  lion  ;  who,  having  given  him 
assurances  of  protection,  and  determined  that  he 
should  be  called  Chitra-varna,  retained  him  in  his 
service.  Some  time  after,  when  the  lion  was  out  of 
order,  his  attendants  were  exceedingly  at  a  loss  for 
provisions,  because  for  some  time  it  had  rained  vio- 
lently. So  the  crow,  the  tiger,  and  the  jackal,  agreed 
amongst  themselves  to  contrive  some  way  for  the  lion 
to  kill  the  camel  ;  for,  said  they,  what  is  that  thorn- 
eater  t  to  us  }  Our  master,  observed  the  tiger,  having 
given  him  assurances  of  safety,  and  taken  him  under 
his  protection,  then  how  can  this  be  brought  about } 
To  which  the  crow  replies, — At  such  a  time  as  this, 
when  our  master's  health  is  upon  the  decline  for  want 
of  food,  he  will  not  scruple  to  commit  a  sin  ;  for  they 
say, 

*  A    mother,   when    oppressed   with   hunger,   will 

*  From  niada,  courage,  vigour,  mettle,  and  ootkatta^  fierce, 
t  Camels  are  fond  of  browsing  upon  thorny  plants. 


254  THE  HITOPADESA  .- 

abandon  her  own  offspring ;  a  female  serpent,  when 
distressed  for  food,  will  devour  her  own  eggs.  What 
crimes  will  they  not  commit  who  are  pinched  with 
hunger !  Men  pining  for  food  become  destitute  of 
pity  and  compassion. 

'Those  who  are  intoxicated  either  with  liquor  or 
pleasure,  the  lazy,  the  passionate,  the  hungry,  the 
covetous,  the  fearful,  the  hasty,  and  libertines,  have 
no  knowledge  of  justice.' 

This  being  proved  to  the  satisfaction  of  all  parties, 
away  they  went  to  the  lion  ;  who,  the  moment  he 
saw  them,  demanded  if  they  had  brought  him  any- 
thing to  eat.  The  crow  replied, — Sir,  with  all  our 
endeavours,  we  have  not  been  able  to  procure  the 
smallest  trifle.  Then  what  means  are  there  now  left 
for  my  support  ^  cried  the  lion.  Sir,  replied  the 
crow,  from  your  refusing  the  food  which  you  have  in 
your  power,  wc  are  all  like  to  perish.  What  is  there 
here  for  me  to  eat }  eagerly  demanded  the  lion.  The 
camel !  replied  the  crow,  whispering  it  in  the  lion's  ear. 
The  noble  beast  at  this  proposal,  touching  the  ground, 
and  then  his  two  ears,  in  abhorrence,  exclaimed, — 
Having,  at  our  first  interview,  given  him  assurances 
of  my  protection,  how  can  he  now  be  treated  thus  ? 
They  say, 

*  Nor  the  gift  of  cattle,  nor  the  gift  of  land,  nor  the 
gift  of  bread,  nor  the  gift  of  milk,  is  to  be  compared 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  255 

with  that  which  men  call  the  greatest  of  all  gifts : 
the  gift  of  assurance  from  injury !  ' 

Again : 

*  He  who  hath  defended  one  who  had  claimed  his 
protection,  receiveth  the  full  reward  which  is  the  fruit 
of  an  Aswa-medha  sacrifice,*  rendered  more  worthy 
by  the  addition  of  everything  which  is  estimable  ! ' 

The  crow  replied, — Under  these  circumstances  it  is 
not  proper  that  your  Highness  should  put  him  to 
death  ;  but  suppose  we  so  contrive,  that  he  shall  con- 
sent to  offer  his  own  body  ?  The  lion  hearing  this, 
remained  silent ;  but  the  crow,  finding  an  opportunity, 
made  a  pretence  to  carry  all  his  friends  and  the  camel 
before  him ;  when  he  addressed  him  in  this  man- 
ner : — Please  your  Highness,  as  we  can  find  nothing 
for  you  to  eat,  rather  than  my  master  shall  fast,  let 
him  satisfy  his  hunger  with  all  the  flesh  upon  my 
poor  body ;  for, 

*  When  nature  is  forsaken  by  her  lord,  be  she  ever 
so  great,  she  doth  not  survive.  Although  Dhanwan- 
tari  be  the  physician,  when  life  is  departed,  what  can 
he  do  ? 

'  All  honours  and  endowments  have  their  founda- 
tions in  the  sovereign  ;  but  although  trees  have  their 


*  The  sacrifice  of  the  horse,  in  ancient  times  performed  by  a  king  at 
the  conclusion  of  a  great  war  in  which  he  had  been  victorious, 


2s6  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

roots,    their   being    fruitful    depcndeth    upon    man's 
exertion.' 

The  lion  nobly  replied, — It  is  better  to  abandon 
life  entirely,  than  to  proceed  in  such  an  act  as  this  ! 
The  jackal  next  offered  himself ;  but  the  lion 
generously  refusing,  the  tiger  said,  Live,  O  master, 
by  my  body !  This  never  can  be  proper !  said  the 
noble  beast ;  and,  last  of  all,  the  camel,  in  whom  was 
created  the  fullest  confidence,  offered  himself  as  the 
rest  had  done  ;  and  instantly  the  tiger  tore  open  his 
sides  ;  and  being  thus  cruelly  murdered,  he  was  de- 
voured by  them  all.  I  say,  therefore,  "The  minds 
even  of  good  men,"  &c. 

At  length,  said  the  spy,  concluding  the  story  of 
the  three  thieves,  the  Brahman  having  heard  the 
third  thief,  like  the  former  two,  insist  upon  it,  that  he 
had  a  dog  upon  his  shoulder,  was  convinced  that  it 
was  a  dog;  and  so,  leaving  his  goat  behind  him, 
which  the  thieves  presently  took  away  and  made  a 
feast  of,  the  good  man  washed  himself*  and  went 
home.  Whence,  I  say,  "  He  who,  judging  by  what 
passeth  in  his  own  breast,"  &c. 

Cloud-colour,  said  the  peacock  king  to  the  crow, 
thou  wert  a  long  time  amongst  the  enemy, — pray 
how  are  their  orders  executed  ?  Please  your  High- 
ness, replied  the  crow,  what  is  there  not  done  by 

*  Because  he  had  touched  what  he  supposed  a  dog,  which  is  esteemed 
an  unclean  animal. 


t^ABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  257 

servants  who  have  their  master's  affairs  at  heart,  or 
from  a  power  derived  from  one's  own  necessities  ? 

*  Do  not  men,  O  king,  bear  burning  wood  upon 
their  heads  ;  and  the  force  of  rivers,  simply  by  wash- 
ing their  roots,  sweep  trees  away  ?' 

When  a  zvise  man  findeth  an  occasion^  he  may  bear 
away  his  enemy  jipon  his  shouldei^,  as  it  ivere ;  just  like 
the  old  serpent  ivho  killed  the  frogs. 

How  did  that  happen?  said  the  peacock  king  ; 
and  the  crow  related  the  following  story : 

FABLE  XII. 

There  was  an  old  serpent,  by  name  Manda-visarpa,"^ 
who,  because  of  his  great  age,  being  unable  to  seek 
food  for  himself,  threw  himself  down  the  bank  of 
a  pond,  where  he  remained,  till  a  certain  frog  seeing 
him  at  a  distance,  asked  him  what  was  the  reason  he 
did  not  hunt  about  for  food  ?  Leave  me !  cried  the 
serpent,  what  occasion  hast  thou  to  inquire  into  the 
story  of  such  an  unfortunate  wretch  as  I  ?  The  frog, 
who  was  not  a  little  pleased  to  find  his  enemy  in 
distress,  desired  him,  by  all  means,  to  make  him 
acquainted  with  the  cause  of  his  trouble.  You  must 
know,  then,  said  the  serpent,  that  here  in  the  town  of 
Brahma-pura,  the  son  of  one  Kowndinya  a  Brahman, 

*  Slow-glide. 


258  THE  HiTOPADESA  : 

in  the  twentieth  year  of  his  age,  and  endued  with 
every  virtue  and  accomplishment,  by  the  will  of  fate, 
was  some  time  since  bitten  by  cruel  me  !  His  father 
beholding  his  beloved  son  Shuseela^  for  that  was  his 
name,  l}"ing  dead^  fell  mad  for  grief,  and  rolled  him- 
self upon  the  ground.  In  the  meantime,  the  people 
of  the  city,  his  kindred,  friends,  and  connections,  all 
came  and  sat  down  upon  the  spot  where  he  lay. 
They  say, 

'  He  is  a  friend  who  attendeth  one  at  a  feast,  m 
affliction,  in  famine,  in  disputing  with  an  enemy,  at 
the  king's  gate,'^  and  in  the  cemetery.' t 

Amongst  the  rest,  there  was  a  certain  pilgrim,  whose 
name  w^as  Kapila,  J  by  whom  the  father  of  the 
youth  was  thus  addressed, — Art  thou  deprived  of 
reason,  Kowndinya,  that  thou  thus  lamentest  the 
dead  ?     Hear  me  ! 

'  Where  are  those  sovereigns  of  the  world,  with  all 
their  numerous  armies  and  splendid  equipage,  of 
whose  departure  the  earth,  even  now,  beareth  testi- 
mony ? 

^  In  the  body  is  concealed  its  decay,  prosperity  is 

*  Figuratively,  when  in  conrnlement. 

+  The  original  word  conveys  the  idea  of  a  place  by  a  river's  side, 
where  those  whose  lives  are  despaired  of  are  carried  and  attended  till 
dead,  and  where,  at  length,  their  bodies  are  burnt  to  ashes. 

I^  The  real  name. of  one  of  their  ancient  saints^  from  whose  works 
probably  the  following" verses  are  quoted. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  259 

succeeded  by  adversity,  and  our  meetings  are  soon 
followed  by  separations.  Thus  everything  in  nature 
is  produced  with  that  which  will  destroy  it ! 

*  Is  not  this  body  seen  to  waste,  perceptibly, 
away  ?  Is  not  its  gradual  consumption  plainly 
to  be  discovered,  as  of  water  standing  in  a  crude 
vessel  ? 

'Youth  and  beauty,  riches  and  stores  of  worldly 
goods,  with  the  society  of  those  we  love,  and  even  life 
itself,  are  all  of  short  duration  I  Then  let  not  the 
wise  man  therein  be  fascinated. 

'As  two  planks  floating  on  the  surface  of  the 
mighty  receptacle  of  the  waters,  meet,  and  having 
met,  are  separated  for  ever ;  so  do  beings  in  this  life 
come  together,  and  presently  are  parted. 

*  Upon  the  reduction  of  a  body  composed  of  five 
elements  to  those  five  principles,  and  each  of  those 
elements  to  its  own  womb,  what  cause  is  there  for 
lamentation  ?  * 

'As  many  tender  connections  as  the  animal  man 
formeth  for  himself,  so  many  thorns  of  sorrow  are 
th^re  ingrafted  in  his  heart. 

'  This  is  not  a  place  for  any  one  long  to  cohabit 
with  another ;  nay,  not  even  with  his  own  body :  then 
how  can  he  expect  it  with  another  1 

'The  dissolution  of  a  body  foretelleth  a  new  birth  : 

*  The  five  elements  mentioned  in  this  verse  are,  fire,  air,  water,  earth, 
and  a  subtile  matter  ihey  call  akas, 

I  2 


26o  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

thus  the  coming  of  death,  which  is  not  to  be  passed 
over,  is  as  the  entrance  into  life.* 

'The  dissolution  of  the  delightful  connections  we 
form  with  those  we  love,  is  as  dreadful  as  the  total 
change  to  those  who  are  become  incurably  blind. 

*  But  as  brooks  run  on  to  join  their  rivers,  and  do 
not  turn  back  ;  so  the  days  and  nights  seize  mortals' 
lives,  and  proceed  eternally. 

*The  society  of  the  good,  which  contributeth  so 
much  to  the  relish  of  happiness  in  this  world,  is 
joined  in  the  yoke  of  troubles,  because  its  end  is 
separation. 

*  Hence  it  is  that  the  wise  avoid  the  acquaintance 
of  good  men ;  for  there  is  no  remedy  for  the  mind 
afflicted  with  the  sorrow  of  separation. 

'  Many  noble  and  pious  works  were  performed  by 
Sagara  and  other  ancient  kings  ;  but,  alas  !  both  they 
and  their  works  are  gone  to  decay. 

*  When  he  hath  considered,  and  reconsidered,  that" 
severe  punishment  deat):,  all  the  endeavours  of  the 
wit  of  man  become  aalax  as  skins  of  leather  sprinkled 
by  the  rain  ! 

'  Every  hero  of  the  human  race,  from  the  first  night 
of  his  residence  in  the  womb,  day  by  day  approacheth 
death.* 

Then  pay  no  attention  to  this  world,  continued  the 

*  Regeneration  in  the  literal  sense. 


FAILLES  AND  PROVERBS.  261 

good   pilgrim  ;    for  sorrow  is  a  proof  of  ignorance. 
Observe, 

*  If  separation  be  the  cause,  and  ignorance  be  not 
the  cause,  how  is  it,  that  after  days  have  passed  away, 
sorrow  is  changed  into  childishness  ? ' 

Wherefore,  compose  thy  troubled  mind,  and  dispel 
all  thought  of  grief ;  for  they  say, 

'  Not  to  think  is  the  grand  remedy,  when  our  chil- 
dren are  untimely  born,*  and  against  those  weapons 
of  deep  sorrow,  which  penetrate  the  heart/ 

The  afflicted  Kowndinya,  roused  by  these  words, 
got  up  as  it  were  from  a  trance,  and  cried, — Since  it 
be  so,  enough  of  dwelling  in  the  hell  of  houses !  I 
will  presently  retire  into  the  wilderness  !  f  Hold,  my 
son,  replied  the  benevolent  Kapila. 

*  Those  who  yield  to  their  passions  will  experience 
evils,  even  in  the  wilderness.  To  restrain  the  five 
organs  of  perception,  even  in  a  house,  is  doing  pen- 
ance. The  habitation  of  him  whose  passions  are  well 
regulated,  and  who  proceedeth  but  in  such  actions  as 
are  irreproachable,  is  as  the  wilderness  of  penitence.' 


*  A  Hindoo's  hopes  of  happiness  after  death  greatly  depend  upon 
his  having  children  to  perform  the  ceremonies  of  the  Sradha  (offering 
cakes  to  the  manes  of  their  ancestors),  by  which  he  is  taught  to  expect 
his  soul  will  be  released  from  the  torments  of  Naraka. 

t  It  is  very  common,  at  this  time,  for  men  to  quit  their  wives  and 
families,  and  all  worldly  concerns,  to  lead  a  godly  life  in  some  retired 
place,  or  else  to  wander  about  the  country  as  beggars. 


262  THE  HITOPADESA : 

For  they  say, 

'The  afflicted  even  should  practise  the  duties  of 
religion,  whatever  mode  of  life  they  may  choose,  and 
wherever  their  abode  may  be  ;  and  our  conduct  should 
be  equal  unto  all  beings  ;  for  distinctions  arc  not 
authorized  by  religion.' 

Again  : 

'  Those  who  eat  but  to  support  life,  who  wed  but 
for  the  sake  of  progeny,  and  who  speak  but  to  declare 
the  truth,  surmount  difficulties.' 

Again  : 

*  Suppose  thyself  a  river  and  a  holy  pilgrimage  in 
the  land  of  Bharata,*  of  which  truth  is  the  water, 
good  actions  the  banks,  and  compassion  the  current ; 


*  This  word  is  a  derivative  from  Bhnrata,  one  of  their  most  ancient 
kings  ;  and  it  is  the  only  name  formerly  used  by  the  natives  themselves 
for  the  countries  we  include  in  the  term  India ;  for  both  the  appellation 
Hindoo  for  the  people,  and  Hindostan  for  the  country,  now  generally 
used  by  natives  and  foreigners,  were  probably  given  them  by  their 
neighbours  the  Persians.  The  river  improperly  called  the  Indus  is 
quite  out  of  the  question,  either  as  giving  a  name  to  the  country,  as 
many  have  imagined,  or  borrowing  one  from  it,  according  to  the  opinion 
of  the  late  Alexander  Dow,  Esq.,  in  the  dissertation  prefixed  to  his 
"  History  of  Hindostan,"  p.  31,  who  in  the  same  page  asserts, 
that  "  the  Plindoos  are  so  called  from  Indoo  or  Hindoo,  which  in  the 
Shanscrita  language  signifies  the  moon."  It  is  true  that  eendoo  is  one  of 
the  names  of  the  moon,  but  not  hindoo.  Let  it  suffice  that  there  are  no 
such  words  as  Hindoo  or  Hindostan  in  the  Sanskrit  language.  lu 
Persian  we  find  Hind  for  the  country,  and  Hindoo  for  the  people.  The 
proper  name  of  the  river  we  call  the  Indus,  as  written  in  Sanskrit 
characters,  is  Seendhoo,  vhich,  by  the  vulgar,  is  pronounced  Seendh. 


'FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  263 

and  then,  O  son  of  Pandu,"^  wash  thyself  therein,  for 
the  inward  soul  is  not  to  be  purified  by  common 
water.' 

And  thou  shouldst  pay  particular  attention  to  this 
saying  : 

'  There  is  ease  for  him  who  quitteth  this  world, 
which  is  totally  destitute  of  good,  and  overwhelmed 
with  birth,  death,  old  age,  sickness,  and  sorrow.  Pain 
is  a  thing  of  certain  existence,  but  not  ease  ;  whence 
it  is  observed  that  the  term  ease  is  applied  as  a  sort 
of  remedy  for  one  in  pain.'  t 

To  all  this,  continued  the  serpent,  the  afflicted 
father  only  replied, — Even  so  it  is  !  but  presently 
after  the  poor  Brahman,  in  the  height  of  his  sorrow, 
denounced  this  curse  against  me,  the  author  of  his 
trouble, — that  henceforward  I  should  be  doomed  to 
carry  frogs  about  upon  my  back  as  a  beast  of  burden  ! 
After  that,  another  Brahman  who  happened  to  be  by, 
observing  that  Kowndinya  was  greatly  revived  by  the 
wholesome  doctrines  of  the  pilgrim,  addressed  him  in 
these  words  : 

'Society  should  be  avoided  with  all  the  efforts  of 
the  mind  ;  but  if  it  be  not  in  one's  power  to  avoid  it. 


*  The  name  of  an  ancient  king. 

t  According  to  this  doctrine,  ease  is  only  a  relative  affection  in  thin 
life,  though  a  positive  one  in  the  next. 


264  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

acquaintance  should  be  formed  with  the  good  alone, 
for  the  company  of  good  men  is  the  remedy.' 

Again  : 

'  The  tender  passion  should  be  avoided  with  all  the 
resistance  of  the  mind  ;  but  if  it  be  not  possible  to 
conquer  it,  it  should  be  indulged  towards  a  wife  alone, 
for  she  is  the  proper  remedy." 

Kowndinya  having  heard  this,  and  being  by  the 
salutary  counsel  of  Kapila  quite  cured  of  his  affliction, 
took  the  staff  according  to  the  usual  forms  ;*  and 
poor  I,  concluded  the  serpent,  lie  here  under  the 
power  of  a  Brahman's  curse,  ready  to  carry  any  frog 
that  shall  choose  to  mount  upon  my  back ! 

The  frog,  who  had  been  attentive  to  this  long  story, 
upon  hearing  the  last  words  of  the  serpent,  went 
away  to  inform  the  chief  of  the  pool  of  it,  who,  soon 
after  making  his  appearance,  the  serpent  placed  him 
upon  his  back  and  carried  him  about,  keeping  a 
gentle  easy  pace.  The  king  of  the  frogs  was  so 
pleased  with  his  ride,  that  he  came  again  the  next 
day  ;  but  upon  finding  the  serpent  unable  to  carry 
him,  and  asking  him  what  was  the  cause  of  his  weak- 
ness, the  artful  animal  replied  that  he  was  totally 
deprived  of  his  strength  for  want  of  food.     Upon  this 

*  He  renounced  the  cares  of  the  wo;  Id  to  lead  the  life  of  a  Brahma- 
charee  (literally  one  who  walkelh  in  God).  The  ceremonies  of  taking 
the  staff  are  fully  explained  in  the  laws  of  Manoo,  chapter  ii. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  265 

the  frog  ordered  him  to  be  fed,  every  day,  with  as 
many  of  his  subjects  as  he  might  choose  ;  and  the 
serpent  having,  by  degrees,  eaten  all  the  frogs  which 
were  to  be  found  in  the  pond,  at  length  devoured  his 
benefactor.  I  repeat,  therefore,  said  the  crow, 
"  When  a  wise  man,"  &c. 

Let  us  have  done  with  the  repetition  of  old  stories, 
observed  the  minister.  In  my  opinion,  said  he, 
Hiranya-garbha  is  worthy  of  our  alliance,  and  there- 
fore I  advise  that  a  treaty  be  formed  with  him.  Sir, 
said  the  king,  is  this  your  opinion  }  He  has  been 
defeated  by  us,  and  therefore  he  is  at  liberty  to 
remain  where  he  is,  provided  he  consent  to  be  our 
vassal ;  otherwise  I  command  him  to  be  attacked  ! 
Just  as  the  king  said  this,  the  parrot  came  in  from 
Jambu-dweepa,  and  informed  his  master  the  peacock 
that  the  Sarasa,  who  was  king  of  Singhala-dweepa,* 
had  lately  invaded  his  country,  and  was  still  there. 
What  is  it  thou  sayest  ?  cried  the  king  in  great  con- 
fusion. Art  thou  too  repeating  some  old  story } 
said  he.  Well  done,  minister  Chakra-vaka !  ex- 
claimed the  vulture,  well  done  !  Whilst  the  peacock 
in  great  anger  cried, — Let  him  stay  there  till  I  come, 
and  I  will  extirpate  him  with  his  whole  generation ! 
To  which  the  minister  Far-see,  smiling,  replied, 

*  There  is  no  necessity  for  imitating  an  autumnal 
*  Ceylon. 


266  THE  HITOPADESA : 

cloud  !  The  thunoer  of  the  heavens  our  chief  dis- 
played!, whether  on  some  account,  or  on  no  account, 
is  of  equal  inefficacy.' 

They  say, 

'A  king  should  not  dispute  with  too  many  enemies 
at  a  time  ;  for  even  the  proud  serpent  is  inevitably 
destroyed  by  large  swarms  of  wasps.' 

Are  we  then,  sir,  continued  the  minister,  to  march 
back  without  concluding  a  peace  ?  If  we  do,  said  he, 
I  think  we  may  have  occasion  to  repent. 

He  zuho  fallctJi  into  iJic  power  of  anger  before  he  Jiath 
made  Jiiniself  acquainted  ivith  another  s  merits,  may 
have  cause  to  be  sorry  for  it ;  like  the  foolish  Brahman 
after  he  had  killed  his  weasel. 

How  was  that  ?  demanded  the  king ;  and  his 
minister  Far-see  related  the  following  story  : 

FABLE   XIII. 

At  Ujjayinee  there  lived  a  Brahman  whose  name  was 
Mahdhava.  His  wife  having  been  lately  brought  to 
bed,  left  her  husband  in  charge  of  the  infant,  whilst 
she  w^ent  to  perform  her  ablutions.*  As  soon  as  she 
was  gone,  the  Brahman,  recollecting  that  the  king's 

*  Women  are  enjoined  by  the  law  to  perform  positive  ablutions  in 
the  river,  after  childbirlh,  and  at  certain  periods  every  month,  before 
they  can  return  to  their  husband's  bed, 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  267 

offerings  to  the  manes  of  his  ancestors  were  about 
to  be  made,  and  seeing  other  Brahmans  going  to 
attend  them,  was  prompted  by  his  natural  avarice  to 
reflect  in  this  manner  :  If  I  don't  go  directly,  said  he, 
some  one  else,  having  heard  of  it,  will  go  and  take 
away  my  share  of  the  good  things.     They  say, 

Time  drinketh  up  the  essence  of  every  work 
which  should  be  done,  and  is  not  done  quickly, 
whether  it  be  an  act  of  receiving,  or  an  act  of  giving 
away.' 

But,  continued  he,  I  have  no  one  to  take  care  of  the 
door,  then  what  am  I  to  do,  unless,  indeed,  I  place 
this  my  long-beloved  weasel  there,  who  is  as  dear  to 
me  as  the  child  itself,  and  then  venture  to  go  ?  In 
short,  he  did  so,  and  went  his  way  to  the  king's  feast. 
It  happened  that  soon  after  the  Brahman  left  the 
house,  as  the  weasel  was  passing  near  the  child,  he 
saw  a  black  serpent  gliding  towards  it,  which  he 
killed,  and  partly  devoured  ;  and  when  he  saw  his 
master  returning,  the  affectionate  little  animal  ran  to 
meet  him,  with  his  mouth  and  legs  all  covered  with 
blood  ;  and  he  rolled  himself  upon  the  ground  at  the 
Brahman's  feet  in  a  very  extraordinary  manner  ;  but 
the  good  man  seeing  him  in  such  a  condition,  and 
hastily  concluding  that  he  had  murdered  his  child, 
without  further  inquiry  put  the  poor  weasel  to  death. 
In  short,  when  the  Brahman  went  towards  his  child, 


-68  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

and  found  it  alive  and  well,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
discovered  the  mangled  remains  of  the  black  serpent 
upon  the  floor  near  it,  the  proofs  of  his  weasel's  merit 
and  fidelity  were  so  evident,  that  he  suffered  the  most 
bitter  pangs  of  sorrow  and  remorse.  I  repeat  therefore, 
continued  the  minister,  "  He  who  falleth  into  the 
power  of  anger,"  &c.     They  say, 

*  A  man  should  avoid  these  six  evils  :  Lust,  anger, 
avarice,  pleasure,  pride,  and  rashness ;  for,  free  of 
these,  he  may  be  happy.' 

The  peacock  king  replied, — So,  minister,  this  is  thy 
determination,  is  it  ?     They  say, 

'The  best  qualiiies  for  a  minister  are,  justice, 
thorough  investigation,  wise  determination,  firmness, 
and  secrecy.' 

Sir,  said  the  minister  in  reply, 

'  Rashness  in  any  undertaking  should  not  be  per- 
mitted ;  for  the  want  of  due  investigation  is  the 
foundation  of  the  greatest  misfortunes.  That  success 
which  merit  is  deserving  of,  attendeth  of  itself  upon 
him  who  actcth  with  due  deliberation.' 

Then,  if  what  I   say  is  worthy  of  attention,  peace 
irhould  be  concluded  ;  for, 

*  Although  four  means  are  mentioned  for  the 
accomplishment  of  the  work,  the  result  of  the  whole 
number  is  uniting  in  peace.' 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  269 

But,  said  the  king,  how  may  that  be  presently- 
effected  ?  Please  your  Highness,  replied  the  minister, 
it  shall  be  brought  about  speedily.     They  say, 

*  A  bad  subject  is  like  an  earthen  vessel,  easily  to 
be  broken  and  hard  to  be  united  ;  and  a  good  one 
like  a  vessel  of  gold,  not  easily  to  be  broken  and  not 
difficult  to  be  reunited.'^ 

Especially,  continued  the  minister,  as  both  the  king 
and  his  minister  are  exceedingly  well  informed  of 
things  in  general ;  for  this  I  knew  from  the  beginning, 
as  well  from  the  reports  of  the  crow  Cloud- colour  as 
from  a  single  review  of  their  conduct. 

'  The  virtue  and  conduct  of  an  absent  person  are, 
on  all  occasions,  to  be  estimated  by  his  works  ;  where- 
fore one  should  weigh  the  actions  of  those  who  are 
out  of  sight  by  the  effect.' 

Let  us  have  done  with  these  answers  and  replies, 
cried  the  king,  and  let  that  which  is  most  preferable 
be  pursued.  At  length  the  minister,  agreeable  to  his 
own  counsel,  went  forth  and  waited  near  the  castle, 
whilst  a  messenger  ran  to  the  royal  goose  Hiranya- 
garbha,  and  informed  him  that  the  minister  of  the 
peacock  king  was  coming  to  treat  for  peace ;  but  the 


*  The  original  words  rendered  by  broken,  united,  and  reunited,  being 
applicable  both  to  ihe  breaking  and  mending  of  a  vessel,  as  well  as  to 
friendly  union  and  dissolution,  the  spirit  of  the  simile  could  not  \vell  be 
preserved. 


270  THE  HITOPADESA : 

former,  still  suspecting  something,  said  to  his  own 
minister,  Know-all, — This  again  must  be  some  spy  or 
other  coming  to  impose  upon  us  !  Please  your  High- 
ness, replied  Know-all^  laughing  as  he  spoke,  there  is 
great  room  for  suspicion,  for  this  same  noble  person 
who  is  coming  is  one  who  can  see  a  great  way ;  "^  else 
suspicion,  which  is  the  proof  of  a  weak  mind,  should 
never  be  indulged. 

*  A  waiy  goose  having  been  once  deceived  by  an 
enemy,  whilst  sitting  in  a  very  thick  shade,  in  a  lake, 
looking  after  the  lotus  plant,  no  more  regardeth  the 
cooling  flower  which  is  distressed  by  the  appearance 
of  day,  and  afraid  of  the  stars.f  Thus  it  is  with  the 
people  of  this  world  ;  having  been  once  deceived,  they 
suspect  deceit  in  truth  itself! ' 

Then,  continued  the  minister,  let  a  present,  consisting 
of  jewels,  rich  dresses,  and  the  like,  the  best  we  can 
afford,  be  provided  for  him  as  a  compliment.  This 
being  done  accordingly,  the  mJnister,  Know-all,  went 
out  and  received  the  vulture,  Far-see,  in  front  of  the 
castle,  with  every  mark  of  respect ;  and  presently 
conducted  him  into  the  presence  of  the  royal  goose, 
where  he  was  permitted  to  be  seated  in  a  chair  of 
state.  Great  minister,  said  Know-all,  addressing 
himself  to   the  vulture,  now  dispose  of  these  your 


*  Alluding  to  his  name  Far- see. 

t  A  lotus,  which  spreads  its  blossoms  only  in  the  night. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS,  271 

dominions  according  to  your  wish  !  Even  so  !  added 
the  royal  goose.  So  be  it !  repHed  the  vulture  ;  but, 
said  he,  at  present  much  negotiation  is  unnecessary ; 
for  they  say, 

'  One  should  receive  the  covetous  with  gifts,  the 
proud  with  joined  hands,  and  the  like  tokens  of  sub- 
mission,  the  ignorant  with  passages  of  poetry,  and 
the  wise  and  learned  with  whatever  is  suitable  to 
their  character.' 

Again  : 

'  A  friend  should  be  received  with  sincerity,  rela- 
tions  with  respect,  women  with  gifts  and  compliments, 
and  others  with  whatever  is  proper/ 

Then  let  peace  be  presently  concluded,  that  the  most 
illustrious  king  Chitra-varna  may  depart,  added  the 
vulture.  Inform  us,  said  the  minister  Know-all,  how 
peace  is  to  be  made.  How  many  species  of  connec- 
tions and  alliances  are  there  ?  demanded  the  king.  I 
am  about  to  tell  you,  said  the  vulture,  so  please  to 
attend  : 

*  When  a  king  hath  been  overcome  by  one  stronger 
than  himself,  no  further  opposition  should  be  made  ; 
and  the  unfortunate  party  should  sue  for  peace  with 
all  possible  expedition. 

'  Those  who   are   acquainted  with    the    nature   of 


272  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

forming  connections  and  alliances,  declare  that  there 
are  sixteen  species,  thus  denominated  : 

Kapala,  Adrishtta-nara, 

Upahara,  Adishtta, 

Santana,  Atma-dishtta, 

Sang-gata,  Upagraha, 

Upanyasa,  Parikraya, 

Prateekara,  Uch-chinna, 

Sang-yoga,  Parabhooshana, 

Purushantara,  Skandopaneya. 

*The  Kapala  union  is  understood  to  be  that  where 
the  parties  simply  form  a  connection  upon  an  equal 
footing.  The  Upahara  is  when  there  is  a  gift  from 
one  of  the  parties. 

*The  Santana  union  is  conceived  to  be  that  in 
forming  which  one  of  the  parties  delivereth  up  his 
family  as  a  preliminary.  The  Sang-gata  alliance  is 
declared  to  be  that  which  is  formed  with  worthy  men 
upon  the  foundation  of  friendship, 

'Which  is  not  to  be  broken  by  any  accidents, 
whose  purposes  are  the  same  in  prosperity  and 
adversity,  and  the  measure  of  whose  duration  is  the 
length  of  life. 

'This  Sang-gata  union,  because  of  its  superior 
excellence,  may  be  compared  to  gold  ;  and  by  others, 
who  are  acquainted  with  the  doctrine  of  forming 
connections,  it  is  called  "  the  golden  union." 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS,  273 

*  The  Upanyasa  alliance  is  declared,  by  those  who 
are  acquainted  with  that  mode  of  uniting,  to  be  that 
which  is  concluded  upon  terrrs  pointed  out  by  one  of 
the  parties. 

*  The  alliance  which  is  formed  upon  this  principle, 
"  I  have  formerly  rendered  him  assistance,  he  shall 
now  do  so  to  me,"  is  denominated  the  Prateekara 
mode. 

*  This  also  is  called  Prateekara  :  "  I  will  render  him 
assistance,  and  he  shall  do  the  same  to  me."  Such 
was  the  alliance  formed  between  Rama  and  Su- 
greeva.^ 

*  It  having  been  made  to  appear,  that  an  expedi- 
tion hath  but  one  object,  and  upon  these  grounds  a 
treaty  is  entered  upon  with  united  authority,  it  is 
called  Sang-yoga. 

'  The  Purushantara  is  an  alliance  formed  upon  this 
principle, — "  Let  my  purpose  be  effected  by  the 
prime  of  both  our  armies ; "  and  in  settling  which 
there  is  a  price  fixed. 

*  The  Adrishtta-nara  is,  when  a  treaty  is  formed  on 
such  a  proposal  as  this : — "  My  purpose  is  to  be 
effected  by  thee  alone ;  "  in  which  also  there  is  a 
price  fixed. 

'  When  a  treaty  is  formed  upon  one  party's  quitting 


*  The  latter  was  a  baboon  who  assisted  the  former  in  his  wars  against 
Ravana,  the  king  of  Ceylon. 


274  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

his  enemy  for  a  fine  of  a  portion  of  his  lands,  it  is 
denominated  Adishtta. 

*The  conjunction  formed  with  one's  own  army^-  is 
called  Atma-dishtta  ;  and  that  for  the  preservation  of 
life,  is  denominated  Upagraha. 

'When  a  moiety,  or  even  the  whole,  of  the  treasure 
is  surrendered  to  save  the  rest  of  the  property,  the 
treaty  is  styled  Parikraya  ;  and  if  the  consideration 
be  the  most  valuable  part  of  the  lands,  the  term  is 
Uch-chinna. 

When  the  purchase  of  peace  is  made  with  a  gift  of 
the  whole  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  it  is  called 
Parabhooshana ;  and,  lastly,  when  by  a  gift  of  the 
fruits  which  have  been  gathered,  wiUingly  borne  upon 
the  shoulder,  Skandhopaneya. 

'  There  are  also  these  four  distinctions  of  alliance : 
"  That  of  reciprocal  assistance,  that  of  friendship, 
that  of  relationship,  and  that  which  is  purchased  with 
a  gift." 

'  It  is  the  opinion  of  Guru,t  that  alliance  and 
assistance  mean  the  same.  There  are  many  modes 
of  alliance  by  gifts  ;  but  these  are  all  rejected  by 
friendship. 

'  The  conqueror,  from  his  being  the  strongest,  is 
not  wont  to  retreat  without  having  gained  something; 


*  The  nature  of  this  compact  is  not  easily  to  be  ascertained,  for  the 
name  given  to  it  docs  not  explain  it. 
t  Vreehaspatee,  the  Guru  or  spiritual  director  of  the  good  spirits. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  275 

whence  no  other  mode  than  the  Upahara  is  known 

to  him.' 

TI12  minister  Know-all  replied, — Hear  this  ! 

'  To  say,  '*  This  is  one  of  us,  or  this  is  a  stranger," 
is  th:  mode  of  estimating  practised  by  trifling  minds. 
To  those  of  more  generous  principles,  the  whole 
world  is  but  as  one  family  ! ' 

Again : 

'  He  who  regardeth  another's  wife  as  his  mother, 
another's  goods  as  clods  of  earth,  and  all  mankind  as 
himself,  is  a  philosopher.' 

You  are  a  philosopher,  said  the  royal  goose  to  the 
vulture,  and  therefore  I  desire  you  will  point  out 
what  is  to  be  done  in  this  affair.  Your  Highness  is 
pleased  to  compliment,  replied  the  minister  Far-see. 
The  poet  says, 

*  What  name  shall  we  give  to  him  who  inhabiteth 
a  body  destitute  of  justice,  when  that  body,  to  day 
or  to-morrow,  is  subject  to  death  by  the  fever  of  sick- 
ness or  sorrow  } 

'  When  we  consider  this  world  in  the  light  of  a 
thirsty  deer  in  a  moment  to  be  destroyed,  it  is  proper 
to  form  connections  with  good  people,  for  the  sake 
of  virtue,  and  for  the  sake  of  happiness.' 

Then,  continued  the  vulture,  the  business  should  be 
settled  according  to  this  saying,  which  corresponds 
with  my  own  opinion. 


276  THE  HITOPADESA  : 

'Truth  being  weighed  against  a  thousand  Aswa- 
medha  sacrifices,  was  found  to  be  of  more  conse- 
quence than  the  whole  thousand  offerings.' 

Wherefore,  let  the  name  of  Truth  be  the  divine  pre- 
cedent for  both  and  each  of  us  ;  and  let  the  alliance 
between  us  be  that  which  is  distinguished  by  the  title 
of  The  Golden  Union  ! 

The  minister  Know-all  having  signified  his  appro- 
bation of  the  proposed  terms,  Far-see  was  compli- 
mented with  a  present  of  rich  cloth  and  jewels ;  and 
being  exceedingly  rejoiced  at  the  event  of  his 
negotiations,  he  took  his  leave  of  the  royal  goose, 
and  returned  with  the  minister  Know-all  into  the 
presence  of  his  own  sovereign.  The  peacock  king 
ratified  the  peace,  and,  at  the  instance  of  the  vulture, 
entered  into  a  conversation  with  Know-all,  in  which 
he  paid  him  many  compliments  ;  at  the  conclusion 
of  which  the  latter  had  leave  to  depart,  and  he  pre- 
sently repaired  to  the  camp  of  the  royal  goose. 

The  minister  Far-see  now  tells  his  master,  that  as 
their  designs  were  happily  accomplished,  it  was 
advisable  to  direct  their  march  towards  home,  the 
mountains  of  Vindhya.  His  advice  was  followed, 
and  the  whole  army  arrived  at  their  respective  habi- 
tations to  enjoy  in  peace  those  fruits  their  hearts 
most  longed  for. 


FABLES  AND  PROVERBS.  277 

Now  declare,  said  Vishnu-Sarma  to  his  royal 
pupils,  what  more  I  am  to  tell  you  !  Through  the 
great  condescension  of  our  reverend  master,  replied 
the  young  princes,  being  made  acquainted  with  every 
thing  which  relates  to  the  royal  department  of  nego- 
tiation, we  are  satisfied.  I\Iay  this  conclusion  render 
you  equally  so !  said  Vishnu-Sarma,  repeating 
these  lines  ; 

*  May  peace  for  ever  yield  happiness  to  all  the 
victorious  possessors  of  the  earth  !  May  just  men 
be  for  ever  free  from  adversity,  and  the  fame  of  those 
who  do  good  long  flourish !  May  prudence,  like  a 
glorious  sun,  shine  continually  on  your  breasts!  May 
the  earth,  with  all  her  vast  productions,  long  remain 
for  your  enjoyment !' 


THE  END. 


Printed  by  balt.an'tynf,  hanson  and  co. 
london  and  edin15lr  ;h 


George  Routledge  &  Sons'  Catalogue, 


NATURAL  HISTORY— ZOOLOGY. 

Routledge's  Illustrated  Natural  History.     By  the  Rev.  J.  G. 

Wood,  M.A.  With  more  than  1500  Illustrations  by  Coleman.  Wolf, 
Harrison  Whir,  Wood,  Zwecker,  and  others.  Three  Vols.,  super-royal, 
cloth,  price  £2  2J.  The  Volumes  are  also  sold  separately,  viz.  : — Alammalia, 
with  600  Illustrations,  14s.  ;  Birds,  with  500  Illustrations,  145.;  Reptiles 
Fishes,  and  Insects,  400  Illustrations,  14J. 

Routledge's  Illustrated  History  of  Man.     Being  an  Account 

of  the  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Uncivilised  Races  of  Men.  By  the 
Rev.  J.  G.  Wood,  M.A.,  F.L.S.  With  more  than  600  Original  Illustrations 
by  Zwecker,  Danby,  Angas,  Handlev,  and  others,  engraved  by  the 
Brothers  Dal2Iel.  Vol.  I.,  Africa,  14^.;  Vol.  II.,  Australia,  New  Zealand, 
Polynesia,  America,  Asia,  and  Ancient  Europe,  145.  Two  Vols.,  super- 
royal  8vo,  cloth,  28*. 

The   Imperial   Natural   History.     By  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood. 

1000  pages,  with  500  Plates,  super-royal  8vo,  cloth,  i^s. 

All  Illustrated  Natural  History.     By  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood. 

With  5CX)  Illustrations  by  William  Harvev,  and  8  full-page  Plates  by 
Wolf  and  Harrison  Weir.    Post  8vo,  cloth,  gilt  edges,  6.r. 

A  Picture  Natural  History.  Adapted  for  Young  Readers.  By 
the  Rev.  J.  G.  Wo.oo.  With  700  Illustrations  by  Wolf,  Weir,  &c.  4to, 
cloth,  gilt  edges, .  7*.  6d. 

The  Popular  Natural  History.      By  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood. 

With  Hundreds  of  Illustrations,  price  7*.  6d. 

The  Boy's  Own  Natural  History.     By  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood, 

With  400  Illustrations,  3J.  6d,  cloth. 

Sketches  and  Anecdotes  of  Animal  Life.  By  the  Rev.  J.  G. 
Wood.    Illustrated  by  Harrison  Weir.    Fcap.  8vo,  cloth,  35.  6d. 

Animal  Traits  and  Characteristics.    By  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood. 

Illustrated  by  H.  Weir.     Fcap.,  cloth,  ^s.  6d. 

The  Poultry  Book.     By  W.  B.  Tegetmeier,  F.Z.S.     Assisted 

by  many  Eminent  Authorities.  With  30  full-page  Illustrations  of  the 
different  Varieties,  drawn  from  Life  by  Harrison  Weir,  and  printed  ia 
Colours  by  Leighton  Brothers  ;  and  numerous  Woodcuts.  Imperial  Svo, 
half- bound,  price  21^. 

The  Standard  of  Excellence  in  Exhibition  Poultry.  By 
W.  I*.  tKGETMKiHR,  F.Z.S      Fcap.,  cloth,  3f.  6</. 


GEORGE  ROUTLEDGE  ^  SONS' 


Natural  History,  continued. 
Pigeons.     By  W.  B.  Tegetmeier,  F.Z.S.,  Assisted  by  many 

£minent  Fanciers.  With  27  Coloured  Plates,  drawn  from  Life  by  Harrison 
Weir,  and  printed  by  Leighton  Brothers  ;  and  numerous  Woodcuts.  Im- 
perial 8vo,  half-bound,  loj.  6^. 

The  Homing:  or  Carrier  Pigeon :  Its  History,  Management, 
and  Method  of  Training.     By  W.  B.  Tegetmeier,  F.Z.S.     ij.  boards. 

My  Feathered  Friends.     Containing  Anecdotes  of  Bird  Life, 

more  especially  Eagles,  Vultures,  Hawks,  Magpies,  Rooks,  Crows,  R,-ivens, 
Parrots,  Humming  Birds,  Ostriches,  &c.,  &c.  By  the  Rev.  J.  G.  WoOD. 
With  lllustrafions  by  Hakrison  Weir.    Cloth  gilt,  35.  6d. 

British  Birds'  Eggs  and  Noets.    By  the  Rev.  J.  C.  Atkinson. 

With  Original  Illustrations  by  W.  S.  Coleman,  printed  in  Colours.  Fcap., 
cloth,  gilt  edges,  price  3J.  td. 

The  Angler  Naturalist.  A  Popular  History  of  British  Fresh- 
water Fish.    By  H.  Cholmondeley  Pennell.    Post  8vo,  3^.  6d. 

British  Conchology.  A  Familiar  History  of  the  Molluscs  of 
the  British  Isles.  By  G.  B.  Sowerby.  With  ao  Pages  of  Coloured  Plates, 
embracing  150  subjects.     Cloth,  sx. 

The  Calendar  of  the  Months.    Giving  an  Account  of  the  Plants, 

Birds,  and  Insects  that  may  be  expected  each  Month.  With  100  lUustra* 
tions.     Cloth  gilt,  35.  td. ;  Cheap  Edition,  aj. 

White's  Natural  History  of  Selborne.     New  Edition.    Edited 
by  Rev.  J.  G. 
cloth,  3J.  6^ 


by  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood,  with  above  200  Illustrations  by  W.  Harvkv.  Fcap.  8vo, 
lot" 

Dogs  and  their  Ways.  Illustrated  by  numerous  Anecdotes 
from  Authentic  Sources.  Bjr  the  Rev.  Charles  Williams.  With  Illus- 
trations.    Fcap.  8vo,  cloth,  .jr.  td. 

Sagacity  of  Animals.  With  60  Engravings  by  Harrison  Weir. 

Small  4to,  3^.  td. 

The  Young  Naturalist*  .     By  Mrs.   Loudon.      i6mo,   cloth. 

Illustrated,  u.  td. 

The  Child's  First  Book  of  Natural  History.     By  Miss  Bondw 

With  100  Illustrations.     i6mo,  cloth,  \s.  td. 

The  Common  Objects  of  the  Country.     By  the  Rev.  J.  G. 
Wood.     With  Illustrations  by  Coleman,  containing  150  of  the  "Objects* 
beautifully  printed  in  Colours.     Cloth,  gilt  edges,  price  y.  td. 
Also  a  Cheap  Edition,  price  ix.,  in  fancy  boards,  with  Plain  Plates. 

Common  British  Beetles.    By  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood,  M.A. 

With  Woodcuts  and  Twelve  pages  of  Plates  of  all  the  Varieties,  beautifuily 
printed  in  Colours  by  Edmund  Evans.  Fcap.  8vo,  cloth,  gilt  edges,  pric« 
3J.  td. 

Westwood's  (Professor)  British  Butterflies  and  their  Trans, 
formations.  With  numerous  Illustrations,  beautifully  Coloured  by  Hand, 
Imperial  8vo,  cloth,  xai.  ftd. 


BOOKS  ON  NATURAL  HISTORY,  ^c. 


Natural  History,  continutd, 
British  Butterflies.     Figures  and  Descriptions  of  every  Native 

Species,  with  an  Account  of  Butterfly  Life.     With  71  Coloured  Figures  of 
Butterflies,  all  of  exact  life-size,  and  67  Figures  of  Caterpillars,  Chrysalides, 
&c.     By  W.  S.  Coleman.     Fcap.,  cloth  gilt,  price  3J.  6d. 
%*  A  Cheap  Edition,  with  plain  Plates,  fancy  boards,  price  is. 

The  Common  Moths  of  England.     By  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood, 

M.A.    12  Plates  printed  in  Colours,  comprising  100  objects.    Cloth,  gilt 

edges.  3J.  6d. 

♦4*  A  Cheap  Edition,  with  plain  Plates,  boards,  i*. 

British  Entomology.  Containing  a  Familiar  and  Technical  De- 
scription of  the  Insects  most  common  to  the  localities  of  the  British  Isles. 
By  Maria  E.  Catlow.    With  16  pages  of  Coloured  Plates.    Cloth,  5J. 

Popular  Scripture  Zoology.  With  Coloured  Illustrations.  By 
Maria  E.  Catlow.    Cloth,  5^. 

The  Common  Objects  of   the    Sea-Shore.      With   Hints  for 
the  Aquarium.     By  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood.    The  Fine  Edition,  with  the 
Illustrations  by  G.  B.  SowHRBy,  beautifully  printed  in  Colours.     Fcap.  8vo, 
cloth,  gilt  edges,  3J.  6d. 
*»*  Also,  price  is.,  a  Cheap  Edition,  with  the  Plates  plain. 

British  Crustacea :  A  Familiar  Account  of  their  Classification 
and  Habits.  By  Adam  White,  F.L.S.  20  Pages  of  Coloured  Plates,  em- 
bracing 120  subjects.     Cloth,  5^. 

The  Fresh- Water  and  Salt-Water  Aquarium.     By  the  Rev. 

J.   G.  Wood,  M.A.      With  11  Coloured  Plates,  containing   126  Objects. 

Cloth,  3J.  6d. 

A  Cheap  Edition,  with  ?^lain  Plates,  boards,  if. 

The  Aquarium  of  Marine  and  Fresh- Water  Animals  and 

Plants.     By  G.  B.  SowERDY,  F.L.S.    With  20  Pages  of  Coloured  Plates, 
embracing  120  subjects.     Cloth,  5^. 


FLOWERS,  PLANTS,  AND  GARDENING. 

Gardening  at  a  Glance.  By  George  Glenny.  With  Illustra- 
tions.   Fcap,  8vo,  gilt  edges,  3J.  €d. 

Roses,  and  How  to  Grow  Them.     By  J.  D.  Prior.    Coloured 

Plates.     Cloth  gilt,  3^.  6d. 

*»•  A  Cheap  Edition,  with  plain  Plates,  faricy  boards,  is.  6d. 

Garden  Botany.  Containing  a  Familiar  and  Scientific  Descrip- 
tion of  most  of  the  Hardy  and  Half-hardy  Plants  introduced  into  the  Flower 
Garden.  By  Agnks  Catlow.  ao  Pages  of  Coloured  Plates,  embracing  67 
Illustrations.    5<; 


GEORGE  ROUTLEDGE  &>  SONS 

Flowers,  Plants,  and  gardening,  continued. 
The  Kitchen  and  Flower  Garden;  or,  The  Culture  in  the  open 

ground  of  Roots,  Vegetables,  Herbs,  and  Fruits,  and  of  Bulbous,  Tuberous, 
Fibrous,  Rooted,  and  Shrubby  Flowers.     By  Eugene  SEBASTIAN  Dela- 
MER.     Fcap.,  cloth,  gilt  edges,  price  31.  6d. 
The  Kitchen  Garden,  separate,  is. 
The  Flower  Garden,  separate,  is. 

The  Cottage  Garden.     How  to  Lay  it  out,  and  Cultivate  it  to 

Advantage.     By  Andrew  Meikle.     Boards,  is. 

Window  Gardening,  for  Town  and  Country.  Compiled  chief!) 
for  the  use  of  the  Working  Classes.     By  Andrew  Meikle.    Boards,  w. 

Greenhouse  Botany.  Containing  a  Familiar  and  Technical 
Description  of  the  Exotic  Plants  introduced  into  the  Greenhouse.  By 
Agnes  Catlow.    With  20  Pages  of  Coloured  Illustrations.    5s. 

Wild  Flowers.     How  to  See  and  How  to  Gather  them.     With 

Remarks  on  the  Economical  and  Medicinal  Uses  of  our  Native  Plants.    By 

Spencer  Thomson,  M.D.     A  New  Edition,  entirely  Revised,  with  171 

Woodcuts,  and  8  large  Coloured  Illustrations  by  Noel  Humphreys.  Fcap. 

■    8vo,  price  3*.  6d.,  cloth,  gilt  edges. 

•**  Also,  price  2s.  in  boards,  a  Cheap  Edition,  with  plain  Plates. 

Haunts  of  Wild  Flowers.     By    Anne    Pratt.      Coloured 

Plates.    Cloth,  gilt  edges,  3^.  6d. 
\*  Plain  Plates,  boards,  zs. 

Common   Wayside    Flowers.     By  Thomas  Miller.     With 

Coloured  Illustrations  by  Birket  Foster.    410,  cloth  gilt,  lo*.  6d. 

British  Ferns  and  the  Allied  Plants.  Comprising  the  Club- 
Mosses,  Pepperworts,  and  Horsetails.  By  Thomas  Moore,  F.L.S.  With 
20  Pages  of  Coloured  Illustrations,  embracing  51  subjects.     Cloth,  5s. 

Our  Woodlands,  Heaths,  and  Hedges.     A  Popular  Descrip- 

tion  of  Trees,  Shrubs,  Wild  Fruits,  &c.,  with  Notices  of  their  Insect  Inhabi- 
tants.    By  W.  S.  Coleman,   M.E.S.L.     With  41   Illustrations  printed  in 
Colours  on  Eight  Plates.     Fcap.,  price  3^.  Cd.,  cloth,  gilt  edges. 
*»*  A  Cheap  Edition,  with  plain  Plates,  fancy  boards,  is. 

British  Ferns  and  their  Allies.     Comprising  the  Club-Mosses, 

Pepper wort.s,  and  Horsetails.     By  Thomas  Moore.    With  40  Illuslrationa 
by  W.  S.  Coleman,  beautifully  printed  in  Colours.    Fcap.  8vo,  cloth,  gilt 
edges,  3J.  6d. 
%**  A  Cheap  Edition,  with  Coloured  Plates,  price  is.,  fancy  boards. 

Plants  of  the  World  ;  or,  A  Botanical  Excursion  Round  the 
World.  By  E.  M.  C.  Edited  by  Charles  Daubeny,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  &c. 
With  20  Pages  of  Coloured  Plates  of  Scenery.    Cloth,  5/. 

Palms  and  their  Allies.    Containing  a  Familiar  Account  of  their 

Structure,  Distribution,  History,  Properties,  and  Uses  ;  and  a  complet* 
List  of  all  the  species  introduced  into  our  Gardens.  By  Berthold  Skb- 
MANN,  Ph.D.,  M.A..  F.L.S.  With  20  Pages  of  Coloured  Illustrations,  em- 
hracing  many  vari«^v«^.    Cloth,  5*. 


BOOKS  ON  SCIENCE,  ^c. 

Flowers,  Plants,  and  Gardening,  continued. 
Profitable  Plants  :  A  Description  of  the  Botanical  and  Commer. 

cial  Characters  of  the  principal  Articles  of  Vegetable  Origin,  used  for  Food, 
Clothing,  Tanning,  Dyeing,  Building,  Medicine,  Perfumery,  &c.  By 
Thomas  C.  Archer,  Collector  for  the  Department  of  Applied  Botany  in 
the  Crystal  Palace,  Sydenham.  With  20  Pages  of  Coloured  Illustrations, 
embracing  106  Plates.     Cloth,  5J. 

The  Language  of   Flowers.      By  the  Rev.   R.  Tyas.     With 

Coloured  Plates  by  Kronheim.     410,  ^s.  6d. 

Language  of  Flowers.  Compiled  and  Edited  by  Mrs.  L.  Burke. 

Cloth  elegant,  2s.  6d. 

\*  Cheaper  Books,  is.  and  6d. 


SCIENCE. 

Discoveries  and  Inventions  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.    By 

Robert  Routledge,  B.Sc.  and  F.C.S.  With  many  Illustrations,  and  a 
beautiful  Coloured  Plate,  -js.  6d. 

Science  in  Sport  made  Philosophy  in  Earnest.     By  Robert 

Routledge.     Post  8vo,  cloth,  gilt  edges,  3^.  Qd. 

The  Boys'  Book  of  Science.  Including  the  Successful  Perform- 
ance of  Scientific  Experiments.  470  Engravings.  By  Professor  Pepper, 
late  of  the  Polytechnic.     Cloth,  gilt  edges,  5^-. 

The  Book  of  Metals.  Including  Personal  Narratives  of  Visits  to 
Coal,  Lead,  Copper,  and  Tin  Mines ;  with  a  large  number  of  interesting^ 
Experiments.  300  Illustrations.  By  Professor  Pepper,  late  of  the  Poly- 
technic.    Post  8vo,  cloth,  gilt  edges,  55. 

The  Microscope  :  It?  History,  Construction,  and  Application. 
Being  a  Familiar  Introduction  to  the  Use  of  the  Instrument,  and  the  Study 
of  Microscopical  Science.  By  Jabez  Hogg,  F.L.S.,  F.R.M.S.  With 
upwards  of  500  Engravings  and  Coloured  Illustrations  by  Tuffen  West. 
Eighth  Edition,  crown  8vo,  cloth,  js.  6d. 

The  Common  Objects  of  the  Microscope.     By  the  Rev.  J.  G.- 
Wood.    With  Twelve  Pages  of  Plates  by  Tuffen  West,  embracing  up- 
wards of  400  Objects,    The  Illustrations  printed  in  Colours.     Fcap.  Svo, 
3J.  6d.,  cloth,  gilt  edges. 
*if*  A  Cheap  Edition,  with  Plain  Plates,  m.,  fancy  boards. 

The  Orbs  of  Heaven  ;   or,  The  Planetary  and  Stellar  Worlds. 

A  Popular  Exposition  of  the  great  Discoveries  and  Theories  of  Modern 
Astronomy.  By  O.  M.  Mitchell.  With  numerous  Illustrations.  Crown 
Svo,  2s.  bd. 

Popular  Astronomy  ;  or.  The  Sun,  Planet,  Satellites,  and  Comets. 
With  Illustrations  of  their  Telescopic  Appearance.  By  O.  M.  Mitchell. 
■2S.  6d. 

The  Story  of  the  Peasant-Boy  Philosopher.  Founded  on  the 
Early  Life  of  Ferguson,  the  Astronomer.  By  Henry  Mj*yhew.  Illus" 
trated.     Cloth  gilt,  3J.  6d. 


GEORGE  ROUTLEDGE  ^  SONS' 

Science,  continued 

The  V^  ^.lu^to  oi  science  ;  c-,  i  ne  Slory  of  Young  Humphrey 
Daw,  the  Cornish  Apothecary's  Boy,  who  taught  Himself  Natural  Philo- 
sophy.    By  Henry  Mayhhw.     Illustrated.     Cloth  gilt,  3J.  6u'. 

The  Book  of  Trades,  and  the  Tools  used  in  Them.  By  One  of  the 
Authors  of  "England's  Workshops."  With  numerous  Hlustrations.  Small 
4to,  cloth,  gilt  edges,  3J.  td. 

Wonderful  Inventions,  from  the  Mariner's  Compass  to  the 
Electric  Telegraph  Cable.     By  John  Timbs.     Illustrated.     Post  8vo,  5J. 

A  Manual  of  Fret-Cutting  and  Wood-Carving.  By  Sir 
Thomas  Seaton,  K.C.B.     Crown  8vo,  cloth,  \s. 

The  Laws  of  Contrast  of  Colours,  and  their  Application  to 
the  Arts.  New  Edition,  with  an  important  Section  on  Army  Clothing.  By 
M.  E.  Chkvreul.  Translated  by  John  Spanton.  With  Coloured  Illus- 
trations. Crown  8vo,  js  bd.  cloth  gilt. 

Geology  for  the  Million.     By  Margaret  Plues.     Edited  by 

Edward  Wood,  F.G.S.     With  80  Illustrations.     Fcap.,  picture  boards,  is. 

A  Manual  of  Weather-casts  and  Storm  Prognostics  on 
Land  and  Sea  ;  or.  The  Signs  whereby  to  judge  of  Coming  Weather. 
Adapted  for  all  Countries.    By  Andrew  Steinmetz.     Boards,  is. 

Scientific  Amusements.  Edited  by  Professor  Pepper.  100 
Woodcuts,     ij.,  boards  ;  is.  6d.,  cloth  gilt. 

Electric  Lighting.    Translated  from  the  French  of  Le  Comle 

Th.  du  Moncd.    By  ROBERT  ROUTLEDGE,  B.Sc.  (Lond.),  F.C.S.     Crow.i  8/0, 
cloth,  zx.  6d. 


HISTuRY. 

THE  HISTORICAL  WORKS  OF  WM.  II.  PRESCOTT. 

The  History  of  ihe  Reign  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  the 
Catholic  of  Spain.  By  William  H.  Prkscott.  With  Steel  Portraits. 
Two  Vols.  8vo,  cloth,  price  10s, 

Do.  Do.  •         Three  Vols,  post  8vo,  cloth,  loj.  6d. 

Do.  Do.  One  Vol.  crown  8vo,  cloth,  3/,  6d. 

History  of  the  Conquest  of  Mexico.  With  a  Preliminary 
View  of  the  Ancient  Mexican  Civilisation,  and  the  Life  of  the  Conqueror, 
Fernando  Cortes.  By  William  H.  Prescott.  With  Portraits  on 
Steel.     Two  Vols.  8vo,  cloth,   loj. 

Do.  Do.  Three  Vols,  post  8vo,  cloth,  ioj.  6d. 

Do.  Do.  One  Vol.  crown  8vo,  cloth,  3/.  (xi. 

History  of  the  Conquest  of  Peru.  With  a  Preliminary  View 
of  the  Civilisation  of  the  Incas.  By  William  H.  Prescott.  With  Steo« 
Portraits.    Two  Vols.  8vo.  cloth,  lo*. 

Do.  Do.  Three  Vols,  post  8vo,  cloth,  lor.  6d. 

J>o.  Do.  One  Vol.  crown  8vo,  cloth,  j».  ^ 


BOOKS  ON  HISTORY,  ^'c. 


History,  continued. 

History  of  the  Reign  of  Philip  the  Second,  King  of  Spain. 
By  William  H.  Pkescott.  With  beautiful  steel  engraved  Portraits. 
Three  Vols.  8vo,  cloth,        15J. 

Do.  Do.  Three  Vols.  postSvo,  doth,  lor.  6d. 

Do,  Do.  One  Vol.  (containing  Vols.  I.  and  II.),  J*.  6^. 

Do.  Do.  One  Vol.  (containing  Vol.  III.  and  Essays),  3/.  6i. 

History  of  the  Reign  of  Charles  the  Fifth.  By  William 
Robertson,  D.D.  With  an  Account  of  the  Emperor's  Life  after  his 
Abdication,  by  William  H.  Prescott.  With  Portraits.  Two  Vols.  8yo, 
cloth,  price  los. 

Do.        .  Do.  Two  Vols,  post  8vo,  cloth,  7*. 

Do.  Do.  One  Vol.  crown  8vo,  cloth,  31.  6d, 


The  Rise  of  the  Dutch  Republic.     By  J.  Lothrop  Motley. 

In  Three  Vols,  crown  Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Do.  New  Edition,  (.xnnplete  in  One  Volume,  crown  Svo,  cloth, 

gilt  edges,  6s. 

Dr.  W.  H.  Russell's  British  Expedition  to  the  Crimea.    A 

New  Edition,  entirely  re-written,  with  Maps  and  Plans,  demy  Svo,  cloth, 

My  Diary  in    India   during   the    Mutiny.       By  Dr.  W.   H. 

Russell,    js.  6d. 

Napier's     History     of    the     Peninsular    War,    1807-1810. 

Unabridged,  crown  Svo,  cloth,  3^.  6d. 

Do.  Do.  i8io-i8i2.    3J.  f)d.      Do.  Do,  1812.1814.  3/.  6d. 

A  History  of  British  India,  from  the  Earliest  Period  of  English 
Intercourse,  By  Charles  Macfarlane.  With  Additions  to  the  Year 
1879.  Illustrated  with  numerous  Engravings.  Post  Svo,  price  3s.  6d.  rl^ 
gilt. 

Froissart's  Chronicles  of  England,  France,  and  Spain,  &c. 

New  Edition,  from  the  text  of  Colonel  Johnes.  With  Notes,  a  Life  of  the 
Author,  an  Essay  on  his  Works,  and  a  Criticism  on  his  History.  With  120 
beautiful  Woodcuts,  illustrative  of  the  Manners,  Customs,  &c.  Two  Vols, 
super-royal  Svo,  Roxburghe,  price  ju. 

Froissart's       Chronicles.        One    Vol.    crown    Svo,    y.    6d, 

(RoMt  ledgers  Standard  Library.) 

The  Fall   of  Rome,  and    the    Rise  of  New  Nationalities. 

Showing  the  Connexion  between  Ancient  and  Modern  History.  By  the 
Rev.  John  G.  Sheppakd,  D.C.L.      Post  Svo,  price  js.  td.  cloth,  750  pp. 

The  Seven  Wonders  of  the  World,  and  their  Associations  in 
Art  and  History,    By  T.  A.  Buckley.    8  Plates.     3^.  6d. 

The  Great  Cities  of  the  Ancient  World,  in  their  Glory  and 
their  Desolation.     By  T.  A.  Buckley.    8  Plates,    y.  6d. 

Tbe  Great  Cities  of  the  Middle  Ages :  Historical  Sketches. 
By  1'.  A.  Buckley.    8  Plates.   3*.  td. 


GEORGE  ROUTLEDGE  ^  SONS* 


History,  cotitimted. 
Bancroft's  History  of  the  United  States,  from  the  Discovery 

of  the  American  Continent  to  the  Declaration  of  Independence  in  1776, 
Seven  Vols.,  fcap.  8vo,  Roxburghe,  15*. 

The  History  of  France,  from  Clovis,  A.D.  481,  to  the  Republic, 
1870.  By  Emile  de  Bonnechose.  A  New  Edition,  with  complete  Index. 
Post  8vo,  cloth,  price  ;f.  (>d. 

Extraordinary   Popular   Delusions,   and   the    Madness   of 

Crowds.     By  Charles  Mackay,  LL.D.     The  Mississippi  Scheme— South 
Sea  Bubble — ^Tulipomania— Alchemy — Fortune  Telling,  &c.    35.  td.  cloth. 

Dean  Milman's  History  of  the  Jews.     With  Maps  and  Plans. 

Crown  8vo,  cloth,  3*.  dd. 

The  Antiquities  and  the  Wars  of  the  Jews.  By  Flavius 
JosEPHUS.  Translated  by  Wm.  Whiston,  with  Life  of  the  Author.  Post 
8vo,  3*.  dd. 

The  Story  of  the  Reformation  of  the  Sixteenth  Century. 
By  the  Rev.  J.  H.  Merle  D'Aubigito.  Translated  by  the  Rev.  John 
Gill.    Crown  8vo,  cloth,  3^.  6^. 

Victoria  History  of  England,  to  1876.      By  Arthur  Bailey 

Thomson.      Crown  8vo,  with  400  Engravings  by  the  Brothers  Dalziel. 
Cloth  gilt,  6f . 

Do.  Do.  2,600  Questions  on  the  above,  xs.  6d. 

A  History  of  England,  from  the  Earliest  Times.  By  the  Rev. 
James  White.    Crown  8vo,  cloth,  3J.  6d. 

Goldsmith's  History  of  England.  A  New  Edition,  with 
Continuation  to  the  Death  of  Wellington.  With  Portraits  of  all  the 
Sovereigns,  and  Questions  to  each  Chapter.    Cloth,  2s. 

Landmarks  to  the  History  of  England.  By  the  Rev.  James 
White.     Cloth,  n, 

A  Handy  History  of  England  for  the  Young.      By  H.  W. 

DuLCKEN,     With  120  Illustrations,  engraved  by  the   Brothers  Dalziel. 
2S.  6d. 

Picture  History  of  England  for  the  Young.    With  80  Plates. 

Broad-line,  410,  boards,  2J.  6d.  ;  cloth,  3J.  6d. 

Glimpses  of  our  Island  Home.  Being  the  Early  History  of 
England,  from  the  Druids  to  the  Death  of  William  the  Conqueror.  By  Mrs. 
Thomas  Geldart.     Fcap.  cloth,  zx. 

Percy's   Tales   of   the     Kings    and   Queens  *of  England. 

New  and  Improved  Edition.    With  Illustrations  by  John  Gilbert.    Fcap. 
8vo,  cloth  gilt,  3^.  6d. 

A  Summary  of  English  History,  from  the  Roman  Conquest 
to  1870.  With  Observations  on  the  Progress  of  Art,  Science,  and  Civili- 
zation, and  Questions  adapted  to  each  Paragraph.  For  the  use  of  Sv-hools. 
By  Amelia  B.  Edwakds.     In  i8mo,  boards,  price  6d. 


BOOKS  OjV  biography,  ^'c. 


History,  continued. 

Great  Battles  of  the  British  Army,  including  the  Indian 
Revolt  and  Abyssinia.  With  8  Illustrations  by  William  Harvey.  Post 
8vo,  cloth,  55. 

Great  Battles  of  the  British  Navy,  including  Sveaborg,  1855. 
By  Lieut.  C.  R.  Low.     With  8  Coloured  Plates,  crown  8vo,  cloth,  55. 

The  Great  Sieges  of  History,  including  the  Sieges  of  Paris. 
Coloured  Illustrations,     ss. 

History  for  Boys.     ByJ.  G.Edgar.     2>^.  6d. 

Shipwrecks  and    Disasters  at  Sea.       By  W.  H.  Kingston. 

Post  8vo,  with  many  Illustrations,  55. 

Baines'  History  of  Lancashire.     A  New  Edition.     Edited  by 
J.  Harland,  F.S.A.,  and  the  Rev.  Brooke  Herford.  Beautifully  printed 
in  Two  handsome  4to  Volumes,  on  thick  paper,  with  a  Coloured  Map  of  the 
whole  County.     Price  £2  ^2,s.  6d.  ;  or  on  Large  Paper,  £s  sj. 
Elaborate  Statistical  Ta  bles  of  a  vs  yy  usefitl  kind  have  been  added. 

Ormerod's  History  of  Cheshire.     Edited  by  Thomas  Helsby, 

Esq.,  with   all  the  Illustrations  of  the  First  Edition     and  additional  plates 
and  woodcuts.    Three  vols.,  Small  Paper,  ^zo;  Large  Paper,  /30. 

Roby's  Traditions  of  Lancashire.     With    Portrait.  Two 

Vols.,  crown  Svo,  cloth,  "Js. 

Gregson's  Portfolio  of  Fragments  relative  to  the  History  and 
Antiquities,  Topography  and  Genealogies  of  the  County  Palatine  and  Duchy 
of  Lancaster.  Embellished  with  numerous  Ei^ravings  of  Views,  Seats, 
Arms,  Seals,  and  Antiquities.  Third  Edition,  with  Additions  and  Improve- 
ments. Edited  by  John  Harland,  F.S.A.  Fcap.  folio,  ^^4  a,s.  ;  Large 
Paper,  £(i  6s. 

The  History  of  the  Original  Parish  of  Whalley  and  Honor 

of  Clitheroe.  Containing  the  Original  Illustrations.  A  New  Edition,  being 
the  Fourth,  of  the  late  Dr.  Whitaker's  well-known  and  valuable  Work. 
Two  Vols.,  Small  Paper,  £^  14s.  6d. ;  Large  Paper,  £6  i6r.  6d. 


BIOGRAPHY, 

M«n  of  the  Time  :    A  Dictionary  of  Contemporary  Biography  of 

Eminent    Living    Characters    of   both    Sexes.      Eleventh    Edition.      Cne 
thick  Vol.  crown  Svo,  cloth,  i^s, 

George    Moore.      A  Memoir,  from  the  Family  Papers,  by  Dr. 

Samuel  Smiles,     With  Portrait.    Crown  Svo,  cloth,  6s. ' 

The  Life  of   Frederick  the   Great.      With  500   Illustrations; 

Royal  Svo,  js.  6d, 


ROUTLEDGE'S    POCKET    LIBRARY. 

IN    MONTHLY   VOLUMES. 

Cut  or  uncut  edges,  is. ;  Cloth,  uncut  edges  with  gilt  tops,  is.  6d. 
Paste  grain,  is.  6d. 

*•  A  series  of  beautiful  little  books,  tastefully  bound." — Times. 
"  Beautifully  printed  and  tastefully  bound." — Saturday  Reviciv. 
"  Deserves  warm  praise  for  the  taste  shown  in  its  production.    The 
Library '  ought  to  be  very  popular." — Athenceum. 


1.  BRET    HARTE'S    POEMS. 

2.  THA-CKERAY'S    PARIS    SKETCH    BOOK. 

3.  HOOD'S    COMIC    POEMS. 

4.  DICKENS'S    CHRISTMAS    CAROL. 

5.  POEMS  BY  OLIVER  "WENDELL  HOLMES. 

6.  WASHINGTON  IRVING'S   SKETCH  BOOK. 

7.  MACAULAY'S  LAYS  OF  ANCIENT   ROME. 

8.  THE   VICAR   OF   WAKEFIELD. 


t) 


«WD/NG  SECT. 


OCT  /  4  m 


to  UD 

cd  C4- 


CV2 

to 


^ 


s:: 

•^  •H 

Cd  ^ 

CQ  H 

Q 

4^ 

d 

I 

d 

^1 

Oi 

Pi 


•la; 

QJfi 


University  of  Toronto 
Library 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  limited 


