===== Internet Archive OCR: holycitybenares00senrrich_djvu.txt =====

MBLF 


/ 


lUZAC  A  CO 


A/ 


d 


PLATE    I 


•  •  • 
•  •  • 

•  •  •  •< 


H.  H.  Sir  Prabhu  Narain  Singh,  G.  C.  I.  E., 
Maharaja    of   Benares. 


Frontispiece. 


THE    HOLY   CITY 

( BENARES ) 

[  With  jS  lUust rations  and  a  ULip  \ 


BY 

Kajani    Ranjan    Sen,  b.  a.,  b.  l. 

Pleader,  and  Law  Lecturer,  Chittagong 

College,  Author  of  "The  Triumph 

iW    \'.\i.MiKi"    (  Valmikir 

J  ay  a  in  English  ). 


*'A   nation    that   does   not   take   a  just   pride   in   its 
own   annals    must    be   wanting    in   self-respect." 

— Dr.     Rash    Behari    (ihosh. 


CHITTAGONG 
1912 

ALL    RIGHTS    RESEftvEO 


e^ 


aciea     Q^7Cefnayu 


eatte7t 


^46873 


Copyright 


-X 


Printed  by    K.  B.  Bose,  at  the  Minto  Press, 

and   Pablished   by   M.  R.  Sen, 

Chittagong. 


Paper-Rs  2-8  ;   CIoth-Rs  3. 

TO    BE    HAD   OF    M.    R.    SEN,    PARA5E.  CHITTAGONG. 


rO   THE  READER 

"Never   resort   to   the  argument  :     'I  do  not  know 

this, — therefore    it   is    false'. 
"We    must   study   to   know,   know   to   comprehend, 

and   comprehend    to  jud^e". 

— Narada. 
(^  HAD  little  idea  while  paying  a  fl)  ing  visit  to 
Benares  for  the  first  time  during  the  X'mas  recess  in 
1909  that  I  should  have  to  put  my  fugitive  recollections 
into  writing.  I  feel  conscious  however  that  a  sketch 
like  this  may  be  of  interest  to  those  who  proceed 
to  that  ancient  place  with  an  open  mind  and  who 
have  no  definite  notion  as  to  what  in  reality  to 
expect  to  find  there.  Random  rambles,  I  believe, 
are  neither  much  illuminating  nor  very  edifying  in 
their  effects  in  the  absence  of  a  capacity  in  the 
wanderer  for  taking  an  intelligent  interest  in  what  is 
observed,  owing  to  the  want  of  requisite  equipment 
in  the  shape  of  needful  informations.  I  felt  this 
myself,  and  hence  a  hope  that  this  little  sketch 
of  the  holy  city  might  be  of  some  use  to  tourists 
like  me  is  my  only  apology  for  bringing  it  to  the 
light  of  day  in  spite  of  the  diffidence  I  feel  in 
doing   so. 

"In  wealth,  population,  d'gnity  and  sanctity,"*  this 
city,  writes  Macaulay,  "was  among  the  foremost  of 
Asia".     As   the   oldest  and    the   cn'y    living     city    in 


(ii) 

existence  where  the  ancient  and  the  modern 
meet  together,  it  stretches  its  memories  to  the  ages 
of  pre-historic  antiquity  and  has  managed  to  outlive, 
as  none  other  has  done,  the  inevitable  ravages  of 
time  and  every  other  destructive  agency.  Speaking 
of  its  antiquity  Rev.  Mr.  Sherring  in  his  'Sacred 
City  of  the  Hindus^   observes  : 

"Twenty-five  centuries  ago  at  the  least,  it  was  famous. 
"When  Babylon  was  struggling  with  Nineveh  for  supremacy, 
"when  Tyre  was  planting  her  colonies,  when  Athens  was 
''growing  in  strength,  before  Rome  had  become  known,  or 
"Greece  had  contested  with  Persia,  or  Cyrus  had  added 
"lustre  to  the  Persian  monarchy,  or  Nebuchadnezzar  had 
''captured  Jerusalem  and  the  inhabitants  of  Judiua  had  been 
"carried  away  into  captivity,  she  had  already  risen  to  greatness, 
"if  not   glory". 

To  the  world  abroad  Benares  has  beoi  known  as 
the  place  of  the  greatest  religious  sanctity  in  all 
India — that  land,  pre-eminently,  where  the  religious 
element  supervenes  and  transfuses  itself  into  the 
most  ordinary  vocations  of  daily  life.  Whatever 
changes  that  element  might  have  undergone  owing 
to  our  contact  with  the  Western  natir*!.^,  their 
religion  and  educational  system, — and  peiiiaps  it 
would  not  be  too  much  to  add, — owing  to  our  own 
ignorance,  apathy  and  consequent  want  of  aptitude 
to  grasp  the  real  underlxdng  the  ^visible, — still  the 
mind  loves  to  linger  over  the  glories  that  are  past, 
and  there  is  much  of  charm  and  attraction  in  old 
associations  of  by-gone  da}'s.  And  steeped  as  we 
have     been    in    the    Western     lore     and     filled     with 


(  iii  ) 

preconceived  notions  and  ideals  of  foreign  infusion, 
we  know  but  little  of  our  precious  possessions  in 
the  treasured  wisdom  of  our  hoary  sa^es,  and  perhaps 
care  still  less  to  know  or  hardly  have  leisure 
enough  to  spare  for  the  purpose.  Yet,  even  in  spite 
of  our  altered  tastes  and  views,  a  sigh  of  deep 
regret  would  not  unoften  involuntarily  come  forth 
for  opportunities  neglected  and  the  lateness  of  the 
hour  of  the  mind's  awakening,  and  make  us  feel 
how  apt  we  are  to  be  carried  away  by  the  glitter 
of  things  exotic,  forgetful  of  the  vast  unexplored 
mines  of  our  own  Golcondas  hiding  gems  of  purest 
rays  serene  and  of  far  brighter  lustre  than  the  sparkle  of 
the  fine-cut  stones  of  other  lands  so  catching  to  the  eye  ! 
Varied  would  be  the  nature  of  the  sights  that 
would  meet  your  eyes  in  this  ancient  city — sublime 
and  fantastic,  elevating  as  well  as  queer.  Advance 
with  a  scoffing  predisposition  and  a  supercilious 
contempt  for  what  you  may  not  understand,  and  things 
will  take  complexion  from  your  temperament,  and 
enough  will  there  be  for  affording  you  amusement 
and  means  of  cavilling  and  reviling.  But  why  leave 
the  honey  and  seek  the  sores  which  incidences  of 
time  must  inevitably  cause  ?  Approach  rather  with 
a  feeling  of  respect  and  in  a  spirit  of  considerate 
s\'mpathy  making  due  allowances  for  the  deformities 
of  age,  and  with  an  earnest  desire  for  peering  into 
the  inner  nature  of  what  you  see,  and  enough  shall 
you  find  for  reflection,  enlightenment  and  enjoyment. 
The     apparent    freckles     and    pallidness    of  age     will 


(  iv  ) 


then  pass  away  from  your  vision  revealinj^  the  cherubic 
h'neaments  of  the  earh'er  da}'s  harbouring  the  soul 
immaculate  and  immortal  !  *Every  religion  is  an 
expression  of  Divine  Wisdom'  and  its  study  is  surel}- 
preff^rable  to   an    off-hand  condemnation. 

Here  I  must  take  leave  of  you  lest  I  grow  too 
tiresome.  My  plan  has  not  been  to  furnish  quite  a 
complete  and  exhaustive  enumeration  of  all  that 
you  may  meet  with  in  this  city,  but  only  to  offer 
hints  and  outlines  just  to  put  you  on  your  track, 
leaving  to  yourself  the  option  of  pondering  over  the 
esoteric  or  the  secular  aspects  and  phases  of  things 
as  you  choose  and  of  studying  the  subjects  that 
catch  your  fancy  as  you  like.  My  object  has  not 
been  to  provide  you  simply  with  thoughts  but 
rather   to    put  you  in  the   way   of  thinking. 

For  the  help  I  received  from  the  authorities  T 
consulted  in  making  this  sketch,  I  have  to  express 
my  indebtedness  and  grateful  acknowledgements  ; 
and  I  embrace  this  opportunity  of  expressing  my  deep 
obligations  to  Mr.  A.  Venis,  Principal,  and  Mr. 
C.  M.  Mulv  my,  Professor  of  Queen's  Colleg^  B  mares, 
and  Col.  Vindeswari  Prasad  vSingh,  Chief  Commandant, 
Benares  State  Army,  and  Rai  Bahadur  Dr.  Nabin 
Chandra  Dutt  of  this  place  for  many  valuable  suggestions 
and  informations  with  which  they  favored  me  ;  and 
I  am  also  very  grateful  to  His  Highness  the  Maharaja 
Bahadur  of  Benares  and  Dr.  J.  Ph.  Vcgel,  Offg. 
Director-General  of  Archaeological  Survey  of  India. 
Simla,  and  Messrs.     Saeed  Brothers  of  Benares,  for  their 


(V) 


kind  permission  to  reproduce  some  of  the  photos  of 
Benares  scenes  which  they  graciously  presented  to 
me.  And  to  Babu  Nobo  Kumar  Chakr^varti  of 
Benares,  who  took  me  all  over  the  city,  I  have  to 
offer  my  sincerest  thanks  for  his  kindness  and 
troubles,  as  also  to  my  very  esteemed  and  revered 
friend  Mr.  A.  F.  Dowling  of  Chittagong  whose 
constant  encouragement  has  helped  me  on  in  my 
work.  If  this  little  volume  into  which  I  have 
attempted  to  compress  as  much  information  as  has 
been  available,  is  thought  useful  and  interesting,  I 
shall    consider   myself  amply  recompensed. 


Chittagong,  ^      ^ 


July^   igi. 


CONTENTS 


PART  I 
Chapter  1— to  the  city 

Cava — The  Sone  Bridge — Mogal  Serai — The  Grand  Trunk 
Road— The  First  Glimpses — Kasi — Nomenclature- Situation 
and  Population — Climate  and  the  Ganges  water — Visweswar- 
gunj  Bazar — The  Municipal  Garden — The  Nagri  Pracharini 
Sabha— Alfred  Hall— The  Chauk- Indigenous  Products- 
Trade — The    Carmichael    Library.  ...  ...  ...  i 

Chapter  II— of  the  stars  and  their  ways 

Jai  Singh — The  Man  Mandil-The  Mural  Quadrant— 
The  Giant  Sun-dial — The  Equinoctial  Circle -The  Chakra 
Yantra — The   Digansha   Yantra.  ...  ...  ...         17 

Chapter  III— mostly  secular 

Ancient  India — Origin  of  Civilisasion— Kasi  of  old  - 
The  oldest  living  City — Educational  Systems  of  old -The 
Central  Hindu  College  — The  Theosophical  Society — The 
Goebi  Kua--The  Ram  Krishna  Sebasram — The  Victoria 
Park — The  Queen's  College — Education — Schools — Chatus- 
pathis  and  Pathsalas — Hospitals — Dharmasalas  and  Chhattras 
— Hindu    Endowments.  ...  ...  ...  ...         24 

Chapter  IV— sects  and  cults 

Kabir — Kabir  Chaura — Madhudas's  Garden  -  Nadesar 
House — The  Radhaswamis — Arya  Samaj— The  Sikhs — The 
Jainas — The  Dandis — The  Vaishnavites-The  Nagas— Sri 
Bharat  Dharma  Mahamandal — Christian  Missions -Reflec- 
tions.      ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...         48 

Chapter  V— of  the  olden  days 

Paucity  of  old  remains- Researches— Ganj-Saheda-ka- 
Musjid— Raj  Ghat  Fort— Lai  Khan's  Tomb— Lat  Bhairo— 
Bakaria  Kund— Battis  Khamba-Arhai  Kangura  Musjid— 
Maqdam    Saheb.  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...         69 


(  vli  ) 

Chapter  VI— sarnath 

An  Ekka— Jhawa  Jharan  -  Humayun's  Tower -The 
Dhamek-The  Deer  Park- Buddha -Bodhi^tree  at  Gaya- 
Fa  Hian  and  Hiuen  Thsang— The  Lion-Capital— Jain  Temple 
— Jagat  Singh's  Stupa — Researches— Modern  Aspects — The 
Excavations— the   Museum — Khantivadi   Jataka.  ...         83 

Chapter  VII— myths  and  annals 

Kasi-Khandam — An  Allegory — Antiquity — The  Early 
Kings — Religion  of  the  time — Later  Kings — Sankaracharya 
—  Mahomedan  Raids — Temple-breaking — The  Moghuls — 
Later   History.  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...       J15 

PART  11 
Chapter  VIII— the  shrines  and  temples 

First     Impression — Siva-worship — Its     Origin    and     later 

developments — Benares   Lanes — The  Temples  ...       137 

(i)     ON  THE  EAST 

Dasaswamedh   Ghat — To  the  Golden  Temple — Annapurna 

— Visweswara — The      Arati— Hindu       Ideas — Jnan       Bapi — 

Aqrangzeb's   Mosque— Adi-Visweswara—Kasi   Karwat.         149 

(2)     ON  THE  NORTH 

Sankata   Devi — Gopal   Mandir — Bhaironath — Naugraha — 

Dandapani — Kal       Kup — Trailanga        Swami — Kameswara — 

Kirtibasseswara — Alamgiri    Mosque  —  Briddhakaleswara — Bara 

Ganesh — Jageswara  —  Kasi      Devi — Bageswari  —  Nag      Kua — 

Kapildhara.        ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...       173 

(3)    ON  THE  SOUTH 

Pisach  Mochan — Pitri  and  Matri  Kund — Suraj  Kund  — 
L^ksmi  Kund — Sankaracharya — Sankudhara  —  Kumareswara — 
Sankat  Mochan — Temple  ofDurga — Bhaskaranand  Swami — 
Jagannath — Lolark^  Kund — Tilbhandeswara  -  Vishuddhanand 
Saraswati-Sitala   Devi.  ...  ...  ...  ...       186 

Chapter  IX— along  the  river 

JJie  Ghats — The  Vyasa  Episode.  ...         .;.      207 


(  vlii  ) 

(i)     NORTHWARD 

Dasaswamedh     Ghat -Man     Mandil     Ghat -Mir   (}hat- 
Lalita  Ghat — Nepalese  Temple— J alsain  Ghat — Manikarnika — 
Tarakeswara — Ahmety  Temple — Manikarnika  Kund — Scindhia 
Ghat— Panchganga  -  Madhoji-ka-deora  -  Beni        Madho  -  Tri- 
lochan   Ghat — Barana    Sangam,  ...  ...  ...      211 

(2)     SOUTHWARD 

A  Dandi's  Watery  Grave -Scenes  on  the  bank- 
Chausatti  Ghat — Kedarnath — Harish  Chandra — Ballavacharya 
—  Sivala  Fort-Tulsi  Das — Asi  Sangam — Temple  restoration 
-Panchkoshi    Road.      ...  ...  ...  ...  ...       229 

Chapter  X— ramnagar 

Mansa  Ram— Bulwant  Singh -Chet  Singh -Mahip 
Narayan — Administration — The  Present  Maharaja -Ramnagar 
Fort-Janakpur  and  Girijaya  Temples -Temple  of  Durga  — 
Maharaja's  Garden -Night  on  the  river -Our  Guide - 
Farewell  !  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...       247 

Appendix— 

A    Firman   of  Emperor   Aurangzeb.  ...  ...      269 

ILLUSTRATIONS 
PLATE      I-H.     H.     the  Maharaja  of  Benares  Frontispiece 

n-i.     The    Crescent    Bank -2.     The    Chakra   (a), 
Samrat  (b),    and     Narivalaya     (c)    Yantras-3. 
Man      Mandil     Ghat -4.     Chakra      Yantra— 5. 
Digansha  Yantra.       ...  ...  ...  ...         17 

in -I.     Saraswati  Temple,  Central   Hindu  College - 
2.     Queen's  College -3.     Central  Hindu  College 
Boarding.        ...  ...  ...  ...  ..        23 

IV- I.     Dasaswamedh  Ghat -2.     Sankaracharya  -  3. 

A   group  of  Sannyasis.  ...  ...  ...         48 

V-i.     Lai      Khan's      Tomb -2.     Ruins     of      old 
Visweswara      Temple -3.     Scindhia      Ghat -4. 
An   Ekka.       ...  ...  ...  ...  ...        5<j 

VI  -  Avalokites wara  -  Buddha  as  Teacher  -  Maitreya.    ^3 


( '^ ) 

PLATEVII-i.     The    Dhamek   and     its     neighbourhood -2. 
The     iMain     Shrine   and    Lion-Capital -3.     Old 
Walls   hi   the   excavations -4.     Asoka  Column.      97 
VIII- I.     Bodhisattwa  Statue -2.     Votive    Memorial - 
3.     Some    Sculptures --4.     Buddha    with    Alms- 
bowl- 5.     Mara -6.     A     group     of    Statues -7. 
Sculptured     fragment    representing     Ramagram 
Stupa,  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...       107 

"  IX -I.     Bas-relief  illustrating   incidents  in  Buddha's 

life  and  a  Buddha  statue  in  Bhumi-sparsha  Mudra 
-2.       An      Elephant      in      Stone -3.      Rama- 
Lakshmana   Sculpture— 4.     The     Gupta     Lintel 
illustrating   the    Khantivadi    Jataka.  ...  ...       114 

X-i.  Jnan  Bapi  Temple -2.  Dandi  Ghat -3. 
Entrance,  Dufterin  Bridge -4.  A  cosy  corner, 
Raj  Ghat  -  5.  A  bit  of  Benares  from  one  of 
the  Beni-Madho  towers -6.  The  Golden  Dome 
and  Spire  of  Visweswara  Temple -7.  Open 
porch   of  a   temple   near   V'isweswars,  ...       149 

"  XI -I,  Bhaskaranand  Mausoleum -2.  Ahmety  Temple 

-3.  Durga  Kund  and  Temple -4.  Vishnu 
image,  Sankudhara  -  5.  A  Benares  Street  — 
6.     Rani  Barahar's  Temple -7.     Durga  Temple 

(porch) 186 

XII -A     road    to    the   Ghat -2.     Bathing    Ghat    for 
females -3.  Ganga  Mehal  Ghat-4.  Manikarnika 
Ghat -5.     Bathing  Scene -6.     Burning  Ghat.        207 
"     XII A  -  Panchaganga   Ghat....  ...  ...  ...       221 

XIII-i,     Durga  Temple,    Ramnagar-2.     View  north- 
ward from  the  Sivala  Ghat -3.     Ramnagar  Fori.  247 

A   PLAN   OF   THE   CITY   OF   BENARES.  ...       268 


THE    HOLY    CITY 

{  BENARES ) 

PAR  T   FIRST 


Chapter   I 


TO  THE  CITY 

*'As  a  queen  she  (Benares)  has  evef  teceived  thfe 
-willing  homage  of  her  subjects  scattered  all  over  India  5 
as   a  lover,  she  has  secured  their  affection  and   regard/^ 

— M.  A.  Sherring. 

i»^.,ffl;  Y  the  Bombay  Mail— Grand  Chord — lies 
'^  ^  the  most  convenient  route  from  Calcutta  ; 
and  it  is  pleasant  to  watch  through  the 
window  as  the  rushing  iron  horse  pierces 
the  serried  darkness  and  emanations  of 
electric  brilliance  from  the  well-lit  carriages 
shimmer  along  the  straight  pathway 
converting  it,  as  it  were,  into  a  rippling 
glistening  streamlet.  It  is  about  ten  in 
the  evening  now,  and  the  gentle  rocking  soon  lulls 
you  into  a  disturbed  slumber — half-way  between  a 
doze  and  actual   sleep. 

Dim  as  the  purple  twilight  looms  in  its  subdued 
brightness  in  the  far-off  east,  a  few  bleak  rocky 
hillocks     appear    on    the   right   and    left   interspersed 


THB,  HQL  V  CITY  (BENARES)  Quw 


.\/v/^\yNyxAv/\)>^x^/x/-,  -v/\y\ 


with  tufts  of  green  sprouting  up  here  and  there. 
Presently  the  Falgu  with  its  shallow  expanse  of 
scanty  water  comes  into  view  with  the  Gaya  temples 
and  buildings  on  the  distant  left  studding  the  gentle 
curve  of  its  sandy  bank.  Wide  awake  at  the  peep 
of  early  dawn  you  come  to  a  halt  at  the  Gaya 
Station,  and  in  a  few  minutes  a  turbaned  boy  clad 
in  the  correct  style  in  spotless  white  brings  in 
his  tea-tray  and  offers  you  chhota-hazri  if  you  would 
care    to   have   it. 

The  sight  of  a  chain  of  sma!!  hillocks  bordering 
the  horizon  on  the  left  with  the  tall  spire  of  some 
ancient  shrine  pointing  heavenward  in  the  distance 
and  the  pleasing  scent  of  the  neighbouring  fields 
borne  on  the  bracing  morning  breeze,  give  you  a 
sense  of  welcome  relief  after  the  clc^eness  of  the 
dusty  and  smoky  atmosphere  of  the  oppressive  brick 
and  mortar  you  have  left  behind.  A  fresh  verdure 
following  the  night's  dewy  bath  seems  to  have 
clothed  the  expansive  fields  on  the  right  and  on  the 
left   as   you   dash   through    them. 

Soon   enough  the   winding   SONE  begins  to  glisten 

to   the   view,  and  presently^   with   slackened  speed    you 

are  upon   the  magnificent  bridge  itself — something  over 

ten    thousand  feet  in  length  1  ^    Famed 

The  Sone         to   be    the    longest  in   existence   in   the 

world, — that      over     the     Scottish     Tay 

only     excepted,— it   is     a     lasting    monument    of    the 

(i)     10,052  feet. 


I.  TO    THE   CITY 


triumph  of  the  engineer's  art  that  harnessed  the 
broad  river  thus  in  the  concluding  year  of  the  past 
century.  As  over  the  rolHng  biliowy  v/ater — ^  couple 
of  miles  in  width — the  iron  dragon  glides  on  dragging 
its  serpentine  tail  behind,  puffing  and  snorting  and 
leaving  a  trail  of  dense  dark  smoke  hovering  in 
the  air  above,  the  grandeur  of  the  scene  would  be 
unrivalled  and  the  view  superb  and  imposing  !  But 
in  the  winter  the  shallow  river  is  nearly  dry  and 
tiny  islets  of  sand  \xi  upraised  patches  appear  on 
its  bed  on  either  side  overgrown  with  moss.  Near 
to  the  white  sandy  expanse  on  the  edge  you  now 
approach,  and  your  vehicle  bounds  with  a  renewed 
start    and    a   vigorous    pull. 

Low  hillocks  and  extensive  fields  green  with 
fertility  now  catch  your  eyes,  and  dense  mango-groves 
lying  scattered  at  intervals  furnish  variety  to  the 
scene.  Patches  of  ripening  yellow  here  and  streaks 
of  snowy  white  there  amidst  the  surrounding  green 
Jook  like  the  pearly  smile  lighting  up  the  features  of 
some  buxom  darksome  beauty.  On  the  fringes  of  the 
spacious  fields  bright  with  their  wealth  of  yellow 
and  green — the  reward  of  a  responsive  Nature  to 
the  labouring  humanity — are  high-wall-ed  wells  sunk 
deep  into  the  bowels  of  Mother  Earth  ;  and  panting 
bullocks  are  observed  tugging  at  the  ropes  attached 
to  primitive  pulleys  depending  from  the  most  archaic 
structures,  and  drawing  up  huge  vessels  filled  with 
the   milk   of  Nature   to  drench   the  parched    soil.     Up 


4         THE  HOL  V  CITY  (BENARES)       Chap:.. 

above  the  adjoining  depression  where  the  excess  finds 
ks  way,  there  hovers  a  tiny  heron,  poised  for  a  moment 
apon  its.  •  pair  of  silver- white  pinions  relieved  in  bold 
contrast  against  the  dark-blue  sky,  and  presently 
alights  gracefully   upon    the    marshy   ground. 

Clusters    of    squalid-looking    huts    lying     on     the 

toad  side,   with   rotting   thatched    roofs   and  mat-walls 

daubed  with  mud,  give  you   some   idea  of  the  general 

poverty  of  the  masses   here   and  fill  your  sympathetic 

heart   with   pity,  perchance,   for   the   people   who   have 

to  live  such   miserable  hves    in  the    midst   of    all   this 

munificent   gift   of  a   bountiful    Nature   in   the     shape 

of  a   plenteous   yield   of  all  that  can    shoot  out  of  her 

bed.     It    is   occasions    like   these   that  bring  forcibly  to 

mind  the  plight    of  tlie   weather-bound  ancient  mariner 

who  saw  'water    everywhere,   but  not  a  drop    to  drink,' 

and     make     one    feel     that     to    the     poverty-stricken. 

people     here     all     this     plenty     is    but   brine.     But    a 

rail-road  journey    is  not  perhaps  leisurely    enough   to 

arouse  an  inclination  to  cogitate  upon  such  a  theme  and 

to  ponder  over  the  causes..    So,  for  the  present   it   must 

all   be    assigned     to    that    easiest     and   safest     of    all 

solutions — kismet  ! 

The   engine    slows    down,    wiiistles    out    a  choked 

scream  and  fetches  a  deep  breath  ;  and    at   last    it   rolls 

into    the     MOGAL   Serai     Station    and 

Mogal  Serai        comes    to    a    stand.      Here    you     must 

change,    and    pass    across   with   bag  and 

^^ggage    along    the     high     overhead     bridge    to     tlie 


TO    THE  CITY 

platform    opposite  and  get  into  some  Oudh-Rohilkhand 
car   and   wait   till   you   are   hurried   eff  again. 

Time,  however,  would  not  hang  heavy,  for  there 
are  diversions  enough  to  engage  your  attention. 
Unique  carved  brassware  and  ciariously- fashioned 
"horn  and  ivory,  earthen  statuettes  and  pretty 
flower-vases,  bundles  of  walking-sticks  and  even 
tap-to-date  novels  and  the  latest  morning  papers,-— 
•such  is  the  strange  medley  of  articles  that  catch 
your  eyes,  and  their  vendors  come  up  and  pester 
you  to  accept  their  eagerly-proferred  presents,  for 
consideration  of  course.  Presently,  the  fruiterers 
with  tempting  ripe  guavas  and  plump  luscious 
©ranges  walk  along  hawking  their  wares  ;  small 
urchins  with  matches  and  cigarettes,  cigars  and 
%etel-leaves,  scream  out  in  their  piercing  treble- 
and  a  sweets-seller  sooia  passes  by  and  keeps  run- 
ning onward  in  his  everlasting  course  with  a  large 
tmcovered  wooden  tray  upon  his  head,  followed  by 
a  companion  waving  an  upraised  stick  to  scare 
away   the    kites   flying   above. 

Even  the  greatest  of  ordeals,  however,  has  a  ter- 
anination.  So  this  new  train  also  starts  at  last  and 
proceeds  with  yoxk  towards  the  holiest  of  the  holy 
cities  you  are  longing  to  see.  The  same  verdure  and 
luxuriance  of  Nature's  bounty  all  around  again,  and 
groves  of  various  trees  now  grow  more  abundant 
As  you  pass  the  Sasseram  Station,  the  large 
t^Mte    dome    oi    Sher  Khan's      tomb     with    its  Jojy 


6  THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)  Chap. 

minarets  around  peeps  throug-h  the  g^reenerfes  on 
the  left  and  seems  to^  play  at  bide-^nd-seek  as  you 
move  onward.  That  heroic  Behar  Chief  who  con- 
quered Bengal  and  drove  Emperor  Humayun  out 
of  India  in  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century 
has  left  one  lasting  memorial  that  serves  to  com- 
memorate his  name  among  posterity  to  this  day. 
His  Grand  Trunk  Road    runs  still  from  Bengal  to 

the  Punjab,  and  in  his  time  mosques 
The  Grand  and  caravaBserais  both  for  Hindus  and 
Trunk  Road      Mahomedans     stood      by      its    side    at 

convenient  distances  for  the  use 
and  comfort  of  the  way-farers.  It  was  then 
traversed  by  millions  of  foot-sore  arid  weary  pil- 
grims to  the  sacred  cities  in  the  North- West,  and 
upon  it  numbers  had  probably  sunk  down  breath- 
less and  even  dropped  dead  from  sheer  exhaustion  ! 
Hallowed  by  associations  such  as  these,  it  now  runs 
parallel  to  the  raO-road  on  the  left  —neat  and  trim 
and  sheltered  under  the  cool  shade  of  the  over- 
arching trees  flanking  its  edges.  Mango-topes  in 
the  distance  planted  in  orderly  symmetrical  rows 
with  their  rounded  leafy  croAvns  standing  above  the 
upright  trunks  cause  frequent  changes  in  the  scenic 
background  of  green  that  variegates  the  blue 
horizorL 

We  now  cross  the  little  Karmanasa  streamlet. 
Presently  a  middle-sized  camel  struts  on  over  Sher 
Khan's   Road   swaying    its    long    neck    from    side  to 


I.  TO  THE  CITY 

side  and  nibbling  the  leaves  from  the  branches  of 
dwarfish  trees ;  and  anon  follow  a  swarm  of  pigs 
urged  on  by  a  small  child  nude  as  the  hand  of 
Nature  had  fashioned  it  There,  a  little  way  off 
saunters  a  straggler  keeping  to  the  shady  side  of 
the  road,  and  even  an  ekka  skips  on  in  its  jolting 
gait,  followed  by  that  picture  of  patience,  the 
washerman's  ass,  carrying  a  pair  of  large  bulging 
bundles  hanging  from  its  back  and  the  happy 
rider  sitting  astride  tapon  tbem  and  evidently  singing 
snatches  of  sofnc  light  popular  ditty  in  a  hoarse 
cracked   voice. 

The  fine  towering  steeple  of  the  Durga  Temple 
?it  Ramnagar  now  raises  itself  above  the  distant  foli- 
age on  the  left.  A  pleasant  half-hour  would  soon 
bring  you  to  the  broad  DUFFERIN  BRIDGE  that  took 
five  years  (18S2-1887)  in  stretching  itself  across  the 
hofy  Ganges,  supplanting  thereby  the  bridge  of 
boats  that  existed  there  before  and  costing  nearly 
forty-nine  laklis  of  rupees.  Grand  amd  imposing  it 
looks  upon  its  half  a  dozen  massive  stone  supports 
'With  its  couple  of  wide  footpaths  quite  three  quarters 
of  a   nsiile   in   length  (Plate  X,  3). 

The  sacred  water  of  the  holy  river,  with  glimpses 
of  towering  temples  standing  on  tier  bank,  now 
gleams  into  view  through  some  breaks  of  the  foliage 
?n  the  remote  horizon.  Forward  as  you  approach,  a 
grand  panorama  of  the  long-looked-for  city,  spreading 
)0Ut   os^ar  an  exjisaaase  ©f  -sofne     four  extend-i»g  joailes 


S  THE  HOL  V  CITY   (BEN'ARES)        Char 

fn   the    form    of  a  mighty   crescent  now  breaks    upon 
your   wondering   gaze. 

Upon  a  high  ridge  of  kankar  on  the  western 
bank  and  m  front  of  the  greenish  bay  of  h"mpid 
water  she  stands  hke  a  vast  amphitheatre^  with  her 
domes  and  spires  and  turrets  up  above  the  flights 
of  numberless  steps,  extending  along  the  winding 
stone-paved    riv^r-bank    far   as     the     eye    can     reach. 

Hurried  on  over  the  bridge,  the  cres- 
Flrst  cent-like   arc  now   widens  and   becomes 

Glimpses         more   defined,   and   the   twin    towers    of 

Madhoji-ka-deora  stand  out  prominent 
among  the  white  and  gold-tipped  spires  clustered 
all  around.  The  tiny  Barana  to  the  right  and  the 
hazy  Asi  to  the  extreme  end  on  the  south  there 
join  the  sacred  river  and  enclose  with  her — figuring 
the  resplendent  crescent  moon  o-n  Siva's  forehead 
— what  IS  known  as  the  ancient  and  holy  Kasi, 
the  city  founded  by  Siva  himself  and  fabled  to  be 
resting  upon  the  points  of  his  trident  which  no 
earthquake  can  shake  and  reminiscent  of  a 
glorified  vision  of  the  sacred  manifestation  of 
Annapurna  and  Visweswara  as  the  originating  and 
ever-sustaining  Energy  of  the   Universe  \ 

Here    then    is   Kasi — ^the  highest   in  sanctity,    the 
thrice-blessed    spot    beneath    the    heavens,    associated 
with   an    ideal    of    all    that   is    pure   and    holy,     the 
dreamland    of  a   devout  Hindu's    longing,  the  dispenser 
of  salvation  from  earthl}'  existence  and  repeated  births. 


I.  TO  THE  CITY  9 

and  the  very  abode  of  peace   and   joy  eternal  !     Here 
must   you   alight   if  you   will   visit  the  holy    city. 


Having  covered  no  less  than  four  hundred  and 
seventy-six  miles  of  the  iron  track  at  a  stretch 
— though  by  the  Grand  Trunk  Road  it  would 
only  be  four  hundred  and  thirty-two, — you  may 
now  pause  awhile  to  take  breath.  About  this 
Kasi  station  lie  the  ruins  of  the  old  Fort  of  the 
ancient  King  Banar,  the  last  of  the  Gaharwar 
princes,  who  ruled  over  Kasi  and  the  kingdom  of 
Kanouj.  "  Benares '\  the  modern  anglicised  name 
of  the  city,  has  been  considered  to  be  associated 
with  the  fort  of  this  king,  who  is  repated  to  have 
rebuilt  the  city  also  in  the  twelfth  century  A.  D. 
The   older  name   "Bdrdnasi"   seems  to  be  compounded 

of    the     names     of    the    two     streams, 

Nomencla-        Barand — and        not     Barna     as      it      is 

ture  usually     spelt — and      Asi,     meandering 

round  the  city  by  the  north  and 
the  south  and  emptying  themselves  into  the 
holy     Ganges.  ^    The     other     name   "Kdsi\''    which    is 

(i)    This  is    supported  by  the    Valmana  Purana  which  notes 
the   words  of  Vishnu   in   the   following  terms  : — 


10  TFIE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)     Chap, 


.•X,-V/X'\'^.^.\^\ 


the  oldest  one,  is  supposed  to  be  derived  from  the 
Kdsis  tribe  of  the  Aryans  who  first  settled 
here  three  thousand  years  ago.  According  to  the 
erudite  editor  of  the  Viswakosha  the  city  came  to 
be  called  "Kasi"  after  the  name  of  Kdshi  or  Kdsya 
(the  son  of  Raja  Kdsli)  who  was  the  first  king  of 
this  place.  Situate  25°  18'  N.  Lat.  and  83^  i'  E. 
Long,  —  it  is  now  the  head -quarters  of  the  Benares 
district  of  the  United  Provinces  and  covers  an 
area  in  acres  of  three  thousand  and  a  half,  ^ 
and  in  course  of  the  Census  of  1901  answered 
for  the  housing  of  nearly  two  lakhs  and  ten 
thousand  citizens,  among  whom  over  a  lakh 
and  a  half  were  Hindus,  and  over  half  a  lakh 
professed  allegiance  to  the  Prophet,  and  about 
twelve   hundred   were   Christians.* 

ff^cTT  ^T^im    ^4mq^?T    5JW  II 

w^vi-m  '[%^m  =^  ^fiff^^^  fa^m  1 
^  ^^  '^  ^^^i  ^^\^  ^^p\'.  II 

if^^^^?:^§   ^^qmiTHlW  II 

cT??Tfe   'RTt    5<!gT    Wm    ^TTT^el'  ^W  II  " 

(i)  3448   acres. 

(2)   151,488    Hindus,  53,677  Mahomedans,  4176  Christians 
and  other:,    making   up   2,09,331    in   all.     In   course   of  the   last 


I.  TO    THE    CITY  ii 

Well-drained  and  standing  dry  on  the  high 
rocky  bank  sloping  to  the  river,  the  city  is  reputed 
to     enjoy     a      pleasant      equable     climate,     with     the 

exception     of     the    extremes     of    heat 

Climate  and      and    cold   during   some  portions  of    the 

Ganges  Water    summer     and     winter.    Its     health  is   no 

doubt  due  to  the  purity  of  the  water 
of  the  Ganges  which  people  use  for  bathing  and 
drinking  purposes  even  in  preference  to  the  filtered 
tap-water  from  the  Water-works  inaugurated  here  by 
Sir  Auckland  Colvin  in  1892.  Mark  Twain,  speaking 
of  some  tests  by  an  expert  scientist  in  Government 
employ  at  Agra  in  connection  with  the  water  of 
the   Ganges,   remarks   in    his    ''More    Tramps  Abroad\ 

"He  added  swarm  after  swarm  of  cholera 
"germs  to  this  (Ganges)  water  ;  within  six  hours 
"they  always  died,  to  the  last  sample.  Repeatedly 
"he  took  pure  well  water  which  was  barren  of 
"animal  life  and  put  into  it  a  few  cholera  germs  ; 
"they  always  began  to  propagate  at  once  and 
"always  within  six  hours  they  swarmed  and  were 
"numberable  by  millions  upon  millions.  For 
"ages  the  Hindus  have  had  absolute  faith  that 
"the  water  of  the  Ganges  was  utterly  pure, 
"could     not     be    defiled    by    any    contact     whatso- 

"ever     and    infallibly    made   pure   and    clean    what- 
"soever   thing   touched    it.     They   still     believe     it, 

Census   of  loth  March  191 1,  however,  there  had  been  a  decrease 
in  the  population  by  10,456,  and  the  total  stood  at  198,859. 


12  TFE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)        Chap. 

"and  that  is  why  they  bathe  in  it  and  drink  it. 
"The  Hindus  have  been  laughed  at  these  many 
"generations,  but  the  laughter  will  need  to  modify 
"itself  a  little  frcm  now  on.  How  did  they 
"find  out  the  water's  secret  in  those  ancient 
"ages  ?  Had  they  germ-scientists  then  ?  We 
"do  not  know.  We  know  that  they  had  a  civili- 
"zation  long  before  we  emerged  from  savagery".^ 

If   you   are   now   refreshed    and    in     proper     trim, 
we    may    proceed    to   have    a    look    at   the     city     and 
shall    first   take   the  road  leading   to  the  Dasaswamedh 
quarter.     The  massive   iron  gates    at    Rajghat  opening 
towards    the    city   lead   us   into    a  dusty 
Visweswar-      road    lined     with     modest     unassuming 
gunge  Bazar      houses  with  the  wrinkles  of  age  stamped 
upon   most   of  them.     A    small  market- 
place— VISWESWARGUNGE  Bazar — soon  appears   with 

(i)  In  confirmation  of  this  may  be  quoted  what  the  Indian 
Medical  Gazette  notes  : — "It  would  appear  as  if  modern 
iicience  was  coming  to  the  aid  of  the  ancient  tradition  in 
maintaining  a  special  blessedness  of  the  water  of  the  Ganges. 
Mr.  E.  H.  Henkin,  in  the  preface  to  the  fifth  edition  of  his 
excellent  pamphlet  'On  the  Cause  and  Prevention  of  Cholera,' 
writes  as  follows : — "Since  I  originally  wrote  this  pamphlet 
1  have  discovered  that  the  water  of  the  Ganges  and  the 
Jumna  is  hostile  to  the  growth  of  the  cholera  microbe,  not 
only  owing  to  the  absence  of  food  materials,  but  owing  to 
actual  presence  of  an  antiseptic  that  his  the  pow3r  of  des- 
troying  this  microbe.  At  present  I  can  make  no  suggcorjon  as 
to   the  origin  of  this  mysterious  antiseptic." 


I.  TO   THE   CITY  13 


pulse-shops  and  flour-stalls  ranged  on  either  side 
and  various  other  necessaries  of  life  piled  about  in 
utter  disregard  of  all  order.  Huge  lumbering  carts 
labouring  heavily  along  the  badly  rutted  pathway, 
each  drawn  by  three  sturdy  bullocks  with  another 
tied  behind  to  serve  as  a  relay  and  being  itself 
tugged    on  in    its   trail,    make   a    curious  spectacle. 

Smiling  at  the  oddity  as  you    proceed  onward,  the 
Municipal  or  the  Maidagun  Garden  comes  to  view 
on  the  right,  neat  and  snug  in  its  iron  en- 
Municipal        closure,  and  the  delicate  perfume  of  roses 

Garden  fills  the  air  near  about.    Roses  of  varied 

hues  and  species  laid  out  in  a  variety   of 

designs  take   up   all  available    space   inside,   and  a  fine 

jet-de-eau     playing     at    one   end    adds    to   the    beauty 

of  this   enjoyable   nook.     It   was   the     Maharajah     of 

Vizianagram    who   brought  it   into  being  in    1866  and 

presented   it  to  the  people  of  Benares.    A  tank  in  the 

middle   of  the  garden  with   stone   steps    running  down 

from    the  banks    into   its  clear  water  below  is  famed  to 

be   the  terrestrial  remnant  of  the  heavenly  Mandakini 

stream     now   shrunk   into    such      circumscribed     and 

diminutive    proportions.     Adjoining   this 

Nagri  Pracharini  garden    is   the   hall    of  the  Nagri   Pra- 

Sabha.  CHARINI    Sabha   founded   in    1893    with 

the  object  of  popularising  the  Hindi 
language.  Patronised  by  Government  with  a  grant 
in  aid  of  research  it  has  a  fine  collection  of  Hindi 
manuscripts  and  has  already  given  sufficient  evidence 
of  its  usefulness   in   the   shape   of  the   publication    of 


14  THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES)         Qww 


a  number  of  works  in  Hindi  comprising  Hindu 
and    Buddhistic   literature   and  philosophy. 

To  the  left  of  the  road  lie  the  TELEGRAPH  Office 
and  the  Police  Kotwali  in  the  same  compound, 
both  of  them  fine-lookinsr  modern  structures.  Close 
by  in  a  large  compound  of  green  lawn  is  the 
Alfred  Hall  — the  Benares  Town  Hall — an  imposing 
pile  in  mixed  Hindu  and  Gothic  style  enclosing  a 
long  splendid  hall  with  a  dais  on  the  further  end 
and  a  gallery  approached  by  flights  of  stairs  on 
either   side   near   the    entrance.      This   also    owes    its 

existence    to   the    munificence     of    the 
Alfred  Hall         Maharaja  of  Vizianagram  who  had  it  built 

(1873-1875)  to  commemorate  the  visit  of 
H.  R.  H.  Prince  Alfred  to  this  city  in  1870.  It  contains 
a  fine  portrait  in  oil  of  the  Maharaja  and  a  marble  bust 
of  the  Hon.  Raja  Deo  Narain  Singh,  late  member  of  the 
Legislative  Council  of  India,  and  was  opened  in  1876 
by  the  then  Prin:e  of  Wales  (the  late  King  Edward  VII). 
We  next  approach  the  Chauk,  practically  the 
centre  of  the  city  and  the  largest  mart  and  empor- 
ium of  trade  in  Benares,  extending  over  a  wide 
area  along  the  main  road  with  a  number  of 
narrow   lanes  running  into  the  interior,  which  are  lined 

with    lofty   buildings   full  of  all  kinds  of 
Indigenous  Pro-   merchandise.     The   most   not^d    and  at- 
ducts  tractive  quarter  here  is  the  Thattiri  Bazar 

glittering  with  shining  repousse  and  embossed 
brassware  and  silver  goods  of  wonderful  workman- 
ship for  which  Benares    has    ever    been    famous.       As 


I.  TO    THE   CITY  i$ 


'  ^'N  'X'-v  '\.rK' 


you  advance  forward,  wooden  articles  inlaid  with 
brass  and  various  kinds  of  fretted  woodwork  engage 
your  attention  for  a  time  ;  and  interspersed  among 
the  indigenous  industrial  products  may  also  be 
noticed  the  woven  fabrics  of  Manchester  and  various 
cheap  shining  tinsels  with  the  hall-mark  of "  Made  in 
Germany  "  upon  them.  It  is  the  gold-embroidered 
kincobs  and  silk  brocades,  hov/ever,  that  are  the  most 
beautiful  products  of  the  Benares  looms  deserving 
prominent  notice,  as  also  shawls  and  fine  embroidery 
and  gold  filigree  work  for  which  Benares  has 
ever  been  noted  in  the  world's  marts.  This  weaving 
industry,  it  is  estimated,  furnishes  employment  to 
no   less    than     twenty-five     thousand  people  here. 

From  the  very  earliest  of  times  Benares  had 
been  famed  as  a  great  commercial  city,  and  in 
testimony  thereof,  Ralph  Fitch  in  1^5  characterised 
it   as    "a   great    towne,  and  a  great   store   of  cloth    is 

made   there   of    cotton."    Bishop     Heber 
Trade  in     his     "  Narrative "     also    speaks     of 

Benares  as  •*  the  great  mart  where  the 
shawls  of  the  north,  and  the  diamonds  of  the  south 
and  the  muslins  of  Dacca  and  the  Eastern  Pro- 
vinces center."  Her  wealth  and  activity  even  in 
the  earlier  part  of  the  last  century  had  called 
forth  the  following  eulogium  from  Macaulay's  pen  : 
"  All  along  the  shores  of  the  venerable  stream  lay 
great  fleets  of  vessels  laden  with  rich  merchandise. 
From  the  looms  of  Benares  went  forth  the  most 
delicate   silks   that   adorned   the     halls     of  St.   James 


i6  THE  HOLY    CITY  {BENARES)      Chap. 

and  of  Versailles ;  and  in  the  bazaars,  the  muslins  of 
Bengal  and  the  sabres  of  Oude  were  mingled  with 
the  jewels  of  Golconda   and  the    shawls   of  Cashmere." 

We  next  come  to  the  large  square  with  the 
imposing  building  on  the  right  where  the  Chauk 
Police  is  stationed.  Vendors  of  various  small  wares 
and  brightly  lacquered  wooden  toys  have  set  their 
stalls  here  in  the  open;  and  the  crowd  is  rather 
thick  and  is  being  constantly  dispersed  right  and 
left  by  the  passing  ekkas  aud  other  vehicles  with 
their  drivers  shouting  at  the  the  top  of  their  voice, 
'■'■Hutto^  Bheiyd''  (Move  away,  Brother  J  and  thus 
adding  to   the   babel   of  noises  filling   the   place. 

A    few   steps     forward    on     the     left     is     the   fine 

entrance  to   the   nice   little   patch     of    garden     of  the 

Carmichael  Library  with  a  beautiful 

The  Carmichael  fountain    squirting    jets  of    cool     clear 

Library  water  around.  In  this  cosy  peaceful 
retreat  is  a  well-stocked  library  with 
reading  rooms.  This  interesting  institution  dates 
from  1870  and  was  first  inaugurated  by  Rana 
Sanga  Thakur  Shaheb,  a  Reis  of  Benares,  with  the 
aid  of  public  subscriptions.  Three  years  later  it 
was  enlarged  at  the  instance  of  Mr.  Carmichael, 
the  then  Commissioner,  whose  name  it  bears,  and 
it   has   now   an   annual    income   of  nearly    Rs.  2,000. 

Past  the  GODOWLIA  CHURCH  of  the  Church 
Mission  Society  on  the  right,  we  may  now  visit  the 
famous   astronomical   observatory,  the  Man  Mandil, 


l'J<ATK    II 


1.  The  Crescent   Bank. 

2.  The  Chakra   (a),    the  Samrat  (b),    and   the     Xari\;ilaya  (C) 
Yantras. 

3.  Man  Mandil   Ghat. 

4.  The  Chakra  Yantra. 

5.  The  Digansha  Yantra. 

P.   17 


Chapter  n 

THE  STARS  AND  THEIR  WAYS 

"Behold  yon   azure  dome,  the  sapphire   sky, 
Rear  in   unpillared  might   its   canopy  ; 
That  vast  pavilion,   gemmed  with  worlds  of  light, 
"Whose   circling  glories   boast  a  boundless  flight ; 
And  as   they  roll,   survey  man's    chequered  state 
And  scan    the   destinies    of  mortal  fate." 

— Pandnameh  of  Sa'di. 

HE   famous  Man  Mandil  (Plate  II,  3) 
was  erected  by   the   Rajput  Raja   Man 
Singh  of  Amber  about   the   year    1600 
A.  D.  and    was   used  as   an  observatory 
ninety-three   years   later  by  his  descen- 
dant   Sawai   Jaya   Singh,  the     founder 
cf  the  picturesque  town  of  Jaipur.  Jaya 
Singh  was   an   erudite   prince    and  his 
favourite  study   was     Astronomy.     He 
spent  seven  long  years   in  ransacking   the  Hindu  as  well 
as   all  available  foreign  astronomical  and 
Jaya  Singh       mathematical    works   which  he  procured 
from  Samarkand  and  elsewhere.     He  had 
many   of  these   works    translated     into     Sanskrit     for 
making    a      comparative   study    of    the      Hindu,     the 
Turkish   and   the  European     systems    of    astronomy  ; 
and  he  himself  invented     some     astronomical     instru- 
ments —  Ram    Ymttra,    Sam  rat    Y antra,   and  notably, 
the    Jaiprakash      Yantra,  —  after    a     great     deal     of 
researck 

2 — 


1 8        THE  HOLY  CITY   (BENARES)  Chap. 

Referring  to  some  astronomical  instruments  he 
had  procured  from  King  Emmanuel  of  Portugal, 
he  noted  in  his  great  work  in  Persian,  the  Zcej 
Mahammad  Shdht\  that  on  critical  examination 
they  were  found  to  be  defective  in  as  much  as 
they  caused  a  difference  of  four  minutes  in 
calculations  regarding  eclipses.  He  attributed  the 
errors  in  the  calculations  of  Hipparchus,  Ptolemy 
and  others  to    the    inaccuracy    of  their   appliances. 

Java  Singh  was  commissioned  by  Mahammad  Shah 
the  Emperor  of  Delhi,  to  correct  the  errors  that  had 
crept  into  the  calender.  Hence  it  was  that  in 
addition  to  the  Observatory  here,  he  installed  four 
others  at  Delhi,  Muttra,  Oojjein  and  Jaipur,  and 
embodied  the  results  of  his  observations  in  his  Zeej 
Mahannnad  Shdhi,  so  named  in  honour  of  the 
aforesaid   emperor. 

Striking  to  the  left  into  a  narrow  alley  where 
no  other  conveyance  but  your  legs  will  carry  you, 
and  taking  a  few  turns  up  over  some  stone-paved 
staircased  lanes,  you  come  at  last  in  front  of  the 
famous  building,  the  Man  Mandil —  a  place  to 
measure  the  globe,  *from  vidn  (measurement)  and 
mandil  (globe)'. 

Admitted  through  a  narrow  entrance  you  find 
yourself  in   a    spacious     quadrangle   shady     and    cool 

under   the     overspreading     branches    of 
The  Man  Mandil  a  pair   of  old    peepuls.     Inside  an  open 

hall,   the  walls  and  arches  are  all  covered 


II.  THE    STARS  AND  THEIR   WAYS         19 


,,-^r\/'\,-\j\/'\/\/^^^y^y\r\/\.r^y\/^y-K/^\/\/^\/  y^./-^/yy\j\j'-^\j\j\y\/\/\/\/\/\. 


with  profuse  floral  decorations  in  the  old  Indian  style 
and  fresh  enough  for  the  vicissitudes  of  three 
goodly  centuries.  A  sudden  glimpse  of  the  clear 
and  pellucid  water  oi  the  Ganges  at  the  ghat  below 
now  catches  your  eyes  through  the  side-doors  and 
apprises    you  of  your    arrival    at    the    river-bank. 

Up  over  to  the  top  of  the  roof  you  find  the 
remnants  cf  the  works  of  the  mighty  ancients.  Few 
they  are  now  that  are  in  existence  —  only  those  that  were 
perhaps  hard-set  immovable  stones,  and  merely  illustra- 
tive of  what  once  there  had  been,  —  standing  out  still 
in  their  colossal  grandeur  beneath  the  wide  expanse  of 
the  azure  above.  Down  below  on  the  east  as  you  look, 
the  placid  shining  lovely  stream  glides  along  its 
stony  bank  of  running  stairs,  and  on  the  west 
spreads  out  the  city  itself  with  myriads  of  house- 
tops basking  in  the  sun.  Amidst  surroundings  so 
grand  and  impressive  under  the  vast  canopy  of 
the  heaven^s  blue,  a  sense  oi  quiet  seclusion,  silent 
and  solemn  and  so  well  adapted  to  contemplation 
and  serious  study,  seems  calmly  to  steal  into  your 
heart.  Looking  backward  into  the  g'oomy  past 
your  mind's  eye  may  yet  perceive  how  those 
mighty  intellects  of  old  sat  here  clad  in  their 
simple  robes  and  lay  entranced  in  their  favourite 
pursuits,  poring  over  their  old  tomes  of  astrology 
and  astronomy  and  scanning  the  heavens  for  the 
stars  and  planets  that  were  to  light  them  into  the 
mysteries  of  Time  and  Space  as  measured  by  the 
cycling   orbs. 


20         THE  HOL  V  CITY  {BENARES)         Chap. 

A  look  at  the  instruments  constructed  by  J  ay  a 
Singh  may  now  be  of  interest  if  you  should  feel 
inclined   to   have    some   idea   of  their   use.     The  first, 

then,    that   you    find    is     the  Dakshina- 

Dakshinabhitti    bhitti     Yantra     (Mural     Quadrant)  —  a 

Yantra  stone  wall  built     in     the  plane   of  the 

meridian  eleven  feet  hig^h  and  a  little 
over  nine  feet  in  length,  with  two  quadrants  inter- 
secting each  other  described  thereon  and  three 
concentric  arcs  upon  each  of  them  graduated  into 
degrees  and  minutes.  The  shadows  cast  by  a 
couple  of  iron  spikes  (fixed  perpendicular  to  the 
plane  of  the  wall  at  the  top  corners)  upon  the 
divisions  of  those  arcs,  give  the  sun's  altitude  and 
zenith-distance  as  also  the  meridianal  altitude  of  the 
stars  and   the  latitude   of  the    place. 

The  next  instrument  is  the  colossal  Samrat 
Yantra  (the  Prince  of  instruments) 
Samrat  Yantra  which  is  rather  a  giant  Sun-dial.  It 
is  a  massive  stone  right-angled 
triangle  4|  feet  broad  standing  upright  in  the  plane 
of  the  meridian,  with  stone  stairs  in  the  middle 
to  ascend  to  the  top.  It  is  36  feet  long,  and  is 
22^  feet  high  on  its  northern  end  and  6^  feet  on 
the  southern,  the  inclined  hypotenuse  thus  formed 
pointing  to  the  North  Pole.  On  the  eastern  and 
western  sides  of  this  wall  are  arcs  of  massive  stone 
somewhat  greater  than  the  quadrant  of  a  circle, 
and    both   sides   of  each   of  the   arcs   are    marked  out 


IL         THE   STARS  AND  THEIR   WAYS         21 


,\j\r^r\r\r\/^ 


into  degrees ;  and  stairs  run  up  by  the  side  of 
each  to  the  top  to  admit  of  closer  observations. 
The  shadow  of  the  wall  as  it  creeps  upon  the 
arcs  gives  the  solar  time  ;  the  distances  in  time 
from  the  meridian  of  the  moon,  the  planets  and  stars, 
and  the  declination  and  hour-angle  of  the  heavenly 
bodies  can  also  be  calculated  by  the  help  of  this 
instrument.  A  double  Mural  Quadrant  has  also 
been  inscribed  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  wall. 
It  is  a  large  structure  of  stone  and  gives  some 
idea  of  the  accuracy  and  precision  in  the  works  of 
ancient  times.  Another  Sarnrat  Yantra  of  smaller 
dimensions  and  exactly  similar  to  this  lies  further 
to   the   east   (Plate    II,  2,  h). 

The    Narivalaya     Dak  shin  a    and    Uttara    Go  la   or 
the    Equ'nojtial  Circle  (Plate   II,    2,  c)    appears   next. 
It    is   a  large   circular   slanting    piece  of 
Narivalaya  Dak-  stone   placed    in    the    equinoctial   plane 
shina  and  Uttara  with  a    circle   described  on  the  northern 
Gola  side    over     4^    feet    in    diameter.     Two 

diameters  drawn  upright  and  horizontally 
at  right  angles  divide  the  circle  into  four  equal  parts 
of  ninety  divisions  each.  An  iron  spike  in  the  centre 
pointing  to  the  North  Pole  denotes  by  its  shadow  the 
meridianal  distance  of  the  sun  or  the  stars  when  in  the 
Northern  Hemisphere.  The  use  of  this  instrument  is  to 
find  out  t'me  and  also  whether  the  heavenly  bodies  are 
m  the  Northern  or  the  Southern  Hemisphere. 

Then  comes  the  CJmkra     Yantra    (Plate    II,    2a,   4) 


22         THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)  Chap. 


V  /\./\,'-s.'\.^yv/-v  r\  /\/ 


consistinj^:  of  a  movable  circle  of  iron  and  brass  —  the 
circumference  of  which  is  graduated  into 
Chakra  Yantra  sixty  parts — turning  upon  an  axis  fixed 
between  two  walls  and  pointing  to  the 
North  Pole.  To  a  peg  in  the  centre  was  attached  a 
brass  index  two  inches  broad  with  a  line  in  its 
middle  passing  through  the  centre  of  the  circle,  but 
this  is  now  broken.  By  moving  the  circle  and  the 
index  to  bring  a  particular  planet  or  star  to  the 
middle  line  of  the  index,  the  degrees  of  its  declina- 
tion may  be  found  out,  and  thus  the  distance  in 
time  (hour-angle^  of  the  sun,  the  moon  and  the 
stars   from  the  meridian  can    be   ascertained. 

We  next   approach   another   large  instrument,  the 
Digansha    Ya^ttra  (Plate,  II,  5)  constructed    of  massive 
stone    and     consisting     of     two     broad 
Pigansha  Yantra  concentric   circular  walls,    the   outer   one 
double   the   height   of    the    inner     and 
graduated    to    360®  degrees    at    the    top.      Four    iron 
spikes   are   planted   on   the     four     cardinal    points   of 
the   compass   upon    the     top     of  the    outer  wall.      A 
round    pillar  of  the    same   height   as    the   inner   wall 
stands    at    the   centre     of  the   space    inside   it.     It   is 
a  little  over  four  feet  high  and  three  and  a  half  feet  m 
diameter  and  has  an  iron  spike  fixed   at   the  top.     The 
yse  of  this   instrument  is  to  find  the  degrees  of  azimuth 
of  the   heavenly   bodies   by   stretching   two    pieces    of 
thread   crosswise  from   the   spikes  upon  the  outer  wall 
and  fastening  another  to  the  centre  of   the  pillar   with 


II.  THE  STARS  AND  THEIR   IVA  VS         23 

its   outer  end  moving  at  the   top   of  the   outer     wall. 

These  are  the  only  remnants  of  all  that  had 
once  been,  which  have  survived  the  ravages  of 
time  and  other  destructive  agencies,  the  rest 
having  gone  to  where  all  things  earthly  must  —  the 
limbo  of  oblivion.  As  they  are,  however^  even  to  this  day 
they  serve  to  give  a  slight  insight  into  the  great- 
ness and  mentality  of  the  versatile  Hindus  of  those 
by-gone  times,  and  make  it  a  wonder  as  to  how 
they  could  attain  to  such  marvellous  accuracy 
in  calculations  and  nice  precision  in  results,  as 
evidenced  by  the  popular  almanacs  and  calendars, 
with  the  aid  of  such  seemingly  crude  and  simple 
materials  at  their  disposal  before  the  quadrant-and- 
telescope  era. 

Our  limited  leisure,  however,  to  be  devoted  to 
our  tour  would  hardly  permit  us  to  indulge  in  reflec- 
tions for  the  present.  So,  with  a  deep  sigh  and 
perhaps  a  heavy  heart  we  now  come  down  from 
the  roof  and  cast  aside  the  thoughts  of  the  celes- 
tials  and  their  science,  and  direct  our  attention  to 
objects  nearer   to   us    in  these  sub-lunar  regions. 


■:o:- 


Chapter  III 


MOSTLY    SECULAR 

"  The  sun  of  eternal  truth  arises  in  the  East  to 
shine  upon  the  West.  The  East  is  the  beginning  of 
human  thought," 

— Sarat    Kumar  Ghose. 

AM  now  standing  at  the  fountain-head 
of  civilisation,  —  the  very  source  of  the 
most  ancient  and  the  most  mighty  monar- 
chies. The  vision  is  distinct,  for  I  hold 
the  vantage-ground  of  the  high  table-land 
of  Western  Asia.  The  warhke  pilgrims 
of  the  Oxus  are  moving  towards  the  east, 
the  west,  and  the  south ;  they  are  the 
patriarch  bands  of  India,  Europe  and 
Eg>'pt.  At  the  mouths  of  the  Indus,  dwell  a  sea- 
faring people,  active,  ingenious,  and  enterprising,  as 
when,  ages  subsequent  to  the  great  movement, 
they  themselves,  with  the  warlike  denizens  of  the 
Punjab,  were  driven  from  their  native  land,  to  seek 
the  far  distant  climeS  of  Greece.  The  commercial 
people  dwelling  along  the  coast  that  stretches  from 
the  mouth  of  the  Indus  to  the  Coree,  are  embarking 
on  that  emigration  whose  magnificent  results  to 
civilisation,  and  whose  gigantic  monuments  of  art, 
fill  the  mind  with  mingled  emotions  of  admiratioi; 
and  awe.  These  people  coast  along  the  shores  of 
Mekran,  traverse  the  mouth  of  the  Persian  Gulf 
and   again    adhering    to   the    sea-board   of  Oman, 


vDe 


III.  MOSTLY  SECULAR  25 

Hadramant,  and  Yemen  (the  Eastern  Arabia),  they 
sail  up  the  Red  Sea ;  and  again  ascending  the 
mighty  stream  that  fertiHses  a  land  of  wonders, 
found  the  kingdoms  of  Egypt,  Nubia  and  Abys- 
sinia. These  are  the  same  stock  that,  centuries  sub- 
sequently to  this  colonisation,  spread  the  blessings 
of  civilisation    over    Hellas   and    her   islands. 

Thus  writes    Mr.   Pococke  of    those    days 

gone  by  in  the  nonage  of  old  Time  in  lines  that  elevate 

and    thrill    the    mind     with     an     indes- 

India  of  old     cribable    feeling   and    make     one    pause 

to   meditate   for     a     while ;    for,      it     is 

now    hardly   ever    possible    to   realise     or     form    any 

idea   of  the   position    that   old    India     occupied     over 

the   globe     in     those     early    ages.      Hard     have     the 

master-minds     and   capable   savants   worked    to    clear 

the   debris  heaped    up  by   aeons   reckoned  in  centuries, 

till    materials     and     informations    enough     have   now 

been    unearthed    to   characterise     her   as     the    pioneer 

all  civilized   life  in   the   world. 


From  a  comparison  of  her  language  and  cus- 
toms, myths  and  religion,  and  her  old  architectural 
remains  with  those  of  the  other  regions  of  the 
earth  boasting  of  ancient  civilisation,  India  has  been 
pronounced  to  be  the  very  spot  where  all  art  and 
learning  had  their  origin  and  the  ultimate  source 
whence  emanated  all  knowledge  and  civilisation  in 
the  infancy  of  humanity,  that  later  en  illumined 
Assyria   and  Egypt,    Persia   and     Greece  —  and,     for 


26  THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)        Chap. 


'  \^^/N^\y  v/'V^'X/v /^y^y-^/\y^xv/Ay'\y^y'\y^  ^./-v/\/\./-\y 


the  matter  of  that,  the  whole  continent  of  Europe 
as  well.  In  his  Philosophy  of  History  in  the  begin- 
ning of  the  last  century  the  great  western  philosopher 
Hegel  took  India  to  be  ''the  centre  of  emigration  for 
all  the  Western  Worlds  Later  researches  have  gone 
further  and  proved  that  the  civilisation  of  Mexico, 
Yucatan  and  Peru  in  the  Western  Hemisphere  also 
owed  its  origin  to  the  Hindu  emigrants  from  the 
Indian  shores.  ^ 

Driven    from    their  native  abodes   by   mighty    con- 
flicts  and   religious    upheavals    large    bodies     of    men 

sought  homes  in  distant  climes  and 
Origin  of  carried  along  with  them  their  old  Ian- 
Civilisation      guage  and  religion  and  all    the    civilized 

arts  known  to  them,  and  spread  them 
over  the  regions  where  they  settled.  Bactria,  Persia, 
Asia  Minor,  Greece'and  Phoenicia  were  among  the  regions 
where  they  carried  the  germs  of  arts  and  sciences  after 
this  vast  human  tide  '  swept  across  the  valley  of  the 
Indus  on  the  west,'  and  'passed  the  barrier  of  the 
Punjab,  rolled  onward  towards  its  destined  channel 
in  Europe  and  in  Asia  to  filful  its  benevolent 
office  in  the  moral  feitilisation  of  the  world.'  Anent 
this  tide  of  col  )aisation  it  may  bs  interesting  to 
note  that  even  Benares  had  then  sent  its  quota 
of  men  that  were  "distinctly  seen  near  the  banks 
of  the  Tigris,  as  'COSS.EI,'  that  is,  the  people  of  CaSI, 
the   classical    name   for    Benares."  * 

(i)   K.  N.  Bose's  Hindu  Civilisation  in  Ancient  America. 
(2)  Pococke's  India  in  Greece,  p.  46. 


III.  MOSTLY  SECULAR  27 

Time  brought  about  inevitable  changes,  old 
shapes  and  forms  \n  their  religion  and  language  were 
transformed  or  modified  almost  beyond  recognition  ; 
but  enough  have  yet  been  left  in  the  crumbling 
ruins  of  old  architecture  and  the  old  language  to 
help  to  trace  with  reasonable  certainty  similaraties 
and  analogies  for  identifying  them  with  their 
parent  source.  A  great  French  scholar,  M.  Creuzer 
remarks  that  "  if  there  is  a  country  on  earth  which 
can  justly  claim  the  honour  of  having  been  the 
cradle  of  the  human  race,  or  at  least  the  scene 
of  a  primitive  civilisation,  the  successive  develop- 
ments of  which  carried  into  all  parts  of  the  ancient 
world,  — •  and  even  beyond,  the  blessings  of  know- 
ledge, which  is  the  second  life  of  man,  that  country 
assuredly  is  Indiar  Hence  it  is  that  another 
great  thinker,  M.  LOUIS  JACOLLIOT,  treats  the 
thesis  that  "  to  study  India  is  to  trace  humanity 
to   its    source"    as   a   simple   truism. 

In  ecstasy  over  India's  language,  PROF.  Barnouf 
writes  :  "We  will  study  India  with  its  philosophy  and 
its  myths,  its  literature  and  its  laws,  in  its  language. 
Nay  it  is  more  than  India,  ?V /^  a  page  of  the  origin 
of  the  world  we  will  attempt  to  decipher."  Speak- 
ing of  her  philosophy,  M.  CousiN  in  the  same 
strain  remarks  :  "the  history  of  Indian  philosoply  is 
the  abridged  history  of  the  philosophy  ot  the  world." 
The  Sankhya  philosophy  of  Kapila  and  the  Nyaya 
of  Gautama  were,    according  to    Mr.   R.   C.  Dutt» 


THE  HOL  Y  CITY  (BENARES)  Chap. 

the  very  first  systems  of  mental  philosophy  and  logic 
in  the  world  ;  and  even  Grammar  and  *  Arithmetic, 
he  holds,  were  invented  in  India.  Hence  it 
was  that  India  attracted  the  sages  of  :old,  Fa  Hian 
and  Hiuen  Thsang,  Pythagorus  and  Lycurgus  and 
Megasthenes  to  travel  to  her  distant  regions  to 
study  law  and  philosophy  and  religion  at  their 
fountain    source. 

As  the  brightest  gem  upon  her  diadem  "and  the 
centre  of  all  culture  and  learning  in 
Kasi  of  old  India,  Benares — which  only  is  within 
the  scope  of  this  work — has  held  its 
pre-eminence  throughout  all  ages  ;  for,  here  it  was 
that  about  700  B.  C.  lived  Kapila,  the  founder 
of  the  aforesaid  Sankhya  school  of  philosophy,  and 
according  to  B.  N.  Chunder,  "here,  probably,  did 
Gautama  found  his  school  of  the  Nyaics.  Yaska 
probably  published  his  Nirukta  at  this  place,  Panini 
his  Grammar  and  Kullak A  Bhatta  his  'Commentaries 
on  the  Institutes'."  Apart  from  being  the  chief 
seat  of  religion,  therefore,  Benares  was  thus  the 
cradle  of  all  learning  in  the  East  and  full  of  abodes 
of  scholars  and  students  from  all  quarters.  When 
the  great  Buddha  came  to  Benares  there  were  no 
less  than  seven  hundred  seminaries  and  even  then 
it  had  wide  celebrity  for  its  educational  institutions 
of  the   ancient  type. 

In    the   Mogul    times,    Feizi,    it   is    said,   disguised 
himself  as   a    Hindu     boy     here    in    order   to   initiate 


III.  MOSTLY  SECULAR  29 

himself  in  the  Hindu  Shastras.  In  latter  days  also, 
distinguished  foreigners  like  Fitch  (1583),  Tavernier 
(1668),  and  Heber  (1825)  directed  their  steps  to 
this  place  in  course  of  their  travels  and  search  after 
Indian  wisdom  and  Indian  antiquity.  Western 
savants  from  Sir  William  Jones  who  had  'discovered 
Sanskrit'  to  the  Western  scholar?,  down  to  all  who  had 
followed  him,  never  failed  to  visit  this  shrine  of  all 
ancient  wisdom  to  study  and  make  researches  here 
for  a  while  in  its  hallowed  grounds  ;  and  the 
English  Cemetery  at  the  Sekrole  quarter  has  a 
melancholy  interest  as  holding  the  last  remains  of 
one  of  the  earliest  of  the  great  Western  scholars, 
Colonel  Wilfred,  who  had  done  so  much  to  bring 
Sanskrit  before  the  world  —  'that  language  which 
formed  all  others'  —  and  who  had  been  taken  to 
have  'almost  Hinduised  himself  by  residence  in 
Benares    from    1788    to    i8?2.' 

Apart    from     the    undisputed    sovereignty     it    had 
wielded     over   the     whole     of      Hindu     India     in   all 
matters   of    religion      from     the     earliest      of     times, 
Benares   has    ever    been     regarded     as     the     fountain- 
head    of  the    Hindu     philosophy,   theology   and  juris- 
prudence,   and      the   decision     of    the 
The     oldest     Benares     authorities     claimed     supreme 
living    City      respect   and    unquestioning    acceptance 
at   all   times    throughout     the   country. 
But   the    inevitable    changes     that   time     works  upon 
th(i   face     of     Dame     Nature     has     its     sequel     up^a 


30         THE  HOL  V  CITY  (BENARES)         Chap. 

humanity  and  national  life  as  well.  So,  though  it 
has  kept  up  its  existence  as  ^/le  only  oldest  livhig 
city  of  note  in  the  two  hemispheres  at  the  present 
time,  the  old  order  has  changed  Svith  the  process 
of  the  suns'  and  new  customs  and  new  modes  of 
life  have  yielded  place  to  the  pre-existing  ones. 
Whether  it  has  been  a  history  of  advance  towards 
the  optimist's  millenium  it  is  for  the  philosopher  to 
ponder,   not   for   the    casual    tourist  to  ascertain. 

What,   however,    is   apparent     even     to     the     most 
superficial     observer     is    that      Benares 
Educational       has     now    lost       its      old       indigenous 
Systems  of  old   institutions    which     alone,      apart    from 
the   holy  shrines,    made    it    famous  and 
sought   for   in    the   by-gone     times.      The   old    chatus- 
pdthis  and    abodes     of    scholars     and     great     teachers 
where   systematic   training    in    all   branches   of  Indian 
philosophy   and   ancient   shastras     was    imparted,    and 
where  the   students   lived    in    all   humility   the    simple 
life   of    Bhramacharya   in    the   homes     of    their     pre- 
ceptors  and     forgot     the      world     while      absorbed    in 
study,  —  are     now     merely     memories     of    the     past. 
A     few     present-day        tols         maintained      by      the 
munificence  of  some  Rajas   and     reises   may    still     be 
met    w^ith   as    we   shall     presently   see,     bat   they  are 
the     merest  shadows     of    the      olden     days.      A    few 
Shasiris    or   great   Pandits  —   through  some  of  whom 
Benares    still    retains     its    ancient     reputation    for     its 
learned   men  —  may   now  and   then   be  found  to   have 


III.  MOSTLY  SECULAR  31 


(^\/\f\f\r\i 


a  few  disciples   attending   on  them,  but  nothing  like   the 
old  institutions    is    now    in    existence. 

As  to  the  utility  of  such  institutions  it  may  be 
unhesitatingly  observed  that  the  influence  they 
exerted  upon  the  national  life  was  vast  and 
wide,  turnmg  out  scholars  of  profound  erudition 
living  the  simplest  of  li\'es  and  knowing  but  the 
fewest  of  wants  and  in  very  deed  exhibiting  a 
striking  combination  of  plain  living  and  high, 
thinking  in  the  highest  sense.  ^  Examples  are  ever 
catching  and  the  effect  upon  the  surroundings  and  the 
multitude  among  whom  they  moved  broadcast 
throughout  the  country  may  well  be  imagined.  How 
the  old  times  had  changed  and  what  the  agencies 
that  wrought  the  change  through  the  various  vicis- 
situdes of  religious  upheavals  and  alien  conquests, 
are    mere    matters   of  history. 

(i)  By  way  of  an  illustration  it  may  not  be  out  of  place  to 
note  the  simple  but  touching  anecdote  of  a  great  Bengal 
Pandit  of  old  named  Ramnath.  He  was  the  brightest  gera 
of  the  court  of  Maharaja  Krishna  Chandra  of  Nadiya,  and  his 
fame  as  the  greatest  of  the  learned  men  of  the  time  had 
spread  all  over  the  land.  The  sum-total  of  his  worldly 
belongings,  however,  consisted  of  a  few  small  huts,  a  large 
heap  of  old  wood-bound  hand-written  puiithis  (books)  and  a 
small  pension  from  the  court  to  live  upon  ;  and  his  wife  had 
but  two  pieces  of  thread  tied  round  her  wrists  as  substitutes 
for  gold  and  silver  to  signify  her  blessed  married  state.  A 
princess'  maid  having  once  jeered  at  these  her  precious  posses- 
bions,   she  was  said  to  have  rejoined  with    conscious    pride    that 


32       THE  HOL  Y  CITY  (BENARES)  Cha1>- 

Though  it  is  not  possible  to  brirg  these  times 
back  again,  a  few  large-hearted  persons  here, 
actuated  by  the  desire  as  well  as  the  hope  of 
creating  something  like  the  wholesome  atmosphere 
of  the  olden  days,  have  undertaken  the  task  of 
imparting  education  to  the  rising  generations  on 
lines  different  fro.n  those  in  vogue  in  our  provincial 
universities,  making  secular  education  go  hand  in 
hand  with  moral  and  religious  training  based  upon 
the  ancestral  religion  and  ethics  of  the  Hindus. 
The  experiment  started  hardly  over  a  decade  ago 
through  the  indefatigable  energy  and  self-sacrifice  of 
that  noble  lady  Mrs.  Annie  Besant  and  her  noble 
band  of  workers,  has  already  been  giving  fair  pro- 
mises of  success.  The  objects  of  the  institution 
founded  by  her,  the  CENTRAL  HINDU  COLLEGE, 
have  been  to  'wed  together  the  religion,  the  ethics, 
the  philosophy  of  the  hoary  East  with  the  science 
and    literature   of  the    young     and     vigourous    West,' 

the  disappearance  of  those   little  bits  of  thread  from   her  wrists 

-would  mean    the  darkening  of  all  Nadiya    which    all   the    lustre 

of  the    princess'    gold     would    be     impotent     to      dispel.      The 

Maharaja  having  once   come  on   a    visit    found    him     employed 

in  his    studies  in  perfect   contentment  and     peace     in   spite     of 

all   the  marks  of  dire   poverty   all   about  his    surroundings.    On 

being  asked  if  he  had  any   want   and   what   the   Raja  could  do 

for    him,     the    Pandit     looked     abstracted    for  a      moment    and 

replied  in  amazement :      "  Want  ?    -  Well,   I    don't    see    1  have 

jiny. — What    can    you    do     for    me  .^ "'    Such    was    this     Indian 
Diogenes! 


I'LATF.    Iir 


1.  Sarasuati    Temple  (Central    Hindu  College). 

2.  Queen's    College. 

3.  CentniJ    Hindu    College    Boarding. 


P»33 


II.  MOSTLY  SECULAR  33 

and  *to  build  up  a  Hindu  aristocracy,  courteous,  brave, 
truthful   in  word  and  deed,   public-spirited 

Central  Hindu    citizens,      patriotic    to     the     Motherland. 

College         loyal    to   the    Imperial    Crown, — to    send 

forth  from  this  place  men  worthy   of  their 

«"lorious  past,  men  worthy   to  build  a  yet  greater  future, 

men  worthy  to   be   citizens    in    an    empire  of  the     free.' 

Too  much  chatting  perhaps  for  hurrying  tourists,— 
but  may  not  this  be  introductory  to  what  follows  ? 
So,  without  further  delay,  we  trace  our  steps  back- 
from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Man  Mandil  to  the 
main  road,  and  go  westward  past  Godowlia  to  see 
this    institution    first. 

Through  a  populous  part  of  the  city  along 
broad  roads  with  stately  structures  upon  their  borders 
we  pass,  till  we  arrive  at  the  precincts  of  the 
Central  Hindu  College  decorated  with  small 
minarets  in  the  Indian  style  of  architecture  in  the 
quiet  Kamachcha  quarter  of  the  city.  Opened  in 
189S,  it  has  been  affiliated  to  the  Allahabad  Univer- 
sit)^  up  to  the  M.  A.  standard ;  *  the  most  marked 
feature  of  this  institution,  however,  is  that  the  boys  in 
all  the  college  and  school  classes  have  to  read  Sanskrit 
as  their  principal  subject.       Attached  to  this    is   also    a 

( I  )  This  institution  is  shortly  to  form  the  nucleus  of  the, 
proposed  Hindu  University  of  Benares  towards  the  establishment 
of  which  Mrs.  Besant  and  the  Hon.  Pandit  Madan  Mohan 
Alalaviya  of  Allahabad  have  been  directing  their  united  efforts  and 
working  unceasingly.     According   to  the    Draft     Memorandum    of 


34  THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES)         Chap, 


seminary  for  the  exclusive  study  of  that  language, 
named  the  Ranavir  Patshala,  and  there  is  also  a  Girls' 
School  as  well  connected  with  it,  designated  the 
Kalika  Vidyalaya.  Thus,  nearly  a  thousand  students 
in  all  receive  their  education  and  training  in  this 
institution. 

It  has  so  far  been  independent  of  Government  aid 
but  its  usefulness  and  the  good  work  done  by  it  have 
met  with  open  recognition  from  the  highest  in  the  "land, 
and  Lord  Minto  almost  on  the  eve  of  his  departure  from 
India  thought  fit  to  visit  this  institution  and  expressed 
high  gratification  at  what  he  saw  here.  The  grounds 
upon  which  the  buildings  stand  are  the  gift  of  the 
Maharaja  of  Benares  ;  and  many  of  the  Ruling  Indian 
Princes,  rich  merchants  and  other  personages  in  various 
grades  of  life  have  contributed  towards  the  erection 
of  the  beautiful  structures  here;  and  white  marble  slabs 
above  the  doorways  commemorate  their  nam^s.  The 
costs  in  respect   to   the  College    Laboratory   here    were 

Association,  besides  the  usual  provisions  for  the  diffusion  of 
scientific,  technical  and  professional  knowledge,  the  main  objects 
of  this  University  are  to  be  'to  promote  the  study  of  the  Hindu 
.Shastras  and  of  Sanskrit  literature  generally,  as  a  means  of  pre- 
serving and  popularising  for  the  benefit  of  the  Hindus  in  particular 
and  of  the  world  at  large  in  general,  the  best  thought  and 
culture  of  the  Hindus,  and  all  that  was  good  and  great  in  thti 
ancient  civilization  of  India,'  and  'to  promote  the  building  up 
of  character  in  youth  by  making  religion  and  ethics  an  integral 
part  of  education. 


III.  MOSTLY  SECULAR  35 

borne  by  two  Bombay  merchants,  and  the  funds  left  by 
an  Indian  student  accidentally  killed  in  England  furni- 
shed means  for  the  erection  of  the  School  Hall.  In  fact, 
every  part  of  all  the  buildings,  bears  testimony  to  tlic 
munificence  of  generous  donors,  which  reached  the 
figure  of  over  Rs.  1,189,000  in  course  of  the  first  nine 
years    of   its   existence. 

It  is  the  day  of  the  great  All-India  Theosophical 
Conference  ^  which  is  to  meet  in  the  hall  of  the  Hindu 
College  and  commence  its  sittings  from  to-day.  Volun- 
teer boys  with  their  pretty  floral  badges  move  about 
briskly  and  are  busy  receiving  delegates  coming  in 
from  all  quarters  of  India,  A  very  young  amiable  bov 
from  the  Punjab  accosts  us  and  undertakes  to  pilot  us 
round  the  college  and  the  Boarding  Houses. 

Stepping  into  the  courtyard  you  find  a  small  w  hite 
marble  temple  in  the  middle  (Plate  HI,  i)  with  a  very 
gracefully-draped  image  of  the  Goddess  of  Learning, 
Sarasivati,  in  white  marble,  worshipped  with  floral 
offerings.  In  the  open  verandah  upon  the  raised  floor 
of  the  hall  the  first  object  that  falls  to  your  sight  is  a 
large  portrait  of  Mrs.  Besant  in  delicate  colours  faithful 
to  life.  There  is  another  of  the  present  Maharaja  of 
Benares,  the  donor  of  the  grounds  of  the  College 
and  one  of  its  pirncipal  benefactors.  By  a  great 
good  fortune  we  meet  here  the  noble  lady  Mrs. 
Besant   herself  who  receives  us  with  a  kindly   smile   and 

(i)Sunday,  the  26th  December  1909. 


THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)  Chap. 


.  'Wy-.  '^.'\.'\.'\.'\/V \y  ^X'V^^v/  V 


with  greetings  in  the  graceful  Hindu  style  with  joined 
palms.  After  a  few  words  with  her  we  walk  round 
the  College  and  see  the  Common  Room  containing 
a  good  supply  of  books  and  newspapers  and  a  large 
portrait  in  oil  of  the  Principal  and  pass  on  to  the 
fine  quadrangle  of  the  adjoining  Boarding  Houses 
(Plate  ni,  3)  carpeted  with  beautiful  season-flowers 
of  the  various  hues  of  the  rainbow.  All  the  houses 
look  neat  and  comfortable  and  accommodate  within 
them  about  two  hundred  and  fifty  students.  Cne 
of  the  interesting  features  here  is  that  a  spacious 
apartment  on  the  first  floor  has  been  consecrated 
and  set  apart  as  a  Prayer  Room  ''for  the  worship 
of  Iszvara  " — the  most  cosmopolitan  name  that  can 
be   thought   of — in   the    right   orthodox  Hindu  style. 

We  now  take  leave  of  our  young  guide  and  cross 
over   to  the  quarters   of  the     TllEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY, 

Indian    Section — on    the     other     side   of 

Thecsophical      the    road.     Amid     extensive    gardens    in 

Society  the   wide   compound,     a    tank     on     one 

end  with  spotted  deer  grazing  on  the 
banks  and  the  pretty  houses  standing  isolated  here 
c.nd  there  overhung  with  flowering  creepers  look 
exceedingly  picturesque.  One  such  accommodates 
Mrs.  Besant  and  is  designated  '  Santi  Kunjd — the 
bow  er  of  peace ;  and  there  are  quarters  here  for 
the  Hindu  College  Professors  as  well  going  by  the 
name   of  '  Jnana-Gehd — the   house  of  knowledge. 

You    must    new   sec  the    hall    v>hcre   tie   memhers 


III.  MOSTLY  SECULAR  17 


j^/^^y\y\/-\^\y\j-\y\/\y^\j^  /\y^y\ 


of  the  Society  meet.  Just  above  the  entrance  is 
engraved  on  the  outer  wall  the  sacred  'Om'  and 
the  mystic  symbol  like  the  six-rayed  star  with  an 
inscription  above  in  Sanscrit  —  'Satydt  ndsti  pan* 
Dharmd!  —  There   is     no   religion   higher   than   Truth. 

Inside  you  see  the  walls  covered  with  interest- 
ing paintings  —  pictures  of  Christ  and  Confucius, 
Zarathustra  and  Lao-Tze,  Birbal  and  Akbar,  Madonna 
under  the  Apple  tree  and  St.  Joseph  with  the  child 
Jesus,  and  other  subjects  of  cosmopolitan  interest. 
A  portrait  of  Col.  Olcott  the  founder  of  the  Society 
and  fine  large  ones  of  Mrs.  Besant  and  Madam 
Blavatsky  decorate  the  northern  and  the  southern  walls. 
One  other  striking  object  in  the  hall  is  a  large 
mirror  upon  which  is  etched  the  figure  of  a  man 
clad  in  the  fashion  of  an  American  Indian  stand- 
ing upon  a  globe  with  a  sword  in  hand  and  starry 
rays  around  his  head  somewhat  like  a  halo — said 
to  be  the  Persian  ( Zoroastrian  )  representation  of 
the  Sun.  The  hall  is  well  stocked  with  books  and 
magazines  and  the  shelves  are  replete  with  all  kinds 
of  Theosophical  literature  and  Hindu  scriptures. 
A  sense  of  calm  repose  pervading  here  has  a 
chastening   effect    upon    the   mind. 

We   may    now  resume  our  rambles,   and  as    we    are 

in    this  quarter   we  may  go    a  little   further   southward 

and     have    a   look  at   the     noted     well 

GoebiKua      ^^^^j.^^    j^^a    lying   under  the  shade  of 

some         large       peepuls      near       some        brick-fields 


38         THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)  Chap. 

in  a  very  retired  nook  at  this  end  of  the 
city.  Beneath  a  wooden  canopy  standing  over 
it  sits  an  old  Brahmin  who  draws  water  and 
supplies  it  to  people  coming  from  the  most  distant 
quarters  for  it.  It  is  scrupulously  clean  and  is 
reputed  to  have  medicinal  properties,  and  its 
continual  use  for  a  time  is  said  to  effect  cure  ot 
dvspepsia  and  debility  and  a  host   of  other   maladies. 

Back   from    this  place,   as    we     pass   by    the    Ram 

Krishna    Shebasram    (Home  of  Service),  not  very 

far     from     the     Central    Hindu   College, 

Ram  Krishna     we   may   drop    in    for   a   short    visit.     It 

Shel>asrain       is    a   local    branch   of  the   Ram  Krishna 

Mission  an  I  is  intended    to  give   relief    to 

the  poor  and    the     diseased    and    was  founded  in    A.  D. 

1900.     The   Hospital    is    well   worth   seeing     and    has 

been     doing     very     noble     work     and     would    amply 

deserv-e   active  help   from   the   munificent  and  the   rich. 

The  institution  has  quite  an  interesting  history  of 
its  own  in  respect  to  the  way  it  was  ushered  into 
existence.  Some  youths  of  noble  blood  in  Benares 
fired  by  the  instructions  and  inspiration  of  Swami 
Vivekanand — a  name  now  of  world-wide  celebrity — 
resolved  to  devote  their  life  in  serving  humanity  in 
the  spirit  of  worshipping  God.  "It  is  this  'worship 
of  the  poor',  this  consecration  of  one's  self  to  'serve 
the  Lord  coming  daily  before  us  in  the  shape  of 
the  diseased,  the  lunatic,  the  leper,  and  the  sinner'  that 
the   great    Swami     Vivekanand    has   taught  the   Indian 


III.  MOSTLY  SECULAR  39 


\/\j-\/\y\r^f^j\/\f\/\.n^r\i^\j\.'\.rs^f\./^ 


people  to  realise  and  practise  in  their  every  day 
life."  Opportunities  were  soon  afforded  them  in  the 
shape  of  a  few  dying  indigent  men  and  women 
cast  adrift  on  the  streets  in  their  last  extremity 
by  the  owners  of  the  hired  houses  where  they  had 
been  staying — a  thing  alas !  not  of  very  rare 
occurrence  in  this  great  city.  These  youths  picked 
them  u[)  and  placed  them  under  shelter,  and  gave 
them  food  and  medicines  by  means  of  funds  they 
had  raised  by  begging.  This  was  the  germ  of  the 
institution  which  gradually  expanded  and  drew 
public  attention,  and  was  then  placed  in  the  hands 
of  the  noble  workers  of  the  Ram  Krishna  Mission 
after  it  had  attained  some  magnitude.  The  found- 
ation-stone of  the  present  fine  buildings — all  constructed 
by  the  aid  of  kindly  donations— was  laid  in  April  1908, 
and  in  the  year  between  July  1908  and  June  1909, 
6413  persons  were  given  relief  in  various  ways  ; 
and  it  is  interesting  to  observe  that  two  among 
them  were  C/insiians  and  244.3  Mahomedans,  the 
rest  being  Hindus  belonging  to  all  the  provinces  of 
Jndia.  The  institution  thus  affords  relief  irrespective 
of  caste,  creed  or  nationality,  to  'the  diseased, 
homeless,  and  neglected  poor*  and  the  destitute, 
iunable  to  earn  a  living  or  lying  starving  in 
the  street.  There  are  neat  indoor  and  outdoor 
}\()spital  and  dispensary  in  the  Home  where 
jnedicines  of  all  the  three  systems  —  Kaviraji,  Allopathy 
;^ind  Homcepathy  —  are  stocked.  Even  those  who  are 
enable   to    attend     are   treated    in    their     own    plaQei»* 


40  THE  HOL  V  CITY  (BENARES)         Chap. 

and  respectable  families  reduced  to  destitution  obtain 
help  in  the  shape  of  food  and  money  supplied  them 
at  their  own  homes  at  stated  intervals.  Such  are 
the  noble  objects  of  this  noble  institution  in  this 
great  city ! 

Along  the  broad  roads  with  spacious  garder^s 
on  either  side  as  we  go  northwards  the  Victoria 
Park  comes  into  view  with  its  marble  bust  of 
{he    good     Queen        set    upon      a      high      pedestal 

wearing      a    very     dignified     expression 
Victoria  Park    upon     the    face.     The    fine  green    lawn 

in  its  ample  compound  has  a  pleasant 
and  inviting  look  and  furnishes  an  enjoyable  pro- 
menade  and    recreation    ground. 

The  turrets  of  the  Queen's  College  now 
appear  amidst  the  picturesque  surroundings  of  its 
well-kept   grounds   lined   with    flower-beds   of   elegant 

designs.  The  High  School  is  located  in  a 
Queen's  CoUe^  separate   building   with   a    very  beautiful 

ornate  column  in  its  front.  The 
quarters  of  the  Principal  and  the  Head  Master  are 
within  the  College  compound — pretty  little  houses  in 
the  quiet  of  arborial   surroundings. 

The  College  building  ^' Plate  HI,  2)  is  a  noble 
edifice  in  the  architecture  of  the  old  Gothic  style 
with  a  central  tower  seventy-five  feet  high.  Mottoes 
and  wise  sayings  in  Old  English  and  Devnagari 
characters  form  a  pretty  as  well  as  useful  decoration 
below   the   cornices  all  around.     The   existence     of  tlie 


III.  MOSTLY  SECULAR  41 


institution  dates  as  far  back  as  1791  when  Jonathan 
Duncan,  the  then  Resident  of  Benares,  suggested  to 
Lord  Cornwallis  the  estabHshment  of  a  College  '' for  tlie 
/yreservation  and  cultivation  of  Sanskrit  literature 
and  i^eligion  of  the  Hi^idu  nation  at  the  centre  of 
their  faith  and  common  resort  of  their  tribes''  Tluis 
was  founded  the  Sanskrit  College  with  Pandit  Kashi 
Nath  as  its  first  Principal.  The  English  School  laised  to 
the  status  of  a  College  in  1843  was  amalgamated 
w  ith  the  Sanskrit  College  ten  years  later,  and  the 
united  colleges  developed  into  the  present  Queen's 
College  now  affiliated  to  the  Allahabad  University. 
I'he  present  building  took  four  years  (1848-1^52) 
in  its  designing  and  erection  by  Major  Kittle 
costing  Rs.  1,27,000,  and  is  undoubtedly  a  thing 
of  beauty.  The  College  owns  a  well-equipped 
Laboratory  and  a  Boarding  House  at  a  slight  dis- 
tance across  the  road,  and  a  commodious  building  is  now 
being  erected  in  the  College  compound  to  serve 
as  a  Library  for  storing  Sanskrit  works  and  to  be 
named    Saras wati-bhabar.. 

As  the  principal  place  for  the  culture  of  Sanskrit 
learning  it  earned  the  reputation  of  being  the 
Oxford  of  India,  and  included  among  the  number 
of  its  professors  such  eminent  Western  Sanskrit 
scholars  as  Mr.  R.  T.  H.  Griffith,  the  translator  of 
the  Ramayana,  Dr.  Kern,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  in 
the  Leyden  University,  Dr.  Fitzgerald  Hall,  late 
Librarian     of  the    India     Office,     and    Dr.   John  Muir, 


42  THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)         Chap. 


f\/'\/\/\/\rsj\/\/\j'\'  \/\/'\y\/\ 


Dr.  Ballantyne  and  Mr.  Gough.  The  present  head 
of  the  institution,  Mr.  A.  Venis,  the  profound 
Sanskrit  scholar,  has  nobly  kept  up  the  old  tradi- 
tions by  his  erudition  and  valuable  researches.  A 
monthly  paper  named  "  Tke  Pandit "  was  started 
from  the  college  in  1866  and  some  rare  and 
\aluable    Sanskrit    works    were  published    therein. 

As  you  enter  the  main  hall  the  first  object  that 
strikes  you  is  the  resplendent  youthful  figure  of  the 
late  Queen  Victoria  of  blessed  memory  clad  in 
ermine  and  seated  in  regal  glory,  crowned  and  with 
a  chain  of  brilliants  round  her  neck  and  the 
sceptre  and  the  orb  in  her  hands.  It  is  in  the 
brightly  coloured  stained  glass  in  the  window  above 
the   entrance   and    is   a   fine   work   of  art. 

As  you  turn  round,  the  long  hall  with  its  high 
roof  looks  exceedingly  imposing  and  strings  of  mottoes 
decorate  the  space  below  the  cornices  here  also. 
Towards  the  centre  of  the  hall  and  furthur  off  as  well^ 
the  senior  college  classes  occupy  the  room.  To  the 
further  end  on  the  other  side  of  the  lofty  arch 
is  the  space  set  apart  for  students  of  Sanskrit  who 
sit  on  the  carpeted  floor  in  the  orthodox  fashion  at 
the  feet  of  their  preceptors  —  the  learned  Pandits  and 
Shastris — in  the  early  hours  of  the  morning.  Above 
the  wall  at  one  end  of  the  hall  is  a  circle  of  the 
the  Zodiac  (the  Rashi-chakra)  on  glass  panes  with 
all  the  symbolic  figures  and  signs  in  bright  and 
beautiful      paints.      Two     wings      running     from      the 


III.  MOSTLY  SECULAR  43 


nave  towarc's     the     right   and     left   accommodate  the 

undergraduates'   classes,     the    office     as     well     as  the 

Library     containing     the     finest      collection     of  rare 

Oriental    manuscripts.     Recesses    upon     the   high  side 
walls    have    been     utilized    for   the     storage     of  books 

and  some   fossilized    bones   and    other     curiosities,  and 
galleries    run    along   them. 

Coming  down  to  the  open  grounds  oelow, 
another  object  of  interest  catches  your  eyes.  It  is 
a  tall  round  stone  pillar  thirty-one  and  a  half  feet 
high — a  monolith  found  at  Pahladpur  near  Gazipur 
and  brought  to  Benares  in  1853.  It  is  similar  to 
the  Asoka  pillar  standing  in  the  Allahabad  Foit, 
w  hich,  however,  is  much  taller  than  this.  Two  line.s 
f^r  inscriptions  in  the  character  of  the  times  of  the 
(iupta  Kings  of  the  fourth  century  are  still  readable 
though  partly  obliterated,  and  a  few  semi-circular 
diagrams  are  also  visible  en  one  side.  Leaving  th's 
antiquarian  treasure,  as  3''ou  prepare  to  come  out 
to  the  road,  a  small  circular  tank  attracts  your  eye 
with  the  head  and  nozzle  of  a  live  crocodile  of 
decent  proportions  floating  thereon  and  diving 
underneath  when  your  attentions  seem  to  grow 
too   obtrusive. 

Such    is   the     premier     educational     institution      of 

Benares.     All  grades  of  Schools    ranging 

Education         between      the      High    and    the    Primary 

are   here,    numbering   over   two  hundred 

and  including  seme    lwcnt\-six    Girls'    Schools   amcr.g 


41        THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)  Chap, 


'"v/\yx/ vX/X-  V'X'  V'^z-^^'v/X/v/X/  V 


them.  They  afford  facilities  to  something  Hke 
eleven  thousand  boys  and  girls  to  pick  up  their 
three  R's  therein.  An  important  one  among  them  is 
that  founded  by  Raja  Jay  Narain  Ghosal  in  1817 
at  Bhelupura  and  now  being  managed  by  the 
Church  Missionary  Society  and  going  by  the  name 
of  the  Jay  Narain  Collegiate  School.  Another  is  the 
Hewett  Kshatriya  School  founded  and  endowed  by 
the  Raja  of  Bhinga  with  lavish  donations.  The  five 
different  Christian  Missions  in  the  city  manage  among 
them  eight  boys'  and  eighteen  girls'  schools  imparting 
Christian    instructions    to  nearly   two  thousand  pupils. 

For  the  exclusive  study  of  Sanskrit  on  the  old 
methods,  there  are  some  thirty  or  more  Chatus- 
pdthis  and  Paths  Has  te  ichi ng  nearly  a  thousand 
students.  The  most  important  among  them  are  the 
Sanskrit  Pdthsala  at  Chauka  Ghat  attached  to  the 
Government  Sanskrit  College,  Xh^  Jugal  Kishore  Ruid 
and  the  Sangvet  Pathsalas  at  Nagwa,  the  Brahma 
Vidyd     Pathsala     at     Tehri     Nim,     the 

Chatuspathis  and  Yasovijaya  Jaina    Pathsala   at  Thatteri 
Pathsilas  Bazar,   the  Syddvada   at    Bhadaini,    the 

Durbhanga  Pathsala  at  Dasaswamedh, 
the  Sannyasi  Sanskrit  Pathsala  near  the  Visweswara 
Temple  and  the  Iswara  and  Sarhamangald  chatuspa- 
this at  Bengalitolah.  Besides  the  Government  College 
Pathsala,  the  Nagwa  Pathsalas  and  the  Durbhanga, 
the  Jaina  and  the  Syadvada  Pathsalas  contain 
the      largest      number      of    pupils.     The      institution 


III.  MOSTLY  SECULAR  45 


''■y^^'\r\s\y\.r\/\/-^ys 


founded  by  the  Maharaja  of  Durbhanga  imparts 
education  in  the  Hindu  Philosophy,  Nyaya  and 
Grammar,  and  the  celebrated  Pandit  Mahamahopadhaya 
Siv  Kumar  Misra  is  at  the  head  of  it  at  present.  The 
Maharaja  of  Kashmir  had  a  similar  institution  near 
the  Dasaswamedh,  but  it  has  been  amalgamated 
with  the  Ranavir  Pathsala  of  the  Central  Hindu 
College.  Besides  these  there  are  numerous  small 
tols,  in  each  of  which  four  or  five  students  read 
under  a  Pandit  or  Adhydpaka,  and  students  from 
various  parts  of  India  still  come  to  this  place  and 
sit  at  their  feet  and  study  the  various  branches  of 
the    Shastras   such    as     Vedanta,     Sankhya,  Miinansha, 

Yoga,  Sniriti,  Yotishy  and  also  Grammar,  Rhetoric 
and  Poetry.  There  are  still  over  eighty  of  such  distin- 
guished AdhydpakaSy  some  of  the  most  eminent  among 
them  being  Mahamahopadhyayas  Gangadhar  Shastri 
Telang,  CLE.,  Siv  Kumar  Misra,  Rakhaldas  Nyayaratna, 
Subrahmanya  Shastri  Dravida,  Tatya  Shastri, 
Krishnanath  Nyayapanchanan,  Bhagavatacharya,  and 
Pandits  Mahadeo  Shastri,  Annoda  Charan    Tarkachura- 

mani,  Priyanath    Tattwaratna,  Srikar  Shastri,    Bhawani 

Dikshit,   Jaya     Krishna     Vidyasagara,    and      Vinayak 

Shastri  Yotishi. 

Along   the   road    leading   to   the     Kasi    station    we 

pass   by    the    Zenana    Mission    House   and     the    Bible 

and   Tract  Depot  on  the  left,   and  further 

Hospitals      on  the     IswARi      Prasad     Memorial 

Hospital  (the   Lady   Dufferin    Hospital 

for      Females)     founded      in      1892     and      occupying 


46  THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES)         Chap 


'\y\''\/^j^./'\/^''\y^^ 


extensive  grounds.  Next  to  it  are  the  fine  buildings 
of  the  Prince  of  Wales'  Hospital  erected  by 
the  gentry  of  Benares  in  honor  of  the  late  King 
Edward's  visit  to  the  city  in  1876  as  the  Prince 
of  Wales.  Another  important  hospital  in  the  city 
is  the  Victoria  Hospital  built  in  1888  by  the 
Zenana  Bible  and  Medical  Mission  at  Sigra  and 
managed  by  them.  There  are  a  few  other  hospitals 
also   doing   very   good  work  though  on  a  small  scale. 

Very  numerous  are  the  charitable  institutions 
founded     by      Rajas     and     rich     men     consisting     of 

Dhannasalas   and     Chhattras   in     which 

Dharmasalas     substantial  provision    has  been    made  for 

and  Chhatras     the      shelter      of  pilgrims  and   strangers. 

the  maintenance  of  poor  Brahmins  and 
indigent  persons  belonging  to  other  classes,  and  for 
helpless  widows  and  students  studying  Sanskrit.  These 
institutions  are  mostly  in  the  nature  of  alms-houses 
and  it  has  been  estimated  that  nearly  four  thousand 
persons  obtain  food  and  she'ter  therein.  There  nrc 
some  endowments  as  well  providing  for  scholarships 
to  students.  The  Chhatras  of  the  Maharajas  of 
Durbhanga  and  Kashmir  near  the  Dasaswamedh 
and  Tehri  Nim,  and  of  Ahalya  Bai  near  the  ghat  of 
her  name,  and  of  the  Maharaja  of  Cooch  Behar,  are 
on  an  extensive  scale.  So  are  the  Nathcote  and  the 
Marwari  Chhattras  feeding  large  number  of 
Marwaris.  Mention  may  also  be  rnade  of  the  Chhattras 
Connected    with   the  names  of  Rani  Bhawani,  Rashmani, 


III.  MOSTLY  SECULAR  47 


^j-\j~^j\/\f\,^rw-^j^-. 


Vidyamayi,  Rajrajeswari,  as  also  of  Putea,  Tahirpur 
and  Ambjria.  A  Maiwari  reis  supplies  rice  and 
tlour  and  other  eatables  to  a  number  ot  students 
\\\    his    garden    at    Sigra. 

The    Indian  Princes   and     Reises     vied      with      one 

another     formerly     in    affording      relief  to     the     poor 

as  an   act   of  the  highest     merit  ;      and 

Hindu   Endow-  thus     was   the   origin    of    the     Ckhatras 

ments  existing  in  scores  in  all  parts   of  the  city. 

Besides  these,  the  Muths  or  monas- 
teries of  different  sects  of  asceties  and  the  various 
Hindu  temples  are  maintained  by  substantial  endow- 
ments made  by  their  votaries  or  patrons,  and 
provide  means  of  living  for  a  very  large  number  of 
religious  devotees.  One  of  these,  the  Gopal  Mandir, 
owns  ten  villages  and  two  mehals  and  commands 
an  annual  income  of  over  three  thousand  rupees. 
So,  between  objects  religious  and  secular  and  consi- 
derations of  piety  and  hankerings  after  fame  an'd 
glory,  immense  is  the  benefit  to  the  poor  and  the 
needy  —  and  for  the  matter  of  that,  to  a  number 
loafers  and  nothing-to-do's  as  well,  unavoidably 
mixed  up  in  the  medley ;  and  the  pious  donors 
undoubtedly  share  the  blessings  and  benedictions 
articulated  in  the  fulness  of  heart  by  grateful  lips. 
This  the  recompense  here  of  charit}-,  and  what 
hereafter  —  it  is  perhaps  for  the  conscious  heart 
alone    to   feel  ! 


Chapter  IV 


SECTS  AND  CULTS 

"  Tht"  religions  of  the  world  are  the  ejaculations 
of  a  few  imaginative  men.  But  the  quality  of  the 
imagination  is    to  flow,  and   not  to    freeze." 

— Emerson. 

" Message    proclaimed     by    my     ancestors    on 

the  banks  of  the  Ganges  thirty  centuries  ago  :  'They 
who  see  but  one  in  all  the  changing  manifoldness 
of  this  universe,  unto  them  belongs  Eternal  Truth, 
unto  none  else,  unto  none   else'." 

—Dr.   J.    C.    Bose. 

ERY  close  to  the  Prince  of  Wales' 
Hospital  is  Kabir  Chaura  named 
after  one  whose  holy  life  and 
sweet  and  entrancing  songs  go  to 
influence  the  lives  of  a  consider- 
able section  of  the  Hindi-speaking 
people.  It  is  Kabir  the  great 
Saint  aud  founder  of  the  Kabirpanihi 

sect     of     ascetics     and    the    first     of  the  born    Sants 

according  to  the   Radhaswamis.    Follow- 

Kabir  ing      an     old     work      'Kabir      Kasauti,' 

the        compiler       of       '  Kabir-Shakeb-ki 

Sabdawair    ^        computes        that       he       was        born 

about    Sambat     1455    (^399    A.  D.)     and     as     he     was 

reputed    to    have    reached     the    great   age   of   120,   he 

(i)    Edition—    Belvedere    Printing  Works,  Allaliabad. 


PLATE   I\' 


1.  D.isa'-wamedh  (iliat. 

2.  Sankara(har\a. 

3.  A    group    of    Sann\asis. 


P.  48 


I V.  SECTS  AND  CUL  TS  49 


probably  passed  away  about  15 19  A.  D.  Of  him  it 
is  said  that  while  Niru  or  Nur  OH  Julaha,  a 
Mahomedan  weaver  of  Benares,  had  been  engaged 
in  washing  thread  in  the  Lahar-ka-talao  he  happened 
to  perceive  a  child  floating  on  the  water,  and  taking 
him  out  he  and  his  wife  Nima  nursed  and  brought 
him  up  under  their  humble  roof.  A  large  shallow 
tank  outside  Benares  and  a  small  temple  lying 
close  to  the  423rd  Milestone  near  the  Grand  Trunk 
Road  running  towards  Allahabad  now  mark  the 
spot    where  Kabir   was   found. 

From  childhood  he  was  of  a  very  devout  turn 
of  mind  and  manifested  great  powers.  As  he 
apparently  belonged  to  a  low  caste,  the  great 
V'aishnava  teacher  Swami  Ramananda  then  living 
in  his  retreat  over  the  Panchaganga  ghat  in  Benares 
would  not  make  him  a  disciple  which  he  ardently 
longed  to  be.  He,  thereupon,  hit  upon  the  expedient  of 
Uing  prone  in  front  of  Ramananda's  house  towards 
the  close  of  one  night.  The  latter  coming  out  in 
the  dim  hours  of  day-break  for  his  morning  ablu- 
tions in  the  Ganges  happened  to  ,  touch  his  body 
with  his  feet,  and  considering  it  to  be  a  corpse 
ejaculated  "Rama"  "Rama".  This  Kabir  took  as  his 
Mantra  or  mystic  text  and  claimed  to  be  his 
disciple  ;  and  moved  by  his  piety  Ramananda  also 
recognised   him    as   such   later   on. 

Numbers   of   followers   soon  flocked  to  him  attract- 
ed   by  his   piety   and    devotion  as    he  grew   in   years  ; 

4— 


so         THE  HOL  y  CITY  (BENARES)         Chap. 

both  Hindus  and  Mahomedans  attended  his  dis- 
courses, for  he  preached  and  maintained  that  under 
whatever  name  God  was  invoked  it  was  THE  ONE 
AND  THE  SAME  GOD  that  was  worshipp(?d.  The 
Benares  Brahmans  grew  extremely  jealous  at  bis 
popularity,  and  with  the  object  of  putting  him  out 
of  countenance  they  once  devised  a  plan  of  invit- 
ing a  very  large  number  of  people  to  his  house 
to  dinner  without  his  knowledge.  Legend  relates 
a  miracle  that  came  to  pass.  Thousands  of  people 
gathered  at  his  door  in  the  morning.  Notlu'ng 
daunted,  he  filled  a  handi  (pot)  with  eatables,  cover- 
ed it  over  with  a  piece  of  cloth,  and  gave  it  to  a 
disciple.  The  latter  thrust  his  hand  repeatedly  into 
the  pot  and  brought  out  food  enough  for  all  to  eat 
to  satiety ;  and  at  last  when  the  cover  was  laid 
aside,    the   pot   was   still   full  to    the   brim. 

A  man  of  great  devotion,  his  grand  and  inimi- 
table musical  dohas  (songs),  many  hundreds  in 
number,  are  .^t'll  familiarly  and  constantly  recited  in 
the  North-West  and  in  the  Punjab  and  afford  plea- 
sure and  comfort  to  many  a  devout  soul.  His 
works  in  Hindi  embodying  his  teachings  are  twenty 
in  number  and  are  known  collectively  as  the  Khas 
Grant  ha.  As  worshipper  of  the  One  Supreme^  Deity 
he  was  claimed  by  the  Hindus  and  the  Mahome- 
dans alike.  At  Maghar,  a  village  not  far  from 
Benares,  he  called  his  followers  together  one  morning 
and   informed   them    that  he     would    leave   them    that 


IV.  SECTS  AND  CULTS  51 

day.  He  laid  himself  down  and  his  disciples  cover- 
ed him  over  with  a  white  sheet  of  cloth,  and  thus 
as  he  was  he  passed  away.  The  Hindus  wanted 
to  cremate  the  dead  body  and  the  Mahomedans 
wished  to  give  it  a  burial.  Both  the  parties  quar- 
relled over  it,  and  at  last  when  the  covering  was 
lifted,  lo!  there  was  nothing  underneath  but  a  few 
snow-white  flowers  upon  the  empty  bed.  These 
they  shared,  and  Bir  Singha,  Raja  of  Kasi,  took 
half  and  burnt  them  and  preserved  the  ashes  at 
Kabir  Chaura  —  one  of  the  twelve  inuths  now  \\\ 
existence  out  of  a  number  of  those  founded  by  him. 
The  Pathan  King  Bijli  Khan  took  the  rest  of  tlie 
flowers  and  gave  them  a  burial  at  Maghar,  near 
Gorakhpur  and  erected  a  tomb  over  the  spot  where 
he  died.  Both  the  places  are  objects  of  pilgrimage 
to   the   followers   of  Kabir. 

Another  saintly  personage,  RoiDAS  Shaheb,  also 
lived  in  Benares  at  this  time  and  was  also  a  sant 
and    associate   of  Kabir. 

In    a  lane  by     the   side     of    the     Iswari      Prasad 
Hospital   lies  a  line   of    low-roofed    buildings   enclos- 
ing  a   quadrangle   shaded    by    neeins^    cool,     noiseless 
and   quiet   in   its   seclusion.      Here   was 
Kabir  Chaura     the    abode     of     Kabir,     and     under     a 
Muth  dome     is   a   clean     white     sheet   spread 

out   upon   the   floor     and     strewn     with 
flowers.     In     an     apartm         close     by    are     kept    an 


Sz        THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)  Char 

ornamental  taj  (head-dress)  and  pictures  of  Ran^ananda, 
and  Kabir,  —  the  latter  discoursing  to  his  followers 
with  his  fingers  holding  a  shuttle.  In  the  garden 
adjoining  are  the  plain  \\hite  tombs  of  Nima  and 
Nur,  the  adoptive  j^arents  of  Kabir,  under  the 
shade   of  over-spreading    ncciris. 

A   few    steps    off    lies   Mai>hu    Dass's   Garden 
a^ssociated    with    the    memcwy  of  the    retreat  of  Warren 
Hastings   to  Cbunar     and    of   a     tragedy    enacted    hy 
Wazir  AH,,  the  ex-Nawab  of  Oudh,  mention  of  which  may 
be  made  here    In  1781,  when.   Warren    Hastings  had  re- 
paired to  Benares  to  bring  Raja  Chet  Singh  to  book  for 
failing  to  supply  troops  as  demanded  by  him^  he  used  to 
stay  at  Madhu  Dass's    Garden.   After   the 
MadlmDass's    massacre    of  the     English     troops     and 
Garden         three   officers   by     Chet   Singh's   follow- 
ers   ^    he   had    to   leave   this    place    and 
retire   to   the   fort   of  Chunar    with     his     men.       His 
position    had   become      so    ver}^     precarious     that      he 
hrmself  writes  :    "  If  Chet   Singli's     people     after   tney 
bad     effected      his     rescue,     had     proceeded     to     my 
quarters  at   Mahadew  Dass's  garden,  instead  of  crowd- 
irrg  after   him    in    a   tumultuous    manner,     as  they  did 
in    his    passage    over   the     river,    it   is    most     probable 
that   my   blood,    and    that   of  about   of  thirty  English 
gentlemen   of  my    party,    would    have   been    added  to 
the  recent   carnage ;  for    they   were    above   two    thou- 
sand  in   number,   furious   and    daring     from    the   easy 
(i)  See  C1,iapter  X,   post. 


IV.  SECTS  AND  CULTS  53 


success  of  their  last  attempt  ;  nor  could  I  assemble 
more  than  fifty  regular  and  armed  Sepoys  for  ray 
Avhole   defence." 

Later  on  it  was  the  scene  of  another  incident — 
the  murder  of  the  English  Resident  Mr.  Cherry, 
whose  memory  is  kept  alive  by  a  lofty  monument 
in  the  cemetary  at  SekroSe,  and  of  his  Private 
Secretary  and  two  other  Europeans.  The  ex-Nawab 
VVazir  Ali,  who  was  removed  from  his  position  as 
Nawab  of  Oudh  in  1799,  to  make  room  for  tl^e 
legitimate  heir  Saadat  A^i  Khan,  had  been  allow- 
ed to  reside  in  this  garden.  The  Resident  hav- 
ing come  to  learn  that  he  was  intriguing  with  dis- 
affected Mahomedans  and  attempting  to  bring  about 
a  rebellion  had  an  order  passed  for  his  removal  to 
Calcutta.  On  a  pretext  of  paying  a  friendly  visit 
to  the  Resident,  Wazir  Ali  came  with  a  largt 
number  of  armed  followers,  and  while  conversini:^ 
with  him  treacherously  stabbed  him  and  killed  the 
other  three  unarmed  Europeans  in  cold  blood,  and 
retired  on  hearing  of  the  approach  of  the  Englislai 
troops. 

This  was  on  the  14th  January  1799,  and  as  a 
sequel  may  be  added  the  story  of  the  signal 
bravery  of  Mr.  Davis,  a  Judge  and  Magistrate  of 
Benares  who  defended  himself  and  his  wife  and 
children  in  the  building  now  known  as  the  Nadeswar 
House    at      the      Sekrole      quarter      of     the      town^ 


54  THE  HOL  >  CITY  (BENARES)       Chap. 

After  the  murder  of  Mr.  Cherry,  the  infuriated 
followers  of  Wazir  Ali  numbering  some  two  hun- 
dred men  advanced  under  his  leadership  and  be- 
seiged  this  place.  Mr.  Davis  had  but  time  to  lay 
hold  of  a  long  iron  pike  with  a  sharp 
triangular  steel  blade  for  his  defence  ;  and 
posting  himself  at  the  head  of  the  narrow  stairs 
leading  to  tlie  roof  where  his  family  had  taken 
refuge,  he  lunged  at  the  insurgents  who  attempted 
to  go  up  the  narrow  stairs  and  caused  them  to 
turn  back.  After  an  hour  of  breathless  suspense  and 
apprehensions  of  imminent  calamity  the  joyous  tread 
of  the  British  cavalry  was  heard  and  the  party  saved. 
Wazir  Ali  retired  to  his  quarters  at  Madhu  Dass's 
Garden  and  stayed  therein  till  his  removal  to 
Calcutta.     The     Nadeswar     House     situated  in    the 

midst   of  nicely-laid    flower-beds     m     a 

Nadeswar  House  spacious     garden     is     now     being   used 

atSekrole       by   the  Maharaja   of  Benares,    to  whom 

it   belongs,   as    a    guest-house     for   dis- 

tiuguished  visitors  —  among  whom  were  the  Prince 
and  Princess  of  Wales  (now  come  to  the  throne)  in 
in  1906  and  the  Crown  Prince  of  Germany  lately 
fn  January  191 1.  It  is  sumptuously  furnished  and  looks 
extremely  comfortable  ;  and  besides  numerous  ex- 
cellent oil-paintings,  a  large  crystal  peacock  and  a 
cockatoo  standing  upon  the  staircase  and  displaying 
natural  colours  and  holding  electric  bulbs  underneath 
their  •  wings   are   very  noticeable, 


IV.  SECTS  AND  CULTS  55 


../\.r^r\r^,^\ 


The  locality  of  Madhudass's  garden  has,  however, 
changed  its  aspect  altogether  at  present,  and  it 
is  now  the  head-quarter  of  the  Radhaswami  sect 
founded  by  Shiva  Dyal  Singh,  a  Khattri 
Radhaswamis  of  Agra,  who  died  in  1873.  It  is  sur- 
rounded by  high  walls  and  possesses  a 
splendid  hall  on  the  northern  side  capable  of  holding 
about  two  thousand  people.  There  is  a  raised  marble 
/^lais  at  one  end  where  the  ashes  of  their  late  Guru 
Brahma  Sankar  Misra  have  been  deposited,  and  the 
niche  on  the  northern  wall  has  a  very  gorgeous  look  ; 
and  the  spacious  grounds  have  been^  very  neatly  laid 
out  in  green  and  floral  patches.  This  sect  follows  the 
tenets  of  Kabir,  Roidas,  Mira  Bai  and  others  and  ob- 
serves certain  Yoga  practices  leading  to  the  contem- 
plation of  Sabdh  (word)  or  Dhwani  (sound).  Though 
of  recent  growth  there  are  numbers  of  people  of 
light  and  education  who  have  joined  this  sect  into 
which   ai!    classes  are   eligible   for   admission. 

Benares  has  ever  been  the  meeting-place  of  all  re- 
ligions, and  here  more  largely  than  anywhere  else  are 
people  of  all  shades  of  opinions  and  beliefs  to  be  al- 
ways met  with  in  numbers.  Not  to  speak  of  the 
orthodox  Hindus  strictly  so  called  who  have  their 
own  shrines  and  temples,  and  the  Mahomedans  who 
have  their  mosques  in  numbers,  there  are  various  other 
sects  claiming  to  share  the  designation  of  Hindu, 
that  have  also  their  places  of  worship  here.  Besides 
thp   followers  of  Kabir  and  the  Radhaswamis,  here  are 


56        THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES^  Cuw. 


Vaishnavites  and  Nagas,  Nanakshabis  and  Jains. 
Gorakpanthis  and  Shibnarayanis,  and  Theosophists 
and  Arya  Samajists  as  well.  And  in  a  field  of  such 
religious  activity  there  could  not  but  be  a  number 
of  proselytising   Christian    Missions   as   well 

A    rapid   survey     of    these    may    not   be     without 
interest.      As    we    proceed    towards   the   Chauk,     after 
leaving   the    Town   Hal!    behind,   on    our   left   appears 
the  large  unfinished    ball  of  the    Benares  branch   of  the 
Arya    Santaj    founded     by    the    famous 
Arya  Samaj      Dayanand     Saraswati    of  Lahore,   \\hose 
ideal   was   the   Vedic     Hinduism    of  the 
earliest   age.s,   without   the    worship   of  idols.     This    is 
somewhat   akin    to     the  Brahnio    Saniaj     which    also 
prefesses   to   cull   the   noble  teachings    of  all   religions 
and     limits     itself  to     the  worship   of  the  One   God- 
head.    The  representatives   of  this    latter    Samaj   had 
been     noticed   by   the   Rev.    Mr.  Sherring  so    far    hack 

„    ^        „       ,     as  1868  in  Benares  in  the  palmy   da\'s   of 
Brahmo  Samtj    ,^    »    ,   ^.       ,      ^  ^   ^       ^        ^ 

Keshab  Chandra  Sen.     Some  members   of 

the  community  are  still  to  be  found  here. 

Going   into  the    As-Bhairo  Muhalla   to    the    nortli- 

east     of    the     Chauk,   is     observed    the 

The  Sikhs       Bari     Sangat  Akhera   ofthe5Y/:/^^   built 

by   the    Maharaja   of   Patiala  in    honour 

of  the   third    Sikh    Guru    Tegh    Bahadoor.  Though  all 

the    Sikhs     are   the   followers   of    Nanak     and    go    by 


IV.  SECTS  AND  CULTS  57 


the  general  name  Ndnak-PantJiis,  there  are  two 
classes  among  them,  the  Uddsis  or  the  Mendicants 
and  the  Ninnalis  or  the  Pure.  They  pay  almost 
divine  honors  to  the  Adi-granth  or  the  book  con- 
taining the  teachings  of  Nanak  consisting  of  a  collection 
of  rhapsodies  compiled  by  one  of  his  successors. 
Guru  Arjun  Dev%  about  fifty  years  after  Nanak's 
death.  The  tenth  Guru  of  the  Sikhs,  the  great 
Guru  Govind  Singh  (1675-1708)  who  converted  them 
into  a  fighting  race,  composed  a  Second  Granth 
known  as  the  Granth  of  ths  Tenth  Reign.  The>^ 
have  dkheras  or  inutJis  near  the  Visvveswara  Road. 
Mir  Ghat  and  Asi  Ghat.  A  large  one  among  them 
is  the  Panchaiti  Kalan  belonging  to  the  Uddsis 
founded  about  1790  and  owning  an  income  of  ten 
thousand  rupees  bequeathed  by  its  founder  Baba 
Nanak  Ram.  Near  the  Durga  Kund  is  the  Kina- 
ram  A/chera  founded  by  a  Rajput  of  the  Aughar 
sect  about  three  hundred  years  ago,  and  near  to  it  is 
another  of  a  very  recent  date  called  the  Melarain 
Akhera, 

While  here,  we  should  not  miss  a  sight  of  the 
fine  richly  furnished  palaces  of  the  Maharajas  of 
Vizianagram  and  Benares  in  the  adjacent  Kamachha 
and  Bhelupura  quarters  in  the  middle  of  well- 
kept  grounds  and  flower-gardens  with  large  roses 
and  bushy  foliages  quaintly  trimmed  to  imitate 
peacocks,    tigers,   camels   and    other  animated  beings. 

At   a   little    distance    from    the    Durga   Kund     and 


58         THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)         Chap. 

near  the  Water-works  are  the  Jain  temples  marking 
the  birth-place  of  the  Tirthankara 
Paresnath  —  a  prince  of  the  blood 
ro)-aI  of  Benares  —  which  makes  the  Bhelu- 
pLira  quarter  so  sacred  to  the  Jains,  like  the 
Paresnath  Hill  on  the  borders  of  Iiazariba<^h  where 
he  passed  his  last  days  and  died.  Some  other 
Jain  temples  stand  above  the  Jain  Mandir  Ghat 
near  Panchaganga  whose  plain  white  tapering  spires 
uplifted  amidst  the  surrounding  elaborate  Hindu 
architecture  have  a  very  striking  appearance.  There 
are  some  other  temples  over  the  Tulsi  Ghat  and 
one   near  the     Alfred    Hall   as   well. 

The  Jain  temples  at  Bhehipu7'a  would  amply 
repay  a  visit.  They  stand  in  two  clusters  and 
belong  to  the  Digavibara  (the  sky-clad  i.e.  naked) 
and  the  Swetambara  (the  white-robed)  sects  ;  both 
the  sects,  however,  enshrine  the  images  of  all  the 
twenty-four  Tirthankaras.  Entering  the  temple  on 
the  right,  the  striking  figure  there  is  the  large  image  in 
white  marble  of  Paresnath  with  a  hooded  snake 
above  the  head  stretched  like  an  umbrella.  By  the 
right  and  left  are  smaller  statues  of  the  other 
Tirthankaras,  six  of  the  Swetambara  and  four  of  the 
Digambara  sect  in  brass  and  in  black  and  white 
marble.  The  walls  are  replete  with  photos  of 
many  famous  Jain  monks  and  the  decorations  are 
gorgeous  and  imposing.  In  an  adjoining  house  is  a 
piece  of  stone   with     irregular   protuberances     daubed 


IV.  SECTS  AND  CULTS  59 

with  red  paint  —  designated  Kdl  Bhairo  —  evident- 
ly a  latter-day  loan  from  the  later  Hinduism  and 
now   an    object   of  worship. 

By  the  left  of  this  is  another  temple  of  the 
Digambara  sect  with  numbers  of  small  marble 
figures  of  the  Tirthankaras,  all  seated  cross-legged 
and  posed  like  Buddha  statues  in  the  attitude  of 
meditation.  Near  to  it  is  a  beautiful  temple  with 
eight  very  finely  worked  ornamental  screens  of 
pierced  white  marble  in  pairs  upon  each  of  the 
four  walls.  Inside  the  delicate  tracery  is  Paresnath's 
Charaii-pdduka  placed  o\'er  a  highly  carved  marble 
pedestal.  In  the  compound  to  the  left  is  another 
temple  of  the  Digambaras  with  a  magnificent  floor 
and    a    large   collection  of  images  of  the    Tirthankaras. 

Between  the  Kurukshetra  Talao  and  the  Jagannath 
Temple   and    at     a     short     distance     from    the     latter 

lies  the  Dakshinamurti  Muth  of  the 
The  Daadis       Dandi     Sann}'asis    founded     by     Tokra 

Swami  containing  a  four-armed  image 
of  Sankara  in  black  marble.  In  the  spacious  quad- 
rangle are  a  few  small  temples  of  Siva,  and  there 
is  another  beautiful  image  of  Sankara  in  white 
marble  seated  upon  a  lotus  represented  in  the  act 
of  teaching  four  disciples  squatting  upon  the  floor 
below. 

The  Vaishnavite  Akhcrns,  crowded  thick  near 
the    Jagannath    Temple     and     the    A  si    Ghat,    would 


6o  THE   HOLY  CITY  {BENARES)         CiiAi'. 

next     call     your   attention.     Among    those     near     the 

Ja_^annath    Temple,    the    Tara    Giidarji 

The  Vaishnavites       \     .        ... ,   ^      x^-    7     •-     i  u  i  . 

and    the    Liifiota    (jiidarji    akheras    date 

from  the  seventeenth  and  the  eighteenth  centuries, 
and  the  Diganibari  and  the  Baid  are  recent  insti- 
tutions. Near  the  Asi-Sangam  is  the  Panditji  akhera 
founded  by  Tika  Das  in  1845,  ^.nd  in  the  interior 
of  the  Asi  Muhulla  lies  the  oldest  of  the  Vaish- 
navite  akheras,  the  Vishnupanthi  Akhera  established 
by  the  great  Ramanuja.  Another  known  as  the 
Krishna  A  char i  Akhera  was  founded  by  a  Mar- 
hatta  Brahman  of  that  name,  and  the  Dadupant/u 
Akhera  reckons  three  centuries  since  its  establishment. 

Above    the   Shivala    Ghat   as     you    proceed    north- 
wards, stands  the  Niranjani  Miiih  of  the 
The  Nagas        Aaga    Sannyasis.     Its    large  and  shad\' 
compound     is  interspersed     with    small 
temples   of  Siva,   one  among  them     being     called    the 
Pataleswara    Siva.     The   central  temple  with   a  trellised 
marble    floor   contains  an     image     in     gilt     copper    of 
Kartikeya,    the    general     of    the      Gods   and     son     of 
Siv-a   and    Parvati. 

Adjoining  it  just  on  the  north  is  the  Nirvdui 
Akhera^  also  of  the  Nagas,  The  grounds  are  very 
spacious  and  capable  of  sheltering  a  large  num- 
ber of  ascetics  beneath  the  spreading  branches  of 
numerous  trees.  Here  also  is  a  large  number  of  small 
temples,   and    underneath   the   rjof    of    one   of    white 


IV.  SECTS  AND  CULTS  6i 

marble  is  the  Charanpaduka  of  Kapil,  the  founder  of 
the  Sankhya  Philsophy,  who  Hved  at  Benares  in 
the  seventh  centur)'  B.  C.  This  iniith  was  founded 
by  a  Dewan  of  Raja  Chet  Singh  named  Lakhi  Baba 
whose  last  remains  lie  beneath  a  high  block  of 
stone  just  above  the  river  under  the  shade  of  a 
slanting  mango  tree  with  a  Siva  emblem  set  upon 
its  flat   square   surface. 

Going  further  north,  above  the  Hanuman  Ghat 
is  one  other  Miith  of  the  Nagas,  the  Juna  Akhera 
containing  among  others  the  standing  figure  of 
Dattatrcya  in  a  temple  and  his  Charanpaduka  of 
white  marble  in  another.  This  also  shelters  a  large 
number  of  ascetics.  The  position  of  all  the  three 
iiiutJis  bordering  the  flowing  stream  is  picturesque 
in  the  extreme,  and  the  view  of  the  great  arc  of 
the  bank  from  them  (Plate  XIII,  2)  with  its  long 
sweep  of  spires  and  temples  ending  near  the 
Dufferin    Bridge   on    the   north   grand    and     majestic. 

Among  the   other     sects     deserving     mention     are 
the     Gorakpanthis     who      have       imiths 
Other  Sects     near   the   Alfred   Hall     and     the   temple 
of  Bhaironath,   and    the    SJiivanarayanis 
who   are   the   disciples   of  the    Grant/i,  —  both  named 
after   their    founders  ;   but   the    number   of    their   fol- 
lowers  is   not   very   considerable. 

The  Theosophical  Society  and  the  good  it  has 
done   to    Hinduism    in    placing     it   in     its     true    light 


62  THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES)         Citap. 


before  the  world  are  too  widely  known  to  need 
anything  more  than  a  msre  mention  of  its  name  here. 
The    Sri  Bharat   Dharina     Makamandal,   which     has 

its   head-quarters   at  Gurudham    in    this 

Sri  Bharat         city,  was  originally   started  in    Northern 

Dharma  India    and   after   a     few     years     became 

Mahamandal      amalgamated      with     the      Nigamagania 

Mandali  Mahashabha   founded  by   San- 

nyasis  and  existing  from  some  time  before.  The 
unified  associations  now  went  by  the  name  of  Sri 
Bharat  Dharma  Mahamandal  and  held  their  first 
All-India  Hindu  Conference  from  the  28th  to  the 
30th  March  1902  at  Mathura.  The  aim  of  the 
Mahamandal  is  to  gather  together  all  the  Hindu 
associations  in  different  parts  of  India  as  its 
branches,  so  that  all  may  work  in  unison  towards 
the  regeneration  of  the  Hindu  nation  and  the  attain- 
ment of  primitive  purity  in  their  religion  by  following 
the  tenets  of  the  ancient  Shastras.  Its  objects, 
according  to  the  Memorandum  of  Association  are 
"to  promote  Hindu  religious  education  in  accordance 
with  the  Sanatana  Dharma,  to  diffuse  the  knowledge 
of  the  Vedas,  Smritis,  Puranas  and  other  Hindu 
Shastras  and  to  introduce  in  the  light  of  such 
knowledge  useful  reforms  into  Hindu  life  and  society 
and  to  promote  and  enrich  the  Sanskrit  and  the 
Hindu  literature  in  all  the  branches."  The  Maha- 
mandal, like  the  Theosophical  Society,  is  thus  not  a 
sect  or   sectarian    at     all,    and    is    patronised    by     the 


IV  SECTS  AND  CULTS  63 

Maharajas  of  Kashmir,  Mysore,  Baroda,  Jaipur, 
Udaipur,  Ahvar  and  ahuost  all  other  Hindu  Rulini^ 
Princes  of  India,  and  the  Maharaja  of  Durbhanga 
is  now    the   President    of   the    Mahamandal. 

The    Christian    missions  doing    good   work    in    the 

matter   of  education    as    already    mentioned    may  next 

claim    our    attention.     The     first   evan- 

Christian         gelical    mission    to   this    place    was     set 

Missions  on     foot    in    1 8 16,     and    the    Rev.    W. 

Smith    was     the    first     missionary    sent 

to  Benares  by  the   Baptist  Missmi    Society   that    \'ear. 

This    Society,    however,    withdrew    to  Delhi  later  on  in 

1890.     There   are   four   other     missions  now   at   work 

here. 

The  ChurcJi  Missionary  Society  followed  the 
Baptist  Mission  to  this  place  one  year  later.  The\' 
have  been  working  steadily  ;  and  besides  managing 
the  Jay  Narain  Collegiate  School, ,  they  have  also  a 
Girls'  Orphanage  and  a  Girls'  Boarding  School  in  hand. 
Into  a  well  in  the  place  occupied  by  their  head- 
quarters at  Sigra,  the  Thugs  of  early  days,  it  is 
said,  used  to  throw  the  bodies  of  their  victims 
after   strangling   them. 

The  next  to  come  were  the  London  Mission  Society 
who  arrived  here  in  1820.  The  Rev.  M.  A.  Sherring 
who  wrote  "The  Sacred  City  of  the  Hindus  stayed 
here  for  many  years  and  belonged  to  this  society. 
They    also     maintain    a     High     School     under     their 


64  THE  HOLY  CITY  (BEX A  RES.)        Chap. 

nianaj:^ement   and    have   a  Church    and  Mission  Houses 
near  the    Cantonment    Railvva}-    Station. 

The  Zeiiano  Bible  and  Medical  Mission  came  later 
in  1867  and  started  a  dispensar}^  for  women  in  1887. 
and  now  manages  the  large  Victoria  Hospital  at 
Sigra   that  was  started  the  year  following. 

The  Weslyan  Missiojiary  Society  were  the  last 
comers  of  them  all  and  settled  here  in  1879.  The\' 
ha\e  a  Church  at  Sekrole  and  a  Reading  Room  and 
Mall  near  the  Ar\a  Mission  Hall  on  the  road  leading 
to  the  Chauk.  The  Roman  Catholics  also  are  not  un- 
represented, and  they  have  a  Church  (  St.  Mary's  ) 
to  the   south-west  of  the  Church    Mission  quarters. 

Such  are  the  varied  sects  and  cults  that  have  local 
habitations  here.  From  times  beyond  human  ken 
did  Hinduism  through  all  its  varied  stages  live  here 
and  claim  the  place  for  its  own  ;  and  even  in  the 
present  days  it  is  Hinduism  of  the  orthodox  type 
with  its  diverse  forms  of  w^orship  and  ceremonials 
and  visible  aspects  that  holds  sway  over  the  whole 
citv  and  makes  it  famous  as  its  greatest  citadel.  The 
various  sects  show  but  the  different  forms  of  its  develop- 
ment in  the  different  ages,  and  mark  the  struggles 
of  the  human  mind  in  its  attempts  towards  the  attain- 
ment of  Truth  and  emancipation  from  the  trammels 
f>f  convention.  The  means  adopted  or  the  particular 
forms    accepted    might   ha\e   degenerated   in    growing 


IV  SECTS    AND   CULTS  65 

years,  but  it  is  not  only  hard  but  unfair  to  imagine 
tliat  their  aims  were  anything  but  pure  at  the 
inception. 

Vast  as  is  the  field  that  Hinduism  embractis,  the  gap 
between  seeming  idolatry  and  pure  monotheism  looks 
rather  wide  ;  but  both  exist  as  parts  of  the  same 
s}'stematic  whole  and  the  gap  is  bridged  over 
bv  broadeninf^  foot-holds  at  each  successive  sta£:e 
of  advance.  As  we  proceed  from  age  to  age 
and  from  the  simplicity  of  nature-worship  to  the 
higher  flights  of  speculative  theology,  we  cannot 
fail  to  observe  how  in  the  intermediate  courses  of  our 
progress  means  have  often  been  converted  into  ends 
and  symbols  mistaken  for  the  very  substance  they 
stood  for.  Introduction  of  corruptions  and  fantastic 
observances  following  this  state  of  things  always 
necessitates  and  paves  the  way  for  the  advent  of 
the  Reformer  who  roots  out  the  weedy  growths  for 
a  time  and  is  honored  and  revered  for  his  work,  till 
veneration  for  his  personality  waxes  and  waxes  and 
culminates  in  his  deification.  It  is  thus  that  almost  in 
the  usual  course  of  nature  w^e  come  *to  make  idols  of 
©ur  ideals  and  divinities  of  human  clay\  The  great 
Gautama,  who  set  up  his  pure  tenets  in  antagonism  to 
the  doctrines  prevailing  at  his  time,  came  thus  to 
be  exalted  into  an  incarnation  ;  and  his  great 
opponent  Sankaracharya  later  on  was  also  accorded 
almost  divine  honors.  Various  other  teachers 
followed  each  other  in  the  different  ages,  and 
their     adherents    and     followers      grouped    tliemselves 


66        THE   HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)         Chap 


•^f\j\y\^  •>^r^-\j\r\r>*/\/  \ 


round  their  respective  masters  and  formed  into 
different  sects  and  gave  birth  to  diverse  cults  — 
all,  however,  linked  together  in  the  same  unity  of 
spiritual  interests.  In  other  religions^  too,  examples 
are  not  scarce  of  schisms  from  the  established  order 
originating  various  creeds  and  sects  characterized 
often  by  violence  and  persecutions  blackening  the 
pages  of  history. 

Despite  all  changes  and  transformations  through- 
out its  chequered  career  and  notwithstanding  the 
growths  of  rolling  years  hanging  all  about  its  frame, 
Hinduism  has  in  the  main  kept  itself  intact,  the 
pristine  purity  of  its  principles  being  only  shrouded 
in  a  gloomy  mist.  Hence  it  was  that  the  destruction 
wrought  by  the  fire  and  sword  of  the  Pi-ophet's 
followers  had  hardly  any  appreciable  effect  at  all 
upon  Hinduism  in  the  long  '  run.  Other  attempts  at 
proselytising  have  apparently  done  but  little  beyond 
touching  the  veriest  surface,  and  why  ?  To  impute 
this  attitude  of  resistance  to  the  mere  sentiment  of 
conservatism  inherent  in  man  would  be  furnishing  a 
very  feeble  answer  to  the  query.  Races  and  tribes 
that  have  no  definite  faith  or  culture  of  their  own 
can  easily  assimilate  what  is  offered  to  them  and  provide 
enough  of  virgin  soil  to  favor  the  growth  of  anything 
implanted  therein  ;  but  the  very  dearth  of  this  makes 
the  case  of  the  Hindus  entirely  different,  for,  here  in 
the  Hindu  world  there  is  hardly  any  space  left 
fallow,    the   whole   having    been     reclaimed     in     ages 


IV  SECTS  AND     CULTS  67 


loner  g-one  bv.  Preoccuoied  as  the  rich  Hindu 
mind  has  been  with  th&  loftiest  notions  and  the  highest 
ideals  handed  down  by  their  illustrious  ancestors  from 
the  hoary  ages,  there  is  little  likelihood  of  its  accepting 
things  that  have  little  of  originality  or  even  the  charm 
of   novelty  for  them. 

To  the  world  outside,  Hinduism  appears,  no 
doubt,  as  a  tangled  mass  hard  to  comprehend  and 
harder  to  appreciate.  The  rough  and  rugged  shape- 
less shell  may,  however,  have  an  ugly  exterior  ow^ng 
to  awkward  protuberances  upon  its  surface  caused  by 
accretions  and  accumulations  of  the  passing  years,  but 
it  shall  ever  have  its  value  if  it  encloses  the  living 
pearl  of  the  purest  lustre  within.  Such,  perhaps,  is 
Hinduism,  and  the  point  is,  whether  it  really  does 
enclose  the  pearl  within  its  shell.  The  solution 
is  not  far  to  seek.  For  a  people  that  sent  forth 
the  highest  ideals  of  Philosophy  and  Theology 
from  the  earliest  of  known  times  and  who  realised 
the  Divinity  as  "  Him  who  exists  by  Himself^  and 
zuho  is  in  all  because  all  is  in  Him!'  no  loftier  or 
purer  conception  of  the  Absolute  and  the  Supreme 
could  be  held  forth  from  any  other  quarter  of  the 
globe  or  system  of  religion  the  wide  world  over. 
And  hence  is  the  full  and  complete  recognition  in 
the  modern  times  that  Hinduism  is  a  system  with 
the  most  perfect  and  complete  conception  of  the 
Most  High  ;  and  hence  has  it  lived  and  wil!  live 
in  spite  of  the  apparent  freckles  upon  its  exterior, 
for   it    has   the    genuine     pearl     within     unbedimmed 


68  THE  HOL  Y  CITY  {BENARES) 


r\^\j-„-^/\y\/ 


m  lustre  through  the  eternal  ages.  The  proclamati(.)n 
by  Sri  Krishna,  that  when  righteousness  decays  and 
evil  is  rampant  then  will  the  Lord  Himself  come 
forth  and  purge  religion  of  its  dregs  by  agencies  thought 
fittest  by  Him,  is  not  a  belief  peculiar  to  Hinduism 
alone  ;  for,  are  there  not  parallels  in  respect  to  the 
saints  and  prophets  of  other  nations  as  well — even 
of  Christ  among  the  Israelites  and  Mahomet 
among  the  Arabs,  who  made  their  advent  in  the 
fulness  of  time  when  the  exigencies  of  their 
nations  needed  them  ?  So  its  reformation,  not  subver- 
sion, will  come  from  within  it  v^  hen  the  inscrutable 
Providence  in  His  wisdom  chooses  to  have  it  so  ! 


PLATE  V 


1.  Lai    Khan's    Tomb. 

2.  Ruins    of   Old    Visweswara  Temple. 

3.  Scindhia  Ghat.  4.     An  Ekka. 


P.  69 


Chapter  V 


OF   THE    OLDEN   DAYS 

The   greatest  glory    of  a   building  is   not  in  its  stone 
nor    in    its    gold.     Its     glory   is     in    its     age,    and    in 
that    deep   sense   of  voicefulness,  of  stern    watching, 
of  mysterious    sympathy,  nay,    even     of    approval  or 
condemnation,   which  we  feel  in   walls  that   have  long 

been  washed   by  the  passing  waves   of   humanity 

It  is  in  that  golden  stain  of  time,  that  we  are  to 
look  for  the  real  light,  and  colour  and  preciousness 
of  architecture," 

— John    Ruskin 

ELICS  of  olden  days  have  ever  a 
peculiar  charm  of  their  own,  and  as 
you  contemplate  them,  a  vista  of  by- 
gone years  lit  up  with  glory  and 
magnificence  and  reminiscent  of  the 
triumphs  and  struggles  of  the  mighty 
men  of  the  past  loom  dim  in  the 
distance  and  fade  away  into  the  frost 
of  the  hoary  ages.  These  are  mile-stones  on  the 
road  of  time  and  each  bit  of  such  remains  may 
inclose  a  mass  of  unwritten  history  and  needs 
only  the  touch  of  a  master-hand  to  convert  its 
stock-and-stone  existence  into  an  object  of  absorbing 
interest. 

In    a  city   like   this   of  pre-historic   ages,   it    is  not 

unfair  to   expect   a    find    of  such    relics 

Paucity  of  old    in    abundance,  but   the     actual     paucity 

Tfimains        of  such   remains  here  is   rather  striking. 


70         THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES)        Chap. 

Though  time  and  other  destructive  agencies  at 
work  had  combined  to  obliterate  much  of  the 
land- marks  that  were  of  the  earliest  ages,  there 
are  unquestionably  some  that  give  us  a  glimpse 
into  the  Buddhist  and  Moslem  periods  at 
least.  It  was  these  two  faiths  that  had  attempted 
to  supplant  the  pre-existing  one  from  this  place,  — 
the  one  by  moral  suasion  and  the  purity  and 
simplicity  of  its  tenets  and  the  other  by  physical 
force  and  the  swords  of  its  votaries.  The  iron 
hand  of  devastation  that  the  latter  laid  upon  the  city 
smote  the  visible  vestiges  of  both  the  other  faiths 
and  left  but  a  few  smoking  ruins  behind  as  scanty 
mementos  of   the   past. 

It  was  in  the  third  century  B.  C,  during  the 
ascendency  of  the  Magadha  Empire  that  Buddhism 
had  reached  the  zenith  of  its  glory  and  domi- 
nated over  the  Benares  district  ;  but  hardly  a  trace 
of  any  ancient  structure  of  that  period  has  yet  been 
discovered  in  the  purely  Hindu  portion  of  the  exis- 
ting city  on  the  south  and  by  the  river-bank,  while 
the  remains  that  are  still  to  be  found  lie  mostly 
near  the  Rajghat  Fort  and  Alipur  and  towards  the 
north-west   of  the   Barana   on    the   way   to    Sarnath. 

In  course  of  his  explorations  Mr.  Sherring,  some 
forty-five   years     back,    found    brick    and    stone     debris 

and     bits  of  sculptured   stones    scattered 

Sherring's       over      the      fields     in    great    abundance 

Researches       on      the      bank     of    the     Ganges     lying 

to   the      north-west    of    the      Barana — 


V  OF   THE    OLDEN  DAYS  71 


leading  him  to  suppose  that  there  was  at  one  time  a 
great  city  on  this  spot.  Moreover,  the  scantiness 
of  structural  remains  of  dates  earlier  than  the  Bud- 
dhisiic  period  coupled  with  the  fact  that  the  des- 
truction of  temples  and  buildings  at  Benares  took 
place  not  once  but  many  times  over,  led  him  to 
believe  that  the  oldest  site  of  the  city  was  here 
and  that  its  modern  location  would  indicate  a  shifting 
towards  the  south-west.  Sarnath,  according  to  him, 
was  thus  a  distinct  city  extending  over  some  three 
miles  from  the  bank  of  the  Barana  all  the  way  in 
a  northerly  direction,  and  the  locality  undoubtedly 
sprang  into  importance  as  a  Buddhist  city  since  the 
fifth  century  B.  C.  The  ancient  remains  at  Bakaria 
Kund  and  Rajghat,  however,  tend  to  suggest  the 
existence  of  Buddhist  Viharas  and  shrines  in  these 
localities  also,  warranting  a  belief  that  the  Buddhist 
city   extended  to  this   side  of  the     Barana   as   well. 

A  look  at  the  remains  may  now  be  of  interest 
Proceeding   to   the   Rajghat    Fort,   at    a   short   distance 

to   the    east     of    the     KASHI     station 

GanJ-Sahida-kl     is    observed     within     a  walled    enclosure 

Musjld  the      object     of    the    greatest     interest 

here.  It  is  the  Ganj-Sahida-KI-MuSJID 
(Mosque  of  the  Assembly  of  Martyrs)  standing 
upon  grounds  lower  than  the  level  of  the  surround- 
ing places.  It  is  an  open  hall  covering  a  space 
about  a  hundred  and  twenty-five  feet  in  length 
and     twenty-five      in     breadth      and     contains     some 


72  THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES)        Cha 


^/^/•^y^/-v/^,^/^ 


seventy-two  richly  carved  stone  pillars  with  floral 
embellishments  and  fine  relief  works  of  lotuses  upon 
some  of  them  in  various  designs  of  much  artistic 
beauty.  The  northern  ones  are  shorter  and  support 
a  roof  lower  than  that  over  the  other  pillars,  and 
this  portion  looks  like  a  later  extension  to  the 
building.  The  pillars  and  the  ornamentations  upon 
them  point  to  their  having  undoubtedly  been  the 
relics  of  Buddhist  art  now  transformed  into  materi- 
als  for  a   later  Mahomedan    mosque. 

Beyond  the  existence  of  the  high  rampart-like 
eminence   of  the   grounds    round    alx>ut     and   a   large 

gate  further  north  that  we  shall  pre- 
Rajghat  Fort    sently   see,  there  is    not  much   else  of  a 

fort  here  in  this  locality  at  present  ; 
but  it  owes  its  name  to  one  erected  by  Raja  Banar 
and  a  later  one  built  in  1857  by  the  British 
Government  to  overawe  the  disaffected  section  of  the 
populace  during  the  Sepoy  Mutiny  and  lately  aban- 
doned   on   account   of  its    unhealthiness. 

This  plateau  of  Rajghat  extends  to  the  junc- 
tion of  the  Barana  and  the  Ganges  and  rises  about 
fifty  feet  above  the  level  of  the  neighbouring  land. 
As  commanding  not  only  Benares  but  a  wide 
extent  of  country  all  around,  its  great  strataglcai 
position  was  recognised  even  in  the  most  ancient 
times,  and  B.  N.  Chunder  in  his  "  Trai^eh "  writes  : 
*'  In  Manu's  time  Benares  was  one  of  the  six  inde- 
pendent   kingdoms    '\\\     the     valley     of    the     Ganges. 


V  OF   THE    OLDEN  DAYS  73 

The  Hi:idu  fort,  overlooking  that  river,  guarded  its 
capital  in  those  days  from  the  approach  of  the 
Panchala  from  the  west  and  from  -the  approach  of 
Magadha  from  the  east.  Inside  the  fort  there 
stood  the  palace  of  the  king.  Troops  of  men.  with 
brilliant  sabres  and  iron-bound  clubs  protected  the 
royal  household.  The  gates  of  the  citadel  were 
guarded  by  pikemen  bearing  long  spear_,  scimitar 
and  buckler.  Those  who  performed  duty  on  the 
turrets  were  armed  with  bows  which  shot  an  arrow 
six  feet  long.  The  ca^-alry,  riding  upon  well-mettled 
horses^  curvetted  in  all  directions.  Richly 
ca{)arisoned  elephants  —  'their  protruding  tusks  armed 
with  keen  sabres'  —  were  driven  about,  and  made 
a  splendid  show.  Gay  cars  and  war-chariots  ran 
hither  and  thither  through  the  streets.  From  this 
fort  poured  forth  of  old  the  wa'Tiors  who  went  to 
assist  the  Pandoos  on  the  plains  of  Kurukshetra. 
The  lieutenants  of  the  Magadha  kings  lodged  m 
this  fort.  Raja  Deva  Pala  Deva,  the  great  Buddhist 
king  of  Gaur,  and  his  successors,  held  court  here 
on  the  second  ascendency  of  their  faith  in  Benares. 
The  province  then  passed  into  the  hands  of  the 
Rathore  Kings  of  Kanouge.  The  last  Raja,  Joy 
Chand,      had      deposited     all     his     valuable     treasures 

there In  the  tenth,  eleventh,  and    twelfth    centuries, 

the  space  enclosed  by  the  walls  of  the  fort  swarmed  with 
houses  and  temples.  Various  ruins  of  them  are  still 
existing,   particularly  the  remains  of  a  Buddhi:  t  Vihara 


74  THE  HOLY  CITY    {BENARES)        chap. 

or   temple,    probably    of  the    Gupta  or  the  Pal  period." 
This  last,  however,  is  not  traceable  now. 

Past    the   hii^^h    and    imposing  structures  at   the  en- 
trance to   the    Dufferin    Bridge   and  a  few  yards  off  tlie 
rail-road    stands    the  beautiful  old  monu- 
Lal  Khan's      ment  (  Plate  V,  i  )  over  the  tomb  of  Lai 
Tomb  Khan,  the  minister  of  a  Raja  of  Benares, 

built  in  ii82Hijri.  Its  grand  and  lofty 
dome  worked  with  fine  designs  in  red  tiles  and  blue 
enamel  looking  fresh  as  ever  is  perhaps  the  finest  of  its 
kind  in  Benares. 

Towards  the  left,  at  a  little  distance  is  a  large  circular 
mound  containing  three  large  tombs,  and  one  of  its  sides 
adjoins  a  small  hall  with  another  supporting  a  roof  on 
four  plain  pillars  beneath  which  is  a  white  marble  tomb. 
The  grounds  near  about  are  strewn  with  mounds  and 
raised  brick  terraces  and  ruins  of  walls  proving  the  ex- 
istence of  numerous  mansions  and  structures  in  the 
locality  in  ancient  times. 

Proceeding  along  the  road  leading  to  the  junction 
of  the  Barana  with  the  Ganges,  we  pass  by  the  neglected 
little  temple  of  KJiarba  Vinayak  Ganesh  on  the  left  and 
find  a  very  spacious  gateway  of  great  solidity  with 
stairs  running  to  the  top.  This  no  doubt  is  the  north- 
eastern gate  of  the  old  fort  and  looks  quite  strong 
and  massirve  even  now,  and  there  is  another  further 
off. 

A  visit  to  the  Lat  Bhairo  about  a  mile  to  the 
west  of   Rajghat.    where  the  Ghazipur  Road  meets  the 


V  OF   THE   OLDEN  DA  YS  .  75 

Rajghat  Road,  would  be  of  greater  interest  than 
heretofore.  Upon  a  very  high  and 
Lat  Bhalro  spacious  stone-paved  terrace  above  a 
large  tank  with  stone  stairs  running 
into  the  bottom,  stands  what  is  known  as  Sivas 
Lat.  The  tank  is  called  the  Kapalmochan  tank  or 
Bhairo-ka-talao  from  the  tradition  that  the  god 
Bhaironath  having  chopped  off  one  of  the  five  heads 
of  Brahma  it  stuck  to  his  hand  till  after  an  extensive 
pilgrimage  he  came  and  touched  the  water  of  this  tank 
when  it  dropped  down  at  once  and  thus  relieved  him.  ^ 
Hence  has  this  tank  been  reputed  to  be  sacred;  and 
a  temple  of  Bhaironath  was  also  erected  above  it, 
but  it  was  afterwards  demolished  by  the  Mahomedns. 
The  Lat  is  the  fragment  of  a  stone  column  about 
eight  or  nine  feet  high  enclosed  in  copper  sheet 
pain<"ed  red,  and  occupies  the  central  place  upon 
the  terrace.  On  the  left  upon  the  same  terrace 
is  a  long  narrow  open  hall  used  as  a  mosque  by 
the  Mahomedans  for  prayers,  and  on  the  right  at 
a  lower  level  are  several  Mahomedan  rauzas  or  tombs, 
one  of  them  containing  sixteen  carved  pillars  of 
of  early  Hindu  workmanship.  Fragments  of  beauti- 
fully carved  stones  lie  strewn  about  the  cemeteries 
in    the   neighbourhood    and    the    banks   of  the   tank. 

(  I  )  There  ''is  another  sacred  tank  of  this  name  with  a 
similar  legend,  only  substituting  Siva  for  Bhaironath,  which  is 
situated  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Sarsuti  River  about  25  miles 
to  the  east  of  Ambala.  Vide  Archaeological  Survey  Reports  Vo 
XIV  (1882} 


76         THE  HOLY  CITY     (BENARES)         chap. 

The  Lat  has  been  supposed  to  be  one  of  Asoka's 
columns  and  originally  stood  forty  feet  high^  and 
later  on  came  to  be  looked  upon  and  venerated 
as  an  emblem  of  Siva.  Some  Hindu  king  is  said 
to  have  brought  it  over  from  Sarnath  and  set  it  up 
within  the  courtyard  of  the  old  Viswesvvara  Temple 
which  was  afterwards  razed  to  the  ground  to  make 
room  for  what  was  popularly  known  as  Aurangzeb's 
Mosque.  The  Lat  was,  however,  allowed  to  stand 
in  the  compound,  and  the  prevailing  belief  among 
the  Hindus  was  that  Hinduism  would  retain  its 
glory  at  Benares  as  long  as  this  column  —  v>hich 
was  styled  Kiila  Stambha  (  pillar  of  caste  )  —  stood 
erect,  and  caste-distinction  and  religion  would  all 
disappear   as    soon    as    it    was  levelled    to    the  ground. 

Being  now  within  the  compound  of  Aurangzeb's 
mosque,  the  Mahomedans  claimed  a  share  of  the 
offerings  made  by  the  Hindus,  and  the  feelings  of 
the  two  parties  were  far  from  being  friendly.  The 
strain  reached  the  breaking  point  and  the  rupture 
came  about  the  beginning  of  the  last  century  when 
the  Holi  festival  of  the  Hindus  and  the  Muhiirruin 
of  the  Mahomedans  happened  to  fall  on  the  same 
day  in  the  vear  1809.  Processions  of  the  rival 
parties  had  to  pass  along  the  same  route,  but 
neither  of  them  would  yi.  Id  a  passage  to  its  opponent 
I'his  quarrel  culminated  in  a  fierce  riot,  and  both 
the  parties  fought  bitterly  in  the  narrow  streets 
causing  a  good  deal  of  bloodshed.  The  Mahomedans 
were     beaten,     and    in    revenge   they     rushed     in    and 


OF  THE  OLDEN  DA  YS  77 


threw  clown  the  Lat  and  broke  it  to  pieces  and 
went  the  length  of  slaughtering  a  cow  upon  the 
stone  steps  in  the  river  tinging  the  water  of  the 
Ganges  with  blood.  The  Hindus  were  infuriated 
and  rose  in  a  mass,  and  it  was  with  considerable 
difficulty  that  a  general  massacre  was  prevented  by 
calling  in  the  Military  and  by  the  tact  and  sagacity 
of  the  sympathetic  Magistrate  of  Benares,  Mr  Bird. 
The  Hindu  populace  grew  extremely  disconsolate  at 
the  desecration  and  defilement  of  the  sacred  stream  ; 
and  great  crowds  consisting  of  all  classes  of  people, 
laymen  and  ascetics,  crowded  the  bank  of  the  river 
and  sat  in  penance  for  a  couple  of  days  together 
without  tasting  any  food.  They  were  at  last  convinced 
that  the  desecration  of  the  Ganges  was  not  possible, 
and  after  the  necessary  expiatory  ceremonies  ,  were 
jjrevailed  upon  to  return  home.  What  remained  of 
the  Lat  was  then  removed  and  placed  upon  the 
bank  of  the  Kapalmochan  tank  in  its  present  site 
and  the  copper  cap  placed  over  it  to  save  it  from 
further  injury  and  to  shut  it  out  from  the  gaze  of 
the   non- Hindus. 

We  may  now  pass  on  to  the  north-western 
quarter   of  the   city    where  lies  the  Bakaria  KUND,  a 

large  rectangular  tank  in  a  very 
Bakaria  Kund    neglected     condition     in      the     interior 

approached  by  narrow  lanes.  The  as- 
pect of  this  locality  must  have  changed  since  Mr. 
Sherring  saw  it  about  1868,  for  he  describes  a 
number   of  terraces    and     structures   above   its    banks 


7S         THE  HOLY  CITY    {^BENARE<)  Chap. 

and  the  neig-hbourhood  which  cannot  now  be 
traced.  Numbers  of  fragments  of  carved  stones 
lie  all  about  and  the  banks  are  \\\  a  very  filthy 
state  in  many  parts  and  not  likeley  to  invite  a 
second  visit  from  any  but  the  most  ardent  antiquary. 
To  the  east  of  the  Kund  is  a  small  raised  mound 
surmounted  by  a  circlet  of  stone  about  three  feet 
in  diameter,  with  a  grcupirg  of  over  a  dozen 
small  figures  sculptured  around.  It  is  in  a  very 
damaged  condition  and  is  likely  to  disappear  in  a  few 
more  years.  This  is  known  as  Jogi  Bzr,  the  place 
where  a  Jogi  (ascetic)  emancipated  himself  from 
his  body    in   samddhi  and    was  buried. 

On  the  south  side  of  the  tank  are  three 
Mahomedan  mosques,  the  central  one  of  which  is 
an  open  hall  with  some  highly  carved  pillars 
apparently  of  very  ancient  dates.  The  Dargd  (place  of 
prayer)  here  known  as  Fakr-ud-dm's  Dargd  has 
near  it  a  musjid  erected  upon  the  foundation  of 
an  old  structure  with  some  beautiful  stone  pillars 
standing  in  rows.  An  inscription  in  Persian  'ipon 
one  of  the  beams  of  the  ceiling  is  said  to  bear 
the  name  of  Feroze  Shah  and  the  date  yyy  Hijri 
(1375  A.  D). 

To  the  west  lies  a  number  of  other  tombs  with 
fine  well-proportioned  domes^  notably  those  of 
Gazi  Meah  and  Alai  Saked,  most  of  which  contain 
remnants  of  old  sculptures.  This  locality  is  full  of 
Mahomedan    tombs    and     high     stone     terraces     and 


V  OF   THE   OLDEN  DAYS  79 

broken  pieces  of  carved  stones  stacked  or  strewn 
about.  The  abundance  of  these  remains,  all  of  which 
seem  to  be  of  the  Buddhistic  period,  leads  to  the 
conjecture  that  there  must  have  been  some  large 
Vikara  or  monastery  here  in  ancient  times,  and 
this  is  matured  to  a  belief  when  it  is  found  that 
Iliuen  Thsang  records  having  seen  some  thirty 
Buddhist  monasteries  in  the  district  of  Benares  at 
his    time. 

At   a    little   distance     from    Gazi    Meah's    tomb    is 

a    beautiful  structure  known  as    the    Battis    Khamba, 

a    large    mausoleum  with   a    magnificent 

Battis  Khamba   dome     sheltering     a     couple   of    tombs 

Mosque  underneath    it.     It    has    forty-two    plain 

square      pillars, — aiid     not       thirty-two 

as     the     name    would     seem      to      imply, — and     has 

porticoes   on    all  the    four   sides   extending     from    the 

middle.     Under  the    cool    shade     of       hoary     trees    it 

looks  quite    a  cosy    old     nook     meet    for      the    weary 

sojourner's  final  rest. 

Another  fine  mosque  is  in  the  quarter  of  the 
city     going     by     its    name.     The    Arhai     Kangura 

MUSJID,  so  called  from  there  being 
Arhai  Kaitgura    two   small     and   another    much    smaller 

Kanguras  (domes^  upon  the  gateway,  has 
a  large  and  shapely  lofty  dome  over  the  main  hall 
with  v/ings  running  right  and  left  with  their  roofs 
supported  upon  a  dozen  square  stone  pillars.  The 
materials   used    in   the   erection    of  this    mosque   have 


8o  THE  HOLY  CITY  [BENARES)         Chap. 


been  supposed  to  have  beloiiired  to  Hindu  as  well 
as  Buddhist  structures  ;  and  there  is  an  inscription 
in  Sanskrit  upon  a  stone  slab  used  in  its  construction 
bearing  date  Samvat  1248  1^1191  A.  D.)  from  which 
Mr.  Sherring  infers  that  there  was  a  tnuth  of 
Hindu  ascetics  here  and  that  the  object  of  the  ins- 
cription was  to  testify  to  the  recent  Hindu  triumph 
over    Buddhism. 

Besides  a  few  Mahomedan  mosques,  such  as  the 
Alamgiri  Musjid,  the  Chaukhamba  Mosque  and 
Aurafigzeb's  Mosque  near  the  J  nan  Bapi,  which  we 
shall  find  later  on,  there  are  no  other  objects  of 
much  antiquarian  interest  in  the  city,  and  many 
among  those  observed  before  are  fast  falling  into  decay. 
The  ruins  of  an  old  Mahomedan  mosque  with  its 
rows  of  sculptured  columns  and  a  part  of  the  wall 
still  standing  in  Tillianallah  on  the  right  of  the 
road  leading  to  Rajghat  will  soon  be  a  thing  of 
the  past,  as  they  were  being  ^  fast  dismantled 
for  making  room  for  a  modern  structure  for  a 
Bengali  gentleman  who  has  purchased  the  property. 
On  the  left  of  the  road  is  what  is  known  as 
Maqdam  Shaheb,  a  cluster  of  Mahomedan  tombs 
with  a  ruined  wall  behind  it  at  a  distance  in  a 
very  neglected    condition. 

So  far  there  has  hardly  been  noticed  any  purely 
Buddhistic  remains  in  the  heart  of  the  city  itself. 
What   have   been    observed    are    all    mixed     up     with 

(i)    October,   1910. 


V  OF   THE   OLDEN  DAYS  8i 


/\J■\/^\J■^.^r\yK/^y^'J'\y^Jr\^^yX/\/^^ 


Mahomed  an  mosques — in  fact,  such  remnants  have 
been  found  only  as  materials  used  in  the  construc- 
tion of  these  structures.  Successive  and  almost 
systematic  devastation  and  demolition  by  the 
Mahomedan  invaders  and  emperors  from  the 
eleventh  to  the  seventeenth  century  had  laid  low 
all  the  Hindu  structures.  This,  probably,  is  the 
reason  why  nothing  very  ancient  can  now  be 
discovered  here*  The  brunt  of  their  animosity,  to 
all  appearances,  fell  against  the  Hindu  structures 
of  Benares  on  account  of  its  reputation,  perhaps,  of 
being  the  strongest  foot-hold  of  Hinduism.  The 
old  Kirtibasseswara  Temple  was  replaced  by  the 
Alarngiri  Mosque  and  the  Visweswara  and  some 
other  temples  had  frequently  to  change  their  sites 
to  make  room  for  Mahomedan  musjids.  This 
would  tend  to  foster  the  belief  that  it  was  the 
ancient  Hindu  structures  that  suffered  the  most 
by  such  vicissitudes.  For,  the  existence  of  the 
Hindu  city  here  from  the  most  ancient  of  times 
having  been  indisputably  recognised,  there  could 
hardly  be  any  other  reason  for  the  scarcity  ot  the 
remains  of  those  days.  Buddhism  for  a  time 
triumphed  over  Hinduism,  and  the  latter  too 
subsequently  subverted  it,  and  all  were  latterly 
borne  down  by  the  violent  zeal  of  the  Prophet's 
followers  ;  and  the  result  is  apparent  in  the 
admixture  of  Hindu  and  Buddhist  materials  in  some 
of  the    Mahomedan    structures    that     have     managed 

6— 


82  THE  HOLY  CITY  [BENARES) 


to  stand  erect  up  to  the  present  day.  A  careful 
scrutiny  of  Aurang-zeb's  Mosque  behind  the  Golden 
Temple  standing  upon  the  old  terrace  and  of  some 
other  similar*  edifices  would  show  all  the  three 
kinds  of  materials  mixed  up  together  and  support 
the   observations   made    above. 

It  would^  however^  appear  that  the  activity  and 
the  iconoclastic  zeal  of  the  earlier  Mahomedans 
had  been  confined  to  Benares  proper  where  they 
also  settled  in  numbers.  Although  the  outlying 
Buddhist  monasteries  were  destroyed  in  the  eleventh 
or  the  twelfth  century  as  we  shall  presentl)'  sec, 
they  did  not  care  to  erect  mosques  or  to  settle 
in  those  localities.  Hence  it  was  perhaps  that  in 
course  of  time  the  ruins  mostly  disappeared  and 
got  buried  below  the  debris  and  mud  till  some  of 
them  were  unearthed  lately  at  Sarnath.  Here  at  this 
last-named  place  is  a  veritable  mine  of  antiquarian 
wealth    that    must    only    be    seen    to    be    understood. 

About  a  mile  to  the  west  of  Kapildhara  on  the 
other  side  of  the  Barana  are  a  lew  Buddhistic  relics 
of  the  past  near  Sona-ka-talao  or  the  Golden  Tank. 
But  the  real  interest  will  centre  in  Sarnath  whither  we 
must  now  hie. 


PLATE    VI 


P.    83 


Chapter  VI 


SARNATH 


I   asked   of  Time  for   whom  those   temples   rose. 
That  prostrate    by  his   hand    in   silence   lie ; 
His    lips    disdain'd   the    myst'ry   to    disclose 
And  borne   on   swifter   wing,    he  hurried   by  I 
"The  Ijroken  columns,  whose  ?     I    asked  of  Fame  ; 
Her  kmdling  breath  gives  life  to  works    sublime  ; 
With  do wnciist  looks   of  mingled  grief  and  shame, 
;She   heaved    the    uncertain  sigh,    and  foUow'd  Time, 
Wrapt   in   arrta/x-meiu  o'er  the  mouldering  pile, 
I    s:uv   Oblivion    pass    with  giant    stride  ; 
And   vvhiJe    liis    visag-e    wore  Pride's  scornful    smile, 
Haply  tJiOU    knoweJt,    then    tell    me   whose,   I   cried, 
Whose   these  vasi  domes    that  evn  in   ruin    shine  ? 
I  reck  not  whose,  he  said,  they  noiv  are  mine." 

— Byron 

Ac)  BOUT  four  miles  off  to  the  north  lie.'^ 
this  repository  of  the  relics  of  antiquity, 
Gharriwalkihs  and  ekka-men  now  come  in 
flocks  pestering  you  with  their  eager  offers  of 
giving  you  a  Hft  lliis  last  means  of  loco- 
motion—the ^y('Xv?— is  one  of  the  peculiarities 
s^j  of  Benares  an-cl  would  merit  a  passing  notice. 
In     ridijg    it    one   must   not    min-d    a   Httle 

jolting,  nof  should  he  think  that  it  is  by  any  means 
meant  for  the  use  of  delicate  and  nervous  fair  o^es, 
A    very   light   queer-looking     two-wheeler  (Plate  V_,  4', 


84         THE    HOL  Y  CITY  (BENARES)         CHAa 


'\/ \y^>V'■\J'^>-v/\•^ 


it  has  a  dome-like  cloth  canopy  set  upon  four 
carved  posts,  and  the  driver  sits  in  front  egging 
the  brisk  httle  pony  on  as  it  trots  to  the 
tune  of  the  tinkhng  bell  fastened  to  its  neck  which 
is  covered  with  trappings  of  green  and  red  and 
yellow.  But  to  be  just,  there  seems  to  be  some 
little  comfort  in  it  if  one  is  not  very  punctilious, 
for  he  can  have  plenty  of  air  and  have  a  look  all 
around  while  sitting  with  his  legs  dangling  by  the 
side  of  the  trap  or  squatting  further  away  in  the 
middle,    by    way    of  a  novel     experience. 

To  the  outskirts  of  the  city  proper  we  go  and^- 
u;>v)n  th^  wide  bridge  over  the  Barana — a  tiny 
stream  m  the  cold  season  now.  We  leave  Raja 
KtiU  Sankar  GJiosaVs  Asyluin  for  the  Blind  and 
Leper  founded  by  him  in  1825  and  the  large 
Lunatic  Asylum  established  in  i8iO  and  the  Jail 
a\so  to  the  left  at  a  little  distance  behind.  Wide 
gardens  of  plum,  guava  and  other  fruit-trees  end  jsed 
by  mud-walls  appear  on  both  sides,  and  the  road — 
the  tine  broad  Gazipore  Rr,-ad,  straight  as  the 
flight  of  an  arrow — passes  through  a  very  jjleisant 
avenue  of  trees  cooled  by  the  shade  of  their  branching 
arms.  A  large  mound  of  decent  height  comes  now 
to  view  to  the  right — they  name  it  Jhawa  Jharan 
and   say   that   it   was     formed     in    a   single     night  b)^ 

the  clods   of  earth  shaken    off  there  from 
Jliawa  Jharan    the  workmen's    baskets    on     their     wav 

hc«ne    from    their     labours    at     Sarnath 


VI  SARNATH  85 

where  they  had  been  digging  the  fine  extensive  tanks, 
the  Naya  Tal  and  Sarang  Tal.  Upon  the  top  of 
this  mound  stands    the  small    temple    of   Mahavira. 

Soon       after,     as     you     take     a     turning     to     the 
left,    you    go    straight     for  Sarnath,   and    find   another 
and  a  larger   mound  on    the   left    of  the    road  looking 
like    a    small    hillock .  about     seventy    feet    high,    with 
fragments    of  small     bricks    strewn     all    over,   making 
it  seem    as   if  built  of  bricks,   which    to   all  appearnces 
it   is.     As     the   debris    are     now    being 
Humaywn's      removed     remnants     of      carved     stone 
Tower  walls   beneath  are    coming  out  to  view. 

There  is  an  octagonal  brick  tower 
at  the  top  rising  to  a  height  of  about  twenty-five 
feet  which  you  may  ascend,  and  thence  have  a 
splendid  view  all  around  over  the  extensive  fields 
and  mango-groves  and  make  a  comprehensive 
survey  of  the  ruins  at  Sarnath  on  the  north  and  of 
the  domes  and  turrets  of  Benares  on  the  south 
surmounted  by  the  tall  minarets  of  Aurangzeb's 
mosque.  Inside,  you  find  a  deep  and  spacious 
hollow  in  the  centre — a  well  sunk  by  General 
Cunningham  for  explorations.  It  was  formerly  a 
Buddhist  Stupa  or  memorial  mound  with  the  top  like 
an  inverted  alms-bowl  surmounted  by  an  arrow, — 
tlie  same,  perhaps,  which  Hiuen  Thsang  had 
reported  having  seen  standing  to  a  height  of  about 
three  hundred  feet  'sparkling  with  the  rarest  and 
the     most    precious  jewels'.      According     to    him     it 


^6  THE  HOLY  CITY    {BEX ARES)        CHAr. 


nirirkecl  th:;  spot  where  Biricllia  on  li's  arrival  at 
Sarnath  from  Gavd  first  met  hfs  five  former 
a  ;sociate'\  Ajnata  Kaundfnya  and  others,  who  had 
forsaken  their  master  at  Uriivilva.  A  couple  of 
standii\i^  Bodhisattwa  fii:^ures  beautf^ully  carved 
in  relief  on  upright  stone  panels — now  preserved 
in  the  small  mtiseum  at  Sarnath, — have  been  diij^  out 
here,  one  reprcsentini^  Maitreva  (Plate  VI).  the 
coming  Buddha,  and  the  other  AVALOKITESWARA 
(Plate  VI),  the  personification  of  compassion.  A  pair 
of  beautiTul  sculptures  (Plate  VI 11,  5)  with  a  rampant 
leoorryph  in  each  ridden  by  a  figure  armed  with  a 
sword  have  also  been  found  here  in  an  excellent 
state  of  preseriTition.  Thfs  mound  was  formerly 
known  as  the  Chaukhandi  or  the  'square*"  mounds 
and  there  were  three  sqcyare  terraces  one  above 
the  other  accountii'K^  for  the  origin  of  the 
name.  It  was  also  called  Lttri-ka-kodan  or  Luri''s 
T.eap  after  an  Ahfr  cow-herd  named  Luri  who 
Jumped  from  the  tower  at  the  request  of  his 
sweet-heart    and   was    kilted. 

The  remains  of  the  ruined  Stwpa  now  measure 
about  a  hundred  feet  aboi-e  the  ground  Jevel.  The 
octagonal  tower  surrrfeountfng  the  mound  was  erected 
in  1588  A.  D.  and  an  mseription  \x\  Arabic  ran  to 
the  effect  that  *as  Huma\'i?n,  Kfng  of  the  Seven 
Climes,  now  residing  \\\  paradise,  deigned  to  come 
and  sit  here  one  day,  thereby  increasing  the  splendour 
f«f   the   Sun^   so   xAkbiir    his   son   and    humble     seuvaut 


VI  SARNATH  Zf 


resolved  to  build  on  this  spot  a  lofty  tower  reaching 
to  the  blue  sky'.  Hence  this  is  also  known  by  the 
name  of  H  U.MAY  UN'S  Tower. 

Something  over  half  a  mile  forward,  upon  a 
slio-htly  rising  ground,  the  great 
The  Dhamek  Sarnath  Stupa  (Plate  VII,  i),  raises 
itself  and  rears  its  crown  on  high.  It 
is  known  as  the  Dhamek— an  abbreviation  according 
to  General  Cunningham,  of  the  word  Dharniopadesak 
(preacher  of  the  law) ;  but  Mr.  Venis  considers  the 
real  word  to  be  Dharmeksha  meaning  'the  pondering 
of  the  law*  a  view  supported  by  a  Jaina  manuscript 
bearing  date  1669  Samvat  (i6i2  A,  D.)  in  which 
the  word  Dharmeksha  occurs  as  the  name  of  a 
locality  containing  a  famous  Bodhisattwa  sanctuary. 
This  large  round  column  of  brick  and  stone,  no 
feet  high  and  93  feet  in  diameter,  was  erected 
as  a  memorial  tower  to  mark  this  blessed  spot 
where,  according  to  Mr.  Oertel,  'Maitreya  received 
an  assurance  from  Sakya  Muni  that  he  would  be 
the  next  Buddha.*  From  the  top  to  about  halfway 
down,  this  magnificent  pile  looks  stripped  of  its 
stony  skin  and  ragged  brickwork  appears  over- 
grown with  grass  and  weeds.  The  rest  of  the 
column  up  to  a  height  of  about  thirty-seven  feet 
from  the  ground,  is  of  massive  stones  attached  to 
one  another  by  solid  iron  clamps,  with  remains  of 
beautiful  carvings,  floral  ornamentations  and  geome- 
trical figures    upon    some   of  them.      There   are   eight 


88        THE  HOLY  CITY    {BENARES)  Chap. 


'.'V/^/^.'^r^y^/^y^/^/^/X/-v■«  r\r\/\r\,r\/ 


niches  on  its  eight  projecting  faces  in  the  lower 
part  of  :the  monument  designed  to  hold  life-size 
images  of  Buddha ;  the  floral  decorations  all  round 
the  western  niche  are  exceedingly  fine  and  elaborate 
and  those  on  the  eastern  one  covered  over  with 
gold  leaf.  The  rich  carvings  at  the  base  are  con- 
sidered to  have  been  interrupted  by  the  first 
Mahomedan  invaders  of  the  eleventh  century  and 
the  unfinished  state  of  the  Dhamek  has  been 
considered  to  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  this  was 
the  :Iast  memorial  of  the  kind  constructed  here. 
Mr.  Marshall,  however,  attributes  the  Dhamek  to 
the  Gupta  period  on  account  of  the  carvings  and 
the  ornate  floral  arabesques  characteristic  of  that 
age. 

It  was  in  1835  that  General  Cunningham 
explored  this  stupa  by  sinking  a  shaft  right  down 
from  its  top  and  found  an  inscribed  stone  slab 
inside  containing  the  usual  formula  or  profession 
of  Buddhist  faith—  Ye  Dharma  hetu  p'>"^hkaba,  crc 
— in  characters  earlier  than  the  Tibetan  alphabet, 
which  led  him  to  ascribe  the  sixth  century  as  the 
period  in  which  this  monument  was  first  erected. 
In  a  corner  in  the  Archaeological  Section  of  the 
Indian  Museum  at  Calcutta  containing  numbers  of 
inscribed  slabs,  lies  this  same  slab  of  yellowish 
Chunar  stone  measuring  about  a  quarter  and  two 
feet  in  length  by  a  foot  and  a  half  in  breadth  with 
three   lines    of    neat     and    fairly    legible   inscriptions 


VI  SARNA  TH  89 

thereupon  ;  and  visitors  are  apprised  by  a  note  at  the 
foot  that  it  was  ''  found  by  General  Cunningham  in 
1835,  three  feet  from  the  top  of  the  great  tower 
called  Damek  in  Sarnatha,  Benares." 

There  was  formerly  a  large  park  here  within 
enclosing  walls,  and  even  in  the  sixth  century 
B.  C,  before  the  advent  of  Buddha,  large  numbers 
of  ascetics  and  religious  devotees  of  all  denomina- 
tions lived  here  in  seclusion  and  safety.  This 
locality  was  then  known  by  the  name 
Rishipattana  or  of  Rishipattana  (the  abode  of  the 
the  Deer  Park  ,        ,  r  -.  ..         r^\         u    1         r 

sages) — also,    Jsjpatiana   (the    abode    of 

the  gods).  The  modern  name  Sarnath  was  after 
the  name  Sdrovgandth^  the  Lord  of  the  deer — an 
epithet  of  Buddha  ;  but  this  derivation  is  open  to 
doul^t.  Legend  relates  that  in  one  of  his  previous 
births  Buddha  was  a  deer  *^ golden  of  hue,'  with 
eyes  like  round  jewels  and  horns  of  silvery  sheen 
and  mouth  as  '  red  as  a  bunch  of  scarlet  cloth.' 
He  dwelt  in  the  forest  under  the  name  of  the 
Banyan  Deer  {^Nyagrodha  ntri^d)  and  was  the  king 
of  a  herd  of  fi^'e  hundred  deer,  out  of  which  one 
was  daily  chosen  by  lot  in  accordance  with  an 
arrangement  with  Brahmadatta,  the  Raja  of  Benares, 
and  sent  to  him  for  his  kitchen  with  the  object 
of  preventing  indiscriminate  slaughter  which  used 
to  follow  his  too  frequent  hunting  excursior.s. 
Once  on  a  time  came  the  turn  of  a  doe  great  \\\\\\ 
young     belonging   to   the    herd    of    his     cousin     who 


90         THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES)  Chap. 


\r\/^y^  r\r\/\/\r\/\ 


reprtsented  to  the  king-  of  the  deer  that  though 
she  might  die,  the  time  of  her  young  one  had 
not  yet  come ;  and  she,  therefore,  begged  to  be 
spared.  Thereupon,  in  great  compassion  the  king 
of  the  deer  approached  the  place  of  execution 
and  lay  down  with  his  head  on  the  block  and 
offered  himself  for  slaughter  in  her  stead.  Surpri- 
sed on  seeing  the  king  of  the  deer,  the  cook  went 
and  informed  the  Raja  of  Benares,  who  mounted 
his  chariot  and  came  in  all  haste  with  a  large 
following.  Finding  that  the  golden  king  of  the 
deer  had  come  to  lay  down  his  life  for  the  doe 
and  hearing  his  wise  discourse,  he  said  he  had 
never  yet  seen,  even  among  men,  one  so  abounding 
in  charity,  love  and  pity.  The  Raja's  eyes  being  thus 
opened  now  he  exclaimed — "  I  have  indeed  the  body 
of  a  man,  but  am  as  a  deer.  You  have  the  bod)- 
of  a  deer,  but  an^  as  a  man,''  From  that  time 
forth  the  practice  ceased  and  the  park,  which  was 
the  King's  pleasaunce  whither  the  herds  had  been 
driven  and  confined,  was  given  over  to  the  perpe- 
tual use  of  the  deer,  and  it  came  to  be  known 
as  Mriga-dava — th.e  Deer  Park.  Thus  is  the 
N igrodJid-M i^:!;n-Jataka  tale,  one  of  the  birth-stories 
of  Buddha,  related  by  Hiuen  Thsang.  It  may  be 
intersting  to  note  that  this  episode  is  figured  in 
tlie  stupa  of  Barhut  and  forms  the  subject  of  one 
of  the  numerous  beautiful  colored  frescoes  upon 
the    ancient      walls    of    the     famous     Ajanta     Caves^ 


Vr  SARlVA  TH  ^r 

where  Buddha  has  been  represented  as  the  Royal 
Antelope  interceding-  with  the  King-  seated  upon  a 
chariot   with    the   royal    umbrella   held   over   him. 

It  was  in  the  fifth  century  before  Christ  that 
Prince  GAUTAMA  of  Kapilavastu,  able  no  longer  to 
bear   the  sight    of    human     miseries,     abandoned     his 

home  of  pleasure  and   enjoyment  in  the 
Buddha  very    prime    of  life    when   he   was    only 

twenty-nine,  and  forsook  his  loving- 
parents,  beloved  wife  and  darling  new-born  child 
in  order  to  seek  for  the  means  of  alleviating- 
human  sufferings  and  securing  eternal  bliss  for 
man.  Born  with  a  silver  spoon  in  his  mouth  and 
nursed  and  bred  in  the  lap  of  luxury,  he  subjected 
himself  to  no  end  of  privations  —  all  for  the  love 
of  his  fellow-beings.  Six  years  and  more  he  toiled  \x\ 
the  Vindhyan  mountains  and  elsewhere  with  five 
followers  who  had  accompanied  him,  studying^  the 
Hindu  philosophy  and  practising  the  austerities 
enjoined  by  the  orthodox  doctrines,  but  could 
obtain  neither  peace  nor  satisfaction.  Tired  at  last 
he  wandered  towards  Gaya  all  alone  forsaken  by 
his  companions,  and  under  the  sacred  tree  of 
wisdom — Bodhi-drnma — at  Bodh  Gaya,  he  sat  in 
contemplation  for  long  and  we?r}'  )'ears  together 
till    the    Divine  Light  dawned    upon  him. 

Five  miles  to  the  south  of  the  city  of  Gaya  lies  the 
famous  Bodhi  tree  immediately  to  the  west  of  the 
great    Bodh-Gaya   temple.     Hiuen    Thsang  relates  that 


92         THE  HOLY  CITY     (BENARES)         chap. 

the  Bodhi-tree  was  destroyed  by  Asoka  before  his  con- 
version and  once  again  by  his  queen, 
Bodhi-tree  at  but  each  time  it  was  miraculously 
Bodh-Gaya  renewed.  About  600  A.  D.  Sasangka, 
a  king  of  Bengal,  again  destroyed 
it,  but  it  reappeared  some  months  afterwards.  The 
existing  tree  must  have  succeeded  this  or  some  other 
as  obviously  it  cannot  from  its  very  appearance 
claim  antiquity  from  the  seventh  century.  Upon  the 
platform  where  stands  the  holy  tree  was  the  famous 
Vajrdsana  or  diamond  throne  wh'ch  Hiuen  Thsang 
saw  in  existence  in  637  A.  D.  Behind  the  temple 
near  the  back  wall  is  now  a  square  slab  of  st  )ne 
upon  the  platform  which  is  pointed  out  to  the 
traveller  as  the  spot  where  Buddha  had  sat  in 
contemplation.  The  grand  temple  rising  to  a  height 
of  over  a  hundred  and  fifty  feet  gives  some  idea 
of  the  solidity  and  architectural  magnificence  of  the 
early  works.  If  at  Sarnath  are  the  dead  bones  of 
the  past,  Bodh-Gaya  is  stil!  instinct  with  life  and 
Buddhist  monks  still  sit  in  devotion  in  front  of  the 
grand    figure   of  Gautama    inside   the    temple. 

A  fortunate  day  it  was  for  the  world  when  in 
B.  C.  522  the  great  Master,  then  only  thirty-six, 
came  out  of  his  seclusion,  and  at  the  end  of 
sixty  days  after  his  attainment  of  the  Light  directed 
his  steps  towards  Isipattana,  and  chose  this  plac^ 
of  all  places — the  meeting-ground  of  the  religious 
recluses      of    all      sects — as     the      spot    whence     to 


VI  SARNATH  93 


disseminate  his  great  lii^ht  of  Dhaiina  throughcut  the 
world.  All  alone  he  travelled  all  the  long  disiance 
through,  till  he  arrived  at  this  Rishipattana  monastery 
where  he  found  his  five  former  hermit-associates 
who  had  deserted  him  before.  They  now  became  the 
first  converts  to  his  new  religion  ;  and  here  at 
Sarnath  he  preached  his  first  sermon  and  initiated 
the  five  famou"-^  Bhikkus^  and  sent  them  about  on 
their  mission  of  revealing  the  light  to  the  world 
which  was  cestined  to  illuminate  later  on 
not  only  India  and  Ceylon  but  the  far-off 
China  and  Japan  and  Tibet  and  Burmah  as  well. 
His  ministry  continued  for  five  and  forty  years 
until  his  attainment  of  Nirvana  in  B.  C.  477  at  the 
advanced    age    of  eighty^. 

The   Chinese   pilgrim    Fa    HiAN    who  travelled  all 

o\er    India    between    4C0    and    411      A.  D.     gives    us 

ll.e    first    definite    informations    about    this  locality   as 

it    was    at    the   beginning   of    the     fifth 

Fa  Hian  century.  He  speaks  oi  the  '  Deer 
Park  of  the  Immortal'  as  lying 
about  two  miles  off  to  the  north-west  of  Fo-to- 
ra-sse  (Benares)  and  of  a  temple  and  two  monas- 
teries therein,  and  makes  mention  of  a  small 
shrine  and  four  topes— one  to  mark  the  spot  where 
on    his    arrival    the   five     associates    of     Buddha     rose 

(i)  Prof.  Rhys  David  in  the  Encyclopoedia  Brittanica    takes  the 
age  of  Buddha  as  568-488  B.  C. 


94  THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES)        Chap, 

up  to  salute  him,  another  where  he  turned  the 
'  Wheel  of  Law,'  a  third  where  he  foretold  the 
coming  of  Maitreya  Buddha,  and  a  fourth  one 
where  a  certain  Naga  named  Elapattra  held 
discourse    with   him. 

Fa    Hian    was     followed     by    the     other     traveller 
HlUEN    THSA^G    in     the     middle     of      the     seventh 

century    (^629 — 645  A.Dj,    and  the   latter 
Hiuen  Thsan^     has   lelt     a     graphic     account      in     his 

great  work  '  c^i-yu-ki '  of  what  he  had 
observed  here.  Speaking  of  the  people  and  the 
general  aspect  of  the  country  he  remarks  :  "  Ihe 
people  are  gentle  and  polished,  and  esteem  most 
ingnly  men  given  to  study.  The  greater  poriion 
of  tnem  believe  in  the  heretical  doctrines  (Hindu- 
ism;, and  few  revere  tiie  Law  (religion)  of  Buddha. 
Ihe  climate  is  temperate,  grain  is  abundant,  the 
fruit-trees  are  luxuriant,  and  the  earth  is  covered 
with  tuited  vegetation."  He  saw  Buddhists  from 
various  places  living  in  huts  and  caves  in  the 
Deer  Park,  Jainas  and  Bhikkus,  followers  of  Siva 
and  Krishna,  philosophers  and  students  of  the 
Brahmanical  School — ail  living  in  harmony,  discus- 
sing and  exchanging  ideas  and  tolerating  one 
another's  views.  He  found  the  Deer  Park  portioned 
out  into  eight  sections  and  a  high  wail  round  the 
compound  enclosing  a  large  Vihara  or  temj^le- 
monastery  about  two  hundred  feet  high,  with  over 
a   hundred    rows    of  niches    in    tiers    over   tiers     each 


VI  S  ARM  ATM  -95 

holding  a  golden  statuette  of  Buddha  and  a  gold- 
covered  figure  of  the  inango  fruit  (ydmrd)  above 
tiie  roof;  and  in  the  mi  idle  of  the  Vihara  was 
a  large  bronze  statue  of  Buddha  seated  upon  a- 
throne  and  posed  in  the  attitude  of  tiie  Teacher 
expounding  his  doctrines.  There  were  splendid  tv,o 
-storied  buildings  in  the  monastery  with  numbers 
of  cells  symimetrically  arranged  and  accomodating 
jio  less  than  fifteen  hundred  bhikkus^  and  hundreds 
of  sacred  monuments  and  memorials  and  votive 
stupas  strewn  all  about  the  compound.  To  the 
west  of  the  monastery  lay  a  tank  in  which  Buddlia 
used  to  bathe  and  two  otlicrs  in  which  he  washed 
liis  water-pot  and  his  clothes.  Upon  the  bank  ot 
this  last  was  a  large  square  block  of  stone 
containing  marks  of  thread-lines  of  the  web  of 
the  cloth,  upon  which  Buddha  used  to  place  liis 
kashciya   (ochre    robes)    to    dr)'.  ^^ 

Towards  the  south-west  portion  of  the  Vihara,  accord- 
ing to  Hiuen  Thsang,  stood  the  remains  of  one  of 
Asoka's  stupas,  even  then  a  hundred  feet  in  height, 
and  in  front  of  it  was  a  smooth  pillar  of  stone 
*  bright  and  shining  like  a  mirror  '  and  seventy  feet 
high,  marking  THE  VERY  SPOT  WHERE  BUDDHA  HAD 
DELIVERED      HIS      FH<ST     DISCOURSE.      '  Its    surf^ice    \:i 

illistenino:   and    smooth     as    ice,   and    on 
The  Asok a  Pillar  it    can    be   constanly    seen    the    figure  (jf 

Buddha  as   a  shadow'^ — thus    chronicles 

*(!)  H.  Thsang's  Si-yu-ki,  translated  by  S.  Beal  Vol  II.  p.  45. 


96  THE  HOLY  CITY  {BEX ARES)         Chap. 

the  great  Hiuen  Thsang  in  his  accounts.  This  spot 
has  now  been  located  just  to  the  west  of  what  is 
known  diS  thQ  Main  Shrine  (Plate  VII,  2^!  ;  and  the 
standing  stump  of  a  sandstone  column  i6  feet  8  inches 
in  height  bearing  an  edict  of  Emperor  Asoka  in  fairly 
legible  characters  and  erected  about  249  B.  C.  has 
been  exhumed  out  of  the  ruins  (Plate  VII,  2,  4).  The 
fragments  of  its  upper  portion  in  four  broken  pieces, 
round,  smooth  and  highly  polished,  have  been 
found  lying  near  it  together  with  the  famous 
Lion-Capital  that  stood  on  the  top  of  the  column. 
The  fragments  still  lie  by  the  side  of  the  western 
wall  of  the  Main  Shrine,  and  the  Lion-Capital  has 
been  placed  in  the  Sarnath  museum.  This  stump 
of  the  pillar  bears  eleven  lines  of  inscriptions  — eight 
of  which  are  still  wonderfully  clear  and  distinct 
— containing  the  edict  of  Asoka.  Mr.  A.  Venis  inter- 
prets the  sdsana  or  injunction  contained  in  the 
edict  m  the  following  manner  :  *'  The  Church  is  not 
to  be  divided.  But  whoever  will  break  up  the 
Church,  be  it  monk  or  nun,  must  be  made  to  put 
on  white  dress  and  live  in  a  place  which  is  not  a 
formal  residence  [/.  e.  beyond  the  official  boundaries 
of  convent  or  monastery].  Thus  must  this  edict  be 
announced  to  the  Order  of  Monks  and  to  the 
Order  of  Nuns." ^  His  Majesty's  command  was  also  to 
be  made  known  to  the  lay  members  as  well  in  all 
towns   and    districts    and    provinces,     that    they    might 

(i)  Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  (Vol.  Ill  1907)  p.  2. 


PLATE    VII 


1.  The  Dhamek  (a)  and  its  neighbourhood. 

2.  The  Main  Shrine  and  Lion-Capital. 

3.  Old  Walls  in  the  excavations.         4-     Asoka  Column. 


VI  SARNATH  97 


everywhere  '  walk  according  to  the  proclamation.' 
Two  more  Hnes  had  been  lately  added  ''  in  the 
fortunate  reign  of  Rajan  Asvaghosha  in  the  fortieth 
year"  and  in  token  of  the  "homage  of  the  masters 
of  the  Sammitiya  sect  and  of  the  Vatsiputrika 
school "   in    the    Gupta    Period.  ^ 

The  Lion-Capital  (Plate  VII,  2)  that  surmount- 
ed the  Asoka  pillar  is  of  the  Persipolian  bell- 
shaped  type  containing  four  magnifi- 
CapiSl*"  *^^"^  ^^^"^  standing  back  to  back 
with  a  large  stone  wheel  (the  sacred 
s\'mbol  of  the  Dharma  CJiakrd)  in  the  middle 
upon  a  circular  block,  which  is  decorated  with  the 
figures  of  an  elephant,  a  lion,  a  bull,  a  horse,  and  four 
wheels  among  them.  In  spite  of  its  great  age  of 
two  and  twenty  centuries,  the  Lion-Capital,  standing 
no  less  than  seven  feet  high  and  superb  in  its 
execution,  looks  wonderfully  fresh  and  clear-cut 
just  as  it  was  when  it  came  from  the  sculptor's 
hands.  It  has  been  pronounced  by  several  art- 
critics  to  be  the  finest  piece  of  sculpture  so  far 
discovered     in       India.  *        This     furnishes     full     and 

(1)  Epigraphla   Indica   Vol.   VIII    pp   and  ff. 

(3)  In  this  connection  it  may  be  interesting  to  note  that 
(ieneral  Cunningham  in  the  Archoeological  Survey  Reports  Vol 
X  (1880)  makes  mention  of  a  similar  Lion-Capital  which  he 
discovered  lying  near  the  broken  shaft  of  a  small  monolith 
standing      to      the    north     of     the      great     Buddhist     stupa    at 


98         THE    HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)         Chap. 


complete  corroboration  to  Hiuen  Thsang's  descrip- 
tions and  enables  one  to  realise  the  grandeur  and 
magnificence  which  the  place  had  attained  as  the 
nursing-ground  of  Buddhism,  Besides  Kapliovastu 
the  birth-place  of  Buddha — the  site  of  which  has 
been  discovered  to  be  the  modern  Bhuila  Dih  in 
Pargana  Mansurnagar  in  the  district  of  Basti  (N. 
W.  P.), — Gaya  where  he  was  inspired,  and  the  Kusinai^ar 
where  he  obtained  Nirvana — identified  with  the  modern 
village  of  Kasia,  35  miles  due  east  of  Gorakhpur, 
where  lies  the  ruined  temple  of  Nirvana, — Sarnath 
is  the  fourth  place  of  pilgrimage  which  Buddhists 
from  Burma,  Tibet,  China,  Siam  and  Japan  still 
visit. 

Alas  !  the  times  !  Though  this  great  religion  of 
'Universal  Love  reckoned  within  its  ibid  more  than 
a  half  of  the  human  race  between  the  fifth  and  the 
tenth  centuries^  and  still  commands  the  allegiance 
of  a  third  of  it,  not  a  single  abode  of  any  of  its 
votaries  is  now  to  be  found  near  about  the  place 
whence  the  light  had  first  emanated — nor  even  in  far 
o.T   Benares  !    Only   a   small    Dhannasala    for   housing 

Sanchi  in  Bhopal,  bearing  a  line  of  Gupta  characters.  It, 
was  ''a  bell-shaped  capital,  i8'i5  inches  in  diameter  and 
13  inches  in  height  with  a  ciicular  abacus  19,!^  inches  in  diame- 
ter ornamented  with  birds  and  flowers.  On  the  top  stand 
four  lions  back  to  back,  above  whom  rises  a  Dharma 
Chakra  or  'Holy  Wliecl'  20  inches  in  diameter."  (See  Plate 
XXi  in  the  Vol.) 


VI  SARNATH  99 


\y\j-\j-^jr\/^'y^^y 


pilgrims  lies  to  the  east  of  ihe  Dhamek  and  another 
is  now  being  built  to  the  west  of  the  excavations  made 
here.      Very  close,   however,     to    the    great    tower    of 

Dhamek  and  to  its  south-east  fPlate 
Jalna  Temple      VII,  i)  now  rises  the  slender  spire  of  the 

modern  jAiNA  TEMPLE  of  the  Degam- 
bara  sect  erected  in  1824,  which  contains  the  foot- 
prints and  a  white  marble  statue  of  the  eleventh 
Tirthankara  (saint)  Ainsanath  who  became  an  Arhnt 
at  Singhpur,  a  village  to  the  north-west  of  Sarnath. 
About  a  mile  off  further   to  the  south-east  and  nestled 

upon  a  hillock  lies  also  the  temple  of 
Siva  Temple        Sarnath   and   Somnath    Sivas — the    two 

in  one — in  a  fine  quiet  and  retired 
corner  ;  but  there  is  not  the  slightest  trace  of  the 
living   Buddhism  near    about  ! 

In   1794   some   workmen    in  the    employ    of  Jagat 

Singh,  the    Dewan    of   Raja    Chet     Singh    of   Benares, 

had     been    engaged    in    digging   out   old   bricks    from 

a   ruined    stupa     about    a    hundred     and     seventy-five 

yards  to   the   west  of  the    Dhamek.      This   has   been 

supposed     to    have     originally    been    a 

Ja^at  Singh's  hemispherical    relic     tower,    *82    feet   in 

Stupa         diameter     and     not     less    than    50   feet 

in     height.'      In     course    of  their  work 

they   lighted    upon    a   couple  of    marble    vessels — one 

inside   the  other   and    a   statue     of    Buddha     bearing 

an     inscription     with    the   name   of   King    Mahipal  of 


lOO         THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES)        chap. 


'\v\/\/^/\/^^•^y^>^>^/\J'\y\y^>'^r^yXy\r\^  ^y^ '' 


the  Pala  dynasty  of  Bengal  dated  Samvat  1083 
(  1026  A.  D.  )^  at  a  depth  of  twenty-seven  feet 
from  the  top.  The  inner  one  of  the  two  vessels 
was  'a  cylindrical  box  of  green  marble  containing 
forty  to  forty-six  pearls,  fourteen  rubies^  eight 
silver  and  nine  gold  ear-rings  and  three  pieces  of 
human  arm-bones.'  The  inscription  upon  the 
statue  of  Buddha  referred  to  above  ran  to  this 
effect : 

"  Mahipal,  Raja  of  Gaur  (Bengal)  having 
worshipped  the  lotus-like  feet  of  Sree 
Dhannasi  (Buddha),  caused  to  be  erected  in 
Kasi  hundreds  of  Jsajia  (lamp  pillars)  and 
Chitraghanta  (ornamental  bells^.  Sree  Sthira 
Pal  and  his  younger  brother  Vasanta  Pal 
having  restored  religion  raised  this  tower 
with  an  inner  chamber  and  eight  large 
niches." 

Sthira  Pal  and  Vasanta  Pal  were  reported  to 
be  sons  of  King  Mahipal  and  were  sent  by  him  in 
1026  A.  D.  to  Benares  to  repair  the  Dhamek  and  the 
Dharma  Chakra  '  where  Buddha  preached  for  the  first 
time'  and  also  to  constiuct  a  Gandhakuti  or  temple 
of  Buddha. 

This  interesting  find  in  Jagat  Singh's  stupa  came  to 
light  afterwards  and  the  statue  was  recovered  in  a  muti- 
lated state  by  Major  Kittoe  in  Jagatgunj,  and  even- 
tually found  its   way   to   the    Lucknow    Museum.     The 


Vr  SARNA  Til 


discovery  was  followed  up  by  Jonathan  Duncan  who 
made  some  exploration  of  the  ruins  ^t 
Researches  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century. 
The  first  reported  exploration  of  this 
kind  was  by  Col.  C.  Mackenzie  in  1815.  In  1835 
General  Cunninorham  succeeded  in  getting  hold  of  a 
very  old  inhabitant  of  the  neighbouring  village  of 
Singhpur,  named  Sangkar,  who  had  worked  for 
Jagat  Singh  in  his  boyhood  and  who  now  pointed 
out  to  him  the  site  of  the  stupa  in  question.  This 
enabled  him  to  excavate  and  find  therein  the  outer 
case  which  was  of  Chunar  sand  stone  with  a  cylindri- 
cal chamber  in  the  centre  to  hold  the  inner  marble 
box,  and  he  presented  it  to  the  Asiatic  Society  of 
Bengal.  It  is  now  to  be  seen  in  the  Archoeological 
section  of  the  Indian  Museum  at  Calcutta.  It  is  a 
cubical  block  of  rough  blackish  stone  a  little  over 
two  feet  each  w^ay  with  a  hole  scooped  out  in  the 
middle  some  ten  inches  deep  and  about  a  foot  in 
diameter,  lying  on  the  floor  with  a  number  of  Buddha 
statues,  the  earlier  finds  at  Sarnath,  ranged  along 
the  wall. 

General  Cunningham  records  in  his  report  that  he 
found  to  the  north  of  the  tank  near  the  site  of  the 
monastery  a  large  single  block  of  stone  six  feet  ii: 
length  and  three  feet  in  height  and  of  the  same 
thickness,  carefully  squared  and  hollowed  out  under- 
neath   to   form    a  small   chamber   four   feet   in   length 


I02        THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES)        Chap. 

and  two  in  breadth  and  height.  This  he  beh'eved  to 
have  been  the  famous  stone  upon  which  Buddha 
used  to  spread  out  his  vestments  to  dry.  He  left 
it  undisturbed  where  it  lay,  but  when  he  came  to 
search  for  it  after  some  years  it  had  unfortunately 
disappeared. 

Since  then  there  were  some  desultory  attempts 
to   explore   the    grounds    by    Mr.    E.    Thomas   (Judge 

of  Benares),  Dr  Frederick  Hall,  Major  Kittoe  and 
others.  In  1856  the  Government  acquired  the  site 
of  the  ruins  from  one  Fergusson,  an  indigo  planter 
and  after  some  further  attempts,  the  work  of  ex- 
ploration was  systematically  taken  up  by  the 
ArchcEological  Survey  Department  of  the  Govern- 
ment of  India  in  right  earnest  about  1903-1904, 
and  the  excavations  were  conducted  under  the 
directions  of  Mr.  J.  H.  Marshall  and  Mr.  F.  O. 
Oertel  and  there  were  interesting  finds  in  1905  and 
subsequent  years  as  well  that  have  amply  reward- 
ed their   labours. 

Success  has,  so  far,  attended  their  efforts  as 
will  appear  from  the  fine  collection  of  hundreds 
of  relics  and  art-treasures  of  ancient  times  gathered 
together  under  the  roof  of  a  small  open  Museum 
a  little  to  the  west  of  the  Dhamek,  waiting  their 
removal    ^    to    the   pretty   houses   of  the  new   Museum 

( 1 )    They  have  since  been,  removed  to  the  pew  Museum, 


VI  SARNATH  103 


now  being  built  for  them  further  to  the  south-west. 
The  larger  pieces  lie  strewn  outside,  all  sorted  and 
numbered  and  duly  catalogued,  and  up  to  1904 — 
1905  the  figures  showed  476  pieces  of  sculpture 
and  41  inscriptions.  A  number  of  the  earlier  find;; 
had  been  sent  to  the  Bengal  Asiatic  Society  which 
they  transferred  to  the  Indian  Museum  at  Calcutta  ; 
*^ome  sent  to  the  Queen's  College  here  were  lately 
sent  back  to  Sarnath  under  the  directions  of  Lord 
Curzon  when  he  went  to  visit  the  College,  and  the\' 
are  now  in  the  Museum  near  the  Dhamek  ;  and 
some  others  found  their  way  to  the  Lucknow 
Museum.  It  may  not  be  out  of  place  here  to  note 
regretfully  that  over  forty  of  the  statues  collected 
by  General  Cunningham  in  1835 — 1836  and  unsuspec- 
tingl)  left  here  to  wait  removal  to  a  better  repo- 
sitory, could  not  escape  the  inordinate  zeal  of  a  Mr. 
Davidson,  sometime  Magistrate  of  Benares,  who, 
not  having  perhaps  been  blessed  with  any  idea  of 
art  or  of  the  sacredness  attaching  to  antiquity,  or 
perhaps  nursing  a  supreme  contempt  for  both, 
hafl  them  carted  away  and  thrown  into  the  Barana 
to  serve  as  a  breakwater  under  the  arches  of  its 
bridge  ! 

We  may  now  have  a  glance  of  the  general 
aspect   of  this    locality.     The   grounds  are   undulating 

and  the  Dhamek  stands  over  a 
Modern  aspects   hundred     and     twenty    feet    above    the 

general  level   of  country  (Plate   VI I,. I). 


I04         THE  HOLY  CITY     (BENARES)       chap. 


'\^\/v/%.'\/ V'>.'-v.'^.'VN-\  '\.'  -^x  'V\.'\y  v/vr\.'\.'^'W/-v  /-vrvvx,' 


The  stretch  of  space  between  the  Dhamek  and  the 
Humayun  Tower,  half  a  mile  in  breadth,  cover 
stone  debris  and  extensive  ruins.  The  excavations 
have  laid  bare  what  seem  to  have  been  the  cells 
and  walls  of  a  Vihara  or  chapel-mona.'-tery  with 
votive  stupas  and  shrines.  The  remains  of  the 
spacious  structures  extending  over  a  wide  area 
agree  well  with  the  descriptions  given  by  Hiuen 
Thsang  of  the  temples  and  build in;Ts  and  tanks  in 
the  Deer  Park.  These  cells  and  buildings  seem,  in 
all  likelihood  to  have  been  originally  intended  for 
Buddhist  monks  who  lived  in  solitude  and  engaged 
in  worship  and  divine  contemplation  ;  and  they 
were  later  on  enriched,  enlarged  and  added  to  by 
various     Buddhist    Kings   of    later  times. 

The  destruction  of  the  monastery  and  its  aban- 
donment had,  according  to  Major  Kittoe,  been  due 
to  sudden  conflagration  of  which  sufficient  traces 
had  been  found  in  tbe  ruined  chambers  in  the 
shape  of  charred  wood,  calcined  bones,  hea{:)s  of 
ashes,  remains  of  wheaten  cakes,  and  hastily  abandoned 
uncooked  food.  Writes  Major  Kittoe  :  "All  has 
been  sacked  and  burned  —  priests,  temples,  idols 
all  together  ;  for  in  some  places,  bones,  iron,  wood 
and  stone  are  found  in  huge  masses."  This  must 
have  occured  in  the  twelfth  century  when,  according 
to  Mr.  Neville,  the  Mahomedan  iconoclasts  under 
Kutb-ud-din      Aibak      carried     on       their      work     of 


VI  SARNATH 


destruction  and  devastation  with  fire  and  sword, 
and  sacked  and  destroyed  the  temples  and  shrines 
at    Benares   and    its    neighbourhood. 

Excavations  have  laid  bare  the  foundations  of  a 
conspicuous  structure  of  massive  walls  lying  to  the 
north-west  of  the  Dhamek,  about  ninety-five  feet 
in    length    and    ninety   feet  in    breadth,    which    is   now 

styled  the  MAIN  SlIRINE,  still  stand- 
The  Excavations  ing     eighteen     feet     high,   with    stumps 

of  the  famous  Asoka  column  in  front 
of  it  (Plate  VII, 2).  In  one  of  the  small  chapels  to 
the  south  is  a  Stone  Railing  enclosing  a  stupa 
like  a  square  fence.  It  stands  four  feet  and  three 
quarters  high  and  is  eight  and  a  half  feet  in  length 
on  each  side.  It  is  of  yellow  stone  and  has  lozenge- 
shaped  cross-bars  cut  entire  from  one  single  block 
exquisitely  chiselled  and  polished  and  bears  a  line 
of  inscription  placing  its  erection  in  or  before  the 
first  century  B.  ('.  Somewhat  similar  to  this  though 
of  rough  workmanship  is  the  outer  stone-railing  of 
the  Bodh-Gaya  temple  which  bears  inscriptions  of 
Asoka's  age.  Nunibers  of  small  chapels  (Plate  VI  11,3) 
lie  on  every  side  of  the  Main  Shrine  and  there 
are  some  admirably  constructed  stupas  at  the  south- 
west corner.  Several  tiny  Sea/s  with  miniatuie 
inscriptions  upon  them  were  found  to  the  we.^t  o( 
this    Shrine. 

Another  iaj-gc  monastery  has  been  dug  out  further 
to     the      north-east     consisting     of    a    fine     block     of 


io5  JEEIICLY  CITY  {BENARES)        Chap. 

build ing^s  with  a  spacious  entrance  facing  the  east 
and  a  paved  courtyard  on  the  west.  The  whole 
site  appears  to  have  been  enclosed  by  a  massive 
circuit  wall,  and  a  section  of  it  apparently,  nine 
feet  thick  and  very  solidly  built,  has  been  brou<^ht 
to    light    alongside    the  Jhil   lying   on    the    west. 

Exceedingly  rich  in  sculpture  these  chapels  and 
the  shrines  must  have  been  as  the  remains  exhumed 
from  the  ruins  would  clearly  testify ;  and  all  the 
chambers  had  their  full  complement  of  large  images 
of  Buddha  in  various  attitudes,  with  his  life-stories 
beautifully  figured  in  the  old  Indian  style  upon 
stones  imbedded  in  the  walls.  A  full  dressed  life-size 
image  of  Bodhisattwa  is  still  to  be  seen  in  the 
excavations  there  standing  erect  all  these  centuries 
in  the  place  assigned  to  it.  But  to  have  some- 
thing like  an  adequate  realisation  of  the  ancient 
Indian  Art  dating  hundreds  of  years  b^ck  we 
must  return  to  the  relics  themselves  in  the  small 
Museum    close    b)-. 

Here  in  this  house  you  find  a  large  number  of 
lovely    images   of   Buddha,    large   and     small,     cut   in 

various  kinds  of  stones  —  mostly 
The  Museum      yellowish  Chunar  stone — posed  in  various 

attitudes  (Plate  VII  1,6).  Besides  statues 
of  Buddha  there  are  several  of  a  number  of  gods 
and  goddes«:es  as  well  —  such  as,  Parvati  and  her 
elephant-h-aded  child  Ganesh,  Sarnswaii  with 
her   Vina   in   hand,   Marichi  or   Dawn     with   her    six 


I'l.ATI'.    VI  n 


I.  Bodhi  Sattwa  Statue,  2.     Votive  memorial. 

3.  Some  Sculptures.  4.     Buddha  with  alms-bowl. 

5.  Mara.  6.     A  group  of  Buddha  btatues. 

7.  Sculptured  fragment  respresenting  Ramagrama  Stupa. 


P.     107 


VI  SARNATH  107 


arms^  and  the  fT^orgeoiisIy  decked  Tara.  Small 
figures  of  Dhvani  Buddha  have  also  been  introduced 
into  the  head-dress  of  some  of  the  statuettes  of 
Tara.  The  stati.es  and  the  bas-reliefs  were  for  the 
most  part  recovered  from  a  chamber  in  the 
monastery  and  a  small  detached  building  about 
ten  feet  square,  huddled  up  tof^ether  showing  as  if 
they  had  all  been  kept  there  in  concealment  to 
save  them  from  destruction  during  a  time  of  panic 
or  persecution. 

A    large    number   of  full-size    Bodhi-sattiva  statues^ 
some   of  them    of  colossal    proportions,  are  noticeable 
—  especially      one     in     red      sandstone 
Bodhisattwa      (  Plate     VI H,    i  )      standing     nine  and 
statues  half    feet     high    and     bearing     an     ins- 

cription    at      the     foot     dated     in     the 

third  year  of  the  reign  of  King  Kanishka  who 
conquered  Kashmir  in  the  first  century  after  Christ. 
This  is  considered  to  be  the  oldest  inscribed  image 
found  ;  and  near  it  was  lying  a  large  beautifully 
carved    umbrella,     also     of  the     third    year    of     King 

Kanishka,  and  of  the  Kushana  epoch. 
The  Umbrella     It     is     of  red     sandstone     and     is     ten 

feet  in  diameter.  The  stump  of  the 
tall  round  massive  red  sandstone  pillar  about  five 
feet  high,  which  supported  the  umbrella  stood  in 
its  place  between  the  Main  Shrine  and  Jagat 
Singh's  stupa.  This  umbrella  now  lying  upon  the 
the    floor   is   partly    broken     but   on    the   whole   looks 


loS         THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES)         Chap 

intact.  It  is  a  lovely  work  of  art  in  the  shape  of 
an  inverted  full-blown  lotus  with  circular  rings  one 
inside  the  other  carved  with  figures  of  conch,  fish, 
fruits,  and  flower  v-ases,  the  mystic  symbols  of  the 
Cross  and  the  Triratna  (the  three  Jewels — Buddha, 
Dhanna  or  law,  and  Sangha  or  the  Community 
of  the  Buddhists),  and  also  of  lion,  bull,  camel, 
antelope,    &c.  —  numbermg    two    dozen    in    all. 

Among  a   number   of   Buddha    figures   of  all    sizes 
ranged     on     all    sides,    a    very     graceful     seated  figure 
of  Buddhi    with    a    serene     and    benign    look    lighting 
up   a    face    full    of   beauty  and    dignity    and  reminding 
one  of  the     similar    charms    of   the  famous    image    o\ 
Prajnaparamita     (  of  the   Mahayana  Buddhists,    Java  ) 
seated    on    a    lotus-bed,     cannot    fail    to    attract  notice 
at   the    very    first     sight      (Plate   VI).     A    large     halo 
{prabha    niandal)    highly    decorated    with 
Buddha  as      floral      embellishments    is     behind      the 
Teacher  head  ;    it    is    also     taken     by     some    to 

represent  the  symbolic  Dharma-chakra, 
the  Wheel  of  Law.  The  attitude  of  sitting  cross- 
legged  with  the  forefinger  of  the  right  hand 
crossed  over  that  of  the  left  as  if  to  accentuate 
his  reasonings  and  carry  his  agruments  home  to 
the  listeners,  show  that  he  is  here  represented  in 
the  act  of  preaching  or  'turning  the  wheel  of 
laiv  as  the  phrase  goes.  The  five  disciples  and 
worshippers  are  seated  below  with  joined  palms 
and    two   deer   are     on     either     side     of    the     statue. 


VI  SARNATH  109 


There  are  some  other  seated  figures  o.^  Buddha,  but 
with  the  left  liand  resting  upon  the  lap  and  the 
right  touching  the  earth  in  what  is  known  as  the 
Bkumi-sparsha  Mudrd,  as  if  to  call  upon  her  to 
bear  witness  to  the  good  deeds  of  his  previous 
existences  when  he  was  being  assailed  with  temp- 
tations by  Mara,  the  Spirit  of  Evil.  This  is  the 
attitude  in  which  Buddha  is  posed  in  the  large 
statue  at  Bodh-Gaya,  and  is  by  far  the  most  fre- 
quently   to    be    met    with. 

Another  seated  statue  finely  decorated  holding  an 
alms-bowl  in  front  of  the  breast  (Plate  VIII,  4) 
with  a  Dhyani-Buddha  upon  the  crown  of  the  head 
and  two  figures  male  and  female  standing  over  the 
shoulders  bowl  in  hand,  is  taken  to  be  a  repre- 
sentation of  Avalokitesvvara  and  is  in  an  excellent 
state  of  preservation.  So  is  another  standing  figure 
of  Buddha  in  spotted  white  sandstone  in  the 
attitude  of  offering  blessings.  Numerous  other  seated 
Buddhas  are  there  with  the  usual  Buddhist  creed 
ox  gatkd  inscribed    at  the    foot — 

'  Ye  dharma  hetuprabhaba  he  turn  tesham  Tathagata 

hyavadat. 
Tesham  cha  yo  nirodha  evambadi  Mahasrafnanah' 

— which  Hodgson  explains  as  signifying  that  "of  all 
things  proceeding  from  cause,  their  cause  hath  the 
Tathagatha  (Buddha)   explained.    The  great  Sramana 


no        THE  HOLY  CITY    {BENARES)        Chap. 

(Buddha)    hath    likewise    explained      the      causes     of 
the  cessation     of    existence/' 

Three  lovely  bas-reliefs  (Plate  IX,  I  middle) 
carved  with  small  figures  illustrating  incidents 
in  the  life  of  Buddha, — the  conception,  the  birth, 
the  flight  from  Kapilvastu,  the  temptations  of 
Mara,  the  contemplation  under  the  Bodhi-tree, 
the  first  sermon,  and  the  death-scene  or  the 
final  Nirvana,  —  would  hold  your  admiring 
eyes  captive  for  long.  So  delicate  are  the 
delineations  and  done  with  such  consummate 
skill  that  the  graceful  expressions  appeal  directly 
to  the  mind  at  the  very  first  glance.  One  frag- 
ment of  a  carved  piece  which  probably  decorated 
some  doorway  calls  for  prominent  notice.  It 
represents  a  beautifully  worked  stupa  with  an 
elephant  and  a  w^inged  figure  placing  a  garland  of 
flowers  upon  it,  illustrating  the  legend  of  the 
worship  of  Buddha's  relics  by  wild  elephants  in  the 
stupa  of  Ramagrama.  The  floral  ornamentations, 
the  lotus,  the  vine-leaves  and  grapes,  and  a  tiny 
parrot  taking  a  bite  with  its  beak  at  the  dainty 
fruits,     look     wonderfully      fresh     and      clear      (Plate 

vni,  7). 

A    very   interesting    find     is   a  large     lintel     five 

yards   long     and     over     two     feet  in     height     in    an 

excellent        state  of         preservation, 

Khantlvadi      depicting     a     few  scenes      from     the 

Jataka           Khantlvadi    fataka^  one   of    the     most 


VI  SARNAIH  III 

remarkable      birth-stories      of      Buddha    that      would 

bear      repetition.       In    one      of    his     previous     births 

Buddha     under     the     name     of      Kundaka      Kumara 

was    living    the   life   of  an    ascetic   in    the    Himalayas 

and   used     occasionally     to     come     down   to     Be.iares 

and    take    up    his   abode    in    the    royal  park.     Kalabu, 

the   King   of  Kasi,    then    reigning    in     Benares,    one 

day   came  to    the   park     surrounded     by    a     company 

of  dancers    and    musicians   who     provided    a     musical 

entertainment    for  him.     While    listening   to    them    he 

laid    his   head    upon     the    lap   of  a     favourite  of    the 

harem    and     fell     asleep.     Thereupon,     finding   further 

singing   and    dances    useless,    the    singers    and  dancers 

dispersed    in    the   garden    and     betook    to     disporting 

themselves.      The    Bodhisattwa     being    seated     in    the 

garden    they    approached    him    and    besought     him    to 

give   them  a  discourse.     The    King   in   the   meanwhile 

awoke,      and    finding   the    women     had   gone   became 

very     wroth     and     came   to    the     plact^     where     they 

were.      He     queried     the     Bodhisattwa     as     to   what 

doctrine    he   preached,    and    the   latter   answered,   'the 

doctrine   of  patience.    Your     Majesty,'   and    explained 

that   patience   was  *the   not   being   angry,    when    men 

abuse  you   and   strike   you   and  revile  you.'     '  To    see 

the     reality '     of    his    patience,     the     King  had   him 

scourged   with   a    lash    of  thorns   all   over   the     body, 

and.     *  the     outer     and     the     inner     skins    were     cut 

through   the   flesh   and    the  blood    flowed.'    On   being 

told   that   he   still   preached   the   doctrine   of  patience 


113  THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)  Ch.m> 


V'^V^Vr^X/Vy^yN  ' 


which  was  not  merely  '  skin-deep '  in  him,  the 
King  had  both  his  hands  cut  ofif  and  his  feet  as 
well,  and  at  last  his  nose  and  ears, — each  time 
repeating  his  question  as  to  what  doctrine  he  would 
still  preach  and  being  told  in  reply  that  his 
patience  dwelt  not  in  the  extremities  of  his  hands 
and  feet  nor  in  the  tips  of  his  nose  and  ears  but 
was  seated  deep  within  his  heart, — whereupon  the 
King  struck  him  above  his  heart  with  his  foot 
and    went    away.     The    Bodhisattwa   exclaimed. 

'Long    live   the    King,    whose    cruel    hand    my    body    has    thus 

maned, 

Pare  souls   like   mine   such    deeds  as    these  with  anger    ne'er 

regard.' 

But  just  as  the  King  was  passing  out  of  the 
garden,  *  the  mighty  earth  that  is  forty-thousand 
leagues  in  thickness  split  in  two,  like  unto  a 
strong  cloth  garment,  and  a  flame  issuing  forth 
from  Avici  (hell)  seized  upon  the  King,  wrapping 
him  up  as  it  were  with  a  royal  robe  of  scarlet 
wjol'. 

Besides      neatly     cut      figures      and     ornamental 

embellishments     (  Plate  IX,  4  ),    the    finely     chiselled 

representations     of    the     dancing     girls 

The  Gupta        waving   their   bodies    gracefully    to    the 

Lintel  tunes   of   flutes  and  timbrels  played    by 

their     associates   grouped    behind    them, 

and  of  the    ascetic    with   the    light   of  divine   serenity 

upon  his  face  preaching  and  being  listened    to  with   rapt 


Vr  SARNATH  113 

attention  by  the  women  sitting  in  front,  and  of 
the  Bodhisattva  being  tortured  and  his  hands  being 
chopped  off  by  the  executioner's  sword  as  he 
holds  them  forward  in  all  meekness, — all  exhibit 
the  high  state  of  proficiency  the  artists  of  those  ages 
had  attained  and  remind  forcibly  of  the  similar 
subjects  depicted  in  the  lovely  reproductions  of  the 
Borobudur  reliefs  of  Java  in  Mr.  Havell's  charming 
book,  The  Indian  Sculpture  and  Paintings  and  in 
the  photos  taken  by  Mr.  Percy  Brown,  Principal 
of  the  Government  School  of  Art  at  Calcutta,  lately 
on  view  in  the  last  Allahabad  Exhibition.  The 
figures  are  exquisitely  fine  and  expressive  and  the 
floral  decorations  wonderfully  neat  and  beautiful. 
This  lintel  has  been  ascribed  to  the  later  Gupta 
age,  and  a  portion  of  it  to  the  left  is  blackened 
and  seems  to  bear  m.arks  of  singeing  by  fire  thus 
proving  the  fact  of  the  late  conflagration.  Another 
large  lintel  has  also  been  found,  but  the  figures 
thereon    are    mostly   worn    out   and    obliterated. 

Two    pieces   of  sculptured    slabs   evidently    not    of 
Buddhist    make   deserve   prominent     notice     as     they 

point    to     the     presence    and    influence 

Rama  Laksman  of    Hinduism     in     the    locality.        One 

Panel  of  them     (  Plate     IX,     3  )     is   devoted 

to  Rama  and  Laksman  with  their 
bows  and  arrows  and  Hanuman  and  the  monkeys 
busily  handling  large  stone  blocks, — illustrating, 
perhaps,      the     preparations  for      the     deliverance   of 

—8 


114  THE  HOL  V  CITY  {BENARES) 

Sita     and     the    attempt     at     bridging     the     sea      by 
means   of   huge     stones    for     the     purpose     of    reach- 
ing    King     Ravana's     stronghold      Lanka      (  Ceylon  ;. 
Unfortunately,     it    is    in   a    damaged     state,    for    many 
of  the    figures    look    mutilated    and    details    have    thus 
beeii     lost.      The   other   one    is    a    \'ery    striking     and 
gigantic      figure      of    Siva,     crushing   a 
Siva  Statue       person    crouched    under     one     upraised 
leg,    and    holding  in    one  hand  a  trident 
having  a  female  figure   surmounting    it   and    in   another 
a   human    skull. 

Various     kinds     of     sculptures     from     floral     and 
artistic     designs   on   friezes    and    cornices  (Plate    Vlll, 
3)    to     heads   of   frowning    lions    and    elephants    (Plate 
IX,    2)  and    even  huge  earthen   pots  and    small  lamps 
and     other  household    utensils,  have    been  unearthed  in 
numbers,      and     art    connoisseurs    have    ascribed   thcni 
to   four     distinct   epochs  of    the     Maury  an,     Kushana 
and   Gupta    Kings    and    of  years   later   tj  t'.iem.     It  is 
not    possible  for  any   but   the   artists    ai;d  antiquarians 
to     descant     upon     their     significance    in    Art     or     to 
discuss     about    their    age   as   measured     in     centuries, 
nor   is   that     within   the   scope   of  a    work     like    this. 
So,    here  ends    our   pleasant   visit    to    old     Sarnath 
which   has    furnished     us   with     materials     enough    for 
reflections     regarding   the    Past  and    its    lessons    upoii 
the   insignificance   and    the     transitory    nature     of    ail 
earthly   grandeur   and    glory    and.   for    leisurely  cogita- 
tions  about  the  Future   and    its   hazy   outlook. 


fiF^V 


C^ 


f>  •—  ._ 


P.    114 


Chapter  VH 

MYTHS  AND  ANNALS 
"So    passes    silent  o'er  the   dead,    thy  shade, 
Brief  time  !  and  hoar   by   hour,    and    day    by    day. 
The   pleasin^jf    pictures    of  the   present    fade, 
And   like   a   sun:imer   vapour   steal   avva}'.'' 

— W.  L.  Bowles, 

E  must  now  return  to  our  quarters 
at  Benares  and  brace  up  our 
jaded  limbs  by  taking-  a  little  res:, 
and  as  we  do  so  we  may  indulge 
in  short  chats  about  the  various 
i  }}^  stages  in  the  life-history  of  this 
ancient  city  which,  remarks  Mark 
Twain  in  his  own  piquant  style, 
"is  older  than  history,  older  than 
tradition,  older  even  than  legend,  and  looks  twice 
as   old    as   all    of  them    put  together* 

It     is     in     the      Kashi     KPiandam^     a     part     of 

the      Skanda      Puranam  ^       that      we      find       what 

may      properly      be     styled      the     my- 

Kashi  Khandam  thology   of  Benares.      In    very     ancient 

times,      so     the     Furana     proceeds     to 

relate, — after     the   era   of  Swayambhava    Manu,  there 

(^)     Though    it  is   hard    to  say   anything  definite  as   to   X\vt 

age     of     this     Furana,     it     nir.y    be     noted     that     the      earlie.s: 

known      manuscripts,      of    the     Ksshi     Khandam     bear      date 

Saka  930  (x\.  D.    1008),    and  a  copy  of  the   Skanda    Puranam 

dating    from   the     seventh   century    was    lately    found   in    Nepal 

by   Mahamahopadhyaya   Fandit  Kara   Prasad  .Shastri. 


it6  the  holy  CirV  {BENARES)        chap. 

was  a  dreadful  drought  extending  over  sixty  years, 
which  drove  men  out  of  their  homes  and  caused 
them  to  resort  to  the  river-banks  and  to  seek 
shelter  in  the  hill  caves,  and  reduced  them  to  the 
extremity  of  sustaining  themselves  upon  animal 
food.  At  last,  apprehending  the  destruction  of 
all  life  in  the  land,  Brahma  thought  of  the 
great  Raja  Ripunja)'a,  a  descendant  of  Manu — 
th.en  engaged  in  tapa  (  austerities  ;  at  Kasi — as  the 
only  person  who  could  avert  the  calamity  by 
the  strength  of  his  righteousness  and  piety.  He 
requested  Ripunjaya  to  protect  the  people  of  Kasi 
b\-  becoming  its  Ruler,  for  it  was  a  virtuous  King 
alone  upon  whom  the  gods  showered  their  bless- 
ings in  the  shape  of  abundance  and  prosperity  for 
his  people.  He  agreed,  but  on  condition  that  while 
he  reigned,  the  gods,  whom  the  beauty  and  sanctity 
(►f  Kasi  had  attracted  to  live  there,  must  leave  it 
and  go  to  the  upper  regions  of  heaven.  *Be  it 
Sv>,'  said  Brahma,  and  Ripunjaya  took  up  the  reins 
of  government  under  the  assumed  name  of  Divodas, 
aiiv"!  his  people  became  happy  and  blessed  with 
plent}'.  On  the  persuasion  of  Brahma,  Siva  went 
to  live  on  the  top  of  the  Mandara  mountain, 
v.hither     all     the     gods  followed    him. 

Eighty     thousand     years     thus     passed     and     the 
gods   became     impatient    to     return    to     Kasi     which, 
they     loved     ardenth-,      and     their     yearning     for     it 
increased     with      the     progress      of    time.      Finding, 


VII  MYTHS   AND    ANNALS  117 

however,  no  fault  in  the  virtuous  Kin^  to  warrant 
his  dislod£]^ment,  they  took  recourse  to  subterfuj^es 
and  prevailed  upon  Agni  (Fire)  to  leave  his 
kingdom  ;  but  the  King  supph'ed  the  want  of  fire 
hy  his  own  supernatural  powers.  Siva  and  Farvati 
also  now  grew  disconsolate  for  the  holy  city  that 
lay  ^floating  like  a  lotus  when  the  sky  met  the 
waters  in  the  great  cataclysm.'  Their  ph'ghted 
word,  however,  to  stay  in  heaven  as  long  as 
Divodas  reigned  at  Kasi,  they  found  no  means  to 
withdraAV. 

So  Siva  first  sent  the  sixty- four  Yoginces 
(female  demi-gods"*  in  disguise  to  find  out  some 
failings  of  the  King  that  should  justify  his 
expulsion  from  the  city.  This  they  could  not  do, 
and  anxious  to  hide  their  faces  in  shame  and 
enamoured  moreover  of  the  charms  of  the  lovely 
Kasi,  they  continued  to  stay  there,  and  each 
established  an  emblem  of  Siva  for  worship. 
Waiting  in  vain  for  a  year  for  their  return,  Siva 
sent  Surya  (the  Sun)  in  his  chariot  of  seven 
swift-footed  chargers — the  seven  elementary  colour- 
rays  of  modern  science  (?) — only  to  court  a  similar 
failure.  Next  followed  Brahma,  and  in  the  shape 
of  an  old  Brahman  requested  the  King  to  provide 
inaterials  for  ten  Asivantedha  sacrifices — a  seemingly 
impossible  task,  which  however  the  King  accomp- 
lished. Thus  foiled,  Brahma  also  resolved  not  to 
return. 


ii8  THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)        chap. 

Siva  then  sent  his  unnumbered  Ganas — his 
attendant  demi-gods  ;  but  they  also  swelled  the 
ranks  of  those  that  had  preceded  and  added  to 
the  number  of  lingams  there,  each  establishing^  one 
for  worship  and  naming-  it  after  his  own  name 
with  the  addition  of  an  * — eswara'  (god^  at  the  end 
of  it.  Last  went  Siva's  beloved  child  Ganesha,  the 
head  of  the  Ganas,  disguised  as  an  old  astrologer. 
[le  settled  himself  in  diverse  shapes  in  various 
ulaces,  and  attained  success  bv  befjuilin"-  the 
people  with  illusions  and  throwing  their  minds  out 
of  balance  by  means  of  dreams  which  as  astrologer 
he  afterwards  interpreted  in  his  own  way.  The 
King  sought  his  advice  and  was  directed  to  abide 
by  the  words  of  a  Brahman  who  would  come 
from  the  north  in  eighteen  days.  This  w^as  Vishnu 
who  had  come  and  ensconced  himself  in  various 
parts  of  the  city  under  different  guises.  At  his 
bidding,  the  King  erected  a  temple  and  established 
an  emblem  of  Siva  there  under  the  name  of 
Divodaseswara  (the  Iswa7'a  or  god  of  Divodas) — 
famed  to  be  the  one  still  existing  above  the 
present  Mir  Ghat.  While  engaged  in  w^orship,  a 
bright  chariot  alighted  from  above  one  day  and 
carried  him  off  to  heaven.  And  the  gods  returned 
and    continued    to    be   here    as    before. 

Here     ends   the    mythical     story,   and     thus 


is     the     existence     accounted     for   of  the    numberless 
emblems   of  Siva   and    of  the     numerous    images    of 


Vn  MYTHS  AND  ANNALS  119 

Ganesha  and  Vishnu,  and  of  Durga,  Annapurna 
and  Parvati  under  these  different  denominations  in 
various  quarters  of  the  city.  It  is  mainly  these 
gods  of  the  Hindu  pantheon  that  are  by  far  the 
most  often  to  be  found  represented  here.  The 
shrines  of  Rama,  Sita,  Hanuman  and  of  Krishna — 
the  only  others  to  be  met  with  here — though 
held  in  much  veneration,  seem  to  be  of  later 
times.  In  Anandagiri's  Sankaravijaya  dealing  with 
the  times  of  ijis  master  Sankaracharya  who  lived 
in  the  ninth  century,  there  is  no  ^'allusion  made 
to  the  separate  worship  of  Krishna,  either  in  his 
own  person,  or  that  of  the  infantile  forms  in 
which  he  is  now  so  pre-eminently  venerated  in 
many  parts  of  India,  nor  are  the  names  of  Rama 
and  Sita,  of  Lakshmana  or  Hanuman  once  parti- 
cularised, as  enjoying  distinct  and  specific  adoration.*  * 
This  should  go  to  indicate  that  they  had  not  yet 
come  to  be  established  here  even  in  the  ninth 
century  A.  D.  It  is  principally  the  Siva  emblems 
that  occupy  the  whole  of  the  Hindu  portion  of 
the  city,  and  numbers  of  such  emblems  are  beings 
constantly  added  in  modern  times  as  well  ty 
]:>ious    old     men  coming    to    live    here  in  their  old  age. 

It    may    be  interesting   to   note    in    this   connection 
that    some    consider   the  legend    of  the  mythical  King 

{\^      H.   H.     Wilson's      Religious      Sects      of    the     Hindi:* 

(Tiubner    1861)  p.    17. 


120         THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)  chap 


Divodas  to  be  an  allegory  of  the  occupation  of 
Benares  by  the  Buddhist  rulers  and 
An  Allegory  its  subsequent  conversion  to  Brahmanic 
Hinduism  again  when  the  Hindu 
practices  and  observances  were  revived  anev/.  The 
recital  in  the  Kashi  Khandam  that  Vishnu  assumed 
the  form  of  Buddha  to  delude  the  minds  of  the 
King  and  tne  people  and  cause  their  fall  from 
Hinduism,  tend  also  to  indicate  that  the  virtuous 
Divodas  and  his  people  discarded  the  gods  and 
became  Buddhists  and  continued  to  be  so  till 
converted  into  Brahmanic  Hinduism  again.  This 
would  go  further  to  prove  that  this  Purana  cannot 
claim  antiquity  to  any  period  anterior  to  that  of 
Buddha. 

''Its  history  is  to  a  great  extent  the  history  of 
India'/  remarks  Mr.  Sherring.  From  the  earliest 
periods  of  the  Aryan  colonisation  in  Hindusthan, 
Benares  was  one  of  the  first  settlements  to  which 
probably  those  ancient  people  had  been  attracted 
by  its  pleasant  site  and  the  fertility  of  the  soil 
as  also  by  the  security  as  well  as  the  immunity 
from  interference  by  the  aborigines  afforded  by  it.s 
isolated  position  between  the  two  streams,  the 
Barana  and  the  Asi — which  must  have  been  of 
much    wider   proportions    then. 

The  great  antiquity  of  this  place  can  be  ga- 
thered   from     its   being    mentioned    in    the     Satapatha 


VII  MYTHS    AND  ANNALS  121 

Brahrna7ia  of  the  Sukla  Yajiirveda  and  in  the 
Kausitaki  Brahmanopanishada  as  'Kasi' 
Antiquity  the  wide  and  holy  land  of  '  Yaj'nas* 
(sacrifices),  as  also  in  the  great  national 
epics,  the  Ramayana  and  the  Mahabharata.  Before 
the  Aryan  colonisation  the  Dravidians  or  the 
Kolarians  originally  inhabited  the  Gangetic  valley 
and  probably  occupied  this  place  too.  The  Knsis  tribe 
of  the  Aryans  came  from  Northern  India  in  the 
later  Vedic  ages  and  ousted  them  and  settled  to 
the  South  of  the  Ganges  at  some  time  between 
1400  and  1000  B.  C.  The  BraJnnanas  and  tb.e 
Upanishads  were  taken  to  have  been  compiled 
about  this  period,  and  Benares  had  then  already 
begun  to  be  famous  *as  a  great  seat  of  Aryan 
philosophy  and  religion.'  A.jatasatru,  king  of  the 
Kasis,  was  a  famous  name  of  this  period,  as  a 
great    patron    of  learning. 

The     Kasis     owed      allegiance     to     the     kings    of 

Kosala  (Modern  Oudh)  belonging    to    the  Solar    Race, 

and  Benares    was   then   a  large  province 

The  City  of     extending      up     to     Prayag       (  modern 

Kasi  Allahabad).    King    Puru    and  his    father 

Yajati,  'Lord  of  all  the  Kasis,'  mentioned 

in    the    Mahabharata    had    their  capital  at    Pratisthana, 

the  site     of  which     was     near     modern     Allahabad  ; 

even     then     Baranasi     'decked    with     beautiful     gates 

and    walls'    had     acquired    prominence    as    a    town    of 

note   and    importance    before    it     became    the    capital 


122  THE  HOL  V  a  TV  (BEJVARES)        chap. 


\y\.'  \r\/\y\  ' 


(^f  the  provinc<\  In  the  first  century  A.  D.  Aswaghosha, 
the  GuTU  (spiritual  preceptor)  of  Raja  Kanishka, 
de«^cribes  it  in  his  Soundarananda  Kabya  as  a  city 
enclosed  by  Barana  and  Asi  ;  and  even  so  late  as  the 
fifth  century  after  Christ,  the  Chinese  traveller 
Fa  Hian  found  the  province  and  the  city  as  ex- 
tensive and  prosperous  as  \x\  the  'ancicnf  times. 
The  other  Chinese  pilgrim  Hiuen  Thsanor  who 
came  here  two  centuries  later  observed  that  the 
kingdom  covered  660  miles  in  circumference  and 
its  capital  Baranasi  lying  'near  the  Ganges  exten- 
ded over  eighteen  or  nineteen  //  (above  three  miles) 
in  length  and  from  five  to  six  //  (about  a  mile) 
in    breadth. 

According  to  the  Vishnu  and  Brahma'uda 
Pnranas,   Raja     K^sk     of     the     line   of     King    Aiyu 

belonging  to  the  Lunar  Race,  was 
me  Early  the  first  ruler  of  this  kingdom  ;  and 
Kin^  it    was     probably     during     the    time   of 

King  Ketuman,  fifth  in  descent  from 
him,  that  the  city  of  'Baranasi'  was  established  as 
the  capital  of  the  kingdom.  There  was,  later  on, 
a  lengthy  struggle  for  supremacy  betwen  this  race 
and  the  Haiheyas,  and  Ketuman,  who  is  also 
known  by  the  name  of  Haryaswa,  was  slain  by 
the  Haiheyas.  His  grandson  Divodas,  however, 
fortified  Benares,  but  he  was  defeated  and  expelled 
by  the  Haihe}  a  King  Durdama,  who  in  his  turn 
was     overcome     and      turned      out      of    Benares     by 


VII  MYTHS  AND  ANNALS  123 

Divodas'*s  son  Pratardan.  This  latter  re-established 
the  kingdom  of  Kasi  and  is  supposed  to  have 
been  a  contemporary  of  Rama  the  hero  of  the 
<]^reat  Epic  Ramayana.  This  hne  consisted  of 
twenty- ''our  kings  among  whom  King  Dhristaketu 
has  been  mentioned  in  the  Bhagabadgeeta  as 
having  been  present  during  the  Kurukshetra  war 
which  took  place  between  1400  and  1300  B.  C. 
Eight  and  twenty  Kings  of  the  Haihcyas  followed 
this  dynasty  and  were  succeeded  by  five  Kings  of 
the  Pradyota  dynasty  who  reigned  for  about  a 
century    and    a    half. 

A  word  here  about  the  religion  of  the  time 
at    Benares. Long   before   the   advent    of    Buddha, 

Jainism — founded,  according  to  Cole- 
Religion  of  the  man,  by  Rishabadeva, — had  first  been 
time  preached    at     Benares     by     SUPARSHA, 

the  seventh  of  the  four  and  twenty 
faina  Tirthankaras  (saints),  who  was  born  at 
Benares  and  who  established  and  sj  read  the  Jaina 
religion  here.  ParSWANATH  or  Paresnatii,  the 
twenty-third  Tirthankara,  was  the  sen  of  Aswa- 
scna,  King  of  Kasi,  and  he  relinquished  the  world 
and  became  a  preacher.  The  Bhelupura  quarter  of 
the  city  is  of  great  sanctity  to  tl  e  Jainas  as 
being  the  place  where  he  was  born.  Jainism  had 
gradually  been  spreading  and  taking  root  at 
Benares    in    his    time   and  the    influence  of   Hinduism 


124         THE  HOLY  CITY  {BE\ARES)         cnvp. 


was  to  some  extent  on  the  wane.  He  passed 
away  in  B.  C.  yyy  ;  and  it  was  two  centuries 
later,  when  Buddha  arrived  at  Benares  and  fixed 
upon  Sarnath  as  the  main  centre  from  which  his 
new  faith  was  to  spread,  that  the  first  onslaught 
upon  orthodox  Hinduism  was  really  made  in  a 
manner  that  was  felt.  Immense  numbers  of 
proselytes  from  all  parts  of  Kasi,  Kosala  and 
Magadha  were  attracted  by  the  simplicity  and 
beauty  of  his  new  doctrines  as  contrasted  with  the 
mystery  and  rigidity  of  the  multifarious  observan- 
ces then  prevailing-.  At  the  time  of  King 
Bimbasara  (532-485  B.  O  of  the  Sisunaga  dynasty 
of  Magadha,  Buddha  came  to  his  court  at  Raj- 
giiha  and  was  received  with  marked  honor.  This 
King's  son  Ajatasatru  afterwards  conquered  Kosala 
and  extended  his  Kingdom  to  the  Northern  India 
and  shifted  his  capital  from  Rajgriha  to  Patali- 
putra    (modern     Patna). 

King  Jasha  or  Jasoratha  who  had  succeeded  after 

the     downfall    of     the    Pradyota     Kings,     was      about 

this    time   the  powerful  monarch  of  Kasi. 

King  Jasha       He   attended    the  discourses    of  Buddha 

and    became   convert  to  the  new  religion 

along     with     his     fifty-four      royal     companions      and 

princes   and    all    the     members    of    the    royal    family, 

and    his     people    also     followed     suit  ;      and     Benares, 

the   holy   land   of  Yajnair-^x  rather  the  major    portion 


VII  SARNATH  125 


\  /A/\:<^/  v/\y-» 


of  it — was  won  over  by  the  new  religion  and 
remained  for  nearly  eight  centuries  under  the  sway 
of  Buddhism.  It  was  at  this  latter  period  that 
the  Buddhist  city  gradually  spread  from  the  north 
of   Benares    all    the    way   to   Sarnath. 

In  the  fourth  century  before  Christ,  Benares 
along   with    the    Kingdom    of  Kosala    became    subject 

to  King  Chandragupta,  who  ascended 
The  Mauryans     the     throne    ot    Magadha    in     320    B.C. 

and  founded  the  Mauryan  dynasty. 
It  was  during  the  reign  of  his  grandson  Asoka 
who  embraced  Buddhism  and  lived  in  the  third 
century  B.  C.  (260-222)  that  Buddhism  ro.se  to  its 
zenith  and  fulness  of  glory,  and  Sarnath  came  to 
be  enriched  and  beautified  with  numbers  of  Buddhist 
shrines  and  memorials^  Buddhist  missionaries  were 
then  despatched  to  various  distant  places  in  and 
out  of  India  for  spreading  the  religion,  and  among 
them  was  Asoka''s  son  Mahindra  \Vho  with  his  sister 
Sangamitra  preached  Buddhism  in  Ce}'lon.  For  a 
century  and  a  half  since  the  deatli  of  the  great 
Master,  according  to  Kalhana's  Rajtaj-migini,  Budhism 
in  its  purest  form  held  full  away  and  then  cam.e 
the  decline,  and  the  high  ideals  of  his  doctrines 
came  to  be  lost  in  popular  superstitions  which 
began  to  group  around  his  personality  and  personal 
relics,  and  his  statues  and  statuettes  were  set  up 
in     great     abundance    for     wc  rship.      When      Ai:oka's 


n 


126  THE  HOL  Y  CITY  (BENARES)        chap 

grandson  Dasaratha  reigned,  the  Jainas  also  roused 
themselves  to  vigourous  action  and  pressed  on  with 
their  work.  Thus  between  Buddhism  and  Jainisni, 
the  Brahmanic  Hinduism  at  Benares  at  this  period 
stood  crippled  as  it  were  in  the  decrepitude  of 
age  and  fell  to  its  lowest  ebb,  and  each  one  of 
them  lost  strength  in  the  conflict  and  went  below 
its    normal    standard. 

The    Mauryan     Kings    held     sway    over    Magadha 

and    Northern   India     till    B.  C.    183    and   Benares  was 

subject    to   them  ;     they    were     followed 

The  Sun^as,     by   the    Hindu    Kings     of    the      Su7?ga 

Kanvas  and      and     Kanva     dynasties    who    ruled     till 

Andhras         B.    C.    26,      and      during      their       reign 

Hinduism  began  to  revive.  The  Afidkras 

then  conquered  Magadha    and  ruled    for  four  centuries 

and   a   half  till   430   A.  D.    Then    came   the    downfall 

of    the     Magadha     empire,     after     which     the     Gupta 

Kings    of    Ka7tquj^    came     to    power     and      obtained 

mastery   over   Benares    in     the     fifth    century  ;      and 

during      their      rule      Benares     regained     its      former 

splendour      and      Hinduism      was     to     some     extent 

resuscitated.       King    Baladitya   Gupta    made     Benares 

his   capital    and    strove     hard     to     restore     Hinduism 

to    its     former    glory.       He     and     his     son     enriched 

Benares   v/ith   numbers    of    lofty     temples     and     fine 

edifices,   and    the   latter   in    the   sixth    century    A.    D. 

erected     a     large    temple     at     Sarnath     also    for    the 


VII  MYTHS  AND  ANNALS  127 


/  \y\  y\y  \j-\y\y\y  v 


worship  of  Vishnu.  Benares  then  became  subject 
to    the   Km^s   of  Oujjein    all    of    whom     except     the 

great     Vikramaditya       were    Buddhists. 

Kin^of         In       the      first      half    of    the     seventh 

Oujjein         century    Benares    was    in    the   hands    of 

the  great  King  liarshavardhana  or 
Siladitya  II.  (610-650  A.  D.),  and  it  was  at  this 
period  that  Huien  Thsang  came  to  Kanouj  and 
witnessed  the  great  Buddhist  festival  which  this 
King  celebrated  with  great  pomp  and  grandeur. 
He  found  Hindu  princes  attending  the  ceremony 
as  guests  and  the  followers  of  the  two  creeds 
living   together  in    good    followship. 

All     the     three     religions     of    the     Hindus,      the 

Buddhists  and    the   Jainas,    had,    however,  grown  weak 

in  their   struggles,   and    at    this   juncture 

Sankaraciiarya   arose  the  great  Sankaracharya  and  with 

his   advent  in    the  eighth   century   after 

Christ' — followed     an     era    of    reformation     and     the 

revival   of  old    Hinduism     in    right   earnest.       Bhatta- 

pada  or    Bhatta     Kumaril,     another     great     reformer, 

who  had    preceded    and    paved  the   way  for  him,   had 

succeeded     in     drawing    away    many    large    provinces 

from    Buddhism  and    converting    them     to    Hinduism. 

(i)  In  an  article  on  Sankaracharya  in  the  "Indian 
Antiquary",  June  1882,  the  dates  of  his  birth  and  death  have 
been  computed  to  be  788  aud  820  A.  D.  respectively  based 
upon  certain  data  contained  in  a  Sanskrit  work  found  at 
Belgaon. 


128  THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES)        chap. 


The  two  met  at  Prayag-  (Allahabad)  just  before  the 
former's  death  which  occurred  under  extremely  tragic 
circumstances,  for  Bhatta  Kumaril  destroyed  himself 
upon  the  pyre  by  way  of  making  a  penance.  Sankara 
came  to  Benares,  the  present  populous  portions  of 
which  were  then  full  of  patches  of  greenwood  with 
asrams  (  retreats  )  of  Sannyasis  and  sacrificial  altars 
sheltered  by  pippals  and  kadambas  occupying  the 
sites  where  now  stand  hundreds  of  lofty  mansions. 
The  Buddhists  had  laid  out  their  town  at  Sarnath,  and 
Sankara  also  bent  his  steps  thither,  and  resided  for  a 
time  under  the  spreading  branches  of  a  banyarr  tree 
where  his  wonderful  discourses  attracted  the  great 
Padmapada   and    others    who    became   his    disxiples. 

Sankara^s  philosophical  teaching  adopting  all 
Nature  as  but  the  manifestation  of  the  Universal 
Soul,  and  his  wonderful  solution  of  the  problems  of 
the  'One  in  many'  and  'Unity  in  variety'  and  his 
doctrine  of  Non-dualism  (  Advaitism  )  or  'the  inse- 
parability of  the  human  nature  from  the  Divine 
Essence"  caused  a  great  upheaval  ;  and  the  people 
returned  to  their  old  religion  and  tlie  worship  of 
Siva,  and  Benares  regained  its  position  as  the 
citadel  city  of  Hinduism,  which  in  spite  of  various 
vicissitudes  it  has  till  now  retained.  Buddha  himself 
was  taken  in  as  an  incarnation  of  Vishnu  and  was 
then  absorbed  in  Hinduism.  The  decline  of  Buddhism 
which  had  already  commenced  and  its  final 
overthrow       in      India     now        became         inevitable. 


VII  MYTHS  AND  ANNALS  129 


■  '>^\yvr^y\/V/'  , 


Hiuen  Thsan<^  who  found  only  thirty  San^haranis 
or  Buddliist  monasteries  inhabited  by  three 
thousand  monks  in  the  whole  kingdom  of  Benares 
and  a  hundred  temples  of  the  Hindus  with  tea 
thousand  devotees  attached  to  them,  must  have 
been  here  during  the  decadence  of  the  Buddhistic 
faith,  as  is  evidenced  by  the  absence  of  any 
mention  of  the  existence  of  any  sacred  Buddhist 
edifices  in  the  capital  of  the  province  at  the  time, 
while  he  noted  that  there  were  twenty  Deva 
temples  in  the  town  of  Benares  the  towers  and 
the  halls  of  which  were  of  sculptured  stone  and 
carved    wood. 

By     the    eighth      century      Jashovarma,    King    of 
Kanouj,  held  mastery  over  Benares  aud  made  strenuous 

efforts    towards   the   re-establishment   of 

Jashovarma  of   the     Vedic     Hinduism  ;    and      Benares 

Kanouj  became     the     centre     of      Brahmanism 

at  the  time.  Then  followed  the  Dark 
Age  of  India  from  the  middle  of  the  eighth  to  the  tenth 
century  A.  D.  whose  history  is  shrouded  in  obscurity. 
Alberiini,  the  Mahomedan  scholar  of  Khiva  who  was 
a  prisoner  of  Mahmud  of  Ghazni,  writing  about 
1030  A.  D.,  however,  records  having  heard  of  the 
holy  fame  of  Benares  which  he  compares  to  Mecca 
of  the  Mahomedans  and  remarks  that  Hindu 
"anchorites  wander  to  it  and  stay  there  for  ever, 
as  dwellers  of  the  Ka'ba  stay  for  ever  at  Mecca/' 
— thus   proving  that  Benares    had  emerged    unscathed 

9— 


130  7 HE  HOLY  CITY  iISENARES)        cnw 


-and    had      retained    its    prestige    and     position     intact 
during    those   dark   days. 

Later   on    King    Dharma    Pal     coiiquercd     Kanouj, 

and     Kasi      along      with     the     Kingdom     of     Kanoiij 

became   subject    to   the    P<7/    KiJigs    of 

Pal  Kin^s  of      Gour       in       Bengal       who       were       all 

Bengal  Buddhists    as  has    been    proved     by   the 

inscriptions   on  the    stone  slab    of   King 

Mahipal    of   1026    A.    D.,    found    at    Sarjiath.     By    the 

beginning  of  the    eleventh     century    the    Kingdom     of 

Kanouj  together   with  Benares   fell    into    the   hands    of 

the  Garhirivdr     Kings,     and     this  city    attained   great 

prosperity   during   their   reign. 

In      1019     and     1022     Benares     was     raided      and 

sacked     by     Mahmud     of    Ghazni,    who     is     said     to 

have     razed     a     thousand     temples     to 

Mabomedan      the     ground.      He     was      followed      by 

^^^  Ahmad    Nialtigin    in     A.    D.     1033     in 

this       career       of      destruction  ;       this, 

however,        was       only       a       raid,       and         towards 

the     end      of     the     twelfth     century     it       fell      into 

the   hands   of  Mahammad    Ghori's   general    Kutbuddin 

— who   had    also     been    credited     with   having     deiTio- 

Jished   nearly   a   thousand     Hindu    temples, — after   the 

defeat     of     Raja    Jaichand     Rathore     0^94     '^'     ^^O 

who   held    sway   at     Kanouj     at     the     time.     Benares 

v/as   again     rebuilt   after   such     destrdction     and     this 

process   was   undoubtedly  repeated   several  times. 

About    I3'>0     A.  D.       Alauddin    laid    a     thou--:nd 
Mini-]     t?'n  )'-^      \\\     t\vy     ^h:  t    :     an:l      t'-:;M!.:h      t'  ;:/ 


VII  MYTHS  AND  ANNALS  i;t 


miiltipiied  again  an  1  even  excce.-led  their  fonner 
number,— for  even  in  later  times  Emperor  Jehaiv^ir 
desi<riiated    Benares    as    'the     city  of     temples,' —  this 

kind  of  vandalism  was  repeated  ac^ain 
TzmVZ'  and  a;.4ain,  and  two  names  that  acquired 
breaking}         notoriety      in       this       connection       were 

those  of  iiarbak  Shah  (1493  A.  D.) 
uid  Soleiman  Karrani  (1580),  the  c^enerals  of 
Sikandar  Lodi  and  Daud.  Not  content  witli 
mere  destruction  the  later  Moslem  conquerors 
went  the  lenf.^t!i  of  erectincj  mosques  upoii 
the  very  sites  of  ihe  temples  they  had  destroved 
What  remained  oi  ancient  Hindu  architecture  after 
"lie  raids  of  the  Kl^ilji  Kings  were  swept  away 
<hiring  the  Patlian  rule  and  specialiy  by  the 
vindictive  bigotry  of  Sikandar  Lodi.  Tliere  vvas  a 
lull  for  a  time  during  the  sovereignty  of  the  first 
Aloghul  emperors ;  and  all  through  the  tolerant 
reign  of  Akbar  there  were  even  renovation  and 
restoration  of  tiindu  structures.  Emperor  Akbar's 
reply  to  Jehangir's  query,  noted  in  his  Mcvioirs^ 
as  to  why  he  had  prohibited  ail  manner  of  inter- 
ference with  the  building  of  temples  by  the 
Hindus,  shows  his  principles  of  action  and  reveals 
the  inner  nature  of  the  man  in  him  :  "  I  find 
myself  a  puissant  monarch,  the  shadow  of  God 
upon  earth.  I  have  seen  that  He  bestows  the 
blessings  of  His  gracious  Providence  upon  all  His 
creatures    without    distinctioii.     T|]    ,c].r>n!fl    \     disrl^''^-;.-: 


132  THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES)        chap 


withhold  my  compassion  and  indulgence  from  any 
of  those  entrusted  to  my  charge.  With  all  of  the 
human  race,  with  all  of  God's  creatures,  1  am  at 
l^eace.  Why  then  should  I  permit  m\  self,  under 
any  consideration,  to  be  the  cause  of  molestation 
»>r  aggression  to  anv'  one  f  But  his  words  of 
wisdom  had  but  little  effect  and  were  entirely  lost 
upon  his  son,  to  whose  pergonal  spite  and  animosit)' 
tile  commencement  of  fresii  raids  against  the  Hindu 
temples  was   evidently   due. 

Temple-breaking  reached  its  acme  in  the  seven- 
teenth century  when,  it  is  said,  Aurangzeb  in  his 
bigoted  zeal  began  smashing  shrines  and  altars 
Jind  destrox'ing  numbers  of  Hindu  temples,  and 
in  his  arrogance  gave  the  holy  city  the  name  of 
Muhainmadabad — which,  however,  never  proceeded 
beyond  his  official  papers.  How  far  Aurangzeb 
had  been  responsible  for  all  the  destruction  laid 
at  his  door  or  whether  they  were  the  doings  of 
his  over-zealous  followers  and  provincial  deputies, 
is  now  open  to  question  in  view  of  the  recent 
discovery  of  a  firman  of  that  emperor  referring  to 
tlie      temples      and       Brahmans     of      Benares.    ^     Be 

(i)  In  course  of  my  search  after  matenals  for  this  work 
1  came  across  an  old  FIRMAN  of  Emperor  Aurangzeb  at 
Benares  tending  to  show  that  he  had  prohibited  all  inter- 
ference with  the  Brahmans  of  Benares  who  had  been 
disturbed  by  some  Mabomedans  in  the  exercise  of  their 
religious  rites, — a  fact  opposed  to  all  accepted  theories.  I 
gave   a   detailed   account    of  this  find   in   my  paper   rejld   at   the 


VII  MYTHS  AND   ANNALS  133 


^.'^/'^y\  /\x\j  \y  \. 


that  as  it  may,  though  the  Mahomedans  converted 
Hindu  stones  into  Mahomedam  mosques  and 
utilized  the  best  of  them  for  the  purpose,  and 
though  Aurangzeb's  name  has  been  connected  with 
the  building  of  the  highest  musjid  in  Benares 
with  the  very  tall  towers — known  as  Madhojl-ki~ 
d cora—xmoxx  the  ruins  of  the  old  temple  of 
Beni  Madho  and  the  erection  of  another  over  the 
wrecks  of  the  old  Visweswara  temple,  still  the 
Hindus  shut  their  ears  to  the  call  of  Islam  and 
adhered    staunchly    to    their    old    faith. 

During    the    time   of   Emperor   Babar    most   of  the 

meeting  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Beny^al  on  the  ist.  March 
191 1  with  a  view  to  further  researches  being  made  in  the 
matter  by  antiquarian  experts — which  is  reproduced  here  in 
the  Appendix  with  a  translation  of  the  Firman  in  question 
into  English.  I  may  also  add  that  in  course  of  an  interest- 
ing conversation  with  an  old  Mahomedan  gentleman  of 
culture,  I  was  told  that  it  was  a  custom  in  former  times 
to  ascribe  a  mosque  erected  by  any  one  in  the  kingdom 
to  the  reigning  sovereign  as  a  mark  of  honor  to  him  although  th»^ 
latter  might  know  nothing  about  it.  From  this  he  infers 
that  the  mosque  near  the  Jnan  Bapi  or  that  over  the 
Panchaganga  or  the  Alamgiri  Musjid  in  the  interior  was 
never  erected  by  Aurangzeb  or  any  Mo^ul  Emperor,  for 
they  are  so  poor  in  architectural  beauty  and  so  small  i;i 
dimensions  that  they  would  hardly  bear  any  comparison  witri 
tiiose  admittedly  erected  by  the  Mogul  Emperors  at  Agr;;, 
Oelhi  and  other  cities  of  India.  1  give  the  firman  in  ques- 
tion and  this  opinion  as  they  are  for  the  scrutiny  of  the 
scholars.  I  have,  however,  chosen  to  retain  the  popular 
denomination  of  the  mosques  attributed  to  Aurangzeb  for 
their  indenlification. 


T54         THE  HOLY  CITY  (BEAARES)         char 


places   now    occupied    b}-    stately    temples    and  palaces 
were     covered     witli     jungles.       It     was  about       1570 

that     Benares     began     to       regain      its 
The  Moguls      ancient     splendour     during    the     regime 

of  a  Rajput  chief,  Raja  Soorjan  of 
]>oondee,  who  was  entrusted  by  Akbar  with  the 
government  of  Benares.  According  to  the 
Ayeen-t-Akbari,  Benares  m  Akbar's  time  formed  a 
separate  province  under  tlie  Subah  of  Allahabad. 
By  the  end  of  the  seventeentli  century  it  was  a 
ch'stinct  Raj  although  subject  to  the  Subadar  of 
Oudh.     About    1722    A.    D.     it    came     to     the     hands 

of  Saadat    Khan,    the    first     Nawab    of 
later  History    Oudh   after     the    disintegration     of    the 

Moghul  Empire  ;  and  it  was  at  last 
ceded  by  the  Nawab  to  the  British  in  1775.  The 
rest  of  the  history  of  this  city  is  intimately  con- 
nected with  the  house  of  the  present  Maharaja  of 
Benares  to   be   resumed    later  on.^ 

For  six  long  centuries  now  had  the  Mahomedans 
held  the  city  ;  since  its  cession,  liowever,  it  had  a 
quiet  uneventful  career  with  only  one  exceptional 
occasion — that  of  the  great  Sepoy  Mutiny  of  1857, 
when  there  was,  as  in  other  parts  of  India,  some 
disturbance  at  Benares  as  well,  on  the  fourth  dav  of 
June.  Three  regiments  consisting  of  two  thousand 
sepoys  rose  in  arms  ;  but  the  trouble  soon 
subsided    after   some  bloodshed    fpllovv^'ng  the    parallel 

(i)    See  Chap.   X^  post. 


VII  MYTHS  AND  ANNALS  135 

in    the   rest    of   Northern    India. 

Reverenced  as  ever  and  held  in  the  highest 
sanctity  throughout  the  whole  of  Hindu  India, 
Benares  has  since  continued  to  enjoy  peace  and 
prosperity  and  to  be  enriched  with  nnagnificent 
temples,  noble  edifices  and  stately  Ghats  built  by 
the  reises  and  Rajas  and  Maharajas  of  all  parts  of 
this  vast  peninsula.  Indeed  there  is  hardly  an 
Indian  prince  of  any  consequence  who  has  not  a 
residence  of  his  own  and  a  Chkatra  or  Dharmasala 
here  as  a  permanently  endowed  institution  for 
feeding  the  poor  with  large  properties  set  apart  for 
the  purpose  ;  for,  this  pre-eminently  is  the  Puri 
or  city  of  Annapurna,  the  goddess  of  plenty,  the 
supplier  of  all  world's  food,  where  none  must  go 
starving  !  And  even  in  the  deep  hours  of  night 
pious  people  are  met  with  going  along  the  river- 
hank  with  loads  of  eatables  in  search  of  the 
liungry  poor  who  might  need  them,  and  calling  out 
'  Koi  hhuka   Jiai  7 — Is   there   anyone  hungry? 


PART  SECOND 


Chapter  VIII 


THE  SHRINES  AND  TEMPLES 


*  I   see   him   in  the   blazing  sun 

And  in   the    thunder-cloud, 
I    hear  him   in   the   mighty  roar 
That  rusheth   through  the   forest    hoar 

When   winds  are  raging  loud. 

I   feel   him  in  the  silent    dews, 

By  grateful   earth  betray'd  ; 
I    feel   him   in   the  gentle  showers, 
The   soft  south   wind,   the  breath  of  flowers, 

The   sunshine  and   the   shade." 

N  impression  that  Benares  is  essentially 
a  city  of  temples  large  and  small  and 
gardens  wide  and  extensive,  is  what  >  ou 
must  have  up  to  time  been  led  to  form. 
But  in  the  portion  of  the  city  we  are 
now  about  to  visit — the  purely  Hindu  one 
of  shrines  and  sacred  spots  that  make 
the  holy  Benares  what  it  is, — it  is  only 
temples  and  temples  and  the  emblems  of  Siva 
scattered  about  here,  there  and  everywliere. 
Nay,    family     temples    abut    even      into    portions    of 


138  THE  HOL  Y  CITY  {BENARES)        chap. 


residential  houses,  and  small  niches  on  the  walls  hold 
Siva, — leading  thus  to  the  natural  inference  that  the 
predominant  deity  in  Benares  is  Siva  under  this 
symbolic   form. 

This  form  of  worship,  however,  has  not  been 
confined  soleh'  to  the  East,  for,  it  prevailed  widely 
in  the  ancient  times  in  Egypt, 
Siva-worship  Assyria  and  Babylon  where  emblems 
similar  to  the  Indian  symbol  have 
been  found  in  abundance.  Osiris,  who  resembled 
the  Indian  Siva  in  many  respects,  was  also 
worshipped  under  this  form,  and  the  city  of 
Memphis  was  exclusively  sacred  to  him  as  Benares 
is  to  Siva.  The  Romans  also  observed  this  form 
of  worship,  and  the  Greeks  worshipped  Bacchus 
under  this  symbol  and  set  up  numbers  of  such 
emblems  in  many  of  the  streets  of  their  cities  ;  it 
is  also  said  that  they  used  to  carry  a  golden 
emblem  sixty  yards  in  height  in  some  of  their 
festive  processions.^  In  different  parts  of  the 
Western  Hemisphere  also,  in  Mexico,  Peru,  Yucatan 
and  Central  America,  many  monolithic  representa- 
tions of  the  Lin^am  have  been  found,  and  according 
to  the  testimony  of  a  companion  of  Fernando  Cortez, 
there  was  a   large  emblem  in    the     temple  at    Panuco*. 

(i)     A.    K*    Datta's     ''  Bharatbarshiya   Upasak   Sampradaya," 

Pp.    145,    148. 

(2)     K.    N«    Bose's   ''Hindu   Civilization   in  Ancient  America " 
F,    10, 


VIII       THE  SHRINES  AND  TEMPLES  1 39 


\.r\.rsj\/-\/\/\/s. 


In  India,  the  worship  of  Siva  became  current 
from  the  very  eadiest  of  times  ;  and  though  this 
emblem  has  no  place  among  the  types  of  the 
mythos  of  the  Vedas,  mention  has  been  made 
of  Siva  therein  under  the  denomination  Rudra. 
The  Vedas,  according  to  Max  Muller,  belong 
approximately  to  2000  B.  C,  while  others  ascribe 
them  to  6000  B.  C.  The  renowned  scholar 
Bal  Gangadhar  Tilak,  however,  in  his  Arctic  Home  of 
the  Aryans,  assigns  the  composition  of  the  Vedas 
to  much  earlier  ages  and  places  it  in  the  times 
when  the  Aryans  were  in  the  Arctic  regions,  his 
theory  being  based  upon  some  astronomical  data 
connected  with  the  sunrise  and  the  recurrence  of 
the  seasons  described  in  certain  verses  of  the 
Rig- Veda.  In  those  early  times,  however,  Siva  appears 
in  the  Vedas  under  the  appellation  of  Rudra,  the 
father  of  the  storm-god  Maruta  ;  and  thus  the 
worship  of  Siva  seems  to  be  almost  as  old  as 
Hinduism  itself  Later  on  in  the  sixth  or  seventh 
century  B.  C.  two  kings  of  Kashmir  named  Asoka 
and  Jaloka  were,  according  to  the  Rnj  Tarangi7ii, 
worshippers  of  Siva.  Image-worship  in  temples, 
however,  was  not  in  vogue  in  those  early  ages,  and  it 
was  through  the  medium  of  the  sacrificial  fire — 
into  which  offerings  made  to  the  Vedic  deities 
were  cast — that  the}'  were  invoked  and  worshipped. 
It  was  after  the  advent  of  Buddha  in  the  fifth 
century     B.  C,    or    rather,   after    the  degeneration    of 


140         THE  HOL  V  CITY  (BENARES)  chap. 

his  creed  into  the  worship  of  his  person  and  his 
personal  relics  later  on  that  image-worship  of  gods 
and  goddesses  began  in  imitation  of  the  Buddhists 
and  gradually  supplanted  the  Vedic  sacrifices 
(Yajnas)  at  the   household    fire-side^. 

That  Siva  was  worshipped  in  his  full-bodicd 
image  is  amply  testified  by  the  existence  of  his 
images  cut  in  stone  and  by  the  glowing  descriptions 
given  of  him  in  the  Puranas  ;  and  even  now  the 
practice  has  not  grown  quite  obsolete.  Iliuen 
Thsang  in  his  accounts  mentions  having  seen  a 
statue  of  Maheswara  Dcva  in  Benares  a  hundred 
feet  high  '  grave  and  majestic,  filling  the  spectator 
with  awe  and  seeming  as  it  were  indeed  alive' — 
which  must  afterwards  have  been  destroyed  by  the 
followers  of  Mahammad  Ghori.  The  representation, 
however,  under  the  symbolic  form  seems  to  have 
been  noticed  so  far  back  as  the  fourth  century 
Vi.  C.  by  Megasthenes  when  he  stayed  at  the  court  of 
Chandragupta   at    Pataliputra. 

Worship  under  the  impersonal  symbol  of  the 
phallus  as  connoting  the  first  principle  of  animation 
attributes  to  Siva  the  function  of  creation^  though 
he  is  represented  as  the  Destroyer  or  the  dissolving 
power  in  the  Hindu  Triad.  This  inconsistency  is 
usually  sought  to  be  explained  away  by  saying 
that   according   to    the    Hindu    belief  in    the   doctrme 

(l)     R.    C.    Dutt's    History   of  Civilisation    in    Ancient    India 
P.    648. 


VIII        THE  SHRINES  AND  TEMPLES  141 

of  repeated  births  and  transmigrations,  death  or 
destruction  is  but  the  opening  of  the  portals  of  a 
renewed  existence.  But  the  history  of  the  origin 
of  this  form  of  worship  though  shrouded  in  mys- 
tery seems  to  f)oint  to  an  interpretation  very 
different  from  what  has  been  generally  accepted 
and  suggests  that  the  symbol  far  from  having 
origina/fy  been,  as  is  now  supposed,  a  representation 
ot  the  phallus  was  in  reality  that  of  a  column  of' 
resplendtfit  flames  sanctified  by  being  the  abode  of 
Siva  for  a  time.  Prof  Wilson  in  his  Essays  mid 
Lectures  011  the  Religion  of  the  Hifidus  remarks  : 
'  It  is  not  interwoven  wirh  their  amusements,  noi 
must  it  be  imagined  that  it  offers  any  stimulus  to 
impure  passions.  The  emblem — a  plain  column  of 
stone,  or  sometimes,  a  cone  of  plastic  mud  suggests 
no  offensive  ideas.'  In  his  preface  to  the  Vishnu 
Punina  also  he  notes  that  '  there  is  nothing  like 
the  phallic  orgies  of  antiquity'  even  in  the  Lhiga 
Parana,  and  that  *  it  is  all  mystical  and  spirirual.' 
It  may  be  worth  while  to  trace  its  mythical 
origin  and  to  attempt  to  draw  out  the  original 
conception  from  among  the  tangled  masses  of  all 
manner  of  stuff  stocked  together  in  the  Puranas 
which  profess  to  narrate  what  had  taken  place  ages 
before   their   compilation. 

When  this  visible  world  had  not  yet  been 
ushered  into  existence,  there  was  even  then  the 
all -pervading    Radiance     {Tefrs)    that     was     Brahman 


143  THE  HOl.Y  CITY  (BEWARES.)        Chap. 

whose      nature     was    Truth,      Wisdom      and    Eteniitw 
In    Him    arose     a    Desire     (  for   creation  )     that    took 
shape  and  came  to  be    known  as  Prakriti 
What  the        or  Maya  (  ilhision  )  ;  and    from  the  same 
Pdranis  say     source    from  which   iVakriti  came,    origi- 
nated Punisha    or     Xarayana  (Vishnu;. 
This     was    the     very    first     act    in     the    great     drama 
of    creation — the     first   manifestation    of    the  Nirgmia. 
or      neuter      and      unconditioned     Brahuian       pa^sinc^ 
into    a      conditioned     state.       Then      came        liJralima 
into        beini^       from       out      of       a      lotus      sprintrini^^- 
from    the    navel    of   Vishnu    as    he    rech'ned    upon     llic 
body     of     tl'.e     serpent     Ananta     (the      endless,      the 
symbol    of   Eternity)    and     floated     asleep     upon     the 
billowy    surface    of  the     vast     chaotic    deep.     Later  on 
lirahma     and     Vishnu     confronted     each     other,    and 
there    were   heated    disputations    between      them,    each 
claiming   to    be    the    source    of  the    other's    origin  and 
to    be   the   sole    lord    of    creation.     In     order    to     put 
an    end    to   their   quarrels   *  there    arose     before     them 
a    resplendent    Sign    {Lhigaifi)    ^    of  light  composed  of 
thousands   of  burning    flames  like    unto  the    conflagra- 
tions  of  all-destroying    time.     Increase    or     decay     it 
had    none,    nor     beginning,    nor    middle,    r.or     end  ;    it 
was   without  a  parallel,   unascertainable,  undivulged  and 


(i)     Sign,    token,    emblem,    anylliinnr     which     diytinguishe'^    >.r 
tlcra'.es.    -Sir   .M'.^aier    Williams, 


VIII       THE  SHRINES  AXD  TEMPLES  143 


the  root-cause  of  the  Universf^.'  ^  Dismayed  at 
this  incomprehensible  manifestation,  they  attempted 
to  find  out  what  this  great  pile  of  flame  was,  but 
failed.  Then,  there  formed  up  before  them  a 
mii^hty  figure  of  manifold  beauty  with  five  faces 
and  ten  arms  and  of  the  delicate  hue  of  camphor. 
Him  they  came  to  realise  as  MaJieswara  ^,  the 
Creator  of  the  Universe.  And  as  they  bent  before 
him  .  and  chanted  hymns  in  his  praise,  '  the 
Stainless  one  {Nira}ija)ia)  '  was  pleased,  and  in 
the  form  of  Sound  Divine  {Logos  ?)  immerged  into 
tliat  same  S/'c^-n  and  stayed  there  smiling  -^.•' 
l>rahma  and  Vishnu  humbled  themselves  before 
Him,  and  He  explained  to  them  that  it  was  fr<Mn 
out  of  //////  alone  that  they  had  Vjoth  sprung  into 
being.  He  then  assigned  to  Brahma  and  Vishnu 
the  duties  of  the  creation  and  the  continuation  of 
the    universe,   reserving    to      himself    the     Inunction     ot 

^^4^r§r^r*|-^^mf^JTV7[SrTsfr^*rrfl  I 

(2)  An  appellation  of  Siva. 

(3)  Lit,    the    stainless  ;   also,   an   appellation   of  Siva. 

(4)  ^»'??f|:  ?gi^r«^Vi  f%r  of'9?lf''T?,^:    I 


144        THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)        Chap. 

!aya     or     making       all      things      merge      into      their 
perennial     source.    ' 

Such      is  the    account      furnished     by       the 

Puranas        in       their        chapters        on  cosmogony 

n^garding  the  conception,  of  Siva  as  the  very 
first  agent  of  the  unconditioned  Brahman  in  the 
work  of  creation  — his  function  as  such  ceasing  with 
the  relegation  of  the  task  of  continuing  this  work 
to  Brahma.  Accepted  thus  to  be  the  Creator  par 
excellence  the  cylindrical  column  of  uprising  flames 
of  fire  wherein  he  had  rested  after  he  became 
manifest  came  to  be  symbolised  to  represent 
him — even  as  the  sacred  Cross  upon  which  the 
Messiah  had  last  rested  while  passing  away  came 
to  symbolise  his  creed.  A  class  of  Sivaite  ascetics, 
the  Jangams,  carry  this  emblen  pendent  from  their 
necks  as  a  section  of  the  followers  of  Christ  carry 
small  representations  of  the  Cross  in  wood  or  stone 
or   metal    upon    their    persons    in  the   very   same    way. 

The  original  conception  of  the  symbol  would 
thus  appear  to  be  very  different  from  its  modern 
significance.  Besides  representing  the  column  of 
flames,  the  Sign  of  Siva  has  also  been  described 
as  tnadhya-vrittam — which  makes  it  of  a  round  or 
spheroidal     shape — covered      all       over      with      fiery 

(T)    Vide   Siva  Puranam — J  nana   Samhita,    Chs.  II    and     III  ; 
Lin^a   Puranam — Purva   Bhaga,  Chs-   XVIII     and    XIX  j    and 
i4l.'^o,   Brahmanda   Puranam,   Chs     HX. 


VIII        THE  SHRINES  AND  TEMPLES        145 

radiance.  '  The  word  lingam  itself  had  thus  no 
technical  meaning  exclusively  attached  to  it,  but 
signified  merely  a  sign  or  emblem.  By  association 
of  ideas  the  symbolic  representation  of  Siva  as  iJie 
first  Creatof  came  to  be  connected  with  Xho.  function 
of  creation.  Hence,  when  the  unmaterial  column  of 
uprising  flame  was  later  on  materialised  by  its 
representation  in  jewels,  stone  or  earth,  it  c(77ne  to 
be  viewed  as  a  representation  of  the  phallus  as  the 
animating  principle  in  its  grosser  earthly  aspect^  and 
the  agency  of  the  Divine  Will  as  the  root-cause  of 
creation  was  thus  entirely  lost  sight  of  and 
forgotten.  And  as  all  things  corporeal  must  have 
supports  to  rest  upon,  an  addition  of  a  Vedi  or 
pedestal  was  made  to  it  ;  and — by  further  develop- 
ment of  the  coarse  idea — this  appurtenance  came 
to  be  regarded  as  representing  the  goddess  Gauri.  The 
fact  that  the  Mahanirvana  Tantram  keeps  the  two 
portions  of  the  symbol  altogether  distinct  *  lends 
support  to  the  view  that  the  latter  was  merely  a 
later  addition.  Thus  what  is  ^low  taken,  no  doubt, 
as  phallic  emblem  was  in  origin  only  a  representa- 
tion of  a  column  of  flames  and  one  of  the 
purest   conceptions   of  the   Hindu     mythology.     Honi 

(i)  "b^*  *{«?f^^  wm  fsfypr^sf^nr  1 

(2)        XIV  Ullasa,  24,   43    76, 

10 


146       THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)       Chap. 

soit  qui  mat y  pense  is,  therefore,  all  that  can  be 
said  of  its  being  viewed  in  any  other  light.  So, 
an  enquiry  into  its  origin  before  we  start  on  our 
pilgrimage  in  this  City  of  Siva  has  not  perhaps 
been    altogether   profitless. 

We  may  now  dive  into  the  interior,  the  mazes 
of  narrow  lanes  and  by-lanes  in  which  will  be 
observed     to    be    a     striking   feature    in    this     quarter. 

There  is  no  question  of  levels  here—it 
Benares  Lanes    is   all  ups   and  downs  !    A  short  distance 

forward  as  you  advance  half  a  dozen 
or  more  of  broad  stony  steps  come  to  view  along 
the  stairs-like  stone-paved  path  which  you  must 
ascend  ;  continue  on  your  way,  and  perhaps  there 
would  soon  be  some  fresh  ones  to  descend,  followed 
by  some  more  leading  you  higher  up  ;  and  thus 
it  is  all  the  way  on, — especially  in  the  eastern 
quarter  towards  the  river-bank  ;  and  not  infrequently 
would  you  be  taken  aback  on  being  confronted  by 
the  remnants  of  the  old  ntuhulla  (  ward  )  gates  at 
the  head  of  such  lanes  in  the  shape  of  narrow 
openings  with  door-frames  attached  to  them,  and 
apprehend  that  you  are  being  led  into  the  premises 
of  the  private  owners  of  some  great  mansion  close  by. 
In  former  times,  there  stood  real  doors  in  those 
frames,  which  used  to  be  kept  closed  at  night  to 
no  little  discomfort  and  inconvenience  of  certain 
classes  of  the  night-roving  gentry.  With  superior 
provisions    for    the    safety    and     security    of   life     and 


VI I r        THE  SHRINES  AND  TEMPLES        147 


property  now,  the  practice  has  of  late  been 
discontinued,  and  the  doors  have  disappeared.  Often 
hardly  wide  enough  for  more  than  a  couple  of 
human  beings  to  w^lk  abreast — not  to  speak  of  an 
elephant  or  a  camel  of  dece-Rt  proportions— you 
find  such  an  alley  often  blocked  by  huge  peregri- 
nating bulls  swaying  from  side  to  side  in  uncertain 
drunken  gait,  for  which  you  must  make  way  by 
standing  aside.  Emancipated  from  human  slavery 
by  their  masters'  acts  of  piety  and  turned  adrift, 
they  are  now  ownerless  and  roam  faros  naUircB,  and 
have  quite  a  pleasant  time  of  it — though  often 
calling  forth  unpleasant  ejaculations  far  from  being 
pious  from  the  profane  lips  of  the  keepers  of  road- 
side stalls  of  edibles  which  they  freely  patronise. 
The  houses  along  these  narrow  lan-es^  generally 
three  to  five  stories  higjj  (  Plate  XI,  5  )  with  only 
patches  of  the  blue  heavens  peering  overhead,  cause 
the  lanes  to  look  narrower  and  make  a  stranger 
feel  a  sense  of  oppressive  closeness.  They  impart, 
however,  a  picturesque  aspect  to  these  winding 
lanes,  and  one  might  fancy  hirrsseif  roving  in  an 
old  town  of  Spain  or  Southern  Italy,  thinks 
Mr.  Havell,  were  it  not  for  the  surroundings  of  the 
temples   and    the   people. 

Perhaps  this  should  suffice  for  a  short  sketch 
of  the  general  outlook  ;  and  if  your  weariness  i"S 
off  and  your  energy  renovated  by  a  night's  sound 
sleep,    we   may   by   your   leave   start   on    our   rambles 


148  THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES) 

to   hav*e  a   look   at   the  sacred   shrines     and   temples 

— which,     according     to     Sir     William 

The  Temples      Hunter   numbered  1454   besides   smaller 

ones,      to      272       mosques       of       the 

Mahomedans  in    1885.     It   is   said    Raja   Man    Singh 

of  Jaipur,   true    to   a   vow   he    had   taken,     presented 

Benares     with   a     lakh     of    temples     all     built     in   a 

single   night, — these     ranging   from     the    larger     ones 

to   the   very   diminutive   models   in   stone    you     often 

meet     with     everywhere     l}'ing   upon   the    ground,   to 

make  i.p  the  number. 


^5\ 


4i    <^ 
c    o 


8- 

.'5    -^ 


W 


^5^ 

^ 
3 

Q    ^ 


.      p    _^ 


.     a. 
"5    S 


6     P 
£    ^ 

is 


P.    14(1 


( 1 ) 

On  The  East 


O     start     with     then,     we     shall     first 
direct       our       steps        towards        the 
DASASWA^fEDH    Ghat    ( Plate   IV,  I ). 
The  soft  reddish  glow  on 
Dasaswamedh    the  murky  east   is  diffu- 
Gliat  sing  itself  into  the   dark 

blue  above  following  the 
track  as  it  were  of  the  pioneering 
Twilight,  that  like  a  gleesome  virgin 
had  started  in  advance  warbling  in  the  voice  of 
the  early   cuckoo 

*I  come  in   the  breath  of  the   waken'd  breeie 

I   kiss   the   flowers,    and    I  bend   the    trees ; 

And    I    shake    the   dew,  which  had  fallen  by  night 

From  its   throne,  on   the  lily's  pure   bosom  of  white.' 

The  solemn  hush  that  had  preceded  the  approach- 
ing dawn  seems  now  to  be  breaking  into  a 
soit  murmur,  and  light  footsteps  are  heard  tripping 
down  the  scone-paved  stairs  to  the  accompaniment 
of  the  humming  chants  of  sacred  hymns.  Up 
betimes  even  before  the  waking  day  the  pious  and 
the  devout  few  have  come  from  afar  for  their 
.ea;"ly  ,ip:iorning    ablutions.     Reverently   they   approach 


TSa        THE  HOL  Y  CITY  (BENARES)         chap. 


the  haly  stream',  and  preparatory  tO'  descendinar 
into  it  bend  down  and  touch  the  water  with  the 
finger-tips  and  sprinkle  a  ^^w  drops  upon  their 
heads — for  the  i^^t  must  rrot  corme  in  contact 
with   the   holy   water   first. 

The  great  orb  of  fiery  r^d^  tes  now  half  risen, 
above  the  sky-line  defined  against  the  green  tree^ 
tops  beyond  the  spreaiding  sands.  With  gentle 
caresses  does  it  rotl  aside  the  white  flimsy  veil 
of  mist  which  half  conceals  the  blushing  looks  of 
the  lovdy  Ganges  gliding  like  a  msaiden  coy  in 
her  onward  course.  Presently  across  thee  rippling 
expanse  of  lier  ample  bosom,  a  stately  column  of 
glowing  crimson  lies  recumbent — in  fruitless  tremulous 
attempt^  as  it  were^  to  bar  her  passage.  Thus 
would  fond  Love  ever  strive  to  Iwld  Life  in  close 
embrace  and  arrest  her  wonted  course  !  But  tide,, 
like  time,  ever  fbl'fows  her  destined  course  and 
would  tarry  for  none — realising  whrch,.  perhaps,  the 
shining  pile  thins  a\¥ay  m  diespair^.  the  fiery  orb 
begins  to  recede  and  ascends  higher  amd  liigher  ;  and 
the  freed  stream  proceeds  antramimelled  in  her  gltsten- 
rng  route.  A  mild  perfume  of  agreeable  incense 
floating  in  the  afr  now  diverts  your  attention  and 
regales  your  senses  -,  and  soft  and  ^weet  falls  the 
delicious  nahnlrat  music  upK>n  your  ears  borne  on 
the  wind  from  some  temples  close  by,  interrupted 
by  occasional  tinkling  of  bells  and  clanging  of 
gongs,: —  a   grand     amd      solemm     welcome     to      the; 


VIII  SHRINES   OJV  7 HE  EA^T  151 

coming   day   and    announcement   of  early     invocation 
to    the    gracious    gods. 

Upon  the  spacious  terrace  of  the  lofty  temple 
standing  prominent  on  the  north  of  the  ghat,  the 
cool  morning  breeze  redolent  with  the  odour  of 
sanctity  jusr  grazes  by  and  gently  fans  your 
cheeks.  In  the  brightening  light  the  long  bridge 
from  Rajghat  spanning  the  river  looks  clear  and 
distinct  on  the  left,  and  towers  and  turrets  come 
out  to  view  in  a  ruddy  hue  blended  with  radiant 
white  ;  and  to  the  right,  the  crescent  bank  studded 
with  temples  and  palaces  on  mighty  foundations 
of  massive  stone  stretches  out  towards  the 
south  till  they  merge  away  in  the  morning  haze. 
A  scene  of  unique  grandeur  full-bathed  in  the 
glamour  of  the  day's  opening  eye  unfolds  before 
)'our  wondering  vision  :  the  tall  turrets  and  gold- 
tipped  spires  of  unnumbered  temples,  the  lofty 
walls  and  lovely  balconies  of  stately  palaces,  the 
broad  stone-paved  stairs  running  along  the  numerous 
ghat=; — all  lining  the  great  arc  of  the  ancient  bank 
in    a    medley    of  variegated    colours  ! 

The  day  is  now  full  awake  and  the  Dasaswamedh 
Ghat —  hallowed  by  its  association  with  the  great 
god  Brahma's  Ten-horse  Sacrifice —  seems  now 
to  wear  its  every-day  garb,  crowded  with  thronging 
bathers  from  far  and  near.  Old  men  and  young 
are  pouring  in  to  take  their  accustomed  dip  in  the 
holy  water,  and  matrons  and  young   women   and  little 


152  THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES)        chap. 


'  \j  v/\  ^  r\j\y\/\,*\/  ^  v'\y\.'  \-^ V.'  vXvv^v/xy  \^\ 


ones  too  in  their  robes  of  varied  hues — the  bright 
red  and  green  and  yellow  of  the  Southerners 
mixing  with  the  paler  shades  of  the  north-west 
and  the  pure  white  of  Bengal.  Ablutions  and 
morning  prayers  over,  and  purified  in  body  and 
feeling  a  sense  of  sanctification  suffusing  their  frames, 
they  would,  most  of  them,  now  go  on  their  jattras 
or  daily  rounds  of  visit  to  the  holy  shrines.  Some 
over  the  edge  of  the  water  there  linger  awhile  and 
sit  in  their  wet  clothes  immersed  in  devotion  ;  and 
an  interesting  group  of  fresh-bathed  elderly  up- 
country  dames  sit  yonder  in  a  circle  and  chant 
hymns  in  soft  mutters  and  throw  flowers  and 
pinches  of  rice  into  a  flat  brass  dish  lying  in  the 
middle. 

We   shall   now   leave   this   sacred    ghat,   the    most 

frequented   and   one   of  the   holiest   here,    and    follow 

a     batch     of    bathers     to     the      Golden     Temple     of 

Viswesivara^     the   presiding   deity     and 

To  the  Golden     the   premier   god    of    all    Benares.     Up 

Temple  the  steps   as   you   proceed   towards   the 

highway,  flower-stalls  prominent  with 
their  wealth  of  golden  marigold  and  barbers'  shops 
with  their  sundries  ranged  before  them  appear  on 
the  right  and  left,  as  do  also  the  platforms  of  the 
ghatia  Brahmans  squatting  under  huge  palm-leaf 
umbrellas  here  and  there  inviting  the  patronage  of 
customers.  A  little  further  on,  and  the  lame,  the 
blind,  the   leper  and   the  decrepit   line    the   path   m 


VIII  SHRINES  ON  THE  EAST  153 

company  with  numbers  of  old  wrinkled  women  and 
beggars,  all  seated  with  small  pieces  of  cloth  spread 
out  in  front  of  them,  into  which  the  pious — the 
women-folk  mostly — throw  in  pinches  of  rice  or 
pulse  and  sometimes  a  few  cowries  or  pieces  of 
copper  as  they  trace  their  way  back  after  their 
morning   bath. 

Emerging  into  the  broad  road  and  wending 
northward,  we  leave  the  Phk-and-vegetable  Market 
on  the  right,  and  arrive  at  the  entrance  to  the 
narrow  lane  leading  to  the  Golden  Temple  flanked 
on  either  side  with  tempting  sweets-shops  bright 
with  their  'white  and  brown  wares.  An  interesting 
couple  of  small  ill-clad  urchins  here  stand  hand  in 
hand  a  little  way  aside,  and  their  lips  water  with 
anticipations  of  untasted  pleasure  and  longing  as 
they  watch  the  customers  handling  the  dream 
objects  of  their  paradise.  Brahmans  now  and  much 
too  many  of  them  accost  you  here  volunteering  to 
conduct  you  to  the  holy  shrine  —  with  sly  expecta- 
tions of  being  recompensed  for  their  troubles  at 
the  end.  Glittering  brass  and  aluminium  and 
German  silver  wares  and  cheap  German  imitations 
of  Indian  paintings  meet  your  ^y^s  on  either  side 
as   you   proceed   up   the   lane. 

Soon  on  the  right  in  a  small  ill-lighted  chamber 
appears  the  white  marble  statue  of  Sankaracharya, 
partly  mutilated,  and  further  on  Kotilingcsivara  Siva 


154         THE  HOLY  CITY  {BEAARES)         chap. 


in  an  unassuming  niche  by  the  road-side.  On  the 
left,  as  you  proceed,  lies  the  temple  of  Sakshi 
ViNAYAK  Ganesha  containing  a  large  red  image 
of  Ganesha  in  a  spacious  quadrangle  to  which  the 
pilgrims  resort  after  visiting  the  other  shrines  in 
order  that  this  god  may  bear  witness  to  the  fact 
of  their   having   performed    the    pilgrimage. 

In  fact  this  lane  and  the  next  by-lane  to  the 
right  that  curves  towards  the  east  from  it,  contain 
sacred  shrines  too  numero'is  to  mention.  Just  at 
the  entrance  to  this  latter  stands  the  red  image 
of  DJmndhiraj  Ganesha  on  the  left  and  some  flower- 
stalls  on  the  right,  and  the  rush  of  pilgrims  from 
all  India  is  thick  at  this  narrow  opening.  The 
stone-paved  pathway  as  you  dive  into  it  is  moist 
with  mud  and  water  from  the  bare  feet  of  thousands 
of  worshippers  passing  this  way,  the  majority  of 
them  with  votive  offerings  of  flowers,  bad  leaves 
and  water-pots  in  their  hands  filled  from  the  holy 
stream.  Shops  bright  with  miniature  brass  statuettes 
of  gods  and  goddesses  and  stone  and  crystal 
emblems  of  Siva  and  sundry  other  appurtenances 
of  worship,  line  this  by-lane  till  you  arrive  near 
the   famous   temple   of  Annapurna. 

The  stately  temple  has  a  fine  and  very  elaborately' 
worked  tower  and  a  dome  supported  upon  carved 
and  ornamented  pillars.  Admitted  through  the  main 
entrance  with  a  pair  of  large  brass  doors  with 
highly      finished      repousse    work     upon     them,     the 


VIII  SHRINES  ON  THE  EAST  155 


floor  of  the  open  hall  beneath  the  dome  is 
found  to  be  a  piece  of  beautifut 
Arnapurna  mosaic  in  white  and  black  marbl? 
It  was  about  the  beginning  of  the 
eighteenth  century  that  this  temple  was  erected  b> 
the  Raja  of  Poona  '  and  was  later  on  greatl> 
embellished  by  the  famous  Rani  Bhawani  of  Nattore 
in  Bengal.  The  golden  face  only  of  the  goddess 
is  visible  from  out  of  the  profusion  of  garlands 
of  marigold  covering  the  whole  body.  This  in 
sanctity  is  next  only  to  Visweswara  ;  and 
tradition  runs  that  Siva  had  once  been  going 
a-begging  all  over  the  three  worlds  but  could  find 
no  food  an\'where,  till  at  the  advice  of  Laksmi 
he  came  to  this  place  where  his  spouse  Annapurna 
had  spirited  away  all  the  provisions  of  the  universe. 
Here  he  was  sumptuously  fed  by  the  latter,  and 
was  so  gratified  and  so  much  elated  with  joy  that 
he  installed  the  image  of  Annapurna  at  Kasi  and 
founded  the  cit\'  in  her  honor  and  for  her  worship. 
This  episode  is  graphically  depicted  in  the  Yomsrain 
Temple  founded  by  the  late  Krishnananda  Swami 
at  Hous-Kattra  in  front  of  the  Dasaswamedh 
Thana  (  Police  Station  ),  where  a  picturesque  golden 
image  of  Annapurna  is  represented  feeding  Siva 
who  stands  in  front  with  a  bowl  in  hand — one 
of   the    very    few    full-bodied    images     of  Siva   to    be 

(i)     According   to    Raja   Jai    Narain    Ghoshal,   it  was   erected 
by   a    Marhatta   named   Vishnu    Mahadec. 


156  THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES')        chap. 

met  with  in  Benares.  In  the  Annapurna  temple 
are  also  to  be  seen  images  of  RadJia  Krishna, 
Ganesha,  Hanuman  the  monkey-god,  and  the  striking 
figure  of  Surya-graha  (  the  sun-god  )  upon  his 
seven-horse  chariot  Numbers  of  beggars  daily  line 
the  road  outside  the  temple  and  obtain  alms  as  a 
regular   institution. 

Proceeding  onward,  your  eyes  light  upon  the 
silver-face  of  the  bodiless  Sani-deva  ( Saturn  )  on 
•^he  right  with  garlands  of  marigold  hanging  below 
It  But  soft,  for,  quite  blocking  the  narrow  lane 
•"•here  advances  a  light  red  and  white  purdah 
enclosure  held  on  by  half  a  dozen  or  more  of 
liveried  servants  shining  in  scarlet  and  yellow.  It 
is  some  Rani  or  princess  on  a  visit  to  the  shrines 
and  bent  on  worship  who  has  thus  been  effectually 
shut  out  from  the  vuli^ar  gaze  of  strangers  and 
aliens.  Slow  it  moves,  this  lightsome  fabric — and 
lesser  folks  must  wait  till  she  walks  away  after 
finishing   her    devotions. 

So,   after   a   brief  haltage,   you    now  approach  the 

far-famed     Golden     Temple     lying     to     the     left 

dedicated   to     ViSWESWARA,     the    Holy 

The  Golden      of     the     Hclies      and     the    highest     in 

Temple  sanctity   in    all    Benares.      The     temple 

propc^r   would    not    be    visible    until  you 

pass   through  the  gate   and    come   to   the    quadrangle 

where   it    stands   with   a   golden    dome    between     two 

tall   towering   spires   each     fifty-one     feet   high  ;    and 


VIII  SHRINES  ON   THE  EAST  i^j 


X /^'^ /% /^--vy  W' v>  \ 


the  floor  below  is  inlaid  with  black  and  white 
marble — some  of  them  covered  with  the  names 
of  their  pious  donors.  The  spire  to  the  right 
with  a  golden  trident  surmounting  it  and  a  golden 
streamer  by  its  side  is  also  shining  like  burnished 
gold  (Plate  X,  6)  ;  the  other  spire  to  the  left  of 
the  golden  dome  is  of  red  sandstone.  The  dome 
and  the  spires  are  all  richly  carved  with  various 
designs  of  flowers  and  foliage  and  images  of  gods 
and  goddesses  executed  in  the  old  Hindu  style. 
Maharaja  Ranjit  Singh,  the  Lion  of  the  Punjab, 
was  said  to  have  been  so  impressed  by  the  holiness 
of  the  city  that  he  covered  the  spire  and  the 
dome  of  this  temple  with  plated  gold — some  say, 
thickly  gilt  copper — that  dazzles  the  eye  of  the 
visitor   to  this  day. 

The  temple   itself  is  said   to  have  been   built  by 

the   Marhatta     prince   Peshwa   Baji    Rao    about    172 1 

and   later   on     enlarged   and    beautified 

Ahalya  Bai      at   great   costs    by     that     pious     Royal 

Princess,   the     great    Ahalya  Bai,    who 

ruled   at    Indore  from    1766  to    1795   and  to    whose 

munificence     Benares     owes     the     magnificent     ghat 

which   bears   her    name   and     some     fine    temples   as 

well.      In     other     parts     of    India,    too — notably     in 

Mysore,     Malwa,      Rameswaram,     Kedarnath,     Gaya 

and   Puri — are     to     be     found     numbers   of    temples, 

Dharmashalas,  wells,  roads  and  other   works  of  public 

utility  which   immortalise  the  memory  of  this   pious 


! 58  THE  HOL  V  CIT  V  (BENARES)         Chap, 


lady,  the  Vishnupada  temple  at  Gaya  among 
these  being  the  greatest  and  the  grandest  of  them 
all.  The  present  temple  of  Visweswara  is  only  a 
poor  substitute  for  the  the  original  one  that  was 
destroyed  by  the  Mahomedans  to  make  room  for 
their  mosque  ;  the  former  was  more  spacious  and 
commodious  as  would  appear  from  the  stately 
ruins  we  shall  presently  see  in  its  old  site  close 
by  (Plate  V,2).  Mr.  Neville  writes  that  ''  the 
original  temple,  it  would  seem,  was  built  on  the 
high  ground  occupied  by  the  (Jarmichael  Library, 
and  is  believed  to  have  been  destroyed  by 
Shahabuddin  Ghori  in  1494.  A  second  temple 
was  erected  soon  after  between  the  Library  and 
the  present  structure :  and  this  was  destroyed  by 
Auran^zsb,  who  built  a  mosque  out  of  the  materials, 
the   walls   displaying     a    large    amount  of  old  Hindu 


Under   the    golden    spire   on    the    right    inside  the 

hio-hly      carved      silver      door-way      is      the      famous 

emblem     in     black      marble — a      plain 

Visweswara      lingam     ef      uncarved       stone — of    the 

great   god    VlSWESWARA,     the     founder 

of  the   holy     city,     in    the    low     cistern-like     seat   on 

the     floor     railed     round     in     silver   and     filled    with 

water    and    offerings    of    flowers     and     garlands     and 

one/    leaves.       Under      the     western     spire     are     the 

emblems     Dandapaniswaj^a       and      Swayainbhu     and 

images    of  some    other   gods    in    the     niches     of     the 


VIII  SHRINES  ON  THE  EAST  159 


apartment.  In  the  open  hall  in  the  middle  under 
the  golden  dome  is  another  white  marble  emblem 
known  as  Vaikunteswara  Siva.  Four  large  bells — 
the  largest  one  on  the  north  side  a  gift  of  the 
Raja  of  Nepal— hang  from  the  ceiling  above.  On 
all  sides  of  the  quadrangle  are  open  verandahs 
filled  with  emblems  and  images, — the  most  important 
among  which,  located  in  the  four  corners,  are 
Abiniukteswara  Siva,  Annapurna,  Parvati  in  an 
attitude  of  prayer,  and  Laks^ni  Narain  ; — and  even 
the  courtyard  below  locate  numbers  of  emblems, 
S'.inischaresivara   being    one   of  them. 

Passing  out  by  a  side-coor  on  the  north-cast 
corner^  numbers  of  stone  emblems  wht^le  and 
mutilated  are  observed  lying  strewn  about  in  utter 
disorder  by  the  back-wall  of  the  building  ;  the:^e 
probab!}-  belonged  to  the  old  Visweswara  temple 
that  was  destroyed.  A  little  further  off  on  the 
left  is  a  small  house  locating  a  large  emblem 
known  as  Dhanneswara  Siva  with  a  very  large 
number  of  smaller  ones  arranged  in  orderly  rows 
constituting  what  is  known  as  the  Deva-Sava  or 
Siva's  court.  In  this  connection  mention  may  be 
made  of  one  other  very  sacred  spot,  nay,  one  of 
the  very  highest  sanctity,  known  as  the  Antargriha 
(  the  inner  home  )  lying  within  the  limits  of  the 
four  shrines  at  four  corners — ^of  Manikarnikeswara 
on  the  east,  Brahmeswara  on  the  south,  Gokar^ia 
on    the    west,    and    Bharbhuteswara    on    the    north. 


i6o        THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)        Chap. 


'■\/-\J-\y'.J^r^r, 


From  the  early  dawn  till  the  very  depth  of 
night  the  temple  of  Visweswara  is  filled  with  priests 
and  devout  worshippers  from  all  parts  of  India 
chanting  the  praises  of  Siva  or  merely  uttering  the 
invocation,  *Hara,  Hara',  'Bom,  Bom'.  The  rush 
in  front  of  the  door  of  Visweswara's  apartment  is 
extremely  great  and  an  eager  crowd  press  and 
jostle  to  get  in  and  just  have  a  glance  at  the 
deity.  The  dim  room  where  a  light  is  ever 
burning  is  rendered  dimmer  by  the  crowd  flocking 
at  the  door  and  is  resounding  with  the  chants  of 
mufitras  as  the  worshippers  bathe  the  god  with 
the  holy  water  and  present  their  offerings.  This 
duty  over,  they  visit  and  pay  their  homage  to 
the  other  gods  and  goddesses  located  in  the  temple 
and  make  substantial  presents  in  small  coins  to 
the  priests  sitting  in  front  of  them  not  forgetting 
the  beggars  as  well,  and  take  last  of  all  a  few  rounds 
about  the  temple,  pass  out  by  the  side-door,  and 
proteed   to   the   other   shrines. 

The  Arati — the  evening   invocation  of  Visweswara 

—is  a  sight  to   see.     The  brightly  illuminated  chamber 

is   filled   with   the   fragrance  of  burning 

The  Arati       incense,    and     heaps  of   sweet  scented 

flowers   and   garlands   almost   shut    out 

the     large    emblem     from     view  ;   and     as   a    dozen 

Brahmans      with      the     five-rayed      lights     {Pancha- 

pradipd )    in    their     right    hands   and     tinkling   bells 

in      their     left      wave    them     in     unison     with    the 


VIII  SHRIXES  ON   THE  EAST  i6i 


solemn  Vedic  chants  and  keep  on  calling  'Sanibko\ 
'Sambho'  (  an  epithet  of  Siva  ),  the  effect  is  simply 
sublime,  to  say  nothing  of  its  being  exceedingly 
impressive  ;  and  it  is  hard  for  one  to  avoid 
being  touched  by  the  pervading  religious  fervour 
and  not  to  feel  a  sense  of  isolation  from  the 
surroundings  and  the  visible  leading  to  the  thought 
of  an    invisible    Presence    beyond. 

Whatever    Hinduism    is    to     casual     observers,     to 
those    who  seriously  study    it    as    it  is    in    the  abstract 

and     as     shorn     of    the     grotesqueness 
Hludu  Ideas      that   time   has  undoubtedly   attached  to 

some  of  its  rituals  and  a  portion  of  its 
exterior,  it  is  a  religion  embodying  a  profusion 
of  allegorical  representations  of  the  principles 
manifest  in  the  Universe  leading  to  the 
contemplation  of  the    one   Supreme    Essence,   the  root 

and    cause   of  all, a    religion    pre-eminently  fitting 

all  stages  of  life  and  all  degrees  of  advancement, 
ranging  from  the  primitive  simplicity — which 
can  hav^e  no  grasp  of  the  abstract  and  for  which 
the  attributes  of  the  Infinite  have  to  be  materialised 
within  the  circumscribed  limits  of  visible  forms 
and  shapes, — and  rising  to  the  highest  culture  of 
the  mind  indulging  in  introspective  vision  and 
dealing  with  the  primal  Essence,  as  in  the  case 
of  the  great  Vojs;-ees  whose  perception  ranges  in  the 
Beyond  and  to  whcm  the  visible  is  but  an  unreality 
and    an    illusion. 

II — 


i62         THE  HOL  V  CI  J  Y  {BENARES)         chap. 

In  the  dim  beginning  of  the  life-history  of 
Man,  the  Child  in  Nature  finds  the  hideous  gloom 
of  the  night  dispdled  by  the  glorious  sun-rise  that 
makes  the  Earth  manifest  to  sight,  and  hears  the 
roaring  thunder  in  the  rolling  clouds  that  melt  in 
welcome  showers  to  cool  the  parched  earth.  He 
watches  the  endless  blue  of  the  mighty  ocean 
surging  mysteriously  in  immense  billows  and  the 
.rushing  gale  lashing  the  waves  into  masses  of 
ebullient  foam.  He  feels  the  sweet  breath  of  the 
Zephyr  bracing  his  frame  and  gladdening  his  heart, 
and  observes  how  the  recurring  seasons  bring  forth 
fresh  bloom  to  adorn  the  earth.  In  awe  and 
wonder  he  stoops  to  adore  and  pours  forth  a  paean 
of  praise, — and  up  arise  in  his  vision  the  glorious 
configurations  of  Savitd,  htdra^  Marut,  Varuna,  and 
the  other  deities  to  bless  and  console  and  allay 
the  agitations  of  his  mind.  As  nature's  phenomena 
grow  familiar  by  repititions  and  orderly  successions, 
agencies  regulating  them  come  to  be  looked  for  ; 
the  mind  begins  to  think,  and — speaking  in  broad 
generalisations, —  the  circle  is  narrowed,  and  the 
mighty  Trinity,  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Siva  stand 
out  pre-eminent  above  all,  as  the  essential  energies 
of  origination,  preservation  and  transmutation  of  all 
kinds.  By  a  process  of  abstraction,  as  the  mind 
t:^rows  maturer,  the  One  above  the  Three,  self-con- 
tained and  comprehending  them  all,  the  Supreme 
Cause — Brahman, —  void  of  shape  or  form, 
beyond    conception     and     comprehension     glows     out 


VIII  SHRLVES   ON-   THE  EAST  163 


and  shines  forth  above  all  the  rest  as  the 
Creator  as  well  as  the  subsisteiit  Essence  of  all — 
the  all-pervading  Universal  Soul  wherein  all  things 
animate  and  inanimate  hold  their  being  as  parts 
of  the  Universal  Whole.  The  mysterious  voice  of 
nature — the  booming  '0-m*  — suffusing  the  universe, 
then  sounds  in  his  mental  ear  as  the  Mother  of 
all  Knowledge,  uplifting  him  above  the  material 
world  and  holding  out  before  his  mind's  eye  the 
glory  of  the  Light  Divine — even  of  "  Him  who,'' 
as  tke  Vedas  proclaim,  "  exists  by  Himself,  whom 
the  spirit  alone  can  perceive,  who  is  imperceptible 
to  the  organs  of  sense,  who  is  without  visible 
parts,  eternal,  the  soul  of  all  beings,  and  whom 
none  can  comprehend."  This,  perhaps,  is  the 
conception  of  the  highest  form  of  the  living 
Hinduism,  where  the  much-dreaded  idol  does  not 
intervene. 

All  races  and  nations  living  under  the  sun  are 
struck  by  the  phenomena  of  Nature  in  the  primi- 
tive ages  in  the  self-same  way  or  with  but  slight 
variations.  As  the  expanding  wisdom  of  the  parent 
race  is  transmitted  as  a  precious  heritage  to  the 
succeeding  generations  of  communities  as  well  as 
nations,  notions  thus  imbibed  and  ideas  based  upon 
the  knowledge  of  their  fathers  usurp  and  fa-^ten  upon 
their  mind  and  are  sometimes  even  improved  upon  ; 
and  the  wonders  of  Nature  gradually  lose  their  former 
glamour     in     their     eyes  and   the     manifestations     of 


i64        THE    HOLY   CfTY  (/i/tXAK/iS)        Cuaf. 

Nature's  God  as  sx-mbolised  hy  their  fathers  lose 
all  their  [>()etry  and  charm.  The  later  conceptions 
of  Zeus,  Neptune,  Hy[>erion  ai.d  the  rest  of  the 
gods  of  the  Western  pantheon — standing  out  in 
most  cases  as  but  brotliers  twin  to  their  Eastern 
prototypes, — and  their  subsequent  disappearance 
with  the  development  of  philosophical  theology 
leading  to  the  contemplation  of  the  Supreme 
Essence,  may  serve  as  instances  in  point.  Coming 
to  modern  times,  it  is  the  Hindus  only  who 
present  the  spectacle  of  the  conservation  of  all  the 
various  .stages  of  the  development  of  their  ideas 
of  the  Divinity  as  being  adapted  to  the  capacity  and 
comprehension  of  the  different  grades  of  intellects  of 
their  ma.sses, — while  others  have  discarded  all  that  was 
old  and  have  striven  to  stick  fast  to  the  later  growths 
alone,  holding  out  the  self-same  ideal  before  all 
irrespective  of  the  question  of  their  capacity  to 
grasp  it.  Thus  it  is  that  with  the  Hindus  religion 
has  still  been  a  matter  of  the  heart  and  not  of 
the  head  ale  re,  and  not  a  mere  convention  and 
leisure-hour  oKservance  but  a  part  of  life  itself,  to 
the  man  of  the  highest  culture  in  the  same  way 
as    to    (me    of   the    weakest   intellect. 

A  Hindu  wlio  has  not  attained  the  requisite 
training  for  directing  his  thoughts  to  the  concep- 
tion of  the  Absolute,  localises  his  contemplation 
in  visible  .'^)  mbols  or  material  emblems,— much  as 
the    veiic.<-t    tvro   falls   if;cn    his   A'^I.a   ar.d    Beta     to 


VIII  SHRINES    OV   THE  EAST  165 

enable  him  tc  grapple  with  the  hii^hest  flights  of 
scientific  formulae  ;  his  mind,  however,  travels 
beyond  them  and  ranges  higher  above.  But  no 
Hindu  ever  believes  that  this  symbol  or  emblem 
or  image,  be  it  earth,  stone,  or  wood,  is  ever 
the  God  he  worships  though  he  invests  it  with 
the  Spirit  Divitte  by  a  particular  process  of  invo- 
cation {Pmnpratishthd).  ^  All  the  satne,  however, 
he  comes  eventually  to  acquire  the  same  kind  of 
love  and  veneration  towards  these  aids  to  his 
devotions  as  the  Christian  has  for  his  Cross  or 
the  stone  image  of  the  Immaculate  Virgin 
or  his  revealed  Scripture  or  the  Buddhist 
for  his  statuette  of  the  Enlightened  One,  or  the 
Jaina    for   his    Arhat,     or     the     Mahomedan     for   his 

U)  It  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  quote  Kere  what 
the  Rev.  E.  R.  Hull  remarks  in  his  le  ture  on  "HINDUISM" 
''As  regards  the  use  of  idols  or  im-i<^es,  it  is  well  to 
be  on  our  guard  against  the  somewhat  naive  idea  of 
*stock-and-stone  worship'  prevalent  among  many,  viz.,  the 
notion  that  image-worshippers  really  worship  material 
objects,  viewing  them  at  the  same  time  simply  as 
such  .  .  .  Where  concrete  object  is  directly  made  an 
object  of  adoration,  that  is  always  because  it  is  viewed 
not  merely  as  the  material  thing  which  it  appears  but 
because  it  is  invisibly  permeated  or  animated  by  the 
presence  of  spirit,  of  which  it  is  merely  the  dw(  lling- 
piace  and  vehicle  ;  Cf.  the  doctrine  of  consubstantiation 
and  transubstantiation  in  the  Blessed  Eucharist.  Hindus 
have  their  recognised  ritual  for  inducing  the  prebence 
^f  (he    God:   and   even  of   causing    its    cessation." 


i66        THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)        Chap. 

Holy  Book  and  the  personality  of  his  Prophet, — in 
all  .which  cases  of  these  aids  to  their  devotions 
tiie  veneration  meant  for  the  Ideal  is  transferred 
to  the  Viable  and  the  Material,  only  in  van-ini;- 
clegrees.  Their  churches  and  mosques  and  shrines^ 
no  less  than  the  symbolic  Cross  or  statuette_,  are 
held  in  sanctity  not  as  the  materfal  dwelling-places 
or  representations  of  the  Eternal  One,— Z^?*'  His 
abode,  according  to  all  creeds,  is  the  pervadiii^ 
universe  and  beyond, —  but  only  as  places  of  worship 
or  as  repositories  of  relics,  or  as  merely  hallowed 
by  associations ;  and  so  are  the  temples  and 
shrines  of  the  Hindus  enshrining  His  manifestations 
under  various  allegoncal  representations  ;  and  theirs 
is  the  sublime  realisation  that  'this  vast  universe 
is  the  sacred  temple  of  Brahman  and  the 
mind  itself  is  His  sacred  shrine".  The  tail 
sticks  of  wax  burning  before  the  Crucified  Son — 
the  glorious  personification  of  man's  suffering  for 
his  brother-man^ — or  the  lights  swinging  from  the 
ceiling  or  the  incense  placed  in  censers  in  the 
empty  mosques  and  churches,  shed  forth  the  same 
amount  of  lustre  and  fragrance,  and  the  tolling 
bells  from  the  tops  of  the  steeples  and  the  Muezzins' 
piercing  call  to  prayer  thrill  with  the  same  religious 
fervour  as  do  their  prototj^pes  in  the  Hindu  temples. 
Rites  and  ceremonials  grotesque  or  otherwise 
imposed  by  priest-crafts,  and  superstitions  and 
caste-prejudices  hem  round  all  religions  in  some 
form     or     other»    though     their      respective      votaries 


VIII  SHRINES    ON   THE    EAST  167 


might  be  loth  to  admit  ;  but  in  spite  of  its  having- 
an  ordered  system  of  its  own  fitting  in  with  all 
grades  of  advancement,  it  is  Hinduism  alone  that 
is  too  often  condemned  and  maligned  for  the  simple 
reason  that  it  is  misunderstood  or  not  understood 
at  all  b}^  the  casual  on-lookers  who  care  not  to 
know  and  only  confine  their  gaze  to  the  merest 
excrescences  in  its  crudest  forms.  Mr.  Burn^,  an 
alien  authority,  who  made  a  special  study  of  the 
subject  in  course  of  the  Census  operations  of  1901 
remarks  thus  in  respect  to  the  faith  of  even  the 
commonest  populace,  subject  among  all  nations  to"" 
ignorant  superstitions  in  the  matter  of  their  creeds 
and  beliefs  :  "  The  great  majority  of  Hindus  have 
a  firm  belief  in  Ofie  Supreme  God,  called  Bhagwan, 
Parameswar,  Iswara,  or  Narain.  .  .  .  This  involved 
a  clear  idea  of  a  single  personal  God,  .  .  .  This 
is  not  limited  to  the  more  intelligent,  but  is 
distinctly  characteristic  of  the  Hindus  as  a  whole.*' 
So,  theirs  is  not  a  hopeless  case  altogether  as 
many  are  apt  to  think,  and  they  may  still 
hope  for  salvation  through  faith  and  piety  and 
righteousness  which  are  the  common  assets  of  all 
religions  and  before  which  the  varied  observances 
and  conventionalisms  of  diverse  creeds  shrink  into 
trivialities   and    nothingness. 

We  have  perhaps  digressed  a  great  deal, — have 
we  ?  But  this  may  to  some  extent  help  to  palliate 
our     ruffled     feelings      if    what     we     shall    presently' 


i68  THE  HOLY  CITY  {BEXARES)        chap. 

observe  in  this  quarter  give  us  any  moral  shock 
at  the  sight  of  what  may  look  like  rampant  idolatory. 
So  we  had  better  leave  off  reflections  for  the 
present   and    look    about. 

By  the  back-door  of  the  Golden  Temple  and 
past    the    Deva     Sabha    we     come     to     the     spacious 

court  where  lie  the  J  NAN  Bapi  well 
Jnan  Bapi       and    Gauri   Sinkar     Siva,     the     seated 

figure  of  Siva  with  Parvati  upon  his 
thigh.  Close  by  rests  in  blissful  idleness  the  huge 
stone  bull  Nandi,  painted  vermilion  and  about  seven 
feet  high,  presented  by  the  Maharaja  of  Nepal, — a 
bold  and  beautiful  piece  of  sculpture.  A  block  of  flat 
shapeless  stone  underneath  the  seat  of  Gauri 
Sankar  is  venerated  under  the  name  of  Tarakeswara 
Sivn.  The  spacious  temple  sheltering  the  Jnan 
Bapi  has  a  colonnade  of  nearly  a  hundred  artistically 
carved  stone  pillars  supporting  the  roof  (  Plate  X,  i  ) 
and  was  erected  in  1828  by  Maharani  Baija 
Bai,  the  widow  of  Daulat  Rao  Scindhia,  an  I  affords 
room  enough  to  numbers  of  persons  lur  their 
religious   observances. 

Iron  railings  enclose  the  raised  walls  of  the 
famous  well  going  by  the  name  of  Jnan  Bapi  or 
J'dan  Kup  (  the  Well  of  Wisdom  ) — wherein  is  said 
to  have  been  hid  the  emblem  of  Siva,  the  original 
one  of  the  old  temple  of  V^isweswara,  thrown  in  by 
the  priests  when  under  Aurangzeb's  orders  the 
Moguls      were      said     to      have     destroyed     the     old 


VIII  SI7K/NES  ON    THE  EA'^T  169 


N,/xy  N  >^yN.'Ay  %/\ 


temple.  Legend  relates  that  once  in  the  olden 
ages  of  the  gods,  'when  no  clouds  would  pour  on 
earth,  and  no  streams  nor  rivers  were  there,  nor 
water  but  in  the  seas  «^alt  and  sweet,  Ishana — the 
Lord  of  the  North-eastern  quarter  of  the  sky, — in 
course  of  his  rambles  arrived  at  Kasi  then  known 
as  Ananda  Kanan  (  the  Bower  of  Bliss  )  and  found 
a  resplendent  lin^am  shining  in  its  brilliance'. 
Wishing  to  lave  it  in  cold  water  he  took  Siva's 
trident  and  gave  a  thrust  at  this  spot,  and  water 
'clean  and  pure  like  the  hearts  of  the  good  and 
white  as  the  bright  moonshine',  welled  out  in 
abundance.  Thus  came  this  well  into  existence 
and  being  sacred  to  Siva  became  famous  as  the 
'  Well  of  Wisdom' — for  the  word  'Siva'  also  signifies 
Jnan  or  'wisdom'.  By  the  side  of  the  well  sits 
an  old  Brahman  with  a  pitcher  and  a  spoon  ready 
to  deal  out  the  water  of  wisdom  to  the  devout 
who  reverently  accepts  it  in  his  open  palm  held 
cup-shape   and    sips   a    i^w   drops   therefrom. 

An     open     courtyard     outside     this     temple     with 

another   banyan    tree     and    the  image   of    Gangeswara 

Siva   at   its    foot,    formed     at    one   time     a   debatable 

ground  over   which  the    Hindus  and    the  Mahomedans 

fought  for  long   until    the    Magistrate   of 

Aurangzeb^s      Benares  interfered.     And    as    a    result,   a 

Mosque         do.)i-u^ay     erected    by     the    latter   along 

the     enclosure     wall     of    the.     a  Ijoining 

mosque  to  overlook  the  courtyard  had   to  be  clo^eJ   up 


170         THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)         Chap. 


\r\ /N /^yNj^yXy  \yXy-v/Vv.'\^^' V% /V/N./^  y 


with  bricks,  and  remains  to  this  day  in  that  state. 
Above  a  raised  platform  stands  this  mosque  with 
a  small  reservoir  of  water  in  front,  and  the 
popular  belief  is  that  Aurangzeb  ca-ised  it  to  be  built 
about  1669  upon  the  site  of  the  former  Visweswara 
temple   after   its   demolition.   ^ 

The  remains  of  the  old  temple  (  Plate  V,  2  )  now 
existing  in  the  ruins, — into  which  the  western  wall 
of  the  mosque  has  evidently  been  built, — go  to 
prove  that  the  old  one  was  much  larger  and  more 
spacious  and  imposing  than  the  present  Golden 
Temple.  The  elaborate  and  highly  ornate  carvings 
upon  the  ruined  wall  and  the  arches  of  the  door- 
way are  still  to  be  seen  at  the  back  of  the  mosque  ; 
and  the  traces  of  a  c  Duple  of  peacocks  and  a  pair 
of  parrots  scooped  out  of  the  carvings  upon  the 
central  arch  of  the  wall — still  clearly  visible  in 
outlines — point  to  their  undoubted  Hindu  origin, 
for  the  Mahomedans  would  not  allow  any  represen- 
tation of  an  animate  being — the  handiwork  of  the 
Almighty — to     be     made    upon    their  structures.     The 

(i)  According  to  General  Cunningham,  however,  it  was 
Jehangir  who  'destroyed  the  great  temple  of  Visweswara  which 
was  built  by  Raja  Man  Singh  at  Banaras  at  a  cost  of  36 
lakhs  of  Rupees  and  built  the  Jimi  Musjid  on  its  site.' 
Evidently,  he  must  have  meant  the  Adi-Visweswara  temple 
over  the  other  side  of  the  Chauk  Road  near  to  which  is  a 
small  mosque  reputed  to  have  been  built  by  Jehangir  upon 
the  site  of  the  old  temple.  Vide  Cunningham's  Archaeological 
Survey   Reports   Vol-    III,   p.   7. 


VIII  SHRINES  ON  THE  EAST  171 


-^/-..y^_/-^y-v./\^-v  ■V'V'-V'-'w--\yvyv/v/  ./'^y^^'  -^""v/'-y  ^ 


existence  of  the  ruined  wall  impresses  one  with 
the  idea  that  the  builders  of  the  mosque  suffered 
it  to  stand  to  serve  as  a  memento  of  Moslem 
triumph  in  this  the  most  sacred  spot  of  the  Hindus. 
The  terrace  which  is  about  five  feet  higher  than 
the  courtyard  upon  which  this  mosque  stands,  would 
seem  to  have  been  erected  upon  some  pillars  of 
Buddhistic  design.  Cell-like  recesses,  as  are  found 
in  temple-monasteries  of  the  earlier  times,  are  to  be 
seen  here  also  below  the  terrace  and  tend  to  show 
that  there  had  once  been  a  Buddhistic  structure 
on  the  spot  over  which  the  Hindu  temple  must 
have  been  erected  after  the  fall  of  Buddhism,  to 
be  supplanted  in  its  turn  by  Aurangzeb's  mosque 
later  on. 

Coming    out   of    this     lane     into    the    broad    road 

leading   to  the  Chauk,   we   may   have   a   look    at  the 

temple    of  Adi-Visweswara— a     large 

Adi-Visweswara  Siva  emblem — to  the  north-west  beyond 

Aurangzeb's  mosque  upon  a  terrace  over 

a   small    rising   ground,    a    little    way    off     from    the 

Carmichael    Library.    It    is  about  sixty  feet  high  and 

is  said  to   have  been    built  after   the   demolition  of  the 

magnificent    temple   erected    by    Raja    Man    Singh    of 

Jaipore    at    a    cost  of  "  nearly   thirty-six    laks   of  five 

methkally   ashrefis."   Jehangir   notes    in    his   'Memoirs 

that    after   throwing   down    the   said    temple,    '*  on  the 

spot    and     with    the   very     same    materials,    I    erected 

the    great    mosque,    because   the  very  name   of   lslc«m 


172  THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES) 


was  proscribed  at  Benares,  and  with  God's  blessint^ 
it  is  my  design,  if  I  live,  to  fill  it  with  true 
believers."  Xear  it  stands  a  small  musjid  built 
with  the  materials  of  Hindu  architecture  which  supplies 
the  basis  for  the  popular  belief  that  the  site  of 
the  original  Visweswara  temple  was  shifted  from 
this    place    when    the    mosque    was    erected. 

A  short  distance  to  the  east  of  the  temple  of 
Adi- Visweswara    is    what    is  known  as  Kashi  Kariuat. 

It  is  inside  a  small  building,  snd 
Kasi  Karwat    through     its      square     vertical     opening 

looks  like  a  well  underground  much 
below  the  floor  of  the  house,  but  it  has  no  water, 
nor  is  it  connected  with  any  water-channel.  Upon 
the  stone-paved  bottom  below  stands  a  large 
emblem  which  can  be  approached  from  above  by 
a  stairway.  It  is  said  people  formerly  believed 
that  death  at  this  place  would  immediately  lead  to 
emancipation  from  the  chances  of  re-birth.  Some 
persons  availed  of  this  easy  means  rather  too 
literally,  and  the  Government  had  to  close  the  top 
with  iron  gratings  allowing  it  to  be  removed  only 
once   a   week. 


(  2  ) 
On  the  North 


NTO  the  labyrinths  of  narrow  lanes 
and  alleys  in  the  eastern  quarter  lying 
along  the  river-side  we 
SankataDevl  now  dive  and  find  it 
full  of  shrines  and  sacred 
places  and  temples  at  very  short  inter- 
vals of  spaces.  A  very  popular  one 
is  the  temple  of  Sankata  Devi — an 
image  of  Durga  in  brass — with  a  figure 
of  Ganesha  and  a  crouching  stone  lion  in  front  of  the 
entrance ;  and  any  morning  you  may  find  numbers 
of  devout  reverend-looking  Brahmans  sitting  cross- 
legged  in  a  line  in  the  hall  in  front  and  reading 
the  sacred  Chandi  in  praise  of  the  goddess.  Near 
it  is  the  large  emblem  Vires wara  Siva  with  the 
representation  of  a  hooded  serpent  above  it. 
Another  temple  not  far  from  it  is  that  of 
Siddhesivari — another  figure  of  Durga— with  a  well 
in  the  centre  of  the  compound  sacred  to  the  Moon 
and    known    as    Chandrakup, 

The   next     temple   of    importance   is    the   exceed- 
ingly   rich     and     highly     tr.ccwcd     GgI'AL     Kx\MIR 


174  THE  HOL  V  CITY  (BENARES)        chap. 

containing  two  golden  images  of  Krishna  and 
dedicated  to  his  worship.  It  stands 
Gopal  Mandir  upon  a  very  high  and  spacious 
terrace  trelissed  with  white  and  black 
marble,  and  is  approached  through  a  lane  lined 
with  tinsel-shops  on  both  sides.  The  decorations 
and  the  ornaments  of  the  idols  here  are  of  the 
costliest  nature  and  the.  ways  and  bearing  of  the 
Mohunt,  the  guardian  of  the  temple,  quite  regal. 
A  small  house  behind  this  temple  is  said  to  have 
been  the  abode  of  Tulsi  Das;  there  is,  however, 
another  connected  with  his  name  near  the  Asi 
Ghat,    which    is    of  greater    importance. 

To  the  west  of  the  Gopal  Mandir  and  the 
north-east  extremity  of  the  Chaukhaniba  Gait — so 
called  from  a  building  here  supported  on  four  low 
massive  pillars — stands  an  ancient  mosque  with  a 
corridor  supported  upon  twenty-four  square  pillars 
of  peculiar  design  'probably  adapted  from  some 
older    Hindu    edifice.' 

Not    very    far    from    the    Gopal     Mandir,     as     you 

penetrate   the   narrow    lanes    where    sun-rays    seem    to 

come   down    quite   subdued,  appears  the 

Bhalronath     temple    of   Bhaironath — the     dreaded 

attendant    of    Siva, — considered     to     be  , 

the     personification    of   Siva's    anger   and     the  reputed 

guardian  of  Siva's   city,    whom    our    European  friends 

delight  in    styling  the    Spiritual  Magistrate  of  Benares, 

The   god    in   visible    representation   is    a  stout-looking 


VIII  SHRINES  ON  THE  NORTH  175 

image  in  black  marble  painted  deep  blue, — sometimes 
wearing  a  silver  mask  on  the  face, — with  a  dog 
beside  him  and  holding  a  massive  club  in  his 
hand.  This  temple  was  erected  by  the  Peshwa 
Baji  Rao  of  Poona,  nearly  a  century  now,  on  the 
site  of  the  old  temple  which  was  a  much  smaller 
one.  The  temple  looks  fine,  but  is  very  much 
cramped  for  space.  This  shrine  is  a  very  popular 
one  and  numbers  of  people  daily  visit  it.  Priests 
sit  upon  the  verandahs  to  purge  you  of  all  sins 
of  omission  and  commission  by  a  light  tap  of  the 
bunch  of  peacock  feathers  they  hold  in  their 
hands,  expecting  no  doubt  a  consideration  for  this 
act  of  merit  ;  and  it  is  interescing  to  observe  how 
eagerly  the  elderly  men  and  women  hold  up  their 
little  innocents  to  be  thus  cleansed  of  imaginary  sins  they 
have  not  yet  grown  old  enough  even  to  conceive  of. 
A  short  distance  to  the  east  along  the  road 
is     the     shrine     of    the     nine     planetary     gods, — the 

temple   of  Naugraha   or  Navagraha. 
Naugraha        It     has     a    small     room     and     through 

the  fretted  stone  screen  on  the  wall 
you  can  have  a  peep  at  them  lying  arranged  in 
a    row. 

Further     on,    lies     the    shrine     of   Dandapani — a 
thick    round    rod    of   stone    set    upright    and    standing 

about     four   or    five     feet    high    with    a 
Dandapani      silver      mask      at      the      top.     This      is 

considered  to  be  the  cudgel  with  which 
Bhaironath,     the   guardian     of    Siva''s     city     chastises 


176        THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)         chap. 

the  wrong-doers  who  have  the  misfortune  of  incurring 
his  displeasure.  Across  the  room  on  the  left  is 
the   noted    Kal    Kup   or   the    Well  of  Fate,   reputed 

to  presage  death  within  six  months 
Kal  Knp         to     those     who     do       not     see     their 

shadows  reflected  upon  its  water  at 
mid-day.  The  sun-rays  are  at  this  hour  admitted 
for  a  short  while  to  alight  upon  the  water 
through  a  curiously  cut  hole  upon  the  trellis-work 
near  the  top,  and  hence  the  mystification.  Within 
a  stone  enclosure  adjoining  the  Kal  Kup  is  what 
is  known  as  the  Pancha  Pandava  which  is  nothing 
but  five  Siva  emblems  lying  there  within  a  stone 
enclosure. 

Not  very  far  from  the  temple  of  Bhaironath  i*^ 
a   signboard    upon    the    threshold    of  a     small     house 

pointing  to  you  the  last  place  of 
Trailanga  Swami  abode      of      the      saintly    Paramhansa 

Trailanga  Swami  who  passed  away 
about  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago  at  a  fabulous 
old  age.  He  is  said  to  have  beea  born  at  Holia 
in  Vizianagram  in  the  year  1529  Sam  vat  of  a 
devout  Brahman  family  and  to  have  relinquished 
the  world  at  the  age  of  forty-eight  when  he  lost 
his  mother.  He  travelled  from  Rameswaram  to 
Tibet  and  Mansarowar  where  he  practised  Yoga, 
and  then  came  to  Benares.  He  stayed  near  the 
Dasaswamedh  Ghat,  ^nd  for  a  time  at  the  Asi 
and    Tulsi    ghats    as    well,   aid   at   la^t   btttlcd    duvai 


VIII  SHRINES  ON  THE  NORTH  177 


^^'NTvyv/W'V.'X/^/ 


here  in  this  Asram  (retreat)  above  the  Panchaganga 
Ghat.  He  was  profoundly  learned  and  has  left 
his  Sanskrit  work  'Mahavakva  Rainavali' ;  he  used 
to  talk  but  little  except  to  his  disciples  and  is 
said  to  have  wielded  miraculous  powers  and  saved 
many  persons  from  untiqaely  death  by  simjly 
touching  their  forehead  with  a  little  earth  from 
the  Ganges  when  they  had  apparently  been  given 
up    for   dead. 

Popular  tradition  runs  that  he  used  to  float 
upon  the  water  of  the  Ganges  seated  with  legs 
crossed  for  two  or  three  days  at  a  stretch  even 
in  the  depth  of  the  winter ;  and  that  on  one  such 
occasion  an  officer  of  the  Ramnagar  Raj  saw  him 
and  took  him  up  in  his  boat.  While  examining 
the  officer's  sword  the  Swami  inadvertently  dropped 
it  m  tiie  water  when  in  mid -stream.  The  former 
was  rather  annoyed  at  this^  whereupon  the  sage 
dipped  his  hands  into  the  water  and  brought  up 
three  swords  exactly  identical  with  the  one  he  had 
dropped.  As  the  officer  was  unable  to  pick  out 
his  own,  the  Swami  gave  him  one  and  threw  the 
other  two  into  the  water.  On  another  occasion,  a 
man  from  Serampore  then  living  at  Benares,  felt 
very  much  distressed  at  heart  without  any  apparent 
cause,  and  alarmed  at  the  premonition  approached 
the  sage,  v^-ho  closed  his  eyes  and  sat  meditafng  for  a 
few  minutes,  and  at  last  broke  the  news  to  him  that 
his  eldest  son  had    that   morning   succumbed  to  cholera 

12 — 


178  THE  HOL  V  CITY  (BENARES)        Cupl^. 


at  Serampore,  hundreds  of  miles  away, — which  came 
out  to  be  correct.  Mystical  as  things  like  these 
might  have  seemed  a  few  decades  before  and 
hard  for  any  but  the  most  easy  credulit)-  to  gulp 
down,  perhaps  in  these  days  of  psychic  researches 
and  latter-day  developments  of  occult  science  they 
would  be  viewed  in  a  different  light  and  take  a 
different  complexion. 

Trailanga  Swami's  was  a  towering  figure  in 
Benares  and  a  name  widely  known  and  respected 
throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  India  for  his 
wisdom,  learning  and  saintly  life.  The  sign-board 
above  the  threshold  leads  you  into  the  courtyard  of 
his  humble  retreat,  and  in  a  narrow  apartment 
under  a  low  roof  lies  his  statue  in  black  marble 
representing  him  seated  in  padmashan  with  legs 
crossed  as  he  used  to  sit  in  life  and  looking 
before  him  with  piercing  eyes.  His  own  string  of 
rudraksha  is  on  the  neck  of  the  figure,  and  his 
wooden  sandals  and  seat  and  old  books  have  been 
preserved  here  with  loving  care.  A  very  large 
Siva  emblem  lies  in  the  courtyard  and  an  image 
of  Kali  stands  behind  the  statue.  There  are  some 
stone  slabs  with  mystic  symbols  and  lotus  and 
chakra  (circle)  irt^ribed  upon  them,  and  one  of  them  is 
named  Ravi  Tarak  Yantra.  Hallowed  the  spot 
that   Was   the   abode    of  a  holy    man  ! 

Coming  now  to  the  road  leadinc;  to  Rajghat 
we     fisid     the     Machchhodari     Tirth—?^      .mall     tank 


VIII  SHRINES  ON  THE  NORTH  179 

of  oval  shape  in  a  large  compound  now  being 
converted  into  a  garden.  Near  to  it  is 
Kameswara  the  temple  of  KaMESWARA  Siva  with  an 
emblem  in  a  railed  cistern  and  another 
copper-plated  one  named  Dtirbasscswara  after  the 
Rishi  Durbasha  whose  image  is  in  the  adjoining 
temple  of  Naleswara  Siva.  The  temple  of 
Kameswara  is  a  very  old  one,  and  \\\  its  compound 
is  a  very  large  cluster  of  small  temples  on  all 
sides  filling  up  every  available  nook  Besides  the 
large  number  of  Siva  emblems  located  in  them, 
there  are  also  the  images  of  Rama  and  Sita, 
Narasinha,  Laksmi  and  Surya  Narain.  A  large 
peepul-tree  in  the  middle  of  the  small  courtyard 
with  its  gnarled  trunk  and  overspreading  branches 
and  a  few  tiny  birds  perching  and  frisking  upon 
them  in  the  noon-tide  sun,  and  the  subdued 
brightness  of  the  flitting  sun-rays  alightini;  through 
the  thick  rustling  foliage  upon  numbers  of  emblems 
and  images  grouped  around  it,  make  the  scene 
one   of  idyllic    restfulness. 

Proceeding  towards  the  north  through  a  quarter 
inhabited  mostly  by  Mahomedans  of  the  poorest 
class  we  come  to  the  small  isolated  temple  of 
SJwJm^esuHxya  Siva  with  a  well  in  front  of  it  in  the  quiet 

silence  of  the  neighbouring  fields.  Here 
Shoha^eswara    are      remains      of      sculptured       stones 

scattered  about,  and  numbers  of  them — 
probably  parts  of  friezes   of  some  building   with  carved 


i8o         THE  HOLY  CI  J  Y  {BENARES)         chap. 


figures  thereupon — lie  beside  a  peepul  tree  near 
the  temple.  This  is  not  very  far  from  the  Arhai 
Kanj:^ura  Mosque,  and  so  the  remains  may  relate 
to  those  of  the  Hindu  structures  that  were  used 
also  in  the  construction  of  that  mosque.  One  in- 
teresting object  here  is  the  large  stone  figure, 
evidently  of  V^ishnu,  partly  mutilated  but  still  showing 
enough  of  its  neat  execution.  To  the  left  a  little 
off  is  the  temple  of  Oinkareswara  Siva  upon  a 
slight  eminence  amidst  a  dense  growth  of  jungles 
extending  far  and  away.  Close  by  on  the  right 
is  a  ruined  old  well  which  is  pointed  out  as 
containing  a  very  large  lateral  cave  underneath 
and    a    passage    leading    to    regions    unknown. 

Back  southwards  to  the  Raj  Gliat  road^  we 
proceed  to  the  western  quarter  towards  the 
Municipal  Park  where  a  large  number 
Kirtibaseswara  of  ancient  temples  lie  close  to  one 
another.  The  first,  then,  is  the  old 
temple  of  Kirtibaseswara  to  the  right  upon  a 
slightly  rising  ground  with  a  small  garden  in  front 
and  a  small  tank  known  as  Hans  Tirtha  behind  it. 
This  temple  is  of  later  construction  and  its  former 
site  where  the  emblem  was  enshrined  was  at  the 
place  where  the  Alamgiri  mosque  now  stands.  Passing 
along  the  road  you  find  the  small  twin  temples 
of  Ratneswara  Siva  ^nd  Hanumanjiy  the  letter  contain 
ing  a  large  image  of  Hanuman,  and  both  standing  back 
to    back    and  almost    encroaching  upon  the  road   itself, 


MI  SflRLVZS  O.V  THE   NORTH  i8i 


,  -\y\/^^-\J^J%J\r\ 


A    few   paces    off  is  the  Alamgiri  MoSQUE  named 

after    Aurangzeb    who    is    reputed    to    have    caused    it 

to    be     erected    upon    the    remains    of  the    old  temple 

of     Kirtibaseswara     in    1659— as    would 

Alamgiri         appear   from    an     inscription   in    Arabic 

Mosque  to   the   effect  :  *'Turn  your   face  towards 

the  sacred  mosque.     1077    Hijira."     The 

massive   capitals    and    the    rows    of  lofty    pillars    with 

the     carvings    at     the   base,     pojnt    them     out   to     be 

materials   of  the   old  Hindu    temple  it    had    displaced. 

The     Rev.     Mr.    Sherring     ascribes     them     to      some 

date  five  or  six  centuries  back  and    they  are  interesting 

and   striking   as    fine   examples   of  the    Hindu   art. 

Somewhat     to     the    north-east   of  the     Municipal 

Park     stands   the     oldest    of  the     existing  temples     in 

j^cnares — that    of  Briddhakaleswara.     It    is  a  very 

plain    temple    with    a     couple   of  spires 

Briddtaa-         containing   the   emblem    within    a  stone 

kaleswara       cistern    a    little   below   the    level    of  the 

floor.     In   the   adjoining  compartment  is 

the     Omkareswara     Siva.      The   temple   is     famed   to 

have   been    in   existence   from    the  middle   Brahmanic 

period     between    the     thirteenth   and     the    fourteenth 

centuries     and    is     said    to   have     been   erected    by   a 

Raja     of  Nandibardhan     m   Southern     India     named 

Briddhakal    and    to    have    formerly   possessed    a  dozen 

separate     courts.     The     important     one   among    them 

in     existence   at    present    is     where   a   small     circular 

tank    of    foul    water     about     two   yards     in    diameter 

lies   in    the   middle.     It  goes   by  the   name   of  Amrita 


icS2         THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)         Chap. 


Kup,  and  its  water  is  supposed  to  be  efficacious 
in  curing  various  skin-diseases.  Close  by  lies  another 
well  with  water  fit  to  drink,  and  to  the  north  of 
it  in  another  court  approached  through  a  narrow 
corridor  and  enclosed  by  old  walls  are  the  temples 
of  Marke7tdes%i^ara  and  Dakskeswara  Sivas  said 
to  have  been  established  by  Rishi  Markendeya 
and  Daksha  Prajapati.  The  whole  is,  however,  in 
a  ver}^  neglected  and  woe-begone  condition  and 
overgrown  with  weeds.  A  little  to  the  west  of  the 
temple  of  Briddhakaleswara  is  the  temple  of 
Alpamriteswara^   also   known   as   Mrityunjaya    Siva. 

Further  off  to  the  west  and  on  the  western 
side    of    the     Municipal      Park     is     the     temple     of 

Bara  Ganesha  standing  upon  a  high 
Bara  Ganesha     terrace   above     the   level   of  the     street 

where  stands  a  beautifully  carved 
Sati  stone  with  a  pair  of  quaint  youthful  figures 
in  a  standing  posture.  This  temple  locates  a  very 
large  image  of  the  elephant-headed  god  painted 
deep  vermilion  with  silver  hands  and  feet. 
Worshipped  at  the  commencement  of  all  ceremonies 
and  believed  to  bring  every  undertaking  to  a 
successful  issue,  the  fane  of  this  god  is  approached 
by  numbers  of  people  on  all  occasions.  A  rather 
g-iant  of  a  rat,  also  painted  red  and  of  the  size  of 
a  full-grown  dog,  stands  in  the  verandah  in  front. 
This  temple  is  said  to  have  been  erected  about 
seventy   years    ago>   but   the   image  is  many  centuries 


VIII  SHRINES  ON  THE  AORTH  183 

old.'*      Adjoining     this   is     the   temple   of    Hanuman 
and    at   some   distance   is   that   oi  Jagannath. 

We   next    pass   on    to    the     temple   of  Jageswara^ 

the    Lord   of  Sacrifices,  lying  towards  the   north-west 

The     emblem    here    is     a   large     round 

Jageswara       tall     piece   of    black     stone,   so    called 

from     its   origin   in     course   of  a   great 

sacrifice.     It    is   of  great   sanctity   and    held     in .  high 

esteem,   and    people   of  all    classes   great   and     small 

frequent    the     shrine    in     numbers.     Close     to   this   is 

the   large   Iswarganji    Tank.  :.        .••... 

The   temple   of  Kasi  Devi,   the   tutelary   deity   of 

Benares,    is   also   very   near   and    is    considfired    to  be 

the    Central  Spot    of    Benares.     A    few 

Kasi  Devi       steps   off    are   the    Karrmghanta     Talao 

with     its    stone     stairs   leading    to     the 

water   below  and  the   temple  of  Veda  Vyas  containing 

his     image     upon     its    southern     bank.     A     little    to 

the    north     of    the     temple     of  Kasi    Devi   lies    one 

containing     the   image     known     as    Bhut-Bhairo^  and 

near   to   it  is   the   large  Jyestheswara   Siva. 

<i)  In  this  connection  it  may  be  interesting  to  note  that 
the  ceiebrated  traveller  Alexander  Von  Humboldt  came 
;across  an  old  Mexican  painting  when  he  was  in 
America  representing  the  head  of  an  elephant  on  the 
body  of  a  man,  which  made  him  remark  :  'it  present£ 
some  remarkable  and  apparently  not  accidental 
resemblances   with   the   Hindu   Ganesh.' 


1 34        TH2  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)       Chap. 

Advancing     further      northward     we     catch     sight 

or    the     temple     of    Bageswari.        The     goddess     is 

seated  upon   a   crouching    lion    and  her 

Ba^eswari  silver  face  only  is  visible,  the  rest  of 
her  body  being  covered  by  a  profusion 
of  garlands.  A  number  of  Brahmans  here  sit 
f5:itia_^  M mtras  in  praise  of  the  goddess,  and  a 
large  white  lion  of  stone  presented  by  Raja  Lai 
Bahadur  Singh  of  Ahmety  frowns  in  front  in  the 
quadrangle.  There  are  images  of  Rama,  Laksmana, 
and  Sita  as  well  in  this  temple.  Very  close 
to  this  lie  the  temples  of  Jwarahares'wara  and 
Siddheswara    Sivas. 

A  short  distance  off  is  the  Nag  Kua,  or  the 
Serpents'    Welly     in  the     quarter     bearing     its     name 

and  considered  to  be  the  oldest 
Na^  Kua        historical  place   in  Benares.     The  stones 

used  in  the  well  are  supposed  to 
show  marks  of  great  antiquity,  and  a  Raja  is 
reputed  to  have  repaired  the  well  in  Sam  vat  1825, 
The  bottom  of  the  v/ell  is  reached  by  a  series  of 
steep  stone  stairs  ver)^  solid  in  make  ;  and  there 
are  three  serpents  carved  in  a  niche  in  the  weil 
and  a   Siva  emblem. 

Here,   perhaps,   we  have  reached  the  northernmost 

point     of     Benares     containing     Hindu 

Kapildltara      shrines    and    temples.      There     is     one 

other      some      distance      off      on      the 

north     of    the  Barana     known     as   KnpHa     Tirtha  or 


VIII  SHRINES  ON  THE  NORTH  185 

Kapildhara  situate  on  the  Panchkoshi  Road 
limiting  the  sacred  ten-mile  radius  of  Benares. 
The  legend  connected  with  this  holy  tank  runs  to 
the  effect  that  five  cows  came  down  from  Golok, 
the  abode  of  Vishnu,  after  Siva  had  returned  to 
Kasi  from  the  Mandara  mountains.  And  as  he 
cast  upon  them  his  kindly  look,  milk  began  to 
from  flow  their  udder  in  copious  squirts  and  thus 
came  a  pool  into  existence,  now  transformed  into  this 
tank   of  sweet   water   in   this  Kali  age. 


(3) 
On  the  South 


OW  with  our  pilgrimage  to  the  southern 

quarter.     Bending   our   steps     towards 

!>Xi^i'^l  t^Wmi        ^^"    south-west   and    passing   close    by 

^feP^M^^P^        ^^^^    Queen's    College,    we     soon     have 

a  glimpse  of  the  spacious 
Pisach  Mochan  grounds  of  the  residence 
of  the  Maharaja  of 
Hutwa  on  the  western  part  of  the 
Behind  it  lies  the  PiSACH  MoCHAN  tank— a 
expanse  of  clear  water — famous  as  the  site 
where  Bhaironath  had  decapitated  a  pisach  (demon) 
who  had  attempted  to  effect  a  forcible  entry  into  Kasi. 
When  the  head,  which  had  retained  its  animation 
and  had  not  lost  its  power  of  speech,  was  presented 
before  Visweswara  it  prayed  that  it  should  be  allowed 
to  stay  at  Kasi  and  that  pilgrims  to  Gaya  should 
be  enjoined  to  visit  this  tank — into  which  Bhaironath 
was  to  throw  the  head — before  starting  on  their 
journey.  Both  these  prayers  Visweswara  was  gracious 
enough  to  grant,  and  hence  arose  the  sanctity  of 
this  place.  A  few  small  temples  stand  on  the  bank, 
one  of  which  h?»d  been  erected  by  the  famous 
Mira  Bai,  the  Queen  poetess  of  Udaipur,   who  according 


0) 

a; 

{-L 

s 

H 

^ 

Tl 

c 

03 

aJ 

-O 

C 

2 

rt 

^ 

ffl 

.— 

rt 

c 

bO 

rt 

D 

»< 

a 

vO 

CO 

u 

(U 

OJ 

^ 

D. 

C/J 

H 

ID 

Si 

03 

>. 

c 

(U 

pa 

fc 

.  03 

I  ^  . 

ii  ^  4= 

C  3  u 

5  c  o 

ns  o3  a, 

^  ^  - 

03  03  C 


S  >  a 


F.  1 86 


SHRINES  ON  THE  SOUTH  187 


N/N.'NyX/V/V  ■ 


to  the  Vaishnava  work  ''  Bhaktamdla^'  had  to  leave 
her  royal  palace  as  she  would  not  abandon  the 
worship  of  Krishna.  There  are  a  number  of  images 
of  various  gods  and  with  them  in  an  open  verandah 
is  the  large  stone  head  representing  the  pisach  in 
question. 

As  we  emerge  into  the  high-road  a  dozen 
men  in  an  orderly  line  —  sojourners  evidently  from 
a  great  distance — precede  us  bearing  straw  baskets 
slung  from  poles  upon  their  shoulders  with  small 
red  pennons  flying  above  them.  With  great  care  are 
they  carrying  the  sacred  water  from  the  source  of 
the  Ganges,  wh'ch  they  have  brought  from  distant 
Hurdwar  in  the  Himalayas  with  the  object  of 
bathing  the  great  god  Visweswara  therewith.  Further 
to   the     south    is   the     large    tank   with     stone     stairs 

known     as    PiTRl      KuND     with     three 

Pitrl  Kund  and  Siva   temples   on   the    north   bank,    and 

Matri  Kund       a    little     to     the    west   is     the     Matri 

Kund  so  called  on  account  of  the 
oblations  offered  here  to  the  manes  of  the  paternal 
and  maternal  ancestors.  The  latter  is  of  an  irregular 
shape  and  is  in  an  exceedingly  bad  condition  being 
almost  filled  up  with  refuse  on  one  side  and  thus 
reduced    to   a   very   small   pool    of  very    foul    water. 

Further  south  still  is  the  SURAJ  KUND  with  a 
small  temple  erected  by  the  Raja  of  Kota  Bundi 
and  dedicated  to  the  sun-god  containing  the  symbolic 


i8S  THE  HOL  V  CITY  {BE.VARES)        CfiAP. 


image   of  Surya  Nafain.'^    This   shrine   is   also   called 

the      Sambaditya      Temple     as    having 

SuraJ  Kund       been  built  by  the  mythical  prince  Samba 

who     is     reputed    to    have    also   erected 

the     wonderful      Sun-temple   at    Kanarak    in  Orissa — 

(i)  Though  this  is  the  solitary  temple  at  Benares  set 
apart  for  the  worship  of  the  Sun,  still  the  Sun  is  daily 
invoked  by  every  Hindu,  even  allegorically  in  reciting  the 
sacred  Gayatri.  It  may  not  thus  be  out  of  place  to  quote 
what  Prescott  in  his  flowing  language  wrote  in  his  'Conquest 
of  Peru'  regarding  Sun-worship  in  that  portion  of  the  globe 
in  the  most  ancient  times  :  "The  most  renowned  of  the 
Peruvian  temples,  the  pride  of  the  capital,  and  the  wonder  of  the 
ein[)ire,  was  at  Cuzco  .  .  .  The  interior  of  the  temple  was 
the  most  worthy  of  admiration.  It  was  totally  a  mine  of  gold. 
On  the  western  wall  was  emblazoned  a  representation  of  the 
deity,  consisting  of  a  human  countenance,  looking  forth  amidst 
innumerable  rays  of  li^ht,  which  emanated  from  it  in  every 
direction,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  sun  is  often  personified 
with  us.  The  figure  was  engraved  on  a  massive  plate  of  gold, 
of  enormous  dimensions,  thickly  powdered  with  emeralds  and 
precious  stones.  It  was  so  situated  in  front  of  the  great 
eastern  portal  that  the  rays  of  the  morning  sun  fell  directly 
upon  it,  and  at  its  rising,  lighted  up  the  whole  of  the 
apartment  with  an  effulgence  that  seemed  more  than  natural, 
and  which  was  reflected  back  from  the  golden  ornaments 
with  which  the  walls  and  ceiling  were  incrusted.  Gold,  in  the 
figurative  language  of  the  people,  was  the  tears  wept  by  the 
sun,  and  every  part  of  the  interior  of  the  temple  glowed  with 
burnished  plates  and  studs  of  the  precious  metals.  The  cornices 
which  surrounded  the  walls  of  the  sanctuary  were  of  the  same 
costly  material,  and  a  broad  belt  of  gold  work  let  into  the  stone 
work,  encompassed  the  whole  interior  of  the  edifice," 


VIII  SHRINES  ON  THE  SOUTH  189 


'  yj'\j'\y\.^y  yv/^.' 


,'^_'*^  '\/\y\yK/'\. 


still  a  marvel  of  the  sculptor's  art.  A  mutilated 
figure,  Ashtanga  Bhairab,  is  in  another  temple  near  to 
it,  and    at  a    little   distance   is   the   Dhrubeswara    Siva, 

Next,    on      the    north     of    the     read     leading     to 
Dasasvvamedh     ghat,  lies   the    Laksmi  Klkd,   a   large 

tank     of  good    clear   water   with    paved 
Laksmi  Kund    banks    and    with      stairs     running    from 

the  middle  of  each  of  them.  On 
the  north  bank  is  the  temple  of  Mahalaksmi , 
in  which  are  the  images  of  Laksmi  with  a 
golden  face  and  of  Mahakali  and  Saraswati  on  the 
two  sides  and  Laksvit  Vznayak  Ganesh  in  a  niche  in 
the  wall.  As  )'ou  pass  through  the  close  narrow  lane 
and  emerge  in  sight  of  the  large  expanse  of  clear 
water  bounded  b}'  the  paved  banks,  the  whole 
scene  smiles  as  it  were  with  its  sunlit  brightness 
and  there  is  a  pleasant  sense  of  welcome  relief 
after    the  dust    and    dirt   of  the   winding   streets. 

Past    the   borders     of  the   quarters     of   the    Theo* 
sophical    Society,  we   now  turn  westwards.     Very  calm 
and    quiet,   and  interspersed    with    numbers  of  gardens 
and    sparse     habitations     is    this    retired    quarter.     To 
the    south    of  the  road    a  little   into  the 
Sankaraclrarya   interior     lies     the     piuth    of    the    great 
Sankaracharva  erected  by   the  Maha- 
raja    of  Nepal    in     the    midst   of    a    large   garden    of 
plums     and    guavas     whose     drooping     branches     arp 
holding   forth    bunches   pf  bright   tepipting   fruits. 


190        THE  HOLY  CITY  (BEWARES)         chap. 

Born  at  Kalpi  in  Kefala  or  the  Malabar  District 
in  Southern  India  of  a  family  of  Nambudri  Brahmans 
this  great  champion  of  Vedantism  and  Advaitism 
had  become  a  Sannyasin  on  the  anniversary  of 
his  ninth  birth-day;  but  unlike  Buddha  who  slipped 
away  unseen  in  the  depth  of  night,  he  relinquished 
the  world  after  taking  leave  of  his  mother  and 
persuading  her  to  permit  him  to  do  so.  When 
only  twelve,  he  commenced  writing  his  famous 
Commentaries  upon  Sfeemadvagavat  Geeta  and  the 
Upanishads  and  other  works  which  have  been  the 
marvel  of  all  ages  as  intellectual  achievments  of 
the  very  highest  order.  The  precocity  of  his  master- 
intellect  unparalleled  in  the  history  of  the  world 
was  almost  supernatural,  and  we  have  the  wonderful 
spectacle  of  the  vast  mass  of  his  philosophical 
writings  being  completed  by  his  sixteenth  year. 
At  the  very  young  age  of  thirty-two  he  obtained 
his  final  emancipation  at  Kedarnath  in  the  Himalayas, 
and  in  course  of  this  brief  span  of  eternal  time 
alloted  to  him  he  had  travelled  all  over  India  and 
established  the  order  of  the  Dasnami  Sannyasis 
(  the  ten  sects  )  and  founded  four  imiths — the 
Sringeri  in  Mysore,  the  Gobardhan  at  Puri  in  Orissa, 
the  Sarada  at  Dwarika  in  Kathiwar,  and  the  Jos  hi 
at  Bddrinath  in  the  Himalayas, — placing  four  of 
his  disciples  at  their  heads.  The  first  three  have 
still  retained  their  ancient  glory,  and  the  one  in 
Southern     India  going     by     the     name   of    Sringeri 


VIII  SMRINES  ON  THE  SOUTH  191 


\/^X'^^^./^y\ 


muth  ^  at  the  source  of  the  Tungabhadra  in  the 
Kadur  district  of  Mysore  with  an  estate  of  Rs  45,000 
a  year,  is  the  most  famous  at  the  present  time. 
The  most  learned  among  his  disciples,  Mandana, 
was  placed  at  its  head  and  a  temple  dedicated  to 
the  Goddess  of  Learning,  Saraswati,  was  erected 
by  Sankara  and  under  the  name  of  Sarada  the 
Goddess  is  still  the  presiding  deity  of  this  muth. 
It  is  the  residence  of  the  head  of  the  order  who 
adopts  the  name  'Sri  JagatgUru  Saitkarachary a*  and 
is   accepted    as    the    religious    head    of   Hindu    India. 

This  temple  in  Benares  contains  a  very  beautiful 
white  marble  statue  of  this  regenerator  of  Hinduism 
(Plate  IV,  2)  in  a  sitting  posture  with  his  dcxnda  (rod) 
and  kania)ida!u  (Water-pot)  — symbolic  of  the  order  of 
the  Dandis  to  which  he  belonged— lying  oy  his  side. 
A  calm  and  placid  expression  and  an  air  of  grace 
sit  upon  the  )'outhful  face  and  eyes.  Far  away  from 
all  noise  and  bustle  of  the  city,  this  is  indeed  a 
veritable  retreat  for  calm  and  quiet  contemplation 
and  reminds  one  of  the  beautiful  lines  of  old 
Chaucer: 

"  Wav'ring  as  winds  the  breath  of  fortune  blows, 
No  power  can  turn  it,  no  prayer  compose. 
Deep  in  some   hermit's  solitary  cell, 
Repose  and  ease  and  contemplation  dwell." 

(Modernised). 

(i)  A  portion  of  it  was  lately  destroyed  by  a  disastrous  fire 
on  the  2Sth  February  19 ii  with  a  number  of  exquisitely  carved 
ancient  pillars. 


192        THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)        Chap. 

Towards  the  south-east  the  small  shrines  of 
Batiik  Bhairab,  Kawachchha  Devi,  and  Baidyanath  Siva 
are  passed  in  quick  succession  along  the  winding 
lanes.  This  last  has  a  temple  with  fine  carved  stone 
pillars  and  mythological  engravings  upon  the  walls. 
A  little  further  off  is  Bhutnath — one  of  the  very  few 
full-bodied  images  of  Siva  in  Benares.  Most  of  these 
temples  have  atithisalas  for  sheltering  pilgrims 
attached  to  them,  and  all  of  them  lie  to  the  south- 
west  of  the   Central    Hindu    College. 

A  little  way  off,  to  the  south  of  the  Bhelupura 
Waterworks  is  a  fine  large  tank  known  as  Sankudhara 

also  called  the  Dwnraka  Tirtha,  because 
Sankudhara       of  the    tradition     that     Krishna      killed 

the  demon  Sankasura  here.  Upon 
a  rising  ground  on  the  east  is  a  large  Vaishnavite 
vmth  of  the  followers  of  Ramanand  and  Ramanuja 
Swami  containing  a  large  image  of  Krishna  styled 
Divarakadhiswara  and  several  other  smaller  ones. 
The  same  temple  also  locates  the  image  of  Hanumanji. 
But  the  most  interesting  object  here  is  the  large 
piece  of  black  sculptured  stone  standing  \\\  the 
veranda  to  the  left  of  the  doorway  of  a  small 
temple  of  Siva  just  over  the  eastern  bank  of  the 
tank  (Plate  XI.  4\  A  finely  cut  and  elaborately  deco- 
rated image  of  the  four-armed  Vishnu  known  as 
Tribakra  Narayan  or  Laksnii  Narayan  stands  in  the 
centre  of  a  group  consisting  of  a  couple  of  female 
figurps     standing    on    either   side,  and    a   pan   and    4 


VI I r  SHRINES  ON  THE  SOUTH  193 


vvomin  posed  at  the  further  ends  in  the  attitude  of 
prayer.  A.  few  smaller  figures  with  .palms  joined 
together  sit  below  upon  the  pedestal.  Three  arms 
of  the  central  figure  are  broken  or  mutilated,  but 
it  is  still  a  fine  example  of  the  Hindu  art.  It  is  report- 
ed to  have  been  found  in  the  bed  of  the  Ganges 
by  a  former  Mohunt  of  the  Vaishnavite  muth  and 
placed  here  in  this  temple.  This  resembles  the 
fine  standing  figure  of  Vishnu  with  four  arms  found 
by  General  Cunningham  at  Devathala  or  Devasthah 
on  the  road  to  Dinajpur,  15  miles  to  the  north  of 
Paridua.  ^ 

Eastwards   hence   to   the  large   shady   grove    in  the 
middle   of  which    stands    a   two-storied    building   con- 
taining    the      images     of    Radha     and 
Gurudham       Krishna — known  as  Giirudhmn  connected 
with    the  memory   of   Raja   Joy    Narain 
Gliosal-  and    owned    by   the    Raj    family  of  Bhukailas 
of  Calcutta.     The     approach    to   the   house   from   the 
road     is    a     fine     long   walk     through   an    avenue   of 
shady   trees.     At  a    short   distance   from    this   is  what 
is   known    as   Menaka   Bart, 

Next    comes      the     beautiful     temple   of    KUMAR- 

ESWARA     Siva    containirg    a    number 

Kumareswara    of  very  fine   artistically  worked  statues 

Siva  of    various     gods     and     goddesses,     all 

in   pure  white  marble,  ranged  along  the 

inner     walls.     In    an    adjoining   chamber  is   a  beautiful 

(i)   See  Plate   XXVI T,     Cunningham's    Arclxseological   Survey 
Reports,  Vol.  XV  ( 187^.80  ),  ■ 

13— 


194  THE  HOL  V  CITY  (IllLVARES)        CHAP; 


white  marble  statue  of  Swami  Bhaskaranand,  perhaps? 
the  best  one  in  Benares.  In  rem ^m 'trance  of  the 
good  the  Swami  had  don^  her,  the  Rani  of  Barahar 
in  Southern  India  made  him  an  offering  of  a  hikh 
and  a  half  of  rupees,  add  017  his  refusal  to  accept 
the  same,  she  caused  this  f^ne  temple  and  the  ad-- 
joining  atithisala  for  pilg:rims  to  be  erected  in 
response   to   his  wishes. 

Now     into   a     narrow    laiie    and     throttgh    a    \o\v^ 
♦md     tortuous     pathway     inside    a     large     greenwood 
till    we   arrive   at    the  temple   of  ^an/cai 
S&nkat  Mochan   Mochan  (deliverer  from   danger),   a  name 
applied  to  the  monkey-god  Hanuman  foi' 
the  very  substantial  help  he  bad  rendered  to  Rama  in  his 
troubles.   Ho^ry  peepuls    overhung  with  thick  clustering 
creepers     dangHng     from    their     branches    overshadow 
the     locality  ;     on     the    left     appear.*^   the     temple    of 
Hanuman    with    an    image    of  large   proportions^     and 
©n    the    right  another   with  images-  of  Rama,  Lak.^mana 
and    Sita.     The    inner   walls     and    the   ceiling   of  this 
latter   one  are    literally   covered    over   xvith    brilliantly 
coloured    scenes    from     Rama's    life     and    mythological 
pictures   of  the   ten  Avatars    and    the  ten    Mahavid)'a/*;y 
iiiparting    a    very    gorgeous     look    to    it.     The    im?lge 
©f   Hanuman    is    said    to    have    been   established    hei>; 
■  by     Tulsi    Das^     whose    own     statue    is     pointed     out 
testing      upon    a     lotus-shaped     marble-slj.b     under   a 
round    canopy    beliind    this    temple.    Though  in    a  very 
Included    nook  and  far  away  from  the  public  thorough- 
fare^ it  is  rxBe  the  less  popular  an€l  largely  visited. 


VI 11  SHRINES  ON  THE  AORTH  195 

Back  to  the  broad  road,  and  after  a  visit  to  the 
Rani  of  Barahar\s  fine  temple  (  Plate  XI,  6  )  ofSita, 
Rama  and  Laksmi  Namyan,  we  approach  the  DURGA 
KUNI)  and  the  famous  TEMPLE  OF  DURGA  by  its 
side.  Amid  a  dense  conglomeration 
Temple  of  of  fine  f^old-tipped  cupolas  symmetrically 
Durga  arranged,  the  lofty  steeple  of  the 
temple  surmounted  by  a  golden  trideiTt 
rises  high  in  a  very  pleasant  manner.  The  temple 
and  the  fine  tank  (  Plate  XI,  3  )  with  runninL;. 
stairs  and  monkeys  sporting  upon  them  are  both 
of  them  gifts  of  Rani  Bhawani,  the  widow  o\ 
Maharaja  Ramkant-a  of  Nattore  in  Bengal.  The 
temple  is  in  the  quadi-angle  and  is  much  visited 
by  pilgrims,  and  is  next  in  importance  only  to 
those  of  Artiiapurna  and  Visweswiara.  This  in  all 
Benares  is  the  only  shrine  where  sacrifices  are 
offered,  and  there  is  none  other  where  slaughter, 
in  any  shape  takes  place,  A  tail  pillar  with  the 
figure  of  a  Hon  upon  the  top  stands  in  front  of 
the  temple,  and  covered  verandahs  running  all  round 
afford  shelter  to  pilgrims  and  devotees.  Finely 
sculptured  bas-reliefs  decorate  the  temple  aii4  its 
arches,  and  a  number  of  beautifully  carved  ]Mllars 
line  the  porch  (Plate  XI, /},  t^e  iloor  of  \d3id1 
is  inlaid  with  black  and  white  marble.  It  has  also 
acquired  the  name  of  the  Monkey  Temple  on  account 
of  its  being  infested  with  monkeys — quite  a  number 
of  families  with  little  sucklings  holding  fast  to 
the   older   ones  as   the   latter  skip  from   place  to  ]>lac.e. 


tq6        the  holy  city  (BENARES)  chap. 


They  keep  to  the  traditions  of  their  race  for  froh'c 
and  mischief  and  are  not  in  the  least  disinch'ned 
to  accept  your  bount}-  in  the  shape  of  anything 
eatable  }'ou  may  like  to  favor  them  with.  As  you 
hold  out  your  hand  with  a  few  g-rains  of  pulse  in 
}'Our  open  palm,  up  scampers  a  big  fellow,  catches 
hold  of  it  with  one  hand  and  with  the  fingers  of 
the  other  picks  them  up  and  throws  them  deftly 
into  his  mouth  till  the  side-pouches  fill  and  bloat 
out,  and  then  leaves  }'ou  without  any  sign  of  offering 
the  poorest  of  thanks  for  the  treat,  and  walks 
av^'ay  munching  and  munching  and  poking  tl\e 
grains  out  from  beneath  the  jaws  with  the 
finger-tips. 

To    the    east    of  the   temple   of   Durga    lies     Rani 
Bliawani's    square    tank     Kunikshctra    Talao   and    'the 
Ananda     Bag   garden      formerly     belonging     to      the 
Marhdtta    Chief   Amritalal    Feshwa.     This    latter  after- 
wards    passed    into     the   hands    of  the 
Biiaskaranand    British   and    was   sold    after   the   Sepoy 
Mutiny    to  the  Raja    of   Ahmet}-.     This 
is     the     famous     osravt    or     retreat      of    the     saintl}- 
Paravihansa     SWAMI       Bhaskaranand    SakasWATI, 
the   glory    of    Benares    and    held    in    high    esteem    not 
only     in    India     but    also    m    Europe     and    America. 
On     account    of    his   vast     erudition    and     piety     his 
name     had   attained     such    wide     celebrity   that   most 
o-f  the   eminent   visitors   to   this   city — even    from    the 
most  distant  and    out-of-the-way  corners   of  the   world 


Vlir  SHRINES  ON  THE  SOUTH  197 

like  New  Zealand,  Iceland  and  China,  not  to  speak 
of  almost  all  parts  of  the  far-off  Europe — came  to 
see  him  under  his  humble  roof  at  this  place  ;  and 
the  present  Czar  of  all  the  Russias  while  visiting 
India  as  the  Czarevitch  in  1890  reckoned  himself 
amongst  the  number  of  his  visitors.  He  was  a 
Kanouj  Brahman  born  in  A.  D.1833  at  Maithilalpur 
in  the  Cawnpur  district,  and  even  from  his  childhood 
a  supreme  indifference  to  all  worldly  concerns 
characterised  all  his  actions.  His  loving  parents 
anticipating  the  bent  of  his  mind  got  him  married 
and  attempted  to  bind  him  down  to  his  home 
by  ties  of  love  and  affection  ;  but  he  s<3on 
tore  himself  away — even  on  the  very  night"  his 
only  child  was  born — like  the  great  Buddha,  and 
renounced  the  world  and  plunged  into  the  diepths 
of  the  night  all  alone  though  he  was  but  eighteen 
at  the  time.  He  became  an  ascetic  and  entered 
the  order  of  Sannyasis  when  he  was  twenty- seven, 
and  travelled  all  over  India  on  foot  for  thirteen 
years.  On  his  arrival  at  Benares,  upon  the  earnest 
entreaty  of  Raja  Lai  Madhav  Singh  of  Ahitiety, 
he  consented  to  reside  in  this  garden  and  lived 
liere  for  twenty-six  years  till  he  passed  away  in 
samadki  ^  in  1899.  He  left  an  invaluable  work  in 
Sanskrit,   ' Sivardjya    Shiddhi   Nayakd. 

(i)  "Samadhi  js  the  state  in  which  the  ascetic  loses  the 
consciousness  of  every  individuahty,  including  his  own.  He 
becomes   the   All  ". — H.    P.     Blavatsky's  *'  Voice  of  Silence  ". 


193         THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)         Chap. 

In  this  quiet  quarter  and  far  away  from  all 
bustle  and  comn:>otion  of  the  cit>\  the  holy  man 
lived  amidst  the  peaceful  surroundings  of  this  garden. 
A  statue  in  white  marble  faithful  to  his  emaciated 
frame  rests  in  a  small  house  for  the  present  and 
awaits  removal  to  the  beautiful  mausoleum  of  milk- 
white  marble  (  Plate  XI,  i  )  with  a  fine  dome  and 
gilt  spires  in  the  centre  of  the  compound  erected 
upon  the  spot  where  he  had  been  buried.  Inside 
the  silver  doors  is  a  marble  vcdi  (  altar  )  beneath 
v/hich  lie  his  remains,  and  behind  a  screen  of 
fretted  white  marble  is  the  room  set  apart  for  the 
location  of  the  statue.  An  air  of  peace  and  purit>" 
soothes  the  mind  as  you  rest  here  for  a  while 
and  look  upon  this  most  handsome  ancl  artistic 
marble  edifice  that  cost  about  a  lakh  and  a  quarter 
and  is  perhaps  the  only  one  of  white  marble  of 
note  m  Benares  with  the  exception  of  the  small 
temple  of  Saras waii  in  the  Central  Hindu  CoUege 
(Plate  III.  I  ). 

Bhaskaranand  used  usually  to  lie  immersed  in 
devotion  in  some  underground  cell  inside  the 
building  and  his  orders  on  such  occasions  were  to 
let  in  none  into  the  garden.  It  is  said  that  a 
powerful  Indian  prince  once  went  to  see  him,  and 
finding  the  gate  closed  and  wo*ild  not  be  opened 
at  his  bidding,  had  it  forced  open  and  entered 
tlie  ho'vver  of  Ketaki  flowers  where  Bhaskaranand 
was     at     the     time.       Here     he   found     what    koked 


Vni  SHRLYES  ON  THE  SOUTH  199 


\j\.r\r\j\.^r\^s_r^r  /^  ^-  /^  '^.''v'N.'V^jfv/-v/\'V/"L 


like  a  couple  of  lifeless  bodies — lying  stretched  full 
length  upon  the  ground — of  Bhaskaranand  and 
Trailanga  Swami,  the  latter  having  been  there  on 
a  visit  to  him.  He  waited  for  a  time,  but  there 
was  no  sign  of  animation,  and  then  he  touched 
the  body  of  the  latter.  At  once  as  if  oy  an 
electric  thrill  passing  through  the  frames  of  both, 
they  began  to  breathe  heavily,  woke  up  and  rose 
to  their  feet,  and  looked  at  him  with  eyes  of  fire, 
so  angered  they  seemed  at  this  intrusion.  The 
Raja  fled  before  them  in  fear,  but  could  not  proceed 
farther  than  a  few  steps,  fell  down  senseless  and 
thus  he  lay  for  fully  half  a  day  !  On  another 
occasion  while  expounding  the  falsity  and  illusory 
nature  of  all  earthly  objects  to  Sir  Romesh  Chander 
Mitter,  the  late  Judge  of  the  Calcutta  High  Court, 
he  is  said  to  have  vanished  away  thrice  into  the 
air  even  as  he  sat,  thus  giving  a  practical  exposition 
of  what  he  had  been  saying  j  Such  are  a  couple 
of  anecdotes  out  of  numbers  connected  with  his 
name.  VV^hether  high  development  of  occult  powers 
makes  miraculous  actions  possible  is  not  a  subject 
we  can  just  now  pause  to  consider.  Trailanga 
Swami  had  also  been  reputed  to  have  similar 
powers,  and  with  another  holy  personage,  Visuddhanand 
Saraswati — the  trio  formed  the  last  connecting 
link  with  the  age  of  the  ancient  Rishis  and 
were  the  veritable  landmarks  of  Benares,  whose 
abodes  were  as  much  frequented  and  held  in  sanctity 
as   any    temple   here. 


200  THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES)        chap 


'■>^'W'^  .'■\/'\/' V  ^yW^.^  V  v-' V>'Vr  v/ V^vr>  y 


From  here  to  the  Jagannath  Temple  is  not 
a  very  far  cry,  and  with  it  you  reach  the  point 
in  the  farthest  south  of  this  city 
Jagannath  where  all  temples  end.  Calm,  cool 
and  quiet  is  the  large  compound  of 
this  solitary  temple  standing  by  the  side  of  the 
Asi  streamlet.  A  long  shaded  walk  along  the  outer 
court  brings  you  in  front  of  a  large  bell  suspended 
a  little  way  off  from  the  low  gateway  of  the 
temple.  Inside  stand  Ja^annath  and  Balabhadva 
with  Shubhadra  between  them  even  as  they  are 
represented  at  Puri.  In  the  four  corners  of  the 
court  are  the  images  of  Krishna  pla)'ing  upon  a 
flute,  of  Krishna  seated  upon  the  hood  of  the 
serpent  overpowering  the  Kalia  Nag,  of  Rama  and 
Sita   gorgeously   decked,    and   of  Laksmi   Narain. 

In      another      temple      just      at      the      back      is 

the     gigantic      white      figure     of      the      lion-mouthed 

Nara-Sinha^      the       avatar     oi     Vishnu 

Nara-Sinha      who    killed     the     dreaded      Demon-king 

Hiranyakasipu    to  save  his  son  Prahlad. 

This     young     prince     had     turned     a   worshipper     of 

Krishna     against     his   father's     will  and    had      at    his 

bidding     been    thrown     into     the   fire    and     the     sea 

and     under    the     feet    of  an     elephant    as   well,    but 

had    every   time     come   out   unscathed.     Fabulous    no 

doubt     all     this     reads  ;     but     fire-w^alking     has    been 

exhibited    with    success    in     course     of    the     last     few 

years,   and     anent     this     last     elephant    incident,    the 


VIII  Sf/i'ZLVES  ON  TII2  SOUTH  201 

achievements  of  a  present-day  youth  of  Vizianagram 
tend  to  foster  the  belief  that  though  much  mixed 
up  with  poetical  exaggeration  all  the  recitals  in 
the  Puranas  are  not  always  absolute  myth.  The 
youngest  among  three  brothers  and  only  twenty- 
nine  and  every  inch  of  him  a  remarkably  well-bred 
gentleman  of  good  education,  Prefessor  Ramamurti 
Naidu,  looks  no  way  much  above  the  ordinary  run 
of  men  in  make  and  stature.  Yet  he  has  repeatedly 
astounded  all  observers  by  allowing  a  tJircc-ton 
elephant  to  walk  across  his  breast  before 
thousands  of  people  in  most  of  the  important  cities 
of  India.  By  such  feats  in  these  degenerate  days, 
and  emerging  unharmed  like  Prahlad  from  beneath  the 
elephant's  feet,  he  proves  the  possibility  of  the 
doings  of  much  greater  thmgs  in  the  blessed  ages 
of  the  glorious  past.  It  is  not  animal  strength 
alone,  but  the  concentration  of  physical  powers  by 
will-force  coupled  with  the  culture  of  the  moral 
faculties  and  Yoga  observances  that  render  the 
performance  of  all  such  exploits  possible, — he  once 
explained  in  answer  to  our  queries  as  to  the 
secret  of  his  success.  His  regrets  were  sincere  as 
with  mournful  looks  he  deplored  our  degeneracy 
ascribing   it   to   our  neglect   of  our    own   old    systems. 

As  we  come  out  of  the  Jagannath  Temple  and 
walk  northward,  we  leave  on  our  left  the  Bhaskar 
Pushkar  Tivth — two  adjoining  wells  joined  together 
at   the   bottom.     And  further  on,  we  find    the   notable 


202         THE  HOL  Y  CI  J  V  (BENARES)         chap. 


LoLARKA     KUND      with     a    beautiful      temple      just 

to   the    South.     This   also   is    a    double- 

Lolarka  Kund    mouthed  well  and  has  two  shafts    leadinp^ 

to  the   water  below,  which   pass  through 

an    arch    in    the    wall     and    connect     the   contents     of 

both.     The   water   can  be   approached  by   three  flights 

of    stairs   running     down    from     above.     This     Kund 

lies   to    the   north-east   of  Kurukshetra    Talao  and    has 

a   peculiar   appearance. 

Xow  towards  the  very  thickly  populated  quarter 
bordering-  the  river  and  extending  a  considerable 
wav  towards  the  west.  This  is  popularly  known 
as  the  Bengalitola  from  the  fact  that  the  Bengali 
population  settled  in  Benares  is  thickly  clustered 
in  this  quarter,  the  selection  of  this  locality  being 
due  to  their  anxiety  to  live  near  the  holy  Ganges 
and  to  have  the  full  secular  and  religious  benefit 
of  a  daily  bath  in  its  sacred  water.  Among  the 
very  large  number  of  temples  and  shrines  here  the 
most  important  one  is  that  of  Kedar7mfh  upon  the 
river-bank  which  we  shall  visit  in  course  of  our 
trip   along    the    river. 

The  TiLBllANDESWARA  SiVA  in  this  quarter 
locatec4  in  a  temple  in  a  narrow  lane  on  our  way 
is  a  prominent  one.  It  is  a  huge  round  dome- 
shaped  black  uncarved  marble  four  and 
Tilbhandeswara  a  half  feet  high  and  quite  fifteen  in 
diameter — supposed  to  be  increasing 
in    bulk     by     the     size    of    a    ///    (  sesamum  )     every 


YIII  SHRnVES  ON  THE  SOUTH 


day.  It  almost  fills  up  the  small  chamber  where 
it  stands  ;  and  a  large  stone  bull  reposes  in  front 
of  it  on  the  veranda  outside.  Numerous  emblems 
and  imagoes  lie  all  about  the  house,  and  beneath 
a  peepul-tree  outside  are  numbers  of  carved  stones 
strewn  about  around  its  trunk.  One  among  them 
is  of  much  interest — the  remnant  of  an  image  up 
to  the  waist  in  very  finely  cut  and  chiselled  black 
marble,  partly  mutilated  in  the  face  and  arms  and 
st\led  Birhhndra,  the  attendant  of  Siva.  The  temple 
and  its  enclosure  stand  much  above  the  level  ol 
the  street  and  is  well  worth  a  visit  owing  to  the 
association  of  great  antiquity  with  its  images  and 
sculptures  ;  and  so  is  the  temple  of  Muktesivara 
lying    near   the   south-west   of  it. 

Walking   in    a   north-easterly  direction   and  jostling 

your     way   through    the   thick    crowd     of     passers-by 

along     a     very     narrow     and     tortuous     thoroughfare, 

you    come     to   the     large   tank     excavated     b}-     Raja 

iNlan       Singh     and      known     as      Man 

Man  Sarowar    Sakowar.     It     is     a     fine     tank     with 

numbers   of  small    temples   all    around, 

the     major     portion     of    them     crowding     upon     the 

northern     bank.     But     it    is     in    a     rather     neglected 

condition    and    its    stairs    are   sadly    in  need    of  repair. 

Another   object   of  interest   in  the    Bengali  quarter 

is     the   small     temple   of    Agastyesivora    Siva     under 

spreadhig     necms   at     the     Agastya     Kund     Muhulla. 

Inside   is   a   large   emblem    with    images    of    Ganesha 


504        THE   HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)       Chap. 


and  Lopamudra  Devi,  the  wife  of  Agastya,  in 
the  niches  of  the  wall.  It  is  associated 
Agastya  Kund  with  the  Kund  of  this  name  which 
was  in  front  of  it,  but  which  is 
said  to  have  been  filled  up  and  a  building 
erected  on  its  site.  Thus  runs  the  Pauranic  tradition 
in  this  connection  :  The  Vindhya  mountain  jealous 
of  the  superiority  of  the  Sumeru  distended  itself 
so  far  and  raised  itself  so  high  as  to  block  the 
path  through  which  the  sun  daily  coursed.  There- 
Jpon,  the  great  Rishi  Agastya,  who  had  his 
'.lermitage  here,  left  Kasi  at  the  request  of  the 
gods  to  humble  Vindhya's  pride.  The  mountain 
bent  down  before  him  in  obeisance  as  soon  as  the 
holy  man  approached,  and  the  Rishi  said,  "Rest 
as  low  till  I  come  back,"  and  went  away  towards 
the  south  never  to  return.  Hence  is  the  popular 
phrase  'Agastya  Jaitn! — meaning  the  starting  on  a 
journey   never   to   return. 

Thus  far  we  have  travelled  all  over  the  interior 
of  the  city  and  visited  all  the  principal  shrines 
and  notable  temples  Though  numerous  enough  to 
tire  out  our  patience,  our  catalogue  has  by  no 
means  been  very  exhaustive.  VVe  have  still  to  see  some 
very  important  shrines  along  the  river-bank  above 
the  several  sacred  ghats  that  pave  the  major  portion 
of  its  lengthy  expanse  with  their  massive  solid 
running   stairs. 

So,     coming    eastwards     and     threading   our     way 


VI r I  SHRINES  ON  THE  SOUTH  20= 


through  a  large  svstem  of  mazy  crowded  lanes 
with  all  manner  of  ups  and  downs  along  short 
flights  of  stony  stairs,  we  pass  towards  the  river- 
side and  emerge  into  the  open  upon  the  broad 
terrace  of  Ahalya  Bat's  Ghat  with  the  glittering 
mass  of  the  moving  ripples  rolling  along.  The 
white  marble  statue  of  that  renowned  Marhatta 
princess — who  had  erected  the  ghat  that  immortalises 
her  name — posed  in  the  act  of  worship  with  a 
small  Siva  in  hand,  \s  in  a  niche  in  the'  inner 
wall  of  the  temple  of  Siva  standing  on  the 
left.  On  the  right,  high  above  the 
Vishuddhanand  water  is  another,  and  by  its  side 
Saraswati  is  the  building  where  lived 
SwAMi  Vishuddhanand  Saraswati — 
a  Brahman  from  Kalyan  in  Southern  India  and  a 
revered  sage  of  great  erudition  who  died  in  1898  at  the 
advanced  age  of  ninety-three.  His  sandals,  a  large, 
conch,  and  other  knick-knacks  have  been  preserved  here 
as  the  valued  relics  of  the  holy  man  upon  the 
spot  where  he  used  to  sit.  There  is  a  gu/id  or 
cell  inside  the  building  with  a  small  entrance 
which  is  pointed  out  by  his  followers  living  there 
as  the  place  where  the  saintly  personage  used  to 
lie  in  saraadhi.  Ahalya  Bai's  Chhattra  where  a 
number   of  people   are   daily   fed    adjoins    her   temple. 

Down  the  fine  broad  stairs  we  descend  and. 
approach  the  small  fiat-roofed  temple  of  SiTALA. 
Devi    just   above     the    water's     ^^z<t,    containing     a 


206        THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES) 

large  Siva  emblem  on  the  floor  and  the  carved 
figure  of  Sitala  Devi  on  the  north 
Sitala  Devi  and  of  Siva  and  Parvati  sitting  together 
in  the  western  corner  of  the  temple. 
During  the  rains  when  the  river  is  swollen  the 
images  are  all  submerged  and  almost  the  whole 
of  the  body  of  the  temple  goes  under  the  water. 
The  Dasaswamedh  ghat  whence  we  had  started 
on  our  pilgrimage  lies  just  to  the  north,  and  as 
we  prepare  to  approach  it,  behold,  a  couple  of 
up-country  women  advance  towards  the  temple 
and  stand  at  the  entrance  like  a  pair  of  delicately 
carved  statuary  in  their  picturesque  drapery  of 
pink  and  light  blue  set,  as  it  were,  against  a 
background  of  the  a^ure  sky  and  the  greenish 
stream.  And  soon  in  ardent  fervour  and  with 
glistening  eyes  they  begin  to  chant  some  hx-mns 
and  sing  feelingly  in  their  sweet  silvery  swelling 
voices  filling  the  air  with  melody  and  the  hearts 
of  the  listeners  with  an  indescribable  pathos.  No 
wonder  that  we  linger  here  a  few  minutes  longer 
than  our  leisure  should  permit,  thus  bringing  this 
much  of  our  pilgrimage  to  a  musical  termination, 
with  our  recollections  of  what  seemed  incongruous 
and  fantastic  melting  away  in  the  sweet  cadence 
and    harmonv   that   ever   refjulate   the   universe. 


I.     A   Road  to  the  (.hat  2 

3.     Ganga  Mehal  Ghat.         4. 
5.     Bathing  Scene'  6. 


Women's  loathing    Ghat. 
Manikarnika  Ghat. 
Ikuning  Ghat. 


P.  207. 


Chapter  IX 

AtONG  THE   RIVER 

"The  Ganges  that  flows— it  is  God  ;  the  ocean  that  roar's— it  is 
God  ;  the  wind  that  blows — it  is  Him  ;  the  cloud  that  thunders, 
the  lightning  that  flashes, — it  is  Him.  As  from  all  eternity 
the  universe  existed  in  the  spirit  of  Brahma,  so  to-day  is  all 
that  exists  His  image*" 

-^The    Veda. 

liE  sacred  bathing  ghats,  .some  sixty 
in  number--the  major  portion  of  them 
dating  from  the  eighteenth  century—  linr 
the  sloping  western  bank  surmounted 
by  lofty  temples  and  palatial  buildings. 
A  pleasant  bracing  breeze  passes 
across  the  glistening  water  bearing 
patches  of  stray  fleecy  clouds  above 
and  toning  down  the  heat  and  mellowing 
the  glare  of  the  shooting  sun-rays.  The  Dasaswamedh 
ghat  is  astir  with  crowds  of  people  in  motley  groups 
hurrying  to  the  boats  about  to  move  away  from 
the  bank.  Rival  boatmen  oars  in  hand  keep  shouting 
at  the  top  of  their  voices  luring  passengers  with 
promises  of  immediate  start  and  no  tarrying  ;  and 
each  is  so  earnest  that  the  bewildered  customer 
does  not  know  which  among  them  to  patronise. 
A  river-trip  in  one  of  the  bhaolia  boats,  alv;a;>"S 
Ig  be    found    here    in    plenty,  would    be   \tty    pl^^^sknt 


2oS  THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)        Chap. 

and  enjoyable,  and  we  should  in  the  first  instance 
instruct  our  boatmen  to  row  us  down  the  river 
towards  the  north  to  enable  us  to  have  a  look  at 
some  very  interesting  scenes  and  important  shrines 
along  that  portion  of  the  river-bank.  Frequently 
should  we  have  to  step  ashore  at  the  important 
ghats  where  our  interest  centres  most,  and  on 
our  way  back  we  must  go  far  up  the  river  and 
land  at  Ram n agar  to  see  the  Maharaja's  Fort  and 
garden  and  his  fine  Temple  of  Durga.  Before,  howev^er, 
you  undertake  the  trip  southward,  it  were  but  fair 
that  you  should  be  enjoined  to  take  every  possible 
care  of  your  precious  limbs  and  be  warned  against 
taking  a  dip  into  the  eternity  even  by  accident  on  the 
portion  of  the  other  bank  of  the  river  going  by 
the  name  of  Vyas  Kasi,  for  if  }  ou  do,  }oi,  will 
ernerge  in  your  next  birth  in  a  form  far  from 
being    pleasing   or    desirable. 

A    tale    hangs     by    it     to    the     effect   that  V}asa, 

the   compiler   of  the   Vedas,  had  once   quarrelled  with 

Siva    who     turned    him   out  of   Kasi  for 

The  Vyasa      reviling  Vishnu    and  laying  a  curse  upon 

Episode  *        its    people  that  any    sin    committed  here 

would     be     beyond    atonement.     Vyasa 

thereupon    resolved    to   build    a   city     like     Kasi    and 

of  -as   great   religious   eminence  as    Siva's    Kasi    itself, 

which   had   the   merit   of  translating     men    to   heaven 

and  of  making  them  merge  in   Siva  \{  they  happened 

to    die   within    the    five   cros   of  its   sacred     precincts. 


VIII  ALONG  THE  RI VER  209 


'^.'V^^/\/•\^V^.'X' 


\^\'asa  succeeded  after  infinite  troubles  in  buildingr 
a  city  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  but  he  har 
to  seek  the  aid  of  the  goddess  Annapurna  for 
conferring  upon  it  the  potency  of  making  those 
who  die  there  turn  to  Siva.  This  boon  the  goddes? 
was  rather  loth  to  grant  ;  but  being  attracted  by  his 
devotions  she  approached  him  in  the  shape  of  ? 
very  repulsive  decrepit  old  woman,  and  —  as  ths 
great  immortal  Bengali  poet  Bharat  Chandra  so 
i^raphicaily  and  humourously  describes, — artfully 
enquired  of  Vyasa  numbers  of  times  as  to  what 
became  of  men  dying  there.  Vyasa  answered  patiently, 
once, — twice, — thrice,  expatiating  upon  the  meiits  of 
his  city, — but  she  feigned  deafness  and  kept  on 
repeating  her  query  ;  till  at  last  the  exasperated 
\'\  asa  roared  out  ar.grily,  "Whoever  dieth  here, 
hccometh  an  ass,'' — \vhereuix)n  the  old  woman 
promptly  rejoined  that  she  had  heard  quite  enough  and 
vanished  saying,  "Be  it  so"  !  and  left  the  crest-fallen 
\^\asa    utterly   dumb-founded  ! — Hence   my   caution  ! 

Fortified  thus  against  all  ills  threatening  us  on 
the  other  shore  of  life,  we  may  now  start.  The 
water  is  clear  and  crystalline  and  of  a  greenisli 
tint  sparkling  and  glistening.  A  wide  expanse  of 
sand  spreads  up  to  the  eastern  bank  and  Ramnagar 
Fort  looms  in  the  farthest  south-east.  Passing 
midstream,  the  eje  takes  at  a  single  sweep 
the  vast  panorama  of  the  crescent-bank  studded 
with    myriads   of  tall    spires   plain    and    gilt   and  lofty 

14— 


2  \o        THE  HOL  Y  CITY  (  BE  MA  RE  S)  c\\  a  p. 

temples  and  beautiful  palaces  three  to  six  stones 
high.  Far  off  due  north  runs  the  network  of  the 
3Jufferin  Bridge  holding  the  two  banks  of  the  hoi},' 
stream  in  its  iron  grip  ;  and  as  you  turn  your  eyes 
about,  prominent  among  the  clustering  structure.^ 
appear  the  twin  towers  ot  lieni  Madho  dominating 
the  neighbourhood.  Magnificent  palaces  of  white 
and  yellow  towering  upon  their  precipitous  foundations 
of  massive  stone  rising  sheer  out  of  tlie  water 
iapping  at  their  feet  and  inter^[>erscd  with  towering 
temple-steeples  shooting  towards  the  sky,  make  a 
scene  of  unsurpassed  splendour  and  unparalleled  beauty. 
"For  picturesqueness  and  grandeur**,  writes  Mr. 
Sherring,  **no  sight  in  all  the  ivorld  can  wej]  surpass 
that    of   Benares    us    seen    fruni    the    river  Ganges.'^ 


(1) 

Northward 


SMALL  colony  of  ash-smeared  Skadhu:^ 
( ascetics  )  burdened  with  heavy  matted 
locks  have  pitched  their  improvised  tents 
of  large  portable  cloth  umbrellas  of  quite 
modern  pattern  and  are  sitting  cross-leggtu' 
in  front  of  smoking  logs  of  wood  with 
an  air  of  perfect  self-content  close  by  the 
Dasasvvamedh  Ghat  (  Plate  IV,  i,  3  ).  Brakmcswara 
and  DasasziHiiHtdhesioara  are  the  important  Sivas  of 
this  Ghat,  and  to  the  north  is  another — Sulatankeswara— 
of  immense  proportions  that  lies  submerged  durini; 
the  rains.  The  broad  stairs  of  the  ghat  rising  tier 
upon  tier  look  exceedingly  solid.  But  nearly  all 
of  them  together  with  the  shrines  on  the  edges 
lie  under  water  and  buried  in  the  silt  during  the 
rainy  season  when  the  Ganges  rises  some  forty 
feet  higher  than  its  winter  level  and  rushes  along 
in  her  fall  expanse  in  mighty  torrents,  and  the 
water  dyed  muddy  yellow  approaches  the  floor  oi 
the  houses  above  and  almost  reaches  the  terrace 
of  the  lofty  temple  yonder  abutting  towards  the 
water.     After   the   floods  subside   people   have  a  great 


212         THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)         Cftap. 

deal  to  do  for  months  together  in  removing  the 
thick  deposit  from  the  steps  and  digging  out 
the   shrines. 

As  you  proceed  northward,  you  cannot  fail  to 
notice  large  quantities  of  stone  slabs,  mostly  from 
Chunar,  lying  piled  in  heaps  or  laden  in  boats  in 
the  river — intended  for  the  erection  of  imposing 
buildings  that  beautify  the  cit\% — and  they  give  you 
some  idea  of  the  commercial  activity  in  this  quarter. 
The  long  stairs  of  the  Man  Mandil  Giiat  (  Plate 
FI,  3)  now  appear  with  the  walls  of  the  structure 
above  furnished  with  some  remarkabl}'  fine  oriel 
windows*  Near  to  this  are  Dalvesii^ara  and  Someswara 
Sivas,  the  former  said  to  have  influence  over  the 
rains  and  the  latter  famed  for  curiiig  all  manner 
of  diseases. 

Above  the  Trifura  Bhairabi  Ghat  lies  the 
temple  of  the  goddess  of  that  name  in  a  lane, 
and  here  is  the  quarter  known  as  the  Brohvtapuri — 
a  number  of  houses  erected  by  the  famous  Rani 
Bhawani  and  dedicated  to  the  use  of  tlie  Brahmans 
of  Benares, 

Then    comes    the     MiR    Gil  AT,    in    a   house   above 

which  resided  Mir  Rustum    Ali  who   was    the  Governor 

of   the    province    before    Bulwant  Singh, 

Divodaseswara    the    father    of     Raja    Chet  Singh.     The 

Siv«  temple   of  Divodaseswara  Sz'va  famed  to 

have  been  established  by    Raja    Divcdas 

of    old    is   in     the    lane     above   this     ghat.     It   is     a 


VIII    ALONG  THE  RIVER— NORTHWARD  213 


small   temple   among   a   cluster   of  similar   ones  under 
the   cool    shade  of  spreading   banyans.     A    very  sacred 
well    known    as   the    Dkarma-Kup   enclosed  by   a  high 
stone     railing   is     in     front     of  this     temple    in     the 
centre   of  the   courtyard,     A    few    steps  off   from    this 
is   the   temple     of    Viskdtakshi    Devi — 
VishalaksW      an    epithet   of  Parvati — finely  sculptured 
Devi  above   the   entrance   and    famed    to     be 

standing  on  the  place  where  Parvati's 
Kundala  (  ear-ornament  )  fell.  For  a  slight  to  her 
divine  spouse  by  her  quondam  father  Daksna  she 
had  cast  her  life  away,  and  the  disconsolate  Siva 
went  roving  all  over  the  three  worlds  with  her 
iifeless  frame  upon  his  shoulders.  Vishnu  cut  ic  to 
pieces  by  his  discus,  and  the  various  members, 
according  to  tradition,  fell  upon  fifty-one  places  on 
earth  that  became  sanctified  as  pithas  or  sacred 
spots  ;  and  this  in  Benares  is  one  of  them.  The 
image  of  the  goddess  is  gorgeously  decked,  the 
floor  is  of  black  and  white  marble,  and  the  ceiling 
and  walls  are  painted  and  embellished  with  various 
decorations  in  bright  colours.  The  building  was 
enriched  by  a  Chetty  of  Nathcote  a  few  years 
ago,  and  the  whole  has  a  very  opulent  look.  In  an 
adjoining  chamber  of  the  same  house  with  humbler 
decora':ions    is    the    imaqfe   of  Mahalaksmi. 

Djwn  the  steps  of  Mir  Ghat  with  some  more 
shrines  on  the  left — one  of  them  being  of  Radha 
Krishna, — we  pass   by   the  Lalita  Ghat.   Above  the 


2T4        THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)        Char 

NapALESE  Ghat  not  far  off,  lies  In  a  shady  corner 
the  picturesque  Ncpakse  temple  of  PasJmpatinath 
Siva      with     its     two-storied     roof    and      its     s^ilded 

top     and    a    pair     of     boldly     executed 

The  Napalese    h'ons   near    the   entrance.    It  is  a  unique 

Temple         structure   of  its    kind    in    Benares   bein^ 

made  entirely  of  wood  with  profuse 
and  elaborate  carvinj^^s  beautiful  and  bold,  repre- 
senting- various  ^ods  and  goddesses  neatly  sculptured 
in  wood  and  other  fine  ornamentations  executed  to  a 
nicety.  But  the  effect  is  much  marred  by  some 
unsiorhtly  and  indelicate  incong;ruities  disfiguring  some 
{>ortions  of  them.  In  a  recess  just  above  the  stairs 
of  the  ghat  is  the  shrine  of  Ganga — the  presiding 
deity   of  the   river    seated  upon  a  crocodile   {makar). 

We  next  come  over  to  the  Jai.asain  Ghat^ 
so  called  after  Vishnu  who  reclines  upon  the 
water  of  the  ocean  whence  the  name  Jalasain.  It 
is  used  as  a  cremation-ground  (  Plate  XII,  6  ),. 
and  is  in  fact  the  continuation  of  the  famous 
Manikarnika  Ghat  where  we  have  now  arrived.  This 
massive  stone  ghat  as  well  as  the  two  fine  temples 
standing  to  the  north  and  south  were  built  by 
the  famous  Ahalya  Bai.  The  high  cremation- 
ground  above  made  of  stone  and  enclosed  and 
protected  by  a  stone  wall  has  been  recently 
constructed  to  avoid  the  difficulties  of  cremation 
during  the  rainy  season  when  the  water  approaches 
its    foundation    and    submerges    the   ground    below. 


VI n    ALONG  THE  RJVER—AORTHWARD   215 


The  fine  temple  of  Tarakeswara  Siva  stands 
almost    in     the    water   in    front    of  the   ghat.     During 

the     rains     the      upper    portion     of     it 

Tarakeswara      only   is    left  to   tower   above   the   large 

Siva  expanse    of   the    rolling    water      which 

strikes  it  on  every  side  and  isolates  it 
as  it  were  from  the  bank  (Plate  IT,  i).  It  is 
believed  that  this  god  recites  in  the  ears  of  the 
dying  the  Mantra  (text)  that  gives  salvation  to  the 
soul.  The  sincere  belief  in  the  Hindu  world  is 
that  persons  dying  at  Benares  are  freed  from  the 
liability  of  being  born  again  and  are  merged  in 
the  God  Siva.  Hence  it  is  that  a  large  number  of 
devout  people  from  all  parts  of  India  flock  to 
this  place  in  their  old  age  leaving  home  and 
family  behind  them  and  take  up  residence  here 
with  the  object  of  passing  the  last  days  of  their 
lives  in  this  holy  spot, — thus  realising  in  a  manner 
the  Banaprastha  Asram  of  old  in  a  modified  form 
in    this   age. 

Towering     above   this   ghat   and     reached    by   the 

steep      steps      leading     into      the     street      above    is 

the     spacious      red-domed     temple      of 

The  Ahmety     Balatripjirasundari    Devi — a     name     of 

Temple  Durga— known       as       the         AllMETY 

Temple.    This  fine  and  artistic  structure 

with        goFd-tipped        pinnacles       standing      in       the 

middle   of    a    large    and     neat     courtyard     was     built 

by    the   Raja   of   Ahmety    in    Oudh,  and  is    strikingly 


THE  HOL  Y  CI  J  Y  {BENARES)         Chap. 


^.'-%J•^-/*v>-^^^  y  xy^v.'X'X/  \ 


beautiful  and  will  fully  repay  a  visit.  The  most 
iioticeable  feature  of  this  temple  is  the  group  of 
charming  figures  of  the  winged  Gandharvas  and 
Apsaras,  the  musicians  of  the  gods,  posed  very 
gracefully  in  lines  underneath  the  main  cornice 
(Plate  XI,  2).  Near  to  it,  further  up,  is  the 
temple  of  Siddhi  Vinayak  Gan-esha  with  the  images 
of  Siddhi  and  Buddhi  Devi  (Success  and  Wisdom) 
by   its   side. 

The  Maj^ikarnika  Ghat  (Plate  Xll,  4)   is    the 

general   cremation -ground   of  all     Benares,     and    any 

time   you    may    find    half  a    dozen     or 

MantkanOka     more     corpses     blazing     at     the     same 

Ghat  time   upon  the  wide   steps   near  to  the 

vvater^s   *i6gQ  and    being   resolved     into 

their   primal   elements.      Numbers   of    S(iti    Stones — 

upright   slabs     placed     in     memory     of    the     faithful 

wives   who   had    followed   their   husbands     even     into 

death   upon  the   funeral    pyre — here    bear    wiiiiess    to 

the     Hindu     ideal     of    love     and     life     which     even 

death   cannot   sunder.*     A   beautiful     embodiment    of 

(  I  )  To  prove  that  the  same  spirit  lives  and  controls  the 
livis  of  the  Hindus  up  to  the  present  times,  it  may  not  be 
uninteresting  to  note  the  very  latest  case  of  Sati  that  occurred 
at  premises  No  9,  Charakdanga  Road,  lielliaghata,  Calcutta, 
on  the  20th  April  191 1  in  a  highly-connected  Kayastha  family. 
The  lady,  Saibalini  Dasi — a  neiceofthe  late  Mr.  R,  C.  Dutt 
(  lately  Commissioner  of  Burdwan  and  Orissa  and  Dewan 
of  the  Gaikwar  of  Baroda  ), — came  to  learn  from  the  physician 
in    attendance   that    her    husband    then  lying     in   his   mortal 


VIII    ALONG  THE  RIVER-NORTHWARD  217 


^^  V'\X\/-V%y'\^%y- 


this  in  the  shape  of  a  youthful  couple  carved 
very  gracefully  in  relief  on  a  large  piece  of  Sati 
stone  is  to  be  observed  near  the  Harisk  Chandra 
or  Maskan  Ghat,  the  cremation  ground  in  the 
southern  end  of  the  town,  besides  the  one  on  the 
street  outside  the  temple  of  Bara  Ganesha.  A 
Charan  paduka  or  Vishnu's  foot-prints  carved  upon 
a  white  marble  block  rests  over  a  black  pedestal 
upon  a  large  lotus-shaped  slab  of  stone  on  the 
pavement.  Vishnu  has  been  reported  to  have 
alighted  here  and  hence  this  spot  is  regarded  to 
be  of  exceptional  sanctity,  and  is  esp'^cially  reserved 
for   the   cremation   of  members    of  noble    families. 

Higher  up  above  the  flights  of  stairs  is  a 
rectangular  well  or  tank  famous  as  the  Manikarnika 
KUND,   variously   styled  as   Miikti  Kshetra   (   the  seat 

illness  had  but  a  couple  of  hours  at  best  to  live.  Just  half  an 
hour  before  his  death  she  went  upstairs,  and  having  shut  herself  up 
in  her  roon  dressed  in  her  best  and  drenched  her  apparels  with 
petroleum.  Then,  having  set  fire  to  her  garments  and  being 
enveloped  in  violent  flames  and  with  a  copy  of  "Geeta"  held  m 
her  joined  palms  she  approached  towards  her  husband's  room 
before  anybody  could  be  aware  of  what  had  transpired,  but 
dropped  down  dead  at  the  verandah  before  she  could  reach 
him.  The  two  bodies  were  then  cremated  together  upon  the 
same  funeral  pyre  on  the  bank  of  the  sacred  Ganges.  This 
may  be  termed  a  determined  felo-de-se  or  a  temporary 
aberration  of  mind,  but  mark  the  inherent  spirit  that  led 
to  it  ! 


2  18  THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)        chap. 


\r\/^ /\j'\r>^r\  f 


of     liberation    )     and      Purnastibhakaran     (    complete 

source   of   felicity  ).       It    \9.  enclosed    by 

Manikarnika     iron  railings  on  al!  sides  and  stone  stairs 

Knnd  run    from  all    its   banks   to   the   bottom, 

and    all    devout    pilgrims    usually   bathe 

in    it.     Some   images    of  gods     and    goddesses   are   in 

some   of  the   niches    by    the   side   of     the   stairs,   and 

this   in   the   whole  city    is  considered   to   be   the  most 

sacred    spot    which    all    pilgrims  must  visit,   and  hence 

tlie   crowd    here   is   always     the   thickest.     Thus   runs 

an    inscription     upon    a     white    marble   slab   attached 

to    the   railings  :     "In    1887    A.    D.    the    Jubilee   year 

of    Her   Most    Gracious     Majesty,     Victoria,     Empress 

of   India,   was    inaugurated    the    scheme   for    restoring 

the     'Ganges'     at     Benares     to     its     native     purity.** 

During   the     ra'ns   the     tank   goes    under     water   and 

barely    a  portion    of  the   railings    remain    visible,   near 

to   which   the    people   then    bathe  and    perform    their 

religious   rites. 

Thus  it  is  that  the  Puranas  ascribe  to  this  Kund 
the   greatest    sanctity    and    antiquity  : 

Said  Siva  to  Parvati, — 'In  the  vast  nothingness — 
no  land,  nor  water,  nor  air.  nor  fire  was  there, 
nor  night  nor  day,  nor  sound  nor  shape.  Darkness 
was  all  around.  And  the  great  Brahman,  incompre- 
hensible and  unknowable,  created  me  and  vanished. 
His  image  am  I,  the  God  of  the  Simple,  and  they 
call  me  the  ancient  Pimisha.  Out  of  me  did  I 
bring     thee    forth,     Mother   of  the    Universe  !' — Such 


VIII    ALONG  THE  RIVER— NORTHWARD   219 


/^/^y■^/•^/v^rv/~«.r»y^.'^/^x^  '^r'^..'"^/^.'^-^^/'v/V^ 


v/as  the  Hindu  idea  of  the  Supreme  Essence, 
Brahman,  the  God  of  the  (^^ods,  transcending  all 
m;,  th  ascribed  to  popular  Hinduism  and  all  worship 
of  images  and  deified  heroes, — The  expanse  of 
five  cms  of  space  underneath  his  feet, — the  episode 
proceeds, — Siva  converted  into  the  land  of  holy 
Kasi.  It  was  set  neither  on  earth,  nor  in  the  sky, 
but  upon  the  top  of  Siva's  trident  ;  and  as  in 
the  time  of  the  deluge  marking  the  change  of  cycles 
water  overran  the  universe  in  one  vast  ocean,  this 
spot  ever  continued  to  rest  high  above  the  rising 
flood.  Siva  and  Parvati  looked  forward  benignantly 
and  out  came  a  four-armed  Being  into  existence. 
They  named  him  Maha-  Vishnu,  and  saying  that 
the  four  Vedas  would  emanate  from  him  for  the 
guidance  of  all  living  beings  they  disappeared.  Upon 
this,  Vishnu  excavated  a  tank  with  his  discus  and 
sat  there  for  fifty  thousand  years  in  tapa  (  practice 
of  austerities  \  and  the  heat  generated  by  his 
arduous  observances  caused  him  to  perspire  profusely 
till  the  tank  was  filled.  Siva  came  back  attracted 
by  his  devotions  and  was  highly  pleased  ;  and  as 
he  leaned  forward  to  look  into  the  tank  a  jewel 
{mani)  pendent  from  his  ear  {karna)  dropped 
into  it.  Hence  arose  the  name  Manikartiika.  Later 
traditions  add  that  goddess  Gans^a  (  Ganges  )  on 
her  way  to  effect  the  deliverance  of  the  ancestors 
of  prince  Bhagiratha  was  greatly  impressed  with  its 
sanctity  and  entered  this  Kund,  and  thus  enhanced 
its    sacredness.     This    is   one   of  the   five     most   holy 


220  THE  HOL  y  CITY  (BENARES)        Chap. 


,/X/^/^/^w'^/'\/\-'^^>'V'^^/\rx.'\r^^^/x/  s 


places  in  Benares  which  all  pilgrims  must  visit, — 
the  other  four  being  the  Asi-  ^angam,  the  Dasaswainedh, 
the  Panchganga  and  the  Barana-Sangam  ghats, — the 
whole  going  by  the  name  of  Pancha-Tirtha  (  the 
five   holy    places   of  pilgrimage  ). 

As  you  now  advance  northward  you  cannot  fail 
to   notice   a   sinking   temple     and    a    massive     broken 

structure  over  the  SciNDHIA  GiiAT 
Scindhia Ghat  (Plate    V,    3).       The     huge     stone     pile 

leaning  a  long  way  out  of  the  per- 
pendicular looks  exceedingly  striking  in  the 
simplicity  and  beauty  of  its  execution.  The  ruins 
of  this  noble  edifice  have  the  appearance  of  being 
torn  from  the  very  foundations  and  lie  slanting 
towards  the  west.  Baija  Bai,  the  Gwalior  Queen, 
began  erecting  the  mansion  and  a  ghat,  but  the 
heavy  weight  of  the  massive  stone-work  caused  the 
foundations  to  sink,  and  the  whole  structure  toppled 
over  as  if  by  a  shock  of  violent  earthquake.  And 
thus  have  the  ruins  stood  and  kept  their  grounds 
to  this  day  a  hundred  years,  grand  even  as  they 
are  in  the  midst  of  the  architectural  grandeur  all 
around.  Thus  runs  a  curious  story  noted  by  Mr. 
Neville  as  to  the  cause  of  the  subsidence  :  In 
attempting  to  trace  the  source  of  a  small  stream 
of  water  that  hampered  the  workmen,  they  opened 
a  cavern  where  was  discovered  an  old  man.  *'  The 
latter  questioned  them  on  current  topics,  such  as 
recovery  of    Sita   by     Rama     of    Ayodhya,     and   on 


PLATE  XIIA 


P.  221 


VIII    ALONG  THE  RrVER— NORTHWARD  221 


hearing  of  the  events  that  had  occurred  during  his 
long  retirement  and  that  Benares  was  in  the  hands 
of  another  race,  he  forthwith  leaped  into  the 
Ganges    and   was    seen   no    more." 

The  towering  pile  of  the  Raja  of  Nagpore's 
large  building  standing  upon  its  steep  stony 
foundation  and  crowning  the  BhoNSLA  Ghat 
appears  next.  The  ghats  after  this  are  not  of 
much  importance  till  \  ou  reach  the  Panchaganga. 
So  we  pass  rapidly  b)-  the  SankaTA  Ghat 
leading  to  the  temple  of  the  goddess  of  that 
name.  Gakga-Mehal  Ghat,  Ghosla  Ghat,  Ram 
Ghat,  Baji  Rao  Ghat,  and  Chor  Ghat  are 
passed  by  in  succession.  This  last  ghat  is  said  to 
have  been  so  called  on  account  of  its  association 
with  the  adventures  of  a  chor  (thief)  who  used 
to  come  to  bathe  here  at  dead  of  night  in  the 
olden  times  presumably  to  wash  away  his  sins. 
The  Baji  Rao  and  Ghosla  Ghats  are  surmounted 
by  two  fine  structures  high  above  their  precipitous 
stone-work,  and  the  towering  palatial  building  of 
the  Maharaja  of  Gwalior  look  exceedingly  grand 
and    prominent    (Plate   XII,    3'. 

Past    the    MUNGLA    GaURI    Ghat,   we     arrive     at 

the     Panchaganga    Ghat    i^Plate   I), 

Panchaganga     also      known     as     the      Patichanada  or 

Ghat  Dharnianada       Tirtha^      with     its     five 

stately     flights     of    steps — a     place    of 

pilgrimage  as  the  meeting-ground    of  the  Ganges   with 


222        THE  HOLY  CITY  (BEXARBS)       Chap 


■  ^'\j^\/\j\y^  \ 


four  of  her  tributaries,  the  Dhutapapa^  the 
Kirananadiy  the  Jamuna^  and  the  Saraswati, 
reputed  to  be  flowing  underground,  no  traces  of 
which   are,   however   to  be  found  xn  this  Iron  Age. 

Right  upwards  the  stairs  run  into  a  narrow 
lane  high  above,  and  you  come  in  front  of  what 
is  known  as  Madhoji-KI-Deora,  the  Mosque  of 
Aurangzeb, — also  known  as  B:?ii  M idJiavs  Dhwaja 
(ensign).  As  you  enter  the  wide  stone  yard  buiit 
high    above   the    level    of     tiie    neighboaring      houses, 

the   twin    tall    turrets   look     taller     still 

Madhoji-kl-       and    rise    to    a     height     of    a     hundred 

Deora  and    fifty    feet   sheer    above     the     floor 

and  to  nearly  double  that  height 
from  the  bed  of  the  Ganges.  Bishop  Herxir 
notes  in  his  Journal  that  according  to  common 
report,  'the  Himalaya  may  be  seen  from  the 
top  of  the  minarets'  in  the  morning  when  the 
sky  is  perfectly  clear.  It  was  at  the  latter  end  of 
the  seventeenth  or  in  the  beginning  of  the  eigh- 
teenth centur>^  that  this  mosque  was  erected  with 
the  best  of  the  materials  of  the  ruined  temples 
upon  the  site  of  the  old  temple  of  Beni  Madhav 
which  was  said  to  have  been  pulled  down  by 
Aurangzeb  to  make  room  for  it ;  but  it  looks 
quite  solid  and  strong  still.  It  is  said  that  the 
minarets  were  originally  higher  by  fifty  feet  more 
and  were  latterly  reduced  to  their  present  height 
to  give  them  greater  stability.  A  couple  of  per- 
secuted  lovers   have   been    said    to    have   stayed  upon 


VIII   ALONG  1  HE  RIVER  -^NORTIIWARD   223 


one  of  the  towers  for  a  time  and  afterwards  thrown 
themselves  down  to  be  freiJ  from  the  panics  ^f 
despair. 

You  may  now  go  inside  and  ascciid  by  the 
s]3iral  stairs  of  over  a  hundred  and  twenty  steps 
tiil  you  reach  one  of  the  minarets  above.  As  yon 
come  up  to  the  topmost  balcony  of  the  minaret 
arid  emerge  into  Hc^ht  from  out  of  the  semi- 
darkness,  a  ^rand  panorama  of  exceeding  brilliance 
i\.\\(\  beauty  flashes  upon  your  entranced  vision 
(Plate  X,  5).  The  sparkiinj^  waters  of  the  holy 
river  to  the  east  seem  to  run  b^low  in  a  mi'4hty 
curve  extcndin^,^  towards  the  south  till  the  chain 
of  buildings  and  towers  and  temples  fades  away 
in  a  mist  near  the  mouth  of  the  Asi  with  the 
hary  outlines  of  the  Ranmagar  Fort  discernible  on 
tiie  other  bank  of  the  Ganges.  To  the  west  arc 
observed  the  well-wooded  gardens  and  palatial 
mansions  beyond  the  thickly  populated  quarters 
with  their  house-tops  alive  with  sportive  monkeys 
frisking  about  upon  them  and  swarms  of  pigeons 
lluttering  high  above  *  like  clustering  white  lotuses 
iloating  in  the  heaven's  blue.'  The  distant 
Dhamek  and  Humayun's  Tower  look  clear-cut 
against  the  blue  sky  with  their  crests  upraised  above 
the  neighbouring  greenery.  On  the  near  north  the 
river  winds  beneath  the  fine  bridge  looking  rather 
slender  and  takes  a  mighty  curve  towards  the  east. 
The    sight    is    really    an     enjoyable     one,     and     upon 


224  THE  HOL  Y  CITY  {BENARES)        chap. 

the  dizzy  height  and  *  far  from  the  madding  crowd's 
ignoble  strife/  you  feel  for  the  time  eh'minated  as 
it  were  from  all  things  mundane  and  resolved  into 
a  non-material  entity  | 

Back    to    the   earth    down    below, — to    the    west   of 

the     lane   at     the    foot     of  the     mosque,    stands     the 

present     temple   of     Beni  Madhav   (    a 

Beni  Madhab     name     of     Krishna   >,    also     known     as 

Bifida    Madhav    after   the     Rishi    Agni 

Bindu    who    established    the   shrine.      It    also    contains 

in     another     apartment    Panchagafigesvcaia    Siva    and 

the   images   of   Ganga,    and  of   Rama,  Sita,   Laksmana 

and     Hanuman    in     white    marble.     A     little     further 

off  through    another  lane  }ou    may  have 

Lasmanbala       a     look     at     the     Lasnianbala     Temple 

Temple  above  the   river  containing   a  gorgt^ously 

decked  image   of  the    four-armed  Vishnu 

holding     the    conch,     the    discus,     the   club   and     the 

lotus,    with    the   discs   of  the    sun    and    the    moon    on 

either     side      in     their     respective     gold     and     silver 

colouring. 

As  you  step  down  the  stairs  of  the  Pancha- 
ganga  Ghat  on  your  return,  you  find  a  small 
house  on  the  right  containing  among  a  number  of 
images  and  emblems  upon  a  stone  platform  what 
is  reported  to  be  the  Chara7i-Padu}ca  of  RaMANAND 
the  great  Vaishnavite  teacher  who  lived  about  the 
fourteenth  century  and  set  up  the  worship  of  Rama 
as  the   divine  Vishnu.     His  residence  was    at     Benares 


VIII   ALONG  THE  RIVER— NORTHWARD  225 


at  the  Panchaganga  Ghat  where  existed  a  muih 
or  monastery  of  his  followers  said  to  have  been 
destroyed    by   some   of  the    Mussalman    princes. 

The  plain  white  tapering  pinnacles  of  some  Jain 
temples  next  appear  above  the  jAiN  MANDlk  Ghat, 
and  passing  the  Gau  Ghat  with  the  figure  of  a 
colossal    cow    upon    the   steps,   you  arrive   at   the  next 

ghat     of  importance,     the     Trilochan 
Trilochan  Ghat   Ghat    where    Vishnu    is   fabled    to  have 

offered  one  of  his  eyes  in  lieu  of  a  blue 
lotus  missing  out  of  a  thousand  while  he  was 
engaged  in  worshipping  Siva — who  had  thus  an 
addition  to  his  visual  organ  and  became  Trilochan 
or  tiiree-eyed.  By  the  side  of  the  steps  in  a  small 
house  are  Hiranyaga7'veswara  and  Narniadeswara 
Sivap,  and  up  above  in  a  courtyard  full  of  various 
images  is  the  temple  of  Ti'ilochan  Siva  with  Parvati 
in  front.  In  a  niche  upon  the  wall  is  an  image 
of  Ganesha  in  white  marble,  and  in  a  room  of  a 
building  in  the  same  compound  is  Baranasi  Devi 
established  by  King  Banar.  To  the  south  of  Trilochan 
is  Kotilitigeiwara^  so  fashioned  as  to  look  like  a 
cluster  of  numerous  emblems  in  one,  and  a  number 
of  other  images.  Further  off  are  the  temples  of 
Nirbuddheszuara  and  Adi-Mahadeo,  and  in  a  dark 
room  of  a  house  in  a  lane  is  a  well  which  is 
known  as  Pilpilla  Tirtha,  a  name  which  is  extended 
to   the    Trilochan    ghat   itself. 

jl^^ck  to  the  boat,  we  now  glide   by  the  TiLLlANALA 


226         THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)         Chap. 

and  Prahlad  Ghats  and  beneath  the  grand  Dufferin 
Bridge  at  Raj  Ghat  (  Plate  X,  4  )  — on  the  high 
bank  above  which  was  old  King  Banar's  fort, — till  we 
arrive  at  the  northernmost  point  of  our  journey  at 
Barana-Sangam,  where  the  Barana  streamlet  empties 
itself  into  the  Ganges.  At  this  place  too,  it  is  said, 
once  stood  a  small  fort,  traces  of  which  are  visible 
on  close  observation.  The  high  bank  on  this  side  of  the 
Barana  with  the  moat-like  streamlet  at  the  foot 
makes  it  eminently  fitted  for  a  strong  defensive  position. 

The  bank  of  the  Ganges  stretches  northward 
plain  and  unencumbered  with  masonry  save  for  a 
few  small  straggling  houses  afar,  and 
Barana-Sangam  then  takes  a  majestic  curve  at  the 
distance  towards  the  east.  As  you  step 
out  of  the  boat  and  look  northward,  a  sense  of 
calm  pervading  restfulness  fills  your  heart  and  makes 
you  linger  a  while  watching  the  pastoral  loveliness 
of  the  locality.  On  the  northern  bank  of  the  slender 
streamlet  flowing  from  the  west,  beneath  the  $hade 
of  the  large  tree  in  the  distance,  lies  a  cow 
ruminating  with  legs  doubled  up  and  eyes  half-closed 
while  her  tail  keeps  flapping  at  the  flies  and 
occasionally  making  a  hit  at  the  naughty  crow  as 
it  hops  about  and  attempts  to  settle  upon  her 
plump  round  belly.  Close  by  strolls  a  pJax'Tul  heifer 
now  browsing  quieth-,  then  frisking  up  to  its  dam 
in  ex  iberance  of  spirits.  The  little  dusky  hc'-lf-clad 
lad    leaning   against    the    tree-trunk    has    fallen    asleep 


VIII    ALONG  THE  RIVER^NORTIIWARD   227 

with  his  stick  lying  by  his  side,  forgetful  of  his 
charges  grazing  peacefully  around.  A  small  boat 
moored  near  the  bank  over  there  with  a  few  clothes 
and  bundles  in  it  lies  waiting  for  its  owner  ;  and 
up  the  stream  farther  off  a  matronly  woman  is 
engaged  cleansing  the  family  linen  and  is  bending 
patiently  down  upon  her  work.  The  green  shrubbery 
on  the  left  lends  a  pleasant  colouring  to  the  charming 
scene  so  serenely  calm  and  noiseless  and  peaceful. 
Presently  there  comes  a  lively  dog  yonder,  dips  its 
mouth  in  the  water  and  laps  it  for  a  while,  and 
turns  round  and  scampers  away  in  a  hurry  as  if 
busy  on  some  urgent  errand,  and  reminds  us  that 
we   too   have   our   own    business  to    mind. 

So     we   turn     back   and     observe    up     above     the 
steep   bank   some     temples    erecred     by   a    Dewan   of 
Maharaja    Scindhia   about   a  century    and    a   half  ago, 
which     may    be     approached    by     some     high      stony 
stairs.     The    first,    as   you    rise    to   the    top   is    a  small 
temple   in  which    are   Nakshatresivara   and     Vedeswam 
Sivas.     In     a    recesss     of  the     wall    is     an    image     of 
Gancsha     and    by    its    side    a   very    beautifully   carved 
small    image   of  Brahma    with    four   faces  seated  upon 
a   lotus — all    in    white     marble.     By    the   side     of  this 
temple   is   the   entrance    to    the     loftier   one   adjoining- 
it.     A    large   standing    figure   of  Vishnu 
Adi-Keshav      in     shining     black      marble     known     as 
Adi-Keshav   is  in    a   room    and   in    front 
of  it  is   a  spacious   porch  with  a  number   of  beautifully 


228  THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES) 

carved  pillars  supporting  a  lofty  dome.  There  are 
some  other  temples  too,  clustering  together  there, 
the  one  of  importance  among  them  being  that  of 
Sangameswara  Siva.  In  the  quadrangle  also  is 
another  image  of  Vishnu  in  Chunar  stone  in  a 
standing  posture  st}'led  the  Jna7i  Keshav.  As  you 
come  down,  a  number  of  Sati  stones  with  figuies 
in  pairs  carved  upon  them  and  set  upright  upon 
the  grounds  above  the  end  of  the  creek  on  the 
Ganges    side  would  be   sure   to    attract    your   attention. 

As  you  stand  upon  the  eminence  of  this  steep 
bank  beneath  the  broad  canopy  of  the  blue  heavens, 
with  the  slender  Barana  making  for  and  at  last 
reaching  and  nestling  in  the  bosom  of  the  mighty 
Ganges  and  the  unified  stream  gliding  along  peace- 
fully, with  the  vast  expanse  of  the  sun-lit  vista 
stretching  before  you  far  as  the  e\e  can  reach, 
what  a  strange  undefinable  impression  of  the  grandeur 
of  solitude  fills  the  mind  and  makes  it  realise  the 
solemnity   of  the    scene  ! 


(2) 
Southward 


I  ME  enough,  and  now  to  return.  Up 
U  the  stream  our  boatmen  ply  and  soon 
;  do  we  begin  to  trace  our  way  back. 
A  booming  muffled  sound  makes  you 
look  ahead,  and  there  goes  a  long- 
drawn  railway  train  heralded  by  puffs 
of  whitish  smoke  as  it  rolls  over 
the  Dufferin  Bridge  towards  tne  Kasi 
Station.  Below  the  bridge  and  past 
R^jg-hat,  we  move  away  from  the  bank  and  run  up 
midstream  to  take  from  the  distance  a  comprehens've 
view  of  the  temples  and  turrets  and  ghats  and 
palaces  at  a  single  sweep.  Trilochan  and  Gau  Ghats 
are  soon  passed  ;  and  up  the  high  steps  of  Pancha 
Ganga,  Aurangzeb's  lofty  mosque  rears  its  head 
with  its  high  minarets  serving  as  landmarks  for 
several    miles   around. 

The  white  spires  of  the  Jain  temples  set  off 
agains^  the  blue  sky  and  the  lofty  palace  of  the 
Nagpore  Raja  also  move  rapidly  away.  But  soft, 
what   is   that     small     boat     laden     with  a   couple     of 


230  THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES)        chap. 


/\j\.'\/\.,\yK/^ 


long  stone  slabs  with  something  between  and  the 
whole  tied  round  with  heavy  ropes  ?  The  five 
Dandi  ascetics  occupying  the  boat^  presently  rai?e 
it  up  with  care  and  lay  it  across  the  edges  of  the 
boat,  and  then  silently  lower  the  whole  down 
into  the  water  below  which  eddies  a  little  and 
then  closes  up.  It  is  only  the  mortal  remains  of  one 
of  their  associates  in  life  which  are  thus  consigned 
to  a  watery  grave  !  Mother  Ganges  is  capacious 
enough  to  hold  all  that  seek  refuge  in  her  cold 
bosom.  Such  is  death — a  vanishing  into  the  dark 
recesses  of  time  !  And  life  ?  Who  knows  ?  Perhaps 
but   a   child^s    play   under   its   boding   shadow  \ 

Hard  matter  of  fact  would^  however,  brook  no 
brooding.  Look  up,  and  there  from  the  sloping  bank 
above  the  Ram  Ghat  stares  a  gigantic  mud  figure  of 
B/mJzay  the  second  of  the  Pandava  brothers,  painted 
white  and  yellow,  lying  on  its  back  under  the  open 
canopy  of  heaven  with  its  head  propped  up  and 
gazing  towards  the  river  with  a  pair  of  large  dark 
eyes  from  beneath  jet-black  eyebraws  and  looking 
fierce  and  frightful  enough  in  all  conscience.  Bhima 
is  worshipped  at  the  end  of  Kartik  (November)  when 
his  image  is  made  on  the  river- bank  which  lasts 
till   the   next   rains    dissolve  it. 

The  stately  ruins  of  the  mighty  piles  slanting 
landward  in  the  Scindhia  Ghat  (Plate  V,  3)  and  lying 
m  wild  confusion  still  attract  the  eye  by  the 
sjrandeur   of  the    massive   stone-work    and    the    beauty 


VIII    ALOI^G  THE  RIVER— SOUTHWARD    231 


.-"v^^'V'' \  ^ -./^^  \  AV/^ '1 


of  its  architecture.  The  grand  stairs  and  the  lofty 
temples  over  the  high  embankments  of  the  Mani- 
Karnika — the  central  one  of  all  the  ghats  in  Benares, 
— look  trembling  behind  the  filmy  screen  of  smoke 
rising  in  wavy  wreaths  from  the  funeral  p}Tes 
blazing  upon  the  steps  below.  Disconsolate  women 
with  their  hopeless  eyes  half  turned  away  to  avert 
the  blaze  and  sitting  with  their  pallid  faces  resting 
upon  their  knees,  the  crowd  of  bathers  making 
their  customary  ablutions  a  little  way  off  heedless 
of  the  solemn  dissolution  taking  place  so  close  at 
hand,  and  the  motley  groups  of  men  and  women 
passing  by  and  casting  awed  looks  toward  the  weird 
scene, — combine  to  make  up  an  impressive  sight 
that   lives   long   in   the  memory. 

From  here  to  Dasaswamedh  the  whole  bank 
is  full  of  bathers  resorting  to  it  for  ablutions  and 
devotional  purposes  ;  and  from  morning  till  late  in 
the  afternoon  large  concourse  of  people  always 
throng  the  bank  employed  in  various  pursuits. 
Down  to  Kedar  Ghat  the  crowds  continue,  but 
beyond    that    point   their   ranks   thin   and    melt  away. 

We  leave  the  Mir  Ghat  and  the  lofty  Man 
Mandil  and  drift  on  opposite  the  Dasaswamedh  Ghat 
(Plate  IV,  I )  once  more.  In  very  old  times  it  was 
styled  the  Rtidra  Sarowar  Th-tha,  but  the  name 
that  now  passes  current  is  associated  with  Brahma's 
Ten- horse  Sacrifice  performed  here  in  the  mythical 
ages.     Temples   cluster  thicker  over  this   bank    than 


232         THE  HOL  V  CIJ  V  {SENA  RES)  chap. 


elsewhere,  and  the  largest  numbers  of  bathers  flock 
to  this  ghat  for  the  observance  of  religious  rites 
and  duties.  Constant  bustle  and  motion  along  these 
ghats   make   the   scene   one   of  intense   animation. 

But  slow  your  boatmen  must  ply  their  oars  if 
you    would  take   in  all  the   ever-changing  kaleidoscopic 

variety   of  scenes    shifting   swifth'  along 

Scenes  on  the     the   Ghat.     Numbers  of  boats  of  diverse 

bank  sizes     and    shapes     painted     green    and 

yellow,  and  some  of  them  looking 
roomy  and  commodious  with  pretty  cane  chairs 
and  lounges  placed  upon  their  flat  railed  roofs  lie 
moored  all  along  the  bank  ;  and  numerous-  similar 
crafts  flit  about  and  make  the  river  lively  with 
their  brisk  movements.  Huge  palm-leaf  umbrellas 
with  long  bamboo-shafts  stuck  in  the  ground  or 
tied  to  posts  afford  shelter  from  the  scorc'iing  sun 
to  various  classes  of  people  on  the  bank — beggars 
and  barbers,  priests  and  flower-sellers,  ash-smeared 
Sadhus  and  devout  lay-worshippers,  and  perhaps 
idlers  as  well  like  you  and  me.  Under  some 
of  these  sit  the  ghatias  upon  their  broad  wooden 
platforms  to  take  care  of  the  clothes  and  other 
belongings  of  the  bathers  and  to  supply  them  with 
oil  and  sandal  paste  and  other  toilet  requisites  for 
some  little  remuneration.  No  distinction  of  rank 
seems  to  stand  in  the  way  of  the  mixing  up  of 
this  medley  of  men  in  these  ghats  ;  and  you  find 
the   rich     and    the     poor   bathing     side   by   side,   and 


VIII   ALONG  THE  RIVER—SOUTHWARD     233 

the  high-class  Brahman  in  close  proximity  to  the 
despised  Sudra  without  the  least  fear  of  contamination 
(  Plate  XII,  5  ).  From  various  parts  of  India  far 
and  near  are  they  all  there,  males,  females  and 
children    of  all    ages    and    all    castes. 

Look  at  the  old  men  sitting  upon  the  steps 
in  their  wet  clothes  reciting  mantras  and  making 
offerings  of  flowers  to  the  gods,  which  thrown  into 
the  water  float  away  afar  in  a  long  trailing  line 
down  the  placid  stream.  See  how  merrily  are  the 
youngsters  over  there  talking  and  laughing  and 
groups  of  females  chatting  incessantly — as  is  thtir 
wont  all  the  world  over — while  bathing  in  a  corner 
of  the  ghat  (  Plate  XII,  2  ).  Yonder  are  the 
frolicsome  children  swimming  and  spkshing  water 
in  innocent  glee  caring  little  for  the  quiet  their 
elders  so  badly  want.  In  a  retired  corner  a  little 
way  off  are  persons  quietly  offering  libations  of 
Ganges  water  to  their  dear  departed  ones  and 
performing  other  rites  enjoined  in  the  skastras  for 
their  good  in  the  world  beyond,  and  making  gifts 
and  presents  to  Brahmans  who  are  everywhere  in 
evidence.  Mark  the  man  there  immersed  to  his 
waist,  standing  with  his  palms  joined  and  muttering 
hymns  in  a  singsong  tone  half  aloud  and  bowing 
often  as  he  looks  to  the  resplendent  sun-god  in 
all    his   glory   in    the   east. 

There  goes  a  batch  of  pilgrims, — the  grave-looking 
pater-fainilias     leading,   and     the    cheerful     old    dame 


234        THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)       Chap. 

behind  with  a  merry  twinkle  in  her  eyes  that 
h'ghts  up  her  jocose  rotund  face  dragging  along  a 
playful  little  urchin  of  a  grandchild.  With  a  wriggling 
restless  little  one  pressed  to  her  bosom  by  her 
encircling  left  arm  decked  with  golden  bracelets,  a 
young  mother  comes  along  in  the  train  of  the  old 
lady,  clutching  by  the  jewelled  fingers  of  her  right 
hand  the  fringe  of  her  laughing  sister-in-law's  apparel 
and  casting  bashful  looks  of  eager  curiosity  from 
beneath  the  half-drawn  veil  which  shades  her  pretty 
little  face.  And  those  two  young  men — who  bring 
up  the  rear  and  carry  the  vessel  of  the  sacred 
Ganges  water  and  votive  offerings  of  green  bael 
leaves,  pink  roses  and  yellow  marigold, — must  be 
brothers  to  all  appearances.  A  guide — a  Jattrawaliah 
or  Gangaputra  (  son  of  the  Ganges  ),  one  of  a 
class  of  Brahmans  who  earn  their  livelihood  by 
this  calling — directs  their  movements  and  points  out 
to  them  the  various  sacred  nooks  and  corners 
where  they  must  pause  to  make  an  offering  in  the 
shape  of  small  coins  or  cowries  in  the  temples 
and  shrines  and  to  the  swarm  of  pestering  beggars 
and    mendicant    Brahmans   hanging  about   ever}  where. 

Venerable  old  men  fresh  from  a  cleansing  dip 
in  the  holy  stream  go  along  in  their  daily  round 
of  visits  to  the  important  shrines,  clad  in  plain 
white  with  painted  7ia77iabali  sheets — stamped  with 
the  names  of  Rama  and  Hari  and  with  the  imprints 
of  Vishnu's     feet     upon     them — thrown     round     their 


VIII    ALONG  THE  RIVER—SOUTHWARD    235 

necks,  and  their  foreheads  and  arms  daubed  with 
streaks  of  the  sacred  Ganges  earth  and  sandalwood 
paste.  Their  teeth  chatter  with  cold  as  they  move 
along  muttering  snatches  of  mantras  and  sprinkling 
drops  of  sacred  water  from  the  Kaina?7daius 
(  water-pots  )  in  their  hands  upon  the  numerous 
emblems  of  Si\a  h  1^  abcut  their  paths. 
I'athetic,  very  rruch,  is  the  sight  of  that  fragile 
withered  old  lady — perhaps  a  lonely  widow  the  best 
part  of  her  life — now  bent  double  with  age  and 
almost  in  the  last  stage  of  decrepitude,  plodding  along 
wearily  with  the  hejp  of  her  trusty  old  stick,  probably 
her  only  support  in  this  world  now,  and  shaking 
and  shivering  for  the  early  morning  bath.  Verily,  it 
was  a  sight    like  this  that   moved  the  poet  as  he  wailed 

'When   one   by  one   our   ties   are   torn, 
And   friend  from   friend   is   snatch'd  forlorn. 
When    man    is   left   alone   to   mourn. 
O,   then,   how  sweet   it   is   to  die  ! 

When    the   trembling-  limbs   refuse   their  weight, 
And   films   slow-gathering  dim   the   sight, 
When   clouds  obscure   the   mental  light, 
'Tis    Nature's   kindest  boon   to  die  !' 

Longingly  does  she  look  up  to  that  welcome  liberation, 
and  bears  up  still  through  the  strength  of  her  implicit 
faith  in  the  virtue  of  the  sacrevi  water  to  effect 
her  salvation  and  places  her  unswerving  reliance 
upon  the  Great  Lord  to  secure  for  her  the  be  on 
of  freedom  from  the  interminable  rounds  of  births 
and   transmigrations   should    fortune   be    so   favorably 


236         THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARE";)  chap 


disposed     as   to     enable   her     to     cast     out    her     last 
breath    in    this    holy    city. 

But  we  must  not  loiter  much  longer,  for  we 
have  yet  to  go  a  long  way  to  reach  Ramnagar 
and  have,  further,  to  go  up  above  some  of  the 
southern  ghats  as  well.  So,  leaving  the  Sitala 
and  Ah  ALVA  Bai'S  Ghats  behind,  we  pass  by  the 
MUNSHI  Ghat  erected  by  Munshi  Sridhar,  the 
architect  of  Ahalya  Bai,  and  Ran  A  Ghat  with 
the  palace  standing  above  it  of  the  Maharaja  of 
Udaipur  who  traces  his  descent  from  Rama,  the 
immortal    hero    of  the    Ramayana.     Next    comes    the 

Chausatti  Ghat  and  up  its  flight 
Chausatti  Ghat    of  stairs     is    the     temple   of     Chausatti 

Devi  built  by  Bengal's  last  independent 
King,  Maharaja  Pratapaditya,  towards  the  end  of 
the  sixteenth  century.  The  image  is  a  representation 
of  Durga  with  her  feet  upon  a  crouching  buffalo  ; 
and  the  stately  figure  of  a  lion,  another  present 
from  Lai  Bahadoor  Singh,  Raja  of  Ahmety,  stands 
in  the  quadrangle.  An  image  of  Bkadrakdli  is  also 
in    the   san.e   compound. 

We  leave  Pande  and  Narad  Ghats  behind, 
and  come  next  to  the  Chauki  Ghat.  Above  it 
stands  a  lofty  peepul  tree  near  the  trunk  of  which 
on  the  round  stone  pavement  are  numerous  Siva 
emblems  and  figures  of  hooded  serpents.  We  then 
float  along  by  the  Kedar  Ghat  with  its  splendid 
stairs    which    in   loftiness    are    next   only    to   the   ghat 


VIII    ALONG  THE  RIVER—SOUTHWARD     237 


above  which  stands  Aurangzeb's  towering  mosque.  At 
the  top  of  this  ghat  is  the  large  domed 
Kedarnath  temple  of  Kedarnath  Siva  painted  red 
and  white.  It  stands  amid  four  smaller 
ones,  locating  a  large  number  of  images  of  various 
gods  and  goddesses,  among  which  are  Annapurna^ 
Laksmi  Narain,  Ganesha  and  Bhaironath.  A  tank 
called  Gauri  Kund^  sacred  to  Siva's  spouse,  is  at 
the  top  of  the  first  flight  of  stairs.  It  is  said  that 
a  Brahman  ot  Oujjein  named  Vasishta  had  resolved 
to  go  on  yearly  pilgrimages  to  the  temple  of 
Kedarnath  in  the  Himalayas  as  long  as  he  lived. 
He  did  so  sixty-one  times,  and  though  grown  very 
old  prepared  to  make  a  fresh  start.  Upon  this 
Kedarnath  became  very  propitious  and  manifesting 
himself  to  the  Bramhan  in  a  dream  promised  to 
stay  in  Benares  for  all  time.  Like  Gauri  Kund^ 
Hansa  Tirtha  and  Ganga  in  the  Himalayas,  all 
the  three   are   represented     here   as    well. 

Proceeding  further  up  upon  the  bank  on  the 
right    appears     another   figure    of   Bhima,     and     soon 

after      this      we      reach      the       Harish 

Harish  Chandra  CHANDRA    Ghat    or    Mashan  Ghat — 

Ghat  the     cremation-ground    of  the   southern 

quarter  of  Benares.  No  flights  of 
stairs  or  stone  pavements  mark  the  ghat  here. 
Several  Sati  stones  upon  the  bank  in  this  place 
mark  the  spots  hallowed  by  the  self-immolation 
of    disconsolate      widows.     This     jjhat     is     connected 


238  THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)        chap. 

with  a  thrilling  incident  and  is  famed  to  be  the  original 
cremation-ground  of  Benares,  where  in  the  Epic 
ages  Raja  Harish  Chandra  was  engaged  by  the 
Chandala  owner  of  the  ghat  to  work  as  his  servant. 
True  to  a  promise  he  had  made  to  Viswamitra 
to  give  whatever  the  Rishi  desired  to  have,  he 
made  him  a  gift  of  all  he  had  and  vacated  his 
kingdom  at  his  bidding.  Even  this,  however,  would 
not  satisfy  the  Rishi  who  demanded  the  customary 
dakshina  or  fee  in  money  that  a  Brahman  usually 
obtains  as  a  concomitant  to  a  gift  of  lands. 
Bereft  of  all  world's  material  goods  he  had  thus 
no  other  means  left  but  to  attempt  to  raise  the 
requisite  funds  by  selling  his  queen  and  his  little 
prince  into  slavery  to  an  old  Brahman.  Even  this 
course  failed  to  raise  the  adequate  amount,  and  he 
had  to  sell  his  own  self  at  last  to  the  Chandala 
who  owned  this  ghat  and  who  employed  him  to 
collect  rates  from  the  people  who  came  to  burn 
their  dead  here.  The  home  of  the  once  happy 
and  powerful  king  thus  broken  up  by  a  freak  of 
fortune  for  a  plighted  word,  the  unlucky  King  and 
his  unhappy  consort  passed  long  years  of  suffering 
in  strange  places  engaged  in  strange  vocations. 
To  add  to  his  miseries,  the  story  runs,  it  so 
happened  that  the  little  prince  was  bitten  by  a 
snake  while  plucking  flowers  for  the  old  Brahman's 
devotional  offerings.  The  poor  mother  brought  down 
the  body  of  her  darling  to  this  very  ghat  for 
cremation      and    lay     wailing   and     disconsolate,   with 


VIII    ALONG  THE  RIVER—SOUTH  WARD  239 

the  dead  prince  in  her  lap  and  the  lurid  flames 
of  the  burning  pyres  imparting  a  ghastly  look  to 
her  wan  and  pallid  face  distorted  by  grief.  From 
out  of  the  night's  somore  gloom  rendered  fearful 
by  the  ruddy  half-lights,  who  should  now  emerge 
with  his  heavy  rod  but  the  erstwhile  King  and 
now  a  dirt-begrimed  slave  to  claim  the  usual 
rate  ?  A  i^v^  brief  minute's  parley,  a  lifting  of 
the  mist  of  years  and  the  assertion  of  the  natural 
ties  of  blood, — and  mutual  recognition  followed 
soon  enough  and  the  inevitable  scene  of  heart- 
rending distress.  Overwhelmed  and  blinded  by 
grief,  as  mai:  and  wife  were  about  to  plunge 
themselves  into  the  funeral  pyre  with  their  dead 
child,  the  sage  Viswamitra  appeared  in  the  very 
nick  of  time  and  restored  life  to  the  prince  and 
the  queen  and  his  kingdom  to  the  King.  Highly 
dramatic  is  this  episode  and  thrilling  with  intense 
pathos  as  you  find  it  narrated  in  the  Ramayana. 
The  large  stone  building  above  the  ghat  is  pointed 
out  as  belonging  to  the  descendants  of  that  same 
Chandala,  and  a  Siva  emblem  near  the  water's 
cd^Q   as   established    by    Raja    liarish    Chandra. 

Up  a  flight  of  high  steps  to  the  south  above 
the  Hanuman  Giiat  stands  the  large  image  of  the 
monkey-god  near  the  entrance  to  the  /una  akhcra. 
This  ghat  is  associated  with  the 
Ballabhacharya  memory  of  Ballabhacharya,  the 
founder  of  the  Ballabhachari  or  the 
Rudra    sect  of  the   Vaishr.ava>,     Born   at    Benares     in 


240        THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)        Chap. 

1479  A.  D.  of  Brahman  parents,  he  set  up  the 
worship  of  Krishna  as  Balgopal.  It  was  a  period  of 
great  reHgious  activity  all  over  India  and  Europe, 
and  his  contemporaries  were  Chaitanya  (1484- 15 27)  at 
Nadiya  in  Bengal  and  Nanak  (1469- 15 39)  in  the 
Punjab,  and  the  great  reformer  Martin  Luther  (1483- 
1546)  had  also  been  then  at  work  in  Europe.  He 
passed  his  last  days  at  the  Jethanwar  quarter  in 
Benares  where  he  founded  2.  imith  and  died  in  1530. 
There  is  a  legend  connected  with  his  death  to  the 
effect  that  he  descended  down  the  steps  of  this 
ghat  into  the  water  below  and  disappeared.  Soon 
after  this  a  flame  of  fire  issued  out  of  the  spot 
where  he  had  gone  down  which  was  seen  ascending 
heavenward  till  it  passed  away  into  the  blue  sky 
above. 

Close  by  is  the  Dandi  Ghat  (PMate  X,  2)  and 
beside  it  the  SiVALA  Ghat  above  which  on  the 
northern  side  are  the  two  muths  of  the  Naga 
Sannyasis,  the  Nirvani  and  the  Niranjani.  To 
the  south  of  this  is  what  is  known  as  the 
Sivala  Fort  where  Chet  Singh,  the  Raja  of  Benares 
resided  till  1781.  It  was  built  by  Baijnath  Misr, 
and  the  solid  foundation  rising  out  of  the  water 
erect  and  upright  impart    to    it  a    look    of   considerable 

strength.  The  spacious  grounds  above 
SivQla  Fort       now   contain    a    small    garden.    Through 

a  small  window  overlooking  the  river  on 
the    north      Raja     Chet    Singh    is     said    to     have     let 


IX       ALONG  THE  RIVER— SOUTHWARD  241 

himself  down  into  a  boat  below  and  crossed  over 
to  Ramnagar  when  he  was  beset  by  British 
troops  under  orders  of  Warren  Hastings.  ^  After  this 
the  fort  was  confiscated  by  the  British  Government 
and  remained  for  many  ye^rs  in  the  occupation 
of  the  descendants  of  the  Emperors  of  Delhi  who 
were  allowed  to  reside  there.  Only  recently  has 
this  reverted  to  the  present  Maharaja  of  Benares. 
The  houses  in  the  outer  and  the  zenana  quarters  on 
the  south  with  five  temples  alongside  the  river  as 
well  as  the  old  Dewan-khana  further  off,  are  all 
now  in  a  sadly  dilapidated  condition.  Their  repairs 
had  lately  been  taken  in  hand,  and  eleven  temples 
with  lofty  pinnacles,  standing  together  to  the  south 
of  the  Naga  Akheras  and  utilized  by  the  Mahomedans 
as  store-houses, — have  now  been  restored  to  their 
former   condition. 

A  little  to  the  south  is  the  TULSI  Ghat  named 
after  the  great  poet  Tulsi  Das,  who  was  a  contem- 
porary    of    Shakespeare     and   was   reputed     to  have 

lived  in  a  house  above  this  ghat  for 
Tulsi  Das        a   long     time.      Here   it     was   that     he 

wrote  his  Hindi  version  of  the  Ra7nayana 
in  1 574  A.  D.  His  father  Bhanu  Datta  was  a  Kanouj 
Brahman,  and  he  was  born  about  1533  at  a  villaife 
in  the  Banda  district  called  Rajapur  lying  to  the 
vvest  of  Prayag  ;    some,  however,  assign  his   birth-place 

(I)     S^e  Chap.  X,  post 

16— 


242        THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)        Chap. 

to  Tari  in  the  Doab.  ^  He  lost  his  father  when 
very  young  and  was  brought  up  by  an  ascetic, 
and  stayed  for  about  twelve  years  at  Benares  engaged 
in  study.  After  this  he  returned  home  and  married 
and  settled  there.  Report  has  it  that  he  had  grown  so 
inordinately  fond  of  his  wife  that  he  could  not  bear 
separation  from  her  for  any  lengthy  period  of  time. 
In  course  of  his  temporary  absence  from  home 
on  one  occasion,  she  had  gone  to  her  father's  house 
on  a  visit.  Apprised  of  this  upon  his  return,  he 
bent  his  steps  thither  ;  but  when  he  accosted  his 
wife,  the  latter  felt  much  ashamed  and  annoyed  at 
being  followed  about  that  way  and  pointed  out 
that  the  highest  and  the  purest  bliss  should  have 
been  his  if  he  had  but  diverted  that  same  love, 
that  he  bore  for  her  transitory  frame  of  flesh  and 
blood,  towards  the  divine  Rama  the  Lord  of  the 
three  worlds.  This  rebuff  had  a  chastening  effect  and 
cooled  the  ardour  of  his  love  and  made  him  relinquish 
the  world  and  turn  an  ascetic.  He  came  away  to 
Benares   and    travelled  to    Ajodhya,   where   according 

(i)  Prof  H.  H,  Wilson  in  his  'Religious  Sects  of  the  Hindus'  notes  : 
Tulsi  Das  was  a  Brahman  of  the  Sarvarya  branch  and  a  native 
of  Hajipur,  near  Chitrakut  ;  when  arrived  at  maturity  he  settled  at 
Benares,  and  held  the  office  of  Dewan  to  the  Raja  of  that  city  ;  his 
preceptor  was  Jagannath  Das,  whom  he  followed  to  Govardhan 
near  Brindaban,  but  afterwards  returned  to  Benares  and  there 
commenced  his  Hindi  version  of  the  Ramayana  in  the  year  of 
Samvat  163 1,  when  he  was  thirty-one  years  of  age.  He  continued 
to  reside  at  Benares  where  he  built  a  temple  to  Sita  Ram,  and 
founded  a  muth  adjoining,  both  of  which  are  still  in  existence  (1861). 


IX        ALONG  THE  RIVER—SOUTHWARD    243 

to  some  he  published  his  Ramayana.  After  staying- 
there  for  a  time  he  came  back  to  Benares  and 
lived  there  till  his  death  in  1623.  His  immortal 
work  has  a  place  in  every  Hindi-speaking  household 
in  the  North-West,  like  Kirtibash's  Ramayana  in 
Bengal  and  Sridhar's  Marhatta  version  of  the  same 
in  Western  India,  and  is  a  source  of  solace  and 
a  guide  in  shaping  the  course  of  daily  life  to  the 
high  and  the  low,  to  the  rich  and  the  poor,  and 
to  the  grihastha  who  sticks  to  his  home  as  well 
as   the    Sannyasi  who   has   renounced    the   world. 

In  a  small  low-roofed  room  on  the  upper  story 
of  an  old  building  above  the  river  are  carefully 
preserved  a  pair  of  sandals  said  to  have  been  worn 
by  Tulsi  Das  and  a  piece  of  rotten  wood  said  to  be 
a  part  of  the  boat  by  which  he  used  to  cross  the 
river  and  an  old  quilted  bedding  pointed  out  as 
the  one  on  which  he  used  to  sleep.  As  to  the 
antiquity  claimed  for  these  relics,  however,  it  is  hard 
to  form  any  estimate.  In  another  apartment  is  the 
image  of  Hanuman  said  to  be  the  identical  one  he 
worshipped  ;  and  a  small  space  upon  the  floor 
where  lies  a  black  stone  slab  with  lines  of  letters 
carved  upon  it  is  pointed  out  as  the  very 
spot  where  he  had  composed  his  Ramayana.  There 
are  also  several  images  here  along  with  those  of 
Rama,    Laksmana   and   Sita. 

The  Tulsi  Ghat  is  also  associated  with  the 
memory     of    many     of     Chaitanyd  s     followers     who 


244        THE  HOL  Y  CIT  Y  {BENARES)         chap. 


had  their  abode  here.  Chaitanya  also  lived  at 
Benares  for  a  time  where  he  had  his  religious  and 
philosophical  disputations  with  Prakasanand  Saraswati, 
the  greatest  of  the  Benares  Pandits  of  the  time, 
and   defeated   him. 

We  now  arrive  at  the  last  of  the  bathing  places — 
the  Asi-Sangam — where   that  small   streamlet  empties 

itself  into  the  Ganges.  After  achievinjaj 
Asi-Sangam      her   victory  over    the    demons    Sumbha 

and  Nishumbha,  Goddess  Durga  is  said 
to  have  thrown  her  sword  ( ast  )  away  and  it  fell 
here  and  carved  out  the  Asi  channel.  Here  ends 
in  a  manner  the  holy  limits  of  Benares  and  bej-ond 
this  to  the  south  there  are  no  more  ghats  and 
stone  revetments  of  the  bank  or  temples  and 
shrines   any   further. 

Having   thus   far   seen   the  holy   shrines   and  ghats 

in     Benares     we    may — as     our     boat     heads     slowly 

towards     Raoinagar — talk     about   one     more     and     a 

rather   arduous   duty     the    pilgrim     has     to     perform, 

viz.,    to    walk   along    the     Panchkoshi 

Panchkoshi      Road     enclosing   the     sacred     precincts 

Road  of  Benares   on    the   land    side, — starting 

from    Manikarnika   Ghat   as    the   centre 

and   going  round  at  a  distance  of  five  cros  or  ten  miles 

from    it.     This   road   was   repaired    by    Rani    Bhawani 

who   had   erected   the   Durga   Temple  ;   but     portions 

of  it     and   many     of    the     temples   and     tanks   lying 

along   it     lately   fell     into   very   bad    condition    again. 


IX      ALONG  THE  RIVER—SOUTHWARD    245 


>  XyV/ v/ v^v/ vy  \r  vr  \ 


It  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  mention  in  this 
connection  that  through  the  exertions  of  an  old 
Brahman  of  Benares  named  Pandit  Dwarlanath 
Dube,  a  thin  wiry  old  man  of  great  earnestness 
and  energy,  a  committee  has  been  formed  under  the 
name  of  '^Kashi  Tirtha  Jirnoddharini  Sabha*'  for  the 
repair  and  restoration  of  old  Tirthas  or  places  of 
pilgrimage  at  Benares.  The  committee  have  succeeded 
in  making  improvements  to  the  Panchkoshi  Road 
repairing  the  bridges  along  the  same  and  making 
provision  for  street-lights  at  Bhimchandi,  Ramesvvara, 
and  other  places,  and  also  by  cleansing  and  restoring 
the  Gandharba  Sagar  tank  at  Bhimchandi  and  a 
well  near  the  temple  at  Ramesvvara.  The  old  temples 
of  Adi-Mahadeo,  Nirbuddeswara,  and  Kameswara 
near  the  Trilochan  Ghat  and  also  of  Briddha- 
kaleswara  and  Daksheswara  in  the  interior  were 
also  repaired  by  some  reises  of  Benares  through 
the  persuasions  of  the  committee.  In  respect  of 
these  repairs  and  restoration  of  old  temples  and 
resuscitation  of  old  shrines,  Dwarkanath  has 
merely  been  following  in  the  footsteps  of  a  Guzrati 
Brahman  named  Pandit  Ramkrishnaji  Dichchhit 
Gorji  whose  disciple  he  professes  to  be.  Even 
before  Pandit  Gorji,  two  Bengal  Brahmans,  Pandit 
Ram  Chandra  Vidyalankara  and  his  son  Pandit 
Uma  Sankar  Tarkalankara,  had  taken  the  initiative 
in  the  matter  and  set  the  movement  afoot  and 
had   done   much    in   this   direction. 

From     the     Manikarnika     Kund,    the    road    runs, 


246  THE  HOL  Y  CITY  (BENARES) 

along  the  ghats  southward  towards  the  Asi-Sangam 
and  thence  passes  towards  the  west  and  the  north, 
through  a  wide  and  wonderfully  picturesque  and 
delightful  area  in  the  interior.  It  has  five  halting 
stages — the  first  being  near  the  temple  of  Kardam- 
eswara  Siva  in  the  village  of  Khandwa  said  to  be 
of  very  great  antiquity,  the  next  near  the  temple 
of  Bhimchandi  Devi  in  the  village  of  Dhupchandi, 
the  third  at  Rameswara,  the  fourth  near  the  Panch 
Pandava  tank  in  the  village  of  Shibpur  and  the 
fifth  near  the  Kapildhara  tank  to  the  south  ol  the 
Barana.  This  takes  the  pilgrim  five  days,  and  on 
the  sixth  he  comes  back  to  Manikarnika  via 
Barana-Sangam  having  covered  a  space  no  less  than 
fifty  miles  in  length.  Circumambulating  thus  round 
the  whole  of  the  holy  area  with  all  its  numerous 
shrines  and  sacred  places,  one  is  said  to  acquire 
in  a  compendious  form  all  the  merits  and  benefits 
to  be  obtained  from  visiting  each   of  them   individually. 


I'LATE    Xiri 


n 

rrt 

to 
<n 

'c5 

r- 

r—t 

^ 

(1) 

0- 

B 

^ 

(U 

•^ 

H 

rt 

CJD 

^ 

n; 

bJD 

C 

P 

(T, 

n 

P^ 

\  247 


Chapter  X 

RAMNAGAR 

"  There  is  a  divinity  that  shapes  our  ends,   rough-hew  them 
how  we  will." 

— Shakespeare. 

ETVVEEN    green   banks   rich   with   fertility 

flows   the   vast   sheet   of    water.     About   a 

mile     off    to     the     left    now     appear     the 

massive   buttresses   and    the   rounded  walls 

and   thick    battlements    of  the     Ramnagar 

Fort   (Plate   XIII,    3),     solid     and     strong 

and    rising  straight  out  of  the  water  ;  and 

fine   windows   and   stately  balconies   above 

overlook   the   river   and   have   a   look     of    quiet     and 

peaceful    opulence.      Important     as   the     residence   of 

the     present      Maharaja,     the      traditions     of    whose 

family   is    said    to     relate     to    the     eleventh     century 

A.   D.,     it     is     also     closely     connected 

Mansa  Ram      with   the   history    of    Benares.      It   was 

Mansa     Ram,      the       head      of     the 

Bhuinhars    and     Zemindar     of    Gangapur — a     village 

ten     miles      west    of    Benares — who      was     the    real 

founder     of    the    greatness   of  the    Raj    family     and 

the  architect   of  its   fortunes.     The   great  Mogul  Moon 

had     been     waning  after     the     death   of    Aurangzeb, 

and    the   Nawabs   of  Oudh  began    to  gather  strength 

during   the   effete   regime   of  his   mediocre   successors. 


248  THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES)        chap. 

Thus  it  was,  as  has  been  traced  before  ^  that  in 
1722  the  Benares  province  came  to  the  hands  of 
Saadat  Khan,  the  first  Navvab  of  Oudh.  It  was  then 
sublet  by  him  to  Mir  Rustom  AH  who  governed  it  till 
1738.  Mansa  Ram  took  service  with  him  and  gradually 
drew  the  reins  of  government  into  his  own  hands, 
and  after  the  expulsion  of  the  former  in  1738,  he 
was,  according  to  Dr.  Hunter,  allowed  to  step  into 
Rustom  AH's  place.  He  made  his  possessions 
secure  and  in  course  of  time  acquired  the  Fort  of 
Jaunpur  and  obtained  the  grant  of  Chunar  and 
Benares  for  his  son  Bulwant  Singh  and  secured 
for  him  the  title  of  Raja.  According  to  another 
authority,  however.  Emperor  Mahammad  Shah  of 
Delhi  being  willing  to  place  Benares  in  the  hands 
of  the  Hindus  made  Mansa  Ram  Raja  of  Benares 
in    1730. 

Upon  the  death  of  Mansa  Ram  in  1739,  his 
son    Bulwant   Singh     succeeded   and     strengthened 

his  position  by  erecting  this  Fort  at 
Bulwant  Singh  Ramnagar  ;       and     in      spite      of     the 

attempts  of  Nawabs  Safdar  Jung  and 
Shujauddowlah  to  bring  him  under  control,  he 
made  himself  practically  independent  oi  the  Nawabs 
of  Oudh,  and  further  added  Chakia  to  his  patrimony 
in  1754  and  obtained  Korh  as  a  Jagir  from 
Nawab  Shujauddowlah.  Later  on  in  1763,  he 
joined   the   Emperor     Shah     Alam     of     Delhi   in   his 

(i)  Vide  p.    134,  ante. 


X  RAMNAGAR  249 

expedition  against  Mir  Jafar,  the  Nawab  of  Bengal, 
the  former  being  backed  by  Nawab  Shujauddovvlah 
and  the  latter  by  the  British.  Then  was  fought 
the  momentous  battle  of  Buxar  in  1764,  and  after 
the  defeat  of  the  Emperor  Bulwant  coolly  went 
over  to  the  side  of  the  conquering  British.  In 
1764  Emperor  Shah  Alam  ceded  the  Benares 
district  to  the  English,  but  under  the  terms  of  a 
subsequent  treaty  in  1766  with  Nawab  Shujauddowlah 
it  reverted  to  the  hands  of  the  VVazirs  of  Oudh. 
Owing  to  the  support  of  the  English,  however, 
Buhvant's  possessions  could  not  be  interfered  with 
by   the   VVazir. 

On  his  death  in  1770,  Chet  Singh,  son  of 
Bulwant  by  a  Rajput  lady,  succeeded  ;  and  the 
VVazir  of  Oudh  having  eventually 
Chet  Sln^h  ceded  the  province  of  Benares  back 
to  the  British  in  1775,  the  Government 
of  John  Company  confirmed  him  in  his  place  in 
1776.  He  could  not,  however,  pull  on  well  with 
Warren  Hastings  who  was  hard  pressed  for  men 
and  money  owing  to  the  wars  with  the  Marhattas 
and  with  Haidar  Ali  in  Mysore.  Complication  j5 
arose,  and  in  1778  he  was  called  upon  to  pay  for 
the  maintenance  of  three  battalions  of  Sepoys  and 
in  1780  to  make  additional  payments  for  cavalry 
for  general  service  of  the  State.  For  a  time  Chet 
Singh  complied,  but  held  back  afterwards.  At  last 
in    1 78 1,     matters     came     to   a   head     when    he     was 


250  THE  HOL  Y  CITY  (BENARES)        chap. 


'V/>.'  \^^^^./■\ 


called  upon  to  pay  the  sum  of  five  lakhs  of 
Rupees  for  failing  to  furnish  a  thousand  horsemen 
to  fight  with  the  French.  As  he  would  not  do  so, 
Hastings  came  over  to  Benares  and  took  up  his 
quarters  at  Madhudas's  garden  ^  and  asked  him 
to  explain  his  conduct.  As  his  attitude  did  not 
impress  him  favorably  he  issued  orders  for  placing 
the  Raja  under  arrest  m  his  own  residence  at  the 
Sivala  Fort,  and  two  companies  of  sepoys  under 
three  British  officers  were  detailed  off  to  mount 
guard  there.  They  went,  but  by  some  mistake 
without  ammunitions,  and  took  their  stand  on  the 
small  square  to  the  west  of  the  eleven  temples 
still  existing  in  the  fort.  A  number  of  the  Raja's 
retainers  who  had  been  apprised  of  the  circumstances, 
now  crossed  over  from  Ramnagar  and  put  all  of 
them — two  hundred  and  five  all  told — to  the  sword  ; 
and  during  the  7nelee  the  Raja  escaped  by  lowering 
himself  down  by  means  of  some  turbans  tied  together 
into  a  boat  below  from  one  of  the  five  windows 
in   the   fort   lying  above   the  river   on   the  north   side. 

This  was  in  1781  ;  and  at  a  little  distance  to 
the  west  of  the  Sivala  Fort,  in  a  quarter  inhabited 
mostly  by  Mahomedans  now,  is  a  rectangular  platform 
raised  above  the  level  of  the  adjoining  road  and 
enclosed  by  a  railing,  inside  which  are  three  plain 
white   tombs   with   a   brass  tablet  recording  thus: 

"  This     tablet     has     been     erected   by    the     Govt, 
(i)    Vide  p.    52,  ante. 


X  R  AM N AGAR  251 

of    the    N.    W.    P.    to     preserve    the     last     earthly 
resting  place   of   Lieut.    Arch  :    Scot,     1st   Battalion 

Sepoys  ;  Jer  :    Symes    2nd J.     Stalker, 

Resid  :    Body-guard    who    were   killed    August  17, 
1 78 1  near    this     spot    doing    their   duty/' 

Far  from  the  scene  of  the  carnage,  however,  and 
near  the  Cheti^unge  Police  Station  and  next 
to  the  fine  large  garden-house  of  Hon.  Munshi 
Madho  Lai  at  Benares  is  the  place  where  the 
remains  of  the  Sepoys  were  buried  which  was  later 
on  enclosed  by  a  wall  built  in  1862.  An  inscription 
upon  a  slab  outside  marks  the  spot  as  Hhe 
burial  place  of  brave  me?i  who  died  in  the  performance 
of  their  duty.* 

An  attack  upon  Fort  Ramnagar  followed  this 
and  was  repulsed  costing  the  life  of  Captain 
Mahaffre  who  led  it.  Chet  Singh  now  prepared  to  take 
up  the  offensive  and  attack  Hastings  in  his  quarters 
at  Madhudass'  garden  at  Benares,  but  the  latter 
thought  it  prudent  to  make  a  hasty  retreat  to  the 
strong  fort  at  Chunar.  ^  Chet  Singh  then  raised 
an  army  of  over  twenty  thousand  regular  troops 
besides  about  the  same  number  of  irregulars,  but 
he  was  eventually  turned  out  of  his  strongholds 
and  had  to  flee  to  Gwalior  where  he  ended  his 
days  in  18 10.  He  was  formally  deposed  and 
Mahip  Narain,  son  of  Bulwant  Singh's  daughter 
Golap    Kumari    was  placed  on  the  throne  in  September 

(i)    Vide  p.  52,   ante. 


252         THE  HOLY  CITY  (BEN ARE '^)         chap. 

1781.      Since     then     till     now      the     succession      has 

b^en        unbroken        and      it      has     all 

MahipNarain    along     been    a   piping     time     of    peace 

and  prosperity.     His  son  Udit    Narain 

succeeded    in     1795    and   was     in    his     turn     followed 

by   his   son    ISWARI    PRASAD  in    1835. 

It  was  during  Raja  Mahip  Narain  s  regime 
that     the     Civil     and     Criminal      Administration     of 

Benares  and  the  Criminal  Administration 
Administration   of     the     province     were      taken     away 

by  the  British  into  their  own 
hands.  In  1794  the  lands  held  by  the  Raja  in 
his  own  right  were  constituted  into  his  Family 
Domains    with     his    own     courts     for    the     trial     of 

civil  and  revenue  cases  cropping  up 
Prabhu  Narain   therein.     The   present   Maharaja   H.   H. 

Sir  Prabhu  Narain  Singh,  G.  C.  I.  E., 
who  succeeded  in  1889,  has  lately  been  the  recipient 
of  signal  honors  from  the  government  of  Lord 
Minto,  having  been  invested  with  the  full  administrative 
powers  and  dignity  of  a  Ruling  Chief  in 
respect  to  the  perganas  Bhadohi  and  Kera  Mangraur 
of  his  Family  Domains  as  well  as  the  tract  comprising 
the  Fort  of  Ramnagar  and  its  appurtenances  which 
are  now  to  be  termed  the  STATE  OF  Benares. 
A  profound  scholar  in  Sanskrit  and  a  patron  of 
learning,  the  Maharaja  is  one  of  the  principal 
benefactors  of  the  Central  Hindu  College.  His 
v/ork*:   of  charity   are   various   and   extensive,   and  he 


X  RAM N AGAR  -?53 

enjoys   a   wide   and   well-deserved  popularity. 

From  the  landiiig  stage,  you  come  to  the  front 
of  the   lofty   gate   leading   to   the   spacious   courtyard 

of  the  Maharaja's  Fort  and  Palace. 
Ramnagar  Fort  The   two   large  courts   inside   the   walls 

are  capacious  enough  to  accomodate  a 
vast  concourse  of  people,  and  thousands  had  in  fact 
stood  here  in  martial  array  and  sallied  out  hence 
in  their  offensive  errand  to  fight  their  foes.  The 
whole  locality,  however,  now  wears  a  lively  appearance, 
when,  on  the  auspicious  tenth  day  of  the  waxing 
moon  during  the  Ram  Nabami  festival  in  autumn 
every  year,  the  Maharaja  goes  out  in  procession  to 
proceed  to  Chitrakut,  about  a  couple  of  miles  off, 
to  witness  the  Bharat  Milan,  the  meeting  of  Bharat 
with  his  exiled  brother  Rama — that  great  dramatic 
event  depicted  by  the  immortal  Valmiki  and  so 
full  of  intense  human  interest  and  pathos.  The 
front-gate  of  the  fort  is  then  blocked  with  crowds 
of  people  mixed  up  with  the  Maharaja's  guards 
pouring  out  of  tlie  Fort  in  an  incessant  stream. 
Dense  expectant  throngs  line  the  broad  pathway, 
and  mounted  sentries  here  and  there  make  but  feeble 
attempts  to  keep  up  a  semblance  of  order.  The  whole 
of  Ramnagar  clad  in  holiday  attire,  and  a  good 
portion  of  Benares  too,  turn  out  here  at  the  time  ; 
and  as  they  press  and  jostle  to  have  a  peep  at 
the  front,  pleasant  jokes  and  good-humoured 
witticisms   flit  along  and    keep  the   company   merry, 


254        THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)       Chap. 

Presently,  there  is  an  unusual  stir  and  the  gorgeous 
cavalcade  advances.  A  party  of  horsemen  with 
pennoned  lances  strut  by  upon  their  prancing 
chargers,  a  line  of  richly-caparisoned  elephants  with 
their  swaying  trunks  and  broad  foreheads  painted 
white  and  vermilion  wave  onward  in  their  measured 
gait,  and  troops  in  red  uniforms  and  with  tall 
matchlocks  follow  them  on  foot.  Beautiful  gold  and 
silver  tanjams  upholstered  in  crimson  velvet  and 
other  paraphernalia  of  royalty  are  carried  along, 
couples  of  horsemen  in  quaint  old-time  coat 
of  mail  and  iron  helmet  of  the  olden  days  pass 
by  and  evoke  admiring  comments  from  the  merry- 
makers ;  large  parties  of  horsemen  in  modern  uniform 
and  armed  with  carbines  now  appear  and  solid 
phalanxes  of  men  on  foot  fully  accoutred  and 
furnished  with  present-day  weapons.  Soon  enough 
the  princes  come  forth,  tall  and  slim  and  fine  youths, 
riding  gracefully  upon  their  high-mettled  steeds. 
Stately  elephants  with  necklaces  of  gold  and  silver 
and  coverings  of  cloths  of  gold  bear  gold  and  silver 
howdahs  of  various  artistic  designs  seating  the  Dewan 
and  the  high  officers  of  State.  Soon  as  the  Maharaja'*s 
elephant  passes  out  of  the  gate  the  crowds  grow 
exultant  and  vociferate  shouts  of  welcome,  cannon 
thunder  forth  the  salute,  the  Maharaja  nods  and 
bows  gracefully,  the  attendant  behind  his  throne 
of  silver  waves  the  white  chamara  in  his  hand  and 
the  pearly  fringes  of  the  broad  glistening  white 
•silver    umbrella   overhead    rock    and    quiver   and    look 


X  RAMNAGAR 


255 


extremely  picturesque.  In  his  robes  of  spotless 
shining^  white  silk,  with  his  jewelled  necklace  decking 
his  breast,  the  Maharaja  looks  on  the  other  side 
of  fifty  with  a  fine  physique  and  a  kind  benevolent 
mien  and  dignified  bearing.  Other  elephants  follow 
and  some  more  troops  and  attendants,  and  a  large 
multitude  of  various  grades  of  men  bring  the  show 
to  an  end.  Onward  the  procession  moves,  the 
crowds    wait   a   while   and    then   disperse. 

Shall  we  now  have  a  peep  at  the  stately  palace  ? 
We  must  then  cross  the  courtyards  and  go  in. 
The  main  hall  inside  is  bright  with  the  shooting 
brilliance  from  the  pendants  of  the  beautiful  crystal 
chandeliers  emitting  rainbow  colours  on  the  least 
motion.  The  floor  is  inlaid  with  fine  trellis-work 
of  dainty  marble,  and  rare  art  curios  and  various 
knick-nacks  adorn  the  tables.  An  interesting  series 
of  large  portraits  in  oil  colours  of  the  Rajas  of 
the  Benares  family  decorate  the  walls,  and  prominent 
among  them  look  those  of  Rajas  Chet  Singh, 
Mahip  Naraiii,  Udit  Narain,  Iswari  Prasad  and  the 
present  Maharaja.  Raja  Iswari  Prasad  Singh  was 
reputed  to  be  a  poet  and  an  artist  of  a  very 
high  order  and  much  of  his  fine  handiwork  are 
preserved  in  the  palace,  and  among  them  are  some 
dainty  flowers  in  ivory  placed  underneath  the  glass-cases 
upon  the  side-tables.  There  is  a  room  adjoining 
the  hall,  the  four  walls  of  which  as  well  as  the 
ceiling     are    literally    covered     over     with     scenes     m 


256        THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)         Chap. 

colours  from  Kalidasa's  glorious  drama  Saktmtala. 
Indeed,  the  whole  history  of  her  charming  life  is 
to  be  observed  here  depicted  in  beautiful  paint 
and  is  well  worth  the  trouble  of  studying.  One 
very  interesting  treasure  in  the  palace  is  an  old 
hand-painted  and  gorgeously  illuninated  copy  of 
Tuist  Das' 9  Ra7nayana  with  profuse  illustrations— 
which  can  be  viewed  only  with  the  Maharaja's 
permission. 

As  you  stroll  along  the  verandahs  and  stand  upon 
the  balcony  facing  the  river,  you  catch  a  glimpse  of 
the  stately  structures  of  the  Benares  bank  in  the 
distance,  and  a  fine  vista  of  unusual  beauty  opens 
up  before  your  absorbed  vision  with  the  crystal  waters 
rolling  on  in  a  mighty  sweep  and  set  against  the 
luxuriant  green  of  the  broad  eastern  bank.  As  the 
horizontal  rays  of  the  afternoon  sun  tinge  the 
white  walls  of  the  palace  with  the  hue  of  pale 
vermilion,  it  is  pleasant  to  watch  and  take  a  retrospect 
of  what  had  once  been  and  reflect  upon  the 
significance   of   the   past   over   the   present. 

In  one  part  of  the  fort  in  a  small  shrine  facing 
the  river  and  just  above  it  is  the  white  marble 
image  of  the  four-armed  river-goddess  Gcutga  Devi, 
the  presiding  deity  of  the  Ganges,  seated  upon  a 
crocodile — a  beautiful  image  with  a  fine  expression 
upon  the  face.  There  are  other  shrines  in  the  fort, 
but  the  main  object  of  interest  is  the  temple  of 
Veda     Vyasa    containing    ^n      emblem     known      ^5 


RAMNAGAR  257 


Vy^seszvara  Siva  said  to  have  been  established  by 
Vyasa,  which  people  from  distant  parts  come  to 
visit. 

Coming     out   of    the   fort    and     striking    into   the 

interior   you    pass   by     the   side   of  a   lofty     gateway 

along    a  broad    path  fringed    with  shady 

Janakpur  and    trees,  and  drop   in  to  see  the  JANAKPUR 

Girijaya         TEMPLE     containing     beautiful     images 

Temples        of  Rama    and    his   three     brothers   and 

their   spouses,   all    in  white   marble,  and 

also     the    GiRlJAYA     TEMPLE     with     the     image     of 

Dtirga   and    a    Siva   emblem    inside   and    a   stone  lion 

at     the     entrance, — both     of  them    in    the   middle   of 

cool   shady   spacious   groves. 

Next     comes   the     very   best    place   in     Ramnagar 

which     makes   it     worth    while     coming   so     far   from 

the   blessed    city   of  Benares   and    which    makes     full 

amends      for     all     the      troubles     you      have     taken. 

Something      over     a      mile     from     the 

Temple  of       Maharaja's   palace   is    the   Temple     OF 

Durga  DURGA     with   the     fine   tank     in    front 

and     the    garden     adjoining     it   (  Plate 

XIII,  I  ).     Far   from   the   clamour   and   bustle   of  the 

city,  an  atmosphere  of  calm  repose  and  serenity   seems 

to     pervade     this     sequestered    nook   and    breathes   a 

sense     of    peace   and     contentment   into     the    heart  ; 

and     the   quiet     environments   make     you   feel     as   if 

you   have  nothing   else  to   desire  for  and  can   smoothly 

17^ 


258  THE  HOL  V  CITY  (BENARES)        chap. 


sleep   the   rest   of   your   life    away   here   immersed    in 
a   pleasant   dream. 

Just  as  you  enter  the  temple  compound,  your 
eyes  light  upon  ^  beautiful  little  white  figure  of 
Kamald  Devi  (  one  of  the  ten  Mahavidyas  )  seated  on 
a  lotus-bed  with  an  elephant  on  either  side  bathing 
her  by  jets  of  glistening  water  issuing  out  of  its 
trunk — all  in  white,  the  symbol  of  purity.  Beyond 
this  is  the  lofty  temple,  a  hundred  feet  high,  with 
its  floor  and  verandahs  upon  a  high  terrace.  The 
principal  figure  inside  the  temple  is  the  marble 
image  of  Durga  covered  all  over  with  gold  and 
wearing  a  yellow  scarf.  On  the  left  is  Saras wati 
seated  upon  a  goose  m  white  marble,  and  on  the 
right  Radha  and  Krishna.  In  front  of  the  main 
entrance  lies  a  winged  lion,  and  facing  the  two 
side-doors   are    the    figures  of   Garuda   and    Nandi, 

The  temple  is  said  to  have  been  built  by  Raja 
diet  Singh  nearly  a  century  and  a  quarter  ago, 
and  the  spire  worked  with  modern  floral  designs 
have  been  added  much  later  and  completed  only 
about  1850.  Over  a  hundred  niches  grouped  in 
five  rows  decorate  the  four  walls  outside  and 
hold  neatly  executed  bas-reliefs  of  mythical  gods 
and  goddesses  sculptured  in  Chunar  sandstone  in 
every  one  of  them.  A  line  of  little  birds  nestle  upon 
the  edges  of  the  roof,  beak  to  beak,  and  many 
of  the  godheads  of  the  Hindu  pantheon  are  there 
with   their  exploits   depicted    in   stone   too   numerous 


X  RAMNAGAR  259 


to  mention.  In  addition  to  Brahma,  Vishnu  and 
Siva,  and  Rama,  Sita  and  Hanuman  usually  to  be 
seen,  there  are  also  Indra,  Surya,  Agni,  Vayu  and 
the  thousand-armed  Kartavirjyarjuna.  The  figures 
of  Krishna  holding  Govardhan  and  of  the  ten-armed 
Durga  are  very  striking.  The  style  of  architecture 
is  a  blending  of  the  genuine  o!d  Indian  and  the 
comparatively  modern  art  and  has  a  very  pleasing 
effect.  Isolated  by  its  position  from  all  other 
architectural  piles  and  situated  in  a  spacioiis  green 
lawn  in  this  retired  quarter  and  fanned  by  the 
gentle  breath  of  the  evening  breeze  coming  through 
the  neighbouring  groves,  this  grand  temple  in  its 
faint  yellow  tint  looks  exceedingly  picturesque  in 
its  solitary  grandeur  and  stands  out  in  bold  relief 
against  the  blue  background  of  the  distant  sky  with 
its  loft>  pinnacle  and  graceful  sculptures  mirrored 
in  the  clear  water  of  the  lovely  tank  in  front 
(  Plate  XIII,  I  ). 

Close   to   the   temple   lies  the    Maharaja's  beautiful 

garden  with   an   entrance  from    the    road    and    a  large 

mansion     at     each     end     of     the      two 

y     Maharaja's      pathways     crossing   each     other   in    the 

Garden  middle.     Just    over   the   crossing   in  the 

centre   is   a   nice    open   marble   resting- 

hall    with   a   beautiful    roof   fashioned    like   a    canopy 

and    supported   upon    chastely    carved    pillars, — all    of 

delicate     white   marble     from    the     roof  to   the    floor 

and   a   masterpiece   of    tasteful   design.     The    garden 


26o        THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)       Chap. 


V  /\/\y^  r^>y^y\y^/\y\y^/\/^^^^>^/^^r^^/^>^./Ay^>'\/^y•^yv^\r^  /\>'^y  \y\/\/ 


itself  has  also  been  nicely  laid  out  on  either  side 
of  the  pathways  and  is  exquisitely  beautiful  and 
pleasing  in  its  effect^  and  the  whole  has  a  look 
of  neatness  and  refinement  not  frequently  to  be 
met  with.  At  some  distance  from  this  is  a  temple 
of  Siva,  a  place  of  pilgrimage  to  the  devout,  and 
some   retreats   of  Sannyasis   as   well. 

Work  enough  perhaps  for  a"  hasty  visit.  The 
sun  has  now  set  behind  the  distant  greenery  and 
the  ruddy  glow  has  disappeared.  The  shades  of 
evening  are  gathering  fast,  and  there  is  a  hard 
conflict  between  the  thick  veil  of  darkness  descending 
to  envelop  the  earth  and  the  pale  but  brightening 
glimmer  of  the  rising  moon  attempting  to  lift  it 
up.  Even  thus  between  light  and  darkness  in  conflict 
does  the  world  hold  on  its  course  towards  eternit}-. 
The  outlook  grows  dim  and  hazy,  and  it  is  now 
time   to    return. 

So,   after    a    brief  rest    for   a   while  we   come  back 

to    the    river-bank   and    rouse    up   our    boatman    from 

his     evening     nap.     Though     our    boat 

Night  on  the     plies     through    a     dense     fog     shutting 

River  out  the   face   of  the   moon  and  reducing 

it     to  a  hazy   glamour     of  dirty  yellow, 

and     thojgh   the     lights   on    the     other   bank    as    we 

approach    it    peep   Mntly    with    a   misty   halo     round 

each   of  them,   still    can    we   picture   to   ourselves   the 

splendour  of  the   resplendent   orb   shining   in    all    its 

glory    overhead    with   its   silvery   sheen   playing    upon 


X  RAMNAGAR  261 


\/\r'^\y\r\r\y\y\/\/\f\j\^-\,--^-\y\r^j-\yK/^\/^/\/^r\y^.fK/^rsj^,r\/^r\j^j\j-Kr\r 


the  ripples  of  the  greenish  water  rolling  in  waving 
sheets  of  emerald  and  bathing  the  great  crescent 
of  the  Benares  bank  in  a  splendour  of  bluish-white 
brightness,  with  its  towers  and  temples  and  spires 
silhoutted  in  the  distance  against  the  pale  blue 
sky, — conjuring  up  before  the  mind's  eye  a  fairy-land 
of  dream  nestled  in  the  sweet  strains  of  nahabat 
music  wafted  from  the  distant  temples  and  encased  in 
the  illumined  fringe  of  lights  on  the  western  bank  that 
have  been  amplified  into  flashing  gems  and  brilliants 
\\\  the  reflections  below — as  \i  the  stream  had  borrowed 
the  glittering  stars  from  heaven  to  heighten 
the  effect ! 

A  night's  quiet  and  well-earned  rest  amid  pleasant 
dreams  and  gladsome  visions  ;  and  in  the  morn 
following  we  take  a  stroll  through  the  Sikrole  quarter 
to  have  a  look  at  the  courts  and  other  public 
buildings,  the  Chapels  and  the  Cemetery,  the  Bank 
and  the  Old  Mint  and  the  hotels — Clarke's  and 
Hotel  de  Paris — which,  pretty  in  their  own  way,  are, 
however,  of  the  usual  type  to  be  seen  in  most 
Indian  civil  stations  of  the  modern  times,  the  only 
place  of  interest  here  being  the  Nadesav  House — 
noticed  before  '-^belonging  to  the  Maharaja  of 
Benares. 

This  brings  our  delightful  tour  to  a  close.  (9//r 
Guide^   a  jolly     old   gentleman — a    pensioned    veteran 

{i)    See  p.  54,  ante. 


262         THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)         Chap. 


/^y^-'■v'^.'^''\,'V^yVvy^y-v,.'^^^/\/^y-V/^/^/^/\>'vrw^y 


of  His  Majesty's  Royal  Mail — who  combines  in 
him  the  old  lore  with  a  sprinkling 
Our  Guide  of  the  modern,  and  to  whom  we  are 
thankful  for  our  hurried  experiences, 
tells  us  that  there  are  very  many  things  in  Benares 
to  be  seen  and  enjoyed  and  thought  over,  for  it 
is  not  for  nothing  that  this  sacred  city  has  been 
famous  as  the  home  of  Indian  wisdom  and  learning 
from  the  very  earliest  of  ages  and  earned  the 
well-deserved  name  of  'the  Athens  of  the  East\ 
He  urges  us  to  make  a  more  intimate  acquaintance 
with  the  holy  city.  But  time  at  our  disposal  hardly 
allows  that.  He  adds  he  had  anticipated  this  and 
his  object  in  showing  us  round  in  the  way  he 
did  w^as  to  give  us  some  idea  of  Benares  that 
should  interest  us  whether  we  were  religiously  bent 
or  were  mere  curious  sight-seers  like  so  many 
other   sinful    mortals    that    frequent    this   holy   place. 

Our  rambles  now  over,  we  come  to  a  halt  at 
the  Cantonment  Station.  Shrill  whistles  the 
parting  signal,  and  puffing  and  heaving  the  iron 
horse  approaches,  and  emits  a  prolonged  sigh.  All 
enjoyments  have  an  end  and  all  pleasure,  and  here 
we  must   now  part   and  put    a  period  to  our   sojourn  ! 


X  FAREWELL  263 


Farewell,  Holy  City  !  Long  will  the  few  brief 
hours  of  fleeting  time  passed  in  thy  fostering 
bosom  linger  in  the  mind  as  a  pleasant  memory  ; 
and  in  the  solitude  of  coming  days  will  fancy 
often  call  up  the  flimsy  fabrics  of  a  fascinating 
dream  woven  with  the  soft  impressions  of  thy 
variegated  scenes.  Full  as  is  thy  large  expanse 
covered  over  with  the  ancient  shrines  of  olden 
times,  the  towering  temples  of  the  middle  ages 
and  the  splendid  present-day  palaces  and  charming 
gardens  replete  with  all  the  comforts  the  hand-maids 
of  modern  civilization  could  invent  and  furnish, — it 
is  pleasant  still  to  contemplate  the  times  when, 
three  thousand  }'ears  ago,  the  revered  Ajyas  found 
thee  clothed  with  the  verdant  green  of  thy  pristine 
forests  luxuriating  in  the  fertility  of  the  tri-fold 
streams,  and  looked  entranced  upon  thy  wavy  eastern 
limb  laved  by  the  holy  Ganges,  that  had  travelled 
all  the  way  from  the  snowy  heights  of  Gangotri 
where  she  had  descended  to  bring  salvation  to  the 
doors  of  all  sinners  who  believed.  In  the  dim 
twilight  of  the  early  dawn,  as  the  bright  and  revered 
Ri's/n's  spt  lining  the  silent  bank  near  the  river's 
edge  alv  oibed  in  the  contemplation  of  the  Supreme, 
after  their  sanctifying  ablutions  in  the  sacred  stream, 
— how     charming   did     the   lovely     Usha    ^    look     in 

(I)    Dawn 


264        THE  HOLY  CITY  (BENARES)        Chap. 


her  roseate  robe  of  subdued  brightness  as  she 
chased  the  fast  receding  gloom  to  usher  in  tlie 
glorious  Savita  ^  ;  and  what  a  day  was  it  that 
dawned  when  they  hailed  the  darting  rays  of  the 
rising  sun — ^just  resuscitating  as  it  were  thy  wondrous 
crescent — with  the  welcome  chant  of  the  choral 
hymns  in  their  grand  and  sonorous  voices  to  which 
the  sounding  conches  added  a  solemn  grandeur  ! 
And  as  the  dazzling  noon  approached,  how  thick 
the  smoke  from  the  circling  hovia  *  fires — lit 
underneath  the  spreading  branches  of  the  giant 
forest-trees — twirled  upwards  in  wavy  wreaths  and 
made  the  air  redolent  with  the  sanctified  perfume 
of  the  burning  habih  '  and  suffused  the  surroundings 
of  their  peaceful  hermitages  with  an  incense  of 
holiness  and  purity  !  And  when  the  pale  twilight 
on  the  west  had  merged  into  the  heavenly  blue 
and  King  Soma  *  shone  forth  fn  his  glory  of 
soothing  white  with  myriads  of  his  twinkling  retinue 
peeping  slyly  from  the  azure  above,  what  a  music 
it  was  that  floated  in  the  air  as  the  joyous  notes 
of  the  Sama  Veda  hymns  rose  up  in  a  chorus  of 
praise  and  adoration  in  their  full  manly  sonorous 
voices  which  the  answering  echo  sweetened  and 
mollified  by  contact  with  the  smooth  water  below  ! 
Skipping   over   a   few    scores     of    Yiigas,  ^ — 

(i)     The  Sun.     (2)     Sacrificial   fire. 
(3)     Clarified   butter.     (4)     The  Moon. 
(5)    Yuga— a  cycle  of  twelve  years. 


X  FAREWELL  265 

in  the  ages  of  mythology  and  poetry,  the  primeval 
monarchs  of  thy  forests  had  glided  out  of  existence 
and  made  room  for  the  populous  city  of  lofty 
mansions  and  stately  palaces  ;  music  and  all  the 
fine  arts  patronised  by  royalty  now  flourished,  and 
sages  added  their  wisdom  and  learning  to  the 
store-house  of  human  knowledge.  Kshatriya  kings 
in  all  their  pomp  and  glory  scoured  the  country 
around  in  war  and  peace  with  their  gorgeous 
following  of  gaily-caparisoned  horses,  stately  elephants 
and  well-decked  chariots,  and  of  men  armed  with 
swords  and  bows  and  arrows,  with  flags  and 
pennons  flying,  the  turyds  ^  shrill  call  mixing 
with  the  booming  of  the  bheris,  *  and  conches 
and  horns  blowing  martial  music.  After  the  victorious 
horse  had  returned  from  its  tours  what  a  brilliant 
array  of  Kings  and  Princes,  of  deified  Saints  and 
god-like  men  thronged  thy  holy  bank  to  witness 
the  performance  of  the  great  Asivamedlia  and  the 
bestowal  of  munificent  gifts  of  horses  and  elephants, 
of  gold  and  even  kingdoms  by  the  bounteous 
Kings  !    Oft   were    such    scenes  repeated    and    various 

were   the   occasions. Allow   a  few   centuries   to 

glide  by, — the  pomp  and  splendour  and  the  glory 
and  poetry  of  the  earlier  ages  lad  grown  dim, 
speculations  in  religion  and  philosophy  had  given 
rise  to  various  sects  and  varied  observances 
and  brought   in    a   host   of  complications,  paving  thus 

(()     Wind   instruments.     (2)     Drums. 


266  THE  HOLY  CITY  {BENARES)        CHAr. 

the  way  for  the  acceptance  of  the  simpler  rules  of 
life  preached  by  the  saintly  Gautama  in  the  Wght 
of  Nh-vana  and  Universal  Love.  Calm  and  placid 
and  serene  sat  the  Great  Master  under  the  vast 
canopy  of  thy  heaven's  blue  with  thy  king  and 
princes  and  all  the  royal  court  grouped  around 
with  palms  joined  and  heads  bent  in  meek  humility 
and  listening  to  the  words  of  wisdom  that  fell 
from  his  lips  like  the  welcome  drops  upon  the 
thirsty  earth  below.  And  often  in  after-days  in 
similar  assemblies  would  the  reverant  hush  of  the 
listeners  break  into  the  thrilling  musical  chorus — "  I 
take   shelter    under   Buddha,    I  take  shelter  under   the 

Dhainma^  I  take  shelter    under  the    Sangha  !  " 

Five  more  centuries  flitted  away, — the  new  light 
had  expanded  and  had  shed  its  effulgence  far  and 
wide  and  much  beyond  thy  distant  horizons. 
Then  came  the  wane  and  a  re-assertion  of  the  older 
faith.  Monarchs  owing  allegiance  to  either  creed 
held  alternate  sway,  and  architectural  embellishments 
of  stately  monasteries  and  lofty  temples  upon 
which  kings  and  princes  lavished  riches  untold 
enhanced  the  loveliness  of  thy  beauteous  frame  ; 
and  vo'-aries  from  far  off  climes  made  pilgrimages 
to   thy    hallowed    grounds."  Eight    centuries    thus 

lost  them.selves  in  the  womb  of  eternit) ,— thick 
gloom  now  began  to  envelop  the  land  and  all 
animation  seemed  suspended  as  it  were  by  some 
m}'sterious  agency  ;  religion,  myth,  philosophy  got 
hopelessly    jumbled     together  ;   and    though     temples 


X  FAREWELL  267 

and  shrines  abounded,  the  real  fervour  of  life  lay 
well-nigh  smothered  and  crushed  underneath  the 
grotesqueness  of  the  elaborate  rites  and  vapid 
ceremonials  that  had  sprung  up  and  clustered  round 
the  bare  exterior.  Then  shone  out  that  youthful 
luminary  upon  thy  firmament,  the  great  Sankara, 
who  rooted  out  the  weeds  from  amidst  the  tangled 
G^rovvth  and  brought  order  out  of  chaos,  and  the 
tide  of  life  flowed  back  rejuvenated  and  vigourous 
under  his  reformed  and  regenerated  doctrines  leading 
again  to  the  contemplation  of  the  Perennial  Source, 
the  Supreme  in  all  his  manifestations  pervading  the 
Universe — culminating    in     the     grand    realisation     of 

So*/ia7n      (  I     am       He  )  ! Again      the    heavens 

lowered, — again  had  degeneration  crept  in  apace 
with  the  strange  creations  of  the  Pauranic  fancies, 
and  decadence  in  religion  led  to  the  inevitable  decay 
in  national  life.  Kings  fell  at  the  advance  of  the 
victorious  Crescent,  and  in  the  half  a  dozen  centuries 
or  more  that  followed,  the  glare  of  the  blazing 
torches  of  persecuticn  revealed  thy  temples  tottering 
to  ruins  and  the  rounded  domes  of  the  uprising 
mosques  rearing  themselves  on  high  to  the 
accompaniment     of     the     deafening    notes     of     'Din\ 

''Dm'  ! Occasional  resuscitations  followed  ;  and  all 

the  vicissitudes  of  conflicting  ages  notwithstanding, 
thy  supremacy  as  the  greatest  stronghold  of 
Hinduism — regained  in  Sankara's  time— held  on  its 
ground  unassailed,  and  the  Moskm  onslaughts  were 
felt   but    as    a  passing   scratch.-'  The   rest  was  but 


268         THE  HOL  Y  CIJ  V  (BENARES) 


the  other  day. 'Heaven  lends  a  thousand  dififering^ 

vv^ays  to  one  sure  end  ;'  and  various  as  are  the  world's 
prevailing  creeds,  like  numberless  paths,  straight  or 
tortuous,  they  all  converge  and  lead  ^/le  devout  and 
the  sincere  to  the  shade  of  the  same  market-place 
of  Salvation  where  sits  the  Glory  above  the 
overspreading  greenery  \  As  a  prominent  landmark 
in  one  such  path,  may  thou  be  long  the  meeting- 
ground  of  all  ages  of  eternal  time  and  the  ideal 
city  of  holiness  in  the  East  and  a  repository  of 
all  that  is  great  and  noble  and  sublime  pulsating 
with  the  throb  of  thy  ancient  greatness,  and  be  a 
soothing  abode  of  rest  and  peace  to  the  devout 
as  heretofore,  after  the  toils  and  turmoils  of  life 
at    its   closing   days  ! — Farewell  ! 


APPENDIX 


A   FIRMAN 
OF 

Emperor  Aurangzeb 


I: 


N  course  of  my  rambles  at  BenarA  during  the 
latter  part  of  last  October  (1910),  v/hileT  searching 
for  materials  for  a  certain  work  upon  that  great 
city,  in  which  I  am  engaged,  I  happened  to  come 
across  a  document  of  a  unique  nature  likely  to  be 
ofnuch  interest  to  the  antiquarian  and  the  historian 
alike.  Messrs.  Saeed  Brothers,  Photographers,  of 
Benares  gave  me  a  photo-copy  of  a  firman  in 
Persian  which  they  alleged  to  be  a  true  and 
faithful  reproduction  of  the  original  which  purported 
to  be  an  Imperial  Decree  addressed  to  one  Abul 
Hossein  by  Emperor  Aurangzeb  and  communicated 
through   his   son    Sultan    Muhammad   Bahadoor. 

All  historians  have  up  to  time  been  almost 
unanimous  in  giving  to  Aurangzeb  a  character 
directly  opposed  to  what  would  appear  from  the  above 
document.  He  has  been  held  to  have  been  bitterly 
opposed  to  the  Hindus  as  evidenced  by  his  imposition 
of  the  Jiziah  tax,  and  has  further  been  reputed 
to  have  demolished  numbers  of  Hindu  temples  at 
Benares  and  erected  the  mosque  over  the  Pancha-Ganga 

(i)     Paper     read     at     the    monthly   General   Meeting    of  the 
Asiatic    Society  of  Bengal   at  CalcvUta  on   March   i,   1911, 


c\ 


270  APPENDIX 

Ghat  in  that  city  with  the  couple  of  tall  minarets 
going  by  the  name  of  Madho-ji-ka-deora  upon  the 
ruins  of  the  old  temple  of  Beni  Madhav  which 
he  had  destroyed.  As  it  was,  I  confess,  I  could 
not  but  look  upon  the  document  in  question  without 
considerable  suspicion,  I  therefore  thought  it  proper 
to  keep  silence  till  I  obtained  satisfactory  and 
authentic  informations  regarding  the  existence  of  the 
original.  It  was  only  on  the  1st  instant  (  February 
191 1  ),  when  I  had  been  on  another  flying  visit  to 
Benares  that  I  was  enabled  to  get  a  sight  of  the 
original  firman  itself  through  the  courtesy  of  Khan 
Bahadoor  Sheik  Muhammad  Tyab,  City  Inspector  of 
Police,  Benares. 

This  gentleman  who  sent  for  the  document  from 
its  present  owner  for  my  inspection,  gave  the 
following   history    in    connection    with    its    find  : — 

*  In  the  Mangla  Gauri  Muhulla  of  this  city  lived 
a  Brahman  named  Gopi  Upadhyaya  who  died 
about  fifteen  years  ago.  This  iirman  was  in  the 
custody  of  Gopi  Upadhyaya.  This  man  had  no 
son,  but  had  only  a  daughter.  His  daughter  has 
a  son  named  Mangal  Pandey  who  also  lives  at 
Mangla  Gauri  now.  Mangal  Pandey  had  obtained 
the  document  from  Gopi  Upadhyaya  along  with  his 
other  papers.  In  April  1905  I  held  an  enquiry 
under  orders  of  the  Magistrate  of  Benares  in  the 
matter  of  a  complaint  by  Mangal  Pandey.  Mangal 
is  a  ghatia  Brahman  who  sits  on  the  river-bank  to 
ply  his   business   as   a  ghatia  piijari  to     whose    stall 


APPENDIX  271 

bathers  in  the  river  resort  for  various  religious 
observances  and  for  purchasing  various  appurtenances 
of  worship.  Buiniah  wointn,  he  had  complained 
used  to  go  to  the  place  where  he  used  to  sit,  and 
in  accordance  with  a  curious  custom  amongst  :hem 
they  would  frequently  set  up  a  wailing  and 
weeping  there.  Mangal  complained  that  no  one 
would  frequent  his  ghat  to  bathe  if  they  were 
allowed  to  continue  their  practice  of  weeping  there 
in  that  way.  There  was  thus  a  dispute  between 
Mangal  and  the  Buiiniahs.  I  asked  him  to  show 
me  his  documents,  if  he  had  any,  to  prove  that 
he  had  any  right  to  the  portion  of  the  ghat  he 
occupied  as  alleged  by  him.  He  and  his  servant, 
one  Babunandan,  produced  several  papers  before  me 
and  I  found  this  finnan  among  them.  It  has 
since   then    been    all    along   in  his    possession/ 

Such  being  the  occasion  when  this  precious 
deed  was  found  as  narrated  by  the  Khan  Bahadoor, 
I  felt  convinced  of  its  authenticity  and  examined 
the  document  carefully  and  noticed  that  it  was  a 
piece  of  slightly  yellowish  old  paper  with  a  piece 
of  thin  linen  pasted  at  the  back  leaving  bare  only 
a  small  portion  4^  X  4  inches  containing 
writings  and  Sultan  Muhammad's  seal  lyi  inch  in 
diameter  at  the  top.  This  document  is  in  an 
excellent  state  of  preservation  and  the  handwriting 
is  very  distinct  and  legible  and  the  letters  bold 
and  large.  The  whole  is  written  in  deep  black 
ink   excepting   a   small     portion   at   the   top    3"  x  2%'^ 


272  APPENDIX 

inches  written  in  red  in  an  ornate  st}^le  and 
enclosed  witliin  some  lines  in  the  form  of  an 
oblong  in  the  middle  at  the  top  of  the  first  page 
and  to  the  left  of  the  seal  of  Aurangzeb.  It 
measures  2  feet  lo^  inches  by  i  feet  5^  inches. 
On  the  next  page  appears  in  smaller  letters  the 
note  of  despatch  through  Prince  Sultan  Muhammad 
Shah  Bahadoor  with  his  seal  on  the  ricrht.  This 
seal  has  some  numerals  looking  like  some  date, 
but   are   not   very    legible. 

From  the  papers  contributed  by  Prof  Jadu 
Nath  Sarkar  in  the  Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society 
of  Bengal,  Vol  II  No.  6  (New  Series) — 1906,  pp. 
223-267,  with  copies  of  two  other  firmans  of 
Plmperor  Aurangzeb  in  respect  to  certain  Revenue 
Regulations  and  fiscal  measures  and  certain  rules 
for  the  guidance  of  Shaistha  Khan  in  connection 
with  the  Government  of  Bengal,  it  would  appear 
that  this  monarch  was  after  all  not  exactly  what 
he  had  been  represented  to  be  and  that  he  was 
rather  solicitous  of  ensuring  peace  and  security  to 
his   subjects. 

With  a  view  that  further  researches  may  be 
made  with  respect  to  this  matter  by  antiquarian 
experts,  I  quote  below  a  rendering  of  the  firman 
into    English   by  Lieut-Colonel    Dr.     D.     C.     Phillot  : 

Let  Abu'l-Hasan  worthy  of  favour  and  countenance  trust 
to  our  royal  bounty  and  let  him  know  that,  since  in  accordance 
with  our  innate  kindness  of  disposition  and  natural  benevolence 
the   whole  of  our  untiring  energy  and  all  our  upright  intentions 


APPENDIX  273 

are  engaged  in  promoting  the  public  welfare  and  bettering  the 
condition  of  all  classes  high  and  low,  therefore  in  accordance 
with  our  holy  Law  we  have  decided  that  the  ancient  temples 
shall  not  be  overthrown  but  that  new  ones  shall  not  be 
built.  In  these  days  of  our  justice,  information  has  reached  our 
noble  and  most  holy  court  that  certain  persons  actuated  by 
rancour  and  spite  have  harassed  the  Hindus  resident  in  the 
town  of  Benares  and  a  few  other  places  in  that  neighbourhood, 
and  also  certain  Brahmins,  keepers  of  the  temples,  in  whose 
charge  those  ancient  temples  are,  and  that  they  further  desire 
to  remove  these  Brahmins  from  their  ancient  office  (  and 
this  intention  of  theirs  causes  distress  to  that  community ) 
therefore  our  Royal  Command  is  that  after  the  arrival  of 
our  lustrous  order  you  should  direct  that  in  future  no  person 
shall  in  unlawful  ways  interfere  or  disturb  the  Brahmins  and 
the  other  Hindus  resident  in  those  places,  so  that  they  may 
as  before  remain  in  their  occupation  and  continue  with  peace 
of  mind  to  offer  up  prayers  for  the  continuance  of  our  God 
given  Empire  that  is  destined  to  last  to  all  time.  Consider 
this  as  an  urgent  matter.  Dated  15th  of  Jumada-'s-Saniya 
A.     H,  ^064   (  ==A.     D.     1653   or  4), 


/ire  u>*^  v.*.--^  fcrt:6.  9'*'<^^^  V 


274 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Archaeological  Survey  of  India  Reports,  by  General  Cunningham 
—Vol   I    (  1862— 65  ),  Vol    III    (1871—72). 

Archaeological  Survey  of  India — Annual  Report  (  1904 — 1905  ) 
by   Mr.     F.     O.     Oertal. 

Alberuni's  India,  by   Dr.     Edward   C.     Sachau  (  1888-Trubner ). 

A   History  of  Civilisation    in   Ancient    India,    by     R.     C.     Dutt 

(  1891  ). 
Benares— A   Gazetteer  of  India,   by  H.  R.    Neville  ( Vol  XXVI 

of   the     District     Gazetteer    of  the     U.     P.     of 

Agra   and   Oudh — 1909  ). 
Benares,   the   Sacred    City  of    the   Hindus,   by     E.     B.     Havell 

(  1905  )■ 
Bharatbarshiya  Upasak  Sampradaya,  by  Akshay  Kumar  Dutta 

(  1314   B.     E.  ) 
Bible    in    India,    by    M.     Louis   Jacolliol   (  1820). 
Bhaskarananda  Charita,   by  Surendra  Nath  Mukherji  (1312  B.  E.) 
Hindu   Civilisation   in   Ancient  America,   by   Kedar    Nath   Bose 

(  1888  ). 
Imperial     Gazetteer    ot     India,     by    W.     W.     Hunter,    Vol     II 

(1885),   Vol.   VII   (1908). 
India   in   Greece,   by    E.     Pockocke    (  1852  ). 
Jivani  Sangraha,  by  Ganesh   Chandra   Mukherji  (  13 16,  B.   E. ) 
Kabir  Salieb  ka  Sabdawali  (  1909— Allahabad  Belvedere  Prmting 

Works  ). 
Kashi  Khandam. 
Kashi,     the     City     Illustrious,      or     Benares,      by  Rev,     Edwin 

Greaves   (  1909 ). 
Kashi   Parikrama,   by   Nagendra   Nath   Basu   (  1313  B.   E. ) 
Memoirs    of  Emperor    Jehangir,   translated    by     Major    David 

Price   (  1829 ), 


BIBLIOGRAPHY.  27$ 

Narrative  of  a  Journey  through  the   Upper   Provinces  of  India 

by    Reginald    Heber   (  1828  ). 
Ralph   Fitch,   by   J.     Horton    Riley    (1890). 
Religious   Sects  of  the    Hindus,   by    H.     H.     Wilson   (  1861  ). 
Sankaracharya  O  Baddlia,     by   Pandit     Kalibar     Vedantabagis 

(  1307   B.     E.  ) 
Si-yu-ki— Buddhist    Records  of  the   Western  World.     Translated 

from    the     Chinese  of    Hiuen   Tsiang    (A.     D. 

629  )   by    Samuel    Beal    (  1884— Trubner  ). 
Sri  Sankaracharya — His    Life   and   Times,   by   C.     N.     Krishna- 

swamy  Aiyar. 
The   Jataka,    or   Stories   of  Buddha's  Former    Births,   edited  by 

E.     B.     Cowell   (  1897 ). 
The   Man   Mandir    Observatory,     by   Pandit   Bapudeva    Shastri 

(  1902  ). 
The  Mystics,   Ascetics,   and   Saints  of  India,   by  John  Campbell 

Oman    (  1905  ). 
Travels   of  a   Hindu,   by   Bhola   Nath   Chunder  (  1845-69 ). 
The  Sacred  City  of  the  Hindus,  by  Rev.  M.    A.  Sherring  (  1868  ). 
Vishwa-Kosha,   edited  by   Nagendra   Nath   Bose. 
Etc.  Etc 


INDEX 


Adi-Keshav 

227 

Aurangzeb's  Firman 

132,  269, 

Adi-Mahadeo 

225 

273 

Adi-Visweswara 

171 

Avalokiteswara 

86 

Agastya  Kund 

204 

Bageswari 

184 

Ahalya    Bai 

157,214 

Baidyanath 

192 

Ahalya  Bai's  Ghai 

205 

Baija  Bai 

f68,  220 

Ahmety  Temple 

215 

Baji  Rao  Ghat 

221 

Akbar,  Emperor 

»3^  134 

Bakaria  Kund 

77 

Akhera,  Baid 

60 

Bala   Tripura  Sundari 

215 

„         Bara  Gudarji 

60 

Ballavacharya 

239 

„         Bari  Sangat 

56 

Banar,  King 

9,  226 

„         Chhota   Gudarji  60 

„         Dadupanthi  60 

„         Degambari  60 

„         Kinaram  57 

„         Krishna  Achari  60 

,,         Melaram  57 

„         Panchaiti  Kalan  57 

„         Panditji  60 

„         Vishnupanthi  60 

„        See  also  Muths. 

Alamgiri  Musjid           80,  81,  r8i 

Alberuni  129 

Alfred  Hall  ,4 

Alpamriteswara  182 

Amrita  Kup  181 

Ananda  Bag  196 

Andhras,  tht  126 

Annapurna  1 54 

Antargriha  159 

A  rati  160 

Area  10 

Arhai  Kangura  Musjid  79 

Arya  Samaj  56 

Ashtanga  Bhairab  189 

Asi-Sangam  244 

Asoka,  Emperor  125 

Asoka  pillar  43,  76,  95 

Aurangzeb  132 

Aurangzeb's  mosques        82,  169, 

181,  222 


Banar's  Fort  226 

Bara  Ganesh  182 

Barana-Sangam  226 

Barahar  Rani's  Temple  194,  195 

Baranasi  9 

Baranasi  Devi  225 

Burnouf,  Prof.  27 

Batuk  Bhairab  192 

Battis  Khamba  79 
Benares,  Maharaja  of  34,  57,  252 

Benares,  State  of  252 

Bengalitolah  202 

Beni  Madhav  224 

Besant,  Mrs.  Annie  32,  35, 
36,37 

Bhaironath  I74 

Bhatta  Kumaril  127 
Bharat  Dharma  Mahamandal  62 

Bhaskaranand  Swami  196 

Bhimchandi  Devi  246 

Bhonsla  Ghat  221 

Bhut  Bhairo  183 

Bhutnath  192 

Bible  and  Tract  Depot  45 

Birbhadra  203 

Bird,  Mr.  77 

Bishalakshi  Devi  213 

Bodh-Gaya  91,  92 

Bodhi-tree  92 

Brahmo  Samaj  56 


INDEX 


77 


Brahmapuri 

212 

Brahmeswara 

211 

Bi  iddhakaleswara 

181 

Buddha 

91 

Burns,  Mr. 

167 

Carmichael  Library 

16 

Central  Hindu  College 

33 

Chaitanya 

240,  244 

Chakra  Yantra 

22 

Chandra  Gupta 

125 

Chandra  Kup 

173 

Charanpaduka 

217 

Chatuspathis 

30,41 

Chauk,  the 

14 

Chaukhamba 

80,  174 

Chauki  Ghat 

236 

Chaukhandi 

86 

Chausatti  Ghat 

236 

Cherry,  Mr. 

53 

Chet  Singh                 52, 

240,  249 

Chor  Ghat 

221 

Christian  Missions 

63 

Church  Missionary  Society      63 

Chunder,  Bholanath 

28,72 

Chhattras 

46 

Climate 

II 

Colvin,  Sir  Auckland 

II 

Cortez,  Fernando 

138 

Cousin,  M. 

27 

Creutzer,  M 

27 

Cunningham,  General 

85,  87, 

88,  10 1, 

170,  193 

Daksheswara 

182 

Dakshinamurthi  Muth 

59 

Dakshinabhitti  Yantra 

20 

Dalveswara 

212 

Dandis 

59,  230 

Dandapani 

175 

Dasaswamedheswara 

211 

Dasaswamedh  Ghat 

149,  207, 

211,231 

Davis,  Mr. 

53 

Deer   Park 

89 

Deva  Sabha     - 

»59 

Dhamek,  the 

87 

Dharma  Kup 

213 

Dharmasalas 

46 

Dhrubeswara 

Dhundiraj  Ganesh 

Digambara 

Digansa  Yantra 

Divodaseswara 

Dufferin    Bridge 

Duncan,  Jonathan 

Dutt,  R.     C. 

Durbasseswara 

Durga  Temple 

Durga  Temple,  Ramna 

Dwarkadhiswara 

Dvarkanath  Dube 

Ekka, 

Endowments 

Fa   Hian 

Falgu,   the 

Fakr-ud-din's  Darga 

Feizi 

Feroze  Shah 

Fitch,  Ralph 

Ganga  Devi  : 

Ganges,  the 

Ganges  water 

Gangamehal  Ghat 

Ganga  putra 

Gauri  Kund 

Gaya 

Ghats,  the 

Ghatias  i 

Ghoshla  Ghat 

Girijaya  Temple 

Goebi  Kua 

Golden  Temple  i 

Gopal  Mandir 

Gorji,  Pandit 

Gorokpanthis 

Grand  Trunk  Road 

Gupta  Kings 

Gupta  Lintel 

Gurudham 

Haiheyas,  the 

Hanuman  Ghat 

Hanumanji  i 

Harish  Chandra  (ihat 

Heber,  Bishop      15. 

Hegel 


28,  93. 


189 

154 

58 

22 

212 

7,  229 

loi 

27,  140 
179 
195 

r  257 

192 

245 

83 

47 

f22 


78 

28 

78 

15,28 

!i4,  256 

211 

II 

221 

234 
237 

2 

207 

52,  232 
221 
257 

yj 

52, 156 

47, 173 
245 
61 

6 
126 
112 

193 

122 
61,  239 
80,  239 

237 

29,  222 
26 


278 


INDEX 


Hindu  Ideas  i6i 
Hiuen  Thsang         28,  79»  85,  94, 
122,  140 
Hospital,  Iswari  Prasad 

Memorial  45 

„         Prince  of  Wales  46 

„        Victoria  46 

Hotels  261 

Hull,  Rev.  E.  R.  165 

Humayun  86 

Humayun's  Tower  85 

Iswarganji  Tank  183 

Iswari  Prasad  Singh,  Raja  130, 
252,255 

Jacolliot,  Louis  27 

Jagannath  200 

Jageswara  1 83 

Jagat  Singh's  Stupa  99 

Jai  Chand,  Raja  130 

Jainas,  the  58 

Jaina  Temple,  Sarnath  99 

Jalsam  Ghat  214 

Janakpur  Temple  257 

Jataka,  Khantivadi  no 

„       N  yagrodha  -  M  i  ga  89 

Jattrawallah  234 

Jaya  Sing,  Raja  17 
Jehangir                    \y.  170,  171 

Jhawa  Jharan  84 

J nan  Bapi  168 

Jogasram  155 

Jogi-Bir  78 

Jones,  Sir  William  29 

Juna  Muth  61 

Jwarahareswara  184 

Jyestheswara  183 

Kabir,  48 

Kabir  Chaura  51 

Kal  Kup  176 

Kalika  Vidyalaya  34 

Kamachcha  192 

Kameswara  I79 

Kanishka,  King  107 

Kanvas,  the  126 

Kapal  Mochan  75 

Kapil  27 

Kapildhara  184 


Kardameswara  246 
Karmanasa 

Karnaghanta  Talao  183 
Kasi                                9,  28,  121 

Kasi  Devi  183 

Kasi  Karwat  172 

Kasis,  the  10,  121 
Kasi  Tirtha  Jirnoddharini  Sabha 

Kasi  Khandam  115 

Kedar  Ghat  236 

Kedarnath  237 

Kirtibash's  Ramayana  243 

Kirtibasseswara  81,  180 

Kittoe,  Major  102,  104 

Kotilingeswara  153,  225 

Kulastambha  76 

Kumareswara  193 

Kurukshetra  Talao  196 

Lahar-ka-talao  49 

Laksmi  Kund  189 
Lai  Bahadur  Sing,  Raj  a         184 
197.  236 

Lai  Khan's  Tomb  74 

Lalita  Ghat  213 

Lat  Bhairo  74 

Lasmanbala  Temple  224 

Lingam  142 

Lion-Capital  97 

Lolarka  Kund  202 

London  Mission  Society  63 

Luri-ka-kodan  86 

Luther,  Martin  240 

Macaulay  15 

Machchodari  Tirtha  178 

Madhoji-ka-deora  222 

Madhudas's  Garden  52 

Maghar  51 

Maheswara  140?  143 

Mahip  Narayan,  Raja  .   251 

Mahipal,  King  100 

Mahalaksmi  189 

M  ah  mud  of  Ghazni  130 

Main  Shrine  105 

Maitreya  86 

Man  Mandil  18,  212 

Mandakini,  the  13 


INDEX 

279 

Mansa  Ram 

247 

Pancha  Ganga 

221 

Man  Singh,  Raja  17,  148, 

>  17'",  171 

Pande  Ghat 

236 

Mangla  Gauri  Ghat 

221 

Panuco 

138 

Manikarnika               214, 

216,  231 

Paresnath 

58, 

123 

Manikarnika  Kund 

217 

Pathsalas 

44 

Maqdam  Saheb 

80 

Pilpilla  Tirtha 

225 

Mark  Twain 

II 

Pisach  Mochan 

186 

Marshall,  Mr. 

88,  102 

Pitri  Kund 

187 

Markandeswara 

182 

Pococke,  Mr. 

25 

Mashan  Ghat 

237 

Police  Kotwali 

14 

Matri  Kund 

187 

Population 

10 

Mauryans,  the 

125 

Prahlad  Ghat 

226 

Megasthenes 

28,  140 

Pratapaditya,  Maharaja 

236 

Memphis 

138 

Prabhu  Narayan,  Maharaja 

34, 

Menaka  Bari 

193 

57, 

252 

Mira  Bai 

186 

Queen's  College 

40 

Mir  Ghat 

212 

Rad  has  warn  is 

55 

Mir  Rustum  Ali 

248 

Rajghat  Fort 

72, 

.  226 

Mitter,  Sir  Romesh  Cliander  199 

Raj  Tarangini 

125, 

139 

Mogul  Serai 

4 

Ram  Ghat 

221, 

230 

Monkey  Temple 

.     195 

Ramanand  Swami 

49, 

224 

Mritunjaya 

182 

Ramkrishna  Sebasram 

38 

Muhulla  gates 

146 

Ramayana 

243 

Muhammad  Ghori 

130 

Ramamurti  Naidu 

201 

Municipal  Garden 

26 

Rana  Ghat 

236 

Museum,  Sarnath 

106 

Ranavir  Pathsala 

34.45 

Muth,  Dakshinamurti 

59 

Rani  Barahar 

194. 

195 

„         Juna 

61 

Rani  Bhawani             46, 

195, 

196 

„         Niranjani 

60 

Ratneswara 

180 

„         Nirvani 

60 

Rishipattana 

89 

Nadeswara  House 

54 

Roman  Catholics 

64 

Nag  Kua 

184 

Rudra  Sarwar 

23^ 

Nagas 

60 

Saadat  Khan 

134, 

248 

Nagri-pracharini  Sabha 

13 

Sakshi  Vinayak  Ganesh 

154 

Naleswara 

179 

Sambaditya  Temple 

188 

Nanak 

240 

Sungas,  the 

126 

Nanakpanthis 

57 

Sangameswara 

228 

Nara  Sinha 

200 

Sankata  Devi 

173 

Narad  Ghat 

236 

Sankata  Ghat 

221 

Naugraha 

175 

Sankat  Mochan 

194 

Nepalese  Temple 

214 

Sankudhara 

192 

Niranjani  Muth 

60 

Sankaracharya          127, 

153, 

189 

Nirvani  Muth 

60 

Sani  Deva 

156 

Oertel,  Mr. 

87,  102 

Sarnath 

89 

Omkareswara 

180,  181 

Sati  Stones                182, 

216, 

228 

Pal  Kings 

130 

Schools 

43 

Pancha  Tirtha 

220 

Scindhia  Ghat 

220 

280 


INDEX 


Sekrole 

29,  261 

Shah  Alam,  Emperor 

248 

Shakespeare 

241 

Sher  Khan 

5 

Sherring,  Rev.  M.  A. 

63,70 

Shibnarayanis 

61 

Siddheswara 

184 

Siddheswari 

^n 

Sikhs,  the 

56 

Siva-worship 

138 

Siva  Temple,  Sarnath 

99 

Sivala  Fort 

240 

Sivala  Ghat 

60, 240 

Sitala  Devi 

206 

Sohagesvvara 

179 

Someswara 

212 

Somnath 

99 

Sone  Bridge 

2 

Sona-ka-talao 

82 

Sridhar 

243 

Sulatankeswara 

211 

Suparsha 

r23 

Suraj  Kund 

187 

Swetambara 

58 

Tarakeswara 

168,  215 

Tavernier 

29 

Telegraph  Office 

14 

Thatteri  Baazar 

14 

Theosophical  Society 

36,61 

Tilak,  B.     G. 

139 

Tilbhandeswara 

202 

Tillianalah 

80,  225 

Town  Hall 

14 

Trade 

15 

74,  194. 


18^ 


Trailanga  Swami 

Trilochan 

Tripura  Bhairabi 

Tulsi  Das 

Tulsi  Ghat 

Vaishnavites 

Venis,  Mr      A. 

Vedas,  the 

Veda  Vyasa 

Victoria  Park 

Vishuddhanand  Saraswati 

Visweswara  156, 

Visweswargunj  Bazar 

Vivekanand,  Swami 

Vizianagram,  Maharaja  of 

13,  14,  57 
Vyasa 

Vyaseswara 

Vyas  Kashi 

Warren  Hastings 

Water  Works 

Wazir  Ali 

Weslyan  Mission 

Wilfred,  Col. 

Wilson,  Prof.  H.  H. 

Yantra,  Chakra 

,,        Dakshinabhitti 

„         Digansha 

„         Narivalaya 

„         Samrat 
Yogasram 

Zeej  Mahammad  Shahi 
Zenana  Bible  and 

Medical  Mission  64 


176 

225 

212 

241 

241 

59 

87 

139 

208 

40 

205 

158 

12 

38 


83,  208 
257 
208 

52,  249 
II 

52,53 
64 
29 
242 
22 
20 
22 
21 
20 

155 
18 


Demy  12  mo,  :  Cloth,  Re  i-6 ;  Paper^  Re  /. 
Foreign  :  Cloth,  2s.  2d. ;  Paper,  rs,  8d, 


The  Triumph  of  Yalmiki. 

{H.  P.  SHASlRfS  VALMIKIR  /AVA) 
ILLUSTRATED. 
By  R.  R.  sen,  B.  L. 
Pleader,  and  Law  Lecturer,  Ghittagong  College* 


To  be  had 


3i 


London  :  Messrs,  LUZAC  &  CO.,  46,  Great 
Russell  Street. 

Bombay:  Messrs.  RAM  CHANDRA 
GOVIND&SONS,  147.  Kalvadevi  Road, 

Madras  :  Messrs.  HIGGINBOTHAM  &  CO., 
165,  Mount  Road  ;— M  e  s  s  r  s  .  G.  A, 
NATESAN  &  CO.,  Esplanade. 

Calcutta  :  Messrs.  W.  NEWMAN  &  CO., 
4,  Dalhousie  Square  ;— Mr.  E.  SEYMOUR 
HALE,  Calcutta  School  Book  Society, 
1,  Wellington  Street. 

Chittagong  :    M.  R.  SEN,  Parade. 


Contents 

Introduction 

PART     I— The     Himalayas— The    Ribhus— The    Three 

Great  Ones— The  Song   of   Brotherhood— After  the 

Sony — The  Ribhus  Depart — Cogitations — After-effects. 
PART  II— The  Two  meet— The  Hermitage— The  Defeat. 
PART  III— The  Austerities— Viswamitra's   Vision— The 

Council  of  the  Rishis. 
PART  IV— In  Quest  of  Materials— The  New  Light— The 

New  Creation— The  New  Earth— The    New  Man^ 

The  Birth  of  Poesy. 
PART    V— The  Old  Earth— Peace  on  Earth. 
PART  VI— The    Flying    City— The    End    of   the   New 

Creation — Viswamitra  falls. 
PART  VII— The   Sacrifice— Unconscious   Musings— The 

Triumph  of  Valmiki. 
PART  VIII— The   Conception   of   the   Ramayana-The 

Advent  of  the   Lord — The   Songs   of  the   Ramayana 

The  'Ascension — The    Seven     Rishis — Viswamitra — 

Heaven  declined— The  Universe-Body. 
J^PPENDIX— The    Safya    and    the  Treta  /uo^as— The 
MrFmjr/a  Form. 


T^EVIE^S?^S   &,   OFINTONS. 


Professor  Edward  Dowden,  l  l.d.,  d.  Litt, 

Author  of  "Shakespeare  :  His  Mind  and  Art,"  DUBLIN:— 
"  Remarkable  translation  of  Mr.  Shastri's  remarkable 
prose-poem,  The  Triumph  of  Valmiki,  which  it  is  a  great 
pleasure  to  me  to  possess,  and  which  enlarges  the  horizons 
of  our  Western  imagination." 


'■'^r  y?- v.^'c 


ttt. 

Jcfyrial  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society 
of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  iONDON, 
Jantiary,  1910  :— "  Mr.  R.  R.  Sen's  English  translation 
of  the  Ren':;ali  original  is  a  ^ood  piece  of  work 
evidently  cai  ried  out  con  amore.  I  have  compared  much 
of  it  with  the  original,  and  can  vouch  for  its  fidelity,  but 
it  is  not  a  too  literaltranslation.  To  convey  to  English 
readers  Hara  Prasad's  raphsodies  without  falling  into  one 
of  the  two  pitfalls  of  turgidity  and  bathos  was  by  no 
means  an  easy  task,  but  Mr.  Sen,  who  exhibits  a  mastery 
of  idiomatic  Ens^lish  rare  among  those  whose  language 
it  is  not  has  successfully  accomplished  it.  In  the  story's 
Western  dress  I  can  safely  recommend  The  Triumph  oj 
Valmiki  to  those  who  are  not  familiar  with  Bengali  and 
who  desire  to  become  acquainted  with  a  modern  Eastern 
poetical  work  esteemed  by  the  compatriots  of  its  author  as 
as  a  masterpiece  of  imagination. — G,  A,  Grierson." 

The  Scotsman,  EDINBURGH.  Augusts,  1909  :— 
^'  From  Mr.  R.  R.  Sen,  Law  Lecturer,  Chittagong 
College,  comes  a  small  volume.. .which  does  every  credit  io 
4iis  lintruisHc  abilities. ...  A  work  of  characteristically 
Oriental  luxuriance  and  splendour  of  imagination,  a  sort 
of  prose-poem  on  a  subject  borrowed  from  the  Ramayana, 
which  mingles  mythology  and  transcendentalism  in  a 
strangely  inteiesting  way,  it  sets  out  a  kind  of  Eastern 
theological  ap  »logue,  of  which  the  root-thought  is  that  of 
an  universal  brotherhood  established  among  men  by 
moral  progress  instead  of  by  intellectual  and  material 
forces.  It  will  well  repay  the  attention  of  English  readers 
interested  in  contemporary  Indian  Literature.'^ 

The  IVIadras  T4mes,  MADRAS,  November,  12, 
1909  : — "  It  is  not  often  that  it  is  given  to  a  modem 
Indian  to  make  anything  that  can  be  called  a  conlributioH 


tv 

fo-  Uterafure,  Modern   Indian   vernacular    literatui'e    haf 

not  been  a   success.  Certainly  there   is   little  of  it 

that  will  bear  translation,  Mr.  H.  P.  Shastri's  "  Z"^^ 
Triumph  of  Vahmki"  judged  by  Mr.  Sen^s  beautijul 
imnslaiion  ts  really  a  gem.  The  English  of  the 
translation  is  almost  faultless.  Indeed  there  is  little 
in  it  that  would  make  one  suspect  that  it  was  not  written 
by  an  Englishman  with  a  taste  for  Eastern  literature. 
To  those  who  wish  to  understand  something  of  the 
Renaissance  of  Hinduism  that  is:  so  important  a  force  in 
modern  India,  "  The  Triumph  of  Valmiki  '^  will  be  of 
the  greatest  value.  The  allegory  centres  round  a  tale  of 
how  three  great  Hindus  of  ancient  times  were  influenced 
in  their  ideals  and  ambitions  by  hearing  the  song  celestial 
of  the  Ribhus  or  departed  saints.  Each  of  them  is 
differently  influenced,  but  it  is  given  to  Valmiki,  the 
repentant  robber-chief,  to  realise  the  greatest  ideal  of  all — 
the  brother-hood  of  mm.  Intermingled  with  what  may 
be  called  the  mythological  machinery  of  the  allegory  we 
find  the  most  modern  ideas,  such  for  instance  as  the 
brother-hood  of  humanity,  and  our  modern  knowledge  of 
the  solar  system.  All  this,  however,  does  not  detract  from 
the  beauty  of  the  tale.  In  it  the  crude  and  primitive 
imaginings  which  are  a  part  of  Eastern  mythology  seem 
in  no  way  incongruous  with  the  humanistic  ideas  of  the 
West,  or  with  modern  scientific  knowledge.  As  a  beauti- 
ful little  gem  of  what  may  be  termed  An^lo-Oriental 
literature  the  'book  is  valuable.,  as  a  key  to  the  neo- 
Hinduism  it  is  invaluable" 

The  Indian  Magazine  and  Review,  LONDON, 

October,  1909,  (eight  pages j  :— "Well  printed,  neatly  and 

tastefully, bound  and  quite  admirably  ill«istrated...the  matter 

of  the  book  is  worthy  of  its  presentation.     Translation  is 


e^er  a  difficult  and  periloiis  task,  but  Mr.  Sen... ...AasMai^e 

his  version  with  such  success  that  there  is  little  to  show, 
thai  a  is  not  the  work  of  an  Englishman  born  and  bred. 
He  has  reproduced^  with  as  much  sympathy  as  skilly  the 
spirit  of  the  original^  and  here  he  is  undoubtedly  to  be 
congratulated  on  not  being  an  Englishman,  for  a  book  so 
charged  with  Hindu  allusions  and  remuiiscences  could 
hardly  be  adequately  translated  by  any  one  who  was  not 
himself  a   Hindu.     We     strongly    recommend  the   little 

book to  the  perusal  of  all  who  would  wish  to  get  some 

glimpse   of   the   workings   of  the   mind   of  a  gifted  and 

erudite   Hindu It   must  be   said    to     the     credit     of 

Mr.  Sen's  translation  that  it  enables  even  a  Christian  or  a 

Mahomedan  to  comprehend  the  Hindu's  preference « 

Of  the  merits  of  the  work  as  a  literary  composition,  it  is 
not  for  a  foreigner  to  speak,  even  after  the  perusal  of 
a  translation  so  manifestly  competent  and  intelli^etU 
as  that  of  Mr.  Sen.  In  that  respect  it  has  stood  the  test 
of  the  enthusiastic  admiration  of  the  writer's  own  country- 
men. But  it  is  essentially  a  book  which  should  be  read 
by  Englishmen  and  Englishwomen  who  are  interested 
in  modern  India,  in  as  much  as  it  may  give  them  some 
clue  to  the  wonderful  renascence  of  Hindu  feeling   in   our 

own  day It  is  not  given  to  many  Europeans    to 

express  modern  problems  in  terms  of  ancient  legends 
and  primeval   imagination.     The  Hindu   does   it  without 

any    seeming    difficulty,    and    Mr.    Shastri has    done 

it  with  a  touch  of  genius.  With  a  little  effort  of  sympathy 
it  is  easy  to  see  that,  to  minds  steeped  in  Hindu  lor^, 
this  little  book  may  seem  like  an  inspired  reconciliation 
of  ancient  stories  with  the  perpetual  puzzle,  in  the  most 
modern  shape,  of  the  mystery  of  our  common   existence 

To   read    Mr.    Sen's    admirable   little   translation  is, 

in    short,    to    be    carried    into    the    atmosphere  of  the 


Tndian  Epics,  and  to  understand  how  these  charac- 
teristic works  of  the  Indian  imaginatran>etain  their  hold 
©«  the  piety  and  admiration  of  modern  Hindus. 
The  readers  will  be  rewarded  by  a  glimpse  into  the 
mentality  of  modem  Hinduism  such  as  he  may  seek 
in  vain  in  the  laborious  explanations  of  European  scholars. 
Mr.  Sen-'s  little  book  ought  to  be  added  to  the  library  oj 
everyone  who  takes  an  interest  tn  Indian  thought" 

East  and  West,  BOMBAY,  December,  1909  :~ 
"It  is  impossible  not  to  admire  the  achievements  of 
hidiarw  who  write  books  and  leading  articles  in  this 
second,  this  secular  speech  (English),  Among  such 
linguistic  feats  I  would  like  to  call  the  attention  of  readers 
Duiside  Bengal  to  Mr.  R.  R.  Sen's  admirable  and  most 
iriteresting  translation,  of  Pandit  Kara  Prasad  Shastri's 
*'  Triumph  of  Vahniku"  The  translation  is  a  tour  de- 
force such  as  few  Englishmen  could  have  achieved,  in 
the  success  with  which  it  suggests  rattier  than  renders 
th&  Hindu  atmosphere  in  which  the  writer's  imagination 
is  steeped.  I  believe  that  it  will  give  intense  pleasure  to 
Hindus,  not  acquainted  with  the  Bengali  language. 
E.ven  to  an  English  reader,  if  he  reads  withoivt  prepos- 
sessions, and  with  an  open  mind,  the  book  is  full  of  sugges- 
tion and  interest,  especially  as  the  Pandit  has  contrived 
to  mingle  some  Christian  imagery  with  purely  indigenous 
modes  of  expression." 

The  Pioneer,    allahabad,   July  25,   1909  .— 

"  Enghsh  readers  will  welcome  Mi  R.  R,  Sen's,  excellent 
translation  of  the  well-known  Bengali  account  of  "^  he 
Triumph  of  Valiniki  by  H.  P.  Shastri.  Mr.  Sen  has 
preserved  the  spirit  ^t/"  M^  ^r^^///<2/,  while  he  has  clothed 
it  in  simple,  direct  English.  The  theme  of  this  mytho- 
logical story  is  the  establishment  of  universal  brotherhood. 


Vtt 

among    men   The    book    recounts    the    progress 

of  the  world  for  many  centuries,  and  is  an  interesting 
commentary  on  Indian  Mythology.. .The  sentiments  of 
the  book  are  elevated,  but  the  style  is  never  bombastic, 
never  turgid.  Ike  illustrations  add  to  the  value  of 
the  bookr 

The    Indian    Mirror,   CALCUTTA.  August   is, 

1909  : — "  In  loftiness  of  conception  and  sublimity  of 
diction  the  paper  ranks  with  the  best  ever  written  in  the 
Bengali  language,  and  it  has  secured  the  writer  undying 
'fame.  By  translating  this  prose-poem  into  English. 
Mr.  R.  R.  Sen,  of  the  Chittagong  Bar,  has  achieved  no 
little  distinction.  The  rendefins;  has  been  so  skilfully 
nt'ide  that^  but  for  the  explanation^  one  would  take  it  for 
an  orioinal  e^ort.  Tiiere  is  not  the  slightest  trace  of 
that  jerk  that,  generally  speaking,  characterises  a  trans- 
lated piece,  nor  is  there  the  absence  of  the  sparkle  oj  the 
engindl  ^\\\(i\\  \s  also  a  feature  of  the  process  of  decan- 
ting. Verily,  as  an  appreciative  critic  has  happily 
remarked,  the  "  Triumph  of  Valmiki  ''  is  a  triumph  oj 
the  translator' s  art  as  well" 

Modern  Review,  CALCUTTA,  February,  1910  :— 
"...The  reader  is  transported  from  his  age  and 
country  :  like  Dante  under  the  guidance  of  Virgil  he 
meets  with  the  Titans  and  the  Celestials,  is  whirled 
through  systems  of  strange  universe.  Shastri's  touch  is 
fearless,    broad,    and   easy,  bespeaking   the  freshness  and 

spontaneity  of  youth The  translation  is   faithful  and 

enriched  with  notes  on  every  Oriental  word  used. 
Englishmen  learning  Bengali  will  find  it  easy  to  read 
the  original  with  this  translation  at  their  elbowP 

The    Malabar  Quarterly    Review, 

TRIVENDRUM,  September,  1909  :—"  We  are  .thankful 


vni 

lo  Mr.  R.  R.    Sen  for  favouring  us    with   a   copy   of  his 
very  excellent    English   translation    of  Valmikir 

y^J^ There  is  absolutely   nothing  in   the   body 

of  the  work  before  us  to  show  that  it  is  merely  a 
translation  and  not  an  original  production. 
Indeed  the  translator  has  brought  to  his  task 
such  naturalness  and  skill  as  to  defy  the  eye 
of  the  critic   in  detecting  a  flaw  in  his  English 

rendering  The  purpose  of  the    story  itself, 

is  to  prove  the  possibility  of  "  the  establishment  of 
universal  brotherhood  among  men  through  the  instru- 
mentality of  the   moral   instead   of    the    intellectual  and 

physical   forces"  the  printing     and   get  up   of  the 

work  does  credit  to  the  printers  and  the  book  contains 
some  eight  fine  illustrations.  We  have  little  hesitation 
in  commending  this  book  to  the  general  reader  who 
will  certainly  find  it  interesting  and  aftording  some  food 
or  thought  as  applicable  to  present-day  conditions," 

The    Indu    Prakash   (Dally),   BOMBAY, 
August  16,  1909  :— '♦  The  Triumph  of  Valmiki    is   a   well 

got    up    volume    brought    out    by    Mr.    R.    R.   Sen, 

The  conception  of  the  basis  of  the  book  is  no  doubt 
grandly   and   nobly   planned   with   an    admixture   of    the 

romantic  and  the  picturesque This  brief  summary 

will,  we  trust,  give  a  general  idea  of  the  grandness  of  its 
conception,  but  still  more  unique  and  commendable  seems 
to  us  the  spirit,  underlying  it,  of  moral  interpretation  and 
romantic  representation  of  some  of  the  stirring  and  ever- 
elevating  episodes  of  our  national  epics,  suited  to  help 
and  guide  the  solution  of  some  of  the  most  delicate  and  ■ 
vexing  problems — national  as  well  as  social — of  the  day, 
,..,..The  book  must  be  welcomed  as  a  laudable  literaiy 


contrihution  to  the  cause  of  national  regeneration. 

Both  the  incidents  of  the  book  and  the  scene  of  their 

working afford  ample  scope  for  the    most   grand   and 

picturesque  descriptions  and  the  most  stirring  and  highly 
romantic  flights  of  imagination.  In  some  places,  to  wit, 
the  course  of  Viswamitra's  creation  and  his  progress 
through  mid-air,  the  reader  is  involuntarily  reminded  of 
the  resplendent  grandeur  and  sublime  imagination  of 
Milton.  The  credit  of  the  translator  is  in  our 
opinion  almost  equal  to  the  unique  merits  of  the 
original  and  we  thoroughly  agree  in  the  remark  of 
Principal  Brajendra  Nath  Seal,  that  the  book  is 
a  ^*  triumph  of  the  translators  art  as  weir' 
Mr.  Sens  English  rendering  is  most  racy,  elegayit 
and  happy,  making  the  translation  itself  by  no 
means  an  inconsiderable  and  independent  produc- 
tion in  English,  We  cannot,  therefore,  conclude  this 
review  without  complimenting  Mr.  Sen  on  his  successful 
performance  in  this  respect  and  further  thanking  him  for 
the  valuable  service  he  has  rendered  in  making  such  a 
unique  book  based  upon  a  topic  of  all-absorbing  national 
interest  available  to  a  wider  class  TKnglish-knowing^  of 
his  fellow  countrymen," 

The    Oriental    Review,    BOMBAY,   July  21, 

1909  : — ''''...The  Triumph  of  Valmtki  wvls  originally  written 
in  Bengali  by  an  eminent  Bengali  writer  and  was  very 
highly  spoken  of  by  many  critics,  being  considered  almost 
an  epic  with  its  grandeur  of  design,  sense  of  elemental 
freedom,  intoxication  of  the  creative  imagination,  and 
dramatic  intensity  of  life  and  passion.  Principal  Seal,  of 
the  Cooch  Behar  College,  in  his  New  Essays  in  Criticism 
considered  this  book  superior  to  such    works   as   Goethe's 


X 

Helena,  De  Quincey's  Dream-fugue,  and  Richter's  Dream 
of  the  Dead  Christ,  and  said  that  the  Bengali  phantas- 
magory  was  sublime,  not  with  the  sublimity  of  Ossa  and 
■Olympus,  but  with  that  of  the  Himalayan  range.  The 
modern  literary  spirit  is  above  everything  cosmopohtan  m 
the  broad  sense  of  the  word.  It  cannot  bear  to  see  that  a 
good  book  should  remain  confined  to  a  limited  circle  of 
readers.  Actuated  by  this  spirit,  Mr,  R,  R,  Sen,  pleader 
■of  Chittagong,  has  translated  the  book  in  English.  The 
-scene  of  the   book  opens   with  a   vivid  and  magnificent 

description Victory  falls  to  the  robber-chief  Valmiki 

■Avho  turns  a  penitent  on  hearing  the     song  of  brotherhood 
■of  Man    sung   by   the  spirits    of    the     departed.     While 
the  others  are  bent    upon    evolving     feelings   of  brother- 
hood by  means   of  the    intellectual    and     physical    forces, 
Valmiki  does  that  effectively  by   the  same     means    which 
Christ,  Zoroaster  and    Buddha   had   found  so   effective — 
;the   Gospel  of  Love.     The  book  thus  shows  the  ultimate 
^triumph   of  the    moral  force  as  against  the  physical    and 
'intellectual  forces.  Though  an  allegorical  phantasmagoria 
it   possesses   a   human  charm  of  its  own  and     holds   the 
reader  enthralled  from    beginning  to   end.      The 
translator   has  succeeded  in  retaining  the  beauty 
of  the  original  ivith  his  sweet  diction  and  beauty 
■of  style.      We   can    only   sav    it   is   a   great  book 
well  translated.      Printed   on  superior  art  paper   with 
handsome  illustrations ,   the  price.. .is  not  much." 

The  Pioneer,     ALLAHABAD,    November     4th, 
.1909,   ^second    notice,    two    columns):— "...Mr.    Shastri'S 

little    book is,    in   short,   a   prose-poem    which    is   an 

allegory  of  the  superiority  of  the  moral  and  emotional 
iforces  over  sirea^th  of  will  and  strength  of  intellect. 
His    translator    Itas    atlempted   a  difficuH,  and   in   some 


respects,  an  impossible  task.     The  original  is  written  by  a. 
Hindu    for    Hindus,  and    in    a    language    rich  in  words 

borrowed  from  the  Sanskrit  Scriptures Mr,   Sen   has 

modestly  attempted  a  fairly  literal  translation,  and  has  so 
far  succeeded  that  his  version  is  fluent  and  readable. 
His  rendering  ivUl  be  useful  not  only  to  Europeans 
who  may  be  interested  in  Bengali  literature, 
but  to  Hindus  in  other  parts  of  hiduiy 
who  will  no  doubt  be  able  to  supply  the  ellipses  and 
allusions  "Vhich  may  present  some  difficulty  to  non-Hindus, 
To  Europeans  the  chief  interest  of  the  book  will  probably 
consist  in  the  fact  that  it  is  an  expression  of  the  neo- 
Hinduism,  the  curious  renascence  of  Hindu  sentiment 
under  the  stimulus  of  Western  education  which  is   one    of 

the  most  marked  features  of  our  time It  is   interesting,. 

nevertheless,  to  see  in  what  form  the  old  Hindu  legends 
linger  in  the  minds  of  the  most  intelligent  and  enlightened 
Bengalis,  forming  a  bond  of  union  between  Hindus  such 
as  Christianity  hardly  supplies  in  the  case  of  the  more 
positive  and  less  emotional  Western  races.  In  Mr.  Shastri's, 
book  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the  name  of  the  Ribhus  carry 
some  similar  charm  of  association  such  as  can  hardly  be 
possessed  by  the- words  of  any  foreign  scripture.  It  is  not 
argument  and  logic  that  can  take  the  place  of  such  haunting 
memories  as  these.  The  appeal  must  be  to  the  elemental 
associations  of  our  nature,  and  these  to  a  Hindu  born  and 
bred,  are  inextricably  linked  with  the  phrases  and  legends 
for  which  Mr.  Sen  has  striven,  not  unsuccessfully,  to  find 
an  English  clothing.  In  any  case,  Mr.  Sen's  little  book; 
is  one  which  may  be  read  tvith  pleasure  and  profit. 
At  times  it  rises  to  heights,  of  real  eloquence,  and 
read  sympathetically,  it  may  serve  to  show  how  Hinduism; 
S   stiH   one   of  the   great   living   religions  of  the    worklv 


Xtl 

althoii>(h  it  is  the  survivor  of  a  type  of  mythologies  which 
have  long  been  obsolete  in  the  West" 

United  India  and  Native  States,   MADRAS, 

January,  1910  : — "  Mr.  Sen  has  done  a  great  service  to  the 
Indian  public  ignorant  of  Bengali,  in  placing   within    their 
reach  this  magnificent  nibnument  of  the  Shastri's   depth  of 
thought,    power   of  imagination,    purity  of  sentiments  arid 
Versatility  of  genius. .....The  above  is,  in  brief,  the  skeleton 

of  the  author's  plot  and  th^  fabric  into  which  he  has  woven 
thesis  ideas,  is  worthy  of  the  traditions  of  ancient  India^ 
the  land  of  bright  fancies  arid  powerful  imagination. 
Perhaps  the  song  of  the  angels  at  the  Nativity,  suggested 
the  song  of  the  "  Ribhus,"  but  ^  he  author's  presentation  of 
it  to  his  readers  is  extremely  fascinating  and  is  calculated 
to  captivate  the  heart  of  the  Hindu,  trained  for  hundreds 
of  generations   to   vibrate  at   the    slightest    touch    of   its 

stiffest  chords  by  firigers  only  like  those  of  the  author 

The  booklet  is  extremely  interesting  and  edifying  and  will 
amply  repay  perusal  and  to  the  thinking  people  of  this 
country  irt  these  days  of  Unrest  cannot  fail  to  be  an 
incentive  to  the  adoption  of  a  right  course  of  thought  and 
life.  The  English  translation  is  simply  splendid  and 
speaks  volumes  for  the  ability  of  the  translator 
in  rendering  into  a  foreign  language,  a  vernacular  work 
without  allowing  it  to  suffer  by  translation.  The  get-up 
of  the  book  is  admirable  as  also  are  the  beautiful  illustra- 
tions.'^ 

The  Mahratta,  POONA,  September  26th,  1909:— 
'The  book  is  happy  reading.  It  is  full  of  beautiful  des- 
criptions and  choice  expressions  and  shows  to  what  height 
ihe  ima]jination  of  a  cultured  Bengali  rises the  con- 
ception of  the  book  is  highly  imaginative— extremely  poetic 
— and  is  well  worth  perusal.^' 


The  Hindu,  MADRAS,  October  2,  1909:-: 
"  The  author  indulges  in  sublime  rhapsody  which  is  at 
once  grand  and  fascinating  ••  ••  The  highly  imaginative 
will  find  in  this  work  ample  food  for  reflection." 

Dr.  G  A.  Grierson,  Ph.  u.,  L  L.  D.,  D.  Litt., 
CLE.,  Director  of  Linguistic  Survey  of  India  :— "  It  is  a 
mjst  interesting  work  and  I  take  the  liberty  of  congratula- 
ting^ you  on  the  excellent  English  used  in  your  transla- 
tion. The  book  must  have  been  a  most  difficult  one  to 
present  in  the  garb  of  a  foreign  language." 

Mr.  Frederic  Harrison,  President,  Positivist 
Society,  England,  Havvkhurst  : — "I  have  read  the  Triumph 
of  Valmiki  with  interest  and  like  the  descriptions  of  India's 
scenery. " 

Principal  Brajendra  Nath  Seal,  M.  A.,  Victoria 
College,  Cooch  Behar:— "Itis  a  triuniph  of  the  translators 
Art  as  well." 

Sir  Henry  Cotton,  K.  C.  S.  I.,  M.  P.,  London:— 
"  I  have  been  reading  the  book  with  much  interest  and 
appreciate  the  skill  with  which  you  have  rendered  Pandit 
Hara  Prasad  Shastri's  version  into  English." 

Dr.  Rash  Behary  Ghosh,  M.  A.,  D.  L.,  C  S.  I., 

late  Member,  Viceregal  Council  :— "  I  have  read  the  book 
with  much  pleasure,  and  I  hope   '^Iso  with  profit.*' 

Mr.  E.  B.  Havell,  Late  Principal,  Govt.  School  of 
Art,  Calcutta  : — "  The  excellent  English  of  your  translation 
enables  me  to  appreciate  the  great  imaginative  power  of 
Mahamahopadhyaya  Hara  Prasad  Shastri's  work." 

Sir  Gurudas  Banerjl,    Kt.,  M.  A.,  D.  L.,  l^te 

Judge,  Calcutta  High  Court  :~''By  presenting  to  English 
scholars  unacquainted  with  Bengali  an  English  translation 
of    Mahamahopadhyaya   Har^a   Prasad   Sastri's     Valmikip 


xtv, 

?faya,   one   of  the  best  works   in  Bengali  prose,  you  lia\  & 

,done  a  real  service  to  Bengali  literature ....I  think  I  can 

say^that  you  have  celebrated  tJte  triumph  of    Valmiki 
Jn  a  manner  befitting  the  subject?* 

Mr.  S.  Charles  Hill,  B.  A.,  B.  Sc,  Director  of 
Public  Instruction,  Central  Provinces,  Nagpur  :— "  As  far 
as  I  can  judge  from  your  English  translation  it  is  a  very 
beautiful  and  daring  poem.  It  ought,  I  think,  to  become 
a   classic   and  to   add   to  tlie   reputation   of  the   Bengali 

language I  trust  that   a  wider  knowledge  of  the 

poem  by  people  of  these  raetes  Cthe  Hindu,  the  Maham- 
:madan,  and  the  European,)  will  tend  to  bring  about 
that  brotherly  fusion  amongst  them  upon   which  the 
happiness  of  India  most  certainly  depends." 

Babu  Sarada  Charan  Mitra,  M.  A.,  B.  L.,  late 
Judge,  Calcutta  High  Court  : — "  I  am  pleased  with  the 
translation.  \\,\^  acmrate  in  good  English.  Transla- 
tions are  intended  for  Europeans  and  Americans,  1 
expect  they  will  appi;eciate  the  work." 

Mr.  J.  D.  Anderson,  I.  C.  S.  (Retired),  Cam- 
bridge : — "  Your  translation  is  admirable.  It  is  vigourous 
and  interesting  and  renders  the  original  with  quite  re- 
.markable  accuracy." 

Mahamahopadhyaya  Satis  Chandra  Vidya- 

bhusana,  M.  A.,  Ph.  D.,  Jt.  Philological  Secretary, 
Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  and  Professor,  Presidency 
College,  Calcutta  :— **  A  faithful  translation  of 
Sastri's  Valmikir  Jaya.  Your  style  is  easy  and  interesting, 
and  the  illustrations  embodied  in  your  work  are 
ingenious  and  impressive,  I  have  no  doubt  that  your 
book  will  be  widely  appreciated  as  it  deserves  to  be. " 


(JCV, 

Babu  Jogendra  Lai  Chowdhuri,    late    Sub« 

ordinate  Judge  :— "  Your  rendering  of  it  was  so  nice  that 
nobody  could  take  it  to  he  other  than  an  original 
composition  without  being"  so  told!* 

Babu  Raj  Kumar  Das,  M.  A,,  Head  Master, 
Dacca  Collegiate  School  :  — "  I  simply  wonder  how  you 
could  render  ?astri's  Valmikir  Jaya  into  such  a  sweet 
and  fascinating  English.  The  book  in  its  present  form 
does  not  at  all  look  like  a  translation  and  one  must 
compare  it  with  the  original  to  be  sure  of  it. 
To  confess  the  truth,  I  had  to  read  it  with  the  original 
to  be  convinced  of  it ,.  The  book  is  a  decided  improve- 
ment in  the  rich  garb  in  which  you  have   clothed   it 

/  am  sure  it  will  he  adopted  by  the  T,  B-  Committee 
for  prizes  and  libraries!* 

Babu   Beni    Madhav    Das,    M.   A.,  Professor, 

Ravenshaw  College,  Cuttuck  : — "  In  fact,  it  is  'a  Triumph* 
or  I  would  say  a  'marvel  of  Traslator's  art'  •••  SO  fit  to  he  a 
text-book  by  its  style,  diction,  and  the  subject-matter." 

Babu  Aghore  Nath  Adhikari,  Superintendent, 
Normal  School,  Silchar  \—It  would  maize  a  capital 
hook  for  our  Matriculation  students.  The  hook 
may  well  find  a  place  in  our  High  School  libraries!' 

Mr.  H.  E.  Ransom,  I.  C.  S.,  District  and  Sessions 
Judge,  Krishnagore  : — "  It  is  a  work  which,  it  seems  to  me 
will  repay  close  study  and  as  a  translation  it  should  almost 
if  not  quite  rank  with  original  compositions.  The 
production,  altogether,  if  I  may  say  so,  does  you  consider- 
able credit." 

Rai  Durga  Das  Das  Bahadur,  Late  Senior 
Government  Pleader,  Chittagong  :— "I  admire  your  English 


xvt 

in  the  Httle  book  as  very  beautiful,  sweet  and  charming, 
do  not  think  that  any  one  including  an   Englishman   could 
have  translated  the  original  in  a  better  way-" 

Mr.  F.  P.  Dixon,  I.  C.  S.,  Director  of  Land 
Records,  Eastern  Bengal  and  ^ssam : — "I  have  been  much 
pleased  to  have  it  and  to  read  it.  You  have  done  well  I 
think  to  take  De  Quincey  as  your  model  in  style." 

Dr.  Julius  Jolly,  Ph.  D,  Paris  :— "  In  its  English 
dress  (it)  is  very  pleasant  reading.  ...  This  work  should  be 
read  by  all  Western  scholars  who  take  an  interest  in 
Eastern  fiction." 

Professor  Poussin  of   Ghent,   Belgium:— 

"  I   admire    the    skilful    melange   of  Indian  ethos   with 
modern  feeling  and  knowledge." 


i>  nuDO  <ci 


RETURN  TO  the  circulation  desk  of  any 

University  of  California  Library 

or  to  the 

NORTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 
BIdg.  400,  Richmond  Field  Station 
University  of  California 
Richmond,  CA  94804-4698 

ALL  BOOKS  MAY  BE  RECALLED  AFTER  7  DAYS 
2-month  loans  may  be  renewed  by  calling 

(510)642-6753 
1-year  loans  may  be  recharged  by  bringing  books 

to  NRLF 
Renevy/als    and    recharges    may    be    made    4    days 

prior  to  due  date 

DUE  AS  STAMPED  BELOW 


JUN  2  7  1995 


g£P  %  8  zonB 


?0,000  (4/94) 


^0873 


YB  28492 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 


