===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.164001.Hymns-Of-The-Alvars_djvu.txt =====


* £• 








V|| 




^ ... ^ 


if* {i. 


:he heritage of india series 


Planned by J. N. Farquhar, M.A,, D.Litt. (Oxon.), 

D.D. (Aberdeen). 

'The Right Reverend V- S. Azariah, LL.D. 
Jomt (Cantab.), Bishop of Domakal. 

Editors " B)ewick, M.A. (Cantab.) 

|J. N, C. Ganguly, M.A, (Birmingham), 
^ Darsan-Sastri. 


Already published. 


The Heart of Buddhism. K. J. Saunders, M.A.. D.Litt. (Cantab.) 

A History of Kanarese Literature, 2nd ed- E. P. Rice., B.A. 

The w^mkhya S^rstem, 2nd ed. A. Berriedade Keith, D.C.L., D.Litt. 
(Oxon.) 

A^oka, 3rd ed. j.^aiEs M. Macphail, M.A., M.D. 

Indian Painting, 2nd ed. Principal Percy Brown, Calcutta. 

Psalms of Maratha Saints. Nicol Macntcoe, M.A., D.Litt. 

A History of Hindi Literature. F. E. Keay, M.A., D.Litt. 

Tne Karma-Mirnamsa. A. Berriedade Keith, D.C.L., D.Litt. (Oxon.) 

HYnms of the Tamil Saivite Saints- F. Kingsbury, B.A., and G. E. 
Phillips, M.A. 

Hymns hom the Rig^-eda. A. A. Macdonell, M.A., Ph.D., Hon, 
LL.D. 


G^wama Buddha., K. J. Saunders, M.A., D.Litt. (Cantab.) 

Coins of todia. C. J. Brown, M.A. 

Poems by Indian Women. Mrs. Macnicol. 

Beng^ Religions Lyrics, Sakta. Edw^ard Tholipson and A. M. 
Spencer. 


Class^_ Sanskrit Literature, 2nd ed- A. Berriedale Keith, D.C.L., 
^ p.Ljtt. (Oson.). 

X ns iVIiisic of India. IT A Popt pv P A. 

Telugn Uterature: M L., and Raja M. Bhujanga 

Rctbindranath Tagore, 2nd ed. Edward Thompson, M-A. 


Stib'iects proposed and volumes U7id^r prepa^'aticn, 

history and the heritage. 

Early Period. 

Gupta Period. 

The Mogul Period. 



THE PHILOSOPHIES. 

Ai; Iz:r.3di;ctioii to Hinda Philosophy. J. N. Fauquhar and 
Principal John McKenzie, Bombay. 

Selecricns from the Upanisbads. M. H- Hahrison, Jaffna. 

The Si'stem of the PSi Buddhist Books. Prof. V. Lesny 
Prague. ^ 


FIXE ART AXD MUSIC. 


Indian ArcbiteetiTre. 

Indian Sculpture. Dr. Stella Kraoisisch, Calcutta. 

Tne JEnor Arts. Principal Percy Brown, formerly of Calcutta. 

BIOGRAPHIES OF EhHXENT INDIANS. 

Ramanuja. Prof. R. Otto, Marburg. 

Akrar. 

VERNACULAR LITERATURE. 

The Kurai. H. A. Popeey, B.A., Madura, and K. T. Paul 
B.A., Saiem. 

Tuls: Das'S Ramdyana in hliniature. G. J. Dann, M.A. 

Bengali Religious Lyrics, Vaishnava. Edward Thompson and 
A. M. Spencer. 

hlalayaiam Devononal Literature. C. E. Abraham, B.D., 
Serampore, 

HISTORIES OF VERNACULAR LITERATURE. 

Bengaii. C. S. Paterson, M-A., Calcutta. 

Gujarat!. ^ 

Marathi. 

Tamil. 

hlaiayalam. T. K. Joseph, B.A., L.T., Trivandrum. 

Urdu. T. GRAHAttiE Baeley, D.Litt, 

Burmese. Prof. Tung Pe, Rangoon. 


VARIOUS. 

Indian Temple Legends. K. T. Paul, B.A. 

Indian Astronomy and Chronology. 

The Aryan Languages of India. Prof. R. L. Turner, London. 
The Indian Drama. Prof. M. Wlnternitz, Prague. 

Praknt literature. Principal A. C. Woolner, Lahore, 



EDITORIAL PREFACE 


Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, 
whatsoever things are honourable, whatsoever 
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatso- 
ever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of 
good report ; if there be any virtue, and if ^ere be 
any praise, think on these things. 

No section of the population of India can afford to 
neglect her ancient heritage. The treasures of knowledge, 
wisdom, and beauty which are contained in her literature, 
philosophy, art, and regulated life are too precious to be 
lost. Every citizen of India needs to use them, if he is to 
be a cultured modern Indian. This is as true of the Chris- 
tian, the Muslim, the Zoroastrian as of the Hindu. But, 
while the heritage of India has been largely explored by 
scholars, and the results of their toil are laid out for us in 
books, they cannot be said to be really available for the 
ordinary man. The volumes are in most cases expensive, 
and are often technical and difficult. Hence this series of 
cheap hooks has been planned by a group of Christian men, 
in order that every educated Indian, whether rich or poor, 
may be able to find his way into the treasures of India’s 
past. Many Europeans, both in India and elsewhere, will 
doubtless be glad to use the series. 

The utmost care is being taken by the General Editors 
in selecting writers, and in passing manuscripts for the 
press. To every book two tests are rigidly applied : every- 
thing must be scholarly, and everything must be sym- 
inthetic. The purpose is to bring the best out of the ancient 
treasuries, so that it may be known, enjoyed, and used. 




THE HERITAGE 




/ 


^ • 


OF INDIA SERIES 


V 

/ / 


r 

,V , ^ ^ 


hymns of the 

ALVARS 


BY 

J. S. M. HOOPER, M.A. (Oxon.) 

( laie Scholar of Corpus Chrisii College, Oxford ; Principal 
of Wesley College, Afcdrcs: 





V ^ 




^9 i, 

^ J^i (C 




A ^ 

\ ^ 




'fVl 




i.* 


, i'j- 

ASSOCIATION PRESS 

5 RUSSELL STREET, CALCUTIA 


LONDON: OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

NEW YORK, TORONTO, MELBOURNE 
BOMBAY, CALCUTTA & MADRAS 


1929 





To THE Memory 


OF 

R. M. H, 

March 4:TH, 1878 — March 21st, 1918 








PREFACE 


It has not been easy to decide the principle on which lo 
select iroin the large amount of material available in the 
Hymns of the Alvars. It would have been comparatively 
simple to choose nothing but pieces naturally attractive, an 
anthology of the best according to a Western literary stan- 
dard ; but it has seemed to me more valuable to attempt 
to convey an impression of other elements which have not 
so frequently found their way from Indian languages into 
English. This is one of the reasons for including the very 
difficult Tiruppallandu^ and for giving what -would other- 
wise appear disproportionate space to the last two selections 
— the Tiruppdz-ai and the Tiruviriiitam — which are suffi- 
ciently long to give the Western reader a consecutive view of 
the qualities of the hymns and of the type of devotion 
fostered by them. The stanzas are numbered throughout 
as in the original Tamil. 

A metrical form, rather than prose, has been chosen for 
most of the translations, because it appears to me that the 
strong emotional element in the hymns is better brought out 
in t'Crse than in prose. But no attempt has been made to 
reproduce the metres of the original Tamil, which are alto- 
gether foreign to English ears, and the actual forms used 
have no relation to any Tamil verse forms.. 

Among those to whom I am under obligations in connec- 
tion with this little book, I would specially refer to Dr. J. N. 
Farquhar, the planner of the ‘ Heritage of India ’ series. It 
■was at his instance that I undertook this -work, and his zeal 



4 


HYilXS OF THE ALVARS 


0 ^ im 


^ fjr 

JtaH«iijlUju^A m 


tna: 


movement a 


tew 


2 :reat 


and 


flT 


^ O Qt 
ijUrni. 


X%^ lH 


^n^ 


:t* ^ 


owe 

iP** 




Ixxtll 


-*-» j-y A ri '* 

W 4».H M MJk « « 


^1-wr* 




e Bkagaz'ad Giid^ Ramannjachar\’a, 
o: the later sects in North India 
.spiration to him, may be taken as 
the Vaishnavite movement is 


>'S 


e on a line of its ovm, owing its inspiration 
ver 3 * largely to the dl/fd, but ^directing its devotion to Siva 
latner than ».tj dshnn, is the Saiwte bhakti movement, with 
s o-f the Dez'drard and the Tif'-uvdckaka??!. Bhakti 


Its ZJT 

itself , the attitude of fervent devotion to God, may of course 
be fo-ond wherever men turn in eagerness of desire, or in 
extremity of despair, away from themselves and their own 
reascndngs to the One : cut the historicai student has to be 
win t t\dth such references to this attitude and experience 

cc H ipk I ^ t* ^ 


ceiore me 


the Vedas, the 
ground for such lev 

’0 T ■« ^ ® 

rXi.W W'k^C^jj^jLjlL 


,/IZ T f jff 


smee 


: has been pointed out that in 
ot Varuna already promdes the 
io%mg devotion as is later to find expres- 
sion in the bhakti ruevement. In the later literature of 
the Brahmanas (? 800-500 b.c.) Vishnu, though only 
one c: many gods, already has something of the attrac- 
tiveness that marks the sun-gods m many mythologies. 
It is sigrificant that if there is any error in the ritual 
of sacrifice, it is Vishnu who is invoked. In the ritual 
of marriage, too. he has an important place, and thus 


comes near to man in the most intimate and friendly 
relations of Hfe. By far the most important reference to 
Vishnu in this connection is the legend which was later to 
find a place as the story of one of the ten avataras of 
Vishnu — the legend of how he, w'hen all the other gods 
were helpless, redeemed the earth from the Asuras, He 


was the dwarf Vamana who was contemptuously offered as 
much of the earth as he could compass in three strides, 
Straightw’ay he swelled to the form of Tri-Vikrama, and 
with Ms nrst step bestrode the earth, with a second the 
highest heaven, and then failing to find a place for the third 
stride, he placed his foot on the head of Bah, the king of the 
demons, \ ishpu thus stands out from among his fellow- 
gods as the one who actually did something for the redemp- 
tion of the world, the one upon wMose grace, therefore, man 




Atman of the Upanukads, and identifies it wnth Vishnu, 
of the gods of the pantheon, hitherto at most on a level 
Brahma and Siva. Vishnu and the Absolute are now 
vertible terms, and the Absolute becomes a gracious 
to some extent, knowable God. In the second place, it takes 
the warrior IMshna, who has hitherto been at mog-t ^ 
partial incarnation of Vishnu, and makes him a full incarna- 
tion ; he that has seen Krishna has seen Vishnu, j^as 
seen the Absolute. In the third place, it lays down as a wav 
of release from rebirth (which release remains through.Q^^ 
the goal of religious endeavour ; though in the work 
the Alvars, as we shall see, there are hints of another 
possible goal), a method that is open to aH. The 
of Knowledge, Jndna Mdrga^ as prescribed in the 
sAads, is recognised as effective, but it is obviouslv 
limited to the few. The Way of Works, Karma Mar^a 
is recognised, and if prescribed duties are done with- 
out desire for reward, and without attachment to the 
fruits of the action, release will come. But as effectiY0 
as either of them is the new Way of Devotion to Krishna 










6 


HYMX5 OF THE ALTTIRS 


Bmkii Mdrgii. Those who have followed the Bhakti 
Marga have oonteviplaied the attractive figure of Krishna, 
and from many sides devotion has been lavished on Mm. 
He has made Ms appeal to the devout and to the sensuous 
alike, and in the love of Krishna, time and space, sin and re> 
birth* have alike been forgotten. Tnis has been a sufficient 
gospel for many eager souls ; but to those who have enquired 
hew this comforting message can he reconciled with the 
Upanishad doctrine of an imx)ersonal, actionless Absolute, 
the Gi/a has bad no satisfactory answer to give. The two 
conceptions are left side hy side : the tMnker, in the main, 
has been content to take the Upanishad doctrine as the food 






M * 


7 


I^TRCDUCTICX 


pcsition of the Glia 'v'hth regard to Vishna and Krishna^ 
and in the type of devotion vrhich they represent and 
siiiniilate they maintain bhakti as the great way of 
salvation. 

The period during which they appear to have flourished 
s that in which South India made its chief contributions to 
he religious life of the country. From the seventh to the 
ninth centuries of the Christian era, not only they, but also 
the curiously parallel Saivite singers, emphasised bhakti. 


s 

enunaaung tne Aavaita philosophy, with its relentless 
emphasis on an Absolute without attributes, and the 
unreality of all manifestation. The bhaktas, holding a view 
ultimately inconsistent with this, were continually drawn 
away into this pantheistic position, and in their hymns we 
can trace the same inconsistency as is to be noted in the 




the n 
n thai 
ts, bu 
nee oi 
it is 
to ha 
less A 
e Bei 
)r me 
1 way 



Iso si 

trad 

z by Buddhi 

sm and 

Ley c 

>pen< 

sd the W'ay 

to the 









excluding from it all the emotional glow that comes from 
devotion to God, and making it a matter of pure ethical 













8 


KY 


OF THE ALVARS 


and 


-f 4" ^ 

ii. i.i? 


If”***" 


teaching, that the hrs^grj htunan heart was ready to turii to 
a religion that would give it someone to loi’e and worship. 

There was al»3 the Advaita philosophy, dominant then 
and dominant still in Indian thought ; hut here it is only 
necessary to touch on Uvo or three of the points in which 
it is particulariy related to our subject. According to it the 
Way of Deliverance is the Way of Knowledge, for only so 
can the bondage of ignorance, producing the illusion of 
reality, he removed. Through ignorance comes rebirth, and 
man and god alike are bound by Karma ; all action works 
itsel; cut with impersonal justice, and there is no room, for 
anything else. Thus bhakti, in any really valuable sense, is 
impossible, both because the Supreme Being is without 
attributes, unknowable, unapproachable, unapproaching, and 
because of this reign of impersonal retributive law, Bhakti 
involves a mutual relationship of love and trust, a relation- 
ship which to be valuable must be between the human soul 
and the One with whom nnally we have to deal. But the 
utmost that is allowed in the Advaita system, and the 
Upanishads as expounded by it, is that Vishnu is a special 
form of the Absolute, worship of whom may be permitted as 
a concession to human weakness, untii with full knowiedge 
this illusion also disappears, and the One is aE and in aE. It 
is clear that a bhakti regarded thus from the superior eleva- 
tion of philosophic enlighteiiment holds its position by a very 
insecure tenure : and it is this that bhakti has had to contend 


9 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


Side by side with philosophy was the practice of poly- 
theistic worship. The remote Ahsoliite of the philosophers 
v;as clearly ill-snitecl to satisfy the craving oi human 
affection for a god near at hand, and, perhaps even less, 
the imperative need of a god who could still the disorder 
of htiman fear. Hinduism as it developed tolerated, as of at 
least temporary value, the ahoiiginal cults in which men 
had found some satisfaction for these needs, and thus v:e 











hi h-hi p 


KY 


!v::\S OF THE ALVAE 


t the temporary \Titli Ramanuja, and are tbere- 

ire some centuries later than the events they profess to 
elate, so that they c ann ot be relied upon if contemporary 
evidence contradicts them. They are, nevertheless, of great 
interest as heing among the earliest attempts at the writing 
cf histcry in South India. It is significant that they come 
when personal contributions begin to be made to religion ; 
hitherto Indian religion had in the main gone its way with 
no outstanding names but that of Buddha ; it had been an 
evolution of thought rather than a succession of prophets ; 
but now the devotion cf disciples was anxious to preserve 
every detail of the life and teaching of the revered guru, 
and these lives are the result They obviously contain 
a large admixture of imagination, but they represent 
thought which was current in the twelfth and thirteenth 
centuries, and which is current to-day among devout §ri- 
Vaishnavas. 

In the second place there are contemporary inscriptions 
on stone or metal. The study of these by competent epigra- 
phists is yielding valuable results, and will increasingly 

trt r*riTiH7T*:^rii-nc rP'ar'lh 






GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


11 


jf*' 


-F 

< 1 
“•j 

the Alvars were predecessors of Ramantija, and the diier- - 
ences of opinion are only as to their relative positions, ahd*- - 
as to the period to which the earliest of their, belong. 


Professor S. Krishnaswainy Aiyangar appears inclined to 
place the four earliest Alvars in the second century a.b. : but 
in the judgment of the present writer the evidence for this 
is lacking, and a considerably later date, the middle of the 
seventh century, must be assigned to them. The late hir. 
T. A. Gopinatha Rao has pointed out that one of the early 
Alvars, Bhutattalvar, makes reference to MamaHai as the 
place of his birth. This is clearly hlahabalipuram (The Seven 
Pagodas), established as a seaport by thePallava king, Rara* 
simhavarman I, sumamed Mahamalla, in the middle of the 
seventh century. This carries with it a later date for Bhutatt- 
aivar and his contemporaries, Pey Alvar and Poykai Alvar. 
In the chronology that is here adopted, Gopinatha Rao has 
been followed, though it has not been thought necessary to 
give the detailed evidence that he brings in support of his 
conclusions. In any case the chronology is so disputed that 
in this introduction no theories are based upon its details, 
and no attempt is made to trace any progression of thought 
from the earlier to the later. 

As to the main order of the Alvars, there is very general 
agreement J;hat the traditicmal account may be followed. The 
first three Alvars are Pey Alvar, Bhutattalvae, and Poy- 
kai Alvar, and their story illustrates the meaning of the 
name ‘ Alvar ’ that aU these devotees have in common ; the 
Alvar is one who has gone deep in the knowledge of God, 
one who is immersed in the contemplation of him. Pey 
Alvar, according to the tradition was bom in a red lotus 
in a well in Mylapore. On the same day, a few miles to the 
south, at Mahabalipuram, was bom Bhutam, also in a 
flower, virhile the day before saw the birth of Poykai in a 
lotus in the tank of the Vishiiu temple at Kanchi (Conjee- 
varam). It chanced that one night each of them was 
weather-bound, and they took shelter one after the other in 
a space all too small for them. As they stood thus dose 
together to escape the fury of the rain they became con- 
scious of another Presence squeezing in among them. It 
was God Himself ; and when the day came, each of them 



12 


HYMNS OF THE ALVARS 


fcroze inio ecstatic song, the result of which we have in the 
first, second and third Tiruzandadt^ each containing a 
hnndred stanzas and composed respectively by Poykai, 
Bhntam and Peyd 

Contempomry with these is Tisuiialisai Alvas, bom 
three months after them in the village of Tirumalisai, near 
Pconamallee. He was the son of a rishi and an apsard^ but 
tvas early abandoned by his mother, and found and brought 
up by a devout man of low caste-" He is reputed to have 
lived for 4,700 years and to have spent much time in Tripli- 
cane, Conjeevaram and Kumtakonam. His hymns are the 
Mdn~Mukkam Tiriizandddij containing 96 stanzas, and the 
Tiru-Cckandu-Viruiiam^ containing 120 stanzas. They con- 
tain an interesting and superior reference to Jains, Bud- 
dhists, and Siva Bhaktas.® 

The nest name is that of NaiimalvaRj_ the greatest, 
most famous and most voluminous of the Alvars. He is 
knowm by various other names, the most frequent of which 
are Sathagopan and Parankusam. His story is closely inter- 
woven with that of another Alvar, his disciple, Mathura- 
m4\n._Narnmalvar was bom in a Sudra family at Kurukur, 
now Alvartirunagari in the Tinnevelly District. For the 
first sixteen years of his life, the child, at that time called 
Maran, remained under a tamarind tree, opening neither 
his mouth nor his eyes. Meanwhile Mathurakavi, who was 
on pilgrimage in North India, saw a great light shining 

^ Tte opening stanzas of the First and Second Tiruvandddi are as 

follows : 

*^Tbe earth as lamp-lwwl, tte poured-ont sea as oil, the burning sun 
as Ight, I have twined a garland of words for the feet of him who 
wields the red blazing discus, that the destruction-bringing discus 
may Ik gone '—Poykai. 

‘ With love as lamp-t»wl, desire as oil, mind melting with bliss as 
- wick, with mdting soul I have kindled the bright light of wisdom in 
the leaxn©3 Tamil which I have wrought for Narayana ' — Bhutam. 

* cf. T'irucckanda ViruUumt 90 .* ‘I was not bom in one of the 
twice two caste : I am not learned in the four sacred Vedas ,* I have 
not conquered the five sen^ . . . i^ve thy shining feet alone, O Lord, 
I have CO other hold.' 

® Mdft^WMkkam TiTUVundddi^ 6: ‘Jains are ignorant, Buddhists 
have faBei inlp delusion, Saivas are ignorant innocents, and those who 
wi3 not worship Vishnu are low indeS.' 



truv 
s; ai 

who 


e et 

y 


nai oenenis inat 
. The Tirtiz'dy- 
: the Ndldyira 
as a whole are 
IS. Unlike some 
was devoted to 
[athnrakavi, has 
: be is the great 
imseli a partial 
5 later develop- 
siich dangerous 
rship assigns to 
ith century. 
;?ancore. and his 


made the ground c 
his exact date. Proh 
may he accepted. Hi 
gradually turned to 
of sacred literature 
of poems drawn fr 
proved increasingly 
various incidents ar- 
occasion he was so i 
the RdmdyaTicL in wh 
against hosts of gian 
to go to the rescue. 
























means. She composed the Timppavai in thirty stanras, 
describing the way of lulfiiment of a sacred vow for the 
realisation of the divine presence. She also composed the 
N^cckiyar TirumoH (the Sacred Speech of the Queen) in 
143 stanzas, consisting of invocations to Kama, the god of 
Love, etc. The question of her marriage arose ; and in a 
wsion it was revealed that she was to be the bride of Sri 
Rahganatha himself, i.e., Vishnu in the recumbent form 
shovm at Srirahgam. She went to Srlrahgam with due 
ceremony, and was there absorbed into the cliwne being, 
ToxpAEADiPPopi was born at Mandaiigudi. His original 
name was Vipra Narayana, and like Periyalvar, he gave 
himself to the preparation of flowers for the worship of the 
god, in this case at Srirahgam. The crisis of his life came 
when he yielded to the seductions of a courtesan called 
Devadevi. He was under her spell for some time, and was 
at last saved only by the inten^ention of the god Rahga- 
nathan himself. Thus saved and shocked into a more 


complete devotion, Vipra Narayana returned to his former 
service of the god, and gave himself the new name of 
Tondaradippodi (The Dust of the Feet of the Slaves of 
God). The heights of his religious experience find 
expression in his two poems, the Tiritmalai (the Sacred 
Garland) and the Tiruppalli Yehichi (the Rousing of the 
Lord) both directed to the same manifestation of the 
recumbent Rahganathan at Srirahgam. He shows strong 
hostility to Buddhists and Jains, and there is one hostile 
reference also to Saivas. He also may be dated about the 
middle of the imth century. 

TinupPAN Alvar was found in a paddy field in Uraiyur 
(now Woriur, TricMnopoly) and adopted by a childless Panar, 
or lute-player, and Ms wife. The child grew up with a deep 
devotion to Vishnu as manifested at Srirahgamj just across 
the river Kar’eri ; but conscious of Ms lowly Panchama 
origin, he contented Mmself with singing Ms praises from 
the southern bank of the Kaveti, not crossing to the sacred 
island itself. There he used to stay, adoring, and altogether 
unconscious of Ms surroundings. On one occasion the 
Brahmin, Loka Sarahga Maha Mum, who was responsible 
for bringing the water for the ablutions of the god, wished 



16 


HYMNS OF THE ALVARS 


to draw wat 0 r irDtn the place where Tinippaa was seated, 
aod called lo hiiD to retnove himself, in order that his out- 
casts presence might not be a pollution- Tiruppap heard 
neeming, till at last the Brahmin in his irritation threw 
a stone at him. Tiruppan at once realised the situation 
and humbly withdrew- The Brahmin proceeded to draw 
the tvater and in due course presented it to Sri Rahganathan. 
To his intense surprise it was rejected, and the god rebuked 
him angrily for his treatment of the outcaste, who was his 
devotee. Finahy, Maha Idurd was instructed to go to 
Tirnppan and carry him on his shoulders to the sacred 
presence, as Timppan’s modesty would not allow him of 
his own motion to bring v/hat he regarded as the defilement 
of his person near to the god- This was done, and the 
ecstatic experience drew from Tiruppan the A7?iala7i-ddi- 
pirdn in ten stanzas, He tvas finally absorbed into the 
divine form at the age of fifty. 

Last and most picturesque of the Alvars comes Tiru- 
MAXGAi, bom in the thief (aste, his father being commander 
of the armies of the Chola king. The name Nila (blue) 
was given to the child in honour of Vishnu. He inherited 
Ms father's position, and was made a sub-king of the Tiru- 
va|i country; he was thus able to indulge his turbulent 
passions to the full. His conversion to religious thought 
dates from Ms falling in love with a heavenly nymph adopted 
by a Vaishnava who gave her the name of Kumuda Valli, 
as he had found her in a Hly pool. Uninfluenced by his 
offers of jewellery and wealth, she refused to marry anyone 
Imt a true Vaishpava. Nila immediately hurried to a shrine 
and begged the deity to make him a Vaishnava. In answer 
to his prayer the twelve marks of Vishnu — the wheel, the 
conch, etc. — were imprinted on his person, and he thus 
returned to claim his bride. Kumuda Valli, however, in- 
sisted that he should feed 1,008 Vaishnavas daily for one 
year. To this also he agreed, and the marriage was duly 
'Celebrated. From tMs point Nila becomes Tinimahgai. He 
kept his promise to feed the 1,008 Vaishnavas, though in 
order to do so he defrauded his overlord, who therefore came 
against Mm and made him a prisoner. However, while he 
was in captivity a hidden hoard was revealed to Mm 








GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


17 


by Varadarajasvami of Kanchl (Vishnu in the forin wor- 
shipped at Conjeevaram), and with this he was able not only 
to ransom himself but to feed the Vaishnavas for a consider- 
able time. When it was exhausted he took to highway 
robbery to procure the requisite money. Narayana himself 
was watching the zeal of Tirumahgai for this good end, and 
in order to win it yet more fully for himself he turned into 
a wealthy Brahmin traveller and allowed himself to be way- 
laid and robbed. Tirumahgai did his work thoroughly but 
was unable to lift his rich spoil from the ground unth the 
Brahmin taught him a mantra w’hich contained within itself 
all the four Vedas. This produced a wonderful effect, and 
Tirumahgai saw the traveller whom he had robbed trans- 
formed into Vishnu in the form of Hrishikesa, with his 
consort Lakshmi, riding on the great kite, Garuda. Inspired 
by the sight he produced the hymns which are pre- 
served in the P^'Ctbaiidhain — Periya Tiriimoli, Tirukurun 
Tdndahmn^ Tirmieduii Tdiidakam^ Tiruveruktitrirukkai^ 
Siriya Tirnviadalj and Periya TirumadaL He \isited 
many sacred shrines, w’hicli he celebrated in his hjrmns. 
At Sihali (Shiyali) he had a debate with the^Saiva saint, 
Sambandhar, in which he came out victorious, Sambandhar 
giving him his trident as a sign of respect. (This trident is 
found on all images of Tirumahgai, W'ho is for this reason 
called Parakalar, the Enemy of Heretics.) At last he reached 
Srirahgam, w^here the god, Ranganathan, commissioned him 
to rebuild and enlarge his temple. To secure the necessary 
funds for this, Tirumafigai again resorted to brigandage. He 
gained possession of half a cargo of nuts by an unscrupulous 
trick, and proceeded to rob the Buddhist shrine at Negapatam 
of its golden image of Buddha, In the latter place his 
brother-in-law, Yatirajan, lost his life, which was however 
restored to him through the intercession of Sri Rahganayaki, 
the divine consort at Srirahgam. With the funds so obtained 
he set about the building wmrk at Sriraf^am. When obstre- 
perous workmen demanded payment he saw to their being 
drowmed in the Kaveri, and consoled their indignant rela- 
tives by telling them that they would be happier at the feet 
of Sri Ranganathan than they had been on earth. . . . And 
so at last, having obtained as a final boon the Hsion of the 



O 









GENERAL INTRODUCTION 




goris, ihan is to bs loniLd in the Alvars. From the stand 
point oi religion ii would appear to mark a per\"ersion 
which is by no means so definite in the Tamil works 

The Nablrira Praba7idha77i is one of the ^eat devc 










HYilNS OF THE ALVARS 


tfi- 




■4> 




"CU ' 


nvmzs : 




vniVx tj::s 

the s: 

<rrff '<«i « 

lins 


ilarity 


'irCltatlOl 


:s still the case la Saiva temples with 
the custom of reciting them together 
leniary gradually grew, possibly to emphasise 
between the ' Tamil Veda ' and the Sanskrit. 
I is part of what may be called the ^ Tamil 


liPorgy.' as distinguished from the regular liturgy which is in 


L to 

Sanskrit. 




The singing of some parts of the Prabandham 
ppears ic be a ccmpamtively modem reiival, and to have 
no necessary relation to the liturgy. In any case it has no 
cormecticn with the recitation ; where there is a singer, he 
performs his part alone. The reciters are called ‘ Araiyar 
they stand on opposite sides of the mandapam or hall, in 
front of the temple, and render the h3mins antiphonally. 
They have allowances and perquisites from the temple, 
and they must be Brahmins. There is also a liturgy for 
domestic worship, in v;hich, for Brahmans, Vedic mantras 
^ verses from the Prabandham are both used : for non- 


Erahmans. the Vedic mantras are of course omitted, though 
other Sanskrit passages from the Pur anas ^ etc., may be put 
in their place. There is no caste restriction as to the 
domestic use of the Prabandham ; it is open to all who 
accept the teaching of Ramanuja. 

hlany hymns of the Prabandham require but little ex- 
planation, in order to be inteliigible. Instances will be found 
among those translated here of a simple appeal to God for 
deliverance from the recurring ill of life — life itself is the 
ill, not sin, or sorrow, or misfortune ,* but existence, from 
which God himself alone may be able to save the soul that 
trusts in him. Others are filled with a passionate devotion 
to God, singularly free from self-regard, and expressing 
itself with a great wealth of illustration. Others again 
consist of Io\'ing and detailed descriptions of God as made 
known to men, especially in the form of Krishna, whose 
exploits both as child and man form the subject-matter of 
many hymns exalting the grace of God. (Only one of the 
many dealing in great detail with Knshna's infancy has been 
chosen for this selection, by Periyalvar.^) Others deal 
similarly with the other avalnras of Vishnu, and with 


^ See below, p. 37. 




relationship they sought to express the passionate hunger 
of the heart for him. The soul cannot find rest until it finds 
God. 

For those not already familiar with the intricate field of 
Hindu mythology, one of the chief obstacles to the ready 
imderstanding of such devotional hymns as those of the 
Alvars is the number of incidents and epithets with which 
they need to be acquainted. Here all that can be given is a 
brief summary of the main beliefs about Vishnu, detailed 


^ See below, pp. 49» 58-60. 


3 










hy:.iks of the alvars 


fcxr 




^Izizczi ihBX are act here made snmdently clear beiag* 
exylaiaedt 7;here they occnr, in the notes to the text. The 
references in the hymns are very largely to one or other 
of the avataras of Vishnn, and it is through them that 
he is chiedy kiiov;n to men. But he himself dwells in 
Vaiknntha, with his consort, Lakshmi, or Sri, who v/as 
btm of the froth of the ocean when it was churned by 
the gC’ds and demons. On his breast he bears a sacred 
Sri-vatsa, and in his four hands he carries always the 
Wheel, the Conch, the Club, and the Lotus. He is for ever at 
war with the demons that for ever plot ev:! against men and 
gcds. Among the demons are Madhu, Kamsa, Bana, Bali, all 
or whom are mentioned in these selections ; and Vishnu hurls 
his wheel and uses his club against them. When he blows 
his conch his enemies are filled with terror and dismay. He 
also has a Bow (Sarhga) and a sword, and wrears special 
iewels on his breast and on his wrist. He rides on Garuda, 


K, ct If 

V aikuntha 
bcm of tl 


i>j 








dvrari, and ay bis three strideSj as Tri-Vikramaj delivers 
the earth iroin the demon Bali. Xent comes Parasurainaj 
followed by me two great hgnres of RamHj whose foe was 
Ravana, and Knshnaj v;ho destroyed Kamsa. To the other 
two names, generally included among the ten av^ataras> 
Buddha, and Kaiki, who is stiil_ to come, it is doubtful if 
there are any references in the Alvars. 

t< 

India — and those of Rama and Krishna have of course been 
elaborated in the fullest detail in popular story and imagina- 
tion — there are stories connected with particular manifesta- 
tions o: Vishnu or of one or other of his avataras at various 
local shrines. The different names by which he is known 


Qme 

Srlrahgam is th 
embracing repose 
f Kanch: 


t K£ 
f the 


m 

& 



iaes, 


in 

the 

selec 



4 




T • 1 



d St 

Team 

,s in 

■ ■lliMMIUll Itll \i_im 


liipiil 
Jill 

lij| 

m 


1 


•I 

«i 


m 

Hmij 
11 

!■ 

Fftpj 

iWliilBii 


nsTs 
IS a 
he i] 
''ara. 
ring 
he \ 





















his active grace and mercy, the mediatorial influence that is 
continually with him. The nature of the relationship is 

LX 

tiie aimosi nysiericai innii or emotion is the sure evihenc 
of the divine presence : ‘ When one is overcome by tfc 
bhakti exaltation, trembling in every cell of his bein 
he must freely and passively allow this influence i 
penetrate his being and carry him beyond all know 
states of consciousness. Never 
bystanders might take him fo; 
exhibition of his bhakti raptur 
to be suppressed. The very ma< 
character of the enraptured sain' 
the ordinary mortals to whom 
is necessarily denied. The ver 

pride In that very madness,” the cAiiuns, run, jump, 
cry, laugh, and sing, and let every man witness it.” Figures 

drawm from the sex relationship are employed to illustrate 
rdinaxy exhilaration and, especially in the later 

ingerous 
g gener- 
Another 

stration (as in much other 
V aishnava poetry) is in the passion of a mother for a child, and 
some of the most charming of the hymns are those in which 
the child Krishna draws out the affection of his devotees in 
the purest form of emotion that men can know." The 
emotion of love is stimulated especially by the avatara 
stories, and the very points in the story of Krishna that have 
been challenged by many critics — his thieving, his im- 






prcpriets" T»itn toe gop:s — are regarced as but supreme 
ezamples cf his utter, condescending, grace. 

On another line, but aiming at the same end of giddy 
exhilaration, is the practice of repeating the thousand names 
of Vishnu, and sc by a kind of self-hypnotism losing 
oneself in rapture. The true devotee sees God in every- 
thing, and again and again in these poems, not only the 
iuiasi (Vishnu's peculiarly sacred plant), but trees and 


dowers, mountains blue in the distance, birds and beasts and 
human beings serve to recall the heart to its allegiance. 
There Is in these hymns more of unrealised desire than 
of present satisfaction, and every reminder of God serves to 


lasm, nor cer 


a personal matter, and there is not a 

















strict pledge or secrecy, immeaiateiy Kamaniija wert- 
forth and proclaimed what he had learnt to a group o 


preiemng lo oe losi ninis 


e goal that is sought appear 
latives, as indeed is the ca 
' land and age. There is firs 
.n longing for a relation of 
'ten man and God ; there is e 
ending service round God’s 
ity of love can alone save 
being a mockery, and in the 


absorption, such as is suggested in the stones of Andal and 
of Tiruppan — the peace that is the peace of nescience. 






HYliXS OF THE ALVARS 


Gcd’s grace is nziiatliOirable, all the wisdom of all the 
sages has touched but the fringe of the knowledge of him, 
their best Hght is only a dickering torchd But such grace 
demands an unlimited answering devotion, and salvation 
comes when God’s boundless grace is met by man’s faith 
and love. The Question that iuevitably arises at this point 
is one of the great questions of the religious life ; what is 
the relation between that grace of God, and the answering 
faith of man ? It is on this that the great division occurred 
amcng the followers of Ram^uja. The Vadagalais, or 
Xorthem school, whose great thinker and leader was 
Vedanta Desika, laid stress on man’s share ; the Tengalais, 
who are more directly in the line of succession to the Alvars, 
emphasised God’s grace, and God’s responsibility, and 
maintained that all that man has to do is to remain passive. 
The two sects still divide the field of South Indian 
Vaishnavism, with many differences of ceremonial obser- 
vance and emphasis ; but the essential difference is as to 
whether man’s hold of God and God’s hold of man are like 


that of the monkey to its young, v/here the young one has 




from tiiese Hymns mat lioci is aDove morality, and tliat to 
bim it is an irrelevance. The Piiranic stories are taken for 
granted. Krishna is a full incamation of God, expressing 
God in everything he does. It has been said above that 
what in an ordinary man would be called his immoralities 
are regarded in Krishna as so many signs of his infinite 
condescension ; but if God can so condescend, morality is 
indifferent to him. Similarly, in the easy theory of partial 
incarnations in the various Alvars there is no recognition 
of morality as a requisite. In the symbols at the great 
Srirahgam temple, as at other temples, there is much 
of what anywhere else would have to be called inde- 
•csncy; but there is no suggestion that this is repugnant 
to Vishnu. Morality is a category applicable only to men ; 
and it is not surprising that in some later developments 


Alvars suggest, the power of a mantra, the repetition of 
the sacred name, or even the use of the right ceremonial, 
are as effective as right living and true thinking.^ In other 
words, there is no necessary connection between bhakti and 
character. Such a story as that of Tondaradippodi certainly 
emphasises the ethical ; but on the other hand is the story 
of Tirumangai ivhere a startling and profound religious 
experience left character entirely unaffected ; he is at least 
as unscrupulous after his * conversion ^ as before it, and there 
is no hint of criticism on the part either of Vishnu or of the 
later devotees of Tirumangai. Deliverance from sin, after 
all, is not what is chiefly desired ; sin is not the problem. 





J 


HY3.INS OF THE ALVARS 


torn;e-3,on 

b .<w. ,Km 
Cl-lk. 


■ n A 


If 

^ i If’ 


: God as revealed in his avataras cannot 
t fellowship vith him which is salvation. 


On :he other hand, this is inconsistent with the fundamentai 


itar 


me aoctr 


ct 

fnongr 


av 


ine, that selnsh action involves rebirth and is 
tar to salvation. Karma thns makes for unselfish, 
self-centred, morality; but the bhakta’s religion 
ite well leave morality on one side. The ethical 


problem is not central in the thought of the Alvars ; the 
fervent glow o: e: 


.otion makes all else seem triwal 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


T* ^ *# W-iCil ^ 

.h ^ to w 








.e^ing with the Alvars is very scanty. 

j*) 'T 1 r 1 T • 


ua:— stoves of the Ah'ars, together with much yurlous 
wmation. may be foimd in T/ie Holy Lives of the Azhvars 
the Drlzzda Saints tv Akondavalli Gowindacharya (Mysore, 


^ Mi * J 


teres: 


toe 


is the same author’s Divine Wisdofn of the 


Draiida Saints. From the standpoint of modem schoiarsbip T. 
Ramgopalachafiar’s Vaishnatiie Reformers of India, S. Krishna- 
swamy A;\’angar’s Early History of Vaishnatnsm in South India, 
and T. A. Gopinatha Rao’s Subrahfnanya Ayyar Lectures on the 
History of Sri Vaisnavas, are of spedal value. There are v'arious 
lives of Ramanujacharya. On the more general lines of bhakti, 
Macnicol’s Indian Theism is most tseful, while Farquhar’s Outline 
of the Religions Literature of India is indispensable for the clear 
wew that it gives of the historical development of thought and practice 
in the bhakti movement, and for its placing of bhakti in relation to the 
other elements of Indian religious life. For mythology, the standard 
works on Hinduism are available, and in small compass Wilkins’ 
Hindu 3IytkolQgy is serviceable, though it is doubtful whether in 
any one English book an account can be found of aU the stories which 
are taken for granted in the Alvar hymns. Of bhakti from the Chnstian 
standpoint there is a valuable and suggestive treatment in J. L. 
Johnston’s Sofm Alternatives to Jesus Christ. The relevant articles 
in Hastings’ Encyclop{edia of Religion and Ethics may also be con- 
sulted with advantage, especiallir Grierson on ‘ Bhakti Marga,’ and A. 
Berriedaie Keith on ‘ Ramanujab 







with the Tiruppallandtt and is closed with it. This is not 























\^SHNU 

(From a stone imasre in the Madras Museum) 





TRANSLATIONS AND NOTES 


35 


3. Take earih and odours/ if to serve the Source of bliss 

Ye vvvsh : but well no worldlings have to join cur 
crew ! 

Seven generations without Saw, we sing ‘ All hail ! ’ 

To him who with his army Lankans demons slew ! 

4. Ere to the evil place^ ye comej — oh haste, 

Ye who would join us, come, resolve to break these 
bounds.^ 

Oh, join the devotees who hymn Narayan’s name,^ 

Oh haste, till town and country with your song 
resounds. 

5. Ye who have been among Irudikesan’s^ slaves, 

The Lord who into one the crowded hosts of vore 
Gathered and slew, demons and giants : leave the past,^ 
And hail his thousand names; oh come, his feet 
adore 1 

6. For generations seven, grandsire and sire, we do 

Our tasks aright : that we the evil eye may stay^ 

All hail we sing to Hari, who his demon foe® 

At Tiruvonam's® sacred eventide did slay. 

^ i.e., from tne lord, as symbols of becoming his slaves. Earth is 
taken by devotees to mark the beginning of a ren-day festival, and in 
it grains are made to sprout. 

® The reference may be either to primordial matter, or to the 
bnming-ghat ; salvation must come while we are in the body. 

® They are bound in that their mind is set on their own soul, not 
on God. 

'‘_Namonarayana has the surface meaning of ‘Salutation to 
Narayana,^ but tradidonally the meaning is, as handed down from his 
guru to *Ram^ujacharya, ‘ (I am) not for me . . . but for Narayana." 
® A name of Vishnu, ‘ the lord of the senses ' (Hrishike§a). 

® The past for these had been spent in singing for wealth, etc.; 
worship henceforth is to be without any ulterior motive. 

’ God, because of his supreme excellence, is exposed to the evil eye,_ 
in the protective thought of his devotees ; and their anxious prayer 
prompted by love has been directed to the warding off from .aim of 
its power. 

^ HiranyakaSipu, slain by Vishnu in the Narasimha avatara. 

® The twenty -second lunar asterism. There are twent^^-seven, 
corresponding to the twelve si^s of the zodiac. It is ‘sacred’" 
because Vishnu is its presiding deity. 







is calling thee, pointing, pointing, with his little hands 1 O 
big Moon, if thou '^vishest to play with this little black one, 
hide not thyself in the clouds, but come rejoicing I 

3. Wert thou bright all over, with the wheeling of 
thy orb of light, with all thou dost, thou canst not match my 
son's face! O Moon, come quickly, so as not to tire 
the hands that beckon thee, of the wondrous one who 
dwells in Vengadam ! 

4. 'Tis thee he points to from my hip, he with the discus 
in his hand, gazing with bright wide eyes ! If thou knowest 
what beseems thee, O Moon, vex him not; if thou art not 
a childless one thyself, come now I 

5. He calls thee in his baby speech, prattle unformed, 
svreetened with nectar from his pretty mouth. O big 
Moon, if thou heedest him not, whose name is Sridharan,*^ 

^ Another name of Periyalyar. 

® Sarhgam, Vishnu’s bow." 

® i.e., they recognise that they are lucky in the time at which they 
live, that they may thus sing. 

* ‘ He who carries Lakshmi in his heart.’ 


4 











TRANSLATIONS AND NOTES 


39 


2. Ere youth can rail, (as vritb one hand on back 
We lean a-tremble on our staff, with eyes 
A-roil, and deep heav’d breaths, and coughs) — can say, 
' What’s this ? Why, what an old man Father is ! ’ 

We v/ould worship Vadari, 

Sung by the honey-drinking bee. 


3. Ere all my veins stand out like hoops, my flesh 
All loose, my mind ashamed, and tottering 
I stand, with rolling eyes turn’d on the path ; 

If sense I have, the thousand names I’d sing: 

I would worship Vadari, 

Sung by bees in ecstasy. 


4. Before the rheum flows, and my eye grotvs dim, 
And bile comes up, and I am old, and cough, 
And my legs pain me and together knock, 

And I can walk but tottering — enough 1 
I would worship Vadari 
Girt by pools where fishes play ; 

Home of the Lad who calves did graze, 

And on a day the hill did raise.^ 


9. Ere in my body all my senses fail, 

And I grow old and sit apart, my mind 
Sunk in dejection ; gathered phlegm I spit, 
And only babble of the things I find : 

I would wrorsliip Vadari, 

Sung by those who tulasi 

Bear to -wreath him, and round the shrine 

Name the thousand names divine. 


^ Krishna, the cowherd, raised the hill, Govardhana, as an 
tunhrella, to protect the docks froia the rain sent in wrath by Indra. 





As Ape, and of another race 


Than ocean, thou didst love, and say : 

^ The margosa tree. The worm enjoys even the bitter maigosa 
leaf, because that is its environment : how much more must man love 
God I 

* The reference is to the episode in the_Ramayana, when Guhan, 
the fisherman king, was loath to leave Rama, Sit a and Lahshmana 




PDfiiViTi] 


accompany them when he provided them with a boat to cross the river. 

® Hanuman, the monkey hero of the Ramayana, was the son of 
Vayu, the wind. 











r j . — VU.V. ciL Liiti o-gc vjli. itxLiaci uiiaii J.1VC ati cvii 

l^e the of 100. By doing penance to Siva he was able to evade 
the i^lute efforte of Yama to capture him. He was further given 
j. * p ^ _ ^^^ala# ^ is either Yama himself or his attendant, 

tne minister of death. (Note that a story usually associated with Siva 
IS by tne Alvar assigned to Vishnu.) 

The Braimiin Santhipini taught Krishna after the killing of Kamsa, 
and made request as for his fee. His son had been drowned 
twelve y^m before. Krishna sought him out and restored him to Ms 

tnread ’ this ceremony is regarded as a youth’s 
second^ birth the entry on the life of manhood. 

disappeared. At the time of the birth of 
fTp appealed to Krishna, who agreed to save it. 

to save the 

cana. Knshna theretore himseli came, and restored all four. 












TRANSLATIONS AND NOTES 


45 


7. Cast out by red-eyed Vishnu is the mind 
That climg on every side to every one : 

‘ Father, forsaken are they all, and I 
With love for Rahgan, for my Lord, fordone,’ 

9. No harm shall touch the man who mighty stands 
In these the songs the Konkan king^ has sung — 
Great in his lonely frenzy for the feet 
Of Rangan with the discus in his hands ! 

VII- 

‘ The worldly hope men set their hearts upon 
Turns ashes . . / 

KULASEKARAN: PERUMAL TIRUMOLI : C. 4 

1. Flesh-pampering birth in body’s not for me 
Unless his slave I be, 

Who tamed the seven bulls.^ Oh, as a crane 
May I be bom again, 

Whose home is in Koneri^ upon Vehgadam, 

Of him who in his left hand holds the conch. 

2. The wealth which rules in heaven is not for me, 

With galaxy 

Of nymphs^ with charms immortal ; on the earth 

No kingship ! May the birth 

That is my lot be as a fish within the springs 

Of Tiruvehgadam, with groves of honeyed flowers ! 

3. Entrance into Vaikuntha’s^ portals high 
— Hard to be entered by 

Him of the thickly matted hair,® and Brahm 
And Indra,^ come 

^ Kulasekaran. 

^ Krishna won the daughter of the shepherd, Nagnachittn, by 
taming seven bulls. ® A small tank on Tirupati hill. 

^ Dancing girls in Indra’s heaven, Svarga. ® Vishnu’s heaven. 

® Siva. 

^ Indra is here ranked with Siva and Brahma : Vishnu is superior 
to the triad. 





dag to spi 


beetles sing 
rengadam, th 


?y 













TRAX5LATI0XS AXD XOTES 


47 


10. If 'neath that canopy which rales above 
I might attain the love 
Of Urvasi" with gir-fle of nne gold. 

To it Tm cold. 


Oh to be any thing at all on Vehgadam, 

The golden hill of him vdth lips c: coral red ! 


VIII 

‘ Ail My hope on Thee is stayed ’ 

KtXASEKARAN : PERUMAL TIRUMOLI : G. 5, 

1. If Thou wilt not my portion’d grief dispel, 

I have no hope but Thee, 

Vitmvakodn’s” Lord, 

Girt with its groves of flowers with fragrant smell. 
Fm like a babe, which weeps, yet thinks of mother’s 
grace, 

Though she with anger fierce has thrast it from her 
face. 


Girt on all sides by walls that heaven touch, 
Vitmvakodu’s Lord, 

E’en like a well-bom girl 

Who only knows her husband, though deeds such 
As men may mock her lover does, so will I sing, 
Though thou’lt not be my Lord, Thy anklets tinkling. 


3. Surrounded by wide lands w’hich fishes see, 
Vitravakodu’s Lord, 

E’en if Thou wilt not look 
On me, I have no other hold but Thee — 

Like subjects looking to the rod of wreathed king, 
Though he regards them not and works deeds harrow- 
ing. 


One of 




Lncing girls in Svarga., widely sitngin Indian p.oetry. 
“ A place in the Chera conntr}.’. 



red waters ail the streams ashing 
Must spread abroad and ran 
And enter the deep sea 
And cannot stand outside. So refuge mine, 

Save in the shining bliss of entering Thee, is none, 
Vitmvakodu's Lord, thick cloud-hued, virtuous one ! 












The Tiruppdvai is one of the best-known and most used 
parts of the Ndldyira Prabmidhmn. In it the poetess, 
Andal, picrures herself as one or the gopis, the milkmaid 
friends of Krishna, rising early in the morning, and per- 
suading her friends to accompany her in order to arouse 
the sleeping Krishna. Their aim is to secure from him a 
drum, as a pledge of bliss. (Possibly the drum is intended to 
suggest the triumph of acknowledged love ; if he gives her 
a drum, it is so far a sign that he has commissioned her to 
proclaim Ms praises.) The first five stanzas are a general 
description of what those who have undertaken this vow of 
waiting upon Krishna must do, and of the benefits that 
will come to them. Stanzas 6 to 15 describe the attempts 
of those who have already risen to awaken others who are 
still asleep. In stanzas 16 to 22 all the maidens have 
gathered together and are trpng to ronse Krishna, waken- 
ing first the gatekeeper, then Nandagopa and Yasoda, 
Balarama and Krishna, In 18 they appeal to Nappinnai, or 
Radha, and in 2i all together unite to call EMshna. In 25 
they reply to the question that Krishna may imagined to 


>S1 




tne^ ye girls ail zily clight 


to 1 


face like to the rays of snn and moon 


We 11 speakj hut give kind alms, and muse with joy 


g gram, and m the lily bud 


Great cows shall flood the bowls with milk, as soon 


Red IS trre colour that shows passion, especially warm affection. 


Adi§esha; see Introduction, p. 22. 












TRANSLATIONS AND NOTES 


51 


4. Great as the sea, O Lord of rain, stint nougM : 

Enter tiie deep and drink and nil thyself ; 

Then rise on high, with body growing black 
Like to the form of the Primeval One ; ^ 

Flashing like disc in Padmanabhan's" hand — 

His, of the fair broad shoulders ! — like the conch^ 
Thundering, rain on earth like pelting darts 
Shot from relentless Saingam,'^ so that it 

May prosper, and_we too, who happy bathe 
In Margali. Ah, Elorembavay 1 

5. When thus aB pure vre come, strewing fair flowers, 
Adoring, and with songs upon our Hps, 

And meditating in our hearts on him — 

Mayan,“ the child of Northern Mathura 

The Ruler of great Jumna's sacred stream ‘7 

The shining lamp w^hich in the shepherd caste 

Appeared Damddaran,^ who brightly lit 

His mother's womb^*^ — faults past and faults to come 

Cease, like to cotton that within the fire 

Flames into dust. Ah, Elorembavay I 

6. Lo, birds are singing ! and hast thou not heard ? — 
Heard the white shell’s deep sounding in the shrine 
Of the Bird's Lord?^‘ Child, wilt thou not arise? 
Sages and Yogis (holding in their hearts 

^ j^arayana as the creator of all in the hegimiing. 

- Vishnu as the lotus-navelled. See Introduction, p. 22. 

3 One of Vishnu^s weapons. Vishnu’s bow. 

® The Mysterious One, sometimes appeaxing in ordinary form, as 
the child Krishna, etc., sometimes revealing himself as the Supreme 
Being. (See p. note 2.) 

® Literally ‘ lasting Northern Mathura ’ — * lasting® because Krishna’s 
birthplace. 

• Mathura and Gokula, where Krishna’s boyhood was spent, are 
both on the river Jumna. 

® The fact that Krishna was brought up among the shepherds 
conferred great distinction on their caste, 

® A name of Krishna, because as a child be was tied by a cord 
round his waist to keep him out of mischief. 

It was a glory for her to have such a child. 

^ Vishnu, whose vehicle is the great kite, Ganida. 



Him who drained poison from the she-ghotil*s breast 


eekly, and in their hearts rejoice at sound 


To him, Narayanan ? to Kesavan 
Oh, thou who mistress of the country art, 

TT _ . _ ff A ^ ■« — 


Wilt thou not rouse her ?' is thy daughter dumb ? 
Or is she deaf ? Is it a slumber light, 


S 

liatl 








TRANSLATIONS AND NOTES 



And miglity w6r© in figjit to bring' to nongbt 

The power ot foes ! Fair as a serpent, thou, 

Bright as the peacock, come ! From everr side 
All thy girl friends are come and crowd thy courts 
To sing the name of the ciond-colotired One* 

Ah, wealthy lady, sdll thou stirrest not, 

StiH speakest not ? What ^s the value of 
This sleep of thine ? Ah, Elorembavay ! 


12. G little sister of the vrealthy lord 

Of loving milch-cows, yearning for their calves 
So that the milk from out their udders hows 
Till all the house is drenched and turned to mud r 
Dew falling on our heads, we at thy gate 
Sing our hearths darling, who in anger slew 
Tne Lord of Lanka in the South but thou 
Remainest dumb ; e'en still thou dost not rise, 
What a great sleep is this, v^en all among 
The household know ! Ah, Elorembavay ! 


14. Lo, how within your garden pool behind, 

The water-lily blossoms red, and how 
The amhal shrinks ! Ascetics, in their robes 
Of saffron, and with teeth all white, ^ have gone 
To sound the conch within their sacred shrine. 

O lady, who didst promise that betimes 
Thou wouldst rouse us, thyself art not yet risen. 
Shameless, all tongue ! W e sing to him who wields 
In his great hands the conch and discus, him 
Lotus-eyed ! Ah, Elorembavay ! 


15. 


* Young parrot,® dearest, art thou sleeping yet ? ' 

* Be still I Cali me no more, ye girls ; I corned 


^ Knshna is alwa}"s pictered as dark in colour. 

® Ajjictiire of overflowing plenty. 

® Rama, who slew Ravana, Lord of Lanka (Ceylon). 

^ A flower that opens in the dark and clc^es in the light. 

= Ascetics do not chew betel, etc., and their teeth are therefore not 
discoloured ; a token of their purity. 

® A term of endearment. 


5 



The Lord of l^Iystery, like to a gem ^ 


To oeat — We m otir pnnty have come 
That we may sing to rouse him from bis sleep. 
Deny ns not our purpose with thy word. 


Nandagopan, lord w'ho graciously 











Daughier" of Xandagopa^j is like 
A liisty elephant, who deeth not. 

With shoulders strong : Xappinnai,” thou with hs 
Dinnsing fragrance, open then the door I 
Come see how eveywhere the cocks are crowing, 
And in the mdikazi^ bower the Knyil"^ sweet 


tinkling bangles lair, that we may sing 


-f O" 


Who 


Dnmest up thy foes, awake from sleep 


Literally ‘ dangliter-in-law.^ 

‘ The one -with beatitifd hair ^—RMha, Kpshna^s gopi devotee 


mm, self is of Vishnu. 









56 


HYMNS OF THE ALVARS 

22. Like nionarchs of the beantiful great world 
Who come with broken pride up to thy couch 
In a great company, we crowd to thee i 
Little by little will not thy red^ eyes 

Open upon us — like to lotus flowers 
Fashioned on tinkling anklets ? If on us 
Thou wilt but glance, with both thy beauteous eyes 
Like to the rising of the moon and sun, 

The curse that rests uponjis is removed — 

If thou but glance I Ah, Eldrembavay I 

23. As a fierce lion, which throughout the rains 
Within his mountain lair has lain asleep, 

Awakes, and flashes Are from his eye, 

And angrily vnth bristling mane he moves 
AH of his body, shakes himself and stands 
Upright, and roars, and lordly issues forth : 

So thou who flowerlike art, come graciously 
Forth from thy shrine ; in grace, upon thy throne“ 

Of cunning craftsmanship, search out the cause 
That brings us here. Ah, Eldrembavay ! 

25. Thou, bom one woman’s son, and in one night 
Conceal’d and reared as another’s child, ^ 

Thou mighty Mai ^ who vrast as very fire 
In Kamsa’s heart stirred unendurably ; 

Thwarting the evil purpose that he planned : 

With longing after thee weVe come, and if 
The drum thou but bestovr, then we wiH sing 
Thy bounty, that is worthy Lakshnd’s self, 

Sing too thy might ; and aE our trouble gone 
We will rejoice ! Ah, Eldrembavay 1 

27. Govinda^, whose nobHity is such 

As conquers e’en thy foes, by singing thee 

* See p. 50, note 5. 

® In the original there is a play on words, ‘ throne * being literally 

‘ Eon-seat.* 

* Krhhna bom to Devaki and transferred the same night to 

YaSoda to estape the of Kamsa, bis uncle. Vishnu. 

® A favonrite name for Krishna—' Cowherd.* 



TRANSLATIONS AND NOTES 


With the cmrGj what is the glory that we gain 
By the prize that all the country deems a boon ? 

Many a jewel we put on — bracelets 
Wristlets and armlets, howerlike ornaments 
For ears, and anklets ,* beauteous robes we wear. 
Thereafter, plenteous meals of rice with milk, 

And elbow-deep in ght ! — In_company 
With thee, what bliss ! Ah, Elorembavay ! 

28» Alter the cotvs we to the jungle go 

And eat there — cowherds knowing nought are we. 

And yet how great the boon w’e have, that thou 
Wast bom among us ! Thou who lackest nought, 
Go^nnda, kinship that we have vnth thee 
Here in this place can never cease ! — If through 
Our love we thee baby names, in grace 
Do not be wroth, for we, — like children, — we 
Know nought — O Lord, thou not grant to us 

The drum we ask ? Ah, Elorembavay I 

29, Dost ask the boon for which at earliest davm 
W^e come to give obeisance and to praise 
Thy golden lotus feet ? It is not fit that thou 
— Born in the tribe that lives by herding cows — 
Withdraw, rejectiiig us who fain would serve. 

To gain the drum, not for today alone 

Have we become thy slaves ; but, Govinda, 

For aye, for sevenfold births ! Only to thee 
We'll service give ; from us do thou remove 
All other loves. Ah, Elorembavay ! 

30. To Mathavan who churned the navied deep,^ 

To Kesavan,^ the moon-faced jewelled maids 
Went and obeisance did, and gained their drum ! 

This wTeath, these thirty (sung in classic verse^ 

By Godai,^ Puduvai^ Pattarpiran's,® 

^ See Introduction, p. 22. By cbiurning, Vishnu obtained Lakshini. 

® See p. 52, note 7. 

® Literally ‘ Sahgam Tamil, ’i.e., T amil such as is approved ty this 
academy : probably the famous Madura academy, the board which 
exercised a kind of literary autocracy, recum'ngly, throughout the 
clasacal period of Tamil literature. Andal. 

® Srivillipuitur, Andal ’s home. See Introduction, p. 14 f. 

® Or Periyalvar, Andai’s reputed father. 



58 


BXlSxXS OF THE ALVARS 

With cool fresh lotus garlands) they who say 
Unf ailin g, everywhere^ shall gain from Mai 
(His arms like mountains four, his face kind-eyed, 
And wealthy Lakshmi by him) sacred grace, 

And bliss enjoy ! Ah, Elorembavay 1 


X 

na:\imalvar 

Intsoduction 

Exigencies of space make it impossible to give any 
selection from the Tiruvayrfioli\ and the Tiruviruttam 
must therefore stand as the representative in this selection 
of poems of the work of Nammalvar." It would be easy to 
illustrate Ms wholehearted devotion. In one place he sings 

‘ If thus I speak, it means hostility ; 

Yet speak I will, so hark to me 1 
While he, my lord, my elephant, my sire, 

Is here, of Vehgadam, with choir 
Of buzzing beetles, ne’er to man shall be 
The gift of my lips’ minstrelsy.’® 

He refuses to degrade his God-given gift in order to 
please men, however powerful or wealthy they may be. 
Elsewhere we find his sublime confidence in the absolute 
supremacy of the Vishnu whom he sings : ‘ If -with your 
sweet songs you praise each Ms own favourite god, all wiU 
come to my Timmal, with Ms crovm of bright-shining 
rays.’^ In another series of stanzas, after enumerating many 
ways of trying to name Krishna, he asks, * Am I to speak 
of my lord of mystery, vrho for the joy of deliverance 
created all the w’orlds, who wears Ms sweet blossoming 
tulasi for the -worlds to praise, as the one with colour like a 
shining jewel, or as Mm who wears matted hair and the cool 
crescent moon (Siva), ever to be praised as the unique 
One, or as the four-faced god (Brahma) ? ’ ® Whatever the 
form, Vishnu, Siva, or Brahma, the object of worsMp is 


^ i.e., in every birth. 

® Tiruvaymoli iii, 9 : 1. 


^ See Introduction, p. 13. 

^ ibid., iii, 9 : 6. ® ibid., iii, 4 : 8 





TRANSLATIONS AND NOTES 


59 


one. And again, ‘ Even those who hare forsahen their 
homes and the many beauties they have long enjoyed, who 
have subdued the nve senses, and have tortured the body — 
though they gain Svarga as their sweet abode, if they are 
without him, they ivili return. Draw near the feet of the 
Lord who has the bird (Garuda) as Ms standard : then 
there is no return.’ ^ 

The Tiruvirutiam of Nammalvar is said to contam the 
quintessence of the Rig Veda. In form_it is a poem of one 
hundred four-line stanzas, in wMch the Alvar expresses the 
longing of his soul for union with God, under the figure of 
the love of a maid for a man. The persons of the poem 
are not consistently maintained. In general the * lord ’ 
represents the god Vishnu, and the Alvar pictures his 
own yearning as that of the mistress for her absent lover, 
with his attendant devotees playing the part of the confiden- 
tial maid, and sometimes of the foster-mother go-between. 
In some stanzas, however, the parts are changed, and the 
Alvar’s longings find expression in the vrords of the lover 
speaking of Ms mistress. There is no consecutive action in 
the poem, and no progress of thought ; but we must imagine 
the lover as coming and going in the intervals of the verse. 
Sometimes the poet seems almost to forget Ms figure, and to 
speak in Ms own person (e.g., stanza 48). The language of 
the original is close-packed and frequently obscure and 
ambiguous. An attempt has been made to proMde a runMng 
analysis, and some Mnts as to the esoteric meamng ; but 
nothing can make it easy reading. The Tamil student 
Mmself requires pages of commentary on each stanza. 

The note of the ’Tirtiviruitafn- is one of almost unrelieved 
yeanling for God, that is at first sight difficult to reconcile 
with the doctrine of His grace. In the Bkdgavaia Purmm 
(Book X, chapter 32) Krishna justifies tMs, in words which 
may be taken as a commentary on tMs poem : * I do not 
attach myself to those wffio are devoted to me, in order to 
make their devotion to me the more intense.’ And again, 
In order to intensify your afiection for me I disapi^ar, 
forsaking you who have for my sake renounced your sense 
of right and wrong, your relatives and your duty.’ 

^ TiruvaynU/li iv, 1:9. 



(The tmderstandmg of sacred erotic poetry is simplined if the 
generaDy-accepted esoteric meaning of recurring syrpbols is held in 
mind. The analysis of the states of the love-sick soul is carried to an 
extreme. A stanza in Sanskrit says : 

‘Love carries parted souls through ten successive states; 1. The 
eve is dram ; 2. The heart is attacked ; 3. The will is resolved ; 4. 
Sleep is gone ; 5. The frame pales ; 6. All is loathed ,* 7. The soul is 
mad ; 8. It becomes senseless ; 9. It swoons ; 10. It dies.^ Devotees 
can of course develop the interpretation as far as they wish, and 
individual interpretations vary ; but the following general key may be 
taken as ti^iical of the esoteric method of interpretation. By the 
mother is meant either the devotee’s own state of mental composure, 
or friends who keep their mental composure. By the bride is meant 
the parox37sm of love for God, and galaxy of God-loved souls. Female 
friends mean the circle of well-wishers. The bridegroom is God, and 
the company of God-loved souls. The messengers are holy ones who 
lead the devotee to God, etc. The beauty of the eye indicates the 
perfection of discerning wisdom, which determines aright the proper 
object of love. The beauty of the breast means the development of 
devotion or holy love, manifested by complete obedience — the sine qua 


QUIMn 


e S 


llfi 



ifftne 

the 

sha] 

H ft 

lowii 

er 1 

XJwk 

ess 

mea 

;s o: 

f faii 


sts t 

ou 

•anc 

ain, 

jeci 

e. T 

are 

sou 

[, sep 

QTQ’f 1 

the 

CtX CiU 

soul 



reach the Lord, and the grief that is accentuated by non-enjojm^nt 
of him, at a time specially associated with enjoyment. The moonlight 
being unbearable indicates the pain which the conscious state brin^ 
to the devotee when he do^ not realise God’s presence. Sunshine is 









TRAXSLATIO:^:S x^XD XOTES 


61 


TiRUViRU tta:m '—translation 

1. hivocaiion : ike Alvar prays' io be delivered from 
revirih^ 

Be gracious. Lord of all the heavenly ones,^ 

Born in all births^ to save all lives, and hear 
Thy servant’s plea. Grant, not again may I 
Such nature win as this — my body foul, 

Wisdom unsound, and character defiled,^ 

2. Tke maid speaks, seehig' ike state oi her mistress, 
zinable to endure separation from her lord, who has left her 
{Here the maid stands for ike Alvar s disciples, the mistress 
for ike Alvar, ike lord for Visk?m), 

Long may she love, this girl with luring locks, 

Who loves the feet® that heavenly ones^ adore, 

The feet of Kannan,® dark as rainy clouds : 

Her red® eyes ail abrim with tears of grief, 

Like darting Kayal fish^® in a deep pool. 


' Tiruvirutimn : sacred messages from the Alvar to God. cf. 
stanza 1. _ 

- The whole poem is the Aivar*s prayer, cf. stanza 100. 

" Literally " the unwinking ones,’ i.e., the devas. Here probably used 
of the Niiyas. See p. 73, note 2. 

The reference is to Vishnvds avataras, as fish, tortoise, etc. 

® In lines 4 and 5 the three bars to salvation are named. Vishnu is 
approached as the one means of deliverance from all of them, 

" The contrast frequently emphasis^, between the devotee's head 
and the lord's feet, suggests that the devotee’s highest glory is the 
service of God. 

' i.e.. the Nityas, who have never been in bondage and never 
needed release. 

® Xannan or K^hna, who is always represented as dark in colour. 
The word may be a pet dimintitive, or it may mean ‘ he who has eyes ' 
(‘like the lotus,’ understood). 

® Red is the colour that shows the passion of love : the English 
a^ociation of ‘ red with weeping ’ must be banished. 

The comparison of the eye with the fish is frequent, the lesem- 
blance being in the swift and gleaming movement of both. 




62 


HY^INS OF THE ALVARS 

3. The mistresSi unable io e?idure separation^ Uses 
heart and speaks io her maid ^ doubt mg ii her hea^i, which 
has gofie after ike lord, will ever return io kef\ 

Wiii’t stey or come again, my lonely heart 
(Which has pursued the hird^ flame-angry, driven 
By the lord of tulasi,^ arm’d with fatal wheel, 

Whom gods adore!) — The piping cowherds’ girl, 
Bhudevi, Sri,^ his shadows, it perceives 1 

What room is there for the devo^ when Vishnu has the unceasing 
devotion of his three consorts? The Alvar distrusts his own power of 
devotion when he thinks of theirs. 

4. Plaint of the mistress deserted by her lord, and 
unable io endure ike wind which reminds Jut of him. 

Wind that art tulasl-poisoned, blowing thoughts 
Of him who drain’d the traitress demon’s breast,^ 

Oh, shame to come and fill with trembling me, — 

Me, whom his bird ere now of her one heart 
Efes reft ! No heart for tulasi remains. 

The wind, which should be comforting, is filled with memories that 
make it painful— The devotee *s heart has already been drawn by the 
Vedas (v. note 1 infra) to make a complete surrender to God and 
thus the wind is merely whetting an appetite that it cannot satisfy, cf . 
stanza 5, etc. 


^ * The bird * is Ganida, the vehicle of Vishnu. This generally symbo- 
lises the Veda with its twofold course of learning and discipline. See 
Introduciion, p. 22. 

® ‘ The lord of tulasi ’ is Vishnu. Tulasi ‘ cool and fair ’ is tfie 
small plant venerated in every orthodox Hindu household. It is akin 
to the_‘ Basil ^ of Keats’ poem. In poetry it symbolises chastity, and 
it is distinctively Vishnu’s, as he wears a garland of it. 

® The three consorts of Vishnu ; in his incarnations one or other of 
these tcx)k appropriate form to his companion. In this passage 
Sri or Lakshmi, the goddess of prosperity, and Bhudevi, the earth 
goddess, are fitly named as they are the consorts of Vishnu hims elf : 
‘ the piping cowherds’ gM,’ hovrever, is Nappinnai (She of the Beautiful 
Hair), the form that Nila took to be the companion of Vishnu in the 
Krishna avat^a. 

■* infant Kmhna sucked the life out of the demon, Putana, who 
came in the guise of a nurse and offered him her poisoned breast. She 
was one of the many agents sent by Kamsa, to kill Krishna. 



t in this vill 
lose nature ' 
e rain-cloud 
steal the lo' 
r tulasi, witi 

aaracter of thi 
lioved lord ; t 
for fi-iii 









Whetner rnencis stay tor many Gays, or go, 

We grieve. Yet, be this spreading darkness biest^ 

In spite of many a cunning trick it has, 

Tim^ of conscious communion with God seem all too short, times 
of separation insuSerabiy long, so that in any case the soul suffeis 
from the vagaries of time. 

17. The mistress gazes at the sea and speaks of ike 
vatiished track of ike lordis chariots 

Hail, stormy sea, where, on his serpent couch, 

Rests Penimal,' like to a bright black sun 







66 


HYMXS OF THE ALVARS 

<k« 

19. The {oster-7noiher s lameiit : ihe lord has not come 
a?id there is ?nu€k village sca?idaL 

E'en when the black clonds rank on rank tlitis rise 
Challenging ‘ Who of maids will keep her pnre ? 

Her lord, the swift bird’s rider,' called her not, 

Xor tnlasi gave 1 My girl with her few words 
The village tongues now rend ! Oh, comfort her ! 

Even when Gcd ’s grace is so overf o\ring chat it draws meek soiais 
to him, the devotee has received no mark of favoiir from him- His 
words have been few, because surely God does not need any persua- 
sion to be gracious. 


20. A foolish attempt is made by means of a devtl-driver 
to rid the mistress of her frenzy ; but ihe devil-driver is 
dismissed ; her fre?izy comes from too august a source for 
such treatment. 

Her pain is from a god exceeding great 
— From no slight god who lists to wheedling words 
You with the trident,"^ stop ! Ye mothers, hark 1 
Naming his name who swallow’d the seven worlds^ 
Garland her head with fair, cool tulasi. 

Severance from false gods and their induence is the necessary 
condicion for reaching the bliss of communion with the Supreme 
Lord. 

21. His friend reminds the lord of his subduing the 
btdls to show Ms prowess to his mistress. 

While heavenly ones to wreathe thee held pure flowers, 
Sprinkled fresh water, offered incense sweet, 

There thou by mystery® rare didst go to steal 

1 The implication is that the rainy season is peculiarly fatal to 
self-ccmtrol. 

® Vishnu rides on Garuda as his vehicle. 

® The minor gcds are susceptible to bribery or cajolery or coercion ; 
not so Vishnu himself. 

* The devil -driver has a trident. 

® Vishnu svrallowed the worlds to preserve them at the time of the 
FIcxkJ. 

a 3faya, God^s mcomprehensible greatness and grace ; cf. p, 54, 
note 2. 






u/ 


And eat the butter stored, and dance^ mid hump’d 
Hom’d oxen, for the cowherds’ willowy girL 

Ei'cr. thcngh in heaven God is vrorshipped by the heavenly hosts-, 
he rejoices tc condescend and show his interest in the things that bold 
men's rhcv.eht on earth. 







the ngfateousness of God’s tmiversai sway, because his own pa 
not being satisfied. 

26. The lord shows his ciiy to his mistress^ at t 
of a io7i_g and weary jour7iey._ C Lord ^ stands for t 
of the Alvar ^ ^ mistress ’ for Alvar) ^ 

O golden girl, the barren land^ is past. 

Spat out as refuse when the lord of heat 
Chewed dry*" the lands C Vehka^ is nigh, of him 


ine i^dvar is encoui 
dryness ’ in his soul. 


■ory 
ir ei 
,er c 
a a] 


the one 

e Kaveri 
veered by 
station of 



















70 


HYMNS OF THE ALVARS 

*9 

32. The mistress speaks of a resemblance between the 
clouds and her lord. 

Tell me, ye clouds, how have ye won the means 
That ye are thus like Tinimars blest form ? 

Bearing good water for protecting life/ 

Ye range through all the sky. Such penance/ sure, 

As makes your bodies ache, has won this grace 1 

The sight of those who give themselves in service to others lifts tip 
the Alvaros heart to Gcd, of whom they remind him. 

33. The friend rebukes the lord^ on seeing her mistress 
mco7isoiabie because of Ms absence. 

With gracious discus thou thy sceptre wield’st, 

And dark deeds perish in broad heaven and earth, 
Thou serpent-couched ! But (whether scorning worth 
Of girls, or thinking she^s outside thy held, 

1 know not) thou destroy ^st my lady^s bloom. 

Friends impressed the eifects of unsatisfied yearning in the 
Alvar plead with God to be mercifui ; as in his own abode he rests on 
a faithful servant, the serpent, so let him favour his faithful devotee 
on earth. 

34. The friend seeing her mistress^ state of distress 
speaks to the lord, 

‘ The rings have spoilt it all ! ’ ^ she pettish cries 
And spurns the rings with angry little feet — 

Her heart is on a garland set, of cool 
Fair tulasi, fuU of thy unfading blooms. , . . 

O Mai/ I know not what to do for her. 

The Alvar is impatient of all self-help, finding it useless, and sets 
bis heart resolutely on God’s grace alone. 

^ The douds are dark hke Vishnu’s body, and, like Vishnu, benefit 
all the world. 

* The popular belief is that the greater the boon the greater must 
have been the penance that has won it. 

® The reference is to a game, similar to the ‘ He loves me, loves 
me not’ played in England with petals of flowers. Concentric circles 
are drawn in the sand and then counted, an odd number meaning one 
thing, an even another. In this case the answer they had given was not 
au^idous to her. VMmu. 



^ He is crtiel in that he allows her none of the many corsolafioas 
she might have. 

= Rama for the sake of Sita did this— and yet now the Lord soenE 
to ignore his mistress* need. 

® Penance is the means by which boons to any extent may won 
from the gods. Note in stanza 38 the different types of tianfehip that 
are sugg^ted, each characteristic of ascetic practice, 














TRANSLATIONS AND NOTES 


73 


42. The fmsiress is absorbed hi the beauty oi her lord\ 
eyes graciously bent on her. 

Like pools of soft-stemmed lotus, as they lie 
A-bloom, on one side, bent by blasts, they shine 
— My lord's great eyes — on me, who at the sky 
Gazing, bow at his feet, who seems to say 
‘ For my stride, earth and heaven do not suffice ! ' ^ 

The Alvar is conscious of God’s grace. 

43. The 7nistress speaks of ike beauty of her hrd^s 
beatific form. 

Can they who wiser are than heavenly ones, — 

Can those of higher grade, or higher still, “ 

The colour of the beauty of my Lord 
Compute — like a great mountain black— -with eyes 
Like lotus red, Hke lotus hands and feet ? 

The Alvar is led to contemplate God in fuller attributes but 
confesses that to estimate these is beyond the powers of any created 
intelligence. 

44. The 77tisiress speaks of ike greahiess of her lord* 

Sages with wisdom won by virtuous toil 
Assert ‘His colour, glorious beauty, name, 

His form — are such and such.' But all their toil 
Has measured not the greatness of my lord : 

Their wisdom's light is but a wretched lamp. 

3^Iany have tried to sum up Gkd in a formula, but in no one 
particular have they succeeded, each being limited by his own powers 
of perception. 

45. The mistress seeks to reassure herself by recalling 
the help give?i by the lord in ike time of the great flood. 

Peace, timid heart ! The boar with lotus eyes 
In that time perilous gazed steadily 

^ In the Tri-Vikrama avatara Vishnu strode over earth and sky 
in two strides. 

“ The three grades are : 

(a) Devas — in heaven, but still in bondage, of whom Brahma 
is the head. 

(^) Emancipated souls. 

(i:) Nityas—^o^ who have never been in bondage. 








TRANSLATIONS AND NOTES 


75 


Bees hum and streams descend like white pearl 
wreaths ^ 

Upon the lofty crown of heaven’s lord. 

Friends seeing the Alvar’s despondency speak to their oto minds 
{‘ car of the mind,’ imagination) to hasten to cheer him. 

51. The mistress lame7its, unable to bear the sound of 
ike sea. 

The sea, that could not nectar win again, 

— Got by the lord of mystery, ’mid tossing waves 
With hill for churning-rod, serpent for rope — ^ 

Joins with sweet tulasi — clamours for its light^ 

In shells® which seamen gave me for a price ! 

The Aly^ is conscious of the attempts made by those who do not 
care for God to divert him from his devotion, and to rob him of its 
fruits. The ‘ sea ’ stands for irreligious men, the * churning rod * for 
faith, the ‘ rope ’ for spiritual eagerness, the ‘ seamen ’ for sages who 
have crossed the dangers of life and are now fixed on the truth, the 
‘ shells ’ for the purity that comes in their disciples when they pay the 
price of full ob^ience, 

52. The friend tries to console the mistress by suggesting 
that this is 7iot really the rainy seasofi^ when her lord is 
expected agai7i^ but that the appearance of it is due to 
Bhtidevzs tears » 

When shyly, lotus-lipped with rain-cool eyes, 

Call’d by dark ocean,* by its white waves led, 

Sri® dimbed the seipent couch, Bhudevi wept : 

^ Vishnu in the churning of the ocean from which, among other 
gifts, nectar emerged, used the mountain, Mandaragiri, as chumiEg-rod 
and the serpent, Vasuld, as rope. 

- The sea and the tulas! seem alike to be her enanies. ‘ Right ^ i.e., 
like a litigant with a claim for joint ownership. 

^ Shells, which now form her treasured bracelet. 

^ The sea of milk, grown dark tecause of the colour of Vishnu who 
lies on it. Its wav^ are pictured as hands and fingers. 

® Sridevi (Lakshmi) and Bhudevi are Vishnu’s consorts. Lakshmi 
was bom in the Sea of Milk (at the time of the churning of the ocean) 
in which lies Adi§esha, the serpent on whom Vishnu recline. She is 
therefore at home there, while Bhudevi is not. Bhudevi therefore 
for jealousy. 





76 


HYMNS OF THE ALVARS 

Cried in high heaven ‘ Cruel Tirumal ! ’ 

While tears rained rivers on those hills, her breasts. 

The Alvaros friends console him by reminding him that even Earth, 
who as a goddess might be expected to enjoy God continually, has to 
suffer the pains of parting, though but for a time. 

53. The prophetess^ called in for advice^ gives her judg- 
ment as to the fre?tzy of the mistress and its cure. 

The pain of her with girdled breasts is good — 

From love of the glory of the heavenly lord ! 

Fan her with garlands of fair tnlasi 
Divinely cool, or wdth a leaf of it, 

A twig, its root — e^en dust wherein it grows ! 

In pain of heait that is caused hy desire for God can only be 
cured by Gcd. The tnlasi is a figure for the companies of devout 
souls, contact with any of whom, in however slight a degree, will help 
to assuage the Alvar’s grief. 

54. The mistress sends beetles on a nussage to the lord. 

Beetles, who’ll take me to the flowery feet 
Of him who stole and ate the ghi., and did 
Such deeds as men may blame, ^ my lord, and heaven’s, 
Fly with your whirring wings (easy your way 
To heaven !) tell me what ye will say, and go I 

The Alvar seeks the aid of others who in familiar access to God can 
intercede for him, and he asks for the solace of knowing what they 
will say to God on his behalf. 

56. The mistress tells her friend that the lord has visited 
her* 

By grace of him who swallowed the broad worlds^ 
Safety and bliss we’ve won 1 Friend, no more fear ! 

A cool south wind® has come and secretly, 

With honey sweet of tnlasi ’s fair bloom, 

Rain-like^ caressed my Hmbs and ornaments. 

In union with Gck 3 the Alvar enjoys the consciousn^ that God 
also rejoice in him. 

^ The reference is to Kmhna’s childhood and youth. 

^ cf. note on stanza 20. 

® Shy to say directly that he has come, she speaks of a south wind 
from him. * Coolly and bounteously. 



TRANSLATIONS AND NOTES 


77 


57. The lord excuses his passio7i by speaking oi the beauty 
of his ?msiress^ eyes, in answer to his irie^ids criticising 

Like fighting: fish, by creeper kept aparD 
In lotus-face fair ear-ringed, do they move 
And spear-like gaze ! No one will blame who saw 
Me moved by them that day — like to the sea 
Foaming with nectar, churned by Kannan’s hand ! “ 

Only those who have never had the vision of God can scoff at the 
devout, and those who see him are themselves converted to a like 
devotion. (The ' lighting ’ of the fishes S 3 ’'mboIises the conflict within 
the mind between different interpretations of the vision that the Alvar 
has. The\^ are saved from final inconsistency by the preponderance of 
some thought which is able to solve all doubts.) 

58. Her friend consoles the mistress by speaking of the 
greatness of the lord : her case^ difficult though it seems to 
he}\ is easy for him to solve. 

One foot ganged all the earth ; one filled the sky 
Overshadowing all ! ^ What is there here for him 
To measure — on high in heaven, the radiant lamp 
Of all-pervading wisdom, unsurpassed, 

With eyes like lotus blooming in the mire ? 

Friends console the Alvar by reminding him of the manifold 
greatness of God. 

59. The foster-mother pities ike mistress^ unable to 
endure the length of ike night. 

This child of sinful me, with well-formed teeth, 

Round breasts and rosy mouth, keeps saying ‘ These 
Fair nights eternal are as my de^e 
For tula si 1 O Lord of great rich plains 
With swelling sea, O MadhusudanaF^ 

Friends are fifled with sympathy at the length of the Alvaros ‘ dark 
night of the soul.’ The teeth symbolise the growing purity of his life, 
the red lips the ardour of his love. 

^ Her eyes are like fish in their quick and teautiful movement, 
'rhe creeper that separates them is her nose- 

^ For the churning of the ocean by Vishnu, see note on stanza 51. 

^ In the Tri-Vikrama avatara. 

^ Vishnu slew the demon, Madhu, and is hence called Madhusu- 

dana. 


7 



78 


HYMNS OF THE ALVARS 


60. The {osier-7nother pities the mistress yotdh ; it is too 
soon for her to be thinking of a lord ; she is love-sick while 
still but a child. 

Breasts not yet full, and short her tresses soft ; 

Skirt loose about the waist ; with prattling tongue 
And innocent eyes (so that one says ‘ The world 
A price for these 1 — is’t right that she repeats 

‘ Is Vehgadam the hill of Perumal ? 

The Alvar is reminded by his friends that he has not yet reached 
the state of spiritual mat-arity which makes possible the full union 
with Gcd for which he longs. 

61. Her friend consoles the mistress by speaking oi the 
g?'eat7iess and condescension of the lord. 

How can we speak ? Our king is lord of those 
In ancient heaven him all heaven's lords^ adore : 

He in two strides the whole globe measured 
So that no stick-point's space escaped 'twas he 
Who came to birth among the cowherd folk 

It is not for men to presume to critidse God, so great and so 
gracious in Ms manifestations. 


62. Her friend speaks to the lord of the ^nistress^ i?i- 
consolability and pleads with him to be graciotis. 

Howe'er one pleads that she is but a giii,® 

The black sea pities not but roars on still 1 
O thou cloud-coloured, serpent-couched, is't meet 

^ AH marfe of immatiirit}^, though each is beautiful enough in 
itself. 

- Contrast stanza 11, where her beauty is spoken of as equal in 
value to the world. The reference is to her ey^. 

* She can do nothing but repeat the name of her lord and think of 
his abode, Tirupati- 

* i.e., of emancipated souls : cf . p 73, note 2. 

® Brahma etc. — minor gods still in bondage. 

® In the Tri-Vikrama avatara there was not room even for a thin 
stick to stand. ^ In the Krishna avatara. 

^ The idea here is not of immaturity as in stanza 60, but of her 
being a woman and therefore claiming consideration. 


ihose who are worldly Cs\-mbolised by the sea) persist in their 
disturbing clamour, and yet God-j^rho became incarnate to be accessible 
to rnaHj does not respond to the Alvar’s ciy : he is in danger of 
overpowered, and his friends intercede for him. 

63. The ?MZsir€ss speaks to ke?" friezid^ who has criticised 
ike lord. 

But his red eyes/ with gaze so kind that heaven 
Is glad, bright like a cool, soft lotns pool, 

Enter my heart and kindle there my love 
For the fair face of Kannan, Lakshmi’s lord, 

And even now abide with me, Ms slave ! 

When the Alvar hears God criticised he is srirred to recall the 


‘ In grief at deeds/ i.e., his past karma ,* * and self/ i.e., his present 
birth. 

® There is perhaps here in line S an apologetic reference to the use 
of Tamil, as contrasted with the Sanskrit of the hymns in 1- 1 : cf. 



80 


HYIdXS OP 


ALVARS 


, The lord replies io a Irit?id^ s criiicis^n of his infaiua- 
tioii for his mistress. \ Lord ^ sta?ids for ike Alzdrs 
friends^ ‘ mistress'^ for ike Alvar,) 


Those lilies red, which are the life oi me — ^ 

The eyes or her w’ho ’s like the heaven of him 
Who &e and water is, wind, sky and earth — “ 

So shine that even meditating seers, ^ 

Who neither eat nor sleep, mnst think of themd 

The Alvaros power of vision of God is so nne that even ascencs 
habituated by long discipline to disregard objects that appeal to the 
senses, are compelled to give their admiring attention to him ; it is not 
only his friends who find life in association with him. 


69. Her friend consoles the fuisiress, zvko is iiiisej'able 
at the approach of night. 

The bull of darkness by the red stm-bnll 
Worsted, is ont for victory I Grieve not 
If bracelets slip, oh thou with swelling breasts 1 
Will he who strode the earth, onr lofty lord, 

Leave thee, this wretched eve, vnthout his grace ? 

His friends console the Alvar, who is grieving for lack of conscions 
fellowship with God : God^s character as shown in the Dwarf 
incarnation is a pledge of his grace. 

70. The mistress laments the length of the night. 

Like days, months, years, and ages — crowding nights 
Have come, to make me pale for tnlasi 
— Sweet garland on the head of heaven’s lord 
With the curved discus ! Now to destroy me quite 
Comes this one night, a thousand ages long i 

In spite of his Mends, the Alvar cries out impatiently at the length 
of time he is cnt off from enjoyment of God. 


' * Of me literally, ‘ who am bomid by sinfiil actions.’ 

^ God penrades all the elements, which form a bcxly for him. 

® Yogis, who by ansterity have gained immtimty from the snares 
of the senses. 

^ The strength even of their mental concentration cannot gnard 
them from her charms. 



TT? 


/I, 1 ne misiresz 
with her 7?ioiker, du 

I spake not of 
World-swallow 
' Its colour 's 1 
l\Iv mother cd 

m4> 

Yon mean 1 


Like the world-swallower 


The A war ■'kvishes 1 
praise of God’s attribtites, it is not that he is attaching nndne importance 
to them, or depending on them or ms ora efforts : he has not forsaken 
the way of utter dependence on God himself for any other way. 

72. The inisiresSi itJiable to endiire the darkness^ is yet 

4 It n i h D h'\s fi /i/ t hp 











82 


HYMNS OF THE ALVARS 


75. T/ie lard expresses Ins ‘wonder ai the beauty of 
his 7?izstr£ss, C_Lord ' stands for the Alvar s devotees, ‘ znis- 
tress ^ for the Alwdrf) 

Ye bright-faced ones,^ with cniel bow that darts 
Arrows like shining nsh, to pierce my life ; 












Like to the rising: on the hill of dawn 
Of two red fiery stins at once, his eyes 
Even on las^ blaze down as if again 
The giants" fell into the burning red ! 

Can this be he who makes the whole world bloom ? 

The Alvar man-els that the ve:^ quality in Gc«3 which won his 
devotion now catises hi-n snch angtiish. 


^ On ns. who expect a grateml warmth rather than scorching. 

® The giants— certain giants fonght against tlte sun, but by means 
of the worship of the snn by Brnhinlss, a nre was created into which 
they fell. 






Ever before her eyes, in a tnomy nest ■ 

On the courtyard palm. Ah ! as she sobs and lisp 
The cloud-hned’s names, I know not if shell live 


His friends wonder if the Alvar can survive lack of conscious com- 
nion with God, reminded as he is by common things of the bliss he 


E en among groups of beauteous girls, or in 
The festivals of the great — or anvwhere — 


Thy slave, my life, thine own, I bring to thee ! 

The Alvar seeks protection from God. 

86. The mistress grieves at her separaiioji fro?n the 
He rescued Hara^ when he begged with bowl 


^ A bird famed as a tYpe of mantal devotion. 
® The precious sunlight seems at nightfall 
away Jor nought in conflict with the darkness. 





wnen ms nurse oeai mm — Duiier-miei i — one aay * 
How then shall I of him make my complaint ? 

The Alvar comforts himself b 5 " recalling God’s extraordinary acts 
grace to others, and his extraordinary cond^censzon to man’s 
akness. 

87. T/ie friend rebukes the lord for his fieglect of his 


O the foaming sea, hooding the flowery marsh — 

— This thing and that, grie^flng this girl ditflne 
Who sings the \irtues of thy mighty bird — 

Is this thy work, for all the world to blame ? 

The Alvaros friends are critical of God for leading his devotee 


Wlien shall I join my lord, who poison is 
For evil deeds, and nectar for the good 
Husband of her who haunts the lotus-bloom. 


^ Literally, ‘ foster-mother,’ i.e., YaSMa. 

- An episode of Kmhaa’s childhood, ® cf. stanza 66. 

^ i.e., he destroys the evil (the r^iilts of previons activity) and 
develops the good in his devotee (his present love to God|. 

^ Vishnas consort is Lakshmi, who springs from, the lotus. 






86 HYMXS OF THE ALVARS 

Cowherd who thought no scorn to graze the cows : ’ 
Who overpaced the world in his two strides 

The Alvar caaaot tadeistand why he is barred from nnion with 
God so gracious. 


90. The mistress is unable to endure separaiio7i from ike 
lord* 

Lord of the Disc which demons put to Sight, 

When I review my wondVous penance wrought 
To win a body fit for thee, thy feet 
Upon my head, yet see that still no hold 
Have I of thee, — time seems eternity 1 

The Alvar coEsidenag how all his efforts in prewotis births have 
stili not brought him to full union with God is fflled with dismay as he 
faces the future. 

91. The mistress asserts her unbroken fidelity to the lord* 

None my heart longs for save the thief who touch’d 
And ate the butter in the closepacked hoops — 

Him of the belly huge who at a gulp 
Swallow’d the world : the trickster who as Dwarf, 
Gain’d the three steps great BaH granted him. 

Though he has not yet attained full bliss, the Alvar can nevertheless 
give himself to none other than God who showed his grace in sundry 
incarnations. 

94. The lord^s friend^ having see^i the mistress^ apolo^ 
gises to him for kavhig spoken critically to him of his 
conduct* 

O thou with body black, red-lotus-eyed, 

None save the learned seers of pious life 
Can touch thy sacred feet e’en with their heads. 

* Like village cows, so lows the blind cow too : ’ 

And I have spoken : what else can I say ? 

The Alvar is humble about his own knowledge of God : after all he 
can only repeat what holy men have said. Possibly there is a refer- 
ence to the inferiority of Tamil to Sanskrit as a medium for the 
highest truth, cf. stanza 64, note 5. 


^ In the Krishna avatara. ^ In the Vamana avatara. 

mm m 



TRANSLATIONS AND NOTES 


87 


96. The misiress determmes to proclaim her passion for 
the lord. 

ilany a different way of worshipping* 

And many clashing creeds from different minds, 

And in the many creeds their many gods 
Thon’st made, spreading abroad thy form I O thou 
Matchless, I will proclaim my love for thee ! 

The Alvar is resolved to proclaim God everywhere, as the One who 
in the I’anous sects is partiijy expressing himself, and who is to be 
worshipped supremely by the way of love. 

97. T he mistress parted from the lord suHers from 
sleeplessfiess. 

There’s nought but grief for those whoVe looked and 
looked 

At dawn and sunset, age succeeding age — 

But can sleep ever come to those who gaze 
Joyful with mighty passion rare, at Mai 
Eternal, whom adoring gods surround ? 

There is no real joy for those who give their attention even to the 
most beautiful things of this world. The Alvar, however, in the vision 
of God duds a joy that banishes even sleep. 

98. The mistress^ friend speaks to her comfortingly of 
the lord^ s wonderful condescension. 

From sleepless seers and others who adore 
He takes away the pain of endless births : 

The mystery of the mighty form of him, 

Unique and self-dependent — * butter-thief ’ I — 

Hard e’en for gods to grasp that slighting word ! 

His friends remind the Alvar of Ga2*s amazing conde^nsion : the 
one who is beyond all understanding took upon him the form of a 
mischievous child, even to the extent of stealing. The ^^teric meaning 
of his pilfering baSes even the gods ; but at least it shows infinite 
condescension to man’s weakness. 

99. The mistress assures her friend of her constancy. 

If slighting words there be, what matters it ? 

Nought else that’s good have I beheld save him 
Who hoar-shaped saved the mighty earth from flood, 



ss 


HYMNS OF THE ALVARS 

m n 


And wnsdom gave to those who dwell where grows 
The E^pak tree,^ to men and all beside. 

The Alvar asserts again his faith in God, the saviour of the 
world : his faith is proof against all sneers. 

100 . Co7i€hisio?i, wherehi appears the friiit of 7nediiaiio7i 
on this hymn. 

Who scan these hundred flowers, the wreath of words, 
The prayer of Maran of famed Kurukur 
Whose wreath's the feet of saints who name dial’s 
names — 

— They In deceptive matter shall not sink 
Thick with the mire of deeds that lead to birth I 

The poet ha\nng laid the tribute of his verse at God’s feet says that 
those who follow what he has said will hnd deliverance from rebirth. 


A 


tree 


Indra’s heaven, yielding aH that men desire. 


f » 




^ ** nl I 


Pronunciation 


Tamil Sanskrit English 


51 ! 

i 

a 

u in punch 

W\ ■ 

a 

a in rather 

* 

i 

i in sit 

i i 
s ' 

1 

1 1 in clicue 

^ ' 

n 

' n in full 


11 

u in rule 


e 

1 e in fed 

^ 1 

0 

a in fable 


ai 

' ai in aisle, but much shorter 

— 

0 

0 in mobility 

jJ 

0 

1 o in noble 


aii. 

ow in cow 


CONSONANTS 


N.B . — The Taniii alphabet is not fully phoneti::, as a__ 
and the other Dravidian alphabets. Several let 
different sounds in different connections. 




anskrit 


.Ct: 


cate 



90 


HYMNS OF THE ALVARS 


Tamil 

Sanskrit 

Translitera 

tion 

Pronunciation 

(approximate) 

Remarks 



n ( before g ) n in singing 

Guttural n 



h 

n in ginger 

Palatal n 

szfJr 

Uf 

-X 

n 

n stopped as far 

Cerebral n 




back as possi- 
ble 


• 0 • 

*\ 

n 

as in English 


ih 


m 

as in English 


lU 

% 

y 

1 as in EngHsli 


w 

T 

T 

r 

as in English 

' 

m 



(when soft) 


^ , 

I 

To 

ii 

as in English 

! 

* \ 

€U 

% 

1 

1 V 

‘ as in English, 





but not so firm 


\ 

■ 


r pronounced 

Peculiar to 


I 

( 

1 

i 

> 

with the 
tongue as far 
back in the 
throat as pos- 

Tamil 

( 

I 

j 

i 





sible. 


^fT 

55 

ji 

1 pronounced by 

Palatal 1 

i 


I 

the palate 


Sanskrit words, tmless they have become modified by long Tamil 

usage, are 

transliterated according to Sanskrit pronunciation, on the 

system used m other books in this series, the Sanskrit alphabet being 

represented as follows 




k 

kh 

g gh 

h 


ch 

cKh 

3 ]h 

h 


t 

th 

d dh 

n 


1 

th 

a dh 

n 


P 

ph 

b bh 

m 


y 

r 

1 V 



s 

sh 

s h 



* 

n 

III 

h 




ESTDEX 


A DI-SeSHA. 22, 36, SO, 52, 65, 
75. 

Advaita., 7, 8. 

Agast3’a,_42. 

^avandar, IS. 

Alvarrlranagari, 12. 
Amalan-adi-piran, 16. 
A.iia:cbattaii, 52. 

AGdai, 14, 21, 27, 49-57. 
Aninidba, 36, 72. 

Ar:tar\’ainin, 23. 

Araiyar, 20, 

Archa, 23. 

Arjtina, 43. ’ 

Asiiras, 4. 

Aypadi, 50, 

D ADARI, 38. 

^ Balara:a2a, 50, 54. 

Bali, 4, 22, 23, 38, 85. 

Bana (Banasura), 22, 36, 72, 82. 
Bhagavad Gita, 3-7. 

Bhagavata, 23. 

Bhagavata Pnrana, IS, 19, 59. 
Bhakti Marga, 6 
Bbddevi, 62, 74, 75. 
Bhutattalvar, XI. 

Brahma. X 22, 45, 58, 67, 78, 84. 
Brahman-Atman, 5. 

Brahmanas, 4. 

Buddha, *10, 17, 23. 

Buddhism, 7, 12, 15. 


pALDWOELL, 10- 
^ Cal\diiism, 23. 
Ceyloa, 14. 

Chera, 47. 

Conjeevaram, 11, 17, 68. 


i 

1 


r\AlkIODARAN, 51 
^ Devade\d, 15. 


Devaki, 56- 
Devaram, 4. 

Dfevas, / O’ 

pARQUHAR, Dr. J. N., IS. 


pAXDHARVA, 42. 

^ Ganges, 41. 

Ganida, 17, 22, 36, 42, 51, 59, 62, 

66 . 

Godai, 57. 

Gdkuia, 50, 51. 

Gopinatha Rao, T. A., 11. 
Govardhana, 39, 67, 31. 

Gonnda, 37, 56, 57- 
Goiindacharya Svamin, A., 25, 



OAXUIilAN, 41. 

^ Hara (Siva), 84. 
Hari (Vishnu), 35, 52. 
Hiranya, 74. 
Kiranyakagipu, 22, 35. 


Hrishike^a, 17, 3a. 


Huhu. 42. 


INDRA, 45, 67, 88- 
Indradyumna, 42. 

Irudike^an (HrKhikega), 35. 

lAINS, 7, 12_, 15. 

Jnana Marga, 5. 

Jumna, 51. 

I^ALA, 43. 

^ Kalki, 23. 

Kalyan, 36- 
Kama, 15, 44, 64. 

Kaihsa, 22, 23, 34, 43, 52, 54, 5S, 
62. 



92 


iar 


4 


ancr.i. iZ, , 2cj. 


Kannan 

tj9 , V i » / ^ / <9 

27, 30 


Krisj^a), 61 


4 f 




Karxa Marga, 5. 

Karpak, S3. 

Xaveri, 15^ 17^j33. 

X-Ssavaa) ^2; o/ • 

Xesi, 52. 

Konrad, 45. 

Krishna, 3, 5, 3, 14, IS, 20, 23, 25, 
'27,29 34,37,38,39,43,44,45, 
49-56,58,59,61,62, 67,76, 78, 
SI, 85, 86. 

Kdshnaswamy Aiyangar, Prof. 
11 79. 

Knlasekara Alvar, 13, 24, 44-48. 
Knmbakoaam, 12. 

Kirmtida VaHi, 16. 

Knnna, 22. 

Knmknr, 12, SS. 


I AKSmLANA,41. 

^ Laksbroi, 17, 22, 24, 37, 44, 
55-58,62. 63,75,79, 85. 
Laiika (Ceylon), 35, 53, 71. 82. 
Loka Saranga ilaha Hmi, 15, 16. 

M ADHU, 22, 77. 

Madlitisiidana, 77. 

Madtira, 14, 26, 57. 

Mai (Visknn), 24, 37, 56, 57, 70, 
71,74,87. 

Mallas, 34. 

Mamallai (Mahabalipuxam), 11. 
Mandangudi, J.5. 

Mandaragiri, 75. 

Maran, 12, 13, 88, 

Maran, 44, 64. 

Margali, 50, 51. 

Markandeya, 43. 

Matbavan, 52, 57. 

Matbura, 36, 51. 

Matbnrakavi, 12, 13, 18. 

Matsya, 22. 

Z^faya, 51, 52, 54, 66. 

Mera, 85. 

Mdbmi, 64, 


M 

M 


*•* n» 

nnanaa, 
vlanore, 11. 


ISJACCHIYAR TIRUMOU. 15. 
^ ^ Na^gaacbitta, 45. 

Nalavira Prabandham, 10, 13, 17- 
i 20,'26, 4S. 

I Nanmalvar, 12-13, IS, 21, 5S- 
I SS. 

I Namonarayana, 35, 37. 

! Nandagopa, 49, 54, 55. 
i Nanmnkham-Tiruvandadi, 12 , 27 . 
i Nappinnai, 49, 54, 55, 62, 67. 
i Naraka, 82. 
j Narasimba, 22, 35, 74. 

* Narasinihavarmau I., 11. 

Narayana. 9, 17, 25, 27, 35, 44. 
! 50, 52. 

' Xatbamnni, 10. 

Negapatam, 17. 

: Nila, 16. 

I Nila Devi, 55. 

’ Nityas, 61, 73. 


DANCHAJANYAil, 34. 

•®- Pancharatra, 9 . 

Pandya, 14. 

Para'kalar, 17. 

Paranktigam, 12. 

Parasnrama, 23. 

Pattar-piran, 14, 57. 

Per a 

Peri>¥lvar, 14, 15, 20, 25, 33, 37, 
57. ■■ 

Periya Timmadal, 17. 

Periya Tiramoli, 17, 27, 38, 40. 
Periya Tiravandadi, 13. 

, Penimal, 65, 78. 

I Perum^ Tirumoli, 14, 44, 45, 47.. 
Peruman, 72. 

Pey Aivar, 11, 24. 

Polytheism, 9. 

Poonamailee, 12. 

Poykai Alvar, 11, 22, 24. 
Prablada, 22. 

1 Pralaya, 65. 

! Pnduvai, 57. 
i PundarikaTisha, 18. 



INDEX 93 


Ptiranas, 9, 18, 20. 

Putana, 38, 52, 62. 

T3 ADHA, 49, 55, 

^ Rama, 3, 13, 14, 23, 25, 41, 
53,71. 

RamamiSra, 18. 

Ramanujacharya, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 
1S,_20, 23, 24, 26, 28, 35. 
Ramayana, 13, 41. 

Ranganatha, 15-17, 23, 24, 44. 
Ranganayaki, 17. 

Ravana, 23, 53. 

Rig Veda, 59. 

-<^VISM, 9, 15, 20. 

Sakadam, 52. 

Sambandhar, 17. 

Sandhya, 33. 

Sankaracharya, 3, 6, 7, 54. 
Santhipini, 43. 

^arnga, 22, 37, 51. 

Sathagopaa, 12. 

SaA’a, 67. 

Mva, 36. 

Sesbagiri Sastri, 10. 

Sibaii, 17. 

Siriya Tinimadal, 17. 

Sita, 14, 41, 71. 

Siva, 4, 5, 12, 24, 43, 45, 46, 58, 
84. 

^ri (Laksbmi), 22, 25, 34, 62, 63, 
75. 

Srirangam, 14, 15, 17, 19, 23, 24, 
^ 26,29.41-44,46, ^,81. 
Sntaran, 37. 

§ri-VaiEbnavas, 10, 19, 24. 
Sri-vatsa, 22. 

Siiviliiptittfir, 14, 57, 

Snmnkba, 42. 

Svarga, 24, 45, 58. 

XENGALAI, 28, 33. 

* Tini-Cchanda-Vinittam, 12. 
Tirukkurongndi, 18 
Tirukottiytir^ 36. 
Tiruktimn-Tandabam, 17. 


Tirumai, 63, 70, 76. 

Tirumalai, 15. 

Tirumalisai Alvar, 12, 27. 
Tirumangal Alvar, 16, 17, 27, 29, 
38, 40. 

TirumoH, 14, 37. 
Tirtmedun-Tandaham, 17. 
Tirupati, 19, 23, 45, 46, 59, 69, 
74, 78. 

TiruppaUandu, 14, 19, 26, 27, 33- 
37. 

TiruppaDi-Yeluchi, 15. 

Tiruppan Alvar, 15, 16, 26, 27. 
Tiruppavai, 15, 19, 21, 49-57. 
Tinivachakam, 4. 

TimvaH, 16. 

Tiruvandadi, 12, 22, 24. 
Tiravabiriam, 13. 

TinavaymoH, 13, 58. 
Tiruveniktitnrttkkai, 17. 
Tiru\'iixittaiB, 13, 19, 21, 24, 28 > 

Tinivonam, 35, 36. 

: Tondaradippodi Alvar, 15, 29. 
Travancore, 13. 

Triplicane, 12. 

! Tri-Vikrama, 4, 23, 38, 73, 77, 78, 
i 79. 

; f TPANISHADS, 5, 6, 8. 

^ Urvasi, 47. 

' Usha, 36. 

^7 AD AG ALAI, 28, 33- 
V vadari, 38, 39. 

Vaikunpia, 22, 45, 52, 69. 
Vallabfaia Deva, 14. 

. Vamana, 4, 22, 38, 50, 54, 72, 

86 . 

Vanan, 36, 82^ 

I V ai^araj^ vami, 17, 23, 24. 
i Varaba, 22. 

Variina, 4. 

Vasndeva, 23. 

Vasnki, 75. 

_ Vayn, 41. 

Vedanta DeSika, 28. 

Vebka, 

Vengadam, 37, 45, 46, 58, 69, 78.. 



-f t 

^4 ^ 


INDEX 


Venkatcsvara, 23, 59. 
Vibbava, 23. 

Narayana, 15. 
Vishnu, passim. 
VIshnu-chittar. 14, 36. 
Yigishtadvaita, 6, S, IS, 25. 
Vitravakodu, 47, 48. 


t 

\ 


Vraja, 19. 
Vyuha. 23. 


42,43. 

^y^^^acharva, is. 

i^oda.37. 49, 54,56, 85. 


Y htirii 


aian, 17 



% 



\ 

* \% 


X* Jk ^s^ •” <■'' .1- 


J * 






t-7 >' :? 






I*ico;cmB AT 



xhe Wesleyan- Mission Press, 






