===== Internet Archive OCR: cu31924023004785_djvu.txt =====

I 


Indian  Wisdom 


i 


m 


m 


I 

1 


Sir  Monier  Monier-Williams 


CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


Cornell  University  Library 
BL  2001.M74 

Indian  wisdom,  or.  Examples  of  ^^^^^^^^^ 


3  1924  023  004  785 


The  original  of  this  bool<  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924023004785 


INDIAN    WISDOM 


IKDIAF  WISDOM; 

OB, 

EXAMPLES  OF  THE  EELIGIOUS,  PHILOSOPHICAL,  AND 
ETHICAL  DOCTEINES  OF  THE  HINDUS. 


A  BEIEF  HISTOEY  OF  THE  CHIEF  DEPAETMENTS 
OF  SANSKEIT  LITEEATUEE. 

AND  SOME  ACCOUNT  OF  THE 

Ipast  anb  ©resent  Con&ition  of  JnOia,  Moral  an&  ^nteUectual. 


Sir  MONIEE  MONIEE-WILLIAMS,  K.C.LE. 

M.A.  Hon.  D.C.L.  OxrORD;  Hon.  LlTt).  Calcutta;  Hon.  Ph.D.  GHttinhen;  V.P.  of  the  Eoyal 

ASIATIC  Society;  Hon.  Member  of  the  Asiatic  Societies  of  Benbal  and  Bombay, 

AND  of  the  Oriental  and  Philosophical  Societies  of  America  ; 

BODEH  PROFESSOR;^ OF  SANSKEIT;  HON.  FELLOW  OF 
UNIVBESITy'  00LLH8E,  OXFORD,  ETC. 


FOURTH  EDITION,  ENLARGED  AND  IMPROVED. 


LONDON: 
LUZAC   &   CO.,   GEEAT   RUSSELL   STREET, 

PUBLISHERS  TO  THE  INDIA  OFFICE. 
1893. 


NOTE 

This  Fourth  Edition  of  "  Indian  Wisdom  "  is  issued  by 
Messrs.  Luzac  &  Co.  with  the  Author's  permission. 
The  Author  has  made  several  additions  and  improve- 
ments, but  the  state  of  his  health  has  not  permitted 
him  to  revise  the  proof-sheets. 


CONTENTS 


CHAP.  PAGE 

I.    THE    HYMNS    OP   THE    VEDA  .  .  .  I 

II.  THE    BEAHMANAS    AND    UPANISHADS  .                                       .             .  24 

III.  THE    SYSTEMS    OF    PHILOSOPHY  .                          ...  46 

IV.  THE.  NYAYA                            .  .  60 
V.  THE    SAN-KHYA       ...  .  .                            .  79 

VI.    THE    PDRVA-MIMANSA   AND    VEDANTA         .             .             .             .  .98 

VII.    IRREGULAR   SYSTEMS   AND    ECLECTIC   SCHOOL    .                          .  1 18 

VIII.    SMRITI THE    VEDAN-'GAS          .                         .             .  -144 

IX.    THE    SMARTA    SUTRAS    OR   TRADITIONAL    RULES              .  186 

X.    THE   DHARMA-SASTRAS    OR    LAW-BOOKS MANU    CONTINUED  .       213 

XL    THE   LAW-BOOKS MANU    CONTINUED         ...  .278 

XII.    THE    ITIHASAS    OR   BPlC    POEMS — THE    RAMAYANA  .       306 

XIII.  THE    ITIHASAS    OR   EPIC    POEMS THE    MAHA-BHABATA         .  -370 

XIV.  THE     INDIAN    EPICS     COMPARED    WITH    BACH    OTHER    AND    WITH 

THE   HOMERIC    POEMS     .  .  .  .  .  .  .416 

XV.    THE    ARTIFICIAL    POEMS.      DRAMAS.     PURANAS.      TANTEAS.      NITI- 

SASTRAS         .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  -452 


INDEX 


5S.S 


INDIAN  WISDOM. 


CHAPTEE   I. 

In  adopting  the  term  '  ludian  Wisdom'  as  the  title  of 
the  present  work,  I  wish  at  the  outset  to  make  it  clear 
that,  although  my  object  is  to  draw  attention  to  the  best 
Indian-  writings,  yet  it  by  no  means  follows  that  every 
single  extract  from  those  writings  will  be  put  forth  as  an 
example  of  what  is  wise  and  just  and  true. 

In  point  of  fact,  the  following  pages  have  a  double 
object.  They  are  designed  as  much  to  give  a  summary  of 
the  history  of  Sanskrit  literature  as  to  present  the  reader 
with  examples  of  certain  selected  portions  of  that  literature. 
In  attempting  this  double  task  I  am  conscious  of  my  in- 
ability to  do  justice  in  a  single  volume  to  the  richness  of 
the  materials  at  my  command.  An  adequate  idea  of  the 
luxuriance  and  varied  character  of  Sanskrit  literature 
can  with  difficulty  be  conveyed  to  Occidental  scholars. 
Naturally,  too,  the  severe  European  critic  will  be  slow  to 
acquiesce  in  any  tribute  of  praise  bestowed  on  composi- 
tions too  often  marked  by  tedious  repetitions,  redundant 
epithets,  and  far-fetched  conceits ;  just  as  the  genuine 
Oriental,  nurtured  under  glowing  tropical  skies,  cannot 
easily  be  brought  to  appreciate  the  coldness  and  severe 
simplicity  of  an  educated  Englishman's  style  of  writing. 
We  might  almost  say  that  with  Indian  authors  merit  is 
apt  to  be  measured  by  magnitude,  quality  by  quantity, 
were  it  not  for  striking  thoughts  and  noble  sentiments 

A 


2  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

which  often  reward  the  student  who  will  take  the  trouble 
to  release  them  from  the  surplusage  of  matter  under  which 
they  lie  concealed ;  were  it  not,  also,  that,  with  all  this 
tendency  to  diffuseness,  it  is  certainly  a  fact  that  nowhere 
do  we  find  the  art  of  condensation  so  successfully  culti- 
vated, as  in  some  departments  of  Sanskrit  literature. 

Probably  the  very  prolixity  natural  to  Indian  writers 
led  to  the  opposite  extreme*  of  brevity,  not  merely  by  a 
law  of  reaction,  but  by  the  necessity  for  providing  short 
summaries  and  epitomes  as  aids  to  the  memory  when 
oppressed  by  too  great  a  burden. 

However  that  may  be,  every  student  of  Sanskrit  will 
certainly  note  in  its  literary  productions  a  singular  in- 
equality both  as  to  quantity  and  quality ;  so  that  in 
studying  Hindu  literature  continuously  we  are  liable  to 
be  called  upon  to  pass  from  the  most  exuberant  verbosity 
to  the  most  obscure  brevity  ;  from  sound  wisdom  to  little 
better  than  puerile  unwisdom ;  from  subtle  reasoning  to 
transparent  sophistry ;  from  high  moral  precepts — often 
expressed  in  language  worthy  of  Christianity  itself — to 
doctrines  implying  a  social  condition  scarcely  compatible 
with  the  lowest  grades  of  culture  and  civilization. 

In  embarking,  so  to  speak,  on  so  vast  an  ocean  of  re- 
search, it  will  be  necessary  for  me  to  start  from  that 
original  source  and  fountain-head  of  all  Indian  religious 
thought,  philosophy'-,  and  literature — the  Veda. 

Vedic  literature,  however,  has  been  already  so  much 
written  about,  and  so  clearly  and  ably  elucidated  by  other 
writers,  that  I  shall  be  excused,  if  I  pass  very  rapidly  over 
this  part  of  my  subject. 

In  the  first  place,  I  think  I  may  assume  that  most 
educated  persons  are  aware  that  the  Sanskrit  word  Veda 
means  '  knowledge.'  Some,  however,  may  possibly  need 
to  be  informed  that  the  term  Veda  is  properly  only  applied 
to  divine  unwritten  knowledge,  imagined  to  have  issued 


THE   HYMNS    OP   THE   VEDA.  3 

like  breath  from  the  Self-existent  (Brahman),  and  com- 
municated to  no  single  person,  but  to  a  whole  class  of 
men  called  Rishis  or  inspired  sages.  B}^  them  the  divine 
knowledge  thus  apprehended  was  transmitted,  not  in 
writing,  but  through  the  ear,  by  constant  oral  repetition 
through  a  succession  of  teachers,  who,  as  claiming  to  be 
its  rightful  recipi-ents,  were  called  Brahmans.  Manu  (I.  3) 
declares  that  the- Veda  is  itself  the  Self-existent  BrahmSQ. 
Sayana,  on  the  other  hand,  affirms  that  the  Veda  is  his 
breath  (acchvasita).  There  are,  however,  numerous  incon- 
sistencies in  the  accounts  of  the  production  of  the  Veda 
which  seem  not  to  have  troubled  the  Brahmans,  or  inter- 
fered with  their  faith  in  its  divine  origin.  With  reference 
to  the  statement  that  it  issued  from  the  Self-existent,  like 
breath,  one  account  makes  it  so  issue  by  the  power  of 
A-drishta  (see  p.  74),  without  any  deliberation  or  thought 
on  his  part ;  another  makes  the  four  Vedas  issue  from 
Brahman,  like  smoke  from  burning  fuel ;  another  educes 
them  from  the  elements ;  another  from  the  Gayatri.  A 
hymn  in  the  Atharva-veda  (XIX.  54)  educes  them  from 
Kala  or  'Time.'  The  Satapatha-brahmana  asserts  that 
the  Creator  brooded  over  the  three  worlds,  and  thelice 
produced  three  lights,  *fire,  the  air,  and  the  sun,  from  which 
respectively  were  extracted  the  Rig,  Yajur,  and  Sama- 
veda.  Manu  (I.  23)  affirms  the  same.  In  the  Purusha- 
sukta  the  three  Vedas  are  derived  from  the  mystical  victim 
Purusha.  Lastly,  by  the  Mimansakas  the  Veda  is  declared 
to  be  itself  an  eternal  sound,  and  to  have  existed  absolutely 
from  all  eternity,  quite  independently  of  any  utterer  or 
revealer  of  its  texts.  Hence  it  is  often  called  sruta,  '  what 
is  heard.'  In  opposition  to  all  this  we  have  the  Rishis 
themselves  frequently  intimating  that  the  Mantras  were 
composed  by  themselves. 

Here,  then,  we  have  a  theory  of  inspiration  higher  even 
than  that  advanced  by  Muhammad  and  his  followers,  or 


4  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

by  the  most  enthusiastic  adherents  of  any  other  religion 
in  the  world.  It  is  very  true  that  this  inspired  knowledge, 
though  its  very  essence  was  held  to  be  mystically  bound 
up  with  Sabda  or  '  articulate  sound '  (thought  to  be 
eternal),  was  ultimately  written  down,  but  the  writing 
and  reading  of  it  were  not  encouraged.  It  was  even  pro- 
hibited by  the  Brahmans,  to  whom  alone  all  property  in 
it  belonged.  Moreover,  when  at  last,  by  its  continued 
growth,  it  became  too  complex  for  mere  oral  transmission, 
then  this  Veda  resolved  itself,  not  into  one  single  volume, 
like  the  Kuran,  but  into  a  whole  series  of  compositions, 
which  had  in  reality  been  composed  by  a  number  of  dif- 
ferent poets  and  writers  at  different  times  during  several 
centuries. 

There  is  this  great  difference,  therefore,  between  the 
Kuran  and  the  Veda,  that  whereas  the  reading  of  the 
former  is  regarded  as  a  sacred  duty,  and  constantly 
practised  by  all  good  Muslims,  the  Veda,  even  after  it  had 
been  committed  to  writing,  became  absolutely  a  sealed 
book  to  the  masses  of  Hindus,  and  with  the  exception  of 
some  of  the  later  Vedic  works,  .called  Upanishads,  is  to 
this  day  almost  entirely  unread,  however  much  it  may  be 
still  repeated  in  religious  services,  and  its  divine  authority 
as  an  infallible  guide  nominally  upheld.^  In  fact,  the 
absolute  and  infallible  authority  of  the  Veda  is  held  to  be 
so  manifest  as  to  require  no  proof,  and  to  be  entirely 
beyond  the  province  of  reason  or  argument.  Manu  even 
extends  this  to  Smriti  (11.  lo),  where  he  says,  'By  sruti 
is  meant  the  Veda,  and  by  smriti  the  books  of  tradition ; 

1  The  want  of  accuracy  in  repeating  the  Mantras  of  the  Rig-veda  is 
illustrated  by  the  native  editions  of  Manu.  An  edition  (with  the  com- 
mentary of  Kulluka)  in  my  possession  is  a  scholar-like  production,  but 
almost  in  every  place  where  the  Mantras  of  the  Rig-veda  are  alluded 
to  by  Manu  (as  in  VIII.  91,  XI.  250,  252,  253,  254)  errors  disfigure 
the  text  and  commentary. 


THE   HYMNS   OP   THE   VEDA.  •  5 

the  contents  of  both  these  must  never  be  questioned  by 
reason.' 

Of  what,  then,  does  this  Veda  consist  ?  To  conduce  to 
clearness  we  may  regard  it  as  separating  itself  into  three 
quite  distinct  divisions,  viz.  : — 

1.  Mantra,  or  prayer  and  praise  embodied  in  metrical 
hymns  and  texts. 

2.  Brahmana,  or  ritualistic  precept  and  illustration 
written  in  prose. 

3.  Upanishad,  '  mystical  or  esoteric  doctrine '  appended 
to  the  aforesaid  Brahmana,  in  prose  and  occasional  verse. 

To  begin,  then,  with  the  Mantra  portion.  By  this  is 
meant  those  prayers,  invocations,  and  hymns  which  have 
been  collected  and  handed  down  to  us  from  a  period  after 
the  Indian  branch  of  the  great  Indo-European  race  had 
finally  settled  down  in  Northern  India,  but  which  were 
doubtless  composed  by  a  succession  of  poets  at  different 
times  (perhaps  between  1500  and  1000  years  B.C.).  These 
compositions,  though  very  unequal  in  poetical  merit,  and 
containing  many  tedious  repetitions  and  puerilities,  are 
highly  interesting  and  important,  as  embodying  some  of 
the  earliest  religious  conceptions,  as  well  as  some  of  the 
earliest  known  forms,  of  the  primitive  language  of  that 
primeval  Aryan  race-stock  from  which  Greeks,  Eomans, 
Kelts,  Teutons,  and  the  Slavonic  races  are  all  offshoots. 

They  are  comprised  in  fi-^  principal  collections  of  Man- 
tras, called  respectively  Rikf"  Atharvan,  Saman,  Taittiriya, 
and  Vajasaneyin.  Of  these  the  Rig-veda — containing  one 
thousand  and  seventeen  hymns — is  the  oldest  and  most 
important,  while  the  Atharva-veda  is  generally  held  to  be 
the  most  recent,  and  is  perhaps  the  most  interesting. 
The  Atharva-veda,  in  fact,  seems  in  its  present  form  to 
have  been  later  than  Mauu.  At  least  it  does  not  appear 
to  have  been  recognized  as  a  fourth  Veda  in  the  time 
of  Manu,   though  he   mentions   the  revelation  made  to 


6  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Atharvan  and  An-giras  (XL  33).  In  book  XL,  verse  264, 
he  declares  that  the  Veda  is  only  threefold,  thus :  Ilico 
yajunshi  cdnydni  sdmdni  vividhdni  6a,  eslia  jneyas  tri- 
vrid  vedo  yo  vedainam  sa  veda-vit.  The  Atharvans  were 
a  class  of  priests  descended  from  a  man  named  Atharvan. 
They  appear  to  have  been  the  first  to  institute  the  worship 
of  fire  before  the  separation  of  the  Indians  and  Iranians, 
for  there  were  priests  called  Atharvans  in  both  India  and 
Persia. 

As  to  the  Sama-veda  and  the  two  collections  of  the 
Yajur-veda  (Taittiriya  and  Vajasaneyin,  or  Black  and 
White),  they  all  three  borrow  largely  from  the  Rik,  and 
are  merely  Brahmauical  manuals,  the  necessity  for  which 
grew  out  of  the  complicated  ritual  gradually  elaborated 
by  the  Hindu  Aryans.  A  curious  allusion  to  the  Sama- 
veda  occurs  in  Manu  IV.  123,  &c.,  '  The  Rig-veda  has  the 
gods  for  its  deities,  the  Yajur-veda  has  men  for  its  objects, 
the  Sama-veda  has  the  Pitris,  therefore  its  sound  is  im- 
pure.' KuUiika,  however,  in  his  commentary  is  careful  to 
state  that  the  Sama-veda  is  not  really  impure,  but  only 
apparently  so.  This  semblance  of  impurity  may  perhaps 
result  from  its  association  with  deceased  persons  and  its 
repetition  at  a  time  of  A-sauca.  The  Sama-veda  is  really 
a  mere  reproduction  of  parts  of  the  Rik,  transposed  and 
scattered  about  piecemeal,  only  seventy-eight  verses  in 
the  whole  Sama-veda  being,  it  is  said,  untraceable  to  the 
present  recension  of  the  Rik.  The  greatest  number  of  its 
verses  are  taken  from  the  ninth  Mandala  of  the  Rik,  which 
is  in  praise  of  the  Soma  plant,  the  Sama-veda  being  a  col- 
lection of  liturgical  forms  for  the  Soma  ceremonies  of  the 
Udgatri  priests,  as  the  Yajus  is  for  the  sacrifices  performed 
by  the  Adhvaryu  priests.  Hence  we  may  affirm  that  the 
only  two  Vedic  hymn-books  worthy  of  being  called  separate 
original  collections  are  the  Rig-veda  and  Atharva-veda ; 
and  to  these,  therefore,  we  shall  confine  our  examples. 


THE   HYMNS   OF   THE   VEDA. 


To  what  deities,  it  will  be  asked,  were  the  prayers  and 
hymns  of  these  collections  addressed  ?  This  is  an  interest- 
ing inquiry,  for  these  were  probably  the  very  deities  wor- 
shipped under  similar  names  by  our  Aryan  progenitors 
in  their  primeval  home  somewhere  on  the  table-land  of 
Central  Asia,  or  elsewhere,  perhaps  not  far  from  the  sources 
of  the  Oxus/  The  answer  is :  They  worshipped  those 
physical  forces  before  which  all  nations,  if  guided  solely 
by  the  light  of  nature,  have  in  the  early  period  of  their 
life  instinctively  bowed  down,  and  before  which  even  the 
more  civilized  and  enlightened  have  always  been  compelled 
to  bend  in  awe  and  reverence,  if  not  in  adoration. 

To  our  Aryan  forefathers  in  their  primeval  home  God's 
power  was  exhibited  in  the  forces  of  nature  even  more 
evidently  than  to  ourselves.  Lands,  houses,  flocks,  herds, 
men,  and  animals  were  more  frequently  than  in  Western 
climates  at  the  mercy  of  winds,  fire,  and  water,  and  the 
sun's  rays  appeared  to  be  endowed  with  a  potency  quite 
beyond  the  experience  of  any  European  country.  We 
cannot  be  surprised,  then,  that  these  forces  were  regarded 
by  our  Eastern  progenitors  as  actual  manifestations,  either 
of  one  deity  in  different  moods  or  of  separate  rival  deities 
contending  for  supremacy.  Nor  is  it  wonderful  that  these 
mighty  agencies  should  have  been  at  first  poetically  per- 
sonified, and  afterwards,  when  invested  with  forms,  attri- 
butes, and  individuality,  worshipped  as  distinct  gods.  It 
was  only  natural,  too,  that  a  varying  supremacy  and  vary- 
ing honours  should  have  been  accorded  to  each  deified 
force — to  the  air,  the  rain,  the  storm,  the  sun,  or  fire — 
according  to  the  special  atmospheric  influences  to  which 
particular   localities   were    exposed,    or  according    to  the 


1  Professor  Whitney  and  others  doubt  this  usual  assumption.  Some 
even  lean  to  the  theory  that  somewhere  in  the  North  of  Europe  is  the 
primeval  home  of  the  Aryans. 


O  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

seasons  of  the  year  when  the  dominance  of  each  was  to  be 
prayed  for  or  deprecated. 

This  was  the  religion  represented  in  the  Vedas  and 
the  primitive  creed  of  the  Indo-Aryans  about  twelve  or 
thirteen  centuries  before  Christ.  The  first  forces  deified 
seem  to  have  been  those  manifested  in  the  sky  and  air. 
These  were  at  first  generalised  under  one  rather  vague 
personification,  as  was  natural  in  the  earliest  attempts  at 
giving  shape  to  religious  ideas.  For  it  may  be  observed 
that  all  religious  systems,  even  the  most  polytheistic,  have 
generally  grown  out  of  some  undefined  original  belief  in 
a  divine  power  or  powers  controlling  and  regulating  the 
universe.  And  although  innumerable  gods  and  goddesses, 
gifted  with  a  thousand  shapes,  now  crowd  the  Hindi! 
Pantheon,  appealing  to  the  instincts  of  the  unthinking 
millions  whose  capacity  for  religious  ideas  is  supposed  to 
require  the  aid  of  external  symbols,  it  is  probable  that 
there  existed  for  the  first  Aryan  worshippers  a  simpler 
theistic  creed  :  even  as  the  thoughtful  Hindu  of  the  pre- 
sent day  looks  through  the  maze  of  his  mythology  to 
the  philosophical  background  of  one  eternal  self-existent 
Being,  one  universal  Spirit,  into  whose  unity  all  visible 
symbols  are  gathered,  and  in  whose  essence  all  entities 
are  comprehended. 

In  the  Veda  this  unity  soon  diverged  into  various  rami- 
fications. Only  a  few  of  the  hymns  appear  to  contain 
the  simple  conception  of  one  divine  self-existent  omni- 
present Being,  and  even  in  these  the  idea  of  one  God 
present  in  all  nature  is  somewhat  nebulous  and  undefined. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  how  this  idea,  vaguely  stated  as 
it  was  in  the  Veda,  gradually  developed  and  became  more 
clearly  defined  in  the  time  of  Manu.  In  the  last  verses  of 
the  twelfth  book  (123-1 25)  we  have  the  following  :  '  Him 
some  adore  as  transcendently  present  in  fire  ;  others  in 
Manu,  lord  of  creatures  ;  some  as  more  distinctly  present 


THE   HYMNS    OP   THE   VEDA.  9 

in  Indra,  others  in  pure  air,  others  as  the  most  high 
eternal  Spirit.  Thus  the  man  who  perceives  in  his  own 
soul,  the  supreme  soul  present  in  all  creatures,  acquires 
equanimity  towards  them  all,  and  shall  be  absorbed  at 
last  in  the  highest  essence. 

In  the  Purusha-stikta  of  the  Rig-veda  (X.  90),  which  is 
one  of  the  later  hymns,  probably  not  much  earlier  than 
the  earliest  Brahmana,  the  one  Spirit  is  called  Purusha. 
The  more  common  name  is  Atman  or  Paramatman,  and  in 
the  later  system  Brahman,  neut.  (nom.  Brahmd),  derived 
from  root  hrih,  '  to  expand,'  and  denoting  the  universally 
expanding  essence  or  universally  diffused  substance  of  the 
universe.  It  was  thus  that  the  later  creed  became  not  so 
much  monotheistic  (by  which  I  mean  the  belief  in  one  god 
regarded  as  a  personal  Being  external  to  the  universe, 
though  creating  and  governing  it)  as  pantheistic ;  Brahman 
in  the  neuter  being  '  simple  infinite  being  '■ — ^the  only  real 
eternal  essence — which,  when  it  passes  into  universal 
manifested  existence,  is  called  Brahma,  when  it  manifests 
itself  on  the  earth,  is  called  Vishnu,  and  when  it  again 
dissolves  itself  into  simple  being,  is  called  S'iva ;  all  the 
other  innumerable  gods  and  demigods  being  also  mere 
manifestations  of  the  neuter  Brahman,  who  alone  is  eternal. 
This,  at  any  rate,  appears  to  be  the  genuine  pantheistic 
creed  of  India  at  the  present  day. 

To  return  to  the  Vedic  hymns — perhaps  the  most  ancient 
and  beautiful  Vedic  deification  was  that  of  Dyaus,^  '  the 
sky,'  as  Dyaush-pitar,  '  Heavenly  Father '  (the  Zeus  or 
Ju-piter  of  the  Greeks  and  Eomans).  Then,  closely  con- 
nected with  Dyaus,  was  a  goddess  A-diti,  '  the  Infinite 
Expanse,'  conceived  of  subsequently  as  the  mother  of  all 


1  From  dyu  or  dyo,  the  same  as  the  Old  German  Tiu  or  Ziu,  who, 
according  to  Professor  Max  Miiller,  afterwards  became  a  kind  of  Mars 
(whence  Tues-day).     For  Dyaush-pitar  see  Kig-veda  VI.  51.  5. 


10  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

the  gods.  Next  came  a  development  of  the  same  concep-' 
tion  called  Varuna,  '  the  Investing  Sky,'  said  to  answer  to 
Ahura  Mazda,  the  Ormazd  of  the  ancient  Persian  (Zand) 
mythology,  and  to  the  Greek  Ovpapo^ — but  a  more  spiritual 
conception,  leading  to  a  worship  which  rose  to  the  nature 
of  a  belief  in  the  great  JJarrip  rjfimv  6  Iv  roti  ovpavoU.  This 
Varuna,  again,  was  soon  thought  of  in  connection  with 
another  vague  personification  called  Mitra  (  =  the  Persian 
Mithra),  '  god  of  day.'  After  a  time  these  impersonations 
of  the  celestial  sphere  were  felt  to  be  too  vague  to  suit  the 
growth  of  religious  ideas  in  ordinary  minds.  Soon,  there- 
fore, the  great  investing  firmament  resolved  itself  into 
separate  cosmical  entities  with  separate  powers  and  attri- 
butes. First,  the  watery  atmosphere — persQnified  under 
the  name  of  Indra,  ever  seeking  to  dispense  his  dewy 
treasures  (indu),  though  ever  restrained  by  an  opposing 
force  or  spirit  of  evil  called  Vritra ;  and,  secondly,  the 
wind — thought  of  either  as  a  single  personality  named 
Vayu,  or  as  a  whole  assemblage  of  moving  powers  coming 
from  every  quarter  of  the  compass,  and  impersonated  as 
Maruts  or  '  Storm-gods.'  At  the  same  time  in  this  pro- 
cess of  decentralization — if  I  may  use  the  term — the  once 
purely  celestial  Varuna  became  relegated  to  a  position 
among  seven  secondary  deities  of  the  heavenly  sphere  called 
Adityas  (afterwards  increased  to  twelve,  and  regarded  as 
diversified  forms  of  the  sun  iu  the  several  months  of  the 
year),  and  subsequently  to  a  dominion  over  the  waters 
when  they  had  left  the  air  and  rested  on  the  earth. 

Of  these  separately  deified  physical  forces  by  far  the 
most  favourite  object  of  adoration  was  the  deity  supposed 
to  yield  the  dew  and  rain,  longed  for  by  Eastern  culti- 
vators of  the  soil  with  even  greater  cravings  than  by 
Northern-  agriculturists.  Indra,  therefore — the  Jupiter 
.Pluvius  of  early  Indian  mythology — is  undoubtedly  the 
principal  divinity  of  Vedic  worshippers,  in  so  far  at  least 


THE   HYMNS   OP   THE   VEDA.  I  I 

as  the  greater  number  of  their  prayers  and  hymns  are 
addressed  to  him. 

What,  however,  could  rain  effect  without  the  aid  of 
heat?  A  force  the  intensity  of  which  must  have  im- 
pressed an  Indian  mind  with  awe,  and  led  him  to  invest 
the  possessor  of  it  with  divine  attributes.  Hence  the 
other  great  god  of  Vedic  worshippers,  and  in  some  respects 
the  most  important  in  his  connection  with  sacrificial  rites, 
is  Agni  (Latin  Ignis)^  '  the  god  of  fire.'  Even  Surya,  '  the 
sun '  (Greek  ■^Xios),  who  was  probably  at  first  adored  as 
the  original  source  of  heat,  came  to  be  regarded  as  only 
another  form  of  fire.  He  was  merely  a  manifestation  of 
the  same  divine  energy  removed  to  the  heavens,  and  con- 
sequently less  accessible.  Another  deity,  Ushas,  '  goddess 
of  the  -dawn,' — the  ^wy  of  the  Greeks, — was  naturally  con- 
nected with  the  sun,  and  regarded  as  daughter  of  the  sky. 
Two  other  deities,  the  Asvins,  were  fabled  as  connected 
with  Ushas,  as  ever  young  and  handsome,  travelling  in  a 
golden  car  and  precursors  of  the  dawn.  They  are  some- 
times called  Dasras,  as  divine  physicians,  '  destroyers  of 
diseases ' ;  sometimes  Nasatyas,  as  '  never  untrue.'  They 
appear  to  have  been  personifications  of  two  luminous  rays 
imagined  to  precede  the  break  of  day.  These,  with  Yama, 
'  the  god  of  departed  spirits,'  are  the  principal  deities  of 
the  Mantra  portion  of  the  Veda. 

A¥e  find,  therefore,  no  trace  in  the  Mantras  of  the  Tri- 
murti  or  Triad  of  deities  (Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  S'iva) 
afterwards  so  popular.  Nor  does  the  doctrine  of  trans- 
migration, afterwards  an  essential  element  of  the  Hindu 
religion,  appear  in  the  Mantra  portion  of  the  Veda ; 
though  there  is  a  clear  declaration  of  it  in  the  Aranyaka 
of  the  Aitareya  Brahmana.  Nor  is  caste  clearly  alluded 
to,  except  in  the  later  Purusha-siikta  (see  p.  21). 

But  here  it  may  be  asked,  if  sky,  air,  water,  fire,  and 
the  sun  were  thus  worshipped  as  manifestations  of  the 


12  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

supreme  universal  God  of  the  universe,  was  not  the  earth 
also  an  object  of  adoration  with  the  early  Hindiis  ?  And 
unquestionably  in  the  earlier  system  the  earth  under  the 
name  of  Prithivi,  '  the  broad  one,'  does  receive  divine 
honours,  being  thought  of  as  the  mother  of  all  beings. 
Moreover,  various  deities  were  regarded  as  the  progeny 
resulting  from  the  fancied  vinion  of  earth  with  Dyaus, 
'  heaven.'  This  imaginary  marriage  of  heaven  and  earth 
was  indeed  a  most  natural  idea,  and  much  of  the  later 
mythology  may  be  explained  by  it.  But  it  is  remarkable 
that  as  religious  worship  became  of  a  more  selfish  charac- 
ter, the  earth,  being  more  evidently  under  man's  control, 
and  not  seeming  to  need  propitiation  so  urgently  as  the 
more  uncertain  air,  fire,  and  water,  lost  importance  amoug 
the  gods,  and  was  rarely  addressed  in  prayer  or  hymn. 

In  all  probability  the  deified  forces  addressed  in  the 
hymns  were  not  represented  by  images  or  idols  in  the  Vedic 
period,  though,  doubtless,  the  early  worshippers  clothed 
their  gods  with  human  form  in  their  own  imaginations.'' 

I  now  begin  my  examples  with  a  nearly  literal  transla- 
tion of  the  well-known  sixteenth  hymn  of  the  fourth  book 
of  the  Atharva-veda,  in  praise  of  Varuna  or  '  the  Investing 
Sky':^- 

1  See  Br  Muir's  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  v.  p.  453. 

2  Ably  translated  by  Dr.  Muir  (Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  v.  p.  63)  and  by 
Profefesor  Max  Miiller.  It  may  be  thought  that  in  giving  additional 
translations  of  this  and  other  hymns  I  am  going  over  ground  already 
well  trodden ;  but  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that,  as  the  design  of  the 
work  is  to  illustrate  continuously  the  development  of  Hindii  knowledge 
and  literature  by  a  selection  of  good  examples  rendered  into  idiomatic 
English,  I  could  not,  in  common  justice  to  such  a  subject,  exclude  the 
best  passages  in  each  department  of  the  literature  merely  because  they 
have  been  translated  by  others.  I  here,  however,  once  for  all  acknow- 
ledge with  gratitude  that,  while  making  versions  of  my  own,  I  have 
derived  the  greatest  assistance  from  the  translations  of  other  scholars. 
It  must  be  understood,  too,  that  my  examples  are  not  put  forth  as 


THE   HYMNS   OP   THE   VEDA.  1 3 

The  mighty  Varuna,  who  rules  above,  looks  down 
Upon  these  worlds,  his  kingdom,  as  if  close  at  hand. 
When  men  imagine  they  do  ought  by  stealth,  he  knows  it. 
No  one  can  stand  or  walk  or  softly  glide  along 
Or  hide  in  dark  recess,  or  lurk  in  secret  cell. 
But  Varuna  detects  him  and  his  movements  spies. 
Two  persons  may  devise  some  plot,  together  sitting 
In  private  and  alone ;  but  he,  the  king,  is  there — - 
A  third — and  sees  it  all.     This  boundless  earth  is  his, 
I  His  the  vast  sky,  whose  depth  no  mortal  e'er  can  fathom. 
Both  oceans  ^  find  a  place  within  his  body,  yet 
In  that  small  pool  he  lies  contained.     Whoe'er  should  flee 
Far,  far  beyond  the  sky,  would  not  escape  the  grasp 
Of  Varuna,  the  king.     His  messengers  descend 
Countless  from  his  abode — for  ever  traversing 
This  world  and  scanning  with  a  thousand  eyes  its  inmates. 
Whate'er  exists  within  this  earth,  and  all  within  the  sky, 
Yea  all  that  is  beyond,  king  Varuna  perceives. 
The  winkings  ^  of  men's  eyes,  are  numbered  all  by  him. 
He  wields  the  universe,  as  gamesters  handle  dice. 
May  thy  destroying  snares  cast  sevenfold  round  the  wicked. 
Entangle  liars,  but  the  truthful  spare,  O  king  !  ^ 

I  pass  from  the  ancient  Aryan  deity  Varuna  to  the  more 
thoroughly  Indian  god  ludra  (see  p.  lo). 


offering  rival  translations.  They  are  generally  intended  to  be  as  literal 
as  possible  consistently  with  the  observance  of  EngHsh  idiom,  and  on 
that  account  I  have  preferred  blank  verse ;  but  occasionally  they  are 
paraphrases  rather  than  translations,  sentences  and  words  being  here 
and  there  omitted  or  transposed,  or  fragments  joined  together,  so  as  to 
read  like  one  continuous  passage.  In  fact,  it  will  be  seen  that  my 
main  design  has  been  to  offer  English  versions  of  the  text  for  general 
readers,  and  for  those  students  and  educated  men  who,  not  being  neces- 
sarily Sanskritists,  are  desirous  of  some  insight  into  Hindu  literature. 

1  That  is,  air  and  sea. 

2  The  winking  of  the  eye  is  an  especial  characteristic  of  humanity, 
distinguishing  men  from  gods ;  c/.  Nala  V.  25,  Magha  III.  42. 

3  Compare  Manu  VIII.  82  :  '  A  witness  who  speaks  falsely  is  fast 
bound  by  the  snares  of  Varuna.'  These  snares  are  explained  by  Kulluka 
to  be  '  cords  consisting  of  serpents '  (pa^aih  sarpa^ajjubMh). 


14  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

The  following  metrical  lines  bring  together  various  scat- 
tered texts  relating  to  this  Hindu  Jupiter  Pluvius  :  ^— 

Indra,  twin  brother  of  the  god  of  fire, 

When  thou  wast  born,  thy  mother  Aditi 

Gave  thee,  her  lusty  child,  the  thrilling  draught 

Of  mountain-growing  Soma — source  of  life 

And  never-dying  vigour  to  thy  frame. 

Then  at  the  Thunderer's  birth,  appalled  with  fear, 

Dreading  the  hundred-jointed  thunderbolt — 

Forged  by  the  cunning  Tvashtri — mountains  rocked. 

Earth  shook  and  heaven  trembled.     Thou  wast  born 

Without  a  rival,  king  of  gods  and  men — 

The  eye  of  living  and  terrestrial  things. 

Immortal  Indra,  unrelenting  foe 

Of  drought  and  darkness,  infinitely  wise. 

Terrific  crusher  of  thy  enemies, 

Heroic,  irresistible  in  might. 

Wall  of  defence  to  us  thy  worshippers, 

We  sing  thy  praises,  and  our  ardent  hymns 

Embrace  thee,  as  a  loving  wife  her  lord. 

Thou  art  our  guardian,  advocate,  and  friend, 

A  brother,  father,  mother,  all  combined. 

Most  fatherly  of  fathers,  we  are  thine 

And  thou  art  ours ;  oh  !  let  thy  pitying  soul 

Turn  to  us  in  compassion,  when  we  praise  thee, 

And  slay  us  not  for  one  sin  or  for  many. 

Deliver  us  to-day,  to-morrow,  every  day. 

Armed  for  the  conflict,  see  !  the  demons  come — 

Ahi  and  Vritra,  and  a  long  array 

Of  darksome  spirits.     Quick,  then,  quaff  the  draught 

That  stimulates  thy  martial  energy, 

And  dashing  onward  in  thy  golden  car. 

Drawn  by  thy  ruddy,  Eibhu-fashioned  ^  steeds. 

Speed  to  the  charge,  escorted  by  the  Maruts. 

Vainly  the  demons  dare  thy  might ;  in  vain 

1  The  texts  wlfich  furnish  the  basis  of  these  and  the  succeeding  verses 
will  be  found  in  the  5  th  volume  of  Dr.  Muir's  work,  and  there  will  also 
be  found  a  complete  poetical  sketch  of  Indra  (pp.  126-139). 

2  The  Ribhus  (Greek  'Op(f>e{i;)  were  the  celestial  artists  of  the  Veda. 


THE   HYMNS    OF   THE   VEDA.  15 

Strive  to  deprive  us  of  thy  watery  treasures. 
Earth  quakes  beneath  the  crashing  of  thy  bolts. 
Pierced,  shattered,  lies  the  foe — his  cities  crushed. 
His  armies  overthrown,  his  fortresses 
Shivered  to  fragments ;  then  the  pent-up  waters. 
Released  from  long  imprisonment,  descend 
In  torrents  to  the  earth,  and  swollen  rivers. 
Foaming  and  rolling  to  their  ocean  home. 
Proclaim  the  triumph  of  the  Thunderer. 

Let  US  proceed  next  to  the  all-important  Vedic  deity 
Agni,  '  god  of  fire,'  especially  of  sacrificial  fire.  I  propose 
now  to  paraphrase  a  few  of  the  texts  which  relate  to 
him  : — 

Agni,  thou  art  a  sage,  a  priest,  a  king, 

Protector,  father  of  the  sacrifice. 

Commissioned  by  us  men  thou' dost  ascend 

A  messenger,  conveying  to  the  sky 

Our  hymns  and  offerings.     Though  thy  origin 

Be  threefold,  now  from  air  and  now  from  water. 

Now  from  the  mystic  double  Arani,^ 

Thou  art  thyself  a  mighty  god,  a  lord, 

Giver  of  life  and  immortality, 

One  in  thy  essence,  but  to  mortals  three ; 

Displaying  thine  eternal  triple  form, 

As  fire  on  earth,  as  lightning  in  the  air, 

As  sun  in  heaven.     Thou  art  a  cherished  guest 

In  every  household — father,  brother,  son. 

Friend,  benefactor,  guardian,  all  in  one. 

Bright,  seven-rayed  god  !  how  manifold  thy  shapes 

Revealed  to  us  thy  votaries  !  now  we  see  thee. 

With  body  all  of  gold,  and  radiant  hair 

Flaming  from  three  terrific  heads,  and  mouths 

Whose  burning  jaws  and  teeth  devour  all  things. 

Now  with  a  thousand  glowing  horns,  and  now 

Plashing  thy  lustre  from  a  thousand  eyes, 

Thou'rt  borne  towards  us  in  a  golden  chariot. 

Impelled  by  winds,  and  drawn  by  ruddy  steeds, 

1  Two  pieces  of  the  wood  of  the  Ficus  religiosa  used  for  kindling  fire. 


1 6  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Marking  thy  car's  destructive  course,  with  blackness. 
Deliver,  mighty  lord,  thy  worshippers. 
Purge  us  from  taint  of  sin,  and  when  we  die, 
Deal  mercifully  with  us  on  the  pyre, 
Burning  our  bodies  with  their  load  of  guilt, 
But  bearing  our  eternal  part  on  high 
To  luminous  abodes  and  realms  of  bliss, 
Tor  ever  there  to  dwell  with  righteous  men. 

The  next  deity  is  Surya,  '  the  Sun,'  ^  who,  with  reference 
to  the  variety  of  his  functions,  has  various  names — such 
as  Savitri,  Aryaman,  Mitra,  Varuna,  Pushan,  sometimes 
ranking  as  distinct  deities  of  the  celestial  sphere.  As 
already  explained,  he  is  associated  in  the  minds  of  Vedic 
worshippers  with  Fire,  and  is  frequently  described  as  sit- 
ting in  a  chariot  drawn  by  seven  ruddy  horses  (represent- 
ing the  seven  days  of  the  week),  preceded  by  the  Dawn. 
Here  is  an  example  of  a  hymn  (Rig-veda  I.  50)  addressed 
to  this  deity,  translated  almost  literally : — 

Behold  the  rays  of  Dawn,  like  heralds,  lead  on  high 

The  Sun,  that  men  may  see  the  great  all-knowing  god. 

The  stars  slink  off  like  thieves,  in  company  with  Night, 

Before  the  all-seeing  eye,  whose  beams  reveal  his  presence, 

Gleaming  like  brilliant  flames,  to  nation  after  nation. 

With  speed,  beyond  the  ken  of  mortals,  thou,  O  Sun, 

Dost  ever  travel  on,  conspicuous  to  all. 

Thou  dost  create  the  light,  and  with  it  dost  illume 

The  universe  entire ;  thou  risest  in  the  sight 

Of  all  the  race  of  men,  and  all  the  host  of  heaven. 

Light-giving  Varuna  !  thy  piercing  glance  doth  scan 

In  quick  succession  all  this  stirring,  active  world. 

And  penetrateth  too  the  broad  ethereal  space, 

Measuring  our  days  and  nights  and  spying  out  all  creatures. 

Surya  with  flaming  locks,  clear-sighted  god  of  day, 

Thy  seven  ruddy  mares  bear  on  thy  rushing  car. 

With  these  thy  self-yoked  steeds,  seven  daughters  of  thy  chariot, 

1  Yaska  makes  Indra,  Agni,  and  Surya  the  Vedic  Triad  of  gods. 


THE   HYMNS    Oh"   THE   VEDA.  1 7 

Onward  thou  dost  advance.  To  tliy  refulgent  orb 
Beyond  this  lower  gloom  and  upward  to  the  light 
Would  we  ascend,  0  Sun,  thou  god  among  the  gods. 

As  an  accompaniment  to  this  hymn  may  here  be  men- 
tioned the  celebrated  Gayatri.  It  is  a  short  prayer  to  the 
Sun  in  his  character  of  Savitri  or  '  the  Vivifier,'  and  is  the 
most  sacred  of  all  Vedic* texts.  Though  hot  always  un- 
derstood, it  is  to  this  very  day  used  by  every  Brahman 
throughout  India  in  his  daily  devotions.  It  occurs  in 
Eig-veda  III.  62.  10,^  and  can  be  literally  translated  as 
follows : — 

Let  us  meditate  (or,  we  meditate)  on  that  excellent  glory  of  the 
divine  Vivifier.  May  he  enlighten  (or  stimulate)  our  understandings. 
[Tat  Savitur  varenyam  bhargo  devasya  dhimdhi,  Dhiyo  yo  ndh  prado- 
dayatJ] 

May  we  not  conjecture,  with  Sir  William  Jones,  that 
the  great  veneration  in  which  this  text  has  ever  been  held 
by  the  Hindiis  from  time  immemorial,  indicates  that  the 
more  enlightened  worshippers  adored,  under  the  type  of 
the  visible  sun,  that  divine  liwht  which  alone  could  illu- 
mine  their  intellects  ? 

I  may  here  also  fitly  offer  a  short  paraphrase  descriptive 
of  the  Vedic  Ushas,  the  Greek  'Hw?,  or  '  Dawn  : ' — 

Hail,  ruddy  Ushas,  golden  goddess,  borne 
Upon  thy  shining  car,  thou  comest  like 
A  lovely  maiden  by  her  mother  decked. 
Disclosing  coyly  all  thy  hidden  graces 
To  our  admiring  eyes ;  or  like  a  wife 
Unveiling  to  her  lord,  with  conscious  pride, 
Beauties  which,  as  he  gazes  lovingly. 
Seem  fresher,  fairer  each  succeeding  morn. 
Through  years  on  years  thou  hast  lived  on,  and  yet 
Thou'rt  ever  young.     Thou  art  the  breath  and  life 


1  Note  that  the  Eishi  or  author  was  Visvamitra,  a  Kshatriya. 

B 


I  8  INDIAN    WISDOM. 

Of  all  that  breathes  and  lives,  awaking  day  by  day 
Myriads  of  prostrate  sleepers,  as  from  death, 
Causing  the  birds  to  flutter  from  their  nests. 
And  rousing  men  to  ply  with  busy  feet 
Their  daily  duties  and  appointed  tasks, 
Toiling  for  wealth  or  pleasure  or  renown. 

Before  leaving  the  subject  of  the  Vedic  deities  I  add  a 
few  words  about  Yama,  '  the  god  of  departed  spirits.'  It 
appears  tolerably  certain  that  the  doctrine  of  metempsy- 
chosis has  no  place  in  the  Mantra  portion  of  the  Veda,^ 
nor  do  the  authors  of  the  hymns  evince  any  sympathy 
with  the  desire  to  get  rid  of  all  action  and  personal  exist- 
ence, which  became  so  remarkable  a  feature  of  the  theology 
and  philosophy  of  the  Brahmans  in  later  tiifl.es.  But  there 
are  many  indirect  references  to  the  immortality  of  man's 
spirit  and  a  future  life,  and  these  become  more  marked 
and  decided  towards  the  end  of  the  Rig-veda,  One  of 
the  hymns  in  the  last  Mandala  is  addressed  to  the  Pitris 
or  fathers,  that  is  to  say,  the  spirits  of  departed  ancestors 
who  have  attained  to  a  state  of  heavenly  bliss,  and  are 
supposed  to  occupy  three  different  stages  of  blessedness, 
— the  highest  inhabiting  the  upper  sky,  the  middle  the 
intermediate  air,  and  the  lowest  the  regions  of  the  at- 
mosphere near  the  earth.  Reverence  and  adoration  are 
always  to  be  offered  them,  and  they  are  presided  over  by 
the  god  Yama,  the  ruler  of  all  the  spirits  of  the  dead, 
whether  good  or  bad.  The  earlier  legends  represent  this 
god  as  a  kind  of  first  man  (his  twin  sister  being  Yami), 
and  also  as  the  first  of  men  that  died.  Hence  he  is 
described  as  guiding  the  spirits  of  other  men  who  die  to 
the  same  world.  In  some  passages,  however.  Death  is  said 
to  be  his  messenger,  he  himself  dwelling  in  celestial  light, 

1  In  Mandala  I.  164.  32,  bahu-prajdh  is  explained  by  hahurjanmor 
hhah,  '  subject  to  many  births,'  but  it  may  mean  '  having  abundant 
offspring.' 


THE   HYMNS   OF   THE   VEDA.  1 9 

to  which  the  departed  are  brought,  and  where  they  enjoy 
his  society  and  that  of  the  fathers.  In  the  Veda  he  has 
nothing  to  do  with  judging  or  punishing  the  departed  (as 
in  the  later  mythology),  but  he  has  two  terrific  dogs,  with 
four  eyes,  which,  guard  the  way  to  his  abode.  Here  are  a 
few  thoughts  about  him  from  various  hymns  in  the  tenth 
Mandala  of  the  Eig-veda : — 

To  Yama,  mighty  king,  be  gifts  and  homage  paid. 
He  was  the  first  of  men  that  died,  the  first  to  brave 
Death's  rapid  rushing  stream,  the  first  to  point  the  road 
To  heaven,  and  welcome  others  to  that  bright  abode. 
No  power  can  rob  us  of  the  home  thus  won  by  thee. 
O  king,  we  come ;  the  born  must  die,  must  tread  the  path 
That  thou  hast  trod — the  path  by  which  each  race  of  men, 
In  long  succession,  and  our  fathers,  too,  have  passed. 
Soul  of  the  dead  !  depart ;  fear  not  to  take  the  road — • 
The  ancient  road — by  which  thy  ancestors  have  gone  ; 
Ascend  to  meet  the  god — to  meet  thy  happy  fathers. 
Who  dwell  in  bliss  with  him.     Fear  not  to  pass  the  guards — 
The  four-eyed  brindled  dogs — ^that  watch  for  the  departed. 
Return  unto  thy  home,  O  soul !     Thy  sin  and  shame 
Leave  thou  behind  on  earth ;  assume  a  shining  form — 
Thy  ancient  shape — refined  and  from  all  taint  set  free. 

Let  me  now  endeavour,  by  slightly  amplified  transla- 
tions, to  convey  some  idea  of  two  of  the  most  remarkable 
hymns  in  the  Rig-veda.  The  first  (Mandala  X.  129),  which 
may  be  compared  with  some  parts  of  the  38  th  chap,  of 
Job,  attempts  to  describe  the  mystery  of  creation  thus  : — 

In  the  beginning  there  was  neither  nought  nor  aught. 

Then  there  was  neither  sky  nor  atmosphere  above. 

What  then  enshrouded  all  this  teeming  Universe  1 

In  the  receptacle  of  what  was  it  contained  1 

Was  it  enveloped  in  the  gulf  profound  of  water  ? 

Then  was  there  neither  death  nor  immortality. 

Then  was  there  neither  day,  nor  night,  nor  light,  nor  darkness, 

Only  the  Existent  One  breathed  calmly,  self-contained. 

Nought  else  than  him  there  was — ^nought  else  above,  beyond. 


20  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Then  first  came  darkness  hid  in  darkness,  gloom  in  gloom. 

Next  all  was  water,  all  a  chaos  indiscreet. 

In  which  the  One  lay  void,  shrouded  in  nothingness. 

Then  turning  inwards  he  by  self-developed  force 

Of  inner  fervour  and  intense  abstraction,  grew. 

And  now  in, him  Desire,  the  primal  germ  of  mind, 

Arose,  which  learned  men,  profoundly  searching,  say 

Is  the  first  subtle  bond,  connecting  Entity 

With  Nullity.     This  ray  that  kindled  dormant  life. 

Where  was  it  then  ?  before  ?  or  was  it  found  above  1 

Were  there  parturient  powers  and  latent  qualities, 

And  fecund  principles  beneath,  and  active  forces 

That  energized  aloft  ?     Who  knows  1     Who  can  declare  ? 

How  and  from  what  has  sprung  this  Universe  ?  the  gods 

Themselves  are  subsequent  to  its  development. 

Who,  then,  can  penetrate  the  secret  of  its  rise  ? 

Whether  'twas  framed  or  not,  made  or  not  made ;  he  only 

Who  in  the  highest  heaven  sits,  the  omniscient  lord, 

Assuredly  knows  all,  or  haply  knows  he  not. 

The  next  example  is  from  the  first  Mandala  of  the  Rig- 
veda  (i2i).  Like  the  preceding,  it  furnishes  a  good  argu- 
ment for  those  who  maintain  that  the  purer  faith  of  the 
Hindus  is  properly  monotheistic : — 

What  god  shall  we  adore  with  sacrifice  ?  ^ 
HLm  let  us  praise,  the  golden  child  that  rose 
In  the  beginning,  who  was  born  the  lord — 
The  one  sole  lord  of  all  that  is — who  made 
The  earth,  and  formed  the  sky,  who  giveth  life. 
Who  giveth  strength,  whose  bidding  gods  revere, 
Whose  hiding-place  is  immortality, 
Whose  shadow,  death ;  who  by  his  might  is  king 
Of  all  the  breathing,  sleeping,  waking  world — 
Who  governs  men  and  beasts,  whose  majesty 
These  snowy  hills,  this  ocean  with  its  rivers 
Declare ;  of  whom  these  spreading  regions  form 
The  arms  ;  by  whom  the  firmament  is  strong, 

1  In  the  te^t  this  question  is  repeated  at  the  end  of  every  versa  A 
literal  translation  will  be  found  in  Muir's  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  iv,  p.  i6. 


THE   HYMNS    OF   THE   VEDA.  21 

Earth  firmly  planted,  and  the  highest  heavens 

Supported,  and  the  clouds  that  fill  the  air 

Distributed  and  measured  out ;  to  whom 

Both  earth  and  heaven,  established  by  his  will, 

Look  up  with  trembling  mind ;  in  whom  revealed 

The  rising  sun  shines  forth  above  the  world. 

Where'er  let  loose  in  space,  the  mighty  waters 

Have  gone,  depositing  a  fruitful  seed 

And  generating  fire,  there  he  arose, 

Who  is  the  breath  and  life  of  all  the  gods. 

Whose  mighty  glance  looks  round  the  vast  expanse 

Of  watery  vapour — source  of  energy. 

Cause  of  the  sacrifice — the  only  God 

Above  the  gods.     May  he  not  injure  us  ! 

He  the  Creator  of  the  earth — the  righteous 

Creator  of  the  sky,  Creator  too 

Of  oceans  bright,  and  far-extending  waters. 

Let  me  how  give  a  few  verses  (not  in  regular  order  and 
not  quite  literally  translated)  from  the  celebrated  Purusha- 
sukta,  one  of  the  most  recent  of  the  hymns  of  the  Rig- 
veda  (Mandala  X.  90).  It  will  serve  to  illustrate  the 
gradual  sliding  of  Hindu  monotheism  into  pantheism,  and 
the  first  foreshadowing  of  the  institution  of  caste,  which 
for  so  many  centuries  has  held  India  in  bondage : — 

The  embodied  spirit  ^  has  a  thousand  heads, 

A  thousand  eyes,  a  thousand  feet,  around 

On  every  side  enveloping  the  earth, 

Yet  filling  space  no  larger  than  a  span.^ 

He  is  himself  this  very  universe. 

He  is  whatever  is,  has  been,  and  shall  be. 

He  is  the  lord  of  immortality. 

All  creatures  are  one-fourth  of  him,  three-fourths 

^  According  to  the  TJpanishads  and  the  Tattva-samasa  the  all-per- 
vading self-existent  spirit  is  called  Purusha,  puri  sayandt,  from  dwelling 
in  the  body. 

2  Dr.  Muir  translates  (literally),  '  He  overpassed  the  earth  by  a 
space  of  ten  fingers.'  The  Katha  Upanishad  (II.  4.  12)  says  that 
Purusha,  '  the  soul,'  is  of  the  measure  of  a  thumb  (anrgushtha-mdtrah), 


2  2  INDIAN    WISDOM. 

Are  that  which  is  immortal  in  the  sky. 
From  him,  called  Purusha,  was  bora  Viraj, 
And  from  Viraj  was  Purusha  produced  ^ 
Whom  gods  and  holy  men  made  their  oblation. 
With  Purusha  as  victim  they  performed 
A  sacrifice.     When  they  divided  him, 
How  did  they  cut  him  up  1  what  was  his  mouth  ? 
What  were  his  arms  t  and  what  his  thighs  and  feet  ? 
The  Brahman  was  his  mouth,  the  kingly  soldier  ^ 
Was  made  his  arms,  the  husbandman  his  thighs, 
■   The  servile  S^udra  issued  from  his  feet. 

I  close  my  examples  of  the  Mantras  with  slightly 
amplified  versions  of  two  hymns — one  in  praise  of  Time, 
personified  as  the  source  of  all  things,  taken  from  the 
Atharva-veda ;  the  other  addressed  to  Night,  from  the 
Rig-veda.^ 

The  following  is  the  hymn  to  Time  (Atharva-veda 
XIX.  53).  A  few  verses  at  the  end  are  omitted,  one  or 
two  lines  transposed,  and  a  few  inserted  from  the  next 
hymn  on  the  same  subject : — 

Time,  like  a  brilliant  steed  with  seven  rays, 

And  with  a  thousand  eyes,  imperishable, 

Full  of  fecundity,  bears  all  things  onward. 

On  him  ascend  the  learned  and  the  wise. 

Time,  like  a  seven-wheeled,  seven-naved  car,  moves  on. 

1  This  is  tantamount  to  saying  that  Purusha  and  Viraj  are  in  sub- 
stance the  same.  Viraj,  as  a  kind  of  secondary  creator,  is  sometimes 
regarded  as  male,  sometimes  as  female.  Manu  (I,  11)  says  that  Purusha, 
'  the  first  male,'  was  called  Brahma,  and  was  produced  from  the  supreme 
self-existent  Spirit.  In  I.  32  he  says  that  Brahma  (see  KuUuka's  com- 
mentary), having  divided  his  own  substance,  became  half  male,  half 
female,  and  that  from  the  female  was  produced  Viraj,  and  that  from 
Viraj  was  born  Manu — the  secondary  progenitor  and  producer  of  all 
beings. 

^  The  second  caste  or  Kshatriya  is  here  called  Rajanya.  By  '  hus- 
bandman '  in  the  next  line  is  of  course  meant  the  third  or  Vaisya  caste. 

3  Both  literally  translated  into  prose  by  Dr.  Muir,  Texts,  vol.  v. 
p.  408,  vol.  iv.  p.  498. 


THE   HYMNS   OF   THE   VEDA.  23 

His  rolling  wheels  are  all  the  worlds,  his  axle 

Is  immortality.     He  is  the  first  of  gods. 

We  see  him  like  an  overflowing  jar ; 

We  see  him  multiplied  in  various  forms. 

He  draws  forth  and  encompasses  the  worlds ; 

He  is  all  future  worlds ;  he  is  theirjather ; 

He  is  their  son  ;  there  is  no  power  like  him. 

The  past  and  future  issue  out  of  Time, 

All  sacred  knowledge  and  austerity. 

From  Time  the  earth  and  waters  were  produced ; 

From  Time,  the  rising,  setting,  burning  sun ; 

From  Time,  the  wind ;  through  Time  the  earth  is  vast ; 

Through  Time  the  eye  perceives ;  mind,  breath,  and  name 

In  him  are  comprehended.     All  rejoice 

When  Time  arrives — the  monarch  who  has  conquered 

This  world,  the  highest  world,  the  holy  worlds, 

Yea,  all  the  worlds — and  ever  marches  on. 

The  hymn  to  Night  is  my  last  example.     It  is  taken 
from  the  tenth  Mandala  of  the  Rig-veda  (127) : — 

The  goddess  Night  arrives  in  all  her  glory, 
Looking  about  her  with  her  countless  eyes. 
She,  the  immortal  goddess,  throws  her  veil 
Over  low  valley,  rising  ground,  and  hill. 
But  soon  with  bright  effulgence  dissipates 
The  darkness  she  produces ;  soon  advancing 
She  calls  her  sister  Morning  to  return, 
And  then  each  darksome  shadow  melts  away. 
Kind  goddess,  be  propitious  to  thy  servants 
Who  at  thy  coming  straightway  seek  repose, 
Like  birds  who  nightly  nestle  in  the  trees. 
Lo  !  men  and  cattle,  flocks  and  winged  creatures, 
And  e'en  the  ravenous  hawks,  have  gone  to  rest. 
Drive  thou  away  from  us,  O  Night,  the  wolf ; 
Drive  thou  away  the  thief,  and  bear  us  safely 
Across  thy  borders.     Then  do  thou,  0  Dawn, 
Like  one  who  clears  away  a  debt,  chase  off 
This  black,  yet  palpable  obscurity, 
Which  came  to  fold  us  in  its  close  embrace. 
Receive,  0  Night,  dark  daughter  of  the  Day, 
My  hymn  of  praise,  which  I  present  to  thee, 
Like  some  rich  offering  to  a  conqueror. 


CHAPTER  II. 

The  Brdhmanas  and  Upanishads. 

Having-  thus  endeavoured  to  gain  an  insight  into  portions 
of  the  Vedic  Mantras,  turn  we  now  to  the  second  division 
of  the  Veda,  called  Brahmana,  or  ritualistic  precept  and 
illustration.  This  division  stands  to  the  Mantra  portion 
in  a  relation  somewhat  resembling  that  of  the  Talmud  to 
the  Mosaic  code,  and  of  the  Hadis  or  Sunna  to  the  Kuran. 
There  is,  however,  a  noteworthy  difference  ;  for  the  Mosaic 
code  alone  contains  the  true  revelation  of  divine  law  for 
the  Jew,  and  the  Kuran  for  Muslims,  whereas  the  Brah- 
manas  are  as  much  Veda  and  Sruti — as  much  revela- 
tion, according  to  the  Hindu  idea  of  revelation — as  the 
Mantras. 

In  fact,  in  their  relation  to  caste  and  the  dominance  of 
the  Brahmans,  these  Brahmanas  are  even  more  important 
than  the  Hymns.  When,  however,  we  are  asked  to  ex- 
plain the  contents  of  the  Brahmanas,  we  find  it  difficult  to 
define  their  nature  accurately.  It  is  usual  to  consider 
them  as  a  body  of  ritualistic  precepts  distributed  under 
two  heads  of  Vidhi  and  Artha-vdda,  that  is,  rules  and 
explanatory  remarks.  They  are  really  a  series  of  rambling 
and  unsystematic  prose  compositions  (the  oldest  of  which 
may  have  been  written  seven  or  eight  centuries  B.C.), 
intended  to  serve  as  ceremonial  directories  for  the  use  of 
the  priests  in  the  exercise  of  their  craft,  prescribing  rules 
for  the  employment  of  the  Mantras  at  sacrifices,  speculat- 
ing as  to  the  meaning  and  effect  of  certain  verses  and 
metres,  and  giving  detailed  explanations   of  the  origin, 

=  4 


THE  BEAHMANA  POETION  OF  THE  VEDA.       25 

import,  and  conduct  of  the  sacrifices,  with  the  occasional 
addition  of  controversial  remarks  (nindd)  and  illustrations 
in  the  shape  of  legends  and  old  stories.  The  great  diffuse- 
ness  of  these  compositions  made  them  practically  useless 
as  directories  to  the  ritual,  until  they  themselves  were 
furnished  with  guides  in  the  form  of  Sutras  or  aphoristic 
rules,  to  be  afterwards  described. 

Each  of  the  collections  of  Mantras  has  its  own  Brah- 
manas.  Thus  the  E,ig-veda  has  the  Aitareya-bramana 
(perhaps  the  oldest)  and  the  Kaushitaki-  (or  Sanrkhayana-) 
brahmana.  The  two  collections  of  the  Yajur-veda  have 
the  Taittiriya-brahmana  and  the  Satapatha  -  brahmana,^ 
which  last,  belonging  to  the  Vajasaneyi-samhita,  is  per- 
haps one  of  the  most  complete  and  interesting  of  these 
productions.  The  Sama-veda  has  eight  Brahmanas,  of 
which  the  best  known  are  the  Praudha  (Panca-vinsa, 
Tandy  a)  and  the  Shad-vinsa.  The  Atharva-veda  has  also 
a  Brahmana,  called  Go-patha.^ 

Though  much  of  the  matter  contained  in  these  treatises 
is  little  better  than  silly  sacerdotalism,  yet  they  furnish 
valuable  materials  to  auy  one  interested  in  tracing  out  the 
growth  of  Brahmauism  and  many  curious  and  interesting 
legends. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  of  these  legends,  as  intro- 
ducing tbe  idea  of  human  sacrifice,  is  called  '  the  Story  of 
Sunahsepa'  in  the  Aitareya-brahmana  ^  (Haug's  edition, 
VII.  13;  cf.  Rig-veda,  I.  24,  12,  &c.,  V.  2.  7).     It  has 


1  Edited,  with  the  Vajasaneyi-samhita,  by  Professor  A.  Weber  of 
Berlin. 

^  This  Brahmana  must,  be  less  ancient  than  others,  as,  according  to 
some,  the  Atharva-veda  was  not  recognized  as  a  part  of  S'ruti,  '  revela- 
tion,' at  the  time  of  the  composition  of  the  more  ancient  Brahmanas. 

3  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson  conjectured  that  this  Brahmana  was 
written  about  six  centuries  B.C.  It  is  sometimes  called  Asvalayana- 
brahmana. 


26  INDIAN   "WISDOM. 

been  well  translated  by  more  than  one  scholar.     I  here 
give  a  metrical  epitome  of  part  of  the  story  :   — 

King  Harisdandra  had  no  son  ;  lie  asked 

Great  Narada,  the  sage,  '  What  benefit 

Comes  from  a  son  ? '  then  Narada  replied — • 

'  A  father  by  his  son  clears  off  a  debt,^ 

In  him  a  self  is  born  from  self.     The  pleasure 

A  father  has  in  his  own  son  exceeds 

All  other  pleasures.     Food  is  life,  apparel 

Is  a  protection,  gold  an  ornament, 

A  loving  wife  the  best  of  friends,  a  daughter 

An  object  of  compassion,^  but  a  son 

Is  like  a  light  sent  from  the  highest  heaven. 

Go  then  to  Varuna,  the  god,  and  say — 

"  Let  but  a  son  be  born,  0  king,  to  me. 

And  I  will  sacrifice  that  son  to  thee." ' 

This  Haris6andra  did,  and  thereupon 

A  son  was  born  to  him,  called  Rohita. 

One  day  the  father  thus  addressed  his  son — 

'  I  have  devoted  thee,  my  son,  to  him 

Who  granted  thee  to  me,  prepare  thyself 

For  sacrifice  to  him.'     The  son  said,  'No,' 

Then  took  his  bow  and  left  his  father's  home. 

The  story  goes  on  to  relate  that  Varuna,  being  disap- 
pointed of  his  promised  victim,  punished  Hariscandra  by 
afflicting  him  with  dropsy.     Meanwhile 

For  six  long  years  did  Harisdandra'sson 

Roam  in  the  forest ;  there  one  day  he  met 

A  famished  Brahman  hermit,  Ajigarta, 

Half  dead  with  hunger  in  the  wilderness. 

The  hermit  was  attended  by  his  wife 

And  three  young  sons ;  then  Rohita  addressed  him — 


1  A  man  is  in  debt  to  his  forefathers  till  he  has  a  son,  because  the 
happiness  of  the  dead  depends  on  certain  ceremonies  (called  S'raddha) 
performed  by  sons. 

■  2  Those  who  have  lived  in  the  East  will  perhaps  understand  why  the 
birth  of  a  daughter  is  here  described  as  a  calamity. 


THE  BKAHMANA  PORTIOH  OF  THE  VEDA.       27 

'  0  Brahman,  I  -will  give  a  hundred  cows 

For  one  of  these  thy  sons.'     The  father  answered — 

Folding  his  arms  around  his  eldest  boy — 

'  I  cannot  part  with  him.'     The  mother  then 

Clung  to  her  youngest  child  and  weeping  said — 

'  I  cannot  part  with  him.'     Then  S'unahsepa, 

Their  second  son,  said,  '  Father,  I  will  go.'  ^ 

So  he  was  purchased  for  a  hundred  cows 

By  Eohita,  who  forthwith  left  the  forest, 

And  taking  him  to  Harisdandra  said — 

'  Father,  this  boy  shall  be  my  substitute.' 

Then  Harisciandra  went  to  Varuna 

And  prayed,  '  Accept  this  ransom  for  my  son.' 

The  god  replied,  '  Let  him  be  sacrificed, 

A  Brahman  is  more  worthy  than  a  Kshatriya. ' 

Upon  that,  the  sacrifice  with  the  intended  victim  was 
prepared.  Four  great  Rishis  officiated,  as  priests,  but  they 
could  not  find  any  one  willing  to  bind  the  boy  to  the 
sacrificial  post.  His  father  Ajigarta,  who  had  followed,  his 
son  to  the  place  of  sacrifice,  then  came  forward  and.  said — 

'  Give  me  a  hundred  cows  and  I  will  bind  him.' 
They  gave  them  to  him,  and  he  bound  the  boy. 
But  now  no  person  would  consent  to  kill  him. 
Then  said  the  father,  '  Give  me  yet  again 

1  The  Brahmana  merely  states  that  they  agreed  together  upon 
selling  the  middle  son.  This  idea  of  the  voluntary  offer  of  himself  on 
the  part  of  S'unahsepa  may,  however,  be  borrowed  from  the  Rama- 
yana,  where  the  story  is  thus  related  (I.  61,  62) : — 

Ambarisha,  king  of  Ayodhya,  performed  a  sacrifice,  but  the  victim 
being  stolen  by  Indra,  he  is  told  by  the  priest  that  either  the  victim 
itself  must  be  recovered,  or  a  human  victim  substituted  in  its  place. 
Ambarisha  wanders  over  the  earth  in  search  of  the  real  victim,  and 
meets  at  last  with  a  Brahman  named  Eidika,  to  whom  he  offers  a 
hundred  thousand  cattle  for  one  of  his  sons.  Ridika  refuses  to  let  his 
eldest  son  go,  and  his  wife  will  not  part  with  the  youngest.  Upon  this 
the  middle  son,  S'unah-sepa,  volunteers  to  go,  and  is  accepted.  When 
about  to  be  offered  up  as  a  sacrifice  he  is  saved  by  Visvamitra,  who 
teaches  him  a  prayer  to  Agni,  and  two  hymns  to  Indra  and  Vishnu. 


2  8  INDIAN  WISDOM. 

Another  hundred  cows  and  I  will  slay  him.' 

Once  more  they  gave  a  hundred,  and  the  father 

Whetted  his  knife  to  sacrifice  his  son. 

Then  said  the  child,  '  Let  me  implore  the  gods, 

Haply  they  will  deliver  me  from  death.' 

So  S'unahsepa  prayed  to  all  the  gods 

With  verses  from  the  Veda,  and  they  heard  him. 

Thus  was  the  boy  released  from  sacrifice. 

And  Harisdandra  was  restored  to  health. 

As  a  sequel  to  the  preceding  legend  I  extract  the  fol- 
lowing curious  passages  from  the  Aitareya-brahmana,  Book 
II.  (Haug,  1-8),  not  in  order,  and  not  quite  literally : — 

The  gods  killed  a  man  for  their  victim.  But  from  him  thus  killed 
the  part  which  was  fit  for  a  sacrifice  went  out  and  entered  a  horse. 
Thence  the  horse  became  an  animal  fit  for  being  sacrificed.  The  gods 
then  killed  the  horse,  but  the  part  fit  for  being  sacrificed  went  out  of 
it  and  entered  an  ox.  The  gods  then  killed  the  ox,  but  the  part  fit  for 
being  sacrificed  went  out  of  it  and  entered  a  sheep.  Thence  it  entered 
a  goat.  The  sacrificial  part  remained  for  the  longest  time  in  the  goat, 
thence  it  became  pre-eminently  fit  for  being  sacrificed.^ 


1  This  is  curious  as  indicating  that  human  sacrifice,  if  it  prevailed  to 
any  extent,  was  superseded  by  the  sacrifice  of  animals,  here  enumerated 
in  the  regular  order  of  their  fitness  for  sacrifice  according  to  some  sup- 
posed inherent  efiicacy  in  each  class.  Such  sacrifices  were  held  to  be 
propitiatory,  though  one  object  of  a  Hindu's  oblations  was  to  afford 
actual  nourishment  to  the  gods,  food  being  a  supposed  necessity  of 
their  being.  The  Asva-medha,  or  '  horse-sacrifice,'  was  a  very  ancient 
ceremony,  hymns  162  and  163  in  Mandala  I.  of  the  Rig-veda  being 
used  at  this  rite.  It  was  regarded  as  the  chief  of  all  animal  sacrifices, 
and  in  later  times  its  efiicacy  was  so  exaggerated  that  a  hundred  horse- 
sacrifices  entitled  the  sacrificer  to  displace  Indra  from  the  dominion 
of  heaven.  Some  think  that  the  horse  was  not  actually  immolated, 
but  merely  bound  to  the  post.  Mr.  Hardwick,  in  his  valuable  work, 
'  Christ  and  other  Masters,'  gives  some  interesting  remarks  on  the 
five  heads  of  Hindu  sacrifices  (vol.  i.  p.  324).  The  five  heads  are — 
I.  Agni-hotra,  burnt-offerings  and  libations  of  butter  on  fire  every 
morning  and  evening  (see  p.  121  );  2,  DarsapHrnamdsa,  half-monthly 
sacrifices  at  new  and  full  moon ;  3.   Cdturmdsya,  sacrifices  every  four 


THE  BEAHMAKA  PORTION  OP  THE  VEDA.       29 

The  gods  went  up  to  heaven  by  means  of  sacrifice.  They  were 
afraid  that  men  and  sages,  after  having  seen  their  sacrifice,  might 
inquire  how  they  could  obtain  some  knowledge  of  sacrificial  rites  and 
follow  them.  They  therefore  debarred  them  by  means  of  the  Ytipa 
(or  post  to  which  the  victim  was  fastened),  turning  its  point  down- 
wards. Thereupon  the  men  and  sages  dug  the  post  out  and  turned 
its  point  upwards.  Thus  they  became  aware  of  the  sacrifice  and 
reached  the  heavenly  world. 

The  following  lines  may  serve  to  give  an  outline  of 
another  curious  legend  in  the  Aitareya-brahmana  (Haug's 
edition,  I.  23),  written  perhaps  seven  or  eight  centuries 
B.C. : — 

The  gods  and  demons,  were  engaged  in  warfare. 

The  evil  demons,  like  to  mighty  kings, 

Made  these  worlds  castles ;  then  they  formed  the  earth 

Into  an  iron  citadel,  the  air 

Into  a  silver  fortress,  and  the  sky 

Into  a  fort  of  gold.     Whereat  the  gods 

Said  to  each  other,  '  Frame  we  other  worlds 

In  opposition  to  these  fortresses.' 

Then  they  constructed  sacrificial  places. 

Where  they  performed  a  triple  burnt  oblation. 

By  the  first  sacrifice  they  drove  the  demons 

Out  of  their  earthly  fortress,  by  the  second 

Out  of  the  air,  and  by  the  third  oblation 

Out  of  the  sky.     Thus  were  the  evil  spirits 

Chased  by  the  gods  in  triumph  from  the  worlds. 

I  next  give  a  metrical  version  of  part  of  a  well-known 
legend  in  the  Satapatha-brahmana  (Professor  Weber's  edi- 
tion, I.  8.  I.  i),  which  represents  the  Indo- Aryan  tradition 
of  the  flood  as  it  existed  in  India  many  centuries  before 
the  Christian  era,  perhaps  not  much  later  than  the  time 
of  David : 

months ;  4.  Aiva-medha  and  paiii-yajna,  sacrifices  of  animals ;  5.  Soma- 
yajna,  offerings  and  libations  of  the  juice  of  the  Soma  or  moon-plant 
(to  Indra  especially).  Goats  are  still  offered  to  Kali,  but  Buddhism 
tended  to  abohsh  animal  sacrifice  in  India. 


30  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

There  lived  in  ancient  time  a  holy  man, 
Called  ManUji  who  by  penances  and  prayers 
Had  won  the  favour  of  the  lord  of  heaven. 
One  day  they  brought  him  water  for  ablution  ; 
Then,  as  he  washed  his  hands,  a  little  fish 
Appeared  and  spoke  in  human  accents  thus — 
'  Take  care  of  me  and  I  will  be  thy  saviour.' 
'  From  what  wilt  thou  preserve  me  ? '  Manu  asked. 
The  fish  replied,  '  A  flood  will  sweep  away 
All  creatures,  I  will  rescue  thee  from  that.' 
'  But  how  shall  I  preserve  thee  ? '  Manu  said. 
The  fish  rejoined,  '  So  long  as  we  are  small 
We  are  in  constant  danger  of  destruction ; 
For  fish  eats  fish ;  so  keep  me  in  a  jar ; 
When  I  outgrow  the  jar,  then  dig  a  trench 
And  place  me  there ;  when  I  outgrow  the  trench, 
Then  take  me  to  the  ocean,  I  shall  then 
Be  out  of  reach  of  danger.'     Having  thus 
Instructed  Manu,  straightway  rapidly 
The  fish  grew  larger ;  then  he  spake  again — 
'  In  such  and  such  a  year  the  flood  will  come ; 
Therefore  construct  a  ship  and  pay  me  homage. 
When  the  flood  rises,  enter  thou  the  ship, 
And  I  will  rescue  thee.'     So  Manu  did 
As  he  was  ordered,  and  preserved  the  fish. 
Then  carried  it  in  safety  to  the  ocean ; 
And  in  the  very  year  the  fish  enjoined 
He  built  a  ship  and  paid  the  fish  respect. 
And  there  took  refuge  when  the  flood  arose. 
Soon  near  him  swam  the  fish,  and  to  its  horn 
Manu  made  fast  the  cable  of  his  vessel. 
Thus  drawn  along  the  waters'  Manu  passed 
Beyond  the  northern  mountain.     Then  the  fish, 
Addressing  Manu,  said,  '  I  have  preserved  thee ; 
Quickly  attach  the  ship  to  yonder  tree. 
But,  lest  the  waters  sink  from  under  thee ; 

1  According  to  the  later  mythology  this  Manu  was  not  the  first 
Manu,  held  to  be  the  author  of  the  well-known  Code,  but  the  seventh 
or  Manu  (Vaivasvata)  of  the  present  period,  regarded  as  a  progenitor 
of  the  human  race,  and  represented  as  conciliating  the  favour  of  the 
Supreme  Being  by  his  piety  in  an  age  of  universal  depravity. 


THE    UPANISHADS.  3  I 

As  fast  as  they  subside,  so  fast  shalt  thou' 

Descend  the  mountain  gently  after  them.' 

Thus  he  descended  from  the  northern  mountain. 

The  iiood  had  swept  away  all  living  creatures ; 

Manu  alone  was  left.     Wishing  for  offspring, 

He  earnestly  performed  a  sacrifice. 

In  a  year's  time  a  female  was  produced. 

She  came  to  Manu,  then  he  said  to  her, 

'  Who  art  thou  ? '     She  replied,  '  I  am  thy  daughter.' 

He  said,  '  How,  lovely  lady,  can  that  be  1 ' 

'  I  came  forth,'  she  rejoined,  '  from  thine  oblations 

Cast  on  the  waters ;  thou  wilt  find  in  me 

A  blessing,  use  me  in  the  sacrifice.' 

With  her  he  worshipped  and  with  toilsome  zeal 

Performed  religious  rites,  hoping  for  offspring. 

Thus  were  created  men,  called  sons  of  Manu. 

Whatever  benediction  he  implored 

With  her,  was  thus  vouchsafed  in  full  abundance. 

We  shall  see  hereafter  that  the  fish  which  figures  in  this 
story  is  declared,  in  the  Mahabharata,  to  be  an  incarnation 
of  Brahma,  the  creator,  who  assumed  this  form  to  preserve 
the  pious  Manu  from  perishing  in  the  waters. 

The  Brahmanas  express  belief  in  a  future  life  more  posi- 
tively than  the  Mantras.  They  also  assert  that  a  recom- 
pense awaits  all  beings  in  the  next  world  according  to 
their  conduct  in  this.  But  the  doctrine  of  transmio-ration. 
which  became  afterwards  an  essential  element  of  the  Hindu 
religion,  is  not  developed.-^  There  is  a  remarkable  passage 
in  the  Satapatha-brahmana  (X.  4.  3.  9),  some  idea  of  which 
may  be  gained  from  the  following  lines  : — 

The  gods  lived  constantly  in  dread  of  death — 
The  mighty  Ender — so  with  toilsome  rites 
They  worshipped  and  performed  religious  acts 
Till  they  became  immortal.     Then  the  Ender 
Said  to  the  gods,  '  As  ye  have  made  yourselves 

^  See  the  third  of  Professor  Weber's  Indische  Streifen,  and  compare 
note  2,  p.  56. 


32  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Imperishable,  so  will  men  endeavour 

To  free  themselves  from  me ;  what  portion  then 

Shall  I  possess  in  man  ? '     The  gods  replied, 

'  Henceforth  no  being  shall  become  immortal 

In  his  own  body  ;  this  his  mortal  frame 

Shalt  thou  stiU  seize ;  this  shall  remain  thy  own. 

He  who  through  knowledge  or  religious  works 

Henceforth  attains  to  immortality 

Shall  first  present  his  body.  Death,  to  thee.' 

I  add  one  other  passage  extracted  from  the  Aitareya- 
brahmana  (Dr.Haug's  edition,  III.  44) : — 

The  sun  never  sets  nor  rises.  When  people  think  to  themselves  the 
sun  is  setting,  he  only  changes  about  (viparyasyate)  after  reaching  the 
end  of  the  day,  and  makes  night  below  and  day  to  what  is  on  the  other 
side.  Then  when  people  think  he  rises  in  the  morning,  he  only  shifts 
himself  about  after  reaching  the  end  of  the  night,  and  makes  day  below 
and  night  to  what  is  on  the  other  side.  In  fact,  he  never  does  set  at 
all.  Whoever  knows  this,  that  the  sun  never  sets,  enjoys  union  and 
sameness  of  nature  with  him  and  abides  in  the  same  sphere.  [Atha  yad 
enam  prdtar  udetlti  manyante  rdtrer  eva  tad  antam  itvd  atha  atmdnam 
viparyasyate,  ahar  eva  avastdt  hirute  rdtrvm  parastat.  Sa  vai  esha  na 
haddcana  nimrocati.  Na  ha  vai  kaddcana  nimrooaty  etasya  ha  sdyujyam 
sarupatdm  saloJcatdm  asnute  ya  evam  veda.\ 

We  may  close  the  subject  of  the  Brahmanas  by  paying  a 
tribute  of  respect  to  the  acuteness  of  the  Hindii  mind,  which 
seems  to  have  made  some  shrewd  astronomical  guesses 
more  than  2000  years  before  the  birth  of  Copernicus. 

The  Upanishads. 

I  come  now  to  the  third  division  of  tbe  Veda,  called 
Upanishad,  or  mystical  doctrine  (rahasya).  The  title  Upa- 
nishad  (derived  from  the  root  sad  with  the  prepositions 
upa  and  w^)  may  imply  either  something  mystical  that 

^  According  to  some  authorities,  upa-ni-shad  means  '  to  set  ignorance 
at  rest  by  revealing  the  knowledge  of  the  supreme  spirit ; '  according 
to  others,  it  means  '  to  sit  down  at  the  feet  of  a  teacher  so  as  to  learn 
from  Mm  his  most  secret  doctrines.' 


THE   UPANISHADS.  33 

underlies  the  surface,  or  the  esoteric  doctrine  taught  to  a 
pupil  who  sits  near  his  master.  Whatever  may  be  the  true 
meaning  of  the  word,  these  Upanishads  do  in  fact  lie  at  the 
root  of  what  may  be  called  the  philosophical  side  of  Hin- 
duism. Not  only  are  they  as  much  sruti,  or  revelation,  as 
the  Mantra  and  Brahmana,  but  they  are  practically  the  only 
Veda  of  all  thoughtful  .Hindus  in  the  present  day. 

There  appear,  in  real  truth,  to  be  two  sides  to  almost 
every  religious  system.  Perhaps  the  one  jreligion  of  the 
world  that  offers  the  same  doctrines  both  to  the  learned 
and  unlearned  is  Christianity.  Its  deeper  truths  may  be 
mysteries,  but  they  are  not  restricted  to  any  single  class 
of  men  ;  they  are  open  to  the  reception  of  all,  and  offered 
equally  to  the  apprehension  of  all.  The  case  is  different 
with  other  religions.  We  know  that  the  Greeks  and 
Eomans  had  their  so-called  mysteries  reserved  only  for  the 
initiated.  We  have  all  heard  of  Esoteric  Buddhism,  Occult- 
ism, and  Theosophy.  Even  the  Kuran  is  held  to  possess  an 
exoteric  or  evident  meaning  called  zahr,  and  an  esoteric, 
deeper  significance  called  "batn ;  and  in  later  times  a  mys- 
tical system  of  pantheistic  philosophy  called  Sufi-ism  was 
developed  in  Persia  out  of  this  esoteric  teaching. 

Very  similar  too  is  the  Hindi!  idea  of  Veda  or  sacred 
knowledge.  It  is  said  to  possess  two  quite  distinct 
branches.  The  first  is  called  Karma-kanda,  which,  embrac- 
ing both  Mautra  and  Brahmana,  is  for  that  vast  majority 
of  persons  who  are  unable  to  conceive  of  religion  except  as 
a  process  of  laying  up  merit  by  external  rites.  For  these 
the  one  God,  although  really  without  form,  assumes  various 
forms  with  the  sole  object  of  lowering  himself  to  the  level 
of  human  understandings.  The  second  branch  of  the  Veda, 
on  the  other  hand,  is  called  Jnana-kanda,  and  is  reserved 
for  that  select  few  who  are  capable  of  the  true  knowledge.-^ 

1  The  one  implies  action,  the  other  cessation  from  all  action.  This 
division  of  the  Veda  is  recognised  by  Manu,  see  XII.  88. 


34  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

What  then,  it  will  be  asked,  is  this  true  knowledge  ? 
The  answer  is,  that  the  creed  of  the  man  who  is  said  to 
possess  the  true  Veda  is  singularly  simple.  He  believes 
in  the  unity  of  all  being.  In  other  words,  that  there  is 
but  one  real  Being  in  the  universe,  which  Being  also  con- 
stitutes the  universe.  This,  it  will  be  said,  is  simple  pan- 
theism, but  it  is  at  least  a  pantheism  of  a  very  spiritual 
kind  ;  for  this  one  Being  is  thought  of  as  the  great  universal 
Spirit,  the  only  really  existing  Soul,  with  which  all  seem- 
ingly existing  material  substances  are  identified,  and  into 
which  the  separate  souls  of  men,  falsely  regarded  as  ema- 
nations from  it,  must  be  ultimately  merged. 

This,  then,  is  the  pantheistic  doctrine  everywhere  trace- 
able in  some  of  the  more  ancient  Upanishads,  though  often 
wrapped  up  in  mystic  language  and  fantastic  allegory.  A 
list  of  about  150  of  these  treatises  has  been  given,  but 
the  absence  of  all  trustworthy  historical  records  in  India 
makes  it  impossible  to  fix  the  date  of  any  of  them  with 
certainty.  Some  of  the  more  ancient,  however,  may  be 
as  old  as  500  years  before  Christ.  These  are  appended  to 
the  Aranyakas — ^certain  chapters  of  the  Brahmanas  so  awe- 
inspiring  and  obscure  that  they  were  required  to  be  read 
in  the  solitude  of  forests.  Properly  each  Brahmana  had 
its  Aranyakas,  but  the  mystical  doctrines  they  contained 
were  so  mixed  up  with  extraneous  subjects  that  the  chap- 
ters called  Upanishads  appear  to  have  been  added  with 
the  object  of  investigating  more  definitely  such  abstruse 
problems  as  the  origin  of  the  universe,  the  nature  of  deity, 
the  nature  of  the  soul,  and  the  reciprocal  connection  of 
spirit  and  matter. 

It  is  interesting  to  trace  the  rudiments  of  the  later 
philosophy  amid  the  labyrinth  of  mystic  language,  fanciful 
etymologies,  far- fetched  analogies,  and  puerile  conceits 
which  bewilder  the  reader  of  the  Upauishads.  Moreover, 
it  is  instructive  to  mark  the  connection  of  these  treatises 


THE   UPANISHADS.  35 

witli  the  Brahmanas,  manifested  by  the  frequent  intro- 
duction of  legendary  matter  and  allusions  to  sacrificial 
rites.  The  language  of  both,  though  occasionally  archaic, 
is  less  so  than  that  of  the  Mantras,  and  difiers  little  from 
classical  Sanskrit. 

The  following  are  some  of  the  most  important  Upa- 
nishads : — the  Aitareya  Upanishad  and  Kaushitaki-brah- 
mana  Upanishad  ^  of  the  Rig-veda  ;  the  Taittiriyti  belonging 
to  the  Taittiriya,  or  Black  Yajur-veda  ;  the  Brihad- 
aranyaka  attached  to  the  Satapatha-brahmana  of  the 
Vajasaneyin,  or  White  Yajur-veda,  and  the  Isa  or  Isavasya 
forming  an  actual  part  (the  40th  chapter)  of  the  Va- 
jasaneyin (this  being  the  only  instance  of  an  Upanishad 
attached  to  the  Mantra  rather  than  to  the  Brahmana 
portion  of  a  Veda) ;  the  Ohandogya  and  Kena  -  belonging 
to  the  Sama-veda ;  the  Prasna,  Mundaka,  Mandukya,  and 
Katha  belonging  to  the  Atharva-veda.  In  some  of  these 
works  (written  generally  in  prose  in  the  form  of  dialogues, 
with  occasional  variations  in  verse)  striking  thoughts,  ori- 
ginal ideas,  and  lofty  sentiments  may  be  found  scattered 
here  and  there,  as  I  hope  now  to  show.  I  commence  my 
examples  with  a  nearly  literal  translation  of  about  half  of 
a  very  short  Upanishad — the  Isa  : ' — 

Whate'er  exists  within  this  universe 

Is  all  to  be  regarded  as  enveloped 

By  the  great  Lord  (ISd  from  Is),  as  if  wrapped  in  a  vesture. 

Renounce,  O  man,  the  world,  and  covet  not 

Another's  wealth,  so  shalt  thou  save  thy  soul. 

Perform  religious  works,  so  may'st  thou  wish 

To  live  a  hundred  years ;  in  this  way  only 


^  Edited  and  translated  for  the  Bibliotheca  Indica  by  Professor 
Cowell. 

^  Also  called  Talava-kara,  and  also  assigned  to  the  Atharva-veda. 

2  This  has  been  well  edited  and  translated  into  prose  by  Dr.  Rder. 
Sir  W.  Jones  translated  the  Isa,  but  by  no  means  literally. 


36  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

May'st  thou  engage  in  worldly  acts,  untainted. 
To  worlds  immersed  in  darkness,  tenanted 
By  evil  spirits,  shall  they  go  at  death, 
Who  in  this  life  are  killers  of  their  souls. 
There  is  one  only  Being  who  exists 
Unmoved,  yet  moving  swifter  than  the  mind  ; 
Who  far  outstrips  the  senses,  though  as  gods 
They  strive  to  reach  him ;  who  himself  at  rest 
Transcends  the  fleetest  flight  of  other  beings ; 
Who,  like  the  air,  supports  all  vital  action. 
He  moves,  yet'  moves  not ;  he  is  far,  yet  near ; 
He  is  within  this  universe,  and  yet 
Outside  this  universe ;  whoe'er  beholds 
All  living  creatures  as  in  him,  and  him — 
The  universal  Spirit — as  in  all. 
Henceforth  regards  no  creature  with  contempt. 
The  man  who  understands  that  every  creature 
Exists  in  God  alone,  and  thus  perceives 
The  unity  of  being,  has  no  grief 
And  no  illusion.     He,  the  all-pervading. 
Is  brilliant,  without  body,  sinewless, 
Invulnerable,  pure,  and  undefiled 
By  taint  of  sin.     He  also  is  all- wise, 
The  Ruler  of  the  mind,  above  all  beings, 
The  Self-existent.     He  created  all  things 
Just  as  they  are  from  all  eternity. 

Next  we  may  pass  to  a  few  passages  selected  from 
different  portions  of  the  Brihad-aranyaka  Upanishad — a 
long  and  tedious  but  important  work  : — 

In  this  universe  there  was  not  anything  at  first  distinguishable. 
But  indeed  it  was  enveloped  by  Death,  and  Death  is  Voracity — that  is 
to  say,  the  desire  to  devour  (I.  2.  i). 

As  the  web  issues  from  the  spider,  as  little  sparks  proceed  from  fire, 
so  from  the  one  Soul  proceed  all  breathing  animals,  all  worlds,  all  the 
gods,  and  all  beings  (II.  i,  20). 

Being  in  this  world  we  may  know  the  Supreme  Spirit ;  if  there  be 
ignorance  of  him,  then  complete  death  ensues ;  those  who  know  him 
become  immortal  (IV.  4.  14). 


THE    UPANISHADS.  37 

When  a  person  regards  his  own  soul  as  truly  God,  as  the  lord  of 
what  was  and  is  to  be,  then  he  does  not  wish  to  conceal  himself  from 
that  Soul  (IV.  4.  15). 

That  Soul  the  gods  adore  as  the  light  of  lights  {jyotishdm  jyotih), 
and  as  the  immortal  life  (IV.  4.  16). 

Those  who  know  him  as  the  life  of  life,  the  eye  of  the  eye,  the  ear  of 
the  ear,  and  the  mind  of  the  mind,  have  comprehended  the  eternal 
pre-existing  Spirit  (IV.  4.  18). 

By  the  mind  is  he  to  be  perceived,  in  him  there  is  no  variation. 
Whoever  sees  variation  in  him  obtains  death  after  death  (IV.  4.  19). 

Infinitely  full  (or  pervasive)  is  that  Spirit  (regarded  as  independent 
of  all  relation) ;  infinite  too  is  this  Spirit  (in  his  relations  and  attri- 
butes). From  the  infinite  is  drawn  out  the  infinite.  On  taking  the 
infinite  from  the  infinite,  there  remains  the  infinite  (V.  i). 

'I  am  Brahma.'  Whoever  knows  this,  'I  am  Brahma,'  knows 
all.  Even  the  gods  are  unable  to  prevent  his  becoming  Brahma 
(I.  4.  10). 

Man  indeed  is  like  a  lofty  tree,  the  lord  of  the  forest.  His  hair  is 
like  the  leaves,  his  skin  the  external  bark.  From  his  skin  flows  blood 
as  sap  from  the  bark ;  it  issues  from  his  wounded  body  like  sap  from  a 
stricken  tree.  If  a  tree  be  cut  down,  it  springs  up  anew  from  the 
root.  From  what  root  does  mortal  man  grow  again  when  hewn  down 
by  death?  [Cf.  Job  xiv.  7-10.]  The  root  is  Brahma,  who  is  know- 
ledge and  bliss  (III.  9.  28). 

The  Chandogya  Upanishad  of  the  Sama-veda  has  some 
iuteresting  passages.  la  the  seventh  chapter  occurs  a 
dialogue  between  Narada  and  Sanat-kumara,  in  which  the 
latter,  in  explaining  the  nature  of  God,  asserts  that  a 
knowledge  of  the  four  Vedas,  Itihasas,  Puranas,  and  such 
works,  is  useless  without  the  knowledge  of  Brahma,  the 
universal  Spirit  (VII.  i.  4): — 

The  knowledge  of  these  works  is  a  mere  name.  Speech  is  greater 
than  this  name.  Mind  than  Speech,  Will  than  Mind,  Sensation  (or  the 
capacity  of  feeling)  is  greater  than  Mind,  Eeflection  is  higher  than 
Sensation,  Knowledge  than  Eeflection,  Power  than  Knowledge,  and 


38  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

highest  of  all  stands  Prana  or  Life.     As  the  spokes  of  a  wheel  are 
attached  to  the  nave,  so  are  all  things  attached  to  Life.^ 

This  Life  ought  to  be  approached  with  faith  and  reverence,  and 
viewed  as  an  Immensity  which  abides  in  its  own  glory.  That  immen- 
sity extends  from  above  and  from  below,  from  behind  and  from  before, 
from  the  south  and  from  the  north.  It  is  the  Soul  of  the  universe. 
It  is  God  himself.  The  man  who  is  conscious  of  this  divinity  incurs 
neither  disease,  nor  pain,  nor  death. 

But  lest  the  deity  might  from  this  description  be  con- 
founded with  space,  it  is  afterwards  stated  that  be  is 
inconceivably  minute,  dwelling  in  a  minute  chamber  of 
the  heart ;  and  lest  this  should  lead  to  the  notion  of  his 
being  finite,  he  is  afterwards  declared  to  be  the  Envelope 
of  all  creation. 

In  another  part  of  the  work  (VI.  lo)  human  souls  are 
compared  to  rivers  : — 

These  rivers  proceed  from  the  East  towards  the  West,  thence  from 
the  ocean  they  rise  in  the  form  of  vapour,  and  dropping  again  they 
flow  towards  the  South  and  merge  into  the  ocean. 

Again  (VIII.  4),  the  supreme  Soul  is  compared  to  a 
bridge  which  cannot  be  crossed  by  disease,  death,  grief, 
virtue,  or  vice  : — 

Crossing  this  bridge,  the  blind  cease  to  be  blind,  the  wounded  to  be 
wounded,  the  afflicted  to  be  afflicted,  and  on  crossing  this  bridge  nights 
become  days;  for  ever-refulgent  is  the  region  of  the  universal  Spirit. 

Here  is  a  portion  of  a  passage  in  the  Chandogya  Upani- 
sbad  (VI.  2)  which  has  some  celebrity  as  containing  the 
well-known  Vedantist  formula  eham  evddvitlyatn : — 

In  the  beginning  there  was  the  mere  state  of  being  {jh  o») — one  only 
without  a  second.    Some,  however,  say  that  in  the  beginning  there  was 

1  Cf.  the  hymn  to  Prana,  Atharva-veda,  XI.  4  (Muir's  Texts, .vol.  v. 
p.  394).  It  begins  thus,  '  Reverence  to  Prana,  to  whom  this  universe 
is  subject,  who  has  become  the  lord  of  all,  on  whom  all  is  supported.' 
The  text  of  this  Veda  has  been  edited  in  a  masterly  manner  by  Pro- 
fessors W.  D.  Whitney  and  R  Roth. 


THE   TJPANISHADS.  39 

the  state  of  non-being  (to  firj  o»)— one  only  without  a  second.  Hence  out 
of  a  state  of  non-being  would  proceed  a  state  of  being.  But,  of  a  truth, 
how  can  this  be  ?  How  can  being  (rJ  on)  proceed  out  of  non-being  ?  In 
the  beginning,  then,  there  was  the  mere  state  of  being — one  only  with- 
out a  second.  It  willed,i  'I  shall  multiply  and  be  born.'  It  created 
heat.  That  heat  willed,  '  I  shall  multiply  and  be  born.'  It  created 
water.  The  water  willed,  '  I  shall  multiply  and  be  born.'  It  created 
aliment.  Therefore,  wherever  rain  falls  much  aliment  is  produced. 
That  deity  willed,  '  Entering  these  three  divinities  in  a  living  form,  I 
shall  develop  name  and  form.' 

In  the  Mundaka  Upanishad  ^  there  are  some  interesting 
passages.  The  following  is  from  the  second  section  of  the 
second  Mundaka  (5) : — 

Know  him,  the  Spirit,  to  be  one  alone.  Give  up  all  words  contrary 
to  this.     He  is  the  bridge  of  immortality. 

The  following  remarkable  passage  from  the  third  Mun- 
daka (i.  1-3)  is  quoted  by  the  San-khyas  in  support  of 
their  doctrine  of  a  duality  of  principle,  but  is  also  appealed 
to  by  Vedantists.  It  rests  on  a  Mantra  of  the  Rig-veda 
(T.  164.  20),  explained  by  Sayana  in  a  Vedantic  sense  :^ — 

1  I  follow  Dr.  Rber.  Subjoined  are  divided  Sanskrit  words  of 
the  fragment  taken  from  the  original  text : — Sad  eva  idam  agre  dsld, 
ekam  eva  advitlyam.  Tad  ha  elce  ahur  asad  eva  idam  agre  dsid,  eltam 
eva  advitlyam,  tasmdd  asatah  saj  jdijeta.  Kutas  tu  Jchalu  sydd  iti, 
katham  asatah  saj  jdyeta  iti.  Sat  tv  eva  idam  agre  dsid  ekam  eva 
advitlyam.  Tad  aikshata  bahu  sydm  prajdyeya  iti,  tat  tejo  asrijata. 
Tat  teja  aikshata  hahu  sydm  prajdyeya  iti,  tad  apo  asrijata.  Td  dpa 
aikshanta  bahvah  sydma  prajdyemahi  iti  td  annam  asrijanta.  Tasmdd 
yatra  kva  ca  varshati  tad  eva  bhUyishtham  annam  hhavati.  Sd  iyam 
devatd  aikshata,  aham  imds  tisro  devatd  jlvena  dtmand  anupravisya 
ndma-rupe  vydkaravdni  iti. 

2  The  name  Mundaka  is  derived  from  Mund,  '  to  shave,'  because  he 
who  understands  the  doctrine  of  this  Upanishad  is  'shorn'  of  all  error. 

^  Subjoined  is  the  Mantra  : — Dvd  suparnd  sayujd  sakhdyd  samdnam 
vriksham  parishasvajdte,  Tayor  anyah  pippalam  svddv  atty  an-asnann 
anyo  abhicdkasiti,  '  two  birds  associated  together  as  friends  inhabit  the 
same  tree.     The  one  of  them  tastes  the  sweet  fig,  the  other  looks  on 


40  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Two  birds  (the  Paramatman  and  Jivatman  or  supreme  and  individual 
souls)  always  united,  of  the  same  name,  occupy  the  same  tree  (abide  in 
the  same  body).  One  of  them  (the  Jivatman)  enjoys  the  sweet  fruit  of 
the  fig  (or  fruit  of  acts),  the  other  looks  on  as  a  witness.  Dwelling  on 
the  same  tree  (with  the  supreme  Soul),  the  deluded  (individual)  soul, 
immersed  (in  worldly  relations),  is  grieved  by  the  want  of  power;  but 
when  it  perceives  the  Ruler,  separate  (from  worldly  relations)  and  his 
glory,  then  its  grief  ceases.  When  the  beholder  sees  the  golden-coloured 
maker  (of  the  world),  the  lord,  the  soul,  the  source  of  Brahma,  then 
having  become  wise,  shaking  ofE  virtue  and  vice,  without  taint  of  any 
kind,  he  obtains  the  highest  identity  (Rber's  edition,  p.  305). 

Here  are  two  or  three  other  examples  from  the  same 
Upanishad  : — 

As  the  spider  casts  out  and  draws  in  (its  web),  as  from  a  living  man 
the  hairs  of  the  head  and  body  spring  forth,  so  is  produced  the  universe 
from  the  indestructible  Spirit  (I.  i.  7). 

As  from  a  blazing  fire  consubstantial  sparks  proceed  in  a  thousand 
ways,  so  from  the  imperishable  (Spirit)  various  living  souls  are  produced, 
and  they  return  to  him  too  (II.  i.  i). 

As  flowing  rivers  are  resolved  into  the  sea,  losing  their  names  and 
forms,  so  the  wise,  freed  from  name  and  form,  pass  into  the  divine 
Spirit,  which  is  greater  than  the  great.  He  who  knows  that  supreme 
Spirit  becomes  spirit  (III.  2.  8,  9). 

One  of  the  most  ancient  and  important  Upanishads  is 
the  Katha.  It  enjoys  considerable  reputation  in  India, 
and  is  also  well  known  by  Sanskrit  students  in  Europe. 
It  opens  with  the  story  of  Naciketas. 

without  enjoying.'  S'an-kara,  commenting  on  the  Upanishad,  explains 
sakhdyd  by  samdna-lchydtau,  '  of  the  same  name.'  He  also  remarks  that 
the  Pippala  or  Asvattha,  '  holy  fig-tree,'  having  roots  above  and  branches 
bent  downwards,  is  allegorical,  and  that  each  tree,  springing  from  an 
unperceived  root,  is  emblematic  of  the  body,  which  really  springs  from 
and  is  one  with  Brahma.  In  the  Katha  VI.  i  and  Bhagavad-gita  XV. 
1-3  the  same  tree  is  said  to  typify  the  universe.  It  is  supposed  to  be 
the  male  of  the  Vata  or  Banyan  (Ficus  Indica). 


THE   UPANISHADS.  4 1 

He  was  the  pious  son  of  a  sage  who  had  given  all  his 
property  to  the  priests,  and  who,  in  a  fit  of  irritation, 
devoted  his  son  to  Death. 

Naciketas  is  described  as  going  to  Death's  abode,  and 
there,  having  propitiated  Yama,  he  is  told  to  choose  three 
boons.  The  youth  chose,  for  the  first  boon,  that  he  might 
be  restored  to  life  and  see  his  reconciled  father  once  more ; 
for  the  second,  that  he  might  know  the  fire  by  which 
heaven  is  gained.  When  asked  to  name  the  third  boon, 
he  addresses  the  god  of  death  thus,— 

Some  say  the  soul  exists  after  death,  others  say  it  does  not  exist. 
I  request,  as  my  third  boon,  that  I  may  be  instructed  by  thee  in  the 
true  answer  to  this  question. 

Death  tries  to  put  him  off,  entreating  him  to  choose  any 
other  boon  than  this  ;  but  the  youth  persisting  in  his 
demand  to  be  enlightened  as  to  the  mysteries  of  the  next 
world,  Yama  at  length  gives  way  and  enlarges  upon  the 
desired  theme  in  the  following  manner  (Valli  II.) : — 

The  good,  the  pleasant,  these  are  separate  ends, 

The  one  or  other  all  mankind  pursue ; 

But  those  who  seek  the  good,  alone  are  blest ; 

Who  choose  the  pleasant  miss  man's  highest  aim. 

The  sage  the  truth  discerns,  not  so  the  fool. 

But  thou,  my  son,  with  wisdom  hast  abandoned 

The  fatal  road  of  wealth  that  leads  to  death. 

Two  other  roads  there  are  all  wide  apart, 

Ending  in  widely  different  goals — the  one 

Called  ignorance,  the  other  knowledge — this, 

0  Na6iketas,  thou  dost  well  to  choose. 

The  foolish  follow  ignorance,  but  think 

They  tread  the  road  of  wisdom,  circling  round 

With  erring  steps,  like  blind  men  led  by  blind. 

The  careless  youth,  by  lust  of  gain  deceived. 

Knows  but  one  world,  one  life ;  to  him  the  Now 

Alone  exists,  the  Future  is  a  dream. 

The  highest  aim  of  knowledge  is  the  soul ; 

This  is  a  miracle,  beyond  the  ken 


42  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Of  common  mortals,  thought  of  though  it  be, 
And  variously  explained  by  skilful  teachers. 
Who  gains  this  knowledge  is  a  marvel  too. 
He  lives  above  the  cares — the  griefs  and  joys 
Of  time  and  sense — seeking  to  penetrate 
The  fathomless  unborn  eternal  essence. 
The  slayer  thinks  he  slays,  the  slain 
Believes  himself  destroyed,  the  thoughts  of  both 
Are  false,  the  soul  survives,  nor  kills,  nor  dies ; 
'Tis  subtler  than  the  subtlest,  greater  than 
The  greatest,  infinitely  small,  yet  vast. 
Asleep,  yet  restless,  moving  everywhere 
Among  the  bodies — ever  bodiless — 
Think  not  to  grasp  it  by  the  reasoning  mind  ; 
The  wicked  ne'er  can  know  it ;  soul  alone 
Knows  soul,  to  none  but  soul  is  soul  revealed. 

In  the  third  Valli  (3,  4,  &c.)  of  the  same  Upanishad  the 
soul  is  compared  to  a  rider  in  a  chariot,  the  body  being 
the  chariot,  the  intellect  the  charioteer,  the  mind  the 
reins,  the  passions  or  senses  the  horses,  and  the  objects  of 
sense  the  roads.  The  unwise  man  neglects  to  apply  the 
reins  ;  in  consequence  of  which  the  passions,  like  unre- 
strained vicious  horses,  rush  about  hither  and  thither, 
carrying  the  charioteer  wherever  they  please.'' 

In  the  fifth  Valli  (11)  the  following  sentiment  occurs  : — 

As  the  sun,  the  eye  of  the  whole  world,  is  not  sullied  by  the  defects  of 
the  (human)  eye  or  of  external  objects,  so  the  inner  soul  of  all  beings  is 
not  sullied  by  the  misery  of  the  world. 


1  Compare  Manu  II.  88,  '  In  the  restraint  of  the  organs  running  wild 
among  objects  of  sense,  which  hurry  him  away  hither  and  thither,  a  wise 
man  should  make  diligent  effort,  like  a  charioteer  restraining  restive 
steeds.'  So  Plato  in  the  Phaedrus  (54,  74)  compares  the  soul  to  a 
charioteer  (the  reason)  driving  a  pair  of  winged  steeds,  one  of  which  (the 
will)  is  obedient  to  the  rein,  and  tries  to  control  its  wild  and  vicious  yoke- 
fellow (the  appetite)  :  Tp'xfi  i'^i'^oiJ.rii  -^'oxv  £.taffrjj»,  i^-jro/jiopcjita  /j,h  tSdo  Tin 
i'ldri,  ^Mo^/ico»  d'e  li&og  rpirov,  x.  r.  a. 


THE   TJPANISHADS.  43 

I  now  add  a  few  extracts  from  one  of  the  most  moderu 
of  these  treatises,  called  Svetasvatara/  which  may  serve 
to  show  how  epithets  of  the  Supreme  Being  are  heaped 
together  by  the  writers  of  the  Upanishads  without  much 
order  and  often  with  apparent  contradiction.: — 

Him  may  we  know,  the  ruler  of  all  rulers, 

The  god  of  gods,  the  lord  of  lords,  the  greater 

Than  all  the  greatest,  the  resplendent  being, 

The  world's  protector,  worthy  of  all  homage. 

Of  him  there  is  not  cause  nor  yet  effect. 

He  is  the  cause,  lord  of  the  lord  of  causes, 

None  is  there  like  him,  none  superior  to  him, 

His  power  is  absolute,  yet  various, 

Dependent  on  himself,  acting  with  knowledge. 

He  the  one  god  is  hidden  in  all  beings. 

Pervades  their  inner  souls  and  rules  their  actions. 

Dwelling  within  their  hearts,  a  witness,  thinker, 

The  singly  perfect,  without  qualities. 

He  is  the  Universe's  maker,  he 

Its  knower,  soul  and  origin  of  all. 

Maker  of  time,  endowed  with  every  virtue, 

Omniscient,  lord  of  all  embodied  beings, 

Lord  of  the  triple  qualities,  the  cause 

Of  man's  existence,  bondage  and  release, 

Eternal,  omnipresent,  without  parts. 

All-knowing,  tranquil,  spotless,  without  blame, 

The  light,  the  bridge  of  immortality, 

Subtler  than  what  is  subtlest,  many-shaped. 

One  penetrator  of  the  universe, 

All-blest,  unborn,  incomprehensible. 

Above,  below,  between,  invisible 

To  mortal  eyes,  the  mover  of  all  beings. 

Whose  name  is  Glory,  matchless,  infinite. 

The  perfect  spirit,  with  a  thousand  heads, 

A  thousand  eyes,  a  thousand  feet,  the  ruler 


1  Of  the  Yajur-veda,  though  sometimes  found  (according  to  Cole- 
brooke)  in  Atharva-veda  collections.  See  Weber's  Indische  Studien, 
I.  420-439. 


44  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Of  all  that  is,  that  was,  that  is  to  be. 
Diffused  through  endless  space,  yet  of  the  measure 
Of  a  man's  thumb,  abiding  in  the  heart, 
Known  only  by  the  heart,  whoever  knows  him 
Gains  everlasting  peace  and  deathlessness.^ 

I  close  these  extracts  from  the  Upanishads  by  a  metrical 
version  of  part  of  the  first  chapter  of  a  short  Upanishad 
called  Maitrayani  or  Maitrayaniya,  belonging  to  the  Black 
Yajur-veda  :^ — 

In  this  decaying  body,  made  of  bones. 

Skin,  tendons,  membranes,  muscles,  blood,  saliva. 

Full  of  putrescence  and  impurity. 

What  relish  can  there  be  for  true  enjoyment?^ 

In  this  weak  body,  ever  liable 

To  wrath,  ambition,  avarice,  illusion. 

To  fear,  grief,  envy,  hatred,  separation 

From  those  we  hold  most  dear,  association 

With  those  we  hate ;  continually  exposed 

To  hunger,  thirst,  disease,  decrepitude. 

Emaciation,  growth,  decline,  and  death. 

What  relish  can  there  be  for  true  enjoyment  ? 

The  universe  is  tending  to  decay, 

Grass,  trees,  and  animals  spring  up  and  die. 

But  what  are  they  ?     Earth's  mighty  men  are  gone. 

Leaving  their  joys  and  glories ;  they  have  passed 

Out  of  this  world  into  the  realm  of  spirits. 

But  what  are  they  ?     Beings  greater  still  than  these, 

Gods,  demigods,  and  demons,  all  have  gone. 

1  Most  of  these  epithets  will  be  found  in  the  following  sections  of  the 
S'vetasvatara  Upanishad  VI.  7,  8,  11,  17,  19,  IV.  14,  17,  19,  &o.  Com- 
pare the  extract  from  the  Purusha-sukta  given  at  p.  21. 

2  Also  called  Maitrayani,  Maitrayana,  Maitrl,  and  Maitri.  Under  the 
latter  name  it  has  been  well  edited  and  translated  for  the  Bibliotheca 
Indica  by  Professor  E.  B.  Cowell.  It  is  in  seven  chapters,  the  first  of 
which  was  translated  into  prose  by  Sir  W.  Jones,  but  without  any  name. 
My  version  is  partly  based  on  his,  but  I  have  consulted  Professor  Oowell's 
more  accurate  translation. 

3  Compare  Manu  VI.  77. 


THE   UPANISHADS.  45 

But  what  are  they  ?  for  others  greater  still 
Have  passed  away,  vast  oceans  have  been  dried, 
Mountains  thrown  down,  the  polar  star  displaced, 
The  cords  that  bind  the  planets  rent  asunder. 
The  whole  earth  deluged  with  a  flood  of  water. 
E'en  highest  angels  driven  from  their  stations. 
In  such  a  world  what  relish  can  there  be 
For  true  enjoyment  1  deign  to  rescue  us ; 
Thou  only  art  our  refuge,  holy  lord.^ 

1  The  following  sentiment  occurs  in  the  text  before  the  concluding 
line  :  Andhodapdna-stlio  hheka  iva  dliam  asmin  samsare : — 

Living  in  such  a  woi-ld  I  seem  to  be 
A  frog  abiding  in  a  dried-up  well. 
Compare  some  of  the  Stoical  reflections  of  Marcus  Aurelius,  given  by 
Archdeacon  F.  W.  Farrar  in  his  '  Seekers  after  God  : ' — 

'  Oil,  sweat,  dirt,  filthy  water,  all  things  disgusting — so  is  every  part 
of  life.' 

'  Enough  of  this  wretched  life,  and  murmuring,  and  apish  trifles.' 
'  All  the  present  time  is  a  point  in  eternity.     All  things  are  little, 
changeable,  perishable.' 


CHAPTER    III. 

The  Systems  of  Philosophy. 

I  MUST  now  advert  in  a  general  way  to  the  six  systems 
of  philosophy  which  grew  out  of  the  Upanishads.  They 
are  sometimes  called  the  six  Sastras  or  bodies  of  teach- 
ing, sometimes  the  Shad  Darsaoas  or  six  Demonstrations. 
Tliey  are — 

1.  The  Nyaya,  founded  by  Gotama. 

2.  The  Vaiseshika,  by  Kanada. 

3.  The  San-khya,  by  Kapila. 

4.  The  Yoga,  by  Patahjali. 

5.  The  Mimansa,  by  Jaimini. 

6.  The  Vedanta,  by  Badarayana  or  Vyasa. 

They  are  delivered  in  Sutras  or  aphorisms,  which  are 
held  to  be  the  basis  of  all  subsequent  teaching  under  each 
head.  These  Siitras  are  often  so  brief  and  obscure  as  to 
be  absolutely  unintelligible  without  a  commentary.  They 
are  commonly  called  '  aphorisms,  but  really  are  mere 
memorial  suggestions  of  the  briefest  possible  kind,  skil- 
fully contrived  for  aiding  the  recollection  of  the  teachers 
of  each  system.  Probably  the  first  to  comment  upon  the 
Sutras  thus  delivered  was  the  author  of  them  himself. 
He  was  followed  by  a  vast  number  of  other  commentators 
in  succeeding  generations  (generally  a  triple  set),  and  by 
writers  who  often  embodied  in  treatises  or  compendiums 
of  their  own  the  tenets  of  the  particular  school  to  which 
they  were  attached.  The  most  celebrated  of  all  commen- 
tators is  the  great  San-kara  Acarya,  a  native  of  Malabar, 

who  lived  probably  between  650  and  740  a.d.,  and  wrote 

46 


THE   SYSTEMS    OF   PHILOSOPHY.  47 

almost   countless  works,   including  commentaries  on  the 
Upanishads,  Vedanta-stitras,  and  Bhagavad-gita. 

It  is  as  impossible  to  settle  the  date  of  any  of  the 
Sutras  with  certainty  as  it  is  to  determine  the  period  of 
the  composition  of  any  single  work  in  Sanskrit  literature. 
Moreover,  it  is  scarcely  practicable  to  decide  as  to  which 
of  the  six  systems  of  philosophy  preceded  the  other  in 
point  of  time,  though  probably  the  San-khya  was  the  most 
ancient.     All  we  can  say  is,  that  about  500  years  before 
the  commencement  of  the  Christian  era  a  great  stir  seems 
to  have  taken  place  in  Indo- Aryan,  as  in  Grecian  minds, 
and  indeed  in  thinking  minds  everywhere  throughout  the 
then  civilized  world.     Thus  when  Buddha  arose  in  India, 
Greece  had  her  thinkers  in  the  disciples  of  Pythagoras, 
Persia  in  those  of  Zoroaster,^  and  China  in  those  of  Con- 
fucius.    Men    began    to    ask    themselves    earnestly    such 
questions  as — What  am  I  ?  whence  have  I  come  ?  whither 
am   I  going  ?     How  can  I   explain  my  consciousness  of 
personal   existence  ?     What   is  the   relationship  between 
my  material  and  immaterial  nature  ?     What  is  this  world 
in  which  I  find  myself?    Did  a  wise,  good,  and  all-powerful 
Being  create  it  out  of  nothing  ?  or  did  it  evolve  itself  out 
of  an  eternal  germ  ?  or  did  it  come  together  by  the  com- 
bination of  eternal   atoms  ?     If  created   by  a  Being  of 
infinite  wisdom,  how  can  I  account  for  the  inequalities  of 
condition  in  it — good  and  evil,   happiness  and  misery  ? 
Has  the  Creator  form,  or  is  he  formless  ?     Has  he  any 
qualities  or  none  ? 

Certainly  in  India  no  satisfactory  solution  of  questions 
such  as  these  was  likely  to  be  obtained  from  the  prayers 
and  hymns  of  the  ancient  Indo- Aryan  poets,  which,  though 


1  Zoroaster  himself,  however,  seems  to  have  lived  many  centuries 
before.  Pythagoras  and  Confucius  were  probably  contemporaries  of 
Buddha, 


48  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

called  Veda  or  'knowledge'  by  the  Brahmans,  did  not 
even  profess  to  furnish  any  real  knowledge  on  these 
points,  but  merely  gave  expression  to  the  first  gropings 
of  the  human  mind,  searching  for  truth  by  the  uncertain 
light  of  natural  phenomena.-' 

Nor  did  the  ritualistic  Brahmanas  contribute  anything 
to  the  elucidation  of  such  topics.  They  merely  encouraged 
the  growth  of  a  superstitious  belief  in  the  efficacy  of  sac- 
rifices and  fostered  the  increasing  dependence  of  the  mul- 
titude on  a  mediatorial  caste  of  priests,  supposed  to  be 
qualified  to  stand  between  them  and  an  angry  god.  Still 
these  momentous  questions  pressed  for  solution,  and  the 
minds  of  men  finding  no  rest  in  mere  traditional  revela- 
tion, and  no  satisfaction  in  mere  external  rites,  turned 
inwards,  each  thinker  endeavouring  to  think  out  the  great 
problems  of  life  for  himself  by  the  aid  of  his  own  reason. 
Hence  were  composed  those  vague  mystical  rationalistic 
speculations  called  Upanishads,  of  which  examples  have 
been  already  given.  Be  it  remembered  that  these  treatises 
were  not  regarded  as  antagonistic  to  revelation,  but  rather 
as  completory  of  it.  They  were  held  to  be  an  integral 
portion  of  the  Veda  or  true  knowledge ;  and,  even  more 
— they  so  rose  in  the  estimation  of  thoughtful  persons 
that  they  ended  by  taking  rank  as  its  most  important 
portion,  its  grandest  and  noblest  utterance,  the  apex  to 
which  all  previous  revelation  tended.  Probably  the 
simple  fact  was,  that  as  it  was  found  impossible  to  stem 
the  progress  of  free  inquiry,  the  Brahmans  with  true 
wisdom  determined  on  making  rationalistic  speculation 
their  own,  and  dignifying  its  first  development  in  the 
Upanishads  with  the  title  of  Veda.     Probably,  too,  some 

1  The  second  aphorism  of  the  San-khya-karika  states  distinctly  that 
Anusravika,  or  knowledge  derived  from  S'ruti — the  revelation  con- 
tained in  the  Veda — is  ineffectual  to  deliver  from  the  bondage  of 
existence. 


THE   SYSTEMS   OF   PHILOSOPHY.  49 

of  their  number  (like  Javali)  became  themselves  infected 
with  the  spirit  of  scepticism,  and  were  not  to  be  re- 
strained from  prosecuting  free  philosophical  investigations 
for  themselves. 

There  are  not  wanting,  however,  evident  indications 
that  the  Kshatriyas  or  second  caste  were  the  first  intro- 
ducers into  India  of  rationalistic  speculation.  The  great 
Buddha  was  a  Kshatriya,  and  the  Ohandogya  Upanishad 
(V.  3)  has  a  remarkable  passage  which,  as  bearing  upon 
this  point,  I  here  abridge  (Rder's  edition,  p.  315)  : — 

A  youth  called  S'vetaketu  (the  son  of  a  Brahman  named  Gautama) 
repaired  to  the  court  of  the  king  of  Paiidala,  Pravahana,  who  said  to  him, 
'  Boy,  has  thy  father  instructed  thee  ? '  '  Yes,  sir,'  replied  he.  '  Knowest 
thou  where  men  ascend  when  they  quit  this  world  ? '  '  No,  sir,'  replied 
he.  '  Knowest  thou  how  they  return  ? '  '  No,  sir,'  replied  he.  '  Knowest 
thou  why  the  region  to  which  they  ascend  is  not  filled  up  ? '  '  No,  sir,' 
replied  he.  '  Why  then  saidst  thou  that  thou  hadst  been  instructed  1 ' 
The  boy  returned  sorrowful  to  his  father's  house  and  said,  'The  king 
asked  me  certain  questions  which  I  could  not  answer.'  His  father  said, 
'  I  know  not  the  answers.'  Then  he,  Gautama,  the  father  of  the  boy, 
went  to  the  king's  house.  When  he  arrived,  the  king  received  him 
hospitably  and  said,  '  O  Gautama,  choose  as  a  boon  the  best  of  all 
worldly  possessions.'  He  replied,  '  0  king,  thine  be  all  worldly  posses- 
sions; tell  me  the  answers  to  the  questions  you  asked  my  son;'  The 
king  became  distressed  in  mind  (knowing  that  a  Brahman  could  not  be 
refused  a  request),  and  begged  him  to  tarry  for  a  time.  Then  he  said, 
'  Since  you  have  sought  this  information  from  me,  and  since  this 
knowledge  has  never  been  imparted  to  any  other  Brahman  before  thee, 
therefore  the  right  of  imparting  it  has  remained  with  the  Kshatriyas 
among  all  the  people  of  the  world.' 

This  story  certainly  appears  to  favour  the  supposition 
that  men  of  the  caste  next  in  rank  to  that  of  Brahmans 
were  the  first  to  venture  upon  free  philosophical  specula- 
tion. However  that  may  be,  it  was  not  long  before 
Brahmanism  and  rationalism  advanced  hand  in  hand, 
making  only  one  compact,  that  however  inconsistent  with 
each  other,  neither  should  declare  the  other  to  be  a  false 


50  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

guide,  A  Brahman  might  be  a  rationalist,  or  both  ration- 
alist and  Brahman  might  live  together  in  harmony,  pro- 
vided both  gave  a  nominal  assent  to  the  Veda,  maintained 
the  inviolability  of  caste,  and  the  ascendency  and  trust- 
worthiness of  the  Brahmans,  as  teachers  both  of  religion 
and  philosophy.-^ 

And  no  doubt  some  common  philosophical  creed  must 
have  prevailed  among  such  teachers  long  before  the  crys- 
tallisation of  rationalistic  speculation  into  separate  systems. 
If  not  distinctly  developed  in  the  Upauishads,  it  is  clearly 
traceable  throughout  Manu  ;  ^  and  as  it  is  not  only  the  faith 
of  every  Indian  philosopher  at  the  present  day,  but  also  of 
the  greater  number  of  thinking  Brahmans,  whether  dis- 
ciples of  any  particular  philosophical  school  or  not,  and 
indeed  of  the  greater  number  of  educated  Hindus,  whether 
nominal  adherents  of  Visbnu  or  Siva,  or  to  whatever  caste 
they  may  belong — its  principal  features  may  be  advan- 
tageously stated  before  pointing  out  the  chief  differences 
between  the  six  systems. 

I.  In  the  first  place,  then,  rationalistic  Brahmanism — 
as  I  propose  to  call  this  common  faith — holds  the  eternity 
of  soul,  both  retrospectively  and  prospectively.^  It  looks 
upon  soul  as  of  two  kinds  :    a.   the  supreme   Spirit  or 

1  The  summary  of  Buddhism  given  here  in  the  previous  edition  of 
'  Indian  Wisdom'  has  been  omitted,  because  the  reader  who  wishes  for 
an  account  of  Buddhism  can  refer  to  my  recent  volume  called  '  Bud- 
dhism,' published  by  John  Murray,  of  Albemarle  Street,  London. 

2  See  Manu  XII.  12,  15-18. 

^  Plato  appears  to  have  held  the  same  :  Tu;^ii  ■jraira  addnarog,  ri  yap 
&iix.ini]Tti)i  d6a.ta.TDv,  Phaed.  51.  And  again:  'Ete/Sjj  ds  ayivrirot  sari,  xal  dbid- 
^6opm  aiirh  avdy^n  il*a.i,  Phaed.  52.  And  again  :  ToDro  &i  our'  cfroXkuaia.! 
ours  yiyviedai  hwa,-6\i.  Cicero  expresses  it  thus  :  Id  autem  nee  nasci potest 
nee  mori,  Tusc.  Quaest.  I.  23.  Plato,  however,  seems  to  have  given  no 
eternity  to  individual  souls,  except  as  emanations  from  the  divine ;  and 
in  Timaeus  44  he  distinguishes  two  parts  of  the  soul,  one  immortal,  the 
other  mortal. 


THE   SYSTEMS    OF   PHILOSOPHY — COMMON   CREED.         SI 

Self  (called  variously  Atman,  Paramdtman,  Brahman, 
Purusha,  &c.) ;  6.  the  personal  individuated  spirit  of  living 
beings  {jlvdtman) ;  ^  and  it  maintains  that  if  any  entity  is 
eternal  it  cannot  have  had  a  begiiminaf,  or  else  it  must 
have  an  end.  Hence  the  personal  spirit  of  every  human 
being,  just  as  the  supreme  Spirit,  has  existed  everlastingly 
and  will  never  cease  to  exist. ^ 

2.  In  the  second  place,  this  creed  asserts  the  eternity  of 
the  visible  universe,  or  of  that  substance  out  of  which  the 
universe  has  been  evolved ;  in  other  words,  of  its  substan- 
tial or  material  cause.^     But,  according  to  one  system  (the 

1  All  the  systems,  as  we  shall  see,  are  not  equally  clear  about  the 
existence  of  a  supreme  Spirit.  One  at  least  practically  ignores  it.  I 
use  the  word  '  spirit '  (in  preference  to  '  soul ')  as  the  best  translation 
of  Atman,  Brahman,  and  Purusha,  because  '  soul '  may  convey  the  idea 
of  thinking  and  feeling,  whereas  pure  spirit,  according  to  Hindu  philo- 
sophy, neither  thinks  nor  feels,  because  that  would  imply  the  existence 
of  some  object  of  thought  and  feeling.  The  translation  *  self '  seems 
scarcely  more  suitable  than  '  soul.' 

2  The  Muslims  have  two  words  for  eternity  :  i.  J  ;1  azl,  '  that  eternity 
which  has  no  beginning '  (whence  God  is  called  Azali,  '  having  no  begin- 
ning'); and  2.  jj\  ahd,  'that  eternity  which  has  no  end.' 

*  The  term  for  substantial  or  material  cause  is  samavdyi-Tcdrana, 
literally,  '  inseparable  inherent  cause ; '  in  the  Vedanta  upaddna-kdrana 
is  used.  Though  the  Greek  philosophers  are  not  very  definite  in  their 
views  as  to  the  eternity  of  matter  or  its  nature,  yet  they  seem  to  have 
acquiesced  generally  in  the  independent  existence  of  some  sort  of 
primordial  substance.  Plato  appears  to  have  held  that  the  elements 
before  the  creation  were  shapeless  and  soulless,  but  were  moulded  and 
arranged  by  the  Creator  (Timaeus  27)  out  of  some  invisible  and  form- 
less essence  (^dtoparov  ildos  ri  xai  a.fji,op<j}0>,  Timaeus  24).  Aristotle  in  one 
passage  describes  the  views  of  older  philosophers  who  held  that  primeval 
substance  was  affected  and  made  to  undergo  changes  by  some  sort  of 
affections  like  the  San-khya  Gunas,  whence  all  the  universe  was  de- 
veloped :  T?;  fih  Dva'iag  V'tto/xivousij;  toTs  d's  Tdhei  ;U.sra/3a>.XouVj)5,  rouro 
eToiyeTov  xa)  rairriv  rrit  apyriv  (paaiv  thai  tSi}i  outuv,  Metaph.  I.  3.  (See 
Wilson's  San-khya-karika,  p.  53.)  Aristotle  adds  his  own  opinion,  'It 
is  necessary  there  should  be  a  certain  nature  (cfidei;) — either  one  or 
more — out  of  which  other  entities  are  produced.' 


52  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Sankhya),  the  external  world  is  evolved  out  of  an  eter- 
nally existing  productive  germ  united  to  eternally  existing 
individual  spirits.  According  to  another  (the  Vedanta), 
this  external  world  is  evolved  out  of  the  eternal  Illusion 
(Maya),  which  overspreads  the  one  eternal  Spirit  and  is 
one  with  it,  though  having  no  real  existence.  In  truth,  a 
Hindu  philosopher's  belief  in  the  eternity  of  the  world's 
substance,  whether  that  substance  has  a  real  material 
existence  or  is  simply  illusory,  arises  from  that  fixed 
article  of  his  creed,  '  Ex  nihilo  nihil  Jit,'  ndvastuno  vastu- 
siddhih.  In  other  words,  A-satah  saj  jdyeta  hutas,  'How 
can  an  entity  be  produced  out  of  a  nonentity  ? '  ^ 

3.  In  the  third  place,   the  spirit,  though  itself  sheer 
thought  and  knowledge,  can  only  exercise  thought,  con- 

1  Oliih  yherai  ex  tou  fi^  Iwog,  'Nothing  is  produced  out  of  nothing.' 
All  the  ancient  philosophers  of  Greece  and  Rome  seem  also  to  have 
agreed  upon  this  point,  as  Aristotle  affirms  {^tp\  yap  radrng  o/ioymij.6j;ovgi 
rrii  U^ni  dirami  01  <!repi  (^uffew;).  Lucretius  (I.  150)  starts  with  laying 
down  the  same  principle : — '  Principium  hinc  nobis  exordia  sumet 
NuUam  rem  e  nihilo  gigni  divinitus  unquam.'  Aristotle,  in  the  third 
chapter  of  the  first  book  of  his  Metaphysics,  informs  us  that  Thales 
made  the  primitive  substance  out  of  which  the  universe  originated 
water,  Anaximenes  and  Diogenes  made  it  air,  Heracleitus  made  it  fire, 
Empedocles  combined  ea,rth,  air,  fire,  and  water.  Anaximander,  on 
the  other  hand,  regarded  the  primordial  germ  as  an  indeterminate  but 
infinite  or  boundless  principle  {rb  amipov).  Other  philosophers  affirmed 
something  similar  in  referring  everything  back  to  a  confused  chaos. 
Parmenides  made  Desire  his  first  principle,  and  Hesiod,  quoted  by 
Aristotle,  says  poetically, — 

'  First  indeed  of  all  was  chaos  ;  then  afterwards 
Earth  with  her  broad  breast  (cf.  Sanskrit  priihivi)  ; 
Then  Desire  (epos),  who  is  pre-eminent  among  all  the  Immortals.' 

Lastly,  the  Eleatics,  like  the  Indian  Vedantists,  were  thoroiighly  pan- 
theistic, and  held  that  the  universe  was  God  and  God  the  universe  • 
in  other  words,  that  God  was  rj  h,  or  the  only  one  existing  thing. 
With  all  these  accounts  compare  the  Eig-veda  hymn  on  the  creation 
translated  on  p.  19. 


THE   SYSTEMS   OF   PHILOSOPHY — COMMON   CREED.         53 

sciousness,  sensation,  and  cognition,  and  indeed  can  only- 
act  and  will  when  connected  with  external  and  objective 
objects  of  sensation,-^  invested  with  some  bodily  form^ 
and  joined  to  mind  {manas),  which  last  (viz.,  mind)  is  an 
internal  organ  of  sense  (antah-karanay — a  sort  of  inlet  of 


1  It  is  difficult  to  find  any  suitable  word  to  express  what  the  Hindiis 
mean  by  material  objects.  There  seems,  in  real  truth,  to  be  no  proper 
Sanskrit  word  equivalent  to  '  matter '  in  its  usual  EngHsh  sense.  Vastu, 
as  applied  to  the  '  one  reality,'  is  the  term  for  the  Vedantist's  universal 
Spirit  j  dravya  stands  for  soul,  mind,  time,  and  space,  as  well  as  the  five 
elements ;  murtti  is  anything  which  has  definite  limits,  and  therefore 
includes  mind  and  the  four  elements,  but  not  dkdsa,  '  ether ; '  pradhdna 
is  the  original  producer  of  the  San-khya  system ;  paddrtha  is  used  for 
the  seven  categories  of  the  Yaiseshika.  What  is  here  meant  is  not 
necessarily  a  collection  of  material  atoms,  nor,  again,  that  imperceptible 
substance  propounded  by  some  as  lying  underneath  and  supporting  all 
visible  phenomena  (disbelieved  in  by  Berkeley),  and  holding  together 
the  attributes  or  qualities  of  everything,  but  rather  what  is  seen,  heard, 
felt,  tasted,  and  touched,  which  is  perhaps  best  denoted  by  the  Sanskrit 
word  vishaya,  the  terms  samavdyi-hdrana  and  updddna-hdrana  being 
generally  used  for  the  substantial  or  the  material  cause  of  the  universe. 

^  All  the  systems  assign  to  each  person  two  bodies  :  a.  an  exterior  or 
gross  body  (sihula-sarlrd) ;  b.  an  interior  or  subtle  body  {sukshma-sanra 
or  Uiifgchsarira).  The  last  is  necessary  as  a  vehicle  for  the  spirit  when 
the  gross  body  is  dissolved,  accompanying  it  through  all  its  transmigra- 
tions and  sojournings  in  heaven  or  hell,  and  never  becoming  separated, 
from  it  till  its  emancipation  is  effected.  The  Vedanta  affirms  the 
existence  of  a  third  body,  called  kdrana-sarira  or  causal  body,  described 
as  a  kind  of  inner  rudiment  or  latent  embryo  of  the  body  existing  with 
the  spirit,  and  by  some  regarded  as  Ignorance  united  with  the  spirit  in 
dreamless  sleep.  The  Platonists  and  other  Greek  and  Roman  philo- 
sophers seem  to  have  held  a  similar  doctrine  as  to  a  subtle  material 
envelope  investing  the  soul  after  death,  serving  as  its  o'xi/i"  or  vehicle. 
See  Plato,  Timaeus  17.  This  is  like  the  idea  of  a  deceased  person's 
ghost  or  shade  (iiioi'kos,  umbra,  imagoj  simulacrum).  Cf.  Virgil,  Aeneid, 
VI.  390,  701. 

3  Manas  is  often  taken  as  the  general  term  applicable  to  all  the 
mental  powers,  but  Manas  is  properly  a  subdivision  of  antah-karana, 
which  is  divided  into  Buddhi,  '  perception  or  intellection ; '  Ahankdra, 


54  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

thought  to  the  spirit — belonging  only  to  the  body,  only 
existing  with  it,  and  quite  as  distinct  from  the  spirit  as 
any  of  the  external  organs  of  the  body.^  The  supreme 
Spirit  has  thus  connected  itself  in  successive  ages  with 
objects  and  forms,  becoming  manifest  either  as  Brahma 
the  creator,  or  in  the  form  of  other  gods,  as  Vishnu  and 
Siva,  or  again  in  the  form  of  men. 

4.  Fourthly,  this  union  of  the  spirit  with  the  body  is 
productive  of  bondage,  and  in  the  case  of  human  spirits, 
of  misery,  for  when  ouce  so  united  the  spirit  begins  to 
apprehend  objects  through  the  senses,  receiving  therefrom 
painful  and  pleasurable  impressions.  It  also  becomes  con- 
scious of  personal  existence  and  individuality;  then  it 
commences  acting;  but  all  action,  whether  good  or  bad, 
leads  to  bondage,  because  every  act  inevitably  entails 
a  consequence,  according  to  the  maxim,  Avasyam  eva 
hhohtavyam  hritam  karma  subhdsubham,  '  The  fruit  of 
every  action  good  or  bad  must  of  necessity  be  eaten.' 
Hence,  if  an  act  be  good  it  must  be  rewarded,  and  if  bad 
it  must  be  punished.^ 

5.  Fifthly,  in  order  to  accomplish  the  entire  working 

'  self-consciousness ; '  and  Manas,  '  volition  or  determination  ; '  to  which 
the  Vedanta  adds  a  fourth  division,  Citta,  '  the  thinking  oi*  reasoning 
organ.' 

1  This  idea  of  the  mind  agrees  to  a  great  extent  with  the  doctrine 
of  Lucretius,  stated  in  III.  94,  &c. : — 

'  Primum  animum  dico  (mentem  quern  saepe  vocamus) 
In  quo  consilium  vitae  regimenque  locatum  est, 
Esse  hominis  partem  nihilo  minus  ao  manus  et  pes 
Atque  oculi  partes  animantis  totius  eztant.' 
The  remainder  of  his  description  of  the  mind  is  very  interesting  in  con- 
nection with  the  Hindi!  theory. 

2  In  the  Panda-tantra  (II.  135,  136)  we  read :  'An  evil  act  follows 
a  man,  passing  through  a  hundred  thousand  transmigrations ;  in  like 
manner  the  act  of  a  high-minded  man.  As  shade  and  sunlight  are 
ever  closely  joined  together,  so  an  act  and  the  agent  stick  close  to  each 
other.' 


THE   SYSTEMS    OF  PHILOSOPHY — COMMON   CREED.         5  5 

out  of  these  consequences  or  '  ripenings  of  acts,'  as  they 
are  called  [harma-vipakdh),^  it  is  not  enough  that  the 
personal  spirit  goes  to  heaven  or  to  hell.  For  all  the 
systems  contend  that  even  in  heaven  or  hell  merit  or 
demerit,  resulting  from  the  inexorable  retributive  efficacy 
of  former  acts,  continues  clinging  to  the  spirit  as  grease 
does  to  a  pot  after  it  has  been  emptied.  The  necessity 
for  removal  to  a  place  of  reward  or  punishment  is  indeed 
admitted  ;  ^  but  this  is  not  effectual  or  final.  lu  order 
that  the  consequences  of  acts  may  be  entirely  worked  out, 
the  spirit  must  leave  heaven  or  hell  and  return  to  corporeal 
existence.  Thus  it  has  to  pass  through  innumerable 
bodies,  migrating  into  higher,  intermediate,  or  lower  forms, 
from  a  god'  to  a  demon,  man,  animal,  or  plant,  or  even 

1  Bad  consequences  are  called  Dur-vipdka.  Some  of  these,  in  the 
shape  of  diseases,  &c.,  are  detailed  by  Manu  (XI.  48-52).  Thus  any 
one  who  has  stolen  gold  in  a  former  life  will  suffer  from  whitlows  on 
his  nails,  a  drinker  of  spirits  will  have  black  teeth,  and  the  killer  of  a 
Brahman,  consumption.  In  the  S'abda-kalpa-druma,  under  the  head  of 
Karma-vipdka,  will  be  found  a  long  catalogue  of  the  various  diseases 
with  which  men  are  born  as  the  fruit  of  evil  deeds  committed  in  former 
states  of  existence,  and  a  declaration  as  to  the  number  of  births  through 
which  each  disease  will  be  protracted,  unless  expiations  (prdyascitta)  be 
performed  in  the  present  life,  as  described  in  the  eleventh  book  of  Manu. 

2  The  twenty-one  hells  (Narakas)  are  enumerated  in  Manu  IV.  88-90. 
One  is  a  place  of  terrific  darkness ;  another  a  pit  of  red-hot  charcoal ; 
another  a  forest  whose  leaves  are  swords;  another  is  filled  with  fetid 
mud ;  another  is  paved  with  iron  spikes.  These  are  not  to  be  con- 
founded with  the  seven  places  under  the  earth,  of  which  Patala  is  one, 
the  abode  of  a  kind  of  serpent  demon.  The  Buddhists  have  one  hundred 
and  thirty-six  hells,  with  regular  gradations  of  suffering.  Hindus  and 
Buddhists  have  also  numerous  heavens.  The  former  make  six  regions 
rising  above  earth,  the  seventh ;  viz.,  hhur  (earth),  bhuvar,  svar,  mahar, 
janar,  tapah,  satya. 

^  The  gods  themselves  are  only  finite  beings.  They  are  nothing  but 
portions  of  the  existing  system  of  a  perishing  universe.  In  fact,  they 
are  represented  as  actually  feeding  on  the  oblations  offered  to  them  (see 
Bhagavad-gita  III.  1 1)  ;  they  go  through  penances  (see  Manu  XI.  221); 
they  are  liable  to  passions  and  affections  Uke  men  and  animals,  and  are 


56  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

a   stone,    according   to   its   various   shades    of  merit   or 
demerit.' 

6.  Sixthly,  this  transmigration  of  the  spirit  through  a 
constant  succession  of  bodies  is  to  be  regarded  as  the 
root  of  all  evil.^  Moreover,  by  it  all  the  misery,  in- 
subject,  as  regards  their  corporeal  part,  to  the  same  law  of  dissolution, 
while  their  souls  obey  the  same  necessity  of  ultimate  absorption  into 
the  supreme  soul.  The  following  occurs  in  the  Saakhya-karika  (p.  3  of 
Wilson)  : — '  Many  thousands  of  Indras  and  other  gods  have,  through 
time,  passed  away  in  every  mundane  age,  for  time  cannot  be  overcome.' 
Muir's  Texts,  vol.  v.  p.  16. 

1  According  to  Manu  XII.  3,  Subhdiubha-phalam  Jcarma  mano-vdg- 
dehorsambhavam  karma-jd  gatayo  nfindm  uttamddhama-madhyamdh, 
'  An  act  either  mental,  verbal,  or  corporeal  bears  good  or  evil  fruit ;  the 
various  transmigrations  of  men  through  the  highest,  middle,  and  lowest 
stages  are  produced  by  acts.'  This  triple  order  of  transmigration  is  after- 
wards (XII.  40,  &c.)  explained  to  be  the  passage  of  the  soul  through 
deities,  men,  and  beasts  and  plants,  according  to  the  dominance  of  one 
or  other  of  the  three  Gunas,  goodness,  passion,  or  darkness.  And  each 
of  these  three  degrees  of  transmigration  has  three  sub-degrfees.  The 
highest  of  the  first  degree  is  Brahma  himself,  the  lowest  of  the  lowest 
is  any  sthdvara  or  '  stationary  substance,'  which  is  explained  to  mean 
either  a  vegetable  or  a  mineral ;  other  lowest  forms  of  the  lowest  degree 
are  in  an  upward  order  worms,  insects,  fish,  reptiles,  snakes,  tortoises,  &c. 
Again,  in  VI.  61,  63,  we  read:  Let  the  man  who  has  renounced  the 
world  reflect  on  the  transmigrations  of  men  caused  by  the  fault  of  their 
acts  (karma-dosha) ;  on  their  downfall  into  hell  and  their  torments  in 
the  abode  of  Yama;  on  their  formation  again  in  the  womb  and  the 
glidings  of  the  soul  through  ten  millions  of  other  wombs.  Again,  in 
XII.  54,  55,  &c. :  Those  who  have  committed  great  crimes,  having  passed 
through  terrible  hells  for  many  series  of  years,  at  the  end  of  that  time 
pass  through  various  bodies.  A  Brahman-killer  enters  the  body  of  a 
dog,  boar,  ass,  camel,  bull,  goat,  sheep,  stag,  bird,  &c.  The  violator  of 
the  bed  of  a  Guru  migrates  a  hundred  times  into  the  forms  of  grasses, 
shrubs,  plants,  &c.  In  I.  49,  XL  143-146,  it  is  clearly  implied  that 
trees  and  vegetables  of  all  kinds  have  internal  consciousness  (antah- 
sanjnd),  and  are  susceptible  of  pleasure  and  pain. 

2  The  doctrine  of  metempsychosis,  however,  does  not  appear  to  have 
taken  hold  of  the  Hindu  mind  when  the  Mantras  were  composed.  There 
seems  at  least  to  be  no  allusion  to  it  in  the  Eig-veda  (see  note,  p.  18).     It 


THE   SYSTEMS    OF   PHILOSOPHY — COMMON   CREED.         S7 

equality  of  fortune,  and  diversity  of  character  in  the  world 
is  to  be  explained.  ■*  For  even  great  genius,  aptitude  for 
special  work,  and  innate  excellence  are  not  natural  gifts, 

begins  to  appear,  though  not  clearly  defined,  in  the  Brahmanas,  and  is 
fully  developed  in  the  Upanishads,  Darsanas,  and  Manu.  A  passage  in 
the  S'atapatha-brahmana  (XI.  6.  i.  i.),  quoted  by  Professor  Weber  and 
Dr.  Muir,  describes  animals  and  plants  as  revenging  in  a  future  state  of 
existence  injuries  and  death  inflicted  on  them  by  men  in  this  life. 

In  Greece  and  Rome  the  doctrine  of  transmigration  seems  never  to 
have  impressed  itself  deeply  on  the  popular  mind.  It  was  confined  to 
philosophers  and  their  disciples,  and  was  first  plainly  taught  by  Pytha- 
goras, who  is  said  to  have  asserted  that  he  remembered  his  own  pre- 
vious existences.  He  was  followed  by  Plato,  who  is  supposed  by  some  to 
have  been  indebted  to  Hindu  writers  for  his  views  on  this  subject.  In 
the  Timaeus  (72,  73)  he  affirms  his  opinion  that  those  who  have  lived 
unrighteously  and  effeminately  will,  at  their  next  birth,  be  changed  to 
women ;  those  who  have  lived  innocently  but  frivolously  will  become 
birds;  those  who  have  lived  without  knowledge  of  the  truths  of  philosophy 
will  become  beasts ;  and  those  whose  lives  have  been  marked  by  the  ex- 
treme of  ignorance  and  folly  will  become  fishes,  oysters,  &c.  He  sums 
up  thus  :  Karii  TaZwa,  hii  Trdvza  toti  xa/'  vdv  iiafitilfiirai  to,  ?>ia  s/;  aXXjj/.a, 
mS  xaX  avoiag  aTrofiokfi  xa\  xrriaii  /jjirajiaXkoiMiva.  Virgil,  in  the  sixth 
book  of  the  Aeneid  (680-751),  describes  the  condition  of  certain  souls, 
which,  after  going  through  a  sort  of  purgatory  for  a  thousand  years  in 
.  the  lower  regions,  again  ascend  to  earth  and  occupy  new  bodies. 

The  Jews  seem  to  have  known  something  of  the  doctrine,  if  we  may 
judge  by  the  question  proposed  to  our  Lord  :  '  Who  did  sin,  this  man 
(i.e.,  in  a  former  life)  or  his  parents,  that  he  was  born  blind  V  (John  ix.  2). 

i  ArSong  Greek  philosophers,  Aristotle,  in  the  eleventh  book  of  his 
Metaphysics  (ch.  10),  goes  into  the  origin  of  evil,  and  his  view  may 
therefore  be  compared  with  that  of  HindU  philosophers.  He  recognizes 
good  as  a  paramount  principle  in  the  world,  but  admits  the  power  of 
evil,  and  considers  matter  (uX?))  as  its  prime  and  only  source,  much  in 
the  same  way  as  the  Gnostics  and  other  early  Christian  philosophical 
sects,  who,  like  Indian  philosophers,  denied  the  possibility  of  anything 
being  produced  out  of  nothing,  and  repudiated  the  doctrine  that  God 
could  in  any  way  be  connected  with  evil  They,  therefore,  supposed 
the  eternal  existence  of  a  sluggish,  inert  substance,  out  of  which  the 
world  was  formed  by  God,  but  which  contained  in  itself  the  principle 
of  evil. 


58 


INDIAN   WISDOM. 


but  the  result  of  habits  formed  and  powers  developed 
through  perhaps  millions  of  previous  existences.  So,  again, 
sufferings  of  all  kinds — weaknesses,  sicknesses,  and  moral 
depravity — are  simply  the  consequences  of  acts  done  by 
each  spirit,  of  its  own  free  will,  in  former  bodies,  which 
acts  exert  upon  that  spirit  an  irresistible  power  called  very 
significantly  Adrishta,  because  felt  and  not  seen. 

Thus  the  spirit  has  to  bear  the  consequences  of  its  own 
acts  only.  It  is  tossed  hither  and  thither  at  the  mercy  of 
a  force  set  in  motion  by  itself  alone,  but  which  can  never 
be  guarded  against,  because  its  operation  depends  on  past 
actions  wholly  beyond  control  and  even  unremembered. 
Nor  does  the  absence  of  all  recollections  of  acts  done  in 
former  states  of  existence  seem  to  strike  Hindu  philo- 
sophers as  an  objection  to  their  theory  of  trausmig ration. 
They  say  that  we  do  not  remember  our  state  of  infancy 
and  childhood  up  to  the  age  of  three  or  four  years,  and  yet 
we  do  not  doubt  that  the  individuality  of  old  people  is 
different  from  their  earliest  individuality.^     Most  of  the 


1  The  Gaibha  Upanishad  (4)  attributes  the  loss  of  memory  to  the 
pain  and  pressure  suffered  by  the  soul  in  the  act  of  leaving  the  womb. 
Cases  are  recorded  of  men  who  were  gifted  with  the  power  of  recollect- 
ing former  existences.  Gautama  Buddha,  we  know,  is  said  to  have 
possessed  the  power.  In  the  Phaedo  of  Plato  (47)  Cebes  is  described 
as  saying  to  Socrates,  '  According  to  that  doctrine  which  you  are  fre- 
quently in  the  habit  of  advancing,  if  it  is  true,  that  all  knowledge 
is  nothing  else  than  reminiscence  (on  riiut  f)  /jidiriai;  oix  a'AXo  n  r)  avd/j,- 
vnaig  Tvyyam  ouffa),  it  is  surely  necessary  that  we  must  at  some  former 
time  have  learned  what  we  now  remember.  But  this  is  impossible, 
unless  our  soul  existed  somewhere  before  it  came  into  this  human 
form.'  Cicero,  in  Tusc.  Quaest.  I.  24,  says,  speaking  of  the  soul, 
'  Habet  primam  memoriam,  et  eam  infinitam  rerum  innumerabilium, 
quam  quidem  Plato  recordationem  esse  vult  superioris  vitae.'  Cf. 
Sakuntala,  Act  V.  104,  '  Can  it  be  that  the  dim  memory  of  events 
long  past,  or  friendships  formed  in  other  states  of  being,  flits  like 
a  passing  shadow  o'er  the  spirit?'     Virgil  (Aeneid  VI.  714)  wisely 


THE   SYSTEMS   OP   PHILOSOPHY — COMMON   CREED.         59 

systems  evade  the  difficulty  by  maintaining  that  at  each 
death  the  soul  is  divested  of  mind,  understanding,  con- 
sciousness,  and  brain-memory. 

7.  Seventhly  and  lastly,  from  a  consideration  of  these 
essential  articles  of  Hindu  Rationalism  it  is  plain  that  the 
great  aim  of  philosophy  is  to  teach  a  man  to  abstain  from 
every  kind  of  action  ;  from  liking  or  disliking,  from  loving 
or  hating,  and  even  from  being  indifferent  to  anything. 

The  living  personal  spirit  must  shake  off  the  fetters  of 
action,  and  getting  rid  of  body,  mind,  and  all  sense  of 
separate  personality,  return  to  the  condition  of  simple  spirit. 

This  constitutes  Prama  or  Jndna,  the  true  measure  of 
all  existing  difficulties — the  right  apprehension  of  truth — 
which,  if  once  acquired  by  the  spirit,  confers  upon  it  final 
emancipation,  whether  called  Muhti,  Mohsha,  NiMreyasa, 
Apavarga,  or  Nirvana.  This,  in  short,  is  the  summum 
honum  of  philosophical  Brahmanism  ;  this'  is  the  only  real 
bliss, — the  loss  of  all  personality  and  separate  identity  by 
absorption  into  the  supreme  and  only  really  existing  Being 
— mere  life  with  nothing  to  live  for,  mere  joy  with  nothing 
to  rejoice  about,  and  mere  thought  with  nothing  upon 
which  thought  is  to  be  exercised.^ 

Having  thus  attempted  to  set  forth  the  common  tenets 
of  Indian  philosophy,  I  must  next  indicate  the  principal 
points  in  which  the  systems  differ  from  each  other. 

makes  the  souls  who  are  to  occupy  new  bodies  upon  earth  throng 
the  banks  of  Lethe  that  they  may  drink  a  deep  draught  of  oblivion 
from  its  waters. 

1  Mr.  Hardwick  has  well  shown  that  the  great  boon  conferred  by 
the  Gospel,  in  contradistinction  to  these  false  systems,  is  the  recogni- 
tion of  man's  responsible  free  agency  and  the  permanence  of  his 
personality.  '  Not  to  be  '  is  the  melancholy  result  of  the  religion  and 
philosophy  of  the  Hindus.  See  '  Christ  and  other  Masters,'  vol.  i. 
p.  355.  Christianity  satisfies  the  deepest  want  of  man's  religious  life, 
viz.,  to  know  and  love  God  as  a  person.  See  Canon  Liddon's  'Elements 
of  Religion,'  p.  36. 


CHAPTER   IV. 

The  Nydya. 

We  begin  witli  the  Nyaya  of  Gotama  or  Gautama,  with 
its  important  supplement,  the  Vaiseshika,  not  because 
this  is  first  in  order  of  time  (see  p.  46),  but  because  it  is 
generally  the  first  studied,  and  much  of  its  terminology  is 
adopted  by  the  other  systems.^ 

The  word  Nyaya  signifies  '  going  into  a  subject,'  that  is, 
investigating  it  analytically.  In  this  sense  of  '  analysis,' 
Nyaya  is  exactly  opposed  to  the  word  San-khya,  '  synthesis.' 
It  is  common  to  suppose  that  the  Nyaya  is  chiefly  con- 
cerned with  logic  ;  but  this  is  merely  one  part  of  a  single 
topic.  The  fact  rather  is  that  this  system  was  intended 
to  furnish  a  correct  method  of  philosophical  inquiry  into 
all  the  objects  and  subjects  of  human  knowledge,  includ- 
ing, amongst  others,  the  process  of  reasoning  and  laws  of 
thought.  The  Nyaya  proper  differs  from  its  later  develop- 
ment, the  Vaiseshika,  by  propounding  sixteen  topics  in  its 
first  Sutra.     The  first  topic  of  these  sixteen  is  Pramdna, 


1  The  Nyaya  Siitras,  consisting  of  five  books,  with  the  commentary, 

were  printed  at  Calcutta  in  1828,  tinder  the  title  of  Nyaya-siitra-vritti. 

Four  of  the  five  books  were  edited  and  translated  by  the  late  Dr.  Ballan- 

tyne.    He  also  published  the  Nyaya  compendium,  called  Tarka-san-graha. 

A  favourite  text-book  of  this  system  is  the  Bhasha-pariddheda,  with  its 

commentary,  called  Siddhanta-muktavali.      This  has  been  edited  and 

translated  by  Dr.  Eder.     The  Vaiseshika  Sutras,   consisting  of  ten 

books,  have  been  edited  and  translated  by  Mr.  A.  E.  Gough.    Professor 

E.  B.  Cowell's  edition  of  the  Kusumaiijali,  a  Nyaya  treatise  proving  the 

existence  of  a  God,  is  a  most  interesting  work. 

60 


THE   SYSTEMS   OP   PHILOSOPHY — NYAYA.  6 1 

that  is,  the  means  or  instruments  by  which  Prama  or  the 
right  measure  of  any  subject  is  to  be  obtained.  Under 
this  head  are  enunciated  the  different  processes  by  which 
the  mind  arrives  at  true  and  accurate  knowledge. 

These  processes  are  declared  in  the  third  Sutra  of  the 
first  book  to  be  four,  viz. : — 

a.  Pratyahsha,  'perception  by  the  senses.'  b.  Anumdna,  'inference.' 
c.  Upamdim,  '  comparison  '  or  '  analogy.'  d.  Sabda,  '  verbal  authority ' 
or  '  trustworthy  testimony,'  including  Vedic  revelation. 

The  treatment  of  the  second  of  these,  viz.,  inference, 
possesses  more  interest  for  Europeans,  as  indicating  that 
the  Hindus  have  not,  like  other  nations,  borrowed  their 
logic  and  metaphysics  from  the  Greeks. 

Inference  is  divided  in  Sutra  I.  32  into  five  Avayavas 
or  'members.' 

1.  The  pratijnd  or  proposition  (stated  hypothetically). 

2.  The  hetu  or  reason. 

3.  The  uddharana  (sometimes  called  nidarsana)  or  example  (equiva- 
lent to  the  major  premiss). 

4.  The  upanaya  or  application  of  the  reason  (equivalent  to  the  minor 
premiss). 

5.  The  nigamana  or  conclusion,  {i.e.,  the  pratijnd  or  'proposition' 
re-stated  as  proved). 

This  method  of  splitting  an  inference  or  argument  into 
five  divisions  is  familiarly  illustrated  by  native  commen- 
tators thus : — 

I.  The  hill  is  fiery;  2.  for  it  smokes;  3.  whatever  smokes  is  fiery, 
as  a  kitchen-hearth  (or,  inversely,  not  as  a  lake,  which  is  invariably 
without  fire);  4.  this  hill  smokes;  5.  therefore  this  hill  is  fiery. 

Here  we  have  a  combination  of  enthymeme  and  syllo- 
gism, which  seems  clumsy  by  the  side  of  Aristotle's  more 
concise  method  ;  the  fourth  and  fifth  members  being  repe- 
titions of  the  second  and  first,  which,  therefore,  appear 
superfluous.      But   it   possesses   some   advantages   when 


62 


INDIAN   WISDOM. 


regarded^  not  as  a  syllogism,  but  as  a  full  and  complete 
rhetorical  statement  of  an  argument. 

Perhaps  the  most  noticeable  peculiarity  in  the  Indian 
method,  stamping  it  as  an  original  and  independent  ana- 
lysis of  the  laws  of  thought,  is  the  use  of  the  curious 
terms,  Vydpti,  'invariable  pervasion'  or  'concomitance'; 
Vydpaha,  'pervader'  or  'invariably  pervading  attribute' ; 
and  Vydpya,  'invariably  pervaded.'  These  terms  are  em- 
ployed in  making  a  universal  affirmation  or  in  affirming 
universal  distribution ;  as,  for  example,  '  Wherever  there 
is  smoke  there  is  fire.'  '  Wherever  there  is  humanity  there 
is  mortality.'  In  such  cases  an  Indian  logician  always  ex- 
presses himself  by  saying  that  there  is  an  invariably  per- 
vading concomitance  of  fire  with  smoke  and  of  mortality 
with  humanity. 

Similarly,  fire  and  mortality  are  called  the  pervaders 
( Vydpaica),  smoke  and  humanity  the  pervaded  ( Vydpya). 
The  first  argument  would  therefore  be  thus  briefly  stated 
by  a  Naiydyika :  '  The  mountain  has  invariably  fire-per- 
vaded smoke,  therefore  it  has  fire.' 

To  show  the  importance  attached  to  a  right  under- 
standing of  this  technical  expression  Vydpti,  and  to  serve 
as  a  specimen  of  a  Naiyayika  writer's  style,  I  now  make 
an  abridged  extract  from  San-kara-misra's  comment  on  the 
fourteenth  Sutra  of  the  first  daily  lesson  of  the  third  book 
of  the  Vaideshika  Siitras  (Gough,  p.  86) : — 

It  may  be  asked,  What  is  this  invariable  concomitance  ?  (Nanu  keyam 
vydptih).  It  is  not  merely  a  relation  of  co-extension.  Nor  is  it  the 
relation  of  totality.  For  if  you  say  that  invariable  concomitance  is  the 
connection  of  the  middle  term  with  the  whole  of  the  major  term  (Itrits- 
nasya  sddhyasya  sddhana-sarnbandhah),  such  connection  does  not  exist 
in  the  case  of  smoke,  &c.  [for  although  fire  exists  wherever  smoke  exists, 
smoke  does  not  always  exist  where  fire  exists,  not  being  found  in  red- 
hot  iron].  Nor  is  it  natural  conjunction ;  for  the  nature  of  a  thing  is 
the  thing's  proper  mode  of  being.  Nor  is  it  invariable  co-inherence  of 
the  major,  which  is  absent  only  when  .there  is  absolute  non-existence 


THE   SYSTEMS    OF   PHILOSOPHY — NYAYA.  63 

of  that  of  which  the  middle  is  predicated ;  for  volcanic  fire  must  always 
be  non-existent  in  a  kitchen-hearth,  though  smoky.  Nor  is  it  the  not 
being  a  subject  of  incompatibility  with  the  predicate.  Nor  is  it  the 
possession  of  a  form  determined  by  the  same  connection  as  something 
else ;  as,  for  instance,  the  being  fiery  is  not  determined  by  connection 
with  smoke,  for  the  being  fiery  is  more  extensive.  We  proceed,  then, 
to  state  that  invariable  concomitance  is  a  connection  requiring  no 
qualifying  term  or  limitation  {ariraupddhihah  sambandhah).^  It  is  an 
extensiveness  co-extensive  with  the  predicate  (sddhya-vyapaka-vydpakat- 
vam).  In  other  words,  invariable  concomitance  is  invariable  00-inher- 
ence  of  the  predicate.^ 

The  second  head  or  topic  of  the  Nyaya  is  Prameya, 
by  which  is  meant  all  the  objects  or  subjects  of  Pramd — 
those  points,  in  short,  about  which  correct  knowledge  is  to 
be  obtained.  This  topic  includes  all  the  most  important 
subjects  investigated  by  Indian  philosophy.  The  Pra- 
meyas  are  twelve,  as  given  in  the  ninth  Sutra ;  thus  : — 

I.  Soul  (diman).  2.  Body  (^arira).  3.  Senses  (indriya).  '  4.  Objects 
of  sense  (artha).  5.  Understanding  or  intellection  {huddhi).  6.  Mind 
(manas).  7.  Activitj  (pravritti).  8.  Faults  (dosha).  9.  Transmigration 
(pretya-bhava).  ro.  Consequences  or  fruits  (^TiaZa).  11.  Vsim  (duhkha). 
12.  Emancipation  (apavarga). 

In  his  first  topic  Gautama  provides  for  hearing  opposing 
disputants  who  desire  to  discuss  fairly  any  of  these  Pra- 
meyas  which  form  his  second  topic. 

With  regard  to  his  fourteen  other  topics,  they  seem  to 


1  Hence,  '  the  mountain  is  smoky  because  it  has  fire '  is  not  vydpti,  but 
ati-vydpti,  because  the  upddhi  or  qualification  drdrendana-jata,  'produced 
by  wet  wood,'  must  be  added  to  make  the  argument  correct.  When  the 
middle  term  (fire)  and  the  major  (smoke)  are  made  co-extensive  then  the 
fault  of  ati-vydpti  is  removed. 

2  It  would  be  difficult  to  convey  to  a  general  reader  any  idea  of  the 
terseness  with  which  the  use  of  long  compounds  enables  all  this  to  be 
expressed  in  the  original  Sanskrit.  Of  course  the  obscurity  of  the  style 
is  proportionably  great,  and  the  difficulty  of  translation  enhanced.  Mr. 
Gough,  however,  is  not  responsible  for  every  word  of  the  above. 


64  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

be  not  so  much  philosophical  categories  as  an  enumeration 
of  the  regular  stages  through  which  a  controversy  is  likely 
to  pass.  In  India  argunient  slides  into  wrangling  dispu- 
tation even  more  easily  than  in  Europe,  and  these  remain- 
ing topics  certainly  illustrate  very  curiously  the  captious 
propensities  of  a  Hindu  disputant,  leading  him  to  be  quick 
in  repartee  and  ready  with  specious  objections  in  opposi- 
tion to  the  most  conclusive  logic. 

There  is,  first,  the  state  of  Samsaya,  or  '  doubt  about  the 
point  to  be  discussed.'  Next,  there  must  be  a  Prayojana, 
or  '  motive  for  discussing  it.'  Next,  a  Drishtdnta,  or  'fami- 
liar example,'  must  be  adduced  in  order  that  a  Siddhdnta, 
or  '  established  conclusion,'  may  be  arrived  at.  Then  comes 
an  objector  with  his  Avayava,  or  'argument'  split  up,  as 
we  have  seen,  into  five  members.  Next  foUows  the  Tarha, 
or  '  refutation  (reductio  ad  absurdum)  of  his  objection,' 
and  the  Nirtmya,  or  '  ascertainment  of  the  true  state  of  the 
case.'  But  this  is  not  enough  to  satisfy  a  Hindu's  passion 
for  disputation.  Every  side  of  a  question  must  be  exa- 
mined— every  possible  objection  stated — and  so  a  further 
Vdda,  or  '  controversy,'  takes  place,  which  of  course  leads 
to  Jalpa,  '  mere  wrangling,'  followed  by  Vitanda,  '  cavil- 
ling ' ;  Hetv-dbhdsa,  '  fallacious  reasoning ' ;  ^  Chala,  '  quib- 
bling artifices' ;  Jdti,  '  futile  replies ' ;  and  Nigraha-sthdna, 
'  the  putting  an  end  to  all  discussion'  by  a  demonstration 
of  the  objector's  incapacity  for  argument. 

The  above  are  Gotama's  sixteen  topics.  After  enume- 
rating them  he  proceeds  to  state  how  deliverance  from  the 
misery  of  repeated  births  is  to  be  attained ;  thus, — ■ 


1  As  an  example  of  fallacious  argument  may  be  taken  the  sixteenth 
Aphorism  of  the  third  book  of  the  Vaiseshika  Sutras,  yasmdd  vishanl 
tasmad  asvdh,  '  because  this  has  horns,  therefore  it  is  a  horse ; '  or  the 
next  Sutra,  yasmdd  vishanl  tasmad  gauh,  '  because  it  has  horns,  therefore 
it  is  a  cow,'  which  last  is  the  fallacy  of  '  undistributed  middle.' 


THE   SYSTEMS    OF   PHILOSOPHY — VAISESHIKA.  65 

Misery,  birth,  activity,  fault,  false  notions  ;  on  the  removal  of  these  in 
turn  (beginning  with  the  last),  there  is  the  removal  also  of  that  which 
precedes  it ;  then  ensues  final  emancipation. 

That  is  to  say,  from  false  notions  comes  the  fault  of 
liking,  disliking,  or  being  indiiferent  to  anything;  from 
that  fault  proceeds  activity ;  from  this  mistaken  activity 
proceed  actions  involving  either  merit  or  demerit,  which 
merit  or  demerit  forces  a  man  nolens  volens  to  pass 
through  repeated  births  for  the  sake  of  its  reward  or 
punishment.  From  these  births  proceed  misery,  and  it  is 
the  aim  of  philosophy  to  correct  the  false  notions  at  the 
root  of  this  misery. 

A  Naiyayika  commentator,  Vatsyayana,  thus  comments 
on  the  foregoing  statement  (Banerjea,  p.  185) : — 

From  false  notion  proceed  partiality  and  prejudice ;  thence  come  the 
faults  of  detraction,  envy,  delusion,  intoxication,  pride,  avarice.  Acting 
with  a  body,  a  person  commits  injury,  theft,  and  unlawful  sensualities, — 
becomes  false,  harsh,  and  slanderous.  This  vicious  activity  produces 
demerit.  But  to  do  acts  of  charity,  benevolence,. and  service  with  the 
body ;  to  be  truthful,  useful,  agreeable  in  speech,  or  given  to  repetition 
of  the  Veda ;  to  be  kind,  disinterested,  and  reverential — these  produce 
merit  (dharma).  Hence  merit  and  demerit  are  fostered  by  activity. 
This  activity  is  the  cause  of  vile  as  well  as  honourable  births.  Attendant 
on  birth  is  pain.  That  comprises  the  feeling  of  distress,  trouble,  disease, 
and  sorrow.  Emancipation  is  the  cessation  of  all  these.  What  intelli- 
gent person  wiU  not  desire  emancipation  from  all  pain  ?  For,  it  is  said, 
food  mixed  with  honey  and  poison  is  to  be  rejected.  Pleasure  joined 
with  pain  is  to  be  avoided. 

I  pass  at  once  to  the  most  important  part  of  the  Nyaya 
system,  its  supplement : — 

The  VaiseshiJca. 

We  now  come  to  the  Vaiseshika  development  of  the 
Nyaya,  attributed   to  an    author   Kanada.^     This  is  not 

1  This  was  probably  a  mere  nickname,  meaning  '  Feeder  on  Atoms.' 
He  is  also  called  Uluka.     Gautama,  the  author  of  the  Nyaya  proper, 

E 


66  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

SO  much  a  branch  of  this  system  as  a  supplement  to  it, 
extending  the  Nyaya  to  physical  inquiries,  which  it  does 
very  imperfectly,  it  is  true,  and  often  with  strange  fancies 
and  blunders ;  but,  nevertheless,  with  occasional  exactness 
and  not  uhfrequently  with  singular  sagacity.  It  is  cer- 
tainly the  most  interesting  of  all  the  systems,  both  from 
its  more  practical  character  and  from  the  parallels  it  offers 
to  European  philosophical  ideas.  It  begins  by  arranging 
its  inquiries  under  seven  Paddrihas,  which,  as  they  are 
more  properly  categories  {i.e.,  an  enumeration  of  certain 
general  properties  or  attributes  that  may  be  predicated  or 
affirmed  of  existing  things^),  are  now  the  generally  received 
categories  of  Naiydyikas.  They  are  as  follow :  i .  Sub- 
stance (dravya).  2.  Quality  or  property  (guna).  3. 
Act  or  action  (karman).  4.  Generality  or  community  of 
properties  (sa/mdnya).  5.  Particularity  or  individuality 
(visesha).  6.  Co-inherence  or  perpetual  intimate  relation 
(samavdya).  7.  Non-existence  or  negation  of  existence 
{abhdva).^ 

had  also  a  nickname,  Alcsha-pdda,  '  eye-footed,'  having  his  eyes  always 
fixed  in  abstraction  on  his  feet,  or  supernaturally  gifted  with  eyes  in  his 
feet,  because  too  absent  to  see  with  those  in  his  head. 

1  Thus  man  is  a  substance,  so  also  is  a  chair  and  a  stone ;  whiteness, 
blackness,  breadth,  and  length,  though  very  different  things,  are  yet 
all  qualities,  &c. 

2  It  is  interesting  to  compare  the  ten  Aristotelian  categories.  They 
are:  i.  Olela,  'Substance.'  2.  Iloffo'v,  'How  much?'  'Quantity.'  3. 
ni>;ov,  '  Of  what  kind  ? '  '  Quality.'  4.  n»o's  n,  '  In  relation  to  what  ? ' 
'  Relation.'  5.  Iloiuv,  '  Action.'  6.  naffp^t/n,  '  Passiveness  '  or  '  Pas- 
sivity.' 7.  noD,  '  Where  ? '  '  Position  in  space.'  8.  IIoVe,  '  When  1 ' 
'  Position  in  time.'  g.  KfiaSai,  '  Local  situation.'  10.  "Exs",  '  Posses- 
sion.' Mr.  J.  S.  Mill,  in  his  Logic,  declares  that  this  enumeration  is 
both  redundant  and  defective.  Some  objects  are  admitted  and  others 
repeated  under  different  heads.  'It  is  like,'  he  says,  'a  division  of 
animals  into  men,  quadrupeds,  horses,  asses,  and  ponies.'  Action, 
passivity,  and  local  situation  ought  not  to  be  excluded  from  the  cate- 
gory of  relation,  and  the  distinction  between  position  in  space  and 


THE    SYSTEMS    OF   PHILOSOPHY — VAISESHIKA.  6'] 

Kanada,  however,  the  author  of  the  Sutras,  enumerated 
only  six  categories.  The  seventh  was  added  by  later 
writers.  This  is  stated  in  the  fourth  Sutra  of  Book  I. ; 
thus  (Gough's  translation,  p.  4): — 

The  highest  good  results  from  knowledge  of  the  truth  which  springs 
from  particular  merit,  and  is  obtained  by  means  of  the  similarity  and 
dissimilarity  of  the  categories,  substance,  attribute,  action,  generality, 
particularity,  co-inherence. 

The  commentator  adds  : — 

In  this  place  there  is  mention  of  six  categories,  but  in  reality  non- 
existence is  also  implied  by  the  sage  as  another  category. 

The  seven  categories  are  all  subdivided. 

Let  us  begin  with  the  first  category  of  Dravya  or '  sub- 
stance.' The  fifth  Sutra  makes  the  following  enumeration 
of  nine  Dravyas  : — 

Earth  (prithivi),  water  {apas),  light  (tejas),  air  (vayu),  ether  (dJcdsa), 
time  Qcdla),  space, (t?ii),  soul  (atman),  the  internal  organ,  mind  {manas) 
are  the  substances. 

The  commentator  adds  : — 

If  it  be  objected,  there  is  a  tenth  substance,  darkness  {tamos),  why  is 

it  not  enumerated  ?  for  it  is  recognised  by  perception,  and  substantially 

belongs  to  it,  because  it  is  possessed  of  colour  and  action ;  and  because 

-devoid  of  odour,  it  is  not  earth ;  and  because  it  possesses  dark  colour, 

local  situation  is  merely  verbal.  His  own  enumeration  of  all  existing 
or  describable  things  is  as  follows: — i.  'Feelings  or  states  of  con- 
sciousness.' Even  the  external  world  is  only  known  as  conceived  by 
the  mind.  2.  '  The  minds  '  which  experience  those  feelings.  3.  '  The 
bodies,'  supposed  to  excite  feelings  or  sensations.  4.  '  The  successions 
and  co-existences,  the  likenesses  and  unlikenesses '  between  these  feel- 
ings. Further,  he  shows  that  all  possible  propositions  affirm  or  deny 
one  or  other  of  the  following  properties  or  facts : — i.  Existence,  the 
most  general  attribute.  2.  Co-existence.  3.  Sequence  or  Succession 
4.  Causation.  5.  Resemblance.  See  Chambers's  Encyclopaedia,  under 
the  article  '  Categories.' 


68  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

it  is  not  water,  &c. :  we  reply  that  it  is  not  so,  because  it  is  illogical  to 
imagine  another  substance,  when  it  is  necessarily  produced  by  non- 
existence of  light. 

It  should  be  stated  that  of  these  substances  the  first 
four  (earth,  water,  light,  and  air)  and  the  last  (mind)  are 
held  to  be  atomic,  and  that  the  first  four  are  both  eternal 
and  non-eternal— non-eternal  in  their  various  compounds, 
eternal  in  their  ultimate  atoms,  to  which  they  must  be 
traced  back.^ 

Next  follows  the  second  category  of  '  quality.'  The 
sixth  Sutra  enumerates  seventeen  qualities  or  properties 
which  belong  to  or  are  inherent  in  the  nine  substances  : — 

Colour  (rupa),  savour  (rasa),  odour  [gandha),  tangibility  (sparsa), 
numbers  {sanhhydh),  extensions  (jparimandni),  individuality  {prithaktva), 
conjunction  {samyoga),  disjunction  (vibhdga),  priority  (jparatva),  poste- 
riority (aparatva),  intellections  (huddliayaK),  pleasure  (sukha), .  pain 
(duhkha),  desire  {iccha),  aversion  (dvesha),  volitions  (jn'ayatndh),  are 
(the  seventeen)  qualities. 

The   commentator  San-kara-misra    adds    seven    others, 

1  According  to  the  Platonic  school,  substances  (oxialai)  are  ranged 
under  two  heads — a.  voriral  xa'i  UKlvriroi ;  b.  aiaSrjTal  xai  h  xnriaii :  a.  per- 
ceptible by  the  mind  and  immovable ;  b.  perceptible  by  the  senses  and 
in  motion.     Aristotle,  in  his  Metaphysics  (XI.  i),  seems  to  divide  sub- 
stances into  three  classes — a.  Those  that  are  cognizable  by  the  mind, 
immovable,   unchangeable,   and  eternal ;    b.  Those  cognizable  by  the 
senses  and  eternal;  c.  Those  cognizable  by  the  senses  and  subject  to 
decay,  as  plants  and  animals.      Odalai  Is  rpilg-  /ula.  /j,i»,  a.'wSrirfj-  ^g  rj  //.h 
atdio;,  fi  3e  cjiSaprri,  i^v  rrAvTsg  o/xoXoyoueiv,  olov  ra  ^urd  xal  to.  ^ua-  r,  d'  ntdiog. 
"AXa*!  di  axlvriTos.     In  another  place  (VII.  8)  he  defines  substance  as  the 
essence  or  very  nature  of  a  thing  (to  ti  rjt  Jtai).     Again,  in  illustration 
(IV.  8),  he  says  that  whatever  may  be  the  cause  of  being  is  a  substance, 
as  soul  in  an  animal  (fi  ■^'"X^  '^V  Z'^v)  >  ^^^  again,  as  many  inherent 
parts  in  anything  as  define  and  indicate  what  it  is,  e.g.,  superficies,  a 
line,  number,  and  that  essence  of  which  the  formal  cause  (o  Xoyog)  is 
the  definition ;  and,  thirdly,  he  says  that  earth,  fire,  water,  &c.,  and  all 
bodies  and  all  animals  consisting  of  these,  are  substances.     See  the  Eev. 
J.  H.  M'Mahon's  useful  translation,  published  by  Bohn. 


THE   SYSTEMS   OF   PHILOSOSHY — VAI^ESHIKA.  69 

which,  he  says,  are  implied,  though  not  mentioned,  making 
twenty-four  in  all.     They  are  : — 

Gravity  (gurutva),  fluidity  (dravatva),  viscidity  (sneha),  self-reproduc- 
tion (sansJcdra,  implying — a.  impetus  as  the  cause  of  activity;  b.  elas- 
ticity ;  c.  the  faculty  of  memory),  merit,  demerit,  and  sound. 

In  point  of  fact  the  Nyaya  goes  more  philosophically 
and  more  correctly  than  the  other  systems  into  the 
qualities  of  all  substances.  The  twenty-four  which  it 
enumerates  may  be  regarded  as  separating  into  two  classes, 
according  as  they  are  the  sixteen  qualities  of  material 
substances  or  the  eight  properties  of  soul.  These  eight 
are  intellection,  volition,  desire,  aversion,  pleasure,  pain, 
merit,  and  demerit. 

The  third  category,  Karman,  '  act '  or  '  action,'  is  thus 
divided  in  Siitra  I.  i.  7  ; — 

Elevation  (literally  throwing  upwards),  depression  (throwing  down- 
wards), contraction,  dilatation,  and  going  (or  motion  in  general)  are 
the  (five  kinds  of)  acts.  [UtJcshepanam  avaJcshepanam  dkuncanam  pra- 
sdranam  gamanam  iti  karmdni.'\ 

The  fourth  category,  Sdmdnya,  '  generality,'  is  said  to 
be  twofold,  viz.,  higher  (para)  and  lower  (apara) ;  the 
first  being  '  simple  existence,'  applicable  to  genus ;  the 
second  being  '  substantiality,'  applicable  to  species. 

The  fifth  category,  Visesha,  '  particularity,'  belongs  to 
the  nine  eternal  substances  of  the  first  category,  viz.,  soul, 
time,  place,  ether,  and  the  five  atoms  of  earth,  water, 
light,  air,  and  mind,  all  of  which  have  an  eternal  ultimate 
difi"erence,  distinguishing  each  from  the  other. 

The  sixth  category,  Samavdya,  '  co-inherence '  or  '  inti- 
mate relation,'  is  of  only  one  kind.  This  relation  appears 
to  be  that  which  exists  between  a  substance  and  its 
qualities,  between  atoms  and  what  is  formed  out  of  them, 
or  between  any  object  and  the  general  idea  connected 
with  it,  and  is  thought  to  be  a  real  entity,  very  much  in 


70  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

accordance  with  the  Platonic  realism  of  the  Middle  Ages. 
It  is  the  relation  between  a  jar  .and  the  earth  which  com- 
poses it,  between  a  cloth  and  its  threads,  between  the  idea 
of  round  and  any  round  thing,  between  a  whole  and  its 
parts,  between  a  genus  or  species  and  its  individuals, 
between  an  act  and  its  agent,  between  individuality  and 
eternal  substance. 

In  connection  with  this  sixth  category  may  be  men- 
tioned the  Nyaya  theory  of  causatiou.  Sutra  I.  2.  i,  2 
states  : — 

Prom  non-existence  of  cause  (Icdrana)  is  non-existence  of  effect  (Jmrya), 
but  there  is  not  from  non-existence  of  effect  non-existence  of  cause. 

In, the  Tarka-san-graha  a  cause  is  declared  to  be  '  that 
which  invariably  precedes  an  effect  which  otherwise  could 
not  be,'  and  three  kinds  of  causes  are  enumerated,  viz. : — 

a.  Co-inherence  cause,  or  that  resulting  from  intimate  and  constant 
relation — perhaps  best  rendered  by  '  substantial  cause '  {samavdyi- 
kdrana),  as  threads  are  the  substantial  cause  of  cloth.  This  corre- 
sponds to  the  material  cause  of  Aristotle.  &.  Non-substantial  cause 
(cu-samavdyi-kdrana),  as  the  putting  together  of  the  threads  is  of  cloth. 
This  corresponds  to  the  formal  cause,  c.  Instrumental  cause  {nimitta- 
kdrana),  as  the  weaver's  tools,  the  loom,  or  the  skill  of  the  weaver 
himself,  &c.,  are  of  cloth.     This  corresponds  to  the  efficient  cause.^ 

1  Aristotle's  four  causes  are : — i.  Material  cause,  i.e.,  the  matter 
(u?.»l)  from  which  anything  is  made,  as  marble  of  a  statue,  silver  of  a 
goblet.  2.  Formal  cause,  i.e.,  the  specific  form  or  pattern  according  to 
which  anything  is  made,  as  a  drawing  or  plan  is  the  formal  cause  of 
the  building  of  a  house.  3.  Efficient  cause,  i.e.,  the  origin  of  the  prin- 
ciple of  motion  {odi\i  f)  aop^^  rra  xmrieiu;),  as  the  energy  of  a  workman  is 
the  prime  mover  in  producing  any  work.  4.  Final  cause,  i.e.,  the  pur- 
pose for  which  anything  is  made,  the  motive  for  its  production,  or  the 
end  served  by  its  existence.  According  to  Dr.  Ballantyne  (Lecture  on 
the  Nyaya,  p.  23),  Aristotle's  final  cause  has  a  counterpart  in  the 
Naiyayika's  prayojana,  i.e.,  motive,  purpose,  or  use.  The  writer  in 
Chambers's  Encyclopaedia,  under  the  head  of  '  Cause,'  shows  that  these 
causes  of  Aristotle  and  the  Nyaya  should  rather  be  called  the  aggre- 
gate of  conditions  necessary  to  the  production  of  any  work  of  man. 


THE   SYSTEMS   OP   PHILOSOPHY — VAISESHIKA.  7  I 

As  to  the  seventh  category  of  non-existence  or  negation, 
four  kinds  are  specified,  viz. : — 

a.  Antecedent  (or  the  non-existence  of  anything  before  it  began  to 
exist,  as  a  jar  not  yet  made),  b.  Cessation  of  existence  (as  of  a  jar  when 
it  is  smashed  to  pieces),  c;  Mutual  non-existence  (as  of  a  jar  in  cloth). 
d.  Absolute  non-existence  (as  of  fire  in  a  lake). 

Without  dwelling  longer  on  the  seven  categories,  we 
must  briefly  indicate  how  the  views  of  the  Nyaya  and 
Vaiseshika,  as  to  the  external  world  and  the  nature  of 
soul,  differ  from  those  of  the  other  systems.  First,  then, 
as  to  the  formation  of  the  world.  This  is  supposed  to  be 
effected  by  the  aggregation  of  Anus  or  'atoms.'  These 
are  innumerable  and  eternal,  and  are  eternally  aggregated, 
disintegrated,  and  redintegrated  by  the  power  of  Adrishta. 
According  to  Kanada's  Sutras  (IV.  i)  an  atom  is  'some- 
thing existing,  having  no  cause,  eternal '  {sad  akdranavan 
nityam).  They  are,  moreover,  described  as  less  than  the 
least,  invisible,  intangible,  indivisible,  imperceptible,  by 
the  senses ;  and — what  is  most  noteworthy  in  distinguish- 
ing the  Vaiseshika  system  from  others — as  having  each  of 
them  a  Visesha  or  eternal  essence  of  its  own.  The  com- 
bination  of   these  atoms    is   first   into    an   aojorregate  Of 

CO        o 

two,  called  Dvy-anuha.  Three  of  them,  again,  are  sup- 
posed to  combine  into  a  Trasa-rmu,  which,  like  a  mote 
in  a  sunbeam,  has  just  sufiicient  magnitude  to  be  per- 
ceptible.^ 

According  to  Colebrooke's  statement  of  the  Vaiseshika 
theory,  the  following  process  is  supposed  to  take  place  in 

1  The  binary  compound  only  differs  from  the  single  atom  by  number, 
and  not  by  measure,  size,  or  perceptibility.  Both  are  infinitesimal,  and, 
being  joined,  can  only  produce  an  infinitesimal  result  (like  multiplied 
fractions).  It  is  the  tertiary  compound  which  first  introduces  magnitude 
and  causes  measure,  just  as  a  jar's  measure  is  caused  by  that  of  its  two 
halves.     See  Professor  Cowell's  translation  of  the  Kusumanjali,  p.  66. 


73  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

the  aggregation  of  atoms  to  form  earth,  water,  light,  and 
air  : — 

Two  earthly  atoms  concurring  by  an  unseen  peculiar  virtue  (a-drishta), 
or  by  the  will  of  God,  or  by  time,  or  by  other  competent  cause,  consti- 
tute a  double  atom  of  earth ;  and  by  concourse  of  three  binary  atoms 
a  tertiary  atom  is  produced,  and  by  concourse  of  four  triple  atoms  a 
quaternary  atom,  and  so  on  to  a  gross,  grosser,  or  grossest  mass  of  earth ; 
thus  great  earth  is  produced ;  and  in  like  manner  great  water  from 
aqueous  atoms,  great  light  from  luminous,  and  great  air  from  aerial.^ 

From  the  Tarka-san-graha  we  may  continue  the  account 
thus : — 

a.  Earth  possesses  the  property  of  odour,  which  is  its  distinguishing 
quality.  It  is  of  two  kinds,  eternal  and  non-eternal — eternal  in  the  form 
of  atoms  (paramanu-rupd),  non-eternal  in  the  form  of  products  (kdrya- 
rupd).     The  non- eternal  character  of  aggregated  earth  is  shown  by  the 

1  As  these  Lectures  were  delivered  before  classical  scholars,  I  thought 
it  superfluous,  at  the  time  of  their  delivery,  to  indicate  all  the  obvious 
points  of  comparison  between  Indian  and  European  systems.  Refer- 
ence might  here,  however,  be  made  to  the  doctrines  of  Epicurus, 
especially  as  expounded  by  Lucretius,  who  begins  his  description  of  the 
coalescing  of  atoms  or  primordial  seeds  to  form  the  world  and  various 
material  objects  thus  : — 

'  Nunc  age,  quo  motu  genitalia  materialia 
Corpora  res  varias  gignant,  genitasque  resolvant 
Et  qua  vi  facere  id  cogantur,  quaeve  sit  ollis 
Eeddita  mobilitas  magnum  per  inane  meandi 
Expediam.'     (II.  61-64.) 

Nearly  the  whole  of  the  second  book  of  Lucretius  might  be  quoted. 
It  is  full  of  interest  in  connection  with  the  Yaiseshika  system.  Cicero's 
criticisms  on  the  Epicurean  theory  are  also  interesting  in  relation  to 
this  subject.  In  his  De  Natura  Deorum  (II.  37)  he  says,  'If  a  con- 
course of  atoms  could  produce  a  world  {quod  si  mundum  efficere  potest 
eoncursus  atomorum),  why  not  also  a  por,tico,  a  temple,  a  house,  a  city, 
which  are  much  less  difficult  to  form  ? '  We  might  even  be  tempted  to 
contrast  some  of  the  discoveries  of  modern  chemists  and  physicists  with 
the  crude  but  shrewd  ideas  of  Indian  philosophers  prosecuting  their 
investigations  more  than  2000  years  ago  without  the  aids  and  appli- 
ances now  at  every  one's  command. 


THE   SYSTEMS   OP   PHILOSOPHY — VAISESHIKA.  73 

want  of  permanence  in  a  jar  when  crushed  to  powder.  When  aggregated 
it  is  of  three  kinds,  organized  body  (iarlra),  organ  of  sense  (indriya), 
and  unorganic  mass  (yishaya).  The  organ  connected  with  it  is  the  nose 
or  sense  of  smell  (ghrdna),  which  is  the  recipient  of  odour,  b.  Water 
possesses  the  property  of  being  cool  to  the  touch.  It  is  also  of  two  kinds, 
eternal  and  non-eternal,  as  before.  Its  organ  is  the  tongue  or  taste 
(rasana),  the  recipient  of  savour,  which  is  one  of  the  qualities  of  water, 
c.  Light  is  distinguished  by  being  hot  to  the  feel.^  It  is  similarly  of 
two  kinds,  and  its  organ  is  the  eye  (cakshus),  the  recipient  of  colour  or 
form,  which  is  its  principal  quality,  d.  Air  is  distinguished  by  being 
sensible  to  the  touch.  It  is  similarly  of  two  kinds,  and  is  colourless. 
Its  organ  is  the  skin  (tva'c),  the  percipient  of  tangibility,  e.  Ether  is 
the  substratum  of  the  quality  of  sound.  It  is  eternal,  one,  and  all- 
pervading.     Its  organ  is  the  ear  {h-otra),  the  recipient  of  sound.  ^ 

The  great  commentator  San-karacarya  (quoted  by  Pro- 
fessor Baneijea,  p.  62)  states  the  process  thus  : — 

'  At  the  time  of  creation  action  is  produced  in  aerial  atoms,  which  is 
dependent  on  A-drishta.  That  action  joins  its  own  atom  with  another. 
Then  from  binaries,  by  gradual  steps,  is  produced  the  air.  The  same  is 
the  case  with  fire.  The  same  with  water.  The  same  with  earth.  The 
same  with  organized  bodies.  ^  Thus  is  the  whole  universe  produced  from 
atoms.'  * 

1  Light  and  heat  are  regarded  by  Naiyayikas  as  one  and  the  same 
substance.  Curiously  enough,  gold  is  described  as  mineral  {ahara-ja) 
light. 

2  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson  has  observed  (San-khya-karika,  p.  122)  that 
something  like  the  Hindu  notion  of  the  senses  and  the  elements  partak- 
ing of  a  common  nature  is  expressed  in  the  dictum  of  Bmpedocles  : — 

Talri  fj,h  yao  yaTat  ovu'Traf/.ev,  udari  3'  uSiao, 
AiSi^i  S  aUioa  biav,  olto,^  'hmoi  ttus  atbriKot. 

'  By  the  earthly  element  we  perceive  earth;  by  the  watery,  water;  by  the 
aerial  element,  the  air  of  heaven  ;  and  by  the  element  of  fire,  devouring 
fire.'  Plato,  Repub.  VI.  18,  has  the  following: — 'AXX.'  r,\ioithieTa.T6)i  yt 
clival  Tuiv  irii'i  rdg  aiaSrjeeig  ooydvuv,  ' I  regard  it  (the  eye)  as  of  all  the 
organs^  of  sense  possessing  most  likeness  to  the  sun.'  See  Muir's  Texts, 
V.  298. 

^  In  Manu  (I.  75-78)  and  the  San-khya  and  the  Vedanta  the  order  of 
the  elements  is  ether,  air,  light  or  fire,  water,  and  earth.     See  p.  83. 

*  Compare  Cicero,  De  Natura  Deorum  II.  33,  'Since  there  are  four 


74  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

With  regard  to  the  question  whether  God  or  the 
supreme  Soul  is  to  be  regarded  as  having  taken  part  in 
the  bringing  together  and  arranging  of  these  atoms,  it 
should  be  noted  that  although  the  name  of  Isvara  is  in- 
troduced ouce  into  Gotama's  Sutras/  it  is  not  found  in 
Kanada's,^  Probably  the  belief  of  both  was  that  the 
formation  of  the  world  was  simply  the  result  of  Adrishta, 
or  '  the  unseen  force,  which  is  derived  from  the  works  or 
acts  of  a  previous  world,'  and  which  becomes  in  Hindu 
philosophy  a  kind  of  god,  if  not  the  only  god  (see  p.  58). 
Later  Naiyayika  writers,  however,  affirm  the  existence  of  a 
supreme  Soul,  Paramdtman,  distinct  from  the  Jlvdtman, 
or  '  human  soul ; '  and  this  supreme  Soul  is  described  as 
eternal,  immutable,  omniscient,  without  form,  all-pervad- 
ing, all-powerful,  and,  moreover,  as  the  framer  of  the 
universe. 

Thus  the  Tarka-san-graha  states  (Ballantyne,  p.  1 2) : — 

The  seat  of  knowledge  is  tlie  soul  (atman).  It  is  twofold,  the  living 
soul  (Jlvdtman)  and  the  supreme  soul  (jiaramdtman).     The  supreme  soul 

sorts  of  elements,  the  continuance  of  the  world  is  caused  by  their  re- 
ciprocal action  and  changes  (vicissitudine).  For  from  the  earth  comes 
water ;  from  water  arises  air ;  from  air,  ether ;  and  then  conversely  in 
regular  order  backwards,  from  ether,  air ;  from  air,  water ;  from  water, 
earth,  the  lowest  element. 

1  The  Sutra  is  IV.  5.  19,  and  is  as  follows.  Some  one  suggests,  'God 
is  the  (sole)  cause,  because  we  see  that  the  acts  of  men  are  occasionally 
unattended  by  their  fruits'  (livarah  kdranam  purusha-karmdphalya- 
dar^andt).  The  next  Aphorism  is  an  answer  to  this  suggestion,  and 
seems  to  assert  that  God  was  not  the  cause  of  the  universe ;  thus,  '  Not 
so,  because  in  the  s^bsence  of  men's  acts  the  fruit  is  not  produced.' 
The  next  Aphorism  runs  thus :  '  It  (man's  agency  X)  is  not  the  (sole) 
cause,  because  that  is  caused  by  that.'  The  word  'sole,'  however,  is 
introduced  by  the  commentator,  and  all  three  Aphorisms  seem  de- 
signedly obscure. 

2  According  to  Banerjea,  p.  62 ;  but  the  commentators  say  it  is 
implied  in  the  third  Sutra. 


THE   SYSTEMS   OF   PHILOSOPHY — VAISESHIKA.  75 

is  lord,  omniscient,  one  only,  subject  to  neither  pleasure  nor  pain,  infinite 
and  eternal. 

Indeed  the  Nyaya  is  held  by  some  to  be  the  stronghold 
of  Theism. 

As  to  the  living  individual  souls  of  corporeal  beings, 
the  Njaya  view  is  that  they  are  eternal,  manifold,^  eter- 
nally separate  from  each  other  and  distinct  from  the 
body,  senses,  and  mind,  yet  capable  of  apprehension,  voli- 
tion (or  effort),  desire,  aversion,  pleasure,  pain,  merit,  and 
demerit. 

In  the  Vaiseshika  Aphorisms  (III.  2.  4)  other  charac- 
teristic signs  {lin.gdni)  of  the  living  soul  are  given,  such 
as  the  opening  and  shutting  of  the  eyes,  the  motions  of 
the  mind  and  especially  life.^  The  commentator,  in  com- 
menting upon  this,  describes  the  soul  as  the  '  governor 
or  superintendent  over  the  body.'  Here  is  the  passage 
(Gough,  p.  1 10)  : — 

Vitality  is  a  mark  of  the  existence  of  the  soul ;  for  by  the  word  '  life ' 
the  effects  of  vitality,  such  as  growth,  the  healing  of  wounds  and  bruises, 
are  implied.  For  as  the  owner  of  a  house  builds  up  the  broken  edifice 
or  enlarges  a  building  which  is  too  small,  so  the  ruler  of  the  body  effects 
by  food,  &c.,  the  increase  and  enlargement  of  the  body,  which  is  to  him 
in  the  stead  of  a  habitation,  and  with  medicine  and  the  like  causes  what 
is  wounded  to  grow  again  and  mutilated  hands  or  feet  to  heal.  Thus  a 
superintendent  of  the  body  {dehasya  adhishthdtd)  is  proved  like  a  master 
of  a  house. 

It  should  be  added  that  souls  are  held  to  be  infinite, 
ubiquitous,  and  diffused  everywhere  throughout  space,  so 

^  According  to  the  VaiseshLka-siitra  III.  2.  20,  Vyavasthdto  nana, 
'because  of  its  circumstances  (or  conditions),  soul  is  manifold.'  The 
commentator  adds,  '  Circumstances  are  the  several  conditions ;  as,  one 
is  rich,  another  mean  ;  one  is  happy,  another  unhappy ;  one  is  of  high, 
another  of  low  birth ;  one  is  learned,  another  reads  badly.  These  cir- 
cumstances evince  a  diversity  and  plurality  of  souls.' 

2  Plato  (Phaedrus  52)  defines  soul  as  ro  auri  airo  xmuv,  quoted  by 
Cicero,  Tusc.  Quaest.  I.  23. 


76  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

that  a  man's  soul  is  as  much  in  England  as  in  Calcutta, 
though  it  can  only  apprehend  and  feel  and  act  where  the 
body  happens  to  be. 

The  Nyaya  idea  of  the  mind  or  internal  organ  (Manas) 
is  that  it,  like  the  soul,  is  a  Dravya  or  '  eternal  substance.' 
Instead,  however,  of  being  diffused  everywhere  like  the 
soul,  it  is  atomic,  like  earth,  water,  fire,  and  air.  Indeed, 
if  it  were  infinite,  like  the  soul,  it  might  be  united  with  all 
subjects  at  once,  and  all  apprehensions  might  be  contem- 
poraneous, which  is  impossible.  It  is  therefore  regarded 
as  a  mere  atom  or  atomic  inlet  to  the  soul,  not  allowing 
the  latter  to  receive  more  than  one  thought  or  conception 
at  a  time.  So  in  Nyaya-sutra  I.  3.  16,  and  in  Vai^eshika 
VIII.  I.  22,  23,  it  is  affirmed  as  follows  : — 

'  The  characteristic  of  the  mind  is  that  it  does  not  give  rise  to  more 
than  one  notion  simultaneously. '  '  Ether,  in  consequence  of  its  universal 
pervasion,  is  infinitely  great,  and  so  likewise  is  soul.  In  consequence  of 
non-existence  of  that  universal  pervasion,  the  internal  organ  (mind)  is 
an  atom.'i 

In  regard  to  the  authority  to  be  accorded  to  the  Veda, 
the  views  of  the  Nyaya  appear  by  no  means  unorthodox. 
Gautama,  in  his  Aphorisms  (II.  58-60,  68),  declares 
plainly  that  the  Veda  is  not  false,  that  it  is  not  charge- 
able either  with  self-contradiction  or  tautology,,  and  that 
it  is  an  instrument  of  true  knowledge.  Similarly,  the 
third  Aphorism  of  Kanada  may  be  regarded  as  a  kind 
of  confession  of  faith  in  the  Veda,  intended  apparently, 
like  that  of  Gautama,  to  counteract  imputations  of  hetero- 
doxy. 

In  further  proof  of  the  Theism  claimed  for  the  Nyaya 

1  The  theory  propounded  by  Lucretius  was  that  the  mind  is  composed 
of  exceedingly  subtle  atoms ;  he  says  (III.  180)  of  it,  '  Esse  aio  persub- 
tilem  atque  minutis  Perquam  corporibus  factum  constare.'  As  to  ether, 
see  note  4,  p.  105. 


THE   SYSTEMS   OP   PHILOSOPHY — VAISESHIKA.  y7 

I  here  give  a  short  passage  from  the  Kusumanjali,  a 
Naiyayika  treatise  by  Udayana  Acarya,  which  will  serve 
as  a  specimen  of  the  sort  of  arguments  employed  to  prove 
the  existence  of  a  personal  God  (Isvara)  in  opposition  to 
atheistical  objectors.  This  work  has  been  ably  edited  and 
translated  by  Professor  E.  B.  Cowell.^  The  following  is 
merely  the  opening  of  the  fifth  chapter,  with  a  portion  of 
Hari-dasa's  comment : — 

An  omniscient  and  indestructible  Being  is  to  be  proved  from  tlie  exist- 
ence of  effects,  from  the  combination  of  atoms,  from  the  support  of  the 
earth  in  the  sky,  from  traditional  arts,  from  belief  in  revelation,  from 
the  Veda,  from  its  sentences,  and  from  particular  numbers. 

Comment :  The  earth  must  have  had  a  maker,  because  it  is  an  effect 
like  a  jar.  Combination  is  an  action,  and  therefore  the  action  which 
produced  the  conjunction  of  two  atoms  at  the  beginning  of  a  creation 
must  have  been  accompanied  by  the  volition  of  an  intelligent  being. 
Again,  the  world  depends  upon  some  being  who  wills  to  hinder  it  from 
falling,  like  a  stick  supported  by  a  bird  in  the  air.  Again,  the  tradi- 
tional arts  (^ada)  now  current,  as  that  of  making  cloth,  &c.,  must  have 
proceeded  from  an  independent  being.  Again,  the  knowledge  derived 
from  the  Veda  is  derived  from  a  virtue  residing  in  its  cause,  because  it 
is  true  knowledge  ^  (this  virtue  consisting  in  the  Veda's  being  uttered 
by  a  fit  person,  and  therefore  necessarily  implying  a  personal  inspirer). 

From  this  brief  statement  of  the  distinctive  features  of 
the  Nyaya  school,  it  is  clear  that  this  system,  at  least 
in  its  Vaiseshika  cosmogony,  is  dualistic  in  the  sense  of 
assuming  the  existence  of  gross  material  eternal  atoms, 

1  I  have  referred  to  his  edition  and  to  Dr.  Muir's  extracts  in  the 
appendix  to  the  third  volume  of  his  Texts. 

^  Those  who  wish  to  pursue  the  argument  should  consult  Professor 
Cowell's  translation.  It  is  interesting  to  compare  Cicero,  De  Natura 
Deorum  (II.  34)  :  '  But  if  all  the  parts  of  the  universe  are  so  constituted 
that  they  could  not  be  better  for  use  or  more  beautiful  in  appearance, 
let  us  consider  whether  they  could  have  been  put  together  by  chance 
or  whether  their  condition  is  such  that  they  could  not  even  cohere  unless 
divine  wisdom  and  providence  had  directed  them  {nisi  sensu  moderante 
divindque  providentid). ' 


78  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

side  by  side  either  with  eternal  souls  or  with  the  supreme 
Soul  of  the  universe.  It  ?ets  itself  against  any  theory 
which  would  make  an  impure  and  evil  world  spring  from 
a  pure  and  perfect  spirit.  Nor  does  it  undertake  to  decide 
positively  what  it  cannot  prove  dialectically, — the  precise 
relation  between  soul  and  matter. 


CHAPTER    V. 

The  Sdn-Miya. 

The  San-khya^  philosophy,  though  possibly  prior  in  date, 
is  generally  studied  next  to  the  Njaya,  and  is  more 
peremptorily  and  categorically  dualistic  (dvaitavddin). 
It  utterly  repudiates  the  notion  that  impure  matter  can 
originate  from  pure  spirit,  and,  of  course,  denies  that 
anything  can  be  produced  out  of  nothing. 

The  following  are  Aphorisms,  I.  78,  11 4- 11 7,  propound- 
ing its  doctrine  of  evolution,  which  may  not  be  altogether 
unworthy  of  the  attention  of  Darwinians : — 

There  cannot  be  the  production  of  something  out  of  nothing  (ndvas- 
tuno  vastu-siddhih) ;  that  which  is  not  cannot  be  developed  into  that 

1  Kapila,  the  reputed  founder  of  this  school  (sometimes  fabled  as  a 
son  of  Brahma,  sometimes  as  an  incarnation  of  Vishnu  and  identified 
with  the  sage  described  in  the  Ramayana  as  the  destroyer  of  the  sixty 
thousand  sons  of  Sagara,  who  in  their  search  for  their  father's  horse 
disturbed  his  devotions),  was  probably  a  Brahman,  though  nothing  is 
known  about  him.  See  Maha-bharata  XII.  13703.  The  word  ^ap«7a 
means  '  of  a  tawny  brown  colour,'  and  may  possibly  have  been  applied 
as  a  nickname,  like  Aksha-pada  and  Kanada.  He  is  the  supposed 
author  of  two  works,  viz.,  a.  the  original  San-khya  Siitras,  sometimes 
called  Sdnhhyorpravacana,  comprising  526  aphorisms  in  six  books;  b.  a 
short  work  called  the  Tattvasamasa  or  '  Compendium  of  Principles ' 
(translated  by  Dr.  Ballantyne).  The  original  Sutras  are  of  course 
accompanied  with  abundant  commentaries,  of  which  one  of  the  best 
known  is  the  San-khya-prava(iana-bhashya,  by  Vijnana-bhikshu,  edited 
with  an  able  and  interesting  preface  by  Dr.  Fitz-Bdward  Hall.  A 
very  useful  and  popular  compendium  of  the  doctrines  of  this  system, 
called  the  San-khya-karika,  was  edited  and  translated  by  Professor 
H.  H.  Wilson. 


80  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

which  is.  The  production  of  what  does,  not  already  exist  (potentially) 
is  impossible,  like  a  horn  on  a  man  {ndsad-utjpado  nri-sringavat) ; 
because  there  must  of  necessity  be  a  material  out  of  which  a  product 
is  developed;  and  because  everything  cannot  occur  everywhere  at  all 
times  (sarvatra  sarvadd  sarvdsambhavdt) ;  and  because  anything  possible 
must  be  produced  from  something  competent  to  produce  it.^ 

'  Thus,'  remarks  a  commentator,  '  curds  come  from  milk,  not  water. 
A  potter  produces  a  jar  from  clay,  not  from  cloth.  Production  is  only 
manifestation  of  what  previously  existed.'  Aphorism  121  adds,  'De- 
struction is  a  resolution  of  anything  into  its  cause.' 

In  the  San-khya,  therefore,  instead  of  an  analytical 
inquiry  into  the  universe  as  actually  existing,  arranged 
under  topics  and  categories,  we  have  a  synthetical  system 
propounded,  starting  from  an  original  primordial  tattva 
or  '  eternally  existing  essence,'  ^  called  Prakriti  (a  word 
meaning  'that  which  evolves  or  produces  everything  else'). 

1  See  the  note  on  the  dogma  Ex  nihilo  nihil  fit,  p.  52.  We  are  also 
here  reminded  of  Lucretius  I.  160,  &c. : — 

Nam  si  de  Nihilo  fierent  ex  omnibu'  rehus 
Omne  germs  nasci  posset ;  nil  semine  egeret ; 
E  mare  primum  homines,  e  terrd  posset  oriri 
Squammigerum  genus  et  volucres  ;  erumpere  caelo 
Armenia,  atque  aliae  peeudes  ;  genus  omne.  ferarum 
Incerto  partu  culta  ac  deserta  teneret : 
Nee  fructus  iidem  arborihus  consiare  solerent, 
Sed  mutarentur  :  ferre  omnes  omnia  possent. 

'  If  things  proceed  from  nothing,  everything  might  spring  from  every- 
thing, and  nothing  would  require  a  seed.  Men  might  arise  first  from 
the  sea,  and  fish  and  birds  from  the  earth,  and  flocks  and  herds  break 
into  being  from  the  sky ;  every  kind  of  beast  might  be  produced  at 
random  in  cultivated  places  or  deserts.  The  same  fruits  would  not 
grow  on  the  same  trees,  but  would  be  changed.  All  things  would  be 
able  to  produce  all  things.' 

^  It  is  usual  to  translate  tat-tva,  '  that-ness,'  by  '  principle ; '  but  such 
words  as  'essence,'  'entity,'  and  in  some  cases  even  'substance,'  seem 
to  convey  a  more  definite  idea  of  its  meaning.  It  corresponds  to  the 
barbarous  term  'quiddity'  (from  quid  est?),  discarded  by  Locke  and 
modern  English  philosophers.     Certainly  'nature'  is  anything  but  a 


THE   SYSTEMS    OF   PHILOSOPHY — SAN-KHYA.  8  I 

i 

It  is  described  by  Kapila  in  his  sixty-seventh  Aphorism 
as  '  a  rootless  root,'  ^  amulam  mulam,  thus  : — 

From  the  absence  of  a  root  in  the  root,  the  root  (of  all  things)  is 
rootless. 

Then  he  continues  in  his  sixty-eighth  Aphorism  : — 

Even  if  there  be  a  succession  of  causes  (one  before  the  other)  there 
must  be  a  halt  at  some  one  point ;  and  so  Prakriti  is  only  a  name  for 
the  primal  source  (of  all  productions). 

good  equivalent  for  Prakriti,  which  denotes  something  very  different 
from  matter  or  even  the  germ  of  mere  material  substances.  It  is  an 
intensely  subtle  original  essence  wholly  distinct  from  soul,  yet  capable 
of  evolving  out  of  itself  consciousness  and  mind  as  well  as  the  whole 
visible  world.  Pralca-roti  iti  praltriti  is  given  as  its  derivation  in  the 
Sarva-darsana-san-graha,  p.  147,  where  pra  seems  to  stand  for  'forth,* 
not  '  before.'  The  commentator  on  the  San-khya-karika  (p.  4)  uses  the 
word  padartha  as  applicable  to  all  the  twenty-five  Tattvas.  A  Vedan- 
tist  would  not  regard  tat-tva  as  an  abstract  noun  from  tat,  '  that,'  but 
would  say  it  meant  '  truth,'  and  in  its  etymology  contained  the  essence 
of  truth,  viz.,  tat  tvam,  '  that  art  thou.' 

^  In  a  passage  in,  the  Timaeus  (34)  Plato  propounds  a  theory  of 
creation  in  allegorical  and  not  very  intelligible  language,  which  the 
reader  can  compare  with  the  San-khyan  view :  'En  d'  out  uffl  ■jraoovn  ^^^ 
yivTi  biavuriffrivai  T^irrd,  to  /j,iv  yiyvo^/isvov,  to  &'  h  ^1  ylyvirai  rh  d'  oht  a(j>o- 
/j,oiou/j,evo\i  <j>oiTai  to  yiyvo/Litot,  xa'i  8n  xai  Tgoeiixdsoii  ^gETTt/  ri  fist  di^o/iivof 
/i7]T^i,  TO  S'  ohv  iraT^l,  rm  Si  /isra^u  TouTiav  cfiisiii  exyoKjJ,  Sih  ifi  dju  tou 
yeyovoTog  o^utou  xai  •aa.vTtai  aleSrjTOtJ  fi/rtTi^a  xal  uiro^o^ijv  h^ts  yijv  jiyiti  asga 
fju'TiTs  rfg  /u-^Ti  iidtii^\syoiijiSv,  /j,riTi  Sea  ix  tovtoiv  /ji,r;Ts  i^  (lis  toiZtk  y'lyom'  aXK' 
asoauTov  ddog  ti  xa}  a/io^(j>ov,  wavhiyig.  '  For  the  present,  therefore,  we 
ought  to  consider  three  things,  that  which  is  produced,  that  in  which 
it  is  produced,  and  that  from  which  a  thing  is  produced,  having  a 
natural  resemblance.  And  especially  it  is  proper  to  compare  that 
which  receives  to  the  mother,  that  from  which  it  receives  to  the  father, 
and  the  nature  which  is  between  these  to  the  child.  Then,  as  to  this 
mother  and  receptacle  of  things  created  which  are  visible  and  altogether 
perceptible,  we  cannot  term  it  either  earth,  air,  fire,  or  water,  nor  any 
one  of  their  compounds,  nor  any  of  the  elements  from  which  they  were 
produced,  but  a  certain  invisible  and  shapeless  essence,  which  receives 
all  things,'  &c.     Compare  note  3,  p.  51. 

F 


82  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Beginning,  then,  with  this  original  eternal  germ  or 
element,  the  San-khya  reckons  up  synthetically,  whence 
its  name  of  '  Synthetic  enumeration,'  ^  twenty-three  other 
Tattvas  or  '  entities,'  which  are  all  productions  of  the  first, 
evolving  themselves  out  of  it  as  naturally  and  spontane- 
ously as  cream  out  of  milk  or  milk  out  of  a  cow. 

The  twenty-fifth  entity  is  Purusha,  '  the  soul,'  which  is 
neither  producer  nor  produced,  but  eternal,  like  Prakriti. 
It  is  quite  distinct  from  the  producing  or  produced  ele- 
m'ents  and  creations  of  the  phenomenal  world,  though 
liable  to  be  brought  into  connection  with  them.  In  fact, 
the  object  of  the  San-khya  system  is  to  efi"ect  the  libera- 
tion of  the  soul  from  the  fetters  in  which  it  is  involved 
by  union  with  Prakriti.  It  does  this  by  conveying  the 
Prama  or  '  correct  knowledge '  of  the  twenty-four  consti- 
tuent principles  of  creation,  and  rightly  discriminating  the 
soul  from  them  ;  its  Pramdnas,  or  '  means  of  obtaining 
the  correct  measure  of  existing  things,'  being  reduced  from 
four  (see  p.  6i)  to  three,  viz.,  Drishta,  Anumdna,  and 
Apta-vacana,  '  perception  by  the  senses,  inference,  and 
credible  assertion  or  trustworthy  testimony.' 

The  third  Aphorism  of  the  San-khya-karika  thus  reckons 
up  the  catalogue  of  all  existing  entities  : — 

The  root  and  substance  of  all  things  (except  soul)  is  Prakriti.  It  is 
no  production.  Seven  things  produced  by  it  are  also  producers.  Thence 
come  sixteen  productions.  Soul,  the  twenty-fifth  essence,  is  neither  a 
production  nor  producer. 

Hence  it  appears  that  from  an  original  Prakriti  (vari- 
ously called  Mula-prahriti,  '  root-principle ; '  Amulam 
mulam, '  rootless  root ; '  Pradhdna, '  chief  one ; '  A-vyahta, 

1  Hence  Sir  "W.  Jones  called  the  San-khya  the  Numeral  philosophy. 
It  has  been  compared  partly  with  the  metaphysics  of  Pythagoras, 
partly  (in  its  Yoga)  with  the  system  of  Zeno ;  also  with  that  of 
Berkeley. 


THE   SYSTEMS    OP   PHILOSOPHY — SAN-KHYA.  83 

'  unevolved  evolver ; '  Brahman,  '  supreme  ; '  Maya, 
*  power  of  illusion '  ^),  seven  other  producers  are  evolved, 
and  as  so  evolved  are  regarded  as  Vikaras  or  *  produc- 
tions.' The  first  production  of  the  original  producer  is 
Buddhi,  commonly  called  '  intellect  or  intellectual  percep- 
tion' (and  variously  termed  Mahat,  from  its  being  the 
Great  source  of  the  two  other  internal  faculties,  Ahankara 
and  Manas  or  ' seLf-consciousness  and  mind').  Third  in 
order  comes  this  Ahan-hdra,  the  '  I-making '  faculty,  that 
is,  self-consciousness  or  the  sense  of  individuality  (some- 
times conveniently  termed  '  Ego-ism '),  which  produces 
the  next  five  principles,  called  Tanmdtras  or  '  subtle 
elementary  particles,'  out  of  which  the  grosser  elements 
(Mahd-bhuta)  are  evolved.^  These  eight  constitute  the 
producers. 

Then  follow  the  sixteen  that  are  productions  ( Vikdra) 
only ;  and  first  in  order,  as  produced  by  the  Tanmdtras, 
come  the  five  grosser  elements  already  mentioned,  viz. : — 

a.  AJcdsa,^  'ether,'  with  the  distinguishing  property  of  sound,  or,  in 
other  words,  the  substratum  of  sound  (which  sound  is  the  vishaya  or 
object  for  a  corresponding  organ  of  sense,  the  ear),     b.  Vdyu,  'air,' 

1  According  to  Gaudapada's  commentary  on  San-khya-karika,  22. 

^  These  Tanmatras  appear  nearly  to  correspond  to  the  wpZra  gmx^Ja 
of  Plato  (Theaet.  139),  or  rather  to  the  SToi^^sia  aroi^ii'aiv,  'elements  of 
elements'  (Theaet.  142),  and  to  the  g/^w/^ara  of  Empedocles. 

3  Akasa,  as  shown  elsewhere  (see  p.  105,  note  4),  must  not  be  exactly 
identified  with  the  modern  '  ether,'  though  this  word  is  usually  taken  as 
its  nearest  possible  equivalent.  In  some  of  its  properties  and  functions 
it  more  corresponds  with  the  inane,  '  vacant  space,'  of  Lucretius.  Qua- 
propter  locus  est  intactus  Inane,  vacansque  (I.  335).  At  any  rate,  one 
synonjrm  of  dkdia  is  sunya.  Cicero,  De  Nat.  Deorum  II.  40,  seems  to 
identify  ether  with  sky  or  space,  which  stretches  to  the  remotest  point 
and  surrounds  all  things.  The  Ramayana,  II.  no.  5,  makes  Brahma 
spring  from  ether,  but  the  Epic  and  Puranic  accounts  of  akasa  are  very 
inconsistent.  Some  say  that  it  was  created  and  is  perishable,  others 
that  it  was  not  created  and  is  eternal.  See  Muir's  Texts,  IV.  119, 
Maha-bharata  XII.  6132. 


84  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

with  the  property  of  tangibility  (which  is  the  vishaya  for  the  skin), 
c.  Tejas  or  jyotis,  '  fire  or  light,'  with  the  property  of  form  or  colour 
(which  is  the  vishaya  for  the  eye),  d.  .4^as,  'water,'  with  the  property 
of  savour  or  taste  (which  is  the  vishaya  for  the  tongue),  e.  Prithivi  or 
hhumi,  '  earth,'  with  the  property  of  odour  or  smell  (which  is  the  vishaya 
for  the  nose). 

Each  of  these  elements  after  the  first  has  also  the  pro- 
perty or  properties  of  the  preceding  besides  its  own. 

Next  follow  the  eleven  organs  produced,  like  the  Tan- 
matras,  by  the  third  producer,  Ahan-kara,  viz.,  the  five 
organs  of  sense,  the  five  organs  of  action,^  and  an  eleventh 
organ  standing  between  these  two  sets,  called  Manas,  '  the 
mind,'  which  is  an  internal  organ  of  perception,  volition, 
and  action. 

The  eight  producers,  then,  with  the  five  grosser  elements, 
ether,  air,  fire,  water,  earth,  and  with  the  eleven  organs, 
constitute  the  true  elements  and  constituent  substances  of 
the  phenomenal  world.  As,  however,  the  most  important 
of  the  producers,  after  the  mere  unintelligent  original 
germ,  is  the  third,  called  Ahan-kdra,  '  self-consciousness 
or  individuality,'  it  is  scarcely  too  much  to  maintain  that, 
according  to  the  San-khya  view,  the  whole  "world  of  sense 
is  practically  created  by  the  individual  Ego,^  who  is, 
nevertheless,  quite  distinct  from  the  soul,  as  this  soul 
is  supposed  to  possess  in  itself  no  real  consciousness  of 
separate  individuality,  though  deluded  by  it. 

It  should  also  be  noted  that,  according  to  the  San-khya 
theory,  Prakriti,  though  a  subtle  elementary  essence,  is 


1  The  five  organs  of  sense  or  perception  {buddhmdriydni)  are,  ear, 
skin,  eye,  nose,  tongue ;  those  of  action  (Jtarmendriydni)  are,  larynx, 
hand,  foot,  and  the  excretory  and  generative  organs. 

2  This  idea  of  personal  iadividual  creation  is  what  chiefly  distinguishes 
the  San-khya  from  the  pantheism  of  the  Vedanta,  which  denies  aU  real 
personal  individuality.  It  has  also  led  to  the  San-khya  system  being 
compared  to  the  theory  of  Berkeley. 


THE   SYSTEMS    OF   PHILOSOPHY — SAN-KHYA.  85 

yet  to  be  regarded  as  consisting  of  three  ingredients  or 
constituent  principles  in  equipoise,  called  Gunas.  These 
are  Sattva,  Rajas,  and  Tamas,  '  goodness  or  purity,  passion 
or  activity,  and  darkness  or  ignorance.' 

Thus  Kapila  (Aphorism  6 1 )  affirms  as  follows  : — 

Prakriti  is  the  state  of  equipoise  (Sdmydvasthd)  of  goodness,  passion, 
and  darkness. 

Evidently,  then,  these  three  constituents  of  the  primal 
elementary  germ  are  really  themselves  elementary  sub- 
stances, and  not  qualities,  although  they  are  called  Gunas, 
and  although  such  expressions  as  goodness,  purity,  &c., 
convey  more  the  notion  of  a  quality  than  of  any  actual  sub- 
stance.    According  to  the  San-khya-pravacana-bhashya, — 

These  Gunas  are  not  like  the  '  qualities '  of  the  Vaiseshika.  They 
are  substances  possessing  themselves  qualities  or  properties,  such  as 
conjunction,  disjunction,  lightness,  motion,  weight,  &c.  The  word 
Guna,  therefore,  is  employed  because  these  three  substances  form  the 
triple  cord  by  which  the  soul,  like  an  animal  {■purusliOrpasu),  is  bound.  1 

It  is  plain,  indeed,  that  as  one  meaning  of  the  word 
Guna  is  '  rope '  or  '  cord,'  the  San-khya  three  Gunas  may 
be  supposed  to  act  like  a  triple-stranded  rope,  binding  and 
confining  souls  in  different  degrees.^  In  point  of  fact, 
goodness,  passion,  and  darkness  are  imagined  to  be  the 
actual  substances  of  which  Prakriti  is  constituted,  just  as 
trees  are  the  constituents  of  a  forest.  Moreover,  as  they 
are  the  ingredients  of  Prakriti,  so  they  make  up  .the  whole 

^  Aristotle  (Metaph.  I.  3)  describes  primordial  substance  as  under- 
going changes  through  different  affections,  something  after  the  manner 
of  the  San-khya  Gunas.     See  note  3,  p.  51. 

2  Manu  states  the  doctrine  of  the  three  Gunas  very  similarly  (XII.  24, 
25,  &c.)  :  '  One  should  know  that  the  three  Gunas  (bonds  or  fetters)  of 
the  soul  are  goodness,  passion,  and  darkness  (bound) ;  by  one  or  more  of 
these,  it  continues  incessantly  attached  to  forms  of  existence.  When- 
ever any  one  of  the  three  Gunas  predominates  wholly  in  a  body,  it  makes 
the  embodied  spirit  abound  in  that  Guna.' 


86  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

world  of  sense  evolved  out  of  Prakriti.  Except,  however, 
in  the  case  of  the  original  producer,  they  are  not  con- 
joined in  equal  quantities.  They  form  component  parts 
of  everything  evolved,  but  in  varying  proportions,  one  or 
other  being  in  excess.  In  other  words,  they  affect  every- 
thing in  creation  unequally  ;  and  as  they  affect  man,  make 
him  divine  and  noble,  thoroughly  human  and  selfish,  or 
bestial  and  ignorant,  according  to  the  predominance  of 
goodness,  passion,  or  darkness  respectively.  The  soul,  on 
the  other  hand,  though  bound  by  the  Gunas,  is  itself  wholly 
and  entirely  free  from  such  constituent  ingredients  (nir- 
guna).  It  stands  twenty-fifth  in  the  catalogue  of  Tattvas, 
and  is  to  be  wholly  distinguished  from  the  creations  evolved 
by  the  three  evolvers,  Prakriti,  Buddhi,  and  Ahankdra. 
It  has,  in  short,  nothing  whatever  in  common  with  the 
world-evolver,  Prakriti,  except  eternal  existence. 

But  although  Prakriti  is  the  sole  originator  of  creation, 
yet,  according  to  the  pure  San-khya,  it  does  not  create  for 
itself,  but  rather  for  each  individual  soul  which  comes  into 
connection  or  juxtaposition  with  it,  like  a  crystal  vase 
with  a  flower.  Souls,  indeed,  exist  eternally  separate  from 
each  other  and  from  the  world-evolver  Prakriti ;  and  with 
whatever  form  of  body  they  may  be  joined,  they  are  held 
to  be  all  intrinsically  equal,  and  each  retains  its  individu- 
ality, remaining  one  and  unchanged  through  all  transmigra- 
tions.^ But  each  separate  soul  is  a  witness  of  the  act  of 
creation  without  participating  in  the  act.     It  is  a  looker- 


1  This  separate  eternal  existence  of  innumerable  individual  souls  is 
the  great  feature  distinguishing  the  Nyaya  and  San-khya  from  the 
Vedanta,  which  holds  the  oneness  of  all  soul.  And  yet  it  would  seem 
that  each  soul  must  be  regarded  as  universally  diffused  both  in  San-khya 
and  Nyaya  (see  p.  75) ;  for  unless  the  soul  is  all-pervading  it  cannot  be 
eternal.  All  Hindus  hold  that  nothing  can  be  eternal  that  is  divisible 
into  parts ;  and  all  things  have  parts  except  the  infinite  (soul)  and  the 
infinitesimal  (atoms). 


THE   SYSTEMS   OP   PHILOSOPHY — SAN-KHYA.  8/ 

on,  uniting  itself  with  unintelligent  Prakriti,  as  a  lame 
man  mounted  on  a  blind  man's  shoulders,  for  the  sake 
of  observing  and  contemplating  the  phenomena  of  crea- 
tion, which  Prakriti  herself  is  unable  to  observe.  In  the 
San-khya-karika  (19)  we  read  : — 

The  soul  is  witness,  solitary,  bystander,  spectator,  and  passive.  For 
its  contemplation  of  Prdlmti  the  union  of  both  takes  place,  as  of  the 
halt  and  blind ;  by  that  union  a  creation  is  formed. 

It  appears,  too,  that  all  Prakriti's  performances  are 
solely  for  the  benefit  of  soul,  who  receives  her  favours 
ungratefully.  Thus,  in  the  San-khya-karika  59,  60,  we 
have  the  following  : — 

As  a  female  dancer,  having  exhibited  herself  to  a  spectator,  desists 
from  the  dance,  so  does  Prakriti  desist,  having  manifested  herself  to 
soul.  By  various  means  Prakriti,  endowed  with  qualities  {gunavat), 
acting  as  a  benefactress,  accomplishes  without  profit  to  herself  the 
purpose  of  soul,  who  is  devoid  of  qualities  {aguiia)  and  makes  no  return 
of  benefit. 

In  fact,  Prakriti  is  sometimes  reproached  with  boldness 
in  exposing  herself  to  the  gaze  of  soul,  who  takes  no  in- 
terest whatever  in  the  sight.  There  is  something  to  a 
European  mind  very  unreal,  cloudy,  and  unpractical  in  all 
this.  Certainly  no  one  can  doubt  that  the  San-khya  view 
of  the  soul  is  inferior  to  that  of  the  Nyaya,  which  ascribes 
to  it,  when  joined  to  mind,  activity,  volition,  thought,  and 
feeling  (see  p.  76).  Obviously,  too,  its  view  of  all  existing 
things  is  even  more  atheistical  than  that  of  the  earliest 
Naiyayikas.  For  if  the  creation  produced  by  the  Evolver, 
Prakriti,  has  an  existence  of  its  own  independent  of  all 
connection  with  the  particular  Purusha  to  which  it  is 
joined,  there  can  be  no  need  for  an  intelligent  Creator  of 
the  world  or  even  of  any  superintending  power.^ 

1  I  presume  this  is  the  reason  why  in  a  catalogue  of  MSS.  edited 
by  Rajendralal  Mitra  the  San-khya  is  styled  the  Hylotheistic  philo- 
sophy. 


88  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Here  are  two  or  three  of  Kapila's  Aphorisms  bearing 
upon  the  charge  of  atheism  brought  against  him.  An 
objection  is  made  that  some  of  his  definitions  are  incon- 
sistent with  the  supposed  existence  of  a  supreme  Lord 
(Isvara).  To  this  he  replies  in  the  ninety-second  and 
following  Aphorisms,  thus : — 

(They  are  not  inconsistent)  because  tlie  existence  of  a  supreme  Lord 
is  unproved  (Isvardsiddheh).  Since  he  could  not  be  either  free  (fron:i 
desires  and  anxieties)  or  bound  by  troubles  of  any  kind,  there  can  be 
no  proof  of  his  existence.  Either  way  he  could  not  be  effective  of  any 
creation.  (That  is,  if  he  were  free  from  anxieties  he  could  have  no 
wish  to  create  ;  and  if  he  were  bound  by  desires  of  any  kind,  he  would 
then  be  under  bondage,  and  therefore  deficient  in  power.) 

The  commentary  of  Gauda-pada  on  San-khya-karika  6i 
ought,  however,  to  be  here  quoted : — 

The  San-khya  teachers  say,  '  How  can  beings  composed  of  the  three 
Gunas  proceed  from  Isvara  (God),  who  is  devoid  of  Gunas  ?  Or  how 
can  they  proceed  from  soul,  equally  devoid  of  qualities  1  Therefore 
they  must  proceed  from  Prakriti.  Thus  from  white  threads  white  cloth 
is  produced  ;  from  black  threads,  black  cloth ; '  and  so  from  Prakriti, 
composed  of  the  three  Gunas,  the  three  worlds  composed  of  the  three 
Gunas  are  produced.  God  (Isvara)  is  free  from  Gunas.  The  production 
of  the  three  worlds  composed  of  the  Gunas  from  him  would  be  an 
inconsistency. 

Again,  with  reference  to  the  soul,  we  have  the  following 
in  Kapila's  ninety-sixth  Aphorism  : — 

'  There  is  a  ruling  influence  of  the  soul  (over  Prakriti)  caused  by 
their  proximity,  just  as  the  loadstone  (draws  iron  to  itself).'  That  is, 
the  proximity  of  soul  to  Prakriti  impels  the  latter  to  go  through  the 
steps  of  production.  This  sort  of  attraction  between  the  two  leads  to 
creation,  but  in  no  other  sense  is  soxil  an  agent  or  concerned  in  creation 
at  all.i 

1  It  is  stated  in  Kapila's  fifty-eighth  Aphorism,  quoted  by  Dr.  Bal- 
lantyne,  that  the  bondage  of  the  soul  caused  by  its  union  with  Prakriti 
is  after  all  merely  nominal,  and  not  real,  because  it  resides  in  the  mind, 
and  not  in  the  soul  itself  {vdnmdtram  na  tu  tattvam  citta-sthiteh).  See 
Mullens'  Essay,  p.  1 83. 


THE   SYSTEMS   OF   PHILOSOPHY — SAN-KHYA.  89 

Notwithstanding  these  atheistical  tendencies,  the  San- 
khya  evades  the  charge  of  unorthodoxy  by  a  confession  of 
faith  in  the  Veda,     Hence  in  Aphorism  98  we  have : — 

The  declaration  of  the  meaning  of  the  texts  of  the  Veda  is  an 
authority,  since  the  author  of  them  knew  the  established  truth. 

And  it  should  be  noted  that  some  adherents  of  the 
San-khya  maintain  the  existence  of  a  supreme  Soul,^  called 
Hiranya-garbha,  and  of  a  general  ideal  phenomenal  uni- 
verse with  which  that  supreme  Soul  is  connected  and  into 
which  all  the  subcreations  of  inferior  souls  are  by  him 
gathered.  Nor  can  it  be  affirmed  that  the  San-khya  proper 
commits  itself  to  a  positive  denial  of  the  existence  of  a 
supreme  Being,  so  much  as  to  an  ignoring  of  what  the 
founder  of  the  school  believed  to  be  incapable  of  dialectic 
demonstration.  As,  however,  the  original  World-evolver 
only  evolves  the  world  for  the  sake  of  the  spectator,  soul, 
this  is  practically  an  admission  that  there  can  be  no 
realization  of  creation  without  the  union  of  Prakriti  with 
Purusha,  the  personal  soul.  In  all  probability  Kapila's 
own  idea  was  that  every  Purusha,  though  he  did  no^ 
himself  create,  had  his  own  creation  and  his  own  created 
universe  comprehended  in  his  own  person.^  It  may  easily 
be  supposed  that  this  union  of  Purusha  and  Prakriti 
began  soon  to  be  compared  to  that  of  male  and  female ; 
and  it  may  be  conjectured  that  the  idea  of  the  production 
of  the  universe  by  the  male  and  female  principles  asso- 
ciating together,  which  was  symbolized  by  the  Ardha-nari 
form  of  Siva,  and  which  lies  at  the  root  of  the  whole  later 


1  Or,  according  to  Professor  E.  B.  Cowell,  '  personified  Sum  of  exist- 
ence.'    Elphinstone's  India,  p.  126,  note. 

^  Something  after  the  manner  of  Berkeley,  who  held  that  the  '  with- 
out '  was  all  within,  though  he  believed  in  the  real  existence  of  external 
objects  produced  by  other  minds  and  wills. 


go  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

mythology  of  India,  was  derived  mainly  from  the  San-khya 
philosophy. 

It  was  not  indeed  to  be  expected  that  the  uneducated 
masses  could  make  anything  of  a  metaphysical  mysticism 
which  could  not  be  explained  to  them  in  intelligible  lan- 
guage. How  could  they  form  any  notion  of  a  primordial 
eternal  energy  evolving  out  of  itself  twenty-three  other 
elements  or  substances  to  form  a  visible  world  for  the  soul, 
described  as  apathetic,  inactive,  devoid  of  all  qualities, 
and  a  mere  indifferent  spectator,  though  in  close  contact 
with  the  individual '  Evolver  and  deluded  by  its  self- 
consciousness  ?  But  they  could  well  understand  the  idea 
of  a  universe  proceeding  from  Prakriti  and  Purusha  as 
from  mother  and  father.  Indeed  the  idea  of  a  union 
between  the  female  principle,  regarded  as  an  energy, 
and  the  male  principle,  is  of  great  antiquity  in  Hindi! 
systems  of  cosmogony.  In  the  Rig-veda  and  Brahmanas 
there  are  various  allusions,  as  we  have  already  seen,  to 
a  supposed  union  of  Earth  and  Heaven,  who  together 
produce  men,  gods,  and  all  creatures.^ 

Buddhism,  moreover,  which  represented  many  of  the 
more  popular  philosophical  ideas  of  the  Hindus  perhaps  as 
early  as  the  fifth  century  B.C.,  has  more  in  common  with 
San-khya  doctrines  than  with  any  of  the  other  systems. 

Even  the  cosmogony  of  Manu,  although  a  compound 
of  various  theories,  presents  a  process  of  evolution  very 
similar,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,  to  that  of  the  San-khya. 

Again,  the  antiquity  and  prevalence  of  San-khyan  ideas 
is  proved  by  the  frequent  allusions  to  them  in  the  great 
Indian  epic  poem,  called  Maha-bharata ;  ^  and  the  per- 


1  See  Muir's  Texts,  vol.  v.  pp.  22,  23. 

2  In  the  Sabha-parvan  (Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  173)  Krishna  is  described  as 
undeveloped  Prakriti,  the  eternal  creator  (esha  prahritir  a-vyaktd  Jcartd 
caiva  sandtanah).     On  the  other  hand,  in  the  Vana-parvan  (1622,  &c., 


THE   SYSTEMS   OF   PHILOSOPHY — SANKHYA.  9  I 

manence  of  their  popularity  till  at  least  the  first  century 
of  our  era  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  the  celebrated 
philosophical  poem  called  Bhagavad-gita  attempts  to  re- 
concile the  San-khya  with  Vedaatist  views.''^ 

Perhaps,  however,  the  extensive  prevalence  of  San-khyan 
ideas  in  India  is  best  shown  by  the  later  cosmogony  and 
mythology.  In  those  repositories  of  the  popular  Hindu 
creed,  the  Puranas  and  Tantras,  Praknti  becomes  a  real 
Mother  of  the  universe.  It  is  true  that  in  some  of  the 
Puranas  there  is  occasional  confusion  and  perversion  of 
San-khyan  doctrines.  Tims,  for  example,  in  the  Vishnu- 
purana  I.  2.  22,  we  have  the  following  : — 

'  There  was  neither  day  nor  night,  neither  sky  nor  earth ;  there  was 
neither  darkness  nor  light  nor  anything  else.  There  was  then  the  One, 
Brahma,  the  Male,  possessing  the  character  of  Pradhana  {prddhdnika).'  ^ 
And  farther  on  :  '  The  principles  or  elements,  commencing  with  Mahat, 
presided  over  by  Purusha  and  under  the  influence  of  Pradhana,  generated 
an  egg,  which  became  the  receptacle  of  Vishnu  in  the  form  of  Brahma.' 

But  generally  in  the  later  mythology,  especially  as 
represented  by  the  Tautras,  the  San-khya  principle  of 
Prakriti  takes  the  form  of  female  personifications,  who 
are  thought  of  as  the  wives  or  creative  female  energies 
of  the  principal  male  deities,  to  whom,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  name  Purusha,  in  the  sense  of  the  supreme  Soul  or  the 
supreme  Male,  is  sometimes  applied.^  This  is  especially 
the  case  with  the  Sakti  or  female  energy  of  Siva,  wor- 
shipped by  a  vast  number  of  persous  as  the  true  Jagad- 
amhd,  or  '  Mother  of  the  universe.' 

Muir,  vol.  iv.  p.  195)  the  god  S'iva  is  declared  to  be  the  cause  of  the 
causes  of  the  world  (Jokoy-lidrana-kdranam),  and  therefore  superior  and 
antecedent  to  Pradhana  and  Purusha.  Again,  in  S'anti-parvan  12725, 
12737,  i3°4i)  &°-)  the  sons  of  Brahma  are  called  Prakritayah. 

1  See  Chapter  VII.  on  the  Eclectic  School  and  Bhagavad-gita. 

^  Compare  the  Rig-veda  hymn,  translated  at  p.  19  of  this  book. 

3  Vishnu  or  Krishna  is  called  Purushottama,  and  the  name  Purusha 
is  equally  given  to  Brahma  and  S'iva. 


92  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

These  proofs  of  the  ancient  popularity  of  the  San-khya 
and  its  influence  on  the  later  naythology  may  help  us  to 
understand  that,  although  in  modern  times  there  are  com- 
paratively few  students  of  the  San-khya  among  the  Pandits 
of  India,  there  is  still  a  common  saying  current  every- 
where (which  will  be  found  in  Maha-bharata,  Sauti-parvan, 
1 1676),  Ndsti  Sdn-khya-samamjndnam  ndsti  Yoga-samam 
balam,  '  There  is  no  knowledge  equal  to  the  San-khya  and 
no  power  equal  to  the  Yoga.' 

The  Yoga. 

The  Yoga,^  commonly  regarded  as  a  branch  of  the 
San-khya,  is  scarcely  worthy  of  the  name  of  a  system  of 
philosophy,  though  it  has  undoubted  charms  for  the 
naturally  contemplative  and  ascetical  Hindu,  and  lays 
claim  to  greater  orthodoxy  than  the  San-khya  proper, 
by  directly  acknowledging  the  existence  of  Is'vara  or  a 
supreme  Being.^  In  fact,  the  aim  of  the  Yoga  is  to  teach 
the  means  by  which  the  human  soul  may  attain  complete 
union  with  the  supreme  Soul.  This  fusion  (laya)  or 
union  of  individual  with  universal  spirit  may  be  effected 
even  in  the  body.  According  to  Patanjali,  the  author  of 
the  system,  the  very  word  Yoga  is  interpreted  to  mean 
the  act  of  '  fixing  or  concentrating  the  mind  in  abstract 
meditation,'  and  this  is  said  to  be  efi'ected  by  preventing 

1  I  have  given  a  later  account  of  the  Yoga  and  its  connection  with 
Buddhism  in  my  recent  work  on  Buddhism  (John  Murray,  Albemarle 
Street,  London),  p.  223. 

2  The  Yoga  was  propounded  by  Patanjali  (of  whom  nothing  is 
known,  except  that  he  was  probably  not  the  same  person  as  the  author 
of  the  Maha-bhashya)  in  Aphorisms  called  the  Yoga-sutra,  a  work  in 
four  books  or  chapters,- two  of  which,  with  some  of  the  commentary  of 
Bhoja-raja  or  Bhoja-deva,  were  translated  by  Dr.  Ballantyne.  Other 
commentators  were  Vadaspati-misra,  Vijnaiia-bhikshu,  and  Nagoji- 
bhatta. 


THE   SYSTEMS   OF   PHILOSOPHY — YOGA.  93 

the  modifications  of  Oitta  or  the  thinking  principle  [which 
modifications  arise  through  the  three  Pramanas,  percep- 
tion, inference,  and  verbal  testimony,  as  well  as  through 
incorrect  ascertainment,  fancy,  sleep,  and  recollection],  by 
the  constant  habit  (ahhydsa)  of  keeping  the  mind  in  its 
unmodified  state — a  state  clear  as  crystal  when  uncoloured 
by  contact  with  other  substances — and  by  the  practice  of 
Vairagya — that  is,  complete  suppression  of  the  passions. 
This  Vairagya  is  only  to  be  obtained  by  Isvara-pranid- 
hdna  or  the  contemplation  of  the  supreme  Being,  who  is 
defined  to  be  a  particular  Purusha  or  Spirit  unaff"ected  by 
works,  afflictions,  &c.,  and  having  the  appellation  Pranava 
or  Om.  The  repetition  of  this  monosyllable  is  supposed 
to  be  attended  with  marvellous  results,  and  the  muttering 
of  it  with  reflection  on  its  meaning  ^  is  said  to  be  con- 
ducive to  a  knowledge  of  the  Supreme  and  to  a  preven- 
tion of  all  the  obstacles  to  Yoga.  The  eight  means  of 
mental  concentration  are — i.  Yama,  'forbearance,'  're- 
straint.' 2.  Niyama,  '  religious  observances.'  3.  Asana, 
'  postures.'  ^  4.  Prdndydma,  '  suppression  of  the  breath  ' 
or  '  breathing  in  a  peculiar  way.'  5.  Pratyahdra,  '  re- 
straint of  the  senses.'  6.  Dhdrdna,  '  steadying  of  the 
mind.'  7.  Dhydna,  '  contemplation.'  8.  Samddhi,  '  pro- 
found meditation,'  or  rather  a  state  of  religious  trance, 
which,  according  to  the  Bhagavad-gita  (VI.  13),  is  most 
eflfectually  attained  by  such  practices  as  fixing  the  eyes 
intently  and  incessantly  on  the  tip  of  the  nose,  &c.*     The 

1  Om  is  supposed  to  be  composed  of  the  three  letters  A,  U,  M,  which 
form  a  most  sacred  monosyllable  (eMkshara),  significant  of  the  supreme 
Being  as  developing  himself  in  the  Triad  of  gods,  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and 
S'iva.     See  Bhagavad-gita  VIII.  13,  and  especially  Manu  II.  83,  84. 

^  One  of  these  postures  is  called  paryan-ha-bandhana  or  paryanka- 
granthi,  '  bed-binding  '  or  '  bed-knot,'  and  is  performed  by  sitting  on 
the  hams  with  a  cloth  fastened  round  the  knees  and  back.  See  line  i 
of  the  Mri<5-6hakatika. 

^  See  the  account  of  the  Bhagavad-gita,  p.  130  of  this  volume. 


94  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

system  of  Yoga  appears,  in  fact,  to  be  a  mere  contrivance 
for  getting  rid  of  all  thought,  or  at  least  for  concentrat- 
ing the  mind  with  the  utmost  intensity  upon  nothing 
in  particular.  It  is  a  strange  compound  of  mental  and 
bodily  exercises,  consisting  in  unnatural  restraint,  forced 
and  painful  postures,  twistings  and  contortions  of  the 
limbs,  suppressions  of  the  breath,  and  utter  absence  of 
mind.  But  although  the  Yoga  of  Patanjali  professes  to 
effect  union  with  the  universal  Spirit  by  means  such 
as  these,  it  should  be  observed  that  far  more  severe 
austerities  and  self-imposed  physical  mortifications  are 
popularly  connected  with  the  Yoga  system.  All  Hindii 
devotees  and  ascetics,  especially  those  who,  as  forming 
a  division  of  the  Saiva  sect,  identify  the  terrific  god  Siva 
with  the  supreme  Being,  are  commonly  called  Yogins  or 
Yogis,  and  indeed  properly  so  called,  in  so  far  as  the  pro- 
fessed object  of  their  austerities  is  union  with  the  Deity.-' 

The  variety  and  intensity  of  the  forms  of  austerity  prac- 
tised by  such  Yogis  in  India  would  appear  to  surpass  all 
credibility  were  they  not  sufficiently  attested  by  trust- 
worthy evidence.  A  few  illustrations  may  not  be  out  of 
place  here,  or  at  least  may  be  instructive,  especially  as 
bearing  upon  an  interesting  field  of  inquiry,  viz.,  first,  how 
is  it  that  faith  in  a  false  system  can  operate  with  sufficient 
force  upon  a  Hindu  to  impel  him  to  submit  voluntarily  to 
almost  incredible  restraints,  mortifications  of  the  flesh,  and 
physical  tortures  ?  and  secondly,  how  is  it  that  an  amount 
of  physical  endurance  may  be  exhibited  by  an  apparently 
weakly  and  emaciated  Asiatic,  which  would  be  impossible 
in  a  European,  the  climate  and  diet  in  the  one  case  tend- 
ing to  debilitate,  in  the  other  to  invigorate  ? 


1  The  name  Fakir  or  Faqir,  sometimes  given,  to  Hindu  devotees, 
ought  to  be  restricted  to  Muslims.  It  is  an  Arabic  word,  meaning 
'  poor,'  '  indigent.' 


THE   SYSTEMS    OF   PHILOSOPHY — YOGA.  95 

In  the  Sakuntala  (Act  VII.  verse  175)  there  is  a  de- 
scription of  an  ascetic  engaged  in  Yoga,  whose  condition 
of  fixed  trance  and  immovable  impassiveness  had  lasted  so 
long  that  ants  had  thrown  up  a  mound  as  high  as  his 
waist  without  being  disturbed,  and  birds  had  built  their 
nests  in  the  long  clotted  tresses  of  his  tangled  hair.  This 
may  be  thought  a  mere  flight  of  poetical  fancy,  but  a 
Mohammedan  traveller,  whose  narrative  is  quoted  by  Mr. 
MiU  (British  India,  I.  355),  once  actually  saw  a  man  in 
India  standing  motionless  with  his  face  turned  towards 
the  sun.  The  same  traveller,  having  occasion  to  revisit 
the  same  spot  sixteen  years  afterwards,  found  the  very 
same  man  in  the  very  same  attitude.  Such  men  have 
been  known  to  fix  their  gaze  on  the  sun's  disk  till  sight 
has  been  extinguished.  This  is  paralleled  by  a  particular 
form  of  austerity  described  in  Manu  VI.  23,  where  men- 
tion is  made  of  the  Panca-tapds,  a  Yogi  who,  during  the 
three  hottest  months  (April,  May,  and  June),  sits  between 
four  blazing  fires  placed  towards  the  four  quarters,  with 
the  burning  sun  above  his  head  to  form  a  fifth.  In  fact, 
a  Yogi  was  actually  seen  not  long  ago  (Mill's  India,  I. 
353)  seated  between  four  such  fires  on  a  quadrangular 
stage.  He  stood  on  one  leg  gazing  at  the  sun  while  these 
fires  were  lighted  at  the  four  corners.  Then  placing  him- 
self upright  on  his  head,  with  his  feet  elevated  in  the 
air,  he  remained  for  three  hours  in  that  position.  He  then 
seated  himself  cross-legged  and  continued  bearing  the 
raging  heat  of  the  sun  above  his  head  and  the  fires  which 
surrounded  him  till  the  end  of  the  day,  ofecasionally  add- 
ino-  combustibles  with  his  own  hands  to  increase  the 
flames. 

Again,  in  the  Asiatic  Monthly  Journal  for  March  1829, 
an  account  is  given  of  a  Brahman  who,  with  no  other 
apparatus  than  a  low  st;ool,  a  hollow  bamboo,  and  a  kind 
of  crutch,  poised  himself  apparently  in  the  air,  about  four 


96  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

feet  from  the  ground,  for  forty  minutes.  This  actually 
took  place  before  the  governor  of  Madras.  Nor  does  there 
appear  to  be  any  limit  to  the  various  forms  of  austerity 
practised  by  Hindii  devotees.  We  read  of  some  who 
acquire  the  power  of  remaining  under  water  for  a  space 
of  time  quite  incredible ;  of  others  who  bury  themselves 
up  to  the  neck  in  the  ground,  or  even  below  it,  leaving 
only  a  little  hole  through  which  to  breathe ;  of  others 
who  keep  their  fists  clenched  for  years  till  the  nails  grow 
through  the  back  of  their  hands ;  of  others  who  hold  one 
or  both  arms  aloft  till  they  beconie  immovably  fixed  in 
that  position  and  withered  to  the  bone ;  of  others  who 
roll  their  bodies  for  thousands  of  miles  to  some  place  of 
pilgrimage;  of  others  who  sleep  on  beds  of  iron  spikes. 
One  man  was  seen  at  Benares  (described  in  the  Asiatic 
Researches,  vol.  v.  p.  49)  who  was  alleged  to  have  used 
such  a  bed  for  thirty-five  years.  Others  have  been  known 
to  chain  themselves  for  life  to  trees ;  others,  again,  to 
pass  their  lives,  heavily  chained,  in  iron  cages.  Lastly, 
the  extent  to  which  some  Indian  ascetics  will  carry  fast- 
ing far  exceeds  anything  ever  heard  of  in  Europe,  as  may 
be  understood  by  a  reference  to  the  rules  of  the  lunar 
penance  given  by  Manu  (XL  20,  XL  216-220).  This 
penance  is  a  kind  of  fast  which  consists  in  diminishing 
the  consumption  of  food  every  day  by  one  mouthful  for 
the  waning  half  of  the  lunar  month,  beginning  with 
fifteen  mouthfuls  at  the  full  moon  until  the  quantity  is 
reduced  to  o  at  the  new  moon,  and  then  increasing  it 
in  like  manner  during  the  fortnight  of  the  moon's  increase. 

Of  course  all  these  mortifications  are  explicable  by  their 
connection  with  the  fancied  attainment  of  extraordinary 
sanctity  and  supernatural  powers. 

As  a  conclusion  to  the  subject  of  Yoga,  I  quote  a  re- 
markable passage  from  Professor  Banerjea  (Dialogues,  pp. 
69,  70) :— 


THE   SYSTEMS   OP    PHILOSOPHY — YOGA.  97 

The  Yogi  may  not  see  or  hear  what  passes  around, — he  may  be  in- 
sensible to  external  impressions,  but  he  has  intuition  of  things  which 
his  neighbours  cannot  see  or  hear.  He  becomes  so  buoyant,  or  rather 
so  sublimated  by  his  Yoga,  that  gravitation,  or,  as  Bhaskaradarya  calls 
it,  the  attractive  power  of  the  earth,  has  no  influence  on  him.  He  can 
walk  and  ascend  in  the  sky,  as  if  he  were  suspended  under  a  balloon. 
He  can  by  this  intuitive  process  inform  himself  of  the  mysteries  of 
astronomy  and  anatomy,  of  all  things,  in  fact,  that  may  be  found  in  any 
of  the  different  worlds.  He  may  call  to  recollection  the  events  of  a 
previous  life.  He  may  understand  the  language  of  the  brute  creation. 
He  may  obtain  an  insight  into  the  past  and  future.  He  may  discern 
the  thoughts  of  others.  He  may  himself  vanish  at  pleasure,  and,  if  he 
choose  to  do  so,  enter  into  his  neighbour's  body  and  take  possession  of 
his  living  skin. 

By  these  and  other  doctrines  of  Hindu  philosophy  we 
are  often  reminded  that  the  human  mind  repeats  itself 
according  to  the  sentiment  expressed  in  Ecclesiastes  i.  9, 
'  The  thing  that  hath  been,  it  is  that  whicli  shall  be ;  and 
that  which  is  done  is  that  which  shall  be  done  :  and  there 
is  no  new  thing  under  the  sun.'  Certainly  almost  all 
extravagant  ideas  now  current  seem  to  have  their  counter- 
part, if  not  their  source,  in  the  East.  The  practisers  of 
self-imposed  superstitious  restraints  and  mortifications,  not 
to  speak  of  the  votaries  of  animal  magnetism,  clairvoyance, 
and  so-called  spiritualism,  wiU  find  most  of  their  theories 
represented  or  rather  far  outdone  by  corresponding  notions 
existing  in  this  Yoga  system  invented  by  the  Hindiis  con- 
siderably more  than  2000  years  ago,  and  more  or  less 
earnestly  believed  in  and  sedulously  practised  up  to  the 
present  day. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

The  Purva-mimdnsd  and  Veddnta. 

Our  next  subject  is  the  Mimansa  of  Jaimini/  which  is 
sometimes  connected  with  the  Vedanta,  this  latter  being 
called  the  Uttara-mlmdnsd  or  Brahma -mlmdnsd — as 
founded  on  the  Upanishads  or  latter  part  of  the  Vedas 
— while  Jaimini's  system  is  styled  the  Purva-mimmisd 
or  Karma-mimdnsd,  as  concerned  with  the  Mantras  and 
Brahmanas  only.  It  is  more  usual,  however,  to  indicate 
the  opposition  of  the  two  systems  to  each  other  by  calling 
the  one  Mimansa  and  the  other  Vedanta.  In  fact,  Jaimini's 
system,  like  the  Yoga,  cannot  suitably  be  called  a  subdivi- 
sion of  any  other  system,  for  it  is  in  real  truth  not  a 
system  of  philosophy,  but  rather  of  ritualism.  It  does 
not  concern  itself,  like  the  other  systems,  with  investiga- 
tions into  the  nature  of  soul,  mind,  and  matter,  but  with 
a  correct  interpretation  of  the  ritual  of  the  Veda  and  the 
solutions  of  doubts  and  discrepancies  in  regard  to  Vedic 
texts  caused  by  the  discordant  explanations  of  opposite 

1  Jaimini,  as  usual,  enunciated  his  doctrines  in  aphorisms.  His  work 
called  the  Mimansa-sutra  or  Jaimini- siitra  is  in  twelve  books.  It  has 
been  partly  edited  and  translated  by  Dr.  Ballantyne.  A  commentary 
on  it  was  written  by  S'abara-svamin,  which  is  being  published  in  the 
Bibliotheca  Indica,  and  this  again  was  commented  on  by  the  celebrated 
Mimansa  authority,  Kumarila  (also  styled  Kumarila-bhatta,  Kumarila- 
svamin),  whose  work  was  again  followed  by  numerous  other  commen- 
taries and  treatises.  A  compendious  explanation  of  the  system,  called 
Jaiminlya-nydya-mdld-vistara,  was  written  by  Madhavadarya.  Jaimini 
must  have  been  a  learned  Brahman,  but  nothing  is  known  as  to  the 

date  of  his  life. 

98 


THE   SYSTEMS   OF   PHILOSOPHY — PURVA-MIMANSA,        QQ 

schools.  Its  only  claim  to  the  title  of  a  philosophy 
consists  in  its  mode  of  interpretation,  the  topics  being 
arranged  according  to  particular  categories  (such  as  autho- 
ritativeness,  indirect  precept,  &e.),  and  treated  according 
to  a  kind  of  logical  method,  commencing  with  the  pro- 
position to  be  discussed,  the  doubt  arising  about  it,  the 
Purva-pahsha  or  prim4  facie  and  wrong  view  of  the 
question,  the  Uttara-paksha  or  refutation  of  the  wrong 
view,  and  the  conclusion.  'The  main  design  of  the  whole 
system  appears  to  be  to  make  a  god  of  ritualism.  Hence 
it  consists  chiefly  of  a  critical  commentary  on  the  Brah- 
mana  or  ritual  portion  of  the  Veda  in  its  connection  with 
the  Mantras,  the  interpretation  given  being  an  exposition 
of  the  obvious  literal  sense  and  not  of  any  supposed  occult 
meaning  underlying  the  text,  as  in  the  Upanishads  and 
Vedanta.  Jaimini  was,  in  point  of  fact,  the  opponent  of 
both  rationalism  and  theism.  Not  that  he  denied  a  God, 
but  the  real  tendency  of  his  teaching  was  to  allow  no 
voice  or  authority  to  either  reason  or  God.  The  Veda 
was  to  be  everything.  A  supreme  Being  might  exist, 
but  was  not  necessary  to  the  system.  The  Veda,  said 
Jaimini,  is  itself  authority  and  has  no  need  of  an  Autho- 
rizer.  His  first  Aphorism  states  the  whole  aim  and 
object  of  his  system,  viz.,  a  desire  to  know  duty  (dharma- 
jijndsa).     When  amplified,  it  may  be  thus  stated  : — 

Understand,  O  student,  that,  after  studying  the  Veda  with  a  pre- 
ceptor, a  desire  to  know  Dharma  or  duty  is  to  be  entertained  by  thee. 

The  fifth  Aphorism  asserts  the  strange  doctrine  of  an 
original  and  perpetual  connection  between  a  word  and  its 
sense.     It  is  thus  paraphrased  : — 

The  connection  of  a  word  with  its  sense  is  contemporaneous  with  the 
origin  of  both.  In  consequence  of  this  connection,  the  words  of  the 
Yeda  convey  unerring  instruction  in  the  knowledge  of  duty. 

But  it  is  to  be  understood  that  Dharma  or  duty  con- 


lOO  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

sists  in  the  performance  of  the  ritual  acts  prescribed  by 
the  Veda  because  they  are  so  prescribed,  without  reference 
to  the  will  or  approval  of  any  personal  god,  for  Dharma 
is  itself  the  bestower  of  reward.  Some  recent  Miman- 
sakas,  however,  maintain  that  Dharma  ought  to  be  per- 
formed as  an  offering  to  a  supreme  Being,  and  that  it 
is  to  be  so  performed  as  a  means  of  emancipation.  Even 
a  verse  of  the  Bhagavad-gita  is  quoted  in  support  of 
this  view.  Krishna,  regarded  by  his  worshippers  as  a 
manifestation  of  the  supreme  lord  of  the  universe,  says 
to  Arjuna, — 

Whatever  thou  doest,  whatever  thou  eatest,  whatever  thou  sacrificest, 
whatever  thou  givest  away,  whatever  austerity  thou  practisest,  do  that 
as  an  offering  to  me  (IX.  27).  (See  Lecture  VII.  on  the  Eclectic  School 
and  Bhagavad-gita,  p.  131  of  this  volume.) 

Some  singular  speculations  occur  in  Jaimini's  system. 
As  he  maintains  the  inherent  authority  of  the  Veda, 
without  any  dependence  on  an  eternal  Authorizer  or 
Eevealer,  so  he  asserts  its  own  absolute  eternity,  and 
declares  that  only  eternally  pre-existing  objects  ate  men- 
tioned in  it.  This  theory  is  supported  by  affirming  that 
sound  is  eternal,  or  rather  that  an  eternal  sound  underlies 
all  temporary  sound.  From  Aphorism  18  we  gather  the 
following  : — 

Sound  must  be  eternal,  because  its  utterance  [exhibition]  is  intended 
to  convey  a  meaning  to  others.  If  it  were  not  eternal  it  would  not  con- 
tinue till  the  hearer  had  learned  its  sense,  and  thus  he  would  not  learn 
the  sense,  because  the  cause  had  ceased  to  exist. 

If,  on  the  other  hand  (says  a  commentator),  it  continues  to  exist  for 
any  period,  however  short,  after  ceasing  to  be  perceived,  it  is  impossible 
to  assign  any  other  instant  at  which  there  is  any  evidence  of  the  dis- 
continuance of  its  existence,  whence  its  eternity  is  inferred.  ^ 

1  See  Muir's  Texts,  voL  iii.  pp.  53,  57;  Dr.  Ballantyne's  Mimansa- 
sutra,  p.  23. 


THE   SYSTEMS   OF   PHILOSOPHY — VEDANTA.  lOI 

This  eternity  of  sound  is  further  pretended  to  be  estab- 
lished by  the  two  following  short  passages,  one  from  the 
Rig-veda  (VIII.  64.  6)  and  one  from  Smriti,  with  which 
I  close  this  brief  notice  of  the  Mimansa  : — 

'  Send  forth  praises,  O  Viriipa,  with  an  eternal  voice.' 
'  An  eternal  voice,  without  beginning  or  end,  was  uttered  by  the 
self-existent.'  ^ 

Let  me  conclude  these  remarks  on  the  singular  theory 
of  the  eternity  of  sound  by  observing  that  the  Chinese  are 
said  to  have  a  saying,  '  The  echoes  of  a  word  once  uttered 
vibrate  in  space  to  all  eternity.' 


The  Vedanta. 

Of  orthodox  systems  there  only  remains  the  Vedanta  of 
Vyasa  or  Badarayana ;  ^  but  this  is  in  some  respects  the 

1  The  whole  text  of  the  Rig-veda  (VIII.  64  or  75.  6)  is  Tasmai  nunam 
dbhidyave  vdcd  Virupa  nityayd,  vrishne  eodasva  sushtutim,  '  send  forth 
praises  to  this  heaven-aspiring  and  prolific  Agni,  0  Viriipa,  with  an 
eternal  voice.'  Nitya,  though  taken  by  the  Mimausakas  in  the  sense  of 
'  eternal,'  probably  means  only  '  unceasing.'  Dr.  Muir's  Texts,  vol.  iii. 
p.  51.  The  text  from  Smriti  has  only  as  yet  been  found  in  Maha- 
bharata,  S'anti-parvan  8.  533,  An-ddi-iiidhand  nityd  vdg  utsrishtd 
svayamrbhwvd. 

^  The  reputed  author  of  this  system,  Badarayana,  is  very  loosely 
identified  with  the  legendary  person  named  Vyasa,  who  is  supposed  to 
have  arranged  the  Vedas  and  written  the  Maha-bharata,  Puranas,  and 
a  particular  Dharma-sastra  or  law-book.  No  doubt  the  name  Vyasa, 
'arranger,'  was  applied  as  a  kind  of  title  to  various  great  writers  or 
compilers,  and  in  this  sense  it  seems  to  have  been  given  to  the  founder 
of  the  Vedanta  system.  He  propounded  his  views,  as  usual,  in  Sutras, 
but  Badarayana's  Aphorisms  are  generally  called  Brahma-sutra,  or 
sometimes  S'ariraka-siitra,  and  the  system  itself  is  variously  styled 
Brahma-mimansa  and  S'ariraka-mimansa  (investigation  into  the  supreme 
Soul  or  embodied  Spirit).  The  text  of  the  Siitras  and  the  celebrated 
commentary  by  S'an-karadarya  have  been   edited   in  the  Bibliotheca 


102  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

most  important  of  all  the  six,  both  from  its  closer  con- 
formity to  the  pantheistic  doctrines  propounded  in  the 
Upanishads,  on  which  treatises  as  forming  the  end  of  the 
Veda  it  professes  to  be  founded,  and  from  its  greater  adap- 
tation to  the  habits  of  thought  common  among  thinking 
and  educated  Hindiis,  as  much  in  present  as  in  former 
periods.  The  pantheism  pervading  the  Upanishads  and 
leading  directly  to  the  Vedanta  system  has  already  been 
illustrated  by  a  selection  of  examples. 

The  following  simple  confession  of  a  Vedantist's  faith 
can  be  added  from  the  Chandogya  Upanishad  (III.  14) : — 

All  this  universe  (rh  mv)  indeed  is  Brahma ;  from  him  does  it  pro- 
ceed ;  into  him  it  is  dissolved ;  in  him  it  breathes.^  So  let  every  one 
adore  him  calmly. 

Here,  then,  we  have  presented  to  us  a  different  view  of 
the  origin  of  the  world.  In  the  Nyaya  it  was  supposed 
to  proceed  from  a  concurrence  of  innumerable  eternal 
atoms ;  in  the  San-khya  from  one  original  eternal  element 
called  Prakriti ;  both  operating  independently,  though  as- 
sociated with  eternal  spirits,  and,  according  to  one  view, 
presided  over  by  a  supreme  Spirit.  But  in  the  Vedanta 
there  is  no  real  material  world  at  all,  as  distinct  from  the 
universal  Spirit.  Hence  the  doctrine  of  this  school  is  called 
A-dvaita,  '  non-dualism.'  The  universe  exists  but  merely 
as  an  illusory  form  of  tlxe  one  eternal  essence  [to  eV).  He  is 
the  all-pervading  Spirit,  the  only  really  existing  substance 

Indica  by  Dr.  Rder,  and  a  portion  translated  by  Professor  Banerjea. 
Dr.  Ballantyne  also  edited  and  translated  a  portion  of  the  Siitras  and 
commentary  and  a  popular  compendium  called  the  Vedanta-sara.  A 
vast  number  of  other  commentaries  and  treatises  on  the  Yedanta  exist. 
1  This  is  expressed  in  the  text  by  one  compound,  taj-jaldn,  interpreted 
as  equivalent  to  taj-ja,  tal-la,  tad-ana.  The  whole  text  is  sarvam  khalv 
idam  hrdhma  taj-jaldn  iti  sdnta  updsita.  The  philosophy  of  the  Siif  is, 
alleged  to  be  developed  out  of  the  Kuran  (see  p.  33),  appears  to  be  a 
kind  of  pantheism  very  similar  to  that  of  the  Vedanta. 


THE   SYSTEMS   OF   PHILOSOPHY — VEDANTA.  103 

(vastu).  Even  as  early  as  the  E-ig-veda  the  outlines  of 
this  pantheistic  creed,  which  became  more  definite  in  the 
Upanishads  and  Vedanta,  may  be  traced.  The  germ  of 
the  Vedanta  is  observable  in  the  Purusha-sukta,  as  we 
have  already  shown  by  the  example  given  at  p.  21.  The 
early  Vedantic  creed  has  the  merit  of  being  exceedingly 
simple.  It  is  comprised  in  these  three  words,  occurring  in 
the  Chandogya  Upanishad  (see  p.  38),  Eham  evadvitiyam, 
'  one  only  Essence  without  a  second  ; '  or  in  the  following 
line  of  nine  short  words,  Brahma  satyam  jagan  mithyd 
jivo  brahmaiva  ndparah,  '  Brahma  is  true,  the  world  is 
false,  the  spirit  is  only  Brahma  and  no  other.' 

As  the  Nyaya  has  much  in  common  with  the  practical 
philosophy  of  Aristotle,  which  gave  to  things  and  indi- 
viduals, rather  than  to  ideas,  a  real  existence,  so  the 
Vedanta  offers  many  parallels  to  the  idealism  of  Plato.'^ 

^  Plato  does  not  always  state  his  theory  of  ideas  very  intelligibly, 
and  probably  modified  them  in  his  later  works.  He  seems,  however, 
to  have  insisted  on  the  doctrine  that  mind  preceded  and  gave  rise  to 
matter,  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  whole  material  world  proceeded 
from  or  was  actually  produced  by  the  Creator  according  to  the  idea  or 
pattern  of  a  world  gxisting  eternally  and  for  ever  the  same  in  his  own 
mind.  In  the  Timaeus  (10)  he  says:  'To  discover  the  Maker  and 
Father  of  this  universe  (tou  Trairds)  is  difficult,  and,  when  he  has  been 
discovered,  it  is  impossible  to  describe  him  to  the  multitude.  Accord- 
ing to  which  of  two  patterns  (tpos  mrspoti  ruv  •jra.^a&ei'yfidTcat)  did  he 
frame  the*  world  ?  According  to  one  subsisting  for  ever  the  same  1  Or 
according  to  one  which  was  produced  1  Since,  then,  this  universe  is 
beautiful  and  its  Artificer  good,  he  evidently  looked  in  modelling  it  to 
an  eternal  (aidtov)  pattern.'  Similarly,  Plato  seems  to  have  held  that 
the  human  mind  has  existing  within  it  certain  abstract  ideas  or  ideal 
forms  which  precede  and  are  visibly  manifested  in  the  actual  concrete 
forms  around  us.  For  example,  the  abstract  ideas  of  goodness  and 
heauty  are  found  pre-existing  in  the  mind,  and,  as  it  were,  give  rise  to 
the  various  good  and  beautiful  objects  manifested  before  our  eyes.  In 
the  same  manner  all  circular  things  must  have  been  preceded  by  some 
ideal  circular  form  existing  as  an  eternal  reality.     For,  according  to 


104  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Badaray ana's  very  first  Aphorism  states  the  object  of 
the  M'hole  system  in  one  compound  word,  viz.,  Brahma- 
jijnasd,  '  Brahma-inquisitiveness,'  i.e.,  the  desire  of  know- 
ing Brahman  (neut.),  or  the  only  really  existing  being. 

Here  we  may  quote  a  portion  of  San-karacarya's  com- 
mentary (Eoer's  edition,  pp.  29  and  43) : — 

The  knower  of  Brahma  attains  the  supreme  good  and  supreme  object 
of  man  [param  purushdrtham  =  to  dyaSov,  rb  aileron,  summum  bonum). 

A  really  existing  substance  (vastu)  cannot  alternately  be  thus  and 
not  thus,  cannot  (optionally)  be  and  not  be.  The  knowledge  of  a  sub- 
stance just  as  it  is  in  reality  {i.e.,  true  knowledge)  is  not  dependent 
on  a  man's  own  personal  notions  {na  purusha-huddhy-apeksham).'^  It 
depends  on  the  substance  itself.  To  say  of  one  and  the  same  post  that 
it  is  either  a  post  or  a  man  or  something  else  is  not  true  knowledge 
{tattvorjndnam).  It  is  a  false  notion  (mMhya^jndnam)?  That  it  is  a 
post  is  alone  the  truth,  because  it  is  dependent  on  the  substance  itself 
{vastiir-tantratvdt).  Thus  the  proving  of  an  existing  substance  is  depen- 
dent on  the  substance  itself.  Thus  the  knowledge  of  Brahma  is  depen- 
dent on  the  substance  itself  (not  on  the  notion  a  man  may  form  of 
Brahma),  because  it  relates  to  a  reaUy  existing  substance  (hhuta-vastu- 
visliayatvdt). 


Plato,  these  abstract  ideas  had  a  real,  eternal,  unchanging  existence  of 
their  own,  quite  separate  from  and  independent  of  the  ever-varying 
concrete  objects  and  appearances  connected  with  them. 

1  S'an-kara  appears  here  to  argue  against  a  doctrine  like  that  ascribed 
to  Protagoras,  Tatrm  /i'sTgov  avd^ta'jTci,  '  the  individual  man  is  the  stan 
dard  of  all  things.' 

^  One  of  Plato's  causes  of  mistaken  notion  is  that  when  two  persons 
or  things  have  been  seen  and  their  forms  impressed  on  the  mind,  they 
are  yet,  owing  to  imperfect  observation,  mistaken  the  one  for  the 
other :  '  It  remains  that  I  may  form  a  false  notion  in  this  case  when 
knowing  you  and  Theodorus  and  having  the  impression  of  both  of  you  on 
that  waxen  tablet  of  the  mind  {U  Ixe/kw  5-jB  xjig/njj)  made  by  a  seal  ring 
as  it  were,  seeing  you  both  from  a  distance  and  not  sufficiently  distin- 
guishing you,  I  fit  the  aspect  of  each  to  the  impression  of  the  other, 
changing  them  like  those  that  put  their  shoes  on  the  wrong  feet :  ran 
In  aufifSoimi  ri  iregodo^ia  x.al  rh  -vJ/euSij  Sti^df^em,'  Theaet.  122.  Compare 
Banerjea's  translation  of  the  Brahma-sutra,  p.  2. 


THE   SYSTEMS    OP   PHILOSOPHY — VEDANTA.  I05 

In  the  second  Aphorism  Brahma  ^  is  defined  to  mean 
'  that  from  which  the  production  of  this  universe  results.' 

San-kara  adds  a  fuller  definition,  thus  (Roer's  edition, 
p.  38)  :- 

Brahma  is  that  all-knowing,  all-powerful  Cause  from  which  arises 
the  production,  continuance,  and  dissolution  of  the  universe,  which 
(universe)  is  modified  by  name  and  form,  contains  many  agents  and 
patients  Qcartri-hhoktri-samyuMa),  is  the  repository  {ah-aya)  of  actions 
and  effects,  and  in  the  form  of  its  arrangement  cannot  be  conceived 
even  by  the  mind. 

The  Aphorisms  which  follow,  as  far  as  the  28th,  proceed 
to  define  and  describe  the  character  of  God  as  the  supreme 
Soul  of  the  universe.  I  here  give  a  summary^  of  the  most 
interesting  of  them,  with  portions  of  the  commentary  : — 

That  the  supreme  Being  is  omniscient  follows  from  the  fact  that  he 
is  the  source  of  the  Veda  (^dstra-yonitvdt).  As  from  that  Being  every 
soul  is  evolved,  so  to  that  same  Being  does  every  soul  return.  How 
can  souls  be  merged  into  Prakriti  ?  ^  for  then  the  intelligent  would  be 
absorbed  in  the  unintelligent.  He,  the  supreme  Being,  consists  of 
joy.  This  is  clear  from  the  Veda,  which  describes  him  as  the  cause 
of  joy;  for  as  those  who  enrich  others  must  be  themselves  rich,  so 
there  must  be  abundant  joy  with  him  who  causes  others  to  rejoice. 
Again,  he,  the  one  God,  is  the  light  (jyotis).  He  is  within  the  sun 
and  within  the  eye.     He  is  the  ethereal  element  (dkdsa).*     He  is  the 

1  The  name  Brahman  is,  in  fact,  derived  from  the  root  brih  or  vrih, 
'to  grow  and  expand,'  and  therefore  means  literally  the  one  essence 
which  grows  or  expands.      Vriksha,  '  a  tree,'  is  from  the  same  root. 

^  See  Dr.  Ballantyne's  translation,  and  that  of  Professor  Banerjea. 

3  The  Prakriti  or  Pradhana  of  the  San-khya  system. 

*  Professor  Banerjea  considers  that  the  word  '  ether '  is  not  a  good 
rendering  for  akdsa,  which  pervades  everything.     There  is  akasa  in 
our  cups  and  within  our  bodies,  which  are  surely  not  ethereal.     One 
of  the  synonyms  of  akasa  is  iunya,  and  this  may  be  compared  in  some 
respects  to  the  'inane'  or  space  of  Lucretius  (I.  330) : — 
Nee  tamen  undique  corpored  stipata  tenentur 
Omnia  naturd  ;  namque  est  in  rebus  inane. 
'  And  yet  all  things  are  not  on  all  sides  held  and  jammed  together  in 
close  and  solid  parts;  there  is  a  space  (or  void)  in  things.' 


I06  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

life  and  the  breath  of  life  (prdna).  He  is  the  life  with  which  Indra 
identified  himself  when  he  said  to  Pratardana,  '  I  am  the  life,  consist- 
ing of  perfect  knowledge.     Worship  me  as  the  life  immortal. '^ 

From  other  portions  of  the  Aphorisms  it  appears  that 
the  TO  ev,  or  one  universal  essence  called  Brahma,  is  to 
the  external  world  what  yarn  is  to  cloth,  what  milk  to 
curds,  what  earth  to  a  jar,  and  gold  to  a  bracelet.  He 
is  both  creator  and  creation,^  actor  and  act.  He  is  also 
Existence,  Knowledge,  and  Joy  {Sa6-6id-dnanda),  but  is 
at  the  same  time  without  parts,  unbound  by  qualities 
(nir-guna,  see  p.  85),  without  action,  without  emotion, 
having  no  consciousness  such  as  is  denoted  by  '  I '  and 
'  Thou,'  *  apprehending  no  person  or  thing,  nor  appre- 
hended by  any,  having  neither  beginning  nor  end,  im- 
mutable, the  only  real  entity. 

This  is  surely  almost  tantamount  to  asserting  that 
pure  Being  is  identical  with  pure  Nothing,  so  that  the 
two  extremes  of  Buddhistic  Nihilism  and  Vedantic  Pan- 
theism, far  as  they  profess  to  be  apart,  appear  in  the  end 
to  meet. 


1  This  is  from  the  Kaushitaki-brahmana  TJpanishad,  chapter  3.  See 
Professor  B.  B.  Cowell's  translation. 

2  A  true  Vedantic  spirit  is  observable  in  the  Orphic  hymns  when 
they  identify  Zeus  with  the  universe ;  thus,  '  Zeus  is  the  ether ;  Zeus 
is  the  earth;  Zeus  is  the  heaven;  Zeus  is  all  things.'  Orphic.  Fragm. 
I^'  363,  VI.  366.     Compare  also  Virgil,  Aeneid  VI.  724,  &c. : — 

'  Principio  caelum  ac  terras,  camposque  liquentes 
Lucentemque  globum  Lunae,  Titaniaque  astra, 
Spiritus  intus  alit,  totamque  infusa  per  artus 
Mens  agitat  molem  et  magno  se  corpore  miscet.' 

3  As  shown  by  Professor  Banerjea,  S'an-kara  compares  the  second 
person  Thou  with  darkness,  because  there  cannot  be  a  real  Thou.  So 
S'an-kara  affirms  that  '  Thou '  and  '  I '  are  as  opposed  as  darkness  and 
light.  Plato  speaks  similarly  of  darkness  and  light  in  connection  with 
nonentity  and  real  entity.     Sophist.  254. 


THE   SYSTEMS    OF   PHILOSOPHY VEDANTA.  I07 

I  add  two  or  three  extracts  from  San-karacarya's  com- 
ment on  Sutra  11.  i.  34  :  ^ — 

It  may  be  objected  that  God  is  proved  not  to  be  the  cause  of  the 
universe.  Why  1  From  the  visible  instances  of  injustice  {vaisliamya) 
and  cruelty  {nairghrinyay.  Some  he  makes  very  happy,  as  the  gods,  &c. ; 
some  very  miserable,  as  the  brutes,  &c.  j  and  some  in  a  middling  condi- 
tion, as  men,  &c.  Being  the  author  of  such  an  unjust  creation,  he  is 
proved  to  be  subject  to  passions  like  other  persons — that  is  to  say,  to 
partiality  and  prejudice — and  therefore  his  nature  is  found  wanting  in 
spotlessness.  And  by  dispensing  pain  and  ruin,  he  is  chargeable  with 
malicious  cruelty,  deemed  culpable  even  among  the  wicked.  Hence, 
because  of  the  instances  of  injustice  and  cruelty,  God  cannot  be  the 
cause  of  the  universe.  To  this  we  reply  :  Injustice  and  cruelty  cannot 
be  charged  upon  God.  Why  1  Because  he  did  not  act  independently 
(sdpekshatvdt).  God  being  dependent  {sdpekshah)  creates  this  world  of 
inequalities.  If  you  ask  on  what  he  is  dependent,  we  reply,  on  merit 
and  demerit  (dharmddharmau).  That  there  should  be  an  unequal 
creation  dependent  on  the  merit  and  demerit  of  the  souls  created,  is  no 
fault  of  God,  As  the  rain  is  the  common  cause  of  the  production  of 
rice  and  wheat,  but  the  causes  of  their  specific  distinctions  as  rice  and 
wheat  are  the  varying  powers  of  their  respective  seeds  ;  so  is  God  the 
common  cause  in  the  creation  of  gods,  men,  and  others ;  but  of  the  dis- 
tinctions between  gods,  men,  and  others,  the  causes  are  the  varying 
works  inherent  in  their  respective  souls. 

In  commenting  on  the  next  Aphorism  (35),  he  answers 
the  objection,  '  How  could  there  be  previous  works  at  the 
original  creation  ?  '  The  objection  and  reply  are  thus 
stated :  ^ — 

The  supreme  Being  existed  at  the  beginning,  one  without  a  second 
(see  p.  103).  Hence,  before  the  creation  there  could  be  no  works  in 
dependence  on  which  inequalities  might  be  created.  God  may  be. 
dependent   on  works  after  distractions  are  made.      But   before  the 

^  Quoted  by  Professor  Banerjea  and  Mr.  Mullens,  and  translated  by 
them.  Dialogues,  p.  120,  &c.  Essay  on  Hindu  Philosophy,  p.  190. 
The  Aphorism  is,  Vaishamya-nairghrinye  na  sdpekshatvdt  tathdhi  dar- 
kayati. 

^  The  original  Sutra  is,  Na  Itarmdvibhdgdd  iti  cen  ndndditvdt. 


I08  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

creation  there  could  be  no  works  caused  by  varying  instruments,  and 
therefore  we  ought  to  find  a  uniform  creation  {tulyd  srishtih).  "We 
reply :  This  does  not  vitiate  our  doctrine,  because  fhe  world  is  without 
beginning  {andditvdt  samsdrasya).  The  world  being  without  beginning, 
nothing  can  prevent  works  and  unequal  creations  from  continuing  in 
the  states  of  cause  and  effect,  like  the  seed  and  its  plant  (vijdnJcura-vat). 

Other  objections  to  the  Vedanta  theory  are  thus  treated 
by  San-kara  : — 

How  can  this  universe,  which  is  manifold,  void  of  life,  impure,  and 
irrational,  proceed  from  him  who  is  one,  living,  pure,  and  rational  ? 
We  reply  :  The  lifeless  world  can  proceed  from  Brahma,  just  as  lifeless 
hair  can  spring  from  a  living  man.  But  in  the  universe  we  find  him 
who  enjoys  and  him  who  is  enjoyed  ;  how  can  he  be  both  ?  We  reply  : 
Such  are  the  changes  of  the  sea.  Foam,  waves,  billows,  bubbles,  are 
not  different  from  the  sea.  There  is  no  difference  between  the  universe 
and  Brahma.  The  effect  is  not  different  from  its  cause.  He  is  the 
soul ;  the  soul  is  he.  The  same  earth  produces  diamonds,  rock-crystal, 
and  vermilion.  The  same  sun  produces  many  kinds  of  plants.  The 
same  nourishment  is  converted  into  hair,  nails,  &c.  As  milk  is  changed 
into  curds,  and  water  into  ice,  so  is  Brahma  variously  transformed 
without  external  aids.  So  the  spider  spins  its  web  from  its  own  sub- 
stance.    So  spirits  assume  various  shapes. 

Such  a  creed  really  implies  (though  some  Vedantists 
deny  this)  that  the  world  is  all  Maya,  '  a  mere  illusion.' 
In  point  of  fact,  a  true  Vedantist,  though  he  affirms  that 
Brahma  alone  is  real,  allows  a  vydvaJiariha,  '  practical 
existence,'  to  souls,  the  world,  and  Isvara,  as  distinguished 
from  pdramdrthikaj '  real,'  and  prdtibhdsika,  '  apparent  or 
illusory  existence.'  How,  indeed,  can  it  be  denied  that 
•external  things  exist,  when  we  see  them  before  our  eyes 
and  feel  them  at  every  instant  ?  But  how,  on  the  other 
hand,  can  it  be  maintained  that  an  impure  world  is  the 
manifestation  of  a  pure  spiritual  essence  ?  To  avoid  this 
difficulty,  the  supreme  Spirit  is  represented  as  ignoring 
himself  by  a  sort  of  self-imposed  ignorance,  in  order  to 
draw  out  from  himself  for  his  own  amusement  the  separate 


THE   SYSTEMS    OF   PHILOSOPHY — VEDANTA.  109 

individuated  spirits  and  various  appearances,  which,  al- 
though really  parts  of  his  own  essence,  constitute  the 
apparent  phenomena  of  the  universe.  Hence  the  external 
world,  the  living  spirits  of  individual  men,  and  even 
Isvara,  the  personal  God,  are  all  described  as  created  by 
a  power  which  the  Vedantist  is  obliged,  for  want  of  a 
better  solution  of  his  difl&culty,  to  call  Maya,  '  Illusion,' 
or  A-vidya,^  'Ignorance,'  that  is,  'False  knowledge'  or 
'  False  notion,' 

Of  this  power  there  are  two  distinct  forms  of  operation, 
viz.,  I.  that  of  envelopment  {avarana),  which,  enveloping 
the  soul,  causes  it  to  imagine  that  it  is  liable  to  mundane 
vicissitudes — that  it  is  an  agent  or  a  patient ;  that  it 
rejoices  or  grieves,  &c. — as  if  a  person  under  a  delusion 
were  to  mistake  a  rope  for  a  snake :  2.  that  of  projection 
{yikshepa),  which,  affecting  the  soul  in  its  state  of  pure 
intelligence,  raises  upon  it  the  appearance  of  a  world, 
producing  first  the  five  subtile  elements  and  drawing  out 
from  them  seventeen  subtile  bodies  (also  called  linga- 
sarira,  comprising  the  five  organs  of  sense,  the  five 
organs  of  action,  the  five  vital  airs,  with  buddhi  and 
manas,  and  the  five  gross  elements  in  the  same  order  as 
in  the  San-khya  (see  p.  83).  Hence  the  soul  mistakes  itself 
for  a  mere  mortal,  as  it  mistook  the  rope  for  a  snake. ^ 

By  reason  of  Maya  oi*  A-vidya,  then,  the  Jivatman,  or 
'personal  spirit  of  every  individual,'  mistakes  the  world, 
as  well  as  its  own  body  and  mind,  for  realities,  just  as  a 
rope  in  a  dark  night  might  be  mistaken  for  a  snake.  The 
moment  the  personal  soul  is  set  free  from  this  self-imposed 
Delusion  or  Ignorance  by  a  proper  understanding  of  the 

1  Something  like  the  'Aynia  of  Plato.  See  Banerjea's  translation  of 
the  Sutras,  p.  3. 

^  See  Ballantyne's  Lecture  on  the  Vedanta-sara,  p.  25.  Eeferenee 
may  also  be  made  to  the  Yedanta-paribhasha,  a  text-book  of  the  most 
modem  Vedantic  school. 


I  I O  INDIAN"   WISDOM. 

truth,  through  the  Vedanta  philosophy,  all  the  illusion 
vanishes  and  the  identity  of  the  Jivatman  and  of  the 
whole  phenomenal  universe  with  the  Paramatman,  or  '  one 
only  really  existing  spirit,'  is  re-established.'^ 

Let  .me  here  introduce  a  version  of  pal?t  of  a  short 
Vedantic  tract  in  verse,  called  Atma-hodha,  'knowledge 
of  soul,'  attributed  to  the  great  San-karacarya.  It  is 
highly  esteemed  as  an  exposition  of  Vedantic  doctrines, 
and  has  therefore  been  inserted  by  Dr.  Haberlin  in  his 
anthology  of  shorter  poems.  ^  The  following  metrical  lines 
may  serve  as  a  specimen  of  some  of  the  ideas  contained 
in  this  well-known  epitome  of  Hindu  pantheistic  philo- 
sophy : — 

Knowledge  alone  effects  emancipation. 

As  fire  is  indispensable  to  cooking, 

So  knowledge  is  essential  to  deliverance  (2). 

Knowledge  alone  disperses  ignorance, 

As  sunlight  scatters  darkness^ — not  so  acts ; 

For  ignorance  originates  in  works  (3). 

The  world  and  all  the  course  of  mundane  things 

Are  like  the  vain  creation  of  a  dream,^ 

In  which  Ambition,  Hatred,  Pride,  and  Passion 

Appear  like  phantoms  mixing  in  confusion. 

While  the  dream  lasts  the  universe  seems  real, 

But  when  'tis  past  the  world  exists  no  longer  (6). 

Like  the  deceptive  silver  of  a  shell,* 

So  at  first  sight  the  world  deludes  the  man 

Who  takes  mere  semblance  for  reality  (7). 

As  golden  bracelets  are  in  substance  one 

Witb  gold,  so  are  all  visible  appearances 

And  each  distinct  existence  one  with  Brahma  (8). 

1  See  the  passage  from  the  Mundaka  Upanishad,  quoted  p.  39. 

2  There  is  also  a  Tamil  version  and  commentary  translated  by  the 
Rev.  I.  F.  Kearns,  Madras,  1867.  I  have  consulted  the  Tamil  com- 
mentary as  given  by  Mr.  Kearns. 

3  Cf .  Shakspeare's  '  We  are  such  stuff  As  dreams  are  made  on,  and 
our  little  life     Is  rounded  with  a  sleep.'     Tempest,  Act  iv.  Scene  i. 

*  That  is,  the  mother-of-pearl  oyster  (^ukti). 


THE   SYSTEMS    OF   PHILOSOPHY — VEDANTA.  I  I  I 

By  action  of  the  fivefold  elements  ^ 
Through  acts  performed  in  former  states  of  being, 
Are  formed  corporeal  bodies,  which  become 
The  dwelling-place  of  pleasure  and  of  pain  (ii). 
The  soul  inwrapped  in  five  investing  sheaths  ^ 
Seems  formed  of  these,  and  all  its  purity- 
Darkened,  like  crystal  laid  on  coloured  cloth  (14). 
As  winnowed  rice  is  purified  from  husk. 
So  is  the  soul  disburdened  of  its  sheaths 
By  force  of  meditation,^  as  by  threshing  (15). 
The  soul  is  like  a  king  whose  ministers 
Are  body,  senses,  mind,  and  understanding.* 
The  soul  is  wholly  separate  from  these, 
Yet  witnesses  and  overlooks  their  actions  (18). 
The  foolish  think  the  Spirit  acts,  whereas 
The  senses  are  the  actors,  so  the  moon 
Is  thought  to  move  when  clouds  are  passing  o'er  it  (19). 
When  intellect  and  mind  are  present,  then 
AfiFections,  inclinations,  pleasures,  pains 
Are  active  ;  in  profound  and  dreamless  sleep 
When  intellect  is  non-existent,  these 
Exist  not ;  therefore  they  belong  to  mind  (22). 
As  brightness  is  inherent  in  the  sun, 
Coolness  in  water,  warmness  in  the  fire. 
E'en  so  existence,  knowledge,  perfect  bliss,^ 

1  This  is  called  Pancl-hrita  or  PanBrkararM,  the  production  of  the 
body,  and  indeed  of  the  whole  world,  by  the  action  of  the  five  elements 
(see  p.  83),  being  a  dogma  of  the  Vedanta. 

^  See  the  remarks,  p.  113. 

^  YuMi  seems  here  to  be  equivalent  to  yoga.  It  may  also  mean 
'argument,'  'reasoning.' 

*  The  soul  is  supposed  by  Yedantists  to  have  three  conditions  besides 
the  conditions  of  pure  intelligence,  viz.,  waking,  dreaming,  and  profound 
or  dreamless  sleep  {su-shwpti).  While  awake,  the  soul,  associated  with 
the  body,  is  active  and  has  to  do  with  a  real  creation.  While  dreaming, 
it  has  to  do  with  an  unreal  or  illusory  world.  When  profoundly  and 
dreamlessly  asleep,  it  is  supposed  to  have  retired  by  the  channel  of 
some  of  the  pericardial  arteries  into  the  perfect  repose  of  union  with 
the  supreme  Soul.     See  Vedanta-stitra  III.  2.  i-io. 

^  Hence  the  Yedantist's  name  for  the  one  universal  Spirit,  Sac-iid- 
dnanda. 


112  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

And  perfect  purity  inhere  in  soul  (23). 

The  understanding  cannot  recognize 

The  soul,  nor  does  the  soul  need  other  knowledge 

To  know  itself/  e'en  as  a  shining  light 

Requires  no  light  to  make  itself  perceived  (27,  28). 

The  soul  declares  its  own  condition  thus — 

'  I  am  distinct  from  body,  I  am  free 

From  birth,  old  age,  infirmity,  and  death. 

I  have  no  senses ;  I  have  no  connection 

With  sound  or  sight  or  objects  of  sensation. 

I  am  distinct  from  mind,  and  so  exempt 

From  passion,  pride,  aversion,  fear,  and  pain. 

I  have  no  qualities,^  I  am  without 

Activity,  and  destitute  of  option,  ^ 

Changeless,  eternal,  formless,  without  taint, 

For  ever  free,  for  ever  without  stain. 

I,  like  the  boundless  ether,  permeate 

The  universe  within,  without,  abiding 

Always,  for  ever  similar  in  all. 

Perfect,  immovable,  without  affection, 

Existence,  knowledge,  undivided  bliss, 

Without  a  second.  One,  supreme  am  I '  (31-35)- 

The  perfect  consciousness  that  '  I  am  Brahma  ' 

Removes  the  false  appearances  projected 

By  Ignorance,*  just  as  elixir,  sickness  (36). 

The  universal  Soul  knows  no  distinction 

Of  knower,  knowledge,  object  to  be  known. 

Rather  is  it  enlightened  through  itself 

And  its  own  essence,  which  is  simple  knowledge  (40). 

When  contemplation  rubs  the  Arani  ^ 

^  The  celebrated  Hindu  maxim,  Atmdnam  dtmand  pa^ya, '  know  (see) 
thyself  by  thyself,'  or  '  know  the  soul  by  the  soul,'  has,  therefore,  a  deeper 
philosophical  meaning  than  the  still  more  celebrated  Greek  precept  ymOi 
ffiavT6v,  attributed  to  Thales. 

2  The  epithet  nir-guva,  'quality-less,'  so  commonly  applied  to  the 
supreme  Being  in  India,  will  be  better  understood  by  a  reference  to 
p.  85. 

s  Nir-vikalpa  may  perhaps  be  translated,  '  destitute  of  all  reflection,' 
or  perhaps,  '  free  from  all  will.' 

*  Avidyd-vikshepam,,  'the  projections  of  ignorance.'     See  p.  109. 

5  See  note,  p.  15. 


THE   SYSTEMS   OF   PHILOSOPHY — VEDANTA.  I  I  3 

Of  soul,  the  flame  of  knowledge  blazing  up 
Quickly  consumes  the  fuel  ignorance  (41). 
The  saint  ^  who  has  attained  to  full  perfection 
Of  contemplation,  sees  the  universe 
Existing  in  himself,  and  with  the  eye 
Of  knowledge  sees  the  All  as  the  One  Soul  (46 ). 
When  bodily  disguises  ^  are  dissolved, 
The  perfect  saint  becomes  completely  blended 
With  the  one  Soul,  as  water  blends  with  water, 
As  air  unites  with  air,  as  fire  with  fire  (52). 
That  gain  than  which  there  is  no  greater  gain, 
That  joy  than  which  there  is  no  greater  joy. 
That  lore  than  which  there  is  no  greater  lore, 
Is  the  one  Brahma — this  is  certain  truth  (53). 
That  which  is  through,  above,  below,  complete. 
Existence,  wisdom,  bliss,^  without  a  second,* 
Endless,  eternal,  one — know  that  as  Brahma  (55). 
That  which  is  neither  coarse  nor  yet  minute. 
That  which  is  neither  short  nor  long,  unborn, 
Imperishable,  without  form,  unbound 
By  qualities,  without  distinctive  marks, 
Without  a  name — know  that  indeed  as  Brahma  (59). 
Nothing  exists  but  Brahma,  when  aught  else 
Appears  to  be,  'tis,  like  the  mirage,  false  ^  (62). 

With,  regard  to  the  five  sheaths  (paiica-Jcosa)  alluded  to 
in  the  fourteenth  verse  of  the  Atma-bodha,  it  must  be  noted 
that  in  the  Vedanta  the  individuated  soul,  when  separated 
off  from  the  supreme  Soul,  is  regarded  as  enclosed  in  a  suc- 
cession of  cases  (Jcosa)  which  envelop  it  and,  as  it  were,  fold 
one  over  the  other,  '  like  the  coats  of  an  onion.'  ^  The  first 
or  innermost  sheath  is  called  the  Vijnana-maya-kosa  or 
'  sheath  composed  of  mere  intellection,'   associated  with 


1  Yogin,  see  p.  92. 

2  Upddhi,  a  term  for  the  illusive  disguises  assumed  by  Brahma. 

3  Sac-cid-dnandam.  *  A-dvayam. 
^  Mithyd  yafhd  maru  maricikd. 

^  As  remarked  by  Dr.   Ballantyne,  Lecture  on  the  Vedanta-sara, 
29. 


I  1 4  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

the  organs  of  perception.  This  gives  the  personal  soul  its 
first  conception  of  individuality.  The  second  case  is  called 
the  Mano-maya  or  '  sheath  composed  of  mind,'  associated 
with  the  organs  of  action.  This  gives  the  individual  soul 
its  powers  of  thought  and  judgment.  The  third  envelope 
is  called  the  Prdna-maya  or  *  breathing  sheath,'  i.e.,  the 
sheath  composed  of  breath  and  the  other  vital  airs  associated 
with  the  organs  of  action.  The  fourth  case  is  called  the 
Anna-maya  or  'covering  supported  by  food/  i.e.,  the  cor- 
poreal form  or  gross  body ;  the  three  preceding  sheaths, 
when  combined  together,  constituting  the  subtile  body. 
A  fifth  case,  called  Ananda-maya  or  '  that  composed  of 
supreme  bliss,'  is  also  named,  although  not  admitted  by  all. 
It  must  be  regarded  as  the  innermost  of  all,  and  ought 
therefore,  when  five  are  enumerated,  to  be  placed  before 
the  Vijnana-maya.  Moreover,  a  collective  totality  of  sub- 
tile bodies  is  supposed  to  exist,  and  the  soul,  which  is 
imagined  to  pass  through  these  subtile  bodies  like  a  thread, 
is  called  the  Sutrdtman,  'thread  soul'  (occasionally styled  the 
Prdndtman),  andsomefcimes  identified  with  Hiranya-garbha. 
Of  course  the  Vedanta  theory,  if  pushed  to  its  ultimate 
consequences,  haust  lead  to  the  neglect  of  all  duties,  reli- 
gious and  mora],  of  all  activity,  physical  or  intellectual,  and 
of  all  self-culture.  If  everything  (to  vav)  be  God,  then 
you  and  he  and  I  must  be  one.  Why  should  any  efibrts  be 
made  for  the  advancement  of  self  or  for  the  good  of  others  ? 
Everything  we  have  must  be  common  property.  Accord- 
ing to  the  Brihad-aranyaka  Upanishad  (IV.  5)  : — 

Where  there  is  anything  like  duality  there  one  sees  another,  one 
smells  another,  one  tastes  another,  one  speaks  to  another,  one  hears 
another,  one  minds  another,  one  regards  another,  one  knows  another ; 
but  where  the  whole  of  this  [to  ■rtav)  is  one  spirit,  then  whom  and  by 
what  can  one  see  ?  whom  and  by  what  can  one  smell  1  whom  and  by 
what  can  one  taste  ?  to  whom  and  by  what  can  one  speak  ?  whom  and 
by  what  can  one  hear  ?  whom  and  by  what  can  one  mind  ?  whom  and 
by  what  can  one  regard  ?  whom  and  by  what  can  one  know  ? 


THE   SYSTEMS    OP   PHILOSOPHY — VEDANTA.  I  I  5 

This  Indian  pantheism  is  paralleled  by  some  phases  of 
modern  German  thought,  as  described  by  Deau  Mansel 
in  the  following  extract  from  one  of  his  Essays  lately 
published : — 

With  German  philosophers  the  root  of  all  mischief  is  the  number 
two — Self  and  Not-self,  Ego  and  Non-ego.  The  pantheist  tells  me  that 
I  have  not  a  real  distinct  existence  and  unity  of  my  own,  but  that  I 
am  merely  a  phenomenal  manifestation,  or  an  aggregate  of  many  mani- 
festations of  the  one  infinite  Being.  If  [then]  we  shrink  from  Nihilism, 
there  remains  the  alternative  of  Pantheism.  The  instincts  of  our  nature 
plead  against  annihilation  and  maintain,  in  spite  of  philosophy,  that 
there  must  really  exist  something  somewhere.  Granting  that  some- 
thing exists,  why  is  that  something  to  be  called  Ego  ?  What  qualities 
can  it  possess  which  shall  make  it  I  rather  than  Thou,  or  any  one 
being  rather  than  any  other  being?  I  am  directly  conscious  of  the 
existence  of  a  self.  But  this  consciousness  is  a  delusion.  This  self  is 
but  the  phenomenal  shadow  of  a  further  self,  of  which  I  am  not  con- 
scious. Why  may  not  this  also  be  a  shadow  of  something  further  still  1 
Why  may  there  not  be  a  yet  more  remote  reality,  which  is  itself 
neither  self  or  not-self,  but  the  root  and  foundation,  and  at  the  same 
time  the  indifference  of  both  ?  This  ultimate  existence,  the  one  and 
sole  reality,  is  then  set  up  as  the  deity  of  philosophy,  and  the  result  is 
pure  pantheism. 

Perhaps  it  may  not  be  out  of  place  here  to  contrast 
with  Indian  ideas  Aristotle's  grand  conception  of  the 
nature  of  God  as  propounded  in  the  eleventh  book  of 
his  Metaphysics.^  In  chapter  vii.  of  that  book  Aristotle 
says  (not,  however,  quite  in  the  order  here  given)  : — 

The  principle  of  life  is  in  God ;  for  energy  of  mind  constitutes  life, 
and  God  is  this  energy.  He,  the  first  mover,  imparts  motion  and  pur- 
sues the  work  of  creation  as  something  that  is  loved  {kikI  Si  iig  sjw,u,s»o>). 
His  course  of  life  {iiayoiyri)  must  be  similar  to  what  is  most  excellent  in 
our  own  short  career.  But  he  exists  for  ever  in  this  excellence,  whereas 
this  is  impossible  for  us.  His  pleasure  consists  in  the  exercise  of  his 
essential  energy,  and  on  this  account  vigilance,  wakefulness,  and  percep- 


This  work  has  been  well  translated  by  the  Rev.  J.  H.  M'Mahon. 


I  1 6  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

tion  are  most  agreeable  to  him.  Again,  the  more  we  examine  God's 
nature  the  more  wonderful  does  it  appear  to  us.  He  is  an  eternal  (atSiov) 
and  most  excellent  (ag/ffrov)  Being.  He  is  indivisible  (dSiai^erig),  devoid 
of  parts  (d/Ji'i^rii),  and  having  no  magnitude  (/jbsyeSog),  for  God  imparts 
motion  through  infinite  time,  and  nothing  finite,  as  magnitude  is,  can 
have  an  infinite  capacity.  He  is  a  being  devoid  of  passions  and  unalter- 
able (dwaSig  xai  dvaWoidirov)?- 

Before  quitting  the  subject  of  the  Vedaata  philosophy 
it  should  be  stated  that  in  many  points  the  Vedaata 
agrees  with  the  San-khya.  The  order  of  creation  in  both 
is  nearly  the  same,  though  the  'Originant'  in  one  case  is 
Prakriti,  in  the  other  A-vidyd,  'ignorance'  (or  'false 
knowledge').  But  even  here  an  attempt  is  made  by  some 
to  establish  a  community  of  ideas  by  identifying  both 
Pralcriti  and  A-vidyd  with  Maya  or  'illusion.'  In  both 
systems  the  gross  elements  proceed  from  subtile  principles, 
imperceptible  to  sense,  in  the  same  order  (see  the  San- 
khyan  account  of  the  elements,  p.  83).  In  both  there  is 
a  subtile  as  well  as  a  gross  body.^  The  nature  of  the 
soul  in  being  incapable  of  cognition  without  the  help  of 
the  mind  or  internal  organ  (antah-karana)  is  described 
in  nearly  similar  language  by  both.     Again,  this  internal 

1  Hence,  according  to  the  translator,  Aristotle's  idea  of  God  is  that  he 
is  a  Being  whose  essence  is  love,  manifested  in  eternal  energy,  the  final 
cause  of  this  energy  being  the  happiness  of  his  creatures,  in  which  he 
himself  participates  for  ever.  Aristotle,  again,  warns  his  disciples  against 
regarding  God's  nature  through  the  medium  of  their  own  subjectivity. 
There  is  a  celebrated  passage  in  book  XI.  chap,  viii.,  in  which  he  says 
that  traditions  have  been  handed  down  representing  the  heavens  as  gods, 
and  the  divine  essence  (ro  Sfm)  as  embracing  the  whole  of  nature ;  and 
these  traditions,  he  affirms,  are  kept  up  to  win  over  the  multitude  and 
secure  obedience  to  the  laws  and  for  the  sake  of  general  expediency.  On 
that  account  gods  are  described  as  existing  in  the  form  of  man  (dvS^u- 
ToeidiJ;),  or  even  as  taking  the  shape  of  animals. 

2  The  gross  body  is  sometimes  called  the  nine-gated  city  of  Brahma 
{Brahma-pura),  from  its  being  the  abode  of  the  soul  and  from  its  having 
nine  openings. 


THE   SYSTEMS    OP   PHILOSOPHY — VEDANTA.  I  1 7 

organ  (antah-karana)  is  held  by  both  to  stand  between 
the  organs  of  perception  and  those  of  action,  as  an  eleventh 
organ  partaking  of  the  nature  of  each  (see  p.  84).  But 
while  the  San-khya  divides  the  internal  organ  into  Buddhi, 
'  intellectual  perception,'  Ahankdra,  '  self- consciousness,' 
and  Manas,  '  the  reasoning  mind,'  the  first  being  the  great 
source  of  the  others  (see  p.  83),  the  Vedanta  propounds  a 
fourth  division,  viz.,  Citta  or  'the  faculty  of  thought.' 
On  the  other  hand,  the  Vedauta  adds  two  Pramanas  or 
'  instruments  of  true  knowledge '  {An-upalabdhi,  '  non- 
perception  '  or  '  negative  proof,'  and  Arthdpatti,  '  inference 
from  circumstances')  to  the  four  admitted  by  the  Nyaya 
(see  p.  61),  while  the  San-khya  rejects  the  Nyaya  Upa- 
mdna,  and  retains  as  its  only  three  Pramanas,  Pratyaksha, 
Anumdna,  and  Sabda. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Irregular  Systems  and  Eclectic  School. 

Befoee  passing  to  the  Eclectic  School  I  may  mention 
that  a  celebrated  work  by  Madhava,  called  Sarva-darsana- 
san-graha,  gives  a  concise  description  of  various  Hindu  sys- 
tems and  sects,  religious  and  philosophical,  orthodox  and 
heterodox,  even  including  the  science  of  applying  quick- 
silver {rasesvara,  regarded  as  a  form  of  Siva)  or  its  pre- 
parations to  various  chemical  and  alchemical  operations, 
and  embracing  also  Panini's  theory  of  grammar. 

Madhava  lived  in  the  fourteenth  century.  He  was 
elder  brother  of  Sayana,  and  associated  with  him  in  the 
commentary  on  the  Rig-veda.  (By  Mr.  Burn  ell,  however, 
in  his  preface  to  the  Vansa-brahmana,  he  is  identified 
with  Sayana.)  He  was  also  prime  minister  in  the  court 
of  Bukka  I.  at  Vijaya-nagara.  He  wrote  many  works 
{e.g.,  an  introduction  to  the  Mimansa  philosophy,  called 
Nyaya-mala-vistara,  a  commentary  on  Parasara's  law-book, 
the  Kala-nirnaya,  &c.),  besides  the  Sarva-darsana-san-graha. 
This  latter  treats  of  fifteen  systems  as  follow  :  i.  Carvaka- 
darsana  ;  2.  Bauddha-d° ;  3.  Arhata-d° ;  4.  Eamaauja-d° ; 
5.  Purna-prajna-d° ;  6.  Nakulisa-pasupata-d° ;  7.  Saiva-d° ; 
8.  Pratyabhijna-d° ;  9.  Eases vara-d° ;  10.  Aultikya-d"  ; 
II.  Akshapada-d°  ;  12.  Jaimini-d° ;  13.  Panini-d° ;  14. 
San-khya-d° ;  15.  Patanjala-d°.  The  Vedanta  is  not  here 
included.  The  third  in  the  list  is  the  system  of  the  Jainas 
or  Jains,  whom  Madhava  calls  Arhata.-'     Ramanuja,  the 

1  In  the  previous  edition  of  Indian  Wisdom  a  short  account  was 

here  given  of  the  Jainas.    This  has  been  superseded  by  my  summary  of 

118 


IRREGULAR   SYSTEMS— dARVAK AS.  I  19 

founder  of  the  fourth,  was  a  Yaishnava  Eeformer,  who, 
according  to  H.  H.  Wilson,  lived  about  the  middle  of  th.e 
twelfth  century.  The  fifth  is  the  doctrine  of  Ananda- 
tirtha,  surnamed  Madhvacarya,  and  also  called  Madhya- 
mandira,  his  epithet  Purna-prajna  merely  meaning  '  one 
whose  knowledge  is  complete.  The  sixth  is  the  system  of 
a  branch  of  the  Mahesvaras,  as  shown  by  Professor  E.  B. 
Cowell  (Colebrooke's  Essays,  I.  pp.  431,  434).  He  con- 
jectures that  Siva  himself,  called  Nakulisa,  may  have  been 
the  supposed  founder  of  this  sect,  and  points  out  that  the 
Pasupatas  are  worshippers  of  Siva  as  Pasu-pati,  '  master 
of  all  inferior  creatures  '  (explained  by  some  to  mean  '  lord 
oi  pasu  or  the  soul  entangled  in  the  bonds  of  matter'). 
The  eighth  is  like  the  sixth  and  that  of  the  Mahesvaras,  a 
form  of  Saiva  doctrine,  but  more  pantheistic,  the  Saivas 
maintaining  that  God  is  in  creating,  Karmddi-sdpekslia, 
'  dependent  on  the  acts,  &c.,  of  individual  souls,'  while 
this  eighth  asserts  that  God's  will  is  the  -only  cause  of 
creation ;  for  it  is  said,  '  He  being  independent  (nir-apek- 
shah)  and  regarding  no  face  but  his  own,  threw  all  exist- 
ences as  a  reflection  on  the  mirror  of  himself.'  Hence 
pratyahhijnd  is  defined  as  pratimabhimu-hhyena  jndnam, 
'  recognition  as  of  a  visible  object  or  image.'  The  tenth  is 
the  Vaiseshika.  (See  note,  p.  65.)  I  propose  here  to  speak 
of  the  first  only. 

The  Odrvdkas. 

r 

Nothing  is  known  about  Carvaka,  the  Pyrrho  and  Epi- 
curus of  India  and  founder  of  the  materialistic  school. 
His  system  is  the  worst  form  of  all  heresies,  and  therefore 
honoured  with  the  first  place  in  Madhavacarya's  Sarva- 

the  Jaina  system,  and  of  the  particular  points  which  distinguish  it  from 
Buddhism,  in  my  recent  volume  on  Buddhism  (p.  529),  published  by 
Mr.  Murray,  Albemarle  Street. 


120  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

darsana-san-graha.  In  the  !^anti-parvan  of  the  Maha- 
bharata  (1410,  &c.)  there  is  a  story  of  a  Kakshasa  named 
Carvaka,  who,  in  the  disguise  of  a  mendicant  Brahman, 
reviled  Yudhishthira,  during  ^  his  triumphant  entry  into 
HastinapUra,  and  uttered  profane  and  heretical  doctrines. 
He  was,  however,  soon  detected,  and  the  real  Brahmans, 
filled  with  fury,  killed  him  on  the  spot.  This  legend  may 
possibly  rest  on  some  basis  of  fact. 

The  creed  of  the  Carvakas,  who  are  sometimes  called 
Lokayatas  or  Lokayatikas,''  is  said  to  have  been  derived 
from  the  Varhaspatya  Sutras  (Aphorisms  of  Vrihaspati). 
They  reject  all  the  Pramanas,  or  '  sources  of  true  know- 
ledge,' except  Pratyaksha,  '  perception  by  the  senses ' 
(see  p.  6i);  they  admit  only  four  Tattvas  or  'eternal 
principles,  viz.,  earth,  air,  fire,  and  water,  and  from  these 
intelligence  (oaitanya)  is  alleged  to  be  produced ;  they 
affirm  that  the  soul  is  not  different  from  the  body ;  and, 
lastly,  they  assert  that  all  the  phenomena  of  the  world 
are  spontaneously  produced,  without  even  the  help  of 
Adrishta  (see  p.  58).  I  sum  up  their  views  with  a  version 
of  a  passage  in  the  Sarva-darsana-san-graha  (Isvara-candra 
Vidyasagara's  edition,  p.  6),  setting  forth  the  opinions  of 
the  Carvaka  materialists  according  to  the  supposed  teaching 
of  Vrihaspati.^  The  sentiments,  it  will  be  perceived,  are 
worthy  of  the  most  sceptical,  materialistic,  and  epicurean 
of  European  writers  : — 

1  By  some  this  name  is  given  to  a  subdivision  of  tlie  Carvakas.  The 
name  Carvaka  is  applied  to  any  adherent  of  the  materialistic  school; 
see  Vedanta-sara,  82-85. 

2  I  have  consulted  Professor  E.  B.  Cowell's  appendix  to  Colebrooke's 
Essay,  and  Dr.  Muir's  prose  translation  as  given  by  him  in  his  article 
on  'Indian  Materialists'  (Royal  Asiatic  Society's  Journal,  vol.  xix., 
art.  xi.).  He  compares  a  passage  in  the  Vishnu-purana  III.  18,  which 
contains  similar  sentiments.  Of.  also  the  speech  of  the  rationalistic 
Brahman  Javali,  addressed  to  Rama  in  the  Ramayana. 


IRREGULAR   SYSTEMS — CARVAKAS.  121 

No  heaven  exists,  no  final  liberation, 

No  soul,  no  other  world,  no  rites  of  caste, 

No  recompense  for  acts ;  the  Agnihotra,^ 

The  triple  Veda,  triple  self-command,^ 

And  all  the  dust  and  ashes  of  repentance — 

These  yield  a  means  of  livelihood  for  men. 

Devoid  of  intellect  and  manliness. 

If  victims  slaughtered  at  a  sacrifice 

Are  raised  to  heavenly  mansions,^  why  should  not 

The  sacrificer  immolate  his  father  ? 

If  otferings  of  food  can  satisfy  * 

Hungry  departed  spirits,  why  supply 

The  man  who  goes  a  Journey  with  provisions  ? 

His  friends  at  home  can  feed  him  with  oblations. 

If  those  abiding  in  celestial  spheres 

Are  filled  with  food  presented  upon  earth, 

Why  should  not  those  wTio  live  in  upper  stories 

Be  nourished  by  a  meal  spread  out  below  ? 

While  life  endures  let  life  be  spent  in  ease 

And  merriment ;^  let  a  man  borrow  money       ' 

From  all  his  friends  and  feast  on  melted  butter. 

How  can  this  body  when  reduced  to  dust 

Revisit  earth  ?  and  if  a  ghost  can  pass 

To  other  worlds,  why  does  not  strong  affection 

For  those  he  leaves  behind  attract  him  back  ? 

The  costly  rites  enjoined  for  those  who  <iie 

1  See  note,  p.  28. 

^  Tri-danda,  '  control  over  thoughts,  words,  and  actions,'  denoted  by 
the  three  Dandas  or  staves  carried  by  ascetics.    See  Manu  XII.  10,  11. 

8  This,  as  Dr.  Muir  points  out,  refers  to  Manu  V.  42,  where  it  is 
stated  that  animals  duly  sacrificed  are  conveyed  to  mansions  of  supreme 
felicity.     Of.  Maha-bharata,  Asvamedhika-parvan  793',  &c. 

*  This  is  a  hit  at  the  S'raddha,  one  of  th«  most  important  oi  all 
Hindi!  religious  acts,  when  oblations  of  cakes  and  libations  of  water 
are  made  to  the  spirits  of  deceased  fathers,  grandfathers,  and  progeni- 
tors. The  strict  observance  of  these  ceremonies  at  regular  intervals 
is  at  least  an  evidence  of  the  strength  of  filial  feeling  among  Hindiis. 
Respect  for  parents  and  their  memory  has  all  the  sanction  of  religion, 
and  is  even  more  insisted  on  as  a  religious  duty  than  in  Europe. 

^  '  Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die  '  (i  Oor.  xv.  32).  See 
Dr.  Muir's  note.    Compare  such  Horatian  precepts  as  Epod.  XIII.  3,  &c. 


122  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Are  a  mere  means  of  livelihood  devised 

By  sacerdotal  cunning — nothing  more. 

The  three  composers  of  the  triple  Veda 

Were  rogues,  or  evil  spirits,  or  buffoons. 

The  recitation  of  mysterious  words 

And  jabber  ^  of  the  priests  is  simple  nonsense. 

Eclectic  School  of  the  Bhagavad-gitd. 

As  a  fitting  conclusion  to  the  subject  of  Indian  philo- 
sophy let  me  endeavour  to  give  some  idea  of  one  of  the 
most  interesting  and  popular  works  in  the  whole  range 
of  Sanskrit  literature,  called  Bhagavad-gita,  the  Song  of 
Bhavagat — that  is,  the  mystical  doctrines  ( Upanishadah  ^) 
sung  by  '  the  adorable  one ' — a  name  applied  to  Krishna 
when  identified  with  the  supreme  Being.  This  poem, 
abounding  in  sentiments  borrowed  from  the  Upanishads, 
and  commented  on  by  the  great  Vedaatic  teacher  San-- 
karacarya,  may  be  taken  to  represent  the  Eclectic  school 
of  Indian  philosophy.  As  the  regular  systems  or  Darsanas 
were  more  or  less  developments  of  the  Upanishads,  so  the 
Eclectic  school  is  connected  with  those  mystical  treatises 
through  the  Svetasvatara  Upanishad^  of  the  Black  Yajur- 

1  Two  curious  Vedic  words,  jarbhari  and  turpliarl,  are  given  in  the 
text  as  specimens  of  what  I  suppose  modern  scoffers  might  call  '  Vedic 
slang.'  They  occur,  as  Dr.  Muir  points  out,  in  Rig-veda  X.  io6.  6,  and 
Nirukta  XIII.  5.  For  their  explanation  see  Bohtlingk  and  Roth  and 
my  Sanskrit-English  Dictionary. 

2  At  the  end  of  each  chapter  the  name  of  the  chapter  is  given  in  the 
plural ;  thus,  Iti  sri-hliagavad-gltdsu  upanishatsu,  &c.    See  note  4,  p.  125. 

3  The  name  of  this  Upanishad  is  derived  from  a  sage,  S'vetasvatara, 
who,  at  the  end  of  the  work  (VI.  21),  is  said  to  have  taught  the  doc- 
trine of  Brahma  to  the  most  excellent  of  the  four  orders.  It  has  been 
translated  by  Dr.  Rcier  into  English,  and  nearly  all  by  Professor  Weber 
into  German  (Indische  Studien  I.  422-429).  The  author  must  have 
been  a  S'aiva  (not  a  Vaishnava,  like  the  author  of  the  Bhagavad-gita), 
as  he  identifies  Rudra  with  the  supreme  Being.     According  to  Wilson, 


ECLECTIC  .SCHOOL — BHAGAVAD-GITA.  I  23 

veda  (see  p.  43).  This  latter  is  doubtless  a  comparatively 
modern  work,  but  whether  composed  before  or  after  the 
Bhagavad  -  gita,  certain  it  is  that  tbe  design  of  both 
appears  to  be  the  same.  They  both  aim  at  reconciling 
the  conflicting  -views  of  different  systems,  and  both  do 
so  by  attempting  to  engraft  the  San-khya  and  Yoga  upon 
Vedanta  doctrines.-'-  Although,  therefore,  the  order  of 
creation  and  much  of  the  cosmogony  and  other  San-khya 
views  are  retained  in  both,  the  paramount  sovereignty  of 
the  supreme  Soul  of  the  universe  (Brahma)  as  the  source 
and  ultimate  end  of  all  created  things,  and  yet  wholly 
independent  of  all  such  creations,  is  asserted  by  both. 

Some  extracts  from  the  Svetasvatara,  describing  the 
character  and  attributes  of  this  supreme  Being,  who  is 
everything  and  in  everything,  have  already  been  given  at 
p.  43.  The  following  are  additional  extracts  from  the 
first  and  third  chapters  (Roer,  pp.  50,  55,  58)  : — 

This  (absolute  Brahma)  should  be  meditated  on  as  eternal  and  as 
abiding  in  one's  own  soul ;  for  beside  him  there  is  nothing  to  be  known 
{ndtah  param  veditavyam  hi  Idncit).  As  oil  in  seeds  {Ulesliu),  butter  in 
cream,  water  in  a  river,  and  fire  in  wood,  so  is  that  absolute  Soul  per- 
ceived within  himself  by  a  person  who  beholds  him  by  means  of  truth 
and  by  austerity. 

He  is  the  eye  of  all,  the  face  of  all,  the  arm  of  all,  the  foot  of  all. 

Thou  art  the  black  bee  {mlah  patan-gah),  the  green  bird  with  red- 
coloured  eye,  the  cloud  in  whose  womb  sleeps  the  lightning,  the  seasons, 
the  seas.  Without  beginning  thou  pervadest  all  things  by  thy  almighty 
power ;  for  by  thee  are  all  the  worlds  created. 

The  following,  again,  is  an  example  of  a  passage  occur- 

Sveta,  '  white,'  Svetdiva,  '  white-horsed,'  Sveta-hJcha,  '  white-haired,'  and 
Sveia-lohita,  '  white-blooded,'  were  names  of  four  disciples  of  S'iva. 
Weber  suspects  here  a  mission  of  Syrian  Christians,  and  thinks  that 
both  the  Upanishad  and  the  Gita,  the  latter  especially,  may  have  bor- 
rowed ideas  from  Christianity. 

1  See  Dr.  Roer's  introduction  for  a  full  explanation  of  this. 


124  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

ring  in  the  fourth  chapter  (5),  which  is  decidedly  San-- 
khyan  in  its  tone  : — 

The  one  unborn  (individual  soul),  for  the  sake  of  enjoyment,  lies  close 
to  the  One  unborn  {Prahriti),  which  is  of  a  white,  red,  and  black  colour 
[answering  evidently  to  the  three  San-khyan  Gunas],  which  is  of  one 
and  the  same  form,  and  produces  a  manifold  offspring.  Then  the  other 
unborn  (or  eternal  soul)  abandons  her  {Prahriti)  whose  enjoyment  he 
has  enjoyed. 

Let  US  now  turn  to  the  Bhagavad-gita.  The  real  author 
of  this  work  is  unknown.  It  was  at  an  early  date  digni- 
fied by  a  place  in  the  Maha-bharata.,  in  which  poem  it  lies 
imbedded,  or  rather  inlaid  like  a  pearl/  contributing  with 
other  numerous  episodes  to  the  mosaic-like  character  of 
that  immense  epia  The  Bhagavad-gita,  however,  is 
quite  independent  of  the  great  epic ;  and  it  cannot  be 
questioned  that  its  proper  place  in  any  arrangement  of 
Sanskrit  literature  framed  with  regard  to  the  continuous 
development  and  progress  of  Hindu  thought  and  know- 
ledge should  be  at  the  close  of  the  subject  of  philosophy. 
The  author  was  probably  a  Brahman  and  nominally  a 
Vaishnava,  but  really  a  philosopher  whose  mind  was  cast 
in  a  broad  and  comprehensive  mould.  He  is  supposed  to 
have  lived  in  India  durina:  the  first  or  second  centurv 


1  It  has  been  interpolated  into  the  Bhishma-parvan  of  the  Maha- 
bharata,  and  is  divided  into  eighteen  chapters  or  into  three  sections, 
each  containing  six  lectures,  commencing  at  line  830  of  the  twenty- 
fifth  chapter  of  the  Parva,  and  ending  at  line  1532.  Such  is  the  esti- 
mation in  which  the  work  is  held  both  in  Asia  and  Europe,  that  it 
has  been  translated  into  Hindi,  Telugu,  Kanarese,  and  other  Eastern 
languages,  and  is  also  well  known  by  European  translations,  of  which 
that  of  Sir  C.  Wilkins,  published  in  London  in  1785,  was  the  first. 
Mr.  J.  C.  Thomson's  edition  and  translation,  published,  with  an  elabo- 
rate introduction,  by  Stephen  Austin  in  1855,  is,  on  the  whole,  a  very 
meritorious  production,  and  I  am  glad  to  acknowledge  my  obligations 
to  it. 


ECLECTIC   SCHOOL — BHAGAVAD-GITA.  I  25 

of  our  era.^  Finding  no  rest  for  his  spirit  in  any  one 
system  of  philosophy,  as  commonly  taught  in  his  own 
time,  much  less  in  the  corrupt  Brahmanism  which  sur- 
rounded him,  he  was  led  to  make  a  selection  from  the 
various  schools  of  rationalistic  and  dogmatic  thought,  so 
as  to  construct  a  composite  theory  of  his  own.  This  he 
did  with  great  perspicuity  and  beauty  of  language,  inter- 
weaving various  opinions  into  one  system  by  taking,  so  to 
speak,  threads  from  the  San-khya,  Yoga,  and  Vedanta,  as 
well  as  from  the  later  theory  of  Bbakti  or  '  faith  in  a 
supreme  Being.' ^  With  these  threads  he  weaves,  as  it 
were,  a  woof  of  many-coloured  hues  of  thought,  which  are 
shot  across  a  stiff  warp  of  stern  uncompromising  panthe- 
istic doctrines,  worthy  of  the  most  decided  adherent  of 
the  Vedanta  school.^  Of  these  cross  threads  the  most 
conspicuous  are  those  of  the  San-khya  system,  for  which 
the  author  of  the  Gita  has  an  evident  predilection.  The 
whole  composition  is  skilfully  thrown  into  the  form  of  a 
dramatic  poem  or  dialogue,  something  after  the  manner 
of  the  book  of  Job  or  a  dialogue  of  Plato.*     The  speakers 


^  Some  consider  that  lie  lived  as  late  as  the  third  century,  and  some 
place  him  even  later,  but  with  these  I  cannot  agree. 

^  The  Aphorisms  of  S'andilya,  the  editing  of  which  was  commenced 
by  Dr.  Ballantyne  and  continued  by  Professor  Griffith,  his  successor  at 
Benares,  deny  that  knowledge  is  the  one  thing  needful,  and  insist  on 
the  subjection  of  knowledge  to  the  higher  principle  of  BJialdi,  '  faith  in 
God.'  The  first  Aphorism  introduces  the  inquiry  into  the  nature  of 
faith,  thus,  Athdto  hhakti-jijndsd.  Professor  Weber  and  others  think 
that  the  introduction  of  iriern;  and  ayairjj  into  the  Hindi!  system  is  due 
to  the  influence  of  Christianity. 

^  The  predominance  of  pantheistic  doctrines,  notwithstanding  the 
attempt  to  interweave  them  with  portions  of  the  San-khya  and  Yoga 
systems,  is  denoted  by  the  fact  that  the  Vedantists  claim  this  poem  as 
an  exponent  of  their  own  opinions. 

*  It  is,  however,  styled  an  Upanishad,  or  rather  a  series  of  Upani 
shads,  because,  like  the  XJpanishads,  it  reveals  secret  and  mystical 


126  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

are  the  two  most  important  personages  in  the  Maha- 
bharata,  Arjuna,  and  Krishna.  Arjuna  is  perhaps  the 
real  hero  of  that  epic.  He  is  the  bravest,  and  yet  the 
most  tender-hearted  of  the  five  sons  of  Pandu.  The  god 
Krishna,  who  is  identified  with  Vishnu,^  and  in  this  philo- 
sophical dialogue  is  held  to  be  an  incarnation  of  the  supreme 
Being  himself,  had  taken  human  form  as  the  son  of  Devaki 
and  Vasudeva,  who  was  brother  of  Kunti,  wife  of  Pandu. 
Hence  the  god  was  cousin  of  the  sons  of  Pandu,  brother  of 
Dhritarashtra,  the  sons  of  these  brothers  being  of  course 
related  as  cousins  to  each  other.  In  the  great  war  which 
arose  between  the  two  families,  each  contending  for  the 
kingdom  of  Hastinapura,^  Krishna  refused  to  take  up 
arms  on  either  side,  but  consented  to  act  as  the  charioteer 
of  Arjuna  and  to  aid  him  with  his  advice.  At  the  com- 
mencement  of    the   Bhagavad-gita   the   two   contending 


doctrines.  For  instance,  at  the  close  of  the  dialogue  (XVIII.  63), 
Krishna  says,  '  I  have  thus  communicated  to  you  knowledge  more  secret 
than  secret  itself '  {Hi  me  jndnam  dkhydtam  guhydd  guhyataram  mayd). 

1  Professor  Weber  (Indische  Studien  I.  400)  thinks  that  Brahmans 
may  have  crossed  the  sea  to  Asia  Minor  at  the  beginning  of  the  Christian 
era,  and  on  their  return  made  use  of  Christian  narratives  to  fabricate 
the  story  of  their  deified  hero,  Krishna,  whose  very  name  would  remind 
them  of  Christ.  The  legends  of  the  birth  of  Krishna  and  his  persecu- 
tion by  Kansa  remind  us,  says  Weber,  too  strikingly  of  the  correspond- 
ing Christian  narratives  to  leave  room  for  the  supposition  that  the 
similarity  is  quite  accidental.  According  to  Lassen,  the  passages  of 
the  Mahabharata  in  which  Krishna  receives  divine  honours  are  later 
interpolations,  and  the  real  worship  of  Krishna  is  not  found  before  the 
fifth  or  sixth  century.  Dr.  Lorinser,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  thinks, 
he  can  trace  the  influence  of  Christianity  throughout  the  Bhagavad- 
glta.  The  legend  of  S'veta^dvipa  in  the-Maha-bharata  (XII.  12703) 
certainly  favours  the  idea  of  some  intercourse  with  Europe  at  an  early 
date.  The  legends  relating  to  Krishna  are  found  detailed  at  full  in 
the  tenth  book  of  the  Bhagavata-purana  and  its  Hindi  paraphrase,  the 
Prem  Sagar. 

2  See  the  epitome  of  this  great  epic  in  a  subsequent  Chapter. 


ECLECTIC   SCHOOL — BHAGAVAD-GITA.  127 

armies  are  supposed  to  be  drawn  up  in  battle  array,  when 
Arjuna,  struck  with  sudden  compunction  at  the  idea  of 
fighting  his  way  to  a  kingdom  through  the  blood  of  his 
kindred,  makes  a  sudden  resolution  to  retire  from  the  com- 
bat, confiding  his  thoughts  to  Krishna  thus  (I.  28-33)  :— 

Beholding  these  my  relatives  arrayed 

Before  my  eyes  in  serried  line  of  battle, 

Preparing  for  the  deadly  fray,  my  limbs 

Are  all  relaxed,  my  blood  dries  up,  a  tremor 

Palsies  my  frame,  the  hairs  upon  my  skin 

Bristle  with  horror,  all  my  body  burns 

As  if  with  fever,  and  my  mind  whirls  round. 

So  that  I  cannot  stand  upright,  nor  hold 

The  bow  Gandiva  slipping  from  my  hand. 

I  cannot — will  not  fight — O  mighty  Krishna. 

I  seek  not  victory,  I  seek  no  kingdom. 

What  shall  we  do  with  regal  pomp  and  power. 

What  with  enjoyments  or  with  life  itself, 

When  we  have  slaughtered  aU  our  kindred  here  1 

Krishna's  reply  to  this  speech  is  made  the  occasion  of 
the  long  philosophical  and  theological  dialogue  which,  in 
fact,  constitutes  the  Bhagavad-gita,  the  main  design  of 
which  undoubtedly  is  to  exalt  the  duties  of  caste  above 
all  other  obligations,  including  the  ties  of  friendship  and 
affection,  but  at  the  same  time  to  show  that  the  practice 
of  these  duties  is  compatible  with  all  the  self-mortification 
and  concentration  of  thought  enjoined  by  the  Yoga  philo- 
sophy, as  well  as  with  the  deepest  devotion  to  the  supreme 
Being,  with  whom  Krishna  claims  to  be  identified.-^  As 
Arjuna  belongs  to  the  n)ilitary  caste,  he  is  exhorted  to 


1  There  is  a  sect  among  the  Hindus  called  Ganapatyas,  who  identify 
Ganapati  or  Ganesa  with  the  supreme  Being.  Their  doctrines  are 
embodied  in  the  Ganesa-purana,  but  they  have  a  poem  called  the 
Ganesa-gita,  which  is  identical  in  substance  with  the  Bhagavad-gita, 
the  name  of  Ganesa  being  substituted  for  that  of  Krishna. 


128  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

perform  his  duties  as  a  soldier.  Again  and  again  is  he 
urged  to  fight,  without  the  least  thought  about  conse- 
quences, and  without  the  slightest  question  as  to  the  pro- 
priety of  slaughtering  his  relations,  if  only  he  acts  in  the 
path  of  duty.  Hence  we  have  the  following  sentiments 
repeated  more  than  once  (III.  35,  XVIII.  47,  48) : — 

Better  to  do  the  duty  of  one's  caste,' 

Tkougli  bad  and  ill-performed  and  fraught  with  evil. 

Than  undertake  the  business  of  another, 

However  good  it  be.     For  better  far 

Abandon  life  at  once  than  not  fulfil 

One's  own  appointed  work  ;  another's  duty 

Brings  danger  to  the  man  who  meddles  with  it. 

Perfection  is  alone  attained  by  him 

Who  swerves  not  from  the  business  of  his  caste. 

Remembering  the  sacred  character  attributed  to  this 
poem  and  the  veneration  in  which  it  has  always  been  held 
throughout  India,  we  may  well  understand  that  such 
words  as  these  must  have  exerted  a  powerful  influence  for 
the  last  1800  years  ;  tending,  as  they  must  have  done,  to 
rivet  the  fetters  of  caste-institutions  which,  for  several 
centuries  preceding  the  Christian  era,  notwithstanding 
the  efforts  of  the  great  liberator  Buddha,  increased  year 
by  year  tbeir  hold  upon  the  various  classes  of  Hindu 
society,  impeding  mutual  intercourse,  preventing  healthy 
interchange  of  ideas,  and  making  national  union  almost 
impossible. 

Before  proceeding  to  offer  further  examples,  we  may 
remark  that  as  the  Bhagavad-gita  is  divided  into  three 
sections,  each  containing  six  chapters,  so  the  philosophical 
teaching  is  somewhat  distinct  in  each  section. 

1  Compare  S'akuntala,  verse  133,  'Verily  the  occupation  in  which  a 
man  is  born,  though  it  be  in  bad  repute,  must  not  be  abandoned.'  The 
words  used  [saha-jam-lcarma)  are  the  same  as  those  in  the  Bhagavad- 
gita. 


ECLECTIC   SCHOOL— BHAGAVAD-GITA.  I  29 

The  first  section  dwells-  chiefly  on  the  benefits  of  the 
Yoga  system,  pointing  out,  however,  as  we  have  already 
observed,  that  the  asceticism  of  the  Yoga  ought  to  be 
joined  with  action  and  the  performance  of  regular  caste 
duties,,  and  winding  up  with  a  declaration  that  the  grand 
end  and  aim  of  all  asceticism  is  to  attain  that  most  desir- 
able pantheistic  state  which  enables  a  man  to  see  God  in 
everything  and  everything  in  God.  Arjuna  is  exhorted,  as 
a  member  of  the  soldier-caste  to  dismiss  all  doubt  about 
the  propriety  of  fighting  and  killing,  his  relations,  by  an 
argument  drawn  from  the  eternal  existence  of  the  soul, 
which  is  nobly  expressed  thus  (II.  1 1 ,  &c.)  :  ^  — 

The  wise  grieve  not  for  the  departed,  nor  for  those  who  yet  survive. 
Ne'er  was  the  time  when  I  was  not,  nor  thou,  nor  yonder  chiefs,  and  ne'er 
Shall  be  the  time  when  all,  of  us  shall  be  not;  as  the  embodied  soul 
In  this   corporeal  frame  moves  swiftly  on  through  boyhood,  youth, 

and  age, 
So  will  it  pass  through  other  forms  hereafter — be  not  grieved  thereat. 
The  man  whom  pain  and  pleasure,  heat  and  cold  affect  not,  he  is  fit 
For  immortality ;  whatever  is  npt  cannot  be,  whatever  is 
Can  never  cease  to   be.     Know  this  -^—  the   Being  that  spread   this 

universe 
Is  indestructible.     Who  can  destroy  the  Indestructible  ? 
These  bodies  that  inclose  the  everlasting  soul,  inscrutable. 
Immortal,  have  an  erfti;  but  he.who  thinks  the  soul  can  be  destroyed, 
And  he  who  deems  it  a  destroyer,  are  alike  mistaken  ;  it 
Kills  not,  and  is  not  killed ;  it  is  not  born,  nor  doth  it  ever  die  ; 
It  has  no  past  nor  future^unproduced,  unchanging,  infinite ;  he 
Who  knows  it  fixed,  unborn,  imperishable,  indissoluble, 
How  can  that  man  destroy  another,  or  extinguish  aught  below  ? 
As  men  abandon  old  and  threadbare  clothes  to  put  on  others  new, 
So  casts  the  embodied  soul  its  worn-out  frame  to  enter  other  forms. 
No  dart  can  pierce  it ;  flame  cannot  consume  it,  water  wet  it  not, 
Nor  scorching  breezes  dry  it — indestructible,  incapable 

1  I.  have  endeavoured  to  give  a  more  literal  version  than  the  well- 
known  one  of  Dean  Milman,  though  I  have  followed  him  ia  some 
expressions. 


13°  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Of  heat  or  moisture  or  aridity,  eternal,  all-pervading, 
Steadfast,  immovable,  perpetual,  yet  imperceptible. 
Incomprehensible,  unfading,  deathless,  unimaginable.  ^ 

The  duty  of  Yoga  or  '  intense  concentration  of  the  mind 
on  one  subject'  (viz.,  the  supreme  Being,  here  identified 
with  Krishna),  till  at  last  the  great  end  of  freedom  from 
all  thought,  perfect  calm,  and  absorption  in  the  Deity  are 
obtained,  is  enjoined  with  much  force  of  language  "in  the 
second  and  sixth  books,  from  which  I  extract  the  following 
examples,  translated  nearly  literally,  but  not  quite  accord 
iug  to  the  order  of  the  text : — 


o 


That  holy  man  who  stands  immovable. 

As  if  erect  upon  a  pinnacle,^ 

His  appetites  and  organs  all  subdued. 

Sated  with  knowledge  secular  and  sacred. 

To  whom  a  lump  of  earth,  a  stone,  or  gold,^ 

To  whom  friends,  relatives,  acquaintances. 

Neutrals  and  enemies,  the  good  and  bad, 

Are  all  alike,  is  called  'one  yoked  with  God.' 

The  man  who  aims  at  that  supreme  condition 

Of  perfect  yoking  *  with  the  Deity 

Must  first  of  all  be  moderate  in  all  things. 

In  food,  in  sleep,  in  vigilance,  in  action. 

In  exercise  and  recreation.     Then 

Let  him,  if  seeking  God  by  deep  abstraction, 

Abandon  his  possessions  and  his  hopes. 

Betake  himself  to  some  secluded  spot,^ 

And  fix  his  heart  and  thoughts  on  God  alone. 

There  let  him  choose  a  seat,  not  high  nor  low, 


1  Compare  the  passage  from  the  Katha  Upanishad,  translated,  p.  4 1 . 

2  Kuta-sthah  (VI.  8)  may  mean  '  standing  erect  like  a  peak' 

2  Tersely  expressed  in  Sanskrit  by  samaAoslitdkna-kdnccmah  VI.  8.' 
*  I  use  these  expressions  as  kindred  words  to  the  Sanskrit  yiikta  and 

yoga.     'Joined  '  and  'junction  '  are  also  cognate  expressions. 

'•>  Cf.  Matt.  vi.  6,   '  But  thou,  when  thou  prayest,  enter  into  thy 

closet,  and  when  thou  hast  shut  thy  door,  pray  to  thy  Father  which  is 

in  secret.' 


ECLECTIC   SCHOOL — BHAGAVAD-GITA.  13I 

And  with  a  cloth  or  skin  to  cover  him, 
And  Kusa  grass  beneath  him,  let  him  sit 
Firm  and  erect,  his  body,  head,  and  neck 
Straight  and  immovable,  his  eyes  directed 
Towards  a  single  point,i  not  looking  round. 
Devoid  of  passion,  free  from  anxious  thought,  ' 
His  heart  restrained,  and  deep  in  meditation. 
E'en  as  a  tortoise  draws  its  head  and  feet 
Within  its  shell,  so  must  he  keep  his  organs 
Withdrawn  from  sensual  objects.     He  whose  senses 
Are  well  controlled  attains  to  sacred  knowledge, 
.And  thence  obtains  tranquillity  of  thought. 
Without  quiescence  there  can  be  no  bliss. 
E'en  as  a  storm- tossed  ship  upon  the  waves. 
So  is  the  man  whose  heart  obeys  his  passions, 
Which,  like  the  winds,  will  hurry  him  away. 
Quiescence  is  the  state  of  the  Supreme. 
He  who,  intent  on  meditation,  joins 
His  soul  with  the  Supreme,  is  like  a  flame 
That  flickers  not  when  sheltered  from  the  wind. 

I  pass  DOW  to  the  second  division  of  this  poena,  in  which 
the  pantheistic  doctrines  of  the  Vedanta  are  more  directly 
inculcated  than  in  the  other  sections.  Krishna  here  in  the 
plainest  language  claims  adoration  as  one  with  the  great 
universal  Spirit,  pervading  and  constituting  the  universe. 
I  extract  portions  from  different  parts  of  this  section 
without  observing  the  order  of  the  text,  which  contains 
much  tautology,  as  well  as  repetitions  of  similar  ideas  in 
different  language  : — 

Whate'er  thou  dost  perform,  whate'er  thou  eatest, 
Whate'er  thou  givest  to  the  poor,  whate'er 
Thou  offerest  in  sacrifice,  whatever 
Thou  doest  as  an  act  of  holy  penance. 
Do  all  as  if  to  me,  O  Arjima  (IX.  27).^ 

1  The  text  (Vl.  1 3)  says,  '  fixing  his  eyes  on  the  tip  of  his  nose ' 
{samprelishya-ndsilutrjram).     See  p.  93. 

■^  Compare  i  Cor.  x.  31,  'Whether  therefore  ye  eat,  or  drink,  or 
whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God.'     Dr.  Lorinser,  expand- 


I  3  2  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

I  am  the  ancient  sage,i  without  beginning, 

I  am  the  Ruler  and.  the  All-sustainer,^ 

I  am  incomprehensible  in  form, 

More  subtle  and  minute  than  subtlest  atoms ;  ^ 

I  am  the  cause  of  the  whole  universe  ; 

Through  me  it  is  created  and  dissolved ; 

On  me  all  things  within  it  hang  suspended, 

ing  the  views  of  Professor  Weber  and  others  concerning  the  influence 
of  Christianity  on  the  legends  of  Krishna,  thinks  that  many  of  the 
sentiments  of  the  Bhagavad-gita  have  been  directly  borrowed  from  the 
New  Testament,  copies  of  which,  he  thinks,  found  their  way  into  India 
about  the  third  century,  when  he  believes  the  poem  to  have  been 
written.  He  even  adopts  the  theory  of  a  parallel  in  tjie  names  of 
Christ  and  Krishna.  He  seems,  however,  to  forget  that  fragments  of 
truth  are  to  be  found  in  all  religious  systems,  however  false,  and  that 
the  Bible,  though  a  true  revelation,  is  still  in  regard  to  the  human 
mind,  through  which  the  thoughts  are  transfused,  a  thoroughly 
Oriental  book,  cast  in  an  Oriental  mould,  and  full  of  Oriental  ideas 
and  expressions.  Some  of  his  comparisons  seem  mere  coincidences  of 
language,  which  might  occur  quite  naturally  and  independently.  In 
other  cases,  where  he  draws  attention  to  coincidences  of  ideas — as,  for 
example,  the  division  of  the  sphere  of  self-control  into  thought,  word, 
and  deed  in  chap.  XVII.  14-16,  &c.,  and  of  good  works  into  prayer, 
fasting,  and  almsgiving — how  could  these  be  borrowed  from  Chris- 
tianity, when  they  are  also  found  in  Manu,  which  few  will  place  later 
than  the  fifth  century  B.C.  ?  Thus  a  Tri-dandin  (Manu  XIT.  10)  is 
explained  to  mean  '  a  triple  commander,'  who  commands  his  thoughts, 
words,  and  actions  (see  note  2,  p.  121);  the  same  division  is  found  in 
Manu  II.  192,  236.  Professor  Cowell  has  pointed  out  that  it  occurs 
still  earlier  than  Manu,  in  the  Black  Yajur-veda  VI.  i.  7,  and  its 
Aranyaka  X.  i.  10,  and  in  the  Aitareya-brahmana  III.  28.  Plato  also 
has  the  same  in  his  Protagoras  (p.  348),  and  it  is  found  in  the  Zand 
Avasta  (Gatha  Ahunavaiti  III.  3).  Nevertheless,  something  may  be 
said  for  Dr.  Lorinser's  theory.  His  German  translation  (1869)  is  rich 
in  notes,  pointing  out  parallels.  See  also  the  '  Indian  Antiquary '  for 
October  1873. 

1  Kavih purdnah  Ylll.  9.  'Kavi'  in  Vedic  Sanskrit  means  'wise,' 
and  is  an  epithet  applied  to  most  of  the  gods,  especially  to  Agni. 
The  meaning  'poet'  belongs  to  later  Sanskrit. 

2  Sarvasya  dhdtd  VIII.  9. 

^  A7}or  aniycm  VIII.  9.     Compare  p.  71  of  this  volume. 


ECLECTIC   SCHOOL — BHAGAVAD-GITA.  I  33 

Like  pearls  upon  a  string.^     I  am  the  light 

In  sun  and  moon,  far,  far  beyond  the  darkness ;  ^ 

I  am  the  brilliancy  in  flame,  the  radiance 

In  all  that's  radiant,  and  the  light  of  lights,* 

The  sound  in  ether,  fragrance  in  the  earth, 

The  seed  eternal  of  existing  tbings,* 

The  life  in  all,  the  father,  mother,  husband. 

Forefather,  and  sustainer  of  the  world, 

Its  friend  and  lord.     I  am  its  way^  and  refuge, 

Its  habitation  and  receptacle, 

I  am  its  witness.     I  am  Victory 

And  Energy ;  I  wafccb  the  universe 

With  eyds  and  face  in  all  dirediions  turned.'' 

I  dwell,  as  Wisdom,  in  the  heart  of  all.' 

I  am  the  Goodness  of  the  good,  I  am 

Beginning,  Middle,  End,  eternal  Time, 

The  Birth,  the  Death  of  all.*     I  am  the  symbol  A 

Among  the  characters."     I  have  created  all 

^  VII.  7.  Dr.  Lorinser  compares  Rom.  xi.  36,  '  Of  him,  a!nd  through 
him,  and  unto  him,  are  all  things.'  John  i.  3,  '  All  things  were  made 
by  him ;  and  without  him  was  riot  anything  made  that  was  made.' 

^  Prahhasmi  iasi-suryayoh  VII.  8.  Tamasah  parastat  VIII.  9.  Cf. 
1  John  i.  5,  '  God  is  light,  and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all.'  See  Rig- 
veda  I.  50.  10. 

*  Jyotishdm  jyotih  XIIl.  17.  Cf.  IBrihad-ar'anyaka  Upanishad,  quoted 
p.  37  of  this  volume. 

*  Sarva-hhutdndm  mjam  VII.  10,  X  39.  Cf.  John  i.  3,  'All  things 
were  made  by  him.' 

*  Gati  IX.  18.     Cf.  John  xiv.  6,  'I  am  the  way.' 

^   Visvato-mukha,  'facing  in  all  directions,'  IX.  15. 

'  Jndnam  hridi  sarvasya  nisKthitam  XIIL  1 7.     Cf.  2  Cor.  iv.  6. 

*  Compare  Rev.  i  17,  18,  'I  am  the  first  and  the  laist;  and  have  the 
keys  of  hell  and  of  death.'  Mr.  Mullens  draws  attention  to  parallel 
descriptions  of  the  supreme  Ruler  in  the  Greek  Orphic  hymns :  '  Zeus 
was  the  first  and  Zeus  the  last ;  Zeus  is  the  head ;  Zeus,  the  centre ; 
from  Zeus  have  all  things  been  made  ;  Zeus  is  the  breath  of  all  things ; 
Zeus  is  the  sun  arid  moon,'  &c.  See  his  Bss'ay,  p.  193,  and  cf.  note  2, 
p.  102.  Cf.  also  an  inscription  said  to  exist  in  a  temple  of  Athene,  'Eyai 
iijjj'i  Trav  rh  yiyotoi  xal  ov  xai  sso/mov. 

9  AUshardndm  a-kdro  'smi  X  33.  Compare  Rev.  i.  8,  '  I  am  Alpha 
and  Omega.' 


^34  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Out  of  one  porfcion  of  myself.     E'en  those 

Who  are  of  low  and  unpretending  birth,i 

May  find  the  path  to  highest  happiness, 

If  they  depend  on  me ;  how  much  more  those 

Who  are  by  rank  and  penance  holy  Brahmans 

And  saintly  soldier-princes  like  thyself. 

Then  be  not  sorrowful ;  from  all  thy  sins 

I  will  deliver  thee.^     Think  thou  on  me, 

Have  faith  in  me,  adore  and  worship  me,^ 

And  join  thyself  in  meditation  to  me ; 

Thus  shalt  thou  come  to  me,  0  Arjuna; 

Thus  shalt  thou  rise  to  my  supreme  abode, 

Where  neither  sun  nor  moon  have  need  to  shine. 

For  know  that  all  the  lustre  they  possess  is  mine.* 

^  Pdpa-yonayah,  '  base-born,'  IX.  32.  The  text  states  who  these  are, 
viz..  Women,  Vaisyas,  and  S'udras.  This  is  significant  in  regard  to 
the  Hindi!  estimate  of  the  female  sex.  A  woman's  religion  is  thought 
to  consist  in  obedience  first  to  her  father  and  then  to  her  husband,  with 
attention  to  domestic  duties.  See  Manu  II.  67.  But  the  joining  of 
Vaisyas  with  S'udras  is  curious  (cf.  p.  149.  6).  Brahmans,  Kshatriyas, 
andRajarshiSji.e.,  holypersonages — half  princes,  half  saints — are  by  birth 
and  rank  fitted  for  religious  exercises,  and  more  likely  to  reach  heaven. 

2  Aham  tvdm  sarva-pdpebhyo  mocayishydmi  md  sucah.  Cf.  Matt. 
ix.  2,  '  Be  of  good  cheer ;  thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee.'  A  sense  of  original 
corruption  seems  to  be  felt  by  all  classes  of  Hindus,  as  indicated  by  the 
following  prayer  used  after  the  Gayatri  by  many  religious  persons  : — 

Pdpo  'ham  pdpa-karmdham  pdpdtmd  pdpa-sarnbhavah, 
Trdhi  mam,  pundankdTcsha  sarva-pdpa-hara  Hare, 

'  I  am  sinful,  I  commit  sin,  my  nature  is  sinful,  I  am  conceived  in  sin, 
Save  me,  0  thou  lotus-eyed  Hari,  the  remover  of  sin.' 
''  The  original  is,  Manmand  bhava  mad-bhaMo  mad-ydjl  mdm  namas- 
kuru  IX.  34.     Cf.  Prov.  xxiii.  26,  'My  son,  give  me  thine  heart.' 

*  Na  tad  hhdsayate  suryo  na  Sasdnltah  XV.  6.  Yad  dditya-gatam 
tejo  yac  candramasi  tat  tejo  viddhi  mdmalcam  XV.  12.  Cf.  Rev.  xxi.  23, 
'  The  city  had  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither  of  the  moon,  to  shine  in  it :  for 
the  glory  of  God  did  Hghten  it.'  Cf.  also  Maha-bharata  III.  1745,  &c., 
Na  tatra  surydh  somo  vd  dyotate  na  ca  pdvakah,  Soayaiva  prabhayd 
tatra  dyotante  punya-ldbdhayd,  '  there  (in  Indra's  heaven)  the  sun 
shines  not,  nor  the  moon  nor  fire ;  there  they  (righteous  men)  shine 
by  their  own  glory  acquired  by  their  own  merit.' 


ECLECTIC    SCHOOL — BHAGAVAD-GITA.  135 

I  come  now  to  chapter  XL,  called  'the  Vision  (or 
Revelation)  of  the  Universal  Form'  (visva-rupa-dar- 
sanam).  Arjuna,  filled  with  awe  at  the  discovery  of  the 
true  nature  of  Krishna,  acting  as  his  charioteer,  addresses 
him  thus : — 

Most  mighty  Lord  supreme,  this  revelation 
Of  thy  mysterious  essence  and  thy  oneness 
With  the  eternal  Spirit,  clears  away 
The  mists  of  my  illusions.     Show  me  then 
Thy  form  celestial,  most  divine  of  men,i 
If  haply  I  may  dare  to  look  upon  it. 

To  this  Krishna  replies  : — 

Thou  canst  not  bear  to  gaze  upon  my  shape 
With  these  thy  human  eyes,  0  son  of  Pandu, 
But  now  I  gift  thee  with  celestial  vision ; 
Behold  me  in  a  hundred  thousand  forms, 
In  phases,  colours,  fashions  infinite. 

Here  follows  the  description  of  Krishna's  supernatural 
transformation  :  ^ — 

Thus  having  said,  the  mighty  Lord  of  all 
Displayed  to  Arjuna  his  form  supreme. 
Endowed  with  countless  mouths  and  countless  eyes, 
With  countless  faces  turned  to  every  quarter, 
With  countless  marvellous  appearances. 
With  ornaments  and  wreaths  and  robes  divine, 
With  heavenly  fragrance  and  celestial  weapons. 
It  was  as  if  the  firmament  were  filled. 
All  in  an  instant,  with  a  thousand  suns. 
Blazing  with  dazzling  lustre,  so  beheld  he 
The  glories  of  the  universe  collected 
In  the  one  person  of  the  God  of  gods.^ 

1  Purushottama,  '  most  excellent  of  men,'  a  common  name  for 
Krishna. 

^  The  idea  of  this,  Dr.  Lorinser  considers  borrowed  from  the  Gospel 
narrative  of  the  transfiguration.  It  is  certainly  very  instructive  to  con- 
trast the  simplicity  of  the  Gospel  scene  :  '  His  face  did  shine  as  the  sun, 
and  his  raiment  was  white  as  the  light,'  Matt.  xvii.  2,  Mark  ix.  3. 

2  In  the  Udyoga-parva  of  the  Maha-bharata  (4419-4430)  Krishna 


136  INDIAN  WISDOl^. 

Arjuna,  with  every  hair  on  his  body  'bristling  with  awe, 
bows  his  head  at  this  vision,  and  folding  his  hands  in 
reverence,  gives  utterance  to  a  passionate  outbul'st  of 
enthusiastic  adoration,  which  I  here  abridge  : — 

I  see  thee,  mighty  Lord  of  all,  revealed 

In  forms  of  infinite  diversity. 

I  see  thee  like  a  mass  of  .purest  light. 

Plashing  thy  lustre  everywhere  around. 

I  see  thee  crowned  with  splendour  like  the  sun, 

Pervading  earth  and  sky,  immeasurable. 

Boundless,  without  beginning,  middle,  end. 

Preserver  of  imperishable  law, 

The  everlasting  Man  ;  1  the  triple  world 

Is  awe-struck  at  this  vision  of  thy  form. 

Stupendous,  indescribable  in  glory. 

Have  mercy,  God  of  gods ;  the  universe 

Is  fitly  dazzled  by  thy  majesty, 

Fitly  to  thee  alone  devotes  its  homage. 

At  thy  approach  the  evil  demons  flee, 

Scattered  in  terror  to  the  winds  of  heaven. 

The  multitude  of  holy  saints  ^  adore  thee — 

Thee,  first  Creator,^  lord  of  all  the  gods. 

The  ancient  One,*  supreme  Receptacle 

Of  all  that  is  and  is  not,  knowing  all, 

And  to  be  known  by  all.     Immensely  vast, 

reveals  his  form  in  the  same  way  to  the  assembled  pifinces,  who  are 
obliged  to  close  their  eyes  at  the  awful  sight,  while  the  blind  Dhrita- 
rashtra  is  gifted  with  divine  vision  that  he  may  behold  the  glorious 
spectacle  (4437). 

1  Sandtanah  purushah  (XI.  1 8)  may  be  translated  '  the  eternal 
Spirit.' 

2  MaliarsMs,  great  saints  and  Siddhas,  XI.  21.  Cf.  parts  of  the  Te 
Deum.  The  Siddhas  are  semi-divine  beings  supposed  to  possess  great 
purity,  called  Sadhyas  in  the  earlier  mythology  (Manu  I.  22).  Siddhas 
and  Sadhyas  are  sometimes  confused,  though  mentioned  separately  in 
the  tesrt. 

^  Of.  John  viii.  58,  '  Before  Abraham  was,  I  am.' 
*  Purushah pufaMh,  'the  most  ancient  person,'  XI.  38.     Cf.  Daniel 
vii.  9,  'The  Ancient  of  days  did  sit.' 


ECLECTIC   SCHOOL — teHAGAVAD-GITA.  I  37 

Thou  coinprehendest  all,  thou  art  the  All  (XI.  40). 
To  thee  earth's  grea!t6st  heroes  must  return, 
Blending  once  more  with  thy  resplendent  'essence, 
Like  mighty  rivers  rushing  to  the  ocean  (XI.  28). 
To  thee  be  sung  a  thousand  hymns  of  praise 
By  every  creature  and  from  every  quarter, 
Before,  above,  behind.     Hail !  Hail !  thou  All ! 
Again  and  yet  again  I  worship  thee. 
Have  mercy,  I  implore  thee,  and  forgive, 
That  I,  in  ignorance  of  this  thy  glory. 
Presumed  to  call  thee  Friend  ;  and  pardon  too 
Whate'et  I  have  too  negligently  uttered. 
Addressing  thee  in  too  familiar  tones. 
Unrivalled  God  of  gods,  I  fall  before  thee 
Prostrate  in  adoration,  thou  the  Father 
Of  all  that  lives  and  lives  not ;  have  compassion, 
Bear  with  me,  as  a  father  with  a  son. 
Or  as  a  lover  with  a  cherished  one. 
Now  that  I  see  thee  as  thou  really  art, 
I  thrill  with  terror  !     -Mercy  !  Lord  of  lords. 
Once  more  display  to  me  thy  human  form, 
Thou  habitation  of  the  universe.^ 

Many  other  remarkable  passages  might  be  adduced  in 
connection  with  the  first  two  div-isions  of  the  subject- 
matter  of  the  Bhagavad-gita.     I  note  the  following  : — 

He  who  has  brought  his  members  under  subjection,  but  sits  with 
foolish  mind  thinking  in  his  heart  of  sensual  things,  is  called  a  hypo- 
crite (mifhydcdra).     (III.  6,     Cf.  Matt.  v.  28,) 

Many  are  my  births  that  are  past ;  many  are  thine  too,  0  Arjuna. 
I  know  them  all,  but  thou  knowest  them  not.  (IV.  5.  Cf.  John 
viii.  14.) 

For  the  establishment  of  righteousness  am  I  born  from  time  to  time. 
(IV.  8.     Cf.  John  xviii.  37,  i  John  iii.  3.) 

^  XI.  45,  46.  Dr.  Lorinser  compares  the  awe  of  our  Lord's  disciples, 
Matt.  xvii.  6,  '  They  fell  on  their  face,  and  were  sore  afraid.'  Also  of 
Simon  Peter,  Luke  v.  8,  'When  Simon  Peter  saVr  it,  he  fell  down  at 
Jesus'  knees,  saying,  Depart  from  me;  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord.' 


138  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

I  am  dearer  to  the  wise  than  all  possessions,  and  he  is  dear  to  me. 
(VI.  17.     Of.  Luke  xiv.  33,  John  xiv.  21.) 

The  ignorant,  the  unbeliever,  and  he  of  a  doubting  mind  perish 
utterly.     (IV.  40.     Cf.  Mark  xvi.  16.) 

In  him  are  all  beings,  by  him  this  universe  was  spread  out.  (VIII. 
22.     Cf.  Acts  xvii.  28.) 

^  Deluded  men  despise  me  when  I  have  taken  human  form.     (IX.  1 1. 
Cf.  John  i.  10.) 

In  all  the  Vedas  I  am  to  be  known.     (XV.  15.     Cf.  John  v.  39.) 

As  many  uses  as  there  are  in  a  reservoir  filled  with  waters  coming 
from  all  parts  (for  bathing,  washing,  or  drinking),  so  many  does  a 
knowing  Brahman  find  in  all  the  Vedas.  (II.  46.  Mr.  Thomson  com- 
pares the  various  uses  made  of  texts  from  our  own  sacred  Scriptures.) 

The  next  is  suggestive  of  the  doctrine  that  the  condi- 
tion of  the  soul  for  a  future  state  is  determined  before 
death  : — 

Whatever  a  man's  state  of  mind  be  at  the  moment  when  he  leaves 
the  body  to  that  condition  does  he  always  go,  being  made  to  conform  to 
that.  (VIII.  6.  Cf.  Eccles.  si.  3.  This  is  the  dying  Sanskara  which 
delays  the  passage  to  heaven.) 

A  similar  passage  occurs  in  the  Chandogya  Upanishad: — 

Man  is  a  creature  of  intelligence  (JcratHr-maya) ;  whatever  ideas  he 
forms  in  this  life,  he  becomes  so  when  he  departs  to  another,  therefore 
he  should  reflect  (on  God,  III.  14.  i). 

The  next  is  a  paraphrase  of  XVI.  12-16.  It  may  be 
compared  with  Luke  xii.  1 7-20  : — 

Entangled  in  a  hundred  worldly  snares. 
Self-seeking  men,  by  ignorance  deluded. 
Strive  by  unrighteous  means  to  pile  up  riches. 
Then,  in  their  self-complacency,  they  say, 
'  This  acqusition  I  have  made  to-day. 
That  I  will  gain  to-morrow ;  so  much  pelf 
Is  hoarded  up  already,  so  much  more 
Remains  that  I  have  yet  to  treasure  up. 
This  enemy  I  have  destroyed,  him  also 


ECLECTIC   SCHOOL — BHAGAVADGITA.  I  39 

And  others  in  their  turn  I  will  despatch. 

I  am  a  lord  ;  I  will  enjoy  myself ; 

I'm  wealthy,  noble,  strong,  successful,  happy  ; 

I'm  absolutely  perfect ;  no  one  else 

In  all  the  world  can  be  compared  to  me. 

Now  I  will  offer  up  a  sacrifice, 

Give  gifts  with  lavish  hand  and  be  triumphant.' 

Such  men,  befooled  by  endless,  vain  conceits. 

Caught  in  the  meshes  of  the  world's  illusion, 

Immersed  in  sensuality,  descend 

Down  to  the  foulest  hell  of  unclean  spirits. 

I  add  a  few  lines  from  chapter  III.,  in  which  Krishna 
exhorts  Arjuna  to  energetic  action  by  an  argument  drawn 
from  the  example  set  by  himself  in  his  own  everlasting 
exertions  for  the  good  of  the  world  (cf.  John  v.  17).  The 
order  of  the  text  is  not  observed  in  the  following  version, 
and  the  sentiment  in  lines  6,  7,  is  from  chapter  II.  47  : — 

Perform  all  necessary  acts,  for  action 

Is  better  than  inaction,  none  can  live 

By  sitting  still  and  doing  nought ;  it  is 

By  action  only  that  a  man  attains 

Immunity  from  action.     Yet  in  working 

Ne'er  work  for  recompense ;  let  the  act's  motive 

Be  in  the  act  itself.     Know  that  work 

Proceeds  fi-om  the  Supreme.     I  am  the  pattern 

For  man  to  follow ;  know  that  I  have  done 

All  acts  already,  nought  remains  for  me 

To  gain  by  action,  yet  I  work  for  ever 

XJnweariedly,  and  this  whole  universe 

Would  perish  if  I  did  not  work  my  work  (III.  19). 

The  third  division  of  the  poem,  comprising  the  six  last 
chapters,  aims  particularly  at  interweaving  San-khya  doc- 
trines with  the  Vedanta,  though  this  is  done  more  or  less 
throughout  the  whole  work.  It  accepts  the  doctrine  of  a 
supreme  presiding  Spirit  (called  Param  Brahma  or  Adhy- 
dtmam,  XIII.  12,  VIII.  i),  as  the  first  source  of  the  uni- 
verse,  but  asserts  the  eternal  existence  of  Prakriti  and 


I40  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Purusha — that  is,  of  an  orisinal  eternal  element  and  soul 
— both  emanating  from  the  supreme  Being  (then  regarded 
as  Para  Prahriti,  '  supreme  Prakriti').  It  maintains  the 
individuality  and  personality  of  souls,  and  affirms  that  the 
body  (hshetra)  and  all  the  world  of  sense  is  evolved  out  of 
Prakriti  by  the  regular  San-khyan  process,  through  Buddhi, 
Ahan-kara,  the  five  subtile  elements,  the  five  grosser  ele- 
ments, and  the  eleven  organs,  including  miud.  Thus,  in 
XIII.  19  and  in  VII.  4-6,  we  read  :^- 

Learn  that  Prakriti  and  Puruslia  ialso  are  both  of  them  without 
beginning.  -And  know  that  the  Vikaras,  or  '(productions,'  and  the 
Gunas  (see  p.  85)  are  sprung  from  Prakriti. 

Earth,  water,  fire,  air,  ether,  mind,  intellect,  and  'egoism,  into  these 
eight  is  my  Prakriti  divided.  This  Prakriti  is  the  inferior  one,  but 
learn  my  superior  Prakriti  to  be  other  than  this.  Understand  that  all 
things  are  produced  from  this  other  Prakriti. 

Again,  in  VII.  12-14,  Krishna,  speaking  of  the  three 
Gunas,  says  : — 

Know  that  all  the  three  Gunas,  whether  Sattva,  JRajas,  or  Tamas 
(of.  p.  85),  proceed  only  from  me.     I  am  not  in  them,  but  they  in  me. 

All  this  universe,  deluded  by  these  three  conditions  consisting  of 
the  Gunas,  does  not  recognise  me,  the  imperishable  Being,  superior 
to  them  all. 

For  this  divine  illusion  {Maya,  i.e.,  '  illusory  creation  '),  consisting  of 
the  three  Gunas,  caused  by  me,  is  difficult  to  be  passed  over.  Those 
only  are  delivered  from  it  who  have  recourse  to  me. 

The  eclecticism  of  the  Bhagavad-gita  will  be  sufficiently 
appai'ent  from  these  examples.  I  close  my  brief  survey 
of  this  celebrated  poem  by  three  or  four  passages  (taken 
from  chapter  III.  27,  chapter  XIII.  29,  31),  which  form 
a  'fit  conclusion  to  the  subject,  as  they  contain  the  gist  of 
the  whole  argument,  viz.,  that  it  is  Arjuna's  duty  as  a 
soldier  to  act  like  a  soldier  and  to  do  the  work  of  his 
caste,  regardless  of  consequences ;  and  that  this  may  be 


ECLECTIC   SCHOOL— BHAGAVAD-GITA.  141 

done  cousistently  witk  adhesion  to  the  Vedantic  dogma  of 
the  soul's  real  inaqtivity  and  state  of  passionless  repose  : — 

All  actions  are  incessantly  performed 

By.  operation  of  the  qualities 

Of  Prakjiti  ;  deluded  by  the  thought 

Of  individuality,  the  soul 

Vainly  believes  itself  to  be  the  doer. 

The  soul  existing  from  eternity, 

Devoid  of  qualities,  imperishable, 

Abiding  in  the  body,  yet  supreme. 

Acts  not,  nor  is  by  any  act  polluted. 

He  who  perceives  that  actions  are  performed 

By  Prakriti  alone,  and  that  the  soul 

Is  not  an  actor,  sees  the  truth  aright. 

Krishna's  last  a(,l vice  may  be  thus  sumrped  up  : — 

Act  then  and  do  thine  own  appointed  task, 

In  every  action  my  assistance  ask. 

Bo  all  with  heart  and  soul  absorbed  in  me, 

Sq  shalt  thou  gain  thine  end  and  be  from  trouble  free. 

Arjuiia's  conclusion  may  be  thus  paraphrased  :— 

Eternal  One  !  thy  glory  ju§t  beheld 
Has  all  illusion  from  my  soul  dispelled  ; 
Now  by  thy  favour  is  my  conscience  clear, 
I  will  thy  bidding  do  and  fight  without  a  fear. 

To  any  one  who  has  followed  me  in  tracing  the  outline 
of  this  remarkable  philosophical  dialogue,  and  has  noted 
the  numerous  parallels  it  o^ers  to  passages  in  our  sacred 
Scriptures,  it  may  seem  strange  that  I  hesitate  to  concur 
in  any  theory  which  explains  these  coincidences  by  sup- 
posing that  the  author  had  access  to  the  New  Testament 
or  that  he  derived  some  of  his  ideas  from  the  first  propa- 
gators of  Christianity.  Surely  it  will  be  conceded  that 
the  probability  of  contact  and  interaction  between  Gentile 
systems  and  the  Christian  religion  in  the  first  two  cen- 
turies of  our  era  must  have  been  greater  in  Italy  than  in 


142  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

India.  Yet,  if  we  take  the  writings  and  recorded  sayings 
of  three  great  Roman  philosophers,  Seneca,  Epictetus,  and 
Marcus  Aurelius,  we  shall  find  them  full  of  resemblances 
to  passages  in  our  Scriptures,  while  there  appears  to  be 
no  ground  whatever  for  supposing  that  these  eminent 
Pagan  writers  and  thinkers  derived  any  of  their  ideas 
from  either  Jewish  or  Christian  sources.  In  fact,  the 
Eev.  F.  W.  Farrar,  iu  his  interesting  and  valuable  work, 
'  Seekers  after  God,'  has  clearly  shown  that  '  to  say  that 
Pagan  morality  kindled  its  faded  taper  at  the  Gospel  light 
whether  furtively  or  unconsciously,  that  it  dissembled  the 
obligation  and  made  a  boast  of  the  splendour,  as  if  it  were 
originally  her  own,  is  to  make  an  assertion  wholly  unten- 
able.' He  points  out  that  the  attempts  of  the  Christian 
Fathers  to  make  out  Pythagoras  a  debtor  to  Hebraic 
wisdom,  Plato  an  '  Atticizing  Moses,  Aristotle  a  picker  up 
of  ethics  from  a  Jew,  Seneca  a  correspondent  of  St.  Paul, 
were  due  'in  some  cases  to  ignorance,  and  in  some  to  a 
want  of  perfect  honesty  in  controversial  dealing.' 

His  arguments  would  be  even  more  conclusive  if  applied 
to  the  Bhagavad-gita,  the  author  of  which  was  probably 
contemporaneous  with  Seneca.  It  must,  indeed,  be  ad- 
mitted that  the  flashes  of  true  light  which  emerge  from  the 
mists  of  pantheism  in  the  writings  of  Indian  philosophers, 
must  spring  from  the  same  source  of  light  as  the  Gospel 
itself;  but  it  may  reasonably  be  questioned  whether  there 
could  have  been  any  actual  contact  of  the  Hiudu  systems 
with  Christianity  without  a  more  satisfactory  result  in  the 
modification  of  pantheistic  and  anti-Christian  ideas.  In 
order  that  the  resemblances  to  Scripture  in  the  writings 
of  Roman  philosophers  may  be  compared  with  those  just 
noted,  I  subjoin  a  few  instances  from  '  Seekers  after  God ' 
and  Dr.  Ramage's  '  Beautiful  Thoughts  : ' — 

I.  Seneca.  'God  comes  to  men:  na}',  what  is  nearer,  comes  into 
men.'     '  A  sacred  spirit  dwells  within  us,  the  observer  and  guardian  of 


ECLECTIC    SCHOOL — BHAGAVAD-GITA.  1 43 

all  our  evil  arid  our  good.'  Cf.  i  Cor.  iii.  16.  'Let  him  who  hath  con- 
ferred a  favour  hold  his  tongue. '  '  In  conferring  a  favour  nothing 
should  be  more  avoided  than  pride.'  Cf.  Matt.  vi.  3.  '  If  you  wish  to 
be  loved,  love.'  '  Expect  from  another  what  you  do  to  another.'  '  We 
are  all  wicked ;  therefore  \Vhatever  we  blame  in  another  we  shall  find 
in  our  own  bosom.'  '  A  good  man  is  God's  disciple  and  imitator  and 
His  true  offspring,  whom  that  magnificent  Father  doth,  after  the 
manner  of  severe  parents,  educate  hardly.'  '  God  is  nigh  to  thee.  He 
is  with  thee.  He  is  in  thee.'  'Temples  are  not  to  be  built  for  God  with 
stones  piled  on  high ;  He  is  to  be  consecrated  in  the  breast  of  each.' 
'  What  a  foolish  thing  it  is  to  promise  ourselves  a  long  life,  who  are 
not  masters  of  even  to-morrow  ! '  '  Live  with  men  as  if  God  saw  you.' 
'  Other  men's  sins  are  before  our  eyes  ;  our  own  behind  our  back.'  '  The 
greater  part  of  mankind  are  angry  with  the  sinner  and  not  with  the 
sin.'  'The  severest  punishment  a  man  can  receive  who  has  injured 
another,  is  to  have  committed  the  injury.' 

2.  Epictetus.  '  If  you  always  remember  that  in  all  you  do  in  soul  or 
body  God  stands  by  as  a  witness,  in  all  your  prayers  and  your  actions 
you  will  not  err ;  and  you  shall  have  God  dwelling  with  you.'  '  How 
should  a  man  grieve  his  enemy  ?  By  preparing  himself  to  act  in  the 
noblest  manner.'     Cf.  Rom.  xii.  20. 

3.  Marcus  Aurelius.  '  The  best  way  of  avenging  thyself  is  not  to 
become  like  the  wrong-doer.'  '  Men  exist  for  the  sake  of  one  another. 
Teach  them  or  bear  with  them.'  Cf.  2  Thess.  iv.  15,  Col.  iii.  13.  'In 
the  morning  when  thou  risest  unwillingly  let  these  thoughts  be  present, 
"  I  am  rising  to  the  work  of  a  human  being.  Why,  then,  am  I  dis- 
satisfied if  I  am  going  to  do  the  things  for  which  I  exist  and  for  which 
I  was  brought  into  the  world  ? "  Dost  thou  exist,  then,  to  take  thy 
pleasure,  and  not  for  action  or  exertion  ?  Dost  thou  not  see  the  little 
birds,  the  ants,  the  spiders,  the  bees  working  together  to  put  in  order 
their  several  parts  of  the  universe  ?'     Of.  Prov.  vi.  6. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

Smriti^The  Vedangas. 

Hitherto  we  have  been  engaged  in  describing  briefly 
and  illustrating  by  selected  exa,mples  the  three  divisions 
of  the  Veda,  viz.,  Mantra,  Brahmana,  and  Upanishad, 
and  the  six  Darsanas.  or  systems  of  philosophy  developed 
out  of  the  third  of  these  divisions.  All  three  portions 
of  the  Veda  come  under  the  head  of  Sruti,  '  audition,' 
or  i§ruta, — that  which  is  directly  heard  or  revealed — the 
eternal  voice  of  divine  knowledge  heard^  by  certain  holy 
men  called  Rishis,  and  by  them  orally  transmitted ;  or 
if  committed  to  writing,  then  written  down  exactly  as 
heard,  without  any  intervention  of  human  authorship. 
We  now  pass  from  Sruti  and  the  six  Darsanas  to  the 
second  great  head  of  Sanskrit  literature,  called  Smriti, 
'  recollection,'  or  that  which  is  remembered  and  handed 
down  by  tradition  (as  distinguished  from  '  audition '). 
This  is  believed  to  be  founded  on  Sruti,  '  direct  revela- 
tion,' as  its  primary  basis,  and  only  possesses  authority 
in  so  far  as  it  is  in  harmony  with  such  revealed  truth. ^ 
The  very  essence  of  Smriti,  however,  is  considered  to 
be  that  it  was  delivered  memoriter  by  human  authors 
and  put  into  the  form   of  human  composition.     In  its 

1  The  expression  generally  used  is  that  the  Eishis  saw  the  hymns, 
rishi  being  fancifully  connected  with  drisid,  as  if  from  root  drii ;  but 
the  terms  Sruti  and  Sruta,  taken  in  connection  with  the  theory  of  the 
eternity  of  sound,  indicate  that  the  ear  was  the  channel  of  communi- 
cation. 

2  If  Veda-vdhya,  it  is  declared  to  be  nishphala.     Manu  XII.  95. 


SMRITI.  14s 

widest  acceptation,  Smriti  may  be  said  to  include  six 
principal  subjects  or  departments,  viz.,  I.  six  Veddngas, 
'  limbs  for  supporting  the  Veda,'  or,  in"  other  words,  helps 
to  aid  the  student  in  reading,  understanding  and  apply- 
ing it  to  sacrificial  rites  (and  hence  called  Pravacana, 
Manu  III.  184):  they  are — i.  Kalpa,  'ceremonial  direc- 
tory,' comprising  rules  relating  to  the  Vedic  ritual  and 
the  whole  complicated  process  of  sacrifices,  which  rules 
are  called  Srauta-sutra,  because  they  are  Vedic,  and 
relate  directly  to  the  application  of  the  Mantra  and  Brali- 
mana  portion  of  Srati,  being  especially  guides  to  the 
Brahmanas;  2.  Siksha,  'the  science  of  pronunciation;' 
3.  Chandas,  '  metre  ; '  4.  Nirukta,  '  exposition  of  difficult 
Vedic  words  ; '  5.  Vyakararia,  '  grammar ; '  6.  Jyotisha, 
'  astronomy,'  including  arithmetic  and  mathematics,  espe- 
cially in  connection  with,  astrology.  Of  these  Vedan-gas, 
I.  and  6.  are  for  employing  the  Veda  at  sacrifices,  2.  and  3. 
are  for  reading,  4.  and  5.  for  understanding  it.  II.  The 
Smdrta-siitra,  a  comprehensive  term  for  such  rules  as 
do  not  relate  to  Srauta  or  Vedic  ceremonies,  which  were 
usually  on  a  grand  scale  and  public  in  their  character,  but 
rather  to  religious  acts  of  a  private  and  personal  kind, 
falling  naturally  under  two  divisions,  viz.,  a.  family  or 
domestic  rites  (grihya)  performed  at  stated  periods ;  h.  con- 
ventional usages  and  every-day  practices  {samaydcdra) ; 
on  which  account  these  Smarta  Sutras  must  be  separated 
into  two  classes,  a.  Grihya-siitra,  6.  Samayacarika-siitra. 

III.  The  Dharma-sdntras  or  '  Law-books,  and  especially 
the  Laws  of  Manu,  and  other  so-called  inspired  law- 
givers— supposed  to  have  grown  out  of  the  Smarta  Sutras. 

IV.  The  Itihdsas  or  '  legendary  poems,'  under  which  head  I 
place  as  portions  of  Smriti  the  two  great  epic  poems  called 
Eamayana  and  Maha-bharata,  and  then,  for  convenience, 
as  following  and  depending  on  these,  but  not  as  properly 
Smriti,  the  artificial  poems  (Kavyas)   and   erotic  poems 


146  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

and  the  dramas,  almost  all  of  whicli  in  their  subject- 
matter  are  closely  connected  with  the  two  great  epics. 
V.  The  eighteen  Purdnas  or  ancient  legendary  histories 
and  traditions,  with  their  train  of  eighteen  inferior  Puranas 
{Ujpa-purdna)  and  subsequent  Tantras.  VI.  The  Nlti- 
sdstras  or  ethical  and  didactic  writings  of  all  kinds,  in- 
cluding collections  of  fables  and  moral  precepts. 

I  propose  now  to  take  these  six  divisions  of  post-Vedic 
literature  in  order,  beginninor  with  I.  the  Vedan-gaa. 

I.   The  Veddngas. 

They  are  six  in  number.  Let  us  consider  them  (not 
quite  according  to  the  Hindu  order)  in  the  following 
sequence  :  i.  Kalpa;*2.  iSikshd;  3.  Ohandas ;  4.  Niruhta ; 
5.    Vydharana;  6.  Jyotisha. 

The  Veddngas — Kalpa,  '  ceremonial  directory.' 

In  the  first  place,  then,  as  regards  Kalpa ;  this  denotes, 
as  we  have  seen,  a  kind  of  ceremonial  directory  or  rubric 
put  forth  in  the  form  of  short  aphoristic  Sutras  or  rules, 
called  Srauta,  because  serving  as  guides  for  the  applica- 
tion of  the  Mantra  and  Brahmana  portion  of  Sruti  to  the 
conduct  of  sacrificial  rites.  There  are  Srauta  Sutras  for 
each  of  the  five  Samhitas  of  the  Veda.  Thus,  for  the 
Rig-veda  there  are  the  Asvaldyana,  Sdnkhdyana,  and 
Saunaka  Srauta  Sutras  ;  for  the  Sama-veda,  the  Masaka, 
Ldtydyana,  and  Drdhydyana ;  for  the  Taittiriya  or  Black 
Yajur-veda,  the  Apastamba,  Baudhdyana,  Satydshddha 
Hiranya-kesin.  Mdnava,  Bhdradvdja,  Vddhuna,  Vai- 
khdnasa,  Laugdkshi,  Maitra,  Katha,  and  Vdrdha;  for 
the  Vajasaneyi  or  White  Yajur-veda  there  is  only  the 
Kdtydyana ;  ^  for  the  Atharva-veda  only  the  Kausika. 

1  Edited  by  Professor  Weber  to  complete  the  series  of  his  great  edition 
of  the  White  Yajur-veda  with  its  Brahmana  (the  S'atapatha). 


VEDAN-GAS — KALPA-SUTRA   OR   CEREMONIAL    RULES.      1 47 

I  should  remark  here  that  the  word  Sutra  (derived 
from  the  root  Siv,  '  to  sew ')  means  properly  '  string,'  and 
that  this  name  was  applied  to  any  series^  of  rules  or 
aphorisms,  either  because  they  were,  figuratively,  strung 
together,  or  because  they  were  written  on  leaves  held 
together  by  strings.^  It  is  perhaps  essential  to  the  true 
nature  of  a  Brahmanical  Sutra  that  it  should  be  a  rule 
or  dogma  expressed  as  briefly  as  possible.  In  the  gram- 
matical Sutras  not  a  single  letter  is  allowed  which  can  by 
any  contrivance  be  dispensed  with,  and  moreover  in  these 
Sutras  letters  and  syllables  are  often  used  symbolically, 
like  algebraic  signs,  to  indicate  ideas  which  would  other- 
wise require  a  whole  sentence  or  more  .to  express  them 
at  full.  In  the  philosophical  Sutras',  as  we  have  already 
seen,  great  brevity  and  a  rigid  economy  of  words  is  also 
practised,  the  aim  being  to  furnish  the  shortest  possible 
suggestive  memorial  sentences  as  an  aid  to  the  memory  of 
both  teachers  and  learners  in  an  age  when  books  were 
scarce  and  paper  and  printing  unknown  (see  p.  46). 
This  extreme  conciseness  is  not  always  maintained,  espe- 
cially in  later  Sutra  works,  but  it  generally  holds  good 
that  the  older  the  Sutra  the  greater  its  curtness  and  ellip- 
tical obscurity,  so  that  without  a  commentary  or  a  key 
to  their  interpretation  these  ancient  aphorisms  are  quite 
unintelligible.  In  later  times,  as  books  became  more  com- 
mon, the  necessity  for  elaborate  and  overstrained  concise- 
ness was  gradually  removed,^  and  rules  and  aphorisms, 
though  still  strung  together  in  Sutra  style,  were  more 
fully  and  explicitly  and  even  sometimes  metrically  stated.* 
In  fact,  these  later  Siitra  works  may  be  regarded  as  simple 

1  Sutra  in  the  singular  may  denote  a  whole  collection  of  rules. 

2  This  last  is  the  theory  of  the  late  Professor  Goldstiicker. 

8  This  relaxation  led  at  last  to  the  very  opposite  extreme  of  prolixity, 
as  in  the  Buddhist  Sutras. 

*  In  some  Sutra  works  there  is  an  occasional  admixture  of  S'lokas. 


14^  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

collections  of  formulated  precepts  or  dogmas  adapted  to 
serve  as  convenient  manuals  to  particular  systems  of 
teaching,  whether  in  ritual,  philosophy,  law,  or  grammar. 
If  Sanskrit  scholars  are  asked  to-  state  the  age  of  the 
oldest  Sutra  works,  they  are  again  obliged  to  confess  their 
inability  to  fix  any  precise  date.  The  most  ancient  are 
probably  not  older  than  the  fifth  or  sixth  century  B.C., 
and  the  time  of  the  compilation  of  the  most  recent  is 
perhaps  not  far  removed  from  the  commencement  of  the 
Christian  era.  I  have  placed  the  Kalpa  Sutras  first  be- 
cause they  are  probably  oldest,  being  closely  connected 
with  the  Brahmana  or  ritual  portion  of  Sruti,  and  thence 
called  Srauta. 

The  following  translation  of  the  first  ten  Sutras  of 
Katyayana's  Srauta-sutra,  which  belong  to  the  Satapatha- 
brahmana  and  White  Yajur-veda  (see  Weber's  edition), 
will  give  some  idea  of  the  nature  of  these  rules.  To 
make  each  aphorism  intelligible,  additional  matter  has 
to  be  introduced  from  the  commentary  of  Tajnika-deva. 
This  I  have  done  parenthetically  in  the  examples  here 
given.  I  have  also  given  the  original  text  of  the  Sutras 
in  italics  : — 

1.  Now,  therefore,  the  right  (of  engaging  in  sacrificial  acts  is  about  to 
be  laid  down  in  the  following  rules).     [Athato  'dhihdrahl] 

2.  (Sacrificial)  acts  (like  the  Agni-hotra,  &c.)  are  attended  with  recom- 
pense (such  as  the  attainment  of  heaven,  of  wealth,  of  a  son,  &c.)  [Phala- 
yuktdni  Jcarmdni.] 

3.  (According  to  the  primd  facie  view  of  the  matter  there  must  be  a 
right)  of  all  (creatures,  e.g.  of  men,  even  though  blind,  dumb,  lame,  or 
deaf,  of  gods,  of  Rishis,  and  of  animals,  but  not  of  plants,  to  engage  in 
sacrificial  acts),  vdthout  distinction  (because  all  such  creatures  are  capable 
of  desiring  recompense).     [SarvesJidm  aviseshdt.l 

4.  But  (according  to  the  orthodos  view,  the  right  belongs)  to  human 
beings  (only),  because  (they  only,  as  the  Veda  declares,  have)  the  power 
of  undertaking  (sacrificial  acts,  and  not  to  gods,  Rishis,  and  animals). 
[Manushydndm  vdrambha-sdm  arthydt.  ] 


VEDAN-GAS— SIKSHA   OR   PHONETIC   DIRECTORY.         1 49 

5.  Cripples,  those  ignorant  of  the  Veda,  eunuchs,  and  S'udras  (are  to 
be)  excepted.     [An-ga-hinasrotriya-shandha-sudra-varjam.] 

6.  (The  right  belongs)  to  Brahmans,  Kshatriyas,!  and  Vaisyas  (but 
not  to  S'udras),  according  to  the  Vedic  precept.  [Brdhmana-rdjanya- 
vaisydndm  sruteh.'\ 

7.  A  woman  also  (has  the  right),  since  there  is  no  difference  (be- 
tween her  and  her  husband  in  regard  to  the  desire  for  heaven).  [Stri 
cdviieshdt.^ 

8.  And  since  it  is  so  seen  (in  the  Veda).     [Dariandc-ca.] 

9.  (According  to  one  view,  the  right  belongs)  to  a  man  of  the  Ratha- 
kara^  ('chariot-maker')  caste,  (so  far  as  regards  the  rite)  of  placing  the 
sacred  fire  (on  the  sacrificial  ground,  on  the  score  of  this  caste  being 
reckoned  among  the  first  three  classes).     [Rathakdmsyddlidne.] 

10.  (But  according  to  the  orthodox  view)  it  is  settled  (that  the 
Rathakara  is  not  to  be  reckoned  among  the  first  three  classes).  \Ni- 
yatam  ca.] 

The  Veddngas — Sikshd,  '  phonetic  directory.' 

The  next  Vedan-ga  in  our  list  is  Sikshd  or  the  science 
of  proper  pronunciation,  especially  as  teaching  the  laws  of 
euphony  peculiar  to  the  Veda.  This  comprises  the  know- 
ledge of  letters,  accents,  quantity,  the  right  use  of  the 
organs  of  articulation,  and  phonetics  generally.  One  short 
comparatively  modern  treatise  on  phonetics,  consisting  iu 
one  recension  of  thirty-five  and  in  another  of  fifty-nine 
verses  (ascribed  to  Panini),  aud  a  chapter  of  the  Taittiriya- 
ranyaka  are  regarded  as  the  representatives  of  this  sub- 
ject; but  the  Vedic  Pratisakhyas  and  other  works  on 
Vedic  phonetics  may  be  included  under  it,^  and  it  will  be 

1  The  word  Rdjanya  is  used  here  and  in  the  Purusha-sukta  for 
Kshatriya,  see  p.  21. 

2  This  mixed  caste,  held  to  be  the  offspring  of  a  Mahishya  by  a 
Karani,  is  also  called  Saudhanvana.  It  appears  to  have  enjoyed  some 
religious  privileges,  perhaps  because  the  ^ibhus  were  Ratha-karas,  see 
note,  p.  14.     Of.  Rig-veda  III.  60.  4. 

^  A  number  of  works  bearing  the  name  of  Sikshd,  and  dealing  with 
phonetics  and  other  kindred  subjects,  have  been  recently  brought  to 
notice.     See  Haug  on  the  Vedic  Accent  (Munich,  1874). 


ISO  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

convenient  so  to  regard  ttem.  These  Pratlsakhyas  are. 
grammatical,  or  rather  phonetic,  treatises  written  in  the 
Sutra  style  (some  of  them  perhaps  of  a  more  recent  date 
than  Panini),^  regulating  the  euphonic  combination  of 
letters  and  their  peculiar  pronunciation  according  to  the 
practice  of  the  different  Sakhas,  '  branches,'  of  the  Vedas, 
in  those  traditional  versions  of  the  Vedic  texts  handed 
down  by  different  families.  The  Pratisakhyas  do  not 
undo  words  in  the  same  way  as  the  Vyakarana,  but  take 
actually  formed  words  as  they  occur  in  the  hymns,  and 
teach  the  phonetic  changes  they  undergo,  the  mode  of 
pronouncing  the  accents,  &c.  In  fact,  they  show  how  the 
Pada  text  is  converted  by  a  process  of  euphonic  combina- 
tion into  the  Sarnhita. 

Since  the  chief  virtue  of  the  Vedic  texts  was  in  their 
oral  repetition,  and  since  so  much  importance  was  attached 
to  the  proper  pronunciation  and  accentuation  of  every 
syllable,  it  may  be  easily  supposed  that  these  phonetic 
manuals  were  of  great  value  to  persons  who  had  to  repeat 
Mantras  every  day  as  an  essential  part  of  their  religious 
exercises.  They  probably  served  as  guides  and  aids  to  the 
memory,  both  for  teachers  in  instructing  their  pupils  and 
for  pupils  in  learning  to  recite  the  Veda.  Four  Prati- 
sakhyas are  extant,  viz.  :  i.  one  to  the  Sakala-sakha  of  the 
Rig-veda,  ascribed  to  Saunaka;^  2.  another  to  a  Sakha 
of  the  Taittiriya  or  Black  Yajur-veda ;  ^  3.  another  to  a 
Sakha  of  the  Madhyandinas,  of  the  family  of  the  Vaja- 
saneyins  or  'followers  of  the  White  Yajur-veda,'  whence 

1  The  late  Professor  Goldstiicker,  in  his  work  on  Panini,  decides  that 
all  the  Pratisakhyas  must  have  been  posterior  to  Panini,  but  this  opinion 
is  shared  by  few  other  scholars. 

2  Edited  and  translated  into  French  by  M.  Adolphe  Eegnier,  and 
into  German  by  Professor  Max  Miiller. 

^  Edited,  with  its  commentary,  and  translated  by  Professor  William 
D.  Whitney. 


VEDANGAS  — SIKSHA   OR   PHONETIC   DIRECTORY.        151 

this 'is  called  the  Vajasaneyi-pratisakhya  ;  Mt  is  ascribed  to 
an  author,  Katyayana,  probably  identical  with  the  writer 
of  the  Varttikas  or  '  supplementary  rules  '  to  Panini ;  4.  an 
Atharva-veda-pratisakhya,  called  Saunakiya  Caturadhya- 
yika/  '  Saunaka's  treatise  in  four  chapters.'  No  Prati- 
sakhya  has  yet  been -found  to  the  Sama-veda. 

The  relative  age  of  the  Pratisakhyas  in  their  present 
form  is  an  open  question.  That  to  the  Rig-veda  has  been 
by  some  confidently  declared  the  oldest,  though  written  in 
Slokas  with  occasional  admixture  of  other  metres. 

I  here  translate  the  fifth  and  sixth  Sutras  of  this  Prati- 
sakhya,  as  they  contain  a  statement  of  some  of  the  points 
which  form  the  subject  of  the  work  : — 

Heaviness  {i.e.,  prosodial  length),  lightness  (i.e.,  prosodial  shortness), 
equality,  shortness,  longness,  and  prolation  (of  vowels),  elision,  augmen- 
tation, and  change,  original  form,  non-change  of  Visarga  into  a  sibilant, 
regular  order,  the  mixed  tone,  high  tone,  low  tone,  breath  and  sound,3 
and  both  (combined), — all  this  must  be  accurately  understood  by  one 
who  reads  (or  repeats)  the  words  of  the  Veda. 

[Gurutvam  I'aghutd  sdmyam  hrasva-dlrgha-plutdni  ca  1 
Lopdgama-vikdrds-6a  prahritir  vihramdh  leramah  || 
Svaritoddtta-m^atvam  hdso  nddas  tathoVhayam  | 
Etat  sarvarn  ca  vijneyam  chando-bhdshdm  adhlyatd  ||] 

The  first  Atharva-veda-pratisakhya  states  the  subject  of 
the  treatise  (Whitney,  p.  9),  and  gives  a  fourfold  division 
of  all  the  parts  of  speech  in  its  first  Siitra,  thus  : — 

The  two  qualities  of  the  four  kinds  of  words — noun  (ndma),  verb 
{dichydta),  preposition  (upasarga),  and  particle  (nipdta) — as  euphonically 
joined  and  as  separate  words,  are  here  the  subject  (prdtijnam). 

1  Edited  and  translated  by  Professor  Weber  in  the  '  Indische 
Studien.' 

2  Also  edited,  with  a  most  valuable  English  translation  and  notes, 
by  Professor  William  D.  Whitney. 

3  We  learn  from  the  Atharva-veda-pratisakhya  I.  12,  13,  that  in  the 
surd  consonants  there  is  mere  breath,  and  in  the  sonant,  sound. 


I  52  INDIAN  WISDOM. 

That  is  to  say,  the  design  of  the  Pratisakhya  is  to  forto 
a  Samhita  out  of  a  Pada  text.  In  fact,  it  supposes  all  th.e 
words  of  the  Veda  to  be  separated  from  each,  other  (as 
they  are  in  the  Pada),  and  then  teaches  how  they  are  to  be 
euphonically  connected,  as  they  must  be  in  the  Samhita.^ 

The  second  chapter  introduces  a  number  of  rules  of 
Sandhi,  which  will  be  familiar  to  the  students  of  Panini's 
Grammar.  The  first  Sutra  consists  of  one  word,  which 
must  be  amplified  thus  (Whitney's  edition,  p.  72) : — 

(The  following  rules  are  to  be  understood  as  of  force  when  the 
separate  words  of  the  disjointed  text  are  put  together)  iip.  the  Sainhita 
[Samhitayam]. 

Then  follow  the  rules,  of  which  I  subjoin  three  or  four 
examples  (II.  10,  11,  18,  19,  III.  20): — 

Before  i,  n  becomes  n  [na-kdrasi/a  iorJcdre  naJcdrah^. 
Also  before  a  sonant  palatal  (as  before  J)  [6a-vargiye  ghoshavati\. 
After  the  preposition  ud,  there  is  elision  of  the  letter  s  of  the  roots 
sthd  and  stamhh  [lapa  udah  sthd-stambhoh  sa-7cdrasya\. 
There  is  elision  of  i?  before  r  [rephasya  rephej. 
When  r  is  elided  (the  preceding  vowel  is  lengthened)  [ra-lope]. 

The  Vajasaneyi-pratisakhya  (I.  27)  gives  a  still  more 
complete  enumeration  of  the  parts  of  speech,  thus  : — 

Words  are  made  up  of  inflected  verbal  bases  [i.e.,  bases  having  the 
personal  endings,  technically  called  tin],  nouns  derived  from. verbs  by 
Krit  affixes,  nouns  derived  from  nouns  by  Taddhita  affixes  and  four 
kinds  of  compounds  (Avyayi-bhava,  Tatpurusha,  Dvandva,  Bahu-vrihi). 
[Tin-hrit-taddMtcircatushtaya-samdsdh  sabdormayam.  See  Professor  Max 
Miiller's  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature,  p.  164.] 

^  In  the  Krama  text  the  ist  word  is  recited  with  the  2nd,  that  is 
repeated  with  the  third,  that  with  the  4th,  &c.  In  the  Jatd,  the  ist 
word  and  2nd,  2nd  and  ist,  and  ist  and  2nd  again;  next  the  2nd 
and  3rd,  3rd  and  2nd,  and  2nd  and  3rd,  and  so  on.  In  the  Ghana,  the 
ist  and  2nd,  2nd  and  ist,  ist  and  2nd  again,  3rd ;  then  3rd,  2nd,  ist, 
ist,  2nd,  3rd;  then  the  2nd  begins  a  new  Ghana. 


VEDAN-GAS — dHANDAS   OR   METRE.  I  S3 

The  Veddngas — Chandas,  'metre.' 

This  Vedan-ga  is  imperfectly  represented  by  the  Chan- 
dah-sdstra  ascribed  to  Pin-gala  or  Pin-gala-naga,  which  may 
be  as  old  as  the  second  century  B.C.,  and  treats  of  Prakrit 
as  well  as  Sanskrit  metres,  including  only  a  few  Vedic. 
Other  works  on  metres  are  the  Nidaiia-sutra  in  ten  Pra- 
pathakas  and  the  Sruta-bodha.  In  truth,  prosody,  like 
every  other  subject  in  Sanskrit  literature,  affords  field  for 
almost  endless  investigation.  It  is  a  complete  study  in 
itself,  and  its  importance  in  the  estimation  of  the  Hindus 
is  shown  by  the  excessive  cultivation  and  elaboration  be- 
stowed upon  their  whole  metrical  system.  A  knowledge 
of  the  metre  of  each  hymn  of  the  Veda  was  considered 
essential  to  the  right  use  and  proper  recitation  of  the 
Mantras.  Hence  we  find  Sayana,  in  his  introduction  to 
the  first  hymn  of  the  Eig-veda,  quoting  the  following 
precept : — 

He  who  shall  cause  any  one  to  repeat  (adhydpayet)  or  shall  himself 
repeat  (any  hymn  of  the  Yeda)  without  having  acquainted  himseK  with 
the  name  of  the  Rishi  to  whom  it  was  revealed,  the  metre  (chandas)  in 
which  it  was  written,  the  deity  to  whom  it  was  addressed,  and  its  right 
application  (yoga),  is  the  worst  of  sinners  (pdplydn). 

Again,  immediately  afterwards,  he  adds  : — 

Any  one  who  makes  use  of  (a  hymn)  without  knowing  the  Rishi,  the 
metre,  the  deity,  the  right  interpretation  according  to  the  Brahmanas 
(brdhmandrtha),  and  the  accents  is  called  '  a  Mantra-thorn '  (mantra- 
JcantaJca,  as  destroying  or  obstructing  its  efficacy). 

In  the  ninth  verse  of  the  Purusha-siikta  of  the  Kig-veda 
{see  p.  21)  the  metres  are  said  to  have  sprung  from 
Purusha  himself,  thus  : — 

From  that  universal  sacrifice  sprang  the  Rid  and  Saman  verses,  the 
metres,  and  the  Yajus  (Shanddnsi  jajnire  tasmdd  yajus  tasmdd  ajdyata). 

The  Taittiriya-samhita  VII.   i.   i.  4,  &c.,  describes  the 


154  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

creation  of  several   metres   by   Prajapati   (Muir,  vol.   i. 
P-  15):— 

Prajapati  desired  'may  I  be  propagated.'  He  formed  the  Trivrit 
from  his  mouth.  After  it  were  produced  the  deity  Agni,  the  metre 
Gayatri,  &c. 

In  Mann  IV.  99,  100,  we  have  the  following : — 

Let  not  a  man  repeat  the  Yeda  without  clear  pronunciation  (of  the 
letters,  accents,  &c.,  svara  varnddi,  Kulluka).  Let  him  always  be 
careful  to  recite  it  as  composed  in  metre  {chandas-lcritam). 

It  is  remarkable  that  in  Panini's  Grammar  the  usual 
name  for  the  Veda  is  Chandas  (see  p.  169). 

From  the  importance  thus  assigned  to  the  metrical 
structure  of  the  hymns  we  shall  be  prepared  to  find 
frequent  allusions  to  the  subject  of  metres  in  the  Brah- 
manas.  In  fact,  these  treatises  attach  a  kind  of  mystical 
efficacy  to  their  right  use,  and  whole  chapters  of  the 
Upanishads  enlarge  on  the  same  fanciful  theme.  The 
Gayatri  is  held  in  especial  veneration,  the  most  sacred 
text  of  the  Eig-veda  being  in  this  metre.     (See  p.  17.) 

The  following  passage  is  from  the  Satapatha-brahmana 
I.  2,  5,  6,  &c.  (Muir's  Texts,  vol.  iv.  p.  123) : — 

The  gods  having  placed  Vishnu  to  the  east  surrounded  him  with 
metres  {chandohliir  dbhitah  faryagrihnari)  ;  saying,  '  On  the  south  side 
I  surround  thee  with  the  Gayatri  metre ;  on  the  west  I  surround  thee 
with  the  Trishtubh  metre ;  on  the  north  I  surround  thee  with  the  Jagati. ' 
Having  thus  surrounded  him  with  metres,  they  placed  Agni  on  the  east, 
and  thus  they  went  on  worshipping  and  toiling.  By  this  means  they 
acquired  this  whole  earth  {tena  imam  sarvdm  priihimm  samavindanta). 

Again,  in  the  fourteenth  Brahmana  of  the  Brihad- 
aranyaka  Upanishad  we  read  (Eoer,  p.  254) ; — 

The  Jiioah,  YajunsM,  and  Sdnidni  are  eight  syllables  (ashtdv  dksha- 
rdni)  ;  the  second  Pada  (padam)  of  the  Gayatri  consists  of  eight  syllables 
(ashtdksharam).  This  Pada  of  the  Gayatri  represents  that  nature  of  the 
three  Yedas.  ,  Whoever  knows  this  Pada  of  the  Gayatri  conquers  all  that 
is  conquerable  by  the  knowledge  of  the  three  Vedas. 


VEDAN-GAS — (5hANDAS    OR   METRE.  155 

Hence  we  cannot  be  surprised  that  some  of  tlie  most 
sacred  metres,  especially  the  Gayatri,  were  in  the  end 
personified  and  invested  with  divine  functions.  Our 
present  purpose  and  limits  do  not  admit  of  our  giving 
schemes  of  even  the  commonest  forms  of  Sanskrit  metre, 
whether  Vedic  or  Post-vedic.  They  will  be  found  enu- 
merated in  the  third  edition  of  my  Sanskrit  Grammar, 
pp.  388-392.-'  Let  me  merely  observe  that  great  licence 
is  allowed  in  Vedic  prosody,  so  that  in  the  Gayatri,  which 
may  be"  regarded  as  consisting  either  of  three  divisions 
of  eight  syllables  each  (whence  it  is  called  tri-padd)  or 
of  six  feet  of  four  syllables  each,  the  quantity  of  each 
syllable  is  very  irregular,  although  the  second,  fourth, 
and  sixth  feet  generally  contain  two  iambics. 

Of  Post-vedic  metres  we  have  so  great  a  variety  that 
it  becomes  necessary  to  arrange  them  under  classes  and 
orders,  genera  and  species.  In  truth,  the  elaboration  of 
every  kind  of  complicated  metre  is  carried  to  an  extent 
quite  beyond  the  ordinary  practice  of  poetical  composi- 
tion in  other  languages.  '  A  Hindu  poet,'  says  Dr.  Yates, 
'  may  proceed  to  any  length  he  pleases,  within  the  limits 
of  a  thousand  syllables  to  the  half-line,'  or  quarter-stanza. 
The  Dandaka  metre  (of  which  a  specimen  occurs  in  the 
drama  called  Malati-madhava,  Act  V.)  ^  offers  more  than 
any  other  an  almost  incredible  capability  of  expansion. 
It  wiU  admit,  indeed,  of  the  stanza  extending  27  x  4  to 
999  X  4  syllables.  But  the  commonest  form  of  metre, 
chiefly  found  in  epic  poetry — the  Anushtubh  or  Sloka 
— is  short  and  easy.  It  consists  of  four  half-lines  of 
eight  syllables  each  or  two  lines  of  sixteen  syllables  each, 

^  See  also  Colebrooke's  Essay  on  Sanskrit  and  Prakrit  metres  and 
Professor  Weber's  articles  in  the  '  Indische  Studien. ' 

2  Beginning  PraSalita-kari-Jcriiti,  &c.  It  has  fifty-four  syllables  to  the 
quarter-verse.  This  specimen  is  translated  in  the  Asiatic  Researches, 
vol.  X.  p.  456. 


IS6  INDIAN   WISDOM, 

the  last  two  feet  of  eacli  line  being  iambics  (see  my  San- 
skrit Grammar,  p.  288).  The  Indra-vajra  (with  its  Upen- 
dra-vajra  variety)  is  also  a  common  metre,  and  one  of  the 
most  rhythmical.  It  nearly  corresponds  to  one  occurring 
in  Horace's  fourth  Ode  : — 

Vulcaniis  ardens  urit  officinas, 
Trahuntque  siccas  macliinae  carinas. 

But  to  make  the  Latin  agree  with  the  Sanskrit  metre  we 
must  suppose  the  first  syllable  of  machinae  and  of  urit 
to  be  short.  It  might  be  represented  in  an  English  line 
thus,  '  Down  comes  thg  rain,  and  with  it  comes  the  thun- 
der,' an  emphasis  being  placed  on  the  first  syllable. 

Tlie  Veddngas — Niruhta,  '  exposition.' 

The  object  of  this  Vedan-ga  is  etymological  explanation 
or  interpretation  of  difficult  Vedic  words.  Doubtless, 
numerous  works  devoted  to  this  object  once  existed,  but 
all  have  perished  except  one,  which  is  now  the  typical 
representative  of  the  whole  class.-^  This  is  a  compilation, 
accompanied  with  an  exposition,  by  an  author  named 
Yaska,  who,  according  to  the  best  authorities,  lived  before 
Panini/  probably  about  400  years  B.C.,  or  about  1800 
years  before  Sayana,  His  work  consists  first  of  three  bare 
lists  or  catalogues  of  words  in  five  chapters  :  viz.,  a.  The 
Naighantuka  in  three  chapters  of  synonyms  or  rather  of 
collections  of  words  said  to  have  the  same  meaning  as 
some  one  word  of  known  signification  given  at  the 
end,  one  such  collection  being  called  a  Nighantu.      The 

1  No  less  than  seventeen  Nairuktikas  or  '  interpreters  of  the  Yeda ' 
are  mentioned  by  name  as  having  preceded  Yaska.  See  Dr.  Muir's 
article  on  the  interpretation  of  the  Veda,  p.  321. 

2  Panini  himself  implies  (IV.  I.  112)  that  the  name  Yaska  means  a 
descendant  of  Yaska. 


VEDAN.GAS — NIRUKTA   OR   EXPOSITION.  I  57 

synonyms  in  each  collection  vary  from  two  (III.  22)  to 
one  hundred  and  twenty-two  (II.  14),  and  can  scarcely 
be  called  synonyms  in  the  strict  sense.  For  example,  when 
it  is  said  that  vartate,  '  he  turns  ; '  lotate,  '  he  rolls  ; '  sar- 
pati,  '  he  creeps ;'  sravati,  '  he  flows ;'  sransate,  '  he  drops  ;' 
plavate,  'he  swims;'  diyate,  'he  flies;'  patati,  'he  falls,' 
and  122  other  words  are  all  synonyms  of  gamati,  'he 
goes,'  01  gati,  'going,'  this  must  be  understood  very  widely 
as  intending  to  include  all  forms  and  varieties  of  motion. 
Again,  in  I.  12,  we  have  a  collection  of  loi  words,  which 
are  all  said  to  be  synonyms  of  water  (udaJca),  but  it  is 
obvious  that  the  only  attribute  most  of  these  have  in 
common  is,  that  they  are  varieties  of  fluids,  including, 
for  example,  nectar  (amrita)  and  clarified  butter  (havis). 
Seeing,  therefore,  that  many  of  the  words  brought  to- 
gether are  old  Vedic  words  of  doubtful  meaning,  quite 
unknown  to  classical  Sanskrit,  and  seeing  that  a  complete 
explanation  of  the  gradations  and  modifications  of  sense 
under  each  head  of  synonyms  is  wanting,  the  practical 
utility  of  these  lists  is  of  course  very  small  indeed,  b.  The 
Naigama,  a  collection  of  278  separate  words  (padani) 
occurring  in  the  Veda  (nigama),  all  in  one  chapter  of 
three  sections,  c.  The  Daivata  or  1 5 1  words  relating  to 
deities  and  religious  or  sacrificial  acts,  in  one  chapter  of 
six  short  sections.  Whether  these  collections  were  drawn 
up  by  Yaska  himself  or  by  some  previous  compiler  is  not 
certain,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  second  and  most 
important  part  of  the  work,  viz.,  the  Nirukta  or  'explana- 
tion' of  the  words  in  these  lists,  is  his  own  composition. 
Although,  therefore,  tiie  term  Nirukta  is  sometimes  ap- 
plied to  the  lists  of  words,  it  more  properly  belongs  to 
Yaska's  explanation  of  them,  which  occupies  twelve  chap- 
ters. The  first  of  the  twelve  is  a  kind  of  introduction, 
which  contains  some  interesting  discussions  of  philological 
questions  and  a  sort  of  summary  or  sketch  of  grammar ; 


IS8  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

the  following  two  chapters  are  an  imperfect  exposition  of 
the  Naighantuka  or  '  lists  of  synonymous  words/  the  defi- 
ciency of  which  has  been  to  a  certain  extent  supplied  by 
Durga,  a  commentator  on  Yaska ;  the  next  three  chapters 
explain  the  Naigama  or  '  single  Vedic  words/  and  the  last 
six  the  Daivata  or  '  deities  addressed  in  the  hymns.' 
Thus  the  three  collections  with  their  explanations  occupy 
seventeen  chapters.  The  value  of  the  work^  consists  in 
its  being  the  oldest  extant  commentary  on  the  Veda. 
When  words  are  explained,  Vedic  passages  are  quoted  in 
illustration,  and  the  author  often  enters  into  curious 
etymological  investigations,  which  possess  great  interest 
from  their  universally  admitted  antiquity,  but  are  difficult 
to  understand  from  the  extreme  brevity  and  obscurity  of 
their  style. 

I  here  abridge  some  valuable  remarks  from  Dr.  John 
Muir's  article  on  the  'Interpretation  of  the  Veda,'  in 
the  Koyal  Asiatic  Society's  Journal  (vol.  ii.  new  series, 
p.  320) :— 

The  Nirukta  makes  frequent  reference  to  the  Brahmanas,  and  alludes 
to  various  schools  of  Vedic  interpretation  which  existed  anterior  to  its 
author,  such  as  the  Nairuktas  or  'etymologists,'  the  Aitihasikas  or 
'  legendary  writers,'  and  the  Yajnikas  or  '  ritualists.'  Yaska  supplies 
specimens  of  the  mode  of  explaining  the  hymns  adopted  by  different 
schools  of  interpreters.  Thus  we  are  told  (Nirukta  XI.  29,  31)  that 
the  Nairuktas  understood  Anumati,  Raka,  Sinlvali,  and  Kuhii  to  be 
goddesses,  while  the  Yajnikas  took  them  for  the  new  and  full  moons. 
The  gods  called  Asvins  were  a  great  enigma.  The  Nirukta  (XII.  i) 
gives  the  following  answers  to  the  question  who  they  were  :  '  Heaven  and 
Earth,'  say  some ;  '  Day  and  Night,'  say  others  ;  '  the  Sun  and  Moon,' 
say  others  ;  '  two  Kings,  performers  of  holy  acts,'  say  the  Aitihasikas. 
Again,  Nirukta  (VI.  13)  tells  us  that  Aurnabhava  understood  Nasatyau 
(an  epithet  of  the  Asvins)  as  '  true,  not  false.'  Agrayana  took  it  to 
mean  '  leaders  of  truth '  (satyasya  pranetdrau) ;  while  Yaska  himself 
suggests  that  it  may  mean  '  nose-born '  (ndsilcd-prdbhavau).     Again,  we 

1  It  has  been  ably  edited  by  Professor  Roth. 


VEDAN'GAS— NIRUKTA   OR   EXPOSITION.  159 

are  informed  (Nirukta  III.  8)  that  some  understood  tte  five  peoples 
{panca-jandh)  mentioned  in  Eig-veda  X.  53.  4  to  be  the  Gandharvas, 
Pitris,  gods,  Asuras,  and  Rakshases ;  whilst  Aupamanyava  took  them 
for  the  four  castes  and  the  Nishadas.  So,  again,  Katthakya  understood 
Narasansa  to  designate  '  sacrifice,'  but  S'akapiini  took  it  for  a  name  of 
Agni  (Nir.  YIII.  4.  5).  In  like  manner,  Yaska's  predecessors  were  not 
agreed  as  to  what  was  meant  by  Vishnu's  three  steps  in  Rig-veda  I. 
22.  17;  S'akapuni  maintaining  that  they  were  planted  on  the  earth, 
the  atmosphere,  and  the  sky  respectively ;  and  Aurnabhava  that  the  hill 
oyer  which  the  sun  rises,  the  meridian,  and  the  hill  where  he  sets,  were 
the  localities  referred  to.  One  of  these  predecessors  (Kautsa)  had  the 
audacity  to  assert  that  Vedic  exposition  was  useless,  as  the  hymns 
were  obscure,  unmeaning,  or  mutually  contradictory.  As  instances  of 
obscurity  he  cites  the  texts  in  which  the  words  amyak  (Rig-veda  I. 
169-  3)1  yddriimin  (V.  44.  8),  jdraydyi  (VI.  12.  4),  and  hdnuTtd  (VIII. 
66.  4)  occur.  In  regard  to  this  charge,  Yaska  replies  that  it  is  not  the 
fault  of  the  post  that  the  blind  man  does  not  see  it.  In  the  Nirukta- 
parisishta  the  '  four  defined  grades  or  stages  of  speech  '  referred  to  in 
Rig-veda  I.  164.  45,  are  said  to  be  explained  by  the  Rishis  as  meaning 
the  four  mystic  words,  om,  hhuh,  Khuvah,  svar;  by  the  grammarians,  as 
denoting  nouns,  verbs,  prepositions,  and  particles ;  by  the  ritualists,  as 
the  hymns,  liturgical  precepts,  Brahmanas,  and  ordinary  language  \ 
by  the  etymologists,  as  the  Rig,  Yajush,  Saman,  and  the  current  lan- 
guage; by  others,  as  the  speech  of  serpents,  birds,  reptiles,  and  the 
vernacular ;  by  the  spiritualists,  as  that  of  beasts,  musical  instruments, 
wild  animals,  and  soul. 

It  is  evident  from  the  above  remarks  that  great  diflPer- 
ence  of  opinion  existed  among  expositors  of  the  Veda  even 
in  Yaska's  time,  considerably  more  than  2000  years  ago, 
and  that  the  objections  of  sceptics  and  rationalists  had  to 
be  met  and  answered  by  orthodox  theologians  like  himself. 
He  commences  his  own  exposition  thus  (1.  i)  : — 

The  traditional  collection  of  words  has  been  thus  traditionally  repeated. 
That  must  now  be  explained.  They  call  this  traditional  collection  the 
Nighantus.  \Samdmnayah  samdmndtah  sa  vydkhydtawjas  tarn  imam 
samdmndyam  nigliantava  ity  dcakshate.] 

Perhaps  as  good  an  example  of  Yaska's  condensed  style 
as  can  be  offered  is  a  passage  quoted  and  explained  by  Pro- 


l60  INDIAN  WISDOM. 

fessor  Goldstiicker  from  Eoth's  edition,  I.  3.  It  is  inte- 
resting as  showing  that,  for  the  better  interpretation  of  the 
Veda,  Yaska  aimed  at  giving  some  sort  of  exposition  of 
grammar  and  grammatical  science  as  then  understood  : — 

(The  ancient  grammarian)  S'akatayana  says  that  prepositions  when 
not  attached  (to  nouns  or  verbs)  do  not  express  meanings ;  but  Gargya 
says  that  they  illustrate  (or  modify)  the  action  which  is  expressed  by  a 
noun  or  verb,  and  that  their  senses  are  various  (even  when  detached). 
Now  they  express  that  sense  which  inheres  in  them  ;  that  is,  that  which 
modifies  the  sense  of  a  noun  or  verb.  The  preposition  a  is  in  the  sense 
of  limit ;  pi~a  and  para  express  the  reverse  of  that ;  ahhi,  direction 
towards ;  prati,  the  reverse  of  that ;  ati  and  su,  superiority;  nir  and  dur, 
the  reverse  of  these  two ;  ni  and  ava,  the  act  of  taking  down ;  ud,  the 
reverse  of  these  two ;  sam,  combining  together ;  vi  and  apa,  the  reverse 
of  that ;  anu,  similarity  or  being  after ;  api,  conjunction  ;  upa,  the  being 
appended;  pari,  being  all  around;  adhi,  being  above  or  supremacy  :  thus 
they  express  various  meanings,  and  these  must  be  taken  into  considera- 
tion. [Na  nirhaddhd  upasargd  arthdn  nir-dhur  iti  Sdkatdyano,  ndmd- 
Ithydtayos  tu  Itarmopasarnyoga-dyotahd  hhavanty  uccdvacdh  paddrthd 
hhavantiti  Gdrgyas,  tad  ya  esJiu  paddrtliah  prdhur  ime  tarn  ndmdkhyd- 
tayor  arthorvikaranam ;  a  ity  arvdg-artlie,  pra  parety  etasya  prdtilo- 
myam ;  dbhity  dbhimukhyam,  prafity  etasya  pixdilomyam ;  ati  su  ity 
dbhipujitdrthe,  nir  dur  ity  etayoh  prdtilomyarn  ;  ny  aveti  vinigrdhdrtTilyd, 
tod  ity  etayoh  pn-dtilomyam  ;  sam  ity  ekihhdvarn,  vy  apety  etasya  prdtilo- 
myarn ;  anv  iti  sddrUydpardblidvam ;  aplti  sarnsargarn ;  upety  upaja- 
nam  ;  pariti  sarvato-ihdvam ;  adhlty  uparihlidvam  aisvaryam  vaivam 
ucidvaSdn  arthdn  prdhus  ta  upekshitavydh.] 

There  is  a  still  more  interesting  passage  on  the  subject  of 
derivation  a  little  further  on  in  the  same  chapter  (I.  1 2) : — 

So  these  four  kinds  of  words  have  been  enumerated,  nouns  (ndman), 
verbs  (dkhydta),  prepositions  (upasargd),  and  particles  (nipdta).  S'aka- 
tayana afiirms  that  nouns  are  derived  from  verbs,  and  on  this  point  there 
is  an  agreement  of  the  etymologists  (nairukta-samayah).  But  Gargya 
and  some  of  the  grammarians  say  that  not  all  (nouns  are  derived  from 
verbs).  For  if  all  nouns  came  from  verbs,  then. whatever  performs  the 
same  action  ought  to  have  the  same  name.  Thus,  if  aha,  '  a  horse,'  were 
derived  from  the  root  ai,  '  to  pass  through,'  then  every  one  who  passes 
along  a  road  ought  to  be  called  aha;  and  if  trina,  'a  blade  of  grass,' 
were  derived  from  the  root  trid,  '  to  pierce,'  then  everything  that  pierces 


YBDAN-GAS  —  VYAKARANA   OR   GRAMMAR.  l6l 

ought  to  be  called  trina.  Again,  if  all  nouns  were  derived  from  verbs, 
then  everything  would  have  as  many  names  as  there  are  states  with 
which  it  could  be  connected.  Thus,  sthtmd,  '  a  post, '  might  be  called 
dara-sayd,  'hole-sleeper,'  because  resting,  in  a  hole,  or  san-jani,  'joiner 
together,  because  things  are  joined  by  being  attached  to  it.  [Yaska 
ends  by  taking  the  side  of  Sakatayana.  See  Professor  Max  Miiller's 
Ancient  Sanskrit  Literatjire,  p.  165.] 

The  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  chapters,  commonly  called 
the  Nirukta-parisishta,  are  thought  to  be  the  work  of  a 
more  recent  author  than  Yaska.  There  are  numerous 
classical  glossaries  by  later  lexicographers,  e.g. : — 

The  Ajnara-kosha  (sometimes  called  Tri-kanda,  '  having  three  chap- 
ters'),  by  the  Bauddha  Amara-sinha,  probably  not  later  than  a.d.  500; 
the  Abhidhana-ratna-mala,  by  Halayudha ;  the  Abhidhana-dintamani, 
by  the  Jaina  Hema-6andra ;  the  Visva-prakasa,  by  Mahesvara ;  the 
Dharani ;  the  Medini ;  the  Haravali,  &c. 

The  Veddn-gas — Vyaicarana,  'grammar.' 

This  word  Vy-d-karana  means  literally  '  undoing,'  and 
is  a[)plied  first  to  linguistic  analysis,  and  then  generally 
to  grammar,  but  especially  to  Panini's  grammar.-'  It  is 
the  opposite  to  Samkarana,  '  putting  together,'  whence 
the  formed  language  is  called  Sanskrita,  '  constructed.' 
Strictly,  the  great  Vyakarana  of  Paniui  can  scarcely  be 
regarded  as  a  Vedan-ga,  seeing  that  it  only  treats  of  the 
Vedic  idiom  exceptionally.  The  grammatical  Sutras  which 
preceded  his  time,  and  which  have  nearly  all  perished,  must 
have  constituted  the  Vyakarana  division  of  works  aucillary 
to  the  study  of  the  Veda.^     Nevertheless,  the  grammar  of 

1  No  Pandit  would  use  Vyakarana  except  for  Sanskrit  grammar, 
and  a  man's  Sanskrit  scholarship  is  often  summed  up  by  describing 
him  as  knowing  '  the  Vyakaran.' 

2  Panini  himself  mentions  several  grammarians  as  having  preceded 
him,  such  as  Api^ali,  Kasyapa,  Gargya,  Galava,  Cakravarmana,  Bhara- 
dvaja,  S'akatayana,  S'akalya,  Senaka,  and  Sphotayana.    The  Unadi-siitras 

L 


1 62  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Panini,  which  is  the  great  standard  of  correct  Sauskrit,  is 
usually  taken  to  represent  this  Vedan-ga,  and  as  it  is  one 
of  the  most  remarkable  literary  works  that  the  world-  has 
ever  seen,  and  as  no  other  country  can  produce  any  gram- 
matical system  at  all  comparable  to  it,  either  for  originality 
of  plan  or  for  analytical  subtlety,  a  brief  description  of  its 
characteristic  features  may  be  introduced  here. 

Little  or  nothing  is  known  of  Panini,  the  author  of  the 
grammar.  He  is  described  as  a  descendant  of  Panin  and 
grandchild  of  an  inspired  legislator  named  Devala.  His 
mother's  name  was  Daksbi. (whence  he  is  called  Daksheya), 
and  Salatura  in  the  Gandhara  country  (Kandahar),  north- 
west of  Attock  on  the  Indus,  is  said  to  have  been  his 
birth-place  (whence  his  name  Salaturiya).  He  belonged, 
therefore,  to  the  North- Western  or  Western  school.  As, 
however,  in  later  times  he  became  more  and  more  an 
object  of  reverence,  he  was  at  last  actually  canonized  by 
his  admirers,  that  is  to  say,  exalted  to  the  rank  of  a  Rishi 
or  inspired  Muni.  Hence  he  is  fabled  to  have  seen  rather 
than  composed  his  grammar,  which  was  declared  to  have 
been  supernaturally  revealed  to  him,  the  first  fourteen 
Sutras  especially  having  been  communicated,  according  to 
the  legend,  by  the  god^iva.  It  is,  of  course,  quite  impos- 
sible to  fix  with  certainty  at  what  period .  Panini  lived. 
The  late  Professor  .Goldsttlcker  thought  he  had  good 
grounds  for  deciding  that  the  great  grammarian  preceded 
Buddha.     This  would  place  him  in  the  sixth  century  B.C. 


(commented  onbyUjjvala-datta),  giving  tlie  affixes,  commencing  with  un, 
for  the  formation  of  words  whose  meaning  has  deviated  from  accordance 
with  their  etymology,  and  whose  root  is  not  always  clear'  are  thought  by 
some  to  be  anterior  to  Panini.  Possibly  he  may  have  made  a  list  of  them 
himself.  At  any  rate,  he  mentions  the  affixes  in  •III.  3'  i,'III.  4.  75. 
S'antanava's  Phit-siitras  on  accent  are  probably  later  than  Panini.  They 
have  been  well  edited  by  Professor  Kielhorn.  I  believe  Dr.  Biilher  has 
found  part  of  a  work  which  claims  to  be  S'akatayana's  grammar. 


VEDAN-GAS — VYAKARANA   OR   GRAMMAR.  1 63 

Other  scholars,  whose  opinions  are  entitled  to  respect,  con- 
sider that  an  earlier  date  cannot  be  assigned  to  him  than 
the  middle  of  the  fourth  century  B.C. 

His  work — perhaps  the  most  original  of  all  productious 
of  the  Hindu  mind — is  sometimes  called  the  Ashtadhya\  i, 
sometimes  Ashtakam  Paniniyam,  because  it  consists  of 
eight  lectures  (Adhyayas),  each  of  which  is  again  sub- 
divided into  four  chapters  (Padas).  In  these  eight 
Adhyayas  are  contaiued  3996  Sutras  or  Aphorisms.^  The 
first  Adhyaya  explains  the  technical  terms  used  in  the 
grammar  and  the  rules  for  their  interpretation  and  ap[)li- 
cation.^  A  root  is  called  Dhatu,  and  a  crude  base  Prati- 
padika,  but  a  root  never  appears  without  some  appendage 
(anubandha)  in  the  shape  of  indicatory  s\']lables  or  letters 
(technically  called  it)  which  do  not  really  form  part  of  the 
root,  but  merely  denote  certain  peculiarities  in  its  inflec- 
tion, conjugation,  &c.  Similar  indicatory  letters  and  syl- 
lables (it)  are  attached  either  at  the  beginning  or  end  of 
all  affixes,  augments,  &c.^  The  case  affixes  are  called  su}-), 
and  the  personal  endings  or  terminations  of  verbs  tin-. 

1  Three  or  four  of  these  are,  supposed  to  be  later  additions.  In  the 
excellent  edition  of  Professor  BohtHngk  |here  are  3997,  including  the 
fourteen  S'iva  Sutras.  Panini  is  also  the  supposed  author  of  the  oldest 
Dhatu-patha  or  dictionary  of  roots  with  their  Anubandhas. 

^  A  rule  giving  the  key  to  Panini's  Siitras  and  their  application 
is  called  a  Paribhasha ;  one  which  explains  the  technical  terms  is  a 
Sanjiia. 

^  For  example,  the  root  nid  is  called  nidi  to  show  that  a  nasal  is 
inserted  in  conjugation,  thus,  ninddmi,  nindasi,  &c.  The  affix  maya  is 
called  mayat  to  show  that  its  feminine  is  may%.  Sometimes  these  Its  or 
Anubandhas  serve  to  distinguish  two  roots  or  affixes,  which,  although 
similar  in  sound,'  have  different  senses ;  for  example,  the  root  da,  '  to 
give,'  is  called  duddn,  while  dd,  'to  divide,'  is  called  dap ;  the  affix  vat, 
meaning  '  like,'  is  .called  vati,  while  the  affix  vat,  meaning  '  possessed 
of,'  is  called  vatwp.  Sometimes  the  only  use  of  these  Anubandhas  is  to 
enable  Pratyaharas  to  be  formed ;  thus  the  case-ending  of  the  accusative 
dual  is  called  aut  merely  for  the  sake  of  forming  the  Pratyahara  sut. 


1 64  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Between  the  latter  and  the  root  a  conjugational  syllable 
is  inserted,  called  vikarana.  The  third  chapter  of  the 
first  Adhyaya  treats  of  the  proper  use  of  the  active  voice 
(Parasmai-pada)  and  middle  or  reflexive  voice  (Atmane- 
pada).  The  second  Adhyaya  explains  compound  words. 
The  third,  fourth,  and  fifth  Adhyayas  enumerate  the  vari- 
ous affixes  and  their  meanings.  Those  belonging  to  verbs 
occupy  the  third  Adhyaya  ;  those  'affixed  to  nouns,  the 
fourth  and  fifth.  The  sixth,  seventh,  and  eighth  Adhyayas 
treat  of  the  changes  which  roots  aud  affixes  undergo  by 
augments  and  substitutions  of  various  kinds.  For  brevity 
and  economy  of  words  nothing  can  be  more  successful  than 
the  system  in  which  all  this  immense  and  intricate  subject 
is  explained.  The  Sutras  of  Panini  are  indeed  a  perfect 
miracle  of  condensation,  their  main  design  apparently 
being  to  aid  the  memory  of  teachers  rather  than  learners 
by  the  briefest  possible  suggestions.  "When  a  single  letter 
can  be  saved  every  other  consideration  is  sacrificed  to  this 
paramount  object ;  and  to  attain  a  greater  amount  of 
abridgment  than  could  be  efl'ected  by  the  use  of  ordinary 
words  an  arbitrary  symbolical  language  is  coined,  the  key 
to  which  must  be  acquired  before  the  rules  themselves 
can  be  rendered  intelligible.^  Perhaps  the  closing  Sutra  of 
the  whole  work  may  be  taken  as  the  best  instance  of  the 
consummate  brevity. attained.  It  consists  of  two  letters, 
as  follows  :  a  a.     This  is  said  to  mean  : — 

Let  short  a  be  held  to  have  its  organ  of  utterance  contracted,  now 
that  we  have  reached  the  end  of  the  work  in  which  it  was  necessary  to 
regard  it  as  otherwise. 

Here  is  one  from  the  sixth  Adhyaya  (i.  jj):  Iho  yan 
aci.     This,  of  course,  is  not  Sanskrit,  but  a  kind  of  grara- 

^  For  example,  iyan  stands  for  the  characteristic  of  roots  of  the  fourth 
class,  yaJc  for  the  passive,  nic  for  the  causal,  sa7i  for  the  desiderative, 
yan-  for  the  intensive. 


VEDAN-GAS — VYAKARANA   OR   GRAMMAR.  165 

matical  algebra.  Ik  is  a  symbol  standing  for  the  four 
vowels  i,  u,  ri,  Iri,  a,nd  gifted  with  an  imaginary  genitive 
case  ikah  (here  changed  to  iko).  Yan  is  a  symbol  for  the 
letters  y,  v,  r,  I ;  and  ac  (supposed  to  possess  a  locative 
case  aci)  represents  all  the  vowels.     The  rule  at  full  is  : — 

The  letters  y,  v,  r,  I,  take  the  place  of  i,  u,  ri,  Iri,  short  or  long, 
respectively,  when  followed  by  any  dissimilar  vowel. 

Moreover,  an  aphorism  which  stands  at  the  head  of  a 
series,  and  is  hence  called  an  Adhikdra  or  '  governing  rule,' 
is  never  repeated,  but  must  be  supplied  after  the  whole 
series  till  the  influence  (anuvritti)  of  this  governing  Sutra 
is  supposed  to  cease,  such  cessation  being  called  nivritti. 
Thus  the  seventy -fourth  Sutra  of  the  third  chapter  of 
Adhyaya  I.  is  nicas-ca,  which  must  be  interpreted  thus  : — 

And  after  a  verbal  base  ending  in  the  causal  affix  (nic)  the  Atmane- 
pada  must  come  when  the  result  of  the  action  returns  to  the  agent. 

Of  course  nearly  all  the  matter  necessary  to  make  this 
rule  intelligible  has  to  be  supplied  from  other  rules,  and 
especially  from  the  Adhikara  rule  12,  which  is  separated 
by  sixty-two  intervening  Sutras. 

In  short,  a  careful  examination  of  Panini's  grammar 
will  dispose  the  student  to  appreciate  Colebrooke's  remark 
that  '  the  endless  pursuit  of  exceptions  and  limitations 
so  disjoins  the  general  precepts,  that  the  reader  cannot 
keep  in  view  their  intended  connection  and  mutual  rela- 
tion. He  wanders  in  an  intricate  maze,  and  the  clue  of 
the  labyrinth  is  continually  slipping  from  his  hand.' 

In  point  of  fact,  however,  this  grammar  ought  not  to 
be  examined  from  a  European  point  of  view  at  all.  We 
must  not  forget  that  an  Indian  Pandit's  ideas  of  grammar 
are  very  difi"erent  from  our  own.  Europeans  are  apt  to 
look  on  a  grammar  of  any  kind  as  a  necessary  evil,  only 
to  be  tolerated  because  indispensable  to  the  attainment 


I  66  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

of  a  desired  end  beyond.  With  us  the  grammar  of  a 
language  is  in  most  cases  a  mere  passage  to  its  literature, 
a  dreary  region  to  be  traversed  as  soon  as  possible.  A 
Pandit,  on  the  other  hand,  regards  grammar  as  we  should 
regard  the  natural  sciences.  It  is  with  him  a  something 
to  be  studied  and  elaborated  for  its  own  sake.  According 
to  the  late  Professor  Goldstiicker,  '  Paniui's  work  is  indeed 
a  kind  of  natural  history  of  the  Sanskrit  language.'  ^  It 
gives  an  account  of  the  linguistic  facts  and  phenomena 
as  it  finds  them,  tracing  them  out  as  they  occur  without 
regard  to  any  scientific  or  methodical  arrangement  of 
materials.  Thus  the  prolongation  of  vowels  is  dealt  with 
*  as  a  fact,  and  is  followed  out  through  a  whole  chapter  in 
ord-er  to  trace  all  the  instances  in  which  such  a  lengthen- 
ing takes  place,  whether  in  declension  or  conjugation  or 
the  composition  of  words.  Hence  the  rules  of  declension 
and  conjugation  do  not  follow  each  other  in  their  usual 
order  according  to  the  European  system,  but  are  scattered 
about  in  a  disjointed  and  often  very  perplexing  manner, 
so  that  it  becomes  necessary  to  search  for  and  put  together 
Aphorisms  in  widely  separated  parts  of  the  work  to  enable 
the  statement  of  some  grammatical  law  or  process  to  be 
completed. 

Panini's  grammar  was  criticized  and  its  deficiencies 
supplied  by  the  celebrated  Katyayana,  who  is  called 
Varttika-kara,  as  author  of  the  Varttikas  or  '  supplemen- 
tary rules  and  annotations.'  -He  must  have  lived  some 
time  after  Panini,  perhaps  in  the  century  following. 
Some,  however,  believe  the  two  grammarians  to  have 
been  contemporaneous.  Katyayana,  again,  was  criticized 
by  his  rival  Patahjali,  who  generally  supports  Panini 
against  the  composer  of  the  supplementary  rules.  To 
Patahjali  we  owe  one  of  the  most  M'onderful  grammatical 

1  See  Chambers's  Encyclopaedia,  article  Panini. 


VEDAN-GAS — VYAKARANA    OR   GRAMMAR.  I  67 

works  that  the  genius  of  any  country  has  ever  produced, 
viz.,  the  Mahabbashya  or  'great  commentary,"  written 
not  so  much  to  explain  Panini  as  to  defend  such  of  his 
Aphorisms  as  had  been  criticized  by  Katyayana.  He  was 
probably  not  the  same  person  as  the  author  of  the  Yoga 
philosophy.  According  to  some,  his  mother's  name  was 
Gonika ;  he  was  born  at  Gonarda  in  the  east  of  India,  and 
he  lived  for  some  time  in  Kashmir,  where  his  work  was  well 
known.  According  to  Professor  Goldstiicker,  he  wrote 
between  140  and  120  B.c.  ;^  but  Professor  Weber  places 
him  about  twenty-five  years  after  Christ.  These  three 
men,  Panini,  Katyayana,  and  Patanjali,  compose  the  great 
Indian  triumvirate  of  grammarians,  from  whose  authority 
there  is  no  appeal  in  anything  which  relates  to  VyakaraiJia. 
About  one  hundred  and  fifty  grammarians  and  commen- 

1  The  whole  of  this  great  work  has  been  lately  edited  by  two  Pandits 
at  Benares.  See  the  able  article  on  it  by  Professor  Weber  in  the  last 
volume  of  the  '  Indische  Studien.'  A  copy  has  been  kindly  sent  to  me 
by  Professor  A.  E.  Gough.  Patanjali's  additions  to  the  Yarttikas  are 
called  Ishtis  or  Desiderata.  He  is  also  the  author  of  many  Karikas  or 
memorial  verses  on  grammar.  A  compendium  of  suqh  verses  was  also 
made  by  Bhartri-hari. 

^  See  the  'Indian  Antiquary'  for  February  1873.  See  also  an 
article  on  Patanjali  in  Chambers's  Encyclopaedia,  where  it  is  well  said 
that  Patanjali's  method  is  analogous  to  that  of  other  classical  commen- 
taries ;  it  establishes,  usually  by  repetition,  the  correct  reading  of  the 
text  in  explaining  every  important  or  doubtful  word,  in  showing  the 
connection  of  the  principal»parts.  of  the  sentence,  and  in  adding  such 
observations  as  may  be  required.  Frequently  Patanjali  attaches  his 
own  critical  remarks  to  the  emendations  of  Katyayana,  often  in  support 
of  the  views  of  the  latter,  but  not  seldom,  too,  in  order  to  refute  his 
criticisms  and  to  defend  Panini;  while,  again,  at  other  times,  he  com- 
pletes the  statement  of  one  of  them  by  his  own  additional  rules. 
Ramkrishna  Gopal  Bhandarkar,  writing  in  the  '  Indian  Antiquary  ' 
for  October  1872,  states  his  opinion  that  Patanjali  lived  when  Push- 
pamitra  was  reigning  at  Patali-putra,  and  '  that  he  probably  wrote  the 
third  chapter  of  his  Bhashya  between  144  B.C.  and  142  B.C.'  Professor 
Weber,  however,  controverts  this  conclusion. 


1 68  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

tators  followed  in  their  footsteps,  each  criticizing  or 
commenting  on  his  predecessors.  Among  these  may- 
be mentioned  Kaiyata  or  Kaiyyata,  who  commented  on 
Patanjali  in  a  work  called  the  Bhashya-pradipa,  and  was 
himself  commented  on  by  Nagoji-bhatta  in  the  Bhashya- 
pradipoddyota.-'  One  of  the  best  of  the  more  modern 
commentaries  on  Panini  is  Vamana's  Kasika  Vritti,  so 
called  because  composed  at  Kasi  or  Benares.  A  gram- 
marian named  Bhattoji-dikshita  attempted  to  arrange  the 
Aphorisms  on  a  plan  more  in  accordance  with  modern 
ideas.  His  useful  work  is  called  the  Siddhanta-kaumudi.^ 
A  second  and  greater  simplification  of  Panini  is  the  Mad- 
hyama-kaumudi,  and  a  still  greater  is  the  Laghu-kaumudi 
of  Varada-raja/  which  is  in  fact  a  kind  of  abridgment  of 
the  Siddhanta-kaumudi,  current  in  the  north-west  of  India. 

Vopadeva,  a  grammarian  who  is  said  to  have  flourished 
about  the  latter  half  of  the  thirteenth  century  at  the 
court  of  Hemadri,  king  of  Deva-giri  (Dowlatabad),  wrote 
a  grammar  for  beginners  on  a  system  of  his  own,  called 
the  Mugdha-bodha,*  which  is  much  valued  as  an  authority 
in  Bengal,  and  referred  to  by  many  native  commentators, 
such,  for  example,  as  Bharata-mallika  or  Bharata-sena, 
who  therefore  called  his  commentary  on  the  Bhatti-kavya, 
Mugdha-bodhini. 

Vopadeva's  arrangement  and  many  of  his  technical 
terms  and  symbolical  expressions  (including  the  technical 
forms  of  his  affixes)  difi'er  from  those  of  Panini,  and  the 
only  allusion  to  Vedic  peculiarities  is  in  the  last  Sutra  of 
the  work  (XXVI.  220),  which  is  as  follows  : — 

1  This  Nagoji-bliatta  was  also  the  author  of  a  grammatical  work 
called  Paribhashendu-sekhara,  lately  edited  at  Bombay,  with  a,  trans- 
lation, by  Professor  F.  Kielhorn. 

2  A  new  edition  of  this  was  published  not  long  ago  in  India. 
s  This  was  edited  and  translated  by  Dr.  Ballantyne. 

*  It  has  been  edited,  like  Panini,  by  Professor  Bohtlingk. 


VEDAN.GAS — VYAKAEANA   OR   GRAMMAR.  1 69 

Manifold  forms  and  irregularities  are  allowed  in  the  Veda.  [Bahu- 
lam  brahmani,  which  corresponds  to  Panini's  often-repeated  hahulam 
chandasi,  II.  4.  39,  II.  4.  73,  &c.  Cf.  also  Panini's  vyatyayo  hahulam, 
'opposition  to  the  usual  rule  is  frequent  in  the  Veda,'  III.  i.  85.] 

In  fact,  Vopadeva  ^  does  not  aim  at  the  completeness  of 
Panini.  He  omits  all  notice  of  the  accents,  and  his  treat- 
ment of  the  laws  of  euphonic  combination  is  hy  no  means 
exhaustive.  In  his  explanation  of  declension  and  conjuga- 
tion he  is  more  satisfactory,  and  he  gives  numerous  useful 
examples  and  paradigms,  but  usually  contents  himself 
with  general  rules,  and  does  not,  like  Panini,  trouble 
himself  to  trace  out  minute  particulars  or  examine  into 
every  corner  of  an  intricate  subject  with  a  view  to  a  care- 
ful search  for  all  possible  exceptions.  Professor  Bohtlingk 
has  given  an  analysis  of  the  Mugdha-bodha  in  the  preface 
to  his  excellent  edition  of  the  work.  Vopadeva's  first 
chapter  explains  technical  terms ;  the  second  treats  of 
euphonic  laws ;  the  third,  of  declension  ;  the  fourth,  of 
the  formation  of  feminines ;  the  fifth,  of  the  use  of  the 
cases;  the  sixth,  of  compound  words;  the  seventh,  of 
Taddhita  affixes  ;  the  eighth,  of  technical  terms  applicable 

^  It  is  very  necessary  to  know  the  commonest  of  Vopadeva's  technical 
expressions,  as  they  are  not  only  occasionally  used  by  some  native 
commentators,  but  are  also  employed  in  some  instances  by  European 
expounders  of  Sanskrit  grammar.  They  often  deviate  from  Panini's 
system.  For  example,  the  memorial  terminations  usually  given  for 
verbs  are  those  of  Vopadeva  (VIII.  i)  ;  dhu  stands  for  dhatu,  '  a  root ; ' 
vri  for  vriddhi ;  kva  for  the  terminations  of  the  singular ;  vva  for  bahu- 
vadana,  those  of  the  plural ;  li  for  lin.ga,  a  nominal  base ;  lidhu  for 
nominal  verbs ;  4ujp  and  up  for  the  characteristic  u  of  the  eighth  class 
of  roots ;  turn  and  catum  instead  of  Panini's  tumun,  for  the  Krit  affix 
turn  forming  the  infinitive ;  sana  (not  sdnac)  for  the  termination  of  the 
present  participle  Atmane;  h'i  for  the  pronominals  (called  Sarva- 
naman  by  Panini)  ;  samdhdra  for  Panini's  pratydlidra  (see  my  Sanskrit- 
English  Dictionary).  Nevertheless,  Vopadeva  adopts  a  great  number 
of  Panini's  technical  terms. 


170  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

to  verbs  and  of  roots  of  the  first  class ;  the  ninth  and 
tenth,  of  roots  of  the  second  and  third  classes ;  the 
eleventh  to  the  seventeenth,  of  roots  of  the  fourth  to  the 
tenth  classes,  one  chapter  being  devoted  to  each  class ; 
the  eighteenth,  of  causal  verbs ;  the  nineteenth,  of  de- 
sideratives  ;  the  twentieth,  of  intensives  ;  the  twenty-first, 
of  nominals ;  the  twenty-second,  of  the  use  of  the  Paras- 
mai-pada ;  the  twenty-third,  of  the  use  of  the  Atmane- 
pada ;  the  twenty-fourth,  of  passives,  impersonals,  and 
reflexive  verbs ;  the  twenty-fifth,  of  the  use  of  the  tenses 
and  moods;  the  twenty-sixth,  of  Krit  affixes  and  of 
affixes  added  to  roots  to  form  participles,  &c. 

I  conclude  by  observing  that  a  popular  grammar  called 
the  Kdtantra  (or  Kaldpa)  is  being  well  edited  for  the 
Bibliotheca  Indica  by  Professor  J.  Eggeling. 

The  Veddngas — Jyotisha,  'astronomy.' 

This  Vedan-ga  should  rather  be  called  '  the  astronomical 
or  astrological  calendar.'  Strictly  speaking,  it  is  repre- 
sented by  a  short  tract,  consisting  of  thirty-six  verses,  in 
a  comparatively  modern  style,  to  which  scholars  cannot 
assign  a  date  earlier  than  300  years  B.C.  According  to 
the  best  authorities,  no  genuine  Sutras  on  astronomy  have 
as  yet  been  discovered.  The  object  of  the  Jyotisha 
Vedan-ga  is  to  fix  the  most  auspicious  days  and  seasons 
for  commencing  sacrifices.  This  treatise,  brief  and  unsa- 
tisfactory as  it  is,  nevertheless  deserves  attention  as  em- 
bodying some  of  the  most  ancient  astronomical  ideas, 
among  which  may  be  mentioned  the  measure  of  a  day 
by  thirty  Muhtirtas  or  hours  of  forty-eight  minutes,  the 
division  of  the  zodiac  into  twenty-seven  parts  or  lunar 
asterisms  (the  first  of  which  is  Krittika),  and  the  tradi- 
tional place  of  the  solstitial  points,  from  which  the 
attempt    has   been   repeatedly   made    (by   Jones,    Davis, 


VEDAN-GAS — JYOTISHA   OR   ASTRONOMY.  171 

Colebrooke,  Pratt,  and  others)  to  deduce  a  date  for  tbe 
treatise  itself,  as  well  as  for  the  whole  Vedic  literature. 

The  following  is  Colebrooke's  translation  of  verses  seven 
and  eight  of  the  Jyotisha  tract,^  which  verses  have  been 
the  subject  of  much  controversy  in  relation  to  their  bear- 
ing on  the  determination  of  dates  from  a  comparisou  of 
the  present  position  of  the  solstitial  points  : — 

The  sun  and  moon  turn  towards  the  north  at  the  beginning  of  S'ra- 
vishtha  ( =  Dhanishtha),  but  the  sun  turns  towards  the  south  in  the 
middle  of  the  constellation  over  which  the  serpents  preside ;  and  this 
(turn  towards  the  south  and  towards  the  north)  always  happens  in  the 
months  of  Magha  and  S'ravana.  [Prapadyete  Sravishthddau  surya- 
candramasdv  udak,  Sdrpdrdhe  ddJcsMndrkas  tu,  mdgha-irdvanayoh  sadd.] 
In  the  northern  passage  an  increase  of  day  and  decrease  of  night  take 
place  amounting  to  a  Prastha  (or  thirty-two  Palas)  of  water ;  in  the 
southern,  both  are  reversed  (i.e.,  the  days  decrease  and  the  nights 
increase),  and  the  difference  amounts,  by  the  journey,  to  six  Muhiirtas. 
[Gharma-vriddhir  apdm  prasfhah  hshapd-lirdsa  udag-gatau,  Daltsliine 
tau  viparyastau  shan-muhiirty  ayanena  tu.  ] 

Whatever  may  be  the  value  of  these  verses  in  an  astro- 
nomical point  of  view,  it  is  clear  that  a  superstitious 
belief  in  the  importance  of  choosing  auspicious  days  and 
lucky  moments  for  the  performance  of  rites  and  cere- 
monies, whether  public  or  domestic,  began  to  show  itself 
very  early  in  India,  and  that  it  grew  and  strengthened 
simultaneously  with  the  growth   of  priestcraft  and  the 

1  See  Professor  E.  B.  Cowell's  new  edition  of  Colebrooke's  Essays, 
republished  by  his  son.  Sir  T.  E.  Colebrooke,  p.  98 ;  and  see  especially 
Professor  Whitney's  valuable  notes  on  this  point  (p.  126).  The  latter 
shows  that  the  date  derivable  from  the  statement  made  in  the  Jyotisha 
has  a  necessary  uncertainty  of  about  four  centuries  (from  the  14th  to  the 
loth  B.C.),  and  he  claims  that  the  actual  uncertainty  is  still  greater — 
that,  in  fact,  the  statement  is  worth  nothing  as  yielding  any  definite 
date  at  all.  Weber  had  before  pointed  out  that  the  difference  of  six 
Muhiirtas  between  the  longest  and  shortest  day  or  night  is  accurate 
only  in  the  extreme  north-western  corner  of  India. 


172  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

elaboration  of  a  complex  ritual.  The  influence  of  the  sun 
upon  the  atmosphere  and  soil  made  itself  so  manifest  that 
it  was  only  natural  to  infer  that  similar  influences  be- 
longed to  the  moon,  planets,  and  stars ;  and  the  per- 
sonification and  deification  of  all  the  most  conspicuous 
luminaries  which  resulted  from  the  supposed  power  in- 
herent in  their  rays,  of  course  intensified  the  superstitious 
feeling  of  dependence  upon  their  favourable  aspects  for 
the  success,  not  only  of  religious  acts,  but  of  all  the  afi"airs 
of  life.  Pernicious  as  such  superstitious  ideas  were  in 
their  effect  on  the  mind  and  all  mental  progress,  they  were 
nevertheless  productive  of  good  in  impelling  the  acute 
Hindi!  to  study  the  movements  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and 
stimulating  him  to  undertake  arithmetical  and  mathema- 
tical investigations.  In  all  probability,  astronomical  and 
mathematical  science  had  an  independent  origin  in  India. 
It  is  at  least  certain  that  they  were  cultivated  with  some 
success  at  a  very  early  epoch,  though  of  course  very 
roughly  in  the  absence  of  all  optical  and  mechanical 
appliances.  We  have  already  given  an  example  from  the 
Aitareya-brahm;ma,  which  contains  certain  shrewd  guesses 
at  scientific  truth  in  regard  to  the  sun  (see  p.  32). 

In  some  of  the  earliest  hymns  of  the  Veda  the  Nak- 
shatras  or  lunar  mansions^  are  mentioned  in  connection 
with  the  moon  (see  Rig-veda  I.  50.  2).  Moreover,  some  of 
the  phases  of  the  moon,  such  as  Anumati,  '  the  moon  one 
digit  less  than  full;'  Rakd,  '  tlie  full  moon;'  Kuhu  (or 


1  For  the  twenty-seven  Vedic  Nakshatras  see  my  Sanskrit-English 
Dictionary  (also  Appendix).  The  word  Nakshatra  at  first  meant  a  star 
or  asterism  in  general ;  then  it  was  applied  to  the  selected  series  of 
asterisms  through  or  near  which  the  moon  passes ;  and  finally  it  was 
loosely  used  for  the  part  of  the  moon's  path,  the  27th  or  28th  of  the 
zodiac,  marked  by  each  asterism.  In  the  later  mythology  the  lunar 
mansions  were  fabled  as  the  twenty-seven  daughters  of  Daksha  and 
wives  of  the  moon. 


VEDAN-GAS — JYOTISHA   OR   ASTRONOMY.  I  73 

Gun-gu),  '  the  new  moon ; '  and  SinivdU,  '  the  first  thin 
crescent  preceding  or  following  new  moon,'  are  personified 
(see  Rig-veda  II.  32.  8),  so  that  we  are  justified  in  in- 
ferring that  the  movements  of  the  moon  in  the  zodiac  and 
its  use  as  the  time-measurer  and  month-maker  (mdsa- 
krit)  ^  were  studied  and  noted  by  the  Hindus  perhaps  as 
early  as  1400  years  B.C.  The  twenty -seven  lunar  man- 
sions implied  a  lunar  division  of  the  zodiac  into  twenty- 
seven  equal  parts  of  13°  20'  to  each  part.  Such  a  division 
(into  twenty-seven  or  twenty-eight  parts)  is  shared  by 
other  Asiatic  peoples,  as  the  Arabs  and  Chinese,  and  the 
question  where  it  originated  has  provoked  much  discus- 
sion, without  leading  to  any  definite  and  certain  results.^ 
The  names  of  the  Indian  months  have  certainly  been 
taken  from  the  asterisms  in  which  the  moon  was  supposed 
to  be  full  at  difi"erent  times  of  the  year,  and,  what  is 
still  more  significant,  the  names  of  some  of  these  lunar 
asterisms  have  clearly  been  derived  from  ancient  Vedic 
deities,   like    the  A^vins,^  &c.      In   the   Yajur-veda   and 

1  This  is  a  Yedic  name  of  the  moon.  A  root  md,  '  to  measure,' 
meaning  also  '  the  measurer,'  is  first  applied  to  the  moon  in  Sanskrit, 
and  then  to  a  lunation  or  period  measured  by  one  revolution  of  the 
moon.  Something  similar  has  happened  in  the  cognate  Aryan  languages. 
At  least  we  know  that  the  words  for  '  month '  are  generally  derived 
from  the  moon,  our  word  '  month  '  being  nothing  but  moonth.  In  Kig- 
Tsda  X.  85.  2  occurs  the  following  :  Atlio  nalcshatrdndm  eshdm  upasthe 
Soma  dhitah,  '  Soma  is  deposited  in  the  lap  of  these  Nakshatras.' 

2  The  various  opinions  and  the  arguments  by  which  they  have  been 
supported  have  been  lately  reviewed  by  Professor  Whitney  in  his 
'Oriental  and  Linguistic  Studies,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  341-421.  He  regards 
the  matter  as  still  unsettled.  The  solar  signs  of  the  zodiac  and  much 
of  the  later  astronomy,  with  many  astronomical  terms  (such  as  hord 
=  mpa ;  Jcendra  =  x'ur^ot ;  driltdna,  the  third  of  a  zodiacal  sign  =  bi-Kavoc ; 
liptd,  the  minute  of  a  degree,  =  Xott-o';),  were  borrowed  from  the  Greeks. 

3  The  names  of  the  months  are  Magha  (from  the  Nakshatra  Magha), 
Phalguna  (from  Phalgum),6a.itv3,  (from  (Jzifra),  Vaisakha  (from  VisdMid), 
Jyaishtha  (from  Jijeshthd),  Ashadha   (from  Ashddhd),  S'ravana  (from 


174  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Brahmanas  occur  the  expressions  Nakshatra-darsa  and 
G-anaka,  applied  to  observers  -of  the  heavens,  either  as 
astronomers  or  astrologers;^  and  the  adjustment  of  the 
lunar  to  the  solar  year  by  the  insertion  of  a  thirteenth 
or  intercalary  month  {mala-mdsa,  malimluca,  adhimdsa, 
sometimes  called  Purushottama)  is  probably  alluded  to  in 
an  ancient  hymn  (Rig-veda  I.  25.  8),  and  frequently  in 
xnore  recent  parts  of  the  Veda.  (Vajasaneyi-samhita  22. 
30,  Atharva-veda  V.  6.  4,  &c.) 

Whatever  conclusions  we  may  arrive  at  as  to  the 
original  source  of  the  first  astronomical  ideas  current  in 
the  world,  it  is  probable  that  to  the  Hindus  is  due  the 
invention  of  algebra^  and  its  application  to  astronomy  and 
geometry.  From  them  also  the  Arabs  received  not  only 
their  first  conceptions  of  algebraic  analysis,  but  also  those 
invaluable  numerical  symbols  and  decimal  notation  now 
current  everywhere  in  Europe,  which  have  rendered  untold 
service  to  the  progress  of  arithmetical  science.     It  will  not, 

Sravana),  Bhadrapada  or  Bhadra  (from  Bhadra-padd),  Asvina  (from 
Asvinl),  Karttika  (from  Krittilta),  Margasirsha,  commonly  called  Agra- 
hayana  (from  Mriga-siras),  Pausha  (from  PusJiya),  I  have  arranged 
these  names  so  as  to  correspond  as  nearly  as  possible  with  our  months, 
Mdgha  representing  January — February,  and  the  others  continuing  in 
regular  order ;  but  practical!}'  the  Hindu  calendar  generally  begins 
with  Vaisakha,  this  being  considered  the  first  month  in  the  year. 

1  Of  course  astronomy  and  astrology  were  mixed  up  together,  and 
the  progress  of  the  former  was  impeded  in  India  by  its  subservience 
to  the  latter. 

^  The  name  Algebra  (from  the  Arabic  al  jabr,  '  the  reduction  of 
parts  to  a  whole  or  of  fractions  to  integers ')  shows  that  Europe  received 
algebra  like  the  ten  numerical  symbols  from  the  Hindus  through  the 
Arabs.  The  Sanskrit  word  for  algebra,  Vlja-ganita,  means  '  calculation 
of  seeds,'  'calculation  of  original  or  primary  elements,'  i.e.,  analysis. 
If  the  Greeks  did  not  receive  their  first  ideas  of  algebra  from  the 
Hindus,  it  may  at  least  be  taken  as  proved  (from  all  that  Colebrooke 
has  so  ably  written  on  the  subject)  that  the  Hindus  were  certainly 
not  indebted  to  the  Greeks,  but  invented  their  system  independently. 


VEDAN-GAS — JYOTISHA    OR   ASTRONOMY.  I  75 

therefore,  be  irrelevant  if  I  introduce  here  a  short  account 
of  the  chief  Hindu  astronomical  and  mathematical  works, 
with  a  few  illustrative  extracts. 

By  some  authorities  nine  principal  astronomical  treatises, 
called  Siddhautas,  are  named,  viz.,  the  Brahma-siddhdnta, 
Surya-s°,  Somas",  Vrihaspati-s° ,  Garga-s°,  Ndrada-s° , 
Pardsara-s° ,  Pulastya-s° ,  Vasishtha-s" ;  by  others  five, 
viz.,  the  Paulisa-s° ,  Romaka-s°,'^  Vdsishtha-s° ,  Saura-s°, 
and  Brdhma-s°  or  Paitdmaha-s° ,  and  these  five,  sometimes 
called  collectively  the  Pahca-siddhautika,  are  said  to  be 
the  original  Siddbantas.  Whether  the  Surya-s°  is  the 
same  as  the  Saura-s°  appears  somewhat  doubtful,  but  this 
treatise,  fabled  to  have  been  revealed  by  Surya  '  the  Sun ' 
himself,  is  perhaps  the  best  kuown  of  all  Hindu  astro- 
nomical works  both  in  India  and  Europe.^ 

The  earliest  Hindi!  astronomer  whose  name  has  come 
down  to  us  is  Arya-bhata,  who  lived,  according  to  Cole- 
brooke,  about  the  fifth  century  of  our  era.  Others  place 
him,  or  another  astronomer  of  his  name,  in  the  third 
century.  Arya-bhata  is  the  author  of  three  works,  the 
Aryabbatiya,  Dasa-gitika,  and  Aryashta-^ata,  and  is  said 
to  have  asserted  a  diurnal  revolution  of  the  earth  on 
its  axis,  to  have  known  the  true  theory  of  the  causes 
of  lunar  and  solar  eclipses,  and  noticed  the  motion  of  the 
solstitial  and  equinoctial  points.^  Professor  Kern  has  just 
published  an  edition  of  the  Aryabhatlya. 

After  Arya-bhata  came  the  astronomer  Varaha-mihira, 
who  lived  about  the  sixth  century  of  our  era,  and  was 

1  This  title  Romaka-s°  points  to  an  exchange  of  ideas  on  astronomical 
subjects  between  India,  Greece,  and  Rome. 

2  It  has  been  well  edited  by  Dr.  Fitz-Edward  Hall,  and  there  are  two 
translations  of  it,  one  published  in  America  with  notes  (by  Professor 
Whitney),  and  another  by  Bapudeva  S'astri. 

^  According  to  Brahma-gupta,  as  quoted  by  the  writer  of  the  article 
Sanskrit  Literature  in  Chambers's  Encyclopaedia,  which  Ihave  consulted. 


176  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

boru  at  Ujjayini.  He  wr^te  a  work  on  nativities  called 
Vrihaj-jataka,  another  well-known  astrological  work  called 
Brihat-samkita  (recently  translated  by  Professor  Kern/  an 
extract  from  which  is  given  p.  179),  and  a  summary  of  the 
five  original  Siddkantas  called  Panca-,siddhantika. 

Next  to  Arya-bhata  and  Varaha-mihira  lived  Brahma- 
gupta  (probably  towards  the  ead  of  tke  sixth  century), 
who  wrote  tke  Brakma-siddhanta,  containing  the  ckapters 
on  aritkmetic  (ganita)  and  algebra  {Jcuttaka^)  in  Cole- 
brooke's  Indian  Algebra. 

Fourtk  and  last  of  celebrated  astronomers  and  mathe- 
maticians came  Bhaskara  or  Bhaskaracarya,  wko  is  sup- 
posed to  have  lived  in  tke  twelftk  century  and  composed 
a  well-known  book  called  the  Siddhanta-siromani,  contain- 
ing the  treatises  on  algebra  [Vija-ganita)  and  arithmetic 
(LUavati  ^),  translated  by  Colebrooke. 

I  proceed  now  to  select  specimens  of  tke  contents  of  the 
above  works.  Tke  first  extract  gives  tke  Indian  division 
of  time  taken  from  tke  Siirya-siddkanta  (I.  11-13),  Bkas- 
kara's  Siddhanta-siromani  (I.  19,  20),  and  other  works 
with  their  commentaries  (Burgess,  pp.  5,  6).  It  illustrates 
very  curiously  tke  natural  taste  of  the  Hindus  for  hyper- 
bole, leading  them  to  attempt  almost  infinite  calculations 
of  inconceivable  periods  in  the  one  direction,  and  infini- 
tesimal subdivisions  of  the  most  minute  quantities  in  the 
other.  Without  any  reliable  chronology  in  regard  to  the 
precise  dates  of  any  great  events  in  their  own  history, 
they  yet  delight  in  a  kind  of  chronology  or  '  science  of 

1  Tor  the  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society. 

2  Kuttalca  properly  means  a  '  pulverizer'  or  piultiplier.' 

8  Llldvatl,  '  delightful  by  its  elegance,'  is  merely  the  name  of  the 
chapter  on  arithmetic  [pdti-ganita,  divided  into  vyalda-gariita,  '  distinct 
computation,'  and  avyakta-g°,  'indistinct.'  The  name  is  also  applied 
to  a  supposed  'charming  woman,'  to  whom  instruction  in  arithmetic 
is  given. 


VEDAN'GAS — JYOTISHA   OR   ASTRONOMY.  1 77 

time,'  making  time  past,  present,  and  future  a  subject 
of  the  most  elaborate  and  minute  computations.  Hence 
we  find  them  heaping  billions  upon  millions  and  trillions 
upon  billions  of  years,  and  reckoning  up  ages  upon  ages. 
Aeons  upon  Aeons,  with  even  more  audacity  tlian  modern 
geologists  and  astronomers.  In  short,  an  astronomical 
Hindu  ventures  on  arithmetical  conceptions  quite  beyond 
the  mental  dimensions  of  any  one  who  feels  himself  incom- 
petent to  attempt  the  task  of  measuring  infinity.  Here 
is  the  time-table  enumerating  the  subdivisious  of  what  is 
called  real  and  unreal  time  : — 

'  That  which  begins  with  respirations  {prdna)  is  called  real  (murta) 
time ;  that  which  begins  with  atoms  (truti)  is  called  unreal  (amurta) 
time.  Ten  long  syllables  {gurti-akshara)  make  one  respiration  ( prdna, 
asu) ;  six  respirations  make  one  Vinadi  (also  called  pala  or  vigliatikd 
of  twenty-four  seconds) ;  sixty  Vinadis  =  one  Nadi  or  Nadika  (also 
called  danda,  ghati,  ghatikd  of  twenty- four  minutes) ;  sixty  Nadis  = 
one  day  (a  sidereal  day  and  night) ;  thirty  sidereal  days  =  one  civil 
(sdvana)  month ;  a  civil  month  consists  of  thirty  sunrises ;  a  lunar 
month  of  thirty  lunar  days  (tithi) ;  a  solar  (saura)  month  is  determined 
by  the  entrance  of  the  sun  into  a  sign  of  the  zodiac'  And  now  with 
regard  to  unreal  time  :  '  One  hundred  atoms  (truti)  =  one  speck  (tatpara); 
thirty  specks  =  one  twinkling  (nimesha) ;  eighteen  twinklings  =  one  bit 
(kdshtha)  ;  thirty  bits  =  one  minute  (kald)  ;  thirty  minutes  =  one  half' 
hour  (ghatikd) ;  two  half-hours  =  one  hour  (kshana)  ;  thirty  hours  = 
one  day.'     This  makes  the  atom  -^-gJi'w  °^  ^  second. 

Considerable  variations  occur  in  Manu  and  the  Puranas. 
According  to  Manu  (I.  64)  thirty  Kalas  =  one  Muhurta  or 
hour  of  forty-eight  minutes.  The  Vishnu-purana  (Wilson, 
p.  22)  makes  the  atom  =  -^-^\^  of  a  second,  and  goes  back 
beyond  an  atom  to  a  Paramanu  or  infinitesimal  atom, 
which  it  makes  =  ^a^Tjir  of  a  second.  All,  however,  agree 
in  dividing  the  day  into  thirty  hours,  just  as  the  month  is 
divided  into  tljirty  Tithis  or  lunar  days,  and  the  year  into 
three  hundred  and  sixty  days,  an  iuteicalary  mouth  being 
inserted  once  in  five  years,  which  is  thought  to  be  the 

M 


178  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

most  aneieut  Hindu  method  of  computing  time/  The 
Surya-siddhanta  then  proceeds,  like  Manu  (I.  68.  71),  to 
reckon  up  vast  periods  of  time  through  ages  ^  (yuga)  and 
great  ages  {maha-yuga),  till  it  arrives  at  an  Aeon  {kalpa), 
the  total  duration  of  which  is  said  to  be  4,320,000,000 
years.     In  verse  24  we  read  (Burgess,  p.  12) : — 

One  hundred  times  four  hundred  and  seventy-four  divine  years 
passed  while  the  All-wise  was  employed  in  creating  the  animate  and 
inanimate  creation,  plants,  stars,  gods,  demons,  and  the  rest. 

Further  on,  we  have  the  division  of  a  circle,  which  cor- 
responds with  our  own  : — 

Sixty  seconds  (vikald)  make  a  minute  {kald),  sixty  minutes  make  a 
degree  (bhdga),  thirty  degrees  make  a  sign  (rdH),  twelve  signs  make  a 
revolution  (bhagana). 

The  following  is  the  measurement  of  the  earth  : — 

Twice  800  yojanas  are  the  diameter  of  the  earth ;  the  square  root  of 
ten  times  the  square  of  that  is  the  earth's  circumference. 

According  to  Bhaskara  the  earth's  diameter  is  1581 
yojanas,  fo  that  if  the  yojana  is  reckoned  at  about  four 
and  a  half  English  miles  (which  is  given  as  one  estimate 
of  its  length,  though  its  value  varies),  the  calculation  in 
both  cases  is  not  very  far  from  accurate. 

At  the  commencement  of  Surya-siddhanta,  Chapter  II., 
we  have  a  strange  theory  of  planetary  motion  (p.  47) : — 

1  Almanacs  and  horoscopes  (Janma-jpalra)  are  called  Pancdn^ja,  as 
treating  of  five  things,  viz.,  solar  days  (commonly  called  Varas,  from 
the  days  of  the  week,  Aditya-v°,  Soma-v°,  Man^gala-v",  Budha-v°, 
Guru-v°  S'ukra^v",  S'ani-v°),  lunar  days  (Tithis),  the  twenty-seven 
Nakshatras,  the  twenty-seven  Yogas,  the  eleven  Karanas. 

^  There  are  properly  four  Yugas  or  ages  in  every  Mahayuga,  viz., 
Krita,  Tretd,  Dvdpara,  and  Kali,  named  from  the  marks  on  dice,  the 
Krita  being  the  best  throw  of  four  points,  and  the  Kali  the  worst  of 
one  point. 


VEDAN-GAS — JYOTISHA   OR   ASTRONOMY.  1 79 

Forms  of  time  {Mlasya  murtayah)  of  invisible  shape  (adnsya-rupdk) 
stationed  in  the  zodiac  (bhaganasritdh),  called  conjunction  (slghrocca), 
upper  apsis  {mandocea),  and  node  (pdta),  are  causes  of  the  motion  of 
the  planets.  The  planets  attached  to  these  Beings  by  cords  of  air  are 
drawn  away  by  them  with  the  right  and  left  hand,  forward  or  back- 
ward, according  to  nearness,  toward  their  own  place.  A  wind,  more- 
over, called  Pravaha,  impels  them  towards  their  own  apices  (ucca)  ; 
being  drawn  away  forward  and  backward,  they  proceed  by  a  varying 
motion. 

In  the  previous  Chapter  (29,  34)  the  following  state- 
meat  occurs  : — 

In  an  age  (yuga)  the  revolutions  of  the  sun,  Mercury  (Budha),  and 
Venus  (Sukra),  and  of  the  conjunctions  of  Mars  {Man gala,  Bhauma), 
Saturn  (Sani),  and  Jupiter  (Vrihaspati),  moving  eastward,  are  four 
million,  three  hundred  and  twenty  thousand.  Of  the  asterisms,  one 
billion,  five  hundred  and  eighty-two  million,  two  hundred  and  thirty- 
seven  thousand,  eight  hundred  and  twenty-eight. 

I  next  give  a  portion  of  a  remarkable  passage  from 
Varaha-mihiia's  Brihat-samhita  or  'complete  system  of 
natural  astrology'  (see  Dr.  Kern's  translation,  p.  433,  of 
vol.  iv.  of  the  Eoyal  Asiatic  Society's  Journal) : — 

An  astrologer  ought  to  be  of  good  family,  friendly  in  his  appearance, 
and  fashionable  in  his  dress  ;  veracious  and  not  malignant.  He  must 
have  well-proportioned,  compact,  and  full  limbs,  no  bodily  defect,  and 
be  a  fine  man,  with  nice  hands,  feet,  nails,  eyes,  chin,  teeth,  ears,  brows, 
and  head,  and  with  a  deep  and  clear  voice ;  for  generally  one's  good 
and  bad  moral  qualities  are  in  unison  with  one's  personal  appearance. 
As  to  mathematical  astronomy,  he  must  know  the  divisions  of  the  heaven 
and  of  time,  in  ages,  years,  half-years,  seasons,  months,  half-months, 
days,  watches,  hours,  half-hours,  minutes,  respirations,  moments,  sub- 
divisions of  a  moment,  &c.,  as  taught  in  the  five  Siddhantas  (see  p.  175). 
He  must  know  the  reason  why  there  are  four  kinds  of  months — the 
solar  (saura),  natural  (sdvana),  stellar  (ndJcshatra),  and  lunar  (cdndra) 
months — and  how  it  happens  that  there  are  intercalary  months  and 
subtractive  days.  He  must  know  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  Jovian 
cycle  of  sixty  years,  of  the  lustrums,  years,  days,  hours,  and  their 
respective  lords.  He  must  foretell  the  moment  of  commencement  and 
separation,  the  direction,  measure,  duration,  amount  of  obscuration. 


l80  '       INDIAN   WISDOM. 

colour  and  place  of  the  eclipses  of  sun  and  moon;  also  the  future 
conjunctions  and  hostile  encounters  of  the  nine  planets.^  He  must 
be  skilful  in  ascertaining  the  distance  of  each  planet  from  the  earth, 
expressed  in  yojanas ;  further,  the  dimensions  of  their  orHts  and  the 
distance  of  the  places  on  earth,  in  yojanas.  He  ought  to  be  clever  in 
geometrical  operations  and  in  the  calculation  of  time.  If,  moreover, 
he  knows  how  to  speak  pithily,  because  he  thoroughly  understands  all 
sorts  of  captious  questions ;  if  the  science  he  expounds,  by  being  put 
to  the  test  by  his  own  exertion  and  unceasing  study,  has  become  more 
refined — like  gold  is  rendered  purer  by  being  put  on  the  touchstone, 
by  purification  in  fire,  and  by  careful  workmanship — then  he  may  be 
said  to  be  a  scientific  man.  It  has  been  said  :  '  How  can  one  who 
solves  no  difficulty,  nor  answers  any  question,  nor  teaches  his  pupils, 
be  styled  a  scientific  man  ? '  And  thus  it  has  been  said  by  the  great 
seer  Garga :  '  The  king  who  does  not  honour  a  scholar  accomplished  in 
horoscopy  and  astronomy  comes  to  grief. '  '  As  the  night  without  a 
light,  as  the  sky  without  the  sun,  so  is  the  king  without  an  astrologer ; 
like  a  blind  man  he  erreth  on  the  road.'  'No  one  who  wishes  for 
well-being  should  live  in  a  country  where  there  is  no  astrologer.'  '  No 
one  that  has  studied  astrology  can  go  to  the  infernal  regions.'  'A 
person  who,  without  knowing  the  science,  exercises  the  profession  of 
an  astrologer  is  a  wicked  man  and  a  disgrace  to  society.  Consider  him 
to  be  a  mere  star-gazer.  But  such  a  one  as  properly  knows  horoscopy, 
astronomy,  and  natural  astrology,  him  ought  the  king  to  honour  and 
his  service  he  ought  to  secure.' 

With  regard  to  Colebrooke's  translation  of  Bhaskara's 
work  on  algebra  (Vvja-ganita),  the  following  extract  is 
taken  from  the  translator's  introduction  (p.  xxii.) : — 

The  motions  of  the  moon  and  sun  were  carefully  observed  by  the 
Hindus,  and  with  such  success  that  their  determination  of  the  moon's 
synodical  revolution  is  a  much  more  correct  one  than  the  Greeks  ever 
achieved.  They  had  a  division  of  the  ecliptic  into  twenty-seven  and 
twenty-eight  parts,  suggested  evidently  by  the  moon's  period  in  days, 
and  seemingly  their  own.     It  was  certainly  borrowed  by  the  Arabs.^ 

1  The  nine  planets  are  the  Sun  and  Moon,  Mercury,  Venus,  Mars, 
Jiupiter,  Saturn,  with  Eahu  and  Ketu  or  the  ascending  and  descending 
nodes, 

^  The  Arabs,  however,  appear  to  have  adopted  the  division  of  the 
zodiac  into  twenty-eight  segments.      Professor  Whitney  thinks  that 


VEDAK-GAS — JYOTISHA   OR   ASTRONOMY.  I  8  I 

They  were  particularly  conversant  with  the  most  splendid  of  the 
primary  planets ;  the  period  of  Jupiter  being  introduced  by  them,  in 
■conjunction  with  those  of  the  sun  and  moon,  into  the  regulation  of 
itheir  calendar  in  the  form  of  the  cycle  of  sixty  years,  common  to  them 
and  the  Chaldeans. 

We  may  add  that  from  certain  expressions  in  Bhaskara's 
work  (see  p.  io6 ;  Banerjea's  Dialogues,  p.  69^)  it  is  in- 
ferred that  some  idea  of  the  laws  of  gravitation  was 
formed  by  Hindu  astronomers  as  early  as  the  twelfth 
century  of  our  era.  The  precession  of  the  equinoctial 
points  (vishuvat,  kranti-pdta)  was  well  known  to  Bhas- 
kara,  and  the  effect  of  the  moon  in  causing  tides  seems  to 
have  been  suspected  much  earlier  (cf.  Kaghu-vansa  V.  61). 

The  points  in  which  Hindu  algebra  appears  particularly 
distinguished  from  the  Greek  are  (Colebrooke,  p.  xvi.)  :— 

In  addition  to  a  better  and  more  comprehensive  algorithm  (or  nota- 
tionj  :  ist.  The  management  of  equations  involving  more  than  one 
unknown  term.  2nd.  The  resolution  of  equations  of  a  higher  order, 
in  which,  if  they  achieved  little,  they  had  at  least  the  merit  of  the 
attempt  and  anticipated  a  modern  discovery  in  the  solution  of  biquad- 
ratics. 3rd.  General  methods  for  the  solution  of  indeterminate  problems 
of  first  and  second  degrees,  in  which  they  went  far,  indeed,  beyond 
Diophantus,  and  anticipated  discoveries  of  modern  algebraists.  4th. 
Application  of  algebra  to  astronomical  investigation  and  geometrical 
demonstration,  in  which  they  hit  on  some  matters  re-invented  in  later 
times.  One  of  their  anticipations  of  modern  discoveries  is  the  demon- 
stration of  the  noted  proposition  of  Pythagoras  concerning  the  square 
of  the  base  of  a  rectangular  triangle  being  equal  to  the  squares  of  the 
two  legs  containing  the  right  angle. 

As  to  the  notation  or  algorithm  of  algebra,  Colebrooke 
remarks  (p.  x.) : — 

The  Hindu  algebraists  use  abbreviations  and  initials  for  symbols. 
They  distinguish  negative  quantities  by  a  dot,  but  have  not  any  mark, 

the  Arabs  did  not  borrow  their  lunar  zodiac  from  the  Hindus.  See 
p.  173  and  the  authorities  there  referred  to. 

1  See  also  the  'Indian  Antiquary'  for  July  1872,  p.  224. 


I  82  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

besides  the  absence  of  the  negative  sign,  to  discriminate  a  positive 
quantity.  No  marks  or  symbols  indicating  operations  of  addition  or 
multiplication,  &c.,  are  employed;  nor  any  announcing  equality  or 
relative  magnitude  (greater  or  less).i  But  a  factum  is  denoted  by  the 
initial  syllable  of  a  word  of  that  import,  subjoined  to  the  terms  vs'hich 
compose  it,  between  which  a  dot  is  sometimes  interposed.  A  fraction 
is  indicated  by  placing  the  divisor  under  the  dividend,  but  without  a 
line  of  separation.  The  symbols  of  unknown  quantity  are  not  confined 
to  a  single  one,  but  extend  to  ever  so  great  a  variety  of  denominations, 
and  the  characters  used  are  initial  syllables  of  the  names  of  colours, 
excepting  the  first,  which  is  the  initial  of  ydvat-tdvat  (applied  to  the 
first  unknown  quantity,  i.e.,  '  so  much '  of  the  unknown  as  this 
coefiicient  number).  Colour,  therefore,  means  unknown  quantity  or 
the  symbol  of  it.  Letters  are  likewise  employed  as  symbols,  either 
taken  from  the  alphabet  or  else  initial  syllables  of  words  signifying 
the  subjects  of  the  problem.  Initials  of  the  terms  for  square  and 
solid  respectively  denote  those  powers.  An  initial  syllable  is  in  like 
manner  used  to  mark  a  surd  root  (see  the  next  extract  and  succeeding 
examples). 

The  following  is  from  the  Vija-ganita  (Chap.  YI.) : — 

This  is  analysis  by  equation  comprising  several  colours.  In  this  the 
unknown  quantities  are  numerous,  two  and  three  or  more,  for  which 
ydvat-tdvat  and  the  several  colours  are  to  be  put  to  represent  the 
values.  They  have-  been  settled  by  the  ancient  teachers  of  the  science, 
viz.,  black  (Icdla),  blue  (nila),  yellow  (pita),  red  (lohitd),  green  (haritaJca), 
white  {heta),  variegated  {citra),  tawny  (kapila),  tan-coloured  (pin-gala), 
grey  (dhumra),  pink  (pdtala),  mottled  (savala),  blackish  {sydmala), 
another  kind  of  black  (mecahx),  &c.  Or  letters  (that  is,  k,  &c.)  are 
to  be  employed  as  names  of  the  unknown.  [In  practice  the  initial 
syllables  of  the  above  words  are  used  thus,  yd,  Jed,  m,  pi,  lo.] 

I  here  give  some  of  the  Sanskrit  equivalents  for  terms 
in  arithmetic  and  algebra  : — 

An  absolute  quantity  which  has  specific  form  is  ?-Mpa  (applied  in  the 
singular  to  a  unit,  in  the  plural  to  an  integer  number,  and  often  ex- 
pressed by  the  first  syllable  ru).      A  surd  or  irrational  niimber  is 

1  The  sign  of  equality  was  first  used  by  Robert  Recorde  (because,  he 
said,  '  No  two  things  can  be  more  equal  than  a  pair  of  parallels '),  and 
those  of  relative  magnitude  by  Harriot. — Colebrooke. 


VEDAN-GAS — JYOTISHA   OR   ASTRONOMY.  I  83 

Tcaram  (often  denoted  by  the  first  syllable  ka).  A  nought  or  cipher 
is  iunya,  ca  ;  a  fraction  which  has  a  cipher  for  its  denominator  ca-hara  ; 
minus  rina,  kshaya  (negative  quantity) ;  plus  dhana,  sva  (positive 
quantity).  A  result  or  product  is  hlidvita  (often  expressed  by  the  first 
syllable  hha  ;  hence  the  product  of  two  unknown  quantities  is  expressed 
by  yd,  ltd  bhd,  or  Jed,  ni  bhd;  so  also  the  square  of  the  first  unknown 
quantity  multiplied  by  the  cube  of  the  second  is  thus  abbreviated,  yd 
va,  Jed  gJia,  hhd). 

It  may  be  interesting  to  note  the  system  of  numeration 
increasing  in  decuple  proportion  given  in  Chapter  II.  of 
tlie  Lilavati.  This  method,  with  the  invention  of  the  nine 
numerical  figures  {an'ha)  and  of  the  nought  (h'mya)  and  of 
the  decuple  value  assigned  to  each  according  to  its  position 
in  the  series,  is  thought  to  be  of  divine  origin  : — 

Unit  (eJid),  ten  (dasa),  hundred  (Sato),  thousand  (sahasra),  ten  thou- 
sand (ayuta),  a  hundred  thousand  (lahslia,  commonly  called  '  a  lac '), 
million  (prayuta),  ten  millions  (Jcoti,  commonly  called  'a  krore'),  a  hun- 
dred millions  (arhuda),  a  thousand  millions  (abja  ovpadma),  ten  thousand 
milhons  (Jcharva),  a  hundred  thousand  millions  (nikharva),  a  billion  or 
million  of  millions  (mahd-padma),  ten  billions  (san-ku),  a  hundred  billions, 
{jaladhi  or  samudra),  a  thousand  billions  {antya),  ten  thousand  billions 
(madhya),  a  hundred  thousand  billions  (pardrdha). 

I  add  four  specimens  of  problems  from  the  Lilavati  and 
Vija-ganita  (Colebrooke,  pp.  24,  124,  191,  269,  272)  : — 

1.  Out  of  a  swarm  of  bees,  one-fifth  part  settled  on  a  Kadamba 
blossom ;  one-third  on  a  S'ilindhra  flower ;  three  times  the  difference 
of  those  numbers' flew  to  the  bloom  of.  a  Kutaja.  One  bee,  which 
remained,  hovered  about  in  the  air.  Tell  me,  charming  woman,  the 
number  of  bees. 

2.  How  many  are  the  variations  of  form  of  the  (ten-armed)  god 
©■ambhu  (S'iva)  by  the  exchange  of  his  ten  attributes  held  reciprocally 
in  his  several  hands,  viz.,  the  rope  {pdia),  the  hook  for  guiding  an 
elephant  (ankuki),  the  serpent,  the  hour-glass-shaped  drum  (damaru), 
the  human  skull,  the  trident  (tri^ula),  the  club  shaped  like  the  foot  of 
a  bedstead  (khatvdn-ga),  the  dagger,  the  arrow,  the  bow  ]  And  those  of 
the  (four-armed)  Hari  (Vishnu)  by  the  exchange  of  the  mace,  the  discus 
(cakra),  the  lotus,  and  the  conch  (sankha)  1     Answer,  3,628,800  ;  24. 


184  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

3.  Eight  rubies,  ten  emeralds,  and  a  hundred  pearls,  which  are  in 
thy  ear-ring,  my  beloved,  were  purchased  by  me  for  thee  at  an  equal 
amount ;  and  the  sum  of  the  rates  of  the  three  sorts  of  gems  was  three 
less  than  half  a  hundred  :  tell  me  the  rate  of  each,  auspicious  woman. 

4.  What  four  numbers  are  s^ch  that  the  product  of  them  all  is  equal 
to  twenty  times  their  sum  ?  The  answer  to  this  last  is  :  Here  let  the  first 
number  heyd  i;  and  the  rest  be  arbitrarily  put  5,  4,  and  2.  Their  sum  is 
yd  i,ru  1 1,  and  multiplied  by  20,  yd  20,  ru  2  20.  Product  of  all  the  quan- 
tities, yd  40.    Statement  for  equation,  "    4  >    _        .    jjence  by  the  first 

>  i>    ^  T-  '  ya  20,  ru  2  20  •' 

analysis,  the  value  of  yd  is  found  1 1,  and  the  numbers  are  i  j,  5,  4,  ?. 

I  should  mention  here  that  attached  to  each  Veda  there 
are  certain  works  called  Parisishta  or  '  Supplements '  in- 
tended to  supply  directions  omitted  in  the  Srauta  Sutras,  &c. 
There  are  also  the  Anuhramanl  or  'Indices'  giving  the  first 
words  of  every  hymn,  the  metre,  the  names  of  the  authors 
and  of  the  deities  addressed,  the  number  of  verses,  &c. 

There  are  also  Upa-vedas  or  'secondary  Vedas,'  which, 
however,  have  really  little  or  uo  connection  with  either 
the  Veda  or  Sroriti.  They  are,  1.  Aynr-veda,  'the  science 
of  life'  or  medicine  (regarded  as  belonging  to  the  Atharva- 
veda,  and  by  some  to  the  Rig-veda) ;  2.  Gandharva-veda, 
'  the  science  of  music '  (as  a  branch  of  the  Sama-veda) ; 
3.  Dhanur-veda,  '  the  science  of  archery '  or  military  art 
(connected  with  the  Yajur-veda) ;  Sthdpatya-veda,  '  the 
science  of  architecture,'  including  the  Silpa-sastra  : — 

As  to  I,  Two  great  medical  writers  are  Varalca  and  Su-snda,  whose 
works  treat  of  anatomy,  physiology,  materia  medica,  pharmacy,  surgery 
(salya),  toxicology  (visha),  omens,  and  the  evil  influence  of  planets  and 
demons  (hhuta)  in  causing  diseases.  (See  Wilson's  Essays,  vol.  i.  pp. 
269-276,  380-393.)  Su-sruta's  work,  in  six  books,  has  been  well  edited 
at  Calcutta  by  Sri  Madhusiidana  Gupta.  As  to  2,  Works  on  music  treat 
of  notes,  scales,  melodies,  singing,  musical  instruments,  and  sometimes 
of  dancing.  Six  primary  modes  or  modifications  of  melody,  called  Ragas, 
are  enumerated,  which  are  personified,  and  each  of  them  married  to  five 
or  sometimes  six  Raginis.  The  chief  musical  works  are  the  Sari-glta- 
ratndltara,  by  S'am-ga-deva ;  the  Sangita-darpana,  by  Damodara]  and 


VEDAN'GAS — JYOTISHA   OR   ASTRONOMY.  I  85 

the  San-glta-ddmodara,  by  S'ubhan-kara.  As  to  3,  This  science  is  by  some 
ascribed  to  Vi^vamitra,  by  others  to  Bhrigu.  As  to  4,  Some  assert  that 
there  are  sixty-four  treatises  on  the  sixty-four  S'ilpas  or  'mechanical  arts,' 
such  as  architecture,  sculpture,  carpentry,  jewellery,  farriery,  &c.  The 
principal  work  on  architecture  is  the  Mdna-sdra,  '  essence  of  measure- 
ment,' in  fifty-eight  chapters,  giving  rules  for  the  construction  of  build- 
ings, temples,  ornamental  arches  (toraria),  &c.  Other  works,  by  celebrated 
Sthapatis  or  '  architects,'  describe  the  soil  suited  for  building  and  rites 
in  honour  of  the  Vdstu-purusha,  '  spirit  presiding  over  sites.' 


CHAPTER  IX. 

11.   The  Smdrta  Sutras  or  Traditional  Rules.^ 

In  our  classification  of  Smriti  or  Post-Vedic  literature,  at 
the  commencement  of  the  last  chapter,  we  placed  the 
Smarta  Sutras  under  the  second  head,  and  pointed  out 
that  they  were  to  a  great  extent  the  source  of  the  sub- 
sequent law-books  which  form,  in  our  arrangement,  the 
third  head  of  Suiriti.  We  also  observed  that  the  term 
Smdrta-sutra  is  a  general  expression  for  collections  of 
aphoristic  rules  which  are  distinguished  from  the  Srauta- 
sutra  of  the  Kalpa  Vedan-ga,  because  they  do  hot  relate 
to  Srauta  or  Vedic  ceremonies,  but  rather  to  Grihya  or 
'  domestic  rites  '  and  Samaydcara  or  '  conventional  every- 
day practices.'  Hence  the  Smarta  Stitras  are  commonly 
subdivided  into,  a.  Grihya  Sutras,  and  b.  Sdmaydcdriha 
Sutras.  It  will  be  desirable,  therefore,  before  com- 
mencing our  survey  of  Manu'e  celebrated  Law-book,  to 
advert  briefly  to  'these  sources  from  which  some  of  its 
materials  were  derived,  and  especially  to  the  Grihya 
Sutras.  "•  Of  these  there  are  collections  of  different  schools 
attached  to  each  Veda.  Thus  to  the  E-ig-veda  belong 
the  Asvaldyana^  and  San-Tchayana  Grihya  Sutras  ;  to  the 
Sama-veda  those  of  Gohhila  ;^  to  the  Vajasuneyi-samhita 

1  Probably,  however,  Manu  owes  more  to  the  Samayadarika  than  to 
the  Grihya  Sutras,  although  these  latter  are  now  best  known  to  us  by 
printed  editions.  We  find  that  the  authors  of  Grihya  Sutras  have 
often  the  same  name  as  the  authors  of  law-books. 

2  There  are  also,  as  we  have  seen,  Asvalayana  S'rauta-siitra  under 
the  head  of  'Kalpa,'  and  probably  each  school  had  all  three  sets  of 
Sutras  complete,  though  they  are  seldom  all  preserved.    The  Asvalayana 

iS6 


SMARTA-SUTRA — GRIHYA   OR   DOMESTIC   RULES.        I  8/ 

or  White  Yajur-veda  those  of  Pdraskara ;  to  the  Taittiriya 
or  Black  Yajur-veda  those  of  KdthaJca,  Baudhdyana, 
Bhdradvdja,  Apastamha,^  the  Maitrdyanlya,  Mdnava 
(which  last  have  perished,  though  some  of  their  Kalpa- 
sutras  have  been  preserved,  see  p.  205),  &c. 

In  fact,  every  Brahmanical  family  or  school  {caraim^) 
had  probably  its  own  traditional  recension  [sdkha,  p.  150) 
of  the  Mantra  and  Brahmana  portion  of  the  Vedas,  as  well 
as  its  own  Kalpa,  Grihya,  and  Samayacarika  Stitras;  and 
even  at  the  present  day  the  domestic  rites  of  particular 
families  of  Brahmans  are  performed  in  accordance  with  the 
Sutras  of  the  Veda  of  which  they  happen  to  be  adlierents. 

Since  these  Grihya  and  Samayacarika  Sutras  are  older 
than  Manu,  they  are  probably  as  old  as  the  sixth  century 
B.C.,  but  possibly  the  works  we  possess  represent  com- 
paratively recent  collections  of  the  original  texts. 

It  has  been  already  pointed  out  that  the  Srauta  Siitras 
are  a  kind  of  rubric  for  the  more  public  solemn  sacrifices 
(Jyotishtoma,  Agnishtoma,  Asva-medha.,  &c.)  enjoined  by 
the  Veda.  The  subject  of  the  Grihya  is  rather  that  indi- 
cated by  Manu  when  he  says  (III.  67) : — 

Let  the  houseliolder  observe  domestic  rites  with,  the  sacred  fire 
kindled  at  his  marriage  (called  Gdrhapaiya)  according  to  rule,  and 
perform  the  five  devotional  acts   and   the   daily  domestic  oblations. 

Grihya  Sutras  and  part  of  the  Paraskara  have  been  edited  and  trans- 
lated into  German  by  Professor  Stenzler  (Leipzig,  1864,  1865),  and 
the  former  have  also  been  edited  by  Pandits  for  the  Bibliotheca  Indica 
(Calcutta,  1869).  The  Gobhillya  Grihya  Satras  are  being  edited  for 
the  Bibliotheca  Indica. 

1  The  Apastambas  appear  to  have  preserved  all  three  sets  of  Sutras 
complete,  for  there  are  also  Apastamba  S'rauta-stjtra  and  Samayadarika- 
sutra.  According  to  Professor  Bhandarkar  there  are  numbers  of  Brah- 
mans in  the  south  of  India  who  are  adherents  of  the  Black  Yajur-veda, 
and  who  receive  ddkshind  or  '  fees '  from  rich  men  for  repeating  it  with 
the  Apastamba  Sutras. 

2  A  work  called  the  Caraiia-vyuha  gives  catalogues  of  these  schools. 


loa  INDIAN  WISDOM. 

[Vaivdhike  'gnau  kurmta   grihyam   karma   ^Jatharvid^li  Panca-^ajna- 
vidhdnam  ca  paktim  (=pdkam  cdnvdhikirn  grilii.'\ 

Indeed  the  word  Grihya  means  'household,'  and  these 
Sutras  do  in  fact  give  rules  for  the  five  diurnal  acts  of 
domestic  devotion  called  Mahd-yajna  (or  Panca-yajna, 
four  of  them  being  also  Pdka-yajna,  Maiiu  11.  86),  as  well 
as  for  the  domestic  ceremonies  named  Sanskdras,  common 
to  all  the  three  higher  classes,  and  not  restricted  to  Brah- 
mans.  The  twelve  Sanskaras  are  described  at  p.  239. 
They  are  generally  performed  at  the  one  domestic  hearth, 
instead  of  with  all  the  three  fires  (called  collectively  Tretd), 
of  the  Vitdnas  or  '  hearths  used  at  public  sacrifices.' 

I  proceed  to  give  a  brief  account  of  Asvalayana's  Grihya 
Sutras  of  the  Rig-veda,  making  one  prefatory  remark  that 
the  Hindu  race  affords  perhaps  the  only  example  of  a 
nation  who,  although  apparently  quite  indifferent  to  the 
registering  of  any  of  the  great  facts  of  their  political  life, 
or  even  to  the  recording  of  any  of  the  most  remarkable 
events  of  their  history — as,  for  example,  the  invasion  of 
the  Greeks  under. Alexander  the  Great — nevertheless,  at 
a  very  eurly  period,  regulated  their  domestic  rites  and 
customs  according  to  definite  prescribed  rules,  which  were 
not  only  written  down,  but  preserved  with  religious  care, 
and  are  many  of  them  still  in  force.  Moreover,  as  this 
race  belongs  to  the  same  original  race-stock  as  ourselves, 
the  antiquity  of  their  customs  must  of  necessity  invest 
them  with  great  interest  in  our  eyes. 

The  domestic  oblations  called  Paka-yajna  (Manu  II.  86, 
143)  are  distinguished  from  the  Vaitanika  ^  in  the  first 
two  Sutras,  thus  (Steuzler's  edition,  I.  i,  2) : — 

1  Kullaka,  on  Manu  V.  84,  derives  vitdna  from  vitan,  '  to  spread  out,' 
and  explains  Vaitanika  to  be  those  S'rauta  oblations  which  are  performed 
when  the  Garhapatya  fire  is  spread  over  both  the  AhavaniyaandDakshina 
hearths  {vaitdnam  irauto  homah  gdrJiapatya-kunda-gthdn  agnin  aliavani- 


SMARTA-SUTRA — GRIHYA   OR   DOMESTIC    RULES.        I  89 

The  Vaitanika  oblations  (performed  with  all  the  three  sacred  fires  ^) 
have  been  explained  (in  the  S'rauta-sutra),  we  will  now  describe  those 
(performed  with  the)  domestic  (fire  only).  There  are  three  kinds  of 
Paka-yajna,  viz.,  those  that  are  offered  in  fire  (such  as  oblations  of 
butter,  &c.);  those  that  are  presented  without  being  offered  in  fire; 
those  that  are  offered  to  the  supreme  Being  (Brdhviani)  in  the  feeding 
of  Brahmans  {Brdhmana-Vhojane). 

Book  I.  ii.  enumerates  the  gods  to  whom  oblations  are 
to  be  offered,  such  as  Agni,  Indra,  Soma,  Heaven  and 
Earth,  Yama,  Varuna,  the  Visve  Devah  (cf.  Manu  III. 
90,  121),  Brahman,  &c.  These,  it  will  be  observed,  are 
generally  Vedic  deities.  The  third  prescribes  the  mode  of 
preparing  the  place  where  oblations  are  to  be  made. 

The  fourth  commences  with  the  following  Siitra  : — 

The  ceremonies  of  tonsure  (caula  —  cudd-harman),  investiture  with  the 
sacred  cord  [uyanayana),  shaving  the  beard  (go-ddna),  and  marriage  must 
be  performed  during  the  northern  course  of  the  sun  (udag-ayane)  in  the 
light  half  of  the  month  {dpuryamdne  pdltshe),  and  under  an  auspicious 
constellation  {kalydne-nakshatre). 

These  Sanskara  ceremonies  are  then  described  (begiu- 
ning  with  marriage),  and  whenever  Mantras  or  texts  of  the 

yddi-Tcundeshu  vitatya  kriyate).  See  also  Manu  VI.  9.  There  is  much 
difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  exact  meaning  of  pdka-yajiia.  Stenzler 
translates  it  by  '  Koch-opfer,'  and  thinks  it  means  an  oblation  offered 
on  the  domestic  fire  when  the  daily  food  is  cooked.  Some  of  the  com- 
mentators, on  the  other  hand,  interpret  paka  by  'small,'  'simple,'  and 
some  by  'good.'  In  Manu  II.  86  four  Paka-yajnas  or  'domestic  obla- 
tions '  are  mentioned  (which  Kulliika  explains  by  Vai&vadeva-homa,  bali, 
nitya-kdddha,  and  atithi-lhojana),  thus  identifying  them  with  four  of 
the  Maharyajnas,  see  p.  1 94.  Seven  different  kinds  of  Paka-yajna  will 
be  found  enumerated  in  my  Sanskrit-English  Dictionary. 

^  In  Manu  III.  100,  185,  five  sacred  fires  are  mentioned,  and  a 
Brahman  who  keeps  them  all  burning,  called  a  PaMdgni  (  =  Agnihoirin), 
is  regarded  as  peculiarly  pious.  They  are,  i.  Dakshina  (Anvdhdrya- 
^acarea  in  the  Brahmanas)  ;  2.  Gdrhapatya;  3.  Ihavamya;  4.  Sdbhya  ; 
5.  Avasathya.  The  three  first  fires  are  the  most  important,  and  are 
collectively  called  Tretd.     Agnihotris  are  still  met  with  in  India. 


190  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Veda  have  to  be  repeated  during  the  performance  of  each 
rite,  the  first  word  or  words  of  the  several  texts  are  cited. 
Thus  before  the  marriage  ceremony  an  oblation  of  clarified 
butter  is  to  be  ofiered  with  repetition  of  the  text :  Tvam 
Aryamd  hhavasi  yat  kanlndm,  &c.,  'Thou  art  Aryaman 
in  relation  to  maidens'  (Rig-veda  V.  3.  2). 

The  fifth  chapter  prescribes  the  due  selection  of  a  wife 
after  proper  inquiry  as  to  family  and  coudition.  Sutra  3 
says  : — 

A  man  ought  to  marry  a  woman  who  is  possessed  of  intelligence, 
beauty,  good  character,  and  auspicious  marks,  and  who  is  free  from 
disease.     (Compare  the  directions  Manu  III.  4-10.) 

The  sixth  chapter  specifies  and  'describes  the  eight 
forms  of  marriage,  called,  Brahma,  Daiva,  Prdjdpatya, 
Arsha,  Gdndharva,  Asura,  Paisdca,  and  Rdhshasa. 
They  are  also  enumerated  by  Manu  (III.  21),  but  not 
quite  in  the  same  order,  and  by  Yajnavalkya  (I.  58,  61). 
Manu  (III.  27-34)  describes  them  more  fully  than 
A^valayana. 

Book  I.  vii.  prescribes  a  common  marriage  ceremony  : — 

West  of  the  (sacred)  fire  a  stone  (for  grinding  corn  and  condiments, 
such  as  is  used  by  women  in  all  households)  is  placed,  and  north-east 
a  water-jar.  The  bridegroom  offers  an  oblation,  standing,  looking 
towards  the  west,  and  taking  hold  of  the  bride's  hands  while  she  sits 
and  looks  towards  the  east.  If  he  wishes  only  for  sons,  he  clasps  her 
thumbs  and  says,  'I  clasp  thy  hands  for  the  sake  of  good  fortune;' 
the  fingers  alone,  if  he  wishes  for  daughters ;  the  hairy  side  of  the 
hand  along  with  the  thumbs,  if  he  wishes  for  both  (sons  and  daughters). 
Then,  whilst  he  leads  her -towards  the  right  three  times  round  the  fire 
and  round  the  water-jar,  he  says  in  a  low  tone,  '  I  am  he,  thou  art  she ; 
thou  art  she,  I  am  he ;  I  am  the  heaven,  thou  art  the  earth ;  I  am  the 
Saman,  thou  art  the  Eid.  Come ;  let  us  marry,  let  us  possess  off- 
spring; united  in  affection,  illustrious,  well  disposed  towards  each 
other  (sumanasyamdnau),  let  us  live  for  a  hundred  years.'  Every  time 
he  leads  her  round  he  makes  her  ascend  the  mill-stone,  and  says, 
'  Ascend  thou  this  stone,  be  thou  firm  as  a  stone '  (a^meva  tvam  sthira 


SMARTA-SUTRA— GRIHYA    OR   DOMESTIC   RULES.        ipr 

bhava).  Then  the  bride's  brother,  after  spreading  melted  butter  on 
the  joined  palms  of  her  hands,  scatters  parched  grains  of  rice  on  them 
twice.  Then,  after  pouring  the  oblation  of  butter  on  the  fire,  some 
Vedic  texts  are  recited.  Then  the  bridegroom  unlooses  the  two  braided 
tresses  of  hair,  one  on  each  side  of  the  top  of  the  bride's  head,  repeating 
the  Vedic  text,  '  I  loose  thee  from  the  fetters  of  Varuna  with  which 
the  very  auspicious  Savitri  has  bound  thee'  (Eig-veda  X.  85.  24 1). 
Then  he  causes  her  to  step  seven  steps  towards  the  north-east  quarter, 
saying  to  her,  'Take  thou  one  step  (ekapadl  bhava)  for  the  acquire- 
ment of  sap-like  energy  (ishe) ;  take  thou  two  steps  for  strength  {urje 
dvipadi  bhava) ;  take  thou  three  steps  for  the  increase  of  wealth  (rnyas- 
poshdya) ;  take  thou  four  steps  for  well-being  [mdyo-bhavydya) ;  take 
thou  five  steps  for  offspring  (prajdbhyah) ;  take  thou  six  steps  for  the 
seasons  (riiuhhyah) ;  take  thou  seven  steps  as  a  friend  (sakhd  saptapadt 
bhava  ^) ;  be  faithfully  devoted  to  me ;  may  we  obtain  many  sons ! 
may  they  attain  to  a  good  old  age  ! '  Then  bringing  both  their  heads 
into  close  juxtaposition,  some  one  sprinkles  them  with  water  from  the 
jar.  He  should  then  remain  for  that  night  in  the  abode  of  an  old 
Brahman  woman  whose  husband  and  children  are  alive.  When  the 
bride  sees  the  polar  star  and  Arundhati  and  the  seven  Rishis,  let  her 
break  silence  and  say, '  May  my  husband  live  and  may  I  obtain  children.' 

In  Book  I.  viii.  12,  13,  14,  we  have  the  foUowiug : — 

When  he  (the  bridegroom)  has  completed  the  marriage  ceremonial 
he  should  give  the  bride's  dress  to  one  who  knows  the  Siirya-sukta 
(Rig-veda  X.  85),  and  food  to  the  Brahmans;  then  he  should  make 
them  pronounce  a  blessing  on  him.  [Carita-vraiah  suryd-vide  vadhu- 
vastram  dadydt  |  annam  brdhmanebhyah  \  atha  scasty-ayanam  vdcayita.l 

Book  I.  ix.  directs  that  after  the  majxi&ge,  [pdni-gra- 
hana)  the  first  duty  of  the  bridegroom  is  to  attend  to 
the  kindh'nre  and  maintaining  of  the  household  fire.  The 
tenth  chapter  prescribes  the  performance  of  the  rite  called 
Sthdli-pdka,  which  appears  to  have  be^n  an  oblation  of 

1  The  text  in  the  original  is  Pra  tvd  muncdmi  Varunasya  pd^dd  yena 
tvdbadhndi  Savita  suievah.  It  is  from  the  well-known  Surya-sukta 
(X.  85),  describing  the  marriage  ceremony  of  Surya,  the  youthful 
daughter  of  the  Sun,  united  to  Soma,  the  Moon. 

2  Sakha  is  Vedic  for  Sakhi.     See  Scholiast  on  Panini  IV.  i.  62. 


192  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

rice,  &c.,  cooked  in  a  kind  of  caldron.  The  eleventh  gives 
the  rules  for  the  ritual  of  animal  sacrifice  (pasu-kalpa), 
and  the  twelfth  for  the  daitya-yajna,  which  seems  to 
have  been  a  ceremouial  performed  at  monuments,  accom- 
panied with  offerings,  perhaps  to  the  memory  of  deceased 
persons.  The  thirteenth,  fourteenth,  fifteenth,  sixteenth, 
and  seventeenth  chapters  prescribe  certain  domestic  cere- 
monies connected  with  the  birth  and  treatment  of  chil- 
dren, which  are  included  under  the  Sanskaras  enjoined  iu 
the  second  Book  of  Manu.     They  are  as  follows  : — 

Garbha-lambhana,  a  rite  performed  on  tlie  first  signs  of  conception, 
and  Punsavana,  one  that  takes  place  on  the  first  indication  of  the  con- 
ception of  a  living  male  (cL  Manu  II.  27). 

Simantonnayana,  '  arranging  the  parting  of  the  mother's  hair,' 
observed  in  the  fourth,  sixth,  or  eighth  month  of  pregnancy. 

Hiranya-madhvrsarpislidm  frdiainmn,  '  feeding  an  infant  with  honey 
and  clarified  butter  from  a  golden  spoon '  before  cutting  the  navel- 
string  at  birth  =  jdta-karman  (Manu  II.  29). 

Anna-praAana,  'feeding  an  infant  with  rice'  between  the  fifth  and 
eighth  month  (Manu  II.  34). 

Caula  ( =  6udd-karman),  '  tonsure '  or  shaving  the  hair  except  one 
lock  on  the  crown,  performed  in  the  third  year  (cf.  Manu  II.  35). 

In  Book  I.  xix.  we  have  precise  directions  in  regard 
to  investiture  {upanayana)  with  the  sacred  thread  [yajno- 
pavlta), — a  ceremony  of  great  importance,  supposed  to 
confer  on  the  recipients  (like  the  Christian  rite  of  bap- 
tism) a  second  spiritual  birtlj.  This  is  enjoined  for  a 
Brahman  in  his  eighth  year,  for  a  Kshatriya  in  his 
eleventh,  and  for  a  Vaisya  iu  his  twelfth,  though  the 
time  may  be  extended  in  each  case.  Tliese  are  therefore 
the  three  twice-born  (dvi-ja)  classes.  (Cf.  Manu  II.  36- 
38).  The  twenty-second  gives  rules  for  the  guidance  of 
the  young  Brahman  as  a  Biahma-carin  or  '  student  of  the 
Veda '  in  the  house  of  his  preceptor  after  investiture  by 
him.     It  begins  thus  : — 


SMARTA-STJTRA — GRIHYA   OR   BOMESTIC    RULES.        1 93 

'  Thou  art  now  a  Brahma-6arl,  take  care  to  wash  out  thy  mouth  daily 
with  water  [  =  upa-sprii,  d-aam  in  Manu  II.  51,  53),  do  thy  appointed 
work  Qtarma  kuru),  sleep  not  in  the  day-time  {diva  md  svdpslh,  cf. 
divdrsvapna,  Manu  VII.  47),  obey  thy  preceptor,  study  the  Veda 
( Vedam  adMshva) ;  every  morning  and  evening  go  out  to  beg  for  alms ; 
every  evening  and  morning  collect  fuel  for  the  fire.'  The  period  of 
studentship  is  to  last  for  twelve  years  or  until  the  student  has  acquired 
a  knowledge  of  the  Vedas  (grahandntam  ;  cf.  Manu  III.  i ;  II.  53-60). 

The  fourth  and  fifth  chapters  of  the  second  Book  pre- 
scribe the  Ashtaka  and  Anvashtakya  Sraddha  ceremonies. 

The  subject  of  Book  II.  vii.  viii.  is  Vastu-pariksha, 
'  examination  of  soil  and  situation '  before  fixing  on  a  site, 
or  laying  the  foundation  of  a  house,  thus  : — 

A  piece  of  ground  (should  be  chosen)  which  does  not  contain  saline 
soil,  and  the  title  to  which  is  not  likely  to  involve  legal  disputes,  and 
which  is  well  stocked  with  plants  and  trees,  and  where  there  is  plenty 
of  Ku^a  grass  and  Virana  (fragrant  grass).  All  thorny  shrubs  and 
plants  with  milky  sap  should  be  rooted  out.  A  hole  should  be  dug 
knee-deep  and  filled  again  with  the  excavated  earth.  If  the  earth 
when  restored  to  the  hole  appears  more  than  enough  to  fill  it,  the  soil 
is  excellent;  if  just  enough,  it  is  fairly  good;  if  too  little,  it  is  bad. 
[Adhike  pra^astam  same  vdrttam  nyune  garhitam,  VIII.  3. J  At  sunset 
the  hole  should  be  filled  with  water  and  allowed  to  stand  all  night. 
If  in  the  morning  it  is  still  full  of  water,  the  soil  is  excellent ;  if  it 
is  moist,  the  soil  is  fairly  good ;  if  dry,  bad.  White,  sweet-tasting, 
sandy  soil  is  good  for  Brahmans,  red  for  Kshatriyas,  yellow  for  Vaisyas. 

Book  II.  X.  prescribes  a  solemn  entrance  into  the  new 
house  {griha-prapadana),  after  having  stored  it  with 
seed-grain.  The  owner  is  then  to  cause  the  adjacent  land 
belonging  to  him  to  be  ploughed  up  and  sown  at  the  right 
season,  and,  standing  at  a  particular  spot  with  his  back  to 
the  wind,  he  is  to  ofi'er  oblations,  repeating  a  hymn  of  the 
Rig-veda  (IV.  57),  part  of  which  I  here  translate  freely  : — 

May  the  land's  Lord  be  present  as  our  friend  ! 
So  shall  we  prosper. '^     May  the  god  accord  us 

1  Lit.  '  with  the  Lord  of  land  as  our  friend,'  &c.  [Kshetrasya 
patina  vayam  hifeneva  jaydmasi.] 


194  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Cattle  and  horses,  nourishment  and  food  ! 
By  gifts  like  these  he  manifests  his  favour. 
God  of  the  land  !  bestow  on  us  sweet  water.'' 
To  us  may  every  herb  be  sweet  as  honey  ! 
To  us  may  sky  and  atmosphere  and  rain 
Be  kind  !  and  may  the  god  who  owns  the  soil 
Be  gracious  !  may  we  fearlessly  approach  him  ! 
For  us  may  oxen  plough  auspiciously  !  ^ 
•    May  peasants  labour  happily  !  may  ploughshares 
Draw  every  furrow  smoothly  !  may  the  ploughmen  ^ 
Follow  the  oxen  joyfully  !     May  he, 
The  rain-god,  water  happily  the  earth 
With  sweetest  showers  !  may  the  god  of  air 
And  sun  ^  bestow  on  us  prosperity  ! 

The  first  chapter  of  the  third  Book  prescribes  the  five 
solemn  ofi"eriiigs  or  devotioaal  acts  which  every  twice-born 
man  is  required  to  perform  every  day.  These  correspond 
to  the  five  Mahd-yajndh  of  Mann  III.  69-71,  sometimes 
called  the  five  Sacraments.  They  are  acts  of  homage 
directed — i.  to  the  gods ;  2.  to  all  beings ;  3.  to  departed 
ancestors  ;  4.  to  the  Eishis  or  authors  of  the  Veda ;  5.  to 
men  {i.  deva-yajna,  2.  bhiita-y°,  2,-J>itri-y°,  4.  hrahma-y°, 
5.  manushya-y°).  The  first  is  performed  by  an  oblation 
(homo)  to  the  gods  offered  on  the  domestic  fire  ;  the  second 
by  an  offering  {bali)  to  animals  and  all  creatures  ;  the  third 
by  pouring  out  water  to  the  spirits  of  the  departed ;  the 
fourth  by  repetition  of  the  Veda ;  the  fifth  by  gifts  to  men 
and  hospitality  to  guests  (cf.  Manu  III.  81,  &c.,  where, 
however,  they  are  not  given  in  the  same  order). 

The  second  and  third  chapters  treat  of  the  fourth  diurnal 
act  of  devotion  {hrahma-yajna),  and  direct  the  twice-born 
man  how  he  is  to  conduct  his  private  devotions,  and  how 
and  what  he  is  to  repeat  to  himself  (svddhydya-vidhi) : — 

1  Curiam  =  sukham. 

2  Klndsdh. 

..        ^  This  is  the  native  interpretation  of  S'una-sira.     See  Wilson. 


SMARTA-SUTRA — GRIHYA    OR   DOMESTIC    RULES.        1 95 

He  is  to  go  in  an  easterly  or  northerly  direction  outside  his  place  of 
abode,  wearing  his  sacrificial  cord  {yajnopavita)  over  his  shoulder ;  he 
is  first  to  bathe,  and,  having  sipped  water  (acamya),  to  sit  down  on 
Kusa  grass  placed  so  that  the  points  are  directed  towards  the  east 
(Manu  II.  7s),  and  to  repeat  the  sacred  syllable  om,  the  three 
Vyahritis  {hTiur,  hhuvah,  svar),  and  the  Savitri  (or  Gdyatrl,  see  p.  1 7  ; 
cf.  Manu  II.  75-77,  79).  Then  he  is  to  repeat,  for  as  long  a  time 
as  he  may  think  proper,  portions  of  some  of  the  Rii,  Yajus,  Saman, 
Atharvan-giras,  Brahmanas,  Kalpas,  Gathas,  Narasansis,  Itihasas,  and 
Puranas  ^  (see  note  2,  p.  245). 

With  regard  to  this  subject,  see  p.  245  of  this  volume. 

Book  III.  vii.  declares  'that  if  a  twice-born  man,  being 
in  good  health,  allows  himself  to  fall  asleep  while  the  sun 
is  setting,  he  is  to  pass  the  remaiuder  of  the  night  in  an 
upright  position,  without  uttering  a  word,  and  at  sunrise 
to  repeat  five  verses,  from  the  fourth  to  the  eighth  inclu- 
sive, of  Rig-veda  X.  ^j,  beginniEg,  'With  whatever  light, 
0  sun,  thou  dispellest  the  darkness.'  [Yena  suryajyotishd 
hddhase  tamo,  &c.]  Again,  if  the  sun  should  rise  while 
he  is  asleep,  he  is  to  continue  standing  and  silent  during 
the  day,  and  to  repeat  the  last  four  verses  of  the  same 
hymn  (c£  Manu  II.  219-222).  The  eighth,  ninth,  and 
tenth  chapters  prescribe  the  ceremonies  to  be  performed 
by  a  twice-born  man  whose  period  of  studentship  with 
his  preceptor  is  completed,  and  who  is  about  to  return 
(samdvartamana)  home,  and  become  a  householder : — 

He  is  to  procure  various  articles  for  himself  and  his  preceptor  (at  any 
rate  for  the  latter),  such  as  a  necklace,  two  ear-rings,  a  suit  of  clothes, 
a  parasol,  a  pair  of  shoes,  a  staff,  a  turban,  perfumes,  &c.  (cf.  Manu  II. 
245,  246).  Having  completed  his  studies  and  received  permission  from 
his  preceptor  to  depart,  and  having  inquired  what  fee  (artha)  he  is  to 
pay,  he  must  perform  an  ablution  (sndna).  He  is  then  to  make  certain 
vows  of  purity,  after  which  he  becomes  elevated  to  the  condition  of 


^  The  modern  Brahma-yajna  of  pious   Brahmans  is  based  on  this 
Siitra. 


196  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

a  Snataka  (cf.  Manu  III.  4)  or  Brahman  -who,  after  purification,  has 
passed  from  the  first  stage  of  life — that  of  a  student — to  the  second 
stage  or  that  of  a  householder  {griha-stha). 

The  fourth  Book  is  perhaps  the  most  interesting.  In 
the  first  four  chapters  it  prescribes  the  funeral  rites  to  be 
performed  at  the  burning  of  dead  bodies/  and  gives  some 
directions  as  to  the  subsequent  Sraddha  ceremonies  : — 

When  a  man  dies,  a  piece  of  ground  is  to  be  excavated  in  a  Smaidna 
or  '  burning-ground  '  south-east  or  south-west  of  his  abode.  His  rela- 
tions are  to  carry  the  fires  and  the  sacrificial  implements  {yajna-pdtrdni) 
to  the  excavated  place.  Those  of  them  who  are  most  advanced  in 
years  {■pravayasah)  are  to  walk  behind  in  single  file — the  men  separated 
from  the  women — bearing  the  corpse,  the  hair  and  nails  of  which  have 
all  been  cut  off  or  clipped,  and  leading  the  sacrificial  animal,  either  a 
cow  or  a  black  she-goat.  The  remaining  relations  and  connexions  are 
to  follow  with  their  garments  and  sacrificial  cords  hanging  down  {adho- 
nivitdh),  and  their  hair  dishevelled — the  elder  in  front,  the  younger 
behind.  When  they  reach  the  prepared  ground,  thei  performer  of  the 
ceremony  is  to  sprinkle  water  on  it  with  a  branch  of  the  S'ami  tree, 
repeating  Eig-veda  X.  14.  9  : — 

'Depart  (ye  evil  spirits),  slink  away  from  here;  the  Fathers  (his 
departed  ancestors)  have  made  for  him  this  place  of  rest,  distinguished 
(vyaktam)  by  days  (ahobhir),  waters  (adbhir),  and  bright  lights  (aktu- 
hhih):^ 

Then  he  is  to  deposit  the  fires  around  the  margin  of  the  excavated 
place — the  Ahavaniya  fire  to  the  south-east,  the  Garhapafcya  to  the 
north-west,  and  the  Dakshina  to  the  south-west  (see  note,  p.  189). 
Then  some  one  who  understands  what  is  required,  is  to  collect  a  heap 
of  fire-wood  and  pile  it  up  inside  the  sacrificial  ground  (antar-vedi). 
Next,  a  layer  of  Kusa  grass  is  to  be  spread  over  the  heap  along  with 

1  See  the  article  '  tjber  Todtenbestattung,'  by  Professor  Max  Miiller 
in  vol.  ix.  of  the  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenlandischen  Gesell- 
schaft,  in  which  a  portion  of  this  division  of  the  Asvalayana  Grihya 
Sutras  is  translated  into  German.  With  regard  to  the  importance 
of  the  following  extracts  as  bearing  upon  Sati  {Suttee),  see  p.  251  of 
this  volume. 

2  The  meaning  of  this  is  not  very  clear.  I  understand  it  as  denoting 
that  the  ground  is  open  and  well  exposed  to  daylight  and  well  sprinkled 
with  water  and  surrounded  with  the  fires. 


SMARTA-SUTRA — GRIHYA    OR   DOMESTIC   RULES.        1 97 

the  black  skin  of  the  goat  and  the  clipped  hair,  and  the  dead  body  is 
to  be  placed  upon  it  with  the  feet  towards  the  Garhapatya  fire  and  the 
head  towards  the  Ahavaniya.  North  of  the  body  his  wife  is  to  be 
made  to  lie  down  (on  the  funeral  pile),  along  with  the  bow  of  the 
dead  man  if  he  was  a  soldier  {Kshatriya).  Then  either  her  husband's 
brother  (devarah),  who  is  in  the  place  of  a  husband  to  her  ( patisthdnl- 
yaJi),  or  a  pupil,  or  an  old  servant  causes  her  to  rise  up,  repeating  the 
words  of  Eig-veda  X.  i8.  8  : — 

'  Rise  up,  0  woman  (udirshva  ndri),  come  back  to  the  world  of  life ; 
thou  art  lying  by  a  dead  man ;  come  back.  Thou  hast  sufficiently 
fulfilled  the  duty  of  a  wife  and  mother  {janitvam)  to  the  husband  who 
wooed  thee  (didhislios)  and  took  thee  by  the  hand.'  (See  note  2, 
p.  252.) 

Next,  the  brother-in-law  is  to  take  back  the  bow,  repeating  Rig-veda 
X.  18.  9:  — 

'  I  take  the  bow  out  of  the  hand  of  the  dead  man  for  our  own 
protection,  for  our  glory,  and  for  our  strength ;  remain  thou  there, 
we  will  remain  here  as  heroes,  (so  that)  in  all  battles  we  may  conquer 
our  foes.' 

Then  he  is  to  place  the  various  sacrificial  implements  and  portions  of 
the  sacrificial  animal  in  the  two  hands  and  on  different  parts  of  the 
body  of  the  corpse.  This  being  done,  he  is  to  order  the  three  fires  to 
be  kindled  (agnin  jprajvdlayati).  If  the  Ahavaniya  fire  reaches  the 
dead  man  first,  then  his  spirit  is  borne  to  heaven ;  if  the  Garhapatya, 
then  his  spirit  is  taken  to  the  middle  region  {antariksliOrloha) ;  if  the 
Dakshina,  then  it  remains  in  the  world  of  mortals  (manushya-lohx). 
When  all  three  reach  him  together,  this  is  the  most  auspicious  sign  of 
alL  While  the  body  is  burnling,  portions  of  hymns  of  the  Eig-veda 
(such  as  X.  14.  7,  8,  10,  11;  X.  16.  1-4^  X.  17.  3-6;  X.  18.  11; 
X.  154.  1-5)  are  to  be  repeated. 

The  following  are  examples  of  some  of  the  verses  : — 

Open  thy  arms,  0  earth,  receive  the  dead 

With  gentle  pressure  and  with  loving  welcome. 

Enshroud  him  tenderly,  e'en  as  a  mother 

Folds  her  soft  vestment  round  the  child  she  loves  (X.  18.  11). 

Soul  of  the  dead  !  depart ;  take  thou  the  path — 

The  ancient  path — by  which  our  ancestors 

Have  gone  before  thee ;  thou  shalt  look  upon 

The  two  kings,  mighty  Varuna  and  Yama, 

Delighting  in  oblations  ;  thou  shalt  meet 


198  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

The  Fathers  and  receive  the  recompense 

Of  all  thy  stored- up  offerings  above. 

Leave  thou  thy  sin  and  imperfection  here  ; 

Return  unto  thy  home  once  more ;  assume 

A  glorious  form.     By  an  auspicious  path 

Hasten  to  pass  the  four-eyed  brindled  dogs — 

The  two  road-guarding  sons  of  Sarama ; 

Advance  to  meet  the  Fathers  who,  with  hearts 

Kindly  disposed  towards  thee,  dwell  in  bliss 

With  Yama ;  and  do  thou,  O  mighty  god, 

Intrust  him  to  thy  guards  ^  to  bring  him  to  thee, 

And  grant  him  health  and  happiness  eternal  (X.  14.  7-11).^ 

When  a  dead  body  is  burnt  by  one  who  knows  and  can  repeat  these 
verses  properly,  then  it  is  certain  that  the  soul  (invested  with  a  kind  of 
subtile  body  ^}  rises  along  with  the  smoke  to  heaven  [sdhaiva  dhumena 
svargam  loJcam  etlti  ha  vijndyate). 

Then  the  performer  of  the  ceremony  is  to  repeat  the  verse  (Rig-veda 
X.  18.  3):- 

We  living  men,  survivors,  now  return 
And  leave  the  dead ;  may  our  oblations  please 
The  gods  and  bring  us  blessings  !  now  we  go 
To  dance  and  jest  and  hope  for  longer  life. 

After  this  they  are  to  move  to  a  spot  where  there  is  a  pool  of  still 
water,  dip  themselves  once,  cast  a  handful  of  water  into  the  air,  pro- 
nouncing the  name  of  the  dead  man  and  that  of  his  family  {e.g.,  0 
Devadatta  Kasyapa,  this  water  is  for  thee ') ;  then  coming  out  of  the 
water,  they  are  to  put  on  other  clothes  and  to  sit  down  till  the  stars 
appear  or  else  till  the  sun  is  quite  invisible,  when  they  are  to  proceed 
homewards,  the  younger  ones  walking  first,  the  elder  behind.     Before 


1  These  are  the  four-eyed  watch-dogs  mentioned  before. 

2  Part  of  this  has  been  freely  rendered  in  a  version  given  p.  19. 

3  The  eighth  Sutra  of  Chapter  IV.  states  that  a  hole  ought  to  be  dug 
north-eastward  of  the  Ahavaniya  fire  and  strewn  with  the  plants  Avaka 
and  S'lpala ;  and  the  commentator  adds  that  the  soul  of  the  dead  man, 
invested  with  its  vehicular  subtile  body  (called  dtivdhika  and  some- 
times adhishthdna  and  distinct  from  the  linga  or  sukshma,  being 
angushthamdtra,  'of  the  size  of  a  thumb'),  waits  in  this  hole  until 
the  gross  body  is  burnt,  and  then  emerging,  is  carried  with  the  smoke 
to  heaven. 


SMARTA-SUTRA — GRIHYA   OR   DOMESTIC    RULES.        1 99 

entering  the  house  they  are  (for  purification)  to  touch  a  stone,  fire, 
cow-dung,  grains  of  barley,  oil,  and  water.  During  one  night  they 
are  not  to  cook  any  food,  but  to  eat  only  what  is  already  prepared, 
and  for  three  nights  they  are  not  to  touch  anything  containing  salt. 

Book  IV.  V.  prescribes  the  gathering  together  the  bones 
and  ashes  of  the  deceased  {sancayana,  Manu  V.  59)  : — 

This  is  to  take  place  after  the  tenth  day  of  the  dark  half  of  the 
month,  on  an  odd  day  {i.e,  the  eleventh,  thirteenth,  fifteenth,  &c.),  and 
under  a  single  Nakshatra  (i.e.,  not  under  one  like  Ashadha,  which  is 
both  purvd  and  Puttara). 

The  bones  and  ashes  of  a  man  are  to  be  placed  in  an  undecorated 
funeral  vase  or  long  vessel  {alakshane  kumbhe),  and  those  of  a  woman 
in  a  female  vaSe  (of  a  fuller  shape,  supposed  to  resemble  the  female 
figure),  .A  hole  is  to  be  excavated  and  the  bones  thus  collected  in  a 
vessel  are  to  be  placed  in  it,  while  Rig-veda  X.  18.  10  is  repeated  : — 

'  Go  to  thy  mother  Earth,  the  Widely-extended  (uru-vyacasam),  the 
Broad,  the  Auspicious ;  may  she  be  to  thee  like  a  young  maiden,  soft 
as  wool  iunichmradd),  to  a  pious  person  !  may  she  protect  thee  from 
the  embrace  of  the  goddess  of  corruption  !  '     {Nirriter  upasfhdt.) 

Then  earth  is  to  be  scattered  over  the  excavation,  and  lEig-veda  X. 
18.  II,  12  are  to  be  repeated  (see  p.  197  for  verse  11).  Lastly,  a 
cover  or  lid  is  to  be  placed  over  the  vase  or  long  vessel  and  the  hole  is 
to  be  filled  up  with  earth,  so  that  the  vessel  is  quite  hidden  from  view, 
while  Eig-veda  X.  18.  13  is  repeated  : — 

'  I  raise  up  the  earth  around  thee  for  a  support,  placing  this  cover 
on  thee  without  causing  injury.  May  the  Fathers  guard  this  fune- 
real monument  for  thee !  May  Yama  establish  a  habitation  for  thee 
there ! ' 

This  being  accomplished,  the  relations  are  to  return  home,  without 
looking  about,  and  after  they  have  performed  an  ablution  they  are  to 
offer  the  first  S'raddha  to  the  deceased  person  separately  (dwddishta). 

Book  IV.  vii.  prescribes  four  kinds  of  Srdddha,  i.e., 
offerings  to  deceased  persons  and  Pitris  or  ancestors 
generally  :  i.  Pdrvana,  '  monthly,'  to  ancestors  for  three 
generations  on  the  days  of  conjunction  or  new  moon  (cf. 
Manu  III.  282  ;  those  to  ancestors  generally  being  called 
Nitya,  '  constant,'  '  daily,'  and  others  Ashtahd,  as  per- 
formed on  the  eighth  day  of  certain  months) ;  2.  Kdmya, 


200  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

'voluntary,'  performed  for  some  object  of  desire  (as 
the  obtaining  of  a  son)  ;  3.  Ahhyudayiha,  performed  as 
thank-offerings  on  occasions  of  family  rejoicing  (as  at  the 
Sanskaras)  or  for  increase  of  prosperity,-  &c.  (Vriddhi- 
purta) ;  4.  ETwddishta,  '  special,'  having  reference  to  one 
person  recently  deceased,  and  not  to  ancestors  generally. 
It  is  repeated  annually  on  the  anniversary  of  his  death. 
(Those  which  are  occasional  are  sometimes  called  Naimit- 
tika.)  To  these  funeral  ceremonies  Brahmans  are  to  be 
invited.  They  are  to  be  feasted,  and  gifts  presented  to 
them.  The  guests  are  to  be  made  to  sit  down  with  their 
faces  towards  the  North,  and  water  is  to  be  poured  into 
their  hands  with  Kusa  ■  grass  and  Sesamum  seed  itila,  cf. 
Manu  III.  223).  Cakes  of  rice  (pinda)  and  libations  of 
water  are  to  be  offered  with  the  auspicious  exclamation 
Svadha.  There  is  also  another  Sraddha  called  Daiva,  in 
lionour  of  the  Visve  Devah,  '  deities  collectively,'  or  of  a 
particular  troop  of  deities,  ten  in  number.  Hence  some 
distinguish  eight  kinds  of  Sraddha  (see  p.  247) ;  and  the 
Nirnaya-sindhu,  twelve. 

A  fuller  description  of  these  solemn  Sraddhas  is  given 
by  Manu  III.  123-286,  and  in  verse  202  the  meaning  of 
the  term  Sraddha  is  explained  as  follows  : — 

Mere  water  (vary  api)  offered  with  faith  (iraddhaya)  to  the  Pitris 
in  silver  or  plated  (rajatdrwitaih)  vessels  procures  imperishable  bliss 
(akshaydyopahalpate). 

I  close  my  account  of  the  Asvalayana  Grihya  Sutras 
by  remarking  that  the  rules  relating  to  funeral  ceremonies 
in  the  fourth  Book,  of  which  au  abstract  has  just  been 
given,  possess  great  interest  in  their  connexion  with  the 
eighteenth  hymn  of  the  tenth  Mandala  of  the  Rig-veda. 
Although  the  Sutras  direct  that  the  texts  of  this  hymn 
are  to  be  used,  yet  the  rite  must  have  undergone  con- 
siderable modifications  since  the  period  when  the  hymn 
was  composed. 


SMABTA-SUTRA-^GRIHYA   OR   DOMESTIC    RULES.       201 

It  may  be  gathered  from  a  study  of  the  text  of  the 
hymu,  that  at  the  early  period  when  the  Aryan  race  first 
settled  on  the  plains  of  Hindustan,  there  was  not  the  same 
prolonged  and  elaborate  observance  of  funeral  rites,  which 
in  later  times  was  converted  into  an  excuse  for  the  osten- 
tatious and  costly  feasting  of  priests  and  guests  (see  p.  249). 
But  there  was  no  less  solemnity  in  the  conduct  of  the  cere- 
monial, no  less  exhibition  of  grief  for  the  dead  in  the 
tender  treatment  of  his  remains,  and  no  less  affectionate 
respect  for  his  memory, — a  feeling  cherished  as  a  religious 
duty,  more  tenaciously  in  India  than  in  Europe. 

We  notice,  too,  even  at  that  early  epoch  an  evident 
belief  in  the  soul's  eterual  existence  and  the  permanence 
of  its  personality  hereafter,  which  notably  contrasts  with 
the  later  ideas  of  transmigration,  absorption  into  the 
divine  essence,  and  pantheistic  identification  with  the 
supreme  Soul  of  the  universe. 

We  learn  also  from  this  same  hymn  that  the  body  in 
ancient  times  was  not  burnt  but  buried ;  nor  can  we  dis- 
cover the  slightest  allusion  to  the  later  practice  of  Sati  or 
cremation  of  the  widow  with  her  husband. 

The  corpse  of  the  deceased  person  was  deposited  close 
to  a  grave  dug  ready  for  its  reception,  and  by  its  side  his 
widow,  if  he  happened  to  be  a  married  man,  seated  herself, 
while  his  children,  relatives,  and  friends  ranged  them- 
selves in  a  circle  round  her.  The  priest  stood  near  at 
an  altar,  on  which  the  sacred  fire  was  kindled,  and  having 
iuvoked  Death,  called  upon  him  to  withdraw  from  the 
path  of  the  living,  and  not  to  molest  the  young  and 
healthy  survivors,  who  were  assembled  to  perform  pious 
rites  for  the  dead,  without  giving  up  the  expectation  of 
a  long  life  themselves.  He  then  placed  a  stone  between 
the  dead  body  and  the  living  relations,  to  mark  oif  the 
boundary-line  of  Death's  domain,  and  ofi"ered  up  a  prayer 
that  none  of  those  present  might  be  removed  to  another 


202  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

world  before  attaining  to  old  age,  and  that  none  of  the 
younger  might  be  taken  before  the  elder.  Then  the 
widow's  married  female  friends  walked  up  to  the  altar 
and  offered  oblations  in  the  fire ;  after  which  the  widow 
herself  withdrew  from  the  inner  circle  assigned  to  the 
dead,  and  joined  the  survivors  outside  the  boundary-line, 
while  the  officiating  priest  took  the  bow  out  of  the  baud 
of  the  deceased,  in  order  to  show  that  the  manly  strength 
which  he  possessed  during  life,  did  not  perish  with  him, 
but  remained  with  his  family.  The  body  was  then  ten- 
derly laid  in  the  grave  with  repetition  of  the  words  of  the 
hymn  already  translated,  '  Open  thy  arms,  0  Earth,  receive 
the  dead,'  &c.  (see  p.  197).  The  ceremony  was  concluded 
by  the  careful  closing  of  the  tomb  with  a  stone  slab. 
Finally  a  mound  of  earth  was  raised  to  mark  and  conse- 
crate the  spot.-^ 

With  regard  to  the  Samayacarika  Sutras  little  remains 
to  add  to  what  has  already  been  stated.  Not  many 
collections  of  this  third  class  of  Sutras  (as  distinguished 
from  the  Srauta  and  Grihya)  have  been  preserved.  Were 
they  better  known  to  us,  we  should  probably  find  that 
they  furnished  materials  for  Manu's  compilation,  even 
more  than  the  Grihya  Sutras  appear  to  have  done.  It 
is  for  this  reason  that,  as  introductory  to  the  Dharma- 
sastras  or  Law-books,  they  are  sometimes  called  Dhar- 
masutras.  Since  'conventional,  every-day  practices' 
constitute  the  proper  subject  of  these  Sutras,  and  it  is 
clear  that  conventional  usages  may  often  come  under  the 
head  of  Grihya  or  *  domestic  rites,'  it  may  easily  be  under- 
stood that  the  Samayacarika  not  uufrequently  go  over  the 
same  ground  as  the  Grihya  Sutras..  For  instance,  we  find 
them  both  giving  rules  for  the  Sanskaras  &c.  (see  p.  239). 

1  A  fuller  account  of  the  whole  rite  will  be  found  in  Professor  Stenz- 
ler's  '  Rede  iiber  die  Sitte,'  which  I  have  consulted  throughout. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  20 3 

Perhaps  the  best  known  Samayacarika  Sutras  are  those  of 
Apastamba  belonging  to  the  Black  Yajur-veda  (see  note  i, 
p.  187).  An  account  of  these  will  be  found  in  Professor 
Max  Mliller's  'Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature'  (p.  100,  &c.), 
and  in  No.  732  of  Eajendralala  Mitra's  MSS.  They 
commence  as  follows  : — 

1.  Therefore  let  us  now  explain  the  Samayadarika  duties.  \_At'hdtah 
sdmaydcdrikdn  dharmdn  vydJchydsydmah.] 

2.  These  agreements  which  were  made  by  men  who  knew  the  law 
are  an  authority.     [Dharma-jna-samayah  pramdnam.] 

3.  And  the  Vedas  (are  an  authority).     [Vedd^-ca.] 

III.   The  Dharma-sdstras  or  Law-hooks — Manu. 

At  least  forty-seven  independent  Law-books^  are  enu- 
merated, and  of  these  at  least  twenty  are  still  extant  and 
are  mentioned  by  Yajnavalkya  (I.  3-5),  as  follows  : — 

I.  That  of  Manu.  2.  Yajnavalkya  (second  in  importance  to  Manu). 
3.  Atri.  4.  Vishnu.  5.  Harita.  6.  TJsanas.  7.  An-giras.  8.  Yama. 
9.  Apastamba.  10.  Samvarta.  11.  Katyayana.  12.  Yrihaspati.  13. 
Parasara.  14.  Yyasa.  15.  S'an-kha.  16.  Likhita.  17.  Daksha. 
18.  Gotama  or  Gautama.  19.  S'atatapa.  20.  Yasishtha.  There  is 
also  a  Law-book,  the  joint  production  of  S'an-kha  and  Likhita;  and 
others  ascribed  to  Narada,  Bhrigu,  &c.  (see  the  end  of  Chapter  X.) ; 
and  KuUiika,  the  commentator  on  Manu,  mentions  the  names  of  Baud- 
hayana,  Medhatithi,  Govinda-raja,  &c. 

Let  US  first  endeavour  to  gain  some  idea  of  the  char-- 
acter  of  the  most  celebrated  and  ancient  of  these  books 
commonly  called  '  the  Code  of  Manu.' 

This  well-known  collection  of  laAvs  and  precepts  is 
perhaps  the  oldest  and  most  sacred  Sanskrit  work  after 

1  Professor  Stenzler  enumerates  forty-six.  Dr.  Roer  forty-seven. 
The  names  of  the  authors  of  some  of  these  law-books  are  the  same  as 
those  of  some  of  the  Grihya  Sutras,  e.g.,  Apastamba,  Paraskara,  and 
Baudhayana.  The  same  men  may  have  been  authors  of  both  Sutras 
and  Dharma-sastras. 


204  INDIAN   WISBOM. 

the  Veda  and  its  Sutras.  Although  standing  in  a  manner 
at  the  head  of  Post-vedic  literature,  it  is  connected  with 
the  Veda  through  these  Sutras,  as  the  philosophical  Dar- 
sanas  are  through  the  Upanishads.  Even  if  not  the  oldest 
of  Post-vedic  writings  (see  note,  p.  207),  it  is  certainly 
the  most  interestiug,  both  as  presentiug  a  picture  of  the 
institutions,  usages,  manners^  and  intellectual  condition  of 
an  important  part  of  the  Hindu  race  at  a  remote  period, 
and  as  revealing  the  exaggerated  nature  of  the  rules  by 
which  the  Brahmans  sought  to  secure  their  own  ascen- 
dency, and  to  perpetuate  an  organized  caste-sys'tem  in 
subordination  to  themselves.  At  the  same  time  it  is  in 
other  respects  perhaps  one  of  the  most  remarkable  books 
that  the  literature  of  the  whole  world  can  offer,  and  some 
of  its  moral  precepts  are  worthy  of  Christianity  itself. 

Probably  the  compilation  we  now  possess  is  an  irregular 
compendium  of  rules  and  maxims  by  different  authors, 
which  existed  unwritten  for  a  long  period  of  time,  and 
were  handed  down  orally.  An  original  collection  is 
alluded  to  by  commentators  under  the  titles  Vriddha 
and  Vrihat,  which  is  said  to  have  contained  100,000 
couplets,  arranged  under  twenty-four  heads  in  one  thou- 
sand chapters  ;  whereas  the  existing  Code  contains  only 
2685  verses.  Possibly  abbreviated  versions  of  old  collec- 
tions were  made  at  successive  periods,  and  additional 
matter  inserted,  the  present  text  merely  representing 
the  latest  compilation. 

At  any  rate  we  must  guard  against  a  supposition  that 
the  expression  '  Code,'  often  applied  to  this  collection, 
is  intended  to  denote  a  systematic  arrangement  of  pre- 
cepts which  existed  as  actual  laws  in  force  throughout  one 
country.  It  is  probable  that  the  whole  of  India  was  never 
under  one  government.  Some  few  powerful  monarchs 
are  known  to  have  acquired  sovereignty  over  very  exten- 
sive territories,  and  were  then  called  Cakra-vartins,  but 


THE   LAW-BOOKS— MANU.  20  5 

we  must  beware  of  imagining  that  Manu's  Law-book 
is  a  record  of  national  ordinances  and  institutions  pre- 
valent over  the  whole  of  such  territories.  No  doubt 
ultimately  it  worked  its  way  to  acceptance  with  the 
entire  Hindu  community  ;  and  certainly  in  the  end  it  not 
only  secured  for  itself  a  high  place  in  popular  estimation 
and  a  degree  of  reverence  only  second  to  that  accorded 
to  the  Veda,  but  it  became,  moreover,  the  chief  authority 
as  a  basis  of  Hindii  jurisprudence.  Originally,  however, 
its  position  must  have  been  different.  It  merely  repre- 
sented certain  rules  and  precepts  (perhaps  by  different 
authors)  current  among  a  particular  tribe,  or  rather  school 
of  Brahmans  called  Manavas,  who  probably  lived  in  the 
North-western  region  betwe'ten  the  rivers  Sarasvati  and 
Drishadvati  (see  p.  208),  not  far  from  Delhi  and  the  scene 
of  the  great  social  conflict  described  in  the  Mahabharata.^ 
This  tribe  seems  to  have  belonged  to  the  Taittiriyakas, 
'adherents  of  the  Black  Yajur-veda;'  and  their  Mantras, 
Brahmana,  and  Srauta  Sutras  are  still  extant,^  but  their 
Grrihya  and  Samayacarika  Sutras  appear  to  have  perished. 
In  all  probability,  too,  many  of  the  rules,  as  we  have  tUem 
presented  to  us,,  were  simply  theoretical, — inserted  to 
complete  an  ideal  of  what  ought  to  constitute  a  perfect 
system  of  religious,  ceremonial,  moral,  political,  and  social 
duties.  Who  the  real  compiler  and  promulgator  of  the 
Institutes  was,  is  not  known.  He  was  probably  a  learned 
Brahman  of  the  Manava  school. 

We  must,   of  course,  make    a   due  allowance  for  the 

1  The  inference  deducible  from  II.  17,  18,  that  the  Manavas  lived 
in  the  region  of  the  earliest  Aryan  settlements,  must  have  weight  in 
determining  the  antiquity  of  the  Code  and  its  value  as  representing 
the  ancient  social  life  of  the  Hindus  before  their  advance  into  the 
Dekhan. 

^  A_  counterpart  of  a  MS.  of  a  commentary  on  part  of  the  Manava- 
kalpa-sutra  has  been  edited  by  the  late  Professor  Goldstiicker. 


206  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

mythical  element  in  the  'Code,  as,  for  instance,  when  a 
divine  sage  named.  Manu^  (or  Svayambhuva — 'sprung 
from  the  great  self-existent  Being')  is  made  to  say  (I.  58- 
60)  as  follows  : — 

The  god  (Brahma)  having  framed  this  system  of  laws  himself, 
taught  it  fully  to  me  in  the  beginning.  I  then  taught  it  to  Maridi 
and  the  nine  other  sages,  my  offspring  (of  whom  Bhrigu  is  one,  cf.  I. 
3S).  Of  these  (my  sons)  Bhrigu  is  deputed  by  me  to  declare  the  Code 
to  you  (Rishis)  from  beginning  to  end,  for  he  has  learned  from  me  to 
recite  the  whole  of  it.  Then  the  great  sage,  Bhrigu,  having  been  thus 
appointed  by  Manu  to  promulgate  his  laws,  addressed  all  the  Eishis 
with  a  pleased  mind,  saying,  '  Listen  ! ' 

Manu,  therefore,  is  supposed  to  speak  in  his  own  person 
as  far  as  I.  60.  After  that,  Bhrigu  is  the  speaker,  and 
the  closing  verse  of  the  whole  Code  (XII.  126)  describes 
it  as  Manavam  Sdstram  Bhrigu-prolctam,  '  enunciated  by 
Bhrigu  ;  while  in  XL   243  Prajapati  or  Brahma  himself 

1  This  name  of  the  supposed  divine  progenitor  of  all  beings  is  derived 
from  the  root  man,  which  means  'to  think,'  or  'reason'  (and  especially 
according  to  the  Hindu  theory,  '  to  think  upon  and  understand  the 
Veda,'  whence  the  desiderative  form  Mimdnid  from  the  same  root, 
signifying  '  investigation  of  the  meaning  of  the  Veda ').  Bhrigu  states 
(I.  61)  that  Manu  sprang  from  Svayambhii,  and  that  six  other  Manus 
descended  from  him ;  whereas  Manu  himself  (I.  33-36)  declares  that 
he  was  created  by  Viraj,  the  male  power  produced  by  Brahma,  and 
that  being  so  created  he  produced  the  ten  Maharshis  or  Prajapatis, 
who  again  produced  seven  Manus.  The  name,  however,  is  generic. 
In  every  Kalpa  or  interval  from  creation  to  creation  there  exist  four- 
teen successive  Manus,  whence  each  whole  period  is  called  a  Manv- 
antara,  described  as  innumerable  in  I.  80.  In  the  present  creation 
there  have  been  as  yet  seven  Manus :  i.  Manu  Svdyambhuva,  the 
supposed  author  of  the  Code,  who  produced  the  ten  Prajapatis  or 
'patriarchs'  for  peopling  the  universe,-  2.  Svdrocisha ,  3.  Auttami ; 
4.  Tdmasa;  5.  Raivata ;  6.  ddJcshusha ;  7.  Vaivasvata,  son  of  the 
Sun,  the  Manu  of  the  present  period,  regarded  as  a  kind  of  Indian 
Adam  or  Noah  (see  note,  p.  30).  According  to  some,  this  last  Manu 
was  the  author  of  the  Code,  and  therefore,  as  progenitor  of  the  Solar 
line  of  kings,  a  Kshatriya. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS— MANU.  207 

is  declared  to  have  created  it  by  the  power  of  austerity 
{tapasd). 

We  need  hardly,  however,  explain  that  these  are  merely 
ideal  personages,  introduced  dramatically  like  Krishna  in 
the  Bhagavad-gita ;  or  rather  perhaps  are  later  additions, 
designed  to  give  an  air  of  antiquity  and  divine  authority 
to  the  teaching  of  the  Code. 

The  work  in  its  present  form  can  scarcely,  I  think,  be 
assigned  to  a  date  earlier  or  later  than  the  fifth  century 
B.c/  Strictly  speaking,  or  at  least  according  to  European 
notions,  it  is,  as  I  have  already  hinted,  no  orderly  codifi- 
cation of  national  statutes  and  customs,  but  rather  an 
unsystematic  compilation  from  previous  sources,^  which, 

1  Sir  W.  Jones  held  that  Manu's  book  was  drawn  up  in  about  the 
year  1280  B.C.  Mr.  Blphinstone  placed  it  goo  years  B.C.  Possibly 
some  parts  of  it  may  represent  laws  and  precepts  which  were  current 
among  the  Manavas  at  the  latter  date,  but  no  one  would  now  assign  so 
early  a  date  to  the  actual  compilation  of  the  Code.  Nor  can  it,  I  think, 
reasonably  be  placed  later  than  the  fifth  century  B.C.  The  gods  men- 
tioned are  chiefly  Vedic,  and  the  fourfold  caste  system  is  that  of  the 
Purusha-sukta  (see  p.  21).  There  is  no  direct  allusion  to  Buddhism, 
though  many  of  Manu's  precepts  are  decidedly  Buddhistic,  having 
frequent  parallels  in  the  Dhamma-pada,  which  indicate  that  Buddhistic 
ideas  were  gaining  ground  in  the  locality  represented  by  the  Code. 
Nor  is  there  any  allusion  to  SatI,  nor  to  the  worship  of  Vishnu  and 
S'iva,  which,  from  a  statement  o£  Megasthenes,  may  be  inferred  to  have 
prevailed  in  India  soon  after  Alexander's  invasion.  Nor  is  there  any 
mention  of  the  stories  of  the  Mahabharata  and  Ramayana.  At  the 
same  time  the  former  Epic  often  contains  verses  identical  with  those 
of  Manu.  These  are  probably  either  taken  from  Manu  or  derived  from 
a  common  source.  Possibly,  however,  portions  of  the  Mahabharata 
may  be  older  than  Manu.  Certainly  in  III.  232  occur  the  words 
Dharma-idstra,  Alcliydna,  Itihdsa,  Purdna,  and  Khila,  as  titles  of  sacred 
works,  and  Kulliika  explains  Itihdsa  by  Mahd-bhdrata,  but  these  words 
may  refer  to  the  older  works,  which  were  the  sources  of  the  present 
compilations. 

^  An  evidence  in  favour  of  the  supposition  that  more  than  one  person 
may  have  had  a  hand  in  the  Code  is  deducible  from  the  emphasis  laid 


208  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

by  blending  civil  and  criminal  law  with  religious,  moral, 
and  ceremonial  precepts,  philosophical  doctrines,  and  meta- 
physical theories,  confounds  the  ordinances  of  government 
with  the  obligations  of  religion,  domestic  life,  and  private 
morals.     It  is  in  twelve  Chapters  or  Books. 

In  verse  6  of  Book  II.  we  have  a  statement  as  to  the 
'root'  or  basis  of  all  law  {dharma-mulam).  This  is 
declared  to  be  (i.)  the  whole  Veda  (Vedo'khilah),  (2.)  the 
traditional  law  (Smriti),  (3.)  morality  (Sllam)  of  those 
who  know  the  Veda,  and  (4.)  the  practices  and  customs 
(acdrah),  established  from  time  immemorial,  of  good  inen. 
In  matters  indifferent  a  man  is  free  to  follow  his  own 
inclination  {atma-tushti). 

Again,  in  verses  107,  108  of  Book  I.  it  is  said  : — 

In  tliis  (Code)  appears  the  whole  system  of  law,  with  definitions  of 
good  and  bad  actions,  and  the  traditional  practices  iacdrd)  of  the  four 
classes,  which  usages  are  held  to  be  eternal  (idivatah,  since  they  reach 
back  to  a  period  beyond  the  memory  of  man).  Traditional  practice 
(dcdra)  is  equivalent  to  supreme  law  (paramo  dharmah),  since  it  is  so 
pronounced  by  the  Veda  and  by  Smriti  (Smdrta). 

This  Law-book,  therefore,,  is  a  metrical  compendium  of 
rules  of  Smriti,  Sila,  and  Acara,  most  of  which  had  been 
previously  collected  and  propounded  under  the  name  of 
Grihya  and  Samayacarika  Sutras.  At  the  end  of  Book  I. 
a  summary  of  subjects  is  given,  but  we  may  more  conve- 
niently examine  the  contents  of  the  twelve  books  under  six 
principal  heads,  viz.,  i.  Veda,  'sacred  knowledge'  and  reli- 
gion ;  2.  Vedanta  or  Atma-Vidya,  as  terms  for  philosophy 
in  general ;  3.  Acara  ;  4.  Vyavahara  ;  5.  Prayas-citta  ;  6. 
Karma-phala. 

It  will  be  found  that  after  eliminating  the  purely  reli- 

upon  certain  maxims  which  are  especially  ascribed  to  Manu  himself, 
such,  for  example,  as  V.  41,  131 ;  VI.  54;  VIII.  124,  168,  279,  339; 
IX.  158,  182,  239 ;  X.  63,  78,  all  of  which  introduce  some  phrase  like 
Manur  abravit. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  209 

gious  and  philosophical  precepts  the  greater  number  of 
rules  propounded  fall  under  the  third  head  of  Acdra, 
'established  practices,'  which  are  described  (II.  17,  18)  as 
Sad-d6ara,  '  approved  practices,'  sanctioned  by  the  Veda 
and  Smriti,  if  they  are  those  which  prevailed  between  the 
two  sacred  rivers,  Sarasvati  and  Drishadvati,  in  the  region 
called  Brahmavarta.  The  word  Acara  is,  in  truth,  a  very 
wide  term,  iucluding  under  it  all  the  observances  of  caste, 
regarded  as  constituting  the  highest  law  and  highest 
religion — such  observances,  for  instance,  as  the  division 
of  a  Brahman's  life  into  four  periods,  the  conduct  of  a 
student  in  the  house  of  his  preceptor,  investiture  with  the 
sacred  cord,  the  five  diurnal  devotional  acts,  the  domestic 
ceremonies  of  marriage,  funeral  rites,  the  various  modes 
of  gaining  subsistence  {yritti),  the  rules  of  diet,,  the  laws 
concerning  women,  and,  in  short,  all  the  observances  of 
private  morality  and  social  economy.-' 

The  fourth  head,  Vyavahdra,  'practices  of  law  •and  kingly 
government,'  embraces  the  procedure  of  legal  tribunals  and 
all  the  rules  of  judicature  and  civil  and  criminal  law. 

The  fifth  head  of  Prdyas-citta,  '  penitential  exercises,'' 
comprehends  all  the  rules  of  penance  and  expiation. 

The  sixth  head,  Karma-phala,  '  recompenses  or  conse- 
quences of  acts,'  is  concerned  not  so  much  with  rules  of 
conduct  as  with  the  doctrine  of  transmigration  ;  the  un- 
avoidable effect  of  acts  of  all  kinds  being  to  entail  repeated 
births  through  numberless  existences  until  the  attainment 
of  final  beatitude. 

All  these  rules  apply  especially  to  the  highest  class, 
viz.,  Brahmans,  whose  ascendency  in  the  social  scale  is  in 
fact  the  first  Acara,  which  must  be  accepted  as  paramo 
dharmah,  '  the  highest  law  and  highest  religion.' 

1  In  Book  V.  4  there  is  a  curious  passage  which  attributes  Death's 
power  over  Brahmans  to  four  causes,  viz.,  i.  omitting  to  repeat  the 
Veda,  2.  neglect  of  Adara,  3.  idleness,  4.  sins  of  diet. 

o 


2IO  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

It  is  only  natural  that,  since  the  precepts  included 
under  these  six  heads  were  framed  by  Brahmans,  they 
should  have  been  framed  with  especial  reference  to  the 
life  of  Brahmans,  the  regulations  for  which  engross  six 
Books,  and  are  besides  introduced  everywhere  throughout 
the  other  six.  But  as  the  Brahman  could  not  be  sup- 
ported in  his  priority  of  rank  without  the  strong  arm 
of  the  Kshatriya  or  military  class,  a  large  portion  of  the 
work  is  devoted  to  the  definition  of  the  Kshatriya's  duties 
and  an  exaggerated  delineation  of  the  kingly  character 
and  office,  while  the  Vaisyas  and  Siidras,  though  essential 
to  Manu's  Caturvarnya  or  fourfold  social  system,^  and  the 
mixed  classes  are  little  noticed.     (See  p.  226,  &c.) 

1  '  Caste '  is  quite  a  modern  word,  and  is  supposed  to  be  a  corruption 
of  the  Portuguese  casta,  '  a  race.'  Manu's  word  for  the  four  classes  is 
varna,  '  colour,'  which  suggests  some  original  distinction  of  colour  as 
marking  the  dominant  races.  The  later  term  for  caste  is  jdti,  'birth,' 
corrupted  into  jdt.  Of  Manu's  four  castes  the  Brahmans  alone  remain, 
though  the  Rajputs  claim  to  be  descendants  of  the  ancient  Kshatriyas. 
The  mixed  castes  of  the  present  day  are  almost  innumerable,  each  sepa- 
rate trade  forming  a  separate  one.  In  Bengal  there  are  the  Eajaks, 
'  washermen,'  the  Tantis,  'weavers,'  the  Kansaris, '  braziers,'  the  Jaliyas, 
'fishermen,'  the  Suris,  'spirit  sellers;'  besides  low  and  servile  castes, 
such  as  the  Bagdis,  Bediyas,  Doms,  Hadis.  Moreover,  we  find  castes 
within  castes,  so  that  even  the  Brahmans  are  broken  up  and  divided 
into  numerous  races,  which  again  are  subdivided  into  numerous 
tribes,  families,  or  sub-castes.  There  are  the  Kanyakubja  Brahmans, 
the  Sarasvata,  the  Gauda  or  Gaur  (Gor),  the  Maithila,  the  Utkala,  the 
Dravida,  the  Karnata,  the  Maharashtra,  the  Gurjara,  &c.,  all  of  which 
races  are  subdivided  into  a  greater  or  less  number  of  tribes  and  families, 
forming,  as  it  were,  sub-castes,  which  do  not  intermarry.  It  is  said 
that  in  Bengal  religion  was  once  at  so  low  an  ebb  that  a  king,  named 
Adisura  (Adlhard),  sent  to  the  Eaja  of  Kanyakubja  or  Kanouj  for 
some  high-caste  Brahmans  to  revive  it.  These  were  accordingly  sent, 
and,  having  ^ttled  in  Bengal,  became  divided  into  one  hundred  and 
fifty-six  tribes,  of  which  one  hundred  were  called  Varendra  and  fifty- 
six  Eadha  or  Rarh,  as  belonging  to  the  district  of  Radha  in  the  West 
of  Bengal.     Of  the  former  eight,  and  of  the  latter  six,  are  regarded 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANCT.  211 

Hence,  after  an  account  of  the  creation  of  the  world  in 
the  first  Book,  the  four  stages  of  a  Brahman's  life  are  the 
first  and  only  subjects  treated  of  in  regular  order  in  the 
second,  third,  fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  Books ;  the  sixth 
being  devoted  to  the  duties  of  the  last  two  stages  of 
anchovite  (vdna-prastha)  and  religious  mendicant  (bhikshu). 
The  fifth  Book  contains,  moreover,  rules  and  regulations 
about  food,  the  killing  of  animals,  purification  after  defile- 
ment, the  duties  of  wives  and  the  position  of  women 
generally.  The  seventh  and  eighth  Books  propound  the 
rules  of  government  and  judicature,  principally,  of  course, 
for  the  guidance  of  the  second  great  class  or  Kshatriyas, 
from  which  the  king  was  chosen.  The  ninth  Book  con- 
tains further  precepts  on  the  subject  of  women,  husband 
and  wife,  their  offspring,  and  the  law  of  inheritance  and 

as  Kulina  or  'noble.'  KuUiika,  the  commentator  on  Manu,  was  a 
Varendra  Brahman.-  The  six  Kulina  Earh  tribes  are  called  Banerjea, 
(Bandyopadhyaya),  Mukhurjea  (Mukhopadhyaya),  Oaturjea  (Cattopa- 
dhyaya),  Ganguli,  Goshala,  Kanjalala.  The  caste  which  in  Bengal  now 
comes  next  in  rank  to  the  Brahman  is  the  Vaidya  or  Baidya,  '  medical ' 
( =  Ambashtha,  Manu  X.  8) ;  and  the  Kanouj  Brahmans,  when  they 
settled  in  Bengal,  brought  with  them  a  number  of  Kayasthas  or 
'  writers,'  from  whom  sprang  the  present  numerous  Kayastha  or 
'  writer-caste,',  subdivided  into  various  tribes,  such  as  Gos  (Ghosha), 
Bose  (Vasu),  Mitra,  De,  Datta,  Palita,  Dasa,  Sena,  &c.  After  them 
come  the  Nava  S'ak  or  '  nine  divisions,'  viz.,  Gopa,  Mali  Taili,  Tantri, 
Modaka,  Varaji  ('  betel-grower '),  Kulala,  Karmakara,  Napita.  See 
Professor  Oowell's  Colebrooke's  Essays,  II.  169.  The  po^er^of  caste 
and  the  effect  of  contact  with  .Europeans  in.  weakening  it,  are  illus- 
trated by  the  following  extract  from  Dr.  Hunter's  valuable  work  on 
Orissa:  'Elderly  Uriyas  have  more  than  once  deplored  to  me  the 
hopeless  degeneracy  of  their  grown-up  sons,  many  of  whom  have 
actually  no  objection  to  wearing  English  shoes.  In  1870  a  Uriya 
Brahman  held  the  post  of  sub-inspector  of  police  in  Puri  itself,  within 
the  shadow  of  Jagan-nath,  although  a  leather  belt  formed  part  of  his 
uniform.  Five  years  ago  a  Brahmjin  who  accidentally  touched  leather 
would  have  had  to  choose  between  public  expiation  or  degradation  and 
expulsion  from  caste.'     Vol.  ii.  p.  147. 


212  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

division  of  property.  At  the  end  (221,  &c.)  there  are 
additional  rules  of  government  for  kings  and  a  few  pre- 
cepts which  have  direct  reference  to  the  two  remaining 
principal  castes — the  Vaisyas  and  Sudras — the  former 
comprising  agriculturists  and  merchants ;  the  latter,  slaves 
and  servants.  The  tenth  Book  treats  of  the  mixed  classes, 
arising  out  of  intermarriage  between  the  four  original 
principal  castes.  It  also  describes  the  employments  to 
which  the  several  classes  are  restricted,  and  states  the 
occupations  permitted  to  Biahmans,  Kshatriyas,  Vaisyas, 
and  Sudras  in  times  of  great  exigency  and  distress.  There 
are  some  verses  at  the  end  (122-129)  which  are  interest- 
ing as  treating  directly  of  the  duties  and  position  of 
Sudras.  The  eleventh  Book  gives  rules  for  expiation  and 
penance  (prdyas-citta),  both  for  sins  committed  in  this 
life — especially  sins  against  caste — and  for  the  effects  of 
offences  perpetrated  in  previous  bodies,  as  shown  in  con- 
genital diseases,  &c.  (XI.  48,  49).  The  twelfth  continues 
the  subject  of  the  recompenses  or  consequences  of  acts 
(karma-phala),  good  or  bad,  as  leading  to  reward  in 
heaven  or  punishment  in  various  hells  (XII.  75,  76),  and 
to  triple  degrees  of  transmigration  (see  p.  275).  It  closes 
with  directions  as  to  the  best  means  of  obtaining  final 
beatitude  and  absorption  into  the  universal  Essence. 

From  this  outline  of  the  contents  of  the  so-called  Code 
of  Manu,  we  may  perceive  that  the  most  diversified  topics 
are  introduced,  some  of  which  are  quite  out  of  the  pro- 
vince of  a  mere  code  of  laws  or  even  of  a  collection  pf 
social  and  moral  precepts.  In  the  next  chapter  I  .propose 
examining  the  contents  more  in  detail. 


CHAPTER  X. 

The  Dharma-sdstras  or  Laiv-hooks — Manu  continued. 

The  Code  of  the  Manavas,  whicli  we  have  assigned  in  its 
present  form  to  about  the  fifth  century  B.o.  (see  p.  207), 
and  which  for  convenience  we  may  call  '  Manu's  Law- 
book,' is  a  metrical  version  of  the  traditions  (smriti)  of 
the  Manavas,  probably  before  embodied  in  their  Grihya 
and  Samayacarika  Siitras  (p.  205),  the  metre  being  Anush- 
tubh  or  that  of  the  common  Sloka  ^  (p.  155).  My  aim  in 
the  present  chapter  will  be  .to  analyze  and  arrange  in  a 
connected  manner  the  contents  of  the  Code/  offering  prose 
translations  of  selected  passages  and  pointing  out  in  a 
general  way  the  characteristic  features  of  (i)  its  sacred 
knowledge  and  religion,  (2)  its  philosophy,  (3)  its  Acdra 
or  '  social  rules  and  caste  organization,'  (4)  its  Vyavahdra 
or  '  criminal  and  civil  laws  and  rules  of  government,'  (5) 
its  system  of  Prdyas-citta  or  '  penance,'  (6)  its  system  of 
Karma-phala  or  '  future  recompenses  of  acts  done  in  this 
life.'     In  the  next  chapter  I  propose  to  give  specimens  of 

1  The  use  of  the  common  Epic  S'loka  throughout  the  whole  work  is 
one  reason  for  regarding  it  as  Post-vedic,  but  we  must  not  forget  that 
the  Anushtubh  metre  is  found  even  in  the  Veda  (see  X.  85  ;  X.  go,  &c.) 

2  I  have  used  the  Calcutta  edition,  which  has  the  excellent  commen- 
tary of  Kulluka-bhatta.  I  have  always  consulted  Sir  W.  Jones'  trans- 
lation, and  I  owe  much  to  Dr.  Johaentgen's  tract,  Vber  das  Gesetzhuah 
des  Manu.  When  Kulliika  lived  is,inot  known,  but  he  describes  him- 
self in  his  modest  preface  (written  in  the  S'ardula-vikridita  metre)  as  a 
Brahman,  the  son  of  Bhatta-divakara,  of  the  Varendra  tribe  of  Gauda 
(Gaur)  or  Bengal,  and  as  having  fixed  his  abode  at  Benares.  I  did  not 
read  Mr.  Talboys  Wheeler's  analysis  till  my  own  was  completed. 


2  14  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

the  most  striking  passages,  under  the  last  four  heads,  in 
a  metrical  English  version. 

I.  First,  then,  as  to  its  religious  teaching.  We  may 
notice  that  this  generally  agrees  with  the  later  Vedic 
period,  especially  that  represented  by  the  Purusha-sukta 
and  some  of  the  Brahmanas. 

'  Divinely  revealed  knowledge '  in  general  is  called  Veda 
(IV.  125,  &c.);  sometimes  Trayl  vidya  (IV.  125);  some- 
times Brahman  (nom.  neut.  brahma,  I.  23  ;  11.  8r  ;  VI. 
83,  in  which  last  passage  this  title  is  also  applied  to  the 
Vedanta  or  Upanishads) ;  sometimes  Sruti  (as  distin- 
guished from  Smriti,  II.  10) ;  sometimes  Chandansi 
(when  the  metrical  Mantras  are  especially  intended,  IV. 
95-97  ;  III.  188) ;  once  Arsha  (neut.,  XII.  106),  and  even 
Vac,  '  word,'  described  as  a  Brahman's  weapon  (XL  33). 

The  three  Vedas  are  mentioned  by  name  in  I.  23,  IV. 
123,  124;  XL  264,  and  their  Samhita  in  XL  JJ,  200,  258, 
262.  In  I.  23  we  read  that  Brahma  milked  out  the  triple 
Veda  [trayam  hrahma),  Rik,  Yajus,  and  Saman  from  Fire, 
Air,  and  the  Sun,  for  the  complete  performance  of  sacri- 
fice ;  and  in  II.  yy  he  is  said  to  have  milked  out  the 
sacred  text  called  Savitri  (  =  Gayatri,  p.  17)  from  the 
three  Vedas.^  The  Brahmana  portion  of  the  Veda  does 
not  seem  to  be  directly  mentioned,  except  under  the  name 
of  Brahma,  as  distinguished  from  the  Mantra  portion, 
called  (5handas  (IV.  100),  The  eternity  and  infallible 
authority  of  the  Veda  and  the  duty  and  expiatory  efficacy 


1  See  p.  5.  In  XI.  265  the  three  Vedas  are  said  to  be  included 
in  the  triliteral  Om.  In  IV.  125,  Om,  the  Vyahritis  (viz.,  Bhuh, 
Bhuvah,  Svar),  and  the  Savitri  text  are  described  as  extracted  from 
the  three  Vedas.  In  III.  185,  a  Brahman  who  understands  the  appli- 
cation of  some  portion  of  the  Yajur-veda  is  called  Tri-Jidciketa,  and 
one  skilled  in  some  part  of  the  Kig-veda  a  Tri-suparna,  though  it  is 
clear  from  Kulluka's  remarks  that  the  exact  meaning  of  these  words 
was  not  known  in  his  time. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  21  5 

of  a  complete  knowledge  of  all  three  Vedas  (XL  262)  are 
insisted  on  in  the  strongest  language.  In  illustration,  I 
here  give  a  version  of  a  passage  in  Book  XII.  94,  &c.  : — • 

The  Veda  is  of  patriarchs  and  men, 

And  e'en  of  gods,  a  very  eye  eternal, 

Giving  unerring  light ;  it  is  beyond 

All  finite  faculties,  nor  can  be  proved 

By  force  of  human  argument — this  is 

A  positive  conclusion.     Codes  of  laws 

Depending  on  the  memory  of  men — 

Not  grounded  on  the  Veda — heresies 

And  false  opinions,  all  are  held  to  be 

Barren  and  worthless  and  involved  in  darkness. 

Whatever  doctrine  rests  not  on  the  Veda 

Must  pass  away  as  recent,  false,  and  fruitless. 

The  triple  world  and  quadruple  distinction 

Of  classes  and  of  Asramas,i  with  all 

That  has  been,  is,  and  ever  will  be,  all 

Are  through  the  Veda  settled  and  established. 

By  this  eternal  Veda  are  sustained 

All  creatures ;  hence  we  hold  it  as  supreme — 

Chief  instrument  of  happiness  to  man. 

Command  of  armies,  regal  dignity, 

Conduct  of  justice^ and  the  world's  dominion 

He  merits  who  completely  knows  the  Veda. 

As  with  augmented  energy  the  fire 

Consumes  e'en  humid  trees,  so  he  who  knows 

This  book  divine  burns  out  the  taint  of  sin 

Inherent  in  his  soul  through  former  works. 

For  he  who  apprehends  the  Veda's  truth, 

Whatever  be  his  Order,  is  prepared 

For  blending  with  the  great  primeval  Spirit, 

E'en  while  abiding  in  this  lower'world. 

The  inferior  relationship  of  the  Sama-veda  to  the  two 
others  is  remarkable.  The  Rig-veda  is  said  to  be  most 
concerned  with  the  gods,  the  Yajur-veda  with  the  religious 

''■  That  is,  the  four  orders  or  stages  of  life  (of  student,  householder, 
anchorite,  and  mendicant)  into  which  a  Brahman's  life  is  divided. 


2l6  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

rites  of  men,  and  the  Sama-veda  with  those  of  the  Pitris 
(IV.  124),  Hence  the  sound  of  the  latter  is  described  as 
impure  (a-suci,  see  p.  6). 

In  unison  with  this,  an  order  of  precedence  is  prescribed 
in  III.  145.  The  preference  at  a  Sraddha  is  directed  to  be 
given  to  a  priest  called  Bahv-rica  (elsewhere  Hotri),  who 
has  made  the  Eig-veda  his  special  study ;  then  to  one  who 
has  studied  all  the  branches  (i§akhanta-ga)  and  especially 
the  Yajur-veda,  and  who  is  called  Adhvaryu ;  and  lastly  to 
a  Sama-veda  priest,  who  is  styled  (3hando-ga  ( =  Udgatri). 

It  is  clear  that  when  the  Code  was  compiled  the  Atharva- 
veda  had  not  yet  been  generally  accepted  as  a  fourth  Veda, 
though  it  must  have  existed,  as  there  is  express  allusion 
(XL  33)  to  the  revelation^  made  to  Atharvan  and  Angiras. 

I  annex  three  other  remarkable  examples  of  the  estima- 
tion in  which  the  Veda  was  held  : — 

A  Brahman  by  retaining  the  Eig-veda  in  his  memory  incurs  no  guilt, 
though  he  should  destroy  the  three  worlds  (XI.  261). 

This  Veda  is  the  refuge  {Parana)  of  those  who  do  not  understand  it 
{ajndndm)  as  well  as  those  who  do  {vijdnatdm),  of  those  who  seek  heaven 
and  of  those  who  seek  immortality  (anantyain,  VI.  84). 

When  there  is  (apparent)  contradiction  of  two  precepts  in  the  Veda 
{iruti-dvaidham)  both  are  declared  to  be  law ;  both  have  been  justly  pro- 
mulgated {samyag-uktau)  by  ancient  sages  as  valid  law.  Thus,  there  is 
a  Vedic  precept  (enjoining  the  sacrifice  to  be  performed)  when  the  sun 
has  risen,  and  before  it  has  risen,  and  when  neither  sun  nor  stars  are 
visible  (samayddhyusMte).  "Wherefore  the  oblation  to  fire  {yaj-iiah  =  agni- 
Jwtra-homah)  may  be  made  at  all  times  (II.  14,  15). 

The  doctrine  of  the  Upanishads  is  directly  mentioned  in 
VI.  29  and  alluded  to  elsewhere,  thus  : — 

He  should  study  the  XJpanishad  portion  of  the  Veda  (aupanishadih 
irufih)  for  the  sake  of  attaining  union  with  the  universal  Spirit. 

Let  the  whole  Veda  be  studied  (or  repeated)  by  a  twice-born  maij 

1  Described  by  KuMka  as  consisting  of  charms  and  incantations. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  2  1/ 

along  with  the  Upanishads.     [  Vedah  hritsno  'ahigantavyah  sorraliasyo 
dvijanmand,  II.  165 ;  cf.  also  II.  140,  XI.  262.J 

He  should  continually  repeat  (Japet)  that  part  of  the  Veda  (brahma) 
which  is  on  the  subject  of  sacrifice  {adhiyajham),  and  that  relating  to 
the  deities  {adhidaivikam),  and  that  relating  to  soul  {ddhydtnikam), 
and  that  declared  in  the  Upanishads  ( Veddntabhihitam,  VI.  83). 

The  Kalpa  Sutras  are  probably  referred  to  in  II.  140. 

A  knower  of  Nirukta  (see  p.  156)  is  reckoned  among 
the  Brahmans  who  compose  a  Parishad  in  XII.  iii,  but 
no  reference  is  made  to  Yaska,  nor  is  it  likely  that  his 
work  then  existed  (see  p.  156). 

In  I.  II.  50  the  name  Brahman  is  applied  to  the 
supreme  Being  (  =  Brahma,  Kulluka) ;  in  XII.  50  the 
Creator  of  the  universe  is  called  Brahma  (see  p.  9) ; 
in  XL  243,  XII.  121,  Prajapati.  In  I.  6  the  supreme 
Spirit  is  termed  Svayambhu,  'the  Self-existent;'  iii  I.  10, 
Narayana.  In  XII.  121  the  names  Vishnu  and  Hara 
occur ;  but  generally  the  gods  named  belong  more  to  the 
Vedic  than  to  the  Epic  and  Puranic  period.  For  instance, 
in  Book  IX.  303  we  have  the  following  list  of  deities  : — 

Of  Indra,  Siirya,  Vayu  (or  Maruta),  Yama,  Varuna,  Candra,  Agni, 
and  Prithivi,  let  the  king  emulate  the  power  and  conduct. 

There  is  no  allusion  to  the  Post-vedic  Tri-murti  or 
popular  worship  of  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva,  nor  to  the 
still  more  recent  worship  of  the  Sakti — that  is  to  say, 
'  the  energy '  represented  by  the  wives  of  the  deities, 
especially  by  Durga,  wife  of  Siva.  Nor,  again,  is  there 
any  recognition  of  that  principle  of  bhakti  or  'faith'  in 
Krishna,  as  supreme  Lord  of  the  universe,  which  was 
a  subsequent  development  of  Hindu  religious  thought 
(p.  125). 

The  doctrine  of  transmigration  is,  however,  fully  stated, 
and,  as  a  consequence  of  this,  the  hells  described  in  the 
Code  (IV.  88-90;  XIL  75,  yy),  though  places  of  terrible 
torture,  resolve  themselves  into  merely  temporary  purga- 


2l8  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

tories,  while  the  heavens  (IV.  182,  260;  VI.  32  ;  II.  244) 
become  only  steps  on  the  road  to  union  with  Brahma. 

The  three  worlds  {trailoTcya,  loka-traya)  alluded  to  in 
XI.  236,  261,  are  probably  the  heavens,  atmosphere,  and 
earth. 

What  must  strike  every  one  as  singular  in  regard  to 
the  religion  of  the  Code  is  the  total  absence  of  allusion  to 
public  and  congregational  services  or  teaching  in  temples. 
Public  sacrifices  are  certainly  mentioned,  but  the  chief 
rites  of  religion  were  evidently  of  a  domestic  kind,  and 
the  priests,  whatever  their  ancient  functions  may  have 
befen,  were  at  the  time  of  the  composition  'of  the  Code 
more  like  domestic  chaplains  (see  p.  230).  Little,  too,  is 
said  about  idols  ^ — certainly  nothing  to  countenance  the 
adoration  of  them  or  to  encourage  Biahmans  to  under- 
take the  care  of  idol-temples,  nor  are  there  directions  as 
to  ofi"ering  rice,  flowers,  and  perfumes  at  idol-shrines, 
which  oblations  (naivedya)  are  commonly  presented  before 
images  in  temples  at  the  present  day. 

II.  In  the  second  place,  as  to  the  philosophy  of 
Manu's  Law-book.  It  is  plain,  from  a  passage  already 
quoted,  that  a  love  for  rationalistic  speculations  (hetu- 
sdstrcc)  and  a  spirit  of  free  scepticism  were  beginning 
to   show    themselves    in   India    at    the    time   the    Code 


1  It  is  very  doubtful  whether  idolatry  was  at  all  commonly  practised 
at  the  time  of  the  compilation  of  the  Code.  We  have  already  seen 
that  there  is  no  satisfactory  proof  of  the  existence  of  idols  in  the 
Vedic  period.  Seep.  12  of  this  volume.  In  Manu  III.  152  a  Deva- 
laka,  '  attendant  on  an  idol '  ( =pratimd-pari6draka),  is  directed  to  be 
shunned.  Certainly  in  II.  176  the  Brahman  student  is  enjoined  to 
perform  devatdhhyarcanam,  '  worship  of  the  deities,'  and  this  is  in- 
terpreted by  KuUtika  to  mean  pt'atimddishu  hari-harddi-deva-pujanam, 
'  doing  homage  to  Yishnu  and  S'iva  before  images,'  &c.,  but  whether 
Manu  really  intended  to  denote  pi-atimd  by  devatd  is  questionable. 
In  IX.  285,  however,  the  accidental  breaker  of  images  (pratimdndm 
lihedakah)  is  directed  to  repair  them  and  pay  a  fine. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  219 

■was  compiled ;  and  it  is  possible  that  Buddha's  ad- 
herents, though  not  naentioned  by  name,  were  pointed 
at  with  reprobation  under  the  designation  Ndstikdh, 
'  atheists '  (  =  Cdrvaka,  Kulliika  II.  1 1 ),  and  Pdshan- 
dinak,  'heretics'  [  =  Sakya-hhikshu-lcshapanakddi,  Kul- 
liika IV.  30 ;  I.  II 8).  The  Code  itself  may  have  been  an 
attempt  to  stem  the  current  of  opinion  which  was  set- 
ting in  the  direction  of  Buddhism  and  rationalistic  Brah- 
manism.  The  compiler,  however,  thought  it  necessary 
to  adopt  some  of  the  current  philosophical  theories,  and 
accordingly  we  find  them  interspersed  throughout  the 
work,  though  more  directly  stated  at  the  beginning  and 
end.  They  are  of  that  vague  and  misty  kind  which 
probably  prevailed  at  the  period  preceding  the  crystal- 
lization of  the  various  systems  into  distinct  schools.  The 
words  San-khya,  Yoga,  Nyaya,  Vaiseshika,  and  Mimansa 
do  not  occur  as  designations  of  philosophical  systems. 
We  notice  indeed  a  strong  leaning  towards  the  San-khyan 
line  of  thought,  though  we  find  only  a  confused  state- 
ment of  some  leading  ideas  of  that  system,  without  any 
mention  of  its  twenty-five  Tattvas.  The  growth  of  pan- 
theistic ideas,  as  foreshadowed  in  the  Purusha-sukta  of 
the  Eig-veda  (see  p.  21),  is  also  traceable.  All  existing 
things  are  said  to  emanate  from  Brahma,  the  one  self- 
existent  Spirit,  to  whom  all  things  must  also  return. 
Atma-vidya,  equivalent  to  Brahma-vidya  and  to  the 
Vedanta  doctrine,  is  directed  to  be  studied  in  VII.  43, 
and  Vedantic  ideas  pervade  the  whole  twelfth  Book, 
which,  however,  may  possibly  be  due  to  later  additions. 
Still  more  remarkable  is  the  attention  directed  to  be 
given  to  the  study  of  Anvikshiki,  '  logic '  (VII.  43  =  tarlca- 
vidyd) ;  and  although  the  Nyaya  and  Mimansa  had  evi- 
dently not  become  schools,  we  find  from  XII.  1 1 1  that  a 
Parishad  or  'assembly  of  twelve  Brahmans,'  competent 
to  decide  on  disputed  points  of  law,  includes  a  Haituka 


2  20  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

{  =  nydya-jna)  and  a  Tarkin  (^mimdnsaka,  KuUuka). 
Moreover,  in  XII.  io6,  it  is  declared  that  be  only  under- 
stands the  Veda  who  investigates  it  by  the  rules  of  Tarka 
{ =  mimdnsddi-nydya),  agreeably  to  Vedic  doctrine — all  of 
which  precepts  are,  of  course,  inconsistent  with  the  repro- 
bation of  Haitukas  in  II.  ii,  IV.  30;  as  well  as  with  a 
precept  in  II.  10,  where  Sruti  and  Smriti  are  aflSrmed  to 
be  a-mimdnsye,  '  not  to  be  reasoned  about.' 

The  cosmogony  adopted  presents  us  with  a  compound 
of  both  the  San-khya  and  Vedanta  theories  of  creation 
before  they  had  diverged  into  distinct  systems.  There  is, 
however,  in  Book  I.  a  synthetical  scheme  advanced  which, 
though  a  confusion  of  two  separate  statements,  one  made 
by  Manu  himself  (I.  14,  &c.),  the  other  by  Bhrigu  (I.  74, 
&c.),  certainly  more  accords  with  the  San-khyan  doctrine 
than  with  any  other  (see  p.  90).  I  here  abridge  the 
account,  commencing  I.  5  : — 

This  universe  first  existed  only  in  darkness  (tamo-bhutmn),  impercep- 
tible, undefinable,  as  if  immersed  in  sleep  (j)rasuptam).  Then  the  Self- 
existent  [Svayam-hliu,  described  by  the  same  epithet  as  the  San-khyan 
Pralcriti,  viz.,  A^yahta,  ' undiscerned '  or  'undeveloped'),  having  willed 
to  produce  various  beings  from  his  own  substance,  first  with  a  thought 
created  the  waters,  and  placed  on  them  a  productive  seed  or  egg 
(vija  or  anda).  Then  he  himself  was  born  in  that  egg  in  the  form  of 
Brahma.  Next  he  caused  the  egg  to  divide  itself,  and  out  of  its  two 
divisions  framed  the  heaven  above  and  the  earth  beneath.  Afterwards, 
having  divided  his  own  substance,  he  became  half  male,  half  female 
(I.  32),  and  from  that  female  produced  Viraj  (see  note  i,  p.  22),  from 
whom  was  created  Manu,  the  secondary  progenitor  of  all  beings.  Then 
he  (Brahma,  according  to  Kulluka  on  I.  14)  from  the  supreme  Soul 
(Afman)  drew  forth  Manas  ( =  Mahat  or  Buddhi,  '  Intellect,'  as  ex- 
plained by  KuUiika  on  I.  74,  75,1  in  which  passage  Manas  is  the 
principle   of   thought   and  stands  for  both  Buddhi  and  Ahan-kara). 


1  But  according  to  I.  14  (Kulliika)  Manas  must  be  distinguished 
from  Buddhi,  and  regarded  as  a  product  of  Ahan-kara,  as  in  the 
San-khya  system. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  221 

Next  to  that  came  Ahan-kara,  and,  after  that,  the  Tan-matras  or 
'  subtile  principles  of  the  elements.'  From  these  seven  active  principles 
(called  'the  seven  Purushas,'  I.  19) — viz.,  Mahat  or  Buddhi  (called 
Manas  in  I.  14,  74,  75),  Ahan-kara,  and  the  five  subtile  elements — 
were  evolved  the  five  gross  or  material  elements  (mahd-bhuta),  the 
organs  of  sense,  and  the  whole  world  of  sense.  (Compare  the 
San-khyan  doctrine  at  pp.  83,  84,) 

It  is  curious  to  compare  Strabo  XV.  59  (see  p.  276). 

All  this  confusion  and  obscurity  in  the  account  of  the 
creation  is  symptomatic  of  diversity  of  authorship.  Of  tlie 
two  narratives,  that  of  Bhrigu  is  the  simplest.  But  both 
(I.  14  and  I.  74)  make  '  the  principle  of  thought '  the  first 
product- — that  which  is  and  is  not  [sad-asad-dtmakam) — 
to  which  belongs  a  jeal  existence,  and  yet  not  eternity, 
because  it  is  a  product  (see  San-khya-pravacana  V.  56). 
I  now  abridge  what  follows  according  to  Bbrigu's  state- 
ment : — 

The  first  Manu  Svayambhuva  produced  six  other  Manus,  and  these 
seven  Manus  (see  note,  p.  206),  each  in  his  own  period,  were  the  creators 
of  all  things  (I.  61-63). 

In  order  to  show  the  duration  of  a  Manv-antara  or  Manu- 
period,  the  divisions  of  time  from  a  moment  to  a  day  of 
Brahma  (12,000,000  years)  are  specified  (I.  64-73)  ■ — 

A  Manu-period  consists  of  seventy-one  times  the  12,000  years,  which 
constitute  an  age  of  the  gods  (I.  79).  Each  Maha-yuga  or  great  age  of 
the  world  is  subdivided  into  four  Yugas  or  ages,  viz.,  i.  Krita,  2. 
Treta,  3.  Dvapara,  and  4.  Kali,  each  decreasing  in  excellence ;  and  the 
life  of  man  lasts  for  400  years  in  the  first,  300  years  in  the  second,  200 
years  in  the  third,  and  100  years  in  the  present  or  Kali  age.'^ 

In  I.  87-101  the  account  of  the  creation  is  concluded 
by  a  description  of  the  origin  of  the  four  castes  from  the 
mouth,  arm,  thigh,  and  foot  of  Brahma,  and  the  pre- 
eminence assigned  to  Brahman s  (see  extracts,  pp.  233,  234). 

^  We  find  it  constantly  implied  in  Hindu  writings  that  the  natural 
term  of  human  life  in  the  present  age  is  100  years. 


222  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

In  the  twelfth  Book  the  leaning  towards  a  San-khyan 
line  of  thought  is  again  conspicuous.  In  24-38  we  have 
a  description  of  the  three  Grunas  of  the  San-khya,  viz., 
Sattva,  Eajas,  and  Tamas,  all  three  of  which  are  said  to 
pervade,  and  one  or  other  of  which  predominate  in  every 
mortal  frame  (see  note  2,  p.  85).  In  XII.  24  it  is  asserted 
that  these  three  form  the  constituent  substances  of  dtman 
(self  or  soul),  and  that  the  first  developed  principle — 
Mahat  or  Buddhi — is  also  pervaded  by  them.  Again, 
the  triple  degrees  of  transmigration,  highest,  middle,  and 
lowest,  through  gods,  men,  and  beasts,  are  supposed  to 
result  from  acts  done  under  the  dominance  of  these  three 
Gunas  (see  note  i,  p.  56).  We  have  also  the  three  Pra- 
manas  of  the  San-khya  philosophy  'clearly  laid  down  in 
XII.  105  :— 

Three  means  of  attaining  true  knowledge  or  three  standards  of  truth, 
viz.,  perception  by  the  senses  (pratyaksha),  inference  (anumdna),  and 
the  Veda  (Sabda)  or  various  books  founded  on  it — these  three  must  be 
known  thoroughly  by  one  wishing  for  a  clear  idea  of  duty  (see  pp.  61, 
82  of  this  volume). 

Although,  however,  the  germ  of  the  San-khya  is  clearly 
traceable,  there  is  an  evident  commingling  of  pantheistic 
ideas,  tending  towards  the  Vedanta,  in  the  frequent  declara- 
tion that  all  existing  things  emanate  from,  and  will  ulti- 
mately be  absorbed  into  Brahma,  '  the  universal  Spirit.' 
The  distinction  between  the  Jivatman  and  Paramatman 
(see  p.  51)  is  recognised  in  VIII.  91,  which  verse  KuUuka 
explains  by  a  reference  to  the  Vedic  allegory  of  the  two 
birds  (quoted  p.  40  of  this  volume).'  Nevertheless,  we  miss 
in  Manu  what  we  find  in  the  later  philosophical  schools, 
a  clear  definition  of  the  subtile  bod}^  as  composed  of  the 
subtile  elements,  aud  a  plain  statement  of  its  relationship 
to  the  individual  soul  and  of  its  accompanyino-  the  soul 
through  all  its  transmigrations.  The  survival  of  this  soul 
over  the  dissolution  of  the  gross  body  is  indeed  plainly 


•   THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  223 

implied ;  but  Manu's  doctrine  is  that  if  a  man  has  been 
wicked  the  soul  clothed  in  a  kind  of  bod}^  composed  of 
coarse  and  impure  elements,  undergoes  along  with  it  tor- 
ment in  hell  for  a  time  (XII.  21) ;  whereas,  if  a  man  has 
been  virtuous,  the  soul  invested  in  a  kind  of  ethereal  and 
shining  body  (kha-saririn),  composed  of  pure  elemen- 
tary particles  of  air,  wind,  and  fire,  enjoys  bliss  in  heaven 
with  it  for  a  certain  period  (IV.  243,  III.  93,  II.  82,  XII. 
20) ;  after  which  both  the  wicked  and  the  virtuous  are 
born  again. 

Nor  do  we  find  any  precise  definition  of  Brahman  (neut.) 
as  pure  absolute  Spirit, — the  only  really  existing  entity, — 
according  to  the  Vedanta  doctrine.  Brahma  seems  rather 
to  be  regarded  as  a  kind  of  shining  ethereal  essence,  out 
of  which  the  universe  was  evolved  and  into  which  it 
becomes  absorbed  (cf.  II.  28;  IV.  232;  VI.  79,  81,  85; 
XJL  123-125). 

III.  Thirdly,  as  to  the  Acara,  '  rules  and  precepts  of 
conduct,'  and  social  legislation  of  the  Mauavas. 

The  organization  of  classes  in  I.  87-91  is  so  simple 
that  this  simplicity,  if  it  be  not  merely  theoretical,  bears 
witness  to  the  antiquity  of  a  considerable  portion  of  the 
Code.  According  to  Book  X.  3,  4,  there  are  only  four 
pure  classes  {varndh,  p.  210),  as  follows  : — 

The  Brahman  (or  priestly  class),  the  Kshatriya  (or  military  class), 
and  the  Vaisya  (or  agricultural  class)  constitute  the  three  twice-born 
(dvi-jdti  or  dvi-ja)  classes  (as  obtaining  a  second  spiritual  birth  through 
investiture  with  the  sacred  thread,  see  p.  239);  the  Sudra  (or  servile 
class)  is  once-born  {elca-jdti),  and  constitutes  the  fourth  class ;  there  is 
no  fifth  class. 

From  priority  of  birth,  from  superiority  of  origin  (in  being  sprung 
from  the  mouth  of  the  Creator),  from  possession  of  the  Veda  (niyam- 
asya  \_  =  vedasyd]  dhdrandt,  i.e.,  from  the  right  of  studying,  teaching, 
and  expounding  it),  and  from  a  distinction  in  the  reception  of  the 
sacrificial  thread  (as  the  most  important  of  the  twelve  Sanskaras  or 
'purificatory  rites,'  specified  in  II.  27,  &c.),  the  Brahman  is  the  lord 
(prabhu)  of  all  the  classes  (X.  3.     See  p.  233). 


2  24  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

The  only  allusion  in  the  Veda  to  this  fourfold  divisioa 
is  in  the  Purusha-siikta  (Rig-veda  X.  90.  12),  which,  as 
we  have  seen  (p.  21),  is  one  of  its  most  recent  hymns. 

A  similar  division  into  classes  or  professions  is  found 
to  have  prevailed  in  almost  all  countries.-^ 

In  the  same  tenth  Book  of  Manu,  however,  we  have  a 
more  developed  social  system  depicted,  and  a  number  of 
mixed  castes  [yarna-san-lcarah,  san-hara-jdtiydh,  X.  12) 
are  described  as  resultins;  from  the  intermarriage  of  the 
pure  classes  :  ^ — 


1  Megasthenes  (according  to  Strabo's  India,  39),  the  Greek  am- 
bassador of  Seleukos  Nikator  (Alexander's  successor  between  the 
Euphrates  and  Indus,  B.C.  312)  at  the  court  of  Sandrokottos  (Candra- 
gupta)  in  Pataliputra  (naXl^oBpa),  divided  the  Hindu  people  into  seven 
classes,  viz.,  philosophers,  husbandmen,  shepherds,  tradesmen  or  arti- 
ficers, soldiers,  spies  or  overseers  (?^opoi)j  and  councillors  of  state  (see 
note  2,  p.  237);  perhaps  because  Herodotus  divided  the  inhabitants  of 
Egypt  into  seven,  viz.,  priests,  soldiers,  cowherds,  swineherds,  trades- 
men, interpreters,,  and  pilots;  but  Diodorus  and  Plato  made  only  five 
divisions,  and  Strabo  only  three.  From  Plato's  Timaeus  (6)  it  appears 
that  a  similar  division  of  professions  existed  among  the  Athenians. 

Jlpmrov  fiev  to  ray  lepiojv  yivos,  anb  ray  aWav  ^^pls  d(l)<opLcrp,4v0Vy  psTO.  de 
TovTO  TO  Tav  by}piovpya>v^  ort  kuB*  avro  cKatTTOv  oXXo)  he  ovk  iiTipiyvvp.evov 
Sfjpuivpyfl,  TOTe  tSiv  vop,i<>>v  kcu  to  tS>v  drjpevTwv,  totc  tSiv  yeapyav  kol  Srj  Koi 
TO  p.d)^ip,ov  yivos  ^crdrja'aL  TTOv  T^de  dffo  TrdvTcov  tcov  yevav  K€)(a>pi(Tp.4vov^  ols 
ovBey  akXo  TrXrjy  to.  nepl  Tov  TToXepov  vtto  tov  vopov  TrpoirfTa^drj  piXeiv,      Again, 

from  a  passage  in  Herodotus  (I.  loi),  it  is  inferred  that  a  similar 
distinction  existed  among  the  Medes.  In  Malcolm's  History  of  Persia 
(I.  205)  the  Persian  monarch  Jamshid  is  said  to  have  divided  the 
Persians  into  four  classes.  Mr.  Mill  also  points  out  an  instructive 
passage  in  Plato's  Republic  (II.  11),  in  which,  describing  the  simplest 
form  of  a  political  association,  he  makes  it  to  consist  of  four  or  five 
classes  of  men  :   EI'jj  h'  h>  -q  ye  dvayKcuoTaTi]  TToXij  eK  TeTTaprnv  fj  rrevTe  dvbpav. 

Finally,  we  read  in  Millar's  Historical  View  of  the  English  Govern- 
ment (I.  11)  that  the  Anglo-Saxons  were  originally  divided  into  four 
great  classes — artificers  and  tradesmen,  husbandmen,  soldiers,  and 
clergy. 

2  Mr.  W.  F.  Sinclair  gives  some  interesting  information  (in  the 
February  and  March  numbers  of  the  '  Indian  Antiquary ')  in  regard  to 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  225 

By  unlawful  intermarriage  of  the  classes  (vyahhicdrena  varndndm), 
by  their  marrying  women  who  ought  not  to  be  married,  and  by  neglect 
of  their  own  duties,  mixed  classes  are  produced  (X.  24). 

These  have  a  great  variety  of  names,  such  as  Murdha- 
vasikta,  Mahishya,  Karana  or  Kaya-stha,  Ambashtha  or 
Vaidya,  Ayogava,  Dhigvana,  Pukkasa,  Candala  (see  p. 
229),  and  are  restricted  to  particular  occupations.     Still 

the  various  subdivisions  or  sub-castes  of  Brahmans,  and  adds  a  list  of 
forty  mised  castes,  now  found  in  the  Dekhan.  With  regard  to  the 
Brahmans,  he  places  at  the  head  the  Chitpdvan  ('  race  of  the  corpse ' 
or  '  race  of  the  burning-ground ')  or  Konkanasth  { =  Kon-kana-stha)i 
Brahmans,  to  whom  the  notorious  Nana  Sahib  of  Bithur  belonged. 
Then  come  the  De^asth  ( =  DeiOrStha)  or  Eigvedl  Brahmans,  who  claim 
for  themselves  descent  from  the  Eishis,  and  therefore  the  highest  rank ; 
then  the  Yajur-vedi,  who  are  chiefly  engaged  in  trade ;  and  then  the 
Devi'ukh  {1),  who  are  mostly  agricultural.  There  are  also  in  the 
Dekhan  Telangi  {i.e.,  Telingi,  from  Sanskrit  tri-lin-gd)  Brahmans,  from 
the  Karnatak,  chiefly  engaged  in  trade;  Kanouj  Brahmans  (from 
Hindustan),  who  are  often  Sipahis  in  native  regiments  or  employes 
upon  the  railway,  and  some  other  tribes.  With  regard  to  the  forty 
mixed  castes  enumerated  by  Mr.  Sinclair,  I  here  subjoin  some  of  them 
as  given  by  him,  with  a  few  notes  of  my  own — Prahhus  (Sanskrit 
prahhu),  who  are  the  highest,  and  divided  into  Kdyasth  and  Pathare , 
Sonars  (  =  Suvarna-lcdra)  or  goldsmiths,  a  subdivision  of  whom  are  the 
JRatha-Jcdra  Sonars,  who  claim  to  be  of  Brahman  race  (c£  note  2,  p. 
149);  Vdrns  (Banias,  Banians  =  Baniyas,  Sanskrit  hanik),  who  are 
grocers  and  grain-dealers,  and  are  distinguished  by  great  reverence  for 
animal  life;  Bhdtiyds  or  cloth  and  cotton  merchants;  Khattrls,.  who 
claim  Rajput  (  =  Kshatriya)  descent,  but  are  dealers  in  cloth,  gold  and 
silver  lace,  &c.  ;  Vaisyas,  who  claim  to  be  a  remnant  of  the  original 
Vaisyas,  and  are  traders;  Mdrvddi,  merchants,  from  Mdrvdd  or 
Marwdr ;  Sinipis  or  tailors ;  Sutars  ( =  Sutra-dhdra)  or  carpenters ; 
Sikalgars  (Saiqal-gar),  turners  and  weapon-sharpeners ;  LoTidrs  (  =  Loha- 
kdra)  or  smiths ;  TeEs  ( =  Taill,  from  Tailin)  or  oilmen ;  Koshfis  and 
Sdlis  or  weavers ;  Kunibhdrs  (  =  Kumblia-hdra)  or  potters ;  KoUs,  who 
are  Bhistis  or  water-bearers ;  Pants  or  washermen ;  Londris  ( =  Lavana- 
kdrin)  or  preparers  of  salt  and  lime  and  charcoal ;  Rangdris  (  =  Ran-ga- 
Jcdrin)  or  dyers ;  Ohainihdrs  ( =  Garmorlcdrin)  or  leather-cutters  and 
shoemakers,  ifec. 

P 


2  26  INDIAN  WISDOM. 

the  superiority  of  the  Brahmans  in  the  Hindu  lawyer's 
scheme  is  the  hinge  on  which  the  whole  social  system 
turns.  In  fact,  the  state  of  society  depicted  is  that  of 
pure  and  unmitigated  Brahmanism, — a  state  of  things 
which,  if  it  really  admitted  of  the  amount  of  Brahmanical 
arrogance  described  as  existing,  would  more  than  account 
for  the  Buddhist  reaction.  The  Brahmans  are  made  to 
constitute  the  great  central  body  around  which  all  other 
classes  and  orders  of  beings  revolve  like  satellites.  Not 
only  are  they  invested  with  the  highest  dignity  and  im- 
portance, but  they  are  bound  together,  and  their  position 
secured  by  the  most  stringent  rules  ;  while  the  other  three 
classes  of  soldiers,  agriculturists,  and  servants  are  made 
powerless  for  combiued  resistance  by  equally  stringeut 
regulations,  one  class  being  separated  from  the  other  by 
insurmountable  lines  of  demarcation. 

We  must,  however,  guard  against  supposing  that  a 
Brahman  claimed  to  take  the  lead  merely  in  the  character 
of  a  priest.  To  understand  more  clearly  the  nature  of 
Brahmanical  ascendency  we  must  ask  ourselves  the  ques- 
tion. What  physical  and  moral  forces  led  to  the  first 
movements  which  ended  in  the  crystallization  of  social 
distinctions  into  the  caste-system  ? 

It  seems  probable,  then,  that  the  formation  of  hard  lines 
of  separation  between  the  classes  was  more  the  result  of 
gradual  and  natural  adjustment  than  of  preconcerted  plan. 
There  can  be  little  doubt  that  when  the  Aryan  Hindus 
came  into  India  as  immigrants  and  conquerors,  they  were 
without  any  systematic  arrangement  of  classes.  Their 
first  seat  was  in  tloe  Punjab,  around  the  five  chief  affluents 
of  the  Indus  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Delhi.  This 
was  a   productive   plain    watered    by   rivers.^     Hence  it 

1  By  degrees  they  spread  themselves  over  the  whole  region  called  by 
Manu  (II.  21,  22)  Aryavarta,  'the  abode  of  Aryas,' i.e.,- the  great  central 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  2  2/ 

Happened  that,  although  in  their  primeval  abode,  some- 
where in  Central  Asia,  they  were  probably  half  nomad, 
half  agricultural,  they  became,  when  fairly  settled  in  Hin- 
dustan, a  nation  of  agriculturists.^  The  soil,  too,  being 
fertile,  yielded  more  than  enough  to  supply  the  necessities 
of  the  cultivators.  Hence  the  surplus  produce  enabled  a 
large  non-agricultural  population  to  spring  up.  Some  of 
these  applied  themselves  to  trade  and  the  improvement  of 
mechanical  arts  ;  others  were  enabled  to  devote  them- 
selves to  one  of  three  occupations  :  i.  mental  and  religious 
culture  ;  2.  military  exercises  ;  3.  domestic  service.^  It 
was,  indeed,  absolutely  necessary  that  the  cultivators  who 
were  called  Vaisyas,  because  they  'settled  down'  on  the 
soil  and  gradually  acquired  an  hereditary  right  to  its 
occupation,*  should  have  a  class  of  military  men  above 

plains  (Madhya-desa),  extending  from  tlie  western  to  the  eastern  sea,  and 
bounded  on  the  north  and  south  by  the  Himalaya  and  Vindhya  moun- 
tains. Only  in  this  region  were  the  three  first  classes  allowed  to  dwell, 
but  S'iidras  njight  sojourn  wherever  they  liked.    (See  Manu  II.  21-24.) 

1  The  very  name  Arya  is,  as  every  one  now  knows,  connected  with  the 
root  4  ri  —  *'■;  ■whence  aratrum,  '  a  plough '  (cf.  Sanskrit  aritra).  It  is 
curious  to  note  how  Brahmans,  after  their  segregation  as  the  dominant 
class,  sought  to  depreciate  agriculture.  Manu  (X.  84)  says,  '  Some  think 
that  agriculture  [hrishi)  is  an  excellent  thing,  but  it  is  a  mode  of  exist- 
ence blamed  by  the  good,  because  the  iron-mouthed  ploughshare  wounds 
the  earth  and  the  creatures  living  in  it.'  Mr.  W.  P.  Sinclair  informs 
us  in  the  'Indian  Antiquary,'  that  in  the  Dekhan  the  cultivators  of  the 
soil  are  by  the  modern  races  of  Brahmans  considered  pure  S'iidras. 

2  The  same  happened  in  the  fertile  plains  of  Egypt  and  Mesopotamia. 
8  In  modern  times  they  are  called  Eyots,  from  the  Arabic  'ij^.  ra"iyat, 

'  protected  people '  (root  ^_^j  '  to  pasture,  guard  ').  The  Hindii  term 
Vaisya  is  more  expressive  of  their  original  condition.  It  is  derived  from 
the  root  otW,  'to  enter  into,'  'sit  down  on,'  'settle  down  on,'  'occupy' 
(whence  veia,  '  an  abode '),  cognate  with  vicus,  '  a  village,'  and  omo;,  '  an 
abode,'  and  our  affix  '  wick '  at  the  end  of  names  of  towns,  denoting 
originally  a  settlement  or  station  of  cultivators.  Hence  the  root  vis, 
when  used  as  a  substantive,  means  '  a  man  of  the  people.'    The  Yai^yas 


228  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

them,  with  leisure  either  to  cultivate  arms,  and  so  defend 
the  land  thus  occupied  from  the  attacks  of  other  invaders, 
or  to  undertake  the  cares  of  government,  and  so  protect 
property  from  the  dangers  incident  to  anarchy.  These 
ultimately  received  the  name  Kshatriya.  But  in  the 
earliest  times,  as  represented  by  the  Vedic  hymns,  they 
were  called  Rdjanya,  '  the  kingly  class.'  (See  the  Purusha- 
sukta,  translated  p.  21,  and  see  p.  22,  note  2.)  Doubtless, 
when  this  class  first  arose  they  must  have  constituted  the 
most  powerful  order  of  society  ;  and  so,  indeed,  practi- 
cally they  must  have  always  remained,  notwithstanding 
the  intellectual  superiority  of  the  Brahmanical  class.'' 
That  the  close  interdependence  of  the  two  higher  classes 
was  recognized  by  the  Brahmans  themselves  is  shown  by 
the  following : — 

were  allowed  to  become  merchants  if  they  preferred  trading  to  agricul- 
ture ;  but  the  only  provision  for  classes  of  artisans  and  mechanics,  is 
from  the  mixed  classes.  This  indicates  that  Manu's  division  belongs  to 
an  early  period,  before  the  industrial  and  mechanical  arts  had  acquired 
much  importance,  though  they  must  have  been  considerably  advanced 
even  in  Yedic  times  (as  shown  by  Dr.  Muir,  Texts  V.  450-472).  The 
Hindi!  village  system  of  the  present  day  seems  to  have  been  developed 
out  of  that  represented  in  Manu's  Code.  Almost  everywhere  are  found 
bodies  of  agriculturists  who  have  settled  on  the  soil  from  time  imme- 
morial, and  formed  themselves  into  little  republics  presided  over  by 
a  half-elective,  half-hereditary  headman,  and  a  number  of  village  offi- 
cials (properly  twelve,  e.g.,  watchman,  accountant,  priest,  schoolmaster, 
doctor,  barber,  astrologer,  &c.),  the  lands  around  the  village  forming  a 
sort  of  jurisdiction,  and  disputes  being  settled  by  gatherings  of  the  vil- 
lagers under  trees,  while  various  low-caste  menials  who  have  no  interest 
in  the  soil  are  attached  to  the  community. 

1  The  name  Kshatriya  comes  from  kshatra,  '  dominion,'  which  is 
probably  from  root  i  7{shi=xra.tifiai,  'to  possess,  rule.'  It  is  fancifully 
derived  from  kshatdt  tra,  'preserving  from  injury,'  in  Raghu-vansa  II. 
53.  Manu  X.  119  says,  'While  defending  the  Vaisyas  by  his  arms 
[sastrena  vaiiyan  ralishitvd)  he  may  raise  from  them  the  rightful 
revenue  {dharmyam  dhdrayed  halim),'  which  was  really  taken  from 
the  soil  in  kind. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MAJSTU.  229 

A  Kshatriya  cannot  thrive  without  a  Brahman,  nor  a  Brahman  with- 
out a  Kshatriya.  The  Brahman  and  the  Kshatriya  when  associated 
together  prosper  in  this  world  and  the  next  (IX.  322). 

It  was  also  necessary  that  there  should  be  a  class  willing 
to  perform  personal  domestic  service.  Th'ese  were  called 
Sudras ;  and  this  class  was  probably  made  up  to  some 
extent  of  the  remnants  of  the  Turanian  tribes,  who  were 
conquered  by  the  Aryan  Hindus,,  and  who  were  mostly 
driven  southwards.^  But,  although  servants,  they  were 
neither  slaves  nor  serfs.  They  merely  occupied  the  lowest 
step  in  the  social  organization.  It  is  true  that  in  theory 
(X.  129)  they  were  debarred  from  any  superfluous  accumu- 
lation of  wealth,  yet,  in  point  of  fact,  they  sometimes  rose 
to  afiiuence,  and  even  became  kings  :  ^ — 

1  It  may  be  questioned  whether  S'udra  (though  found  in  the  Purusha- 
siikta,  Rig-veda  X.  90.  12)  is  a  genuine  Sanskrit  word.  At  least  no 
satisfactory  etymology  is  given  for  it,  and  this  favours  the  idea  of  its 
denoting  some  pre- Aryan  race.  The  fanciful  derivation  from  Sue,  '  to 
grieve,'  and  dru,  '  to  run,'  is  hardly  worth  noticing.  Besides  the 
Turanian  races  who  partially  blended  with  the  Aryans  there  were 
doubtless  other  aboriginal  tribes  who  occupied  the  hills  and  outlying 
districts  and  who  were  called  Mleddhas,  as  constituting  those  more 
barbarous  and  uncultivated  communities  who  stood  aloof  and  would 
not  amalgamate  with  the  Aryans.  Mlecoha-de^a  is  defined  to  be  a 
country  where  the  four  classes  do  not  dwell.  In  Manu  X.  44  a  number 
of  degraded  tribes  are  mentioned,  such  as  Paundrakas,  Odras,  Dravidas, 
Kambojas,  Yavanas,  S'akas,  Paradas,  Cinas,  Kiratas,  &c.  As  these 
were  probably  powerful  warlike  tribes,  they  are  declared  by  Manu 
to  be  outcaste  Kshatriyas.  It  is  clear  that  the  mountaineer  Kiratas 
were  a  martial  race;  nor  could  they  have  been  greatly  despised,  for 
Arjuna  lived  among  them  and  adopted  their  style  of  life  in  order  to 
learn  archery  from  S'iva,  regarded  as  their  god.  See  my  account  of 
the  Kiratarjuniya  and  the  'Indian  Antiquary'  for  June,  1874,  p.  178. 
The  most  degraded  outcastes  were  men  called  Oandalas  or  Candalas 
(children  of  a  S'iidra  man  and  a  Brahmani) ;  they  were  expelled  from 
towns,  where  they  could  not  even  walk  except  by  day ;  they  wore  only 
dead  men's  clothes,  rusty  iron  ornaments,  &c.  (X.  51-56). 

2  Professor  Cowell,  in  a  note  to  Elphinstone's  India,  p.   18,  well 


230  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

As  a  S'udra,  without  censuring  others,  performs  lawful  acts,  so, 
without  being  censured,  he  obtains  exaltation  in  this  world  and  the 
next  (X.  128). 

Again,  the  gradual  assumption  of  superiority  over  tbe 
Kshatriyas,  Vaisyas,  and  Sudras,  by  a  class  of  men  who 
called  themselves  Brahmans,''  seems  to  have  been  due  to 
the  operation  of  a  law  of  intellectual  development,  such  as 
lias  been  common  among  all  nations  in  their  progress 
towards  civilization,  in  all  periods  of  the  world's  history. 
Those  who  were  intellectually  superior  took  advantage  of 
that  growth  of  religious  cravings  which  generally  accom- 
panies political  growth,  and  formed  themselves  into  a 
fraternity  of  religious  teachers,  who  afterwards  became 
priests.  Religion,  or  a  sense  of  dependence  upon  God  and 
a  desire  to  propitiate  Him,  has  always  formed  a  marked 
feature  of  the  Hiadii  character.  Hence  in  India,  the 
fraternity  of  priests  multiplied  with  unusual  rapidity ;  so 
that  a  considerable  number  of  tbe  sncerdotal  class  were 

shows  that  the  condition  of  a  S'udra  was  very  superior  to  that  of  the 
helot,  slave,  and  serf  of  the  Greek,  Roman,  and  feudal  systeni.  The 
Puranas  record  dynasties  of  -S'udra  kings,  and  even  Manu  notices 
these.  In  II.  238  it  is  said,  'A  believer  in  Scripture  may  receive  pure 
knowledge  even  from  a  S'udra.'  In  modern  times  cultivators  of  the 
soil  are  in  some  places  regarded  as  S'iidras.  There  are  occasional 
passages  in  the  Mahabharata  depreciating  caste  and  even  Vedic  know- 
ledge in  comparison  with  moral  character ;  cf .  the  Raja-dharma  of  the 
S'anti-parvan  2955. 

1  According  to  some  scholars  the  original  meaning  of  brahman  was 
'  prayer,'  or  rather  '  devotional  spirit  pervading  and  filling  the  soul ' 
(root  brth  or  vrik).  Hence  it  came  afterwards  to  mean  Veda,  'sacred 
knowledge,'  in  which  sense  it  is  often  used  by  Manu.  Similarly, 
brahman  and  brdhmana  meant  originally  '  a  prayer- ofiwer,'  and  after- 
wards 'religious  teacher,'  the  signification  'priest'  not  having  been 
attached  to  these  words  till  sacrificial  ideas  had  fully  developed  them- 
selves in  the  Hindii  mind.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  Brahmana 
and  priest  are  convertible  terms.  Brahman  s  are  rather  '  men  of  the 
first  class.' 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  23  I 

thrown  out  of  employment  and.  forced  to  engage  in  secular 
occupations.  In  this  manner  it  came  to  pass  that  although 
all  priests  were  properly  Brahmaus,  all  Brahmans  were  by 
no  means  necessarily  priests.  Nor  was  it  likely  that  with 
the  partial  secularization  of  the  Brahmans  the  complicated 
Vedic  ceremonial  could  be  long  maintained.  Some  public 
sacrifices,  such  as  the  Agnishtoma,  were  still  performed, 
but  the  more  intricate  rites  enjoined  by  the  Brahmanas 
and  occasionally  practised  in  ancient  times,  lasting  for 
long  periods,  and  requiring  for  their  efficacious  perform- 
ance a  staff  of  sixteen  different  orders  of  priests,-'  fell  into 
partial  if  not  entire  desuetude.  It  was  found,  however, 
indispensable  to  the  retention  of  power  over  the  other 
classes  that  some  sacerdotal  offices  should  be  maintained. 
In  proportion,  indeed,  to  the  neglect  of  high  ceremonial 
observances  was  there  an  increased  strictness  in  exacting 
a  knowledge  of  the  Veda,  and  the  discharge  of  domestic 
rites  for  which  a  priest's  teaching  and  superintendence 
were  required. 

In  II.  84,  85,  it  is  declared  that  all  Vedic  rites,  oblations 
to  fire,  and  solemn  sacrifices  gradually  pass  away  (ksha- 
ranti),  but  that  the  act  of  repeating  the  Veda,  especially 
the  repetition  of  the  Gayatri  with  the  four  mystic  syl- 
lables, is  ten  times  better  than  the  appointed  sacrifice 
(see  pp.  245,  246). 

Manu  is  careful  to  assign  distinct  functions  and  titles 
to  the  priests  qualified  for  these  duties ;  thus  we  read  : — 

Some  Brahinans  are  intent  on  knowledge  (of  the  supreme  Spirit), 
others  are  intent  on  acts  of  austerity  (tcipo-nishthdh),  others  on  acts  of 
austerity  and  repetition  of  the  Veda  combined,  and  others  on  sacrificial 
rites  (III.  134). 

He  who  is  selected  for  the  office  of  preparing  the  sacred  fire,  for  con- 


1  See  their  names  all  given  in  my  Sanskrit-English  Dictionary  under 
Eitv-ij,  p.  181,  col.  I. 


232  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

ducting  the  Paka-yajna  (see  note,  p.  1 88)  and  performing  the  Agnish- 
toma  1  and  other  sacrifices,  is  called  the  Ritv-ij  of  his  employer  (II.  143). 

He  who  having  invested  his  pupil  with  the  sacred  thread  afterwards 
instructs  him  in  the  whole  Veda,  with  the  rules  of  ceremonial  {sahal- 
pam'^)  and  the  Upanishads,  is  called  an  Acdrya  (II.  140). 

He  who,  for  the  sake  of  a  livelihood,  gives  instruction  in  one  part 
only  of  the  Veda  or  in  the  Vedan-gas  (such  as  grammar,  &c.)  is  called 
an  Upddliydya  or  sub-teacher  (II.  141). 

The  Brahman  who  performs  the  Sanskara  ceremonies  on  conception, 
&c.,  according  to  rule,  and  who  feeds  the  child  with  rice  {i.e.,  performs 
the  anna-prdsanam  in  the  sixth  month,  see  II.  34  and  p.  192  of  this 
volume),  is  called  a  Guru^  (II.  142). 

Manu,  however,  found  it  necessary  to  conciliate  the 
Kshatriya  class.  The  most  exalted  eulogies  were  lavished 
on  kings;  but  Brahmans  were  to  act  as  their  advisers  and 
to  have  much  of  the  judicial  authority  and  interpretation 
of  the  laws  in  their  own  hands,  and  were  always  theoreti- 
cally superior  in  rank — a  circumstance  which  led  in  the 
end  to  jealousies,  feuds,  and  even  internecine  warfare 
between  the  first  two  classes.  Certain  privileges  also 
naturally  fell  to  the  Yaisyas,  and  both  they  and  the 
Kshatriyas  were  equally  with  the  Brahmans  entitled  to 
the  appellation  Dvi-ja,  '  twice-born.'  Their  whole  status, 
however,   depended  upon  various  domestic  rites,   to  the 


1  The  Agnishtoma  is  a  protracted  sacrifice  of  five  days'  duration,  per- 
formed by  one  who  is  desirous  of  obtaining  heaven.  It  is  either  a  part  or 
a  modification  of  the  Jyotishtoma,  and  in  ancient  times  required  sixteen 
priests. 

2  That  is,  probably,  '  the  Kalpa  Siitras.' 

^  The  title  Guru,  however,  appears  to  have  been  applied  in  a  general 
way  to  all  spiritual  preceptors,  cf.  p.  238.  It  is  sometimes  used  alone 
as  a  distinctive  epithet  of  Prabha-kara,  a  teacher  of  the  Mimansa,  often 
named  in  conjunction  with  Kumarila,  to  denote  whom  the  title  Bhatta 
is  generally  employed  in  the  same  way.  According  to  Yajnavalkya  I.  34, 
a  Guru  is  one  who  imparts  the  Veda,  while  an  Adarya  is  one  who  invests 
with  the  Yajnopavita  or  '  sacred  thread.'  Similarly  in  the  Panjab  the 
teachers  of  the  Grantha  (Granthis)  are  called  Gurus. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANTJ.  233 

due  conduct  of  which  the  superintendence  of  Brahmans 
was  indispensable.  Yet,  in  spite  of  the  importance  and 
dignity  thus  attached  to  the  priestly  office,  a  Brahman, 
according  to  Manu's  Code,  was  by  hirth  and  divine  right 
— not  by  profession  or  self-elevation — at  the  head  of  all 
creatures.  He  was  born  a  Brahman  and  did  not  become 
one.  He  not  only  inherited  superiority  as  his  birthright, 
but  was  created  a  leader  of  mankind — a  sort  of  deity  in 
human  shape — by  the  fiat  of  the  great  Creator  himself. 

He  is  declared,  in  Book  I.  8y,  to  have  proceeded  from 
the  mouth  of  Brahma,  as  the  Kshatriya  did  from  his  arm, 
the  Vaisya  from  his  tbigh,  and  the  Sudra  from  his  foot. 
Manu's  theory,  in  short,  was  that  the  distinction  of  caste 
and  the  inherent  superiority  of  one  class  over  the  three 
others  was  as  much  a  law  of  nature  and  a  matter  of  divine 
appointment,  as  the  creation  of  separate  classes  of  animals, 
with  insurmountable  differences  of  physical  constitution, 
such  as  elephants,  lions,  horses,  and  dogs. 

That  the  Brahmans  assumed  a  pre-eminence  nothing 
short  of  divine,  is  clear  from  numerous  passages.  I  select 
the  following  : — 

Since  the  Brahman  sprang  from  the  most  excellent  part,  since  he  has 
the  priority  arising  from  primogeniture  (jyaishthydt),  and  since  he  pos- 
sesses the  Veda,  he  is  by  right  the  lord  (prabhu)  of  this  whole  creation 
(I.  93.     See  also  p.  223  of  this  volume). 

A  Brahman,  whether  learned  or  unlearned,  is  a  mighty  divinit}- 
{daivatam  mahaf),  just  as  fire  is  a  mighty  divinity,  whether  consecrated 
(jpranita)  or  unconsecrated  (IX.  317). 

Even  when  Brahmans  employ  themselves  in  all  sorts  of  inferior  occu- 
pations {an-ishteshu),  they  must  under  all  circumstances  be  honoured, 
for  they  are  to  be  regarded  as  supreme  divinities  (paramam  daivatam, 
IX.  319). 

From  his  high  birth  alone  (samihavenaiva)  a  Brahman  is  regarded  as 
a  divinity  even  by  the  gods  (devandm  api).  His  teaching  must  be 
accepted  by  the  rest  of  the  world  as  an  infallible  authority  {jtramdnam), 
for  the  Veda  (brahma)  itself  is  the  cause  (of  its  being  so  accepted, 
XL  84). 


2  34  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Consistently  with  the  divine  nature  thus  ascribed  to 
the  Brahman,  he  is  declared  to  possess  poM'ers  of  the  most 
tremendous  and  awe-inspiring  character  : — 

Let  not  a  king,  although  fallen  into  the  greatest  distress  (through  a 
deficiency  of  revenue),  provoke  Brahmans  to  anger  (by  taking  revenue 
from  them),  for  they,  if  once  enraged,  could  instantly  (by  pronouncing 
curses  and  mystical  texts)  destroy  him  with  all  his  army  and  retinue. 

"Who,  without  bringing  destruction  on  himself,  can  provoke  those 
men,  by  whose  imprecation  (abhiSdpena,  KuUuka)  all-devouring  fire  was 
created,  and  by  whom  the  undrinkable  ocean  was  swallowed,^  and  the 
wasted  moon  restored  to  its  full  size  ^  {wpydyitah  =  paScdt  jpuritak,  IX. 

3i3>  3M)? 

What  king  would  gain  increase  of  revenue  by  oppressing  those  who, 
if  angry,  could  create  other  worlds  and  guardians  of  worlds  (Idlca-pdldn), 
and  could  create  new  gods  and  mortals  (IX.  315)  ? 

A  Brahman  well  skilled  in  the  law,  need  not  make  any  representa- 

*  tion  to  the  king  (if  he  has  received  an  injury),  for,  by  his  own  power 

(svavlryena),  he  may  punish  (sishydt)  those  who  injure  him.    His  own 

power  is  stronger  than  the  power  of  the  king,  therefore  by  his  own 

might  may  a  Brahman  chastise  (nigrihmydt)  his  foes.     He  may,  with- 


1  This  seems  to  refer  to  the  legend  of  Agastya,  who  is  said  to  have 
swallowed  the  ocean  and  was  afterwards  raised  to  be  regent  of  the  star 
Canopus.     Much,  however,  of  the  detail  of  this  legend  must  be  later. 

2  This  refers  to  the  legend  of  Candra,  '  the  Moon,'  afflicted  with  con- 
sumption for  fifteen  days  by  his  father-in-law,  Daksha,  because  of  his 
(the  Moon's)  partiality  for  Rohini,  one  of  Daksha's  daughters,  some  of 
whom  had  become  his  wives.  On  the  Moon's  repentance,  his  wasted 
strength  and  size  were  restored.  Manu  IX.  129  states  that  Daksha  gave 
ten  of  his  daughters  to  Dharma,  thirteen  to  Kasyapa,  and  twenty-seven 
to  Soma,  the  Moon.  The  legend  of  Daksha's  daughters  is  found  (like 
many  other  of  Manu's  allusions)  in  the  Taittiriya-samhita,  ii.  3,  5  : 
'  Prajapati  had  thirty-three  daughters — he  gave  them  to  king  Soma ; 
among  them  he  only  went  to  Rohini.  The  others  jealous  returned  [to 
their  father]  :  he  went  after  them,  he  sought  them  again ;  but  he  [the 
father]  did  not  give  them  again  to  him.  He  said  to  him,  "  Take  an 
oath  that  you  will  go  to  them  alike,  then  I  will  give  them  to  you 
again."  He  took  an  oath ;  he  gave  them  back  to  him.  He  only  out 
of  them  went  to  Rohini.  Him,  the  king  [Soma],  consumption  attacked. 
This  is  the  origin  of  the  Raja-yakshma.' 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  235 

out  hesitation,  make  use  of  (as  magical  formularies)  the  sacred  texts 
(Jrutlh)  revealed  to  Atharvan  and  An-giras  (Atharvdn-giraslh,  see 
p.  6)  ;  for  the  uttering  of  texts  {vdk  =  ahliicara-mantroccaranam)  is  the 
weapon  (sastram)  of  a  Brahman ;  with  that  he  may  destroy  his  foes 
(XI.  31-33)- 

The  crime  of  striking  and  killing  a  Brahman  involves, 
of  course,  terrible  consequences,  thus  : — 

He  who  merely  assails  a  Brahman  with  intent  to  kill  him  will  con- 
tinue in  hell  {naralmm)  for  a  hundred  years,  and  he  who  actually 
strikes  him,  a  thousand  years  (XI.  206.  Compare  also  IV.  165,  where 
it  is  said  that  the  hell  to  which  he  will  be  consigned,  and  where  he 
will  be  made  to  wander  about  incessantly,  is  called  Tdmisra,  '  profound 
darkness '). 

As  many  particles  of  dust  (pdnmn)  as  the  blood  of  a  Brahman 
absorbs  from  the  soil,  so  many  thousands  of  years  must  the  shedder 
of  that  blood  abide  in  hell  (XI.  207). 

The  above  may  be  thought  an  exaggeration  of  the 
powers  and  status  claimed  by  the  highest  order  of  Hindu 
society,  and  doubtless  the  compiler  of  the  Code  often  draws 
an  ideal  picture  of  a  condition  of  things  which  never  actu- 
ally existed,  and  was  never  likely  to  exist;  much  in  the 
same  manner  as  we  in  England  maintain  that  our  king 
can  do  no  wrong.  Yet  in  the  matter  of  the  Brahman  we  are 
compelled  to  accept  the  colouring  as,  in  the  main,  truthful. 
Some  time  ago  there  appeared  in  a  leading  journal  a  report 
of  a  sermon  preached  by  a  converted  Brahman,  in  which 
the  preacher  asserted  that  the  Brahmans  of  the  present  day 
pretend  to  '  dethrone  the  Creator  and  put  themselves  in 
his  place.  Moreover,  that  he  himself  (the  preacher)  had 
claimed  and  received  divine  honours,  and  had  seen  be- 
lievers (among  his  own  fellow-countrymen)  greedily  drink 
the  water  in  which  his  feet  had  been  washed.'  ^ 

1  The  Rev.  Narayan  S'eshadri  (a  Marathi  name  derived  from  the  ser- 
pent-like folds  of  the  serpent  S'esha,  Yishnu's  seat),  who  preached  on 
Easter  Sunday,  April  5,  1874  (in  a  Presbyterian  Church  in  Kensington 


236  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

It  may  be  asked  how  did  the  Brahman,  laden  with  all 
this  weight  of  dignity  and  theoretically  debarred  from  all 
other  occupations,  except  studying  and  teaching  the  Veda, 
and  performing  religious  rites,  contrive  to  support  him- 
self? The  answer  is  that  he  took  care  to  provide  for  his 
own  material  comforts  ^  by  making  the  efficacy  of  all  repe- 
titions of  the  Veda  and  all  sacrificial  rites  depend  upon  tLe 
gifts  (dahshindh)  with  which  they  were  accompanied : — 

A  sacrifice  performed  witli  trifling  presents  (alpa-dakshinah)  destroys 
the  organs  of  sense,  fame,  heaven,  life,  reputation,  offspring,  cattle ; 
therefore  let  no  man  undertake  a  sacrifice  who  has  not  plenty  of  money 
to  make  liberal  gifts  (XI.  40). 


Park  Road),  a  sermon,  the  report  of  which  appeared  in  the  next  day's 
Daily  News.  He  embraced  the  Christian  faith  on  September  13,  1843. 
He  had  to  give  up  father,  mother,  three  brothers,  and  three  sisters. 
Such  is  the  condition  of  Brahmanical  society  that  a  man  must  renounce 
all  former  associations  when  converted.  I  subjoin  a  further  portion  of 
the  matter  reported  as  preached.  '  He  had  been  emptied  of  Hindooism. 
This  creed  dealt  largely  in  the  marvellous ;  for  instance,  it  is  said  that 
one  great  saint  drank  up  all  the  ocean  in  three  sips,  and  was  afterwards 
seated  among  the  constellations  on  account  of  this  feat.  But  there  was 
a  philosophic  as  well  as  a  popular  form  of  Hindooism.  There  were 
atheistical  and  theistical  forms,  the  latter  having  as  many  advocates 
in  India  as  it  had  in  this  country,  in  Germany,  and  in  the  United 
States.  He  dwelt  at  length  on  the  pantheistic  notion  of  Brahm, 
which  ignored  man's  responsibility.  Man's  sins,  in  fact,  became  God's 
sins ;  and  gradually  the  preacher  had  become  convinced  that  this  was 
blasphemy.' 

1  This  appears  to  hold  good  even  in  the  present  day ;  for  Professor 
Ramkrishna  Bhandarkar,  writing  in  the  '  Indian  Antiquary '  for  May 
1874,  remarks  that  repetition  of  the  Veda  for  dahshind  still  prevails  in 
Gujarat,  and  to  a  much  greater  extent  in  the  Marathi  country  and 
Tailangana.  'Numbers  of  Brahmans  go  about  to  all  parts  of  the 
country  in  search  of  daJisMnd,  and  all  well-to-do  natives  patronise 
them  according  to  their  means,  by  getting  them  to  repeat  portions  of 
their  Veda,  which  is  mostly  the  Black  Yajush,  with  Apastamba  for 
their  Sutra.  Hardly  a  week  passes  here  in  Bombay  in  which  no 
Tailanga  Brahman  comes  to  ask  me  for  dakshind.' 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  237 

Let  a  man,  according  to  his  ability,  give  wealth  to  Brahmans  who 
know  the  Yedas  and  keep  apart  from  the  world.  By  so  doing  he 
obtains  heaven  when  he  dies  (XI.  6). 

A  king,  even  though  dying  (from  want),  must  not  receive  taxes  from 
a  Brahman  learned  in  the  Vedas,  nor  must  he  allow  such  a  Brahman 
dwelling  in  his  country  to  pine  away  with  hunger.  Of  that  king  in 
whose  territory  a  Brahman  learned  in  the  Vedas  wastes  with  hunger, 
the  whole  kingdom  will  in  a  short  time  be  wasted  with  famine  (VII. 

i33>  144)- 

All  that  exists  in  this  universe  is  the  Brahmans'  property  (I.  100). 

Moreover,  when  the  increase  of  the  Brahmanical  class 
compelled  the  secularization  of  many  of  its  members,  they 
were  allowed  to  engage  in  the  occupations  of  the  other 
classes.  This  was  afc  first  only  permitted  under  circum- 
stnnces  of  exigency  and  distress.  Some  verses  in  XII.  71, 
X.  75,  76,  80-82,  lay  down  the  law  on  this  point : — 

A  Brahman  who  swerves  from  his  own  peculiar  duty  is,  on  depart- 
ing this  life,  born  again  as  a  vomit-eating  demon  called  Ulka-mukha 
(XII.  71). 

Repetition  (or  study)  of  the  Veda  (adhyayanam),  expounding  it  (or 
literally,  teaching  others  to  repeat  it,  adhydpanam),  sacrificing  {yaja- 
nam)  and  assisting  others  to  sacrifice  (ydjanam),  giving  (ddnam)  and 
receiving  gifts  {pratigrahah)  are  the  six  legitimate  acts^  [sliat-harmdni) 
of  a  Brahman.  Of  these  six  acts,  three  are  the  means  of  his  subsistence, 
viz. ,  assisting  at  sacrifices,  teaching  the  Veda,  and  receiving  presents  from 
a  pious  giver  (viiuddhdt).  These  three  privileges  {dharmdh)  are  limited 
to  Brahmans,  and  do  not  extend  to  Kshatriyas  (X.  75-77).  Hence  a 
Brahman  is  called  Tri-lcarman,  'one  who  engages  in  three  acts.' 

The  most  proper  occupation  for  the  Brahman  is  teaching  and  expound- 
ing the  Veda  (vedabhydsah)  ;  for  a  Kshatriya,  defending  the  people ;  for 
a  Vai^ya,  agriculture,  keeping  cattle,  and  trade  {vdrtd-liarma  ''■).  Yet  a 
Brahman,  unable  to  subsist  by  his  proper  employment,  may  live  by  the 
duty  of  a  soldier,  for  that  is  the  next  in  dignity.    If  it  be  asked,  how  is 

1  Called  the  '  six  privileges.'  A  particular  tribe  of  Konkan  Brahmans 
is  said  to  be  excluded  from  these  privileges  because  its  members  eat  fish. 

2  This  word  vdrta-karman,  as  may  be  gathered  from  Kulluka's  com- 
mentary on  these  three  verses,  includes  krislii,  go-rahslia,  and  hdnijya. 
The  caste-division  of  Megasthenes  (note  i,  p.  224)  separates  these  three. 


238  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

he  to  live  if  unable  to  subsist  by  either  of  these  occupations  ?  the  answer 
is  that  he  may  adopt  the  mode  of  life  of  a  Yaisya  (X.  80-82.  See  also 
X.  loi,  102.     Cf.  note  3,  p.  227). 

Here  are  some  of  the  rules  by  which  the  whole  exist- 
ence of  a  Brahman  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave  was 
regulated : — 

Every  Brahman  was  supposed  to  pass  through  four 
Asramas  or  '  Orders,'^ — that  is  to  say,  his  life  was  divided 
iuto  four  stages  or  periods  according  as  he  became  succes- 
sively, I.  Eeligious  student  {h'ahma-cdrin) ;  2.  House- 
holder (^n"to-s^A«) ;  3.  Anchorite  or  hermit  {vdnaprastha) ; 
4.  Eeligious  mendicant  {bhikshu  or  parivrdjaka  or  san- 
nydsin).  For  the  regulation  of  his  life  in  the  first  two  of 
these  periods  the  most  minute  instructions  are  spread  over 
the  2iid,  3rd,  4th,  and  5th  Books  with  much  wearisome 
detail  and  repetition.^ 

To  begin  with  the  religious  student.  The  young 
Brahman  is  to  reside  with  his  preceptor  {guru)  until 
he  has  gained  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  three  Vedas. 
This  residence  may  continue  for  thirty-six  years,  or  for 
half  that  time,  or  for  a  quarter  of  it,  according  to  his 
capacity  for  acquiring  the  requisite  instruction  (cf.  Grihya 
Sutras,  p.  193).  He  may  even, be  a  student  for  life  (naish- 
thika,  III.  I,  II.  243). 

He  is  of  course  to  go  through  all  the  twelve  Sanskaras 
or  'purificatory  rites'  (II.  27,  &c.).  They  are  supposed  to 
purify  a  man  from  the  taint  of  sin  derived  from  his  parents 
(gdrhhikam  enas),  and  are  enjoined,  with  certain  variations, 
on  all  the  three  first  classes  alike  ;  some  being  performed 


1  It  is  interesting  to  find  that  Megasthenes  (Strabo  XV.  i,  59), 
three  centuries  B.C.,  had  noted  that  Brahmans,  even  from  the  time  of 
conception  {^Sri  &'  il6ii;  xa)  xvo/i'ivoug),  were  under  the  care  of  learned 
men,  and  lived  for  thirty-seven  years  as  philosophers  before  becoming 
householders. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  339 

before  the  birth  of  a  male  child,  and  some  during  the  first 
year  after  birth.     I  here  enumerate  them  : — 

I.  GarhJiadhdna  or  Garbha-lamhhana,  'the  ceremony  on  conception' 
(p.  192);  2.  Punsavana  (p.  192);  3.  Simantonnayana  (p.  192);  4.  Jdta- 
karman  (p.  192) ;  5.  Ndma-karman  or  Ndma-ltarana,  '  the  ceremony  of 
giving  a  name '  on  the  tenth  or  twelfth  day  after  birth  (Manu  II.  30) ; 
6.  Nish-ltramana,  '  taking  out  the  child '  in  the  fourth  month  to  see 
the  sun  (II.  34);  7.  Anna-prd^ana  (p.  192);  8.  6udd-karman  or  6aula 
(p.  192);  9.  IJpanapana  {-p.  192);  10.  Kesdnta,  '  cutting  o£F  the  hair,' 
performed  on  a  Brahman  in  his  sixteenth  year,  on  a  Kshatriya  in  his 
twenty-second,  on  a  Vaisya  in  his  twenty-fourth  (Manu  II.  65);  11. 
Samdvartana,  performed  on  the  student's  return  home  after  completing 
his  studies  with  his  preceptor  (pp.  195,  242);  12.  Vivdha,  'marriage.' 
This  last  is  the  principal  purificatory  rite  for  women ;  but  they  are 
allowed  some  of  the  others,  provided  there  is  an  omission  of  the 
Mantras  or  Vedic  texts,  with  which  all  the  Sanskaras  were  accompanied 
(II.  66,  67). 

It  is  noteworthy  that  marriage  is  the  twelfth  Sanskara, 
and  hence  a  religious  duty  incumbent  upon  all,  completing 
the  purification  and  regeneration  of  the  twice-born  : — 

Of  the  above  twelve  rites,  i,  2,  3,  and  10  are  little  observed.  The 
other  eight  are  more  worthy  of  attention  ;  8  and  9  are  of  considerable 
legal  importance  even  in  the  present  day,  and  7  is  still  practised.  7 
and  12  are  said  to  be  the  only  rites  allowed  to  Sudras.  Other 
Sanskaras,  practised  in  some  parts  of  India,  are  mentioned,  such  as 
Karna-vedlia,  '  boring  the  ears  ; '  and  occasionally  the  imparting  of  the 
Savitri  or  'sacred  Vedic  text'  (  =  Gayatri,  p.  17),  which  ought  to  be 
performed  at  TJpanayana,  is  reserved  for  a  separate  ceremony  four  days 
later. 

But  the  most  important  of  the  above  Sanskaras  is 
Upanayana,  'investiture  with  the  sacred  cord,'  already 
described  in  the  Grihya  Sutras  (p.  192).  This  cord, 
which  is  a  thin  coil  of  three  threads,  commonly  called 
the  Yajnopavita  or  '  sacrificial  thread,'  is  worn  over  the 
left  shoulder  and  allowed  to  hang  down  diagonally  across 
the  body  to  the  right  hip,  and  the  wearing  of  it  by  the  three 


240  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

twice-born  classes  was  the  mark  of  their  second  birth.''     A 
third  birth  is  mentioned  for  Brahmans  (II.  169) : — 

The  first  birth  is  from  the  natural  mother;  the  second  from  the  binding 
on  of  the  girdle  (maunji-'bandhane)  ;  the  third  is  at  initiation  into  sacrifi- 
cial rites  (as  the  j'yotishtoma,  &c.),  according  to  a  precept  of  the  Veda. 

There  was  some  difference  in  the  kind  of  thread  worn, 
according  to  the  class  of  the  wearer.     In  II.  44  we  read  : — 

The  sacred  cord  of  a  Brahman  must  be  of  cotton  (lidrpdsa)  so  as  to  be 
put  on  over  his  head  in  a  coil  of  three  threads  (tri-vrit) ;  that  of  a 
Kshatriya  of  flax  or  hemp  {sana) ;  that  of  a  Vaisya  of  wool  {aoiha). 

[In  the  previous  two  verses  Manu  intimates  that  a  Brahman  must  also 
have  a  girdle  (mehhald)  either  of  Munja  grass  or  of  Kusa  grass.  From 
II.  169,  170,  it  might  be  inferred  that  the  girdle  and  sacrificial  thread 
are  equivalent,  but  II.  174  clearly  distinguishes  them.  The  leather 
mantle,  thread,  girdle,  staff,  and  underclothing  are,  all  five,  prescribed 
at  the  time  of  Upanayana,  and  the  binding  on  of  the  girdle  seems  to 
complete  the  rite.] 

The  ceremony  of  investiture  begins  by  the  youth's 
standing  opposite  the  sun  and  walking  thrice  round  the 
fire.  Then  girt  with  the  thread,  he  asks  alms  from  the 
assembled  company.  This  begging  for  alms  still  consti- 
tutes part  of  the  rite,  and  indicates  that  the  youth  under- 
takes to  provide  himself  and  his 'preceptor  [guru,  dSdrya), 
with  food  (p.  193).  The  Giiru  then  initiates  him  into  the 
daily  use  of  the  Savitii  or  holy  prayer  in  the  three  mea- 
sured Gayatri  (pp.  17,  154),  preceded  by  three  suppressions 
of  breath  (tribhih  prdndydmaih),  the  triliteral  syllable 
Om,  and  three  Vyahritis  or  mystical  words,  Bhur  Bhuvah 
Svar,^  and  admits  him  to  the  privilege  of  repeating  the 


1  It  is  still  worn,  but  the  word  Yajnopaviia  for  'the  sacred  thread' 
has  been  corrupted  into  Jane-o.  In  Bengali  it  is  called  Poitd  for 
Favitra. 

2  The  utterance  of  these  three  mystical  words,  meaning  '  earth,  the 
middle  region,  and  heaven'  (note  2,  p.  55),  together  with  the  awful 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  24 1 

three  Vedas,  and  of  performing  other  religious  rites,  none 
of  which  are  allowed  before  investiture  (II.  171,  173).  The 
Guru  or  Acarya  is  thus  his  spiritual  father. 

Purifications,  ablutions,  and  libations  (called  Savanas) 
are  enjoined  on  Vanaprasthas  or  'hermits'  (p.  254)  at  all 
the  three  Sandhyas,^  that  is,  at  the  three  divisions  of  the 
day — sunrise,  noon,  and  sunset — but  on  Brahma-carins 
and  Griha-sthas  at  the  two  Sandhyas  of  sunrise  and 
sunset  only,  when  the  Gayatri  (p.  1 7)  is  by  all  means  to 
be  repeated.     Thus  in  II.  222,  we  have  : — 

Let  him  constantly  observe  the  two  Sandhyas  according  to  rule, 
sipping  water,  with  all  his  organs  controlled  and  with  fixed  attention, 
repeating  the  Gayatri  prayer  (japyam,  which  ought  to  be  repeated). 

The  young  Brahman  is  also  every  day  to  bathe ;  to 
offer  oblations  of  water  (tarpana)  to  the  gods,  holy  sages 
[Rishis]  generally,  and  departed  ancestors  (Pitris) ;  to 
reverence  the  deities  [according  to  Kulltika,  Devatd  =^pra- 
timd,  the  images  of  the  deities] ;  and  to  offer  an  oblation 
of  fuel  to  the  sacred  fire  (II.  176).  But  in  V.  88  he  is 
forbidden  to  perform  the  regular  offerings  of  water  to 
deceased  persons,  till  his  studentship  is  completed.  He 
is  to  abstain  from  meat,  perfumes,  unguents,  sensuality, 
wrath,  covetousness,  dancing,  music,  gambling,  detraction 

syllable  Oin  (pp.  93,  214),  is  supposed  to  be  attended  with  marvellous 
and  mysterious  effects  (see  II.  76,  79,  83,  84).  Note  the  sacredness 
attached  to  the  number  three. 

^  See  Book  VI.  22,  24,  and  compare  Kulluka,  savaneshu  sndyat, 
pratar-madhyandina-sdyam  savaneshu  trishu  devarsM-pitri-tarpanam 
kunan.  Sandhya  often  means  'twilight,'  but  is  applied  to  morning 
and  evening  twilight  and  to  the  change  from  midday  to  afternoon. 
With  reference  to  the  Hindu  and  Mohammedan  custom  of  performing 
religious  rites  three  times  a  day,  we  may  compare  a  passage  in  Daniel, 
who  'kneeled  upon  his  knees  three  times  a  day,  and  prayed,  and  gave 
thanks  before  his  God,'  Dan.  vi.  10.  And  David  says,  'Evening,  and 
morning,  and  at  noon,  will  I  pray,  and  cry  aloud,'  Ps.  Iv.  1 7. 

Q 


242  .  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

of  others,  falsehood,  impurity  of  all  kinds,  and  is  never  to 
injure  any  being  (II.  177-179). 

Every  day,  too,  both  morning  and  evening,  he  is  to 
go  round  the  neighbouring  villages  begging  for  food  for 
himself  and  his  preceptor,  and  collecting  fuel  for  the  main- 
tenance of  the  sacred  fire  (II.  187), 

He  is  always  to  pay  the  most  profound  respect  to  his 
religious  teacher  (guru),  as  well  as  to  his  parents  and  to 
all  persons  older  than  himself : — 

By  reverencing  his  mother  he  gains  this  terrestrial  world ;  by  rever- 
encing his  father,  the  middle  world;  by  constant  attention  to  his  spiritual 
master  (guru),  the  celestial  world  of  Brahma  (II.  233). 

A  youth  who  habitually  salutes  and  constantly  reveres  the  aged, 
prospers  in  four  things,  life,  knowledge,  fame,  and  strength  (II.  121). 

In  short,  even  Christians  may  learn  from  Hindus,  as 
indeed  from  Oriental  nations  generally,^  '  to  love,  honour, 
and  succour  their  father  and  mother,  to  submit  them- 
selves to  all  their  governors,  teachers,  spiritual  pastors 
and  masters,  and  to  order  themselves  lowly  and  reverently 
to  all  their  betters ; '  and,  moreover,  to  extend  the  duty  of 
'hurting  nobody  by  word  or  deed'  to  animals  and  the 
whole  inferior  creation.^ 

On  completing  his  studies  the  young  Brahman  is  to  give 
some  valuable  present  to  his  preceptor.  He  is  then  to 
perform  the  proper  Sanskara  ceremony  of  ablution  {sndna) 
on  the  occasion  of  his  solemn  return  to  his  own  home 
{samdvartana),  as  already  described  (see  pp.  195,  239) : — 

Let  not  a  student  whd  knows  his  duty  make  a  present  to  his  spiritual 
master  before  the  ceremony  on  his  return ;  but  when,  being  permitted 
by  his  preceptor,  he  is  about  to  perform  the  requisite  ablution  (sndsyan), 

1  Notably  from  the  Chinese  as  well  as  from  the  Hindus. 

2  I  am  told,  however,  that,  notwithstanding  the  strict  rules  of  Orhinsd, 
the  '  Society  for  Prevention  of  Cruelty  to  Animals  '  might  iind  work  to 
do  in  some  parts  of  India. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  243 

let  him  offer  him  some  valuable  article  (gurv-artham,  such  as  a  field, 
gold,  a  jewel,  cow,  horse,  &c.)  as  a  gift  to  the  best  of  his  ability  (II. 
245,  246). 

The  young  Brahman's  return  to  his  own  house  is  made 
an  occasion  of  festivity ;  he  is  decked  with  flowers  and 
receives  a  present  of  a  cow  (III.  3).  He  is  then  to  select 
a  wife  of  the  same  class  with  himself,  endowed  with 
auspicious  marks  (lakshana),  and  thereupon  he  enters  the 
second  A&ama,  and  becomes  a  householder  (griha-stha). 
Some  curious  directions  for  his  guidance  in  choosing  a 
wife  are  given  (III.  8-10)  : — 

Let  him  not  marry  a  girl  with  reddish  hair,  nor  one  with  a  superfluity 
of  limbs  (as,  for  instance,  one  with  six  fingers),  nor  one  who  is  sickly, 
nor  one  with  either  too  little  or  too  much  hair,  nor  one  who  talks  too 
much,  nor  one  who  is  red-eyed,  nor  one  named  after  a  constellation, 
a  tree,  or  a  river,  nor  one  with  a  barbarous  name  {antya  =  mleccha), 
or  the  name  of  a  mountain,  a  bird,  a  snake,  a  slave,  or  any  frightful 
object.  But  let  him  marry  a  woman  without  defective  or  deformed 
limbs,  having  an  agreeable  name,  whose  gait  is  like  that  of  a  flamingo 
(hansa)  or  elephant,  ^  whose  hair  and  teeth  are  moderate  in  quantity, 
and  whose  whole  body  is  soft. 

We  have  seen  that  marriage  is  a  Sanskara.  Hence  it 
is  a  religious  duty  and  a  purificatory  rite  (p.  239). 

It  is  clear  from  III.  12-15,  IX.  45,  loi,  that,  as  a 
general  rule,  a  twice-born  man  is  expected  to  have  one 
wife  only ;  but  polygamy  is  not  illegal,  and  he  might  take 
other  wives  of  classes  diffierent  from  his  own,  being  careful 
to  settle  their  precedence  according  to  the  order  of  these 
classes  (IX.  85).  A  Brahman  might  thus  have  four  wives, 
one  from  his  own  class  and  one  from  each  of  the  three 
classes  below  him  ;  a  Kshatriya  three ;  and  a  Vaisya  two. 
But  the  sons  of  inferior  wives  are  degraded  and  called 

1  That  is,  having  a  kind  of  rolling  gait,  corresponding  to  Homer's 


244  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Apasadah  (X.  lo).  Nevertheless,  if  there  be  four  wives  of 
a  Brahman  in  the  order  of  the  classes,  and  sons  are  born 
to  all  four  wives,  there  is  a  rule  for  dividing  the  inherit- 
ance between  them  (IX.  149). 

Manu's  eight  forms  of  marriage  are  specified  in  the 
Grihya  Sutras  (see  p.  190).  Of  these  the  first  four,  viz., 
that  of  Brahma  (which  is  described  as  'the  gift  of  a 
daughter  to  a  man  learned  in  the  Veda'),  the  Devas 
(daiva),  Rishis  {drsha),  and  Prajapatis  (prajapatya),  are 
the  most  approved  for  a  Brahman.  The  Gandharva 
marriage  ('  from  affection  without  any  nuptial  rite  ')  and 
Eakshasa  ('marrying  a  girl  carried  off  as  a  prize  in  war') 
were  allowable  for  Kshatriyas ;  the  Asura  and  Paisaca 
were  prohibited. 

A  description  has  been  given  of  one  of  the  oldest  mar- 
riage rites  (p.  190),  as  well  as  of  the  ceremony  on  com- 
mencing residence  in  a  new  house  (p.  193).  The  house- 
holder is  to  fulfil  every  day  all  his  domestic  religious  duties 
(grihyam  harma),  some  of  which,  such  as  the  morning 
and  evening  oblation  {agnihotra,  sdyarri-prdtar-homa),  are 
to  be  performed  with  the  fire  of  the  nuptial  ceremony 
maintained  ever  afterwards  [vaivdhike'  gnau,  III.  67, 
see  p.  28). 

He  is  especially  to  perform  the  five  Mahd-yajndJi,  great 
devotional  acts^  (III.  70,  &c.) :  viz.,  i.  towards  tbe  divine 

1  The  Musalmans  have  also  five  principal  devotional  acts,  but  these 
are  not  all  diurnal.  They  are — i.  Prayer  (namdz)  five  times  a  day, 
practically  reduced  to  three  times,  morning,  midday,  and  evening,  z. 
Alms-giving  (zakdt).  3.  Fasting  (roza),  especially  keeping  the  great 
fast  during  the  ninth  month,  Ramazan  (^Ui^i),  once  a  year.  4.  Pil- 
grimage to  Mecca  (haj)  once  in  a  lifetime.  5.  Confession  of  faith 
(shahddai),  i.e.,  repeating  the  tawhid  or  'declaration  of  faith  in  the 
unity  of  God  : '  '  there  is  no  god  but  God,  and  Muhammad  is  the 
apostle  of  God.'  A  Hajji  is  a  pilgrim  who  has  performed  the  Haj. 
There  is  no  duty  of  pilgrimage  among  the  five  necessary  devotional 
acts  prescribed  by  Manu,  but  the  Hindu  system  has,  nevertheless,  it 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  245 

Rishis,  by  repetition  and  teaching  of  the  Veda  {Brahma- 
yajna) ;  2.  towards  departed  fathers  [Pitri-y  ),  by  the 
Sraddha  ceremonies ;  3.  towards  the  gods  {Deva-y°),  by 
oblations  (homa^)  to  Fire,  Prajapati,  Heaven  and  Earth, 
Indra,  Soma,  &c.  (85-89) ;  4.  towards  all  creatures  {Bhuta- 
y°),  including  good  and  evil  spirits  supposed  to  people  the 
air,  by  the  hali  or  offering  of  rice-grains,  &c.,  generally 
scattered  on  the  house-top  or  outside  the  door  for  animals 
to  devour  (91) ;  5.  towards  men,  by  hospitality  {Manushya- 
y°).  A  description  of  all  five  has  already  been  given  (p.  1 94). 
The  last  four  are  sometimes  called  Paka-yajnas  (II.  86). 
Of  these  five,  the  first,  viz.,  repetition  of  the  Veda  {Brahma- 
yajna,  japa-y°  svadhyaya,^  III.  81,  II.  85,  86),  and  espe- 

Haj.  Purl,  in  Orissa  (the  abode  of  Jagan-nath),  is  described  by  Mr. 
Hunter  as  the  Jerusalem  of  India.  It  is  really  only  one  of  the  Indian 
Meocas.  Other  great  places  of  pilgrimage  {Tlrthas)  are  Haridvar,  in  the 
Himalaya  (one  of  the  most  celebrated),  where  the  Ganges  is  supposed 
to  have  descended  from  the  head  of  S'iva  on  to  the  earth ;  (jitraktit,  in 
Bundelkhand,  Kama's  first  abode  after  his  banishment;  Jvala-mukhi, 
in  the  Panjab,  where  SatI,  wife  of  S'iva,  burned  herself,  and  her  presence 
is  thought  to  be  denoted  by  gas  flaming  from  the  ground. 

1  The  homa  or  '  oblation  of  butter '  was  the  peculiar  offering  to  the  god 
of  fire,  as  the  Soma  juice  was  to  Indra,  the  rain-god.     See  note,  p.  28. 

^  It  seems  to  me  that  Sir  W.  Jones'  usual  translation  of  this  and 
similar  words  by  '  reading  and  studying  the  Veda,'  conveys  a  somewhat 
wrong  idea.  The  words  generally  used  to  denote  the  performance  of 
the  Brahma-yajna  rather  imply  '  going  over  inaudibly  to  one's  self,' 
'  repeating  or  muttering  texts  in  a  low  tone  of  voice.'  It  is  doubtful 
whether  the  Veda  was  ever  read  or  studied  as  we  should  read  a  book 
in  the  present  day.  Neither  the  word  Veda  nor  any  of  the  words 
connected  with  it  imply  truth  written  down  like  our  word  '  Scripture ; ' 
and  for  a  long  period  the  writing  of  it  was  discouraged,  if  not  prohibited. 
The  very  object  of  the  long  residence  with  a  Guru  (see  p.  238)  was  to 
learn  to  repeat  the  sacred  texts  by  heart,  not  to  study  them.  Indeed, 
very  little  mention  of  writing  is  made  in  Manu.  Even  written  evidence 
is  not  alluded  to  as  it  is  in  Yajnavalkya.  In  connection  with  the  repe- 
tition of  the  Veda  at  the  present  day  I  here  give  the  substance  of  an 
interesting  article  by  Professor  Bhandarkar  in  the  '  Indian  Antiquary ' 


246  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

cially  of  the  Gayatii  text,  is  regarded  as  the  most  effica- 
cious ;  and  a  peculiar  virtue  is  attributed  to  its  being 
repeated  in  a  low  tone  or  even  mentally  : — 

The  Japa-yajna  or  '  repetition  of  the  Veda '  is  declared  to  be  ten 
times  superior  to  the  Vidhi-yajna  (or  appointed  oblations  at  the  changes 
of  the  moon,  called  Daria  and  Paurnamdsa,  see  note,  p.  28)  ;  a  hundred 
times  superior,  if  it  is  muttered  in  a  low  voice  (■updnJu) ;  and  a  thousand 
times  superior,  if  it  is  only  mentally  repeated  (indnasah,  II.  85). 

The  four  Paka-yajnas,  even  when  accompanied  with  the  Vidhi-yajna, 
are  not  together  worth  a  sixteenth  part  of  the  Japa-yajna  (II.  86). 

A  Brahman  becomes  fit  for  beatitude  by  simple  repetition  of  the 
Veda,  whether  he  perform  other  rites  or  not ;  of  this  there  is  no  doubt 
(II.  87). 

Let  him  habitually  repeat  (ahhyaset  =japet)  the  Veda  at  the  right 
season  without  weariness,  for  that  is  called  his  highest  duty  {paw 
dharmah) ;  every  other  duty  is  called  subordinate  {upa  -  dharmah, 
IV.  147). 

The  filial  piety  of  the  Hindus  is  notably  manifested 


for  May  1874.  Every  Brahmanic  family  is  devoted  to  the  study  of  a 
particular  Veda  or  S'akha  of  a  Veda,  and  its  family  domestic  rites  are 
performed  in  accordance  with  the  Sutra  of  that  Veda,  In  JSTorthern 
India  the  favourite  Veda  is  the  White  Yajur-veda  in  its  Madhyandina 
S'akha,  but  the  study  has  almost  died  out  except  at  Benares.  (According 
to  Mr.  Burnell  the  Black  Yajur-veda  is  the  favourite  in  the  Telugu 
country.)  Brahmans  of  each  Veda  are  divided  into  two  classes — 
Grihasthas,  who  are  devoted  to  worldly  avocations,  and  Bhikshukas, 
who  study  the  sacred  texts  and  perform  religious  rites.  Both  classes 
have  to  repeat  the  Sandhya-vandana  or  '  morning  and  evening  prayers ' 
(see  p.  241),  which  principally  consist  of  the  Gayatrl  (see  p.  17),  re- 
cited five,  ten,  twenty-eight,  or  a  hundred  and  eight  times.  Besides 
these  prayers,  many  perform  daily  the  Brahma-yajna,  incumbent  on  all 
alike  on  certain  occasions.  This  for  Eig-vedi  Brahmans  consists  of — 
I.  Part  of  Eig-veda  I.  i.  2.  Aitareya-brahmana  I.  i.  3.  Portions  of 
the  Aitareya-aranyaka  (1-5).  4.  The  opening  text  or  a  portion  of  the 
White  Yajur-veda.  5.  Of  the  Sama-veda.  6.  Of  the  Atharva-veda. 
7.  Of  the  Asvalayana  Kalpa-stitra.  8.  Of  the  Nighajatu.  9.  Of  the 
Nirukta.  10.  Of  the  dhandas.  11.  Of  the  Jyotisha.  12.  Of  the 
S'iksha.     13.  Of  Panini.      14.  Of  Yajnavalkya's  Smriti.     15,  Of  the 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANTJ.  247 

in  the  importance  attaclied  to  the  Sraddhas,  sometimes 
reckoned  as  twelve  in  number  (the  three  principal  being 
Nitya,  'daily;'  Pdrvana,  'monthly;'  Ehoddishta,  'special,' 
p.  199),  consisting  of  an  offering  of  water  {udaka-ddna, 
tarpana)  and  cakes  of  rice-meal,  &c.  (pinda)  to  a  deceased 
father,  grandfather,  and  great-grandfather,  and  to  fore- 
fathers and  progenitors  (Pitris)  collectively,  on  which 
offerings  they  are  supposed  really  to  feed  (III.  237). 
The  custom  was  probably  very  ancient,  as  the  Pitris  are 
addressed  with  the  utmost  reverence  in  the  Rig-veda 
(VI.  52.  4,  VII.  35.  12,  X.  14.  7,  8,  &c.  See  p.  18  of 
this  volume). 

The  actual  funeral,  when  the  bodies  of  all  deceased  per- 
sons (except  those  of  infants  up  to  two  years  old,  cf.  p.  299) 
are  burnt,  is  described  at  p.  196.  The  offering  to  deceased 
fathers  at  the  Sraddha  is  the  key  to  the  Hindu  law  of 
inheritance.     It  furnishes  the  principal  evidence  of  kin- 


Mahabharata.  16.  Of  Kanada's  Sutra.  17.  Of  Jaimini's  Mimansa. 
18.  Of  Badarayana's  Yedanta-sutra.  This  course  of  Svadhyaya  is  based 
on  Asvalayana's  Sutra  III.  23  (given  at  p.  195  of  tbis  volume).  ISTo.  i 
corresponds  to  his  Eid ;  4,  5,  6  to  his  Yajur,  Saman,  and  Atharvan- 
giras ;  2,  3  to  his  Brabmanas,  &c.  Those  Bhikshukas  who  have  studied 
the  whole  Yeda  follow  Asvalayana's  precept  ydvan  manyeta  tdvad 
adhltya.  Some  of  them  are  also  Yajnikas,  skilled  in  the  performance 
of  sacred  rites,  and  some  are  Vaidikas,  whose  sole  occupation  in  life  is 
to  learn  the  Vedas  by  heart  in  the  Sambita,  Pada,  Krama,  Jata,  and 
Ghana  arrangement  of  the  texts  (see  p.  152)  without  making  a  single 
mistake  in  the  Sandhi  changes  or  even  in  the  accents.  The  Eig-vedis 
pronounce  the  accents  differently  from  the  Taittiriyaa,  while  the 
Madhyandinas  indicate  the  accents  by  movements  of  the  right  hand. 
In  addition  to  the  Mantra  portion  of  the  Veda,  the  Rig-vedis  learn  to 
recite  the  Brahmana  portion  and  the  Vedan-gas,  including  the  Kalpa 
and  Grihya  Sutras.  At  a  public  recitation  the  first  place  is  given  to 
Rig-yedis,  the  second  to  Yajur- vedis,  and  the  third  to  Sama-vedis  (cf. 
p.  215).  As  the  Black  and  White  Yajur- vedis  are  liable  to  quarrel 
about  precedence,  they  are  not  generally  invited  to  recital-meetings 
(Mantra  jar garas)  together. 


248  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

ship,  on  which,  the  title  to  participate  in  the  patrimony 
is  founded,  no  power  of  making  wills  being  recognized 
in  Mann  or  any  other  authoritative  code  of  Hindii  juris- 
prudence (see  p.  265).  The  Gotra  or  family  is  in  fact  a 
corporate  body  bound  together  by  what  may  be  called 
iSapmrfaship  (Sapindata)  and  Samanodakaship  {Samdno- 
daka-bhdva,  Manu  V.  60).  All  who  offer  the  funeral  cake 
(pinda)  and  water  (udaha)  together  are  Sapindas  and 
Samanodakas  to  each  other,  and  a  kind  of  intercommunion 
and  interdependence  is  thus  continually  maintained  between  " 
the  dead  and  living  members  of  a  family — between  past, 
present,  and  future  generations.  Practically,  however,  the 
closeness  of  the  interconnection  extends  only  to  three 
generations  on  each  side,  so  that  if  we  imagine  a  clasp 
connecting  two  short  chains  of  three  links  each,  this  will 
represent  the  householder  uniting  father,  grandfather,  and 
great-grandfather,  on  the  one  side,  with  son,  grandson, 
and  great-grandson  on  the  other  —  in  all  seven  persons 
connected  by  the  Pinda  (Manu  V.  60).  The  first  three  are 
supposed  to  be  dependent  on  the  living  paterfamilias  for 
their  happiness,  and  even  for  their  support,  through  the 
constant  offering  of  the  sacred  cakes  and  water ;  and  he 
himself,  the  moment  he  dies,  becomes  similarly  dependent 
on  the  three  succeeding  generations. 

The  connection  of  Samanodakaship  lasts  longer,  and 
ends  only  when  the  family  names  are  no  longer  known 
(V.60).     _ 

The  object  of  such  Sraddhas  is  twofold,  viz.,  first,  the 
re-embodying  of  the  soul  of  the  deceased  in  some  kind 
of  form  after  cremation  of  the  corpse,  or  simply  the 
release  of  the  subtile,  body  which  is  to  convey  the  soul 
away  (see  p.  197).  Secondly,  the  raising  him  from  the 
regions  of  the  atmosphere,  where  he  would  have  other- 
wise to  roam  for  an  indefinite  period  among  demons  and 
evil   spirits   to   a   particular   heaven   or   region  of  bliss. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  249 

There  he  is  eventually  half  deified  among  the  shades  of 
departed  kinsmen.  Manu,  however,  is  not  clear  as  to  the 
precise  effect  of  the  Sraddha.  He  merely  states  that  its 
performance  by  a  son  or  the  nearest  male  kinsman  is  neces- 
sary to  deliver  a  father  from  a  kind  of  hell  called  Fut} 
and  that  the  spirits  of  the  departed  (Pitris)  feed  on  the 
offered  food  (III.  237). 

Special  Sraddhas  such  as  these  (p.  199),  which  form  to 
tliis  very  day  the  most  important  religious  rite  among  the 
Hindus,  are  accompanied  with  much  feasting  and  costly 
gifts  to  the  Brahmans  invited  to  assist  at  their  celebra- 
tion^ (III.  145).  The  performance  of  the  first  Sraddha  is 
more  particularly  marked  by  largesses  of  all  kinds,  and 
sometimes,  it  is  said,  costs  a  rich  man  a  sum  equivalent  to 
several  thousand  pounds.^  It  should  take  place  the  day 
after  mourning  expires,  and  then  at  intervals  during 
twelve  successive  months,  this  monthly  ceremony  being 
called  by  Manu  Anmhdrya  (III.  123).  Afterwards  it 
should  be  performed  on  all  anniversaries  of  a  father's 
death.     Other  Sraddhas  are  described  at  p.  199. 

It  is  curious  to  learn  from  III.  150-168  Manu's  idea  of 
the  persons  to  be  excluded  from  these  ceremonies  (viz., 
thieves,  spirit-drinkers,  atheists,  men  with  diseased  nails 
or  teeth,  dancers,  physicians,  &c.,  see  note,  p.  270). 

At  some  Sraddhas  the  old  Dharma-sastras  Akhyanas, 
Itihasas,  and  Puramis  were  recited  (III.  232,  note,  p.  206). 

^  See  Manu  IX.  138.  Whence  a  son  who  performs  the  rite  is  called 
Put-tra,  '  the  rescuer  from  Put.'  This  explains  the  desire  of  every 
Hinda  for  the  birth  of  a  son  rather  than  a  daughter;  but  it  seems 
inconsistent  that  the  S'raddha  should  have  an  effect  irrespective 
of  deeds  done  during  life. 

2  In  Book  III.  14s  we  have  yatnena  hhojayec  chrdddlie  hahv-ricam 
veda-pdragam,  see  p.  201.  Manu,  however,  discouraged  too  much 
feasting  (yistara),  and  limited  the  number  of  guests,  see  III.  125,  126. 

3  That  of  the  Bengali  millionaire,  Ramdoolal  Dey,  cost  ;!^5o,ooo, 
according  to  Mr.  Wheeler. 


2  50  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

With  reference  to  the  subject  of  diet,  it  is  clear  from 
V.  15.  5,  &c.,  that  as  a  general  rule  the  eating  of  flesh 
(mdnsa)  and  of  fish  (matsya)  by  twice-born  men  was 
prohibited  ;  that  the  drinking  of  spirituous  liquor  was 
included  among  the  five  great  sins  (see  p.  270) ;  and  that 
many  other  kinds  of  food,  such  as  garlic,  onions,  leeks 
{lasuna,  grinjana,  paldndu),  mushrooms  {Jcavaka,  cha- 
traka),  and  carnivorous  birds  [hravydddJi  pakshinah, 
V.  11),  were  forbidden.  But  it  is  an  argument  for  the 
antiquity  of  Mauu's  Law-book  that  it  directs  flesh-meat 
(drrdsha)  to  be  eaten  at  some  of  these  Sraddhas  (III. 
123,  IV.  131).  I  annex  a  few  interesting  passages  which 
bear  upon  the  killing  of  animals  for  sacrifice  and  the 
eating  of  flesh-meat  under  certain  circumstances  : — 

Never  let  a  Brahman  eat  tlie  flesh  of  cattle  unconsecrated  with 
Mantras,  but  let  him  eat  it  only  when  hallowed  with  texts  of  the  Veda 
(IV.  36). 

On  a  solemn  offering  to  a  guest  {madhu-parka)  at  a  sacrifice,  and  in 
holy  rites  to  departed  ancestors  or  to  the  gods — on  these  occq,sions  and 
no  other  may  cattle  be  slain  (V.  41). 

As  many  hairs  as  grow  on  any  animal,  so  many  similar  deaths  shall 
one  who  slays  it  unnecessarily  (vrithd)  endure  hereafter  from  birth  to 
birth.  By  the  Self-existent  himself  were  animals  created  for  sacrifice, 
which  was  ordained  for  the  welfare  {ihutyai)  of  all  this  universe ;  there- 
fore slaughter  of  animals  for  sacrifice  is  no  slaughter  (V.  38,  2)9)-^ 

In  eating  meat  {mdnsorbhaJcsliane)  and  in  drinking  wine  (niadye) 
there  is  no  crime  (provided  it  be  on  a  lawful  occasion,  V.  56). 

Hospitalityis  enjoined  on  the  householder, in  the  strongest 
language,  as  a  religious  duty  (see  also  p.  282) : — 

No  guest  (atifhi)  who  arrives  in  the  evening,  brought  by  the  setting 
sun  (suryodhah),  must  be  dismissed.  Whether  he  arrives  in  season  or 
out  of  season,  let  him  be  allowed  to  sojourn  in  the  house  and  be  well 
entertained. 

1  This  is  another  indication  of  the  priority  of  at  least  part  of  Manu's 
Code  to  the  general  spread  of  Buddhism,  which  reformation  led  to  the 
almost  total  abolition  of  animal  sacrifice  in  India. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  251 

A  Brahman  sojourning  in  a  house  and  not  honoured  takes  to  himself 
all  the  merit  of  the  householder's  good  deeds  (III.  100). 

Let  the  householder  not  eat  anything  himself  till  he  has  made  his 
guest  eat.  The  honouring  of  a  guest  confers  wealth,  reputation,  life, 
and  heaven  (III.  105,  106.     Compare  also  IV.  29), 

An  oblation  (of  food)  in  the  fire  of  a  Brahman's  mouth  delivers  (the 
offerer)  from  great  guilt  (III.  98). 

With  regard  to  the  liouseholder's  wife  and  the  condition 
of  women  as  depicted  by  Mann,  we  may  observe  that  their 
position  is  one  of  entire  subordination,  amounting,  in 
theory,  to  a  complete  abnegation  of  what  in  these  days 
would  be  called  '  women's  rights.'  But  although  it  is 
certain  that  the  inferiority  of  women  is  a  fixed  Oriental 
dogma  which  no  contact  with  Europeans  is  likely  entirely 
to  eradicate,  yet  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  prac- 
tice does  not  always  conform  to  the  theory.  The  influence 
of  Hindi!  mothers  in  their  own  families,  and  the  respect 
paid  to  them  by  their  children,  have  always  been  great ; 
and  it  is  one  indication  of  the  antiquity  of  Manu's  Code 
that,  although  some  of  its  precepts  pronounce  women 
unfit  for  independence,  and  debarred  from  the  study  of  the 
Veda,  others  concede  to  them  an  amount  of  freedom  to 
which  they  became  strangers  in  times  subsequent  to  the 
influx  of  Mohammedan  customs.^  In  some  cases  a  girl,  if 
unmarried  for  three  years,  is  even  allowed  to  choose  her 
own  husband,^  when  she  is  called  Svayam-vara  (IX.  90, 
92).  It  is  very  true  that  Manu  distinctly  directs  (V.  162, 
IX.  47,  65)  that  no  second  husband  is  to  be  allowed  to 
widows,  but  he  nowhere  alludes  to  that  exaggerated 
devotion  which  induced  the  Sati  or  '  devoted  wife '  to  burn 
herself  with  her  husband's  body — a    custom  which  from 

^  The  seclusion  of  Hindu  women  is  chiefly  due  to  the  introduction  of 
Muslim  customs  when  the  Mohammedans  invaded  India. 

^  Girls  of  the  Kshatriya  class  sometimes  chose  their  own  husbands,  as 
we  know  from  the  story  of  !Nala  and  other  episodes  of  the  Mahabharata, 


252  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

about  the  time  of  Alexander's  invasion/  more  than  300 
years  b.c.,  till  the  year  1829,  has  led  to  the  sacrifice  of 
innumerable  lives,  and  has  left  a  blot  on  the  anuals  of  our 
own  administration.^ 

^  It  is  clear  from  Strabo  XV.  30  and  62  that  Sati  prevailed  in  India 
about  the  time  of  Alexander.  Strabo  says  that  the  Kathaei  (  =  Kanya- 
kubja  or  perhaps  Kshatriya),  a  tribe  in  the  Panjab,  in  order  to  prevent 
wives  poisoning  their  husbands,  made  a  law  that  they  should  be  burnt 
with  them  when  they  died  (ffuyxaraxa/Erfa/  TsSnuei  rolg  aiBpaai  Tag  yvvaJxa;), 
and  that  some  wives  burnt  themselves  voluntarily  (^aa/iha;).  Compare 
also  Diodorus  Siculus  (XIX.  33),  who  describes  how,  after  the  battle 
between  Antiochus  and  Eumenes,  one  of  the  wives  of  the  Indian  general 
KrjTiii;  (  =  Ketu  or  Khatrl  ? )  burnt  herself,  after  contending  with  the 
other  for  the  honour.  But  Ar-rian  makes  no  mention  of  any  Sati.  He 
only  describes  (VII.  2,  3)  how  Ka.Xa.vog  (perhaps  =  Sanskrit  Kalyana), 
one  of  a  sect  of  Indian  wise  men  who  went  naked,  burnt  himself  upon 
a  pile.  The  description  is  like  that  of  the  self-cremation  of  the  ascetic 
S'arabhan-ga  in  Ramayana  III.  9.  Cf.  Cicero  Tusc.  Disp.  II.  22  and  de 
Divin.  I.  23.  The  following  is  a  portion  of  the  latter  passage:  'Est 
profecto  quiddam  etiam  in  barbaris  gentibus  praesentiens,  atque  divi- 
nans  :  siquidem  ad  inortem  proficiscens  Oalanus  Indus,  cum  adscenderet 
in  rogum  ardentem,  0  praeclarum  discessum,  inquiet,  e  vitS, ! '  The 
idea  qf  Sati  seems  to  have  been  borrowed  by  the  Hindus  from  the 
Scythians  (Herod.  IV.  71).  A  similar  custom  prevailed  among  the 
Thracians  (Herod.  V.  5).  Of.  also  Propertius  III.  13,  'Ardent  victrices, 
et  flammae  pectora  praebent,  Imponuntque  suis  ora  perusta  viris.' 
Madri,  wife  of  Pandu,  became  a  Sati  (Maha-bharata,  Adi-parva  4896). 
Compare  Dr.  Host's  edition  of  Wilson's  Works,  vol.  ii.  pp.  270-309). 

^  The  practice  of  Sati  was  for  a  long  time  thought  to  be  so  intimately 
connected  with  the  religious  belief  of  the  Hindus,  that  our  Government 
did  not  venture  to  put  a  stop  to  it.  It  was  known  to  be  enjoined  in  the 
Brahma-pumna  and  Codes  of  Vyasa,  An-giras,  &c. ;  and  such  authorities 
as  Colebrooke  (see  his  life  by  his  son,  p.  287)  and  H.  H.  Wilson  (in 
1828)  gave  their  opinion  against  interference,  although  it  was  ascer- 
tained that  neither  the  Veda  nor  Manu  directed  or  even  hinted  at 
concremation  of  the  living  wife  with  the  dead  husband.  To  Haghu- 
nandana  (according  to  Dr.  F.  Hall)  is  due  the  alteration  of  the  last  word 
of  a  Eig-veda  text  (X.  18,  7,  see  p.  201)  on  which  the  authority  for  Sati 
was  made  to  rest :  AnaJravo  'namivdh  su-ratnd  a  rdhantu  janayo  yonim 
dgre,  '  without  tears,  without  sorrow,  bedecked  with  jewels,  let  the  wives 


THE  LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  253 

ludeed,  the  marriage  of  widows  is  even  spoken  of  as 
practised,  though,  reprehended  (IX.  66-68) ;  and  a  damsel 
given  away  in  marriage  may  be  re-betrothed,  if  her  hus- 
band die  before  she  is  actually  married  (69). 

The  following  passages  will  be  sufficient  to  fill  up  the 
picture  of  Hindu  domestic  life  (see  also  p.  284) : — 

Day  and  night  must  women  be  made  to  feel  their  dependence  on  their 
husbands.  But  if  they  are  fond  of  worldly  amusements  (vishayeshu 
mjjantyah),  let  them  be  allowed  to  follow  their  own  inclinations  (IX.  2). 

Even  if  confined  at  home  by  faithful  guardians  they  are  not  (really) 
guarded ;  but  those  women  who  guard  themselves  by  their  own  will 
{atmdnam  dtmand  yds  tu  raksTieyuh)  are  well  guarded  (IX.  12). 

Let  not  (a  husband)  eat  with  his  wife,  nor  look  at  her  eating  (IV.  43). 

Women  have  no  business  to  repeat  texts  of  the  Veda  {nddi  strlndm 
kriyd  mantrair),  thus  is  the  law  estabhshed  (IX.  18). 

Domestic  rites  are  to  be  performed  in  common  with  a  wife  (sddhdrano 
dharmah  patnyd  saha),  so  it  is  ordained  in  the  Veda  (IX.  96). 

No  sacrifice  is  permitted  to  women  separately  (from  their  husbands), 
no  religious  observance  (vratam),  no  fasting  (uposTiitam).  As  far  as  a 
wife  obeys  her  husband  so  far  is  she  exalted  in  heaven  (V.  155). 

A  husband  must  continually  be  revered  {upacavyah)  as  a  god  (deva- 
vat)  by  a  virtuous  wife  (V.  154). 

A  virtuous  wife  who  remains  unmarried  after  the  death  of  her  husband 
goes  to  heaven,  even  though  she  have  no  son  (V.  160). 

We  have  already  indicated  that  in  the  third  and  fourth 
periods  of  his  life  a  Brahman,  according  to  Manu,  is  to 

go  up  to  the  altar  first,'  where  agneh,  'of  fire,'  was  substituted  for  agre, 
'  first.'  (Compare  pp.  197,  201,  202).  It  is  true  that  our  Government 
adopted  a  middle  course,  and  prohibited  the  burning  of  the  widow, 
except  under  strict  regulations,  and  except  with  her  own  full  consent, 
and  ofiacials  were  to  be  present  to  see  the  rules  enforced ;  but  I  have 
been  informed  by  a  distinguished  friend  (Mr.  Seton-Karr)  who  held 
high  ofiaces  in  India,  that,  in  consequence  of  our  half -sanction,  the 
number  of  widows  actually  returned  as  burnt,  rose  in  one  year  to  800, 
while  in  other  years  (between  1815  and  1828)  it  varied  from  300  to 
600.  Lord  William  Bentinck  passed  a  law  in  1829  (Reg.  svii.)  which 
suppressed  the  practice  with  entire  success  and  without  diflSculty. 


2  54  INDIAN  WISDOM, 

become  first  an  anchorite  (vdnaprastha)  and  then  a  reli- 
gious mendicant  (bhikshu  or  parivrdjaka).  It  is  indeed 
wholly  improbable  that  all  Brahmans  conformed  to  this 
ru|e,  but  the  second  verse  of  the  sixth  Book  prescribes 
that  when  the  father  of  a  family  perceives  his  hair  to  be 
turning  grey,  or  as  soon  as  his  first  grandchild  is  born, 
and  after  he  has  paid  his  three  debts,^  he  is  to  retire  to  a 
forest  and  there  as  a  hermit  to  practise  austerities  : — 

Having  taken  up  his  sacred  fire  (agni-hotram)  and  all  the  domestic 
utensils  for  making  oblations  to  it,  and  having  gone  forth  from  the 
town  to  the  forest,  let  him  dwell  there  with  all  his  organs  of  sense  well 
restrained  (VI.  4). 

With  many  kinds  of  pure  food  let  him  perform  the  five  Maha-yajnas 
or  '  devotional  rites '  (VI.  5). 

Let  him  also  offer  the  Vaitanika  oblations  with  the  (three  sacred)  fires 
according  to  rule  (see  p.  188,  note  i,  p.  189). 

Let  him  roll  backwards  and  forwards  on  the  ground,  or  stand  all  day 
on  tiptoe  (prapadaih),  let  him  move  about  by  alternately  standing  up 
and  sitting  down,  going  to  the  waters  to  bathe  at  the  three  Savanas 
(sunrise,  sunset,  and  midday,  VI.  22.     See  p.  241). 

Let  him  practise  the  rules  of  the  lunar  penance  (VI.  20.     See  p.  96). 

In  the  hot  weather  let  him  be  a  Panda-tapas  (VI.  23.     See  p.  95). 

Let  him  offer  libations  (tarpayet)  to  the  gods  and  Pitris,  performing 
ablutions  at  the  three  Savanas  (VI.  24). 

Having  consigned  the  three  sacred  fires  (vaitdndn)  to  his  own  person 
(by  swallowing  the  ashes)  according  to  prescribed  rules,  let  him  remain 
without  fire,  without  habitation,  feeding  on  roots  and  fruits,  practising 
the  vow  of  a  Muni  {i.e.,  the  Mauna-vrata  of  perpetual  silence,  VI.  25). 

Book  VI.  33  directs  him  for  the  fourth  period  of  his 
life  to  wander  about  as  a  Bhikshu  or  Parivrajaka,  'reli- 
gious mebdicant'  {caturtham  dyusho  bhdgam  parivrajet). 
Here  are  a  few  rules  for  the  regulation  of  this  final  stage 
of  his  existence,  when  he  is  sometimes  called  a  Sannydsin, 

1  These  three  debts  ifrvni  rindni)  are,  i.  to  the  gods,  2.  to  the  Pitris, 
3.  to  the  Eishis.  The  ist  is  liquidated  by  sacrifices,  the  2nd  by 
begetting  a  son  for  performance  of  the  S'raddha,  the  3rd  by  repetition 
of  the  Veda. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  255 

'  one  who  has  given  up  the  world ; '  sometimes   a  Yati, 
'  one  who  has  suppressed  his  passions  :  ^ ' — 

Let  him  remain  without  fire,  without  habitation  {a-niketah) ;  let 
him  resort  once  a  day  to  the  town  for  food,  regardless  of  hardships, 
resolute,  keeping  a  vow  of  silence  (muni),  fixing  his  mind  in  meditation 

(VI.  43)- 

With  hair,  naUs,  and  beard  well  clipped,  carrying  a  bowl  (patri), 
a  staff  (dandl),  and  a  pitcher  (Jcusumbhavan),  let  him  wander  about 
continually,  intent  on  meditation  and  avoiding  injury  to  any  being 
(VI.  52). 

In  this  manner,  having  little  by  little  {ianaih  ianaih)  abandoned  all 
worldly  attachments  (san-gdn),  and  freed  himself  from  all  concern  about 
pairs  of  opposites  ^  {dvandva),  he  obtains  absorption  into  the  universal 
Spirit  (brahmany  avatishthate,  VI.  81). 

IV.  Let  us  now  note,  in  the  fourth  place,  the  chief 
characteristics  of  Manu's  ordinances  of  government  and 
judicature  (vyavahara),  and  a  few  of  the  most  remarkable 

1  I  find  that  some  of  M.  Earth's  remarks  in  the  '  Revue  Critique ' 
for  June  13,  1874,  bear  on  what  I  have  stated  with  regard  to  Manu's 
ordinances  in  the  preceding  pages  :  '  Si  nous  remontons  plus  haut,  aux 
livres  v^diques,  aux  plus  anciens  comme  aux  plus  modernes,  nous 
trouvons  la  nation  Indienne  divis^e  en  un  grand  nombre  de  petites 
principautfe,  ou  domine  le  principe  ethnique  de  la  peuplade  et  du  clan. 
Cette  organisation  qui  n'avait  certainement  pas  beaucoup  change  a 
r^poque  du  Buddha,  s'accorde  encore  moins  avec  le  systeme  de  Manu, 
qui  suppose  une  certaine  uniformity  et  I'existence  de  grands  6tats.  La 
plupart  de  ces  peuplades  avaient  sans  doute  un  ^tat  social  analogue :  de 
temps  immemorial  elles  6taient  divis^es  en  4  classes.  .  .  .  Mais  il  est 
difficile  de  pr^ciser  le  degr6  de  rigueur  de  cette  division.  Encore  k  une 
epoque  relativement  rteente  (Ohandog.  Up.  iv.  4.  2)  la  plus  jalouse,  et 
la  plus  ferm^e  de  ces  classes,  celle  des  Br^hmanes,  ne  parait  pas  tres 
scrupuleuse  quant  k  la  puret^  du  sang.  Je  ne  puis  done  voir  autre 
chose  dans  la  th^orie  officielle  de  la  caste  qu'une  sortede  thfeme  convenu 
dont  il  faut  faire  usage  avec  la  plus  grande  prudence,  thfeme  dont  la 
donn^e  fondamentale  a  dt,  parce  qu'elle  6tait  consacr^e  par  une  tradi- 
tion sainte,  se  prater  successivement,  et  d'une  fagon  plus  ou  moins 
artificielle  a  I'explication  d'^tats  de  soci6t6  bien  diff^rents.' 

2  Such  as  honour  and  dishonour  (mdnapamdna),  joy  and  sorrow,  &c. 


2S6  INDIAN  WISDOM. 

civil  and  penal  laws  and  rulea  of  evidence.i  The  treat- 
ment of  these  subjects,  which  ought  to  constitute  the  most 
important  department  of  a  code  of  laws,  is  only  commenced 
by  Manu  in  the  second  half  of  his  work,  and  is  chiefly  com- 
prised in  one  quarter  of  it,  viz.,  the  seventh,  eighth,  and 
ninth  Books.  As  the  state  of  society  depicted  in  the  first 
six  Books  is  of  a  simple  and  primitive  character,  recogniz- 
ing only  four  principal  divisions  of  the  people,  so  the  only 
form  of  government  prescribed  in  the  seventh  Book  is  of 
a  paternal  and  patriarchal  description.  The  king  is  to  rule 
by  divine  right,  and,  though  a  despot,  to  act  like  a  father  ^ 
towards  his  subjects  {varteta  pitri-van  nrishu,  Vll.  80). 
That  he  was  treated  as  a  kind  of  divinity  is  evident : — 

The  Creator  created  a  king  for  the  protection  of  the  whole  world  by 
drawing  forth  eternal  particles  (mdtrdh  iobivatlK)  from  the  essence  of 
Indra,  Anila  (Wind),  Yama  (god  of  justice),  Siirya  (Sun),  Agni  (Fire), 
Varuna,  Candra  (Moon),  and  Kuvera  (god  of  wealth,  VII.  3,  4). 

A  king,  even  though  a  child,  must  not  be  treated  with  contempt,  as 
it  he  were  a  mortal ;  he  is  a  great  divinity  in  human  shape  (VII.  8). 

He  is  directed  to  appoint  seven  or  eight  ministers 
(VII.  54)  and  to  consult  them  first  apart,  and  then  collec- 
tively, as  a  kind  of  council.  His  prime  minister  (VII.  58) 
is  to  be  a  Brahman,'  and  in  him  he  is  to  place  implicit 
confidence  (59).  He  is  to  have  a  standing  army  (VII. 
102,  103),  commander-in-chief  (VII.  65),  and  an  ambas- 
sador {dutah)  of  great  knowledge  and  abilities  (VII.  63). 
The  following  is  very  significant : — 

1  I  have  here  consulted  Elphinstone's  and  Mill's  India. 

2  Compare  S^akuntala,  Act  V.  :  Tvayi  parisamdptam  landhu-lmtyam 
prajdndm,  'in  thee  (the  king)  is  comprehended  the  whole  duty  of  a 
kinsman  towards  thy  subjects.'  Asff?roV))s  is  said  to  be  =  Sanskrit  ddsa- 
jpati,  '  lord  of  conquered  races.' 

3  This  rule  was  followed  by  S'ivaji  in  the  constitution  of  the  Marathi 
empire,  and  the  Peshwa  or  chief  of  the  eight  Pradhan-as,  '  principal 
ministers,'  ultimately  superseded  S'ivaji's  weak  successors  and  usurped 
the  supremacy. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  25/ 

Determination  not  to  retreat  in  battle  {san-grameshu  anivarlitvam), 
protection  of  the  people,  and  obedience  (iuirushd)  to  Brahmans  is  the 
highest  duty  of  kings,  and  secures  their  felicity  in  heaven  (VII.  88). 

The  king's  mode  of  life  and  the  distribution  of  his  time 
are  carefully  regulated  (VII.  145,  &c.)  He  is  to  rise  in  the 
last  watch  of  the  night,  then  to  hold  a  court,  then  to 
assemble  his  council  and  deliberate  on  the  affairs  of  his 
kingdom  and  all  the  eightfold  business  of  kings  (VII.  154)  ; 
after  that,  to  engage  in  manly  exercises,  then  to  dine, 
taking  care  that  his  food  is  not  poisoned  (VII.  218),  and 
then  to  regulate  his  family ;  after  that,  he  is  allowed  some 
relaxation ;  then  he  is  to  review  his  troops ;  then  to 
perform  religious  exercises  ;  and  lastly,  being  himself  well 
armed,  to  receive  the  report  of  his  spies  (cara),  informers 
and  secret  emissaries  (pranidhi) ,  who  are  regarded  as  of 
great  importance.-'  He  is  to  conclude  the  day  by  a  frugal 
meal  and  musical  recreations,  and  to  go  to  bed  early  (VII. 
225).^     The  rules  for  diplomacy  and  war  show  that  India 

''■  In  IX.  256  a  king  is  called  cdm-cakshuk,  'spy-eyed.' 
2  The  royal  office  was  no  sinecure.  This  is  evident  from  the  Maha- 
bharata  and  Dasa-kumara-6arita  as  well  as  from  Manu.  It  appears 
that  the  day  and  night  were  each  divided  into  eight  portions  of  one 
hour  and  a  half  each,  reckoned  from  sunrise,  and  thus  distributed. 
Day — I.  the  king  being  dressed  is  to  audit  accounts;  2.  he  is  to  pro- 
nounce judgments  in  appeals ;  3.  he  is  to  breakfast ;  4.  he  is  to  receive 
and  make  presents;  5.  he  is  to  discuss  political  questions  with  his 
ministers;  6.  he  is  to  amuse  himself ;  7.  he  is  to  review  his  troops ;  8. 
he  is  to  hold  a  military  council.  Night — i.  he  is  to  receive  the  reports 
of  his  spies  and  envoys ;  2.  he  is  to  dine ;  3.  he  is  to  retire  to  rest 
after  the  perusal  of  some  sacred  work ;  4.  and  5.  he  is  to  sleep  ;  6.  he 
is  to  rise  and  purify  himself ;  7.  he  is  to  hold  a  private  consultation 
with  his  ministers  and  instruct  his  officers  ;  8.  he  is  to  attend  upon  the 
Purohita  or  '  family  priest '  for  the  performance  of  religious  ceremonies 
(Wilson's  Hindu  Theatre,  L  209).  Megasthenes  (Strabo  XV.  i,  55) 
says  that  the  Indian  king  may  not  sleep  in  the  daytime,  but_continues 
the  whole  day  judging  causes.  Compare  Macaulay's  account  of  the 
daily  life  of  Frederic  the  Great  (Essays,  p.  805). 

E 


2S8  INDIAN  WISDOM. 

was  divided  into  a  number  of  unequal  states.  Intrigues 
are  to  be  carried  on  with  the  leaders  of  the  enemy,  and 
negotiation  is  declared  to  be  better  than  force  (VII.  197, 
198).  In  battle  the  king  is  to  set  an  example  of  personal 
bravery  (VII.  87).  The  chief  weapon  is  the  bow  (VIl. 
74).  Elephants,  chariots,  cavalry,  and  infantry  form  the 
Catur-an-ga  or  'fourfold  army,'  ^  and  minute  directions  are 
given  for  its  marching  (VIL  187,  &c.). 

With  regard  to  internal  administration,  it  is  clear  from 
the  Code  that  the  country  was  partitioned  into  divisions 
governed  by  vicegerents,  to  whom  the  king  delegated  his 
own  despotic  powers,  and  whose  authority  was  again  dele- 
gated to  other  subordinate  governors,  who  again  divided 
their  power  by  committing  it  to  other  rulers  of  townships 
in  a  regular  chain,  the  highest  governor  ruling  over  a 
thousand  towns,  the  next  over  a  hundred,  the  next  over 
twenty,  the  next  over  ten  (cf.  Luke  xix.  17),  and  the 
lowest  ruling  over  one  town : — 

Let  the  lord  of  one  town  {grdmikah)  notify  of  his  own  accord,  and 
in  due  order,  to  the  lord  of  ten  towns  (grdma-dasesdya)  any  crimes 
which  have  taken  place  in  his  own  district,  and  the  lord  of  ten  to  the 
lord  of  twenty ;  let  the  lord  of  twenty  notify  everything  to  the  lord 
of  a  hundred,  and  the  lord  of  a  hundred  to  the  lord  of  a  thousand 
(VII.  116,  117). 

Another  important  subject  is  revenue,  which  the  monarch 
is  to  obtain  from  the  following  sources :— i.  Taxes  on 
the  produce  of  land,  which  was  probably  held  in  common 
by  village  communities,  though  occasional  grants  may 
have  been  made  to  individuals,  the  king  being  theoreti- 
cally the  only  absolute  proprietor  of  the  soil  {bhumer  adhi- 
patik),  VIII.  39).^      2.  Taxes  on  the  produce  of  labour. 

1  In  VII.  185  a  sixfold  {shad-vidha)  army  is  spoken  of,  the  two  other 
component  parts  being  officers  and  attendants. 

2  In  later  times  a  sort  of  middle-man,  to  whom  the  name  Zamlnddr 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  2S9 

3.  Taxes  on  certain  metals  and  commodities  added  to 
capital  stock.  4.  Taxes  on  purchases  and  sales.  5.  A 
kind  of  poll-tax.     6.  Another  kind  paid  in  labour. 

With  regard  to  i,  the  usual  proportion  of  produce  taken 
by  the  king  was  a  sixth  part,  but  in  times  of  necessity 
(as  of  war  or  invasion),  he  might  even  take  a  fourth  of 
the  crops.  But,  even  though  dying  for  want  of  money,  he 
is  never  to  receive  a  tax  from  a  Brahman  conversant  with 
the  Veda  {VII.  133).^  The  following  passages  illustrate 
the  above  six  heads  of  taxation  : — 

1.  A  sixth,  an  eighth,  or  a  twelfth  part  of  grain  may  be  taken  by  the 
king  (according  to  the  goodness  or  badness  of  the  soil,  VII.  130). 

The  king  who,  without  giving  protection,  takes  a  sixth  part  of  the 
grain  as  tax  (pali)  is  declared  to  draw  upon  himself  all  the  sins  of  all 
his  subjects  (VIII.  308). 

A  military  king  {ksliatriyah)  who  takes  even  a  fourth  part  in  a  time 
of  necessity  (apadi)  while  protecting  his  subjects  to  the  utmost  of  his 
ability  is  freed  from  all  culpability  (X  118). 

2.  Moreover,  he  may  take  a  sixth  part  of  the  annual  increase  of  trees 
{dru),  meat,  honey,  clarified  butter,  perfumes,  medicinal  herbs,  liquids, 
flowers,  roots,  and  fruits,  of  leaves  (patra),  pot-herbs  (Jdka),  grass, 
wicker-work  (vaidala),  hides,  earthenware  vessels,  and  all  articles  made 
of  stone  (VII.  131,  132). 

3.  Of  cattle  and  gold  and  silver  (hiranyayoh)  added  to  the  capital 
stock  (muldd  adhikayoh),  a  fiftieth  part  may  be  taken  by  the  king 
(VII.  130). 

Of  old  treasures  and  precious  metals  in  the  earth  the  king  may  take 


(introduced  by  the  Muhammadans)  is  applied,  acquired  an  ownership 
nearly  absolute  in  the  soil;  or,  at  any  rate,  intervened  between  the 
Eyot  or  '  cultivator '  and  the  king,  receiving  a  share  of  the  produce 
from  the  former  and  paying  a  stipulated  proportion  to  the  sovereign. 

1  In  S'akuntala,  Act  II.,  Mathavya  says  to  the  king,  '  Say  you  have 
come  for  the  sixth  part  of  their  grain  which  they  owe  you  for  tribute. ' 
The  Maha-bharata  allows  secularized  Brahmans  to  be  taxed.  Strabo 
(XV.  I,  40)  says,  '  The  whole  land  belongs  to  the  king,  but  the  Indians 
work  it  on  condition  of  receiving  the  fourth  part  of  the  crops  (liti 
TerdpToucy 


260  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

one  half,  because  lie  protects  his  subjects  and  is  the  paramount  lord  of 
the  soil  (VIII.  39). 

4.  Having  -well  considered  the  rates  of  purchase  and  sale,  the  length  of 
transit  (adhvdnam),  with  cost  of  food,  &c.,  on  the  journey  (saparivya- 
yam),  the  profit  gained,  and  expense  of  insurance  (yoga-kshemam),  let 
him  make  merchants  pay  taxes  on  their  commodities  (VII.  127). 

5.  The  king  should  cause  the  lower  classes  (jprithag-janam  =  nikrishta- 
janam,  Kulliika)  in  his  kingdom,  who  live  by  petty  trading,  to  pay  some 
small  sum  (per  head)  in  the  name  of  the  annual  tax  (VII.  137). 

6.  The  king  should  cause  inferior  artisans  and  artificers  (such  as 
blacksmiths,  &c.)  and  men  of  the  servile  class  i^udrari),  who  support 
themselves  by  their  own  labour,  to  work  for  one  day  in  every  month 
(VII.  138). 

As  regards  the  administration  of  justice,  this  is  also 
to  be  performed  by  the  king  in  person,  aided  by  Brahmans 
or  else  by  a  Brahman  acting  as  his  deputy,  assisted  by 
three  others  (VIII.  9,  10).     In  Book  VII.  14  we  read  : — 

For  the  use  of  the  king  the  great  Creator  (Iharah)  created  in  the 
beginning  his  own  son  Justice,  composed  of  particles  of  his  own  divine 
essence,  to  act  as  the  protector  of  all  creatures  (by  wielding)  the  rod  of 
punishment. 

The  terrible  consequences  of  neglecting  to  wield  this 
rod  are  described  in  VII.  20,  &c.  (see  p.  285).  The  king 
is  not  to  encourage  litigation  {notpadayet  hdryam,  VIII. 
43).  Nevertheless,  he  is  to  be  ready  every  day  to  decide 
causes  in  the  court  (sahhd)  when  brought  before  him. 
The  mode  of  conducting  a  trial  is  simple  and  patriarchal. 
In  VIII.  23  we  read : — 

Let  the  king,  having  seated  himself  on  the  judgment-seat,  with  his 
body  suitably  attired  and  his  mind  collected  {samdhitah),  and  haviijg 
offered  homage  (jpranamya)  to  the  gods  who  are  guardians  of  the  world, 
commence  the  trial  of  causes  (kdrya-dar4ana).     (Cf.  Strabo  XV.  i,  55.) 

The  litigant  parties  are  to  be  heard  in  person,  and  the 
plaintiff's  accusation  is  to  be  made  vivd  voce.  The  wit- 
nesses are  to  be  examined  by  the  judge,  who  is  to  observe 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  26 1 

their  countenances  carefully  (VIII.  25,  26).  In  his  deci- 
sion the  jijdge  is  to  attend  to  local  usage,  established 
practice  {acdra),  the  decisions  of  former  judges  (VIII.  45, 
46),  and  written  codes  of  law  (sastra,  VIII.  3). 

Let  me  pass  on  to  notice  the  broad  features  of  the  civil 
and  criminal  code.  It  is,  of  course,  very  desirable  that 
the  distinction  between  civil  and  criminal  laws  should  be 
clearly  marked  out.  They  are,  however,  mixed  together 
very  confusedly  in  the  eighteen  heads  or  divisions  of  law 
given  by  Manu  (Book  VII.  4-7)  as  follows  : — 

The  eighteen  titles  or  branches  of  law  are  :  i.  recovery  of  debts  (rind- 
ddnam) ;  2.  deposits  {nikshepak) ;  3.  sale  of  property  by  one  who  is  not 
the  rightful  owner  (asvdmi-vikrayah) ;  4.  engaging  in  business  after 
joining  partnership,  association  in  trade  (sambhuya  samutthanam) ; 
5.  non-delivery  of  what  has  been  given  (dattasydnapaJcarma) ;  6.  non- 
payment of  wages  {vetanasya  adanam) ;  7.  breach  of  contract  (samvido 
vyatikramah) ;  8.  annulling  of  purchase  or  sale  (kraya-vikraydnu^ayah) ; 
9.  disputes  between  the  owner  and  tender  of  cattle  or  between  master 
and  servant  {vivddah  svdmipdlayoh) ;  10.  the  law  respecting  disputes 
about  boundaries  {slmor-vwddardharmah) ;  11,  12.  the  two  kinds  of 
assault,  viz.,  blows  and  abuse,  or  assault  with  blows  and  assault  with 
slander  (pdrushye-danda-vdcike) ;  13.  theft  and  larceny  (steyam) ;  14. 
robbery  with  violence  (sdhasam) ;  15.  adultery  (strirsan-grahanam) ; 
16.  the  law  regulating  (the  duties  of)  husband  and  wife  (dn-pun- 
dharmah) ;  17.  partition  of  patrimony  or  inheritance  («;i6Aag'a/j) ;  18. 
gambling  with  dice  and  betting  on  animals,  such  as  fighting-cocks 
{dyutam  dhvayaJ  6a). 

The  first  nine  of  the  above  titles  and  the  sixteenth  and 
seventeenth  belong  to  civil  law ;  those  from  the  eleventh 
to  the  fifteenth,  and  the  eighteenth  relate  to  criminal 
law ;  the  tenth  belongs  partly  to  civil,  partly  to  criminal. 
With  reference  to  the  whole  arrangement  of  the  subject, 
Mr.  James  Mill's  History  of  India  (vol.  i.  p.  195,  &c.)  has 
some  valuable  remarks,  the  substance  of  which  I  here 
give : — 

Though  no  arrangement  would  appear  more  natural  than  the  division 
of  laws  into  civil  and  penal,  we  find  them  here  mixed  together.    Another 


262  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

obvious  ground  of  division — the  distinction  between  the  laws  about 
persons  and  the  laws  about  things — which  prevailed  in  Eoman  law  and 
was  transferred,  rude  as  it  was,  to  English,  seems  never  to  have  occurred 
to  Hindu  lawyers  in  the  time  of  Manu.  The  first  nine  of  the  heads  in 
Manu's  arrangement  relate  to  contracts,  but  the  division  is  rude  and 
imperfect.  It  begins  with  '  Loans,'  one  of  the  most  refined  of  contracts. 
The  subject  of  '  purchase  and  sale '  is  divided  into  two  parts,  but  one 
occupies  the  third  place  in  the  list,  the  other  the  eighth,  and  a  number 
of  heterogeneous  subjects  intervene.  '  Partnership '  occupies  a  middle 
place  between  two  subjects,  to  neither  of  which  it  has  any  relation. 
'  Non-payment  of  wages '  stands  immediately  before  '  Breach  of  con- 
tract,' as  a  separate  title,  though  it  ought  to  be  included  under  that 
head.  In  fact,  this  seventh  head  is  so  general  that  it  comprehends  the 
whole  subject  of  contracts.  When  the  subject  of  contracts  is  ended, 
the  principal  branches  of  criminal  law  are  introduced.  After  these  and 
some  other  topics  follows  the  great  subject  of  inheritance.^ 

Under  the  head  of  Civil  Law  the  most  interesting  of 
Manu's  ordinances  are  on  the  important  subject  of  pro- 
perty, whether  acquired  by  possession  or  occupancy  (Idbha, 
hhuhti,  hhoga),  by  purchase  (kraya),  by  contract  (samvid, 
vyavahdra),  by  labour  (karma-yoga),  by  donation  {prati- 
graha),  by  inheritance  (ddya).     I  note  the  following : — 

He  who  has  acquired  any  property  through  the  sale  of  it  (vikrayat) 
in  the  presence  of  a  number  (of  buyers  and  sellers)  justly  obtains  the 
right  to  that  property  by  reason  of  having  paid  the  purchase  money 
(VIII.  201). 

The  property  of  infants  who  are  heirs  let  the  king  hold  in  trust  until 
the  owner  has  completed  his  term  of  studentship  or  tUl  he  is  of  age 
(at  sixteen,  VIII.  27). 

Let  the  king  fix  the  rate  of  sale  and  purchase  of  all  marketable  com- 
modities (sarva-jpanydndm),  after  having  considered  the  distance  (from 
which  they  have  been  imported),  the  remoteness  of  the  place  to  which 
they  are  sent,  the  time  they  are  kept,  and  the  gain  or  loss  upon  them. 
Once  in  every  five  nights  or  once  a  fortnight  he  should  fix  the  proper 
rate  in  the  presence  of  those  (who  understand  it,  VIII.  401,  402). 

1  In  consulting  Mr.  James  Mill  I  have  found  that  some  of  his  state- 
ments must  be  taken  with  considerable  qualification,  prejudiced  as  he 
appears  to  have  been  against  everything  Hindu. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  263 

A  lost  article,  when  found,  should  be  guarded  by  trusty  men.  Any 
thieves  convicted  of  stealing  it  should  be  condemned  to  be  trampled  to 
death  by  the  royal  elephant  (VIII.  34). 

It  is  evidence  of  a  somewhat  rude  state  of  society 
that  in  certain  cases  a  man  is  allowed  to  repent  of  a 
bargain  and  to  have  a  contract  annulled,  thus : — 

When  a  man  has  bought  or  sold  anything  (not  perishable,  such  as 
land  or  copper),  and  may  afterwards  repent,  he  may  restore  it  or  take 
it  back  within  ten  days  (antar-daidhdt,  VIII.  222). 

Marriage  is  regarded  as  a  contract,  but  the  same  liberty 
of  annulling  is  in  this  case  not  allowed  : — 

If  a  man  shall  give  away  in  marriage  a  girl  who  has  any  defects 
{dosliavatim)  without  notifying  these  defects,  the  king  must  fine  him 
ninety-six  Panas  {kuryad  dandam  sTiannavatim  pandn,  VIII.  224): 

The  repetition  of  the  nuptial  texts  (pdnigrahaniJcd  mantrdh)  are  the 
settled  mark  (niyatam  lakshanam)  of  a  marriage  contract.  Of  those 
texts  (the  one)  repeated  on  (making)  the  seventh  step  (viz.,  sahTid  sapta- 
padi  hliava,  see  p.  191)  is  decided  by  the  wise  to  be  (the  sign  of) 
the  completion  (nishthd)  of  the  contract  (VIII.  227). 

Throughout  Eastern  countries,  especially  in  ancient  times, 
the  insecurity  of  property  has  led  to  two  practices  little 
resorted  to  by  the  peoples  of  modern  Europe,  viz.,  conceal- 
ment of  valuable  articles  and  the  habit  of  entrusting  them 
for  safety  to  the  keeping  of  others.  We  can  understand, 
therefore,  the  importance  assigned  in  Manu's  Law-book 
(Book  VIII.  179,  &c.)  to  the  subject  of  'deposits'  or, 
according  to  legal  phraseology,  '  bailments.'  This  branch 
of  law  opens  thus  : — 

A  wise  man  should  make  a  deposit  {nikshepam  niksMpet)  with  a  person 
of  good  family,  of  good  conduct,  acquainted  with  law,  a  speaker  of  truth, 
possessing  numerous  relations,  wealthy  and  honourable  (VIII.  179). 

If  a  bailee  (nydsa-dhdrin)  fail  to  restore  a  deposit,  and  there  are  no 
witnesses,  the  judge  is  to  cause  secret  agents  (pranidhi)  to  deposit  gold 
with  him,  and  should  he  fail  to  redeliver  it,  he  is  to  be  made  to  pay 
(dapyah)  the  equivalent  of  both  deposits  (VIII.  181-184). 


264  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Another  proof  of  a  primitive  state  of  society  may  be 
found  in  the  rules  respecting  interest  and  the  premium 
paid  for  the  use  of  borrowed  property.  This  is  sometimes 
allowed  to  be  paid  in  kind ;  ^  as,  for  instance,  when  grain, 
fruit,  wool,  animals,  &c.,  have  been  borrowed,  showing 
that  coined  money  was  still  uncommon  as  a  general  circu- 
lating medium.  (Compare  the  mention  of  ndnaka,  '  coin,' 
in  the  later  Code  of  Yajnavalkya  II.  241.) 

Interest  on  money  (Imsida-vriddliih)  received  all  at  once  (and  not  by 
the  month,  &c.)  must  not  exceed  the  double  (of  the  sum  lent) ;  ^  on  grain 
(dhdnye),  fruit  (sade),  wool  (lave),  and  beasts  of  burden  (vdhye)  it  must 
not  exceed  five  times  the  value  (pancatd,  VIII.  151). 

The  rate  of  interest  (vriddhi)  is  not  only  high,  but 
Agarics  according  to  the  class  of  the  man  to  whom  any- 
thing is  lent ;  but  compound  interest  (cahra-vriddhi)  is 
not  approved  (VIII.  153)  : — 

A  money-lender  (vdrdhusMJmh)  may  take  two  per  cent,  (dvikam  Mam) 
as  interest  per  month  from  a  Brahman,  three  {trikam)  from  a  Ksha- 
triya,  four  (catushlcam)  from  a  Vaisya,  and  five  {paneaham)  from  a 
S'udra,  in  the  order  of  the  classes  (VIII.  142). 

In  VIII.  156,  157,  there  is  a  law  bottomry,  which  is 
interesting  as  showing  that  sea-voyages  were  undertaken 
in  Manu's  time. 

The  recovery  of  debts  is  enforced  by  stringent  laws,  and 
the  debtor  is  not  only  made  to  pay  what  he  owes,  but  an 
additional  fine  to  the  king,  thus  : ' — 


1  Compare  Deut.  xxiii.  19,  20,  'Thou  shalt  not  lend  upon  usury  to 
thy  brother ;  usury  of  money,  usury  of  victuals,  usury  of  anything  that 
is  lent  upon  usury  :  unto  a  stranger  thou  mayest  lend  upon  usury,'  &c. 

2  Principal  doubled  by  accumulated  interest  is  called  in  Marathi 
Damdupat.  Even  now  a  village  Mahajan  will  take  from  50  to  75  per 
cent. 

8  No  sanction,  however,  is  given  by  Manu  to  the  later  practice  of 
Dliarnd  or  '  sitting  at  the  door  of  a  house  to  compel  payment  of  a  debt.' 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANTJ.  265 

When  a  debt  has  to  be  paid  (rine  deye)  which  is  admitted  to  be  just, 
the  debtor  owes  a  fine  of  five  per  cent,  (pancakam  iatam)  in  addition, 
and  ten  per  cent,  if  it  be  repudiated  (though  it  be  just,  VIII.  139). 

The  laws  respecting  herdsmen  (pasu-pala)  and  tlieir 
employers  (svamin)  are  carefully  laid  down  (VIII.  229, 
&c.).     I  note  one  instance  (VIII.  232) : — 

The  herdsman  himself  must  restore  an  animal  that  has  been  lost 
(nashta),  or  destroyed  by  vermin  (krimibhih),  or  killed  by  dogs,  or  has 
perished  by  falling  into  a  hole  (vishame)  through  want  of  his  having 
exerted  himself  to  save  it  (Junam  purusha-hdrena). 

We  may  also  observe  that  the  hire  of  some  kinds  of 
agricultural  labourers  is  directed  to  be  paid  in  kind  :  ^ — 

That  hired  herdsman  whose  hire  is  paid  with  milk  must  be  allowed 
by  the  owner  of  the  cattle  to  milk  the  best  cow  out  of  ten  (dasato- 
vardm),  unless  he  be  paid  with  some  other  kind  of  food  (VIII.  231). 

The  most  important  subject  connected  with  property  is  . 
the  law  of  inheritance  {daya)  treated  of  in  the  ninth  Book 
of  Manu's  Code.  And  here  we  cannot  fail  to  be  struck 
with  the  remarkable  circumstance  that  Hindii  law  does 
not  allow  the  owner  of  property  any  testamentary  power.^ 
Indeed,  a  proper  word  for  '  will '  or  '  testament '  does  not 
exist  in  the  Sanskrit  language.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind 
that  in  a  patriarchal  state  of  society  all  family  property 

The  person  so  sitting  refuses  to  eat,  and  as  long  as  he  does  so  the  debtor 
must  abstain  from  food  too,  and  if  the  suitor  perishes  the  crime  of  his 
death  falls  on  the  debtor.  Originally  the  person  sitting  in  Dharna, 
either  on  his  own  behalf  or  that  of  another,  was  a  Brahman.  See  H.  H. 
Wilson's  Glossary  of  Indian  Terms. 

1  Payments  in  kind  in  aid  of  money  wages  are  not  unusual  even  in 
the  present  day.  Even  quite  recently  in  British  territory  the  land-tax 
was  sometimes  paid  in  kind,  and  is  still  so  paid  in  some  native  states. 

2  Our  Government  made  this  legal  by  the  Hindu  Wills  Act  (sxi.  of 
1870).  Certain  peculiar  documents,  however,  resembling  wills,  but 
bearing  other  titles,  were  previously  recognized  by  our  courts. 


266  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

was  supposed  to  be  held  in  common  by  a  sort  of  joint 
ownership,  the  father  or  principal  person  in  a  household 
being  regarded  as  a  head  partner. 

In  India,  where  customs  become  stereotyped  for  cen- 
turies, this  primitive  idea  of  a  common  title  to  the  family 
property  has  continued  to  prevail  up  to  recent  times.  The 
family  is,  as  we  have  seen,  a  corporate  society,  whose  bond 
of  union  is  the  sacred  oblation  offered  in  common  by  its 
living  to  its  deceased  members.  On  the  death  of  a  father 
the  sons  or  nearest  relatives  succeed  to  the  inheritance 
by  simple  right  of  Sa-pindaship,  that  is,  by  a  right  ob- 
tained through  the  common  offering  of  rice-cakes  (pinda) 
and  of  water,  &c.,  to  a  deceased  father,  grandfather,  and 
great-grandfather  at  the  Sraddha  ceremonies  (see  p.  248). 
It  must  be  noted,  however,  that  although  the  whole  family 
has  a  joint-interest  in  the  property,  the  estate  cannot 
be  divided  during  the  lifetime  of  the  parents,  and  even  at 
their  death  the  eldest  son  is  allowed  to  take  the  father's 
place  as  chief  manager  of  the  family  partnership,  thus  : — 

The  eldest  brother  may  take  the  paternal  property  (pitryam  dhanam) 
entirely  (into  his  own  hands).  The  rest  of  the  family  {iesJidh)  may 
live  under  him  (tarn  upajweyuh)  exactly  as  they  lived  under  the  father 
(IX.  105). 

An  eldest  brother  conducting  himself  as  he  ought  (towards  his 
younger  brothers)  is  to  be  regarded  by  them  as  a  mother  and  father 
(IX.  no). 

Nevertheless,  the  brothers  are  allowed,  if  they  like,  to 
separate,  and  full  directions  are  given  in  Book  IX.  112, 
&c,,  for  the  partition  of  the  family  estate ;  a  distinction 
being  made  according  to  merit  as  well  as  age,  and  some 
being,  very  unjustly  according  to  our  ideas,  disqualified  : — 

After  the  death  of  the  father  and  mother,  the  brothers  having 
assembled  together  may  make  a  partition  of  the  paternal  property, 
but  they  have  no  power  to  do  so  during  the  lifetime  of  their  parents 
(IX.  104). 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  267 

Either  let  them  live  together  (sahavaseyuh)  or  separately,  from  reli- 
gious mbtives ;  since  the  number  of  religious  rites  (such  as  the  five 
Mahd-yajnah,  see  p.  244)  are  increased  by  separation  of  households, 
therefore  separation  is  legal  (IX.  iii). 

The  portion  taken  out  (of  the  estate)  by  the  eldest  son  is  a  twentieth, 
along  with  the  best  of  all  the  chattels ;  by  the  middle  son,  a  fortieth  ; 
and  by  the  youngest,  an  eightieth  (IX.  112). 

A  deduction  (uddhdra)  being  thus  made,  the  remainder  should  be 
allotted  among  the  brothers  in  equal  shares ;  if  no  deduction  is  made 
they  should  share  in  the  following  manner : — Let  the  eldest  take  a 
double  share  and  the  next  born  a  share  and  a  half  (if  they  excel  in 
learning  and  merit),  and  let  the  younger  sons  have  a  share  each 
(IX.  116,  117). 

Those  brothers  who  are  addicted  to  vicious  habits  (such  as  gambling, 
licentiousness,  &c.)  forfeit  a  right  {ndrhanti)  to  any  share  in  the  in- 
heritance (IX.  214). 

Impotent  persons  (Jcliva),  those  who  have  lost  caste  (pattta),  those 
who  are  blind,  deaf,  insane,  paralyzed  (Jada),  dumb,  defective  in  limb 
or  sense,  are  also  debarred  from  sharing  (IX  201). 

But  a  wise  heir  will  in  common  justice  supply  all  such  persons  with 
food  and  raiment  (grdsdcchddanam)  to  the  best  of  his  ability.  Other- 
wise he  is  guilty  of  a  great  crime  (IX  202). 

It  must  be  observed  that  women  are  generally  excluded 
from  a  direct  title  to  share  in  the  division  of  property  : — 

Three  persons  are  declared  to  have  no  property  of  their  own 
(a-dhandh),  a  wife,  a  son,  and  a  slave.  Whatever  money  they  earn 
is  his  to  whom  they  belong  (VIII.  416). 

Nevertheless,  some  marriage  portions  (sulka)  or  gifts 
received  by  a  married  woman  at  and  after  the  nuptial 
ceremony,  are  regarded  as  her  own  peculiar  property. 
These    constitute   what    is    still   called   Stn-dhana,^   'a 

1  Commonly  written  Stridhun.  Mr.  Herbert  Cowell,  in  his  Tagore 
Law  Lectures  for  1871  (p.  28),  says,  that  although  this  property  is  sup- 
posed to  belong  exclusively  to  a  wife,  the  husband  has  a  concurrent 
power  over  it,  so  that  he  may  use  it  in  any  exigency,  without  being 
held  accountable  for  it.  Stri-dhana  is  now,  however,  acquired  '  by  gift, 
by  earnings,  and  by  inheritance,'  and  the  Dayabhaga  lays  down  that 


2  68  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

woman'd  (separate)  wealth  or  dower,'  which,  according  to 
Maiiu,  is  sixfold  : — 

Whatever  was  given  over  the  nuptial  fire  (adhy-agni),  whatever  she 
receives  while  being  led  in  procession  from  her  father's  to  her  hus- 
band's house  (adhydvdhanikam),  a  gift  (from  her  husband)  in  token  of 
affection  (prlti),  and  a  similar  gift  received  from  her  brother,  from  her 
mother,  from  her  father,  all  these  are  declared  to  be  a  woman's  own 
property  (IX.  194). 

Those  young  girls,  too,  who  are  unmarried  (kanyak)  at 
a  father's  death  are  directed  (IX.  118)  to  receive  an  allot- 
ment-out  of  the  shares  accruing  to  their  brothers.  The 
following  also  (IX.  130)  is  noteworthy  : — 

A  man's  own  son  is  even  as  himself,  and  a  daughter  is  like  a  son. 
How,  then  (if  he  have  no  son),  ought  any  one  else  than  a  daughter, 
who  is  part  of  his  own  person  {dtmani  tishthanti),  to  inherit  his  own 
property  ? 

I  pass  on  to  a  brief  notice  of  Manu's  Criminal  Code. 
The  three  most  conspicuous  features  of  his  penal  laws  are 
exactly  those  which  mark  the  earliest  forms  of  criminal 
legislation,  viz.,  severity,  inconsistency,  and  a  belief  in  the 
supposed  justice  of  the  lex  talionis,  the  latter  leading  to 
punishments  which  in  later  times  would  be  considered 
unjustifiably  disproportionate  to  the  offences  committed, 
and  sometimes  barbarously  cruel.^     Thus  : — 

the  husband  has  power  over  the  wife's  earnings  and  '  any  presents  she 
m^y  receive  from  any  other  but  kindred.' 

1  Mr.  Mill  on  this  point  quotes  Sir  W.  Jones,  who  is  not,  like  him- 
self, disposed  to  view  everything  Hindu  in  an  unfavourable  light. 
'  The  cruel  mutilations  practised  by  the  native  powers  are  shocking  to 
humanity.'  We  know  what  was  said  by  our  Lord  about  '  an  eye  for 
an  eye  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth,'  Matt.  v.  38.  See  Lev.  xxiv.  20; 
Deut.  xix.  21.  Compare  the  laws  of  Draco  and  of  the  ancient 
Egyptians.  Strabo  (XV.  i.  54)  says  of  the  Hindus,  'He  who  has 
given  false  testimony  suffers  mutilation  of  the  extremities  (axpurriptd,- 
^sra;),  and  he  who  maims  a  limb  is  condemned  to  suffer  maiming.' 


THE  LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  269 

With  -whatever  member  of  the  body  a  low-born  man  may  injure  a 
superior,  that  very  member  of  his  must  be  mutilated  (VIII.  279). 

A  once-born  man  insulting  (kshipan)  twice-born  men  with  abusive 
language  (va6d  ddrunaya)  must  have  his  tongue  out  (VIII.  270). 

Should  he  mention  their  name  and  caste  with  insulting  expressions 
(as,  '  Hallo !  there,  Yajnadatta,  vilest  of  Brahmans '),  a  red-hot  iron 
spike  ten  fingers  long  is  to  be  thrust  into  his  mouth  (VIII.  271). 

Should  he,  through  arrogance,  attempt  to  instruct  a  Brahman  in  his 
duty  (saying,  '  You  ought  to  do  so  and  so '),  the  king  is  to  have  boiling 
oil  poured  into  his  mouth  and  ears  (VIII.  272). 

Thieves  are  to  have  their  hands  cut  off,  and  then  to  be  impaled  on  a 
sharp  stake  (IX.  276). 

A  goldsmith  detected  in  committing  frauds  is  to  have  his  body  cut 
to  pieces  with  razors  (IX.  292). 

Perhaps  the  most  objectionable  feature  in  the  penal 
code  is  not  the  cruel  retaliation,  which  was  probably- 
more  a  matter  of  theory  than  actual  practice,  but  the 
leniency  with  which  Brahmans  are  directed  to  be  treated. 
It  will  be  observed  that  a  graduated  scale  is  prescribed 
according  to  the  rank  of  the  offender  and  the  class  to 
which  he  belongs,  thus  : — 

A  king  must  never  kill  a  Brahman,  though  he  may  be  found  guilty 
of  all  possible  crimes  (sarva-pdpeshv  api  sthitam) ;  let  him  expel  him 
from  the  kingdom  unharmed  in  body  and  intact  in  all  his  property. 
There  is  no  greater  injustice  on  earth  than  the  killing  of  a  Brahman. 
The  king,  therefore,  must  not  harbour  a  thought  about  putting  him  to 
death  (VIII.  380,  381). 

A  Kshatriya  insulting  a  Brahman  must  be  fined  a  hundred  Panes 
i^atam.  dandam  arhati) ;  a  Vaisya  doing  the  same  must  pay  one  hundred 
and  fifty  or  two  hundred  Panas ;  a  S'udra  doing  the  same  must  receive 
corporal  punishment^  (badham  arhati,  VIII.  267). 

Five  great  crimes  (mahd-pdtaJcdni)  are  enumerated  in 
Book  XI.  54,  which  are  described  as  entailing  the  highest 
degree  of  guilt,  though  certainly  from  a  European  point 
of  view  they  cannot  all  be  regarded  as  equally  heinous  : — 

^  Badha  might  be  rendered  'capital  punishment,'  but  Kulluka 
explains  it  by  'the  lash.' 


270  INDIAN    WISDOM. 

I.  Killing  a  Brahman  (brahma-hatyd) ;  2.  drinking  intoxicating 
liquor  (surd-pdna) ;  3.  stealing  gold  from  a  Brahman  (steya) ;  4.  adul- 
tery with  the  wife  of  a  Guru  or  spiritual  teacher  (gurv-angandgamah) ; 
and  5.  associating  with  any  one  guilty  of  such  sins. 

Severe  penances  voluntarily  performed,  rather  than 
legal  penalties  judicially  inflicted,  are  enjoined  for  some 
of  these  crimes  (see  p.  274);  and  they  are  declared  in 
XI.  49  to  involve  rather  singular  consequences  (phala)  in 
future  states  of  existence.  Thus  for  i.  a  man  will  suffer 
from  consumption  (hshaya-rogitvam)  in  a  future  life  (see 
also  XI.  T^)  ;  for  2.  he  will  have  discoloured  teeth ;  for  3. 
diseased  nails  {haunahhyam)} 

Moreover,  in  XIL  54-57,  much  more  awful  results  are 
alleged  to  follow  hereafter ;  inasmuch  as  those  who  are 
guilty  of  these  great  crimes  are  condemned  to  dwell  for  a 
vast  number  of  years  in  terrible  hells  {ghordn  narakdn) 
before  entering  on  new  states  of  being.  After  protracted 
torture  in  one  or  other  of  these  hells  (see  p.  217)  a  Brah- 
man-slayer (brahma-hd)  must  enter  the  body  of  a  dog, 
boar,  ass,  camel,  bull,  goat,  sheep,  stag,  bird,  or  outcaste 
Candala,  according  to  the  degree  of  his  guilt;  a  spirit- 
drinker  will  become  a  worm,  insect,  moth,  &c. ;  a  gold- 
stealer  will  pass  a  thousand  times  into  the  bodies  of 
spiders,  snakes,  noxious  demons,  &c.     (Compare  p.  276.) 

Some  crimes  in  the  second  degree  are  the  following : — 

Falsely  asserting  oneself  to  be  of  too  high  a  caste,  falsely  accusing 
a  Guru,  forgetting  texts  of  the  Veda  through  neglect  of  repeating 
them  (brahmojjhatd),  giving  false  testimony  (kauta-sdlcshyam),  eating 
impure  food,  stealing  deposits,  incest,  intercourse  with  women  of  the 
lowest  class. 

A  long  list  of  crimes  in  the  third  degree  {upapdtaka)  is 
given  in  XL  59-66.     Some  of  them  are  : — 

1  For  this  reason  it  is  directed  in  Book  III.  153,  154,  that  consump- 
tive persons  and  persons  with  diseased  nails  (Icu-nalchin)  and  discoloured 
teeth  (^ydva-dantaJca)  ought  to  be  excluded  from  S'raddhas. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  2  7  I 

Killing  a  cow  (go-badhah) ;  neglect  of  repetition  of  the  Veda  {i.e.,  of 
the  daily  Brahma-yajna) ;  neglect  of  the  sacred  fire;  usury  (vdrdJiu- 
shyam)  ;  selling  a  tank  or  garden  or  wife  or  child  ;  neglecting  investiture 
{vrdtyatd) ;  superintendence  over  mines  of  any  kind  (sarvdkareshv  adhi- 
Mrah) ;  cutting  down  green  trees  for  fuel ;  performing  religious  rites 
for  selfish  motives  (dtmdrtham) ;  reading  infidel  books  {asac-ehdstrddhi- 
gamanam) ;  addiction  to  music  and  dancing  (Jtaidllavyasya  Icriyd) ; 
atheism  (ndstiJcyam). 

For  many  of  these  crimes  also  voluntary  penances  con- 
stitute the  only  punishment.  Thus  the  killer  of  a  cow 
must  undergo  great  hardships  and  make  atonement  by 
attending  upon  a  herd,  guarding  them  from  injury, 
following  them  day  and  night  in  all  weathers  for  three 
months,  swallowing  the  dust  raised  by  their  hoofs,  &c. 
(XL  108-115). 

Trial  by  ordeal  {divya)  is  recognized  by  Manu,  though 
the  ten  different  forms  of  it  are  not  all  specified  as  in  later 
works :  ^ — 

Let  him  cause  a  man  (whose  veracity  is  doubted)  to  take  hold  of  fire 
or  dive  under  water  (apsu  nimajjayet),  or  touch  the  heads  of  his  wife 
and  sons  one  by  one.  The  man  whom  flaming  fire  burns  not  and  water 
forces  not  up  (dpo  nonmajjayanti),  and  who  suffers  no  harm,  must  be 
instantly  held  innocent  of  perjury  (VIII.  114,  115). 

It  remains  to  notice  a  few  of  the  laws  of  evidence. 
Fearful  denunciations  are  pronounced  against  those  who 
deliver  false  testimony  in  a  court  of  justice  (VIII.  82). 
The  strictest  rules  are  also  to  be  observed  in  selecting 
witnesses    competent  to  give  trustworthy   evidence  (see 

1  These  ten  forms  (some  of  which  are  given  by  Yajnavalkya,  see  p. 
297)  are — i.  Tula,  'the  balance;'  2.  Agni,  'fire;'  3.  Jala,  'water;' 
4.  Vislia,  '  poison.; '  5.  Kosa,  '  drinking  water  in  which  an  idol  has  been 
washed;'  6.  Tandula,  'ejecting  chewed  rice-grains;'  7.  Tapta-mdsha, 
'  taking  a  Masha  weight  of  gold  out  of  heated  oil ; '  8.  Phdla,  '  holding 
a  hot  ploughshare ; '  9.  Dharmddharma,  '  drawing  concealed  images  of 
virtue  and  vice  out  of  a  vessel  filled  with  earth;'  10.  Tulasl,  'holding 
the  leaves  of  holy  basil.'     This  holy  basil  is  said  to  be  sacred  to  Vishnu. 


2/2  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

p.  287).    At  least  three  witnesses  are  required  to  establish 
a  fact  in  dispute  : — 

If  a  man  is  summoned  (kritdvasthah)  by  a  creditor  for  a  debt  and 
denies  it  when  questioned,  he  is  to  be  proved  guilty  by  three  witnesses 
at  least  (try-avaraih  sdksMbhih)  in  Jhe  presence  of  a  Brahman  appointed 
by  the  king  1  (VIII.  60). 

Witnesses  are  to  deliver  their  testimony  vivd  voce, 
and  no  directions  are  given  about  written  documents, 
which  makes  it  probable  that  this  kind  of  evidence, 
though  fully  recognized  by  Yajnavalkya  (see  p.  297),  was 
not  received,  or  at  least  not  usual,  at  the  early  epoch  when 
Manu's  Law-book  was  composed.  If  the  testimony  is 
contradictory,  the  judge  is  to  decide  by  the  majority  of 
credible  witnesses.  If  the  number  of  witnesses  is  equal, 
he  is  to  be  guided  by  the  testimony  of  those  who  are  most 
distinguished  for  virtuous  qualities  (VIII.  y^)-  -A-  similar 
rule  is  propounded  by  Yajnavalkya  (see  p.  298).  It  is  a 
noteworthy  point  that  women  are,  as  a  rule,  debarred  from 
giving  evidence,  except  for  women  (VIII.  68).  Moreover, 
the  distinctions  between  the  credibility  of  witnesses  must 
strike  a  European  mind  as  somewhat  extraordi^iary  and 
whimsical.  A  man  who  has  male  offspring  is  thought  more 
worthy  of  credence  than  a  man  who  has  female  (VIII.  62), 
perhaps  because  he  is  supposed  to  have  a  greater  stake 
in  the  common  weal.  A  hungry  or  thirsty  and  tired  per- 
son is  excluded  from  all  right  of  bearing  testimony  (VIII. 
67).     The  reason  for  the  following  is  not  very  clear : — 

In  cases  of  robbery  with  violence  (sdhaseshu),  theft,  and  adultery 
{steyOrsan-grahaneshu),  calumny  and  assault  ivdg-dandayoh  pdrushye),  a 
judge  must  not  examine  (the  competence  of)  witnesses  too  strictly  {na 
panksheta  sdJcsliinah,  VIII.  72). 


^  Compare  Yajnavalkya's  rules  about  witnesses,  which  are  a  develop- 
ment of  those  of  Manu.     See  p.  298. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  273 

The  following  precept  is  calculated,  I  fear,  to  dimiaisli 
the  favourable  impression  which  the  laws  of  the  Manavas, 
taken  together  and  regarded  relatively  to  circumstances, 
must  produce  on  a  candid  mind  : — 

In  certain  cases  a  man  stating  a  fact  falsely  from  a  pious  motive  ■ 
(dharmatah),  even  though  he  knows  the  truth,  is  not  excluded  from 
heaven ;  such  a  statement  they  call  divine  speech. 

Whenever  the  death  of  a  Brahman,  Kshatriya,  Vaisya,  or  S'udra  may 
result  from  speaking  the  truth,  then  an  untruth  may  be  told,  for  false- 
hood is  in  this  case  preferable  to  truth  (VIII.  103,  104). 

A  similar  precept  occurs  in  Yajnavalkya's  Code,  but  an 
expiation  is  there  prescribed.     (See  the  examples,  p.  298.) 

V.  I  now  turn  to  some  of  the  Prayas-citta  or  'penances' 
enjoined  in  the  eleventh  Book  of  Manu  :— 

A  twice-born  man  performing  the  Prajdpatya  penance  (i.e.,  that  called 
after  Prajapati)  must  for  three  days  eat  only  once  in  the  morning,  for 
three  days  only  once  in  the  evening,  for  three  days  food  unsolicited  (but 
given  as  alms),  and  for  three  days  more  nothing  at  all  (XI.  211). 

A  twice-born  man  performing  the  penance  called  Ati-liricchra  ('  very 
severe')  must  eat,  as  before  (i.e.,  as  described  in  the  last),  a  single 
mouthful  (grctsam)  for  three  times  three  days,  and  for  the  last  three 
days  must  fast  entirely  (XI.  213). 

A  Brahman  performing  the  penance  called  Tapta-kricchroi  ('  hot  and 
severe')  must  swallow  hot  water,  hot  milk,  hot  clarified  butter,  and  hot 
air,  each  of  them  for  three  days  successively,  after  bathing  and  keeping 
his  organs  of  sense  all  restrained  (XI.  214). 

The  act  of  fasting  for  twelve  days,  performed  by  one  whose  heart  is 
restrained,  and  whose  mind  is  attentive,  is  called  the  PamJca  penance, 
which  removes  all  guilt  (XI.  215). 

Eating  for  one  day  the  excrement  and  urine  of  a  cow  mixed  wdth  milk, 
curds,  clarified  butter  and  water  boiled  with  Kusa  grass,  and  fasting 
entirely  for  a  day  and  night  is  the  penance  called  Smtapana  (XI.  2 1 2). 

This  last  penance  is  to  be  performed  by  any  one  who 
does  any  voluntary  act  causing  loss  of  caste  (jdti-bhransa- 
haram  karma) ;  if  the  act  be  involuntary,  the  Prajapatya 
is  to  be  performed.     (See  XI.  124.) 

The  Pancagavya  penance  consists  in  sM^allowing  the 


274  IKDIAN   WISDOM. 

five  products  of  a  cow  mentioned  above  under  the  Santa- 
pana  penance.  This  is  declared  to  be  a  sufficient  atone- 
ment for  having  stolen  food,  a  carriage,  bed,  chair,  roots, 
flowers,  or  fruit  (XI.  165).  A  variety  of  other  curipus 
penances  and  expiations  are  enumerated  : — 

A  twice-born  man  having,  through  infatuation,  drunk  intoxicating 
liquor,  may  (as  an  expiation)  drink  the  same  liquor  when  boiling  hot 
{agni-varndm).  If  his  body  is  completely  scalded  by  this  process  he  is 
absolved  from  guilt  (XI.  90). 

When  the  divine  knowledge  (hralima)  which  is  in  his  body  [kdya- 
gatam)  is  once  immersed  in  spirituous  liquor,  his  Brahmanical  rank 
departs  and  he  descends  to  the  condition  of  a  Sudra  (XI.  97). 

He  who  says  '  hush '  (hum)  to  a  Brahman,  or  '  thou '  to  one  who  is 
his  superior  (in  knowledge)  must  perform  an  ablution,  eat  nothing  for 
the  rest  of  the  day,  and  appease  the  Brahman's  anger  by  prostrating 
himself  at  his  feet  (XI.  204). 

If  a  Brahman  who  has  drunk  the  Soma-juice  (at  a  Soma-sacrifice,  see 
p.  6)  smells  the  breath  of  a  man  who  has  been  drinking  spirituous  liquor, 
he  is  absolved  from  the  taint  by  thrice  suppressing  his  breath  under 
water  and  swallowing  clarified  butter  (XI.  149). 

One  of  the  most  severe  penances  is  called  Cdndrdyana 

or  'the  lunar  penance,'  described  in  VI.  20,  XL  216-221. 

We  have  already  given  a  short  account  of  this  (see  p.  96), 

.  a,nd  have  only  here  to  note,  as  peculiar,  some  of  the  offences 

for  which  it  is  required  to  be  performed  : — 

The  Candrayana  is  declared  to  be  an  expiation  for  carrying  off  a  man 
or  woman,  for  seizing  a  field  or  house,  and  for  taking  without  per- 
mission the  water  of  a  well  or  reservoir  (XI.  163).  It  is  also  to  be 
performed  for  acts  which  cause  mixture  of  caste  and  exclusion  from 
society  (XL  125). 

The  following  will  show  that  the  greatest  atoning 
efficacy  is  attached  to  a  repetition  of  the  Veda  : — 

Having  repeated  (Japitva)  the  Savitri  (or  Gayatri,  see  p.  17)  three 
thousand  times  with  a  collected  mind,  and  having  drunk  milk  for  one 
month  in  a  cow-house,  a  Brahman  is  delivered  from  the  guilt  of  receiving 
gifts  from  wicked  persons  (asat-pratigrahdt,  XI.  194). 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  2/5 

Desiring  to  obtain  absolution  (ciJdrshan  apanodanam)  for  all  bis  sins 
great  and  small,  he  sbould  repeat^once  a  day  for  a  year  the  text  beginning 
Ava  and  that  beginning  Yatkivi  cedam  (Rig-veda  YII.  89.  5). 

Having  accepted  a  prohibited  gift  or  eaten  improper  food,  he  is 
absolved  by  repeating  for  three  days  the  texts  (Rig-veda  IX.  58) 
beginning  Tarat  sa  mandi  dhdvati  (XI.  252,  253). 

Although  he  be  guilty  of  many  crimes  (bahv-endh)  he  is  absolved 
{sudhyate)  by  repeating  (abhyasya)  for  a  month  the  text  beginning 
Somdrudra  (Rig-veda  VI,  74.  i,  Atharva-veda  VII.  42.  i,  and  the  three 
texts  beginning  Aryamariam  varunam  mitram,  &c.  (Rig-veda  IV.  2.  4), 
while  performing  ablution  in  a  running  stream  (XI.  254). 

By  intently  (samdhitah)  repeating  three  times  the  whole  Samhita 
(and  Brahmana  Kidlulid)  of  the  Rig,  Yajur,  and  Sama-veda  with  their 
Upanishads  (sa-rahasya),  he  is  absolved  from  all  his  sins  (XI.  262). 

VI.  The  sixth,  and  last  head  is  that  of  harma-phala, 
'  acts-recompenses.'  I  select  a  few  passages  illustrative  of 
the  most  characteristic  of  all  Hindu  doctrines — that  of  the 
soul's  transmigration  through  three  stages  of  beiug,  until 
a  complete  recompense  of  its  acts  is  effected. 

Book  Xll.  3,  9,  II,  39,  40,  declares  that  the  triple 
order  of  transmigration  through  the  highest,  middle,  and 
lowest  stages,  results  from  good  or  bad  acts,  words,  and 
thoughts  produced  by  the  influence  of  the  three  Gunas, 
Sattva,  Eajas,  and  Tamas  (see  note  i,  p.  56) ;  and  that 
for  sins  of  act,  a  man  takes  a  vegetable  or  mineral  form 
(sthdvaratdm) ;  for  sins  of  word,  the  form  of  a  bird  or 
beast;  for  sins  of  thought,  that  of  a  man  of  the  lowest  caste  ; 
but  that  a  triple  self-command  (p.  132,  note  i,  p.  288)  leads 
to  emancipation  from  all  births  and  final  beatitude  : — 

Those  who  are  endowed  with  the  Sattva  Guna  ('  purity ')  take  the 
form  of  gods  (devatvam),  those  who  are  filled  with  Eajas  ('passion') 
become  men,  and  those  who  are  overwhelmed  with  Tamas  ('  darkness 
and  ignorance ')  become  beasts  (XII.  40). 

But  in  XII.  41,  50  each  of  the  three  orders  of  transmi- 
gration is  described  as  divided  into  a  threefold  scale  of 
being,  the  gradations  and  subdivisions  of  which  proceed  on 
principles  which  are  not  very  consistent  or  intelligible  : — 


276  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

1.  a.  Highest  highest — Brahma,  the  creator,  Maridi,  &c.  I.  Highest 
middle — Sacrificers  (yajvdnah),  Eishis,  incarnate  deities  (devdh  =  devatdh 
vigrahavatijah),  regents  of  the  stars,  Pitris,  Sadhyas,  &c.  c.  Highest 
lowest — Ascetics,  religious  mendicants,  Brahmans,  demigods  borne  in 
heavenly  cars  {vaimdnikdh),  those  that  preside  over  the  lunar  mansions, 
Daityas,  &c.  (XIT.  48-50). 

2.  a.  Middle  highest — Gandharvas,  Guhyakas,  Yakshas,  Apsarases, 
&c.  6.  Middle  middle — Kings,  Kshatriyas,  the  chaplains  of  kings 
{purohitdh),  &c.  c.  Middle  lowest — Club-fighters  (jhalldh),  prize- 
fighters {malldh),  actors,  those  who  live  by  the  use  of  weapons, 
gamblers,  and  drinkers  (XII.  45-47). 

3.  a.  Lowest  highest — Dancers,  birds  {suparndh=paTcshinah),  deceitful 
men,  Eakshasas,  Pisadas,  &c.  h.  Lowest  middle — Elephants,  horses, 
S'udras,  despicable  Mledchas,  lions,  tigers,  boars,  c.  Lowest  lowest — 
Vegetables  and  minerals  (sthdvardh  =  vriltsliddayali),  worms,  insects, 
fish,  reptiles,  tortoises,  cattle,  animals  of  various  kinds  (XIT.  42-44). 

It  is  curious  to  note  the  eifect  of  apparently  slight  sins 
of  commission  and  omission  in  degrading  a  man  to  lower 
conditions  of  being,  or  in  exposing  him  to  diseases  : — 

Through  speaking  ill  (parwdddi)  of  his  preceptor,  a  man  will  be  born 
an  ass ;  if  he  reviles  him,  a  dog ;  if  he  uses  his  property  without  leave, 
a  worm;  if  he  envies  him,  an  insect  (II.  201). 

If  a  man  steal  grain  he  shall  be  born  a  mouse ;  if  brass,  a  gander;  if 
water,  a  water-duck ;  if  honey,  a  gad-fly ;  if  milk,  a  crow ;  if  syrup,  a 
dog;  if  ghee,  a  weasel  (XII.  62). 

A  Brahman  neglecting  his  own  appointed  caste  duty  (dharmdt 
svdiidt)  will  be  born  as  a  vomit-eating  demon ;  a  Kshatriya,  as  a  demon 
feeding  on  excrement  and  dead  bodies ;  a  Vaisya,  as  a  demon  feeding 
on  putrid  carrion  (UlJcd-muJcJia,  Kata-putdna,  and  Maitrdhsha-jyotiha, 
XIL  71,  72). 

A  stealer  of  grain  will  be  afflicted  with  dyspepsia  (in  a  future  exist- 
ence) ;  a  stealer  of  the  words  (of  the  Veda,  by  repeating  it  without 
authority),  with  dumbness ;  a  stealer  of  cloth,  with  leprosy ;  a  horse- 
stealer with  lameness  (XI.  51).     Compare  p.  270.^ 

1  It  may  be  interesting  to  annex  to  this  Chapter  a  few  of  the  statements 
of  Megasthenes  (300  years  B.C.)  about  the  Brahmans  (Strabo  XV.  i,  59) : 
'  They  practise  the  greatest  austerities  to  prepare  for  death  (ajzijiTE/ 
■s-Xs/ffT?)  -^prisiai  irpog  Tb  Iroifj-oSdvaToii),  which  they  hold  to  be  birth  to  a. real 
and  happy  life  (yhisiv  11;  rlv  hru;  (iiav  -/.oii  t'ov  sMa/'aona) ;  they  maintain 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  277 

that  nothing  of  what  happens  to  men  is  good  or  bad;  that  the  world 
was  created  and  is  perishable ;  that  it  is  spheroidal ;  that  the  God  who 
made  and  rules  it  pervades  every  part  of  it ;  that  water  was  the  first 
element  created ;  that  besides  the  four  elements  there  is  a  fifth  ('Trphg 
Toic,  TSTTapsi  eToi\iloii  lai/jL'jrrTi  rig  lert  (pugic'^ ;  and  that  the  earth  is  in  the 
centre  of  the  universe.  Besides,  like  Plato,  they  weave  many  fables 
{(/,uhu;)  about  the  immortality  of  the  soul  and  punishments  in  hell. 
As  to  the  Hindus  generally — they  are  ignorant  of  writing,  have  no 
written  laws,  and  arrange  everything  from  memory  (XY.  53,  66). 
They  do  not  employ  slaves  (54).  They  worship  Jupiter  Pluvius  (tok 
'ia/Siov  A/a),  the  river  Ganges,  and  the  gods  of  the  country ;  those  who 
live  in  the  mountains  worship  Dionysos  (  =  S'iva) ;  those  in  the  plains, 
Herakles  (  =  Vishnu,  XV.  58,  69)  ■  they  never  drink  wine  except  at  sacri- 
fices (53).  It  is  not  permitted  to  any  one  to  marry  a  person  of  another 
caste,  nor  to  change  from  one  business  or  trade  to  another,  nor  to  engage 
in  many  pursuits,  unless  he  belong  to  the  caste  of  philosophers  (XV.  49). 
These  philosophers  are  of  two  kinds,  Brachmanes  and  Garmanes  (Bpax- 
fidiveg,  Tapfxavii  =  Brahmans  and  S'ramanas  or  Buddhist  ascetics,  59), 
Both  practise  endurance  (KapTepia,)/),  and  will  remain  a  whole  day  in 
one  posture  without  moving  (60.     Cf.  also  XV.  61,  63).' 


CHAPTER  XI. 

The  Law-hoohs — Manu  continued. 

I  NOW  endeavour  to  give,  as  literally  as  possible,  a 
metrical  version  of  some  of  Manu's  most  noteworthy 
precepts,  selected  from  different  parts  of  the  Code,  under 
the  four  heads  of  Acmu,  '  rules  of  conduct ; '  Vyavahdra, 
'  rules  of  government  and  judicature ; '  P^^dyas-citta,  'pen- 
ance ; '  Karma-phala,  '  rewards  and  punishments  of  acts.' 

Acdra,  '  rules  of  conduct.' 

A  Brahman  from  exalted  birth  is  called 
A  god  among  the  gods,  and  is  a  measure 
Of  truth  for  all  the  world,  so  says  the  Veda  (XI.  84). 

Knowledge,  1  descending  from  her  home  divine. 

Said  to  a  holy  Brahman,  I  am  come 

To  be  thy  cherished  treasure,  trust  me  not 

To  scorners,  but  to  careful  guardians. 

Pure,  self-restrained,  and  pious ;  so  in  them 

I  shall  be  gifted  with  resistless  power  (II.  114,  115).    • 

The  man  with  hoary  head  is  not  revered 

As  aged  by  the  gods,  but  only  he 

Who  has  true  knowledge;^  he,  though  young,  is  old  (II.  156). 

A  wooden  elephant,  an  antelope 

Of  leather,  and  a  Brahman  without  knowledge — 

These  are  three  things  that  only  bear  a  name  (II.  157). 

1  In  II.  117  knowledge  is  divided  into  three  parts — i.  Lavkika, 
'secular;'  2.  Vaidika,  'Vedic;'  3.  Adhydtmiha,  'spiritual'  or  that 
which  relates  to  soul. 

2  Strabo  XV.  i,  54,  says  of  the  Hindus,  Ou2e  t^  nkm'lc^  rm  yioovruv 

•jToonijilav  iihoaaiv  oiv  iJ'ft  aoii  rip  (p^oviiv  ffXsovesirSff/. 

278 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  279 

As  with  laborious  toil  the  husbandman, 

Digging  with  spade  beneath  the  ground,  arrives 

At  springs  of  living  water,  so  the  man 

Who  searches  eagerly  for  truth  will  find 

The  knowledge  hidden  in  his  teacher's  mind  (II.  1 1 8). 

With  pain  the  mother  to  her  child  gives  birth, 

With  pain  the  father  rears  him ;  as  he  grows 

He  heaps  up  cares  and  troubles  for  them  both ; 

Incurring  thus  a  debt  he  ne'er  can  pay, 

Though  he  should  strive  through  centuries  of  time  (II.  227). 

Think  constantly,  O  son,  how  thou  mayest  please 

Thy  father,  mother,  teacher— these  obey. 

By  deep  devotion  seek  thy  debt  to  pay. 

This  is  thy  highest  duty  and  religion  (II.  228). 

Who  finds  around  him  only  wicked  sons. 

When  called  by  fate  to  pass  the  gloom  of  death. 

Is  like  a  man  who  seeks  to  cross  a  flood 

Borne  on  a  raft  composed  of  rotten  wood  (IX.  161). 

Even  though  wronged,  treat  not  with  disrespect 
Thy  father,  mother,  teacher,  elder  brother  (II.  226). 

From  poison  thou  mayest  take  the  food  of  Hfe, 
The  purest  gold  from  lumps  of  impure  earth. 
Examples  of  good  conduct  from  a  foe. 
Sweet  speech  and  gentleness  from  e'en  a  child, 
Something  from  all ;  from  men  of  low  degree 
Lessons  of  wisdom,  if  thou  humble  be  (II.  238,  239). 

Wound  not  another,  though  by  him  provoked. 

Do  no  one  injury  by  thought  or  deed. 

Utter  no  word  to  pain  thy  fellow-creatures  (II.  161). 

Say  what  is  true,  speak  not  agreeable  falsehood  (IV.  138). 

Treat  no  one  with  disdain,^  with  patience  bear 

Eeviling  language ;  with  an  angry  man 

Be  never  angry ;  blessings  give  for  curses  (VI.  47,  48). 

1  In  IV.  13s  the  householder  is  especially  warned  against  treating 
with  contempt  a  Brahman  well  versed  in  the  Veda,  a  Kshatriya,  and  a 
serpent,  because  (says  KuUuka)  the  first  has  the  power  of  destroying 


2  8o  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

E'en  as  a  driver  checks  his  restive  steeds, 

Do  thou,  if  thou  art  wise,  restrain  thy  passions, 

Which,  running  wild,  will  hurry  thee  away  (II.  88). 

When  asked,  give  something,  though  a  very  trifle. 

Ungrudgingly  and  with  a  cheerful  heart. 

According  to  thy  substance  ;  only  see 

That  he  to  whom  thou  givest  worthy  be  (IV.  227,  228). 

Pride  not  thyself  on  thy  religious  works, 

Give  to  the  poor,  but  talk  not  of  thy  gifts. 

By  pride  religious  merit  melts  away. 

The  merit  of  thy  alms  by  ostentation  (IV.  236,  237). 

None  sees  us,  say  the  sinful  in  their  heart's ; 

Yes,  the  gods  see  them,  and  the  omniscient  Spirit 

Within  their  breasts.     Thou  thinkest,  O  good  friend, 

'  I  am  alone,'  but  there  resides  within  thee 

A  Being  who  inspects  thy  every  act, 

Knows  all  thy  goodness  and  thy  wickedness  (VIII.  85,  91). 

The  soul  is  its  own  witness ;  yea,  the  soul 

Itself  is  its  own  refuge ;  grieve  thou  not, 

O  man,  thy  sotil,  the  great  internal  Witness  (VIII.  84). 

The  Firmament,  the  Earth,  the  Sea,  the  Moon, 
The  Sun,  the  Fire,  the  Wind,  the  Night,  and  both 
The  sacred  Twilights,^  and  the  Judge  of  souls,  ^ 
The  god  of  Justice,  and  the  Heart  itself — 
All  constantly  survey  the  acts  of  men  (VIII.  86). 

When  thou  hast  sinned,  think  not  to  hide  thy  guilt 
Under  a  cloak  of  penance  and  austerity  (IV.  198). 

No  study  of  the  Veda  nor  oblation. 

No  gift  of  alms,  nor  round  of  strict  observance 

Can  lead  the  inwardly  depraved  to  heaven  (II.  97). 


him  by  his  unseen  power  of  magical  texts  and  spells,  the  other  two  by 
their  seen  power  {drishta-Saktya).  Cf.  the  passages  relative  to  the 
power  of  the  Brahmans,  translated  p.  234. 

1  See  the  account  of  the  Sandhyas,  p.  241. 

2  Yama,  see  p.  19. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  28 1 

If'  with  the  great  Divinity  who  dwells 

Within  thy  breast  thou  hast  no  controversy, 

Go  not  to  Ganges'  water  to  be  cleansed, 

Nor  make  a  pilgrimage  to  Kuru's  fields  (YIII.  92).! 

Iniquity  once  practised,  like  a  seed, 

Fails  not  to  yield  its  fruit  to  him  who  wrought  it, 

If  not  to  him,  yet  to  his  sons  and  grandsons  (IV.  173). 

Contentment  is  the  root  of  happiness. 

And  discontent  the  root  of  misery. 

"Wouldst  thou  be  happy,  be  thou  moderate  (IV.  1 2). 

Honour  thy  food,  receive  it  thankfully, 
Eat  it  contentedly  and  joyfully, 
Ne'er  hold  it  in  contempt ;  avoid  excess. 
For  gluttony  is  hateful,  injures  health. 
May  lead  to  death,  and  surely  bars  the  road. 
To  holy  merit  and  celestial  bliss  (II.  54,  57). 

Desire  is  not  extinguished  by  enjoyment, 
Fire  is  not  quenched  by  offerings  of  oil. 
But  blazes  with  increased  intensity  (II.  94). 

Shrink  thou  from  worldly  honour  as  from  poison, 
Seek  rather  scorn ;  the  scorn'd  may  sleep  in  peace. 
In  peace  awake;  the  scorner  perishes  (II.  162,  163), 

Daily  perform  thy  own  appointed  work         ' 

Unweariedly ;  and  to  obtain  a  friend — ■ 

A  sure  companion  to  the  future  world — 

Collect  a  store  of  virtue  like  the  ants 

Who  garner  up  their  treasures  into  heaps ; 

For  neither  father,  mother,  wife,  nor  son, 

Nor  kinsman,  will  remain  beside  thee  then, 

When  thou  art  passing  to  that  other  home — 

Thy  virtue  will  thy  only  comrade  be  (IV.  238,  239). 

Single  is  every  living  creature  born. 
Single  he  passes  to  another  world, 
Single  he  eats  the  fruit  of  evil  deeds. 
Single,  the  fruit  of  good ;  and  when  he  leaves 


^  See  note,  p.  244. 


282  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

His  body  like  a  log  or  heap  of  clay 

Upon  the  ground,  his  kinsmen  walk  away ; 

Virtue  alone  stays  by  him  at  the  tomb 

And  bears  him  through  the  dreary  trackless  gloom  (IV.  240-242).^ 

Thou  canst  not  gather  what  thou  dost  not  sow ; 

As  thou  dost  plant  the  tree  so  will  it  grow  (IX.  40). 

Depend  not  on  another,  rather  lean 

Upon  thyself ;  trust  to  thine  own  exertions. 

Subjection  to  another's  will  gives  pain ; 

True  happiness  consists  in  self-reliance  (IV.  160). 

Strive  to  complete  the  task  thou  hast  commenced ; 

Wearied,  renew  thy  efforts  once  again ; 

Again  fatigued,  once  more  the  work  begin, 

So  shalt  thou  earn  success  and  fortune  win  (IX.  300). 

Never  despise  thyself,  nor  yet  contemn 

Thy  own  first  efforts,  though  they  end  in  failure ; 

Seek  Fortune  with  persistency  till  death, 

Nor  ever  deem  her  hard  to  be  obtained  (IV.  137). 

Success  in  every  enterprise  depends 

On  Destiny  2  and  man  combined,  the  acts 

Of  Destiny  are  out  of  man's  control ; 

Think  not  on  Destiny,  but  act  thyself  (VII.  205). 

Be  courteous  to  thy  guest  who  visits  thee ; 

Offer  a  seat,  bed,  water,  food  enough, 

Accordiug  to  thy  substance,  hospitably ; 

Naught  taking  for  thyself  till  he  be  served ; 

Homagetoguestsbrings  wealth,  fame,  Ufe,  and  heaven  (III.  106,  IV.  29). 

He  who  possessed  of  ample  means  bestows 
His  gifts  on  strangers  while  his  kindred  starve. 
Thinks  to  enjoy  the  honey  of  applause, 
But  only  eating  poison  dies  despised — 
Such  charity  is  cruelty  disguised  (XI.  9). 

1  Dr.  Muir  has  pointed  out  that  the  expression  tamas  tarati  dustaram, 
'  he  crosses  the  gloom  difficult  to  be  passed,'  may  be  taken  from  Atharva- 
veda  IX.  5.  i,  tlrtvd  tamdnsi  hahudhd  mahdnti. 

2  Daiva  is  here  the  Adrishta  described  p.  58. 


THE  .  LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  283 

He  who  pretends  to  be  what  he  is  not, 

Acting  a  part,  commits  the  worst  of  crimes, 

For,  thief-like,  he  abstracts  a  good  man's  heart  (IV.  255). 

Though  thou  mayest  suffer  for  thy  righteous  acts. 
Ne'er  give  thy  mind  to  aught  but  honest  gain  (lY.  171). 

So  act  in  thy  brief  passage  through  this  world 
That  thy  apparel,  speech,  and  inner  store 
Of  knowledge  be  adapted  to  thy  age^ 
Thy  occupation,  means,  and  parentage  (IV.  18). 

The  man  who  keeps  his  senses  in  control, 

His  speech,  heart,  actions  pure  and  ever  guarded, '^ 

Gains  all  the  fruit  of  holy  study ;  he 

Needs  neither  penance  nor  austerity  (II.  160). 

But  if  a  single  organ  fail,  by  that  defect 

His  knowledge  of  the  truth  flows  all  away 

Like  water  leaking  from  a  leathern  vessel  (II.  99). 

Contentment,  patience  under  injury, 

Self-subjugation,  honesty,  restraint 

Of  all  the  sensual  organs,  purity, 

Devotion,^  knowledge  of  the  Deity,^ 

Veracity,  and  abstinence  from  anger, 

These  form  the  tenfold  summary  of  duty  (VI.  92). 

Long  not  for  death,  nor  hanker  after  life ; 

Calmly  expect  thy  own  appointed  time, 

E'en  as  a  servant  reckons  on  his  hire  (IV.  45). 

This  mansion  of  the  soul,  composed  of  earth. 

Subject  to  sorrow  and  decrepitude. 

Inhabited  by  sicknesses  and  pains. 

Bound  by  the  bonds  of  ignorance  and  darkness. 

Let  a  wise  man  with  cheerfulness  abandon  (VI.  77). 

Quitting  this  body,  he  resembles  merely 
A  bird  that  leaves  a  tree.     Thus  is  he  freed 
From  the  fell  monster  of  an  evil  world  *  (VI.  7  8). 

1  See  note  i,  p.  288. 

2  KuUiika  interprets  dhl  by  'knowledge  of  the  sacred  truth  contained 
in  the  S'astras.' 

^  Yidyd,  '  knowledge  of  the  supreme  Spirit.' — Kulluka. 
*  KriccTirdd  grdhdt  =  samsdra-kashtad  grdhdd  iva. 


284  INDIAN   WISDOM. 


Duties  of  Women  and  Wives. 

In  childhood  must  a  father  guard  his  daughter; 

In  youth  the  husband  shields  his  wife ;  in  age 

A  mother  is  protected  by  her  sons — 

Ne'er  should  a  woman  lean  upon  herself  (V.  148,  IX.  3). 

A  faithful  wife  who  wishes  to  attain 

The  heaven  of  her  lord,  must  serve  him  here 

As  if  he  were  a  god,  and  ne'er  do  aught 

To  pain  him,  whatsoever  be  his  state, 

And  even  though  devoid  of  every  virtue  (V.  154,  156)- 

She  who  in  mind,  speech,  body,  honours  him, 
Alive  or  dead,  is  called  a  virtuous  wife  (Y.  165). 

Be  it  her  duty  to  preserve  with  care 

Her  husband's  substance ;  let  her  too  be  trusted 

With  its  expenditure,  with  management 

Of  household  property  and  furniture, 

Of  cooking  and  purveying  daily  food. 

Let  her  be  ever  cheerful,  skilled  in  all 

Domestic  work,  and  not  too  free  in  spending  (V.  150). 

Drink,  bad  companions,  absence  from  her  lord, 

Rambling  about,  unseasonable  sleep. 

Dwelling  in  others'  houses,  let  her  shun — 

These  are  six  things  which  tarnish  woman's  fame  (IX.  1 3). 

Whatever  be  the  character  and  mind 
Of  him  to  whom  a  woman  weds  herself. 
Such  qualities  her  nature  must  imbibe, 
E'en  as  a  river  blending  with  the  sea  (IX.  22). 

Women,  united  by  the  marriage  tie 

To  men  they  love,  in  hope  of  virtuous  offspring, 

Worthy  of  honour,  eminently  blessed, 

Irradiate  the  houses  of  their  lords, 

Like  shining  lights  or  goddesses  of  fortune  (IX.  26). 

Then  only  is  a  man  a  perfect  man 

When  he  is  three — himself,  his  wife,  his  son — 

For  thus  have  learned  men  the  law  declared, 

'A  husband  is  one  person  with  his  wife'  (IX.  45). 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  285 

Fidelity  till  death,  this  is  the  sum 

Of  mutual  duties  for  a  married  pair  (IX.  loi). 

And  if  the  wife  survives,  let  her  remain 

Constant  and  true,  nor  suUy  her  fair  fame. 

E'en  by  the  utterance  of  another's  name  (V.  157). 


Vyavahara,  '  rules  of  governmeut  and  judictiture.' 

The  Lord  of  all  in  pity  to  our  needs 

Created  kings,  to  rule  and  guard  us  here ; 

Without  a  king  this  world  would  rock  with  fear  (VII.  3). 

A  king,  e'en  though  a  child,  must  not  be  treated 

As  if  he  were  a  mortal ;  rather  he 

Is  a  divinity  in  human  shape  (VII.  8). 

The  king,  his  council,  and  the  royal  city, 

The  country,!  treasure,  army,  and  ally. 

These  are  the  seven  members  of  a  realm  (IX.  294). 

Dread  of  the  rod  alone  restrains  the  bad. 

Controls  the  good,  and  makes  a  nation  happy  (VII.  15). 

The  king  must  therefore  punish  fearlessly ; 

Else  would  the  strong  oppress  the  weak,  the  bad 

Would  wrong  the  good,  and  pierce  them  as  with  iron ;  ^ 

The  crow  would  eat  the  consecrated  rice. 

The  dog  the  burnt  oblation ;  ownership 

And  rights  of  property  would  be  subverted  ; 

All  ranks  and  classes  would  become  confused, 

All  barriers  and  bridges  broken  down, 

And  all  the  world  turned  wrong  side  uppermost  (VII.  20,  21,  24). 

But  let  the  monarch,  ere  he  wield  his  rod. 

Consider  place  and  time,  the  written  law 

Of  justice,  and  the  measure  of  his  strength  (VII.  16). 


!  For  rashtra  {  =  desa)  Yajnavalkya  (I.  352)  substitutes  ya«ffl,  'the 
people.' 

2  The  literal  translation  of  the  text  here  is  '  the  stronger  would  roast 
the  weaker  like  fish  on  a  spit'  (JMe  matsydn  ivapalcshyan  durhaldn 
halavattardh). 


286  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Gamesters  and  public  dancers,  heretics, 

Eevilers  of  the  Veda,  infidels, 

Sellers  of  liquor,  men  who  interfere 

In  others'  duties  and  neglect  their  own. 

All  such  he  should  expel  from  his  domain  (IX.  225). 

To  women,  children,  crazy  men,  and  fools. 

The  old,  the  poor,  the  sickly,  and  infirm 

Let  him  be  never  harsh ;  if  they  do  wrong 

Let  them  be  bound  or  punished  tenderly  ^  (IX.  230). 

That  king  is  equally  unjust  who  frees 

The  guilty  or  condemns  the  innocent. 

The  wicked  he  must  treat  like  thorny  weeds. 

They  must  be  rooted  out  with  active  arm ; 

The  good  and  virtuous  let  him  shield  from  harm  (IX.  252,  253). 

Let  not  a  king  or  judge  promote  disputes. 
But  if  a  suit  be  tried,  let  him  with  fairness 
Adjudicate  between  the  disputants  (VIII.  43). 

When  Goodness,  wounded  by  Iniquity, 

Comes  to  a  court  of  justice,  and  the  judge 

Extracts  not  tenderly  the  pointed  dart. 

That  very  shaft  shall  pierce  him  to  the  heart  (VIII.  12). 

Justice  destroyed  will  ruin  the  destroyer ; 

Preserved,  it  will  preserve.     Beware,  0  judge. 

Lest  outraged  justice  overthrow  the  world  (VIII.  15). 

E'en  as  a  hunter  tracks  the  lurking-place 

Of  some  poor  wounded  deer  by  drops  of  blood. 

So  must  a  king  by  strict  investigation 

Trace  out  the  source  of  violated  justice  (VIII.  44). 

Let  him  with  full  deliberation  weigh 
The  evidence,  the  place,  the  mode,  the  time, 
The  facts,  the  truth,  and  his  own  frame  of  mind, 
Firmly  adhering  to  the  rules  of  law  (VIII.  45). 


1  The  text  says  '  with  a  whip,  twig,  or  rope.'  It  must  be  presumed 
that  the  whip  and  twig  are  intended  to  be  used  in  the  case  of  children 
only. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  287 

Just  men  and  men  of  sense,  whate'er  their  caste, 
And  those  who  know  their  duty  and  are  free 
From  love  of  gain,  may  tender  evidence ; 
The  opposite  must  not  be  witnesses  (VIII.  63). 

Kings,  priests,  religious  students,  anchorites, 

All  interested  men,  friends,  boon  companions. 

Foes,  criminals,  diseased  and  perjured  men, 

Low  artisans  and  dancers,  lunatics, 

Old  men,  and  children,  drunkards,  vagabonds. 

Thieves,  starving  wretches,  irritated  persons, 

A  single  witness — these  are  all  excluded  (VIII.  64-67). 

Let  women  act  as  witnesses  for  women ; 

The  twice-born  classes  for  the  twice-born ;  slaves 

For  slaves,  and  only  lowest  men  for  outcastes  (VIII.  68). 

The  court  must  not  be  entered  by  a  witness. 

Unless  he  speak  the  truth  without  reserve ; 

For  equally  does  he  commit  a  crime, 

Who  tells  not  all  the  facts,  or  tells  them  falsely  (VIII.  13). 

A  witness  who  gives  evidence  with  truth 

Shall  be  absolved  from  every  sin,  and  gain 

Exalted  glory  here  and  highest  bliss  above  (VIII.  81,  83). 

Headlong  in  utter  darkness  shall  the  wretch 

Fall  into  hell,  who  in  a  court  of  justice 

Answers  a  single  question  falsely ;  he 

Shall  be  tormented  through  a  hundred  births  (VIII.  82,  94). 

And  all  the  merit  of  his  virtuous  acts 

Shall  be  transferred  to  dogs.     Therefore  be  true, 

Speak  the  whole  truth  without  equivocation  (VIII.  90,  loi). 

Let  no  considerate  witness  take  an  oath 

Lightly,  or  in  a  trifling  matter ;  he 

Who  does  so  shall  incur  eternal  ruin  (VIII.  iii). 

Prdyas-citta,  '  penance  and  expiation.' 

According  to  a  man's  sincerity 

In  penitent  confession  of  his  crime. 

And  detestation  of  the  evil  deed, 

Shall  he  be  pardoned  and  his  soul  released 

From  taint  of  guilt,  like  serpent  from  its  skin  (XI.  227,  228). 


288  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

If  he  do  wrong,  'tis  not  enough  to  say 
I  -will  not  sin  again ;  release  from  guilt 
Depends  on  true  contrition,  which  consists 
In  actual  abstinence  from  sinful  deeds  (XI.  230). 

Therefore,  whatever  fault  a  man  commits, 
Whether  from  ignorance  or  knowingly. 
Let  him,  desiring  quittance  from  his  crime. 
Beware  how  he  offend  a  second  time  (XI.  232). 

Revolving  in  his  mind  the  certainty 

Of  retribution  in  a  future  state, 

Let  him  be  pure  in  thought,  in  word,  in  deed  ^  (XL  231). 

By  free  confession,  penitence,  and  penance. 

By  daily  repetition  of  the  Veda,^ 

By  the  five  holy  acts,^  by  giving  alms. 

By  patience,  and  by  bearing  injuries. 

The  greatest  sinner  may  obtain  release  (XL  227,  245). 

Whate'er  is  hard  to  cross,  whate'er  is  hard 

To  have  or  do  or  be,  may  be  attained 

By  penance — sins  of  heart  and  speech  and  act 

May  be  burnt  out;  therefore  be  rich  in  penance  (XL  238,  241). 

E'en  as  a  clod  of  earth  melts  all  away 

Cast  in  a  mighty  lake,  so  every  sin 

Becomes  effaced,  merged  in  the  triple  Veda  (XL  263). 

In  penance  all  the  bliss  of  gods  and  men 

Is  said  to  have  its  root,  continuance,  end*  (XL  234). 

Karma-phala,  'recompenses  of  acts.' 

Innumerable  souls,  endued  with  form, 
Issue  like  scintillations  ^  from  the  substance 

^  Here  and  in  another  example  •  below  further  instances  occur  of 
Manu's  triple  division  of  '  thought,  word,  and  deed  '  (see  note  2,  p.  131). 
The  same  triple  division  is  frequent  in  Buddhistic  writings. 

2  Khyapanena,  anutdpena,  tapasd,  adhyayena  ca. 

3  That  is,  the  five  Maha-yajiias ;  see  p.  244. 

*  A  variety  of  penances  will  be  found  detailed  at  p.  273. 
^  Compare  the  extracts  from  the  Upanishads,  pp.  36,  40. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — MANU.  289 

Of  the  great  Self-existent,  constantly 
Impelling  beings  multiform  to  action  (XII.  15). 

Whate'er  the  act  a  man  commits,  whate'er 

His  state  of  mind,  of  that  the  recompense 

Must  he  receive  in  corresponding  body  (XII.  8 1 ). 

Action  of  every  kind,  whether  of  mind 

Or  speech  or  body,  must  bear  fruit,  entailing 

Fresh  births  through  multifarious  conditions. 

In  highest,  mean,  and  lowest  transmigrations  (XII.  3). 

Souls  gifted  with  the  quality  of  goodness 
Attain  the  state  of  gods ;  those  filled  with  passion, 
The  state  of  men  ;  and  those  immersed  in  darkness. 
The  state  of  beasts — this  is  the  triple  course  (XII.  40).. 

Let  all  men  ponder  with  attentive  mind 

The  passage  of  the  soul  through  diverse  forms, 

Of  Brahma,  gods  and  men,  beasts,  plants,  and  stones, 

According  to  their  good  or  evil  acts, 

And  so  apply  their  minds  to  virtue  only  (XII.  22,  42,  50)^ 

Just  in  proportion  as  a  vital  soul 

Addicts  itself  to  sensuality. 

In  that  degree  its  senses  shall  become 

Intensely  keen  in  future  transmigrations  (XII.  73). 

Reflect  thou  on  man's  manifold  transitions 

And  passages  through  forms  of  being,  caused 

By  faults  of  action,^  and  his  headlong  fall 

Down  to  the  lower  regions ;  then  the  torments 

Reserved  for  him  by  Yama  ;  then  in  life 

His  partings  from  his  loved  ones  and  his  meetings 

With  those  he  loves  not ;  then  the  victory 

Of  sickness  and  decrepitude  and  death ; 

Then  the  soul's  painful  egress  from  the  body. 

And  lastly  its  return  to  other  forms, 

Passing  from  womb  to  womb  to  undergo 

Ten  thousand  millions  of  existences  ^  (VI.  61-63). 

1  Aveksheta  gatlr  nrindm  karma-dosha-samudbhavah. 

2  Toni-hoti-sahasreshu  sritl4-ia  antar-dtmanah. 

T 


290  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Then  do  thou  contemplate  with  fixed  attention 
The  subtile  essence  of  the  Soul  supreme, 
Existing  in  the  highest  and  the  lowest — 
Pervading  every  creature  equally  (VI.  65). 

He  who  perceives  the  omnipresent  God 

Is  nevermore  enslaved  by  acts,  but  he 

"Who  sees  him  not,  can  never  be  released  (VI.  74). 

Those  who  repeat  their  vicious  acts  are  doomed 

To  misery,  increasing  more  and  more, 

In  forms  becoming  more  and  more  debased  (XII.  74). 

Tfiey  shall  be  born  as  despicable  beasts, 

Suffer  the  worst  extremes  of  cold  and  heat, 

Painful  diseases,  various  kinds  of  terror  (XII.  77,  80). 

He  who  by  firmness  gains  the  mastery 

Over  his  words,  his  mind,  and  his  whole  body. 

Is  justly  called  a  triple-governor  ^  (XII.  10). 

Exerting  thus  a  threefold  self-command 
Towards  himself  and  every  living  creature. 
Subduing  lust  and  wrath,  be  may  aspire 
To  that  perfection  which  the  good  desire  (XII.  11). 

Every  created  being  which  exists 

And  yet  is  not  eternal,  ^  is  in  Soul. 

He  who  with  fixed  abstraction  sees  himself 

And  all  things  in  the  universal  Self  ^ 

Cannot  apply  his  soul  to  wickedness  (XII.  118). 

^  This  is  the  Tri-dandin  (see  note,  p.  132).  It  is  noticeable  that  the 
Indian  ascetic,  who  is  described  by  Arrian  (VII.  2)  as  exciting  the  wonder 
of  Alexander  the  Great  by  his  xaon^la,  is  named  Adtduf/iig,  probably  from 
the  same  root  as  danda  (dam,  '  to  subdue,'  in  Intens.).  By  others  he  is 
called  Mandanis  (root  mand  ?). 

2  This  seems  to  mean,  as  explained  by  Dr.  Johaentgen,  that  to  which 
belongs  a  real  existence  and  yet  not  eternity,  because  it  is  a  product. 
Cf.  Saii-khya-prava(5ana  V.  56. 

^  Dr.  Johaentgen  thinks  that  Atman  in  these  passages  is  wrongly 
translated  '  the  supreme  Soul.'  He  believes  that  it  denotes  '  the  whole 
self  or  soul '  of  man,  regarded  as  an  epitome  of  the  universe,  and  he 
refers  in  confirmation  of  his  view  to  Tattva-samasa  56.  See  also  Manu 
VIII.  84,  translated  p.  280. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — YAJNAVALKYA.  29 1' 

This  universal  Soul  is  all  tlie  gods, 

Is  all  the  worlds,  and  is  the  only  source 

Of  all  the  actions  of  embodied  spirits  (XII.  119). 

He  is  their  ruler,  brighter  than  pUre  gold. 

Subtler  than  atoms,  imperceptible, 

Except  by  minds  abstracted,  all-pervading. 

Investing  all  with  rudiments  of  matter, 

Causing  all  beings  to  revolve  like  wheels 

In  regular  and  constant  revolution 

Through  birth  and  growth,  decay  and  dissolution  (XII.  122,  124). 

The  man  who  sees  by  means  of  his  own  soul 

The  universal  Spirit  present  there. 

Present  in  every  creature  everywhere. 

With  perfect  equanimity  may  wait 

Till  he  has  reached  the  state  of  bliss  supreme — 

Complete  absorption  in  the  eternal  essence  (XII.  125). 

The  Code  of  Ydjnavalhya. 

The  most  important  Law-book  next  to  Manu  is  the 
Dharma-sastra  of  Yajnavalkya,  which,  with  its  most 
celebrated  commentary,  the  Mitakshara  by  Vijnanesvara, 
is  at  present  the  principal  authority  of  the  school  of 
Benares  and  Middle  India.  It  seems  originally  to  have 
emanated  from  a  school  of  the  White  Yajur-veda  in 
Mithila  ^  or  North  Behar,  just  as  we  have  seen  (p.  205)  that 
the  Code  of  the  Manavas  did  from  a  school  of  the  Black 
Yajur-veda  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Delhi,  Book  I.  2 
makes  the  author  say  : — 

The  chief  of  devout  sages  (Yajnavalkya),  dwelling  in  Mithila,  having 
reflected  for  a  moment,  said  to  the  Munis,  '  Listen  to  the  laws  which 
prevail  in  the  country  where  the  black  antelope  is  found '  (cf.  Manu 

n.  23). 

^  According  to  Dr.  Eber,  it  is  still  the  leading  authority  of  the 
Mithila  school,  but  Oolebrooke  names  other  works  as  constituting  the( 
chief  texts  of  this  school. 


292  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Yajnavalkya's  work-^  is  much  more  concise  than  that 
of  Manu,  being  all  comprised  in  three  books  instead  of 
twelve,  which  circumstance  leads  to  the  inference  that 
it  has  suffered  even  more  curtailment  at  the  hands  of 
successive  revisers  of  the  original  text  than  the  Code  of 
the  Manavas.  Like  that  Code,  it  seems  to  have  been 
preceded  by  a  Vriddha  and  a  Vrihad  Yajnavalkya.  The 
whole  work,  as  we  now  possess  it,  is  written  in  the  ordi- 
nary Sloka  metre.  The  first  Book,  consisting  of  376 
couplets,  is  chiefly  on  social  and  caste  deities  (dcdra) ; 
the  second,  consisting  of  307  verses  (which  have  been 
transferred  almost  word  for  word  to  the  Agni  Purana), 
is  mainly  on  administrative  judicature  and  civil  and 
criminal  law  (vyavahdra) ;  the  third,  consisting  of  335 
verses,  is  principally  on  devotion,  purification,  expiation, 
penance  (prdyas-citta),  &c.  The  Mitakshara  commentary 
follows  the  same  arrangement,  and  is  divided  also  into 
three  parts. 

As  to  the  date  of  Yajnavalkya's  Law-book,  it  has  been 
conjecturally  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  first  century  of 
our  era.  The  period  of  its  first  compilation  cannot,  of 
course,  be  fixed  with  certainty,  but  internal  evidence 
clearly  indicates  that  the  present  redaction  is  much  more 
recent  than  that  of  Manu's  Law-book. 

The  following  points  have  been  noted  by  me  : — 

I.  Although  Yajnavalkya's  Code  must  have  represented  the  customs 
and  practices  prevalent  in  a  district  (Mithila)  situated  in  a  different  and 
more  easterly  part  of  India,  yet  nearly  every  precept  in  the  first  book, 
and  a  great  many  in  the  second  and  third,  have  their  parallels  in  similar 
precepts  occurring  throughout  the  Code  of  the  Manavas. 


1  The  edition  I  have  used  is  the  excellent  one  of  Stenzler.  I  have 
consulted  his  preface  and  translation,  and  the  translation  of  part  of  the 
Code  made  by  Dr.  Roer  and  W.  A.  Montriou,  to  which  there  is  an 
instructive  introduction. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — YAJNAVALKYA.  293 

2.  Although  generally  founded  on  Manu,  it  represents  a  later  stage 
of  Hindu  development.  Its  arrangement  is  much  more  systematic.  It 
presents  fewer  repetitions  and  inconsistencies,  and  less  confusion  of 
religion,  morality,  and  philosophy,  with  civil  and  criminal  law. 

3.  In  Book  I.  3  the  sources  of  law  are  expanded  beyond  those  stated 
by  Manu ;  although  afterwards  in  I.  7  Manu's  fourfold  Dharma-miilam 
(see  p.  208)  is  adopted,  thus  : — 

'  The  Vedas,  with  the  Puranas,  the  Nyaya,  the  Mimansa,  the  codes  of 
law  (dharma-sastra),  and  the  (six)  Vedan-gas  are  the  fourteen  repositories 
{sthdndni)  of  the  sciences  (vidydndm)  and  of  law  {dharmasya,  I.  3). 

'  The  Veda  (sruti),  traditional  law  (smriti),  the  practices  of  good 
men  (sad-dodra),  and  one's  own  inclination,  are  called  the  root  of 
law '  (I.  7). 

4.  Those  of  its  precepts  which  introduce  new  matter  evince  a  more 
advanced  Brahmanism  and  a  stricter  caste-organization ;  thus,  for 
example,  it  is  directed  in  I.  57  that  a  Brahman  must  not  have  a  S  udra 
as  a  fourth  wife,  but  only  wives  of  the  three  higher  classes,  whereas  in 
Manu  (see  p.  243)  such  a  wife  is  permitted.^ 

5.  In  I.  271,  272,  there  is  an  allusion  to  the  shaven  heads  (munda) 
and  yellow  garments  (kashdyct-vdsas)  of  the  Buddhists,  which  marks  a 
period  subsequent  to  the  establishment  and  previous  to  the  expulsion 
of  Buddhism.  It  must  be  admitted,  however,  that  there  is  no  mention 
of  the  Buddhists  by  name. 

6.  In  II.  185  the  king  is  recommended  to  found  and  endow  monas- 
teries and  to  place  in  them  Brahmans  learned  in  the  Vedas. 

7.  In  II.  241  mention  is  made  of  Ndndica,  'coined  money,'  both  true 
and  counterfeit  (aJcuta  and  hutaha),  whereas,  although  Manu  speaks  of 
weights  of  gold  and  silver,  such  as  S'uvarnas,  Palas,  Nishkas,  Dharanas, 
and  Puranas  (VIII.  135-137),  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  any  stamped 
coin  was  current  in  his  day. 

8.  Written  accusations  and  defences  (leTchya)  are  required  to  be  made 
(II.  6,  7),  and  written  documents  (Jihhitam)  are  allowed  as  evidence 
(II.  22)  ;  and  in  I.  318  grants  of  land  and  copper-plates,  properly  sealed, 
are  mentioned. 

9.  The  worship  of  Ganesa,  as  the  remover  of  obstacles,  is  expressly 
alluded  to  in  I.  270,  and  Graha-yajna  or  '  offerings  to  the  planets'  are 
directed  to  be  made  in  I.  294. 

10.  In  III.  no  the  author  of  the  Code  (Yajnavalkya)  speaks  of  an 
Aranyaga  or  TJpanishad   (of  the  "White  Yajur-veda),  which  he  had 


Later  Codes  limit  Brahmans  to  wives  of  their  own  classes  only. 


294  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

timself  received  from  the  Sun,  and  of  a  Yoga-sastra,  '  Yoga  system  of 
philosophy,'  which  he  had  himself  delivered  (to  Patanjali).^ 

Some  of  these  points  seem  decisive  as  to  the  lapse  of 
a  considerable  period  between  Manu  and  Yajnavalkya, 
and  lead  us  to  agree  with  those  who  hesitate  to  refer 
the  latter  Code,  in  its  present  form,  to  an  earlier  epoch 
than  the  first  century  of  our  era/  On  the  other  hand, 
some  of  the  facts  stated  incline  us  to  attribute  a  greater 
antiquity  to  portions  of  the  work  than  that  usually  as- 
signed to  it. 

I  proceed  to  give  specimens  of  the  three  divisions  of 
Yajnavalkya's  Code. 

I,  The  following  are  from  the  first  Book  on  Acara 
or  '  social  customs  and  immemorial  practices.'  Attention 
should  be  directed  to  the  parallels  in  Manu  at  the  end 
of  several  of  the  translated  passages.  The  mention  of 
four  Vedas  and  the  efficacy  attributed  to  their  repetition 
is  noticeable : — 

Brahmans,  Kshatriyas,  and  Vaisyas  are  called  twice-born  (dvi-jdh), 
since  they  are  born  once  from  their  mothers  and  a  second  time  through 
the  binding  on  of  the  girdle  (Maunji-bandhandt,  I.  39.  Cf.  Manu 
II.  169,  and  see  p.  240). 

The  Veda  is  more  efficacious  in  effecting  the  final  salvation  of  the 
twice-born  {dvijdtindm  niMreyasa-harah  parah)  than  sacrifices,  than 
penances,  and  even  than  good  works  (I.  40.     Cf.  Manu  II.  166). 

A  twice-born  man  ^  who  every  day  repeats  the  texts  of  the  Kig-veda 


1  See  p.  92  of  this  volume.  Patanjali,  who  flourished,  according  to 
Lassen,  about  200  B.C.,  is  not,  however,  mentioned  in  the  text. 

2  Some  of  Yajnavalkya's  verses  are  found  in  the  Panda-tantra,  the 
date  of  the  oldest  portions  of  which  is  usually  referred  to  the  fifth  century 
of  our  era.  In  almost  all  Sanskrit  works  the  introduction  of  apposite 
verses  from  older  sources,  for  the  illustration  of  the  original  text,  is 
common. 

^  These  following  five  verses  are  more  explicit  than  Manu  in  describ- 
ing the  efficacy  of  the  Brahma-yajna  or  Japa-yajiia  (see  p.  245).     They 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — YAJNAVALKYA.  295 

iricoK)  satiates  the  gods  with  honey  and  milk,  and  the  fathers  {Pitrin) 
with  honey  and  butter  (I.  41.     Of.  Manu  II.  107). 

He  who  every  day  to  the  best  of  his  ability  repeats  the  texts  of  the 
Yajur-veda'  (yajunshi)  refreshes  the  gods  with  butter  and  nectar  and 
the  fathers  with  honey  and  butter  (I.  42). 

He  who  every  day  repeats  the  texts  of  the  Sama-veda  (sdmdni) 
satiates  the  gods  with  Soma-juice  and  butter  and  the  fathers  as  before 

(I-  43). 

Twice-born  men  who  every  day  to  the  best  of  their  power  repeat  the 
texts  of  the  Atharva-veda  {Atharvdn-girasah,  see  p.  216)  satiate  the 
gods  with  marrow  (medasd)  and  the  fathers  as  before  (I.  44). 

He  who  every  day  to  the  best  of  his  power  repeats  the  sacred  discus- 
sions {vakovakyam),^  the  Puranas,  the  NarasaTisis,^  the  sacred  songs 
{gdthilidh),  the  Itihasas,  and  the  sciences  {vidydh),  satiates  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  skies  (divauJcasah)  with  fLesh,  milk,  rice,  and  honey,  and 
the  fathers  as  before  (I.  45,  46). 

The  precept  that  the  twice-born  can  take  a  S'udra  as  a  wife  (cf. 
Manu  III.  13,  IX.  149)  is  not  approved  by  me,  since  in  that  wife 
(tatra)  he  is  himself  born  again  (whence  she  is  called  jdyd,  according 
to  Manu  IX.  8). 

Three  wives  in  the  regular  order  (of  the  first  three  classes)  may 
belong  to  a  Brahman,  two  to  a  Kshatriya,  and  one  to  a  Vaisya.  A 
S'udra  must  only  have  one  of  his  own  class  (I.  56,  57). 

Once  every  year  (the  following  persons)  are  to  be  honoured  with  a 
respectful  offering  (argha)  :  a  Snataka  (see  p.  196),  an  Adarya  (see 
p.  232),  a  king,  a  friend,  and  a  son-in-law,  but  a  sacrificing  priest  at 
every  sacrifice^  (I.  no.     Cf.  Manu  III.  119). 

A  traveller  is  to  be  treated  as  a  guest,  and  also  a  Brahman  who 
knows  the  entire  Veda.  These  two  a  householder,  who  wishes  to 
obtain  the  world  of  Brahman,  must  especially  honour  (I.  in.  Cf. 
Manu  I.  120,  130). 

are  based  on  S'atapatha-brahmana  XI.  5,  6,  4-8,  and  on  Asvalayana 
Grihya-sutra  III.  3.  2,  &c. 

1  This  might  be  translated  '  dialogue.'  It  appears  from  S'atapatha- 
brahmana  IV.  6,  9,  20,  that  some  portions  of  Vedic  tradition  were 
called  vdkovakyam  or  hrahmodyam. 

^  See  this  word  in  my  Sanskrit-English  Dictionary.  Compare  the 
directions  as  to  the  hrahma-yajna  in  the  Asvalayana  Grihya-siitra, 
translated  p.  194  of  this  volume. 

3  These  six  are  also  named  in  Paraskara's  Grihya-sutra  I.  i  (Stenzler) 
as  worthy  of  the  Argha. 


296  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

The  success  of  every  action  depends  on  destiny  and  on  a  man's  own 
effort ;  but  destiny  is  evidently  nothing  but  (the  result)  of  a  man's  act 
in  a  former  state  of  existence  (I.  348.  Of.  Manu  VII.  205  and  p.  282 
of  this  volume). 

Some  expect  the  -whole  result  from  destiny  or  from  the  inherent 
nature  (or  force  of  a  thing) ;  some  expect  it  from  the  lapse  of  time ; 
and  some,  from  a  man's  own  effort :  other  persons  of  wiser  judgment 
expect  it  from  a  combination  of  all  these  (I.  349). 

II.  The  following  are  from  the  second  section  of  Yajna- 
valkya's  Code  on  Vyavahdra  or  '  the  administration  of 
justice  : ' — 

Every  day  should  a  king,  reflecting  on  his  reward  equal  to  that  of 
sacrifices,  personally  investigate  lawsuits  in  regular  order  surrounded 
by  assessors  1  (I.  359.     Cf.  Manu  VIII.  i). 


1  Colebrooke,  in  one  of  his  Essays  (Professor  E.  B.  Cowell's  edition, 
vol.  iL  p.  490),  gives  an  interesting  account  of  the  composition  of  an 
Indian  court  of  justice,  according  to  the  rules  of  Hindii  Law-books. 
The  admiaistration  of  justice,  civil  and  criminal,  is  one  of  the  chief 
duties  of  the  Raja  or  sovereign.  Hence  the  king's  court  takes  prece- 
dence of  all.  He  is  assisted  by  learned  Brahmans  as  assessors,  one  of 
whom  acts  as  chief  judge  in  his  absence.  It  is  not  stationary,  but 
follows  him  about.  The  second  court,  which  is  stationary,  is  that  of 
the  chief  judge  {Frddvivaica),  appointed  by  the  kiag,  and  assisted  by 
three  or  more  Brahman  assessors,  not  exceeding  seven.  The  third  court 
is  that  of  the  inferior  judges  for  local  trials.  Besides  these,  there  are 
country  courts  or  assemblies  of  townsmen  {Puga),  of  traders,  artisans, 
&c.  (Sreni),  and  of  kinsmen  (Kuld)  for  arbitration  in  small  matters. 
The  sovereign  or  supreme  court  (to  which  there  is  an  appeal  from  all 
the  others)  is  compared  to  a  body  consisting  of  various  members,  viz., 
I.  the  king,  2.  the  chief  judge,  3.  the  assessors,  4.  the  ministers  of 
state,  5.  the  king's  domestic  priest,  6.  the  written  law,  7.  gold,  fire 
and  water  (used  for  oaths  and  ordeals),  8.  the  accountant,  9.  the  scribe 
(Kdyastha),  10.  the  keeper  of  things  in  dispute  and  the  enforcer  of 
judgments,  11.  the  messenger,  12.  the  moderator  of  the  court.  The 
audience  or  bystanders  are  also  regarded  as  a  component  part  of  the 
court,  any  one  duly  qualified  to  interpose  with  a  suggestion  or  advice 
being  at  liberty  to  do  so.  All  this  is  illustrated  in  a  most  interesting 
manner  by  the  ninth  act  of  the  drama  called  Mriddhakatika,  to  which 


THE  .LAW-BOOKS — YAJNAVALKYA.  297 

A  king,  having  duly  corrected  the  castes,  families,  companies  of 
artisans  (irenl),  schools,  and  communities  of  people  that  have  swerved 
from  the  duty  of  their  caste  {sva-dharmat,  cf.  p.  128),  should  place  them 
in  the  right  path  (I.  360.     Cf.  Manu  VIII.  41). 

Let  the  king,  keeping  himself  free  from  anger  and  covetousness,  try 
lawsuits  along  with  learned  Brahmans  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of 
written  law  (dharma-^dstrdnusdrena,  II.  i.     Cf.  Manu  VIII.  i). 

He  should  appoint  as  judges  men  well  versed  in  the  study  of  the 
Veda,  conversant  with  the  laws,  speakers  of  truth,  impartial  to  friend 
and  foe  (II.  2). 

When  any  one,  injured  by  others  in  any  way  contrary  to  law  or 
usage,  makes  a  representation  to  the  king,  this  is  a  proper  subject  for 
a  lawsuit  {vyavahdra-padam,  II.  5). 

The  charge,  as  made  by  the  plaintiff,  is  to  be  put  down  in  writing 
in  presence  of  the  defendant,  marked  with  the  year,  month,  half-month, 
day,  names,  caste,  &c.  (II.  6). 

The  answer  to  the  charge  is  to  be  then  written  down  in  presence  of 
the  person  who  made  the  first  representation ;  after  which  the  plaintiff 
shall  immediately  cause  to  be  committed  to  writing  the  proofs  by  which 
his  accusation  is  supported  (II.  6,  7). 

Legal  proof  {pramdnam)  is  of  three  kinds,  viz.,  written  documents 
(likhitam),  actual  possession  (hhuMih),  and  witnesses  {sdkshinah).  In 
the  absence  of  any  one  of  these,  some  one  of  the  ordeals  {divydnya- 
tamam)  isenjoined  (II.  22.     Cf.  Manu  VIII.  114). 

The  scales  (tuld),  fire,  water,  poison,  drinking  the  water  in  which 
idols  have  been  washed  {koia),  these  are  the  ordeals  for  the  testing  of 
innocence  (II.  95.     See  note,  p.  271). 

There  should  be  at  least  three  witnesses,  persons  who  act  in  accord- 
ance with  the  precepts  of  the  Veda  or  traditional  law  and  are  of  suitable 
caste  (II.  69.     Cf.  Manu  VIII.  60,  and  see  p.  272  of  this  volume). 

The  judge  should  thus  address  the  witnesses  standing  near  the 
plaintiff  {vddin)  and  defendant  (pratwddin),  '  Whatever  worlds  are 
appointed  for  the  worst  criminals,  for  incendiaries,  for  murderers  of 
women  and  children,  these  shall  be  the  abode  of  him  who  gives  false 
evidence'  (sdkshyam  anritam,  II.  73,  74.     Cf.  Manu  VIII.  89). 

Know  that  whatever  merit  has  been  acquired  by  thee  through  good 


reference  will  be  made  in  a  subsequent  chapter.  In  the  description  of 
a  court  of  justice  there  given,  as  Professor  Cowell  has  remarked,  the 
S'reshthin  or  ' chief  of  the  merchants '  and  the  Kayastha  or  'scribe' 
seem  to  sit  as  assessors  with  the  judge. 


298  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

actions  in  hundreds  of  former  births  shall  become  the  property  of  him 
whom  thou  defeatest  by  false  evidence^  (II.  75.     Cf.  Manu  VIII.  90). 

In  conflicting  evidence  (dvaidhe),  that  of  the  majority  (bahunam) 
must  be  taken ;  in  the  case  of  an  equality  of  testimony,  that  of,  the 
virtuous  persons ;  when  these  disagree,  then  the  statements  of  the  most 
virtuous  must  be  taken  (II.  78.     Cf.  Manu  VIII.  73). 

Whenever  the  evidence  of  a  witness  might  occasion  the  death  of 
a  person  of  whatever  class,  the  witness  may  tell  an  untruth.  To  obtain 
expiation  (pdvandya)  after  such  false  evidence  twice-born  men  must  offer 
an  oblation  {cam)  to  Sarasvati  (II.  83.     Cf.  Manu  VIII.  104,  105). 

When  a  murder  or  robbery  has  occurred  (ghdtite  ';pahrite)  and  no 
traces  of  it  are  found  beyond  the  village,  the  blame  must  rest  on  the 
governor  of  the  village  (grdma-bhartuh)  and  the  village  must  pay  (II. 
271,  272). 

When  a  Brahman  is  a  thief,  he  must  be  marked  with  a  hot  iron  and 
banished  from  the  country  (II.  270). 

Housebreakers,  stealers  of  horses  and  elephants,  and  those  who 
commit  murder  with  violence  should  be  impaled  (II.  273.  Cf.  Manu 
IX.  276,  280). 

A  stealer  of  clothes  should  have  his  hand  cut  off ;  cut-purses  should 
have  the  thumb  and  forefinger  amputated  (II.  274.    Cf.  Manu  IX.  277). 

The  highest  fine  should  be  imposed  on  any  one  who  knowingly  gives 
a  thief  or  murderer  food,  shelter,  fire,  water,  advice,  implements,  or 
money  (II.  276.     Cf.  Manu  IX.  278). 

Whoever  falsifies  scales,  an  edict,  measures  or  coins,  or  does  business 
with  them  so  falsified,  should  be  made  to  pay  the  highest  fine  (II.  240. 
Cf.  Manu  IX.  232). 

One  who  falsely  practises  as  a  physician  must  pay  the  first  fine,  if 
his  deception  be  practised  towards  animals  ;  the.  middle  fine,  if  towards 
men ;  the  highest  fine,  if  towards  any  of  the  king's  officers  (II.  242. 
Cf.  Manu  IX.  284). 

Any  one  who  adulterates  medicine,  or  oil,  or  salt,  or  perfumes,  or 
coi'n,  or  sugar,  or  other  commodities,  should  be  made  to  pay  sixteen 
Panas  (II.  245.     Cf.  Manu  VIII.  203,  IX.  286,  291). 

The  highest  fine  should  be  imposed  on  those  who,  knowing  the  rise  or 
fall  in  prices,  combine  to  make  a  price  of  their  own  to  the  detriment  of 
workmen  and  artisans  (II.  249). 

If  a  king  has  imposed  any  fine  unjustly,  he  must  give  thirty  times 
the  amount  to  Brahmans  after  having  made  an  offering  to  Varuna 
(II.  307.     Cf.  Manu  IX.  244). 

1  In  Manu  the  merit  is  said  to  be  transferred  to  dogs,  see  p.  287. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — YAJNAVALKYA.  299 

III.  Tte  third  Book  gives  various  rules  for  Prdyas- 
citta,  '  penance,  expiation,  and  purification.'  Many  of  the 
laws  are  like  those  of  Manu.  It  will  suffice  to  note  a  few 
examples  which  have  reference  to  funeral  ceremonies : — 

A  child,  under  two  years  old  must  be  buried,  and  no  offering  of  water 
should  be  made  to  him.  (The  corpse  of)  any  other  deceased  person 
should  be  accompanied  by  (a  procession  of)  relations  to  the  burning- 
place  {d-smaJdndt,  III.  i.     See  p.  196.     Of.  Manu  Y.  68,  69,  103). 

It  is  then  to  be  burnt  with  common  fire  {lauldkdgnind)  while  they 
repeat  the  hymn  to  Yama  (yama-suktam)  and  the  sacred  chant  {gdilidm, 
III.  2). 

It  is  usual  (for  the  relatives)  to  pour  out  a  libation  of  water  once  (to 
the  deceased),  uttering  his  name  and  family,  (and  then)  remaining 
silent  (see  p.  198). 

But  religious  students  and  outcastes  are  not  allowed  to  offer  the 
oblations  of  water  (III.  5.     Cf.  Manu  V.  88). 

The  funeral  oblation  is  not  allowed  for  heretics  (jidshandin),  persons 
without  any  fixed  station  (an-d4rUdh),  thieves,  women  who  have  killed 
their  husbands,  or  who  have  lived  an  independent  life  (Jcdma-gdh),  or 
have  been  drunkards,  or  have  committed  suicide  {dtma-tydginyah, 
III.  6.     Of.  Manu  Y.  89,  90). 

When  the  relatives  have  poured  out  water,  have  completed  their 
ablutions,  and  have  seated  themselves  on  a  spot  covered  with  soft 
grass,  (the  elder  ones)  may  repeat  to  the  others  some  verses  from  the 
ancient  Itihasas,  such  as  the  following  (III.  7)  : — 

Does  it  not  argue  folly  to  expect 

Stability  in  man,  who  is  as  transient 

As  a  mere  bubble  and  fragile  as  a  stalk  ? 

Why  should  we  utter  wailings  if  a  frame. 

Composed  of  five  material  elements, 

Is  decomposed  by  force  of  its  own  acts, 

And  once  again  resolved  into  its  parts  ? 

The  earth,  the  ocean,  and  the  gods  themselves 

Must  perish,  how  should  not  the  world 

Of  mortals,  light  as  froth,  obey  the  law 

Of  universal  death  and  perish  too  (III.  8-1 1)  1 

After  hearing  verses  of  this  kind  they  should  return  home,  the 
younger  ones  leading  the  way,  stopping  solemnly  outside  the  door  of 
the  house  to  chew  leaves  of  the  Nimb  tree  {Nimba-patrdni,  III.  12). 


300  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

After  they  have  rinsed  out  their  mouths  and  touched  fire,  water,  cow- 
dung,  white  mustard-seed,  and  placed  their  feet  on  a  stone,  they  should 
enter  the  house  slowly  (III.  13.  Cf.  the  account  of  the  funeral  proces- 
sion in  the  Grihya-siitras,  pp.  196-199). 

Impurity  caused  by  the  ceremonies  connected  with  touching  a  corpse 
{S2vam  dkmcam)  lasts  for  either  three  nights  or  ten  nights  (III.  18. 
Of.  Manu  V.  59,  64). 

Those  who  preserve  this  Law-book  diligently  in  their  memories  shall 
obtain  reputation  in  this  world  and  shall  go  to  heaven  (III.  330). 

He  who  repeats  only  three  verses  out  of  this  Law-book  at  a  S'raddha 
causes  perpetual  satisfaction  to  his  departed  ancestors ;  of  this  there  is 
no  doubt.  A  Brahman  may  obtain  merit,  a  Kshatriya  may  become  vic- 
torious, and  a  Vaisya  may  become  rich  in  corn  and  money  by  preserving 
this  book  in  his  memory  (III.  332,  333). 


The  eighteen  principal  Codes  posterior  to  Manu  and 
Ydjnavalhya. 

A  list  of  eighteen  of  the  most  important  of  these  has 
been  given  at  p.  203.  They  are  all  extant  in  some  form 
or  other,  as  described  by  Colebrooke.^  Little  or  nothing 
is  known  about  the  authorship  of  any  one  of  them.  They 
have  arisen  from  the  necessity  of  framing  new  laws  or 
modifying  old  ones  to  suit  particular  localities  and  parti- 
cular periods.  In  order  to  invest  them  with  antiquity 
and  authority,  they  are  all  eighteen  ascribed,  like  the 
Codes  of  Manu  and  Yajnavalkya,  to  various  mythical 
inspired  sages.  The  fact  is,  that  although  Manu  and 
Yajnavalkya  still  form  the  basis  of  Hindii  jurisprudence, 
many  of  their  laws  are  regarded  by  more  recent  Hindu 
legislators  as  only  intended  for  the  first  three  ages  of  the 
world,  and  therefore  as  having  no  force,  or  superseded  by 
others,  in  the  present  fourth  and  more  degenerate  Kali- 


^  See  Professor  E.  B.  Cowell's  edition  of  his  Essays,  vol.  i.  pp.  468- 
470.  The  works  or  their  abridgments,  ascribed  to  these  eighteen 
inspired  law-givers,  have  been  all  printed  at  Calcutta. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — YAJNAVALKYA.  30 1 

yuga  (see  note  2,  p.  178).     Thus  the  author  of  the  work 
ascribed  to  Narada  ^  says  : — 

Marriage  with  the  widow  of  a  deceased  brother,  the  slaughter  of 
cattle  in  entertaining  guests,  flesh-meat  at  funeral  obsequies,  and  the 
entrance  into  the  third  order  (or  that  of  a  Vanaprastha,  '  hermit ')  are 
forbidden  in  the  fourth  age. 

The  following  acts,  allowed  under  certain  circumstances 
by  ancient  law,  are  also  forbidden  in  the  fourth  age : — 

Drinking  any  spirituous  liquor,  even  at  a  religious  ceremony ;  ^  the 
gift  of  a  young  married  woman  to  another  bridegroom  if  her  husband 
should  die  while  she  is  still  a  virgin  ;  the  marriage  of  twice-born  men 
with  women  not  of  the  same  class  j  any  intercourse  with  a  twice-born 
man  who  has  passed  the  sea  in  a  ship ;  the  slaughter  of  a  bull  at  a 
sacrifice,  &c. 

And  the  author  of  Parasara's  Code  ^  affirms  :— 

The  laws  of  various  ages  are  different.  Manu's  Law-book  belongs  to 
the  Erita  age,  Gautama's  to  the  Treta,  that  of  S'an-kjia  and  Likhita  to 
the  Dvapara,  and  Parasara's  Code  to  the  Kali  age. 

Many  modern  lawyers,  however,  regard  the  whole  of 
Smriti,  beginning  with  Manu,  as  one,  and  assert  that  the 
inconsistencies  and  contradictions  it  contains  are  all  capable 
of  explanation. 

I  here  annex  a  few  particulars  relative  to  the  eighteen 
principal  Codes  posterior  to  Manu  and  Yajnavalkya  : — 

I.  That  attributed  to  Atri,  one  of  Manu's  ten  Prajapatis  (I.  35),  is 
in  verse,  and  written  in  a  perspicuous  style.  2.  That  of  VishijM  is  also 
in  verse,  and  is  regarded  as  an  excellent  treatise,  an  abridgment  of  which 
is  also  extant.  3.  That  of  Hdrita,  on  the  contrary,  is  in  prose,  but  has 
been  abridged  in  a  metrical  form.  4.  That  of  U^anas  or  S'ukra  is  in 
verse,  and  an  abridgment  is  extant.  5.  A  short  treatise  of  about  seventy 
verses  is  ascribed  to  An-giras,  one  of  Manu's  Prajapatis  and  Maharshis 
(I.  35).  6.  A  tract  consisting  of  one  hundred  verses,  commented  on  by 
KuUuka-bhatta,  is  mythically  attributed  to  Tama  (brother  of  Manu 

1  Quoted  by  Sir  W.  Jones,  vol.  viii.  p.  153. 

^  As,  for  example,  the  Sautramani. 

^  Quoted  by  Professor  Stenzler  in  his  preface  to  Yajnavalkya, 


302  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Vaivasvata),  ruler  of  the  world  of  spirits.  7.  That  of  Apastamha  is  in 
prose,  but  an  abridgment  in  verse  also  exists.  8.  Samvarta's  Code  has 
also  a  metrical  abridgment.  9.  Kdtydyana's  law-treatise  is  full  and 
perspicuous.  10.  Vrihaspati's  has  been  abridged,  and  it  is  doubtful 
whether  we  possess  the  abridgment  or  the  Code  itself.  1 1 .  Pardiarda 
treatise  is  regarded  by  some  as  the  highest  authority  for  the  Kali  or 
fourth  age  of  the  world.     It  has  been  commented  on  by  Madhavadarya. 

12.  A  law-treatise  is  ascribed  to  the  celebrated  Vydsa,  son  of  Parasara. 

13,  14.  Two  separate  tracts  in  verse  by  San-kha  and  IdJchita  exist,  but 
their  joint  treatise  in  prose  is  the  one  usually  cited  by  KuUuka  and 
others.  It  is  supposed  to  be  adapted  to  the  Dvapara  age.  15.  A  Code 
in  verse  of  no  special  interest  is  attributed  to  Daksha,  one  of  Manu's 
ten  Prajapatis  (I.  35).  16.  A  prose  treatise  written  in  a  clear  style 
bears  the  name  of  Gautama.  It  is  held  to  have  been  written  for  the 
Treta  age.  17.  S'atatapa's  Code  is  chiefly  on  penance  and  expiation. 
There  is  an  abridgment  of  it  in  verse.  18.  The  treatise  attributed  to 
Vasishtha,  another  of  Manu's  Prajapatis  (I.  35),  is  a  mixture  of  prose 
and  verse. 

Of  other  codes  ascribed  to  various  mythical  lawgivers 
in  the  Padma-purana,  &c.,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  mention 
those  of  Marici,  Pulastya,  Bhrigu,  Narada  (Manu  I.  35), 
Kasyapa,  Visvamitra,  Gargya,  Baudhayana,  Paithinasi, 
Sumantu,  Lokakshi,  Kuthumi  or  Kuthumi,  and  Dhaumya. 

Besides,  there  are  a  vast  number  of  legal  treatises  and 
commentaries  based  on  ancient  codes  by  modern  lawyers, 
whose  works  are  current  and  more  or  less  esteemed  as 
authorities  in  different  parts  of  India.  They  form  five 
schools,  of  which  I  here  give  a  brief  account. 

The  Five  Schools  of  Hindu  Law. 

These  are  the  schools  of — i.  Bengal,  2.  Benares,  3. 
Mithila  (North  Behar  and  Tirhut),  4.  Madras  {Drdvida), 
and    5.    Bombay    [Mahd-rdshtra)}      There    are    certain 

1  I  have  here  consulted  Mr.  Herbert  Cowell's  Tagore  Law  Lectures, 
copies  of  which  have  always  been  kindly  given  to  me  by  the  Senate  of 
the  Calcutta  University. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — OTHER   CODES   AND   SCHOOLS.       303 

books  regarded   as   special  authorities   in  each  of  these 
principal  schools. 

I.  In  Bengal  both  Manu  and  Yajnavalkya  are  of  course 
held  in  great  reverence  as  original  sources  of  law.  We 
have  already  noted  that  the  best  commentary  on  Manu  is 
one  called  Manv-artha-muktavali,  by  Kulliika-bhatta  (see 
note  2,  p.  2 1 3).  There  is  also  a  commentary  by  Medhatithi 
(partially  lost,  and  completed  by  another  author) ;  another 
by  Govinda-raja ;  another  by  Dharani-dhara,  Bhaguri, 
and  others.  To  Yajnavalkya  belong  at  least  four  other 
commentaries  besides  the  Mitakshara,  viz.,  that  of  Apa- 
rarka  (which  is  the  oldest  of  all) ;  of  6ula-pani  (called 
the  Dipa-kalika) ;  of  Deva-bodha,  and  of  Visva-rupa. 
Sula-pani  is  also  the  author  of  a  work  on  penance  and 
expiation.  The  Mitakshara  of  Vijnanesvara^  is,  however, 
the  principal  commentary  on  Yajnavalkya  (as  before 
noticed).  It  is  much  studied  in  Bengal,  but  the  chief 
authority  in  the  Bengal  school  is  a  well-kuown  work, 
somewhat  .different  in  character  and  principles,  called 
the  Daya-bhaga  or  '  treatise  on  inheritance,'  ascribed  to 
Jimiita-vahana,^  by  some  thought  to  have  been  a  prince 
of  the  house  of  Silara,  who  either  composed  this  work 
himself  or  caused  it  to  be  compiled  rather  earlier  than  the 
beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century.  It  should  be  stated 
that  both  the  Mitakshara  and  Daya-bhaga  are  develop- 
ments of,  rather  than  commentaries  on,  Manu  and  Yajna- 
valkya. Although  they  profess  to  be  based  on  these 
ancient  books,  they  sometimes  modify  the  laws  there  pro- 
pounded to  suit  a  more  advanced  social  system.     In  other 

^  Vijnanesvara  belonged  to  a  sect  of  Sanoyasins  founded  by  S^an-kara- 
6arya,  and  his  commentary  may  bave  been  written  as  early  as  the  ninth 
century  'of  our  era. 

2  Translated  by  Colebrooke.  Jimiita-vahana's  work  seems  to  have 
been  called  Dharma-ratna,  and  only  the  chapter  on  inheritance  is 
preserved. 


304  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

cases  they  discuss  doubtful  points  and  supply  omissions ; 
while  they,  in  their  turn,  have  been  commented  on  by 
succeeding  lawyers,  whose  works  introduce  still  further 
modifications  on  various  important  points,^  thus  : — 

Three  prinoipal  commentaries  on  the  Mitakshara  are  named,  viz., 
the  Subodhini  of  Visvesvara-bhatta  (thought  by  Oolebrooke  to  be  as 
old  as  the  fourteenth  century) ;  a  later  work  by  Balam-bhatta ;  and  a 
third  (called  the  Pratitakshara)  by  Nanda-pandita,  who  was  also  the 
author  of  the  work  on  adoption  called  Dattaka-mimansa  and  of  the 
Vaijayanti  (see  next  page).  The  commentaries  on  the  Daya-bhaga  are 
numerous.  Some  of  these  (published  under  the  patronage  of  Prasanna 
Kumar  Thakur)  are,  that  of  S'rikrishna-tarkalan-kara,  which,  with  a 
treatise  by  the  same  author  called  Daya-krama-san-graha,  is  highly 
esteemed  in  Bengal;  that  of  S'ri-nathadarya-dudamard;  that  of  Adyuta- 
(Sakravartin ;  and  that  of  Mahesvara.  Before  any  of  these  ought  to 
be  placed  the  works  of  a  celebrated  Brahman  (who  lived  at  the  beginning 
of  the  sixteenth  century),  named  Raghu-nandana,  in  about  twenty- 
seven  books,  on  rites  and  customs  and  the  times  of  their  observance. 
His  treatises,  intended  to  comment  on  and  support  Jimuta-vahana,  are 
called  Smriti-tattva,  Tithi-tattva,  &c.,  the  former  including  the  Vyava- 
hara-tattva  and  Daya-tattva.^ 

2.  As  regards  th.e  school  of  Benares  and  Middle  India  it 
should  be  noted  that  the  Mitakshara  of  Vijnanesvara  is 
acknowledged  as  an  authority,  and  studied  by  the  ad- 
herents of  this  school,  as  it  is  to  a  certain  extent  by  all 
five  schools.  But  in  the  Benares  school  certain  popular 
commentaries  on  the  Mitakshara,  such  as  the  Vira-mitro- 
daya  of  Mitra-misra  and  the  Vivada-tandava  of  Kamala- 
kara,  have  great  weight. 

3.  In  the  Maithila  school  or  that  of  Mithila  (North  Behar 

1  The  certainty  we  feel  as  to  the  accuracy  of  the  texts  of  all  im- 
portant Sanskrit  works  is  due  to  the  practice  of  writing  commentaries, 
which  always  quote  the  words  of  the  original,  and  so  prevent  changes. 
Again,  the  accuracy  and  genuineness  of  the  best  commentaries  are 
secured  by  other  commentaries  on  them. 

2  Printed  at  Calcutta  in  1828.  Raghu-nandana  is  often  called  Smartar 
bhattadarya. 


THE   LAW-BOOKS — OTHER   CODES   AND   SCHOOLS.        30S 

and  Tirhut),  besides  the  Code  of  Yajnavalkya  with  the 
Mitakshara,  the  Vivada-cintamani  and  Vyavahara-cinta- 
mani  of  Vacaspati  Misra  ^  are  much  studied  ;  also  the 
Vivada-ratnakara  of  Candesvara  (who  lived  about  13 14) 
and  the  Vivada-candra,  composed  by  a  learned  female 
named  Lakhima-devT,  who  is  said  to  have  set  the  name  of 
her  kinsman,  Misaru-misra,  to  her  own  works. 

4.  In  the  Dravidian  or  South-Indian  school,  besides  the 
Mitakshara,  as  before,  there  is  the  Smriti-candrika  and 
Dattaka-candrika  of  Devana-bhatta ;  Madhavacarya's  com- 
mentary on  Parasara's  Code  (called  Parasara-smriti-vya- 
khya);  and  Nanda-pandita's  commentary  on  Vishnu's  Code 
(called  Vaijayanti),  and  on  Parasara's  Code,  and  his  treatise 
on  the  law  of  adoption  called  Dattaka-candrika. 

5.  In  the  Western  school  (of  Bombay  and  Maha-rashtra), 
besides  the  Mitakshara,  certain  treatises  by  Nilakantha- 
bhatta,  particularly  one  called  Vyavahara-mayukha,^  have 
the  most  weight. 

1  Often  called  Misra.  His  work  has  been  translated  by  Prasanna 
Kumar  Thakur,  and  printed  at  Calcutta  in  1863.  A  copy  was  kindly 
sent  to  me  by  the  translator. 

2  A  translation  of  this  by  Mr.  H.  Borrodaile  of  the  Bombay  Civil 
Service  was  published  at  Surat  at  the  Mission  Press  in  1827. 


U 


CHAPTER  XII. 

IV.  The  Itihdsas  or  Epic  Poems — The  Rdmdyana} 

In  India,  literature,  like  the  whole  face  of  nature,  is 
on  a  gigantic  scale.  Poetry,  born  amid  the  majestic 
scenery  of  the  Himalayas,  and  fostered  in  a  climate  which 
inflamed  the  imaginative  powers,  developed  itself  with 
Oriental  luxuriance,  if  not  always  with  true  sublimity. 
Although  the  Hindiis,  like  the  Greeks,  have  only  two 
great  epic  poems  ^ — the  Eamayana  and  Maha-bharata— 
yet  to  compare  these  vast  compositions  with  the  Iliad 
and  the  Odyssey,  is  to  compare  the  Indus  and  the  Ganges, 
rising  in  the  snows  of  the  world's  most  colossal  ranges, 
swollen  by  numerous  tributaries,  spreading  into  vast 
shallows  or  branching  into  deep  divergent  channels,  with 
the  streams  of  Attica  or  the  mountain-torrents  of  Thessaly. 
There  is,  in  fact,  an  immensity  of  bulk  about  this,  as 
about  every  other  department  of  Sanskrit  literature,  which 
to  a  European  mind,  accustomed  to  a  more  limited  horizon, 
is  absolutely  bewildering. 


1  A  portion  of  the  matter  of  this  chapter  and  of  that  on  the  Maha- 
bharata  was  delivered  by  me  as  a  public  Lecture  before  the  University 
of  Oxford,  on  the  9th  of  May  1862,  and  was  afterwards  published  in  a 
little  work  called  '  Indian  Epic  Poetry,'  which  is  now  out  of  print. 

2  I  am  here  speaking  of  that  form  of  epic  poetry  which  may  be  called 

natural  and  spontaneous  as  distinguished  from  artiiicial.     Whether  the 

Indian  Epics  (Itihasas)  or  even  the  Iliad  can  be  strictly  -said  to  answer 

Aristotle's  definition   of   Epos,   is   another  question.      Artificial  epic 

poems  (Kavyas)  are  not  wanting  in  later  Sanskrit,  and  specimens  will 

be  given  in  a  subsequent  chapter. 

306 


ORIGIN   OF   THE   EPIC   POEMS.  307 

Nevertheless,  a  sketch,  however  imperfect,  of  the  two 
Indian  Epics  can  scarcely  fail  to  interest  Occidental 
scholars  ;  for  all  true  poetry,  whether  European  or  Asiatic, 
must  have  features  of  resemblance ;  and  no  poems  could 
have  achieved  celebrity  in  the  East  as  these  have  done, 
had  they  not  addressed  themselves  to  feelings  and  affec- 
tions common  to  human  nature,  and  belonging  alike  to 
Englishmen  and  Hindus. 

I  propose,  therefore,  in  the  next  three  chapters,  to  give 
a  brief  general  idea  of  the  character  and  contents  of  the 
Eamayana  and  Maha-bharata,^  comparing  them  in  some 
important  particulars  with  each  other,  and  pointing  out 
the  most  obvious  features  of  similarity  or  difference, 
which  must  strike  every  classical  scholar  who  contrasts 
them  with  the  Iliad  and  the  Odyssey. 

It  is,  of  course,  a  principal  characteristic  of  epic  poetry, 
as  distinguished  from  lyrical,  that  it  should  concern  itself 
more  with  external  action  than  internal  feelings.  It  is 
this  which  makes  Epos  the  natural  expression  of  early 
national  life.  When  centuries  of  trial  have  turned  the 
mind  of  nations  inwards,  and  men  begin  to  speculate,  to 
reason,  to  elaborate  language  and  cultivate  science,  there 
may  be  no  lack  of  refined  poetry,  but  the  spontaneous 
production  of  epic  song  is,  at  that  stage  of  national  exist- 
ence, as  impossible  as  for  an  octogenarian  to  delight  in  the 
giants  and  giant-killers  of  his  childhood.  The  Eamayana 
and  Maha-bharata  then,  as  reflecting  the  Hindu  character 
in  ancient  times,  may  be  expected  to  abound  in  stirring 
incidents  of  exaggerated  heroic  action. 

Songs   in    celebration    of  great   heroes   were   probably 
current  in  India  quite  as  early  as  the  Homeric  poems  in 

1  A  more  complete  analysis  of  the  Eamayana  and  Mahirbharata  was 
given  by  me  at  the  end  of  the  little  work  called  '  Indian  Epic  Poetry,' 
and  will  probably  be  reprinted  with  additions  hereafter. 


308  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Greece.  No  mention,  indeed,  is  made  of  Eama,  Arjuna, 
and  Yudhi-shthira  in  the  hymns  of  the  Rig-veda,  but  the 
deeds  of  Indra  and  other  gods  and  heroes,  who  were  sup- 
posed to  protect  the  more  civUized  Aryas  from  the  bar- 
barous An-aryas,  are  there  narrated  and  lauded,  and  it 
is  in  the  songs  composed  in  their  praise  that  we  may 
trace  the  foreshadowings  of  Indian  epic  poetry.  Again, 
we  know  that  Itihasas,  or  legendary  narratives,  were 
recited  orally  at  the  period  when  the  Grihya  Siitras 
and  Manu  were  composed  (see  p.  195  ;  note  i,  p.  207  ; 
and  p.  249).  Such  narratives  doubtless  recounted  the 
adventures  of  the  popular  heroes  of  the  period,  with 
all  the  warmth  of  colouring  natural  to  writers  whose 
imaginations  were  stimulated  by  an  Eastern  climate  and 
environments ;  but  it  is  scarcely  credible  that  they  could 
have  achieved  much  popularity  had  they  not  rested  on  a 
basis  of  historical  truth. 

It  is  certainly  likely  that  at  some  early  date,  not  long 
after  the  first  settlement  of  the  Aryan  races  in  the  country 
of  the  five  rivers,  rival  tribes  of  immigrants,  called  Kurus, 
advancing  from  that  region  towards  the  plains  of  Hindii- 
stan,  contended  for  supremacy.  It  is,  moreover,  probable 
that  soon  after  their  final  occupation  of  the  Gangetic 
districts,  a  body  of  invaders  headed  by  a  bold  leader,  and 
aided  by  the  warlike  but  uncivilized  hill-tribes,  forced 
their  way  southwards  into  the  peninsula  of  India  as  far 
as  Ceylon.  The  heroic  exploits  of  the  chieftains  in  both 
cases  would  naturally  become  the  theme  of  epic  poetry, 
and  the  wild  Aborigines  of  the  Vindhya  and  neighbouring 
hills  would  be  poetically  converted  into  monkeys,^  while 


1  Strabo  (XV.  29)  relates  that  on  a  particular  occasion  a  large  number 
of  monkeys  came  out  of  a  wood  and  stood  opposite  the  Macedonian 
troops,  who  seeing  them  apparently  stationed  in  military  array,  mistook 
them  for  a  real  army  and  prepared  to  attack  them  as  enemies. 


ORIGIN    OF   THE   EPIC   POEMS.  309 

the  powerful  pre-Aryan  races  of  the  south  would  be  repre- 
sented as  many-headed  ogres  and  bloodthirsty  demons.^ 

^  We  must  be  careful  not  to  confound  the  great  Dravidian  races 
occupying  the  Madras  Presidency  and  speaking  Tamil,  Telugu,  Kanarese, 
and  Malayalam,  with  the  uncivilized  aboriginal  tribes  found  on  the  hills 
and  in  the  jungles  of  India.  The  Dravidian  races  (probably  symbolized 
by  the  Ravanas  and  Vibhishanas  of  epic  poetry)  were  the  precursors  of 
the  Sanskrit-speaking  Aryans,  and  possibly  had  their  origin  in  the  same 
districts  of  Central  Asia,  whpnce  they  immigrated  by  the  same  mountain- 
passes  into  the  Panjab  and  Northern  India.  Theyjmay  have  partially 
amalgamated  with  the  advancing  Aryans,  but  were  mostly  driven  south- 
wards. There  they  attained  a  considerable  independent  civilization. 
Their  languages,  although  eventually  more  or  less  intermingled  with 
Sanskrit  words,  are  agglutinating  (commonly  called  Turanian)  in  struc- 
ture, and  possess  an  extensive  and  important  literature  of  their  own. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  hill-tribes  and  others  (such  as  were  symbolized 
by  the  monkey-armies  of  Hanumat) — the  Gonds  of  Central  India,  the 
Bhils  of  the  hills  to  the  west  of  the  Gonds,  the  Khonds  or  Kus  of  the 
eastern  districts  of  Gondvana  and  the  ranges  south  of  Orissa,  the 
Santhals  and  Kols  of  the  hills  to  the  west  of  Bengal,  the  Khasias  and 
Garos  of  the  eastern  border — are  the  present  representatives  of  numerous 
wild  Tartar  tribes  who  swarmed  into  India  at  various  epochs,  some  of 
them  probably  coming  from  Chinese  Tartary  and  Tibet,  and  taking 
the  course  of  the  Brahma-putra  into  Bengal.  These  speak  an  infinite 
number  of  different  dialects  and  are  almost  all  mutually  unintelligible. 
If  the  term  Turanian  is  to  embrace  races  so  widely  separated  by  language 
and  customs  as  the  Dravidians  and  various  hill-tribes  of  India,  the 
sooner  it  is  expelled  from  the  vocabulary  of  philologists  and  ethnologists 
the  better.  At  any  rate,  there  must  be  two  great  classes  of  Turanian 
languages,  the  North  and  the  South ;  the  former  comprising  the  three 
sisters  Tungusic  (or  Mantchu),  Mongol,  and  Turkish,  besides  Samoyedic 
and  Finnish,  while  the  latter  takes  in  Tibetan,  Siamese,  Burmese,  and 
the  Dravidian  languages  ;  the  monosyllabic  Chinese  standing,  as  it  were, 
between  the  two.  Perhaps  the  dialects  of  the  Himalayan  tribes  have, 
of  all  hill-dialects,  the  best  title  to  be  ranked  among  the  South  Turanian 
class.  Dr.  Caldwell,  in  his  valuable  Comparative  Grammar  of  the  South- 
Indian  Languages,  has  discussed  the  affiliation  of  the  Dravidian  family 
with  great  ability.  He  considers  that  the  Dravidians  were  the  first 
inhabitants  of  India,  and  that  they  were  driven  southwards  by  other 
invaders,  who  were  afterwards  subdued  by  the  Aryana    The  rude  dialects 


310  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

These  races,  who  are  called  An-drya,  '  ignoble,'  in  opposi- 
tion to  Arya,  '  noble/  had  been  gradually  driven  south- 
wards or  towards  the  hills  by  the  Aryan  settlers.  They 
probably  made  great  resistance  in  the  North  at  the  time 
the  Rig-veda  was  composed.  They  are  there  called 
Dasyus,  Yatudhanas,  &c.,  and  described  as  monstrous  in 
form,  godless,  inhuman,  haters  of  Brahmans,  disturbers  of 
sacred  rites,  eaters  of  human  and  horse  flesh  (Rig-veda 
X.  87,  16  ;  Muir's  Texts  II.  435).  In  .the  epic  poems  they 
are  generally  called  Eakshasas  or  evil  demons,  the  relent- 
less enemies  of  gods  and  good  men  and  of  all  sacred  rites.^ 


of  the  more  southern  hill-tribea  are  partially  connected  with  the  Dra- 
vidian,  especially  the  Tuda,  Kota  (two  dialects  of  the  Nil-giri  hills), 
Gond,  and  Khond  (Ku).  The  Ramtisies  and  most  of  the  Korawars 
speak  a  patois  of  Telugu.  The  Male-arasars  ('  hill-kings ')  of  the 
Southern  Ghats  speak  partly  corrupt  Malayalam  and  corrupt  Tamil. 
The  Lambadies,  or  gipsies,  speak  a  dialect  of  Hindustani.  Among  the 
barbarous  tribes  of  the  South  are  included  the  Vedars  of  the  forests  of 
Ceylon. 

1  In  one  place  (Eamayana  III.  i.  15)  they  are  described  as  black, 
with  woolly  hair  and  thick  lips.  The  following  is  from  III.  i.  22,  &c. : 
'  Men- devouring  Eakshasas  of  various  shapes  and  wild  beasts  dwell  in 
this  vast  forest.  They  harass  the  devotees  in  the  settlements.  These 
shapeless  and  ill-looking  monsters  testify  their  abominable  character 
by  various  cruel  and  terrific  displays  of  it.  These  base-born  wretches 
{an-drya)  perpetrate  the  greatest  outrages.  Changing  their  shapes 
and  hiding  in  the  thickets  they  delight  in  terrifying  devotees.  They 
cast  away  the  sacrificial  ladles  and  vessels  (srug-hhdndam),  pollute  the 
cooked  oblations,  and  defile  the  offerings  with  blood.  They  utter 
frightful  sounds  in  the  ears  of  the  faithful.'  Viradha,  a  Rakshasa,  is 
said  (Ramayana  III.  vii.  5;  Muir  II.  427)  to  be  'like  a  mountain- 
peak,  with  long  legs,  a  huge  body,  a  crooked  nose,  hideous  eyes,  a  long 
face,  pendent  belly,  &c. ,  like  Death  with  an  open  mouth. '  The  Nishadas 
of  the  Puranas,  though  described  as  dwarfish,  have  similar  features,  and 
are  no  doubt  intended  for  the  same  race.  In  the  same  way,  in  describ- 
ing races  unknown  to  the  Greeks,  such  as  the  Cyclopes,  Laestrygones, 
Centauri,  &c..  Homer  and  other  Grecian  writers  are  given  to  exaggera- 
tion, and  relate  the  most  absurd  fables. 


ORIGIN   OF   THE   EPIC   POEMS.  311 

It  is  to  the  subjugation  of  these  non-Aryan  races  by  heroic 
Aryan  leaders  who  were  Kshatriyas,  as  well  as  to  the  rivalry 
between  different  tribes  of  the  settlers  themselves,  that  we 
owe  the  circumstances  out  of  which  the  two  great  Epics 
arose.  Whether  the  celebrated  Aryan  warriors  of  the 
Eamayana  and  Maha-bharata  were  identical  with  those 
of  the  Itihasas  of  which  mention  is  made  in  the  Grihya 
Sutras  and  in  Manu  (III.  232)  cannot  be  proved  ;  but  this 
much  is  clear,  that  the  exploits  of  the  three  Eamas, 
Arjuna,  &c.,  became,  soon  after  Manu's  time,  the  theme 
of  song,  and  that  these  heroes  were  in  the  first  instance 
represented  as  merely  men  of  great  strength  and  prowess, 
whose  powers,  however  extraordinary,  were  not  more  than 
human.  The  oral  descriptions  of  their  deeds  and  adven- 
tures by  public  reciters  formed  the  original  basis  of  the 
two  great  Epics,  and  were  naturally  the  peculiar  property 
of  the  Kshatriya  and  conquering  class.  Probably  these 
narratives  were  in  the  first  instance  delivered  in  prose, 
which  became  gradually  interspersed  with  the  simplest 
forms  of  metre,  such  as  that  called  Anushtubh  or  Sloka.^ 

It  is  easy  indeed  for  the  most  cursory  reader  of  the 
Ramayana  and  Maha-bharata  to  trace  a  substratum  or 
basis  (jtmla)  of  simple  heroic  narration  underlying  the 
mass  of  more  recent  accretions.  But  to  what  date  is 
this  first  framework  of  the  poems  to  be  referred  ?  And 
again — When  occurred  that  first  process  of  brahmanizing 
which  obscured  and  transformed  its  original  character  ? 
And  lastly — When  was  the  structure  completed  and  the 


1  The  oldest  part  of  the  Maha-bharata  has  a  section  entirely  in 
prose  (see  note  i,  p.  371).  The  invention  of  the  S'loka  is  attributed 
to  Valmiki,  the  reputed  author  of  the  Ramayana,  with  the  object 
doubtless  of  establishing  his  claims  to  be  regarded  as  one  of  the 
earliest  and  most  ancient  of  Indian  poets.  This  metre  is  found  in 
the  Veda. 


312  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

whole  work  moulded  into  a  form  similar  to  that  we  now 
possess  1 

With  regard  to  the  first  of  these  questions,  I  have 
now  to  submit  five  reasons  in  support  of  the  view  that 
the  earliest  or  pre-brahmanical  composition  of  both  Epics 
took  place  at  a  period  not  later  than  the  fifth  century 
B.C.,  as  follows  : — 

1.  The  Eamayana  records  no  case  of  Sat!.  In  the  Maha-bharata,. 
Madri,  wife  of  Pandu,  is  made  to  immolate  herself  with  her  husband/ 
and  the  four  wives  of  Vasu-deva  and  some  of  Krishna's  wives  do  the 
same ;  ^  but  it  is  remarkable  that  none  of  the  numerous  widows  of  the 
slain  heroes  are  represented  as  burning  themselves  in  the  same  manner. 
This  shows  that  the  practice  of  Sati  was  beginning  to  be  introduced  in  the 
North-west  of  India  near  the  Panjab  (where  we  know  it  prevailed  about 
300  years  B.C.),  but  that  it  had  not  at  the  time  of.  the  earliest  composi- 
tion of  the  Ramayana  reached  the  more  eastern  districts.  But  if  one 
Epic  records  no  Sati,  and  the  other  only  rare  cases — notwithstanding 
the  numerous  opportunities  for  referring  to  the  practice  afforded  by 
the  circumstances  of  the  plot — it  follows  that  we  ought  to  place  the 
laying  down  of  the  first  lines  of  both  compositions  before  the  thi?d 
century  B.C.,  when  we  know  from  Megasthenes  that  it  prevailed 
generally  even  as  far  east  as  Magadha. 

2.  The  first  construction,  or,  so  to  speak,  '  first  casting '  of  the  stories 
of  Rama  and  of  the  Pandavas  as  poems  with  definite  plots,  seems  to 
have  been  pre-buddhistic  quite  as  clearly  as  it  was  pre-brahmanical — by 
which  I  mean,  that  it  took  place  anterior  to  the  actual  establishment 
of  Buddhism  as  a  rival  system.  Only  one  direct  mention  of  Buddha 
and  Buddhism  occurs  in  the  Ramayana,  and  the  verses  in  which  it 
occurs  (II.  cviii.  30-38),  and  in  which  Buddha  is  compared  to  a  thief,. 
are  admitted  to  be  an  interpolation  and  not  part  of  the  original  poem. 
Nor  can  it  be  proved  that  any  such  direct  reference  occurs  in  the  original 
Maha-bharata.  Nevertheless,  there  are  numerous  allusions  (not  bearing 
the  stamp  of  later  additions)  in  both  Epics,  especially  the  latter,  to  that 
development  of  rationalistic  inquiry  and  Buddhistic  scepticism,  which 
we  know  commenced  about  500  years  b.c.^ 

1  Adi-parvan  4896.     See  also  3030. 

2  Mausala-parvan  194,  249. 

^  Note  particularly  the  infidel  doctrines  expressed  by  the  Brahman. 
Javali  (see  p.  351),  and  Book  I.  12.  of  the  Bengali  recension  of  the- 


ORIGIN   OP   THE   EPIC    POEMS.  313 

3.  It  is  evident  from  the  Asoka  inscriptions  that  the  language  of  the 
mass  of  the  people  in  Hindustan  in  the  third  century  e.g.  was  not  pure 
Sanskrit.  It  consisted  rather  of  a  variety  of  provincial  Sanskritic 
dialects,  to  which  the  general  name  of  Prakrit  is  applied.  If,  then,  the 
first  redaction  of  these  popular  poems  had  taken  place  as  late  as  the 
third  century,  is  it  likely  that  some  forms  of  Prakrit  would  not  have 
been  introduced  into  the  dialogues  and  allowed  to  remain  there,  as  we 
find  has  been  done  in  the  dramas,  the  oldest  of  which — the  Mriddha- 
katika — can  scarcely  be  much  later  than  the  second  century  B.C.?  It 
is  true  that  the  language  of  the  original  story  of  both  Epics,  as  trace- 
able in  the  present  texts,  is  generally  simple  Sanskrit,  and  by  no  means 
elaborate  or  artificial;  but  this  is  just  what  might  have  been  under- 
stood by  the  majority  of  the  people  about  five  centuries  B.C.,  before  the 
language  of  the  people  had  become  generally  prakriticized. 

4.  When  the  story  of  the  poems  was  first  put  together  in  a  continuous 
form,  it  is  clear  that  the  Dekhan  and  more  westerly  and  southerly 
regions  of  India  had  not  been  occupied  by  the  Aryans.  But  we  know 
from  the  Asoka  inscriptions  that  the  empire  of  the  kings  of  Magadha 
and  Palibothra  in  the  third  century  radiated  in  all  directions,  as 
inscriptions  are  found  in  the  Panjab,  at  Delhi,  in  Kuttack,  and  as  far 
west  as  Gujarat. 

5.  The  Greek  writer,  Dion  Chrysostomos,  who  was  born  about  the 
middle  of  the  first  century,  and  was  especially  honoured  by  the  emperor 
Trajan,  mentions  (Or.  LIII.  555)  that  records  existed  in  his  time  of  epic 
poems,  recited  by  the  Hindus,  which  had  been  copied  or  translated  from 
Homer.  These  statements,  as  Professor  Lassen  has  shown  (Ind.  Alt. 
III.  346),  must  have  been  taken  from  the  accounts  of  Megasthenes, 
who  lived  at  the  court  of  Candra-gupta  (see  note  i,  p.  224).  They  indi- 
cate that  poems  resembling  the  Iliad  were  current  in  India  at  least  as 
early  as  the  third  or  fourth  century  B.C.,  though  it  by  no  means  follows 
that  the  Hindu  poets  borrowed  a  single  idea  from  Homer.  ^ 

Eamayana,  where  S'ramanas,  or  Buddhist  mendicants,  are  mentioned 
(see  also  p.  121). 

^  The  passage  in  Dion  Chrysostomos  is  as  follows :  ''Orron  xal  iras 
'Iv5o7s  ^ii(s6a,i  <j)aai  rfiv'O/i^^ov  To/jjff/k,  fijiTaj^aXovriav  ahrrit  ili  rr\v  a<j>iT'!^aii 
didXiXTov  7s  xal  <^uivriv  (Eeiske's  Edit.,  p.  253).  There  seems  too  great  a 
disposition  among  European  scholars  to  regard  the  Hindus  as  destitute  of 
all  originality.  I  cannot  but  agree  with  Professor  Lassen  that  Megas- 
thenes was  mistaken,  though  obviously  the  story  of  the  great  war  between 
the  rival  tribes,  and  that  of  the  carrying  o£f  of  Sita  by  a  South-Indian 
chief,  have,  of  course,  points  of  resemblance  to  the  Iliad,  which  may  have 


3^4  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

These  points  seem  to  merit  consideration  in  fixing 
500  B.C.  as  an  approximate  date  for  the  first  or  pre- 
brahmanical  and  pre-buddhistic  versions  of  the  two  poems. 
The  names  of  the  authors  of  these  original  versions  appear 
to  have  perished,  unless  it  be  held  (which  seems  highly 
improbable)  that  the  story  of  Rama  must  be  assigned  to 
Valmiki  from  its  very  first  existence  as  a  Kavya. 

We  come  next  to  the  second  stage  of  their  construction. 
We  have  suggested  the  fifth  century  B.C.  as  the  probable 
date  of  the  rise  of  Brahmanism,  as  depicted  ia  Manu 
(see  p.  207),  and  with  it  of  Buddhistic  scepticism.  The 
ambitious  Brahmans,  who  aimed  at  religious  and  intel- 
lectual supremacy,  gradually  saw  the  policy  of  converting 
the  great  national  Epics,  which  they  could  not  suppress, 
into  instruments  for  moulding  the  popular  mind  in  accord- 
ance with  their  own  pattern.  Possibly,  too,  they  may  have 
hoped  to  turn  them  into  important  engines  for  arresting 
the  progress  of  Buddhistic  rationalism.  Accordingly,  I 
conjecture  that  in  the  fourth  century  b.c.  they  commenced 
reconstructing  and  remodelling  the  two  great  Epics. 
They  proceeded,  in  short,  to  brahmanize  what  was  before 
the  property  of  the  Kshatriya  or  warrior  caste.  This 
process  was  of  course  committed  to  poets  who  were 
Brahmans,  and  was  not  completed  all  at  once.  Those 
songs  which  described  too  plainly  the  independence  of 
the  military  caste,  were  modified,  obscured  by  allegory, 
and  rendered  improbable  by  monstrous  fable  and  mytho- 


suggested  the  idea  of  plagiarism.  The  sufferings  of  king  Dhrita-raslitra 
are  like  those  of  Priam,  and  the  lamentations  of  the  wives  of  the  slain 
heroes  after  the  battles  between  the  Pandavas  and  Kauravas  are  like 
those  of  Hecuba  and  Andromache,  while  the  martial  deeds  of  Arjuna 
and  Duryodhana  resemble  those  of  Achilles  and  Hector.  According  to 
Professor  Weber  the  passage  in  Dion  contains  the  earliest  notice  by 
other  writers  of  the  Indian  epic  poems.  He  is,  moreover,  of  opinion 
that  the  Indian  poets  really  took  ideas  from  Homer. 


ORIGIN   OF   THE   EPIC    POEMS.  31S 

logical  embellisliments.  Any  circumstance  which  appeared 
opposed  to  the  Brahmanical  system,  was  speciously  ex- 
plained away,  glossed  over,  or  mystified.''  If  unbelievers, 
like  Javali,  were  brought  on  the  scene,  it  was  only  that 
their  arguments  might  be  refuted,  and  their  characters 
reprobated  (see  p.  351)-  The  great  Kshatriya  dynasties 
were  made  to  trace  back  their  origin  to  Brahmanical  sages 
(see  p.  344).  Kings  were  allowed  to  undertake  nothing 
except  under  the  direction  of  Brahman  ministers  ;  ^  while 
the  great  heroes  themselves  were  not  really  Kshatriyas, 
or  even  human  beings,  but  emanations  of  the  Deity. 

In  the  case  of  the  Ramayana,  the  unity  of  the  story 
was  never  broken  by  calling  in  the  aid  of  more  than 
one  author,  whose  name  was  Valmiki,  and  who  must 
have  completed  the  task  single-handed.  Hence  it  never 
lost  its  character  of  a  Kavya,  or  poem,  with  a  clear 
and  coherent  plot.  On  the  other  hand,  the  brafhmanizing 
of  the  story  of  the  great  war  between  the  Pandavas  and 
Kauravas  seems  to  have  attracted  a  succession  of  poets, 
who  interwove  their  own  compositions  into  the  original 


1  Thus  when  Dasaratha  kills  a  boy  while  hunting  (see  p.  349),  the 
dying  youth  is  made  to  explain  that,  although  a  hermit's  son,  he  is  no 
Brahman,  thereby  relieving  the  king  from  the  guilt  of  Brahmanicide, 
which,  according  to  Manu,  was  unpardonable  either  in  this  world  or 
the  next  (Manu  VIII.  381,  XII.  55).  Again,  the  account  of  the  victory 
of  the  Kshatriya  Rama-6andra  over  the  Brahman  Parasu-rama — the 
mythical  champion  of  the  sacerdotal  caste — is  surrounded  with  a  haze 
of  mysticism  (see  p.  329,  note  2  ;  p.  347)  ;  while  the  episode  which 
relates  at  full  Visvamitra's  quarrel  with  the  great  saint  Vasishtha, 
and  the  success  of  the  former,  though  a  Kshatriya,  in  elevating  him- 
self to  a  Brahman's  rank,  introduces  the  wildest  hyperbole,  with  the 
manifest  object  of  investing  the  position  of  a  Brahman  with  unap- 
proachable grandeur,  and  deterring  others  from  attempts  in  the  same 
direction  (see  p.  361). 

^  King  Dasaratha  in  the  Eamayana  is  described  as  surrounded  by 
Brahman  ministers  (see  p.  340). 


3l6  INDIAN  WISDOM. 

texture  of  the  work,  so  that  its  individuality,  and  even  the 
name  of  its  first  author,  disappeared  under  the  constant 
accession  of  new  matter.  Hence  we  must  suppose,  in  the 
case  of  the  Maha-bharata,  more  than  one  Brahmanical 
redaction  and  amplification,  which  need  not  be  assumed 
for  the  completion  of  the  Ramayana.  Moreover,  the 
great  mass  of  ever-increasing  materials  under  which  the 
original  story  of  the  Pandavas  became  almost  lost  to  view, 
and  under  which  the  title  to  the  name  Kavya  merged 
in  that  of  a  rambling  Itihasa,  had  to  be  adjusted  and 
arranged  by  an  imaginary  compiler,  called  Vyasa. 

The  first  orderly  completion,  then,  of  the  two  poems  in 
their  brahmanized  form,  may  have  taken  place,  I  think, 
in  the  case  of  the  Eamayana  about  tbe  beginning  of  the 
third  century  B.C.,  and  in  the  case  of  the  Maha-bharata 
(the  original  story  of  which  is  possibly  more  ancient  than 
that  of  the  Eamayana)  still  later, — perhaps  as  late  as  the 
second  century  B.c.  The  posteriority  of  the  brahmanized 
Maha-bharata  may  be  supported  by  the  more  frequent, 
allusions  it  contains  to  the  progress  of  Buddhistic  opinions, 
and  to  intercourse  witb  the  Yavanas  or  Greeks,  who  had 
no  considerable  dealings  with  the  Hindus  till  two  or  three 
centuries  after  Alexander's  invasion.-^ 

1  A  candid  study  of  Professor  Weber's  writings,  and  especially  of 
the  reproduction  of  his  views  lately  put  forth  in  the  '  Indian  Anti- 
quary,' has  led  me  to  modify  to  a  certain  extent  the  statements  in  my 
Lecture  on  '  Indian  Epic  Poetry,'  delivered  May  9,  1862 ;  but  I  cannot 
agree  in  thinking  that  the  work  of  Valmiki  is  to  be  referred  to  as  late 
a  date  as  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era.  Nor  can  I  concur  in 
the  opinion  that  the  Ramayana  is  later  than,  and  to  a  certain  extent 
a  copy  of  the  Buddhist  story  of  Rama,  called  Dasaratha-jataka,  in 
which  Rama  is  represented  as  the  brother  of  Sita,  and  in  which  there 
are  certain  verses  almost  identical  with  verses  in  the  present  text  of 
the  Ramayana.  Nor  do  I  think  that  the  great  Indian  Epic  has  been 
developed  out  of  germs  furnished  by  this  or  any  other  Buddhistic 
legends.     Still  less  can  I  give  in  my  adhesion  to  the  theory  that  the 


ORIGIN   OF   THE   EPIC    POEMS.  317 

It  is,  however,  uecessary  to  refer  the  final  construction 
of  both  poems  in  their  present  form  to  a  third  and  still 
later  epoch,  and  even  to  assign  portions  of  them  to  the 
early  centuries  of  our  own  era,  if  we  are  to  accept  as 
integral  parts  of  the  two  Epics  such  a  supplement  to  the 
Eamayana  as  the  Uttara-kanda,  and  such  additions  to  the 
Maba-bharata  as  the  Bhagavad-gita  and  Hari-vansa,  as  well 
as  those  later  episodes  which  identify  Rama  and  Krishna 
with  the  Supreme  Being.  And  here  again  in  this  final  con- 
struction of  both  poems,  we  must  bear  in  mind,  that  the 
deification  of  Eama  represents  an  earlier  stage  of  Vishnu- 
worship  than  that  of  Krishna ;  and  that  the  Ramayana,  as 
now  presented  to  us,  contains  far  fewer  recent  additions 
than  the  Maha-bharata. 

My  reasons,  therefore,  for  placing  the  first  Brahmanical 
construction  of  the  two  Indian  Epics  in  the  third  and 
second  century  B.C.  respectively,  and  for  commencing  an 
account  of  epic  poetry  with  the  story  of  Rama,  rather  than 
with  that  of  Pandavas,  will  be  clear.  It  must  be  remem- 
bered, however,  that  the  priority  of  one  poem  over  the 
other  cannot  be  made  to  rest  on  any  certain  chronological 
basis.  Indeed,  the  Maha-bharata  describes  a  conflict  be- 
tween rude  colonists  in  a  district  nearer  to  the  earliest 
settlements  of  the  Aryans,  while  the  Ramayana  is  con- 
cerned with  a  more  established  kingdom  (Kosala),  and  a 
more  civilized  and  luxurious  capital  city  (Ayodhya). 

Before  commencing  our  summary  of  either  story  it  will 
be  desirable  to  note  more  particularly  when  and  how  the 
doctrine  of  divine  incarnation  was  imported  .into  both 
poems,    imparting   to    them    that    religious    and    sacred 

Hindu  Epics  took  ideas  from  the  Homeric  poems ;  or  to  the  suggestion 
of  Mr.  Talboys  Wheeler,  that  the  story  of  the  Ramayana  was  invented 
to  give  expression  to  the  hostile  feeling  and  contention  between  the 
Brahmans  and  Buddhists  of  Ceylon,  alleged  to  be  represented  by  the 
Rakshasas. 


3l8  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

character  which  they  have  ever  since  retained,  and  which  is 
a  distinguishing  feature  in  comparing  them  with  the  epic 
poetry  of  other  nations.  We  know  from  the  statements 
of  Megasthenes,  preserved  in  Strabo  and  Diodorus,  that 
the  worship  of  Vishnu  in  his  heroic  incarnations  prevailed 
in  Hindustan  about  300  years  before  Christ  (see  note, 
p.  276).  The  deification  of  great  men  probably  began 
with  the  desire  of  the  Brahmans  to  incorporate  the  most 
eminent  Kshatriya  heroes  into  their  system.  It  pro- 
ceeded, however,  from  necessity  rather  than  from  any 
wish  to  do  honour  to  the  warrior  caste.  The  Buddhistic 
movement  in  India  had  broken  down  the  Brahmanical 
monopoly  and  introduced  a  rival  principle.  Some  counter- 
acting and  equally  popular  expansion  of  religious  creed 
seemed  essential  to  the  very  existence  of  Brahmanism, 
and  it  became  absolutely  necessary  to  present  the  people 
with  deities  of  their  own  as  a  counter-attraction  to  Bud- 
dhism. Hence  the  previously  human  heroes  Eama  and 
Krishna  were  exalted  by  the  Brahmans  to  divine  rank, 
and  even  Buddha  himself  was,  in  the  end,  adopted  into 
their  system  and  represented  as  one  of  the  ten  incarna- 
tions of  the  god  Vishnu.'^ 

But  the  idea  of  divine  incarnation  had  taken  possession 
of  the  Hindi!  mind  still  earlier.  It  is  probable  that  in 
that  primeval  country,  where  the  ancestors  of  Greeks  and 
Hindus  had  their  common  home,  men  satisfied  their  first 
religious  instincts  by  idealizing  and  worshipping,  under 
no  defined  form  and  without  precise  ritual,  the  principal 
forces  and  energies  of  nature — the  air,  the  rain,  the  wind, 

1  Heroism,  undaunted  bravery,  and  personal  strength  will  always 
find  worshippers  in  India.  It  is  recorded  that  a  number  of  Panjabi 
Hindus  commenced  worshipping  the  late  John  Nicholson,  one  of  the 
bravest  and  noblest  of  men,  under  the  name  Nikkil  Seyn.  He  endea- 
voured to  put  a  stop  to  the  absurdity,  but  they  persisted  in  their 
worship  notwithstanding. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THEORY   OF   INCARNATION.  319 

the  storm,  the  fire,  the  sun — the  elements  on  which,  as 
an  agricultural  and  pastoral  race,  their  welfare  depended. 
This  was  the  earliest  religion  of  nature  which  the  Aryan 
family  carried  with  them  when  they  first  left  their  home, 
and  which  they  cherished  in  their  wanderings ;  and  in 
this  we  may  trace  the  germ  of  their  subsequent  religious 
systems.  When  they  had  settled  down  in  new  resting- 
places,  their  religious  cravings  naturally  found  utterance 
in  prayers,  hymns,  and  a  simple  form  of  ritual.  Eeligion, 
or  a  sense  of  dependence  on  a  higher  Power,  and  a  desire 
to  realize  his  presence,  grew  with  their  growth  and 
strengthened  with  their  strength.  But  in  all  ages  and 
countries  the  religion  of  the  mass  of  mankind  rapidly 
assumes  an  anthropomorphic  character.  A  richly  peopled 
mythology  arose  in  India  and  Grreece  as  naturally  as 
poetry  itself.  The  one  was  the  ojffspring  of  the  others 
and  was  in  fact  the  poetical  expression  of  those  high 
aspirations  which  marked  the  Aryan  character.  Soon  the 
Hindu,  like  the  Greek,  unguided  by  direct  revelation, 
personified  and  deified  not  only  the  powers  of  external 
nature,  but  all  the  internal  feelings,  passions,  moral  and 
intellectual  qualities  and  faculties  of  the  mind.  Soon  he 
began  to  regard  every  grand  and  useful  object  as  a  visible 
mauifestation  of  the  supreme  Intelligence  presiding  over 
the  universe,  and  every  departed  hero  or  benefactor  as 
a  mere  reflection  of  the  same  all-wise  and  omnipresent 
Ruler.  Hence,  to  give  expression  to  the  varied  attributes 
and  functions  of  this  great  Being,  thus  visibly  manifested 
to  the  world,  both  Hindu  and  Greek  peopled  their  pan- 
theons with  numerous  divine  and  semi-divine  creations, 
clothing  them  with  male  and  female  forms,  and  inventing 
in  connection  with  them  various  fanciful  and  often  mon- 
strous mytbs,  fables,  and  allegories,  which  the  undis- 
criminating  multitude  accepted  as  realities,  without  at  all 
understanding  the  ideas  they  symbolized.     In  India  we 


320  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

are  able  to  trace  back  the  development  of  these  anthropo- 
morphic ideas  to  their  source  in  the  Rig-veda,  and  thence 
follow  them  step  by  step  through  Manu,  the  epic  poems, 
and  Puranas.  In  the  Rig-veda  a  god  Vishnu  is  often 
named  as  a  manifestation  of  the  Solar  energy,  or  rather 
as  a  form  of  the  Sun ;  and  the  point  which  distinguishes 
him  from  the  others  is  his  striding  over  the  heavens  in 
three  paces,  supposed  to  symbolize  the  three  stages  of 
the  Sun's  daily  course  in  his  rising,  culminating,  and 
setting  (see  note  i,  p.  329).  Subsequently  he  takes  a  fore- 
most place  among  the  twelve  Adityas,  or  twelve  distinct 
forms  of  the  Sun  in  the  twelve  months  of  the  year.  In 
the  Brahmanas  he  is  identified  with  sacrifice  {Yajna), 
and  once  described  as  a  dwarf  {Vdmana;  Satapatha- 
brahmana  XIV.  i,  i,  6,  I.  2,  5,  5).  In  Manu,  Brahman, 
the  universal  Soul,  is  represented  as  evolving  his  essence 
in  the  form  of  Brahma,  the  Creator  of  all  things,  and 
various  other  visible  manifestations  of  the  Deity  are  re- 
cognized, as  in  the  Veda.  In  Book  XII.  121,  Vishnu  and 
Hara  ( =  Siva)  are  mentioned  as  present  in  the  human 
body,  the  former  imparting  movement  to  its  muscles,  the 
latter  bestowing  strength. 

In  all  this,  however,  there  was  not  enough  to  satisfy 
the  cravings  of  the  human  heart  for  a  religion  of  faith 
in  a  personal  god — a  god  sympathizing  with  humanity, 
and  even  with  the  lower  forms  of  animal  life,  loving  all 
his  creatures,  interested  in  their  affairs,  and  ever  at  hand 
to  assist  them  in  their  difficulties.  Nor,  on  the  other 
hand,  was  there  sufficient  to  meet  the  demands  of  other 
constituent  parts  of  man's  complex  nature  for  a  religion 
of  activity  and  good  works ;  of  austerity  and  subjugation 
of  the  passions ;  of  contemplation  and  higher  spiritual 
knowledge.  Soon,  therefore,  the  great  Spirit  of  the 
universe  began  to  be  viewed  still  more  anthropomor- 
phically,  throifgh  the  medium  of  man's  increasing  sub- 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THEOBY   OF   INCARNATION.  32  I 

jectivity,  as  a  Being  who  not  only  created  man  but 
condescended  to  human  sympathies,  and  placed  himself 
in  the  closest  connection  with  all  his  creatures,  whether 
gods,  men,  or  animals. 

But  first  arose  the  inquiry  why  and  how  this  great 
Being  willed  to  create  at  all  ?  To  account  for  this  it  was 
conceived  that  when  the  universal  and  infinite  Being 
Brahma  (nom.  case  of  the  neut.  Brahman) — the  only 
really  existing  entity,  wholly  without  form  and  unbound 
and  unafiected  by  the  three  Gunas  or  by  qualities  of  any 
kind  (pp.  85,  107) — wished  to  create  for  his  own  enter- 
tainment the  phenomena  of  the  universe,  he  assumed 
the  quality  of  activity  {rajas)  and  became  a  male  person 
as  Brahma  (nom.  case  masc.)  the  Creator.  Next,  in  the 
progress  of  still  further  self-evolution,  he  willed  to  invest 
himself  with  the  second  quality  of  goodness  (sattva)  as 
Vishnu  the  Preserver,  and  with  the  third  quality  of  dark- 
ness (tamas)'^  as  Siva  the  Destroyer.  This  development 
of  the  doctrine  of  triple  manifestation  (tri-murti),  which 
appears  first  in  the  brahmanized  version  of  the  Indian 
Epics,  had  already  been  adumbrated  in  the  Veda  in  the 
triple  form  of  fire  (see  p.  15),  and  in  the  triad,  of  gods, 
Agni,  SHrya,  and  Indra  (see  note,  p.  16) ;  and  in  other 
ways.^ 

In  fact  the  Veda,  rather  than  Manu,  was  the  source  of 
the  later  incarnations  (see  notes,  pp.  326-329).  It  was  the 
Vedic  Vishnu   (connected  with  Surya,    'the    Sun')    who 


1  In  the  Kumara-sambhava  II.  4,  we  have  the  following : — Namas 
trimurtaye  tuhhyam  prak- srishteh  kevaldtmane  Gruna-traya-vihhdga.ya 
pascad  bhedam  upeyushe,  '  Hail  to  thee  of  triple  form,  who  before 
creation  wast  simple  Soul,  and  afterwards  underwent  partition  for  the 
distribution  of  the  three  Gunas,' 

2  The  thirty-three  gods  (3  multiplied  by  11)  of  the  Rig-veda  {trihhir 
elcadasair  devebhir  ydtam,  I.  34,  11,  I.  45,  2)  point  to  the  same  idea  of 
triple  manifestation. 

X 


322  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

became  Vishnu  the  world-preserver,  while  Rudra  (connected 
with  Indra  and  the  Maruts),  the  god  of  tempests,  became 
the  world-dissolver  Siva.  Under  the  latter  form,  the 
Supreme  Being  is  supposed  to  pass  from  the  operation 
of  creation  and  preservation  to  that  of  destruction,  these 
three  separate  acts  being  assigned  to  separate  deities  who 
are  themselves  finite,  and  obey  the  universal  law  of  dis- 
solution at  the  end  of  a  Kalpa  {see  note  3,  p.  330),  when  they 
again  become  merged  in  simple  Soul  (kevaldtman).  But  as 
it  was  essential  that  eyen  the  god  of  dissolution  should  con- 
nect himself  with  humanity,  and  as,  according  to  a  funda- 
mental dogma  of  Hinduism,  all  death  leads  to  new  life, 
all  destruction  to  reproduction,  it  was  natural  that  the 
latter  operation  should  be  chosen  as  the  link  of  connection, 
rather  than  the  former.  His  function  of  destroyer  is, 
therefore,  interchanged  with  that  of  creator  (note  3, 
p.  323)  ;  he  himself  is  called  Siva,  'the  Auspicious,'  and 
his  character  is  oftener  typified  by  the  reproductive  Lin-ga 
(without  necessary  implication  of  sensual  ideas)  than  by 
any  symbol  of  destruction.  Under  this  image,  in  fact,  he 
is  generally  worshipped  in  India.^  Nevertheless,  he  is  also 
represented  in  human  form,  living  in  the  Himalaya  moun- 
tains along  with  his  wife  Parvati,^  sometimes  in  the  act 

1  Twelve  celebrated  Lin-gas  were  set  up,  about  the  tenth  century,  in 
twelve  great  shrines,  in  twelve  chief  cities  of  India,  of  which  Somnath 
was  one.  The  representation  of  the  generative  organ  is  not  offensive 
to  delicacy  even  when  surrounded  by  the  Yoni,  or  female  symbol. 
Quite  enough,  however,  is  implied  to  account  for  the  degeneration  of 
S'iva-worship  in  modern  times,  as  expressed  in  the  works  called  Tantras 
and  in  the  practices  of  the  S'aktas.  The  representation  of  S'iva  as 
Ardhanarl,  half  male,  half  female,  symbolizes  the  unity  of  the  gene- 
rative principle.  Some  think  the  god  S'iva  with  the  Lin-ga  (Phallus) 
was  adopted  by  the  Aryans  from  the  aborigines.  The  word  S'iva  means 
'  auspicious,'  and  being  first  applied  euphemistically  to  the  god  of  tem- 
pests (Rudra)  afterwards  passed  into  the  name  of  the  god  of  destruction. 

^  The  ^akti  or  active  energy  of  a  deity  is  personified  as  his  wife,  and 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THEORY   OF   INCARNATION.         323 

of  trampling  on  and  destroying  demons,  wearing  round 
his  black  neck  {mla-hantha)  a  serpent  and  a  necklace  of 
skulls,  and  furnished  with  a  whole  apparatus  of  external 
emblems  (such  as  a  white  bull  on  which  he  rides,  a 
crescent,  a  trident,^  tiger's  skin,  elephant's  skin,  rattle, 
noose,  &c.),  the  exaggeration  of  which  imparts  a  childish 
and  grotesque  character  to  Hindu  symbolism  when  re- 
garded from  a  European  point  of  view.  Again,  Maha- 
deva,  or  the  great  deity  Siva,  is  sometimes  connected  with 
humanity  in  one  other  personification  very  different  from 
that  just  noted,  viz.,  that  of  an  austere  naked  ascetic,  with 
matted  hair^  {Dig-ambara,  Dliurjati),  living  in  a  forest 
apart  from  his  consort,  abiding  in  one  spot  fixed  and 
immovable  {Sthdnu) — teaching  men  by  his  own  example, 
first,  the  power  to  be  acquired  by  penance  (tapas),  morti- 
fication of  the  body,^  and  suppression  of  the  passions; 
and,  secondly,  the  great  virtue  of  abstract  meditation 
(samddhi),  as  leading  to  the  loftiest  spiritual  know- 
ledge ijndna)  and  ultimately  to  union  {yoga)  or  actual 

those  who  worship  the  female  principle  are  called  S'aktas.  ParvatI, 
daughter  of  the  mountain,  and  worshipped  under  the  name  Durga  in 
Bengal,  is  the  chief  object  of  the  adoration  of  S'aktas  and  Tantrikas. 

1  This  three-pronged  symbol  may  denote  creation,  destruction,  and 
regeneration.  He  has  also  three  eyes  (one  of  which  is  in  his  forehead), 
in  allusion  to  either  the  three  Vedas  or  time  past,  present,  and  future 
(whence  he  is  called  Try-amhccka),  and  five  faces  (whence  his  name 
Pancdnand) ;  the  crescent  moon  also  symbolizing  his  power  over  the 
measurement  of  time.  He  is  sometimes  said  to  manifest  himself  under 
eight  forms — ether,  air,  fire,  water,  earth,  sun,  moon,  the  sacrificing 
priest  (whence  his  name  Ashta-murti).  His  black  throat  was  caused 
by  the  deadly  poison  churned  out  of  the  ocean,  which  would  have 
destroyed  the  universe  had  he  not  swallowed  it. 

^  The  hair  is  so  worn  by  S'iva- worshipping  Yogis  (see  p.  95). 

^  In  Maha-bharata,  Sauptika-parvan  769,  Brahma,  the  Creator,  is 
represented  as  calling  on  S'iva  to  create  living  creatures ;  and  the 
latter,  to  qualify  himself  for  the  task,  undergoes  a  severe  penance 
under  water. 


324  INDIAN  WISDOM. 

identification  with  the  great  Spirit  of  the  universe 
{Paramdtman) .  ■^ 

These  three  manifestations  of  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and 
Siva,  whose  functions  are  sometimes  interchanged,^  exhibit 
the  three  sides  of  JHinduism  as  developed  in  the  epic 
poems,  and  still  more  unfolded  in  the  subsequent  Puranas. 
The  first  is  the  religion  of  activity  and  works,  the  second 
that  of  faith  and  love,  the  third  that  of  austerity,  con- 
templation, and  spiritual  knowledge.  This  last  is  regarded 
as  the  highest,  because  it  aims  at  entire  cessation  of  action 
and  total  effacement  of  all  personal  entity  and  identity 
by  absorption  into  simple  Soul. 

In  medieval  times  -bitter  rivalries  and  disputes  sprung 
up  between  the  upholders  of  these  three  doctrines  ex- 

^  In  the  character  of  'lord  of  abstract  meditation,' S'iva  is  called 
Yogesa,  Yogin.  Indeed,  in  some  of  the  Puranas  the  origin  of  the  Yoga 
(see  p.  94)  is  ascribed  to  S'iva.  In  Book  I.  55  and  III.  45-50  of  the 
Kumara-sambhava,  and  in  the  opening  invocation  or  Nandi  of  the 
Mrid&hakatika,  there  is  a  description  of  S'iva's  posture  and  whole  ap- 
pearance while  engaged  in  profound  meditation.  He  is  seated  on  his 
hams  in  the  posture  called  paryanha-handha  (p.  93,  note  2),  with  his 
breath  suppressed  and  his  vision  fixed  on  his  nose.  While  in  this 
situation  the  god  of  love  attempted  to  inspire  him  with  affection  for 
Parvati,  daughter  of  Himalaya,  in  order  that  a  son  might  be  born  to 
S'iva  for  the  destruction  of  the  Daitya  Taraka,  who  had  extorted,  by 
his  penances,  so  many  boons  from  Brahma,  that  the  whole  universe 
had  become  subject  to  him.  S'iva,  indignant  at  the  interruption  of  his 
austerities,  reduced  Kama  (Love)  to  ashes  by  a  flash  from  his  eye. 
Parvati  then  herself  followed  S'iva's  example,  and  commenced  a  course 
of  penance  whereby  she  conciliated  S'iva  and  became  his  wife.  A  son, 
Karttikeya,  '  god  of  war,'  was  then  born,  who  killed  Taraka.  This  is 
the  subject  of  the  Kumara-sambhava.  The  use  of  ashes  rubbed  upon 
the  body  and  of  Rudraksha  berries,  to  form  rosaries,  is  of  great  im- 
portance in  S'iva-worship. 

^  Thus,  Vishnu-worship  (like  S'iva-worship)  is  connected  with  the 
highest  spiritual  knowledge  in  the  Bhagavad-gita.  See  also  note  3, 
p.  323.  In  some  parts  of  India  a  saint  Dattdtreya  is  revered  as 
combining  the  Hindii  Triad  in  himself. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   TRIAD.  325 

pressed  by  the  worship  of  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva^ 
respectively.  Each  sect  was  jealous  of  the  superiority  of 
his  own  system,  and  particular  Puranas  were  devoted  to 

1  Brahma,  '  the  Creator,'  however,  is  supposed  to  have  done  his 
work.  Hence  the  worship  of  this  manifestation  fell  into  desuetude, 
and  only  in  one  place  do  traces  of  it  continue,  viz.,  Pushkara  in  Ajmir 
(Rajputana).  Even  the  worship  of  the  other  two  manifestations  began 
in  time  to  languish,  until  that  of  S'iva  was  revived  by  the  great  teacher 
and  reformer  S'an-karadarya  (sometimes  described  as  an  incarnation  of 
S'iva)  in  the  eighth  century ;  and  that  of  Vishnu  or  Krishna  by  Rama- 
nuja  in  the  twelfth,  and  by  Vallabhadarya  at  the  end  of  the  fifteenth. 
S'iva  is  now  the  favourite  manifestation  with  Brahmans  and  the  better 
classes,  as  Krishna  is  with  the  others.  Benares  is  a  stronghold  of 
S'iva-worship  (whence  his  name  Kasi-natha),  but  even  there  Krishna  is 
the  popular  god  of  the  lower  orders.  The  chiefs  of  many  monasteries 
in  the  south  of  India  are  to  this  day  called  S'an-karadaryas.  A  popular 
festival,  or  rather  fast  {v/pavasoi,.  vrata),  called  S'iva^-ratri,  in  honour  of 
the  god  S'iva  (under  the  form  of  the  Lin-ga),  is  kept  for  a  whole  day 
and  night,  on  the  14th  of  the  dark  half  of  the  month  Magha  (January 
— February).  The  spring  festival  (utsava),  commonly  called  Hull  or 
Holl,  celebrated  a  few  days  before  the  full  moon  of  Phalguna  (February 
— March),  and  still  more  popular  than  the  last,  is  said  to  be  in  honour 
of  Krishna  and  the  Gopis  dancing  round  fires.  Their  frolics  are  com- 
memorated in  a  variety  of  sports  and  jokes.  In  some  parts  of  India 
the  Holl  corresponds  to  the  Dola-yatra  or  '  swinging  festival,'  when 
figures  of  Krishna  and  his  favourite  wife  Radha  are  swung  in  an  orna- 
mented swing.  The  Divali  (dipdE)  or  '  festival  of  lights,'  at  the  end  of 
Aivin  and  beginning  of  Kartik  (October — ITovember),  is  in  honour  of 
Vishnu's  wife  Lakshmi.  Those  who  worship  Durga  or  Parvati,  wife  of 
S'iva,  are  called  S'aktas  (see  note  2,  p.  322).  Besides  the  three  prin- 
cipal sects  of  Saivas,  Vaishnavas,  and  ^dittos,  three  other  inferior  ones 
are  often  named,  viz. ,  the  Odnwpatyas  or  worshippers  of  Gana-pati  or 
Ganesa,  the  Sauryas  or  Sauras,  worshippers  of  Surya,  '  the  sun,'  and 
the  Bhdgavatas,  who  are  supposed  to  worship  Bhagavat,  '  the  Supreme 
Being.'  There  are  also  the  Sikhs  of  the  Pahjab,  disciples  of  Guru 
Nanak  Shah — born  near  Lahore — who  in  the  reign  of  Baber,  at  the 
end  of  the  fifteenth  century,  attempted  to  conibine  Hinduism  with 
Islam,  and  promulgated  about  the  time  of  our  Reformation  a  book 
called  the  Adi  Grantha,  'first  Book'  (prohibiting  idol-worship  and 
teaching  the  unity  of  the  Godhead  pantheistically),  as  a  kind  of  new 


326  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

the  exaltation  of  the  one  god  or  the  other.  But  iu  the 
present  day  the  strife  of  sects  has  generally  given  way 
to  universal  toleration,  and  a  liberal  school  of  theology 
has  arisen  in  India.  Most  thinking  men  among  the 
educated  classes,  whatever  may  be  the  form  of  religion  to 
which  they  nominally  incline,  regard  the  names  Brahma, 
Rama,  Krishna,  and  Siva  as  mere  convenient  symbols 
for  different  manifestations  of  the  one  Supreme  Being, 
who  may  be  worshipped  under  different  external  forms 
and  by  separate  methods,  according  to  the  disposition, 
circumstances,  and  preference  {ishti)  of  his  worshippers. 
They  hold,  in  short,  that  there  are  three  ways  or  means  of 
salvation,  i.  the  way  of  works  (harman),  2.  that  of  faith 
(bhahti),  3.  that  of  spiritual  knowledge  (Jnana)  ;  and 
heaven,  they  assert,  may  be  reached  by  any  one  of  these 
three  roads  or  by  a  combination  of  all.  The  second, 
however,  represents  the  popular  side  of  the  Indian  creed, 
as  of  all  religions,  false  or  true. 

It  is  as  Vishnu,  then,  that  the  Supreme  Being,  accord- 
ing to  the  Hindus,  exhibited  his  sympathy  with  human 
trials,  his  love  for  the  human  race,  his  respect  for  all 
forms  of  life,  and  his  condescension  towards  even  the 
inferior  animals  as  integral  parts  of  his  creation.  Por- 
tions of  his  essence,  they  assert,  became  incarnate  in 
the  lower  animals,  as  well  as  in  men,  to  rescue  the 
world  in  great  emergencies.  Nine  principal  occasions 
have  already  occurred  in  which  the  god  has  thus 
interposed  for  the  salvation  of  his  creatures.      A  tenth 

Veda.  He  was  succeeded  by  nine  other  Gurus,  eacli  of  whom  was  in 
some  way  remarkable.  The  tenth,  Govind,  added  another  '  Book '  to 
the  first,  and,  meeting  with  persecution  under  Aurangzlb,  converted 
the  Sikhs  from  peaceable  disciples  of  a  peculiar  teacher  into  a  military 
nation  and  enemies  of  the  Mogul  empire.  The  Sikh  chiefs  formed 
themselves  into  confederacies  called  Misals,  over  whom  Eunjit  Sinh 
eventually  became  supreme. 


THE   EPIC    POEMS — INCARNATIONS    OF   VISHNU.        327 

has  still  to  take  place.     These  incarnations  are  briefly  as 
follows  :  ^ — 

1.  Matsya,  the  fish.  In  this  Vishnu  became  a  fish  to 
save  the  seventh  Manu,  the  progenitor  of  the  human  race, 
from  the  universal  deluge.^     (See  the  story  told  p.  393.) 

2.  Kurma,^  the  tortoise.  In  this  he  descended  to  aid 
in  recovering  certain  valuable  articles  lost  in  the  deluge. 
For  this  purpose  he  stationed  himself  as  a  tortoise  at 
the  bottom  of  the  ocean,  that  his  back  might  serve  as 
a  pivot  for  the  mountain  Mandara,  around  which  the 
gods  and  demons  twisted  the  great  serpent  Vasuki.  They 
then  stood  opposite  to  each  other,  and  using  the  snake 
as  a  rope  and  the  mountain  as  a  churning-stick,  churned 
the  ocean  *  for  the  recovery  of  the  Amrita  or  '  nectar,'  the 
goddess  Lakshmi,^  and  twelve  other  sacred  things  which 
had  been  lost  in  the  depths. 

3.  Varaha,  the  boar.  In  this  he  descended  to  deliver 
the  world  from  the  power  of  a  demon  called  Hiranyaksha, 
who  had  seized  the  earth  and  carried  it  down  into  the 

1  It  should  be  mentioned  that  the  Bhagavata-purana  gives  twenty-two 
incarnations  of  Vishnu.     Muir's  Texts  IV.  156. 

^  The  oldest  version  of  this  legend,  which  furnished  the  germ  of  the 
subsequent  incai^nation,  is  found  Lq  the  S'atapatha-brahmana,  as  given 
pp.  30-31  of  this  volume.  The  legend  is  also  told  in  Maha-bharata 
Vana-parvan  12747,  &c.,  where  the  fish  is  represented  as  an  incarnation 
of  Brahma;  and  in  the  Bhagavata-purana  VIII.  24,  7,  where  it  is 
identified  with  Vishnu.     Muir's  Texts  I.  208,  &c. 

^  In  S'atapatha-brahmana  VII.  4,  3,  5,  Prajapati  (or  Brahma)  is  said 
to  have  assumed  the  form  of  the  tortoise  :  '  Having  assumed  the  form 
of  a  tortoise,  Prajapati  created  offspring.  That  which  he  created  he 
made  {alMrot)  ;  hence  the  word  kurma.'     Muir's  Texts  IV.  27. 

*  In  this  there  appears  to  be  an  allegory,  and  the  lesson  that  may  be 
supposed  to  be  taught  is,  that  nothing  valuable  can  be  produced  or 
recovered  by  man  without  great  labour — without,  as  it  were,  stirring 
the  lowest  depths  of  his  whole  nature. 

^  Goddess  of  beauty,  and  wife  of  Vishnu,  a  kind  of  Hindii  Venus, 
Aphrodite  {atjioodiTrj,  '  foam-born  '). 


328  I  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

lowest  depths  of  the  sea.  Vishnu,  as  a  boar,  dived  into 
the  abyss,  and  after  a  contest  of  a  thousand  years,  slew 
the  monster  and  raised  the  earth.''  In  the  earlier  legends 
the  universe  is  represented  as  a  mass  of  water,  and  the 
earth  being  submerged,  was  upheaved  by  the  tusks  of 
the  divine  boar.  According  to  some,  the  object  of  this 
incarnation  was  to  recover  the  lost  Vedas.  It  is  notice- 
able that  the  first  three  incarnations  are  all  connected 
with  the  tradition  of  a  universal  deluge. 

4.  Nara-sinha,  the  man-lion.  In  this  he  assumed  the 
shape  of  a  creature,  half  man,  half  lion,  to  deliver  the 
world  from  the  tyranny  of  a  demon  called  Hiranya-kasipu, 
who  had  obtained  a  boon  from  Brahma  that  he  should 
not  be  slain  by  either  god  or  man  or  animal.  Hence  he 
became  so  powerful  that  he  usurped  the  dominion  of  the 
three  worlds,  and  appropriated  the  sacrifices  made  to 
the  gods.  When  his  pious  son  Prahlada  praised  Vishnu, 
the  demon  tried  to  destroy  the  boy,  but  Vishnu  appeared 
out  of  a  pillar  in  the  form  Nara-sinha  and  tore  Hiranya- 
kasipu  to  pieces. 

These  first  four  incarnations  are  said  to  have  taken 
place  in  the  Satya  or  first  age  of  the  world. 

5.  Vdmana,  the  dwarf.  In  the  second  or  Treta  age 
Vishnu  descended  as  a  dwarf,  to  deprive  the  demon 
Bali  (who  resembles  Eavana  and  Kansa  in  the  stories  of 


1  The  germs  of  the  fable  in  the  earlier  literature  are  very  simple.  In 
Taittiriya-brahmana  I.  i,  3,  5,  we  read  :  '  This  universe  was  formerly 
water.  Prajapati,  as  a  boar,  plunged  beneath.  He  found  the  earth 
below.  Breaking  off  a  portion  of  her  he  rose  to  the  surface.'  In 
S'atapatha-brahmana  XIV.  i,  2,  11,  occurs  the  following:  'The  earth 
was  formerly  so  large — Emusha,  a  boar,  raised  her  up '  (Muir's  Texts 
IV.  27).  In  the  Ramayana  II.  no,  Brahma,  not  Vishnu,  is  repre- 
sented as  taking  the  form  of  the  boar  :  '  All  was  water  only  in  which 
the  earth  was  formed.  Thence  arose  Brahma.  He,  becoming  a  boar, 
raised  up  the  earth,'  &c.     See  Muir's  Texts  I.  53,  IV.  36,  &c. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — INCARNATIONS    OF   VISHNU.        329 

Rama  and  Krishna)  of  the  dominion  of  the  three  worlds. 
Vishrrn  presented  himself  before  him  as  a  diminutive  man, 
and  solicited  as  much  land  as  he  could  step  in  three  paces. 
When  his  request  was  granted  he  strided  in  two  steps 
over  heaven  and  earth,  but  out  of  compassion  left  the 
lower  world  or  Patala  in  the  demon's  possession.-^ 

6.  Parasu-rama,  Eama  with  the  axe.  In  this  Vishnu 
was  born  as  the  son  of  the  Brahman  Jamad-agni  and 
descendant  of  Bhrigu,  in  the  second  age,  to  restrain  the 
Kshatriyas  from  arrogating  dominion  over  the  Brahmani- 
cal  caste.  Parasu-rama  is  said  to  have  cleared  the  earth 
twenty-one  times  of  the  Kshatriya  class  ^  (see  p.  347). 


1  The  germ  of  this  incarnation  in  the  Rig-veda.  I  quote  one  pas- 
sage :  '  Vishnu  strode  over  this  (universe) ;  in  three  places  he  planted 
his  step'  (I.  22,  17).  Hence  Vishnu  is  called  Tri-vikrama.  See  also 
p.  320  of  this  volume  and  Muir's  Texts,  vol.  iv.  p.  63.  An  account  of 
the  Dwarf  incarnation  is  given  in  Ramayana  (Schlegel)  I.  31,  2,  and 
(Bombay  ed.)  I.  29,  2,  &c.  (Gorresio  I.  32,  2).  It  is  noticed  in  the 
Maha-bharata,  Hanti-parvan  12943,  &c.,  Vana-parvan  484,  &c. 

^  Though  now  regarded  as  the  mythical  type  of  Brahmanism,  arrayed 
in  opposition  to  the  military  caste,  he  was  probably,  in  the  first  instance, 
the  hero  of  a  quarrel  caused  by  a  Kshatriya  stealing  a  cow  from  a 
Brahman  named  Jamad-agni,  In  revenge,  his  son  Parasu-rama  slew 
the  Kshatriya,  upon  which  the  other  Kshatriyas  murdered  Jamad-agni, 
and  a  fierce  contest  ensued  between  his  son  and  the  murderers.  All 
this  points  to  the  historical  fact  of  constant  struggles  between  the  two 
leading  classes,  and  it  may  be  inferred  from  the  circumstance  that 
Parasu-rama  is  described  as  fighting  with  (and  conquered  by)  Eama- 
6andra,  as  well  as  with  Bhishma  in  the  Maha-bharata,  that  the 
Kshatriyas  held  their  own  if  they  did  not  gain  the  upper  hand.  The 
story  of  Parasu-rama  is  told  in  the  Vana-parvan  11071,  &c.,  and  in 
the  S'alnti-parvan  1707,  &c. ;  also  in  the  ninth  book  of  the  Bhagavata 
and  in  the  Padma  and  Agni  Puranas.  In  the  Vana-parvan  8679, 
Parasu-rama  is  described  as  struck  senseless  by  Eama-dandra.  The 
TJdyoga-parvan  7142,  &c.,  relates  the  long  single  combat  between 
Parasu-rama  and  Bhishma.  They  both  repeatedly  strike  each  other 
senseless.  Ultimately  they  are  persuaded  by  some  Munis  to  leave  off 
fighting.     In  Adi-parvan  272-280,  the  destruction  of  the  Kshatriyas 


33°  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

/.  Rama  (commonly  called  Rama-candra/  '  the  mild 
or  moon-like  Eama'),  the  hero  of  the  Ramayana,  son  of 
king  Dasaratha  of  the  Solar  race,  and  therefore  a  Ksha- 
triya.  Vishnu  took  this  form  at  the  close  of  the  second 
or  Treta  age,  to  destroy  the  demon  Ravana  (see  p.  343). 

8.  Krishna,  '  the  dark  god ' — the  most  popular  of  all 
the  later  deities  of  India.^  This  incarnation  of  Vishnu, 
at  the  end  of  the  Dvapara  or  third  age  of  the  world,^ 

by  Parasu-rama  is  said  to  have  taken  place  between  tbe  Treta  and 
Dvapara  ages.  Muir's  Texts  I.  447.  Tradition  ascribes  the  formation 
of  the  Malabar  coast  to  Parasu-rama,  vs^ho  is  said  to  have  compelled 
the  ocean  to  retire  and  to  have  caused  fissures  in  the  western  Ghats  by 
blows  of  his  axe. 

1  The  addition  of  Candra,  to  distinguish  this  E,ama  from  the  other 
two,  is  only  found  in  the  later  literature  (see  note,  p.  360). 

^  Especially  in  Bengal.  In  the  upper  provinces  (except  at  Mathura 
or  Muttra,  Krishna's  own  city),  Oude,  Behar,  and  the  greater  part  of 
Hindustan  Proper,  the  seventh  incarnation,  Rama-iandra,  is  principally 
worshipped.  That  Krishna-worship  is  comparatively  modern  is  shown 
by  the  fact  that  in  the  old  Buddhist  Sutras  the  gods  reverenced  at  the 
time  Buddhism  arose  are  named,  viz.,  Brahma,  Narayana,  S'iva,  Indra, 
&c.,  but  not  Krishna. 

2  The  Kali-yuga  or  fourth  age  of  the  world  was  supposed  to  com- 
mence at  the  death  of  Krishna.  Hence  the  events  of  the  Maharbharata 
must  have  taken  place  during  the  third  or  Dvapara  age,  and  those 
of  the  Ramayana  at  the  end  of  the  second  or  Treta  age.  Prom  the 
gambling  scene  in  the  Second  Act  of  the,  Mriddhakatika,  it  is  probable 
that  the  names  of  the  four  ages  are  connected  with  throws  of  dice ; 
Krita  being  the  best  throw ;  Treta,  the  throw  of  three  or  the  second 
best  throw ;  and  Dvapara,  the  throw  of  two  or  a  worse  throw ;  the 
worst  of  all  being  Kah.  The  Hindu  notion  appears  to  have  been  that 
gambling  prevailed  especially  in  the  Dvap'ara  and  Kali  Yugas.  In 
the  episode  of  Nala,  the  personified  Dvapara  enters  into  the  dice,  and 
the  personified  Kali  into  Nali  himself,  who  is  then  seized  with  the 
fatal  passion  for  play.  The  Hindi!  idea  of  a  succession  of  four  Yugas 
or  ages,  in  which  a  gradual  deterioration  of  the  human  race  takes 
place,  has  its  counterpart  among  the  Romans  in  the  Golden,  Silver, 
Brazen,  and  Iron  ages,  as  described  in  Ovid's  Metamorphoses  (I.  89, 
&c.).     But  the  Hindu  system  of  mundane  periods  is  more  elaborately 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — INCARNATIONS   OP   VISHNU.        33  I 

as  the  eighth  son  of  Vasu-deva  and  Devaki  of  the  Lunar 
race,  was  for  the  destruction  of  the  tyrant  Kansa,  the 
representative  of  the  principle  of  evil,  corresponding  to 
Ravana  in  the  previous  iucamation. 

The  details  of  the  later  life  of  Krishna  have  been  inter- 
woven with  the  later  portions  of  the  Maha-bharata,  but 
they  do  not  belong  to  the  plot,  and  they  might  be  omitted 
without  imparing  its  unity.  He  is  certainly  not  the  hero 
of  the  great  Epic.  He  appears  as  a  great  chief  who  takes 
the  part  of  the  real,  heroes — the  Panda vas  ^ — and  his 
claims  to  deification  are  often  disputed.  His  earlier  days 
and  juvenile  feats,  though  not  found  in  the  oldest  parts 
of  the  Maha-bharata,  may  be  gathered  from  the  Hari-vansa 
and  Puranas,  especially  the  tenth  book  of  the  Bhagavata- 
purana,  from  which  we  learn  as  follows  : — 

extended,  and  perhaps  agrees  better  with  modern  scientific  theories 
(see  p.  178,  note  2).  A  Maha-yuga  or  period  of  four  ages  comprises 
12,000  years  of  the  gods,  which  (according  to  the  Vishnu- purana)  are 
equal  to  12,000x360  (the  assumed  number  of  days  in  an  ordinary 
year),  and  therefore  to  4,320,000  years  of  mortals,  when  another  cycle 
of  four  ages  is  commenced.  One  thousand  of  these  periods  of  four  ages 
constitute  a  Kalpa  or  day  of  Brahma  =  4,320,000,000  human  years 
(comprising  under  it  fourteen  Manv-antaras  or  periods  presided  over 
by  fourteen  successive  Manus),  after  which  there  is  a  universal  collapse 
{pratisancara,  mahd-pralaya)  of  all  creation — including  Brahma,  Vishnu, 
S'iva,  gods,  demons,  men,  animals — into  Brahman  or  simple  being.  In 
the  present  Kalpa  or  Aeon,  six  Manus  have  passed  away,  of  whom 
the  first  was  Svayambhuva,  the  present  or  seventh  being  Vaivasvata. 
Manu's  account  is  confused,  and  some  think  the  periods  of  his  four 
Yugas  are  no  more  than  4800,  3600,  2400,  and  1200  ordinary  years 
respectively  (Manu  I.  69-71).  There  is  no  allusion  to  mundane  periods 
in  the  Eig-veda,  but  there  is  in  the  Aitareya-brahmana  (VII.  15).  The 
present  Kali-yuga  is  reckoned  to  have  begun  February  i8th,  3102 
B.C.  at  midnight,  on  the  meridian  of  Ujjayinl.  Whitney's  2nd  Series 
of  Oriental  Studies,  p.  366 ;  Muir's  Texts  I.  43  ;  Weber's  Indische 
Studien  I.  286,  460. 

'^  Later  additions  to  the  Maha-bharata  make  the  Pandavas  also  incar- 
nations of  certain  deities. 


332  INMAN   WISDOM. 

Vasu-deva  (a  descendant  of  tbe  Yadu  who  with  Puru,  as  sons  of 
Yayati,  formed  the  two  branches  of  the  lunar  dynasty)  had  two  wives, 
B-ohini  and  Devaki.  The  latter  had  eight  sons,  of  whom  the  eighth 
was  Krishna.  It  was  predicted  that  one  of  these  would  kill  Kansa, 
king  of  Mathura  and  cousin  of  Devaki.  He  therefore  imprisoned 
Vasu-deva  and  his  wife,  and  slew  their  first  sis  children.  The  seventh, 
Bala-rama,  was  abstracted  from  Devaki's  womb,  transferred  to  that  of 
Eohini,  and  thus  saved.  The  eighth  was  Krishna,  born  with  black 
skin  and  the  mark  called  Sri-vatsa  on  his  breast.^  His  father,  Vasu- 
deva,  escaped  from  Mathura  with  the  child,  and,  favoured  by  the  gods, 
found  a  herdsman  named  Nanda — of  the  race  of  the  Yadavas — whose 
wife,  Yasoda,  had  Just  had  a  son,  whom  Vasu-deva  conveyed  to  Devaki, 
after  substituting  his  own  son  in  its  place.  ISTanda  took  the  infant 
Krishna  and  settled  first  in  Gokula  or  Vraja,  and  afterwards  in 
Vrindavana,  where  Krishna  and  Bala-rama  grew  up  together,  roaming 
in  the  woods,  and  joining  in  the  sports  of  the  herdsmen's  sons.  ''While 
still  a  boy,  Krishna  destroyed  the  serpent  Kaliya,  and  lifted  up  the 
mountain  Govardhana  on  his  finger  to  shelter  the  Gojfts  from  the 
wrath  of  Indra,  who,  enraged  by  their  love  for  Krishna,  tried  to  destroy 
them  by  a  deluge.  He  is  described  as  sporting  constantly  with  these 
Gopis  or  shepherdesses,  of  whom  a  thousand  became  his  wives,  though 
only  eight  are  specified,  Eadha  being  the  favourite.  Krishna  built 
Dvaraka  in  Gujarat,  and  thither  transported  the  inhabitants  of  Mathura 
after  killing  Kansa. 

According  to  some,  Krishna  is  not  an  incarnation  of 
Vishnu,  but  Vishnu  himself;  in  which  case,  Bala-rama, 
'the  strong  Rama,' ^  born  at  the  end  of  the  Dvapara  or 
third  age  of  the  world,  as  son  of  Vasu-deva  and  Devaki,  and 

1  The  anniversary  of  the  birthday  of  Krishna,  called  JanmashtamI, 
because  his  birth  is  said  to  have  occurred  on  the  eighth  day  of  the 
month  Bhadra  (August — September),  is  celebrated  as  a  great  festival. 
Professor  Weber  has  lately  published  some  valuable  information  on 
this  subject. 

^  This  third  Rama,  usually  held  to  be  the  seventh  son  of  Vasu- 
deva,  and  sometimes  called  Haldyudha,  '  armed  with  a  plough-shaped 
weapon,'  sometimes  Musalin,  '  club-armed,'  is,  the  Hindu  Hercules. 
In  Maha-bharata  I.  7308  (as  well  as  in  the  Vishnu-purana),  he  is  said 
to  have  been  produced  from  a  white  hair  of  Vishnu,  as  Krishna  was 
from  a  black.  Elsewhere  he  is  said  to  be  an  incarnation  of  the  great 
serpent  S'esha,  and  in  Anusasana-parvan  6163  he  is  regarded  as  a 


THE   EPIC    POEMS — INCARNATIONS    OP   VISHNU.        333 

elder   brother   of  Krishna,   is  sometimes   substituted  for 
Krishna  as  the  eighth  incarnation  of  Vishnu. 

9.  Buddha.  According  to  the  Brahmans,  Vishnu  as- 
sumed the  form  of  the  great  sceptical  philosopher,  in 
the  fourth  age  of  the  world,  to  delude  the  Daityas  or 
demons  into  neglecting  the  worship  of  the  gods,  and 
thus  exposing  them  to  destruction. 

10.  Ktdki  or  Kalkin,  who  is  yet  to  appear  at  the  close 
of  the  fourth  or  Kali  age,  when  the  world  has  become 
wholly  depraved,  for  the  final  destruction  of  the  wicked, 
for  the  re-establishment  of  righteousness  upon  the  earth, 
and  the  renovation  of  all  creation  with  a  return  to  a  new 
age  of  purity  (satya-yuga).  According  to  some,  he  will 
be  revealed  in  the  sky,  seated  on  a  white  horse,  with  a 
drawn  sword  in  his  hand,  blazing  like  a  comet.^ 

Looking  more  closely  at  these  ten  incarnations,  we  may 
observe  that  in  the  first  three  Vishnu  is  supposed  to  be 
present  in  the  body  of  animals,  and  in  the  fourth  to  take 
the  form  of  a  being  half  animal,  half  human.  This  last 
may  be  regarded  as  a  kind  of  intermediate  link,  the  object 

Naga,  or  semi-divine  being,  half  man,  half  serpent ;  and  at  his  death 
(recorded  in  Mausala-parvan  117),  a  large  Naga  is  described  as  coming 
out  of  his  mouth  and  entering  the  ocean.  Diodorus  Siculus,  in  his 
account  of  the  Indians  (II.  39),  has  the  following : — '  It  is  said  that 
Hercules  also  (as  well  as  Aiovusog,  worshipped  by  the  inhabitants  of  the 
mountains)  lived  amongst  them ;  and,  like  the  Greeks,  they  represent 
him  with  a  club  and  lion's  skin ;  and  that  in  strength  of  body  and 
bravery,  he  excelled  all  mortals,  and  purged  the  earth  and  sea  from 
monsters  {9riPi'm).  And  that  since  he  had  numerous  sons  from  his 
many  wives,  but  only  one  daughter,  when  they  were  grown  up,  he 
divided  the  whole  of  India  into  equal  parts,  so  that  each  of  his  sons 
should  have  a  kingdom  of  his  own,  and  his  one  daughter  he  made 
queen.  And  that  he  founded  many  cities,  and  among  them  the  largest 
and  most  celebrated  was  Palibothra  (UaX/^oOpa) ;  and  that  after  his 
death,  he  obtained  divine  honours.' 

1  According  to  Vishnu-purana  IV.  24,  he  is  to  be  born  as  Kalki  in 
the  family  of  Vishnu-yasas,  an  ancient  Brahman  of  S'ambhala. 


334  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

of  wMch  is  to  prevent  too  great  abruptness  iu  connecting 
the  Deity  with,  the  higher  forms  of  worldly  existence. 
From  the  mixed  manifestation  of  half  a  lion,  half  a  man, 
the  transition  is  natural  to  that  of  a  complete  man.  The 
divine  essence  passing  into  human  forms  commences  with 
the  smallest  type  of  humanity,  represented  by  a  dwarf. 
Thence  it  rises  to  mighty  heroes,  who  deliver  the  world 
from  the  oppression  of  evil  demons  and  tyrants  whose 
power  increases  with  the  deterioration  of  mankind  during 
the  four  ages.  In  the  tenth  and  final  manifestation,  which 
remains  to  be  revealed,  evil  and  wickedness  are  to  be 
entirely  rooted  out.  We  see  in  all  this  the  working  of 
the  Hindu  idea  of  transmigration.  Even  in  Manu's  time 
it  was  an  accepted  dogma  that  the  souls  of  men,  popularly 
regarded  as  emanations  from  the  Deity,  might  descend 
into  the  bodies  of  animals,  or  rise  to  those  of  higher 
beings.  It  was  therefore  an  easy  expansion  of  such  a 
doctrine  to  imagine  the  divine  Soul  itself  as  passing 
through  various  stages  of  incarnation  for  the  delivery  of 
the  world  from  the  effects  of  evil  and  sin,  and  for  the 
maintenance  of  order  in  the  whole  cycle  of  creation. 

Let  me  introduce  here  a  curious  legend  from  the  Bha- 
gavata-purana  X.  Ixxxix. — also  told  in  the  Prem  Sagar. 
I  translate  it  (with  a  little  amplification)  as  well  illus- 
trating the  distinctive  characters  of  the  three  gods, 
Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva.  (The  Sanskrit  text  is  given 
at  p.  516.) 

The  great  sage  Bhrigu,  one  of  the  ten  Maharshis  or  primeval  patriarchs 
created  by  the  first  Manu  (I.  35),  was  asked  which  god  was  the  greatest. 
He  said  he  would  endeavour  to  ascertain,  and  first  went  to  Brahma  ; 
on  approaching  whom,  he  purposely  omitted  an  obeisance.  Upon  this, 
the  god  reprehended  him  very  severely,  but  was  pacified  by  seasonable 
apologies.  Next  he  entered  the  abode  of  S'iva,  in  Kailasa,  and  omitted 
to  return  the  god's  salutation.  The  vindictive  deity  was  enraged,  and 
would  have  destroyed  the  sage,  but  was  conciliated  by  his  wife  Parvati. 
Lastly,  he  repaired  to  Vaikuntha,  the  heaven  of  Vishnu,  whom  he  found 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   RAMAYANA.  335 

asleep  with  his  head  on  Lakshmi's  lap.  To  make  a  trial  of  his  for- 
bearance, he  boldly  gave  the  god  a  kick  on  his  breast,  which  awoke 
him.  Instead  of  showing  anger,  however,  the  god  arose,  and  on  seeing 
Bhrigu,  inquired  tenderly  whether  his  foot  was  hurt,  and  then  pro- 
ceeded to  rub  it  gently.  'This,'  said  Bhrigu,  'is  the  mightiest  god; 
he  overpowers  by  the  most  potent  of  all  weapons — sympathy  and 
generosity.' 

The  Rdmdyana. 

I  proceed  now  to  give  a  brief  account  of  Valmiki's^ 
poem,  the  Eamayana  {Rdma-ayana,  '  the  goings  or  doings 
of  Rama'),  wliich  in  its  present  form  consists  of  about 
24,000  stanzas,  mostly  in  the  common  heroic  Anushtubh 
metre.^ 

It  should  be  noted  in  the  first  place  that  the  purity  of 


^  Valmiki  is  thought  to  have  been  born  in  that  part  of  India  which 
corresponds  to  Kosala,  the  chief  town  of  which  was  Ayodhya  (reigned 
over  by  Dasaratha,  llama's  father),  and  which  was  close  to  the  region 
of  Videha,  whose  king,  Janaka,  was  the  father  of  Sita,  and  whose  con- 
nection with  Yajnavalkya  is  described  in  the  Brahmana  of  the  White 
Yajur-veda,  and  in  some  of  the  Maha-bharata  legends.  Valmiki  himself 
is  believed  to  have  been  an  adherent  of  the  Black  Yajur-veda,  and  it  is 
certain  that  the  story  of  Rama  was  carefully  preserved  among  the  Tait- 
tiriyakas,  and  that  Yalmiki  interweaves  their  legends  into  his  narrative. 
According  to  Mr.  Oust  (Calcutta  Review  XLV.)  Valmiki  resided  on  the 
banks  of  the  Jumna,  near  its  coniiuence  with  the  Ganges  at  Allahabad ; 
and  tradition  has  marked  a  hill  in  the  district  of  Banda,  in  Bundelkund, 
as  his  abode.  Some  actually  assert  that  he  began  life  as  a  highway 
robber,  but  repenting  of  his  misdeeds,  betook  himself  to  a  hei'mitage 
on  this  hill,  where  he  eventually  received  Sita,  the  wife  of  Eama,  when 
banished  by  her  over-sensitive  husband.  There  were  born  her  two 
sons,  Kusa  and  Lava  (sometimes  combined  into  one  compound,  thus — 
Ku^i-lavau),  who  were  taught  to  sing  the  poem  descriptive  of  their 
unknown  father's  actions,  and  from  whom  are  traced  the  proudest 
Rajput  castes.  The  reviewer  thinks  it  not  unlikely  that  Valmiki  may 
have  been  contemporaneous  with  the  heroes  whom  he  describes. 

^  The  metre  in  which  the  greater  part  of  the  Eamayana  and  Maha- 
bharata  is  written  is  the  common  S'loka  (see  my  Sanskrit  Grammar, 


336  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

its  text  has  been  exposed  to  risks,  which  the  longer  Epic 
h9,s  escaped.     Its  story  was  more  popular  and  attractive. 
It  was  shorter,  and  far  less  burdened  with  digressions ; 
it  had  more  unity  of  plot ;  its  language  was  simpler  and 
presented  fewer  difficulties.     As  a  result  of  these  circum- 
stances it  was  more  easily  committed  to  memory.     Hence 
it  happened  that,  even  after  the  final  settlement  of  its 
text,  it  became  orally  current  over  a  great  part  of  India. 
We  know  from  the  fourth  chapter  of  the  first  book  that 
it  had  its  minstrels  and  reciters  like  the  Greek  pay^wSol, 
and  variations  in  the  wording  of  the  narratives  became 
almost  unavoidable.     In  process  of  time,  as  written  copies 
of  the  poem  multiplied,  the  unfettered  flow  of  the  common 
heroic  metre  facilitated  slight  alterations  and  interpola- 
tions by  transcribers  who  sometimes  aimed  at  being  poets 
themselves.     Hence  we  have  at  least  three  versions  of 
the  text  of  the  poem  :  one  belonging  to  Benares  and  the 
North-west ;    another,    which    is    generally,    though   not 
always,  more  difi'use  and  open  to  suspicion  of  interpola- 
tions, peculiar  to    Calcutta   and   Bengal   Proper;   and  a 
third,  to  Western  India  (Bombay).     These  principal  recen- 
sions, as  well  as  all  the  known  MSS.,  whatever  may  be 
their  occasional  variations,^  divide  the  poem  into  seven 
books,  as  follows  : — 

935),  in  which  only  five  syllables  out  of  sixteen  in  each  line  are  really 
fixed.  The  others  may  be  either  long  or  short.  The  Indra-vajra  variety 
of  Trishtubh  is,  however,  frequently  used  in  the  Maha-bharata ;  and  in 
the  Eamayana,  at  the  end  of  the  chapters,  we  have  often  the  Jaga/tl 
(Gram.  937,  941).  The  former  of  these  has  eleven  syllables  to  the 
half-line,  the  latter  twelve ;  and  the  quantity  of  every  syllable  being 
fixed,  there  is  less  simplicity  and  freedom  of  style. 

1  Professor  Weber  shows  that  the  variations  now  discovered  in  MSS. 
of  the  Eamayana  in  different  parts  of  India  are  so  great,  that  it  is  no 
longer  possible  to  talk  of  three  recensions  only.  With  regard  to  the 
Bengal  (Gauda)  recension,  it  may  be  observed  that  in  that  part  of 
India,  where  there  is  less  demand  for  MSS.,  learned  men  have  been 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   RAMAYANA.  337 

I.  Bdla-kdnda,  ih.e  section  relating  to  the  boyhood  of  Rama.  2.  Ayo- 
dhyd-h°,  descriptive  of  the  transactions  in  Ayodhya  and  the  banish- 
ment of  Rama  by  his  father,  king  Dasaratha.  3.  Aramja-h°,  narrating 
events  in  the  forest-abode  of  Rama  after  his  banishment,  including 
the  carrying  off  of  Sita  by  Ravana.  4.  Kislikindhyd-k° ,  detailing  the 
occurrences  at  Kishkindhya,  the  capital  city  of  Rama's  ally  Sugriva. 
5.  Sundara-k°,  'the  beautiful  section,'  giving  an  account  of  the  miracles 
by  which  the  passage  of  the  straits  and  the  arrival  of  the  invading 
armies  in  Lan-ka  (Ceylon)  were  effected.  6.  Tuddha-k°,  describing 
the  actual  war  with  Ravana  in  Lan-ka,  the  victory  over  his  armies  and 
his  destruction  by  Rama,  the  recovery  of  Sita,  the  return  to  Ayodhya, 
the  reunion  of  the  four  brothers,  and  final  coronation  of  Rama.  7.  Uttor 
ra-k°,  narrating  the  concluding  events  of  the  history  of  Rama  after  his 
coronation  on  returning  to  Ayodhya — his  sensitiveness  to  the  gossip 
and  scandal  of  the  citizens,  his  consequent  banishment  of  Sita  to  the 
hermitage  of  Valmiki,  notwithstanding  the  absolute  certainty  of  her 
blameless  conduct  during  her  captivity  in  Ravana's  palace,  the  birth  of 
his  twin  sons,  Ku^a  and  Lava,  in  the  hermitage,  his  final  reunion  with 
her,  and  translation  to  heaven.  All  this  supplement  to  the  story  has 
been  dramatized  by  Bhava-bhuti  in  his  TJttara-rama-6aritra,  and  the 
whole  previous  history  in  his  Maha-vira-daritra. 

We  have  already  noted  that  the  seventh  Book,  as  well 

their  own  scribes,  and  have  always  tampered  more  freely  with  original 
texts  than  the  unlearned  copyists  of  the  North.  In  1806  and  1810 
Carey  and  Marshman  published  the  text  and  translation  of  two  books 
out  of  the  seven  which  complete  this  recension;  but  here  and  there 
they  have  followed  the  northern.  Twenty  years  afterwards  Augustus 
William  Schlegel  published  the  text  of  two  books  of  the  northern 
version,  with  a  Latin  translation  of  the  first;  and  after  another  in- 
terval of  twenty  years  Signer  Gorresio,  a  learned  Italian  scholar, 
published,  at  the  expense  of  king  Charles  Albert,  a  very  beautiful  and 
accurate  edition  of  the  Bengal  recension,  with  an  Italian  translation, 
which  I  have  generally  followed  in  my  summary  of  the  narrative.  The 
remainder  of  that  particular  recension,  the  editing  of  which  was  com- 
menced by  Schlegel,  was  left  unprinted.  More  than  ten  years  have 
elapsed  since  editions  of  the  more  reliable  recension,  with  commentary, 
were  put  forth  at  Calcutta  and  Bombay.  That  of  Calcutta  is  dated 
Sarnvat,  191 7.  Mr.  R.  Griffith's  poetical  translation  of  the  Ramayana, 
which  has  appeared  since,  deserves,  and  has  received,  the  greatest 
commendation. 

Y 


338  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

as  the  introductory  chapters  of  the  first,  giving  a  stim- 
mary  of  the  plot,  and  the  passages  identifying  Rama 
with  Vishnu  or  the  Supreme  Being  (such  as  VI.  cii.  12, 
Gorresio),  are  in  all  probability  comparatively  modern 
appendages. 

No  suspicion,  however,  of  interpolations  and  variations 
avails  to  impair  the  sacred  character  of  the  poem  in  the 
eyes  of  the  natives.^  Some  idea  of  the  veneration  in 
which  it  is  held  may  be  formed  from  the  verses  at  the 
end  of  the  introductory  chapter,  which  declare — 

He  who  reads  and  repeats  this  holy  life-giving  Eamayana  is  liberated 
from  all  his  sins  and  exalted  with  all  his  posterity  to  the  highest 
heaven. 

Brahma  also,  in  I.  2,  40,  is  made  to  utter  the  following 
prophecy  in  the  presence  of  the  poet  Valmiki : — 

As  long  as  the  mountains  and  rivers  shall  continue  on  the  surface  of 
the  earth,  so  long  shall  the  story  of  the  Ramayana  be  current  in  the 
world.  \_Ydvat  sthdsyanti  girayah  saritai-ca  mahltale  Tdvad  BamdyanOr 
hatha  lolcesliu  pracarishyatiJ] 

The  main  story  of  the  poem,^  although  often  inter- 
rupted by  long  episodes  which  have  little  bearing  on  the 
plot,  flows  in  a  far  more  continuous  and  traceable  course 
than  that  of  the  Maha-bharata.  It  may  be  divided  into 
four  principal  parts  or  periods,  corresponding  to  the  chief 
epochs  in  the  life  of  Rama.     I.  The  account  of  his  youth- 

1  Weber  has  noted  that  in  the  Sarva-darsana-san-graha  (p.  72,  1.  15) 
a  passage  is  quoted  from  the  Skanda-purana  which  places  the  Mula- 
ramayana,  '  original  Ramayana,'  as  a  S'astra  after  the  four  Vedas,  the 
Bharata,  and  the  Panda-ratraka.  Some  of  the  Sargas  in  the  Uttara- 
kanda  have  no  comment  as  being  prakshipta. 

2  While  writing  my  account  of  the  Ramayana,  I  have  consulted  an 
able  article  on  this  poem  in  the  Calcutta  Review  (XLV.),  to  which  I 
am  under  great  obligations.  The  author  of  the  article  is  my  friend 
Mr.  R.  N.  Oust,  a  late  distinguished  member  of  the  Bengal  Civil 
Service. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE    RAMAYANA.  339 

ful  days ;  his  education  and  residence  at  the  court  of  his 
father  Dasaratha,  king  of  Ayodhya  ;  his  happy  marriage 
to  Sita ;  and  his  inauguration  as  heir- apparent  or  crown- 
prince.  II.  The  circumstances  that  led  to  his  banish- 
ment ;  the  description  of  his  exile  and  residence  in  the 
forests  of  Central  India.  III.  His  war  with  the  giants 
or  demons  of  the  South  for  the  recovery  of  his  wife  Sita, 
carried  off  by  tbeir  chief  Eavana  ;  his  conquest  and 
destruction  of  Eavana,  and  reunion  with  Sita.  IV.  His 
return  with  Sita  to  Ayodhya ;  his  restoration  to  the 
throne  of  his  father ;  and  his  subsequent  banishment  of 
Sita.^ 

The  poem  opens  with  a  description  of  Ayodhya,^  and 
an  eulogium  on  Dasaratha  and  his  ministers,  of  whom 
the  most  eminent  were  the  two  prime  ministers  Vasishtha 
and  Vamadeva.      Besides  these,  there  were  eight  other 


1  According  to  Professor  Lassen  the  development  of  the  story  of 
Rama  may  be  divided  into  four  stages.  The  first  construction  of  the 
poem  did  not  carry  the  narrative  beyond  the  banishment  of  Kama  to 
the  Himalaya  and  the  circumstances  which  caused  his  wife  Sita  and 
his  brother  Lakshmana  to  follow  him  into  esile.  The  second  changed 
the  place  of  banishment  to  the  Godavari,  and  described  the  protection 
afforded  to  the  hermits  against  the  attacks  of  the  aborigines.  The 
third  embraced  the  account  of  the  first  attempts  to  subdue  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  Dekhan.  The  fourth  amplification,  which  resulted  from 
the  knowledge  gained  by  the  Hindus  of  the  island  of  Ceylon,  included 
the  description  of  Eama's  expedition  against  Lan-ka.     See  Ind.  Alt.  II. 

2  Although  Ayodhya  is  the  base  of  operations  in  the  Eamayana,  yet 
the  poet  carries  us  through  a  vast  extent  of  country,  conducting  us 
now  beyond  the  Sutlej  into  the  Panjab,  now  across  the  Vindhya  moun- 
tains into  the  Dekhan,  and  now  across  the  Narmada  and  Godavari  to 
the  most  southern  parts  of  India,  even  to  the  island  of  Ceylon.  The 
geography  of  the  poem,  however,  though  far  more  interesting,  and 
extending  to  wider  points  in  every  direction,  than  that  of  the  Maha- 
bharata,  is  not  always  to  be  trusted.  The  river  Sarayu  is  now  called 
the  Gogra. 


340  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

councillors  [amdtydh),  agreeably  to  the  precept  laid  down 
by  Manu  (see  p.  256,  with  note  2).  These  are  of  course 
all  Brahmans,  and  direct  the  affairs  of  the  government. 
King  Dasaratha  has  no  son  (VIII.  i) — a  serious  calamity 
in  India,  where  a  son  is  needed  for  the  due  performance 
of  the  Sraddha  (see  p.  249,  with  note  i).  The  usual 
remedy  for  this  misfortune  was  a  great  sacrifice,  pur- 
posely cumbered  with  a  most  tedious  and  intricate  cere- 
monial, not  to  be  performed  except  by  Brahmans,  who 
received  in  return  enormous  gifts.  The  Eakshasas  were, 
of  course,  eagerly  on  the  watch  for  any  flaw,  defect,  or  mis- 
take. If  any  occurred,  the  whole  ceremony  was  seriously 
obstructed,  and  its  efficacy  destroyed. 

Rishyasrin-ga,  therefore,  a  celebrated  sage,  is  married 
to  Dasaratha's  daughter  Santa,  and  induced  to  assist  at 
the  celebration  of  a  great  AsVa-medha  or  horse-sacrifice. 

The  episode  in  which  the  story  of  this  -sage  is  told  is 
very  curious  : — 

It  so  happened,  that  in  the  neighbouring  kingdom  of  An-ga,  now 
known  as  Bhagulpore,  in  Bengal,  there  had  been  a  great  dearth,  and 
the  king,  Lomapada,  had  been  assured  that  the  only  chance  of  obtaining 
rain  was  to  entice  the  ascetic  Rishyasrin-ga  from  his  retirement,  and 
induce  him  to  marry  the  king's  daughter,  or  rather  the  adopted  child 
of  Lomapada,  and  real  daughter  of  Dasaratha.  This  ascetic  was  the 
son  of  Vibhandaka,  a  sainted  mortal  of  frightful  power,  who  had  pro- 
duced him  apparently  without  a  mother,  and  had  brought  him  up  alone 
in  the  wilderness,  where  he  had  never  seen  or  even  heard  of  the  fascina- 
tions of  women.  The  plan  was  to  send  a  party  of  young  females,  dis- 
guised as  ascetics,  and  inveigle  the  great  saint  from  his  retreat.  The 
description  of  the  surprise  and  unsettlement  of  mind,  the  interruption 
of  devotion,  and  heart's  unrest,  that  befell  the  unhappy  saint  when  he 
received  his  strange  guests,  is  very  singular.  In  the  end,  the  ascetic 
is  seduced  from  his  hermitage,  put  on  board  a  vessel  on  the  Ganges, 
married  to  the  king's  daughter,  and  brought  to  Ayodhya,  to  conduct 
the  sacrifice.^ 

1  I  have  consulted  here  Mr.  Gust's  article  in  the  Galcutta  Review 
(XLV.).     He  there  remarks  that  'we  might  laugh  at  the  conceit  of 


THE   EPIC    POEMS — THE   RAMA Y ANA.  34 1 

The  horse-sacrifice/  therefore,  was  successfully  per- 
formed. We  are  told  that  no  oblation  was  neglected, 
nor  any  mistake  committed ;  all  was  in  exact  conformity 
to  the  Veda  (I.  xiii.  10).  The  queen  Kausalya,  mother 
of  Eama,  and  the  other  two  queens,  Sumitra  and  Kai- 
keyi,^  remain  with  the  slaughtered  horse  for  one  whole 


such  a  case  being  possible  had  not  a  modern  traveller  in  the  Levant, 
Mr.  Ourzon,  assured  us  of  the  existence  of  a  similar  case  in  one  of  the 
convents  of  Mount  Athos  in  the  nineteenth  century.  He  there  found 
a  monk  in  middle  life  who  had  never  set  eyes  on  women,  nor  had  any 
notion  of  them  beyond  what  could  be  formed  from  a  black  and  hideous 
altar-picture  of  the  Yirgin  Mary.  The  cruel  traveller,  by  an  accurate 
description  of  the  many  charms  of  the  fair  sisterhood,  entirely  destroyed 
the  poor  monk's  peace  of  mind  for  the  future.' 

1  The  horse  chosen  for  this  purpose  was  let  loose  and  allowed  to  roam 
about  for  a  year.  If  no  one  was  able  to  seize  it  during  this  period,  it 
was  deemed  fit  for  sacrifice ;  bat  the  seizure  was  sometimes  effected  by 
the  god  Indra,  whose  tenure  of  heaven  was  imperilled  by  the  great  power 
acquired  by  those  who  completed  many  Asva-medhas.  Another  year 
was  consumed  in  preparations  for  the  sacrifice.  The  description  of  the 
ceremony,  in  I.  xiii.,  is  curious.  Twenty-one  Yupas  or  sacrificial  posts 
were  erected,  to  which  were  tied  various  animals,  and  the  horse.  Near 
the  latter  the  queens  of  Da^aratha  watched  for  a  whole  night.  The 
marrow  (vapd)  of  the  horse  [patatrin  =  haise;  according  to  the  com- 
mentator, purd  aivdndm  pakshdh  samtlti]  was  then  taken  out  and 
dressed,  and  the  horse  itself  cut  up  and  offered  in  the  fire,  and  the  king, 
smelling  the  smoke  of  the  burning  flesh,  became  absolved  from  his  sins. 
Various  other  sacrifices  seem  to  have  accompanied  the  Asva-medha, 
such  as  the  (jatushtoma,  Jyotishtoma,  Atiratra,  Abhijit,  &c.  The 
Pravargya  and  Upasad  are  described  in  Aitareyarbrahmana  I.  18,  i, 
23-25.  Compare  the  Asva-medha  hymns  of  the  Rig-veda  (I.  162,  163) 
and  the  rules  for  this  sacrifice  given  in  S'atapatha-brahmana  XIII.  and 
Katyayana's  Sutras  XX.  6,  78.  An  important  part  of  the  proceedings 
was  the  feasting  and  the  largesses.  King  Dasaratha  is  described  as 
giving  to  the  priests  a  million  cows,  a  hundred  million  pieces  of  gold, 
and  four  times  as  many  pieces  of  silver. 

2  Of  Dasaratha's  three  wives,  the  chief,  Kausalya,  is  said  to  have 
been  of  his  own  race  and  country  (probably  so  called  from  Kosala,  the 
country  of  Dasaratha) ;  the  second,  Kaikeyi,  was  the  daughter  of  Asva- 


342  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

night  (I.  xiii.  36,  2)7)-  The  gods,  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and 
Siva,  along  with  Indra  and  his  troop  of  Maruts,  assemble 
to  receive  their  shares  of  the  sacrificial  oblations,  and 
being  satisfied,  promise  four  sons  to  Dasaratha  (I.  xiv.  9). 
The  scene  then  changes  to  the  abode  of  the  gods,  where 
a  deputation  of  the  deities  waits  on  Brahma,  and  repre- 
sents to  him  that  the  universe  is  in  danger  of  being 
destroyed  by  the  chief  of  the  Rakshasas  or  evil  demons, 
called  Eavana,  who  from  his  island-throne  in  Ceylon 
menaces  earth  and  heaven  with  destruction.  His  power 
is  described  as  so  great  that — 

Where  he  is,  there  the  sun  does  not  give  out  its  heat ;  the  winds 
through  fear  of  him  do  not  blow ;  the  fire  ceases  to  burn ;  and  the 
ocean,  crowned  with  rolling  billows,  becomes  motionless  (I.  xiv.  1 7). 

The  secret  of  this  power  lay  in  a  long  course  of  aus- 
terity,^ which,  according  to  the  Hindu  doctrine,  gained  for 

pati,  king  of  Kekaya,  supposed  to  be  in  the  Panjab  (whence  the  king 
himself  is  sometimes  called  Kekaya) ;  and  the  third,  Sumitra,  was 
probably  from  Magadha  or  Behar.  The  father  of  the  last  is  said  to 
have  been  a  Vaisya.  It  is  noticeable  that  Asva-pati,  king  of  Kekaya, 
is  mentioned  in  the  Brahmana  of  the  White  Yajur-veda  as  nearly 
contemporary  with  Janaka,  father  of  Sita. 

1  According  to  the  Hindu  theory,  the  performance  of  tapas  or 
austerities  of  various  kinds  was  like  making  deposits  in  the  bank  of 
heaven.  By  degrees  an  enormous  credit  was  accumulated,  which  enabled 
the  depositor  to  draw  to  the  amount  of  his  savings,  without  fear  of  his 
drafts  being  refused  payment.  The  merit  and  power  thus  gained  by 
weak  mortals  was  so  enormous,  that  gods  as  well  as  men  were  equally 
at  the  mercy  of  these  all  but  omnipotent  ascetics.  Hence  both  Rishis 
and  Eakshasas  and  even  gods,  especially  S'iva  (p.  323),  are  described 
as  engaging  in  self-inflicted  austerities,  in  order  to  set  mere  human 
beings  an  example,  or  perhaps  not  to  be  supplanted  by  them,  or 
else  not  to  be  outdone  in  aiming  at  re-absorption  into  Brahma.  In 
these  cases  it  is  incorrect  (as  remarked  by  Professor  Banerjea)  to 
translate  tapas  by  '  penance,'  if  expiation  for  sin  is  thereby  implied. 
It  is  simply  self-inflicted  pain  and  suffering,  with  a  view  to  the 
acquisition  of   superhuman   powers,   or  of  final   emancipation.      The 


THE   EPIC    POEMS — THE   RAMA  Y  AN  A.  343 

him  who  persevered  sufficiently,  however  evil  his  designs, 
superiority  to  the  gods  themselves,  and  enabled  Ravana' 
to  extort  from  the  god  Brahma  this  remarkable  boon — 
that  neither  gods,  genii,  demons,  nor  giants  should  be 
able  to  vanquish  him.  As,  howe\^er,  iu  his  pride,  he 
scorned  to  ask  security  from  man  also,  he  remained,  vul- 
nerable from  this  one  quarter,  if  any  mortal  could  be 
found  capable  of  coping  with  him.  While  the  discussion 
of  the  matter  is  carried  on  in  heaven,  Vishnu  joins  the 
conclave,  and  at  the  request  of  the  other  gods,  promises 
to  take  the  form  of  man  that  he  may  kill  Eavana,  and 
consents  to  become  incarnate  for  this  purpose,  in  the 
family  of  Dasaratha,  king  of  Ayodhya  (Oude),  of  the 
Solar  dynasty. 

It  should  be  stated  here  that,  according  to  the  legendary 
history  of  India,  two  lines  of  rulers  were  originally  domi- 
nant in  the  north  of  India,  called  Solar  and  Lunar,  under 
whom  numerous  petty  princes  held  authority  and  to 
whom  they  acknowledged  fealty.  Under  the  Solar 
dynasty  the  Brahmanical  system  gained  ascendency  more 
rapidly  and  completely  than  under  the  Lunar  kings  in 
the  more  northern  districts,  where  fresh  arrivals  of  martial 
tribes  preserved  an  independent  spirit  among  the  popula- 
tion already  settled  in  that  district. 

This  Solar  line,  though  practically  commencing  with 
Ikshvaku,  is  fabled  to  have  derived  its  origin  from  the 
Sun,  and  even  from  an  earlier  source — the  god  Brahma 
himself.  Perhaps  the  object  of  the  Brahman  poet  or 
later"  constructor  of  the  poem  might  have  been  to  connect 
Eama  in  his  then  acknowledged  character  of  an  incar- 

root  iap  signifies  first  'to  burn'  and  then  'to  torment.'  It  is  con- 
nected with  Lat.  tepeo.  Also  with  Greek  s-spja,  root  rap,  Oi'HToi, 
which  last  originally  signified  'to  burn,' not  'to  bury,' dead  bodies. 
As,  however,  '  penance '  is  derived  from  poena,  '  pain,'  it  is  perhaps  a 
suitable  equivalent  for  the  Sanskrit  tapas. 


344  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

nation  of  Vishnu,  with  the  solar  Vishnu  of  the  Veda  (see 
p.  320).  However  this  may  have  been,  nothing  shows 
more  clearly  than  the  legendary  pedigree  of  Eama  how 
the  whole  poem  was  subjected  to  a  brahmanizing  process. 
We  see  from  it  that  the  most  powerful  line  of  Kshatriya 
kings  is  thus  made  to  owe  its  origin  to  Brahmanical 
sages  of  the  greatest  sanctity.  I  here  abridge  the 
genealogy  : — 

Ikshvaku  was  the  son  of  Manu  Vaivasvata  (i.e.,  the  seventh  Manu, 
or  Manu  of  the  present  period).  The  latter  was  a  son  of  Vivasvat  or 
the  Sun  (commonly  called  Surya).  The  Sun  again  was  a  son  of  the 
Muni  Kasyapa,  who  was  the  son  of  the  ^ishi  Maridi,  who  was  the  son 
of  Erahma.  From  Ikshvaku  sprang  the  two  branches  of  the  Solar 
dynasty,  viz.,  that  of  Ayodhya  or  Oude,  which  may  be  said  to  have 
commenced  in  Kakutstha,  the  grandson  of  Ikshvaku  (as  the  latter's 
son  Vikukshi,  father  of  Kakutstha,  did  not  reign),  and  that  of  Mithila, 
or  Videha  (North  Behar  and  Tirhut),  which  commenced  in  another  of 
Ikshvaku's  sons,  Nimi.  Thirty-fifth  in  descent  from  Kakutstha  came 
Sagara ;  fourth  from  him  Bhagiratha ;  third  from  him  Ambarisha ; 
and  fifteenth  from  him  Eaghu,  who  was  father  of  Aja,  who  was  father 
of  Da^aratha.  Hence  we  have  the  following  order  of  names  :  Brahma, 
Maridi,  Kasyapa,  Vivasvat  or  Stirya,  Vaivasvata,  Ikshvaku  [Vikuk- 
shi], Kakutstha  [ J, 

Sagara  [. .],  Dilipa,  Bhagiratha  [. .],  Ambarisha  [. . .],  Nala  [ ], 

Eaghu,  Aja,  Dasaratha,  Rama. 

This  explains  why  Rama  is  variously  called  Kakutstha,  Raghava, 
Dasaratha,  Dasarathi,  &c.^ 

We  are  thus  brought  to  the  real  commencement  of  the 
story — the  birth  of  Eama.^     Four  sons  are  born  from  the 

1  This  list  agrees  with  the  usual  one  as  exhibited  in  Prinsep's  table ; 
but  there  is  considerable  variation  in  the  genealogy,  as  given  in  Rama- 
yana  II.  ex.  and  in  the  Raghu-vaxisa.  Tor  instance,  the  son  of  Iksh- 
vaku is  said  to  be  Kukshi,  and  his  son  Vikukshi  j  the  son  of  Dilipa  is 
Bhagiratha,  and  his  son  is  Kakutstha,  and  his  son  is  Raghu.  In  the 
Raghu-vansa,  Raghu,  father  of  Aja  (V.  36),  is  said  to  be  the  son  of 
Dilipa  (III.  13). 

^  In  Schlegel's  and  the  Bombay  Ramayana,  the  horoscope  of  Rama's 


THE    EPIC   POEMS — THE   KAMA Y ANA.  345 

three  wives  of  Dasaratha  ;  the  eldest,  Eama,  possessing 
half  the  nature  of  Vishnu,  from  Kausalya ;  the  second, 
Bharata,  possessing  a  fourth  part,  from  Kaikeyi ;  and  the 
other  two,  Lakshmana  and  Satru-ghna,  sharing  the  re- 
maining quarter  between  them,  from  Sumitra.  The 
brothers  are  all  deeply  attached  to  each  other ;  but 
Lakshmana  (often  called  Saumitri)  is  especially  the  com- 
panion of  Eama,  and  Satru-ghna  of  Bharata.^ 

While  yet  striplings,  Rama  and  his  brothers  are  taken 
by  Visvamitra  (see  p.  361)  to  the  court  of  Janaka,  king 
of  Mithila  or  Videha.^  He  had  a  wonderful  bow,  once  the 
property  of  Siva,  and  had  given  out,  that  the  man  who 


birth  is  given.  His  birthday  is  called  Edma-navarm  (see  p.  365, 
note  t),  because  he  is  said  (I.  xLx.  i,  2,  II.  xv.  3)  to  have  been  born 
on  the  9th  Tithi  of  Caitra,  about  the  vernal  equinox,  Jupiter  being  in 
Cancer  (Karkata).  Weber  thinks  that  the  mention  of  the  Zodiacal 
sign  and  the  planet  Jupiter  is  a  proof  of  the  late  date  to  be  assigned 
to  the  composition  of  the  Ramayana,  or  at  least  of  this  passage,  seeing 
that  the  Hindus  obtained  their  knowledge  of  the  signs  and  planets 
from  the  Greeks,  and  these  latter  only  completed  their  Zodiac  in  the 
first  century  b.c.  Weber,  however,  remarks  that  in  the  Ramayana 
Ceylon  is  never  called  Tamraparni  or  Siiihala  (by  which  name  alone  it 
was  known  to  the  Greeks),  but  always  jLaw-M. 

1  Although  in  xix.  the  birth  of  Bharata  is  narrated  after  that  of  Rama, 
he  is  supposed  to  have  been  bom  after  the  twins ;  and  we  read  in 
I.  XV.  that  the  divine  nectar  containing  the  essence  of  the  god  Vishnu 
was  drunk  by  Sumitra  next  to  Kausalya.  According  to  Schlegel, 
Bharata  was  eleven  months  junior  to  Rama,  and  the  twins  only  three 
months.  Probably  the  mother  of  Bharata  was  higher  in  rank  than 
Sumitra,  which  would  give  him  the  precedence.  Lakshmana  was  to 
Rama  like  another  self  {Rdmasya  LahshmaTio  vdhihprdna  ivdparah,  na 
ca  tena  vind  nidrdm  labliate,  na  tarn  vind  mishtam  annam  updmtam 
aJndti,  I.  xix.  20-22). 

2  It  is  evident  that  Mithila  (North  Behar  and  Tirhut),  situated  quite 
towards  the  east,  was  an  Aryan  country  at  this  time,  for  Janaka  is 
described  (Earn.  I.  12)  as  conversant  with  all  the  S'astras  and  Vedas. 
He  is  a  frequent  interlocutor  in  the  Brihad-aranyaka. 


346  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

could  bend  it  should  win  his  beautiful  daughter  Sita.^ 
On  the  arrival  of  Eama  and  his  brothers  the  bow  is  brought 
on  an  eight-wheeled  platform,  drawn  by  no  less  than  5000 
men.  Eama  not  only  bends  the  bow,  but  snaps  it  asunder 
with  a  concussion  so  terrible  that  the  whole  assembly  is 
thrown  to  the  ground,  and  the  earth  quivers  as  if  a 
mountain  were  rent  in  twain. 

Sita  thus  becomes  the  wife  of  Eama,  and  she  remained 
his  one  wife — the  type  of  wife-like  devotion.  Eama  also 
remained  her  faithful  lord — the  type  of  all  that  a  husband 
ought  to  be  in  loving  tenderness  and  fidelity.^ 

On  their  way  back  to  Ayodhya,  Dasaratha  and  his  sons 
are  met  by  Parasu-rama,  and  here  we  have  introduced 
the  curious  episode  of  the  conflict  between  the  second 
Eama  and  the  previous  incarnation  of  Vishnu  —  who 
suddenly  appears  on  the  scene  (though  not  till  various 
strange  omens  and  awful  portents  had  given  notice  of  his 
approach)  to  challenge  the  young  son  of  Dasaratha.  The 
object  of  this  digression,  which  is  clearly  not  part  of  the 
original   story,  seems  to  be,   that  the  ex-incarnation  of 


1  Called  Sita  because  not  born  from  a  woman,  but  from  a  furrow 
(sitd)  while  Janaka  was  ploughing  (I.  Ixvi.  14).  This  has  given  rise 
to  a  theory  that  the  story  of  Rama  allegorizes  the  introduction  of 
agriculture  into  the  south  of  India.  The  name  Sita  occurs  in 
Taittiriya^brahmana  II.  3,  10,  1-3,  as  applied  to  the  daughter  of 
Savitri,  or  Prajapati,  and  as  in  love  with  the  Moon,  who  on  his  part 
loves  another  daughter,  S'raddha,  but  in  the  end  is  brought  to  love 
Sita.  (See  also  Rig-veda  IV.  57,  6,  7;  Atharva-veda  XI.  3,  12.) 
This  is  a  variation  of  the  older  legend  which  represents  Savitri  as 
giving  his  daughter  Surya  in  marriage  to  the  Moon.  This  may  account 
for  the  name  Mdma-candra,  '  moon-like  Rama,'  which  was  ultimately 
given  to  the  hero  of  the  Ramayana. 

2  In  this  respect  he  contrasts  very  remarkably  with  the  five 
Pandavas — the  heroes  of  the  Maha-bharata — who  had  one  wife  be- 
tween them  as  common  property,  besides  others  on  their  own  private 
account. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   RAMAYANA.  347 

Vishnu,  as  a  Brahman,  may,  by  acknowledging  himself 
justly'  superseded  by  the  Kshatriya  incarnation,  give  a 
Brahmanical  sanction  to  the  deification  of  the  second 
Rama ;  i)ut  much  mythological  mysticism  is  mixed  up 
with  the  narrative,  with  the  apparent  design  of  obscuring 
the  actual  facts  of  the  Kshatriya  hero's  victory,  which 
,  could  not,  if  stated  in  plain  language,  be  otherwise  than 
mortifying  to  Brahmanical  pride.  I  here  abridge  the  story 
as  told  in  Ramayana  I.  Ixxiv.,  &c.  (Schlegel ;  Muir's  Texts, 
vol.  iv.  pp.  176,  177): — 

When  the  king  and  his  son  Rama  were  returning  home  after  the 
marriage  of  the  latter  to  Sita,  he  was  alarmed  by  the  ill-omened  sounds 
uttered  by  certain  birds,  which,  however,  were  counteracted,  as  the  sage 
Vasishtha  assured  the  king,  by  the  auspicious  sign  of  his  being  perambu- 
lated by  the  wild  animals  of  the  forest.  Then  a  hurricane  shook  the 
earth,  uprooting  the  trees,  and  thick  darkness  veiled  the  sun.  Finally, 
Parasu-rama  appeared,  fearful  to  behold,  brilliant  as  fire,  with  his  axe 
in  his  hand,  and  a  bow  on  his  shoulder.  He  was  angry  at  the  breaking 
of  the  bow  of  S'iva,  of  whom  he  was  a  disciple.  Being  reverently  received, 
he  proceeded  to  tell  Rama,  Dasaratha's  son,  that  he  had  heard  of  his 
success  in  breaking  Siva's  bow,  and  had  brought  another  bow,  once  the 
property  of  Vishnu  (I.  Ixxv.  13),  which  he  asked  Rama  to  bend,  and 
fit  an  arrow  on  the  string,  adding,  that  if  he  succeeded  in  bending  it,  he 
(Parasu-rama)  would  challenge  him  to  single  combat.  Rama  replies  that 
though  his  powers  were  slighted  by  his  rival,  he  would  give  him  a  proof 
of  his  strength.  Whereupon,  he  angrily  snatches  the  bow  from  Parasu- 
rama,  bends  it,  fits  an  arrow  on  the  string,  and  tells  his  challenger  that 
he  will  spare  his  life  because  he  is  a  Brahman,  but  will  either  destroy  his 
supernatural  power  of  movement,  or  deprive  him  of  the  abode  in  bliss  he 
had  acquired  by  his  austerities.  The  gods  now  arrive  to  be  witnesses  of 
the  scene.  ParaSu-rama  becomes  disheartened,  loses  his  strength,  and 
entreats  not  to  be  deprived  of  his  faculty  of  moving  in  the  air  (lest  he 
should  be  unable  to  fulfil  his  promise,  made  to  Kasyapa,  to  leave  the 
earth  every  night).  He  then  continues  to  say  that  by  the  bending  of 
the  bow  he  recognizes  Rama's  divinity,  and  that  he  regards  defeat  by 
the  lord  of  the  three  worlds  as  no  disgrace.  The  second  Rama  then 
shoots  the  arrow,  and  thereby  in  some  mysterious  manner  destroys 
Parasu-rama's  abode  in  the  celestial  world. 

Da^aratha  and  his  party  now  return  to  the  capital,  and 


348  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

preparations  are  made  for  the  inauguration  of  Eama  as 
successor  to  the  throne,  when  Kaikeyi,  mother  o'f  his 
brother  Bharata,  jealous  of  the  preference  shown  to  the 
son  of  Kausalya,  demands  of  the  king  the  fulfilment  of  a 
promise,  made  to  her  in  former  years,  that  he  would  grant 
her  any  two  boons  she  asked.  A  promise  of  this  kind  in 
Eastern  countries  is  quite  inviolable ;  and  the  king  being 
required  to  banish  his  favourite  son  Eama  for  fourteen 
years  to  the  forest  of  Dandaka,  and  to  instal  Bharata,  is 
forced  to  comply. 

Eama,  therefore,  with  his  wife  Sita  and  his  brother 
Lakshmana,  is  banished.  They  establish  themselves  in  the 
forest  near  the  river  Grodavari.-^  Meanwhile  the  heart- 
broken king  pines  away  in  inconsolable  anguish.  Here 
occurs  a  touching  episode  (II.  Ixiii.).  The  kiag,  in  the 
midst  of  his  despondency,  confesses  that  his  present  be- 
reavement is  a  punishment  for  a  deed  of  blood  committed 
by  himself  accidentally  in  his  youthful  days.  Thus  it 
happened :  (I  translate  as  nearly  as  I  can  word  for  word, 
in  a  metre  resembling  the  sixteen-syllable  heroic  verse  of 
the  original,  omitting  portions  here  and  there) : — 

One  day  wlien  rains  refreshed  the  earth,  and  caused  my  heart  to  swell  with  joy, 
When,  after  scorching  with  his  rays  the  parched  ground,  the  summer  sun 
Had  passed  towards  the  south  ;  when  cooling  hreezes  chased  away  the  heat, 
And  grateful  clouds  arose  ;  when  frogs  and  pea-fowl  sported,  and  the  deer 
Seemed  drunk  with  glee,  and  all  the  winged  creation,  drippuig  as  if  drowned, 
Plumed  their  dank  feathers  on  the  tops  of  wind-rooked  trees,  and  falling  showers 
Covered  the  mountains  till  they  looked  like  watery  heaps,  and  torrents  poured 
Down  from  their  sides,  filled  with  loose  stones  and  red  as  dawn  with  mineral  earth, 
Winding  like  serpents  in  their  course  ;  then  at  that  charming  season  I, 
Longing  to  breathe  the  air,  went  forth,  with  bow  and  arrow  in  my  hand. 
To  seek  for  game,  if  haply  by  the  river-side  a  buffalo. 
Or  elephant  or  other  animal  might  cross,  at  eve,  my  path. 
Coming  to  drink.     Then  in  the  dusk  I  heard  the  sound  of  gurghng  water  : 


1  The  Dandaka  forest  is  described  as  beginning  south  of  the  Jumna,  and 
extending  to  the  Godavarl.  The  whole  of  that  country  was  a  wilderness, 
inhabited  by  savage  tribes  (Eakshasas),  and  infested  by  wild  beasts. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   RAMA Y ANA.  349 

Quickly  I  took  my  bow,  and  aiming  toward  the  sound,  shot  off  the  dart. 

A  cry  of  mortal  agony  came  from  the  spot, — a  human  voice 

"Was  heard,  and  a  poor  hermit's  son  fell  pierced  and  bleeding  in  the  stream. 

'  Ah  !  wherefore  then,'  he  cried,  '  am  I  a  harmless  hermit's  son  struck  down  ? 

Hither  to  this  lone  brook  I  came  at  eve  to  fill  my  water-jar. 

By  whom  have  I  been  smitten  ?  whom  have  I  offended  ?     Oh  !  I  grieve 

Not  for  myself  or  my  own  fate,  but  for  my  parents,  old  and  blind. 

Who  perish  in  my  death  !     Ah  !  what  will  be  the  end  of  that  loved  pair, 

Long  guided  and  supported  by  my  hand  ?  this  barbed  dart  has  pierced 

Both  me  and  them.'     Hearing  that  piteous  voice,  I  Da^aratha, 

Who  meant  no  harm  to  any  human  creature,  young  or  old,  became 

Palsied  with  fekr  ;  my  bow  and  arrows  dropped  from  my  senseless  hands ; 

And  I  approached  the  place  in  horror  ;  there  with  dismay  I  saw, 

Stretched  on  the  bank,  an  innocent  hermit-boy,  writhing  in  pain  and  smeared 

With  dust  and  blood,  his  knotted  hair  dishevelled,  and  a  broken  jar 

Lying  beside  him.     I  stood  petrified  and  speechless.     He  on  me 

Fixed  full  his  eyes,  and  then,  as  if  to  burn  my  inmost  soul,  he  said, 

'  How  have  I  wronged  thee,  monarch  ?  that  thy  cruel  hand  has  smitten  me — 

Me,  a  poor  hermit's  son,  born  in  the  forest :  father,  mother,  child 

Hast  thou  transfixed  with  this  one  arrow  :  they,  my  parents,  sit  at  home 

Expecting  my  return,  and  long  will  cherish  hope — a  prey  to  thirst 

And  agonizing  fears.     Go  to  my  father — tell  him  of  my  fate. 

Lest  his  dread  curse  consume  thee,  as  the  flame  devours  the  withered  wood. 

But  first  in  pity  draw  thou  forth  the  shaft  that  pierces  to  my  heart. 

And  checks  the  gushing  life-blood,  as  the  bank  obstructs  the  bounding  stream.'' 

He  ceased,  and  as  he  rolled  his  eyes  in  agony,  and  quivering  writhed 

Upon  the  ground,  I  slowly  drew  the  arrow  from  the  poor  boy's  side. 

Then  with  a  piteous  look,  his  features  set  in  terror,  he  expired. 

Distracted  at  the  grievous  crime,  wrought  by  my  hand  unwittingly  ; 

Sadly  I  thought  within  myself,  how  best  I  might  repair  the  wrong. 

Then  took  the  way  he  had  directed  me  towards  the  hermitage. 

There  I  beheld  his  parents,  old  and  blind  ,-  like  two  clipped  wingless  birds 

Sitting  forlorn,  without  their  guide,  awaiting  his  arrival  anxiously. 

And,  to  beguile  their  weariness,  conversing  of  him  tenderly. 

Quickly  they  caught  the  sound  of  footsteps,  and  I  heard  the  old  man  say, 

With  chiding  voice,  'Why  hast  thou  lingered,  child  ?  Quick  give  us  both  to  drink 

A  little  water.     Long  forgetful  of  us,  in  the  cooling  stream 

Hast  thou  disported  ;  come  in — for  thy  mother  yearneth  for  her  son. 

If  she  or  I  in  ought  have  caused  thee  pain,  or  spoken  hasty  words. 

Think  on  thy  hermit's  duty  of  forgiveness  ;  bear  them  not  in  mind. 

Thou  art  the  refuge  of  us  refugeless — the  eyes  of  thy  blind  sire. 

Why  art  thou  silent  ?    Speak  !    Bound  up  in  thee  are  both  thy  parents'  lives.' 

He  ceased,  and  I  stood  paralyzed — till  by  an  effort  resolutely 


1  I  have  omitted  the  youth's  statement  that  he  is  not  a  Brahman,  but 
begotten  by  a  Vaii^ya  on  a  SMra  woman  (II.  Ixiii.  48,  &c.). 


35°  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Collecting  all  my  powers  of  utterance,  with  faltering  voice  I  said, 

'  Pious  and  noble  hermit ;  I  am  not  thy  son  ;  I  am  the  king  : 

Wandering  with  bow  and  arrow  by  a  stream,  seeking  for  game,  I  pierced 

Unknowingly  thy  child.     The  rest  I  need  not  tell.     Be  gracious  to  me.' 

Hearing  my  pitiless  words,  announcing  his  bereavement,  he  remained 

Senseless  awhile ;  then  drawing  a  deep  sigh,  his  face  all  bathed  in  tears, 

He  spake  to  me  as  I  approached  him  suppliantly,  and  slowly  said, 

'  Hadst  thou  not  come  thyself,  to  tell  the  awful  tale,  its  load  of  guilt 

Had  crushed  thy  head  into  ten  thousand  fragments.     This  ill-fated  deed 

Was  wrought  by  thee  unwittingly,  0  king,  else  hadst  thou  not  been  spared. 

And  all  the  race  of  Baghavas  had  perished.    Lead  us  to  the  place  : 

All  bloody  though  he  be,  and  lifeless,  we  must  look  upon  ^  our  son 

For  the  last  time,  and  clasp,him  in  our  arms.'     Then  weeping  bitterly 

The  pair,  led  by  my  hand,  came  to  the  spot  and  fell  i:pon  their  son. 

Thrilled  by  the  touch,  the  father  cried, '  My  child,  hast  thou  no  greeting  for  us  ? 

No  word  of  recognition  :  wherefore  liest  thou  here  upon  the  ground  ? 

Art  thou  offended  1  or  am  I  no  longer  loved  by  thee,  my  son  ? 

See  here  thy  mother.     Thou  wert  ever  dutiful  towards  us  both. 

Why  wilt  thou  not  embrace  me  ?  speak  one  tender  word.     Whom  shall  I  hear 

Eeading  again  the  sacred  S'astra  in  the  early  morning  hours  ? 

Who  now  will  bring  me  roots  and  fruits  to  feed  me  like  a  cherished  guest  ? 

How,  weak  and  blind,  can  I  support  thy  aged  mother,  pining  for  her  son  1 

Stay  !    Go  not  yet  to  Death's  abode — stay  with  thy  parents  yet  one  day, 

To-morrow  we  will  both  go  with  thee  on  the  dreary  way.     Forlorn 

And  sad,  deserted  by  our  child,  without  protector  in  the  wood. 

Soon  shall  we  both  depart  toward  the  mansions  of  the  King  of  death.' 

Thus  bitterly  lamenting,  he  performed  the  funeral  rites  ;  then  turning 

Towards  me  thus  addressed  me,  standing  reverently  near — '  I  had 

But  this  one  child,  and  thoii  hast  made  me  childless.     Now  strike  down 

The  father  :  I  shall  feel  no  pain  in  death.     But  thy  requital  be 

That  sorrow  for  a  child  shall  one  day  bring  thee  also  to  the  grave.' 

After  narrating  this  affecting  incident  of  his  early  life, 
king  Dasaratha,  struck  with  remorse,  sickens  and  dies.^ 

Soon  afterwards  the  ministers  assemble,  and  decide  that 
Bharata  shall  assume  the  government  (II.  Ixxix.),  but  he 
declines  to  deprive  his  elder  brother  Eama  of  his  rightful 
inheritance,  and  declares  his  intention  of  setting  out  for 

1  This  is  literally  translated.  It  is  well  known  that  blind  people 
commonly  talk  of  themselves  as  if  able  to  see. 

2  His  body  is  burnt  with  much  pomp.  We  have  already  noted,  as  a 
proof  of  the  antiquity  of  the  poem,  that  his  widows  are  not  burnt  with 
him  (see  p.  312). 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   RAMA Y ANA.  3  S  I 

the  forest  with  a  complete  army  {catur-anga)  to  bring 
Eama  back,  and  his  determination  to  undergo  in  his  place 
the  appointed  term  of  fourteen  years'  exile  in  the  forest 
(II.  Ixxix.  8,  9). 

After  some  trouble  he  discovers  Rama's  retreat  at  Citra- 
kuta.-^  There  and  then  he  breaks  the  sad  news  of  his 
father's  death,  and  entreats  him  to  return  to  Ayodhya 
and  assume  the  sovereigntj''  (cii.). 

Next  ensues  a  generous  contest  between  the  brothers ; 
Bharata  imploring  Eama  to  accept  the  throne,  and  Eama 
insisting  on  the  duty  of  fulfilling  his  father's  vow  (cvi., 
cvii.). 

.  Here  occurs  the  episode  ia  which  the  Brahman  Javali, 
who  is  a  sort  of  impersonation  of  scepticism,  tries  in  a 
brief  address  (II.  cviii.)  to  instil  atheistic  and  irreligious 
sentiments  into  Eama,  hoping  to  shake  his  resolution  and 
induce  him  to  accept  the  kingdom.  His  speech,  which  is 
full  of  interest  as  indicating  the  prevalence  of  infidel  and 
materialistic  doctrines  &t  the  time  when  the  brahmanized 
version  of  the  Eamayana  was  completed,  may  be  thus 
abridged : — 

You  oTiglit  not  by  abandoning  your  paternal  kingdom  to  enter  upon 
a  wrong  road,  beset  with,  difficulties  and  troubles.  Permit  yourself  to 
be  enthroned  in  Ayodhya.  Dasaratha  (your  father)  is  dead  and  is  now 
nothing  to  you,  nor  you  to  him.  Any  one  who  feels  attachment  for 
any  other  person  is  insane,  since  no  one  is  anything  to  any  other.     I 

1  The  isolated  hill  Citra-kuta  is  the  holiest  spot  of  the  worshippers 
of  Rama,  and  is  crowded  with  temples  and  shrines  of  Rama  and 
Lakshmana.  Every  cavern  is  connected  with  their  names;  the  heights 
swarm  with  monkeys,  and  some  of  the  wild-fruits  are  still  called  Sita- 
phal.  It  is  situated  on  a  river  called  the  Pisuni,  described  as  the 
Mandakini  (II.  xcv.),  fifty  miles  south-east  of  the  town  of  Bandah  in 
Bundelkund,  lat.  25.  12,  long.  80.  47.  The  river  is  lined  with  ghats 
and  ilights  of  stairs  suitable  for  religious  ablutions.  It  is  worthy  of 
note  that  at  some  holy  places  all  distinctions  of  caste  are  laid  aside  by 
the  Hindus. 


352  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

grieve  for  those  who  swerve  not  from  virtue  and  justice;  such  persons 
suffer  affliction  here,  and  when  they  die  incur  annihilation.  Men  are 
careful  to  offer  oblations  to  their  progenitors,  but  what  can  a  dead  man 
eat  ?  If  an  oblation  eaten  here  by  one  person,  passes  into  the  body  of 
another,  then  let  a  S'raddha  be  offered  to  a  man  who  is  travelling 
abroad ;  he  need  not  eat  upon  his  journey  (cf .  the  doctrine  of  the  Car- 
vakas,  p.  120).  The  books  composed  by  theologians  (in  which  men 
are  enjoined  to)  worship,  give  gifts,  offer  sacrifice,  practise  austerities, 
abandon  the  world,  are  mere  artifices  to  draw  forth  gifts  (ddna-sam- 
vanana).  Make  up  your  mind  (kuru  buddhim)  that  no  one  exists  here- 
after. Have  regard  only  to  what  is  visible  and  perceptible  by  the 
senses  (jpratydksham).  Cast  everything  beyond  this  behind  your  back 
(prishthatah  Icuru).  (See  Dr.  Muir's  article  on  Indian  Materialists, 
Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  xLx.  p.  303.) 

Kama's  reply,  in  which  he  indignantly  rebukes  Javali, 
is  a  noble  vindication  of  religion  and  faith,  but  his  refer- 
ence to  Buddhism  and  his  designation  of  Buddha  himself 
as  a  Cora  or  thief  (II.  cviii.  33)  must  be  regarded  as 
interpolations.^ 

In  the  end  Bharata  desists  from  pressing  his  brother  to 
accept  the  throne,  but  only  consents  to  take  charge  of  the 
kingdom  as  a  deposit.  He  bears  away  Rama's  shoes  on 
his  head  in  token  of  this  (cxiii.  i),  and  takes  up  his  abode 
outside  Ayodhya,  at  Nandi-grama,  until  the  return  of  the 
rightful  king,  never  transacting  any  business  without  first 
laying  it  before  the  shoes  (cxv.).  Before  dismissing  him, 
the  forgiving  Rama  entreats  him  not  to  indulge  angry 
feelings  towards  his  mother  for  having  caused  the  family 
calamities,  in  these  words  : — 

Cherish  thy  mother  Kaikeyi,  show  no  resentment  towards  her  (II. 
cxii.  27). 

After  Bharata's  departure  ten  years  of  Rama's  banish- 
ment pass  in  moving  from  one  hermitage  to  another.     In 

1  Other  allusions  to  rationalistic  doctrines  will  be  found  scattered 
throughout  the  Ramayana. 


IHE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   RAMA Y ANA.  353 

the  description  of  the  quiet  life  of  the  exiles  we  find  that 
their  morning  and  evening  devotions  are  never  omitted, 
and  that  Sita  dutifully  waits  on  her  husband  and  brother- 
in-law,  never  eating  till  they  have  finished.^  When  they 
travel,  Eama  walks  first,  Sita  in  the  middle,  and  Laksh- 
mana  behind  (III.  xv.  i).  At  length  they  move  westward 
to  visit  the  hermitage  of  the  sage  Agastya,  near  the 
Vindhya  mountains.  He  advises  Eama  to  live  for  the 
remainder  of  his  exile  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Janasthana 
at  Pancavati  on  the  Godavari^  (xix.).  This  district  is 
infested^  by  Eakshasas,  and,  amongst  others,  by  Eavana's 
sister,  Stirpa-nakha,  who  becomes  smitten  with  love  for 
Eama.  He  of  course  repels  her,  telling  her  that  he  is 
already  married  (xxiv.  i)  ;  but  this  only  rouses  the 
jealousy  of  Surpa-nakha,  who  makes  an  attack  on  Sita, 
and  so  infuriates  the  fiery  Lakshmana  that  he  thought- 
lessly cuts  ofi"  her  ears  and  nose^  (xxiv.  22).  Stirpa- 
nakha,  smarting  with  pain  and  bent  qn  revenge,  repairs 
to  her  brother  Eavana,  the  demon-monarch  of  Ceylon. 

The  description  of  Eavana  (HI.  xxxvi. ;  Bombay  ed. 
xxxii.)  is  as  follows: — 

This  mighty  demon  had  ten  faces,  twenty  arms,  copper-coloured  eyes, 
a  huge  chest,  and  bright  teeth  like  the  young  moon.  His  form  was  as 
a  thick  cloud,  or  a  mountain,  or  the  god  of  death  with  open  mouth. 
He  had  all  the  marks  of  royalty ;  but  his  body  bore  the  impress  of 
wounds  inflicted  by  all  the  divine  arms  in  his  warfare  with  the  gods. 
It  was  scarred  by  the  thunderbolt  of  Indra,  by  the  tusks  of  (Indra's) 
elephant  Airavata,  and  by  the  discus  of  Vishnu.  His  strength  was  so 
great  that  he  could  agitate  the  seas  and  split  the  tops  of  mountains. 
He  was  a  breaker  of  all  laws,  and  a  ravisher  of  other  men's  wives. 
He  once  penetrated  into  Bhogavati    (the  serpent -capital  of  Patala), 

1  This  custom  remains  unaltered  to  the  present  day.  Compare  Manu 
IV.  43  :  '  Let  him  not  eat  with  his  wife,  nor  look  at  her  eating. ' 

^  A  spot  now  known  as  Nasik,  in  the  Bombay  Presidency. 

*  It  was  from  this  circumstance  that  Pahdavati  is  now  called  Nasik 
{ndsikd,  '  the  nose '). 

Z 


3  54  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

conquered  the  great  serpent  Vasuki,  and  carried  off  the  beloved  wife  of 
Takshaka.  He  defeated  Vaisravana  {i.e.,  his  own  brother  Kuvera,  the 
god  of  wealth),  and  carried  off  his  self-moving  chariot  called  Pushpaka. 
He  devastated  the  divine  groves  of  Citra-ratha,  and  the  gardens  of  the 
gods.  Tall  as  a  mountain  peak,  he  stopped  with  bis  arms  the  sun  and 
moon  in  their  course,  and  prevented  their  rising.  The  sun,  when  it 
passed  over  his  residence,  drew  in  its  beams  in  terror.  He  underwent 
severe  austerities  in  the  forest  of  Gokarna  for  ten  thousand  years, 
standing  in  the  midst  of  five  fires  (see  p.  95)  with  his  feet  in  the  air ; 
whence  he  was  released  by  Brahma,  and  obtained  from  him  (among 
other  boons,  see  p.  343)  the  power  of  taking  what  shape  he  pleased.^ 

The  better  to  secure  the  mighty  Ravana's  co-operation, 
Stirpa-nakha  succeeds  in  inspiring  him  with  a  passion  for 
Sita  (III.  xxxviii.  17),  whom  he  determines  to  carry  off. 
Having  with  difficulty  secured  the  aid  of  another  demon, 
Marica — who  was  the  son  of  the  Tadaka  (I.  zxvii.  8) 
formerly  killed  by  Rama — Ravana  transports  himself  and 
his  accomplice  in  the  aerial  car  Pushpaka  to  the  forest 
near  Rama's  dwelling.  Marica  then  assumes  the  form  of 
a  beautiful  golden  deer,  which  so  captivates  Sita  (III. 
xlviii.  1 1 )  that  Rama  is  induced  to  leave  her  with  Laksh- 
mana,  that  he  may  catch  the  deer  for  her,  or  kill  it. 
Mortally  wounded  by  his  arrow,  the  deer  utters  cries  for 
help,  feigning  Rama's  voice,  which  so  alarms  Sita  that 

1  One  cannot  help  comparing  part  of  this  description  with  Milton's 
portrait  of  Satan.  The  majestic  imagery  of  the  English  poet  stands 
out  in  striking  contrast  to  the  wild  hyperbole  of  Valmiki.  It  appears 
from  III.  liii  (Gorresio)  that  Havana  was  the  son  of  Vi^ravas,  who  was 
the  son  of  the  sage  Pulastya,  who  was  the  son  of  Brahma.  Hence 
Ravana  was  the  brother  of  the  god  Kuvera  (though  by  a  different 
mother),  and  in  verse  30  he  calls  himself  his  brother  and  enemy.  Both 
he  and  Kuvera  are  sometimes  called  Paulastya.  Vibhishana  and 
Kumbha-karna  were  also  brothers  of  Havana,  and,  like  him,  propitiated 
Brahma  by  their  penances,  and,  like  him,  obtained  boons,  but  the  boon 
chosen  by  Yibhishana  was  that  he  should  never  swerve  from  virtue, 
and  by  Kumbha-karna  (whose  size  was  gigantic  and  appetite  voracious) 
that  he  should  enjoy  deep  sleep  for  long  periods  of  time.  (See  Maha- 
bharata  III.  15916.) 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   RAMAYANA.  355 

she  persuades  Lakshmana  against  his  will  to  leave  her 
alone  and  go  to  the  assistance  of  his  brother.  Meanwhile 
Eavana  approaches  in  the  guise  of  a  religious  mendicant. 
All  nature  seems  petrified  with  terror  as  he  advances  (III. 
lii.  10,  11);  and  when  Sita's  eyes  fall  on  the  stranger, 
she  starts,  but  is  lulled  to  confidence  by  his  mendi- 
cant's dress,  and  offers  him  food  and  water.  Sud- 
denly Eavana  declares  himself.  Then  throwing  off  his 
disguise  he  avows  his  intention  to  make  her  his  queen. 
Sita's  indignation  bursts  forth,  but  her  wrath  is  powerless 
against  the  fierce  Eavana,  who  takes  her  up  in  his  arms, 
places  her  in  his  self-moving  car,  and  bears  her  through 
the  sky  to  his  capital.  As  Sita  is  carried  along,  she  in- 
vokes heaven  and  earth,  mountains  and  streams  (Iv.  43). 
The  gods  and  saints  come  to  look  on,  and  are  struck  with 
horror,  but  they  stand  in  awe  of  the  ravisher,  and  know 
that  this  is  part  of  the  plan  for  his  destruction.  All 
nature  shudders,  the  sun's  disc  pales,  darkness  over- 
spreads the  heavens  (Iviii.  16-43).  I^  is  the  short-lived 
triumph  of  evil  over  good.  Even  the  great  Creator 
Brahma  rouses  himself,  and  exclaims,  '  Sin  is  consum- 
mated' (III.  Iviii.  17). 

Arrived  in  the  demon-city,  Eavana  forces  Sita  to  inspect 
all  the  wonders  and  beauties  of  his  capital  (III.  Ixi.),  and 
then  promises  to  make  them  hers,  if  she  will  consent  to 
become  his  queen.  Indignantly  rejected,  he  is  enraged, 
and  delivers  her  over  to  the  guardianship  of  a  troop  of 
Eakshasis  or  female  furies,  who  are  described  as  horrible 
in  appearance,  and  cannibal  in  their  propensities  (III.  Ixii. 
29-38).  Tormented  by  them,  she  seems  likely  to  die  of 
despair,  but  Brahma  in  compassion  sends  Lidra  to  her 
with  the  god  of  sleep,^  and  a  vessel  containing  celestial 
food  (Ixiii.  7,  8)  to  support  her  strength. 

1  Similarly  in  the  Odyssey  (IV.   795)  Minerva  sends  a  dream  to 
console  and  animate  Penelope. 


3S6  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Terrible  is  the  wrath  of  the  usually  gentle  Eama  when 
on  his  return  he  finds  that  Sita  is  carried  off  by  Eavana 
(Ixix.).  He  and  Lakshmana  at  once  set  off  on  a  long 
search,  determined  to  effect  her  rescue.  After  many  ad- 
ventures, in  the  course  of  which  they  have  a  battle  with 
a  headless  fiend  called  Kabandha,  who  opposes  their  pro- 
gress, but  is  killed,  and  then  restored  to  life  by  them  (III. 
Ixxiv.),  they  make  an  alliance  with  Sugriva,  king  of  the 
monkeys  (foresters),  and  assisted  by  Hanumat,  one  of  the 
monkey-generals,  and  by  Eavana's  brother  Vibhishana,  in- 
vade'Lan-ka,  the  capital  of  Eavana,  in  Ceylon  (IV.  Ixiii.). 

To  transport  the  army  across  the  channel,  a  bridge  is 
constructed  under  the  direction  of  the  monkey-general 
Nala,  son  of  Visva-karman  : — 

Thousands  of  monkey  bridge-builders,  flying  through  the  sky  in 
every  direction,  tear  up  rocks  and  trees,  and  throw  them  into  the 
water.  In  bringing  huge  crags  from  the  Himalayas,  some  are  acci- 
dentally dropped,  and  remain  to  this  day  monuments  of  the  exploit. 
At  length  a  pier  ^  is  formed  twenty  Yojanas  long  and  ten  wide  (V. 
xcv.  11-15),  by  which  the  whole  army  crosses,  Vibhishana  taking  the 
lead.  The  gods,  IJishis,  Pitris,  &c.,  look  on,  and  utter  the  celebrated 
prophecy — 

'  As  long  as  the  sea  shall  remain,  so  long  shall  this  pier  (setu)  endure, 
and  the  fame  of  Rama  he  proclaimed.'  ^ 

1  The  god  of  the  ocean  at  first  objected  to  a  regular  embankment 
(V.  xciv.  8),  though  a  pier  (described  as  a  setu)  was  afterwards  con- 
structed :  the  line  of  rocks  in  the  channel  is  certainly  known  in  India 
as  Rama-setu.  In  maps  it  is  called  'Adam's  bridge.'  Everywhere  in 
India  are  scattered  isolated  blocks,  attributed  by  the  natives  to  llama's 
bridge-builders.  More  than  this,  the  hill  Govardhana,  near  Muttra, 
and  the  whole  Kymar  range  in  Central  India  are  firmly  believed  to 
have  arisen  from  the  same  cause. 

2  '  In  the  midst  of  the  arm  of  the  sea  is  the  island  Ramesurum 
(Rame^vara),  or  the  pillar  of  Rama,  of  as  great  repute  and  renown  as 
the  pillars  of  the  western  Hercules.  There  to  this  day  stands  a  temple 
of  massive  Cyclopean  workmanship,  said  to  have  been  built  by  the 
hero,  the  idol  of  which  is  washed  daily  with  water  from  the  Ganges. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   RAMAYANA.  357 

After  various  engagements,  described  with  much  weari- 
some exaggeration,  the  great  battle  between  Eama  and 
Eavana  takes  place  : — 

The  gods  assemble  to  take  the  side  of  the  former,  and  all  the  demons 
and  evil  spirits  back  their  own  champion  (VI.  Ixxxvii.  8).  Eavana  is 
mounted  on  a  magic  car,  drawn  by  horses  having  human  faces  (manu- 
shyavadanair  hayaih) ;  and,  in  order  that  the  two  champions  may  fight 
on  an  equality,  Indra  sends  his  own  car,  driven  by  his  charioteer 
Matali,  for  the  use  of  Rama.  Both  armies  cease  fighting,  that  they 
may  look  on  (xci.  2) ;  but  the  gods  and  demons  in  the  sky,  taking  the 
part  of  either  warrior,  renew  their  ancient  strife.^  The  heroes  now 
overwhelm  each  other  with  arrows.  Eama  cuts  off  a  hundred  heads 
from  Eavana  successively ;  but  no  sooner  is  one  cut  off  than  another 
appears  in  its  place  ^  (xcii.  24),  and  the  battle,  which  has  already  lasted 
seven  days  and  seven  nights  without  interruption,  seems  likely  to  be 
endlessly  protracted,  until  Matali  informs  Eama  that  Eavana  is  not 
vulnerable  in  the  head.  Thereupon  Eama  shoots  off  the  terrible  arrow 
of  Brahma,^  given  to  him  by  the  sage  Agastya,  and  the  demon-king 
falls  dead  (xcii.  58). 

From  the  highest  point  is  a  commanding  view  of  the  ocean,  and  the 
interminable  black  line  of  rocks  stretching  across  the  gulf  of  Manaar. 
Thither,  from  all  parts  of  India,  wander  the  pilgrims,  who  are  smitten 
with  the  wondrous  love  of  travel  to  sacred  shrines.  From  Ohuteer- 
kote  iCitrOrTcuta),  near  the  Jumna,  it  is  roughly  calculated  to  be  one 
hundred  stages.  We  have  conversed  with  some  who  have  accomplished 
the  great  feat :  but  many  never  return ;  they  either  die  by  the  way, 
or  their  cpurage  and  strength  evaporate  in  some  roadside  hermitage. 
Whatever  may  be  its  origin,  there  is  the  reefy  barrier,  compelling  every 
vessel  from  or  to  the  mouths  of  the  Ganges,  to  circumnavigate  the 
island  of  Ceylon.'     Calcutta  Eeview,  XLV. 

1  This  is  just  what  takes  place  in  the  Iliad  before  the  great  battle 
between  Achilles  and  Hector,  the  gods  taking  their  respective  places 
on  either  side  (II.  XX.).  It  is  interesting  to  compare  the  simple 
Homeric  narrative  with  the  wild  improbabilities  of  the  Indian  poem. 

2  This  reminds  one  of  Hercules  and  the  Hydra. 

3  Here  called  jpaiidmaham  astram,  and  described  as  having  the  wind 
for  its  feathers,  the  fire  and  the  sun  for  its  point,  the  air  for  its  body, 
and  the  mountains  Meru  and  Mandara  for  its  weight  (YI.  xcii.  45). 
It  had  the  very  convenient  property  of  returning  to  its  owner's  quiver 


3S8  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Great  portents  and  prodigies  precede  the  fall  of  Eavana, 

and  when  the  victory  is  consummated  a  perfect  deluge  of 

flowers  covers  the  conqueror.     The  generous  Eama  causes 

magnificent  obsequies  to  be  performed  over  the  body  of 

his  enemy,  which  is  duly  consumed  by  fire/  and  then 

places  Vibhishana  on  the  throne  of  Lan-ka  (VI.  xcvii.  15). 

Eama  then  sends  Hanumat  with  a  message  to  Sita,  and 

Vibhishana  brings  her  into  his  presence  in  a  litter  (sivika); 

but  Eama  allows  her  to  come  before  him  on  foot,  that 

she  may  be  seen  by  all  the  army. 
• 
The  monkeys  crowd  round  her,  admiring  her  incomparable  beauty, 
the  cause  of  so  much  toil,  danger,  and  suffering  to  themselves.^  On 
seeing  her,  Rama  is  deeply  moved.  Three  feelings  distract  him — joy, 
grief,  and  anger  (xcix.  19) — and  he  does  not  address  his  wife.  Sita, 
conscious  of  her  purity,  is  hurt  by  his  cold  reception  of  her,  and  bursts 
into  tears,  uttering  only  the  words,  hd  dryaputra,  '  alas  !  my  husband  ! ' 
Eama  then  haughtily  informs  her,  that  having  satisfied  his  honour  by 
the  destruction  of  the  demon  who  had  wronged  his  wife,  he  can  do  no 
more.  He  cannot  take  her  back,  contaminated  as  she  must  certainly 
be  (VI.  c).  Sita  asserts  her  innocence  in  the  most  dignified  and  touch- 
ing language,  and  directs  Lakshmana  to  prepare  a  pyre,  that  she  may 
prove  her  purity.  She  enters  the  flames,  invoking  Agni  (ci.) ;  upon 
which  all  the  gods  with  the  old  king  Dasaratha  appear,  and  reveal  to 
Rama  his  divine  nature,^  telling  him  that  he  is  Narayaiia,  and  that 
Sita  is  Lakshmi  (cii.).  Agni,  the  god  of  tire,  then  presents  himself, 
holding  Sita,  whom  he  places  in  Rama's  arms  unhurt.*     Thereupon 

after  doing  its  work.     There  appear  to  have  been  various  forms  of  this 
unerring  weapon. 

1  Contrast  this  with  Achilles'  treatment  of  the  fallen  Hector. 

2  The  whole  scene  is  very  similar  to  that  in  Hiad  III.  121,  &c., 
where  Helen  shows  herself  on  the  rampart,  and  calls  forth  much  the 
same  kind  of  admiration. 

3  He  never  appears  to  be  conscious  of  it,  until  the  gods  enlighten 
him.  (See  VI.  cii.  10,  cxix.)  This  is  not  the  case  with  Krishna  in 
the  Maha-bharata.  It  is  probable,  as  we  have  seen,  that  all  these 
passages  are  later  additions. 

*  The  whole  description  of  Sita's  repudiation  by  Rama  is  certainly 
one  of  the  finest  scenes  in  the  Ramayana. 


XHE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   RAMA Y ANA.  359 

Kama  is  overjoyed,  and  declares  that  he  only  consented  to  the  ordeal 
that  he  might  establish  his  wife's  innocence  in  the  eyes  of  the  world 
(ciii.).  Dasaratha  then  blesses  his  son,  gives  him  good  advice,  and 
returns  to  heaven  (civ.) ;  while  Indra,  at  the  request  of  Eama,  restores 
to  life  all  the  monkeys  killed  during  the  war  (cv.). 

Eama  and  Lakshmana,  along  with  Vibhishana,  Sugriva, 
and  the  allies,  now  mount  the  self-moving  car  Pushpaka, 
which  is  described  as  containing  a  whole  palace  within 
itself,  and  set  out  on  their  return  to  Ayodhya ;  Eama,  to 
beguile  the  way  as  they  travel  through  the  sky,  recount- 
ing to  Sita  all  the  scenes  of  their  late  adventures  .lying 
beneath  their  feet-'  (cviii.).  On  their  reaching  the  hermi- 
tage of  Bharadvaja  at  Prayaga,  the  car  is  stopped  ;  and 
the  fourteen  years  of  banishment  having  now  expired  (cix.), 
Hanumat  is  sent  forward  to  announce  their  return  to 
Bharata.  Eama  and  the  three  brothers  are  now  once 
more  reunited,  and,  accompanied  by  them  and  by  Sita 
and  the  monkeys,  who  assume  human  forms  (cxii.  28),  he 
makes  a  magnificent  entry  into  Ayodhya.  He  is  then 
solemnly  crowned,  associates  Lakshmana  in  the  empire, 
and,  before  dismissing  his  allies,  bestows  on  them  splendid 
presents  (cxii.).  Hanumat,  at  his  own  request,  receives  as 
a  reward  the  gift  of  perpetual  life  and  youth  (cxii.  loi). 
Every  one  returns  happy  and  loaded  with  gifts  to  his 
own  home,  and  Eama  commences  a  glorious  reign  at 
Ayodhya  (cxiii.). 

Such  is  a  brief  sketch  of  the  Eamayana,  omitting  the 
Uttara-kanda  or  supplementary  chapters,  which  contain 
the  concluding  events  in  the  life  of  Eama  (see  p.  S2)7)- 

^  Ealidasa  devotes  nearly  the  whole  of  the  thirteenth  chapter  of  his 
Eaghu-vansa  to  this  subject,  which  he  makes  a  convenient  pretext  for 
displaying  his  geographical  and  topographical  knowledge,  as  in  the 
Megha-dtita.  Bhava-bhuti  does  the  same  in  the  seventh  act  of  his 
drama,  Maha-vira-daritra ;  and  Murari,  the  same  in  his  play  on  the 
same  subject. 


36o  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Much  of  the  story,  exaggerated  as  its  later  details  are, 
probably  rests,  as  we  have  already  pointed  out,  on  a 
foundation  of  historical  truth. 

It  is  clear,  too,  that  a  moral  lesson  is  intended  to  be 
conveyed  by  the  whole  narrative.  Under  the  story  of  the 
conflict  between  the  armies  of  the  noble  Eama  and  the 
barbarous  races  of  the  South,  figured  by  the  Eakshasas, 
there  appears  to  lie  a  typical  representation  of  the  great 
mystery  of  the  struggle  ever  going  on  between  the  powers 
of  good  and  evil.  With  regard,  however,  to  any  other 
allegorical  and  figurative  ideas  involved,  as,  for  example, 
that  Rama  is  a  mere  impersonation  of  the  Solar  energy ;  ^ 
Sita,  of  agriculture  or  of  civilization  introduced  into  the 
South  of  India  by  immigrants  from  the  North ;  the  Eak- 
shasas, of  night,  darkness  or  winter — whatever  ingenuity 
there  may  be  in  any  or  all  of  these  theories,  it  seems 
very  questionable  whether  any  such  conceptions  ever 
entered  into  the  mind  of  the  author  or  authors  of  any 
part  of  the  poem. 

1  Certainly  Rama  belongs  to  the  Solar  race  of  kings,  but  this  points 
to  the  connection  of  the  Epic  Vishnu  (of  whom  Rama  came  to  be 
regarded  as  an  incarnation)  with  the  Solar  Vishnu  of  the  Veda. ,  Pro- 
fessor Weber  remarks  that  as  Rama  is  at  a  later  period  called  Rama- 
dandra,  and  is  even  in  one  place  called  Oandra  alone,  the  mildness  so 
conspicuous  in  his  character  might  be  explained  by  supposing  that  he 
was  originally  a  kind  of  moon-genius,  and  that  the  legend  in  the  Tait- 
tiriya-brahmana  (see  note  i,  p.  346)  representing  the  love  of  Sita  (the 
field-furrow)  for  the  Moon  might  be  regarded  by  some  zealous  mytho- 
logists  as  the  first  germ  of  the  story  of  the  Ramayana ;  the  beautifying 
ointment  (anga-rdga)  which  Anasuya,  wife  of  Atri,  poured  over  the 
limbs  of  Sita  (III.  2),  representing  the  dew  spread  over  the  furrow  in 
which  the  moonlight  is  reflected.  Weber,  however,  thinks  that  as  the 
name  Rama-dandra  was  not  given  to  the  second  Rama  till  a  late  date 
(the  first  application  of  it  occurring  in  Bhava-bhiiti's  Maha-vira-6aritra 
III.  18),  the  converse  is  rather  true,  viz.,  that  a  poetical  spirit  among 
the  Brahmans  connected  Rama  with  the  Moon  merely  on  account  of  the 
mildness  of  his  character. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   RAMA Y ANA.  36 1 

Time  would  fail,  if  we  were  to  attempt  even  the  briefest 
epitome  of  all  the  episodes  in  the  Eamayana.  I  note  two 
others  in  addition  to  those  already  given.  That  of  Visva- 
mitra  (I.  5 1-65),  which  is  one  of  the  most  interesting,  may 
be  thus  abridged  :  ^ — 

Visvamitra,  son  of  Gadhi,  was  a  prince  of  the  Lunar  race,  sovereign 
of  Kanoj,  and  the  district  of  Magadha.  He  had  a  tremendous  conflict 
with  the  Brahman  Vasishtha  for  the  possession  of  the  cow  of  plenty 
(Kamadhenu,  also  called  S'avala),  which  no  doubt  typified  the  earth  (go) 
or  India.  At  the  command  of  Vasishtha,  the  cow  created  hordes  of 
barbarians,  such  as  Pahlavas  (Persians),  S'akas  (Scythians),  Yavanas 
(Greeks),  Kambojas,  &c.,  by  whose  aid  Vasishtha  conquered  Visvamitra. 
Hence  the  latter,  convinced  of  the  superior  power  inherent  in  Brah- 
manism,  determined  to  raise  himself  to  that  dignity,  and  in  order  to 
effect  this  object,  .increased  the  rigour  of  his  austerities  for  thousands 
of  years.  The  gods,  who  always  had  a  hard  struggle  to  hold  their  own 
against  resolute  ascetics,  did  what  they  could  to  interrupt  him,  and 
partially  succeeded.  Visvamitra  yielded  for  a  time  to  the  seductions  of 
the  nymph  Menaka,  sent  by  them  to  entice  his  thoughts  towards  sensual 
objects.  A  daughter  (S'akuntala)  was  the  result  of  this  temporary  back- 
sliding. However,  in  the  end,  the  obstinate  ascetic  was  too  much  for  the 
whole  troop  of  deities.  He  obtained  complete  power  over  his  passions, 
and  when  the  gods  still  refused  to  brahmanize  him,  he  began  creating 
new  heavens  and  new  gods,  and  had  already  manufactured  a  few  stars, 
when  the  celestial  host  thought  it  prudent  to  concede  the  point,  and 
make  him  a  veritable  Brahman. 

Another  curious  episode  is  the  story  of  the  Ganges 
(1.36-44):^- 

Gan-ga,  the  personified  Ganges,  was  the  eldest  daughter  of  Himavat, 
lord  of  mountains,  her  younger  sister  being  Uma.  Sagara,  a  king  of 
Ayodhya,  of  the  Solar  race,  had  60,000  sons,  who  were  directed  by  their 
father  to  look  for  a  horse  which  had  been  stolen  by  Eakshasa  at  an 
A^va-medha  or  horse-sacrifice.  Having  first  searched  the  earth  unsuc- 
cessfully, they  proceeded  to  dig  up  the  ground  towards  the  lower  regions. 

^  The  episode  of  Visvamitra  includes  under  it  the  story  of  Ambarisha 
given  at  p.  27  of  this  volume. 

2  The  story  is  also  told  in  the  Maha-bharata,  Vana-parvan  9920,  &c. 


3^2  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Meeting  -with  the  sage  Kapila,  they  accused  him  of  the  theft,  which 
enraged  him  to  such  a  degree,  that  without  more  ado  he  reduced  them 
all  to  ashes.  Sagara's  grandson  some  time  afterwards  found  their 
remains,  and  commenced  performing  the  funeral  obsequies  of  his  rela- 
tives, but  was  told  that  it  was  necessary  for  Gan-ga  to  water  the  ashes 
with  her  sacred  stream.  Neither  Sagara,  however,  nor  his  grandson 
could  devise  any  means  for  effecting  the  descent  of  the  heavenly  river 
It  was  reserved  for  his  great-grandson,  Bhagiratha,  by  his  austerities 
to  bring  down  the  sacred  stream  from  heaven.  In  her  descent  she 
fell  first  with  great  fury  on  the  head  of  S'iva,  who  undertook  to  break 
her  fall. 

Mr.  Ralph  Griffith  has  translated  the  description  of  this  descent 
with  great  skill  and  taste.  I  subjoin  a  portion  of  his  version  (vol.  i. 
p.  194)  :— 

On  S'iva's  head  descending  first 

A  rest  the  torrents  found, 
Then  down  in  all  their  might  they  burst 

And  roared  along  the  ground. 
On  countless  glittering  scales  the  beam 

Of  rosy  morning  flashed. 
Where  fish  and  dolphins  through  the  stream 

Fallen  and  falling  dashed. 
Then  bards  who  chant  celestial  lays, 

And  nymphs  of  heavenly  birth. 
Flocked  round  upon  that  flood  to  gaze 

That  streamed  from  sky  to  earth. 
The  gods  themselves  from  every  sphere, 

Incomparably  bright, 
Borne  in  their  golden  cars  drew  near 

To  see  the  wondrous  sight. 
The  cloudless  sky  was  all  aflame 

"With  the  light  of  a  hundred  suns. 
Where'er  the  shining  chariots  came 

That  bore  those  holy  ones. 
So  flashed  the  air  with  crested  snakes 

And  fish  of  every  hue, 
As  when  the  lightning's  glory  breaks 

Through  fields  of  summer  blue. 
And  white  foam-clouds  and  silver  spray 

Were  wildly  tossed  on  high. 
Like  swans  that  urge  their  homeward  way 
Across  the  autumn  sky. 


THE  EPIC  POEMS — THE  RAM  AY  ANA.        363 

Then,  by  further  austerities,  Bhagiratha  forced  the  sacred  river  to 
flow  over  the  earth,  and  to  follow  him  thence  to  the  ocean  (therefore 
called  Sagara),  and  thence  to  the  lower  regions  (Patala),  where  she 
watered  the  ashes  of  Sagara's  sons,  and  became  the  means  of  con- 
veying their  souls  to  heaven.  Hence  a  common  name  for  the  Ganges 
is  Bhagirathi. 

Another  name  for  the  river  Ganges  is  Jahnavi,  because 
in  its  course  it  inundated  the  sacrificial  ground  of  the 
sage  Jahnu,  who  thereupon  without  any  ceremony  drank 
up  its  waters,  but  consented  to  discharge  them  again 
from  his  ears. 

Notwithstanding  the  wilderness  of  exaggeration  and 
hyperbole  through  which  the  reader  of  the  Indian  Epics 
has  occasionally  to  wander,  there  are  in  the  whole  range 
of  the  world's  literature  few  more  charming  poems  than 
the  Ramayana.  The  classical  purity,  clearness,  and  sim- 
plicity of  its  style,  the  exquisite  touches  of  true  poetic 
feeling  with  which  it  abounds,  its  graphic  descriptions  of 
heroic  incidents  and  nature's  grandest  scenes,  the  deep 
acquaintance  it  displays  with  the  conflicting  workings 
and  most  refined  emotions  of  the  human  heart,  all  entitle 
it  to  rank  among  the  most  beautiful  compositions  that 
have  appeared  at  any  period  or  in  any  country.  It  is  like 
a  spacious  and  delightful  garden ;  here  and  there  allowed 
to  run  wild,  but  teeming  with  fruits  and  flowers,  watered 
by  perennial  streams,  and  even  its  most  tangled  thickets 
intersected  with  delightful  pathways.  The  character  of 
Eama  is  nobly  pourtrayed.  It  is  only  too  consistently 
unselfish  to  be  human.  We  must,  in  fact,  bear  in  mind 
that  the  poet  is  bent  on  raising  his  hero  to  the  rank  of  a 
god.  Yet  though  occasionally  dazzled  by  flashes  from 
his  superhuman  nature,  we  are  not  often  blinded  or 
bewildered  by  it.  At  least  in  the  earlier  portion  of  the 
poem  he  is  not  generally  represented  as  more  than  a 
heroic,  noble-minded,  pious,  and  virtuous  man — a  model 


364  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

son,  husband,  brother — whose  bravery,  unselfish  gene- 
rosity, filial  obedience,  tender  attachment  to  his  wife, 
fraternal  afi'ection,  and  freedom  from  all  resentful  feelings, 
we  cannot  help  admiring.  When  he  falls  a  victim  to  the 
spite  of  his  father's  second  wife,  he  cherishes  no  sense  of 
wrong.  When  the  sentence  of  banishment  is  pronounced, 
not  a  murmur  escapes  his  lips.  In  noble  language  he 
expresses  his  resolution  to -sacrifice  himself  rather  than 
allow  his  parent  to  break  his  pledged  word ;  and  he  per- 
sists in  this  determination,  notwithstanding  the  entreaties 
of  his  mother  Kausalya,  the  taunting  remarks  of  his  fiery 
brother  Lakshmana,  and  Lis  own  anxious  fear  for  the 
safety  of  his  wife  Sita,  who  resolves  to  accompany  him. 
Again,  after  the  death  of  his  father,  when  Bharata  urges 
Rama  to  accept  the  government,  and  when  all  the  citizens 
add  their  entreaties,  and  the  atheistical  Javali  his  sophis- 
tical arguments  (see  p.  351),  Eama  replies  : — 

There  is  nothing  greater  than  truth  ;  and  truth  should  be  esteemed 
the  most  sacred  of  all  things.  The  Vedas  have  their  sole  foundation 
in  truth.  Having  promised  obedience  to  my  father's  commands,  I  will 
neither,  through  covetousness  nor  forgetfulness  nor  blind  ignorance, 
break  down  the  barrier  of  truth  (II.  cix.  17). 

As  to  Sita,  she  is  a  paragon  of  wife-like  virtues.  Her 
pleadings  for  permission  to  accompany  her  husband  into 
banishment  breathe  such  noble  devotion  to  her  lord  and 
master,  that  I  close  my  examples  with  a  few  extracts  :  ^ — 

A  wife  must  share  her  husband's  fate.     My  duty  is  to  follow  thee 
Where'er  thou  goest.    Apart  from  thee,  I  would  not  dwell  in  heaven  itself. 
Deserted  by  her  lord,  a  wife  is  like  a  miserable  corpse. 
Close  as  thy  shadow  would  I  cleave  to  thee  in  this  life  and  hereafter. 
Thou  art  my  king,  my  guide,  my  only  refuge,  my  divinity. 

1  I  have  translated  these  nearly  literally,  but  not  consecutively,  in 
the  sixteen-syllable  metre  of  the  original.  The  substance  of  them  will 
be  found  in  the  text  of  Gorresio's  Eamayana,  vol.  ii.  p.  74,  &c. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   RAMAYANA.  365 

It  is  my  fixed  resolve  to  follow  thee.     If  thou  must  wander  forth 
Through  thorny  trackless  forests,  I  will  go  before  thee,  treading  down 
The  prickly  brambles  to  make  smooth  thy  path.     Walking  before  thee,  I 
Shall  feel  no  weariness  :  the  forest-thorns  will  seem  like  silken  robes ; 
The  bed  of  leaves,  a  couch  of.  down.     To  me  the  shelter  of  thy  presence 
Is  better  far  than  stately  palaces,  and  paradise  itself. 
Protected  by  thy  arm,  gods,  demons,  men  shall  have  no  power  to  harm  me. 
With  thee  I'll  live  contentedly  on  roots  and  fruits.     Sweet  or  not  sweet. 
If  given  by  thy  hand,  they  will  to  me,  be  like  the  food  of  life. 
Roaming  with  thee  in  desert  wastes,  a  thousand  years  will  be  a  da,y ; 
Dwelling  with  thee,  e'en  hell  itself  would  be  to  me  a  heaven  of  bliss. 

As  if  in  support  of  the  prophecy  recorded  in  the  begin- 
ning of  the  work  (see  p.  338)  the  story  of  Rama  down 
to  the  death  of  Havana  and  recovery  of  Sita,  is  still 
regularly  recited  every  year  throughout  a  great  part  of 
India,  at  an  annual  festival  in  the  beginning  of  October, 
called  Eama-lila.^  Moreover,  Hindu  writers  never  seem 
tired  of  working  up  the  oft-repeated  tale  into  various 
forms.  Hence  the  history  of  the  adventures  of  Eama, 
or  at  least  some  reference  to  them,  is  found  in  almost 
every  work  of  the  subsequent  literature.  I  conclude 
this  chapter  with  instances  : — 

1  On  the  day  in  the  month  Asvin  or  beginning  of  October,  when 
the  Bengalis  consign  their  images  of  Durga  to  the  waters  {i.e.,  at  the 
Durgapiija,  of  which  the  fourth  day  is  called  Dasahara,  and  during 
which  for  a  whole  fortnight  all  business  is  suspended,  and  even  thieves 
and  rogues  allow  themselves  a  vacation),  Hindiis  of  other  provinces 
perform  the  Rama-lila,  a  dramatic  representation  of  the  carrying  off 
of  Sita,  concluding  with  the  death  of  Havana,  of  which  that  day  is 
the  anniversary.  llama's  birth  is  celebrated  on  the  9th  of  the  month 
Caitra  (April),  called  Rama-navami.  The  sequel  of  the  story  of  Rama, 
as  contained  in  the  TJttara-kanda  and  TJttara-rama-darita,  is  not  so 
popularly  known.  See  an  article  in  the  '  Indian  Antiquary '  for  May 
1872,  by  the  Rev.  K.  M.  Banerjea.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  Rama 
legends  have  always  retained  their  purity,  and,  unlike  those  of  Brahma, 
Krishna,  S'iva,  and  Durga,  have  never  been  mixed  up  with  indecencies 
and  licentiousness.  In  fact,  the  worship  of  Rama  has  never  degene- 
rated to  the  same  extent  as  that  of  some  of  these  other  deities. 


366  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

In  the  Maha-bharata  (Vana-parvan  15872-16601)  the  Eamopakhyana 
is  told  very  nearly  as  in  the  Eamayana,  but  there  is  no  mention  of 
Valmiki  as  its  author,  and  no  allusion  to  the  existence  of  the  great 
sister  Epic.     Markandeya  is  made  to  recount  the  narrative  to  Yudhi- 
shthira,  after  the  recovery  of  Draupadi  (who  had  been  carried  off  by 
Jayad-ratha,  as  Sita  was  by  Eavana),  in  order  to  show  that  there  were 
other  examples  in  ancient  times  of  virtuous  people  suffering  violence 
at  the  hands  of  wicked  men.      It  is  probable  (and  even  Professor 
Weber  admits  it  to  be  possible)  that  the  Maha-bharata  episode  was 
epitomized  from  the  Eamayana,  and  altered  here  and  there  to  give  it 
an  appearance  of  originality.     There  are,  however,  remarkable  differ- 
ences.     The  story  in  the  Maha-bharata,  although  generally  treating 
Rama  as  a  great  human  hero  only,  begins  with  the  circumstances 
which  led  to  the  incarnation  of  Vishnu,  and  gives  a  detailed  account 
of  what  is  first  mentioned  in  the  Uttara-kanda  of  the  Eamayana — - 
the  early  history  of  Eavana  and  his  brother.     The  birth  of  Eama,  his 
youth,  and  his  father's  wish  to  inaugurate  him  as  heir-apparent  are 
then  briefly  recounted.      Dasaratha's  sacrifice,  Eama's  education,  his 
winning  of  Sita,  and  other  contents  of  the  Bala-kanda  are  omitted. 
The  events  of  the  Ayodhya-kanda  and  much  of  the  Aranya-kanda  are 
narrated  in  about  forty  verses.      A  more  detailed  narrative  begins 
with  the  appearance  before  Eavana  of  the  mutilated  S'urpa-nakha  (see 
p.  353),  but  many  variations  occur;  for  instance,  Kabatfdha  is  killed, 
but  not  restored  to  life  (see  p.  356) ;  the  story  of  S'avari  is  omitted, 
and  there  is  no  mention  of  the  dream  sent  by  Brahma  to  comfort  Sita 
(see  p.  35s).i 

There  are  other  references  to,  and  brief  epitomes  of  parts  of  the 
story  of  the  Eamayana  in  the  Maha-bharata,  e.g.,  in  Yana-parvan 
11177-11219  ;  in  Drona-parvan  2224-2246  ;  in  S'anti-parvan  944-955  ; 
in  Hari-vansa  2324-2359,  8672-8674,  16232. 

The  story  of  Eama  is  also  (as  Professor  Weber  observes)  referred  to 
in  the  Mricchakatilcd  (Act  I.);  and  although  not  mentioned  in  Kalidasa's 

1  These  and  other  differences  have  led  Professor  Weber  to  suggest 
the  inquiry  whether  the  Maha-bharata  version  may  not  be  more 
primitive  than  that  of  the  Eamayana,  and  possibly  even  the  original 
version,  out  of  which  the  other  was  developed.  '  Or  ought  we,'  he 
asks,  'to  assume  only  that  the  Maha-bharata  contains  the  epitome  of 
an  earlier  recension  of  our  text  of  the  Eamayana;  or  should  both 
texts,  the  Eamopakhyana  and  the  Eamayana,  be  regarded  as  resting 
alike  upon  a  common  groundwork,  but  each  occupying  an  independent 
standpoint  ? ' 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   EAMAYANA.  367 

dramas,  it  is  alluded  to  in  his  Meghorduta  (verses  i,  99);  and  in  his 
Raghu-vania — which  is  a  kind  of  abridged  Ramayana — the  poet  Valmiki 
is  named  (XV.  63,  64).  Moreover,  the  Ramayana  forms  the  basis  of 
a  Prakrit  work  called  the  Setu-handha  (ascribed  to  one  Kalidasa,  and 
mentioned  in  Dandin's  Kdvyddarsa  I.  34),  as  well  as  of  the  Bhatti- 
kdvya,  or  grammatical  poem  of  Bhatti  (written,  according  to  Lassen, 
Ind.  Alt.  III.  512,  in  Valabhi-pura  imder  king  S'ridhara-sena,  between 
530  and  545  of  the  Christian  era),  and  of  the  two  celebrated  dramas  of 
Bhava-bhuti,  called  Mahd-vvra-iaritra  and  Uttara-rdma-caritra  (whose 
date  is  fixed  by  Lassen  between  695  and  733).  The  last  of  these 
dramas  quotes  verses  from  the  Ramayana  in  thres  places,  one  in  the 
second  and  two  in  the  sixth  Act.  Indeed,  the  dramatic  literature  which 
makes  use  of  the  adventures  of  Rama  for  the  subject-matter  of  the  plots 
of  its  plays  is  extensive.  Besides  the  two  dramas  of  Bhava-bhuti,  there 
is  the  Hmiuman-ndtaica  or  Mahd-ndtaica,  'great  drama,'  in  fourteen 
acts,  fabled  to  have  been  composed  by  the  monkey-chief  Hanumat  him- 
self, who  first  wrote  it  on  the  rocks,  and  then  to  please  Valmiki  (lest 
it  should  throw  his  Ramayana  into  the  shade),  cast  it  into  the  sea, 
whence  some  portions  were  recovered  in  Bhoja's  time  and  arranged  by 
Misra-damodara  (probably  about  the  tenth  century).  There  is  also  the 
Anargha-rdgTiava  or  Anarghya-rdghava  in  seven  acts  by  Murari;  the 
Prasanna-rdghava  by  Jaya-deva  (probably  not  the  author  of  the  Gita- 
govinda) ;  the  AiMrdma-mani  in  seven  acts  by  Sundara-misra ;  the 
6ampu  ramayana  by  Vidarbha-raja  (or  Bhoja)  in  five  acts ;  the  Rag- 
havdbhyudaya ;  the  Bdla-rdmdyana  by  Raja-sekhara ;  the  Uddtta- 
rdgliava  ;  the  6hdlita-rdma  ;  (the  last  three  quoted  by  the  well-known 
work  on  the  Ars  poetica  called  Sdliitya-darpana) ;  the  Diitdn-gada,  a 
short  piece  by  Su-bhata,  and  others. 

Other  works  mentioned  by  Weber  as  noticing  the  Ramayana  are 
that  of  Vardha-mihira — written  between  505  and  587  of  our  era — which 
takes  for  granted  that  Rama  was  honoured  as  a  demigod  about  that 
time ;  the  ^atrunjaya  mdhdtmya  written  in  Valabhi  under  king  S'ila- 
ditya  about  a.d.  598  ;  the  Vdsava-dattd  of  Subandhu  (about  the  begin- 
ning of  the  seventh  century,  Weber's  Indische  Streifen  I.  373,  380), 
in  which  mention  is  made  of  the  Sundara-kanda  as  a  section  of  the 
Ramayana;  the  Eddambarl  of  Bana  (written  a  little  later,  Indische 
Streifen  I.  354),  in  which  repeated  reference  is  made  to  the  great  Epic 
(I.  36,  45,  81);  the  Sapta4atalca  of  Hala  (35,  316),  on  which  Weber 
has  written  a  treatise ;  the  Pracanda-pdndava  of  Raja-sekhara  (about 
the  end  of  the  tenth  century);  the  Dasa-rupa  of  Dhananjaya  (I.  61, 
about  the  same  date);  the  Sapta-iatl  of  Govardhana  (32,  about  the 
tenth  century  or  later);  the  Damayanli-kathd  of  Trivikrama-bhatta  (11); 


368  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

the  Rdja-taran-ginl  (I.    i66);  the  Sdrn-gadharorpaddhati  (Bohtlingk, 
Ind.  Spr.  1586),  &c. 

The  eighteen  Puranas  (which  are  to  a  great  extent  drawn  from  the 
two  great  Epics)  contain,  of  course,  numerous  allusions  to  the  Rama- 
yana,  and  sometimes  relate  the  whole  story.  The  Agni-piirdna  has  an 
epitome  of  the  seven  Books  in  seven  chapters.  The  Padma  and  Skanda 
also  devote  several  chapters  to  the  same  subject.  The  Vishnu-purdna 
has  also  a  section  (IV.  4)  about  Rama,  and  in  III.  3  describes  Valmiki 
as  the  Vyasa  of  the  24th  Dvapara.  The  Brahmandorpurdna — a  con- 
fused medley  of  various  subjects — has  a  Rdmdyana-mdhdtmya,  and  in 
this  Purana  is  also  contained  the  well-known  Adhyatma-ramayana, 
'  Spiritual  Ramayana,'  divided  into  seven  Books,  bearing  the  same 
titles  as  those  of  Valmiki's  E-amayana.  Its  object  is  to  show  that 
Rama  was  a  manifestation  of  the  Supreme  Spirit,  and  Sita  (identified 
with  Lakshmi),  a  type  of  Nature. 

This  Adhyatma-ramayana  contains  two  chapters,  held  to  be  especially 
sacred :  i.  The  Rdmorhridaya  or  first  chapter,  in  which  the  inner  or 
hidden  nature  of  Rama  is  explained  and  his  identification  with  Vishnu, 
as  the  Supreme  Spirit,  is  asserted;  2.  the  Rdma-gitd  or  fifth  chapter 
of  the  seventh  Book,  in  which  the  author,  who  is  evidently  a  Vedantist, 
sets  forth  the  advantage  of  giving  up  all  works  in  order  to  meditate 
upon  and  become  united  with  the  Supreme  Spirit. 

There  is  also  a  remarkable  work  called  Vdsishtha-rdmdyana  (or  Yoga- 
vdsishtha  or  Vdsishtham  Mahd-rdmdyanam)  in  the  form  of  an  exhorta- 
tion with  illustrative  narratives  addressed  by  Vasishtha  to  his  pupil, 
the  youthful  Rama,  on  the  best  means  of  attaining  true  happiness,  and 
considered  to  have  been  composed  as  an  appendage  to  the  Ramayana 
by  Valmiki  himself. 

We  ought  also  here  to  mention  the  celebrated  Hindi  Ramayana  by 
the  poet  Tulasi-dasa  (Tulsi-das).  This  poem  is  so  well  known  and  so 
greatly  esteemed  in  some  parts  of  India,  that  it  is  sometimes  affirmed 
that  there  are  three  epic  poems  called  Ramayana  :  i.  that  of  Valmiki, 
2.  that  attributed  to  Vyasa  called  Adhyatma-ramayana,  3.  the  Hindi 
Epic  by  Tulasi-dasa. 

I  conclude  the  list  by  noting  the  following  comparatively  modern 
artificial  poems  on  the  same  subject: — i.  the  Rdghavapdndamya  by 
Kavi-raja,  a  very  singular  production,  much  admired  and  imitated 
by  later  Indian  writers,  being  nothing  less  than  a  poem  worded  with 
such  dexterous  '  double-entendre,'  that  it  may  serve  as  an  epitome 
of  either  the  Ramayana  or  MahSrbharata  j  2.  the  Rdghava-vildsa  by 
Visva-natha  (author  of  the  Sahitya-darpana)  5  3.  the  Rdma-vildsa  by 
Rama-ciarana ;  4.  another  Rdma-vilasa  by  Hari-natha  (in  imitation  of 


THE    EPIC   POEMS — THE   RAMAYANA.  369 

the   Gita-govinda) ;    5.    the   Rdmaiandra-6aritra-sara  by  Agni--^e^a; 
6.  the  Raghu-ndfhaihyu-daya  mentioned  by  Professor  Weber. ^ 

With  regard  to  the  composition  called  Campu,  this,  is  a  kind  of 
highly  artificial  style  in  alternations  of  prose  and  verse  (gadya  and 
padya). 

1  The  story  of  the  Kamayana  and  Maharbharata,  as  given  in  full  by 
Mr.  Talboys  Wheeler  in  his  History  of  India,  is  most  interesting  and 
instructive,  although  it  does  not  profess  to  be  an  analysis  made  by 
himself  from  the  original  Sanskrit. 


2  A 


CHAPTER  XIIL 

The  Itihdsas  or  Epic  Poems — The  Mahd-hhdrata. 

I  PASS  on  now  to  the  Maba-bharata — probably  by  far 
the  longest  epic  poem  that  the  world  has  ever  produced. 
Its  main  design  is  to  describe  the  great  contest  between 
the  descendants  of  king  Bharata.-'  He  was  the  most 
renowned  monarch  of  the  Lunar  dynasty,  and  is  alleged 
to  have  reigned  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Hastina-pur  or 
ancient  Delhi,  and  to  have  extended  his  authority  over  a 
great  part  of  India,  so  tliat  India  to  this  day  is  called  by 
the  natives  Bharata-varsha.  The  great  Epic,  however, 
is  not  so  much  a  poem  with  a  single  subject  as  a  vast 
cyclopaedia  or  thesaurus  of  Hindu  mythology,  legendary 
history,  ethics,  and  philosophy.  The  work,  as  we  now 
possess  it,  cannot  possibly  be  regarded  as  representing 
the  original  form  of  the  poem.  Its  compilation  appears  to 
have  proceeded  gradually  for  centuries.     At  any  rate,  as 

^  The  title  of  the  poem  is  Mahd-bhdratain,  a  compound  word  in  the 
neuter  gender,  the  first  member  of  which,  mahd  (for  mahat),  means 
'  great,'  and  the  second,  hhdrata,  'relating  to  Bharata.'  The  title  of  a 
book  is  often  in  the  neuter  gender,  some  word  like  hdvyam,  '  a  poem,' 
being  understood.  Here  the  word  with  which  Maha-bharatam  agrees 
may  be  either  dhhyanam,  'a  historical  poem,'  or  yuddham,  'war.'  It 
is  curious  that  in  the  San-graha-'parva,  or  introductory  summary 
(1.  264),  the  word  Maha-bharata  is  said  to  be  derived  from  its  large 
size  and  great  weight,  because  the  poem  is  described  as  outweighing  all 
the  four  Vedas  and  mystical  writings  together.  Here  is  the  passage  : — 
Ekatas  caturo  Veddn  Bhdratam  caitad  ekatah  Purd  Mia  suraih  sarvaih 
sametya  tulayd  dliritam,  Caturhhyah  sardliasyehhyo  Vedebhyo  hy  adhikam 
yadd,  Todd  prabhriti  loke  'smin  [mahattvdd  hharavattvdc-ca]  Mahd- 
bJidratam  ucyate. 


THiE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  37  I 

we  have  already  indicated  (pp.  316,  317),  it  seems  to 
liave  passed  through  several  stages  of  construction  and 
reconstruction,  until,  finally  arranged  and  reduced  to 
orderly  written  shape  by  a  Brahman  or  Brahmans,  whose 
names  have  not  been  preserved/  The  relationship  which 
the  original  Brahman  compiler  bore  to  the  scattered 
legends  and  lays  of  India,  many  of  them  orally  trans- 
mitted until  transferred  to  the  Maha-bharata,  was  similar 
to  that  borne  by  Pisistratus  to  the  Homeric  poems.  But 
the  Hindus  invest  this  personage,  whoever  he  was,  with 
a  nimbus  of  mystical  sanctity,  and  assert  that  he  was  also 
the  arranger  of  various  other  celebrated  religious  works, 
such  as  the  Vedas  and  Puranas.  He  is  called  Vyasa,  but 
this  is,  of  course,  a  mere  epithet  derived  from  the  Sanskrit 
verb  vy-as,  meaning  '  to  dispose  in  regular  sequence,'  and 
therefore  would  be  equally  applicable  to  any  compiler.^ 

1  Professor  Lassen,  in  his  '  Indische  Alterthumskunde '  (II.  499, 
new  edition),  considers  that  it  may  be  proved  from  an  examination  of 
the  Introduction  to  the  Maha-bharata  that  there  were  three  consecutive 
workings-up.  *(6ear&ejtoMp)  of  that  poem  by  different  authors.  The 
first  or  oldest  version,  called  simply  Bhdraia,  which  contained  only 
24,000  verses,  began  with  the  history  of  Manu,  the. progenitor  of  the 
Kshatriya  or  military  class  (Adi-parvan  3126),  and  a  short  section^ 
describing  the  pedigree  of  Vyasa,  and  how  he  appeared  at  the  Snake- 
sacrifice,  and  how,  at  the  request  of  Janamejaya,  he  commissioned  Vai- 
sampayana  to  relate  the  story  of  the  strife  between  the  Pandavas 
and  Kauravas  (I.  2208,  &c.) — might  have  formed  the  introduction 
(einleitung)  to  this  oldest  Bharata.  The  second  reconstruction  or  re- 
casting of  the  poem — thought  by  Professor  Lassen  to  be  identical  with 
the  Itihasa  mentioned  in  Asvalayana's  Grihya-siitras,  and  recited  at 
S'aunaka's  Horse-sacrifice — took  place  about  400  B.C.-  It  began  with 
the  history  of  king  Yasu,  whose  daughter  Satyavati  was  mother  of 
Vyasa;  and  the  section  called  Pavshya  (I.  661),  the  antiquity  of  which 
is  indicated  by  its  being  almost  entirely  in  prose,  might  have  served 
as  its  introduction.  The  section  called  Pauloma  (I.  851)  probably 
formed  the  commencement  of  the  third  reconstruction  of  the  great 
Epic,  which  he  considers  must  have  preceded  the  era  of  Asoka. 

2  Vivydsa   Veddn  yasmdt  sa  tasmdd    Vyasa  iti  smritah  (I.    2417). 


372  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Many  of  the  legends  are  Vedic,  and  of  great  antiquity ; 
while  others,  as  we  have  already  pointed  out,  are  com- 
paratively modern — probably  interpolated  during  the  first 
centuries  of  the  Christian  era-  In  fact,  the  entire  work, 
which  consists  of  about  220,000  lines  in  eighteen  Parvans 
or  sections,  nearly  every  one  of  which  would  form  a  large 
volume,  may  be  compared  to  a'  confused  congeries  of 
'geological  strata.  The  principal  story,  which  occupies 
little  more  than  a  fifth  of  the  whole,  forms  the  lowest 
layer;  but  this  has  been  so  completely  overlaid  by  suc- 
cessive incrustations,  and  the  mass  so  compacted  together. 


Similarly  the  name  Homerus  (O,u,rioog)  is  thought  by  some  to  come  from 
ofiou  and  ci^u.  It  may  seem  strange  that  the  compilation  of  whoUy 
different  works  composed  at  very  different  epochs,  such  as  the  Vedas, 
Maha-bharata,  and  Puranas  undoubtedly  were,  shou]^  be  attributed  to 
the  same  person ;  but  the  close  relationship  supposed  by  learned  natives 
to  subsist  between  these  productions,  will  account  for  a  desire  to  call  in 
the  aid  of  the  same  great  sage  in  their  construction.  The  following 
passage  from  the  Yedartha-praka^a  of  Madhava  Adarya  (who  lived  in 
the  fourteenth  century)  commenting  on  the  Taittiriya  Yajur-veda  (p.  i), 
translated  by  Dr.  Muir  in  his  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  iii.  p.  47,  attributes 
the  actual  composition  of  the  Maha-bharata  to  the  sage  Yyasa,  and  gives 
a  remarkable  reason  for  his  having  written  it : — '  It  may  be  said  that 
all  persons  whatever,  including  women  and  S'udras,  must  be  competent 
students  of  the  Veda,  since  the  aspiration  after  good  [ishtam  me  syad 
iti)  and  the  deprecation  of  evil  are  common  to  all  mankind.  But  it 
is  not  so.  For  though  the  expedient  exists,  and  women  and  S'iidras  are 
desirous  to  know  it,  they  are  debarred  by  another  cause  from  being 
competent  students  of  the  Veda.  The  scripture  (sdstra)  which  declares 
that  those  persons  only  who  have  been  invested  with  the  sacrificial  cord 
are  competent  to  read  the  Veda,  intimates  thereby  that  the  same  study 
would  be  a  cause  of  unhappiness  to  women  and  S'iidras  (who  are  not  so 
invested).  How  then  are  thqse  two  classes  of  persons  to  discover  the 
means  of  future  happiness  ?  We  answer,  from  the  Puranas  and  other 
such  works.  Hence  it  has  been  said  :  Since  the  triple  Veda  may  not 
be  heard  by  women,  S'udras,  and  degraded  twice-born  men,  the  M-aha,- 
hh&xeXa{Bhdratamdkhydnam)'was,  in  his  benevolence,  composed  (fcnYam) 
by  the  Muni.' 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA,  373 

tbat  the  original  substratum  is  not  always  clearly  trace- 
able. If  the  successive  layers  can  ever  be  critically 
analysed  and  separated,  the  more  ancient  from  the  later 
additions,  and  the  historical  element  from  the  purely 
fabulous,  it  may  be  expected  that  light  will  be  thrown 
on  the  early  history  of  India,  religious,  social,  and  political 
— ^a  subject  still  veiled  in  much  obscurity,  notwithstanding 
the  valuable  researches  of  Professor  Lassen  and  others. 

I  now  give  the  names  of  the  eighteen  sections  or  Books 
which  constitute  the  poem,  with  a  brief  statement  of  their 
contents : — 

1.  Adi-parvan,  '  introductory  Book,'  describes  how  the  two  brothers, 
Dhrita-rashtra  and  Pandu,  are  brought  up  by  their  uncle  Bhishma ;  and 
how  Dhrita-rashtra,.  who  is  blind,  has  one  hundred  sons — commonly 
called  the  Kuru  princes — by  his  wife  Gandhari ;  and  how  the  two  wives 
of  Pandu — Pritha  (Kunti)  and  Madri — have  five  sons,  called  the  Pan- 
davas  or  Pandu  princes. 

2.  Sahha^parvan  describes  the  great  Sabhd  or  '  assembly  of  princes  ' 
at  Hastina-pura,  when  Yudhi-shthira,  the  eldest  of  the  five  Pandavas, 
is  persuaded  to  play  at  dice  with  S'akuni  and  loses  his  kingdom.  The 
five  Pandavas  and  Draupadi,  their  wife,  are  required  to  live  for  twelve 
years  in  the  woods. 

3.  Vana-parvan  narrates  the  life  of  the  Pandavas  in  the  Eamyaka 
forest.  This  is  one  of  the  longest  books,  and  full  of  episodes  such  as  the 
story  of  Nala  and  that  of  the  Kiratarjuniya. 

4.  Virata-parvan  describes  the  thirteenth  year  of  exile  and  the  adven- 
tures of  the  Pandavas  while  living  disguised  in  the  service  of  king 
Virata. 

5.  Udyoga-parvan.  In  this  the  preparations  for  war  on  the  side  of 
both  Pandavas  and  Kauravas  are  described. 

6.  Bhishma-parvan.  In  this  both  armies  join  battle  on  Kuru-kshetra, 
a  plain  north-west  of  Delhi.  The  Kauravas  are  commanded  by  Bhishma, 
who  falls  transfixed  with  arrows  by  Arjuna. 

7.  Drona-parvan.  In  this  the  Kuru  forces  are  commanded  by  Drona, 
and  numerous  battles  take  place.  Drona  falls  in  a  fight  with  Dhrishta- 
dyumna  (son  of  Drupada).. 

8.  Kartj.a-parvan.  In  this  the  Kurus  are  led  by  Karna.  Other 
battles  are  described.     Arjuna  kills  Karna. 

9.  ^alya-parvan.     In  this  ffalya  is  made  general  of  the  Kuru  army. 


374  INDIAN  WISDOM. 

The  concluding  battles  take  place,  and  only  three  of  the  Kuru  warriors, 
with  Duryodhana,  are  left  alive.  Bhima  and  Duryodhana  then  fight  with 
clubs.     Duryodhana,  chief  and  eldest  of  the  Kurus,  is  struck  down. 

lo.  Sauptika-parvan.  In  this  the  three  surviving  Kurus  make  a 
night  attack  on  the  camp  of  the  Pandavas  and  kill  all  their  army,  but 
not  the  five  Pandavas. 

I  r.  Stri-parvan  describes  the  lamentations  of  queen  Gandhari  and 
the  other  wives  and  women  over  the  bodies  of  the  slain  heroes. 

1 2.  Sdnti-parvan.  In  this  Yudhi-shthira  is  crowned  in  Hastina-pura. 
To  calm  his  spirit,  troubled  with  the  slaughter  of  his  kindred,  BhTshma, 
still  alive,  instructs  him  at  great  length  in  the  duties  of  kings  (rdja- 
dharma  1995-4778),  rules  for  adversity  {apad-dharma  4779-6455), 
rules  for  attaining  final  emancipation  (moksha-dharma  6456  to  end). 

13.  Anu^dsana-parvan.  In  this  the  instruction  is  continued  by 
Bhishma,  who  gives  precepts  and  wise  axioms  on  all  subjects,  such  as 
the  duties  of  kings,  liberality,  fasting,  eating,  &c.,  mixed  up  with  tales, 
moral  and  religious  discourses,  and  metaphysical  disquisitions.  At  the 
conclusion  of  his  long  sermon  Bhishma  dies. 

14.  Asvamedhika-parvan.  In  this  Yudhi-shthira,  having  assumed  the 
government,  performs  an  Asva-medha  or  '  horse-sacrifice '  in  token  of  his 
supremacy. 

15.  Ahdmavdsika-parvan  narrates  how  the  old  blind  king  Dhrita- 
rashtra,  with  his  queen  Gandhari  and  with  Kunti,  mother  of  the  Pan- 
davas, retires  to  a  hermitage  in  the  woods.  After  two  years  a  forest 
conflagration  takes  place,  and  they  immolate  themselves  in  the  fire  to 
secure  heaven  and  felicity. 

16.  Mausala-parvan  narrates  the  death  of  Krishna  and  Bala-rama, 
their  return  to  heaven,  the  submergence  of  Krishna's  city  Dvaraka  by 
the  sea,  and  the  self-slaughter  in  a  fight  with  clubs  (musala)  of  Krishna's 
family — the  Tadavas — through  the  curse  of  some  Brahmans. 

17.  Mahdprasthdnika-parvan  describes  the  renunciation  of  their 
kingdom  by  Yudhi-shthira  and  his  four  brothers,  and  their  departure 
towards  Indra's  heaven  in  Mount  Meru. 

18.  Svargdrohanika- parvan  narrates  the  ascent  and  admission  to 
heaven  of  the  five  Pandavas,  their  wife  DraupadT,  and  kindred. 

Supplement  or  Hari-vania-parvan,  a  later  addition,  recounting  the 
genealogy  and  birth  of  Krishna  and  the  details  of  his  early  life. 

The  following  is  a  more  complete  and  continuous 
account  of  the  story  of  the  poem,  which  is  supposed  to 
be  recited  by  Vaisampayana,  the  pupil  of  Vyasa,  to  Jana- 
mejaya,  great-grandson  of  Arjuna. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  37 S 

We  have  seen  tliat  the  Eamayana  commences  by  recount- 
ing the  genealogy  of  the  Solar  line  of  kings,  of  whom  Eama 
was  one.  The  heroes  of  the  Maha-bharata  are  of  the 
other  great  race,  called  Lunar.  Here,  however,  as  in  the 
Solar  race,  the  Brahman  compiler  was  careful  to  assign 
the  origin  of  the  second  great  dynasty  of  kings  to  a 
noted  sage  and  Brahman.  I  epitomize  the  genealogy  as 
essential  to  the  comprehension  of  the  story  : — 

Soma,  the  Moon,  the  progenitor  of  the  Lunar  race,  who  reigned  at 
Hastina-pur,  was  the  child  of  the  Rishi  Atri,  and  had  a  son  named 
Budha,  who  married  Ila  or  Ida,  daughter  of  the  Solar  prince  Ikshvaku, 
and  had  by  her  a  son,  Aila  or  Pururavas.  The  latter  had  a  son  by 
UrvasI,  named  Ayus,  from  whom  came  Nahusha,  the  father  of  Yaydti. 
The  latter  had  two  sons,  Puru  ^  and  Yadu,  from  whom  proceeded  the 
two  branches  of  the  Lunar  line.  In  the  line  of  Tadu,  we  need  only 
mention  the  last  three  princes,  Sura,  Vasu-deva,^  and  Krishna  with  his 
brother  Bala-rdma.  Fifteenth  in  the  other  line — that  of  Puru — came 
Dushyanta,  father  of  the  great  Bliarata,  from  whom  India  is  called 
Bharata-varsha.  Ninth  from  Bharata  came  Kuru,  and  fourteenth  from 
him  Sdntanu.  This  S'antanu  had  by  his  wife  Satyavati,  a  son  named 
Vicitrorvirya.  Bliishma  (also  called  S'antanava,  Deva-vrata,  &c.),  who 
renounced  the  right  of  succession  and  took  the  vow  of  a  BraKmadari,^ 
was  the  son  of  S'antanu  by  a  former  wife,  the  goddess  Gan-ga,  whence  one 
of  his  names  is  Gan-geya.  Satyavati  also  had,  before  her  marriage  with 
S'antanu,  borne  Vyasa,  to  the  sage  Parasara ;  so  that  Vicitra-virya, 
Bhlshma,  and    Vyasa  were  half-brothers ;  *    and  Vyasa,    although   he 

^  This  name  Puru  (nom.  case  Purus)  is  probably  the  original  of 
Porns,  whose  country  in  the  Panjab,  between  the  Hydaspes  and  Acesines, 
was  conquered  by  Alexander  the  Great. 

2  Pritha  or  Kunti,  wife  of  Pandu,  and  mother  of  three  of  the  Pandu 
princes,  was  a  sister  of  Vasu-deva,  and  therefore  aunt  of  Krishna. 

8  I.e.,  perpetual  celibacy.  Adya-prabhriti  me  brahmacaryam  bha- 
vishyati ;  Aputrasyapi  me  lokd  bhavishyanty  akshayd  divi  (I.  4060). 

*  Parasara  met  with  Satyavati  when  quite  a  girl,  as  he  was  crossing 
the  river  Yamuna  (Jumna)  in  a  boat.  The  result  of  their  intercourse 
was  a  child,  Vyasa,  who  was  called  Krishna,  from  his  swarthy  com- 
plexion, and  Dvaipayana,  because  he  was  brought  forth  by  Satyavati  on 
an  island  (dmpa)  in  the  Jumna.  (See  Maha-bharata  I.  2416,  2417,  and 
4235-) 


376  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

retired  into  the  wilderness,  to  live  a  life  of  contemplation,  promised 
his  mother  that  he  would  place  himself  at  her  disposal  whenever  she 
required  his  services.  Satyavati  had  recourse  to  him  when  her  son 
Vi6itra-virya  died  childless,  and  requested  him  to  pay  his  addresses  to 
ViditrarVirya's  two  widows,  named  Ambika  and  Ambalika.  He  con- 
sented, and  had  by  them  respectively  two  children,  Dhrita-rdshtra,  who 
was  born  bHnd,  and  Pdndu,  who  was  born  with  a  pale  complexion.^ 
When  Satyavati  begged  Vyasa  to  become  the  father  of  a  third  son 
(who  should  be  without  any  defect),  the  elder  wife,  terrified  by  Vyasa's 
austere  appearance,  sent  him  one  of  her  slave-girls,  dressed  in  her  own 
clothes  ;  and  this  girl  became  the  mother  of  Vidura  (whence  he  is 
sometimes  called  Kshattri).^ 

Dhrita-rdshtra,  Pdndu,  and  Vidura  were  thus  brothers,  sons  of 
Vyasa,  the  supposed  author  or  compiler  of  the  Maha-bharata.  Vyasa 
after  this  retired  again  to  the  woods ;  but,  gifted  with  divine  presci- 
ence, appeared  both  to  his  sons  and  grandsons  whenever  they  were 
in  difiiculties,  and  needed  his  advice  and  assistance. 

^  The  mother  of  Pandu  was  also  called  Kausalya ;  and  this  name 
(which  was  that  of  the  mother  of  Rama-dandra)  seems  also  to  be 
applied  to  the  mother  of  Dhrita-rashtra.  Paleness  of  complexion,  in 
the  eyes  of  a  Hindii,  would  be  regarded  as  a  kind  of  leprosy,  and  was 
therefore  almost  as  great  a  defect  as  blindness.  The  reason  given  for 
these  defects  is  very  curious.  Ambika  was  so  terrified  by  the  swarthy 
complexion  and  shaggy  aspect  of  the  sage  Vyasa  (not  to  speak  of  the 
gandha  emitted  by  his  body),  that  when  he  visited  her  she  closed  her 
eyes,  and  did  not  venture  to  open  them  while  he  was  with  her.  In 
consequence  of  this  assumed  blindness  her  child  was  born  blind. 
Ambalika,  on  the  other  hand,  though  she  kept  her  eyes  open,  became 
so  colourless  with  fright,  that  her  son  was  born  with  a  pale  complexion 
(I.  4275-4290).  Pandu  seems  to  have  been  in  other  respects  good- 
looking — Sd  devi  Tcumdram  ajljanat  pdndu-laltshana-sam'parmain  dlpya- 
mdnam  vara-iriyd. 

2  Vyasa  was  so  much  pleased  with  this  slave-girl  that  he  pronounced 
her  free,  and  declared  that  her  child,  Vidura,  should  be  sarva-iuddM- 
matdm  varah,  '  the  most  excellent  of  all  wise  men.'  Kshattri,  although 
described  in  Manu  as  the  child  of  a  S'udra  father  and  Brahman 
mother,  signifies  here  the  child  of  a  Brahman  father  and  S'Sdra 
mother.  Vidura  is  one  of  the  best  characters  in  the  Maha-bharata, 
always  ready  with  useful  advice  (hitopadeSa)  both  for  the  PSndavas  and 
for  his  brother  Dhrita-rashtra.  His  disposition  leads  him  to  side  with 
the  Pandu  princes  and  warn  them  of  the  evil  designs  of  their  cousins. 


THE  EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  37/ 

The  two  brothers,  Dhrita-rashtra  and  Pandu,  were 
brought  up .  by  their  uncle  Bhishma,^  who,  until  they 
were  of  age,  conducted  the  government  of  Hastina-pur? 
Dhrita-rashtra  was  the  first-born,  but  renounced  the 
throne,  in  consequence  of  his  blindness.  The  other 
brother,  Vidura,  being  the  son  of  a  Sudra  woman,  could 
not  succeed,  and  Pandu  therefore,  when  of  age,  became 
king  (I.  4361).  Meanwhile  Dhrita-rashtra  married  Gan- 
dhari,  also  called  Saubaleyi  or,  Saubali,  daughter  of 
Subala,  king  of  Gandhara.  When  she  first  heard  that 
her  future  husband  was  blind,  she  from  that  moment 
showed  her  respect  for  him,  by  binding  her  own  eyes  with 
a  handkerchief,  and  always  remaining  blindfolded  in  his 
presence/  '  Soon  afterwards  a  Svayamvara  was  held  by 
king  Kuntibhoja,  and  his  adopted  daughter,  Pritha  or 
Kunti,  then  chose  Pandu  for  her  husband.  She  was 
really  the  child  of  a  Yadava  prince.  Sura,  who  gave  her 
to  his  childless  cousin  Kuntibhoja ;  under  whose  care  she 
was  brought  up  : — 

One  day,  before  her  marriage,  she  paid  such  respect  and  attention  to 
a  powerful  sage  named  Durvasas,  a  guest  in  her  father's  house,  that  he 
gave  her  a  charm  and  taught  her  an  incantation,  by  virtue  of  which 
she  might  have  a  child  by  any  god  she  liked  to  call  into  her  presence. 
Out  of  curiosity,  she  invoked  the  Sun,  by  whom  she  had  a  child,  who 
was  born  clothed  in  armour.*  But. Pritha  (Kunti),  fearing  the  censure 
of  her  relatives,  deserted  her  offspring,  after  exposing  it  in  the  river. 
It  was  found  by  Adhiratha,  a  charioteer  (suta),  and  nurtured  by  his 
wife  Eadha ;  whence  the  child  was  afterwards  called  Radheya,  though 

^  They  were  all  three  thoroughly  educated  by  Bhishma.  Dhrita- 
rashtra  is  described  as  excelling  all  others  in  strength  (I.  4356),  Pandu 
as  excelling  in  the  use  of  the  bow,  and  Vidura  as  pre-eminent  for  virtue 
and  wisdom  (4358). 

2  Hastina-pur  is  also  called  Gajasahvaya  and  Nagasahvaya. 

*  Sd  patam  dddya  kritvd  hahurgunam  tadd  Babandha  netre  sve  rdjan 
joativrata-pardyand  {I.  4376).  She  is  described  as  so  devoted  to  her 
husband  that  Vdoa  'pi  purushdn  anydn  suvratd  ndnvakirtayat. 

*  The  Sun  afterwards  restored  her  Tcanydtva  (I.  4400). 


378  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

named  by  his  foster-parents  Vasu-shena.  When  he  was  grown  up,  the 
god  Indra  conferred  upon  him  enormous  strength,  and  changed  his 
name  to  Karna.^ 

After  Pandu's  marriage  to  Pritha,  his  uncle  Bhislima 
■wishing  him  to  take  a  second  wife,  made  an  expedition  to 
visit  Salya,  king  of  Madra,  and  prevailed  upon  him  to 
bestow  his  sister  Madri  upon  Pandu,  in  exchange  for  vast 
sums  of  money  and  jewels.  Soon  after  this  second  mar- 
riage Pandu  undertook  a  great  campaign,  in  which  he 
subjugated  so  many  countries,  that  the  kingdom  of  Has- 
tina-pur  became  under  him  as  glorious  and  extensive  as 
formerly  under  his  ancestor  Bharata  (I.  4461).  Having 
acquired  enormous  wealth,  he  distributed  it  to  Bhishma, 
Dhrita-rashtra,  and  Vidura,  and  then  retired  to  the  woods 
to  indulge  his  passion  for  hunting,  living  with  his  two 
wives  as  a  forester  on  the  southern  slope  of  the  Hima- 
layas. The  blind  Dhrita-rashtra,  who  had  a  very  useful 
charioteer  named  Sanjaya,  was  then  obliged,  with  the 
assistance  of  Bhishma  as  his  regent,  to  assume  the  reins 
of  government. 

We  have  next  an  account  of  the  supernatural  birth  of 
Dhrita-rashtra's  sons : — 

One  day  the  sage  Vyasa  was  hospitably  entertained  by  queen  Gan- 
dhari,  and  in  return  gi-anted  her  a  boon.  She  chose  to  be  the  mother 
of  a  hundred  sons.  After  two  years  she,  produced  a  mass  of  flesh, 
which  was  divided  by  Vyasa  into  a  hundred  and  one  pieces,  as  big  as 
the  joint  of  a  thumb.  From  these  in  due  time  the  eldest,  Duryodhana, 
'  difficult  to  be  subdued '  (sometimes  called  Su-yodhana,  see  p.  382, 
note  2),  was  bom.  At  his  birth,  however,  various  evil  omens  took 
place;  jackals  yelled,  asses  brayed,  whirlwinds  blew,  and  the  sky 
seemed  on  fire.     Dhrita-rashtra,  alarmed,  called  his  ministers  together, 

1  He  is  also  called  Vaikartana,  as  son  of  Vikartana  or  the  Sun,  and 
sometimes  Yrisha.  Karna  is  described  (4405)  as  worshipping  the  Sun 
till  his  back  became  warm  {d-prishtha-tdpdt,  i.e.,  'till  after  midday,' 
when  the  sun  began  to  shine  behind  him).  Compare  Hitop.,  Book 
II.  V.  32. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  379 

who  recommended  him  to  ahandon  the  child,  but  could  not  persuade 
him  to  take  their  advice.  The  miraculous  birth  of  the  remaining 
ninety-nine  sons  then  occurred  in  due  course.^  There  was  also  one 
daughter,  called  Duhsala  (afterwards  married  to  Jayad-ratha). 

Next  follows  the  description  of  the  supernatural  birth 
of  the  five  reputed  sons  of  Pandu  : — 

One  day,  on  a  hunting  expedition,  Pandu  transfixed  with  five 
arrows  a  male  and  female  deer.  These  turned  out  to  be  a  certain 
sage  and  his  wife,  who  had  assumed  the  form  of  these  animals.  The 
sage  cursed  Pandu,  and  predicted  that  he  would  die  in  the  embraces 
of  one  of  his  wives.  In  consequence  of  this  curse,  Pandu  took  the 
vow  of  a  Brahmadari,^  gave  all  his  property  to  the  Brahmans,  and 
became  a  hermit. 

Thereupon  his  wife  Pritha  (also  called  Kunti),  with  his 
approval,  made  use  of  the  charm  and  incantation  formerly 
given  to  her  by  Durvasas,  and  had  three  sons,  Yudhi- 
shthira,  Bhima,  and  Arjuna,  by  the  three  deities,  Dharma, 
Vayu,  and  Indra  respectively  : — 

Yudhi-shthira  was  born  first,  and  at  the  moment  of  his  birth  a 
heavenly  voice  was  heard  to  utter  these  words,  'This  is  the  most 
virtuous  of  men.'  Bhima,  the  son  of  Pritha  and  Vayu,  was  born  on 
the  same  day  as  Duryodhana.  Soon  after  his  birth,  his  mother  acci- 
dentally let  him  fall,  when  a  great  prodigy — indicative  of  the  vast 
strength  which  was  to  distinguish  him — occurred ;  for  the  body  of  the 
child  falling  on  a  rock  shivered  it  to  atoms.  On  the  birth  of  Arjuna 
auspicious  omens  were  manifested ;  showers  of  flowers  fell,^  celestial 
minstrels  filled  the  air  with  harmony,  and  a  heavenly  voice  sounded 
his  praises  and  future  glory. 

Madri,  the  other  wife  of  Pandu,  was  now  anxious  to 
have  children,  and  was  told  by  Pritha  (Kunti)  to  think 
on  any  god  she  pleased.  She  chose  the  two  Asvins  (see 
p.  11),  who  appeared  to  her,  and  were  the  fathers  of  her 

'^  Their  names  are  all  detailed  at  I.  4540. 

2  The  brahmOearya-vrata,  or  vow  of  continence. 

3  Showers  of  flowers  are  as  common  in  Indian  poetry  as  showers  of 
blood ;  the  one  indicating  good,  the  other  portending  evil. 


38o  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

twin  sons  Nakula  and  Sahadeva.  While  the  five  princes 
were  still  children,  Pandu,  forgetting  the  curse  of  the  sage 
whom  he  had  killed  in  th.e  form  of  a  deer,  ventured  one 
day  to  embrace  his  wife  Madri,  and  died  in  her  arms. 
She  and  Pritha  (Kunti)  then  had  a  dispute  for  the  honour 
of  becoming  a  Sati  (see  p.  312),  which  ended  in  Madri 
burning  herself  with  her  husband's  corpse  (I.  4896). 
Pritha  and  the  five  Pandu  princes  were  then  taken  by- 
certain  Rishis,  or  holy  men — companions  of  Pandu — to 
Hastina-pur,  where  they  were  presented  to  Dhrita-rashtra, 
and  all  the  circumstances  of  their  birth  and  of  the  death 
of  Pandu  narrated.  The  news  of  the  death  of  his  brother 
was  received  by  Dhrita-rashtra  with  much  apparent  sorrow; 
he  gave  orders  for  the  due  performance  of  the  funeral 
rites,  and  allowed  the  five  young  princes  and. their  mother 
to  live  with  his  own  family.  The  cousins  were  in  the 
habit  of  playing  together : — 

In  tlieir  boyisli  sports  the  Pandu  princes  excelled  the  sons  of  Dhrita- 
rashtra,  which  excited  much  ill-feeling  j  and  Duryodhana,  spiteful 
even  when  a  boy,  tried  to  destroy  Bhima  by  mixing  poison  in  his  food, 
and  then  throwing  him  into  the  water  when  stupefied  by  its  effects 
(I.  5008).  Bhima,  however,  was  not  drowned,  but  descended  to  the 
abode  of  the  Nagas  (or  serpent-demons),  who  freed  him  from  the  poison 
(5052),  and  gave  him  a  liquid  to  drink  which  endued  him  with  the 
strength  of  ten  thousand  Nagas.  From  that  moment  he  became  a  kind 
of  Hercules. 

Then  Duryodhana,  Karna,  and  Sakuni  ^  devised  schemes 
for  destroying  the  Pandu  princes,  but  without  success. 

The  characters  of  the  five  Pandavas  are  drawn  with 
much  artistic  delicacy  of  touch,  and  maintained  with 
general  consistency  -throughout  the  poem.^     The  eldest, 

1  S'akuni  was  the  brother  of  Gandhari,  and  therefore  maternal 
uncle  {■mdtula)  of  the  Kaurava  princes.  He  was  the  counsellor  of 
Duryodhana.  He  is  often  called  Saubala,  as  Gandhari  is  called 
Saubali. 

^  Complete  consistency  must  not  be  expected  in  such  a  poem  as 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  38  I 

Yudhi-shthira,  is  the  Hindu,  ideal  of  excellence — a  pattern 
of  justice,  integrity,  calm  passionless  composure,  chivalrous 
honour,  and  cold  heroism.-'  Bhima  is  a  type  of  brute 
courage  and  strength  :  he  is  of  gigantic  stature,  impe- 
tuous, irascible,  somewhat  vindictive,  and  cruel  even  to 
the  verge  of  ferocity,  making  him,  as  his  name  implies, 
'  terrible.'  It  would  appear  that  his  great  strength  had 
to  be  maintained  by  plentiful  supplies  of  food ;  as  his 
name  Yrikodara,  '  wolf-stomached,'  indicated  a  voracious 
appetite ;  and  we  are  told  that  at  the  daily  meals  of  the 
five  brothers,  half  of  the  whole  dish  had  to  be  given  to 
Bhima  (I.  7161).  But  he  has  the  capacity  for  warm 
unselfish  love,  and  is  ardent  in  his  aff'ection  for  his 
mother  and  brothers.  Arjuna  rises  more  to  the  European 
standard  of  perfection.  He  may  be  regarded  as  the  real 
hero  of  the  Maha-bharata,^  of  undaunted  bravery,  gene- 
rous,^ with  refined  and  delicate  sensibilities,  tender-hearted, 
forgiving,  and  affectionate  as  a  woman,  yet  of  superhuman 
strength,  and  matchless  in  arms  and  athletic  exercises. 
Nakula  and  Sahadeva  are  both  amiable,  noble-minded, 
and  spirited.*    All  five  are  as  unlike  as  possible  to  the 

the  Maha-bharata,  which  was  the  growth  of  several  centuries.  The 
act  of  the  five  Pandavas,  described  p.  385,  cannot  be  reconciled  with 
their  usual  probity  and  generosity,  though  committed  under  great 
provocation.  Bhima  appears  to  have  been  most  in  fault,  which  is  so 
far  consistent. 

1  Yudhi  -  shthira,  '  firm  in  battle,'  was  probably  of  commanding 
stature  and  imposing  presence.  He  is  described  as  Maha-sinha-gati, 
'having,  a  majestic  lion -like  gait,'  with  a  Wellington  -  like  profile 
{Fralambojjvala-cdru-ghona)  and  long  lotus-eyes  {kamaldyataksha). 

^  Strictly,  as  in  the  Iliad,  there  is  no  real  hero  kept  always  in  view. 

^  Perhaps  it  may  be  objected  that  some  of  Arjuna's  acts  were  in- 
consistent with  this  character.  Thus  he  carried  off  Subhadra,  the 
sister  of  Krishna,  by  force.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind,  however, 
that  Krishna  himself  encourages  him  to  this  act,  and  says,  Prasahya 
haranam  Kshatri-ydndm  prasasyate  (L  7927).     Compare  p.  391. 

*  The  five  Pandu  princes  are  known  by  various  other  names  in  the 


3o2  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

hundred  sons  of  Dhrita-rashtra,  commonly  called  the 
Kuru  princes,  or  Kauravas,^  who  are  represented  as 
mean,  spiteful,  dishonourable,  and  vicious. 

So  bad  indeed  are  these  hundred  brothers,  and  so 
uniformly  without  redeemicg  points,  that  their  characters 
present  few  distinctive  features.  The  most  conspicuous 
is  the  eldest,  Duryodhana,^  who,  as  the  representative  of 
the  others,  is  painted  in  the  darkest  colours,  and  embodies 
all  their  bad  qualities.  When  the  Maha-bharata  (like  the 
Eamayana)  is  regarded  as  an  allegory,  then  Duryodhana 
(like  Eavana)  is  a  visible  type  of  the  evil  principle  in 
human  nature*  for  ever  doing  battle  with  the  good  and 
divine  principle,  symbolized  by  the  five  sons  of  Pandu. 

The  cousins,  though  so  uncongenial  in  character,  were 
educated   together   at   Hastina-pur,   the   city  of  Dhrita- 

Maha-biiarata,  some  of  which  it  may  be  useful  here  to  note.  Yudhi- 
shthira  is  also  called  Dharma-raja,  Dharma-putra,  and  sometimes 
simply  Eajan.  His  charioteer  was  called  Indrasena.  Bhima's  other 
names  are  Bhimasena,  Vrikodara,  Bahusalin.  Arjuna  is  also  called 
Kiritin,  Phalguna,  Jishnu,  Dhananjaya,  Bibhatsu,  Savyasadin,  Paka- 
sasani,  Guda-kesa,  S'veta-vahana,  Nara,  Vijaya,  Krishna,  and  some- 
times par  excellence  Partha,  though  Bhlma  and  Yudhi  -  shthira,  as 
sons  of  Pritha,  had  also  this  title.  Nakula  and  Sahadeva  are  called 
Madreyau  (as  sons  of  Madri),  and  sometimes  Yamau  (the  twins). 

1  This  name,  however,  is  occasionally  applied  to  the  Pandavas, 
as  they  and  the  sons  of  Dhrita-rashtra  were  equally  descendants  of 
Kuru. 

2  '  Difficult  to  conquer,'  cf.  p.  408.  The  names  of  all  are  given  in 
Adi-Parvan  4541.     Duhsasana  is  one  of  the  most  conspicuous. 

8  There  are  certainly  many  points  in  his  character,  as  well  as  in 
that  of  Havana,  which  may  be  compared  to  Milton's  conception  of 
Satan.  Perhaps  his  intimacy  with  the  Asura  Carvaka  may  be  in- 
tended to  mark  him  out  as  a  type  of  heresy  and  infidelity,  as  well  as 
of  every  other  bad  quality.  In  the  case  of  Ravana  it  is  remarkable 
that  he  gained  his  power  by  penance,  and  that  he  is  described  as 
well  read  in  the  Veda  (Ram.  VI.  xciii.  58).  Some  Rakshasas,  such 
as  Vibhishana,  Atikaya,  are  described  as  religious  (Ram.  VI.  Ixxi.  31). 
Cf.  Manu  VII.  38. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  383 

rashtra,  by  a  Brahman  named  Drona,^  who  found  in  the 
Pandu  princes  apt  pupils.  From  him  the  five  sons  of 
Pandu  acquired  *  intelligence  and  learning,  lofty  aims, 
religious  earnestness,  and  love  of  truth.'  All  the  cousins 
were  equally  instructed  in  war  and  arms ;  but  Arjuna,  by 
the  help  of  Drona,  who  gave  him  magical  weapons,  ex- 
celled all,  distinguishing  himself  in  every  exercise,  '  sub- 
missive ever  to  his  teacher's  will,  contented,  modest, 
affable,  and  mild,'  and  both  Bhima  and  Duryodhana 
learnt  the  use  of  the  club  from  their  cousin  Bala-rama 
(I-  5520). 

Their  education  finished,  a  tournament  was  held,  at  which 
all  the  youthful  cousins  displayed  their  skill  in  archery, 
in  the  management  of  chariots  {ratha-caryd),  horses,  and 
elephants,  in  sword,  spear,  and  club  exercises,  and  wrest- 
ling.    The  scene  is  graphically  described  (I.  5324) : — 

An  immense  concourse  of  spectators  cheered  the  combatants.  The 
agitation  of  the  crowd  was  like  the  roar  of  a  mighty  ocean.  Arjuna, 
after  exhibiting  prodigies  of  strength,  shot  five  separate  arrows  simul- 
taneously into-  the  jaws  of  a  revolving  iron  boar,  and  twenty-one 
arrows  into  the  hollow  of  a  cow's  horn  suspended  by  a  string.  Sud- 
denly there  was  a  pause.  The  crowd  turned  as  one  man  towards  a 
point  iu  the  arena,  where  the  sound  of  a  warrior  striking  his  arms  in 
defiance  ^  rent  the  sky  like  a  thunder-clap,  and  announced  the  entrance 
of  another  combatant.  This  proved  to  be  a  warrior  named  Karna, 
who  entered  the  lists  in  full  armour,  and  after  accomplishing  the  same 
feats  in  archery,  challenged  Arjuna  to  single  combat.  But  each 
champion  was  required  to  tell  his  name  and  pedigree;  and  Karna's 
parentage  being  doubtful  (see  p.  377),  he  was  obliged  to  retire,  'hang- 
ing his  head  with  shame  Hke  a  drooping  lily.' 

1  Drona  appears  to  have  kept  a  kind  of  school,  to  which  all  the 
young  princes  of  the  neighbouring  countries  resorted  (I.  5220).  He 
married  Kripi,  sister  of  Kripa,  and  had  by  her  a  son,  Asvatthaman. 

2  So  in  Vishnu-purana,  p.  513  :  '  Krishna  having  dived  into  the  pool 
struck  his  arms  in  defiance,  and  the  snake-king,  hearing  the  sound, 
came  quickly  forth.' 


384  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Kama,  thus  publicly  humiliated,  became  afterwards  a 
conspicuous  and  valuable  ally  of  the  Kurus  against  his 
own  half-brothers.  His  character  is  well  imagined.  Feel- 
ing keenly  the  stain  on  his  birth,  his  nature  was  chastened 
by  the  trial.  He  exhibited  in  a  high  degree  fortitude, , 
chivalrous  honour,  self-sacrifice,  and  devotion.  Especially 
remarkable  for  a  liberal  and  generous  disposition,-^  he 
never  stooped  to  ignoble  practj.ces  like  his  friends  the 
Kurus,  who  were  intrinsically  bad  men. 

The  tutor's  fee  (Gurv-arthra,  see  pp.  195,  242,  Manu 
IL  245,  Raghu-van^a  V.  17)  which  Drona  required  of  his 
pupils  for  their  instruction  was,  that  they  should  capture 
Drupada,  king  of  Pancala,  who  was  his  old  schoolfellow, 
but  had  insulted  him  by  repudiating  his  friendship  (I. 
5446) :— 

They  therefore  invaded  Drupada's  territory  and  took  him  prisoner; 
but  Drona  generously  spared  his  Kfe,  and  gave  him  back  half  his  king- 
dom. Drupada,  however,  burning  with  resentment,  endeavoured  to 
procure  the  birth  of  a  son,  to  avenge  his  defeat,  and  bring  about  the 
destruction  of  Drona.  Two  Brahmans  undertook  a  sacrifice  for  him, 
and  two  children  were  born  from  the  midst  of  the  altar,  out  of  the 
sacrificial  fire,  a  son,  Dhrishta-djnimna,  and  a  daughter,  Krishna  or 
Draupadi,  afterwards  the  wife  of  the  Pandavas  (see  p.  387). 

After  this,  Yudhi-shthira  was  installed  by  Dhrita-rashtra 
as  Yuva-raja  or  heir-apparent,  and  by  his  exploits  soon 
eclipsed  the  glory  of  his  father  Pandu's  reign. 

The  great  renown  gained  by  the  Pandu  princes  excited 
the  jealousy  and  ill-will  of  Dhrita-rashtra,  but  won  the 
affections  of  the  citizens.  The  latter  met  together,  and 
after  consultation  declared  that,  as  Dhrita-rashtra  was 
blind,  he  ought  not  to  conduct  the  government,  and  that 
as  Bhishma  had  formerly  declined  the  throne,  he  ought 
not  to  be  allowed  to  act  as  regent.     They  therefore  pro- 

^  He  is  often  to  this  day  cited  as  a  model  of  liberality.  Hence  his 
name,  Vasu-shena. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  385 

posed  to  crown  Yudhi-shthira  at  once.  When  Duryo- 
dhana  heard  of  this,  he  consulted  with  Karna,  ^akuni, 
and  Duh^asana,  how  he  might  remove  Yudhi-shthira  out 
of  the  way,  and  secure  the  throne  for  himself : — 

Urged  by  Duryodhana,  Dhnta-rashtra  was  induced  to  send  the  Pan- 
dava  princes  on  an  excursion  to  the  city  of  Varanavata,  pretending  that 
he  wished  them  to  see  the  beauties  of  that  town,  and  to  be  present  at 
a  festival  there.  Meanwhile  Duryodhana  instigated  his  friend  Puro- 
cana  to  precede  them,  and  to  prepare  a  house  for  their  reception,  which 
he  was  to  fill  secretly  with  hemp,  resin,  and  other  combustible  sub- 
stances, plastering  the  walls  with  mortar  composed  of  oil,  fat,  and  lac 
(IdJcshd,  jatu).  When  the  princes  were  asleep  in  this  house,  and  un- 
suspicious of  danger,  he  was  to  set  it  on  fire.  The  five  Pandavas  and 
their  mother  left  Hastina-pur  amid  the  tears  and  regrets  of  the  citizens, 
and  in  eight  days  arrived  at  Varanavata,  where,  after  great  demonstra- 
tions of  respect  from  the  inhabitants,  they  were  conducted  by  Purodana 
to  the  house  of  lac.  Having  been  warned  by  Vidura,  they  soon  dis- 
covered the  dangerous  character  of  the  structure,  and  with  the  assistance 
of  a  miner  {Idianaka)  sent  by  Vidura,  dug  an  underground  passage,  by 
which  to  escape  from  the  interior  (I.  5813).  Then  they  devised  a 
counterplot,  and  agreed  together  that  a  degraded  outcaste  woman 
(nishadi)  with  her  five  sons  should  be  invited  to  a  feast,  and  stupefied 
with  wine.  Bhima  was  then  to  set  fire  to  the  lac-house  in  which  they 
were  all  assembled  (see  note  2,  p.  380).  This  was  done.  Purodana  was 
burnt,  as  well  as  the  woman  with  her  five  sons,  but  they  themselves 
escaped  by  the  secret  passage  (surun-gd).  The  charred  bodies  of  the 
woman  and  her  sons  being  afterwards  found,  it  was  supposed  that  the 
Pandava  princes  had  perished  in  the  conflagration,  and  their  funeral 
ceremonies  were  actually  performed  by  Dhrita-rashtra.  Meanwhile 
they  hurried  off  to  the  woods;  Bhima,  the  strong  one,  carrying  his 
mother  and  the  twins,  and  leading  his  other  brothers  by  the  hands 
when  through  fatigue  they  could  not  move  on.  Whilst  his  mother  and 
brothers  were  asleep  under  a  fig-tree,  Bhima  had  an  encounter  with  a 
hideous  giant  named  Hidimba,  whom  he  slew.^  Afterwards  he  married 
Hidimba,  the  sister  of  this  monster,  and  had  a  son  by  her  named 
Ghatotkada. 

By  the  advice  of  their  grandfather  Vyasa,  the  Pandava 
princes   next   took   up    their   abode   in   the   house    of  a 

1  This  forms  the  subject  of  a  celebrated  episode,  edited  by  Bopp. 

2  B 


386  INDIAN    WISDOM. 

Brahman  at  a  city  called  Ekacakra. .  There  they  lived 
for  a  long  time  in  the  guise  of  mendicant  Brahmans,  safe 
from  the  persecution  of  Duryodhana.  Every  day  they 
went  out  to  beg  for  food  as  alms  [hhihshd,  bhaiksha), 
which  their  mother  Kunti  divided  at  night,  giving  half 
of  the  whole  to  Bhima  as  his  share  (cf.  p.  381).  While 
resident  in  the  house  of  the  Brahman,  Bhima  delivered 
his  family  and  the  city  of  Ekacakra  from  a  fierce  giant 
(or  Eakshasa)  named  Baka  (or  Vaka),  who  forced  the 
citizens  to  send  him  every  day  a  dish  of  food  by  a  man, 
whom  he  always  devoured  as  his  daintiest  morsel  at  the 
end  of  the  repast.'' 

The  turn  had  come  to  a  poor  Brahman  to  provide  the  Eakshasa  with 
his  meal.  He  determined  to  go  himself,  but  lamented  bitterly  the  hard- 
ness of  his  fate.  Upon  this,  his  wife  and  daughter  addressed  him  in 
language  full  of  the  deepest  pathos,  each  in  turn  insisting  on  sacrificing 
herself  for  the  good  of  the  family.  Lastly,  the  little  son,  too  young  to 
speak  distinctly,  ran  with  beaming  eyes  and  smiling  face  to  his  parents, 
and  in  prattling  accents  said,  '  Weep  not,  father ;  sigh  not,  mother.' 
Then  breaking  off  and  brandishing  a  pointed  spike  of  grass,  he  ex- 
claimed, '  With  this  spike  will  I  kill  the  fierce  man-eating  giant. '  His 
parents,  hearing  this  innocent  prattle  of  their  child,  in  the  midst  of 
their  heartrending  anguish  felt  a  thrill  of  exquisite  delight.  In  the 
end  Bhima,  who  overheard  the  whole  conversation,  undertook  to 
convey  the  meal  to  the  monster,  and,  of  course,  speedily  despatched 
him  (I.  6202). 

After  this  Vyasa  appeared  to  his  grandsons,  and  informed 
them  that  Draupadi,  the  daughter  of  Drupada,  king  of 
Pancala,  was  destined  to  be  their  common  wife  :^ — 

1  This  story  forms  a  touching  episode,  which  has  been  printed  by 
Bopp,  and  translated  by  Milman. 

2  Polyandry  is  still  practised  among  some  hill-tribes  in  the  Himalaya 
range  near  Simla,  and  in  other  barren  mountainous  regions,  such  as 
Bhotan,  where  a  large  population  could  not  be  supported.  It  prevails 
also  among  the  Nair  (Nayar)  tribe  in  Malabar.  Our  forefathers,  or  at 
least  the  ancient  Britons,  according  to  Csesar,  were  given  to  the  same 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  387 

In  real  fact  she  had  been  in  a  former  life  the  daughter  of  a  sage, 
and  had  performed  a  most  severe  penance,  in  order  that  a  husband 
might  fall  to  her  lot.  S'iva,  pleased  with  her  penance,  had  appeared 
to  her,  and  had  promised  her,  instead  of  one,  five  husbands.  When 
the  maiden  replied  that  she  wanted  only  one  husband,  the  god  answered, 
'  Five  times  you  said  to  me,  Grant  me  a  husband ;  therefore  in  another 
body  you  will  obtain  five  husbands'  (I.  6433,  7322).  This  Eishi's 
daughter  was  thereupon  born  in  the  family  of  Drupada  as  a  maiden  of 
the  most  distinguished  beauty,  and  was  destined  to  be  the  wife  of  the 
Pandavas.i 

practice :   '  Uxores  habent  deni  duodenique  inter  se  communes,'  &c. 
De  Bello  Gallico,  V.  14. 

^  Vyasa,  who  is  the  type  and  representative  of  strict  Brahmanism,  is 
made  to  explain  at  length  the  necessity  for  the  marriage  of  Draupadi 
to  five  husbands  (which  is  called  a  sukshma-dharma,  I.  7246).  He  also 
gifted  Drupada  with  divine  intuition  {cakshur  divyam)  to  perceive  the 
divinity  of  the  Pandavas  and  penetrate  the  mystic  meaning  of  what 
,otherwise  would  have  been  a  serious  violation  of  the  laws  and  institu- 
tions of  the  Brahmans  (7313).  Hence  Drupada  became  aware  of  his 
daughter's  former  birth,  and  that  Arjuna  was  really  a  portion  of  the 
essence  of  Indra  {Sakrasydnia),  and  all  his  brothers  portions  of  the  same 
god.  Draupadi  herself,  although  nominally  the  daughter  of  Drupada, 
was  really  born,  like  her  brother  Dhrishta-dyumna,  out  of  the  midst  of 
the  sacrificial  fire  (vedv-Tnadhydt,  I.  693 1 ;  see  p.  384),  and  was  a  form 
of  Lakshmi.  In  no  other  way  could  her  supernatural  birth,  and  the 
divine  perfume  which  exhaled  from  her  person,  and  was  perceived  a 
league  o£E  (kro^a-mdtrdt  pravdti),  be  accounted  for.  Vyasa  at  the  same 
time  explained  the  mysterious  birth  of  Krishna  and  Baladeva; — how 
the  god  Vishnu  pulled  out  two  of  his  own  hairs,  one  white  and  the  other 
black,  which  entered  into  two  women  of  the  family  of  the  Yadavas 
(DevakI  and  Rohinl),  and  became,  the  white  one  Baladeva,  the  black 
one  Krishna  (I.  7307  ;  Vishnu-purana  V.  i).  The  Markandeya-purana 
(ch.  5)  shows  how  the  five  Pandavas  could  be  all  portions  of  Indra,  and 
yet  four  of  them  sons  of  other  gods.  When  Indra  killed  the  son  of 
Tvashtri  (or  Visvakarman  as  Prajapati,  the  Creator),  his  punishment 
for  this  hrahma^liatyd  was  that  all  his  tejas,  '  manly  vigour,'  deserted 
him,  and  entered  Dharma,  the  god  of  justice.  The  son  of  Tvashtri  was 
reproduced  as  the  demon  Vritra,  and  again  slain  by  Indra ;  as  a  punish- 
ment for  which  his  hala,  '  strength,'  left  him,  and  entered  Mdruta,  '  the 
Wind.'  Lastly,  when  Indra  violated  Ahalya,  the  wife  of  the  sage 
Gautama,  his  rupa,  '  beauty,'  abandoned  him,  and  entered  the  Nasatyau 


388  INDIAN   WISDOM.  ' 

In  obedience  to  the  directions  of  their  grandfather,  the 
five  Pandavag  quitted  Ekacakra,  and  betook  themselves 
to  the  court  of  king  Drupada,  where  Draupadi  was  about 
to  hold  her  Svayamyara  : — 

An  immense  concourse  of  princely  suitors,  with  their  retainers,  came 
to  the  ceremony ;  and  king  Drupada  eagerly  looked  for  Arjuna  among 
them,  that,  strengthened  by  that  hero's  alliance,  he  might  defy  Drona's 
anger.  He  therefore  prepared  an  enormous  bow,  which  he  was  per- 
suaded none  but  Arjuna  could  bend,  and  proposed  a  trial  of  strength, 
promising  to  give  his  daughter  to  any  one  who  could  by  means  of  the 
bow  shoot  five  arrows  simultaneously  through  a  revolving  ring  into  a 
target  beyond.  An  amphitheatre  was  erected  outside  the  town,  sur- 
rounded by  tiers  of  lofty  seats  and  raised  platforms,  with  variegated 
awnings.  Magnificent  palaces,  crowded  with  eager  spectators,  over- 
looked the  scene.  Actors,  conjurors,  athletes,  and  dancers  exhibited 
their  skill  before  the  multitude.  Strains  of  exquisite  music  floated  in 
the  air.  Drums  and  trumpets  sounded.  When  expectation  was  at  its 
height,  Draupadi  in  gorgeous  apparel  entered  the  arena,  and  the  bow- 
was  brought.  The  hundred  sons  of  Dhrita-rashtra  strained  every 
nerve  to  bend  the  ponderous  weapon,  but  without  effect.  Its  recoil 
dashed  them  breathless  to  the  ground,  and  made  them  the  laughing- 
stock of  the  crowd. 

Arjuna  now  advanced,  disguised  as  a  Brahman.  I  here 
translate  a  portion  metrically  (I.  7049,  &c.) : — - 

A  moment  motionless  he  stood  and  scanned 

The  bow,  collecting  all  his  energy. 

Next  walking  round  in  homage,  breathed  a  prayer 

To  the  Supreme  Bestower  of  good  gifts ; 

Then  fixing  all  his  mind  on  Draupadi 

He  grasped  the  ponderous  weapon  in  his  hand. 

And  with  one  vigorous  effort  braced  the  string. 

or  Asvins.  When  Dharma  gave  back  the  tejas  of  Indra,  Yudhi-shthira 
was  born ;  when  the  Wind  gave  up  Indra's  bala,  Bhima  was  born ;  and 
when  the  Asvins  restored  the  9'wpa  of  Indra,  Nakula  and  Sahadeva  were 
born.  Arjuna  was  bom  as  half  the  essence  of  Indra.  Hence,  as  they 
were  all  portions  of  one  deity,  there  could  be  no  harm  in  Draupadi 
becoming  the  wife  of  all  five. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  389 

Quickly  the  shafts  were  aimed ;  they  flew ; 
The  mark  fell  pierced ;  a  shout  of  victory 
Rang  through  the  vast  arena ;  from  the  sky 
Garlands  of  flowers  crowned  the  hero's  head, 
Ten  thousand  fluttering  scarfs  waved  in  the  air, 
And  drum  and  trumpet  sounded  forth  his  triumph. 

I  need  not  suggest  the  parallel  which  will  at  once  be 
drawn  by  the  classical  scholar  between  this  trial  of  archery 
and  a  similar  scene  in  the  Odyssey. 

When  the  suitors  found  themselves  outdone  by  a  mere 
stripling  in  the  coarse  dress  of  a  mendicant  Brahman, 
their  rage  knew  no  bounds.     A  real  battle  ensued  : — 

The  Pandu  princes  protected  Drupada,  and  enacted  prodigies. 
Bhima  tore  up  a  tree,  and  used  it  as  a  club.  Karna  at  last  met 
Arjuna  in  single  combat,  rushing  on  him  like  a  young  elephant. 
They  overwhelmed  each  other  with  showers  of  arrows,  which  darkened 
the  air.  But  not  even  Karna  could  withstand  the  irresistible  onset  of 
the  godlike  Arjuna,  and  he  and  the  other  suitors  retired  vanquished 
from  the  field,  leaving  Draupadi  as  the  bride  of  Arjuna.   • 

Arjuna  having  been  chosen  by  Draupadi,  the  five 
brothers  returned  with  her  to  their  mother,  who  being 
inside  the  house,  and  fancying  that  they  had  brought 
alms,  called  out  to  them,  'Share  it  between  you'  [bhun-kteti 
sametya  sarve,  I.  7132).  The  words  of  a  parent,  thus 
spoken,  could  not  be  set  aside  without  evil  consequences  ; 
and  Drupada,  at  the  persuasion  of  Vyasa,  who  acquainted 
him  with  the  divinely  ordained  destination  of  his  daughter,^ 
consented  to  her  becoming  the  common  wife  of  the  five 
brothers.  She  was  first  married  by  the  family -priest 
Dhaumya  to  Yudhi-shthira  (I.  7340),  and  then,  according 
to  priority  of  birth,  to  the  other  four.^ 

^  See  note  i,  p.  387.  Drupada  at  first  objected.  Yudhi-shthira's 
excuse  for  himself  and  his  brothers  is  remarkable ;  Purveshdm  dnupur- 
vyena  yaiam  vartmdnuydmahe  (I.  7246). 

2  She  had  a  son  by  each  of  the  five   brothers — Prativindhya  by 


390  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

The  Panclavas,  being  now  strengthened  by  their  alliance 
with  the  powerful  king  of  Paiicala,  threw  off  their  dis- 
guises ;  and  ting  Dhrita-rashtra  thought  it  more  politic 
to  settle  all  differences  by  dividing  his  kingdom  between 
them  and  his  own  sons.  He  gave  up  Hastina-pur  to  the 
latter,  presided  over  by  Duryodhana,  and  permitted  the 
five  Pandavas  to  occupy  a  district  near  the  Yamuna 
(Jumna),  called  Khandava-prastha,  where  they  built  Indra- 
prastha  (the  modern  Delhi),  and,  under  Yudhi-shthira  as 
their  leader,  subjugated  much  of  the  adjacent  territory  by 
predatory  incursions  (1.  6573). 

One  day,  when  Arjuna  was  bathing  in  the  Ganges,  he  was  carried 
off  by  the  serpent-nymph  XJliipi,  daughter  of  the  king  of  the  Nagas, 
whom  he  married  (I.  7809).  Afterwards  he  married  Citran-gada, 
daughter  of  the  king  of  Manipura,  and  had  a  child  by  her  named 
Babhru-vahana  (I.  7883). 

Wandering  for  twelve  years  in  the  forests,  to  fulfil  a 
vow,  Arjuna  came  to  Prabhasa,  a  place  of  pilgrimage  in 
the  west  of  India,  where  he  met  Krishna,^  the  details  of 


Yudhi-shthira ;  Sutasoma  by  Bhima ;  S'rutakarman  by  Arjuna ;  S'atar 
nika  by  Nakula;  S'rutasena  by  Sahadeva  (I.  8039).  Arjuna  had  also 
another  wife,  Subhadra,  the  sister  of  Krishna,  with  whom  he  eloped 
when  on  a  visit  to  Krishna  at  Dvaraka.  By  her  he  had  a  son, 
Abhimanyu.  He  had  also  a  son  named  Iravat  by  the  serpent-nymph 
Ultipi.  Bhima  had  also  a  son,  Ghatotkada,  by  the  Eakshasi  Hidimba 
(see  p.  385) ;  and  the  others  had  children  by  different  wives  (Vishnu- 
purana,  p.  459).  Arjuna's  son  Abhimanyu  had  a  son  Parikshit,  who 
was  father  of  Janamejaya.  Parikshit  died  of  the  bite  of  a  snake  ;  and 
the  Bhagavata-purana  was  narrated  to  him  between  the  bite  and  his 
death. 

1  See  note  i,  p.  387.  I  enumerate  some  of  the  other  names  by 
which  Krishna  is  known  in  the  Maha-bharata,  as  follows: — Vasu- 
deva,  Kesava,  Govinda,  Janardana,  Damodara,  Dasarha,  Narayana, 
Hrishikesa,  Purushottama,  Madhava,  Madhu-siidana,  Adyuta.  (See 
V.  2560).  In  the  Draupadi-harana  (75)  Krishna  and  Arjuna  are 
called  Krishnau. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA,  39 1 

■whose  early  life  have  already  been  given  (p.  332),  and 
who  here  first  formed  a  friendship  with  Arjuna,  and  took 
him  to  his  city  Dvaraka,  where  he  received  him  as  a 
visitor  into,  his  own  house  (I.  7905).  Soon  afterwards, 
some  of  the  relatives  of  Krishna  celebrated  a  festival 
in  the  mountain  Eaivataka,  to  which  both  Arjuna  and 
Krishna  went.  There  they  saw  Bala-rama,  elder  brother 
of  Krishna  (p.  332),  in  a  state  of  intoxication  {hshivaY 
with  his  wife  Revati ;  and  there  they  saw  Subhadra, 
Krishna's  sister.  Her  beauty  excited  the  love  of  Arjuna, 
who,  after  obtaining  Krishna's  leave,  carried  her  off  (see 
note  2,  p.  389)  and  married  her  (I.  7937).  In  the 
twelfth  year  of  his  absence  he  returned  with  her  to 
Indra-prastha. 

The  Pandavas  and  all  the  people  of  Indra-prastha  then 
lived  happily  for  some  time  under  the  rule  of  Yudhi- 
shthira,  who,  elated  with  his  conquests,  undertook,  assisted 
by  Krishna,  to  celebrate  the  Eajastiya,  a  great  sacrifice, 
at  which  his  own  inauguration  as  paramount  sovereign 
was  to  be  performed. 

A  great  assembly  (sahhd)  was  accordingly  held  : — 

Various  princes  attended,  and  brought  either  rich  presents  or 
tribute  (II.  1264).  Among  those  who  came  were  Bhishma,  Dhrita- 
rashtra  and  his  hundred  sons,  Subala  (king  of  Gandhara),  S'akuni, 
Drupada,  S'alya,  Drona,  Kripa,  Jayad-ratha,  Kuntibhoja,  S'isu-pala, 
and  others  from  the  extreme  south  and  north  (Dravida,  Ceylon,  and 
Kasmir,  II.  1271).^  On  the  day  of  the  inauguration  (ahhisheka) 
Bhishma,  at  the  suggestion  of  the  sage  Narada,  proposed  that  a  re- 
spectful oblation  (argha)  should  be  prepared  and  offered  in  token  of 
worship  to  the  best  and  strongest  person  present,  whom  he  declared  to 

1  Compare  Megha-diita,  verse  51,  whete  Bala-rama's  fondness  for 
wine  is  alluded  to.     See  also  Vishnu- purana  V.  25. 

2  The  details  in  this  part  of  the  poem  are  interesting  and  curious. 
As  shown  by  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson,  they  throw  light  on  the 
geographical  divisions  and  political  condition  of  India  at  an  early 
epoch. 


392  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

be  Krishna.  To  this  the  Pandavas  readily  agreed ;  and  Sahadeva  was 
commissioned  to  present  the  offering.  S'isu-pala  (also  called  Sunitha), 
however,  opposed  the  worship  of  Krishna ;  and,  after  denouncing  him 
as  a  contemptible  and  Hi-instructed  person  (II.  1340),  challenged  him 
to  fight ;  1  but  Krishna  instantly  struck  off  his  head  with  his  discus 
called  Su-darsana.^ 

After  this,  Dhrita-rashtra  was  persuaded  to  hold  another 
assembly  (sahhd)  at  Hastina-pur ;  and  Vidura  was  sent  to 
the  Pandavas,  to  invite  them  to  be  present  (11.  1993). 
They  consented  to  attend ;  and  Yudhi-shthira  was  easily 
prevailed  on  by  Duryodhana  to  play  with  Sakuni.  By 
degrees  Yudhi-shthira  staked  everything  —  his  territory, 
his  possessions,  and  last  of  all  Draupadi.  All  were,  suc- 
cessively lost ;  and  Draupadi,  then  regarded  as  a  slave, 
was  treated  with  great  indignity  by  Duhsasana.  He 
dragged  her  by  the  hair  of  the  head  into  the  assembly ; 
upon  which  Bbima,  who  witnessed  this  insult,  swore  that 
he  would  one  day  dash  Duhsasana  to  pieces  and  drink  his 
blood  ^  (II.  2302).  In  the  end  a  compromise  was  agreed 
upon.  The  kingdom  was  given  up  to  Duryodhana  for 
twelve  years ;  and  the  five  Pandavas,  with  Draupadi, 
were  required  to  live  for  that  period  in  the  woods,  and 


1  Duryodhana  also,  in  a  subsequent  part  of  the  Maha-bharata,  evinces 
scepticism  in  regard  to  the  divine  nature  of  Krishna  (Y.  4368). 

2  The  story  of  S'isu-pala  and  his  destruction  by  Krishna  form  the 
subject  of  the  celebrated  poem  of  Magha.  The  particulars  of  the 
narrative  as  told  in  this  book  of  the  Maha-bharata  are  given  by  Dr. 
Muir  in  his  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  iv.  The  Vishnu-purana  identifies 
S^isu  -  pala  with  the  demons  Hiranya  -  kasipu  and '  Havana  (Wilson, 

P-  437)- 

8  This  threat  he  fulfilled.  The  incident  is  noticeable  as  it  is  the 
subject  of  the  well-known  drama  by  Bhatta^narayana  called  Venl- 
sambhara,  '  braid-binding,'  which  describes  how  the  braided  hair  torn  by 
Duhsasana  was  again  bound  together  by  Bhima,  who  is  made  to  say 
Svayam  aham  samhardmi,  '  I  myself  will  again  bind  the  braid  together.' 
See  Sahitya-darpana,  p.  169. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  393 

to  pass  the  thirteentli  concealed  under  assumed  names  in 
various  disguises. 

They  accordingly  retired  to  the  Kamyaka  forest,  and 
took  up  their  abode  on  the  banks  of  the  SarasvatT. 

While  they  were  resident  in  the  forest,  various  episodes 
occurred,  thus  i — • 

Arjuna  went  to  the  Himalaya  mountains  to  perform  severe  penance, 
and  thereby  obtain  celestial  arms.  After  some  time  S'iva,  to  reward 
him  and  prove  his  bravery,  approached  him  as  a  Kirata  or  wild 
mountaineer  living  by  the  chase,  at  the  moment  that  a  demon  named 
Miika,  in  the  form  of  a  boar,  was  making  an  attack  upon  him.  S'iva 
and  Arjuna  both  shot  together  at  the  boar,  which  fell  dead,  and  both 
claimed  to  have  hit  him  first.  This  served  as  a  pretext  for  S'iva, 
as  the  Kirata,  to  quarrel  with  Arjuna,  and  have  a  battle  with  him. 
Arjuna  fought  long  with  the  Kirata,i  but  could  not  conquer  him. 
At  last  he  recognized  the  god,  and  threw  himself  at  his  feet.  Siva, 
pleased  with  his  bravery,  gave  him  the'  celebrated  weapon  Pasupata, 
to  enable  him  to  conquer  Karna  and  the  Kuru  princes  in  war  (III. 
1650,  1664). 

Many  legends  were  also  repeated  to  console  and  amuse 
the  Pandu  princes  in  their  time  of  exile.  For  instance, 
we  have  here  introduced  (III.  12746- 12804)  ^^^  epic 
version  of  the  tradition  of  the  Deluge  (the  earliest  account 
of  which  occurs  in  the  Satapatha-brahmana,  see  p.  29  of 
this  volume),  as  follows  : — 

Manu,  the  Hindu  Noah  (not  the  grandson  of  Brahma,  and  reputed 
author  of  the  Code,  but  the  seventh  Manu,  or  Manu  of  the  present 
period,  called  Vaivasvata,  and  regarded  as  one  of  the  progenitors  of 
the  human  race,  Manu  I.  61,  62),  is  represented  as  conciliating  the 
favour  of  the  Supreme  Being  by  his  austerities  in  an  age  of  universal 
depravity.  A  fish,  which  was  an  incarnation  of  Brahma  (cf.  p.  327), 
appeared  to  him  whilst  engaged  in  penance  on  the  margin  of  a  river,  and 
accosting  him,  craved  protection  from  the  larger  fish.    Manu  complied, 

^  This  forms  the  subject  of  a  celebrated  poem  by  Bharavi  called  the 
Kiratarjuniya.  S'iva  was  regarded  as  the  god  of  the  Kiratas,  who  were 
evidently  a  race  of  aborigines  much  respected  by  the  Hindus  for  their 
bravery  and  skill  in  archery. 


394  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

and  placed  him  in  a  glass  vessel.  Having  outgrown  this,  he  requested 
to  be  taken  to  a,  more  roomy  receptacle.  Manu  then  placed  him  in  a 
lake.  Still  the  fish  grew,  till  the  lake,  though  three  leagues  long, 
could  not  contain  him.  He  next  asked  to  be  taken  to  the  Ganges ; 
but  even  the  Ganges  was  soon  too  small,  and  the  fish  was  finally 
transferred  to  the  ocean.  There  he  continued  to  expand,  till  at  last, 
addressing  Manu,  he  warned  him  of  the  coming  Deluge. 

Manu,  however,  was  to  be  preserved  by  the  help  of  the  fish,  who 
commanded  him  to  build  a  ship  and  go  on  board,  not  with  his  own 
wife  and  children,  but  with  the  seven  Kishis  or  patriarchs ;  and  not 
with  pairs  of  animals,  but  with  the  seeds  of  all  existing  things.  The 
flood  came ;  Manu  went  on  board,  and  fastened  the  ship,  as  directed, 
to  a  horn  in  the  fish's  head.  He  was  then  drawn  along  ^ — (I  translate 
nearly  literally)  : —  • 

Along  the  ocean  in  that  stately  ship  was  borne  the  lord  of  men,  and  through 
Its  dancing,  tumbling  billows,  and  its  roaring  waters  ;  and  the  bark. 
Tossed  to  and  fro  by  violent  winds,  reeled  on  the  surface  of  the  deep. 
Staggering  and  trembling  like  a  drunken  woman.    Land  was  seen  no  more, 
Nor  far  horizon,  nor  the  space  between ;  for  everywhere  around 
Spread  the  wild  waste  of  waters,  reeking  atmosphere,  and  boundless  sky. 
And  now  when  all  theworldwas  deluged,  nought  appeared  above  the  waves 
But  Manu  and  the  seven  sages,  and  the  fish  that  drew  the  bark. 
Unwearied  thus  for  years  on  years  the  fish  propelled  the  ship  across 
The  heaped-up  waters,  till  at  length  it  bore  the  vessel  to  the  peak 
Of  Himavan  ;  then,  softly  smiling,  thus  the  fish  addressed  the  sage  : 
Haste  now  to  bind  thy  ship  to  this  high  crag.     Know  me  the  lord  of  all. 
The  great  creator  Brahma,  mightier  than  all  might — omnipotent. 
By  me  in  fish-like  shape  hast  thou  been  saved  in  dire  emergency. 
Prom  Manu  all  creation,  gods,  Asuras,  men,  must  be  produced ; 
By  him  the  world  must  be  created — that  which  moves  and  moveth  not. 

Another  tale  told  in  this  section-  of  the  poem  (III. 
1 66 1 9,  &c.)  may  be  cited  for  its  true  poetic  feeling  and 
pathos — qualities  in  which  it  is  scarcely  excelled  by  the 


1  There  is  still  a  later  account  of  the  Deluge  in  the  Bhagavata- 
purana,  where  the  fish  is  represented  as  an  incarnation  of  Vishnu. 
The  god's  object  in  descending  as  a  fish  seems  to  have  been  to  steer 
the  ship.  In  the  Assyrian  account  (as  interpreted  by  Mr.  G.  Smith) 
sailors  and  a  helmsman  are  taken  on  board. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  395 

story  of  Admetus  and  Alcestis.      I  subjoin  the  briefest 
epitome : — 

Savitri,  the  beautiful  daughter  of  a  king  Asvapati,  loved  Satyavan, 
the  son  of  an  old  hermit,  but  was  warned  by  a  seer  to  overcome  her 
attachment,  as  Satyavan  was  a  doomed  man,  having  only  one  year  to 
live.     But  Savitri  replies  :  ^ — 

Whether  his  years  be  few  or  many,  be  he  gifted  with  all  grace 
Or  graceless,  him  my  heart  hath  chosen,  and  it  chooseth  not  again. 

The  king's  daughter  and  the  hermit's  son  were  therefore  married, 
and  the  bride  strove  to  forget  the  ominous  prophecy ;  but  as  the  last 
day  of  the  year  approached,  her  anxiety  became  irrepressible.  She 
exhausted  herself  in  prayers  and  penances,  hoping  to  stay  the  hand  of 
the  destroyer ;  yet  all  the  while  dared  not  reveal  the  fatal  secret  to  her 
husband.  At  last  the  dreaded  day  arrived,  and  Satyavan  set  out  to  cut 
wood  in  the  forest.-  His  wife  asked  leave  to  accompany  him,  and  walked 
behind  her  husband,  smiling,  but  with  a  heavy  heart.  Satyavan  soon 
made  the  wood  resound  with  his  hatchet,  when  suddenly  a  thrill  of 
agony  shot  through  his  temples,  and  feeling  himself  falling,  he  called 
out  to  his  wife  to  support  him. 

Then  she  received  her  fainting  husband  in  her  arms,  and  sat  herself 
On  the  cold  ground,  and  gently  laid  his  drooping  head  upon  her  lap ; 
Sorrowing,  she  call'd  to  mind  the  sage's  prophecy,  and  reckoned  up 
The  days  and  hours.     All  in  an  instant  she  beheld  an  awful  shape 
Standing  before  her,  dressed  in  blood-red  garments,  with  a  glittering  crown 
Upon  his  head  :  his  form,  though  glowing  like  the  sun,  was  yet  obscure. 
And  eyes  he  had  like  flames,  a  noose  depended  from  his  hand ;  and  he 
Was  terrible  to  look  upon,  as  by  her  husband's  side  he  stood  ■ 
And  gazed  upon  him  with  a  fiery  glance.     Shuddering  she  started  up 
And  laid  her  dying  Satyavan  upon  the  ground,  and  with  her  hands 
Joined  reverently,  she  thus  with  beating  heart  addressed  the  Shape  : 
Surely  thou  art  a  god,  such  form  as  thine  must  more  than  mortal  be  ! 
Tell  me,  thou  godlike  being,  who  thou  art,  and  wherefore  art  thou  here  ? 

The  figure  replied  that  he  was  Yama,  king  of  the  dead ;  that  her 
husband's  time  was  come,  and  that  he  must  bind  and  take  his 
spirit : — 

1  I  translate  as  closely  as  I  can  to  the  original.  This  and  other 
select  specimens  of  Indian  poetry  have  been  more  freely  and  poetically 
translated  by  Mr.  R.  Griffiths. 


396  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Then  from  her  husband's  body  forced  he  out  and  firmly  with  his  cord 
Bound  and  detained  the  spirit,  clothed  in  form  no  larger  than  a  thumb,  i 
Forthwith  the  body,  reft  of  vital  being  and  deprived  of  breath, 
Lost  all  its  grace  and  beauty,  and  became  ghastly  and  motionless. 

After  binding  the  spirit,  Yama  proceeds  with  it  towards  the  quarter 
of  which  he  is  guardian — the  south.  The  faithful  wife  follows  him 
closely.  Yama  bids  her  go  home  and  prepare  her  husband's  funeral 
rites ;  but  she  persists  in  following,  till  Yama,  pleased  with  her  devo- 
tion, grants  her  any  boon  she  pleases,  except  the  life  of  her  husband. 
She  chooses  that  her  husband's  father,  who  is  blind,  may  recover  his 
sight.  Yama  consents,  and  bids  her  now  return  home.  Still  she 
persists  in  following.  Two  other  boons  are  granted  in  the  same  way, 
and  still  Savitri  follows  closely  on  the  heels  of  the  king  of  death.  At 
last,  overcome  by  her  constancy,  Yama  grants  a  boon  without  exception. 
The  delighted  Savitri  exclaims — 

Nought,  mighty  king,  this  time  hast  thou  excepted :  let  my  husband  live; 
Without  him  I  desire  not  happiness,  nor  even  heaven  itself ; 
Without  him  I  must  die.  'So  be  it!  faithful  wife,'  replied  the  kingof  death; 
'  Thus  I  release  him ; '  and  with  that  he  loosed  the  cord  that  bound  his  soul. 

During  the  residence  of  the  five  brothers  in  the  forest, 
Jayad-ratha  attempted  to  carry  off  Draupadi,  while  they 
were  absent  on  a  shooting  excursion.  This  resembled  in 
some  respects  the  story  of  Sita's  forcible  abduction  by 
Eavana  in  the  Eamayana  (III.  15572),  which  story, 
therefore,  is  here  told  (15945.  See  p.  366  of  this 
volume). 

In  the  thirteenth  year  of  exile,  the  Pandavas  journeyed 
to  the  court  of  king  Virata,  and  entered  his  service  in 
different  disguises : — 

Yudhi-shthira  called  himself  a  Brahman  and  took  the  name  of  Kan-ka 
(23) ;  Arjuna  named  himself  Vrihan-nala,  and  pretending  to  be  a  eunuch 
{tritvyam  prakritim  gatah),  adopted  a  sort  of  woman's  dress,  putting 
bracelets  on  his  arms  and  ear-rings  in  his  ears,  in  order,  as  he  said,  to 
hide  the  scars  caused  by  his  bow-string.  He  undertook  in  this  capacity 
to  teach  dancing,  music,  and  singing  to  the  daughter  of  Virata  and 

1  Compare  note  3,  p.  198  of  this  volume. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  397 

the  other  women  of  the  palace,  and  soon  gained  their  good  graces 
(IV.  310). 

One  day  when  Virata  and  four  of  the  Pandavas  were  absent,  Duryo- 
dhana  and  his  brothers  made  an  expedition  against  Virata's  capital, 
Matsya,  and  carried  off  some  cattle.  TJttara  the  son  of  Virata  (in  the 
absence  of  his  father)  determined  to  follow  and  attack  the  Kuru  army, 
it  any  one  could  be  found  to  act  as  his  charioteer.  Vrihan-nala  (Arjuna) 
undertook  this  office,  and  promised  to  bring  back  fine  clothes  and  orna^ 
ments  for  TJttara  and  the  other  women  of  the  palace  (IV.  1226).  When 
they  arrived  in  sight  of  the  Kuru  army,  the  courage  of  Uttara,  who  was 
a  mere  youth,  failed  him.  Vrihan-nala  then  made  him  act  as  charioteer, 
while  he  himself  (Arjuna)  undertook  to  fight  the  Kauravas.  Upon  that 
great  prodigies  occurred.  Terror  seized  Bhishma,  Duryodhana,  and 
their  followers,  who  suspected  that  Vrihan-nala  was  Arjuna  in  disguise, 
and  even  the  horses  shed  tears  ^  (IV.  1290).  Duryodhana,  however, 
declared  that  if  he  turned  out  to  be  Arjuna,  he  would  have  to  wander  in 
exile  for  a  second  period  of  twelve  years.  Meanwhile  Arjuna  revealed 
himself  to  Uttara,  and  explained  also  the  disguises  of  his  brothers  and 
Draupadi.  Uttara,  to  test  his  veracity.  Inquired  whether  he  could 
repeat  Arjuna's  ten  names,  and  what  each  meant.  Arjuna  enumerated 
them  (Arjuna,  Phalguna,  Jishnu,  Kiritin,  S'vetavahana,  Bibhatsu, 
Vijaya,  Krishna,  Savyasadin,  Dhanaiijaya),  and  explained  their  deriva- 
tion^  (IV.  1380).  Uttara  then  declared  that  he  was  satisfied,  and  no 
longer  afraid  of  the  Kuru  army  (IV.  1393). 

Arjuna  next  put  off  his  bracelets  and  woman's  attire,  strung  his  bow 
Gandiva,  and  assumed  all  his  other  weapons,  which  had  been  concealed 
in  a  S'ami  tree.  They  are  described  as  addressing  him  suppliantly,  and 
saying,  'We  are  your  servants,  ready  to  carry  out  your  commands'^ 
(IV.  142 1).  He  also  removed  Uttara's  standard  and  placed  his  own 
ape-emblazoned  banner  in  front  of  the  chariot.  Then  was  fought  a 
great  battle  between  Arjuna  and  the  Kauravas.  In  the  end  the  whole 
Kuru  army  fled  before  him,  and  all  the  property  and  cattle  of  Virata 
was  recovered.  Arjuna  told  Uttara  to  conceal  the  real  circumstances 
of  the  battle,  but  to  send  messengers  to  his  father's  capital  announcing 
his  victory,  which  so  delighted  Virata  that  he  ordered  the  whole  city  to 
be  decorated. 

Not  long  afterwards  Virata  held  a  great  assembly,  at 

1  Compare  Homer,  Iliad  XVII.  426. 

2  See  Arjuna's  other  names  in  note  4,  p.  381. 
8  Compare  note,  p.  402. 


398  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

which  the  five  Pandavas  attended,  and  took  their  seats 
with  the  other  princes.  Virata,  who  did  not  yet  know 
their  real  rank,  was  at  first  angry  at  this  presumption 
(IV.  2266).  Arjuna  then  revealed  who  they  were.  Virata 
was  delighted,  embraced  the  Pandavas,  offered  them  all 
his  possessions,  and  to  Arjuna  his  daughter  Uttara  in 
marriage.  Arjuna  declined,  but  accepted  her  for  his  son 
Abhimanyu  (IV.  2356). 

A  council  of  princes  was  then  called  by  Virata,  at  which 
the  Pandavas,  Krishna,  and  Bala-rama  were  present,  and 
a  consultation  was  held  as  to  what  course  the  Pandavas 
were  to  take  : — 

Krishna,  in  a  speech,  advised  that  they  should  not  go  to  war  with 
their  kinsmen  until  they  had  sent  an  ambassador  to  Duryodhana,  sum- 
moning him  to  restore  half  the  kingdom.  Bala-rama  supported  Krishna's 
opinion,  and  recommended  conciliation  (sdman),  but  Satyaki,  in  an  angry 
tone,  counselled  war  (V.  40).  Drupada  supported  him,  and  recom- 
mended that  they  should  send  messengers  to  all  their  allies,  and  collect 
forces  from  all  parts.  The  upshot  was  that  the  family-priest  of  Drupada 
was  despatched  by  the  Pandavas  as  an  ambassador  to  king  Dhrita-rashtra 
at  Hastina-pur,  to  try  the  effect  of  negotiation. 

Meanwhile  Krishna  and  Bala-rama  returned  to  Dva- 
raka.  Soon  afterwards  Daryodhana  visited  Krishna  there, 
hoping  to  prevail  on  him  to  fight  on  the  side  of  the  Kuru 
army. 

On  the  same  day  Arjuna  arrived  there  also,  and  it  happened  that  they 
both  reached  the  door  of  Krishna's  apartment,  where  he  was  asleep,  at 
the  same  inoment.  Duryodhana  succeeded  in  entering  first,  and  took 
up  his  station  at  Krishna's  head.  Arjuna  followed  behind,  and  stood 
reverently  at  Krishna's  feet.  On  awaking,  Krishna's  eyes  first  fell  on 
Arjuna.  He  then  asked  them  both  the  object  of  their  visit.  Duryo- 
dhana thereupon  requested  his  aid  in  battle,  declaring  that  although 
Krishna  was  equally  related  to  Arjuna,  yet  that,  as  he  (Duryodhana) 
had  entered  the  room  first,  he  was  entitled  to  the  priority.  Krishna 
answered  that,  as  he  had  seen  Arjuna  first,  he  should  give  Arjuna  the 
fitst  choice  of  two  things.  On  the  one  side,  he  placed  himself,  stipu- 
lating that  he  was  to  lay  down  his  weapons  and  abstain  from  fighting. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  399 

On  the  other,  he  placed  his  army  of  a  hundred  million  (arbuda)  warriors, 
named  Narayanas.  Arjuna,  without  hesitation,  chose  Krishna;  and 
Duryodhana,  with  glee,  accepted  the  army,  thinking  that  as  Krishna 
was  pledged  not  to  fight,  he  would  be  unable  to  help  the  Pandavas  in 
battle  (V.  154). 

Duryodhana  next  went  to  Bala-rama  and  asked  his  aid ; 
but  Bala-rama  declared  that  both  he  and  Krishna  had 
determined  to  take  no  part  in  the  strife/  Krishna,  how- 
ever, consented  to  act  as  Arjuna's  charioteer,  and  soon 
afterwards  joined  Yudhi-shthira,  who  with  his  brothers  was 
still  living  in  the  country  of  Virata.  Various  attempts 
at  negotiation  followed,  and  before  any  actual  declaration 
of  war  the  Pandavas  held  a  final  consultation,  at  which 
Arjuna  begged  Krishna  to  undertake  the  office  of  a 
mediator.  Krishna  consented  and  departed  for  Hastina- 
pura  : — 

Midway  he  was  met  by  Parasu-rama  and  various  Eishis,  who  informed 
him  of  their  resolution  to  be  present  at  the  coming  congress  of  Kuru 
princes.  On  reaching  Hastina-pura,  Krishna  retired  to  rest  in  the  house 
of  Vidura.  In  the  morning  he  performed  all  the  appointed  religious 
ceremonies,  dressed  himself,  put  on  the  jewel  Kaustubha  (V.  3343), 
and  set  out  for  the  assembly.  Then  followed  the  great  congress.  The 
Eishis,  headed  by  Narada,  appeared  in  the  sky,  and  were  accommodated 
with  seats.  Krishna  opened  the  proceedings  by  a  speech,  which  com- 
menced thus  :  '  Let  there  be  peace  (dama)  between  the  Kurus  and  Pan- 
davas.' Then,  looking  towards  Dhrita-rashtra,  he  said,  '  It  rests  with 
you  and  me  to  effect  a  reconciliation.'  When  he  had  concluded  a  long 
harangue,  all  remained  riveted  and  thrilled  by  his  eloquence  (V.  3448). 
None  ventured  for  some  time  to  reply,  except  Parasu-rama,  the  sage 
Kanva,  and  Narada,  who  all  advocated  harmony  and  peace  between  the 
rival  cousins.  At  length  Duryodhana  spoke,  and  flatly  refused  to  give 
up  any  territory  :  '  It  was  not  our  fault,'  he  said,  '  if  the  Pandavas  were 
conquered  at  dice.'  Upon  that  Krishna's  wrath  rose,  and  addressing 
Duryodhana,  he  said,  '  You  think  that  I  am  alone,  but  know  that  the 
Pandavas,  Andhakas,  Vrishnis,  Adityas,  Rudras,  Vasus,  and  Eishis  are 

1  Compare  Megha-dtita,  verse  51,  where  Bala-rama  is  described  as 
Bandhu-prityd  samara-vimulchah. 


400  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

all  present  tere  in  me.'  Thereupon  flames  of  fire,  of  the  size  of  a  thumb, 
settled  on  him.  Brahma  appeared  on  his  forehead,  Rudra  on  his  breast, 
the  guardians  of  the  world  issued  from  his  arms,  Agni  from  his  mouth. 
The  Adityas,  Sadhyas,  Vasus,  Asvins,  Maruts  with  Indra,  Visvadevas, 
Yakshas,  Gandharvas,  and  Rakshasas  were  also  manifested  out  of  his 
body ;  Arjuna  was  produced  from  his  right  arm ;  Bala-rama  from  his 
left  arm ;  Bhima,  Yudhi-shthira,  and  the  sons  of  Madri  from  his  back ; 
flames  of  fire  darted  from  his  eyes,  nose,  and  ears ;  and  the  sun's  rays 
from  the  pores  of  his  skin^  (V.  4419-4430).  At  this  awful  sight,  the 
assembled  princes  were  compelled  to  close  their  eyes ;  but  Drona, 
Bhishma,  Vidura,  Sanjaya,  the  Rishis,  and  the  blind  Dhrita-rashtra 
were  gifted  by  Krishna  with  divine  vision  that  they  might  behold  the 
glorious  spectacle  of  his  identification  with  every  form  (cf.  p.  135  of 
this  volume).  Then  a  great  earthquake  and  other  portents  occurred, 
and  the  congress  broke  up.  Krishna,  having  suppressed  his  divinity, 
reassumed  his  human  form  and  set  out  on  his  return.  He  took  Karna 
with  him  for  some  distance  in  his  chariot,  hoping  to  persuade  him  to 
take  part  with  the  Pandavas  as  a  sixth  brother.  But,  notwithstanding 
all  Krishna's  arguments,  Karna  would  not  be  persuaded ;  and,  leaving 
the  chariot,  returned  to  the  sons  of  Dhritarrashtra  (V.  4883). 

Meanwhile  Bhishma  consented  to  accept  the  general- 
ship of  the  Kuru  army  (V.  5719).  Though  averse  from 
fighting  against  his  kinsmen,  he  could  not  as  a  Kshatriya 
abstain  from  joining  in  the  war,  when  once  commenced.^ 

Before  the  armies  joined  battle,  Vyasa  appeared  to  his  son  Dhrita- 
rashtra,  who  was  greatly  dejected  at  the  prospect  of  the  war,  consoled 
him,  and  offered  to  confer  sight  upon  him,  that  he  might  view  the 
combat.  Dhrita-rashtra  declined  witnessing  the  slaughter  of  his  kin- 
dred, and  Vyasa  then  said  that  he  would  endow  Sanjaya  (Dhrita- 
rashtra's  charioteer)  with  the  faculty  of  knowing  everything  that  took 
place,  make  him  invulnerable,  and  enable  him  to  transport  himself  by 
a  thought  at  any  time  to  any  part  of  the  field  of  battle  (VI.  43-47). 

1  This  remarkable  passage,  identifying  Vishnu  with  everything  in  the 
universe,  is  probably  a  later  interpolation. 

^  Bhishma,  though  really  the  grand-uncle  of  the  Kuru  and  Pandu 
princes,  is  often  styled  their  grandfather  {pitdmaha) ;  and  though  really 
the  uncle  of  Dhritarrashtra  and  Pandu,  is  sometimes  styled  their  father. 
He  is  a  kind  of  Priam  in  caution  and  sagacity,  but  like  a  hardy  old 
veteran,  never  consents  to  leave  the  fighting  to  others. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  401 

The  armies  now  met  on  Kuru-kshetra,  a  vast  plain 
north-west  of  the  modern  Delhi ;  the  Kuru  forces  being 
commanded  by  Bhishma,  and  the  Pandavas  by  Dhrishta- 
dyumna,  son  of  Drupada  (VI.  832).  While  the  hosts 
stood  drawn  up  in  battle  array,  Krishna,  acting  as  Arjuna's 
charioteer,  addressed  him  in  a  long  philosophical  discourse, 
which  forms  the  celebrated  episode  called  Bhagavad-gita 
(VI.  830-1532),  an  epitome  of  which  is  given  at  pp.  124- 
140  of  this  volume. 

And  now  as  the  armies  advanced  a  tumult  filled  the 
sky ;  the  earth  shook  ;  '  Chafed  by  wild  winds,  the  sands 
upcurled  to  heaven,  and  spread  a  veil  before  the  sun.' 
Awful  portents  occurred;  showers  of  blood  fell;^  asses 
were  born  from  cows,  calves  from  mares,  jackals  from  dogs. 
Shrill  kites,  vultures,  and  howling  jackals  hung  about 
the  rear  of  the  marching  armies.  Thunder  roared  in 
the  cloudless  sky.  Then  darkness  supervened,  lightnings 
flashed,  and  blazing  meteors  shot  across  the  darkened 
firmament ;  yet. 

The  mighty  chiefs,  with  martial  ardour  fired, 
Scorning  Heaven's  portents,  eager  for  the  fray, 
Pressed  on  to  mutual  slaughter,  and  the  peal 
Of  shouting  hosts  commingling,  shook  the  world. 

There  is  to  a  European  a  ponderous  and  unwieldy 
character  about  Oriental  warfare,  which  he  finds  it  difii- 
cult  to  realize ;  yet  the  battle-scenes,  though  exaggerated, 
are  vividly  described,  and  carry  the  imagination  into  the 
midst  of  the  conflict.  Monstrous  elephants  career  over 
the  field,  trampling  on  men  and  horses,  and  dealing 
destruction  with  their  huge  tusks ;  enormous  clubs  and 
iron   maces    clash  together  with  the    noise  of  thunder ; 

1  So  Jupiter  rains  blood  twice  in  the  Iliad,  XL  53  and  XVI.  459. 
We  have  also  the  following  in  Hesiod,  Scut.  Here.  384  :  Kad  d'  ag'  olt' 
DUoatioOiv  ■yl'idias  jSdKiv  a'i/j,aToie6ui. 

2  0 


402  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

rattling  chariots  dash  against  each  other  ;  thousands  of 
arrows  hurtle  in  the  air,  darkening  the  sky ;  trumpets, 
kettle-drums,  and  horns  add  to  the  uproar  ;  confusion, 
carnage,  and  death  are  everywhere. 

In  all  this,  however,  there  is  nothing  absolutely  ex- 
travagant ;  but  when  Arjuna  is  described  as  killing  five 
hundred  warriors  simultaneously,  or  as  covering  the  whole 
plain  with  dead-  and  filling  rivers  with  blood ;  Yudhi- 
shthira,  as  slaughtering  a  hundred  men  '  in  a  mere 
twinkle '  (nimesha-mdtrend)  ;  Bhima,  as  annihilating  a 
monstrous  elephant,  including  all  mounted  upon  it,  and 
fourteen  foot-soldiers  besides,  with  one  blow  of  his  club ; 
Nakula  and  Sahadeva,  fighting  from  their  chariots,  as 
cutting  off  heads  by  the  thousand,  and  sowing  them 
like  seed  upon  the  ground ;  when,  moreover,  the  principal 
heroes  make  use  of  mystical  god-given  weapons,  possessed 
of  supernatural  powers,  and  supposed  to  be  themselves 
celestial  beings ;  ^ — we  at  once  perceive  that  the  utter 
unreality  of  such  scenes  mars  the  beauty  of  the  descrip- 
tion.     Still  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  poets 


1  About  a  hundred  of  these  weapons  are  enumerated  in  the  Rama- 
yana  (I.  xxix.),  and  constant  allusion  is  made  to  them  in  battle-scenes, 
both  in  the  Eamayana  and  Maha^bharata^  ,Arjuna  underwent  a  long 
course  of  austerities  to  obtain  celestial  weapons  from  S'iva  (see  p.  393)- 
It  was  by  the  terrific  hrfJimdstra  that  Vasish^a  conquered  Visvamitra, 
and  Eama  killed  Ravana.  Sometimes  they  appear  to  be  mystical 
powers  exercised  by  meditation,  rather  than  weapons,  and  are  supposed 
to  assume  animate  forms,  and  possess  names  and  faculties  like  the 
genii  in  the  Arabian  Nights,  and  to  address  their  owners  (see  p.  397). 
Certain  distinct  spells,  charms,  or  prayers  had  to  be  learnt  for  their 
due  use  {prayoga)  and  restraint  (samhdra).  See  Ram.  I.  xxix.,  xxx., 
where  they  are  personified ;  also  Raghu-vansa  V.  57  {Sammohanam 
noma  astram  ddhatsva  prayoga-samhara-vibhaMa-mantram).  When 
once  let  loose,  he  only  who  knew  the  secret  spell  for  recalling  them, 
could  bring  them  back ;  but  the  hrahmdsira  returned  to  its  possessor's 
quiver  of  its  own  accord. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  403 

who  brahmauized  the  Indian  Epics  gifted  the  heroes 
with  semi-divine  natures,  and  that  what  would  be  in- 
credible in  a  mere  mortal  is  not  only  possible  but  appro- 
priate when  enacted  by  a  demigod.^  The  individual 
deeds  of  prowess  and  single  combats  between  the  heroes 
are  sometimes  graphically  narrated.  Each  chief  has  a 
conch-shell  (sanJcha)  for  a  trumpet,  which,  as  well  as 
his  principal  weapon,  has  a  name,  as  if  personified.^ 
Thus  we  read  : — 

Arjuna  blew  his  shell  called  Deva-datta,  '  god-given,'  and  carried  a 
bow  named  Gandiva.  Krishna  sounded  a  shell  made  of  the  bones  of 
the  demon  Pandajana  and  hence  called  Pandajanya,  Bhima  blew  a 
great  trumpet  named  Paundra,  and  Yudhi-shthira  sounded  his,  called 
Ananta-vijaya,  '  eternal  victory.' 

The  first  great  single  combat  was  between  Bhishma 
and  Arjuna.  It  ended  in  Arjuna  transfixing  Bhishma 
with  innumerable  arrows,  so  that  there  was  not  a  space 
of  two  fingers'  breadth  on  his  whole  body  unpierced. 

Then  Bhishma  fell  from  his  chariot ;  but  his  body  could  not  touch 
the  ground,  surrounded  as  it  was  by  countless  arrows  (VI.  5658). 
There  it  remained,  reclining  as  it  were  on  an  arrowy  couch  (Mra-talpe 
iaydna).  In  that  state  consciousness  returned,  and  the  old  warrior 
became  divinely  supported.  He  had  received  from  his  father  the 
power  of  fixing  the  time  of  his  own  death,^  and  now  declared  that  he 
intended  retaining  life  till  the  sun  entered  the  summer  solstice  {uttard- 

^  Aristotle  says  that  the  epic  poet  should  prefer  impossibilities 
which  appear  probable  to  such  things  as,  though  possible,  appear  im- 
probable (Poetics  III.  6).  But  previously,  in  comparing  epic  poetry 
with  tragedy,  he  observes,  '  the  surprising  is  necessary  in  tragedy, 
.  but  the  epic  poem  goes  further,  and  admits  even  the  improbable  and 
incredible,  from  which  the  highest  degree  of  the  surprising  results ' 
(III.  4). 

^  Trumpets  do  not  appear  to  have  been  used  by  Homer's  heroes. 
Whence  the  value  of  a  Stentorian  voice.  But  there  is  express  allusion 
in  ll.  XVIII.  219  to  the  use  of  trumpets  at  sieges. 

3  Compare  Kiratarjuniya  III.  19. 


404  INDIAN    WISDOM. 

yand).  All  the  warriors  on  both  sides  ceased  fighting  that  they 
might  view  this  wonderful  sight,  and  do  homage  to  their  dying  rela- 
tive (VI.  5716).  As  he  lay  on  his  arrowy  bed,  his  head  hanging 
down,  he  begged  for  a  pillow ;  whereupon  the  chiefs  brought  soft 
supports,  which  the  hardy  old  soldier  sternly  rejected.  Arjuna  then 
made  a  rest  for  his  head  with  three  arrows,  which  Bhishma  quite 
approved,  and  soon  afterwards  asked  Arjuna  to  bring  him  water. 
Whereupon  Arjuna  struck  the  ground  with  an  arrow,  and  forthwith 
a  pure  spring  burst  forth,  which  so  refreshed  Bhishma  that  he  called 
for  Duryodhana,  and  in  a  long  speech  begged  him,  before  it  was  too 
late,  to  restore  half  the  kingdom  to  the  Pandavas  (VI.  5813). 

After  the  fall  of  Bhishma,  Kama  advised  Duryodhana 
to  appoint  his  old  tutor  Drona — who  was  chiefly  for- 
midable from  his  stock  of  fiery  arrows  and  magical 
weapons^ — to  the  command  of  the  army  (VII.  150). 
Several  single  combats  and  general  engagements  [sanJcula- 
yuddham,  tumula-yuddham),  in  which  sometimes  one 
party,  sometimes  the  other  had  the  advantage,  took  place. 
Here  is  an  account  of  a  single  combat  {VII.  544)  : — 

High  on  a  stately  car 
Swift  borne  by  generous  coursers  to  the  fight. 
The  vaunting  son  of  Puru  proudly  drove. 
Secure  of  conquest  o'er  Subhadra's  son. 
The  youthful  champion  shrank  not  from  the  conflict. 
Fierce  on  the  boastful  chief  he  sprang,  as  bounds 
The  lion's  cub  upon  the  ox ;  and  now 
The  Puru  chief  had  perished,  but  his  dart 
Shivered  with  timely  aim  the  upraised  bow 
Of  Abhimanyu.2     From  his  tingling  hand 
The  youthful  warrior  cast  the  fragments  o£f. 
And  drew  his  sword,  and  grasped  his  iron-bound  shield  ; 
Upon  the  car  of  Paurava  he  leapt 
And  seized  the  chief — -his  charioteer  he  slew. 
And  dragged  the  monarch  senseless  o'er  the  plain. ^ 

1  These  dgneydstra  were  received  by  Drona  from  the  son  of  Agni, 
who  obtained  them  from  Drona's  father,  Bharadvaja. 

2  The  name  of  Arjuna's  son  by  Subhadra. 

^  The  translation  of  this   and  the   short   passage   at   p.  401  is  a 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  40$ 

Amongst  other  battles  a  great  fight  was  fought  between 
Ghatotkaca  and  Karna,  in  which  the  former  as  a  Rakshasa 
(son  of  the  Eakshasi  Hidimba  and  Bhima)  assumed  various 
forms,  but  was  eventually  slain  (VII.  8104).  This  disaster 
filled  the  Pandavas  with  grief,  but  the  fortunes  of  the 
day  were  retrieved  by  Dhrishta-dyumna  (son  of  Drupada), 
who  fought  with  Drona,  and  succeeded  in  decapitating 
his  lifeless  body, — not,  however,  till  Drona  had  laid  down 
his  arms  and  saved  Dhrishta-dyumna  from  the  enormous 
crime  of  killing  a  Brahman  and  an  Acarya,  by  transport- 
ing himself  to  heaven  in  a  glittering  shape  like  the  sun. 
His  translation  to  Brahma-loka  was  only  witnessed  by 
five  persons,  and  before  leaving  the  earth  he  made  over 
his  divine  weapons  to  his  son  Asvatthaman.  The  loss  of 
their  general  Drona  caused  the  flight  of  the  whole  Kuru 
army  (VII.  8879),  but  they  appointed  Karna  general,  in 
his  place,  and  renewed  the  combat : — 

In  this  engagement  so  terrible  was  tlie  slaughter  that  the  rivers 
flowed  with  blood,  and  the  field  became  covered  with  mutilated  corpses 
(VIII.  2550,  3899).  Numbers  of  warriors  bound  themselves  by  oath 
{sam4ap-taka)  to  slay  Arjuna,  but  were  all  destroyed,  and  an  army 
of  Mleddhas  or  barbarians  with  thirteen  hundred  elephants,  sent  by 
Duryodhana  against  Arjuna,  were  all  routed  by  him  (4133). 

Then  Bhima  and  Duh.sasana  joined  in  deadly  conflict.  The  latter 
was  slain,  and  Bhima,  remembering  the  iasult  to  Draupadi,  and  the 
vow  he  made  in  consequence  (see  p.  392),  cut  o£f  his  head,  and  drank 
his  blood  on  the  field  of  battle  (4235). 

Then  occurred  the  battle  between  Karna  and  Arjuna : — 

Arjuna  was  wounded  and  stunned  by  an  arrow  shot  off  by  Karna, 
and  seemed  likely  to  be  defeated  had  not  the  wheel  of  Karna's  chariot 
come  off.  This  obliged  Karna  to  leap  down,  and  his  head  was  then 
shot  off  by  one  of  Arjuna's  arrows  ^  (VIII.  4798).     His  death  struck 

slightly  altered  version  of  some  spirited  lines  by  Professor  H.   H. 
Wilson,  given  in  vol.  iii.  of  his  collected  works  edited  by  Dr.  E.  Host. 
^  This  arrow  is  called  in  the  text  Anjaliha  (VIII.   4788).      The 


40 6  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

terror  into  the  Kuru  army,  which  fled  in  dismay,  while  Bhima  and 
the  Pandu  party  raised  a  shout  of  triumph  that  shook  heaven  and 
earth. 

On  the  death  of  Karna,  Salya,  king  of  Madra,  was 
appointed  to  the  command  of  the  Kuru  army,  then  much 
reduced  in  numbers  (IX.  327),  Another  general  engage- 
ment followed,  and  a  single  combat  between  Salya  and 
Bhima  with  clubs  or  maces,  in  which  both  were  equally 
matched  (IX.  594).    Here  is  a  version  of  the  encounter  : — 

Soon  as  he  saw  his  charioteer  struck  down, 

Straightway  the  Madra  monarch  grasped  his  mace, 

And  like  a  mountain  firm  and  motionless 

Awaited  the  attack.     The  warrior's  form 

Was  awful  as  the  world-consuming  fire, 

Or  as  the  noose- armed  god  of  death,  or  as 

The  peaked  Kailasa,  or  the  Thunderer 

Himself,  or  as  the  trident-bearing  god, 

Or  as  a  maddened  forest  elephant. 

Him  to  defy  did  Bhima  hastily 

Advance,  wielding  aloft  his  massive  club. 

A  thousand  conchs  and  trumpets  and  a  shout, 

Firing  each  champion's  ardour,  rent  the  air. 

From  either  host,  spectators  of  the  fight, 

Burst  forth  applauding  cheers  :  '  The  Madra  king 

Alone,'  they  cried,  '  can  bear  the  rush  of  Bhima ; 

None  but  heroic  Bhima  can  sustain 

The  force  of  S'alya '     Now  like  two  fierce  bulls 

Sprang  they  towards  each  other,  mace  in  hand. 

And  first  as  cautiously  they  circled  round, 

Whirling  their  weapons  as  in  sport,  the  pair 

Seemed  matched  in  equal  combat.     S'alya's  club. 

Set  with  red  fillets,  glittered  as  with  flame, 

arrows  used  in  the  Maha-bharata  are  of  various  kinds,  some  having 
crescent-shaped  heads.  It  may  be  useful  to  subjoin  a  list  of  words 
for  arrow,  which  occur  constantly  in  the  description  of  battles : 
sara,  vdna,  ishu,  sayalm,  patrin,  kdnda,  vidikha,  ndrdca,  vipdtha, 
prishatka,  ihalla,  tomara  (a  kind  of  lance),  Salya  (a  dart),  ishiJcd, 
sillmukha. 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  407 

While  that  of  Bhima  gleamed  like  flashing  lightning. 

Anon  the  clashing  iron  met,  and  scattered  round 

A  fiery  shower ;  then  fierce  as  elephants 

Or  butting  bulls  they  battered  each  the  other. 

Thick  fell  the  blows,  and  soon  each  stalwart  frame. 

Spattered  with  gore,  glowed  like  the  Kinsuka, 

Bedecked  with  scarlet  blossoms ;  yet  beneath 

The  rain  of  strokes,  unshaken  as  a  rock 

Bhima  sustained  the  mace  of  S'alya,  he 

With  equal  firmness  bore  the  other's  blows. 

Now  like  the  roar  of  crashing  thunder-clouds 

Sounded  the  clashing  iron ;  then,  their  clubs 

Brandished  aloft,  eight  paces  they  retired. 

And  swift  again  advancing  to  the  fight, 

Met  in  the  midst  like  two  huge  mountain-crags 

Hurled  into  contact.     Nov  could  either  bear 

The  other's  shock ;  tpgether  down  they  rolled, 

Mangled  and  crushed,  like  two  tall  standards  fallen. 

After  this  a  great  battle  was  fought  between  Tudhi- 
shthira  and  Salya,  who  was  at  first  aided  and  rescued  by 
Asvatthaman,  but  was  eventually  killed  (IX.  919). 

The  Kauravas,  after  suffering  continual  reverses,  rallied 
their  scattered  forces  for  a  final  charge,  which  led  to  a 
complete  rout  and  general  slaughter,  Duryodhana,  Asvat- 
thaman (son  of  Drona),  Ej-ita-varman  (also  called  Bhoja), 
and  Kripa  (see  note  i,  p.  383)  being  the  only  chiefs  of  the 
Kuru  army  left  alive.  ^  Nothing  remained  of  eleven  whole 
armies  (IX.  1581).  Duryodhana,  wounded,  disheartened, 
and  alarmed  for  his  own  safety,  resolved  on  flight  :— 

On  foot,  with  nothing  but  his  mace,  he  took  refuge  in  a  lake,  hiding 
himself  under  the  water,  and  then,  by  his  magical  power,  supporting 
it  so  as  to  form  a  chamber  around  his  body.^     The  Panda vas,  informed 

^  Sanjaya  was  taken  by  Dhrishta-dyumna,  and  would  have  been 
killed  had  not  Yyasa  suddenly  appeared  and  demanded  that  he  should 
be  dismissed  unharmed  (compare  p.  376). 

2  So  I  interpret  astambhayat  toy  am  mdyayci  (IX.  162 1)  and  w's7i- 
tabhya  apah  svormdyaya  (1680,  1739).  Duryodhana  is  described  as 
lying  down  and  sleeping  at  the  bottom  of  the  lake  (1705). 


40  8  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

of  his  hiding-place,  came  to  the  lake,  and  Yudhi-shthira  commenced 
taunting  Duryodhana,  '  Where  is  your  manliness  1  where  is  your 
pride  ?  where  your  valour  ?  where  your  skill  in  arms,  that  you  hide 
yourself  at  the  bottom  of  a  lake  ?  Rise  up  and  fight ;  perform  your 
duty  as  a  Kshatriya '  (IX.  1 7  74).  Duryodhana  answered,  that  it  was 
not  from  fear,  but  fatigue,  that  he  was  lying  under  the  water,  and  that 
he  was  ready  to  fight  them  all.  He  entreated  them,  however,  to  go 
and  take  the  kingdom,  as  he  had  no  longer  any  pleasure  in  life,  his 
brothers  being  killed.  Yudhi-shthira  then  continued  his  sarcasms, 
till  at  last,  thoroughly  roused  by  his  goading  words  (valc-pratoda), 
Duryodhana  rose  up  out  of  the  lake,  his  body  streaming  with  blood 
and  water  (IX.  1865). 

It  was  settled  that  a  single  combat  with  clubs  should 
take  place  between  Duryodhana  and  Bhima ;  and  when 
Bala-rama  heard  that  his  two  pupils  (see  p.  383)  were 
about  to  engage  in  conflict,  he  determined  to  be  present, 
that  he  might  ensure  fair  play.-^ 

Then  followed  the  great  club-fight  [gadd-yuddha)  : — 

The  two  combatants  entered  the  lists  and  challenged  each  other, 
while  Krishna,  Bala-rama,  and  all  the  other  Pandavas  sat  round  as 
spectators.  The  fight  was  tedious,  the  combatants  being  equally 
matched.  At  last  Bhima  struck  Duryodhana  a  blow  on  his  thighs, 
broke  them,  and  felled  him  to  the  ground.  Then  reminding  him  of 
the  insult  received  by  Draupadi,  he  kicked  him  on  the  head  with  his 
left  foot  (IX.  3313).  Upon  this  Bala-rama  started  up  in  anger, 
declaring  that  Bhima  had  fought  unfairly  (it  being  a  rule  in  club- 
fights  that  no  blow  should  be  given  below  the  middle  of  the  body), 
and  that  he  should  ever  after  be  called  Jihrna-yodMn  (unfair-fighter), 
while  Duryodhana  should  always  be  celebrated  as  ^iju-yodhin  (fair- 
fighter). 

Bala-rama  thereupon  returned  to  Dvaraka,  and  the  five 
Pandavas  with  Krishna  entered  the  camp  of  Duryodhana, 

1  An  interesting  episode  about  the  mahdtmya  of  Tirthas,  and 
especially  of  those  on  the  sacred  Sarasvati  (IX.  2006),  is  inserted  in 
this  part  of  the  poem.  The  story  of  the  Moon,  who  was  afilicted  with 
consumption,  on  account  of  the  curse  of  Daksha,  is  also  told  (2030), 
as  well  as  the  celebrated  legend  of  Vasishtha  and  Visvamitra  (2296, 
see  p.  361). 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  409 

and   took   possession  of  it  and  its  treasures  as  victors 
(IX.  3492). 

Tlie  three  surviving  Kuru  warriors  (Asvatthaman, 
Kripa,  and  Krita-varman),  hearing  of  the  fall  of  Duryo- 
dhana,  hastened  to  the  place  where  he  was  lying.  There 
they  found  him  weltering  in  his  blood  (IX.  3629),  but  still 
alive.  He  spoke  to  them,  told  them  not  to  grieve  for 
him,  and  assured  them  that  he  should  die  happy  in 
having  done  his  duty  as  a  Kshatriya.  Then  leaving 
Duryodhana  still  lingering  alive  with  broken  thighs  on 
the  battle-field,  they  took  refuge  in  a  forest. 

There,  at  night,  they  rested  near  a  Nyagrodha-tree,  where  thousands 
of  crows  were  roosting.  Asvatthaman,  who  could  not  sleep,  saw  an 
pwl  approach  stealthily  and  destroy  numbers  of  the  sleeping  crows 
(X.  41).  This  suggested  the  idea  of  entering  the  camp  of  the  Pandavas 
by  night  and  slaughtering  them  while  asleep  isuptd)^  Accordingly 
he  set  out  for  the  Pandu  camp,  followed  by  Kripa  and  Krita-varman. 
At  the  gate  of  the  camp  his  progress  was  arrested  by  an  awful  figure, 
described  as  gigantic,  glowing  like  the  sun,  dressed  in  a  tiger's  skin, 
with  long  arms,  and  bracelets  formed  of  serpents.  This  was  the  deity 
S'iva ;  ^  and  after  a  tremendous  conflict  with  him,  Asvatthaman  recog- 
nized the  god,  worshipped  and  propitiated  him  (X.  251). 

Asvatthaman  then  directed  Kfipa  and  Krita-varman  to  stand  at  the 
camp-gate  and  kill  any  of  the  Pandu  army  that  attempted  to  escape 
(X  327).  He  himself  made  his  way  alone  and  stealthily  to  the  tent 
of  Dhrishta-dyumna,  who  was  lying  there  fast  asleep.  Him  he  killed 
by  stamping  on  him,  declaring  that  one  who  had  murdered  his  father 
(Drona,  see  p.  405) — a  Brahman  and  an  Adarya — ^was  not  worthy  to 

1  Hence  the  name  sauptiJca  applied  to  this  section  of  the  poem. 
Compare  Homer's  narrative  of  the  night  adventures  of  Diomed  and 
Ulysses  in  the  camp  of  the  Trojans  (Iliad  X.). 

2  The  description  of  S'iva  in  this  passage  is  remarkable.  Hundreds 
and  thousands  of  Krishnas  are  said  to  be  manifested  from  the  light 
issuing  from  his  person.  Many  of  S'iva's  names  also  are  enume- 
rated as  follows : — Ugra,  Sthanu,  S'iva,  Eudra,  S'arva,  Isana,  I^yara, 
Girisa,  Varada,  Deva,  Bhava,  Bhavana,  S'itikantha,  Aja,  S'ukra, 
Daksha-kratu-hara,  Hara,  Yisvarupa,  Yirupaksha,  Bahurupa,  Umapati 
(X.  252). 


4IO  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

die  in  any  other  way  (X.  342).  After  killing  every  one  in  the  camp 
and  destroying  the  whole  Pandu  army  (except  the  five  Pandavas 
themselves  with  Satyaki  and  Krishna,  who  happened  to  be  stationed 
outside  the  camp),  Asvatthaman  joined  his  comrades,  and  they  all 
three  proceeded  to  the  spot  where  Duryodhana  was  lying.  They  found 
him  just  breathing  (kincit-prdna),  but  weltering  in  his  blood  and  sur- 
rounded by  beasts  of  prey.  Asvatthaman  then  announced  that  he  was 
avenged,  as  only  seven  of  the  Pandu  army  were  now  left ;  all  the  rest 
were  slaughtered  like  cattle  (X.  531).  Duryodhana  hearing  this, 
revived  a  little,  and  gathering  strength  to  thank  them  and  say  fare- 
well, expired ;  his  spirit  rising  to  heaven  and  his  body  entering  the 
ground  (X.  536). 

Thus  perished  both  armies  of  Kurus  and  Pandavas. 

Dhrita-rashtra  was  so  overwhelmed  with  grief  for  the 
death  of  his  sons,  that  his  father  Vyasa  appeared  to  him 
and  consoled  him  by  pointing  out  that  their  fate  was 
predestined,  and  that  they  could  not  escape  death.  He 
also  declared  that  the  Pandavas  were  not  to  blame ;  that 
Duryodhana,  though  born  from  Gandhari,  was  really  a 
partial  incarnation  of  Kali  ^  (Kaler  ansa),  and  Sakuni  of 
Dvapara  (see  p.  330,  note). 

Vidura  also  comforted  the  king  with  his  usual  sensible 
advice,  and  recommended  that  the  funeral  ceremonies 
(preta  -  kdrydni)  should  be  performed.  Dhrita  -  rashtra 
then  ordered  carriages  to  be  prepared,  and  with  the 
women  proceeded  to  the  field  of  battle  (XI.  269). 

There  he  met  and  became  reconciled  to  the  five  Pan- 
davas, but  his  wife  Gandhari  would  have  cursed  them  had 
not  Vyasa  interfered.  The  five  brothers  next  embraced 
and  comforted  their  mother  Pritha,  who  with  the  queen 
Gandhari,  and  the  other  wives  and  women,  uttered  lamen- 
tations over  the  bodies  of  the  slain  heroes,  as  one  by 
one  they  came  in  sight  on  the  field  of  battle  (XL  427- 

755)- 

^  So  also  S'akuni  is  said  to  be  an  incarnsition  of  Dvapara  (XVIII. 
166). 


THE   EPIC   POEMS' — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  4II 

Finally,  the  funeral  obsequies  (srdddha)  were  per- 
formed at  the  command  of  Yudhi-shthira  (XI.  779), 
after  which  he,  with  his  brothers,  entered  Hastina-pura 
in  triumph. 

All  the  streets  were  decorated ;  and  Brahmans  offered  him  con- 
gratulations, which  he  acknowledged  by  distributing  largesses  among 
them  (XII.  1410).  Only  one  person  stood  aloof.  This  turned  out 
to  be  an  impostor,  a  friend  of  Duryodhana  —  a  Eakshasa  named 
6arvaka — who  in  the  disguise  of  a  mendicant  reviled  him  and  the 
Brahmans.  He  was,  however,  soon  detected ;  and  the  real  Brahmans, 
filled  with  fury  and  uttering  imprecations,  killed  him  on  the  spot  (see 
p.  119). 

After  this  incident,  Yudhi-shthira,  seated  on  a  golden 
throne,  was  solemnly  crowned  (XII.  1443). 

Nevertheless,  restless  and  uneasy,  and  his  mind  filled  with  anguish 
at  the  slaughter  of  his  kindred,  he  longed  for  consolation  (idnti),  and 
Krishna  recommended  him  to  apply  to  Bhishma,  who  still  remained 
alive  on  the  field  of  battle,  reclining  on  his  soldier's  bed  (vlra-sayana), 
surrounded  by  Yyasa,  Narada,  and  other  holy  sages.  Accordingly, 
Yudhi-shthira  and  his  brothers,  accompaned  by  Krishna,  set  out  for 
Kuru-kshetra,  passing  mutilatpd  corpses,  skulls,  broken  armour,  and 
other  evidences  of  the  fearful  nature  of  the  war.  This  reminded 
Krishna  of  the  slaughter  caused  by  Parasu-rama,  who  cleared  the  earth 
thrice  seven  times  of  the  Kshatriya  caste  (see  p.  329).  His  story  was 
accordingly  narrated  to  Yudhi-shthira  (XII.  1 707-1 805).  -They  then 
approached  Bhishma  lying  on  his  couch  of  arrows  (sara-samsiara- 
sdyinam),  and  Krishna  entreated  him  to  instruct  Yudhi-shthira,  and 
calm  his  spirit. 

Upon  that  Bhishma,  who  had  been  lying  for  fifty-eight  nights  on 
his  spiky  bed  (XIIT.  7732),  assisted  by  Krishna,  Narada,  Vyasa,  and 
other  Rishis,  commenced  a  series  of  long  and  tedious  didactic  discourses 
(contained  in  the  S'anti-parvan  and  Anusasana-parvan).^ 

1  In  XII.  1241  we  have  some  curious  rules  for  expiation  {jprayas- 
citta),  and  at  1393  rules  for  what  to  eat  and  what  to  avoid  {hhaltshyd- 
hhakshya).  Some  of  the  precepts  are  either  taken  from  or  founded  on 
Manu.  For  instance,  compare  6071  with  Manu  II.  238.  Many  of  the 
moral  verses  in  the  Hitopadesa  will  be  found  in  the  S'anti-parvan ;  and 


412  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Then  having  finished  instructing  his  relatives,  he  bade  them  fare- 
well, and  asked  Krishna's  leave  to  depart.  Suddenly  the  arrows  left 
his  bodyj  his  skull  divided,  and  his  spirit,  bright  as  a  meteor,  ascended 
through  the  top  of  his  head  to  the  skies  (XIII.  7765).  They  covered 
him  with  garlands  and  perfumes,  carried  him,  to  the  Ganges,  and  per- 
formed his  last  obsequies. 

And  here  a  European  poet  would  have  brought  the 
story  to  an  end.  The  Sanskrit  poet  has  a  deeper  know- 
ledge of  human  nature,  or  at  least  of  Hindu  nature. 

In  the  most  popular  of  Indian  dramas  (the  Sak'untala) 
there  occurs  this  sentiment :  ^ — 

'Tis  a  vain  thought  that  to  attain  the  end 
And  object  of  ambition  is  to  rest. 
Success  doth  only  mitigate  the  fever 
Of  anxious  expectation  :  soon  the  fear 
Of  losing  what  we  have,  the  constant  care 
Of  guarding  it  doth  weary. 

If  then  the  great  national  Epic  was  to  respond  truly 
to  the  deeper  emotions  of  the  Hindu  mind,  it  could  not 
leave  the  Panda vas  in  the  contented  enjoyment  of  their 
kingdom.  It  had  to  instil  a  more  sublime  moral — a 
lesson  which  even  the  disciples  of  a  divine  philosophy 
are  slpw  to  learn — that  all  who  desire  rest  must  aim 
at  union  with  the  Infinite.  Hence  we  are  brought  in  the 
concluding  chapters  to  a  sublime  description  of  the  renun- 
ciation of  their  kingdom  by  the  five  brothers,  and  their 
journey  towards  Indra's  heaven  in  the  mountain  Meru. 
Part  of  this  (XVII.  24,  &c.)  I  now  translate  : — 

When  the  four  brothers  knew  the  high  resolve  of  king  Yudhi-shthira, 
Forthwith  with  Draupadi  they  issued  forth,  and  after  them  a  dog 
Followed  :  the  king  himself  went  out  the  seventh  from  the  royal  city, 

the  fable  of  the  three  fishes  is  founded  on  the  story  at  4889.     For  the 
contents  of  the  Asvamedhika,  Aaramavasika,  and  Mausala  Parvans,  see 

P-  374- 

1  See  my  translation  of  this  play,  4th  edition,  p.  124  (recently  pub- 
lished by  W.  H.  Allen  &  Co.,  13  Waterloo  Place). 


THE   EPIC   POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  413 

And  all  the  citizens  and  women  of  the  palace  walked  behind ; 
But  none  could  find  it  in  their  heart  to  say  unto  the  king,  '  Return.' 
And  so  at  length  the  train  of  citizens  went  back,  bidding  adieu. 
Then  the  high-minded  sons  of  Pandu  and  the  noble  Draupadi 
Roamed  onwards,  fasting,  with  their  faces  towards  the  east;  their  hearts 
Yearning  for  union  with  the  Infinite ;  bent  on  abandonment 
Of  worldly  things.     They  wandered  on  to  many  countries,  many  a  sea 
And  river.    Yudhi-shthira  walked  in  front,  and  next  to  him  came  Bhima, 
And  Arjuna  came  after  him,  and  then,  in  order,  the  twin  brothers. 
And  last  of  all  came  Draupadi,  with  her  dark  skin  and  lotus-eyes— 
The  faithful  Draupadi,  loveliest  of  women,  best  of  noble  wives — 
Behind  them  walked  the  only  living  thing  that  shared  their  pilgrimage — 
The  dog — and  by  degrees  they  reached  the  briny  sea.     There  Arjuna 
Oast  in  the  waves  his  bow  and  quivers.^    Then  with  souls  well-disciplined 
They  reached  the  northern  region,  and  beheld  with  heaven-aspiring  hearts 
The  mighty  mountain  Himavat.     Beyond  its  lofty  peak  they  passed 
Towards  a  sea  of  sand,  and  saw  at  last  the  rocky  Meru,  king 
Of  mountains.    As  with  eager  steps  they  hastened  on,  their  souls  intent 
On  union  with  the  Eternal,  Draupadi  lost  hold  of  her  high  hope. 
And  faltering  fell  upon  the  earth. 

One  by  one  the  others  also  drop,  till  only  Bhima, 
Yudhi-shthira,  and  the  dog  are  left.  Still  Yudhi-shthira 
walks  steadily  in  front,  calm  and  unmoved,  looking  neither 
to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the  left,  and  gathering  up  his 
soul  in  inflexible  resolution.  Bhima,  shocked  at  the  fall 
of  his  companions,  and  unable  to  understand  how  beings 
so  apparently  guileless  should  be  struck  down  by  fate, 
appeals  to  his  brother,  who,  \vithout  looking  back,  explains 
that  death  is  the  consequence  of  sinful  thoughts  and  too 
great  attachment  to  worldly  objects ;  and  that  Draupadi's 
fall  was  owing  to  her  excessive  afi'ection  for  Arjuna ; 
Sahadeva's  (who  is  supposed  to  be  the  most  humble- 
minded  of  the  five  brothers)  to  his  pride  in  his  own  know- 
ledge ;  Nakula's   (who  is  very  handsome)  to  feelings  of 

1  Arjuna  had  two  celebrated  quivers,  besides  the  bow  named 
Gandiva,  given  to  him  by  the  god  Agni.  See  Kiratarjuniya 
XL  16. 


414  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

personal  vanity ;  and  Arjuna's  to  a  boastful  confidence  in 
his  power  to  destroy  his  foes.  Bhima  then  feels  himself 
falling,  and  is  told  that  he  sufiers  death  for  his  selfishness, 
pride,  and  too  great  love  of  enjoyment.  The  sole  survivor 
is  now  Yudhi-shthira,  who  still  walks  steadily  forward, 
followed  only  by  the  dog  ; — 

When  with  a  sudden  sound  that  rang  through  earth  and  heaven  the  mighty  god 
Came  towards  him  in  a  chariot,  and  he  cried,  '  Ascend,  0  resolute  prince.' 
Then  did  the  king  look  back  upon  his  fallen  brothers,  and  address'd 
These  words  unto  the  Thousand-eyed  in  anguish — '  Let  my  brothers  here 
Come  with  me.     Without  them,  0  god  of  gods,  I  would  not  wish  to  enter 
E'en  heaven ;  and  yonder  tender  princess  Draupadi,  the  faithful  wife, 
Worthy  of  endless  bliss,  let  her  too  come.     In  mercy  hear  my  prayer.' 

Upon  this,  Indra  informs  him  that  the  spirits  of  Drau- 
padi and  his  brothers  are  already  in  heaven,  and  that  he 
alone  is  permitted  to  ascend  there  in  bodily  form.  Yudhi- 
shthira  now  stipulates  that  his  dog  shall  be  admitted  with 
him.  Indra  says  sternly,  '  Heaven  has  no  place  for  men 
accompanied  by  dogs '  (svavatdm) ;  but  Yudhi-shthira  is 
unshaken  in  his  resolution,  and  declines  abandoning  the 
faithful  animal.  Indra  remonstrates — '  You  have  aban- 
doned your  brothers  and  Draupadi ;  why  not  forsake  the 
dog  ? '  To  this  Yudhi-shthira  haughtily  replies,  '  I  had 
no  power  to  bring  them  back  to  life :  how  can  there  be 
abandonment  of  those  who  no  longer  live  ? ' 

The  dog,  it  appears,  is  his  own  father  Dharma  in  dis- 
guise (XVII.  88).^  Eeassuming  now  his  proper  form, 
he  praises  Yudhi-shthira  for  his  constancy,  and  they  enter 
heaven  together.  There,  to  his  surprise,  he  finds  Duryo- 
dhana  and  his  cousins,  but  not  his  brothers  or  Draupadi. 
Hereupon  he  declines  remaining  in  heaven  without  them. 

1  So  I  infer  from  the  original,  which,  however,  is  somewhat  obscure. 
The  expression  is  dharma-svarupl  hhagavdn.  At  any  rate,  the  dog  was 
a  mere  phantom  created  to  try  Yudhi-shthira,  as  it  is  evident  that  a 
real  dog  is  not  admitted  with  Yudhi-shthira  to  heaven. 


THE   EPIC    POEMS — THE   MAHA-BHARATA.  415 

An  angel  is  then  sent  to  conduct  him  to  the  lower  regions 
and  across  the  Indian  Styx  ( Vaitarani)  to  the  hell  where 
they  are  supposed  to  be.  The  scene  which  now  follows 
may  be  compared  to  the  Nekyomanteia  in  the  eleventh 
book  of  the  Odyssey,  or  to  parts  of  Dante. 

The  particular  hell  to  which  Yudhi-shthira  is  taken  is 
a  dense  wood,  whose  leaves  are  sharp  swords,  and  its 
ground  paved  with  razors  [asi-patra-vana,  see  p.  55, 
note  2).  The  way  to  it  is  strewed  with  foul  and  muti- 
lated corpses.  Hideous  shapes  flit  across  the  air  and 
hover  over  him.  Here  there  is  an  awful  sensation  of 
palpable  darkness.  There  the  wicked  are  burning  in 
flames  of  blazing  fire.  Suddenly  he  hears  the  voices  of 
his  brothers  and  companions  imploring  him  to  assuage 
their  torments,  and  not  desert  them.  His  resolution  is 
taken.  Deeply  aff"ected,  he  bids  the  angel  leave  him  to 
share  their  miseries.  This  is  his  last  trial.  The  whole 
scene  now  vanishes.  It  was  a  mere  illusion,  to  test  his 
constancy  to  the  utmost.  He  is  now  directed  to  bathe  in 
the  heavenly  Ganges  ;  and  having  plunged  into  the  sacred 
stream,  he  enters  the  real  heaven,  where  at  length,  in 
company  with  Draupadi  and  his  brothers,  he  finds  that 
rest  and  happiness  which  were  unattainable  on  earth. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

The  Indian  Epics  compared  with  each  other  and  ivith 
the  Homeric  Poems. 

I  PEOCEED  to  note  a  few  obvious  points  that  force  them- 
selves on  the  attention  in  comparing  the  two  great  Indian 
Epics  with  each  other,  and  with  the  Homeric  poems.  I 
have  already  stated  that  the  episodes  of  the  Maha-bharata, 
occupy  more  than  three-fourths  of  the  whole  poem.^  It 
is,  in  fact,  not  one  poem,  but  a  combination  of  many 
poems ;  not  a  Kdvya,  like  the  poem  of  Valmiki,  by  one 
author,  but  an  Itihdsa  by  many  authors.  This  is  one 
great  distinctive  feature  in  comparing  it  with  the  Eama- 
yana.  In  both  Epics  there  is  a  leading  story,  about  which 
are  collected  a  multitude  of  other  stories ;  but  in  the 
Maha-bharata  the  main  narrative  only  acts  as  a  slender 
thread  to  connect  together  a  vast  mass  of  independeut 
legends,  and  religious,  moral,  and  political  precepts ;  while 
in  the  Eamayana  the  episodes,  though  numerous,  never 
break  the  solid  chain  of  one  principal  and  paramount 
subject,  which  is  ever  kept  in  view.  Moreover,  in  the 
Eamayana  there  are  few  didactic  discourses  and  a  remark- 
able paucity  of  sententious  maxims. 

It  should  be  remembered  that  the  two  Epics  belong 
to  different  periods  and  different  localities.     Not  only  was 

1  Although,  the  Maha-bharata  is  so  much  longer  than  the  Ramayana 
as  to  preclude  the  idea  of  its  being,  like  that  poem,  the  work  of  one  or 
even  a  few  authors,  yet  it  is  the  number  of  the  episodes  which,  after  all, 
causes  the  disparity.  Separated  from  these,  the  main  story  of  the  Maha- 
bharata  is  not  longer  than  the  other  Epic. 


THE  EPICS  COMPARED  TOGETHER  AND  WITH  HOMER.      4 1 7 

a  latge  part  of  tlie  Maha-bharata  composed  later  than  the 
Ramayana,  parts  of  it  being  comparatively  modern,  but 
the  places  which  gave  birth  to  the  two  poems  are  distinct 
(see  p.  317).  Moreover,  in  the  Eamayana  the  circle  of 
territory  represented  as  occupied  by  the  Aryans  is  more 
restricted  than  that  in  the  Maha-bharata.  It  reaches  to 
Videha  or  Mithila  and  An-ga  in  the  East,  to  Su-rashtra  in 
the  South-west,  to  the  Yamuna  and  great  Dandaka  forest 
in  the  South.  Whereas  in  the  Maha-bharata  (as  pointed 
out  by  Professor  Lassen)  the  Aryan  settlers  are  described 
as  having  extended  themselves  to  the  mouths  of  the 
Ganges  in  the  East,  to  the  mouth  of  the  Godavari  on 
the  Koromandel  coast,  and  to  the  Malabar  coast  in  the 
West ;  and  even  the  inhabitants  of  Ceylon  (Sinhala)  bring 
tribute  to  the  Northern  kings.  It  is  well  known  that  in 
India  different  customs  and  opinions  frequently  prevail  in 
districts  almost  adjacent ;  and  it  is  certain  that  Brah- 
mauism  never  gained  the  ascendency  in  the  more  martial 
north  which  it  acquired  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Oude,^ 
so  that  in  the  Maha-bharata  we  have  far  more  allusions  to 
Buddhistic  scepticism  than  we  have  in  the  sister  Epic. 
In  fact,  each  poem,  though  often  running  parallel  to 
the  other,  has  yet  a  distinct  point  of  departure ;  and  the 
Maha-bharata,  as  it  became  current  in  various  localities, 
diverged  more  into  by-paths  and  cross-roads  than  its  sister. 
Hence  the  Ramayana  is  in  some  respects  a  more  finished 
composition  than  the  Maha-bharata,  and  depicts  a  more 
polished  state  of  society,  and  a  more  advanced  civilization. 

1  Professor  "Weber  (Ind.  Stud.  I.  220)  remarks  that  the  north-western 
tribes  retained  their  ancient  customs,  which  those  who  migrated  to  the 
east  had  at  one  time  shared.  The  former  (as  represented  in  the  Maha- 
bharata)  kept  themselves  free  from  those  influences  of  hierarchy  and 
caste,  which  arose  among  the  inhabitants  of  Ayodhya  (in  the  Ramayana) 
as  a  consequence  of  their  intermingling  and  coming  more  in  contact 
with  the  aborigines. 

2  D 


41  8  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

In  fact,  the  Maha-bharata  presents  a  complete  circle  of 
post-Vedic  mythology,  including  many  myths  which  have 
their  germ  in  the  Veda,  and  continually  enlarging  its  cir- 
cumference to  embrace  the  later  phases  of  Hinduism,  with 
its  whole  train  of  confused  and  conflicting  legends.''  From 
this  storehouse  are  drawn  much  of  the  Puranas,  and  many 
of  the  more  recent  heroic  poems  and  dramas.  Here  we 
have  repeated  many  of  the  legends  of  the  Eamayana,  and 
even  the  history  of  Kama  himself  (see  p.  366).  Here  also 
we  have  long  discourses  on  religion,  politics,  morality,  and 
philosophy,  introduced  without  any  particular  connection 
with  the  plot.  Here  again  are  most  of  the  narratives 
of  the  incarnation  of  Vishnu,  numberless  stories  connected 
with  the  worship  of  Siva,  and  various  details  of  the  life 
of  Krishna.  Those  which  especially  bear  on  the  modern 
worship  of  Krishna  are  contained  in  the  supplement  called 
Hari-vansa,  which  is  itself  a  long  poem^consisting  of 
16,374  stanzas^ — longer  than  the  Iliad  and  Odyssey  com- 
bined.* Hence  the  religious  system  of  the  Maha-bharata 
is  far  more  popular,  liberal,  and  comprehensive  than  that 
of  the  Eamayana.  It  is  true  that  the  god  Vishnu  is  con- 
nected with  Krishna  in  the  Maha-bharata,  as  he  is  with 
Eama  in  the  Eamayana,  but  in  the  latter  Eama  is  every- 

1  It  should  be  noted,  that  the  germs  of  many  of  the  legends  of 
Hindu  epic  poetry  are  found  in  the  Eig-veda.  Also  that  the  same 
legend  is  sometimes  repeated  in  different  parts  of  the  Maha-bharata, 
with  considerable  variations ;  as,  for  example,  the  story  of  the  combat 
of  Indra — god  of  air  and  thunder — with  the  demon  Yritra,  who  re- 
presents enveloping  clouds  and  vapour.  See  Vana-parvan  8690,  &c. ; 
and  compare  with  S'anti-parvan  10 124,  &c.  Compare  also  the  story 
of  the  'Hawk  and  Pigeon,' Vana-parvan  10558,  with  Anu^asana-parvan 
2046. 

2  The  Hari-vansa  bears  to  the  Maha-bharata  a  relation  very  similar 
to  that  which  the  Uttara-kanda,  or  last  Book  of  the  Ramayana,  bears 
to  the  preceding  Books  of  that  poem. 

8  The  Iliad  and  Odyssey  together  contain  about  30,000  lines. 


THE  EPICS  COMPARED  TOGETHER  AND  WITH  HOMER.      419 

thing  ;  whereas  in  the  Maha-bharata,  Krishna  is  by  no 
means  the  centre  of  the  system.  His  divinity  is  even 
occasionally  disputed.^  The  five  Pandavas  have  also 
partially  divine  natures,  and  by  turns  become  prominent. 
Sometimes  Arjuna,  sometimes  Yudhi-shthira,  at  others 
Bhima,  appears  to  be  the  principal  orb  round  which  the 
plot  moves.^  Moreover,  in  various  passages  Siva  is 
described  as  supreme,  and  receives  worship  from  Krishna. 
In  others,  Krishna  is  exalted  above  all,  and  receives 
honour  from  Siva.^  In  fact,  while  the  Eamayana  gene- 
rally represents  one-sided  and  exclusive  Brahmanism,*  the 
Maha-bharata  reflects  the  multilateral  character  of  Hin- 
duism ;  its  monotheism  and  polytheism,  its  spirituality  and 
materialism,  its  strictness  and  laxity,  its  priestcraft  and 
anti-priestcraft,  its  hierarchical  intolerance  and  rational- 
istic philosophy,  combined.  Not  that  there  was  any 
intentional  variety  in  the  original  design  of  the  work, 
but  that  almost  every  shade  of  opinion  found  expression 
in  a  compilation  formed  by  gradual  accretion  through  a 
long  period. 

In  unison  with  its  more  secular,  popular,  and  human 

1  As  by  S'isu-pala  and  others.     See  p.  392,  with  notes. 

2  In  this  respect  the  Maha-bharata  resembles  the  Iliad.  Achilles 
is  scarcely  its  hero.  Other  warriors  too  much  divide  the  interest 
with  him. 

^  In  the  Bhagavad-gita  Krishna  is  not  merely  an  incarnation  of 
Vishnu ;  he  is  identified  with  Brahma,  the  Supreme  Spirit,  and  is  so 
in  numerous  other  places.  It  is  well  known  that  in  Homer  the 
supremacy  of  one  god  (Jove),  and  due  subordination  of  the  other 
deities,  is  maintained. 

*  Some  free  thought,  however,  has  found  its  way  into  the  Eama- 
yana; see  II.  cviii.  (Schl.) ;  VI.  IxiL  15  (Gorr.,  Bomb.  Ixxxiii.  14); 
VI.  Ixxxiii.  14  (Calc).  It  is  remarkable  that  in  the  Eamayana  the 
same  gods  are  appealed  to  by  Eama  and  Eavana,  just  as  by  Greeks 
and  Trojans  in  the  Iliad ;  and  Hanumat,  when  in  Lan-ka,  heard  the 
Brahma-ghosha  in  the  morning.  Eamay.  V.  xvi.  41.  This  has  been 
noticed  by  Weber. 


420  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

character,  the  MaLa-bharata  has,  as  a  rule,  less  of  mere 
mythical  allegory,  and  more  of  historical  probability  in 
its  narratives  than  the  Eamayana.  The  reverse,  however, 
sometimes  holds  good.  For  example,  in  Eamayana  IV.  xl. 
we  have  a  simple  division  of  the  world  into  four  quarters 
or  regions,  whereas  in  Maha-bharata  VI.  236,  (fee,  we  have 
the  fanciful  divisidn  (afterwards  adopted  by  the  Puranas) 
into  seven  circular  Dvipas  or  continents,  viz.,  i.  Jambu- 
dvipa  or  the  Earth,  2.  Plaksha-dvipa,  3.  Salmali-dvipa, 
4.  Kusa-dvipa,  5.  Krauhca-dvipa,  6.  Saka-dvTpa,  7.  Push- 
kara-dvipa;  surrounded  respectively  by  seven  oceans  in 
concentric  belts,  viz.,  i.  the  sea  of  salt-water  (lavana), 
2.  of  sugar-cane  juice  (ihshu),  3.  of  wine  (surd),  4.  of 
clarified  butter  (sarpis),  5.  of  curdled  milk  (dadhi),  6.  of 
milk  (dugdha),  7.  of  fresh  water  (jala) ;  the  mountain 
Meru,  or  abode  of  the  gods,  being  in  the  centre  of 
Jamhu-dvipa,  which  again  is  divided  into  nine  Varshas 
or  countries  separated  by  eight  ranges  of  mountains,  the 
Varsha  called  Bhdrata  (India)  lying  south  of  the  Himavat 
range.^ 

Notwithstanding  these  wild  ideas  and  absurd  figments, 
the  Maha-bharata  contains  many  more  illustrations  of  real 
life  and  of  domestic  and  social  habits  and  manners  than 
the  sister  Epic.  Its  diction,  again,  is  more  varied  than 
that  of  the  Eamayana.  The  bulk  of  the  latter  poem 
(notwithstanding  interpolations  and  additions)  being  by 


1  The  eight  ranges  are  Nishadha,  Hema-kuta,  Nishadha  on  the 
south  of  Meru ;  Nila,  S'veta,  S'rin-gin  on  the  north ;  and  Malyavat 
and  Gandha-madana  on  the  west  and  east.  Beyond  the  sea  of  fresh 
water  is  a  circle  called  'the  land  of  gold,'  and  beyond  this  the  circle 
of  the  Lokaloka  mountains,  which  form  the  limit  of  the  sun's  light, 
all  the  region  on  one  side  being  illuminated,  and  all  on  the  other  side 
of  them  being  in  utter  darkness.  See  Eaghu-vansa  I.  68.  Below  the 
seven  Dvipas  are  the  seven  Patalas,  and  below  these  are  the  twenty-one 
Hells  (note' 2,  p.  55). 


THE  EPICS  COMPARED  TOGETHER  AND  WITH  HOMER.      42  I 

one  author,  is  written  with  uniform  simplicity  of  style 
and  metre  (see  p.  335,  note  2) ;  and  the  antiquity  of  the 
greater  part  is  proved  by  the  absence  of  any  studied 
elaboration  of  diction.  The  Maha-bharata,  on  the  other 
hand,  though  generally  simple  and  natural  in  its  language, 
and  free  from  the  conceits  and  artificial  constructions 
of  later  writers,  comprehends  a  greater  diversity  of  com- 
position, rising  sometimes  (especially  when  the  Indra- 
vajra  metre  is  employed)  to  the  higher  style,  and  using 
not  only  loose  and  irregular,  but  also  studiously  complex 
grammatical  forms,^  and  from  the  mixture  of  ancient 
legends,  occasional  archaisms  and  Vedic  formations. 

In  contrasting  the  two  Indian  poems  with  the  Iliad 
and  the  Odyssey,  we  may  observe  many  points  of  simi- 
larity. Some  parallel  passages  have  been  already  pointed 
out.  "We  must  expect  to  find  the  distinctive  genius  of 
two  different  people  (though  both  of  the  Aryan  race)  in 
widely  distant  localities,  colouring  their  epic  poetry  very 
differently,  notwithstanding  general  features  of  resem- 
blance. The  Eamayana  and  Maha-bharata  are  no  less 
wonderful  than  the  Homeric  poems  as  monuments  of 
the  human  mind,  and  no  less  interesting  as  pictures  of 
human  life  and  manners  in  ancient  times,  yet  they  bear 
in  a  remarkable  degree  the  peculiar  impress  ever  stamped 
on  the  productions  of  Asiatic  nations,  and  separating 
them  from  European.  On  the  side  of  art  and  harmony 
of  proportion,  they  can  no  more  compete  with  the  Iliad 
and  the  Odyssey  than  the  unnatural  outline  of  the  ten- 
headed  and  twenty-armed  Eavana  can  bear  comparison 


1  Thus,  jivase  (I.  732),  hurmi  (III.  10943,  and  Eamay.  II.  xii.  33), 
c?A«te for /w'to (Hari-van^a  •j']()q), parinaydmdsaiai  parindyaydmdsa,  md 
ihaih  for  md  thaisMh,  vyavasishydmi  for  vyavasdsydmi.  The  use  of 
irregular  grammatical  forms  is  sometimes  due  to  the  exigency  of  the 
metre. 


42  2  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

witli  the  symmetry  of  a  Grecian  statue.  While  the 
simplicity  of  the  one  commends  itself  to  the  most 
refined  classical  taste,  the  exaggerations  of  the  other 
only  excite  the  wonder  of  Asiatic  minds,  or  if  attractive 
to  European,  can  only  please  imaginations  nursed  in  aa 
Oriental  school. 

Thus,  in  the  Iliad,  time,  space,  and  action  are  all 
restricted  within  the  narrowest  limits.  In  the  Odyssey 
they  are  allowed  a  wider,  though  not  tQO  wide,  a  cycle ; 
but  in  the  Eamayana  and  Maha-bharata  their  range  is 
almost  unbounded.  The  Eamayana,  as  it  traces  the  life 
of  a  single  individual  with  tolerable  continuity,  is  in  this 
respect  more  like  the  Odyssey  than  the  Iliad.  In  other 
points,  especially  in  its  plot,  the  greater  simplicity  of  its 
style,  and  its  comparative  freedom  from  irrelevant  episodes, 
it  more  resembles  the  Iliad.  There  are  many  graphic 
passages  in  both  the  Eamayana  and  Maha-bharata  which, 
for  beauty  of  description,  cannot  be  surpassed  by  any- 
thing in  Homer.  It  should  be  observed,  moreover,  that 
the  diction  of  the  Indian  Epics  is  more  polished,  regular, 
and  cultivated,  and  the  language  altogether  in  a  more 
advanced  stage  of  development  than  that  of  Homer. 
This,  of  course,  tells  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  style  on 
the  side  of  nervous  force  and  vigour;  and  it  must  be 
admitted  that  in  the  Sanskrit  poems  there  is  a  great 
redundance  of  epithets,  too  liberal  a  use  of  metaphor, 
simile,  and  hyperbole,  and  far  too  much  repetition,  ampli- 
fication, and  prolixity. 

In  fact,  the  European  who  wishes  to  estimate  rightly 
the  Indian  Epics,  must  be  prepared  not  to  judge  them 
exclusively  from  his  own  point  of  view.  He  should  bear 
in  mind  that  to  satisfy  the  ordinary  Oriental  taste,  poetry 
requires  to  be  seasoned  with  exaggeration. 

Again,  an  Occidental  student's  appreciation  of  many 
passages    will   depend  upon  his  familiarity  with   Indian 


THE  EPICS  COMPARED  TOGETHER  AND  WITH  HOMER.      423 

mythologj^,  as  well  as  with  Oriental  customs,  scenery, 
and  even,  the  characteristic  idiosyncrasies  of  the  animal 
creation  in  the  East.  Most  of  the  similes  in  Hindu  epic 
poetry  are  taken  from  the  habits  and  motions  of  Asiatic 
animals,  such  as  elephants  and  tigers,^  or  from  peculiarities 
in  the  aspect  of  Indian  plants  and  natural  objects.  Then, 
as  to  the  description  of  scenery,  in  which  Hindu  poets  are 
certainly  more  graphic  and  picturesque  than  either  Greek 
or  Latin,^  the  whole  appearance  of  external  nature  in  the 
East,  the  exuberance  of  vegetation,  the  profusion  of  trees 
and  fruits  and  flowers,^  the  glare  of  burning  skies,  the 
freshness  of  the  rainy  season,  the  fury  of  storms,  the 
serenity  of  Indian  moonlight,*  and  the  gigantic  mould  in 

1  Thus  any  eminent  or  courageous  person  would  be  spoken  of  as  '  a 
tiger  of  a  man.'  Other  favourite  animals  in  similes  are  the  lion  (sinha), 
the  ruddy  goose  {cakravdJca  or  rathdn-ga),  the  buffalo  [mahisha),  the 
boar  (vardha),  the  koil  or  Indian  cuckoo  (Jcokila),  the  heron  (kraunca), 
the  ox  {gavaya,  i.e.,  los  gavaeus),  &c.  &c.  A  woman  is  sometimes  said 
to  have  a  rolling  gait  like  that  of  an  elephant.  It  should  be  noted, 
however,  that  similes  in  the  Indian  Epics,  though  far  too  frequent,  are 
generally  confined  to  a  few  words,  and  not,  as  in  Homer,  drawn  out  for 
three  or  four  lines. 

2  The  descriptions  of  scenery  and  natural  objects  in  Homer  are  too 
short  and  general  to  be  really  picturesque.  They  want  more  colour- 
ing and  minuteness  of  detail.  Some  account  for  this  by  supposing 
that  a  Greek  poet  was  not  accustomed  to  look  upon  nature  with  a 
painter's  eye. 

3  The  immense  profusion  of  flowers  of  all  kinds  is  indicated  by  the 
number  of  botanical  terms  in  a  Sanskrit  dictionary.  Some  of  the  most 
common  flowers  and  trees  alluded  to  in  epic  poetry  are,  the  cuta  or 
mango ;  the  oAoJca  (described  by  Sir  William  Jones) ;  the  Idniuka  (butea 
frondosa,  with  beautiful  red  blossoms) ;  the  tamarind  (amlikd) ;  the  jas- 
mine (of  which  there  are  many  varieties,  such  as  mdlatl,  jdtl,  yuthikd, 
&c.)  ;  the  kuruvaka  (amaranth)  ;  the  sandal  (candana) ;  the  jujube  {kar- 
kandhu)  ;  the  pomegranate  (dddima) ;  the  kadamba  (nipa) ;  the  tamarisk 
(picula)  ;  the  vakula,  karnikdra,  iringdta,  &c. 

*  See  the  beautiful  description  of  night  in  Ramayana  (Gorr,)  I. 
XXX  vi.  15. 


424  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

whicli  natural  objects  are  generally  cast — these  and  many 
other  features  are  difficult  to  be  realized  by  a  European. 
We  must  also  make  allowance  for  the  difference  in  Eastern 
manners ;  though,  after  conceding  a  wide  margin  in  this 
direction,  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  disregard  of  all 
delicacy  in  laying  bare  the  most  revolting  particulars  of 
certain  ancient  legends  which  we  now  and  then  encounter 
in  the  Indian  Epics  (especially  in  the  Maha-bharata)  is 
a  serious  blot,  and  one  which  never  disfigures  the  pages 
of  Homer,  notwithstanding  his  occasional  freedom,  of  ex- 
pression. Yet  there  are  not  wanting  indications  in  the 
Indian  Epics  of  a  higher  degree  of  civilization  than  that 
represented  in  the  Homeric  poems.  The  battle-fields  of  the 
Ramayana  and  Maha-bharata,  though  spoiled  by  childish 
exaggerations  and  the  use  of  supernatural  weapons,  are 
not  made  barbarous  by  wanton  cruelties;^  and  the  de- 
scriptions of  Ayodhya  and  Lan-ka  imply  far  greater  luxury 
and  refinement  than  those  of  Sparta  and  Troy. 

The  constant  interruption  of  the  principal  story  (as 
before  described)  by  tedious  episodes,  in  both  Eamayana 
and  Maha-bharata,  added  to  the  rambling  prolixity  of  the 
story  itself,  will  always  be  regarded  as  the  chief  drawback 
in  Hindu  epic  poetry,  and  constitutes  one  of  its  most 
marked  features  of  distinction.  Even  in  this  respect, 
however,  the  Iliad  has  not  escaped  the  censure  of  critics. 
Many  believe  that  this  poem  is  the  result  of  the  fusion 
of  different  songs  on  one  subject,  long  current  in  various 
localities,  intermixed  with  later  interpolations,  something 
after  the  manner  of  the  Maha-bharata.  But  the  artistic 
instincts  of  the  Greeks  required  that  all  the  parts  and 


1  There  is  something  savage  in  Achilles'  treatment  of  Hector ;  and 
the  cruelties  permitted  by  Ulysses,  in  the  22  nd  Book  of  the  Odyssejf, 
are  almost  revolting.  Compare  with  these  Rama's  treatment  of  his 
fallen  foe  E,avana,  in  the  Yuddha-kanda. 


THE  EPICS  COMPARED  TOaETHER  AND  WITH  HOMER.      425 

appendages  and  more  recent  additions  should  be  blended 
into  one  compact,  homogeneous,  and  symmetrical  whole. 
Although  we  have  certainly  in  Homer  occasional  digres- 
sions or  parentheses,  such  as  the  description  of  the  '  shield 
of  Achilles,'  the  '  story  of  Venus  and  Mars,'  these  are  not 
like  the  Indian  episodes.  If  not  absolutely  essential  to 
the  completeness  of  the  epic  conception,  they  appear  to 
arise  naturally  out  of  the  business  of  the  plot,  and  cause 
no  violent  disruption  of  its  unity.  On  the  contrary,  with 
Eastern  writers  and  narrators  of  stories,  continuity  is  often 
designedly  interrupted.  They  delight  in  stringing  together 
a  number  of  distinct  stories — detached  from  each  other, 
yet  connected  like  the  figures  on  a  frieze.  They  even 
purposely  break  the  sequence  of  each ;  so  that  before  one 
is  ended  another  is  commenced,  and  ere  this  is  completed, 
others  are  interwoven;  the  result  being  a  curious  inter- 
twining of  stories  within  stories,  the  slender  thread  of  an 
original  narrative  running  through  them  all.  A  familiar 
instance  of  this  is  afforded  by  the  well-known  collection  of 
tales  called  ' Hitopadesa,'  and  by  the  'Arabian  Nights.' 
The  same  tendency  is  observable  in  the  composition  of 
the  epic  poems — far  more,  however,  in  the  Maha-bharata 
than  in  the  Ramayana. 

Passing  on  to  a  comparison  of  the  plot  and  the  per- 
sonages of  the  Eamayana  with  those  of  the  Iliad,  without 
supposing,  as  some  have  done,  that  either  poem  has  been 
imitated  from  the  other,  it  is  certainly  true,  and  so  far 
remarkable,  that  the  subject  of  both  is  a  war  undertaken 
to  recover  the  wife  of  one  of  the  warriors,  carried  off  by 
a  hero  on  the  other  side ;  and  that  Eama,  in  this  respect, 
corresponds  to  Menelaus,  while  in  others  he  may  be  com- 
pared to  Achiljes,  Sita  answering  to  Helen,  Sparta  to 
Ayodhya,  Lan-ka  to  Troy.  It  may  even  be  true  that 
some  sort  of  analogy  may  be  traced  between  the  parts 
played  by  Agamemnon  and  Sugriva,  Patroclus  and  Lak- 


426  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

shmaiia,  Nestor  and  Jambavat.^  Again,  Ulysses,^  in  one 
respect,  may  be  compared  to  Hannmat ;  and  Hector,  as 
the  bravest  warrior  on  the  Trojan  side,  may  in  some  points 
be  likened  to  Indrajit,  in  others  to  the  indignant  Vibhi- 
shana,^  or  again  in  the  Maha-bharata  to  Duryodhana, 
while  Achilles  has  qualities  in  common  with  Arjuna. 
Other  resemblances  might  be  indicated ;  but  these  com- 
parisons cannot  be  carried  out  to  any  extent  without 
encountering  difficulties  at  every  step,  so  that  any  theory 
of  an  interchange  of  ideas  between  Hindu  and  Greek  epic 
poets  becomes  untenable.  Eama's  character  has  really 
nothing  in  common  with  that  of  Menelaus,  and  very  little 
with  that  of  Achilles ;  although,  as  the  bravest  and  most 
powerful  of  the  warriors,  he  is  rather  to  be  compared  with 
the  latter  than  the  former  hero.  If  in  his  anger  he  is 
occasionally  Achillean,  his  whole  nature  is  cast  in  a  less 
hiiman  mould  than  that  of  the  Grecian  hero.  He  is  the 
type  of  a  perfect  husband,  son,  and  brother.  Sita  also 
rises  in  character  far  above  Helen,  and  even  above 
Penelope,*  both  in  her  sublime  devotion  and  loyalty  to 
her  husband,  and  her  indomitable  patience  and  endurance 
under  suffering  and  temptation.  As  for  Bharata  and 
Lakshmana,  they  are  models  of  fraternal  duty ;  Kausalya 
of  maternal  tenderness  ;  Dasaratha  of  paternal  love  :  and 
it  may  be  affirmed  generally  that  the  whole  moral  tone  of 
the  Eamayana  is  certainly  above  that  of  the  Iliad.    Again, 


1  Jambavat  was  the  chief  of  the  bears,  who  was  always  giving  sage 
advice. 

2  When  any  work  had  to  be  done  which  required  peculiar  skill  or 
stratagem,  it  was  entrusted  to  iroX-Jfiriris  'OSvsaetlg. 

s  Hector,  like  Vibhishana,  was  indignant  with  the  ravisher,  but  he 
does  not  refuse  to  fight  on  his  brother's  side. 

*  One  cannot  help  suspecting  Penelope  of  giving  way  to  a  little 
womanly  vanity  in  allowing  herself  to  be  surrounded  by  so  many 
suitors,  though  she  repudiated  their  advances. 


THE  EPICS  COMPARED  TOGETHER  AND  WITH  HOMER.      427 

iu  the  Iliad  the  subject  is  really  the  anger  of  Achilles  ; 
and  when  that  is  satisfied  the  drama  closes.  The  fall  of 
Troy  is  not  considered  necessary  to  the  completion  of  the 
plot.  Whereas  in  the  Eamayana  the  whole  action  points 
to  the  capture  of  Lan-ka  and  destruction  of  the  ravisher. 
No  one  too  can  read  either  the  Eamayana  or  Maha-bharata 
without  feeling  that  they  rise  above  the  Homeric  poems 
in  this — that  a  deep  religious  meaning  appears  to  underlie 
all  the  narrative,  and  that  the  wildest  allegory  may  be 
intended  to  conceal  a  sublime  moral,  symbolizing  the 
conflict  between  good  and  evil,  and  teaching  the  hopeless- 
ness of  victory  in  so  terrible  a  contest  without  purity  of 
soul,  self-abnegation,  and  subjugation  of  the  passions. 

In  reality  it  is  the  religious  element  of  the  Indian 
Epics  that  constitutes  one  of  the  principal  features  of  con- 
trast in  comparing  them  with  the  Homeric.  We  cannot  of 
course  do  more  than  indicate  here  the  bare  outlines  of  so 
interesting  a  subject  as  a  comparison  between  the  gods  of 
India,  Eome,  and  Greece.     Thus  : — 

Indra  ^  and  S'iva  certainly  offer  points  of  analogy  to  Jupiter  and 
Zeus ;  Durga  or  Parvati  to  Juno ;  Krishna  to  Apollo ;  S'ri  to  Ceres ; 
Prithivi  to  Cybele ;  Varuna  to  Neptune,  and,  in  his  earlier  character, 
to  Uranus ;  Sarasvati,  goddess  of  speech  and  the  arts,  to  Minerva ; 
Karttikeya  or  Skanda,  god  of  war,  to  Mars ;  ^  Yama  to  Pluto  or 
Minos ;  Kuvera  to  Plutus ;  Visvakarman  to  Vulcan  ;  Kama,  god  of 


1  Indra  is,  as  we  have  already  seen  (p.  10),  the  Jupiter  Pluvius  who 
sends  rain  and  wields  the  thunderbolt,  and  in  the  earlier  mythology  is 
the  chief  of  the  gods,  like  Zeus.  Subsequently  his  worship  was  super- 
seded by  that  of  Krishna  and  S'iva. 

2  It  is  curious  that  Karttikeya,  the  war-god,  is  represented  in  Hindu 
mythology  as  the  god  of  thieves — I  suppose  from  their  habit  of  sapping 
and  mining  under  houses.  (See  Mrid-6hakatika,  Act  III.)  Indian 
thieves,  however,  display  such  skill  and  ingenuity,  that  a  god  like 
Mercury  would  appear  to  be  a  more  appropriate  patron.  Karttikeya 
was  the  son  of  S'iva,  just  as  Mars  was  the  offspring  of  Jupiter. 


42  8  INDIAN  WISDOM. 

love,  to  Cupid ;  Rati,  his  wife,  to  Venus ;  ^  Narada  to  Mercury ;  ^ 
Hanumat  to  Pan ;  Uslias,  and  in  tlie  later  mythology  Aruna,  to  Eos 
('Hci;)  and  Aurora ;  Vayu  to  Aeolus ;  Ganesa,  as  presiding  over  the 
opening  and  beginning  of  all  undertakings,  to  Janus;  the  A^vinl- 
kumaras^  to  the  Dioscuri  (Amxovsoi),  Castor  and  Pollux. 

But  in  Greece,  mythology,  which,  was  in  many  respects 
fully  systematized  when  the  Homeric  poems  were  com- 
posed,* never  passed  certain  limits,  or  outgrew  a  certain 
symmetry  of  outline.  In  the  Iliad  and  the  Odyssey,  a 
god  is  little  more  than  idealized  humanity.  His  form  and 
his  actions  are  seldom  out  of  keeping  with  this  character. 
Hindu  mythology,  on  the  other  hand,  springing  from  the 
same  source  as  that  of  Europe,  but  spreadiug  and  rami- 
fying with  the  rank  luxuriance  of  an  Indian  forest,  speedily 
outgrew  all  harmony  of  proportions,  and  surrounded  itself 
with  an  intricate  undergrowth  of  monstrous  and  confused 
allegory.  Doubtless  the  gods  of  the  Indian  and  Grecian 
Epics  preserve  some  traces  of  their  common  origin,  resem- 
bling each  other  in  various  ways;  interfering  in  human 
concerns,  exhibiting  human  infirmities,  taking  part  in  the 
battles  of  their  favourite  heroes,  furnishing  them  with 
celestial  arms,  or  interposing  directly  to  protect  them. 

But  in  the  Eamayana  and  Maha-bharata,  and  in  the 
Puranas  to  which  they  led,  the  shape  and  operations  of 

1  In  one  or  two  points  Lakshmi  may  be  compared  to  Venus. 

^  As  Mercury  was  the  inventor  of  the  lyre,  so  Narada  was  the 
inventor  of  the  Vina  or  lute. 

^  These  ever-youthful  twin  sons  of  the  Sun,  by  his  wife  Sanjna, 
transformed  into  a  mare  (asvini),  resemble  the  classical  Dioscuri, 
both  by  their  exploits  and  the  aid  they  render  to  their  worshippers 
(see  p.  ii). 

*  Herodotus  says  (Euterpe,  53)  that  '  Homer  and  Hesiod  framed 
the  Greek  Theogony,  gave  distinctive  names  to  the  gods,  distributed 
honours  and  functions  to  them,  and  described  their  forms.'  I  con- 
clude that  by  the  verb  Troieis,  Herodotus  did  not  mean  to  imply  that 
Homer  invented  the  myths,  but  that  he  gave  system  to  a  mythology 
already  current;  see,  however,  Grote's  History  of  Greece,  I.  482,  &c. 


THE  EPICS  COMPARED  TOGETHER  AJSTD  WITH  HOMER.      429 

divine  and  semi-divine  beings  are  generally  suggestive  of 
the  monstrous,  the  frightful,  and  the  incredible.  The 
human  form,  however  idealized,  is  seldom  thought  adequate 
to  the  expression  of  divine  attributes.  Brahma  is  four- 
faced  ;  Siva,  three-eyed  and  sometimes  five-headed ;  Indra 
has  a  thousand  eyes ;  Karttikeya,  six  faces ;  Eavana,  ten 
heads  ;  G-anesa  has  the  head  of  an  elephant.  Nearly  every 
god  and  goddess  has  at  least  four  arms,  with  symbols  of 
obscure  import  exhibited  in  every  hand.^  The  deeds  of 
heroes,  who  are  themselves  half  gods,  transport  the  imagi- 
nation into  the  region  of  the  wildest  chimera  ;  and  a  whole 
pantheon  presents  itself,  teeming  with  grotesque  fancies, 
with  horrible  creations,  half  animals,  half  gods,  with  man- 
eating  ogres,  many-headed  giants  and  disgustihg  demons, 
to  an  extent  which  the  refined  and  delicate  sensibilities 
of  the  Greeks  and  Eomans  could  not  have  tolerated.^ 

Moreover,  in  the  Indian  Epics,  the  boundaries  between 
the  natural  and  supernatural,  between  earth  and  heaven, 
between  the  divine,  human,  and  even  animal  creations, 
are  singularly  vague  and  undefined ;  troops  of  deities 
and  semi-divine  personages  appear  on  the  stage  on  every 
occasion.  Gods,  men,  and  animals  are  ever  changing 
places,  A  constant  communication  is  kept  up  between 
the  two  worlds,  and  such  is  their  mutual  interdependence 
that  each  seems  to  need  the  other's  help.  If  distressed 
mortals  are  assisted  out  of  their  difficulties  by  divine 
interposition,  the  tables  are  often  turned,  and  perturbed 
gods,  themselves  reduced  to  pitiful  straits,  are  forced  to 
implore  the  aid  of  mortal  M'arriors  in  their  conflicts  with 

1  The  Roman  god  Janus  (supposed  to  be  for  Dianus  and  connected 
with  dies)  was  represented  by  two  and  sometimes  four  heads. 

2  It  is  true  that  Homer  now  and  then  indulges  in  monstrous  crea- 
tions ;  but  even  the  description  of  Polyphemus  does  not  outrage  all 
probability,  like  the  exaggerated  horrors  of  the  demon  Kabandha,  in 
the  3rd  Book  of  the  Ramayana  (see  p.  356). 


43°  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

the  demons.^  They  even  look  to  mortals  for  their  daily 
sustenance,  and  are  represented  as  actually  living  on  the 
sacrifices  offered  to  them  by  human  beings,  and  at  every 
Facrificial  ceremony  assemble  in  troops,  eager  to  feed  upon 
tlieir  shares.  In  fact,  sacrifice  with  the  Hindus  is  not 
merely  expiatory  or  placatory ;  it  is  necessary  for  the  food 
and  support  of  the  gods.  If  there  were  no  sacrifices  the 
gods  would  starve  to  death.  This  alone  will  account  for 
the  interest  they  take  in  the  destruction  of  demons,  whose 
great  aim  was  to  obstruct  these  sources  of  their  suste- 
nance. Much  in  the  same  way  the  spirits  of  dead  men  are 
supposed  to  depend  for  existence  and  happiness  on  the 
living,  and  to  be  fed  with  cakes  of  rice  and  libations  of 
water  at  the  Sraddha  ceremonies. 

Again,  not  only  are  men  aided  by  animals  which  usurp 
human  functions,  but  the  gods  also  are  dependent  on  and 
associated  with  birds  and  beasts  of  all  kinds,  and  even  with 
plants.  Most  of  the  principal  deities  are  described  as  using 
animals  for  their  Vahanas  or  vehicles.  Brahma  is  carried 
on  a  swan,  and  sometimes  seated  on  a  lotus ;  Vishnu  is 
borne  on  or  attended  by  a  being,  half  eagle,  half  man 
(called  Garada) ;  Lakshmi  is  seated  on  a  lotus  or  carries 
one  in  her  hand  ;  Siva  has  a  bull  for  his  vehicle  or  com- 
panion ;  Karttikeya,  god  of  war,  has  a  peacock  ;  ^  Indra  has 
an  elephant ;  Yama,  god  of  death,  has  a  buffalo  (mahisha);^ 
Kama-deva,  a  parrot  and  fish  ;  *  Ganesa,  a  rat ;  ^  Agni,  a 
ram ;  Varuna,  a  fish  ;  Durga,  a  tiger.     The  latter  is  some- 


1  Indra  does  so  in  the  S'akuntala  and  Vikramorvasi. 

^  Karttikeya  is  represented  as  a  handsome  young  man  (though  with 
six  faces).     This  may  account  for  his  being  associated  with  a  peacock. 

^  Perhaps  from  its  great  power. 

*  A  parrot  often  figures  in  Indian  love  stories.  He  is  also  associated 
with  a  kind  of  crocodile  as  his  symbol  (whence  his  name  Makarordhvaja). 
Such  an  animal  is  kept  in  tanks  near  his  temples. 

5  Supposod  to  possess  great  sagacity. 


THE  EPICS  COMPARED  TOGETHER  AND  WITH  HOMER.   431 

times  represented  with  her  husband  on  a  bull,  Siva  him- 
self being  also  associated  with  a  tiger  and  antelope  as 
well  as  with  countless  serpents.  Vishnu  (Hari,  Narayana) 
is  also  represented  as  the  Supreme  Being  sleeping  on  a 
thousand-headed  serpent  called  Sesha  (or  Ananta,  '  the 
Infinite '). 

This  Sesha  is,  moreover,  held  to  be  the  chief  of  a  race  of 
Nagas  or  semi-divine  beings,  sometimes  stated  to  be  one 
thousand  in  number,  half  serpents,  half  men,  their  heads 
being  human  and  their  bodies  snake-like.  They  inhabit 
the  seven  Patalas  ^  or  regions  under  the  earth,  which,  with 
the  seven  superincumbent  worlds,  are  supposed  to  rest  on 


1  Patala,  though  often  used  as  a  general  term  for  all  the  seven  regions 
under  the  earth,  is  properly  only  one  of  the  seven,  called  in  order,  Atala, 
Vitala,  Sutala,  Rasdtala,  Taldtala,  Mahdtala,  and  Pdtdla ;  above  which 
are  the  seven  worlds  (Lokas),  called  Bliu  (the  earth),  Bliuvar,  Svar, 
Mdhar,  Janar,  Tapah,  and  Brahma  or  Satya  (see  note  2,  p.  55)  ;  all 
fourteen  resting  on  the  heads  of  the  great  serpent.  The  serpent-race 
who  inhabit  these  lower  regions  (which  are  not  to  be  confounded  with 
the  Narakas  or  hells,  note  2,  p.  55)  are  sometimes  regarded  as  belong- 
ing to  only  one  of  the  seven,  viz.,  Patala,  or  to  a  portion  of  it  called 
Naga-loka,  of  which  the  capital  is  Bhogavati.  They  are  fabled  to  have 
sprung  from  Kadru,  wife  of  Kasyapa,  and  some  of  the  females  among 
them  (Naga-kanyas)  are  said  to  have  married  human  heroes.  In  this 
way  Uliipi  became  the  wife  of  Arjuna  (p.  389,  note  2),  and,  curiously 
enough,  a  tribe  of  the  Rajputs  claims  descent  from  the  Nagas  even  in 
the  present  day.  A  particular  day  is  held  sacred  to  the  Nagas,  and  a 
festival  called  Naga-pandami  is  kept  in  their  honour  about  the  end  of 
July  (S'ravana).  Vasuki  and  Takshaka  are  other  leading  Nagas,  to 
whom  a  separate  dominion  over  part  of  the  serpent-race  in  different 
parts  of  the  lower  regions  is  sometimes  assigned.  All  the  Nagas  are 
described  as  having  jewels  in  their  heads.  Their  chiefs,  S'esha,  Vasuki, 
and  Takshaka,  are  said  to  rule  over  snakes  generally,  while  Garuda  is 
called  the  enemy  of  Nagas  {Ndgari) ;  so  that  the  term  Naga  sometimes 
stands  for  an  ordinary  serpent.  The  habit  which  snakes  have  of 
hiding  in  holes  may  have  given  rise  to  the  notion  of  peopling  the  lower 
regions  with  Nagas.  The  Rev.  K.  M.  Banerjea  has  a  curious  theory 
about  them. 


432  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

the  thousand  heads  of  the  serpent  Sesha,  who  typifies 
infinity — inasmuch  as,  according  to  a  common  myth,  he 
supports  the  Supreme  Being  between  the  intervals  of 
creation,  as  well  as  the  worlds  created  at  the  commence- 
ment of  each  Kalpa  (note  3,  p.  330).  Again,  the  earth  is 
sometimes  fabled  to  be  supported  by  the  vast  heads  and 
backs  of  eight  male  and  eight  female  mythical  elephants, 
who  all  have  names,^  and  are  the  elephants  of  the  eight 
quarters.  When  any  one  of  these  shakes  his  body  the 
whole  earth  quakes  (see  Eamayana  I.  xli.). 

In  fact,  it  is  not  merely  in  a  confused,  exaggerated, 
and  overgrown  mythology  that  the  difference  between  the 
Indian  and  Grecian  Epics  lies.  It  is  in  the  injudicious 
and  excessive  use  of  it.  In  the  Eamayana  and  Maha- 
bharata,  the  spiritual  and  the  supernatural  are  every- 
where so  dominant  and  overpowering,  that  anything 
merely  human  seems  altogether  out  of  place. 

In  the  Iliad  and  Odyssey,  the  religious  and  super- 
natural are  perhaps  scarcely  less  prevalent.  The  gods 
are  continually  interposing  and  superintending ;  but  they 
do  so  as  if  they  were  themselves  little  removed  from  men, 
or  at  least  without  destroying  the  dramatic  probability  of 
the  poem,  or  neutralizing  its  general  air  of  plain  matter- 
of-fact  humanity.  Again,  granted  that  in  Homer  there  is 
frequent  mention  of  the  future  existence  of  the  soul,  and 
its  condition  of  happiness  or  misery  hereafter,  and  that 
the  Homeric  descriptions  of  disembodied  spirits  correspond 
in   many  points  with   the  Hindu  notions   on   the  same 


1  The  eight  names  of  the  male  elephants  are  given  in  the  Amara- 
kosha,  thus  :  Airavata,  Pundarika,  Vamana,  Kumuda,  Anjana,  Pushpa^ 
danta,  Sarva-bhauma,  Supratika.  Pour  are  named  in  Eamayana  (I.  xK.), 
Viru-paksha,  Maha-padma,  Saumanas,  and  Bhadra.  Sometimes  these 
elephants  appear  to  have  locomotive  habits,  and  roam  about  the  sky  ia 
the  neighbourhood  of  their  respective  quarters  (see  Megha-duta  14). 


THE  EPICS  COMPARED  TOGETHER  AND  WITH  HOMER.      433 

subject  ^ — yet  even  these  doctrines  do  not  stand  out  with 
such  exaggerated  reality  in  Homer  as  to  make  human 
concerns  appear  unreal.  Nor  is  there  in  his  poems  the 
slightest  allusion  to  the  soul's  pre-existence  in  a  former 
body,  and  its  liability  to  pass  into  other  bodies  hereafter— 
a  theory  which  in  Hindu  poetry  invests  present  actions 
with  a  mysterious  meaning,  and  gives  a  deep  distinctive 
colouring  to  Indian  theology. 

Above  all,  although  priests  are  occasionally  mentioned 
in  the  Iliad  and  the  Odyssey,  there  is  wholly  wanting  in 
the  Homeric  poems  any  recognition  of  a  regular  hierarchy, 
or  the  necessity  for  a  mediatorial  caste  of  sacrificers.^ 
This,  which  may  be  called  the  sacerdotal  element  of  the 
Indian  Epics,  is  more  or  less  woven  into  their  very  tissue, 
Brahmanism  has  been  at  work  in  these  productions  almost 
as  much  as  the  imagination  of  the  poet ;  and  boldly 
claiming  a  monopoly  of  aU  knowledge,  human  and  divine, 
has  appropriated  this,  as  it  has  every  other  department 
of  literature,  and  warped  it  to  its  own  purposes.  Its 
policy  having  been  to  check  the  development  of  intellect, 
and  keep  the  inferior  castes  in  perpetual  childhood,  it 
encouraged  an  appetite  for  exaggeration  more  insatiable 
than  would  be  tolerated  in  the  most  extravagant  European 

1  See  the  following  passages,  which  bear  on  the  existence  of  the  •4'ux'? 
after  death  as  an  I'lbaikov  in  Hades  :  II.  XXIII.  72,  104  :  Od.  XI.  213, 
476  ;  XX.  355  ;  XXIY.  14.  It  is  curious  that  the  Hindu  notion  of  the 
restless  state  of  the  soul  until  the  S'raddha  is  performed  (see  p.  247) 
agrees  with  the  ancient  classical  superstition  that  the  ghosts  of  the  dead 
wandered  about  as  long  as  their  bodies  remained  unburied,  and  were 
not  suffered  to  mingle  with  those  of  the  other  dead.  See  Odyss.  XL 
54  j  II.  XXIII.  72  ;  and  cf.  Aen.  VI.  325  :  Lucan  I.  II.  :  Eur.  Hec.  30. 

2  A  king,  or  any  other  individual,  is  allowed  in  Homer  to  perform 
a  sacrifice  without  the  help  of  priests.  See  II.  II.  411;  III.  392. 
Nevertheless  we  read  occasionally  of  a  Ouoixoi;,  or  'sacrifice-viewer,' 
who  prophesied  from  the  appearance  of  the  flame  and  the  smoke  at  the 
sacrifice.     See  II.  XXIV.  221  :  Odyss.  XXI.  144;  XXII.  319. 

2  E 


434  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

fairy-tale.  This  has  been  done  more  in  the  Eamayana  than 
in  the  Maha-bharata  ;  but  even  in  the  later  Epic,  full  as  it 
is  of  geographical,  chronological,  and  historical  details,  few 
assertions  can  be  trusted.  Time  is  measured  by  millions 
of  years,  space  by  millions  of  miles  ;  and  if  a  battle  has 
to  be  described,  nothing  is  thought  of  it  unless  millions 
of  soldiers,  elephants,  and  horses  are  brought  into  the 
field.^ 

This  difference  in  the  religious  systems  of  Europe  and 
India  becomes  still  more  noteworthy,  when  it  is  borne  in 
mind  that  the  wildest  fictions  of  the  Eamayana  and  Maha- 
bharata  are  to  this  very  day  intimately  bound  up  with 
the  religious  creed  of  the  Hindus.  It  is  certain  that  the 
more  intelligent  among  them,  like  the  more  educated 
Greeks  and  Eomans,  regarded  and  still  regard  the  fictions 
of  mythology  as  allegorical.  But  both  in  Europe  and  Asia 
the  mass  of  the  people,  not  troubling  themselves  about 
the  mystical  significance  of  symbols,  took  emblem  and 
allegory  for  reality.  And  this,  doubtless,  they  are  apt  to 
do  still,  as  much  in  the  West  as  in  the  East.  Among 
European  nations,  however,  even  the  ductile  faith  of  the 
masses  is  sufficiently  controlled  by  common  sense  to  pre- 
vent the  fervour  of  religious  men  from  imposing  any  great 
extravagance  on  their  credulity  ;  and  much  as  the  Homeric 
poems  are  still  admired,  no  one  in  any  part  of  the  world 
now  dreams  of  placing  the  slightest  faith  in  their  legends, 
so  as  to  connect  them  with  religious  opinions  and  practices. 
In  India  a  complete  contrast  in  this  respect  may  be  ob- 
served. The  myths  of  the  Indian  Epics  are  still  closely 
interwoven  with  present  faith.  In  fact,  the  capacity  of 
an  uneducated  Hindu  for  accepting  and  admiring  the  most 
monstrous  fictions  is  apparently  unlimited.  Hence  the 
absence  of  all  history  in  the  literature  of  India.     A  plain 

1  Cf.  extract  from  Aristotle's  Poetics,  p.  435,  note  i,  of  this  volume. 


THE  'EPICS  COMPARED  TOCETHBR  AND  WITH  HOMER.      435 

relation  of  facts  has  little  charm  for  the  ordinary  Hindu 
mind. 

Even  in  the  delineation  of  heroic  character,  where  Indian 
poets  exhibit  much  skill,  they  cannot  avoid  ministering 
to  the  craving  for  the  marvellous  which  appears  to  be 
almost  inseparable  from  the  mental  constitution  of  Eastern 
peoples. 

Homer's  characters  are  like  Shakespeare's.  They  are 
true  heroes,  if  you  will,  but  they  are  always  men;  never 
perfect,  never  free  from  human  weaknesses,  inconsistencies, 
and  caprices  of  temper.  If  their  deeds  are  sometimes 
praeterhuman,  they  do  not  commit  improbabilities  which 
are  absolutely  absurd.  Moreover,  he  does  not  seem  to 
delineate  his  characters ;  he  allows  them  to  delineate 
themselves.  They  stand  out  like  photographs,  in  all  the 
reality  of  nature.  We  are  not  so  much  told  what  they 
do  or  say.^  They  appear  rather  to  speak  and  act  for 
themselves.  In  the  Hindu  Epics  the  poet  gives  us  too 
long  and  too  tedious  descriptions  in  his  own  person ;  and, 
as  a  rule,  his  characters  are  either  too  good  or  too  bad. 
How  far  more  natural  is  Achilles,  with  all  his  faults,  than 
Eama,  with  his  almost  painful  correctness  of  conduct ! 
Even  the  cruel  vengeance  that  Achilles  perpetrates  on 
the  dead  Hector  strikes  us  as  more  likely  to  be  true  than 
Rama's  magnanimous  treatment  of  the  fallen  Eavana. 
True,  even  the  heroes  sometimes  commit  what  a  European 
would  call  crimes  ;  and  the  Pandavas  were  certainly  guilty 
of  one  inhuman  act  of  treachery.  In  their  anxiety  to 
provide  for  their  own  escape  from  a  horrible  death,  they 

^  Aristotle  says  that  '  among  the  many  just  claims  of  Homer  to  our 
praise,  this  is  one — that  he  is  the  only  poet  who  seems  to  have  under- 
stood what  part  in  his  poem  it  was  proper  for  him  to  take  himself.  The 
poet,  in  his  own  person,  should  speak  as  little  as  possible.  .  .  .  Homer, 
after  a  few  preparatory  lines,  immediately  introduces  a  man,  a  woman, 
or  some  other  character;  for  all  have  their  character.'     (Poetics  III.  3.) 


436  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

enticed  an  outcaste  woman  and  her  five  sons  into  their 
inflammable  lac-house,  and  then  burnt  her  alive  (see  p. 
385).  But  the  guilt  of  this  transaction  is  neutralized 
to  a  Hindu  by  the  woman  being  an  outcaste ;  and  besides, 
it  is  the  savage  Bhima  who  sets  fire  to  the  house.  Eama 
and  Lakshmana  again  were  betrayed  into  a  deed  of  cruelty 
in  mutilating  Stirpa-nakha.  For  this,  however,  the  fiery 
Lakshmana  was  responsible.  If  the  better  heroes  sin, 
they  do  not  sin  like  men.  We  see  in  them  no  portraits 
of  ourselves.  The  pictures  are  too  much  one  colour. 
There  are  few  gradations  of  light  and  shadow,  and  little 
artistic  blending  of  opposite  hues.  On  the  one  side  we 
have  all  gods  or  demigods ;  on  the  other,  all  demons  or 
fiends.  We  miss  real  human  beings  with  mixed  charac- 
ters. Ttiere  is  no  mirror  held  up  to  inconsistent  humanity. 
Duryodhana  and  his  ninety-nine  brothers  are  too  uniformly 
vicious  to  be  types  of  real  men,  Lakshmana  has  perhaps 
the  most  natural  character  among  the  heroes  of  the  Eama- 
yana,  and  Bhima  among  those  of  the  Maha-bharata.  In 
many  respects  the  character  of  the  latter  is  not  unlike 
that  of  Achilles ;  but  in  drawing  his  most  human  heroes 
the  Indian  poet  still  displays  a  perpetual  tendency  to  run 
into  extravagance. 

It  must  be  admitted,  however,  that  in  exhibiting  pictures 
of  domestic  life  and  manners  the  Sanskrit  Epics  are  even 
more  true  and  real  than  the  Greek  and  Roman.  In 
the  delineation  of  women  the  Hindu  poet  throws  aside 
all  exaggerated  colouring,  and  draws  from  nature.  Kai- 
keyi,  Kau^alya,  Mandodari  (the  favourite  wife  of  Eavana),^ 
and  even  the  hump-backed  Manthara  (Eamayana  II. 
viii.),  are  all  drawn  to  the  very  life.     Sita,  Draupadi,  and 


1  What  can  be  more  natural  than  Mandodari's  lamentations  over  the 
dead  body  of  Eavana,  and  her  allusions  to  his  fatal  passion  for  Sita  in 
Eamayana  VI.  95  (Gorresio's  ed.)? 


THE  EPICS  COMPARED  TOGETHER  AND  WITH  HOMER.   437 

Damayanti  engage  our  affections  and  our  interest  far  more 
than  Helen,  or  even  than  Penelope.  Indeed,  Hindu  wives 
are  generally  perfect  patterns  of  conjugal  fidelity;  nor 
can  it  be  doubted  that  in  these  delightful  portraits  of  the 
Pativrata  or  'devoted  wife'  we  have  true  representations 
of  the  purity  and  simplicity  of  Hindii  domestic  manners 
in  early  times.^  We  may  also  gather  from  the  epic  poems 
many  interesting  hints  as  to  the  social  position  occupied 
by  Hindu  women  before  the  Muhammadan  conquest.  No 
one  can  read  the  Eamayana  and  Maha-bharata  without 
coming  to  the  conclusion  that  the  habit  of  secluding 
women,  and  of  treating  them  as  inferiors,  is,  to  a  certain 
extent,  natural  to  all  Eastern  nations,  and  prevailed  in  the 
earliest  times.^  Yet  various  passages  in  both  Epics  clearly 
establish  the  fact,  that  women  in  India  were  subjected  to 

1  No  doubt  the  devotion,  of  a  Hindu  wife  implied  greater  inferiority 
than  is  compatible  with  modern  European  ideas  of  independence.  The 
extent  to  which  this  devotion  was  carried,  even  in  little  matters,  is 
curiously  exemplified  by  the  story  of  Gandharl,  who  out  of  sympathy 
for  her  blind  husband  never  appeared  in  public  without  a  veil  over  her 
face  (see  p.  377).  Hence,  during  the  grand  sham- fight  between  the 
Kuru  and  Pandu  princes,  Yidura  stood  by  Dhrita-rashtra,  and  Kunti 
by  Gandharl,  to  describe  the  scene  to  them  (see  p.  383). 

2  It  was  equally  natural  to  the  Greeks  and  Romans.  Chivalry  and 
reverence  for  the  fair  sex  belonged  only  to  European  nations  of  northern 
origin,  who  were  the  first  to  hold  '  inesse  foeminis  sanctum  aliquid ' 
(Tac.  Germ.  8).  That  Hindu  women  in  ancient  times  secluded  them- 
selves, except  on  certain  occasions,  may  be  inferred  from  the  word 
asuryam-paiyd,  given  by  Panini  as  an  epithet  of  a  king's  wife  ('  one  who 
never  sees  the  sun ') — a  very  strong  expression,  stronger  even  than  the 
parda-nishln  of  the  Muhammadans.  It  is  to  be  observed  also  that  in 
the  Eamayana  (VI.  xcix.  33)  there  is  clear  allusion  to  some  sort  of 
seclusion  being  practised ;  and  the  term  avarodha,  '  fenced  or  guarded 
place,'  is  used  long  before  the  time  of  the  Muhammadans  for  the  women's 
apartments.  In  the  Ratnavall,  however,  the  minister  of  king  Vatsa, 
and  his  chamberlain  and  the  envoy  from  Ceylon,  are  admitted  to  an 
audience  in  the  presence  of  the  queen  and  her  damsels ;  and  although 
Rama  in  Ramayana  VI.  99  thinks  it  necessary  to  excuse  himself  for 


438  INBIAN   WISDOM. 

less  social  restraint  in  former  days  than  they  are  at  present, 
and  even  enjoyed  considerable  liberty/  True,  the  ancient 
lawgiver,  Manu,  speaks  of  women  as  having  no  will  of  their 
own,  and  unfit  for  independence  (see  p.  253  of  this  volume); 
but  he  probably  described  a  state  of  society  which  it 
was  the  aim  of  the  priesthood  to  establish,  rather  than 
that  which  really  existed  in  his  own  time.  At  a  later 
period  the  pride  of  Brahmanism,  and  still  more  recently 
the  influence  of  Muhammadanism,  deprived  women  of 
even  such  freedom  as  they  once  enjoyed ;  so  that  at  the 
present  day  no  ■  Hindu  woman  has,  in  theory,  any  inde- 
pendence. It  is  not  merely  that  she  is  not  her  own 
mistress  :  she  is  not  her  own  property,  and  never,  under 
any  circumstances,  can  be.  She  belongs  to  her  father 
first,  who  gives  her  away  to  her  husband,  to  whom  she 
belongs  for  ever.^     She  is  not  considered  capable  of  so 

permitting  his  wife  to  expose  herself  to  the  gaze  of  the  crowd,  yet  he 
expressly  (99,  34)  enumerates  various  occasions  on  which  it  was  allow- 
able for  a  woman  to  show  herself  unveiled.  I  here  translate  the  passage, 
as  it  bears  very  remarkably  on  this  interesting  subject.  Eama  says  to 
Vibhishana — 

'  Neither  houses  nor  vestments,  nor  enclosing  walls,  nor  ceremony, 
nor  regal  insignia  (rdja-satJcdra),  are  the  screen  (dvarana)  of  a  woman. 
Her  own  virtue  alone  (protects  her).  In  great  calamities  {vyasaneshu), 
at  marriages,  at  the  public  choice  of  a  husband  by  maidens  (of  the 
Kshatriya  caste),  at  a  sacrifice,  at  assemblies  (samsatsu),  it  is  allowable 
for  all  the  world  to  look  upon  women  (strindm  darianam  mrvalauldham).' 

Hence  S'akuntala  appears  in  the  public  court  of  king  Dushyanta ; 
Damayanti  travels  about  by  herself;  and  in  the  Uttara-rama-6arita,  the 
mother  of  Rama  goes  to  the  hermitage  of  Valmiki.  Again,  women  were 
present  at  dramatic  representations,  visited  the  temples  of  the  gods, 
and  performed  their  ablutions  with  little  privacy;  which  last  custom 
they  stUl  practise,  though  Muhammadan  women  do  not. 

1  In  Maha-bh.  I.  4719  we  read: — Anrdvritdh  Mia  purd  striya  dsan 
kdma-cdra-mhdrinyah  svatantrdh,  &c. 

2  Hence  when  her  husband  dies  she  cannot  be  remarried,  as  there 
is  no  one  to  give  her  away.  In  fact,  the  remarriage  of  Hindii  widows, 
which  is  now  permitted  by  law,  is  utterly  opposed  to  all  modern  Hindii 


THE  EPICS  COMPARED  TOGETHER  AND  WITH  HOMER.       439 

tigh  a  form  of  religiou  as  man/  and  she  does  not  mix 
freely  in  society.  But  in  ancient  times,  when  the  epic 
songs  were  current  in  India,  women  were  not  confined 
to  intercourse  with  their  own  families;' they  did  very 
much  as  they  pleased,  travelled  about,  and  showed  them- 
selves unreservedly  in  public,^  and,  if  of  the  Kshatriya 
caste,  were  occasionally  allowed  to  choose  their  own  hus- 
bands from  a  number  of  assembled  suitors.^  It  is  clear, 
moreover,  that,  in  many  instances,  there  was  considerable 
dignity  and  elevation  about  the  female  character,  and  that 
much  mutual  afi'ection  prevailed  in  families.     Nothing  can 


ideas  about  women ;  and  many  persons  think  that  the  passing  of  this 
law  was  one  cause  of  the  mutiny  of  1857.  It  is  clear  from  the  story 
of  Damayanti,  who  appoints  a  second  Svayamvara,  that  in  early  times 
remarriage  was  not  necessarily  improper;  though,  from  her  wonder 
that  the  new  suitor  should  have  failed  to  see  through  her  artifice,  and 
from  her  vexation  at  being  supposed  capable  of  a  second  marriage,  it 
may  be  inferred  that  such  a  marriage  was  even  then  not  reputable. 

1  See,  however,  the  stories  of  Gar^  and  Maitreyi  (Brihad-aranyaka 
Upanishad,  Eoer's  transl.  pp.  198,  203,  242).  No  doubt  the  inferior 
capacity  of  a  woman  as  regards  religion  was  implied  in  the  epic  poems, 
as  well  as  in  later  works.  A  husband  was  the  wife's  divinity,  as 
well  as  her  lord,  and  her  best  religion  was  to  please  him.  See  Sita's 
speech,  p.  364  of  this  volume ;  and  the  quotation  from  Madhava  Adarya 
(who  flourished  in  the  fourteenth  century),  p.  372,  note.  Such  verses 
as  the  following  are  common  in  Hindu  literature  :  Bhartd  hi  paramam 
ndryd  hhushanam  hhushanair  vind,  '  a  husband  is  a  wife's  chief  orna- 
ment even  without  (other)  ornaments.'  Manu  says  (V.  151),  Yasmai 
dadydt  pita  tv  endm  bhrdtd  vdnumate  pituh,  Tarn  kiirusheta  fivantam 
samsthitam  ca  na  lan-gliayet  See  p.  284  of  this  volume.  In  IV.  198, 
Manu  classes  women  with  S'udras. 

2  Especially  married  women.  A  wife  was  required  to  obey  her 
husband  implicitly,  but  in  other  respects  she  was  to  be  independent 
(svdtantryam  arhati,  Maha-bhar.  I.  4741). 

3  The  Svayamvara,  however,  appears  to  have  been  something  ex- 
ceptional, and  only  to  have  been  allowed  in  the  case  of  the  daughters 
of  kings  or  Kshatriyas.  See  Draupadl-svayamvara  127;  Maha-bhar. 
I.  7926. 


440  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

be  more  beautiful  and  toucMng  than  the  pictures  of 
domestic  and  social  happiness  in  the  Ramayana  and  Maha- 
bharata.  Children  are  dutiful  to  their  parents  ^  and  sub- 
missive to  their  superiors  ;  younger  brothers  are  respectful 
to  elder  brothers ;  parents  are  fondly  attached  to  their 
children,  watchful  over  their  interests  and  ready  to  sacri- 
fice themselves  for  their  welfare  ;  wives  are  loyal,  devoted, 
and  obedient  to  their  husbands,  yet  show  much  indepen- 
dence of  character,  and  do  not  hesitate  to  express  their 
own  opinions ;  husbands  are  tenderly  afi'ectionate  towards 
their  wives,  and  treat  them  with  respect  and  courtesy ; 
daughters  and  women  generally  are  virtuous  and  modest, 
yet  spirited,  and,  when  occasion  requires,  firm  and  coura- 
geous ;  love  and  harmony  reign  throughout  the  family 
circle.  Indeed,  in  depicting  scenes  of  domestic  afiection, 
and  expressing  those  universal  feelings  and  emotions  which 
belong  to  human  nature  in  all  time  and  in  all  places,  San- 
skrit epic  poetry  is  unrivalled  even  by  Greek  Epos.  It  is 
not  often  that  Homer  takes  us  out  of  the  battle-field  ;  and 
if  we  except  the  lamentations  over  the  bodies  of  Patroclus 
and  Hector,  the  visit  of  Priam  to  the  tent  of  Achilles,  and  ^ 
the  parting  of  Hector  and  Andromache,  there  are  no  such 
pathetic  passages  in  the  Iliad  as  the  death  of  the  hermit 
boy  (p.  349),  the  pleadings  of  Sita  for  permission  to  accom- 
pany her  husband  into  exile  (p.  364),  and  the  whole  ordeal 


^  Contrast  with  the  respectful  tone  of  Hindu  children  towards  their 
parents,  the  harsh  manner  in  which  Telemachus  generally  speaks  to 
his  mother.  Filial  respect  and  affection  is  quite  as  noteworthy  a 
feature  in  the  Hindu  character  now  as  in  ancient  times.  It  is 
common  for  unmarried  soldiers  to  stint  themselves  almost  to  starva- 
tion point,  that  they  may  send  home  money  to  their  aged  parents. 
In  fact,  in  proportion  to  the  weakness  or  rather  total  absence  of  the 
national  is  the  strength  of  the  family  bond.  In  England  and  America, 
where  national  life  is  strongest,  children  are  less  respectful  to  their 
parents. 


RELIGIOUS   AND   MORAL   SENTIMENTS.  44 1 

scene  at  the  end  of  the  Eamayana.  In  the  Indian  Epics 
such  passages  abound,  and,  besides  giving  a  very  high 
idea  of  the  purity  and  happiness  of  domestic  life  in 
ancient  India,  indicate  a  capacity  in  Hindu  women  for 
the  discharge  of  the  most  sacred  and  important  social 
duties. 

We  must  guard  against  the  supposition  that  the  women 
of  India  at  the  present  day  have  altogether  fallen  from 
their  ancient  character.  Notwithstanding  the  corrupting 
example  of  Islamism,  and  the  degrading  tendency  of 
modern  Hinduism,  some  remarkable  instances  may  still 
be  found  of  moral  and  even  intellectual  excellence.^ 
These,  however,  are  exceptions,  and  we  may  rest  assured, 
that  until  Asiatic  women,  whether  Hindu  or  Muslim,  are 
elevated  and  educated,  our  eflforts  to  raise  Asiatic  nations/ 
to  the  level  of  European  will  be  fruitless.^  Let  us  hope 
that  when  the  Eamayana  and  Maha-bharata  shall  no  longer 
be  held  sacred  as  repositories  of  faith  and  storehouses  of 
trustworthy  tradition,  the  enlightened  Hindu  may  still 
learn  from  these  poems  to  honour  the  weaker  sex  ;  and  that 
Indian  women,  restored  to  their  ancient  liberty  and  raised 
to  a  still  higher  position  by  becoming  partakers  of  the 
'  fulness  of  the  blessing '  of  Christianity,  may  do  for  our 
Eastern  empire  what  they  have  done  for  Europe — soften, 
invigorate,  and  dignify  the  character  of  its  people. 

I  close  my  present  subject  with  examples  of  the  re- 
ligious and  moral  teaching  of  the  two  Indian  Epics.  A 
few  sentiments  and  maxims,  extracted  from  both  poems, 
here  follow : — 


1  In  some  parts  of  India,  especially  in  the  Marathi  districts,  there 
is  still  considerable  freedom  of  thought  and  action  allowed  to  women. 

2  Manu  gives  expression  to  a  great  truth  when  he  says  (III.  145), 
Sahasram  tu  pitnn  moid  gauravendtiriSyate,  '  a  mother  exceeds  in  value 
a  thousand  fathers.' 


442  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

A  heavy  blow,  inflicted  by  a  ioe,^ 
Is  often  easier  to  bear,  than  griefs. 
However  slight,  that  happen  casually. 

Eamayana  (ed.  Bombay)  II.  Ixii.  i6.. 

To  carry  out  an  enterprise  in  words 
Is  easy,  to  accomplish  it  by  acts 
Is  the  sole  test  of  man's  capacity. 

Ramayana  (ed.  Gorresio)  VI.  Ixvii.  to. 

Truth,  justice,  and  nobility  of  rank 

Are  centred  in  the  King ;  he  is  a  mother, 

Father,  and  benefactor  of  his  subjects. 

Ramayana  (ed.  Bombay)  II.  Ixvii.  35. 

In  countries  without  monarchs,  none  can  call 
His  property  or  family  his  own ; 
No  one  is  master  even  of  himself. 

Ramayana  (ed.  Gorresio)  II.  Ixix.  1 1 . 

Where'er  we  walk,  Death  marches  at  our  side  ; 
Where'er  we  sit.  Death  seats  himself  beside  us ; 
However  far  we  journey.  Death  continues 
Our  fellow-traveller  and  goes  with  us  home. 
Men  take  delight  in  each  returning  dawn. 
And  with  admiring  gaze,  behold  the  glow 
Of  sunset.     Every  season,  as  it  comes, 
Fills  them  with  gladness,  yet  they  never  reck 
That  each  recurring  season,  every  day 
Fragment  by  fragment  bears  their  life  away. 
As  drifting  logs  of  wood  may  haply  meet 
On  Ocean's  waters,  surging  to  and  fro. 
And  having  met,  drift  once  again  apart ; 
So  fleeting  is  a  man's  association 


1  Though  some  of  these  translations  were  made  years  ago  from 
Bohtlingk's  admirable  collection  of  Indische  Spriiche,  I  have  since 
been  assisted  in  my  renderings  of  many  examples  by  Dr.  Muir's 
'  Religious  and  Moral  Sentiments  freely  translated  from  Indian 
writers,'  lately  printed  at  Edinburgh,  with  an  appendix  and  notes.  I 
may  not  have  succeeded  so  well  as  Dr.  Muir,  but  rhymeless  metre  may 
have  enabled  me  to  keep  somewhat  closer  to  the  original. 


RELIGIOUS   AND   MORAL   SENTIMENTS.  443 

With  wife  and  children,  relatives  and  wealth, 
So  surely  must  a  time  of  parting  come. 

Ramayana  (ed.  Bombay)  II.  cv.  24-27. 

Whate'er  the  work  a  man  performs, 
The  most  effective  aid  to  its  completion — 
The  most  prolific  source  of  true  success — 
Is  energy  without  despondency. 

Ramayana  (ed.  Bombay)  V.  xii.  1 1. 

Fate  binds  a  man  with  adamantine  cords, 
And  drags  him  upwards  to  the  highest  rank 
Or  downward  to  the  depths  of  misery. 

Ramayana  (ed.  Bombay)  V.  xxxvii.  3. 

He  who  has  wealth  has  strength  of  intellect ; 
He  who  has  wealth  has  depth  of  erudition  ; 
He  who  has  wealth  has  nobleness  of  birth ; 
He  who  has  wealth  has  relatives  and  friends ; 
He  who  has  wealth  is  thought  a  very  hero ; 
He  who  has  wealth  is  rich  in  every  virtue. 

Ramayana  (ed.  Bombay)  VI.  Ixxxiii.  35,  36. 

Time  is  awake  while  mortals  are  asleep. 
None  can  elude  his  grasp  or  curb  his  course, 
He  passes  unrestrained  o'er  all  alike. 

Maha-bh.  I.  243. 

Thou  thinkest :  I  am  single  and  alone — 
Perceiving  not  the  great  eternal  Sage 
Who  dwells  within  thy  breast.     Whatever  wrong 
Is  done  by  thee,  he  sees  and  notes  it  all. 

Maha-bh.  I.  3015. 

Heaven,  Earth,  and  Sea,  Sun,  Moon,  and  Wind,  and  Fire, 
Day,  Night,  the  Twilights,  and  the  Judge  of  souls, 
The  god  of  justice  and  the  Heart  itself. 
All  see  and  note  the  conduct  of  a  man.^ 

Maha-bh.  I.  3017. 

A  wife  is  half  the  man,  his  truest  friend. 
Source  of  his  virtue,  pleasure,  wealth — the  root 
Whence  springs  the  line  of  his  posterity. 

Maha-bh.  I.  3028. 

1  Compare  Manu  VIII.  86,  p.  280  of  this  volume. 


444  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

An  evil-minded  man  is  quick  to  see 
His  neighbour's  faults,  though  small  as  mustard-seed  ; 
But  when  he  turns  his  eyes  towards  his  own, 
Though  large  as  Bilva  ^  fruit,  he  none  descries. 

Maha-bh.  I.  3069. 

If  Truth  and  thousands  of  Horse-sacrifices 
Were  weighed  together,  Truth  would  weigh  the  most.^ 

Maha-bh.  I.  3095. 

Death  follows  life  by  an  unerring  law ; 
Why  grieve  for  that  which  is  inevitable  ? 

Maha-bh.  I.  6144. 

■Conquer  a  man  who  never  gives  by  gifts ; 
Subdue  untruthful  men  by  truthfulness ; 
Vanquish  an  angry  man  by  gentleness ; 
And  overcome  the  evil  man  by  goodness.^ 

Maha-bh.  III.  13253. 

Triple  restraint  of  thought  and  word  and  deed. 
Strict  vow  of  silence,  coil  of  matted  hair, 
Close  shaven  head,  garments  of  skin  or  bark. 
Keeping  of  fasts,  ablutions,  maintenance 
Of  sacrificial  fires,  a  hermit's  life. 
Emaciation — these  are  all  in  vain. 
Unless  the  inward  soul  be  free  from  stain. 

Maha-bh.  III.  13445. 

To  injure  none  by  thought  or  word  or  deed, 

To  give  to  others,  and  be  kind  to  all —  * 

This  is  the  constant  duty  of  the  good. 

High-minded  men  delight  in  doing  good. 

Without  a  thought  of  their  own  interest ; 

When  they  confer  a  benefit  on  others. 

They  reckon  not  on  favours  in  return.* 

Maha-bh.  III.  16782,  16796. 

1  This  is  the  Aegle  Marmelos  {BeT)  or  Bengal  Quince,  bearing  a  large 
fruit.  It  is  esteemed  sacred  to  Maha-deva.  Compare  St.  Matthew 
vii.  3,  4.  ^  Hitopadesa  IV.  135. 

^  See  Rom.  xii.  21.  Compare  the  Pali  Rajovada  Jataka  (FausboU's 
Ten  Jatakas,  p.  5),  AkJwdhena  jine  kodham,  Asddhum  sadhuna  jine, 
Jine  Icadariyam  ddnena,  Saccena  alika-vddinam.  See  also  [Dhamma- 
pada  223.  *  Compare  St.  Luke  vi.  35. 


RELIGIOUS   AND   MORAL   SENTIMENTS.  445 

An  archer  shoots  an  arrow  which  may  kill 
One  man,  or  none  ;  but  clever  men  discharge 
The  shaft  of  intellect,  whose  stroke  has  power 
To  overwhelm  a  king  and  all  his  kingdom. 

Maha-bh.  V.  1013. 

Two  persons  will  hereafter  be  exalted 

Above  the  heavens — the  man  with  boundless  power 

Who  yet  forbears  to  use  it  indiscreetly, 

And  he  who  is  not  rich  and  yet  can  give.i 

Maharbh.  V.  1028. 

Sufficient  wealth,  unbroken  health,  a  friend, 
A  wife  of  gentle  speech,  a  docile  son, 
And  learning  that  subserves  some  useful  end — 
These  are  a  living  man's  six  greatest  blessings. 

Maha-bh.  V.  1057. 

Good  words,  good  deeds,  and  beautiful  expressions 
A  wise  man  ever  culls  from  every  quarter. 
E'en  as  a  gleaner  gathers  ears  of  corn. 

Maharbh.  V.  11 26. 

The  gods  defend  not  with  a  club  or  shield 
The  man  they  wish  to  favour — but  endow  him 
With  wisdom ;  and  the  man  whom  they  intend 
To  ruin,  they  deprive  of  understanding  ;  ^ 
So  that  to  him  all  things  appear  distorted. 
Then,  when  his  mind  is  dulled  and  he  is  ripe 
To  meet  his  doom,  evil  appears  to  him 
Like  good,  and  even  fortunate  events 
Turn  to  his  harm  and  tend  to  his  destruction. 

Maha-bh.  V.  1122,  2679. 

To  curb  the  tongue  and  moderate  the  speech. 
Is  held  to  be  the  hardest  of  all  tasks.* 
The  words  of  him  who  talks  too  volubly 
Have  neither  substance  nor  variety. 

Maha-bh.  V.  1170. 


1  Compare  St.  Mark  xii.  41-44. 

2  Quos  Deus  vult  ^perdere  prius  dementat. 

3  St.  James  iii.  8. 


446  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Darts,  barbed  arrows,  iron-beaded  spears, 
However  deep  tbey  penetrate  the  flesh, 
May  be  extracted  ;  but  a  cutting  speech. 
That  pierces,  like  a  javelin,  to  the  heart, 
None  can  remove ;  it  lies  and  rankles  there. 

Maha-bh.  V.  1173. 

Repeated  sin  destroys  the  understanding. 
And  he  whose  reason  is  impaired,  repeats 
His  sins.     The  constant  practising  of  virtue 
Strengthens  the  mental  faculties,  and  he 
Whose  judgment  stronger  grows,  acts  always  right. 

Maha-bh.  V.  1242. 

Bear  railing  words  with  patience,  never  meet 
An  angry  man  with  anger,  nor  return 
Reviling  for  reviling,  smite  not  him 
Who  smites  thee ;  let  thy  speech  and  acts  be  gentle. 

Maha-bh.  V.  1270,  9972. 

If  thou  art  wise,  seek  ease  and  happiness 

In  deeds  of  virtue  and  of  usefulness ; 

And  ever  act  in  such  a  way  by  day 

That  in  the  night  thy  sleep  may  tranquil  be ; 

And  so  comport  thyself  when  thou  art  young. 

That  when  thou  art  grown  old,  thine  age  may  pass 

In  calm  serenity.     So  ply  thy  task 

Throughout  thy  life,  that  when  thy  days  are  ended, 

Thou  may'st  enjoy  eternal  bliss  hereafter. 

Maha-bh.  V.  1248. 

Esteem  that  gain  a  loss  which  ends  in  harm  ; 
Account  that  loss  a  gain  which  brings  advantage. 

Maha-bh.  V.  1451. 

Reflect  that  health  is  transient,  death  impends. 
Ne'er  in  thy  day  of  youthful  strength  do  aught 
To  grieve  thy  conscience,  lest  when  weakness  comes. 
And  thou  art  on  a  bed  of  sickness  laid, 
Fear  and  remorse  augment  thy  sufferings. 

Maha-bh.  V.  1474. 

Do  naught  to  others  which  if  done  to  thee 
Would  cause  thee  pain  ;  this  is  the  sum  of  duty. 

Maha-bh.  V.  15 17. 


RELIGIOUS   AND   MORAL   SENTIMENTS.  44  / 

How  can  a  man  love  knowledge  yet  repose  ? 
Would'st  thou  be  learned,  then  abandon  ease. 
Either  give  up  thy  knowledge  or  thy  rest. 

Maha-bh.  Y.  1537. 

No  sacred  lore  can  save  the  hypocrite, 
Though  he  employ  it  craftily,  from  hell ; 
When  his  end  comes,  his  pious  texts  take  wing, 
Like  fledglings  eager  to  forsake  their  nest. 

Maha-bh.  V.  1623. 

When  men  are  ripe  for  ruin,  e'en  a  straw 
Has  power  to  crush  them,  like  a  thunderbolt. 

Maha-bh.  VII.  429. 

By  anger,  fear,  and  avarice  deluded, 

Men  do  not  strive  to  understand  themselves, 

Nor  ever  gain  self-knowledge.     One  is  proud 

Of  rank,  and  plumes  himself  upon  his  birth, 

Contemning  those  of  low  degree ;  another 

Boasts  of  his  riches,  and  disdains  the  poor ; 

Another  vaunts  his  learning,  and  despising 

Men  of  less  wisdom,  calls  them  fools ;  a  fourth 

Piquing  himself  upon  his  rectitude. 

Is  quick  to  censure  other  people's  faults. 

But  when  the  high  and  low,  the  rich  and  poor, 

The  wise  and  foolish,  worthy  and  unworthy, 

Are  borne  to  their  last  resting-place — the  grave — - 

When  all  their  troubles  end  in  that  last  sleep. 

And  of  their  earthly  bodies  naught  remains 

But  fleshless  skeletons — can  living  men 

Mark  differences  between  them,  or  perceive 

Distinctions  in  the  dust  of  birth  or  form  1 

Since  all  are,  therefore,  levelled  by  the  grave. 

And  all  milst  sleep  together  in  the  earth — 

Why,  foolish  mortals,  do  ye  wrong  each  other  1 

Maha-bh.  XL  116. 

Some  who  are  wealthy  perish  in  their  youth. 
While  others  who  are  fortuneless  and  needy. 
Attain  a  hundred  years ;  the  prosperous  man 
Who  lives,  oft  lacks  the  power  to  enjoy  his  wealth. 

Maha-bh.  XII.  859 


448  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

A  king  must  first  subdue  himself,  and  then 
Vanquish  his  enemies.     How  can  a  prince 
Who  cannot  rule  himself,  enthral  his  foes  ? 
To  curb  the  senses,  is  to  conquer  self. 

Maha-bh.  XII.  2599. 

Who  in  this  world  is  able  to  distinguish 
The  virtuous  from  the  wicked  1  both  alike 
The  fruitful  earth  supports,  on  both  alike 
The  sun  pours  down  his  beams,  on  both  alike 
Refreshing  breezes  blow,  and  both  alike 
The  waters  purify.     Not  so  hereafter — 
Then  shall  the  good  be  severed  from  the  bad ; 
Then  in  a  region  bright  with  golden  lustre — 
Centre  of  light  and  immortality — 
The  righteous  after  death  shall  dwell  in  bliss.  ^ 
Then  a  terrific  hell  awaits  the  wicked — 
Profound  abyss  of  utter  misery — 
Into  the  depths  of  which  bad  men  shall  fall 
Headlong,  and  mourn  their  doom  for  countless  years. 

Maha-bh.  XII.  2798. 

He  who  lets  slip  his  opportunity, 
And  turns  not  the  occasion  to  account, 
Though  he  may  strive  to  execute  his  work, 
Finds  not  again  the  fitting  time  for  action. 

Maha-bh.  XII.  3814. 

Enjoy  thou  the  prosperity  of  others. 
Although  thyself  unprosperous ;  noble  men 
Take  pleasure  in  their  neighbour's  happiness. 

Maha-bh.  XII.  3880. 

Even  to  foes  who  visit  us  as  guests 
Due  hospitality  should  be  displayed  ; 
The  tree  screens  with  its  leaves,  the  man  who  fells  it.^ 

Maha-bh.  XII.  5528. 


1  Compare  St.  Matthew  xiii.  43,  xxv.  46. 

2  This  verse  occurs  in  Hitopadesa  I.  60.  Of.  Rom.  sii.  20.  Pro- 
fessor H.  H.  Wilson  was  induced  to  commence  the  study  of  Sanskrit 
by  reading  somewhere  that  this  sentiment  was  to  be  met  with  in 
Sanskrit  literature. 


RELIGIOUS   AND   MORAL   SENTIMENTS.  449 

What  need  has  he  who  subjugates  himself 
To  live  secluded  in  a  hermit's  cell  ? 
Where'er  resides  the  self-subduing  sage, 
That  place  to  him  is  like  a  hermitage. 

Maha-bh.  XII.  5961. 

Do  good  to-day,  time  passes.  Death  is  near. 
Death  falls  upon  a  man  all  unawares, 
Like  a  ferocious  wolf  upon  a  sheep. 
Death  comes  when  his  approach  is  least  expected. 
Death  sometimes  seizes  ere  the  work  of  life 
Is  finished,  or  its  purposes  accomplished. 
Death  carries  off  the  weak  and  strong  alike, 
The  brave  and  timorous,  the  wise  and  foolish, 
And  those  whose  objects  are  not  yet  achieved. 
Therefore  delay  not ;  Death  may  come  to-day. 
Death  will  not  wait  to  know  if  thou  art  ready, 
Or  if  thy  work  be  done.     Be  active  now. 
While  thou  art  young,  and  time  is  still  thy  own. 
This  very  day  perform  to-morrow's  work. 
This  very  morning  do  thy  evening's  task. 
When  duty  is  discharged,  then  if  thou  Hve, 
Honour  and  happiness  will  be  thy  lot, 
And  if  thou  die,  supreme  beatitude.^ 

Maha^bh.  XII.  6534. 

The  building  of  a  house  is  fraught  with  troubles. 
And  ne'er  brings  comfort ;  therefore,  cunning  serpents 
Seek  for  a  habitation  made  by  others. 
And  creeping  in,  abide  there  at  their  ease. 

Maha-bh.  XII.  6619. 

Just  as  the  track  of  birds  that  cleave  the  air 
Is  not  discerned,  nor  yet  the  path  of  fish 
That  skim  the  water,  so  the  course  of  those 
Who  do  good  actions,  is  not  always  seen. 

Maha-bh.  XII.  6763,  12156. 

Let  none  reject  the  meanest  suppliant 
Or  send  him  empty-handed  from  his  door. 

1  The  order  of  the  text  has  been  slightly  changed  in  this  translation, 
and  a  few  liberties  taken  in  the  wording  of  it. 

2  F 


450  INDIAN    WISDOM. 

A  gift  bestowed  on  outcasts  or  on  dogs 
Is  never  thrown  away  or  unrequited. 

Maha-bh.  XIII.  3212. 

Time  passes,  and  the  man  who  older  grows 
Finds  hair  and  teeth  and  eyes  grow  ever  older. 
One  thing  alone  within  him  ne'er  grows  old — 
The  thirst  for  riches  and  the  love  of  gold. 

Maha-bh.  XIII.  3676, 368*. 

This  is  the  sum  of  all  true  righteousness — 
Treat  others,  as  thou  would'st  thyself  be  treated. 
Do  nothing  to  thy  neighbour,  which  hereafter 
Thou  would'st  not  have  thy  neighbour  do  to  thee. 
In  causing  pleasure,  or  in  giving  pain, 
In  doing  good,  or  injury  to  others, 
In  granting,  or  refusing  a  request, 
A  man  obtains  a  proper  rule  of  action 
By  looking  on  his  neighbour  as  himself.  ^ 

Maha-bh.  XIII.  5571. 

No  being  perishes  before  his  time, 
Though  by  a  hundred  arrows  pierced ;  but  when 
His  destined  moment  comes,  though  barely  pricked 
By  a  sharp  point  of  grass,  he  surely  dies.^ 

Maha-bh.  XIII.  7607. 

Before  infirmities  creep  o'er  thy  flesh  ; 
Before  decay  impairs  thy  strength  and  mars 
The  beauty  of  thy  limbs ;  before  the  Ender, 
Whose  charioteer  is  sickness,  hastes  towards  thee, 
Breaks  up  thy  fragile  frame  and  ends  thy  life,^ 
Lay  up  the  only  treasure  :  do  good  deeds ; 
Practise  sobriety  and  self-control ; 
Amass  that  wealth  which  thieves  cannot  abstract. 
Nor  tyrants  seize,  which  follows  thee  at  death. 
Which  never  wastes  away,  nor  is  corrupted.* 

Maha-bh.  XIII.  12084. 


1  Compare  St.  Matthew  sxii.  39  j  St.  Luke  vi.  31. 

2  This  occurs  also  in  Hitopadesa  II.  15. 
5  Compare  Bccles.  xii.  i. 

*  Compare  St.  Matthew  vi.  19;  Job  xxi.  23. 


RELIGIOUS   AND   MORAL   SENTIMENTS.  45  I 

Heaven's  gate  is  very  narrow  and  minute,^ 
It  cannot  be  perceived  by  foolish  men, 
Blinded  by  vain  illusions  of  the  world. 
E'en  the  clear-sighted  who  discern  the  way, 
And  seek  to.  enter,  find  the  portal  barred 
And  hard  to  be  unlocked.     Its  massive  bolts 
Are  pride  and  passion,  avarice  and  lust. 

Maha-bh.  XIV.  2784. 

Just  heaven  is  not  so  pleased  with  costly  gifts. 

Offered  in  hope  of  future  recompense. 

As  with  the  merest  trifle  set  apart 

From  honest  gains,  and  sanctified  by  faith.^ 

Maha^bh.  XIV.  2788. 


1 


Compare  St.  Matthew  vii.  14. 


^  Compare  St.  Matthew  vi.  1-4 ;  St.  Mark  xii.  43,  44. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

The  Artificial  Poems.     Dramas.     Pur  anas.     Tantras 
Nui-sdstras. 

I  CAN  only  notice  very  briefly  the  remaining  classes  of 
Indian  writings  which  follow  on  the  Eamayana  and  Maha- 
bharata.  In  their  religions  bearing,  as  constituting  part 
of  Smriti,  and  as  chiefly  drawn  from  the  two  great  Epics, 
the  eighteen  Puranas  possess  the  next  claim  on  our  atten- 
tion. It  will  be  convenient,  however,  to  introduce  here 
an  enumeration  of  some  of  the  more  celebrated  artificial 
poems  and  dramas,  which  are  connected  with  the  Epics, 
adding  a  few  explanations  and  examples,  but  reserving 
the  fuller  consideration  of  these  and  other  departments  of 
Sanskrit  literature  to  a  future  opportunity. 

The  Artificial  Poems. 
Some  of  the  best  known  of  the  artificial  poems  are  : — 

I.  The  Baght/rVanda  or  'history  of  Raghu's  race,'  in  nineteen  chapters, 
by  Kalidasa,  on  the  same  subject  as  the  Eamayana,  viz.,  the  history  of 
Rama-dandra,  but  beginning  with  a  longer  account  of  his  ancestors ; 
2.  the  Kumdra-samhhava,  by  Kalidasa,  on  the  'birth  of  Kumara'  or 
Karttikeya,  god  of  war,  son  of  S'iva  and  Parvati — originally  in  sixteen 
cantos,  of  which  only  seven  are  usually  edited,  though  nine  more  have 
been  printed  in  the  Pandit  at  Benares;  3.  the  Megha-duta,  'cloud- 
messenger,'  also  by  Kalidasa — a  poem  of  116  verses,  in  the  Manda- 
kranta  metre  (well  edited  by  Professor  Johnson),  describing  a  message 
sent  by  a  banished  Yaksha  to  his  wife  in  the  Himalayas  ;  a  cloud  being 
personified  and  converted  into  the  messenger;  4.  the  Kirdtdrjunlya, 
'  battle  of  the  Kirata  and  Arjuna,'  by  Bharavi,  in  eighteen  cantos,  on  a 
subject  taken  from  the  fourth  chapter  of  Maha^bharata  TIL,  viz.,  the 
penance  performed  by  Arjuna,  one  lof  the  Pandava  princes,  and  his 


THE   AETIFICIAL   POEMS.  453 

combat  with  S'iva  disguised  as  a  Kirata  or  wild  mountaineer  (see  p. 
393)  >  5-  ths  ^Uupdla-hadha  or  '  destruction  of  S'iiiu-pala,'  a  poem  in 
twenty  cantos,  by  Magha,  on  a  subject  taken  from  the  seventh  chapter 
of  the  Sabha-parvan  of  the  Maha-bharata,  viz.,  the  slaying  of  the  impious 
S'isu-pala  by  Krishna  at  a  Eajasiiya  sacrifice  performed  by  Yudhi-shthira 
(see  p.  392)  ;  6.  the  Naishadha  or  Naishadhlya,  by  S'ri-harsha,i  on  a  sub- 
ject drawn  from  an  episode  in  the  sixth  chapter  of  the  Vana-parvan 
of  the  Maha-bharata,  viz.,  the  history  and  adventures  of  Nala,  king  of 
Nishadha. 

The  above  six  are  sometimes  called  Maha-kavyas,  '  great 
poems,'  not  with  reference  to  their  length  (for  they  are 
generally  short),  but  with  reference  to  the  subjects  of 
which  they  treat.     To  these  may  be  added  : — 

7.  The  Eitu-sarnhdra  or  'collection  of  the  seasons,'  a  short  but  cele- 
brated poem  by  Kalidasa,  on  the  six  seasons  of  the  year  (viz.,  Grishma, 
the  hot  season  ;  Varshd,  the  rains  ;  Sarad,  autumn ;  Hemanta,  the  cold 
season;  ^isira,  the  dewy  season;  Vasanta,  the  spring);  8.  the:  Nalodaya 
or  'rise  of  Nala,'  an  artificial  poem,  also  ascribed  to  one  Kalidasa,  but 
probably  not  the  composition  of  the  celebrated  poet  of  that  name,  on 
much  the  same  subject  as  the  Naishadha,  and  describing  especially  the 
restoration  of  the  fallen  Nala  to  prosperity  and  power;  g.  the  Bhatti- 
hdvya,  '  poem  of  Bhatti,'  according  to  some  the  work  of  Bhartri-hari  or 
his  son,  on  the  same  subject  as  the  Ramayana,  written  at  Valabhi 
(Ballabhi)  in  the  reign  of  S'ridhara-sena  (probably  the  king- who  reigned 
in  Gujarat  from  about  a.d,  530-544) ;  its  aim  being  to  illustrate  the 
rules  of  Sanskrit  grammar,  as  well  as  the  figures  of  poetry  and  rhetoric, 
by  introducing  examples  of  all  possible  forms  and  constructions,  as  well 
as  of  the  Alan-karas  (see  p.  457) ;  it  is  divided  into  two  great  divisions, 
viz.,  ^abda-laJcsha)}a,  '  illustration  of  grammar,'  and  Kdvya-lalcshana, 
'  illustration  of  poetry,'  together  comprising  twenty-two  chapters ; 
10.  the  Rdghava-pdndavlya,  an  artificial  poem  by  Kavi-raja,  giving  a 
narrative  of  the  acts  of  both  the  descendants  of  Raghu  and  Pandu,  in 


1  He  is  supposed  to  have  lived  about  the  year  1000  (cf.  note,  p.  505). 
This  S'ri-harsha  was  the  greatest  of  all  sceptical  philosophers,  and  wrote_ 
a  book  called  Kharj.danaM.anda-k'hddya  for  the  refutation  of  all  other 
systems.  It  is  alluded  to  in  Naishadha  VI.  113  (Premadandra's  com- 
mentary). The  commentator  Narayana  does  not  seem  to  have  under- 
stood this.     There  are  some  philosophical  chapters  in  the  Naishadha. 


454  INDIAN   WISDOM.. 

such  language  that  it  may  be  interpreted  as  a  history  of  either  one  or  the 
other  family  J  ii.  the  Amaru-sataJca  or  Amari/^^atahx,' hundred  yerses 
of  Amaru,'  on  erotic  subjects,  to  which  a  mystical  interpretation  is 
given,  especially  as  they  are  supposed  to  have  been  composed  by  the  great 
philosopher  S'an-kara-darya,  when,  according  to  a  popular  legend,  he 
animated  the  dead  body  of  king  Amaru,  his  object  being  to  become  the 
husband  of  his  widow,  that  he  might  argue  on  amatory  subjects  with 
the  wife  of  a  Brahman,  named  Mandana ;  12.  the  GUa-govinda  or 
'  Krishna  in  his  character  of  Govinda  (the  Cow-finder  or  Herdsman) 
celebrated  in  song,'  by  Jaya-deva,  a  lyrical  or  erotic  poem,  thought  to 
have  been  composed  about  the  twelfth  or  thirteenth  century  of  our  era; 
it  was  written  nominally  to  celebrate  the  loves  of  Krishna  and  the 
Gopis,  especially  of  Krishna  and  Kadha ;  but  as  the  latter  is  supposed  to 
t3rpify  the  human  soul,  the  whole  poem  is  regarded  as  susceptible  of  a 
mystical  interpretation. 

Some  of  these  poems,  especially  the  Eaghu-vansa,  Ku- 
mara-sambhavai,  Megha-dtita,  and  Ritu-samhara  of  Kali- 
dasa  (who,  according  to  native  authorities,  lived  a  little 
before  the  commencement  of  the  Christian  era,  but  is  now 
placed  in  the  third  century),^  abound  in  truly  poetical  ideas, 
and  display  great  fertility  of  imagination  and  power  of 
description ;  but  it  cannot  be  denied  that  even  in  these 
works  of  the  greatest  of  Indian  poets  there  are  occasional 
fanciful  conceits,  combined  with  a  too  studied  and  artificial 
elaboration  of  diction,  and  a  constant  tendency  to  what 
a  European  would  consider  an  almost  puerile  love  for 
alliteration  and  playing  upon  words  {wort-spiel).  Some 
of  the  other  poems,  such  as  the  Kiratarjuuiya,  Sisupala- 
badha,  Nalodaya,  Naishadha,  and  Bhatti-kavya,  are  not 
wanting  in  occasional  passages  containing  poetical  feeling, 
striking  imagery,  and  noble  sentiment ;  but  they  are  arti- 
ficial to  a  degree  quite  opposed  to  European  canons  of 
taste  ;  the  chief  aim  of  the  composers  being  to  exhibit  their 
artistic  skill  in  bringing  out  the  capabilities  of  the  Sanskrit 
language,  its  ductility,  its  adaptation  to  every  kind  of  style 

1  Professor  Weber  places  him  either  in  the  third  or  sixth  century. 


THE   ARTIFICIAL   POEMS.  45  5 

from  the  most  diffuse  to  the  most  concise,  its  power  of 
compounding  words,  its  intricate  grammatical  structure,  its 
complex  system  of  metres,  and  the  fertility  of  its  resources 
in  the  employment  of  rhyme,  rhythm,  and  alliteration. 
In  fact,  there  is  nothing  in  the  whole  range  of  Greek  or 
Latin  or  any  other  literature  that  can  be  compared  with 
these  poems.  Nearly  every  verse  in  them  presents  a 
separate  puzzle — so  that  when  one  riddle  is  solved,  little 
is  gained  towards  the  solution  of  the  next — or  exhibits 
rare  words,  unusual  grammatical  forms,  and  intricate  com- 
pounds, as  it  were  twisted  together  into  complicated  verbal 
knots,  the  unravelment  of  which  can  only  be  effected  by 
the  aid  of  a  native  commentary. 

Of  course,  in  such  cases  the  sense,  and  even  the  strict 
grammatical  construction,  are  sometimes  sacrificed  to  the 
display  of  ingenuity  in  the  bending  and  straining  of  words 
to  suit  a  difficult  metre  or  rhyme ;  and  this  art  is  studied 
as  an  end  in  itself,  the  ideas  to  be  conveyed  by  the  lan- 
guage employed  being  quite  a  secondary  matter.  To  such 
an  extreme  is  this  carried,  that  whole  verses  are  sometimes 
composed  with  the  repetition  of  a  single  consonant,"^  while 
in  other  cases  a  string  of  epithets  is  employed,  each  of 
which  will  apply  to  two  quite  distinct  words  in  a  sentence, 
and  thus  be  capable  of  yielding  different  senses,  suited  to 

1  English,  I  fear,  would  be  quite  unequal  to  such  a  task  as  the  pro- 
duction of  a  verse  like  the  following  from  the  Kiratarjuniya  (XV.  14) — 
Na  nonanunno  nunnono  nana  ndnanand  nanu  \ 
Nunno  nunnonanunneno  ndnena  nunnanunnanut  \\ 

Or  the  following  from  Magha  (XIX.  114) — 

Dddadoduddaduddddi  dddddodudadldadoh  | 
Duddddam  dadade  dudde  dadadadadadodadah  \\ 

Though  in  Latin  we  have  something  similar  in  Ennius,  0  Tite  tute  Tati 
tibi  tanta  tyranne  tulisti.  It  must  be  admitted,  however,  that  the  cele- 
brated nursery  stanza  beginning  Peter  Piper  picked  a  peck  of  pepper  is 
an  effort  in  the  same  direction. 


45 6  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

either  word,  according  to  the  will  of  the  solver  of  the 
verbal  puzzle. 

Again,  stanzas  are  sometimes  composed  so  as  to  form 
fanciful  shapes  or  figures,  such  as  that  of  a  lotus  {padma- 
bandha) ;  or  so  that  the  lines  or  parts  of  the  lines  com- 
posing the  verses,  whether  read  horizontally,  diagonally, 
or  perpendicularly,  or  in  opposite  directions,  will  yield 
significant  and  grammatical  sentences  of  some  kind,  the 
sense  being  a  matter  of  subordinate  consideration.  This 
is  called  the  Fanciful-shape  (citra)  ornament. 

The  formation  of  the  octopetalous  Lotus-stanza  is  described  in  Sahitya- 
darpana  X.  p.  268.  One  of  the  commonest  of  these  artificial  stanzas, 
called  Sarvato-ihadra,  is  a  verse  so  contrived  that  the  same  syllables 
occur  in  each  Pada  of  the  verse,  whether  read  backwards  or  forwards, 
or  from  the  centre  to  each  extremity,  while  all  the  Padas  together  read 
the  same  either  downwards  or  upwards,  whether  the  reader  commence 
at  the  centre  or  each  extremity.  An  example  of  this  verse  occurs  in 
Kiratarjuniya  XV.  25. 

Still  more  complicated  forms  are  occasionally  found,  as 
described  by  Dr.  Yates  in  his  edition  of  the  Nalodaya. 

Thus  we  have  the  muraja-handha,  a  stanza  shaped  like  a  drum ;  the 
Tthadga-handha,  like  a  sword ;  the  dhanu-handha,  like  a;  how ;  the  srag- 
iandha,  like  a  garland ;  the  vriksha-handha,  like  a  tree ;  and  the  go- 
mutrikd,  like  a  stream  of  cow's  urine,  in  uneven  or  undulating  lines. 

The  art,  too,  of  inventing  and  employing  an  almost 
endless  variety  of  rhetorical  figures  called  Alankaras, 
'  ornaments  of  speech,'  for  the  sake  of  illustrating  the 
various  sentiments,  feelings,  and  emotions  depicted  in 
dramatic  and  erotic  poetry,  is  studied  to  a  degree  quite 
unknown  in  other  languages,  the  most  refined  subtlety 
being  phown  in  marking  ofi"  minute  gradations  of  simile, 
comparison,  metaphor,  &c.  There  are  numerous  works  on 
this  subject — which  may  be  called  a  kind  of  Ars  poetica 
or  rhetorica — some  of  the  best  known  of  which  are  : — 


THE   ARTIFICIAL   POEMS.  457 

I.  The  Sdhitya-darpana,  '  mirror  of  composition,' by  Visvanatha-kavi- 
raja  (said  to  have  lived  in  Dacca  about  the  fifteenth  century),  giving 
rules  and  canons  for  literary  composition  from  simple  sentences  to  epic 
poems  and  dramas,  illustrated  by  examples  from  standard  authors, 
especially  dramatic  (see  p.  470,  note  i).  2.  The  Kdvyddaria,  'mirror  of 
poetry,'  by  Dandin.  3.  The  Kdvya-prakdia,  'illumination  of  poetry,' 
by  Mammata  (the  commentary  to  which,  by  Govinda,  is  called  Kavya- 
pradlpa).  4.  The  Daia-rupaka,  'description  of  the  ten  kinds  of  dramatic 
composition  called  Eupakas,'  by  Dhanaiijaya  (p.  469,  note  2).  5.  The 
Kdvydlan-hdra-vritti,  'explanation  of  the  ornaments  of  poetry,'  by 
Vamana.  6.  The  Sarasvatl-Tcanthabharana,  '  necklace  of  the  goddess  of 
speech,'  by  Bhojardeva.  7.  The  SringdrOrtilaka,  '  mark  of  love,'  a  work 
by  Rudra-bhatta,  describing  and  illustrating  by  examples  the  various 
emotions,  feelings,  and  affections  of  lovers,  male  and  female  (ndyalta 
and  ndyikS),  as  exhibited  in  dramas,  &c.  8.  The  Rasa-manjan,  '  cluster 
of  affections,'  a  work  on  the  Rasas,i  by  Bhanu-datta,  of  much  the  same 
character  as  the  last. 

I  add  here  a  brief  description  of  some  of  the  commonest 
Alan-karas.  They  are  divided  into  two  classes  : — A.  Sabdd- 
lan-kdra,  those  produced  by  the  mere  sound  of  words ; 
B.  Arthdlan-Jcdra,  those  arising  from  the  meaning.  The 
tenth  Books  of  the  Sahitya-darpana  and  Bhatti-kavya  are 
devoted  to  the  illustration  of  this  subject. 

Examples  of  A.  are,  i.  Anuprasa,  a  kind  of  alliteration  or  repetition 
of  the  same  consonants,  although  the  vowels  may  be  dissimilar,  e.g., 
Samd-lin-gan  an-gan.  2.  Yamaka,  more  perfect  alliteration  or  repeti- 
tion of  vowels  and  consonants,  e.g.,  Sakalaih  sakodaih.  Various  kinds 
of  Yamaka  will  be  found  in  Bhatti-kavya  X.  2-2 1 ;  and  in  Kiratarjuniya 
XV.  52  there  is  a  Mahd-yamaka. 

Examples  of  B.  are,  i.  Upamd,  comparison  or  simile  (the  subject  of 
comparison  is  called  upameyam,  sometimes  prastuta,  prakrita,  prakrdnta, 
vastu,  vishaya/  while  the  object  to  which  it  is  compared  is  called  upamd- 
nam,  sometimes  a-prastuta,  a-prakrita,  &c.).  It  is  essential  to  an  Upamd 
that  the  upameya,  the  upamdna,  and  common  attribute  (sdmdnya-dliarina) 

1  There  are  ten  Rasas  or  'feelings,'  enumerated  as  exemplified  in 
dramatic  composition,  i.  orin-gdra,  love;  2.  Ftra,  heroism;  3.  Bib- 
hatsa,  disgust;  4.  Raudra,  anger;  5.  Hdsya,  mirth;  6.  Bhayanaka, 
terror ;  7.  Karuna,  pity ;  8.  Adhhuta,  wonder ;  9.  Sdnta,  calmness ; 
10.  Vdtsalya,  parental  fondness.     Some  authors  only  allow  1-8. 


45 8  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

should  be  all  expressed,  and  the  complete  subordination  of  the  wpamdna 
to  the  upameya  preserved ;  thus  '  her  face  is  like  the  moon  in  charming- 
ness,'  where  'her  face'  is  the  upameya;  'moon,'  the  upamana;  and 
'  charmingness,'  the  common  quality.  If  the  latter  is  omitted  it  is  a 
luptopamd  (see  Bhatti-kavya  X.  30-35).  2.  Utprehshd,  a  comparison 
in  which  the  upamdna  is  beginning  to  encroach  on  the  upameya  and  to 
assume  equal  prominence.  It  is  thirty-two-fold,  under  two  classes,  one 
called  vdcya  when  a  word  like  iva  is  expressed,  as  '  her  face  shines  as 
if  it  were  a  moon ; '  the  other  pratlyamdna  when  iva  is  understood  (cf. 
Bhatti-k.  X.  44).  3.  Rupaka,  'superimposition,' consisting  in  the  super- 
imposition  (dropd)  of  a  fancied  form  over  the  original  subject,  the  upa- 
meya and  upamdna  being  connected  as  if  possessing  equal  prominence, 
and  their  resemblance  implied  rather  than  expressed ;  thus  '  moon-face,' 
'  her  face  is  the  moon '  (Bhatti-k.  X.  28).  4.  Atiiayokti,  hyperbole, 
exaggeration,  pleonasm  (Bhatti-k.  X.  42),  in  which  the  upameya  is 
swallowed  up  in  the  upamdna,  as  when  'her  moon'  is  used  for  'her 
face,'  or  'her  slender  stem'  for  'her  figure.'  5.  Tulya-yogitd,  in  which 
the  upamdna  or  upameya  is  connected  with  the  common  quality,  as  '  a 
snow-white  flower'  (Bhatti-k.  X.  61 ;  Kumara-s.  I.  2).  6.  Drishtdnta, 
exemplification  by  comparing  or  contrasting  similar  attributes  (Magha 
II.  23).  7.  Dlpaha,  'illuminator,'  i.e.,  using  an  illustrative  expression, 
placed  either  in  the  beginning  {ddi),  middle  (madhya),  or  end  (anta)  of 
a  verse  to  throw  light  on  a  description  (Bhatti-k.  X.  22-24;  Kumara-s. 

11.  60).  8.  Vydjorstuti,  artful  or  indirect  eulogy  in  which  praise  is 
rather  implied  than  directly  expressed  (Bhatti-k.  X.  59).  g.  Slesha  {lit. 
coalescence),  paronomasia,  using  distinct  words  which  have  identity  of 
sound,  the  meaning  being  different ;  thus  vidhau  may  mean  '  in  fate '  if 
it  comes  from  vidlii,  or  'in  the  moon'  if  from  vidhu.  10.  Vihhdvand, 
description  of  an  effect  produced  without  a  cause  (Kumara-sambhava 
I.  10).     II.  ViieshoMi,  description  of  a  cause  without  its  natural  effect. 

12.  Arthdntara-nydsa,  transition  to  another  matter,  i.e.,  the  turning 
aside  to  state  a  general  truth  as  an  illustration  of  a  particular  case 
(Bhatti-k.  X.  36;  Kiratarjuniya  VII.  15).  13.  Arthdpatti,  inference 
of  one  fact  from  another.  14.  Sdra,  climax.  15.  Karana-mdld,  series 
of  causes.  16.  F^/afore/ca,  contrast  or  dissimilitude,  i"].  Akshepa,h.m.t. 
18.  SahoJdi,  a  hyperbolical  description  of  simultaneous  action  connected 
by  the  word  saha.  19.  PariJcara,  employment  of  a  number  of  signifi- 
cant epithets.  20.  Samsrishti,  conjunction,  i.e.,  the  employment  of 
more  than  one  figure  in  the  same  verse  independently  of  each  other 
(Bhatti-k.  X.  70).  When  there  is  a  commixture  or  combination  of  more 
than  one  figure,  it  is  called  San-hara  ;  especially  when  they  are  combined 
as  principal  and  subordinates  [an-gdn-gi-bhdva). 


THE   ARTIFICIAL   POEMS.  459 

To  give  examples  from  all  the  artificial  poems  enume- 
rated (pp.  452,  453)  would  be  wearisome.  It  will  be  suffi- 
cient to  select  a  passage  from  Kalidasa's  Eagbu-vansa, 
and  a  few  of  the  moral  sentiments  scattered  through  the 
KiratarjuEiya  and  the  Si^upala-badha.  I  first  translate 
Raghu-vansa  X.  16-33.  The  inferior  gods  are  supposed 
to  be  addressing  Vishnu  as  the  Supreme  Being  (cf.  a 
similar  address  in  Kumara-sambhava  II.) : — 

Hail  to  thee,  mighty  lord,  the  world's  creator. 

Supporter  and  destroyer,  three  in  one — 

One  in  thy  essence,  tripartite  in  action  !  1 

E'en  as  heaven's  water — one  in  savour — gains 

Trom  different  receptacles  on  earth 

Diversity  of  flavours,  so  dost  thou, 

Unchangeable  in  essence,  manifest 

Changes  of  state  in  diverse  qualities.  ^ 

Unmeasured  and  immeasurable,  yet 

Thou  measurest  the  world ;  desireless,  yet 

Pulfilling  all  desire ;  unconquered  and 

A  conqueror ;  unmanif ested,  yet 

A  manif ester  j  uniformly  one, 

Yet  ever  multiform  from  various  motives. 

Thy  manifold  conditions  are  compared 

To  those  of  clearest  crystal,  which  reflects 

Varieties  of  hue  from  diverse  objects. 

Though  ever  present  in  the  heart,  thou  art 

Held  to  be  inflnitely  distant;  free 

From  passion,  yet  austere  in  self-restraint ; 

Full  of  all  pity,  yet  thyself  untouched 

By  misery ;  the  ever  ancient  one. 

Yet  never  growing  ancient ;  knowing  all. 

Yet  never  known ;  unborn,  yet  giving  birth 

To  all ;  all-ruling,  yet  thyself  unruled ; 

One  in  thyself,  yet  many  in  thy  aspects. 

Men  hymn  thy  praises  in  seven  songs ;  and  say 

Thou  liest  sleeping  on  the  earth's  seven  seas ;  * 

Thy  face  is  seven-flamed  fire,  and  thou  thyself 

1  See  p.  321.  2  See  p.  321,  note  2.  ^  See  p.  420. 


460  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

The  sole  asylum  of  tlie  world's  seven  spheres.'^ 

JProm  the-  four  mouths  of  thee,  pourtrayed  as  four-faced, 

Proceeds  the  knowledge  of  life's  fourfold  objects, 

Time's  quadruple  divisions  through  four  ages,^ 

Man's  fourfold  distribution  into  castes. 

On  thee  abiding  in  man's  heart,  the  source 

Of  light,  with  minds  and  senses  all  subdued, 

The  pious  meditate  in  hope  of  bliss. 

Of  thee  the  mystic  nature  who  can  fathom  ? 

Unborn,  yet  taking  birth ;  from  action  free, 

Yet  active  to  destroy  thy  demon-foes ; 

Seeming  asleep,  yet  ever  vigilant ; 

Possessing  senses  fitted  for  enjoyment. 

Yet  in  all  points  restrained ;  protecting  all 

Thy  creatures,  yet  apparently  indifferent. 

The  ways  which  lead  to  everlasting  bliss, 

Though  variously  distinguished  in  the  -Yeda, 

Converge  to  thee  alone ;  e'en  as  the  streams 

Of  Gan-ga's  waters  to  their  ocean  home. 

Thou  art  the  only  way,  the  only  refuge 

Of  all  whose  hearts  are  fixed  on  thee,  whose  acts 

Are  centred  in  thee,  and  whose  worldly  longings, 

Checked  and  suppressed,  have  passed  away  for  ever. 

Thy  greatness  is  displayed  before  our  eyes 

In  this  thy  world  and  these  thy  mighty  works ; 

Yet  through  the  Veda  and  by  inference 

Alone  can  thy  existence  be  established.^ 

How  then  can  we,  the  finite,  tell  thy  essence  ? 

Since  merely  by  the  thought  of  thee  thy  creatures 

Are  purified,  much  more  have  other  acts 

Which  have  thee  for  their  object,  full  reward. 

As  jewels  lying  deep  in  ocean's  bed, 

And  fires  deep  hidden  in  the  solar  orb 

Are  far  beyond  the  reach  of  mortals,  so  thy  deeds 

Exceed  our  praises.     Naught  is  unattained 

By  thee,  and  naught  is  unattainable ; 

Yet  love,  and  love  alone,  for  these  thy  worlds 


1  See  p.  431.  ^  See  p.  330,  note  3. 

3  This  is  an  allusion  to  the  three  Pramanas  of  the  San-khya,  viz., 
Pratyaksha,  Anumana,  and  Apta-vadana  or  S'abda;  see  p.  82. 


THE   ARTiriOIAL   POEMS — MORAL   SENTIMENTS.         46 1 

Moves^thee  to  act,  leads  to  thy  incarnations.^ 
That  in  the  celebration  of  thy  praises 
Our  voices  are  restrained,  deign  to  ascribe 
This  to  our  limited  capacities, 
Not  to  the  limitation  of  thy  glory. 

I  next  translate  some  moral  sentiments  and  wise  sayings 
from  the  Kiratarjuniya  of  Bharavi : — 

Those  who  wish  well  towards  their  friends  disdain 

To  please  them  by  fair  words  which  are  not  true  (I.  2). 

Better  to  have  a  great  man  for  one's  foe 
Than  court  association  with  the  low  (I.  8). 

As  drops  of  bitter  medicine,  though  minute, 
May  have  a  salutary  force,  so  words 
Though  few  and  painful,  uttered  seasonably, 
May  rouse  the  prostrate  energies  of  those 
Who  meet  misfortune  with  despondency  (II.  4). 

Do  nothing  rashly,  want  of  circumspection 

Is  the  chief  cause  of  failure  and  disaster. 

Fortune,  wise  lover  of  the  wise,  selects 

Him  for  her  lord  who  ere  he  acts,  reflects  (II.  30). 

He  who  with  patience  and  deliberation 
Prepares  the  ground  whence  issue  all  his  actions, 
Obtains,  like  those  who  water  seeds  and  roots, 
An  ample  harvest  of  autumnal  fruits  (II.  31). 

The  body's  truest  ornament  consists 

In  knowledge  of  the  truth ;  of  sacred  knowledge 

The  best  embellishment  is  self-control ; 

Of  self-control  the  garniture  is  courage. 

Courage  is  best  embellished  by  success  (II.  32). 

In  matters  difficult  and  dark,  concealed 

By  doubt  and  disagreement  of  opinion. 

The  Veda,  handed  down  by  holy  men. 

Explained  with  clearness,  and  well  put  in  practice, 

Like  a  bright  lamp  throws  light  upon  the  way. 

Guiding  the  prudent  lest  they  go  astray  (II.  33). 

1  See  p.  320. 


462  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

To  those  who  travel  on  the  rugged  road 

Trodden  by  virtuous  and  high-minded  men, 

A  fall,  if  pre-ordained  by  destiny, 

Becomes  equivalent  to  exaltation  ; 

Such  falls  cause  neither  evil  nor  distress. 

The  wise  make  failures  equal  to  success  (II.  34). 

Would'st  thou  be  eminent,  all  passion  shun. 
Drive  wrath  away  by  wisdom ;  e'en  the  sun 
Ascends  not  to  display  his  fullest  light 
Till  he  has  chased  away  the  mists  of  night  (II.  36). 

That  lord  of  earth  who,  equable  in  mind. 

Is  on  occasion  lenient  and  kind. 

Then  acts  in  season  with  severity. 

Rules  like  the  sun  by  his  own  majesty  (II.  38). 

The  man  who  every  sacred  science  knows. 
Yet  has  not  strength  to  keep  in  check  the  foes 
That  rise  within  him,  mars  his  Fortune's  fame 
And  brings  her  by  his  feebleness  to  shame  (II.  41). 

Be  patient  if  thou  would'st  thy  ends  accomplish, 
For  like  to  patience  is  there  no  appliance 
Effective  of  success,  producing  surely 
Abundant  fruit  of  actions,  never  damped 
By  failure,  conquering  impediments  (II.  43). 

If  the  constituent  members  of  a  state 

Be  in  disorder,  then  a  trifling  war 

May  cause  a  ruler's  ruin,  just  as  fire 

Caused  by  the  friction  of  the  dried-up  branches 

Of  one  small  tree,  may  devastate  a  mountain  (II.  51). 

Success  is  like  a  lovely  woman,  wooed 
By  many  men,  but  folded  in  the  arms 
Of  him  alone  who  free  from  over-zeal 
Firmly  persists  and  calmly  perseveres  (III.  40). 

The  drops  upon  a  lovely  woman's. face 
Appear  like  pearls ;  no  marks  avail  to  mar. 
But  rather  to  her  beauty  add  a  grace  (VII.  5). 

The  noble-minded  dedicate  themselves 

To  the  promotion  of  the  happiness 

Of  others — e'en  of  those  who  injure  them. 

True  happiness  consists  in  making  happy  (VII.  13,  28). 


THE   ARTIFICIAL   POEMS — MORAL   SENTIMENTS.        463 

Let  not  a  little  fault  in  Mm  who  does 

An  act  of  kindness,  minish  aught  its  value  (VII.  15). 

If  intercourse  with  noble-minded  men, 

Though  short  and  accidental,  leads  to  profit. 

How  great  the  benefit  of  constant  friendship  !  (VII.  27)! 

As  persons  though  fatigued  forbear  to  seek 

The  shelter  of  the  fragrant  sandal-trees, 

If  deadly  serpents  lurk  beneath  their  roots, 

So  must  the  intercourse  of  e'en  the  virtuous, 

If  vicious  men  surround  them,  be  avoided  (VII.  29). 

A  woman  wiU  not  throw  away  a  garland, 

Though  soiled  and  dirty,  which  her  lover  gave ; 

Not  in  the  object  lies  a  present's  worth. 

But  in  the  love  which  it  was  meant  to  mark  (VIII.  37). 

To  one  who  pines  in  solitude  apart 

From  those  he  loves,  even  the  moon's  cool  rays 

Appear  unbearable ;  for  in  affliction 

Even  a  pleasant  object  heightens  grief  (IX.  30). 

Wine  is  averse  from  secrecy ;  it  has 

A  power  to  bring  to  light  what  is  concealed — 

The  hidden  qualities  both  good  and  bad  (IX.  68). 

True  love  is  ever  on  the  watch,  and  sees 

Risks  even  in  its  loved  one's  happiness  (IX.  70). 

Youth's  glories  are  as  transient  as  the  shadow 

Of  an  autumnal  cloud ;  and  sensual  joys, 

Though  pleasant  at  the  moment,  end  in  pain  (XI.  12). 

Soon  as  a  man  is  bom,  an  adversary 

Confronts  him,  Death  the  Ender ;  ceaseless  troubles 

Begin ;  his  place  of  birth — the  world — 

Must  one  day  be  abandoned ;  hence  the  wise 

Seek  the  full  bliss  of  freedom  from  existence  (XI.  13). 

Riches  and  pleasure  are  the  root  of  evil ; 
Hold  them  not  dear,  encourage  not  their  growth ; 
They  are  aggressors  hard  to  be  subdued. 
Destroyers  of  all  knowledge  and  of  truth  (XI.  20). 


464  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

To  one  united  with  a  much-loved  object 

The  empty  turns  to  fulness ;  evil  fortune 

Brings  festive  joys ;  and  disappointment,  gain ; 

But  not  to  him  who  lives  in  separation — 

He  in  the  midst  of  friends  feels  solitary ; 

The  pleasant  causes  grief ;  and  life  itself, 

Before  so  dear,  pains  lite  a  piercing  shaft  (XI.  27,  28). 

<J  The  enemies  which  rise  within  the  body, 
Hard  to  be  overcome — thy  evil  passions — 
Should  manfully  be  fought ;  who  conquers  these 
Is  equal  to  the  conqueror  of  worlds  (XI.  32). 

Why  give  thyself  to  pleasure  ?  this  day's  joys 
Are  thought  upon  to-morrow,  then  like  dreams 
They  pass  away  and  are  for  ever  lost  (XI.  34). 

V  Who  trusts  the  passions  finds  them  base  deceivers  : 
Acting  like  friends,  they  are  his  bitterest  foes  ; 
Causing  delight,  they  do  him  great  unkindness ; 
Hard  to  be  shaken  off,  they  yet  desert  him  (XI.  35). 

,  The  clear  and  quiet  minds  of  prudent  men, 
Though  ruffled  on  the  surface  and  disturbed 
Like  the  deep  waters  of  the  ocean,  fear 
To  pass  the  Hmits  of  self-mastery  (XI.  54). 

•  j  The  friendship  of  the  bad  is  like  the  shade 
Of  some  precipitous  bank  with  crumbling  sides. 
Which  falling  buries  him  who  sits  beneath  (XI.  55). 

The  natural  hostility  of  beasts 

Is  laid  aside  when  flying  from  pursuers  j 

So  also  when  calamities  impend 

The  enmity  of  rivals  has  an  end  (XIL  46). 

The  following  are  from  Book  II.  of  tlie  Sisupala-badha 
of  Maglia  (I  translate  nearly  literally) : — 

Alliance  should  be  formed  with  friendly  foes. 
Not  with  unfriendly  friends ;  of  friend  and  foe 
The  test  is  benefit  and  injury  (37).'- 

1  This  vers?  occurs  also  in  Hitopade^a  IV.  16. 


THE   ARTIFICIAL   POEMS — MORAL   SENTIMENTS.         465 

He  who  excites  the  wrath  of  foes  and  then 
Sits  down  inactively,  is  like  a  man 
Who  kindles  withered  grass  and  then  lies  near 
While  a  strong  wind  is  blowing  from  beyond  (42). 

He  who  by  virtue  of  his  rank,  his  actions, 
And  qualities,  effects  no  useful  purpose. 
Is  like  a  chance-invented  word ;  his  birth 
Is  useless,  for  he  merely  bears  a  name  (47). 

V  A  man  of  feeble  character  resembles 
A  reed  that  bends  with  every  gust  of  wind  (50). 

Soft  words,  intended  to  alleviate. 

Often  foment  the  wrath  of  one  enraged, 

Like  drops  of  water  poured  on  burning  butter  (55). 

A  rambling  speech  whose  meaning  is  confused. 
Though  long,  is  spoken  easily ;  not  so 
A  clear,  connected,  logical  discourse  (73). 

Two  only  sources  of  success  are  known — 
Wisdom  and  effort ;  make  them  both  thine  own 
If  thou  would'st  rise  and  haply  gain  a  throne  (76). 

Science  is  like  a  couch  to  sapient  men  ; 
Reclining  there,  they  never  feel  fatigue  (77). 

A  subtle- witted  man  is  like  an  arrow, 
Which  rending  little  surface,  enters  deeply  ; 
But  they  whose  minds  are  dull,  resemble  stones. 
Dashing  with  clumsy  force,  but  never  piercing  (78). 

1  J  The  foolish  undertake  a  trifling  act 
And  soon  desist,  discouraged  ;  wiser  men 
Engage  in  mighty  works  and  persevere  (79). 

The  undertaking  of  a  careless  man 
Succeeds  not,  though  he  use  the  right  expedients ; 
A  clever  hunter,  though  well  placed  in  ambush. 
Kills  not  his  quarry  if  he  fall  asleep  (80). 

A  monarch's  weapon  is  his  intellect ; 

His  minister  and  servants  are  his  limbs ; 

Close  secrecy  of  counsel  is  his  armour ; 

Spies  are  his  eyes  ;  ambassadors,  his  mouth  (82). 

2  G 


\y 


466  INDIAIJ   WISDOM. 

That  energy  -whicli  veils  itself  in  mildness 

Is  most  effective  of  its  object;  so 

The  lamp  that  burns  most  brightly  owes  its  force 

To  oil  drawn  upwards  by  a  hidden  wick  (85). 

Wise  men  rest  not  on  destiny  alone, 

Nor  yet  on  manly  effort,  but  on  both  (86). 

Weak  persons  gain  their  object  when  allied 
With  strong  associates ;  the  rivulet 
Reaches  the  ocean- by  the  river's  aid  (100). 

A  good  man's  intellect  is  piercing,  yet 
Inflicts  no  wound ;  his  actions  are  deliberate, 
Yet  bold ;  his  heart  is  warm,  but  never  burns  ; 
His  speech  is  eloquent,  yet  ever  true  (109). 


The  Dramas. 

If  we  bear  in  mind  that  the  nations  of  modern  Europe 
can  scarcely  be  said  to  have  possessed  a  dramatic  litera- 
ture before  the  fifteenth  century  of  the  present  era,  the 
antiquity  of  the  extant  Hindi!  plays,  some  of  which  may 
be  traced  back  to  about  the  first  or  second  century  of  our 
era,  will  of  itself  appear  a  remarkable  circumstance.  But 
to  the  age  of  these  dramas  must  be  added  their  undoubted 
literary  value  as  repositories  of  much  true  poetry,  though 
of  an  Oriental  type.  They  are  also  valuable  as  repre- 
senting the  early  condition  of  Hindi!  society,  and  as 
serving  to  illustrate  some  of  its  present  peculiarities ;  for 
notwithstanding  the  increasing  intercourse  with  Europe, 
India,  like  other  Eastern  countries,  is  slow  in  delivering 
itself  from  subjection  to  the  stereotyped  laws  of  tradition 
which  appear  to  be  stamped  on  its  manners  and  social 
practices. 

In  all  likelihood  the  germ  of  the  dramatic  representa- 
tions of  the  Hindus,  as  of  the  Greeks,  is  to  be  sought  for 


THE   DRAMAS.  467 

in  public  exhibitions  of  dancing,  which  consisted  at  first 
of  simple  movements  of  the  body,  executed  in  harmony 
with  singing  and  music.  Indeed,  the  root  nat  and  the 
nouns  natya  and  ndtaJca,  which  are  now  applied  to  dramatic 
acting,  are  probably  mere  corruptions  of  nrit,  '  to  dance,' 
nritya,  '  dancing,'  and  nartaka,  '  a  dancer.'  Of  this  dancing 
various'  styles  were  gradually  invented,  such  as  the  Ldsya 
and  Tdndava,^  to  express  difi"erent  actions  or  various 
sentiments  and  emotions. 

Very  soon  dancing  was  extended  to  include  pantomimic 
gesticulations  accompanied  with  more  elaborate  musical 
performances,  and  these  gesticulations  were  aided  by 
occasional  exclamations  between  the  intervals  of  singing. 
Finally,  natural  language  took  the  place  of  music  and 
singing,  while  gesticulation  became  merely  subservient  to 
emphasis  in  dramatic  dialogue. 

When  we  come  to  actual  dramatic  writing  we  are 
obliged  to  confess  that  its  origin,  like  that  of  epic  poetry, 
and  of  nearly  every  department  of  Sanskrit  composition, 
is  lost  in  remote  antiquity.  There  is  evidence  that  plays 
were  acted  in  India  as  early  as  the  reign  of  Asoka,  in  the 
third  century  B.C.  At  that  period  intercourse  between 
India  and  Greece  had  certainly  commenced,  but  it  does  not 
appear  that  the  Hindus  borrowed  either  the  matter  or 
form  of  any  of  their  dramas  from  the  Greeks.  (See 
Lassen's  Ind.  Alt.  II.  507.) 

Semitic  nations  have  never  inclined  towards  theatrical 
representations.  The  Book  of  Job  is  a  kind  of  dramatic 
dialogue.  The  same  may  be  said  of  parts  of  the  Song  of 
Solomon,  and  there  is  occasional  dialogue  in  the  Makamat 
of  al  Hariri  and  Thousand  and  One  Nights  ;  but  neither 


1  The  Tdndava  is  a  boisterous  dance  regarded  as  the  peculiar  inven- 
tion of  S'iva ;  the  Lasya  is  said  to  have  been  invented  by  Parvati ;  the 
Rdsamandala  is  the  circular  dance  of  Krishna. 


468  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

the  Hebrews  nor  Arabs  seem  to  have  carried  dramatic  ideas 
beyond  this  point.  Among  the  Aryans,  on  the  other  hand, 
as  well  as  among  the  Chinese,  the  drama  appears  to  have 
arisen  naturally.  At  least,  its  independent  origin  in 
Greece  and  India — both  which  countries  also  gave  birth 
independently  to  epic  poetry,  grammar,  philosophy,  and 
logic — can  scarcely  be  called  in  question,  however  probable 
it  may  be  that  an  interchange  of  ideas  took  place  in  later 
times.  In  fact,  the  Hindu  drama,  while  it  has  certainly 
much  in  common  with  the  representations  of  other 
nations,  has  quite  a  distinctive  character  of  its  own 
which  invests  it  with  great  interest. 

At  the  same  time  the  English  reader,  when  told  that 
the  author  of  the  earliest  Hindu  drama  which  has  come 
down  to  us — the  Mric-chakatihd  or  '  Clay-cart ' — probably 
lived  ill  the  first  or  second  century  of  the  Christian  era, 
will  be  inclined  to  wonder  at  the  analogies  it  offers  to 
our  own  dramatic  compositions  of  about  fifteen  centtiries 
later.  The  dexterity  with  which  the  plot  is  arranged, 
the  ingenuity  with  which  the  incidents  are  connected, 
the  skill  with  which  the  characters  are  delineated  and 
contrasted,  the  boldness  and  felicity  of  the  diction  are 
scarcely  unworthy  of  our  own  great  dramatists.  Nor 
does  the  parallel  fail  in  the  management  of  the  stage- 
business,  in  minute  directions  to  the  actors  and  various 
scenic  artifices.  The  asides  and  aparts,  the  exits  and  the 
entrances,  the  manner,  attitude,  and  gait  of  the  speakers, 
their  tones  of  voice,  tears,  smiles,  and  laughter  are  as 
regularly  indicated  as  in  a  modern  drama. 

A  groat  number  of  other  ancient  plays  besides  'the 
Clay-cart'  are  extant,  and  many  of  the  most  celebrated 
have  been  printed.  To  classify  these  Hindu  dramas  ac- 
cording to  European  ideas,  or  even  to  arrange  them  under 
the  general  heads  of  tragedy  and  comedy,  is  impossible. 
Indeed,  if  a  calamitous  conclusion  be  necessary  to  consti- 


THE   DRAMAS.  469 

tute  a  tragedy,  Hindu  plays  are  never  tragedies.^  They 
are  rather  mixed  representations,  in  which  happiness  and 
misery,  good  and  evil,  right  and  wrong,  justice  and  in- 
justice are  allowed  to  blend  in  confusion  until  the  end 
of  the  drama.  In  the  last  act  harmony  is  restored,  tran- 
quillity succeeds  to  agitation,  and  the  minds  of  the  spec- 
tators, no  longer  perplexed  by  the  ascendency  of  evil,  are 
soothed  and  purified  by  the  moral  lesson  deducible  from 
the  plot,  or  led  to  acquiesce  in  the  inevitable  results  of 
Adrishta  (see  p.  58).  Such  dramatic  conceptions  are,  in 
truth,  exactly  what  might  be  expected  to  prevail  among 
a  people  who  look  upon  no  occurrence  in  human  life  as 
really  tragic,  but  regard  evil  and  suffering  of  all  kinds 
as  simply  the  unavoidable  consequences  of  acts  done  by 
each  soul,  of  its  own  free  will,  in  former  bodies. 

Nevertheless,  to  invest  the  subject  of  dramatic  compo- 
sition with  dignity,  a  great  sage  is,  as  usual  (compare 
p.  371),  supposed  to  be  its  inventor.  He  is  called  Bharata, 
and  is  regarded  as  the  author  of  a  system  of  music,  as 
well  as  of  an  Alan-kara-sastra  containing  Siitras  or  rules. 
His  work  is  constantly  quoted  as  the  original  authority 
for  dramatic  composition.^  On  Bharata's  Sutras  followed 
various  treatises  which  laid  down  minute  precepts  and 
regulations  for  the  construction  and  conduct  of  plays,  and 
subjected  dramatic  writing  to  the  most  refined  and  artificial 
rules  of  poetical  and  rhetorical  style. 

Besides  the  DaJa-rupaka,  Kdvya-'prahaia,  Kdvyadarsa,  and  Sdhitya- 
darparia,  &o.,  mentioned  at  p.  457,  others  are  named  which  treat  of 
dramatic  composition  as  well  as  of  ornaments  (alan-lcdra)  and  figures 
of  rhetoric.     For  example  :  the  Kdvydlan-hdra-vritti,  by  Vamana ;  the 

1  A  rule  states  that  the  killing  of  a  hero  is  not  to  be  hinted  at.  This 
does  not  always  hold  good.     No  one,  however,  is  killed  on  the  stage. 

^  Dr.  Fitz-Edward  Hall  has  a  MS.  of  the  work  in  36  Books,  of  which 
18,  19,  20,  and  34  were  printed  at  the  end  of  his  Dasa-rupa.  Dr. 
Heymann  is  now  editing  the  whole  work. 


470  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Alankdra-sarvasva,  by  Bhama ;  the  Alan-Jcdra-kaustuhha,  by  Kavi  Karna- 
purakaj  the  Kuvahxydnanda,  by  Apyaya  [or  Apya]-dikshita;  the  Candror 
loka,  by  Jaya-deva ;  and  a  work  on  music,  singing,  and  dancing,  called 
the  San-glta-ratndkara,  by  S'arn-gadeva,  thought  by  Wilson  to  have  been 
written  between  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries. 

These  treatises  classify  Sanskrit  plays  very  elaborately 
under  various  subdivisions ;  and  the  Sahitya-darpana — 
a  favourite  authority  ^  —  divides  them  into  two  great 
classes,  viz.,  i.  Rupaka,  'principal  dramas,'  of  which  there 
are  ten  species  ;  2.  Upa-rupaka,  'minor  or  inferior  dramas,' 
of  which  eighteen  are  enumerated.  The  trouble  taken  to 
invent  titles  for  every  variety  of  Hindu  play,  according 
to  far  more  subtle  shades  of  distinction  than  those  denoted 
by  our  drama,  melodrama,  comedy,  farce,  and  ballet,  proves 
that  dramatic  composition  has  been  more  elaborately  cul- 
tivated in  India  than  in  European  countries.  The  ten 
species  of  Rupaka  are  as  follow  : — 

I.  The  Ndtalta,  or  '  principal  play,'  should  consist  of  from  five  to  ten 
acts  (an-ka),  and  should  have  a  celebrated  story  (such  as  the  history 
of  Rama)  for  its  plot  (vastu).  It  should  represent  heroic  or  godlike 
characters,  and  good  deeds ;  should  be  written  in  an  elaborate  style,  and 
be  full  of  noble  sentiments.  Moreover,  it  should  contain  all  the  five 
'  joints '  or  '  junctures  '  (sandhi)  ^  of  the  plot ;  the  four  kinds  of  action 
ivritti) ;  the  sixty-four  members  (an-ga)  or  peculiar  properties ;  and  the 
thirty-six  distinctive  marks  (lakslianja).  The  hero  or  leading  character 
{ndyaka)  should  be  of  the  kind  described  as  high-spirited  but  firm,' 

1  The  Sahitya-darpana  is  in  ten  sections,  treating  of  the  nature  and 
divisions  of  poetry,  the  various  powers  of  a  word,  varieties  of  style, 
ornaments  of  style  and  blemishes  (dosha).  I  have  here  consulted  the 
late  Dr.  Ballantyne's  translation  of  part  of  it,  published  at  Benares. 

2  These  five  junctures  are,  i.  the  mukha  or  'opening';  2.  t\ie prati- 
mukha  or  '  first  development  of  the  germ  ivlja)  of  the  plot ' ;  3.  the 
garhlia  or  'actual  development  and  growth  of  the  germ';  4.  th.e  vimarsha 
or  'some  hindrance  to  its  progress';  5.  the  nirvaJiana  or  upa-samhrili, 
'  conclusion.' 

*  There  are  four  kinds  of  heroes  :  i.  high-spirited  but  firm  {dhlro- 
ddtta) ;  2.  firm  and  haughty  (dhlroddliata) ;  3.  gay  and  firm  (dhira- 
lalita) ;  4.  firm  and  mild  (dhira-pra&nta). 


THE   DRAMAS.  47  I 

being  either  a  royal  sage  of  high  family  (as  Dushyanta  in  the  S'akun- 
tala),  or  a  god  (as  Krishna),  or  a  demigod  (divyddivya),  who,  though  a 
god  (like  E,ama-6andra)  thinks  himself  a  man  (narabhimdm,  see  note  3, 
p.  358).  The  principal  sentiment  or  flavour  {rasa,  see  p.  457,  note) 
should  be  either  the  erotic  {irin-gdra)  or  heroic  (mra),  and  in  the  con- 
clusion (nirvahana)  the  marvellous  (adbhuta).  It  should  be  composed 
like  the  end  of  a  cow's  tail  (go-pucchdgra),  i.e.,  so  that  each  of  the  acts 
is  gradually  made  shorter.  If  it  also  contain  the  four  Patdkd-stlianaka 
or  '  striking  points,'  and  the  number  of  its  acts  (an-ka)  be  ten,  it  is 
entitled  to  be  called  a  Mahd-ndtaka.  An  example  of  the  Ndtaha  is  the 
S'akuntala,  and  of  the  Malia^ndtaka  is  the  Bala-ramayana  (see  p.  508). 
2.  The  Prdlmrana  should  resemble  the  Nataka  in  the  number  of  its  acts 
as  well  as  in  other  respects;  but  the  plot  must  be  founded  on  some 
mundane  or  human  story,  invented  by  the  poet,  and  have  love  for  its 
principal  sentiment,  the  hero  or  leading  character  being  either  a 
Brahman  (as  in  the  Mrid-dhakatika),  or  a  minister  (as  in  the  Malati- 
madhava),  or  a  merchant  (as  in  the  Pushpa-bhiishita),  of  the  description 
called  firm  and  mild  (dhlra-praJdnta),  while  the  heroine  {ndyihd)  is  some- 
times a  woman  of  good  family,  sometimes  a  courtesan,  or  both.  3.  The 
Bhdna,  in  one  act,  should  consist  of  a  variety  of  incidents,  not  progres- 
sively developed,  the  plot  being  invented  by  the  poet.  It  should  only 
have  the  opening  and  concluding  juncture  (see  note  2,  p.  470).  An 
example  is  the  Lild-madliVrkara.  4.  The  Vyayoga,  in  one  act,  should 
have  a  well-known  story  for  its  plot,  and  few  females  in  its  dramatis 
personae.  Its  hero  should  be  some  celebrated  personage  of  the  class 
called  firm  and  haughty  (virod-dhatd).  Its  principal  sentiments  or 
flavours  {rasa,  see  p.  457,  note)  should  be  the  comic  (hdsya),  the  erotic 
{irin-gdra),  and  the  unimpassioned  {Mnta).  5.  The  Samavahdra,  in 
four  acts,  in  which  a  great  variety  of  subjects  are  mixed  together 
{samavaklryante) ;  it  dramatizes  a  well-known  story,  relating  to  gods 
and  demons.  An  example  is  the  Samudra-mathana,  '  churning  of  the 
ocean  '  (described  in  Bharata's  S'astra  IV.).  6.  TheDima,  in  four  acts, 
founded  on  some  celebrated  story;  its  principal  sentiment  should  be 
the  terrible  {raudra)  ;  it  should  have  sixteen  heroes  (a  god,  a  Yaksha, 
a  Eakshasa,  a  serpent,  goblin,  &c.).  An  example  is  the  Tripura-ddha, 
'  conflagration  of  Tripura'  (described  in  Bharata's  S'astra  IV.).  7.  The 
Thd-mriga,  in  four  acts,  founded  on  a  mixed  story  {misra-vritta),  partly 
popular,  and  partly  invented  ;  the  hero  and  rival  hero  {prati-ndyaka) 
should  be  either  a  mortal  or  a  god.  According  to  some  it  should  have 
six  heroes.  It  derives  its  name  from  this,  that  the  hero  seeks  {ihate) 
a  divine  female,  who  is  as  unattainable  as  a  deer  {mriga).  8.  The 
An-ka  or  Utsrishtikdn-ka,  in  one  act,  should  have  ordinary  men  {prdk- 


472  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

ritornardh)  for  its  heroes  ;  its  principal  sentiment  should  be  the  pathetic 
(karuna),  and  its  form  {srishti)  should  transgress  (utkrcmta)  the  usual 
rules.  An  example  is  the  ^armishthd-yaydti.  9.  The  Vifhl,  in  one 
act,  is  so  called  because  it  forms  a  kind  of  garland  (mtlil)  of  various 
sentiments,  and  is  supposed  to  contain  thirteen  members  (an-ga)  or 
peculiar  properties.  An  example  is  the  if aZawM.  10.  The  Praliasana, 
properly  in  one  act,  is  a  sort  of  farce  representing  reprobate  characters 
(nindya),  aiid  the  story  is  invented  by  the  poet,  the  principal  sentiment 
being  the  comic  (hdsya)  ;  it  may  be  either  pure  {^uddha),  of  which  the 
Kandarpa-keli,  '  love-sports,'  is  an  example ;  or  mixed  (san-kirna),  like 
the  Dhurta-(5arita,  '  adventures  of  a  rogue ; '  or  it  may  represent 
characters  transformed  (vihrita)  by  various  disguises. 

The  eighteen  Upa-rupakas  need  not  be  so  fully  described. 
Their  names  are  as  follow  : — 

I.  The  Ndtihd,  which  is  of  two  kinds — Ndtikd  pure,  and  Praltaranikd 
differing  little  from  the  Nataka  and  Prakarana.  The  Ratnavali  is  an 
example  of  the  Natika.  2.  The  Trotaka,  in  five,  seven,  eight,  or  nine  acts; 
the  plot  should  be  founded  on  the  story  of  a  demigod,  and  the  Vidushaka 
or  '  jesting  Brahman '  should  be  introduced  into  every  act.  An  example 
is  the  Yikramorvasi.  3.  The  Goshthl.  4.  The  Sattaka.  5.  The  Ndtya- 
rdsaka.  6.  The  Prasthdna.  7.  The  Ullapya.  8.  The  Kdvya.  9.  The 
Prenkhana.  10.  TheRdsaka.  11.  Th^  Samlapaka.  12.  The  §n-gadita, 
in  one  act,  dedicated  chiefly  to  the  goddess  S'ri.  13.  The  Bilpaka. 
14,  The  Vildsika.  15.  The  DurmalUkd.  16.  The  Prakararil.  17.  The 
HalViAa,  chiefly  consisting  in  music  and  singing.     18.  The  Bhdnikd. 

As  I  have  elsewhere  stated  (see  Introduction  to  trans- 
lation  of  the  Sakuntala),  it  is  probable  that  in  India,  as 
in  Greece,  scenic  entertainments  took  place  at  religious 
festivals,  and  especially  at  the  Spring  festival  {Vasanto- 
tsava,  corresponding  to  the  present  Holi)  in  the  month 
Phalguna.  Kalidasa's  Sakuntala  seems  to  have  been 
acted  at  the  commencement  of  the  summer  season — 
a  period  sacred  to  Kama-deva,  the  Indian  god  of  love. 
We  are  told  that  it  was  enacted  before  an  audience  '  con- 
sisting chiefly  of  men  of  education  and  discernment.' 
As  the  greater  part  of  every  play  was  written  in  Sanskrit, 
which  was  certainly  not  the  vernacular  of  the  country 


THE   DRAMAS.  473 

at  the  time  when  the  dramas  were  performed,  few  spec- 
tators could  have  been  present  who  were  not  of  the 
learned  classes.  This  circumstance  is  in  accordance  with 
the  constitution  of  Hindu  society,  whereby  the  produc- 
tions of  literature,  as  well  as  the  offices  of  state,  were 
reserved  for  the  privileged  castes.  The  following  is  a 
brief  account  of  the  construction  of  an  ordinary  Hindu 
Nataka : — 

Every  play  opens  with  a  prologue  {jprastdvand),  or,  to  speak  more 
correctly,  an  introduction,  designed  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  en- 
trance of  the  dramatis  personae.  The  prologue  commences  with  a 
benediction  (ndncR)  or  prayer  ^  (pronounced  by  a  Brahman,  or  if  the 
stage-manager  happens  to  be  a  Brahnian,  by  the  manager  himself),  in 
which  the  poet  invokes  the  favour  of  his  favourite  deity  in  behalf  of 
the  audience.  The  blessing  is  generally  followed  by  a  dialogue  between 
the  maiiager  and  one  or  two  of  the  actors,  in  which  an  account  is 
given  of  the  author  of  the  drama,  a  complimentary  tribute  is  paid  to 
the  critical  acumen  of  the  spectators,  and  such  a  reference  is  made  to 
past  occurrences  or  present  circumstances  as  may  be  necessary  for 
the  elucidation  of  the  plot.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  prologue,  the 
manager,  by  some  abrupt  exclamation,  adroitly  introduces  one  of  the 
dramatic  personages,  and  the  real  performance  commences.  The  play 
being  thus  opened,  is  carried  forward  in  scenes  and  acts  j  each  scene 
being  marked  by  the  entrance  of  one  character  and  the  exit  of  another. 
The  dramatis  personae  are  divided  into  three  classes  —  the  inferior 
characters  (mca),  who  are  said  to  speak  Prakrit  in  a  monotonous 
unaccented  tone  {anudditoJctyd) ;  the  middling  {madhyama) ;  and  the 
superior  (pradJidna).  These  latter  are  to  speak  Sanskrit  with  accent 
and  expression  (uddttoktyd).  The  commencement  of  a  new  act,  like 
that  of  the  whole  piece,  is  often  marked  by  an  introductory  monologue 
or  dialogue  spoken  by  one  or  more  of  the  dramatis  personae,  and  called 
Vishkambha  or  Praveidka.  In  this  scene  allusion  is  made  to  events 
supposed  to  have  occurred  in  the  interval  of  the  acts,  and  the  audience 
is  prepared  to  take  up  the  thread  of  the  story,  which  is  then  skilfully 

1  The  fact  that  scarcely  a  single  work  in  Sanskrit  literature  is  com- 
menced without  a  prayer  to  some  god,  is,  as  Professor  Banerjea  has 
remarked,  a  testimony  to  the  universal  sentiment  of  piety  animating 
the  Hindi!  race. 


474  INDIAN    WISDOM. 

carried  on  to  the  concluding  scene.  The  piece  closes,  as  it  began,  with 
a  prayer  for  national  prosperity,  addressed  to  the  favourite  deity,  and 
spoken  by  one  of  the  principal  personages  of  the  drama. 

Although  in  the  conduct  of  the  plot,  and  tlie  delinea- 
tion of  character,  Hindu  dramatists  show  considerable 
skill,  yet  in  the  plot  itself,  or  in  the  story  on  which  it 
is  founded,  they  rarely  evince  much  fertility  of  invention. 
The  narrative  of  Rama's  adventures  and  other  well-known 
fictions  of  Hindu  mythology  are  constantly  repeated. 
Love,  too,  according  to  Hindu  notions,  is  the  subject  of 
most  of  their  dramas.  The  hero  and  heroine  are  generally 
smitten  with  attachment  for  each  other  at  first  sight, 
and  that,  too,  in  no  very  interesting  manner.  By  way 
of  relief,  however,  an  element  of  life  is  introduced  in 
the  character  of  the  VidushaJca  or  'jester,'  who  is  the 
constant  companion  of  the  hero ;  and  in  the  young 
maidens,  who  are  the  confidential  friends  of  the  heroine, 
and  soon  become  possessed  of  her  secret.  By  a  curious 
regulation,  the  jester  is  always  a  Brahman ;  yet  his 
business  is  to  excite  mirth  by  being  ridiculous  in  person, 
age,  and  attire.  Strictly  he  should  be  represented  as 
grey-haired,  humpbacked,  lame,  and  ugly.  He  is  a  species 
of  bufi'oon,  who  is  allowed  full  liberty  of  speech,  being 
himself  a  universal  butt.  His  attempts  at  wit,  which  are 
rarely  very  successful,  and  his  allusions  to  the  pleasures 
of  the  table,  of  which  he  is  a  confessed  votary,  are  absurdly 
contrasted  with  the  sententious  solemnity  of  the  despairing 
hero,  crossed  in  the  prosecution  of  his  love-suit.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  shrewdness  of  the  heroine's  confidantes 
never  seem  to  fail  them  under  the  most  trying  circum- 
stances ;  while  their  sly  jokes  and  innuendoes,  their  love 
of  fun,  their  girlish  sympathy  with  the  progress  of  the 
love-affair,  their  warm  afi'ection  for  their  friend,  heighten 
the  interest  of  the  plot,  and  contribute  to  vary  its 
monotony. 


THE   DRAMAS.  475 

Let  me  now  introduce  a  few  remarks  on  certain  well- 
known  plays,  some  of  which  have  been  already  mentioned. 
And  first  with  regard  to  the  earliest  extant  Sanskrit 
drama — the  Mric-chakatihd  or  '  Clay-cart.' 

This  was  attributed  (probably  out  of  mere  flattery)  to  a  royal  author, 
king  S'udraka,  who  is  said  to  have  mgned  in  the  first  or  second  century 
B.C.  Its  real  author  is  unknown,  and  its  exact  date  is,  of  course,  un- 
certain. According  to  Professor  Weber,  so  much  at  least  may  be 
affirmed,  '  that  it  was  composed  at  a  time  in  which  Buddhism  was 
flourishing  in  full  vigour.'  Some,  indeed,  may  be  inclined  to  infer  from 
the  fact  of  its  describing  a  Sramana  or  Buddhist  ascetic  as  appointed 
to  the  head  of  the  Viharas  or  monasteries,  that  one  hundred  years  after 
Christ  is  too  early  an  epoch  to  allow  for  the  possibility  of  representing 
Buddhism  as  occupying  such  a  position  in  India.  At  any  rate,  the  date 
of  this  drama  ought  not  to  be  placed  before  the  first  century  of  our 
era.i  The  play  is  in  ten  acts,  and  though  too  long  and  tedious  to  suit 
European  theatrical  ideas,  has  nevertheless  considerable  dramatic  merit, 
the  plot  being  ingeniously  developed,  and  the  interest  well  sustained 
by  a  rapid  succession  of  stirring  incidents  and  picturesquely  diversified 
scenes  of  every-day  life.  In  fact,  its  pictures  of  domestic  manners  and 
descriptions  of  the  natural  intercourse  of  ordinary  men  and  women, 
followed  by  the  usual  train  of  social  evils,  make  it  more  interesting 
than  other  Sanskrit  dramas,  which,  as  a  rule,  introduce  too  much  of 
the  supernatural,  and  abound  in  overwrought  poetical  fancies  unsuited 
to  occidental  minds. 

I  now  give  an  epitome  of  this  interesting  drama,  omitting 
the  underplot,  which  is  not  essential  to  the  unity  of  the 
play,  thougli  ingeniously  interwoven  with  it.^ 

1  Professor  Lassen  assigns  it  to  about  150  after  Christ. 

2  In  composing  this  epitome  from  Professor  Stenzler's  edition  of  the 
text,  I  am  bound  to  state  that  I  have  made  free  use  of  Professor  H.  H. 
Wilson's  translation  of  the  Mric-ehakatiha,  to  which,  as  well  as  to 
Professor  Stenzler's  edition,  I  am  under  the  greatest  obligations.  Pro- 
fessor Wilson's  translation  is  executed  with  a  spirit  and  power  which 
could  only  be  displayed  by  a  writer  himself  gifted  with  poetical  and 
dramatic  genius.  Nevertheless,  although  I  have  made  use  of  many  of 
his  expressions,  I  have  not  always  ventured  to  depart  so  widely  as  he 
has  done  from  the  original  text  in  giving  my  own  translation. 


4/6  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

The  first  scene  represents  a  court  in  front  of  Carn-datta's  house. 
His  friend  Maitreya,  who,  although  a  Brahman,  acts  the  part  of 
a  sort  of  jovial  companion,  and  displays  a  disposition  of  mixed 
shrewdness  and  simplicity,  laments  Oaru-datta's  fallen  fortunes, 
caused  by  his  too  great  liberality.     Caru-datta  replies  thus : — 

Cdru.     Think  not,  my  friend,  I  mourn  departed  wealth ; 

One  thing  alone  torments  me,  that  my  guests 

Desert  my  beggared  house,  like  bees 

That  swarm  around  the  elephant,  when  dews 

Exhale  from  his  broad  front ;  but  quickly  leave 

His  dried-up  temples  when  they  yield  no  sweets. 
Maitreya.     The  sons  of  slaves  !     These  guests  you  speak  of  are  always 
ready  to  make  a  morning  meal  off  a  man's  property, 
/  Odru.     It  is  most  true,  but  I  bestow  no  thought 

On  my  lost  property ;  as  fate  decrees 

Wealth  comes  and  goes,  but  this  is  torture  to  me 

That  friendships  I  thought  firm  hang  all  relaxed 

And  loose,  when  poverty  sticks  closest  to  me. 

From  poverty,  'tis  but  a  step  to  shame — 

From  shame,  to  loss  of  manly  self-respect ; 

Then  comes  disdainful  scorn,  then  dark  despair 

O'erwhelms  the  mind  with  melancholy  thoughts. 

Then  reason  goes,  and  last  of  all  comes  ruin. 

Oh  !  poverty  is  source  of  every  ill. 
Mait.     Ah  well,  cheer  up  !     Let's  have  no  more  of  these  woebegone 
memories.     What's  lost  can't  be  recovered. 

Cdru.     Good  !  I  will  grieve  no  more.     Go  you,  my  friend. 

And  offer  this  oblation,  just  prepared, 

Unto  the  gods,  and  mothers  of  us  all. 
Mait.     Kot  I. 
6dru.     And  why  not,  pray  ? 

Mait.  Why,  what's  the  use,  when  the  gods  you  have  worshipped 
have  done  nothing  for  you  ? 

Udru.     Friend,  speak  not  thus,  for  worship  is  the  duty 

Of  every  family ;  the  gods  are  honoured 

By  offerings,  and  gratified  by  acts 

Of  penance  and  restraint  in  thought  and  word. 

Therefore  delay  not  to  present  the  oblation. 
Mait.     I  don't  intend  to  go ;  send  some  one  else. 
Cdru.     Stay  quiet  then  for  a  little,  till  I  have  finished 

My  religious  meditation  and  prayer. 


THE   DRAMAS.  ,  477 

They  are  supposed  here  to  retire,  and  a  voice  is  heard  behind 

the  scenes — 

Stop  !  Vasanta-sena,  stop ! 

The  heroine  of  the  play  now  appears  in  front  of  Caru-datta's 
house  pursued  by  the  king's  worthless  but  wealthy  brother-in-law, 
called  Samsthanaka,'^  who  is  an  embodiment  of  everything  vicious 
and  mean,  in  exact  contrast  to  Caru-datta. 

Samsth.  Stop  !  Vasanta-sena,  stop  !  Why  do  you  run  away  ?  Don't 
be  alarmed  !  I  am  not  going  to  kill  you.  My  poor  heart  is  on  fire 
with  love,  like  a  piece  of  meat  placed  ou  a  heap  of  burning  coals. 

Vas.     Noble  sir,  I  am  only  a  weak  woman. 

SamstJi.     That  is  just  why  I  don't  intend  murdering  you. 

Vas.     Why,  then,  do  you  pursue  me  t     Do  you  seek  my  jewels  ? 

Samsth.     No,  I  only  seek  to  gain  your  affections. 

At  this  point  the  frightened  Vasanta-sena  discovers  that  she  is 
close  to  Caru-datta's  house.  He  is  not  only  loved  by  her,  but 
greatly  respected  as  a  man  of  honour,  and  under  cover  of  the 
evening  darkness,  now  supposed  to  have  supervened,  she  slips 
into  the  courtyard  of  his  house  by  a  side- door,  and  hides  herself. 
A  companion  who  is  with  the  king's  brother  now  counsels  him  to 
desist  from  following  her  by  remarking — 

/       An  elephant  is  bound  by  a  chain, 

A  horse  is  curbed  by  a  bridle  and  rein ; 
But  a  woman  is  only  held  by  her  heart — 
If  you  can't  hold  that,  you  had  better  depart. 

Samsthanaka,  however,  forces  his  way  into  Caru-datta's  house, 
and  there  finding  Caru-datta's  friend  and  companion,  Maitreya, 
thus  addresses  him  : — 

Take  this  message  to  Oaru. — Vasanta-sena  loves  you,  and  has 
taken  refuge  in  your  house.  If  you  will  deliver  her  up,  you  shall  be 
rewarded  by  my  everlasting  friendship ;  if  not,  I  shall  remain  your 
enemy  till  death.  Give  this  message,  so  that  I  may  hear  you  from 
the  neighbouring  terrace ;  refuse  to  say  exactly  what  I  have  told  you 
and  I  will  crush  your  head  as  I  would  a  wood-apple  beneath  a  door. 

He  then  leaves  the  stage. 

Maitreya  accordingly  delivers  the  message.      Soon  afterwards 

1  We  shall  sometimes  speak  of  him  as  the  king's  brother. 


478  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

the  heroine  Vasanta-sena  ventures  into  the  presence  of  Caru- 
datta,  asks  pardon  for  intruding  into  his  house,  requests  him  to 
take  charge  of  a  golden  casket  containing  her  ornaments  as  a 
deposit  left  in  trust,  and  solicits  his  friend's  escort  back  to  her 
own  house. 

Maitreya  is  too  much  alarmed  to  accompany  her,  so  Caru-datta 
himself  escorts  Vasanta-sena  home. 

So  far  is  an  epitome  of  the  first  act. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  second  act  a  gambler  is  introduced 
running  away  from  the  keeper  of  a  gaming-house  named  Mathura, 
and  another  gambler,  to  whom  the  first  gambler  has  lost  money, 
who  are  both  pursuing  him. 

ist  Gambler.  The  master  of  the  tables  and  the  gamester  are  at  my 
heels ;  how  can  I  escape  them  t  Here  is  an  empty  temple ;  I  will  enter 
it  walking  backwards,  and  pretend  to  be  its  idol. 

Mathura.  Ho !  there !  stop  thief !  A  gambler  has  lost  ten  Suvarnas, 
and  is  running  o£E  without  paying.     Stop  him,  stop  him  ! 

2nd  Gambler.  He  has  run  as  far  as  this  point ;  but  here  the  track 
is  lost. 

Math.  Ah  !  I  see,  the  footsteps  are  reversed ;  the  rogue  has  walked 
backwards  into  this  temple  which  has  no  image  in  it. 

They  enter  and  make  signs  to  each  other  on  discovering  the 
object  of  their  search,  who  pretends  to  be  an  idol  fixed  on  a 
pedestal. 

2nd  Gambler.     Is  this  a  wooden  image,  I  wonder  ? 

Math.  No,  no,  it  must  be  made  of  stone,  I  think.  (So  saying,  they 
shake  and  pinch  him.)  Never  mind,  sit  we  down  here  and  play  out 
our  game.     {They  commence  playing.) 

1st  Gambler.  (Still  acting  the  image,  but  looking  on  and  with  difficulty 
restraining  his  loish  to  join  in  the  game — Aside.)  The  rattling  of  dice  is 
as  tantalizing  to  a  penniless  man  as  the  sound  of  drums  to  a  dethroned 
monarch ;  verily,  it  is  sweet  as  the  note  of  a  nightingale. 

2nd  Gambler.     The  throw  is  muie,  the  throw  is  mine  ! 

Math.     No,  no,  it  is  mine,  I  say. 

ist  Gambler.  (Forgetting  himself  and  jumping  off  his  pedestal.)  No, 
I  tell  you  it  is  mine. 

2nd  Gambler.     We've  caught  him  ! 

Math.     Yes,  rascal,  you're  caught  at  last;  hand  over  the  Suvarnas. 

id  Gambler.     Worthy  sir,  I'll  pay  them  in  good  time. 


THE   DRAMAS.  479 

Math.     Hand  them  over  this  very  minute,  I  say.     {They  heat  him.) 

ist  Gambler.  (Aside  to  2nd  Gambler.)  I'll  pay  you  half  if  you  will 
forgive  me  the  rest. 

27id  Gambler.     Agreed. 

1st  Gambler.  (Aside  to  Math.)  I'll  give  you  security  for  half  if 
you  will  let  me  off  the  other  half. 

Math.     Agreed. 

ist  Gambler.     Then  good  morning  to  you,  sirs,  I'm  off. 

Math.  Hullo  !  stop  there,  where  are  you  going  so  fast ;  hand  over 
the  money. 

ist  Gambler.  See  here,  my  good  sirs,  one  has  taken  security  for 
half,  and  the  other  has  let  me  off  another  half.  Isn't  it  clear  I  have 
nothing  to  pay. 

Math.  No,  no,  my  fine  fellow ;  my  name  is  Mathura,  and  I'm  not 
such  a  fool  as  you  take  me  for.  Don't  suppose  I'm  going  to  be  cheated 
out  of  my  ten  Suvarnas  in  this  way.     Hand  them  over,  you  scoundrel. 

Upon  that  they  set  to  work  beating  the  unfortunate  gambler, 
whose  cries  for  help  bring  another  gamester  who  happens  to  be 
passing  to  bis  rescue.  A  general  scuffle  now  takes  place,  and  in 
the  midst  of  the  confusion  the  first  gambler  escapes.  In  his  flight 
he  comes  to  the  house  of  Vasanta-sena,  and  finding  the  door  open, 
rushes  in.  Vasanta-sena  inquires  who  he  is  and  what  he  wants. 
He  then  recites  his  story,  and  makes  known  to  her  that  having 
been  once  in  the. service  of  Caru-datta,  and  having  been  discharged 
by  him  on  account  of  his  reduced  circumstances,  he  has  been 
driven  to  seek  a  livelihood  by  gambling.  The  mention  of  Caru- 
datta  at  once  secures  Vasanta-sena's  aid,  and  the  pursuers  having 
now  tracked  their  fugitive  to  the  door  of  her  house,  she  sends 
them  out  a  jewelled  bracelet  which  satisfies  their  demands,  and 
they  retire.  The  gambler  expresses  the  deepest  gratitude,  hopes 
in  return  to  be  of  use  to  Vasanta-sena  at  some  future  time,  and 
announces  his  intention  of  abandoning  his  disreputable  mode  of 
life  and  becoming  a  Buddhist  mendicant. 

The  third  act  opens  with  a  scene  inside  Caru-datta's  house.  The 
time  is  supposed  to  be  night.  Caru-datta  and  Maitreya  are  absent 
at  a  concert.  A  servant  is  preparing  their  sleeping-couches,  and 
commences  talking  to  himself  thus: — 

A  good  master  who  is  kind  to  his  servants,  even  though  he  be  poor, 
is  their  delight ;  while  a  harsh  fellow  who  is  always  finding  fault  and 
has  nothing  but  his  money  to  be  proud  of,  is  a  perpetual  torment  from 


480  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

moming  to  night.  "Well,  well !  one  can't  alter  nature ;  an  ox  can't  be 
kept  out  of  a  field  of  corn,  and  a  man  once  addicted  to  gambling 
can't  be  induced  to  leave  off.  My  good  master  has  gone  to  a  concert. 
I  must  await  his  return ;  so  I  may  as  well  take  a  nap  in  the  hall. 

Meanwhile  Caru-datta  and  Maitreya  come  back,  and  the  servant 
delivers  Vasanta-sena's  golden  casket,  saying  that  it  is  his  turn  to 
take  charge  of  it  by  night.     They  now  lie  down. 

Mait.     Are  you  sleepy  ? 

Caru.     Yes ; 

I  feel  inconstant  sleep,  with  shadowy  form 
Viewless  and  wayward,  creep  across  my  brow 
And  weigh  my  eyelids  down ;  her  soft  approach 
Is  like  Decay's  advance,  which  stronger  grows. 
Till  it  has  mastered  all  our  faculties. 
And  life  is  lost  in  blank  unconsciousness. 

The  whole  household  is  soon  buried  in  slumber,  when  a  thief 
named  Sarvilaka  is  seen  to  approach. 

His  soliloquy,  while  he  proceeds  to  accomplish  his  design  of 
breaking  into  the  house,  is  curious,  as  showing  that  an  Indian 
burglar's  mode  of  operation  in  ancient  times  differed  very  little 
from  that  now  in  fashion.  Moreover,  it  appears  that  the  whole 
practice  of  housebreaking  was  carried  on  by  professional  artists 
according  to  certain  fixed  rules  and  principles,  which  a  master  of 
the  science,  named  Yogadarya,  had  embodied  in  a  kind  of  'Thieves' 
Manual'  for  the  better  training  of  his  disciples.  It  is  evident, 
too,  that  the  fraternity  of  thieves,  burglars,  and  rogues  had  a 
special  presiding  Deity  and  Patron  in  India,  much  in  the  same 
way  as  in  ancient  Greece  and  Eome. 

It  may  be  noted  also,  as  still  more  curious,  that  the  particular 
burglar  here  introduced  is  represented  as  a  Brahman,  that  he  is 
made  to  speak  the  learned  language,  Sanskrit,  and  to  display 
acquaintance  with  Sanskrit  literature,  while  all  the  subordinate 
characters  in  Indian  dramas,  including  women  of  rank,  are  repre- 
sented as  speaking  one  or  other  of  the  provincial  dialects  called 
Prakrit.     Here  is  part  of  the  burglar's  soliloquy  : — 

I  advance  creeping  stealthily  along  the  ground,  like  a  snake  wriggling 
out  of  its  worn-out  skin,  making  a  path  for  my  operations  by  the  sheer 
force  of  my  scientific  craft,  and  artfully  constructing  an  opening  just 
big  enough  to  admit  my  body  with  ease. 


THE   DRAMAS.  48  I 

This  friendly  night  which  covers  all  the  stars 
With  a  thick  coat  of  darkness,  acts  the  part 
Of  a  kind  mother,  shrouding  me,  her  son. 
Whose  valouf^  is  displayed  in  night  assaults 
Upon  my  neighbours,  and  whose  only  dread 
Is  to  be  pounced  upon  by  royal  watchmen. 

Good  !  I  have  made  a  hole  in  the  garden-wall,  and  am  now  in  the 
midst  of  the  premises.  Now  for  an  attack  on  the  four  walls  of  the 
house  itself. 

Men  call  this  occupation  mean,  which  thrives 

By  triumphing  o'er  sleeping  enemies. 

This,  say  they,  is  not  chivalry  but  burglary ; 

But  better  far  reproach  with  independence. 

Than  cringing  service  without  liberty  : 

And  did  not  Aswatthainan  long  ago 

O'erpower  in  night-attack  his  slumbering  foe  1  ^ 

Then  follows  a  little  of  the  burglar's  plain  prose : — 

Where  shall  I  make  my  breach  ?  Ah  1  here's  a  rat-hole — this  is  the 
very  thing  we  disciples  of  the  god  Skanda  hail  as  the  best  guide  to 
our  operations,  and  the  best  omen  of  success.  Here,  then,  I  must 
begin  my  excavation,  that's  clear ;  but  how  shall  I  proceed  ?  The 
golden  -  speared  god  has  taught  four  methods  of  making  a  breach, 
namely, — pulling  out  baked  bricks,  cutting  through  unbaked  ones  ; 
soaking  a  mud  wall  with  water,  and  boring  through  one  made  of  wood. 
This  wall  is  evidently  of  baked  bricks,  so  they  must  be  pulled  out. 
Now  for  the  shape  of  the  hole.  It  must  be  carved  according  to  some 
orthodox  pattern — Shall  it  be  like  a  lotus-blossom,  the  sun,  a  crescent, 
a  lake,  a  triangle,  or  a  jar  ?  I  must  do  it  cleverly,  so  that  to-morrow 
morning  people  may  look  at  my  handiwork  with  wonder,  and  say  to 
each  other,  '  None  but  a  skilled  artist  could  have  done  this  ! '  The  jar- 
shape  looks  best  in  a  wall  of  baked  bricks.  Be  it  so ;  now,  then,  to 
work  !  Reverence  to  the  golden-speared  god,  Karttikeya,  the  giver  of 
all  boons !     Reverence  to  Yogadarya,  whose  chief  disciple  I  am,  and 

^  This  is  an  allusion  to  Karttikeya  or  Skanda.  The  God  of  War 
was  the  patron  of  burglars,  probably  from  the  fact  that  excavations, 
mining  operations,  and  the  making  of  breaches  in  walls  are  often 
resorted  to  in  Eastern  warfare  as  in  the  present  day.  Professor  H. 
H.  Wilson  states  that  modern  thieves  worship  some  of  the  forms  of 
Durga. 

2  H 


482  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

who  was  so  pleased  with  his  pupil  that  he  gave  me  a  magical  pigment, 
which,  when  spread  over  my  body,  prevents  any  police-officer  from 
catching  sight  of  me  and  any  weapons  from  harming  my  limbs.  Ah  ! 
what  a  pity !  I  have  forgotten  my  measuring-line.  Never  mind,  I 
can  use  my  Brahmanical  cord — a  most  serviceable  implement  to  all 
Brahmans,  especially  to  men  of  my  profession.  It  serves  to  measure 
a  wall,  or  to  throw  round  ornaments  which  have  to  be  drawn  from  their 
places,  or  to  lift  the  latch  of  a  door,  or  to  bind  up  one's  finger  when 
bitten  by  insects  or  snakes.  And  now  to  commence  measuring. 
Good  !  the  hole  is  exactly  the  right  size  ;  only  one  brick  remains  !  Ah  ! 
botheration  !  I  am  bitten  by  a  snake ;  I  must  bind  up  my  finger  and 
apply  the  antidote ;  that's  the  only  cure.  Now  I  am  all  right  again. 
Let  me  first  peep  in.  What !  a  light  gleams  somewhere  !  Never  mind  ! 
the  breach  being  perfect,  I  must  creep  in.  Reverence  to  Karttikeya  ! 
How  now  !  two  men  asleep  !  Are  they  really  asleep,  or  only  shamming? 
If  they  are  shamming,  they  won't  bear  the  glimmer  of  this  lamp  when 
passed  over  their  faces ;  they  are  fast  asleep,  I  believe ;  their  breathing 
is  regular ;  their  eyes  are  firmly  closed,  their  joints  are  all  relaxed, 
and  their  limbs  protrude  beyond  the  bed.  What  have  we  here  ?  Here 
are  tabours,  a  lute,  flutes,  and  books ;  why,  I  must  have  broken  into 
the  house  of  a  dancing-master  j  I  took  it  for  the  mansion  of  a  man  of 
rank.     I  had  better  be  off. 

Maitreya  here  calls  out  in  his  sleep — 

Master,  I  am  afraid  some  thief  is  breaking  into  the  house ;  take  you 
charge  of  the  golden  casket. 

Sarvil.  What !  does  he  see  me  ?  Shall  I  have  to  kill  him  1  No,  no, 
it's  all  right ;  he's  only  dreaming  and  talking  in  his  sleep.  But  sure 
enough,  he  has  hold  of  a  casket  of  jewels  wrapped  up  in  an  old  bathing- 
dress.  Very  good  !  I  will  relieve  him  of  his  burden ;  but  no,  it's  a 
shame  to  take  the  only  thing  the  poor  creature  seems  to  possess ;  so 
I'll  be  off  without  more  ado. 

Mait.  My  good  friend,  if  you  loon't  take  the  casket,  may  you  incur 
the  curse  of  disappointing  the  wishes  of  a  cow  and  of  a  Brahman. 

Sarvil.  The  wishes  of  a  cow  and  a  Brahman  !  These  are  much  too 
sacred  to  be  opposed ;  so  take  the  casket  I  must. 

Accordingly  he  helps  himself  to  the  casket,  and  proceeds  to 
make  good  his  escape. 

The  noise  he  makes  in  going  out  rouses  its  inmates,  and  they 
discover  that  the  house  has  been  robbed.  Caru-datta  is  greatly 
shocked  at  the  loss  of  Vasanta-sena's  casket,  which  had  been 
deposited  with  him  in  trust.     He  has  only  one  valuable  thing  left 


THE   DRAMAS.  483 

— a  necklace  or  string  of  jewels  forming  part  of  the  private  pro- 
perty of  his  wife.  This  he  sends  by  Maitreya  to  Vasanta-sena  as 
a  substitute  for  the  casket. 

The  fourth  act  commences  with  a  scene  in  Vasanta-sena's  house. 
The  burglar  ^arvilaka  is  seen  to  approach,  but  this  time  with  no 
burglarious  designs.  It  appears  that  he  is  in  love  with  Vasanta- 
sena's  slave-girl,  and  hopes  to  purchase  her  freedom  by  offering 
as  a  ransom  the  stolen  casket  of  jewels,  being  of  course  ignorant 
that  he  is  offering  it  to  its  owner. 

As  he  advances  towards  the  house,  he  thus  soliloquizes  :  — 

I  have  brought  blame  and  censure  on  the  night, 

I've  triumphed  over  slumber,  and  defied 

The  vigilance  of  royal  watchmen,  now 

I  imitate  the  moon,  who  when  the  night 

Is  closing,  quickly  pales  beneath  the  rays 

Of  the  ascending  sun,  and  hides  himself. 

I  tremble,  or  I  run,  or  stand  aside, 

Or  seek  deliverance  by  a  hundred  shifts. 

If  haply  from  behind  some  hurried  step 

Appears  to  track  me,  or  a  passer-by 

Casts  but  a  glance  upon  me ;  every  one 

Is  viewed  by  me  suspiciously,  for  thus 

A  guilty  conscience  makes  a  man  a  coward, 

Affrightening  him  with  his  unrighteous  deeds. 

On  reaching  the  house,  he  sees  the  object  of  his  affections — the 
female-slave  of  Vasanta-sena.  He  presents  her  with  the  casket, 
and  begs  her  to  take  it  to  her  mistress,  and  request  in  return 
freedom  from  further  service.  The  servant-girl,  on  seeing  the 
casket,  recognizes  the  ornaments  as  belonging  to  her  mistress. 
She  then  reproaches  her  lover,  who  is  forced  to  confess  how  they 
came  into  his  possession,  and  to  explain  that  they  were  stolen 
entirely  out  of  love  for  her.  The  altercation  which  ensues  leads 
him  to  make  some  very  disparaging  remarks  on  the  female  sex 
generally.  Here  is  a  specimen  of  his  asperities,  which  are  some- 
what softened  down  in  the  translation : — 

A  woman  will  for  money  smile  or  weep 
According  to  your  will ;  she  makes  a  man 
Put  trust  in  her,  but  trusts  him  not  herself. 
Women  are  as  inconstant  as  the  waves 
Of  ocean,  their  affection  is  as  fugitive 


4^4  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

As  streak  of  sunset  glow  upon  a  cloud. 
They  cling  with  eager  fondness  to  the  man 
Who  yields  them  wealth,  which  they  squeeze  out  like  sap 
Out  of  a  juicy  plant,  and  then  they  leave  him. 
Therefore  are  men  thought  foolish  who  confide 
In  women  and  in  fortune,  for  their  windings 
Are  like  the  coils  of  serpent  nymphs,  insidious. 
Well  is  it  said,  you  cannot  alter  nature  ; 
'    The  lotus  grows  not  on  the  mountain-top, 
Asses  refuse  to  bear  a  horse's  burden. 
He  who  sows  barley  reaps  not  fields  of  rice ; 
Do  what  you  will,  a  woman  will  be  woman. 

After  other  still  more  caustic  aspersions,  the  thief  Sarvilaka 
and  his  lover  make  up  their  differences,  and  it  is  agreed  between 
them  that  the  only  way  out  of  the  difiSculty  is  for  him  to  take  the 
casket  to  Vasanta-sena,  as  if  he  were  a  messenger  from  Caru-datta^ 
sent  to  restore  her  property.  This  he  does ;  and  Vasanta-sena, 
who,  unknown  to  the  lovers,  has  overheard  their  conversation, 
astonishes  Sarvilaka  by  setting  her  slave-girl  free,  and  permitting 
her  to  become  his  wife  ;  thus  affording  a  practical  refutation  of 
his  charge  against  women  of  selfishness  and  want  of  generosity. 

Soon  after  the  departure  of  the  lovers  an  attendant  announces 
the  arrival  of  a  Brahman  from  Caru-datta.  This  turns  out  to  be 
Maitreya,  who  is  honoured  by  an  introduction  into  the  private 
garden  attached  to  the  inner  apartments  of  Yasanta-sena's  house. 
His  passage  through  the  courts  of  the  mansion,  no  less  than  seven 
in  number,  is  made  an  occasion  for  describing  the  interior  of  the 
splendid  residence  which  a  Hindi!  lady  of  wealth  and  fashion  might 
be  supposed,  allowing  for  a  little  play  of  the  imagination,  to 
occupy. 

The  description  affords  a  striking  picture  of  Indian  life  and 
manners,  which  to  this  day  are  not  greatly  changed.  The  account 
of  the  courtyards  will  remind  those  who  have  seen  Pompeii  of 
some  of  the  houses  there,  and  will  illustrate  the  now  universally 
received  opinion  of  the  common  origin  of  Hindiis,  Greeks,  and 
Eomans.  Of  course  the  object  of  Maitreya's  visit  to  Vasanta-sena 
is  to  confess  the  loss  of  the  casket,  and  to  request  her  acceptance 
of  the  string  of  jewels  from  Caru-datta  as  a  compensation.  The 
good  man  in  his  simplicity  expects  that  she  will  politely  decline 
the  costly  present  tendered  by  Caru-datta  as  a  substitute  for  her 


THE   DRAMAS.  485 

far  less  valuable  casket  of  ornaments ;  but,  to  his  surprise  and 
disgust,  she  eagerly  accepts'  tbe  proffered  compensation,  and  dis- 
misses iiim  with  a  few  complimentary  words,  intending,  however, 
as  it  afterwards  appears,  to  make  the  acceptance  of  Caru-datta's 
compensation  an  excuse  for  going  in  person  to  his  house,  that  she 
may  see  him  once  again  and  restore  to  him  with  her  own  hand 
both  the  necklace  and  casket. 

The  fifth  act  opens  with  a  scene  in  Caru-datta's  garden.  A 
heavy  thunderstorm  is  supposed  to  be  gathering,  when  Maitreya 
enters,  salutes  daru-datta,  and  informs  him  of  the  particulars  of 
his  interview  with  Vasanta-sena.  The  rain  now  begins  to  descend 
in  torrents,  when  a  servant  arrives  to  announce  that  Vasanta-sena 
is  waiting  outside.     On  hearing  this,  Maitreya  says : — 

What  can  she  have  come  for  ?  Oh  !  I  know  what  she  wants.  She 
considers  the  casket  worth  more  than  the  necklace  of  jewels,  and  so  she 
wants  to  get  the  balance  out  of  you. 

Gdru-datta.     Then  she  shall  go  away  satisfied. 

Meanwhile  some  delay  occurs  in  admitting  Vasanta-sena,  which 
is  made  an  occasion  for  introducing  a  dialogue  between  her  and 
her  attendant,  in  the  course  of  which  they  are  made  to  describe 
very  poetically  the  grandeur  of  the  approaching  storm,  the  sudden 
accumulation  of  dense  masses'  of  threatening  clouds,  the  increasing 
gloom  followed  by  portentous  darkness,  the  terrific  rolling  of 
thunder,  the  blaze  of  blinding  lightning,  the  sudden  outburst  of 
rain,  as  if  the  very  clouds  themselves  were  falling,  and  the  effect 
of  all  this  upon  the  animals,  some  of  which,  such  as  the  peacocks 
and  storks,  welcome  the  strife  of  elements  with  their  shrillest  cries. 
In  her  descriptions  of  the  scene,  Vasanta-sena  speaks  Sanskrit, 
which  is  quite  an  unusual  circumstance,  and  an  evidence  of  her 
superior  education — (no  good  sign,  however,  according  to  Eastern 
ideas) — the  female  characters  in  Indian  dramas  being  supposed 
to  be  incapable  of  speaking  anything  but  the  ordinary  provincial 
Prakrit.^     Vasanta-sena  is  ultimately  admitted  to  the  presence  of 

1  There  is  a  suitableness  in  this,  however,  when  it  is  remembered  that 
Prakrit  words  are  to  Sanskrit  what  Italian  is  to  Latin.  Harsh  con- 
sonants are  often  softened  off  and  compound  ones  are  simplified. 
Piombo  certainly  comes  more  suitably  from  female  lips  than  plumbum, 
and  Sa-undala  than  S'akuntala. 


486  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Oaru-datta,  and  before  returning  the  necklace  practises  a  little 
playful  deception  upon  him  as  a  set-off  against  that  tried  upon 
herself.  She  pretends  that  the  string  of  pearls  sent  to  her  by 
Caru-datta  has  been  accidentally  lost  by  her;  she  therefore  pro- 
duces a  casket  which  she  begs  him  to  accept  in  its  place.  This, 
of  course,  turns  out  to  be  the  identical  casket  which  the  thief  had 
carried  off  from  Caru-datta's  house.  In  the  end,  the  whole  matter 
is  explained,  and  both  casket  and  necklace  are  given  over  to  Caru- 
datta,  and  the  storm  having  now  increased  in  violence,  Vasanta- 
sena,  to  her  great  delight,  is  obliged  to  accept  the  shelter  of  his 
roof  and  is  conducted  to  his  private  apartments.  This  brings  five 
acts  of  the  drama  to  a  close. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  sixth  act  Vasanta-sena  is  supposed 
to  be  at  Caru-datta's  house  waiting  for  a  covered  carriage  which  is 
to  convey  her  away.  While  the  vehicle  is  preparing,  Caru-datta's 
child,  a  little  boy,  comes  into  the  room  with  a  toy-cart  made  of 
clay.  He  appears  to  be  crying,  and  an  attendant  explains  that 
his  tears  are  caused  by  certain  childish  troubles  connected  with 
his  clay-cart,  which  has  ceased  to  please  him  since  his  happening 
to  see  one  made  of  gold  belonging  to  a  neighbour's  child.  Upon 
this,  Vasanta-sena  takes  off  her  jewelled  ornaments,  places  them 
in  the  clay-cart,  and  tells  the  child  to  purchase  a  golden  cart  with 
the  value  of  the  jewels  as  a  present  from  herself.  While  this  is 
going  on,  the  carriage  which  is  to  convey  her  away  is  brought  up 
to  the  door,  but  is  driven  off  again  to  fetch  some  cushions  acci- 
dentally forgotten  by  the  driver.  Meanwhile  an  empty  carriage 
belonging  to  Samsthanaka — the  worthless  brother-in-law  of  the 
king — which  is  on  its  way  to  meet  him  at  an  appointed  place  in 
a  certain  garden  called  Pushpa-karandaka,  happens  to  stop  for  a 
moment,  impeded  by  some  obstruction  in  the  road  close  to  the  door 
of  Caru-datta's  house.  Vasanta-sena  having  been  told  that  Caru- 
datta's  carriage  is  ready  and  waiting  for  her,  goes  suddenly  out 
and  jumps  by  mistake  into  the  carriage  of  the  man  who  is  most 
hateful  to  her,  and  the  very  man  who  is  represented  as  persecuting 
her  by  his  attentions  in  the  first  act.  The  driver  of  the  empty 
vehicle,  quite  unaware  of  the  passenger  he  has  suddenly  received, 
and  finding  the  road  now  clear  before  him,  drives  on  to  meet  his 
master.  Soon  afbeirwards  the  empty  carriage  of  Caru-datta  is 
brought  to  the  door,  and  in  connection  with  this  incident  an  im- 
portant part  of  the  underplot  of  the  drama  is  then  introduced. 


THE   DRAMAS.  487 

The  seventh  act  continues  this  underplot,  which,  although  in- 
geniously interwoven  with  the  main  action  of  the  drama,  is  not 
sufficiently  interesting  to  be  worth  following  out  in  this  epitome. 

The  eighth  act  commences  with  a  scene  in  the  Pushpa-karandaka 
garden.  Our  old  friend  the  gambler  of  the  second  act,  who  has 
abjured  his  evil  ways  and  is  now  converted  into  a  Sramana  or 
Buddhist  mendicant,  appears  with  a  wet  garment  in  his  hand. 
He  begins  his  soliloquy  with  some  verses,  of  which  the  following 
is  a  slightly  amplified  translation : — 

Hear  me,  ye  foolish,  I  implore — 
Make  sanctity  your  only  store  ; 
Be  satisfied  with  meagre  fare ; 
Of  greed  and  gluttony  beware ; 
Shun  slumber,  practise  lucubration, 
Sound  the  deep  gong  of  meditation. 
Restrain  your  appetites  with  zeal. 
Let  not  these  thieves  your  merit  steal ; 
Be  ever  storing  it  anew, 
And  keep  eternity  in  view. 
Live  ever  thus,  like  me,  austerely, 
And  be  the  home  of  Virtue  merely. 
Kill  your  five  senses,  murder  then 
Women  and  all  immoral  men. 
Whoever  has  slain  these  evils  seven 
Has  saved  himself,  and  goes  to  heaven  ; 
Nor  think  by  shaven  face  and  head 
To  prove  your  appetites  are  dead ; 
Who  shears  his  head  and  not  his  heart 
Is  an  ascetic,  but  in  part ; 
But  he  whose  heart  is  closely  lopped 
Has  also  head  and  visage  cropped. 

He  then  proceeds  with  his  soliloquy  thus : — 

My  tattered  garment  is  now  properly  dyed  of  a  reddish-yellow  colour. 
I  will  just  slip  into  this  garden  belonging  to  the  king's  brother-in-law, 
wash  my  clothes  in  the  lake,  and  then  make  off  as  fast  as  I  can. 

[A  voice  behind.)    Hollo !  there !  you  wretch  of  a  mendicant,  stop,  stop. 

Mendicant.  Woe's  me  !  here  is  the  king's  brother  himself  coming. 
A  poor  mendicant  once  offended  him,  so  now  whenever  he  sees  another 
like  me,  he  slits  his  nose  and  drags  him  away  like  an  ox.  Where  shall 
I  take  refuge  ?     None  but  the  venerated  Buddha  can  be  my  protector. 


488  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Samsthanaka,  the  king's  brother-in-law,  now  enters  the  gardeji, 
and  laying  hold  of  the  luckless  mendicant,  commences  beating  him. 
A  companion  of  Samsthanaka,  however,  here  interposes,  and  begs 
that  the  mendicant  may  be  released. 

Samsthanaka  then  says : — 

I  will  let  him  go  on  one  condition,  viz.,  that  he  removes  all  the  mud 
from  this  pool  without  disturbing  the  water,  or  else  collects  all  the  clear 
water  in  a  heap  and  then  throws  the  mud  away. 

After  some  wrangling,  and  a  good  deal  of  nonsense  of  this  sort, 
spoken  by  the  king's  brother,  the  mendicant  is  allowed  to  make  off. 
Nevertheless,  he  still  hangs  about  the  precincts  of  the  garden.  In 
the  meantime  the  carriage  containing  Vasanta-sena  approaches. 

Samsth.  (to  Ms  companion).  What  o'clock  is  it  ?  That  driver  of 
mine,  Sthavaraka,  was  ordered  to  be  here  sharp  with  the  carriage,  and 
has  not  yet  arrived.  I  am  dying  with  hunger ;  it  is  mid -day,  and  one 
cannot  stir  a  step  on  foot ;  the  sun  is  in  mid-sky,  and  can  no  more  be 
looked  at  than  an  angry  ape ;  the  ground  is  as  parched  as  the  face  of 
Gandhari  when  her  hundred  sons  were  slain ;  the  birds  seek  shelter 
among  the  branches ;  men  panting  with  heat  hide  themselves  from  the 
sun's  rays  as  well  as  they  can  in  the  recesses  of  their  houses.  Shall  I 
give  you  a  song  to  while  away  the  time  ?  My  voice  is  in  iirst-rate  con- 
dition, for  I  keep  it  so  with  asafoetida,  cumin-seed,  cyperus,  orris-root, 
treacle  and  ginger.     {Sings.) 

The  driver  Sthavaraka  now  enters  with  the  carriage  containing 
Vasanta-sena. 

Samsth.  (continues.)     Oh  !  here  is  the  carriage  at  last. 

On  seeing  it  he  is  about  to  jump  into  the  vehicle,  but  starts 
back  in  alarm,  declaring  that  either  a  thief  or  a  witch  is  inside. 
In  the  end  he  recognizes  Vasanta-sena,  and  in  his  delight  at  having 
secured  the  object  of  his  affection,  kneels  at  her  feet,  in  the  attitude 
of  a  lover.  She  is  at  first  terrified  at  the  mistake  she  has  made, 
then  in  her  anger  and  scorn  spurns  him  with  her  foot.  This  dis- 
dainful treatment  so  enrageg  the  king's  brother-in-law  that  he 
resolves  to  kill  her  on  the  spot.  He  tries  first  to  induce  his  com- 
panion to  put  her  to  death,  but  he  will  not  listen  to  so  scandalous 
a  proposal.     Stopping  his  ears,  he  says : — 

What !  kill  a  woman,  innocent  and  young. 
Our  city's  ornament !  were  I  to  perpetrate 


THE   DRAMAS.  489 

A  deed  so  foul,  who  could  transport  my  soul 
Across  the  stream  that  bounds  the  other  world  ? 
Samsth.     Never  fear.     I'll  make  you  a  raft  to  carry  you  across. 

To  this  his  companion  replies,  quoting  with  a  little  alteration 
from  Manu  :  ^ — 

The  heaven  and  all  ten  quarters  of  the  sky. 
The  moon,  the  light-creating  sun,  the  winds, 
This  earth,  the  spirits  of  the  dead,  the  god 
Of  Justice,  and  the  inner  soul  itself. 
Witness  man's  actions,  be  they  good  or  bad. 
Samsth.     Conceal  her  under  a  cloth,  then,  and  kill  her  under  a  cover. 

His  associate  remaining  firm  in  his  indignant  refusal  to  have 
any  hand  in  the  crime,  Samsthanaka  next  tries  first  by  bribes  and 
then  by  threats  to  force  the  driver  Sthavaraka  to  do  the  deed 
for  him. 

Samsth.  Sthavaraka,  my  good  fellow,  I  will  give  you  golden  bracelets ; 
I  will  place  you  on  a  golden  seat ;  you  shall  eat  all  the  dainties  from 
my  table ;  you  shall  be  chief  of  all  my  servants,  only  do  as  I  bid  you. 

Sthav.    What  are  your  commands  ? 

Smnsth.     Kill  Vasanta-sena. 

Sthdv.  Nay,  sir  ;  forgive  her,  sir ;  her  coming  hither  was  my  fault ; 
I  brought  her  here  in  the  carriage  by  mistake. 

Samsth.     Do  as  I  command  you.     Am  I  not  your  master  ? 
^  Sthdv.    You  are  master  of  my  body,  but  not  of  my  morality.    Pardon 
me,  sir,  I  dare  not  commit  such  a  crime. 

Samsth.     Why  ?     What  are  you  afraid  of  ? 

Sthdv.     Of  futurity. 

Samsth.     Futurity  ?     Who  is  he  ? 

Sthdv.     The  certain  issue  of  our  good  and  evil  deeds. 

Samsth.    Then  you  won't  murder  her  ?    (Begins  heating  Mm.) 

Sthdv.     Beat  me  or  kill  me,  I  will  not  commit  such  a  crime. 

Samsthanaka's  companion  now  interferes  and  says : — 

Sthavaraka  says  well,  he  now  a  slave 
Is  poor  and  lowly  in  condition,  but 
Hopes  for  reward  hereafter,  not  so  those 


See  page  280. 


490  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Who  prosper  in  their  wicked  actions  here, 
Destruction  waits  them  in  another  sphere. 
Unequal  fortune  makes  you  here  the  lord, 
And  him  the  slave,  but  there  't  may  be  invetted, 
He  to  a  lord  and  you  to  slave  converted. 

Smnsfli.  What  a  pair  of  cowards !  One  of  them  is  afraid  of  Injustice, 
and  the  other  of  Futurity.  Well,  I'm  a  king's  brother-in-law,  and  fear 
no  one.     Be  off  out  of  my  way,  you  son  of  a  slave. 

The  slave  Sthavaraka  then  retreats.  The  king's  brother,  by 
pretending  that  the  proposal  to  kill  Vasanta-sena  was  only  a  joke, 
and  by  putting  on  a  show  of  great  affection  for  her,  rids  himself 
next  of  his  companion,  who  would  otherwise  have  defended  her. 
He  then  strangles  Vasanta-sena.  Soon  afterwards  his  companion 
and  the  driver  of  the  carriage,  unable  to  repress  their  fears  for  her 
safety,  return  and  find  her  apparently  dead.  The  king's  brother- 
in-law  horrifies  them  by  confessing  that  he  has  murdered  her. 
After  much  angry  altercation  they  leave  him.  He  then  covers  up 
the  body  with  some  leaves,  and  resolves  to  go  before  a  judge 
and  accuse  Caru-datta  of  having  murdered  Vasanta-sena  for  the 
sake  of  her  costly  ornaments.  Meanwhile  the  Buddhist  mendi- 
cant, having  washed  his  garments,  returns  into  the  garden  and 
finds  the  body  under  a  heap  of  leaves.  He  sprinkles  water  on  the 
face,  and  Vasanta-sena  revives.  He  is  delighted  to  have  the  power 
of  making  some  return  to  his  benefactress,  who  formerly  delivered 
him  from  the  rapacity  of  the  gaming-house  keeper.  He  therefore 
does  all  he  can  to  restore  animation,  and  having  at  last  succeeded, 
places  her  in  a  neighbouring  convent  to  recover. 

The  ninth  act  opens  with  a  scene  in  a  court  of  justice.  The 
judge  before  taking  his  seat  soliloquizes  thus : — 

How  difficult  our  task  !  to  search  the  heart, 

To  sift  false  charges,  and  elicit  truth  ! 

A  judge  must  be  well  read  in  books  of  law, 

Well  skilled  in  tracking  crime,  able  to  speak 

With  eloquence,  not  easily  made  angry, 

Holding  the  scales  impartially  between 

Friends,  kindred  and  opponents ;  a  protector 

Of  weak  and  feeble  men,  a  punisher 

Of  knaves  ;  not  covetous,  having  a  heart 

Intent  on  truth  and  justice ;  not  pronouncing 


THE   DRAMAS.  49! 

Judgment  in  any  case  imtil  the  facts 

Are  duly  weighed,  then  shielding  the  condemned 

From  the  king's  wrath,  and  loving  clemency. 

Samsthanaka,  the  king's  brother,  now  enters  in  a  sumptuous 
dress  and  makes  his  accusation  against  Caru-datta  of  having 
murdered  Vasanta-sena.  It  is  proved  that  Vasanta-sena  was  last 
seen  at  (Jaru-datta's  house.  It  is  also  discovered  that  some  portions 
of  her  hair  and  the  marks  of  her  feet  remain  in  the  Pushpa-karan- 
daka  garden,  which  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  her  body  may  have 
been  carried  off  by  beasts  of  prey.  (Jaru-datta  is  therefore  sum- 
moned, and  as  he  enters  the  court  says  to  himself: — 

The  court-house  looks  imposing ;  it  is  like 

A  sea  whose  waters  are  the  advocates 

Deep  in  sagacious  thought,  whose  waves  are  messengers, 

In  constant  movement  hurrying  to  and  fro, 

Whose  fish  and  screaming  birds  are  vile  informers, 

Whose  serpents  are  attornies'-clerks,  whose  banks 

Are  worn  by  constant  course  of  legal  action. 

The  king's  brother  now  repeats  his  accusation,  but  the  judge 
is, not  inclined  to  believe  in  the  guilt  of  daru-datta,  who  indeed 
makes  his  innocence  clear  to  the  whole  court.  Unhappily,  how- 
ever, just  at  this  moment  his  friend  Maitreya,  who,  by  Oaru-datta's 
request,  is  seeking  for  Vasanta-sena,  that  he  may  restore  to  her  the 
jewels  she  had  placed  in  his  little  son's  clay-cart,  hears  on  his  road 
of  the  accusation  brought  against  his  friend,  hurries  into  the  court 
of  justice,  and  is  so  enraged  with  the  king's  brother  for  accusing 
his  friend  that  he  strikes  him,  and  in  the  struggle  which  ensues  lets 
fall  Vasanta-sena's  jewels.  It  is  admitted  that  these  ornaments  are 
being  brought  from  Oaru-datta's  house,  and  this  is  thought  to  be 
conclusive  evidence  of  his  guilt.  As  a  Brahman  he  cannot  legally 
be  put  to  death ;  ^  but  the  king  is  a  tyrant,  and  although  the  judge 
recommends  banishment  as  the  proper  punishment  under  the  cir- 
cumstances, the  king  pronounces  his  sentence  thus  : — 

Let  Vasanta-sena's  ornaments  be  hung  round  Caru-datta's  neck  ;  let 
him  be  led  by  the  beat  of  drums  to  the  southern  cemetery,  bearing  his 
own  stake,  and  there  let  him  be  put  to  death. 

^  Manu  is  very  precise  about  this ;  but  here  is  a  proof  that  the  laws 
of  Manu  were  rather  theoretical  than  ever  strictly  followed. 


492  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

The  tenth  act  introduces  the  road  leading  to  the  place  of  execu- 
tion. Caru-datta  enters  bearing  the  stake,^  and  attended  by  two 
Candalas  or  low  outcastes,  who  are  sent  to  act  as  executioners. 

One  of  the  executioners  calls  out : — 

Out  of  the  way  1  out  of  the  way  !  Make  room  for  Caru-datta. 
Crowned  with  a  garland  of  oleander  flowers,  and  attended  by  execu- 
tioners, he  approaches  his  end  like  a  lamp  which  has  little  oil  left. 
Now  then,  halt !  beat  the  drum  !  Hark  ye,  good  people  all !  stop  and 
listen  to  the  proclamation  of  the  sentence.  '  This  is  Caru-datta,  son 
of  Sagara-datta,  who  strangled  Vasanta-sena  in  the  Pushpa-karandaka 
garden  for  the  sake  of  her  ornaments,  and  was  caught  with  the  stolen 
property  in  his  possession ;  we  have  orders  to  put  him  to  death,  that 
others  may  be  deterred  from  committing  a  crime  which  both  worlds 
forbid  to  be  perpetrated.' 
Cam.     Alas  !  alas  ! 

Even  my  friends  and  intimate  compeers 

Pass  coldly  by,  their  faces  turned  aside 

Or  hidden  in  their  vestments ;  thus  it  is 

That  in  prosperity,  our  enemies 

Appear  like  friends,  but  in  adversity 

Those  we  thought  friends  behave  like  very  foes. 

The  proclamation  is  repeated  at  intervals  on  the  road  to  the 
place  of  execution,  and  some  delay  is  thus  occasioned.  Meanwhile 
an  affecting  scene  takes  place.  Caru-datta's  little  son  is  brought 
by  Maitreya  to  bid  his  father  farewell,  and  the  executioner 
permits  him  to  approach.  The  boy  can  only  say,  '  Father ! 
Father ! ' 

Caru-datta  embraces  him  and  says  : — 

What  shall  I  give  my  son  as  a  memento  ? 
This  sacred  cord  is  all  I  can  bestow  ; 
It  is  an  ornament  of  Brahmans,  better 
Than  pearls  or  gold — the  instrument  by  which 
Worship  is  paid  to  gods  and  ancestors. 
This  take,  my  son,  and  wear  it  for  my  sake. 

The  child  then  addressing  the  executioner  says : — 
Yile  outcaste,  where  are  you  leading  my  father  ? 

1  The  whole  scene  is  very  curious,  and  suggestive  of  a  comparison 
with  the  Roman  method  of  execution. 


THE   DRAMAS.  493 

Gdru.     Crowned  with  a  garland,  bearing  on  my  shoulder 
The  fatal  stake,  and  deep  within  my  heart, 
Hiding  my  grief,  I  hasten  to  my  grave 
Like  victim  to  the  place  of  sacrifice. 

Execu.     Call  us  not  outcastes.     All  wicked  men,  and  all  who  harm 
the  good,  are  the  only  outcastes. 

Boy.     If  you  are  not  outcastes,  then  why  do  you  kill  my  father  1 

Execu.     'Tis  the  king's  order ;  we  are  not  to  blame. 
L^Boy.     Kill  me  instead,  and  let  my  father  go. 

Execu.     Rather  for  such  a  speech  live  long,  my  boy. 

Gdru.  {bursting  into  tears  and  embracing  his  child). 

L^     This  is  true  wealth — a  child's  devoted  love — 
A  wealth  which  rich  and  poor  enjoy  alike — 
A  balm  to  soothe  an  agitated  heart. 
Better  than  eooHng  sandal  or  TJsira. 

The  child  is  of  course  removed,  but  another  delay  is  caused  by 
Sthavaraka,  who  drove  Vasanta-sena  to  the  garden,  and  who,  as 
cognizant  of  the  real  facts,  had  been  shut  up  by  his  guilty  master, 
the  king's  brother-in-law.  Sthavaraka,  on  hearing  the  noise  of  the 
procession  on  its  way  to  the  place  of  ezecution,  contrives  to  escape 
from  his  prison,  and  rushing  towards  the  executioners,  proclaims 
Caru-datta's  innocence,  and  his  master's  guilt.  Unhappily,  how- 
ever, just  at  this  juncture  his  master  appears  on  the  scene,  and 
declares  that  his  servant  Sthavaraka,  having  been  imprisoned  for 
thieving,  is  unworthy  of  credit,  and  has  made  up  this  accusation 
out  of  spite  and  desire  for  revenge.  Notwithstanding,  therefore, 
the  servant's  repeated  asseverations,  his  statements  are  disbelieved, 
and  his  efforts  to  save  Caru-datta  prove  ineffectual.  The  proces- 
sion and  crowd  now  move  on  to  the  cemetery,  and  Caru-datta's 
condition  seems  altogether  hopeless,  when  just  as  he  is  led  to  the 
stake,  and  the  executioners  are  about  to  perform  their  office,  the 
Buddhist  mendicant  is  seen  forcing  his  way  through  the  crowd, 
leading  a  woman,  who  cries  out,  '  Hold  !  hold  !  I  am  the  miserable 
creature  for  whose  sake  you  are  putting  him  to  deatL'  This,  to 
the  astonishment  of  every  one,  proves  to  be  Vasanta-sena  herself, 
resuscitated  and  restored  to  health,  through  the  instrumentality 
of  the  mendicant.  The  executioners  immediately  release  Caru- 
datta,  and  as  the  king's  brother-in-law  in  utter  confusion  and 
terror  is  observed  to  be  making  off,  they  attempt  to  seize  him. 


494  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

He  appears  likely  to  be  torn  to  pieces  by  the  infuriated  crowd ; 
but  here  Caru-datta  gives  a  crowning  evidence  of  the  generosity 
of  his  character  by  protecting  the  villain  who  had  come  to  feast 
his  eyes  on  the  dying  agonies  of  his  victim.  He  is  actually,  at 
Caru-datta's  intercession,  permitted  to  make  his  escape.  The 
play  ends  in  the  elevation  o£  Oaru-datta  to  rank  and  honour,  in 
the  happiness  of  both  hero  and  heroine,  and  in  the  promotion 
of  the  mendicant  to  the  headship  of  all  the  Viharas  or  Buddhist 
monasteries. 

I  pass  on  to  the  greatest  of  all  Indian  dramatists, 
Kdliddsa.  He  is  represented  by  some  native  authorities 
(though  on  insuflScient  grounds)  to  have  lived  in  the  time 
of  a  celebrated  king,  Vikramaditya,  whose  reign  forms  the 
starting-point  of  the  Hindu  era  called  Samvat,  beginning 
fifty-seven  years  B.C.  This  king  had  his  capital  in  Ujja- 
yini  (Oujein) ;  he  was  a  great  patron  of  literature,  and 
Kalidasa  is  described  as  one  of  the  nine  illustrious  men 
called  the  nine  jewels  of  his  court.  It  is,  however,  more 
probable  that  Kalidasa  lived  and  composed  his  works 
about  the  commencement  of  the  third  century.^  His  well- 
koown  poems  have  already  been  noticed  at  pp.  452-454.^ 
He  only  wrote  three  plays  —  the  Sakuntald,  the  Vik- 
ramorvasi,  and  the  Mdlavihdgnimitra.  Of  these,  the 
Sakuntala,  in  seven  acts,  is  by  far  the  most  celebrated 

1  Professor  Lassen  places  Kalidasa  about  the  year  250  after  Christ. 
Dr.  Bhau  Daji  assigns  him  to  the  reign  of  a  Vikramaditya  in  the 
sixth  century.  Kalidasa  probably  lived  at  Ujjayini,  as  he  describes 
it  with  much  feeling  in  the  Meghardiita,  and  to  this  circumstance 
may  probably  be  traced  his  supposed  connection  with  the  great  Vikra- 
maditya. 

2  Besides  these,  he  is  said  to  have  written  a  poem  called  the  Setu- 
Itmnja  or  Setu-handha,  describing  the  building  of  Rama's  bridge,  and 
written  for  Pravara-sena,  king  of  Ka^mir.  A  work  on  metres,  called 
the  S'ruta-bodha,  is  also  attributed  to  him.  This  last  may  be  by 
another  Kalidasa.  No  doubt  many  works  were  ascribed  to  the  greatest 
Indian  poet,  as  to  the  greatest  Indian  philosopher,  S'an-kara6arya, 
which  they  neither  of  them  wrote. 


THE   DRAMAS.  495 

and  popular.  I  have  endeavoured  in  my  translation 
of  this  beautiful  drama  (sixth,  edition,  published  by 
W.  H.  Allen  &  Co.)  ^  to  give  some  idea  of  the  merits  of  a 
work  which  drew  unqualified  praise  from  such  a  poet  as 
Goethe  in  the  following  words  (Mr.  E.  B.  Eastwick's 
translation) : — 

Wouldst  thou  the  young  year's  blossoms  and  the  fruits  of  its  decline, 
And  all  by  which  the  soul  is  charmed,  enraptured,  feasted,  fed  ? 

Wouldst  thou  the  earth  and  heaven  itself  in  one  sole  name  combine  1 
I  name  thee,  O  S'akoontala  !  and  all  at  once  is  said. 

I  merely  extract  from  my  own  translation  of  the 
Sahuntala  two  passages.  The  following  is  the  hero 
Dushyanta's  description  of  a  peculiar  sensation  to  which 
he  confesses  himself  subject,  and  to  which  perhaps  the 
minds  of  sensitive  persons,  even  in  Western  countries,  are 
not  altogether  strangers  (Act  V.,  Translation,  p.  121)  : — 

Not  seldom  in  our  happy  hours  of  ease, 

When  thought  is  still,  the  sight  of  some  fair  form. 

Or  mournful  fall  of  music  breathing  low, 

^  As  every  Orientalist  knows.  Sir  W.  Jones  was  the  first  to  trans- 
late the  S'akuntala,  but  he  had  only  access  to  the  Bengal  (Bengali) 
recension.  Two  other  recensions  exist,  one  in  the  north-west  (com- 
monly called  the  Devanagari)  and  one  in  the  South  of  India.  The  last 
is  the  shortest,  and  the  Bengal  version  is  the  longest.  The  Devana- 
gari recension,  translated  by  me  into  English,  is  generally  considered 
the  purest.  Nevertheless  Dr.  R.  Pischel  in  a  learned  dissertation 
maintains  that  the  palm  belongs  to  the  Bengali,  and  it  must  be 
admitted  that  in  some  cases  the  Bengal  version  contains  readings 
which  appear  more  likely  to  represent  the  original.  Professor  Boht- 
lingk's  edition  of  the  Devanagari  recension  is  well  known.  My 
edition  of  the  same  recension,  with  literal  translations  of  the  difficult 
passages  and  critical  notes  (published  by  Stephen  Austin  of  Hertford), 
is  now  out  of  print.  Dr.  0.  Burkhard  has  published  a  new  edition 
of  this  recension  with  a  useful  vocabulary.  A  good  edition  of  the 
Bengal  recension  was  prepared  in  Calcutta  by  Pandit  Prem  Chunder 
Tarkabagish,  and  brought  out  in  i860  under  the  superintendence  of 
Professor  E.  B.  Cowell. 


496  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Will  stir  strange  fancies,  thrilling  all  the  soul 
"With  a  mysterious  sadness,  and  a  sense 
Of  vague  yet  earnest  longing.     Can  it  be 
That  the  dim  memory  of  events  long  past, 
Or  friendships  formed  in  other  states  of  being, 
Flits  like  a  passing  shadow  o'er  the  spirit  ? 

Here  is  a  specimen  of  the  poetical  similes  which  occur 
constantly  throughout  the  drama  (Act  V.,  Translation, 
p.  1 29) :  '— 

The  loftiest  trees  bend  humbly  to  the  ground 
Beneath  the  teeming  burden  of  their  fruit ; 
High  in  the  vernal  sky  the  pregnant  clouds 
Suspend  their  stately  course,  and,  hanging  low. 
Scatter  their  sparkling  treasures  o'er  the  earth  : 
And  such  is  true  benevolence ;  the  good 
Are  never  rendered  arrogant  by  riches. 

The  two  other  dramas  composed  by  Kalidasa  are  the 
Vikramorvasl,  '  Urvasi  won  by  valour,'  and  the  Mdla- 
vikdgnimitra,  '  story  of  Malavika  and  Agnimitra,'  the  first 
of  which  is  unequalled  in  poetical  beauty  by  any  other 
Indian  drama  except  the  Sakuntala.  The  Vikramorvasl 
is  in  only  five  acts,  and  its  subject  is  easily  told  : " — ■ 

TJrvasi,  a  nymph  of  heaven — the  heroine  of  the  piece — is  carried 
off  by  a  demon,  and  is  rescued  by  the  hero,  king  Purtiravas,  who, 
of  course,  falls  in  love  with  her.  The  usual  impediments  arise,  caused 
by  the  inconvenient  fact  that  the  king  has  a  wife  already ;  but  in  the 
end  the  nymph  is  permitted  by  the  god  Indra  to  marry  the  mortal 
hero.     Subsequently,  in  consequence  of  a  curse,  Urvasi  becomes  meta- 

1  This  verse  occurs  also  in  Bhartri-hari  II.  62.  He  was  the  author 
of  300  moral,  political,  and  erotic  verses  called  ^rin-gdra-daiaka,  Niti-d°, 
and  VairdgyOrS". 

2  Various  editions  of  this  play  have  been  published ;  one  by  Lenz, 
another  by  myself.  By  far  the  best  edition  is  by  Dr.  Bollensen. 
Professor  H.  H.  Wilson's  spirited  verse  translation  is  well  known. 
A  prose  translation  was  made  by  Professor  B.  B.  Cowell  and  published 
in  1851. 


THE   DRAJVEAS.  497 

morphosed  into  a  plant,  and  Pururavas  goes  mad.  She  is  afterwards 
restored  to  her  proper  form  through  the  efficacy  of  a  magical  gem, 
and  her  husband  recovers  his  reason.  They  are  happily  reunited, 
but  it  is  decreed  that  when  Urvasl's  son  is  seen  by  his  father  Pururavas 
she  is  to  be  recalled  to  heaven.  This  induces  her  to  conceal  the  birth 
of  her  son  Ayus,  and  to  intrust  him  for  some  years  to  the  care  of  a 
female  ascetic.  Accidentally  father  and  son  meet,  and  UrvasI  pre- 
pares to  leave  her  husband;  but  Indra  compassionately  revoke^  the 
decree,  and  the  nymph  is  permitted  to  remain  on  earth  as  the  hero's 
second  wife. 

As  to  the  Mdlavihagnimitra,  which  is  also  rather  a 
short  play  in  five  acts,  the  excellent  German  trauslation 
of  it  by  Professor  Weber  of  Berlin,  published  in  1856, 
and  the  scholarlike  edition  published  in  1869  by  Shankar 
P.  Pandit  of  the  Dekhan  College,^  have  set  at  rest  the 
vexed  question  of  its  authenticity,  by  enabling  the  student 
to  compare  it  with  Kalidasa's  acknowledged  writings. 
So  many  analogies  of  thought,  style,  and  diction  in  the 
Malavikagnimitra  have  been  thus  brought'  to  light,  that 
few  can  now  have  any  doubt  about  the  authorship  of  the 
extant  drama.  According  to  the  statement  in  its  own 
prologue,  it  is  evidently  the  veritable  production  of  the 
author  of  the  Sakuntala  and  Vikramorvasi.  Nevertheless, 
its  inferiority  to  the  two  masterpieces  of  Kalidasa — not- 
withstanding considerable  poetical  and  dramatic  merit, 
and  great  beauty  and  simplicity  of  style— must  be  ad- 
mitted on  all  hands.  Perhaps  this  may  be  accounted  for 
by  supposing  the  Malavikagnimitra  to  have  been  Kali- 
dasa's first  theatrical  composition.  Or  possibly  the  scenes 
in  which  the  dramatic  action  is  laid,  aff'orded  the  poet 
no  opportunity  (as  in  the  other  two  plays)  of  displaying 
his  marvellous  powers  of  describing  the  beauties  of  nature 
and  the  habits  of  animals  in  rural  and  sylvan  retreats. 

1  A   previous    edition   was    published   at    Bonn    in    1840   by   Dr. 

TuUberg. 

2  I 


498  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Its  hero,  kiug  Agnimitra,  is  certainly  a  more  ordinary 
and  strictly  human  character  than  the  semi-mythical 
Dushyanta  and  Pururavas,  and  the  same  may  be  said 
of  its  heroine  Malavika,  as  compared  with  Sakuntala  and 
Urvasi ;  but  the  plots  of  the  three  plays  resemble  each 
other  in  depending  for  their  interest  on  the  successful 
prosecution  of  love-intrigues  under  very  similar  difficulties 
and  impediments. 

In  the  Malavikagnimitra/  king  Agnimitra  (son  of  Pushpamitra, 
founder  of  the  S'un-ga  dynasty  of  Magadha  kings)  falls  in  love  with  a 
girl  named  Malavika — belonging  to  the  train  of  his  queen  Dharini's 
attendants — from  accidentally  seeing  her  portrait.  As  usual,  the  Vidti- 
shaka  is  employed  as  a  go-between,  and  undertakes  to  procure  the  king 
a  sight  of  the  original.  It  happens  that  the  principal  queen,  Dharini, 
has  caused  Malavika  to  be  instructed  in  music,  singing,  and  dancing. 
Hence  in  the  second  act  a  sort  of  concert  (San-glta),  or  trial  of  skill,  is 
arranged,  at  which  Malavika  executes  a  very  difficult  part  in  a  particular 
musical  time — called  the  Madhya-lay a — with  wonderful  brilliancy.  This, 
of  course,  captivates  the  king,  and  destroys  bis  peace  of  mind.  In  spite 
of  the  opposition  of  his  two  queens,  Dharini  and  Iravati,  and  notwith- 
standing other  hindrances,  he  contrives  to  carry  on  an  intrigue  with 
Malavika.  Not  that  he  attempts  to  marry  her  by  unlawful  means,  nor 
even  against  the  wishes  of  his  other  wives.  Polygamy  is,  of  course, 
held  to  be  legitimate  in  the  household  of  Oriental  Rajas.  The  difficulty 
consists  in  conciliating  his  two  queens.  This,  however,  he  contrives  in 
the  end  to  accomplish,  and  their  assent  to  his  union  with  Malavika  is 
at  last  obtained.  In  the  course  of  the  plot  a  Parivrdjikd  or  Buddhist 
female  mendicant  is  introduced,  which  is  regarded  by  Professor  Weber 
as  an  argument  for  the  antiquity  of  the  drama.  In  the  prologue  Bhasa 
and  Saumilla  are  mentioned  as  two  poets,  predecessors  of  Kalidasa. 

I  here  give  an  example  of  a  wise  sentiment  from  the 
prelude.     The    stage-manager,    addressing    the    audience, 


says : 


All  that  is  old  is  not  on  that  account 

Worthy  of  praise,  nor  is  a  novelty 

By  reason  of  its  newness  to  be  censured. 


1  I  have  consulted  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson's  epitome  of  the  play  in 
the  appendix  to  his  Hindu  Theatre. 


THE   DRAMAS.  499 

The  wise  decide  not  what  is  good  or  bad, 
Till  they  have  tested  merit  for  themselves. 
A  foolish  man  trusts  to  another's  judgment. 

I  come  now  to  a  more  modern  Indian  dramatist  named. 
Bhavabhuti  and  surnamed  Srl-Jcantha,  '  wiiose  voice  is 
eloquence.'  His  reputation  is  only  second,  to  that  of 
Kalidasa.  In  the  prelude  to  two  of  his  plays  he  is  de- 
scribed as  the  son  of  a  Brahman  named  Nilakantha  (his 
mother  being  Jatukarni),  who  was  one  of  the  descendants 
of  Kasyapa,  living  in  a  city  called  Padma-pura,  and  a 
follower  of  the  Black  Yajur-veda.  He  is  said  to  have 
been  born  somewhere  in  the  district  Berar,  and  to  have 
flourished  at  the  court  of  Yasovarman,  who  reigned  at 
Kanouj  (Kanya-kubja)  about  a.d.  720.^  Like  Kalidasa, 
he  only  wrote  three  plays.  These  are  called  the  Mdlatl- 
mddhava,  Mahd-vira-carita,  and  Uttara-rdma-carita} 
Of  these  three  the  Malati-madhava,  in  ten  acts,  is  per- 
haps the  best  known  to  English  Sanskrit  scholars.  The 
style  is  more  laboured  and  artificial  than  that  of  Kalidasa's 
plays,  and  some  of  the  metres  adopted  in  the  versification 
are  of  that  complex  kind  which  later  Hindu  poets  delight 
to  employ  for  the  exhibition  of  their  skill.^  In  the  pre- 
lude the  poet  is  guilty  of  the  bad  taste  of  praising  his 
own  composition.  Its  plot,  however,  is  more  interesting 
than  that  of  Kalidasa's  plays  ;  its  action  is  dramatic,  and 
its  pictures  of  domestic  life  and  manners  are  most  valuable, 
notwithstanding  too  free  an  introduction  of  the  preter- 
natural element,  from  which,  as  we  have  seen,  the  Mric- 

1  According  to  Professor  Lassen  he  lived  about  the  year  710.  Kanouj, 
now  in  ruins,  ranks  in  antiquity  next  to  Ayodhya.  It  is  situated  in 
the  North-west,  on  the  Kalinadi,  a  branch  of  the  Ganges,  in  the  district 
of  Furruckabad. 

2  Oarita  is  sometimes  written  taritra. 

8  Colebrooke  especially  mentions  the  Dandaka  metre,  for  an  account 
of  which  see  page  155  of  this  volume. 


500  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

chakatika  is  exceptionally  free.  The  story  of  the  Mdlati- 
Mddhava  has  been  well  epitomized  by  Colebrooke.^  I. 
give  here  but  a  bare  outline  : — 

Two  ministers  of  two  neighbouring  tings  have  agreed  together 
privately  that  their  children,  Madhava  and  Malati,  shall  in  due  time 
marry  each  other.  Unhappily  for  the  accomplishment  of  their  project, 
one  of  the  kings  requires  the  father  of  Malati  to  make  a  match  between 
his  daughter  and  an  ugly  old  court-favourite  named  Nandana.  The 
minister,  fearing  to  offend  the  monarch,  consents  to  sacrifice  his  daughter. 
Meanwhile  Madhava  is  sent  to  finish  his  studies  under  an  old  Buddhist 
priestess  named  Kamandaki,  who  had  been  Malati's  nurse,  and  who 
contrives  that  she  and  Madhava  shall  meet  and  fall  in  love,  though 
they  do  not  at  that  time  make  known  their  mutual  attachment.  Soon 
afterwards  the  king  prepares  to  enforce  the  marriage  of  Malati  with  his 
favourite  Ifandana.  The  news,  when  brought  to  Malati,  makes  her 
desperate.  Another  meeting  takes  place  in  Kamandaki's  garden  be- 
tween her  and  her  lover  Madhava,  who  is  followed  to  the  garden  by  a 
friend,  Makaranda.  During  their  interview  a  great  tumult  and  terrific 
screams  are  heard.  A  tiger  has  escaped  from  an  iron  cage  and  spreads 
destruction  everywhere.  Madayantika,  sister  of  Nandana,  happens  to 
be  passing  and  is  attacked  by  the  tiger.  Madhava  and  Makaranda  both 
rush  to  the  rescue.  The  latter  kills  the  animal  and  thus  saves  Mada- 
yantika, who  is  then  brought  in  a  half-fainting  state  into  the  garden. 
On  recovering  she  naturally  falls  in  love  with  her  preserver  Makaranda. 
The  two  couples  are  thus  brought  together,  and  Malati  afiiances  herself 
there  and  then  to  Madhava.  At  this  very  moment  a  messenger  arrives 
to  summon  Madayantika,  Nandana's  sister,  to  be  present  at  Nandana's 
marriage  with  Malati,  and  another  messenger  summons  Malati  herself 
to  the  king's  palace.  Madhava  is  mad  with  grief,  and  in  despair  makes 
the  extraordinary  resolution  of  purchasing  the  aid  of  evil  demons  by 
going  to  the  cemetery  and  offering  them  living  flesh,  cut  off  from  his 
own  body,  as  food.  The  cemetery  happens  to  be  near  the  temple  of  the 
awful  goddess  Camunda  (a  form  of  Durga),  presided  over  by  a  sorceress 
named  Kapala-kundala  and  her  preceptor,  a  terrible  necromancer, 
Aghora-ghanta.  They  have  determined  on  offering  some  beautiful 
maiden  as  a  human  victim  to  the  goddess.  With  this  object  they  carry 
off  Malati,  before  her  departure,  while  asleep  on  a  terrace,  and  bringing 
her  to  the  temple  are  about  to  kill  her  at  Oamunda's  shrine,  when  her 
cries  attract  the  attention  of  Madhava,  who  is  at  that  moment  in  the 

1  See  Professor  E.  B.  Cowell's  edition  of  his  Essays,  vol.  iL  p.  123. 


THE    DRAMAS.  501 

cemetery,  offering  his  flesh  to  the  demons.  He  rushes  forward,  en- 
counters the  sorcerer  Aghora-ghanta,  and  after  a  terrific  hand-to-hand 
fight  kills  him  and  rescues  MalatI,  who  is  thus  restored  to  her  family. 
The  remainder  of  the  story,  occupying  the  five  concluding  acts,  is  tediously 
protracted  and  scarcely  worth  following  out.  The  preparations  for 
Malati's  marriage  to  Nandana  go  on,  and  the  old  priestess  Kamandaki, 
who  favours  the  union  of  Malati  with  her  lover  Madhava,  contrives 
that,  by  the  king's  order,  the  bridal  dress  shall  be  put  on  at  the  very 
temple  where  her  own  ministrations  are  conducted.  There  she  persuades 
Makaranda  to  substitute  himself  for  the  bride.  He  puts  on  the  bridal 
dress,  is  taken  in  procession  to  the  house  of  Nandana,  and  goes  through 
the  form  of  being  married  to  him.  Nandana,  disgusted  with  the 
masculine  appearance  of  his  supposed  bride,  leaves  Makaranda  in  the 
inner  apartments,  thus  enabling  him  to  effect  an  interview  with  Nan- 
dana's  sister  Madayantika — the  object  of  his  own  affections.  Makaranda 
then  makes  himself  known,  and  persuades  her  to  run  away  with  him  to 
the  place  where  Malati  and  Madhava  have  concealed  themselves.  Their 
flight  is  discovered  ;  the  king's  guards  are  sent  in  pursuit,  a  great  fight 
follows,  but  Makaranda  assisted  by  Madhava  defeats  his  opponents. 
The  bravery  and  handsome  appearance  of  the  two  youths  avert  the  king's 
anger,  and  they  are  allowed  to  join  their  friends  unpunished.  In  the 
midst  of  the  confusion,  however,  Malati  has  been  carried  off  by  the 
sorceress  Kapala-kundala  in  revenge  for  the  death  of  her  preceptor 
Aghora-ghanta.  Madhava  is  again  in  despair  at  this  second  obstacle 
to  his  union,  but  an  old  pupil  of  the  priestess  .Kamandaki,  named 
Saudamini,  who  has  acquired  extraordinary  magical  powers  by  her 
penances,  opportunely  appears  on  the  scene,  delivers  Malati  from  the 
sorceress,  and  brings  about  the  happy  marriage  of  Malati  with  Madhava 
and  of  Madayantika  with  Makaranda. 

The  following  description  of  Madhava's  first  interview 
with  Malati  is  from  the  first  act  :^ — 

One  day  by  curiosity  impelled 
I  sought  the  temple  of  the  god  of  love. 
There  I  roved  to  and  fro,  glancing  around. 
Till  weary  with  my  wandering  I  stood 
Close  to  a  pool  that  laved  a  Vakul  tree 


1  Some  expressions  in  my  version  have  been  suggested  by  Professor 
H.  H.  Wilson's,  but  I  have  endeavoured  to  make  my  own  closer  to  the 
original. 


502  INDIAN    WISDOM. 

In  the  court-yard  and  precincts  of  the  temple. 
The  tree's  sweet  blo.ssoms  wooed  a  swarm  of  bees 
To  cull  their  nectar ;  and  in  idleness,  ' 

To  while  away  the  time,  I  laid  me  down 
And  gathered  round  me  all  the  fallen  flowers 
To  weave  a  garland,  when  there  issued  forth 
Prom  the  interior  fane  a  lovely  maid. 
Stately  her  gait,  yet  graceful  as  the  banner 
Waved  by  victorious  Love  o'er  prostrate  men  ; 
Her  garb  with  fitting  ornaments  embellished 
Bespoke  a  youthful  princess,  her  attendants 
Moved  proudly  as  became  their  noble  rank ; 
She  seemed  a  treasury  of  all  the  graces, 
Or  Beauty's  store-house,  where  collected  shone 
A  bright  assemblage  of  all  fairest  things 
To  frame  a  perfect  form ;  or  rather  was  she 
The  very  guardian  goddess  of  love's  shrine ; 
Or  did  the  great  Creator  mould  her  charms 
From  some  of  Nature's  loveliest  materials — 
The  moon,  the  lotus-stalk,  and  sweetest  nectar  ? 
I  looked  and  in  an  instant  both  my  eyes 
Seemed  bathed  with  rapture  and  my  inmost  soul 
Was  drawn  towards  her  unresistingly. 
Like  iron  by  the  iron-loving  magnet. 

The  other  two  plays  of  Bhava-bhuti,  called  Maha-vira- 
carita  and  Uttara-rdma-carita,  form  together  a  dramatic 
version  of  the  story  of  the  second  Eama  or  Eama-candra, 
as  narrated  in  Valmiki's  Eamayana  and  Kalidasa's  Eaghu- 
vansa. 

The  Mahd-vira-carita,^  in  seven  acts  (often  quoted  iti 
the  Sahitya-darpana  under  the  title  Vira-carita),  drama- 
tizes the  history  of  Eama,  the  great  hero  {mahd-vira), 
as  told  in  the  first  six  Books  of  the  Eamayana,  but  with 
some  variations. 

1  Mr.  John  Pickford,  one  of  my  former  Boden  Scholars,  some  time 
Professor  at  Madras,  has  made  a  translation  of  this  play  from  the 
Calcutta  edition  of  1857,  and  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson  has  given  an 
epitome  of  it  in  the  appendix  to  his  Hindu  Theatre. 


THE   DRAMAS.  S03 

The  author  informs  us  in  the  prologue  that  his  object  in  composing 
the  play  was  '  to  delineate  the  sentiment  (rasa)  of  heroism  (mra,  see  note, 
p.  457)  as  exhibited  in  noble  characters.'  The  marvellous  (adbliuta) 
sentiment  is  also  said  to  be  depicted,  and  the  style  of  the  action  is  called 
Bhdrati.^  The  first  five  acts  carry  the  story  to  the  commencement  of 
the  ponflict  between  Rama  and  Havana  and  between  his  army  and  the 
Rakshasas ;  but  no  fighting  is  allowed  to  take  place  on  the  stage,  and  no 
one  is  killed  before  the  spectators.  Indra  and  his  attendant  spirits  are 
supposed  to  view  the  scene  from  the  air,  and  they  describe  its  progress 
to  the  audience ;  as,  for  example,  the  cutting  off  of  Ravana's  heads,  the 
slaughter  of  the  demons,  the  victory  of  Rama  and  recovery  of  Sita. 
The  seventh  and  last  act  represents  the  aerial  voyage  of  Rama, 
Lakshmana,  Sita,  Yibhishana,  and  their  companions  in  the  celestial  car 
Pushpaka  (once  the  property  of  Ravana)  from  Lan-ka  back  to  Ayodhya. 
As  they  move  through  the  air,  they  descry  some  of  the  scenes  of  their 
previous  adventures,  and  many  poetical  descriptions  are  here  introduced. 
The  oar  at  one  time  passes  over  the  Dandaka  fore.st,  and  even  approaches 
the  sun.  At  length  it  descends  at  Ayodhya.  Rama  and  Lakshmana 
are  re-united  to  Bharata  and  S'atrughna,  and  the  four  brothers  once 
more  embrace  each  other.  Rama  is  then  consecrated  king  by  Vasishtha 
and  Yisvamitra. 

The  Uttara-rdma-carita,'^  in  seven  acts,  continues  the 
narrative  and  dramatizes  the  events  described  in  the 
seventh  Book  or  Uttara-kanda  of  the  Eamayana  (see 
PP-  337^339)-     I  gi"^^  ^  brief  epitome  :  ^ — 

Rama,  when  duly  crowned  at  Ayodhya,  seemed  likely  to  enter  upon 
a  life  of  quiet  enjoyment  with  his  wife.  But  this  would  not  have 
satisfied  the  Hindi!  conception  of  the  impossibility  of  finding  rest  in 
this   world  (compare  p.   412),  nor  harmonized  with   the  idea   of    the 

1  The  word  Bharati  may  perhaps  mean  simply  '  language.'  But  we 
may  note  here  that  the  Sahitya-darpana  enumerates  four  kinds  of  style 
of  dramatic  action  {vritti),  viz.,  r.  the  Kaisilci,  vivacious  and  graceful; 
2.  the  Satvatl  or  Sdttvatl,  abounding  in  descriptions  of  brave  deeds  and 
characterized  by  the  marvellous ;  3.  the  Arabhatl,  supernatural  and  ter- 
rible ;  4.  the  Bharati,  in  which  the  vocal  action  is  mostly  in  Sanskrit. 

2  The  whole  of  this  play  is  translated  in  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson's 
Hindu  Theatre. 

8  I  have  consulted  the  Rev.  K.  M.  Banerjea's  article  in  the  '  Indian 
Antiquary'  for  May  1872. 


504  INDIAN   WISDOM.    , 

pattern  man  Rama,  born  to  suffering  and  self-denial.  We  are  first 
informed  that  the  family-priest  Vasishtha,  having  to  leave  the  capital 
for  a  time  to  assist  at  a  sacrifice,  utters  a  few  words  of  parting  advice 
to  Rama,  thus :  '  Remember  that  a  king's  real  glory  consists  in  his 
people's  welfare.'  Rama  replies  :  '  I  am  ready  to  give  up  everything, 
happiness,  love,  pity — even  Sita  herself — if  needful  for  my  subjects' 
good.'  In  accordance  with  this  promise  he  employs  an  emissary  (named 
Durmukha)  to  ascertain  the  popular  opinion  as  to  his  own  treatment 
of  his  subjects,  and  is  astonished  to  hear  from  Durmukha  that  they 
approve  all  his  conduct  but  one  thing.  They  find  fault  with  him  for 
having  taken  back  his  wife  after  her  long  residence  in  a  stranger's 
house  (para-griJia-vdsa).  In  short,  he  is  told  that  they  still  gossip  and 
talk  scandal  about  her  and  Ravana.  The  scrupulously  correct  and  over- 
sensitive Rama,  though  convinced  of  his  wife's  fidelity  after  her  sub- 
mission to  the  fiery  ordeal  (p.  358),  and  though  she  is  now  likely  to 
become  a  mother,  feels  himself  quite  unable  to  allow  the  slightest  cause 
of  offence  to  continue  among  the  citizens.  Torn  by  contending  feelings, 
he  steals  away  from  his  wife,  while  asleep,  and  directs  Lakshmana  to 
seclude  her  somewhere  in  the  woods.  This  is  the  first  act.  An  interval 
of  twelve  years  elapses  before  the  second  act,  during  which  time  Sita 
is  protected  by  divine  agencies.  In  this  interval,  too,  her  twin  sons, 
Kusa  and  Lava,  are  born  and  entrusted  to  the  care  of  Valmiki,  the 
author  of  the  Ramayana,  who  educates  them  in  his  hermitage.  This 
leads  to  the  introduction  at  the  beginning  of  the  second  act  of  Valmiki's 
stanza  (drawn  from  him  by  his  ^oka  or  sorrow  on  beholding  a  bird,  one 
of  a  pair,  killed  by  a  hunter),  quoted  from  the  Ramayana  (I.  ii.  18), 
where  it  is  said  to  be  the  first  S'loka  ever  invented.  An  incident  now 
occurs  which  leads  Rama  to  revisit  the  Dandaka  forest,  the  scene  of  his 
former  exile.  The  child  of  a  Brahman  dies  suddenly  and  unaccount- 
ably. His  body  is  laid  at  Rama's  door.  Evidently  some  national  sin  is 
the  cause  of  such  a  calamity,  and  an  aerial  voice  informs  him  that  an 
awful  crime  is  being  perpetrated ;  for  a  S'udra,  named  S'ambuka,  is 
practising  religious  austerities  instead  of  confining  himself  to  his  proper 
province  of  waiting  on  the  twice-born  (Manu  I.  91).  Rama  instantly 
starts  for  the  forest,  discovers  S'ambuka  in  the  sacrilegious  act,  and 
strikes  off  his  head.  But  death  by  Rama's  hand  confers  immortality 
on  the  S'udra,  who  appears  as  a  celestial  spirit,  and  thanks  Rama  for 
the  glory  and'  felicity  thus  obtained.  Before  returning  to  Ayodhya, 
Rama  is  induced  to  visit  the  hermitage  of  Agastya  in  the  woods.  Sita 
now  reappears  on  the  scene.  She  is  herself  invisible  to  Rama,  but 
able  to  thrill  him  with  emotions  by  her  touch.  Rama's  distraction 
is  described  with  great  feeling.      '  What  does  this  mean  1 '    he  says 


THE   DRAMAS.  50S 

'  heavenly  balm  seems  poured  into  my  heart ;  a  well-known  touch 
changes  my  insensibility  to  life.  Is  it  Sita,  or  am  I  dreaming  ? '  This 
leads  on  to  the  last  act  of  the  drama.  In  the  end,  husband  and  wife 
are  re-united,  but  "not  ■without  supernatural  agencies  being  again  em- 
ployed, and  not  until  Prithivi,  the  Earth,  who,  it  appears,  had  taken 
charge  of  Sita,  restores  her  to  the  world.  Valmiki '  then  introduces 
Kusa  and  Lava  to  Rama,  who  recognizes  in  them  his  two  sons.  Happi- 
ness is  once  more  restored  to  the  whole  family,  and  the  play  closes. 

"We  may  note  as  remarkable  that  at  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  act 
a  dialogue  takes  place  between  two  young  pupils  of  Valmiki,  who  are 
delighted  because  some  guests,  having  visited  the  hermitage,  afford 
hopes  of  a  feast  at  which  flesh  meat  is  to  constitute  one  of  the  dishes. 
Manu's  rule  (Y.  41 ;  see  p.  250  of  this  volume)  is  cited,  whereby  a 
Madhu-parha  or  offering  of  honey  to  a  guest  is  directed  to  be  accom- 
panied with  a  dish  of  beef  or  veal ;  for  on  these  occasions  householders 
may  kill  calves,  bulls,  and  goats  (vatsatarim  mahoksham  vd  mahdjam  va 
nirvapanti  grilia-medhinah). 

As  a  specimen  of  the  poetry  of  the  play,  I  here  give 
Eama's  description  of  his  love  for  his  wife  (translated  by 
Professor  H.  H.  Wilson) : — 

Her  presence  is  ambrosia  to  my  sight ; 
Her  contact  fragrant  sandal;  her  fond  arms, 
Twined  round  my  neck,  are  a  far  richer  clasp 
Than  costliest  gems,  and  in  my  house  she  reigns 
The  guardian  goddess  of  my  fame  and  fortune. 
Oh  !  I  could  never  bear  again  to  lose  her. 

Two  other  well-known  plays,  the  Ratndvall  and  the 
Mudrd  -  rdhshasa  (both  translated  by  Professor  H.  H. 
Wilson),  ought  to  be  mentioned. 

The  Ratndvall,  or  'jewel-necklace,'  is  a  short  play  in 
four  acts,  attributed  (like  the  Mric-chakatika,  see  p.  475) 
to  a  royal  author,  king  ^rl  Harsha-deva} 


1  This  is  probably  a  different  S^ri  Harsha  from  the  author  of  the 
Naishadlia  or  Naishadhiya  (at  p.  453).  The  Ndgananda  (see  p.  508), 
a  Hindu-Buddhist  drama,  is  attributed  to  the  same  author.  Hindu 
poets  appear  to  have  been  in  the  habit  of  flattering  kings  and  great 
men  in  this  way.     Professor  E.  B.  Cowell  is  inclined  to  assign  the 


So6  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

There  is  nothing  of  the  supernatural  about  this  drama.  It  may  be 
called  a  comedy  in  which  the  characters  are  all  mortal  men  and  women, 
and  the  incidents  quite  domestic.  The  play  is  connected  with  what 
appears  to  have  been  a  familiar  story,  viz.,  the  loves  and  intrigues  of  a 
certain  king  Udayana,  and  Vdsava-dattd,  a  princess  of  TJjjayini.  This 
tale  is  told  in  the  Katha-sarit-sagara.  The  king  is  there  called  Udayana 
(see  the  account  in  Wilson's  Essays,  Dr.  Eost's  edition,  I.  igi),  and  is 
said  to  have  carried  off  Vasava-datta,  who  is  there  the  daughter  of  Canda- 
mahasena,  while  in  the  Eatnavali  she  is  daughter  of  Pradyota,  and  is  not 
said  to  be  a  princess  of  TJjjayini.  The  same  story  (along  wT!;h  the  stories 
of  S'akuntala  and  TJrvasI)  is  alluded  to  towards  the  end  of  the  second  act 
of  the  Malati-madhava,  and  according  to  Professor  Wilson  is  referred 
to  by  Kalidasa  in  the  Megha-duta  when  he  speaks  of  the  Udayana-kafhd 
as  frequently  recited  in  TJjjayini  (verse  32).  Dr.  Pitz-Edward  Hall  has 
shown  in  his  Preface  to  Subandhu's  Vdsava-dattd  that  this  romance  has 
scarcely  any  feature  in  common  with  the  Eatnavali  story  except  the 
name  of  its  heroine.  The  plot  of  the  Eatnavali  resembles  in  its  love- 
intrigues  that  of  the  Vikramorvasi,  Malavikagnimitra,  &c.,  and  in  like 
manner  presents  us  with  a  valuable  picture  of  Hindu  manners  in 
medieval  times.  The  poet  seems  to  have  had  no  scruple  in  borrowing 
ideas  and  expressions  from  Kalidasa.  The  hero  of  the  piece  is  generally 
spoken  of  as  '  the  King,'  or  else  as  Vatsa-rdjah,  king  of  Vatsa — a  country 
or  people  whose  capital  was  KausdmbM.  He  is,  however,  called 
Udayana  at  the  end  of  the  first  act,  and  before  the  play  commences 
he  is  supposed  to  be  already  married  to  Vdsava-dattd.  His  minister's 
name  is  Taugandhardyana  or  Yogandhardyana,  his  Vidushaka  or  jovial 
companion  is  called  Vasantalca,  and  his  general  Riimanvat. 

The  first  scene  introduces  a  curious  description  of  the  sports  and 
practical  jokes  practised  at  the  Spring  festival  (now  called  Holi), 
when  plays  were  generally  acted,  and  still  continue  to  be  performed 
in  some  parts  of  India.  Sdgarikd  (otherwise  called  RatndvaR,  from 
her  jewel -necklace),  a  princess  of  Lan-ka  (Ceylon),  is  accidentally 
brought  to  the  king's  court,  falls  in  love  with  him,  and  paints  his 
picture.  The  king  is,  of  course,  equally  struck  with  her.  His  queen's 
jealousy  is  excited  by  the  discovery  of  the  picture.     She  even  succeeds 

Nagananda  to  a  poet  named  Dhdvalca,  mentioned  in  the  Kavya-prakasa, 
while  he  conjectures  that  Bdna,  the  author  of  the  Kadambari,  may 
have  written  the  RatndvaE,  which  would  place  the  date  of  this  play  (as 
shown  by  Dr.  Fitz-Bdward  Hall)  in  the  seventh  century  of  our  era. 
One  native  commentator  on  the  Kavya-prakasa  asserts  that  DJ^dvaka 
wrote  the  RatndvaE. 


THE   DRAMAS.  507 

in  imprisoning  Sdgarikd  and  putting  fetters  on  her  feet,  and  more 
than  the  ordinary  impediments  threaten  to  stop  the  progress  of  the 
love-affair.  All  difficulties,  however,  are  eventually  removed,  and  the 
play  ends,  as  usual,  by  the  king's  conciliating  his  first  wife  and  gaining 
a  second. 

I  give  one  specimen  of  a  sentiment  uttered  by  the  hero  on  hearing 
of  the  death  of  a  brave  enemy.  He  says :  Mrityur  api  tasya  £dffhyo 
yasya  ripavah  purtisha-hdram  varjiayanti  ;  that  is, 

How  glorious  is  the  death  of  that  brave  man 
Whose  very  enemies  applaud  his  prowess  ! 

The  Mudra-rdhshasa,  or  '  signet-ring  Rakshasa,'  ^  is  by 
Visakha-datta,  and  is  a  political  drama  in  seven  acts, 
attributed  to  the  twelfth  century. 

This  play  is  noteworthy  as  introducing  the  well-known  Candra-gupta, 
king  of  Pataliputra,  who  was  happily  conjectured  by  Sir  W.  Jones  to 
be  identical  with  the  Sandrakottus  described  by  Megasthenes  in  Strabo 
as  the  most  powerful  Raja  immediately  succeeding  Alexander's  death, 
and  whose  date  (about  315  B.C.)  serves  as  the  only  definite  starting- 
point  in  Hindu  chronology.  Another  celebrated  character  is  his 
crafty  minister  Canakya,  the  Indian  Maccliiavelli,  and  writer  on  Niti 
or  '  rules  of  government  and  polity,'  and  the  reputed  author  of  nume- 
rous moral  and  political  precepts  commonly  current  in  India.  He  is 
represented  as  having  slain  king  Nanda  and  assisted  Candra-gupta 
to  the  throne.  The  principal  design  of  the  play  is  to  describe  how 
this  wily  Brahman  Canakya  (also  called  Vishnu-gupta)  effects  a  re- 
conciliation between  a  person  named  Rakshasa,  the  minister  of  the 
murdered  Nanda,  and  the  persons  on  whose  behalf  he  was  killed. 
At  the  beginning  of  Act  VII.  there  is  a  curious  scene  in  which  a 
Candala  or  executioner  leads  a  criminal  to  the  place  of  execution 
(hadhya-sthdna).  The  latter  bears  a  stake  (iula)  on  his  shoulder, 
and  is  followed  by  his  wife  and  child.     The  executioner  calls  out — 

1  If  this  title  Mudrd-rdhshasa  is  a  compound  similar  to  Vikramor- 
vaii  and  Ahhijndna-dakuntalam,  where  there  is  madhyama-pada-lopa, 
it  might  be  translated,  '  Rakshasa  known  by  the  signet-ring ; '  but  it 
may  possibly  be  one  in  which  the  terms  are  inverted.  Some  translate 
it  as  a  Dvandva,  'Rakshasa  and  the  signetring.'  In  the  fifth  act, 
Canakya's  emissary  Siddhartha  enters,  bearing  a  letter  marked  with 
the  signet-ring  of  the  minister  Rakshasa  (amdtyardkshasasya  mudrd- 
Idnchito  lekhah). 


S08  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

'  Make  way,  make  way,  good  people !  let  every  one  who  wishes  to 
preserve  his  life,  his  property,  or  his  family,  avoid  transgressing 
against  the  king  as  he  would  poison.'     (Cf.  Mri<5-<ihakatika,  Act  X.) 

With  regard  to  the  interesting  Hindu- Buddhist  drama 
called  Ndgdnanda  or  'joy  of  the  snake- world,'  I  must 
refer  those  who  wish  for  an  account  of  its  contents  to 
Professor  Cowell's  Preface  prefixed  to  Mr.  Boyd's  recent 
translation  (see  note,  p.  505). 

Some  other  well  -  known  plays  have  been  before 
noticed  : — 

Thus,  for  example,  the  student  will  find  mentioned  at  p.  367  the 
Hanuman-ndtalca,  a  Mahd-ndtaica  in  fourteen  acts ;  ^  the  Bdla-rdmd- 
yana,  a  Mdlid-ndtaka  in  ten  acts,  by  Rdja-ieTchara  (edited  by  Pandit 
Govinda  Deva  S'astri  of  Benares  in  1869);  the  Prasanna-rdghava  in 
seven  acts  (edited  by  the  same  in  1868);  the  Anargha-rdgTiava ;  and 
the  Vem-samJidra  at  p.  392,  note  3.  The  Hdsydrnava,  a  comic  and 
satirical  piece  in  two  acts,  is  described  in  the  appendix  to  Professor 
Wilson's  Hindu  Theatre. 

Before,  however,  taking  leave  of  the  Hindu  Theatre 
I  ought  to  note  a  curious  allegorical  and  philosophical 
play  by  Krishn.a-misra,  who  is  supposed  to  have  lived  in 
the  twelfth  century  of  our  era.  The  play  is  called  Pra- 
bodha  candrodaya,  i.e.,  'rise  of  the  moon  of  (true)  in- 
telligence or  knowledge,'  and  its  dramcCtis  personae 
remind  one  of  some  of  our  old  Moralities  —  acted  in 
England  about  the  time  of  Henry  VHI. — in  which  the 
Virtues  and  Vices  were  introduced  as  persons  for  the 
purpose  of  inculcating  moral  and  religious  truth. 

Thus  in  an  old  English  Morality  called  Eve7-y-man  some  of  the  per- 
sonifications are  —  God,  Death,  Every  -  man.  Fellowship,  Kindred, 
Good-deeds,  Knowledge,  Confession,  Beauty,  Strength,  Discretion.     In 

1  I  possess  an  old  and  valuable  MS.  of  this  play,  which  I  hope 
may  one  day  be  used  in  editing  it.  The  edition  published  in  Calcutta 
by  Maharaja  Kali-krishna  Bahadur,  in  1840,  was  not  from  the  purest 
recension.     It  was  lithographed  at  Bombay  about  ten  years  ago. 


THE   PURANAS.  509 

Hyche-scorner — Contemplation,  Pity,  Imagination,  Free-will.  In  LMsty 
Juventus— Good  Counsel,  Knowledge,  Satan,  Hypocrisy,  Fellowship, 
Abominable  Living,  God's  Merciful  Promises.  Similarly  in  the  Hindi! 
Morality  Prdbodha  -  eandrodaya  we  have  Faith,  Volition,  Opinion, 
Imagination,  Contemplation,  Devotion,  Quietude,  Friendship,  &c.  &c., 
on  one  side ;  Error,  Self-conceit,  Hypocrisy,  Love,  Passion,  Anger, 
Avarice,  on  the  other.  The  two  sets  of  characters  are,  of  course, 
opposed  to  each  other,  the  object  of  the  play  being  to  show  how  the 
former  become  victorious  over  the  latter,  the  Buddhists  and  other 
heretical  sects  being  represented  as  adherents  of  the  losing  side. 

V.   The  Purdnas. 

I  must  now  advert  briefly  to  the  eighteen  Puranas. 
They  constitute  an  important  department  of  Sanskrit 
literature  in  their  connection  with  the  later  phases  of 
Brahmanism,  as  exhibited  in  the  doctrines  of  emana- 
tion, incarnation,  and  triple  manifestation  (tri-murti,  see 
pp.  321-324),  and  are,  in  real  fact,  the  proper  Veda  of 
popular  Hinduism,  having  been  designed  to  convey  the 
exoteric  doctrines  of  the  Veda  to  the  lower  castes  and 
to  women.  On  this  account,  indeed,  they  are  sometimes 
called  a  fifth  Veda  (see  note  2,  p.  371).  Their  name 
Purdna  signifies  '  old  traditional  story,'  and  the  eighteen 
ancient  narratives  to  which  this  name  is  applied  are 
said  to  have  been  compiled  by  the  ancient  sage  Vydsa 
(also  called  Krishna  -  dvaipayana  and  Badarayana),  the 
arranger  of  the  Vedas  and  Maha-bharata  (p.  371,  with 
note  2),  and  the  supposed  founder  of  the  Vedanta  philo- 
sophy (p.  10 1,  note  2).  They  are  composed  chiefly  in  the 
simple  Sloka  metre  (with  occasional  passages  in  prose), 
and  are,  like  the  Maha-bharata,  very  encyclopedical  in 
their  range  of  subjects.  They  must  not,  however,  be 
confounded  with  the  Itihasas,  which  are  properly  the 
histories  of  heroic  men,  not  gods,  though  tbese  men  were 
afterwards  deified.  The  Puranas  are  properly  the  history 
of  the  gods  themselves,  interwoven  with  every  variety  of 


5IO  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

legendary  tradition  on  other  subjects.  Viewing  them  as 
a  whole,  the  theology  they  teach  is  anything  but  simple, 
consistent,  or  uniform.  While  nominally  tritheistic— to  suit 
the  three  developments  of  Hinduism  explained  at  p.  324 — 
the  religion  of  the  Puranas  is  practically  polytheistic 
and  yet  essentially  pantheistic.  Underlying  their  whole 
teaching  may  be  discerned  the  one  grand  doctrine  which 
is  generally  found  at  the  root  of  Hindu  theology,  whether 
Vedic  or  Puranic — pure  uncompromising  pantheism.  But 
interwoven  with  the  radically  pantheistic  and  Vedantic 
texture  of  these  compositions,  tinged  as  it  is  with  other 
philosophical  ideas  (especially  the  San-khyan  doctrine  of 
Prakriti),  and  diversified  as  it  is  with  endless  fanciful 
mythologies,  theogonies,  cosmogonies,  and  mythical  genea- 
logies, we  have  a  whole  body  of  teaching  on  nearly  every 
subject  of  knowledge.  The  Puranas  pretend  to  give  the 
history  of  the  whole  universe  from  the  most  remote  ages, 
and  claim  to  be  the  inspired  revealers  of  scientific  as  well 
as  theological  truth.  They  dogmatize  on  physical  science, 
geography,  the  form  of  the  earth  (see  p.  420),  astronomy, 
chronology ;  and  even  in  the  case  of  one  or  two  Puranas, 
anatomy,  medicine,  grammar,  and  the  use  of  military 
weapons.  All  this  cycle  of  very  questionable  omniscience 
is  conveyed  in  the  form  of  leading  dialogues  (connecting 
numerous  subordinate  dialogues),  in  some  of  which  a  well- 
known  and  supposed  divinely  inspired  sage,  like  Parasara, 
is  the  principal  speaker,  and  answers  the  inquiries  put  to 
him  by  his  disciples ;  while  in  others,  Loma-harshana  (or 
Eoma-harshana),  the  pupil  of  Vyasa,  is  the  narrator,  being 
called  Suta,  that  is,  'Bard'  or  'Encomiast,'  as  one  of  an 
order  of  men  to  whom  the  reciting  of  the  Itihasas  and 
Puranas  was  especially  intrusted.-^ 

1  A  Suta  was  properly  the  charioteer  of  a  king,  and  was  the  son  of 
a  Kshatriya  by  a  Brahmani.     His  business  was  to  proclaim  the  heroic 


THE   PTJRANAS.  S  I  I 

Strictly,  however,  every  Parana  is  supposed  to  treat  of 
only  five  topics  : — i.  The  creation  of  the  universe  {sarga) ; 
2.  Its  destruction  and  re-creation  (prati-sarga) ;  3.  The 
genealogy  of  gods  and  patriarchs  (vansa) ;  4.  The  reigns 
and  periods  of  the  Manus  (manv-antara) ;  5.  The  history 
of  the  solar  and  lunar  races  of  kings  [vansdnucarita) } 


actions  of  the  king  and  his  ancestors,  as  he  drove  his  chariot  to  battle, 
or  on  state  occasions.  He  had  therefore  to  know  by  heart  the  epic 
poems  and  ancient  ballads,  in  which  the  deeds  of  heroes  were  celebrated, 
and  he  had  more  to  do  with  reciting  portions  of  the  Maha-bharata  and 
Itihasas  than  with  the  Puranas.  In  Maha-bh.  I.  1026  it  is  said  that 
Sauti  or  Ugra-sravas  (son  of  the  Siita  Loma-harshana)  had  learnt  to 
recite  a  portion  of  the  Maha-bharata  from  his  father.  Generally  it  is 
declared  that  Loma-harshana  learnt  to  recite  it  from  Vaisampayana,  a 
pupil  of  Vyasa. 

1  Certainly  the  recounting  of  royal  genealogies  is  an  important  part 
of  the  Puranas.  It  consists,  however,  of  a  dry  chronicle  of  names. 
Similar  chronicles  were  probably  written  by  the  early  Greek  historians, 
called  Koyoypdipoi  (Thuc.  I.  21);  but  these  developed  into  real  histories, 
which  the  Indian  never  did.  It  was  the  duty  of  bards  to  commit  their 
masters'  genealogies  to  memory,  and  recite  them  at  weddings  or  great 
festivals,  and  this  is  done  by  Bhats  ia  India  to  this  day.  In  Ramayana 
I.  Ixx.  ig,  however,  it  is  the  family-priest  Vasishtha  who,  before  the 
marriage  of  the  sons  of  Dasaratha  with  the  daughters  of  Janaka,  recites 
the  genealogy  of  the  solar  line  of  kings  reigning  at  Ayodhya.  This 
dry  genealogy  of  a  race  of  kings  is  sometimes  called  Ajiuvankt.  Several 
similar  catalogues  of  the  lunar  race  (Soma- vansa  or  Aila-vansa),  who 
first  reigned  at  Pratishthana,  and  afterwards  at  Hastina-pura,  are  found 
in  the  Maha-bharata  (see  especially  one  in  prose,  with  occasional  S'lokas 
called  Anuvania-ilolta  interspersed,  Maha-bh.  I.  3759,  &c.).  Professor 
Lassen  gives  valuable  lists  at  the  end  of  vol.  i.  of  his  Ind.  Alt.  It  must 
be  noted  that  both  the  solar  and  lunar  races  have  collateral  lines  or 
branches.  A  principal  branch  of  the  solar  consisted  of  the  kings  of 
Mithila  or  Videha,  commencing  with  the  bad  king  Nimi,  who  perished 
for  his  wickedness  (Manu  VII.  41).  His  son  was  Mitlii  (who  gave  his 
name  to  the  city),  and  his  son  was  Janaka  (so  called  as  the  real  '  father 
of  the  race') ;  the  great  and  good  Janaka,  learned  in  Brahmanical  lore, 
being,  it  appears,  a  descendant  of  this  first  Janaka.  The  lunar  race, 
to  which  the  Pandavas  belonged,  had  two  principal  branches,  that  of 


5  I  2  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

On  this  account  the  oldest  native  lexicographer  Amara- 
sinha  (see  p.  i6i),  whose  date  was  placed  by  Professor 
H.  H.  Wilson  at  the  end  of  the  first  century  B.C.,  gives 
the  word  Panca-lahshana,  '  characterized  by  five  subjects,' 
as  a  synonym  of  Purana.  No  doubt  some  kind  of  Puranas 
must  have  existed  before  his  time,  as  we  find  the  word 
mentioned  in  the  Grihya-stitras  of  Asvalayana  (see  p.  195 
of  this  volume),  and  in  Manu  (see  p.  207,  note  i,  and 
p.  249  of  this  volume).  The  fact  that  very  few  of  the 
Puranas  now  extant,  answer  to  the  title  Panca-lakshana, 
and  that  the  abstract  given  in  the  Matsya-purana  of  the 
contents  of  all  the  others,  does  not  always  agree  with  the 
extant  works,  either  in  the  subjects  described,  or  number 
of  verses  enumerated,^  proves  that,  like  the  Eamayana 
and  Maha-bharata,  they  were  preceded  by  more  ancient 
works.  In  all  probability  there  were  Mula  or  original 
Puranas,  as  there  once  existed  also  a  Mula  Eamayana  and 
Mula  Maha-bharata.  Indeed,  in  the  Bhagavata-purana 
XII.  vii.  7,  six  M-ula-samhitah  or  original  collections  are 
specially  declared  to  have  been  taught  by  Vyasa  to  six 
sages,  his  pupils ;  and  these  six  collections  may  have 
formed  the  bases  of  the  present  works,  which,  as  we  shall 
presently  see,  are  arranged  in  three  groups  of  six.  At 
any  rate,  it  appears  certain  that  the  Puranas  had  an  an- 
cient groundwork,  which  may  have  been  in  some  cases 


the  Yddavas  (commencing  witli  Yadu,  and  comprising  under  it  Arjuna 
KdHamrya  and  Krislina),  and  that  of  the  kings  of  Magadha.  The 
Yadavas  had  also  a  collateral  line  of  kings  of  Ka&,  or  VdrdTUXsl.  For 
the  solar  and  lunar  genealogies  see  pp.  344  and  375  of  this  volume. 

1  Thus  the  Bhavishya-purdna  ought  to  consist  of  a  revelation  of  future 
events  by  Brahma,  but  contains  scarcely  any  prophecies.  This  work 
is  rather  a  manual  of  religious  observances;  and  the  commencement, 
which  treats  of  creation,  is  little  else  than  a  transcript  of  Manu.  We 
may  note,  however,  that  S'an-kara  A6arya  often  quotes  the  extant 
Yishnu-purana. 


THE   PURANAS.  S13 

reduced  by  omissions  or  curtailments,  before  serving  as 
a  basis  for  the  later  superstructures.  This  groundwork 
became  more  or  less  overlaid  from  time  to  time  by  accre- 
tions and  incrustations  ;  the  epic  poems,  and  especially  the 
Maha-bharata,  constituting  the  principal  sources  drawn 
upon  for  each  successive  augmentation  of  the  original 
work.  Nevertheless,  it  must  always  be  borne  in  mind 
that  the  mythology  of  the  Puranas  is  more  developed  than 
that  of  the  Maha-bharata,  in  which  (as  properly  an  Itihasa, 
and  therefore  only  concerned  with  kings  and  heroic  men) 
Vishnu  and' Siva  are  often  little  more  than  great  heroes, 
and  are  not  yet  regarded  as  rival  gods.  In  medieval 
times,  when  the  present  Puranas  were  compiled,  the  rivalry 
between  the  worshippers  of  Vishnu  aud  Siva  was  in  full 
force — the  fervour  of  their  worship  having  been  stimu- 
lated by"-  the  Brahmans  as  an  aid  to  the  expulsion  of 
Buddhism — and  the  Puranas  themselves  were  the  expres- 
sion and  exponent  of  this  phase  of  Hinduism.  Hence 
the  great  antiquity  ascribed  to  the  present  works  by  the 
Hindiis,  although  it  may  have  had  the  effect  of  investing 
them  with  a  more  sacred  character  than  they  could  other- 
wise have  acquired,  is  not  supported  by  either  internal  or 
external  evidence.  The  oldest  we  possess  can  scarcely 
date  from  a  period  more  remote  than  the  sixth  or  seventh 
century  of  our  era. 

Of  course  the  main  object  of  most  of  the  Puranas  is,  as 
I  have  already  hinted,  a  sectarian  one.  They  aim  at  exalt- 
ing one  of  the  three  members  of  the  Tri-murti,  Brahma, 
Vishnu,  or  ^iva;  those  which  relate  to  Brahma  being 
sometimes  called  Rdjasa  Puranas  (from  his  own  peculiar 
Guna  rajas)  ;  those  which  exalt  Vishnu  being  designated 
6attvika  (from  his  Guna  sattva) ;  and  those  which  prefer 
^iva  being  styled  Tdmasa  (from  his  Guna  tamas).  The 
reason  for  connecting  them  with  the  three  Gunas  will  be 
understood  by  referring  to  p.  321. 

2  K 


5  1 4  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

I  now  give  the  names  of  the  eighteen  Puranas  according 
to  the  above  three  divisions  : — 

A.  The  Eajasa   Puranas,   or   those  which  relate  to  Brahma,  are, 

1.  Brahma,  2.  Brahmdnda,  3.  Brahma-vaivarta,  4.  Markandeya,  5.  Bha- 
vishya,  6.  Vdmana. 

B.  The  S'attvika  Puranas,  or  those  which  exalt  Vishnu,  are,  i.  Vishnu, 

2.  Bhdgavata,  z^.  Ndrad-iya,  4.  Garuda,  5.  Padma,  6.  Vdrdha.  TJiese 
six  are  usually  ^called  Vaishnava  Puranas. 

C.  The  Tamasa,  or  those  which  glorify  S^iva,  are,  i.  Siva,  2.  Lin-ga, 

3.  Shanda,  4.  Agni,  5.  Matsya,  6.  Kurma.  These  six  are  usually  styled 
S'aiva  Puranas.  For  the  '  Agni,'  an  ancient  Purana  called  '  Vdyu,' 
which  is  probably  one  of  the  oldest  of  the  eighteen,  is  often  substituted. 

Although  it  is  certainly  convenient  to  group  the  eighteen 
Puranas  in  these  three  divisions  in  accordance  with  the 
theory  of  the  Tri-murti  or  triple  manifestation,  it  must 
not  be  supposed  that  the  six  Puranas  in  the  first,  or  Rdjasa 
group,  are  devoted  to  the  exclusive  exaltation  of  Brahma, 
whose  worship  has  never  been  either  general  or  popular 
(see  note  i,  p.  325). 

Though  these  six  Puranas  abound  in  legends  connected  with  the  first 
member  of  the  Triad,  they  resemble  the  other  two  groups  in  encouraging 
the  worship  of  either  Vishnu  or  S'iva,  and  especially  of  Vishnu  as  the 
lover  Krishna.  According  to  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson  some  of  them 
are  even  favourites  with  the  S'aktas  (see  p.  522  of  this  volume),  as 
promoting  the  adoration  of  the  goddess  Durga  or  Kali,  the  personified 
energy  of  S'iva. 

One  of  their  number,  the  Markandeya,  is  (as  Professor 
Banerjea  has  shown  ia  the  Preface  to  his  excellent  edition 
of  this  work)  quite  unseptarian  in  character. 

This  Mdrkandeya-purdna  is,  therefore,  probably  one  of  the  oldest — 
perhaps  as  old  as  the  eighth  century  of  our  era.  Part  of  it  seems  to  be 
devoted  to  Brahma,  part  to  Vishnu,  and  part  consists  of  a  Dem-mdhdtmya 
or  exaltation  of  the  female  goddess.  At  the  commencement  Jaimini, 
the  pupil  of  Vyasa,  addresses  himself  to  certain  sapient  birds  (who  had 
been  Brahmans  in  a  previous  birth)  and  requests  the  solution  of  four 
theological  and  moral  difficulties,  viz.,  i.  Why  did  Vishnu,  himself 
being  nirguna  (see  p.  86),  take  human  form  ?     2.  How  could  Draupadi 


THE   PURANAS.  515 

become  the  common  wife  of  the  five  Pandavas  (see  p.  386,  with  notes)  ? 
3.  Why  had  Bala-rama  to  expiate  the  crime  of  Brahmanicide  committed 
by  him  while  intoxicated  (see  p.  391)?  4.  Why  did  the  five  sons  of 
Draupadi  meet  with  untimely  deaths,  when  Krishna  and  Arjuna  were 
their  protectors  (see  p.  389,  note  2,  and  p.  410)  ? 

Another  of  this  group  of  Puranas,  the  Brahma-vai- 
varta,  inculcates  the  worship  of  the  young  Krishna  (Bdla- 
Tcrishna)  and  his  favourite  Eadha,  now  so  popular  in 
India  ;  from  which  circumstance  this  work  is  justly- 
regarded  as  the  most  modern  of  all  the  Puranas. 

Of  course  it  will  be  inferred  from  the  statement  at 
p.  326  that  the  second  group  of  Puranas — the  Sdttvika 
or  Vaishnava  —  is  the  most  popular.  Of  these  the 
Bhdgavata  and  Vishnu,  which  are  sometimes  called 
Mahd- puranas,  'great  Puranas,'  are  by  far  the  best 
known  and  most  generally  esteemed. 

The  Bhdgavata-purdna,^  in  twelve  Books,  is  perhaps 
the  most  popular  of  all  the  eighteen  Puranas,  since  it 
is  devoted  to  the  exaltation  of  the  favourite  god  Vishnu 
or  Krishna,  one  of  whose  names  is  Bhagavat. 

It  is  related  to  the  Eishis  at  Naimisharanya  by  the  Suta  (see  p.  510), 
but  he  only  recites  what  was  really  narrated  by  the  sage  S'uka,  son  of 
Vyasa,  to  Parikshit,  king  of  Hastina-pura,  and  grandson  of  Arjuna, 
who  in  consequence  of  a  curse  was  condemned  to  die  by  the  bite  of  a 
snake  in  seven  days,  and  who  therefore  goes  to  the  banks  of  the 
Ganges  to  prepare  for  death.  There  he  is  visited  by  certain  sages, 
among  whom  is  S'uka,  who  answers  his  inquiry  (how  can  a  man  best 
prepare  to  die  ?)  by  relating  the  Bhagavata-purana  as  he  received  it 
from  Yyasa. 

Colebrooke  believed  it  to  be  the  work  of  the  grammarian  Vopadeva 
(p.  168  of  this  volume). 

This  Purana  has  been  well  edited  at  Bombay  with  the 
commentary  of  Sridhara-svamin. 

1  A  magnificent  edition  was  commenced  by  Eugfene  Burnouf  at  Paris 
in  the  '  Collection  Orientale,'  but  its  completion  was  prevented  by  that 
great  scholar's  death. 


Sl6  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Its  most  important  Book  is  the  tenth,  which  gives  the  early  life  of 
Krishna.  This  Book  has  its  Hindi  counterpart  in  the  Prem  Sagar, 
and  has  been  translated  into  nearly  all  the  languages  of  India. 

An  epitome  of  this  part  of  the  work  has  already  been 
given  at  p.  332.  As  an  example  of  the  style  of  the 
Puranas  I  here  give  the  text  of  the  story  related  at 
p.  334  of  this  volume.  It  is  condensed  in  Bhdgavata- 
'purdna  X.  Ixxxix.  i,  thus  : — 

Sri-^uka  uvdca  |  Sarasvatyds  tate  rdjann  Rishayah  satram  dsata  \ 
Vitarkah  samahhut  teshdm  trishv  adhiieshu  Jco  mahdn  \\  Tasya  jijndsayd 
te  vai  Bhrigum  Brahma-sutarri  nripa  \  Taj  jnaptyai  preshaydm-dsuh 
so  'bhyagdd  Brahmanah  sabhdm  \\  Na  tasmai  prahvanam  stotram  cahre 
sattva-parlkshayd  \  Tasmai  cukrodha  Bliagavdn  prajvalan  svena  tejasd  \\ 
Sa  dtmany  utthitam  manyum  dtma-jdydtmand  prabhuh  \  Afi^amad 
yathd  vahnivi  sva-yonyd  vdrindtmanah  \\  Tatah  Kaildsam  agamat  sa 
tarn  devo  mdheivarah  \  Parirdbdhum  samdreblia  idthdya  hhrdtaram 
mudd  II  Naicchat  tvam  asy  utpathaga  iti  devai  cukopa  ha  \  Sulam 
udyamya  tarn  hantum  drebhe  tigma-locanah  \\  Patitvd  padayor  Devi 
sdntvaydmdsa  tarn  gird  \  Atho  jagdma  Vaikuntham  yatra  devo  Jandrda- 
nah  II  Aaydnarn  Sriya  utsan-ge  padd  vakshasy  atddayat  \  Tata  utthdya 
Bhagavan  saha  Lalcshinya  satdrn  gatih  \\  Sva-talpdd  avaruhydtha  nandma 
sirasd  munim  \  Ahate  svdgatam  Brahman  nishiddtrdsane  kshanam  \  Ajd- 
natdm  dgatdn  vah  kshantum  arhatha  nah  pirabho  ||  Ativa  komalau  tdta 
caranau  te  mahd-mune  |  Ity  uktvd  vipra-caranau  mardayan  svena  pd- 
nind  \\  Pumhi  sahalokam  mam  loka-pdldnd-ca  mad-gatdn  \  Pddodakena 
bhavatas  tvrthdndrn  tlrtha-kdrind  \\  Adydham  Bhagaval  lakshmyd  dsam 
ekdnta-bhdjanam  \  Vatsyaty  urasi  me  bhutir  hhavat-pdda-hatdnhasah  \\ 

The  above  story  affords  a  good  example  of  the  view 
taken  by  the  Bhagavata  of  the  comparative  excellence 
of  the  three  members  of  the  Tri-miirti. 

In  VIII.  vii.  44,  the  following  sentiment  occurs  : — 

When  other  men  are  pained  the  good  man  grieves — 
Such  care  for  others  is  the  highest  worship 
Of  the  Supreme  Creator  of  mankind. 

Perhaps  the  Vishnu-purdna  as  conforming  most  nearly 
to  the  epithet  Pdnca-lahshana  (see  p.  512),  will  give  the 
best  idea  of  this  department  of  Sanskrit  literature. 


THE   PURANAS.  5  1 7 

It  is  in  six  Books,  and  is,  of  course,  dedicated  to  the  exaltation  of 
Vishnu,  whom  it  identifies  with  the  Supreme  Being.  Book  I.  treats 
of  the  creation  of  the  universe ;  the  peopling  of  the  world  and  the 
descent  of  mankind  from  seven  or  nine  patriarchs,^  sons  of  Brahma ; 
the  destruction  of  the  universe  at  the  end  of  a  Kalpa  (see  p.  330,  note) 
and  its  re-creation  {prati-sarga) ;  and  the  reigns  of  kings  during  the 
first  Manvantara.  Book  II.  describes  the  various  worlds,  heavens, 
hells,  and  planetary  spheres;  and  gives  the  formation  of  the  seven 
circular  continents  and  concentric  oceans  as  described  at  p.  420  of 
this  volume.  Book  III.  describes  the  arrangement  of  the  Vedas, 
Itihasas,  and  Puranas  by  Vyasa,  and  the  institution  and  rules  of 
caste,  in  which  it  follows  and  resembles  Manu.  Book  IV.  gives  lists  of 
kings  and  dynasties.  Book  V.  corresponds  to  Book  X.  of  the  Bhaga- 
vata-purana  and  is  devoted  to  the  life  of  Krishna.  Book  VI.  describes 
the  deterioration  of  mankind  during  the  four  ages,  the  destruction 
of  the  world  by  fire  and  water,  and  its  dissolution  at  the  end  of  a 
Kalpa. 

The  above  is  a  bare  outline  of  tbe  contents  of  this 
Purana.  It  is  encyclopedical,  like  the  others,  and  is  rich 
in  philosophical  speculations  and  curious  legends.  A  pas- 
sage illustrating  the  San-khyan  tone  of  its  philosophy  will 
be  found  quoted  at  p.  91  of  this  volume.  The  great  sage 
Para^ara,  father  of  Vyasa  (p.  375,  note  4),  is  supposed  to 
relate  the  whole  Purana  to  his  disciple  Maitreya.  The 
narrative  begins  thus :  ^ — 

Having  adored  Vishnu,  the  lord  of  all,  and  revered  Brahma  and 
the  rest,  and  done  homage  to  the  Guru,  I  will  relate  a  Purana,  equal 
to  the  Vedas  [Pranamya  Vishnum  viiveiam  Brahmddin  pranipatya  ca  \ 
Gurum  pranamya  vaJcshyami  Purdnam  Veda-sammitam,  I.  3]. 

1  The  seven  patriarchs  or  sages  (saptarshayah,  sometimes  identified 
with  the  seven  stars  of  the  Great  Bear)  were  created  by  Brahma  as 
progenitors  of  the  human  race,  and  are  called  his  mind-born  sons ;  they 
are,  Marici,  Atri,  An-giras,  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu,  and  Vasishtha. 
To  these  two  others  are  added  in  Vishnu-purana  I.  vii.,  viz.,  Dahsha  and 
Bhrigu.     In  Manu  I.  35,  Ndrada  is  also  added,  making  ten. 

2  In  my  translations  I  have  consulted  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson's 
great  work,  but  I  have  had  the  text  of  the  Bodleian  MS.  before  me. 


Sl8  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

The  metre  is  generally  the  simple  Sloka,  with  occasional 
stanzas  in  the  Indra-vajra,  Vansa-sthavila,  &c. 

The  following  is  a  metrical  version  of  the  prayer  of 
Parasara,  addressed  to  Vishnu,  at  the  beginning  of  Book 
I.  2,  (with  which  compare  similar  descriptions  of  the 
Supreme  Being  in  the  Upanishads  and  Bhagavad-gita, 
pp.  43,  131-135  of  this  volume) : — 

Hail  to  thee,  mighty  Lord,  all-potent  Vishnu  ! 

Soul  of  the  Universe,  unchangeable, 

Holy,  eternal,  always  one  in  nature. 

Whether  revealed  as  Brahma,  Hari,  S'iva — 

Creator  or  Preserver  or  Destroyer — 

Thou  art  the  cause  of  final  liberation ; 

Whose  form  is  one,  yet  manifold  ;  whose  essence 

Is  one,  yet  diverse ;  tenuous,  yet  vast ; 

Discernible,  yet  undiscernible; 

Root  of  the  world,  yet  of  the  world  composed  ; 

Prop  of  the  universe,^  yet  more  minute 

Than  earth's  minutest  particles ;  abiding 

In  every  creature,  yet  without  defilement ; 

Imperishable,  one  with  perfect  wisdom. 

There  is  a  curious  story  of  the  churning  of  the  ocean  for 
the  production  of  the  Amrita,  '  ambrosial  food  of  immor- 
tality,' in  Book  I.  9,  (compare  p.  327  of  this  volume). 
It  is  noteworthy  as  differing  considerably  from  that  in 
Eamayana  I.  xlv.  The  passage  represents  Indra  and 
the  gods  as  having  lost  all  their  strength — in  consequence 
of  a  curse  pronounced  on  them  by  the  choleric  sage 
Durvasas — and  so  becoming  subject  to  the  demons.  The 
gods  apply  to  Vishnu  in  their  distress,  and  even  Brahma 
adores  him  in  a  long  hymn.  I  give  a  portion  of  the 
story  metrically,  changing  the  order  of  the  text  in  one 
or  two  places  : — 


1  In  the  original  these  three  attributes  are,   Mula-bhuto  jagatah, 
jaganmayah,  and  ddhdra-bhuto  viivasya. 


THE   PURANAS.  5  1 9 

The.  gods  addressed  the  mighty  Vishnu  thus — 

'  Conquered  in  battle  by  the  evil  demons 

We  fly  to  thee  for  succour,  Soul  of  all, 

Pity  and  by  thy  might  deliver  us.' 

Hari  the  lord,  creator  of  the  world. 

Thus  by  the  gods  implored,  all  graciously 

Replied — '  Your  strength  shall  be  restored,  ye  gods ; 

Only  accomplish  what  I  now  command ; 

Unite  yourselves  in  peaceful  combination 

With  these  your  foes ;  collect  all  plants  and  herbs 

Of  diverse  kinds  from  every  quarter ;  cast  them 

Into  the  sea  of  milk  ;  take  Mandara, 

The  mountain,  for  a  churning-stick,  and  Vasuki, 

The  serpent,  for  a  rope  ;  together  churn 

The  ocean  to  produce  the  beverage — 

Source  of  all  strength  and  immortality — ■ 

Then  reckon  on  my  aid,  I  will  take  care 

Your  foes  shall  share  your  toil,  but  not  partake 

In  its  reward  or  drink  th'  immortal  draught.' 

Thus  by  the  god  of  gods  advised,  the  host 

United  in  alhance  with  the  demons. 

Straightway  they  gathered  various  herbs  and  cast  them 

Into  the  waters,  then  they  took  the  mountain 

To  serve  as  churning-stafF,  and  next  the  snake 

To  serve  as  cord,  and  in  the  ocean's  midst 

Hari  himself,  present  in  tortoise-form. 

Became  a  pivot  for  the  churning-staff. 

Then  did  they  churn  the  sea  of  milk ;  and  first 

Out  of  the  waters  rose  the  sacred  Cow, 

God-worshipped  Surabhi — eternal  fountain 

Of  milk  and  offerings  of  butter ;  next. 

While  holy  Siddhas  wondered  at  the  sight. 

With  eyes  all  rolling.  Varum  uprose — 

Goddess  of  wine.     Then  from  the  whirlpool  sprang 

Fair  Parijata,  tree  of  Paradise,  delight 

Of  heavenly  maidens,  with  its  fragrant  blossoms 

Perfuming  the  whole  world.     Th'  Apsarasas 

Troop  of  celestial  nymphs,  matchless  in  grace, 

Perfect  in  loveliness,  were  next  produced. 

Then  from  the  sea  uprose  the  cool-rayed  moon, 

Which  Maha-deva  seized  ;  terrific  poison 

Next  issued  from  the  waters ;  this  the  snake-gods 


520  rNDIAN   WISDOM. 

Claimed  as  their  own.     Then  seated  on  a  lotus, 
Beauty's  bright  goddess,  peerless  S'ri,  arose 
Out  of  the  waves ;  and,  with  her,  robed  in  white. 
Came  forth  Dhanvantari,  the  gods'  physician. 
High  in  his  hand  he  bore  the  cup  of  nectar — 
Life-giving  draught — longed  for  by  gods  and  demons. 
Then  had  the  demons  forcibly  borne  off 
The  cup,  and  drained  the  precious  beverage. 
Had  not  the  mighty  Vishnu  interposed. 
Bewildering  them,  he  gave  it  to  the  gods ; 
Whereat  incensed  the  demon  troops  assailed 
The  host  of  heaven,  but  they  with  strength  renewed 
Quaffing  the  draught,  struck  down  their  foes,  who  fell 
Headlong  through  space  to  lowest  depths  of  hell. 

The  following  is  part  of  tlie  prayer  of  Mucukunda, 
Book  V.  23  : — 

Lord  of  the  Universe,  the  only  refuge 
Of  living  beings,  the  alleviator 
Of  pain,  the  benefactor  of  mankind, 
Show  me  thy  favour  and  deliver  me 
Prom  evil ;  0  creator  of  the  world, 
Maker  of  all  that  has  been  and  will  be. 
Of  all  that  moves  and  is  immovable. 
Thyself  composed  of  what  possesses  form. 
And  what  is  formless ;  limitless  in  bulk. 
Yet  infinitely  subtle ;  lord  of  all, 
"Worthy  of  praise,  I  come  to  thee  my  refuge, 
Renouncing  all  attachment  to  the  world, 
Longing  for  fulness  of  felicity — 
Extinction  of  myself,  absorption  into  thee. 

The  following  account  of  the  Kali  or  fourth  age  of 
the  world — the  age  of  universal  degeneracy — is  from 
Book  VI.  I  (compare  p.  330,  note  3,  of  this  volume) : — 

Hear  what  will  happen  in  the  Kali  age. 
The  usages  and  institutes  of  caste, 
Of  order  and  of  raijk,  will  not  prevail. 
Nor  yet  the  precepts  of  the  triple  Veda. 
Religion  will  consist  in  wasting  wealth. 
In  fasting  and  performing  penances 


THE   PURANAS.  521 

At  will ;  the  man  who  owns  most  property 

And  lavishly  distributes  it,  will  gain 

Dominion  over  others  ;  noble  rank 

Will  give  no  claim  to  lordship ;  self-willed  women 

Will  seek  their  pleasure,  and  ambitious  men 

Fix  all  their  hopes  on  riches  gained  by  fraud. 

Then  women  will  be  fickle  and  desert 

Their  beggared  husbands,  loving  them  alone 

Who  give  them  money.     Kings  instead  of  guarding 

Will  rob  their  subjects,  and  abstract  the  wealth 

Of  merchants,  under  plea  of  raising  tasses. 

Then  in  the  world's  last  age  the  rights  of  men 

Will  be  confused,  no  property  be  safe, 

No  joy  and  no  prosperity  be  lasting. 

There  are  eighteen  Upa-purdnas  or  'secondary  Puranas,' 
subordinate  to  the  eighteen  Mahd  or  principal  Puranas, 
but  as  they  are  of  less  importance  I  shall  do  little  more 
than  simply  give  their  names  as  follow  : — 

I.  Sanatkumdra ;  2.  Nara-dnha  or  Nri-sinha  ;  3.  Naradiya  or 
Vrihan-naradiya  j  1  4.  ^iva ;  5.  Durvdsasa ;  6.  Kdpila ;  7.  Mdnava  ; 
8.  Av^anasa ;  9.  Varuna ;  10.  Kdlikd ;  11.  Sdmha ;  12.  Nandi ; 
13.  Saura;  14.  Pdrdsara ;  15.  Aditya ;  16.  Maheivara ;  17.  Bhdga- 
vata  (thought  to  be  a  misreading  for  Bhargava)  ;  18.  Vdsishtha. 
Another  list  given  by  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson  varies  a  little,  thus  : 
I.  Sanatkumdra;  2.  Nara-sinha ;  3.  Nandd;  4.  Siva-dharma ;  5.  Dur- 
vdsasa; 6.  Bhavishya  ;  "j.  Kdpila;  8.  Mdnava  ;  (j.Au^anasa;  10.  Brah- 
mdnda;  11.  Varuna;  12.  Kdlikd;  13.  Maheivara;  14.  ^dmba ; 
15.  Saura;  16.  Pdraiara ;  17.  Bhdgavata ;  18.  Kaurma. 

With  regard  to  the  second  or  Ndra-sinha  Upa-purdna  we  have  an 
abstract  of  its  contents  by  Rajendralala  Mitra  in  his  Notices  of  MSS. 
(No.  1020),  whence  it  appears  that  the  general  character  of  these  works 
is  very  similar  to  that  of  the  principal  Puranas.  For  example.  Chapters 
1-5  give  the  origin  of  creation;  6.  the  story  of  Vasishtha;  18.  the 
praises  of  Vishnu;  22.  the  solar  race;  23.  the  lunar  race;  30.  the 
terrestrial  sphere.  That  this  work  was  well  known  at  least  five  hundred 
years  ago  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  Madhava6arya  quotes  from  it. 

1  According  to  Rajendralala  Mitra  this  is  called  Vrihat  to  distinguish 
it  from  the  Naradiya,  one  of  the  Maha-puranas.  He  gives  an  abstract 
of  it  in  No.  1021  of  his  valuable  Notices  of  MSS. 


522  INDIAN   WISDOM. 


The  Tantras. 

I  have  already  alluded  to  the  Tantras,  which  represent 
a  phase  of  Hinduism  generally  later  than  that  of  the 
Puranas,  although  some  of  the  Puranas  and  Upa-puranas, 
such  as  the  Skanda,  Brahma-vaivarta,  and  Kalika,  are  said 
to  teach  Tantrika  doctrines,  by  promoting  the  worship  of 
Prakriti  and  Durga. 

The  Tantras  are  very  numerous,  but  none  have  as  yet 
been  printed  or  translated  in  Europe.  Practically  they 
constitute  a  fifth  Veda  (in  place  of  the  Puranas)  for  the 
Saktas  or  worshippers  of  the  active  energizing  will  (sakti) 
of  a  god — personified  as  his  wife,  or  sometimes  as  the 
female  half  of  his  essence.^ 

It  must  here  be  remarked  that  the  principal  Hindu 
deities  are  sometimes  supposed  to  possess  a  double  nature, 
or,  in  other  words,  two  characters,  one  quiescent,  the  other 
active.     The  active  is  called  his  Sakti. 

Sometimes  only  eight  S'aktis  are  enumerated  and  sometimes  nine,  viz., 
Vaishnam,  Brahmdm,  Raudri,  Mahe^varl,  Ndrasinln,  VdrdM,  Indrdnl, 
Kdrttikl,  and  Pradhdnd.  Others  reckon  fifty  forms  of  the  S'akti  of 
Vishnu,  besides  Lakshml ;  and  fifty  of  S'iva  or  Eudra,  besides  Durgd  or 
Gaurl.  Sarasvatl  is  named  as  a  S'akti  of  Vishnu  and  Rudra,  as  well  as 
of  Brahma.  According  to  the  Vayu-purana,  the  female  nature  of  Eudra 
(S'iva)  became  two-fold,  one  half  Asita  or  white,  and  the  other  half  Sita 
or  black,  each  of  these  again  becoming  manifold.  The  white  or  mild 
nature  includes  the  S'aktis  Urad,  Gaurl,  LaJcshmi,  Sarasvatl,  &c. ;  the 
black  or  fierce  nature  includes  Durgd,  Kdli,  Oandl,  Cdmundd,  &c. 

This  idea  of  personifying  the  will  of  a  deity  may  have 
been  originally  suggested  by  the  celebrated  hymn  (129)  in 

1  It  is  remarkable,  as  noticed  by  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson,  that 
Kulluka-bhatta,  in  commenting  on  Manu  II.  i,  says,  §rutU-ca 
dvi-^idhd  vaidiki  tdntriki  ea,  'revelation  is  two-fold,  Vedic  and 
Tantric. ' 


THE   TANTRAS.  523 

the  tenth  Mandala  of  the  Rig-veda,  which,  describing  the 
creation,  says  that  Will  or  Desire  {Kama),  the  first  germ 
(prathamam  retas)  of  Mind,  brought  the  universe  into 
existence  (see  p.  20  of  this  volume). 

But,  in  all  probability,  the  Tantrika  doctrine  owes  its 
development  to  the  popularizing  of  the  San-khya  theory 
of  Purusha  and  Prakriti  (as  described  at  p.  86  and  p.  91 
of  this  volume).  The  active  producing  principle,  whether 
displayed  in  creation,  maintenance,  or  destruction — each 
of  which  necessarily  implies  the  other — became  in  the 
later  stages  of  Hinduism  a.  living  visible  personification. 
Moreover,  as  destruction  was  more  dreaded  than  creation 
or  preservation,  so  the  wife  of  the  god  Siva,  presiding 
over  dissolution,  and  called  Kail,  Durgd,  Pdrvatl,  Umd, 
Devi,  Bhairavl,  &c.,  became  the  most  important  per- 
sonage in  the  whole  Pantheon  to  that  great  majority  of 
worshippers  whose  religion  was  actuated  by  superstitious 
fears.  Sometimes  the  god  himself  was  regarded  as  con- 
sisting of  two  halves,  representing  the  male  principle  on 
his  right  side,  and  the  female  on  his  left^ — both  inti- 
mately united,  and  both  necessary  to  re-creation  as  fol- 
lowing on  dissolution.  It  may  be  easily  imagined  that  a 
creed  like  this,  which  regarded  the  blending  of  the  male 
and  female  principles,   not  only  as  the  necessary  cause 

1  This  is  the  Ardha-mdri  or  half  male  half  female  form  of  S'iva. 
There  are  two  divisions  of  the  S'aktas  :  i.  the  DaJcshindcdrins,  'right- 
doers,'  '  right-hand  worshippers,'  or  BhaJdas,  '  devoted  ones,'  who  wor- 
ship the  goddess  Parvati  or  Durga  openly,  and  without  impure 
practices;  2.  the  Vdmdcdrins,  'left-doers,'  'left-hand  worshippers,'  or 
Kaulas,  'ancestral  ones,'  who  are  said  to  perform  all  their  rites  in 
secret,  a  naked  woman  representing  the  goddess.  The  sacred  books 
appealed  to  by  i.  are  called  the  Nigamas ;  by  2.  the  Agamas.  The 
forms  of  worship  are  said  to  require  the  use  of  some  one  of  the  five 
Morkdras,  '  words  beginning  with  the  letter  m,'  viz.,  i.  madya,  wine ; 
2.  mdnsa,  flesh;  3.  matsya,  fish;  4.  mudrd,  mystical  gestures;  5. 
maithuna,  intercourse  of  sexes. 


524  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

of  production  and  reproduction,  but  also  as  the  source 
of  strength,  vigour,  and  successful  enterprise,  soon  de- 
generated into  corrupt  and  superstitious  practices.  And, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Tantrika  doctrines  have  in  some 
cases  lapsed  into  a  degrading  system  of  impurity  and 
licentiousness. 

Nevertheless  the  original  Tantra  books,  which  simply 
inculcate  the  worship  of  the  active  energizing  principle  of 
the  deity — full  as  they  are  of  doubtful  symbolism,  strange 
mysticism,  and  even  directions  for  witchcraft  and  every 
kind  of  superstitious  rite — are  not  necessarily  in  themselves 
impure.  On  the  contrary,  the  best  of  them  are  believed 
to  be  free  from  gross  allusions,  however  questionable  may 
be  the  tendency  of  their  teaching.  The  truth,  I  believe, 
is  that  they  have  never  yet  been  thoroughly  investigated 
by  European  scholars.  When  they  become  more  so,  their 
connection  with  a  popular  and  distorted  view  of  the . 
San-khyan  theory  of  creation,  and  perhaps  with  some 
corrupt  forms  of  Buddhism,  will  probably  be  made  clear. 
It  is  certain  that  among  the  Northern  Buddhists,  especi- 
ally in  Nepal,  a  kind  of  worship  of  the  terrific  forms 
of  Siva  and  Durga  appears  to  have  become  interwoven 
with  the  Buddhistic  system. 

In  all  probability,  too,  the  mystical  texts  (Mantras) 
and  magical  formularies  contained  in  the  Tantras  will 
be  found  to  bring  them  into  a  closer  relationship  with 
the  Atharva-veda  than  has  been  hitherto  suspected. 

As  so  little  is  known  of  these  mystical  writings,  it  is 
not  possible  to  decide  at  present  as  to  which  are  the  most 
ancient,  and  still  less  as  to  the  date  to  be  assigned  to  any 
of  them.  It  may,  however,  be  taken  for  granted  that  the 
extant  treatises  are,  like  the  extant  Puranas,  founded  on 
older  works ;  and  if  the  oldest  known  Purana  is  not  older 
than  the  sixth  or  seventh  century  (see  p.  513),  an  earlier 
date   can   scarcely  be   attributed   to   the    oldest  known 


THE   TANTRAS.  525 

Tantra.^  Perhaps  the  Rudra-ydmala  is  one  of  the  most 
esteemed.  Others  are  the  Kdlihd,  Mahd-nirvdna  (attri- 
buted to  Siva),  Kuldrnava  (or  text-book  of  the  Kaulas, 
see  note,  p.  523),  ^ydmd-rahasya,  iSaradd-tilaka,  Mantra- 
mahodadhi,  Uddisa,  Kdmada,  Kdmdhhyd. 

I  now  note  some  of  the  subjects  of  which  they  treat, 
merely  premising  that  the  Tantras  are  generally  in  the 
form  of  a  dialogue  between  Siva  and  his  wife  Durga  or 
Parvati,  the  latter  inquiring  as  to  the  correct  mode  of 
performing  certain  secret  ceremonies,  or  as  to  the  mystical 
efficacy  of  various  Mantras  used  as  spells,  charms,  and 
magical  formularies  ;  and  the  former  instructing  her. 

Properly  a  Tantra,  like  a  Purana,  ought  to  treat  of  five  subjects, 
viz.,  I.  the  creation  ;  2.  the  destruction  of  the  world ;  3.  the  vror- 
ship  of  the  gods ;  4.  the  attainment  of  all  objects,  especially  of  six 
superhuman  faculties ;  5.  the  four  modes  of  union  with  the  Supreme 
Spirit.  A  great  variety  of  other  subjects,  however,  are  intro- 
duced, and  practically  a  great  number  of  Tantras  are  merely 
handbooks  or  manuals  of  magic  and  witchcraft,  and  collections  of 
Mantras  for  producing  and  averting  evils.  Such,  at  least,  must  be 
the  conclusion  arrived  at,  if  we  are  to  judge  of  them  by  the  bare 
statement  of  their  contents  in  the  Catalogues  published  by  Rajen- 
dralala  Mitra  and  others.  I  select  the  following  as  specimens  of 
what  they  contain  : — 

Praise  of  the  female  energy ;  spells  for  bringing  people  into  sub- 
jection ;  for  making  them  enamoured ;  for  unsettling  their  minds  ; 
for  fattening ;  for  destroying  sight ;  for  producing  dumbness,  deaf- 
ness, fevers,  &c. ;  for  bringing  on  miscarriage ;  for  destroying  crops ; 
for  preventing  various  kinds  of  evil ;  modes  of  worshipping  Kali ; 
methods  of  breathing  in  certain  rites ;  language  of  birds,  beasts,  &c. ; 
worship  of  the  female  emblem,  with  the  adjuncts  of  wine,  flesh-meat, 
women,  &c. 

This  last  is  said  to  be  the  subject  of  the  Kamakhya-tantra. 

1  It  has  been  noted  that  the  oldest  native  lexicographer,  Amara 
Siuha,  does  not  give  the  meaning  '  sacred  treatise '  to  the  word  tantra, 
as  later  writers  do. 


526  INDIAN   WISDOM. 


VI.  The  Nui-sdstras. 


This  department  of  Sanskrit  literature  may  be  regarded 
as  including,  in  the  first  place,  Niti-sastras  proper,  or 
works  whose  direct  object  is  moral  teaching ;  and,  in  the 
second,  all  the  didactic  portion  of  the  epic  poems  and 
other  works. 

The  aim  of  the  Nui  -  sdstras  proper  is  to  serve  as 
guides  to  correct  conduct  (niti)  in  all  the  relations  of 
domestic,    social,    and    political    life.      They   are   either, 

A.  collections  of  choice  maxims,  striking  thoughts,  and 
wise   sentiments,   in  the  form   of  metrical   stanzas ;    or, 

B.  books  of  fables  in  prose,  which  string  together  stories 
about  animals  and  amusing  apologues  for  the  sake  of  the 
moral  they  contain,  or  to  serve  as  frameworks  for  the 
introduction  of  metrical  precepts.  These  latter  often 
represent  wise  sayings  orally  current,  or  are  cited  from 
the  regular  collections  and  from  other  sources. 

But  besides  the  Niti-sastras  proper,  almost  every  de- 
partment of  Sanskrit  literature  contributes  its  share  to 
moral  teaching. 

Any  one  who  studies  the  best  Hindu  writings  cannot 
but  be  struck  by  the  moral  tone  which  everywhere 
pervades  them.  Indian  writers,  although  they  do  not 
trouble  themselves  much  about  the  history  of  past  gene- 
rations, constantly  represent  the  present  condition  of 
human  life  as  the  result  of  actions  in  previous  exist- 
ences. Hence  a  right  course  of  present  conduct  becomes 
an  all-important  consideration  as  bearing  on  future  hap- 
piness ;  and  we  need  not  be  surprised  if,  to  satisfy  a 
constant  longing  for  Nui  or  guidance  and  instruction  in 
practical  wisdom,  nearly  all  departments  of  Sanskrit 
literature  —  Brahmanas,  Upanishads,  Law-books,  Epic 
poems,  and  Puranas — are  more  or  less  didactic,  nearly 
all  delight  in  moralizing  and  philosophizing,  nearly  all 


THE   NITI-^ASTRAS.  527 

abound  in  wise  sayings  and  prudential  rules.  Scarcely 
a  book  or  writing  of  any  kind  begins  without  an  invo- 
cation to  the  Supreme  Being  or  to  some  god  supposed 
to  represent  his  overruling  functions,  and  as  each  work 
proceeds  the  writers  constantly  suspend  the  main  topic, 
or  turn  aside  from  their  regular  subject  for  the  purpose 
of  interposing  moral  and  religious  reflections,  and  even 
long  discourses,  on  the  duties  of  life.  This  is  especially 
the  case  in  the  Maha-bharata. 

Examples  of  the  religious  precepts,  sentiments,  and 
apophthegms,  scattered  everywhere  throughout  Sanskrit 
literature,  have  already  been  given  in  this  volume  (see, 
for  instance,  pp.  278-291,  442-461).-' 

We  now  therefore  turn,  in  conclusion,  to  the  two  divi- 
sions of  Nui-sdstras  proper. 

A.  With  tegard  to  the  regular  coUectioDS  of  moral 
maxims,  sentiments,  &c.,  these  are  generally  in  metrical 
stanzas,  and  sometimes  contain  charming  allusions  to 
natural  objects  and  domestic  life,  with  occasional  striking 
thoughts  on  the  nature  of  G-od  and  the  immortality  of 
the  soul,  as  well  as  sound  ethical  teaching  in  regard  to 
the  various  relations  and  conditions  of  society.  They  are 
really  mines  of  practical  good  sense.  The  knowledge  of 
human  nature  displayed  by  the  authors,  the  shrewd  advice 
they  give,  and  the  censure  they  pass  on  human  frailties — 
often  in  pointed,  vigorous,  and  epigrammatic  language — 
attest  an  amount  of  wisdom  which,  if  it  had  been  exhibited 
in  practice,  must  have  raised  the  Hindus  to  a  high  position 
among  the  nations  of  the  earth.  Whether,  however,  any 
entire  collection  of  such  stanzas  can  be  attributed  to  any 


1  I  need  scarcely  mention  here  so  well-known  and  valuable  a  work  as 
Dr.  Bbhtlingk's  Indische  Spriiche,  whicli  contains  a  complete  collection 
of  maxims,  &c.,  in  three  volumes,  and  gives  the  text  of  each  apophthegm 
critically,  with  a  German  translation. 


S28  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

one  particular  author  is  doubtful.  The  Hiudtis,  for  the 
reasons  we  have  already  stated,  have  always  delighted  in 
apophthegms.  Numbers  of  wise  sayings  have,  from  time 
immemorial,  been  constantly  quoted  in  conversation. 
Many  thus  orally  current  were  of  such  antiquity  that  to 
settle  their  authorship  was  impossible.  But  occasional 
attempts  were  made  to  give  permanence  to  the  floating 
wisdom  of  the  day,  by  stringing  together  in  stanzas  the 
most  celebrated  maxims  and  sayings  like  beads  on  a 
necklace ;  each  necklace  representing  a  separate  topic, 
and  the  authorship  of  a  whole  series  being  naturally 
ascribed  to  men  of  known  wisdom,  like  Bhartri-hari  and 
Canaka  (see  p.  507),  much  in  the  same  way  as  the  author- 
ship of  the  Puranas  and  Maha-bharata  was  referred  to  the 
sage  Vyasa  (see  p.  371).  Among  these  collections  it  will 
be  sufficient  to  note  : — 

I.  The  three  hundred  apophthegms,  ascribed  to  Bhartri-hari^  (see  p. 
533),  of  which  the  ist  S'ataia,  or  collection  of  a  hundred  verses,  is  on 
love  {irin-gara),  and  therefore  more  lyrical  than  didactic,  the  2nd  is  on 
good  conduct  {nlti),  and  the  3rd  on  the  renunciation  of  worldly  desires 
(vairagya).  2.  The  Vriddha-cdnakya  or  Rdjaniti-iastra.  3.  The 
Gdnakyoriataha  or  hundred  verses  (109  in  one  collection  translated  by 
Weber)  of  OdnaTcya,  minister  of  (3andra-gupta  (see  under  Mudra-rakshasa, 
p.  507).  4.  The  Amartb-dataka  or  one  hundred  erotic  stanzas  of  Amaru 
(already  described  at  p.  454).  5.  The  ^drn-gadhara-paddhati,  '  S'arn-ga- 
dhara's  collection,'  an  anthology  professing  to  collect  sententious  verses 
from  various  sources  and  to  give  the  names  of  most  of  the  authors,  to 
the  number  of  about  247.^     Some  verses,  however,  are  anonymous. 

There  are  numerous  other  collections  of  didactic  and  erotic  stanzas, 
some  of  which  are  quite  modem,  e.g.,  the  Suhhaahitdrnava,  &dnti-iataka, 
Nlti  -  san-lcalana,  Kavitdmrita  -  Jcupa,  Kavitdrnava,  Jnana-sudhdkara, 
Slohormald,  the  Bhdmini-vilasa  by  Jagan-natha,  the  Caura-pancdUka 
by  Vihlana  (edited  with  Bhartri-hari  by  Von  Bohlen). 


1  Edited  by  Von  Bohlen,  with  a  Latin  translation,  in  1833. 
^  See  Professor  Aufrecht's  article  on  this  anthology  in  vol.  xxvii.  of 
the  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft. 


THE   NITI-SASTRAS.  529 

B.  As  to  the  collections  of  fables  and  apologues,  these 
form  a  class  of  composition  in  which  the  natives  of  India 
are  wholly  unsurpassed. 

Sir  W.  Jones  affirmed  that  the  Hindus  claimed  for 
themselves  three  inventions  :  i.  the  game  of  chess  [catur- 
an.ga,  see  p.  258  of  this  volume) ;  2.  the  decimal  figures 
(see  p.  183) ;  3.  the  method  of  teaching  by  fables.  To 
these  might  be  added:  4.  grammar  (p.  163);  5.  logic 
(p.  62). 

It  is  thought  that  both  the  Greek  fabulist  Aesop  and 
the  Arabian  Lokman^  [Lukmdn)  owed  much  to  the  Hindus. 
Indeed,  in  all  likelihood,  some  ancient  book  of  Sanskrit 
apologues,  of  which  the  present  representative  is  the 
Panca-tantra,  and  which  has  been  translated  or  para- 
phrased into  most  of  the  dialects  of  India,  as  well  as 
into  Hebrew,  Arabic,  Syriac,  Pahlavi,  Persian,  Turkish, 
Italian,  French,  German,  English,  and  almost  every  known 
language  of  the  literary  world,  is  the  original  source  of  all 
the  well-known  fables  current  in  Europe  and  Asia  for 
more  than  two  thousand  years  since  the  days  of  Herodotus 
(II.  134).^ 

1  According  to  Herodotus  and  Plutarch,  Aesop  lived  in  the  latter 
part  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  and  was  once  a  slave  at  Samos.  On  being 
freed,  he  travelled  about  and  visited  Croesus,  &c.  As  to  Lokman, 
probably  such  a  person  once  lived,  though  thought  by  some  to  be  an 
imaginary  character.  He  is  certainly  more  likely  to  have  borrowed 
ideas  from  Indian  fabulists  than  from  Job,  or  Abraham,  whose  nephew 
he  is  said  by  some  Arabic  writers  to  have  been.  The  31st  chap,  of  the 
Kuran  is  called  after  him,  God  being  made  to  say,  '  We  have  given  him 
wisdom.' 

^  A  Pahlavi  version  of  the  Panda-tantra  was  the  first  real  translation. 
It  was  made  in  the  time  of  Nushirvan,  about  a.d.  570,  and  perished 
with  much  of  the  Pahlavi .  literature  when  the  Axabs  invaded  Persia. 
Before  its  destruction  it  had  been  translated  into  Arabic,  about  a.d.  760, 
and  was  called  Kcdila  wa  Damna  ( =  Sanskrit  Karatalta  and  Daviandka, 
the  names  of  two  jackals)  or  fables  of  the  Brahman  Bidpai.     The  well- 

2  L 


530  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

This  Pancortantra} — which  is  itself  the  original  source 
of  a  still  later  work,  the  well-known  class-book  Hito- 
padesa,  'friendly  instruction' — derives  its  name  from 
being  divided  into  five  chapters  (Tantras)  ;  but  it  is  also 
commonly  called  the  Pancopakhydna,  'five  collections  of 
stories.'  The  date  of  the  extant  Panda-tan tra  is  usually 
placed  about  the  end  of  the  fifth  century.  But  the  fables 
of  which  it  consists  are  many  of  them  referable  to  a  period 
long  preceding  the  Christian  era. 

It  has  even  been  conjectured  that  the  notion  of  in- 
structing in  domestic,  social,  and  political  duties  by  means 
of  stories  in  which  animals  figure  as  the  speakers,  first 
suggested  itself  to  Hindu  moralists  when  the  doctrine 
of  metempsychosis  had  taken  root  in  India.  We  have 
seen  that  a  most  elaborate  theory  of  transmigration  of 
souls  through  plants,  animals,  men,  and  gods  was  pro- 
pounded by  Manu  at  least  500  years  B.C.,  to  which  date 
we  have  conjecturally  assigned  the  existing  Code  of  the 
Manavas  (see  p.  56,  note  i,  a,nd  p.  275).  Accordingly 
there  is  evidence  that  contemporaneously  with  the  rise  of 


known  Persian  Anvdr-i-Siihaili,  '  lights  of  Canopus,'  of  Husain  Va'iz, 
written  about  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century,  was  also  an  amplifi- 
cation of  the  Pan6a-tantra.  Abu-1  Fazl,  Akbar's  Celebrated  minister, 
also  translated  it  into  simpler  Persian  and  called  it  'lydr-i- Danish, 
'  criterion  of  knowledge.'  An  Urdu  version,  called  Kliirad  Afroz,  '  illu- 
minator of  the  understanding,'  was  made  in  1803  by  Hafizu'd  din  Ahmad. 
The  Hebrew  version  is  attributed  to  one  Rabbi  Joel.  This  was  trans- 
lated into  Latin  by  John  of  Oapua  at  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century ; 
and  from  this  various  Italian,  Spanish,  and  German  translations  were 
made.  The  English  Pilpay's  fables  is  said  to  have  been  taken  from  a 
French  translation.  The  best  of  the  Turkish  versions,  called  Humdyun 
Ndmqh,  was  made,  according  to  Mr.  E.  B.  Eastwick,  in  the  reign  of  the 
Emperor  Sulaiman  T.,  by  'Ali  Chalabi  bin  Salih. 

1  Edited  by  Kosegarten  in  1848,  and  lately  in  India  by  Professors 
Biihler  and  Kielhorn.  Translated  into  German,  with  an  elaborate 
Introduction,  by  Professor  Benfey  in  1859. 


THE   NITI-SASTRAS.  53  I 

Brahmanism  in  Manu's  time,  and  the  consequent  growth 
of  antagonistic  systems  like  Buddhism  and  the  San-khya 
philosophy,  fables  were  commonly  used  to  illustrate  the 
teaching  of  these  systems.     Thus  : — 

In  the  whole  fourth  Book  of  the  Sdrb-khyorjiravaeana  (see  p.  79, 
note  i)  there  are  constant  exemplifications  of  philosophical  truth  by 
allusions  to  the  habits  of  animals,  as  recorded  in  popular  stories  and 
proverbs.  (For  example,  sarporvat,  'like  the  serpent,'  IV.  12;  bheld- 
vat,  'like  the  female  frog,'  lY.  16  j  suka-vat,  'like  the  parrot,'  IV. 
25,  &c.)  Again,  one  of  Katyayana's  Varttikas  or  supplements  to  a  rule 
of  the  grammarian  Panini  (IV.  2,  104;  cf.  IV.  3,  125)  gives  a  name  for 
the  popular  fable  of  the  crows  and  owls  (Kakolulcihd),  the  actual  title 
of  the  fourth  Tantra  of  the  Pandartantra,  Kdkoluklya,  being  formed 
according  to  another  rule  of  Panini  (IV.  3,  88).  This  fable  is  also 
alluded  to  in  the  Sauptika-parvan  of  the  Maha-bharata  (see  p.  409  of 
this  volume).  In  that  Epic,  too,  other  well-known  fables  are  related. 
For  example,  the  story  of  the  three  fishes  occurring  in  Hitopadesa, 
Book  IV.,  is  found  in  S'anti-parvan  4889,  &c.,  and  that  of  Sunda  and 
Upasunda  in  Adi-parvan  7619. 

The  fables  of  the  Panca-tantra  and  Hitopadesa  are 
supposed  to  be  narrated  by  a  learned  Brahman  named 
Vishnu  -  sarman  for  the  improvement  of  some  young 
princes,  whose  royal  father  had  expressed  himself 
grieved  by  their  idle,  dissolute  habits.  Of  course, 
the  fables  are  merely  a  vehicle  for  the  instruction  con- 
veyed. They  are  strung  together  one  within  another, 
so  that  before  one  is  finished  another  is  commenced,  and 
moral  verses  from  all  sources  are  interwoven  with  the 
narratives. 

A  still  larger  collection  of  tales  exists  in  Sanskrit 
literature.  It  is  called  the  Katha-sarit-sdgara,  '  ocean 
of  rivers  of  stories,'  and  was  compiled  by  Soma-deva 
Bhatta  of  Kasmir,  towards  the  end  of  the  eleventh  or 
beginning  of  the  twelfth  century,  from  a  still  larger  work 
named  Vrihat-kathd  (ascribed  to  Gunddhya) : — 


5  32  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

t 

Tke  Kathd-sarit-sdgara  ^  consists  of  eighteen  Books  {Lambahas), 
containing  in  all  124  chapters  [Taran-gas).  The  second  and  third 
Books  contain  the  celebrated  story  of  TJdayana  (see  p.  506).  A  con- 
temporary of  Soma-deva  was  Kalhana,  who  is  said  to  have  written 
the  Rdjataran-gim,  'stream  of  kings' — a  chronicle  of  the  kings  of 
Kasmir — about  a.d.  1148.  This  is  almost  the  only  work  in  the  whole 
range  of  Sanskrit  literature  which  has  any  historical  value.  It  is 
mostly  composed  in  the  common  S'loka  metre,  a;nd  consists  of  eight 
chapters  {Taran-gas).'^ 

Other  collections  of  tales  and  works  of  fiction — 
which  are  not,  however,  properly  Niti-sastras  —  are  the 
following : — 

1.  The  Da^a-kumdroriarita,  'adventures  of  ten  princes,'  a  series  of 
tales  in  prose  (but  called  by  native  authorities  a  Kdvya  or  poem)  by 
Dandin,  who  lived  in  the  eleventh  century.  The  style  is  studiously 
difficult,  long  compounds  and  rare  grammatical  forms  being  used.  It 
was  edited,  with  a  long  Introduction,  by  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson  in 
1846.  2.  The  Vetdla-panca-vinSati,  'twenty-five  tales  of  a  demon,' 
ascribed  to  an  author  named  Jambhala-datta.  It  is  the  original  of  the 
well-known  Hindi  collection  of  stories  called  Baitdl-paclsi.  The  stories 
are  told  by  a  Yetala,  or  spirit,  to  king  Vikramaditya,  who  tries  to 
carry  o£F  a  dead  body  occupied  by  the  Vetala.  3.  The  Sinhdsana- 
dvdtrin^at  (sometimes  called  Vikrama-carita  or  '  adventures  of  Vikra- 
maditya '),  stories  related  by  the  thirty-two  images  on  king  Vikrama- 
ditya's  throne  which  was  dug  up  near  Dhara,  the  capital  of  king 
Bhoja,  to  whom  the  tales  are  told,  and  who  is  supposed  to  have 
flourished  in  the  tenth  or  eleventh  century.  It  is  the  original  of  the 
Bengali  jBainV  Sinhdsan.  4.  The  Suka-saptati  or  '  seventy  tales  of  a 
parrot,'  translated  into  many  modern  dialects  of  India  {e.g.,  into 
Hindiistani  under  the  title  Totd-kahdni ;  several  Persian  versions 
called  Tuii-ndma  being  also  extant).  5.  The  KatJidrnava,  '  ocean  of 
stories,'  a  collection  of  about  thirty-five  comparatively  modern  stories, 
attributed  to  S'iva-dasa.     6.  The  Bhoja-prahandha,  a  work  by  Balldla, 

1  The  whole  work  has  been  excellently  edited  by  Dr.  Hermann 
Brockhaus,  all  but  the  first  five  Lambakas  being  in  the  Roman 
character. 

2  The  first  six  Books  were  edited  and  the  whole  work  translated 
into  French  by  M.  Troyer  in  1 840,  and  analysed  by  Professor  H.  H. 
Wilson.     See  Dr.  Host's  edition  of  his  works. 


THE   NITI-SASTRAS.  533 

celebrating  the  deeds  of  king  Bhoja.  7.  The  Kddamban,  a  kind  of 
novel  by  Vdna  or  Bdna,  who  flourished  in  the  seventh  century  at  the 
court  of  Harsha-vardhana  or  S'iladitya,  king  of  Kanauj.  An  analysis 
of  this  work  is  given  by  Professor  Weber  (vol.  i.  p.  352  of  his  Indische 
Streifen).  Good  editions  have  been  printed  at  Calcutta.  8.  The 
Vdsava-dattd,  a  romance  by  Subandhu,  written,  according  to  Dr.  Ktz- 
Edward  Hall,  not  later  than  the  early  part  of  the  seventh  century  (see 
the  elaborate  Preface  to  his  excellent  edition  of  the  work  in  1859). 
This  and  the  previous  story,  although  written  in  prose,  are  regarded 
(like  i)  as  Kavyas  or  poems,  and  are  supposed,  like  the  Raghava- 
pandavlya  ^p.  453),  to  contain,  numerous  words  and  phrases  which 
convey  a  double  sense. 

I  conclude  with  examples  from  Bhartri-hari's   apoph- 
thegms, from  the  Panca-tantra,  and  from  the  Hitopadesa. 
The  following  are  specimens  from  Bhartri-hari : — 

Here  in  this  world  love's  only  fruit  is  won, 
When  two  true  hearts  are  blended  into  one  ; 
But  when  by  disagreement  love  is  blighted, 
'Twere  better  that  two  corpses  were  united  (I.  29). 

Blinded  by  self-conceit  and  knowing  nothing. 

Like  elephant  infatuate  with  passion, 

I  thought  within  myself,  I  all  things  knew ; 

But  when  by  slow  degrees  I  somewhat  learnt. 

By  aid  of  wise  preceptors,  my  conceit, 

Like  some  disease,  passed  off  ;  and  now  I  live 

In  the  plain  sense  of  what  a  fool  I  am  (II.  8). 

The  attribute  most  noble  of  the  hand 
Is  readiness  in  giving ;  of  the  head. 
Bending  before  a  teacher  ;  of  the  mouth, 
Veracious  speaking ;  of  a  victor's  arms, 
Undaunted  valour ;  of  the  inner  heart, 
Pureness  the  most  unsullied ;  of  the  ears. 
Delight  in  hearing  and  receiving  truth — 
These  are  adornments  of  high-minded  men 
Better  than  all  the  majesty  of  Empire  (II.  55). 

Better  be  thrown  from  some  high  peak. 
Or  dashed  to  pieces,  falling  upon  rocks ; 
Better  insert  the  hand  between  the  fangs 


534  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Of  an  envenomed  serpent ;  better  fall 

Into  a  fiery  furnace,  than  destroy 

The  character  by  stains  of  infamy  (II.  77). 

Now  for  a  little  while  a  child,  and  now 

An  amorous  youth ;  then  for  a  season  turned 

Into  the  wealthy  householder ;  then  stripped 

Of  all  his  riches,  with  decrepit  limbs 

And  wrinkled  frame,  man  creeps  towards  the  end 

Of  life's  erratic  course ;  and,  like  an  actor. 

Passes  behind  Death's  curtain  out  of  view  1  (III.  51). 

I  now  give,  as  an  example  of  an  Indian  apologue,  a 
nearly  literal  translation  of  a  fable  in  the  Panca-tantra 
(Book  V.  8tli  story)  :— 

The  Two-headed  Weaver} 

Once  upon  a  time  there  Uved  in  a  certain  place  a  weaver  (haulika) 
named  Manthara,  all  the  wood-work  of  whose  loom  one  day  fell  to 
pieces  while  he  was  weaving.  Taking  his  axe  (Icuthdra),  he  set  off  to 
cut  fresh  timber  to  make  a  new  loom,  and  finding  a  large  Sinsapa'tree 
by  the  sea-side,  and  thinking  to  himself,  '  This  will  furnish  plenty  of 
wood  for  my  purpose,'  began  to  fell  it.  In  the  tree  resided  a  spirit 
(vyantard),  who  exclaimed  on  the  first  stroke  of  the  axe,  'Hallo,  there! 
what  are  you  about  ?  this  tree  is  my  dwelling,  and  I  can't  allow  you 
to  destroy  it ;  for  here  I  live  very  happily,  inhaling  the  fresh  breezes 
cooled  by  the  ocean's  spray.'  The  weaver  replied,  '  What  am  I  to  do  ? 
unless  I  get  wood,  my  family  must  starve.  Be  quick,  then,  and  look 
out  for  another  house ;  for  cut  your  present  one  down  I  must,  and 
that  too  instantly.'  The  spirit  replied,  '  I  am  really  quite  pleased  with 
your  candour,  and  you  shall  have  any  boon  you  like  to  ask  for ;  but 
you  shall  not  injure  this  tree.'  The  weaver  said  he  would  go  home  and 
consult  a  friend  and  his  wife ;  and  would  then  come  back  and  let  the 
spirit  know  what  gift  he  would  be  willing  to  take  in  compensation  for 
the  loss  of  the  tree.  To  this  the  spirit  assented.  When  the  weaver 
returned  home,  he  found  there  a  particular  friend  of  his — the  village 

1  The  parallel  in  Shakespeare  need  scarcely  be  suggested. 

2  I  have  omitted  some  verses  in  this  story,  and  taken  a  few  liberties. 
In  my  translations  I  have  consulted  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson,  and 
Professor  Benfey's  German  translation. 


THE   NITI-^ASTRAS.  S3S 

barber  {napita).  To  him  be  confided  all  that  bad  occurred,  telling  bim 
that  he  bad  forced  the  spirit  to  grant  bim  a  boon,  and  consulting  bis 
friend  as  to  what  be  should  demand.  The  barber  said,  '  My  good 
fellow,  ask  to  be  made  a  king ;  then  I'll  be  your  prime  minister,  and 
we'll  enjoy  ourselves  gloriously  in  this  world  and  gain  felicity  in  the 
next.     Don't  you  know  the  saying  ? — 

,  A  king  by  gifts  on  earth  achieves  renown, 
And,  when  be  dies,  in  heaven  obtains  a  crown.' 

The  weaver  approved  bis  friend's  suggestion,  but  said  be  must  first 
consult  his  wife.  To  this  the  barber  strenuously  objected,  and 
reminded  him  of  the  proverb  : — 

'  Give  women  food,  dress,  gems,  and  all  that's  nice, 
But  tell  them  not  your  plans,  if  you  are  wise. 

Besides,  the  sagacious  son  of  Bhrigu  has  said  as  follows : — 

If  you  have  ought  to  do  and  want  to  do  it, 
Don't  ask  a  woman's  counsel,  or  you'll  rue  it.' 

The  weaver  admitted  the  justice  of  his  friend  the  barber's  observa- 
tions, but  insisted  that  his  wife  was  quite  a  model  woman  and  wholly 
devoted  to  her  husband's  welfare,  and  that  be  felt  compelled  to  ask 
ber  opinion.  Accordingly  be  went  to  her,  and  told  her  of  the  pro- 
mise be  bad  extorted  from  the  spirit  of  the  tree,  and  bow  the  barber 
had  recommended  bis  asking  to  be  made  a  king.  He  then  requested 
her  advice  as  to  what  boon  be  should  solicit.  She  replied,  'You 
should  never  Ksten,  husband,  to  barbers.  What  can  they  possibly 
know  about  anything  %     Surely  you  have  beard  the  saying  : — 

No  man  of  sense  should  take  as  bis  adviser 
A  barber,  dancer,  mendicant,  or  miser. 

Besides,  all  the  world  knows  that  royalty  leads  to  a  perpetual  round 
of  troubles.  The  cares  of  peace  and  war,  marching  and  encamping, 
making  allies  and  quarrelling  with  them  afterwards,  never  allow  a 
monarch  a  moment's  enjoyment.     Let  me  tell  you  then  : — 

If  you  are  longing  to  be  made  a  king, 
You've  set  your  heart  upon  a  foolish  thing ; 
The  vase  of  unction  at  your  coronation 
Will  sprinkle  you  with  water  and  vexation. ' 

The  weaver  replied,  '  What  you  say,  wife,  is  very  just,  but  pray  tell 
me  what  I  am  to  ask  for.'     His  wife  rejoined,  'I  recommend  you  to 


536  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

seek  the  means  of  doing  more  work.  Formed  as  you  now  are,  you  can 
never  weave  more  than  one  piece  of  cloth  at  a  time.  Ask  for  an 
additional  pair  of  hands  and  another  head,  with  which  you  may  keep 
a  loom  going  both  before  and  behind  you.  The  profits  of  the  first 
loom  will  be  enough  for  all  household  expenses,  and  with  the  proceeds 
of  the  second  you'll  be  able  to  gain  consequence  and  credit  with  your 
tribe,  and  a  respectable  position  in  this  world  and  the  next.' 

'  Capital !  capital ! '  exclaimed  the  husband,  mightily  pleased  with  his 
excellent  wife's  advice.  Forthwith  he  repaired  to  the  tree,  and  address- 
ing the  spirit,  said,  '  As  you  have  promised  to  grant  me  anything  I  ask 
for,  give  me  another  pair  of  arms,  and  an  additional  head.'  No  sooner 
said  than  done.  In  an  instant  he  became  equipped  with  a  couple  of 
heads  and  four  arms,  and  returned  home,  highly  delighted  with  his 
new  acquisitions.  No  sooner,  however,  did  the  villagers  see  him,  than, 
greatly  alarmed,  they  exclaimed,  '  A  goblin  !  a  goblin  ! '  and  between 
striking  him  with  sticks  and  pelting  him  with  stones,  speedily  put  an 
end  to  his  existence. 

The  following  sentiments  are  also  from  the  Panca- 
tantra : — 

Praise  not  the  goodness  of  the  grateful  man 
Who  acts  with  kindness  to  his  benefactors. 
He  who  does  good  to  those  who  do  him  wrong 
Alone  deserves  the  epithet  of  good  (I.  277). 

The  misery  a  foolish  man  endures 

In  seeking  riches,  is  a  hundred-fold 

More  grievous  than  the  sufferings  of  him 

Who  strives  to  gain  eternal  blessedness  (II.  127). 

V /Hear  thou  a  summary  of  righteousness. 
And  ponder  well  the  maxim  :  Never  do 
To  other  persons  what  would  pain  thyself  (III.  104). 

1/  The  little-minded  ask  :  Belongs  this  man 
To  our  own  family  ?     The  noble-hearted 
Regard  the  human  race  as  all  akin  (V.  38). 

As  a  conclusion,  I  subjoin  some  sentiments  from  the 
Hitopadesa  or  book  of  '  friendly  advice,'  My  translations 
are  from  the  late  Professor  Johnson's  excellent  edition  : — 


THE   NITI-SASTRAS.  537 

HITOPADES'A— INTRODUCTION. 

A  sapient  man  should  think  of  storing  up 
Knowledge"  and  wealth,  as  if  old  age  and  death 
Could  ne'er  assail  him,  but  should  practise  virtue 
As  if  already  in  the  grasp  of  death  (3). 

-  Of  all  possessions  knowledge  is  the  best, 
For  none  can  steal  it,  none  can  estimate 
Its  value,  nor  can  any  one  destroy  it  (4). 

Learning,  the  solver  of  perplexing  doubts, 
A  sure  revealer  of  the  truths  that  lie 
Beyond  the  sight — is  like  another  eye 
For  all  mankind — who  has  it  not,  is  blind  (10). 

Fortune  attends  the  lion-hearted  man 
Who  acts  with  energy ;  weak-minded  persons 
Sit  idly  waiting  for  some  gift  of  fate. 
Banish  all  thought  of  destiny  and  act 
With  manly  vigour,  straining  all  thy  nerve. 
When  thou  hast  put  forth  all  thy  energy 
The  blame  of  failure  wUl  not  rest  on  thee  (31). 

The  thought  that  destiny  is  ever  working 
Should  not  induce  abandonment  of  effort ; 
Without  exertion  oil  cannot  be  had 
E'en  from  the  seeds  of  unctuous  Sesamum  (30). 

A  chariot  moves  not  with  a  single  wheel. 

So  fortune  acts  not  without  human  effort  (32). 

The  fixed  result  of  all  one's  acts  committed 
In  former  births,  is  called  one's  destiny  ; 
Therefore  let  every  man  apply  himself 
Unweariedly  to  doing  noble  actions  (33). 

As  from  a  lump  of  clay  the  potter  moulds 

Whate'er  he  pleases,  so  a  man  obtains 

The  destiny  worked  out  by  his  own  deeds  (34). 

Objects  are  best  accomplished  by  exertion. 
Not  by  mere  wishes  ;  not  by  any  law 
Enters  the  deer  a  sleeping  lion's  maw  (36). 


5  38  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

Even  a  blockhead  may  respect  inspire 

So  long  as  lie  is  dressed  in  gay  attire ; 

A  fool  may  cut  a  dash  the  wise  among, 

So  long  as  he  has  sense  to  hold  his  tongue  (40). 

A  piece  of  glass  may  like  a  jewel  glow, 
If  but  a  lump  of  gold  be  placed  below ; 
So  even  fools  to  eminence  may  rise 
By  close  association  with  the  wise  (41). 

By  intercourse  with  men  of  lower  grade 
The  mind  is  lowered ;  by  companionship 
With  equals  it  preserves  equality ; 
With  higher  men  it  reaches  eminence  (42). 


HITOPADES'A— BOOK  I. 

Bach  morning,  when  thou  risest,  thus  reflect : — 

'  Some  great  calamity  to-day  may  happen. 

Of  sickness,  sorrow,  death,  which  will  befall?'  (3). 

Never  expect  a  prosperous  result 
In  seeking  profit  from  an  evil  quarter ; 
When  there  is  taint  of  poison  in  the  cup, 
E'en  the  ambrosial  draught  which  to  the  gods 
Is  source  of  life  immortal,  tends  to  death  (5). 

Subjection  to  the  senses  has  been  called 
The  road  to  ruin,  and  their  subjugation 
The  path  to  fortune;  go  by  which  you  please  (29). 

A  combination  of  e'en  feeble  things 
Is  often  potent  to  effect  a  purpose. 
Even  fragUe  straws  when  twisted  into  ropes 
May  serve  to  bind  a  furious  elephant  (35). 

A  man  of  truest  wisdom  will  resign 

His  wealth  and  even  life  for  good  of  others  ;  ^ 

Better  abandon  life  in  a  good  cause 

When  death  in  any  case  is  sure  to  happen  (45). 

1  1  St.  John  iii.  16., 


THE   NITI-^ASTRAS.  539 

Even  to  foes  who  visit  us  as  guests 

Due  hospitality  should  be  displayed  ; 

The  tree  screens  with  its  shade  the  man  who  fells  it  ^  (60). 

The  good  show  pity  even  to  the  worthless, 
The  moon  irradiates  the  meanest  hovel  (63). 

Those  who  abstain  from  injury  to  all, 

Who  bear  with  all,  and  offer  an  asylum 

To  all  mankind,  are  journeying  to  heaven  (66). 

The  only  friend  that  follows  us  at  death 

Is  virtue;  all  besides  dies  with  the  body^  (67). 

Form  neither  friendship  nor  a  slight  acquaintance 
With  evil  persons ;  does  not  charcoal  burn 
The  hand,  if  hot,  and  blacken  it,  if  cold  ?  (82). 

A  good  man's  mind,  even  when  moved  to  anger, 
Suffers  no  lasting  change ;  a  torch  of  straw 
Avails  not  to  make  ocean's  waters  hot  (88). 

-  A  wicked  man  is  like  an  earthen  jar. 
Broken  with  ease,  repaired  with  difficulty  ; 
A  virtuous  man  is  like  a  golden  vessel. 
Hard  to  be  broken,  quickly  joined  together  (94). 

One  thing  is  in  a  bad  man's  heart,  another 

Is  in  his  words,  another  in  his  deeds. 

But  oneness  marks  a  man  of  noble  mind 

In  heart,  speech,  conduct,  all  the  three  combined  (103). 

Wisdom  is  easy  when  displayed  in  giving 
Advice  to  others,  but  one's  self  to  follow 
Good  counsel,  marks  a  man  of  high  degree, 
Such  noble-minded  men  are  rare  to  see  (108). 


^  Compare  Rom.  xii.  20  :  'If  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed  him ;  if  he 
thirst,  give  him  drink.'  I  have  been  informed  on  good  authority 
that  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson  was  first  induced  to  commence  the 
study  of  Sanskrit  by  reading  casually  in  some  book  or  newspaper 
that  this  sentiment  was  to  be  met  with  somewhere  in  Sanskrit 
literature. 

2  Compare  Manu  IV.  240,  242. 


S40  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

He  has  all  wealth  who  has  a  mind  contented. 

To  one  whose  foot  is  covered  with  a  shoe 

The  earth  appears  all  carpeted  with  leather  (152). 

'Tis  right  to  sacrifice  an  individual 

For  a  whole  household,  and  a  family 

For  a  whole  village,  and  a  village  even 

For  a  whole  country's  good,  but  for  one's  self 

And  one's  own  soul,  one  should  give  up  the  world  (159). 

Accumulated  wealth  is  best  preserved 
By  liberal  gifts ;  e'en  as  collected  waters 
Are  best  secured  within  a  hollow  tank. 
When  by  an  outlet  they  refresh  the  fields  (165). 

/If  men  are  rich  with  money  they  possess, 
But  give  not  nor  enjoy,  then  are  they  rich 
With  money  buried  in  the  mines  of  earth  (168). 

What  boots  it  to  have  wealth  which  is  not  given. 

Nor  yet  enjoyed  t    What  profits  strength  to  one 

Who  ne'er  assails  his  foes  ?    Where  is  the  use 

Of  sacred  knowledge  if  it  does  not  lead 

To  practice  of  religion  ?     What  avails 

A  soul  to  him  whose  senses  are  not  conquered?  (170). 

Wealth  joined  with  giving,  liberality 

Joined  with  kind  words,  knowledge  without  conceit, 

Valour  with  mercy,  these  are  four  rare  virtues  (174). 

The  wise  long  not  for  the  impossible, 

And  grieve  not  for  the  irretrievable. 

Nor  are  they  in  calamity  bewildered  (181). 

Some  men,  well-read  in  books,  are  blockheads  stUl, 
But  he  who  puts  in  practice  what  he  knows 
Is  truly  wise ;  a  medicine,  though  effective, 
Effects  no  cure  by  knowledge  of  its  name  (182). 

Make  the  best  use  of  thy  prosperity, 
And  then  of  thy  reverses  when  they  happen. 
For  good  and  evil  fortune  come  and  go 
Revolving  like  a  wheel  in  sure  rotation  (184). 


THE   NITI-^ASTRAS.  541 

Strive  not  too  anxiously  for  a  subsistence, 

Thy  Maker  will  provide  thee  sustenance ; 

No  sooner  is  a  human  being  born 

Than  milk  for  his  support  streams  from  the  breast  (190). 

He  by  whose  hand  the  swans  were  painted  white, 
And  parrots  green,  and  peacocks  many-hued, 
Will  make  provision  for  thy  maintenance  ^  (191). 

1^  How  can  true  happiness  proceed  from  wealth, 
Which  in  its  acquisition  causes  pain ; 
In  loss,  affliction;  in  abundance,  folly  (192). 

V  A  koil's  2  only  beauty  is  its  note, 

A  woman's  is  devotion  to  her  husband ; 

The  beauty  of  the  badly-formed  is  knowledge. 

The  beauty  of  ascetics  is  endurance  (212). 

Men  place  not  such  reliance  in  a  mother, 
Nor  in  a  wife,  nor  in  a  son,  nor  brother, 
As  in  a  friend  affectionate  by  nature  (222). 

Man's  frame  has  ever  death  at  hand,  successes 

Are  followed  by  reverses,  friendly  meetings 

Must  end  in  partings,  nothing  here  is  lasting  (224). 

(^A  friend  the  sight  of  whom  is  to  the  eyes 

A  balm,  who  is  the  heart's  delight — who  shares 
Our  joys  and  sorrows — is  a  treasure  rare. 
But  other  friendly  persons  who  are  ready 
To  share  in  our  prosperity,  abound — 
Friendship's  true  touchstone  is  adversity  (226). 

Whoever,  quitting  certainties,  pursues 
Uncertain  things,  may  lose  his  certainties. 
What  is  uncertain  is  as  good  as  lost  (227). 


'^  Compare  St.  Matthew  vi. 

^  The  kokila  or  koil  is  the  nightingale  of  India. 


542  INDIAN  WISDOM. 


HITOPADES'A— BOOK  II.  ' 

*— The  man  who  is  accustomed  to  regard 
With  constant  looks  of  sympathy  the  poor 
Beneath  him  in  position  feels  exalted  ; 
But  he  who  with  habitual  envy  views 
Those  higher  than  himself  feels  always  poopi  (2). 

^    Let  a  man  strive  with  earnestness  to  gain 
Possessions  unacquired  ;  when  acquired 
Let  him  with  care  preserve  them ;  when  preserved 
Let  him  increase  them ;  lawfully  increased 
Let  them  be  used  for  acts  of  pious  service  (8). 

'^^y  drops  of  water,  falling  one  by  one, 
Little  by  little,  may  a  jar  be  filled  ; 
Such  is  the  law  of  all  accumulations 
Of  money,  knowledge,  and  religious  merit  (10). 

What  burden  is  too  great  for  able  men  ? 
What  is  too  distant  for  the  energetic  ? 
What  is  a  foreign  country  to  the  wise  \ 
Who  is  a  stranger  to  the  kindly  speaking  ?  (11). 

•y  Let  prudent  men  engage  in  undertakings 
Of  diverse  kinds,  according  to  their  will ; 
Yet  after  all,  the  issue  will  be  that 
Which  the  Supreme  Disposer  shall  determine  (12). 

No  being  perishes  before  his  time, 
Though  by  a  hundred  arrows  pierced,  but  when 
His  destined  hour  comes,  though  barely  pricked 
By  a  sharp  point  of  grass,  he  surely  dies  (15). 

So  long  alone  does  every  man  fulfil 
The  true  design  of  life,  as  long  as  he 
Preserves  his  independence ;  he  is  dead 
Who  lives  in  base  subjection  to  another  (20). 


1  This  verse  is  amplified,  but  the  sense  of  the  original  is,  I  think, 
fairly  expressed. 


THE   NITI-^ASTRAS.  543 

How  difficult  the  duty  of  a  courtier  ! 

If  silent,  he  is  thougjit  a  fool ;  if  clever 

In  conversation,  he  is  called  a  chatterer, 

Or  perhaps  a  magpie  ;  if  submissive,  timid ; 

If  now  and  then  impatient  under  slights. 

Then  he  is  called  ill-bred ;  if  he  should  sit 

Too  close,  he  is  decidedly  intrusive ; 

If  too  far  off,  then  diffident  and  sheepish ; 

The  law  of  service  is  indeed  abstruse. 

E'en  devotees  would  find  it  hard  to  master  (25). 

He  lives  to  some  good  purpose  in  the  world 
Who  lives  for  Brahman  s,  relatives  and  friends. 
Where  is  the  man  who  lives  not  for  himself  ?  (34). 

/As  by  a  toilsome  effort  some  huge  rock 
Is  forced  uphill,  but  in  an  instant  rolled 
Down  to  the  valley,  so  the  soul  of  man 
Is  only  by  hard  labour  made  upright. 
But  easily  descends  to  depths  of  vice  (44). 

As  one  man  digs  a  well,  another  builds 

A  lofty  wall,  so  every  human  being 

Sinks  down  or  rises  by  his  own  exertions  (45). 

That  man  is  sapient,  who  knows  how  to  suit 

His  words  to  each  occasion,  his  kind  acts 

To  each  man's  worth,  his  anger  to  his  power  (48). 

Is  anything  by  nature  beautiful. 

Or  the  reverse  ?    Whatever  pleases  each, 

That  only  is  by  each  thought  beautiful  (50). 

'  Disinclination  to  begin  a  work 
Through  fear  of  failure,  is  a  mark  of  weakness ; 
Is  food  renounced  through  fear  of  indigestion?  (S4)- 

That  faculty  which  qualifies  a  man 

To  earn  subsistence,  and  which  wise  men  praise, 

Should  be  preserved  and  carefully  improved  (63). 

A  jewel  may  be  placed  upon  the  foot, 
And  glass  be  raised  to  decorate  the  head, 
But  at  the  time  of  purchasing  or  selling. 
Glass  will  be  reckoned  glass ;  a  gem,  a  gem  (66). 


544  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

If  glass  be  used  to  decorate  a  crown 

While  gems  are  taken  to  bedeck  a  foot, 

'Tis  not  that  any  fault  lies  in  the  gems,^ 

But  in  the  want  of  knowledge  of  the  setter  (72). 

The  wise  have  said  that  profitable  lessons 
May  oftentimes  be  learnt  e'en  from  a  child ; 
When  the  sun  sets  a  taper  may  give  light  (78). 

A  man  may  on  affliction's  touchstone  learn 

The  worth  of  his  own  kindred,  wife,  dependants ; 

Also  of  his  own  mind  and  character. 

'^Reason  indeed  is  stronger  than  brute  force,' 
Such  is  the  truth  the  sounding  drum  proclaims, 
Beaten  by  him  who  drives  the  elephant  (85). 

Krishna  replied  not  to  his  cursing  foe, 
The  lion  answers  not  the  jackal's  yell, 
But  roars  responsive  to  the  thunder-cloud  (86). 

The  hurricane  uproots  the  lofty  trees, 

But  injures  not  the  grass  that  prostrate  lies ; 

The  mighty  only  fight  against  the  mighty  (87). 

A  minister  is  like  a  small-necked  jar 

Of  wide  capacity,  but  yielding  little. 

He  who  says  '  What's  a  moment  ? '  is  a  fool. 

He  who  says  '  What's  a  farthing  ? '  will  be  poor  (91). 

An  old  domestic  long  employed  in  service 
Is  fearless  though  in  fault ;  at  other  times 
Acting  unchecked  he  disregards  his  master  (98). 

He  who  is  made  the  intimate  associate 
Of  a  king's  sports,  regards  himself  as  king ; 
Contempt  is  sure  to  be  displayed  by  one 
Admitted  to  too  close  familiarity  (100). 

Ingenious  men  can  make  e'en  falsehoods  seem 
Like  truths,  as  skilful  painters  represent 
Mountains  and  valleys  on  a  level  surface  (112). 

1  Compare  one  of  the  meditations  of  Marcus  Aurelius :  '  Is  such  a 
thing  as  an  emerald  made  worse  than  it  was,  if  it  is  not  praised  ? ' 
Rev.  F.  W.  Farrar's  '  Seekers  after  God,'  p.  306. 


THE   NITI-SlSTRAS.  S45 

In  case  of  some  calamity  impending, 
In  going  a  wrong  road,  or  when  a  time 
For  action  presses,  brooking  no  delay, 
Then  only  may  a  friend  advise  unasked  (123). 

"  He  who  is  truly  loved  is  still  beloved. 
Even  when  doing  irritating  acts ; 
Who  does  not  feel  the  same  respect  for  fire 
Though  it  consume  the  treasures  in  his  house?  (132). 

A  man  innately  bad,  though  vigorous  efforts 

Be  constantly  applied  for  his  improvement, 

Will  in  the  end  revert  to  his  old  nature ; 

E'en  as  the  curly  tail  of  some  young  cur. 

Though  pressed  and  swathed  with  bandages  for  years. 

Resumes  its  twist,  when  once  again  set  free  (136,  137). 

'Whate'er  thou  hast  to  take,  that  take  thou  quickly; 
Give  quickly  what  thou  hast  to  give ;  do  quickly 
The  work  thou  hast  to  do ;  if  thou  delay, 
Time  will  drink  up  the  spirit  of  thy  act  (145). 

Bad  men  derive  some  beauty  from  the  lustre 
Of  their  connections,  like  the  sooty  powder 
Laid  on  the  eyelash  of  a  lovely  woman  (157). 

"tTust  anger  may  be  certainly  appeased 
By  the  removal  of  its  cause,  but  how 
Can  any  one  allay  the  spite  of  him 
Who  cherishes  unreasonable  rancour?  (159). 

A  hundred  kindly  acts  are  thrown  away 

Upon  the  bad ;  a  hundred  clever  speeches 

Are  lost  on  him  who  cannot  understand ; 

A  hundred  admonitions,  on  the  man 

Who  will  not  put  in  practice  what  is  said  ;■ 

A  hundred  sapient  precepts,  on  the  senseless  (161). 

In  sandal-trees  are  serpents,  in  the  waters 
Of  pleasant  pools  are  lovely  lotus-flowers. 
But  also  alligators ;  in  enjoyments 
Evils  are  present  to  destroy  their  zest ; 
No  earthly  pleasures  are  without  alloy  (162). 

2  M 


546  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

A  bark  displays  its  uses  in  the  crossing 
Of  pathless  waters ;  at  th'  approach  of  night 
A  lantern  is  of  service ;  in  a  calm 
A  fan ;  and  for  an  elephant's  restraint 
A  hook ;  thus  is  there  nothing  upon  earth 
For  which  a  remedy  has  not  been  planned 
By  the  all-wise  Qreator,  but,  I  think, 
That  Providence  himself  has  failed  to  find 
A  fitting  check  to  curb  a  wicked  man  (165). 

A  man,  however  strong,  if  destitute 

Of  zeal  and  fervour,  is  by  all  held  cheap. 

Who  fears  to  trample  upon  burnt-out  ashes?  (173)- 


HITOPADES'A— BOOK  III. 

Advice  tends  only  to  exasperate, 

Ifot  to  allay  the  anger  of  a  fool ; 

Just  as  the  drinking  of  nutritious  milk 

Only  augments  the  venom  of  a  serpent  (4). 

He  who  comparing  well  the  strength  and  weakness 

Of  others,  by  himself,  discovers  not 

The  difference,  is  vanquished  by  his  foes  (8). 

Seek  not  companionship  with  evil  men, 

But  court  association  with  the  great ; 

The  purest  water  in  the  hand  of  her 

Who  lives  by  selling  drams,  is  called  a  dram  (11). 

i  Even  kind  words  accompanied  with  smiles. 
If  spoken  by  bad  men,  excite  suspicion, 
Like  scent  of  fragrant  flowers  out  of  season  (25). 

A  husband  is  a  wife's  chief  ornament ; 

She  needs  no  other  ornament  but  him ; 

Deprived  of  him,  she  shines  not,  though  adorned  (29). 

A  rock  is  not  so  easily  upheaved 

By  a  strong  hand  1  as  by  a  wooden  lever ; 

This  is  the  great  advantage  of  good  counsel. 

That  by  an  insignificant  appliance 

A  great  success  may  often  be  effected  (45). 

1  I  follow  B.  's  reading  here. 


^ 


THE   NITI-SASTRAS.  547 

When  danger  is  far  off,  then  cautiousness — 

But  when  at  hand,  heroic  fortitude — 

Is  the  distinctive  merit  of  a  man 

Of  noble  spirit ;  everywhere  the  great 

Exhibit  courage  in  adversity  (47). 

A  feverish  display  of  over-zeal 

At  the  first  outset,  is  an  obstacle 

To  all  success ;  water,  however  cold, 

Will  penetrate  the  ground  by  slow  degrees  (48). 

A  store  of  grain  is  of  all  stores  the  best ; 
A  jewel  in  the  mouth  supports  not  life  (58). 

Whate'er  the  natural  propensity 

Of  any  one  may  be,  that  is  most  hard 

To  be  subdued ;  thus,  if  a  dog  were  raised 

To  a  king's  rank,  would  he  not  gnaw  his  shoe  1  (6i). 

That  is  no  counsel  where  no  elders  are, 
Those  are  no  elders  who  declare  no  law. 
That  is  not  law  which  is  not  marked  by  truth, 
That  is  not  truth  which  is  by  fear  affected  (64). 

Those  who,  neglecting  accurate  inquiries 

Into  the  measure  of  a  foe's  resources. 

Commence  a  fight,  receive  a  cold  embrace 

By  the  sword's  edge,  and  must  be  reckoned  fools  (70). 

'  Advice,  though  good,  and  strictly  in  accordance 
With  books,  is  useless  if  it  be  not  followed  ; 
Mere  knowledge  of  a  medicine  does  not  cure  (71). 

Man  is  a  slave  of  money,  not  of  man  ; 
According  to  his  wealth,  his  fellow-men 
Hold  him  in  honour  or  in  disesteem  (81). 

The  honours  that  a  king  confers,  do  more 
To  stimulate  the  courage  of  his  subjects, 
Than  any  hope  of  money  recompense  (91). 

Even  a  foe,  if  he  perform  a  kindness, 

Should  be  esteemed  a  kinsman  ;  e'en  a  kinsman. 

If  he  do  harm,  should  be  esteemed  a  foe. 


548  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

A  malady,  though  bred  within  the  body, 

Does  mischief ;  while  a  foreign  drug  that  comes 

From  some  far  forest  does  a  friendly  work  (loi). 

Speak  kindly,  without  cringing ;  be  heroic. 
But  not  a  boaster ;  be  a  generous  giver, 
But  give  your  bounty  to  deserving  persons ; 
Be  ever  bold,  but  always  without  harshness  (io6). 

The  king  whose  doctor,  minister,  and  priest 
Are  flatterers,  is  speedily  bereft 
Of  health,  of  treasure,  and  of  piety. 

The  skilful  man  attains  to  wealth,  the  eater 
Of  wholesome  food,  to  health — the  healthy  man 
To  ease ;  the  diligent  to  utmost  range 
Of  knowledge ;  the  disciplined  in  heart 
To  true  religion,  richeg,  and  renown  (117)- 

A  lofty  station  cannot  be  obtained 

By  one  who  acts  with  rashness,  yielding  solely 

To  impulse,  nor  by  one  whose  energies 

Of  mind  are  paralysed  by  pondering 

On  ways  and  means  of  acting ;  great  successes 

Depend  on  hardihood  combined  with  prudence  (120). 

What  will  books  do  for  one  who  has  no  sense  1 
How  can  a  mirror  benefit  the  blind?  (123). 

The  wisdom  of  a  counsellor  is  shown 

In  healing  breaches  ;  of  a  wise  physician 

In  complicated  cases  of  disorder. 

'Tis  easy  to  be  wise,  when  all  is  well  (125). 

Weak-minded  men  are  easily  bewildered 
Even  in  trifling  enterprises,  those 
Whose  intellects  are  well-matured  engage 
In  mighty  undertakings  and  stand  fast  (126). 

The  goddess  of  good  fortune  ne'er  deserts 

That  noble-minded  monarch  who  withholds 

The  smallest  piece  of  money,  equally 

With  thousands,  if  it  seem  in  danger 

Of  application  to  improper  uses ; 

But  readily  bestows  with  open  hand 

E'en  tens  of  millions  on  a  fit  occasion  (127). 


THE   NITI-SASTRAS.  549 

He  is  a  fool  who  loses  a  possession 

Through  fear  of  some  slight  outlay ;  who  would  forfeit 

A  bale  of  goods  rather  than  pay  a  toll  (129). 

A  crocodile,  however  fierce,  is  powerless 

Soon  as  he  quits  the  water ;  even  Uons 

Out  of  a  forest  might  as  well  be  jackals  (139). 

In  this  uncertain  world,  unstable  as 

The  ocean  stirred  by  winds,  the  sacrifice 

Of  one's  own  life  to  save  the  life  of  others 

Is  an  exalted  action,  which  results 

From  merit  earned  in  former  states  of  being  (146). 


HITOPADES'A— BOOK  IV. 

An  unwise  man,  when  meeting  with  disaster, 
Blames  Destiny,  and  sees  not  that  the  fault 
Lies  in  himself  and  in  his  own  misdoings  (3). 

That  man  has  wisdom  who  is  wise  enough 
To  remedy  disaster  when  it  happens  (6). 

Whatever  fate  decrees  is  not  to  be, 

That  will  not  happen ;  if  it  is  to  be, 

'Tis  sure  to  come  to  pass.     'Why  drink  not  off 

This  anodyne— the  antidote  of  care  ?  (9). 

JLet  not  the  labour  of  an  honest  servant. 
Who  strives  to  do  his  duty,  seem  in  vain ; 
But  cheer  him  with  rewards,  with  heart,  voice,  look  (12). 

A  low-born  person  should  not  be  exalted 
To  any  high  position ;  once  in  office 
He  cannot  easily  be  set  aside. 
Tlonour  conferred  upon  a  base-born  man 
B,esembles  an  impression  stamped  on  sand  (13). 

So  long  alone  ought  danger  to  be  feared 
As  long  as  it  is  distant ;  when  we  see 
The  cause  of  apprehension  close  at  hand, 
We  ought  to  fight  against  it  fearlessly  (17). 


5 so  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

A  monarch  has  a  real  ally  in  him 
Who,  faithful  to  his  duty,  disregarding 
His  royal  master's  likings  and  dislikings, 
Tells  him  unwelcome  salutary  truths  (21). 

A  man  should  ever  strive  to  be  at  peace 
Even  with  those  who  equal  him  in  strength; 
The  victory  in  war  is  always  doubtful. 
Who  but  a  silly  person  would  commit 
His  friends,  his  army,  realm,  renown,  and  self 
To  the  uncertain  balance  of  a  battle?  (22,  23). 

The  monarch  who  distributes  equitably 
His  riches,  who  conceals  his  spies  from  view, 
Who  keeps  his  counsel  secret,  and  who  says 
No  unkind  words  to  those  around  him,  he 
May  spread  his  kingdom  even  to  the  sea  (54). 

Whatever  be  the  recompense  obtained 
By  a  Horse-sacrifice,  accomplishing 
All  wishes ;  that  will  he  achieve  in  full 
Who  gives  protection  to  a  fugitive  (62). 

External  deference  may  be  consistent 

With  malice  in  the  heart,^  for  do  not  people 

Bear  wood  upto  their  heads  that  they  may  burn  it  'i 

A  running  river  may  refresh  a  tree 

While  undermining  by  its  stream  the  roots  (64). 

What  cause  have  we  to  grieve  for  those  who  die  ? 

Since  when  a  child  is  born  Mortality 

Is  the  first  loving  nurse  to  fondle  it 

In  close  embrace,  and  not  till  thus  caressed 

May  its  own  mother  fold  it  to  her  breast  (67). 

Whither  have  gone  the  rulers  of  the  earth 
With  all  their  armies,  all  their  regal  pomp. 
And  all  their  stately  equipages  1     Earth, 
That  witnessed  their  departure,  still  abides  (68), 


1  This  amplification  seems  necessary  to  the  sense. 


THE   NITI-SASTRAS.  551 

All  unobserved  the  body  wastes  away, 
Moment  by  moment,  like  a  crumbling  jar 
Of  unbaked  clay  in  water ;  when  dissolved, 
Then  its  decaying  nature  is  perceived  (69). 

Nearer  and  ever  nearer,  day  by  day. 

Doth  death  advance  towards  each  living  being, 

E'en  as  an  awful  executioner 

Draws  nearer  to  a  criminal  condemned, 

And  drags  him  by  slow  degrees  towards  his  doom  (70). 

-Youth,  beauty,  life,  a  store  of  worldly  goods, 
Exalted  rank,  society  of  friends, 
Are  all  unstable,  let  no  man  of  sense 
Be  duped  by  trusting  to  their  permanence  (71). 

As  drifting  logs  of  wood  may  haply  meet 
On  ocean's  waters  surging  to  and  fro. 
And  having  met,  drift  once  again  apart, 
So  fleeting  is  the  intercourse  of  men  (72). 

'  E'en  as  a  traveller  meeting  with  the  shade 
Of  some  o'erhanging  tree,  awhile  reposes. 
Then  leaves  its  shelter  to  pursue  his  way, 
So  men  meet  friends,  then  part  with  them  for  ever  (73). 

This  is  no  permanent  companionship 
Gained  by  residing  with  one's  own  frail  body. 
Much  less  by  intercourse  with  other  persons  (76). 

For  union  points  to  coming  separation. 
As  birth  to  death's  infallible  approach  (77). 

As  streams  of  rivers  ever  onward  flow. 
Never  returning,  so  do  day  and  night 
Go  on  for  ever,  bearing  off  man's  life  (79). 

As  oft  as  men  of  thoughtful  minds,  reflect 

6n  death's  inexorable  rod,  impending 

O'er  their  doomed  heads,  their  energies  relax 

Like  thongs  of  leather  soaked  by  dropping  rain  (83). 

'Tis  ignorance  that  is  the  cause  of  sorrow 
For  those  who  die ;  if  separation  cause  it. 
Then  with  the  lapse  of  time  grief  should  increase ; 
As  days  pass  on  why  does  it  rather  cease  ?  (85). 


5  53  INDIAN   WISDOM. 

A  panacea  for  the  cure  of  blows 

Dealt  suddenly  by  unexpected  strokes  ^ 

Of  deep  affliction,  rending  all  the  soul — 

Is  to  control  the  will  and  stifle  thought  (86).   ' 

E'en  in  a  forest  vices  may  be  practised 
By  those  who  foster  there  their  evil  passions  : 
While  in  a  house,  subjection  of  the  senses 
Is  a  true  penance,  and  the  home  of  one 
Who,  holding  all  his  passions  in  restraint, 
Engages  in  good  actions,  is  a  convent  (87). 

Cease  not,  whatever  be  thy  mode  of  life. 
Although  distressed,  to  walk  in  righteous  paths. 
And  act  with  justice  towards  every  creature. 
No  outward  badge  is  proof  of  piety  (88). 

Thou  art  thyself  a  stream  whose  sacred  ford 
Is  self-restraint,  whose  water  is  veracity. 
Whose  bank  is  virtue,  and  whose  waves  are  love ; 
Here  practise  thy  ablutions,  by  mere  water 
The  inner  man  can  ne'er  be  purified  (90). 

That  man  attains  to  happiness  who  quits 
This  unsubstantial  world — a  world  beset 
With  pains  of  birth  and  death,  old  age  and  sickness  (91). 

Pain  and  not  pleasure  has  a  real  existence — 

'Tis  hence,  the  name  of  pleasure  is  applied 

To  that  which  gives  relief  from  present  pain  (92). 

A  roaring  noise,  like  that  of  autumn-cloud. 
Should  not  be  made  in  vain,  one  really  great 
Proclaims  not  his  successes  or  reverses  (95). 

War  not  with  many  foes ;  by  swarming  insects 
Even  a  mighty  serpent  is  destroyed  (96). 

"'Lust,  anger,  love  of  money,  overjoy. 

Pride  and  conceit,  this  six-fold  class  of  faults 
Should  be  forsaken ;  then  one  may  be  happy  (99). 


^  B.'s  reading. 


THE   NITI-SASTRAS.  553 

^Good  memory,  activity  in  business, 
ThoTiglitful  deliberation,  accuracy 
Of  information,  firmness  and  concealment 
Of  counsel,  are  a  minister's  prime  virtues  (loo). 

''Do  nothing  rashly,  want  of  due  reflection 
Is  the  chief  source  of  failure ;  Fortune,  eager 
To  favour  merit,  of  her  own  accord. 
Chooses  the  man  who  acts  deliberately  (lor). 

The  qualities  and  course  of  life  of  those  ^ 
Who  live  in  distant  places,  out  of  sight, 
Can  only  from  their  actions  be  inferred, 
And  actions  must  be  judged  of  by  results  (105). 

A  swan  that  could  not  clearly  see  by  night,^ 
Searching  for  food  upon  a  lotus-pool, 
Mistook  the  mirrored  image  of  the  stars 
For  tender  shoots  of  lilies,  then  by  day 
The  silly  bird  refused  to  peck  the  buds, 
Thinking  them  stars ;  thus  persons  once  deceived 
Suspect  deception  even  in  the  truth  (ro6). 

''A  mind  which  has  been  poisoned  by  the  wicked 
Confides  not  even  in  the  good,  a  child 
Once  scalded  by  hot  porridge  will  not  drink 
Even  cold  milk  till  he  has  blown  upon  it  (107). 

By  gifts  of  money  one  may  win  a  miser ; 
By  gestures  of  respect,  a  stubborn  man ; 
A  simpleton  by  humouring  his  will ; 
A  wise  man,  only  by  veracity  (108). 

Who  would  be  guilty  of  unrighteous  acts 

For  or  against  a  body  doomed  to  die 

To-day  or  perhaps  to-morrow  by  the  pains 

Of  some  disease,  or  some  heartrending  grief?  (132). 

Do  rightly,  knowing  that  thy  life  resembles 

The  moon's  reflection  on  the  quivering  wave  (133). 


1  B.'s  reading. 


5  54  INDIAN  WISDOM. 

In  order  to  the  increase  of  tiiy  virtue 
And  of  thy  happiness,  consort  thou  only 
With  righteous  men,  remembering  that  thy  life 
Is  transient  as  the  mirage  of  the  desert  (134). 

^If  Truth  and  thousands  of  Horse-sacrifices 

Were  weighed  together,  Truth  would  be  more  weighty  (135). 


INDEX. 


Observe — In  the  following  Index  the  numbers  indicate  the  pages.  When  more  than  one 
page  is  given,  the  numbers  are  separated  by  semicolons.  A  unit  separated  from  a 
preceding  number  by  a  comma,  indicates  the  number  of  a  footnote. 


Abhava,  66. 

Abhidhana-fSintamani,  l6l. 
Abhidhana-ratnamala,  l6l. 
Abhijit,  341,  1. 
Abhijnana-fekuntala,  507, 1. 
Abhimanyu,   389,   2  ;    398  ; 

404._ 
Abhirama-mani,  367. 
Abhisheka,  391. 
Abhyasa,  93. 

Abhyudayika  SrSddha,  200. 
Abu-1  Pazl,  529,  2. 
Adara, 208  ;  213;  261  ;  278  ; 
_  292  ;  294. 

A(Sarya,  232;  240  ;  295  ;  409. 
Accent,  153  ;  245,  2. 
Aoesines,  river,  375,  I. 
Achilles,  313,  1  ;  357,  i. 
Action,  470. 
A(iyuta,  390,  i. 
A(5yuta-(5akravartin,  304. 
Adbhuta,  457,  I. 
Adhidaivikam,  217. 
Adhikara,  165- 
Adhimasa,  174. 
Adhiratha,  377. 
Adhishthana,  198,  3. 
Adhiyajiiam,  217. 
Adho-nivitah,  196. 
Adhvaryu  (priests),  6  ;  216. 
Adhyapanam,  237. 
Adhy-atmam,  139. 
Adhyatma-ramayana,  368. 
Adhyatmika,  217  ;  278,  I. 
Adhyavahanikam,  268. 
Adhyayanam,  237. 
Idi  Grantha,  of  Sikhs,  325, 1. 
Adi-parvan,  371,  I  ;  373- 
Adi^ura,  210,  i. 
Adi^vara,  210,  I. 
A-diti,  9 ;  14. 
Aditya,  521. 
Adityas,  twelve,   10  ;  320  ; 

_  399- 

Aditya-vara,  178,  I. 
Admetus  and  Alcestis,  395. 


Adrishta,  3  ;  58  ;  71  ;  73  ; 

74  ;   120  ;  282,  2  ;  469. 
A-dvaita,  'non-dualism,'  102. 
A-dvayam,  113,  4. 
Aegle  Marmelos,  444. 
Aeneid,  58,  I. 
Aesop,  529. 
Agama,  323,  1. 
Agamemnon,  425. 
Agastya,  234,  I  ;  353  ;  504. 
Ages,  four,  178,  2  ;  221. 
Aghora-ghaijta,  500  ;  501. 
Agneyastra,  404,  I. 
Agni,  11;  15;  16,  I  ;  189; 

256  ;  321  ;  430 ;  514. 
Agni,  a  prayer  to,  27,  1. 
Agni-hotra,    28,     1  ;     121  ; 

148  ;  244  ;  254. 
Agnihotra-homah,  216. 
Agnihotrin,  189,  I. 
Agnimitra,  498. 
Agni-purSna,  292  ;  368. 
Agnishtoma,      187 ;      231  ; 

232,  i. 
Agni-vef^a,  369. 
Agrahayana,  173,  3. 
Agrayana,  158. 
Ahalya,    wife   of   Gautama, 

387,  I.  „       „ 

Ahan-kara,  53,  3  ;  83  ;  84  ; 
_  86;  117  ;  140  ;  221. 
Ahavanlya  fire,  188,  I  ;  189, 

I  ;  196  ;  197. 
Ahi,  14. 
A-hinsa,  242,  2. 
Ahura  Mazda,  10. 
Ahvaya,  261. 
Aila,  375. 
Aila-vansa,  511,  1. 
Airavata,  Indra's  elephant, 

353;  43_2.  I- 
Aitareya  Aranyaka,  245,  2. 
Aitareya  XJpanishad,  35. 
Aitareya-brahmana,  25  ;  28 ; 

29;    32;     172';    24s,   2; 

330,  3- 

555 


Aitihasikas,  158. 

Aja,  344 ;  409,  2. 

Ajigarta,  26  ;  27.  ' 

Ajmir,  325,  i. 

Aka^a,  53,  I  ;  67  ;  83  ;  83,  3. 

Akbar,  Emperor,  529,  2. 

Akhyana,    207,     i  ;      249 ; 

.  370.  I- 

Akhyata,  151  ;  160. 
Aksha-pada,  65,  I  ;  79i  '■ 
Akshapada-dar^ana,  118. 
Akshepa,  458. 
AlaU'kara-kaustubha,  470. 
AlaU'karas,  456  ;  457. 
AlaU'kara-sarvasva,  470. 
Alan-kara-^astra,  469. 
Albert,  King  Charles,  336,  I . 
Alexander's  death,  507. 
Alexander's  invasion,   252  ; 

316. 
Algebra,  invention  of,  174. 
Algebra,  Hindu,  180;   181. 
Algebraists,  Hindu,  181. 
Allegory  of   two  birds,  40  ; 

222 
Allen,'  W.  H.  &  Co.,  495. 
Alliteration,  employment  of, 

455-    ,       „ 
Almanacs,  178,  I. 
Amara-kosha,  161  ;  432,  I. 
Amara-sinha,  512  ;  S^Si  '• 
Amaru,  454. 

Amaru-lataka,  454 ;  S^S- 
Ambalika,  376. 
Ambarisha,    27,     I  ;     344 ; 

361,  I. 
Ambashtha,  210,  I  ;  225. 
Ambika,  376. 
Amlika,  423,  3. 
Amrita,  327  ;  518. 
Amulam  mulam,  81  ;  82. 
Amtirta,  177. 
Amyak,  159. 
Analysis,  60;  161. 
Ananda-maya,  114. 
Ananda-tlrtha,  119 


556 


INDEX. 


Ananta,  431. 
Anauta-vijaya,  403. 
Anargha-raghava,  367;  508. 
An-arya,  310.  ' 

An-aryas,  308. 
An-a^rita,  299. 
Anasuya,  wife  of  Atri,  360, 1. 
Anatomy,  184. 
An-aupadhikah       samband- 

hah,  63. 
Anaxiu^ander,  52,  I. 
Anaximenes,  52,  i. 
Anda,  220. 
Andhakas,  399. 
Andromache,  313,  i;  440. 
An-ga,    kingdom    of,    340; 

417;  470;  472. 
An-ga-raga,  360,  i. 
An-giras,  6;  203;  216;  235; 

252,  2;  301  j  517,  I. 
An'gushtha-matra,  198,  3. 
Anila  (Wind),  256. 
Animals,  55,  3 ;  276. 
Anjalika,  405,  I. 
Anjana,  432,  i. 
An-ka,  183;  470;  471. 
An-kui5a,  183. 
Anna-maya,  114. 
Anna-pra^ana,    192 ;     232 ; 

239- 
Antah-karana,    53;    53,   3; 

116. 
Antahsanjna,  56,  I. 
Antariksha,  197. 
Antar-vedi,  ig6. 
Anthropomorphism,  319. 
Antiochus     and    Eumenes, 

252,  I. 
Antya,  243. 

Anubandha,  163  ;  163,  3. 
Anudattoktya,  473. 
AnukramanI    or    '  Indices, ' 

184. 
Anumana,  61 ;  82 ;  117;  222. 
Anumati,  158 ;  172. 
An-upalabdhi,  117. 
Anuprasa,  457. 
Anus  or  'atoms,'  71. 
Anu&sana-parvan,374;  411. 
Anushtubh  metres,  155 ;  213, 

- 1;  311;  335- 

Anu^ravika,  4S,  i. 
Anuvan^a-^loka,  511,  i. 
Anavritti,  165. 
Anvaharya,  249. 
Anvaharya-paiana  fire,  189, 

I. 
Anvar-i-Suhaili,  529,  2. 
Anvashtakya  ^raddlia,  193. 
Anvlkshiki,  '  logic,'  219. 
Apad-dharma,  374. 
Apara,  69. 
Apararka,  303. 


Aparatva,  68. 
Apas,  '  water,'  67  ;  84. 
Apasadal^,  244. 
Apastamba,   203 ;    203,    I  ; 
_  236,  I  ;  302. 
Apastamba     Grihya  -  sutra, 

.187. 

Apastamba     Srauta  -  sutra, 

_  146;  187,  I. 
Apastambas,  187,  I. 
Apavarga,  59 ;  63. 
Aphorisms,  46. 
Aphrodite,  327,  5. 
Apisali,  161,  2. 
Apologue,  Indian,  534. 
A-prakrita,  457. 
A-prastuta,  457. 
Apsaras,  276 ;  519. 
Apta-vadana,  82. 
Apya-dikshita,  470. 

4pjaya.  470- 
ArabhatI,  503,  I. 
Arabs,  180,  2. 
Arani,  15. 

Aranya-kanda,  337 ;  366. 
Aranyakas,  34. 
Arbuda,  399. 
Archery,  184. 
Architecture,^  184. 
Ardha-nari  (Siva),  89  j  322, 

I ;  523.  I- 

Argha,  295  ;  295,  3  ;  391. 
Arhata-dar^ana,  118. 
Aristotle,  51,  3  ;  57,  i ;  61 ; 

68,    1  ;  70  ;  85,    I ;    103  ; 

IIS;  "6,  I  ;  403,  I. 
Aritra,  227,  i. 
Arjuna,  100;  126;  229,   I; 

379 ;  387.  I ;  403 ;  413 ; 
.419;  431.  i;  S".  I- 

Aropa,  458. 

Arrian,  252,  I. 

Arsha  (revealed  knowledge), 

_  214. 

Arsha  form  of  marriage,  190; 

244. 
Ars  poetica,  456. 
Artha,  63 ;  195. 
Arthalan-kara,  457. 
Arthantara-nyasa,  458. 
Arthapatti,  117;  458. 
Artha-vada,  24. 
Aruna,  428. 
AruudhatI,  191. 
Arya,  'noble,'  310. 
Arya-bhatta,  175. 
Aryaman,  16  ;  190. 
Aryans,  6  ;  311. 
Aryashta-^ata,  175. 
Aryavarta,  226,  I. 
A-samavayi-karana,  70. 
Asana, '  postures,'  93. 
A-^auda,  6. 


A^audam,  300. 
Asceticism,  93  ;  94  ;  129. 
Ashadha,  173,  3. 
Asha4ha,_i73,  3;  199. 
Ashtadhyayi,  163. 
Ashtaka  Sraddha,  193  ;  199. 
Ashtakam  Paniniyam,  163, 
Ashtakshara,  154. 
Ashta-murti,  323,  i. 
Asiatic  Kesearches,  96  ;  155, 
2. 

Asi-patra-vana,  415. 
Asita,  520. 

Aioka,  371,  I  ;  423,  3  ;  467. 
A^oka  inscriptions,  313. 
A&amas  or  'Orders,'  215; 
-  238. 

A^ramavasika,  411,  I. 
A^ramavasika-parvan,  374. 
Assessors,  296. 
Astrologer,  179. 
Astrology,  174 ;  179. 
Astronomy,  170;  172;  174. 
A-^udi,  216. 
Asura,  244. 

Asuraformof  marriage,  190. 
Asura  C'arvaka,  382,  3. 
Asiiras,  159 ;  394. 
Asuryam-pa^ya,  437,  I. 
A^valayana     Grihya  -  sutra, 

186;    186, 2;'  188;    245, 

2;  294,   3;  29s,   2;  371, 

I  ;  512. 
A,^  valay  ana     Srauta  -  sutra, 

146  ;  186,  2 ;  245,  2. 
Asvalayana-brahmana,  25, 3. 
A^va-medha,  28,    I;   187; 

340;  374- 
A^vamedhika-parvan,  374. 
Asvami-vikraya,  261. 
A^va-pati,  king  of  Kekaya, 

341.  2- 
A^vattha,  '  holy  fig-tree,  39, 

3- 
A^vatthaman,  383,  I  ;  405  ; 

407;  409;  481. 
A^vin,  365,  1. 
A^vina,  173,  3. 
Asvini,  I73>^3;  428,  3- 
A^vini-kumaras,  428. 
A^vins,  11;  158;  379;  387, 

I  ;  400. 
Atala,  431,  I. 
Atharvan,  216  ;  235. 
Atharvan-giras,    195 ;    245, 

2 ;  295. 
Atharva - veda,    3;   J;    12; 

22  ;  24s,  2 ;  275. 
Atharva- veda  -  prati^akhya, 

151- 

Atheists,  249. 

Athene,  temple  of,  133,  8. 

Athenians,  224,  i. 


INDEX. 


557 


Atikaya,  382,  3. 
Ati-kri6(5hra  penance,  273. 
Atiratra,  341,  i. 
Ati^ayokti,  458. 
Atithi,  250. 

Atithi-bhojana,  188,  I. 
Ativahika,  ig8,  3. 
Ati-vyapti,  63,  i. 
Atma-bodjia,  no;  113. 
Atman,  63  ;   67  ;  74 ;  220 ; 
_  222  ;  290,  3. 
Atmane-pada,  164  ;  165. 
Atma-tushti,  208. 
Atma-tyaginyah,  '299. 
Atma-vidya,  219. 
Atoms,  71- 

Atri,203;  301:375;  517,  I. 
Aufreoht,  Professor,  528,  2. 
Aulukya-dar^ana,  118. 
Aupamanyava,  159. 
Aurangzib,  325,  I.  . 

Aurelius,    Marcus,    45,    1  ; 

142 ;  143 ;  544.  I- 
Aurnabhava,  158. 
Auianasa,  521. 
Austin,  Stephen,  495,  i. 
Authority  of  Veda,  215. 
Auttami,  Manu,  206,  1. 
Avaka,  198,  3. 
A  varan  a,  109. 
Avarodha,  437,  2. 
Avasathya  fire,  189,  I. 
Avayava,     'member    of    an 

argument,'  61 ;  64. 
A-vidya,  109. 
A-vyakta,  82  ;  220. 
Avyakta-ganita,  176,  3. 
Avyayi-bhava,  152. 
Ayodhya,  27,  1 ;  317  ;  335, 

i;  351;  359;  499>  I- 

Ayodhya-kanda,  337;  366. 
Ayogava,  225. 
Ayur-veda,  184. 
Ayus,  375. 

Azali,   'without  beginning, 
SI,  2. 

Babhru-vahana,  390. 
Badarayana,    loi  ;    245,   2 ; 

509- 
Bagdis,  210,  I. 
Bahu-janma-bhak,  18,  I. 
Bahu-prajah,  18,  1. 
Bahurupa,  409,  2. 
Bahu^alin,  381,  4. 
Bahu-vrihi,  152. 
Bahv-ri(5a,  216. 
Baidya,  210,  1.  ^ 

Bailee,  263. 
Bailments,  263. 
Baital-paiSisI,  532. 
Baka,  386. 
Bala,  '  strength,'  387,  I. 


Baladeva,  387,  I. 
Bala-kanda,  337  ;  366. 
Bala-krishna,  515. 
Balam-bhatta,  304. 
Bala-rama,  332  ;  374  ;  375  ; 

383 ;    391 ;    398 ;,  408 ; 
515- 

Bala-ramayana,  367 ;  S°8. 
Bali,    i88,    I ;    194 ;    245  ; 

259 ;  328. 

Ballala,  532. 

Ballantyne,  Dr.,  60,   I ;  70, 

i;  74;  79,1;  88,1;  470, 

I. 
Bana,  367 ;  533. 
Bandyopadhyaya,  210,  I. 
Banerjea,  Professor  K.  M., 

65 ;  73  ;  74,  2  ;  96  ;  210, 

I ;  365. 1-  .    „ 

Banerjea's  Dialogues,  181. 

Banians,  224,  2. 

Banias,  224,  2. 

Banijya,  237,  2. 

Banik,  224,  2. 

Baniyas,  224,  2. 

Bapudera  ^astri,  175,  2. 

Bard,  510. 

Barth,  M.,  Revue  Critique, 

255.  I- 
Batn,  33. 

Batri^  Sinhasan,  532. 
Bauddha-dar^ana,  118. 
Baudhayana,  203  ;  203,  I  ; 

302. 
Baudhayana  Grihya  Sutras, 

187. 
Baudhayana  Srauta  Siitras, 

146. 
Bear,  Great,  517,  I. 
Bediyas,  2ro,  i. 
Behar,  302. 

Benares,  school  of,  302  ;  304. 
Benfey,    Professor,  530,   I  ; 

534,  2. 
Bengal,  303. 

Bengal,  school  of  law,  302. 
Bentinck,  Lord  William,  252, 

2. 
Berkeley,  53,  I  ;   82,  I ;  84, 

2  ;  89,  2. 
Bha  (in  algebra),  183. 
Bhadra,  432,  I. 
Bhadra,  173,  3. 
Bhadrapada,  173,  3. 
Bhadra-pada,  173,  3. 
Bhaga,  178. 
Bhagana,  178. 
Bhagavad-gita,   39,   3  ;   47  ; 

55,  3;  91;  91,  I  ;  93; 
100;  122;  317;  324,  2; 

401  ;  518. 
Bhaga  vat,  515. 
Bhagavata-purana,    126,   I  ; 


327,2:331;  389,  2;  515; 

516. 

lagavatas,    325,    I  ;    514  ; 

521. 
Bhaglratha,  344 ;  362 ;  363. 
Bhagirathi,  363. 
Bhaguri,  303. 
Bhaiksha,  386. 
Bhakshyabhakshya,  411,  i. 
Bhaktas,  523,  i. 
Bhakti  (faith),  217  ;  326. 
Bhakti,  later  theory  of,  125. 
Bhalla,  405,  i. 
Bhama,  470, 
Bhana,  471. 
Bhandarkar,  Professor,   167, 

2;  187,  i;  236,  l;  245,  2. 
Bhanika,  472. 
Bhanu-datta,  457. 
Bharadvaja,  359;  404,  i. 
Bharadvaja     (grammarian), 

161,  2. 
Bharadvaja  Grihya  Sutras, 

187. 
Bharadvaja   Srauta    Sutras, 

146. 
Bharata,    345;    351  ;    359; 

364  ;  420  ;  469. 
Bharata  (Sutras),  469. 
Bharata,  33S,  1  ;  371,  I. 
Bharatam  akhyanam,  371,  2. 
Bharata-mallika,  168. 
Bharata-sena,  168. 
Bharata-varsha,  370 ;  375- 
Bharati,  503,  i. 
Bharavi,  393,  i  ;  452. 
Bhartri-hari,    167,   i  ;   453  ; 

528  ;  533- 
Bhasa,  498. 

Bhasha-pari66heda,  60,  I. 
Bhashya-pradipa,  168. 
Bhashya-pradipoddy  ota,  1 68. 
Bhaskara,  176;  178;    180; 

181. 
Bhaskara6arya,  97 ;  176. 
Bhatiyas,  224,  2. 
Bhatta,  232,  3. 
Bhatta-divakara,  213,  2. 
Bhatta-narayana,  392,  3. 
Bhatti-kavya,      168 ;     367 ; 

453  ;  454  ;  457- 
Bhattoji-dlkshita,  i68. 
Bhau  Daji,  Dr.,  494,  i. 
Bhauma,  179. 
Bhava,  409,  2. 
Bhava-bhuti,  337  ;    359,  I  ; 

367 ;  499- 
Bhavana,  409,  2. 
Bhavishya,  514;  521. 
Bhavishya-purana,  512,  I. 
Bhavita,  183. 
Bhayanaka,  457,  1. 
Bhikshu,  211  ;  238;  254. 


5S8 


INDEX. 


Bhikshuka,  245,  2. 

Bhils,  309,  I. 

Bhima,    379  ;    405  ;    414  ; 

419. 
Bhimasena,  381,  4. 
Bhishma,  329,  2  ;  373 ;  375  ; 

384;    391;    397;   401; 

403;  411. 
Bhishma-parvan,  373. 
Bhistis  (water-bearers),  224, 

2. 
Bhogavati,  431,  I. 
Bhoja,  367  ;  407 ;  532  ;  533. 
Bhoja-deva,  commentary  of, 

92,  2. 
Bhoja-prabaudha,  532. 
Bhoja-raja,  commentary  of, 

92,  2. 
Bhrigu,  185 ;  203 ;  206 ;  221 ; 

302  ;  335  ;  517,  I. 
Bhu,  431,  I. 
Bhuh,  159. 
Bhukti,  297. 
Bhumi,  '  earth,'  84. 
Bhilr,  55,  2  ;   195. 
Bhuta,  184, 

Bhuta-yajna,  194  ;  245. 
Bhuvalj  or  Bhuvar,    55,  2  ; 

159;   19s;  431.  I- 
Bibhatsa,  457,  I. 
Bibhatsu,  381,  4;  397. 
Bible,  131,  2. 
Bibliotheoa   Indica,    35,   I  ; 

44.  2 ;  98, 1. 

Binary  compound,  71. 
Bohlen,  Von,  528,  I. 
Bohn,  68,  i. 
Bohtlingk,  Professor,  168,  4 ; 

169  ;  527,  I. 
Bombay,  school  of  law,  302. 
Bopp,  385  ;  386. 
Borrodaile,  Mr.  H.,  305,  2. 
Bose,  210,  I. 
Bottomry,  264. 
Braohmanes,  276,  I. 
Brahma,  37  ;  see  Brahman. 
Brahma  (world),  431,  I. 
Brahma,  22,  I  ;  3 1  ;  40 ;  54  5 

83,  3 ;  91 ;  324 ;  325.  i ; 

343  ;_ 429;  514;  518. 
Brahma  (son  of),  79,  I. 
Brahma  (form  of  marriage), 

190. 
Brahmadarl,  375. 
Brahma-iarin,    192;     238; 

241. 
Brahma6arya-vrata,  379,  2. 
Brahma-ghosha,  419,  4, 
Brahma-gupta,  175,  3;  176. 
Brahma-ha,  270. 
Brahmahatya,  270 ;  387,  I. 
Brahma- jijnasa,  104. 
Brahma-loka,  405. 


Brahma-mlmansa,  88. 
Brahman  (Supreme  Spirit), 

9583;  104;  105,  3;  189; 

217. 
Brahman     (prayer,     Veda), 

214 ;  230,  I ;  273. 
Brahmana  (portion  of  Veda), 

5  ;  24";  25  ;  48  ;  56,  2. 
Brahmana     (prayer-offerer), 

230,  i. 
Brahmanas  (of  each  Veda), 

25 ;  195- 
Brahmanda,  514  !  52 '• 
Brahmanda-purana,  368. 
Brahmani,  522. 
Brahmanioide,  315,  I. 
Brahmanism,    232  ;      233  ; 

238.       ■ 
Brahmans,  223  ;  232,  &o. 
Brahmans,  Kshatriyas,  and 

'  Vai^yas,  232. 
Brahmans      (of      Konkan), 

237.  I- 
Brahma-pura,  116,  2. 
Brahma-purana,     252,      2  ; 

514. 
Brahma-siddhanta  or  Brah- 

ma-s°,  175  ;   176. 
Brahmastra,  402,  i. 
Brahmavarta,  209. 
Brahma-vaivarta,  514;  5'S  > 

522. 
Brahma-vidya,  219. 
Brahma-yajua,    194  ;    245  ; 

245,  2;     271  ;     294,    3; 

29s,  2. 
Brahmodyan,  295,  I. 
Brahmojjhata,  270. 
Brihad  -  aranyaka      Upani- 

shad,  35;  36;   114;   133, 

3 ;  345.  2.  _ 

Brihat-samhita,  176  ;   179. 
Brockhaus,    Dr.    Hermann, 

532,  I. 
Buddha,  47  ;  333. 
Buddhi,  53,  3  ;  63  ;  83  ;  85  ; 

109  ;  117;  140;  222. 
Buddhindriyani,  84,  I. 
Buddhism,   28,    i  ;  207,   i  ; 

475 ;  513 ;'  524- 

Buddhist   ascetics,   276,    1 ; 

47S- 
Buddhistic  scepticism,  314. 
Budha,  179  ;  375. 
Budha-vara,  178,  1. 
Bilhler,   Dr.,   161,   2 ;    530, 

I. 
Bukka,  court  of  King,  118. 
Burgess,  E.,  176. 
Burial  in  the  ground,  299. 
Burkhard,  Dr.  C,  495,  I. 
Burmese  language,  309,  1. 
Bumell,  Dr.,  118  ;  245,  2. 


C'a-hara,  183. 

C'aitanya  (intelligence),  120. 
C'aitra,  173,  3  ;  365,  I. 
C'aitya-yajna,  192. 
O'akra,  183. 
C'akravaka,  423,  I. 
C'akravarmana,  161,  2. 
C'akra-vartins,  204. 
C'akra-vriddhi,  264. 
C'akshur-divyam,  387,  i. 
Cakshusha,  Manu,  206,  i. 
Calcutta  Review,    335,     I  ; 

338,  2 ;  340,  I  ;  356,  2. 
Calcutta  University,  302,  I. 
Caldwell,  Dr.,  309,  I. 
C'ampu,  369. 
C'ampu-ramayana,  367. 
C'amunda,  500  ;  522. 
C'anakya,  507  ;  528. 
C'andala  or  C'andala,  225  ; 

229,  I  ;  270. 
C'andana,  423,  3. 
C'andatas,  492. 
C'andi,  522. 
O'andra,  234,  2  ;  256  ;  330, 

I ;  360. 1- 
C'andra,  179. 
C'andra-gupta,  224,  I  ;  313; 

507.  _ 
C'andraloka,  470. 
C'andrayana  penance,  274. 
C'ara,  257. 
C'araka,  184. 
C'arana  or  school,  187. 
C'arana-vyuha,  187,  2. 
Carey,  336,  I. 
C'aru,  298. 
C'aru-datta,  476. 
C'arvaka,    119;    120;    219; 

411. 
C'arvaka-dar^ana,  118. 
C'arvakas,  119;  120. 
C'arvakas,   doctrine   of  the, 

352- 
Caste,  210 ;  223. 
Caste,  loss  of,  273. 
Categories,  Aristotelian,  66, 

2. 
Categories  of  Vaifeshika,  66. 
C'attopadhyaya,  zi8,  I. 
C'atur-an.ga,  258  ;  351. 
C'aturjea,  210,  I. 
C'aturmasya,  28,  I. 
C'atushtoma,  341,  I. 
C'aula,  189  ;  192  ;  239. 
Causation,  theory  of,  Jo. 
Cebes,  58,  I. 
Centauri,  310,  i. 
Ceremonies,  S'raddha,  196  ; 

266  ;  430. 
Ceylon,  308. 
C'hala,  64. 
C'halita-rama,  367. 


INDEX. 


559 


Chambers's    Encyclopaedia, 

70,  I  ;  166,  I. 
Chambhars,  leather-cutters, 

224,  2. 
C'handah-festra,  153. 
C'handas,   145;    153;    154; 

214. 
C'hando-ga,  216. 
C'handogya  Upanishad,  35  ; 

37 ;  38 ;  49 ;  102. 

Chess,  529. 

China,  173,  2. 

Chinese  drama,  468. 

Chinese  language,  309,  I. 

Chitpavan,  224,  I. 

Christ,  131,  2. 

Christ   and   other   Masters, 

28,  I ;  59,  I. 
Christianity,  2;  131,  2. 
Christians,  Syrian,  122,  3. 
Chronicle,  511,  I- 
Ohuteerkote,  356,  2. 
Cicero,  72,  i  ;  73,  4 ;  77,  2 ; 

83.3- 
Cicero,  Tusc.  Disp.,  58,  i ; 

7S,  2  ;  252,  I. 
C'lnas,  229,  I. 
C'itra,  173,  3  ;  456^ 
C'itrakut,  1  C'itra-kuta,  244, 

i;_3S6,  2. 
C'itraU'gada,  390. 
C'itra-ratha,  354. 
C'itta,  53,3;  93;  117. 
Civil  code,  261. 
Clay-cart,  475. 
Codes,  eighteen,  after  Yaj- 

navalkya,  300. 
Colebrooke,  43,    I  ;   171,  I  ; 

291,  I  ;  296,  I  ;  300;  500. 
Colebrooke's  Indian  Algebra, 

176. 
Colebrooke's  Bhaskara,  180. 
Comedy,  468. 
Compound  interest,  264. 
Confidantes,  heroine's,  474. 
Confucius,  47. 

Consumptive  persons,  270,  1. 
Contract,  262 ;  263. 
Copernicus,  32. 
Cosmogony  (Vaii^eshika),  77. 
Cow  (sacred),  519. 
Cowell,  Professor  E.  B.,  35 

I  ;44,  2;6o,  I,;  7i>  I ;  77; 

296,  I ;  300,  I  ;  495,  i. 
Cowell,  Mr.  Herbert,  267,  I. 
Cowell's  Tagore  Law   Lec- 
tures, 302,  I. 
Creator,  518. 
Crimes  (great),  269. 
Crimes  (secondary),  270. 
Criminal  code,  Manu's,  268. 
C'iida-karman,     189 ;     192  ; 

239- 


Curzon,  Mr.,  340,  i. 

Cust,   Mr.  R.   N.,  335,   i  ; 

338,  2  ;  340,  I. 
C'uta,  423,  3. 
Cyclopes,  310,  I.  ' 

Dadhi,  420. 

Dadima,  423,  3. 

Daiva,  244  ;  282,  2. 

Daiva  form  of  marriage,  I  go. 

Daiva,  S'raddha,  200. 

Daivata,  157;  158. 

Daksha,   172,   i;  203;  234, 

2;  302;  517.  I- 
Daksha-kratu-hara,  409,  2. 
Daksheya,  162. 
Dakshi,  162. 
Dakshina,  197  ;  236,  I. 
Dakshina  (fee),  187,  I  ;  236. 
Dakshina  (fire),  189,  I. 
Dakshina  (hearth),  188,  I. 
Dakshinadarins,  523,  I. 
Damanaka,  529,  2. 
Pamaru,  183. 
Damayantl-katha,  367. 
Dam-dupat,  264,  2. 
Damodara,  184 ;  390,  I. 
Danam,  237. 
Dana-sainvanana,  352. 
Dancing,  184 ;  467. 
Danda,  177  ;  290,  i. 
Dandaka  forest,  348, 1 ;  417  ; 

503- 
Dandaka  metre,  155. 
Dandi,  255. 
Dandin,  367 ;  532. 
Daniel,  136,  4. 
Dante,  415. 
Dar^a,  246. 
Dar^anas,  46  ;  56,  2. 
Dar^a-purnamasa,  28,  I. 
Darwinians,  79. 
Dasa,  210,  I. 
Da^a-gitika,  I75- 
Da^a-hara,  365,  I. 
Da^a-kumara-(5arita,  257,  2 ; 

532- 
Da^ama-grantha  (Sikh),  325, 

I. 
Dasa-pati,  256,  I. 
Dai^aratha,    330 ;    335,     i  ; 

337  ;  344 j  347  ;  426. 
Da,4aratha-jataka,  316,  I. 
Da^aratha's  ministers,  339. 
Da.4arha,  390,  I. 
Da^a  -  rupa,    Da^a  t  ru] 

367 ;  457- 
Dasras,  II. 
Dasyus,  310. 
Datta,  210,  r, 
Dattaka-dandrika,  305. 
Dattaka-mimansa,  304. 
Dattasyanapakarma,  261. 


Dattatreya,  324,  2. 
Dawn,  16 ;  17. 
Daya,  262 ;  265. 
Daya-bhaga,  267,  1  ;  303. 
Daya-krama-Ban'graha,  304. 
Daya-tattva,  304. 
De,  210,  I. 
Death,    18  ;    31  ;    32  ;    36 ; 

37  ;  41 ;  209,  i. 
Debt,  261. 
Debts,  three,  254,  i. 
Decimal  figures,  529. 
Defendant,  297. 
Degeneracy,  520. 
Delhi,  205  ;  370  ;  390. 
Deluge,    tradition    of     the, 

393- 
Deposits,  law  of,  263. 
Deiasth,  224,  2. 
Desire,  20;  52,  I. 
Destroyer,  518. 
Deva,  409,  2. 
Deva-bodha,  303. 
Deva-datta,  403. 
Devah,  276. 
Devaki,     126 ;     331 ;    332 ; 

387.  I. 
Devala,  162. 
Devalaka,  218,  I. 
Devarah  197. 
Devas,  244. 

Devata,  Devatah,  241  ;  276. 
Deva-vrata,  375. 
Deva-yajna,  194;  245. 
Devi,  523. 

Devi-mahatmya,  514. 
Devrukh,  224,  2. 
Dhamma-pada,  207,  I. 
Dhana,  183. 
Dhananjaya,   367  ;   381-,   4  ; 

397 ;  457- 
Dhanishtha,  171. 
Dhanu-bandha,  456. 
Dhanur-veda,  184. 
Dhanvantari,  520. 
Dhara,  532. 
Dharana,  93. 
Dharana,  293. 
Dharani  (glossary),  i6l. 
Dharani-dhara,  303. 
Dharma,   65';    234,   2  ;  387, 

I. 
Dharmadharma,  271,  i. 
Dharma-jijnasa,  99. 
Dharma-mulam,  root  of  law, 

293- 
Dharma-putra,  381,  4. 
Dharma-raja,  381,  4. 
Dharma-ratna,  303,  2. 
Dharma-^astra,    202  ;    203  ; 

207,  l;_2i3. 
Dharma-sutras,  202. 
Dharna,  264,  3. 


56o 


INDEX. 


Dhatu,  163. 
Dhatu-patha,  163,  I. 
Dhaumya,  302 ;  389. 
Dhi,  283,  2. 
Dhigvana,  225. 
Dhiralalita,  470,  3. 
Dhira-prafenta,  470,  3. 
Dhirodatta,  470,  3. 
Dhrishta  -  dyumna,       373  ; 

384 ;'  387,  I ;   401 ;  405  ; 

407,  ij  409. 
Dhrita-rashtra,    373  ;    374  j 

376 ;  377- 

Dhurjati,  323. 

Dhurta-(5arita,  472. 

Dhyana,  93. 

Dialogue,  dramatic,  467. 

Dianus,  429,  I. 

Didhishu,  197. 

Diet,  rules  of,  250. 

Dig-ambara,  323. 

Dilipa,  344 

Dima,  471. 

DiodoTUS,  224,  I ;  318. 

Diodorus    Sioulus,   252,    i ; 

332>  2. 
Diogenes,  52,  i. 
Dion    Chrisostomps,     313  ; 

313.  I- 

Dionysos,  276,  r. 

Diophantus,  181. 

Dipaka,  458. 

Dipakalika,  303. 

Dipali,  325,  I. 

Dii,  67. 

Divall,  325,  I. 

Diva-svapna,  193. 

Divya,  ordeal,  271. 

Divyadivya,  471. 

Dola-yatra,  325,  I. 

Domestic  manners  (Hindu), 
436. 

Doms,  210,  I. 

Dosha,  63  ;  470,  I. 

Dower,  268. 

Draco,  laws  of,  268,  I. 

Drahyayana  S'rauta  Sutras, 
146. 

Dramas,  466 ;  470. 

Dramas  of  Greeks,  467. 

DraupadI,  366;  373;  384; 
405  ;  408  ;  S14. 

Dravatva,  69. 

Dravida,  210,  I  ;  229,  I  ; 
302. 

Dravidian  races  and  lan- 
guages, 309,  I. 

Dravidian    school    of    law, 

305- 
Dravya,  53,  i  ;  66 ;  76. 
Drikana,  173,  2. 
Drishadvati,  205  ;  209. 
Drishi,  144,  I. 


Drishta,  82. 
Drishtanta,  64 ;  458. 
Drona,    373  ;     383  ;     388  ; 

391 ;  404- 

Drona-parvan,  366 ;  373. 
Drupada,  384;  39 1  ;  398. 
Dugdha,  420. 
Duhkha,  63  ;  68. 
Duh&Ia,  379. 

Duh^asana,  385  ;  392  ;  405. 
Dnrga,    158;  217;  322,   2; 

325,  i;  427;  431;    S14; 

S22_;  523. 
Durga,  images  of,  365,  I. 
Durga-puja,  365,  I. 
Durmallika,  472. 
Durvasas,  377;  S'^' 
Durvasasa  IJpa-purana,  521. 
Dur-vipaka,  55,  i. 
Duryodhana,  374;  378;  380; 

38s  ;  397  ;  404. 
Dushyanta,  375  ;  495. 
Dutan-gada,  367. 
Dvaidha,  298. 
Dvaipayana,  375,  4. 
Dvaita-vadin,  79. 
Dvandva,  152,  255. 
Dvapara,  178,  2 ;  221 ;  301  ; 

302-329,  2;  410,  I. 
Dvaraka,  332 ;  408. 
Dvesha,  68. 
Dvi-ja,    '  twice-born,'    192  ; 

223  ;  232  ;  294. 
Dvi-jati,  223. 
Dvikam  ^atam,  264. 
Dvipa,  375,  4 ;  420. 
Dvy-anuka,  71, 
Dyaus,  9 ;   12. 
Dyaush-pitar,  9  ;  9,  i . 

Earth,  189. 

Earth   and   Heaven  (union 

of),  90. 
Eastwick,  Mr.  E.  B.,  495  ; 

S29>  2. 
Eclectic  School,  91,  I ;  118; 

122. 
Eggeling,  Professor  J.,  170. 
Ego,  84. 
Ego-ism,  83. 

Egyptians,  'ancient,  268,  I. 
Eka6akra,  city  of,  386. 
Eka-jati,  223. 
Ekakshara,  93,  1. 
Ekam  evadvitiyam,  38. 
Ekapadi,  191. 
Ekoddishta  S'raddha,   200 ; 

247. 
Eleatios,  52,  I. 
Elphinstone,  Mr.,  207,  i. 
Elphinstone's  India,  89,  i  ; 

229,  2  ;  256,  I. 
Emusha,  328,  I. 


Empedbcles,  52,  i  ;  73,  2. 

Encomiast,  510. 

Entity,  20. 

Epic  poetry,  306. 

Epic  poetry,  principal  char- 
acteristics of,  307. 

Epics,  Indian,  compared  to- 
gether and  with  Homer, 
416. 

Epictetus,  142;  143. 

Epicurus,  doctrines  of,  72,  i. 

Epos,  307. 

Ether,  53,  i  ;  67  ;  83  ;  83,  3. 

Ethnology  of  India,  309,  I. 

Etymologist,  160. 

Etymology,  156. 

Every-man  (morality),  508. 

Evidence,  law  of,  271. 

Expiation,  273  ;  274  ;  287. 

Tables,  526 ;  529. 
Pakir  or  Faqir,  94,  i. 
Ealse  evidence,  270. 
Earrar,    Dr.,  45,     I  ;     142  ; 

544,  I. 
Eemale  mendicant,Buddhist, 

498. 
Eicus  religiosa,  15,  i. 
Finnish  language,  309,  I. 
Fish,  eating  of,  250. 
Five  per  cent.,  265. 
Flesh,  eating  of,  250 ;  505. 
Flood,  tradition  of,  29. 
Frederic  the  Great,  257,  2. 
Funeral    ceremonies,     196 ; 

247;  299. 
Furruckabad,  499,  i. 
Future  life,  belief  in  a,  31. 

Gada-yuddha,  408. 
Gadya  (prose),  369. 
Gajasahvaya,  377,  2. 
Galava,  161,  2. 
Gambler,  478. 
Ganaka,  174. 
Gauapati,  127,  i. 
Ganapatyas,  127,  i  ;  325,  I. 
Gandha,  68  ;  376,  I. 
Gandhamadana,  420,  i. 
Gandhara  country,  162. 
Gandhari,  377  ;  378. 
Gandharva,  276. 
Gandharva  (marriage),  190. 
Gandharvas,  159 ;  400. 
Gandharva-veda,  184. 
Gandiva,    127  ;    397  ;    403  ; 

413.  1- 
Gane^a,   127,    I  ;  293  ;  325, 

l';  429;_430- 
Ganesa-glta,  127,  I. 
Gane^a-purana,  127,  i. 
Gan-ga,  361  /  362 ;  375. 
Ganges,  276,  i ;  412. 


INDEX. 


561 


Ganges,  story  of,  361. 

Gangeya,  375. 

Ganguli,  2IO,  i. 

Ganita,  176. 

Garbha,  470,  2. 

Garbha  XJpanishad,  58,  I. 

Garbhadhana,  239. 

Garbha-lambhana,  192  ;  239. 

Garbhikam  enas,  238. 

Garga,  180. 

Garga-siddhanta,  175. 

Gargi,  439,  i. 

Gargya,  160;  161,  2  ;  302. 

Garhapatya  fire,   187  ;  188, 

l;   189,  I  ;   196;   197. 
Garmanes,  276,  I. 
Garos  or  Garrows,  309,  i. 
Garuda,  430;  431,  I  ;  514. 
Gatha,  195  ;  299. 
Gatha  Ahunavaiti,  131,  j,. 
Gathikah,  295. 
Gauda,  210,  I  ;  336,  I. 
Gauda-pada,  83,  i  ;  88. 
Gaur,  210,  I. 
Gaurl,  522. 
Gautama,   49  ;    65,    i  ;   76  ; 

301 ;  302. 
Gavaya,  423,  i, 
Gayatri  text,  3  ;   17  ;  134,  2 ; 

154;  19s;  214;  231:274. 
Gayatri  metre,  155. 
Genealogies,  511,  i. 
Gesticulations,  pantomimic, 

467.' 
Ghana  arrangement  of  text, 

152,  I  ;  245,  2. 
Ghati,  177. 
Ghatika,  177. 
Ghatotkada,    385  ;    389,   2  ; 

405- 
Ghosha,  210,  I. 
Ghrana,  73. 
Giri^a,  409,  2. 

Gita-govinda,  367;  369;  454. 
Glossaries,  161. 
Gnostics,  57,  1. 
Go-badhah,  271. 
Gobhila's     Grihya     Sutras, 

186 ;  186,  2. 
Go-dana,  189. 

Godavari,  river,  339,  i;  417. 
Goethe,  495. 
Gogra,  river,  339,  2. 
Gokarna,  354. 
Gokula,  332. 
Goldstuoker,  Professor,  147, 

2  ;_i5o,  I. 
Gomutrika,  456. 
Gonarda,  167. 
Gond,  309,  I. 
Gonika,  167. 
Gopa,  210,  I. 
Go-patha  Brahmana,  25. 


Gopis,  325,  I  ;  332 ;  454. 
Go-pu(5(ihagra,  471. 
Goraksha,  237,  2. 
Gorresio,  336,  I ;  338  ;  354, 

I ;  364.  I ;  442. 

Gos,  210,  I. 

Goshala,  210,  I. 

Goshthi,  472. 

Gotama  (of  Nyaya),  60,  74. 

Gotama  (law-book),  203. 

Gotra  or  family,  24S. 

Gough,  Professor  A.  E.,  60, 

I ;  62  ;  63,  2  ;  67  ;  167,  I. 
Govardhana,  356,  i  ;'367. 
Govind,  325,  I. 
Govinda,  390,  \;,  454,  457. 
Govinda  Deva  Sastri,  508. 
Govinda-raja,  203  ;  303. 
Graha-rajna,  293. 
Grama,  village,  258. 
Grammar,  161 ;  529. 
Grantha,  232,  3. 
Granthis,  232,  3. 
Grasai5i5hadana,  267. 
Gravitation,  181. 
Greeks,  173,  2;  361 ;  467. 
Greeks  and  Romans,  33. 
Griffith,   Professor  R.,    125, 

2  ;  336,  I  ;  362  ;  395,  I. 
Griha-prapadana,  193. 
Griha-stha,  196  ;  238  ;  241  ; 

'243 ;  245,  2. 
Grihya  (domestic  rites),  186. 
Grihya   Sutras,    145  ;    186  ; 

300;  308. 
Grishraa,  453. 
Gudakefe,  381,  4. 
Guhyaka,  276. 
Gujarat,  236,  I  ;  332. 
Guna    (of   the   Vaiseshika), 

66  ;  68. 
Guna    (three),    56,    I  ;    85 ; 

275 ;  513- 

Gunadhya,  532. 

Gun-gu,  173. 

Gurjara,  210,  I. 

Guru,   56,  I ;  232  ;  232,  3 ; 

238  ;  240  ;  241  ;  242. 
Guru  Nanak,  325,  i. 
Gurutva,  69. 
Guru-vara,  178,  i. 
Gurv-artha,  384. 

Haberlin,  no. 
Hadis,  24. 
Hadis,  210,  I. 
Haituka,  219. 
Haj,  244,  I. 
Hajji,  244,  I. 
Hala,  367. 

Halayudha,  161  ;  332,  2. 
Hall,  Dr.  F.,  79,  i ;   175,  2  ; 
252,  2  ;  533. 


Hallisa,  472. 
Hansa,  243. 

Hanuman-nataka,  367 ;  508. 
Hanumat,   356;   359;  367; 

419,  4  ;  426  ;  428. 
Hara,  217;  320  ;  409,  2. 
Haravall,  161. 
Hard  wick,  Mr.,  28,  I  j  59, 1. 
Hari,  134,  2;  518. 
Hari-dasa's  comment,  77. 
Haridvar,  244,  i. 
Hari  Narayana,  431. 
Hari-natha,  368. 
Haris(5andra,  26. 
Harita,  203  ;  30 1. 
Hari-vani^a,  317;  331 ;  366; 

374;  418;  418,  2. 
Harriot,  182,  i. 
Harsha-vardhana,  533. 
Hastinapur,  370 ;  390. 
Hastina-pura,    126  ;     373  ; 

374;  4";  S".  1- 
Hasya,  457,  i. 
Hasyarnava,  508. 
Haug,  Professor,  25. 
Heads  of  law  (eighteen),  261. 
Heaven,  189. 
Heavens  (seven),  218;  431, 

I. 
Hector,  313,  i  ;  426. 
Hecuba,  313,  i. 
Hells,  217  ;  420,  I. 
Hema-6andra,  161. 
Hemadri,  168. 
Hema-kuta,  420,  i. 
Hemanta,  453. 
Heracleitus,  52,  I. 
Herakles,  276,  i. 
Hercules,  332,  2  ;  357,  2. 
Hero,  474. 
Herodotus,  224,  I. 
Heroes  (four  kinds),  470,  3. 
Heroine,  474. 
Hesiod,  52,  1  ;  428,  4. 
Hetu  (reason),  6i. 
Hetu-sastra,  218. 
Hetv-abhasa  (fallacy),  64. 
Hidimba,  385  ;  389,2;  405. 
Hill-tribes,  309,  i. 
Himavat,  361  ;  394;  413. 
Hiranya-garbha,  89  ;  114. 
Hiranya-ka^ipu,  328 ;  392, 2. 
Hiranyaksha,  demon,  327. 
History  of  kings  of  Ka4mir, 

532.      , 
Hitopadesa,  376,  2  ;  411,  I ; 

425;  530;  531 ;  533;  537- 
Holi,  472  ;  506. 
Homa  (oblation),  194  ;  245  ; 

245,  I. 
Homer,  310,  I ;  313  ;  428,  4. 
Hora,  173,  2. 
Horace,  156. 

2   N' 


562 


INDEX. 


Horoscope,  178,  i ;  (of  Ra- 
ma's birth),  344,  2. 

Hospitality,  250. 

Hotri,  216. 

Hrishikei^a,  390,  I. 

Hull  or  Holi,  325,  I. 

Hum,  274. 

Humayun  Namah,  529,  2. 

Hunter,  Dr.  (Orissa),  210,  I; 
244,  1. 

Hyoke-soorner,  509. 

Hydaspes,  river,  375,  i. 

Hydra,  357,  2. 

166ha,  68. 
Ida,  375. 
Idolatry,  2r8,  I. 
Idols,  12 ;  218. 
Iha-mriga,  471. 
Ikshu,  420. 
Ikshvaku,  344  ;  375. 

I}a,  375- 

Iliads,    306  ;   313 ;  357,    1  ; 

401,  I  ;  421. 
Incarnation,  doctrine  of,  317; 

318. 
Incarnations  of  Vishnu,  327. 
Indian  Antiquary,   224,  2  ; 

236,  1 :  503,  3. 
Indian  Vedantists,  52,  I. 
Indices  to  Veda,  184. 
Indische   Alterthumskunde, 

37i>  1. 
Indische      Spriiche,     Boht- 

lingk's,  527,  I. 
Indische   Streifen   (Weber), 

367i  533- 
Indo-Aryans,  47. 
Indra,   10;  13;  14;   16,  1; 

189;  256;  308;  3215429; 

43°- 
Indra  and  Vishnu,  hymns  to, 

27,  I. 
Indra,  poetical  sketch  of,  13; 

14. 
Indrajit,  426. 
Indrani,  522. 
Indra-prastha,  390 ;  391. 
Indrasena,  381,  4. 
Indra-vajra,  156  ;  335,  2. 
Indriya,  63  ;  73. 
Indu,  10. 
Inference,  61. 
Inheritance,  law  of,  265. 
Intercalary  month,  174. 
Interest  on  money,  264. 
Iravat,  389,  2. 
IravatI,  498. 
Isa  Upanishad,  35. 
Isana,  409,  2. 
Ii^avasya  Upanishad,  35. 
Ishika,  405,  I. 
Ishti  (preference),  326. 


Ishtis  (desiderata),  167,  I. 
Ishu,  405,  I. 

Kvara,  74  ;  77  ;  88  ;  409,  2, 
Ii5vara-dandra   Vidyasagara. 

120. 
Kvara-pranidhana,  93. 
Itihasa,   37  ;     195  ;  207,   i  ; 

249  ;    29s  ;     299  ;     306  ; 

371,  I  ;  416;  509;  513. 

Jagad-amba,  91. , 
Jagan-nath,  210,  1  ;  244,  I. 
Jagati,  154;  335,  2. 
Jahnavl,  363. 
Jahnu,  363. 
Jaimimi,  98  ;  98,  i. 
Jaimini     (Mimansa),      98  ; 

118;  24s,  2^ 
Jaiminlya:  -  nyaya-mala-vis- 

tara,  98,  i. 
Jainas  or  Jains,  118. 
Jala,  420. 

Jaliyas,  'fishermen,'  210,  I. 
Jalpa,  '  mere  wrangling,'  64. 
Jamad-agni,  329,  2. 
Jambavat,  426. 
Jambhala-datta,  532. 
Jambu-dvlpa,  420. 
Jamshid,  224,  I. 
Jana  (people),  285,  I. 
Janaka,    335,   i  ;    341,    2  ; 

345;  511. 1- 

Janamejaya,   371,   I  ;    374  ; 

389.  2. 
Janar,  55,  2  ;  431,  I. 
Janardana,  390,  I. 
Jane-o,  240,  I. 
Janitva,  197. 
Janma-patra,  178,  I. 
Janmashtami,  332,  I. 
Janus,  429,  I. 
Japa  -  yajna,     245  ;     246  ; 

294.  3- 
Japyam,  241. 
Jarbhari,  122,  i. 
Jat,  210,  I. 
Jata,   arrangement  of   text, 

J52,  I  ;  245,  2. 
Jata-karman,  192  ;  239. 
Jati  (birth),  210,  I. 
Jati  (futile  replies),  64. 
Jati  (flower),  423,  3. 
Jatu,  385. 
Jatakarni,  499. 
Javali,  49  ;   120,  2  ;  312,  3  ; 

315 ;  351 ;  364- 

Jaya-deva,  367  ;  454;  470. 
Jayad-ratha,  366;  379;  391; 

396. 
Jester,  474. 
Jews,  56,  2. 

Jhalla  (club-fighter),  276. 
Jihma-yodhin,  408. 


Jlmuta-vahana,  303  ;  3°4' 
Jishnu,  381,  4  ;  397. 
Jivatman,  40  ;  51  ;  74  ;  109  ; 

1 10  ;  222. 
Jnana,  59  ;  323  ;  326. 
Jnana-kanda,  33. 
Job,  19  ;  467. 
Johaentgen,    Dr.,   213,    2  ; 

290,  2  ;  290,  3. 
John  of  Capua,  529,  2. 
Johnson,  Professor  F.,  452  ; 

536. 
Jones,  Sir  W.,  35,  3  ;  44,  2  ; 

82,  I  ;  24s,  2  ;  507. 
Jovian  cycle  of  sixty  years, 

179. 
Junctures  (Sandhi),  470. 
Jupiter  (planet),  179. 
Jupiter  Pluvius,  10 ;  276,  i . 
Justice,    administration    of, 

260. 
Jvala-mukhT,  244,  i, 
Jyaishtha,  173,  3. 
Jyeshtha,  173,  3. 
Jyotis  (fire,  light),  84. 
Jyotisha  (astronomy)    145  ; 

170. 
Jyotishtoma,.  187  ;  232,   i  ; 

240; '341,  I. 

Kabandha,  356  ;  366  ;  429,  2. 
Kadambarl,  367  ;  533. 
Kadrii,  431,  i. 
Kaikeyi,  341  ;  348  ;  352. 
Kailasa,  406. 
Kai^ikl  (style),  503,  1. 
Kaiyata  or  Kaiyyata,  168. 
Kakolukika,  531. 
Kakolukiya,  531. 
Kakutstha,  344. 
Kala,  3  ;  67. 
Kala,  177  ;  178. 
Kala-nirnaya,  118. 
Kalapa  (grammar),  170. 
Kaler  an^a,  410. 
Kalhana,  532. 
Kali,  28,  I  ;  178,    2  ;    221 ; 

301  ;  330,  3  ;  410  ;  520. 
Kali,  514  ;  522  ;  523. 
Kalidasa,  359,  i  ;  366  ;  452 ; 

4S4_;  494- 
Kalidasa's  dramas,  366. 
Kalika,  521  ;  522  ;  525. 
Kalilah  Damnah,  529,  2. 
Kalinadi,  499,  i. 
Kaliya  (serpent),  332. 
Kali-yuga,  300  ;  330,  3. 
Kalki,  333  ;  333,  i. 
Kalpa  (period of  time),  178  ; 

206,    I ;     322 ;     330,    3  ; 

432;  517. 
Kalpa     (ceremonial),     145  ; 
146  ;  19s  ;  232. 


INDEX. 


563 


Kalpa-sutra,  146. 

Kalyana,  252,  I. 

Kama,  324,  i. 

Kamada,  525. 

Kilmadeva,  430. 

Kama-dhenu,  361. 

Kama-ga,  299. 

Kamakhya,  525. 

Kamalayataksha,  381,  i. 

Kamandaka,  500. 

Kambojas,  229,  i ;  361. 

Kamya  Sraddha,  199. 

Kamyaka  forest,  373  ;  393. 

Kanada,  65  ;  79,  I. 

Kanada's    Sutra,    71  ;    74  ; 
24s,  2. 

Kanarese,  309,  I. 

Kanauj,  499 ;  499,  I  ;  533. 

Kanda  (arrow),  405,  I. 

Kandahar,  162. 

Kandarpa-keli,  472. 

Kanjalala,  210,  I. 

Kanka,  396. 

Kanoj,  361. 

Kanouj  Brahmans,  210,   I  ; 
224,  2. 

Kausa,    126,   I  ;  328;  331  ; 
332.  . 

Kansaris  (braziers),  210,  I. 
Kanyakubja,  210,  I  ;  499. 
Kanyatva,  377^4. 
Kapala-kundala,  500;  501. 
Kapila,  79,'  i ;  81  ;  85  ;  362. 
Kapila,  521. 
Kapila's  Aphorisms,  88. 
Karana,  70 ;  225. 
Karana-mala,  458. 
Karana-sarira,  53,  2. 
Karanas,  eleven,  17S,  I. 
Karani,  149,  z. 
Karataka,  529,  2. 
Karika  (verses),  167,  I. 
Karkandhu,  423,  3. 
Karkata,  344,  2. 
Karma-dosha,  56,  I. 
Karma-kanda,  33. 
Karmakara,  210,  I. 
Karma-mlmansa,  98. 
Karman,  66  ;  69  ;  326. 
Karma  -  phala,   208  ;    209  ; 
212  ;  213  ;  275  ;  278  5288. 
Karma-vipaka,  S^;  ;  55,  i. 
Karmendriyani,  84,  1. 
Karna,  373  ;  383  ;  384  ;  385. 
Karna-parvan,  •■173. 
Karnata,  210,  i  ;  224,  2. 
Karna-vedha,  239. 
Karnikara,  423,  3. 
Kartavirj'a,  511,  i. 
Karttika,  173,  3. 
Karttikeya,  324,  I  ;  427,  2  ; 

430,  2  ;  452  ;  481. 
Karttiki,  522. 


Karuna,  457,  i. 
Karya,  70. 
Karya-dar^ana,  260. 
Kashaya-vasas,  293. 
Kashtha,  177. 
Ka^I,  511,  1. 
Ka^I-natha,  325,  i. 
Kaiyapa,    161,   2  ;    234,   2 ; 

302 ;  344 ;  347 ;  431,  i- 

Katantra  (grammar),  170. 
Kata-putana,  276. 
Katha,  39,  3  ;  40. 
Katha  Srauta  Sutras,  146. 
Katha   Upanishad,   21,    2 ; 

35- 
Kathaei,  252,  I. 
Kathaka  Grihya  Sutras,  187. 
Katharnava,  532. 
Katha-sarit-sagara,  532. 
Katthakya,  159. 
Katyayana,  151;  i66  ;  531. 
Katyayana's     law  -  treatise, 

203;  302. 
Katyayana's   Srauta   Sutra, 

146;   148;  341.  1- 
Kaulas,  523,  i. 
Kaulika  (weaver),  534. 
Kaunakhya,  270. 
Kauravas,  373  ;  382  ;  397  ; 

407. 
Kaurma,  521. 
Kausalya,  341  ;  348  ;   364  ; 

376,  I. 
Kausambhi,  506. 
Kavishitaki-brahmana,  25, 
Kaushltaki-brahmana   Upa- 
nishad, 35 ;  106,  I. 
Kaustubha,  399. 
Kautsa,  159. 
Kavi  Karna-puraka,  470. 
Kaviraja,  368. 
Kavya,  306,   2;   315  ;   316; 

370,  I;  416;  472. 
Kavyadar4a,  367  ;  457. 
Kavya-lakshana,  453. 
Kavyalan-kara-vritti,    457  ; 

469.      _ 
Kavya-pradlpa,  457. 
Kavya-praka^a,  457. 
Kayastha,  210,  I ;    224,  2  ; 

225  ;  296,  I. 
Kearns,  Kev.  I.  P.,  no,  2. 
Kena  Upanishad,  35. 
Kendra,  173,  2. 
Kern,  Professor,  175. 
Ke^anta,  239. 
Ke^ava,  390,  i. 
Ketu,  180,  I  ;  252,  I. 
Kevalatman,  322. 
Khadga-bandha,  456. 
Khanaka,  385. 
Khandana-khanda  -  khadya, 

453,  I- 


Khandava-prastha,  390. 
Khasias,  309,  i. 
Khatri,  224,  2 ;  252,  i. 
Khila,  207,  I. 
Khirad  Afroz,  529,  2. 
KhondsorKus,  309,  i. 
Kielhorn,  Professor,  P.,  161, 

2  ;  i68,  I  ;  530,  I. 
Kiudit-prana,  410. 
Kinsuka,  407  ;  423,  3. 
Kirata,  393  ;  452  ;  453. 
Kirata  (mountaineer),   229, 

IJ  393.  I- 
Kiratarjuniya,  229,  i  ;  373  ; 

393,   I ;  403,   3 ;    452 ; 

461. 
Kiritin,  381,  4  ;  397. 
Kishkindhya-kanda,  337. 
Kokila,  423,  I  ;  '541,  2. 
Kolis,  224,  2. 
Kols,  309,  I. 
Konkanasth,  224,  2. 
Korawars,  309,  i. 
Ko^a,  113;  271,  I  ;  297. 
Ko^ala,  317  ;  335,  I. 
Kosegarten,  530,  I. 
Koshtis,  224,  2. 
Kota,  309,  I. 
Krama,      arrangement      of 

text,  245,  2. 
Krama  text,  152,  i. 
Kranti  pata,  181. 
Kratu,  517,  I. 
Kraunda,  423,  i. 
Kraunda-dvipa,  420. 
Kraya-vikrayanu^aya,  261. 
Kripa,  383,  I. 
Kripi,    383,   I  ;    391  ;    407  ; 

409. 
Krishi,  227,  i  ;  237,  2. 
Krishna,  90,  2  ;   122  ;   126  ; 

217;    330;    358,  3;    381, 

4;  397;  S",  l;  Sis- 
Krishna  (life  of),  331  ;  517. 
Krishna  (names  of),  390,  i. 
Krishna  (wives  of\  312. 
Krishna  (Draupadi),  384. 
Krishna-dvaipayana,  509. 
Krishna-mi&a,  508. 
Krishna-tarkalan'kara,  304. 
Krishnau,  390,  i. 
Krit  affixes,  152  ;   170. 
Krita   age,     178,    2;     221  ; 

301  ;  330,  3. 
Kritavarman,  407  ;  409. 
Krittika,  170  ;  173,  3. 
Kshana,  177. 
Kshatra,  228,  1. 
Kshatriya,    17,    I  ;    22,    2  ; 

49  ;  212  ;  223  ;  224,  2. 
Kshattri,  376. 
Kshetra,  140. 
Kshiva,  391. 


564 


INDEX. 


Kuhu  (new  moon),  158  ;  172. 
Kula,  296,  I. 
Kulala,  210,  I. 
Kularnava,  525. 
Kulina,  'noble,'  210,  I. 
Kulluka,  4,   I  ;   6  ;    13,   3  5 

22,  I  ;   188,  I  ;  203  ;   207, 

I  ;  210,  I  ;  213,  2  ;  301  ; 

302;  303;  522,  1. 
Kumara,  452. 
Kumara-sambhava,  321,  I  ; 

324,  I  ;  452. 
Kumarila,  98,  I ;  232,  3. 
Kumbha-kara     or     potters, 

224,  2. 
Kumbha-karna,  354,  I. 
Kumbhars   or  potters,  224, 

2. 
Kumuda,  432,  I. 
Ku-nakhin,  270,  I. 
Kunti,   373;    374;    375,  2; 

377;  386;  437,  I- 
Kuntibhoja,  377  ;  391. 
Kuran,  4  ;  24  ;  33  ;   102,  I. 
Kurma,  327;  327,  3;  514. 
Kuru-kshetra,  373  ;  401. 
Kurus,  308  ;  384. 
Kuruvaka,  423,  3. , 
Kus  or  Khoncls,  309,  I. 
Kusa,  335,  i;'  504. 
Kufia-dvlpa,  420. 
Ku.4a  grass,  195;   196;  273. 
Kusida-vriddhi,  264. 
KuSka  ^rauta  Sutras,  146. 
Ku^i-lavau,  335,  I. 
Kusumanjali,  60,  i  ;  71,  I ; 

77- 
Kuta-sthah,  130,  2. 
Kuthumi  or  Kuthumi,  302. 
Kuttaka,  176;  1 76,  2. 
Kuvalayananda,  470. 
Kuvera,  god  of  wealth,  256  ; 

354 ;  427- 

Kymar  range  of  mountains, 
356,  I. 

Laestrygones,  310,  i. 
Laghu-kaumudi,  168. 
Lakhima-devI,  305. 
Laksha,  183. 
Laksha,  385. 
Lakshana,  243  ;  470. 
Lakshmana,  345  ;  348 ;  356 ; 

364  ;  425  ;  426  ;  503. 
Lakshml,  325,  i;  327;  358; 

_368_;  387,  I  ;  43° ;  522. 
Lambadies,  309,  I. 
Lambaka,  532.        • 
Lan-ka,  337  ;  339,   I  ;  344, 

l;  356;  419,4;  503. 
Lassen,    Professor,    126,-   I  ; 

294,   I ;    313  ;    339,  1 ; 

371,  I;  499,  l;  511,  I. 


Lasya,  dance,  467. 
Latyayana    Srauta    Sutras, 

146. 
Laugakshi    Srauta    Sutras, 

146. 
Laukika  (secular),  278,  I. 
Laukikagni,  299. 
Lava;  335,  I  ;  504. 
Larana,  420. 
Law,  schools  of,  302. 
Laya,  92. 
Left-hand  worshippers,  523, 

I. 
Lekhya,  293. 
Lethe,  58,  i. 
Lexicographers,  161. 
Lex  talionis,  268. 
Liddon,  Canon,  59,  i. 
Lidhu,  169,  I, 
Likhita  (lawyer),  203  ;  301 ; 

302. 
Likhita  (written  document), 

2_97- 
Lila-madhukara,  471. 
Lilavati,  176;  176,  3  ;  183. 
Lin-ga,  169,  I  ;  198,  3  ;  322  ; 

514- 
Liu'ga-^arira,  53,  2  ;  109. 
Lipta,  173,  2. 
Loans,  law  of,  262. 
Locke,  80,  2. 
Logic,  Hindu,  61  ;  529. 
Logician,  Hindu,  62. 
Loha-kara  (smiths),  224,  2. 
Lobars  (smiths),  224,  :i. 
Lokakshi,  302. 
Lokaloka,  420,  i. 
Lukas,  431,  I. 
Lokayatas,  120. 
Lokayatikas,  120. 
Lokman,  529. 
Loma-harshana,  510. 
Lomapada,  340. 
Lonaris,  224,  2. 
Lorinser,  Dr.,    126,   i  ;  131 

2 ;  135,  2  ;  137,  I. 
Lotus-stanza,  456. 
Lucretius,  52,  i  ;  54,  i ;  72, 

I  ;  76,  I  ;   80,   I ;   83,   3 ; 

105,  4. 
Lunar   line   of   kings,   375  ; 

511,  I- 
Luptopama,  458. 
Lusty  Juventus,  509. 

Macchiavelli,  507. 
Madayantika,  500. 
Madhava,  118;  390,  i ;  500. 
Madhavadarya,  98,  I  ;   119; 
302;    305;    371,  2;  439, 

I  ;  521- 

Madhu-parka,  250 ;  505. 
Madhusudana,  390,  i. 


Madhusudana  Gupta,  184. 
Madhya-desa,  226,  I. 
Madhya-laya,  498. 
Madhyama,  473. 
Madhya-mandira,  119. 
Madhyandina  S'akha,    150  ; 

245,  2. 
Madhyandinas,  245,  2. 
Madras,  302. 
Madreyau,  381,  4. 
Madri,  252,  i;  312;  373. 
Madya,  250. 
Magadha,  361. 
Magadha,  kings  of,  313. 
Magha,  173,  3. 
Magha,  13,  2;  173,  3;  453. 
Magha,  month  of,  171. 
Magha,  poem  of,  392,  2. 
Maha-bharata,     31  ;     205  ; 

245,  2;  306;  361,  2;  366; 

370;  405,  1. 
Maha-bhashya,  92,  2  ;  167. 
Maha-bhuta,  83 ;  221. 
Maha-deva,  323  ;  519. 
MS,hajan,  264,  2. 
Maha-kavyas,  453. 
Maha-nataka,  367  ;  471. 
Maha-nirvana,  525. 
Maha-padma,  432,  I. 
Maha-patakas,  269. 
Maha  -  prasthanika  -  parvan, 

374- 
Maha-puranas,  515. 
Mahar,  55, '2;  431,  I. 
Maha-rashtra,  210,  i ;  302. 
Maharshis,'  136,  2 ;  206,  i '; 

301. 
Mahasinha-gati,  381,  I. 
Mahat,  83  ;  91 ;  220  ;  221  ; 

222. 
Mahatala,  431,  I. 
Mahatmya,  408,  I. 
Mahavira-(5arita  or  "caritra, 

337  ;  359,  I ;  360,  I  ;  367 ; 

499;  502. 
Maha-yajna,    188  ;    188,   I  ; 

194 ;  244  ;  267  ;  288,  3. 
Maha-yamaka,  457. 
Maha-yuga,  178;  221;  330, 

3- 
Mahesvara,  119;  161 ;  304; 

521. 
Mahef5vari,  522. 
Mahisha,  423,  i ;  430. 
Mahishya,  149,  2 ;  225. 
Maithila,  210,  i. 
Maithila  school,  304. 
Maitra  S'rauta  Sutras,  146. 
Maitraksha-jyotika,  276. 
Maitrayana,  44,  2. 
Maitrayani  Upanishad,  44 ; 

44,  f. 
MaitrayaniyaUpanishad,  44. 


INDEX. 


565 


Maitrayamya  Grihya  Sutras, 

187. 
Maitreyi,  439,  i. 
Maitri  Upanishad,  44,  2. 
Makamat  of  Hariri,  467. 
Makaranda,  500. 
Ma-karas,  523,  i. 
Malabar  coast,  329,  2. 
Mala-masa,  174, 
Malati,  423,  3  ;  500. 
Malati-madhava,  155,  499. 
Malavika,  472  ;  498. 
Malavikagnimitra,  494 ;  497. 
Malayalam,  309,  I. 
Malcolm's  ]?ersia,  224,  i. 
Male  -  arasars,     'hill  -  kings, ' 

309.  I- 
Mall,  210,  I. 
Malimlui5a,  174. 
Mallah  (prize-fighters),  276. 
Malyavat,  420,  I. 
Mammata,  457. 
Manapamana,  255,  2. 
Manas,  53  ;  53.  3  ;  63  ;  67  ; 

76;  83;   109;   117;  220  ; 

221. 
Mana-sara,  185. 
Manava  Grihya  Sutras,  187. 
Manava  S'rauta  Sutras,  146. 
Manava-kalpa-siitra,      187  ; 

205,  2. 
Manaras,  205  ;  207,  I. 
Manavas,  Code  of,  213  ;  291. 
MandakinI,  351,  i. 
Mandakranta,  452. 
Mandala,  18  ;  18,  i. 
Mandala  of  the  Rlk,  ninth,  6. 
Mandanis,  290,  I. 
Mandara,  357,  3  ;  519. 
Maudoii(Sa,  179. 
Mandodari,  436. 
Mandukl-siksha,  149,  3. 
Mandukya  Upanishad,  35. 
Man.gala,  179. 
Man -gala- vara,  178,  i. 
Mankind,    deterioration    of, 

517- 
Mano-maya,  114. 
Mansa-bhakshana,  250. 
Mansel,  Dean,  115. 
Manthara,  534. 
Mautra-mahodadhi,  525. 
Mantra  portion  of  the  Veda, 

5  ;   1 1 ;_  245,  2. 
Mantra-jargaras,  245,  2. 
Mantras   (texts),   3 ;    4,    I ; 

22;  524;  s'25. 
Manu,  4 ;  4,  I  ;  5  ;  6  ;  30  ; 

56,   2  ;    202  ;    203  ;    220 ; 

303;  491,  l;   512,  I. 
Manu's  Code.  203. 
Manushya-loka,  197. 
Manusbya-yajiia,  194 ;  246. 


Manv-antara,  206,   I  ;  221  ; 

330.3;  511- 
Manv-artha-muktavali,  303. 
Marathi  country,  236,  I. 
Marathi  empire,  256,  3. 
Margasirsha,  173,  3. 
Mari6a,  354;  517,  i. 
Maridi,  206  ;  276  ;  302  ;  344. 
Markandeya,  366. 
Markandeya-purana,  387,  I  ; 

514-  ■  ■ 
Marriage,  forms  of,  244. 
Marriage  portion,  267. 
Marriage  rite,  190;  244. 
Mars,  179. 
Marshman,  336,  I. 
Maruta  (the  Wind),  387,  I. 
Maruts,  10  ;   14  ;  400. 
Marvadi  (merchants),  224,  2. 
M3,4aka  S'rauta  Sutras,  146. 
Matali,  357. 

Materialists,  120,  2  ;  352. 
Mathavya,  259,  i. 
Mathematical  science,  172. 
Mathura,  330,  2  ;  332. 
Matsya,  327;  397;  514. 
Matsya  purana,  512. 
INJatula,  380,  I. 
Mauna-vrata,  254. 
Maunji-bandhana,  240 ;  294. 
Mausala-parvan,  374;  411,  i. 
Maya,  83  ;   108  ;   140. 
Mechanical  arts,  185. 
Medhatithi   (lawyer),     203; 

SOS- 
Medicine,  184. 
MedinI,  161. 
Megasthenes,    207,    I  :  224, 

I  ;  238,    I  ;  257,   2  ;  276, 

l;  312;  318;  507. 
Megasthenes,  caste-divisions 

of,  224,  I  ;  237,  2. 
Megha-duta,    359,    I  ;   367  ; 

390,  I  ;  452 ;  494,  I. 
Mekhala,  240. 
Menaka,  361. 
Mercury,  179. 
Meru  (mount),  357,  3  ;  412  ; 

413;  420. 
Metaphor,  456. 
Metaphysics,  Hindu,  61, 
Metempsychosis,     11;     18; 

56,  I  ;  56,  2  ;  530. 
Metre,  153  ;   155,  I. 
Mill,  J.  S.,  66,  2. 
Mill's   India,    95 ;   224,    I  ; 

256,  I. 
Millar,  224,  I. 
Milman,  Dean,  129,  1  ;  386, 

I., 
Milton's  Satan,  354,  I. 
Mimansa,  46  ;  98  ;  206,   I  ; 

219;  232,  3. 


Mimansaka,  3  ;  100  ;  220. 
Mimansa-sutra,  98,  i ;   100, 

I. 
Mind-born  sons,  517,  i. 
Minerva,  355,  i. 
Misals  of  Sikhs,  325,  I. 
Misarti-mi^ra,  305. 
Mi^ra,  305,  i. 
Misra-damodara,  367. 
Mi^ra-vritta,  471. 
Mitakshara,  291 ;  303;  304. 
Mithi,  511,  I. 

Mithila,  345;  345,2;  511,1. 
Mithila  (school  of  law),  291  ; 

302;  304. 
Mithya-jnana,  104. 
Mitra,  10  ;  16;  210,  i. 
Mle&iha.,  229,  I  ;  243  ;  276  ; 

405- 
Mle<5(5ha-de^a,  229,  i. 
Mledihas,  405. 
M'Mahon,  Rev.  J.  H.,  68,  i  ; 

IIS,  I- 
Modaka,  210,  I. 
Mohammed,  see  Muhammad. 
Moksha,  59. 
Moksha-dharma,  374. 
Monasteries,  475. 
Money-lender,  264. 
Mongol  language,  309,  i. 
Months,  names  of,  173,  3. 
Montriou,  W.  A.,  292,  i. 
Morality,  508. 
Mr66ihakatika,  93,2;  296, 1 ; 

313;  324.1;  330,3;  366; 

468;  475. 
Mriga-^iras,  173,  3. 
Mudukunda,  520. 
Mudra-rakshasa,  505  ;  507. 
Mugdha-bodha,  168. 
Mugdha-bodhini,  168. 
Muhammad,  3  ;  244,  i. 
Muhurta,  177. 
Muhurtas,  170. 
Muir,   Dr.  John,   12,  I,   2  ; 

and  passim. 
Muka,  393. 

Mukha,  opening,  470,  2. 
Mukhopadhyaya,  210,  i. 
Mukhurjea,  210,  I. 
Mukti,  59. 

Mula  Maha-bharata,  512. 
Mula-prakriti,  82. 
Mula-ramayana,    311;    338, 

I  ;  512- 

Mula-sainhitah,  512. 
Mullen's  Essay,  88,  i. 
Miiller,  Professor  Max,  9,  i ; 

12,  2  ;  and  passim. 
Munda,  293. 
Mundaka    Upanishad,    35  ; 

39;  39.  2;  no,  I. 
Mimi,  254;  255. 


566 


INDEX. 


Muraja-bandha,  456. 

Murari^  359,  i  ;  367. 

Murdhavasikta,  225. 

Murta,  177. 

Murtti,  53,  I. 

Musala,  374. 

Musalin  (club-armed),   332, 

2. 
Musalmans,  244,  I. 
Mushrooms,  eating  of,  250. 
Music,  184. 
Muslims,  4;  251,  I. 
Muttra,  356,  I. 
Mythology,    Grecian,    319  ; 

427  ;  428. 
Mythology,  Post- vedic,  321  ; 

418;  428-434- 

Nafiiketas,  40 ;  41. 

Nadi,  177. 

Kadika,  177. 

Naga  (serpent-demons),  332, 

2;  380;  431;  431,  I. 
Naga-kanyas,  431,  i. 
Naga-loka,  431,  I. 
Nagananda,  505,  i  ;  508. 
Naga-pan(5ami,  431,  I. 
Nagasahvaya,  377,  2. 
Nagoji-bhatta,  92,  2  ;  168. 
Nahusha,  375. 
Naigama,  157;   158.      ^ 
Naighantuka,  156  ;  158. 
Naimittika  Sraddha,  200. 
Nair  tribe,  386,  2. 
Nairuktas       (etymologists), 

158. 
Nairuktikas,  156,  i. 
Naishadha,  453,  i  ;  454. 
Naishthika,  238. 
Naivedya,  218. 
Naiyayikas,    62 ;     65  ;    66  ; 

n,  1 ;  87. 

Nakshatra,    172  ;     172,    i  ; 

178,  I  ;  179  ;  199. 
Nakshatra-darsa,  174. 
Nakula,  380  ;  387,   I ;  402  ; 

413- 
Nakuli^a,  118. 
Nala  (story  of),   13,  2;  251, 

2 ;  330,  3. 
Nala  (king),  344. 
Nala  (monkey-general),  356. 
Nalodaya,  453  ;  454. 
Nama-karana,  239. 
Nama-karman,  239. 
Namaz,  244,  i. 
Naijaka  (coin),  264  ;  293. 
Nanak  Shah,  325,  I. 
Nana  Sahib,  224,  2. 
Nanda,  332. 
Nanda,  521. 
Nandana,  500. 
Nanda-pandita,  304  ;  305. 


Nandi,  324,  i  ;  473  ;  501. 
Nandi-grama,  352. 
Napita,  210,  I  ;  535. 
Nara,'38l,  4. 
Narabhimani,  471, 
Narafia,  405,  I. 
Narada,  26  ;  37  ;  203  ;  301  ; 

302;  411  ;_428;  517,  i. 
Narada-siddhanta,  175. 
Naradiya,  514;  521. 
Narakas,  55,  2  ;  431,  I. 
Nara^ansa,  159. 
Narasansi,  195  ;  295. 
Nara-sinha,  328  ;  521  ;  522. 
Nara  -  sinha     Upa  -  purana, 

521. 
Narayana,  217 ;    358;    390, 

I  ;  399- 
Narmada,  339,  2. 
Nartaka,  467  ;  470. 
Nasatyau,  II;   158;  387,  i. 
Nasik  (from  nasika),  353,  3. 
Nastika,  219. 
Nastikyam,  271. 
Natha<Sarya-(Sudamani,  304. 
Natika,  472. 
Natya,  467. 
Natyarasaka,  472. 
Nava  S'ak  (nine  divisions), 

210,  I. 
Nayaka,  470. 
Nayar,  386,  2. 
Nayika,  471. 
Nectar,  520. 
Nekyomanteia,  415. 
Nepal,  524. 
Nestor,  426. 
New  Testament,  131,  2. 
Ni6,  164,   1. 
Ni6a,  473. 

Nicholson,  John,  318,  I. 
Nidana-sutra,  153. 
Nidar^ana  (example),  61. 
Nigama,  157  ;  523,  i. 
Nigamana  (conclusion),  61. 
Nighantu,    156;    159;   245, 

2. 
Night,  16  ;  22  ;  423,  4. 
Nigraha-sthana,  64. 
Nihilism,   115. 
Nihsreyasa,  59. 
Nikshepa,  261. 
Nila,  420,  I. 
Nila-kantha  (S'iva),  323. 
Nilakantha-bhatta,  305. 
Nil-giri  hills,  309,  i. 
Nimb  tree,  leaves  of,  299. 
Nimesha,  177 ;  402, 
Nimi,  344J  511,  i. 
Nimitta-karana,  70. 
Ninda,  25. 
Nipa,  423,  3. 
Nipata,  151  ;  160. 


Nir-guna,  86  ;  106  ;  112,  2  j 

514- ■ 
Nirnaya,  64. 
Nirnaya-sindhu,  200. 
Nirukta,  122,  i  ;  145  ;  156; 

157;   158;  217. 
Nirukta  -  parii^ishta,     159  ; 

161. 
Nirvahana,  470,  2;  471. 
Nirvana,  59. 
Nir-vikalpa,  112,  3. 
Nishadas,  159  ;  310,  I. 
Nishadha,  420,  I. 
Nishadi,  385. 
Nishka,  293. 
Nish-kramana,  239. 
Nishphala,  144,  2. 
Niti,  507  ;  526. 
Niti-^astras,  146 ;  526. 
Niti-^astras  proper,  526. 
Nitya    (S'raddha),    188,    I  ; 

199;  247. 
Nivritti,  165. 
Niyama,  93. 
Non-Aryan  races,  311. 
Northern  Buddhists,  524. 
Notation  (in  algebra),  181. 
Nri-sinha  Upa-purana,  521. 
Nritya,  467. 
Nullity,  20. 

Numeration,  system  of,  183. 
Nushirvan,  529,  2. 
Nyagrodha  tree,  409. 
Nyasa-dharin,  263. 
Nyaya,  46  ;  60  ;  65  ;  86,  I ; 

219. 
Nyaya  (Sutras),  60,  i. 
Nyaya-mala-vistara,  118. 
Nyaya-sutra-vritti,  60,  i. 

Odras,  229,  i. 

Odyssey,  306  ;  355,  I ;  389 ; 

415  ;  421  ;  422. 
Om,  93;  159;  195;  214,  I. 
Omens,  184. 

Ordeal,  ten  forms  of,  271,  I. 
Ordeal,  trial  by,  271  ;  297. 
Orissa,  210,  I  ;  244,  i. 
Ormazd,  10. 
Orphic  hymns,  106,  2. 
Ovid's  Metamorphoses,  330, 

3- 
Oxus,  7' 

Pada  (traditional  art),  77. 
Pada  text,    150;  152;  245, 

2. 
Padartha,  53,  I  ;  66 ;  80,  2. 
Padma,  368  ;  514. 
Padma-bandha,  456. 
Padma-pura,  499. 
Padma-purana,  302, 
Padya  (verse),  369. 


INDEX. 


567 


Pahlavas,  361. 

Pahlavi,  529,  2. 

Paisafia     (marriage),     190  ; 

244. 
Paitamaham    astram,    357  ; 

3- 

Paitamaha  siddhanta,  175. 
Paithlnasi,  302. 
Pakai^asani,  381,  4. 
Paka-yajna,    188 ;     188,    I  ; 

232 ;  245  ;  246. 
Pala,  177;  293. 
Palibothra,  313  ;  332,  2. 
Palita,  210,  I. 
Pan6agavya  penance,  273. 
Paniagni,  189,  I. 
Pan(5ajanah,  159;  403. 
Pandajanya,  403. 
Panda-koia,  113. 
Pandala,  49 ;  390. 
Paiida-lakshana,  512;  516. 
Pandanana,  323,  I. 
Pan(5an'ga,  178,  i. 
Pau6a-ratraka,  338,  I. 
Pan(5a-siddhantika,  175. 
Pan6a-tantra,    54)    2  ;    294, 

2;     529,    2;    530;     531; 

533 ;  S3_6. 
Pan(Sa-tapas,  95  ;  254. 
Pandavati,  353,_3. 
Pauda-vin^a  Brahmana,  25. 
Panda-yajna,  188. 
Pandi-karana,  III,  I. 
Paudi-krita,  III,  I, 
Pandopakhyana,  530. 
Pandavas,  346,  2 ;  373 ;  401 ; 

408;  515. 
Paiidu,  373  ;  376  ;  377. 
Pani-grahana,  191. 
Panigrahanika         mantrah, 

263. 
Panin,  162. 
Panini,    118  ;     149  ;    150  ; 

156,  2;  162;  531. 
Panini-dar^ana,  Ii8. 
Panini's      grammar,      152  ; 

l'6l. 
Panjab,  232,  3;  252,  I. 
Pantheism,  34;    102;   no; 

IIS;  SIO- 
Para,  69. 
Paradas,  229,  I. 
Paraka  (penance),  273. 
Paramanu,  177. 
Paramartliika      (existence), 

108. 
Paramatman,  40 ;    51;   74  ; 

222;  324. 
Para^ara,   203  ;    302  ;    375  ; 

510;  518;  521. 
Parai^ara's  Code,  118;  301  ; 

302;  305. 
Parafera-siddhanta,  175. 


Para^ara  -  smi^iti  -  vyakhya, 

Paraskara's    Grihya  -  sutra, 

187  ;  203,  I  ;'  29s,  3. 
Parasmai-pada,  164. 
Para^u-rama,  329  ;   329,  2  ; 

346;  347;  399;  4H' 
Paratva,  68. 
Parda-nishln,  437,  2. 
Paribhasha,  163,  2. 
Paribhashendu-^ekhara,  168, 

I. 
Parijata,  519. 
Parikara,  458. 
Parikshit,  389,  2;  515. 
Parimanani,  68. 
Parishad,  217  ;  219. 
Pari^ishta       (supplements), 
•    184. 

Parits  (washermen),  224,  2. 
Parivrajaka,  238 ;  254;  498. 
Parmenides,  52,  I. 
Partha,  381,  4. 
Partnership,  262. 
Parushye,  26 1. 
Parvana  Sraddha,  199;  247. 
ParvatI,  322  ;  322,   2  ;  324, 

I ;  325.  I ;  427 ;  523.  i- 

Paryan.ka-bandha,    93,    2  ; 

324.  I- 
Pasa,  183. 
Pashandin     (heretic),    219 ; 

299-'  ' 
Pa^u-kalpa,  192. 
Pasupata  (weapon),  393. 
Pa^upatas,  119 
Pa^ii-pati,  119. 
Pa^u-yajna,  28,  r. 
Pata,  179. 

Pataka-sthanaka,  471. 
Patala,  55,  2;  363 ;  420,  i  ; 

431,  I- 
Pataliputra,  167,  2  ;  224,  I  ; 

Patanjala-darsana,  118. 
Patanjali,  92  ;   166  ;  294,  I. 
Patl-ganita,  176,  3. 
Pativrata,  437. 
Patriarchs,  517. 
Patrin,  405,  i. 
Patroclus,  425. 
Paulastya,  354,  I. 
PauliBa-siddhanta,  175. 
Pauloma,  371,  i. 
Paundra  (trumpet),  403. 
Paundrakas,  229,  I. 
Paurava,  404. 
Paurnamasa,  246. 
Pausha,  173,  3. 
Paushya,  371,  i. 
Pavitra,  240,  I. 
PenaiSce,  273  ;  274  ;  287. 
Penelope,  355,  I. 


Persians,  361. 

Pervasion  in  logic,  62. 

Peshwa,  256,  3. 

Phaedo  of  Plato,  58,  1. 

Phaedriis,  42,  I, 

Phala,  63. 

Phalguna,    173,  3;   325,   I; 

381.  4 ;  397 ;  472. 

Phalguui,  173.  3- 
Phallus,  322,  I. 
Philosophy,  common   creed, 

50. 
Philosophy,   six  systems  or, 

46. 
Pickford,  Mr.  John,  502,  i. 
Pidula,  423,  3. 
Pilpay's  fables,  529,  2. 
Pinda,  200  ;  247 ;  248  ;  266. 
Pin-gala,  153. 
Pin.gala-naga,  153. 
Pippala,  39,  3. 
Pisada,  276. 
Pischel,  Dr.  R.,  495,  i. 
Pisistratus,  371. 
PisunI,  351,  I. 
Pitamaha,  400,  ^. 
Pitris,    6;    18  ;    159  ;   241  ; 

247  ;  276. 
Pitri-yajna,  194;  245. 
Plaintiff,  297. 
Plaksha-dvipa,  420. 
Planets,  nine,  180. 
Plato,   42,   I  ;  50,  3  ;  53,  2  ; 

56,  2;  73,  2;  75,    2;  81, 

I ;  83,  2  ;   104,  2  ;  106,  3  ; 

109,  l;   131,  2;  224,  I. 
Plato  (Republic),  224,  I. 
Plato  (Timaeus),  224,  i. 
Platonic  idealism,  103. 
Platonic  realism,  70. 
Platonists,  53,  2. 
Plays,  Hindu,  466. 
Poems,  artificial,  452  ;  454. 
Poems,  Homeric,  416. 
Poison,  519. 
Poita,  240,  I. 
Polyandry,  386,  2. 
Polygamy,  243. 
Polyphemus,  429,  2. 
Porus,  375,  I. 
Post-vedic  literature,  204. 
Prabha-kara,  232,  3. 
Prabhasa,  390. 
Prabhus,  224,  2. 
Prabodha-dandrodaya,  508  ; 

509- 
Pradanda-pandava,  367. 
PradhSna,  53, 1  ;  82  ;  90,  2  ; 

91  ;_I05,  3;  473. 
Pradhana,  522. 
Prad-vivaka,  296,  I. 
Prahasana,  472. 
Prahlada,  328. 


568 


INDEX. 


Prajapati,   154;   206;  217; 

234>  2  ;  273  ;  327,  3. 
Prajapatis,  206, 1 ;  244 ;  301. 
Prajapatya  (marriage),  190  ; 

244. 
Prajapatj'a  penance,  273. 
Prakarana,  471. 
Prakarani,  472. 
Prakaranika,  472. 
Prakranta,  457. 
Prakrit,    313;     473;    480; 

48s-  I- 
Prakrita,  457. 
Prakriti,  80 ;  84 ;  85  ;  139  ; 

140 ;  522  ;  523. 
Prama,  59  ;  61  ;  63  ;  82. 
Pramana  (philosophical),  60  ; 

82;_93;  117;  222. 
Pramanam,  233  ;  297. 
Prameya,  63. 
Prana,  38  ;   1 7  7. 
Prana-maya,  114. 
Pranatman,  114. 
Pranava,  93. 
Pranayama,  93. 
Pranidhi,  257  ;  263. 
Prasanna    Kumar    Thakur, 

304 ;  3°5.  I- 
Prasanna-raghava,  367 ;  508. 
Prasna  Upauishad,  35. 
Prastavana  (prologue),  473. 
Prasthana,  472. 
Prastuta,  457. 
Prathamam  retas,  523. 
Pratibhasika  (existence),  108. 
Pratigraha,  237  ;  262. 
Pratijna  (proposition),  61. 
Pratima,  218,  i  ;  241. 
Pratima-pari^araka,  218,  1. 
Pratimukha,  470,  2. 
Prati-nayaka,  471. 
Pratipadika,  163. 
Pratisakhyas,   Vedic,     149  ; 

150. 
Prati  -  sarga      (re  -  creation), 

511;  517- 
Pratishthana,  511,  i, 
Pratitakshara,  304. 
Prativadin  (defendant),  297. 
Prativindhya,  389,  2. 
Pratiyarcana,  458. 
Pratyabhijna,  119. 
Pratyabhijna-dar^ana,  118. 
Pratyahara     (grammatical), 

163,  3  ;  169,  I. 
Pratyahara  (restraint),  93. 
Pratyaksha,  61  ;   117  ;  222  ; 

35!- 
Praudha  Brahmana,  25. 
Pravadana,  145. 
Pravaha,  179. 
Pravahana,  49. 
Pravara-sena,  494,  2. 


Pravargya,  341,  i. 
Prave^aka,  473. 
Pravritti,  63. 
Prayaga,  359. 
Praya?-6itta,    55,    1  ;    208  ; 

209;     212;     213;     273; 

278  ;    287  ;     292  ;    299  ; 

411,  I. 
Prayatna,  68. 
Prayer,  473. 
Prayoga,  402,  i. 
Prayojana  (motive),  64. 
Precepts  (moral),  278  ;  441  ; 

442;  461  ;  533;  536-  , 
Prem  Chunder  Tarkabagish, 

495.  I-. 
Premiss  in  logic,  61. 
Prem  Sagar,  126,  I  ;  516. 
Pren'khana,  472. 
Preserver,  518. 
Preta-karyani  (funeral  rites), 

410. 
Pretya-bhava,  63. 
Priam,  313,  I  ;'  400,  ii. 
Prinsep's  tables,  344,  i. 
Prishatka,  405,  I. 
Pritha,   373  ;  375,  2  ;  377  ; 

410. 
Prithaktva,  68. 
Prithivi,  12  ;  67  ;  84  ;  427  ; 

■505. 
Privileges,    six     (of    Brah- 

mans),  237,  i. 
Problems    (from     Lilavati), 

183-  » 

Pronunciation,  149. 
Properties  (an-ga),  470. 
Propertius,  252,  I. 
Property,  law  of,  262. 
Proposition  in  logic,  61. 
Protagoras,  104,  i  ;  131,  2. 
Puga,  296,  I. 
Pukkasa,  225. 
Pulaha,  517,  I. 
Pulastya,  sage,  302 ;  354,  1  ; 

517.  I- 
Pulastya-siddhanta,  175. 
Pundarika,  432,  I. 
Punsavana,  192  ;  239. 
Purana,  37  ;   91;   195;   207, 

I  ;'z49;  295;  368;  509; 

510;  514;  521. 
Pur!,  210,  I  ;    244,  1. 
Purna-prajna,  118  ;  1 19. 
Purodana,  3S5. 
Purohita,  257,  2  ;  276. 
Puru,  332 ;   375. 
Purusha,  21, '  i  ;  21,  2  ;  22  ; 

82  ;  87  ;  90,  2  ;  140  ;  523. , 
Purusha-pasu,  85. 
Purusha-sukta,   3  ;   9  ;    11; 

21  ;  44,  1  ;  207,  I ;   214  ; 

219. 


Purushottama,   91,   3  ;   135, 

I  ;_390,  I. 
Purva,  199'. 
Purva-mlmansa,  98. 
Purva-paksha,  99. 
Pushan,  16. 

Pushkara,  325,  I  ;  420. 
Pushpa-danta,  432,  I. 
Pushpaka,  354  ;  359  ;  503. 
Pushpamitra,  167,  2. 
Pushya,  173,  3. 
Put,  249. 
Put-tra,  249,  I. 
Pythagoras,  47  ;    56,  2  ;    82, 

I  ;  142;   181. 

Qualities,  three,  56,  I  ;    85  ; 

275;  513- 
Qualities  of  the  Vai&shika, 

68. 
Quality,  66. 

Races     (solai^    and    lunar), 

Radha,  325,  M  332  ;  377. 
Radha    or    Rarh,   210,    I  ; 

454;  515- 
Radheya,  377. 
Raga  (musical),  184. 
Raghava,  344. 
Raghavabhyudaya,  367. 
Raghavapandaviya,        36S ; 

_453  ;  533-' 
Raghava-vilasa,  368. 
Raghu,  344. 

Raghu-nandana,  S52,  2 ;  304. 
Raghu-nathabhyudaya,  369. 
Raghu-van^a,   181  ;  228,  i  ; 

344, 1 ;  359. 1 ;  367 ;  452 ; 

459- 
Ragiiil  (musical),  184. 
Rahasya,  32  ;  275. 
Rahu,  180,  I. 
Raivata,  Manu,  206,  I 
Raivataka  (mountain),  391. 
Rajadharma,  374. 
Rajaks  (washermen),  2io,  i. 
Rajanya,  22,  2  ;  149,  I;  228. 
Rajarshis,  134,  i. 
Rajas  (guna),  85 ;  140 ;  222 ; 

275;  321^ 
Rajasa  Puranas,  513;  514. 
Raja-sekhara,  367  ;  508. 
Rajasiiya,  391  ;  453. 
Raja-taran-gini,  368  ;  532. 
Raja-yakshma,  234,  2. 
Rajendralala,  Mitra,  87,  1  ; 

525- 
Rajput^2io,i;  224,  2;  335,1. 
Rajputana,  325,  i. 
Raka,  158  ;  172. 
Rakshasa     (demon),     276  ; 
.    310  ;  348,  I  ;  400. 


INDEX. 


569 


Kakshasa  (marriage),  190. 

Kakshasi,  355. 

ESma,   244,    I  ;   343  ;   344 ; 

502;  503;  504. 
Rama'a  banishment,  348. 
Rama's  birth,  344. 
E;ama  (second),  330. 
Kama  and  Lakshmana,  345  ; 

351.  I- 
Rama  and  Ravana,  357. 
Rama-(^andra,   315,  I  ;  329, 

2;  330;  346,  1  ;  360,  1. 
Ramaciandra  -  daritra  •  sara, 

_369- 

Rama-darana,  368. 
Ramage's     'Beautiful 

Thoughts,'  142. 
Rama-glta,  368. 
Rama-hridaya,  368. 
Rama-llla,  365. 
Rama-navami,  365,  I. 
Ramanuja,  118;  325,  i. 
Eama-setu,  356,  i. 
Rama-vilasa,  368. 
Ramayana,  306  ;  315  ;  335  ; 

366;  367;  368. 
Ramayana  (epitome  of),  335. 
Ramayana     (recension    of), 

336. 
Ramayana-mahatmya,  368. 
Ramdoolal  Dey,  249,  3. 
Ramesurum,  356,  2. 
Ramopakhyana,  366  ;  366,  i. 
Ramusies,  309,  I. 
Rangaris  (dyers),  224,  2. 
Rasa,  68 ;  457;  471. 
Rasaka,  472. 
Rasa-manjari,  457- 
Rasana,  73. 
Rasatala,  431,  i. 
Rasei^vara,  118. 
Ra^i,  178 ;   182. 
Ratha-iarya,  383. 
Ratha-kara,    149;    149,    2; 

224,  2. 
Rathan-ga,  423,  I. 
Rationalism,  218. 
Rationalistic    Brahmanism, 

SO. 
Ratnavali,  437, 2  ;  505  ;  506. 
Raudra,  457,  I  ;  471. 
Raudri,  522. 
Ravana,  309,  I  ;  328  ;  330  ; 

337';  339;   353;   392,   2; 

S°3-  .        , 

Ravana,  description  of,  342  ; 

421  ;  429. 

Realism,  70. 

Reasoning,  61. 

Reciters  of  the  Ramayana, 

336- 
Recorde,  Robert,  182,  i. 
Regions,  seven,  431,  I. 


Regnier,  M.  Adolphe,  150,  2. 

Retaliation,  269. 

RevatI,  391. 

Revenue,  258. 

Rhetoric  (figures  of),  469. 

Rhyme     (employment     of), 

4SS- 
Ribhus,  14  ;   14,  2  ;  149,  2. 
Ri(5ika,  27,  i. 
Right  -  hand     worshippers, 

523.  I- 
Rig-veda,   5  ;    19  ;  21 ;  23  ; 

lOl  ;  245,2.  _ 
Rig-veda-pratisakhya,    149 ; 

■  150;  151. 

Rigvedi  Brahmans,  224,  2  ; 

■  24s,  2. 

Riju-yodhin,  408. 
Rik,  5 ;  6. 
Rina,  183. 
Rinadana,  261. 

Rishi,   3  ;    29  ;    191  ;    241  ; 
'  244;  375;  399. 
Rishya^rin.ga,  340. 
Ritu-samhara,  453. 
Ritv-ij,  231,  I ;  232. 
R.ivalry  between  sects,  513. 
Roer,  Dr.,  35,  3  ;  39,  I  ;  60, 

I  ;  203,  I  ;  291,2;  292,  I. 
RohinI,  234,  2  ;  332  ;  387,  i. 
Rohita,  26. 
Roma-harshana,  510. 
Romaka-siddhanta,  175. 
Rost,Dr.,252,  i;  506;  532,2. 
Roth,  Professor,  38,  l;  158, 1. 
Royal  Asiatic  Society,  158  ; 

179. 
Ru  (in  algebra),  182. 
Rudra,   322;   322,    I;  399; 

409,  2. 
Rudra-bhattj,,  457. 
Rudraksha  iDerries,  324,  I. 
Rudra-yamala  Tantra,  525. 
Runjit  Sinh,  325,  I. 
Rupa,  68  ;  182  ;  387,  I. 
Rupaka,  458. 
Ryot    (cultivator),    227,    3  ; 

258,  2. 

Sabara-svamin,  98,  1. 

^abda  (sound),  4. 

^abda  (verbal  authority),  61 ; 

117  ;  222. 
^abda-kalpadruma,  55,  i. 
^abda-lakshana,  453. 
Sabdalan-kara,  457. 
Sabha,  260  ;  391  ;  392. 
Sabha-parvan,  373. 
Sabhya  (fire),  189,  i. 
Sa6-(Sid-ananda,  106  ;  1 1 1,  5 ; 

113,  3. 
Sacrifice,  28,  I  ;  430. 
Sad-aiara,  209;  293. 


I,  136,  2;  276;  400. 
Sagara,    79,    i  ;    344;  361  ; 

362. 
Sagara,  363. 
Sagarika,  506. 

Sahadeva,  380 ;  387,  i ;  402. 
Sahasa,  261. 
Sahitya-darpana,  367  ;  456  ; 

457- 
Sahokti,  458. 
Saiqal-gar,  224,  2. 
Saiva-darsana,  118. 
Saiva  Puranas,  514. 
Saiva  sect,  94  ;  325,  i. 
Saka-dvipa,  420. 
^akala-^kha,  150. 
^akalya,  161,  ^. 
^akapuni,  159. 
Sakas,  229,  i  ;  361. 
Sakatayana,  160;  161;  161, 

2. 
Sakha,  150  ;  187. 
Sakhanta-ga,  216. 
Sakrasyania,  387,  I. 
Sakshinah  (witnesses),  297. 
Saktas,  322,  i ;  322,  2  ;  325, 

,  I ;  514;  522. 

Sakti,  91;  217;  322,  2;  522. 
Sakuni,  373;38o;385;39i; 

,  392;  410,  !■ 

Sakuntala,  58, 1;  95;  128,  i; 
256,  2;  259,  i;  361;  437, 

,  2_;  494-, _ 

Saiatura,  Salaturiya,  162. 

Sails  (weavers),  224,  2. 

^almali-dvipa,  420. 

ialya  (king),  184;  378;  391; 

405,  I  ;  406. 
Salya-parvan,  373. 
Sama,  399. 
Samadhi,  93 ;  323. 
Samahara,  169,  I. 
Saman,  5  ;  398. 
Samanodaka-bhava,  248. 
Samanya,  66  ;  69. 
Samanya-dharma,  457. 
Samavakara,  471. 
Samavartana,  195;  239;  242. 
Samavaya,  66 ;  69. 
Samavayi-karana,  51,  3;  53, 

I  ;  70. 
Sama-veda,  3 ;  6  ;  25 ;  245, 2. 
Sama- veda  priest,  216. 
Sama-veda  Upanishads,  35. 
Samayaiara,  145;   186. 
Samayai5arika   Sutras.   145  ; 

186  ;  202;  203  ;  208;  213. 
^amba,  521. 
Sambhu,  183. 

Sambhuya  samutthana,  261. 
Sambiika,  504. 
Sarnhara  (restraint),  402,  i. 
Samhita  text,  152. 


570 


INDEX. 


Samhitas  of  the  Veda,  245, 
,  2  ;  275. 
Sami  tree,  196. 
Samlapaka,  472. 
Samoyedio  language,  309,  i. 
Sam^aptaka,  405. 
Sam^aya,  64. 
Samsrishti,  458. 
Samudra-mathana,  471. 
Samvarta's  Code,  203  ;  302. 
Samvat,  494. 

Samvido  vyatikrama,  261. 
Samyavastha,  85. 
Saiuyoga,  68. 
San  (in  grammar),  164,  I. 
Sanat-kumara,  37  ;  521. 
Saidayana  (of  ashes),  199. 
Sandhi  (juncture  in  drama), 

470 ;  470,  2. 
Sandhi  (rules  of),  152;  245,  2. 
Sandhyas,  241  ;  280,  I. 
Sandhya-vandana,  245,  2. 
Sandilya,  Aphorisms  of,  125. 

2. 
Sandrokottos  or  Saudrakot- 

tus,  224,  I  ;  507. 
Sari'gita,  498. 
San-gita-damodara,  185. 
San'gita-darpana,  184. 
San'gita-ratnakara,       1S4 ; 

470. 
San-graha-parvan,  370,  I. 
Sani  (Saturn),  179. 
^ani-vara,  178,  i. 
Saiijaya,  378;  400;   407,  I. 
Sanjna,  163,  2  ;  428,  3. 
SaU'kara  A(5arya  or  6an-ka- 

ra6arya,    39,  3  ;    46  ;    73  ; 

loi,  2  ;    104  ;    107  ;  no  ; 

122;  303,  I  ;  325,  i;  454; 

494,  2- 
San-kara  (of  figures),  458. 
San*kara-jatTyah,  224. 
San-kara-misra,  62  ;  68. 
^an-kha,    183;    203;    301; 
,_302;_403. 
San-khayana,  146. 
San-khayana-brahmana,  25. 
San-khayana  Grihya  Sutras, 

186. 
San-khya     philosophy,    39 ; 

46;  73;  79;  86,1;   118; 

219;  531. 
San-khya  Gunas,  51,  3;  85, 

I. 
San-khya  Sutras,  79,  i. 
San-khya  (synthesis),  60. 
San-khyah  (numbers),  68. 
San -khya-karika,  48,  i  ;   51, 

I  ;  55.  3;  73,  2;  79,  i; 

80,  2  ;  83,  I. 
San-khya-prava<5ana,  79,  I  ; 

221  ;  290,  2  ;  531. 


San-khya  -  pravadaua  -  bha- 

shya,  79,  I ;  85. 
San-kirna,  472. 
Sanuyasin,  238  ;  254 ;  303, 

I. 
Sanskara  (ceremonies),  188 ; 

192  j  232;  238;  239;  243. 
Sanskara  (quality),  69  ;  138. 
Sanskarana,  161. 
Sanskrit,  485. 
Sanskrita,  161. 
Santa  (rasa),  457,  i. 
Santa,  Dasaratha's  daughter, 

340. 
Santanava,  375. 
Santanava's  Phit-sutras,l6l, 

2. 
Santanu,  375. 
Santapana  (penance),  273- 
Santhals,  309,  I. 
Santi,  411. 
^anti  -  parvan,    366  ;    374  ; 

411. 
Sapindata         (sapindaship), 

248  ;  266. 
Saptapadibhava,  191. 
Saptarshayah   (seven   patri- 
archs), 517,  I. 
Sapta-4ataka,  367. 
Sapta-^ati,  367. 
Sara,  405,  i ;  458. 
Sarabhan-ga     (an     ascetic), 

252,  I. 
^arad^  453. 
Sarada-tilaka,  525. 
Sarama,  sons  of,  198. 
Sarasvata,  210,  i. 
SarasvatI,  205  ;    209 ;    298 ; 

393 ;  408, 1 ;  427 ;  522. 

SarasvatI      kanthabharana, 

4S7;_ 

Sarayu,  river,  339,  2. 
Sardula  -  \ikridita,     metre, 

213,  2. 
Sarga  (creation),  511. 
Sarira,  63 1  73-  _  . 
Sarmishtha-yayati,  472. 
Sarn-ga-deva,  184  ;  470. 
Sarn-gadhara-paddhati,  368. 
Sarpari,  431,  i. 
Sarpis,  420. 
^arva,  409,  2. 
Sarva-darsana-san-graha,8o, 

2;   118;  119;   120;  338, 

I. 
Sarva-naman,  169,  i. 
Sarvato-bhadra,  456. 
Sarva-bhauma,  431,  2. 
^astra,  46;  261 ;  283,2;  371, 

2. 
Satanlka,  389,  2. 
^atapatha-brahmana,  3 ;  25 ; 

29;  31  ;  35;  56,2;  148; 


294,  3  ;  320  ;  327, 2  ;  328, 

,_ij  341,  I- 

Satatapa's  Code,  203  ;  302. 
Sati,  196,  I  ;  201  ;  207,  i  ; 
,  244,  l;  251;  252,2;  312. 
Satru-ghna,  345;  503. 
Satrunjaya-mahatmya,  367. 
Sattaka,  472. 
Sattva,  85 ;   140 ;  222  ;  275  ; 

321. 
Sattvati  or  SatvatI   (style), 

503,  i- 
Sattvika  Puranas,  513-515- 
Saturn,  179- 
Satya(age),55,2;  328:333; 

431,  I- 
Satyaki,  398 ;,  410. 
Satyashadha  Srauta  Sutras, 

146. 
Satyavan,  395. 
SatyavatI,  371,  I  ;  375. 
Saubala,  380,  I. 
Saubaleyi,  377. 
Saubali,  377  ;  380,  1. 
Saudhanvana,  149,  2. 
Saumanas,  432,  1. 
Saumitri,  345. 
Saumilla,  498. 
Saunaka,  150. 

^aimaka  Srauta  Sutras,  146. 
Saunakiya  C'aturadhyayika, 

151- 
Sauptika-parvan,  374  ;  409, 

I. 
Saura,  177;  179  ;  521. 
Saura-siddhanta,  175. 
Sauryas  or  Sauras,  325,  i. 
Sauti,  510,  I. 
Sautramani,  301,  2. 
Zavala,  361. 

Savana  (month),  177  ;  179. 
Savanas  (three),  241 ;  254. 
Savitri,  16  ;  17  ;  191  ;  346,  I. 
Savitri  (Gayatri),  17  ;  195  ; 

214  ;  214,  I  ;  274- 
Savya-sadin,  381,  4  ;  397. 
Sayaka  (arrov?),  405,  i. 
Sayana,  39;  118;  153;  156. 
Scepticism,  49;    120;   351; 

417- 
Schlegel,  Augustus  William, 

336,  I. 
Schools  of  Hindu  law,  302. 
Scythians,  361. 
Seclusion  of  Hindu  women, 

437,  2- 
Sects,  Hindu,  325  ;  325,  r ; 

326. 
Seekers  after  God  (Farrar's), 

142. 
Sena  (tribe),  210,  I. 
Senaka  (grammarian),  161, 2. 
Seneca,  142. 


INDEX. 


571 


Sentiments,  moral,  278;  441; 

461 ;  533- 
Sesamum  seed,  200. 
Sesha,  serpent,  235,  I  ;  332, 
,  2;  431  ;  431,  I.         _ 
Seshadri,     Rev.      Narayan, 

235,  I- 
Seton-Karr,  Mr.,  252,  2. 
Setu,  355,  I. 

Setu-bandha,  367  ;  494,  ^. 
Setu-kavya,  494,  2. 
Shad-vin^a  Brahmana,  25. 
Shaliadat,  244,  I. 
Shakespeare,  no,  3;  435. 
Shankar  P.  Pandit,  497. 
Shat-karmani,  237. 
Siamese  language,  309,  i. 
Siddha  (divine  being),    136, 

2;  519- 
Siddhanta       (astronomical), 

175-  .       ^ 

Siddhanta  (in  logic),  64. 
Siddhanta-kaumudi,  168. 
Siddhanta-muktavali,  60,  I. 
Siddhanta-siromani,  176. 
Siddhartha,  507,  i. 
Sighro6(5a,  179. 
Sikalgars,  224,  2. 
Sikh  chief,  325,  i. 
Sikhs   of   the   Panjab,   325, 

1. 
Siksha,  145  ;  149. 
Sila  (morality),  208. 
Slladitya,  367  :  533. 
Silara  (king),  303. 
Silimukha,  405,  I. 
6ilpa  (mechanical  arts),  185. 
^ilpaka,  472. 
Silpa-^astra,  184. 
Simantonnayana,  192  ;  239. 
Sima-vivada-dharma,  261. 
Simla,  386,  2. 
Simpis  (tailors),  224,  2. 
Sinclair,  Mr.  W.  F.,  224,  2  ; 

227,  I. 
Singing,  184;  467. 
Sinha,  423,  i. 
Sinhala,  344,  2. 
Sinhasana-dvatrin^at,  532. 
Siiiivali,  158;   173. 
Sinfepa,  S34. 
Sipahis,  224,  2. 
§Ipala,  198,  3. 
Si^ira,  453. 

6iiu-pala,  391  ;  419,  I. 
^i.4upala-badha,  453 ;  464. 
Sita  (black),  522. 
Sita,   335,    I  ;    353 ;    426 ; 

503;  504- 
Sita,  rape  of,  337. 
Sita-phal,  351,  I. 
^itikantha,  409,  2. 
Siva,  9';  50;  276,  I  ;  321; 


322  ;   409,   2  ;   429,  430 ; 
,513;  514;  518;  521. 
Siva-dharma,  521. 
^iva-ratri,  325,  i. 
Siva  Sutras,  163,  i. 
^ivaji,  256,  3. 
Sivika,  358. 
Six  privileges  of  Brahmans, 

237- 
Skanda,     368  ;    427  ;    481  ; 

481,  i;  514;  522. 
Slesha,  458. 
Sloka,  155;  213. 
Sloka  (invention  of),  311,  i  ; 

5^4- 

Smarta-bhatta(5arya,  304,  2. 

Smarta  Sutras,  145  ;   186. 

Sma^ana  (burning-ground), 
196;  299. 

Smith,  Mr.  G.,  394,  1. 

Smriti,  4  ;  loi  ;  144  ;  145  ; 
208  ;  213  ;  220  ;  293 ; 
301 ;  452. 

Smriti-(5andrika,  305. 

Smriti-tattva,  304. 

Snana,  195  ;  242. 

Snataka,  196 ;  295. 

Sneha,  69. 

Socrates,  58,  I. 

Soka,  504. 

Solar  line  of  kings,  343;  344. 

Solomon,  Song  of,  467. 

Soma  (ceremonies  and  sacri- 
fice), 6  ;  28,  I  ;  274. 

Soma  (juice),  274. 

Soma  (god),  189. 

Soma  (moon),  234,  2  ;  375- 

Soma  (plant),  6  ;  14. 

Soma-deva,  531 ;  532. 

Soma-deva,  Bhatta,  531. 

Soma-rudra,  275. 

Soma-siddhanta,  175. 

Soma-van^a,  375;  511,  i. 

Soma- vara,  178,  I. 

Somnath,  322,  i. 

Sonars,  224,  2. 

Soul  (universal),  9  ;  21 ;  22  ; 

34- 
South  Indian  school,  305. 
Spar&,  68. 
Sphotayana,  161,  2. 
Spirit  (universal),  8  ;  9  ;  21  ; 

22;  34;   103. 
Spirituous  liquor  (drinking), 

250. 
^raddha,    26,    I  ;    121,    4 ; 

196;     199;     200;     247; 

266;  270,   I  ;   300;  411  ; 

,  430 ;  433>  I- 
Sraddha,  346,  I. 
Srag-bandha,  456. 
Sramana,   276,    I  ;    312,    3 ; 

475 ;"  487- 


Srauta-sutra,  145  ;  146;  184; 
,   186. 

Sravana  (nakshatra),  173,  3. 
^ravana  (month),  171  ;   173, 

,  3;  431.  I- 
Sravishtha,  171. 
Sreni,  296,  i  ;  297. 
^reshthin,  296,  i. 
^ri,  427  ;  520. 
Sridhara-sena,  367. 
Sridhara-svamin,  515. 
Sri-gadita,  472. 
^ri-harsha,     453  ;    453,     i  ; 

,   505- 

Sri-kantha,  499. 
$rin-gara,  457,  I ;  471  ;  528. 
Sriu'gara-tilaka,  457. 
Sringata,  423,  3. 
^rin-gin,  420,  I. 
Sti-vatsa,  332. 
Sruta,  3  ;   144. 
^ruta-bodha,  153  ;  494,  2. 
Srutakarman,  389,  2. 
Srutasena,  389,  2. 
iruti,  24;    25,   2;    33;    48, 

i;   144;  214;  220;  293. 
Sruti-dvaidham,  216. 
Stage-manager,  473. 
Stanzas,  fanciful  shapes  of, 

456. 
Stenzler,  Prof.,  1S6,  2  ;  188  ; 

201,   I ;    203,   I  ;    292,   I ; 

295.  3;  30i>  3;  475.  2. 

Stay  a,  261  ;  270. 

Sthalipaka,  191. 

Sthanu,  323  ;  409,  2. 

Sthapati  (architect),  185. 

Sthapatya-veda,  184. 

Sthavara,  56,  i. 

Sthilla-^arira,  53,  2. 

Strabo,  221  ;  224,  I  ;  252, 
I  ;  257,  2;  259,  I  ;  268, 
I  ;  276,    1  ;  278,    2  ;    308, 

i;  318;  507. 

Stri-dhana,  267  ;  267,  i. 
Stri-parvan,  374. 
Stri-pun-dharma,  261. 
Stri-san'grahana,  261. 
Subala  (king),  377  ;  391. 
Subandhu,  ■i(>^  ;  533. 
Subhadra,    381,   3  ;  389,  2  ; 

,  391- 

Subhan'kara,   185. 
Su-bhata,  367. 
Subodhini,  304. 
SQdra,  212;  223;  439,  i. 
Sudraka,  475. 
Sufi-ism,  33  ;  102,  I. 
Sugriva,    337  ;    356 ;    359  ; 

425. 
Suicide,  299. 
Suka,  515. 
^uka-saptati,  532. 


572 


INDEX. 


Sukha,  68. 

Sukra,  179;  301  ;  409,  2. 
Sukra-vara,  178,  I. 
Sukshma-dharma,  387,  I. 
Sukshma-ferira,  53,  2 ;  198, 

^ukti,  no,  4.     ' 
Sulaiman  I. ,  529,  2. 
Sula-pani,  303. 
6ulka,  267. 
Sumantu,  302. 
Sumitra,  341. 
Sun,  16 ;  17. 
Suuahsepha,  25  ;  27. 
Sundara-kanda,  337  ;  367. 
Sundara-misra,  367. 
Sun-ga  dynasty,  498. 
Sunitha,  392. 
Sunnah  or  Sunna,  24. 
>^unja,  83,3;   105,4;  183. 
Suparna,  276. 
Supplements  to  Veda,  184. 
Suppressions  of  breath,  three, 

240. 
Supratika,  432,  i. 
Supreme  Being,  epithets  of, 

,  43- 

Sura  (Yadava  liing),  377. 

Surabhi,  519. 

Sura-pana,  270 ;  420. 

Surashtra,  417. 

Surgery,  184. 

Suris  (spirit  sellers),  210,  i. 

Surpa-nakha,  353  ;  366. 

Surun-ga,  385. 

Sfirya,   II  ;   16;   256;    321  ; 

344- 
Surya-siddhanta,  175;  176; 

178. 
Surya,  346,  i. 
Surya-sukta,  191,  i. 
Su-shupti,  III,  4. 
Su-sr\ita,  184. 
Suta  (charioteer,  bard),  377 ; 

510;  SIS- 
Sutala,  431,  I. 
Sutars  (carpenters),  224,  :i. 
Sutasoma,  389,  2. 
Sutra,  60. 
Sutra-dhara     or    carpenter, 

224,  2. 
Sutras  of  Panini,  162  ;  163  ; 

164. 
Sutras  (aphorisms),  25 ;  46. 
Sutras  (Buddhist),  147,  3. 
Sutratraan,  114. 
Suttee  (Sati),  ig6,  I. 
Suvarna,  293. 
Su-yodhana,  378. 
Sva  (in  algebra),  183. 
Sva-dharma,  297. 
Svadhyaya,  194  ;  245  ;  245, 

2. 


Svar,  ss,  2  ;  IS9  ;  195  5  43'. 

I. 
Svargarohanika-parvan,  374. 
Svarodisha  (Manu),  206,  I. 
Svayam-bhu,   206,   I  ;   217  ; 

220. 
Svayambhuva  (Manu),  206  ; 

221  ;  330,  3. 
Svayamvara,  251 ;  377  j  3^^ ! 

438,  2  ;  439,  3. 
Sveta,  122,  3. 
^veta  (mountains),  420,  I. 
Sveta-dvipa,  126,  i. 
^vetaketu,  49. 
Sveta-lohita,  122,  3. 
6veta-sikha,  122,  3. 
^veta^va,  122,  3. 
Sveta^vatara        TJpanishad, 

43  ;  44,  I ;   122. 
Sveta-vahana,  381,  4;  397. 
Swinging  festival,  325,  i. 
Syama-rahasya,  525. 
^yan  (in  grammar),  164,  I. 
Syllogism,  62. 
Synthesis,  60 ;  82. 

Tadaka,  354. 

Taddhita  affixes,  152,  169. 

Tagore  Law  Lectures,  267, 

I. 
Tail!  (oilman),  210,  i ;  224, 

2. 
Taittiriya  (Yajur-veda),  5  ; 

6  ;  3S  ;  234,  2. 
Taittiriyas  or  Taittiriyakas, 

205  ;  24s,  2_;  335,  I. 
Taittiriya  -  brahmana,     25  ; 

328,  I._ 
Taittiriyaranyaka,  149. 
Taittiriya  TJpanishad,  35. 
Taj-jalan,  102,  i. 
Takshaka,  354;  431,  I. 
Talatala,  431,  i. 
TalaTa-kara  TJpanishad,  35, 

2. 
Talmud,  24. 
Tamas,  67  ;  85  ;  140 ;  222  ; 

27s;  321. 
Tamasa    (Manu),     206,     i  ; 

S13;  SH- 
Tamil,  309,  i. 
Tamisra  (hell),  335. 
Tamraparni,  344,  2. 
Tandava,  467. 
Tandula,  271,  I. 
Tandya  Brahmana,  25. 
Tan-matras,  83  ;  221. 
Tantis  (weavers),  210,  i. 
Tantra,  91  ;    322,    i  ;    522- 

525 ;  530- 

Tantrl,  210,  I. 
Tantrika  doctrines,  322,  2  ; 
524. 


Tapah    or    tapar   (heavenly 

sphere),  55,  2;  431,  I. 
Tapas  (austerity),  323. 
Tapas  (theory  of),  342,  1. 
Tapta  -  kriidhra     (penance), 

273- 
Tapta-masha,  271,  I. 
Taraka  (a  Daitya),  324,  I. 
TaraU'ga,  532. 
Tarka,  64 ;  220. 
Tarka-san'graha,  60,  I ;  70  ! 

72;  74-  _ 
Tarka- vidya,  219. 
Tarkin,  220. 
Tarpana,  241. 
Tartar  tribes,  309,  I. 
Tatpara  (measure  of  time), 

177. 
Tatpurusha,  152. 
Tattva,  80 ;  80,  2. 
Tattva-jnanam,  104. 
Tattva-samasa,    21,    i  ;    79, 

I  ;  290,  3. 
Tattvas,  twenty-five,  80,  2  ; 

82  ;  219. 
Tawhid,  244,  i. 
Taxation,  six  heads  of,  259. 
Taxes,  258  ;  259. 
Te  Deum,  136,  2. 
Tejas,  67  ;  84  ;  387,  1. 
Telemachus,  440,  i. 
Telingi,  224,  2. 
Telis  or  oilmen,  224,  2. 
Telugu,  309,  I. 
Telugu  country,  245,  2. 
Terms  in  arithmetic  and  al- 
gebra, 182. 
Tertiary  compound,  71. 
Testamentary  power,  265. 
Thales,  52,  i  ;  112,  I. 
Thirty- three  gods,  321,  2. 
Thomson,  Mr.,  124,  I ;   138. 
Thracians,  252,  I. 
Thunderer,  14. 
Tibetan  language,  309,  I. 
Tila,  200. 
Timaeus,  50,  3;  SI,  3;  53. 

2;  56,  2;  81,  I  ;   103,  I. 
Time,   hymn   in   praise    of, 

22. 
Tirhut,  302. 
Tirtha,  244,  I  ;  408,  I. 
Tithi,  177. 
Tithi-tattva,  304. 
Tomara,  405,  i. 
Topics  of  the  Nyaya,   60; 

64. 
Torana,  185. 
Tota  kahani,  532. 
Townships,  258. 
Toxicology,  184. 
Tradition  (smriti),  144. 
Tragedy,  468 ;  469. 


INDEX. 


573 


Trailokya,  218. 
Trajan,  Emperor,  313. 
Transfiguration,  135,  2. 
Transmigration,  II  ;  31;  56; 

56,   2;    217;   222;    334; 

530. 
Trasa-renu,  71. 
Trayam  brahma,  214. 
Trayl  vidya,  214. 
Treasure-trove,  259. 
Treta   (age),    178,    2;   221; 

301  ;  302  ;  328 ;  330,  3. 
Treta(threefires),l88;  189,1. 
Triad,  n  ;  217  ;  321, 
Tri-danda,  121,  2. 
Tri-dandin,  131,  2. 
Tri-kanda,  161. 
Tri-lin-ga,  224,  2. 
Trimurti,     II;    217;    321  ; 

509;  S14;  SK"- 

Tri-na(5iketa,  214,  I. 

Tri-pada,  155. 

Tripura-daha,  471. 

Trishtubh  metre,  154;  335,2. 

Tri^uia,  183. 

Tri-suparna,  214,  i. 

Tri-vikrama,  329,  I  ;  367. 

Tri-vrit,  154  ;  240. 

Trotaka,  472. 

Troyer,  M.,  532,  2. 

Truti,  177. 

Try-ambaka,  323,  I. 

Tuda,  309,  I. 

Tula,  271,  I  ;  297. 

Tnlasi,  271,  i. 

Tulasi-dasa  or  Tiilsi-das, 
368. 

Tullberg,  Dr.,  497,  i. 

Tulya-yogita,  458. 

Tungusio  (Mautchu)  lan- 
guage, 309,  I. 

Turanian  languages,  309,  I.  . 

Turanian  races,  229. 

Turkish  language,  309,  i. 

Turphari,  122,  I. 

Tuti-nama,  532. 

Tvashtri,  14  ;  387,  I. 

UcSfSa,  179. 
Udaharana,  61. 
Udaka-dana,  247  ;  248. 
Udatta-raghava,  367. 
TJdattokti,  473. 
Udayana  (king),  506. 
Udayana  A(5arya,  77- 
Uddhara,  267. 
Uddi^a,  535. 
Udgatri,  6  ;  216. 
Udyoga-parvan,  373. 
Ugra,  409,  2. 
Ugra-^ravas,  510,  I. 
Ujjayini  (Oujein),  176  ;  330, 
3;  494;  494.  I-  I 


TJjjvala-datta,  161,  2. 

Ulka-mukha,  237  ;  276. 

UUapya,  472. 

Uluka,  65,  I. 

Ulupi,  389,  2  ;  431,  I. 

Ulysses,  426. 

Uma,  361 ;  522  ;  523. 

Umapati,  409,  2. 

Unadi-sutras,  161,  2. 

Unmarried  girls,  268. 

Upadana-karana,  53,  i. 

Upa-dharma,  246. 

Upadhi,  63,  I  ;   113,  2. 

Upadhyaya,  232. 

Upama,  457. 

Upamana,    61;    117;   457; 

458. 
Upameya,  457  ;  458. 
Upanaya,  61. 

Upanayana,  189;  192;  239. 
Upanishads,  4  ;  21,   2  ;  32  ; 

32.    I  :   34 ;   35  ;  S6, '  2 ; 

122  ;  2l5. 
Upan^u,  246. 
Upapataka,  270. 
Upa-purana,  146  ;  521. 
Upa-rupaka,  470 ;  472. 
Upasad,  341,  i. 
Upa-sarnhriti,  470;  2. 
Upasarga,  15 1,  160. 
Upavasa  (fast),  325,  i. 
Upa-veda,  184. 
Upendra-vajra,  156. 
Uposhita  (fasting),  253. 
Urva^i,  375. 
Ui^anas,  203  ;  301. 
Ushas,  II  ;   17  ;  428. 
Usury,  263  ;  264. 
Utkala,  210,  I. 
Utpreksha,  458. 
Utsava,  325,  I. 
Utsrishtikan-ka,  471. 
Uttara,  199. 
Uttara  -  kanda,    337  ;    359  ; 

365.  I- 
Uttara-mimansa,  98. 
Uttara-paksha,  99. 
Uttara  -  rama  -  darita,    337  ; 

365.  I ;  367 ;  499 ;  502 ; 
503^ 

Uttarayana,  403. 

Vad  (word),  214. 
Vadaspati  Mii^ra,  92,  2 ;  305. 
Vai5ya,  458. 

Vada  (controversy),  64. 
Vadhuna  Srauta  Siitras,  146. 
Vadin  (plaintiff),  297. 
Vag-dandayohparu8hye,272. 
Vahana,  430. 
Vaidika,  278,  I. 
Vaidika  (repeaters  of  Veda), 
245,  z. 


Vaidya,  210,  i;  225. 
VaijayantI,  304  ;  305. 
Vaikartana,  378,  1. 
Vaikhanasa   Srauta   Sutras, 

146. 
Vaikuntha,  334. 
Vaimanika,  276. 
Vairagya,  93  ;  528. 
Vai^akha,  173,  3. 
Vaisampayana,  371,  i;  374; 

510,  I- 
Vaiseshika  philosophy,  46  ; 

S3,   I  ;  60;  65;  71  ;  77; 

85;  219. 
Vaiseshika   Siitras,    60,    i  ; 

62  ;  64,  I. 
Vaishnavas,  325,  I  ;  515. 
Vaishnavi,  522. 
Vai^ravana,  354. 
Vai^vadeva-homa,  1S8,  i. 
Vaisya,   22,    2  ;    212  ;  223  ; 

224,  2  ;  349,  I. 
Vaitanika    oblations,     188  ; 

254- 
VaitaranT,  415. 
Vaivasvata  (seventh  Manu), 

30,    I  ;    206,    I  ;    330,    3 ; 

_344- 
Vajasaneyins,  5  ;  150. 
Vajasaneyi-prati^akhya,  151; 

152. 
Vajasaneyi-sainhita,  25. 
Vaka,  386. 

Vakovakyam,  295  ;  295,  i. 
Vakula,  423,  3. 
Valabhi,  367. 
Valabhi,  453. 
Valabhi-pura,  367. 
Vallabhadarya,  325,  i. 
Valli  (Katha  Upanishad),  42. 
Valraiki,  311,  1 ;  314  ;  315; 

366;     367;     368;     416; 

Vama6arins,  523,  i. 

Vamadeva,  339. 

Vamana  (dwarf),  320  ;  328  ; 

432,  i;  469;  514- 

Vamana'sKa^ikaVritti,  168. 
Vana,  405 ;  533. 
Vana-parvan,  361,  2  ;  366  ; 

373- 
Vanaprastha,     211;      238; 

241 ;  254  ;  301. 
Vanis,  224,  2. 
Vansa  (genealogy),  511. 
Van&  brahmana,  118. 
Van^anu&rita,  511. 
Van^a-sthavila,  518. 
Vara,  178,  i. 
Varada,  409,  2. 
Varaha  (boar),  327  ;  423,  i. 
Varaha-mihira,    175;    176; 

179;  367. 


574 


INDEX. 


Varaha  ^rauta  Sutras,  146. 
Varahi,  522. 

Varaji  (betel-grower),  210,  1. 
Varanasi,  511,  !• 
Varanavata  (city),  385. 
Vardhushika,  264. 
Vardhushya,  271. 
"Varendra,  210,  i. 
Varhaspatya  Sutras,  120. 
Varna  (caste),  210,  i  ;  223. 
Varna-san-karah,  224. 
Varsha,  420  ;  453. 
Varta-karma,  237. 
Varttika-kara,  166. 
Varttikas,   151  ;   166  ;    167, 

i;  531- 

Varuna,    10  ;   12  ;   13  ;    16  ; 
26;'  189;  191;  197;  256; 

431  ;  521- 
Varunl,  519. 
Vasanta  (spring),  453. 
Vasantaka,  506. 
Vasanta-sena,  477  ;  479- 
Vasantotsava,  472. 
Vasava  -  datta,    367  ;     5°^  > 

533- 
Vasishtha,   203  ;   302  ;   315, 

I ;  339 ;  347 ;  361 ;  402, 

1  ;  408,   I ;  504;  511,   I  ; 

517,  I  ;  521. 
Vasishtha,  368. 
Vasishtha-ramayana,  368. 
Vasishtha-siddhanta,  175. 
Vastn,    53,    I  ;    103  ;    104  ; 

457 ;  470- 

Vastn-pariksha,  193. 
Vastu-purusha,  185. 
Vasu  (king),  210,  I  ;  371,  I. 
Vasu-deva,  312;  331. 
Vasudeva,   331  ;  332  ;  375  ; 

390,  I. 
Vasuki  (serpent),  327  ;  354  ; 

431. 1 ;  519- 

Vasus,  399 ;  400. 
Vasu-shena,  378  ;  ^84,  I. 
Vata  or  Banyan  (Ficus  In- 

d'ioa),  39,  3. 
Vatsa,  437,  2. 
Vatsalya,  457,  I. 
Vatsa-raja,  506. 
Vatsyayana,  65. 
Vatup  (in  grammar),  163,  3. 
Vayu,  10  ;  67  ;  83  ;  428. 
Vayu-purana,  514- 
Veda,  2  ;  208  ;  509  ;  522. 
Veda    (repetition    of),    194: 

195  ;  236  ;   245  ;   245,  2  ; 

27_4. 
Vedabhyasa,  237. 
Vedan-gas  (six),   145  ;  146  ; 

161. 
Vedanta,    46;    73,    3 ;    98 ; 

loi  ;  208. 


Vedanta-paribhasha,  109,  2. 

Vedanta-sara,  loi,  2;  113, 
6._ 

Vedanta-siltra,  47  ;  245,  2. 

Vedantist  formula,  38. 

Vedantists,  39. 

Vedars,  309,  I. 

Vedartha-praka^a,  371,  2. 

Veda-vahya,  144,  2. 

Vedio  Nakshatras  (twenty- 
seven),  172,  I. 

Vedic  prosody,  155. 

Veni-samhara,  392,  t  ;  50S. 

Venus  (planet),  179- 

Vetala,  532. 

Vetala-pau6a-Tini5ati,  532. 

Vibhaga,  68  ;  261. 

Vibhandaka,  340. 

Vibhishana,  309,  i  ;  354,  i ; 

356 ;  359 ;  382, 3 ;  503- 

Viditra-virya,  375  ;  376. 
Vidarbha-raja,  367. 
Videha,  335, 1  ;  417;  511,1. 
Vidhi,  24. 
Vidhi-yajna,  246. 
Vidura,    376;    385;     392; 

399  ;  410 ;  437,  i- 
Vidushaka   or   jester,  474  ; 

498. 
Vidya,  283,  3  ;  295. 
Vighatika,  177. 
Viharas,  475  ;  494. 
Vija,  220 ;  470,  2. 
Vija-ganita,    174,    2  ;    176  ; 

182. 
Vijaya,  381,  4  ;  397. 
Vijaya-nagara,  118. 
Vijnana-bhikshu,      79>      '  ! 

92^2. 
Vijnana-maya-kosa,  113. 
Vijnane^vara,  291. 
Vikala,  178. 

Vikara  (production), 83  ;  140. 
Vikarana,  164. 
Vikartana,  378,  i. 
Vikramaditya,  494  ;  494,  i ; 

532- 
Vikramorva^i,  494 ;  496. 
Vikrita,  472. 
Vikshepa,  109;  112,4. 
Vikukshi,  344. 
Vilasika,  472. 
Village  government,  258. 
Vimarsha      or      hindrance, 

470,  2. 
Viradi,  177. 
Vindhya,  308. 
Vipatha,  405,  I. 
Vira,'  457,  I  ;  471. 
Vira-6arita,  502. 
Viradha,  310,  I. 
Viraj,  22;  22, 1  ;  206,  I  ;  220. 
Vira-mitrodaya,  304. 


Virana,  193. 
Vira-iSayana,  411. 
Virata  (king),  373. 
Virata-parvan,  373. 
Virgil,  53,  2  ;  56,  2  ;  58,  I  ; 

106,  2. 
Virupa,  loi. 

Virvlpaksha,  409,  2  ;  432,  I. 
Vi^akha,  173,  3. 
Vii^esha,  66  ;  69  ;  71. 
Viseshokti,  458. 
Visha  (poison),  184;  271,  I. 
Vishaya,  53,  i ;  73  ;  84 ;  457, 
Vishkambha,  473. 
Vishnu,  9  ;  50 ;  79,  I  ;  203  ; 

217 ;  276,  I  ;   301  ;   320 ; 

430 ;  431 ;  513 ;  520. 

Vishnu   (of    the   Rig-veda), 

320;  321. 
Vishnu-gupta,  507. 
Vish|nu-purana,     91  ;    368  ; 

387,  i;  389.  2:514;  516. 

Vishnu-^arman,  531. 

Vishnu-yaSas,  336,  i. 

Vishuvat,  181. 

Vi^ikha,  405,  i. 

Vision     of    the     Universal 

Form,  13s  ;  400. 
Vi^ravas,  354,  1. 
Vii^vadevas,  400. 
Vi^vakarman,  387,  I. 
Vi^vamitra,   17,   i  ;    27,    I  ; 

185  ;    302  ;    315,  I  ;  345  ; 

361  ;  402,  I  ;  408,  I. 
Viiva-natha  Kaviraja,  368  ; 

457- 
Vi.4va-praka^a,  i6i. 
Vi^va-rflpa,  303  ;  409,  2. 
Vi^ve  Devah,  189  ;  200. 
Vitala,  431,  I. 
Vitana  (hearths),  188;  188, 1. 
Vitanda  (cavilling),  64. 
Vithi,  472. 
Vivada-6andra,  305. 
Vivada  (Sintamani,  305. 
Vivadah  svamipalayoh,  261. 
Vivada-ratnakara,  305. 
Vivada-tandava,  304. 
Vivaha     (marriage),      190; 

239  ;  243  ;  244. 
Vivasat,  344. 
Vopadeva,  168  ;  515. 
Vow  of- continence,  379,  2. 
Vraja,  332. 
Vrata,  253  ;  325,  I. 
Vratyata,  271. 
Vriddha  Yajuavalkya,  204 ; 

292. 
Vriddhi,  264. 
Vriddhi-purta,  200. 
Vrihaj-jataka,  176. 
Vrihan-nala,  396  ;  397. 
Vrihannaradiya,  521. 


INDEX. 


575 


Vrihaspati,  179  ;  203  ;  302. 
Vrihaapati    (aphorisms    of), 

120  ;   121. 
Vrihaspati-siddhanta,  175. 
Vrihat,  204. 
Vrihat-katha,  531. 
Vrikodara,  381. 
Vriksha-bandha,  456. 
Vrindavana,  332. 
Vrisha,  378,  I. 
Vrishnis,  399. 
Vritra,    10 ;    14 ;    387,    I  ; 

418,  1. 
Vritti,  209 ;  470. 
Vyahritis  (three) ,  1 95 ;  2 1 4, 1 . 
"Vyaja-stuti,  458. 
Vyakarana  (grammar),  145  ; 

150;  161. 
Vyakta-ganita,  176,  3. 
Vyapaka,  '  pervader,'  62. 
Vyapti,  62 ;  63,  1. 
Vyapya,  6z. 
Vyasa,  46  ;   loi  ;  203  ;  252, 

2;  302;    316;  368;  371, 

2;  375  5378;  385; 407, 1 ; 

410;   411;   509;   510,  i; 

515- 

Vyatireka,  458. 
Vyavahara,  209  ;  255  ;  278  ; 

285  ;  292  ;  296. 
Vyavahava-dintamani,  305. 
Vyavahara-mayukba,  305. 
Vyavahara-padam,  297. 
Vyavahara-tattva,  304. 
Vyavaharika  (existence),  108. 
Vyayoga,  471. 

Weaver,  two-headed,  534. 
"Weber,  25,   i  ;    29 ;  56,  2  ; 

171.  I ;  313.  I ;  332,  I ; 
367 ;  497 ;  533- 

Weber's   Indiscbe  Streifen, 

•31,  I- 

Weber's   Indisohe    Studien, 

43,  I ;  330.  3- 

Western  school,  305. 
Wheeler,  Mr.  Talboys,  213, 

2  ;  249,  3  ;  316,  I  ;  369,  I. 
Whitney,  Prof.  W.  D.,  7,  i ; 

38,  l;  151;   151,  2;   171, 

i;  173,  2;  175,  2. 
Whitney's  Oriental  Studies, 

330.  3- 
Widows,  marriage  of,  253  ; 
438,  2. 


Wife  (directions  tor  choos- 
ing), 243. 

Wilkins,  Sir  C,  124,  i. 

Wills  Act  (Hindu),  265,  2. 

Wilson,  Professor  H.  H., 
25,  3  >  73i  2  ;  and  passim. 

Wilson's  Glossary,  264,  3. 

Wilson's  Hindu  Theatre,257, 
2. 

Winking  of  eyes,  13,  2. 

Witnesses,  13,  3;  272;  297. 

Wives  (four  or  three),  243  ; 

293- 
Wives,   character  of,    436 ; 

437- 
Women  and  wives,  duties  of, 

284. 
Women,  position  of,  134,  i  ; 

441. 
World,  destruction  of,  517. 
Wort-spiel,  454. 
Written   evidence,    245,  2 ; 

293;  297. 

Ya  (in  algebra),  183. 
Yadavas,  332;  374;  511,  i. 
Yadu,  332  ;  375. 
Yajanam,  237. 
Yajanam,  237. 
Yajna,  320. 
Yajna-patra,  1 96. 
Yajnavalkya,  190;  203;  232, 

3  ;  245,  2  ;  285,  I  ;  303. 
Yajnavalkya,  Code  of,  391. 
Yajnavalkya,      commentary 

on,  303. 
Yajnavalkya  Vrihad,  292. 
Yajnika-deva,  148. 
Yajnika  (ritualist),  158  ;  245 

2. 
Yajnopavita,  192;  195  ;  232, 

3 ;  239. 

Yajur-veda,  6  ;  25  ;  43,  i. 
Yajur-veda,   Black,  6  ;  44  ; 

24s,  ^. 
Yajur-veda,  White,  6  ;  245, 

2. 
Yajurvedi,  224,  2. 
Yajus,  6. 

Yajvan  (sacrificer),  276. 
Yak  (in  grammar),  164,  I. 
Yaksha,  276 ;  400. 
Yama,    II  ;    18;    41  ;    189  ; 

197  ;     198  ;    203  ;     256  ; 

2S0,  2  ;  301  ;  427  ;  430. 


Yama  (abode  of),  56,  I. 

Yama  (forbearance),  93. 

Yama  (hymn  to),  19  ;  299. 

Yamaka,  457. 

Yamau  (twins),  381,  4. 

Yami,  18. 

Yamuna    (river),    375,    4  ; 

417- 
Yan.  (in  grammar),  164,  i. 
Yaska,  16,  1  ;  156  ;  156,  I  ; 

156,2. 
Yasoda,  332. 
Yasovarman,  499. 
Yates,  Dr.,  155;  456. 
Yati,  255. 
Yatudhanas,  310. 
Yaugandharayana,  506. 
Yavanas,  229,  i  ;  316;  361. 
Yavat-tavat,  182. 
Yayati,  331  ;  375. 
Yellow  garments,  293. 
Yoga,  46;  82,  I  ;  92;   130, 

4;   153;  219;  294;   323. 
Yoga  (Sutras  of),  92,  2. 
YogaSrya,  480. 
Yoga-ksiaema,  260. 
Yogas  (twenty-seven),i78,  i. 
Yoga-vasishtha,  368. 
Yoge^a,  324,  I. 
Yogin,  94;  113,  I  ;  324,  i. 
Yojana  (measure),  178,  180. 
Yoni  (female  symbol),   322, 

I. 
Yuddha-kanda,  337. 
Yudhi-shthira,    366  ;    373  ; 

374;     379;     384;     385; 

387,  I ;  389,  I ;  396 ;  399, 

402  ;    403  ;    407  ;    408  ; 

411;  419. 
Yugas  (four),   178;   178,  2; 

179  ;  221. 
Yukti,  in,  3. 
Yupa,  29  ;  341,  I. 
Yuthika,  423,  3. 
Yuva-raja     (heir-apparent), 


Zahr,  33. 
Zakat,  244,  I. 
Zamindar,  258,  2. 
Zand-Avasta,  131,  2. 
Zeno,  82,  1. 

Zeus,  9;  106,  2  ;   133,  8. 
Zodiac  (divisions  of),  170. 
Zoroaster,  47. 


PRINTED    BY   BALLANTYNE,    HANSON    AND    CO. 
EDINBURGH    AND   LONDON. 


THE    INDO-ROMANIC    ALPHABET 

WITH    THE 

EQUIVALENT    SANSKRIT    LETTERS    AND    RULES    FOE 
PRONUNCIATION. 

TOWTiLS.  _ 

A,  a,  for  ^,  pronounced  as  in  rural ;  A,  a,  for  ^rr,  T,  as  in  tar,  father  ; 
I,  i,  for  ■?: ,  f ,  as  in  fill ;  I,  ^,  for  f  ,'^ .  as  in  police ;  17,  m,  f or  '^  ,  ^  , 
as  in  iuW ;  V,  H,  for  "^T ,  ,  as  in  rwde;  Bi,  ri,  for  ^ ,  __ ,  as  in  merrily  ; 
Rl,  rl,  for  ^ ,  ,  as  in  marine  ;  E,  e,  ioic  X  ,'"  ,  as  in  prey  ;  Ai,  ai, 
f or  ^  ,  "^  ,  as  in  aisle  ;  0,  o,  for  'w'^ ,> ,  as  in  go;  Au,  au,  for  ^'^  ,  °T , 
as  in  Haws  (German)  ;  ji  or  m,  for  ' ,  i.e.  the  Anusvara,  sounded 
like  n  in  French  moji,  or  like  any  nasal ;  h,  for  : ,  i.e.  the  Visarga  or 
a  distinctly  audible  aspirate. 

CONSONANTS.' 

K,  Te,  for  ^ ,  pronounced  as  in  Mil,  see^ ;  Kh,  hh,  for  ^g ,  as  in 
inMorn ;  Q,  g,  for  V  ,  as  in  jrun,  dogr ;  Gh,  gh,  for  g^  as  in  lo^Aut  ;]Sr-,7i-, 
for  ^ ,  as  in  simg"  (sin-). 

C,  c  for  ^,  as  in  dolce  (in  music), = English  ch  in  chnreh,  \wceh 
(lure')  ;  G'h,  ch,  for  W  ,  as  in  churc^/iill  (c  urc'MU)  ;  J,  j,  for  'ST ,  as  in 
yet ;  Jh,  jh,  for  f[ ,  as  in  hed^e-^og  (hejhog)  ;  N,  n,  for  «r,  as  in 
sijige  (siraj). 

T,  t,  for  ■^,  as  in  <rue  (?ru)  ,  Th,  th,  for  ?,  as  in  ani^ill  (anfAill)  ; 
P,  d,  for  '^,  as  in  drum  (rfrum)  ;  Dh,  dh,  for  "S ,  as  in  recZAaired 
(rerffeaired)  ;  N,  n,  for  tt,  as  in  none  (nun). 

T,  t,  for  fT ,  as  in  water  (as  pronounced  in  Ireland)  ;  Th,  th,  for  'sj  ^ 
as  in  rmt-hook  (but  more  dental)  ;  D,  d,  for^^,  as  in  dice  (more  like  th 
in  this) ;  Dh,  dh,  for  v,  as  in  adhere  (more  dental);  N,  n,  for  •r,  as 
in  wot,  in. 

P,  p,  for  T^,  as  in  ^ut,  sip  ;  Ph,  ph,  for  tjt  ,  as  in  nphill :  B,  b,  iorsf  ^ 
as  in  6ear,  ru6  ;  Bh,  hh,  for  W,  as  in  shhov  ;  M,  m,  for  H ,  as  in  map,  jam. 

Y,  y,  for  ^,  as  in  yei ;  B,  r,  for  T,  as  in  red,  year ;  L,  I,  for  ^,  as 
in  Zie  ;  F,  v,  for  "q" ,  as  in  vie  (but  lilie  w  after  consonants,  as  in  twice). 

/S',  i,  for  ■?!:,  as  ia  sure,  ses.<!ion;  Sh,  sh,  f or  ■^  ,  as  in  sAun,  husA. ; 
S,  8,  for  ^  ,  as  in  sir,  hiss ;  B[,  h,  for  "^  ,  as  in  hit. 

Fuller  directions  for  pronunciation  will  be  found  in  a  '  Practical 
Grammar  of  the  Sanskrit  Language,'  by  Monier  WiUiams,  third 
edition,  published  by  the  Delegates  of  the  Clarendon  Press,  Oxford , 
and  sold  by  Macmillan  and  Co.,  and  by  W.  H.  Allen  &  Co.,  13, 
Waterloo  Place.  Also  in  a  Sanskrit-English  Dictionary,  published 
by  the  same. 


