===== Internet Archive OCR: inspiredtalks00viverich_djvu.txt =====

LIBRARY 

UNlVEKtlY  OP 
CAUPOHNIA 


\ 


SWAMI  VIVEKANANDA 

(From  a  photograph  taken  just  before  leaving  Madras  for  the 
Parliament  of  Religions  at  Chicago,  showing  the  Swami  in  the  orange 
robe  and  with  the  shaven  head  of  the  Sanyasin.) 


VEDANTA    PHILOSOPHY 


INSPIRED  TALKS 

BY 

SWAMI    VIVEKANANDA 

(Recorded  by  a  disciple  during  the  seven  weeks 
at  Thousand  Island  Park) 


Second  Edition 

[Copyright] 
All  Rights  Reserved 


PUBLISHED   BY 

THE   RAMAKRISHNA   MISSION 

MYLAPORE,  MADRAS 


MADRAS:  G.  C.  LOGANADHAM  BROS. 
THE   "GUARDIAN"   PRESS,   MOUNT  ROAD 


V+3T 


To  His  Holiness 

SWAMI  BRAHMANANDAJI 

In  Loving  Memory 

of 

SWAM  I  VJVEKANANDA 

This  Book 

is  dedicated  by 

His  Devoted  Disciples. 


i .  °" 


INSPIRED  TALKS 


CONTENTS 


Frontispiece— Swami  Vivekananda. 

House  at  Thousand  Island  Park. 

Page. 
I. 
Preface  i 

II. 

Introductory  Narrative 1 

III. 

The  Master 24 

IV. 
Inspired  Talks        51 


PREFACE 

This  invaluable  book  is  published  for  the 
second  time.  In  this  edition  I  have  added  a 
few  notes  where  Swamiji's  utterances  may 
appear  to  be  abrupt  and  unconnected.  Some 
typographical  mistakes  also  have  been  attended 
to  and  no  pains  have  been  spared  to  make  it 
intelligible  to  all  readers  and  free  from  all 
errors,  as  far  as  possible. 

Swamiji  is  known  all  over  the  world  as  the 
greatest  and  most  powerful  exponent  of  the 
Vedanta  in  modern  times.  Many  have  felt  the 
irresistible  charm  of  his  eloquence  in  India  and 
abroad.  In  the  present  case  Swamiji  did  not 
stand  before    a  vast   and   critical    audience  to 


Preface 

conquer  them  by  his  irrefutable  arguments 
based  upon  sound  logic,  his  bewitching  persona- 
lity and  his  rare  gifts  of  explaining  the  most 
abstruse  subjects  in  a  most  perspicuous  manner 
accompanied  by  his  "cyclonic"  eloquence,  but 
he  was  sitting  before  a  few  of  his  already 
conquered  chosen  disciples  who  had  begun  to 
see  in  him  their  only  guide  to  take  them  beyond 
the  ocean  of  ignorance  and  misery.  There  he 
sat  in  the  glory  of  his  own  all-illumining 
realisation  diffusing  the  balmy  rays  of  his  inner 
light  by  means  of  his  most  sweet  and  musical 
voice,  all  about  him,  softly  raising  and  opening 
the  lotus  buds  of  the  hearts  of  his  ardent  devo- 
tees. Peace  reigned  all  around  him.  Blessed 
indeed  were  those  few  fortunate  souls  who 
had  the  rare  privilege  of  sitting  at  the  feet  of 
such  a  great  sage  and  Guru. 

The  cyclonic   monk  was   not  there   carrying 
everything  before  him.     There  sat  the  peaceful 

ii 


Preface 

Rishi   mildly   disseminating    the  messages   of 
peace  and  bliss  to  a  few  ardent   souls  fully  ripe 
to  receive  them.     How  illumining  and  solacing 
were  those  sweet  words  coming  out  of  his  holy 
mouth  like  the  smiling  and  breezy  Dawn  coming 
out  of  the  lap  of  the  bright  and   ruddy  east  and 
driving  away  the  darkness  before  her.    If  those 
words     had    the     power     to   console    a     few 
souls,  they  must  have  the  power  to  bring  com- 
fort   to  all    souls  and  blessed   be  the   mother- 
heart  of  that  loving  disciple  who  preserved  those 
saving  words  and  did  not  allow  them  to  be  lost 
in  the  abysmal  womb  of  Eternity.     To  mother 
Haridasi  (Miss  S.  Ellen  Waldo)  the  whole  world 
should   be  grateful   for   these  "inspired"    talks 
of  Swamiji  which  have  brought   into  existence 
the  present  volume.     There   cannot  be  a  better 
friend  and  a  better  guide  to   all  humanity  than 
this.     Whoever  will  taste  the  nectar  in  it  is  sure 
to  know  that  death  has  no   power  over  him, 

iii 


Preface 

May  every  soul  seeking  for  illumination,  rest 
and  peace  have  recourse  to  it  to  end  his  or  her 
miseries  once  for  all. 

Madras,       }    RAMAKRISHNANANDA. 

9th  December  1910.  f 


IV 


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 

All  who  had  the  blessing  of  personal  contact 
with  Swami  Vivekananda  are  of  one  accord 
that  those  who  knew  him  on  the  lecture  plat- 
form only,  had  but  a  small  measure  of  his  true 
power  and  greatness.  It  was  in  familiar  con- 
versation with  chosen  friends  and  disciples  that 
came  his  most  brilliant  flashes  of  illumination, 
his  loftiest  flights  of  eloquence,  his  utterances 
of  profoundest  wisdom.  Unfortunately,  how- 
ever, his  printed  works  so  far  have  shown  us 
only  Vivekananda  the  lecturer  ;  Vivekananda 
the  friend,  the  teacher,  the  loving  master,  was 
known  only  to  the  happy  few  who  had  the  rare 
privilege  of  sitting  at  his  feet.     Glimpses  of  this 


Preface 

side  of  the  great  spiritual  genius  are  revealed 
to  us,  it  is  true,  in  his  published  letters  ;  but 
the  present  volume  is  the  first  to  give  us  words 
spoken  by  him  in  the  intimacy  of  an  inner 
circle. 

They  were  taken  down  by  Miss  S.  E.  Waldo 
of  New  York,  who  from  the  early  days  of  the 
Swami's  American  mission  served  him  with 
unremitting  devotion.  It  was  to  her  that  he 
dictated  his  translation  and  explanation  of 
Pantanjali's  Aphorisms,  published  in  his  M  Raja 
Yoga,  "  and  often  has  she  told  me  how  she 
would  sit  for  long  periods  of  time  watching 
always  to  see  that  the  ink  on  her  pen  was  kept 
wet,  ready  to  write  down  the  first  word  that 
would  come  as  the  Swami  would  emerge  from 
the  depths  of  self-contemplation  into  which 
he  had  plunged,  to  discover  the  true  meaning  of 
the  terse  Sanskrit  phrases.  It  was  she  also  who 
prepared  all  his  American    publications  for  the 

vi 


Preface 

press  ;  and  so  great  was  Swami  Vivekananda's 

confidence  in  her  ability,  that  he  would 
pass  the  type  written  transcriptions  of  his  lec- 
tures over  to  her  with  the  instruction  to  do 
with  them  what  she  thought  best,  for  his  own 
indifference  to  the  fruits  of  his  work  was  so 
extreme,  that  he  could  not  be  induced  to  give 
even  a  cursory  glance  at  his  recorded  words. 

Through  this  constant  faithful  service  with 
heart  and  brain,  the  disciple's  mind  became  so 
at  one  with  the  master's  that,  even  without  the 
aid  of  shorthand,  she  was  able  to  transcribe  his 
teaching  with  wonderful  fullness  and  accuracy. 
As  she  herself  said,  it  was  as  if  the  thought  of 
Swami  Vivekananda  flowed  through  her  and 
wrote  itself  upon  the  page.  Once  when  she 
was  reading  a  portion  of  these  same  notes  to 
some  tardy  arrivals  in  the  Thousand  Island 
Park  home,  the  Swami  paced  up  down  the 
floor,    apparently    unconscious    of    what    was 

vii 


Preface 

going  on,  until  the  travellers  had  left  the  room  ; 
then  he  turned  to  her  and  said  :  "  How  could 
you  have  caught  my  thought  and  words  so 
perfectly  ?  It  was  as  if  I  heard  myself  speaking." 
What  need  of  other  commendation  ? 

The  Ramakrishna  Mission  of  Madras  is 
highly  gratified  in  having  been  entrusted  with 
the  task  of  presenting  these  truly  Inspired  Talks 
to  the  public,  and  it  wishes  to  express  its  heart- 
felt gratitude  to  each  one  of  those  who  have 
aided  in  making  this  rich  treasure,  so  long 
hidden,  the  property  of  all  mankind. 

Madras,  DEVAMATA. 

November  1908. 


Vlll 


I 

INTRODUCTORY  NARRATIVE 

In  the  summer  of  1893  there  landed  in 
Vancouver  a  young  Hindu  Sanydsin*  He 
was  on  his  way  to  attend  the  Parliament  of 
Religions  at  Chicago,  but  not  as  an  accredited 
delegate  from  any  recognised  religious  organisa- 
tion. Unknown  and  inexperienced,  he  had 
been  chosen  for  his  mission  by  a  few  earnest 
young  men  of  Madras,  who  firm  in  their  belief 
that  he,  better  than  any  one,  could  worthily 
represent  the   ancient   religion    of   India,    had 

*  Literally  "  one  who  has  renounced  " — the  Hindu  name 
for  a  man  who  gives  up  everything  and  devotes  himself  to 
the  religious  life  either  as  a  hermit  or  as  a  wandering  reli- 
gious teacher. 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

gone  from  door  to  door,  soliciting  money  for 
his  journey.  The  amount  thus  collected,  to- 
gether with  contributions  from  one  or  two 
princes,  enabled  the  youthful  monk,  the  then 
obscure  Swami  Vivekananda,  to  set  out  on  his 
long  journey. 

It  required  tremendous  courage  to  ven- 
ture forth  on  such  a  mission.  To  leave 
the  sacred  soil  of  India  for  a  foreign  country 
means  far  more  to  a  Hindu  than  we  of  the 
West  can  realize.  Especially  is  this  the 
case  with  a  Sanydsin,  whose  whole  train- 
ing is  away  from  the  practical,  material  side 
of  life.  Unused  to  handling  money,  or  to 
any  mode  of  travel  save  on  his  own  feet,  the 
Swami  was  robbed  and  imposed  upon  at 
every  stage  of  his  journey,  until  when  he 
finally  reached  Chicago  he  was  nearly  penni- 
less. He  had  brought  with  him  no  letters 
of  introduction  and  knew  no  one  in  the  great 

2 


Introductory    Narrative 

city.*  Thus  alone  among  strangers,  thousands 
of  miles  from  his  own  country,  it  was  a 
situation  to  daunt  even  a  strong  man  ;  but 
the  Swami  left  the  matter  in  the  hands  of  the 
Lord,  firm  in  his  faith  that  Divine  protection 
would  never  fail  him . 

For  nearly  a  fortnight  he  was  able  to  meet 
the  exorbitant  demands  of  his  hotel-keeper  and 
others.  Then  the  smal]  sum  still  in  his  posses- 
sion was  reduced  to  such  meagre  proportions 
that  he  realized  that,  if  he  did  not  wish  to  die 
of  starvation  in  the  street,  he  must  at  once  seek 
a  place   where  the  cost  of  living  would  be    less. 

*  Later  a  Brahmin  of  Madras  wrote  to  a  gentleman  in 
Chicago  about  the  Swami  and  this  gentleman  took  the  joung 
Hindu  into  his  own  family.  Thus  was  begun  a  friendship 
which  lasted  as  long  as  Swami  Vivekananda  lived.  All  the 
members  of  the  family  learned  to  dearly  love  the  Swami,  to 
appreciate  his  brilliant  gifts  and  to  admire  the  purity  and 
simplicity  of  his  character,  to  which  they  often  bore  willing 
and  loving  testimony. 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

It  was  very  hard  for  him  to  abandon  the  task 
which  he  had  so  bravely  undertaken.  For  a 
moment  a  wave  of  discouragement  and  doubt 
swept  over  him  and  he  began  to  wonder  why 
he  had  been  so  foolish  as  to  listen  to  those  few 
hot-headed  school-boys  of  Madras.  Yet  since 
no  other  course  was  left  to  him,  with  a  sad 
heart  he  set  out  for  Boston,  determined  to 
cable  for  money  and,  if  need  be,  return  to 
India. 

But  the  Lord,  in  whom  he  so  firmly  trusted, 
willed  otherwise.  On  the  train  he  met  an  old  lady 
and  so  far  awakened  her  friendly  interest  that 
she  invited  him  to  become  a  guest  in  her  house. 
Here  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  a  professor 
from  Harvard  University,  who  after  being  closet- 
ed with  the  Swami  for  four  hours  one  day,  was 
so  deeply  impressed  with  his  rare  ability  that 
he  asked  him  why  he  did  not  represent  Hin- 
duism at  the  Chicago  Parliament  of  Religions. 

4 


Introductory    Narrative 

The  Swami  explained  his  difficulties,— that  he 
had  neither  money  nor  letter  of  introduction 
to  any  one  connected  with  the  Parliament. 
44  Mr.  Bonney  is  my  friend  ;  I  will  give  you  a 
letter  to  him,"  the  Professor  quickly  replied  ; 
and  at  once  he  wrote  it,  declaring  in  the  course 
of  it  that  he  had  found  this  unknown  Hindu 
monk  u  more  learned  than  all  our  learned  men 
put  together."  With  this  letter  and  a  ticket 
presented  by  the  Professor,  the  Swami  returned 
to  Chicago  and  was  readily  accepted  as  a  dele- 
gate. 

At  last  the  day  of  the  opening  of  the  Parlia- 
ment arrived  and  Swami  Vivekananda  took  his 
place  in  the  line  of  Oriental  delegates  who  filed 
out  on  the  platform  at  the  opening  Session. 
His  purpose  was  accomplished ;  but  as  he 
caught  sight  of  that  vast  audience,  a  sudden 
nervousness  seized  him.  All  the  others  had 
prepared     speeches.     He     had    none.     What 

5 


Vedanta    Philosophy 

should  he  say  to  that  great  gathering  of  six  or 
seven  thousand  men  and  women  ?  Through- 
out the  morning  he  kept  putting  off  his  turn  to 
be  introduced,  whispering  each  time  to  th  e 
President,  "  Let  some  one  else  speak  first."  So 
again  in  the  afternoon,  until  about  five  when 
Dr.  Barrows  rising,  named  him  as  the  next 
speaker. 

The  shock  steadied  the  nerves  and  stimulated 
the  courage  of  Vivekananda,  and  he  at  once 
rose  to  the  occasion.  It  was  the  first  time  in 
his  life  that  he  had  ever  stood  upon  his  feet 
to  speak,  or  had  addressed  a  large  audience, 
but  the  effect  was  electric.  When  he  looked 
over  the  sea  of  expectant  faces,  he  was  filled 
with  power  and  eloquence,  and  beginning  in 
his  musical  voice,  he  addressed  his  hearers  as 
11  Sisters  and  Brothers  of  America."  His  suc- 
cess was  immediate  and  during  all  the  rest  of 
the  Congress  his  popularity  never  waned.     He 

6 


Introductory  Narrative 

was  always  eagerly  listened  to  and  people 
would  remain  to  the  end  of  a  long  Session  on 
a  hot  day  in  order  to  hear  him. 

This  was  the  beginning  of  his  work  in  the 
United  States.  After  the  Parliament  was  over, 
in  order  to  provide  for  his  necessities,  the 
Swami  accepted  an  offer  from  a  Lecture 
Bureau  to  make  a  tour  through  the  West. 
Although  he  attracted  large  audiences,  he  soon 
gave  up  the  uncongenial  work.  He  was  here 
as  a  religious  teacher,  not  as  a  popular  lecturer 
on  secular  subjects ;  so  he  quickly  abandon- 
ed a  most  profitable  career  and  early  in  1894 
came  to  New  York  to  start  on  his  real  mission. 
He  first  visited  friends  whom  he  had  made  in 
Chicago.  They  were  chiefly  among  the 
wealthier  class  and  he  spoke  now  and  then  in 
their  parlors  ;  but  this  too  failed  to  satisfy  him. 
He  felt  that  the  interest  he  awakened  was  not 
what  he  wanted  ;  it   was  too  superficial,   too 

7 


Vedanta   Philosophy 

much  mere  amusement-seeking.  Therefore  he 
decided  to  have  a  place  of  his  own,  where  all 
earnest  truth-seekers,  whether  rich  or  poor, 
would  be  free  to  come. 

A  lecture  before  the  Brooklyn  Ethical 
Association  led  naturally  to  this  independent 
teaching.  Dr.  Lewis  G.  Janes,  the  President 
of  the  Association,  had  heard  the  young  Hindu 
monk  and,  much  attracted  by  his  ability  as 
well  as  by  his  message  to  us  of  the  Western 
Hemisphere,  had  invited  him  to  speak  before 
the  Association.  It  was  on  the  last  day  of 
1894.  A  large  audience  filled  the  Pouch  Man- 
sion, where  the  Ethical  Association  then  held 
its  meetings.  The  lecture  was  on  "Hinduism" 
and  as  the  Swami,  in  his  long  robe  and  turban, 
expounded  the  ancient  [religion  of  his  native 
land,  the  interest  grew  so  deep  that  at  the  close 
of  the  evening  there  was  an  insistent  demand 
for  regular  classes  in   Brooklyn.     The  Swami 

8 


Introductory   Narrative 

graciously  acceded  and  a  series  of  class  meet- 
ings was  held  and  several  public  lectures  were 
given  in  the  Pouch  Mansion  and  elsewhere. 

A  few  of  those  who  had  heard  him  in 
Brooklyn  now  began  to  go  to  the  place  where 
he  lived  in  New  York.  It  was  just  an  ordinary 
room  on  the  second  floor  of  a  lodging  hou$e, 
and  as  the  classes  rapidly  increased  beyond  the 
capacity  of  the  chairs  and  one  lounge,  students 
sat  on  the  dresser,  on  the  corner  marble  wash- 
basin and  still  others  on  the  floor,  like  the 
Swami  himself,  who  thus  seated  cross-legged 
after  the  manner  of  his  own  country,  taught 
his  eager  students  the  great  truths  of  Vedanta. 

At  last  he  felt  that  he  was  fairly  started  on 
his  mission,  which  was  to  deliver  to  the  Wes- 
tern world  the  message  of  his  Master,  Sri  Rama- 
krishna,  which  proclaimed  the  truth  and  funda- 
mental unity  of  all  religions.  The  classes  grew 
so  rapidly  that  they  soon  overflowed  the  small 

9 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

upstairs  room,  and  the  large  double  parlors 
below  were  engaged.  In  them  the  Swami 
taught  until  the  end  of  the  season.  The  teach- 
ing was  entirely  free,  the  necessary  expenses 
being  met  by  voluntary  contributions.  These 
proving  insufficient  to  pay  the  rent  and  provide 
for  the  maintenance  of  the  Swami,  the  classes 
came  near  ending  for  want  of  pecuniary  sup- 
port. At  once  the  Swami  announced  a  course 
of  public  lectures  on  secular  subjects  for  which 
he  could  receive  remuneration,  and  so  earned 
the  money  to  support  the  religious  classes.  He 
explained  that  the  Hindus  regarded  it  as  the 
duty  of  a  religious  teacher  not  only  to  freely  give 
his  teaching,  but  also  if  he  possibly  could,  to 
bear  the  expenses  of  his  work.  In  former  times 
in  India,  it  was  even  customary  for  the  teacher 
to  provide  a  home  and  food  for  his  students. 

By    this  time    some   of   the     students    had 
become  so   deeply  interested   in  the   Swami's 

10 


Introductory   Narrative 

teachings  that  they  were  desirous  to  have  them 
continued  through  the  summer.  He,  however 
was  tired  after  a  hard  season's  work  and  at  first 
demurred  against  prolonging  his  labors  through 
the  hot  weather.  Then  too,  many  of  the  stu- 
dents would  be  out  of  town  at  this  time  of 
year.  The  problem  solved  itself.  One  of  our 
number  owned  a  small  cottage  at  Thousand 
Island  Park,  the  largest  island  in  the  St.  Law- 
rence River;  and  she  offered  the  use  of  it  to 
the  Swami  and  as  many  of  us  as  it  would 
accommodate.  This  plan  appealed  to  the 
Swami  and  he  agreed  to  join  us  there  after  a 
brief  visit  to  the  Maine  Camp  of  one  of  his 
friends. 

Miss  D.,  the  student  to  whom  the  cottage 
belonged,  feeling  that  a  special  sanctuary  should 
be  prepared  for  the  occasion,  built  as  a  true 
love  offering  to  her  Teacher,  a  new  wing  that 
was   nearly   as   large   as   the   original   cottage. 

11 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

The  place  was  ideally  situated  on  high  ground, 
overlooking  a  wide  sweep  of  the  beautiful  river 
with  many  of  its  far-famed  Thousand  Islands. 
Clayton  could  be  dimly  discerned  in  the  dis- 
tance, while  the  nearer  and  wider  Canadian 
shores  bounded  the  view  to  the  north.  The 
cottage  stood  on  the  side  of  a  hill,  which  on 
the  north  and  west  sloped  abruptly  down 
towards  the  shores  of  the  river  and  of  a  little 
inlet  that  like  a  small  lake  lay  behind  the  house. 
The  house  itself  was  literally  "  built  upon  a 
rock,  "  and  huge  bowlders  lay  all  around  it. 
The  new  wing  stood  on  the  steep  slope  of  the 
rocks  like  a  great  lantern  tower  with  windows 
on  three  sides,  three  stories  deep  at  the  back, 
and  only  two  in  the  front.  The  lower  room 
was  occupied  by  one  of  the  students.  The  one 
over  it  opened  out  of  the  main  part  of  the 
house  by  several  doors,  and  being  large  and 
•convenient,  became  our  class-room,  where   for 

12 


Introductory  Narrative 

hours  each  day  the  Swami  gave  us  familiar 
instruction.  Over  this  room  was  the  one 
devoted  exclusively  to  the  use  of: the  Swami. 
In  order  that  it  might  be  perfectly  secluded, 
Miss  D.  had  supplied  it  with  a  separate  outside 
staircase,  although  there  was  also  a  door  open- 
ing upon  the  second  story  of  the  piazza. 

This  upstairs  piazza  played  an  important 
part  in  our  lives,  as  all  the  Swami's  evening 
talks  were  given  here.  It  was  wide  and  roomy, 
roofed  in,  and  extended  along  the  south  and 
west  sides  of  the  cottage.  Miss  D.  had  the 
west  side  of  it  carefully  screened  off  by  a 
partition,  so  that  none  of  the  strangers  who 
frequently  visited  the  piazza  to  see  the  magni- 
ficent view  it  commanded,  could  intrude  upon 
our  privacy.  There,  close  by  his  own  door,  sat 
our  beloved  Teacher  every  evening  during  our 
stay  and  communed  with  us  who  sat  silent  in- 
the   darkness,  eagerly   drinking  in  his   inspired 

13 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

words.  The  place  was  a  veritable  sanctuary. 
At  our  feet,  like  a  sea  of  green,  waved  the  leaves 
of  the  tree  tops,  for  the  entire  place  was  sur- 
rounded by  thick  woods.  Not  one  house  of 
the  large  village  could  be  seen,  it  was  as  if  we 
were  in  the  heart  of  some  dense  forest,  miles 
away  from  the  haunts  of  men.  Beyond  the 
trees  spread  the  wide  expanse  of  the  St.  Law- 
rence, dotted  here  and  there  with  islands,  some 
of  which  gleamed  bright  with  the  lights  of 
hotels  and  boarding-houses.  All  these  were  so 
far  away  that  they  seemed  more  like  a  pictured 
scene  than  a  reality.  Not  a  human  sound 
penetrated  our  seclusion ;  we  heard  but  the 
murmur  of  the  insects,  the  sweet  songs  of  the 
birds,  or  the  gentle  sighing  of  the  wind  through 
the  leaves.  Part  of  the  time  the  scene  was 
illumined  by  the  soft  rays  of  the  moon  and  her 
face  was  mirrored  in  the  shining  waters  beneath. 
In    this   scene    of    enchantment,    "  the   world 

14 


Introductory  Narrative 

forgetting,  by  the  world  forgot,"  we  spent  seven 
blessed  weeks  with  our  beloved  Teacher,  listen- 
ing to  his  words  of  inspiration.  Immediately 
after  our  evening  meal  each  day  of  our  stay, 
we  all  repaired  to  the  upper  piazza  and  awaited 
the  coming  of  our  Master.  Nor  had  we  long 
to  wait,  for  hardly  had  we  assembled  ere  the 
door  of  his  room  would  open  and  he  would 
quietly  step  out  and  take  his  accustomed  seat. 
He  always  spent  two  hours  with  us  and  more 
often  much  longer.  One  glorious  night,  when 
the  moon  was  about  the  full,  he  talked  to 
us  until  she  set  below  the  western  horizon, 
apparently  as  unconscious  as  we  were  of  the 
lapse  of  time. 

Of  these  talks  it  was  not  possible  to  take 
notes.  They  are  preserved  only  in  the  hearts 
of  the  hearers.  None  of  us  can  ever  forget  the 
uplift,  the  intense  spiritual  life  of  those  hallow- 
ed hours.      The  Swami  poured  out  all  his  heart 

15 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

at  those  times,  his  own  struggles  were  enacted 
again  before  us  ;  the  very  spirit  of  his  Master 
seemed  to  speak  through  his  lips,  to  satisfy  all 
doubts,  to  answer  all  questioning,  to  soothe 
every  fear.  Many  times  the  Swami  seemed 
hardly  conscious  of  our  presence,  and  then  we 
almost  held  our  breath  for  fear  of  disturbing 
him  and  checking  the  flow  of  his  thoughts. 
He  would  rise  from  his  seat  and  pace  up  and 
down  the  narrow  limits  of  the  piazza,  pouring 
forth  a  perfect  torrent  of  eloquence.  Never 
was  he  more  gentle,  more  loveable  than  during 
these  hours.  It  may  have  been  much  like  the 
way  his  own  great  Master  taught  his  disciples,, 
just  allowing  them  to  listen  to  the  outpourings 
of  hfe  own  spirit  in  communion  with  himself. 

It  was  a  perpetual  inspiration  to  live  with  a 
man  like  Swami  Vivekananda.  From  morning 
till  night  it  was  ever  the  same,  we  lived  in  a 
constant    atmosphere  of    intense    spirituality 

16 


Introductory  Narrative 

Often  playful  and  fun-loving,  full  of  merry  jest 
and  quick  repartee,  he  was  never  for  a  moment 
far  from  the  dominating  note  of  his  life.  Every- 
thing could  furnish  a  text  or  an  illustration, 
and  in  a  moment  we  would  find  ourselves 
swept  from  amusing  tales  of  Hindu  mythology 
to  the  deepest  philosophy.  The  Swami  had  an 
inexhaustible  fund  of  mythological  lore  and 
surely  no  race  is  more  abundantly  supplied 
with  myths  than  those  ancient  Aryans.  He 
loved  to  tell  them  to  us  and  we  delighted  to 
listen,  for  he  never  failed  to  point  out  the  reality 
hidden  un  der  myth  and  story  and  to  draw  from 
it  valuable  spiritual  lessons.  Never  had  for- 
tunate students  greater  cause  to  congratulate 
themselves  on  having  so  gifted  a  Teacher  I 

By  a  singular  coincidence  just  twelve  students 
followed  the  Swami  to  Thousand  Island  Park, 
and  he  told  us  that  he  accepted  us  as  real 
disciples  and  that  was  why  he  so   constantly 

B  17 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

and  freely  taught  us,  giving  us  his  best.  All 
the  twelve  were  not  together  at  once,  ten  being 
the  largest  number  present  at  any  one  time. 
Two  of  our  number  subsequently  became 
sanydsins,  both  being  initiated  at  Thousand 
Island  Park.  On  the  occasion  of  the  conse- 
cration of  the  second  sanydsin,  Swami  initiat- 
ed five  of  us  as  brahmacharins,*  and  later,  in 
New  York  City,  the  rest  of  our  number  took 
initiation,  together  with  several  other  of  the 
Swami's  disciples  there. 

It  was  decided,  when  we  went  to  Thousand 
Island  Park,  that  we  should  live  as  a  community, 
each  doing  his  or  her  share  of  the  house-work 
in  order  that  no  alien  presence  should  mar  the 
serenity  of  our  household.  The  Swami  himself 
was  an  accomplished  cook  and  often  prepared 
for  us  delicious  dishes.  He  had  learned  how 
to  cook  when,  after  his  Master's  death,  he  had 

*  Religious  students  devoted  to  a  particular  teacher. 

18 


Introductory  Narrative. 

served  his  brethren,  a  band  of  young  men,  his 
fellow- disciples,  whom  he  held  together  and 
taught,  continuing  the  training  begun  by  his 
Master,  in  order  that  they  might  be  fitted  to 
spread  abroad  over  the  world  the  truths  im- 
parted by  Sri  Ramakrishna. 

Every  morning,  just  as  soon  as  our  various 
tasks  were  over  (and  often  before),  the  Swami 
called  us  together  in  the  large  parlor  that  served 
us  as  class-room  and  began  to  teach  us.  Each 
day  he  took  up  some  special  subject,  or  ex- 
pounded from  some  sacred  book,  as  the  Bhaga- 
vad  Gitd,  the  Upanishads,  or  the  Veddnta  Sutras 
of  Vyasa.  The  Sutras  are  in  the  form  of 
aphorisms,  being  the  briefest  possible  state- 
ments of  the  great  truths  imbedded  in  the 
Vedas.  They  have  neither  nominative  nor 
verb,  and  so  intent  were  the  writers  of  them  on 
-eliminating  every  unnecessary  word,  that  a 
Hindu  proverb  says  that  M  a  writer  of  Sutras 

19 


Vedanta  Philosophy. 

would  rather  give  one  of  his  sons  than  add  a 
syllable  to  his  sw/ra." 

Because  of  their  almost  enigmatical  brevity 
the  Vedanta  Sutras  offer  a  rich  field  for  the 
commentator,  and  three  great  Hindu  philoso- 
phers, Sankara,  Ramanuja,  and  Madhva,  wrote 
elaborate  commentaries  upon  them.  In  his 
morning  talks  the  Swami  would  take  up  firs! 
one  of  these  commentaries,  then  another, 
showing  how  each  commentator  was  guilty  of 
twisting  the  meaning  of  the  Sutras  to  meet  his 
own  particular  view,  and  would  read  in  the 
aphorism  whatever  would  best  substantiate  his 
own  interpretation.  The  Swami  often  pointed 
out  to  us  how  old  is  the  bad  habit  of  u  text- 
torturing.'' 

Thus  it  was  that  in  these  lessons  the  point 
of  view  presented  was  some  times  that  of 
pure  dualism  as  represented  by  Madhva,  while 
on   another  day  it  was   that  of  the  qualified 

20 


Introductory  Narrative 

non-dualism  taught  by  Ramanuja,  known  as 
Visishtddvaita.  Most  frequently,  however,  the 
monistic  commentary  of  Sankara  was  taken  up  ; 
but  because  of  his  subtlety  he  was  more  difficult 
to  understand,  so  to  the  end  Ramanuja  remain- 
ed the  favourite  among  the  students. 

Sometimes  the  Swami  took  up  the  Bhakti 
Sutras  of  Narada.  They  are  a  short  exposition 
of  devotion  to  God,  which  gives  one  some 
conception  of  the  lofty  Hindu  ideal  of  real, 
all-absorbing  love  for  the  Lord,  love  that  liter- 
ally possesses  the  devotee  to  the  exclusion 
of  every  other  thought.  Bhakti  is  the  Hindu 
method  of  realizing  union  with  the  Divine,  a 
method  which  naturally  appeals  to  the  devout. 
It  is  to  love  God  and  Him  only. 

In  these  talks  the  Swami  for  the  first  time 

spoke  to  us  at  length  about  his  great  Master, 
Sri  Ramakrishna,  of  his  daily  life  with  him 
and  of  his  struggles  with  his  own  tendency  to 

21 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

unbelief,  which  at  times  drew  tears  from  his 
Master.  The  other  disciples  have  often  said 
that  Sri  Ramakrishna  always  told  them  that 
Swami  Vivekananda  was  a  great  Soul,  who  had 
come  especially  to  help  his  work  and  that  as 
soon  as  he  knew  who  he  really  was,  he  would, 
at  once  give  up  the  body.  But  he  added  that 
before  that  time  arrived,  there  was  a  certain 
mission  which  the  Swami  would  have  to  ac- 
complish, to  help  not  only  India  but  other 
lands  as  well.  Frequently  Sri  Ramakrishna 
said,  "I  have  other  disciples  far  away,  who 
speak  a  language  I  do  not  understand." 

After  seven  weeks  spent  at  Thousand  Island 
Park,  the  Swami  returned  to  New  York  City 
and  later  went  abroad.  He  lectured  and  held 
classes  in  England  until  the  end  of  November, 
when  he  returned  to  New  York  and  resumed 
his  teaching  there.  On  this  occasion,  his  stu- 
dents secured  a  competent   stenographer    and 

22 


Introductory  Narrative 

thus  preserved  the  Swami's  words.  The  reports 
of  the  class  lectures  were  soon  after  published 
in  book  form  and  these  books,  together  with 
the  pamphlets  of  the  public  lectures,  remain 
to-day  as  enduring  monuments  of  Swami  Vive- 
kananda's  work  in  America.  To  those  of  us 
who  were  privileged  to  hear  the  lectures  given, 
the  Swami's  very  presence  seems  to  live  again 
and  to  speak  to  us  from  the  printed  pages,  so 
exactly  and  accurately  were  his  utterances  tran- 
scribed by  one,  who  subsequently  became  one 
of  the  Swami's  most  devoted  disciples.  The 
work  of  both  Teacher  and  taught  was  purely  a 
labor  of  love,  so  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  rested 
upon  it. 


S.   E.   W. 


New  York,  1908. 


23 


II 

THE  MASTER. 

February  14th,  1894,  stands  out  in  my 
memory  as  a  day  apart,  a  sacred,  holy  day  ;  for 
it  was  then  that  I  first  saw  the  form  and  lis- 
tened to  the  voice  of  that  Great  Soul,  that 
Spiritual  Giant,  the  Swami  Vivekananda  who, 
two  years  later,  to  my  great  joy  and  never- 
ceasing  wonder,  accepted  me  as  a  disciple. 

He  had  been  lecturing  in  the  large  cities  of 
this  country  and  on  the  above  date  gave  the 
first  of  a  series  of  lectures  in  Detroit,  in  the 
Unitarian  Church.  The  large  edifice  was 
literally  packed  and  the  Swami  received  an 
ovation.  I  can  see  him  yet  as  he  stepped  upon 
the    platform,  a  regal,     majestic   figure,   vital, 

24 


The  Master 

forceful,  dominant,  and  at  the  first  sound  of  the 
wonderful  voice,  a  voice  all  music — now  like 
the  plaintive  minor  strain  of  an  Eolian  harp, 
again,  deep,  vibrant,  resonant — there  was  a 
hush,  a  stillness  that  could  almost  be  felt,  and 
the  vast  audience  breathed  as  one  man. 

The  Swami  gave  five  public  lectures  and  he 
held  his  audiences,  for  his  was  the  grasp  of  the 
"  master  hand  "  and  he  spoke  as  one  with 
authority.  His  arguments  were  logical,  con- 
vincing, and  in  his  most  brilliant  oratorical 
flights  never  once  did  he  lose  sight  of  the  main 
issue, — the  truth  he  wished  to  drive  home. 

He  fearlessly  attacked  principles,  but  in  per- 
sonal matters  one  felt  that  here  was  a  man 
whose  great  heart  could  take  in  all  of  humanity, 
seeing  beyond  their  faults  and  foibles;  one  who 
would  suffer  and  forgive  to  the  uttermost.  In 
fact,  when  it  was  given  to  me  to  know  him 
more  intimately,  I  found  that  he  did  forgive    to 

25 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

the  uttermost.  With  what  infinite  love  and 
patience  would  he  lead  those  who  came  to  him, 
out  of  the  labyrinth  of  their  own  frailties  and 
point  out  to  them  the  way  out  of  self  to  God. 
He  knew  no  malice.  Did  one  abuse  him,  he 
would  look  thoughtful,  repeat  Siva,  Siva,  then 
his  face  would  become  illumined  and  he  would 
tay  gently  :  "  It  is  only  the  voice  of  the  Be- 
loved; "  or  if  we  who  loved  him  would  become 
indignant,  he  would  ask  :  "What  difference  can 
it  make  when  one  knows  that  blamer,  blamed, 
and  praiser,  praised,  are  one  ?  "  Again,  under 
like  circumstances  he  would  tell  us  some  story 
of  how  Sri  Ramakrishna  would  never  recognise 
personal  abuse  or  malice.  Everything  good 
or  bad,  "  the  dual  throng/'  was  from  the  "  Be- 
loved Mother.  " 

It  was  given  to  me  to  know  him  in  an  inti- 
mate way  for  a  period  of  several  years  and 
never   once   did  Tfind  a  flaw  in   his  character*. 

26 


The    Master 

He  was  incapable  of  petty  weakness  and  had 
Vivekananda  possessed  faults,  they  would  have 
been  generous  ones.  With  all  his  greatness  he 
was  as  simple  as  a  child,  equally  at  home 
among  the  rich  and  the  great,  or  among  the 
poor  and  the  lowly. 

While  in  Detroit  he  was  the  guest  of  Mrs, 
John  J.  Bagley,  the  widow  of  the  ex-Governor 
of  Michigan  and  a  lady  of  rare  culture  and  un- 
usual spirituality.  She  told  me  that  never  once 
during  the  time  he  was  a  guest  in  her  house 
(about  four  weeks)  did  he  fail  to  express  the 
highest  in  word  and  action,  that  his  presence 
was  a  "  continual  benediction."  After  leaving 
Mrs.  Bagley,  Vivekananda  spent  two  weeks  as 
the  guest  of  Hon.  Thomas  W.  Palmer.  Mr. 
Palmer  was  President  of  the  World's  Fair  Com- 
mission; he  had  been  formerly  U.  S.  Minister  to 
Spain  and  also  a  U.  S.  Senator.  This  gentleman 
is  still  living  and  is  over  eighty  years  of  age. 

27 


Vedanta   Philosophy 

For  myself,  I  can  say  that  never  in  all  the 
years  I  knew  Vivekananda  did  he  fail  to  manifest 
the  highest  in  life  and  purpose. 

Blessed  and  beloved  Swamiji,  I  never  thought 
it  possible  for  man  to  be  so  white,  so  chaste,  as 
he  was  !  It  set  him  apart  from  other  men. 
He  was  brought  in  contact  with  our  most 
brilliant  and  beautiful  women,  mere  beauty  did 
not  attract  him  but  he  would  often  say  :  "  I 
like  to  cross  swords  with  your  bright  intellec- 
tual women  ;  it  is  a  new  experience  for  me,  for 
in  my  country  the  women  are  more  or  less 
secluded." 

His  manner  was  that  of  boyish  frankness 
and  naivete'  and  very  winsome.  I  remember  one 
-evening  after  he  had  delivered  a  profoundly 
impressive  lesson,  scaling  the  very  heights  of 
realization,  he  was  found  standing  at  the  foot 
of  the  stairs  with  a  puzzled,  almost  disconsolate 
expression  on  his  face.     People  were  going  up 

28 


The  Master 

and  down  stairs  putting  on  their  wraps,  etc. 
Suddenly  his  face  lighted  up  and  he  said  :  "  I 
have  it  !  going  up  the  stairs,  the  gentleman 
precedes  the  lady, — coming  down,  the  lady 
precedes  the  gentleman,  isn't  it  ?  "  True  to  his 
Eastern  training,  he  felt  that  a  breach  of  eti- 
quette was  a  breach  of  hospitality. 

In  speaking  to  me  one  day  regarding  those 
who  wished  to  have  a  part  in  his  life  work,  he 
said  "  they  must  be  pure  in  heart."  There  was 
one  disciple  of  whom  he  hoped  much.  He 
evidently  saw  in  her  great  possibilities  for  re- 
nunciation and  self-sacrifice.  He  found  me 
alone  one  day  and  asked  me  many  questions 
regarding  her  life  and  environment,  and  after  I 
had  answered  them  all,  he  looked  at  me  so 
wistfully  and  said  :  "  And  she  is  pure,  pure  in 
soul,  is  it  not  ?  "  I  simply  answered  :  "  Yes. 
Swami,  she  is  absolutely  pure  in  heart."  His 
face  lighted  up  and  his  eyes  shone  with  divine 

29 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

fire  ;— "  I  knew  it,  I  felt  it,  I  must  have  her  for 
my  work  in  Calcutta,"  he  said  with  enthusiasm. 
He  then  told  me  of  his  plans  and  hopes  for 
the  advancement  of  the  women  of  India. 
"  Education  is  what  they  need,"  he  would  say, 
"  We  must  have  a  school  in  Calcutta."  A 
school  for  girls  has  since  been  established  there 
by  the  Sister  Nivedita  and  the  above-mentioned 
disciple  shares  the  work  with  her,  living  in  a 
Calcutta  lane  and  wearing  the  Sari,  doing  the 
Mother's  work  as  best  she  may.  She  shared 
all  these  experiences  with  me,  for  we  together 
sought  out  the  Master  and  asked  him  to  teack 
us.  He  was  the  "  man  of  the  hour''  in  Detroit 
that  winter.  Society  smiled  upon  him  and  he 
was  much  sought  after.  The  daily  papers  re- 
corded his  comings  and  his  goings  ;  even  his 
food  was  discussed,  one  paper  gravely  stating 
that  his  breakfast  consisted  of  bread  and  butter 
thickly   sprinkled   with  pepper  !    Letters    and 

30 


The  Master 

invitations  came  pouring  in  and  Detroit  was  at 
the  feet  of  Vivekananda. 

He  always  loved  Detroit  and  was  grateful 
for  all  the  kindness  and  courtesy  shown  him. 
We  had  no  chance  to  meet  him  in  a  personal 
way  at  the  time,  but  we  listened  and  pondered 
in  our  hearts  over  all  that  we  heard  him  say, 
resolving  to  find  him  sometime,  somewhere, 
even  if  we  had  to  go  across  the  world  to  do  it. 
We  lost  trace  of  him  completely  for  nearly  two 
years  and  thought  that  probably  he  had  return- 
ed to  India,  but  one  afternoon  we  were  told  by 
a  friend  that  he  was  still  in  this  country  and 
that  he  was  spending  the  summer  at  Thousand 
Island  Park.  We  started  the  next  morning,  re- 
solved to  seek  him  out  and  ask  him  to  teach  us. 

At  last  after  a  weary  search,  we  found  him. 
We  were  feeling  very  much  frightened  at  our 
temerity  in  thus  intruding  upon  his  privacy, 
but  he  had  lighted  a  fire  in  our  souls  that  could 

31 


Vedanta   Philosophy 

not  be  quenched.  We  must  know  more  of 
this  wonderful  man  and  his  teaching.  It  was 
a  dark  and  rainy  night  and  we  were  weary  after 
our  long  journey,  but  we  could  not  rest  until 
we  had  seen  him  face  to  face.  Would  he 
accept  us  ?  And  if  he  did  not,  what  then  could 
we  do  ?  It  suddenly  seemed  to  us  that  it  might 
be  a  foolish  thing  to  go  several  hundred  miles 
to  find  a  man  who  did  not  even  know  of  our 
existence,  but  we  plodded  on  up  the  hill  in  the 
rain  and  darkness,  with  a  man  we  had  hired  to 
show  us  the  way  with  his  lantern.  Speaking 
of  this  in  after  years,  our  Guru  would  refer  to 
us  as  u  my  disciples,  who  travelled  hundreds  of 
miles  to  find  me  and  they  came  in  the  night 
and  in  the  rain.''  We  had  thought  of  what  to- 
say  to  him,  but  when  we  realized  that  we  had 
really  found  him,  we  instantly  forgot  all  our 
fine  speeches  and  one  of  us  blurted  out  :  "  We 
came  from   Detroit  and   Mrs.   P.   sent   us  to 

32 


The  Master 

you."  The  other  said  :  "  We  have  come  to  you 
just  as  we  would  go  to  Jesus  if  he  were  still  on 
the  earth  and  ask  him  to  teach  us.''  He  looked 
at  us  so  kindly  and  said  gently,  "  If  only  I 
possessed  the  power  of  the  Christ  to  set  you 
free  now!"  He  stood  for  a  moment  looking 
thoughtful  and  then  turning  to  his  hostess  who 
was  standing  near,  said  :  "  These  ladies  are 
from  Detroit,  please  show  them  upstairs  and 
allow  them  to  spend  the  evening  with  us." 
We  remained  until  late  listening  to  the  Master 
who  paid  no  more  attention  to  us,  but  as  we 
bade  them  all  good  night  we  were  told  to  come 
the  next  morning  at  nine  o'clock.  We  arrived 
promptly,  and  to  our  great  joy  were  accepted 
by  the  Master  and  were  cordially  invited  to 
become  members  of  the  household. 

Of  our  stay  there  another  disciple  has  written 
fully,  and  I  will  only  say  that  it  was  a  most 
blessed  summer.     I  have  never  seen  our  Master 

C  33 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

quite   as  he  was  then.     He   was  at  his   best 
among  those  who  loved  him. 

There  were  twelve  of  us  and  it  seemed  as  if 
Pentecostal  fire  descended  and  touched  the 
Master.  One  afternoon  when  he  had  been 
telling  us  of  the  glory  of  renunciation,  of  the 
joy  and  freedom  of  those  of  the  ochre  robe,  he 
suddenly  left  us  and  in  a  short  time  he  had 
written  his  "  Song  of  the  Sanyasin"  a  very 
passion  of  sacrifice  and  renunciation.  I  think 
the  thing  which  impressed  me  most  in  those 
days  was  his  infinite  patience  and  gentleness — 
like  a  father  with  his  children,  though  most  of 
us  were  several  years  older  than  he.  After  a 
morning  in  the  class-room  where  it  almost 
seemed  as  if  he  had  gazed  into  the  very  face  of 
the  Infinite,  he  would  leave  the  room  returning 
soon  to  say  :  u  Now  I  am  going  to  cook  for 
you."  And  with  what  patience  would  he  stand 
over  the  stove  and    prepare  some  Indian  tit-bit 

34 


The  Master 

for  us!  The  last  time  he  was  with  us  in  Detroit 
he  prepared  for  us  the  most  delicious  curries. 
What  a  lesson  to  his  disciples, — the  brilliant, 
the  great  and  learned  Vivekananda  ministering 
to  their  little  wants  !  He  was  at  those  times  so 
gentle,  so  benign.  What  a  legacy  of  sacred 
tender  memories  has  he  left  us  ! 

One  day  Vivekananda  related  to  us  the  story 
that  had  most  impressed  itself  upon  his  life. 
It  was  told  him  over  and  over  again  in  his 
babyhood  by  his  nurse  and  he  never  wearied 
of  hearing  it  repeated.  I  will  give  it  as  nearly 
as  possible  in  his  own  words. 

The  widow  of  a  Brahmin  was  left  very,  very 
poor  with  one  child,  a  little  boy  who  was 
almost  a  baby.  Because  he  was  the  son  of  a 
Brahmin  the  boy  had  to  be  educated,  but  how 
to  do  it?  In  the  village  where  the  poor  widow 
lived,  there  was  no  teacher,  so  the  boy  had  to 
go  to  the  neighbouring  village  to  be  taught  and 

35 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

because  his  mother  was  very,   very  poor  he  had 
to  walk  there.     There  was  a  small  forest   be- 
tween the  two  villages  and  through  this  the  boy 
had  to  pass.      In  India,  as  in  all  hot  countries,, 
teaching  is  given  very  early  in  the  morning  and 
again  towards  evening.     Through  the  heat  of 
the  day  no  work  is  done,  so  it  was  always  dark 
when   the  little   boy   went  to   school  and   also 
when  be  came  home.     In  my  country,  instruc- 
tion in  religion  is  free  to  those  who  cannot  pay, 
so  the  little  boy  could  go  to  this  teacher  without 
charge,   but  he  had  to  walk  through  the   forest 
and  he  was  all  alone  and  he  was  terribly  afraid. 
He  went  to  his  mother  and  said:  "I  have  always 
to  go  alone  through  that  terrible  forest  and    I 
am  afraid.     Other  boys  have  servants    to   go 
with  them  and  take  care   of  them,  why  cannot 
1  have  a  servant   to   go   with    me?"    But    his 
mother  said:  "Alas  my  child  !  I  am  too  poor,  I 
cannot  send  a  servant  with  you."   "What  can  I 

36 


The  Master 

do  then  ?"  asked  the  little  boy.  Ml  will  tell  you," 
said  his  mother,  "  do  this.  In  the  forest  is 
your  shepherd-brother  Krishna  (Krishna  is 
known  in  India  as  the  "  shepherd-god")  ;  call 
on  him  and  he  will  come  and  take  care  of  you 
and  you  will  not  be  alone."  So  the  next  day 
the  little  boy  went  into  the  forest  and  called 
tl  Brother-shepherd,  brother-shepherd,  are  you 
there  ?"  and  he  heard  a  voice  say  "  Yes,  I  am 
here,"  and  the  little  boy  was  comforted  and  was 
no  more  afraid.  By  and  by  he  used  to  meet, 
coming  out  of  the  forest,  a  boy  of  his  own  age 
who  played  with  him  and  walked  with  him  and 
the  little  boy  was  happy.  After  a  while  the 
father  of  the  teacher  died  and  their  was  a  great 
ceremonial  festival  (as  is  common  in  India  on 
such  occasions),  when  all  the  scholars  made 
presents  to  their  teacher  and  the  poor  little  boy 
went  to  his  mother  and  asked  her  to  buy  him  a 
present  to  give  like  the  rest.     But  his  mother 

37 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

told  him  she  was  too  poor.  Then  he  wept  and 
said  :  "What  shall  I  do?"  And  his  mother 
said,  "  Go  to  brother-shepherd  and  ask  him." 
So  he  went  into  the  forest  and  called,  "Brother- 
shepherd,  brother-shepherd,  can  you  give  me  a 
present  to  give  to  my  teacher  ?"  And  there 
appeared  before  him  a  little  pitcher  of  milk. 
The  boy  took  the  pitcher  gratefully  and  went 
to  the  house  of  his  teacher  and  stood  in  a 
corner  waiting  for  the  servants  to  take  his  gift 
to  the  teacher.  Bat  the  other  presents  were  so 
much  grander  and  finer  that  the  servants  paid 
no  attention  to  him,  so  he  spoke  and  said, 
"  Teacher,  here  is  the  present  I  have  brought 
you."  Still  no  one  took  any  notice.  Then 
the  little  boy  spoke  up  again  from  his  corner 
and  said,  "  Teacher,  here  is  the  present  I  have 
brought  you,"  and  the  teacher  looking  over  and 
seeing  the  pitiful  little  gift,  scorned  it,  but  said 
to  the  servant,  "  Since  he  makes  so  much  fuss 

38 


The  Master 

about  it,  take  the  pitcher  and  pour  the  milk 
into  one  of  the  glasses  and  let  him  go."  So 
the  servant  took  the  pitcher  and  poured  the 
milk  into  a  cup,  but  just  as  soon  as  he  poured 
out  the  milk,  the  pitcher  filled  right  up  again 
and  it  could  not  be  emptied.  Then  everybody 
was  surprised  and  asked,  "  What  is  this,  where 
did  you  get  this  pitcher  ?"  and  the  little  boy 
said,  "  Brother-shepherd  gave  it  to  me  in  the 
forest."  "  What  V  they  all  exclaimed,  "  you 
have  seen  Krishna  and  he  gave  you  this  V 
li  Yes",  said  the  little  boy,  "  and  he  plays 
with  me  every  day  and  walks  with  me  when 
I  come  to  school.  "  "  What  !"  they  all  ex- 
claimed "  You  walk  with  Krishna  !  You  play 
with  Krishna  P  And  the  teacher  said,  "  Can 
you  take  us  and  show  us  this  ?"  And  the  little 
boy  said,  "  Yes  I  can,  come  with  me.  "  Then 
the  little  boy  and  the  teacher  went  into  the 
forest  and  the  little  boy  began  to  call  as  usual, 

89 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

41  Brother-shepherd,  brother-shepherd,  here  is 
my  teacher  come  to  you,  where  are  you  ?' ' 
but  no  answer  came.  The  little  boy  called 
again  and  again  and  no  answer  came.  Then 
he  wept  and  said,  "  Brother-shepherd  do 
come,  or  else  they  will  call  me  a  liar.'' 
Then  from  afar  off  a  voice  was  heard  saying  : 
4t  I  come  to  you  because  you  are  pure  and 
your  time  has  come,  but  your  teacher  has 
many  many  rounds  to  go  through  before  he 
can  see  Me." 

After  the  summer  at  Thousand  Island  Park, 
Vivekananda  sailed  for  England  and  I  did  not 
see  him  until  the  following  spring  (1896)  when 
he  came  to  Detroit  for  two  weeks.  He  was 
accompanied  by  his  stenographer,  the  faithful 
Goodwin.  They  occupied  a  suite  of  rooms  at 
The  Richelieu^  a  small  family  hotel,  and  had  the 
use  of  the  large  drawing  room  for  class  work 
and  lectures.     The  room  was  not  large  enough 

40 


The  Master 

to  accommodate  the  crowds  and  to  our  great 
regret  many  were  turned  away.  The  room,  as 
also  the  hall,  staircase  and  library  were  literally 
packed.  At  that  time  he  was  all  Bhakti — the 
love  for  God  was  a  hunger  and  a  thirst.  A 
kind  of  divine  madness  seemed  to  take  posses- 
sion of  him,  as  if  his  heart  would  burst  with 
longing  for  the  Beloved  Mother. 

His  last  public  appearance  in  Detroit  was  at 
the  Temple  Beth  El  of  which  the  Rabbi  Louis 
Grossman,  an  ardent  admirer  of  the  Swami, 
was  the  pastor.  It  was  Sunday  evening  and  so 
great  was  the  crowd  that  we  almost  feared  a 
panic.  There  was  a  solid  line  reaching  far  out 
into  the  street  and  hundreds  were  turned  away. 
Vivekananda  held  the  large  audience  spell- 
bound, his  subject  being,  "  India's  message  to 
the  West,"  and  "The  Ideal  of  a  Universal 
Religion."  He  gave  us  a  most  brilliant  and 
masterly   discourse.      Never   had    I    seen   tfye 

41 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Master  look  as  he  looked  that  night.  There 
was  something  in  his  beauty  not  of  earth.  It 
was  as  if  the  spirit  had  almost  burst  the  bonds 
of  flesh  and  it  was  then  that  I  first  saw  a  fore- 
shadowing of  the  end.  He  was  much  exhausted 
from  years  of  overwork,  and  it  was  even  then 
to  be  seen  that  he  was  not  long  for  this  world, 
I  tried  to  close  my  eyes  to  it,  but  in  my  heart 
I  knew  the  truth.  He  had  needed  rest  but  felt 
that  he  must  go  on. 

The  next  time  I  saw  him  was  in  July  1899. 
He  had  been  extremely  ill  and  it  was  thought 
that  a  long  sea  voyage  would  benefit  him,  so  he 
sailed  for  England  from  Calcutta  on  the  steam- 
ship Golconda  ;  much  to  his  surprise,  two  of  his 
American  disciples  were  at  the  Tilbury  Docks 
in  London  when  the  ship  arrived.  We  had 
seen  in  an  Indian  magazine  a  notice  that  he 
would  sail  on  a  certain  date  and  we  hastened 
over  to  the  other  side  to  meet  him,  as  we  were 

42 


The  Master 

very  much  alarmed  at  the  reports  we  had  heard 
regarding  his  health. 

He  had  grown  very  slim  and  looked  and 
acted  like  a  boy.  He  was  so  happy  to  find  the 
voyage  had  brought  back  some  of  the  old 
strength  and  vigor.  The  Sister  Nivedita  and 
the  Swami  Turiyananda  accompanied  him 
to  England  and  quarters  were  found  for  the 
two  Swamis  in  a  roomy  old  fashioned  house  at 
Wimbledon  not  far  from  London.  It  was  very 
quiet  and  restful  and  we  all  spent  a  happy 
month  there. 

Swami  did  no  public  work  in  England  at 
that  time  and  soon  sailed  for  America  accom- 
panied by  the  Swami  Turiyananda  and  his 
American  friends.  There  were  ten  never-to-be- 
forgotten  days  spent  on  the  ocean.  Reading 
and  exposition  of  the  Gitd  occupied  every 
morning,  also  reciting  and  translating  poems 
and  stories  from  the  Sanskrit  and  chanting  old 

43 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Vedie  hymns.  The  sea  was  smooth  and  at 
night  the  moonlight  was  entrancing.  Those 
were  wonderful  evenings ;  the  Master  paced  up 
and  down  the  deck,  a  majestic  figure  in  the 
moonlight,  stopping  now  and  then  to  speak  to 
us  of  the  beauties  of  Nature.  "  And  if  all  this 
Maya  is  so  beautiful,  think  of  the  wondrous 
beauty  of  the  Reality  behind  it  !  "  he  would 
exclaim. 

One  especially  fine  evening  when  the  moon 
was  at  the  full  and  softly  mellow  and  golden, 
a  night  of  mystery  and  enchantment,  he  stood 
silently  for  a  long  time  drinking  in  the  beauty 
of  the  scene.  Suddenly  he  turned  to  us  and 
said  .  "  Why  recite  poetry  when  there,  "  point- 
ing to  sea  and  sky,  "  is  the  very  essence  of 
poetry  ?" 

We  reached  New  York  all  too  soon,  feeling 
that  we  never  could  be  grateful  enough  for 
those  blessed,  intimate  ten  days  with  our  Guru. 

44 


The  Master 

The  next  time  I  saw  him  was  on  July  4th,  1900, 
when  he  came  to  Detroit  for  a  short  visit 
among  his  friends. 

He  had  grown  so  thin,  almost  ethereal,— not 
long  would  that  great  spirit  be  imprisoned  in 
clay.  Once  more  we  closed  our  eyes  to  the 
sad  truth,  hoping  against  hope. 

I  never  saw  him  again,  but  "that  other  dis- 
ciple "  was  privileged  to  be  with  him  in  India 
for  a  few  weeks  before  he  left  us  for  ever.  Of 
that  time  I  cannot  bear  to  think.  The  sorrow 
and  the  heartbreak  of  it  all  still  abides  with 
me  ;  but  deep  down  underneath  all  the  pain 
and  grief  is  a  great  calm,  a  sweet  and  blessed 
consciousness  that  Great  Souls  do  come  to 
earth  to  point  out  to  men  "  the  way,  the  truth, 
and  the  life  ";  and  when  I  realize  that  it  was 
given  to  me  to  come  under  the  influence  of 
such  an  One,  finding  each  day  a  new  beauty, 
a  deeper  significance   in   his  teachings,   I  can 

45 


Vcdanta  Philosophy 

almost  believe,  as  I  meditate  upon  all  this,  that 
I  hear  a  voice  saying  : — "  Take  off  thy  shoes 
from  off  thy  feet  for  the  place  whereon  thou 
standest  is  holy  ground." 

M.  C.  F. 
Detroit,  Michigan,  1908. 


46 


NOTE 

At  the  morning  talks  it  was  possible  to  take 
a  few  notes  and  those  that  follow  were  made 
on  these  occasions.    They  are  naturally  some- 
what disconnected  as  the  Swami   encouraged 
us  to  ask  questions  and   to   seek   the   fullest 
explanation  of  any  problem  that  presented  itself. 
Thus,  these  are  not  at  all  like  notes  of  regular 
lectures,  but  simply  brief  records   of  familiar 
discourses.      Being   taken   in   longhand    (and 
solely    for    individual    use),    much     that    was 
said  failed  to  be  written  down.     Such   as  they 
are,  with  all  their  incompleteness,   they  possess 
a  value  of  their  own,  and  an  added  value  to 
those  who  knew  and  loved  the  Swami,  as  being 
his  utterances.    While  necessarily  the  teaching 

47 


Note 

itself  cannot  vary  much,  the  presentation  is 
new  and  different  from  anything  that  we  now 
have  in  print  of  the  words  of  our  much  loved 
Teacher. 

In  loving  remembrance  of  a  great  and  good 

man  and  of  the  many  happy  hours  spent  with 
him,  these  fragments  of  his  teachings  are  now 
offered  to  the  public.  May  the  Lord  whom  he 
so  devoutly  worshipped  and  untiringly  pro- 
claimed to  us,  bless  his  inspired  words  and  fill 
our  hearts  with  that  divine  love  which  the 
Swami  so  constantly  urged  us  to  manifest  ! 

S.  E.  W. 


48 


INSPIRED  TALKS 


INSPIRED  TALKS 

Wednesday,  June  19th,  1895. 

(This  day  marks  the  beginning  of  the  regular 
leaching  given  daily  by  Swdmi  Vivekdnanda  to 
his  disciples  at  Thousand  Island  Park.  We  had 
not  yet  all  assembled  there,  but  the  Master's  heart 
was  always  in  his  work,  so  he  commenced  at 
>once  to  teach  the  three  or  four  who  were  with 
him.  He  came  on  this  first  morning  with  the 
Bible  in  his  hand  and  opened  to  the  Book  of 
John,  saying  that  since  we  were  all  Christians, 
it  was  proper  that  he  should  begin  with  the 
Christian  Scriptures.) 

"In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  and  the 
Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God/' 
The  Hindu  calls  this  Maya,  the  manifestation 

51 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

'of  God,  because  it  is  the  power  of  God  *  The 
Absolute  reflecting  through  the  universe  is 
what  we  call  Nature.  The  word  has  two  mani- 
festations,— the  general  one  of  Nature,  and  the 
special  one  of  the  great  Incarnations  of  God — 
Krishna,  Buddha,  Jesus  and  Ramakrishna. 
Christ,  the  special  manifestation  of  the  Absolute, 
is  known  and  knowable.  The  Absolute  cannot 
be  known  :  we  cannot  know  the  Father,  only 
the  Son.  We  can  only  see  the  Absolute 
through  the  "  tint  of  humanity,"  through  Christ. 

In  the  first  five  verses  of  John  is  the  whole 
essence  of  Christianity  ;  each  verse  is  full  of 
the  profoundest  philosophy. 

The  Perfect  never  becomes  imperfect.  It  is 
in  the  darkness,  but  is  not  affected  by  the  dark- 
ness. God's  mercy  goes  to  all,  but  is  not 
affected  by  their  wickedness.  The  sun  is 
not  affected  by  any  disease  of  our  eyes 
which  may  make  us  see  it  distorted.     In  the 

*  Ma'ya'  being  the  Sakti  (power)  of  God. 

52 


Inspired  Talks 

twenty-ninth  verse  "  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the 
world  "  means  that  Christ  would  show  us  the 
way  to  become  perfect.  God  became  Christ 
to  show  man  his  true  nature,  that  we  too  are 
God.  We  are  human  coverings  over  the 
Divine,  but  as  the  divine  Man,  Christ  and  we 
are  one. 

The  Trinitarian  Christ  is  elevated  above  us  ; 
the  Unitarian  Christ  is  merely  a  moral  man  ; 
neither  can  help  us.  The  Christ  who  is  the 
Incarnation  of  God,  who  has  not  forgotten 
His  divinity,  that  Christ  can  help  us,  in  Him 
there  is  no  imperfection.  These  Incarnations 
are  always  conscious  of  their  own  divinity  ; 
they  know  it  from  their  birth.  They  are  like 
the  actors  whose  play  is  over,  but  who,  after 
their  work  is  done,  return  to  please  others. 
These  great  Ones  are  untouched  by  aught  of 
earth  ;  they  assume  our  form  and  our  limi- 
tations for   a  time  in  order  to   teach  us,  but  in 

53 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

reality  they  are  never  limited,  they  are  ever  free. 
*  *  •  *  * 

Good   is  near  Truth,    but  is   not   yet   Truth. 

After  learning  not  to  be  disturbed   by  evil,   we 

have  to  learn  not  to  be   made  happy  by   good. 

We  must   find  that    we  are   beyond   both  evil 

and  good  ;  we  must  study  their  adjustment  and 

see  that  they  are  both  necessary. 

The  idea  of  dualism  is  from  the  ancient 
Persians.*  Really  good  and  evil  are  one,f  and 
are  in  our  own  mind.  When  the  mind  is  self- 
poised  neither  good  nor  bad  affects  it.  Be 
perfectly  free,  then  neither  can  affect  it,  and  we 
enjoy  freedom  and  bliss.  Evil  is  the  iron  chain,, 
good  is  the  gold  one  ;  both  are  chains.  Be  free, 
and  know  once  for  all  that  there  is  no  chain  for 

*  Parsees,  the  followers  of  Zoroaster  who  taught  that 
the  whole  creation  has  come  out  of  two  primary  principles, 
one  being  called  Orntuzd  (the  principle  of  Good)  and  the 
other  Ahriman  (the  principle  of  Evil.) 

f  Because  they  are  both  chains. 

54 


Inspired  Talks 

you.  Lay  hold  of  the  golden  chain  to  loosen 
the  hold  of  the  iron  one,  then  throw  both 
away.  The  thorn  of  evil  is  in  our  flesh  ;  take 
another  thorn  from  the  same  bush  and  extract 
the  first  thorn,  then  throw  away  both  and  be 
free. 

•  •«>•« 

In  the  world  take  always  the  position  of  the 
giver.  Give  everything  and  look  for  no  return. 
Give  love,  give  help,  give  service,  give  any  little 
thing  you  can,  but  keep  out  barter.  Make  no 
conditions  and  none  will  be  imposed.  Let  us 
give  out  of  our  own  bounty,  just  as  God  gives 
to  us. 

The  Lord  is  the  only  Giver,  all  the  world  are 
only  shopkeepers.  Get  His  cheque  and  it 
must  be  honored  everywhere. 

"  God  is  the  inexplicable,  inexpressible  es- 
sence of  Love,"  to  be  known,  but  never  defined. 


55 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

In  our  miseries  and  struggles  the  world 
seems  to  us  a  very  dreadful  place.  But  just  as 
when  we  watch  two  puppies  playing  and  biting 
we  do  not  concern  ourselves  at  all,  realizing 
that  it  is  only  fun  and  that  even  a  sharp  nip 
now  and  then  will  do  no  actual  harm  ;  so  all 
our  struggles  are  but  play  in  God's  eyes.  This 
world  is  all  for  play  and  only  amuses  God  ; 
nothing  in  it  can  make  God  angry. 

*  *  *  * 

4i Mother  !     In   the   sea  of  life    my   bark  is 
sinking, 

The    whirlwind    of    illusion,    the  storm   of 

attachment  is  growing   every    moment, 

My  five  oarsmen    (senses)    are  foolish,  and 

the  helmsman  (mind)  is  weak. 
My   bearings  are  lost,   my   boat  is  sinking. 
O  Mother  1  Save  me  !" 

"Mother,  Thy  light  stops  not  for  the  saint 
or  the  sinner;  it  animates  the  lover  and  the  mur- 

56 


Inspired  Talks 

derer/'  Mother  is  ever  manifesting  through 
all.  The  light  is  not  polluted  by  what  it  shines 
on,  nor  benefited  by  it.  The  light  is  ever  pure, 
ever  changeless.  Behind  every  creature  is 
the  "  Mother,"  pure,  lovely,  never  changing. 
"  Mother  !  manifested  as  light  in  all  beings,  we 
bow  down  to  Thee  !"  She  is  equally  in  suffer- 
ing, hunger,  pleasure,  sublimity.  "  When  the 
bee  sucks  honey,  the  Lord  is  eating."  Know- 
ing that  the  Lord  is  everywhere,  the  sages  give 
up  praising  and  blaming.  Know  that  nothing 
can  hurt  you.  How  ?  Are  you  not  free  ? 
Are  you  not  A'tman  ?  He  is  the  Life  of  our 
lives,  the  hearing  of  our  ears,  the  sight  of  our 
eyes. 

We  go  through  the  world  like  a  man  pursued 
by  a  policeman  and  see  the  barest  glimpses 
of  the  beauty  of  it.  All  this  fear  that  pursues 
us  comes  from  believing  in  matter.  Matter 
gets  its  whole  existence  from  the  presence   of 

57 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

mind  behind  it.    What  we  see  is  God  percolat- 
ing through  nature.* 
Sunday,  June  23rd 

Be  brave  and  be  sincere  ;  then  follow  any 
path  with  devotion  and  you  must  reach  the 
Whole.  Once  lay  hold  of  one  link  of  the 
chain  and  the  whole  chain  must  come  by 
degrees.  Water  the  roots  of  the  tree,  (that  is, 
reach  the  Lord)  and  the  whole  tree  is  watered  ; 
getting  the  Lord,  we  get  all. 

One-sideness  is  the  bane  of  the  world.  The 
more  sides  you  can  develop,  the  more  souls 
you  have  and  you  can  see  the  universe  through 
all  souls,— 'through  the  Bhakta,  (devotee)  and 
the  Jndni  (philosopher).  Determine  your  own 
nature  and  stick  to  it.  Nishthd  (devotion  to  one 
ideal)  is  the  only  method  for  the  beginner,  but 
with  devotion  and  sincerity  it  will  lead  to  alL 
Churches,  doctrines,  forms  are  the  hedges    to 

*  Here  "  Nature'  means  matter  and  mind.  (Ed.) 

58 


Inspired  Talks 

protect  the  tender  plant,  but  they   must  later  be 

broken  down  that  the  plant  may  become  a  tree. 

So  the  various  religions,  Bibles,  Vedas,  dogmas 

all  are  just  tubs  for  the  little  plant ;  but  it  must 

get  out  of  the  tub.     Nishthd  is,  in  a  manner, 

placing   the   plant    in   the    tub,   shielding    the 

struggling  soul  in  its  chosen  path. 

•  *  «  * 

Look  at  the  "  ocean  "  and  not  at  the  "  wave"; 
see  no  difference  between  ant  and  angel.  Every 
worm  is  the  brother  of  the  Nazarene.  How 
say  one  is  greater  and  one  less  ?  Each  is  great, 
in  his  own  place.  We  are  in  the  sun  and  in 
the  stars  as  much  as  here.  Spirit  is  beyond 
space  and  time,  and  is  every  where.  Every  mouth 
praising  the  Lord  is  my  mouth,every  eye  seeing 
is  my  eye.  We  are  confined  nowhere  ;  we  are 
not  body,  the  universe  is  our  body.  We  are 
magicians  waving  magic  wands  and  creating 
scenes  before   us  at  will.    We  are  the   spider  in 

59 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

his  huge  web,  who  can  go  on  the  varied  strands 
wheresoever  he  desires.  The  spider  is  now 
only  conscious  of  the  spot  where  he  is,  but  he 
will  in  time  become  conscious  of  the  whole 
web.  We  are  now  conscious  only  where  the 
body  is,  we  can  use  only  one  brain  ;  but  when 
we  reach  ultra-consciousness,  we  know  all,  we 
can  use  all  brains.  Even  now  we  can  "  give 
the  push  "  in  consciousness  and  it  goes  beyond 
and  acts  in  the  superconscious. 

We  are  striving  "  to  be  ''  and  nothing  more, 
no  "  I  "  even, — just  pure  crystal,  reflecting  all, 
but  ever  the  same.  When  that  state  is  reached 
there  is  no  more  doing  ;  the  body  becomes  a 
mere  mechanism,  pure  without  care  for  it  ;  it 
cannot  become  impure. 

Know  you  are  the  Infinite,  then  fear  must  die. 
Say  ever  K  I  and  my  Father  are  one." 
#  *  #  * 

In  time  to  come  Christs  will  be  in  numbers 
60 


Inspired  Talks 

like  bunches  of  grapes  on  a  vine  ;  then  the  play 
will  be  over  and  all  will   pass  out.     As  water  in 
a  kettle  beginning  to  boil  shows  first  one  bubble 
then  another,  then  more  and  more  until  all  is 
in  ebullition  and  passes  out  as  steam.      Buddha 
and  Christ  are  the  two  biggest  "bubbles  "  the 
world  has  yet    produced.     Moses   was  a  tiny 
bubble,  greater  and  greater  ones  came.     Some- 
time however  all  will  be  bubbles  and  escape  ; 
but  creation,  ever  new,  will  bring  new  water  to 
go  through  the  process  all  over  again. 

Monday,  June  24//?.  (The  reading  to-day- 
was  from  the  Bhakti  Sutras  byNdrada.) 

"  Extreme  love  to  God  is  Bhakti,  and  this 
love  is  the  real  immortality,  getting  which  a 
man  becomes  perfectly  satisfied,  sorrows  for 
no  loss  and  is  never  jealous ;  knowing  which 
man  becomes  mad." 

My  Master  used  to  say,  "  this  world  is  a  huge 
61 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

lunatic  asylum  where  all  men  are  mad,  some  after 
money,  some  after  women,  some  after  name 
or  fame,  and  a  few  after  God.  I  prefer  to  be 
mad  after  God.  God  is  the  philosopher's  stone 
that  turns  us  to  gold  in  an  instant  ;  the  form 
remains, but  the  nature  is  changed — the  human 
form  remains,  but  no  more  can  we  hurt  or  sin." 

"  Thinking  of  God,  some  weep,  some  sing, 
some  laugh,  some  dance,  some  say  wonderful 
things,  but  all  speak  of  nothing  but  God." 

Prophets  preach,  but  the  Incarnations  like 
Jesus,  Buddha,  Ramakrishna,  can  give  religion  ; 
one  glance,  one  touch  is  enough.  That  is  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  "  laying  on  of 
hands "  ;  the  power  was  actually  transmitted 
to  the  disciples  by  the  Master, — the  "  chain  of 
Guru-power."  That,  the  real  baptism,  has 
been  handed  down  for  untold  ages. 

u  Bhakti  cannot  be  used  to  fulfil  any  desires, 
itself  being  the  check  to  all   desires."    Narada 

62 


Inspired  Talks 

gives  these  as  the  signs  of  love.  "  When  all 
thoughts,  all  words  and  all  deeds  are  given  up 
unto  the  Lord,  and  the  least  forgetfulness  of 
God  makes  one  intensely  miserable,  then  love 
has  begun." 

*  This  is  the  highest  form  of  love  because 
therein  is  no  desire  for  reciprocity,  which  desire 
is  in  all  human  love." 

11  A  man  who  has  gone  beyond  social  and 
Scriptural  usage,  he  is  a  Sanydsin.  When  the 
whole  soul  goes  to  God,  when  we  take  refuge 
only  in  God,  then  we  know  that  we  are  about 
to  get  this  love." 

Obey  the  Scriptures  until  you  are  strong 
enough  to  do  without  them,  then  go  beyond 
them.  Books  are  not  an  end-all.  Verification 
is  the  only  proof  of  religious  truth.  Each  must 
verify  for  himself  ;  and  no  teacher  who  says 
11  I  have  seen,  but  you  cannot "  is  to  be  trusted, 
only  that  one  who  says  "  you  can  see  too."  All 

63 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Scriptures,  all  truths  are  Vedas,  in  all  times,  in 
all  countries  ;  because  these  truths  are  to  be 
seen  and  any  one  may  discover  them. 

"  When  the  sun  of  Love  begins  to  break  on 
the  horizon,  we  want  to  give  up  all  our  actions 
unto  God  and  when  we  forget  Him  for  a 
moment,  it  grieves  us  greatly.'' 

Let  nothing  stand  between  God  and  youF 
love  for  Him.  Love  Him,  love  Him,  love  Him, 
and  let  the  world  say  what  it  will.  Love  is  of 
three  sorts, — one  demands,  but  gives  nothing  ;. 
the  second  is  exchange,  and  the  third  is  love 
without  thought  of  return,  love  like  that  of  the 
moths  for  the  light. 

"  Love  is  higher  than  works,  than  Yoga,  than 
knowledge." 

Work  is  merely  a  schooling  for  the  doer,  it 
can  do  no  good  to  others.  We  must  work  out 
our  own  problem,  the  prophets  only  show  us 
how  to  work.   "  What  you  think,  you  become," 

64 


Inspired  Talks 

so  if  you  throw  your  burden  on  Jesus,  you 
will  have  to  think  of  Him  and  thus  becom  e 
like  Him,  you  love  Him. 

u  Extreme  love  and  highest  knowledge  are 
one." 

But  theorizing  about  God  will  not  do  ;  we 
must  love  and  work.  Give  up  the  world  and 
all  wordly  things,  especially  while  the  "  plant  " 
is  tender.  Day  and  night  think  of  God  and 
think  of  nothing  else  as  far  as  possible.  The 
daily  necessary  thoughts  can  all  be  thought 
through  God.  Eat  to  Him,  drink  to  Him, 
sleep  to  Him,  see  Him  in  all.  Talk  of  God  to 
others,  this  is  most  beneficial. 

Get  the  mercy  of  God  and  of  His  greatest 
children  ;  these  are  the  two  chief  ways  to  God. 
The  company  of  these  children  of  light  is  very 
hard  to  get  ;  five  minutes  in  their  company  will 
change  a  whole  life,  and  if  you  really  want  it 
enough,  one  will  come  to  you.      The  presence 

E  65 


Vedanta  Pilosophy 

of  those  who  love  God  makes  a  place  holy, 
"  such  is  the  glory  of  the  children  of  the  Lord." 
They  are  He  ;  and  when  they  speak,  their 
words  are  Scriptures.  The  place  where  they 
have  been  becomes  filled  with  their  vibrations, 
and  those  going  there  feel  them  and  have  a 
tendency  to  become  holy  also. 

"To  such  lovers  there  is  no  distinction  of 
caste,  learning,  beauty,  birth,  wealth,  or  oc- 
cupation ;  because  all  are  His." 

Give  up  all  evil  company,  especially  at 
the  beginning.  Avoid  worldly  company,  that 
will  distract  your  mind.  Give  up  all  "  me 
and  mine."  To  him  who  has  nothing  in  the 
universe  the  Lord  comes.  Cut  the  bondage 
of  all  worldly  affections  ;  go  beyond  lazi- 
ness and  all  care  as  to  what  becomes  of 
you.  Never  turn  back  to  see  the  result  of 
what  you  have  done.  Give  all  to  the  Lord 
and  go  on  and    think  not  of  it.     The  whole 

66 


Inspired  Talks 

soul  pours  in  a  continuous  current  to  God  ; 
there  is  no  time  to  seek  money,  or  name,  or 
fame,  no  time  to  think  of  anything  but  God  ; 
then  will  come  into  our  hearts  that  infinite, 
wonderful  bliss  of  Love.  All  desires  are  but 
beads  of  glass.  Love  of  God  increases  every 
moment  and  is  ever  new,  to  be  known  only 
by  feeling  it.  Love  is  the  easiest  of  all,  it 
waits  for  no  logic,  it  is  natural.  We  need 
no  demonstration,  no  proof.  Reasoning  is 
limiting  something  by  our  own  minds.  We 
throw  a  net  and  catch  something,  and  then 
say  that  we  have  demonstrated  it  ;  but  never, 
never  can  we  catch  God  in  a  net. 

Love  should  be  unrelated.  Even  when  we 
love  wrongly,  it  is  of  the  true  love,  of  the  true 
bliss  ;  the  power  is  the  same,  use  it  as  we  may. 
Its  very  nature  is  peace  and  bliss.  The  mur- 
derer when  he  kisses  his  baby  forgets  for  an 
instant    all   but    love.     Give    up   all   self,   all 

67 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

egotism  -5  get  out  of  anger,  lust,  give  all  to  God. 
"  I  am  not,  but  Thou  art ;  the  old  man  is  air 
gone,  only  Thou  remainest."  M  I  am  Thou." 
Blame  none  ;  if  evil  comes,  know  the  Lord  i& 
playing  with  you  and  be  exceeding  glad. 

Love  is  beyond  time  and  space,  it  is  absolute. 

Tuesday,  June  25th. 

After  every  happiness  comes  misery  ;  they 
may  be  far  apart  or  near.  The  more  advanced 
the  soul,  the  more  quickly  does  one  follow  the 
other.  What  we  want  is  neither  happiness 
nor  misery.  Both  make  us  forget  our  true 
nature  ;  both  are  chains,  one  iron,  one  gold  ; 
behind  both  is  the  ^tman,  Who  knows  neither 
happiness  nor  misery.  These  are  states  and 
states  must  ever  change  ;  but  the  nature  of  the 
soul  is  bliss,  peace  unchanging.  We  have  not 
to  get  it,  we  have  it ;  only  wash  away  the  dross 
and  see  it. 

Stand  upon  the  Self,  then  only  can  we  truly 

68 


Inspired  Talks 

love  the  world.  Take  a  very,  very  high  stand  ; 
knowing  our  universal  nature,  we  must  look 
with  perfect  calmness  upon  all  the  panorama 
of  the  world.  It  is  but  baby's  play,  and  we 
know  that,  so  cannot  be  disturbed  by  it.  If 
the  mind  is  pleased  with  praise,  it  will  be  dis- 
pleased with  blame.  All  pleasures  of  the  senses 
or  even  of  the  mind  are  evanescent,  but  within 
ourselves  is  the  one  true  unrelated  pleasure, 
dependent  upon  nothing.  It  is  perfectly  free, 
it  is  bliss.  The  more  our  bliss  is  within,  the 
more  spiritual  we  are.  The  pleasure  of  the 
Self  is  what  the  world  calls  religion. 

The  internal  universe,  the  real,  is  infinitely 
greater  than  the  external,  which  is  only  a 
shadowy  projection  of  the  true  one.  This  world 
is  neither  true  nor  untrue,  it  is  the  shadow  of 
truth.  ''Imagination  is  the  gilded  shadow  of 
truth,''  says  the  poet. 

We  enter  into  creation,   and  then  for  us  it 

69 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

becomes  living.  Things  are  dead  in  them- 
selves ;  only  we  give  them  life,  and  then, 
like  fools,  we  turn  around  and  are  afraid 
of  them,  or  enjoy  them.  But  be  not  like 
certain  fisherwomen,  who,  caught  in  a  storm 
on  their  way  home  from  market,  took  refuge 
in  the  house  of  a  florist.  They  were  lodged 
for  the  night  in  a  room  next  the  garden 
where  the  air  was  full  of  the  fragrance  of 
flowers.  In  vain  did  they  try  to  rest,  until 
one  of  their  number  suggested  that  they 
wet  their  fishy  baskets  and  place  them  near 
their  heads.  Then  they  all  fell  into  a  sound 
sleep. 

The  world  is  our  fish  basket,  we  must  not 
depend  upon  it  for  enjoyment.  Those  who  do 
are  the  tdmasas,  or  the  bound.  Then  there  are 
the  rajasaS)  or  the  egotistical,  who  talk  always 
about  "I,"  "I."  They  do  good  work  some- 
times   and    may    become    spiritual.     But   the 

70 


Inspired  Talks 

highest  are  the  s&ttvikas,  the  introspective, 
those  who  live  only  in  the  Self.  These  three 
qualities,  tamas,  rajas  and  sattva,  are  in 
everyone,  and  different  once  predominate  at 
different  times. 

Creation  is  not  a  "  making"  of  something,  it 
is  the  struggle  to  regain  the  equilibrium,  as 
when  atoms  of  cork  are  thrown  to  the  bottom  of 
a  pail  of  water  and  rush  to  rise  to  the  top,  singly 
or  in  clusters.  Life  is  and  must  be  accompanied 
by  evil .  A  little  evil  is  the  source  of  life  ;  the  little 
wickedness  that  is  in  the  world  is  very  good, 
for  when  the  balance  is  regained,  the  world 
will  end,  because  sameness  and  destruction  are 
one.  When  this  world  goes,  good  and  evil  go 
with  it  •,  but  when  we  can  transcend  this  world 
we  get  rid  of  both  good  and  evil  and  have 
bliss. 

There  is  no  possibility  of  ever  having  plea- 
sure without  pain,  good  without  evil,  for  living 

71 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

itself  is  just  the  lost  equilibrium.  What  we 
want  is  freedom,  not  life,  nor  pleasure,  nor 
good.  Creation  is  infinite,  without  beginning 
and  without  end,  the  ever-moving  ripple  in  an 
infinite  lake.  There  are  yet  unreached  depths 
and  others  where  the  equilibrium  has  been 
regained,  but  the  ripple  is  always  progressing, 
the  struggle  to  regain  the  balance  is  eternal. 
Life  and  death  are  only  different  names  for  the 
same  fact,  the  two  sides  of  the  one  coin.  Both 
are  Mdyd,  the  inexplicable  state  of  striving  at 
one  time  to  live,  and  a  moment  later  to  die. 
Beyond  this  is  the  true  nature,  the  A'tman. 
While  we  recognize  a  God,  it  is  really  only 
the  Self,  from  which  we  have  separated  our- 
selves and  worship  as  outside  of  us  ;  but  it 
is  our  true  Self  all  the  time,  the  one  and  only 
God. 

To  regain  the  balance  we   must    counteract 
tamas  by  rajas,  then  conquer  rajas  by  sattva, 

72 


Inspired  Talks 

the  calm  beautiful  state  that  will  grow  and 
grow  until  all  else  is  gone.  Give  up  bondage, 
become  a  son,  be  free,  and  then  you  can 
"see  the  Father"  as  did  Jesus.  Infinite 
strength  is  religion  and  God.  Avoid  weakness 
and  slavery.  You  are  only  a  soul,  if  you  are 
free  ;  there  is  immortality   for   you,  if  you   are 

free  ;  there  is  a  God,  if  He  is  free. 

m  m  m  m  m 

The  world  for  me,  not  I  for  the  world.  Good 
and  evil  are  our  slaves,  not  we  theirs.  It  is  the 
nature  of  the  brute  to  remain  where  he  is  (not  to 
progress);  it  is  the  nature  of  man  to  seek  good 
and  avoid  bad;  it  is  the  nature  of  God  to  seek 
neither,  but  just  to  be  eternally  blissful.  Let  us 
be  gods  !  Make  the  heart  like  an  ocean;  go 
beyond  all  the  trifles  of  the  world;  be  mad  with 
joy  even  at  evil,  see  the  world  as  a  picture  and 
then  enjoy  its  beauty,  knowing  that  nothing 
affects  you.    Children   finding  glass  beads  in  a 

73 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

mud  puddle,  that  is  the  good  of  the  world. 
Look  at  it  with  calm  complacency;  see  good  and 
evil  as  the  same,  both  are  merely  "  Gods 
play";  enjoy  all, 

***** 

My  Master  used  to  say  :  "  All  is  God,  but 
tiger-God  is  to  be  shunned.  All  water  is 
water,  but  we  avoid  dirty  water  for  drink- 
ing.'' 

The  whole  sky  is  the  censer  of  God  and  the 
sun  and  moon  are  the  lamps.  What  temple  i& 
needed  ?  All  eyes  are  Thine,  yet  Thou  hast 
not  an  eye  ;  all  hands  are  Thine,  yet  Thou  hast 
not  a  hand. 

Neither  seek  nor  avoid,  take  what  comes^ 
It  is  liberty  to  be  affected  by  nothing  ;  do  not 
merely  endure,  be  unattached.  Remember  the 
story  of  the  bull.  A  mosquito  sat  long  on  the 
horn   of   a  certain   bull  5  then   his  conscience 

74 


Inspired  Talks 

troubled  him  and  he  said  :  "  Mr.  Bull,  I  have 
been  sitting  here  a  long  time,  perhaps  I  annoy 
you.  I  am  sorry,  I  will  go  away."  But  the  bull 
replied  :  "  Oh  no,  not  at  all  1  Bring  your  whole 
family  and  live  on  my  horn  ;  what  can  you  do 
to  me  ?" 
Wednesday,  June  26th. 

Our  best  work  is  done,  our  greatest  influence 
is  exerted  when  we  are  without  thought  of  self. 
All  great  geniuses  know  this.  Let  us  open 
ourselves  to  the  one  Divine  Actor  and  let  Him 
act,  and  do  nothing  ourselves.  "  O  Arjuna  1 
I  have  no  duty  in  the  whole  world,"  says 
Krishna.  Be  perfectly  resigned,  perfectly-  un- 
concerned ;  then  alone  can  you  do  any  true 
work.  No  eyes  can  see  the  real  forces,  we  can 
only  see  the  results.  Put  out  self,  lose  it,  for- 
get it  ;  just  let  God  work,  it  is  His  business. 
We  have  nothing  to  do  but  stand  aside  and  let 
God  work.    The  more  we  go  away,  the  more 

75 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

•God  comes  in.     Get  rid  of  the  little  "  I  "  and 
let  only  the  great  H  I  "  live. 

We  are  what  our  thoughts  have  made  us,  so 
take  care  of  what  you  think.  Words  are  se- 
condary. Thoughts  live,  they  travel  far.  Each 
thought  we  think  is  tinged  with  our  own  cha- 
racter, so  that  for  the  pure  and  holy  man,  even 
his  jests  or  abuse  will  have  the  twist  of  his  own 
love  and  purity  and  do  good. 

Desire  nothing  ;  think  of  God  and  look  for 
no  return  ;  it  is  the  desireless  who  bring  results. 
The  begging  monks  carry  religion  to  every 
man's  door ;  but  they  think  that  they  do  noth- 
ing, they  claim  nothing,  their  work  is  uncon- 
sciously done.  If  they  should  eat  of  the  tree 
of  knowledge,  they  would  become  egoists  and 
all  the  good  they  do  would  fly  away .  As  soon 
as  we  say  "  I  "  we  are  humbugged  all  the  time, 
and  we  call  it  u  knowledge,"  but  it  is  only 
going  round  and  round  like  a  bullock    tied  to  a 

76 


Inspired  Talks 

tree.  The  Lord  has  hidden  Himself  best  and 
His  work  is  best  ;  so  he  who  hides  himself 
best,  accomplishes  most.  Conquer  yourself  and 
the  whole  universe  is  yours. 

In  the  state  of  sattva  we  see  the  very  nature 
of  things,  we  go  beyond  the  senses  and  beyond 
reason.  The  adamantine  wall  that  shuts  us  in 
is  egoism  ;  we  refer  everything  to  ourselves,, 
thinking  I  do  this,  that  and  the  other.  Get  rid 
of  this  puny  ul  "  ;  kill  this  diabolism  in  us  ^ 
"not  I,  but  Thou,"  say  it,  feel  it,  live  it.  Un 
til  we  give  up  the  world  manufactured  by  the 
ego,  never  can  we  enter  the  kingdom  of 
teaven.  None  ever  did,  none  ever  will.  To 
[ive  up  the  world  is  to  forget  the  ego,  to 
mow  it  not  at  all,  living  in  the  body,  but  not 
of  it.  This  rascal  ego  must  be  obliterated. 
Bless  men,  when  they  revile  you.  Think  how 
luch  good  they  are  doing  you  ;  they  can 
>nly  hurt  themselves.    Go  where  people  hate 

77 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

you,  let  them  thrash  the  ego  out  of  you  and 
you  will  get  nearer  to  the  Lord.  Like  the 
mother-monkey,*  we  hug  our  "baby,''  the 
world,  as  long  as  we  can,  but  at  last  when  we 
are  driven  to  put  it  under  our  feet  and  step  on 
it,  then  we  are  ready  to  come  to  God.  Blessed 
it  is  to  be  persecuted  for  the  sake  of  righteous- 
ness. Blessed  are  we  if  we  cannot  read,  we 
have  less  to  take  us  away  from  God. 

Enjoyment  is  the  million-headed  serpent  that 
we  must  tread  under  foot.  We  renounce,  and 
go  on,  then  find  nothing  and  despair ;  but 
hold  on,  hold  on.  The  world  is  a  demon.  It 
is  a  kingdom  of  which  the  puny  ego  is  king. 
Put  it  away  and  stand  firm.  Give  up  lust  and 
gold  and  fame  and  hold  fast  to  the  Lord,  and 
at  last  we  shall  reach  a  state  of  perfect  indiffer- 


•  The  mother  monkey  is  very  fond  of  her  young  in  time 
of  safety  ;  but  when  danger  comes,  she  does  not  scruple  to 
throw  it  down  and  trample  on  it,  if  necessary,  to  save  her- 
self.   [Ed.] 

78 


Inspired  Talks 

ence.  The  idea  that  the  gratification  of  the 
senses  constitutes  enjoyment  is  purely  materia- 
listic. There  is  not  one  spark  of  real  enjoyment 
there:  all  the  joy  there  is,  is  a  mere  reflection 
of  the  true  bliss. 

Those  who  give  themselves  up  to  the  Lord 
do  more  for  the  world  than  all  the  so-called 
workers.  One  man  who  has  purified  himself 
thoroughly,  accomplishes  more  than  a  regiment 
of  preachers.  Out  of  purity  and  silence  comes 
the  word  of  power. 

"Be  like  a  lily,  stay  in  one  place  and  expand 
your  petals  and  the  bees  will  come  of  them- 
selves." There  was  a  great  contrast  between 
[eshab  Chunder  Sen  and  Sri  Ramakrishna. 
'he  second  never  recognized  any  sin  or  misery 
in  the  world,  no  evil  to  fight  against.  The  first 
ras  a  great  ethical  reformer,  leader,  and  founder 
>f  the  BrdhmO'Samdj.  After  twelve  years  the 
[uiet     prophet   of   Dakshineswar   had   worked 

79 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

a  revolution  not  only  in  India,  but  in  the  world. 
The  power  is  with  the  silent  ones,  who  only 
live  and  love  and  then  withdraw  their  per- 
sonality. They  never  say  "me"  and  "mine"; 
they  are  only  blessed  in  being  instruments. 
Such  men  are  the  makers  of  Christs  and 
Buddhas,  ever  living,  fully  identified  with 
God,  ideal  existences,  asking  nothing  and  not 
consciously  doing  anything.  They  are  the  real 
movers,  the  Jivan-muktas,  absolutely  selfless, 
the  little  personality  entirely  blown  away,  am- 
bition non-existent.  They  are  all  principle, 
no  personality. 

Thursday,  June  27th  (Swdmi  brought  the 
New  Testament  this  morning  and  talked  again 
on  the  book  of  John.) 

Mahommed  claimed  to  be  the  "Comforter" 
that  Christ  promised  to  send.  He  considered 
it  unnecessary  to  claim  a  supernatural  birth  for 
Jesus.     Such   claims  have  been  common  in   all 

80 


Inspired  Talks 

ages  and  in  all  countries.    All  great  men  have 
claimed  gods  for  their  fathers. 

Knowing  is  only  relative  ;  we  can  be  God,, 
but  never  know  Him.  Knowledge  is  a  lower 
state  ;  Adam's  falli  was  when  he  came  to  "  know." 
Befo  re  that  he  was  God,  he  was  truth,  he  was 
purity.  We  are  our  own  faces,  but  can  see 
only  a  reflection,  never  the  real  thing.  We  are 
love,  but  when  we  think  of  it  we  have  to  use  a 
phantasm,  which  proves  that  matter  is  only 
externalized  thought.* 

Nivritti  is    turning   aside    from   the    world- 
Hindu   mythology   says    that    the    four    first- 

*  Since  the  knower  can  know  only  his  reflection  and 
not  himself,  he  is  ever  unknowable.  So  knowledge  is 
distinct  and  separate  from  the  knower,  and  as  such  it  is 
externalized  thought  or  thought  standing  outside  the 
knower  as  a  separate  entity.  Since  the  knower  goes  by 
the  name  of  Spirit  that  which  is  distinct  and  separate  from 
it  should  go  by  the  name  of  Matter.  Hence  the  Swami 
says  "  matter  is  only  externalized  thought. " 

F  81 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

created  *  were  warned  by  a  Swan  (God  Himself) 
that  manifestation  was  only  secondary,  so  they 
remained  without  creating.  The  meaning  of 
this  is  that  expression  is  degeneration,  because 
spirit  can  only  be  expressed  by  the  letter  and 
then  the  "  letter  killeth M  ;  t  yet  principle  is 
bound  to  be  clothed  in  matter,  though  we  know 
that  later  we  shall  lose  sight  of  the  real  in  the 
covering.  Every  great  teacher  understands  this 
and  that  is  why  a  continual  succession  of  pro- 
phets has  to  come  to  show  us  the  principle  and 
give  it  a  new  covering  suited  to  the  times. 
My  Master  taught  that  religion  is  one  ;  all 
prophets  teach  the  same,  but  they  can  only 
present  the  principle  in  a  form,  so  they  take  it 
out  of  the  old  form  and  put  it  before  us  in  a 
new  one.  When  we  free  ourselves  from  name 
and  form,  especially  from  a  body, — when  we 

*  The  four  first-created  were  Sanaka,  Sananda  na,  Sani- 
taria, and  Sanatkumara.     [Ed.] 

f  Bible,  2  Cor.  III.,  6. 

82 


Inspired  Talks 

need  no  body,  good  or | bad,  then  only  do  we 
•escape  from  bondage.  Eternal  progression  is 
eternal  bondage ;  annihilation  of  form  is  to  be 
preferred.  We  must  get  free  from  any  body 
even  a  "  god-body."  God  is  the  only  real, 
•existence,  there  cannot  be  two*.  There  is  but 
One  Soul  and  I  am  That. 

Good  works  are  only  valuable  as  a  means  of 
escape  ;  they  do  good  to  the  doer,  never  to  any 

other. 

*  *  *  * 

Knowledge  is  mere  classification.  When  we 
find  many  things  of  the  same  kind  we  call  the 
sum  of  them  by  a  certain  name  and  are  satis- 
fied ;  we  discover  "  facts,"  never  "  why."  We 
take  a  circuit  in  a  wider  field  of  darkness  and 
think    we  know  something  !  No   "  why"   can 

*  Body  is  a  limitation.  Hence  the  bodiless  must  be 
limitless  or  infinite.  As  there  cannot  be  two  Infinities, 
<3od  or  "  One  Soul  "  (who  is  bodiless)  must  be  one  and 
cannot  be  two. 

83 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

be  answered  in  this  world,  for  that  we  must  go- 
to  God.  The  Knower  can  never  be  expressed  ; 
it  is  as  when  a  grain  of  salt  drops  into  the  ocean,, 
it  is  at  once  merged  in  the  ocean. 

Differentiation  creates  ;  homogeneity  or  same- 
ness is  God.  Get  beyond  differentiation  ;  then 
you  conquer  life  and  death  and  reach  eternal 
sameness  and  are  in  God,  are  God.  Get  free- 
dom, even  at  the  cost  of  life.  All  lives  belong 
to  us  as  leaves  to  a  book  ;  but  we  are  unchang- 
ed, the  Witness,  the  Soul,  upon  whom  the  im- 
pression is  made,  as  when  the  impression  of  a 
circle  is  made  upon  the  eyes  when  a  firebrand 
is  rapidly  whirled  round  and  round.  The  soul 
is  the  unity  of  all  personalities,  and  because  it  is 
at  rest,  eternal,  unchangeable,  it  is  God,  Atman. 
It  is  not  life,  but  it  is  coined  into  life.     It  is  not 

pleasure,  but  it  is  manufactured  into  pleasure. 
#  #  #  # 

To-day  God  is  being  abandoned  by  the  world 
84 


Inspired  Talks 

because  He  does  not  seem  to  be  doing  enough 
for  the  world,  so  they  say,  "  Of  what  good  is 
He  V  Shall  we  look  upon  God  as  a  mere 
municipal  authority  ? 

All  we  can  do  is  to  put  down  all  desires, 
hates,  differences ;  put  down  the  lower  self, 
commit  mental  suicide,  as  it  were  ;  keep  the 
body  and  mind  pure  and  healthy,  but  only  as 
instruments  to  help  us  to  God,  that  is  their  only 
true  use.  Seek  truth  for  truth's  sake  alone,  look 
not  for  bliss.  It  may  come,  but  do  not  let  that 
be  your  incentive.  Have  no  motive  except 
God.     Dare  to  come  to  Truth  even  through  hell. 

Friday,  June  28th.  (The  entire  party  went 
en  a  picnic  for  the  day  and  although  the  Swdmi 
taught  constantly^  as  he  did  wherever  he  was} 
no  notes  were  taken  and  no  record,  therefore,  of 
what  he  said  remains.  As  he  began  his  break- 
fast before  setting  out,  however,  he  remarked-,) 

85 


Vedanta    Philosophy 

Be  thankful  for  all  food,  it  is  Brahman.* 
His  universal  energy  is  transmuted  into  our 
individual  energy  and  helps  us  in  all  that 
we  do. 

Saturday,  June  29th.  (The  Swdmi  came 
this  morning  with  the  GlTA  in  his  hand.) 

Krishna,  the  "  Lord  of  souls,"  talks  to 
Arjuna,  or  Gudakesa,  "lord  of  sleep"  (he 
who  has  conquered  sleep).  The  "  field  of 
virtue"  (the  battlefield)  is  this  world  ;  the 
five  brothers  (representing  righteousness)  fight 
the  hundred  other  brothers  (all  that  we  love 
and  have  to  contend  against)  ;  the  most  heroic 
brother,  Arjuna  (the  awakened  soul),  is  the 
general.    We    have  to   fight  all  sense-delights, 

♦Perhaps  it  will  be  well  to  explain  here  the  difference  bet- 
ween Brahman  (neut.)  and  Brahma'  (mas.).  The  former  is 
the  impersonal,  beginningless  supreme  Self,  the  Atman.  The 
latter  is  the  first  person  of  the  Hindu  Trinity(Brabm&,  Vishnu, 
Siva)   and  is  the  Creator  of  the  Universe — (Ed.) 

86 


Inspired  Talks 

the  things  to  which  we  are^most  attached,  to 
kill  them.  We  have  to  stand  alone  ;  we  are 
Brahman,  all  other  ideas  must  be  merged 
into  this  one. 

Krishna    did    everything    but   without    any 

attachment  ;  he  was  in  the  world,  but  not  of  it. 

"  Do  all  work  but  without   attachment ;    work 

for  work's  sake,  never  for  yourself." 

***** 

Freedom  can  never  be  true  of  name  and 
form  ;  it  is  the  clay  out  of  which  we  (the  pots) 
are  made  ;  then  it  is  limited  and  not  free,  so 
that  freedom  can  never  be  true  of  the  related. 
One  pot  can  never  say  "  I  am  free'*  as  a  pot  ; 
only  as  it  loses  all  idea  of  form  does  it  become 
free.  The  whole  universe  is  only  the  Self  with 
variations,  the  one  time  made  bearable  by 
variation  ;  sometimes  there  are  discords,  but 
they  only  make  the  subsequent  harmony:  tnore 

87 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

perfect.  In  the  universal  melody  three  ideas 
•stand  out,  freedom,  strength  and  sameness.* 

If  your  freedom  hurts  others,  you  are  not 
free  there  ;  you  must  not  hurt  others. 

"To  be  weak  is  to  be  miserable,"  says  Milton. 

Doing    and   suffering  are   inseparably   joined. 

(Often,  too,  the  man  who  laughs   most  is  the 

one  who  surfers  most.)  u  To  work  you  have  the 

right,  not  to  the  fruits  thereof." 

it  n 

Evil   thoughts,  looked  at  materially,    are  the 

disease  bacilli. 

Each  thought  is  a  little  hammer  blow  on  the 
lump  of  iron  which  our  bodies  are,  manufac- 
turing out  of  it  what  we  want  it  to  be. 

We  are  heirs  to  all  the  good  thoughts  of  the 
universe,  if  we  open  ourselves  to  them. 

The  book  is  all  in  us.  "  Fool,  hearest  not 
thou  ?  In  thine  own  heart  day  and  night  is 
singing  that    Eternal   MusiCj^-Satchiddnanda, 

*  These  are  the  Swami's  Trinity. 

88 


Inspired  Talks 

Soham,    Sohant.      (Existence-Knowledge-Bliss 
Absolute,  I  am  He,  I  am  He.) 

The  fountain  of  all  knowledge  is  in  every  one 
of  us,  in  the  ant  as  in  the  highest  angel.  Real 
religion  is  one,  but  we  quarrel  with  the  forms, 
the  symbols,  the  illustrations.  The  millenium 
exists  already  for  those  who  find  it ;  we  have 
lost  ourselves  and  then  think  the  world  is  lost. 

Perfect  strength  will  have  no  activity  in  this 
world;  it  only  is,  it  does  not  act. 

While  real  perfection  is  only  one,  relative 
perfections  must  be  many. 

Sunday,  June  30//;. 

To  try  to  think  without  a  phantasm  is  to  try 
to  make  the  impossible  possible.  We  cannot 
think  "mammalia"  without  a  concrete  example, 
so  with  the  idea  of  God. 

The  great  abstraction  of  ideas  in  the  world  is 
what  we  call  God. 

89 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Each  thought  has   two  parts, — the  thinking 

and  the  word,  and  we  must  have  both.  Neither 

idealists  nor  materialists  are  right ;  we  must  take 
both  idea  and  expression. 

All  knowledge  is  of  the  reflected,  as  we  can 

only   see  our  face   in  a  mirror.     No  one  will 

ever  know  his   own   Self  or  God,    but  we   are 
that  own  Self,  we  are  God. 

In  Nirvana  you  are  when  you  are  not. 
Buddha  said,  "You  are  best,  you  are  real  when 
you  are  not.''     (When  the  little  self  is  gone.) 

T  he  Light  Divine  within  is  obscured  in  most 
people.  It  is  like  a  lamp  in  a  cask  of  iron,  no 
gleam  of  light  can  shine  through.  Gradually, 
by  purity  and  unselfishness  we  can  make  the 
obscuring  medium  less  and  less  dense,  until  at 
last  it  becomes  as  transparent  as  glass.  Sri 
Ramakrishna  was  like  the  iron  cask  transformed 
into  a  glass  cask,  through  which  can  be  seen 
the  inner  light  as  it  is,  We  are  all  on  the 
way  to   become  the  cask  of  glass  and  even 

90 


Inspired  Talks 

higher  and  higher  reflections.    As  long  as  there 
is    a  "  cask"  at  all,     we  must   think    through 
material  means.     No   impatient   one  can  ever 
succeed. 

*%t  vjr  ^f  *%t 

Great  saints  are  the  object  lessons  of  the 
Principle.  But  the  disciples  make  the  saint 
the  Principle  and  then  they  forget  the  Prin- 
ciple in  the  person. 

The  result  of  Buddha's  constant  inveighing 
against  a  personal  God  was  the  introduction  of 
idols  into  India.  In  the  Vedas  they  knew  them 
not  because  they  saw  God  everywhere,  but  the 
reaction  against  the  loss  of  God  as  Creator  and 
Friend  was  to  make  idols,  and  Buddha  became 
an  idol — so  too  with  Jesus.  The  range  of  idols 
is  from  wood  and  stone  to  Jesus  and  Buddha, 
but  we  must  have  idols. 

*  *  *  * 

Violent  attempts   at  reform   always  end  by 
91 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

retarding  reform.     Do  not  say  "  You  are  bad"; 
say  only  "  You  are  good,  but  be  better. " 

Priests  are  an  evil  in  every  country  be- 
cause they  denounce  and  criticise,  pulling 
at  one  string  to  mend  it  until  two  or  three 
others  are  out  of  place.  Love  never  de- 
nounces, only  ambition  does  that.  There  is 
no  such  thing  as  "  righteous  "  anger  of  justifi- 
abl  e  killing. 

If  you  do  not  allow  one  to  become  a  lion, 
he  will  become  a  fox.  Women  are  a  power, 
only  now  it  is  more  for  evil  because  man 
oppresses  her ;  she  is  the  fox,  but  when  she  is 
no  longer  oppressed,  she  will    become  the  lion. 

Ordinarily  speaking,  spiritual  aspiration 
ought  to  be  balanced  through  the  intellect, 
otherwise  it  may  degenerate  into  mere  senti- 
mentality. 

*  *  *  * 

All  theists  agree   that  behind  the  changeable 

there  is  an  Unchangeable,  though  they  vary  in 
92 


Inspired  Talks 

their  conception  of  the  Ultimate.  Buddha 
denied  this  in  toto.  "There  is  no  Brahman, 
no  Atman,  no  soul"  he  said. 

As  a  character  Buddha  was  the  greatest  the 
world  has  ever  seen  ;  next  to  him  Christ.  But 
the  teachings  of  Krishna  as  taught  by  the  Gita 
are  the  grandest  the  world  has  ever  known. 
He  who  wrote  that  wonderful  poem  was  one  of 
those  rare  souls  whose  lives  send  a  wave  of 
regeneration  through  the  world.  The  human 
race  will  never  again  see  such   a    brain    as   his 

who  wrote  the  Gita. 

*  *  *  * 

There  is  only  one  Power,  whether  manifest- 
ing as  evil   or  good.     God  and  the   devil   are 
the    same  river  with  the  water  flowing  in   op- 
>osite  directions. 

Monday,  July  1st.  (Sri  Rdmakrishna  Deva.) 
Sri  Ramakrishna  was  the  son  of  a  very  ortho- 
dox Brahmin,  who  would  refuse  even    a  gift 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

from  any  but  a  special  caste  of  Brahmins ; 
neither  might  he  work,  nor  even  be  a  priest  in 
a  temple,  nor  sell  books  nor  serve  anyone. 
He  could  only  have  u  what  fell  from  the  skies" 
(alms)  and  even  then  it  must  not  come  through 
a  "fallen"  Brahmin.  Temples  have  no  hold  on 
the  Hindu  religion;  if  they  were  all  destroyed, 
religion  would  not  be  affected  a  grain.  A  man 
must  only  build  a  house  for  "God  and  guests," 
to  build  for  himself  would  be  selfish;  therefore 
he  erects  temples  as  dwelling  places  for  God. 

Owing  to  the  extreme  poverty  of  bis  family, 
Sri  Ramakrishna  was  obliged  to  become  in  his 
boyhood  a  priest  in  a  temple  dedicated  to 
Divine  Mother,  also  called  Prakriti  or  Kali, 
represented  by  a  female  figure  standing  with  her 
feet  on  a  male  figure,  indicating  that  until  Mdyd 
lifts,  we  can  know  nothing.  Brahman  is  neuter, 
unknown  and  unknowable,  but  to  be  objectified 
he  covers  himself  with  a  veil  of  Mdyd,  becomes 

94 


Inspired  Talks 

the  Mother  of  the  Universe  and  so  brings  forth 
the  creation.  The  prostrate  figure  (Siva,  or  God) 
has  become  Sava  (dead,  or  lifeless)  by  being 
covered  by  Mdyd.  The  Jndni  says  "  I  will 
uncover  God  by  force  "  (Advaitism)  ;  but  the 
dualist  says  "  we  will  uncover  God  by  praying 
to  Mother,  begging  Her  to  open  the  door  to 
which  She  alone  has  the  key." 

The  daily  service  of  the  Mother  Kali  gradu- 
ally awakened  such  intense  devotion  in  the 
heart  of  the  young  priest  that  he  could  no 
longer  carry  on  the  regular  temple  worship,  so 
he  abandoned  his  duties  and  retired  to  a  small 
woodland  in  the  temple  compound,  where  he 
gave  himself  up  entirely  to  meditation.  These 
woods  were  on  the  bank  of  the  river  Ganges 
and  one  day  the  swift  current  bore  to  his  very 
feet  just  the  necessary  materials  to  build  him  a 
little  hut.  In  this  hut  he  stayed  and  wept  and 
prayed,  taking  no  thought  for    the   care   of   his 

95 


Vedanta  Philosophy, 

body  or  for  aught  except  his  Divine  Mother. 
A  relative  fed  him  once  a  day  and  watched  over 
him.  Later  came  a  girl  Sanydsin  or  ascetic,  to 
help  him  find  his  u  Mother."  Whatever  tea- 
chers he  needed  came  to  him  unsought  ;  from 
every  sect  some  holy  saint  would  come  and 
offer  to  teach  him  and  to  each  he  listened 
eagerly.  But  he  worshipped  only  Mother  ; 
all  to  him  was  Mother. 

Sri  Ramakrishna  never  spoke  a  harsh  word 
against  anyone.  So  beautifully  tolerant  was  he 
that  every  sect  thought  that  he  belonged  to 
them.  He  loved  everyone.  To  him  all  reli- 
gions were  true.  He  found  a  place  for  each 
one.  He  was  free,  but  free  in  love,  not  in 
"  thunder.''  The  mild  type  creates,  the  thun- 
dering type  spreads.  Paul  was  the  thundering 
type  to  spread  the  light.* 

*  And  it  has  been  said  by  many  that  Swami  Vivekananda 
himself  was  a  kind  of  St.  Paul  to  Sri  Ramakrishna.  [Ed.] 

96 


Inspired  Talks 

The  age  of  St.  Paul,  however,  is  gone  ;  we  are 
to  be  the  new  lights  for  this  day.    A  self-ad- 
justing organization  is  the  great    need  of  our 
time.    When  we  can  get  one,  that  will   be  the 
last  religion  of  the   world.     The  wheel  must 
turn,  and  we  should  help  it,  not   hinder.     The 
waves  of  religious  thought  rise  and  fall  and  on 
the  topmost  one  stands  the  u   prophet  of  the 
period."   Ramakrishna  came  to   teach  the  reli- 
gion  of  today,   constructive,   not    destructive. 
He  had  to  go  afresh  to  Nature  to  ask  for  facts 
and  he  got  scientific  religion,   which  never  says 
11  believe,"  but  "  see";  "  I  see,  and  you  too  can 
see."  Use  the  same  means  and  you  will   reach 
the  same  vision.     God  will  come  to  everyone, 
harmony  is  within  the  reach  of  all.     Sri  Rama- 
krishna's  teachings  are    "  the  gist  of    Hindu- 
ism ;"  they  were  not  peculiar  to  him.     Nor  did 
he  claim  that  they   were  -,  he  cared  naught  for 
name  or  fame. 


97 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

He  began  to  preach  when  he  was  about 
forty  ;  but  he  never  went  out  to  do  it.  He 
waited  for  those  who  wanted  his  teachings  to 
come  to  him.  In  accordance  with  Hindu 
custom,  he  was  married  by  his  parents  in  early 
youth  to  a  little  girl  of  five,  who  remained  at 
home  with  her  family  in  a  distant  village,  un- 
conscious of  the  great  struggle  through  which 
her  young  husband  was  passing.  When  she 
reached  maturity,  he  was  already  deeply  ab- 
sorbed in  religious  devotion.  She  travelled  on 
foot  from  her  home  to  the  temple  at  Dakshi- 
neswara  where  he  was  then  living,  and  as  soon 
as  she  saw  him  she  recognized  what  he  was, 
for  she  herself  was  a  great  soul,  pure  and  holy, 
who  only  desired  to  help  his  work  and  never  to 
drag  him  down  to  the  level  of  the  grihastha 
(householder). 

Sri  Ramakrishna  is  worshipped  in  India 
as    one   of    the  great   Incarnations    and    his 

98 


Inspired  Talks 

birthday    is  celebrated   there    as    a    religious 
festival. 

*  *  *  * 

A  curious  round  stone  is  the  emblem  of 
Vishnu,  the  omnipresent.  Each  morning  a 
priest  comes  in,  offers  sacrifice  to  the  idol, 
waves  incense  before  him,  then  puts  him  to 
bed  and  apologizes  to  God  for  worshipping 
him  in  that  way,  because  he  can  only  conceive 
of  him  through  an  image  or  by  means  of  some 
material  object.  He  bathes  the  idol,  clothes 
him,  and  puts  his  divine  self  into  the  idol    "  to 

make  it  alive.'' 

•  •  *  ,  « 

There  is  a  sect  which  says  :  "It  is  weakness 
to  worship  only  the  good  and  beautiful,  we 
ought  also  to  love  and  worship  the  hideous 
and  the  evil/'  This  sect  prevails  all  over 
Thibet  and  they  have  no  marriage.  In  India 
proper  they  cannot  exist  openly,    but  organize 

99 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

secret  societies.  No  decent  men  will  belong  to 
them  except  sub  rosa.  Thrice  communism  was 
tried  in  Thibet  and  thrice  it  failed.  They  use 
tapas  and  with  immense  success  as  far  as  power 
is  concerned. 

Tapas  means  literally  "to  burn."  It  is  a  kind 
of  penance  to  "  heat  "  the  higher  nature.  It  is 
sometimes  in  the  form  of  a  sunrise  to  sunset 
vow,  such  as  repeating  Om  all  day  incessantly. 
These  actions  will  produce  a  certain  power 
that  you  can  convert  into  any  form  you  wish, 
spiritual  or  material.  This  idea  of  tapas  pene- 
trates the  whole  of  Hindu  religion.  The 
Hindus  even  say  that  God  made  tapas  to  create 
the  world.  It  is  a  mental  instrument  with 
which   to  do   everything.     rt  Everything  in  the 

three  worlds  can  be  caught  by  tapas!' 

*  *  *  • 

People  who  report  about  sects  with  which 
they  are  not  in   sympathy  are  both  conscious 

100 


Inspired  Talks 

and  unconscious  liars.  A  believer  in  one  sect  can 
rarely  see  truth  in  others. 

***** 
A  great  Bhakta  (Hanuman)  once  said  when 
asked  what  day  of  the  month  it  was,"  God  is 
my  eternal  date,  no  other  date  I  care  for.*' 

Tuesday,  July  2nd  {The  Divine  Mother.) 
Sdktas  worship  the  Universal  Energy  as  Mother, 
the  sweetest  name  they  know;  for  the  mother  is 
the  highest  ideal  of  womanhood  in  India.  When 
God  is  worshipped  as  "Mother,"  as  Love,  the 
Hindus  call  it  the"  right-handed"  way  and  it 
leads  to  spirituality,  but  never  to  material 
prosperity.  When  God  is  worshipped  on  His 
terrible  side,  that  is,  in  the"left-handed"  way, 
it  leads  usually  to  great  material  prosperity,  but 
rarely  to  spirituality;  and  eventually  it  leads  to 
degeneration  and  the  obliteration  of  the  race 
who  practise  it. 

101 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Mother  is  the  first  manifestation  of  power 
and  is  considered  a  higher  idea  than  father. 
With  the  name  of  mother  comes  the  idea  of 
Sakti,  Divine  Energy  and  omnipotence,  just  as 
the  baby  believes  its  mother  to  be  all-powerful, 
able  to  do  anything.  The  Divine  Mother  is 
the  Kundalini  sleeping  in  us,  without  worship- 
ping Her  we  can  never  know  ourselves.  All- 
merciful,  ail-powerfui,  omnipresent  are  attri- 
butes of  Divine  Mother.  She  is  the  sum-total 
of  the  energy  in  the  universe.  Every  manifest- 
ation of  power  in  the  universe  is  "Mother." 
She  is  Life,  She  is  Intelligence,  She  is  Love. 
She  is  in  the  universe,  yet  separate  from  it.  She 
is  a  person  and  can  be  seen  and  known  (as  Sri 
Ramakrishna  saw  and  new  Her).  Established 
in  the  idea  of  Mother  we  can  do  anything.  She 
quickly  answers  prayer. 

She  can  show  Herself  to  us  in  any  form  at 
any  moment.    Divine    Mother  can  have   form 

102 


Inspired  Talks 

(rupa)  and  name  (ndma),  or  name  without 
form,  and  as  we  worship  Her  in  these  various 
aspects  we  can  rise  to  pure  Being,  having 
neither  form  nor  name. 

The  sum-total  of  all  the  cells  in  an  organism 
is  one  person,  so  each  soul  is  like  one  cell  and 
the  sum  of  them  is  God,  and  beyond  that  is 
the  Absolute.  The  sea  calm  is  the  Absolute; 
the  same  sea  in  waves  is  Divine  Mother.  She 
is  time,  space  and  causation.  God  is  Mother 
and  has  two  natures,  the  conditioned  and  the 
unconditioned.  As  the  former,  She  is  God, 
Nature  and  soul  (man).  As  the  latter,  She  is 
unknown  and  unknowable.  Out  of  the  Un- 
conditioned came  the  trinity,  God,  Nature  and 
soul,  the  triangle  of  existence.  This  is  the 
Visishtadvaitist  idea. 

A  bit  of  Mother,  a  drop,  was  Krishna, 
another  was  Buddha,  another  was  Christ. 
The  w  orship  of  even  one  spark  of  Mother  in 

103 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

our  earthly  mother  leads  to  greatness.     Wor- 
ship Her  if  you  want  love  and  wisdom. 

Wednesday,  July  3rd. 

Generally  speaking,  human  religion  begins 
with  fear.  uThe  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the 
beginning  of  wisdom.''  But  later  comes 
the  higher  idea  "Perfect  love  casteth  out  fear." 
Traces  of  fear  will  remain  with  us  until  we  get 
knowledge,  know  what  God  is.  Christ,  being 
man  had  to  see  impurity  and  denounced 
it ;  but  God  infinitely  higher,  does  not  see 
iniquity  and  cannot  be  angry.  Denunciation 
is  never  the  highest,  David's  hands  were 
smeared  with  blood;  he  could  not  build  the 
temple. 

The  more  we  grow  in  love  and  virtue  and 
holiness,  the  more  we  see  love  and  virtue  and 
holiness  outside.  All  condemnation  of  others 
really  condemns  ourselves.     Adjust  the  micro- 

104 


Inspired  Talks 

cosm  (which  is  in  your  power  to  do)  and  the 
macrocosm  will  adjust  itself  for  you  .  It  is  like 
the  hydrostatic  paradox,  one  drop  of  water  can 
balance  the  universe.  We  cannot  see  outside 
what  we  are  not  inside.  The  universe  is  to 
us  what  the  huge  engine  is  to  the  miniature 
engine  ;  an  indication  of  any  error  in  the 
tiny  engine  leads  us  to  imagine  trouble  in  the 
huge  one. 

Every  step  that  has  been  really  gained  in  the 
world  has  been  gained  by  love  ;  criticising  can 
never  do  any  good,  it  has  been  tried  for 
thousands  of  years.  Condemnation  accom- 
plishes nothing. 

A  real  Vedantist  must  sympathize  with 
all.  Monism  or  absolute  oneness  is  the  very 
soul  of  Vedanta.  Dualists  naturally  tend  to 
become  intolerant,  to  think  theirs  the  only 
way.  The  Vaishnavas  in  India,  who  are 
dualists,  are    a    most  intolerant  sect.    Among 

105 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

the  Saivas,  another  dualistic  sect,  the  story 
is  told  of  a  devotee  by  the  name  of  Ghanta- 
karna,  or  the  Bell. eared,  who  was  so  devout 
a  worshipper  of  Siva  that  he  did  not  wish 
even  to  hear  the  name  of  any  other  deity,  so 
he  wore  two  bells  tied  to  his  ears  in  order 
to  drown  the  sound  of  any  voice  uttering 
other  Divine  names.  On  account  of  his 
intense  devotion  to  Siva  the  latter  wanted 
to  teach  him  that  there  was  no  difference 
between  Siva  and  Vishnu,  so  he  appeared 
before  him  as  half  Vishnu  and  half  Siva.  At 
that  moment  the  devotee  was  waving  incense 
before  him,  but  so  great  was  the  bigotry  of 
Ghantakarna  that  when  he  saw  the  fragrance 
of  the  incense  entering  the  nostril  of  Vishnu, 
he  thrust  his  finger  into  it  to  prevent  the  god 
from  enjoying  the  sweet  smell. 

*  •  *  * 

The  meat-eating  animal,  like  the   lion,   gives 
106 


Inspired  Talks 

one  blow  and  subsides,  but  the  patient  bullock 
goes  on  all  day,  eating  and  sleeping  as  it  walks. 
The  u  live  Yankee ''  cannot  compete  with  the 
rice-eating  Chinese  coolie.  While  military 
power  dominates,  meat-eating  will  prevail  5  but 
with  the  advance  of  science  fighting  will  grow 
less  and  then  the  vegetarians  will  come  in. 

V  v  V  * 

We  divide  ourselves  into  two  to  love  God, — 
myself  loving  my  Self.  God  has  created  me 
and  I  have  created  God.  We  create  God  in  our 
image  ;  it  is  we  who  create  Him  to  be  our  master, 
it  is  not  God  who  makes  us  His  servants.  When 
we  know  that  we  are  one  with  God,  that  we 
and  He  are  friends,  then  come  equality  and 
freedom.  So  long  as  you  hold  yourself  separa- 
ted by  a  hair's  breadth  from  this  Eternal  One, 
fear  cannot  go. 

Never  ask  that  foolish  question,  what  good 
will   it  do  to   the   world  ?    Let  the   world   go. 

107 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Love  and  ask  nothing  ;  love  and  look  for  noth- 
ing further.  Love  and  forget  all  the  "isms." 
Drink  the  cup  of  love  and  become  mad.  Say 
u  Thine,  O  Thine  forever  O  Lord  ! "  and  plunge 
in,  forgetting  all  else.  The  very  idea  of  God  is 
love.  Seeing  a  cat  loving  her  kittens,  stand  and 
pray.  God  has  become  manifest  there  ;  literally 
believe  this.  Repeat H  I  am  Thine,  I  am  Thine", 
for  we  can  see  God  everywhere.  Do  not  seek 
for  Him,  just  see  Him. 

11  May  the   Lord  ever  keep  you  alive,    light  of 

the  world,  soul  of  the  universe  !" 

*  *  *  # 

The  Absolute  cannot  be  worshipped,  so  we 
must  worship  a  manifestation,  such  a  one  as 
has  our  nature.  Jesus  had  our  nature  ;  he 
became  the  Christ  ;  so  can  we  and  so  must  we. 
Christ  and  Buddha  were  the  names  of  a 
state  to  be  attained;  Jesus  and  Gautama  were 
the    persons    to    manifest  it.      "  Mother ''    is 

108 


Inspired  Talks 

the  first  and  highest  manifestation,  next  the 
Christs  and  Buddhas.  We  make  our  own  en- 
vironment and  we  strike  the  fetters  off.  The 
Atman  is  the  fearless.  When  we  pray  to  a 
God,  outside  it  is  good,  only  we  do  not 
know  what  we  do.  When  we  know  the  Self, 
we  understand.  The  highest  expression  of  love 
is  unification. 

"  There  was  a  time  when  I  was  a  woman 

and  he  was  a  man, 
Still  love  grew  until  there  was  neither  he 

nor  I; 
Only  I  remember  faintly  there  was  a  time 

when  there  were  two, 
But  love  came  between  and  made  them 
one." 

(Persian  Sufi  Poem). 
Knowledge  exists    eternally  and   is  co-exis- 
tent with   God.    The   man    who   discovers   a 
spiritual  law  is  inspired   and   what  he  brings 

109 


Vedanta   Philosophy 

is  revelation,  but  revelation  too  is  eternal, 
not  to  be  crystallized  as  final  and  then  blindly 
followed.  The  Hindus  have  been  criticised 
so  many  years  by  their  conquerors  that  they 
(the  Hindus)  dare  to  criticise  their  religion 
themselves,  and  this  makes  them  free.  Their 
foreign  rulers  struck  off  their  fetters  without 
knowing  it.  The  most  religious  people  on 
earth,  the  Hindus  have  actually  no  sense 
of  blasphemy ;  to  speak  of  holy  things  in 
any  way  is  to  them  in  itself  a  sanctifica- 
tion.  Nor  have  they  any  artificial  respect  for 
prophets  or  books,  or  for  hypocritical  piety. 

The  Church  tries  to  fit  Christ  into  it,  not 
the  Church  into  Christ;  so  only  those  writ- 
ings were  preserved  that  suited  the  purpose  in 
hand.  Thus  the  books  are  not  to  be  depended 
upon  and  book- worship  is  the  worst  kind  of 
idolatry  to  bind  our  feet.  All  has  to  conform 
to  the   book, — science,    religion,   philosophy  ; 

110 


Inspired  Talks 

it  is  the  most  horrible  tyranny,  this  tyranny 
of  the  Protestant  Bible.  Every  man  in  Chris- 
tian countries  has  a  huge  cathedral  on  his 
head,  and  on  top  of  that  a  Book,  and  yet  man 
lives  and  grows  !  Does  not  this  prove  that  man 
is  God  ? 

Man  is  the  highest  being  that  exists  and 
this  is  the  greatest  world.  We  can  have  no 
conception  of  God  higher  than  man,  so  our 
God  is  man  and  man  is  God.  When  we  rise 
and  go  beyond  and  find  something  higher, 
we  have  to  jump  out  of  the  mind,  out  of 
body  and  the  imagination  and  leave  this 
world  ;  when  we  rise  to  be  the  Absolutei 
we  are  no  longer  in  this  world.  Man  is 
the  apex  of  the  only  world  we  can  ever 
know.  All  we  know  of  animals  is  only  by 
analogy,  we  judge  them  by  what  we  do  and 
feel  ourselves. 

The  sum-total  of  knowledge  is  ever  the  same, 

111 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

only  sometimes  it  is  more  manifested  and 
sometimes  less.  The  only  source  of  it  is  within 
and  there  only  is  it  found. 

*  *  i  * 

All  poetry,  painting  and  music  is  feeling  ex- 
pressed through  words,  through  color,  through 
sound. 

*  *  *  * 

Blessed  are  those  upon  whom  their  sins  are 
quickly  visited,  their  account  is  the  sooner 
balanced  !  Woe  to  those  whose  punishment  is 
deferred,  it  is  the  greater  ! 

Those  who  have  attained  sameness  are  said 
to  be  living  in  God.  All  hatred  is  killing  the 
"Self  by  the  self/'  therefore  love  is  the  law  of 
life.  To  rise  to  this  is  to  be  perfect,  but  the 
more  perfect  we  are,  the  less  work  (so-called)  can 
we  do.  The  sdttvikas  see  and  know  that  all  is 
mere  child's  play  and  do  not  trouble  them- 
selves about  anything. 

112 


Inspired  Talks 

It  is  easy  to  strike  a  blow,  but  tremendously 
hard  to  stay  the  hand,  stand  still  and  say  :  "  In 
Thee  O  Lord  I  take  refuge, "  and  then  wait  for 
Him  to  act. 

Friday,  July  5th. 

Until  you  are  ready  to  change  any  minute 
you  can  never  see  the  truth  ;  but  you  must, 
hold   fast     and   be   steady   in   the    search   for 

truth. 

*  •  *  * 

Chdrvdkas,  a  very  ancient  sect  in  India,  were 
rank  materialists.  They  have  died  out  now 
and  most  of  their  books  are  lost.  They  claim- 
ed that  the  soul,  being  the  product  of  the  body 
and  its  forces,  died  with  it  ;  that  there  was  no 
proof  of  its  further  existence.  They  denied 
inferential  knowledge,  accepting  only  percep- 
tion by  the  senses. 

*  *  *  * 

H  113 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Samddhi  is  when  the  Divine  and  human  are 

in  one,  or  it  is  u  bringing  sameness." 

*  *  *  * 

Materialism  says,  The  voice  of  freedom  is  a 
delusion.  Idealism  says,  The  voice  that  tells  of 
bondage  is  delusion.  Vedanta  says,  You  are 
free  and  not  free  at  the  same  time  ;  never  free 
on  the  earthly  plane,  but  ever  free  on  the 
spiritual. 

Be  beyond  both  freedom  and  bondage. 

We  are  Siva,  we  are  immortal  knowledge 
beyond  the  senses. 

Infinite  power  is  back  of  everyone  ;  pray  to 
"Mother  "and  it  will  come  to  you. 

"  O  Mother,  giver  of  Vdk  (eloquence),  Thou 
self-existent,  come  as  the  Vdk  upon  my  lips." 
{Hindu  invocation). 

"  That  Mother  whose  voice  is  in  the  thunder, 
come  Thou  in  me  !  Kdli,  Thou  time  eternal, 
Thou  force  irresistible,  Sakti,  Power  !" 

114 


Inspired  Talks 

Saturday,  July  Uh.  (To-day  we  had  Sankard- 
charya's  commentary  on  Vydsa's  Vedanta  Sutras) 
Om  tat  sat  ! 

According  to  Sankara,  there  are  two  phases 
of  the  universe,  one  is  I  and  the  other  thou  ; 
and  they  are  as  contrary  as  light  and  darkness, 
so  it  goes  without  saying  that  neither  can  be 
derived  from  the  other.  On  the  subject,  the 
object  has  been  superimposed  ;  the  subject  is 
the  only  reality,  the  other  a  mere  appearance. 
The  opposite  view  is  untenable.  Matter  and 
the  external  world  are  but  the  soul  in  a  certain 
state  ;  in  reality  there  is  only  one. 

All  our  world  comes  from  truth  and  untruth 
coupled  together.  Samsdra  (life)  is  the  result 
of  the  contradictory  forces  acting  upon  us,  like 
the  diagonal  motion  of  a  ball  in  a  parallelogram 
of  forces.  The  world  is  God  and  is  real,  but 
that  is  not  the  world  we  see  ;  just  as  we  see 
silver  in  the  mother-of-pearl  where  it  is  not. 

115 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

This  is  what  is  known  as  Adhydsa  or  super- 
imposition,  that  is,  a  relative  existence  depen- 
dent upon  a  real  one,  as  when  we  recall  a 
scene  we  have  seen  ;  for  the  time  it  exists  for 
us,  but  that  existence  is  not  real.  Or  some  sayr 
it  is  as  when  we  imagine  heat  in  water,  which 
does  not  belong  to  it  ;  so  really  it  is  something 
which  has  been  put  where  it  does  not  belong, 
"  taking  the  thing  for  what  it  is  not."  We  see 
reality,  but  distorted  by  the  medium  through 
which  we  see  it. 

You  can  never  know  yourself  except  as 
objectified.  When  we  mistake  one  thing  for 
another,  we  always  take  the  thing  before  us  as 
the  real,  never  the  unseen  ;  thus  we  mistake 
the  object  for  the  subject.  The  Atman  never 
becomes  the  object.  Mind  is  the  internal  sense 
the  outer  senses  are  its  instruments.  In  the 
subject  is  a  trifle  of  the  objectifying  power  that 
enables  him  to  know  u  I  am  ";   but  the  subject 

116 


Inspired  Talks 

is  the  object  of  its  own  self,  never  of  the  mind 
or  the  senses.  You  can,  however,  superimpose 
one  idea  on  another  idea,  as  when  we  say  "  the 
sky  is  blue",  the  sky  itself  being  only  an  idea. 
Science  and  nescience  are  all  there  are,  but 
the  Self  is  never  affected  by  any  nescience. 
Relative  knowledge  is  good,  because  it  leads  to 
absolute  knowledge;  but  neither  the  knowledge 
of  the  senses,  nor  of  the  mind,  nor  even  of  the 
Vedas  is  true,  since  they  are  all  within  the 
realm  of  relative  knowledge.  First  get  rid  of 
the  delusion  "I  am  the  body",  then  only  can 
we  want  real  knowledge.     Man's  knowledge  is 

only  a  higher  degree  of  brute  knowledge. 

*  •  *  * 

One  part  of  the  Vedas  deals  with  Karma, — 
forms  and  ceremonies.  The  other  part  deals 
with  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  and  discusses 
religion.  The  Vedas  in  this  part  teach  of  the 
Self  and  because  they  do,  their  knowledge  is 

117 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

approaching  real  knowledge.  Knowledge  of 
the  Absolute  depends  upon  no  book,  nor  upon 
anything;  it  is  absolute  in  itself.  No  amount 
of  study  will  give  this  knowledge;  it  is  not 
theory,  it  is  realization.  Cleanse  the  dust  from 
the  mirror,  purify  your  own  mind,  and  in  a 
flash  you  know  that  you  are  Brahman. 

God  exists,  not  birth  or  death,  not  pain,  nor 
misery,  nor  murder,  nor  change,  nor  good  or 
evil;  all  is  Brahman.  We  take  the  "rope  for 
the  serpent,"  the  error  is  ours... We  can  only 
do  good  when  we  love  God  and  He  reflects  our 
love.  The  murderer  is  God  and  the  "clothing 
of  murderer"  is  only  superimposed  upon 
him.  Take  him  by  the  hand  and  tell  him  the 
truth. 

Soul  has  no  caste  and  to  think  it  has  is  a 
delusion,  so  are  life  and  death  or  any  motion 
or  quality.  The  Atman  never  changes,  never 
goes  or  comes.     It  is   the  eternal  Witness  of 

118 


Inspired  Talks 

all  its  own  manifestations,  but  we  take  it  for  the 
manifestation  ;  an  eternal  illusion,  without 
beginning  or  end,  ever  going  on.  The  Vedas, 
however,  have  to  come  down  to  our  level,  for 
if  they  told  us  the  highest  truth  in  the  highest 
way,  we  could  not  understand  it. 

Heaven  is  a  mere  superstition  arising  from 
desire,  and  desire  is  ever  a  yoke,  a  degenera- 
tion. Never  approach,  anything  except  as 
God  ;  for  if  we  do,  we  see  evil ;  because  we 
throw  a  veil  of  delusion  over  what  we  look  at 
and  then  we  see  evil.  Get  free  from  these  il- 
lusions ;  be  blessed.  Freedom  is  to  lose  all 
illusions. 

In  one  sense  Brahman  is  known  to  every 
human  being  ;  he  knows  "  I  am";  but  man 
does  not  know  himself  as  he  is.  We  all 
know  we  are,  but  not  how  we  are.  All 
lower  explanations  are  partial  truths  ;  but  the 
flower,  the    essence  of   the    Vedas  is  that  the 

119 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Self  in  each  of  us  is  Brahman.  Every  pheno- 
menon is  included  in  birth,  growth  and  death  ; 
appearance,  continuance  and  disappearance. 
Our  own  realization  is  beyond  the  Vedas, 
because  even  they  depend  upon  that.  The 
highest  Vedanta  is  the  philosophy  of  the  Be- 
yond. 

To  say  that  creation  has  any  beginning 
is  to  lay  'the  axe  at  the  root  of  all  phi- 
losophy. 

Mdyd  is  the  energy  of  the  universe,  potential 
and  kinetic.  Until  Mother  releases  us,  we 
cannot  get  free. 

The  universe  is  ours  to  enjoy,  but  want 
nothing.  To  want  is  weakness.  Want  makes 
us  beggars  and  we  are  sons  of  the  king,  not 
beggars. 

Sunday  Morning,  fuly  1th. 

Infinite  manifestation  dividing  itself  in  portions 

120 


Inspired  Talks 

still  remains  infinite,  and  each  portion  is  infinite.* 
Brahman  is  the  same  in  two  forms, — change- 
able and  unchangeable,  expressed  and  unex- 
pressed. Know  that  the  Knower  and  the  known 
are  one.  The  Trinity,  the  Knower,  the  known 
and  knowing,  is  manifesting  as  this  universe. 
That  God  the  Yogi  sees  in  meditation,  he  sees 
through  the  power  of  his  own  Self. 

What  we  call  nature,  fate,  is  simply  God's  will. 
So  long  as  enjoyment  is  sought,  bondage 
remains.  Only  imperfection  can  enjoy,  because 
enjoyment  is  the  fulfilling  of  desire.  The 
human  soul  enjoys  Nature.  The  underlying 
reality  of  Nature,  soul  and  God  is  Brahman; 
but   it   (Brahman)  is  unseen,  until  we  bring   it 

*  Infinity  is  one,  without  a  second,  ever  indivisible,  and 
unmanifested.  By  'infinite  manifestation,'  the  Swami 
means  the  universe,  both  visible  and  invisible.  Although  it 
is  made  up  of  countless  forms  which  are  limited  by  their 
very  nature,  still  as  a  whole  it  is  always  infinite  ;  nay  even 
a  portion  of  it  is  infinite,  as  each  such  portion  is  insepara- 
bly united  with  it. 

121 


Vedanta   Philosophy 

out.  It  may  be  brought  out  by  Pramantha  or 
friction,  just  as  we  can  produce  fire  by  friction. 
The  body  is  the  lower  piece  of  wood,  Om  is 
the  pointed  piece  and  dhydna  (meditation)  is 
the  friction.  When  this  is  used,  that  light 
which  is  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  will  burst 
forth  in  the  soul.  Seek  it  through  tapas.  Hold- 
ing the  body  upright,  sacrifice  the  organs  of 
sense  in  the  mind.  The  sense-centres  are  within, 
the  organs  without,  so  drive  them  into  the  mind 
and  through  dhdrana  (concentration)  fix  the 
mind  in  dhydna.  Brahman  is  omnipresent  in 
the  universe  as  is  butter  in  milk,  but  friction 
makes  it  manifest  in  one  pJace.  As  churning 
brings  out  the  butter  in  the  milk,  so  dhydna 
brings  the  realization  of  Brahman  in  the  soul. 
All  Hindu  philosophy  declares  that  there  is 
a  sixth  sense,  the  superconscious,  and  through 
it  comes  inspiration. 


122 


Inspired   Talks 

The   universe  is   motion,    and   friction    will 
eventually  bring  everything  to    an  end  ;  then 
comes  a  rest  and  after  that  all  begins  again. 
*  *  *  * 

So  long  as  the  "  skin  sky  "  surrounds  man,, 
that  is,  so  long  as  he  identifies  himself  with  his 
body,  he  cannot  see  God. 

Sunday  afternoon. 

There  are  six  schools  of  philosophy  in  India 
that  are  regarded  as  orthodox  because  they  be- 
lieve in  the  Vedas. 

Vyasa's  philosophy  is  par  excellence  that  of  the 
Upanishads.  He  wrote  in  Sutra  form,  that  is 
in  brief  algebraical  symbols  without  nominative 
or  verb.  This  caused  so  much  ambiguity  that 
out  of  the  Sutras  came  dualism,  mono-dualism, 
and  monism  or  "  roaring  Vedanta "  ;  and  all 
the  great  commentators  in  these  different 
schools  were  at  times  "  conscious  liars "  in 
order  to  make  the  texts  suit  their  philosophy. 

125 


Vedanta   Philosophy 

The  Upanishads  contain  very  little  history 
of  the  doings  of  any  man,  but  nearly  all  other 
Scriptures  are  largely  personal  histories.  The 
Vedas  deal  almost  entirely  with  philosophy. 
Religion  without  philosophy  runs  into  super- 
stition ;  philosophy  without  religion  becomes 
dry  atheism. 

Visishta-advaita  is  qualified  advaita  (mon- 
ism). Its  expounder  was  Ramanuja.  He  says, 
"  Out  of  the  ocean  of  milk  of  the  Vedas 
Vyasa  has  churned  this  butter  of  philosophy, 
the  better  to  help  mankind."  He  says  again, 
"  All  virtues  and  all  qualities  belong  to  Brahma, 
Lord  of  the  universe.  He  is  the  greatest 
Pttrusha  and  Brahman  (neut.)  is  lower,  or 
the  universe  itself."  Madhva  is  a  thorough- 
going dualist  or  dvaitist.  He  claims  that 
every  caste  and  even  women  might  study  the 
Vedas.  He  quotes  chiefly  from  the  Purdnas. 
He  says  that  Brahman   means  Vishnu,  not  Siva 

124 


Inspired  Talks 

at  all,  because   there   is   no   salvation   except 
through  Vishnu. 

Monday,  July  Sth. 

There  is  no  place  for  reasoning  in  Madhva's 
explanation,  it  is  all  taken  from  the  revelation 
in  the  Vedas. 

Ramanuja  says,  the  Vedas  are  the  holiest 
study.  Let  the  sons  of  the  three  upper  castes 
get  the  Sutras  and  at  eight,  ten,  or  eleven  years 
of  age  begin  the  study,  which  means  going 
to  a  Guru  and  learning  the  Vedas  word  for 
word,  with  perfect  intonation  and  pronuncia- 
tion. 

Japa  is  repeating  the  Holy  Name  ;  through 
this  the  devotee  rises  to  the  Infinite.  The  boat 
of  sacrifice  and  ceremonies  is  very  frail,  we 
need  more  than  that  to  know  Brahman ,  which 
alone  is  freedom.  Liberty  is  nothing  more 
than   destruction   of   ignorance    and   that  can 

125 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

only  go  when  we  know  Brahman.  It  is  not 
necessary  to  go  through  all  these  ceremonials 
to  reach  the  meaning  of  the  Vedanta.  Repeat- 
ing Om  is  enough. 

Seeing  difference  is  the  cause  of  all  misery, 
and  ignorance  is  the  cause  of  seeing  difference. 
That  is  why  ceremonials  are  not  needed,  be- 
cause they  increase  the  idea  of  inequality  ;  you 
practise  them  to  get  rid  of  something,  or  to 
obtain  something. 

Brahman  is  without  action,  At  man  is  Brah~ 
man  and  we  are  Atman  ;  knowledge  like 
this  takes  off  all  error.  It  must  be  heard, 
apprehended  intellectually,  and  lastly  realized. 
Cogitating  is  applying  reason  and  establishing 
this  knowledge  in  ourselves  by  reason.  Realiz- 
ing is  making  it  a  part  of  our  lives  by 
constant  thinking  of  it.  This  constant  thought 
or  dhydnam  is  as  oil  that  pours  in  one  un- 
broken  line  from  vessel  to   vessel  ;    dhydnam 

126 


Inspired  Talks 

rolls  the  mind  in  this  thought  day  and  night 
and  so  helps  us  to  attain  to  liberation.  Think 
always  "  Soham,  Soham"  ;  this  is  almost  as 
good  as  liberation.  Say  it  day  and  night ; 
realization  will  come  as  the  result  of  this  con- 
tinuous cogitation.  This  absolute  and  conti- 
nuous remembrance  of  the  Lord  is  what  is 
meant  by  Bhakti. 

This  Bhakti  is  indirectly  helped  by  all  good 
works.  Good  thoughts  and  good  works  create 
less  differentiation  than  bad  ones,  so  indirectly 
they  lead  to  freedom.  Work,  but  give  up  the 
results  to  the  Lord.  Knowledge  alone  can 
make  us  perfect.  He  who  follows  the  God  of 
Truth  with  devotion,  to  him  the  God  of  Truth 

reveals  Himself. 

*  *  *  * 

We  are  lamps  and  our  burning  is  what  we 

call  "life."    When  the  supply  of  oxygen  gives 

out,  then  the  lamp  must  go  out.     All  we  can 

127 


Vedanta    Philosophy 

do  is  to  keep  the  lamp  clean.  Life  is  a  product, 
a  compound,  and  as  such  must  resolve  itself 
into  its  elements. 

Tuesday,  July  9th. 

Man  as  Atman  is   really  free,  as  man  he  is- 
bound,  changed  by   every  physical  condition. 
As   man,   he   is  a   machine   with   an    idea   of 
freedom ;   but   this  human   body    is   the   best 
and  the  human  mind  the  highest  mind  there  is. 
When  a  man  attains  to  the  Atman  state  he  can 
take  a  body,  making  it  to  suit  himself ;  he  is 
above  law.     This  is  a  statement  and  must  be 
proved.     Each  one  must  prove  it  for  himself ; 
we  may  satisfy  ourselves  but  we  cannot  satisfy 
another.    Raja  Yoga  is  the  only  science  of  reli- 
gion that  can  be  demonstrated,  and  only  what 
I  myself  have  proved  by  experience,  do  I  teach. 
The  full  ripeness  of  reason  is  intuition,   but  in 
tuition  cannot  antagonize  reason. 

128 


Inspired  Talks 

Work  purifies  the  heart  and  so  leads  to  vidyd 
(wisdom).  The  Buddhists  said  doing  good  to 
men  and  to  animals  were  the  only  works  ;  the 
Brahmins  said  that  worship  and  all  ceremonials 
were  equally  "  work"  and  purify  the  mind. 
Sankara  declares  that  M  all  works,  good  and 
bad,  are  against  knowledge."  Actions  tend- 
ing to  ignorance  are  sins,  not  directly,  but 
as  causes,  because  they  tend  to  increase  tamas 
and  rajas.  With  sattva  only,  comes  wisdom. 
Virtuous  deeds  take  off  the  veil  from  knowledge 
and  knowledge  alone  can  make  us  see  God. 

Knowledge  can  never  be  created,  it  can  only 
be  discovered  ;  and  every  man  who  makes  a 
great  discovery  is  inspired.  Only,  when  it  is  a 
spiritual  truth  he  brings,  we  call  him  a  prophet  ; 
and  when  it  is  on  the  physical  plane,  we  call 
him  a  scientific  man  and  we  attribute  more 
importance  to  the  former,  although  the  source 
of  all  truth  is  One. 

I  129 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Sankara  says  Brahman  is  the  essence,  the 
reality  of  all  knowledge  and  that  all  manifesta- 
tion as  Knower,  knowing  and  known  are  mere 
imaginings  in  Brahman.  Ramanuja  attributes 
consciousness  to  God  ;  the  real  monists  attri- 
bute nothing,  not  even  existence  in  any  mean- 
ing that  we  can  attach  to  it.  Ramanuja 
declares  that  God  is  the  essence  of  conscious 
knowledge.  Undifferentiated  consciousness, 
when  differentiated,  becomes  the  world. 

Buddhism,  one  of  the  most  philosophical 
religions  in  the  world,  spread  all  through 
the  populace,  the  common  people  of  India. 
What  a  wonderful  culture  there  must  have 
been  among  the  Aryans  twenty-five  hundred 
years  ago,  to  be  able  to  grasp  such  ideas  ! 

Buddha  was  the  only  great  Indian  philoso- 
pher who  would  not  recognise  caste,  and^not  one 
of  his  followers  remains  in  India.  All  the  other 

130 


Inspired    Talks 

philosophers  pandered  more  or  less  to  social 
prejudices  ;  no  matter  how  high  they  soared, 
still  a  bit  of  the  vulture  remained  in  them.  As 
my  Master  used  to  say,  "  The  vulture  soars 
high  out  of  sight  in  the  sky,  but  his  eye  is  ever 
on  a  bit  of  carrion  on  the  earth." 

*  *  *  * 

The  ancient  Hindus  were  wonderful  scholars, 
veritable  living  encyclopaedias.  They  said, 
11  knowledge  in  books  and  money  in  other 
people's  hands  is  like  no  money  and  no  know- 
ledge at  all." 

Sankara   was  regarded  by  many  as  an  incar- 
nation of   Siva. 

Wednesday,  July  10th. 
There  are  sixty-five  million   Mohammedans 
in  India,  most  of   them    Sufis.*   Sufis  identify 

*  The  influence  of  Hinduism  upon  Mahommedanism  in 
India  gave  rise  to  the  sect  known  as  Sufis  or  Shias.  [Ed.] 

131 


Vedanta   Philosophy 

man  with  God  and  through  them  this  idea  came 
into  Europe.     They  are  also  called  M  Shias.'* 
They  say  "  I  am  that  Truth  ";  but  they  have 
an  esoteric   as    well  as  an   exoteric   doctrine, 
although  Mohammed  himself  did  not  hold  it. 

"Hashshashin"*  has  become  our  word 
"assassin'',  because  the  old  sects  of  Mohamme- 
danism killed  non-believers  as  a  part  of  their 
creed. 

A  pitcher  of  water  has  to  be  present  in  the 
Mohammedan  worship  as  a  symbol  of  God 
filling  the  universe. 

The   Hindus   believe  that  there  will  be   ten 

*  The  name  of  a  military  and  religious  order  existing  in 
Syria  in  the  11th  century  and  famous  for  the  number  of 
secret  murders  committed  by  its  members  in  obedience  to 
the  will  of  their  chief.  The  literal  meaning  of  the  word  is 
"  Hashish-eater  "  and  was  applied  to  the  order  because  of 
their  habitual  use  of  this  special  drug  to  fortify  the  murderers 
for  their  task.     [Ed.] 

132 


! 


Inspired  Talks 

Divine  Incarnations.     Nine  have  been  and  the 
tenth  is  still  to  come. 

*  •  *  * 

Sankara  sometimes  resorts  to  sophistry  in 
order  to  prove  that  the  ideas  in  the  Books  go 
to.  uphold  his  philosophy.  Buddha  was  more 
brave  and  sincere  than  any  teacher.  He  said  : 
"  Believe  no  book  ;  Vedas  *  are  all  humbug. 
If  they  agree  with  me,  so  much  the  better  for 
the  books.  1  am  the  greatest  book  ;  sacrifice 
and  prayer  are  useless."  Buddha  was  the  first 
human  being  to  give  to  the  world  a  complete 
system  of  morality.  He  was  good  for  good's 
sake,  he  loved  for  love's  sake. 

Sankara  says:  God  is  to  be  reasoned  on, 
because  the  Vedas  say  so.  Reason  helps 
inspiration ;  books  and  realized  reason, — or 
individualized  perception — both  are  proofs  of 
God.     The  Vedas  are,  according  to  him,  a  sort 

*By  Vedas  is  here  meant  the  Karma-Kanda  or  first  portion. 

133 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

of  incarnation  of  universal  knowledge.  The 
proof  of  God  is  that  he  brought  forth  the 
Vedas,  and  the  proof  of  the  Vedas  is  that  such 
wonderful  books  could  only  have  been  given 
out  by  Brahman.  They  are  the  mine  of  all 
knowledge  and  they  have  come  out  of  Him 
as  a  man  breathes  out  air  ;  therefore  we  know 
that  He  is  infinite  in  power  and  knowledge. 
He  may  or  may  not  have  created  the  wo  rid  , 
that  is  a  trifle  ;  to  have  produced  the  Vedas 
is  more  important !  The  world  has  come  to 
know  God  through  the  Vedas  ;  no  other  way 
there  is. 

And  so  universal  is  this  belief,  held  by 
Sankara,  in  the  all-inclusiveness  of  the  Vedas 
that  there  is  even  a  Hindu  proverb  that  if  a  man 
loses  his  cow,  he  goes  to  look  for  her  in  the 
Vedas  ! 

Sankara  further  affirms  that  obedience  to 
ceremonial  is   not  knowledge.     Knowledge  of 

134 


Inspired  Talks 

God  is  independent  of  moral  duties,  or  sacri- 
fice, or  ceremonial,  or  what  we  think  or  do  not 
think,  just  as  the  stump  is  not  affected  when 
one  man  takes  it  for  a  ghost  and  another  sees 
it  as  it  is. 

Vedanta  is  necessary  because  neither  reason- 
ing nor  books  can  show  us  God.  He  is  only 
to  be  realized  by  superconscious  perception 
and  Vtdanta  teaches  how  to  attain  that.  You 
must  get  beyond  personal  God  (Isvara)  and 
reach  the  Absolute  Brahman.  God  is  the  per- 
ception of  every  being  ;  He  is  all  there  is  to  be 
perceived.  That  which  says"  1 ,;  is  Brahman,. 
but  although  we,  day  and  night,  perceive  Him, 
we  do  not  know  that  we  are  perceiving  Him. 
As  so  on  as  we  become  aware  of  this  truth,  all 
misery  goes  ;  so  we  must  get  knowledge  of  the 
truth.  Reach  unity  ;  no  more  duality  will  come. 
But  knowledge  does  not  come  by  sacrifice,  but 
by  seeking,  worshipping,  knowing    the   Aiman- 

135 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Brahmavidyd  is  the  highest  knowledge, 
knowing  the  Brahman  ;  lower  knowledge  is 
science.  This  is  the  teaching  of  the  Munda- 
kopanishad,  or  the  Upanishad  for  Sanydsins, 
There  are  two  sorts  of  knowledge, — principal 
and  secondary.  The  unessential  is  that  part  of 
the  Vedas  dealing  with  worship  and  ceremonial, 
also  all  secular  knowledge.  The  essential  is 
that  by  which  we  reach  the  Absolute.  It  (the 
Absolute)  creates  all  from  its  own  nature  ;  there 
is  nothing  to  cause,  nothing  outside.  It  is  all 
energy,  it  is  all  there  is.  He  who  makes  all 
sacrifices  to  himself,  the  Atman,  he  alone 
knows  Brahman.  Fools  think  outside  worship 
the  highest;  fools  think  works  can  give  us  God. 
Only  those  whe  go  through  the  Susumna  (the 
<l  path  "  of  the  Yogis)  reach  the  At  man.  They 
must  go  to  a  Guru  to  learn.  Each  part  has 
the  same  nature  as  the  whole  ;  all  springs  from 
the  Atman.  Meditation  is  the   arrow,   the  whole 

136 


Inspired  Talks 

^oul  going  out  to  God  is  the  bow,  which  speeds 
the  arrow  to  its  mark,  the  Alman.  As  finite 
we  can  never  express  the  Infinite,  but  we  are 
the  Infinite.  Knowing  this  we  argue  with  no 
one. 

Divine  wisdom  is  to  be  got  by  devotion, 
meditation  and  chastity.  tl  Truth  alone 
triumphs,  and  not  untruth."  Through  truth 
alone  the  way  is  spread  to  Brahman,  where 
alone  love  and  truth  are. 

Thursday,  July  11th. 

Without  mother-love  no  creation  could 
continue.  Nothing  is  entirely  physical,  nor  yet 
entirely  metaphysical  ;  one  presupposes  the 
other  and  explains  the  other.  All  Theists  agree 
that  there  is  a  background  to  this  visible 
universe,  they  differ  as  to  the  nature  or 
character  of  that  background.  Materialists  say 
there  is  no  background. 

137 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

In  all  religions  the  superconscious  state  is 
identical.  Hindus,  Christians,  Mohammedans, 
Buddhists,  and  even  those  of  no  creed,  all  have 
the  very  same  experience  when  they  transcend 
the  body. 


•  *  ,  * 


* 


The  purest  Christians  in  the  world  were  es- 
tablished in  India  by  the  Apostle  Thomas 
about  twenty-five  years  after  the  death  of 
Jesus.  This  was  while  the  Anglo-Saxons  were 
still  savages,  painting  their  bodies  and  living  in 
caves.  The  Christians  in  India  once  number- 
ed about  three  millions,  but  now  there  are 
about  one  million. 

Christianity  is  always  propagated  by  the 
sword.  How  wonderful  that  the  disciples  of 
such  a  gentle  soul  should  kill  so  much  !  The 
three  missionary  religions  are  the  Buddhist, 
Mohammedan  and  Christian.  The  three  older 
ones,   Hinduism,  Judaism  and  Zoroastrianism,, 

138 


Inspired  Talks 

never  sought  to  make  converts.  Buddhists 
never  killed,  but  converted  three-quarters  of  the 
world  at  one  time  by  pure  gentleness. 

The  Buddhists  were  the  most  logical  agnos- 
tics. You  can  really  stop  nowhere  between 
nihilism  and  absolutism.  The  Buddhists  were 
intellectually  all-destroyers,  carrying  their 
theory  to  its  ultimate  logical  issue.  The  Ad- 
vaitists  also  worked  out  their  theory  to  its 
logical  conclusion  and  reached  the  Absolute, 
one  identified  Unit  Substance,  out  of  which 
all  phenomena  are  being  manifested.  Both 
Buddhists  and  Advaitists  have  a  feeling  of 
identity  and  non-identity  at  the  same  time  ; 
one  of  these  feelings  must  be  false  and  one 
true.  The  nihilist  puts  the  reality  in  non- 
identity,  the  realist  puts  the  reality  in  identity  ; 
and  this  is  the  fight  which  occupies  the  whole 
world.     This  is  the  "  tug  of  war." 

139 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

The  realist  asks,  "  How  does  the  nihilist  get 
any  idea  of  identity  ?"  How  does  the  revolv- 
ing light  appear  a  circle  ?  A  point  of  rest 
alone  explains  motion.  The  nihilist  can  never 
explain  the  genesis  of  the  delusion  that  there  is 
a  background  ;  neither  can  the  idealist  explain 
how  the  One  becomes  the  many.  The  only 
explanation  must  come  from  beyond  the  sense- 
plane  ;  we  must  rise  to  the  superconscious,  to 
a  state  entirely  beyond  sense  perception.  That 
metaphysical  power  is  the  further  instrument 
that  the  idealist  alone  can  use.  He  can  experi- 
ence the  Absolute  ;  the  man  Vivekananda  can 
resolve  himself  into  the  Absolute  and  then 
come  back  to  the  man  again.  For  him,  then, 
the  problem  is  solved  and  secondarily  for 
others,  for  he  can  show  the  way  to  others. 
Thus  religion  begins  where  philosophy  ends. 
The  "good  to  the  world''  will  be  that  what  is 
now  superconscious  for  us  will  in  ages  to  come 

140 


Inspired  Talks 

be  the  conscious  for  all.  Religion  is  there- 
fore the  highest  work  the  world  has;  and 
because  man  has  unconsciously  felt  this,  he 
has  clung  through  all  the  ages  to  the  idea  of 
religion. 

Religion  the  great  milch  cow  has  given  many 
kicks,  but  never  mind,  it  gives  a  great  deal  of 
milk.  The  milkman  does  not  mind  the  kick 
of  the  cow  which  gives  much  milk.  Religion  is 
the  greatest  child  to  be  born,  the  great  "moon 
of  realization,"  let  us  feed  it  and  help  it  grow 
and  it  will  become  a.  giant.  King  Desire  and 
King  Knowledge  fought  and  just  as  the  latter 
was  about  to  be  defeated,  a  child  was  born, 
to  him,  Vedanta,  and  saved  the  victory  to 
him.  Then  Love  (Bhakti)  and  Knowledge 
married  and  "  lived  happy  ever  after."  Love 
concentrates  all  the  power  of  the  will  without 
effort,  as  when  a  man  falls  in  love  with  a. 
woman. 

141 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

The  path  of  devotion  is  natural  and 
pleasant.  Philosophy  is  taking  the  mountain 
stream  back  to  its  source  by  force.  It  is  a 
quicker  method  but  very  hard.  Philosophy 
says,  "check  everything."  Devotion  says, 
"give  up  all  to  the  stream,  have  eternal  self- 
surrender."  It  is  a  longer  way,  but  easier  and 
happier. 

"Thine  am  1  forever;  henceforth  whatever 
I  do,  it  is  Thou  doing  it.  No  more  is  there  any 
me  or  mine." 

"Having  no  money  to  give,  no  brains  to 
learn,  no  time  to  practice  Yoga,  to  Thee, 
O  sweet  One,  I  give  myself,  to  Thee  my  body 
and  mind." 

No  amount  of  ignorance  or  wrong  ideas  can 
put  a  barrier  between  the  soul  aud  God.  Even 
if  there  be  no  God,  still  hold  fast  to  love.  It  is 
better  to  die  seeking  a  God  than  as  a  dog 
seeking  only  carrion.    Chose  the  highest  ideal 

142 


Inspired  Talks 

and  give  your  life  up  to  that.  Death  being  so 
certain,  it  is  the  highest  thing  to  give  up  life 
for  a  great  purpose. 

Love  will  painlessly  attain  to  philosophy  ; 
then  after  knowledge  comes  Pardbhakti  (su- 
preme devotion). 

Knowledge  is  critical  and  makes  a  great 
fuss  over  everything ;  but  Love  says  u  God 
will  show  His  real  nature  to  me  "  and 
.accepts  all. 

RABBIA. 

Rabbia,  sick  upon  her  bed, 
By  two  saints  was  visited, — 

Holy  Malik,  Hassan  wise, 
Men  of  mark  in  Moslem  eyes. 

Hassan  said,  k  Whose  prayer  is  pure, 
Will  God's  chastisements  endure." 

Malik,  from  a  deeper  sense 
Uttered  his  experience  : — 

143 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

"  He  who  loves  his  master's  choice 
Will  in  chastisement  rejoice" 

Rabbia  saw  some  selfish  will 
In  their  maxims  lingering  still, 

And  replied  ;  "  O  men  of  grace, 
He  who  sees  his  Master's  face 

Will  not  in  his  prayers  recall 
That  he  is  chastised  at  all  !" 

Persian  Poem, 

Friday,  July  12th.  (Sankara's  Commentary)*. 

Fourth  Vyasa  Sutra:  "  Atman  (is)  the  aim  of 
all." 

The  Isvara  is  to  be  known  from  the  Vedanta  ; 
all  Vedas  point  to  Him  (who  is  the  Cause  ;  the 
Creator,  Preserver  and  Destroyer).  Isvara  is 
the  unification  of  the  Trinity,  known  as  Brahma 
Vishnu  and  Siva,  which  stands  at  the  head  of 
the    Hindu    Pantheon.    "  Thou  art  our  Father 

144 


Inspired  Talks 

who  takest  us  to  the  other  shore  of  the  dark 
ocean."     (Invocation  to  Isvara). 

The  Vedas  cannot  show  you  Brahman,  you 
are  That  already  ;  they  can  only  help  to  take 
away  the  veil  that  hides  the  truth  from  our  eyes. 
The  first  veil  to  vanish  is  ignorance,  and  when 
that  is  gone,  sin  goes,  next  desire  ceases,  selfish- 
ness ends  and  all  misery  disappears.  This 
cessation  of  ignorance  can  only  come  when  I 
know  that  God  and  I  are  one  ;  in  other  words, 
identify  yourself  with  Atman,  not  with  human 
limitations.  D/s-identify  yourself  with  the  body 
and  all  pain  will  cease.  This  is  the  secret  of 
healing.  The  universe  is  a  case  of  hypnotiza- 
tion  ;  de-hypnotize  yourself  and  cease  to 
suffer. 

In  order  to  be  free  we  have  to  pass  through 
vice  to  virtue,  and  then  get  rid  of  both.  Tamas 
is  to  be  conquered  by  rajas,  both  are  to  be 
submerged   in   sattva  ;    then,   go    beyond   the 

K  145 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

three  qualities.     Reach  a  state  where  your  very 
breathing  is  a  prayer. 

Whenever  you  learn  (gain  anything)  from 
another  man's  words,  know  that  you  had  the 
experience  in  a  previous  existence,  because  ex- 
perience is  the  only  teacher.  * 

With  all  powers  comes  further  misery,  so  kill 
desire.  Getting  any  desire  is  like  putting  a 
stick  into  a  nest  of  hornets.  Vairdgyam  is  find- 
ing out  that  desires  are  but  gilded  balls  of 
poison. 

"  Mind  is  not  God  "  (Sankara).  u  Tat  tvam 
asi,"  "Aham  Brahmasmi"  ("That  thou  art," 
u  I  am  Brahman  '').  When  a  man  realizes  this, 
all  the  knots  of  'his  heart  are  cut  asunder,  all 
his  doubts  vanish.     Fearlessness  is  not  possible 

*  Whenever  you  know  any  person,  place  or  thing, 
you  know  it  because  you  can  remember  it  ,-  it  you  can- 
not, you  say  that  you  do  not  know  it,  and  ycu  can  only 
remember  that  which  you  experienced  before.  £o  expe- 
rience is  the  only  teacher. 


146 


Inspired  Talks 

as  long  as  we  have  even  God  over  us  ;  we  must 
be  God.  What  is  disjoined  will  be  forever  dis- 
joined ;  if  you  are  separate  from  God,  then  you 
can  never  be  one  with  Him,  and  vice  versa.  If 
by  virtue  you  are  joined  to  God,  when  that 
ceases,  disjunction  will  come.  The  junction  is 
eternal  and  virtue  only  helps  to  remove  the  veil. 
We  are  dzdd  (free),  we  must  realize  it.  <l  Whom 
the  Self  chooses"  means  we  are  the  Self  and 
choose  ourselves. 

Does  seeing  depend  upon  our  own  efforts 
or  does  it  depend  upon  something  outside  ? 
It  depends  upon  ourselves ;  our  efforts  take 
off  the  dust,  the  mirror  does  not  change. 
There  is  neither  knower,  knowing  nor  known. 
14  He  who  knows  that  he  does  not  know,  he 
knows  It."  He  who  has  a  theory  knows 
nothing. 

The  idea  that  we  are  bound  is  only  an  illu- 
sion. 


147 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Religion  is  not  of  this  world  ;  it  is  "  heart- 
cleansing"  and  its  effect  on  this  world  is- 
secondary.  Freedom  is  inseparable  from  the 
nature  of  the  Atman.  This  is  ever  pure,  ever 
perfect,  ever  unchangeable.  This  Atman  you 
can  never  know.  We  can  say  nothing  about 
the  Atman  but  "not  this,  not  this." 

"  Brahman  is  that  which  we  can  never  drive 
out  by  any  power  of  mind  or  imagination." 
(Sankara). 

*  *  #  * 

The  universe  is  thought,  and  the  Vedas 
are  the  words  of  this  thought.  We  can 
create  and  uncreate  this  whole  universe. 
Repeating  the  words,  the  unseen  thought  is 
aroused  and  as  a  result  a  seen  effect  is  pro- 
duced. This  is  the  claim  of  a  certain  sect  of 
Karmis.  They  think  that  each  one  of  us  is  a 
creator.  Pronounce  the  wTords,  the  thought 
which   corresponds    will  arise    and   the  result 

148 


Inspired  Talks 

will  become  visible.  "  Thought  is  the  power 
of  the  word,  the  word  is  the  expression  of 
the  thought/'  say  the  Mimdnsakas,  a  Hindu 
philosophical  sect. 

Saturday,  July  13th. 

Everything  we  know  is  a  compound  and  all 
sense-knowledge  comes  through  analysis.  To 
think  that  mind  is  a  simple,  single  or  indepen- 
dent, is  dualism.  Philosophy  is  not  got  by 
studying  books  •,  the  more  you  read  books,  the 
more  muddled  becomes  the  mind.  The  idea 
of  unthinking  philosophers  was  that  the  mind 
was  a  simple,  and  this  led  them  to  believe  in 
free-will.  Psychology,  the  analysis  of  the  mind, 
shows  the  mind  to  be  a  compound,  and  every 
compound  must  be  held  together  by  some  out- 
side force  ;  so  the  will  is  bound  by  the  combi- 
nation of  outside  forces.  Man  cannot  even 
will  to  eat  unless  he  is  hungry.  Will  is  subject 
to  desire.     But  we  are  free  ;  everyone  feels  it. 

149 


Vedanta    Philosophy 

The  agnostic  says  this  idea  is  a  delusion. 
Then,  how  prove  the  world  ?  Its  only  proof 
is  that  we  all  see  it  and  feel  it ;  so  just  as  much 
we  all  feel  freedom.  If  universal  consensus 
affirms  this  world,  then  it  must  be  accepted  as 
affirming  freedom  ;  but  freedom  is  not  of  the 
will  as  it  is.  The  constitutional  belief  of  man 
in  freedom  is  the  basis  of  all  reasoning.  Free- 
dom is  of  the  will  as  it  was  before  it  became 
bound.  The  very  idea  of  free-will  shows  every 
moment  man's  struggle  against  bondage.  The 
free  can  be  only  one,  the  Unconditioned,  the 
Infinite,  the  Unlimited.  Freedom  in  man  is 
now  a  memory,  an  attempt  towards  free- 
dom. 

Everything  in  the  universe  is  struggling  to 
complete  a  circle,  to  return  to  its  source,  to  re- 
turn to  its  only  real  Source,  Atman.  The  search 
for  happiness  is  a  struggle  to  find  the  balance, 
to    restore    the   equilibrium.     Morality    is  the 

150 


Inspired  Talks 

struggle  of  the  bound  will  to  get  free  and  is  the 
proof  that  we  have  come  from  perfection. 

•■*'** 

The  idea  of  duty  is  the  midday  sun  of  misery 
scorching  the  very  soul.  "  O  king,  drink  this 
one  drop  of  nectar  and  be  happy."  ("  I  am 
not  the  doer,"  this  is  the  nectar.) 

Let  there  be  action  without  reaction  ;  action 
is  pleasant,  all  misery  is  reaction.  The  child 
puts  its  hand  in  the  flame,  that  is  pleasure  ; 
but  when  its  system  reacts,  then  comes  the  pain 
of  burning.  When  we  can  stop  that  reaction, 
then  we  have  nothing  to  fear.  Control  the  brain 
and  do  not  let  it  read  the  record  ;  be  the  wit- 
ness and  do  not  react,  only  thus  can  you  be 
happy.  The  happiest  moments  we  ever  know 
are  when  we  entirely  forget  ourselves.  Work  of 
your  own  free  will,  not  from  duty.  We  have  no 
duty.  This  world  is  just  a  gymnasium  in 
which  we  play;  our  life    is  an  eternal  holiday. 

151 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

The  whole  secret  of  existence  is  to  have  no 
fear.  Never  fear  what  will  become  of  you,  de- 
pend on  no  one.  Only  the  moment  you  reject 
all    help  are  you  free.     The  full    sponge    can 

absorb  no  more. 

*  *  *  * 

Even  righting  in  self-defence  is  wrong, 
though  it  is  higher  than  fighting  in  aggression. 
There  is  no  "  righteous  "  indignation,  because 
indignation  comes  from  not  recognizing  "same- 
ness "  in  all  things. 

Sunday,  July  14//*. 

Philosophy  in  India  means  that  through 
which  we  see  God,  the  rationale  of  religion  ;  so 
no  Hindu  would  ever  ask  for  a  link  between 
religion  and  philosophy. 

Concrete,  generalized,  abstract  are  the  three 
stages  in  the  process  of  philosophy.  The  high- 
est abstraction  in  which  all  things  agree,  is  the 

152 


Inspired  Talks 

One.  In  religion  we  have,  first,  symbols  and 
forms,  next  mythology,  and  last,  philosophy. 
The  first  two  are  for  the  time  being  ;  philoso- 
phy is  the  underlying  basis  of  all  and  the 
others  are  only  stepping  stones  in  the  struggle 
to  reach  the  Ultimate. 

In  Western  religion  the  idea  is  that  without 
the  New  Testament  and  Christ  there  could  be  no 
religion.  A  similar  belief  exists  in  Judaism  with 
regard  to  Moses  and  the  Prophets,  because  these 
religions  are  dependent  upon  mythology  only. 
Real  religion,  the  highest,  rises  above  mytho- 
logy ;  it  can  never  rest  upon  that.  Modern 
science  has  really  made  the  foundations  of  reli- 
gion strong.  That  the  whole  universe  is  one  is 
scientifically  demonstrable.  What  the  meta- 
physicians call  "being"  the  physicist  calls  "mat- 
ter," but  there  is  no  real  fight  between  the  two, 
for  both  are  one.  Though  an  atom  is  invisible, 
unthinkable,  yet  in  it  are  the   whole  power  and 

153 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

potency  of  the  universe.  That  is  exactly  what 
the  Vedantist  says  of  Atman.  All  sects  are  real- 
ly saying  the  same  thing  in  different  words. 

Vedanta  and  modern  science  both  posit  a 
self-evolving  Cause.  In  Itself  are  all  the  causes. 
Take  for  example  the  potter  shaping  a  pot. 
The  potter  is  the  primal  cause,  the  clay  the 
material  cause,  and  the  wheel  the  instrumental 
cause ;  but  the  Atman  is  all  three.  Atman  is 
cause  and  manifestation  too.  The  Vedantist 
says,  the  universe  is  not  real,  it  is  only  apparent. 
Nature  is  God  seen  through  nescience.  The 
Pantheists  say,  God  has  become  nature  or  this 
world;  the  Advaitists  affirm  that  God  is  appear- 
ing as  this  world,  but  He  is  not  this  world. 

We  can  only  know  experience  as  a  mental 
process,  a  fact  in  the  mind  as  well  as  a  mark 
in  the  brain.  We  cannot  push  the  brain  back 
or  forward,  but  we  can  the  mind  ;  it  can  stretch 
over  all  time,  past,  present  and  future,   and  so 

154 


Inspired  Talks 

facts  in  the  mind  are  eternally  preserved.  All 
facts  are  already  generalized  in  mind,  which  is 
omnipresent.* 

Kant's  great  achievement  was  the  discovery 
that  "  time,  space  and  causation  are  modes  of 
thought,"  but  Vedanta  taught  this  ages  ago 
and  called  it  "  Mdyd."  Schopenhauer  stands 
on  reason  only  and  rationalizes  the  Vedas... 
Sankara  maintained  the  orthodoxy  of  the  Vedas. 
*  *  *  * 

M  Treeness  "  or  the  idea  tree,  found  out 
among  trees,  is  knowledge,  and  the  highest 
knowledge  is  One 

Personal  God  is  the  last  generalization  of  the 

*Asthe  entire  creation  existing  in  Space,  Time  and  Causa- 
tion can  never  exist  beyond  mind  or  memory,  manifesting 
itself  as  thinking,  feeling  and  willing,  therefore  the  whole 
of  space,  time  and  causation  must  have  to  be  in  it.  Hence 
mind  is  omnipresent.  Individual  mind  is  a  portion  of  the 
omnipresent  or  universal  mind  almost  shut  up  in  a  body 
like  a  gulf  or  a  bit  of  the  ocean  mostly  surrounded  by  land 
leaving  a  narrow  opening  which  joins  it  to  the  ocean. 

155 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

universe,  only   hazy,  not   clear-cut  and   philo- 
sophic  

Unity  is  self-evolving,  out  of  which  every- 
thing comes.  .... 

Physical  science  is  to  find  out  facts,  meta- 
physics is  the  thread  to  bind  the  flowers  into  a 
bouquet.  Every  abstraction  is  metaphysical  $ 
even  putting  manure  at  the  root  of  a  tree 
involves  a  process  of  abstraction 

Religion  includes  the  concrete,  the  more 
generalized  and  the  ultimate  unity.  Do  not 
stick  to  particularizations.  Get  to  the  prin- 
ciple, to  the  One. 

*  #  *  * 

Devils  are  machines  of  darkness,  angels 
are  machines  of  light  ;  but  both  are  machines. 
Man  alone  is  alive.  Break  the  machine,  strike 
the  balance,*  and  then  man  can  become   free. 


*  Find  out  that  the  relationship  between  yourself  and  the 
machine  is  as  between  a  worker  and  his  instrument. 
Never  identify  yourself  with  it. 


156 


Inspired  Talks 

This  is  the  only  world    where   man    can    work 
out  his  salvation. 

"  Whom  the  Self  chooses  "  is  true.  Election 
is  true,  but  put  it  within.  As  an  external  and 
fatalistic  doctrine,  it  is  horrible. 

Monday,  July  15th. 

Where  there  is  polyandry,  as  in  Thibet, 
women  are  physically  stronger  than  the  men. 
When  the  English  go  there,  these  women  carry 
large  men  up  the  mountains. 

In  Malabar,  although  of  course  polyandry  does 
not  obtain  there,  the  women  lead  in  everything. 
Exceptional  cleanliness  is  apparent  everywhere 
and  there  is  the  greatest  impetus  to  learning. 
When  I  myself  was  in  that  country,  I  met  many 
women  who  spoke  good  Sanskrit,  while  in  the 
rest  of  India  not  one  woman  in  a  million 
can  speak  it.  Mastery  elevates  and  servitude 
debases.     Malabar   has  never   been  conquered 

157 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

either   by   the  Portuguese,  or   by   the  Mussul- 
mans. 

The  Dravidians  were  a  non-Aryan  race  of 
Central  Asia,  who  preceded  the  Aryans,  and 
those  of  Southern  India  were  the  most  civilized. 
Women  with  them  stood  higher  than  men. 
They  subsequently  divided,  some  going  to 
Egypt,  others  to  Babylonia,  and  the  rest  re- 
maining in  India. 

Tuesday,  July  16th.  (Sankara) 

Adrishtam,  the  u  unseen  cause,"  leads  us 
to  sacrifice  and  worship,  which  in  turn  produce 
seen  results  ;  so  we  must  first  hear,  then  think 
or  reason,   and  then    meditate  upon   Brahman. 

The  result  of  works  and  the  result  of  know- 
ledge are  two  different  things.  u  Do  "  and  "  Do 
not  do  "  are  the  background  of  all  morality,  but 
they  really  belong  only  to  the  body  and  the 
mind.     All   happiness  and  misery  are   inextri- 

'     158 


Inspired  Talks 

cably  connected  with  the  senses,  and  body  is 
necessary  to  experience  them.  The  higher  the 
body,  the  higher  the  standard  of  virtue,  even 
up  to  Brahma  j  but  all  have  bodies.  As  long  as 
there  is  a  body,  there  must  be  pleasure  and 
pain  ;  only  when  one  has  got  rid  of  the  body 
can  one  escape  them.  The  Atman  is  bodiless, 
says  Sankara. 

No  law  can  make  ,you  free,  you  are  free. 
Nothing  can  give  you  freedom,  if  you  have  it  not 
already.  The  Atman  is  self-illumined.  Cause 
and  effect  do  not  reach  there,  and  this  disembodi- 
edness  is  freedom.  Beyond  what  was,  or  is,  or  is 
to  be  is  Brahman.  As  an  effect,  freedom  would 
have  no  value  ;  it  would  be  a  compound ,  and 
as  such  would  contain  the  seeds  of  bondage. 
It  is  the  one  real  factor,  not  to  be  attained,  but 
the  real  nature  of  the  soul. 

Work  and  worship,  however,  are  necessary 
to  take  away  the  veil,  to  lift  off  the  bondage 

159 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

and  illusion.  They  do  not  give  us  freedom, 
but  all  the  same,  without  effort  on  our  own 
part  we  do  not  open  our  eyes  and  see  what  we 
are.  Sankara  says  further  that  Advaita-Veddnta 
is  the  crowning  glory  of  the  Vedas  ;  but  the 
lower  Vedas  are  also  necessary,  because  they 
teach  work  and  worship  and  through  these  many 
come  to  the  Lord.  Others  may  come  without 
any  help  but  Advaita.  Work  and  worship  lead 
to  the  same  result  as  Advaita. 

Books  cannot  teach  God,  but  they  can  des- 
troy ignorance  ;  their  action  is  negative.  To 
hold  to  the  books  and  at  the  Same  time  open 
the  way  to  freedom,  is  Sankara's  great  achieve- 
ment. But  after  all,  it  is  a  kind  of  hair-split- 
ting. Give  man  first  the  concrete,  then  raise 
him  to  the  highest  by  slow  degrees.  This  is 
the  effort  of  the  various  religions  and  explains 
their  existence  and  why  each  is  suited  to  some 
stage  of  development.     The  very  books  are  a 

160 


Inspired  Talks 

part  of  the  ignorance  they  help  to  dispel.  Their 
duty  is  to  drive  out  the  ignorance  that  has  come 
upon  knowledge.  "Truth  shall  drive  out  un- 
truth." You  are  free  and  cannot  be  made  so. 
So  long  as  you  have  a  creed,  you  have  no  God. 
"He  who  knows  he  knows,  knows  noth- 
thing."  Who  can  know  the  Knower  ?  There 
are  two  eternal  facts  in  existence,  God  and  the 
universe.  The  former  unchangeable,  the  latter 
changeable.  The  world  exists  eternally.  Where 
your  mind  cannot  grasp  the  amount  of  change, 
you  call  it  eternity... You  see  the  stone  or  the  has 

relief  on  it,  but  not  both  at  once;  yet  both  are  one. 

•  *  •  * 

Can  you  make  yourself  at  rest  even   for   a 

second  ?   All  Yogis  say  you  can. 

*  *  *  * 

The  greatest  sin  is  to  think  yourself  weak.  No 
one  is  greater ;  realize  you  are  Brahman* 
Nothing  has  power  except  what  you  give  it. 
We  are  beyond  the  sun,  the  stars,  the  universe. 

L  161 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Teach  the  Godhood  of  man.  Deny  evil,  create 
none.  Stand  up  and  say,  I  am  the  master,  the 
master  of  all.  We  forge  the  chain  and  we  alone 
can  break  it. 

No  action  can  give  you  freedom;  only  know- 
ledge can  make  you  free.  Knowledge  is  irre- 
sistible ;  the  mind  cannot  take  it  or  reject  it. 
When  it  comes,  the  mind  has  to  accept  it  ;  so 
it  is  not  a  work  of  the  mind,  only,  its  expres- 
sion comes  in  the  mind. 

Work  or  worship  is  to  bring  you  back  to 
your  own  nature.  It  is  an  entire  illusion  that 
the  Self  is  the  body;  so  even  while  living  here  in 
the  body,  we  can  be  free.  The  body  has  nothing 
in  common  with  the  Self.  Illusion  is  taking 
the  real  for  the  unreal — not   "nothing  at  all." 

Wednesday,  July  17///. 

Raman uja  divides  the  universe  into  Chit,  Achit 
and  Isvara  ;  man,  Nature  and  God  ;  conscious, 
subconscious     and      superconscious.     Sankara, 

162 


Inspired  Talks 

on  the  contrary,  says  that  Chit,  the  soul,  is  the 
same  as  God.  God  is  truth,  is  knowledge,  is 
infinity  5  these  are  not  qualities.  Any  thought 
of  God  is  a  qualification  and  all  that  can  be 
said  of  him  is  uOm  tat  sat'' 

Sankara  further  asks,  can  you  see  existence 
separate  from  everything  else  ?  Where  is  the 
differentiation  between  two  objects  ?  Not  in 
sense  perception,  else  ail  would  be  one  in  it. 
We  have  to  perceive  in  sequence.  In  getting 
knowledge  of  what  a  thing  is,  we  get  also 
something  which  it  is  not  The  differentiae 
are  in  the  memory  and  are  got  by  comparison 
with  what  is  stored  there.  Difference  is  not  in 
the  nature  of  a  thing,  it  is  in  the  brain.  Homo- 
geneous one  is  outside,  differentiae  are  inside 
(in  the  mind)  ;  so  the  idea  of  "  many  "  is  the 
creation  of  the  mind. 

Differentiae  become  qualities   when  they  are 
separate,  but  joined  in  one  object.     We  cannot 

163 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

say  positively  what  differentiation  is.  All  that 
we  see  and  feel  about  things  is  pure  and  simple 
existence,  "  isness  "  All  else  is  in  us.  Being  is 
the  only  positive  proof  we  have  of  anything. 
All  differentiation  is  really  "secondary  reality,  " 
as  the  snake  in  the  rope,  because  the  serpent 
too  had  a  certain  reality,  in  that  something  was 
seen  although  misapprehended.  When  the 
knowledge  of  the  rope  becomes  negative,  the 
knowledge  of  the  snake  becomes  positive,  and 
vice  versa  ;  but  the  fact  that  you  see  only  one 
does  not  prove  that  the  other  is  non-existent. 
The  idea  of  the  world  is  an  obstruction  cover- 
ing the  idea  of  God,  and  is  to  be  removed,  but 
it  does  have  an  existence. 

Sankara  says  again,  perception  is  the  last 
proof  of  existence.  It  is  self-effulgent  and  self- 
conscious,  because  to  go  beyond  the  senses  we 
should  still  need  perception.  Perception  is  in- 
dependent of  the  senses,  of  all  instruments,  un- 

164 


Inspired  Talks 

conditioned.  There  can  be  no  perception 
without  consciousness ;  perception  has  self- 
luminosity,  which  in  a  lesser  degree  is  called 
consciousness.  Not  one  act  of  perception  can 
be  unconscious  ;  in  fact,  consciousness  is  the 
nature  of  perception.  Existence  and  perception 
are  one  thing,  not  two  things  joined  together. 
That  which  needs  no  cause  is  infinite,  so  as 
perception  is  the  last  proof  of  itself,  it  is  eternal. 
It  is  always  subjective  ;  perception  itself  is  its 
own  perceiver.  Perception  is  not  in  the  mind, 
but  perception  brings  mind.  It  is  absolute,  the 
only  knower,  so  perception  is  really  the  Atman. 
Perception  itself  perceives,  but  the  Atman  can- 
not be  a  knower,  because  a  u  knower  "  becomes 
such  by  the  action  of  knowledge  ;  but  Sankara 
says  "this  Atman  is  not  I  "  because  the  con- 
sciousness "  I  am  "  (a ham)  is  not  in  the  Atman. 
We  are  but  the  reflections  of  that  Atman  ;  and 
Atman  and  Brahman  are  one. 

165 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

When  you  talk  and  think  of  the  Absolute, 
you  have  to  do  it  in  the  relative,  so  all  these 
logical  arguments  apply.  In  Yoga,  perception 
and  realization  are  one.  Visishtddvaita ,  of 
which  Ramanuja  is  the  exponent,  is  seeing  partial 
unity  and  is  a  step  toward  Advaita.  Visishtam 
means  differentiation.  Prakriti  is  the  nature  of 
the  world  and  change  comes  upon  it.  Change- 
ful thoughts  expressed  in  changeful  words  can 
never  prove  the  Absolute.  You  reach  only 
something  that  is  minus  certain  qualities,  not 
Brahman  Itself  ;  only  a  verbal  unification,  the 
highest  abstraction,  but  not  the  non-existence 
of  the  relative. 

Thursday,  Jidy  18th.  (The  lesson  to-day 
was  mainly  Sankara's  argument  against  the  con- 
clusions of  the  Sdnkhya  philosophy.) 

The  Sdnkhyas  say  that  consciousness  is  a 
compound,  and  beyond  that,  the  last  analysis 
gives  us  the  Purusha,  Witness  ;  but  that  there 

166 


Inspired  Talks 

are  many  purushas,  each  of  us  is  one.  Advait  a 
on  the  contrary,  affirms  that  purushas  can  be 
only  One.  That  Purusha  cannot  be  conscious, 
unconscious  or  have  any  qualification,  for  either 
these  qualities  would  bind,  or  they  would  even- 
tually cease  •  so  the  One  must  be  without  any 
qualities,  even  knowledge,  and  It  cannot  be  the 
cause  of  the  universe  or  of  anything.  "  In  the 
beginning,  existence  only,  One  without  a 
second,"  says  the  Vedas. 

*  *  *  * 

The  presence  of  satlva  with  knowledge  does 
not  prove  that  sattva  is  the  cause  of  knowledge; 
on  the  contrary  sattva  calls  out  what  was  already 
existing  in  man,  as  the  fire  heats  an  iron  ball 
placed  near  it  by  arousing  the  heat  latent  in  it, 
not  by  entering  into  the  ball. 

Sankara  says,  knowledge  is  not  a  bondage, 
because   it  is  the  nature  of  God.    The   world 

167 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

ever  is,   whether  manifested  or   unmanifested  ; 
so  an  eternal  object  exists. 

Jndna-bala-kriya  (knowledge,  power,  activity) 
is  God.  Nor  does  He  need  form,  because  the 
finite  only  needs  form  to  interpose  as  an  ob- 
struction to  catch  and  hold  infinite  knowledge  ; 
but  God  really  needs  no  such  help.  There  is 
no  "  moving  soul,"  there  is  only  one  Atman. 
Jiva  (individual  soul)  is  the  conscious  ruler  of 
this  body,  in  whom  the  five  life  principles  come 
into  unity,  and  yet  that  very  jiva  is  the  Atmant 
because  all  is  Atman.  What  you  think  about 
it,  is  your  delusion  and  not  in  the  jiva.  You 
are  God  and  whatever  else  you  may  think  is 
wrong.  You  must  worship  the  Self  in  Krishna, 
not  Krishna  as  Krishna,  Only  by  worshipping 
the  Self  can  freedom  be  won.  Even  person- 
al God  is  but  the  Self  objectified.  "  Intense 
search  after  my  own  reality  is  Bhakti"  says 
Sankara, 

168 


Inspired  Talks 

All  the  means  we  take  to  reach  God  are  true  ; 
it  is  only  like  trying  to  find  the  pole  star  by 
locating  it  through  the  stars  that  are  around  it. 
*  *  *  * 

The  Bhagavad  Gild  is  the  best  authority  on 
Vedanta. 

Friday,  July  19lh. 

So  long  as  I  say  "  you''  1  have  the  right  to 
speak  of  God  protecting  us.  When  I  see 
another,  I  must  take  all  the  consequences  and 
put  in  the  third,  the  Ideal,  which  stands  be- 
tween us  ;  that  is  the  apex  of  the  triangle.  The 
vapor  becomes  snow, then  water,  then  Ganges; 
but  when  it  is  vapor,  there  is  no  Ganges,  and 
when  it  is  water,  we  think  of  no  vapor  in  it. 
The  idea  of  creation  or  change  is  inseparably 
connected  with  will.  So  long  as  we  perceive 
this  world  in  motion,  we  have  to  conceive  will 
behind  it.  Physics  prove  the  utter  delusion  of 
the  senses  ;   nothing   really  is  as  we  see,  hear, 

169 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

feel,  smell,  taste  it.  Certain  vibrations  produc- 
ing certain  results  affect  our  senses  ;  we  know 
only  relative  truth. 

The  Sanskrit  word  for  truth  is'1  Isness''  (sat). 
From  our  present  standpoint  this  world  appears 
to  us  as  will  and  consciousness.  Personal  God 
is  as  much  an  entity  for  Himself  as  we  are  for 
ourselves,  and  no  more.  God  can  also  be  seen 
as  a  form,  just  as  we  are  seen.  As  men  we 
must  have  a  God  ;  as  gods  we  need  none. 
This  is  why  Sri  Ramakrishna  constantly  saw 
the  Divine  Mother  ever  present  with  him,  more 
real  than  any  other  thing  around  him  ;  but  in 
Samddhi  all  went  but  the  Self.  Personal  God 
comes  nearer  and  nearer  until  He  melts  away 
and  there  is  no  more  personal  God  and  no 
more  "I  ";  all  is  merged  in  Self. 

Consciousness  is  a  bondage.  The  argument 
from  design  claims  that  intelligence  precedes 
form  •,  but  if    intelligence   is  the   cause  of  any- 

170 


Inspired  Talks 

thing,  it  itself  is  in  its  turn  an  effect.  It  is  M&yd. 
God  creates  us  and  we  create  God  and  this  is 
Mayd.  The  circle  is  unbroken  ;  mind  creates 
body  and  body  creates  mind;  the  egg  brings 
the  chicken,  the  chicken  the  egg  ;  the  tree  the 
seed,  the  seed  the  tree.  The  world  is  neither 
entirely  differentiated  nor  yet  entirely  homoge- 
neous. Man  is  free  and  must  rise  above  both 
sides.  Both  are  right  in  their  place  ;  but  to 
teach  truth,  "  isness,"  we  must  transcend  all 
that  we  now  know  of  existence,  will,  consci- 
ousness, doing,  going,  knowing.  There  is  no 
real  individuality  of  the  jiva  ('separate  soul);, 
eventually  it,  as  a  compound,  will  go  to  pieces. 
Only  that  which  is  beyond  further  analysis  is 
"  simple  °  and  that  alone  is  truth,  freedom, 
immortality,  bliss.  All  struggles  for  the  pre- 
servation of  this  illusive  individuality  are  really 
vices.  All  struggles  to  lose  this  individuality 
are  virtues.     Everything  in  the  universe  is  try- 

171 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

ing  to  break  down  this  individuality,  either 
consciously  or  unconsciously.  All  morality  is 
based  upon  the  destruction  of  separateness  or 
false  individuality,  because  that  is  the  cause  of 
all  sin.  Morality  exists  first,  later  religion  codi- 
fies it.  Customs  come  first  and  then  mythology 
follows  to  explain  them.  While  things  are 
happening,  they  come  by  a  higher  law  than 
reasoning  ;  that  arises  later  in  the  attempt  to 
understand  them.  Reasoning  is  not  the  motive 
power,  it  is  u  chewing  the  cud "  afterwards. 
Reason  is  the  historian  of  the  actions  of  the 
human  being, 

*  *  *  * 

Buddha  was  a  great  Vedantist  (for  Buddhism 
was  really  only  an  offshoot  of  Vedanta),  and 
Sankara  is  often  called  a  "  hidden  Buddhist.'' 
Buddha  made  the  analysis,  Sankara  made  the 
synthesis  out  of  it.  Buddha  never  bowed  down 
to  anything,  neither  Veda,  nor  caste,  nor  priest, 

172 


Inspired  Talks 

nor  custom.     He  fearlessly   reasoned  so   far  as 

reason  could  take  him.     Such  a  fearless  search 

for  truth  and  such  love   for  every    living    thing 

i 
the  world  has   never  seen.     Buddha    was    the 

Washington  of  the  religious  world  ;  he  con- 
quered a  throne  only  to  give  it  to  the  world,  as 
Washington  did  to  the  American  people.  He 
sought  nothing  for  himself. 

Saturday,  July  20th. 

Perception  is  our  only  real  knowledge  or  reli- 
gion. Talking  about  it  for  ages  will  never  make 
us  know  our  soul.  There  is  no  difference 
between  theories  and  atheism.  In  fact,  the 
atheist  is  the  truer  man.  Every  step  I  take  in 
the  light  is  mine  forever.  When  you  go  to  a 
country  and  see  it,  then  it  is  yours.  We  have 
each  to  see  for  ourselves ;  teachers  can  only 
u  bring  the  food,"  we  must  eat  it  to  be  nourish- 
ed. Argument  can  never  prove  God  save  as  a 
logical  conclusion. 

173 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

It  is  impossible  to  find  God  outside  of  our- 
selves. Our  own  souls  contribute  all  the  divi- 
nity that  is  outside  of  us.  We  are  the  greatest 
temple.  The  objectifi cation  is  only  a  faint 
imitation  of  what  we  see  within  ourselves. 

Concentration  of  the  powers  of  the  mind  is 
our  only  instrument  to  help  us  see  God.  If  you 
know  one  soul  (your  own),  you  know  all  souls, 
past,  present  and  to  come.  The  will  concen- 
trates the  mind,  certain  things  excite  and  con- 
trol this  will,  such  as  reason,  love,  devotion 
breathing,  etc.  The  concentrated  mind  is  a 
lamp  that  shows  us  every  corner  of  the  soul. 

No  one  method  can  suit  ail.  These  different 
methods  are  not  steps  necessary  to  be  taken 
one  after  another.  Ceremonials  are  the  lowest 
form  next  God  external  and  after  that  God 
internal.  In  some  cases  gradation  may  be 
needed,  but  in  many  only  one  way  is  required 
It  would  be  the  height  of  folly  to  say  to  every- 

174 


Inspired  Talks 

one,   uyou   must    pass    through    Karma    and 
Bhakti  before  you  can  reach  Jndnam." 

Stick   to  your  reason    until  you  reach   some- 
thing higher,  and  you  will  know  it  to  be  higher 
because   it  will  not  jar  with  reason.     The   stage 
beyond  consciousness   is  inspiration  (Samddhi) 
but  never  mistake  hysterical  trances  for  the  real 
thing.     It  is  a  terrible  thing  to  claim  this  inspir- 
ation falsely,  to  mistake  instinct  for  inspiration. 
There   is   no  external  test  for   inspiration,   we 
know  it  ourselves  •,  our  guardian  against  mistake 
is  negative, — the  voice  of  reason.    All  religion 
is  going  beyond  reason,  but  the  reason  is  the 
only  guide  to  get  there.    Instinct  is  like   ice, 
reason  is  the  water,  and  inspiration  is  the  sub- 
tlest form   or  vapor ;  one  follows  the    other. 
Everywhere   is  this  eternal   sequence,    uncon- 
sciousness, consciousness,  intelligence  ;  matter, 
body,  mind  ;    and  to  us  it  seems  as  if  the  chain 
began  with  the  particular  link  we  first  lay  hold 

175 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

of.  Arguments  on  both  sides  are  of  equal 
weight  and  both  are  true.  We  must  reach 
beyond  both,  to  where  there  is  neither  the 
one  nor  the  other.  These  successions  are  all 
Maya. 

Religion  is  above  reason,  supernatural.  Faith 
is  not  belief,  it  is  the  grasp  on  the  Ultimate,  an 
illumination.  First  hear,  then  reason  and  find 
out  all  that  reason  can  give  about  the  Atman  ; 
let  the  flood  of  reason  flow  over  it,  then  take 
what  remains.  If  nothing  remains,  thank  God 
you  have  escaped  a  superstition.  When  you 
have  determined  that  nothing  can  take  away  the 
Atman,  that  it  stands  every  test,  hold  fast  to  this 
and  teach  it  to  all.  Truth  cannot  be  partial  ; 
it  is  for  the  good  of  all.  Finally,  in  perfect 
rest  and  peace  meditate  upon  it,  concentrate 
your  mind  upon  it,  make  yourself  one  with  it. 
Then  no  speech  is  needed  ;  silence  will  carry 
the  truth.  Do  not  spend  your  energy  in  talking, 

176- 


Inspired  Talks 

but  meditate  in  silence  ;  and  do  not  let  the  rush 
of  the  outside  world  disturb  you.  When  your 
mind  is  in  the  highest  state,  you  are  uncon- 
scious of  it.  Accumulate  power  in  silence  and 
become  a  dynamo  of  spirituality.  What  can  a 
beggar  give  ?  Only  a  king  can  give,  and  he 
only  when  he  wants  nothing  himself. 
*  *  *  * 

Hold  your  money  merely  as  custodian  for 
what  is  God's.  Have  no  attachment  for  h\ 
Let  name  and  fame  and  money  go  ;  they  are  a 
terrible  bondage.  Feel  the  wonderful  atmos- 
phere of  freedom.  You  are  free,  free,  free  !  Oh 
blessed  am  I  !  Freedom  am  I  !  I  am  the  In- 
finite !  In  my  soul  I  can  find  no  beginning  and 
no  end.    All  is  my  Self.     Say   this  unceasingly. 

Sunday,  July  21st.  (Patanjali's  Yoga  Aph- 
orisms.) 

Yoga  is  the  science  of  restraining  the  chitta 

M  377 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

(mind)  from  breaking  into  m//*  (modifications.) 
Mind  is  a  mixture  of  sensation  and  feelings,  or 
action  and  reaction,  so  it  cannot  be  permanent. 
The  mind  has  a  fine  body  and  through  this  it 
works  on  the  gross  body.  Vedanta  says  that 
behind  the  mind  is  the  real  Self.  It  accepts 
the  other  two,  but  posits  a  third,  the  Eternal,  the 
Ultimate,  the  last  analysis,  the  unit,  where  there 
is  no  further  compound.  Birth  is  ^-composi- 
tion, death  is  decomposition,  and  the  final 
analysis  is  where  Atman  is  found ;  there  being 
no  further  division  possible,  the  perduring  is 
reached. 

The  whole  ocean  is  present  at  the  back  of 
each  wave  and  all  manifestations  are  waves, 
some  very  big,  some  small  ;  yet  all  are  the  ocean 
in  their  essence,  the  whole  ocean,  but  as  waves 
each  is  a  part.  When  the  waves  are  stilled, 
then  all  is  one  ;  "  a  spectator  without  a  spect- 
acle" says  Patanjali.     When  the  mind  is  active, 

178 


Inspired  Talks 

the  Atman  is  mixed  up   with  it.     The  repetition 
of  old  forms  in  quick   succession  is  memory. 

Be  unattached.  Knowledge  is  power,  and 
getting  one  you  get  the  other.  By  knowledge 
you  can  even  banish  the  material  world.  When 
you  can  mentally  get  rid  of  one  quality  after 
another  from  any  object  until  all  are  gone,  you 
can  at  will  make  the  object  itself  disappear  from 
your  consciousness. 

Those  who  are  ready,  advance  very  quickly 
and  can  become  Yogis  in  six  months.  The  less 
developed  may  take  several  years  ;  and  anyone 
by  faithful  work  and  by  giving  up  everything 
else  and  devoting  himself  solely  to  practice  can 
reach  the  goal  in  twelve  years.  Bhakti  will 
bring  you  there  without  any  of  these  mental 
gymnastics,  but  it  is  a  slower  way.  * 

*  Here  by  Bhakti  Swamiji  does  not  mean  intense  or 
ur  divided  love  for  God.  He  has  already  taught  "  Extreme 
Love  and  Highest  knowledge  are  one  "  and  again  in  de- 
fining it  he  says.  "This  absolute  and  continuous  remembr- 
ance of  the  Lord  is   what  is  meant   by   Bhakti  ";   so  by 

179 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Isvara  is  the  Atman  as  seen  or  grasped  by 
mind.  His  highest  name  is  Otn,  so  repeat  it, 
meditate  on  it  and  think  of  all  its  wonderful 
nature  and  attributes.  Repeating  the  Om  con- 
tinually is  the  only  true  worship.  It  is  not  a 
word,  it  is  God  Himself. 

Religion  gives  you  nothing  new  ;  it  only 
takes  off  obstacles  and  lets  you  see  your  Self. 
Sickness  is  the  first  great  obstacle  ;  a  healthy 
body  is  the  best  instrument.  Melancholy  is  an 
almost  insuperable  barrier.  If  you  have  once 
known  Brahman,  never  after  can  you  be  melan- 
choly.    Doubt,  want  of  perseverance,  mistaken 

ideas,  are  other  obstacles. 

*  *  *  * 

Prdnas  are  subtle  energies,  sources  of  motion. 

There   are  ten   in   all,  five  inward  and  five    out- 

Bhakti  he  means  here,  Love  which  is  not  yet  whole-souled. 
There  are  few  Bhaktas  who  love  God  for  God's  sake.  Most 
of  them  love  Him  for  His  omnipotence,  wherewith  he  can 
fulfil  their  desires  for  things  other  than  Himself. 

180 


Inspired  Talks 

ward.  One  great  current  flows  upwards,  and 
the  other  downwards.  Prdnaydma  is  control- 
ling the  prdnas  through  breathing.  Breath  is 
the  fuel,  prdna  is  the  steam  and  the  body  is  the 
engine.  Prdnaydma  has  three  parts,  puraka 
(in-breathing),  kumbhaka  (holding  the  breath) 
rechaka  (out-breathing). 

*  *  *  # 

The  Guru  is  the  conveyance  in  which  the 
spiritual  influence  is  brought  to  you.  Anyone 
can  teach,  but  the  spirit  must  be  passed  on  by 
the  Guru  to  the  Sishya  (disciple)  and  that  will 
fructify.  The  relation  between  sishyas  is  that 
of  brotherhood,  and  this  is  actually  accepted 
by  law  in  India.  The  Guru  passes  the  thought 
power,  the  mantram,  that  he  has  received  from 
those  before  him  ;  and  nothing  can  be  done 
without  a  Guru.  In  fact,  great  danger  ensues. 
Usually  without  a  Guru  these  yoga  practices 
lead  to  lust ;  but  with  one  this  seldom  happens. 

181 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Each  Ishtam  has  a  mantram.  The  Ishtam  is  the 
ideal  peculiar  to  the  particular  worshipper  ;  the 
mantram  is  the  external  word  to  express  it.  Con- 
stant repetition  of  the  word  helps  to  fix  the  ideal 
firmly  in  the  mind.  This  method  of  worship 
prevails  among  religious  devotees  all  over  India. 

Tuesday,  July  23rd.  (Bhagavad  Gitd.  Kar- 
ma Yoga). 

To  attain  liberation  through  work  join  your- 
self to  work  but  without  desire,  looking  for  no 
result.  Such  work  leads  to  knowledge,  which 
in  turn  brings  emancipation.  To  give  up  work 
before  you  know,  leads  to  misery.  Work  done 
for  the  Self  gives  no  bondage.  Neither  desire 
pleasure  nor  fear  pain  from  work.  It  is  the 
mind  and  body  that  work,  not  I.  Tell  your- 
self this  unceasingly  and  realize  it.  Try  not  to 
know  that  you  work. 

Do  all  as  a  sacrifice   or   offering  to  the  Lord. 

182 


Inspired  Talks 

Be  in  the  world,  but  not  of  it,  like  the  lotus 
leaf,  whose  roots  are  in  the  mud  but  which 
remains  always  pure.  Let  your  love  go  to  all, 
whatever  they  do  to  you.  A  blind  man  can- 
not see  color,  so  how  can  we  see  evil  except  it 
is  in  us  ?  We  compare  what  we  see  outside 
with  what  we  find  in  ourselves  and  pronounce 
judgment  accordingly.  If  we  are  pure,  we 
cannot  see  impurity.  It  may  exist,  but  not  for 
us.  See  only  God  in  every  man,  woman  and 
child  ;  see  it  by  the  "  antarjyotis,"  "inner  light," 
and  seeing  that,  we  can  see  naught  else.  Do 
not  want  this  world,  because  what  you  desire 
you  get.  Seek  the  Lord  and  the  Lord  only. 
The  more  power  there  is,  the  more  bondage, 
the  more  fear.  How  much  more  afraid  and 
miserable  are  we  than  the  ant  !  Get  out  of  it 
all  and  come  to  the  Lord.  Seek  the  science  of 
the  maker  and  not  that  of  the  made. 

"  I  am  the  doer  and  the  deed."  "  He  who  can 

183 


Vedanta   Philosophy 

stem  the  tide  of  lust  and  anger  is  a  great  Yogi." 
"  Only  by  practice  and   non-attachment   cai 
we  conquer  mind." 

3ft  3fe  %  % 

Our  Hindu  ancestors  sat  down  and  thought  on 
God  and  morality,  and  so  have  we  brains  to  use 
for  the  same  ends ;  but  in  the  rush  of  trying  to 
get  gain,  we  are  likely   to  lose  them  again. 

The  body  has  in  itself  a  certain  power  of 
curing  itself  and  many  things  can  rouse  this 
curative  power  into  action,  such  as  mental 
conditions  or  medicine,  or  exercise,  etc.  As 
long  as  we  are  disturbed  by  physical  conditions, 
so  long  we  need  the  help  of  physical  agencies. 
Not  until  we  have  got  rid  of  bondage  to  the 
nerves,  can  we  disregard  them. 

There  is  unconscious  mind,  but  it  is  below 
consciousness,  which  is  just  one    part  of  the 
human   organism.     Philosophy  is    guess   work 

184 


Inspired  Talks 

about  the  mind.  Religion  is  based  upon  sense 
contact,  upon  seeing,  the  only  basis  of  know- 
ledge. What  comes  in  contact  with  the  super- 
conscious  mind  is  fact.  "  Aptas"  are  those  who 
have  "  sensed  "  religion.  The  proof  is  that  if 
you  follow  their  method,  you  too  will  see. 
Each  science  requires  its  own  particular  method 
and  instruments.  An  astronomer  cannot  show 
you  the  rings  of  Saturn  by  the  aid  of  all  the 
pots  and  pans  in  the  kitchen.  He  needs  a 
telescope.  So,  to  see  the  great  facts  of  religion, 
the  method  of  those  who  have  already  seen 
must  be  followed.  The  greater  the  science, 
the  more  varied  the  means  of  studying  it. 
Before  we  came  into  the  world  God  provided 
the  means  to  get  out  ;  so  all  we  have  to  do  is 
to  find  the  means.  But  do  not  fight  over 
methods.  Look  only  for  realization  and  choose 
the  best  method  you  can  find  to  suit  you.  Eat 
the  mangoes  and  let  the  rest  quarrel  over  the 

185 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

basket.  See  Christ,  then  you  will  be  a  Christian , 
All  else  is  talk ;  the  less  talking  the  better. 

The  message  makes  the  messenger.  The 
Lord  makes  the  temple  ;  not  vice  versa. 

Learn  until  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shines 
through  your  face,"  as  it  shone  through  the  face 
of  Svetaketu. 

Guess  against  guess  makes  fight  ;  but  talk  of 
what  you  have  seen  and  no  human  heart  can 
resist  it.  Paul  was  converted  against  his  will 
by  realization. 

Tuesday  Afternoon.  (AJter  dinner  there 
was  a  short  conversation  in  the  course  of  which 
the  Swdmi  said :) 

Delusion  creates  delusion.  Delusion  creates 
itself  and  destroys  itself,  such  is  Maya.  All 
knowledge  (so-called)  being  based  on  Maya, 
is  a  vicious  circle  and  in  time  that  very  know- 
ledge   destroys    itself.     "  Let    go    the    rope," 

186 


Inspired  Talks 

delusion  cannot  touch  the  Attnan.  When  we 
lay  hold  of  the  rope, — identify  ourselves  with 
Mciydy  she  has  power  over  us.  Let  go  of  it,  be 
the  Witness  only,  then  you  can  admire  the 
picture  of  the  universe  undisturbed. 

Wednesday,  July  2ith. 

The  powers  acquired  by  the  practice  of  Yoga 
are  not  obstacles  for  the  Yogi  who  is  perfect,  but 
are  apt  to  be  so  for  the  beginner,  through  the 
wonder  and  pleasure  excited  by  their  exercise. 
Siddhis  are  the  powers  which  mark  success  in 
the  practice  and  they  may  be  produced  by 
various  means,  such  as  the  repetition  of  a 
mantram,  by  yoga  practice,  meditation,  fasting, 
or  even  by  the  use  of  herbs  and  drugs.  The 
Yogi  who  has  conquered  all  interest  in  the 
powers  acquired  and  who  renounces  all  virtue 
arising  from  his  actions,  comes  into  the  "  cloud 
of  virtue"  (name  of  one  of  the  states  of  Samd- 

187 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

dhi)  and  radiates    holiness   as    a  cloud    rains 
water. 

Meditation  is  on  a  series  of  objects,  con- 
centration is  on  one  object. 

Mind  is  cognized  by  the  Atman,  but  it  is  not 
self-illuminated.  The  Atman  cannot  be  the 
cause  of  anything.  How  can  it  be?  How  can 
the  Purusha  join  itself  to  Prakriti  (Nature)  ? 
It  does  not;  it  is  only  illusively  thought  to 
do  so. 

*  *  *  * 

Learn  to  help  without  pitying,  or  feeling  that 
there  is  any  misery.  Learn  to  be  the  same  to 
enemy  and  to  friend,  then  when  you  can  do 
that  and  no  longer  have  any  desires,  the  goal  is 
attained. 

Cut  down  the  banyan  tree  of  desire  with  the 
axe  of  non-attachment  and  it  will  vanish  utterly. 
It  is  all  illusion.  u  He  from  whom  blight  and 
delusion   have  fallen,   he   who   has  conquered 

188 


Inspired  Talks 

the  evils  of  association,  he  alone  is  dzdd 
(free)." 

To  love  anyone  personally  is  bondage.  Love 
all  alike,  then  all  desires  fall  off. 

Time,  the  M  eater  of  everything,"  comes  and 
all  has  to  go.  Why  try  to  improve  the  earth,, 
to  paint  the  butterfly  ?  It  all  has  to  go  at  last. 
Do  not  be  mere  white  mice  in  a  treadmill, 
working  always  aud  never  accomplishing  any- 
thing. Every  desire  is  fraught  with  evil,  whe- 
ther the  desire  itself  be  good  or  evil.  It  is  like 
a  dog  jumping  for  a  piece  of  meat  which  is 
ever  receding  from  his  reach,  and  dying  a  dog's 
death  at  last.  Do  not  be  like  that.  Cut  off  all 
desire. 

Paramdtman  as  ruling  Mdyd  is  Isvara ; 
Paramdtman  as  under  Mdyd  is  Jivdtman. 
Maya  is  the  sum-total  of  manifestation  and  will 
utterly  vanish. 

189 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Tree- nature  is  Maya,  it  is  really  God- nature 
which  we  see  under  the  veil  of  Maya.  The 
"  why  "  of  anything  is  in  Maya.  To  ask  why 
Maya  came  is  a  useless  question,  because  the 
answer  can  never  be  given  in  Maya,  and  beyond 
Maya  who  will  ask  it  ?  Evil  creates  "  why  " 
not  "  why  "  the  evil,  and  it  is  evil  that  asks 
"  why  "  ?  Illusion  destroys  illusion.  Reason 
itself,  being  based  upon  contradiction,  is  a 
circle  and  has  to  kill  itself.  Sense  perception 
is  an  inference  and  yet  all  inference  comes  from 
perception. 

Ignorance  reflecting  the  light  of  God  is 
seen  ;  but  by  itself  it  is  zero.  The  cloud 
would  not  appear  except  as  the  sunlight  falls 
on  it. 

There  were  four  travellers  who  came  to  a 
high  wall.  The  first  one  climbed  with  difficulty 
to  the  top  and  without  looking  back,  jumped 
over.     The    second   clambered    up   the   wall, 

2  90 


Inspired  Talks 

looked  over  and  with  a  shout  of  delight  dis- 
appeared. The  third  in  his  turn  climbed  to  the 
top,  looked  where  his  companions  had  gone^ 
laughed  with  joy  and  followed  them.  But  the 
fourth  one  came  back  to  tell  what  had  happen* 
ed  to  his  fellow-travellers.  The  sign  to  hs  that 
there  is  something  beyond  is  the  laugh  that 
rings  back   from  those   great    ones   who   have 

plunged  from  M/lyd's  wall. 

*  *  *  * 

Separating  ourselves  from  the  Absolute  and 

attributing  certain  qualities  to  it  gives  us  Isvara. 

It  is  the  Reality  of  the  universe  as  seen  through 

our  mind.     Personal  devil  is  the  misery  of  the 

world  seen  through  the  minds  of  the  superstitious. 

Thursday,  July  25th.  (Patanjalis  Yoga 
Aphorisms.) 

"  Things  may  be  done,  caused  to  be  done,  or 
approved  of,"  and  the  effect  upon  us  is  nearly 
equal. 

191 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Complete  continence  gives  great  intellectual 
and  spiritual  power.  The  Brahmacharin  must 
be  sexually  pure  in  thought,  word  and  deed. 
Lose  regard  for  the  body  ;  get  rid  of  the  con- 
sciousness of  it  so  far  as  possible. 

Asana  (posture)  must  be  steady  and  pleasant, 
and  constant  practice,  identifying  the  mind 
with  the  Infinite,  will  bring  this  about. 

Continual  attention  to  one  object  is  con- 
templation. 

When  a  stone  is  thrown  into  still  water, 
many  circles  are  made,  each  distinct  but  all 
interacting  •,  so  with  our  minds  ;  only  in  us  the 
action  is  unconscious,  while  with  the  Yogi  it  is 
conscious.  We  are  spiders  in  a  web  and  yoga 
practice  will  enable  us  like  the  spider  to  pass 
along  any  strand  of  the  web  we  please.  Non- 
Yogis  are  bound  to  the  particular  spot  where 
they  are. 


192 


Inspired  Talks 

To  injure  another  creates  bondage  and  hides 
the  truth.  Negative  virtues  are  not  enough  ; 
we  have  to  conquer  Mdyd  and  then  she  will 
follow  us.  We  only  deserve  things  when  they 
have  ceased  to  bind  us.  When  the  bondage 
ceases,  really  and  truly,  all  things  come  to  us. 
Only  those  who  want  nothing  are  masters  of 
Nature. 

Take  refuge  in  some  soul  who  has  already 
broken  his  bondage,  and  in  time  he  will  free 
you  through  his  mercy.  Higher  still,  is  to 
take  refuge  in  the  Lord  (Isvara),  but  it  is  the 
most  difficult  ;  only  once  in  a  century  can  one 
be  found  who  has  really  done  it.  Feel  nothing, 
know  nothing,  do  nothing,  have  nothing,  give 
up  all  to  God  and  say  utterly,  "  Thy  will  be 
done."  We  only  dream  this  bondage.  Wake 
up  and  let  it  go.  Take  refuge  in  God,  only  so 
can  we  cross  the  desert  of  Mdyd.  "  Let  go  thy 
hold,    Sanydsin   bold,  say  '  Om  tat  sat,  Om  !  ". 

N  193 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

It  is  our  privilege  to  be  allowed  to  be  charit- 
able, for  only  so  can  we  grow.  The  poor  man 
suffers  that  we  may  be  helped  ;  let  the  giver 
kneel  down  and  give  thanks,  let  the  receiver 
stand  up  and  permit.  See  the  Lord  back  of 
every  being  and  give  to  Him.  When  we  cease 
to  see  evil,  the  world  must  end  for  us,  since  to 
rid  us  of  that  mistake  is  its  only  object.  To 
think  there  is  any  imperfection  creates  it. 
Thoughts  of  strength  and  perfection  alone  can 
cure  it.  Do  what  good  you  can,  some  evil  will 
inhere  in  it  ;  but  do  all  without  regard  to  per- 
sonal result,  give  up  all  results  to  the  Lord,  then 
neither  good  nor  evil  will  affect  you. 

Doing  work  is  not  religion,  but  work  done 
rightly  leads  to  freedom.  In  reality  all  pity  is 
darkness,  because  whom  to  pity  ?  Can  you 
pity  God  ?  And  is  there  anything  else  ?  Thank 
God  for  giving  ycu  this  world  as  a  moral 
gymnasium   to   help    your    development,    but 

194 


Inspired  Talks 

never  imagine  you  can  help  the  world.  Be 
grateful  to  him  who  curses  you,  for  he  gives 
you  a  mirror  to  show  what  cursing  is,  also  a 
chance  to  practise  self-restraint  ;  so  bless  him 
and  be  glad.  Without  exercise  power  cannot 
come  out,  without  the  mirror  we  cannot  see 
ourselves. 

Unchaste  imagination  is  as  bad  as  unchaste 
action.  Controlled  desire  leads  to  the  highest 
result.  Transform  the  sexual  energy  into 
spiritual  energy,  but  do  not  emasculate,  because 
that  is  throwing  away  the  power.  The  stronger 
this  force,  the  more  can  be  done  with  it.  Only 
a  powerful  current  of  water  can  do  hydraulic 
mining. 

What  we  need  to-day  is  to  know  that  there  is 
a  God  and  that  we  can  see  and  feel  Him  here 
and  now.  A  Chicago  professor  says,  "Take 
care  of  this  world,  God  will  take  care  of  the 
next."     What  nonsense  !  If  we  can  take   care 

195 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

of  this  world,  what  need  of  a  gratuitous  Lord 
to  take  care  of  the  other  ! 

Friday,  July  2&th.  (Brihadciranyakopani- 
shad.) 

Love  all  things  only  through  and  for  the 
Self.  Yajnavalkya  said  to  Maitreyi,  his  wife, 
11  Through  the  At  man  we  know  all  things.'' 
The  Atman  can  never  be  the  object  of  know- 
ledge, nor  can  the  Knower  be  known.  He  who 
knows  he  is  the  Atman,  he  is  a  law  unto  himself. 

He  knows  he  is  the  universe  and  its  creator. 
*  *  *  * 

Perpetuating  old  myths  in  the  form  of  allego- 
ries and  giving  them  undue  importance  fosters 
superstition  and  is  really  weakness.  Truth 
must  have  no  compromise.  Teach  truth  and 
make  no  apology  for  any  superstition  ;  neither 
drag  truth  down  to  the  level  of  the  lis- 
tener. 

196 


Inspired  Talks 

Saturday,  July  21th,  (Kathopanishad.) 
Learn  not  the  truth  of  the  Self  save  from  one 
who  has  realized  it ;  in  all  others  it  is  mere 
talk.  Realization  is  beyond  virtue  and  vice., 
beyond  future  and  past  ;  beyond  all  the  pairs  of 
opposites.  "The  stainless  one  sees  the  Self  and 
an  eternal  calm  comes  in  the  soul."  Talking, 
arguing  and  reading  books,  the  highest  flights 
of  the  intellect,  the  Vedas  themselves,  all  these 
cannot  give  knowledge  of  the  Self. 

In  us  are  the  two,— the  God-soul  and  the 
man-soul.  The  sages  know  that  the  latter  is  but 
the  shadow,  that  the  former  is  the  only  real  Sun. 

Unless  we  join  the  mind  with  the  senses,  we 
get  no  report  from  eyes,  nose,  ears,  etc.  The 
external  organs  are  used  by  the  power  of  the 
mind.  Do  not  let  the  senses  go  outside  and 
then  you  can  get  rid  of  body  and  the  external 
world. 

This  very   "x"   which  we   see   here    as   an 

197 


Vedanta   Philosophy 

external  world,  the  departed  see  as  heaven  or 
hell  according  to  their  own  mental  states.  Here 
and  hereafter  are  two  dreams,  the  latter  model- 
led on  the  former ;  get  rid  of  both,  all  is  omni- 
present, all  is  now.  Nature,  body  and  mind 
go  to  death,  not  we  ;  we  never  go  nor  come. 
The  man  Swami  Vivekananda  is  in  Nature,  is 
born  and  dies  ;  but  the  Self  which  we  see  as 
Swami  Vivekananda  is  never  born  and  never 
dies.  It  is  the  eternal  and  unchangeable  Reality. 

The  power  of  the  mind  is  the  same,  whether 
we  divide  it  into  five  senses  or  whether  we  see 
only  one.  A  blind  man  says,  "Every  thing  has 
a  distinct  echo,  so  I  clap  my  hands  and  get 
that  echo  and  then  I  can  tell  everything  that  is 
around  me."  So  in  a  fog  the  blind  man  could 
safely  lead  the  seeing  man.  Fog  or  darkness 
makes  no  difference  to  him. 

Control  the  mind,  cut  off  the  senses,  then 
you  are  a  Yogi;  after  that  all  the  rest  will  come. 

198 


Inspired  Talks 

Refuse  to  hear,  to  see,  to  smell,  to  taste  ;  take 
away  the  mental  power  from  the  external 
organs.  You  continually  do  it  unconsciously, 
as  when  your  mind  is  absorbed  ;  so  you  can 
learn  to  do  it  consciously.  The  mind  can  put 
the  senses  where  it  pleases.  Get  rid  of  the 
fundamental  superstition  that  we  are  obliged  to 
act  through  the  body.  We  are  not.  Go  into  your 
own  room  and  get  the  Upanishads  out  of  your 
own  Self.  You  are  the  greatest  book  that  ever 
was  or  ever  will  be,  the  infinite  depositary  of 
all  that  is.  Until  the  inner  teacher  opens,  all 
outside  teaching  is  in  vain.  It  must  lead  to 
the  opening  of  the  book  of  the  heart  to  have 
any  value. 

The  will  is  the  <l  still  small  voice,"  the  real 
Ruler  who  says  "do"  and  M  do  not."  It  has 
done  all  that  binds  us.  The  ignorant  will  leads 
to  bondage,  the  knowing  will  can  free  us.  The 
will  can  be  made  strong  in  thousands  of  ways  •, 

199 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

every  way  is  a  kind  of  Yoga,  but  the  systematiz- 
ed Yoga  accomplishes  the  work  more  quickly. 
Bhakti,  Karma,  Rdja  and  Jnana  Yoga  get  over 
the  ground  more  effectively.  Put  on  all  powers, 
philosophy,  work,  prayer,  meditation  ;  crowd 
all  sail,  put  on  all  head  of  steam,  and  reach  the 

goal.     The  sooner,  the  better. 

#  *  *  #  * 

Baptism  is  external  purification  symbolizing 
the  internal.     It  is  of  Buddhist  origin. 

The  Eucharist  is  a  survival  of  a  very  ancient 
custom  of  savage  tribes.  They  sometimes  kill- 
ed their  great  chiefs  and  ate  their  flesh  in  order 
to  obtain  in  themselves  the  qualities  that  made 
their  leaders  great.  They  believed  that  in  such 
a  way,  the  characteristics  that  made  the  chief 
brave  and  wise  would  become  theirs  and  make 
the  whole  tribe  brave  and  wise,  instead  of  only 
one  man.  Human  sacrifice  was  also  a  Jewish 
idea  and  one  that  clung  to  them  despite  many 

200 


Inspired  Talks 

chastisements  from  Jehovah.  Jesus  was  gentle 
and  loving,  but  to  fit  him  into  Jewish  beliefs, 
the  idea  of  human  sacrifice  in  the  form  of 
atonement  or  as  a  human  scape-goat,  had  to 
come  in.  This  cruel  idea  made  Christianity 
depart  from  the  teachings  of  Jesus  himself  and 
develop  a  spirit  of  persecution  and  bloodshed. 
•  *  •  *  * 

Say  "it  is  my  nature,"  never  say  "it  is  my 
duty  *'  to  do  anything  whatever. 

" Truth  alone  triumphs,  not  untruth.''  Stand 
upon  Truth  and  you  have  got  God. 

*    *  #  *  * 

From  the  earliest  times  in  India  the  Brahmin 
caste  have  held  themselves  beyond  all  law  •, 
they  claim  to  be  gods.  They  are  poor,  but  their 
weakness  is  that  they  seek  power.  Here  are 
about  sixty  millions  of  people  who  are  good 
and  moral  and  hold  no  property,  and  they  are 
what  they  are  because  from  their  birth  they  are 

201 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

taught  that  they  are  above  law,  above  punish- 
ment They  feel  themselves  to  be  "  twice- 
born,"  to  be  sons  of  God. 


Sunday,  July  2Sth  (Avadhuta  Gitd  or 
"Song  of  the  Purified''  by  Dattdtreya*) 

"All  knowledge  depends  upon  calmness  of 
mind." 

"  He  who  has  filled  the  universe,  He  who  is 
Self  in  self,  How  shall  I  salute  Him  !" 

To  know  the  Atman  as  my  nature  is  both 
knowledge  and  realization.  "  I  am  He,  there 
is  not  the  least  doubt  of  it." 

"No  thought,  no  word,  no  deed,  creates  a 
bondage  for  me.  I  am  beyond  the  senses,  I 
am  knowledge  and  Bliss." 

There  is  neither  existence  nor  non-existence, 
all  is  Atman.     Shake  off  all  ideas  of  relativity  ; 

*  Dattatreya  was  a  sage,  the  son  of  Atri  and  Anasuya> 
and  was  an  incarnation  of  Brahm&,  Vishnu  and  Maheswara, 

202 


Inspired  Talks 

shake  off  all  superstitions;  let  caste  and  birth 
and  devas  and  all  else  vanish.  Why  talk  of  be- 
ing and  becoming  ?  Give  up  talking  of  Dualism 
and  Advaitism  !  When  were  you  two,  that  you 
talk  of  two  or  one  ?  The  universe  is  this  Holy 
One  and  He  alone.  Talk  not  of  Yoga  to  make 
you  pure  ;  you  are  pure  by  your  very  nature. 
None  can  teach  you. 

Men  like  him  who  wrote  this  song  are  what 
keep  religion  alive.  They  have  actually  realiz- 
ed ;  they  care  for  nothing,  feel  nothing  done  to 
the  body,  care  not  for  heat  and  cold  or  danger 
or  anything.  They  sit  still  and  enjoy  the  bliss 
of  Atman,  while  red  hot  coals  burn  their  body, 
and  they  feel  them  not. 

"When  the  threefold  bondage  of  knower, 
knowledge  and  known  ceases,  there  is  the 
Atman." 

"  Where  the  delusion  of  bondage  and  free- 
dom ceases,  there  the  Atman  is." 

203 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

"  What  if  you  have  controlled  the  mind, 
what  if  you  have  not  ?  What  if  you  have 
money,  what  if  you  have  not  ?  You  are  the 
Atmanf  ever  pure.  Say,  'I  am  the  Atman, 
No  bondage  ever  came  near  me.  I  am  the 
changeless  sky  ;  clouds  of  belief  may  pass  over 
me,  but  they  do  not  touch  me'/' 

"  Burn  virtue,  burn  vice.  Freedom  is  baby 
talk.  I  am  that  immortal  Knowledge.  I  am 
that  purity." 

11  No  one  was  ever  bound,  none  was  ever 
free.  There  is  none  but  me.  I  am  the  In- 
finite, the  Ever-Free.  Talk  not  to  me  !  Wiiat 
can  change  me,  the  essence  of  knowledge  ! 
Who  can  teach,  who  can  be  taught  ?" 

Throw  argument,  throw  philosophy  into  the 
ditch. 

"  Only  a  slave  sees  slaves,  the  deluded  delu- 
sion, the  impure  impurity." 

Place,  time,  causation    are   all   delusions.     It 

204 


Inspired  Talks 

is  your  disease  that  you  think  you  are  bound 
and  will  be  free.  You  are  the  Unchangeable. 
Talk  not.  Sit  down  and  let  all  things  melt 
away,  they  are  but  dreams.  There  is  no  dif- 
ferentiation, no  distinction,  it  is  all  super- 
stition ;  therefore  be  silent  and  know  what  you 
are. 

"  I  am  the  essence  of  bliss. "  Follow  no 
ideal,  you  are  all  there  is.  Fear  naught,  you 
are  the  essence  of  existence.  Be  at  peace.  Do 
not  disturb  yourself.  You  never  were  in  bond- 
age, you  never  were  virtuous  or  sinful.  Get 
rid  of  all  these  delusions  and  be  at  peace. 
Whom  to  worship  ?  Who  worships  ?  All  is 
the  Atman.  To  speak,  to  think  is  superstition. 
Repeat  over  and  over,  u  I  am  Atman,''  "  I  am 
Atman."      Let  everything  else  go. 

MONDAY,  July  29th. 

We  sometimes  indicate  a  thing  by  describing 

205 


Vedanta   Philosophy 

its  surroundings.  When  we  say  "  Satchi- 
ddnanda"  ("  Existence — Knowledge — Bliss''), 
we  are  merely  indicating  the  shores  of  an  indes- 
cribable Beyond.  Not  even  can  we  say  "  is  " 
about  it,  for  that  too  is  relative.  Any  imagi- 
nation, any  concept  is  in  vain  ;  neti ,  neti  ("  not 
this,  not  this")  is  all  that  can  be  said,  for  even 
to  think  is  to  limit  and  so  to  lose. 

The  senses  cheat  you  day  and  night.  Ve- 
danta found  that  out  ages  ago  ;  modern  science 
is  just  discovering  the  same  fact.  A  picture 
has  only  length  and  breadth,  and  the  painter 
copies  Nature  in  her  cheating  by  artificially 
giving  the  appearance  of  depth.  No  two 
people  see  the  same  world.  The  highest 
knowledge  will  show  you  that  there  is  no 
motion,  no  change  in  anything  ;  that  the  very 
idea  of  it  is  all  Maya.  Study  Nature  as  a  whole, 
that  is,  study  motion.  Mind  and  body  are  not 
our   real   Self  ;   both    belong   to     nature,     but 

206 


Inspired   Talks 

-eventually  we  can  know  the  ding  an  sich.  Then 
mind  and  body  being  transcended,  all  that  they 
conceive  goes.  When  you  cease  utterly  to 
know  and  see  the  world,  then  you  realize  Atman. 
The  superseding  of  relative  knowledge  is  what 
we  want.  There  is  no  infinite  mind  or  infinite 
knowledge,  because  both  mind  and  knowledge 
are  limited.  We  are  now  seeing  through  a  veil, 
then  we  reach  the  Mx,p  which  is  the  Reality  of 
all  our  knowing. 

If  we  look  at  a  picture  through  a  pin  hole  in 
a  card  board,  we  get  an  utterly  mistaken 
notion  ;  yet  what  we  see  is  really  the  picture. 
As  we  enlarge  the  hole,  we  get  a  clearer  and 
clearer  idea-  Out  of  the  reality  we  manufacture 
the  different  views  in  conformity  with  our 
mistaken  perceptions  of  name  and  form.  When 
we  throw  away  the  cardboard,  we  see  the  same 
picture,  but  we  see  it  as  it  is.  We  put  in  all 
the  attributes,  all  the  errors,  the  picture  itself  is 

207 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

unaltered  thereby.  That  is  because  Atman  is 
the  reality  of  all  ;  all  we  see  is  Atman,  but  not 
as  we  see  it,  as  name  and  form  ;  they  are  all  in 
our  veil,  in  Mdyd. 

They  are  like  spots  in  the  object  glass  of  a 
telescope,  yet  it  is  the  light  of  the  sun  that 
shows  us  the  spots  ;  we  could  not  even  see  the 
illusion  save  for  the  background  of  reality  which 
is  Brahman.  Swami  Vivekananda  is  just  the 
speck  on  the  object  glass  •,  I  am  Atman,  real, 
unchangeable,  and  that  reality  alone  enables 
me  to  see  Swami  Vivekananda.  Atman  is  the 
essence  of  every  hallucination;  but  the  sun  is 
never  identified  with  the  spots  on  the  glass,  it 
only  shows  them  to  us.  Our  actions,  as  they 
are  evil  or  good,  increase  or  decrease  the 
"spots,"  but  they  never  affect  the  God  within 
us.  Perfectly  cleanse  the  mind  of  spots  and 
instantly  we  see    "I  and  my   father   are   one'* 

We   first   perceive,   then   reason   later.     We 

208 


Inspired  Talks 

must  have  this  perception  as  a  [fact,  and  it  is 
called  religion,  realization.  No  matter  if  one 
never  heard  of  creed  or  prophet  or  book,  let 
him  get  this  realization  and  he  needs  no  more. 
Cleanse  the  mind,  this  is  all  of  religion;  and 
until  we  ourselves  clear  off  the  spots,  we  cannot 
see  the  Reality  as  it  is.  The  baby  sees  no  sin  ; 
he  has  not  yet  the  measure  of  it  in  himself. 
Get  rid  of  the  defects  within  yourself  and  you 
will  not  be  able  to  see  any  without.  A  baby 
sees  robbery  done  and  it  means  nothing  to 
him.  Once  you  find  the  hidden  object  in  a 
puzzle  picture,  you  see  it  ever  more  ;  so  when 
once  you  are  free  and  stainless,  you  see  only 
freedom  and  purity  in  the  world  around. 
"That  moment  all  the  knots  of  the  heart  are 
cut  asunder,  all  crooked  places  are  made 
straight  and  this  world  vanishes  as  a  dream." 
And  when  we  awake,  we  wonder  how  we  ever 
came  to  dream  such  trash  I 


209 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

"Getting  Whom,  misery  mountain  high  has 
no  power  to  move  the  soul." 

With  the  axe  of  knowledge  cut  the  wheels 
asunder  and  the  Altnan  stands  free,  even  though 
the  old  momentum  carries  on  the  wheel  of 
mind  and  body.  The  wheel  can  now  only  go 
straight,  can  only  do  good.  If  that  body  does 
anything  bad,  know  that  the  man  is  not  "jivan- 
tnukta"  ;  he  lies  if  he  makes  that  claim.  But 
it  is  only  when  the  wheels  have  got  a  good 
straight  motion  (from  cleansing  the  mind)  that 
the  axe  can  be  applied.  All  purifying  action 
deals  conscious  or  unconscious  blows  on  delu- 
sion. To  call  another  a  sinner  is  the  worst 
thing  you  can  do.  Good  action  done  ignor- 
antly  produces  the  same  result  and  helps  to 
break  the  bondage. 

To  identify  the  sun  with  the  spots  on  the 
object  glass  is  the  fundamental  error.  Know  the 
sun,  the  "I,"  to  be  ever  unaffected  by  anything, 

210 


Inspired  Talks 

and  devote  yourself  to  cleansing  the  spots. 
Man  is  the  greatest  being  that  ever  can  be. 
The  highest  worship  there  is,  is  to  worship 
man,  as  Krishna,  Buddha,  Christ.     What  you 

want,  you  create.     Get  rid  of  desire. 
*  *  *  * 

The  angels  and  the  departed  are  all  here, 
seeing  this  world  as  heaven.  The  same  "x" 
is  seen  by  all  according  to  their  mental  attitude. 
The  best  vision  to  be  had  of  the  "  x"  is  here 
on  this  earth.  Never  want  to  go  to  heaven, 
that  is  the  worst  delusion.  Even  here,  too 
much  wealth  and  grinding  poverty  are  both 
bondages  and  hold  us  back  from  religion. 
Three  great  gifts  we  have,  — first  a  human  body. 
(The  human  mind  is  the  nearest  reflection  of 
God,  we  are  "  His  own  image.")  Second,  the 
desire  to  be  free.  Third,  the  help  of  a  noble 
soul,  who  has  crossed  the  ocean  of  delu- 
sion,  as  a    teacher.      When  you    have    these 

211 


Vedanta    Philosophy 

three,  bless  the  Lord ;  you  are  sure  to  be 
free. 

What  you  only  grasp  intellectually  may  be 
overthrown  by  a  new  argument,  but  what  you 
realize  is  yours  forever.  Talking,  talking  reli- 
gion is  but  little  good.  Put  God  behind  every- 
thing, man,  animal,  food,  work,  make  this  a 
habit. 

Ingersoll  once  said  to  me:  "I  believe  in 
making  the  most  out  of  this  world,  in  squeezing 
the  orange  dry,  because  this  world  is  all  we  are 
sure  of."  I  replied  :  "  I  know  a  better  way  to 
squeeze  the  orange  of  this  world  than  you  do 
and  I  get  more  out  of  it.  I  know  I  cannot  die, 
so  I  am  not  in  a  hurry  ;  I  know  there  is  no 
fear,  so  I  enjoy  the  squeezing.  I  have  no  duty, 
no  bondage  of  wife  and  children  and  property  ; 
I  can  love  all  men  and  women.  Every  one  is 
God  to  me.  Think  of  the  joy  of  loving  man  as 
God  !  Squeeze  your  orange  this  way  and  get 

212 


Inspired  Talks 

ten  thousand   fold  more   out  of  it.     Get  every 
single  drop." 

That  which  seems  to  be  the  will  is  the  Atman 
behind,  it  is  really  free. 

Monday  Afternoon. 

Jesus  was  imperfect  because  he  did  not  live 
up  fully  to  his  own  ideal,  and  above  all  because 
he  did  not  give  woman  a  place  equal  to  man. 
Women  did  everything  for  him  and  yet  he  was 
so  bound  by  the  Jewish  custom  that  not  one 
was  made  an  apostle.  Still  he  was  the  greatest 
character  next  to  Buddha,  who  in  his  turn  was 
not  fully  perfect.  Buddha,  however,  recognized 
woman's  right  to  an  equal  place  in  religion  and 
his  first  and  one  of  his  greatest  disciples  was 
his  own  wife,  who  became  the  head  of  the 
whole  Buddhistic  movement  among  the  women 
of  India.  But  we  ought  not  to  criticise  these 
great  ones,  we  should  only   look  upon  them  as 

213 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

far  above  ourselves.  Nonetheless  we  must  not 
pin  our  faith  to  any  man,  however  great ;  we 
too  must  become  Buddhas  and  Christs. 

No  man  should  be  judged  by  his  defects. 
The  great  virtues  a  man  has  are  his,  especially 
his  errors  are  the  common  weaknesses  of 
humanity    and   should    never   be   counted    in 

estimating  his  character. 

*  *  #  # 

Viva,  the  Sanskrit  word  for  "  heroic",  is  the 
origin  of  our  word  u  virtue",  because  in  ancient 
times  the  best  fighter  was  regarded  as  the  most 
virtuous  man. 

TUESDAY,  July  30th. 

Christs  and  Buddhas  are  simply  occasions 
upon  which  to  objectify  our  own  inner  powers. 
We  really  answer  our  own  prayers. 

It  is  blasphemy  to  think  that  if  Jesus  had 
never  been  born,  humanity  would  not  have  been 

214 


Inspired  Talks 

saved.  It  is  horrible  to  thus  forget  the  divinity 
in  human  nature,  a  divinity  that  must  come 
out.  Never  forget  the  glory  of  human  nature. 
We  are  the  greatest  God  that  ever  was  or  ever 
will  be.  Christs  and  Buddhas  are  but  waves 
on  the  boundless  ocean  which  /  am.  Bow  down 
to  nothing  but  your  own  higher  Self.  Until 
you  know  that  you  are  that  very  God  of  gods, 
there  will  never  be  any  freedom  for  you. 

All  our  past  actions  are  really  good  because 
they  lead  us  to  what  we  ultimately  become. 
Of  whom  to  beg  ?  I  am  the  real  existence 
and  all  else  is  a  dream  save  as  it  is  I.  I  am 
the  whole  ocean  ;  do  not  call  the  little  wave 
you  have  made  "  I  "  ;  know  it  for  nothing 
but  a  wave.  Satyakdma  (lover  of  truth) 
heard  the  inner  voice  telling  him,  "  You  are  y 
the  infinite,  the  universal  is  in  you.  Control 
yourself  and  listen  to  the  voice  of  your  true 
Self." 

215 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

The  great  prophets  who  do  the  fighting  have 
to  be  less  perfect  than  those  who  live  silent 
lives  of  holiness,  thinking  great  thoughts  and  so 
helping  the  world.  These  men,  passing  out 
one  after  another,  produce  as  final  outcome 
the  man  of  power  who  preaches. 

*  *  *  * 

Knowledge  exists,  man  only  discovers  it. 
The  Vedas  are  this  eternal  knowledge,  through 
which  God  created  the  world.  They  talk  high 
philosophy  (the  highest),  and  make  this  tre- 
mendous claim. 

*  #  *  # 

Tell  the  truth  boldly,  whether  it  hurts  or  not. 
Never  pander  to  weakness.  If  truth  is  too  much 
for  intelligent  people  and  sweeps  them  away, 
let  them  go  ;  the  sooner  the  better.  Childish 
ideas  are  for  babies  and  savages  ;  and  these  are 
not  all  in  the  nursery  and  the  forests,  some  of 
them  have  fallen  into  the  pulpits. 

216 


Inspired  Talks 

It  is  bad  to  stay  in  the  church  after  you  are 
grown  up  spiritually.  Come  out  and  die  in  the 
open  air  of  freedom. 

All  progression  is  in  the  relative  world.  The 
human  form  is  the  highest  and  man  the  greatest 
being,  because  here  and  now  we  can  get  rid  of 
the  relative  world  entirely,  can  actually  attain 
freedom,  and  this  is  the  goal.  Not  only  we 
can,  but  some  have  reached  perfection  ;  so  no 
matter  what  finer  bodies  come,  they  could  only 
be  on  the  relative  plane  and  could  do  no  more 
than  we,  for  to  attain  freedom  is  all  that  can  be 
done. 

The  angels  never   do   wicked  deeds,  so   they 

never  get  punished  and  never  get  saved.     Blows 

are  what   awaken    us  and   help    to   break  the 

dream.     They  show  us  the  insufficiency  of  this 

world  and  make  us  long  to  escape,  to   have 

freedom. 

•  •  *  * 


217 


Vedanta    Philosophy 

A  thing  dimly  perceived  we  call  by  one  name  ; 
the  same  thing  when  fully  perceived  we  call  by 
another.  The  higher  the  moral  nature,  the 
higher  the  perception  and  the   stronger  the  will. 

Tuesday  Afternoon. 

The  reason  of  the  harmony  between  thought 
and  matter  is  because  they  are  two  sides  of  one 
thing,  call  it  •%"  which  divides  itself  into  the 
internal  and  the  external. 

The  English  word  "  paradise  "  comes  from 
the  Sanskrit  para-desa,  which  was  taken  over 
into  the  Persian  language  and  means  literally 
"  beyond  the  land  '*  or  really  "  the  land  beyond," 
or  the  other  world.  The  old  Aryans  always 
believed  in  a  soul,  never  that  man  was  the  body. 
Their  heavens  and  hells  were  all  temporary, 
because  no  effect  can  outlast  its  cause  and  no 
cause  is  eternal  ;  therefore  all  effects  must  come 
to  an  end. 

218 


Inspired  Talks 

The  whole  of  the  Vedanta  Philosophy  is  in 
this  story  :  Two  birds  of  golden  plumage  sat 
on  the  same  tree.  The  one  above,  serene, 
majestic,  immersed  in  his  own  glory  ;  the  one 
below  restless  and  eating  the  fruits  of  the  tree, 
now  sweet,  now  bitter.  Once  he  ate  an  excep- 
tionally bitter  fruit,  then  he  paused  and  looked 
up  at  the  majestic  bird  above  ;  but  he  soon 
forgot  about  the  other  bird  and  went  on  eating 
the  fruits  of  the  tree  as  before.  Again  he  ate  a 
bitter  fruit  and  this  time  he  hopped  up  a  few 
boughs  nearer  to  the  bird  at  the  top.  This 
happened  many  times  until  at  last  the  lower 
bird  came  to  the  place  of  the  upper  bird  and 
lost  himself.  He  found  all  at  once  that  there 
had  never  been  two  birds,  but  that  he  al]  the 
time  was  that  upper  bird,  serene,  majestic  and 
immersed  in  his  own  glory. 

Wednesday,  July  31s/. 

Luther   drove  a  nail  into   religion  when    he 

219 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

took  away  renunciation  and  gave  us  morality 
instead.  Atheists  and  materialists  can  have 
ethics,  but  only  believers  in  the  Lord  can  have 
religion. 

The  wicked  pay  the  price  of  the  great  soul's 
holiness.  Think  of  that  when  you  see  a  wicked 
man.  just  as  the  poor  man's  labor  pays  for 
the  rich  man's  luxury,  so  is  it  in  the  spiritual 
world.  The  terrible  degradation  of  the  masses 
in  India  is  the  price  Nature  pays  for  the  pro- 
duction of  great  souls  like  Mira-bai,  Buddha, 
etc.* 

*  *  *  * 

"  I  am  the  holiness  of  the  holy."  (Gita)  "  I 
am  the  root,  each  uses  it  in  his  own  way,  but 
all  is  I.M  "  I  do  everything,  you  are  but  the 
occasion." 


*  For  when  people  become  very  much  degraded  then 
only  great  souls  like  Mira-bai,  Buddha  etc  are  born.  (Vide 
Gita.) 

220 


Inspired  Talks 

Do  not  talk  much,  but  feel  the  spirit   within 

you,  then  you  are  a  Jnani.    This  is  knowledge, 

all  else  is  ignorance.     All  that  i£to  be  known 

is  Brahman.     It  is  the  all. 

*  *  *  * 

Sattva  binds  through  the  search  for  happi- 
ness and  knowledge,  rajas  binds  through  desire, 
tamas  binds  through  wrong  perception  and 
laziness.  Conquer  the  two  lower  by  $attvar 
and  then  give  up  all  to  the  Lord  and  be 
free. 

The  Bhakti  Yogi  realizes  Brahman  very  soon 
and  goes  beyond  the  three  qualities.* 

The  will,  the  consciousness,  the  senses,  desire, 
the  passions,  all  these  combined  make  what  we 
call  the  lt  soul." 

There  is  first  the  apparent  self  (body)  ;  second 
the  mental  self,  who  mistakes  the  body  for 
himself  (the  Absolute  bound  by  Mdyd)  ;   third 

*  Git&,  Chapter  XII. 

221 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

the  Atman,  the  ever  pure,  the  ever  free. 
Seen  partially,  It  is  nature  ;  seen  wholly,  all 
Nature  goes,  even  the  memory  of  it  is  lost. 
There  is  the  changeable  (mortal),  the  eternally 
changeable  (Nature),  and  the  Unchangeable 
(Atman). 

*  *  *  * 

Be  perfectly  hopeless,  that  is  the  highest  state. 
What  is  there  to  hope  for  ?  Burst  asunder  the 
bonds  of  hope,  stand  on  your  Self,  be  at  rest, 
never  mind  what  you  do,  give  up  all  to  God, 
but  have  no  hypocrisy  about  it. 

Svastha,  the  Sanskrit  word  for  "  standing  on 
your  own  Self,  "  is  used  colloquially  in  India 
to  enquire  "  Are  you  well,  are  you  happy  ?  " 
And  when  Hindus  would  express  "  I  saw  a 
thing,  "  they  say,  "  I  saw  a  word-meaning  " 
(Paddrtha).  Even  this  universe  is  a  "  word- 
meaning." 

*  *  *  * 

222 


Inspired  Talks 

A   perfect   man's    body   mechanically   does 

right  ;   it  can  do  only  good   because  it   is  fully 

purified.     The    past    momentum    that    carries 

on   the  wheel  of   body  is   all  good.     All    evil 

tendencies  are  burnt  out. 

*  *  *  # 

"  That  day  is  indeed  a  bad  day  when  we  do 
not  speak  of  the  Lord,  not  a  stormy  day." 

Only  love  for  the  Supreme  Lord  is  true 
Bhakti.  Love  for  any  other  being,  however 
great,  is  not  Bhakti.  The  "  Supreme  Lord  "  here 
means  Isvara,  the  concept  of  which  transcends 
what  you  in  the  West  mean  by  the  personal 
God.  "  He  from  whom  this  universe  proceeds, 
in  whom  it  rests,  and  to  whom  it  returns,  He 
is  Isvara,  the  Eternal,  the  Pure,  the  All- Merci- 
ful, the  Almighty,  the  Ever-Free,  the  All  Know- 
ing, the  Teacher  of  all  teachers,  the  Lord  who 
of  His  own  nature  is  inexpressible  Love." 

Man  does  not  manufacture  God  out  of  his 


223 


Vedanta   Philosophy 

own  brain  ;  but  he  can  only  see  God  in  the 
light  of  his  own  capacity,  and  he  attributes  to 
Him  the  best  of  all  he  knows.  Each  attribute 
is  the  whole  of  God,  and  this  signifying  the 
whole  by  one  quality  is  the  metaphysical 
explanation  of  the  personal  God.  hvara  is 
without  form  yet  has  all  forms,  is  without  qua- 
lities yet  has  all  qualities.  As  human  beings 
we  have  to  see  the  trinity  of  existence, — God, 
man,  Nature ;  and  we  cannot  do  otherwise. 

But  to  the  Bhakta  all  these  philosophical  dis- 
tinctions are  mere  idle  talk.  He  cares  nothing 
for  argument,  he  does  not  reason,  he  "  senses," 
he  perceives.  He  wants  to  lose  himself  in  pure 
love  of  God,  and  there  have  been  Bhaktas  who 
maintain  that  this  is  more  to  be  desired  than 
liberation  ;  who  say  "  I  do  not  want  to  be 
sugar.  I  want  to  taste  sugar."  "  I  want  to  love 
and  enjoy  the  Beloved," 

In  Bhakti-Yoga  the  first  essential  is  to  want 

224 


Inspired  Talks 

God  honestly  and  intensely.  We  want  every, 
thing  but  God,  because  our  ordinary  desires 
are  fulfilled  by  the  external  world.  So  long  as 
our  needs  are  confined  within  the  limits  of  the 
physical  universe,  we  do  not  feel  any  need  for 
God;  it  is  only  when  we  have  had  hard  blows 
in  our  lives  and  are  disappointed  with  every- 
thing here  that  we  feel  the  need  for  something 
higher  ;  then  we  seek  God. 

Bhakti  is  not  destructive  ;  it  teaches  that 
all  our  faculties  may  become  means  to  reach 
salvation.  We  must  turn  them  all  towards 
God  and  give  to  Him  that  love  which  is 
usually  wasted  on  the  fleeting  objects  of  sense. 
Bhakti  differs  from  your  Western  idea  of 
religion  in  that  Bhakti  admits  no  element  of 
fear,  no  Being  to  be  appeased  or  propitiated. 
There  are  even  Bhaktas  who  worship  God  as 
their  own  child,  so  that  there  may  remain  no 
feeling  even  of  awe  or  reverence.   There  can  be 

P  225 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

no  fear  in  true  love,  and  so  long  as  there  is 
the  least  fearT  Bhakti  cannot  even  begin.  In 
Bhakti  there  is  also  no  place  for  begging  or 
bargaining  with  God.  The  idea  of  asking  God 
for  anything  is  sacrilege  to  a  Bhakta.  He  will 
not  pray  for  health  or  wealth  or  even  to  go  to 
heaven. 

One  who  wants  to  love  God,  to  be  a  Bhakta, 
must  make  a  bundle  of  all  these  desires  and 
leave  them  outside  the  door  and  then  enter. 
He  who  wants  to  enter  the  realms  of  light  must 
make  a  bundle  of  all  "  shop-keeping  "  religion 
and  cast  it  away  before  he  can  pass  the  gates. 
It  is  not  that  you  do  not  get  what  you  pray  for; 
you  get  everything,  but  it  is  low,  vulgar,  a 
beggar's  religion.  M  Fool  indeed  is  he,  who 
living  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  digs  a  little 
well  for  water.  Fool  indeed  is  the  man  who, 
coming  to  a  mine  of  diamonds,  begins  to  search 
for  glass  beads."     These  prayers  for  health  and 

226 


Inspired  Talks 

wealth  and  material  prosperity  are  not  Bhakti. 
They  are  the  lowest  form  of  Karma.  Bhakti  is 
a  higher  thing.  We  are  striving  to  come  into 
the  presence  of  the  King  of  kings.  We  cannot 
get  there  in  a  beggar's  dress.  If  we  wanted  to 
enter  the  presence  of  an  emperor  would  we  be 
admitted  in  beggar's  rags  ?  Certainly  not.  The 
lackey  would  drive  us  out  of  the  gates.  This 
is  the  Emperor  of  emperors  and  never  can  we 
come  before  Him  in  beggar's  garb.  Shop- 
keepers never  have  admission  there,  buying  and 
selling  will  not  do  there  at  all.  You  read  in  the 
Bible  that  Jesus  drove  the  buyers  and  sellers 
out  of  the  temple. 

So  it  goes  without  saying  that  the  first  task  in 
becoming  a  Bhakta  is  to  give  up  all  desires  of 
heaven  and  so  on.  Such  a  heaven  would  be  like 
this  place,  this  earth,  only  a  little  better.  The 
Christian  idea  of  heaven  is  a  place  of  intensified 
enjoyment.     How  can  that  be  God  ?     All  this 

227 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

desire  to  go  to  heaven  is  a  desire  for  enjoyment. 
This  has  to  be  given  up.  The  love  of  the 
Bhakta  must  be  absolutely  pure  and  unselfish, 
seeking  nothing  for  itself  either  here  or  here- 
after. 

"  Giving  up  the  desire  of  pleasure  and  pain, 
gain  or  loss,  worship  God  day  and  night  ;  not 
a  moment  is  to  be  lost  in  vain.', 

"  Giving  up  all  other  thoughts,  the  whole 
mind  day  and  night  worships  God.  Thus 
being  worshipped  day  and  night,  He  reveals 
Himself  and  makes  His  worshippers  feel  him." 

Thursday,  August  1st. 

The  real  Guru  is  the  one  through  whom  we 
have  our  spiritual  descent.  He  is  the  channel 
through  which  the  spiritual  current  flows  to  us; 
the  link  which  joins  us  to  the  whole  spiritual 
world.  Too  much  faith  in  personality  has  a 
tendency  to   produce   weakness  and   idolatry, 

228 


Inspired  Talks 

but  intense  love  for  the  Guru  makes  rapid 
growth  possible,  he  connects  us  with  the  inter- 
nal Guru.  Adore  your  Guru  -if  there  be  real 
truth  in  him  ;  that  Guru-bhakti  (devotion  to 
the  teacher)  will  quickly  lead  you  to  the  highest. 
Sri  Ramakrishna's  purity  was  that  of  a  baby. 
He  never  touched  money  in  his  life  and  lust 
was  absolutely  annihilated  in  him.  Do  not  go 
to  great  religious  teachers  to  learn  physical 
science,  their  whole  energy  has  gone  to  the 
spiritual.  In  Sri  Ramakrishna  Paramahamsa 
the  man  was  all  dead  and  only  God  remained  ; 
he  actually  could  not  see  sin,  he  was  literally 
"  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity."  The 
purity  of  these  few  paramahamsas  is  all  that 
holds  the  world  together.  If  they  should  all 
die  out  and  leave  it,  the  world  would  go  to 
pieces.  They  do  good  by  simply  being,  and 
they  know  it  not  ;  they  just  are. 


229 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Books  suggest  the  inner  light  and  the  method 
of  bringing  that  out,  but  we  can  only  under- 
stand them  when  we  have  earned  the  know- 
ledge ourselves.  When  the  inner  light  has 
flashed  for  you,  let  the  books  go,  and  look  only 
within.  You  have  in  you  all  and  a  thousand 
times  more  than  is  in  all  the  books.  Never 
lose  faith  in  yourself,  you  can  do  anything  in 
this  universe.  Never  weaken,  all  power  is 
yours. 

If  religion  and  life  depend  upon  books  or 
upon  the  existence  of  any  prophet  whatsoever,. 
then  perish  all  religion  and  books  !  Religion 
is  in  us.  No  books  or  teachers  can  do  more 
than  help  us  to  find  it,  and  even  without  them 
we  can  get  all  truth  within.  Yet  have  gratitude 
to  books  and  teachers  without  bondage  to  them; 
and  worship  your  Guru  as  God,  but  do  not 
obey  him  blindly  ;  love  him  all  you  will,  but 
think  for  yourself.     No   blind   belief   can  save 

230 


Inspired  Talks 

you,  work  out  your  own  salvation.    Have  only 
one  idea  of  God, — that  He  is  an  eternal  help. 

Freedom  and  highest  love  must  go  together, 
then  neither  can  become  a  bondage.  We  can 
give  nothing  to  God  ;  He  gives  all  to  us.  He 
is  the  Guru  of  gurus.  Then  we  find  that  He  is 
the  "  Soul  of  our  souls'',  our  very  Self.  No 
wonder  we  love  Him,  He  is  the  Soul  of  our 
souls  ;  whom  or  what  else  can  we  love  ?  We 
want  to  be  the  " steady  flame,  burning  without 
heat  and  without  smoke."  To  whom  can  you 
do  good,  when  you  see  only  God  ?  You 
cannot  do  good  to  God.  All  doubt  goes,  all  is 
"  sameness."  If  you  do  good  at  all,  you  do  it 
to  yourself  ;  feel  that  the  receiver  is  the  higher 
one.  You  serve  the  other  because  you  are 
lower  then  he,  not  because  he  is  low  and  you 
are  high.  Give  as  the  rose  gives  perfume, 
because  it  is  its  own  nature,  utterly  uncon- 
scious of  giving. 

231 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

The  great  Hiudu  reformer,  Rajah  Ram 
Mohan  Roy,  was  a  wonderful  example  of  this 
unselfish  work.  He  devoted  his  whole  life  to 
helping  India.  It  was  he  who  stopped  the 
burning  of  widows.  It  is  usually  believed  that 
this  reform  was  due  entirely  to  the  English  ; 
but  it  was  Rajah  Ram  Mohan  Roy  who  started 
the  agitation  against  the  custom  and  succeeded 
in  obtaining  the  support  of  the  Government 
in  suppressing  it.  Until  he  began  the  move- 
ment, the  English  had  done  nothing.  He  also 
founded  the  important  religious  Society  called 
the  Brahmo-Samdj,  and  subscribed  $  100,000 
to  found  a  university.  He  then  stepped  out 
and  told  them  to  go  ahead  without  him.  He 
cared  nothing  for  fame  or  for  results  to  himself. 

Thursday  Afternoon. 
There  are  endless  series  of  manifestations,  like 
41  merry-go-rounds",  in  which  the   souls  ride, 

232 


Inspired  Talks 

so  to  speak.  The  series  are  eternal  ;  individual 
souls  get  out,  but  the  events  repeat  themselves 
eternally  and  that  is  how  one's  past  and  future 
can  be  read,  because  all  is  really  present. 
When  the  soul  is  in  a  certain  chain,  it  has  to 
go  through  the  experiences  of  that  chain.  From 
one  series  souls  go  to  other  series  ;  from  some 
series  they  escape  forever  by  realizing  that  they 
are  Brahman.  By  getting  hold  of  one  promi- 
nent event  in  a  chain  and  holding  on  to  it,  the 
whole  chain  can  be  dragged  in  and  read.  This 
power  is  easily  acquired,  but  it  is  of  no  real 
value  and  to  practise  it  takes  just  so  much  from 
our  spiritual  forces.  Go  not  after  these  things, 
worship  God. 

Friday,  August  2nd. 

Nishta     (devotion    to  one     Ideal)     is     the 

beginning  of  realization.  Take  the  honey  out 

of  all  flowers  :  sit  and  be  friendly  with  all,  pay 

233 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

reverence  to  all,  say  to  all,  "  Yes  brother,  yes 
brother, M  but  keep  firm  in  your  own  way.  A 
higher  stage  is  actually  to  take  the  position  of 
the  other.  If  I  am  all,  why  can  I  not  really  and 
actively  sympathize  with  my  brother  and  see 
with  his  eyes  ?  While  I  am  weak,  I  must  stick 
to  one  course  (nishta),  but  when  I  am  strong, 
I  can  feel  with  every  other  and  perfectly 
sympathize  with  his  ideas. 

The  old  idea  was  "  develop  one  idea  at  the 
expense  of  all  the  rest."  The  modern  way  is 
"harmonious  development."  A  third  way  is  to 
"  develop  the  mind  and  control  it,"  then  put 
it  where  you  will ;  the  result  will  come  quickly. 
This  is  developing  yourself  in  the  truest  way. 
Learn  concentration  and  use  it  in  any  direction. 
Thus  you  lose  nothing.  He  who  gets  the 
whole  must  have  the  parts  too.  Dualism  is 
included  in  Advaitism  (monism). 
"  I  first  saw  him  and  he  saw  me, 

234 


Inspired  Talks 

"  There  was  a  flash  of  eye  from  me  to  him  and 

from  him  to  me." 

This  went  on  until  the  two  souls  became  so 

closely  united  that  they  actually  became  one. 
•  *  •  « 

There  are  two  [kinds  Sam&dhi, — I  concen- 
trate on  myself,  then  I  concentrate,  and  there  is 
a  unity  of  subject  and  object. 

You  must  be  able  to  sympathize  fully  with 
each  particular,  then  at  once  to  jump  back  to 
the  highest  monism.  After  having  perfected 
yourself,  you  limit  yourself  voluntarily.  Take 
the  whole  power  into  each  action.  Be  able  to 
become  a  dualist  for  the  time  being  and  forget 
Advaita,  yet  be  able  to  take  it  up  again  at 
will. 

*  *  *  * 

Cause  and  effect  is  all  Mdyd,  and  we  shalF 
grow  to  understand  that  all  we  see  is  as  dis- 
connected as  the  child's  fairy  tales  now   seem 

235 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

to  us.  There  is  really  no  such  thing  as  cause 
and  effect  and  we  shall  come  to  know  it.  Then 
if  you  can,  lower  your  intellect  to  let  any 
allegory  pass  through  your  mind  without 
questioning  about  connection.  Develop  love 
of  imagery  and  beautiful  poetry  and  then 
enjoy  all  mythologies  as  poetry.  Come  not  to 
mythology  with  ideas  of  history  and  reasoning. 
Let  it  flow  as  a  current  through  your  mind, 
let  it  be  whirled  as  a  candle  before  your  eyes, 
without  asking  who  holds  the  candle,  and 
you  will  get  the  circle  ;  the  residuum  of  truth 
will  remain  in  your  mind. 

The  writers  of  all  mythologies  wrote  in 
symbols  of  what  they  saw  and  heard,  they 
painted  flowing  pictures.  Do  not  try  to  pick 
out  the  themes  and  so  destroy  the  pictures  ; 
take  them  as  they  are  and  let  them  act  on  you. 
Judge  them  only  by  the  effect  and  get  the  good 

out  of  them. 

*  *  *  * 

236 


Inspired  Talks 

Your  own  will  is  all  that  answers  prayer,  only 
it  appears  under  the  guise  of  different  religious 
conceptions  to  each  mind.  We  may  call  it 
Buddha,  Jesus,  Krishna,  Jehovah,  Allah,  Agnid 
but  it  is  only  the  Self,  the  "I." 

*  #  #  * 

Concepts  grow,   but   there    is   no   historical 

value  in  the  allegories  which  present  them 
Moses'  visions  are  more  likely  to  be  wrong 
than  ours  are,  because  we  have  more  knowledge 
and  are  less  likely  to  be  deceived  by  illu- 
sions. 

Books  are  useless  to  us  until  our  own  book 
opens,  then  all  other  books  are  good  so  far  as 
they  confirm  our  book.  It  is  the  strong  that 
understands  strength,  it  is  the  elephant  that 
understands  the  lion,  not  the  rat.  How  can 
we  understand  Jesus  until  We  are  his  equals  ? 
It  is  all  in  the  dream  to  feed  five  thousand 
with  two  loaves,  or  to  feed  two  with  five  loaves  ; 

237 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

neither  is  real  and  neither  affects  the  other. 
Only  grandeur  appreciates  grandeur,  only  God 
realizes  God.  The  dream  is  only  the  dreamer, 
it  has  no  other  basis.  It  is  not  one  thing  and 
the  dreamer  another.  The  keynote  running 
through  the  music  is  "I  am  He,"  "I  am  He,'' 
all  other  notes  are  but  variations  and  do  not 
affect  the  real  theme.  We  are  the  living  books 
and  books  are  but  the  words  we  have  spoken. 
Everything  is  the  living  God,  the  living  Christ  ; 
see  it  as  such.  Read  man,  he  is  the  living  poem. 
We  are  the  light  that  illumines  all  the  Bibles 
and  Christs  and  Buddhas  that  ever  were.  With- 
out that,  these  would  be  dead  for  us,  not  living. 

Stand  on  your  own  self. 

The  dead  body  resents  nothing  ;  let  us  make 
our  bodies  dead  and  cease  to  identify  ourselves 
with  them. 

Saturday,  August  3rd. 

Individuals  who  are  to  get  freedom  in  this 

238 


Inspired  Talks 

life  have  to  live  thousands  of  years  in  one  life- 
time. They  have  to  be  ahead  of  their  times, 
but  the  masses  can  only  crawl.  Thus  we  have 
Christs  and  Buddhas. 

*  *  #  * 

There  was  once  a  Hindu  queen,  who  so  much 
desired  that  all  her  children  should  attain  free- 
dom in  this  life  that  she  herself  took  all  the 
care  of  them  ;  and  as  she  rocked  them  to  sleep, 
she  sang  always  the  one  song  to  them, — "Tat 
tvam  asi,  Tat  tvam  asi"  ("That  thou  art,  That 
thou  art.")  Three  of  them  became  Sanydsins, 
but  the  fourth  was  taken  away  to  be  brought 
up  elsewhere  to  become  a  king.  As  he  was 
leaving  home,  the  mother  gave  him  a  piece  of 
paper  which  he  was  to  read  when  he  grew  to 
manhood.  On  that  piece  of  paper  was  written, 
"God  alone  is  true.  All  else  is  false.  The  soul 
never  kills  or  is  killed.  Live  alone  or  in  the 
company    of   holy   ones."    When   the   young 

239 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

prince   read  this,  he  too  at  once  renounced  the 
world  and  became  a  Sanydsin. 

Give  up,  renounce  the  world.  Now,  we  are 
like  dogs  strayed  into  a  kitchen  and  eating  a 
piece  of  meat,  looking  round  in  fear  lest  at  any 
moment  some  one  may  come  and  drive  them 
out.  Instead  of  that  be  a  king  and  know  you 
own  the  world.  This  never  comes  until  you 
give  it  up  and  it  ceases  to  bind.  Give  up 
mentally,  if  you  do  not  physically.  Give  up 
from  the  heart  of  your  hearts.  Have  Vaird- 
gyam  (renunciation).  This  is  the  real  sacrifice, 
and  without  it,  it  is  impossible  to  attain  spiri- 
tuality. Do  not  desire,  for  what  you  desire  you 
get  and  with  it  comes  terrible  bondage.  It  is 
nothing  but  bringing  "noses  on  us,"*  as  in  the 

*  A  poor  man  was  once  able  to  propitiate  a  certain  God 
who  gave  him  three  boons  to  ask  along  with  three  throws 
of  dice.  The  happy  man  went  home  and  communicated 
the  news  of  this  good  luck  to  his  wife  who,  full  of  joy,  at 
once  told  him   to  cast  for  wealth  first.     To  this  the   man 


240 


Inspired  Talks 

case   of   the    man  who  had  three  boons  to  ask. 
We     never    get  freedom   until    we     are    self 

said  "  We, both  have  very  ugly  little  noses,  for  which 
people  laugh  at  us.  Let  us  first  cast  for  beautiful  acquiline 
noses.  Wealth  cannot  remove  the  deformity  of  our 
persons.  "  But  the  wife  was  for  th  e  wealth  first  and  so 
she  caught  hold  of  his  hand  to  prevent  him  from  throwing 
the  dice.  The  man  hastily  snatched  his  hand  a  way  and  at 
once  threw  the  dice,  exclaiming  "  Let  us  both  have 
beautiful  noses  and  nothing  but  noses."  All  at  once  both 
their  bodies  were  covered  over  with  many  beautiful  noses, 
but  they  proved  such  a  great  nuisance  to  them  that  both 
of  them  agreed  to  throw  for  the  second  time  asking  for 
their  removal.  It  was  done,  and  also  they  lost  their  own 
little  ones  by  that,  and  left  completely  noseless.  Two 
boons  thus  they  had  lost  and  in  utter  dismay  they  did  not 
know  what  to  do.  There  was  only  one  boon  more  to  ask. 
Having  lost  thefr  noses  they  looked  more  ugly  than  before. 
They  could  not  even  dream  of  going  out  in  that  plight. 
They  wanted  to  have  two  beautiful  noses,  but  they  feared 
to  be  questioned  about  their  transformation  lest  they  should 
be  regarded  by  all  to  be  two  big  fools  who  could  not 
mend  their  circumstances  even  with  the  help  of  three 
boons.  So  both  of  them  agreed  to  get  back  their  ugly 
little  noses  and  the  dice  were  accordingly  cast.  This  story 
illustrates  the  previous  sentence  "  Do  not  desire;  for  what 
you  desire   you  get  and  with  it  comes  terrible  bondage." 


241 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

contained.     "Self  is  the  Saviour  of   self,  none 
else." 

Learn  to  feel  yourself  in  other  bodies,  to 
know  that  we  are  all  one.  Throw  all  other, 
nonsense  to  the  winds.  Spit  out  your  actions, 
good  or  bad,  and  never  think  of  them  again. 
What  is  done  is  done.  Throw  off  superstition. 
Have  no  weakness  even  in  the  face  of  death. 
Do  not  repent,  do  not  brood  over  past  deeds, 
and  do  not  remember  your  good  deeds  ;  be 
dzdd  (free).  The  weak,  the  fearful,  the  ignorant 
will  never  reach  Attnan.  You  cannot  undo,  the 
effect  must  come,  face  it,  but  be  careful  never 
to  do  the  same  thing  again.  Give  up  the  bur- 
den of  all  deeds  to  the  Lord  ;  give  all,  both 
good  and  bad.  Do  not  keep  the  good  and  give 
only  the  bad.  God  helps  those  who  do  not 
help  themselves. 

*  »  *  * 

"Drinking    the  cup    of    desire,    the  world 

242 


Inspired  Talks 

becomes  mad."  Day  and  night  never  come 
together,  so  desire  and  the  Lord  can  never 
come  together.     Give  up  desire. 

*  *  *  * 

There  is  a  vast  difference  between  saying 
"  food,  food  "  and  eating  it,  between  saying 
"  water,  water"  and  drinking  it.  So  by  merely 
repeating  the  word  "  God,  God  "  we  cannot 
hope  to  attain  realization.  We  must  strive  and 
practise. 

Only  by  the  wave  falling  back  into  the  sea 
can  it  become  unlimited,  never  as  a  wave  can 
it  be  so.  Then  after  it  has  become  the  sea,  it 
can  become  the  wave  again  and  as  big  a  one  as 
it  pleases.  Break  the  identification  of  yourself 
with  the  current  and  know  that  you  are  free. 

True  philosophy  is  the  systematizing  of  cer- 
tain perceptions.  Intellect  ends  where  religion 
begins.  Inspiration  is  much  higher  than  reason, 
but   it  must  not  contradict  it.     Reason  is  the 

243 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

rough  tool  to  do  the  hard  work  ;  inspiration  is 
the  bright  light  which  shows  us  all  truth. 
The  will  to  do  a  thing  is  not  necessarily  inspi- 
ration. 

*  *  *  * 

Progression  in  Maya  is  a  circle  that  brings 
you  back  to  the  starting  point;  but  you  start  ig- 
norant and  come  to  the  end  with  all  knowledge. 
Worship  of  God,  worship  of  the  holy  ones, 
concentration  and  meditation,  and  unselfish 
work,  these  are  the  ways  of  breaking  away  from 
Mdyd's  net ;  but  we  must  first  have  the  strong 
desire  to  get  free.  The  flash  of  light  that  will 
illumine  the  darkness  for  us,  is  in  us  ;  it  is  the 
knowledge  that  is  our  nature,  (there  is  no"birth- 
right,"  we  were  never  born).  All  that  we  have 
to  do  is  to  drive  away   the  clouds   that  cover  it. 

Give  up  all  desire  for  enjoyment  in  earth  or 
heaven.  Control  the  organs  of  the  senses  and 
control  the  mind.     Bear  every   misery  without 

244 


Inspired  Talks 

even  knowing  that  you  are  miserable.  Think 
of  nothing  but  liberation.  Have  faith  in  Guru, 
in  his  teachings,  and  in  the  surety  that  you  can 
get  free.  Say  "  Soham,  Soham  "  whatever 
Comes.  Tell  yourself  this  even  in  eating,  walk- 
ing, suffering  ;  tell  the  mind  this  incessantly, — 
that  what  we  see  never  existed, — that  there  is 
only  '*  I".  Flash, — the  dream  will  break ! 
Think  day  and  night,  this  universe  is  zero,  only 
God  is.     Have  intense  desire  to  get  free. 

All  relatives  and  friends  -are  but  u  old  dry 
wells" -,  we  fall  into  them  and  get  dreams  of 
duty  and  bondage,  and  there  is  no  end.  Do 
not  create  illusion  by  helping  anyone.  It  is 
like  a  banyan  tree,  that  spreads  on  and  on. 
If  you  are  a  dualist,  you  are  a  fool  to  try  to 
help  God.  If  you  are  a  monist,  you  know  that 
you  are  God ;  where  find  duty  ?  You  have  no 
duty  to  husband,  child,  friend.  Take  things  as 
they  come,  lie  still  and   when  your  body  floats, 

245 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

go  ;  rise  with  the  rising  tide,  fall  with  the  fall- 
ing tide.  Let  the  body  die  ;  this  idea  of  body 
is  but  a  worn-out  fable.  "  Be  still  and  know 
that  I  am  God." 

The  present  is  the  only  existence.  There  is 
no  past  or  future  even  in  thought,  because  to 
think  it  you  have  to  make  it  the  present. 
Give  up  everything  and  let  it  float  where  it  will. 
This  world  is  all  a  delusion,  do  not  let  it  fool  you 
again.  You  have  known  it  for  what  it  is  not, 
now  know  it  for  what  it  is.  If  the  body  is 
dragged  anywhere,  let  it  go  ;  do  not  care  where 
the  body  is.  This  tyrannical  idea  of  duty  is  a 
terrible  poison  and  is  destroying  the  world. 

Do  not  wait  to  have  a  harp  and  rest  by  and 
by  ;  why  not  take  a  harp  and  begin  here  ? 
Why  wait  for  heaven  ?  Make  it  here.  In  heaven 
there  is  no  marrying  or  giving  in  marriage  ; 
why  not  begin  at  once  and  have  none  here  ? 
The  yellow  robe  of  the   Sanyasin   is  the   sign 

246 


Inspired   Talks 

of  the  free.  Give  up  the  beggar's  dress  ot  the 
world;  wear  the  flag  of  freedom,  the  ochre 
robe. 

Sunday,  August  tth. 

"  Whom  the  ignorant  worship,  Him  I  preach 
unto  thee." 

This  one  and  only  God  is  the  "  knownest" 
of  the  known.  He  is  the  one  thing  we  see 
everywhere.  All  know  their  own  self,  all 
know  "I  am",  even  animals.  All  we  know 
is  the  projection  of  the  Self.  Teach  this 
to  the  children,  they  can  grasp  it.  Every 
religion  has  worshipped  the  Self,  even  though 
unconsciously,  because  there  is  nothing  else. 

This  indecent  clinging  to  life  as  we  know  it 
here,  is  the  source  of  all  evil.  It  causes  all  this 
cheating  and  stealing.  It  makes  money  a  god 
and  all  vices  and  fears  ensue.  Value  nothing 
material  and  do  not  cling  to  it.     If  you  cling  to 

247 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

nothing,  not  even  life,  then  there  is  no  ^fear. 
"  He  goes  from  death  to  death  who  sees  many 
in  this  world."  There  can  be  no  physical 
death  for  as  and  no  mental  death,  when  we  see 
thai  all  is  one.  All  bodies  are  mine,  so  even 
body  is  eternal,  because  the  tree,  the  animal, 
the  sun,  the  moon,  the  universe  itself  is  my 
body  ;  then  how  can  it  die  ?  Every  mind, 
every  thought  is  mine,  then  how  can  death 
come  ?  The  Self  is  never  born  and  never  dies. 
When  we  realize  this,  all  doubts  vanish,  "  I 
am,  I  know,  I  love,"  these  can  never  be 
doubted.  There  is  no  hunger,  for  all  that  is 
eaten  is  eaten  by  me.  If  a  hair  falls  out,  we 
do  not  think  we  die  ;  so  if  one  body  dies,  it 
is  but  a  hair  falling. 

The  superconscious  is  God,  is  beyond  speech, 

beyond  thought,  beyond   consciousness 

There  are  three  states, — brutality  {lamas),    hu- 

248 


Inspired  Talks 

manity  (rajas),  and  divinity  (sattva).  Those 
attaining  the  highest  state  simply  are.  Duty 
dies  there ;  they  only  love  and  as  a  magnet 
draw  others  to  them.  This  is  freedom.  No 
more  you  do  moral  acts,  but  whatever  you  do 
is  moral.  The  Brahmavit  (knower  of  God)  is 
higher  than  all  gods.  The  angels  came  to  wor- 
ship Jesus  when  he  had  conquered  delusion  and 
had  said  "Get  thee  behind  me  Satan.  "  None 
can  help  a  Brahmavit,  the  universe  itself  bows 
down  before  him.  His  every  desire  is  fulfilled, 
his  spirit  purifies  others  ;  therefore  worship  the 
Brahmavit  if  you  wish  to  attain  the  highest. 
When  we  have  the  three  great '  'gifts  of  God/' 
a  human  body,  intense  desire  to  be  free  and  the 
help  of  a  great  soul  to  show  us  the  way,  then 
liberation  is  certain  for  us.  Mukti  is  ours. 

■3f?  3JJ  u£  3|& 

Death  of  the  body  forever  is  Nirvdna.     It  is 
the  negative  side  and  says  "  1  am  not  this,    nor 

249 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

this,  nor  this. "  Vedanta  takes  the  further 
step  and  asserts  the  positive  side, — mukti  or 
freedom.  "  I  am  Existence  absolute,  Know- 
ledge absolute,  Bliss  absolute,  I  am  He" ,  this 
is  Vedanta,  the  capstone  of  the  perfect  arch. 

The  great  majority  of  the  adherents  of 
Northern  Buddhism  believe  in  mukti  and  are 
really  Vedantists.  Only  the  Ceylonese  accept 
Nirvdna  as  annihilation. 

No  belief  or  disbelief  can  kill  the  "  I.  " 
That  which  comes  with  belief  and  goes  with 
disbelief  is  only  a  delusion.  Nothing  touches 
the  At  man.  "  I  salute  my  own  Self."  "Self- 
illuminated,  I  salute  myself,  I  am  Brahman" 
The  body  is  a  dark  room  ;  when  we  enter  it,  it 
becomes  illuminated,  it  becomes  alive.  No- 
thing can  ever  affect  the  illumination  ;  it  cannot 
be  destroyed.  It  may  be  covered,  but  never 
destroyed. 


250 


Inspired   Talks 

At  the  present  time  God  should   be  worship- 
ped as  <l  Mother",   the   Infinite   Energy.     This 
will  lead    to    purity,    and   tremendous  energy 
will  come  here  in  America.     Here  no  temples 
weigh  us  down,  no  one  suffers  as  they    do   in 
poorer    countries.     Woman   has    suffered   for 
aeons,  and   that  has  given  her  infinite  patience 
and  infinite  perseverance.     She  holds  on  to  an 
idea.     It  is  this  which  makes   her   the   support 
of  even  superstitious  religions  and  of  the  priests 
in  every  land,  and  it  is  this   that   will  free   her. 
We  have  to   become    Vedantists  and   live   this 
grand  thought  ;  the  masses  must  get   it,  and 
only  in   free  America  can   this  be    done.     In 
India     these      ideas  were     brought     out     by 
individuals,  like  Buddha,  Sankara,   and   others, 
but    the     masses  did    not    retain  them.     The 
new  cycle  must  see  the  masses  living  Vedanta 
and     this     will     have      to      come     through 
women. 

251 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Keep  the  beloved,  beautiful  Mother  in  the 
heart  of  your  hearts  with   all  care. 

"  Throw  out  everything  but  the   tongue,  keep 

that  to  say  '  Mother,  Mother  !  " 

"  Let  no  evil  counsellors  enter  ;  let  you  and 
me,  my  heart,  alone  see  Mother."     .     .     . 

"  Thou  art  beyond  all  that  lives  ! 

u  My  Moon  of  life,  my  Soul  of  soul  !  '! 

Sunday  Afternoon. 

Mind  is  an  instrument  in  the  hand  of  Atman, 
just  as  body  is  an  instrument  in  the  hand  of 
mind.  Matter  is  motion  outside,  mind  is  motion 
inside.  All  change  begins  and  ends  in  time. 
If  the  Atman  is  unchangeable,  It  must  be  per- 
fect ;  if  perfect,  it  must  be  infinite  ;  and  if  It 
be  infinite,  It  must  be  only  One  ;  there  cannot 
be  two  infinities.  So  the  Atman,  the  Self  can 
be  only  One.  Though  It  seems  to  be  various, 
It  is  really    only    One.     If  a  man    were  to  go 

252 


Inspired  Talks 

toward  the  sun,  at  every  step  he  would  see  a 
different  sun,  and  yet  it  would  be  the  same  sua 
after  all. 

Asti,  "  isness,'3  is  the  basis  of  all  unity  and 
just  as  soon  as  the  basis  is  found,  perfection 
ensues.  If  all  color  could  be  resolved  into  one 
color,  painting  would  cease.  The  perfect  one- 
ness is  rest ;  we  refer  all  manifestations  to  one 
Being.  Taoists,  Confucianists,  Buddhists,. 
Hindus,  Jews,  Mahommedans,  Christians  and 
Zoroastrians,  all  preached  the  golden  rule  and 
in  almost  the  same  words ;  but  only  the 
Hindus  have  given  the  rationale,  because  they 
saw  the  reason  :  Man  must  love  others  because 
those  others  are  himself.    There  is  but  One. 

Of  all  the  great  religious  teachers  the  world 
has  known  only  Laotze,  Buddha  and  Jesus 
transcended  the  golden  rule  and  said,  "  Do 
good  to  your  enemies,"  u  Love  them  that  hate 
you." 

253 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Principles  exist;  we  do  not  create  them,  we 
only  discover  them. ..Religion  consists  solely 
in  realization.  Doctrines  are  methods,  not  reli- 
gion. All  the  different  religions  are  but  appli- 
cations of  the  one  religion  adapted  to  suit  the 
requirements  of  different  nations.  Theories 
only  lead  to  fighting  ;  thus  the  Name  of  God 
that  ought  to  bring  peace  has  been  the  cause 
of  half  the  bloodshed  of  the  world.  Go  to  the 
direct  source.  Ask  God  what  He  is.  Unless 
He  answers,  He  is  not;  but  every  religion 
teaches  that  He  does  answer. 

Have  something  to  say  for  yourself,  else  how 
can  you  have  any  idea  of  what  others  have 
said  ?  Do  not  cling  to  old  superstitions 
be  ever  ready  for  new  truths.  u  Fools  are 
they  who  would  drink  brackish  water  from 
a  well  that  their  forefathers  have  digged  and 
would  not  drink  pure  water  from  a  well  that 
others  have  digged."     Until  we  realize  God  for 

254 


Inspired  Talks 

ourselves  we  can  know  nothing  about  Him. 
Each  man  is  perfect  by  his  nature  ;  prophets 
have  manifested  this  perfection,  but  it  is  poten- 
tial in  us.  How  can  we  understand  that 
Moses  saw  God  unless  we  too  see  Him  ?  If 
God  ever  came  to  anyone  He  will  come  to  me. 
I  will  go  to  God  direct  ;  let  Him  talk  to  me. 
I  cannot  take  belief  as  a  basis,  that  is  atheism 
and  blasphemy.  If  God  spake  to  a  man  in  the 
deserts  of  Arabia  two  thousand  years  ago,  He 
can  also  speak  to  me  to-day,  else  how  can  I 
know  that  He  has  not  died  ?  Come  to  God 
any  way  you  can  ;  only  come.  But  in  coming 
do  not  push  anyone  down. 

The  knowing  ones  must  have  pity  on  the 
ignorant.  One  who  knows  is  willing  to  give 
up  his  body  even  for  an  ant,  because  he  knows 
that  the  body  is  nothing. 

Monday,  August  5th. 

The   question    is  :  Is  it   necessary    to    pass 

255 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

through  all  the  lower  stages  to  reach  the  highest 
or  can  a  plunge  be  taken  at  once  ?  The 
modern  American  boy  takes  twenty-five  years 
to  attain  that  which  his  forefathers  took  hun- 
dreds of  years  to  do.  The  Hindu  gets  in 
twenty  years  to  the  height  reached  in  eight 
thousand  years  by  his  ancestors.  On  the  phy- 
sical side,  the  embryo  goes  from  the  amoeba  to 
man  in  the  womb.  These  are  the  teachings  of 
modern  science.  Vedanta  goes  further  and 
tells  us  that  we  not  only  have  to  live  the  life  of 
all  past  humanity,  but  also  the  future  life  of  all 
humanity.  The  man  who  does  the  first  is  the 
educated  man,  the  second  is  the  jivan-mukta, 
forever  free. 

Time  is  merely  the  measure  of  our  thoughts, 
and  thought  being  inconceivably  swift,  there  is 
no  limit  to  the  speed  with  which  we  can  live 
the  life  ahead.  So  it  cannot  be  stated  how 
long  it  would  take  to  live   all  future  life.     It 

256 


Inspired  Talks 

might  be  in  a   second,  or  it  might  take  fifty 
lifetimes.     It   depends  on   the    intensity  of  the 
desire.     The  teaching  must   therefore  be  modi- 
fied according  to  the  needs  of  the  taught.    The 
consuming  fire  is  ready  for   all,  even  water  and 
chunks  of  ice  quickly   consume.     Fire  a   mass 
of  bird- shot,   one  at  least   will  strike  ;   give  a 
man  a  whole  museum  of  truths,  he  will  at  once 
take   what  is  suited  to  him.      Past  lives  have 
moulded  our    tendencies,  give  to  the  taught  in 
accordance    with  his   tendency.      Intellectual, 
mystical,    devotional,  practical,   make  one  the 
basis,  but   teach  the  others  with  it.     Intellect 
must  be  balanced  with  love,  the  mystical  nature 
with  reason,    while  practice    must  form  part  of 
every  method.  Take  every  one  where  he  stands 
and   push     him    forward.     Religious   teaching 
must    always  be  constructive,    not  destructive. 
Each    tendency   shows   the  life-work  of  the 
past,  the    line  or  radius  along  which   that  man 

R  257 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

must  move.  All  radii  lead  to  the  centre.  Never 
even  attempt  to  disturb  anyone's  tendencies,  to 
do  that  puts  back  both  teacher  and  taught. 
When  you  teach  Jnanam,  you  must  become  a 
Jndni  and  stand  mentally  exactly  where  the 
taught  stands.  Similarly  in  every  other  Yoga. 
Develop  every  faculty  as  if  it  were  the  only 
one  possessed,  this  is  the  true  secret  of  so-called 
harmonious  development.  That  is,  get  exten- 
sity  with  intensity,  but  not  at  its  expense.  We 
are  infinite.  There  is  no  limitation  in  us,  we 
can  be  as  intense  as  the  most  devoted  Mahom. 
medan  and  as  broad  as  the  most  roaring  atheist. 
The  way  to  do  this  is  not  to  put  the  mind  on 
any  one  subject,  but  to  develop  and  control 
the  mind  itself ;  then  you  can  turn  it  on  any 
side  you  choose.  Thus  you  keep  the  intensity 
and  extensity.  Feel  Jnanam  as  if  it  were  all 
there  was,  then  do  the  same  with  Bhakti,  with 
Raja,  with  Karma.     Give  up  the  waves  and  go 


258 


Inspired  Talks 

to  the  ocean,  then  you  can  have  the  waves  as 
you  please.  Control  the  "  lake  "  of  your  own 
mind,  else  you  cannot  understand  the  lake  of 
another's  mind. 

The  true  teacher  is  one  who  can  throw  his 
whole  force  into  the  tendency  of  the  taught. 
Without  real  sympathy  we  can  never  teach  well. 
Give  up  the  notion  that  man  is  a  responsible 
being,  only  the  perfect  man  is  responsible.  The 
ignorant  have  drunk  deep  of  the  cup  of  delu- 
sion and  are  not  sane.  You,  who  know,  must 
have  infinite  patience  with  these.  Have  nothing 
but  love  for  them  and  find  out  the  disease  that 
has  made  them  see  the  world  in  a  wrong  light, 
then  help  them  to  cure  it  and  see  aright.  Re- 
member always  that  only  the  free  have  free 
will  ;  all  the  rest  are  in  bondage  and  are  not 
responsible  for  what  they  do.  Will  as  will  is 
bound.  The  water  when  melting  on  the  top  of 
the  Himalayas  is  free,  but  becoming    the  riverr 

259 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

it  is  bound  by  the  banks  ;  yet  the  original  im- 
petus carries  it  to  the  sea  and  it  regains  its 
freedom.  The  first  is  the  "  fall  of  man,"  the 
second  is  the  "  resurrection.''  Not  one  atom 
can  rest  until  it  finds  its  freedom. 

Some  imaginations  help  to  break  the  bond- 
age of  the  rest.  The  whole  universe  is  imagin- 
ation, but  one  set  of  imaginations  will  cure 
another  set.  Those  which  tell  us  that  there  is 
sin  and  sorrow  and  death  in  the  world  are 
terrible  ;  but  the  other  set  which  says  ever  *  I 
am  holy,  there  is  God,  there  is  no  pain, "  these 
are  good  and  help  to  break  the  bondage  of  the 
others.  The  highest  imagination  that  can 
break  all  the  links  of  the  chain,  is  that  of  per- 
sonal God. 

"  Om  tat  sat  "  is  the  only  thing  beyond  Maya, 
but  God  exists  eternally.  As  long  as  Niagara 
Falls  exists,  the  rainbow  will  exist  ;  but  the 
water  continually  flows  away.    The  falls  are  the 

260 


Inspired  Talks 

universe  and  the  rainbow  is  personal  God,  and 
both  are  eternal.  While  the  universe  exists, 
God  must  exist.  God  creates  the  universe  and 
the  universe  creates  God  and  both  are  eternal. 
Mdyd  is  neither  existence  nor  non-existence. 
Both  Niagara  Falls  and  the  rainbow  are  the 
eternal  changeable,  Brahman  seen  through 
Mdyd.  Persians  and  Christians  split  Mdyd  into 
two  and  call  the  good  half  "  God  "  and  the  bad 
half  the  "devil."  Vedanta  takes  Mdyd  as  a 
whole  and  recognizes  a  unity  beyond  it, — 
Brahman,  \ 

#  #  *  * 

Mahommed  found  that  Christianity  was 
straying  out  from  the  Semitic  fold  and  his 
teachings  were  to  show  what  Christianity  ought 
to  be  as  a  Semitic  religion,  that  it  should  hold 
to  one  God.  The  Aryan  idea  that  "  I  and  my 
Father  are  one"  disgusted  and  terrified  him. 
In   reality  the  conception  of  the  Trinity  was   a 

261 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

great  advance  over  the  dualistic  idea  of  Jehovah, 
who  was  forever  separate  from  man.  The 
theory  of  incarnation  is  the  first  link  in  the 
chain  of  ideas  leading  to  the  recognition  of  the 
oneness  of  God  and  man.  God  appearing  first 
in  one  human  form,  then  re-appearing  at  differ- 
ent times  in  other  human  forms  is  at  last  re- 
cognized as  being  in  every  human  form,  or 
in  all  men.  Monistic  is  the  highest  stage, 
monotheistic  is  a  lower  stage.  Imagination  will 
lead  you  to  the  highest  even  more  rapidly  and 
easily  than  reasoning. 

Let  a  few  stand  out  and  live  for  God  alone 
and  save  religion  for  the  world.  Do  not  pre- 
tend to  be  like  Janaka  when  you  are  only  the 
"progenitor"  of  delusions.  (The  name  Janaka 
means  "progenitor''  and  belonged  to  a  king 
who,  although  he  still  held  his  kingdom  for  the 
sake  of  his  people,  had  given  up  everything 
mentally).     Be  honest  and  say,  "I  see  the  ideal 

262 


Inspired  Talks 

but  I  cannot  yet  approach  it"  ;  but  do  not  pre- 
tend to  give  up  when  you  do  not.  If  you  give 
up,  stand  fast.  If  a  hundred  fall  in  the  fight, 
seize  the  flag  and  carry  it  on.  God  is  true  for 
all  that,  no  matter  who  fails.  Let  him  who 
falls  hand  on  the  flag  to  another  to  carry  on  ; 
it  can  never  fall. 

When  I  am  washed  and  clean  why  shall 
impurity  be  added  on  to  me?  Seek  first 
the  kingdom  of  Heaven  and  let  everything 
else  go.  Do  not  want  anything  "added  unto 
you"  ;  be  only  glad  to  get  rid  of  it.  Give 
up  and  know  that  success  will  follow,  even 
if  you  never  see  it.  Jesus  left  twelve  fisher- 
men and  yet  those  few  blew  up  the  Roman 
Empire. 

Sacrifice  on  God's  altar  earth's  purest  and 
best.  He  who  struggles  is  better  than  he 
who  never  attempts.  Even  to  look  on  one 
who    has   given    up    has    a    purifying    effect 

263 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

Stand  up  for  God;  let  the  world  go.  Have 
no  compromise.  Give  up  the  world,  then 
alone  you  are  loosened  from  the  body.  When 
it  dies,  you  are  az&d,  free.  Be  free.  Death 
alone  can  never  free  us.  Freedom  must  be 
attained  by  our  own  efforts  during  life  ;  then, 
when  the  body  falls,  there  will  be  no  re-birth 
for  the  free. 

Truth  is  to  be  judged  by  truth  and  by  nothing 
else.     Doing  good  is   no  test  of  truth  ;    the  Sun 

needs   no  torch   by  which   to  see   it.     Even    if 

truth   destroys  the   whole   universe,   still  it   is 

truth  ;  stand  by  it. 

Practising  the  concrete   forms  of   religion  is 

easy  and  attracts  the  masses ;  but  really  there  is 

nothing  in  the  external. 
"  As  the  spider  throws  her  web  out  of  herself 

and  draws  it  in,  even  so  this  universe  is  thrown 

out  and  drawn  in  by  God." 


264 


Inspired  Talks 

Tuesday,  August  Mh. 

Without  the  "  I  "  there  can  be  no  *  you  " 
outside.  From  this  some  philosophers  came  to 
the  conclusion  that  the  external  world  did  not 
exist  save  in  the  subject;  that  the  "  you '' 
existed  only  in  the  "I."  Others  have  argued 
that  the  "  I "  can  only  be  known  through 
the  "you "and  with  equal  logic.  These  two 
views  are  partial  truths  each  wrong  in  part  and 
each  right  in  part.  Thought  is  as  much  mate- 
rial and  as  much  in  nature  as  body  is.  Both 
matter  and  mind  exist  in  a  third,  a  unity  which 
divides  itself  into  the  two.  This  unity  is  the 
Attnan,  the  real  Self. 

There  is  being,  "x"  which  is  manifesting 
itself  as  both  mind  and  matter.  Its  move- 
ments in  the  seen  are  along  certain  fixed  lines 
called  law.  As  a  unity,  it  is  free  ;  as  many,  it 
is  bound  by  law.  Still,  with  all  this  bondage, 
an  idea   of  freedom   is  ever  present   and  this  is 

265 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

nivtitti  or  the  "dragging  from  attachment." 
The  materializing  forces  which  through  desire 
lead  us  tu  take  an  active  part  in  worldly  affairs 
are  called  pravritti. 

That  action  is  moral  which  frees  us  from  the 
bondage  of  matter  and  vice  versa.  This  world 
appears  infinite  because  everything  is  in  a 
circle ;  it  returns  to  whence  it  came.  The 
circle  meets,  so  there  is  no  rest  or  peace  here 
in  any  place.  We  must  get  out.  Mukti  is  the 
one  end  to  be  attained. 

*  *  *  * 

Evil  changes  in  form,  but  remains  the  same 
in  quality.  In  ancient  times  force  ruled,  to-day 
it  is  cunning.  Misery  in  India  is  not  so  bad 
as  in  America,  because  the  poor  man  here  sees 
the  greater   contrast  to  his  own  bad   condition. 

Good  and  evil  are  inextricably  combined, 
and  one  cannot  be  had  without  the  other. 
The  sum  total  of   energy  in  this   universe  is  like 

266 


Inspired  Talks 

a  lake,  every  wave  inevitably  leads  to  a  corres- 
ponding depression.  The  sum  total  is  abso- 
lutely the  same,  so  to  make  one  man  happy  is 
to  make  another  unhappy.  External  happiness 
is  material  and  the  supply  is  fixed  ;  so  that  not 
one  grain  can  be  had  by  one  person  without 
taking  from  another.  Only  bliss  beyond  | the 
material  world  can  be  had  without  loss  to  any. 
Material  happiness  is  but  a  transformation  of 
material  sorrow. 

Those  who  are  born  in  the  wave  and  keep  in 
it,  do  not  see  the  depression  and  what  is  there. 
Never  think  you  can  make  the  world  better  and 
happier.  The  bullock  in  the  oil  mill  never 
reaches  the  wisp  of  hay  tied  in  front  of  him,  he 
only  grinds  out  the  oil.  So  we  chase  the  will- 
o'-the-wisp  of  happiness  that  always  eludes  us 
and  we  only  grind  Nature's  mill,  then  die 
merely  to  begin  again.  If  we  could  get  rid  of 
evil,  we   should  never  catch  a  glimpse   of  any- 

267 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

thing  higher  ;  we  would  be  satisfied  and  never 
struggle  to  get  free.  When  man  finds  that  all 
search  for  happiness  in  matter  is  nonsense, 
then  religion  begins.  All  human  knowledge  is 
but  part  of  religion. 

In  the  human  body  the  balance  between 
good  and  evil  is  so  even  that  there  is  a  chance 
for  man  to  wish  to  free  himself  from  both. 

The  free  never  became  bound  ;  to  ask  how 
he  did,  is  an  illogical  question.  Where  no 
bondage  is,  there  is  no  cause  and  effect.  "  I 
became  a  fox  in  a  dream  and  a  dog  chased  me." 
Now  how  can  I  ask  why  the  dog  chased  me  ? 
The  fox  was  a  part  of  the  dream  and  the  dog 
followed  as  a  matter  of  course ;  but  both 
belong  to  the  dream  and  have  no  existence 
outside.  Science  and  religion  are  both  attempts 
to  help  us  out  of  the  bondage  ;  only  religion  is 
the  more  ancient  and  we  have  the  superstition 
that  it  is  the  more  holy.     In  a  way  it  is,  because 

268 


Inspired  Talks 

it  makes  morality  a  vital  point  and  science  does 
not. 

"  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall 
see  God."  This  sentence  alone  would  save 
mankind,  if  all  books  and  prophets  were  lost. 
This  purity  of  heart  will  bring  the  vision  of 
God.  It  is  the  theme  of  the  whole  music  of 
this  universe.  In  purity  is  no  bondage. 
Remove  the  veils  of  ignorance  by  purity,  then 
we  manifest  ourselves  as  we  really  are  and 
know  that  we  were  never  in  bondage.  The 
seeing  of  many  is  the  great  sin  of  all  the  world. 
See  all  as  Self  and  love  all  ;  let  all  idea  of 
separateness  go. 

¥fc  ?y  4y  ^ 

The  diabolical  man  is  a  part  of  my  body  as  a 
wound  or  a  burn  is.  We  have  to  nurse  it  and 
get  it  better  5  so  continually  nurse  and  help  the 
diabolical  man  until  he  "  heals"  and  is  once 
more  happy  and  healthy. 

268 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

While  we  think  on  the  relative  plane,  we 
have  the  right  to  believe  that  as  bodies  we  can 
be  hurt  by  relative  things  and  equally  that  we 
can  be  helped  by  them.  This  idea  of  help, 
abstracted,  is  what  we  call  God.  The  sum 
total  of  all  ideas  of  help  is  God. 

God  is  the  abstract  compound  of  all  that  is 
merciful  and  good  and  helpful  ;  that  should  be 
the  sole  idea.  As  Atman  we  have  no  body,  so 
to  say  "  I  am  God  and  poison  does  not  hurt 
me''  is  an  absurdity.  While  there  is  a  body 
and  we  see  it,  we  have  not  realized  God.  Can 
the  little  whirlpool  remain  after  the  river  van- 
ishes ?  Cry  for  help  and  you  will  get  it,  and 
at  last  you  will  find  that  the  one  crying  for  help 
has  vanished  and  so  has  the  Helper,  and  the 
play  is  over  ;  only  the  Self  remains. 

This  once  done,  come  back  and  play  as  you 
will.  This  body  can  then  do  no  evil,  because 
it  is  not  until  the  evil  forces  are  all  burned  out 

270 


Inspired   Talks 

that  liberation  comes.  All  dross  has  been 
burned  out  and  there  remains  "  flame  without 
heat  and  without  smoke." 

The  past  momentum  carries  on  the  body,  but 
it  can  only  do  good,  because  the  bad  was  all 
gone  before  freedom  came.  The  dying  thief 
on  the  cross  reaped  the  effects  of  his  past 
actions.  He  had  been  a  Yogi  and  had  slipped  ; 
then  he  had  to  be  born  again  ;  again  he  slipped 
and  became  a  thief ;  but  the  past  good  he  had 
done  bore  fruit,  and  he  met  Jesus  in  the 
moment  when  liberation  could  come  and  one 
word  made  him  free. 

Buddha  set  his  greatest  enemy  free  because 
he,  by  hating  him  (Buddha)  so  much,  kept 
constantly  thinking  of  him  ;  that  thought  puri- 
fied his  mind  and  he  became  ready  for  free- 
dom. Therefore  think  of  God  all  the  time  and 
that  will  purify  you. 


271 


Vedanta  Philosophy 

(This  ended  the  beautiful  lessons  of  our  beloved 
Guru.  The  following  day  he  left  Thousand 
Island  Park  and  returned  to  New  York.) 


272 


ADVERTISEMENTS 


This  book  is  also  obtainable : 

In  America,  from 

VEDANTA  CENTRE, 

16,  St.  Batolph  Street, 

Boston,  Mass. 
U.  S  A. 

In  Europe,  from 

LUZAC  &  Co., 

46,  Great  Russell  Street, 

LONDON,  W.C. 


List  of  Books  for  sale  at  The  Sri  Ramakr  ishna 
Home,  Brodie's  Road,  Mylapore 


Madras,  S. 


Sri  Ramakrishna — 


Rs.  A. 

Gospel  of  Sri  Ramakrishna  (cloth)         ...  2     8 

Do.  do.  (paper)        ...  2     0 

Sayings  of  Sri  Ramakrishna — Brahmava- 

din  Edition         1 


Swami  Vivekananda — 

My  Master  

Complete  works  of  Swami  Vivekananda, 

in  6  volumes  (5  volumes  now  ready)each 

Inspired  Talks        

From  Colombo  to  Almora  

Jnana  Yoga  

Raja  Yoga 

Bhakti  Yoga  

Karma  Yoga  

Epistles  of  Swamiji  

Do.      second  series       

Vedanta  Philosophy         

Modern  India         

Ideal  of  Universal  Religion  

The  East  and  the  West 

Swami  Ramakr  ishnanan  da — 

The  Universe  and  man  (cloth)         

Do.  do.      (paper)  

The  Soul  of  Man  (cloth)  

Do.        do.        (paper)  

Sri  Krishna,  the  Pastoral  and   the    King- 
maker        

The  Path  to  Perfection     

Sri  Ramakrishna  and  His  Mission 


0     0 


0     7     0 


2 

8 

0 

2 

0 

0 

'2 

0 

0 

1 

6 

0 

I 

8 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

6 

0 

0 

6 

0 

0 

6 

0 

0 

5 

0 

0 

2 

6 

0 

12 

0 

i 

8 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

8 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

12 

0 

0 

3 

0 

0 

5 

0 

Swami  Saradananda —  Rs.  A.  P. 

Lectures,  Literary  and  Religious  ...     0     8     0 

The  Vedanta— Its  Theory  and  Practice...     0     10 

Swami  Abhedananda— 

Single  Lectures  (17  different  subjects)  each  0     4     0 
Re-incarnation  (paper)      10     0 

Swami  Paramananda — 

The  Path  of  Devotion  (cloth)      1  12  0 

Do.  do.  (paper)      0  12  0 

Vedanta  in  Practice  (cloth)         1  12  0 

Do.         do.  (paper)         10  0 

The  True  Spirit  of  Religion  is  Universal  0     5  0 

Principles  and  Purpose  of  Vedanta        ...  0     4  0 

A.  Panchapakesa  Iyer,  M.  A.,  L.  T. 

India's  Needs  and  Sri  Ramakrishna  Mission  0     2     0 

Tamil  Books— 

44  My  Master"  by  Swami  Vivekananda  ...     0     4     0 
Karmayoga  do  ...020 

Sri  Ramakrishna  Paramahamsa  Vijayam.     14     0 

Telugu  Book- 
Life  and  Sayings  of  Sri    Ramakrishna — 

610  Sayings         0     8     0 

Half-Tone  Picture — 

Sri  Ramakrishna    ...         0     5     0 

Vivekananda  (tri-coloured)  0     5     0 

Acharya  Vivekananda      ...         0  10     0 

PHOTO  of  His  Holiness  Swami  Brahma- 
nanda,   President   of   the    Ramakrishna 
Mission,    Bust,    Home   Dress,   Standing 
Posture  and  Group  of  Swamiji  and   His 

Disciples  ...  each  0    8    0 

Do.  do.      (Bromide)  ...    0  12    0 


THE  UNIVERSE  AND  MAN 

BY 
SWAM1  RAMAKRISHNANANDA 

CONTENTS: 

1.  THE  MESSAGE  OF  I  IV.  THE   SELF— IMPOSED 
SRI  RAMAKRISHNA.  STRUGGLE. 

II.  THE  UNIVERSE.  I  V.  THE  VEDANTA. 

III.  SPACE  AND  TIME.  |  VI.  BHAKTI. 

American  Edition,  Cloth,  $  1.00.     Postage  8  cents. 
Indian  Edition,  Boards,  Re.  1.        Postage  Anna  I. 

"The  present  volume  contains,  in  the  main,  the  essence  of  the 
teachings  of  his  (the  author's)  Master,  Sri  Ramakrishna,  on  the 
philosophy  and  religion  of  Vedanta.  The  treatment  is  in  many 
respects  quite  original  and  the  Swami  has  done  his  best  to  give  a 
clear  and  succinct  exposition  of  the  essential  teachings  of  the 
Vedanta  in  all  its  divers  aspects.  We  congratulate  the  Swami  on 
having  succeeded  in  bringing  such  a  difficult  subject   within  the 

easy  comprehension  of  the  general  reader  and  the  beginner 

Swami  Ramakrishnananda  has  always    rightly   kept   in  view 

the  highest  standpoint  of  the  Vedanta  philosophy  throughout.  We 
recommend  the  book  to  the  careful  perusal  of  all  students  of  the 
Vedanta." 

BRAHMAVADIN  (India.) 

"  The  necessity  for  the  highest  ethical  life  is  insisted  on  ; 
realization  of  the  truth  based  on  an  altruistic  life  is  its  keynote 
and  the  divinity  of  man,  nay  of  all  life,  is  its  basic  principle.  The 
author's  conception  of  devotion  or  Bhakti  and  its  relation  to 
Gnanam  is  highly  original.  The  Swami  is  a  master  of  the  lofty 
and  intricate  philosophy  of  the  Vedanta.  His  expositions  are 
clear,  concise  and  well-reasoned.  They  bear  the  stamp  of  a  high 
degree  of  self-realization. 

THE  HINDU,  Madras,  India 
Published  by 
THE   RAMAKRISHNA  MISSION 
Mylapore,  MADRAS. 


WORKS  BY 

SWAMI  PARAMANANDA 

THE  PATH  OF  DEVOTION 


CONTENTS: 


I.  Devotion 
II.  Purity 


III.  Steadfastness 

IV.  Fearlessness 


V.  Self-surrender, 

(Portrait  of  Author) 

American  Edition,  Cloth,  Gilt  top.     $  1.00.  Postage   5  cents. 

Indian  Edition,  Cloth,  Re.  1-12;  Paper,  As.  12.     Postage  extra. 

PRESS   NOTICES. 

u  The  book  has  the  same  ring  of  strength,  boldness  and 
universal  sympathy  that  is  to  be  found  in  every  page  of  Swami 
Vivekananda's  writings.  The  words  are  so  alive  that  they  seem 
rather  spoken  than  written.  " 

Indian  Review, 

"  This  is  not  a  book  of  theory,  but  of  practice.  It  gives 
wisdom  for  the  inner  life  and  its  outer  manifestations.  Without 
doubt  the  book  will  have  a  wide  reading.  " 

Detroit  Times. 


THE  TRUE  SPIRIT  OF  RELIGION 

(With  an  Essay  on  IDOLS  AND  IDEALS  appended) 

Paper — For  America  25  cents.     Postage  2  cents. 
For  India  As.  5.   Postage  extra. 

For  Sale  by 

THE    RAMAKRISHNA   MISSION, 

Mylapore,  MADRAS. 


INSPIRED    TALKS 

BY 

SWAMI  VIVEKANANDA 

Recorded  by  a  disciple  during  the  Seven  Weeks 
at  Thousand  Island  Park 

(Second  Edition,  with  notes) 

Price  Rs.  2 


GOSPEL 

OF 

SRI  RAMAK&ISHNA. 
(According  to  M.,  a  son  and  disciple  of  the  Lord.) 
Second  Edition  Revised    and  Enlarged  in  the  Press, 
Cloth  Rs.  2-8  PART  I  Paper,  Rs.  2 

Only  authorised  edition 

This  volume  contains  the  inspired  words  of  the  great  Divine 
Teacher,  Sri  Kamakrishna  Deva,  the  Master  of  Swami  Viveka- 
nanda  and  his  brothers.  It  is  a  series  of  conversations  in  which 
the  highest  spiritual  truths  were  expounded  by  the  Master,  in 
simple  language  with  homely  illustrations,  to  disciples  and  casual 
visitors.  These  conversations  were  carefully  recorded  and 
preserved  by  an  earnest  and  faithful  householder-disciple,  M., 
and  translated  by  himself  into  English.  The  original  and  the 
translation  received  the  hearty  commendation  of  Swami  Viveka- 
nanda  and  are  absolutely  authentic. 

The  teachings  comprised  in  these  pages  offer  a  complete  and 
profound  exposition  of  the  universal  religion  and  philosophy  of 
Vedanta  in  all  its  aspects.  There  is  no  metaphysical  problem  or 
practical  spiritual  difficulty  that  i«  not  brought  up  and  solved,  1 1 
is  a  divine  message,  given  especially  for  the  present  age,  and  is 
therefore  pre-eminently  adapted  to  meet  its  needs.  It  is  a  record 
of  the  highest  spiritual  experiences  of  the  great  Incarnation  of 
the  day.  No  earnest  aspirant  or  thoughtful  scholar  can  read  it 
without  gaining  new  light  and  inspiration. 

THE  RAMAKRISHNA  MISSION. 

Mylapotet  Madras. 


HOME  USE 

CIRCULATION  DEPARTMENT 

MAIN  LIBRARY 

This  book  is  due  on  the  last  date  stamped  below. 
1 -month  loans  may  be  renewed  by  calling  642-3405. 
6-month  loans  may  be  recharged  by  bringing  books 

to  Circulation  Desk. 
Renewals  and  recharges  may  be  made  4  days  prior 

to  due  date. 

ALL  BOOKS  ARE  SUBJECT  TO  RECALL  7  DAYS 

AFTER  DATE  CHECKED  OUT. 





LD21-£30m-7,'73 
(R2275S10)476 — A-32 


General  Library 

University  of  California 

Berkeley 


