===== Internet Archive OCR: vedntaphilosop00vive_djvu.txt =====

•■  •^'■V';.,: 


>,■«»:■■'• 


I 


.4(^i: 


Class     B  \^2, 

Rooic  .V,3  VjTir' 

COFyRIGHT  DEPOSm 


/ 


JNANA    YOGA 


VEDANTA    PHILOSOPHY 


LECTURES 


SWAMI   VIVEKANANDA 


ON 


jnAna  yoga 


* 


PUBLISHED  BY 

THE  VEDANTA  SOCIETY 
New  York 


THE  LIBRARY  OF 
CONGRESS, 

Two  C0PI68  Received 

JUN.  27    1902 

Copyright  entry 
CLASS  (X^  XXc.  No. 

^  /  5  /  3 

COPY  A. 


^$' 


^ 


Copyright,  1902 

BY 

SWAMI    ABHEDANANDA 


New  York 

Kay  Printing  House 

66-68  Centre  St. 


PREFACE 

Ved^nta  Philosophy  regards  the  religious  tenden- 
cies of  mankind  as  being  of  four  main  divisions,  the 
dividing  lines  not  being  necessarily  sharply  defined, 
for  more  than  one  of  these  tendencies  may  be  found 
in  one  individual.  Broadly  speaking,  there  is  a  large 
class  of  men  who  seek  to  express  their  religious  ideas 
through  ethical  work,  through  constant  effort  to  help 
and  uplift  their  fellow-men.  Then  there  are  others 
of  a  strongly  devotional  character,  who  find  in  love 
and  worship  the  satisfaction  of  their  religious  needs. 
Others  again,  of  more  mystical  nature,  prefer  to  realize 
their  ideals  through  concentration  and  meditation. 
Lastly,  there  is  a  class  of  men  of  strongly  analytical 
natures  who  must  have  the  sanction  of  logic  and 
reason  for  every  belief  and  who  therefore  take  the 
path  of  philosophy  and  discrimination. 

The  books  by  Swami  Vivekananda  already  published 
have  been  intended  to  meet  the  inquiries  of  the  first 
three  classes  of  men.  The  present  work  is  adapted  for 
the  last  class,  the  philosophers.  Jnana  Yoga  is,  as 
its  name  implies,  the  yoga,  or  method,  of  realizing 
our  divine   nature  through   wisdom    {Jnana).     Wis- 

7 


8  J  NAN  A   YOGA 

dom  is  not  knowledge  in  its  ordinary  sense,  although 
it  includes  it.  It  is  that  higher  knowledge  which  is 
self-illumination.  This  is  equally  the  goal  of  every 
yoga,  or  method,  the  difference  lying  only  in  the  path 
chosen  for  reaching  that  goal. 

The  present  volume  consists  chiefly  of  lectures 
which  were  delivered  in  London,  England.  Two  were 
given  in  India,  and  are  consequently  new  both  in 
England  and  in  this  country.  The  lectures  deal  with 
the  teachings  of  the  Upanishads,  which  contain  the 
essence  of  Vedanta.  Some  of  these  Upanishads  are 
among  the  most  ancient  of  the  Hindu  Scriptures,  and 
show  a  wonderful  insight  into  the  great  truths  under- 
lying all  religious  aspiration.  It  is  because  Vedanta 
is  a  religion  of  principles,  not  of  external  authority, 
that  the  late  Professor  Max  Miiller  said  of  it :  "Vedanta 
has  room  for  almost  every  religion;  nay,  it  embraces 
them  all." 


CONTENTS 

PAGE 

I.  The  Song  of  the  Sannyasin    ....  9 

11.  The  Necessity  of  Religion 12 

III.  The  Real  Nature  of  Man 28 

IV.  Maya  and  Illusion 51 

V.  Maya  and  the  Evolution  of  the  Con- 
ception OF  God 74 

VI.  Maya  and  Freedom       91 

VII.  The  Absolute  and  Manifestation    .    .  106 

VIII.  Unity  in  Diversity 124 

IX.  God  in  Everything       142 

X.  Realization 156 

XL  The  Freedom  of  the  Soul 183 

XII.  Practical  Vedanta,  Part  i 201 

XIII.  Practical  Vedanta^  Part  ii 222 

XIV.  Practical  Vedanta,  Part  ili 245 

XV.  Practical  Vedanta,  Part  iv.    .    .    .    .  261 

XVI.  Vedanta  in  All  Its  Phases      ....  283 
XVII.  Vedanta 310 


JNANA    YOGA 


THE  SONG  OF  THE  SANNYASIN 

Wake  up  the  note !    The  song  that  had  its  birth 
Far  off,  where  worldly  taint  could  never  reach; 
In  mountain  caves,  and  glades  of  forest  deep, 
Whose  calm  no  sigh  for  lust  or  wealth  or  fame 
Could  ever  dare  to  break;  where  rolled  the  stream 
Of  knowledge,  truth,  and  bliss  that  follows  both. 
Sing  high  that  note,  Sannyasin  bold !     Say — 

''Om  tat  sat,  Om!" 

Strike  off  thy  fetters !     Bonds  that  bind  thee  down, 
Of  shining  gold,  or  darker,  baser  ore; 
Love,  hate — good,  bad — and  all  the  dual  throng. 
Know  slave  is  slave,  caressed  or  whipped,  not  free; 
For  fetters  tho'  of  gold,  are  not  less  strong  to  bind. 
Then  off  with  them  Sannyasin  bold !     Say — 

"Om  tat  sat,  Om!" 

Let  darkness  go;  the  will-o'-the-wisp  that  leads 
With  blinking  light  to  pile  more  gloom  on  gloom. 
This  thirst  for  life,  for  ever  quench ;  it  drags, 
From  birth  to  death  and  death  to  birth,  the  soul. 
He  conquers  all  who  conquers  self.     Know  this 
And  never  yield,  Sannyasin  bold!     Say — 


'Om  tat  sat,  Omf 


9 


lO  J  NANA   YOGA 

**Who  sows  must  reap,"  they  say,  "and  cause  must  bring 
The  sure  effect;  good,  good;  bad,  bad;  and  none 
Escape  the  law.     But  whoso  wears  a  form 
Must  wear  the  chain."    Too  true,  but  far  beyond 
Both  name  and  form  is  Atman,  ever  free. 
Know  thou  art  That,  Sannyasin  bold!    Say — 

"Om  tat  sat,  Om!" 

They  know  not  truth,  who  dream  such  vacant  dreams 

As  father,  mother,  children,  wife  and  friend. 

The  sexless  Self!    Whose  father  He?    Whose  child? 

Whose  friend,  whose  foe  is  He  who  is  but  One? 

The  Self  is  all  in  all,  naught  else  exists; 

And  thou  art  That,  Sannyasin  bold!     Say — 

"Om  tat  sat,  Om!" 

There  is  but  One— The  Free— The  Knower— Self  I 
Without  a  name,  without  a  form  or  stain; 
In  Him  is  Maya  dreaming  all  this  dream. 
The  Witness,  He  appears  as  nature,  soul. 
Know  thou  art  That,  Sannyasin!     Say — 

"Om  tat  sat,  Om!" 

Where  seekest  thou?    That  freedom,  friend,  this  world 
Nor  that,  can  give.     In  books  and  temples  vain 
Thy  search.     Thine  only  is  the  hand  that  holds 
The  rope  that  drags  thee  on.     Then,  cease  lament. 
Let  go  thy  hold,  Sannyasin  bold !     Say — 

"Om  tat  sat,  OniV 

Say — "Peace  to  all ;  from  me  no  danger  be 

To  aught  that  lives ;  in  those  that  dwell  on  high, 

In  those  that  lowly  creep,  I  am  the  Self  in  all ! 

All  life,  both  here  and  there,  do  I  renounce, 

And  heav'ns,  earths  and  hells ;  all  hopes  and  fears." 

Thus  cut  thy  bonds,  Sannyasin  bold !     Say — 

"Om  tat  sat,  Om!** 


THE    SONG   OF   THE   SANNYASIN  II 

Heed  then  no  more  how  body  lives  or  goes, 

Its  task  is  done.     Let  Karma  float  it  down, 

Let  one  put  garlands  on,  another  kick 

This  frame;  say  naught.     No  praise  or  blame  can  be 

Where  praiser,  praised — and  blamer,  blamed — are  one. 

Thus  be  thou  calm,  Sannyasin  bold!     Say — 

"Om  tat  sat,  Om!" 

Truth  never  comes  where  lust  and  fame  and  greed 
Of  gain  reside.     No  man  who  thinks  of  woman 
As  his  wife  can  ever  perfect  be; 
Nor  he  who  owns  the  least  of  things,  nor  he 
Whom  anger  chains,  can  pass  thro'  Maya's  gates. 
So,  give  these  up,  Sannyasin  bold!     Say — 

"Om  tat  sat,  Om!" 

Have  thou  no  home.     What  home  can  hold  thee,  friend? 
The  sky  thy  roof,  the  grass  thy  bed;  and  food 
What  chance  may  bring,  well  cooked  or  ill,  judge  not. 
No  food  or  drink  can  taint  that  noble  self 
Which  knows  itself.    Like  rolling  river,  be 
Thou  ever  free,  Sannyasin  bold!     Say — 

"Om  tat  sat,  Om!" 

Few  only  know  the  truth.    The  rest  will  hate 
And  laugh  at  thee,  great  one;  but  pay  no  heed. 
Go  thou,  the  free,  from  place  to  place,  and  help 
Them  out  of  darkness,  Maya's  veil.     Without 
The  fear  of  pain  or  search  for  pleasure,  go 
Beyond  them  both  Sannyasin  bold!     Say — 

"Om  tat  sat,  Om!" 

Thus  day  to  day,  till  Karma's  powers  spent 
Release  the  soul  for  ever.     No  more  is  birth 
Nor  I,  nor  thou,  nor  god,  nor  man.    The  "I" 
Has  all  become,  the  all  is  "I,"  and  bliss. 
Know  thou  art  That,  Sannyasin  bold!    Say — 

"Om  tat  sat,  Om!" 


II 

THE  NECESSITY  OF  RELIGION 

Of  all  the  forces  that  have  worked  and  are  still 
working,  to  mould  the  destinies  of  the  human  race, 
none,  certainly,  is  more  potent  than  that,  the  manifes- 
tation of  which  we  call  religion.  All  social  organiza- 
tions have  as  a  background,  somewhere,  the  workings 
of  that  peculiar  force,  and  the  greatest  cohesive  im- 
pulse ever  brought  into  play  amongst  human  units  has 
been  derived  from  this  power  of  religion.  It  is  obvious 
to  all  of  us,  that  in  very  many  cases  the  bonds  of 
religion  have  proved  stronger  than  the  bonds  of  race, 
of  climate,  or  even  of  descent.  It  is  a  well  known 
fact  that  persons  worshipping  the  same  God,  believing 
in  the  same  leligion,  have  stood  by  each  other,  with 
much  greater  strength  and  constancy  than  people  of 
merely  the  same  descent,  or  even  than  brothers.  Vari- 
ous attempts  have  been  made  to  trace  the  beginnings 
of  religion.  In  all  the  ancient  religions  which  have 
come  down  to  us  at  the  present  day  we  find  one  claim 
made — that  they  are  all  supernatural ;  that  their  genesis 
is  not,  as  it  were,  in  the  human  brain,  but  that  they 
have  originated  somewhere  outside  of  it. 

Two  theories  have  gained  some  acceptance  amongst 
modern  scholars.  One  is  the  spirit  theory  of  religion, 
the  other  the  evolution  of  the  Infinite.     One  party 

12 


THE    NECESSITY   OF   RELIGION  1 3 

maintains  that  ancestor  worship  is  the  beginning  of 
religious  ideas;  the  other  that  reHgion  originates  in 
the  personification  of  the  powers  of  nature.  Man 
wants  to  keep  up  the  memory  of  his  dead  relatives, 
and  thinks  they  are  living  even  when  the  body  has 
been  dissolved,  and  he  wants  to  place  food  for  them 
and,  in  a  certain  sense,  to  worship  them.  Out  of  that 
came  the  growth  we  call  religion.  Studying  the 
ancient  religions  of  the  Egyptians,  Babylonians,  Chi- 
nese, and  many  other  races  in  America  and  elsewhere, 
we  find  very  clear  traces  of  this  ancestor  worship 
being  the  beginning  of  religion.  With  the  ancient 
Egyptians  the  first  idea  of  the  soul  was  that  of  a 
double.  This  physical  man  contained  in  it  another 
being  very  similar  to  it,  and  when  a  man  died  this 
double  went  out  of  the  body  and  yet  lived  on.  But 
the  life  of  the  double  lasted  only  as  long  as  the  dead 
body  remained  intact,  and  that  is  why  we  find  among 
the  Egyptians  so  much  solicitude  to  keep  the  body 
intact.  That  is  why  they  built  those  huge  pyramids  in 
which  they  preserved  bodies.  For,  if  any  portion  of 
the  external  body  was  hurt,  just  so  would  the  double 
be  hurt.  This  is  clearly  ancestor  worship.  With  the 
ancient  Babylonians  we  find  the  same  idea  of  the 
double,  but  with  a  variation.  The  double  lost  all  sense 
of  love;  it  frightened  the  living  to  give  it  food  and 
drink,  and  to  help  it  in  various  ways.  It  even  lost  all 
affection  for  its  own  children,  its  own  wife  or  daugh- 
ter. Am.ong  the  ancient  Hindus,  also,  we  find  traces 
of  this  ancestor  worship.  Among  the  Chinese  the 
basis  of  their  religion  may  also  be  said  to  be  clearly 
ancestor  worship,  and  it  still  permeates  the  length  and 


14  J  NANA   YOGA 

breadth  of  that  vast  country.  In  fact  the  only  reUgion 
that  can  really  be  said  to  flourish  in  China  is  that  of 
ancestor  worship.  Thus  it  seems  on  the  one  hand  a 
very  good  position  is  made  out  for  those  who  hold  to 
the  theory  of  ancestor  worship  as  the  beginning  of 
religion. 

On  the  other  hand  there  are  scholars  who  go  back 
to  ancient  Aryan  literature.  Although  in  India  we 
find  proofs  of  ancestor  worship  everywhere,  yet  in  the 
oldest  records  there  is  no  trace  of  it  whatsoever.  In 
the  Rig  Veda  Samhita,  the  most  ancient  record  of  the 
Aryan  race,  we  do  not  find  any  trace  of  it  at  all. 
Modern  scholars  think  it  is  the  worship  of  nature  that 
they  find  there.  The  human  mind  seems  to  struggle 
to  get  a  peep  behind  the  scenes.  The  dawn,  the  even- 
ing, the  hurricane,  the  stupendous  and  gigantic  forces 
of  nature,  its  beauties,  these  have  exercised  the  human 
mind,  and  it  aspires  to  go  beyond,  to  understand  some- 
thing about  them.  In  the  struggle  they  endow  these 
phenomena  with  personal  attributes,  giving  them  souls 
and  bodies,  sometimes  beautiful,  sometimes  transcen- 
dent. Every  attempt  ends  by  these  phenomena  becom- 
ing abstractions  whether  personalized  or  not.  So  also 
it  is  found  with  the  ancient  Greeks;  their  whole 
mythology  is  simply  this  abstracted  nature  worship. 
So  also  with  the  ancient  Germans,  the  Scandinavians, 
and  all  the  other  Aryan  races.  Thus,  on  this  side  too 
a  very  strong  case  has  been  made  out  that  religion  has 
its  origin  in  the  personification  of  the  powers  of 
nature. 

These  two  views,  though  they  seem  to  be  contra- 
dictory, can  be  reconciled  on  a  third  basis,  which  to 


THE    NECESSITY   OF   RELIGION  1$ 

my  mind  is  the  real  germ  of  religion,  and  that  I  pro- 
pose to  call  the  struggle  to  transcend  the  limitations  of 
the  senses.  Either  man  goes  to  seek  for  the  spirits 
of  his  ancestors,  or  the  spirits  of  the  dead,  or  he  wants 
to  get  a  glimpse  of  what  there  is  after  the  body  is 
dissolved,  or  he  desires  to  understand  the  power 
working  behind  the  stupendous  phenomena  of  nature. 
Whichever  of  these  is  the  case,  one  thing  is  centain, 
that  he  is  trying  to  transcend  the  limitations  of  the 
senses.  He  cannot  remain  satisfied  with  his  senses; 
he  wants  to  go  beyond  them.  The  explanation  need 
not  be  mysterious.  To  me  it  seems  very  natural  that 
the  first  glimpse  of  religion  should  come  through 
dreams.  The  first  idea  of  immortality  man  must  get 
through  dreams.  Is  not  the  dream  state  a  most  won- 
derful state?  We  know  that  children  and  untutored 
minds  find  very  little  difference  between  dreaming 
and  their  waking  state.  What  can  be  more  natural 
than  that  they  find,  as  natural  logic,  that  even  during 
the  sleep  state,  when  the  body  is  apparently  dead,  the 
mind  goes  on  with  all  its  intricate  workings?  What 
wonder  that  men  will  at  once  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  when  this  body  is  dissolved  for  ever  the  same 
working  will  go  on?  This,  to  my  mind,  would  be  a 
more  natural  explanation  of  the  supernatural,  and 
through  this  dream  idea  the  human  mind  rises  to 
higher  and  higher  concepts.  Of  course  in  time  the 
vast  majority  of  mankind  found  out  that  these  dreams 
were  not  verified  by  their  awakened  states,  and  that 
during  the  dream  state  it  is  not  that  man  has  a  fresh 
existence,  but  simply  that  he  recapitulates  the  experi- 
ences of  the  awakened  state. 


l6  J  NANA   YOGA 

But  by  this  time  the  search  had  begun,  and  the 
search  was  inward,  and  they  continued  to  inquire  more 
deeply  into  the  different  stages  of  the  mind,  and  dis- 
covered higher  states  than  either  the  waking  or  dream- 
ing. This  state  of  things  we  find  in  all  the  organized 
religions  of  the  world,  called  either  a  state  of  ecstasy, 
or  inspiration.  In  all  the  organized  religions,  their 
founders,  prophets  and  messengers  are  declared  to 
have  gone  into  states  of  mind  which  were  neither 
waking  nor  sleeping,  but  states  in  which  they  came 
face  to  face  with  a  new  series  of  facts,  those  relating 
to  what  is  called  the  spiritual  kingdom.  They  real- 
ized things  there  in  a  much  more  intense  sense  than 
we  realize  facts  around  us  in  our  waking  state.  This 
we  find  in  all  the  existing  religions.  Take,  for  in- 
stance, the  religions  of  the  Brahmans.  The  Vedas  are 
said  to  be  written  by  Rishis.  These  Rishis  were  sages 
who  realized  certain  facts.  The  exact  definition  of 
the  Sanskrit  word  is  "The  Seers  of  the  Mantrams" — 
of  the  thoughts  conveyed  in  the  Vedic  Hymns.  These 
men  declared  that  they  had  realized — sensed,  if  that 
word  can  be  used  with  regard  to  the  supersensuous — 
certain  facts,  and  these  facts  they  proceeded  to  put  on 
record.  We  find  the  same  thing  declared  among  both 
the  Jews  and  the  Christians. 

Some  exception  may  be  taken  in  the  case  of  the 
Buddhists  as  represented  by  the  Southern  sect.  It 
may  be  asked — if  the  Buddhists  do  not  believe  in  any 
God,  or  a  soul,  how  can  their  religion  be  derived  from 
this  supersensuous  state  of  existence?  The  answer 
to  this  is,  that  even  the  Buddhists  find  an  eternal 
moral  law,  and  that  moral  law  was  not  reasoned  out 


THE    NECESSITY   OF   RELIGION  I7 

in  our  sense  of  the  word,  but  Buddha  found  it,  discov- 
ered it,  in  a  supersensuous  state.  Those  of  you  who 
have  studied  the  life  of  Buddha,  even  as  shortly  given 
in  that  beautiful  poem  "The  Light  of  Asia,"  may 
remember  that  Buddha  is  represented  as  sitting  under 
the  Bo-tree  until  he  had  reached  the  supersensuous 
state  of  mind.  All  his  teachings  came  from  this,  and 
not  from  intellectual  cogitations. 

Thus,  here  is  a  tremendous  statement  made  by  all 
religions,  that  this  human  mind,  at  certain  moments, 
transcends  not  only  the  limitations  of  the  senses,  but 
also  the  power  of  reasoning.  It  then  comes  face  to 
face  with  facts  which  it  could  never  have  sensed, 
could  never  have  reasoned  out.  These  facts  are  the 
basis  of  all  the  religions  of  the  world.  Of  course  we 
have  the  right  to  challenge  these  facts,  to  put  them  to 
the  test  of  reason,  nevertheless,  all  the  existing 
religions  of  the  world  claim  for  the  human  mind  this 
peculiar  power  of  transcending  the  limits  of  the  senses, 
and  the  limits  of  reason;  and  this  power  they  put 
forward  as  a  statement  of  fact. 

Apart  from  the  consideration  of  the  question  how 
far  these  facts  claimed  by  religions  are  true,  we  find 
one  characteristic  common  to  them  all.  They  are  all 
abstractions  as  contrasted  with  the  concrete  discov- 
eries of  physics,  for  instance;  and  in  all  the  highly 
organized  religions  they  take  the  purest  form  of  Unit 
Abstraction,  either  in  the  form  of  an  Abstracted 
Presence,  as  an  Omnipresent  Being,  as  an  Abstract 
Personality,  called  God,  as  a  Moral  Law,  or  in  the 
form  of  an  Abstract  Essence  underlying  every  exist- 
ence.    In  modern  times,  too,  the  attempts  made  to 


l8  J  NANA  YOGA 

preach  religions  without  appeaUng  to  the  supersen*. 
suous  state  of  the  mind,  have  had  to  take  up  the  old 
abstractions  of  the  Ancients,  and  put  different  names 
to  them  as  ''Moral  Law,"  the  ''Ideal  Unity,"  and  so 
forth,  thus  showing  that  these  abstractions  are  not 
in  the  senses.  None  of  us  have  yet  seen  an  Ideal 
Human  Being,  and  yet  we  are  told  to  believe  in  an 
Ideal  Human  Being.  None  of  us  have  yet  seen  an 
ideally  perfect  man,  and  yet  without  that  ideal  we 
cannot  progress.  Thus,  this  one  fact  stands  out  from 
all  these  different  religions,  that  there  is  an  Ideal  Unit 
Abstraction,  and  this  is  either  put  before  us  in  the 
form  of  a  Person,  or  as  an  Impersonal  Being,  or  as 
Law,  or  a  Presence,  or  an  Essence.  We  are  always 
struggling  to  raise  ourselves  up  to  that  ideal.  Every 
human  being  whosoever  and  wheresoever  he  may  be, 
has  an  ideal  of  infinite  power.  Every  human  being 
has  an  ideal  of  infinite  pleasure.  Most  of  the  works 
that  we  find  around  us,  the  activities  displayed  every- 
where, are  due  to  the  struggle  for  this  infinite  power, 
or  this  infinite  pleasure.  But  a  few  quickly  discover 
that  although  they  are  struggling  for  infinite  power, 
it  is  not  through  the  senses  that  it  can  be  reached. 
They  find  out  very  soon  that  that  infinite  pleasure 
is  not  to  be  got  through  the  senses,  or,  in  other  words, 
the  senses  are  too  limited,  and  the  body  is  too  limited 
to  express  the  Infinite.  To  manifest  the  Infinite 
through  the  finite  is  impossible,  and,  sooner  or  later, 
man  learns  to  give  up  the  attempt  to  express  the 
Infinite  through  the  finite.  This  giving  up,  this  renun- 
ciation of  the  attempt,  is  the  background  of  ethics. 
Renunciation    is    the    very   basis    upon    which   ethics 


THE    NECESSITY   OF   RELIGION  I9 

stand.  There  never  was  an  ethical  code  preached 
which  had  not  renunciation  for  its  basis. 

Ethics  always  says :  "Not  I,  but  thou."  Its  motto 
is,  "Not  self,  but  non-self."  The  vain  ideas  of  indi- 
vidualism to  which  man  clings  when  he  is  trying  to 
find  that  Infinite  Power,  or  that  Infinite  Pleasure 
through  the  senses,  have  to  be  given  up,  say  the  laws 
of  ethics.  You  have  to  put  yourself  last,  and  others 
before  you.  The  senses  say,  "Myself  first."  Ethics 
says,  "I  must  hold  myself  last."  Thus,  all  codes  of 
ethics  are  based  upon  this  renunciation ;  destruction, 
not  construction,  of  the  individual  on  the  material 
plane.  That  Infinite  will  never  find  expression  upon 
the  material  plane,  nor  is  it  possible  or  thinkable. 

So,  man  had  to  give  up  the  plane  of  matter,  and 
rise  to  other  spheres  to  seek  a  deeper  expression  of 
that  Infinite.  In  this  way  the  various  ethical  laws 
are  being  moulded,  but  all  have  that  one  central  idea, 
eternal  self-abnegation.  Perfect  self-annihilation  is 
the  ideal  of  ethics.  People  are  startled  if  they  are 
asked  not  to  think  of  their  individualities.  Every- 
body seems  so  very  much  afraid  of  losing  what  he 
calls  his  individuality.  At  the  same  time,  the  same 
men  would  declare  the  highest  ideals  of  ethics  to  be 
right;  never  for  a  moment  thinking  that  the  scope, 
the  goal,  the  idea  of  all  ethics  is  destruction  of  the 
individual,  and  not  the  building  up  of  the  individual. 

Utilitarian  standards  cannot  explain  the  ethical  rela- 
tions of  men;  for,  in  the  first  place  we  cannot  derive 
any  ethical  laws  from  considerations  of  utility.  With- 
out this  supernatural  sanction,  as  it  is  called,  or  the 
perception  of  the  super-conscious,  as  I  prefer  to  term 


20  J  NANA   YOGA 

it,  there  can  be  no  ethics.  Without  this  struggle 
towards  the  Infinite  there  can  be  no  ideal.  Any  sys- 
tem that  wants  to  bind  men  down  within  the  limits 
of  their  own  societies  would  not  be  able  to  find  an 
explanation  for  the  ethical  laws  of  mankind.  The 
Utilitarian  wants  us  to  give  up  all  this  struggle  after 
the  Infinite,  all  this  going  to  the  Supersensuous,  as 
impracticable  and  absurd,  and,  in  the  same  breath, 
asks  us  to  take  up  ethics,  and  do  good  to  society. 
Why  should  we  do  good  ?  Doing  good  is  a  secondary 
consideration.  We  must  have  an  ideal.  Ethics  itself 
is  not  the  end,  but  the  means  to  the  end.  If  the  end 
is  not  there  why  should  we  be  ethical?  W^hy  should 
1  do  good  to  other  men,  and  not  injure  them?  If 
happiness  be  the  goal  of  mankind,  why  should  I  not 
make  myself  happy  and  others  unhappy?  What  pre- 
vents me?  In  the  second  place,  the  basis  of  utility 
is  too  narrow.  All  these  forms  and  methods  are 
derived  from  society  as  it  exists,  but  what  right  has 
the  Utilitarian  to  assume  that  society  is  eternal? 
Society  did  not  exist  ages  ago,  possibly  will  not  exist 
ages  hence.  Most  probably  it  is  one  of  the  passing 
stages  through  which  we  are  going  towards  a  higher 
evolution,  and  any  law  that  is  derived  from  society 
alone  cannot  be  eternal,  cannot  cover  the  whole  ground 
of  man's  nature.  At  best,  therefore.  Utilitarian 
theories  can  only  work  under  present  social  condi- 
tions. Beyond  that,  they  have  no  value.  But  a  mor- 
ality, an  ethical  code  derived  from  religion  and  spirit- 
uality, has  the  whole  of  infinite  man  for  its  scope.  It 
takes  up  the  individual  but  its  relations  are  to  the 
Infinite,  and  it  takes  up  society  also — because  society 


THE    NECESSITY   OF    RELIGION  21 

is  nothing  but  numbers  of  these  individuals  grouped 
together — and  applying  to  the  individual  and  his 
eternal  relations,  it  must  necessarily  apply  to  the 
whole  of  society,  in  whatever  condition  it  may  be  at 
any  given  time.  Thus  we  see  that  there  is  always  the 
necessity  of  spiritual  religion  for  mankind.  Man  can- 
not always  think  of  matter,  however  pleasurable  it 
may  be. 

It  has  been  said  that  too  much  attention  to  things 
spiritual  disturbs  our  practical  relations  in  this  world. 
As  long  ago  as  the  days  of  the  Chinese  sage  Con- 
fucius it  was  said :  "Let  us  take  care  of  this  world, 
and  then,  when  we  have  finished  with  this  world,  we 
will  take  care  of  other  worlds."  It  is  all  very  well 
that  we  should  take  care  of  this  world  and  let  the 
other  go,  but  though  too  much  attention  to  the  spirit- 
ual may  hurt  a  little  our  practical  relations,  yet  too 
much  attention  to  the  so-called  practical  hurts  us  here 
and  hereafter.  It  makes  us  materialistic.  For  man 
is  not  to  regard  Nature  as  his  goal,  but  something 
higher  than  Nature. 

Man  is  man  so  long  as  he  is  struggling  to  rise  above 
Nature,  and  this  nature  is  both  internal  and  external. 
Not  only  does  nature  comprise  the  laws  that  govern 
the  particles  of  matter  outside  us  and  in  our  bodies, 
but  there  is  the  more  subtle  nature  inside  us,  which 
is,  in  fact,  the  motive  power  which  is  governing  the 
external  and  the  internal  nature.  It  is  good  and  very 
grand  to  conquer  external  nature,  but  grander  still 
to  conquer  the  internal  nature  of  man.  It  is  grand 
and  good  to  know  the  laws  that  govern  the  stars  and 
planets ;  it  is  infinitely  grander  and  better  to  know  the 


22  JNANA   YOGA 

laws  that  govern  the  passions,  the  feelings,  the  will 
of  mankind.  This  conquering  of  the  inner  man, 
understanding  the  secrets  of  the  subtle  workings  that 
are  within  the  human  mind,  and  knowing  its  wonder- 
ful secrets,  belong  entirely  to  religion.  Human  nature 
— ^the  ordinary  human  nature,  I  mean — wants  to  see 
big  material  facts.  Ordinary  mankind  cannot  under- 
stand anything  that  is  subtle.  Well  has  it  been  said 
that  mobs  would  run  after  a  lion  that  could  kill  a 
thousand  lambs,  and  never  for  a  moment  think  that 
it  is  death  unto  the  lambs,  although  it  may  be  a  mo- 
mentary triumph  for  the  lion,  because  in  that  the  mob 
finds  the  greatest  manifestation  of  physical  strength. 
Thus  with  the  ordinary  run  of  mankind,  they  under- 
stand and  find  pleasure  in  everything  that  is  external ; 
but  in  every  society  there  is  a  section  whose  pleasures 
are  not  in  the  senses,  but  beyond,  and  who  now  and 
then  catch  glimpses  of  something  higher  than  matter, 
and  want  to  struggle  thither.  And  if  we  read  the 
histories  of  nations  between  the  lines  we  shall  always 
find  that  the  rise  of  a  nation  comes  with  an  increase 
in  the  number  of  such  men  in  society;  and  the  fall 
begins  when  this  pursuit  after  the  Infinite,  however 
vain  utilitarians  may  call  it,  has  ceased.  That  is  to 
say,  the  mainspring  of  the  strength  of  every  race  lies 
in  the  spirituality  manifested  in  religion,  and  the 
death  of  that  race  will  begin  the  day  that  spirituality 
wanes  and  materialism  begins. 

Thus,  apart  from  the  solid  facts  and  truths  that  we 
may  learn  from  religion,  apart  from  the  comforts  that 
we  may  gain  therefrom,  religion  itself,  as  a  science, 
as  a  study,  is  the  greatest  and  healthiest  exercise  that 


THE    NECESSITY   OF    RELIGION  23 

the  human  mind  can  have.  This  pursuit  of  the  Infin- 
ite, this  struggle  to  grasp  the  Infinite,  this  effort  to 
get  beyond  the  Hmitations  of  the  senses,  out  of  matter, 
as  it  were,  and  to  evolve  the  spiritual  man,  instead 
of  filling  the  mind  with  low,  narrow  and  little  ideals ; 
this  striving  day  and  night  to  make  the  Infinite  one 
with  our  being — this  struggle  itself  is  the  grandest 
and  most  glorious  that  man  can  make.  Some  persons 
find  the  greatest  pleasure  in  eating.  We  have  no 
right  to  say  they  should  not.  Others  find  the  greatest 
pleasure  in  possessing  certain  things.  We  have  no 
right  to  say  they  should  not.  But  they  also  have  no 
right  to  say  "no"  to  the  man  who  finds  his  highest 
pleasure  in  spiritual  thought.  The  lower  the  organi- 
zation the  more  is  the  pleasure  in  the  senses.  Very 
few  men  can  eat  a  meal  with  the  same  gusto  that  a 
dog,  or  a  wolf  can.  But  all  the  pleasures  of  the  dog 
or  the  wolf  have  gone,  as  it  were,  into  the  senses, 
into  that  eating.  The  lower  types  of  humanity  in  all 
nations  find  more  pleasure  in  the  senses,  while  the 
cultured  and  the  educated  find  more  in  thought,  in 
philosophy,  in  the  arts  and  sciences.  Spiritual  thought 
is  a  still  higher  plane.  The  subject  being  infinite, 
that  plane  is  the  highest,  and  the  pleasure  there  is  the 
highest  for  tliose  who  appreciate  it.  So,  even  on  the 
utilitarian  ground — that  man  is  to  seek  for  pleasure 
— he  should  cultivate  religious  thought,  for  that  is  the 
highest  pleasure  that  exists.  Thus  religion  as  a  study, 
seems  to  me  to  be  absolutely  necessary.  W^e  can  see 
it  in  its  effects.  It  is  the  greatest  motive  power  that 
moves  the  human  mind.  No  other  ideal  can  put  into 
us  the  same  mass  of  energy  as  the  spiritual.     So  far 


24  J  NANA    YOGA 

as  human  history  goes,  it  is  obvious  to  all  of  us  that 
this  has  been  the  case,  and  its  powers  are  not  dead. 
I  do  not  deny  that  men  on  simply  utilitarian  grounds 
can  be  very  good  and  moral.  There  have  been  many 
great  men  in  this  world  perfectly  sound  and  moral 
and  good  simply  on  utilitarian  grounds,  but  the  world- 
movers,  men  who  bring,  as  it  were,  a  mass  of  mag- 
netism into  the  world,  whose  spirit  works  in  hundreds 
and  in  thousands,  whose  life  produces  a  halo  around 
them  wherever  they  go,  igniting  others  with  a  spiritual 
fire — such  men  we  always  find  had  that  spiritual  back- 
ground. The  motive  power  of  their  energy  came 
from  religion.  Religion  is  the  greatest  motive  power, 
to  release  that  infinite  energy  which  is  the  birthright 
and  nature  of  every  man.  Nothing  can  compare  with 
religion  there.  In  building  up  character,  in  making 
for  everything  that  is  good  and  great,  in  bringing 
peace  to  others,  and  peace  to  one's  own  self,  religion 
is  the  highest  motive  power,  and  religion  ought  to  be 
studied  therefore  from  that  standpoint.  Religion  must 
be  studied  on  a  broader  basis  than  formerly.  All 
narrow,  limited,  fighting  ideas  of  religion  have  to  go. 
All  sect  ideas  and  tribal  or  national  ideas  of  religion 
must  be  given  up.  Each  tribe  or  nation  having  its 
own  particular  God,  and  thinking  that  every  other  is 
wrong,  is  superstition  that  should  belong  to  the  past. 
All  such  ideas  must  be  abandoned. 

As  the  human  mind  broadens,  so  its  spiritual  steps 
must  broaden.  The  time  has  already  come  when  a 
man  cannot  record  a  thought  without  it  reaching  to  all 
corners  of  the  earth;  by  merely  physical  means  we 
have  come  into  touch  with  the  whole  world — so  the 


THE    NECESSITY   OF    RELIGION  25 

future  religions  of  the  world  have  to  become  as  univer- 
sal, as  wide. 

The  religious  ideals  of  the  future  must  embrace  all 
that  exists  in  the  world  that  is  good  and  great,  and, 
at  the  same  time,  have  infinite  scope  for  future  devel- 
opment. All  that  was  good  in  the  past  must  be 
preserved  and  kept;  and  yet  the  doors  must  be  open 
for  future  addition  to  this  already  existing  store. 
Religions  must  also  be  inclusive.  Religions  must  not 
look  down  wath  contempt  upon  people  who  have  not 
the  particular  ideal  of  God  which  governs  their  spe- 
cial sect.  In  my  life  1  have  seen  a  great  many  spir- 
itual men,  a  great  many  sensible  persons,  who  did  not 
believe  in  God  at  all.  That  is  to  say,  not  in  our  sense 
of  the  word.  Perhaps  they  understood  God  better 
than  we  can  ever  do.  The  Personal  idea  of  God  or 
the  Impersonal,  the  Infinite,  the  Moral  Law,  or  the 
Ideal  Man — these  all  have  to  come  under  the  definition 
of  religion.  And  when  religions  have  become  thus 
broadened,  their  power  for  good  will  have  increased 
a  hundred  times  beyond  the  present.  Religions,  hav- 
ing tremendous  power  in  them,  have  often  done  more 
injury  to  the  world  than  good,  simply  on  account  of 
their  narrowness,  and  limitations. 

Even  at  the  present  time  we  find  many  sects  and 
societies,  with  almost  the  same  ideas,  fighting  each 
other,  because  the  one  does  not  want  to  set  forth  those 
ideas  in  precisely  the  same  way  as  the  others.  There- 
fore religions  will  have  to  broaden.  Religious  ideas 
will  have  to  become  universal,  vast  and  infinite,  and 
then  alone  we  shall  have  the  fullest  play  of  religion, 
for  the  power  of  religion  has  only  just  begun  in  the 


26  J  NANA   YOGA 

world.  It  is  sometimes  said  that  religions  are  dying 
out,  that  spiritual  ideas  are  dying  out  of  the  world. 
To  me  it  seems  that  they  have  just  begun.  The  power 
of  religion,  broadened  and  purified,  is  going  to  pene- 
trate every  part  of  human  life.  So  long  as  religion 
was  in  the  hands  of  a  chosen  few,  or  of  a  body  of 
priests,  it  was  in  the  temples,  it  was  in  the  churches, 
it  was  in  books,  in  dogmas,  in  ceremonials,  forms  and 
rituals.  When  men  have  come  to  the  real,  universal, 
spiritual  concept,  then,  and  then  alone,  religion  will 
become  real  and  living;  it  will  come  into  our  very 
nature,  live  in  every  movement  of  the  human  being, 
it  will  penetrate  every  pore  of  society,  and  be  infinite- 
ly more  a  power  for  good  than  it  has  ever  been  before. 

What  is  needed  is  a  fellow-feeling  between  the 
different  types  of  religion,  seeing  that  they  all  stand 
or  fall  together;  a  fellow-feeling  which  springs  from 
mutual  esteem  and  mutual  respect,  and  not  the  con- 
descending, patronizing,  niggardly  expression  of  good- 
will unfortunately  in  vogue  at  the  present  time  with 
many.  And  above  all,  this  is  needed,  between  types 
of  religious  expression  coming  from  the  study  of 
mental  phenomena — unfortunately  even  now  laying 
exclusive  claim  to  the  name  of  religion — and  those 
expressions  of  religion  whose  heads  are  penetrating 
more  and  more  into  the  secrets  of  heaven,  though 
their  feet  are  clinging  to  earth — the  so-called  material- 
istic sciences. 

To  bring  about  this  harmony  both  will  have  to  make 
concessions,  sometimes  very  large,  nay,  more,  some- 
times painful ;  but  after  all,  each  will  find  itself  better 
for  the  sacrifice  and  more  advanced  in  truth.     And 


THE   NECESSITY   OF   RELIGION"  2/ 

in  the  end,  the  knowledge  which  has  its  basis  in 
changes  in  time,  and  that  which  is  founded  on  changes 
in  space  will  both  meet  and  become  one,  where  there 
is  neither  space  nor  time,  where  the  mind  cannot  reach, 
nor  the  senses — the  Absolute,  the  Infinite,  the  "One 
without  a  second." 


Ill 

THE  REAL  NATURE  OF  MAN 

Great  is  the  tenacity  with  which  man  cHngs  to  the 
senses,  yet  however  substantial  he  may  think  the  exter- 
nal world  in  which  he  lives  and  moves,  there  come 
times  in  the  lives  of  individuals  and  of  races  when, 
involuntarily  they  ask,  'Ts  this  real?"  To  the  person 
who  never  finds  a  moment  to  question  the  credentials 
of  his  senses,  whose  every  moment  is  occupied  with 
some  sort  of  sense-enjoyment — even  to  him  death 
comes,  and  he  also  is  compelled  to  ask:  *Ts  this  real?" 
Religion  begins  with  this  question  and  ends  with  the 
answer.  Even  in  the  remote  past  where  recorded  his- 
tory cannot  help  us,  in  the  mysterious  light  of  mytholo- 
gy, back  in  the  dim  twilight  of  civilization,  we  find 
the  same  question  was  asked  "What  becomes  of  this? 
What  is  real  ?" 

One  of  the  most  poetical  of  the  Upanishads,  the 
Katha  Upanishad,  begins  with  the  inquiry :  **When  a 
man  dies  there  is  a  contention.  One  party  declares 
that  he  has  gone  forever,  the  other  insists  that  he  is 
still  living.  Which  is  true?"  Various  answers  have 
been  given.  The  whole  sphere  of  metaphysics,  phil- 
osophy and  religion  is  really  filled  with  various 
answers  to  this  question.  Attempts  at  the  same  time 
have  been  made  to  suppress  it,  to  put  a  stop  to  this 

28 


THE    REAL    NATURE    OF    MAN  2g 

unrest  of  mind,  which  asks,  "What  beyond  ?  What  is 
real  ?"  But  so  long  as  death  remains  all  these  attempts 
at  suppression  will  uniformly  prove  to  be  unsuccess- 
ful. We  may  very  easily  talk  about  seeing  nothing 
beyond  and  keeping  all  our  hopes  and  aspirations  con- 
fined to  the  present  moment.  We  may  struggle  hard, 
and  perhaps  everything  outside  may  help  to  keep  us 
limited  within  the  narrow  bonds  of  the  senses.  The 
whole  world  may  combine  to  prevent  us  from  broad- 
ening out  beyond  the  present;  yet,  so  long  as  there 
is  death  the  question  must  come  again  and  again,  **Is 
death  the  end  of  everythmg,  of  all  these  things  to 
which  we  are  clinging  as  if  they  were  the  most  real 
of  all  realities,  the  most  substantial  of  all  substances  ?" 
The  world  vanishes  in  a  moment  and  is  gone.  Stand- 
ing on  the  brink  of  a  precipice  beyond  which  is  the 
infinite  yawning  chasm,  every  mind,  however  har- 
dened, is  bound  to  recoil,  and  ask,  **Is  this  real?" 
The  hopes  of  a  lifetime,  built  little  by  little  with  all 
the  energies  of  a  great  mind,  vanish  in  one  second. 
Are  they  real  ?  This  question  will  have  to  be  answered. 
Time  will  never  lessen  its  power.  As  time  rolls  on 
it  adds  value  to  itself.  Then  there  is  the  desire  to  be 
happy;  we  run  after  everything  to  make  ourselves 
happy,  we  run  after  the  senses,  go  on  madly  career- 
ing into  the  external  world.  The  young  man,  with 
whom  life  is  successful,  if  you  ask  him,  declares  that 
it  is  real ;  he  thinks  it  is  all  quite  real.  Perhaps  the 
same  man,  growing  old,  and  with  fortune  ever  elud- 
ing him,  will  declare  that  it  is  fate.  He  finds  at  last 
that  his  desires  cannot  be  fulfilled.  Wherever  he 
goes  there  is  an  adamantine  wall  beyond  which  he 


30  J  NANA   YOGA 

cannot  pass.  Every  sense-activity  results  in  a  reac- 
tion. Everything  is  evanescent.  Enjoyment,  misery, 
luxury,  wealth,  power  and  poverty,  even  life  itself  are 
all  evanescent. 

Two  positions  remain  to  mankind.  One  is  to  be- 
lieve with  the  Nihilists  that  all  is  nothing.  We  know 
nothing.  We  can  never  know  anything  either  about 
the  future,  the  past,  or  even  of  the  present.  For  we 
must  remember  that  he  who  denies  the  past  and  the 
future  and  wants  to  stick  to  the  present  is  simply  a" 
madman.  One  may  as  well  deny  the  father  and 
mother  and  assert  the  child.  It  would  be  equally  logi- 
cal. To  deny  the  past  and  future,  the  present  must 
inevitably  be  denied  also.  This  is  one  position,  that 
of  the  Nihilists.  I  have  never  seen  a  man  who  could 
really  become  a  Nihilist  for  one  minute.  It  is  very 
easy  to  talk. 

Then  there  is  the  other  position,  to  seek  for  an 
explanation,  to  seek  for  the  real,  to  discover  in  the 
midst  of  this  eternally  changing  and  evanescent  world 
whatever  is  real.  In  this  body  which  is  an  aggrega- 
tion of  molecules  of  matter,  is  there  anything  which 
is  real  ?  And  this  has  been  the  search  throughout  the 
history  of  the  human  mind.  In  the  very  oldest  times 
we  often  find  glimpses  of  light  coming  into  men's 
minds.  We  find  man  even  then  going  a  step  beyond 
this  body  finding  something  which  is  not  this  external 
body,  but  which  although  very  much  like  it,  is  not  it, 
being  much  more  complete,  much  more  perfect,  which 
remains  even  when  this  body  is  dissolved.  We  read  in 
the  hymns  of  the  Rig  Veda  addressed  to  the  God  of 
Fire  who  is  burning  a  dead  body,  "Carry  him,  Fire, 


THE    REAL    NATURE   OF    MAN  3 1 

in  your  arms  gently,  give  him  a  perfect  body,  a  bright 
body,  carry  him  where  the  fathers  Hve,  where  there 
is  no  more  sorrow,  where  there  is  no  more  death." 
The  same  idea  you  will  find  present  in  every  religion, 
and  we  get  another  idea  with  it.  It  is  a  curious  fact 
that  all  religions,  without  one  exception,  hold  that 
man  is  a  degeneration  of  what  he  was,  whether  they 
clothe  this  in  mythological  words,  or  in  the  clear  lan- 
guage of  philosophy,  or  in  the  beautiful  expressions 
of  poetry.  This  is  the  one  fact  that  comes  out  of 
every  scripture  and  of  every  mythology,  that  the  man 
that  is,  is  a  degeneration  of  what  he  was.  This  is  the 
kernel  of  truth  behind  the  story  of  Adam's  fall  in  the 
Jewish  scripture.  This  is  again  and  again  repeated 
in  the  scriptures  of  the  Hindus ;  the  dream  of  a  period 
which  they  call  the  age  of  truth,  when  no  man  died 
unless  he  wished  to  die ;  when  he  could  keep  his  body 
as  long  as  he  liked  and  his  mind  was  pure  and  strong. 
There  was  no  death  at  that  time,  and  no  evil  and  no 
misery;  and  the  present  age  is  a  corruption  of  that 
state  of  perfection.  Side  by  side  with  this  we  find  the 
story  of  the  deluge  everywhere.  That  story  itself  is  a 
proof  that  this  present  age  is  held  to  be  a  corruption 
of  the  former  by  every  religion.  It  went  on  becom- 
ing more  and  more  corrupt  until  the  deluge  swept 
away  a  large  portion  of  mankind  and  again  the  ascend- 
ing series  began.  It  is  going  up  slowly  again  to  reach 
once  more  that  early  state  of  purity.  You  are  all 
aware  of  the  story  of  the  deluge  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. The  same  story  was  current  among  the  ancient 
Babylonians,  the  Egyptians,  the  Chinese  and  the 
Hindus.     Manu,  a  great  ancient  sage,  was  praying  on 


32  JNANA   YOGA 

the  banks  of  the  Ganges  when  a  little  minnow  came 
to  him  for  protection  and  he  put  it  into  a  pot  of  water 
he  had  before  him.  "What  do  you  want?"  asked 
Manu.  The  little  minnow  declared  he  was  pursued 
by  a  bigger  fish  and  wanted  protection.  Manu  car- 
ried the  little  fish  to  his  home,  and  in  the  morning  it 
had  become  as  big  as  the  pot,  and  said,  "I  cannot 
live  in  this  pot  any  longer.''  Manu  put  him  in  a  tank, 
and  the  next  day  he  was  as  big  as  the  tank  and  declared 
he  could  not  live  there  any  more.  So  Manu  had  to 
take  him  to  a  river,  and  in  the  morning  the  fish  filled 
the  river.  Then  Manu  put  him  in  the  ocean,  and  he 
declared,  "Manu,  I  am  the  creator  of  the  Universe,  I 
have  taken  this  form  to  come  and  warn  you  that  I 
will  deluge  the  world.  You  build  an  ark,  and  in  it  put 
a  pair  of  every  kind  of  animal,  and  let  your  family 
enter  the  ark  and  there  will  come  out  of  the  deluge 
my  horn.  Fasten  the  ark  to  it,  and  when  the  deluge 
subsides  come  down  and  people  the  earth."  So  the 
world  was  deluged,  and  Manu  saved  his  own  family 
and  a  pair  of  every  kind  of  animal  and  seeds  of  every 
plant,  and  when  it  subsided  he  came  and  peopled  the 
world  and  we  are  all  called  "man"  because  we  are 
progeny  of  Manu.*  Now  human  language  is  the 
attempt  to  express  the  truth  that  is  within.  A  little 
baby  whose  language  itself  consists  of  imperceptible, 
indistinct  sounds,  I  am  fully  persuaded  is  attempting 
to  express  the  highest  philosophy,  only  the  baby  has 
not  got  the  organs  to  express  it,  nor  the  means.  The 
difference  in  the  language  between  the  highest  phil- 
osophers and  the  utterances  of  babies  is  one  of  degree 
*  Sanskrit  root  man,  to  think. 


THE   REAL    NATURE   OF    MAN  33 

and  not  of  kind.  What  you  call  the  most  correct,  sys- 
tematic, mathematical  language  of  the  present  time  and 
the  hazy,  mystical,  mythological  languages  of  the  an- 
cients, differ  only  in  degree.  All  of  them  have  a  grand 
idea  behind,  which  is,  as  it  were,  struggling  to  express 
itself,  and  many  times  behind  these  ancient  mytholo- 
gies are  nuggets  of  truth,  and  many  times,  I  am  sorry 
to  say,  behind  the  fine,  polished  phrases  of  the  modern, 
is  arrant  trash.  So  we  need  not  throw  overboard 
everything  because  it  is  clothed  in  mythology,  because 
it  does  not  fit  in  with  the  notions  of  Mr.  So-and-So,  or 
Mrs.  So-and-So  of  modern  times.  If  they  laugh  at 
religion  because  most  religions  declared  that  men  must 
believe  these  things,  because  such  and  such  a  prophet 
has  said  them,  they  ought  to  laugh  more  at  these 
moderns.  In  modern  times  if  a  man  quotes  a  Moses, 
or  a  Buddha,  or  a  Christ,  he  is  laughed  at;  but  let 
him  give  the  name  of  a  Huxley,  a  Tyndall,  or  a  Dar- 
win, and  it  is  swallowed  without  salt.  "Huxley  has 
said  it,"  that  is  enough  for  many.  We  are  free  from 
superstitions  indeed!  That  was  a  religious  supersti- 
tion, and  this  is  a  scientific  superstition;  only  in  and 
through  that  superstition  came  life-jgiving  lines  of  spir- 
ituality ;  in  and  through  this  modern  superstition  come 
lust  and  greed.  That  superstition  was  worship  of 
God,  and  this  superstition  is  worship  of  filthy  lucre,  of 
fame  or  power.     That  is  the  difference. 

To  turn  back  to  our  mythology,  behind  all  these 
stories  we  find  one  idea  standing  supreme — that  man 
is  a  degeneration  of  what  he  was.  Coming  to  the  pres- 
ent times,  modern  research  seems  to  repudiate  this 
position   absolutely.     Evolutionists    seem   to   entirely 


34  J  NANA    YOGA 

contradict  this  assertion.  According  to  them  man  is 
the  evolution  of  the  mollusc,  and  therefore  what  this 
mythology  states  cannot  be  true.  There  is  in  India, 
however,  a  mythology  which  is  able  to  reconcile  both 
these  positions.  The  Indian  mythology  has  a  theory 
of  cycles,  that  all  progression  is  in  the  form  of  waves. 
Every  wave  is  attended  by  a  fall,  and  that  by  a  rise  the 
next  moment,  that  by  a  fall  in  the  next,  and  again 
another  rise.  The  motion  is  in  cycles.  Certainly  it 
is  true  even  on  the  grounds  of  modern  research,  that 
man  cannot  be  simply  an  evolution.  Every  evolution 
presupposes  an  involution.  The  modern  scientific  man 
will  tell  you  that  you  can  only  get  the  amount  of  ener- 
gy out  of  a  machine  which  you  put  into  it  before. 
Something  cannot  be  produced  out  of  nothing.  If 
man  is  an  evolution  of  the  mollusc,  then  the  perfect 
man,  the  Buddha  man,  the  Christ  man,  was  involved 
in  the  mollusc.  If  it  is  not  so,  whence  come  these 
gigantic  personalities?  Something  cannot  come  out 
of  nothing.  Thus  we  are  in  the  position  of  reconciling 
the  scriptures  with  modern  light.  That  energy  which 
manifests  itself  slowly  through  various  stages  until  it 
becomes  the  perfect  man  cannot  come  out  of  nothing. 
It  existed  somewhere,  and  if  the  mollusc,  or  the  pro- 
toplasm, is  the  first  point  to  which  you  can  trace  it, 
that  protoplasm,  somehow  or  other,  must  have  con- 
tained the  energy.  There  is  a  great  modern  discus- 
sion going  on  as  to  whether  this  aggregate  of  materials 
we  call  the  body  is  the  cause  of  manifestation  of  the 
force  we  call  the  soul  and  thought,  etc.,  or  whether  it 
is  the  thought  that  manifests  this  body.  The  religions 
of  the  world   of  course   hold  that  the   force  called 


THE   REAL    NATURE   OF    MAN  35 

thought  manifests  the  body,  and  not  the  reverse. 
There  are  schools  of  modern  people  who  hold  that 
what  we  call  thought  is  simply  the  outcome  of  the 
adjustment  of  the  parts  of  the  machine  which  we  call 
body.  Taking  the  second  position,  that  the  soul  or 
the  mass  of  the  thought,  or  however  you  may  call  it, 
is  the  outcome  of  this  machine,  the  outcome  of  the 
chemical  and  physical  combinations  of  matter  making 
up  the  body  and  brain,  the  question  remains  unan- 
swered. What  makes  the  body?  What  force  com- 
bines all  these  molecules  into  the  body  form?  What 
force  is  there  which  takes  up  material  from  the  mass 
of  matter  around  and  forms  my  body  one  way,  another 
body  another  way,  and  so  on?  What  makes  these 
infinite  distinctions  ?  To  say  that  the  force  called  soul 
is  the  outcome  of  the  combinations  of  the  molecules 
of  the  body  is  putting  the  cart  before  the  horse.  How 
did  the  combinations  come:  where  was  the  force  to 
make  them?  If  you  say  some  other  force  was  the 
cause  of  these  combinations  and  that  soul  was  the  out- 
come of  that  matter,  and  that  soul — which  combined 
a  certain  mass  of  matter — was  itself  the  result  of  the 
combinations,  it  is  no  answer.  That  theory  ought  to 
be  taken  which  explains  most  of  the  facts,  if  not  all, 
and  without  contradicting  other  existing  theories. 
The  force  which  takes  up  the  matter  and  forms  the 
body  is  the  same  which  manifests  through  that  body, 
and  this  is  more  logical.  To  say  therefore  that  the 
thought- forces  manifested  by  the  body  are  the  out- 
come of  the  arrangement  of  molecules  and  have  no 
existence  at  all,  has  no  meaning,  neither  can  force 
evolve  out  of  matter.     It  is  rather  more  possible  to 


36  J  NANA    YOGA 

demonstrate  that  what  we  call  matter  does  not  exist 
at  all.  It  is  only  a  certain  state  of  force.  Solidity, 
hardness,  or  anything,  can  be  proved  to  be  the  result 
of  motion.  Increase  of  vibration  will  make  things 
solid.  A  mass  of  air  vibrated  at  a  tremendous  rate 
would  become  as  solid  as  a  table.  A  thread  of  a 
spider's  web  moved  at  almost  infinite  velocity  would 
be  as  strong  as  an  iron  chain,  would  cut  through  an 
oak  tree,  such  force  would  be  given  to  it  by  motion. 
Looking  at  it  that  way  it  would  be  rather  easier  to 
prove  that  what  we  call  matter  and  so  on  does  not 
exist.     But  the  other  way  cannot  be  proved. 

What  is  this  force  which  is  manifesting  itself 
through  the  body?  It  is  obvious  to  all  of  us,  what- 
ever that  force  be,  that  it  is  taking  particles  up,  as  it 
were,  and  manipulating  forms  out  of  them — the  human 
body.  None  other  comes  here  to  manipulate  bodies 
for  you  and  me.  I  never  saw  anybody  eat  food  for 
me.  I  have  to  assimilate  it,  manufacture  blood  and 
bones  and  everything  out  of  that  food.  What  is  this 
mysterious  force?  Ideas  about  the  future  and  about 
the  past  seem  to  be  terrifying  to  man.  To  many  they 
seem  to  be  mere  speculation.  We  will  take  the  pres- 
ent theme.  What  is  this  force  now  which  is  working 
through  us?  We  have  seen  how  in  old  times  in  all 
the  ancient  scriptures  this  power,  this  manifestation 
of  power,  was  thought  to  be  a  bright  substance  having 
a  body  like  this  body,  and  which  remains  even  after 
this  body  falls.  Later  on,  however,  we  find  a  higher 
idea  coming  even — that  this  body  does  not  represent 
the  force.  Whatsoever  has  form  must  be  the  result 
of  combinations  of  particles  and  requires  something 


THE   REAL    NATURE   OF    MAN  37 

else  behind  it  to  move  it.  If  this  body  requires  some- 
thing which  is  not  the  body  to  manipulate  it,  the 
bright  body,  by  the  same  necessity,  will  also  require 
something  other  than  itself  to  manipulate  it.  So  that 
something  was  called  the  soul,  the  Atman,  in  Sanskrit. 
It  was  the  Atman  which  through  the  bright  body,  as 
it  were,  worked  on  the  gross  body  outside.  The 
bright  body  is  considered  as  the  receptacle  of  the  mind, 
and  the  Atman  is  beyond  that.  It  is  not  the  mind 
even,  it  operates  the  mind,  and  through  the  mind  the 
body.  You  have  an  Atman,  I  have  another,  each  one 
of  us  has  a  separate  Atman,  and  a  separate  fine  body, 
and  through  that  we  work  on  the  gross  external  body. 
Questions  were  then  asked  about  this  Atman,  about 
its  nature.  What  is  this  Atman,  this  soul  of  man 
which  is  neither  a  body  nor  a  mind?  Great  discus- 
sions followed.  Speculations  came,  various  shades  of 
philosophic  inquiry  came  into  existence,  and  I  will 
try  to  place  before  you  some  of  the  conclusions  that 
have  been  reached  about  this  Atman.  The  different 
philosophies  seem  to  agree  that  this  Atman,  whatever 
it  be,  has  neither  form  nor  shape,  and  that  which  has 
neither  form  nor  shape  must  be  omnipresent.  Time 
begins  with  mind,  space  also  is  in  the  mind.  Causa- 
tion cannot  stand  without  time.  Without  the  idea  of 
succession  there  cannot  be  any  idea  of  causation. 
Time,  space,  and  causation,  therefore,  are  in  the  mind, 
and  as  this  Atman  is  beyond  the  mind  and  formless 
it  must  be  beyond  time,  beyond  space,  and  beyond 
causation.  Now  if  it.  is  beyond  time,  space  and  causa- 
tion, it  must  be  infinite.  Then  comes  the  highest 
speculation  in  our  philosophy.     The  infinite  cannot  be 


38  J  NANA    YOGA 

two.  If  the  soul  be  infinite  there  can  be  only  one  soul, 
and  all  these  ideas  of  various  souls — you  having  one 
soul,  and  I  having  another,  and  so  forth — are  not 
real.  The  real  man  therefore  is  one  and  infinite,  the 
omnipresent  spirit.  And  the  apparent  man  is  only  a 
limitation  of  that  real  man.  In  that  sense  all  these 
mythologies  are  true,  that  the  apparent  man,  however 
great  he  may  be,  is  only  a  dim  reflection  of  the  real 
man  which  is  beyond.  The  real  man,  the  spirit,  being 
beyond  cause  and  effect,  not  bound  by  time  and  space, 
must  therefore  be  free.  He  was  never  bound,  and 
could  not  be  bound.  The  apparent  man,  the  reflec- 
tion, is  limited  by  time,,  space  and  causation,  and  he 
is  therefore  bound.  Or  in  the  language  of  some  of 
our  philosophers,  he  appears  to  be  bound,  but  really 
is  not.  This  is  the  reality  in  our  souls,  this  omni- 
presence, this  spiritual  nature,  this  infinity,  which  we 
are  already.  Every  soul  is  infinite,  therefore  there  is 
no  question  of  birth  and  death.  Some  children  were 
being  examined.  The  examiner  put  them  rather  hard 
questions,  and  among  them  was  this  question:  "Why 
does  not  the  earth  fail  ?"  He  wanted  to  evoke  answers 
about  gravitation  and  so  forth.  Most  of  the  children 
could  not  answer  at  all;  a  few  answered  that  it  was 
gravitation  or  something.  One  bright  little  girl  an- 
swered it  by  putting  another  question :  "Where  should 
it  fall?"  The  question  is  nonsense.  Where  should 
the  earth  fall?  There  is  no  falling  or  rising  for  the 
earth.  In  infinite  space  there  is  no  up  or  down;  that 
is  only  in  the  relative.  Where  is  going  or  coming  for 
the  infinite?  Whence  should  it  come  and  whither 
should  it  go?     When  people  refuse  to  think  of  the 


THE   REAL    NATURE    OF    MAN  39 

past,  or  future,  or  what  is  going  to  become  of  them— 
when  they  give  up  the  ideas  of  body,  because  being 
limited,  the  body  comes  and  goes — then  they  have 
risen  to  a  higher  ideal.  The  body  is  not  the  real  man, 
neither  is  the  mind,  for  the  mind  waxes  and  wanes. 
It  is  the  spirit  beyond  which  alone  can  live  forever. 
The  body  and  mind  are  continually  changing.  These 
are  the  names  of  series  of  changeful  phenomena,  rivers 
where  every  particle  of  water  is  in  a  constant  state  of 
flux;  yet  we  recognize  the  series  as  the  same  river. 
Every  particle  in  this  body  is  continually  changing; 
no  one  has  the  same  body  for  several  minute's  together. 
Yet  a  sort  of  impression  left  in  the  mind  makes  us 
call  it  the  same.  So  with  the  mind,  one  moment 
happy,  another  moment  unhappy ;  one  moment  strong, 
another  weak.  An  ever-changing  whirlpool.  That 
cannot  be  the  spirit,  for  spirit  is  infinite.  Change  can 
only  be  in  the  limited.  To  say  that  the  infinite  changes 
in  any  way  is  absurd;  it  cannot  be.  You  can  move 
and  I  can  move  as  bodies ;  every  particle  in  this  uni- 
verse is  in  a  constant  state  of  flux,  but  taking  the 
universe  as  a  unit,  as  one  whole,  it  cannot  move,  it 
cannot  change.  Motion  is  always  a  relative  thing. 
I  move  only  in  relation  to  something  else.  Any  par- 
ticle in  this  universe  can  change  in  relation  to  any  other 
particle,  but  the  whole  universe  as  one; — in  relation 
to  what  will  that  move?  There  is  nothing  beside  it. 
So  this  infinite  unit  is  unchangeable,  immovable,  abso- 
lute, and  this  is  the  Real  Man.  Our  reality,  there- 
fore, consists  in  the  Universal,  and  not  in  the  limited. 
These  are  old  delusions,  however  comfortable  they 
are,  to  think  that  we  are  little  limited  beings,  constant- 


40  J  NANA   YOGA 

ly  changing.  People  are  frightened  when  they  are 
told  that  they  are  Universal  Being,  everywhere  pres- 
ent. Through  everything  you  work,  through  every 
foot  you  move,  through  every  lip  you  talk,  through 
every  breath  you  breathe.  People  are  frightened 
when  they  are  told  this.  They  will  again  and  again 
ask  you  if  they  are  not  going  to  lose  their  individuali- 
ty. What  is  any  man's  individuality?  I  should  be 
glad  to  see  it. 

A  little  baby  has  no  moustache;  when  he  grows 
older  he  has  a  moustache  and  beard.  His  individu- 
ality is  lost  if  it  is  in  the  body.  If  I  lose  one  eye,  or 
if  I  lose  one  of  my  hands  my  individuality  will  be 
lost  if  it  is  in  the  body.  A  drunkard  should  not  give 
up  drinking  because  he  would  lose  his  indivuality.  A 
thief  need  not  be  a  good  man  because  he  would  there- 
fore lose  his  individuality.  No  man  ought  to  change 
his  habits  for  fear  of  this.  There  is  no  individuality 
except  in  the  Infinite.  That  is  the  only  condition 
which  does  not  change.  Everything  else  is  in  a  con- 
stant state  of  flux.  Neither  can  individuality  be  in 
memory.  Suppose  I  receive  a  blow  on  the  head  and 
forget  all  about  my  past;  then  I  have  lost  all  my 
individuality;  I  am  gone.  I  do  not  remember  two  or 
three  years  of  my  childhood,  and  if  memory  and  exist- 
ence are  one,  then  whatever  I  forget  is  gone.  That 
part  of  my  life  which  I  do  not  remember  I  did  not 
live.  That  is  a  very  narrow  idea  of  individuality. 
We  are  not  individuals  yet.  We  are  struggling 
towards  individuality  and  that  is  the  Infinite;  that  is 
the  real  nature  of  man.  He  alone  lives  whose  life  is 
in  the  whole  universe,  and  the  more  we  concentrate 


THE   REAL    NATURE   OF    MAN  4I 

our  lives  on  little  limited  things  the  faster  are  we 
going  towards  death.  That  moment  alone  we  have 
lived  when  our  lives  were  in  the  universe,  in  others; 
and  all  those  minutes  which  we  concentrated  upon 
this  little  life  was  death,  simply  death,  and  that  is 
why  the  fear  of  death  comes.  The  fear  of  death  can 
only  be  conquered  when  man  realizes  that  so  long  as 
there  is  one  life  in  this  universe  he  is  living.  When 
he  can  say :  'T  am  in  everything,  in  every  body ;  I  am 
in  all  lives,  I  am  the  universe,  this  whole  universe  is 
my  body.  How  can  I  die  so  long  as  one  particle 
remains?  Who  says  I  will  die?"  then  alone  comes  the 
state  of  fearlessness.  To  talk  of  immortality  in  little 
constantly  changing  things  is  ridiculous.  Says  an  old 
Sanskrit  philosopher:  It  is  only  the  spirit  that  is  the 
individual  because  it  is  infinite;  no  infinity  can  be 
divided;  infinity  cannot  be  broken  into  pieces.  It  is 
the  same  one,  undivided  unit  forever,  and  this  is  the 
individual  man,  the  Real  Man.  The  apparent  man  is 
merely  a  struggle  to  express,  to  manifest  this  indi- 
viduality, which  is  beyond,  and  that  evolution  is  not  in 
the  spirit.  These  changes  which  are  going  on,  the 
wicked  becoming  good,  the  animal  becoming  man, 
take  it  whatever  way  you  like,  are  not  in  the  spirit. 
Evolution  of  nature  and  manifestation  of  spirit.  Sup- 
pose here  is  a  screen  hiding  you  from  me,  and  there 
is  a  small  hole  in  the  screen,  and  through  that  I  can 
just  see  some  of  the  faces  before  me,  just  a  few  faces. 
Now  suppose  this  hole  begins  to  grow  larger  and 
larger.  As  the  hole  goes  on  becoming  larger  and 
larger,  more  and  more  of  the  scene  before  me  reveals 
itself,  and  when  the  hole  has  become  identified  with 


42  JNANA    YOGA 

the  screen  I  stand  face  to  face  with  you.  You  did  not 
change  at  all  in  this  case,  you  were  where  you  always 
were.  It  was  the  hole  that  was  evolving  and  you 
were  manifesting  yourself.  So  it  is  with  the  spirit. 
You  are  already  free  and  perfect.  No  perfection  is 
going  to  be  attained.  You  are  that  already — free  and 
perfect.  What  are  all  these  ideas  of  religion  and  God 
and  searching  for  the  hereafter?  Why  does  man  go 
to  look  for  a  God?  Why  in  every  nation,  in  every 
state  of  society  did  man  want  a  perfect  ideal  some- 
where, either  in  man,  in  God,  or  anywhere  else?  Be- 
cause that  idea  is  in  you.  It  is  your  own  heart  beating 
and  you  did  not  know,  you  were  mistaking  it  for 
something  external.  It  is  the  God  within  your  own 
self  that  is  impelling  you  to  seek  for  Him,  to  realize 
Him,  and  after  long  search  here  and  there,  in  temples 
and  in  churches,  in  earths,  in  heavens,  and  in  all 
various  ways,  at  last  you  come  back,  complete  the 
circle  from  where  you  started,  back  to  your  own  soul 
and  find  that  He  for  whom  you  have  been  seeking  all 
over  the  world,  for  whom  you  have  been  weeping  and 
praying  in  churches  and  temples,  on  whom  you  were 
looking  as  the  mystery  of  all  mysteries  shrouded 
behind  the  clouds.  He  nearest  of  the  near,  your  own 
Self,  the  reality  of  your  own  life,  your  body  and  your 
soul.  That  is  your  own  nature,  the  real  nature  of  man. 
Assert  it,  manifest  it.  You  are  pure  already.  You 
are  not  to  become  perfect,  you  are  that  already.  This 
w^hole  of  nature  is  like  that  screen  which  was  hiding 
the  reality  beyond.  Every  good  thought  that  you 
think  or  act  upon  is  simply  tearing  the  veil,  as  it  were, 
and  the  purity,  the  Infinity,  the  God  behind,  manifests 


THE   REAL    NATURE   OF    MAN  43 

itself.  This  is  the  whole  history  of  man.  Finer  and 
finer  becomes  the  veil,  more  and  more  of  the  light 
behind  shines  by  its  own  nature,  for  it  is  its  nature  to 
shine.  It  cannot  be  known ;  ni  vain  we  try  to  know  it. 
Were  it  knowable,  it  would  not  be  what  it  is,  for  it  is 
the  Eternal  Subject :  knowledge  is  a  limitation,  knowl- 
edge is  objectifying.  He  is  the  eternal  subject  of 
everything,  the  eternal  witness  in  this  universe,  your 
own  Self.  Knowledge  is,  as  it  were,  a  lower  step,  a 
degeneration.  We  are  that  Eternal  Subject  already; 
how  to  know  it?  That  is  the  real  nature  of  every 
man  and  he  is  struggling  to  express  it  in  various 
ways;  else  why  are  there  so  many  ethical  codes? 
Where  is  the  explanation  of  all  ethics?  One  idea 
stands  out  as  the  centre  in  all  ethics,  expressed  in 
various  forms;  doing  good  to  others.  The  guiding 
motive  of  mankind  is  charity  towards  men,  charity 
towards  all  animals.  But  these  are  all  various  expres- 
sions of  that  eternal  truth  that  "I  am  the  universe; 
this  universe  is  one."  Else  where  is  the  reason  ?  Why 
shall  I  do  good  to  my  fellow  men?  Why  should  I 
do  good  to  others?  What  compels  me?  It  is  this 
sympathy,  this  feeling  the  sameness  everywhere.  The 
hardest  hearts  feel  sympathy  to  other  beings  some- 
times. Even  the  man  who  gets  frightened  if  he  is 
told  that  this  assumed  individuality  is  really  a  delu- 
sion, that  it  is  ignoble  to  try  to  cling  to  this  apparent 
individuality,  that  very  man  will  tell  you  that  extreme 
self-abnegation  is  the  centre  of  all  morality ;  and  what 
is  perfect  self-abnegation?  What  remains?  Self- 
abnegation  means  the  abnegation  of  this  apparent  self, 
the  abnegation  of  all  selfishness.     This  idea  of  "me" 


44  JNANA   YOGA 

and  "mine" — ahankdra  and  mama — is  the  result  of 
past  superstition,  and  the  more  this  present  self  rolls 
away,  the  more  the  Real  Self  becomes  manifest  in  its 
full  glory.  This  is  real  self-abnegation,  the  centre, 
the  basis,  the  gist  of  all  moral  teaching,  and  whether 
men  know  it  or  not,  the  whole  world  is  slowly  going 
towards  that,  practising  that  more  or  less.  Only  the 
vast  majority  of  mankind  do  it  unconsciously.  Let 
them  do  it  consciously.  Let  them  make  the  sacrifice 
knowing  that  this  is  not  the  real  self;  this  is  nothing 
but  a  limitation.  One  glimpse  of  that  Infinite  Reality 
which  is  behind,  one  spark  of  that  Infinite  Fire  that  is 
the  All,  represents  the  present  man,  but  that  Infinite 
is  his  true  nature. 

What  is  the  utility,  the  effect,  the  result  of  this 
knowledge  ?     In  these  days  we  have  to  measure  every- 
thing by  utility.     That  is  to  say  generally,  by  how 
many  pounds,  shillings  and  pence  it  represents.     What 
right  has  a  person  to  ask  that  truth  should  be  judged 
by  the  standard  of  utility  or  money  ?     Suppose  there  is 
no  utility,  will  it  be  less  truth  ?     Utility  is  not  the  test 
of  truth.     Nevertheless,  there  is  the  highest  utility  in 
this.     Happiness,  we  see,  is  what  every  one  is  seeking 
for,   but  the  majority  seek   it  in   things   which   are 
evanescent,   and  which  are  not  real.     No  happiness 
/  was  ever  found  in  the  senses.     There  never  was  a 
V  person  who  found  happiness  in  the  senses,  or  in  enjoy- 
ments of  the  senses.     Happiness  is  only  found  in  the 
/  spirit.     Therefore  the  highest  utility  to  mankind  is  to 
/    find  this  happiness  in  the  spirit.     The  next  point  is, 
that  ignorance  is  the  great  mother  of  all  misery,  and 
this  is  the  fundamental  ignorance,  to  think  that  the 


THE   REAL    NATURE   OF    MAN  45 

Infinite  weeps  and  cries  that  he  is  finite,  and  this  is 
the  basis  of  all  ignorance,  that  we,  the  immortal,  the 
ever  pure,  the  perfect  spirit,  think  that  we  are  little 
minds,  that  we  are  little  bodies;  this  is  the  mother  of 
all  selfishness.  As  soon  as  I  am  a  little  body  I  want 
to  preserve  it,  to  protect  it,  to  keep  it  nice,  at  the 
expense  of  other  bodies;  you  and  I  have  become  sep- 
arate. As  soon  as  this  idea  of  separation  comes,  it 
opens  the  door  to  all  mischief  and  leads  to  all  misery. 
This  is  the  utility,  that  if  a  very  small  fractional  part 
of  the  human  beings  living  to-day  can  put  aside  this 
idea  of  selfishness  and  narrowness  and  littleness,  this 
earth  will  become  a  paradise  to-morrow,  but  with 
machines  and  improvements  of  material  knowledge  it 
will  never  come.  These  only  increase  misery,  as  oil 
poured  on  fire  increases  the  flame  all  the  more.  With- 
out the  knowledge  of  spirit,  every  bit  of  material 
knowledge  is  only  adding  fuel  to  fire,  only  giving  into 
the  hands  of  selfish  man  one  more  instrument  to  take 
what  belongs  to  others,  to  live  upon  the  life  of  others, 
instead  of  giving  up  his  life  for  others. 

Is  it  practical,  is  another  question.  Can  it  be  prac- 
tised in  modern  society.  Truth  does  not  pay  homage 
to  any  society,  modern  or  ancient.  Society  has  to  pay 
homage  to  Truth,  or  die.  Societies  and  all  beings  are 
moulded  upon  truth,  and  truth  has  not  to  adjust  itself 
to  society.  If  such  noble  truth  as  unselfishness  cannot 
be  practised  in  society,  better  give  up  society  and  go 
into  forests.  That  is  the  daring  man.  There  are  two 
sorts  of  courage.  One  is  the  courage  to  jump  at  the 
mouth  of  a  cannon.  Tigers,  in  that  case,  have  been 
braver  than  men  and  wolves  also.     But  there  is  also 


46  J  NANA   YOGA 

the  courage  of  spiritual  boldness.  An  invading  Em- 
peror went  to  India.  His  teacher  told  him  to  go  and 
see  some  of  those  sages  of  India.  After  a  long  search 
he  found  a  very  old  man  sitting  on  a  block  of  stone. 
The  Emperor  talked  with  him  a  little  and  became  very 
much  pleased  with  the  conversation  of  the  man.  He 
asked  the  sage  to  go  with  him  to  his  country.  "No, 
I  am  quite  satisfied  with  my  forest  here."  Said  the 
Emperor,  "I  will  give  you  money,  position,  wealth. 
I  am  the  Emperor  of  the  world."  "No,"  replied  the 
man,  "I  don't  care  for  those  things."  The  Emperor 
replied,  "If  you  do  not  go  I  will  kill  you."  The  man 
smiled  serenely.  "That  is  the  most  foolish  thing  you 
ever  said,  Emperor.  You  cannot  kill  me.  Me  the 
sun  cannot  dry,  neither  fire  can  burn,  neither  instru- 
ment kill,  for  I  am  the  birthless,  the  deathless,  the 
omnipotent,  omnipresent  spirit,  ever  living."  That 
is  another  boldness.  In  the  Mutiny  of  1857  there  was 
a  great  Swami,  a  very  great  soul.  A  Mahommedan 
mutineer  stabbed  him  and  nearly  killed  him.  The 
Hindu  mutineers  brought  the  Mahommedan  to  the 
Swami  and  offered  to  kill  him.  But  the  Swami  turned 
and  said:  "Yet,  brother,  thou  art  He,  thou  art  He!" 
and  expired.  That  is  another  bravery.  What  is  it  to 
talk  of  the  bravery  of  your  muscles,  of  the  superiority 
of  your  Western  institutions,  if  you  cannot  make  a 
truth  square  with  your  society,  if  you  cannot  build 
up  a  society  into  which  the  highest  truth  will  fit? 
What  is  this  boastful  talk  about  your  grandeur  and 
greatness,  if  you  above  all  things  stand  up  and  say, 
"This  kind  of  courage  is  not  practical."  Is  nothing 
practical,  but  pounds,   shillings,   and  pence?     If  so, 


THE   REAL   NATURE   OF    MAN  47 

why  the  boast  of  your  society?  That  society  is  the 
greatest  where  the  highest  truths  become  practical. 
That  is  my  opinion,  and  if  society  is  not  fit  for  the 
highest  truths,  make  it  fit.  Make  it  if  you  can,  and 
the  sooner  you  do  so,  the  better.  Stand  up,  men  and 
women,  in  the  spirit,  dare  to  beheve  in  the  truth,  dare 
to  practise  the  truth.  The  world  requires  a  few  hun- 
dred bold  men  and  women.  It  is  very  hard  to  be  bold. 
In  that  animal  boldness,  the  tigers  can  do  better. 
Wolves  have  it  naturally.  Even  the  ants  are  better 
than  all  other  animals.  What  use  to  talk  of  this  physi- 
cal boldness!  Practice  that  boldness  which  does  not 
quake  before  death,  which  welcomes  death,  which 
stands  there  and  knows  it  is  the  spirit  and  in  the 
whole  universe,  no  arms  can  kill  it,  not  all  the  light- 
nings can  kill  it.  Not  all  the  fire  in  the  universe  can 
burn  it.  It  dares  know  the  truth  and  show  the  truth 
in  life.  This  is  the  free  man,  this  is  the  real  soul. 
**This  Atman  is  first  to  be  heard,  then  thought  about, 
and  then  meditated  upon." 

There  is  a  great  tendency  in  modern  times  to  talk 
too  much  of  works  and  decry  all  thought.  Doing  is 
very  good,  but  even  that  comes  from  thinking.  Little 
manifestations  of  energy  which  have  originated  in 
thought  are  escaping  through  the  muscles  and  are 
called  work.  Where  there  is  no  thought,  there  will 
be  no  work.  Fill  the  brain,  therefore,  with  high 
thoughts,  highest  ideals,  place  them  day  and  night 
before  you,  and  out  of  that  will  come  great  work. 
Talk  not  about  impuritv,  but  tell  the  mind  we  are 
pure.  We  have  hypnotized  ourselves  into  this  thought 
that   we   are  little,   that   we   are  born   and   that   we 


^8  J  NANA   YOGA 

are  going  to  die,  and  into  living  in  a  constant  state 
of  fear. 

There  was  a  lioness,  heavy  with  young,  going  about 
in  search  of  prey,  and  there  was  a  flock  of  sheep,  and 
the  lioness  jumped  upon  the  flock.  She  died  in  the 
attempt  and  a  little  baby  lion  was  born,  motherless. 
It  was  taken  care  of  by  the  sheep  and  the  sheep  brought 
it  up  and  it  grew  with  the  sheep,  lived  on  grass  like  the 
sheep,  bleated  like  the  sheep,  and  although  it  became 
a  big  full-grown  lion,  to  all  intents  and  purposes  it 
thought  it  was  a  sheep.  In  course  of  time  another 
big  lion  came  in  search  of  prey,  and  what  was  its 
astonishment  to  find  that  in  the  midst  of  this  flock  was 
this  lion  flying  like  the  sheep  at  the  approach  of 
danger.  He  tried  to  get  near  to  teach  it  that  it  was 
not  a  sheep,  but  a  lion,  but  at  the  very  approach  of  the 
other  lion  the  sheep  fled,  and  with  it  the  sheep-lion. 
But  the  other  lion  was  rather  kind,  he  watched,  and 
one  day  found  the  big  sheep-lion  sleeping.  He  jumped 
on  it  and  said,  "You  are  a  lion."  "I  am  a  sheep," 
cried  the  other  lion.  He  would  not  believe,  but 
bleated.  The  lion  dragged  him  towards  a  lake  and 
said,  "Look  there,  there  is  my  reflection  and  yours." 
Then  came  the  comparison.  He  looked  at  this  lion 
and  then  at  his  own  reflection,  and  in  a  moment  came 
the  idea  that  he  was  a  lion.  The  lion  roared,  the 
bleating  was  gone.  You  are  the  lions,  you  are  souls, 
pure,  infinite  and  perfect.  The  might  of  the  universe 
is  in  you.  "Why  weepest  thou,  my  friend  ?  There  is 
neither  birth  nor  death  for  thee.  Why  weepest  thou  ? 
There  is  no  disease  nor  misery  for  thee,  but  thou  art 
like  the  infinite  sky,  clouds  of  various  colors  come 


THE    REAL    NATURE   OF    MAN  49 

over  it,  play  for  a  moment,  then  vanish.  It  is  the  same 
eternal  blue."  Why  do  we  see  wickedness?  There 
was  a  stump  of  a  tree  in  the  dark  at  night.  A  thief 
came  that  way  and  said,  "That  is  a  policeman."  A 
young  man  waiting  for  his  beloved  came  that  way  and 
thought  that  was  his  sweetheart.  A  child  who  had 
been  told  ghost  stories  came  out  and  began  to  shriek 
that  it  was  a  ghost.  But  it  was  the  stump  of  a  tree. 
We  see  the  world  as  we  are.  Put  on  the  table  a  bag 
of  gold  and  let  a  baby  be  here.  Let  a  thief  come  and 
take  the  gold.  Would  the  baby  know  it  was  stolen? 
That  which  we  have  inside  we  see  outside.  The  baby 
has  no  thief  inside  and  sees  no  thief  outside.  So  with 
all  knowledge.  Do  not  talk  of  the  wickedness  of  the 
world  and  all  its  sins.  Weep  that  you  are  bound  to 
see  wickedness  yet.  Weep  that  you  are  bound  to  see 
sin  everywhere,  and  if  you  want  to  help  the  world  do 
not  condemn  it.  Do  not  weaken  it  all  the  more.  For 
what  is  sin  and  what  is  misery,  and  what  are  all  these, 
but  the  results  of  weakness?  The  world  has  been 
made  weaker  and  weaker  every  day  by  such  teachings. 
Men  are  taught  from  childhood  that  they  are  weak  and 
are  sinners.  Teach  them  that  they  are  all  glorious 
children  of  immortality,  even  those  who  are  the  weak- 
est in  manifestation.  Let  positive,  strong,  helpful 
thought,  enter  into  their  brains  from  very  childhood 
and  not  weakening  and  paralyzing  thought.  Lay 
yourselves  open  to  those  thoughts.  Tell  your  own 
minds  *T  am  He,  I  am  He."  Let  it  ring  day  and  night 
in  your  minds  like  a  song,  and  at  the  point  of  death 
declare:  "I  am  He."  That  is  the  truth,  the  infinite 
strength  of  the  world  is  yours.     Drive  out  the  super- 


50  JNANA   YOGA 

stition  that  has  covered  your  minds.  Let  us  be  brave. 
Know  the  truth  and  practise  the  truth.  The  goal  may 
be  distant,  but  awake,  arise,  and  stop  not  till  that  goal 
is  reached. 


MAYA  AND  ILLUSION 

Almost  all  of  you  have  heard  of  the  word  Maya- 
Generally  it  is  used,  though  I  am  afraid  very  wrongly, 
to  denote  illusion,  or  delusion,  or  some  such  thing, 
but  as  the  theory  of  Maya  forms,  as  it  were,  one  of 
the  pillars  upon  which  the  Vedanta  rests,  it  is  neces- 
sary that  it  should  be  properly  understood,  and  I  ask 
a  little  patience  of  you,  for  there  is  great  danger  of 
being  misunderstood  in  expounding  the  theory  of 
mdyd.  The  oldest  idea  of  mdyd  that  we  can  find  in 
Vedic  literature  is  where  this  word  is  used  in  the 
sense  of  delusion,  but  then  the  real  theory  had  not 
been  reached.  We  find  such  passages  as  "Indra 
through  his  mdyd  assumed  various  forms."  Here  it 
is  true  the  word  mdyd  means  something  like  magic. 
So  we  find  various  other  passages,  always  taking  the 
same  meaning.  The  word  mdyd  then  drops  out  of 
sight  altogether.  In  the  meanwhile  the  idea  is  devel- 
oping. Later  the  question  is  raised,  why  cannot  we 
know  the  secret  of  the  Universe,  and  the  answer  given 
is  very  significant.  "Because  we  talk  in  vain,  and^ 
because  we  are  satisfied  with  the  things  of  the  senses, 
and  because  we  are  running  after  desires;  therefore 
we,  as  it  were,  cover  this  reality  with  a  mist."  Here 
the  word  mdyd  is  not  used  at  all,  but  we  get  one  idea, 

51 


52  JNANA   YOGA 

that  the  cause  of  our  ignorance  is  a  kind  of  mist  that 
has  come  between  us  and  the  truth.  Much  later  on, 
in  one  of  the  latest  Upanishads,  we  find  the  word 
maya,  reappearing,  but  by  this  time  a  good  deal  of 
transformation  has  been  worked  upon  it,  a  mass  of 
new  meaning  has  by  this  time  attached  itself  to  the 
word.  Theories  have  been  propounded  and  repeated ; 
others  have  been  taken  up,  until  at  last  the  idea  of 
mdyd  has  become  a  fixed  quantity.  We  read  in  the 
Svetas'vatara  Upanishad  ''Know  nature  to  be  mdyd 
and  the  mind,  the  ruler  of  this  mdyd  is  the  Lord 
Himself."  Coming  to  our  philosophers,  we  find  that 
this  word  mdyd  has  been  manipulated  in  various 
fashions,  until  we  come  to  the  great  S'ankaracharya. 
The  theory  of  mdyd  was  manipulated  a  little  by  the 
Buddhists,  too,  but  in  their  hands  it  became  very 
much  like  what  is  caled  Idealism,  and  that  is  the 
meaning  that  is  now  generally  given  to  the  word 
mdyd.  When  the  Hindu  says  the  world  is  mdyd,  at 
once  people  get  the  idea  that  the  world  is  an  illusion. 
This  interpretation  has  some  basis,  as  coming  through 
the  Buddhistic  philosophers,  because  there  was  one 
section  of  them  who  did  not  believe  in  the  external 
world  at  all.  But  the  mdyd  of  the  Vedanta,  in 
its  last  developed  form,  is  neither  idealism  nor  real- 
ism, nor  is  it  theory.  It  is  a  simple  statement  of 
facts — what  we  are,  and  what  we  see  around  us.  As 
I  have  told  you  before,  the  minds  of  the  people  from 
whom  the  Vedas  came  were  intent  upon  following 
principles,  discovering  principles.  They  had  no  time  to 
work  upon  details,  or  to  wait  for  them;  they  wanted 
to    go    deep    into    the    heart    of    things.     Something 


MAYA   AND   ILLUSION  53 

beyond  was  calling  them,  as  it  were,  and  they  could 
not  wait.  We  find  that,  scattered  all  through  the 
Upanishads  and  other  books  the  details  of  subjects 
which  we  now  call  modern  sciences,  are  often  very 
erroneous,  but,  at  the  same  time,  their  principles  are 
correct.  For  instance,  the  idea  of  ether,  which  is  one 
of  the  latest  theories  of  modern  science,  is  to  be  found 
in  our  ancient  literature  in  forms  much  more  devel- 
oped than  is  the  modern  scientific  theory  of  ether 
to-day;  but  it  was  in  principle;  when  they  tried  to 
demonstrate  the  workings  of  that  principle,  they  made 
many  mistakes.  The  theory  of  the  all-pervading  life 
principle,  of  which  all  life  in  this  universe  is  but  a 
differing  manifestation,  was  understood  in  Vedic 
times ;  it  is  found  in  the  Brahmanas.  There  is  a  long 
hymn  in  the  Samhita  in  praise  of  Prana,  of  which  all 
life  is  but  a  manifestation.  By  the  bye,  it  may  interest 
some  of  you  to  know  that  there  are  in  the  Vedic  phil- 
osophy theories  about  the  origin  of  life  on  this  earth 
very  similar  to  those  which  have  been  advanced  by 
some  modern  European  scientists.  You,  of  course, 
all  know  that  there  is  a  theory  that  life  came  from 
other  planets.  It  is  a  settled  doctrine  with  some  Vedic 
philosophers  that  life  comes  in  this  way  from  the 
moon. 

Coming  to  the  principles,  we  find  these  Vedic 
thinkers  very  courageous  and  wonderfully  bold  in  pro- 
pounding large  and  generalized  theories.  The  answer 
which  they  gave  as  a  solution  of  the  mystery  of  this 
Universe  from  the  external  world  was  a  general  one. 
The  detailed  workings  of  modern  science  do  not  bring 
the  question  one  step  nearer  to  solution,  because  the 


54  J  NANA   YOGA 

principles  have  failed.  If  the  theory  of  ether  failed  in 
ancient  times  to  give  a  solution  of  the  mystery  of  the 
Universe,  working  out  the  details  of  that  ether  theory 
will  not  bring  us  much  nearer  to  the  truth.  If  the 
theory  of  all-pervading  life  failed  as  a  theory  of  this 
Universe,  it  would  not  mean  anything  more  if  worked 
out  in  detail,  for  the  details  do  not  change  the  prin- 
ciple of  the  Universe.  What  I  mean  is,  that  in  their 
inquiry  into  the  principle,  the  Hindu  thinkers  were 
as  bold,  and  in  some  cases  much  bolder,  than  the 
moderns.  They  made  some  of  the  grandest  general- 
izations that  have  yet  been  reached,  and  some  still 
remain  in  India  as  theories,  which  modern  science 
has  yet  to  get  even  as  theories.  For  instance,  they  not 
only  arrived  at  the  ether  theory,  but  went  beyond  and 
classified  mind  also,  as  a  still  more  rarefied  ether. 
Beyond  that  they  found  a  still  more  rarefied  ether. 
Yet  there  is  no  solution,  it  does  not  answer  the  prob- 
lem. No  amount  of  knowledge  of  the  external  world 
would  answer  the  problem.  We  find  here  we  were 
just  beginning  to  know  a  little;  wait  a  few  thousand 
years  and  we  shall  get  the  solution.  '*No,"  says  the 
Vedantist,  for  he  has  proved  beyond  all  doubt  that 
the  mind  is  limited;  that  it  cannot  go  beyond  certain 
limits;  we  cannot  go  beyond  time,  space  and  the  law 
of  causation.  ,  As  no  man  can  jump  out  of  his  own 
self,  so  no  man  can  go  beyond  the  limits  that  have 
been  put  upon  us  by  the  laws  of  time  and  space. 
Every  attempt  to  solve  the  law  of  causation,  time  and 
space,  will  be  futile,  because  the  very  attempt  would 
have  to  be  made  by  taking  for  granted  the  existence 
of  these  three.     It  cannot  be.     What  form  does  the 


MAYA    AND    ILLUSION  55 

statement  of  the  existence  of  the  world  take  then? 
"This  world  has  no  existence."  What  is  meant 
thereby  ?  That  it  has  no  existence-absolute.  It  exists 
only  as  relative  to  my  mind,  to  yours,  and  to  the  minds 
of  everybody  else.  We  see  this  world  with  the  five 
senses.  If  we  had  another  sense,  we  would  see  in  it 
something  else.  If  we  had  still  another  sense,  it 
would  appear  as  something  yet  different.  It  has, 
therefore,  no  real  existence;  that  unchangeable,  im- 
movable, infinite  existence  it  has  not.  Nor  can  it  be 
called  non-existence,  seeing  that  it  exists,  and  we  have 
to  work  in  and  through  it.  It  is  a  mixture  of  exist- 
ence and  non-existence. 

Coming  from  abstractions  to  the  common  everyday 
details  of  our  lives,  we  find  that  our  whole  life  is  a 
mixture  of  this  contradiction  of  existence  and  non- 
existence. There  is  this  contradiction  in  knowledge. 
It  seems  that  man  can  know  everything,  if  he  only 
wants  to  know;  but  before  he  has  gone  more  than  a 
few  steps  he  finds  an  adamantine  wall  which  he  cannot 
move.  All  his  work  is  in  a  circle,  and  he  cannot  go 
beyond  that  circle.  The  problems  which  are  nearest 
and  dearest  to  him,  are  impelling  him  and  calling  on 
him  day  and  night  for  a  solution,  but  he  cannot  solve 
them,  because  he  cannot  go  beyond  his  intellect.  And 
yet  the  desire  is  implanted  strongly  in  him.  Still  we 
know  that  the  only  good  is  to  be  obtained  by  con- 
trolling and  checking  these  impulses.  With  every 
breath,  every  impulse  of  our  heart  asks  us  to  be  selfish. 
At  the  same  time,  there  is  some  power  beyond  us 
which  says  that  it  is  unselfishness  alone  which  is  good. 
Every  child  is  a  born  optimist ;  he  is  dreaming  golden 


56  J  NANA    YOGA 

dreams.  In  youth  he  becomes  still  more  optimistic. 
It  is  hard  for  a  young  man  to  believe  that  there  is 
such  a  thing  as  death,  such  a  thing  as  defeat  or  degra- 
dation. Old  age  comes,  and  life  is  a  mass  of  ruin. 
Dreams  have  vanished  into  air,  and  the  old  man  has 
become  a  pessimist.  Thus  we  are  going  on,  from 
one  extreme  to  the  other,  buffeted  by  Nature,  without 
hope,  without  limit,  without  knowing  the  bounds, 
without  knowing  where  we  are  going.  It  reminds 
me  of  a  celebrated  song  written  in  the  Lalita  Vistara, 
in  the  biography  of  Buddha.  Buddha  was  born,  says 
the  book,  as  the  saviour  of  mankind,  but  he  forgot 
himself  in  the  luxuries  of  his  palace,  and  some  angels 
came  to  sing  a  song  to  rouse  him  up,  and  the  burden 
of  the  whole  song  is,  we  are  floating  down  this  river, 
continually  changing,  with  no  stop  and  no  rest.  So 
are  all  our  lives,  going  on  and  on  without  knowing 
any  rest.  What  are  we  to  do?  The  man  who  has 
enough  to  eat  and  drink  is  an  optimist,  and  he  avoids 
all  mention  of  misery,  for  it  frightens  him.  Tell  not 
to  him  the  sorrows  and  the  suiferings  of  the  world; 
go  to  him  and  tell  that  it  is  all  good.  "Yes,  I  am 
safe,"  says  he;  "look  at  me,  I  have  a  nice  house  to 
live  in.  I  do  not  care  for  cold;  therefore  do  not 
bring  these  horrid  pictures  before  me."  But,  on  the 
other  hand,  there  are  others  dying  of  cold  and  hunger. 
Go  and  teach  them  that  it  is  all  good  and  they  will 
refuse  to  believe  you.  There  may  be  a  man  who  has 
suffered  tremendously  in  this  life,  and  he  will  not 
hear  of  anything  joyful,  of  anything  beautiful,  of 
anything  that  is  good.  "Frighten  everybody,"  says 
he ;  "why  should  it  be  that  anybody  should  laugh  while 


MAYA    AND    ILLUSION  57 

I  am  weeping?  I  must  make  them  all  weep  with  me, 
for  I  am  miserable;  that  is  my  only  consolation." 
Thus  we  are  going  on,  between  optimism  and  pes- 
simism. Then  there  is  the  tremendous  fact  of  death. 
The  whole  world  is  going  to  death ;  everything  is 
dying.  All  our  progress,  our  vanities,  our  reforms, 
our  luxuries,  our  knowledge  have  that  one  end — 
death.  That  is  all  that  is  certain.  Cities  come  and 
go,  empires  rise  and  fall,  planets  break  into  pieces 
and  crumble  into  dust,  to  be  blown  about  by  the 
atmospheres  of  other  planets.  Thus  it  is  going  on 
from  time  without  beginning.  What  is  the  goal? 
Death  is  the  goal  of  everything.  Death  is  the  goal 
of  life,  of  beauty,  of  power,  of  wealth,  of  virtue,  too. 
Saints  die  and  sinners  die,  kings  die  and  beggars  die. 
They  are  all  going  to  death,  and  yet  this  tremendous 
clinging  on  to  life  exists.  Somehow,  we  do  not  know 
why,  we  have  to  cling  on  to  life;  we  cannot  give  it 
up.     And  this  is  mdyd! 

The  mother  is  nursing  a  child  with  great  care;  all 
her  soul,  her  life,  is  in  that  child.  The  child  grows, 
becomes  a  man,  and  perchance  becomes  a  blackguard 
and  a  brute,  kicks  her  and  beats  her  every  day;  and 
yet  the  mother  clings  on  to  the  child,  and  when  her 
reason  awakes,  she  covers  it  up  with  the  idea  of  love. 
She  little  thinks  it  is  not  love,  it  is  something  which 
has  got  hold  of  her  nerves,  she  cannot  shake  it  off; 
however  she  may  try,  she  cannot  shake  off  the  bondage 
she  has — and  this  is  mdyd!  We  are  all  after  the 
golden  fleece.  Every  one  of  us  thinks  that  this  will 
be  ours,  but  very  few  of  them  are  in  the  world. 
Every  reasonable  man  sees  that  the  chance  of  getting 


58  J  NANA   YOGA 

it  is  perhaps  one  in  twenty  millions,  yet  every  one  must 
struggle  for  it,  and  the  majority  never  get  anything. 
And  this  is  may  a!  Death  is  stalking  day  and  night 
over  this  earth  of  ours,  but  at  the  same  time  we 
always  believe  that  we  shall  live  eternally.  A  ques- 
tion was  once  asked  of  King  Yudhisthira,  "What  is 
the  most  wonderful  thing  on  this  earth?"  And  the 
King  replied,  "Every  day  people  are  dying  around  us, 
and  yet  men  think  they  will  never  die."  And  this  is 
may  a!  This  tremendous  contradiction,  pleasure  suc- 
ceeding pain,  and  pain  pleasure,  seems  quite  natural 
to  us.  A  reformer  arises  and  wants  to  remedy  the 
evils  that  are  existing  in  a  certain  nation;  and  before 
they  have  been  remedied  a  thousand  other  evils  have 
arisen  in  another  place.  It  is  an  old  house  that  is 
falling;  patch  it  up  in  one  place,  the  ruin  extends  to 
another  corner.  In  India  our  reformers  cry  and 
preach  against  the  evils  which  enforced  widowhood 
brings  to  Indian  women.  In  the  West  non-marriage 
is  the  great  evil.  Help  the  unmarried  on  one  side; 
they  are  suffering.  Help  the  widows  on  the  other; 
they  are  suffering.  Like  the  old  rheumatism  in  the 
body,  drive  it  from  the  head  and  it  goes  to  the  body, 
drive  it  from  there  and  it  goes  to  the  feet.  Some 
people  become  richer  than  others ;  learning,  and  wealth, 
and  culture  become  their  exclusive  possession. 
Reformers  cry  that  these  treasures  should  not  be  in 
the  hands  of  a  select  few;  that  they  should  be  dis- 
tributed, that  all  ought  to  share  them.  More  happi- 
ness might  possibly  be  brought  to  the  masses  in  the 
sense  of  physical  happiness,  but,  perhaps,  as  culture 
comes,  this  physical  happiness  vanishes.     Which  way 


MAYA   AND   ILLUSION  59 

shall  we  go,  for  the  knowledge  of  happiness  brings 
the  knowledge  of  unhappiness?  The  least  bit  of 
material  prosperity  that  we  enjoy  is  elsewhere  causing 
the  same  amount  of  misery.  This  is  the  state  of 
things.  The  young,  perhaps,  do  not  see  it  clearly,  but 
those  who  have  lived  long  enough  and  those  who 
have  struggled  enough  will  understand  it.  And  this 
is  may  a!  These  things  are  going  on  day  and  night, 
and  to  find  a  solution  of  this  problem  would  be  impos- 
sible. Why  should  it  be  thus  ?  This  is  an  impossible 
question  to  answer,  because  the  question  cannot  be 
logically  formulated.  There  is  neither  how  nor  why 
in  this.  We  must  grasp  it  before  we  can  answer  it; 
we  must  know  what  it  is  before  we  can  answer.  But 
we  cannot  make  it  steady  one  moment,  it  eludes  our 
grasp  every  minute.  We  are  like  blind  machines. 
We  struggle  to  find  a  solution  of  a  problem  that 
incessantly  changes;  we  have  to  do  this,  we  cannot 
help  ourselves.  And  this  too  is  may  a!  I  stand  up  and 
lecture  to  you,  and  you  sit  and  listen ;  we  cannot  help  it. 
And  you  will  go  home,  and  some  of  you  may  have 
learned  a  little,  while,  perhaps,  others  will  think  this 
man  has  talked  nonsense.  I  will  go  home  thinking 
I  have  been  lecturing.     And  this  is  may  a! 

Maya  is  a  statement  of  the  facts  of  this  Universe, 
of  how  it  is  going  on.  People  generally  get  fright- 
ened when  these  things  are  told  to  them.  Bold  we 
must  be.  Hiding  facts  is  not  the  way  to  find  a 
remedy.  As  the  hare,  you  all  know,  hunted  down 
by  dogs,  puts  its  head  down  and  thinks  itself  safe, 
so,  when  we  run  into  optimism  or  pessimism,  we  are 
doing  just  like  the  hare,  but  that  is  not  a  remedy. 


6o  J  NANA    YOGA 

On  all  sides  there  are  objections  and  these  objec- 
tions, you  may  remark,  are  generally  from  people 
who  possess  more  of  the  good  things  of  life,  or  of 
enjoyments.  In  this  country  (England)  it  is  very 
difficult  to  become  a  pessimist.  Every  one  tells  me 
how  wonderfully  the  world  is  going  on,  how  pro- 
gressive, but  what  he  himself  is,  is  his  own  world. 
Old  questions  arise ;  Christianity  must  be  the  only  true 
religion  of  the  world,  because  Christian  nations  are 
prosperous.  But  that  assertion  contradicts  itself, 
because  the  prosperity  of  the  Christian  nations  depends 
on  the  misfortune  of  non-Christian  nations.  There 
must  be  some  to  prey  upon.  Suppose  the  whole  world 
were  to  become  Christian,  then  the  Christian  nations 
would  become  poor,  because  there  would  be  no  non- 
Christian  nations  for  them  to  prey  upon.  Thus  the 
argument  would  kill  itself.  Animals  are  living  upon 
the  plants,  men  upon  animals,  and  worst  of  all  upon 
each  other,  the  strong  upon  the  weak;  this  is  going 
on  everywhere,  and  this  is  may  a!  What  solution  do 
you  apply  to  this?  We  hear  every  day  of  such  and 
such  explanations,  and  are  told  that  in  the  long  run 
it  will  be  all  good.  Suppose  it  be  possible — which  is 
very  much  to  be  doubted — ^but  let  us  take  it  for  granted, 
why  should  there  be  this  diabolical  way  of  doing  good  ? 
Why  cannot  good  be  done  through  good  instead  of 
through  these  diabolical  methods?  The  descendants 
of  the  human  beings^  of  to-day  will  be  happy ;  but  why 
must  there  be  all  this  suffering  so  now?  This  is 
mdyd;  there  is  no  solution  to  it. 

Again,  we  often  hear  that  it  is  one  of  the  features 
of  evolution  that  it  eliminates  evil,  and  this  evil  being 


MAYA   AND   ILLUSION  6l 

continually  eliminated  from  the  world,  at  last  there 
will  remain  only  good  and  good  alone.  That  is  very 
nice  to  hear,  and  it  panders  to  our  vanities,  at  least 
with  those  of  us  who  have  enough  of  this  world's 
goods,  who  have  not  a  hard  struggle  to  face  every 
day,  and  are  not  being  crushed  under  the  wheels  of 
this  so-called  evolution.  It  is  very  good  and  comfort- 
ing, indeed,  to  such  fortunate  ones.  The  common 
herds  may  suffer,  but  they  do  not  care;  let  them  die, 
they  are  of  no  consequence.  Very  good,  yet  this  argu- 
ment is  fallacious  from  beginning  to  end.  It  takes 
for  granted,  in  the  first  place,  that  manifested  good 
and  evil  in  this  world  are  certain  quantities.  In  the 
second  place,  it  makes  a  still  worse  assumption,  that 
the  amount  of  good  is  an  increasing  quantity,  and  the 
amount  of  evil  is  a  decreasing  quantity.  So,  if  evil  is 
being  eliminated  in  this  way  by  what  they  call  evolu- 
tion, there  will  come  a  time  when  this  evil  will  be 
eliminated  and  what  remains  will  be  all  good.  Very 
(  easy  to  say,  but  can  it  be  proved  that  evil  is  a  lessening 
quantity?  Is  it  not  increasing  all  the  time?  Take 
the  man  who  lives  in  a  forest,  who  does  not  know 
even  how  to  cultivate  the  mind,  cannot  read  a  book, 
has  not  heard  of  such  a  thing  as  writing.  Run  a 
bayonet  through  that  man  and  take  it  out,  and  soon  he 
is  all  right  again,  while  we,  who  are  more  cultured, 
get  scratched  in  the  streets  and  die.  Machines  are 
making  things  cheap,  making  for  progress  and  evolu- 
tion, but  are  crushing  down  millions,  that  one  may 
become  rich,  making  one  richer  than  others,  and 
thousands  at  the  same  time  poorer  and  poorer,  making 
slaves  of  whole  masses  of  human  beings.     That  way 


62  J  NANA   YOGA 

it  is  going  on.  'The  animal  man  has  enjoyments  only 
in  the  senses.  If  he  does  not  get  enough  to  eat,  he 
is  miserable,  or  if  something  happens  to  his  body,  he 
is  miserable.  In  the  senses,  both  his  misery  and  his 
happiness  begin  and  end.  As  soon  as  this  man  pro- 
gresses, as  soon  as  the  horizon  of  his  happiness 
increases,  his  horizon  of  unhappiness  increases  pro- 
portionately. The  man  in  the  forest  does  not  know 
what  it  is  to  be  jealous,  to  be  in  the  Law  Courts,  to 
pay  taxes  regularly,  what  it  is  to  be  blamed  by  society, 
to  be  watched  day  and  night  by  the  most  tremendous 
tyranny  that  human  diabolism  ever  invented,  prying 
into  the  secrets  of  every  human  heart.  He  does  not 
know  how  man  becomes  a  thousand  times  more  diabol- 
ical than  any  other  animal,  with  all  his  vain  knowledge, 
and  with  all  his  pride.  Thus  it  is  that,  as  we  emerge 
out  of  the  senses  we  develop  higher  powers  of  enjoy- 
ment, and,  at  the  same  time,  we  have  to  develop 
higher  powers  of  suffering,  too.  The  nerves,  on  the 
other  hand,  are  becoming  finer  and  capable  of  suffer- 
ing more.  Often,  in  every  society,  we  find  that  the 
ignorant,  common  man,  if  he  is  abused,  does  not  feel 
much,  but  he  feels  a  good  thrashing.  But  the  gentle- 
man cannot  bear  a  single  word  of  abuse,  he  has  become 
so  finely  nerved.  Misery  has  increased  with  his  sus- 
ceptibility to  happiness.  This  does  not  go  much  to 
prove  the  philosopher's  case.  As  we  increase  our 
power  to  be  happy,  we  are  always  increasing  our 
power  to  suffer,  and  in  my  humble  opinion,  if  we 
advance  in  our  power  to  become  happy  in  arithmetical 
progression,  we  shall  progress,  on  the  other  hand,  in 
the  power  to  become  miserable  in  geometrical  progres- 


^M^fU, 


MAYA   AND   ILLUSION  63 

sion. ")  We  who  are  progressing  know  that  the  more  we 
progress  the  more  avenues  are  opened  to  pain  as  well 
as  to  pleasure.     And  this  is  may  a! 

Thus  we  find  that  mdyd  is  not  a  theory  for  the 
explanation  of  the  world;  it  is  simply  a  statement  of 
facts  as  they  exist.  The  very  basis  of  our  being  is 
contradiction,  everywhere  we  have  to  move  through 
this  tremendous  contradiction,  that  wherever  there  is 
good  there  must  also  be  evil,  and  wherever  there  is 
evil  there  must  be  some  good,  wherever  there  is  life 
death  must  follow  it  as  its  shadow,  and  every  one 
who  smiles  will  have  to  weep,  and  whoever  weeps 
must  smile  also.  Nor  can  this  state  of  things  be 
remedied.  We  may  verily  imagine  that  there  will  be 
a  place  where  there  will  be  only  good,  and  no  evil, 
that  there  will  be  places  where  we  shall  only  smile 
and  never  weep.  Such  a  thing  is  impossible  in  the 
very  nature  of  things,  for  the  conditions  will  be  the 
same.  Wherever  there  is  the  power  of  producing  a 
smile  in  us,  there  lurks  the  power  of  producing  tears 
in  our  eyes.  Wherever  there  is  the  power  of  pro- 
ducing happiness  in  us,  there  lurks  somewhere  the 
power  of  making  us  miserable. 

Thus  the  Vedanta  philosophy  is  neither  optimistic 
nor  pessimistic.  It  voices  both  these  views  and  takes 
things  as  they  are;  it  admits  that  this  world  is  a 
mixture  of  good  and  evil,  happiness  and  misery;  and 
that  to  increase  the  one,  of  necessity  must  increase 
the  other.  There  will  never  be  a  good  world,  because 
the  very  idea  is  a  contradiction  in  terms ;  nor  can 
there  be  a  bad  world.  The  great  secret  revealed  by 
this  analysis  is  this,  that  good  and  bad  are  not  two 


64  JNANA   YOGA 

cut-and-dried,  separate  existences.  There  is  not  one 
thing  in  this  world  of  ours  which  you  can  label  as 
good,  and  good  alone,  and  there  is  not  one  thing  in 
the  universe  which  you  can  label  as  bad,  and  bad 
alone.  The  very  same  phenomenon  which  is  appear- 
ing to  be  good  now,  may  appear  to  be  bad  to-morrow. 
The  same  thing  which  is  producing  misery  in  one, 
may  produce  happiness  in  another.  The  fire  that  burns 
the  child  may  cook  a  good  meal  for  a  starving  man. 
The  same  nerves  that  carry  the  sensations  of  misery 
carry  also  the  sensations  of  happiness.  The  only  way 
to  stop  evil,  therefore,  is  to  stop  the  good  also;  there 
is  no  other  way  that  is  sure.  To  stop  death,  we  shall 
have  to  stop  life  also.  Life  without  death,  and  happi- 
ness without  misery,  are  contradictions,  and  neither 
can  be  found  alone,  because  each  of  them  is  but  a 
different  manifestation  of  the  same  thing.  What  I 
thought  to  be  good  yesterday,  I  do  not  think  to  be 
good  now.  In  all  my  life,  when  I  look  back  upon  it, 
and  see  what  were  my  ideals  at  different  times,  I  find 
this  to  be  so.  At  one  time  my  ideal  was  to  drive  a 
strong  pair  of  horses.  I  do  not  hold  that  ideal  now. 
At  another  time,  when  I  was  a  little  child,  I  thought 
if  I  could  make  a  certain  kind  of  sweetmeat  I  should 
be  perfectly  happy.  At  another  time  I  imagined  that 
I  should  be  entirely  satisfied  if  I  had  a  wife  and 
children  and  plenty  of  money.  To-day,  I  laugh  at  all 
these  ideals  as  mere  childish  nonsense.  The  Vedanta 
says,  there  must  come  a  time  when  we  look  back  and 
laugh  at  these  ideals  of  ours  which  make  us  afraid 
of  giving  up  our  individuality.  Each  one  wants  to 
keep  this  body  and  not  give  it  up,  and  our  idea  is  that 


MAYA   AND   ILLUSION  65 

if  we  can  keep  the  body  for  an  indefinite  time  we 
shall  be  very  happy,  but  there  will  come  a  time  when 
we  shall  laugh  at  that  too.  Now,  if  such  be  the  state 
of  things,  we  are  in  a  state  of  helpless  contradiction, 
neither  existence,  nor  non-existence,  but  a  mixture 
of  them  both;  neither  misery,  nor  happiness,  but  a 
mixture  of  them  both.  What,  then,  is  the  use  of 
Vedanta,  and  all  other  philosophies  and  religions? 
And,  above  all,  what  is  the  use  of  doing  good  work? 
This  is  the  question  that  comes  to  the  mind.  If  this 
be  the  truth,  that  whenever  you  try  to  do  good  the 
same  evil  remains,  and  whenever  you  try  to  create 
happiness  there  will  always  be  mountains  high  of 
misery,  people  will  always  ask  you — what  is  the  use 
of  doing  right?  The  answer  is,  in  the  first  place,  that 
we  must  work  in  the  way  of  lessening  misery,  for 
that  is  the  only  way  of  making  ourselves  happy. 
Every  one  of  us  finds  it  out  sooner  or  later  in  our 
lives.  The  bright  ones  find  it  out  a  little  earlier,  and 
the  dull  ones  a  little  later.  The  dull  ones  pay  very 
dearly  for  the  discovery  and  the  bright  ones  less 
dearly.  In  the  second  place,  apart  from  that,  although 
we  know  there  never  will  come  a  time  when  this 
universe  will  be  full  of  happiness  and  without  misery, 
still  this  is  the  work  to  be  done;  although  misery 
increases,  we  must  do  our  part  at  the  same  time.  Both 
these  forces  will  make  the  universe  live  until  there 
will  come  a  time  when  we  shall  awake  from  our 
dreams  and  give  up  this  building  of  mud-pies,  which 
we  are  doing  all  the  time,  for  it  is  true  that  it  is  only 
a  building  of  mud-pies.  That  one  lesson  we  shall  have 
to  learn.     It  will  take  a  long,  long  time  to  learn  it. 


66  JNANA   YOGA 

Attempts  have  been  made  in  Germany  to  build  a 
system  of  philosophy  on  the  basis  that  the  Infinite  has 
become  the  finite.  Such  attempts  are  made  even  in 
England  now,  and  the  analysis  of  the  position  of  these 
philosophers  is  this,  that  the  Infinite  is  trying  to 
express  Itself  in  this  universe.  The  mistake  is  that 
they  imagine  there  will  come  a  time  when  the  Infinite 
will  succeed  in  expressing  itself.  In  that  case  the 
absolute  state  would  be  a  lower  one  than  the  mani- 
fested, because  in  the  manifested  state,  the  Absolute 
expresses  itself,  and  we  are  to  help  this  expression 
more  and  more,  until  the  Infinite  pours  itself  out  on 
this  side  as  the  finite.  This  is  all  very  nice,  and  we 
have  used  the  words  infinite  and  manifestation  and 
expression,  and  so  on,  but  philosophers  naturally  ask 
for  a  logical,  fundamental  basis  for  the  statement  that 
the  finite  can  fully  express  the  Infinite.  The  Absolute 
and  the  Infinite  can  become  this  universe  only  by  limi- 
tation. Everything  here,  therefore,  must  be  limited, 
everything  that  comes  out  of  the  senses,  or  through 
the  mind,  or  through  the  intellect,  must  of  necessity 
be  limited,  and  for  the  limited  to  be  the  unlimited  is 
simply  absurd,  and  can  never  be. 

The  Vedanta,  on  the  other  hand,  says  that  it  is  true 
that  the  Absolute,  or  the  Infinite,  is  trying  to  express 
itself  in  the  finite,  but  there  will  come  a  time  when 
it  will  find  that  it  is  impossible,  and  it  will  then  have 
to  beat  a  retreat,  and  this  beating  a  retreat  is  the  real 
beginning  of  religion.  It  is  very  hard  for  modern 
people  to  talk  of  renunciation.  I  stand,  as  it  was  said 
of  me  in  America,  as  a  man  coming  out  of  a  world 
that  has  been  dead  and  buried  these  five  thousand 


MAYA   AND   ILLUSION  •6'J 

years,  and  talking  of  renunciation.  So  says,  perhaps, 
the  English  philosopher.  Yet  it  is  true  that  that  is 
the  only  path  to  religion — renounce  and  give  up. 
Struggle  hard  and  try  your  best  to  find  any  other  way. 
What  did  Christ  say?  "He  that  loseth  his  life  for 
my  sake,  shall  find  it."  Again  and  again  did  he  preach 
renunciation  as  the  only  way  to  be  perfect.  There 
comes  a  time  when  the  mind  awakes  from  this  long  and 
dreary  dream,  and  longs  for  some  satisfying  reality. 
It  finds  the  truth  of  the  statement :  "Desires  are  never 
satisfied  by  the  enjoyment  of  desires  they  only  increase 
the  more,  as  butter  poured  upon  the  fire  increases 
the  flame  the  more."  This  is  true  of  all  sense  enjoy- 
ments, of  all  intellectual  enjoyments,  and  of  all  the 
enjoyments  of  which  the  human  soul  is  capable. 
They  are  all  without  real  value,  they  are  within  mdyd, 
within  this  net-work  beyond  which  we  cannot  go. 
We  may  run  therein  through  infinite  time  and  find 
no  end,  and  whenever  we  struggle  to  get  a  little  bit 
of  enjoyment,  a  mass  of  misery  will  be  on  our  back. 
How  awful  is  this  state  of  things !  And  when  I  think 
of  all  this,  I  cannot  but  think  that  this  theory  of  mdyd, 
this  statement  that  it  is  all  mdyd,  is  the  best  and  only 
explanation.  What  an  amount  of  misery  there  is  in 
this  world,  and  if  you  travel  among  various  nations 
you  will  find  that  one  nation  has  attempted  to  cure  its 
evils  by  one  means,  and  another  by  enother.  Evil 
has  been  taken  up  by  the  various  races,  and  attempts 
have  been  made  in  various  ways  to  check  it,  yet  no 
nation  has  succeeded.  If  it  has  been  minimized  in 
one  point,  a  mass  of  evil  has  been  crowded  into 
another  point.     Thus  it  goes.     The  Hindus,  to  pro- 


68  J  NANA    YOGA 

duce  a  little  chastity  in  the  race,  have  sanctioned  child- 
marriage,  which  in  the  long  run  has  degraded  the 
race.  At  the  same  time,  I  cannot  deny  that  this  child- 
marriage  makes  the  race  more  chaste.  What  would 
you  have  ?  If  you  want  the  nation  to  be  more  chaste, 
you  weaken  men  and  women  physically  by  child- 
marriage.  On  the  other  hand,  are  you  in  England 
any  safer  ?  No,  because  chastity  is  the  life  of  a  nation. 
Do  you  not  find  in  history  that  the  first  death-sign 
of  a  nation  has  been  unchastity?  When  that  has 
entered,  the  end  of  the  race  is  in  sight.  Where  shall 
we  get  a  solution  of  these  miseries  then?  If  parents 
select  husbands  and  wives  for  their  children,  will  this 
evil  be  prevented?  The  daughters  of  India  are  more 
practical  than  sentimental.  Very  little  of  poetry 
remains  in  their  lives.  Again,  if  people  select  their 
own  husbands  and  wives,  that  does  not  seem  to  bring 
much  happiness,  if  the  records  of  the  divorce  court 
are  to  be  trusted.  The  Indian  woman  is  very  happy; 
there  is  scarcely  a  case  of  quarrelling  between  husband 
and  wife.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  United  States, 
where  the  greatest  liberty  obtains,  the  number  of 
unhappy  homes  and  marriages  is  very  large.  Unhap- 
piness  is  here,  there  and  everywhere.  What  does  it 
show?  That,  after  all,  not  much  happiness  has  been 
gained  by  all  these  ideals.  We  all  struggle  for  hap- 
piness, and  before  we  get  a  little  on  one  side  on  the 
other  side  there  begins  unhappiness. 

Shall  we  not  work  to  do  good  then?  Yes,  with 
more  zest  than  ever,  but  what  this  knowledge  will 
do  for  us  is  to  break  down  our  fanaticism.  The 
Englishman  will  no  more  become  a  fanatic  to  curse 


MAYA   AND   ILLUSION 


69 


the  Hindu.  He  will  have  learned  to  respect  the  cus- 
toms of  different  nations.  There  will  be  less  fanati- 
cism and  more  real  work;  fanatics  cannot  work,  they 
waste  three-fourths  of  their  energy.  It  is  the  level- 
headed, calm,  practical  man  who  works.  Mere  ranting 
fanatics  do  not  do  much.  So  the  power  to  work  will 
increase  from  this  idea.  Knowing  that  this  is  the 
state  of  things,  there  will  be  more  patience.  The 
sight  of  misery  or  of  evil  will  not  be  able  to  throw 
us  off  our  balance  and  make  us  run  after  shadows. 
Therefore,  patience  will  come  to  us,  knowing  that 
the  world  will  have  to  go  on  in  this  way.  Say,  for 
instance,  that  all  men  will  have  become  good,  then 
the  animals  will  have  become  men,  and  will  have  to 
go  through  the  same  state,  and  so  the  plants.  But 
only  one  thing  is  certain ;  the  mighty  river  is  rush- 
ing towards  the  ocean,  and  there  are  bits  of  straw 
and  paper  in  the  stream,  which  are  trying  to  get  back, 
but  we  are  sure  that  the  time  will  come  when  each  one 
of  these  pieces  will  be  drawn  into  that  boundless 
ocean.  So,  in  this  life,  with  all  its  miseries  and  sor- 
rows, its  joys  and  smiles  and  tears,  one  thing  is  certain, 
that  all  things  are  rushing  towards  their  goal  and 
it  is  only  a  question  of  time  when  you  and  I,  and 
plants  and  animals,  and  every  particle  of  life  that 
exists  must  go  into  the  Infinite  Ocean  of  perfection, 
must  attain  unto  freedom,  unto  God. 

Let  me  repeat,  once  more,  because  the  mistake  is 
constantly  being  made,  that  the  Vedantic  position  is 
neither  pessimism  nor  optimism.  It  does  not  say  that 
this  world  is  all  evil  or  all  good.  It  says  that  our 
evil  is  of  no  less  value  than  our  good,  and  our  good 


70  J  NANA   YOGA 

of  no  more  value  than  our  evil.  They  are  all  bound 
together.  This  is  the  world,  and  knowing  this  you 
work  with  patience.  What  for?  Why  should  we 
work  ?  If  this  is  the  state  of  things  what  shall  we  do  ? 
Why  not  become  agnostics?  The  modern  agnostics 
also  know  that  there  is  no  solution  of  this  problem,  no 
getting  out  of  this  evil,  or  this  mdyd,  as  we  should 
say  in  our  language ;  therefore,  they  tell  us  to  be  satis- 
fied and  enjoy  life.  Here,  again,  is  a  mistake,  a  tre- 
mendous mistake,  a  most  illogical  mistake.  And  it  is 
this.  What  do  you  mean  by  life?  Do  you  mean 
only  the  life  of  the  senses?  In  this,  every  one  of  us 
differs  only  slightly  from  the  brutes.  I  am  sure  that 
no  one  is  present  here  whose  life  is  only  in  the  senses. 
Then  this  present  life  means  something  more  than 
that.  Our  feelings  and  thoughts  and  aspirations  are 
all  part  and  parcel  of  our  life,  and  is  not  the  struggle 
towards  the  great  ideal,  towards  perfection,  one  of 
the  most  important  components  of  what  we  call  life? 
According  to  the  agnostics,  we  must  enjoy  life  as  it 
is.  But  this  life  means,  above  all,  this  tremendous 
search  after  the  ideal;  the  backbone  of  life  is  going 
towards  perfection.  We  must  have  that,  and,  there- 
fore, we  cannot  be  agnostics,  or  take  the  world  as  it 
appears.  The  agnostic  position  takes  this  life  minus 
this  latter  component,  to  be  all  that  exists,  and  this 
he  claims  cannot  be  known,  wherefore  he  must  give 
up  the  search.  This  is  what  is  called  Maya,  this 
Nature,  this  Universe.  This  according  to  the  Vedan- 
tist  is  Nature. 

All  religions  are  more  or  less  attempts  to  get  beyond 
nature,  the  crudest,  or  the  most  developed,  expressed 


MAYA   AND   ILLUSION  7I 

through  mythology,  or  symbology,  or  through  the 
abstractions  of  philosophy,  through  stories  of  gods, 
or  angels,  or  demons;  through  stories  of  saints,  or 
seers,  or  great  men,  or  prophets,  all  have  that  one 
object,  all  are  trying  to  get  beyond  these  limitations, 
to  find  something  better  and  higher.  In  one  word, 
they  are  all  struggling  towards  freedom.  Man  feels, 
consciously  or  unconsciously,  that  he  is  bound;  that 
he  is  not  what  he  wants  to  be.  It  was  taught  to  him 
at  the  very  moment  he  began  to  look  around;  that 
very  instant  he  learned  that  he  was  bound,  and  he  also 
found  that  there  was  something  in  him  which  wanted 
to  fly  beyond,  where  the  body  could  not  follow,  some- 
thing which  was  as  yet  chained  down  by  this  limita- 
tion. Even  in  the  lowest  of  religious  ideas,  where 
departed  ancestors,  and  other  spirits,  mostly  violent 
and  cruel,  lurking  about  the  houses  of  their  friends, 
fond  of  bloodshed  and  strong  drink — even  there  we 
find  that  one  common  factor,  that  of  freedom.  The 
man  who  wants  to  worship  the  gods,  sees  in  them 
above  all  things  greater  freedom  than  in  himself.  If 
a  door  is  closed,  he  imagines  that  the  gods  can  get 
through  walls  and  so  on ;  the  walls  have  no  limitations 
for  them.  This  one  idea  of  liberty  is  increasing,  until 
it  comes  to  the  ideal  of  a  Personal  God,  of  which  the 
central  concept  is  that  God  is  a  Being  beyond  the  limi- 
tation of  Nature,  of  mayd.  I  hear,  as  it  were,  a  voice, 
before  me,  I  feel  as  if  this  question  were  being  dis-) 
cussed  by  those  ancient  sages  of  India,  in  some  of^' 
those  forest  retreats,  and  in  one  of  them  even  the 
oldest  and  the  holiest  fail  to  reach  the  solution,  but 
a  young  boy  is  standing  up  in  the  midst  of  them  and 


72  JNANA  YOGA 

declaring:  *'Hear  ye  children  of  immortality,  hear  ye 
who  live  in  the  highest  places,  I  have  found  the  way. 
There  is  a  way  out  beyond  the  darkness  by  knowing 
Him  who  is  beyond  this  darkness." 

This  mdya  is  everywhere,  it  is  terrible;  to  work 
through  mdyd  is  impossible.  If  a  man  says  I  will 
sit  beside  this  great  river  and  I  wiU  ford  the  river 
when  all  the  water  has  run  down  into  the  ocean,  that 
man  would  be  as  likely  to  succeed  as  the  man  who 
says  he  will  work  till  this  world  has  become  all  good, 
and  then  he  will  enjoy  this  world.  Great  Ganges 
herself  might  sooner  run  dry  than  the  world  become 
all  good!  The  way  is  not  with  mdyd  but  against 
mdyd.  This  is  another  fact  to  learn.  We  are  not 
born  helpers  of  Nature,  but  competitors  with  Nature. 
We  are  the  bondmasters,  and  we  are  trying  to  bind 
ourselves  down.  Why  is  this  house  here?  Nature 
did  not  give  it.  Nature  says  go  and  live  in  the  forest. 
Man  says  I  will  build  a  house  and  fight  with  Nature, 
and  he  does.  The  whole  history  of  humanity  is  a 
continuous  fight  against  the  so-called  laws  of  Nature, 
and  man  gains  in  the  end.  Coming  to  the  internal 
world,  there,  too,  the  same  fight  is  going  on,  this  fight 
between  the  animal  man  and  the  spiritual  man, 
between  light  and  darkness,  and  here,  too,  man 
becomes  victorious.  He,  as  it  were,  cuts  his  way  out 
of  Nature  to  his  idea  of  freedom.  We  have  seen  so 
far,  then,  that  here  is  a  statement  of  mdyd,  and  beyond 
this  mdyd  the  Vedantic  philosophers  find  something 
which  is  not  bound  by  mdyd,  and  if  we  can  get  where 
that  stands,  certainly  we  shall  be  beyond  mdyd.  This, 
in  some  form  or  other,  is  the  common  property  of  all 


MAYA   AND   ILLUSION  73 

religions,  and  is  what  is  called  Theism.  But  with  the 
Vedanta,  it  is  the  beginning  of  religion  and  not  the 
end.  The  idea  of  a  personal  God,  the  Ruler  and 
Creator  of  this  Universe,  as  He  has  been  styled,  the 
Ruler  of  mdyd,  or  Nature,  is  not  the  end  of  these 
Vedantic  ideas,  it  is  only  the  beginning,  and  the  idea 
grows  and  grows  until  the  Vedantist  finds  that  He 
who  was  standing  outside  was  he  himself,  and  was 
in  reality  inside.  It  was  the  very  one  who  is  free, 
who  through  limitation  thought  he  was  bound. 


MAYA  AND  THE  EVOLUTION  OF  THE 
CONCEPTION  OF  GOD 

We  have  seen  how  the  idea  of  Mdydj  which  forms, 
as  it  were,  one  of  the  basic  doctrines  of  the  Advaita 
Vedanta,  is,  in  its  germ,  found  even  in  the  Samhitas, 
and  that  in  reaHty  all  the  ideas  which  are  developed 
in  the  Upanishads  are  to  be  found  already  in  the 
Samhitas  in  some  form  or  other.  Most  of  you  are 
by  this  time  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  idea  of 
Maya,  and  know  that  it  is  sometimes  very  erroneously 
explained  as  illusion,  so  that  when  the  universe  is 
said  to  be  Maya,  that  also  would  have  to  be  explained 
as  being  illusion.  The  translation  of  the  word  is 
neither  happy  nor  correct.  Maya  is  not  a  theory,  it 
is  simply  a  statement  of  facts  about  the  universe  as 
it  exists,  and  to  understand  Maya  we  must  go  back 
to  the  Samhitas  and  begin  with  the  conception  in  the 
germ.  We  have  seen  how  the  ideas  of  the  Devas 
came.  At  the  same  time  these  Devas  were  at  first 
only  powerful  beings,  nothing  more.  Most  of  you 
are  horrified  when  reading  the  old  scriptures,  whether 
of  the  Greeks,  the  Hebrews,  the  Persians,  or  others, 
to  find  that  the  ancient  gods  sometimes  did  things 
which,  to  us,  are  very  repugnant,  but  when  reading 
these  books,  we  entirely  forget  that  we  are  persons  of 

74 


MAYA   AND   EVOLUTION    OF   CONCEPTION    OF   GOD    75 

the  nineteenth  century,  and  these  gods  were  beings 
existing  thousands  of  years  ago,  and  we  also  forget 
that  the  people  who  worshipped  these  gods  found 
nothing  incongruous  in  their  characters,  found  nothing 
to  frighten  them  in  depicting  their  gods  as  they  did, 
because  they  were  very  much  like  them  themselves. 
I  may  also  remark  that  this  is  the  one  great  lesson 
we  have  to  learn  throughout  our  lives.  In  judging 
others  we  always  judge  them  by  our  own  ideals.  That 
is  not  as  it  should  be.  Every  one  must  be  judged 
according  to  his  own  ideal,  and  not  by  that  of  any 
one  else.  In  all  our  dealings  with  our  fellow-beings 
we  constantly  labor  under  this  mistake,  and  I  am  of 
the  opinion  that  the  vast  majority  of  our  quarrels 
with  our  fellow-beings  arise  simply  from  this  one 
cause,  that  we  are  always  trying  to  judge  other  gods 
by  our  own,  other  ideals  by  our  ideals,  and  others* 
motives  from  our  motives.  Under  certain  circum- 
stances I  might  do  a  certain  thing,  and  when  I  see 
another  person  taking  the  same  course  I  think  he  has 
also  the  same  motive  actuating  him,  little  dreaming 
that  although  the  effect  may  be  the  same,  yet  many 
thousands  of  causes  may  produce  the  same  effect. 
He  may  have  performed  the  action  with  quite  a  dif- 
ferent motive  from  what  would  impel  me  to  do  the 
same  thing.  So  in  judging  of  those  ancient  religions 
we  must  not  take  the  ordinary  standpoint  to  which 
we  incline  in  our  judgment  of  others,  but  must  throw 
ourselves,  as  it  were,  into  the  position  of  thought  in 
those  early  times. 

The  idea  of  the  cruel  and  ruthless  Jehovah  in  the 
Old    Testament    has    frightened    many — but    why? 


^6  JNANA   YOGA 

What  right  have  they  to  assume  that  the  Jehovah  of 
the  ancient  Jews  must  represent  the  conventional  idea 
of  God  of  the  present  day?  And  at  the  same  time 
we  must  not  forget  that  there  will  come  men  after  us 
who  will  laugh  at  our  ideas  of  religion  and  God  in 
the  same  way  that  we  laugh  at  those  of  the  ancients. 
Yet  through  all  these  various  conceptions  runs  the 
golden  thread  of  unity,  and  it  is  the  purpose  of  the 
Vedanta  to  unfold  this  thread.  "I  am  the  thread  that 
runs  through  all  these  various  ideas,  each  one  of  which 
is  like  one  pearl,"  says  the  Lord  Krishna ;  and  it  is  the 
duty  of  Vedanta  to  establish  this  connecting  thread, 
however  incongruous,  hideous,  horrible,  or  disgusting 
may  seem  these  ideas  when  judged  according  to  the 
conceptions  of  to-day.  When  these  ideas  had  the  set- 
ting of  past  times  they  were  harmonious,  they  were 
not  more  hideous  than  our  present  ideas.  It  is  only 
when  we  try  to  take  them  out  of  these  settings  and 
apply  them  to  our  own  present  circumstances  that  the 
hideousness  becomes  obvious.  It  is  all  dead  and  gone 
and  past.  Just  as  the  old  Jew  has  developed  into  the 
keen,  modern,  sharp  Jew,  and  the  ancient  Aryan  into 
the  intellectual  Hindu,  similarly  Jehovah  has  grown, 
and  Devas  have  grown.  The  great  mistake  is  in 
recognizing  the  evolution  of  the  worshippers,  while 
we  do  not  acknowledge  the  evolution  of  the  God.  He 
is  not  credited  with  the  advance  that  his  devotees  have 
made.  That  is  to  say,  you  and  I,  as  representing 
ideas,  have  grown;  these  gods  also,  as  representing 
ideas,  have  grown.  This  may  seem  somewhat  curious 
to  you — how  can  God  grow?  He  cannot.  He  is 
unchangeable,  but  man's  ideas  about  God  are  con- 


MAYA   AND   EVOLUTION    OF   CONCEPTION   OF   GOD    7/ 

stantly  changing  and  expanding.  In  the  same  sense 
the  real  man  never  grows.  We  will  see  later  on  how 
the  real  man  behind  each  one  of  these  manifestations 
is  immovable,  unchangeable,  pure,  and  always  perfect ; 
and  in  the  same  way  the  idea  that  we  form  of  God 
is  a  mere  manifestation,  our  own  creation.  Behind 
that  is  the  real  God  who  never  changes,  the  ever  pure, 
the  immutable.  But  the  manifestations  are  always 
changing,  revealing  the  reality  behind  more  and  more. 
When  it  reveals  more  of  the  fact  behind,  it  is  called 
progression;  when  it  hides  more  of  the  fact  behind, 
it  is  called  retrogression.  Thus,  as  we  grow,  so  the 
gods  grow.  From  the  common-sense  point  of  view, 
just  as  we  reveal  ourselves  as  we  evolve,  so  the  gods 
reveal  themselves. 

We  shall  now  be  in  a  position  to  understand  the 
theory  of  Maya.  In  stating  all  the  religions  of  the 
world  one  question  they  propose  to  discuss  is  this : 
Why  is  there  disharmony  in  the  universe?  Why  is 
there  evil  in  the  universe?  We  do  not  find  this  ques- 
tion in  the  very  primitive  inception  of  religious  ideas 
because  the  world  did  not  appear  incongruous  to  the 
primitive  man.  Circumstances  around  him  were  not 
inharmonious;  there  was  no  clash  of  opinions;  no 
antagonism  of  good  and  evil.  There  was  merely  the 
fight  in  his  own  heart  between  something  which  said 
yea,  and  something  which  said  nay.  The  primitive 
man  was  a  man  of  impulse.  He  did  what  occurred 
to  him,  and  tried  to  bring  out  into  his  muscles  what- 
ever thought  came  into  his  mind.  He  never  stopped 
to  judge,  and  seldom  tried  to  check  his  impulses.  So 
with  the  gods,  they  also  were  creatures  of  impulse. 


78  J  NANA  YOGA 

Indra  comes  and  shatters  the  forces  of  the  demons. 
Jehovah  is  pleased  with  one  person  and  displeased 
with  another,  for  what  reason  no  one  knows  or  asks; 
for  the  habit  of  inquiry  had  not  then  arisen,  and  what- 
ever he  did  was  regarded  as  right.  There  was  no 
idea  of  good  or  evil.  The  Devas  did  many  wicked 
things  in  our  sense  of  the  word;  again  and  again 
Indra  and  other  gods  committed  very  wicked  deeds, 
but  to  the  worshippers  of  Indra  the  ideas  of  wicked- 
ness and  evil  did  not  occur,  so  they  did  not  question. 

With  the  advance  of  ethical  ideas  came  the  fight. 
There  arose  a  certain  sense  in  man;  different  lan- 
guages and  nations  called  it  by  different  names,  and 
it  acted  as  a  checking  power;  for  the  impulses  of  the 
human  heart  are  the  voice  of  God,  or  the  result  of 
past  education,  but  whatever  it  is  called  the  effect  is 
the  same.  There  is  one  impulse  in  our  minds  which 
says :  "do."  Behind  it  rises  another  voice  which  says : 
"do  not."  There  is  one  set  of  ideas  in  our  mind  which 
is  always  struggling  to  get  outside  through  the  chan- 
nels of  the  senses,  and  behind  that,  although  it  may 
be  thin  and  weak,  an  infinitely  small  voice  which 
says  do  not  go  outside.  The  two  beautiful  Sanskrit 
words  for  these  phenomena  are  pravritti  and  nivritti, 
"circling  forward"  and  "circling  inward."  It  is  the 
circling  forward  which  usually  governs  our  actions. 
Religion  begins  with  the  circling  inward.  Religion 
begins  with  this  "do  not."  Spirituality  begins  with 
this  "do  not."  When  the  "do  not"  is  not  there, 
religion  has  not  begun.  And  this  "do  not"  came, 
causing  men's  ideas  to  grow  despite  the  brutal  fighting 
gods  which  they  had  made. 


MAYA  AND   EVOLUTION   OF   CONCEPTION   OF  GOD    79 

A  little  love  awoke  in  the  hearts  of  mankind.  It 
was  very  small  indeed,  and  even  now  it  is  not  much 
greater.  It  was  at  first  confined  to  the  tribe,  embrac- 
ing perhaps  members  of  the  same  tribe;  these  gods 
loved  their  tribes  and  each  god  was  a  tribal  god,  the 
protector  of  that  tribe.  And  sometimes  the  members 
of  those  tribes  would  think  of  themselves  as  the 
descendants  of  that  god,  just  as  the  clans  in  different 
nations  think  that  they  are  the  common  descendants 
of  some  one  who  was  the  founder  of  the  clan.  There 
were  in  ancient  times,  and  are  even  now,  some  people 
claiming  to  be  descendants  not  only  of  these  gods, 
but  also  of  the  Sun  and  Moon.  You  read  in  the 
ancient  Sanskrit  books  of  the  great  heroic  emperors 
of  the  solar  dynasty.  They  were  first  worshippers 
of  the  Moon  and  Sun,  and  gradually  came  to  think 
of  themselves  as  descendants  of  the  god  of  the  Sun, 
of  the  Moon,  and  so  forth.  So  when  these  tribal  ideas 
began  to  grow  there  came  a  little  love,  some  slight 
idea  of  duties  towards  each  other,  a  little  social  organ- 
ization, and  immediately  began  the  idea,  how  can  we 
live  together  without  bearing  and  forbearing?  How 
can  one  man  live  with  another  man — even  one — 
without  having  some  time  or  other  to  check  his 
impulses,  restrain  himself,  forbear  from  doing  things 
which  his  mind  would  prompt  him  to  do.  It  is  impos- 
sible. Thus  comes  the  idea  of  restraint.  The  whole 
social  fabric  is  based  upon  that  idea  of  restraint,  and 
we  all  know  that  the  man  or  woman  who  has  not 
learned  the  great  lesson  of  bearing  and  forbearing, 
leads  a  most  miserable  life. 

Now  when  these  ideas  of  religion  came,  a  glimpse 


80  J  NANA  YOGA 

of  something  higher,  more  ethical,  dawned  upon  the 
intellect  of  mankind.  The  old  gods  were  found  to 
be  incongruous,  these  boisterous,  fighting,  drinking, 
beef-eating  gods  of  the  ancients,  whose  delight  was 
in  the  smell  of  burning  flesh  and  libations  of  strong 
liquor.  Sometimes  Indra  drank  so  much  that  he  fell 
upon  the  ground  and  began  to  talk  unintelligently. 
These  gods  could  no  longer  be  tolerated.  The  notion 
had  arisen  of  inquiring  into  motives,  and  the  gods 
had  to  come  in  for  their  share  of  inquiry.  What  is 
the  reason  for  such  an  action  of  such  and  such  a 
god? — ^and  the  reason  was  wanting.  Therefore  men 
gave  up  these  gods,  or  rather  they  developed  higher 
ideas  concerning  them;  they  collected  together  and 
discarded  all  the  actions  and  qualities  of  the  gods 
which  they  could  not  harmonize,  and  they  kept  those 
which  they  could  understand  and  harmonize,  and  com- 
bining these,  labelled  them  with  one  name,  Deva-deva, 
the  God  of  gods  of  the  universe.  The  god  to  be  wor- 
shipped was  no  more  a  simple  symbol  of  power ;  some- 
thing more  was  required  than  power.  He  was  an 
ethical  god;  he  loved  mankind,  did  good  to  mankind. 
But  the  idea  of  god  still  remained.  They  increased 
his  ethical  significance,  and  increased  also  his  power. 
He  became  the  most  ethical  being  in  the  Universe, 
as  well  as  almost  almighty. 

But  all  this  patchwork  would  not  do.  As  the 
explanation  assumed  greater  proportion,  the  difficulty 
which  it  sought  to  solve  did  the  same.  If  the  qualities 
of  the  god  increased  in  arithmetical  progression,  the 
difficulty  and  doubt  increased  in  geometrical  progres- 
sion.    The  difficulty  of  Jehovah  was  very  little  beside 


MAYA   AND   EVOLUTION   OF   CONCEPTION   OF   GOD    8 1 

the  difficulty  of  the  god  of  the  universe,  and  this 
question  remains  to  the  present  day.  Why,  under  the 
reign  of  an  almighty  and  all  loving  God  of  the  Uni- 
verse, should  such  diabolical  things  be  allowed  to 
remain  ?  Why  so  much  more  misery  than  happiness  ? 
and  so  much  more  wickedness  than  good?  We  may 
shut  our  eyes  to  all  these  things,  but  the  fact  still 
remains,  this  world  is  a  hideous  world.  At  best  it  is 
the  hell  of  Tantalus  and  nothing  else.  Here  we  are 
with  strong  impulses,  and  stronger  cravings  for  sense 
enjoyments  and  nothing  outside  to  satisfy  them. 
There  rises  a  wave  which  impels  us  forward  in  spite 
of  our  own  will,  and  as  soon  as  we  move  one  step 
comes  a  blow.  We  are  all  doomed  to  live  here  and 
die  here  like  Tantalus.  Ideals  come  into  our  head, 
far  beyond  the  limit  of  our  sense  ideals,  but  when 
we  seek  to  express  them,  we  never  can  see  them  ful- 
filled. On  the  other  hand,  we  are  crushed  into  atoms 
by  the  surging  mass  around  us.  Yet  if  I  give  up  all 
ideality  and  merely  struggle  through  this  world,  my 
existence  is  that  of  a  brute,  and  I  degenerate  and 
degrade  myself.  Neither  way  is  happiness.  Unhap- 
piness  is  the  fate  of  those  who  are  content  to  live  in 
this  world  born  as  they  are.  A  thousandfold  unhap- 
piness  is  the  fate  of  those  who  dare  to  stand  forth  for 
truth  and  for  higher  things,  and  who  dare  to  ask  for 
something  higher  than  mere  brute  existence  here. 
These  are  the  facts;  there  is  no  explanation.  There 
cannot  be  any  explanation,  but  Vedanta  shows  the 
way  out.  You  must  bear  in  mind  that  I  must  tell 
you  facts  in  this  course  which  will  frighten  you  some- 
times, but  remember  what  I  say,  think  of  it,  digest  it. 


82  J  NANA   YOGA 

and  it  will  be  yours,  it  will  raise  you  high,  and  make 
you  capable  of  understanding  and  living  in  truth. 

Now  this  is  a  statement  of  fact,  not  a  theory,  that 
this  world  is  a  Tantalus'  hell,  that  we  do  not  know 
anything  about  this  Universe,  yet  at  the  same  time  we 
cannot  say  that  we  do  not  know.  I  cannot  say  that 
this  chain  exists,  when  I  think  of  it  I  do  not  know. 
It  may  be  an  entire  delusion  in  my  brain.  I  may  be 
dreaming  all  the  time.  I  am  dreaming  that  I  am 
talking  to  you,  and  that  you  are  listening  to  me.  No 
one  can  prove  that  it  is  not  a  dream.  My  brain  itself 
may  be  a  dream,  and  as  to  that,  no  one  has  ever  seen 
his  own  brain  yet.  We  all  take  that  for  granted.  So 
it  is  with  everything.  My  own  body  I  take  for 
granted.  At  the  same  time  I  cannot  say  I  do  not 
know.  This  standing  between  knowledge  and  ignor- 
ance, this  mystic  twilight,  the  mingling  of  truth  and 
falsehood,  where  they  meet  no  one  knows.  We  are 
walking  in  the  midst  of  a  dream,  half  sleeping,  half 
waking,  passing  all  our  lives  in  a  haze,  this  is  the  fate 
of  every  one  of  us.  This  is  the  fate  of  all  sense 
knowledge.  This  is  the  fate  of  all  philosophy,  of  all 
boasted  science,  of  all  boasted  human  knowledge. 
This  is  the  Universe. 

What  you  call  matter,  or  spirit,  or  mind,  or  any- 
thing else  you  may  like  to  call  them,  any  nickname 
you  may  choose  to  give  them,  the  fact  remains  the 
same,  we  cannot  say  they  are;  we  cannot  say  they 
are  not.  We  cannot  say  they  are  one,  we  cannot 
say  they  are  many.  This  eternal  play  of  light  and 
darkness,  indiscriminate,  indistinguishable,  inseparable 
is  always  there.    A  fact,  yet  at  the  same  time,  not  a 


MAYA   AND   EVOLUTION   OF   CONCEPTION   OF   GOD    83 

fact,  awake,  and  at  the  same  time,  asleep.  This  is  a 
statement  of  facts,  and  this  is  what  is  called  Maya. 
We  are  born  in  this  Maya,  we  live  in  it,  we  think  in 
it,  we  dream  in  it.  We  are  philosophers  in  it,  we  are 
spiritual  men  in  it,  nay,  we  are  devils  in  this  Maya, 
and  we  are  gods  in  this  Maya.  Stretch  your  ideas 
as  far  as  you  can,  make  them  higher  and  higher,  call 
it  infinite  or  by  any  other  name  you  please,  even  that 
idea  is  within  this  Maya.  It  cannot  be  otherwise, 
and  the  whole  of  human  knowledge  is  generalization 
of  this  Maya,  trying  to  know  it  as  it  really  is.  This 
is  the  work  of  Ndma-Rupa — name  and  form.  Every- 
thing that  has  form,  everything  that  calls  up  an  idea 
in  your  mind,  is  within  Maya,  for,  everything  that 
is  bound  by  what  the  German  philosophers  call  the 
laws  of  time,  space,  and  causation,  is  within  Maya. 

Let  us  go  back  a  little  to  those  earlier  ideas  of  God, 
and  see  what  became  of  them.  We  perceive  at  once 
that  with  such  a  state  of  things  the  idea  of  some  being 
who  is  eternally  loving  us — the  word  love  in  our  sense 
— eternally  unselfish  and  almighty,  ruling  this  universe, 
cannot  be.  It  requires  the  boldness  of  the  poet  to 
withstand  this  idea  of  the  personal  God.  Where  is 
your  just,  merciful  God?  the  poet  asks.  Does  he  not 
see  millions  and  millions  of  his  children  perish,  either 
in  the  form  of  men,  or  of  animals;  for  who  can  live 
one  moment  here  without  killing  others?  Can  you 
draw  a  breath  without  destroying  thousands  of  lives? 
You  live  because  millions  die.  Every  moment  of 
your  life,  every  breath  that  you  breathe,  is  death  to 
thousands,  every  movement  that  you  make  is  death 
unto  millions.     Every  morsel  that  you  eat  is  death 


84  J  NANA    YOGA 

unto  millions.  Why  should  they  die?  There  is  an 
old  sophism,  "But  they  are  very  low  existences." 
Supposing  they  are;  it  is  a  question.  Who  knows 
whether  the  ant  is  greater  than  man,  or  the  man  than 
the  ant?  Who  can  prove  one  way  or  the  other? 
Man  can  build  a  house  or  invent  a  machine,  therefore 
the  man  is  greater!  The  same  argument  will  apply, 
because  the  ant  cannot  build  a  house  nor  make  a 
machine,  therefore  he  is  greater.  There  is  no  more 
reason  for  one  than  for  the  other. 

Apart  from  that  question,  even  taking  it  for  granted 
that  these  are  very  low  beings,  still  why  should  they 
die?  If  they  are  low  they  ought  to  live  the  more. 
Why  not?  Because  they  live  more  in  the  senses, 
they  feel  pleasure  and  pain  a  thousandfold  more  than 
you  or  I  can.  Which  of  you  can  eat  a  dinner  with 
the  same  gusto  as  a  dog  or  a  wolf?  Because  our 
energies  are  not  in  the  senses,  they  are  in  the  intellect, 
the  spirit.  But  in  the  dog  the  whole  soul  is  in  the 
senses,  and  they  become  mad,  enthusiastic,  enjoy 
things  which  we  human  beings  can  never  dream  of, 
and  the  pain  is  commensurate  with  the  pleasure. 

Pleasure  and  pain  are  meted  out  in  equal  measure. 
If  the  pleasures  felt  by  animals  are  so  much  keener 
than  those  felt  by  man,  it  follows  absolutely  that  the 
animals'  sense  of  pain  is  as  keen,  if  not  keener  than 
that  in  men ;  and  they  have  to  die.  So  the  fact  is 
that  the  pain  and  misery  men  would  feel  in  dying  is 
intensified  a  thousandfold  in  animals,  and  yet  we  have 
to  kill  them,  without  troubling  about  their  misery. 
This  is  Maya,  and  if  we  suppose  there  is  a  personal 
God  like  a  human  being,  who  made  all,  these  so-called 


MAYA   AND   EVOLUTION    OF    CONCEPTION   OF   GOD    85 

explanations  and  theories  which  try  to  prove  that  out 
of  evil  comes  good  are  not  sufficient.  Let  twenty; 
thousand  good  things  come,  why  should  they  come 
from  evil?  On  that  principle  I  might  cut  the  throats 
of  others  because  I  want  the  full  pleasure  of  my  five 
senses.  That  is  no  reason.  Why  should  good  come 
through  evil?  The  question  remains  to  be  answered, 
and  it  cannot  be  answered;  and  philosophy  in  India 
was  compelled  to  admit  this. 

The  Vedanta  is  the  boldest  system  of  religion.  It 
stopped  nowhere,  and  it  had  one  advantage.  There 
was  no  body  of  priests  seeking  to  suppress  every  man 
who  tried  to  tell  the  truth.  There  was  always  abso- 
lute religious  freedom.  In  India  the  bondage  of  super- 
stition was  a  social  one;  here  society  is  very  free. 
Social  matters  in  India  have  not  been  free,  but  religious 
opinion  has.  In  England  a  man  may  dress  as  he 
likes,  or  eat  what  he  likes — no  one  says  nay,  or  objects ; 
but  if  he  misses  attending  his  church  then  Mrs.  Grundy 
is  down  on  him.  He  has  to  look  a  thousand  times  at 
what  society  says,  and  then  think  of  the  truth.  In 
India,  on  the  other  hand,  if  a  man  dines  with  another 
who  does  not  belong  to  his  own  caste,  down  comes 
society  with  all  its  terrible  power^  and  crushes  him 
then  and  there.  If  he  wants  to  dress  a  little  differently 
from  the  way  in  which  his  ancestor  dressed  ages  ago 
he  is  done  for.  I  have  heard  of  a  man  who  was  out- 
casted  because  he  went  several  miles  to  see  the  first 
railway  train.  Well,  we  will  presume  that  that  was 
not  true!  On  the  other  hand,  in  religion,  we  find 
Atheists,  and  Materialists,  and  Buddhists,  and  creeds 
and  opinions,  and  speculations  of  every  phase  and 


86  J  NANA   YOGA 

variety;  some  of  a  most  startling  character.  Men 
going  about  preaching  and  gaining  adherents,  and  at 
the  very  gates  of  the  temple  full  of  all  the  gods,  the 
Brahmins — to  their  credit  be  it  said — allow  even  the 
Materialist  to  stand  on  the  steps  of  their  temples  and 
denounce  their  gods. 

Buddha  died  at  a  ripe  old  age.  I  remember  a  friend 
of  mine,  a  great  American  scientist,  who  was  fond 
of  reading  his  life.  He  did  not  like  the  death  of 
Buddha,  because  he  was  not  crucified.  What  a  false 
idea!  For  a  man  to  be  great  he  must  be  murdered! 
Such  ideas  never  prevailed  in  India.  This  great 
Buddha  travelled  all  over  India  denouncing  all  gods, 
and  even  their  God,  the  Governor  of  the  Universe,  and 
he  died  at  a  ripe  old  age.  Eighty-five  years  he  lived, 
until  he  had  converted  half  the  country. 

There  were  the  Chdrvdkas,  who  preached  the  most 
horrible  things;  the  most  rank,  undisguised  mate- 
rialism, such  as  in  the  nineteenth  century  they  dare 
not  preach  openly.  These  Chdrvdkas  were  allowed  to 
preach  from  temple  to  temple,  and  city  to  city,  that 
religion  was  all  nonsense,  that  it  was  priestcraft,  that 
the  Vedas  were  the  words  and  writings  of  fools, 
rogues  and  demons,  and  that  there  was  neither  God 
nor  an  eternal  soul.  If  there  were  a  soul  why  did 
it  not  come  back  after  death,  drawn  by  love  of  wife 
and  children?  Their  idea  was  that  if  there  was  a 
soul  it  must  still  love  after  death,  and  want  nice  things 
to  eat  and  nice  dresses.  Yet  no  one  hurt  these 
Chdrvdkas. 

Thus  India  has  always  had  this  magnificent  idea 
of  religious  freedom — for  you  must  always  remember 


MAYA    AND    EVOLUTION    OF    CONCEPTION    OF   GOD    8/ 

that  freedom  is  the  first  condition  of  growth.  What 
you  do  not  make  free  will  never  grow.  The  whole 
of  that  idea  that  you  can  make  others  grow,  and  help 
their  growth,  can  direct  and  guide  them,  always  retain- 
ing for  yourself  the  freedom  of  the  teacher,  is  non- 
sense, a  dangerous  lie,  which  has  retarded  the  growth 
of  millions  and  millions  of  human  beings  in  this  world. 
Let  men  have  the  light  of  liberty.  That  is  the  only 
condition  of  growth. 

We,  in  India,  allowed  liberty  in  spiritual  matters, 
and  we  have  a  tremendous  spiritual  power  in  religious 
thought,  even  to-day.  You  grant  the  same  liberty  in 
social  matters,  and  so  have  a  splendid  social  organiza- 
tion. We  have  not  given  any  freedom  to  the  expan- 
sion of  social  matters,  and  ours  is  a  cramped  society. 
You  have  never  given  any  freedom  in  religious  matters. 
With  fire  and  sword  you  have  enforced  your  beliefs, 
and  the  result  is  that  religion  is  a  stunted,  degenerate 
growth  in  the  European  mind.  In  India  we  have  to 
take  off  the  shackles  from  society;  in  Europe  the 
chains  must  be  taken  from  the  feet  of  spiritual  pro- 
gress. Then  will  come  a  wonderful  growth  and 
development  of  men.  If  we  discover  that  there  is 
one  unity  running  behind  all  these  developments,  either 
spiritual,  moral  or  social,  we  shall  find  that  religion 
in  the  full  sense  of  the  word  must  come  into  society, 
must  come  into  our  every  day  lives.  In  the  light  of 
Vedanta  you  will  understand  that  all  your  sciences 
are  but  manifestations  of  religion,  and  so  is  every- 
thing that  exists  in  this  world. 

We  see  then  that  through  freedom  these  sciences 
were  built,  and  in  them  we  have  two  sets  of  opinions 


88  JNANA    YOGA 

growing  slowly  in  the  teaching  of  the  Vedanta,  the 
one  about  which  I  have  just  told  you,  that  of  the 
materialists,  the  denouncers,  and  the  other  the  positive, 
the  constructive.  This  again  is  a  most  curious  fact; 
in  every  society  you  find  it.  Supposing  there  is  an 
evil  in  society.  You  will  find  immediately  one  group 
rising  up  and  beginning  to  denounce  it  in  vindictive 
fashion.  This  sometimes  degenerates  into  fanaticism. 
You  always  find  fanatics  in  every  society,,  and  women 
frequently  join  in  these  outcries,  because  they  are 
impulsive  in  their  nature.  Every  fanatic  who  gets 
up  and  denounces  something  secures  a  following.  It 
is  very  easy  to  break  down;  a  manaic  can  break  any- 
thing he  likes,  but  it  would  be  hard  for  him  to  build 
anything  in  this  world. 

So  there  is  this  set  of  denouncers  in  every  country, 
present  in  some  form  or  other,  and  they  think  they  will 
mend  this  world  by  the  sheer  power  of  denunciation 
and  of  exposing  evil;  they  do  some  good,  according 
to  their  light,  but  much  more  harm,  because  things 
are  not  done  in  a  day.  Social  institutions  are  not 
made  in  a  day,  and  to  change  means  removing  the 
cause.  Suppose  there  is  evil  here;  denouncing  it  will 
not  do  anything,  but  you  must  go  to  work  at  the  root. 
First  find  out  the  cause,  then  remove  it,  and  the  effect 
will  be  removed  also.  All  this  outcry  will  not  produce 
any  effect,  unless  indeed  it  produces  misfortune. 

There  were  others  who  had  sympathy  in  their  hearts 
and  who  understood  the  idea  that  we  must  go  deep 
into  the  cause,  and  these  were  the  great  saints.  One 
fact  you  must  remember,  that  all  the  great  teachers 
of  the  world  have  declared  that  they  came  not  to 


MAYA    AND    EVOLUTION    OF    CONCEPTION    OF    GOD    89 

destroy  but  to  fulfil.  Many  times  this  has  not  been 
understood,  and  their  forbearance  has  been  thought 
to  be  an  unworthy  compromise  with  existing  popular 
opinions.  Even  now,  you  occasionally  hear  that  these 
prophets  and  great  teachers  were  rather  cowardly, 
dared  not  say  and  do  what  they  thought  was  right; 
but  it  was  not  so.  Fanatics  little  understand  the 
infinite  power  of  love  in  the  hearts  of  these  great 
sages.  They  looked  upon  the  inhabitants  of  this  world 
as  their  children.  They  were  the  real  fathers,  the 
real  gods,  filled  with  infinite  sympathy  and  patience 
for  every  one,  they  were  ready  to  bear  and  forbear. 
They  knew  how  human  society  should  grow,  and 
patiently,  slowly,  surely,  went  on  applying  their  rem- 
edies, not  by  denouncing  and  not  by  frightening  people, 
but  by  gently  and  kindly  leading  them  step  by  step. 
Such  were  the  writers  of  the  Upanishads.  They  knew 
full  well  how  the  old  ideas  of  God  were  not  recon- 
cilable with  the  advanced  ethical  ideas  of  the  time; 
they  knew  perfectly  well  that  truth  was  not  on  that 
side  of  the  question,  but  on  the  other  side ;  they  knew 
full  well  that  what  the  Buddhists  and  the  other  atheists 
were  preaching  contained  a  good  deal  of  truth,  nay, 
great  nuggets  of  truth,  but,  at  the  same  time,  they 
understood  that  those  who  wish  to  sever  the  thread 
that  binds  the  beads,  who  want  to  build  a  new  society 
upon  the  air,  will  entirely  fail. 

We  never  build  anew,  we  simply  change  places,  we 
cannot  have  anything  new,  we  only  change  the  posi- 
tions of  things.  The  seed  grows  into  the  tree,  and 
patiently,  gently,  we  must  direct  the  energies  towards 
truth,  and  fulfil  the  truth  that  exists,  not  try  to  make 


90  J  NANA   YOGA 

new  truths.  Thus,  instead  of  denouncing  these  old 
ideas  of  God  as  unfit  for  modern  times,  these  ancient 
sages  began  to  seek  out  the  reality  that  was  in  them, 
and  the  result  was  the  Vedanta  Philosophy,  and  out 
of  the  old  deities,  out  of  the  monotheistic  God,  Ruler 
of  the  Universe,  they  found  yet  higher  and  higher 
ideas  in  what  is  called  the  Impersonal  Absolute;  they 
found  One-ness  throughout  the  Universe.  '*'He  who  ^ 
sees  in  this  world  of  manifoldness  that  One  running 
through  all ;  in  this  world  of  death,  he  who  finds  that 
one  Infinite  Life ;  and  in  this  world  of  insentience  and 
ignorance,  he  who  finds  that  one  Light  and  Knowledge, 
unto  him  belongs  eternal  peace.  Unto  none  else,  unto^ 
none  else." 


VI 
MAYA  AND  FREEDOM 

"Trailing  clouds  of  glory  we  come/'  says  the  poet. 
Not  all  of  us  come  trailing  clouds  of  glory  however, 
some  of  us  come  also  trailing  black  fogs  behind  us; 
there  can  be  no  question  about  that.  But  every  one 
of  us  is  sent  into  this  world  as  on  to  the  battlefield 
to  fight.  We  must  come  here  weeping  to  fight  our 
way,  as  well  as  we  can,  to  make  a  path  through  this 
infinite  ocean  of  life  without  leaving  any  track;  for- 
ward we  go,  long  ages  behind  us,  and  immense  the 
expanse  beyond.  So  on  we  go,  till  death  comes,  takes 
us  ofl:  the  field,  victorious  or  defeated,  we  do  not  know, 
and  this  is  Maya. 

Hope  is  dominant  in  the  heart  of  childhood.  The 
whole  is  a  golden  vision  to  the  opening  eyes  of  the 
child;  his  will  he  thinks  is  supreme.  As  he  moves 
onward,  at  every  step  nature  stands  as  an  adaman- 
tine wall  barring  his  further  progress.  He  may  hurl 
himself  against  it  again  and  again,  striving  to  break 
through.  Through  his  life  the  farther  he  goes,  the 
farther  recedes  the  ideal  until  death  comes,  and  there 
is  release  perhaps,  and  this  is  Mdya. 

A  man  of  science  rises,  he  is  thirsting  after  knowl- 
edge. No  sacrifice  is  too  great,  no  struggle  too  hope- 
less for  him.     He  moves  onward  discovering  secret 

91 


92  JNANA   YOGA 

after  secret  of  Nature,  searching  out  the  secrets  from 
the  innermost  heart  of  Nature,  and  what  for  ?  What 
is  it  all  for  ?  Why  should  we  give  him  glory  ?  Why 
should  he  acquire  fame?  Does  not  Nature  know 
infinitely  more  than  any  human  being  can  know,  and 
Nature  is  dull,  insentient.  Why  should  it  be  glory 
to  imitate  the  dull,  the  insentient?  Nature  can  hurl 
a  thunderbolt  of  any  magnitude  to  any  distance.  If 
a  man  can  do  one  small  part  as  much  we  praise  him, 
laud  him  up  to  the  skies,  and  why?  Why  should  we 
praise  him  for  imitating  Nature,  imitating  death,  imi- 
tating dulness,  imitating  insentience?  The  force  of 
gravitation  can  pull  to  pieces  the  biggest  mass  that 
ever  existed;  yet  it  is  insentient.  What  glory  is  in 
imitating  the  insentient?  Yet  we  are  all  struggling 
after  that,  and  this  is  Maya. 

The  senses  drag  the  human  soul  out.  Man  is  ask- 
ing for  pleasure,  for  happiness  where  it  can  never  be 
found;  for  countless  ages  every  one  of  us  is  taught 
that  this  is  futile  and  vain,  there  is  no  happiness  here. 
But  we  cannot  learn;  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  learn, 
except  through  our  own  experience.  We  try  them, 
and  a  blow  comes ;  do  we  learn  then  ?  Not  even  then. 
Like  moths  hurling  themselves  against  the  flame  we 
are  hurling  ourselves  again  and  again  into  sense 
pleasures,  hoping  to  find  satisfaction  there.  We 
return  again  and  again  with  freshened  energy;  thus 
we  go  on  till  crippled,  cheated,  we  die,  and  this  is 
Maya. 

So  with  our  intellect,  in  our  desire  to  solve  the  mys- 
teries of  the  universe,  we  cannot  stop  our  questioning, 
we  must  know;  and  cannot  believe  that  there  is  no 


MAYA    AND    FREEDOM  93 

knowledge  to  be  gained.  A  few  steps,  and  there  arises 
the  wall  of  beginningless  and  endless  time  which  we 
cannot  surmount.  A  few  steps  and  there  appears  a 
wall  of  boundless  space  which  cannot  be  surmounted, 
and  the  whole  is  irrevocably  bound  in  by  the  walls  of 
cause  and  effect.  We  cannot  go  beyond  them.  Yet 
we  struggle;  we  have  to  struggle;  and  this  is  Maya. 

With  every  breath,  with  every  pulsation  of  the  heart, 
with  every  one  of  our  movements,  we  think  we  are 
free,  and  the  very  same  moment  we  are  shown  that  we 
are  not.  Bound  slaves.  Nature's  bond-slaves,  in  body, 
in  mind,  in  all  our  thoughts,  in  all  our  feelings,  and 
this  is  Maya. 

There  was  never  a  mother  who  did  not  think  her. 
child  a  genius,  the  most  extraordinary  child  that  was 
ever  born ;  she  dotes  upon  her  child.  Her  whole  soul 
is  in  that  child.  It  grows  up,  perhaps  becomes  a 
drunkard,  a  brute,  ill-treats  the  mother,  and  the  more 
he  ill-treats  her  the  more  her  love  increases.  The 
world  lauds  it  as  the  unselfish  love  of  the  mother, 
little  dreaming  that  the  mother  is  a  born  slave,  she 
cannot  help  herself.  She  would  throw  it  off  a  thou- 
sand times,  but  cannot.  So  she  covers  it  with  a  mass 
of  flowers,  calls  it  wonderful  love,  and  this  is  Maya. 

So  are  we  all  in  this  world,  and  the  legend  tells  how 
once  Narada  said  to  Krishna,  "Lord,  show  me  Maya." 
A  few  days  passed  away,  and  Krishna  asked  Narada 
to  make  a  trip  with  him  towards  a  desert,  and  after 
walking  for  several  miles  Krishna  said,  "Narada,  I 
am  thirsty;  can  you  fetch  some  water  to  me?"  I 
will  go  at  once,  sir,  and  get  you  water."  So  Narada 
went.     At  a  little  distance  from  the  place  there  was  a 


94  J  NANA   YOGA 

village ;  he  entered  the  village  in  search  of  some  water, 
and  knocked  at  a  door,  the  door  opened  and  a  most 
beautiful  young  girl  appeared.  At  the  sight  of  her  he 
immediately  forgot  that  his  master  was  waiting,  thirs- 
ty, perhaps  dying  for  want  of  water.  He  forgot 
everything,  and  began  to  talk  with  the  girl.  All  that 
day  he  did  not  return  to  his  master.  The  next  day 
he  was  again  at  the  house  talking  to  the  girl.  That 
talk  ripened  into  love,  he  asked  the  father  for  the 
daughter,  and  they  were  married,  and  lived  there  and 
had  children.  Thus  twelve  years  passed.  His  father- 
in-law  died,  he  inherited  his  property,  and  lived,  as  he 
seemed  to  think,  a  very  happy  life  with  his  wife  and 
children,  his  fields  and  his  cattle,  his  lands  and  his 
house.  Then  came  a  flood.  One  night  the  river  rose 
until^  it  overflowed  its  banks  and  flooded  the  whole  of 
the  village.  Houses  began  to  fall,  men  and  animals 
were  swept  away  and  drowned,  and  everything  was 
floating  in  the  rush  of  the  stream.  Narada  had  to 
escape.  With  one  hand  he  had  hold  of  his  wife,  with 
the  other  two  of  his  children,  another  child  was  on 
his  shoulders,  and  he  was  trying  to  ford  this  tremen- 
dous flood. 

After  a  few  steps  the  current  was  too  strong,  and 
the  child  on  his  shoulders  fell  and  was  borne  away. 
A  cry  of  despair  came  from  Narada.  In  trying  to 
save  that  child  he  lost  his  grasp  upon  one  of  the  others 
he  was  holding,  and  it  also  was  lost.  At  last  his  wife, 
to  whom  he  had  clung  with  all  his  might  and  main 
to  save  her  life,  was  also  torn  away  by  the  current,  and 
weeping  and  wailing  he  was  thrown  on  the  bank, 
where  he  fell  upon  the  ground  with  bitter  lamenta- 


MAYA   AND   FREEDOM  95 

tions.  Behind  him  there  came  a  gentle  voice:  "My; 
child,  where  is  the  water?  You  went  to  fetch  a 
pitcher  of  water,  and  I  am  waiting  for  you ;  you  have 
been  gone  about  half  an  hour."  "Half  an  hour!" 
Twelve  whole  years  had  passed  through  his  mind,  and 
all  these  scenes  had  passed  by  in  that  half  an  hour — 
and  this  is  Maya.  In  one  shape  or  another  we  are  all 
in  it.  It  is  a  most  difficult  and  intricate  state  of  things 
to  understand.  What  does  it  show  ?  Something  very 
terrible,  which  has  been  preached  in  every  country, 
taught  everywhere  and  only  believed  by  a  few,  because 
until  we  get  the  experiences  ourselves  we  cannot  believe 
in  it.     After  all,  it  is  all  futile. 

Time,  the  avenger  of  everything,  comes,  and  noth- 
ing is  left.  He  swallows  up  the  sin  and  the  sinner, 
the  king  and  the  peasant,  the  beautiful  and  the  ugly; 
he  leaves  none.  Everything  is  rushing  towards  that 
one  goal,  destruction.  Our  knowledge,  our  arts,  our 
sciences,  everything  is  rushing  towards  that  one  in- 
evitable goal  of  all,  destruction.  None  can  stem  the 
tide,  none  can  hold  it  back  for  a  minute.  We  may 
try  to  forget  it,  just  as  we  hear  of  persons  in  a  plague- 
stricken  city  becoming  paralyzed,  trying  to  create 
oblivion  by  drinking  and  dancing,  and  other  vain 
devices.  So  we  are  all  trying  hard  to  forget  it,  try- 
ing to  create  oblivion  with  all  sorts  of  sense  pleasures. 
And  this  is  Maya. 

Two  ways  of  living  have  been  proposed.  There  is 
one  method  very  common,  which  every  one  knows,  and 
that  is  to  say,  "It  may  be  very  true,  but  do  not  think 
of  it.  *Make  hay  while  the  sun  shines,'  as  the  pro- 
verb says.     It  is  all  true ;  it  is  a  fact ;  but  do  not  mind 


96  J  NANA   YOGA 

it.  Seize  the  few  pleasures  you  have,  do  what  Httle 
you  can,  do  not  think  of  this  negative  side  of  the 
picture,  always  look  towards  the  hopeful,  the  positive 
side."  There  is  some  truth  in  this,  but  there  is  also 
danger.  The  truth  is  that  it  is  a  good  motive  power ; 
hope  and  a  positive  ideal  are  very  good  motive  powers 
for  our  lives,  but  there  is  a  certain  danger  in  them. 
The  danger  lies  in  our  giving  up  the  struggle  in 
despair,  as  is  the  case  with  every  one  who  preaches: 
**Take  the  world  as  it  is ;  sit  down  calmly,  as  comforta- 
bly as  you  can,  and  be  contented  with  all  these  mis- 
eries, and  when  you  receive  blows,  say  they  are  not 
blows  but  flowers,  and  when  you  are  driven  about  like 
a  slave,  say  that  you  are  free,  just  tell  lies  day  and 
night  to  others  and  to  your  own  souls,  because  that  is 
the  only  way  to  live."  This  is  what  is  called  practi- 
cal wisdom,  and  never  was  it  more  before  the  world 
than  in  this  nineteenth  century,  because  never  were 
blows  hitting  harder  than  at  the  present  time,  never 
was  competition  keener,  never  were  men  so  cruel  to 
their  fellow-men  as  now,  and  therefore  is  this  conso- 
lation offered.  It  is  strongest  at  the  present  time, 
and  it  fails,  it  always  fails.  We  cannot  hide  carrion 
with  roses ;  it  is  impossible.  It  would  not  avail  long ; 
one  day  the  roses  would  vanish,  and  the  carrion  would 
become  worse  than  ever  before.  So  with  all  our  lives ; 
we  may  try  to  cover  our  old  and  festering  sores  with 
cloth  of  gold,  but  there  will  come  a  day  when  the 
cloth  of  gold  is  removed,  and  the  sore  in  all  its  ugli- 
ness is  revealed.  Is  there  no  hope?  True  it  is  that 
we  are  all  slaves  of  Maya,  we  are  all  born  in  Maya, 
we  live  in  Maya. 


MAYA   AND   FREEDOM  97 

Is  there  then  no  way  out,  no  hope?  That  we  are 
all  miserable,  that  this  world  is  really  a  prison,  that 
even  our  so-called  trailing  beauty  is  but  a  prison- 
house,  and  that  even  our  intellects  and  minds  are 
prison-houses,  has  been  known  for  ages  upon  ages. 
There  has  not  been  a  man,  there  has  not  been  a 
human  soul,  who  has  not  felt  it  some  time  or  other, 
however  he  may  talk.  And  the  old  people  feel  it  most, 
because  in  them  is  the  accumulated  experience  of  a 
whole  life,  because  they  cannot  be  easily  cheated  by 
the  lies  of  Nature;  Maya's  lies  cannot  cheat  them 
much.  What  of  them?  Is  there  no  way  out?  We 
find  that  with  all  this,  with  this  terrible  fact  before 
us,  in  the  midst  of  all  this  sorrow  and  suffering,  even 
in  this  world,  where  life  and  death  are  synonymous, 
even  here  there  is  a  voice  that  is  going  through  all 
ages,  through  all  countries,  and  through  every  heart. 
"This  my  Maya  is  divine,  made  up  of  qualities,  and 
very  difficult  to  cross.  Yet  those  that  come  unto  Me, 
I  cause  them  to  cross  this  river  of  life."  "Come  unto 
Me,  all  ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will 
give  you  rest.'*  This  is  the  voice  that  is  leading  us 
forward.  Man  has  heard  it,  and  is  hearing  it  all 
through  the  ages.  This  voice  comes  to  men  when 
everything  seems  to  be  lost,  and  hope  is  flying  away, 
when  man's  dependence  on  his  own  strength  has  been 
crushed  down,  when  everything  seems  to  melt  away 
between  his  fingers,  and  life  is  a  hopeless  ruin.  Then 
he  hears  it.     This  is  called  Religion. 

On  the  one  side,  therefore,  is  the  bold  assertion,  the 
most  hopeful  assertion,  to  realize  that  this  is  all  non- 
sense, that  this  is  Maya,  but  that  beyond  Maya  there 


98  JNANA   YOGA 

is  a  way  out.  On  the  other  hand  our  practical  men 
tell  us  "Don't  you  bother  your  heads  about  such  non- 
sense as  religion  and  metaphysics.  Live  here;  this 
is  a  very  bad  world  indeed,  but  make  the  best  of  it." 
Which  put  in  plain  language  means — live  a  hypocriti- 
cal, lying  life,  a  life  of  continuous  fraud,  covering  all 
sores  the  best  way  you  can.  Go  on,  patch  after  patch, 
until  everything  is  lost,  and  you  are  a  mass  of  patch- 
work. This  is  what  is  called  practical  life.  Those 
that  are  satisfied  with  this  patchwork  will  never  come 
to  Religion.  Religion  begins  with  a  tremendous  dis- 
satisfaction with  the  present  state  of  things,  with  our 
own  lives,  a  hatred,  an  intense  hatred,  for  this  patch- 
ing up  of  life,  an  unbounded  disgust  for  fraud  and 
lies.  He  alone  can  be  religious  who  dares  stand  up 
and  say  as  the  mighty  Buddha  once  said  under  the 
Bo-tree,  when  this  idea  of  practicality  appeared  also 
before  him  and  he  saw  that  it  was  nonsense,  and  yet 
could  not  find  a  way  out.  The  temptation  came  to 
give  up  his  search,  to  give  up  the  search  after  truth, 
to  go  back  to  the  world  and  live  the  old  life  of  fraud, 
calling  things  by  wrong  names,  telling  lies  to  oneself 
and  to  everybody — once  came  this  temptation,  but  he, 
the  giant,  conquered  it,  and  said :  "Death  is  better  than 
a  vegetating  ignorant  life;  it  is  better  to  die  on  the 
battlefield  than  to  live  a  life  of  defeat."  That  is  the 
basis  of  Religion.  When  a  man  takes  that  stand  he 
is  in  the  way  to  find  the  truth,  he  is  on  the  way  to 
God.  That  determination  must  be  the  first  impulse 
towards  becoming  religious.  I  will  hew  out  a  way 
for  myself.  I  will  know  the  truth,  or  give  up  my  life 
in  the  attempt.     For  on  this  side  it  is  nothing,  it  is 


MAYA   AND   FREEDOM  99 

gone,  it  is  vanishing  every  hour.  The  beautiful,  hope- 
ful young  person  of  to-day  is  the  veteran  of  to-morrow. 
Hopes  and  joys  and  pleasures  will  die  like  blossoms 
with  to-morrow's  frost.  That  is  this  side;  on  the 
other  side  there  are  the  delights  of  conquest,  victories 
over  all  the  ills  of  life,  victories  over  life  itself,  the 
conquering  of  the  universe.  On  that  side  men  can 
stand.  Those  who  dare,  therefore,  to  struggle  for 
victory,  for  truth,  for  religion,  are  in  the  right  way, 
and  this  is  what  the  Vedas  preach.  "Be  not  in 
despair;  the  way  is  very  difficult;  it  is,  as  it  were, 
walking  on  the  blade  of  a  razor.  Yet,  despair  not, 
awake,  arise,  and  find  the  ideal,  the  goal." 

Now  all  the  various  manifestations  of  religion,  in 
whatever  shape  and  form  they  have  come  to  man- 
kind, have  this  one  common  central  basis.  It  is  the 
preaching  of  freedom,  the  way  out  of  this  world. 
They  never  came  to  reconcile  the  world  and  religion, 
but  to  cut  the  Gordian  knot,  to  establish  religion  in 
its  own  ideal,  and  not  to  compromise  with  the  world. 
That  is  what  every  religion  preaches,  and  the  duty  of 
the  Vedanta  is  to  harmonize  all  these  aspirations,  to 
make  manifest  the  common  ground  between  all  the 
religions  of  the  world,  the  highest  as  well  as  the 
lowest.  What  we  call  the  most  arrant  superstition  and 
the  highest  philosophy  really  have  a  common  aim  in 
that  they  both  are  trying  to  show  the  way  out  of  the 
same  difficulty,  and  in  most  cases  this  way  is  through 
the  help  of  some  one  who  is  outside  this  universe, 
some  one  who  is  not  himself  bound  by  the  laws  of 
nature,  in  one  word  some  one  who  is  free.  In  spite  of 
all  the  difficulties  and  differences  of  opinion  about  the 


lOO  JNANA   YOGA 

nature  of  the  one  free  agent,  whether  he  is  God, 
whether  he  is  a  personal  God,  whether  he  is  a  sentient 
being  Hke  man,  whether  he  is  a  conscious  being, 
whether  mascuhne,  feminine,  or  neuter — ^and  the  dis- 
cussions have  been  endless — the  fundamental  idea  is 
the  same.  In  spite  of  the  almost  helpless  contradic- 
tions of  the  different  systems,  we  find  the  golden 
thread  of  unity  running  through  them  all,  and  in  this 
philosophy,  this  golden  thread  has  been  traced,  re- 
vealed little  by  little  to  our  view,  and  the  first  step  to 
this  revelation  is  this  common  ground,  that  all  are 
advancing  towards  freedom. 

One  curious  fact  is  present  in  the  midst  of  all  our 
sorrows  and  joys,  our  difficulties  and  struggles,  we  are 
surely  journeying  towards  freedom.  The  question 
was  practically  what  is  this  universe?  From  what 
does  it  arise  ?  Into  what  does  it  go  ?  And  the  answer 
was,  in  Freedom  it  rises,  in  Freedom  it  rests,  and  into 
Freedom  it  melts  away.  This  curious  fact  you  can- 
not relinquish,  your  actions,  your  very  lives  will  be 
lost  without  it,  this  idea  of  freedom,  that  we  are  free. 
Every  moment  nature  is  proving  us  to  be  slaves,  and 
not  free.  Yet,  simultaneously  rises  the  other  idea 
that  still  we  are  free.  At  every  step  we  are  knocked 
down  as  it  were,  by  Maya,  and  shown  that  we  are 
bound,  yet  at  the  same  moment,  together  with  this 
blow,  together  with  this  feeling  that  we  are  bound, 
comes  the  other  feeling  that  we  are  free.  Some  inner 
voice  tells  us  that  we  are  free.  But  if  we  attempt  to 
realize  this  freedom,  to  make  it  manifest,  we  find  the 
difficulties  almost  insuperable.  Yet,  in  spite  of  that, 
it  insists  on  asserting  itself  inwardly,  "I  am  free,  I  am 


MAYA   AND   FREEDOM  lOI 

free."  And  if  you  study  all  the  various  religions  of 
the  world  you  will  find  this  idea  expressed.  Not  only 
Religion — do  not  take  this  word  in  the  narrow  sense 
— but  the  whole  life  of  society,  is  the  assertion  of  that 
one  principle  of  freedom.  All  movements  are  the 
assertion  of  that  one  freedom.  That  voice  has  been 
heard  by  every  one,  whether  he  knows  it  or  not;  that 
voice  which  declares,  "Come  to  me  all  ye  that  are 
weary  and  heavy  laden."  It  may  not  be  in  the  same 
language,  or  the  same  form  of  speech,  but  in  some 
form  or  other,  that  voice  calling  for  freedom  has  been 
with  us.  Yes,  we  are  born  here  on  account  of  that 
voice ;  every  one  of  our  movements  is  for  that.  We  are 
all  rushing  towards  freedom,  we  are  all  following  that 
voice,  whether  we  know  it  or  not :  like  the  flute  player 
who  attracted  the  children  of  the  village;  we  are  all 
following  the  music  of  the  flute  without  knowing  it. 

Why  are  we  ethical  but  that  we  must  follow  that 
voice?  Not  only  the  human  soul,  but  all  from  the 
lowest  atom  to  the  highest  man,  have  heard  the  voice 
and  are  rushing  to  meet  it;  and  in  the  struggle  are 
combining  with  each  other,  or  pushing  each  other  out 
of  the  way.  Thus  come  competition,  joys,  struggles, 
life,  pleasure  and  death,  and  the  whole  Universe  is 
nothing  but  the  result  of  this  mad  struggle  to  reach 
the  A^oice.  That  is  what  we  are  doing.  This  is  the 
manifestation  of  Nature. 

What  happens  then?  The  scene  begins  to  shift. 
As  soon  as  you  know  the  voice  and  understand  what 
it  is,  the  whole  scene  changes.  The  very  world  which 
was  the  ghastly  battlefield  of  Maya  is  changed  into 
something  else,  into  something  more  beautiful,  better. 


I02  JNANA   YOGA 

We  need  not  curse  nature,  we  need  not  say  that  the 
world  is  horrible,  we  need  not  say  it  is  all  vain,  we 
need  not  weep  or  wail.  As  soon  as  we  understand 
the  voice  we  see  the  reason  why  this  struggle  should 
be  here,  this  fight,  this  competition,  this  difficulty,  this 
cruelty,  these  little  pleasures  and  joys — that  they  are 
in  the  nature  of  things,  because  we  are  going  towards 
the  voice,  to  attain  which  we  are  called,  whether  we 
know  it  or  not.  All  human  life,  all  Nature,  therefore, 
is  struggling  to  manifest  this  freedom;  the  sun  is 
moving  towards  the  goal,  so  is  the  earth  circling  round 
the  sun,  so  is  the  moon  circling  round  the  earth.  For 
that  goal  the  planet  is  moving,  and  the  breeze  is 
blowing.  "For  that  goal  the  sun  is  shining  and  so 
is  the  moon,  for  that  goal  the  wind  is  blowing  and 
thunder  is  crashing,  for  that  goal  death  is  stalking 
about."  They  are  all  struggling  towards  that.  The 
saint  is  going  that  way;  he  cannot  help  it;  it  is  no 
glory  to  him.  So  is  the  sinner.  The  most  charitable 
man  is  going  straight  towards  that  voice,  he -cannot 
stop;  the  most  hopeless  miser  is  going  towards  the 
same  destination;  the  greatest  worker  of  good  hears 
the  same  voice  within,  he  cannot  resist  it,  he  must  go 
towards  the  voice.  So  with  the  most  arrant  idler. 
One  stumbles  more  than  another,  and  he  who  stum- 
bles more  we  call  weak,  he  who  stumbles  less  we  call 
good.  Good  and  bad  are  never  two  different  things, 
they  are  one  and  the  same;  the  difference  is  not  one 
of -kind,  but  of  degree. 

Now,  if  the  manifestation  of  this  power  of  freedom 
is  really  governing  the  whole  universe — applying  that 
to  religion,  our  special  study — we  find  this  idea  has 


MAYA   AND   FREEDOM  IO3 

been  the  one  assertion  throughout.  Take  the  lowest 
form  of  religion,  where  there  is  a  departed  ancestor, 
or  certain  powerful  and  cruel  gods,  and  they  are 
worshipped;  what  is  the  very  idea  of  the  god  or  de- 
parted ancestor?  That  he  is  superior  to  Nature,  not 
bound  by  this  Maya.  The  idea  of  Nature  here  is  very 
small,  of  course.  The  worshipper,  an  ignorant  man, 
of  crude  ideas,  cannot  pass  through  the  wall  of  a  room, 
cannot  jump  up  into  the  skies,  or  fly  through  the  air, 
and  his  idea  of  Nature  is  one  of  bondage  to  superior 
powers;  hence  the  gods  whom  he  worships  can  pass 
through  walls,  or  the  air,  or  change  shape.  What  is 
meant  by  that,  philosophically  ?  That  the  assertion  of 
freedom  is  there,  that  the  gods  whom  he  worships  are 
superior  to  Nature  as  he  knows  it.  So  with  those 
who  worship  still  higher  beings ;  it  is  the  same  asser- 
tion. As  the  view  of  Nature  expands,  the  view  of  the 
soul  as  superior  to  Nature  also  expands,  and  at  last 
we  cogie  to  what  we  call  Monotheism — that  there  is 
Maya,  (this  Nature,)  and  that  there  is  some  Being  who 
is  superior  to  the  whole  of  this  Maya,  and  this  is  the 
hope. 

Vedanta  begins  where  monotheistic  ideas  first 
appear,  but  the  Vedanta  philosophy  wants  further 
explanation.  This  explanation — that  there  is  a  Being 
beyond  all  these  manifestations  of  Maya,  who  is 
superior  to,  and  independent  of  Maya,  and  who  is 
attracting  us  towards  Himself,  and  that  we  are  all 
going  towards  Him — is  very  good,  says  the  Vedanta, 
but  yet  the  perception  is  not  clear,  the  vision  is  dim 
and  hazy,  although  it  does  not  directly  contradict 
reason.     Just  as  in  your  hymn  it  is  said,  "Nearer  my 


I04  JNANA  YOGA 

God  to  Thee,"  the  same  hymn  would  be  very  good  to 
the  Vedantin,  only  he  would  change  a  word,  and  make 
it,  "Nearer  my  God  to  me."  The  idea  that  the  goal 
is  far  off,  far  beyond  Nature,  attracting  us  all  towards 
it,  has  to  be  brought  down  nearer  and  nearer,  without 
degrading  or  degenerating  it,  until  it  comes  closer  and 
closer,  and  the  God  of  Heaven  becomes  the  God  in 
Nature,  till  the  God  in  Nature  becomes  the  God  who 
is  Nature,  and  the  God  who  is  Nature  becomes  the  God 
within  this  temple  of  the  body,  and  the  God  dwelling 
in  the  temple  of  the  body,  becomes  the  temple  itself, 
becomes  the  soul  of  man,  and  there  it  reaches  the  last 
words  it  can  teach.  He  whom  the  sages  have  been 
seeking  in  all  these  places  is  in  our  own  hearts.  The 
voice  that  you  heard  was  right,  says  the  Vedanta,  but 
the  direction  you  gave  to  the  voice  was  wrong.  That 
ideal  of  freedom  that  you  perceived  was  correct,  but 
you  projected  it  outside  yourself,  and  that  was  your 
mistake.  Bring  it  nearer  and  nearer,  until  you  will 
find  that  it  was  all  the  time  within  you,  that  it  is  the 
Self  of  your  own  self.  That  freedom  is  your  own 
nature,  and  this  Maya  never  found  you.  Nature 
never  had  power  over  you.  Like  a  frightened  child 
you  were  dreaming  that  it  was  throttling  you,  and  the 
release  from  this  fear  is  the  goal ;  not  only  to  see  it 
intellectually,  but  to  perceive  it,  actualize  it,  much 
more  definitely  than  we  perceive  this  world.  Then  we 
shall  know  that  we  are  free.  Then,  and  then  alone, 
will  all  difficulties  vanish,  then  will  all  the  perplexi- 
ties of  the  heart  be  smoothed  away,  all  crookedness 
made  straight,  then  will  vanish  the  delusion  of  mani- 
foldness  and  nature;  and  Maya,  instead  of  being  a 


MAYA   AND   FREEDOM                                 lOt^  I 

J 

horrible,  hopeless  dream  as  it  is  now,   will  become  \ 

beautiful,  and  this  earth,  instead  of  being  the  prison-  ] 

house  it  is  now,  will  become  our  playground.     Even  j 

dangers  and  difficulties,  even  all  sufferings,  will  be-  i 

come  deified,  as  it  were,  and  show  us  their  real  nature,  ; 
will  show  us  that  behind  everything,  as  the  substance 
of  evervthing.  He  is  standing,  and  that  He  is  the  One 
Real  Self. 


VII 


THE  ABSOLUTE  AND  MANIFESTATION 


(a)  The  Absolute. 


The  one  question  that  is  most  difficult  to  grasp  in 
understanding  the  Advaita  Philosophy,  and  the  one 
question  that  will  be  asked  again  and  again  and  that 
will  always  remain  after  thinking  of  it  all  our  life,  is 
— "How  has  the  Infinite,  the  Absolute,  apparently 
become  the  finite?"  I  will  take  up  this  question,  and, 
in  order  to  illustrate  it  better,  I  will  use  a  figure. 

Here  is  the  Absolute  (a),  and 
this  is  the  Universe  (b).  The 
Absolute  has  become  the  Uni- 
verse. By  this  is  not  only  meant 
the  material  world,  but  the  men- 
tal world,  the  spiritual  world — 
everything,  heavens  and  earths, 
and  all  that  exists.  Mind  is  the 
name  of  a  change,  and  body  the  name  of  another 
change,  and  so  on,  and  all  these  changes  compose  our 
universe.  The  Absolute  (a)  appears  to  have  become 
the  Universe  (b)  by  coming  through  time,  space,  and 
causation  (c).  This  is  the  central  idea  of  Advaita. 
Time,  space,  and  causation  are  like  the  glass  through 
which  the  Absolute  is  seen,  and  when  It  is  seen  on  the 
lower  side  It  appears  as  the  Universe.  Now  we  at 
once  gather  from  this,  that  in  the  Absolute,  there  is 

io6 


(c) 
Time. 
Space. 
Causation. 


(b)  The  Universe. 


THE   ABSOLUTE   AND    MANIFESTATION  IO7 

neither  time,  space,  nor  causation.  The  idea  of  time 
cannot  be  there,  seeing  that  there  is  no  mind,  no 
thought.  The  idea  of  space  cannot  be  there,  seeing 
that  there  is  no  external  change.  What  you  call  mo- 
tion and  causation  cannot  exist  where  there  is  only  one. 
We  have  to  understand  this  and  impress  it  on  our 
minds,  that  what  we  call  causation  begins  after,  if  we 
may  be  permitted  to  say  so,  the  degeneration  of  the 
Absolute  into  the  phenomenal,  and  not  before;  that 
our  will,  our  desire,  and  all  these  things  always  come 
after  that.  I  think  Schopenhauer's  philosophy  makes 
a  mistake  in  its  interpretation  of  Vedanta,  for  it  seeks 
to  make  the  will  everything.  Schopenhauer  makes  the 
will  stand  in  the  place  of  the  Absolute.  But  the  Abso- 
lute cannot  be  presented  as  will,  for  will  is  something 
changeable  and  phenomenal,  and  over  the  line  drawn 
above  time,  space  and  causation,  there  is  no  change, 
no  motion.  It  is  only  below  the  line  that  external 
motion  and  internal  motion,  called  thought,  begin. 
There  can  be  no  will  on  the  other  side,  and  will,  there- 
fore, cannot  be  the  cause  of  this  universe.  Coming 
nearer,  we  see  in  our  own  bodies  that  will  is  not  the 
cause  of  every  movement.  I  move  this  chair;  will 
was  the  cause  of  that  movement,  and  that  will  became 
manifested  as  muscular  motion  at  the  other  end.  But 
the  same  power  that  moves  the  chair  is  moving  the 
heart,  the  lungs,  and  so  on,  but  not  through  will. 
Given  that  the  power  is  the  same,  it  only  becomes  will 
when  it  rises  to  the  plane  of  consciousness,  and  to  call 
it  will  before  it  has  risen  to  this  plane  is  a  misnomer. 
This  makes  a  good  deal  of  confusion  in  Schopenhauer's 
philosophy. 


I08  J  NANA   YOGA 

A  Stone  falls  and  we  ask  why.  This  question  is 
possible  only  on  the  supposition  that  nothing  happens 
independently,  that  every  motion  must  have  been  pre- 
ceded by  a  cause  of  some  kind.  I  request  you  to 
make  this  very  clear  in  your  minds,  for  whenever  we 
ask  why  anything  happens,  we  are  taking  for  granted 
that  everything  that  happens  must  have  a  zvhy,  that  is 
to  say,  it  must  have  been  preceded  by  something  else 
which  acted  as  cause.  This  precedence  and  succed- 
ence  are  what  we  call  the  law  of  causation.  It  means 
that  everything  in  the  Universe  is  by  turn  a  cause 
and  an  effect.  It  is  the  cause  of  certain  things  which 
come  after  it  and  is  itself  the  effect  of  something  else 
which  has  preceded  it.  This  is  called  the  law  of 
causation,  and  is  a  necessary  condition  of  all  our  think- 
ing. We  believe  that  every  particle  in  the  universe, 
whatever  it  be,  is  in  relation  to  every  other  particle. 
There  has  been  great  discussion  as  to  how  this  idea 
arose.  In  Europe  there  have  been  so-called  intuitive 
philosophers  who  believed  that  it  was  constitutional 
in  humanity,  others  have  believed  that  it  comes  from 
experience,  but  the  question  has  never  been  settled. 
We  shall  see  later  on  what  Vedanta  has  to  say  about  it. 
But  first  we  have  to  understand  this,  that  the  very 
asking  of  the  question  "why"  presupposes  that  every- 
thing round  us  has  been  preceded  by  certain  things, 
and  will  be  succeeded  by  certain  other  things.  The 
other  belief  involved  in  this  question  is  that  nothing  in 
the  universe  is  independent,  everything  can  be  acted 
upon  by  something  outside  itself.  Inter-dependence 
is  the  law  of  the  whole  universe.  In  saying,  "What 
caused  the  Absolute?''  what  error  are  we  making! 


THE   ABSOLUTE  AND    MANIFESTATION  IO9 

We  are  applying  the  same  supposition  in  this  case. 
To  ask  this  question  we  have  to  suppose  that  the  Abso- 
lute also  is  bound  by  something  else,  and  that  the  Abso- 
lute also  is  dependent  on  something  else.  That  is  to 
say,  in  so  using  the  word  Absolute,  we  drag  the 
Absolute  down  to  the  level  of  the  universe.  For  above 
that  line  there  is  neither  time,  space,  nor  causation, 
because  it  is  all  one.  That  which  exists  by  itself  alone 
cannot  have  any  cause.  That  which  is  free,  cannot 
have  any  cause,  else  it  would  not  be  free,  but  bound. 
That  which  has  relativity  cannot  be  free.  Thus,  we 
see  that  the  very  question,  why  the  infinite  became  the 
finite,  is  an  impossible  one,  it  is  self-contradictory. 
Coming  from  subtleties  to  the  logic  of  our  common 
plane,  to  common  sense,  we  can  see  this  from  another 
side,  when  we  seek  to  know  how  the  Absolute  has 
become  the  relative.  Supposing  we  knew  the  answer, 
would  the  Absolute  remain  the  Absolute?  It  would 
have  become  the  relative.  What  is  meant  by  knowl- 
edge in  our  common  sense  idea?  It  is  only  something 
that  has  become  limited  by  our  mind,  that  we  know, 
and  when  it  is  beyond  our  mind,  it  is  not  knowledge. 
Now  if  the  Absolute  becomes  limited  by  the  mind,  it 
is  no  more  Absolute ;  it  has  become  finite.  Everything 
limited  by  the  mind  becomes  finite.  Therefore,  to 
know  the  Absolute  is  again  a  contradiction  in  terms. 
That  is  why  this  question  has  never  been  answered, 
because  if  it  were  answered  there  would  no  more  be 
an  Absolute.  A  God  known  is  no  more  God ;  He  has 
become  finite  like  one  of  us.  He  cannot  be  known. 
He  is  always  the  Unknowable  One.  But  what  Advai- 
ta  says  is  that  God  is  more  than  knowable.     This  is 


no  JNANA   YOGA 

a  great  fact  to  learn.  You  must  not  go  home  with 
the  idea  that  God  is  unknowable  in  the  sense  in  which 
Agnostics  put  it.  For  instance,  here  is  a  chair,  it  is 
known  to  me.  On  the  contrary  what  is  beyond  ether, 
or  whether  people  exist  there  or  not  is  possibly  un- 
knowable. But  God  is  neither  known  nor  unknowable 
in  this  sense.  He  is  something  still  higher  than 
known ;  that  is  what  is  meant  by  God  being  unknown 
and  unknowable;  the  expression  is  not  used  in  the 
sense  in  which  it  may  be  said  that  some  questions  are 
unknown  and  unknowable.  God  is  more  than  known. 
This  chair  is  known;  but  God  is  intensely  more  than 
that,  because  in  and  through  Him  we  have  to  know  this 
chair  itself.  He  is  the  witness,  the  Eternal  Witness  of 
all  knowledge.  Whatever  we  know,  we  have  to  know 
in  and  through  Him.  He  is  the  essence  of  our  own 
Self.  He,  the  *'I,"  is  the  essence  of  this  ego ;  we  can- 
not know  anything  excepting  in  and  through  that  "I." 
You  have  to  know  everything  in  and  through  the 
Brahman.  To  know  the  chair,  therefore,  you  have  to 
know  it  in  and  through  God.  Thus  God  is  infinitely 
nearer  to  us  than  the  chair,  yet  He  is  infinitely  higher. 
Neither  known,  nor  unknown,  but  something  infinitely 
higher  than  either.  He  is  your  Self.  "Who  would 
live  a  second,  who  would  breathe  a  second  in  this 
universe,  if  that  Blessed  One  were  not  filling  it, 
because  in  and  through  Him  we  breathe,  in  and 
through  Him  we  exist?"  Not  that  he  is  standing 
somewhere  and  making  my  blood  circulate.  What  is 
meant  is  that  He  is  the  essence  of  all  this,  the  Soul  of 
my  soul.  You  cannot  by  any  possibility  say  you  know 
Him;  it  would  be  too  much  of  a  degradation.    You 


THE   ABSOLUTE  AND   MANIFESTATION  III 

cannot  jump  out  of  yourself,  so  you  cannot  know 
Him.  Knowledge  is  objectification.  For  instance,  in 
memory  you  are  objectifying  many  things,  projecting 
them  out  of  yourself.  All  memory,  all  the  things 
which  I  have  seen  and  which  I  know  are  in  my  mind. 
The  pictures,  the  impressions  of  all  these  things  are  in 
my  mind,  as  it  were,  and  when  I  would  try  to  think 
of  them,  to  know  them,  the  first  act  of  knowledge 
would  be  to  project  them  outside.  This  cannot  be 
done  with  God,  because  He  is  the  essence  of  our  souls ; 
we  cannot  throw  Him  out.  This  is  said  to  be  the 
holiest  word  in  Vedanta:  "He  that  is  the  essence  of 
your  soul.  He  is  the  Truth,  He  is  the  Self,  Thou  that 
art,  O  Svetaketu."  This  is  what  is  meant  by  "Thou 
art  Brahman."  You  cannot  describe  Him  by  any 
other  language.  All  attempts  of  language,  calling 
Him  father,  or  brother,  or  our  dearest  friend,  are 
attempts  to  objectify  God,  which  cannot  be.  He  is 
the  Eternal  Subject  of  everything.  I  am  the  subject 
of  this  chair;  I  see  the  chair,  so  God  is  the  Eternal 
Subject  of  my  soul.  How  can  you  objectify  Him,  the 
Essence  of  your  souls,  the  Reality  of  everything? 
Thus,  I  would  repeat  to  you  once  more,  God  is  neither 
knowable  nor  unknowable,  but  something  infinitely 
higher  than  these.  He  is  one  with  us,  and  that  which 
is  One  is  neither  knowable,  nor  unknowable,  just  as 
my  own  self,  or  your  own  self.  You  cannot  know 
your  own  self,  you  cannot  move  it  out,  and  make  it  an 
object  to  look  at,  because  you  are  that,  and  cannot 
separate  yourself  from  it.  Neither  is  it  unknowable, 
for  what  is  more  known  than  yourself?  It  is  really 
the  centre  of  our  knowledge  in  exactly  the  same  sense 


112  J  NANA  YOGA 

that  God  is  neither  unknowable  nor  known,  but  infin- 
itely higher  than  that,  your  real  Self. 

Thus  we  see,  that,  first,  the  question :  "What  caused 
the  Absolute"  is  a  contradiction  in  terms,  and  secondly, 
we  find  that  the  idea  of  God  in  the  Advaita  is  His 
Oneness,  and  therefore  we  cannot  objectify  Him,  for 
we  are  always  living  and  moving  in  Him;  whether 
we  know  it  or  not  does  not  matter.  Whatever  we 
do  is  always  through  Him.  Now  the  question  is  what 
are  time,  space,  and  causation?  Advaita  means  non- 
duality;  there  are  no  two,  but  One.  We  see  that 
here  is  a  proposition  that  the  Absolute,  the  One  is 
manifesting  Itself  as  many  through  the  veil  of  time, 
space,  and  causation.  Therefore  it  seems  that  here 
are  two,  the  Absolute,  and  Maya  (the  sum- total  of 
time,  space,  and  causation).  It  seems  apparently  very 
convincing  that  there  are  two.  To  which  the  Advait- 
ist  replies  that  it  cannot  be  called  two.  To  have  two, 
we  must  have  two  independent  existences,  just  as 
that  of  the  Absolute,  which  cannot  be  caused.  In  the 
first  place,  this  time,  space,  and  causation  cannot  be 
said  to  be  an  independent  existence.  Time  is  entire- 
ly a  dependent  existence ;  it  changes  with  every  change 
of  our  mind.  Sometimes  in  a  dream  one  imagines  that 
he  has  lived  several  years;  at  other  times  several 
months  were  passed  as  one  second.  So  that  time  has 
entire  dependence  on  our  state  of  mind.  Secondly, 
the  idea  of  time  vanishes  altogether  sometimes.  So 
with  space,  we  cannot  know  what  space  is.  Yet  it  is 
there,  indefinable,  and  cannot  live  separate  from  any- 
thing else.     So  with  causation. 

The  one  peculiar  attribute  we  find  in  all  this  time. 


THE   ABSOLUTE  AND    MANIFESTATION  II3 

space,  and  causation,  is  that  they  cannot  live  separate 
from  other  things.  Try  to  think  of  space  which  has 
neither  color,  nor  limits,  nor  any  connection  with  the 
things  around,  just  abstract  space.  You  cannot  think 
of  it  thus ;  you  have  to  think  of  it  as  the  space  between 
two  limits,  or  between  objects.  It  has  to  cling  on  to 
some  object  to  have  its  existence.  So  with  time;  you 
cannot  have  any  idea  of  abstract  time,  but  you  have  to 
take  two  events,  one  preceding  and  the  other  succeed- 
ing, and  join  the  two  events  by  the  idea  of  succes- 
sion. Time  depends  on  two  events,  just  as  space  has 
to  relate  itself  to  outside  objects.  And  the  idea  of 
causation  is  inseparable  from  time  and  space.  This  is 
the  peculiar  thing  about  them,  that  they  have  no  inde- 
pendent existence.  They  have  not  even  the  existence 
which  the  chair  or  the  wall  has.  They  are  as  a  shadow 
around  everything,  but  you  cannot  catch  it.  It  has  no 
real  existence;  we  see  that  it  has  not.  Yet  a  shadow 
is  not  non-existence,  seeing  that  through  this  shadow 
all  things  are  manifesting  as  this  universe.  Thus  we 
see  first  that  this  combination  of  time,  space,  and  causa- 
tion, has  neither  existence  nor  non-existence.  It  is 
like  a  shadow  which  comes  around  things.  Secondly, 
it  sometimes  vanishes.  To  give  an  illustration,  there 
is  a  wave  on  the  sea.  The  wave  is  the  same  as  the 
ocean,  certainly,  and  yet  we  know  it  is  a  wave,  and 
as  such  different  from  the  ocean.  What  makes  this 
difference?  The  form  and  the  name,  the  idea  in  the 
mind  and  the  form.  Now  can  we  think  of  a  wave 
form  as  anything  separate  from  the  ocean  ?  Certainly 
not.  It  always  clings  on  to  the  ocean  idea.  If  the 
wave  subsides,  the  form  vanishes  in  a  moment,  and 


114  JNANA   YOGA 

yet  the  form  was  not  a  delusion.  So  long  as  the  wave 
existed  the  form  was  there,  and  you  were  bound  to 
see  the  form.     This  is  Maya. 

The  whole  of  this  universe,  therefore,  is  as  it  were, 
a  peculiar  form ;  the  Absolute  is  that  ocean,  while  you 
and  I,  the  suns,  and  stars,  and  all  things  are  various 
waves  of  the  ocean.  And  what  makes  the  waves  dif- 
ferent? Only  form,  and  that  form  is  just  time,  space, 
and  causation,  all  entirely  dependent  on  the  wave. 
As  soon  as  you  take  away  the  wave,  they  vanish.  As 
soon  as  the  individual  gives  up  this  Maya,  it  vanishes 
for  him,  and  he  becomes  free.  The  whole  struggle 
is  to  get  rid  of  this  clinging  on  to  time,  space,  and 
causation.  It  is  always  throwing  obstacles  in  our 
way,  and  we  are  trying  to  get  free.  What  do  they 
call  the  theory  of  evolution?  What  are  the  two  fac- 
tors? There  is  a  tremendous  potential  power  which 
is  trying  to  express  itself,  and  circumstances  are  hold- 
ing it  down,  the  environments  will  not  allow  it  to  ex- 
press itself.  So,  in  order  to  fight  with  these  environ- 
ments, the  power  is  getting  newer  and  newer  bodies. 
A  little  amoeba,  in  the  struggle,  gets  another  body  and 
conquers  some  obstacles,  then  gets  other  bodies,  until 
it  becomes  man.  Now  if  we  carry  that  logic  to  its 
conclusion,  there  must  come  a  time  when  that  power 
that  was  in  the  amoeba  and  which  came  out  as  man 
will  have  conquered  all  the  obstructions  that  nature 
can  bring  before  it,  and  will  have  escaped  from  all  its 
environments.  This  idea  brought  into  metaphysics 
would  be  expressed  thus :  there  are  two  components  of 
every  action,  the  one  the  subject,  the  other  the  object. 
For  instance,  I  feel  unhappy  because  a  man  scolds  me. 


THE   ABSOLUTE   AND   MANIFESTATION  II 5 

These  are  the  two  parts;  and  what  is  my  struggle  all 
my  life?  To  make  myself  strong  enough  to  conquer 
that  environment,  so  that  he  may  scold  and  I  shall  not 
feel.  That  is  how  we  are  trying  to  conquer.  What  is 
meant  by  morality?  Making  the  subject  strong,  inur- 
ing ourselves  to  the  hardships  of  temptation  until  it 
ceases  to  have  power  over  us  and  it  is  a  logical  con- 
clusion of  our  philosophy,  that  there  must  come  a  time 
when  we  shall  have  conquered  all  environments,  be- 
cause Nature  is  finite. 

That  is  another  thing  to  learn.  How  do  you  know 
that  Nature  is  finite  ?  You  can  only  know  this  through 
metaphysics.  Nature  is  that  infinite  under  limitations. 
Therefore  it  is  finite.  So  there  must  come  a  time  when 
we  have  conquered  all  environments.  And  how  are 
we  to  conquer  them  ?  We  cannot  possibly  conquer  all 
the  objective  environments.  No.  The  little  fish  wants 
to  fly  from  its  enemies  which  are  in  the  water.  How 
does  it  conquer?  By  flying  up  into  the  air,  becoming 
a  bird.  The  fish  did  not  change  the  water,  or  the  air ; 
the  change  was  in  itself.  Change  is  always  subjec- 
tive. So  on,  all  through  evolution  you  find  that  the 
conquest  of  nature  comes  by  change  in  the  subjective. 
Apply  this  to  religion,  and  morality,  and  you  will  find 
that  the  conquest  of  evil  comes  by  the  change  in  the 
subjective  also.  That  is  how  the  Advaita  system  gets 
its  whole  force,  on  the  subjective  side  of  man.  To  talk 
of  evil  and  misery  is  nonsense,  because  they  do  not 
exist  outside.  If  I  am  inured  against  all  anger,  I  never 
feel  angry.  If  I  am  proof  against  all  hatred,  I  never 
feel  hatred,  because  it  cannot  touch  me. 

This  is  therefore  the  process  by  which  to  achieve 


Il6  J  NANA   YOGA 

that  conquest — ^through  the  subjective,  by  perfecting 
the  subjective.  Therefore,  you  find  one  more  thing, 
that  the  only  rehgion,  I  may  make  bold  to  say,  which 
agrees  with  and  even  goes  a  little  further  than  modern 
researches,  both  on  physical  and  moral  lines,  is  the 
Advaita,  and  that  is  why  it  appeals  to  modern  scien- 
tists so  much.  They  find  that  the  old  dualistic  theories 
are  not  enough  for  them,  do  not  satisfy  their  necessi- 
ties. A  man  must  not  only  have  faith,  but  intellectual 
faith  too.  Now,  in  this  latter  part  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  such  ideas  as  that  a  religion  coming  from  any 
other  source  than  one's  own  forefather's  religion  must 
be  false,  show  that  there  is  still  weakness  left,  and 
such  ideas  must  be  given  up.  I  do  not  mean  that  it  is 
in  this  country  alone,  but  in  every  country,  and  no- 
where more  than  in  my  own.  This  Advaita  was  never 
allowed  to  come  to  the  people.  At  first  some  monks 
got  hold  of  it,  and  took  it  to  the  forests,  and  so  it 
came  to  be  called  the  Forest  Philosophy.  By  the 
mercy  of  the  Lord,  the  Buddha  came  and  preached  it 
to  the  masses,  and  the  whole  nation  arose  to  Buddh- 
ism. Long  after  that,  when  atheists  and  agnostics 
had  destroyed  the  nation  again,  the  old  preachers  found 
out  that  Advaita  was  the  only  thing  to  save  India  from 
materialism. 

Twice  has  Advaita  saved  India  from  materialism. 
Just  before  the  Buddha  came,  when  materialism  had 
spread  to  a  fearful  extent,  and  it  was  of  a  most  hideous 
kind,  not  like  that  of  the  present  day  but  of  a  far 
worse  nature.  I  am  a  materialist  of  a  certain  kind, 
because  I  believe  that  there  is  only  One.  That  is  what 
the  materialist  wants  to  tell  you,  only  he  calls  it  matter 


THE    ABSOLUTE   AND    MANIFESTATION  II7 

and  I  call  it  God.  The  materialists  admit  that  out  of 
this  one  matter,  all  hope,  and  religion,  and  everything 
have  come.  I  say  that  all  these  have  come  out  of 
Brahman.  I  allude  to  the  old  crude  sort  of  material- 
ism— eat,  drink  and  be  merry;  there  is  neither  God, 
nor  soul,  nor  heaven ;  religion  is  a  concoction  of  wicked 
priests ;  the  materialism  which  said  to  man :  "As  long 
as  you  live,  try  to  live  happily;  eat,  though  you  may 
have  to  borrow  money  for  it,  and  never  mind  about 
repaying."  That  was  the  old  materialism,  and  that 
kind  of  philosophy  spread  so  much  that  even  to-day 
it  has  got  the  name  of  "popular  philosophy."  Buddha 
brought  the  Vedanta  out,  gave  it  to  the  people  and 
saved  India.  Then  a  thousand  years  after  his  death 
a  similar  state  of  things  prevailed;  the  mobs,  the 
masses,  and  the  various  races,  had  been  converted  to 
Buddhism,  and  naturally  the  teachings  of  the  Buddha 
became  in  time  degenerated  because  most  of  these 
people  were  very  ignorant.  Buddhism  taught  no  God, 
no  Ruler  of  the  universe,  so  gradually  the  masses 
brought  their  gods,  and  devils,  and  hobgoblins,  out 
again,  and  a  tremendous  hotch-potch  was  made  of 
Buddhism  in  India.  Then  again  Materialism  came  to 
the  fore,  taking  the  form  of  license  with  the  higher 
classes,  and  superstition  with  the  lower,  when  San- 
karacharya  arose,  and  once  more  revivified  the  Vedan- 
ta philosophy.  He  made  it  a  rationalistic  philosophy. 
In  the  Upanishads  the  arguments  are  often  very 
obscure.  By  Buddha  the  moral  side  of  the  philosophy 
was  emphasized,  and  by  Sankaracharya,  the  intellec- 
tual side.  He  collected  all  the  obscure  and  apparently 
contradictory  texts  of  the  Upanishads  and  showed  the 


Il8  J  NANA   YOGA 

harmony  between  them.     He  worked  out,  rationalized 
and  placed  before  men  a  wonderful,  coherent  whole. 

Materialism  prevails  in  Europe  to-day.  You  may 
pray  all  the  world  over  for  the  salvation  of  these 
sceptics,  but  they  do  not  yield,  they  want  reason. 
The  salvation  of  Europe  depends  on  a  rationalistic 
religion,  and  Advaita — the  non-duality,  the  Oneness, 
the  idea  of  the  impersonal  God — is  the  only  religion 
that  can  keep  any  hold  on  intellectual  people.  It 
comes  whenever  religion  seems  to  disappear,  and  irre- 
ligion  seems  to  prevail,  and  that  is  why  it  is  gaining 
ground  in  Europe  and  America.  One  thing  more  has 
to  be  added  to  it.  In  the  old  Upanishads  we  find 
sublime  poetry;  these  "Seers  of  Truth"  were  poets. 
Plato  says,  inspiration  comes  to  people  through  poetry, 
and  it  seemed  as  if  these  ancient  Rishis  were  raised 
above  humanity  to  show  these  truths  through  poetry. 
They  never  preached,  nor  philosophized,  nor  wrote. 
Strains  of  music  came  out  of  their  lips.  In  Buddha 
we  had  the  great,  universal  heart,  infinite  patience 
making  religion  practical,  bringing  it  to  every  one's 
door;  in  Sankaracharya  we  saw  tremendous  intellec- 
tual power,  throwing  the  scorching  light  of  reason 
over  everything.  We  want  to-day  that  bright  sun  of 
intellectuality,  and  joined  to  it  the  heart  of  Buddha, 
that  wonderful,  infinite  heart  of  love  and  mercy.  This 
union  will  give  us  the  highest  philosophy.  Science 
and  religion  will  meet  and  shake  hands.  Poetry  and 
philosophy  will  become  friends.  This  will  be  the 
religion  of  the  future,  and  if  we  can  work  it  out,  we 
may  be  sure  that  it  will  be  for  all  times  and  profes- 
sions.    This  is  the  one  way  that  will  be  acceptable 


THE    ABSOLUTE   AND    MANIFESTATION  II9 

to  modern  science,  for  it  has  almost  fallen  into  it. 
When  a  great  scientific  teacher  asserts  that  all  things 
are  the  manifestation  of  one  force,  does  it  not  remind 
you  of  the  God  of  whom  you  hear  in  the  Upanishads : 
"As  the  one  fire  entering  into  the  universe  is  express- 
ing itself  in  various  forms,  and  yet  is  infinitely  more 
besides,  even  so  that  one  Soul  is  expressing  itself  in 
every  soul  and  yet  is  infinitely  more  besides."  Do 
you  not  see  how  science  is  going  ?  The  Hindu  nation 
proceeded  through  the  study  of  the  mind,  through 
metaphysics  and  logic.  The  European  nations  start 
from  external  nature,  and  now  they^  too,  are  coming 
to  the  same  results.  We  find  that  searching  through 
the  mind  we  at  last  come  to  that  Oneness,  that  Uni- 
versal One,  the  Internal  Soul  of  everything,  the 
Essence,  the  Reality  of  everything,  the  Ever-Free, 
the  Ever-Blissful,  the  Ever-Existing.  Through  mate- 
rial science  we  come  to  the  same  Oneness.  Science 
to-day  is  telling  us  that  all  things  are  but  the  mani- 
festation of  one  energy,  which  is  the  sum-total  of 
everything  which  exists,  and  the  trend  of  humanity  is 
towards  freedom,  and  not  towards  bondage.  Why 
should  men  be  moral?  Because  through  morality  is 
the  path  towards  freedom,  and  immorality  leads  to 
bondage. 

Another  peculiarity  of  the  Advaita  system  is  that 
from  its  very  start  it  is  non-destructive.  That  is 
another  glory,  that  boldness  to  preach :  "Do  not  disturb 
the  faith  of  any,  even  of  those  who  through  ignorance 
have  attached  themselves  to  lower  forms  of  worship." 
That  is  what  it  says :  "Do  not  disturb,  but  help  every 
one  to  get  higher  and  higher;  include  all  humanity." 


I20  J  NANA   YOGA 

This  philosophy  preaches  a  God  who  is  a  sum-total. 
If  you  seek  a  universal  religion  which  can  apply  to 
every  one,  that  religion  must  not  be  partial  and  one- 
sided, it  must  always  be  the  sum-total  and  be  able  to 
include  all  degrees  of  religious  development. 

This  idea  is  not  clearly  found  in  any  other  religious 
system.  They  are  all  parts  which  have  not  yet 
grasped  the  idea  of  absolute  Unity.  The  existence  of 
the  part  is  merely  for  this,  that  it  is  always  struggling 
to  attain  to  the  whole.  So,  from  the  very  first  Advaita 
had  no  antagonism  with  the  various  sects  existing  in 
India.  There  are  dualists  existing  to-day,  and  their 
number  is  by  far  the  largest  in  India,  because  dualism 
naturally  appeals  to  less  educated  minds.  It  is  a  very 
handy,  natural,  common-sense  explanation  of  the  uni- 
verse. But  with  these  dualists,  Advaita  has  no  quarrel. 
The  one  thinks  the  God  of  the  universe  is  outside  the 
universe,  somewhere  in  heaven,  and  the  other  that 
the  God  of  the  universe  is  his  own  soul,  and  that  it 
would  be  a  blasphemy  to  call  Him  anything  more 
distant.  Any  idea  of  separation  would  be  terrible. 
We  can  only  be  the  nearest  of  the  near.  There  are 
not  words  in  any  language  to  express  this  nearness, 
except  this  one  word — Oneness.  With  any  other  idea 
the  Advaitist  is  frightened,  just  as  the  dualist  is 
frightened  with  the  concept  of  the  Advaita,  and  thinks 
it  blasphemy.  At  the  same  time  the  Advaitist  knows 
why  these  other  ideas  must  be  and  so  has  no  quarrel 
with  the  dualist ;  the  latter  is  on  the  right  road.  From 
his  standpoint,  as  soon  as  he  looks  from  the  part,  he 
will  have  to  see  many.  Any  view  of  God  looked  at 
from  a  part  of  this  universe  can  only  be  that  project- 


THE   ABSOLUTE   AND    MANIFESTATION  121 

ing  outside.  It  is  the  constitutional  necessity  of  the 
duaHstic  standpoint.  Let  them  have  it.  The  Advai- 
tist  knows  that  whatever  may  be  their  defects  or 
mistakes,  they  are  all  going  to  the  same  goal.  There 
he  differs  entirely  from  the  dualist,  who  is  forced  by 
his  very  point  of  view  to  believe  that  all  opposing 
views  are  wrong.  The  dualists  all  the  world  over 
naturally  believe  in  a  personal  God  who  is  purely 
anthropomorphic;  and  just  as  a  great  potentate  here 
is  pleased  with  some  and  displeased  with  others,  the 
same  idea  attaches  to  the  personal  God  of  the  dualist. 
He  is  arbitrarily  pleased  with  some  person,  or  race, 
and  showers  blessings  upon  them.  Naturally  the 
dualist  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  God  has  certain 
favorites,  and  hopes  to  be  one  of  them.  You  will 
find  in  almost  every  religion  the  idea  that  "we  are 
the  favorites  of  our  God,  and  only  by  believing  as 
we  do  can  you  be  taken  into  favor  with  Him."  Some 
dualists  are  so  narrow  as  to  insist  that  only  the  few 
who  have  been  predestined  to  the  favor  of  that  God 
can  be  saved,  the  rest  may  try  ever  so  hard,  but  they 
cannot  come  in.  I  challenge  you  to  show  one  dualistic 
rehgion  which  has  not  more  or  less  of  this  exclusive- 
ness.  And  because  of  it,  they  are  in  the  nature  of 
things  bound  to  fight  and  quarrel  with  each  other, 
and  this  they  have  ever  been  doing.  Again,  these 
dualists  win  popular  favor,  for  the  vanity  of  the  unedu- 
cated is  appealed  to.  They  like  to  feel  that  they 
enjoy  exclusive  privileges.  The  dualist  thinks  you 
cannot  have  morality  until  you  have  a  God  with  a 
rod  in  his  hand,  ready  to  punish  you.  The  unthinking 
masses  are  generally  dualists,  and  they,  poor  fellows, 


122  J  NANA   YOGA 

have  been  persecuted  for  thousands  of  years  in  every 
country,  therefore  their  idea  of  salvation  is  absence 
from  the  fear  of  punishment.  I  have  been  asked  by 
a  clergyman  in  America:  "What,  no  devil  in  your 
religion?  How  can  that  be?"  But,  on  the  other 
hand,  we  find  that  the  best  and  greatest  men  that 
have  been  born  in  the  world  have  worked  with  that 
high  impersonal  idea.  It  is  the  Man  who  says  in  the 
New  Testament,  "I  and  my  Father  are  One,"  whose 
power  descends  unto  millions.  For  thousands  of 
years  it  has  worked  for  good.  And  we  know  that  the 
same  Man,  because  he  was  a  non-dualist,  was  merciful 
to  others.  To  the  masses  who  cannot  conceive  of 
anything  higher  than  a  personal  God,  he  says :  "Pray 
to  your  Father  in  heaven."  To  others,  who  could 
grasp  a  higher  idea,  he  said:  "I  am  the  Vine,  ye  are 
the  branches ;"  but  to  his  disciples  to  whom  he  revealed 
himself  more  fully  he  proclaimed  the  highest  truth: 
"I  and  my  Father  are  One." 

It  was  the  great  Buddha,  in  India,  who  never  cared 
for  the  dualist  gods,  and  who  has  been  called  an 
atheist  and  a  materialist,  who  yet  was  ready  to  give 
up  his  body  for  a  poor  goat.  That  man  set  in  motion 
the  highest  moral  ideas  any  nation  can  have.  .Wher- 
ever there  is  a  moral  code,  it  is  a  ray  of  light  from 
that  man.  We  cannot  force  the  great  hearts  of  the 
world  into  little  narrow  limits  and  keep  them  there, 
especially  at  this  time  in  the  history  of  humanity, 
when  there  is  a  degree  of  intellectual  development 
such  as  was  never  dreamed  of,  even  a  hundred  years 
ago;  a  wave  of  scientific  knowledge  which  nobody, 
even  fifty  years  ago,  would  have  dreamed  of.    Do 


THE   ABSOLUTE  AND    MANIFESTATION  I23 

you  want  to  kill  people  by  forcing  them  into  narrow 
limits?  It  is  impossible  until  you  degrade  them  into 
animals  and  unthinking  masses.  What  is  now  wanted 
is  a  combination  of  the  highest  intellectuality  with  the 
greatest  heart  expansion,  infinite  love  and  infinite 
knowledge.  The  Vedantist  gives  no  other  attribute 
to  God  except  these  three,  that  He  is  Infinite  Exist- 
ence, Infinite  Knowledge,  Infinite  Bliss ;  and  he  regards 
these  three  as  One.  Existence  without  knowledge  and 
love  cannot  be.  Knowledge  without  love  cannot  be, 
and  Love  without  knowledge  cannot  be.  That  is  what 
we  want,  that  harmony  of  Existence,  Knowledge  and 
Bliss.  Infinite.  Our  goal  is  that  perfection  of  Exist- 
ence, Knowledge,  and  Bliss.  We  want  harmony,  not 
one-sided  development.  It  is  possible  to  have  the 
intellect  of  a  Sankara  with  the  heart  of  a  Buddha, 
and  I  hope  we  shall  all  struggle  to  attain  to  that 
blessed  combination. 


VIII 

UNITY  IN  DIVERSITY 

"The  Self -Existent  One  projected  the  senses  out- 
wards and  therefore  a  man  looks  outward,  not  within 
himself.  A  certain  wise  one,  desiring  immortality, 
with  inverted  senses  perceived  the  Self  within."  As 
we  have  been  saying,  the  first  inquiry  that  we  find 
in  the  Samhita,  and  in  the  other  books,  was  concerning 
outward  things,  and  then  a  new  idea  came,  that  the 
reality  of  things  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  external 
world ;  not  by  looking  out,  as  it  were,  but  by  turning 
the  eyes,  as  it  is  literally  expressed,  inwards.  And 
the  word  used  for  the  soul  is  very  significant,  it  is 
"He  who  has  gone  inward,"  the  innermost  reality  of 
our  being,  the  heart  centre,  the  core,  from  which,  as 
it  were,  everything  comes  out;  the  central  sun,  of 
which  the  mind,  the  body,  the  sense  organs,  and 
everything  else  that  we  have,  are  but  rays  going  out- 
wards. "Men  of  childish  intellect,  ignorant  persons, 
run  after  desires,  which  are  external,  and  enter  the 
trap  of  far-reaching  death,  but  the  wise,  understanding 
immortality,  never  seek  for  the  eternal  in  this  life  of 
finite  things."  The  same  idea  is  here  made  clear, 
that  in  this  external  world,  which  is  full  of  finite  things, 
it  is  impossible  to  see  and  find  the  Infinite.  The 
Infinite  must  alone  be  sought  in  that  which  is  infinite, 

124 


UNITY   IN   DIVERSITY  125 

and  the  only  thing  infinite  about  us  is  that  which  is 
within  us,  our  own  soul.  Neither  the  body,  nor  the 
mind,  nor  the  world  we  see  around  us,  not  even  our 
thoughts,  are  infinite.  They  all  have  beginning  in 
time  and  finish  in  time.  The  Seer,  He  to  whom  they 
all  belong,  the  soul  of  man.  He  who  is  awake  in  the 
internal  man,  alone  is  infinite,  and  to  seek  for  the 
infinite  cause  of  this  whole  universe  we  must  go  there ; 
in  the  infinite  soul  alone  can  we  find  it.  ''What  is 
here  is  there  too,  and  what  is  there  is  here  also.  He 
who  sees  the  manifold  is  going  from  death  to  death." 
We  have  seen  how  at  first  there  was  the  desire  to  go 
to  heaven.  When  these  ancient  Aryans  became  dis- 
satisfied with  the  world  around  them  naturally  they 
thought  that  after  death  they  would  go  to  some  place 
where  there  would  be  all  happiness  without  any  mis- 
eries ;  these  places  they  multiplied  and  called  Svargas — 
the  word  may  be  translated  as  heavens — where  there 
would  be  joy  for  ever ;  the  body  would  become  perfect, 
and  also  the  mind,  and  there  they  would  live  with  their 
forefathers.  But  as  soon  as  philosophy  came,  men 
found  that  this  was  impossible  and  absurd.  The  very 
idea  of  an  infinite  in  place  would  be  a  contradiction 
in  terms.  A  place  must  begin  and  continue  in  time, 
therefore  they  had  to  give  that  up.  They  found  out 
that  the  gods  who  lived  in  these  heavens  had  once 
been  human  beings  on  earth,  and  through  their  good 
works,  or  something  else,  had  become  gods,  and  the 
godhoods,  as  they  called  them,  were  different  states, 
different  positions;  none  of  the  gods  spoken  of  in 
the  Vedas  are  permanent  individuals. 

For  instance,  Indra  and  Varuna  are  not  the  names 


126  JNANA   YOGA 

of  certain  persons,  but  the  names  of  conditions,  as 
governors  and  so  on.  The  Indra  who  had  been  before 
is  not  the  same  person  as  the  Indra  of  the  present 
day ;  according  to  them,  he  has  passed  away,  and 
another  man  from  earth  has  gone  up  and  filled  the 
place  of  Indra.  So  with  all  the  gods.  They  are  cer- 
tain positions,  which  are  filled  successively  by  human 
souls,  who  have  raised  themselves  to  the  condition  of 
gods,  and  yet — even  they  die.  In  the  old  Rig  Veda 
we  find  the  word  immortality  used  with  regard  to 
these  gods,  but  later  on  it  is  dropped  entirely,  for  they 
found  that  immortality,  which  is  beyond  time  and 
space,  cannot  be  spoken  of  with  regard  to  any  physical 
form,  however  subtle  it  may  be.  However  fine  it  may 
be  it  must  have  a  beginning  in  time  and  space,  for 
the  necessary  factors  that  enter  into  the  production 
of  form  are  in  space.  Try  to  think  of  having  form 
without  space;  it  is  impossible.  Space  is  one  of  the 
materials,  as  it  were,  which  makes  up  the  form,  and 
this  is  continually  changing.  Space  and  time  are  in 
Maya,  and  this  idea  is  related  in  the  line — "What  is 
here,  that  is  there  too."  If  there  are  these  gods  they 
must  be  bound  by  the  same  laws  that  apply  here,  and 
the  one  end  of  all  laws,  in  their  development,  involves 
destruction  and  renewal  again  and  again.  These  laws 
are  taking  the  whole  of  matter  to  pieces,  as  it  were 
moulding  out  of  it  different  forms,  and  inversely 
crushing  them  out  into  matter  again.  Everything  born 
must  die,  and  so,  if  there  are  heavens,  the  same  laws 
must  hold  good  there. 

In  this  world  we  find  that  all  happiness  is  followed 
by  some  sort  of  misery  as  its  shadow.     Life  has  its 


UNITY   IN   DIVERSITY  12/ 

shadow  death.  They  must  go  together,  because  they 
are  not  contradictory,  not  two  separate  existences,  but 
different  manifestations  of  the  same  unit  factor,  life 
and  death,  sorrow  and  happiness,  good  and  evil.  The 
dualistic  conception  that  good  and  evil  are  two  separate 
identities,  and  that  they  are  both  going  on  eternally, 
is  absurd  on  the  face  of  it.  They  are  the  diverse  man- 
ifestations of  one  and  the  same  fact,  at  one  time 
appearing  as  bad,  and  at  another  time  as  good.  The 
difference  does  not  exist  in  kind,  but  only  in  degree. 
They  differ  from  each  other  in  degree  of  intensity. 
We  find  as  a  fact  that  the  same  nerve  systems  carry 
good  and  bad  sensations  alike,  and  when  the  nerves 
are  injured  neither  sensation  comes  to  us.  If  a  certain 
nerve  is  paralyzed,  we  do  not  get  the  pleasurable 
feelings  that  used  to  come  along  that  wire,  and  at 
the  same  time  we  do  not  get  the  painful  feelings 
either.  They  are  never  two,  but  the  same.  Again, 
the  same  thing  produces  pleasure  and  pain  at  different 
times  of  life.  The  same  phenomenon  will  produce 
pleasure  in  one,  and  give  pain  to  another.  The  eating 
of  meat  produces  pleasure  to  the  man,  but  pain  to  the 
animal  which  is  being  eaten.  There  has  never  been 
anything  which  has  pleased  every  one  alike.  Some 
are  pleased,  others  displeased.  So  it  goes  on.  There- 
fore, on  the  face  of  it,  this  duality  of  existence  is 
denied,  and  what  follows  from  this?  I  told  you  in 
my  last  lecture  that  we  can  never  ultimately  have 
everything  good  on  this  earth  and  nothing  bad.  This 
may  have  disappointed  and  frightened  some,  but  I 
cannot  help  it  and  I  am  open  to  conviction  when 
I   am   shown   the   contrary;   but   until   that   can   be 


128  J  NANA  YOGA 

proved  to  me,  and  I  can  find  that  it  is  true,  I  cannot 
say  so. 

The  general  argument  against  my  statement  and 
apparently  a  very  convincing  one,  is  this,  that  in  the 
course  of  evolution,  all  that  is  evil  in  what  we  see 
around  us  is  gradually  being  eliminated,  and  the  result 
is  that  if  this  elimination  continues  after  millions  of 
years  a  time  will  come  when  all  the  evil  will  have 
been  eliminated,  and  the  good  alone  will  remain.  This 
is  apparently  a  very  sound  argument,  would  to  God  it 
were  true,  but  there  is  a  fallacy,  and  it  is  this,  that  it 
takes  for  granted  that  good  and  evil  both  are  quantities 
that  are  eternally  fixed.  It  takes  for  granted  that 
there  is  a  definite  mass  of  evil  which  may  be  repre- 
sented by  100,  and  likewise  of  good,  and  that  this 
mass  of  evil  is  being  diminished  every  day,  leaving 
only  the  good  remaining.  But  is  this  so?  The  his- 
tory of  the  world  shows  that  evil  is  a  continuously 
increasing  quantity  as  well  as  good.  Take  the  lowest 
man;  he  lives  in  the  forest.  His  sense  of  enjoyment 
is  very  small,  and  so  also  is  his  power  to  suffer.  His 
misery  is  entirely  on  this  sense  plane.  If  he  does  not 
get  plenty  of  food  he  is  miserable,  give  him  plenty  of 
food  and  freedom  to  rove  and  to  hunt,  and  he  is  per- 
fectly happy.  His  happiness  consists  only  in  the 
senses,  and  his  misery  also.  See  that  man  increasing 
in  knowledge;  his  happiness  is  increasing,  intellect 
is  opening  to  him,  sense  enjoyment  is  evolving  into 
intellectual  enjoyment.  He  now  feels  wonderful 
pleasure  in  reading  a  beautiful  poem.  A  mathematical 
problem  takes  up  his  whole  life,  and  he  is  absorbed 
in  the  intense  pleasure  of  it.     But,  with  that,  the  finer 


UNITY   IN    DIVERSITY  1 29 

nerves  are  becoming  more  and  more  susceptible  to 
intense  miseries  of  which  the  savage  did  not  think, 
and  he  suffers  mental  pain.  The  sense  of  separation 
when  the  husband  does  not  love  the  wife,  quarrels, 
and  in  a  dozen  things  intense  desires  seize  upon  him, 
causing  pain  which  was  unknown  to  the  savage.  Take 
a  very  simple  illustration.  In  Thibet  there  is  no  mar- 
riage, and  there  is  no  jealousy;  yet  we  know  that 
marriage  is  a  much  higher  state.  The  Thibetans  have 
not  known  the  wonderful  enjoyment,  the  blessing  of 
chastity,  the  happiness  of  having  a  chaste,  virtuous 
wife,  and  a  chaste,  virtuous  husband.  These  people 
cannot  feel  that.  And  similarly  they  do  not  feel  the 
intense  jealousy  of  the  unchaste  wife  or  husband,  of 
unfaithfulness  on  either  side,  with  all  the  heart-burn- 
ings and  miseries  which  believers  in  chastity  experi- 
ence. On  one  side  the  latter  gain  happiness,  but  on  the 
other  they  gain  misery  too. 

Take  your  country,  which  is  the  richest  the  world 
ever  knew,  and  which  is  more  luxurious  than  any 
other  country,  and  see  how  intense  is  the  misery,  how 
many  more  lunatics  you  have,  compared  with  other 
races,  only  because  the  desires  are  so  keen.  A  man 
must  keep  up  a  high  standard.  The  amount  of  money 
you  spend  in  one  year  would  be  a  fortune  to  a  man  in 
India,  and  you  cannot  preach  to  him  because  the  sur- 
roundings are  such,  that  that  man  must  have  so  much 
money  or  he  is  crushed.  The  wheel  of  society  is 
rolling  on;  it  stops  not  for  widows'  tears  or  orphans' 
wails.  You  must  move  on,  or  you  will  be  crushed 
under  it.  That  is  the  state  of  things  everywhere. 
Your  sense  of  enjoyment  is  developed,  your  society 


.130  J  NANA   YOGA 

is  very  much  more  beautiful  than  some  others.  You 
have  so  many  more  things  to  enjoy.  But  those  who 
have  fewer  have  much  less  misery  than  you  have  in 
this  country.  You  can  argue  thus  throughout.  The 
higher  the  ideal  you  have  in  the  brain,  the  greater  is 
your  enjoyment,  and  the  more  profound  your  misery. 
One  is  like  the  shadow  of  the  other,  so  to  say;  that 
evils  are  being  eliminated  may  be  true,  but  if  so,  the 
good  also  must  be  dying  out.  But  are  not  evils  multi- 
plying fast,  and  diminishing  on  the  other  side,  if  I 
may  so  put  it?  If  good  increases  in  arithmetical  pro- 
portion, evil  increases  in  geometrical  proportion.  And 
this  is  Maya.  It  means  that  it  is  neither  optimism 
nor  pessimism.  It  is  not  the  position  of  Vedanta  that 
this  world  is  a  miserable  world.  That  would  be  a 
lie.  At  the  same  time  we  say  it  is  not  true,  it  is  a 
mistake  to  say  that  this  world  is  full  of  happiness 
and  blessings.  So  it  is  useless  to  tell  children  that 
this  world  is  all  good,  all  flowers,  and  milk  and  honey. 
That  is  what  we  have  all  dreamed.  At  the  same  time 
it  is  erroneous  to  think  because  one  man  has  suffered 
more  than  another  that  all  is  evil.  It  is  this  duality, 
this  play  of  good  and  evil,  that  misleads  us.  We 
must  always  remember  the  warning  of  Vedanta  not 
to  think  that  good  and  evil  are  two,  not  to  believe 
that  good  and  evil  are  two  separate  essences,  for 
they  are  one  and  the  same  thing  appearing  in  different 
degrees  and  in  different  guises,  and  producing  differ- 
ences of  feeling  in  the  same  mind.  So,  the  first 
thought  of  Vedanta  is  the  finding  of  unity  in  the 
external,  the  One  Existence  manifesting  Itself,  how- 
ever different  It  may  appear  in  manifestation.   Think 


UNITY   IN   DIVERSITY  I3I 

of  the  old  crude  theories  of  the  Persians — two  gods 
creating  this  world.  The  good  god  doing  everything 
that  is  pleasurable,  and  the  bad  one  everything  else. 
On  the  very  face  of  it  you  find  the  absurdity,  for  if 
it  be  carried  out  every  law  of  nature  must  have  two 
parts,  and  this  law  of  nature  is  sometimes  manipulated 
by  one  god,  and  then  he  goes  away  and  the  other  man- 
ipulates it.  It  is  the  law  of  Unity  that  gives  us  our 
food,  and  the  same  law  kills  many  men  through  acci- 
dents or  misadventure.  Then  the  difficulty  comes, 
that  both  are  working  at  the  same  time,  and  these  two 
gods  keep  themselves  in  harmony,  by  injuring  one  and 
doing  good  to  another.  This  was  a  crude  case,  of 
course,  the  crudest  way  of  expressing  the  duality  of 
existence.  But  then,  take  the  more  advanced  philoso- 
phy, the  abstract  cases,  of  telling  people  that  this  world 
is  partly  good  and  partly  bad.  This  again  is  absurd, 
arguing  from  the  same  standpoint. 

As  such,  we  find  first  of  all  that  this  world  is  neither 
optimistic  nor  pessimistic ;  it  is  a  mixture  of  both,  and 
as  we  go  on  we  shall  find  that  the  whole  blame  is 
taken  out  of  the  hands  of  nature  and  put  upon  us. 
And  again,  the  Vedanta  offers  a  great  hope.  It  is  not 
a  denial  of  evil ;  it  analyzes  boldly  the  fact  as  it  is, 
and  does  not  seek  to  conceal  anything.  It  is  not  hope- 
less; it  is  not  agnostic.  It  finds  out  a  remedy,  but  it 
wants  to  place  that  remedy  on  adamantine  foundations, 
not  by  shutting  the  child's  mouth  and  blinding  its 
eyes  with  something  which  is  transparently  untrue, 
and  which  the  child  will  find  out  in  a  few  days.  I 
remember  when  I  was  a  young  child,  a  young  man's 
father  died  and  left  him  poor,  and  with  a  large  family 


132  J  NANA   YOGA 

to  support.  He  found  that  his  father's  friends  were 
his  worst  enemies  in  reaHty,  and  one  day  he  had  a 
conversation  with  a  clergyman  who  offered  this  con- 
solation, "Oh,  it  is  all  good,  all  is  sent  for  our  good." 
That  is  the  old  method  of  trying  to  put  a  piece  of 
gold  cloth  on  an  old  sore.  It  is  a  confession  of  weak- 
ness, of  absurdity.  Then  this  young  man  went  away, 
and  six  months  afterw^ards  the  clergyman  had  a  son 
born,  and  the  young  man  was  invited  to  the  party  for 
thanksgiving.  Then  the  clergyman  began  to  pray, 
"Thank  God  for  His  mercies."  And  the  young  man 
stood  up  and  said,  "Stop;  this  is  all  misery."  The 
clergyman  asked  why.  "Because  when  my  father  died 
it  was  all  good,  though  apparently  evil;  so  now  this 
is  apparently  good,  but  really  evil."  Is  this  the  way 
to  cure  the  misery  of  the  world?  Be  good  and  have 
mercy  to  those  who  suffer.  Do  not  try  to  patch  it 
up,  nothing  will  cure  this  world;  go  beyond  it. 

This  world  is  a  world  of  good  and  evil  always. 
Wherever  there  is  good,  evil  follows,  but  beyond  and 
behind  all  the  manifestation,  all  the  contradiction,  the 
Vedanta  finds  that  Unity.  It  says  give  up  what  is 
evil  and  give  up  what  is  good.  What  then  remains? 
It  says  good  and  evil  are  not  all  we  have.  Behind 
these  stands  something  which  is  yours,  the  real  you, 
beyond  every  evil,  and  beyond  every  good  too,  and  it 
is  that  which  is  manifesting  itself  as  good  and  bad. 
Know  that  first,  and  then,  and  then  alone,  you  will  be 
an  optimist;  and  not  before;  for  you  will  then  control 
the  whole  thing.  Control  these  manifestations  and 
then  you  will  be  at  liberty  to  manifest  the  real  "you" 
just  as  you  hke.     Then  alone  you  will  be  able  to 


UNITY   IN   DIVERSITY  1 33 

manifest  it  only  as  good,  or  only  as  evil,  just  as  you 
like;  but  be  first  master  of  yourself,  stand  up  and  be 
free ;  go  beyond  the  pale  of  these  laws,  for  these  laws 
do  not  absolutely  govern  you,  they  are  only  part  of 
your  being.  First  find  out  that  you  are  not  the  slave 
of  nature,  never  were  and  never  will  be;  that  this 
nature,  infinite  as  you  may  think  it,  is  only  finite,  but 
one  drop  in  the  ocean,  and  your  nature  is  as  the  ocean ; 
you  are  beyond  the  stars,  or  the  sun,  or  the  moon. 
They  are  like  mere  bubbles  compared  with  your  infinite 
being.  Know  that  and  you  will  control  both  good  and 
evil.  Then  alone  the  whole  vision  will  change  and 
you  will  stand  up  and  say,  how  beautiful  is  good  and 
how  wonderful  is  evil. 

That  is  what  the  Vedanta  teaches  you  to  do.  It 
does  not  propose  any  slipshod  remedy  by  covering 
things  over  with  gold  paper,  and  the  more  the  wound 
festers  putting  on  the  more  gold  paper.  This  life  is 
a  hard  fact;  work  out  of  it  if  you  can,  boldly,  though 
it  may  be  adamantine;  no  matter,  the  soul  is  greater. 
It  lays  no  responsibility  on  little  gods;  but  you  are 
the  makers  of  your  fortunes.  You  make  yourselves 
suffer,  you  make  good  and  evil,  and  it  is  you  who  put 
your  hands  before  your  eyes  and  say  it  is  dark.  Hands 
off  and  see  the  light ;  you  are  effulgent,  you  are  perfect 
already,  from  the  very  beginning.  We  understand 
it  now.  "He  goes  from  death  to  death  who  sees  the 
many  here.     See  that  One  and  be  free." 

How  are  we  to  see  it?  Nay,  even  this  very  mind, 
so  deluded,  so  weak,  so  easily  led,  even  this  mind  can 
be  strong  and  may  catch  a  glimpse  of  that  knowledge, 
that  Oneness,  and  then  it  saves  us  from  dying  again 


134  J  NAN  A   YOGA 

and  again.  "As  water  which  falls  upon  a  mountain 
breaks  into  pieces,  and  in  many  various  streams  runs 
down  the  sides  of  the  mountain,  so  all  the  energies 
which  you  see  here  are  that  one  Unit  beginning."  It 
has  become  manifold  falling  upon  Maya.  Do  not  run 
after  the  manifold ;  go  towards  the  One.  "He  is  in 
all  that  moves ;  He  is  in  all  that  is  pure.  He  fills  the 
Universe;  He  is  in  the  sacrifice;  He  is  the  Guest  in 
the  house ;  He  is  in  man,  in  water,  in  animals,  in  truth ; 
He  is  the  Great  One ;  He  is  the  One  Fire  coming  into 
this  world.  He  is  manifesting  Himself  in  various 
forms.  Even  so  that  one  Soul  of  the  Universe  is  mani- 
festing Himself  in  all  these  various  forms.  As  the  one 
air  coming  into  this  universe  manifests  itself  in  various 
forms,  even  so  the  One  Soul  of  all  souls  of  all  beings, 
is  manifesting  Himself  in  all  forms."  This  is  true  for 
you  when  you  have  understood  this  Unity,  and  not 
before.  Then  all  is  optimism,  because  He  is  seen 
everywhere.  The  question  is,  that  if  all  this  be  true, 
that  that  Pure  One,  the  Self,  the  Infinite,  has  entered 
all  this,  how  is  it  that  He  suffers,  how  is  it  that  He 
becomes  miserable,  impure?  He  does  not,  says  the 
Upanishad.  "As  the  sun  is  the  cause  of  the  eye-sight 
of  every  being,  yet  is  not  made  defective  by  the  defect 
in  any  eye,  even  so  the  Self  of  all  is  not  affected  by 
the  miseries  of  the  body,  or  by  any  misery  that  is 
around  you."  I  may  have  some  disease,  and  see 
everything  yellow,  but  the  sun  is  not  affected.  "He 
is  the  One,  the  Creator  of  all,  the  Ruler  of  all,  the 
internal  Soul  of  every  being.  He  who  makes  His 
Oneness  manifold.  Thus  sages  who  realize  him  as 
the   Soul   of  their   souls,   unto  them  belong  eternal 


UNITY    IN    DIVERSITY  I35 

peace;  unto  none  else,  unto  none  else.  He  who  in 
this  world  of  evanescence  finds  Him  who  never 
changes,  he  who  in  this  universe  of  death  finds  that 
one  life,  he  who  in  this  manifold  finds  that  oneness, 
and  all  those  who  realize  Him  as  the  soul  of  their 
souls,  to  them  belongs  eternal  peace;  unto  none  else, 
unto  none  else.  Where  to  find  Him  in  the  external 
world,  where  to  find  Him  in  the  suns,  and  moons,  and 
stars?  There  the  sun  cannot  illumine,  nor  the  moon, 
nor  the  stars,  the  flash  of  lightning  cannot  illumine 
the  place ;  what  to  speak  of  this  mortal  fire.  He  shin- 
ing, everything  else  shines.  It  is  His  light  that  they 
have  borrowed,  and  He  is  shining  through  them.'* 
Here  is  another  beautiful  simile.  Those  of  you  who 
have  been  in  India  and  have  heard  of  the  Banyan  tree, 
how  it  comes  from  one  root,  and  spreads  far  around, 
will  understand.  He  is  that  Banyan  tree;  His  root 
is  above,  and  has  branched  out  until  it  has  become 
this  universe,  and  however  far  it  extends,  every  one 
of  these  trunks  and  branches  is  connected.  He  is  the 
root  of  all. 

Various  heavens  are  spoken  of  in  the  Brahmana 
portion  of  the  Vedas,  and  the  philosophical  teaching  of 
the  Upanishads  implies  giving  up  the  idea  of  going 
to  heaven.  All  the  work  is  not  in  this  heaven,  or 
that  heaven,  it  is  here  in  the  soul ;  places  do  not  sig-  ) 
nify  anything.  Here  is  another  passage  which  shows  j 
these  different  states.  "In  the  heaven  of  the  fore- 
fathers, as  a  man  sees  things  in  a  dream,  so  the  real 
truth  is  seen."  As  in  dreams  we  see  things  hazy  and 
indistinct,  so  we  see  things  there.  There  is  another 
heaven  called  the   Gandharva;  there  it  is   still   less 


136  J  NANA   YOGA 

distinct ;  as  a  man  sees  his  own  reflection  in  the  water, 
so  is  the  reaUty  seen  there.  The  highest  heaven 
that  the  Hindus  conceive  is  called  the  Brahmaloka, 
and  in  this  the  truth  is  seen  much  more  clearly  but 
not  yet  quite  distinctly,  like  light  and  shade;  but  as 
a  man  sees  his  own  face  in  a  mirror,  perfect,  dis- 
tinct, and  clear,  so  is  the  truth  shining  in  the  soul  of 
man.  The  highest  heaven,  therefore,  is  here  in  our 
own  souls,  the  greatest  temple  of  worship  is  the  human 
soul,  greater  than  all  heavens,  says  the  Vedanta,  for 
in  no  heaven  anywhere  can  we  understand  the  reality 
as  distinctly  and  clearly  as  here  in  this  life,  in  our 
own  soul.  You  may  change  places,  just  as  we  have 
seen.  I  have  thought  while  in  India  that  the  cave 
would  give  clearer  vision.  I  found  it  was  not  so. 
Then  I  thought  the  forest  would  be  better.  Then  I 
thought  Benares.  The  difficulty  exists  everywhere, 
because  we  make  our  own  worlds,  t  If  I  am  evil  the 
whole  world  is  evil  to  me.  That  is  what  the  Upanishad 
says.  And  the  same  thing  applies  to  all.  If  I  die 
and  go  to  heaven,  I  should  find  the  same.  Until  you 
are  pure  it  is  no  use  going  to  caves,  or  forests,  or  to 
Benares,  or  to  heaven;  and  if  you  have  polished  your 
mirror  it  does  not  matter  where  you  live,  you  get  the 
\  reality  just  as  it  is.  So  it  is  useless  work,  running 
hither  and  thither,  spending  energy  in  vain,  which 
should  be  spent  only  in  polishing  the  mirror.  The 
same  idea  is  expressed  again. 

"None  see  Him,  none  see  His  form  with  the  eyes. 
It  is  in  the  mind,  the  pure  mind.  He  is  seen,  and  thus 
immortality  is  gained."  Those  that  were  at  the  sum- 
mer lectures  on  Raja  Yoga  will  be  interested  to  know 


( 


UNITY   IN   DIVERSITY  137 

that  what  was  taught  then  was  a  different  kind  of 
Yoga.  Here  in  philosophy  there  is  also  a  Yoga,  but 
this  is  what  is  meant,  that  where  there  is  control  of 
all  our  senses,  when  these  are  held  as  slaves  by  the 
human  soul;  when  they  can  no  longer  disturb  his 
mind,  then  the  Yogin  has  reached  the  goal.  "When 
all  vain  desires  of  the  heart  have  been  thrown  out, 
then  this  very  mortal  becomes  immortal,  then  here 
he  becomes  one  with  God.  When  all  the  knots  of  the 
heart  are  cut  asunder,  then  the  mortal  becomes  immor- 
tal, and  he  enjoys  Brahman."  Here  on  earth,  nowhere 
else. 

A  few  words  ought  to  be  said  here.  Generally  you 
will  hear  that  this  Vedanta,  this  philosophy  and  these 
Eastern  systems  look  only  to  something  beyond,  letting 
go  the  enjoyments  and  struggles  of  this  life.  This 
idea  is  entirely  wrong.  Ignorant  people  who  do  not 
know  anything  of  Eastern  thought,  and  never  had 
brain  enough  among  them  all  to  understand  anything 
of  the  real  teaching,  tell  you  that  you  are  going  outside 
to  the  other  world.  On  the  other  hand,  we  read  in 
black  and  white  here  that  they  do  not  desire  to  go 
to  any  other  world,  but  depreciate  these  worlds  as 
places  where  people  weep  or  laugh  for  a  little  while 
and  then  die.  So  long  as  we  are  weak,  we  shall  have 
to  go  through  the  same  thing  there,  but  whatever  is 
true  is  here,  and  that  is  the  human  soul.  And  this 
also  is  insisted  upon,  that  we  cannot  escape  the  inevit- 
able by  committing  suicide ;  we  cannot  evade  it.  But 
the  right  path  is  hard  to  find.  The  Hindu  mind  is 
just  as  practical  as  the  Western,  only  we  differ  in  our 
views  of  life.     One  man  says  build  a  good  house,  and 


138  JNANA   YOGA 

have  good  clothes  and  good  food,  and  intellectual 
knowledge,  knowledge  of  science  and  so  on,  this  is 
the  whole  of  life ;  and  in  that  he  is  immensely  practical. 
But  the  Hindu  says  true  knowledge  of  the  world  means 
knowledge  of  the  soul,  metaphysics,  and  he  wants  to 
enjoy  that  life.  In  America  there  was  a  great  Agnostic 
orator,  a  very  noble  man,  a  very  good  man,  and  a  very 
fine  speaker.  He  lectured  on  religion  and  said  it  was 
no  use,  we  need  not  bother  our  heads  about  other 
worlds,  and  he  employed  this  simile:  we  have  an 
orange  here,  and  we  want  to  squeeze  all  the  juice  out 
of  it.  I  met  him  once  and  said,  "I  agree  with  you 
entirely.  I  have  this  orange  and  I  want  to  squeeze 
the  juice  out  too.  Only  we  differ  as  to  the  fruit. 
You  think  it  is  an  orange;  I  think  it  is  a  mango. 
You  think  it  is  only  necessary  to  live  here  and  eat  and 
drink  and  have  a  little  scientific  knowledge,  but  you 
have  no  right  to  say,  that  is  the  whole  idea  of  life. 
To  me  such  a  conception  is  nothing.  If  I  had  only 
to  know  how  an  apple  falls  to  the  ground,  or  how  an 
electric  current  shakes  my  nerves,  I  would  commit 
suicide  the  next  moment.  I  want  to  know  the  heart 
of  things,  the  very  life  itself.  Your  study  is  the  man- 
ifestation of  life,  mine  is  the  life  itself.  I  want  to 
squeeze  the  juice  out  of  my  fruit  even  in  this  life. 
My  philosophy  says  you  must  know  the  whole  of  it 
and  drive  out  your  heavens  and  hells  and  all  these 
superstitions,  even  if  they  exist  in  the  same  sense  that 
this  world  exists.  I  would  know  the  heart  of  this  life, 
its  very  essence,  how  it  is,  not  only  how  it  works  and 
what  are  its  manifestations.  I  want  the  'why'  of 
everything,  I  leave  the  'how'  to  children.     As  one  of 


UNITY   IN  DIVERSITY  I39 

your  countrymen  said,  'While  I  am  smoking  a  cigarette, 
if  I  were  to  write  down  everything  that  happens,  it 
would  be  the  science  of  the  cigarette.'  It  is  good  and 
great  to  be  scientific.  Lord  bless  them  in  their  search, 
but  when  a  man  says  that  is  all,  he  is  talking  foolishly, 
not  caring  to  know  the  raison  d'etre  of  life,  never 
studying  existence  itself.  I  may  argue  that  all  your 
knowledge  is  nonsense  without  basis.  You  are  study- 
ing the  manifestations  of  life,  and  when  I  ask  you 
what  life  is  you  say  you  do  not  know.  You  are  wel- 
come to  your  study,  but  leave  me  mine." 

Yet  I  myself  am  practical,  very  practical,  in  my 
own  way.  So  all  these  ideas  about  being  practical 
are  nonsense.  You  arc  practical  in  one  way,  and 
others  in  another.  But  a  man  of  another  type  of  mind 
does  not  talk.  If  he  is  told  that  he  will  find  out  the 
truth  standing  on  one  leg,  he  will  find  it  that  way. 
Another  kind  of  man  hears  there  is  a  gold  mine  some- 
where, with  savages  all  round.  Three  men  go.  Two 
perish,  but  one  succeeds.  The  same  man  has  heard 
there  is  a  soul,  and  is  content  to  leave  it  to  the  clergy- 
man to  preach.  But  the  first  man  will  not  go  near  the 
savages.  He  says  it  may  be  dangerous,  but  if  you 
tell  him  that  on  the  top  of  Mount  Everest,  30,000  feet 
above  the  sea  level,  there  is  a  wonderful  sage  who  can 
give  him  knowledge  of  the  soul,  he  tries  to  climb  there 
— 40,000  may  be  killed,  but  one  finds  out  the  truth. 
These  are  practical,  too,  but  the  mistake  lies  in  regard- 
ing what  you  term  the  world,  as  the  whole  of  life. 
Yours  is  the  vanishing  point  of  enjoyment  of  the 
senses;  there  never  was  anything  permanent  in  it, 
it   can    only   bring   more   and   more   misery.      Mine 


I40  J  NANA   YOGA 

brings  eternal  peace,  and  yours  brings  only  perpetual 
sorrows. 

I  do  not  say  your  view  of  what  is  practical  is  wrong. 
You  are  welcome  to  your  interpretation.  Great  good 
and  man's  blessing  come  out  of  it,  but  do  not  therefore 
condemn  my  view.  Mine  also  is  practical  in  its  own 
way.  Let  us  all  work  according  to  our  own  plans. 
Would  to  God  all  of  us  were  equally  practical  on  both 
sides.  I  have  seen  some  scientists  who  were  equally 
practical  scientists  and  spiritual  men,  and  it  is  my 
great  hope  that  in  course  of  time  the  whole  of  humanity 
will  be  efficient  in  all  such  things.  When  a  kettle  of 
water  is  boiling,  if  you  watch  the  phenomenon  you 
find  a  bubble  rising  in  one  corner,  and  another  in  an 
opposite  corner,  then  the  bubbles  begin  to  multiply, 
and  four  or  five  join  together,  and  at  last  they  all  join, 
and  a  tremendous  motion  goes  on.  This  world  is 
very  similar.  Each  individual  is  like  a  bubble,  and 
the  nations  resemble  many  bubbles.  Gradually  these 
nations  are  joining,  and  I  am  sure  the  day  will  come 
when  such  a  thing  as  a  nation  will  vanish,  and  this 
separation  will  vanish;  that  Oneness  to  which  we  are 
all  going,  whether  we  like  it  or  not,  will  become  mani- 
fest; we  are  brothers  by  nature,  and  have  become 
separate.  A  time  must  come  when  all  these  ideas  will 
be  joined,  and  every  man  and  woman  in  this  world 
will  be  as  intensely  practical  in  the  scientific  world  as 
in  the  spiritual,  and  then  that  Oneness,  the  harmony 
of  oneness,  will  pervade  the  whole  world.  The  whole 
world  will  become  jivanmuktas — "free  whilst  living." 
And  we  are  all  fighting  towards  that  one  end  through 
all  our  jealousies  and  hatreds,  through  co-operation 


UNtTY    IN    DIVERSITY  I4I 

and  antagonism.  A  tremendous  stream  is  flowing 
towards  the  ocean.  There  are  Httle  bits  of  paper  and 
straw  in  the  stream.  They  may  struggle  to  go  back, 
but,  in  the  long  run,  must  follow  down  to  the  ocean. 
So  you  and  I  and  all  nature  are  like  these  little  bits 
of  paper  rushing  in  mad  currents  towards  that  ocean 
of  Life,  Perfection  and  God;  we  may  struggle  to  go 
back,  to  get  up  or  down,  and  play  all  sorts  of  pranks, 
but  in  the  long  run  we  must  go  and  join  this  ocean 
of  Life  and  Bliss. 


GOD  IN  EVERYTHING 

We  have  seen  how  the  greater  portion  of  our  life 
must  of  necessity  be  filled  with  evils,  however  we  may 
resist,  and  that  this  mass  of  evil  is  practically  almost 
infinite  for  us.  We  have  been  struggling  to  remedy 
this  since  the  beginning  of  time,  yet  everything  remains 
very  much  the  same.  The  more  we  discover  remedies, 
the  more  we  find  subtle  evils  existing  in  the  world. 
We  have  also  seen  that  all  religions  propose  a  God, 
as  the  one  way  of  escaping  from  these  difficulties. 
All  religions  tell  us  that  if  you  take  the  world  as  it  is, 
as  most  practical  people  would  advise  us  to  do  in  this 
age,  then  nothing  would  be  left  to  us  but  evil.  But 
all  religions  assert  that  there  is  something  beyond  this 
world.  This  life  in  the  five  senses,  life  in  the  material 
world,  is  not  all  that  we  have,  it  is  only  a  small  portion, 
and  merely  superficial.  Behind  and  beyond  is  the 
Infinite  where  there  is  no  more  evil.  Some  people 
call  this  Infinite  God,  some  Allah,  some  Jehovah,  and 
so  on.      The  Vedantin  calls  It  Brahman. 

The  first  impression  of  the  advice  given  by  religions 
is  that  we  had  better  terminate  our  existence.  Yet 
we  have  to  live.  The  question  is  how  to  cure  the 
evils  of  life,  and  the  answer  apparently  is,  give  up  life. 
It  reminds  one  of  the  old  story.     A  mosquito  settled 

142 


GOD    IN    EVERYTHING  143 

on  the  head  of  a  man,  and  a  friend,  wishing  to  kill 
the  mosquito,  gave  it  such  a  blow  that  he  killed  both 
man  and  mosquito.  The  remedy  seems  to  suggest  a 
similar  course  of  action.  Life  is  full  of  ills,  the  world 
is  full  of  evil ;  that  is  a  fact  which  no  one  who  is  old 
enough  to  know  the  world  can  deny. 

But  what  is  the  remedy  proposed  by  all  the  religions  ? 
That  this  world  is  nothing.  Beyond  this  world  is 
something  which  is  very  real.  And  here  is  the  real 
fight.  The  remedy  seems  to  destroy  everything.  How 
can  that  be  a  remedy  ?  Is  there  no  way  out  ?  Another 
remedy  is  proposed.  The  Vedanta  says  that  what  all 
the  religions  advance  is  perfectly  true,  but  it  should 
be  properly  understood.  Often  it  is  misunderstood, 
because  the  various  religions  are  not  very  explicit, 
not  very  clear.  What  we  want  is  head  and  heart 
together.  The  heart  is  great  indeed ;  it  is  through  the 
heart  that  come  the  great  inspirations  of  life.  I  would 
a  hundred  times  rather  have  a  little  heart  and  no  brain, 
than  be  all  brains  and  no  heart.  Life  is  possible, 
progress  is  possible  for  him  who  has  heart,  but  he 
who  has  no  heart  and  only  brains  dies  of  dryness. 

At  the  same  time  we  know  that  he  who  is  carried 
along  by  his  heart  alone  has  to  undergo  many  ills,  for 
now  and  then  he  is  liable  to  fall  into  pits.  The  com- 
bination of  heart  and  head  is  what  we  want.  I  do 
not  mean  that  a  man  should  have  less  heart  or  less 
brain,  and  make  a  compromise,  but  let  every  one  have 
an  infinite  amount  of  heart  and  feeling,  and  at  the 
same  time  an  infinite  amount  of  reason.  Is  there  any 
limit  to  what  we  want  in  this  world  ?  Is  not  the  world 
infinite?     There  is  room   for  an   infinite  amount  of 


144  JNANA   YOGA 

feeling,  and  so  also  for  an  infinite  amount  of  culture 
and  reason.  Let  them  all  come  together  without  any 
limit,  let  them  be  running  together,  as  it  were,  in  paral- 
lel lines  each  with  the  other. 

Most  religions  understand  this  fact  and  state  it  in 
very  clear  and  precise  language,  but  the  error  into 
which  they  all  seem  to  fall  is  the  same ;  they  are  carried 
away  by  the  heart,  the  feelings.  There  is  evil  in  the 
world;  give  up  the  world:  that  is  the  great  teaching, 
and  the  only  teaching,  no  doubt.  Give  up  the  world. 
There  cannot  be  two  opinions  that,  to  understand  the 
truth,  every  one  of  us  must  give  up  error.  There 
cannot  be  two  opinions  that  every  one  of  us,  in  order 
to  have  good  must  give  up  evil;  there  cannot  be  two 
opinions  that  every  one  of  us  to  have  life,  must  give 
up  what  is  death.  And  yet,  what  remains  to  us,  if 
this  theory  involves  giving  up  the  life  of  the  senses, 
life  as  we  know  it,  and  what  do  we  mean  by  life?  If 
we  give  up  all  this,  nothing  remains.  We  shall  under- 
stand this  better,  when,  later  on,  we  come  to  the  more 
philosophical  portions  of  the  Vedanta.  For  the 
present,  however,  I  beg  to  state  that  in  Vedanta  alone 
we  find  a  rational  solution  of  the  problem.  Here  I 
can  only  lay  before  you  what  the  Vedanta  seeks  to 
teach,  and  that  is,  the  deification  of  the  world. 

The  Vedanta  does  not,  in  reality,  denounce  the 
world.  The  ideals  of  renunciation  nowhere  attain  such 
a  climax  as  in  the  teachings  of  the  Vedanta,  but,  at 
the  same  time,  dry  suicidal  advice  is  not  intended,  it 
really  means  deification  of  the  world — ^to  give  up  the 
world  as  we  think  of  it,  as  we  seem  to  know  it,  as  it 
is  appearing,  and  to  know  what  it  really  is.     Deify  it ; 


GOD   IN    EVERYTHING  I45 

it  is  God  alone,  and,  as  such,  we  read  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  oldest  of  the  Upanishads,  the  very 
first  book  that  was  ever  written  on  the  Vedanta — 
"Whatever  exists  in  this  Universe,  whatever  is  there, 
is  to  be  covered  with  the  Lord." 

We  have  to  cover  everything  with  the  Lord  Himself, 
not  by  a  false  sort  of  optimism,  not  by  blinding  our 
eyes  to  the  evil,  but  by  really  seeing  God  in  everything. 
Thus  we  have  to  give  up  the  world,  and  when  the 
world  is  given  up,  what  remains?  God.  What  is 
meant?  You  can  have  your  wives;  it  does  not  mean 
that  you  are  to  abandon  them,  and  leave  them  to  go 
away,  but  that  you  are  to  see  God  in  the  wife.  Give 
up  your  children;  what  does  that  mean?  Take  your 
children  and  throw  them  into  the  street,  as  some 
human  brutes  do  in  every  country?  Certainly  not. 
That  is  diabolism;  it  would  not  be  religion.  But  see 
God  in  your  children.  So  in  everything.  In  life  and 
in  death,  in  woe  and  in  joy,  in  misery  and  in  happiness, 
the  whole  world  is  full  of  the  Lord.  Open  your  eyes 
and  see  Him.  That  is  what  Vedanta  says.  Give  up 
the  world  which  you  have  conjectured,  because  your 
conjecture  was  based  upon  very  partial  experience; 
your  conjecture  was  based  upon  poor  reasoning,  and 
upon  your  own  weakness.  Give  that  up;  the  world 
we  have  been  thinking  of  so  long,  the  world  to  which 
we  have  been  clinging  so  long,  is  a  false  world  of  our 
own  creation.  Give  that  up;  open  your  eyes  and  see 
that  as  such  it  never  existed;  it  was  a  dream,  Maya. 
What  existed  was  the  Lord  Himself.  It  is  He  in 
the  child,  He  in  the  wife,  and  He  in  the  husband,  He 
in  the  good,  and  He  in  the  bad.  He  in  the  murderer. 


146  J  NANA   YOGA 

He  in  the  sin,  and  He  in  the  sinner,  He  in  life,  and 
He  in  death.  A  tremendous  proposal  indeed!  Yet 
that  is  the  theme  which  the  Vedanta  wants  to  demon- 
strate, to  teach,  to  preach,  and  to  prove.  This  is  just 
the  opening  theme. 

Thus  we  avoid  the  dangers  of  life  and  its  evils.  Do 
not  want  anything.  What  makes  us  miserable  ?  The 
cause  of  all  miseries  from  which  we  suffer  has  been 
made  by  desire,  want.  You  want  something,  and  the 
want  is  not  fulfilled;  the  result  is  distress.  If  there 
be  no  want  there  will  be  no  more  suffering.  When 
we  shall  give  up  all  our  desires,  what  will  be  the  result  ? 
The  walls  have  no  desires  and  they  never  suffer.  No, 
and  they  never  evolve.  This  chair  has  no  desires;  it 
never  suffers,  and  it  is  a  chair,  too,  all  the  time.  There 
is  a  glory  in  happiness,  there  is  a  glory  in  suffering. 
If  I  may  dare  to  say  so,  there  is  a  utility  in  evil,  too. 
The  great  lesson  in  misery  we  all  know.  Hundreds 
of  things  we  have  done  in  our  lives  which  we  wish  we 
had  never  done,  but  which,  at  the  same  time,  have 
been  great  teachers.  As  for  me,  I  am  glad  that  I  have 
done  good  things,  and  glad  I  have  done  something 
bad;  glad  I  have  done  something  right,  and  glad  I 
have  committed  many  errors,  because  every  one  of 
them  has  been  a  great  lesson. 

I,  as  I  am  this  minute,  am  the  resultant  of  all  I  have 
done,  all  I  have  thought.  Every  action  and  every 
/  thought  has  had  its  effect,  and  these  effects  are  the 
i  sum-total  of  my  progress.  The  problem  becomes  diffi- 
cult. We  all  understand  that  desires  are  wrong,  but 
what  is  meant  by  giving  up  desires?  How  can  life 
go  on?     It  would  be  the  same  suicidal  advice,  which 


GOD   IN   EVERYTHING  1 47 

means  killing  the  desire  and  the  patient  too.  So  the 
answer  comes.  Not  that  you  should  not  have  property, 
not  that  you  should  not  have  things  which  are  neces- 
sary, and  things  which  are  even  luxuries.  Have  all 
that  you  want,  and  everything  that  you  do  not  want 
sometimes,  only  know  the  truth  and  realize  the  truth. 
This  wealth  does  not  belong  to  anybody.  Have  no  idea 
of  proprietorship,  possessorship.  You  are  nobody,  nor 
am  I,  nor  any  one  else.  It  all  belongs  to  the  Lord, 
because  the  opening  verse  told  us  to  put  the  Lord  in 
everything.  God  is  in  that  wealth  that  you  enjoy. 
He  is  in  the  desire  that  rises  in  your  mind.  He  is  in 
these  things  you  buy  because  you  desire  them;  He  is 
in  your  beautiful  attire,  in  your  handsome  ornaments. 
That  is  the  line  of  thought.  All  will  be  metamor- 
phosed as  soon  as  you  begin  to  see  things  in  that 
light.  If  you  put  God  in  your  every  movement,  in 
your  clothes,  in  your  talk,  in  your  body,  in  your  mind, 
in  everything,  the  whole  scene  changes,  and  the  world, 
instead  of  appearing  as  woe  and  misery,  will  become 
a  heaven. 

•'The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  within  you,"  says  Jesus ; 
it  is  already  there,  says  the  Vedanta;  so  say  others, 
so  says  every  great  teacher.  "He  that  hath  eyes  to 
see,  let  him  see,"  and  "he  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let 
him  hear."  It  is  already  here.  And  that  is  one  of  the 
themes  which  the  Vedanta  undertakes  to  prove.  It 
will  prove  also,  that  the  truth  for  which  we  have  been 
searching  all  this  time  is  already  present,  it  was  all  the 
time  with  us.  In  our  ignorance,  we  thought  we  had 
lost  it,  and  went  about  in  the  world  crying  and  weeping, 
suffering  misery,  struggling  to  find  the  truth,  and  all 


148  J  NANA   YOGA 

the  time  it  was  dwelling  in  our  own  hearts.  There 
alone  can  we  find  it. 

If  giving  up  the  world  is  true,  and  if  it  is  taken  in 
its  crude,  old  sense,  then  it  would  come  to  mean  this : 
that  we  must  not  work,  that  we  must  become  idle, 
that  we  must  sit  like  lumps  of  earth,  and  neither  think 
nor  do  anything,  but  become  fatalists,  driven  about 
by  every  circumstance,  ordered  about  by  the  laws  of 
nature,  drifting  from  place  to  place.  That  would  be 
the  result.  But  that  is  not  what  is  meant.  We  must 
work.  Ordinary  mankind,  driven  everywhere  by  false 
desires,  what  do  they  know  of  work?  The  man  pro- 
pelled by  his  own  feelings  and  his  own  senses,  what 
does  he  know  about  work?  He  works  who  is  not 
propelled  by  his  own  desires,  or  by  any  selfishness 
whatsoever.  He  works  who  has  no  ulterior  motive  in 
view.     He  works  who  has  nothing  to  gain  from  work. 

Who  enjoys  a  picture,  the  seller  of  the  picture  or 
the  seer?  The  seller  is  busy  with  his  accounts,  com- 
puting what  his  gain  will  be,  how  much  profit  he  will 
realize  on  the  picture.  His  brain  is  full  of  that.  He 
is  looking  at  the  hammer,  and  watching  the  bids.  He 
is  intent  on  hearing  how  fast  the  bids  are  rising.  That 
man  is  enjoying  the  picture  who  has  gone  there  without 
any  intention  of  buying  or  selling.  He  looks  at  the 
picture  and  enjoys  it.  So  this  whole  universe  is  a 
picture,  and  when  these  desires  have  vanished,  men 
will  enjoy  the  world ;  and  this  buying  and  selling,  and 
these  foolish  ideas  of  possession  will  be  ended.  The 
money-lender  gone,  the  buyer  gone,  the  seller  gone, 
this  world  remains  the  picture,  a  beautiful  painting. 
I  never  read  of  any  more  beautiful  conception  of  God 


GOD   IN    EVERYTHING  I49 

than  the  following :  "He  is  the  great  poet,  the  ancient 
poet :  the  whole  universe  is  his  poem,  coming  in  verses 
and  rhymes  and  rhythms,  written  in  infinite  bliss.'* 
When  we  have  given  up  desires,  then  alone  shall  we 
be  able  to  read  and  enjoy  this  universe  of  God.  Then 
everything  will  become  deified.  Nooks  and  corners, 
by-ways  and  shady  places,  which  we  thought  so  unholy, 
spots  on  its  surface  which  appeared  so  black,  will  be 
all  deified.  They  will  all  reveal  their  true  nature, 
and  we  shall  smile  at  ourselves,  and  think  that  all 
this  weeping  and  crying  has  been  but  child's  play,  and 
we  were  standing  there  watching. 

Thus,  says  the  Vedanta,  do  you  work.  It  first 
advises  us  how  to  work — by  giving  up — giving  up  the 
world,  the  apparent,  illusive  world.  What  is  meant 
by  that?  Seeing  God  everywhere,  as  said  already. 
Thus  do  you  work.  Desire  to  live  a  hundred  years, 
have  all  the  earthly  desires,  if  you  will,  only  deify 
them,  convert  them  into  heaven,  and  live  a  hundred 
years.  Have  the  desire  to  live  a  long  life  of  helpful- 
ness, of  blissfulness  and  activity  on  this  earth.  Thus 
working,  you  will  find  the  way.  There  is  no  other 
way.  If  a  man  plunges  headlong  into  foolish  luxuries 
of  the  world  without  knowing  the  truth,  he  has  not 
reached  the  goal,  he  has  missed  his  footing.  And  if 
a  man  curses  the  world,  mortifies  his  flesh,  goes  into  a 
forest,  and  kills  himself  bit  by  bit  by  starving  himself, 
makes  his  heart  a  barren  waste,  a  desert,  kills  out  all 
his  feeling,  becomes  stern,  awful,  dried-up,  that  man 
also  has  missed  the  way.  These  are  the  two  extremes, 
the  two  mistakes  at  either  end.  Both  have  lost  the 
way,  both  have  missed  the  goal. 


150  J  NANA   YOGA 

Thus,  says  the  Vedanta,  thus  work,  putting  God  in 
everything,  and  knowing  Him  to  be  in  everything, 
thus  work  incessantly,  holding  life  as  something  deified, 
as  God  Himself,  and  knowing  that  this  is  all  we  have 
to  do,  this  is  all  we  have  to  ask  for,  because  God  is 
here  in  everything ;  where  else  shall  we  go  to  find  Him  ? 
In  every  work,  in  every  thought,  in  every  feeling, 
He  is  already  there.  Thus  knowing,  we  must  work; 
this  is  the  only  way,  there  is  no  other.  Thus  the 
effects  of  work  will  not  bind  us  down.  We  shall  not 
be  injured  by  the  effects  of  work.  We  have  seen  how 
these  false  desires  are  the  causes  of  all  the  misery  and 
evil  we  suffer,  but  when  they  are  thus  deified,  purified 
through  God,  when  they  come  they  bring  no  evil,  they 
bring  no  misery.  Those  who  have  not  learned  this 
secret  will  have  to  live  in  a  demoniacal  world  until 
they  discover  the  secret.  Many  do  not  know  what  an 
infinite  mine  of  bliss  fulness  and  pleasure  and  happiness 
is  here,  in  them,  around  them,  everywhere;  they  have 
not  yet  discovered  it.  What  is  a  demoniacal  world? 
The  Vedanta  says  a  world  of  ignorance. 

Says  the  Vedanta,  we  are  dying  of  thirst  sitting 
on  the  banks  of  the  mightiest  river.  We  are  dying  of 
hunger  sitting  near  piles  of  food.  Here  is  the  blissful 
universe.  We  do  not  find  it.  We  are  in  it;  it  is 
around  us  all  the  time,  and  we  are  always  mistaking 
it.  Religions  propose  to  find  this  out  for  us.  This 
blissful  universe  is  the  real  search  in  all  hearts.  It 
has  been  the  search  of  all  nations,  it  is  the  one  goal  of 
religion,  and  this  ideal  is  expressed  in  various  lan- 
guages ;  all  the  petty  differences  between  religions  and 
religions  are  mere  word  struggles,  nonsense.     It  i§ 


GOD   IN    EVERYTHING  I5I 

only  difference  of  language  that  makes  all  these 
apparent  divergences;  one  expresses  a  thought  in  one 
way,  another  a  little  differently,  yet  perhaps  each  is 
saying  exactly  what  the  other  is  expressing  in  dif- 
ferent language.  That  is  how  struggles  come  in  this 
life  of  ours. 

More  questions  arise  in  connection  with  this.  It  is 
very  easy  to  talk  about.  From  my  childhood  I  have 
heard  of  this  putting  God  everywhere  and  everything 
will  become  deified,  and  then  I  can  really  enjoy  every- 
thing, but  as  soon  as  I  come  into  this  world,  and  get 
a  few  blows  from  it,  this  idea  vanishes.  I  am  out  in 
the  street  thinking  that  God  is  in  every  man,  and  a 
strong  man  comes  and  gives  me  a  push  and  I  fall  flat 
on  the  footpath.  Then  I  rise  up  quickly,  the  blood 
has  rushed  into  my  head,  and  my  fist  clinches  and 
reflection  goes.  Immediately  I  become  mad.  Every- 
thing is  forgotten,  instead  of  encountering  God  I  see 
the  devil.  We  have  been  told  since  we  were  born  to 
see  God  in  all;  every  religion  has  taught  that — see 
God  in  everything  and  everywhere.  Do  you  not 
remember  in  the  New  Testament  how  Christ  explicitly 
says  so  ?  We  have  all  been  taught  this,  but  it  is  when 
we  come  to  the  practical  side  that  the  difficulty  begins. 
You  all  remember  how  in  "^sop's  Fables"  a  fine  big 
stag  is  looking  at  his  picture  reflected  in  a  lake,  and 
saying  to  his  child,  "How  powerful  I  am,  look  at  my 
splendid  head,  look  at  my  limbs,  how  strong  and 
muscular  they  are;  how  swiftly  I  can  run,"  and  in 
the  meantime  he  hears  the  barking  of  dogs  in  the 
distance,  and  immediately  takes  to  his  heels,  and  after 
he  has  run  several  miles  he  comes  back  panting.     The 


152  JNANA   YOGA 

child  says,  ''You  just  told  me  how  strong  you  were, 
how  was  it  that  when  the  dogs  barked  you  ran  away  ?" 
"That  is  it,  my  son;  when  the  dogs  bark  all  my  con- 
fidence vanishes.  I  forget  my  strength;  my  courage 
forsakes  me  and  I  flee  for  my  life."  So  are  we  all 
our  lives.  We  are  all  thinking  highly  of  poor  human- 
ity, we  feel  ourselves  strong  and  valiant  in  the  right; 
we  make  grand  resolves,  but  when  the  "dogs"  of 
trial  and  temptation  bark,  we  are  like  the  stag  in  the 
fable.  We  forget  our  power  to  overcome,  we  waver 
and  for  a  time  we  are  vanquished.  Then  if  such  is  the 
case,  what  is  the  use  of  teaching  all  these  things? 
There  is  the  greatest  use.  The  use  is  this,  that  perse- 
verance will  finally  conquer.  Nothing  is  to  be  done 
in  a  day. 

"This  Self  is  first  to  be  heard,  then  to  be  thought 
upon,  and  then  meditated  upon."  Every  one  can  see 
the  sky,  even  the  very  worm  crawling  upon  the  earth, 
as  soon  as  he  looks  up,  sees  the  blue  sky,  but  how  very 
far  away  it  is.  The  mind  goes  everywhere,  but  the 
poor  body  takes  a  long  time  to  crawl  on  the  surface  of 
the  earth.  So  it  is  with  all  our  ideals.  The  ideal  is 
far  away,  and  we  are  here  far  below.  At  the  same  time 
we  know  that  we  must  have  an  ideal.  We  must  even 
have  the  highest  ideal.  And  we  know  that  unfortu- 
nately the  vast  majority  of  persons  are  groping  through 
this  dark  life  of  ours  without  any  ideal  at  all.  If  a 
man  with  an  ideal  makes  a  thousand  mistakes,  I  am 
sure  the  man  without  an  ideal  makes  fifty  thousand. 
Therefore  it  is  better  to  have  an  ideal.  And  this 
ideal  we  must  hear  as  much  as  we  can,  hear  till  it 
enters  into  our  hearts,  enters  into  our  brains,  hear  until 


GOD    IN    EVERYTHING  1 53 

it  enters  into  our  very  veins,  until  it  tingles  in  every 
drop  of  our  blood,  until  it  fills  every  pore  in  our  body. 
We  must  meditate  upon  it.  "Out  of  the  fulness  of  the 
heart  the  mouth  speaketh,"  and  out  of  the  fulness  of 
the  heart  the  hand  works,  too. 

It  is  thought  which  is  the  propelling  force  in  us.  i 
Fill  the  mind  with  the  highest  thoughts,  hear  them  | 
day  after  day,  think  of  them  month  after  month. 
Never  mind  failures;  they  are  quite  natural,  they  are 
the  beauty  of  life,  these  failures.  What  would  life  be 
without  these  failures  ?  It  would  not  be  worth  having 
if  it  were  not  for  the  struggle.  Where  would  be  the 
poetry  of  life?  Never  mind  the  struggles,  the  mis- 
takes. I  never  heard  a  cow  tell  a  lie,  but  it  is  a  cow 
— never  a  man.  So  never  mind  these  failures,  these 
little  backslidings,  hold  the  ideal  a  thousand  times, 
and  if  you  fail  a  thousand  times  make  the  attempt 
once  more.  This  is  the  ideal  of  man,  to  see  God  in 
everything.  If  you  cannot  see  Him  in  everything,  see 
Him  in  one,  in  that  thing  which  you  like  best,  and 
then  see  Him  in  another.  So  on  you  can  go.  There 
is  infinite  life  before  the  soul.  Take  your  time  and 
you  will  achieve  your  desire. 

"He,  that  One  who  vibrates  more  quickly  than  mind, 
who  attains  to  more  speed  than  mind  can  ever  attain, 
to  whom  even  the  gods  attain  not,  nor  thought  grasps, 
He  moving,  everything  moves.  In  Him  all  exists. 
He  is  moving,  He  also  is  immovable.  He  is  near  and 
He  is  far.  He  is  inside  everything.  He  is  the  out- 
side of  everything,  interpenetrating  everything.  Who- 
ever sees  in  every  human  being  that  same  Atman,  and 
whoever  sees  everything  in  that  Atman,  he  never  goes 


154  JNANA   YOGA 

far  from  that  Atmaii."  When  all  life  and  the  whole 
universe  are  seen  in  this  Atman,  then  man  has  attained 
the  secret.  There  is  no  more  delusion  for  him. 
Where  is  any  more  misery  for  him  who  sees  this  one- 
ness in  the  universe? 

This  is  another  great  theme  of  the  Vedanta,  this 
Oneness  of  life,  Oneness  of  everything.  We  shall  see 
how  it  demonstrates  that  all  misery  comes  through 
ignorance,  for  this  ignorance  creates  the  idea  of  mani- 
foldness,  of  separation  between  man  and  man,  between 
nation  and  nation,  between  earth  and  moon,  between 
moon  and  sun.  Out  of  this  idea  of  separation  between 
atom  and  atom  arises  all  misery,  but  the  Vedanta  says 
this  separation  does  not  exist,  that  it  is  not  real.  It 
is  merely  apparent,  on  the  surface.  In  the  heart  of 
things  there  is  Unity  still.  If  you  go  inside  you  find 
that  Unity  between  man  and  man,  between  races  and 
races,  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  gods  and  men, 
and  animals  too.  If  you  go  deep  enough  all  will  be 
seen  as  only  variations  of  the  One,  and  he  who  has 
attained  to  this  conception  of  Oneness  has  no  more 
delusion.  He  has  reached  that  Unity  which  we  call 
God  in  theology.  Where  is  there  any  more  delusion 
for  him?  What  can  delude  him?  He  knows  the 
reality  of  everything,  the  secret  of  everything.  Where 
is  there  any  more  misery  for  him?  What  does  he 
desire?  He  has  traced  the  reality  of  everything  unto 
the  Uord,  that  centre,  that  Unity  of  everything,  and 
that  is  Eternal  Existence,  Eternal  Knowledge,  Eternal 
Bliss.  Neither  death  nor  disease,  nor  sorrow  nor 
misery,  nor  discontent  is  there.  All  is  Perfect  Union 
and  Perfect  Bliss.     For  whom  should  he  mourn  then  ? 


GOD   IN    EVERYTHING  1 55 

In  reality  there  is  no  death,  there  is  no  misery ;  in  the 
centre,  the  Reality,  there  is  no  one  to  be  mourned  for, 
no  one  to  be  sorry  for.  He  has  penetrated  everything, 
the  Pure  One,  the  Formless,  the  Bodiless,  the  Stainless, 
He  the  Knower,  He  the  Great  Poet,  the  Self-Existent, 
He  who  is  giving  to  every  one  what  he  deserves. 
They  are  groping  in  darkness  who  are  worshipping 
this  ignorant  world,  the  world  that  is  produced  out  of 
ignorance.  Those  who  are  worshipping  this  world, 
thinking  of  it  as  Existence,  are  groping  in  darkness, 
and  those  who  live  their  whole  lives  in  this  world,  and 
never  find  anything  better  or  higher,  are  groping  in 
still  greater  darkness. 

But  he  who  knows  the  secret  of  beautiful  nature, 
thinking  of  pure  nature  through  the  help  of  nature, 
he  crosses  death,  and  through  the  help  of  that  which 
is  pure  nature,  he  enjoys  Eternal  Bliss.  "Thou  Sun, 
thou  hast  covered  the  truth  with  thy  golden  disk.  Do 
thou  open  that  for  me  so  that  I  may  see  the  truth  which 
is  inside  thee.  I  have  known  the  truth  that  is  inside 
thee,  I  have  known  what  is  the  real  meaning  of  thy 
rays  and  thy  glory,  and  have  seen  that  which  shines 
in  thee;  the  truth  in  thee  I  see,  and  that  which  is 
within  thee  is  within  me  also,  and  I  in  thee." 


REALIZATION 

I  WILL  read  to  you  from  one  of  the  simplest,  but,  I 
think,  one  of  the  most  poetical  of  the  Upanishads. 
It  is  called  the  Katha  Upanishad.  Some  of  you,  per- 
haps, have  read  the  translation  by  Sir  Edwin  Arnold, 
called  "The  Secret  of  Death."  In  our  last  lecture  we 
saw  how  the  inquiry  which  started  with  the  origin  of 
the  world,  and  the  creation  of  the  universe,  failed  to 
obtain  a  satisfactory  answer  from  without,  and  how 
it  then  turned  inward.  This  book  psychologically 
takes  up  that  suggestion,  questioning  into  the  internal 
nature  of  man.  It  was  first  asked  who  created  the 
external  world,  how  it  came  into  being,  and  now  the 
question  is,  what  is  that  in  man  which  makes  him  live 
and  move,  and  what  becomes  of  it  when  the  man  dies. 
The  first  philosophers  studied  the  material  substance, 
and  tried  to  reach  the  ultimate  through  that.  At  the 
best  they  found  a  personal  Governor  of  the  Universe, 
a  human  being  immensely  magnified,  but  yet  to  all 
intents  and  purposes  a  human  being.  But  that  cannot 
be  the  whole  of  truth;  at  best  it  can  only  be  partial 
truth.  We  see  this  universe  as  human  beings,  and 
our  God  is  our  human  explanation  of  the  universe. , 

Suppose  a  cow  were  philosophical  and  had  religion,  it 
would  have  a  Cow  Universe,  and  a  cow  solution  of  the 

156 


REALIZATION  1 57 

problem,  and  it  would  not  be  necessary  that  it  should 
see  our  God.  Suppose  cats  became  philosophers,  they 
would  see  a  Cat  Universe  and  have  a  cat  solution  of 
the  problem  of  the  universe,  some  Cat  ruling  it.  So 
we  see  from  this  that  our  explanation  of  the  universe 
is  not  the  whole  of  the  solution.  Neither  does  our 
conception  cover  the  whole  of  the  universe.  It  would 
be  a  great  mistake  to  accept  that  tremendously  selfish 
position  which  man  is  apt  to  take.  Such  a  solution  of 
the  universal  problem  as  we  can  get  from  the  outside, 
labors  under  this  difficulty,  that  in  the  first  place  the 
universe  we  see  is  our  own  particular  universe,  our 
own  view  of  the  Reality.  That  Reality  we  cannot  see 
through  the  senses;  we  cannot  comprehend  it.  We 
only  know  the  universe  from  the  point  of  view  of 
beings  with  five  senses.  Suppose  we  obtain  another 
sense,  the  whole  universe  must  change  for  us.  Sup- 
pose we  had  a  magnetic  sense ;  it  is  quite  possible  that 
we  might  find  millions  and  millions  of  varieties  of 
forces  in  existence  which  we  do  not  yet  know,  for 
which  we  have  no  present  sense  or  feeling.  Our 
senses  are  limited,  very  limited  indeed,  and  within 
those  limitations  exists  what  we  call  our  universe,  and 
our  God  is  the  solution  of  our  universe,  but  that  can- 
not be  the  solution  of  the  whole  problem.  It  cannot 
be;  it  is  nothing,  so  to  say.  But  man  cannot  stop. 
He  is  a  thinking  being,  and  he  wants  to  find  a  solution 
which  will  comprehensively  explain  all  universes.  He 
wants  to  see  a  world  which  is  at  once  the  world  of 
men  and  of  God,  and  of  all  beings  possible  and  impos- 
sible, and  he  wants  to  find  one  solution  which  will 
explain  all  phenomena. 


158  JNANA   YOGA 

We  see  we  must  first  find  the  Universe  where  all 
universes  are  one ;  we  must  find  something  which,  by 
itself,  of  a  logical  necessity  must  be  the  background, 
the  material  running  through  all  these  various  planes 
of  existence,  whether  we  apprehend  it  through  the 
senses  or  not.  If  we  could  possibly  find  something 
which  we  could  know  as  the  common  property  of  the 
lower  worlds,  as  also  of  the  higher  worlds,  although 
we  do  not  see  them,  but  by  the  sheer  force  of  logic 
could  understand  that  this  must  be  the  basis  of  all 
existence,  then  our  problem  would  approach  to  some 
sort  of  solution;  but  this  solution  certainly  cannot  be 
obtained  from  the  world  we  see  and  know,  because 
that  is  only  one  view  of  the  whole. 

The  only  hope  then  lies  in  penetrating  deeply.  The 
early  thinkers  discovered  that  the  further  they  were 
from  the  centre,  the  more  marked  were  the  variation 
and  differentiation,  and  the  nearer  they  approached  the 
centre  the  nearer  they  were  to  unity.  The  nearer  we 
are  to  the  centre  of  a  circle  the  nearer  we  are  to  the 
common  ground  in  which  all  the  radii  meet,  and  the 
farther  we  are  from  the  centre,  the  more  differentiated 
is  our  radical  line  from  the  others.  The  external 
world  is  farther  and  farther  away  from  the  centre, 
and  so  there  is  no  common  ground  where  all  the 
phenomena  of  existence  meet.  At  best  the  external 
world  is  but  one  part  of  the  whole  of  phenomena. 
There  are  other  parts,  the  mental  phenomena,  the 
moral  phenomena,  the  intellectual  phenomena,  the 
various  planes  of  existence,  and  to  take  up  only  one, 
and  find  a  solution  of  the  whole  out  of  that  one, 
would  be  simply  impossible.     We  first,  therefore,  want 


REALIZATION  1 59 

to  find  somewhere  a  centre  from  which,  as  it  were,  all 
the  other  planes  of  existence  start,  and  standing  there,, 
we  will  try  to  find  a  solution.  That  is  the  proposition. 
And  where  is  that  centre?  It  is  inside,  internal  man. 
Going  deeper  and  deeper  inside,  the  ancient  sages 
found  that  there,  in  the  innermost  core  of  the  human 
soul,  is  the  centre  of  the  whole  universe.  All  the 
planes  gravitate  towards  that  one  point;  there  is  the 
common  ground,  and  standing  there  alone  can  we  find 
a  common  solution.  So  the  question  who  made  this 
world  is  not  philosophical,  nor  does  its  solution  amount 
to  anything. 

This  Katha  Upanishad  speaks  in  very  figurative 
language.  There  was  in  ancient  times,  a  very  rich 
man,  who  made  a  certain  sacrifice  which  required  that 
he  who  made  it  should  give  away  everything  that  he 
had.  Now  this  man  was  not  sincere.  He  wanted  to 
get  the  fame  and  glory  of  having  made  the  sacrifice, 
which  required  the  giving  away  of  everything,  but 
at  the  same  time  he  was  only  giving  things  which  were 
of  no  further  use  to  him — old  cows,  half  dead,  barren, 
with  one  eye,  and  lame.  Now  he  had  a  boy  called 
Nachiketas.  This  boy  saw  that  his  father  was  not 
doing  what  was  right,  that  he  was  breaking  his  vow, 
and  he  did  not  know  what  to  say.  In  India  the  father 
and  mother  are  living  gods ;  a  child  dare  not  do  any- 
thing before  them,  or  speak  before  them,  but  simply 
stands.  And  so  the  boy  appreached  the  father,  and 
because  he  could  not  make  a  direct  inquiry  he  asked 
him,  "Father,  to  whom  are  you  going  to  give  me? 
Your  sacrifice  requires  that  everything  shall  be  given 
away."     The  father  became  very  much  vexed.     "What 


l60  J  NANA   YOGA 

do  you  mean,  boy?  A  father  giving  away  his  own 
son?"  The  boy  asked  the  question  a  second  and  a 
third  time,  and  then  the  angry  father  answered,  "Thee 
I  give  unto  Death"  (  Yama) .  And  the  story  goes  on 
to  say  that  the  boy  went  unto  Death.  There  is  a  god 
called  Yama,  the  first  man  who  died.  He  went  to 
heaven  and  became  the  governor  of  all  the  Pitris;  all 
the  good  people  who  die,  go  and  live  with  him  for  a 
long  time.  He  is  a  very  pure  and  holy  person  (i.e., 
yama),  chaste  and  good  and  pure  is  this  Yama.  The 
boy  went  to  Yama's  world.  Even  gods  are  sometimes 
not  at  home,  and  so  three  days  this  boy  had  to  wait 
there.     After  the  third  day  Yama  returned. 

"O,  learned  one,"  says  Yama,  "you  have  been  wait- 
ing here  for  three  days  without  food,  and  you  are  a 
guest  worthy  of  respect.  Salutation  to  thee,  O  Brah- 
man, and  welfare  to  me.  I  am  very  sorry  I  was  not 
at  home.  But  for  that  I  will  make  amends.  Ask 
three  boons,  one  for  each  day."  And  the  boy  asked. 
"My  first  boon  is  that  my  father's  anger  against  me 
may  pass  away,  that  he  be  kind  to  me  and  recognize 
me  when  you  allow  me  to  depart."  Yama  granted 
this  fully.  The  next  boon  was  that  he  wanted  to  know 
about  a  certain  sacrifice  which  took  people  to  heaven. 
Now  we  have  seen  that  the  oldest  idea  which  we  got 
in  the  Samhita  portion  of  the  Vedas  was  only  about 
heaven,  where  they  had  bright  bodies,  and  lived  with 
the  fathers.  Gradually  other  ideas  came,  but  they 
were  not  sufficient;  there  was  need  for  something 
higher  yet.  Living  in  heaven  would  not  be  very  dif- 
ferent from  life  in  this  world.  At  best  it  would  only 
be  a  verjr  healthy  rich  man's  life,  plenty  of  enjoyment 


REALIZATION  l6l 

of  the  senses,  plenty  of  things  to  enjoy,  a  sound  body 
which  knows  no  disease.  It  would  be  this  material 
world  a  little  more  refined,  and  just  as  we  have  seen, 
there  is  this  difficulty,  that  this  external  material  world 
can  never  solve  the  problem.  So  it  would  be  there; 
no  heaven  can  solve  the  problem.  If  this  world  can- 
not solve  the  problem  no  multiplication  of  this  world 
can  do  so,  because  we  must  always  remember  that 
matter  is  only  an  infinitesimal  part  of  the  phenomena 
of  nature.  The  vast  part  of  phenomena  which  we 
actually  see  is  not  matter. 

For  instance,  in  every  moment  of  our  life  how  much 
is  our  own  feeling,  how  much  is  thought  phenomena, 
and  how  much  is  actual  phenomena  outside?  How 
much  do  we  feel  and  touch  and  see?  How  vast  is  the 
external  world  with  its  tremendous  activity !  And  the 
sense  phenomena  are  very  small  compared  with  the 
mental  phenomena.  The  heaven  solution  commits  this 
mistake ;  it  insists  that  the  whole  of  phenomena  is 
only  in  touch,  taste,  sight,  etc.,  so  this  idea  of  heaven 
where  we  are  to  live  with  very  bright  bodies,  did  not 
give  full  satisfaction  to  all.  Yet  Nachiketas  asks  as 
the  second  boon  for  some  sacrifice  through  which 
people  might  attain  to  this  heaven.  There  was  an 
idea  in  the  Vedas  that  these  sacrifices  pleased  the 
gods  and  took  human  beings  to  heaven.  Now,  in 
studying  all  religions  you  will  find  the  inevitable  fact 
that  whatever  is  old  becomes  holy.  For  instance,  our 
forefathers  in  India  used  to  write  on  birch  bark,  but 
in  time  they  learned  how  to  make  paper.  Yet  the 
birch  bark  is  still  looked  upon  as  very  holy.  When 
the  utensils  in  which  they  used  to  cook  in  the  most 


1 62  J  NANA   YOGA 

ancient  times  were  improved  upon,  the  old  became 
holy,  and  nowhere  has  this  idea  been  more  kept  up 
than  in  India.  Old  methods,  which  must  be  nine  or 
ten  thousand  years  old,  of  rubbing  two  sticks  together 
to  make  fire,  are  still  kept  up.  At  the  time  of  sacri- 
fice no  other  method  will  do.  So  with  the  other 
branch  of  the  Asiatic  Aryans.  Their  modern  descen- 
dants still  like  to  preserve  fire  that  comes  from  light- 
ning, showing  that  they  used  to  get  fire  in  this 
way,  afterwards  learning  to  obtain  it  by  rubbing 
two  pieces  of  wood,  and  when  they  learned  other 
customs  they  kept  up  the  old  customs,  which  then 
became  holy. 

So  with  the  Hebrews.  They  used  to  write  on 
parchment.  They  now  write  on  paper,  and  the  other 
method  is  very  holy.  So  with  all  nations,  every  rite 
which  you  now  consider  holy  was  simply  an  old 
custom,  and  these  sacrifices  were  of  this  nature.  In 
course  of  time,  as  they  found  better  methods  of  life, 
their  ideas  were  much  improved,  still,  these  old  forms 
remained,  and  from  time  to  time  they  were  practised, 
and  received  a  holy  significance.  Then  a  body  of  men 
made  it  their  business  to  carry  on  these  sacrifices. 
These  were  the  priests,  and  they  speculated  on  the 
sacrifices,  and  the  sacrifices  became  everything  to 
them.  The  gods  came  to  enjoy  the  fragrance  of  the 
sacrifices,  and  everything  in  this  world  could  be  got 
by  the  power  of  sacrifices.  If  certain  oblations  were 
made,  certain  hymns  chanted,  certain  peculiar  forms  of 
altars  made,  the  gods  would  grant  everything.  So 
Nachiketas  asks  by  what  form  of  sacrifice  a  man  will 
go  to  heaven.     This   second  boon  was  also  readily 


REALIZATION  163 

granted  by  Yama,  who  promised  that  this  sacrifice 
should  henceforth  be  named  after  Nachiketas. 

Then  the  third  boon  comes,  and  with  that  the 
Upanishad  proper  begins.  The  boy  says:  "There  is 
this  difficuhy ;  when  a  man  dies  some  say  he  is,  others 
that  he  is  not.  Instructed  by  you,  I  desire  to  under- 
stand this." 

Yama  is  frightened.  He  was  very  glad  to  satisfy 
the  other  two  boons.  Now  he  says,  "The  gods  in 
ancient  times  were  puzzled  on  this  point.  This  subtle 
law  is  not  easy  to  understand.  Choose  some  other 
boon,  O  Nachiketas,  do  not  press  me,  release  me  on 
this  point."  The  boy  was  determined  and  said, 
"What  thou  hast  said  is  true,  O  Death,  that  even  the 
gods  doubted  on  this  point,  and  it  is  no  easy  matter 
to  understand.  But  I  cannot  obtain  another  exponent 
like  you  and  there  is  no  other  boon  equal  to  this." 

Death  said:  "Ask  for  sons  and  grandsons  who  will 
live  one  hundred  years,  many  cattle,  elephants,  gold 
and  horses.  Ask  for  empire  on  this  earth  and  live  as 
many  years  as  you  like.  Or  choose  any  other  boon 
which  you  think  equal  to  these — wealth  and  long  life. 
Or  be  thou  a  king,  O  Nachiketas,  on  the  wide  earth 
I  will  make  thee  enjoyer  of  all  desires.  Ask  for  all 
those  desires  which  are  difficult  to  obtain  in  this 
world.  These  heavenly  maidens  with  chariots  and 
music  which  are  not  to  be  obtained  by  men.  Let 
these,  which  I  will  give  to  you,  serve  you,  O  Nachike- 
tas, but  do  not  ask  me  what  comes  after  death." 

Nachiketas  said :  "These  are  merely  things  of  a  day, 
O  Death,  they  bear  away  the  energy  of  all  the  sense- 
organs.     The  longest  life  even  is  very  short.     These 


164  JNANA    YOGA 

horses  and  chariots  and  dances  and  maidens  may 
remain  with  thee.  Man  cannot  be  satisfied  by  wealth. 
Shall  we  retain  wealth  when  we  behold  Thee?  We 
shall  live  only  so  long  as  Thou  desirest.  Only  the 
boon  which  I  have  asked  is  to  be  chosen  by  me.'' 

Yama  is  pleased  with  this  answer  and  replies :  "Per- 
fection is  one  thing  and  enjoyment  another,  these 
two  having  different  ends,  bind  a  man.  He  who 
(  chooses  perfection  becomes  pure.  He  who  chooses 
enjoyment  misses  his  true  end.  Both  perfection  and 
enjoyment  present  themselves  to  man;  the  wise  man 
having  examined  both  distinguishes  one  from  the 
other.  He  chooses  perfection  as  being  superior  to 
enjoyment,  but  the  foolish  chooses  enjoyment  for  the 
benefit  of  his  body.  O  Nachiketas,  having  thought 
upon  the  things  which  are  desirable  or  apparently  so, 
thou  hast  abandoned  them."  Death  then  proceeds  to 
teach  Nachiketas. 

We  now  get  a  very  developed  idea  of  renunciation 
and  Vedic  morality — that  until  one  has  conquered  the 
/desire  for  enjoyment  the  truth  will  not  shine  in  him. 
So  long  as  the  vain  desires  of  our  senses  are  clamoring 
and,  as  it  were,  dragging  us  every  moment  outward, 
making  us  slaves  to  everything  outside,  a  little  bit  of 
color,  a  little  bit  of  taste,  a  little  bit  of  touch,  dragging 
the  human  soul  out,  notwithstanding  all  our  preten- 
sions, how  can  the  truth  express  itself  in  our  hearts? 
"That  which  is  to  follow  never  rises  before  the  mind 
of  a  thoughtless  child  deluded  by  the  folly  of  riches. 
This  world  exists,  the  other  does  not,  thinking  thus 
they  come  again  and  again  under  my  power,"  says 
Yama. 


REALIZATION  1 65 

To  understand  this  truth  is  very  difficult.  Many, 
even  hearing  it  continually,  do  not  understand,  for  the 
speaker  must  be  wonderful,  so  must  be  the  hearer. 
The  teacher  must  be  wonderful,  so  must  be  the  taught. 
Neither  is  the  mind  to  be  disturbed  by  vain  argument, 
for  it  is  no  more  a  question  of  argument,  it  is  a  ques- 
tion of  fact.  We  have  always  heard  that  there  is  a 
path  in  every  religion  which  insists  on  our  faith.  We 
have  been  taught  to  believe  blindly.  Well,  this  idea 
of  blind  faith  is  objectionable,  no  doubt — no  doubt  it 
is  very  objectionable — but  analyzing  it  we  find  that 
behind  it  is  a  very  great  truth.  What  it  really  means 
is  what  we  read  now.  The  mind  is  not  to  be  ruffled 
by  vain  arguments,  because  argument  will  not  bring 
us  to  know  God.  It  is  a  question  of  fact,  and  not  of 
argument.  All  argument  and  reasoning  must  be 
based  upon  certain  principles.  Without  these  princi- 
ples there  cannot  be  any  argument.  Reasoning  is  the 
method  of  comparison  between  certain  facts  which  we 
have  already  absolutely  perceived.  If  these  absolutely 
perceived  facts  are  not  there  already,  there  cannot  be 
any  reasoning.  Just  as  it  is  true  in  the  external  sense, 
why  should  it  not  be  at  the  same  time  true  in  the 
internal?  The  external  sensations  all  depend  on 
actual  experiences.  You  are  not  asked  to  believe  in 
any  assertions,  but  the  rules  become  established  by 
actual  demonstration,  not  in  the  form  of  argument, 
but  by  actual  perception. 

All  arguments  are  based  upon  certain  perceptions. 
The  chemist  takes  certain  things  and  certain  results 
are  produced.  This  is  a  fact ;  you  see  it,  sense  it,  and 
make  that  the  basis  on  which  to  build  all  your  chemi- 


l66  JNANA   YOGA 

cal  arguments.  So  with  the  physicists,  so  with  all 
other  sciences,  all  knowledge  must  stand  on  certain 
perception  of  facts,  and  upon  that  we  have  to  build, 
our  reasoning.  But,  curiously  enough,  the  vast 
majority  of  mankind  think,  especially  at  the  present 
time,  that  no  such  perception  is  possible  in  religion, 
that  religion  can  only  be  apprehended  by  vain  argu- 
ments outside.  Therefore  we  are  told,  the  mind  is 
not  to  be  disturbed  by  vain  arguments.  Religion  is  ' 
a  question  of  fact,  not  of  talk.  CWe  have  to  analyze  \ 
our  own  souls  and  to  find  what  is  there.  We  have  to 
understand  it  and  to  realize  what  is  understood.  That 
is  religion.  No  amount  of  talk  will  make  religion. 
So  the  question  of  whether  there  is  a  God  or  not  can 
never  be  proved  by  argument,  for  the  arguments  are  as 
much  on  one  side  as  the  other.  But  if  there  be  a  God, 
He  is  in  our  own  hearts.  Have  you  ever  seen  Him? 
Just  as  the  question  as  to  whether  this  world  exists  or 
not  has  not  yet  been  decided,  so  the  debate  between 
the  idealists  and  the  realists  is  eternal.  It  is  a  fact, 
yet  we  only  know  that  the  world  exists,  that  it  goes  on. 
We  only  change  the  meaning  of  the  word.  So  with 
all  the  questions  of  life,  we  must  come  back  to  facts. 
There  are  certain  facts  which  are  to  be  perceived,  and 
there  are  certain  religious  facts,  as  in  external  science, 
that  have  to  be  perceived,  and  upon  them  religion  will 
be  built.  Of  course  the  extreme  claim  that  you  must 
believe  any  dogma  of  a  religion  is  degrading  to  the 
human  mind.  That  man  who  asks  you  to  believe  any- 
thing degrades  himself,  and,  if  you  believe,  degrades 
you  too.  The  only  right  that  the  sages  of  the  world 
have  to  tell  us  anything,  is  that  they  have  analyzed 


REALIZATION  167 

their  own  minds  and  have  found  these  facts,  and  if 
we  do  the  same,  we  shall  believe,  and  not  before. 
That  is  all  that  there  is  in  religion.  But  you  must 
always  remember  this,  that  as  a  matter  of  fact  99.9 
per  cent,  of  those  who  attack  religion  have  never 
analyzed  their  minds,  have  never  struggled  to  get  at, 
the  facts.  So  their  arguments  do  not  have  any  weight 
against  religion,  any  more  than  those  of  a  blind  man 
who  cries  against  the  sun,  *'You  are  all  fools  who 
believe  in  the  sun."  That  would  have  no  weight  with 
us.  So  the  arguments  of  these  people  who  have  not 
gone  to  work  to  analyze  their  own  minds,  yet  at  the 
same  time  try  to  pull  down  religion,  should  have  no 
weight  with  us. 

This  is  one  great  idea  to  learn  and  to  hold  on 
to,  this  idea  of  realization.  This  turmoil  and  fight 
and  difference  in  religions  will  only  cease  when  we 
understand  that  religion  is  not  in  books,  neither  in 
temples,  nor  in  the  senses.  It  is  an  actual  percep-  ^ 
tion,  and  only  the  man  who  has  actually  perceived 
God  and  perceived  soul,  has  religion,  while  all  men 
who  have  not  done  that  are  alike.  There  is  no  real 
difference  between  the  highest  ecclesiastical  giant, 
who  can  talk  by  the  volume,  and  the  lowest,  most  ^ 
ignorant  materialist.  We  are  all  atheists ;  let  us  con-  ) 
fess  it.  Mere  intellectual  assent  will  not  make  us 
religious,  and  it  does  not.  Take  a  Christian,  or  a 
Mohammedan,  or  a  follower  of  any  religion  in  the 
world.  See  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  Any  man 
who  truly  realized  it  would  be  a  god  immediately, 
would  be  perfect,  and  yet  it  is  said  that  there  are 
many  millions  of  Christi2in3  in  the  world.     Do  you 


1 68  JNANA   YOGA 

mean  to  say  they  are  all  Christians?  What  is  meant 
is,  that  mankind  may  at  some  time  try  to  realize  that 
sermon.  Not  one  in  twenty  millions  is  a  real  Chris- 
tian. 

So,  in  India,  there  are  said  to  be  three  hundred 
millions  of  Vedantins.  If  there  were  one  in  a  thou- 
sand who  had  actually  realized  religion,  this  world 
would  soon  be  greatly  changed.  We  are  all  atheists, 
and  yet  we  try  to  fight  the  man  who  admits  it.  We 
are  all  in  the  dark;  religion  is  to  us  a  mere  nothing, 
mere  intellectual  assent,  mere  talk — this  man  talks 
well,  and  that  man  ill — this  to  us  is  religion.  "Won- 
derful methods  of  joining  words,  rhetorical  powers, 
and  explaining  texts  of  the  books  in  various  ways, 
.the^e  are  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  learned,  not 
religion."  Religion  will  begin  when  that  actual  reali- 
zation in  our  own  souls  begins.  That  will  be  the 
dawn  of  religion;  then  we  shall  become  religious; 
then,  and  then  alone,  morality  will  begin.  Now  we 
are  not  much  more  moral  than  the  animals  in  the 
streets.  We  are  only  held  down  by  the  whips  of 
society.  If  society  said  to-day  I  will  not  punish  you 
if  you  go  and  steal,  we  should  just  make  a  rush  for 
every  one's  property.  It  is  the  policeman  that  makes 
the  majority  of  us  moral.  It  is  social  opinion  that 
makes  a  great  deal  of  our  morality,  and  really  we  are 
little  better  than  the  animals.  We  understand  how 
much  this  is  so,  in  the  secret  of  our  own  rooms.  So 
let  us  not  be  hypocrites.  Let  us  confess  that  we  are 
not  religious  and  have  no  right  to  look  down  on 
others.  We  are  all  brothers,  and  we  shall  be  moral, 
we  hope,  when  we  have  realized  religion. 


REALIZATION  1 69 

If  you  have  seen  a  certain  country,  a  man  may  cut 
you  to  pieces,  but  you  will  never  in  your  heart  of 
hearts  say  you  have  not  seen  the  country.  Extra- 
ordinary physical .  force  may  compel  you  to  say  you 
have  not  seen  it,  but  in  your  own  mind  you  know  you 
have  seen  it.  When  you  see  Religion  and  God  in  a 
more  intense  sense  than  you  see  this  external  world, 
nothing  will  be  able  to  shake  your  belief.  Then  will 
real  faith  begm.  That  is  what  is  meant  by  the  words 
in  your  Gospel :  *'He  who  has  faith  even  as  a  grain  of 
mustard  seed."  Then  you  will  know  the  truth  because 
you  have  become  the  truth,  for  mere  intellectual  assent 
is  nothing. 

The  one  idea  is,  does  this  realization  exist?  This 
is  the  watchword  of  Vedanta,  realize  religion,  no  talk- 
ing will  do,  but  it  is  only  to  be  done  with  great 
difficulty.  He  has  hidden  Himself  inside  the  atom, 
the  Ancient  One  who  resides  in  the  inmost  recess  of 
every  human  heart.  The  sages  realized  Him  through 
the  power  of  introspection,  and  then  they  got  beyond 
both  joy  and  misery,  beyond  what  we  call  virtue, 
beyond  what  we  call  vice,  beyond  our  bad  deeds, 
beyond  our  good  deeds,  beyond  being  and  non-being, 
he  who  has  seen  Him  has  seen  the  Reality.  But  what 
then  about  the  idea  of  heaven?  It  was  the  idea  of 
happiness  minus  unhappiness.  That  is  to  say,  what 
we  want,  is  all  the  joys  of  this  life  minus  its  sorrows. 
That  is  a  very  good  idea,  no  doubt;  it  comes  natural- 
ly ;  but  it  is  a  mistake  throughout,  because  there  is  no 
such  thing  as  absolute  good,  nor  any  such  thing  as 
absolute  sorrow. 

You  have  all  heard  of  that  very  rich  man  in  Rome 


170 


J  NANA    YOGA 


who  learned  one  day  that  he  had  only  about  a  million 
pounds  left  of  his  property,  and  said :  *'What  shall  I 
do  to-morrow  ?"  and  forthwith  committed  suicide.  A 
million  pounds  was  poverty  to  him.  What  is  joy, 
and  what  is  sorrow?  It  is  a  vanishing  quantity,  con- 
tinually vanishing.  When  I  was  a  child  I  thought  if 
I  could  become  a  cabman  that  would  be  the  very  acme 
of  happiness  for  me,  just  to  drive  about.  I  do  not 
think  so  now.  To  what  joy  will  you  cling?  This  is 
one  point  we  must  all  try  to  understand,  and  it  is  one 
of  the  last  superstitions  to  leave  us.  Every  one's 
pleasure  is  different.  I  have  seen  a  man  who  is  not 
happy  unless  he  swallows  a  lump  of  opium  every  day. 
He  may  dream  of  a  heaven  where  the  land  is  made  of 
opium.  It  would  be  a  very  bad  heaven  for  me.  Again 
and  again  in  Arabian  poetry  we  read  of  heaven  full  of 
gardens,  where  rivers  run  below.  I  have  lived  much 
of  my  life  in  a  country  where  there  is  too  much  water ; 
some  villages  and  a  few  thousand  lives  are  sacrificed 
to  it  every  year.  So  my  heaven  would  not  have  gar- 
dens beneath  which  rivers  flow ;  I  would  have  dry  land 
where  very  little  rain  falls.  So  with  life,  our  pleas- 
ures are  always  changing.  If  a  young  man  dreams  of 
heaven  he  dreams  of  a  heaven  where  he  will  have  a 
beautiful  wife.  Let  that  very  man  become  old  and 
he  does  not  want  a  wife.  It  is  our  necessities  which 
^  make  our  heaven,  and  the  heaven  changes  with  the 
j  change  of  our  necessities.  If  we  had  a  heaven  where 
all  these  things  were  intensified,  the  heaven  desired  by 
those  to  whom  this  sense  enjoyment  is  the  very  end 
of  existence,  we  should  not  progress.  That  would  be 
the  most  terrible  curse  we  could  pronounce  on  the  souL 


REALIZATION  I7I 

Is  this  all  we  can  come  to  ?  A  little  weeping  and  danc- 
ing, and  then  to  die  like  a  dog.  What  a  curse  you 
pronounce  on  the  head  of  humanity  when  you  long 
for  these  things !  That  is  what  you  do  when  you  cry 
after  the  joys  of  this  world,  for  you  do  not  know  what 
joy  is.  What  philosophy  insists  on  is  not  to  give  up 
joys,  but  to  know  what  joy  really  is.  The  Norwegian 
heaven  is  a  tremendous  fighting  place,  where  they  all 
sit  before  Wodin,  and  then  comes  a  wild  boar  hunt, 
and  then  they  go  to  war  and  slash  each  other  to 
pieces.  But  somehow  or  other,  after  a  few  hours  of 
such  fighting  the  wounds  are  all  healed  up,  and  they 
go  into  a  hall,  where  the  boar  has  been  roasted,  and 
have  a  carousal.  And  then  the  wild  boar  is  made  up 
again  to  be  hunted  the  next  day.  That  is  quite  the 
same  thing,  not  a  whit  worse  than  our  ideas,  only  our 
ideas  are  a  little  more  refined.  We  want  to  hunt  all 
these  wild  boars,  and  get  to  a  place  where  all  the 
enjoyments  will  continue,  just  as  they  imagine  that 
the  wild  boar  is  hunted  and  eaten  every  day,  and 
recovers  the  next  day. 

Now  philosophy  insists  that  there  is  a  joy  which  is 
absolute,  which  never  changes,  and  therefore  that  joy 
cannot  be  the  joys  and  pleasures  we  have  in  this  life, 
and  yet  it  is  Vedanta  alone  that  proves  that  every- 
thing that  is  joyful  in  this  life  is  but  a  particle  of  that 
real  joy,  because  that  is  the  only  joy  there  is.  Every 
moment  we  are  really  enjoying  the  absolute  bliss,  cov- 
ered up,  misunderstood,  caricatured.  Wherever  there 
is  any  blessing,  any  blissfulness,  any  joy,  even  the  joy 
of  the  thief  in  stealing  from  somebody  else,  it  is  that 
absolute  bliss  coming  out  through  him,  only  it  has 


1/2  J  NANA   YOGA 

become  obscured,  muddled  up  as  it  were,  with  all  sorts 
of  extraneous  circumstances,  caricatured,   misunder- 
stood, and  that  is  what  we  call  the  thief.     But,  to 
understand  that,  we  have  first  to  go  through  the  nega- 
tion, and  then  the  positive  side  will  begin.     First  we 
have  to  give  up  all  that  is  ignorance,  all  that  is  false, 
and  then  truth  will  begin  for  us.     When  we  have 
grasped  the  truth  these  things  which  we  have  given 
up  at  first  will  take  a  new  shape  and  form,  will  appear 
to  us  in  a  new  light,  they  will  all  have  become  deified. 
They  will  have  become  sublimated,  we  shall  under- 
stand them  then  in  their  real  light.     But  to  under- 
stand them  we  have  first  to  get  a  glirnpse  of  truth,  and 
we  must  give  them  up  first,  and  then  take  thernback 
again  deified.     Therefore  we  have  to  give  up  all  our 
miseries  and  sorrows,  all  our  little  joys.     They  are 
but  different  degrees  of  happiness  or  misery  as  we( 
may  call  it.     "That  which  all  the  Vedas  declare,  which  ^ 
is  proclaimed  by  all  penances,  seeking  which  men  lead  S 
lives  of  continence,  I  will  tell  you  ih  one  word — it  is   ; 
*Om.'  *'     You  will  find  this  word  "Om"  praised  very    / 
much  in  the  Vedas,  and  it  is  held  to  be  very  sacred.       } 

Now  Yama  answers  the  question — "What  becomes 
of  a  man  when  the  body  dies?"  "This  Wise  One 
never  dies,  is  never  born ;  it  arises  from  nothing,  noth- 
ing arises  from  it.  Unborn,  Eternal,  Everlasting, 
this  Ancient  One  can  never  be  destroyed  with  the 
destruction  of  the  body.  If  the  killer  thinks  he  can 
kill,  or  if  the  killed  thinks  he  is  slain,  they  both  do 
not  know  the  truth,  for  the  Self  neither  kills  nor  is 
killed."  A  most  tremendous  position.  The  one  adjec- 
tive in  the  first  line  is  "wise"  One.     As  you  go  on  you 


REALIZATION  r73 

will  find  that  the  ideal  of  Vedanta  is,  that  all  wisdom, 
and  all  purity  are  in  the  soul  already — dimly  expressed, 
or  better  expressed — that  is  the  only  difference.  The 
difference  between  man  and  man,  and  all  things  in  the 
whole  creation  is  not  in  kind  but  only  in  degree.  The 
background,  the  reality  of  every  one  is  that  same  eter- 
nal, ever  blessed,  ever  pure,  and  ever  perfect  One. 
That  is  the  Atman,  the  soul,  in  the  sinner  or  the  sin- 
less, in  the  happy  or  the  unhappy,  in  the  beautiful  or 
the  ugly,  in  man  or  animals,  it  is  the  same  throughout. 
He  is  the  Shining  One.  The  difference  is  caused  by 
the  power  of  expression.  In  some  it  is  expressed 
more,  in  others  less,  but  this  difference  of  expression 
has  no  effect  upon  Him,  the  Atman.  If  in  his  cloth- 
ing one  shows  more  of  his  body,  and  another  less,  it 
would  not  make  any  difference  in  the  bodies.  The  dif- 
ference is  in  the  clothes  that  cover  or  do  not  cover  the 
body.  According  to  the  covering,  the  body  and  the 
man,  its  powers,  its  purity  begin  to  shine.  Therefore 
we  had  better  remember  here  also,  that  throughout  the 
Vedanta  philosophy,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  good  and 
bad,  they  are  not  two  different  things ;  the  same  thing 
is  good  or  bad,  and  the  difference  is  only  in  degree,  and 
that  we  see  to  be  an  actual  fact.  The  very  thing  I  call 
pleasurable  to-day,  to-morrow  under  better  circum- 
stances, I  may  call  pain.  So  the  difference  is  only  in 
the  degree,  the  manifestation,  not  in  the  thing  itself. 
There  is  no  such  thing  as  what  we  call  good  or  bad. 
The  fire  that  warms  us,  would  also  consume  us,*  it 
would  not  be  the  fault  of  the  fire.  Thus,  the  soul 
being  pure  and  perfect,  the  man  who  wants  to  do  evil 
is  giving  the  lie  unto  himself,  he  does  not  know  the 


174  JNANA   YOGA 

nature  of  himself.  Even  in  the  murderer  the  pure 
soul  is  there;  it  dies  not.  It  was  his  mistake;  he 
could  not  manifest  it;  he  had  covered  it  up.  Nor  in 
the  man  who  thinks  that  he  is  killed  is  the  soul 
killed;  it  is  the  eternal,  never  killed,  never  destroyed. 
"Infinitely  smaller  than  the  smallest,  infinitely  larger 
than  the  largest,  yet  this  Lord  of  all  is  present  in  the 
depths  of  every  human  heart.  The  sinless,  bereft  of 
all  misery,  see  Him  through  the  mercy  of  the  Lord; 
the  bodiless,  yet  living  in  the  body,  the  spaceless,  yet 
seeming  to  occupy  space,  infinite,  omnipresent ;  know- 
ing such  to  be  the  soul,  the  sages  never  are  miserable." 
This  Atman  is  not  to  be  realized  by  the  power  of 
speech,  nor  by  a  vast  intellect,  nor  by  the  study  of  the 
Vedas.  This  is  a  very  bold  thing.  As  I  told  you 
before,  the  sages  were  very  bold  thinkers,  never 
stopped  at  anything.  You  will  remember  that  in  India 
these  Vedas  are  regarded  in  such  a  light  as  the 
Christians  never  regarded  the  Bible.  Your  idea  of 
revelation  is,  that  a  man  was  inspired  by  God;  but 
their  idea  was,  that  things  exist  because  they  are  in 
the  Vedas.  In  and  through  the  Vedas  the  whole 
creation  has  come.  All  that  is  called  knowledge  is  in 
the  Vedas.  Every  word  is  sacred  and  eternal,  eternal 
as  the  created  man,  without  beginning  and  without 
end.  As  it  were,  the  whole  of  the  Creator's  mind  is 
in  this  book.  That  was  the  light  in  which  they  held 
the  Vedas.  Why  is  this  moral?  Because  the  Vedas 
say  so.  Why  is  this  immoral  ?  Because  the  Vedas  say 
so,  and  in  spite  of  that,  see  these  bold  men.  No,  the 
truth  is  not  to  be  found  by  much  study  of  the  Vedas. 
"With  whom  the  Lord  is  pleased,  unto  that  man  He 


REALIZATION  175 

expresses  Himself."  But  then,  the  objection  may  be 
advanced — this  is  something  Hke  partisanship.  But 
Yama  explains:  "Those  who  are  evil  doers,  whose 
minds  are  not  peaceful,  can  never  know  the  light." 
It  is  those  who  are  true  in  heart,  pure  in  their  deeds, 
whose  senses  have  become  controlled,  unto  them  this 
Self  manifests  Itself. 

Here  is  a  beautiful  figure.  Picture  the  Self  to  be 
the  rider  and  this  body  the  chariot,  the  intellect  to  be 
the  charioteer,  the  mind  the  reins,  and  the  senses  the 
horses.  In  that  chariot,  where  the  horses  are  well 
broken,  where  the  reins  are  strong  and  kept  well  in 
the  hands  of  the  charioteer  (the  intellect),  that  chariot 
reaches  the  goal  which  is  the  state  of  Him  the  Omni- 
present. But  where  the  horses  (the  senses),  are  not 
controlled,  nor  the  reins  (the  mind),  well  managed, 
that  chariot  comes  to  destruction.  This  Atman  in 
all  beings  does  not  manifest  Himself  to  the  eyes  or 
the  senses,  but  those  whose  minds  have  become  puri- 
fied and  refined,  they  see  Him.  Beyond  all  sound, 
all  sight,  beyond  form,  absolute,  beyond  all  taste  and 
touch;  infinite,  without  beginning  and  without  end, 
even  beyond  nature,  the  unchangeable,  he  who  realizes 
Him,  frees  himself  from  the  jaws  of  death.  But  it 
is  very  difficult.  It  is,  as  it  were,  walking  on  the 
blade  of  a  razor;  the  way  is  long  and  perilous,  but 
struggle  on,  do  not  despair.  "Awake,  arise,  and  stop 
not  till  the  goal  is  reached." 

Now  you  see  that  the  one  central  idea  throughout 
all  the  Upanishads  is  that  of  realization.  A  great 
many  questions  will  arise  from  time  to  time,  and 
especially  to  the  modern  man.     There  will  be  the  ques- 


176  JNANA   YOGA 

tion  of  utility,  there  will  be  various  other  questions, 
but  in  all  we  shall  find,  that  we  are  prompted  by  our 
past  associations.  It  is  association  of  ideas  that  has 
such  a  tremendous  power  in  our  mind.  To  those  who 
from  childhood  have  always  heard  about  a  personal 
God  and  the  personality  of  the  mind,  these  ideas  will 
of  course  appear  very  stern  and  harsh,  but  if  we 
listen  to  them,  think  of  them  for  a  long  time,  they 
will  become  part  and  parcel  of  our  lives,  and  will  no 
longer  frighten  us.  The  great  question  that  gener- 
ally arises  of  course  is  the  utility  of  philosophy.  To 
that  there  can  be  only  one  answer,  that  if  on  the 
utilitarian  ground  it  is  good  for  men  to  seek  for 
pleasure,  why  should  not  those  whose  pleasure  is  in 
religious  speculation  seek  that?  Because  sense  enjoy- 
ments please  many,  they  seek  for  them,  but  there  may 
be  others  whom  they  do  not  please,  who  want  higher 
enjoyment.  The  dog's  pleasure  is  only  in  eating  and 
drinkmg.  The  dog  cannot  understand  the  pleasure 
of  the  scientist  who  gives  up  everything,  and  perhaps 
dwells  on  the  top  of  a  mountain  to  observe  the  posi- 
tion of  certain  stars.  The  dog  may  smile  at  him  and 
think  he  is  a  madman.  Perhaps  this  poor  scientist 
never  had  money  enough  to  marry  even;  he  eats  a 
few  bits  of  bread  and  drinks  water  and  sits  on  the 
top  of  a  mountain.  Perhaps  this  dog  laughs  at  him. 
But  the  scientist  will  say,  ''My  dear  dog,  your  pleas- 
ure is  only  in  the  senses;  you  enjoy  it;  you  know 
nothing  beyond  it,  but  for  me  this  is  the  most  enjoya- 
ble thing,  and  if  you  have  the  right  to  seek  your 
pleasure  in  your  own  way  so  have  I,  in  my  own  way." 
The  mistake  is  that  we  want  to  tie  the  whole  world 


REALIZATION  177 

down  to  our  own  plane,  we  want  to  make  our  minds 

the  measure  of  the  whole  universe.     To  you  the  old 

sense  things  are  perhaps  the  greatest  pleasure,  but  it 

is  not  necessary  that  my  pleasure  should  be  the  same, 

and  when  you  insist  upon  that,  I  differ  from  you. 

That  is  the  difference  between  the  worldly  utilitarian 

and  the  religious  man.     The  worldly  utilitarian  says : 

"See  how  happy  I  am.    I  get  a  little  money,  but  about 

all  these  other  things  I  do  not  bother  my  head.     They 

are  too  unsearchable,  and  so  I  am  happy.*'     So  far, 

so  good;  good  for  all  you  utilitarians.     This  world 

is  terrible.     If  any  man  gets  happiness  in  any  way 

excepting  by  injuring  his  fellow  beings,  God  speed 

him,  but  when  this  man  comes  to  me  and  says  you 

too  must  do  these  things;  you  will  be  a  fool  if  you 

do  not,  I  say  you  are  wrong,  because  the  very  things 

which  are  pleasurable  to  you,  have  not  the  slightest 

attraction  for  me.     If  I  had  to  go  after  a  few  hand- 

fuls  of  gold,  my  life  would  not  be  worth  living!  I 

would  die.     That  is   the  answer  the   religious   man 

would  make  to  him.     The  fact  is  that  religion  is  only 

possible  for  those  who  have  finished  with  these  lower  ;    ^^^-^— , 

things.     We  must  have  our  experiences,  must  have  ) 

our  full  run.     It  is  only  when  we  have  finished  this  ] 

run  that  the  other  world  opens. 

There  is  a  great  problem  that  arises  in  my  mind. 
It  is  a  very  harsh  thing  to  say,  and  yet  a  fact.  These 
enjoyments  of  the  senses  sometimes  assume  another 
phase  which  is  very  dangerous  and  tempting.  This 
idea  you  will  always  hear — it  was  in  very  old  times, 
in  every  religion — ^that  a  time  will  come  when  all  the 
miseries  of  life  will  cease,  and  only  its  joys  and  pleas- 


178  J  NANA   YOGA 

ures  will  remain,  that  this  earth  will  thus  become  a 
heaven.  That  I  do  not  believe.  This  earth  of  ours 
will  always  remain  this  same  world.  It  is  a  most 
terrible  thing  to  say,  yet  I  do  not  see  my  way  out 
of  it.  It  is  like  rheumatism;  drive  it  from  the  head, 
it  goes  to  the  legs,  drive  it  from  there  it  goes  to  other 
parts.  Whatever  you  do  is  there.  So  is  misery. 
In  olden  times  people  lived  in  forests,  and  they  ate 
each  other  up;  in  modern  times  they  do  not  eat  each 
other's  flesh,  but  they  cheat  one  another.  They  ruin 
whole  countries  and  cities  by  cheating.  That  is  not 
great  progress ;  I  do  not  see  that  what  you  call 
progress  in  the  world  is  other  than  multiplication  of 
desires.  If  one  thing  is  obvious  to  me  it  is  this,  that 
desires  bring  all  misery,  the  state  of  the  beggar,  always 
begging  for  something,  unable  to  see  anything  without 
the  idea  of  having  it;  having,  having,  everything. 
The  whole  life  is  the  life  of  the  thirsty,  thirsty  beggar, 
unquenchable  thirst  of  desire.  If  the  power  to  satis- 
fy our  desires  is  increased  in  arithmetical  progression, 
the  power  of  desire  is  increased  in  geometrical  pro- 
gression. The  sum-total  of  happiness  and  misery  in 
the  world  is  at  least  the  same  throughout.  If  a  wave 
rises  in  the  ocean  it  makes  a  hollow  somewhere.  If 
happiness  comes  to  a  man  unhappiness  comes  to  some 
other,  or  to  some  animal.  Men  are  increasing  and 
animals  are  vanishing ;  we  are  killing  them,  and  taking 
their  land ;  we  are  taking  all  means  of  sustenance 
from  them.  How  can  we  say  that  happiness  is 
increasing?  The  strong  race  eats  up  the  weaker,  but 
do  you  think  that  the  strong  race  will  be  very  happy  ? 
No;  they  will  begin  to  kill  each  other.     I  do  not  see 


REALIZATION  179 

how  it  can  be  on  practical  grounds.  It  is  a  question 
of  fact.  On  theoretical  grounds,  also,  I  see  it  cannot 
be. 

Perfection  is  always  infinite.  We  are  this  infinite 
already,  and  we  are  trying  to  manifest  that  infinity. 
You  and  I  and  all  beings  are  trying  to  manifest  this 
infinity.  So  far  it  is  all  right.  But  from  this  fact, 
some  German  philosophers  have  tried  to  make  out  a 
very  peculiar  theory  of  philosophy — that  this  mani- 
festation will  become  higher  and  higher  until  we 
attain  perfect  manifestation,  until  we  have  become 
perfect  beings.  What  is  meant  by  perfect  manifesta- 
tion? Perfection  means  infinity,  and  manifestation 
means  limit,  and  so  it  means  that  we  shall  become 
unlimited  limiteds ;  which  is  self-contradictory.  Such 
a  doctrine  may  please  children;  it  may  be  very  nice 
to  please  children,  to  give  them  a  comfortable  religion, 
but  it  is  poisoning  them  with  lies,  and  it  is  bad  for 
religion.  We  are  told  that  this  world  is  a  degrada- 
tion, that  man  is  a  degradation  of  God,  that  Adam 
fell.  There  is  no  one  religion  to-day  which  does  not 
teach  you  that  man  is  a  degradation.  We  have  been 
degraded  down  to  the  animal;  now  we  are  going  up, 
to  emerge  again,  to  get  away  from  this  bondage, 
but  we  shall  never  be  able  to  manifest  the  infinite 
here.  We  shall  struggle  hard,  and  then  find  it  impos- 
sible. There  will  come  a  time  when  we  shall  find  that 
it  is  impossible  to  be  perfect  here,  while  we  are 
bound  by  the  senses.  And  then  the  march  back  will 
be  sounded. 

This  is  renunciation.  We  shall  have  to  get  out  of 
the  difficulty  as  we  got  in,  and  then  morality  and 


l8o  .  J  NANA   YOGA 

charity  will  begin.  What  is  the  watchword  of  all 
ethical  codes?  ''Not  I,  but  thou/'  and  this  "I"  is  the 
outcome  of  the  infinite  behind,  trying  to  manifest  itself 
on  the  outside  world.  This  little  'T'  is  the  result. 
This  is  the  result  that  has  been  obtained,  and  this 
little  *T"  will  have  to  go  back  and  join  the  infinite, 
its  own  nature.  It  will  find  that  it  has  been  making 
a  false  attempt.  It  has  put  its  foot  into  the  wheel  and 
will  have  to  get  out,  and  this  is  being  discovered  every 
day.  Every  time  you  say:  "Not  I,  my  brother,  but 
thou,"  you  are  trying  to  go  back,  and  every  time  you 
forget  the  ideal,  you  say:  *T,  not  thou."  Struggles 
and  evils  are  in  the  world,  but  after  that  must  begin 
renunciation,  eternal  renunciation.  Why  care  for  this 
little  life?  All  these  vain  desires  of  living  here  and 
enjoying  this  life,  this  thinking  I  will  live  and  enjoy 
again  in  some  other  place — living  always  in  the  senses 
and  in  sense  enjoyment — these  ideas  bring  death. 

If  we  are  developed  animals  the  very  same  argu- 
ment can  be  worked  out  on  the  other  side ;  the  animals 
also  may  be  degraded  men.  How  do  you  know  it  is 
not  so?  You  have  seen  that  the  proof  of  evolution 
is  simply  this,  that  you  find  a  series  of  bodies,  one 
near  to  the  other,  from  the  lowest  body  to  the  highest 
body,  but  from  that  argument  how  can  you  insist  that 
it  is  from  the  lower  up,  and  not  from  the  top  down? 
The  argument  applies  to  both  sides,  and  if  anything 
is  true  I  believe  it  is  going  up  and  down,  the  series 
repeating  itself.  How  can  you  have  an  evolution 
without  going  back  in  the  same  series  in  which  we 
came  up?  However  it  may  be,  the  central  idea  to 
which  I  am  referring  is  there. 


REALIZATION  l8l 

Of  course  I  am  ready  to  be  convinced  the  other 
way,  that  the  infinite  can  manifest  itself.  As  to  the 
other  idea — that  we  are  going  ever  and  ever  in  a 
straight  line — I  do  not  believe  it;  it  is  too  nonsensical 
to  believe.  There  is  no  motion  in  a  straight  line.  If 
you  could  throw  a  stone  forward  with  sufficient  force, 
a  time  would  come  when  it  would  complete  the  circle 
and  return  to  its  starting  place.  Do  you  not  read 
the  mathematical  axiom,  a  straight  line  infinitely  pro- 
jected becomes  a  circle?  It  must  be  so,  only  it  may 
vary  as  to  details.  So  I  always  cling  to  the  side  of 
the  old  religious  ideas,  when  I  hear  Christ  preachy 
and  Buddha  assert,  and  the  Vedanta  declare,  and  the 
Bible  proclaim,  that  we  must  all  come  to  perfection 
in  time,  but  only  by  giving  up  this  imperfection.  This 
world  is  nothing.  It  is  at  best  only  a  hideous  carica- 
ture, a  shadow  of  the  reality.  All  the  fools  are  rush- 
ing after  sense-enjoyments. 

It  is  easy  to  live  in  the  senses.  It  is  easier  to  run 
in  the  old  groove,  eating  and  drinking ;  but  what  these 
modern  philosophers  want  to  tell  you  is  to  take  these 
comfortable  ideas  and  put  the  stamp  of  religion  on 
them.  Such  a  doctrine  is  dangerous.  Death  is  in  the 
senses.  We  must  go  beyond  death.  It  is  not  a  reali- 
ty. Renunciation  will  take  us  to  the  reality.  Renun- 
ciation is  meant  by  morality.^  Renunciation  is  the 
vqry  basis  of  our  true  life;  every  moment  of  good- 
ness and  real  life  that  we  enjoy,  is  when  we  do  not 
think  of  ourselves.  This  little  separate  self  must  die ; 
and  then  we  shall  find  that  we  are  in  the  Real,  and  the 
Vedanta  says,  that  Reality  is  God,  and  He  is  our  own 
real  nature,  and  He  is  always  in  us  and  with  us. 


1 82  J  NANA   YOGA 

Live  in  Him  and  stand  in  Him;  although  it  seems  to 
be  so  hard,  it  will  become  easier  by-and-by.  You 
will  find  that  it  is  the  only  joyful  state  of  existence; 
every  other  existence  is  of  death.  Life  on  the  plane 
of  the  spirit  is  the  only  life,  life  on  any  other  plane 
is  mere  death;  the  whole  of  this  life  can  be  only 
described  as  a  gymnasium.  We  must  go  beyond  it  to 
enjoy  real  life.     We  must  attain  to  Realization. 


XI 

THE  FREEDOM  OF  THE  SOUL 

The  Katha  Upanishad,  which  we  have  been  study- 
ing, was  written  much  later  than  that  to  which  we 
now  turn — the  Chandogya.  The  language  is  more 
modern,  and  the  thought  more  organized.  In  the 
older  Upanishads  the  language  is  very  archaic,  like 
that  of  the  hymn  portions  of  the  Veda,  and  one  has 
to  wade  sometimes  through  quite  a  mass  of  unneces- 
sary things  to  get  at  the  essential  doctrines.  The  rit- 
ualistic literature  about  which  I  told  you,  which  forms 
the  second  division  of  the  Vedas,  has,  to  a  large  extent, 
left  its  mark  upon  this  old  Upanishad,  so  that  more 
than  half  of  it  is  still  ritualistic.  There  is,  however, 
one  great  gain  in  studying  the  very  old  Upanishads; 
you  trace,  as  it  were,  the  historical  springing  up  of 
spiritual  ideas.  In  the  more  recent  Upanishads  the 
spiritual  ideas  have  been  collected  and  brought  into 
one  place,  just  as  in  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  for  instance, 
which  we  may  perhaps  look  upon  as  the  last  of  the 
Upanishads,  and  you  do  not  find  in  them  any  inkling 
of  these  ritualistic  ideas.  Every  verse  of  the  Gita  has 
been  collected  from  some  portion  of  the  Upanishads, 
and  made  into  a  sort  of  bouquet.  But  therein  you 
cannot  understand  the  rise  of  the  idea,  you  cannot 
trace  it  to  its  source,  and  to  do  that  is,  as  has  been 

183 


184  J  NANA   YOGA 

pointed  out  b)^  many,  one  of  the  great  benefits  of  study- 
ing the  Vedas ;  for  the  great  idea  of  holiness  that  has 
been  attached  to  these  books  has  preserved  them,  more 
than  any  other  book  in  the  world,  from  mutilation. 
There,  thoughts  at  their  highest  and  at  their  lowest 
level  have  all  been  preserved,  essential  and  non-essen- 
tial. The  most  ennobling  teachings  and  simple  mat- 
ters of  detail  stand  side  by  side,  for  nobody  has  dared 
to  touch  them.  The  commentators  came,  of  course, 
and  tried  to  smooth  them  out,  and  to  bring  out  won- 
derful new  ideas  from  very  old  things;  they  tried  to 
find  spiritual  ideas  in  even  the  most  ordinary  state- 
ments, but  the  texts  remained,  and,  as  such,  they  are 
the  most  wonderful  historical  study.  We  all  know 
that  in  every  religion  in  later  times,  as  thoughts  began 
to  grow  and  develop  there  came  this  spiritual  progress. 
One  word  is  changed  here  and  one  put  in  there; 
another  is  thrown  out,  apart  from  the  commentators. 
This,  probably,  has  not  been  done  with  the  Vedic 
literature  at  all,  or  if  ever  done,  it  is  almost  imper- 
ceptible. So  we  have  this  great  advantage,  we  are 
able  to  study  thoughts  in  their  original  significance, 
to  note  how  they  developed,  how  from  materialistic 
ideas,  finer  and  finer  spiritual  ideas  evolved,  until  they 
attained  their  greatest  height  in  the  Vedanta.  Some 
of  the  old  manners  and  customs  are  also  there,  but  not 
very  much  in  the  Upanishads.  The  language  is  a 
peculiar  terse  mnemonic. 

The  writers  of  these  books  simply  jotted  down  these 
lines  as  helps  to  remember  certain  facts  which  they 
supposed  were  already  well  known.  In  a  narrative, 
perhaps,  as  they  are  telling  a  story  they  take  it  for 


THE    FREEDOM    OF   THE   SOUL  185 

granted  that  it  is  well  known  to  every  one  they  are 
addressing,  and  thus  a  great  difficulty  arises;  we 
scarcely  know  the  real  meaning  of  any  one  of  these 
stories,  because  the  traditions  have  nearly  died  out,  and 
the  little  that  is  left  has  been  very  much  exaggerated. 
So  many  new  interpretations  have  been  put  on  them 
that  when  you  find  them  in  the  Puranas,  they  have  al- 
ready become  lyrical  poems.  Now,  just  as  in  the  West, 
we  find  one  fact  in  the  political  development  of  western 
races :  that  they  cannot  bear  absolute  rule,  that  they  are 
always  trying  to  throw  off  any  sort  of  bondage,  to  pre- 
vent any  one  man  from  ruling  over  them,  and  are  grad- 
ually advancing  to  higher  and  higher  democratic  ideas, 
higher  and  higher  ideas  of  physical  liberty,  so  in  meta- 
physics exactly  the  same  phenomenon  appears  in  the 
development  of  spiritual  life.  Multiplicity  of  gods 
gives  place  to  one  God  of  the  Universe,  and  in  the 
Upanishads  there  is  a  rebellion  against  that  one  God. 
Not  only  was  the  idea  of  so  many  governors  of  the 
universe  ruling  their  destinies  unbearable,  but  it  was 
also  intolerable  to  them  that  there  should  be  one  person 
ruling  this  universe.  This  is  the  first  thing  that  strikes 
us.  The  idea  grows  and  grows,  until  it  attains  its 
climax.  In  almost  all  of  the  Upanishads  we  find  the 
climax  coming  at  the  last,  and  that  is  the  dethroning 
of  this  God  of  the  Universe.  The  personality  of  God 
vanishes,  the  impersonality  comes.  God  is  no  more  a 
person,  no  more  a  human  being,  however  magnified 
and  exaggerated,  ruling  this  universe,  but  God  has 
become  an  embodied  Principle  in  us,  in  every  being, 
immanent  in  the  whole  universe.  And  of  course  it 
would  be  illogical  to  go  from  the  personal  God  to  the 


1 86  J  NANA   YOGA 

impersonal,  and  at  the  same  time  to  leave  man  as  a 
person.  So  the  personal  man  has  to  be  broken  down, 
man  is  also  a  principle.  The  person  is  without,  the 
principle  is  within.  Thus  from  both  sides  simulta- 
neously we  find  the  breaking  down  of  personalities  and 
the  approach  towards  principles,  the  personal  God 
approaching  the  impersonal,  the  personal  man  ap- 
proaching the  impersonal  man,  and  then  come  the  suc- 
ceeding stages  of  delineating  the  difference  between 
the  two  advancing  lines  of  impersonal  God  and 
impersonal  Man.  And  the  Upanishads  embody  these 
succeeding  stages,  by  which  these  two  lines  at  last 
become  one,  and  the  last  word  of  each  Upanishad  is, 
''Thou  art  That."  There  is  but  One  eternally  blissful, 
and  that  One  Principle  is  manifesting  Itself  as  all 
this  variety. 

Then  came  the  philosophers.  The  work  of  the 
Upanishads  seems  to  have  ended  at  that  point;  the 
next  was  taken  up  by  the  philosophers.  The  frame- 
work was  given  them  by  the  Upanishads,  and  they 
had  to  work  out  the  details.  So,  many  questions 
would  naturally  arise.  Taking  for  granted  that  there 
is  but  one  impersonal  Principle  which  is  manifesting 
Itself  in  all  these  manifold  forms,  how  is  it  that  the 
One  becomes  many  ?  It  is  another  way  of  putting  the 
same  old  question  which  in  its  crude  form  comes  into 
the  human  heart  in  the  shape  of  an  inquiry  into  the 
cause  of  evil  and  so  forth.  Why  does  evil  exist  in 
(  the  world,  what  is  its  cause?  But  the  same  question 
has  now  become  refined,  abstracted.  No  more  is  it 
asked  from  the  platform  of  the  senses  why  we  are 
unhappy,  but  from  the  platform  of  philosophy.     How 


THE    FREEDOM    OF    THE    SOUL  1 87 

is  it  that  this  one  Principle  becomes  manifold?  And 
the  answer,  as  we  have  seen,  the  best  answer  that  India 
produced,  was  the  theory  of  Maya,  that  it  really  has 
not  become  manifold,  that  it  really  did  not  lose  a  bit 
of  its  real  nature.  This  manifold  is  only  apparent.  \ 
Man  is  only  apparently  a  person,  and  in  reality  he  is 
the  Impersonal  Being.  God  is  a  person  only  appar- 
ently, but  really  He  is  the  Impersonal  Being  of  the 
Universe. 

Even  in  this  answer  there  have  been  succeeding 
stages — philosophies  have  varied.  All  Indian  philoso- 
phers did  not  admit  this  theory  of  Maya.  Possibly 
most  of  them  did  not.  There  are  the  dualists,  with 
a  very  crude  sort  of  dualism,  who  would  not  allow 
the  question  to  be  asked,  stifled  it  at  its  very  coming 
into  existence.  They  said  you  have  no  right  to  ask 
such  a  question,  you  have  no  right  to  ask   for  an        ^  . 

explanation;  it  is  simply  the  will  of  God,  and  we  '%yhSuAdL 
have  to  submit  quietly.  There  is  no  liberty  for  the 
human  soul.  It  is  all  predestined — what  we  shall  do, 
and  have,  and  suffer,  and  enjoy,  and  it  is  our  duty 
quietly  to  suffer,  and  if  we  do  not  we  shall  be  punished 
all  the  more.  How  do  we  know  that?  Because  the 
Vedas  say  so.  And  so  they  have  their  texts,  their 
meanings,  and  they  want  to  enforce  them.  The  idea 
here  is  much  like  the  theory  of  predestination  preached 
by  St.  Paul. 

There  are  others  who,  though  not  admitting  the 
Maya  theory,  stand  midway,  and  try  to  explain  all 
this  by  succeeding  manifestations,  succeeding  develop- 
ment and  degradation  of  the  nature  of  man.  All  souls 
are  metaphorically  expanded  and  contracted  in  turn. 


I05  JNANA    YOGA 

The  whole  of  this  creation  forms,  as  it  were,  the  body 
of  God.  God  is  the  Soul  of  all  souls  and  of  the  whole 
of  nature.  Creation  means  the  expansion  of  this 
nature  of  God,  and  after  it  is  expanded  for  a  certain 
time  it  again  begins  to  contract.  In  the  case  of  indi- 
vidual souls  the  contraction  comes  from  evil  doing. 
When  a  man  does  anything  evil  his  soul  begins  to 
contract  in  its  power,  and  so  on  it  goes,  until  it  does 
good  works,  and  then  it  expands  again.  One  idea 
seems  to  be  common  in  all  these  various  Indian  sys- 
tems, and  to  my  mind  in  every  system  in  the  world, 
whether  they  know  it  or  not,  and  that  is  what  I  should 
/call  the  Divinity  of  Man.  There  is  no  one  system 
V  in  the  world,  no  proper  religion,  which  does  not  hold 
somewhere  or  other,  either  expressed  in  the  language 
of  mythology  or  in  the  language  of  allegory,  or  in 
the  polished,  clear  language  of  philosophy,  the  one 
idea  that  the  human  soul,  whatever  it  be,  or  whatever 
its  relation  to  God,  is  essentially  pure  and  perfect. 
Its  real  nature  is  blessedness  and  power,  not  weakness 
and  misery.  Somehow  or  other  this  misery  has  come. 
The  crude  systems  may  call  in  a  personified  evil,  a 
devil,  or  an  Ahriman  to  explain  how  this  misery  came. 
Other  systems  may  try  to  make  a  God  and  a  devil  in 
one,  making  some  people  miserable  and  some  happy, 
■  without  any  explanation  whatever.  Others  again, 
more  thoughtful,  bring  in  the  theory  of  Maya  and  so 
forth.  But  one  fact  stands  out  clearly,  and  it  is  with 
this  that  we  have  to  deal.  After  all,  these  philosoph- 
ical ideas  and  systems  are  but  the  gymnastics  of  the 
mind,  intellectual  exercises.  The  one  great  idea  that 
to  me  seems  to  be  clear,  and  comes  out  through  masses 


THE   FREEDOM    OF   THE   SOUL  189 

of  superstition  in  every  country  and  every  religion,  is 
the  one  luminous  idea  that  man  is  divine,  that  that 
divinity  is  our  nature. 

Whatever  else  comes  is  a  mere  super-imposition,  as 
the  Vedanta  calls  it.  Something  has  been  super- 
imposed, but  that  Divine  Nature  never  dies.  In  the 
most  degraded,  as  well  as  the  most  saintly,  it  is  ever 
present.  It  has  to  be  called  out,  and  it  will  work  itself 
out.  We  have  to  ask  and  it  will  manifest  itself.  The 
people  of  old  fancied  that  fire  lived  in  the  flint,  and 
that  friction  of  the  steel  was  necessary  to  call  that  fire 
out.  Others  believed  that  fire  lived  in  two  dry  pieces 
of  stick  and  that  friction  alone  was  necessary  to  cause 
it  to  manifest  itself.  So  this  fire  of  natural  freedom 
and  purity  is  the  nature  of  every  soul,  not  a  quality, 
because  qualities  can  be  acquired  and  therefore  can  be 
lost.  The  soul  is  one  with  freedom,  and  the  soul  is 
one  with  existence,  and  the  soul  is  one  with  knowl- 
edge ;  this  Sat-Chit-Ananda — Existence-Knowledge- 
Bliss  Absolute — is  the  nature,  the  birthright  of  the 
soul,  and  all  the  manifestations  that  we  see  are  the 
expressions  of  this  nature  of  the  soul,  dimly  or  brightly 
manifesting  itself.  Even  death  itself  is  but  the  mani- 
festation of  that  Real  Existence.  Birth  and  death, 
life  and  decay,  degradation  and  degeneration,  or  regen- 
eration, are  all  only  the  manifestations  of  that  One- 
ness. So,  knowledge,  however  it  manifests  itself, 
either  as  ignorance  or  as  learning,  is  but  the  manifes- 
tation of  that  same  Chit,  that  essence  of  knowledge;' 
the  diflference  is  only  in  degree,  and  not  in  kind.  The 
difference  in  knowledge  between  the  lowest  worm 
that  crawls  under  our  feet  and  the  highest  genius  that 


190  JNANA   YOGA 

the  heavens  may  produce,  is  only  one  of  degree,  and 
not  of  kind.  So  the  Vedantin  thinker  says  boldly  that 
the  bliss  of  the  enjoyments  in  this  life,  even  the  most 
(jdegraded  joy,  is  but  the  manifestation  of  that  one 
Divine  Bliss,  the  essence  of  the  soul. 

This  one  idea  seems  to  be  the  most  prominent,  and, 
as  I  have  said,  to  me  it  appears  that  every  religion 
holds  this  same  doctrine.  I  have  yet  to  know  the 
religion  which  has  not  that  as  its  basis.  It  is  the  one 
universal  idea  working  through  all  religions.  Take 
the  Bible  for  instance.  You  find  there  the  allegorical 
statement,  how  Adam  came  first  and  was  pure,  and 
that  purity  was  obliterated  by  his  evil  deeds  after- 
wards. It  is  clear  from  this  allegory  that  they  thought 
that  the  nature  of  the  primitive  man,  or  however  they 
may  have  put  it,  the  real  man,  was  already  perfection. 
The  impurities  that  we  see,  the  weaknesses  that  we 
feel,  are  but  super-impositions,  and  the  subsequent 
history  of  that  very  religion  shows  that  they  also 
believe  in  the  possibility,  nay,  the  surety  of  regaining 
that  old  state.  This  is  the  whole  history  of  the  Bible, 
Old  and  New  Testament  together.  So  with  the 
Mohammedans,  they  also  believed  in  Adam  and  the 
purity  of  Adam,  and  since  Mohammed  came  the  way 
opened  to  regain  that  lost  state.  So  with  the  Bud- 
dhists, they  also  believed  in  the  state  called  Nirvana, 
which  is  beyond  this  relative  world  of  ours.  It  is 
exactly  the  same  which  the  Vedantins  called  the 
Brahman,  and  the  whole  system  of  the  Buddhists  is 
advice  to  regain  that  lost  state  of  Nirvana,  So  in 
every  system,  we  find  this  one  doctrine  always  present, 
that   you   cannot   get   anything   which   is   not   yours 


THE   FREEDOM   OF  THE   SOUL  J9I 

already.  You  are  indebted  to  nobody  in  this  universe. 
You  will  claim  your  own  birthright,  or  as  it  has  been 
most  poetically  put  by  the  great  Vedantin  philosopher, 
by  making  it  the  title  of  one  of  his  books — "The 
attaining  to  our  own  empire."  That  empire  is  ours; 
we  have  lost  it  and  we  have  to  regain  it.  The  Mdyd- 
avdin,  however,  says  that  this  losing  of  the  empire 
was  an  hallucination ;  you  never  lost  it.  This  is  the 
only  difference. 

Although  all  the  systems  agree  so  far,  that  we  had 
the  empire,  and  that  we  have  lost  it,  they  give  us 
varied  advice  how  to  regain  it.  One  says  that  you 
must  perform  certain  ceremonies,  pay  certain  sums 
of  money  to  certain  idols,  eat  certain  sorts  of  food, 
live  in  a  peculiar  fashion  to  regain  that  empire. 
Another  says  that  if  you  weep  and  prostrate  yourselves 
and  ask  pardon  of  some  Being  beyond  nature  you  will 
regain  that  empire.  Another  says,  if  you  love  such 
a  Being  with  all  your  heart  you  will  regain  that 
empire.  All  this  varied  advice  is  in  the  Upanishads. 
As  I  go  on  you  will  find  it  so.  But  the  last  and 
the  greatest  counsel  is,  that  you  need  not  weep  at 
all.  You  need  not  go  through  all  these  ceremonies, 
and  need  not  take  any  notice  of  how  to  regain  your 
empire,  because  you  never  lost  it.  Why  should  you 
go  to  seek  for  what  you  never  lost.  You  are  pure 
already,  you  are  free  already.  If  you  think  you 
i  are  free,  free  you  are  this  moment,  and  if  you  think 
j  you  are  bound,  bound  you  will  be.  Not  only  that : 
it  is  a  very  bold  statement — as  I  told  you  at  the 
beginning  of  this  course,  I  shall  have  to  speak  to 
you  most  boldly.     It  may  frighten  you  now,  but  you 


192  JNANA   YOGA 

will  come  to  know  by-and-by  that  it  is  true,  when 
you  think  of  it,  and  when  you  realize  in  your  life  the 
truth  of  it.  For,  supposing  it  is  not  your  nature, 
that  freedom  is  not  your  nature;  by  no  manner  of 
means  can  you  become  free.  Supposing  you  were 
free  and  in  some  way  you  lost  the  freedom,  then  you 
cannot  regain  it,  because  that  shows  you  were  not 
free  to  commence  with.  Had  you  been  free  what 
could  have  bound  you?  The  independent  can  never 
be  made  dependent,  otherwise  it  was  not  independent, 
it  was  an  hallucination. 

So,  of  the  two  sides  which  will  you  take  ?  If  argu- 
ment is  stated  it  comes  to  this.  If  you  say  that  the 
soul  was  by  its  own  nature  pure  and  free,  it  naturally 
follows  that  there  was  nothing  in  this  universe  which 
could  make  it  bound  or  limited.  But  if  there  was 
something  in  nature  which  could  bind  you,  it  naturally 
follows  that  the  soul  was  not  free,  and  your  state- 
ment that  it  was  free  is  a  delusion.  So  you  have  to 
come  to  this  idea,  that  the  soul  is  by  its  nature  free. 
It  cannot  be  otherwise.  Freedom  means  independence 
of  anything  outside,  and  that  means  that  nothing  out- 
side itself  could  work  upon  it  as  a  cause.  The  soul 
is  causeless,  and  hence  come  all  the  great  ideas  that 
we  have.  You  cannot  establish  any  idea  of  immor- 
tality unless  you  grant  that  the  soul  is  by  its  nature 
free,  or  in  other  words,  that  it  cannot  be  acted  upon 
by  anything  outside.  For  death  is  an  effect  produced 
by  something  outside  of  man,  showing  that  he  can  be 
acted  upon  by  something  else.  I  drink  some  poison 
and  I  am  killed,  showing  that  my  body  can  be  acted 
upon  by  something  outside  that  is  called  poison.     If 


THE    FREEDOM    OF   THE    SOUL  I93 

this  be  true  of  the  soul,  the  soul  is  bound.  But  if  it 
be  true  that  the  soul  is  free  it  naturally  follows  that 
nothing  outside  can  work  upon  the  soul,  and  never 
will ;  therefore  the  soul  will  never  die,  it  is  beyond  the 
law  of  causation.  Freedom,  immortality,  blessedness, 
all  depend  on  this,  that  the  soul  is  beyond  the  law  of 
causation,  beyond  this  Maya.  Very  good.  Now  if 
your  nature  was  originally  perfectly  free  and  we  have 
become  bound,  that  shows  that  we  were  not  really 
free.  It  was  untrue.  But,  on  the  other  side,  here 
is  this  proposition,  that  we  are  free,  and  that  this  idea 
of  bondage  is  but  a  delusion.  Of  these  two,  which 
will  you  take?  Either  make  the  first  a  delusion,  or 
make  the  second  a  delusion.  Certainly  I  will  make 
the  second  a  delusion.  It  is  more  consonant  with  all 
my  feelings  and  aspirations.  I  am  perfectly  aware  that 
I  am  free  by  nature,  and  I  will  not  admit  that  this 
bondage  is  true  and  my  freedom  a  delusion. 

This  discussion  you  see  going  on  in  all  philosophies, 
taken  in  the  crude  form.  Even  in  the  most  modern 
philosophies  you  find  the  same  discussion  entering. 
Here  are  the  two  parties.  One  party  says  that  there  is 
no  soul,  soul  is  a  delusion.  That  delusion  is  being 
produced  by  the  repeated  transit  of  particles  of  matter, 
this  combination  which  you  call  the  body  or  the  brain, 
and  so  on;  its  vibrations  and  motions  and  continuous 
transit  of  particles  here  and  there,  leaving  that  impres- 
sion of  freedom.  There  were  Buddhistic  sects  who 
said,  if  you  take  a  torch,  and  whirl  it  round  you 
rapidly,  there  will  be  a  circle  of  light.  That  does 
not  exist,  because  the  torch  is  changing  place  every 
moment.     We  are  but  bundles  of  little  particles,  which 


194  J  NANA   YOGA 

in  the  rapid  whirling  produce  this  delusion.  On  the 
other  hand  there  is  the  statement,  that  this  body  is 
true,  and  the  soul  does  not  exist.  Another  explana- 
tion is,  that  in  the  rapid  interchange  of  thought  matter 
occurs  as  a  delusion,  but  matter  does  not  really  exist. 
These  remain  to  the  present  day,  one  side  claiming 
that  spirit  is  a  delusion  and  the  other  that  matter  is 
a  delusion.  Which  side  will  you  take  ?  Of  course  we 
will  take  the  spirit  side  and  deny  the  matter  side. 
The  arguments  are  the  same  for  both  sides,  only  on 
the  spirit  side  the  argument  is  a  little  stronger.  For 
nobody  has  even  seen  what  matter  is.  We  can  only 
feel  ourselves.  I  never  saw  a  man  who  could  feel 
matter  outside  of  himself.  Nobody  was  ever  able  to 
jump  outside  his  own  soul.  Therefore  the  argument 
is  a  little  stronger  on  the  side  of  the  spirit.  Secondly, 
the  spirit  thought  explains  the  universe,  while  mate- 
rialism does  not.  Therefore  the  materialistic  explan- 
ation is  illogical.  This  is  a  crude  form  of  the  same 
thought.  If  you  boil  all  these  philosophies  down  and 
analyze  them,  you  will  find  these  two  things  in  col- 
lision. So  here,  too,  in  a  more  intricate  form,  in  a 
more  philosophical  form,  we  find  the  same  question 
about  natural  purity  and  freedom,  and  natural  bond- 
age. One  side  says  that  the  first  is  a  delusion,  and 
the  other  that  the  second  is  the  delusion.  And  here, 
too,  we  side  with  the  second,  that  our  bondage  is  a 
delusion. 

So  the  solution  of  the  Vedanta  is  that  we  are  not 
bound,  we  are  free  already.  Not  only  so,  but  to  say 
or  to  think  that  we  are  bound  is  dangerous;  it  is  a 
mistake;  it  is  self-hypnotism.     As  soon  as  you  say, 


THE    FREEDOM    OF  THE   SOUL  195 

"I  am  bound/'  "I  am  weak,"  "I  am  helpless,"  woe 
unto  you;  you  rivet  one  more  chain  upon  yourself. 
Do  not  say  that,  do  not  think  it.  I  have  heard  of  a 
man  who  lived  in  a  forest  and  used  to  repeat  day  and 
night,  "S'ivoham" — I  am  the  Blessed  One — and  one 
day  a  tiger  fell  upon  the  man  and  dragged  him  away 
to  kill  him,  and  people  on  the  other  side  of  the  river 
saw  it,  and  heard  the  voice  as  long  as  voice  remained 
in  him  saying,  ^'S'ivoham" — even  in  the  very  jaws  of 
the  tiger.  There  have  been  many  such  men.  There 
have  been  cases  of  men  who,  while  being  cut  to  pieces, 
have  blessed  their  enemies.  "I  am  He,  I  am  He ;  and 
so  art  thou."  I  am  pure  and  perfect,  and  so  are  all 
my  enemies.  You  are  He,  and  so  am  I.  That  is  the 
position  of  strength.  Nevertheless,  there  are  great 
and  wonderful  things  in  the  religions  of  the  dualists; 
wonderful  is  the  idea  of  the  personal  God  apart  from 
this  nature,  whom  we  are  to  worship  and  whom  we 
are  to  love.  Sometimes  it  is  very  soothing.  But,  says 
the  Vedanta,  that  soothing  is  something  like  morphia, 
the  soothing  that  comes  from  an  opiate,  not  natural. 
It  brings  weakness  in  the  long  run,  and  what  this 
world  wants  to-day  more  than  it  ever  did  is  strength- 
ening. It  is  weakness,  says  the  Vedanta,  which  is  the 
cause  of  all  misery  in  this  world.  Weakness  is  the 
one  cause  of  suffering.  We  become  miserable  because 
we  are  weak.  We  lie,  steal,  kill,  or  commit  any  crime, 
because  we  are  weak.  We  suffer  because  we  are  weak. 
We  die  because  we  are  weak.  Where  there  is  nothing 
to  weaken  us,  there  is  no  death  or  sorrow.  We  are 
miserable  through  delusion.  Give  up  the  delusion  and 
the   whole   thing   vanishes.     It   is   plain   and   simple 


196  JNANA   YOGA 

indeed.  Through  all  these  philosophical  discussions 
and  tremendous  mental  gymnastics  we  come  back  to 
this  one  religious  idea,  the  simplest  in  the  whole  world. 
The  Monistic  Vedanta  is  the  simplest  form  in  which 
you  can  put  a  truth.  To  teach  dualism  was  the  tre- 
mendous mistake  made  in  India,  made  everywhere  else, 
because  people  did  not  look  at  the  principles  they 
arrived  at,  but  only  thought  of  the  process,  which  is 
very  intricate  indeed.  These  tremendous  philosoph- 
ical and  logical  propositions  were  alarming  to  them. 
They  thought  these  things  could  not  be  made  universal, 
could  not  be  made  teachings  of  everyday  practical  life, 
and  that  under  the  guise  of  such  a  philosophy  much 
laxity  of  living  would  arise. 

But  I  do  not  believe  at  all  that  Monistic  ideas 
preached  to  the  world  would  produce  immorality  and 
weakness.  On  the  contrary,  I  have  reason  to  believe 
that  it  is  the  only  remedy  there  is.  If  this  be  the 
truth,  why  let  people  drink  ditchwater  when  the  stream 
of  life  is  flowing  by?  If  this  be  the  truth,  that  they 
are  all  pure,  why  not  at  this  moment  teach  it  to  the 
whole  world?  Saints  and  sinners,  men,  women  and 
children,  great  or  small,  why  not  teach  it  with  the 
voice  of  thunder,  teach  it  to  every  man  that  is  born 
or  ever  will  come  into  the  world,  to  the  man  on  the 
throne  and  to  the  man  sweeping  the  streets,  rich  or 
poor  ? 

It  appears  now  a  very  big  and  a  very  great  under- 
taking, to  many  it  appears  very  startling,  but  that  is 
because  of  superstition,  nothing  else.  By  eating  all 
sorts  of  low  and  indigestible  food,  and  by  starving 
ourselves,  we  have  made  ourselves  incompetent  to  eat 


THE    FREEDOM    OF    THE    SOUL  I97 

a  good  meal.  We  have  listened  to  words  of  weakness 
from  our  childhood.  It  is  just  the  same  with  ghosts. 
You  always  hear  people  say  they  do  not  believe  in 
ghosts,  but,  at  the  same  time,  there  are  very  few  who 
do  not  get  a  little  creepy  sensation  in  the  dark.  It  is 
simply  superstition.  So  with  all  these  things.  This 
is  the  one  idea  that  will  come  out  of  Vedanta,  and  the 
one  idea  that  deserves  to  live.  These  books  may  perish 
to-morrow.  Whether  this  idea  first  flashed  into  the 
brains  of  Hebrews  or  of  people  living  at  the  North 
Pole  nobody  cares.  But  this  is  truth  and  truth  is 
eternal,  and  truth  itself  teaches  that  it  is  not  the 
special  property  of  any  being.  Men  and  animals  and 
gods  are  all  common  recipients  of  this  one  truth. 
Teach  it  to  them.  Why  make  life  miserable?  Why 
let  people  fall  into  all  sorts  of  superstition?  I  will 
give  ten  thousand  lives  if  twenty  of  them  will  give  up 
their  superstitions.  Not  only  in  this  country,  but  in 
the  land  of  its  very  birth,  if  you  tell  people  this  they 
are  frightened.  They  say  that  this  idea  is  for  San- 
nyasins,  who  give  up  the  world  and  live  in  forests; 
for  them  it  is  all  right.  But  for  us  poor  householders, 
we  must  all  have  some  sort  of  fear,  we  must  have 
ceremonies,  and  so  on. 

Dualistic  ideas  have  ruled  the  world  long  enough,  and 
this  is  the  result.  W^hy  not  make  a  new  experiment? 
It  may  take  millions  of  years  perhaps  for  all  minds  to 
receive  it,  but  why  not  begin  now?  If  we  have  told 
it  to  twenty  persons  in  our  lives  we  have  done  a  great 
work.  There  is  generally  one  idea  in  India  which 
militates  against  it.  It  is  this.  It  is  all  very  well  to 
say,  "I  am  the  Pure,  the  Blessed,"  but  I  cannot  show 


igS  J  NANA   YOGA 

it  always  in  my  life.  That  is  true ;  the  ideal  is  always 
hard.  Every  child  that  is  born  sees  the  sky  over  head 
very  far  away,  but  is  that  any  reason  why  we  should 
not  strike  towards  the  sky?  Would  it  mend  matters 
to  go  towards  superstition?  If  we  cannot  get  nectar, 
will  it  mend  matters  for  us  to  drink  poison?  Would 
it  be  any  help  for  us  because  we  cannot  realize  truth 
immediately  to  go  into  darkness  and  weakness  and 
superstition  ? 

I  have  no  objection  to  dualism  in  many  of  its  forms. 
I  like  most  of  them,  but  I  have  objections  to  every 
form  of  teaching  which  inculcates  weakness.  That 
is  the  one  question  I  put  to  every  one,  man,  woman 
or  child,  when  they  are  in  training,  physical,  mental 
or  spiritual.  The  question  is:  Are  you  strong?  Do 
you  feel  strength? — for  I  know  it  is  truth  alone  that 
gives  strength.  I  know  that  truth  alone  gives  life, 
and  nothing  but  going  towards  reality  will  make  us 
strong,  and  none  will  reach  truth  until  he  is  strong. 
Every  system,  therefore,  w^hich  weakens  the  mind, 
weakens  the  brain,  makes  one  superstitious,  makes  one 
mope  in  darkness,  makes  one  desire  all  sorts  of  morbid 
impossibilities  and  mysteries  and  superstitions,  I  do 
not  like,  because  its  effect  is  dangerous  on  the  human 
being.     Such  teachings  never  bring  any  good. 

Some  may  agree  with  me,  that  such  things  create 
morbidness  in  the  human  being,  miake  him  weak,  so 
weak  that  in  course  of  time  it  will  be  almost  impossible 
for  him  to  receive  truth  or  live  up  to  it.  Strength, 
therefore,  is  the  one  thing  that  we  want.  Strengthen- 
ing is  the  great  medicine  for  the  world's  disease. 
Strengthening  is  the  medicine  which  the  poor  must 


THE    FREEDOM    OF    THE    SOUL  1 99 

have  when  tyrannized  over  by  the  rich.  Strength  is 
the  medicine  that  the  ignorant  must  have  when 
oppressed  by  the  learned;  and  it  is  the  medicine  that 
sinners  must  have  when  tyrannized  over  by  other  sin- 
ners, and  nothing  gives  such  strength  as  this  idea  of 
Monism.  Nothing  makes  us  so  moral  as  this  idea 
of  Monism.  Nothing  makes  us  work  so  well  at  our 
best  and  highest^  as  when  all  the  responsibility  is 
thrown  upon  us.  I  challenge  every  one  of  you.  How 
will  you  behave  if  I  put  a  little  baby  in  your  hands? 
Your  whole  life  will  be  changed  for  the  moment; 
whatever  you  may  be  you  must  become  selfless  for  the 
time  being.  You  will  give  up  all  your  criminal  ideas ; 
as  soon  as  responsibility  is  thrown  upon  you,  your 
whole  character  will  change.  So,  if  the  whole  respon- 
sibility is  thrown  upon  our  own  shoulders  we  shall  be 
at  our  highest  and  best.  When  we  have  nobody  to 
grope  towards,  no  one  to  lay  all  our  blame  upon ;  when 
we  have  neither  the  devil  nor  a  personal  God  to  lay 
all  our  evils  upon,  when  we  are  alone  responsible,  then 
we  shall  rise  to  our  highest  and  best.  I  am  responsible 
for  my  fate,  I  am  the  bringer  of  good  unto  myself,  I 
am  the  bringer  of  evil.  I  am  the  Pure  and  Blessed 
One.  We  must  reject  all  thoughts  that  assert  the 
contrary.  "I  never  had  death  nor  fear,  I  have  no 
difference  of  caste  or  creed,  I  had  neither  father  nor 
mother,  nor  birth  nor  death,  nor  friend  nor  foe,  for 
I  am  the  Existing- Knowledge-Bliss  Absolute ;  I  am  the 
Blissful  One,  I  am  the  Blissful  One.  I  am  not  bound 
either  by  virtue  or  vice,  by  happiness  or  misery.  Pil- 
grimages and  book  and  the  Vedas,  and  all  these  cere- 
monials can  never  bind  me.  I  do  not  eat,  the  body 
is  not  mine,  nor  the  superstitions  that  come  to  the 


200  J  NANA  YOGA 

body,  nor  the  decay  that  comes  to  the  body,  for  I  am 
Existence-Knowledge-Bliss  Absolute;  I  am  the  Bliss- 
ful One,  I  am  the  Blissful  One." 

This,  says  the  Vedanta,  is  the  only  prayer  that  the 
masses  should  have.  This  is  the  only  way  to  reach 
the  goal,  to  tell  ourselves,  and  to  tell  everybody  else 
that  we  are  divine.  And  as  we  go  on  repeating, 
strength  comes.  He  who  limps  at  first  will  get 
stronger  and  stronger,  the  voice  will  increase  in  volume 
until  it  takes  possession  of  our  hearts  and  ideas,  and 
will  course  through  our  veins,  and  permeate  all  our 
body.  The  delusion  will  vanish  as  the  sunlight 
becomes  more  and  more  effulgent,  load  after  load  of 
ignorance  will  vanish,  and  then  will  come  a  time  when 
the  whole  has  disappeared  and  the  Sun  alone  will  be 
left.  This  Vedantic  idea  of  course  to  many  seems 
very  terrible,  but  that  is,  just  as  I  have  said,  on 
account  of  superstition.  There  are  people  in  this 
country  who,  if  I  tell  them  there  is  no  such  being  as 
the  devil,  will  think  all  religion  has  gone  too.  Many 
people  have  said  to  me,  how  can  there  be  religion 
without  a  devil  ?  They  say,  how  can  there  be  a  religion 
without  some  one  to  direct  us?  How  can  we  live 
without  being  ruled  by  somebody?  We  like  to  be  so 
treated.  We  have  become  used  to  it  and  like  it.  We 
are  not  happy  until  we  feel  we  have  been  reprimanded 
by  somebody  every  day.  The  same  superstition !  But 
however  terrible  it  may  seem  now,  the  time  will  come 
when  we  shall  look  back,  each  one  of  us,  and  smile  at 
every  one  of  those  superstitions  which  covered  the 
pure  and  eternal  soul,  and  repeat  with  gladness,  with 
truth,  and  with  strength,  "I  am  free,  and  was  free, 
and  alwavs  will  be  free," 


XII 

PRACTICAL  VEDANTA 

Part  I 

I  HAVE  been  asked  to  say  something  about  the  prac- 
tical position  of  the  Vedanta  Philosophy.  As  I  have 
told  you,  theory  is  very  good  indeed,  but  how  are  we 
to  carry  it  into  practice?  If  it  be  absolutely  impracti- 
cable no  theory  is  of  any  value  whatever,  except  as 
intellectual  gymnastics.  The  Vedanta,  therefore,  to 
become  a  religion,  must  be  intensely  practical.  We 
must  be  able  to  carry  it  out  in  every  part  of  our  lives. 
And  not  only  this,  the  fictitious  differentiation  between 
religion  and  the  life  of  the  world  must  vanish,  for  the 
Vedanta  teaches  Oneness — one  life  throughout.  The 
ideals  of  religion  must  cover  the  whole  field  of  life, 
they  must  enter  into  every  one  of  our  thoughts,  and 
more  and  more  into  our  practice.  I  will  enter  grad- 
ually into  the  practical  side  as  we  go  on.  But  this 
series  of  lectures  is  intended  to  be  a  basis,  and  so  we 
must  first  apply  ourselves  to  theories,  and  understand 
how  they  are  worked  out,  proceeding  from  forest 
caves,  to  busy  streets,  and  cities ;  and  one  peculiar 
feature  we  find  is  that  many  of  these  thoughts  have 
been  the  outcome,  not  of  retirement  into  forests,  but 
have  emanated  from  thrones — from  persons  whom  we 

201 


202 


JNANA   YOGA 


expect  to  be  the  busiest  in  this  Hfe  of  ours,  from  ruling 
monarchs. 

S'vetaketu  was  the  son  of  Aruni,  a  sage,  most  proba- 
bly a  recluse.  He  was  brought  up  in  the  forest,  but 
he  went  into  the  city  of  the  Panchalas  and  there  went 
to  the  court  of  the  king,  Pravdhana  Taivali,  and  the 
king  asked  him:  **Do  you  know  how  beings  depart 
hence  at  death?"  "No,  Sir."  "Do  you  know  how 
they  return  hither?"  No,  Sir."  Do  you  know  the 
way  of  the  fathers  and  the  way  of  the  gods?"  "No, 
Sir."  Then  the  king  asked  other  questions.  S'vetaketu 
could  not  answer  them.  Then  the  king  told  him  that 
he  knew  nothing.  The  boy  went  back  to  his  father 
and  the  father  admitted  that  he  could  not  answer  these 
questions.  It  was  not  that  he  had  not  taught  the 
boy,  but  he  did  not  know  these  things  himself.  So 
S'vetaketu  returned  to  the  king  with  his  father  and 
they  both  asked  to  be  taught  this  secret.  The  king 
said  this  secret,  this  philosophy,  was  only  known 
among  kings  hitherto ;  the  priests  never  knew  it.  He, 
however,  proceeded  to  teach  them  what  he  knew  about 
these  things.  Thus  we  find  in  various  Upanishads  the 
same  idea,  that  this  Vedanta  philosophy  is  not  the  out- 
come of  meditation  in  the  forests  only,  but  that  the 
very  best  parts  of  it  were  thought  out  and  expressed 
by  brains  which  were  busiest  in  the  affairs  of  this  life 
of  ours.  We  cannot  conceive  any  man  busier  than  an 
absolute  monarch,  one  man  who  is  ruling  absolutely 
over  millions  of  people,  and  yet  some  of  these  rulers 
were  deep  thinkers. 

Everything  goes  to  show  that  this  philosophy  must 
be  very  practical,  and  later  on,  when  we  come  to  the 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  203 

Bhagavad  Gita — most  of  you,  perhaps,  have  read  it; 
it  is  the  best  commentary  we  have  on  the  Vedanta 
philosophy — curiously  enough  the  scene  is  laid  on  the 
battle  field,  where  Krishna  teaches  this  philosophy  to 
Arjuna,  and  the  doctrine  which  stands  out  luminously 
in  every  page  of  the  Gita  is  intense  activity,  but  in  the 
midst  of  that,  eternal  calmness.  And  this  idea  is 
called  the  "Secret  of  Work,'*  to  attain  which  is  the 
goal  of  the  Vedanta.  Inactivity  as  we  understand  it, 
in  the  sense  of  passivity,  certainly  cannot  be  the  goal. 
Were  it  so  then  the  w^alls  around  us  would  be  the 
most  intelligent;  they  are  inactive.  Clods  of  earth, 
stumps  of  trees,  would  be  the  greatest  sages  in  the 
world ;  they  are  inactive.  Nor  does  inactivity  become 
activity  when  it  is  combined  with  passion.  Real  activi- 
ty, which  is  the  goal  of  Vedanta,  is  that  which  is  com- 
bined with  eternal  calmness,  the  calmness  which  cannot 
be  ruffled,  the  balance  of  mind  which  is  never  disturbed, 
whatever  happens  around  it.  And  we  all  know  from 
our  experience  in  life  that  that  is  the  best  attitude  for 
work. 

I  have  been  asked  many  times  how  we  can  work  if 
we  do  not  feel  the  passions  which  we  generally  feel 
for  work.  I  also  thought  in  that  way  years  ago,  but 
as  I  am  growing  older,  getting  more  experience,  I 
find  it  is  not  true.  The  less  passion  there  is,  the  better 
we  work.  The  calmer  we  are,  the  better  for  us,  and 
the  more  the  amount  of  work  we  do.  When  we  let 
loose  our  feelings  we  spoil  so  much  of  energy,  shatter 
our  nerves,  disturb  our  minds,  and  accomplish  very 
little  work.  The  energy  which  ought  to  have  gone 
out  as  work  is  spent  as  mere  feeling,  which  counts  for 


204  J  NANA   YOGA 

nothing.  It  is  only  when  the  mind  is  very  calm  and 
collected  that  the  whole  of  its  energy  is  spent  in  doing 
good  work.  And  if  you  read  the  lives  of  the  great 
workers  which  the  world  has  produced,  you  will  find 
that  they  were  wonderfully  calm  men.  Nothing,  as 
it  were,  could  throw  them  off  their  balance.  That  is 
why  the  man  who  becomes  angry  never  does  a  great 
amount  of  work,  and  the  man  whom  nothing  can  make 
angry  accomplishes  much  more.  The  man  who  gives 
way  to  anger,  or  hatred,  or  any  other  passion,  cannot 
work  in  this  life  of  ours;  he  only  breaks  himself  to 
pieces,  and  does  nothing  practical.  It  is  the  calm,  for- 
giving, equable,  well-balanced  mind  that  does  the  great- 
est amount  of  work. 

The  Vedanta  preaches  the  ideal,  and  the  ideal,  as 
we  know,  is  always  far  ahead  of  the  real,  of  the  practi- 
cal; as  we  may  call  it.  There  are  two  tendencies  in 
this  life  of  ours,  one  to  harmonize  the  ideal  with  the 
life,  and  the  other  to  elevate  the  life  to  the  ideal.  It 
is  a  great  thing  to  understand  this,  for  the  former  ten- 
dency is  the  temptation  of  our  lives.  I  think  that  I 
can  only  do  a  certain  class  of  work.  Most  of  it,  per- 
haps, is  bad;  most  of  it,  perhaps,  has  a  motive  power 
of  passion  behind  it,  anger,  or  greed,  or  selfishness. 
Now  if  any  man  comes  to  preach  to  me  a  certain  ideal, 
and  the  first  step  is  to  give  up  selfishness,  to  give  up 
self -enjoyment,  I  think  that  is  impractical.  But  when 
a  man  comes  to  bring  an  ideal  which  reconciles  my 
selfishness,  which  reconciles  all  my  vileness  to  itself, 
I  am  glad  at  once,  and  jump  at  the  ideal.  That  is 
the  ideal  for  me.  As  the  word  "orthodox"  has  been 
manipulated  into  various  forms,  so  has  been  the  word 


*       PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  205 

"practical."  "My  doxy  is  orthodoxy;  your  doxy  is 
heterodoxy."  So  with  practicality.  What  I  think  is 
practical  is  the  only  practicality  in  the  world.  If  I 
am  a  shopkeeper  I  think  sh(2)Opkeeping  the  only  practi- 
cal religion  in  the  world.  If  I  am  a  thief  I  think  the 
best  means  of  stealing  is  the  only  practical  thing ;  the 
others  arc  not  practical.  You  see  how  we  all  use  this 
word  practical  for  things  we  can  do,  as  we  are  at  pres- 
ent situated,  and  circumstanced.  Therefore  I  will  ask 
you  to  understand  that  Vedanta,  though  it  is  intensely 
practical,  is  always  so  in  the  sense  of  the  ideal.  It 
does  not  preach  an  impossible  ideal  however  high  it  is, 
and  it  is  high  enough  for  an  ideal.  In  one  word,  its 
ideal  is  that  "Thou  art  That,"  you  are  divine.  That 
is  the  result  of  all  this  teaching ;  after  all  its  ramifica- 
tions and  intellectual  gymnastics  you  arrive  at  the 
human  soul  as  pure  and  omniscient ;  you  see  that  such 
superstititions  as  birth  and  death  would  be  entire  non- 
sense when  spoken  of  the  soul.  The  soul  was  never 
born  and  will  never  die,  and  all  these  ideas  that  we 
are  going  to  die  and  are  afraid  to  die  are  mere  super- 
stitions. And  all  such  ideas,  as  we  can  do  or  cannot 
do,  are  also  superstition.  We  can  do  everything.  The 
Vedanta  preaches  to  men  to  have  faith  in  themselves 
first.  As  certain  religions  of  the  world  say  a  man  who 
does  not  believe  in  a  personal  god  outside  of  himself 
is  an  atheist,  so  the  Vedanta  says,  a  man  who  does  not 
believe  in  himself  is  an  atheist.  Not  believing  in  the 
glory  of  your  own  soul  is  what  the  Vedanta  calls 
atheism.  To  many  this  is,  no  doubt,  a  terrible  idea, 
and  most  of  us  think  that  this  ideal  can  never  be 
reached,  but  the  Vedanta  insists  that  it  can  be  realized 


206  JNANA   YOGA 

by  every  one.  There  is  neither  man  nor  woman  nor 
child,  nor  difference  of  race  or  sex,  nor  anything  that 
stands  as  a  bar  to  the  reaHzation  of  the  ideal,  because 
Vedanta  shows  that  it  is  realized  already,  it  is  already 
here. 

All  the  powers  in  the  universe  are  already  ours.  It 
is  we  who  have  put  our  hands  before  our  eyes,  and 
cry  that  it  is  dark.  Know  that  there  is  no  darkness 
round  us.  Take  the  hands  off  and  there  is  light  from 
the  beginning.  Darkness  never  existed,  weakness 
never  existed.  We  who  are  fools  cry  that  we  are 
weak ;  we  who  are  fools  cry  that  we  are  impure.  Thus 
not  only  Vedanta  insists  that  the  ideal  is  practical,  but 
it  has  been  so  all  the  time,  and  this  apparent  Ideal, 
this  Reality,  is  our  own  nature.  Everything  else  that 
you  see  is  false,  untrue.  As  soon  as  you  say  "I  am 
a  little  mortal  being,"  you  are  saying  something  which 
is  not  true,  you  are  giving  the  lie  to  yourselves,  you 
are  hypnotizing  yourselves  into  something  vile  and 
weak  and  wretched. 

It  recognizes  no  sin,  it  recognizes  error:  and  the 
greatest  error,  says  the  Vedanta,  is  to  say  you  are  weak, 
and  a  sinner,  and  a  miserable  creature,  and  that  you 
have  no  power,  and  cannot  do  this  and  that.  Every 
time  you  think  in  that  way  you,  as  it  were,  rivet  one 
more  link  in  the  chain  that  holds  you  down,  you  add 
but  one  more  layer  of  hypnotism  to  your  own  soul. 
Therefore,  whosoever  thinks  he  is  weak  is  wrong,  who- 
soever thinks  he  is  impure,  is  wrong,  and  is  throwing 
a  bad  thought  into  the  world.  This  we  must  bear  in 
mind  always :  that  in  the  Vedanta  there  is  no  attempt 
at  reconciling  the  present  life,  the  hypnotized  life,  this 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  207 

false  life  which  we  have  assumed,  with  the  ideal,  but 
this  false  life  must  go,  and  the  real  life,  which  is 
always  existing,  must  manifest  itself,  must  shine  out. 
No  man  becomes  purer  and  purer:  it  is  more  or  less 
of  manifestation.  The  veil  goes  away,  and  the  native 
purity  of  the  soul  begins  to  manifest  itself.  All  is 
ours  already,  infinite  purity,  freedom,  love  and  power. 
Also,  the  Vedanta  says,  not  only  can  this  be  realized 
in  the  depths  of  forests,  or  hidden  in  caves,  but  just 
as  we  have  seen,  the  first  people  who  discovered  these 
truths  for  us  were  neither  living  in  caves  nor  forests, 
nor  were  they  ordinary  persons  in  life,  but  persons 
whom  we  have  every  reason  to  believe  had  the  busiest 
lives  to  lead,  persons  who  had  to  command  armies,  to 
sit  on  thrones,  and  look  to  the  welfare  of  their  sub- 
jects— and  in  those  days  of  absolute  monarchs,  not  in 
these  days  when  a  king  is  to  a  great  extent  a  mere 
figure  head.  Yet  they  could  find  time  to  think  out  all 
these  thoughts,  to  realize  them,  and  to  teach  them  to 
humanity.  How  much  more  then  should  it  be  practi- 
cal for  us  whose  lives,  compared  with  theirs,  are  lives 
of  leisure?  That  we  cannot  realize  them  is  a  shame 
to  us,  seeing  that  we  are  comparatively  free  all  the 
time,  have  very  little  to  do.  My  wants  are  as  nothing 
to  tlie  wants  of  one  of  those  ancient  absolute  monarchs. 
My  wants  are  as  nothing  to  the  wants  of  Arjuna  on 
the  battle-field  at  Kurukshetra,  commanding  a  huge 
army,  and  yet  finding  time  in  the  midst  of  the  din  of 
battle  to  talk  of  the  highest  philosophy,  and  to  carry 
it  into  his  life  also :  and  we  ought  to  be  able  to  do  as 
much  in  this  life  of  ours,  comparatively  free,  mostly  of 
ease  and  comfort.     Most  of  us  here  have  more  time 


2o8  J  NANA   YOGA 

than  we  think  of,  or  know  of,  if  we  really  want  to 
use  it  for  good.  We  can  attain  two  hundred  ideals  in 
this  life  of  ours,  if  we  want  them,  with  the  amount  of 
freedom  we  have,  but  we  must  not  degrade  the  ideal 
to  the  actual.  This  is  one  of  the  most  insinuating 
things  that  comes  to  us  in  the  shape  of  persons  who 
apologize  for  us  here,  and  teach  us  how  to  make  special 
excuses  for  all  our  foolish  wants,  foolish  desires,  and 
we  think  that  this  is  the  only  ideal  we  can  have,  but  it 
is  not  so.  The  Vedanta  teaches  no  such  thing.  The 
actual  is  to  be  reconciled  to  the  ideal,  the  present  life 
is  to  be  made  to  coincide  with  the  eternal  life. 

For  you  must  always  remember  that  the  one  central 
ideal  of  Vedanta  is  this  Oneness.  There  are  not  two 
in  anything,  no  two  lives,  or  two  kinds  of  life  for  two 
worlds _even.  ^  You  will  find  the  Vedas  speaking  of 
heavens  and  all  these  things  at  first,  but  later  on,  when 
they  come  to  the  highest  ideals  of  their  philosophy,  they 
brush  off  all  these  things.  There  is  but  One  Life,  and 
One  World,  and  One  Existence.  Everything  is  that 
Oneness,  and  the  difference  is  in  degree  and  not  of 
kind.  The  difference  between  our  lives  is  not  of  kind. 
The  Vedanta.  entirely  denies  such  ideals  as  that  the 
animals  are  separate  from  men,  and  that  they  were 
made  and  created  by  God  to  be  used  for  our  food. 

Some  people  have  been  kind  enough  to  start  an  anti- 
vivisection  society.  I  asked  a  member,  "Why,  my 
friend,  do  you  think  it  is  quite  lawful  to  kill  animals 
for  food,  and  not  to  kill  one  or  two  for  scientific 
experiments?"  He  replied,  "That  vivisection  is  most 
horrible,  but  animals  have  been  given  to  us  for  food." 
The  Oneness  includes  all  animals.     If  man's  life  is 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  209 

immortal  so  is  the  animal's.  The  difference  is  only  in 
degree  and  not  in  kind.  The  amoeba  is  the  same  as  I 
am;  the  difference  is  only  in  degree,  and  from  the 
standpoint  of  the  highest  life  all  these  little  differences 
vanish.  A  man  may  see  a  great  deal  of  difference 
between  grass  and  ^  little  tree,  but  if  you  climb  a  very 
high  mountain,  grass  and  the  biggest  tree  will  appear 
much  the  same.  So,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  high- 
est, all  these  ideals  are  the  same,  and  if  you  believe 
there  is  a  God,  the  animals  and  the  highest  creatures 
must  be  the  same.  A  God  who  is  partial  to  his  chil- 
dren called  men,  and  so  cruel  to  his  children  called 
brute-beasts,  is  worse  than  a  demon.  I  would  rather 
die  a  hundred  times  than  worship  such  a  God.  My 
whole  life  would  be  a  fight  with  such  a  God.  But  it 
is  not  so.  Those  who  say  so  do  not  know,  they  are 
irresponsible,  heartless  people,  who  do  not  know.  'Here 
is  again  a  case  of  the  practical  used  in  the  wrong  sense. 
We  want  to  eat.  I  myself  may  not  be  a  very  strict 
vegetarian,  but  I  understand  the  ideal.  When  I  eat 
meat  I  know  it  is  wrong.  Even  if  I  were  bound  ta 
eat  it  under  certain  circumstances  I  know  it  is  cruel. 
I  must  not  drag  the  ideal  down  to  the  actual  and  try 
to  apologize  for  my  weak  conduct  in  this  way.  The 
ideal  is  not  eating  flesh,  not  injuring  any  being,  for  the 
animal  is  my  brother;  so  is  the  cat  and  the  dog.  If 
you  can  think  of  them  as  that,  you  have  arrived  a  little 
towards  the  brotherhood  of  all  souls,  not  to  speak  of 
the  brotherhood  of  man!  That  is  child's  play.  You 
generally  find  that  this  is  not  very  acceptable  to  many, 
because  it  teaches  to  give  up  the  actual,  and  go  up 
higher  to  the  ideal ;  but  if  you  bring  out  a  theory  which 


210  JNANA  YOGA 

reconciles  their  present  conduct  they  regard  that  as 
entirely  practical. 

There  is  this  strongly  conservative  tendency  in 
human  nature :  we  do  not  like  to  move  one  step  for- 
ward. I  think  of  mankind  just  as  I  read  of  persons 
who  have  become  frozen  in  snow;  all  such,  they  say, 
want  to  go  to  sleep,  and  if  you  try  to  drag  them  up 
they  say,  *'Let  me  sleep.  It  is  so  beautiful  to  sleep  in 
the  snow,"  and  they  die  there  in  that  sleep.  So  is  our 
nature.  That  is  what  we  are  doing  all  our  life,  getting 
frozen  from  the  feet  upwards,  and  yet  wanting  tc 
sleep.  Therefore  you  must  struggle  towards  the  ideal, 
and  if  there  comes  any  one  to  bring  the  ideal  down  to 
your  level,  if  a  man  comes  to  teach  you  a  religion  that 
is  not  the  highest  ideal,  do  not  listen  to  him.  That  is 
impracticable  religion  for  me.  But  if  a  man  comes 
and  says  religion  is  the  highest  work  in  life,  I  am 
ready  for  him.  This  is  one  thing  to  be  guarded 
against,  one  thing  to  be  taken  care  of.  Beware  when 
any  one  is  trying  to  apologize  for  sense  vanities  and 
sense  weaknesses.  If  any  one  wants  to  preach  that 
way,  sense-bound  clods  of  earth  as  we  have  made  our- 
selves, if  we  follow  in  that  teaching,  we  shall  never 
progress.  I  have  seen  a  number  of  these  things,  I 
have  had  some  experience  of  the  world,  and  my  coun- 
try is  the  land  where  religious  sects  grow  like  mush- 
rooms. Every  year  new  sects  arise.  But  one  thing  I 
have  marked,  that  it  is  only  those  that  never  want  to 
reconcile  the  man  of  flesh  with  the  man  of  truth  that 
make  progress.  Wherever  there  is  this  false  idea  of 
reconciling  fleshly  vanities  with  the  highest  ideals^  of 
dragging  down  God  to  the  level  of  man,  there  comes 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  211 

decay.  Man  should  not  be  degraded  to  man  where 
he  is ;  he  should  be  raised  up  to  (^od. 

At  the  same  time,  there  is  another  side  to  the  ques- 
tion. We  must  not  look  down  with  contempt  on 
others.  All  of  us  are  going  towards  the  same  goal. 
The  difference  between  weakness  and  strength  is  one 
of  degree ;  the  difference  between  light  and  darkness  is 
one  of  degree;  the  difference  between  virtue  and  vice 
is  one  of  degree;  the  difference  between  heaven  and 
hell  is  one  of  degree;  the  difference  between  life  and 
death  is  one  of  degree;  all  difference  in  this  world  is 
one  of  degree,  and  not  of  kind,  because  Oneness  is  the 
secret  of  everything.  It  is  all  One,  either  as  thought, 
or  as  life,  or  as  soul,  or  as  body,  and  the  difference 
is  only  of  degree.  As  such  we  have  no  right  to 
look  down  with  contempt  upon  those  who  are  not 
exactly  in  the  same  degree  that  we  are.  Condemn 
none;  if  you  can  stretch  out  a  helping  hand,  do  so. 
If  you  cannot,  fold  your  hands,  bless  your  brothers 
and  let  them  go  their  own  way.  Dragging  down  and 
condemning  is  not  the  way  to  work.  Never  is  work 
accomplished  in  that  way.  We  spend  our  energies  in 
condemning  others.  Criticism  and  condemnation  is  a 
vain  way  of  spending  our  energies,  for  in  the  long  run 
we  come  to  learn  that  all  are  seeing  the  same  thing, 
are  more  or  less  approaching  the  same  ideal,  and  that 
most  of  our  differences  are  merely  differences  of  lan- 
guage. 

Take  even  the  idea  of  sin,  what  I  was  telling  you 
just  now,  the  Vedanta  idea  and  the  other  idea,  that 
man  is  a  sinner;  they  are  practically  the  same,  only 
the  one  is  a  mistaken  direction.     One  takes  the  nega- 


212  J  NANA   YOGA 

tive  side  and  the  Vedanta  the  positive.  One  shows  to 
man  his  weakness,  the  other  says  weakness  there  may 
be,  but  never  mind,  we  want  to  grow.  Disease  was 
found  out  as  soon  as  man  was  born.  Every  one  knows 
his  disease ;  it  requires  no  one  to  tell  us  what  our  dis- 
eases are.  We  may  forget  anything  outside,  we  may 
try  to  become  hypocrites  to  the  external  world,  but  in 
the  heart  of  our  hearts  we  all  know  our  weakness. 
But,  says  the  Vedanta,  being  reminded  of  weakness 
will  not  help  much;  give  medicine,  medicine  is  not 
making  man  think  that  he  is  diseased  all  the  time. 
The  remedy  for  weakness  is  not  by  making  men  think 
of  their  weakness  all  the  time,  but  letting  them  think 
of  their  strength.  Teach  them  of  the  strength  that  is 
already  within  them.  Instead  of  telling  men  they  are 
sinners,  the  Vedanta  takes  the  opposite  stand,  and 
says,  **You  are  pure  and  perfect,  and  all  you  call  sin 
does  not  belong  to  you."  Sins  are  very  low  degrees 
of  manifestation ;  manifest  yourself  in  a  higher  degree 
if  you  can.  That  is  one  thing  to  remember ;  all  of  us 
can.  Never  say  no;  never  say,  "I  cannot."  It  must 
not  be,  for  you  are  infinite.  Time  and  space  even  are 
nothing  compared  to  your  nature.  You  can  do  any- 
thing and  everything,  you  are  almighty. 

These  of  course  are  the  principles  of  ethics.  We 
shall  have  to  come  down  still  lower  and  work  into  the 
details.  We  shall  have  to  see  how  this  Vedanta  can 
be  carried  into  this  everyday  life  of  ours,  the  city  life, 
the  country  life,  life  in  every  nation,  the  home  life  of 
every  nation.  For,  if  a  religion  cannot  help  man 
wherever  he  may  be,  wherever  he  stands,  it  is  not 
much  use;  it  will  remain  only  a  theory  for  a  chosen 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  213 

few.  Religion,  to  help  mankind,  must  be  ready  and 
able  to  help  him  wherever  he  is;  in  servitude  or  in 
the  full  freedom  of  life,  in  the  depths  of  degradation 
or  in  the  heights  of  purity,  everywhere  equally  it 
should  be  able  to  help  mankind,  and  then  alone  the 
principles  of  Vedanta,  or  the  ideal  of  Religion,  or  how- 
ever you  may  call  it,  will  be  fulfilled. 

The  one  ideal  of  faith  in  ourselves  is  the  greatest 
help  that  can  come  to  mankind.  Had  faith  in  our- 
selves been  more  extensively  taught  and  practiced  I 
am  sure  a  very  large  portion  of  the  evils  and  miseries 
that  we  have  would  have  vanished.  Throughout  the 
history  of  mankind,  if  any  motive  power  in  the  lives  of 
all  great  men  and  women  from  their  very  birth  has 
been  more  potent  than  another  it  is  that  of  faith  in 
themselves;  born  in  the  consciousness  that  they  were 
to  be  great,  they  became  great.  Let  a  man  go  down 
as  low  as  he  likes,  but  there  must  come  a  time  when 
out  of  sheer  desperation  an  upward  curve  will  be  taken 
and  he  will  learn  to  have  faith  in  himself.  But  for 
us  it  is  better  that  we  know  it  from  the  very  first. 
Why  should  we  be  compelled  to  have  all  this  bitter 
experience  in  order  to  have  faith  in  ourselves?  We 
can  see  that  all  the  difference  between  man  and  man 
is  owing  to  the  existence  or  non-existence  of  faith  in 
himslf.  Faith  in  ourselves  will  do  everything.  I  have 
experienced  it  in  my  own  life,  and  am  doing  so  con- 
tinually, and  as  I  grow  older  that  faith  becomes 
stronger  and  stronger.  He  is  an  atheist  who  does  not 
believe  in  himself.  The  old  religions  said  he  was  the 
atheist  who  did  not  believe  in  God.  The  new  religion 
says  he  is  the  atheist  who  does  ngt  believe  in  himself. 


214  J  NANA   YOGA 

But  it  is  not  selfish  faith,  because  the  Vedanta,  again, 
is  the  doctrine  of  oneness.  It  means  faith  in  all, 
because  you  are  pure.  Love  for  yourselves  means  love 
for  all,  for  you  are  one ;  faith  in  animals,  faith  in  every- 
thing. This  is  the  great  faith  which  v^ill  make  the 
world  better.  I  am  sure  of  that.  He  is  the  highest 
man  who  dares  to  say  "1  know  all  about  myself."  Do 
you  know  how  many  powers,  how  many  forces,  how 
many  energies  are  stiil  lurking  behind  that  frame  of 
yours?  What  scientist  has  yet  known  all  that  is  in 
man?  Millions  of  years  have  passed  since  man  was 
here,  and  yet  but  one  infinitesimal  part  of  his  power 
has  been  manifested.  Therefore,  how  dare  you  say 
you  are  weak  ?  How  do  you  know  what  is  behind  that 
degradation  on  the  surface  ?  How  do  you  know  every- 
thing that  is  within  you?  Behind  you  is  the  ocean  of 
infinite  power  and  blessedness. 

'This  Atman  is  first  to  be  listened  to,  to  be  heard." 
Hear  day  and  night  that  you  are  that  Soul.  Repeat 
it  to  yourselves  day  and  night  till  it  enters  into  your 
very  veins,  till  it  tingles  in  every  drop  of  blood,  till  it  is 
in  your  flesh  and  bone.  Let  the  whole  body  be  full  of 
that  one  ideal,  "I  am  the  birthless,  the  deathless,  the 
blissful,  the  omniscient,  the  omnipotent,  ever-glorious 
Soul."  Think  on  it  day  and  night;  think  on  it  till 
it  becomes  part  and  parcel  of  your  life.  Meditate  upon 
it,  and  out  of  that  will  come  work.  Out  of  the  fulness 
of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh,  and  out  of  the  fulness 
of  the  heart  the  hand  worketh  also.  Practice  will 
come.  Fill  yourselves  with  the  ideal;  whatever  you 
do,  think  well  on  it.  All  your  actions  will  be  trans- 
formed, deified,  magnified,  raised,  by  the  very  power 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  215 

of  the  thought.  If  matter  is  powerful,  thought  is 
omnipotent.  Bring  that  thought,  fill  yourselves  with 
the  thought  of  your  almightiness,  your  majesty,  and 
your  glory.  Would  to  God  all  the  other  superstitious 
things  had  not  been  put  into  your  head!  Would  to 
God  we  had  not  been  born  surrounded  by  all  these 
superstitious  influences  and  paralyzing  ideas  of  our 
weakness  and  vileness !  Would  to  God  that  mankind 
had  an  easier  path  through  which  to  attain  to  the 
noblest  and  highest  truths!  But  man  has  to  pass 
through  all  this;  do  not  make  the  path  more  difficult 
for  those  who  are  coming  after  you. 

These  are  sometimes  terrible  doctrines  to  teach.  I 
know  people  who  get  frightened,  but  for  those  who 
want  to  be  practical  this  is  the  first  practice.  Tell  not 
yourselves  or  others  that  you  are  weak.  Do  good  if 
you  can,  but  do  not  injure  the  world.  You  know  in 
your  inmost  heart  that  many  of  your  limited  ideas, 
this  humbling  yourself,  and  weeping  to  imaginary 
beings,  are  superstitions.  Tell  me  one  case  where 
these  prayers  have  been  answered.  All  the  answers 
that  came  were  from  our  own  hearts.  You  all  know 
there  are  no  ghosts,  but  no  sooner  are  you  in  the  dark 
than  there  is  a  little  creepy  sensation.  It  is  so  because 
in  our  childhood  we  have  all  these  fearful  ideas  put 
into  our  heads.  But  here  is  the  practice.  Do  not  do 
the  same  to  others,  through  fear  of  society,  through 
fear  of  public  opinion,  through  fear  of  the  hatred  of 
our  friends,  for  fear  of  loss  of  superstition.  Be  mas- 
ters of  it  all.  What  is  there  more  to  be  taught  in 
religion  ?  Oneness  in  this  Universe,  and  to  have  faith 
in  yourselves. 


2l6  JNANA    YOGA 

That  is  all  there  is  to  teach.  All  the  works  of  man- 
kind for  thousands  of  years  have  been  for  this  one 
goal,  and  mankind  is  working  it  out  yet.  It  is  yours 
now.  We  know  it.  It  has  been  taught  from  all  sides. 
Not  only  philosophy  and  psychology,  but  materialistic 
sciences  have  every  day  declared  it.  Where  is  the  sci- 
entific man  to-day  who  fears  to  acknowledge  the  truth 
of  this  oneness  of  the  universe?  Who  is  there  who 
dares  talk  of  many  worlds,  and  so  on  ?  All  these  were 
superstitions.  There  is  only  one  life  and  one  world, 
and  this  one  life  and  one  world  is  appearing  to  us  as 
manifold,  just  as  when  you  dream,  one  dream  passes 
away  and  another  comes.  You  do  not  live  in  your 
dreams.  The  dreams  come  one  after  the  other,  scene 
after  scene  unfolds  before  you.  So  it  is  in  this  world 
of  ours,  of  ninety  per  cent,  misery  and  ten  per  cent, 
happiness.  Perhaps  after  a  while  it  will  appear  as 
ninety  per  cent,  happiness,  and  we  shall  call  it  heaven ; 
but  a  time  will  come  to  the  sage  when  the  whole  thing 
will  vanish,  and  this  very  world  will  appear  as  God 
Himself,  and  our  own  soul  as  God.  It  is  not  there- 
fore that  there  are  many  worlds,  it  is  not  that  there  are 
many  lives.  All  this  manifoldness  is  the  manifesta- 
tion of  that  One.  That  One  is  manifesting  Himself 
as  many,  either  in  matter,  or  in  spirit,  or  in  mind,  or  in 
thought ;  or  in  any  other  thing.  It  is  that  One,  mani- 
festing Himself  as  many.  Therefore  the  first  practice 
for  us  is  to  teach  the  truth  to  ourselves  and  to  others. 

Let  the  world  resound  with  this  ideal  and  let  super- 
stitions vanish.  Tell  it  to  men  who  are  weak;  persist 
in  telling  it  to  them.  You  are  the  pure  one ;  arise  and 
awake,  oh  mighty  one,  this  sleep  does  not  represent 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  2\J 

you.  Arise  and  go ;  it  does  not  befit  you.  Think  not 
that  you  are  weak  and  miserable.  Almighty,  arise  and 
awake,  and  manifest  your  own  nature.  It  is  not 
fitting  that  you  think  yourself  a  sinner.  It  is  not 
fitting  that  you  think  yourself  weak.  Say  that  to  the 
world,  say  it  to  yourselves,  and  see  what  a  practical 
result  will  come,  see  how  with  an  electric  flash  every- 
thing will  be  manifested,  how  everything  will  be 
changed.  Tell  that  to  mankind  and  show  them  their 
power.  Then  we  shall  learn  how  to  practise  it  In  our 
daily  lives. 

What  we  call  viveka  (discrimination),  we  shall  come 
to  later  on,  we  shall  learn  how  in  every  moment  of  our 
lives,  in  every  one  of  our  actions,  to  discriminate 
between  what  is  right  and  wrong,  true  or  false,  and( 
we  shall  have,  therefore,  to  know  the  test  of  truth,; 
which  is  purity,  oneness.  Everything  that  makes  for 
oneness  is  truth.  Love  is  truth,  and  hatred  is  false, 
because  hatred  makes  for  multiplicity.  It  is  hatred 
that  separates  man  from  man;  it  is  wrong  and  false 
therefore.  It  is  a  disintegrating  power;  it  separates 
and  destroys. 

Love  binds,  love  makes  for  that  oneness.  You  are 
become  one,  the  mother  with  the  child,  families  become 
one  with  the  city.  The  whole  world  becomes  one  with 
the  animals.  For  love  is  existence,  God  Himself,  and 
all  this  is  the  manifestation  of  that  one  love,  more  or 
less  expressed.  The  difference  is  only  in  degree,  but 
it  is  the  manifestation  of  that  one  love  throughout. 
Therefore  in  all  our  actions  we  have  to  judge  whether 
it  is  making  for  diversity  or  for  oneness.  If  for 
diversity  we  have  to  give  it  up,  but  if  it  makes  for  one- 


2l8  JNANA   YOGA 

ness  we  are  sure  it  is  a  good  action.  So  with  our 
thoughts  we  have  to  understand  whether  they  make 
for  disintegration,  the  many,  or  for  oneness,  for  binding 
soul  unto  soul,  and  bringing  one  influence  tp  bear.  If 
they  do  this  we  will  take  them  up,  and  if  not  we  will 
throw  them  off  as  criminal. 

The  whole  idea  of  ethics  is  that  it  does  not  depend 
on  anything  unknowable,  it  does  not  teach  anything 
unknown,  but  in  the  language  of  the  Upanishad,  "The 
God  whom  we  worship  as  an  unknown  God,  the  same 
I  preach  unto  thee."  It  is  through  that  Self  that  you 
know  anything  else.  I  know  the  chair,  but  to  know 
the  chair  I  have  first  to  know  myself  and  then  the 
chair.  It  is  in  and  through  the  Self  that  the  chair  is 
known.  It  is  in  and  through  the  Self  that  you  are 
known  to  me,  that  the  whole  world  is  known  to  me, 
and  therefore  to  say  this  Self  is  unknown  is  sheer 
nonsense.  Take  off  the  Self  and  the  whole  universe; 
vanishes.  In  and  through  Self  all  knowledge  comes. 
Therefore  it  is  the  most  known  of  all.  It  is  yourself, 
that  which  you  call  'T."  You  may  wonder  how  this 
"I'*  of  me  can  be  the  "1"  of  you.  You  may  wonder 
how  this  limited  "I"  can  be  that  unlimited  Infinite, 
and  yet  it  is  so.  The  limited  is  a  mere  fiction.  It  has 
been  covered  up,  and  a  little  of  it  is  manifesting  as  the 
"I,"  but  as  yet  it  is  only  a  part  of  the  Infinite.  The 
limitation  never  comes  upon  the  unlimited ;  the  limited 
is  a  fiction.  The  Self  is  known,  therefore,  to  every  one 
of  us,  man,  woman  or  child,  even  to  the  animals.  I 
Without  knowing  Him  we  can  neither  live  nor  move, 
nor  have  our  being.  Without  knowing  this  Lord  of  all 
we  cannot  breathe  a  second,  or  live  a  second,  for  He 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  2ig 

must  be  there  to  make  us  move,  and  think,  and  live. 
The  most  known  of  all,  the  God  of  the  Vedanta,  is 
not  the  outcome  of  imagination. 

If  this  is  not  preaching  a  practical  God,  how  would 
you  teach  a  practical  God?  A  God  omnipresent,  in 
every  being,  more  real  than  these  senses  of  ours. 
Where  is  there  a  more  practical  God  than  Him  I  see 
before  me?  For  you  are  He,  the  Omnipresent  God 
Almighty,  the  Soul  of  your  souls,  and  if  I  say  you 
are  not  I  tell  an  untruth.  I  know  it,  whether  at  all 
times  I  realize  it  or  not.  He  is  the  oneness,  the  unity 
of  all,  the  reality  of  all  life  and  all  existence. 

These  ideas  of  the  ethics  of  Vedanta  have  to  be 
worked  out  in  great  detail,  and  therefore  you  must 
have  a  little  patience.  As  I  have  told  you,  we  want 
to  take  the  subject  in  detail  and  work  through  it 
thoroughly,  to  see  how  the  ideas  grow  from  very  low 
ideals,  how  the  one  great  ideal  of  oneness  has  started 
out  from  all  the  surrounding  ideas,  and  become  shaped 
into  that  universal  love,  and  we  ought  to  study  all 
these,  in  order  to  avoid  dangers.  But  the  world  cannot 
wait  for  time  to  work  up  from  the  lowest  steps.  What 
is  the  use  of  our  standing  on  higher  steps  if  we  cannot 
give  the  same  truth  to  others  coming  afterwards. 
Therefore  it  is  better  to  study  it  in  all  its  workings; 
and  first,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  clear  the  intellec- 
tual portion,  although  we  know  that  intellectuality  is 
almost  nothing,  it  is  the  heart  that  is  of  most  impor- 
tance. It  is  through  the  heart  that  the  Lord  is  seen 
not  through  the  intellect.  The  intellect  is  only  the 
street  cleaner,  cleansing  the  path  for  us,  a  secondary 
worker,  the  watchman,  the  policeman ;  but  the  police- 
man is  not  a  positive  necessity  for  the  workings  of 


220  J  NANA   YOGA 

society.  He  is  only  to  stop  disturbances,  to  check 
wrong-doing,  and  that  is  all  the  work  required  of  the 
intellect.  When  you  read  intellectual  books,  you 
think  when  you  have  mastered  them :  *  "Bless  the  Lord 
that  I  am  out  of  them  once  more,"  because  the  intellect 
is  blind  and  has  no  motion  of  itself,  it  has  neither 
hands  nor  feet.  It  is  feeling  that  is  the  worker,  that 
moves  with  speed  infinitely  superior  to  that  of  elec- 
tricity or  any  thing  else.  Do  you  feel,  is  the  question. 
If  you  do,  through  that  you  will  see  the  Lord.  It  is 
this  feeling  that  you  have  to-day  that  will  be  intensi- 
fied, deified,  raised  to  the  highest  platform,  till  it  feels 
"everything,  the  oneness  in  everything,  till  it  feels  God 
in  itself  and  in  others.  The  intellect  can  never  do 
that.  "Different  methods  of  speaking  words,  different 
methods  of  explaining  the  texts  of  books,  these  are 
for  the  enjoyment  of  the  learned,  not  for  the  salvation 
of  the  soul." 

Those  of  you  who  have  read  Thomas  a  Kempis  will 
have  found  how  in  every  page  he  insists  on  this :  and 
almost  every  holy  man  in  the  world  has  insisted  on  it. 
Intellect  is  necessary,  without  it  we  fall  into  crude 
error,  make  all  sorts  of  crude  mistakes.  Intellect 
checks  this,  but  beyond  that,  do  not  try  to  build  any- 
thing upon  it.  It  is  an  inactive,  secondary  help;  the 
real  help  is  feeling,  love.  Do  you  feel  for  others  ?  If 
you  do  you  are  growing  in  oneness.  If  you  do  not  feel 
for  others  you  may  be  the  most  intellectual  giant  ever 
born,  but  you  will  be  nothing ;  you  are  but  dry  intellect, 
,  and  you  will  remain  so.  And  if  you  feel,  even  if  you 
cannot  read  any  book,  and  do  not  know  any  language, 
you  are  in  the  right  way.     The  Lord  is  yours. 

Do  you  not  know  in  the  history  of  the  world  the 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  221 

power  the  prophets  had,  and  where  was  it?  In  the 
intellect  ?  Did  any  of  them  write  a  fine  book  on  phil- 
osophy, on  the  most  intricate  ratiocinations  of  logic? 
Not  one.  They  spoke  only  a  handful  of  words.  Feel 
like  Christ  and  you  will  be  a  Christ ;  feel  like  Buddha 
and  you  will  be  a  Buddha.  It  is  feeling  that  is  the 
life,  the  strength,  the  vitality  without  which  no  amount 
of  intellectual  activity  can  reach  God.  Intellect  is  like 
limbs  without  power  of  locomotion.  It  is  only  when 
feeling  enters  and  gives  them  motion  that  they  move 
and  strike  others.  That  has  been  the  way  all  over  the 
world,  and  you  must  remember  it.  This  is  one  of  the 
most  practical  things  in  Vedantic  morality,  for  it  is 
the  teaching  of  the  Vedanta  that  you  are  all  prophets, 
and  all  must  be  prophets.  The  book  is  not  the  proof 
of  your  conduct,  but  you  are  the  proof  of  the  book. 
How  do  you  know  that  a  book  preaches  truth? 
Because  you  do  it  and  feel  it.  That  is  what  Vedanta 
says.  What  is  the  proofs  of  the  Christs  and  Buddhas 
of  the  world  ?  That  you  or  I  feel  like  them.  That  is 
how  I  and  you  understand  that  they  were  true.  Our 
prophet  soul  Is  the  proof  of  their  prophet  soul.  Your 
godhead  is  the  proof  of  God  Himself.  If  you  are  not 
a  prophet  there  never  has  been  anything  true  of  God. 
If  you  are  not  God  there  never  was  any  God,  and  never 
will  be.  This,  says  the  Vedanta,  is  the  ideal  to  follow. 
Every  one  of  us  has  to  become  a  prophet,  and  you  are 
that  already.  Only,  know  it.  Never  think  there  is 
anything  impossible  for  the  soul.  It  is  the  greatest 
heresy  to  say  that.  If  there  be  sin  this  is  the  only  sin, 
to  say  that  you  are  weak,  or  that  others  are  weak. 


XIII 

PRACTICAL  VEDANTA 

Part  II 

I  WILL  read  to  you  a  very  ancient  story  from  the 
Chandogya  Upanishad,  how  knowledge  came  to  a 
boy.  The  form  of  the  story  is  very  crude,  but  we 
shall  find  that  it  contains  a  principle.  A  young  boy 
said  to  his  mother,  "I  am  going  to  study  the  Vedas. 
Tell  me  the  name  of  my  father,  and  my  caste."  The 
mother  was  not  a  married  woman,  and  in  India 
the  child  of  a  woman  who  has  not  been  married  is  con- 
sidered an  outcast;  he  is  not  fit  for  anything,  he  is 
unable  to  be  recognized,  much  less  is  he  competent  to 
study  the  Vedas.  So  the  poor  mother  said :  "My  child, 
I  do  not  know  the  name  of  your  family.  I  was  in 
service ;  I  had  to  serve  in  many  places ;  I  do  not  know 
who  your  father  is,  but  my  name  is  Jabala."  The  child 
went  to  the  college  of  sages,  and  there  he  was  asked 
the  same  question.  He  asked  to  be  taken  as  a  student, 
and  they  in  turn  asked  him:  "Say  child,  what  is  the 
name  of  your  father,  and  what  is  your  caste?"  The 
boy  repeated  what  he  had  heard  from  his  mother. 
"Sir,  I  asked  my  mother  the  question,  and  this  was 
her  answer."  Most  of  the  sages  were  disappointed  at 
the  answer,  and  did  not  know  what  to  say,  but  one  of 

222 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  223 

them  stood  up  and  asked  the  boy  to  come  to  him,  and 
said :  "My  boy  you  have  not  swerved  from  the  truth ; 
you  have  not  swerved  from  the  path  of  righteousness, 
and  this  is  what  is  called  a  Brahmin,  so  you  are  a 
Brahmin,  and  I  will  teach  you."  So  he  kept  the  boy 
with  him  and  educated  him;  and  because  he  had  told 
the  truth,  gave  him  a  new  name — Satyakama — ^the 
"truth  desiring." 

Now  come  some  of  the  peculiar  methods  of  ancient 
education.  This  teacher  gave  Satyakama  four  hun- 
dred lean,  weak  cows  to  take  care  of,  and  sent  him  to 
the  forest.  There  he  went  and  lived  for  some  time. 
The  teacher  had  told  him  to  come  back  when  there 
were  one  thousand  in  the  herd.  So  after  a  few  years, 
Satyakama  heard  a  big  bull  in  the  herd  telling  him 
"We  are  a  thousand  now ;  take  us  back  to  your  teacher. 
I  will  teach  you  a  little  of  Brahman."  "Say  on,  sir," 
said  Satyakama.  Then  the  bull  said,  "The  east  is  a 
part  of  the  Lord,  so  is  the  west,  so  is  the  south,  so  is 
the  north.  The  four  cardinal  points  are  four  parts 
of  Brahman.  You  will  be  taught  by  the  fire."  Fire 
was  the  great  symbol  in  those  days,  and  every  student 
had  to  procure  fire  and  make  offerings.  So  Satyakama 
came  back,  and  after  performing  his  oblation,  and 
worshipping  at  the  fire,  he  was  sitting  near  it,  when 
from  the  fire  came  a  voice,  "O  Satyakama."  "Speak 
Lord,"  said  Satyakama.  Perhaps  you  may  remember 
a  very  similar  story  in  the  Old  Testament,  how  Samuel 
heard  a  mysterious  voice.  "O  Satyakama,  I  am  come 
to  teach  you  a  little  of  Brahman.  This  earth  is  a  por- 
tion of  that  Brahman.  The  sky  and  the  heaven  are  a 
portion  of  Him.    The  ocean  is  a  part  of  that  Brahman." 


224  J  NANA  YOGA 

Then  the  fire  said  that  a  certain  bird  would  teach  him 
something.  Satyakama  continued  on  his  journey,  and 
when  he  had  performed  his  evening  sacrifice,  there 
came  a  swan  who  said,  "I  will  teach  you  something 
about  Brahman.  This  fire  which  you  worship,  O 
Satyakama,  is  a  part  of  that  Brahman.  The  sun  is  a 
part,  the  moon  is  a  part,  the  lightning  is  a  part  of  that 
Brahman.  A  bird  called  Madgu  will  tell  you  another 
part."  The  next  evening  that  bird  came,  and  a  similar 
voice  was  heard  by  Satyakama,  "I  will  tell  you  some- 
thing about  Brahman.  Breath  is  a  part  of  Brahman, 
sight  is  a  part,  hearing  is  a  part,  the  mind  is  a  part." 
Then  the  boy  returned  to  his  teacher,  and  the  teacher 
saw  him  from  a  distance,  and  this  is  what  he  said, 
"Boy,  thy  face  shines  like  a  knower  of  Brahman." 
Then  the  boy  asked  the  teacher  to  teach  him  more,  and 
he  said:  "You  have  known  some  part  of  the  truth 
already." 

Now,  apart  from  these  allegories,  what  the  bull 
taught,  what  fire  taught,  and  what  these  others  taught, 
we  see  the  tendency  of  the  thought  and  the  direction 
in  which  it  is  going.  The  great  idea  of  which  we 
here  see  the  germs,  is,  that  all  these  voices  are  inside 
ourselves.  As  we  read  on  we  shall  find  how  it  is  at 
last  made  clear  that  the  voice  is  here  in  the  heart,  and 
the  student  understands  that  all  this  time  he  was 
hearing  the  truth,  but  his  explanation  was  not  cor- 
rect. He  was  interpreting  the  voice  as  from  the; 
external  world,  while  all  the  time  the  voice  was  inside 
him.  The  second  idea  that  comes,  is  that  of  making 
the  knowledge  of  the  Brahman  practical.  It  is  always 
seeking  the  practical  possibilities  of  religion,  and  we 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  22$ 

find  in  reading  these  stories  how  it  is  becoming  more 
and  more  practical  every  day.  The  idea  is  shown 
through  everything  with  which  the  students  were 
famihar.  The  fire  with  which  they  were  worshipping 
was  that  Brahman.  This  earth  is  a  part  of  Brahman, 
and  so  on. 

The  next  story  belongs  to  a  disciple  of  this  Satya- 
kama,  who  went  to  be  taught  by  him  and  dwelt  near 
him  for  some  time.  Now  Satyakama  went  away 
somewhere,  and  the  student  became  very  down-hearted, 
so  that  when  the  teacher's  wife  came  and  asked  the 
boy  why  he  was  not  eating,  the  boy  said:  'T  am  too 
unhappy  to  eat,"  and  then  a  voice  from  the  fire  he 
was  worshipping,  saying:  ''This  life  is  Brahman. 
Brahman  is  the  ether,  and  Brahman  is  space.  Know 
Brahman.''  "I  know,  sir,  that  life  is  Brahman,  but 
that  He  is  space  and  that  He  is  ether  I  do  not  know." 
What  is  meant  by  ether  is  infinite  space.  Then  the 
fire  taught  him  the  duties  of  the  householder.  "This 
earth,  this  food,  this  fire  and  this  sun,  whom  you  wor- 
ship, are  forms  of  Brahman.  He  who  inhabits  these 
is  within  you  all.  He  who  knows  this  and  meditates 
on  Him,  all  his  sins  vanish  and  he  has  long  life  and 
becomes  happy.  He  who  lives  in  the  cardinal  points, 
I  am  He.  He  who  lives  in  the  breath,  and  in  the 
ether,  in  the  heavens,  and  in  the  lightning,  I  am  He." 
Here  too  we  see  the  same  idea  of  practical  religion. 
That  which  they  were  worshipping  as  the  fire,  the  sun, 
the  moon,  and  so  forth,  the  voice  with  which  they  are 
familiar,  takes  up  the  subject,  and  explains  it,  and 
gives  it  a  higher  meaning,  and  that  is  the  real  practi- 
cal side  of  Vedanta.     It  does  not  destroy  the  world, 


226  J  NANA   YOGA 

but  it  explains  it;  it  does  not  destroy  the  person,  but 
explains  it;  it  does  not  destroy  the  individuality,  but 
explains  it,  by  showing  the  real  individuality.  It 
does  not  show  that  this  world  is  vain,  and  does  not 
exist,  but  it  says  understand  what  this  world  is,  so 
that  it  may  not  hurt  you.  The  voice  did  not  say  to 
Satyakama  that  the  fire  which  he  was  worshipping 
was  all  wrong,  or  the  sun,  or  the  moon,  or  the  light- 
ning, or  anything  else,  but  it  showed  him  that  the  same 
spirit  which  is  inside  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  lightning, 
the  lire,  and  the  earth,  is  in  him,  so  that  everything 
became  transformed,  as  it  were,  to  the  eyes  of  Satya- 
kama. The  fire  which  was  merely  a  material  fire 
before  in  which  to  make  oblations,  assumes  a  new 
aspect,  and  becomes  the  Lord  really.  The  earth  has 
become  transformed,  life  has  become  transformed,  the 
sun,  the  moon,  the  stars,  the  lightning,  everything 
becomes  transformed,  deified.  Their  real  nature  is 
known.  For  we  must  know  that  the  theme  of  the 
Vedanta  is  to  see  the  Lord  in  everything,  to  see  things 
in  their  real  nature,  not  as  they  appear  to  be. 

Then  another  lesson  is  taught  which  is  very  peculiar. 
**He  who  shines  through  the  eyes  is  Brahman.  He  is 
the  beautiful  one,  He  is  the  shining  one.  He  shines 
in  all  these  worlds."  A  certain  peculiar  light,  the 
commentator  says,  which  comes  to  the  pure  man  is 
the  light  in  the  eyes  meant  here,  and  it  is  said  that 
when  a  man  is  pure,  such  a  light  will  shine  in  his 
eyes,  and  that  light  belongs  really  to  the  soul  within 
which  is  everywhere.  It  is  the  same  light  which  is 
shining  in  the  planets,  in  the  stars,  and  suns. 

The  other  thing  that  I  will  read  to  you  is  about 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  227 

some  peculiar  doctrines  of  these  ancient  Upanishads, 
about  birth  and  death  and  so  on.  Perhaps  it  will 
interest  you.  Svetaketu  went  to  the  king  of  the 
Panchdlas,  and  there  the  king  asked  him,  "Do  you 
know  where  people  go  when  they  die?  Do  you  know 
whether  they  come  back  or  not?  Do  you  know  why 
this  earth  does  not  become  full,  and  why  it  does  not 
become  empty?"  The  boy  replied  that  he  did  not 
know  Then  he  went  to  his  father  and  asked  him  the 
same  questions.  The  father  said,  "I  do  not  know," 
and  they  both  returned  to  the  king.  The  king  said 
this  knowledge  was  never  among  the  priests,  it  was 
only  among  the  kings,  and  that  is  why  the  king  rules 
the  world.  But  this  man  served  the  king  for  some 
time,  and  at  last  the  king  said  he  would  teach  him. 
*'0  Gautama,  the  fire  that  you  worship  outside  is  a 
very  low  state  of  things.  This  earth  itself  is  that 
great  symbol  of  fire.  The  air  is  its  fuel.  The  night 
is  its  smoke.  Its  flame  is  the  cardinal  points.  The 
lower  part  is  inhabited  by  darkness.  In  this  fire  the 
gods  pour  the  oblation,  the  rain  out  of  which  comes 
food.  You  need  not  make  oblation  to  that  little  fire; 
the  whole  world  is  that  fire,  and  this  oblation,  this 
worship,  is  continually  going  on.  The  gods,  and  the 
angels,  everybody  is  worshipping.  Man,  O  Gautama, 
is  the  greatest  symbol  of  fire,  the  body  of  man.  We  get 
the  idea  becoming  practical  once  more,  the  Brahman 
coming  down.  And  the  one  idea  that  runs  through  all 
these  symbolical  stories  is  that  invented  symbolism 
may  be  good,  and  helpful,  but  better  symbols  exist 
already  than  any  you  can  invent.  If  you  want  to 
invent  an  image  to  worship  God,  a  better  image  still 


228  J  NANA   YOGA 

exists,  the  living  man.  If  you  want  to  build  a  temple 
to  worship  God,  that  may  be  good,  but  a  better  one,  a 
much  higher  one,  exists,  the  human  body. 

We  must  remember  that  the  Vedas  have  two  parts, 
the  ceremonial  and  the  knowledge  portions.  By  that 
time  ceremonials  had  become  so  intricate  and  multi- 
plied that  it  was  almost  hopeless  to  disentangle  them 
and  in  the  Upanishads  the  ceremonials  are  almost 
done  away  with,  but  gently,  by  explaining  them.  We 
see  that  in  old  times  they  had  these  oblations  and 
sacrifices,  but  here  the  philosophers  come,  and  they, 
instead  of  snatching  their  symbols  from  the  hands  of 
the  ignorant,  instead  of  taking  the  negative  position 
which  we,  unfortunately,  find  general  in  modern 
reforms,  gave  them  something  to  take  their  place. 
Here  is  the  symbol  of  fire,  very  good.  But  here  is 
another  symbol,  the  earth.  What  a  grand,  great  sym- 
bol !  Here  is  this  little  temple,  but  the  whole  universe 
is  a  temple;  a  man  can  worship  anywhere.  There 
are  the  peculiar  figures  that  men  draw  on  the  earth, 
and  build  altars,  but  here  is  the  greatest  of  altars,  the 
living  conscious  human  body,  and  worship  here  is  far 
greater  than  the  worship  of  any  dead  symbols. 

We  now  come  to  a  peculiar  doctrine.  I  do  not 
understand  much  of  it  myself.  If  you  can  make 
something  out  of  it  I  will  read  it  to  you.  When  a 
man  who  has  meditated,  and  purified  himself,  and  got 
knowledge,  dies,  then  he  first  goes  to  light,  from 
light  to  day,  from  day  to  the  light  half  of  the  moon, 
from  that  to  the  six  months  when  the  sun  goes  to  the 
north,  from  the  months  to  the  year,  from  the  year  to 
the  sun,  from  the  sun  to  the  moon,  from  the  moon  to 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  229 

the  lightning,  and  when  he  comes  to  the  sphere  of 
lightning  he  meets  a  person  who  is  not  a  man,  and 
that  person  helps  him  to  meet  Brahman,  to  meet  God. 
This  is  the  path  of  the  gods.  When  sages  and  know- 
ing persons  die  they  go  that  way  and  they  do  not 
return.  What  is  meant  by  this  month  and  year  and 
all  these  things,  no  one  understands  clearly.  Each 
one  makes  his  own  meaning,  and  a  good  many  say  it  is 
all  nonsense.  What  is  meant  by  going  to  the  world 
of  the  moon,  and  of  the  sun,  and  this  person  who 
comes  to  help  the  Soul  after  it  has  reached  the  spheres 
of  light,  no  one  knows.  There  has  been  a  peculiar 
idea  among  the  Hindus  that  the  moon  is  a  state  of 
life,  and  we  will  see  how  life  has  come  from  the  moon, 
it  has  rained  from  the  moon  upon  this  earth.  Those 
that  have  not  attained  to  knowledge,  but  have  done 
good  work  in  this  life,  when  they  die,  first  go  through 
smoke,  then  to  night,  then  to  the  dark  fifteen  days, 
then  the  six  months  when  the  sun  goes  to  the  south, 
from  that  they  go  to  the  region  of  the  forefathers, 
then  to  ether,  then  to  the  region  of  the  moon,  and 
there  they  become  the  food  of  the  gods,  and  are  born 
as  gods.  There  they  live  as  long  as  their  good  works 
will  permit.  And  when  the  efifect  of  the  good  work 
has  been  finished  they  come  back.  They  first  become 
ether,  and  then  air,  and  then  smoke,  then  mist,  then 
cloud,  and  then  get  hold  of  raindrops,  and  fall  upon 
the  earth,  get  into  food,  are  eaten  up  by  human  beings, 
and  then  become  their  children.  Those  whose  works 
have  been  very  good  take  birth  in  very  good  families, 
and  those  whose  works  have  been  bad  take  very  bad 
births.     The  animals  are  always  dying,  and  are  con- 


230  J  NANA   YOGA 

tinually  coming  in  this  earth.  That  is  why  this  earth 
is  not  full,  and  not  empty. 

Several  ideas  we  can  get  also  from  this,  and  later 
on,  perhaps,  we  shall  be  able  to  understand  it  better, 
and  we  can  speculate  a  little  upon  what  they  mean. 
The  last  part,  how  those  who  have  been  in  heaven 
are  returning,  is  clearer  perhaps  than  the  first  part, 
but  the  whole  idea  seems  to  be  this,  that  there  is  no 
permanent  heaven  without  realizing  God.  Now  some 
people  who  have  not  realized  God,  but  have  done  good 
work  in  this  world,  with  the  view  of  enjoying  the 
results  thereof,  when  they  die  go  through  this  and 
that  place,  until  they  reach  heaven,  and  there  they 
are  born  in  the  same  way  as  we  are  here,  as  children 
of  the  gods,  and  they  live  there  as  long  as  their  good 
works  will  permit.  Out  of  this  comes  one  basic  idea 
of  the  Vedanta,  that  everything  which  has  name  and 
form  is  transient.  This  earth  is  transient,  because  it 
has  name  and  form,  and  so  the  heavens  must  be  tran- 
sient, because  there  also  the  name  and  form  remain. 
A  heaven  which  was  eternal  would  be  contradictory  in 
terms,  just  as  the  earth  cannot  be  eternal;  because 
everything  that  has  name  and  form  must  begin  in 
time,  exist  in  time,  and  finish  in  time.  These  are 
settled  doctrines  with  the  Vedanta,  and  the  heavens 
are  given  up. 

We  have  seen  in  the  Samhita  how  the  other  idea 
was  that  heaven  was  eternal,  much  the  same  as  the 
idea  which  is  prevalent  in  Europe  among  Mohamme- 
dans and  Christians.  The  Mohammedans  concretize 
it  a  little  more.  They  say  it  is  a  place  where  there 
are  gardens,  beneath  which  rivers  run.     In  the  desert 


PRACTICAL  VEDANTA  23 1 

of  Arabia  water  is  something  which  is  very  desirable, 
so  the  Mohammedan  always  conceives  his  heaven  as 
full  of  water.  I  was  born  in  a  country  where  there 
are  six  months  of  rain  every  year.  I  would  think 
of  heaven,  I  suppose,  as  a  dry  place,  and  so  would  the 
English  people.  These  heavens  in  the  Samhita  por- 
tion are  eternal;  the  departed  have  beautiful  bodies 
and  live  with  their  forefathers,  and  are  happy  ever 
afterwards.  There  they  meet  with  their  fathers,  and 
children,  and  relatives,  and  lead  very  much  the  same 
life  as  here,  only  much  happier.  All  the  difficulties 
and  obstructions  to  happiness  in  this  life  will  vanish, 
and  all  its  good  parts  and  enjoyments  will  be  left. 
But  however  comfortable  mankind  may  consider  this, 
there  is  something  which  is  truth  and  something 
which  is  comfort.  There  are  cases  where  truth  is  not 
comfortable  until  we  reach  the  climax.  Human  nature 
is  very  conservative.  It  goes  on  doing  something, 
and  once  having  done  that  something  it  finds  it  hard 
to  get  out  of  it.  The  mind  will  not  allow  new  thoughts 
to  come,  because  they  give  pain. 

So  here,  in  the  Upanishads,  we  see  a  tremendous 
departure  made.  It  is  declared  that  these  heavens, 
where  men  used  to  go  and  live  with  the  ancestors 
cannot  be  permanent,  seeing  that  everything  which 
has  nam.e  and  form  must  die.  If  there  arc  heavens 
with  forms,  these  heavens  must  vanish  in  course  of 
time ;  it  may  be  millions  of  years,  but  there  must  come 
a  time  when  they  will  have  to  go.  Another  idea  by 
this  time  has  appeared,  that  these  souls  must  come 
back  to  this  earth,  that  these  heavens  are  places  where 
they  enjoy  the  results  of  their  good  works,  and  after 


232  JNANA   YOGA 

these  effects  are  finished  they  come  back  into  this 
earth  life  again.  One  idea  is  clear  from  this,  that 
mankind  had  a  perception  of  the  philosophy  of  causa- 
tion even  at  that  early  time.  Later  on  we  shall  see 
how  our  philosophers  bring  that  out  in  the  language 
of  philosophy  and  logic,  but  here  it  is  almost  in  the 
language  of  children.  One  thing  you  may  remark  in 
reading  these  books,  that  it  is  all  internal  perception. 
If  you  ask  me  if  this  can  be  practical,  my  answer  is  it 
has  been  practical  first,  and  philosophical  next.  You 
can  see  that  these  things  have  been  perceived  and 
realized  first,  and  then  written.  This  world  spoke  to 
the  early  thinkers,  birds  spoke  to  them,  animals  spoke 
to  them,  the  sun,  the  moon  spoke  to  them,  and  bit  by 
bit  they  realized  things  and  got  into  the  heart  of 
nature,  not  by  cogitation,  not  by  the  force  of  logic, 
not  by  picking  the  brains  of  others  and  making  a  big 
book,  as  is  the  fashion  in  modern  times,  not  as  I  do, 
by  taking  up  one  of  their  writings  and  makmg  a 
lecture;  but  by  patient  investigation  and  discovery. 
Its  essential  method  was  practice,  and  so  it  will  be 
always.  Religion  will  be  always  a  most  practical 
science.  There  never  was  or  will  be  any  theological 
religion.  It  is  practice  first,  and  knowledge  after- 
wards. The  idea  that  these  souls  come  back  is  already 
there.  Those  persons  who  do  good  work  with  the 
idea  of  a  result,  get  it,  but  the  result  is  not  perma- 
nent. There  we  get  the  idea  of  causation  very  beauti- 
fully put  forward,  that  the  effect  is  only  commen- 
surate with  the  cause.  What  the  cause  is,  so  the  effect 
will  be.  The  cause  being  finite,  the  effect  must  be 
finite.     If  the  cause  is  eternal  the  effect  can  be  eternal. 


PRACTICAL  VEDANTA  233 

but  all  these  causes,  doing  good  work,  and  all  other 
things,  are  only  finite  causes,  and  as  such  cannot 
produce  infinite  result. 

We  come  to  the  other  side  of  the  question,  that  as 
there  cannot  be  an  eternal  heaven,  there  cannot  be  an 
eternal  hell,  on  the  same  grounds.  Suppose  I  am  a 
very  wicked  man.  Suppose  I  do  evil  every  minute  of 
this  life  of  mine.  Still  this  whole  life  here,  compared 
to  my  eternal  life,  is  nothing.  If  there  be  an  eternal 
punishment  it  will  mean  that  there  is  an  infinite  effect 
produced  by  a  finite  cause.  The  infinite  effect  of  my 
work  will  be  produced  by  the  finite  cause  of  this  life, 
and  for  this  infinite  result  I  shall  have  a  finite  cause 
which  cannot  be.  If  I  do  good  all  my  life  I  cannot 
have  an  infinite  heaven ;  it  would  be  making  the  same 
mistake.  But  there  is  the  third  course,  for  those  who 
have  known  the  truth,  for  those  who  have  realized. 
That  is  the  only  way  to  get  out,  as  it  were,  beyond 
this  veil  of  mdya,  to  realize  what  truth  is,  and  the 
Upanishads  indicate  what  line  these  are  taking,  what 
is  meant  by  realizing  the  truth. 

It  means  recognizing  neither  good  nor  bad,  but 
knowing  all  as  coming  from  the  Self ;  self  is  in  every- 
thing. It  means  denying  the  universe;  closing  your 
eyes;  seeing  the  Lord  in  heaven  and  in  hell  also; 
seeing  the  Lord  in  life  and  in  death  also.  This  is  the 
line  which  thought  is  taking  in  the  passage  I  have 
just  read  to  you,  how  this  earth  itself  is  a  symbol  of 
the  Lord,  how  the  sky  is  said  to  be  the  Lord,  how  the 
place  we  fill  is  said  to  be  the  Lord.  Everything  is 
Brahman.  And  this  is  to  be  seen,  realized,  not  simply 
talked  about,  or  thought  about.     We  can  see  as  a 


234  JNANA   YOGA 

logical  consequence  that  when  the  soul  has  realized 
that  everything  in  this  universe,  every  place  is  full  of 
the  Lord,  of  Brahman;  it  will  not  mean  anything  to 
that  soul  whether  it  goes  to  heaven,  or  hell,  or  any- 
where. It  does  not  mean  anything  to  it  whether  it  be 
born  again  on  this  earth,  or  in  heaven.  These  have 
ceased  to  have  any  meaning,  because  for  the  soul  that 
has  realized  its  real  nature,  every  place  is  the  same, 
every  place  is  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  every  place  has 
become  holy,  and  the  presence  of  the  Lord  is  all  that 
it  sees  in  heaven,  or  hell,  or  anywhere.  Neither  good 
nor  bad,  neither  life  nor  death;  only  one  Infinite 
Brahman  exists  for  that  soul. 

When  a  man  has  arrived  at  that  perception  accord- 
ing to  the  Vedanta,  he  has  become  free,  and,  says  the 
Vedanta,  that  is  the  only  man  who  is  fit  to  live  in  this 
world.  Others  are  not.  The  man  who  sees  evil,  how 
can  he  live  in  this  world?  His  life  is  a  misery;  it 
is  a  mass  of  misery  here.  The  man  who  sees  dangers 
here,  his  life  is  a  misery;  the  man  who  sees  death, 
his  life  is  a  misery.  That  man  alone  can  live  in  this 
world,  he  alone  can  say:  *T  enjoy  this  life,  and  I  am 
happy  in  this  life,''  who  has  seen  the  truth,  and  the 
truth  in  everything.  By  the  bye,  I  may  tell  you  that 
the  idea  of  hell  does  not  occur  in  the  Vedas  anywhere. 
It  comes  into  India  with  the  Purdnas,  much  later. 
The  worst  punishment  described  in  the  Vedas  is  coming 
back  here,  having  another  chance  on  this  earth.  From 
the  very  first  we  see  the  idea  is  taking  the  impersonal 
turn.  The  ideas  of  punishment  and  reward  are  very 
material,  and  they  are  only  consonant  with  the  idea  of 
a  human  God,  a  being  who  loves  one  and  not  another. 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  235 

just  as  we  do.  Punishment  and  reward  are  only 
admissible  with  the  existence  of  such  a  God.  They 
had  such  a  God  in  the  Samhita,  and  there  we  find  the 
idea  of  fear  entering,  but  as  soon  as  we  come  to  the 
Upanishads  the  idea  of  fear  vanishes,  and  the  imper- 
sonal idea  takes  its  place,  and  it  is  naturally  the  hardest 
thing  to  understand,  this  impersonal  idea,  in  every 
country.     Man  is  always  clinging  on  to  the  person. 

On  the  other  hand  the  Impersonal  God  is  a  Hving 
God,  a  Principle.  The  difference  between  personal 
and  impersonal  is  this,  that  the  personal  is  only  a  little 
man,  and  the  impersonal  idea  is  that  he  is  the  animal, 
the  man,  the  angel,  and  yet  something  more  which 
we  cannot  see,  because  impersonality  involves  all  per- 
sonality, is  the  sum-total  of  all  personality  in  the 
universe,  and  infinitely  more  besides.  "As  the  one 
fire  coming  into  the  world  is  manifesting  itself  in  so 
many  forms,  and  yet  is  infinitely  more  besides."  Such 
is  the  Impersonal. 

We  want  to  worship  a  living  God.  I  have  seen 
nothing  but  God  all  my  life,  nor  have  you.  To  see 
this  chair  you  first  see  God,  and  then  the  chair,  in  and 
through  Him.  He  is  there  day  and  night,  saying :  "I 
am."  The  moment  you  say  "I  am"  you  are  knowing 
existence.  Where  shall  you  go  to  find  God  if  you 
cannot  see  Him  in  your  own  hearts,  in  living  beings, 
in  the  man  working  in  the  street  ?  "Thou  art  the  man, 
Thou  art  the  woman.  Thou  art  the  girl,  and  Thou  art 
the  boy.  Thou  art  the  old  man  tottering  on  a  stick. 
Thou  art  the  young  man  walking  in  the  pride  of  his 
strength."  He  is  all  that  exists,  a  wonderful  living 
God,  who  is  the  only  Fact  in  the  Universe.     This 


236  J  NANA   YOGA 

seems  to  many  to  be  a  very  terrible  contradiction  to 
the  traditional  God,  who  lives  behind  a  veil  some- 
where and  whom  nobody  ever  sees.  The  priests  only 
give  us  an  assurance  that  if  we  follow  them,  listen  to 
their  admonitions  and  walk  in  the  way  they  mark  out 
for  us — then  when  we  die,  they  will  give  us  a  pass- 
port, and  we  may  happen  to  see  the  face  of  God! 
What  are  all  these  heaven  ideas  but  simply  modifica- 
tions of  this  nonsenical  priestcraft  ? 

Of  course  the  impersonal  idea  is  very  destructive; 
it  takes  away  all  trade  from  the  priests,  all  churches 
and  temples  will  vanish.  If  they  taught  this  imper- 
sonal idea  to  the  people  their  occupation  would  be 
gone.  Yet  we  have  to  teach  it  unselfishly,  without 
priestcraft.  You  are  God  and  so  am  I;  who  obeys 
whom?  Who  worships  whom?  You  are  the  highest 
temple  of  God;  I  would  rather  worship  you  than  any 
temple  or  any  image  or  bible.  Why  are  these  people 
so  contradictory  in  their  thought?  They  are  like  fish 
slipping  through  our  fingers.  They  say  we  are  hard- 
headed  practical  men.  Very  good.  But  what  is  more 
practical  than  worshipping  here,  worshipping  you?  I 
see  you,  feel  you,  and  I  know  you  are  God.  The 
Mohammedan  says  there  is  no  Gk)d  but  Allah.  The 
Vedanta  says  there  is  no  God  but  man.  It  may 
frighten  many  of  you,  but  you  will  understand  it  by- 
and-by.  The  living  God  is  within  you,  and  yet  you 
are  building  churches  and  temples  and  believing  all 
sorts  of  imaginary  nonsense.  The  only  God  to  wor- 
ship is  the  human  soul,  or  the  human  body.  Of  course 
all  animals  are  temples,  but  man  is  the  highest,  the 
Taj  Mahal  of  temples.     If  I  cannot  worship  that,  no 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  237 

Other  temple  will  be  of  any  advantage.  The  moment 
I  have  realized  God  sitting  in  the  temple  of  every 
human  body,  the  moment  I  stand  in  reverence  before 
every  human  being,  and  really  see  God,  the  moment 
that  feeling  comes  to  me,  that  moment  I  am  free  from 
bondage,  everything  vanishes,  and  I  am  free. 

This  is  practical,  the  most  practical  of  all  worship. 
It  does  not  have  anything  to  do  with  theorizing  and 
speculation ;  yet,  if  you  tell  it  to  most  men,  it  frightens 
them.  They  say  it  is  not  right.  They  go  on  theoriz- 
ing about  ideas  their  grandfathers  told  them,  and  their 
forefathers  six  thousand  years  ago,  that  a  God  some- 
where in  heaven  told  somebody  that  he  was  God. 
Since  that  time  we  have  only  theories.  This  is  practi- 
cality according  to  them,  and  our  ideas  are  impractical. 
Each  one  must  have  his  way,  says  the  Vedanta,  but 
this  is  the  ideal.  The  worship  of  a  god  in  heaven,  and 
all  these  things,  are  not  bad,  but  they  are  only  steps 
towards  the  truth,  and  not  the  truth  itself.  They  are 
good  and  beautiful,  and  some  wonderful  ideas  are 
there,  but  the  Vedanta  says  at  every  point :  *'My  friend, 
Him  whom  you  are  worshipping  as  unknown  I  worship 
as  thee.  Whom  you  are  worshipping  as  unknown  and 
trying  to  seek  throughout  the  universe.  He  has  been 
there  all  the  time.  You  are  living  through  Him.  He 
is  the  eternal  witness  of  the  universe."  **Him  whom 
all  the  Vedas  worship,  nay,  more,  He  who  is  always 
present  in  the  eternal  T,'  He  existing,  the  whole 
universe  exists.  He  is  the  light  of  the  universe.  If 
the  *r  were  not  in  you,  you  would  not  see  the  sun, 
everything  would  be  a  dark  mass  for  you,  non-exist- 
ence.    He  shining,  you  see  the  world," 


238  J  NANA   YOGA 

One  question  is  generally  asked  and  it  is  this,  that 
this  may  lead  to  a  tremendous  amount  of  difficulty. 
Every  one  of  us  will  think  I  am  God,  whatever  I  do 
or  think  is  good;  God  can  do  no  evil.  In  the  first 
place,  even  taking  this  danger  of  misinterpretation 
for  granted,  can  it  be  proved  that  on  the  other  side 
the  same  danger  does  not  exist  ?  They  have  been  wor- 
shipping a  God  in  heaven  separate  from  them,  and  of 
whom  they  are  so  much  afraid.  They  have  come  in 
shaking  with  fear,  and  all  their  life  they  go  on  shaking. 
Has  the  world  been  made  much  better?  The  same 
question  you  ask  on  the  other  side.  Those  who  have 
understood  and  worshipped  a  personal  God,  and  those 
who  have  understood  and  worshipped  an  impersonal 
God,  on  which  side  have  been  the  great  workers  of 
the  world  ?  Gigantic  workers,  gigantic  moral  powers  ? 
Certainly  the  impersonal.  How  can  you  expect  moral 
persons  to  be  developed  from  fear?  It  can  never  be. 
"Where  one  sees  another,  where  one  hurts  another, 
that  is  Maya.  When  one  does  not  see  another,  when 
one  does  not  hurt  another,  when  everything  has 
become  the  Atman,  who  sees  whom,  who  perceives 
whom  ?"  It  is  all  He,  and  all  I,  at  the  same  time. 
The  soul  has  become  pure.  Then,  and  then  alone  we 
understand  what  is  love,  and  can  love  come  through 
fear?  Its  basis  is  in  freedom;  then  comes  love.  We 
really  begin  to  love  the  world,  then  we  understand 
what  is  meant  by  brotherhood  and  mankind,  and  not 
before. 

So  it  is  not  right  to  say  this  will  lead  to  a  tremen- 
dous amount  of  evil  doing  all  over  the  world,  as  if  the 
other  doctrine  never  lends  itself  to  the  works  of  evil ; 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  239 

as  if  it  does  not  deluge  this  world  in  blood,  as  if  it  does 
not  tear  to  pieces  and  lead  to  sectarianism.  My  God 
is  the  greatest  God.  Let  us  decide  it  by  a  free  fight. 
That  is  the  outcome  of  dualism  all  through  the  world. 
Come  out  into  the  broad  open  light  of  day,  come  out 
from  the  little  narrow  paths..  How  can  the  great 
infinite  human  soul  rest  content  to  live  and  die  in  small 
ruts?  There  is  the  universe  of  light,  everything  in 
the  universe  is  ours.  Try  to  stretch  out  your  arms 
and  embrace  the  whole  universe  in  love.  If  you  have 
ever  felt  that  you  wanted  to  do  that,  you  have  felt  God. 
You  remember  that  passage  in  the  sermon  of 
Buddha,  how  he  sent  a  thought  of  love  towards  the 
South,  and  the  North,  and  the  East,  and  the  West, 
above  and  below,  until  the  whole  universe  was  filled 
with  this  love,  grand  and  great  and  infinite.  When 
you  have  that  feeling  that  means  true  personality. 
The  whole  universe  is  one  Person;  let  go  these  little 
things.  Give  up  the  small  for  this  infinite  enjoyment, 
give  up  small  enjoyments  for  this  infinite  bliss.  What 
use  is  it  to  have  these  small  bits  of  bliss?  And  it  is 
all  yours,  for  you  must  remember  that  the  impersonal 
includes  the  personal.  So  God  is  the  Personal  and  the 
Impersonal  at  the  same  time.  So  man,  the  infinite, 
impersonal  Man,  is  manifesting  himself  as  this  person. 
We  the  infinite  have  limited  ourselves,  as  it  were,  into 
little  bits.  The  Vedanta  says  this  is  the  state  of  things. 
It  will  not  vanish,  it  will  remain,  but  now  it  is  our- 
selves. We  are  limiting  ourselves  by  our  Karma,  and 
that  like  a  chain  round  our  necks  has  dragged  us  into 
this  limitation.  Break  that  chain  and  be  free.  Tram- 
ple law  under  your  feet.     There  is  no  law  in  human 


(( 


240  JNANA   YOGA 

nature,  there  is  no  destiny,  no  fate.  How  can  there 
be  law  in  infinity?  Freedom  is  its  watchword.  Free- 
dom is  its  nature,  its  birthright.  Be  free,  and  then 
have  any  amount  of  Httle  personaHties  you  Hke.  Then 
we  will  play  as  the  actor,  as  a  king  comes  upon  the 
stage  and  takes  up  the  role  of  a  beggar,  and  the  actual 
beggar  is  walking  through  the  streets.  The  scene  is 
the  same  in  both  cases,  the  words  are  perhaps  the  same, 
but  yet  what  a  difference.  The  one  enjoys  his  beg- 
gary and  the  other  is  suffering  misery  from  it.  And 
what  makes  this  difference?  The  one  is  free  and  the 
other  is  bound.  The  king  knows  this  beggary  is  not 
true,  but  that  he  has  assumed  it,  taken  it  up  just  for 
play,  and  the  beggar  thinks  that  it  is  his  familiar  state 
and  he  has  to  bear  it  whether  lie  will  or  not.  This  is 
law,  so  he  is  miserable.  You  and  I  as  long  as  we  have 
no  knowledge  of  our  real  nature,  are  these  beggars, 
jostled  about  by  every  force  in  nature,  made  slaves  by 
everything  in  nature,  crying  all  the  world  over  for 
help,  and  help  never  comes  to  us,  trying  to  get  help 
from  every  quarter,  from  imaginary  fictitious  beings, 
and  yet  never  getting  any  help.  Then  thinking,  this 
time  it  will  come,  and  weeping  and  wailing  and  hoping, 
one  life  is  passed  and  the  same  play  goes  on. 

Be  free ;  hope  for  nothing  from  any  one  else.  I  am 
sure  if  you  all  look  back  upon  your  lives  you  will  find 
that  you  were  always  vainly  trying  to  get  help  from 
others  and  it  never  came.  All  the  help  that  has  been 
given  you  was  from  within  yourselves.  You  only  had 
the  fruits  of  what  you  yourselves  worked  for,  and  yet 
strangely  hoping  all  the  time  for  help.  Like  the  rich 
man's  parlor,  always  full,  but  if  you  watch  it  you  do 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  24I 

not  find  the  same  batch  of  people  there.  Always 
hoping  that  they  will  get  something  out  of  these  rich 
men,  but  they  never  do.  So  are  our  lives,  hoping, 
hoping,  hoping,  never  coming  to  an  end.  Give  up  this 
hope,  says  the  Vedanta.  Why  should  you  hope  ?  You 
have  everything.  You  are  the  king,  the  vSelf.  What 
are  you  going  to  hope  for  ?  If  the  king  goes  mad,  and 
goes  about  to  find  the  king  in  his  own  country,  he  will 
never  find  him  because  he  is  the  king  himself.  He 
may  go  through  every  village  and  city  in  his  own  coun- 
try, seeking  in  every  house,  he  may  weep  and  wail,  but 
will  never  find  any  king  because  he  is  the  king  himself. 
It  is  better  that  we  know  we  are  the  king  and  give  up 
this  fool's  search  after  the  king.  Thus  says  the  Vedan- 
ta, and  knowing  that  we  are  the  king  we  become  happy 
and  contented.  Give  up  all  these  fools'  searches,  and 
then  play  on  in  the  universe. 

The  whole  vision  is  changed.  Instead  of  an  eternal 
prison  this  world  has  become  a  playground.  Instead 
of  a  land  of  competition  it  is  merely  a  land  of  Spring- 
time, where  the  butterflies  are  flitting  about  in  mirth. 
This  very  world  is  then  heaven,  where  in  the  first  place 
it  was  hell.  To  the  eyes  of  the  bound  it  is  a  tremen- 
dous place  of  torment,  and  to  the  eyes  of  the  free  it  is 
the  only  world  that  exists.  Heavens  and  all  these 
places  are  here.  This  one  life  is  the  universal  life. 
All  rebirths  are  here.  All  the  gods  are  here,  the  pro- 
totypes of  man.  The  gods  did  not  create  man  after 
their  type,  but  man  created  gods.  And  here  are  the 
prototypes,  here  is  the  Indra,  the  Karma,  and  all  the 
gods  of  the  universe  sitting  before  him.  You  have 
been  projecting  your  little  doubles,  and  you  are  the 


242  JNANA   YOGA 

originals,  the  real,  the  only  gods  to  be  worshipped. 
This  is  the  view  of  the  Vedanta,  and  this  its  practica- 
bility. Because  we  have  become  free,  we  shall  not  go 
mad  and  throw  up  society  and  fly  off  to  die  in  the 
forest  or  the  cave,  we  shall  remain  where  we  are,  only 
we  shall  have  understood  the  whole  thing.  The  same 
phenomena  will  come,  but  with  new  meaning.  We  do 
not  know  the  world  yet;  it  is  only  through  freedom 
that  we  see  what  it  is,  understand  its  nature.  We 
shall  see  then  that  this  so-called  law,  or  fate,  or  des- 
tiny, occupied  only  an  infinitesimal  part  of  our  nature. 
It  was  just  one  side,  and  on  the  other  side  there  was 
freedom  all  the  time,  and  we  have  been  like  the  hunted 
hare  putting  our  faces  on  the  ground,  and  trying  to 
save  ourselves  from  evil. 

We  have  through  delusion  been  trying  to  forget  our 
nature,  and  yet  we  could  not  forget,  it  was  always 
calling  upon  us,  and  all  our  search  after  god  or  gods, 
or  external  freedom,  was  a  search  after  our  real 
nature.  We  mistook  the  voice.  We  thought  it  was 
from  the  fire,  or  from  a  god,  or  the  sun,  or  moon,  or 
stars,  but  at  last  we  have  found  that  it  was  from  our- 
selves. Here  is  this  eternal  voice  speaking  of  eternal 
freedom.  Its  music  is  eternally  going  on.  Part  of 
this  music  of  the  soul  has  become  the  earth,  the  law, 
this  universe,  but  it  was  always  ours  and  always  will 
be.  In  one  word  the  ideal  of  Vedanta  is  to  know  man 
as  he  really  is,  and  this  is  the  message,  that  if  you  can- 
not worship  your  brother  man,  the  manifested  God, 
neither  can  you  worship  a  God  who  is  unmanifested. 

Do  you  not  remember  in  the  Christian  Bible,  if  you 
cannot  love  your  own  brother  whom  you  have  seen. 


PRACTICAL  VEDANTA  243 

how  can  you  love  God  whom  you  have  not  seen?  If 
you  cannot  see  God  in  the  human  face  divine,  how  can 
you  see  Him  in  the  clouds,  or  in  anything  dull,  or 
dead,  or  in  mere  fictitious  stories  of  your  brain?  I 
will  call  you  religious,  from  the  day  you  begin  to  see 
God  in  men  and  women,  for  then  you  will  understand 
what  is  meant  by  turning  the  left  cheek  to  the  man 
who  strikes  you  on  the  right.  When  you  see  man  as 
God,  everything,  even  the  tiger,  will  be  welcome. 
Everything  that  comes  is  but  the  Lord  in  various 
forms,  the  Eternal,  the  Blessed  One,  our  father,  and 
mother,  and  friend,  our  own  soul  playing  with  us. 

There  is  still  a  higher  ideal  than  calling  God  Father ; 
to  call  Him  Mother.  There  are  other  ideals ;  He  has 
been  called  "Friend" ;  still  higher  "the  Beloved."  The 
highest  point  of  all  is  to  see  no  difference  between 
lover  and  beloved.  You  remember  the  old  Persian 
story,  how  a  lover  came  and  knocked  at  the  door  and 
was  asked,  "Who  is  that."  He  answered,  "It  is  I," 
and  there  was  no  answer.  A  second  time  he  came, 
and  answered  "I  am  here,**  but  the  door  did  not  open. 
The  third  time  the  lover  came,  and  the  voice  again 
asked,  "Who  is  that."  He  replied,  "I  am  thyself,  my 
love,"  and  the  door  opened.  So,  between  God  and 
ourselves.  He  is  in  everything.  He  is  everything. 
Every  man  and  woman  is  the  palpable  blissful  living 
and  only  God.  Who  says  God  is  unknown,  who  says 
He  is  to  be  searched  after  ?  We  have  found  God  eter- 
nally. We  have  been  living  in  Him  eternally.  Every- 
where He  is  eternally  known,  eternally  worshipped. 

A  great  mistake  is  often  made,  that  other  forms  of 
worship  than  our  own  are  all  errors.     That  is  one  of 


244  J  NANA   YOGA 

the  great  points  not  to  be  forgotten,  that  those  who 
worship  God  through  ceremonials  and  forms,  however 
crude  we  may  think  them,  are  not  in  error.  It  is 
the  travel  from  truth  to  truth,  from  lower  truth  to 
higher  truth.  Darkness  is  less  light ;  evil  is  less  good ; 
impurity  is  less  purity.  This  must  always  be  borne  in 
mind  that  we  have  to  see  others  with  eyes  of  love,  with 
sympathy,  knowing  that  they  are  but  going  through 
the  same  path  that  we  have  trod.  If  you  are  free, 
you  must  know  that  all  are  coming  up  to  be  free 
sooner  or  later,  and  if  you  are  free  how  do  you  see  the 
impermanent  ?  If  you  are  really  pure  how  do  you  see 
the  impure,  for  what  is  within  is  without.  We  cannot 
see  impurity  without  having  it  first  inside.  This  is  one 
of  the  practical  sides  of  Vedanta,  and  I  hope  that  we 
shall  all  try  to  carry  it  into  our  lives.  The  whole  of 
life  is  for  this  to  be  carried  into  practice;  but  one 
great  point  we  gain,  that  we  shall  work  with  satisfac- 
tion and  contentment,  instead  of  discontent  and  dissat- 
isfaction, for  we  know  Truth  is  within  us,  we  have  it, 
it  is  our  birthright,  and  we  have  only  to  manifest  it, 
make  it  tangible. 


XIV 

PRACTICAL  VEDANTA 

Part  III 

In  the  Chandogya  Upanishad  we  read  that  a  sage 
called  Narada  came  to  another  called  Sanatkumara, 
arid  asked  various  questions,  and  among  them  inquired 
if  religion  is  the  cause  of  things  as  they  are.  And 
Sanatkumara  takes  him,  as  it  were,  step  by  step,  tells 
him  that  there  is  something  higher  than  this  earth, 
and  something  higher  than  that,  and  so  on,  till  he 
comes  to  akasa,  ether.  Ether  is  higher  than  light, 
because  in  the  ether  are  the  sun  and  the  moon,  light- 
ning, the  stars ;  it  is  in  the  ether  we  hear,  in  ether  we 
live,  and  in  ether  we  die.  Then  the  question  arises, 
is  there  anything  higher  than  that,  and  he  tells  him  of 
prdna.  This  prdna,  according  to  the  Vedanta,  is  the 
principle  of  life.  It  is  like  ether,  an  omnipresent  prin- 
ciple, and  all  motion,  either  in  the  body  or  anywhere 
else,  is  the  work  of  this  prdna.  Prdna  is  greater  than 
dkdsa.  Through  prdna  everything  lives,  prdna  is  in 
the  mother,  in  the  father,  in  the  sister,  in  the  teacher, 
prdna  is  the  knower. 

I  will  read  another  passage,  where  Svetaketu  asks 
his  father  about  the  truth,  and  the  father  teaches  him 
different  things,  and  then  at  last  answers  "That  which 

345 


246  J  NANA   YOGA 

is  the  fine  cause  in  all  these  things,  of  it  are  all  these 
things  made.  That  is  the  all,  that  is  truth,  thou  art 
That,  O  Svetaketu.''  And  then  he  again  gives  various 
examples.  "As  a  bee,  O  Svetaketii,  gathers  honey 
from  different  flowers,  and  as  the  different  honeys  do 
not  know  that  they  are  from  various  trees,  and  from 
various  flowers,  so  all  of  us,  having  come  out  of  that 
existence,  have  forgotten  that  we  have  done  so. 
Therefore,  O  Svetaketn,  That  thou  art."  He  gives 
another  example  of  the  rivers  running  down  to  the 
ocean,  and  they  do  not  know  that  they  have  risen  as 
various  rivers,  so  even  we  come  out  of  that  Existence, 
and  do  not  know  that  we  are  That.  "O  Svetaketu, 
thou  art  That."     So  on  he  goes. 

Now  there  are  two  principles  of  all  knowledge.  The 
one  principle  is  that  we  can  know  by  referring  the 
particular  to  the  general,  and  the  general  to  the  univer- 
sal ;  and  the  second  principle  is,  that  anything  of  which 
the  explanation  is  sot^ght,  is  to  be  explained  so  far  as 
possible  from  its  own  nature.  Taking  up  the  first 
principle  we  see  that  all  our  knowledge  really  consists 
of  that  classification  going 'higher  and  higher.  When 
something  happens  singly  we  are,  as  it  were,  dissati- 
fied.  When  it  can  be  shown  that  that  very  thing  hap- 
pens again  and  again  we  are  satisfied,  and  call  it  law. 
When  we  find  that  one  stone  falls,  or  one  apple  falls,  we 
are  dissatified ;  when  we  find  that  all  stones  and  all 
apples  fall  we  call  it  the  law  of  gravitation  and  are 
satisfied.  The  fact  is  that  from  the  particular  we 
deduce  the  general.  When  we  want  to  study  religion 
this  is  the  scientific  process. 

To  study  religion,  therefore,  to  make  it  scientific, 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  247 

we  have  to  admit  the  same  light.  The  same  principle 
also  holds  good,  and  as  a  fact  we  find  that  that  has 
been  the  course  all  through.  In  reading  these  books 
that  I  have  been  translating  to  you,  the  earliest  idea 
that  I  can  trace  is  from  the  particular  to  the  general. 
We  see  how  these  "bright  ones'*  become  merged 
together  and  become  one  principle,  and  how  in  the 
ideas  of  the  cosmos  they  are  going  higher  and  higher, 
how  from  the  fine  elements  they  are  going  to  finer 
and  finer,  and  more  embracing  elements,  how  from 
particulars  they  come  to  one  omnipresent  ether,  and 
how  from  even  that  they  went  to  an  all  embracing 
force,  or  prdna,  and  in  all  this  the  principle  that  runs 
through  all,  is,  that  one  is  not  separate  from  the 
others.  It  is  the  very  ether  that  exists  in  the  higher 
form,  or,  so  to  say,  the  higher  form  of  prdna  con- 
cretes and  becomes  ether  and  that  ether  becomes  still 
grosser,  and  so  on. 

The  generalization  of  the  personal  God  is  another 
case  in  point.  We  have  seen  how  the  same  generaliza- 
tion was  reached,  and  how  it  was  called  the  sum  total 
of  all  consciousness.  But  a  difficulty  arises  from  that ; 
it  is  not  an  all-sufficient  generalization.  We  take  up 
only  one  side  of  the  facts  of  nature,  the  fact  of  con- 
sciousness, and  out  of  that  we  generalize,  and  our 
generalization  takes  the  form  of  the  personal  God, 
when  the  whole  of  nature  is  left  aside.  So,  in  the 
first  place  it  is  rather  a  defective  generalization.  There 
is  another  insufficiency,  and  that  is  the  outcome  of  the 
second  principle.  Everything  should  be  explained  out 
of  its  own  nature.  There  may  have  been  people  who 
thought  that  every  stone  that  fell  to  the  ground  was 


248  J  NANA    YOGA 

dragged  down  by  some  ghost,  but  the  explanation  is 
the  law  of  gravitation,  and  although  we  know  it  is  not 
a  perfect  explanation,  yet  it  is  much  better  than  the 
other,  because  one  explanation  is  by  some  extraneous 
cause,  and  the  other  is  by  its  own  nature.  So  on, 
throughout  the  whole  range  of  our  knowledge,  the 
explanation  which  is  the  outcome  of  the  nature  of  the 
thing  itself  is  a  scientific  explanation,  and  any  explana- 
tion which  is  entirely  outside  of  the  thing  in  question 
is  unscientific. 

So  the  explanation  of  a  personal  God  as  the  creator 
of  the  universe  has  to  stand  that  test.  If  that  God  is 
outside  of  nature,  having  nothing  to  do  with  nature, 
and  this  nature  is  the  outcome  of  the  command  of 
that  God,  produced  from  nothing,  it  becomes  naturally, 
a  very  unscientific  theory,  and  that  has  been  the  diffi- 
culty and  the  weak  point  of  every  theistic  theory 
throughout  the  ages.  These  two  defects  we  find  there- 
fore in  what  is  generally  called  the  theory  of  mono- 
theism, the  theory  of  a  personal  God,  with  all  the 
qualities  of  a  human  being  multiplied  very  much,  and 
who,  by  his  will,  created  this  universe  out  of  nothing, 
and  yet  is  separate  from  it.  This  leads  us  into  two 
difficulties. 

As  w^e  have  seen,  it  is  not  a  sufficient  generalization, 
and  secondly  it  is  not  an  explanation  of  nature  from 
nature.  It  holds  that  the  effect  is  not  the  cause,  that 
the  cause  is  entirely  separate  from  the  effect.  Yet  all 
the  tendency  of  human  knowledge  shows  that  the 
effect  is  but  the  cause  in  another  form.  To  this  idea 
the  discoveries  in  modern  science  are  pointing  every 
day,  and  the  latest  theory  that  has  been  granted  on 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  249 

all  sides  is  what  we  call  the  theory  of  evolution,  the 
principle  of  which  is  that  the  effect  is  but  the  cause 
in  another  form,  readjustment  of  the  old  cause,  and  the 
old  cause  takes  the  form  of  the  effect.  Creation  out 
of  nothing  would  be  laughed  at  by  modern  scientific 
men. 

Can  religion  stand  these  tests?  If  there  be  any 
religious  theories  which  can  stand  these  two  tests  they 
will  be  acceptable  to  the  modern  mind,  to  the  thinking 
mind.  Any  other  theory  which  we  ask  them  to 
believe  from  the  authority  of  priests,  or  churches,  or 
books,  the  modern  man  is  unable  to  accept,  and  the 
result  is  a  hideous  mass  of  unbelief.  Even  in  those 
in  whom  there  is  an  external  display  of  belief,  in  their 
hearts  there  is  a  tremendous  amount  of  unbelief.  The 
rest  give  up  religion,  shrink  away  from  it,  as  it  were, 
do  not  want  to  touch  it,  regard  it  as  priestcraft. 

Religion  has  been  reduced  to  a  sort  of  national 
form.  It  is  one  of  our  very  best  social  remnants ;  let 
it  remain.  But  the  real  necessity  which  the  grand- 
father of  the  modern  man  felt  for  it  is  gone.  He  no 
longer  finds  it  satisfactory  to  his  reason.  The  idea  of 
such  a  personal  God,  and  such  a  creation,  the  idea 
which  is  generally  known  as  monotheism  in  every 
religion,  cannot  hold  any  longer.  In  India  it  could 
not  hold  its  own  because  of  the  Buddhists,  and  that 
was  the  very  point  where  the  Buddhists  gained  their 
victory  in  ancient  times.  They  showed  that  if  nature 
is  allowed  its  almost  infinite  power,  and  if  nature  can 
work  out  all  its  wants,  it  is  simply  unnecessary  to 
insist  that  there  is  something  beside  nature.  Even 
the  soul  is  unnecessary.     There  was  an  old  discus- 


250  J  NANA   YOGA 

sion,  and  you  will  sometimes  find  that  old  superstition 
living  at  the  present  day,  the  idea  of  substance  and 
qualities. 

Most  of  you  have  read  how,  during  the  middle  ages, 
and,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  even  much  later,  this  was  one 
of  the  questions  of  discussion,  whether  qualities 
inhered  in  substance,  or  substance  in  qualities ;  whether 
length  and  breadth  and  thickness  form  part  of  certain 
substances  which  we  call  dead  matter,  or  if  the  sub- 
stance remains  whether  the  qualities  are  there  or  not. 
Now  comes  our  Buddhist,  and  he  says  you  have  no 
grounds  to  maintain  the  existence  of  such  a  substance, 
these  qualities  are  all  that  exist.  You  do  not  see 
beyond  them;  and  that  is  just  the  position  of  most 
of  our  modern  agnostics.  For,  taking  this  fight  of  the 
substance  and  qualities  upon  a  still  higher  plane  is  the 
fight  between  noumenon  and  phenomenon.  There  is 
this  phenomenal  world,  the  universe  of  continuous 
change,  and  there  is  something  which  does  not  change, 
and  this  duality  of  existence,  noumenon  and  phenom- 
enon, some  hold  is  true,  and  others  with  better  reason 
claim  that  you  have  no  right  to  admit  the  two,  for 
what  we  see,  feel,  and  think  is  only  the  phenomenon. 
You  have  no  right  to  assert  there  is  anything  beyond 
phenomena;  and  there  is  no  answer  at  all.  The  only 
answer  we  get  is  from  the  monistic  theory  of  the 
Vedanta,  that  it  is  true  that  only  one  exists,  and  that 
one  is  either  phenomenon  or  noumenon.  It  is  not 
true  that  there  are  two,  something  changing,  and  in 
and  through  that,  something  which  does  not  change, 
but  it  is  the  one  and  the  same  thing  which  appears  as 
changing,  and  which  is  in  reality  unchangeable. 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  25 1 

To  bring  it  to  a  concrete  and  philosophical  conclu- 
sion, we  have  come  to  think  of  the  body,  and  mind, 
and  soul  as  many,  but  really  there  is  only  one;  that 
one  is  appearing  in  all  these  various  forms.  Taking 
the  well-known  illustration  of  the  monists,  the  rope 
appears  as  the  snake.  Some  people  mistake  the  rope 
for  the  snake,  in  the  dark  or  through  some  other 
cause,  but  when  knowledge  comes,  the  snake  vanishes 
and  it  is  found  to  be  a  rope.  By  this  illustration  we 
see,  that,  when  the  snake  exists  in  the  mind,  the  rope 
has  vanished,  and  when  the  rope  exists,  the  snake  has 
gone.  When  we  see  phenomena  and  phenomena  only 
around  us,  the  noumenon  has  vanished;  but  when  we 
see  the  noumenon,  the  unchangeable,  it  naturally  fol- 
lows that  the  phenomena  have  vanished.  We  under- 
stand then  better  the  position  of  both  the  realist  and 
the  idealist.  The  realist  looks  at  phenomena  only, 
and  the  idealist  tries  to  look  at  the  noumenon.  For 
the  idealist,  the  really  genuine  idealist,  who  has  truly 
arrived  at  the  power  of  perception,  where  he  can  get 
away  from  changes,  for  him  the  changeful  universe 
has  vanished,  and  he  has  the  right  to  say  it  is  all 
delusion,  there  was  no  change.  The  realist  at  the 
same  time  looks  at  the  changeful.  For  him  the 
unchangeable  has  vanished,  and  he  has  a  right  to  say 
this  is  all  real. 

What  is  the  outcome  of  this  philosophy  ?  It  is  that 
the  personal  idea  of  God  is  not  sufficient.  We  have  to 
get  to  something  higher,  to  the  impersonal  idea.  Not 
that  the  personal  idea  would  be  destroyed  by  that,  not 
that  we  supply  proof  that  the  personal  God  does  not 
exist,  but  it  is  the  only  logical  step  that  we  can  take. 


252  JNANA    YOGA 

Just  as  we  say  that  man  is  a  personal-impersonal 
being.  We  are  the  impersonal,  at  the  same  time  that 
we  are  the  personal.  So  our  old  idea  of  God  must 
go,  for  it  is  only  a  repetition  of  the  same  idea  on  a 
higher  plane,  the  anthropomorphic  idea  of  God.  To 
the  impersonal  we  must  go  at  last,  therefore,  for  the 
explanation  of  the  personal,  for  the  impersonal  is  a 
much  higher  generalization  than  the  personal.  The 
Infinite  can  only  be  impersonal,  the  personal  is  lim- 
ited. Thereby  we  preserve  the  personal  and  do  not 
destroy  it.  Many  times  this  doubt  comes  that  if  we 
arrive  at  the  idea  of  the  impersonal  God  the  personal 
will  be  destroyed,  if  we  arrive  at  the  idea  of  •  the 
impersonal  man  the  personal  will  be  lost.  But  the 
idea  is  not  the  destruction  of  the  individual,  but  its 
real  preservation.  We  cannot  prove  the  individual  by 
any  other  means  than  by  referring  to  the  universal, 
by  proving  that  this  individual  is  really  the  universal. 
If  we  think  of  the  individual  as  separate  from  every- 
thing else  in  the  universe,  it  cannot  stand  a  minute, 
such  a  thing  never  existed. 

Secondly,  by  the  application  of  the  second  principle, 
that  the  explanation  of  everything  must  come  out  of 
the  nature  of  the  thing,  we  confront  a  still  bolder 
idea,  and  one  more  difficult  to  understand.  But  it 
comes  to  nothing  short  of  this,  that  the  Impersonal 
Being,  our  highest  generalization,  is  in  ourselves,  and 
we  are  That.  "O  Svetaketu,  thou  art  That;  thou 
art  that  Impersonal  Being;  that  God  for  whom  thou 
hast  been  searching  all  over  the  universe  is  all  the 
time  thyself" — not  in  the  personal  sense  but  in  the 
impersonal  sense.     The  man  we  know  now,  the  mani- 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  253 

fested,  is  personalized,  but  the  reality  of  this  is  the 
impersonal.  To  understand  the  personal  we  have  to 
refer  to  the  impersonal,  the  particular  must  be  referred 
to  the  general,  and  that  impersonal  is  the  Truth,  the 
Self  of  man,  but  this  personalized  manifestation  is 
not  referred  to  as  that  truth. 

There  will  be  various  questions  in  connection  with 
this,  and  I  will  try  to  answer  them  as  we  go  on. 
Many  difficulties  will  arise,  but  first  let  us  clearly 
understand  the  position  of  monism.  That  this  uni- 
verse which  we  see  is  all  that  exists;  we  need  not 
seek  elsewhere.  Gross  or  fine  it  is  all  here :  the  effect 
and  the  cause  are  both  here,  the  explanation  is  here. 
What  is  known  as  the  particular  is  simply  repetition 
in  a  minute  form  of  the  universal.  We  get  our  idea 
of  the  universe  from  the  study  of  our  own  souls,  and 
what  is  true  there  also  holds  good  in  the  outside 
universe.  The  ideas  of  heaven  and  all  these  various 
places,  even  if  they  be  true,  are  in  the  universe ;  they 
altogether  make  this  unity.  The  first  idea,  therefore, 
is  that  of  a  whole,  a  unit,  composed  of  various  minute 
particles,  and  each  one  of  us,  as  it  were,  is  a  part  of 
this  unit.  As  manifested  beings  we  appear  to  be 
separate,  but  our  reality  is  in  that  unit,  and  the  less 
we  think  of  ourselves  as  separate  from  that  unit  the 
better  for  us.  The  more  we  think  of  ourselves  as 
separate  from  this  whole  the  more  miserable  we 
become.  From  this  principle  we  get  the  principle  of 
monistic  ethics,  and  I  dare  to  say  that  we  cannot  get 
any  ethics  from  anywhere  else.  We  know  that  the 
oldest  idea  of  ethics  was  the  will  of  some  particular 
being  or  beings,  but  few  are  ready  to  accept  that  now. 


254  J  NANA   YOGA 

because  it  would  be  only  a  partial  generalization.  The 
Hindus  say  we  must  not  do  this,  or  that  because  the 
Vedas  say  so,  but  the  Christian  is  not  going  to  obey 
the  authority  of  the  Vedas.  The  Christian  says  you 
must  do  this  and  not  do  that  because  it  is  in  the 
Bible.  That  will  not  be  binding  on  those  who  do  not 
believe  in  the  Bible.  But  we  must  have  a  theory  which 
is  large  enough  to  take  in  all  these  various  grounds. 
Just  as  there  are  millions  of  people  who  are  ready  to 
believe  in  a  personal  Creator,  there  have  also  been 
thousands  of  the  brightest  minds  in  this  world  who 
felt  that  such  ideas  were  not  sufficient  for  them,  and 
wanted  something  higher,  and  wherever  religion  was 
not  broad  enough  to  include  all  these  minds  the  result 
was  that  the  brightest  minds  in  the  society  were 
always  on  the  outside  of  religion,  and  never  was  this 
so  marked  as  at  the  present  time,  especially  in  Europe. 
To  include  these,  therefore,  religion  must  become 
broad  enough.  Everything  it  claims  must  be  judged 
from  the  standpoint  of  reason.  Why  religions  should 
claim  that  they  are  not  bound  to  abide  by  the  stand- 
point of  reason  no  one  knows.  If  one  does  not  take 
the  standard  of  reason  there  cannot  be  any  true  judg- 
ment, even  in  the  case  of  religions.  One  religion  may 
ordain  something  very  hideous.  For  instance,  the 
Mohammedan  religion  allows  all  who  are  not  Moham- 
medans to  be  killed.  It  is  clearly  stated  in  the  Koran, 
kill  the  infidels  if  they  do  not  become  Mohammedans. 
They  must  be  put  to  fire  and  sword.  Now  if  you  tell 
a  Mohammedan  that  this  is  wrong,  he  will  naturally 
ask:  "How  do  you  know  that?  How  do  you  know  it 
is  not  good  ?     Because  your  ideas  of  good  and  bad  are 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  255 

from  your  books  ?  My  book  says  it  is  good."  If  you 
say  your  book  is  older,  there  will  come  the  Buddhist, 
who  says :  "My  book  is  much  older  still."  Then  there 
will  come  the  Hindu,  who  says:  "My  books  are  the 
oldest  of  all."  Therefore  referring  to  books  will  not 
do.  Where  is  the  standard  by  which  you  can  com- 
pare ?  You  will  say,  look  at  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount, 
and  the  Mohammedan  will  reply,  look  at  the  Ethics  of 
the  Koran.  The  Mohammedan  will  say,  who  is  the 
arbiter  as  to  which  is  better  of  the  two?  Neither  the 
New  Testament  nor  the  Koran  can  be  the  arbiter  in  a 
quarrel  between  them.  There  must  be  some  indepen- 
dent authority,  and  that  cannot  be  any  book,  but  some- 
thing which  is  universal;  and  what  is  more  universal 
than  reason?  It  has  been  said  that  reason  is  not 
strong  enough;  it  does  not  always  help  us  to  get  the 
Truth;  many  times  it  makes  mistakes,  and  therefore 
the  conclusion  was,  that  we  must  believe  in  the  authori- 
ty of  a  church.  That  was  said  by  a  Roman  Catholic, 
but  I  could  not  see  the  logic  of  it.  On  the  other  hand, 
if  I  have  to  state  a  proposition,  I  should  say  if  reason 
be  so  weak,  a  body  of  priests  would  be  weaker,  and  I 
am  not  going  to  accept  their  verdict,  but  I  will  yield 
to  reason,  because  with  all  its  weakness  there  is  some 
chance  of  getting  truth,  while  by  the  other  means  I 
should  not  get  any  truth. 

We  have  to  follow  reason,  therefore,  and  we  have 
to  sympathize  with  those  who  do  not  come  to  any 
sort  of  belief  following  reason.  For  it  is  better  that 
mankind  should  become  atheists  by  following  reason, 
than  believe  in  two  hundred  millions  of  gods  by  fol- 
lowing anybody.     What  we  want  is  progress,  devel- 


256  J  NANA   YOGA 

opment,  realization.  No  theories  ever  made  men 
higher.  No  amount  of  books  can  help  us  to  become 
purer.  The  only  power  that  lies  in  ourselves  is  in 
realization,  and  that  comes  from  thinking.  Let  men 
think.  A  clod  of  earth  never  thinks;  you  may  take 
it  for  granted  that  a  clod  of  earth  believes  in  every- 
thing, but  it  is  only  a  lump  of  earth.  The  glory  of 
man  is  that  he  is  a  thinking  being.  It  is  the  nature  of 
man  that  he  differs  therein  from  animals,  and  there- 
fore man  must  think.  I  believe  in  reason  and  follow 
reason,  having  seen  enough  of  the  evils  of  authority, 
for  I  was  born  in  a  country  where  they  have  gone  to 
the  extreme  of  authority. 

The  Hindiis  believe  that  creation  has  come  out  of 
their  book.  How  do  you  know  there  is  a  cow? 
Because  the  word  cow  is  in  the  Vedas.  How  do  you 
know  there  is  a  man  outside  ?  Because  the  word  man 
is  there.  If  it  had  not  been  there  would  have  been  no 
man  outside.  That  is  what  they  say.  Authority  with 
a  vengeance !  And  it  is  not  studied  as  I  have  studied 
it  now,  but  some  of  the  most  powerful  minds  have 
taken  it  up  and  spun  out  some  most  wonderful  logical 
theories  round  it.  They  have  argued  it  out  and  there 
it  stands,  a  whole  system  of  philosophy,  and  thousands 
of  the  brightest  intellects  have  been  dedicated  through 
thousands  of  years  to  the  working  out  of  this  theory. 
Such  has  been  the  power  of  authority,  and  great  are 
the  dangers  thereof !  It  stunts  the  growth  of  humani- 
ty, and  we  must  not  forget  that  we  want  growth. 
Even  in  all  relative  truth,  more  than  the  truth  itself  we 
want  the  exercise.     That  is  our  life. 

The  monistic  theory  has  this  merit,  that  it  is  the 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  257 

nearest  to  a  demonstrable  truth  in  theology  that  we 
can  get.  The  idea  of  the  Impersonal,  and  that  nature 
is  the  evolution  of  that  Impersonal,  is  the  nearest  that 
we  can  get  to  any  truth  that  is  demonstrable,  and 
every  other  idea,  every  conception  of  God  which  is 
partial  and  little  and  personal  is  not  rational.  And 
it  has  this  glory,  that  this  rational  conception  of  God 
proves  that  these  partial  conceptions  which  we  see 
are  yet  necessary  for  many.  For  that  is  the  only  argu- 
ment in  their  favor.  You  sometimes  see  people  who 
say  this  personal  explanation  is  irrational,  but  it  is 
comfortable ;  they  want  a  comfortable  religion  and  we 
understand  that  it  is  necessary  for  them.  The  clear 
light  of  truth  very  few  in  this  life  can  bear,  much  less 
work  upon.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that  this  com- 
fortable religion  should  be  there;  it  helps  many  souls, 
in  time,  to  a  better.  The  little  mind  whose  circum- 
ference is  very  limited  and  requires  little  things  to 
build  it  up,  never  dares  to  soar  in  thought.  Their 
conceptions  are  very  good  and  helpful,  even  of  little 
gods  and  symbols  and  ideals,  but  you  have  to  under- 
stand the  impersonal,  for  it  is  in  and  through  that 
alone  that  these  others  can  be  made  helpful  and  good. 
For  instance,  the  man  who  understands  and  believes 
in  the  impersonal — ^John  Stuart  Mill,  for  example — 
says  the  personal  God  is  impossible,  cannot  be  proved. 
I  admit  with  him,  that  it  cannot  be  demonstrated,  but 
it  is  the  highest  reading  of  the  Absolute  that  can  be 
reached  by  the  human  intellect,  and  what  else  is  the 
universe  but  various  readings  of  the  Absolute.  It  is 
like  a  book  before  us,  and  each  one  has  brought  his 
intellect  to  read  the  book,  and  each  one  has  to  read 


258  JNANA  YOGA 

it  for  himself.  There  is  something  which  is  similar 
in  the  intellect  of  all  men,  therefore  certain  things  are 
common  to  the  intellect  of  mankind.  That  you  and  I 
see  a  chair  proves  that  there  is  something  common  to 
both  our  minds.  Suppose  a  being  comes  with  another 
sense;  he  will  not  see  the  chair  at  all,  but  all  beings 
similarly  constituted  will  see  the  same  things.  Thus 
this  universe  itself  is  the  Absolute,  the  unchangeable, 
the  noumenon,  and  the  phenomena  constitute  the  read- 
ing thereof.  For  you  will  first  find  that  all  phenomena 
are  finite.  Every  phenomenon  that  we  can  see,  feel, 
or  think  of,  is  finite,  limited  by  our  knowledge;  and 
a  personal  God  as  we  conceive  of  Him  is  in  fact  a 
phenomenon.  The  very  idea  of  causation  exists  only 
in  the  phenomenal  world,  and  God,  as  the  cause  of 
this  universe,  must  naturally  be  thought  of  as  limited, 
and  yet  He  is  the  same  impersonal  God.  This  very 
universe,  as  we  have  seen,  is  the  same  Impersonal 
Being  read  by  our  intellect.  Whatever  is  reality  in  the 
universe  is  that  Impersonal  Being,  and  the  forms  and 
conceptions  are  given  to  It  by  our  intellects.  What- 
ever is  real  in  this  table  is  that  Being,  and  the  table 
form  and  all  other  forms  are  given  by  the  intellects  of 
men. 

Now,  motion,  for  instance,  which  is  a  necessary 
adjunct  of  the  phenomenal,  cannot  be  spoken  of  the 
universal.  Every  little  bit,  every  atom  inside  the 
universe,  is  in  a  constant  state  of  change  and  motion, 
but  the  universe  as  a  whole  is  unchangeable,  because 
motion  or  change  is  a  relative  thing,  we  can  only  think 
of  something  in  motion  in  comparison  to  something 
not  in  motion.     There  must  be  two  in  order  to  under- 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  259 

stand  motion.  The  whole  mass  of  the  universe,  taken 
as  a  unit,  cannot  move.  In  regard  to  what  will  it 
move?  It  cannot  be  said  to  change.  With  regard  to 
what  will  it  change?  So  the  whole  is  the  Absolute, 
but  within  it  every  particle  is  in  a  constant  state  of 
flux  and  change.  It  is  unchangeable  and  changeable 
at  the  same  time,  impersonal  and  personal  in  one. 
This  is  our  conception  of  the  universe,  of  motion  and 
of  God,  and  that  is  what  is  meant  by  "Thou  art  That." 
For  we  must  know  our  own  nature. 

The  finite,  manifested  man  forgets  his  origin,  like 
the  water  that  comes  from  the  ocean  forgetting  its 
origin  and  thinking  itself  to  be  entirely  separate.  So 
we,  as  personalized  beings,  little,  differentiated  beings, 
forget  our  reality,  and  what  is  meant  by  the  teaching 
of  monism  is  not  that  we  must  give  up  these  differ- 
entiations, but  that  we  must  learn  to  understand  what 
they  are.  We,  that  infinite  Being,  that  very  Soul,  are 
like  the  water,  and  this  water  starts  and  has  its  being 
from,  and  is  really  the  ocean,  not  a  part,  but  the  whole 
of  the  ocean,  for  the  infinite  mass  of  energy  which 
exists  is  yours  and  mine,  because  you  and  I,  and  every 
being,  represent  so  many  channels,  so  many  paths, 
through  which  this  Infinite  Reality  is  manifesting 
Itself,  and  the  whole  mass  of  changes  which  we  call 
evolution  is  the  soul  manifesting  all  this  infinite  ener- 
gy, and  we  cannot  stop  anywhere  on  this  side  of  the 
Infinite.  Our  power,  and  blessedness,  and  wisdom, 
cannot  stop  anywhere  this  side  of  the  Infinite.  Infinite 
power  and  existence  and  blessedness  are  ours,  not 
that  we  will  acquire  them,  but  they  are  our  own;  we 
have  to  manifest  them. 

This  is  one  great  idea  that  comes  from  monism,  and 


260  J  NANA   YOGA 

one  that  is  very  hard  to  understand.  I  find  in  myself 
how  from  childhood  every  one  around  teaches  weak- 
ness, how  I  have  been  told  since  I  was  born  that  I 
was  a  weak  thing.  It  is  very  hard  for  me  now  to 
understand  my  own  strength,  but  by  analysis  and  rea- 
soning I  see  I  must  simply  gain  knowledge  of  my  own 
strength,  must  realize  it.  All  the  knowledge  that  we 
have  in  this  world,  where  did  it  come  from?  It  is 
in  us.  What  knowledge  is  outside?  Show  me  one 
bit.  Knowledge  was  not  in  matter;  it  was  in  man  all 
the  time.  Nobody  ever  created  knowledge;  man  dis- 
covers it,  brings  it  from  within.  It  is  lying  there. 
The  whole  of  that  big  banyan  tree,  which  covers  miles 
of  ground  perhaps,  was  in  the  little  seed,  like  one- 
eighth  of  a  mustard  seed— that  mass  of  energy  was 
there  confined.  The  gigantic  intellect  we  know  can  lie 
coiled  up  in  the  protoplasmic  cell,  and  why  not  infinite 
energy?  We  know  that  it  is  so.  It  may  seem  like  a 
paradox,  but  it  is  true.  All  of  us  have  come  out  of" 
one  protoplasmic  cell,  and  all  the  little  powers  we; 
have  were  coiled  up  there.  You  cannot  say  it  was  ', 
acquired  by  food;  for  build  up  food  mountains  high 
and  see  what  power  comes  out.  The  energy  was 
there;  potentially,  but  still  there,  and  so  is  infinite 
power  in  the  soul  of  man,  if  man  never  knows  it.  It 
is  only  a  question  of  being  conscious  of  it.  Slowly  i 
this  infinite  giant  is,  as  it  were,  arousing  himself,  I 
waking  up,  and  becoming  conscious  of  his  power,  and 
the  more  he  is  becoming  conscious  the  more  bonds  are 
breaking,  chains  are  snapping  all  around,  and  there 
must  come  a  day  when  infinite  consciousness  is 
regained ;  with  power  and  wisdom  this  giant  will  stand 
erect.     Let  us  all  help  to  bring  that  about. 


XV 

PRACTICAL  VEDANTA 

Part  IV 

We  have  been  dealing  more  with  the  universal  so  far. 
This  morning  I  will  try  to  bring  before  you  the 
Vedantic  ideas  of  the  relation  of  the  particular  to  the 
universal.  As  we  have  seen  in  the  dualistic  form  of 
Vedic  doctrines,  the  earlier  forms,  there  was  a  clearly 
defined  particular  and  limited  soul  for  every  being. 
There  have  been  a  great  many  theories  about  this  par- 
ticular soul  in  each  individual,  but  the  main  discussion 
was  between  the  ancient  Buddhists  and  the  ancient 
Vedantists,  the  one  believing  in  the  individual  soul 
complete  in  itself,  the  other  denying  in  toto  the  exist- 
ence of  such  an  individual  soul.  As  I  told  you  the 
other  day,  it  is  pretty  much  the  same  discussion  you 
had  in  Europe  as  to  substance  and  quality,  one  set 
holding  that  behind  the  qualities  there  is  something 
as  substance,  in  which  the  qualities  inhere,  and  the 
other  denying  the  existence  of  such  a  substance  as 
being  unnecessary;  the  qualities  may  live  by  them- 
selves. The  most  ancient  theory  of  the  soul,  of  course, 
is  based  upon  the  argument  from  self -identity — "I 
am  I"— that  the  "F'  of  yesterday  is  the  "I"  of  to-day, 
and  the  "I"  of  to-day  will  be  the  *T"  of  to-morrow, 

261 


262  JNANA   YOGA 

that  in  spite  of  all  the  changes  that  are  happening  to 
the  body,  I  yet  believe  that  I  am  the  same  "I."  This 
seems  to  have  been  the  central  argument  with  those 
who  believed  in  a  limited,  and  yet  perfectly  complete, 
individual  soul. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  ancient  Buddhists  denied  the 
necessity  of  such  an  assumption.  They  brought  for- 
ward the  argument  that  all  that  we  know,  and  all  that 
we  possibly  can  know,  are  simply  these  changes.  The 
positing  of  an  unchangeable  and  unchanging  substance 
is  simply  superfluous,  and  then,  if  there  were  any  such 
unchangeable  thing,  we  could  never  understand  it,  nor 
should  we  ever  be  able  to  cognize  it  in  any  sense  of 
the  word.  The  same  discussion  you  will  find  at  the 
present  time  going  on  in  Europe  between  the  relig- 
ionists and  the  idealists  on  the  one  side,  and  the  mod- 
ern positivists  and  agnostics  on  the  other;  one  set 
believing  there  is  something  which  does  not  change — 
of  whom  the  latest  representative  has  been  your  Her- 
bert Spencer — that  we  catch  a  glimpse  of  something 
which  is,  as  it  were,  unchangeable.  And  the  other  is 
represented  by  the  modern  Comtists  and  modern  Ag- 
nostics. Those  of  you  who  were  interested  a  few 
years  ago  in  the  discussions  between  Mr.  Harrison  and 
Mr.  Herbert  Spencer,  may  have  found  out  that  it  is 
the  same  old  difficulty,  the  one  party  standing  for  a 
substance  behind  the  changeful,  and  the  other  party 
denying  the  necessity  for  such  an  assumption.  One 
party  says,  we  cannot  conceive  of  changes  without 
conceiving  of  something  which  does  not  change,  the 
other  party  brings  out  the  argument  that  this  is  super- 
fluous; we  can  only  conceive  of  something  which  is 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  263 

changing.  As  to  the  unchanging,  we  can  neither 
know,  feel,  nor  sense  it. 

The  great  question  in  India  did  not  find  its  solution 
in  the  very  ancient  times,  because  we  have  seen  that 
the  assumption  of  a  substance  which  is  behind  the 
qualities,  and  which  is  not  the  qualities,  can  never  be 
substantiated;  nay,  even  the  argument  from  self- 
identity,  from  memory,  that  I  am  the  "I"  of  yesterday 
because  I  remember  it,  and  therefore  I  have  been  a 
continuous  something — cannot  be  substantiated.  The 
other  quibble  that  is  generally  put  forward  is  a  mere  de- 
lusion of  words.  For  instance,  a  man  may  take  a  long 
series  of  such  sentences  as  "1  do,"  "I  go,"  *T  dream," 
"I  sleep,"  "I  move,"  and  here  you  will  find  it  claimed 
that  the  doing,  going  and  dreaming,  etc.,  have  been 
changing,  but  what  remained  constant  was  that  "I." 
As  such  they  conclude  that  the  *T"  is  something  which 
is  constant,  and  an  individual  in  itself,  but  all  these 
changes  belong  to  the  body.  This,  though  apparently 
very  convincing  and  clear,  is  based  upon  word  pun- 
ning. The  "I"  and  the  doing,  going  and  dreaming, 
may  be  separate  in  black  and  white,  and  on  a  piece  of 
paper,  but  no  one  can  separate  them  in  his  mind. 

When  I  eat  I  think  of  myself  as  eating — I  am  iden- 
tified with  eating.  When  I  run  I  and  the  running  are 
not  two  separate  things.  Thus  the  argument  from  per- 
sonal identity  does  not  seem  to  be  very  strong.  The 
other  argument,  from  memory,  is  also  weak.  If  the 
identity  of  my  being  is  represented  by  my  memory, 
many  things  which  I  have  forgotten  are  lost  from 
that  identity.  And  we  know  that  people  under  cer- 
tain conditions  will  forget  their  whole  past.     In  many 


264  J  NANA   YOGA 

cases  of  lunacy  a  man  will  think  of  himself  as  made 
of  glass,  or  as  being  an  animal.  If  the  existence  of 
that  man  depends  on  memory  he  has  become  glass, 
which  not  being  the  case  we  cannot  make  the  identity 
of  the  self  depend  on  such  a  flimsy  argument  as  mem- 
ory. What  remains?  That  on  the  side  of  the  soul, 
limited,  yet  complete  and  continuing,  its  identity  can- 
not be  established  as  separate  from  the  qualities.  We 
cannot  establish  a  narrowed  down,  limited  existence 
behind  which  there  is  a  bunch  of  qualities. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  argument  of  the  ancient 
Buddhists  seems  to  be  stronger — that  we  do  not  know, 
and  cannot  know,  anything  that  is  beyond  the  bunch 
of  qualities.  According  to  them  the  soul  consists  of 
a  bundle  of  qualities  called  sensations  and  feelings. 
A  mass  of  such  is  what  is  called  the  soul,  and  this 
mass  is  continually  changing.  The  Advaitist  theory 
of  the  soul  reconciles  both  these  positions. 

The  position  of  the  Advaitist  is  that  it  is  true  that 
we  cannot  think  of  the  substance  as  separate  from  the 
qualities;  at  the  same  time  we  cannot  think  of  change 
and  not  change;  it  would  be  impossible;  but  the  very 
thing  which  is  substance  is  the  same  which  is  the 
quality.  Substance  and  quality  are  not  two.  It  is  the 
unchangeable  that  is  appearing  as  the  changeable. 
The  unchangeable  substance  of  the  universe  is  not 
something  separate  from  this  changeful  universe.  The 
noumenon  is  not  something  different  from  the  phe- 
nomena, but  it  is  the  very  noumenon  which  has  become 
the  phenomena.  There  is  a  soul  which  is  unchanging, 
and  what  we  call  feelings  and  perceptions,  nay,  even 
the  body,  is  the  very  same  soul  seen  from  another  point 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  265 

of  View.  We  have  got  into  the  habit  of  thinking  that 
we  have  bodies  and  souls  and  so  forth,  but  really 
speaking  we  can  only  have  one,  not  two  even. 

When  I  think  of  myself  as  a  body  I  am  a  body  alone ; 
it  is  useless  to  say  I  am  something  else.  And  when 
I  think  of  myself  as  the  soul  the  body  vanishes,  per- 
ception of  the  body  does  not  remain.  None  can  get 
the  perception  of  the  Self  without  his  perception  of 
the  body  having  vanished,  none  can  get  perception  of 
the  substance  without  his  perception  of  the  qualities 
vanishing. 

The  ancient  illustration  of  the  Advaita,  the  rope 
taken  for  a  snake,  may  be  brought  in  here  to  illustrate 
a  little  further  that  when  a  man  mistakes  the  rope 
for  a  snake  the  rope  has  vanished,  and  when  he  takes 
it  for  a  rope  the  snake  has  vanished,  and  the  rope 
remains.  These  ideas  that  we  have  of  dual  existence 
and  treble  existence  come  from  analysis,  and  after 
analysis  they  are  written  in  books,  and  we  read  those 
books  or  hear  about  them,  until  we  come  under  the 
delusion  that  we  really  have  a  dual  perception  of  the 
soul  and  the  body,  but  such  a  perception  never  really 
exists.  The  perception  is  either  for  body  or  for  soul. 
It  requires  no  other  arguments.  You  can  verify  it  in 
your  own  minds. 

Try  to  think  of  yourself  as  a  soul,  as  a  disembodied 
something.  You  will  find  it  is  almost  impossible,  and 
those  few  who  find  it  possible  will  find  that  at  the  time 
when  they  realize  themselves  as  soul  they  have  no 
idea  of  body.  You  have  heard,  or  have  seen,  perhaps, 
some  persons  who  had  been  at  certain  times  in  peculiar 
states  of  mind,  brought  about  either  by  hypnotism 


266  J  NANA    YOGA 

or  some  hysterical  disease,  or  drugs.  From  their 
experience  you  may  gather  that  when  they  were  per- 
ceiving the  internal  something,  the  external  had  van- 
ished for  them;  it  did  not  remain.  This  shows  that 
whatever  exists  is  one.  That  one  is  appearing  in  these 
various  forms,  and  all  these  various  forms  give  rise 
to  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect.  The  relation  of 
cause  and  effect  is  one  of  evolution — ^the  one  becomes 
the  other,  and  so  on.  The  cause,  as  it  were,  some- 
times vanishes,  and  in  its  place  leaves  the  effect.  If 
the  soul  is  the  cause  of  the  body,  the  soul,  as  it  were, 
vanishes  for  the  time  being,  and  the  body  remains, 
and  when  the  body  vanishes  the  soul  remains.  This 
theory  would  meet  the  arguments  of  the  Buddhists, 
the  arguments  that  were  levelled  against  the  assump- 
tion of  the  dualism  of  body  and  soul,  by  denying  the 
duality,  and  showing  that  the  substance  and  the  qual- 
ities are  one  and  the  same  thing,  appearing  in  various 
forms. 

We  have  seen  also  that  this  idea  of  the  unchange- 
able can  only  be  established  as  regards  the  whole,  but 
never  as  regards  the  part.  The  very  idea  of  part 
comes  from  the  idea  of  change,  of  motion.  Every- 
thing that  is  limited  we  can  understand  and  know 
because  it  is  changeable,  and  the  whole  must  be 
unchangeable  because  it  cannot  change — there  is  no 
other  thing  besides  it.  Change  is  always  in  regard 
to  something  which  does  not  change,  or  which  changes 
relatively  less. 

According  to  Advaita,  therefore,  the  idea  of  the 
soul  as  universal,  unchangeable  and  immortal,  can  be 
as  far  as  possible  demonstrated.     The  difficulty  would 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  26'J 

be  as  regards  the  particular.  What  shall  we  do  with 
the  old  dualistic  theories  which  have  got  such  a  hold 
on  us,  which  we  have  all  to  pass  through,  these  beliefs 
in  limited,  little,  individual  souls? 

We  have  seen  that  we  are  immortal  with  regard  to 
the  whole,  but  the  difficulty  is,  we  desire  so  much  to 
be  immortal  with  regard  to  the  parts  of  us.  We  have 
seen  that  we  are  infinite,  and  that  that  is  our  real  indi- 
viduality. But  we  want  so  much  to  make  these  little 
souls  individual !  What  becomes  of  them  when  we 
find  in  our  everyday  experience  that  these  little  souls 
are  continuously  growing  and  cannot  really  be  indi- 
vidual? They  are  the  same  yet  not  the  same.  The 
"I"  of  yesterday  is  the  'T"  of  to-day,  and  yet  not.  It 
is  changed  somewhat,  and  if  we  take  the  most  modern 
of  conceptions,  that  of  evolution  for  instance,  we  find 
that  the  "I"  is  a  continuously  changing,  expanding 
identity. 

If  it  be  true  that  man  is  the  evolution  of  a  mollusc, 
the  mollusc  individual  is  the  same  as  the  man,  only  it 
has  to  becom_e  expanded  a  great  deal.  From  mollusc 
to  man  has  been  a  continuous  expansion  towards  the 
state  of  infinity.  Therefore  the  limited  soul  can  be 
styled  an  individual  which  is  continuously  expanding 
towards  the  Individual.  Perfect  individuality  will  only 
be  reached  when  it  has  reached  the  Infinite,  but  on 
this  side  of  the  Infinite  it  is  a  continuously  changing, 
growing  personality. 

The  Advaitist  system  of  the  Vedanta  has  one  pecu- 
liar tendency,  the  tendency  to  harmonize  the  preceding 
systems.  In  many  cases  it  was  very  helpful ;  in  others 
it  hurt  the  philosophy.     They  had  the  same  idea  that 


268  J  NANA    YOGA 

is  called  the  theory  of  evolution  in  modern  times,  that 
all  is  growth,  step  by  step,  and  this  instrument  in  their 
hands  made  it  easy  for  them  to  harmonize  all  preced- 
ing systems.  Thus  not  one  of  these  preceding  ideas 
was  rejected.  The  fault  of  the  Buddhistic  ideas  was 
that  they  had  neither  the  faculty  nor  the  perception 
of  this  continual  expansive  growth,  and  for  this  reason, 
they  never  even  made  an  attempt  to  harmonize  their 
system  with  the  pre-existing  steps  towards  the  ideal. 
They  rejected  all  of  them  as  useless  and  harmful. 

You  will  find  this  tendency  is  a  most  harmful  one 
in  religion.  A  man  gets  a  new  and  better  idea,  and 
then  he  looks  back  on  those  he  has  given  up,  and  forth- 
with decides  that  they  were  mischievous  and  unnec- 
essary. He  never  thinks  that  however  crude  they  may 
appear  from  his  present  point  of  view,  they  were  very 
useful  to  him,  that  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  reach 
his  present  state  through  these  ideas,  and  that  every 
one  of  us  has  to  grow  in  a  similar  fashion,  living  first 
in  crude  ideas,  taking  benefit  from  them,  and  so  arriv- 
ing at  a  higher  standard.  To  the  oldest  theories, 
therefore,  the  Advaita  is  friendly.  Dualism,  and  all 
theories  that  had  preceded  it,  are  accepted  by  the 
Advaita,  not  in  a  patronizing  way,  but  with  the  con- 
viction that  they  are  truths,  manifestations  of  the 
same  truth ;  and  that  they  have  all  to  rise  to  the  same 
conclusions  that  the  Advaita  has  reached. 

With  words  of  blessing,  and  not  of  cursing,  are  to 
be  preserved  all  these  various  steps  through  which 
humanity  had  to  pass.  Therefore  all  these  dualistic 
systems  have  been  kept  intact  in  the  Vedanta,  and 
never  rejected  or  thrown  out,  and  the  dualistic  con- 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  269 

ception  of  an  individual  soul,  limited,  yet  complete  in 
itself,  finds  a  place  in  the  Vedanta.  According  to  this 
conception  the  man  dies  and  goes  to  other  worlds,  and 
so  forth,  and  these  ideas  are  also  kept  in  their  entirety, 
because  with  this  recognition  of  growth  behind  the 
Advaitist  system  any  one  of  these  theories  can  be  kept 
in  its  proper  place,  by  understanding  that  they  repre- 
sent only  a  partial  view  of  the  truth. 

If  you  regard  the  universe  from  a  certain  point  of 
view  from  which  you  can  only  look  at  one  part,  this 
is  the  way  in  which  the  universe  presents  itself  to  the 
mind.  From  the  dualistic  standpoint  this  universe  can 
only  be  looked  upon  as  a  creation  of  matter  or  force, 
can  only  be  looked  upon  as  the  play  of  a  certain  will, 
and  that  will  again  can  only  be  looked  upon  as  sep- 
arate from  the  universe;  thus  a  man  from  such  a 
standpoint  has  to  see  himself  as  composed  of  a  dual 
nature,  of  the  body  and  soul,  and  this  soul,  though 
limited,  appears  individually  complete  in  itself.  Such 
a  man's  ideas  of  immortality  and  of  the  future  life 
would  be  applied  to  this  soul.  These  phases  of 
thought  have  been  kept  in  the  Vedanta,  and  it  is  neces- 
sary, therefore,  for  me  to  present  to  you  a  few  of  the 
popular  ideas  of  dualism.  According  to  this  theory 
we  have  a  body,  of  course.  Behind  the  body  there  is 
what  they  call  a  fine  body.  This  fine  body  is  also  made 
up  of  materials,  only  very  fine.  It  is  the  receptacle  of 
all  our  karma,  of  all  our  actions ;  the  impressions  of  all 
actions  live  there  in  that  fine  body,  ready  to  spring  up. 
Every  thought  that  we  think,  every  deed  that  we  do, 
after  a  certain  time  becomes  fine,  goes  into  seed  form, 
so  to  speak;  that  lives  in  the  fine  body  in  a  potential 


270  JNANA  YOGA 

form,  and  after  a  time  it  emerges  again  and  bears  its 
results.  These  results  condition  the  life  of  man ;  thus 
he  has  moulded  his  own  life.  It  is  not  that  man  is 
bound  by  any  laws  excepting  those  he  makes  for  him- 
self. Our  works,  our  thoughts,  our  deeds,  are  but 
threads  in  the  net  which  we  throw  round  ourselves 
for  good  or  for  evil.  Once  we  set  in  motion  a  certain 
power,  we  have  to  bear  the  full  consequences  of  it. 
This  is  the  law  of  Karma.  Behind  the  subtle  body 
lives  the  jiva,  or  individual  soul  of  man.  There  are 
various  discussions  about  the  size,  or  the  form,  or 
the  non-form,  of  this  individual  soul.  According  to 
some  it  is  very  small,  like  an  atom ;  according  to  others 
it  is  not  so  small  as  that;  according  to  others  it  is 
very  big,  and  so  on.  This  jiva  is  a  part  of  the  uni- 
versal substance,  and  it  also  is  eternal ;  without  begin- 
ning it  is  existing  as  a  part  of  the  whole ;  it  will  exist 
without  end,  and  it  is  passing  through  all  these  forms 
in  order  to  manifest  its  real  nature  as  purity.  Every 
action  that  retards  this  manifestation  is  called  an  evil 
action ;  so  with  thoughts.  And  every  action  and  every 
thought  that  helps  the  jiva  to  expand,  to  manifest  its 
real  nature,  is  a  good  action.  One  theory  is  common 
in  India  with  the  crudest  dualists  and  the  most  ad- 
vanced non-dualists — that  all  the  possibilities  and 
powers  of  the  soul  are  always  in  it,  and  will  not  come 
from  any  external  source.  They  are  in  the  soul  in 
potential  form,  and  the  whole  work  of  life,  or  lives, 
is  simply  directed  to  manifesting  those  potentialities. 
They  have  also  the  doctrine  of  reincarnation,  that 
after  this  body  has  been  dissolved,  the  jiva  will  have 
another  body,  and  after  that  has  been  dissolved  it  will 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  27I 

have  another  body,  and  so  on,  either  here  or  in  some 
other  worlds;  but  this  world  is  given  the  preference; 
it  is  considered  as  the  best  of  worlds  for  all  our  pur- 
poses. Other  worlds  are  conceived  of  as  worlds  where 
there  is  very  little  misery,  but  for  that  very  reason 
they  argue  that  there  is  less  chance  there  of  thinking 
of  higher  things.  This  world  being  nicely  balanced, 
a  good  deal  of  misery,  and  some  happiness,  too,  the 
jiva  sometime  or  other  gets  awakened,  as  it  were,  and 
thinks  of  freeing  itself.  But  just  as  very  rich  persons 
in  this  world  have  the  least  chance  of  thinking  of 
higher  things,  so  if  the  jtva  goes  to  heaven  it  will 
have  no  chance,  but  only  the  same  position  intensified, 
having  a  very  fine  body  w^hich  thinks  of  no  disease, 
being  without  the  necessity  of  eating,  or  drinking,  and 
having  all  its  desires  fulfilled.  The  jwa  goes  there, 
with  enjoyment  after  enjoyment,  and  forgets  all  its 
real  nature.  Still  there  are  some  higher  worlds, 
where,  in  spite  of  all  these  enjoyments,  further  evolu- 
tion is  possible.  Some  dualists  conceive  of  the  goal 
to  be  reached  as  the  highest  heaven,  where  souls  will 
go  and  live  with  God  forever.  They  will  have  beau- 
tiful bodies  there,  and  will  know  no  more  disease  or 
death,  or  any  sort  of  evil.  They  will  have  all  their 
desires  fulfilled,  and  live  with  God  forever,  and  from 
time  to  time  some  of  them  will  come  back  to  this  earth 
and  take  another  body  to  teach  human  beings  the  way, 
and  the  great  teachers  of  the  world  have  been  such. 
They  have  been  already  free,  and  were  living  with  God 
in  that  sphere,  but  their  mercy  for  suffering  humanity 
here  was  very  great,  so  they  came  and  incarnated  again, 
and  preached  unto  mankind  the  way  to  heaven. 


272  J  NANA   YOGA 

Of  course  we  know  that  the  Advaita  holds  that  this 
cannot  be  the  goal  or  the  ideal;  bodilessness  must  be 
the  ideal.  The  ideal  cannot  be  finite.  Anything  short 
of  the  Infinite  cannot  be  the  ideal,  and  there  cannot 
be  an  infinite  body.  That  would  be  impossible,  as  body 
comes  from  limitation.  There  cannot  be  infinite 
thought,  because  thought  comes  from  limitation.  We 
have  to  go  beyond  the  body,  and  beyond  thought  too, 
says  the  Advaita.  And  we  have  also  seen  the  other 
peculiar  Advaitist  position,  that  this  freedom  is  not 
to  be  attained,  it  already  fj.  We  only  forget  it  and 
deny  it.  This  perfection  is  not  to  be  attained,  it 
already  exists.  This  immortality  and  unchangeable- 
ness  are  not  to  be  attained;  they  already  exist.  W^e 
have  them  all  the  time.  If  you  dare  declare  of  your- 
self that  you  are  free,  free  you  are  this  moment.  If 
you  say  you  are  bound,  bound  you  will  remain.  How- 
ever, the  dualists  and  others  have  these  ideas.  You 
can  take  up  whichever  )^ou  like. 

This  highest  ideal  of  the  Vedanta  is  very  difficult 
to  understand,  and  people  are  always  quarrelling  about 
it,  and  the  greatest  difficulty  is  that  when  they  get 
hold  of  one  set  of  these  ideas  they  want  to  deny  and 
fight  the  other  sets.  Take  up  what  you  are  fit  for, 
jjand  let  others  take  up  what  they  are  fit  for.  If  you 
'  are  desirous  of  clinging  to  this  little  individuality,  to 
this  limited  manhood,  you  will  have  to  remain  in  it, 
you  will  have  these  lower  ideals,  and  be  content  and 
pleased  with  them.  If  your  experience  of  manhood 
has  been  very  good  and  nice,  retain  it  as  long  as  you 
like,  for  you  know  you  are  the  makers  of  your  own 
fortunes;  none  can  compel  you.     You  will  be  men 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  273 

as  long  as  you  like ;  none  can  deter  you.  If  you  want 
to  be  angels,  you  will  be  angels ;  that  is  the  law.  But 
there  may  be  others  who  do  not  like  to  be  angels 
even.  What  right  have  you  to  tell  them  that  they 
must  be?  You  may  be  frightened  to  lose  a  hundred 
pounds ;  there  may  be  others  who  would  not  wink  a 
bit  if  they  lost  all  the  money  in  the  world.  There 
have  been  such,  and  are  still  such.  Why  do  you  dare 
to  judge  them  according  to  your  standard?  You 
cling  on  to  your  limitations,  and  these  little  worldly 
ideas  may  be  your  highest  ideal.  You  are  welcome. 
It  will  be  to  you  as  you  wish.  But  there  are  others 
who  have  seen  the  truth,  finished  all  this,  and  cannot 
rest  in  these  limitations,  who  want  to  rush  outside,  and 
whom  nothing  in  this  world  satisfies.  The  world  with 
all  its  enjoyments  is  a  mere  mud  puddle  for  them. 
Why  do  you  want  to  bind  them  down  to  your  ideas? 
You  must  get  rid  of  this  once  for  all.  Give  place  to 
every  one. 

I  once  read  a  certain  story  of  how  some  ships  were 
caught  in  a  cyclone  in  the  South  Sea  Islands,  and 
there  was  a  picture  in  the  Illustrated  London  News. 
All  were  wrecked  except  one,  an  English  vessel  which 
weathered  the  storm,  and  the  picture  showed  those 
men  who  were  getting  drowned  standing  up  on  the 
decks  and  cheering  the  people  who  were  sailing  through 
the  storm.*  Be  brave  like  that  and  do  not  try  to 
drag  others  down  to  where  you  are.  There  is  another 
foolish  notion  going  on — if  we  are  to  lose  our  little 
individuality,  there  will  be  no  morality,  no  hope  for 

*  H.  M.  S.  Calliope  and  the  American  men-of-war  at  Samoa. 
-Ed. 


f- 


274  J  NANA   YOGA 

humanity.  As  if  everybody  had  been  dying  for  hu- 
manity all  the  time!  God  bless  you,  if  in  every 
country  there  were  two  hundred  men  and  women 
really  wanting  to  do  good  to  humanity,  the  millennium 
would  come  in  five  days.  We  know  how  we  are  dying 
for  humanity.  These  are  tall  talks  and  nothing  else. 
But  the  history  of  the  world  shows  that  those  who 
never  thought  of  this  little  individuality  were  the 
greatest  benefactors  of  the  human  race,  and  the  more 
men  and  women  think  of  themselves  the  less  were 
they  able  to  do  for  others.  One  is  selfishness,  the 
other  unselfishness,  clinging  on  to  their  little  enjoy- 
ments, and  to  desire  the  continuation  and  repetition  of 
this  state  of  things  is  utter  selfishness.  It  arises  not 
from  any  desire  for  truth,  its  genesis  is  not  kindness  for 
other  beings,  but  in  the  utter  selfishness  of  the  human 
heart,  in  this  idea  of  "I  will  have  everything,"  without 
caring  for  any  one  else.  This  is  as  it  appears  to  me. 
I  would  like  to  see  in  the  world  more  moral  men  like 
some  of  those  grand  old  prophets  and  sages  of  ancient 
times  who  would  have  given  up  a  hundred  lives  if  they 
could  by  so  doing  benefit  one  little  animal!  Talk  of 
morality  and  doing  good  to  others !  Silly  talk  of  the 
present  time! 

I  would  like  to  see  moral  men  like  Gautama  Buddha, 
who  did  not  believe  in  a  personal  God,  or  a  personal 
soul,  never  questioned,  never  asked,  stood  there  a  per- 
fect agnostic,  and  yet  a  man  ready  to  lay  down  his  life 
for  any  one,  and  who  worked  all  his  life  for  the  good 
of  all,  and  thought  only  of  that.  Well  has  it  been  said 
by  his  biographer,  describing  his  birth,  he  was  born 
for  the  good  of  many,  for  a  blessing  to  many.     He 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  275 

never  even  went  to  the  forest  to  meditate  for  his  own 
salvation.  He  felt  that  the  world  was  burning;  some 
one  must  find  a  way  out.  Why  is  there  so  much 
misery  was  the  one  thought  that  dominated  his  whole 
life.     Do  you  think  we  are  so  moral  as  that? 

The  more  immoral  is  the  man,  the  more  immoral  is 
the  race,  the  more  selfish  it  is.  That  race  which  is 
bound  down  to  itself  has  been  the  most  cruel  and 
the  most  wicked  in  the  whole  world.  There  has  not 
been  a  religion  that  has  clung  on  to  this  dualism  more 
than  that  founded  by  the  Prophet  of  Arabia  or  which 
has  shed  so  much  blood  and  been  so  cruel  to  other 
beings.  In  the  Koran  there  is  a  doctrine  that  a  man 
who  does  not  believe  these  teachings  should  be  killed ; 
it  is  a  mercy  to  kill  him !  And  the  surest  way  to  get 
to  heaven,  where  there  are  beautiful  houris,  and  all 
sorts  of  sense  enjoyments,  is  by  killing  these  unbe- 
lievers. Think  of  how  much  bloodshed  there  has  been 
in  consequence  of  such  beliefs! 

In  the  Religion  of  Christ  there  was  little  of  crude- 
ness,  very  little  of  difference  between  the  pure  religion 
of  Christ  and  of  the  Vedanta.  You  find  there  the  idea 
of  oneness  preached,  and  Christ  also  takes  up  the  dual- 
istic  ideas  in  order  to  please  the  people,  give  them 
something  to  take  hold  of  in  order  to  come  up  to  the 
highest  ideal.  The  same  prophet  who  preached  "Our 
Father  which  art  in  heaven,''  also  preached,  "I  and 
my  Father  are  one,"  and  the  same  prophet  knew  that 
through  the  Father  in  heaven  lies  the  way  to  the  "I 
and  my  Father  are  one."  There  was  only  blessing 
and  love  in  the  religion  of  Christ,  but  as  soon  as  crude- 
ness  came,  it  was  degraded  into  something  not  much 


276  J  NANA   YOGA 

better  than  the  reHgion  of  the  Prophet  of  Arabia.  It 
came  out  of  crudeness,  this  fight  for  the  httle  self, 
cHnging  on  to  this  "I"  not  only  in  the  passage  through 
this  life,  but  also  in  the  desire  to  continue  it  even  after 
death.  This  they  declare  is  unselfishness;  this  is  the 
foundation  of  morality.  Lord  help  us  all,  if  this  be 
the  foundation  of  morality!  Selfishness  is  made  the 
foundation  of  morality,  and  men  and  women  who 
ought  to  know  better  stand  aghast,  think  all  morality 
will  be  destroyed,  if  these  little  selves  go.  The  watch- 
word of  all  well-being,  of  moral  good,  is  not  I,  but 
thou.  Who  cares  whether  there  is  such  a  thing  as 
heaven  or  hell,  who  cares  if  there  be  a  soul  or  not,  who 
cares  if  there  be  an  unchangeable  or  not?  Here  is 
the  world,  and  it  is  full  of  misery.  Come  out  into  it 
as  Buddha  came  and  struggle  to  lessen  it  or  die  in  the 
attempt.  Forget  yourselves ;  this  is  the  first  lesson  to 
be  learned,  whether  you  are  a  theist  or  an  atheist, 
whether  you  are  an  agnostic  or  a  Vedantist,  a  Christian 
or  a  Mohammedan.  The  one  lesson  obvious  to  all  is 
destruction  of  the  little  self  and  building  up  of  the 
Real  Self. 

Two  forces  have  been  working  side  by  side  in  par- 
allel lines.  The  one  says  "I,"  the  other  says  "not  I.'^ 
Their  manifestation  is  not  only  in  man  but  in  animals, 
not  only  in  animals  but  in  the  lowest  of  worms.  The 
tigress  that  plunges  her  fangs  into  the  red  hot  blood 
of  a  human  being,  would  give  up  her  life  to  protect 
her  young.  The  most  depraved  of  men,  who  thinks 
nothing  of  taking  the  lives  of  his  brother  men,  will 
perhaps  do  anything  to  save  his  starving  wife  or  his 
little  children.     Thus  throughout  creation  these  two 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  2'J'J 

forces  are  working  side  by  side,  where  you  find  the 
one  you  find  the  other.  The  one  is  selfishness,  the 
other  is  unselfishness.  The  one  is  assumption,  the 
other  is  renunciation.  The  one  takes,  the  other  gives 
up  everything.  From  the  lowest  to  the  highest,  the 
whole  universe  is  the  playground  of  these  two  forces. 
This  does  not  require  any  demonstration ;  it  is  obvious 
to  all. 

What  right  has  one  section  of  the  community  to  base 
the  whole  work  and  evolution  of  the  universe  upon 
one  of  these  two,  upon  competition  and  struggle? 
What  right  has  it  to  base  the  whole  working  of  the 
universe  upon  passion,  and  fight,  and  quarrel,  and 
struggle  ?  That  these  exist  we  do  not  deny ;  but  what 
right  has  any  one  to  deny  the  working  of  the  other 
force?  Can  men  deny  that  this  love,  this  "not  I," 
this  renunciation,  is  the  only  positive  power  in  the 
universe  ?  The  other  is  misguided  employment  of  the 
same  power  of  love;  the  power  of  love  brought  com- 
petition also.  The  real  genesis  of  the  competition  was 
in  love.  The  real  genesis  of  even  evil  was  in  unselfish- 
ness. The  creator  of  evil  is  good,  and  the  end  is  also 
good.  It  is  only  misdirection  of  the  power  of  good. 
A  man  who  murders  another  man  is  moved  to  do  it 
perhaps,  by  the  love  of  his  own  child.  His  love  had 
become  limited,  and  had  come  down  to  that  one  little 
baby,  and  been  taken  oflf  from  the  millions  of  other 
people  in  the  universe.  Yet,  limited  or  unlimited,  it 
is  the  same  love. 

Thus  the  motive  power  of  the  whole  universe,  in 
whatever  way  it  manifests  itself,  is  that  one  wonderful 
thing,  unselfishness,  renunciation,  love,  the  real,  the 


278  J  NANA   YOGA 

only  living  force  in  existence.  Therefore  the  Vedan- 
tist  insists  upon  that  oneness  and  not  duality.  We 
insist  upon  this  explanation  because  we  cannot  admit 
two  causes  of  the  universe.  If  we  simply  hold  that  by 
limitation  the  same  unit,  beautiful  wonderful  love 
appears  to  be  evil  or  vile,  we  find  the  whole  universe 
explained  by  the  one  force  of  love.  If  not,  two  causes 
of  the  universe  have  to  be  taken  for  granted,  one  good 
and  one  evil;  two  forces — one  love  and  the  other 
hatred.     Which  is  more  logical  ?     Certainly  the  one. 

I  have  been  going  into  things  which  do  not  belong 
to  the  dualists  possibly.  I  cannot  stand  long  with 
the  dualists,  I  am  afraid.  My  idea  is  to  show  that  the 
highest  ideal  of  morality  and  unselfishness  goes  hand 
in  hand  with  the  highest  metaphysical  conception ;  that 
you  need  not  lower  your  conception  to  get  ethics 
and  morality ;  on  the  other  hand,  to  reach  a  real  basis 
of  morality  and  ethics  you  must  have  the  highest 
philosophical  and  scientific  conceptions.  Human 
knowledge  is  not  antagonistic  to  human  well-being. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  knowledge  alone  that  will 
save  us  in  every  department  of  life — in  knowledge  is 
worship.  The  more  we  know  the  better.  As  the 
Vedantist  says,  the  cause  of  all  that  is  apparently  evil 
is  the  limitation  of  the  Unlimited.  The  love  which 
gets  limited  into  little  channels  and  seems  to  be  evil, 
eventually  comes  out  at  the  other  end  and  manifests 
God.  And  the  Vedanta  says  that  the  cause  of  all  this 
apparent  evil  is  in  ourselves ;  do  not  blame  any  super- 
natural being,  neither  be  hopeless  and  despondent,  nor 
think  w^e  are  in  a  place  from  which  we  can  never  escape 
until  some  one  comes  and  lends  us  a  helping  hand. 


PRACTICAL   VEDANTA  279 

That  cannot  be,  says  the  Vedanta;  we  are  like  silk- 
worms. We  make  the  thread  out  of  our  own  sub- 
stance, and  spin  the  cocoon,  and  in  course  of  time 
are  bound  inside.  But  not  forever.  In  that  cocoon 
we  have  to  develop  spiritual  realization  and,  like  the 
butterfly,  come  out  free.  This  network  of  karma  we 
have  thrown  around  ourselves;  in  our  ignorance  we 
feel  as  if  we  were  bound,  and  sometimes  weep  and 
wail  for  help.  But  help  does  not  come  from  without ; 
it  comes  from  within  ourselves.  Cry  to  all  the  gods 
in  the  universe.  I  cried  for  years,  and  in  the  end  I 
found  that  I  was  helped;  but  help  came  from  within. 
And  1  had  to  undo  what  I  had  done  by  mistake.  That 
is  the  only  way.  I  had  to  cut  the  net  which  I  had 
thrown  round  myself,  and  the  power  to  do  this  is 
within.  Of  this  I  am  certain,  that  not  one  aspiration, 
well-guided  or  ill-guided,  in  my  life  has  been  in  vain, 
but  I  am  the  resultant  of  all  my  past  good  and  evil 
both.  I  have  committed  many  mistakes  in  my  life, 
but  mark  you,  I  am  sure  of  this,  without  every  one 
of  those  mistakes  I  would  not  be  what  I  am  to-day, 
and  I  am  quite  satisfied  to  have  made  them.  I  do  not 
mean  that  you  are  to  go  home  and  commit  mistakes ; 
do  not  misunderstand  me  that  way.  But  do  not  mope 
because  of  some  mistakes  you  have  committed,  but 
know  that  in  the  end  they  will  all  come  out  straight. 
It  cannot  be  otherwise,  because  goodness  is  our  nature, 
purity  is  our  nature,  and  that  nature  can  never  be 
destroyed.  Our  essential  nature  always  remains  the 
same. 

What  we  are  to  understand  is  this,  that  what  we 
call  mistakes,  or  evil,  we  commit  because  we  are  weak, 


28o  J  NANA   YOGA 

and  we  are  weak  because  we  are  ignorant.  I  prefer 
to  call  them  mistakes.  The  word  sin,  although  orig- 
inally a  very  good  word,  has  got  a  certain  flavor  around 
it  that  frightens  me.  Who  makes  us  ignorant?  We 
ourselves.  We  throw  our  hands  before  our  eyes  and 
weep  that  it  is  dark.  Take  the  hands  off  and  the  light 
exists  always  for  us,  the  self-effulgent  nature  of  the 
human  soul.  Do  you  not  see  what  your  modern  scien- 
tific men  say  ?  What  is  the  cause  of  all  this  evolution  ? 
Desire.  The  animal  wants  to  do  something  else,  but 
does  not  find  the  environment  satisfactory,  and  there- 
fore manufactures  a  new  body.  Who  manufactures? 
He  himself,  his  will.  You  have  developed  from  the 
lowest  amoeba.  Exercise  that  will  and  it  will  take  you 
higher  still.  The  will  is  almighty.  If  it  is  almighty 
you  will  say,  why  cannot  I  do  many  things  ?  But  you 
are  thinking  only  of  your  little  self.  Look  back  on 
yourselves  from  the  state  of  the  amoeba  to  the  human 
being ;  who  made  all  that  ?  Your  own  will.  Can  you 
deny  then  that  it  is  almighty?  That  which  has 
made  you  come  up  so  high  can  make  you  go  higher 
still.  What  we  want  is  character,  strengthening  this 
will,  and  not  weakening  it. 

If  I  teach  you,  therefore^  that  your  nature  is  evil, 
and  tell  you  to  go  home  in  sackcloth  and  ashes  and 
weep  your  lives  out  because  you  made  certain  false 
steps  it  will  not  help  you,  but  will  weaken  you  all  the 
more,  and  I  shall  be  showing  you  the  road  to  more 
evil  than  good.  If  this  room  were  full  of  darkness 
for  thousands  of  years  and  you  come  in  and  begin 
to  weep  and  wail  "Oh,  the  darkness,"  will  the  darkness 
vanish?     Bring  the  light  in,  strike  a  match  and  light 


PRACTICAL    VEDANTA  281 

comes  in  a  moment.  So  what  good  will  it  do  you 
to  think  all  your  lives  *'Oh,  I  have  done  evil,  I  have 
made  many  mistakes?"  It  requires  no  ghost  to  tell 
us  that!  Bring  in  the  light  and  the  evil  goes  in  a 
moment.  Strengthen  the  real  nature,  build  up  your- 
selves, the  effulgent,  the  resplendent,  the  ever  pure, 
call  that  up  in  every  one  that  you  see.  I  wish  that 
every  one  of  us  had  come  to  such  a  state  that  even 
when  we  see  the  vilest  of  human  beings  we  could  see 
the  real  Self  within,  and  instead  of  condemning,  say 
''Rise,  thou  effulgent  one,  rise  thou  who  art  always 
pure,  rise  thou  birthless  and  deathless,  rise  almighty, 
and  manifest  your  true  nature.  These  little  manifes- 
tations do  not  befit  thee."  This  is  the  highest  prayer 
that  the  Advaita  teaches.  This  is  the  one  prayer,  to 
remember  our  nature,  the  God  Who  is  always  within  us, 
thinking  of  Him  always  as  the  Infinite,  the  Almighty, 
the  ever  good,  the  ever  beneficent,  the  selfless,  bereft  of 
all  this  little  self,  little  limitations,  and  because  that 
nature  is  selfless,  it  is  strong  and  fearless;  only  to 
selfishness  comes  fear.  He  who  has  nothing  to  desire 
for  himself  whom  does  he  fear,  what  can  frighten  him  ? 
What  fear  has  death  for  him  ?  What  fear  has  evil  for 
him  ?  So  we  must  think,  if  we  are  Advaitists,  that  we 
are  dead  and  gone  from  this  moment.  The  old  Mr., 
Mrs.  or  Miss  So-and-So  is  gone,  mere  superstition,  and 
what  remains  is  the  ever  pure,  the  ever  strong,  the 
almighty,  the  all-knowing — that  remains  for  us,  and 
then  all  fear  has  vanished  from  us.  Who  can  injure 
us,  the  omnipresent?  Thus  all  weakness  has  vanished 
from  us,  and  our  only  work  is  to  rouse  this  knowledge 
in  our  fellow  beings.     We  see  that  they  too  are  the 


282  J  NANA    YOGA 

same  pure  self,  only  they  do  not  know  it;  we  must 
teach  them,  we  must  help  them  to  rouse  up  the  infinite 
nature  in  each.  This  is  what  I  feel  is  absolutely  neces- 
sary over  the  whole  world.  These  doctrines  are  old, 
older  than  many  mountains  possibly.  All  truth  is 
eternal.  Truth  is  nobody's  property ;  no  race,  no  indi- 
vidual can  lay  any  claim  to  truth.  Truth  is  the  nature 
of  all  souls.  Who  lays  any  special  claim  to  it?  But 
it  has  to  be  made  practical,  to  be  made  simple,  for  the 
highest  truths  are  the  simplest  of  all.  It  m.ust  be 
made  thoroughly  simple,  so  that  it  may  penetrate  every 
pore  of  human  society,  that  it  may  become  the  property 
of  the  highest  intellects  and  the  commonest  minds ;  of 
the  child,  the  woman,  and  the  man  at  the  same  time. 
All  these  ratiocinations  of  logic,  all  these  bundles  of 
metaphysics,  all  these  theologies  and  ceremonies,  may 
have  been  good  in  their  own  time,  but  let  us  try  to 
make  things  simpler  and  bring  about  the  golden  days 
when  every  man  is  a  worshipper,  and  the  Reality  in 
every  man  is  the  object  of  worship. 


XVI 

VEDANTA  IN  ALL  ITS  PHASES 

(Lecture  delivered  at  Calcutta.) 

Far  back  where  no  recorded  history,  nor  even  the 
dim  Hght  of  tradition  can  penetrate,  has  been  steadily 
shining  a  Hght,  sometimes  dimmed  by  external  cir- 
cumstances, at  others  effulgent,  but  undying  and 
steady — a  light  shining  not  only  over  India,  but  per- 
meating the  whole  thought-world  with  its  power, 
silent,  gentle,  yet  omnipotent;  unperceived  like  the 
dew  that  falls  in  the  evening  unseen  and  unnoticed, 
yet  bringing  into  bloom  the  fairest  of  roses — ^this 
light  has  been  the  thought  of  the  Upanishads,  the 
philosophy  of  the  Vedanta.  Nobody  knows  when  it 
first  came  to  flourish  on  the  soil  of  India.  Guess- 
works have  been  vain.  The  guesses,  especially  of  the 
Western  writers,  have  been  so  conflicting  that  no 
certain  date  can  be  ascribed  to  them.  But  we  Hindus, 
from  the  spiritual  standpoint,  do  not  admit  that  they 
had  any  origin.  This  Vedanta,  the  philosophy  of  the 
Upanishads,  I  would  make  bold  to  state,  has  been  the 
first  as  well  as  the  final  thought  that  on  the  spiritual 
plane  has  ever  been  vouchsafed  to  man.  From  this 
light  have  been  going  westward  and  eastward,  from 
time  to  time,  waves  from  the  ocean  of  Vedanta.     In 

283 


284  J  NANA   YOGA 

the  days  of  yore  it  traveled  westward  and  gave  its 
impetus  to  the  minds  of  the  Greeks,  either  in  Athens, 
or  in  Alexandria,  or  in  Antioch.  The  Sankhya  sys- 
tem clearly  must  have  made  its  mark  on  the  minds  of 
the  ancient  Greeks:  and  the  Sankhya,  and  all  other 
systems  in  India,  had  that  one  authority,  the  Upani- 
shads,  the  Vedanta.  In  India,  too,  the  one  authority, 
the  basis  of  all  religious  and  philosophical  systems, 
has  yet  been  the  Upanishads,  the  Vedanta.  Whether 
you  are  a  monist,  or  a  qualified  monist:  an  Advaitin 
or  Dvaitin,  or  whatever  you  may  call  yourself,  there 
stand  behind  you  as  your  authority,  your  Shdstras, 
your  Scriptures,  the  Upanishads.  Whatever  system 
in  India  does  not  obey  the  Upanishads  cannot  be 
called  orthodox,  and  even  the  systems  of  the  Jains 
and  the  Buddhists  have  been  rejected  from  the  soil 
of  India  only  because  they  did  not  bear  allegiance  to 
the  Upanishads.  Thus,  the  Vedanta,  whether  we 
know  it  or  not,  has  penetrated  all  the  sects  in  India, 
and  what  we  call  Hinduism,  this  mighty  banyan  with 
its  immense,  almost  infinite  ramifications,  has  been 
throughout  inter-penetrated  by  the  influence  of  the 
Vedanta.  Whether  we  are  conscious  of  it  or  not,  we 
think  the  Vedanta,  we  live  in  the  Vedanta,  we  breathe 
the  Vedanta,  and  we  die  in  the  Vedanta,  and  every 
Hindu  does  that.  To  preach  Vedanta  in  the  land  of 
India,  and  before  an  Indian  audience,  seems  there- 
fore to  be  an  anomaly.  But  it  is  the  one  thing  that 
has  got  to  be  preached,  and  it  is  the  necessity  of 
the  age  that  it  shall  be  preached.  As  I  have  just  told 
you,  all  the  Indian  sects  must  bear  allegiance  to  the 
Upanishads,  but  among  these  sects,  there  are  many 


VEDANTA   IN    ALL   ITS   PHASES  285 

apparent  contradictions.  Many  times  the  great  sages 
of  yore  could  not  themselves  understand  the  underly- 
ing harmony  of  the  Upanishads.  Many  times  even 
sages  quarreled,  and  so  much  so  that  at  times  it 
became  a  proverb :  "They  are  not  sages  who  do  not 
differ."  But  the  time  requires  that  a  better  inter- 
pretation should  be  given  to  this  underlying  harmony 
of  the  Upanishadic  texts,  whether  they  are  dualistic, 
non-dualistic,  or  quasi-dualistic.  It  has  to  be  shown 
before  the  world  at  large,  and  this  work  is  necessary 
as  much  in  India  as  outside  of  India,  and  I,  through 
the  grace  of  God,  had  the  great  good  fortune  to  sit 
at  the  feet  of  one  whose  whole  life  was  such  an  inter- 
pretation— whose  life,  a  thousandfold  more  than 
whose  teaching,  was  a  living  commentary  on  the  texts 
of  the  Upanishads,  was  in  fact,  the  spirit  of  the 
Upanishads  living  in  a  human  form.  Perhaps,  I 
have  got  a  little  of  that  harmony,  I  do  not  know 
whether  I  shall  be  able  to  express  it  or  not,  but  this 
is  my  attempt,  my  mission  in  life,  to  show  that  the 
Vedantic  schools  are  not  contradictory,  that  they  all 
necessitate  each  other,  and  one,  as  it  were,  is  the 
stepping-stone  to  the  other,  until  the  goal,  the  Advaita, 
is  reached  (the  Tat  Tvam  asi).  There  was  a  time 
in  India  when  the  Karma  Kanda  had  its  sway.  There 
have  been  many  grand  ideals,  no  doubt,  in  that  por- 
tion of  the  Vedas.  Some  of  our  present  daily  worship 
is  still  according  to  the  precepts  of  the  Karma  Kanda. 
But  with  all  that,  the  Karma  Kanda  of  the  Vedas  has 
almost  disappeared  from  India.  Very  little  of  our  life 
at  the  present  day  is  bound  or  regulated  by  the  orders 
of  the  Karma  Kanda  of  the  Vedas.     In  our  ordinary 


286  J  NANA  YOGA 

lives,  we  are  mostly  Paurdnics  or  Tantrics,  and  even 
where  some  Vedic  texts  are  used  by  the  Brahmins  of 
India,  the  adjustment  of  the  texts  is  not  according 
to  the  Vedas  mostly,  but  according  to  the  Tdntras  or 
the  Purdnas.  As  such,  to  call  ourselves  Vaidics  in 
the  sense  of  following  the  Karma  Kdnda  of  the  Vedas, 
I  do  not  think,  would  be  proper.  But  the  other  fact 
stands  that  we  are  all  of  us  Vedantins.  The  people 
who  call  themselves  Hindus,  had  better  be  called 
Vedantins,  and  as  I  have  shown  you  just  now,  under 
that  one  name  Vaiddntika  come  all  our  various  sects, 
either  dualist  or  non-dualist. 

The  sects  that  are  at  the  present  time  in  India,  may 
in  general  be  divided  into  the  two  great  classes 
of  dualists  and  monists.  The  little  differences,  which 
some  of  these  sects  insist  upon,  and  upon  the  authori- 
ty of  which  they  want  to  take  new  names,  as  pure 
Advaitins  or  qualified  Advaitins,  and  so  forth,  do  not 
matter  much.  As  a  classification,  either  they  are 
dualists  or  monists,  and  of  the  sects  existing  at  the 
present  time,  some  are  very  new,  and  others  seem  to 
be  reproductions  of  very  ancient  sects.  The  one 
class  I  would  represent  by  the  life  and  philosophy 
of  Ramanuja,  and  the  other  by  Sankaracharya. 
Ramanuja  is  the  leading  dualistic  philosopher  of  later 
India,  whom  all  the  other  dualistic  sects  have  fol- 
lowed directly  or  indirectly,  both  in  the  substance  of 
their  teaching,  as  well  as  in  the  organization  of  their 
sects,  even  down  to  some  of  the  most  minute  points. 
You  will  be  astonished  if  you  compare  Ramanuja  and 
his  works  with  the  other  dualistic  Vaishnava  sects  in 
India,  to  find  how  much  they  resemble  each  other  in 


VEDANTA   IN   ALL   ITS   PHASES  287 

organization,  teaching  and  method.  There  has  been 
the  great  southern  preacher,  Madhva  Muni,  and  fol- 
lowing him  our  great  Chaitanya  of  Bengal  taking  up 
the  philosophy  of  the  Madhvas,  and  preaching  it  in 
Bengal.  There  have  been  some  other  sects  in  South- 
ern India  also,  as  the  qualified  dualistic  Shivites.  The 
Shivites  in  most  parts  of  India  are  Advaitins,  except 
in  some  portions  of  Southern  India  and  in  Ceylon. 
But  they  also  only  substitute  Shiva  for  Vishnu,  and 
are  Ramanujists  in  every  sense  of  the  term  except  in 
the  doctrine  of  the  soul.  The  followers  of  Ramanuja 
hold  that  the  soul  is  anu,  like  a  particle,  very  small, 
and  the  followers  of  Sankaracharya  hold  that  it  is 
vibhu,  omnipresent.  There  have  been  several  non- 
dualistic  sects.  It  seems  that  there  have  been  sects 
in  ancient  times  which  Sankara's  movement  entirely 
swallowed  up  and  assimilated.  In  modern  times  the 
Advaitins  have  all  ranged  themselves  under  San- 
karacharya; and  he  and  his  disciples  have  been  the 
great  preachers  of  Advaita,  both  in  Southern  and  in 
Northern  India.  The  influence  of  Sankaracharya 
did  not  penetrate  much  into  our  country  of  Bengal, 
or  into  Cashmere  and  the  Punjab;  but  in  Southern 
India  the  Smdrtas  are  all  followers  of  Sankaracharya, 
and  with  Benares  as  the  centre,  his  influence  is  simply 
immense  even  in  many  parts  of  Northern  India. 

Now,  both  Sankara  and  Ramanuja  laid  aside  all 
claim  to  originality.  Ramanuja  expressly  tells  us 
that  he  is  only  following  the  great  commentary  of 
Bodhayana.  He  takes  it  up  and  makes  of  it  an 
abstract,  and  that  is  what  we  have  to-day.  Ramanuja 
is  very  plain  on  the  point,  and  he  tells  us  that  he  is 


288  J  NANA   YOGA 

taking  the  ideas,  and  sometimes  even  passages  out  of 
this  ancient  commentator  and  condensing  them  into 
the  present  Ramanuja  Bhashya.  It  seems  that  San- 
karacharya  was  also  doing  the  same.  There  are  a 
few  places  in  his  Bhashya,  which  mention  older  com- 
mentaries; and  when  we  know  that  his  Guru  and  his 
Guru's  Guru  had  been  Vedantins  of  the  same  school 
as  himself,  sometimes  even  more  thoroughgoing, 
bolder  even  than  Sankara  himself  on  certain  points, 
it  seems  pretty  plain  that  he  also  was  not  preaching 
anything  very  original,  and  that  even  in  his  Bhashya 
he  himself  had  been  doing  the  same  work  that  Rama- 
nuja did  with  Bodhayana,  but  from  what  Bhashya 
cannot  be  discovered  at  the  present  time.  All  these 
Darsanas  (schools  of  philosophy)  that  you  have  seen, 
or  ever  heard  of,  are  based  upon  Upanishadic  authori- 
ty. Whenever  they  quote  a  Sruti  .(scriptural  lext), 
they  mean  the  Upanishads.  They  are  always  quoting 
the  Upanishads.  Following  the  Upanishads  there 
came  other  philosophies  in  India,  but  every  one  of 
them  failed  in  getting  that  hold  upon  India  which 
the  philosophy  of  Vyasa  obtained.  The  philosophy  of 
Vyasa  is  a  development  out  of  an  older  one,  the 
Sankhya;  and  every  philosophy  and  every  system  in 
India — and  possibly  throughout  the  world — owes 
much  to  Kapila,  the  great  founder  of  the  Sankhya 
system,  perhaps  the  greatest  name  in  the  history  of 
India  in  psychological  and  philosophical  lines.  The 
influence  of  Kapila  is  everywhere  throughout  the 
world.  Wherever  there  is  a  recognized  system  of 
thought,  there  you  can  trace  his  influence;  it  may  be 
thousands  of  years  back,  but  yet  he  stands  there,  the 


VEDANTA   IN   ALL   ITS   PHASES  289 

shining,  glorious,  wonderful  Kapila.  His  psychology 
and  a  good  deal  of  his  philosophy  have  been  accepted 
by  all  the  different  sects  of  India  with  but  very  slight 
differences.  In  our  own  country,  our  Naiyayika  phil- 
osophers could  not  make  much  impression  on  the 
philosophical  world  of  India.  They  were  too  busy 
with  little  species  and  genera  and  that  most  cumber- 
some terminology,  which  is  a  life's  work  to  study. 
They  were  very  busy  also  with  logic,  and  left  philoso- 
phy to  the  Vedantins,  but  every  one  of  the  Indian 
philosophic  sects  in  modern  times  has  adopted  the 
logical  terminology  of  the  Naiyayikas  of  Bengal.  The 
philosophy  of  Vyasa  as  embodied  in  the  Vyasa  Sutras 
is  firm-seated,  and  has  attained  the  permanence  of  that 
which  it  intended  to  present  to  men,  the  orthodox  and 
Vedantic  side  of  philosophy.  Reason  was  entirely 
subordinated  to  the  Srutis  and  as  Sankaracharya 
declares,  Vyasa  did  not  care  to  reason  at  all.  His 
idea  in  writing  the  Sutras  was  just  to  bring  together 
with  one  thread  and  make  a  garland  of  the  flowers  of 
Vedantic  texts.  His  Sutras  are  admitted  so  far  as 
they  are  subordinate  to  the  authority  of  the  Upani- 
shads  and  no  further.  And  as  I  have  said,  all  the 
sects  of  India  now  hold  these  Vyasa  Sutras  to  be  the 
great  authority,  and  every  new  sect  in  India  starts 
with  a  fresh  commentary  on  the  Vyasa  Sutras  accord- 
ing to  its  light.  The  difference  between  some  of 
these  commentators  is  often  very  great,  giving  rise 
to  not  a  little  text-torturing.  The  Vyasa  Sutras  how- 
ever have  got  the  place  of  authority  in  India  to-day, 
and  no  one  can  expect  to  found  a  new  sect  until  he 
can  write  a  fresh  commentary  on  them. 


290  J  NANA   YOGA 

Next  in  authority  is  the  celebrated  Bhagavad  Gita. 
The  great  glory  of  Sankaracharya  is  his  preaching  of 
the  Gita.  It  is  one  of  the  greatest  works  that  this 
great  man  did  among  the  many  noble  works  of  his 
noble  life — the  preaching  of  the  Gita  and  the  writing 
of  a  most  beautiful  commentary  on  it.  And  he  has 
been  followed  by  every  founder  of  an  orthodox  sect  in 
India,  and  they  have  each  written  a  commentary  on 
this  Gita. 

The  Upanishads  are  many  in  number,  by  some  said 
to  be  one  hundred  and  eight;  others  declare  them  to 
be  still  more  numerous.  Those  which  on  the  face  of 
them  bear  the  evidence  of  genuineness  have  been  taken 
up  by  the  great  Teachers  and  commented  upon, 
especially  those  upon  which  Sankara,  and  later  Rama- 
nuja  wrote  commentaries.  There  are  one  or  two 
more  ideas  with  regard  to  the  Upanishads  which  I 
want  to  bring  to  your  notice ;  for  these  are  an  ocean  of 
knowledge,  and  to  talk  about  the  Upanishads  even  by 
an  incompetent  person  like  myself,  takes  years,  and 
not  one  lecture  only.  I  want  therefore,  to  bring  to 
your  notice  one  or  two  of  the  more  important  points 
in  the  study  of  the  Upanishads.  In  the  first  place, 
they  are  the  most  marvellous  poems  in  the  world.  If 
you  read  the  Samhita  portion  of  the  Vedas,  you  now 
and  then  find  passages  of  most  marvellous  beauty. 
For  instance,  the  famous  Sloka  which  describes  chaos 
— "When  darkness  was  hidden  in  darkness."  One 
reads  and  feels  the  wonderful  sublimity  of  the  poetry. 
Do  you  mark  this,  that  outside  of  India,  and  inside  of 
India  also,  there  have  been  attempts  at  painting  the 
sublime.     But  outside  it  has  always  been  the  sublime 


VEDANTA   IN    ALL   ITS   PHASES  29I 

as  seen  in  the  external  world,  the  infinite  of  matter, 
or  of  space.  When  Milton  or  Dante,  or  any  other 
great  European  poet,  either  ancient  or  modern,  seeks 
to  paint  a  picture  of  the  infinite,  he  tries  to  soar  out- 
side, to  make  you  feel  the  infinite  through  the  external. 
That  attempt  has  been  made  in  India  also.  You  find 
in  the  Samhitas,  the  infinite  of  enumeration,  the  infinite 
of  extension,  most  marvellously  painted  and  placed 
before  the  readers,  as  has  been  done  nowhere  else. 
Mark  that  one  sentence :  ''When  darkness  was  hidden 
in  darkness,"  and  now  mark  the  description  of  dark- 
ness by  three  poets.  Take  your  own  Kalidasa — 
"Darkness  which  can  be  penetrated  with  the  point  of 
a  needle";  Milton — "No  light  but  rather  darkness 
visible" ;  but  here — "Darkness  was  covering  darkness," 
"Darkness  was  hidden  in  darkness."  We  who  live  in 
the  Tropics  can  understand  it,  the  sudden  outburst  of 
the  monsoon,  when  in  a  moment,  the  horizon  becomes 
darkened,  and  the  sky  becomes  covered  with  more  and 
more  rolling  black  clouds,  and  these  again  in  denser 
blackness  until  it  is  literally  "Darkness  hidden  in  dark- 
ness." In  India  as  everywhere  else,  attempts  at  find- 
ing the  solution  of  the  great  problems  of  life  have 
first  been  made  through  the  external  world.  Just  as 
the  Greek  mind,  or  the  modern  European  mind  tries 
to  find  the  solution  of  life  and  of  all  the  sacred  prob- 
lems of  being  by  searching  into  the  external  world, 
so  did  our  own  forefathers ;  and  just  as  the  Europeans 
failed,  they  failed  also.  But  the  Westerners  never 
made  a  move  more,  they  remained  there;  they  failed 
in  the  search  for  the  solution  of  the  great  problems  of 
life  and  death  in  the  external  world,  and  there  they 
remained  stranded;  but  our  forefathers  were  bolder 


292  JNANA   YOGA 

and  declared  the  utter  helplessness  of  the  senses  to 
find  out  the  solution.  Nowhere  else  was  the  fact 
better  put  than  in  the  same  Upanishad — ''From 
whence  the  word  comes  back  reflected  by  the  mind." 
There  are  various  sentences  which  declared  the  utter 
helplessness  of  the  senses ;  but  they  did  not  stop  there, 
they  fell  back  upon  the  internal  nature  of  man,  they 
sought  to  get  the  answer  from  their  own  souls,  they 
became  introspective;  they  gave  up  exploring  external 
nature  as  a  failure,  as  nothing  could  be  done  there. 
No  hope,  no  answer  could  be  found;  they  discovered 
that  dull  dead  matter  would  not  give  them  truth,  and 
they  fell  back  upon  the  shining  soul  of  man,  and  there 
the  answer  was  found. 

"Know  this  Atman,"  they  declared ;  "give  up  all 
vain  words  and  hear  no  other."  In  the  Atman  they 
found  the  solution — the  greatest  of  all  dtmans,  the 
God,  the  Lord  of  this  Universe,  His  relation  to  the 
atman  of  man,  our  duty  to  Him,  and  through  that  our 
relation  to  each  other.  And  herein  you  find  the  most 
sublime  poetry  in  this  world.  No  more  is  the  attempt 
made  to  paint  this  Atman  in  the  language  of  matter. 
Nay,  they  have  even  given  up  all  positive  language. 
No  more  do  they  attempt  to  find  in  the  senses  the 
idea  of  the  Infinite,  no  more  is  there  an  external,  dull, 
dead,  material,  spatial,  sensuous  Infinite;  but  instead 
of  that,  comes  something  which  is  as  fine  as  that  say- 
ing about  darkness,  and  what  poetry  in  the  world  can 
be  more  sublime  than  this? 

"There  the  sun  cannot  illumine,  nor  the  moon,  nor 
the  stars,  a  flash  of  lightning  cannot  illumine  the 
place ;  what  to  speak  of  this  mortal  fire  ?" 

Such  poetry  you  find  nowhere  else.     Take  that  most 


VEDANTA   IN   ALL   ITS   PHASES  293 

marvellous  Upanishad,  the  Katha.  What  wonderful 
finish,  what  most  remarkable  art  are  displayed  in  that 
poem!  How  wonderfully  it  opens,  with  that  high- 
minded  boy,  whose  father  devoted  him  to  Yama 
(Death),  and  how  that  most  wondrous  of  all  teachers, 
Death  himself,  unfolds  to  him  the  great  lessons  of  life 
and  death.  And  what  was  the  quest  of  that  fearless 
youth?     To  know  the  secret  of  death. 

The  second  point  that  I  want  you  to  remember  is 
the  perfectly  impersonal  character  of  the  Upanishads. 
Although  we  find  many  names,  and  many  speakers, 
and  many  teachers  in  the  Upanishads,  not  one  of  them 
stands  as  an  authority  for  the  Upanishads,  not  one 
verse  is  based  upon  the  life  of  any  one  of  them.  They 
are  simply  figures  like  shadows  moving  in  the  back- 
ground, imfelt,  unseen,  unrealized,  but  the  real  force 
is  in  the  marvellous,  the  brilliant,  the  effulgent  texts 
of  the  Upanishads,  which  are  perfectly  impersonal. 
If  Yagnavalkya  never  lived,  or  died,  it  would  not  mat- 
ter, the  texts  are  there.  And  yet  the  teachings  are 
against  no  personality;  they  are  broad  and  expansive 
enough  to  embrace  all  the  personalities  that  the  world 
has  yet  produced,  and  all  that  are  to  be  produced. 
Nothing  is  said  against  the  worship  of  persons,  or 
Avataras,  or  sages.  On  the  other  hand,  all  worship 
is  upheld  by  the  Upanishads.  It  is  a  most  marvellous 
idea,  like  the  God  it  preaches,  the  impersonal  idea  of 
the  Upanishads.  At  the  same  time,  for  the  sage,  the 
thinker,  the  philosopher,  for  the  rationalist,  it  is  as 
impersonal  as  any  modern  scientist  can  wish.  And 
these  are  our  Scriptures.  You  must  remember  that 
what  the  Bible  is  to  the  Christians,  what  the  Qu'ran 


294  J  NANA   YOGA 

is  to  the  Mohammedans,  what  the  Tripitaka  is  to  the 
Buddhists,  what  the  Zend  Avesta  is  to  the  Parsis, 
these  Upanishads  are  to  us.  These,  and  nothing  but 
these  are  our  Scriptures.  The  Purdnas,  the  Tantras, 
and  all  the  other  books,  even  the  Vydsa  Sutras,  are 
of  secondary,  or  tertiary  authority,  but  primary  are 
the  Vedas.  Manu  and  the  Purdnas,  and  all  the  other 
books  are  to  be  taken  so  far  as  they  agree  with  the 
authority  of  the  Upanishads,  and  when  they  disagree 
they  are  to  be  rejected  without  mercy.  This  we 
ought  to  remember  always.  The  Upanishads  are 
the  words  of  the  Rishis,  our  forefathers,  and  you 
have  to  believe  them  if  you  want  to  be  a  Hindu. 
You  may  even  believe  the  most  peculiar  ideas  about 
the  God-head,  but  if  you  deny  the  authority  of  the 
Vedas,  you  are  a  Ndstika,  an  atheist.  The  Scrip- 
tures of  other  religions  are  all  Purdnas  and  not  Scrip- 
tures, because  they  describe  the  history  of  the  deluge, 
and  the  history  of  the  kings  and  reigning  families, 
and  record  the  lives  of  great  men,  and  so  on.  This 
is  the  work  of  the  Purdnas,  and  so  far  as  they  agree 
with  the  Vedas,  very  good,  but  when  they  do  not 
agree,  they  are  not  to  be  accepted.  So  with  the 
QuVan,  there  are  many  moral  teachings  in  it  and  so 
far  as  they  agree  with  the  Vedas,  they  have  the  authori- 
ty of  the  Purdnas,  but  no  more.  The  idea  is  that  the 
Vedas  were  never  written,  that  they  never  came  into 
existence.  I  was  told  once  by  a  Christian  missionary 
that  their  Scriptures  have  historical  character  and 
therefore  are  true.  To  which  I  replied:  "Mine  have 
no  historical  character,  and  therefore  they  are  true; 
yours  being  historical  were  evidently  made  by  some 


VEDANTA   IN    ALL   ITS   PHASES  295 

man  the  other  day.  Yours  are  man-made  but  mine 
are  not;  their  non-historical  character  is  in  their 
favor."  These  are  the  relations  of  the  Vedas  to  the 
other  Scriptures  of  the  world. 

We  now  return  to  the  teachings  of  the  Upanishads. 
Various  texts  are  there.  Some  are  entirely  dualistic. 
There  are  certain  doctrines  which  are  agreed  to  by  all 
the  different  sects  in  India.  First,  there  is  the  doc- 
trine of  Samsdra,  or  reincarnation  of  the  soul.  Sec- 
ondly, they  all  agree  in  their  psychology ;  there  is  the 
body,  behind  that  what  is  called  the  Sukshma  Sarira 
(the  mind),  and  behind  that  is  the  Jiva  (the  soul). 
The  great  difference  between  Western  and  Indian 
psychology  is  that  in  the  former  the  mind  is  the  soul ; 
in  the  latter  it  is  not.  The  antahkarana,  the  internal 
instrument,  as  the  mind  is  called,  is  only  an  instrument, 
in  the  hands  of  the  Jiva,  through  which  the  Jiva  works 
on  the  body,  or  on  the  external  world.  Here  Hindus 
all  agree,  and  they  all  also  agree  that  this  Jiva  (or 
Atman,  or  Jivdtman  as  it  is  called  by  different  sects) 
is  eternal,  without  beginning  or  end ;  and  that  it  goes 
from  birth  to  birth  until  it  gets  final  release.  They 
all  agree  in  this,  and  they  also  all  agree  in  one  vital 
point  which  marks  most  characteristically,  most  prom- 
inently, most  completely,  the  difference  between  the 
Indian  and  the  Western  mind,  and  it  is  this — that 
everything  is  in  the  soul.  There  is  no  inspiration 
properly  speaking,  but  rather  expiration.  All  power, 
all  purity,  and  all  greatness — everything  is  in  the  soul.^ 

The  Yogi  would  tell  you  that  the  Siddhis  (powers) 
that  he  is  striving  to  attain  to,  are  not  to  be  attained, 
in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  but  are  already  in 


296  J  NANA  YOGA 

the  soul ;  the  work  is  to  make  them  manifest.  Patan- 
jaH,  for  instance,  would  tell  you  that  even  in  the  low- 
est worm  that  crawls  under  your  feet,  are  already 
existing  all  the  eightfold  powers  of  the  Yogi.  The 
difference  has  been  made  by  the  body ;  the  powers  are 
there  but  they  will  have  to  be  brought  out  through  the 
medium  of  a  suitable  body.  Patau jali  gives  the  cele- 
brated example  of  the  cultivator  bringing  water  into 
his  field  from  a  huge  tank  somewhere.  The  tank  is 
already  filled  and  the  water  would  flood  his  land  in  a 
moment,  only  there  is  a  wall  between  the  tank  and  his 
field.  As  soon  as  the  barrier  is  broken,  in  rushes  the 
water  by  its  own  power  and  force.  Power  and  puri- 
ty and  perfection  are  in  the  soul  already,  but  they  are 
hidden  by  this  Avarana— this  veil — that  has  been  cast 
over  them.  Once  the  veil  is  removed,  the  soul  mani- 
fests its  powers  which  are  its  real  nature.  This,  you 
ought  to  remember,  is  the  fundamental  difference 
between  Eastern  and  Western  thought.  When  you 
find  people  teaching  such  awful  doctrines  as  that  we 
are  all  born  sinners  always  remember  that  if  we  are 
by  our  very  nature  sinful,  we  never  can  become  good. 
How  can  nature  change?  If  it  changes,  it  contra- 
dicts itself;  it  is  not  nature.  We  ought  never  to  for- 
get this.  Here  the  Dvaitins,  the  Advaitins,  and  all 
others  in  India  agree. 

The  next  point  upon  which  all  the  sects  in  India  are 
agreed  is  belief  in  God.  Of  course,  their  ideas  of  God 
will  be  different.  The  dualists  believe  only  in  a  per- 
sonal God.  I  want  you  to  understand  this  word  per- 
sonal a  little  more.  It  does  not  mean  that  God  has  a 
body,   sits  on  a  throne  somewhere,  and  rules  this 


VEDANTA   IN   ALL   ITS   PHASES  297 

world;  but  personal  means  Saguna,  ''with  qualities." 
There  are  many  descriptions  of  the  personal  God. 
This  personal  God  as  the  Ruler,  the  Creator,  the  Pre- 
server, and  the  Destroyer,  of  this  universe,  is  believed 
in  by  all  sects.  The  Advaitins  believe  something 
more.  They  believe  in  a  still  higher  phase  of  this 
personal  God,  which  is  personal-impersonal.  No 
adjective  can  illustrate  where  there  is  no  qualification, 
and  the  Advaitin  would  not  give  God  any  qualities 
except  the  three  —  Sat-Chit-Ananda,  Existence  — 
Knowledge — Bliss  Absolute.  That  is  what  Sankara 
did,  but  in  the  Upanishads  themselves  you  find  that 
they  penetrate  even  further,  and  say  nothing  can  be 
said  except  ''Neti,  Neti,"  *'Not  this,  Not  this." 
According  to  Ramanuja  the  great  modern  representa- 
tive of  the  dualistic  system  these  three  entities  are 
eternal — God,  Soul,  and  Nature.  The  souls  are  eter- 
nal, and  they  will  remain  eternally  existing,  and  will 
retain  their  individuality  forever.  Your  soul  will  be 
difTerent  from  my  soul  through  all  eternity,  says 
Ramanuja,  and  so  will  Nature  which  is  an  existing 
fact,  as  much  so  as  the  existence  of  soul,  or  the  exist- 
ence of  God — Nature  will  remain  always.  And  God 
is  interpenetrating  the  essence  of  the  soul.  He  is  the 
Antarayamin  (the  Soul  of  our  souls).  In  this  sense 
Ramanuja  sometimes  thinks  that  God  is  one  with  the 
soul,  the  essence  of  the  soul,  and  that  at  the  time  of 
Pralaya  (the  end  of  a  cycle,  or  dissolution  of  phenom- 
ena), when  the  whole  of  Nature  becomes  what  he 
calls  Sankocha  (contracted),  these  souls  become  con- 
tracted, or  minute,  and  remain  so  for  a  time.  At  the 
beginning  of  the  next  cycle,  they  all  come  out  accord- 


298  JNANA   YOGA 

ing  to  their  past  Karma.  Every  action  that  dims  the 
inborn,  natural  purity  and  perfection  of  the  soul,  is  a 
bad  action ;  and  every  action  that  causes  these  to  shine 
forth  and  expand  the  soul  is  a  good  action,  says 
Ramanuja.  And  thus  the  soul  is  going  on,  expanding 
or  contracting  by  its  actions,  until  through  the  grace 
of  God,  comes  salvation.  And  that  grace  comes  to  all 
souls,  says  Ramanuja,  that  are  pure,  and  struggle  to 
gain  it. 

There  is  a  celebrated  verse  in  the  Srutis:  "When 
the  food  is  pure  then  the  Sattva  becomes  pure,  when 
the  Sattva  becomes  pure  then  the  smriti  (the  memory 
of  the  Lord,  or  the  memory  of  our  own  perfection — 
if  you  are  an  Advaitin)  becomes  truer,  steadier,  and 
absolute."  Here  arises  a  great  discussion.  First  of 
all  what  is  this  Sattva?  We  know  that  according  to 
the  Sankhya — and  it  has  been  admitted  by  all  our  sects 
of  philosophy — the  body  is  composed  of  three  sorts 
of  gunas  (materials — ^not  qualities).  It  is  the  general 
idea  that  Sattva,  Rajas  and  Tamas  are  qualities.  Not 
at  all,  they  are  not  qualities  but  materials  of  this  uni- 
verse, and  with  dhdra  suddhi  (pure  food),  the  Sattva 
material  becomes  pure.  The  one  aim  of  the  Vedanta 
is  to  get  this  Sattva.  As  I  have  told  you,  the  soul  is 
already  pure  and  perfect  but,  according  to  the  Vedanta, 
it  is  covered  up  by  Rajas  and  Tamas  particles.  The 
Sattva  particles  are  the  most  luminous,  and  the  efful- 
gence of  the  soul  penetrates  through  them  as  easily 
as  light  through  glass.  So  if  the  Rajas  and  Tamas 
particles  are  eliminated,  leaving  the  Sattva  particles 
uncovered,  the  powers  and  purity  of  the  soul  will 
appear,  and  make  the  soul  more  manifest.     Therefore 


VEDANTA    IN    ALL    ITS    PHASES  299 

it  is  necessary  to  have  this  Sattva.  The  text  says: 
''When  the  dhdra  becomes  pure,  etc."  Ramanuja 
takes  this  word  dhdra  to  mean  food,  and  he  has  made 
it  one  of  the  turning  points  of  his  philosophy.  Not 
only  so,  but  the  idea  has  affected  the  whole  of  India, 
and  all  the  different  sects.  Therefore,  it  is  necessary 
for  us  to  understand  what  it  means,  for  according  to 
Ramanuja,  dhdra  suddhi  is  one  of  the  principal  fac- 
tors in  our  life.  "What  makes  food  impure?"  asks 
Ramanuja.  According  to  him,  three  sorts  of  defects 
make  food  impure — first,  jdti,  that  is,  the  very  nature 
of  the  class  to  which  the  food  belongs,  as  onion,  gar- 
lic and  so  on.  The  next  is  dsraya^  or  the  person  from 
whom  the  food  comes.  A  wicked  person  is  dsraya 
and  food  coming  from  him  will  make  you  impure.  I 
myself  have  seen  many  great  sages  in  India  following 
strictly  that  advice  all  their  lives.  The  third  defect 
is  nimiita  dosha,  impurity  in  the  food  itself,  as  hairs 
dirt,  etc.  If  only  that  food  be  taken  from  which  these 
three  defects  have  been  removed,  that  will  make 
Sattva  suddhi,  will  purify  the  Sattva.  Religion  then 
would  seem  to  be  a  very  easy  task!  But  now  comes 
Sankaracharya,  who  says  this  word  dhara  does  not 
mean  pure  food,  but  pure  thought  collected  in  the 
mind ;  when  the  mind  becomes  pure,  the  sattva  becomes 
pure  and  not  before  that.  You  may  eat  what  you 
like.  If  food  alone  would  purify  the  sattva,  then  feed 
a  monkey  with  milk  and  rice  all  its  life,  would  it 
become  a  great  Yogif  As  has  been  said  if  it  is  by 
bathing  much  one  goes  to  heaven,  then  the  fishes 
would  get  there  first.  If  by  eating  vegetables  a  man 
gets  to  heaven,  the  cows  and  the  deer  will  get  there 


300  JNANA   YOGA 

before  him.  But  what  is  the  solution?  Both  are 
necessary.  Of  course,  the  interpretation  that  San- 
karacharya  gives  to  the  text  is  the  fundamental  and 
more  important  one.  But  pure  food  no  doubt,  helps 
pure  thought,  it  has  an  intimate  connection;  both 
ideas  ought  to  be  acted  upon.  The  defect  is  that  many 
have  forgotten  the  advice  of  Sankaracharya  and  have 
taken  only  the  "pure  food"  meaning  of  dhara. 

According  to  the  dualistic  sects  of  India,  the  indi- 
vidual souls  remain  as  individuals  throughout,  and  God 
is  the  Creator  of  the  universe  out  of  pre-existing  mate- 
rial. He  is  the  efficient  cause.  According  to  the  Ad- 
vaitins,  on  the  other  hand,  God  is  both  the  material  and 
the  efficient  cause  of  the  universe.  He  is  not  only  the 
Creator  of  the  universe,  but  He  creates  it  out  of 
Himself.  The  one  sect  of  Advaitins  that  you  see  in 
modern  India  is  composed  of  the  followers  of  Sankara. 
According  to  Sankara,  God  is  both  the  material  and 
the  efficient  cause  through  Maya,  but  not  in  reality. 
God  has  not  become  this  universe,  but  the  universe 
appears  because  God  is  its  Background.  This  is  one 
of  the  highest  points  to  understand  of  Advaitic  Vedan- 
ta,  this  idea  of  Mdyd.  I  am  afraid  I  have  not  time 
now  to  discuss  this  one  most  difficult  point  in  our 
philosophy.  Those  of  you  who  are  acquainted  with 
Western  philosophy  will  find  something  very  similar 
in  Kant.  But  I  must  warn  you,  those  of  you,  who 
have  studied  Professor  Max  Muller's  writings  on 
Kant,  that  there  is  one  idea  most  misleading.  It  was 
Sankara  who  first  found  out  the  idea  of  the  identity 
of  time,  space,  and  causation,  with  Mdyd,  and  I  had 
the  good  fortune  to  find  one  or  two  passages  in  San- 


VEDANTA    IN    ALL    ITS   PHASES  3OI 

kara's  commentaries  and  send  them  to  my  friend  the 
Professor.  So  even  that  idea  was  to  be  found  in  India. 
Now  this  is  a  pecuHar  theory — this  Maya  theory  of 
the  Advaita  Vedantins.  The  Brahman  is  all  that 
exists,  but  differentiation  has  been  caused  by  this 
Maya.  Unity,  the  one  Brahman,  is  the  ultimate,  the 
goal,  and  herein  is  an  endless  dissension  again  between 
Indian  and  Western  thought.  India  has  thrown  this 
challenge  to  the  world  for  thousands  of  years,  and 
the  challenge  has  been  taken  up  by  different  nations 
and  the  result  is  that  they  have  all  succumbed  and 
you  live.  This  is  the  challenge,  that  this  world  is  a 
delusion,  that  it  is  all  Maya,  that  whether  you  eat  off 
of  the  ground  with  your  fingers,  or  dine  from  golden 
plates,  whether  you  live  in  palaces  or  hovels;  are  the 
mightest  monarchs  or  the  poorest  beggars,  death  is 
the  one  result;  it  is  all  the  same,  all  Maya.  That  is 
the  old  Indian  theme,  and  again  and  again  nations 
are  springing  up  trying  to  unsay  it,  to  disprove  it, 
becoming  great,  enjoyment  their  watchword,  power  in 
their  hands,  and  they  use  that  power  to  the  utmost, 
enjoy  to  the  utmost,  and  the  next  moment  they  die. 
We  stand  forever  because  we  see  that  everything  is 
Maya.  The  children  of  Maya  live  forever,  but  chil- 
dren of  enjoyment  die. 

Here  is  again  another  great  difference.  Just  as  you 
find  in  German  philosophy  the  attempts  of  Hegel  and 
Schopenhauer  you  will  find  the  very  same  ideas  coming 
in  ancient  India.  Fortunately  for  us  Hegelianism 
was  nipped  in  the  bud,  and  not  allowed  to  sprout  out 
and  cast  its  baneful  shoot  over  this  mother-land  of 
ours.     Hegel's  one  idea  is  that  the  One,  the  Absolute, 


302  J  NANA   YOGA 

is  only  chaos,  and  that  the  individualized  form  is  the 
greater.  The  world  is  greater  than  the  non- world, 
Samsdra  is  greater  than  Salvation.  That  is  the  one 
idea,  and  the  more  you  plunge  into  this  Samsdra,  the 
more  your  soul  is  covered  with  the  workings  of  life, 
the  better  you  are.  They  say:  "Do  you  not  see  how 
we  build  houses,  cleanse  the  streets,  enjoy  the  senses?" 
Aye,  but  behind  that,  behind  every  bit  of  that  enjoy- 
ment, may  lurk  rancor,  misery,  and  horror.  On  the 
other  hand,  our  philosophers  have  from  the  very  first 
declared  that  every  manifestation,  what  is  called  evo- 
lution, is  a  vain  attempt  of  the  Unmanifested  to 
manifest  Itself.  After  making  the  attempt  for  a  time, 
man  finds  out  it  is  vain,  and  gives  it  up.  This  is 
Vairdgyam,  or  renunciation,  and  is  the  very  beginning 
of  religion.  How  can  religion  or  morality  begin  with- 
out renunciation?  The  Alpha  and  Omega  is  renun- 
ciation. "Give  up,"  say  the  Vedas,  "give  up."  That 
is  the  one  way,  give  up. 

"Neither  through  wealth,  nor  through  progeny,  but 
by  renunciation  alone  immortality  is  to  be  reached." 
That  is  the  dictate  of  the  Indian  Scriptures.  Of 
course,  there  have  been  great  givers  up  of  the  world 
even  sitting  on  thrones,  but  even  Janaka  himself  had 
to  renounce;  who  was  a  greater  renouncer  than  he? 
But  in  modern  times  we  all  want  to  be  called  Janakas. 
They  are  all  Janakas,  all  over  India,  but  unfortu- 
nately I  find  them  only  *Janakas  of  children,  unclad, 
ill-fed,  miserable  children.  That  is  all  they  are  of 
Janaka,  not  with  shining,  God-like  thoughts  as  the  old 
Janaka   was.     These   are   our   modern   Janakas!     If 

*  Janaka  means  also  "progenitor." 


VEDANTA    IN    ALL    ITS    PHASES  303 

you  can  give  up,  you  will  have  religion.  If  you  can- 
not, you  may  read  all  the  books  that  are  in  the  world, 
from  East  to  West,  swallow  all  the  libraries,  and 
become  the  greatest  of  pandits,  but  with  all  that  there 
will  be  no  spirituality.  "Through  renunciation  alone 
immortality  is  to  be  reached."  It  is  the  power,  the 
great  power,  that  cares  not  even  for  the  universe. 
Renunciation,  that  is  the  flag,  the  banner  of  India, 
floating  out  to  the  world,  the  one  undying  thought 
which  India  sends  again  and  again  as  a  warning  to 
dying  races,  as  a  warning  to  all  tyranny,  as  a  warning 
to  wickedness  in  the  world.  Aye,  Hindus,  let  not  your 
hold  of  that  banner  go !  Hold  it  aloft !  Even  if  you 
are  weak,  and  cannot  renounce  the  world,  try  not  to 
be  hypocrites,  torturing  texts,  and  making  specious 
arguments.  Do  not  do  that,  but  admit  you  are  weak. 
For  the  idea  is  great,  that  of  renunciation.  What 
matters  if  millions  fail  in  the  attempt,  if  one,  if  two, 
if  ten  return  victorious  ?  Blessed  be  the  millions  that 
died;  their  blood  has  bought  the  victory.  This 
renunciation  is  the  one  ideal  of  nearly  all  the  different 
Vedic  sects.  We  want  orthodoxy,  even  the  hideous- 
ly orthodox,  even  those  who  smother  themselves  with 
ashes,  even  those  who  stand  with  their  hands  uplifted. 
Aye,  we  want  them,  unnatural  though  they  be,  as  a 
warning  to  the  race,  as  examples  of  the  idea  of  giving 
up.  They  are  to  be  preferred  to  the  effeminate  crav- 
ings for  Western  luxuries  that  are  creeping  into 
India;  and  mistaken  as  they  are,  even  these  crude 
ideas  of  renunciation  are  infinitely  better  than  material- 
ism, with  its  gross  and  degenerating  tendencies.  We 
want  to  have  renunciation.     It  has  conquered  India  in 


304  J  NANA   YOGA 

days  of  yore,  it  has  still  to  conquer  India.  Still  it 
stands  greatest  and  highest  of  Indian  ideals — Renun- 
ciation. The  land  of  Buddha,  the  land  of  Ramanuja, 
of  Ramakrishna  Paramahamsa,  the  land  of  renuncia- 
tion, the  land  where  from  the  days  of  yore  they 
preached  against  Karma  Kdnda,  and  where  even  to-day 
there  are  hundreds  who  have  given  up  everything, 
passed  everything  away  and  became  Jivan  Muktds — 
shall  that  land  give  up  its  ideals?  Certainly  not. 
There  may  be  people  whose  brains  have  become  turned 
with  luxurious  Western  ideals.  There  may  be  thou- 
sands, and  hundreds  of  thousands,  w^ho  have  drunk 
deep  of  this  curse  of  the  world — enjoyment— into 
whose  brains  have  come  the  allurements  of  the  senses, 
yet  for  all  that  there  will  be  other  thousands  in  this 
Motherland  of  ours  to  whom  religion  will  be  a  reality, 
and  who  will  be  ready  to  give  up  if  need  be,  without 
counting  the  cost. 

Another  ideal  very  common  in  all  our  sects,  I  want 
to  place  before  you.  It  also  is  a  vast  subject.  This 
idea  is  unique  in  India,  that  is  that  religion  is  to  be 
realized.  "This  Atman  is  not  to  be  reached  by  too 
much  talking,  nor  is  it  to  be  reached  by  the  power  of 
intellect."  Nay,  ours  are  the  only  Scriptures  in  the 
world  that  declare  that  not  even  by  the  study  of  the 
Scriptures  themselves  is  the  Atman  to  be  realized. 
This  power  of  realization  comes  from  the  teacher  unto 
the  disciple.  When  this  insight  com.es  to  the  disciple 
everything  is  cleared  up  and  realization  comes. 

One  more  idea,  what  is  a  Guru?  Let  us  go  back  to 
the  Srutis:  "He  who  knows  the  secret  of  the  Vedas," 
not  book-worms,  not  grammarians,  not  pandits  in  gen- 


VEDANTA   IN    ALL   ITS   PHASES  305 

eral,  but  he  who  knows  the  meaning  of  the  Scriptures, 
he  alone  is  the  Guru.  "An  ass  laden  with  a  mass  of 
sandalwood  knows  only  the  weight  of  the  wood,  but 
not  its  precious  qualities."  So  are  these  pandits 
(scholars)  ;  we  do  not  want  these  to  teach  religion. 
What  can  they  teach,  if  they  have  no  realization? 
When  I  was  a  boy  here  in  this  city  of  Calcutta,  I 
used  to  go  from  place  to  place  in  search  of  religion, 
and  everywhere  after  hearing  very  great  speakers  I 
asked :  "Have  you  seen  God  ?' '  The  men  were  all 
taken  aback  at  the  idea  of  seeing  God,  and  the  only 
man  who  told  me,  "I  have,"  was  Sri  Ramakrishna 
Paramahamsa,  and  not  only  so,  but  he  said :  "I  will  put 
you  in  the  way  of  seeing  Him  too."  Not  a  man  who 
can  twist  and  torture  texts,  is  fit  to  be  a  teacher. 
"Different  ways  of  throwing  out  words,  different  ways 
of  explaining  texts  of  the  Scriptures,  these  are  for  the 
enjoyment  of  the  learned,  not  for  freedom."  He  who 
knows  the  secret  of  the  Srutis,  the  sinless,  and  he 
who  does  not  want  to  make  money  by  teaching — ^he 
is  the  Shanta  (saint),  the  Sddhu  (Holy  one),  who 
comes  as  the  Spring,  which  brings  the  leaves  and 
fruits  to  various  plants  but  does  not  ask  anything 
from  the  plant,  for  its  very  nature  is  to  do  good.  It 
does  good  and  that  is  all  Such  is  the  Guru.  "Who 
has  himself  crossed  this  ocean  of  life,  and  without  any 
idea  of  gain  to  himself  helps  others  to  cross  the  ocean 
also ;"  this  is  the  Guru,  and  mark  that  none  else  can  be 
a  Guru.  As  for  others :  "Themselves  steeped  in  dark- 
ness, but  in  the  pride  of  their  hearts  thinking  they 
know  everything,  do  not  stop  even  there,  but  want  to 
help  others,  and,  blind  leading  the  blind,  both  fall  into 


306  J  NANA   YOGA 

the  ditch."  Thus  say  your  Vedas.  You  are  Vedan- 
tins,  you  are  very  orthodox,  are  you  not?  Aye,  what 
I  want  to  do  is  to  make  you  more  orthodox.  The 
more  really  orthodox  you  are  the  more  sensible,  and 
the  more  you  think  of  modern  orthodoxy  the  more 
foolish  you  are.  Go  back  to  your  old  orthodoxy,  for 
in  those  days  every  sound  that  came  from  these  books, 
every  pulsation,  was  out  of  a  strong,  steady,  and 
sincere  heart;  every  note  was  true.  After  that  came 
degradation  in  art,  in  science,  in  religion,  in  every- 
thing, national  degradation.  Go  back,  go  back,  to 
the  old  days,  when  there  was  strength  and  vitality. 
Be  strong  once  more,  drink  deep  out  of  this  fountain 
of  yore,  for  that  is  the  only  condition  of  life  in  India. 
It  has  been  a  hard  nut  to  crack  all  over  the  world 
that  the  idea  of  individuality  which  we  have  to-day 
is  an  illusion.  Tell  a  man  that  he  is  not  an  individual 
in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word  and  forthwith  he 
becomes  afraid  that  his  individuality  (whatever  that 
may  be)  will  be  lost.  But  the  Advaitin  says  there 
never  has  been  a  finite  individuality;  you  as  a  finite 
being  have  been  changing  every  moment  of  your  life. 
You  have  been  a  child,  and  thought  in  one  way,  you 
are  a  man,  and  think  another  way,  you  will  be  an  old 
man,  and  will  think  yet  another  way.  Everybody  is 
thus  changing.  If  so,  where  is  your  individuality? 
Certainly  not  in  the  body,  nor  in  the  mind,  nor  in 
thought.  And  beyond  that  is  the  Atman,  and  says  the 
Advaitin :  "This  Atman  is  the  Brahman  Itself.  There 
cannot  be  two  Infinites.  There  is  only  One  Individual 
and  It  is  Infinite.  In  plain  words,  we  are  rational 
beings,  and  we  want  to  reason.     And  what  is  rea- 


VEDANTA    IN    ALL   ITS   PHASES  307 

son?  More  or  less  of  classification,  until  you  cannot 
go  any  farther.  And  the  finite  can  only  find  its  ulti- 
mate rest  when  it  is  classified  into  the  Infinite.  Go 
on  taking  up  a  finite  and  finding  its  reasons,  and  you 
will  find  rest  nowhere  until  you  reach  the  ultimate  or 
Infinite;  and  that  Infinite  says  the  Advaitin,  is  what 
alone  exists.  Everything  else  is  Maya,  everything 
else  has  no  real  existence.  Whatever  of  existence  is 
in  any  material  thing  is  this  Brahman;  we  are  this 
Brahman,  and  name,  shape,  and  everything  else  is 
Maya.  Take  off  the  name  and  form  and  you  and  I 
are  all  one.  But  we  have  to  guard  against  the  misuse 
of  the  word  "I."  Generally  people  say:  ''If  I  am 
the  Brahman  why  cannot  I  do  this  or  that?"  But 
they  are  using  the  word  "I"  in  two  different  senses. 
You  think  you  are  a  body,  or  a  man,  and  as  soon  as 
you  do  this  you  are  bound ;  no  more  are  you  Brahman, 
the  Self,  Who  wants  nothing.  Whose  light  is  within. 
All  His  pleasure  and  bliss  are  within,  perfectly  satis- 
fied with  Himself  He  wants  nothing,  expects  nothing, 
is  perfectly  fearless,  perfectly  free.  That  is  Brahman. 
That  is  the  meaning  of  the  real  'T."  In  that  we  are 
all  one. 

Now  this  seems  to  be  the  great  point  of  difference 
between  the  dualist  and  the  Advaitin.  You  find  even 
great  commentators,  like  Sankaracharya,  making 
meanings  of  texts,  which,  to  my  mind,  sometimes  do 
not  seem  to  be  justified.  Sometimes  you  find  Rama- 
nuja  dealing  with  texts  in  a  way  that  is  not  very 
clear.  The  idea  has  been  even  among  our  pandits  that 
only  one  of  these  views  can  be  true;  the  rest  mxust  be 
false.     Yet  they  find  in  their  Srutis  the  most  wonderful 


308  JNANA   YOGA 

idea  that  India  has  to  give  to  the  world,  "Ekam  sat 
vipra  bahudhd  vadanti,"  "That  which  exists  is  One, 
sages  call  it  by  various  names."  That  has  been  the 
theme,  and  the  working  out  of  the  whole  of  this  life- 
problem  of  the  nation  is  the  working  out  of  that 
theme:  "That  which  exists  is  One,  sages  call  it  by 
various  names."  Yet,  except  a  very  few  spiritual 
men  in  India,  we  all  forget  this.  We  forget  this 
great  idea,  and  you  will  find  there  are  those  among 
the  pandits  who  are  of  opinion  that  only  the  Advaitin 
is  right,  or  that  only  the  Visishtadvaitin  is  right,  or  that 
only  the  Dvaitin  can  have  the  Truth.  But  a  few  years 
ago  there  came  to  India  one  whose  life  was  the  explana- 
tion of  all  these  differences,  whose  life  was  the  work- 
ing out  of  the  harmony  that  is  the  background  of  all 
the  different  sects  of  India.  I  mean  Sri  Ramakrishna 
Paramahamsa.  It  is  his  life  that  explains  that  all  of 
these  are  necessary ;  that  dualism  is  the  natural  idea  of 
the  senses.  As  long  as  we  are  bound  by  the  senses 
we  are  bound  to  see  a  God  who  is  personal,  and  noth- 
ing but  personal ;  we  are  bound  to  see  the  world  as  it 
appears.  Just  as  says  Ramanuja:  "As  long  as  you 
think  you  are  a  body,  or  think  you  are  a  mind,  or 
think  you  are  a  Jiva,  every  act  of  perception  will  give 
you  the  three,  God  and  Nature  and  something  as  see- 
ing both."  But  yet  even  the  idea  of  the  body  grows 
dimmer  where  the  mind  itself  becomes  finer  and  finer, 
until  it  has  almost  all  disappeared;  and  when  all  the 
different  things  that  bind  us  down  to  this  body-life, 
all  the  things  that  make  us  fear,  that  make  us  weak, 
have  disappeared,  then  comes  the  realization  of  One- 
ness.    The  Bhagavad  Gitd  says:  "Even  in  this  life 


VEDANTA    IN    ALL   ITS   PHASES  309 

they  have  conquered  heaven,  whose  minds  are  firmly 
fixed  on  this  sameness  of  everything ;  for  God  is  pure, 
and  the  same  to  all;  therefore,  such  are  said  to  be 
living  in  God."  And  again:  "Thus  seeing  the  same 
Lord  everywhere  he,  the  sage,  does  not  hurt  the  Self 
by  the  self  and  thus  goes  to  the  highest  goal." 


XVII 

VEDANTA 

(Lecture  delivered  at  Lahore,  India.) 

Two  worlds  there  are  in  which  we  live,  one  the 
external,  the  other  the  internal.  Human  progress  has 
been,  from  time  immemorial,  along  parallel  lines  in 
both  these  worlds.  The  search  began  in  the  external, 
and  man  at  first  sought  to  get  answers  for  all  the 
deep  problems  from  external  nature.  He  wanted  to 
satisfy  his  thirst  for  the  beautiful  and  the  sublime 
from  all  that  surrounded  him;  he  wanted  to  express 
himself  and  all  that  was  within  him  in  the  language 
of  the  concrete;  and  grand  indeed  were  the  answers 
— most  marvellous  ideas  of  God  and  worship,  most 
rapturous  expressions  of  the  beautiful,  most  sublime 
conceptions  came  from  the  external  world.  But  the 
other,  opening  out  for  humanity  later,  laid  out  before 
him  a  universe  yet  sublimer,  yet  more  beautiful,  and 
infinitely  more  expansive.  In  the  Karma  Kanda 
(doctrines  and  ceremonies)  portion  of  the  Vedas  we 
find  most  Wonderful  ideas  about  an  over-ruling  Creator, 
Preserver  and  Destroyer  of  this  universe  presented 
before  us  in  language  which  is  at  times  soul-stirring. 
Most  of  you,  perhaps,  remember  that  wonderful  pas- 
sage in  the  Rig  Veda  Samhita,  where  you  get  a  descrip- 

310 


VEDANTA  311 

tion  of  chaos,  possibly  the  subHmest  that  has  ever  been 
attempted  by  man.  In  spite  of  all  this,  we  find  it  is 
only  a  painting  of  the  sublime  external,  that  it  is  still 
gross,  that  something  of  matter  yet  clings  to  it.  It 
is  only  the  expression  of  the  Infinite  in  the  language 
of  matter,  in  the  language  of  the  finite,  it  is  the  infinite 
of  the  muscles  and  not  of  the  mind.  It  is  the  infinite 
of  space  and  not  of  thought.  Therefore  in  the  second 
portion  of  the  Vedas,  or  J  nana  Kanda  (philosophy), 
we  find  the  method  of  procedure  altogether  different. 
The  first  attempt  was  to  search  out  from  external 
nature  the  truths  of  the  universe;  to  get  the  solution 
of  all  the  deep  problems  of  life  from  the  material 
world.  There  arose  the  cry —  ''When  a  man  dies, 
what  becomes  of  him  ?  Some  say  that  he  exists,  others 
that  he  is  gone,  say,  O  king  of  Death,  what  is  truth?" 
The  Indian  mind  has  discovered  what  was  to  be  got 
from  the  external  world,  but  it  did  not  feel  satisfied 
with  that;  it  wanted  to  search  more  deeply,  to  dig  in 
its  own  interior,  to  seek  from  its  own  soul,  and  the 
answer  came. 

Upanishads,  or  Vedanta,  or  Aranyakas,  is  the  name 
of  this  portion  of  the  Vedas.  Here  we  perceive  at  once 
that  religion  has  got  rid  of  all  external  formalities, 
that  spiritual  things  are  told  not  in  the  language  of 
matter,  but  that  spirituality  is  preached  in  the  language 
of  the  spirit,  the  superfine  in  the  language  of  the  super- 
fine. No  more  is  any  grossness  apparent  in  it,  no 
more  is  there  any  compromise  with  things  that  concern 
us.  Bold,  brave  beyond  our  conception  at  the  present 
day,  stand  the  giant  minds  of  the  sages  of  the  Upan- 
ishads, declaring  the  noblest  truths  that  have  been 


312  J  NANA   YOGA 

preached  unto  humanity,  without  compromise,  without 
fear.     This,  my  countrymen,  I  want  to  lay  before  you. 

Even  the  Jndna  Kanda  of  the  Vedas  is  a  vast  ocean ; 
many  lives  are  necessary  to  understand  even  a  little 
of  it.  Truly  has  it  been  said  by  Rdmdnuja  that 
the  Vedanta  is  the  head,  the  shoulders,  the  crested 
form  of  the  Vedas,  and  surely  enough  the  Upanishads 
that  teach  it  have  become  the  Scriptures  of  modern 
India.  The  Hindus  have  the  greatest  respect  for  the 
Karma  Kanda  of  the  Vedas,  but  for  all  practical  pur- 
poses we  know  that  for  ages  Shruti  (sacred  revela- 
tion) has  meant  the  Upanishads  and  the  Upanishads 
alone.  We  know  that  all  our  great  philosophers,  either 
Vyasa  or  Patanjali,  or  Gautama,  or  even  the  great 
father  of  all  philosophy,  the  celebrated  Kapila  himself, 
when  ever  they  wanted  an  authority  for  what  they 
wrote,  every  one  of  them  drew  it  from  the  Upanishads 
and  from  no  other  source,  for  therein  are  the  truths 
that  remain  forever. 

There  are  truths  that  are  true  only  in  a  certain  line, 
in  a  certain  direction,  under  certain  circumstances  and 
for  certain  times,  those  that  are  founded  on  the  insti- 
tutions of  the  time.  There  are  other  truths  that  are 
based  on  the  nature  of  man  himself  that  must  endure 
as  long  as  man  himself  endures.  These  are  the  truths 
that  alone  can  be  universal,  and  in  spite  of  all  the 
changes  that  we  are  sure  must  have  come  in  India, 
as  to  our  social  surroundings,  our  methods  of  dress, 
our  manner  of  eating,  our  modes  of  worship,  these 
universal  truths  of  the  Shrutis,  the  marvellous  Vedan- 
tic  ideas,  stand  out  in  their  own  sublimity,  immovable, 
unvanquishable,    deathless    and    immortal.      Yet    the 


VEDANTA  313 

germs  of  all  the  ideas  that  are  developed  in  the  Upan- 
ishads  have  been  taught  already  in  the  Karma  Kanda. 
The  idea  of  the  cosmos  which  all  sects  of  Vedantins 
take  for  granted,  the  psychology  which  has  formed  the 
common  basis  of  all  Indian  schools  of  thought  had 
there  been  worked  out  and  presented  before  the  world. 
A  few  words  therefore  about  the  Karma  Kanda  are 
necessary  before  we  start  into  the  spiritual  portion 
of  the  Vedanta,  and  I  want  first  to  make  clear  my 
use  of  the  word  Vedanta.  Unfortunately  there  is 
a  mistake  common  in  modern  India,  that  the  word 
Vedanta  has  reference  only  to  the  Advaita  system, 
but  you  must  always  remember  that  in  modern  India 
there  are  the  three  Prasthanas  (authorities)  for  man 
to  study.  First  of  all  there  are  the  Revelations  (the 
Shrutis),  by  which  I  mean  the  Upanishads.  Secondly, 
among  our  philosophies,  the  Sutras  of  Vyasa  have 
always  held  great  prominence  on  account  of  their  being 
the  summation  of  all  the  preceding  systems  of  philos- 
ophy; not  that  these  systems  are  contradictory  to  one 
another,  but  the  one  is  based  on  the  other.  There  is 
a  gradual  unfolding  of  the  theme  which  culminates 
in  the  Sutras  of  Vyasa;  and  between  the  Upanishads 
and  the  Sutras,  which  are  the  systematizing  of  the 
marvellous  truths  of  the  Vedanta,  comes  the  divine 
commentary  of  the  Vedanta  Sri  Bhagavad  Gtfd.  The 
Upanishads,  the  Git  a,  and  the  Vyasa  Sutras  therefore 
have  been  taken  up  by  every  sect  in  India  which  has 
wished  to  claim  authority  as  orthodox,  whether 
Dvaitist,  or  Vaishnavist,  or  Advaitist  it  matters  little, 
the  authorities  of  each  and  every  one  are  these  three. 
We  find  that  a  Sankardchdrya,  or  a  Rdmdnuja,  or  a 


314  J  NANA   YOGA 

Madhvdchdrya,  or  a  Chaitanya — any  one  who  wanted  to 
propound  a  new  theory — had  to  take  up  these  three  sys- 
tems and  write  only  a  new  commentary  on  them.  There- 
fore it  would  be  wrong  to  confine  the  word  Vedanta 
only  to  one  system  which  has  arisen  out  of  the 
Upanishads.  All  these  systems  are  covered  by  the 
word  Vedanta.  The  Ramanujist  has  as  much  right 
to  be  called  a  Vedantist  as  the  Advaitist ;  in  fact  I  will 
go  a  little  further  and  say  that  what  we  really  mean 
by  the  word  Hindu  is  the  word  Vedantist;  the  word 
Vedantist  will  express  that  too.  One  idea  more  I  wish 
you  to  note,  that  these  three  systems  have  been  current 
in  India  almost  from  time  immemorial;  for  you  must 
not  believe  that  Sankara  was  the  inventor  of  the  Ad- 
vaitist system;  it  existed  ages  before  Sankara  was 
born ;  he  was  one  of  its  last  representatives.  So  with 
the  Ramanujist  system,  it  existed  ages  before  Rdmd- 
nuja  appeared,  as  we  already  know  by  the  commen- 
taries that  were  written.  This  is  true  of  all  the 
dualistic  systems  that  have  existed  side  by  side  with 
the  others,  and  with  my  little  knowledge  I  have  come 
to  the  conclusion  that  they  do  not  contradict  each 
other.  Just  as  in  the  case  of  our  six  Darsanas  (systems 
of  philosophy) ,  we  find  that  they  are  a  grand  unfolding 
of  the  highest  principles,  the  theme  beginning  far  back, 
with  the  uncertain  utterances  of  early  investigators, 
and  ending  in  the  trimuphant  blast  of  the  Advaita,  so 
also  in  these  three  main  systems  we  trace  the  gradual 
working  up  of  the  human  mind  towards  higher  and 
higher  ideals,  until  everything  is  merged  in  that  won- 
derful unity  which  is  reached  in  the  Advaita.  There- 
fore these  three  are  not  contradictory.     But  I  am  bound 


VEDANTA  315 

to  tell  you  that  this  mistake  has  been  committed  by 
not  a  few.  We  find  an  Advaitist  preacher  keeping 
entire  those  texts  which  teach  Advaitism  especially, 
and  getting  hold  of  the  dualistic  or  qualified-dualistic 
texts  and  trying  to  wrest  them  into  his  own  meaning ; 
We  find  dualistic  teachers  leaving  alone  those  passages 
that  are  expressly  dualistic  and  getting  hold  of  Advaitic 
texts  and  trying  to  force  them  into  a  dualistic  meaning. 
They  have  been  great  men,  our  Gurus,  yet  there  is  such 
a  saying  as  ''even  the  faults  of  a  Guru  must  be  told." 
I  am  of  the  opinion  that  in  this  only  were  these  great 
teachers  mistaken.  We  need  not  go  into  text  torturing, 
we  need  not  go  into  any  sort  of  religious  dishonesty, 
we  need  not  go  into  any  kind  of  grammatical  twaddle, 
we  need  not  go  about  trying  to  put  our  own  ideas  into 
texts  which  were  never  meant  for  those  ideas,  but  the 
work  is  plain  and  it  becomes  easier  once  you  under- 
stand the  marvellous  doctrine  of  Adhikara  Vedas.  It 
is  true  that  the  Upanishads  have  one  theme  before 
them.  "What  is  that,  knowing  which  we  know  every- 
thing else?"  In  modern  language  the  theme  of  the 
Upanishads,  like  the  theme  of  every  other  knowledge, 
is  to  find  the  ultimate  unity  of  things,  for  you  must 
remember  that  knowledge  is  nothing  but  discovering 
unity  in  the  midst  of  diversity.  Each  science  is  based 
upon  this;  all  human  knowledge  is  based  upon  the 
finding  of  unity  in  the  midst  of  diversity ;  and  if  it  be 
the  task  of  those  small  fragments  of  human  knowledge 
which  we  call  our  sciences,  to  find  unity  in  the  midst 
of  a  few  different  phenomena,  the  effort  becomes  stu- 
pendous when  the  theme  before  us  is  to  find  unity  in 
the  midst  of  this  marvellously  diversified  universe, 


3l6  J  NANA    YOGA 

differing  in  name  and  form,  differing  in  matter  and 
spirit,  differing  in  everything,  each  thought  differing 
from  every  other  thought,  each  form  differing  from 
every  other  form.  Yet,  to  harmonize  these  many 
planes,  unending  lokas — in  the  midst  of  this  infinite 
variety  to  find  unity,  this  is  the  theme  of  the  Upan- 
ishads ;  this  is  the  task  those  great  sages  set  themselves. 
To  show  a  man  the  Pole  Star,  one  takes  the  nearest 
star  which  is  bigger  than  the  Pole  Star  and  more 
brilliant,  and  leads  him  to  fix  his  mind  on  that,  until 
at  last  he  comes  to  the  Pole  Star.  This  is  the  task 
before  us,  and  to  prove  my  idea  I  have  simply  to 
show  you  the  Upanishads,  and  you  will  see  it.  Nearly 
every  chapter  begins  with  dualistic  teachings.  Later 
on  God  is  taught  as  some  one  who  is  the  Creator  of 
the  Universe,  its  Preserver,  unto  whom  everything 
goes  at  last.  He  is  one  to  be  worshipped,  the  Ruler, 
the  Guide  of  nature,  external  and  internal.  One  step 
further,  and  we  find  the  same  teacher  showing  that 
this  God  is  not  outside  nature,  but  immanent  in  nature. 
And  at  last  both  ideas  are  discarded  and  whatever  is 
real  is  He;  there  is  no  difference.  That  immanent 
One  is  at  last  declared  to  be  the  same  that  is  in  the 
human  soul.  ''Tat  tvam  asi  Svetaketo."  "Svetaketu, 
That  thou  art."  Here  is  no  compromise;  here  is  no 
fear  of  others'  opinions.  Truth,  bold  truth,  has  been 
taught  in  bold  language,  and  we  need  not  fear  to  preach 
the  truth  in  the  same  bold  language  to-day,  and  by 
the  grace  of  God  I  hope  at  least  to  be  the  one  who 
dares  to  be  that  bold  preacher. 

To  go  back  to  our  preliminaries.     There  are  first 
two  things  to  be  understood,  one  the  psychological 


VEDANTA  317 

aspect  common  to  all  the  Vedantic  schools,  and  the 
other  the  cosmological  aspect.  I  will  first  take  up  the 
latter.  To-day  we  find  wonderful  discoveries  of  mod- 
ern science  coming  upon  us  like  bolts  from  the  blue, 
opening  our  eyes  to  marvels  we  never  dreamed  of. 
Man  had  long  since  discovered  what  he  calls  force. 
It  is  only  the  other  day  that  man  came  to  know  that 
even  in  the  midst  of  this  variety  of  forces  there  is  a 
unity.  Man  has  just  discovered  that  what  he  calls 
heat,  magnetism,  electricity,  and  so  forth,  are  all  con- 
vertible into  that  one  unit  force,  whatever  you  may 
call  it.  This  has  been  done  even  in  the  Samhita;  as 
ancient  and  hoary  as  the  Samhita,  is  that  very  idea 
of  force  I  was  referring  to.  All  the  forces,  whether 
called  gravitation,  or  attraction,  or  repulsion;  whether 
expressing  themselves  as  heat,  or  electricity,  or  mag- 
netism, are  but  the  variations  of  that  unit  energy. 
They  may  even  express  themselves  as  thought,  reflected 
from  antahkarana,  the  mentality  of  man,  and  the  unit 
from  which  they  spring  is  what  is  called  the  Prdna. 
Again  what  is  prdna  f  Prdna  is  spandanam,  or  vibra- 
tion. When  all  this  universe  shall  have  resolved  back 
into  its  primal  state,  what  will  become  of  this  infinite 
force?  Do  they  think  that  it  becomes  extinct?  Of 
course  not.  If  it  became  extinct,  what  would  be  the 
cause  of  the  next  wave,  because  the  motion  is  going 
in  wave  forms,  rising,  falling,  rising  again,  falling 
again?  Here  is  the  word  srishti,  which  expresses  the 
universe.  Mark  that  the  word  is  not  "creation."  I 
am  helpless  in  talking  English,  I  have  to  translate 
the  Sanskrit  words  as  best  I  can.  It  is  srishti,  "pro- 
jection."    Everything  becomes  finer  and  finer,  and  is 


3l8  J  NANA   YOGA 

resolved  back  to  the  primal  state  from  which  it  sprang, 
and  there  it  remains  for  a  time,  quiescent,  ready  to 
spring  forth  again.  That  springing  forth  is  srishti, 
projection.  And  what  becomes  of  all  these  forces,  the 
prdnas?  They  are  resolved  back  into  the  primal 
prdna,  and  this  prdna  becomes  almost  motionless — 
not  entirely  motionless,  but  almost  motionless — and 
that  is  what  is  described  in  the  Vedic  hymn,  "It  vibrated 
without  vibrations."  There  are  many  difficult  texts  in 
the  Upanishads  to  understand,  especially  in  the  use  of 
technical  phrases.  For  instance,  the  word  vayu,  to 
move ;  many  times  it  means  air  and  many  times  motion, 
and  often  people  confuse  one  with  the  other.  We 
have  to  be  careful  about  this.  And  what  becomes  of 
what  you  call  matter  ?  The  forces  permeate  all  matter ; 
they  all  dissolve  into  ether,  from  which  they  again 
come  out ;  and  the  first  to  come  out  is  akdsa.  Whether 
you  translate  it  as  ether,  or  as  anything  else,  this  is 
the  idea,  that  this  akdsa  is  the  primal  form  of  matter. 
This  akdsa  vibrates  under  the  action  of  prdna,  and 
when  the  next  srishti  is  coming  up,  as  the  vibration 
becomes  quicker,  the  akdsa  is  lashed  into  all  those 
wave  forms  which  we  call  the  suns,  moons,  and 
systems. 

We  read  again,  "Everything  in  this  universe  has 
been  projected,  prdna  vibrating,  (ejati.)  You  must 
remark  the  word  ejati,  because  it  comes  from  ej,  to 
vibrate.  Nissritam — projected,  yadidamkincha  jagat 
— whatever  is  this  universe. 

This  is  a  part  of  the  cosmological  side.  There  are 
many  details  working  into  it.  For  instance,  how  the 
process  takes  place,  how  there  is  first  ether,  and  how 


VEDANTA  319 

from  the  ether  evolve  other  things,  how  that  ether 
begins  to  vibrate,  and  how  from  that  comes  vdyu 
(air).  But  the  one  idea  is  here,  that  it  is  from  the 
finer  that  the  grosser  has  come.  Gross  matter  is  the 
last  to  emerge  and  is  the  most  external,  and  this  gross 
matter  had  the  finer  matter  before  it.  Yet  we  see 
that  the  whole  thing  has  been  resolved  into  two,  but 
there  is  not  yet  a  final  unity.  There  is  the  unity  of 
force,  prdna;  there  is  the  unity  of  matter,  called  akdsa. 
Is  there  any  unity  to  be  found  behind  them  ?  Can  they 
be  melted  into  one.  Our  modern  science  is  mute  here, 
has  not  yet  found  its  way  out,  and  if  it  is  finding  its  way 
out,  just  as  it  slowly  found  the  same  old  prdna  and  the 
same  ancient  akdsa,  it  will  also  have  to  seek  this  unity 
along  similar  lines.  The  next  unity  is  the  omnipresent, 
impersonal  being,  known  by  its  old  mythological  name 
as  Brahma,  the  four-headed  Brahma,  and  psycho- 
logically called  Mahat.  This  is  where  the  two  unite. 
What  is  called  your  mind  is  only  a  bit  of  this  mahat 
caught  in  the  trap  of  the  brain,  and  the  sum  total  of 
all  brains  caught  in  the  meshes  of  mahat  is  what  you 
call  samashti  (the  aggregate,  the  universal).  Analysis 
had  to  go  further;  it  was  not  yet  complete.  In  this 
view  we  were  each  one  of  us,  as  it  were,  a  microcosm, 
and  the  world  taken  altogether  the  macrocosm.  But 
whatever  is  in  the  vyashti  (the  particular),  we  may 
safely  conjecture  that  a  similar  thing  is  also  in  the 
universal.  We  may  feel  reasonably  sure  that  if  we 
had  the  power  to  anaylze  our  own  minds  we  should  find 
in  them  what  we  find  outside.  What  is  this  mind,  is 
the  question.  In  modern  times,  in  Western  countries, 
as  physical  science  is  making  rapid  progress,  as  phys- 


320  J  NANA   YOGA 

iology  is  step  by  step  conquering  stronghold  after 
stronghold  of  old  beliefs,  people  do  not  know  where 
to  stand,  because  to  their  great  despair  modern  phys- 
iology has  identified  the  mind  with  the  brain  at  every 
step.  But  that  we  in  India  have  known  always.  It 
was  the  first  proposition  the  Hindu  boy  should  learn, 
that  the  mind  is  matter,  only  finer.  The  body  is  gross, 
and  behind  the  body  is  what  we  call  the  sukshma 
sharira,  the  fine  body  or  mind.  This  is  also  material, 
only  finer;  but  it  is  not  the  Atman.  I  will  not  trans- 
late this  word  to  you  in  English,  because  the  idea  does 
not  exist  in  Europe,  it  is  untranslatable.  The  modern 
attempt  of  German  philosophers  is  to  translate  the 
word  dtman  by  the  word  ''self,"  but  until  that  word 
is  universally  accepted  it  is  impossible  to  use  it.  So, 
call  it  self  or  anything,  it  is  our  dtman.  This  dtman 
is  the  real  man  behind.  It  is  the  dtman  that  uses  the 
material  mind  as  its  instrument,  its  antahkarana  (inter- 
nal instrument),  as  the  psychological  term  for  the 
mind  is.  And  the  mind  by  means  of  a  series  of 
internal  organs  works  the  visible  organs  of  the  body. 
What  is  this  mind?  It  was  comparatively  only  the 
other  day  that  Western  philosophers  arrived  at  the 
knowledge  that  the  eyes  are  not  the  real  organs  of 
vision,  but  that  behind  these  are  other  organs,  the 
indriyas,  and  if  these  are  destroyed  a  man  may  have 
a  thousand  eyes,  like  Indra,  but  there  will  be  no  sight 
for  him.  Aye,  your  philosophy  starts  with  this  as- 
sumption, that  by  vision  is  not  meant  the  external 
vision.  The  real  vision  belongs  to  the  internal  organs, 
the  brain  centres  inside.  You  may  call  them  what 
you  like,  but  the  indriyas  are  not  the  eyes,  or  the  nose. 


VEDANTA  321 

or  the  ears.  And  the  sum  total  of  all  these  indriyas 
plus  the  manas,  huddhi,  chitta,  ahankara,  etc.,  is  what 
is  called  the  mind,  and  if  the  modern  physiologist 
comes  to  tell  you  that  the  brain  is  what  is  called  the 
mind  and  that  the  brain  is  formed  of  so  many  organs, 
you  need  not  be  afraid  at  all;  tell  him  your  philoso- 
phers knew  it  always,  it  is  the  very  alpha  of  your 
religion. 

Next  we  have  to  understand  what  is  meant  by  this 
manas,  huddhi,  chitta,  ahankara,  etc.  First  of  all  let 
us  consider  the  chitta;  it  is  the  "mind-stuff" — a  part 
of  the  mahat — and  is  the  generic  name  for  the  mind 
itself,  including  all  its  various  states.  Suppose  here 
is  a  lake  on  a  summer  evening,  smooth  and  calm, 
without  a  ripple  on  its  surface.  Let  us  call  this  the 
chitta.  And  suppose  some  one  throws  a  stone  into 
this  lake.  What  happens?  First  there  is  the  action, 
the  blow  given  to  the  water,  next  the  water  rises  and 
sends  a  reaction  towards  the  stone,  and  that  reaction 
takes  the  form  of  a  wave.  First  the  water  vibrates  a 
little,  then  immediately  sends  back  a  reaction  in  the 
form  of  a  wave.  This  chitta  let  us  compare  to  this 
lake,  and  the  external  objects  are  like  these  stones 
thrown  into  it.  As  soon  as  it  comes  in  contact  with 
any  external  object  by  means  of  these  indriyas — the 
indriyas  must  be  there  to  carry  these  external  objects 
inside — there  is  a  vibration,  what  is  called  the  manas, 
indecisive.  Next  there  is  a  reaction,  the  determinative 
faculty,  huddhi,  and  along  with  this  huddhi  flashes  the 
idea  aham  (egoism)  and  the  external  object.  Suppose 
there  is  a  mosquito  sitting  on  my  hand.  This  sensa- 
tion is  carried  to  my  chitta  and  it  vibrates  a  little,  this 


322  J  NANA   YOGA 

is  the  psychological  nianas.  Then  there  is  reaction, 
and  immediately  comes  the  idea  that  I  have  a  mos- 
quito on  my  hand,  and  that  I  shall  have  to  drive  it  off. 
Thus  these  stones  are  thrown  into  the  lake,  but  in  the 
case  of  the  lake,  every  blow  that  comes  to  it  is  from 
the  external  world,  while  in  the  case  of  the  lake  of 
the  mind  the  blows  may  either  come  from  the  external 
world,  or  the  internal  world.  This  whole  series — 
chitta,  manas,  etc.^  form  what  is  called  the  antah- 
karana.  Along  with  it  you  ought  to  understand  one 
thing  more  that  will  help  us  in  understanding  the 
Advaita  system  later  on.  It  is  this.  All  of  you  must 
have  seen  pearls,  and  most  of  you  know  how  pearls 
are  made.  Some  irritating  grain  of  dust  or  sand 
enters  into  the  body  of  the  pearl  oyster  and  sets  up 
an  irritation  there,  and  the  oyster's  body  reacts  towards 
the  irritation  and  covers  the  little  grain  with  its  own 
juice.  That  crystallizes  and  forms  the  pearl.  So  the 
whole  universe  is  like  that,  the  universe  is  the  pearl 
which  is  being  formed  by  us.  What  we  get  from  the 
external  world  is  simply  the  blow.  Even  to  know 
that  blow  we  have  to  react,  and  as  soon  as  we  react 
we  project  really  a  portion  of  our  own  mind  towards 
the  blow,  and  when  we  come  to  know  of  it,  it  is  really 
our  own  mind  as  it  has  been  shaped  by  the  blow. 
Therefore  it  is  clear  even  to  those  who  wish  to  believe 
in  a  hard  and  fast  realism  of  an  external  world,  (and 
they  cannot  but  admit  it  in  these  days  of  physiology,) 
that,  supposing  that  we  represent  the  external  world 
by  "X"  what  we  really  know  is  "X"  plus  mind,  and 
this  mind  element  is  so  great  that  it  has  covered  the 
whole  of  that  ''X"  which  has  remained  unknown  and 


VEDANTA  323 

unknowable  throughout,  therefore  if  there  be  an  ex- 
ternal world  it  is  always  unknown  and  unknowable. 
What  we  know  of  it  is  as  moulded,  formed,  fashioned 
by  our  own  mind.  So  with  the  internal  world.  The 
same  applies  to  our  own  soul,  the  dtman.  In  order 
to  know  the  dtman  we  shall  have  to  know  it  through 
the  mind,  and  therefore  what  little  we  know  of  this 
dtman  is  simply  the  dtman  plus  the  mind.  That  is 
to  say,  the  dtman  covered  over^  fashioned,  and  moulded 
by  the  mind,  and  nothing  more.  We  shall  revert  to 
this  a  little  later,  but  we  will  remember  it  here. 

The  next  thing  to  understand  is  this.  The  state- 
ment was  made  that  this  body  is  merely  the  name  of 
one  continuous  stream  of  matter.  Every  moment  we 
are  adding  material  to  it,  and  every  moment  material 
is  being  thrown  off  by  it,  like  unto  a  continually  flow- 
ing river  in  which  vast  masses  of  water  are  always 
changing  place ;  yet  we  take  up  the  whole  in  imagina- 
tion, and  call  it  the  same  river.  What  do  we  call  the 
river?  Every  moment  the  water  is  changing,  the 
shore  is  changing,  every  moment  the  trees  and  plants, 
the  leaves,  and  the  foliage  are  changing;  what  is  the 
river?  It  is  the  name  of  this  series  of  changes.  So 
with  the  mind.  There  is  the  Buddhistic  side,  the  great 
Kshanika  Vijndna  Vada  doctrine,  most  difficult  to 
understand,  but  most  rigorously  and  logically  worked 
out ;  and  this  also  arose  in  India  in  opposition  to  some 
part  of  the  Vedanta.  It  had  to  be  answered,  and  we 
will  see  how,  later  on,  it  could  only  be  answered  by 
the  Advaita  and  by  nothing  else.  We  shall  also  see 
how,  in  spite  of  people's  curious  notions  about  Advai- 
ta, people's  fright  about  Advaita,  it  is  the  salvation 


324  J  NANA   YOGA 

of  the  world,  because  therein  alone  is  to  be  found  the 
reason  of  things.  Dualism  and  other  *4sms"  are  very 
good  as  means  of  worship,  very  satisfying  to  the  mind ; 
it  may  be  that  they  have  helped  the  mind  onward ;  but 
if  man  wants  to  be  rational  and  religious  at  the  same 
time,  Advaita  is  the  one  system  in  the  world  for  him. 
We  will  regard  the  mind  as  a  similar  river,  contin- 
ually emptying  itself  at  one  end,  and  filling  itself  at 
the  other  end.  Where  is  that  unity  which  we  call  the 
dtmanf  The  idea  is  that,  in  spite  of  this  continuous 
change  in  the  body,  and  in  spite  of  this  continuous 
change  in  the  mind,  there  is  in  us  something  that  is 
unchangeable.  When  rays  of  light  coming  from  dif- 
ferent quarters  fall  upon  a  screen,  or  a  wall,  or  upon 
something  that  is  not  changeable,  then  and  then  alone 
it  is  possible  for  them  to  form  one  complete  whole. 
Where  is  this  background  in  the  human  mind,  falling 
upon  which,  as  it  were,  the  various  ideas  will  come 
to  unity  and  become  one  complete  whole?  This  cer- 
tainly cannot  be  the  mind  itself,  seeing  that  it  also 
changes.  Therefore  there  must  be  something  which 
is  neither  the  body  nor  the  mind,  something  which 
changes  not,  something  permanent,  upon  which  all  our 
sensations,  all  our  ideas  fall  to  form  a  unity  and  a 
complete  whole,  and  this  is  the  real  soul,  the  dtman 
of  man.  And  seeing  that  everything  material,  even 
if  you  call  it  fine  matter,  or  mind,  must  be  changeful ; 
seeing  that  what  you  call  gross  matter,  the  external 
world,  must  be  more  changeful  in  comparison  to  that ; 
this  unchangeable  something  cannot  be  of  material 
substance ;  it  must  be  spiritual ;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  not 
matter ;  it  is  indestructible,  unchangeable. 


VEDANTA  325 

Next  will  come  another  question — apart  from  those 
old  arguments  which  only  rise  in  the  external  world, 
the  arguments  from  design — who  created  this  external 
world,  who  created  matter,  etc.  ?  The  idea  here  is  to 
know  truth  only  from  the  inner  nature  of  man,  and 
the  question  arises  just  in  the  same  way  as  it  arose 
about  the  soul.  Taking  for  granted  that  there  is  an 
unchangeable  soul  in  each  man,  which  is  neither  the 
mind,  nor  the  body,  there  is  still  a  unity  of  idea  among 
these  souls,  a  unity  of  feeling,  of  sympathy.  How  is 
it  possible  that  my  soul  can  act  upon  your  soul,  where 
is  the  medium  through  which  it  can  work,  where  is 
the  medium  through  which  it  can  act?  How  is  it  I 
can  feel  anything  about  your  soul?  What  is  it  that 
is  in  touch  both  with  your  soul  and  with  my  soul? 
Herein  arises  a  metaphysical  necessity  for  admitting 
another  soul,  for  it  must  be  a  soul  which  acts  in  contact 
with  all  the  different  souls ;  one  Soul  which  covers  and 
interpenetrates  all  the  infinite  number  of  souls  in  the 
world,  in  and  through  which  they  live,  in  and  through 
which  they  sympathize  and  love  and  work  for  one 
another.  And  this  universal  Soul  is  Paramdtman,  the 
Lord  God  of  the  universe.  Again,  it  follows  that 
because  the  soul  is  not  composed  of  matter,  because  it 
is  spiritual,  it  cannot  obey  the  laws  of  matter,  it  cannot 
be  judged  by  the  laws  of  matter.  It  is  therefore 
deathless  and  changeless.  "This  Self  the  fire  cannot 
burn,  nor  instruments  pierce,  the  sword  cannot  cut 
it  asunder,  the  air  cannot  dry  it  up,  nor  can  water 
melt  it;  unconquerable,  deathless,  and  birthless  is  this 
Self  of  man."  What  is  this  Self  doing  then?  We 
have  known  that  according  to  the  GUa  and  according 


^26  J  NANA   YOGA 

to  Vedanta,  this  individual  Self  is  also  vihhu  (all  per- 
vading), is,  according  to  Kapila,  omnipresent.  Of 
course  there  are  sects  in  India  which  regard  this  Self 
as  anu  (infinitely  small),  but  what  they  mean  is  ami 
in  mani  testation ;  its  real  nature  is  vihhu. 

There  comes  another  idea,  startling  perhaps,  yet  a 
characteristically  Indian  idea,  and  if  there  is  any  idea 
that  is  common  to  all  our  sects  it  is  this.  Therefore 
I  beg  you  to  pay  attention  to  this  one  idea  and  to 
remember  it,  for  this  is  the  very  foundation  of  every- 
thing that  we  have  in  India.  The  idea  is  this.  You 
have  heard  of  the  doctrine  of  physical  evolution 
preached  in  the  Western  world,  by  the  German  and 
English  savants.  It  tells  us  that  the  bodies  of  the 
different  animals  differ  only  in  degree,  not  in  kind. 
The  differences  that  we  see  are  but  varying  expres- 
sions of  the  same  series,  but  from  the  lowest  worm  to 
the  highest  and  most  saintly  man  it  is  but  one  chain 
of  expression,  the  one  changing  into  the  other,  going 
up  and  up,  higher  and  higher,  until  it  attains  perfec- 
tion. We  had  that  idea  also.  Declares  our  Yogi 
Patanjali,  ''Jdtyantara  parinamah/'  "one  species  (the 
jati  is  species)  changes  into  another  species,"  (evolu- 
tion) ;  parindmah  means  one  thing  changing  into  an- 
other, just  as  one  species  changes  into  another.  Where 
do  we  differ  from  the  Europeans?  Patanjali  says: 
"Prakritydpurdf — ''By  the  infilling  of  nature."  The 
European  says  it  is  competition,  natural  and  sexual 
selection,  etc.,  that  forces  one  body  to  take  the  form 
of  another.  But  here  is  another  idea,  a  still  better 
analysis,  going  deeper  into  the  thing,  and  saying  ''By 
the  infilling  of  nature."     What  is  meant  by  this  infilling 


VEDANTA  327 

of  nature?  We  admit  that  the  amoeba  goes  higher 
and  higher  until  it  becomes  a  Buddha ;  we  admit  this, 
but  we  are,  at  the  same  time,  equally  certain  that  you 
cannot  get  any  amount  of  work  out  of  a  machine  until 
you  put  it  on  the  other  side.  The  sum  total  of  the 
energy  remains  the  same  whatever  the  form  it  may 
take.  If  you  want  a  mass  of  energy  at  one  end  you 
have  got  to  put  it  in  at  the  other  end,  it  may  be  in 
another  form,  but  the  amount  must  be  the  same. 
Therefore,  if  a  Buddha  is  the  one  end  of  the  change, 
the  very  amoeba  must  have  been  the  Buddha  also. 
If  the  Buddha  is  the  evolved  amoeba,  the  amoeba 
was  the  involved  Buddha.  If  this  universe  is  the 
manifestation  of  an  almost  infinite  amount  of  energy, 
when  this  universe  was  in  a  state  of  pralaya  (rest), 
it  must  have  represented  the  same  amount  of  involved 
energy.  It  cannot  have  been  otherwise.  As  such  it 
follows  that  every  soul  is  infinite.  From  the  lowest 
worm  that  crawls  under  our  feet  to  the  noblest 
and  greatest  saints,  all  possess  this  infinite  power, 
infinite  purity,  and  infinite  everything.  The  apparent 
difference  is  in  the  degree  of  manifestation.  The 
worm  is  manifesting  only  a  little  bit  of  that  energy; 
you  have  manifested  more,  another  god-man  has 
manifested  still  more;  that  is  all  the  diflPerence. 
But  that  infinite  power  is  there  all  the  same.  Says 
Patau jali ;  ^'Tatah  kshetrikavat" — "J^^t  as  the  peasant 
irrigating  his  field."  He  has  a  little  canal  that  comes 
into  his  field  and  brings  water  from  a  reservoir  some- 
where, and  perhaps  he  has  a  little  lock  that  prevents 
the  water  from  rushing  into  his  field.  When  he  wants 
water  he  has  simply  to  open  the  lock  and  in  rushes  the 


328  J  NANA   YOGA 

water  by  its  own  power.  The  power  has  not  to  be 
added,  it  is  already  there  in  the  reservoir.  So,  every 
one  of  us,  every  being  has  as  his  own  background  such 
a  reservoir  of  strength,  infinite  power,  infinite  purity, 
infinite  bhss,  and  infinite  existence,  only  these  locks, 
these  bodies  are  hindering  us  from  fully  expressing 
what  we  really  are.  And  as  these  bodies  become  more 
and  more  finely  organized,  as  the  tamasa  guna  (dull- 
ness) becomes  the  rajasa  guna  (activity)  and  as  the 
rajasa  guna  becomes  sattva  guna  (purity),  more  and 
more  of  this  power  and  purity  will  become  manifest; 
and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  our  people  have  been  so 
careful  about  their  eating  and  drinking.  It  may  be 
that  the  original  ideas  have  been  lost,  just  as  with  our 
child-marriage,  which,  though  not  belonging  to  the 
subject,  I  may  take  as  an  example.  If  I  have  another 
opportunity  I  will  talk  more  fully  about  it,  for  the  ideas 
behind  child-marriage  are  the  only  ideas  through  which 
there  can  be  a  real  civilization.  There  cannot  be  any- 
thing else.  If  a  man,  or  a  woman,  is  allowed  the 
freedom  to  take  up  any  man  or  wornan,  as  wife  or 
husband,  if  individual  pleasure,  or  satisfaction  of 
animal  instincts,  were  to  be  allowed  to  run  loose  in 
society,  the  result  must  be  evil,  evil  children,  wicked 
and  demoniacal.  Aye,  man  in  every  country  is,  on  the 
one  hand,  producing  these  evil  children,  and  on  the 
other  hand  multiplying  the  police  force  to  keep  down 
their  brutal  instincts.  The  question  is  not  how  to 
destroy  evil  that  way,  but  how  to  prevent  the  very 
birth  of  evil,  and  as  long  as  you  live  in  society,  your 
marriage  certainly  affects  every  member  of  it;  there- 
fore society  has  the  right  to  dictate  whom  you  shall 


VEDA  NT  A  329 

marry,  and  whom  you  shall  not.  And  great  ideas 
of  this  kind  have  been  behind  the  system  of  child- 
marriage  here,  what  they  call  the  astrological  jati  of 
the  bride  and  bridegroom.  And  in  passing  I  may 
remark  that  according  to  Manu  a  child  who  is  born 
of  lust  is  not  an  Aryan.  The  child  whose  very  con- 
ception and  whose  death  is  according  to  the  rules  of 
Vedas,  such  is  an  Aryan.  Yes,  and  less  of  these 
Aryan  children  are  being  produced  in  every  country, 
and  the  result  is  the  mass  of  evil  which  we  call  Kali 
Yuga  (Black  Age).  But  we  have  lost  these  ideals, 
we  cannot  carry  these  ideas  to  the  fullest  length  now. 
It  is  perfectly  true  that  we  have  made  almost  a  caric- 
ature of  som.e  of  them.  It  is  lamentably  true  that 
fathers  and  mothers  are  not  what  they  were  in  the 
old  times,  neither  is  society  so  educated  as  it  used  to 
be,  neither  has  society  that  love  for  individuals  that 
it  used  to  have.  But  however  faulty  the  working  out 
may  be,  the  principle  is  sound;  and  if  its  application 
has  become  defective,  if  one  method  has  failed,  take 
up  the  principle  and  work  it  out  better;  why  kill 
the  principle  ?  The  same  applies  to  the  food  question, 
the  work  and  details  are  bad,  very  bad  indeed,  but 
that  does  not  affect  the  principle.  The  principle  is 
eternal  and  must  be  kept.  Work  it  out  afresh,  and 
make  a  reform  application. 

This  great  idea  of  the  atman  is  the  one  in  India 
which  every  one  of  our  sects  has  got  to  believe ;  only, 
as  we  will  find,  the  dualists  preach  that  this  atman  by 
evil  works  becomes  sankocha,  that  is,  all  its  powers 
and  its  nature  become  contracted,  and  by  good  works 
its  nature  again  expands.     The  Advaitist,  on  the  other 


330  J  NANA   YOGA 

hand,  says  that  the  atman  never  expands  or  contracts, 
but  only  seems  to  do  so;  it  appears  to  have  become 
contracted.  That  is  the  only  difference;  but  all  have 
the  one  idea  that  the  dtman  has  all  power  already; 
that  nothing  will  come  to  it  from  outside,  that  nothing 
will  drop  into  it  from  the  skies.  Mark  you,  your 
Vedas  are  not  inspired,  but  expired;  they  come  not 
from  somewhere  outside,  but  are  eternal  laws  living 
in  every  soul.  The  Vedas  are  in  the  soul  of  the  ant, 
in  the  soul  of  the  god.  The  ant  has  only  to  evolve 
and  get  the  body  of  a  sage  or  a  Rishi,  and  the  Vedas 
will  come  out,  eternal  laws  expressing  themselves. 
This  is  the  one  great  idea  to  understand,  that  our 
power  is  already  ours,  our  salvation  is  already  within 
us.  Say  either  that  it  has  become  contracted,  or  say 
that  it  has  been  covered  with  the  evil  of  mdyd,  it  mat- 
ters little ;  the  idea  is  there ;  you  must  believe  in  that, 
believe  in  the  possibilities  of  everybody,  that  even  in 
the  lowest  man  there  is  the  same  possibility  as  in  the 
Buddha.     This  is  doctrine  of  the  dtman. 

But  now  comes  a  tremendous  fight.  Here  are  the 
Buddhists,  who  equally  analyze  the  body  into  a  material 
stream,  and  as  equally  analyze  the  mind  into  another. 
About  this  dtman,  however,  they  state  that  it  is  unneces- 
sary ;  that  we  need  not  assume  the  dtman  at  all.  What 
use  of  a  substance  and  qualities  inhering  in  the  sub- 
stance? Why  not  say  gunas,  qualities,  and  qualities 
alone?  It  is  illogical  to  assume  two  causes  where  one 
will  explain  the  whole  thing.  And  the  fight  went  on, 
and  all  the  theories  which  held  the  doctrine  of  sub- 
stance were  thrown  to  the  ground  by  the  Buddhists. 
There  was  a  break  up  all  along  the  line  of  those  who 


VEDANTA  331 

held  to  the  doctrine  of  substance  and  qualities,  that 
you  have  a  soul,  and  I  have  a  soul,  and  every  one  has 
a  soul  separate  from  the  mind  and  body — and  each 
one  individual.  So  far  we  have  seen  that  the  idea 
of  dualism  is  all  right,  for  there  is  the  body,  there  is 
then  the  fine  mind,  there  is  this  dtman,  and  in  and 
through  all  the  dtmans  is  that  Paramatinan,  God.  The 
difficulty  is  here,  that  this  dtman  and  Paramdtman  are 
both  so-called  substance,  in  which  the  mind  and  body 
inhere  like  so  many  qualities.  Nobody  has  ever  seen 
substance,  none  can  ever  conceive  it;  what  is  the  use 
of  thinking  of  this  substance  ?  Why  not  say  that  what- 
ever exists  is  this  succession  of  mental  currents  and 
nothing  more.  They  do  not  inhere  in  each  other,  they 
do  not  form  a  unit,  one  is  chasing  the  other,  like  waves 
in  the  ocean,  never  complete,  never  forming  one  unit 
whole.  Man  is  a  succession  of  waves,  and  when  one 
goes  away  it  generates  another,  and  so  on,  and  the 
cessation  of  these  wave  forms  is  what  is  called  Nirvana. 
You  see  that  dualism  is  mute  before  this,  it  is  impos- 
sible that  it  can  bring  up  any  argument,  and  the 
dualistic  God  also  cannot  be  retained  here.  The  idea 
of  a  God  that  is  omnipresent,  and  yet  is  a  person  who 
creates  without  hands,  and  moves  without  feet,  and 
who  has  created  the  universe  as  a  kumbhakara  (potter) 
creates  a  ghata  (pot),  the  Buddhist  declares  is  childish, 
and  that  if  this  be  God  he  is  going  to  deny  and  not 
worship  Him.  This  universe  is  full  of  misery;  if  it 
be  the  work  of  a  God,  we  are  going  to  fight  Him.  And 
secondly,  this  God  is  illogical  and  impossible,  as  all 
of  you  are  aware.  We  need  not  go  into  the  defects 
of  the  design  theory,  nor  into  all  the  arguments  against 


332  J  NANA   YOGA 

the  Idea  of  a  personal  God.  Truth  and  nothing  but 
truth  can  prevail.  The  Advaitist  watchword  is: 
Satayameva  jayati — "Truth  alone  triumphs,  and  not 
untruth."  Through  truth  alone  the  way  to  Devayanam 
lies.  Everybody  marches  forward  under  that  banner ; 
but  it  is  not  meant  to  crush  the  weak  man's  position. 

You  come  with  your  dualistic  idea  of  God  to  pick 
a  quarrel  with  a  poor  man  who  is  worshipping  an 
image,  and  you  think  you  are  wonderfully  rational. 
You  can  confound  him,  but  if  he  turns  round  and 
shatters  your  own  personal  God,  and  calls  that  an 
imaginary  ideal,  where  are  you?  You  fall  back  on 
faith,  or  raise  up  the  cry  of  atheism,  the  old  cry  of 
weak  man — whosoever  defeats  him  is  an  atheist.  If 
you  are  to  be  rational,  be  rational  all  along  the  line; 
and  if  not,  allow  others  the  same  privilege  which  you 
ask  for  yourselves.  How  can  you  prove  the  existence 
of  this  God?  On  the  other  hand,  it  can  be  almost 
disproved.  There  is  not  a  shadow  of  proof  as  to  His 
existence,  and  there  are  very  strong  arguments  to 
the  contrary.  How  will  you  prove  His  existence, 
with  your  God,  and  his  gunas,  and  an  infinite  number 
of  souls  which  are  substance  and  each  soul  an  indi- 
vidual? In  what  are  you  an  individual?  You  are 
not  as  a  body,  for  you  know  to-day  better  even  than 
the  Buddhists  of  old  knew  that  what  may  have  been 
matter  in  the  sun  has  just  now  become  matter  in  you, 
and  shortly  will  go  out  and  become  matter  in  the 
plants,  where  is  your  individuality,  you  Mr.  So  and  So  ? 
You  have  one  thought  to-night  and  another  to-morrow. 
You  do  not  think  the  same  way  that  you  thought 
when  a  child,  and  old  men  do  not  think  as  they  did 


VEDANTA  333 

when  they  were  young.  Where  is  your  individuality  ? 
Do  not  say  it  is  in  consciousness,  this  ahankara, 
because  this  only  covers  a  small  part  of  your  existence. 
While  I  am  talking  to  you  all  my  organs  are  working 
and  I  am  not  conscious  of  it.  If  consciousness  is  the 
proof  of  existence  they  do  not  exist  then,  because  I 
am  not  conscious  of  them.  Where  are  you  then  with 
your  personal  God  theories?  How  can  you  prove 
such  a  God? 

Again,  the  Buddhists  will  stand  up  and  declare, 
not  only  is  it  illogical,  but  immoral,  for  it  teaches  man 
to  be  a  coward  and  to  seek  assistance  outside,  and 
nobody  can  give  him  such  help.  Here  is  the  universe, 
man  made  it,  why,  then,  depend  on  an  imaginary  being 
outside,  whom  nobody  ever  saw  or  felt,  or  got  help 
from  ?  Why  then  do  you  make  cowards  of  yourselves, 
and  teach  your  children  that  the  highest  state  of  man  is 
to  be  a  dog,  to  go  crawling  before  this  imaginary 
being,  saying  that  you  are  weak  and  impure,  and  that 
you  are  everything  vile  in  this  universe?  On  the 
other  hand,  the  Buddhists  may  urge  not  only  that  you 
are  telling  a  lie,  but  that  you  are  bringing  a  tremendous 
amount  of  evil  upon  your  children,  for,  mark  you, 
this  world  is  one  of  hypnotization.  Whatever  you 
tell  yourself  that  you  believe.  Almost  the  first  words 
the  great  Buddha  uttered  were :  "What  you  think, 
that  you  are;  what  you  will  think,  that  you  will  be." 
If  this  be  true — and  who  can  deny  it — do  not  teach 
yourselves  that  you  are  nothing,  and  that  you  cannot 
do  anything  unless  you  are  helped  by  somebody  who 
does  not  live  here,  who  sits  above  the  damp  clouds. 
The  result  will  be  that  you  will  be  more  and  more 


334  J  NANA   YOGA 

weakened  every  day;  and  by  constantly  repeating: 
"We  are  very  impure;  Lord,  make  us  pure,"  you  will 
hypnotize  yourselves  into  all  sorts  of  vices. 

The  Buddhists  say  that  ninety  per  cent,  of  the  vices 
that  are  found  in  every  society  arise  from  this  idea 
of  inferiority  and  become  as  a  dog  before  God;  this 
awful  idea  of  the  human  being  that  the  end  and  aim 
of  this  expression  of  life,  this  wonderful  expression 
of  life,  is  to  become  like  a  worm  of  the  dust.  Says 
the  Buddhist  to  the  Vaishnavist,  if  your  ideal,  your 
aim  and  goal  is  to  go  to  a  place  called  Vaikunta,  where 
God  lives,  and  there  stand  before  Him  with  folded 
hands  all  through  eternity,  it  is  better  to  commit  suicide. 
The  Buddhist  may  even  urge  that  it  is  better  to  believe 
in  annihilation  to  escape  this. 

I  am  putting  these  ideas  before  you  as  a  Buddhist 
just  for  the  time  being,  because  nowadays  all  these 
Advaitic  ideas  are  said  to  make  you  immoral,  and  I 
am  trying  to  tell  you  how  the  other  side  looks.  Let 
us  face  both  sides  boldly  and  bravely.  We  have  seen 
first  of  all  that  the  Buddhists  claim  that  the  idea  of 
personal  God  creating  the  world  cannot  be  proved; 
is  there  any  child  that  can  believe  this  to-day? 
Because  a  kumhhakara  creates  a  ghata,  therefore  a 
God  created  the  world.  If  this  be  so,  then  your  kumh- 
hakara is  a  god  also,  and  if  any  one  tells  you  that  he 
acts  w^ithout  head  and  hands  you  may  take  him  to  a 
lunatic  asylum.  Has  your  God,  the  Creator  of  the 
world,  your  personal  God,  to  whom  you  cry  all  your 
life,  ever  helped  you,  and  what  help  have  you  received 
is  the  next  challenge  from  modern  science? 

They  will  prove  that  any  help  you  have  had  could 


VEDANTA  335 

have  been  obtained  by  your  own  exertion,  and  better 
still,  you  need  not  have  spent  your  energy  in  that 
crying,  you  could  have  done  it  all  without  weeping 
or  crying  at  all.  We  have  seen  that  along  with  this 
idea  of  a  personal  God  comes  tyranny  and  priestcraft. 
Tyranny  and  priestcraft  have  prevailed  wherever  this 
idea  existed,  and  until  the  lie  is  knocked  on  the  head, 
say  the  Buddhists,  tyranny  will  not  cease.  So  long 
as  man  thinks  he  has  to  cower  before  a  supernatural 
being,  so  long  there  will  be  priests  to  claim  rights  and 
privileges  and  to  make  men  cower  before  them,  while 
these  poor  men  will  continue  to  ask  some  priest  to 
stand  as  interceder  for  them.  You  may  knock  the 
Brahmin  on  the  head,  but  mark  me  that  those  who 
do  so  will  stand  in  his  place,  and  will  be  worse ;  because 
these  ancient  Brahmins  have  a  certain  amount  of  gen- 
erosity in  them,  and  upstarts  are  always  the  worst 
tyrants.  If  a  beggar  gets  wealth,  he  thinks  the  whole 
world  is  a  bit  of  straw.  So  priests  there  will  be,  as 
long  as  this  personal  God  idea  continues,  and  it  will 
be  impossible  to  think  of  any  great  morality  in  society. 
Priestcraft  and  tyranny  will  go  hand  in  hand  as  long 
as  the  need  of  mediation  is  felt  by  mankind.  It  is 
the  idea  of  a  thunderer,  who  kills  every  one  who  does 
not  obey  him.  Next  the  Buddhist  says,  you  have  been 
so  rational  up  to  this  point  that  you  say  that  every- 
thing is  the  result  of  the  law  of  Karma.  You  believe 
in  an  infinity  of  souls  and  the  belief  in  the  law  of 
Karma  is  perfectly  logical  no  doubt.  There  cannot 
be  a  cause  without  an  eflFect,  the  present  must  have 
had  its  cause  in  the  past,  and  will  have  its  effect  in 
the  future.     The  Hindu  says  the  karma  is  jada  (non- 


33^  J  NANA   YOGA 

intelligent)  and  not  chaitanya  (intelligent),  therefore 
some  chaitanya  is  necessary  to  bring  this  cause  to 
fruition.  Is  it  that  chaitanya  is  necessary  to  bring 
the  plant  to  fruition?  If  I  add  water  and  plant  the 
seed,  no  chaitanya  is  necessary.  You  may  say  there 
was  some  original  chaitanya,  but  the  souls  themselves 
were  the  chaitanya,  none  else  is  necessary.  If  human 
souls  have  it  too,  what  necessity  is  there  for  a  God, 
as  say  the  Jains,  who,  unlike  the  Buddhists,  believe 
in  souls  and  do  not  believe  in  God.  Where  are  you 
logical,  where  are  you  moral?  And  when  you  try  to 
maintain  that  Advaita  will  make  for  immorality,  just 
read  a  little  of  what  has  been  done  in  India  by  dualistic 
sects,  and  what  has  been  brought  before  law  courts. 
If  there  have  been  ten  thousand  Advaitist  black- 
guards, there  will  be  twenty  thousand  Dvaitist  black- 
guards. Generally  speaking,  there  will  be  more 
Dvaitist  blackguards,  because  it  takes  a  better  ♦lype  of 
mind  to  understand  Advaita,  and  they  can  scarcely 
be  frightened  into  anything.  What  stands  for  you 
then?  There  is  no  escape  from  the  arguments  of  the 
Buddhist.  You  may  quote  the  Vedas,  but  he  does 
not  believe  in  them.  He  will  say:  "My  Tripetakas 
say  otherwise,  and  they  are  without  beginning  or  end, 
not  even  written  by  Buddha,  for  Buddha  says  he  is 
only  reciting  them,  they  are  eternal."  And  he  adds 
that  yours  are  wrong  and  his  are  the  true  Vedas,  yours 
are  manufactured  by  the  Brahmin  priests,  therefore 
out  with  them.     How  do  you  escape  ? 

Here  is  the  Avay  out.  Take  up  the  first  objection, 
the  metaphysical  one,  that  substance  and  qualities  are 
different.     Says  the  Advaitist  they  are  not.     There  is 


VEDANTA  337 

no  difference  between  substance  and  qualities.  You 
know  the  old  illustration,  how  the  rope  is  taken  for 
the  snake,  and  when  you  see  the  snake  you  do  not 
sec  the  rope  at  all,  the  rope  has  vanished.  Dividing 
the  thing  into  substance  and  quality  is  a  metaphysical 
something  in  the  brains  of  philosophers,  never  can  it 
Jiave  an  objective  reality.  You  see  substance  if  you 
are  an  ordinary  man,  and  qualities  if  you  are  a  great 
yogi,  but  you  never  see  both  at  the  same  time.  So, 
Buddhists,  your  quarrel  about  substance  and  qualities 
has  been  but  a  quibble  which  does  not  exist  in  fact. 
But,  if  substance  is  qualified,  there  can  only  be  one. 
If  you  take  qualities  from  the  soul,  and  show  that  these 
qualities  are  in  the  mind,  really  superimposed  on  the 
soul,  then  there  can  never  be  two  souls,  for  it  is  quali- 
fication that  makes  the  difference  between  one  soul 
and  another.  How  do  you  know  that  one  soul  is  dif- 
ferent from  another  ?  Owing  to  certain  differentiating 
marks,  certain  qualities.  And  where  qualities  do  not 
exist,  how  can  there  be  differentiations?  Therefore 
there  are  not  two  souls,  there  is  but  One,  and  your 
Paramdtman  is  unnecessary,  it  is  this  very  soul.  That 
one  is  called  Paramdtman,  that  very  one  is  also  called 
jivdtman,  and  so  on,  and  you  dualists,  such  as  Sdnkhya 
and  others,  who  say  that  the  soul  is  omnipresent,  vibhu,, 
tell  me,  how  can  there  be  two  Infinites?  There  can 
be  only  one.  What  else  ?  This  one  is  the  one  Infinite 
Atman,  everything  else  is  Its  manifestation.  There 
the  Buddhist  stops,  but  there  it  does  not  end. 

The  Advaitist  position  is  not  merely  a  weak  one  of 
criticism.  The  Advaitist  criticises  others  when  they 
come   too   near   him,   just   throws   them   away,   that 


338  J  NANA   YOGA 

is  all,  but  he  propounds  his  own  position.  He  is  the 
only  one  that  criticises,  and  does  not  stop  with  criticism 
and  showing  books.  You  say  the  universe  is  a  thing 
of  continuous  motion.  In  vyashti  everything  is  mov- 
ing, you  are  moving,  the  table  is  moving,  motion  every- 
where, samsdra:  continuous  motion,  this  is  jagat  (the 
universe) .  Therefore  there  cannot  be  individuality  in 
this  jagat,  because  individuality  means  that  which  does 
not  change ;  there  cannot  be  any  changeful  individual- 
ity, it  is  a  contradiction  in  terms.  There  is  no  such 
thing  as  individuality  in  this  little  world  of  ours,  the 
jagat.  Thought  and  feeling,  mind  and  body,  plants  and 
animals  and  so  on,  are  in  a  continuous  state  of  flux. 
But  suppose  you  take  the  universe  as  a  unit  whole ;  can 
it  change  or  move  ?  Certainly  not.  Motion  is  possible 
only  in  comparison  with  something  which  is  a  little 
less  in  motion,  or  entirely  motionless.  The  universe 
as  a  whole,  therefore,  is  motionless,  unchangeable. 
You  are,  therefore,  an  individual  then  and  then  alone, 
when  you  are  the  whole  of  it,  when  you  realize :  'T  am 
the  universe."  That  is  why  the  Vedantist  says  that  so 
long  as  there  are  two,  fear  does  not  cease.  It  is  only 
when  one  does  not  see  another^  does  not  feel  another 
that  fear  ceases ;  then  alone  death  vanishes,  then  alone 
samsdra  disappears.  Advaita  teaches  us  therefore  that 
man  is  individual  in  being  universal,  and  not  in  being 
particular.  You  are  immortal  only  when  you  are  the 
whole.  You  are  fearless  and  deathless  when  you  are 
the  universe,  and  then  that  which  you  call  the  iiniverse 
is  the  same  as  that  which  you  call  God.  It  is  the  same 
undivided  existence  which  is  taken  to  be  many  by 
people  having  the  same  state  of  mind  as  we  have. 


VEDANTA  339 

looking  upon  this  universe  as  we  see  it,  suns,  and 
moons,  and  so  on.  People  who  have  made  a  little 
better  karma  and  have  another  state  of  mind,  when 
they  die  look  upon  it  as  svarga  (Heaven),  and  see 
Indras  and  so  forth.  People  still  higher  will  see  the 
very  same  thing  as  Brahma  Loka,  and  the  perfect 
ones  will  neither  see  the  earth  nor  the  heavens,  nor 
any  loka  at  all.  This  universe  will  have  vanished, 
and  Brahman  will  be  in  its  stead. 

Can  we  know  this  Brahman?  I  have  told  you  of 
the  painting  of  the  infinite  in  the  Samhita.  Here  we 
shall  find  another  side  taken,  the  infinite  internal.  That 
was  the  infinite  of  the  muscles.  Here  we  shall  have 
the  infinite  of  thought.  There  the  attempt  was  made 
to  paint  the  infinite  in  positive  language  here  that  lan- 
guage failed,  and  the  attempt  has  been  made  to  paint 
it  in  negative  language.  Here  is  this  universe,  and 
even  admitting  that  it  is  Brahman,  can  we  know  it? 
No !  No !  You  must  understand  this  one  thing  very 
clearly.  Again  and  again  this  doubt  will  come  to 
you,  if  this  be  Brahman,  how  can  we  know  it?  "By 
what,  O  Maitreyi,  can  the  knower  be  known;  how 
can  the  knower  be  known  ?"  The  eyes  see  everything ; 
can  they  see  themselves?  They  cannot,  because  the 
very  fact  of  knowledge  is  a  degradation.  Children 
of  Aryas  you  must  remember  this,  for  herein  lies  a 
great  error.  All  the  Western  temptations  that  come 
to  you,  have  their  metaphysical  basis  in  that  one  claim 
— ^that  there  is  nothing  higher  than  sense  knowledge. 
In  the  East,  we  say  in  our  Veda's  that  this  knowledge 
is  lower  than  the  thing  itself,  because  it  is  always  a 
limitation.     When  you  want  to  know  a  thing,  it  imme- 


340  J  NANA   YOGA 

diately  becomes  limited  by  your  mind.  They  cite  that 
instance  of  the  oyster  making  pearls  to  show  how 
knowledge  is  limitation,  gathering  a  thing,  bringing  it 
into  consciousness,  and  not  knowing  it  as  a  whole. 
This  is  true  about  all  knowledge,  and  can  it  be  less  so 
about  the  infinite?  Can  you  thus  limit  Him  who  is 
the  Substance  of  all  knowledge.  Him  who  is  the  Sdkshi, 
the  Witness,  without  whom  you  cannot  have  any  knowl- 
edge. Him  who  has  no  qualities,  who  is  the  Witness 
of  the  whole  tmiverse,  the  Witness  in  our  souls  ?  How 
can  you  know  Him  ?  By  what  means  can  you  encom- 
pass Him?  Everything,  the  whole  universe,  is  a  false 
attempt  to  do  so.  As  it  were  this  infinite  Atman  is 
trying  to  see  his  own  face,  and  all  from  the  lowest 
animal  to  the  highest  of  gods,  are  like  so  many  mir- 
rors to  reflect  himself  in,  and  he  is  taking  up  still 
others,  finding  them  insufficient,  and  so  on,  until  in 
the  human  body  he  comes  to  know  that  it  is  finite  of 
the  finite,  that  all  is  finite;  that  there  cannot  be  any 
expression  of  the  infinite  in  the  finite.  Then  comes 
the  retrograde  march,  and  this  is  what  is  called  renun- 
ciation, vairdgyam.  Back  from  the  senses,  back:  do 
not  go  to  the  senses,  is  the  watchword  of  vairdgyam. 
This  is  the  watchword  of  all  morality,  this  is  the  watch- 
word of  all  well-being,  for  you  must  remember  that 
the  imiverse  begins  in  tapasya,  in  renunciation;  and 
as  you  go  back  and  back  all  the  forms  are  being  mani- 
fested before  you,  and  they  are  left  aside  one  after  the 
other  until  you  remain  what  you  really  are.  This  is 
moksha,  or  liberation. 

This  idea  we  have  to  understand — "How  to  know 
the  knower;"  the  knower  cannot  be  known,  because 


VEDANTA  341 

if  it  be  known,  it  will  not  be  the  knower.  If  you 
look  at  your  eyes  in  a  mirror,  the  reflection  is  no 
more  your  eyes,  but  something  else,  a  reflection  only. 
Then  if  this  Soul,  this  universal,  infinite  being  which 
you  are,  is  only  a  witness,  what  good  is  it?  It  can- 
not live,  and  move  about,  and  enjoy  the  world,  as  we 
do.  People  cannot  understand  how  the  witness  can 
enjoy.  Oh,  you  Hindus  have  become  quiescent,  and 
good  for  nothing,  through  this  doctrine  that  you  are 
witnesses.  First  of  all  it  is  only  the  witness  that  can 
enjoy.  The  more  and  more  you  are  the  witness  of 
anything  in  life  the  more  you  enjoy  it.  And  this  is 
anandam  (bliss),  and  therefore  infinite  bliss  can  only 
be  yours  when  you  have  become  the  witness  of  this 
universe,  then  alone  you  are  a  mukta  (free  soul.)  It 
is  the  witness  alone  that  can  work  without  any  desire, 
without  any  idea  of  going  to  heaven,  without  any 
fear  of  blame,  without  any  desire  for  praise.  The 
witness  alone  enjoys,  and  none  else. 

Coming  to  the  moral  aspect,  there  is  one  thing 
between  the  metaphysical  and  the  moral  aspect  of 
Advaitism,  it  is  the  theory  of  Maya.  Every  one  of 
these  points  in  the  Advaita  system  requires  years  to 
understand  and  months  to  tell.  Therefore  you  will 
excuse  me  if  I  only  just  touch  upon  them  en  passant. 
This  theory  of  mdyd  has  been  the  most  difficult  thing 
to  understand  in  all  ages.  Let  me  tell  you  in  a  few 
words  that  it  is  more  than  a  theory,  it  is  the  combina- 
tion of  the  three  ideas  Desa-kdla-nimitfa — Space, 
time,  and  causation,  which  have  been  further  reduced 
to  nama-rupa — name  and  form.  Suppose  there  is  a 
wave  in  the  ocean.     The  wave  is  distinct  from  the 


342  JNANA   YOGA 

ocean  only  in  its  form  and  name,  and  this  form  and 
this  name  cannot  have  any  separate  existence  from 
the  wave,  they  exist  only  with  the  wave.  The  wave 
may  subside,  but  the  same  amount  of  water  remains, 
even  if  the  name  and  form  that  were  on  the  wave 
vanish  forever.  So  this  mdya  is  what  makes  the 
difference  between  me  and  you,  between  all  animals 
and  man,  between  men  and  gods.  In  fact  it  is  this 
may  a  that  causes  the  Atman  to  be  caught,  as  it  were, 
in  so  many  millions  of  beings,  and  these  are  distin- 
guishable only  through  name  and  form.  If  you  let 
name  and  form  go,  all  this  variety  vanishes  forever, 
and  you  are  what  you  really  are.  This  is  mdya.  It 
is  again  no  theory,  but  a  statement  of  facts. 

When  the  realist  states  that  this  world  exists,  what 
he  means  is  that  this  table  has  an  independent  exist- 
ence of  its  own,  that  it  does  not  depend  on  the  exist- 
ence of  anything  else  in  the  universe,  and  if  the  rest 
of  the  universe  were  destroyed  and  annihilated  this 
table  would  remain  just  as  it  is  now.  A  little  knowl- 
edge shows  3'^ou  this  cannot  be.  Everything  here  in 
the  sense-world  is  dependent  and  inter-dependent, 
relative  and  correlative,  the  existence  of  one  depend- 
ing on  the  other.  There  are  three  steps,  therefore,  in 
our  knowledge  of  things;  the  first  is  that  each  thing 
is  individual  and  separate  from  every  other;  the  next 
step  is  to  find  that  there  is  relation  and  correlation 
between  all  things;  and  the  third  is  that  there  is  only 
one  thing  which  we  see  as  many.  The  first  idea  of 
God  with  the  ignorant  is  that  God  is  somewhere 
outside  of  the  universe;  that  is  to  say,  the  con- 
ception of  God  is  extremely  human,  He  does  just 


VEDA  NT  A  343 

what  a  man  does  only  on  a  higher  scale.  And 
we  have  seen  how  that  idea  of  God  is  proved  in 
a  few  words  to  be  unreasonable  and  insufficient.  And 
next  is  the  idea  of  a  power  that  we  see  manifested 
everywhere.  This  is  the  real  personal  God  we  get  in 
the  Chandi  (a  book  of  praise  of  the  Divine  Mother), 
but,  mark  me,  not  the  God  whom  you  make  the  reser- 
voir of  all  good  qualities  only.  You  cannot  have  two 
Gods,  God  and  Satan,  you  must  have  only  one,  and 
dare  to  call  Him  good  and  bad,  but  have  only  one, 
and  take  the  logical  consequences. 

"Thus  we  salute  Thee,  O  Divine  Mother,  who 
lives  in  every  being  as  peace,  who  lives  in  all  beings 
as  purity."  At  the  same  time  we  must  take  the  whole 
consequence  of  it.  "All  this  bliss,  O  Gargi,  wherever 
there  is  bliss,  there  is  a  portion  of  the  Divine."  You 
may  use  it  how  you  like.  You  may  try  to  give  a  poor 
man  a  hundred  rupees,  another  man  may  forge  your 
name,  but  the  sunlight  will  be  the  same  for  both. 
This  is  the  second  stage,  and  the  third  is  that  God 
is  neither  outside  nature,  nor  inside  nature,  but  God 
and  nature  and  soul  and  universe  are  all  convertible 
terms.  You  never  see  two  things,  it  is  your  meta- 
physical words  that  have  deluded  you.  You  assume 
that  you  are  a  body  and  have  a  soul,  and  that  you  are 
both  together.  How  can  that  be?  Try  in  your  own 
mind.  If  there  is  a  yogi  among  you,  he  knows  him- 
self as  chaitanya,  for  him  the  body  has  vanished.  An 
ordinary  man  thinks  of  himself  as  a  body;  the  idea 
of  spirit  has  vanished;  but  because  the  metaphysical 
ideas  exist  that  man  has  a  body  and  a  soul  and  all 
these  things,  you  think  they  are  all  simultaneously 


344  j^NANA   YOGA 

there.  One  thing  at  a  time.  Do  not  talk  of  God 
when  you  see  matter,  you  see  the  effect  and  the  effect 
alone,  and  the  cause  you  cannot  see,  and  the  moment 
you  can  see  the  cause  the  effect  will  have  vanished. 
Where  then  is  this  world,  and  who  has  taken  it  off  ? 

"One  that  is  formless  and  limitless,  beyond  all  com- 
pare, beyond  all  qualities,  O  sage,  O  learned  man, 
such  a  Brahman  will  shine  in  your  heart  in  samadhi" 
(the  superconscious  state.) 

"Where  all  the  changes  of  nature  cease  forever, 
thought  beyond  all  thoughts,  whom  the  Vedas  declare, 
who  is  the  essence  in  what  we  call  our  existence,  such 
a  Brahman  will  manifest  himself  in  you  in  samadhi." 

"Beyond  all  birth  and  death,  the  Infinite  One, 
incomparable,  like  the  whole  universe  deluged  in  water 
in  mahdpralaya  ("the  great  dissolution'') — water 
above,  water  beneath,  water  on  all  sides,  and  on  the 
face  of  that  water  not  a  wave,  not  a  ripple,  silent  and 
calm,  all  visions  have  died  out,  all  fights  and  quarrels 
and  wars  of  fools  and  saints  have  ceased  forever, 
such  a  Brahman  will  shine  in  your  hearts  in  samadhi/' 
That  also  comes,  and  when  that  comes  the  world  has 
vanished. 

We  have  seen  then,  that  this  Brahman,  this  Reality 
is  unknown  and  unknowable,  not  in  the  sense  of  the 
agnostic,  but  because  to  know  Him  would  be  blas- 
phemy, because  you  are  He  already.  We  have  also 
seen  that  this  Brahman  is  not  this  table  and  yet  is 
this  table.  Take  off  the  name  and  form,  and  what- 
ever is  reality  is  He.  He  is  the  reality  in  everything. 
"Thou  art  the  woman,  thou  art  the  man,  thou  the 
young  man  walking  in  the  pride  of  youth,  thou  the  old 


VEDANTA  345 

man  tottering  on  his  stick,  thou  art  all  in  all,  in  every- 
thing, and  I  am  Thou,  I  am  Thou." 

That  is  the  theme  of  Advaitism.  A  few  words 
more.  Herein  we  find  the  explanation  of  the  essence 
of  things.  We  have  seen  how  here  alone  we  can  take 
a  firm  stand  against  all  the  onrush  of  logic  and  scien- 
tific knowledge.  Here  at  last  reason  has  a  firm 
foundation.  At  the  same  time  the  Indian  Vedantist 
does  not  curse  the  preceding  steps.  He  looks  back 
and  he  blesses  them,  for  he  knows  that  they  were  true, 
only  wrongly  perceived  and  wrongly  stated.  They 
were  seen  through  the  glass  of  mdya,  distorted  it  may 
be,  yet  truth  and  nothing  but  truth.  The  same  God 
whom  the  ignorant  man  saw  outside  nature,  the  same 
whom  the  little-knowing  man  saw  as  inter-penetrating 
the  universe,  and  the  same  whom  the  sage  realizes  as 
his  own  self,  as  the  whole  universe  itself,  all  are  one 
and  the  same  being,  the  same  entity  seen  from  differ- 
ent points  of  view,  seen  through  different  glasses  of 
maya,  perceived  by  different  minds.  All  the  differ- 
ence is  caused  by  that.  Not  only  so,  but  one  view  must 
lead  to  the  other.  What  is  the  difference  between 
science  and  common  knowledge?  Go  out  into  one  of 
these  streets  and  if  something  is  happening,  ask  one 
of  gonwars  (boors)  what  it  is.  It  is  ten  to  one  that  he 
will  tell  you  that  a  ghost  is  causing  the  phenomenon. 
He  is  always  going  after  ghosts  and  spirits  outside, 
because  it  is  the  nature  of  ignorance  to  seek  for  causes 
outside  of  effects.  If  a  stone  falls  it  has  been  thrown 
by  a  devil  or  a  ghost,  says  the  ignorant  man,  but  the 
scientific  man  says  it  is  the  law  of  nature,  the  law  of 
gravitation. 


346  J  NANA   YOGA 

What  is  the  fight  between  science  and  religion 
everywhere?  Religions  are  encumbered  with  a  mass 
of  explanations  which  are  outside,  one  angel  is  in 
charge  of  the  sun,  another  of  the  moon,  and  so  on  ad 
infinitum;  every  change  is  caused  by  a  spirit,  the  one 
point  of  agreement  being  that  they  are  all  outside  the 
thing  itself;  while  science  means  that  the  cause  of  a 
thing  is  to  be  sought  in  the  nature  of  the  thing  itself. 
As  step  by  step  science  is  progressing,  it  has  taken 
the  explanation  of  natural  phenomena  out  of  the  hands 
of  spirits  and  angels.  Because  Advaitism  has  done 
likewise,  it  is  the  most  scientific  religion.  This  uni- 
verse has  not  been  created  by  any  extra-cosmic  God, 
nor  is  it  the  work  of  any  outside  genius.  It  is  self- 
created,  self-manifesting,  self-dissolved,,  one  infinite 
existence,  the  Brahman.  ''Tat  tvam  asi  Svetaketo" 
— "O  Svetaketu,  That  thou  art."  Thus  you  see  that 
this,  and  this  alone,  can  be  the  scientific  religion,  and 
with  all  the  prattle  about  science  that  is  going  on 
daily  at  the  present  time  in  modem  half -educated 
India,  with  all  the  talk  about  rationalism  and  reason 
that  I  hear  every  day,  I  expect  that  whole  sects  will 
come  over  and  dare  to  be  Advaitists,  and  dare  to 
preach  it  to  the  world  in  the  words  of  Buddha,  "for 
the  good  of  many,  for  the  happiness  of  many."  If 
you  do  not,  I  take  you  for  cowards.  If  you  are  cow- 
ards, if  fear  is  your  excuse,  allow  the  same  liberty 
unto  others,  do  not  try  to  overthrow  the  poor  idol- 
worshipper,  do  not  call  him  a  devil,  do  not  go  about 
preaching  to  every  man  who  does  not  agree  entirely 
with  you ;  know  first  that  you  are  cowards  yourselves, 
and  if  society  frightens  you,  if  your  own  superstitions 


VEDANTA  347 

of  the  past  frighten  you  so  much,  how  much  more 
will  these  superstitions  frighten  and  bind  down  those 
who  are  ignorant?  That  is  the  Advaitist  position. 
Have  mercy  on  others.  Would  to  God  that  the  whole 
world  were  Advaitists  to-morrow,  not  only  in  theory, 
but  in  realization ;  but  if  that  cannot  be,  let  us  do  the 
next  best  thing.  Let  us  take  our  less  enlightened 
brothers  by  the  hand,  lead  them  gently  step  by  step 
just  as  they  can  go,  and  know  that  every  step  in  all 
religious  growth  in  India  has  been  progressive.  It  is 
not  from  bad  to  good,  but  from  good  to  better. 

Something  more  must  be  said  about  the  moral  rela- 
tion. Our  boys  blithely  talk  nowadays,  they  learn 
from  somebody  —  Lord  knows  from  whom  —  that 
Advaita  will  make  people  immoral,  because  if  we  are 
all  one  and  all  God,  we  need  not  be  moral  at  all.  In 
the  first  place,  that  is  the  argument  of  the  brute,  who 
can  only  be  kept  down  by  the  whip.  If  you  are  such  a 
brute,  commit  suicide  first,  rather  than  be  the  kind  of 
human  being  that  has  to  be  kept  down  by  the  whip. 
If  the  whip  goes  away,  you  will  be  a  demon!  You 
ought  all  to  be  killed  just  here,  if  such  is  the  case; 
there  is  no  help  for  you;  you  must  always  be  living 
under  this  whip  and  rod,  and  there  is  no  salvation,  no 
escape  for  you.  In  the  second  place,  Advaita  and 
Advaita  alone  explains  morality.  Every  religion 
preaches  that  the  essence  of  all  morality  is  to  do  good 
unto  others.  And  why?  Be  unselfish.  And  why? 
Some  god  has  said  it  ?  He  is  not  for  me.  Some  texts 
have  told  it?  Let  them  all  tell  it;  that  is  nothing  to 
me;  let  them  all  tell  it.  And  if  they  do,  what  is  it? 
Each  one  for  himself,  and  somebody  for  the  hinder- 


34^  J  NANA   YOGA 

most,  that  is  all  the  morality  in  the  world,  at  least 
with  many.  What  is  the  reason  why  I  should  be 
moral  ?  You  cannot  explain  it  except  when  you  come 
to  know.  "He  who  sees  every  one  in  himself,  and 
himself  in  every  one,  thus  seeing  the  same  God  living 
in  all  in  the  same  manner,  he  (the  sage)  no  more  kills 
the  self  by  the  self."  Know  through  Advaita  that 
whomever  you  hurt,  you  hurt  yourself;  they  are  all 
you.  Whether  you  know  it  or  not,  through  all  hands 
you  work,  through  all  feet  you  move,  you  are  the 
king  enjoying  in  the  palace,  you  are  the  beggar  lead- 
ing that  miserable  existence  in  the  street ;  you  are  the 
ignorant  as  well  as  the  learned,  you  are  the  man  who 
is  weak,  and  you  are  the  strong;  know  this  and  be 
sympathetic.  And  that  is  why  we  must  not  hurt 
others.  That  is  why  I  do  not  even  care  whether  I 
have  got  to  starve,  because  there  will  be  millions  of 
mouths  eating  at  the  same  time,  and  they  are  all  mine. 
Therefore  I  should  not  care  what  becomes  of  me  and 
mine,  for  the  whole  universe  is  mine,  I  am  enjoying 
all  the  bliss  at  the  same  time;  and  who  can  kill  me, 
or  the  universe  ?  Herein  Advaita  alone  explains  mor- 
ality. The  others  teach  it,  but  cannot  give  you  its 
reason.     So  much  for  explanation. 

What  is  the  gain  ?  Strength  is  the  gain.  Take  off 
that  veil  of  hypnotism  which  you  have  cast  upon  the 
world,  send  not  out  thoughts  and  words  of  weakness 
unto  humanity.  Know  that  all  sins  and  all  evil  can  be 
summed  up  in  that  one  word  weakness.  It  is  weak- 
ness that  is  the  motive  power  in  all  evil  doing;  it  is 
weakness  that  is  the  source  of  all  selfishness,  it  is  weak- 
ness that  makes  men  injure  each  other,  it  is  weakness 


VEDANTA  349 

that  makes  them  manifest  as  they  are  not  really.  Let 
them  all  know  what  they  are;  let  them  tell  day  and 
night  what  they  are.  Let  them  suck  it  with  their 
mothers'  milk,  this  idea  of  strength.  Let  them  ever 
repeat  "Soham,  Soham''  "I  am  He,  I  am  He."  And 
then  let  them  think  of  it,  and  lastly  let  them  deeply 
meditate  upon  it,  and  out  of  that  heart  will  proceed 
works  such  as  the  world  has  never  seen.  What  has 
to  be  done?  This  Advaitism  is  said  by  some  to  be 
impracticable;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  not  yet  manifesting 
itself  on  the  material  plane.  To  a  certain  extent  this 
is  true,  for,  remember  the  saying  of  the  Vedas — "Om, 
this  is  the  great  secret;  Om.  this  is  the  greatest  pos- 
session; he  who  knows  the  secret  of  this  Om,  what- 
ever he  desires  that  he  gets."  Therefore  first  know 
the  secret  of  this  ''Om,"  that  you  are  the  "Om'' ;  know 
the  secret  of  this  "Tat  tvam  asi,"  and  then,  and  then 
alone,  whatever  you  want  shall  come  to  you.  If  you 
want  to  be  great  materially,  believe  that  you  are  so. 
I  may  be  a  little  bubble,  and  you  may  be  a  wave 
mountain-high,  but  know  that  for  both  of  us  the 
infinite  ocean  is  the  background,  the  infinite  Brahman 
is  our  magazine  of  power  and  strength,  and  we  can 
draw  as  much  as  we  like,  both  of  us,  I  the  bubble  and 
you  the  mountain-high  wave.  Believe  therefore  in 
yourselves.  The  secret  of  Advaita  is — Believe  in 
yourselves  first,  and  then  believe  in  anything  else. 
In  the  history  of  the  world,  you  will  find  that  only 
those  nations  that  have  believed  in  themselves  have 
become  great  and  strong.  In  the  history  of  each 
nation,  you  will  always  find  that  only  those  individuals 
who  have  believed  in  themselves  have  become  great 


350  JNANA  YOGA 

and  strong.  Here,  in  India,  came  an  Englishman, 
who  was  only  a  clerk,  and  for  want  of  funds  and  other 
reasons  he  twice  tried  to  blow  out  his  brains,  and  when 
he  failed  he  believed  that  he  was  born  to  do  great 
things,  and  that  man  became  Lord  Clive,  the  founder 
of  the  Empire.  If  he  had  believed  the  padris  and 
gone  crawling  all  his  life — "Oh  Lord,  I  am  weak  and 
I  am  low" — where  would  he  have  been?  In  a  lunatic 
asylum.  They  have  made  weaklings  of  you  with 
these  evil  teachings.  I  have  seen  all  the  world  over 
the  bad  effects  of  these  weak  teachings  of  humility, 
destroying  the  human  race. 

This  is  on  the  practical  side.  Believe,  therefore,  in 
yourselves,  and  if  you  want  material  wealth  work  it 
out ;  it  will  come  to  you.  If  you  want  to  be  intellec- 
tual let  it  work  out  on  the  intellectual  plane  and  intel- 
lectual giants  you  shall  be.  And  if  you  want  to  attain 
to  freedom  let  it  work  out  on  the  spiritual  plane,  and 
gods  you  shall  be.  "Enter  into  Nirvana,  the  blissful." 
The  defect  is  here;  so  far  the  Advaita  has  only  been 
tried  on  the  spiritual  plane,  and  nowhere  else,  now 
the  time  has  come  when  you  must  make  it  practical. 
It  shall  no  more  be  a  secret,  it  shall  no  more  live  with 
monks  in  caves  and  forests,  and  in  the  Himalayas; 
it  must  come  down  to  the  daily,  everyday  life  of  the 
people;  it  shall  be  worked  out  in  the  palace  of  the 
king,  in  the  cave  of  the  recluse,  it  shall  be  worked  out 
in  the  cottage  of  the  poor,  by  the  beggar  in  the  street, 
everywhere,  anywhere  it  can  be  worked  out.  There- 
fore do  not  fear  if  you  are  a  woman  or  a  Sudra,  or 
anything,  for  this  religion  is  so  great,  says  Lord 
Krishna,  that  even  the  least  done  brings  a  great  amount 


VEDANTA  351 

of  good.  Therefore  children  of  the  Aryans,  do  not  sit 
idle,  awake  and  arise,  and  stop  not  until  the  goal  is 
reached.  The  time  has  come  when  this  Advaita  is  to 
be  worked  out  practically.  Let  us  bring  it  down  from 
heaven  unto  earth;  this  is  the  present  dispensation. 
Aye,  the  voices  of  our  forefathers  of  old  are  telling  us 
to  stop — stop  here  my  children.  Let  these  great  teach- 
ings come  down  lower  and  lower  until  they  have  per- 
meated the  world,  till  they  have  entered  into  every  pore 
of  society,  till  they  have  become  the  common  property 
of  everybody,  till  they  have  become  part  and  parcel  of 
our  lives,  till  they  have  entered  into  our  veins  and 
tingle  with  every  drop  of  blood  there. 

You  may  be  astonished  to  hear  it,  but  as  practical 
Vedantists  the  Americans  are  better  than  we  are.  I 
used  to  stand  on  the  sea-front  of  New  York,  and  look 
at  the  emigrants  coming  from  different  countries, 
crushed,  down-trodden,  hopeless,  with  a  little  bundle  of 
clothes  as  their  only  possession,  their  clothes  in  rags, 
unable  to  look  a  man  in  the  face ;  if  they  saw  a  police- 
man they  were  afraid  and  tried  to  get  to  the  other  side 
of  the  footpath.  And,  mark  you,  in  six  months  those 
very  men  were  walking  erect,  well  clothed,  looked 
everybody  in  the  face ;  and  what  makes  this  wonderful 
difference?  Suppose  a  man  comes  from  Armenia,  or 
from  any  other  place  where  he  was  crushed  down 
beyond  all  recognition,  where  everybody  told  him  he 
was  a  born  slave,  born  to  remain  in  a  low  state  all  his 
life,  and  where  at  the  least  move  on  his  part  he  was 
trodden  upon^  There  everything  cried  out  to  him, 
"Slave;  you  are  a  slave;  remain  such  Helpless  you 
were  born,  helpless  remain."     Even  the  very  air  mur- 


352  J  NAN  A  YOGA 

mured  round  him,  "There  is  no  hope  for  you,  hopeless 
and  a  slave  remain;"  while  stronger  men  crushed  the 
life  out  of  him.  And  when  that  same  man  landed  in 
New  York  he  went  about,  and  found  a  new  life;  he 
found  that  there  was  a  place  in  the  world  where  he 
was  a  man  among  men.  Perhaps  he  went  to  Wash- 
ington, shook  hands  with  the  President  of  the  United 
States,  and  perhaps  there  he  saw  men  coming  from 
distant  villages,  peasants,  and  ill  clad,  all  shaking 
hands  with  the  President.  Then  the  veil  of  mdya 
slipped  away  from  him.  He  who  had  been  hypnotized 
into  slavery  and  weakness,  is  once  more  awake,  and  he 
rises  up  and  finds  himself  a  man  in  the  world  of  men. 

In  this  country  of  ours,  the  very  birthplace  of 
Vedanta,  our  masses  have  been  hypnotized  for  ages 
into  that  very  state.  To  touch  them  is  pollution.  To 
sit  with  them  is  pollution.  Hopeless  they  were  born; 
hopeless  they  must  remain ;  and  the  result  is  that  they 
have  been  sinking,  sinking,  sinking,  and  have  come  to 
the  last  stage  to  which  a  human  being  can  come.  For 
what  other  country  is  there  in  the  world  where  man 
has  to  sleep  with  the  cattle?  And  for  this  blame 
nobody  else,  do  not  commit  the  mistake  of  the  ignorant. 
The  effect  is  here  and  the  cause  is  here  too.  We  are 
to  blame.  Stand  up,  be  bold,  and  take  the  blame  on 
your  shoulders.  Do  not  go  about  throwing  mud  at 
others;  for  all  the  pangs  you  suffer  you  are  the  sole 
and  only  cause. 

Young  men  of  Lahore,  understand  this,  that  this 
great  sin,  hereditary  and  national,  is  on  your  shoul- 
ders. There  is  no  hope  for  us.  You  may  make  thou- 
sands of  societies,  twenty  thousand  political  assem- 


VEDANTA  353 

blages,  fifty  thousand  institutions.  These  will  be  of 
no  use  until  there  is  that  sympathy,  that  love,  that 
heart,  which  thinks  of  all,  until  Buddha's  heart  comes 
once  more  into  India,  until  the  words  of  Lord  Krishna 
are  brought  to  their  practical  use  there  is  no  hope  for 
us.  You  go  on  imitating  the  Europeans  and  their 
societies  and  their  assemblages,  but  let  me  tell  you  a 
story,  a  fact  that  I  saw  with  my  own  eyes.  A  company 
of  Burmans  was  taken  over  to  London  by  some  per- 
sons from  India,  who  turned  out  to  be  Eurasians. 
They  exhibited  these  people  in  London,  took  all  the 
money,  and  then  took  these  Burmans  over  to  the  Con- 
tinent, and  left  them  there  for  good  or  ill.  These 
poor  people  did  not  know  one  word  of  any  European 
language,  but  the  English  Consul  in  Austria  sent  them 
over  to  London.  They  were  helpless  in  London,  not 
knowing  any  one.  But  an  English  lady  heard  of  them, 
took  these  foreigners  from  Burmah  into  her  own 
house,  gave  them  her  own  clothes,  her  bed,  and  every- 
thing, and  then  sent  the  news  to  the  newspapers.  And, 
mark  you,  the  next  day  the  whole  nation  was,  as  it 
were,  aroused.  Money  poured  in  and  these  people 
were  helped  out,  and  sent  back  to  Burmah.  On  this 
sort  of  sympathy  are  based  all  English  political  and 
other  institutions,  it  is  the  rock  foundation  of  love, 
for  themselves  at  least.  They  may  not  love  the 
world ;  they  may  be  enemies  all  round,  but  in  that  coun- 
try, it  goes  without  saying,  there  is  this  great  love  for 
their  own  people,  for  truth  and  justice  and  charity  to 
the  stranger  at  the  door.  I  would  be  the  most  un- 
grateful man,  if  I  did  not  continually  tell  you  how 
wonderfully  and  how  hospitably  I  was  received  in 


554  JNANA   YOGA 

every  country  in  the  West.     Where  is  the  heart  here 
to  build  upon? 

No  sooner  do  we  start  a  little  joint-stock  company 
then  we  cheat  each  other,  and  the  whole  thing  comes 
down  with  a  crash.  You  talk  of  imitating  the  Eng- 
lish, and  building  as  big  a  nation  as  they  have.  But 
where  are  the  foundations?  Ours  are  only  sand,  and 
therefore  the  building  comes  down  with  a  crash  in  no 
time.  Young  men  of  Lahore,  raise  once  more  that 
wonderful  banner  of  Advaita,  for  on  no  other  ground 
can  you  have  that  all-embracing  love,  until  you  see  that 
the  same  Lord  is  present  in  the  same  manner  every- 
where; unfurl  that  banner  of  love.  "Arise,  awake 
and  stop  not  till  the  goal  is  reached."  Arise,  arise 
once  more,  for  nothing  can  be  done  without  renuncia- 
tion. If  you  want  to  help  others,  your  own  little  self 
must  go.  In  the  words  of  the  Christians,  you  cannot 
serve  God  and  mammon  at  the  same  time.  Have 
vairdgyam — your  ancestors  gave  up  the  world  to  do 
great  things.  At  the  present  time  there  are  men 
who  give  up  the  world  to  help  their  own  salvation. 
Throw  away  everything,  even  your  own  salvation,  and 
go  and  help  others.  Aye,  you  are  always  talking  bold 
words,  but  here  is  practical  Vedanta  before  you.  Give 
up  this  little  life  of  yours.  What  matters  if  you  die 
of  starvation,  you  and  I  and  thousands  like  us,  so  long 
as  this  nation  lives  ?  The  nation  is  sinking,  the  curse 
of  unnumbered  millions  is  on  our  heads ;  to  whom  we 
have  been  giving  ditch-water  to  drink  when  they  have 
been  dying  of  thirst,  while  the  perennial  river  of  water 
was  flowing  past;  the  unnumbered  millions  whom  we 
have  allowed  to  starve  in  sight  of  plenty ;  the  unnum- 


VEDANTA  355 

bered  millions  to  whom  we  have  talked  of  Advaita  and 
whom  we  have  hated  with  all  our  strength ;  the  unnum- 
bered millions  to  whom  we  have  talked  theoretically 
that  all  are  one,  and  that  all  are  the  same  Lord,  without 
even  an  ounce  of  practice.  O  my  friends,  must  it 
only  be  in  the  mind  and  never  in  practice  ? 

Wipe  off  this  blot.  Arise  and  awake.  What  mat- 
ters it  if  this  little  life  goes ;  every  one  has  to  die,  the 
saint  or  the  sinner,  the  rich  or  the  poor.  The  body 
never  remains  for  any  one.  Arise  and  awake  and  be 
perfectly  sincere.  What  we  want  is  character,  that 
steadiness  and  character  that  make  a  man  cling  to  a 
thing  like  grim  death.  "Let  the  sages  blame  or  let 
them  praise,  let  Lakshmi  come  to-day,  let  her  go  away, 
let  death  come  just  now,  or  in  a  hundred  years;  he 
indeed  is  the  sage  who  does  not  make  one  false  step 
from  the  path  of  right."  Arise  and  awake,  for  the 
time  is  passing  and  all  our  energies  will  be  frittered 
away  in  vain  talking.  Arise  and  awake,  let  minor 
things  and  quarrels  over  little  details,  and  fights  over 
little  doctrines  be  thrown  aside,  for  here  is  the  greatest 
of  all  works,  here  are  the  sinking  millions.  Mark, 
when  the  Mohammedans  first  came  into  India,  there 
were  sixty  millions  of  Hindus  here;  to-day  there  are 
less  than  twenty  millions.  Every  day  they  will  become 
less  and  less  till  the  whole  disappear.  Let  them  disap- 
pear, but  with  them  will  disappear  the  marvellous 
ideas  of  which  with  all  their  defects  and  all  their 
misrepresentations  they  have  stood  as  representatives. 
And  with  them  will  disappear  this  sublime  Advaita, 
the  crown  jewel  of  all  spiritual  thought.  Therefore, 
arise,  awake,  with  your  hands  stretched  out  to  protect 


356  J  NANA   YOGA 

the  spirituality  of  the  world.  And  first  of  all,  work 
it  out  for  your  own  country.  What  we  want  is  not 
so  much  spirituality,  as  the  bringing  down  of  a  little 
of  Advaita  into  the  material  world,  first  bread  and 
then  religion.  We  stuff  them  too  much  with  religion, 
when  the  poor  fellows  have  been  starving.  No 
dogmas  will  satisfy  the  cravings  of  hunger.  There 
are  two  curses  here,  first  our  weakness,  second  our 
hatred,  our  dried-up  hearts.  You  may  talk  doctrines 
by  the  thousand,  you  may  have  sects  by  the  hundreds 
of  thousands ;  but  it  is  nothing  until  you  have  the  heart 
to  feel,  feel  for  them  as  your  Veda  teaches  you;  till 
you  find  that  they  are  parts  of  your  own  bodies,  till 
you  realize  that  you  and  they,  the  poor  and  the  rich, 
the  saint  and  the  sinner,  all  are  parts  of  one  Infinite 
whole  which  you  call  Brahman. 

Gentlemen,  thus  I  have  tried  to  place  before  you 
only  a  few  of  the  most  brilliant  points  of  the  Advaita 
system,  and  to  show  that  the  time  has  come  when  it 
should  be  carried  out  into  practice,  not  only  in  this 
country,  but  everywhere.  Modern  science  and  its 
sledge-hammer  blows  are  pulverizing  the  porcelain 
foundations  of  all  dualistic  religions  everywhere. 
Not  only  here  are  the  dualists  torturing  texts  till  they 
will  extend  no  longer,  for  texts  are  not  india-rubber; 
it  is  not  only  here  that  they  are  trying  to  get  into  the 
nooks  and  corners  to  protect  themselves,  it  is  still  more 
so  in  Europe  and  America.  And  even  there  something 
of  this  idea  will  have  to  go  from  India.  It  has  already 
reached  there.  It  will  have  to  increase  and  increase, 
and  to  save  their  civilizations  too.  For,  in  the  West, 
the  old  order  of  things  is  vanishing,  giving  way  to 


VEDANTA  357 

a  new  order  of  things,  which  is  the  worship  of  gold, 
the  worship  of  Mammon.  Even  the  old  crude  system 
of  religion  was  better  than  the  modern  system — namely, 
competition  and  gold.  No  nation,  however  strong, 
can  stand  on  such  foundations,  and  the  history  of  the 
world  tells  us  that  all  those  which  had  similar  founda- 
tions are  dead  and  gone.  In  the  first  place  we  have  to 
stop  the  incoming  of  such  a  wave  in  India.  There- 
fore preach  the  Advaita  to  every  one,  so  that  religion 
may  withstand  the  shock  of  modern  science.  Not 
only  so,  you  will  have  to  help  others,  your  thought 
must  reach  out  to  Europe  and  America.  But  above 
all  let  me  once  more  remind  you  that  there  is  need 
of  practical  work,  and  the  first  part  of  this  is  to  go 
down  to  the  sinking  millions  of  India.  Take  them 
by  the  hand,  remembering  the  words  of  Lord  Krishna : 
"Even  in  this  life  they  have  conquered  heaven  whose 
minds  are  firmly  fixed  in  this  sameness,  for  God  is 
pure  and  the  same  to  all ;  therefore  such  are  said  to  be 
living  in  God." 


PDBLICATIONS  OF  THE  YEDANTA  SOCIETY. 

LECTURES  BY  THE  SWAMI  VIVEKANANDA. 

The  Ideal  of  a  Universal  Religion. 

The  Cosmos. 

The  Atman. 

The  Real  and  Apparent  Man. 

Bhakti  Yoga. 

World's  Fair  Addresses. 

Price  I  o  cents  each ;  i  cent  each  for  postage. 

The  Ved^nta  Philosophy.— An  Address  before  the  Graduate  Philo- 
sophical Society  of  Haivard  College,  with  introduction  by  Prof.  C.  C. 
Everett.     15  cents;  2  cents  for  postage. 

MY  MASTER. 

Bound,  50  cents;  postage  2  cents. 

This  little  book,  by  Swami  Vivekananda,  gives  an  account  of  the 
character  and  career  of  the  remarkable  man  known  in  India  as  Paramhamsa 
Srimat  Ramakrishna,  who  is  regarded  by  a  great  number  of  his  country- 
men as  a  divine  incarnation.  ...  It  is  not  more  remarkable  for  the  story 
it  tells  of  a  holy  man  than  for  the  clear  English  in  which  it  is  told,  and  the 
expressions  of  elevated  religious  thought  in  its  pages.  .  .  .—Journal^ 
Indianapolis,  May  13th,  1901. 

The  contrast  drawn  by  the  author  between  the  dominant  ideas  of  the 
Occident  and  the  Oiient  is  a  most  instructive  and  interesting  one,  and  will 
prove  a  great  aid  to  a  correct  understanding  of  that  which  causes  such  a  wide 
difference  in  their  respective  ideals. — Times,  Pittsburg,  May  24th,   1901. 

The  book,  besides  telling  of  the  life  of  Sri  Ramakrishna,  gives  an  in- 
sight into  some  of  the  religious  ideas  of  the  Hindus  and  sets  forth  the  more 
important  ideals  that  vitally  influence  India's  teeming  millions.  If  we  are 
willing  to  sympathetically  study  the  religious  views  of  our  Aryan  brethren 
of  the  Orient,  we  shall  find  them  governed  by  spiritual  concepts  in  no  way 
inferior  to  the  highest  known  to  ourselves— concepts  which  were  thought 
out  and  practically  applied  by  those  ancient  philosophers  in  ages  so  remote 
as  to  antedate  history. — Post,  Washington,  May  13th,  1901. 

Orders  received  and  filled  promptly  by  the 

VEDANTA  PUBLICATION  COMMITTEE, 
102  East  58th  Street,  New  York. 


PDBLICATIONS  OF  THE  YEDANTA  SOCIETY. 

LECTURES  BY  THE  SWAM!  ABHEDANANDA. 
PHILOSOPHY    OF   WORK.      (3  Lectures.) 

I.     Philosophy  of  Work. 
II.    Secret  of  Work. 
III.    Duty  or  Motive  in  Work. 

Paper,  35  cents.     Cloth,  50  cents.     Postage  2  and  6  cents. 


CHRISTIAN  SCIENCE  AND  VEDANTA.    (Lecture.) 

Price  ID  cents.         Postage  i  cent. 

WOMAN'S  PLACE  IN  HINDU  RELIGION.    (Lecture.) 

Price  10  cents.        Postage  i  cent. 

This  lecture  will  correct  many  of  the  erroneous  ideas  which  Christian 
missionaries  have  spread  abroad  regarding  the  condition  of  Hindu  women. 
In  it  the  Swami  gives  the  real  causes  of  child  marriage,  the  burning  of 
widows  and  other  social  evils  which  arose  in  certain  parts  of  India. 

Bishop  Potter  writes:  "  Believe  me,  it  is  not  of  the  smallest  consequence 
what  I  have  to  say  on  the  subject,  but  rather  what  they  who  are  accused 
of  such  a  custom  have  to  say.  And  here  again  I  summon  the  accomplished 
gentleman  and  scholar,  who  has  already  testified,  SwS,mi  Abhedananda. 
In  the  address,  *  Woman's  Place,'  from  which  I  have  already  quoted  and 
which  I  have  yet  to  see  challenged,  he  says.  .  .  .  " — The  Cburcbman, 
Nov.  9,  1901. 

"  It  is  an  able  survey  of  the  rights  of  Indian  womanhood  from  the 
Vedic  down  to  the  latest  period  of  Hindu  literature  and  history,  and  fur- 
nishes the  most  complete  answer  to  those  who  accuse  Hinduism  of  having 
denied  the  dignity  and  moral  worth  of  woman.  ,  ,  .  The  learned  Swami 
makes  out  by  an  unassailable  array  of  authorities  that  the  idea  of  equality 
of  man  and  woman  is  the  comer-stone  of  religion  among  the  Hindus." — 
Indian  Review,  Sept.,  1901. 

Orders  received  and  filled  promptly  by  the 

VEDANTA  PUBLICATION  COMMITTEE, 
102  East  58th  Street,  New  York. 


PDBLICATIOHS  OF  THE  YEDAHTA  SOCIETY. 

WORKS  BY  THE  SWAMI  ABHEDANANDA. 
HOW  TO  BE  A  YOQI. 

i6o  pages,  bound,  $i.oo.     Postage,  7  cents. 

This  volume  contains  a  comprehensive  survey  of  the  Science  of  Yoga 
as  a  whole  and  of  its  different  branches.  The  first  chapter  answers  the 
question  '*  What  is  Yoga?  " ;  and  in  five  succeeding  chapters  on  " Hatha 
Yoga,"  "Raja  Yoga,"  "Karma  Yoga,"  "Bhakti  Yoga,"  and  "  Jn^na 
Yoga"  the  peculiar  character  and  specific  practices  of  each  of  these 
branches  are  described.  The  Science  of  Breathing  and  its  bearing  on 
health  and  spiritual  development  is  also  treated  at  length;  while  the  con- 
cluding chapter  on  "  Was  Christ  a  Yogi?"  brings  the  Yoga  teaching  into 
direct  relation  with  the  religious  thought  of  the  West.  The  text  has  been 
kept  as  free  as  possible  from  technical  or  Sanskrit  terms,  and  this  will  make 
the  book  especially  useful  for  the  general  reader  desirous  of  gaining  a  clear 
idea  of  the  Science  of  Yoga  and  of  its  various  methods  of  training, 

SPIRITUAL  UNFOLDMENT.    (3  lectures.) 

Paper,  25  cents.     Cloth,  40  cents.     Postage,  2  and  5  cents. 

I.  Self-control. 

II.  Concentration  and  Meditation. 
III.  God-consciousness. 

"  This  attractive  little  volume  comprises  three  lectures  on  the  Vedinta 
Philosophy.  The  discourses  will  be  found  vitally  helpful  even  by  those 
who  know  little  and  care  less  about  the  spiritual  and  ethical  teachings  of 
which  the  Sw^mi  is  an  able  and  popular  exponent.  As  the  Veda,nta  itself 
is  largely  a  doctrine  of  universals  and  ultimates,  so  also  is  this  book  of 
common  utility  and  significance  among  all  races  of  believers.  Its  precepts 
are  susceptible  of  application  by  any  rational  thinker,  regardless  of  relig- 
ious predilection  and  inherited  prejudices.  The  principles  set  forth  by 
this  teacher  are  an  excellent  corrective  of  spiritual  bias  or  narrowness,  and 
as  such  the  present  work  is  to  be  commended.  It  has  already  awakened 
an  interest  in  Oriental  literature  that  augurs  well  for  the  cause  of  human 
brotherhood,  and  it  merits  a  wide  circulation  among  all  who  cherish  ad- 
vanced ideals." — Mind,  April,  igo2. 

Orders  received  and  filled  promptly  by  the 

VEDANTA  PUBLICATION  COMMITTEE, 
102  East  58th  Street,  New  York. 


PDBLICATIONS  OF  THE  YEDANTA  SOCIETY. 

LECTURES  BY  THE  SWAMI  ABHEDANANDA. 

The  Way  to  the  Blessed  Life. 

Scientific  Basis  of  Religion. 

Cosmic  Evolution  and  its  Purpose. 

The  Philosophy  of  Good  and  Evil. 

Does  the  Soul  Exist  after  Death? 

The  Relation  of  5oul  to  God. 

The  Word  and  the  Cross  in  Ancient  India. 

The  Motherhood  of  God. 

Why  a  Hindu  is  a  Vegetarian. 

Religion  of  the  Hindus. 

Divine  Communion. 

Who  is  the  Saviour  of  Souls? 

Woman's  Place  in  Hindu  Religion. 

Why  a  Hindu  Accepts  Christ  and  Rejects  Churchianity. 

Christian  Science  and  Vedanta. 

10  Cents  Each ;  i  Cent  Postage. 


REINCARNATION. 


I.  Reincarnation. 
II.  Evolution  and  Reincarnation. 
III.  Which  is  Scientific,  Resurreofion  or  Reincarnation? 

Paper,  25  cents.     Cloth,  40  cents.     Postage,  2  and  5  cents. 

**  In  these  discourses  the  Swimi  Abhedananda  considers  the 
questions  of  evolution  and  the  resurrection  in  their  bearing  upon 
the  ancient  teaching  of  rebirth,  the  truth,  logic  and  justice  of 
which  are  rapidly  permeating  the  best  thought  of  the  Western 
world.  For  the  preservation  of  this  doctrine  mankind  is  indebted 
to  the  literary  storehouses  of  India,  the  racial  and  geographical 
source  of  much  of  the  vital  knowledge  of  Occidental  peoples. 
Reincarnation  is  shown  in  the  present  volume  to  be  a  universal 
solvent  of  life's  mysteries.  It  answers  those  questions  of  children 
that  have  staggered  the  wisest  minds  who  seek  to  reconcile  the 
law  of  evolution  and  the  existence  of  an  intelligent  and  just 
Creator  with  the  proposition  that  man  has  but  a  single  lifetime 
in  which  to  develop  spiritual  self-consciousness.  It  is  commended 
to  every  thinker." — Afind,  February,  J  goo. 

Orders  received  and  filled  promptly  by  the 

VEDANTA  PUBLICATION  COMMITTEE, 
102  East  58th  Street,  New  York, 


BAKER  6-  TAYLOR   CO:S  PUBLICATIONS. 

BOOKS  ON  THE 

VEDANTA   PHILOSOPHY. 

BY  SWAMI   VIVEKANANDA. 

RAJA  YOOA. — Lectures  by  Swami  Vivekananda,  contain- 
ing also  Patanjali's  Yoga  Aphorisms,  with  Commentary,  and  a 
copious  Sanslcrit  Glossary.  The  book  includes  a  lecture  on 
"  Immortality,"  and  the  Swami's  lectures  on  BHAKTI  YOGA. 
A  fine  portrait  of  the  author,  frontispiece.  The  whole  hand- 
somely bound  in  cloth,  $1.50. 

*'  With  the  simplicity  of  language  of  a  child's  primer,  and  the  pro- 
gressive logic  of  a  mathematical  proposition,  the  Swami  explains  the 
simple  working  rules  of  this  science.  .  .  .  The  book  is  charming  to 
any  one  interested  in  the  subject,  and  an  instructive  study  in  logic  to 
even  the  most  indifferent." — Public  Opinion^  N.  Y.,  July  27th,  1899. 

KARMA  YOQA. — Eight  lectures  on  the  practical  applica- 
tion of  the  Vedanta  Philosophy  to  the  affairs  of  daily  life, 
showing  in  a  clear  and  forcible  manner  how  it  is  possible  to 
lead  the  highest  life  without  abandoning  the  duties  and  avo- 
cations of  one's  station  in  the  world,  and  proving  conclusively 
that  the  loftiest  aspiration  and  attainment  are  entirely  com- 
patible with  the  humblest  occupation,  and  are  open  to  every 
human  being.  Cloth,  with  portrait.  New  and  revised  edi- 
tion.    $1.00. 

MY  MASTER,  besides  telling  of  the  life  of  Sri  Rama- 
krishna,  gives  us  an  insight  into  some  of  the  religious  ideas 
of  the  Hindus  and  sets  forth  the  more  important  ideals  that 
vitally  influence  India's  teeming  millions.  If  we  are  willing 
to  sympathetically  study  the  religious  views  of  our  Aryan 
brethren  of  the  Orient,  we  shall  find  them  governed  by  spirit- 
ual concepts  in  no  way  inferior  to  the  highest  known  to  our- 
selves; concepts  that  were  thought  out  and  practically  applied 
by  these  ancient  philosophers  in  ages  so  remote  as  to  antedate 
history.     i2mo,  cloth.     50  cents. 

Sent^  postpaid^  on  receipt  of  the  price  By 

THE    BAKER  &   TAYLOR  CO.,   PUBLISHERS. 
33-37  E.  17th  St.,  Union  Sq.  North,  New  York. 


BAKER  ^  TAYLOR  CO:S  PUBLICATIONS, 


PRESS   NOTICES   OF   RAJA   YOGA. 


^        \ 


The  whole  spirit  of  the  book  is  candid  in  the  extreme.  It 
appeals  to  what  is  best  and  noblest  in  ma—  It  makes  no 
foolish  mysteries,  and  demands  no  blind  belief.  It  puts  forth 
its  system  in  a  plain  and  simple  manner.  It  is  able  to  pre- 
sent its  own  method  without  in  any  way  attacking  the 
method  of  others.  It  manifests  a  charity  that  it  is  usual  to 
call  Chri  .ian,  b-.t  which  Vivekananda  proves  is  equally  the 
property  of  the  Hindu.  If  this  little  book  had  nothing  to 
teach  but  the  beautiful  toleration  it  advocates,  it  ..ould  be 
well  worth  reading;  but  many  will  find  in  it  valuable  sug- 
gestions to  aid  in  reaching  the  higher  life. — Arena,  March, 
1897. 

This  work  embraces  a  series  of  lectures  that  fully  explain 
the  doctrines  and  principles  of  the  philosophy  of  the  Indian 
monks,  wI-j  have  aroused  such  a  widespread  interest  in  this 
country.  To  the  reader  who  is  seeking  after  the  truth  and 
light,  this  volume  will  be  indeed  welcome.  It  is  written  in 
an  unusually  clear  style  that  all  readers  can  understand. — 
Bookseller  and  Newsman. 

How  to  get  at  the  soul  and  put  the  reins  of  the  mind  and 
the  body  into  its  hands,  is  the  problem  that  Raja  Yoga  at- 
tempts to  solve,  and  all  those  persons  who  practice  Yoga 
are  known  as  Yogis.  Then — how  to  become  a  Yogi,  how  to 
rise  to  a  high  state  of  psychic  control  is  what  Vivekananda 
endeavors  to  point  out  in  these  lectures. — Literary  Digest. 

A  large  part  of  the  book  is  occupied  with  that  method  of 
attaining  perfection  known  as  Raja  Yoga,  and  there  are  also 
translations  of  a  number  of  aphorisms  and  an  excellent  glos- 
sary.— Living  Age,  Aug.  sth,  1899. 

A  valuable  portion  of  the  volume  to  students  is  the  glos- 
sary of  Sanskrit  technical  terms.  This  includes  not  only 
such  terms  as  are  employed  in  the  book,  but  also  those  frc- 
jquently  employed  in  works  on  the  Vedanta  philosophy  in 
I  general. — New  York  Times,  July  22nd,  1899. 

A  new  edition,  with  an  enlarged  glossary,  which  will  be 
welcomed  by  students  of  comparative  religion,  who  arc  al- 
ready familiar  with  the  author's  lectures  in  this  country.— 
Review  of  Reviews,  Oct.,  1899. 

The  methods  of  practical  realization  of  the  divine  within 
the  human  are  applicable  to  all  religions,  and  all  peoples, 
and  only  vary  in  their  details  to  suit  the  idiosyncrasy  of  race 
and  individuals.— Fw^,  Washington,  D.  C,  June  12th,  1899. 


^?.; 

/.  / 


