===== Internet Archive OCR: kabirkabirpanth00westuoft_djvu.txt =====

This  Is  an  authorized  facsimile  of  the  original 
book,  and  was  produced  in  1973  by  microfilm- 
xerography  by  University  Microfilms,  A  Xerox 
Company,  Ann  Arbor,  Michigan,  U.S.A. 


THE  KABIR  PANTH 


•/ 


"t'V'7^*/' 


BY 


Rev.   G.  H,    WESTCOTT,  m.  a. 

FELLOW  OF^ALLAHABAD  UNIVERSJTV. 


CAWNPORE  : 

rSINTID  AND  rUBUSUSD  AT  THB  CHKIST  CnUROC  msglOJf  PBX8S. 

1907 


Bl 


tt..?SS>?^^t>[|\ 


'       LLGRAniES       j 


\U  h-A 


1712750 


PREFACE 

The  following  pages  represent  the'iresult  of 
inquiries  extending  over  the  last  ten  years.  The 
gradual  way  in  which  such  information,  us  is 
given,  has  been  acquired  and  the  number  of 
times  that  first  impressions  have  had  to  give 
way  to  subsequent  discoveries  would  be  sufii- 
cient  warning  that  (liis  rcprcscntaticm  of  the 
subject  is  little  likely  to  l)c  free  from  errors. 
My  hope  is  that  this  study  will  do  something 
to  increase  the  interest  already  felt  by  many  in 
the  various  religious  sects  that  have  been  called 
into  existence  in  India  th^'ough  the  efforts  of 
distinguished  teachers. 

I  have  tried  to  avoid  dogmatising  on  ques- 
tions that  call  for  fuller  investigation  ;  but  we 
have  at  any  rate  in  the  teaching  of  Kabir  an 
attempt  to  break  dov/n  the  barriers  that  separate 
Hindus  from  Muhammadans,  and  we  have 
probably  in  the  Kabir  Panth  a  religious  system 
that  owes.something  to  Hindu,  Miihammadan 
and  Christian  influences. 


(iv) 

IfChrist  had  been  an  Indian,  would  not  his 
Gospel  have  been  welcomed  by  many  ^vho  now 
refuse  to  listen  ? 

For  help  in  this  undertaking  I  am  principal- 
ly indebted  to  my  Mali,  Badlu  Dass,  ^^•ho  is 
himself  a    member    of  the    Panth.      He   ha. 
^.SItedaII  places  of  interest  in  connexion  with 
the  Panth,  has  introduced  me  to  rnanv  Mahants 
and  conducted  inquiries  with  great  intelligence. 
The  Rev.  Ahmad  Shah,  who  is  now  enaa^ed 
m  bnng^ng  out  an  edition  of  the  Bijak,  has 
made  many  valuable  suggestions  and  has  also 
supenntended   the   copying   of  various    Kabir 
Panlh,   MSS.   Mr.  U.  R.  Clement  and  the  Rev, 
Prem  Chand  l,ave  also  rendered  valuable  a<^sist- 
ance,  wiu'ie  the   Rev.    B.  H.  P.  Fisher  of  this 
Mission  has  kindly  seen   these  pages  through 
the  Press.  *" 


S.  P.  G.  Mission  House 
Cawnpore. 


G.  H.  WESTCOTT. 


(T) 


•     CONTENTS. 

Chapteb.  Pack 

L     THE   LIFE   OF  KABIR                        ...  I 

Additional  Note.    Kabir  in  History  25 

II.     THE  LIFE  OF  KABIR   (Contd.)      ...  29 

III.      THE   TEACHING   OF  KABIR              ...  4? 

Additional  ^otes.     The  Bijak       ...  73 

The  Doctrine  of  Shabda  (word)     ...  74 

IV.      SAKHIS   ATTRIBUTED  TO  KABIR...  77 

V.      THE   KABIR   PANTH      ...                     ...  9^ 

Additiojial  Note.    Lists  of  Mahants  114 

VI.      THE   KABIR   PANTH.                            ...  TI7 

Additional  Notes. 

The  Religious  Orders  of  Islam       ..  135 

Early  Christian  influences  in  Nor- 
thern India            ...                 ...  137 


(Yi) 

VII.     THE  TEACHING  OF  THE  PANTH  ...    I40 
Additional  Notes, 

Literature  on  life  and  Teaching  of 

Kabir  ...  ...  j6o 

Pandit  Walj  i  Bhai        ...  ...172 

Addenda  and  Corrigenda  ..,   174 

Glossary  of  Indian  Terms 

Index 


177 


ILLUSTRATIONS, 

Kabir,  as  represented  in  the  pictiiie  hung  in  the 
Kabir  Charan  Math,  Benares. 

Frontispiece. 
A  Potter  at  work,  to  illustrate  Sakhi.(9). 

to /ace  p.  80. 
A  group  of  Kabir  Panthis,  in  camp  at  the  Magh 
Mela,  Allahabad. 

to /ace  p.  104, 


(vii) 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


Century 
A.  D. 

Hindu. 

Christian. 

1 100 

Ramanuja 

1090-1150  (?) 

1200 

1300 

Ramanand 

1 300-1400  (?) 

Wyckliffe  1324-84 
Jordanus  132 1 

1400 

Gorakh  Nath 
1420-1485  (?) 

Erasmus  1467- 
1536. 

Kabir  1440-15 18 

Lutlier   1483-1546 

Nanak  1469-1538 

Chaitanya 

1486-1527 

Cranmer^i489- 
1555 

1500 

Vallabha    Swami 

Fr  Xavier  1506- 

1520 

1552 

Dadu  1544-1O03 

Tulsi  Dass    1544- 
1624 

J.   Xavier  goes  to 
Lahore  1596. 

y 


/ 


Sankarachar>'a  was  born  in  788  and  died  in  828. 


Chapter  I. 
The  Life  of  KabIr. 

It  is  generally  allowed  that  of  all  the  great 
Hindu  Reformers  Kabi'r  and  Tulsi  Dass  have 
had  the  greatest  influence  for  good  among 
the  uneducated  classes  of  Northern  and  Cen- 
tral India.  Kabi'r  has  been  fittingly  described 
by  Sir  W.  W.  Hunter  as  the  Indian  Luther 
of  the  15th  century. 

Among  those  who  acknowledge  their  in- 
vdebtedness  to  Kabir  as  a  spiritual  guide  are 
Nanak  Shah  of  the  Panjab,  the  founder  of 
the  Sikh  community  ;  Dadu  of  Ahmedabad 
(1544)^  founder  of  the  Panth  that  bears  his 
name,  and  Jag  Ji'wan  Dass  of  Oudh  (1760) 
the  founder  of  the  Sat  Nami  sect.  Among 
religious  teachers  whose  doctiine  is  said  to 
be  largely  based  upon  the  teaching  of  Kabi'r 
are  Bribhan,  the  founder  of  the  Sadh  com- 
munity (1658),  Baba  Lai  of  Malwa  and  Shiva 
Narain  of  Ghazipur. 

Of  these  Nanak  Shah  is  the  teacher  with 
•whose  name  the  English  reader  is  most  familiar 
and  it  is  therefore  well  in  his  case  to  enlarge 

(1 )  All  the  dates  given  in  the  text  refer  to  the  year  Anno 
Domini. 


2  The  Life  of  KabIr. 

somewhat  upon  a  bald  assertion  of  indebted- 
ness. 

In  the  Jauam  Sakhi-  Kabir  is  mentioned  as 
a  Bhagat  equal  in  merit  to  Nanak  himself,  and 
other  Bhagats  are  exhorted  to  follow  his  exam- 
ple. On  more  than  one  occasion  Nanak  quotes 
with  emphasised  approval  verses  attributed  to 
Kabi'r. 

The  Adi  Granth^,  the  sacred  book  of  the 
Sikhs,  gives  much  information  concerning  the 
life  of  Kabir  and  the  character  ot  his  teaching. 
The  interest  which  Nanak  felt  in  Kabir  was 
probably  enhanced  by  the  fact  that  he  had 
enjoyed  personal  intercourse  with  the  reformer.* 

In  modern  days  the  number  of  those  who 
have  in  one  way  or  another  come  under  the 
influence  of  Kabi'r  is  very  great.  In  the  Census 
Report  for  rpoi  the  number  of  Kabir  Panthis 
alone  is  returned  as  843,171  and  the  actual 
number  is  probably  considerably  larger,  as  in 
the    United   Provinces    many    Kabir   Panthfs 

(2)  Jaiiam  Sakhi  (Evidence  or  Story  of  birth)  is  the 
name  given  to  tlie  accounts  of  Nanak,  current  amonp:  In's 
followers.  A  tran=;ation  of  two  sr.ch  accounts  will  be  founil 
ia  Trumpp"s  elitiou  of  the  A<li  Granth. 

(3)  Adi  tirst,  principal.  Granth  book  The  term  Granth 
i«  used  bj  several  sects  to  denote  their  authoritative  writiiii:^ 

The  quotations  from  the  -\ili  Grauth  are  taken  from 
Trumpp's  translation. 

(4)  Kanak  is  said  to  have  l»ccn  27  years  of  ajre  when  he 
met  Kabir.  As  Nanak  was  born  in  \\i\\)  the  ye;ir  of  meeting 
will  have  been  UUO,  the  very  year  in  which  Sikandar  Lodi,  the 
Emperor  of  Delhi,  visited  Jauupur  and  other  cities  in  that 
neishbourbeod. 


The  Life  of  KabIr.  3 

seem  to  have  been  returned  as  Rdm^nandis  and 
the  figures  for  the  Panjab  are  not  included.* 

There  is  no  doubt  as  to  the  greatness  ot 
Kabir's  influence  as  a  reh'gious  teacher ;  he  has 
also  been  described  as  the  founder  of  Hindi 
literature.  Tiie  hymns  of  Kabi'r  are  still  sang 
by  many  a  wandering  minstrel,  while  his  pithy 
sayings  are  frequently  employed  to  win  the  at- 
tention of  a  dreamy  audience  or  to  clench  a 
lengthy  argument. 

Unfortunately  the  material  for  a  life  of  Kabir 
is  miserably  scanty.  If  we  confine  our  atten- 
tion to  traditions  of  historical  value,  we  are  left 
in  uncertainty  as  to  the  place  and  date  ot  his 
birth,  his  name,  the  religion  to  which  he  was 
attached  by  birth,  the  state  of  life  in  which  he 
lived,  married  or  single,  and  the  number  of  years 
that  he  resided  in  any  particular  place.  It  is 
true  that  many  legends  have  gathered  round  his 
name,  but  however  interesting  these  may  be 
from  various  points  of  view  they  can  hardly  be 
said  to  meet  the  needs  of  those  who  desire  ac- 
curate information.'"' 

(5)  This  total  is  distributed  as  fo'lows  :— Central 
rroviiicc«,  4^3,893  :  United  Provinces,  215,771  ;  Central  India 
124,000  ;  Bombay  Presidency,  9,407. 

(6)  It  is  stated  in  the  Benares  Gazetteer  that  Kahlr  was 
born  at  Belhara,  a  village  in  the  district  of  Azamgarh. 
Accordinf^  to  the  belief  of  Kabir  Panthis  he  wa?  born  in  1398 
und  die<l  in  lolS.  The  latter  d.ite  is  probably  correct ;  the 
former  is  probably  dictated  by  a  desire  to  make  him  contem- 
poraneous with  lUimAnaud  who  is  supposed  to  have  lired  in 
the  14th  Century. 


^  The  Life  of  KabIr 

It  is  admitted  by  all  Kabir  Panthis  that 
Kabir  was  brouglit  up  as  a  child  in  the  house  of 
Airu.  a  Muhammadnn  weaver.  In  the  Janam 
-Su/^/;/Nanak  is  reporled  to  have  told  Babar  that 
Kabir  was  a  iMuhammadan  weaver.  In  the  Adi 
Grafit/i  occur  these  lines  :— 

By  caste  a  weaver  and  patient  of  mind  :  utters 
Kabir  with  natural  ease  the  excellencies  of  Ram.^ 

In  one  of  his  best  known  Hymns  Kabir  says 
that  he  will  shortly  give  up   weaving  and  de- 
vote   himself  entirely  to  singing  the  praises  of 
Wan.'-      In    another  hymn    he  savs   tliat   he 
had  m  a  previous  birth  been  born  as'a  Brahmin 
but  had  been  re-incarnated  as  a  Ju/d/^a  (Mu' 
hammedan   weaver  ;    because  he   had  in  that 
life  neglected  the  worship  ofRAm  (Rdm  B/ia- 
J  an). 

In  none  of  the  writings  that  can  be  traced 
directly  to  Kabir  is  any  account  given  as  to  the 
manner  of  his  birth,  but  the  following  legends 
nave  long  been  current  in  this  country  •— 

The  first  legend  relates  that  his  mother  was  a 
Brahmin  widow  who  went  with  her  father  on  a 

He  writes  in   the   Liiak    t  .V/   i  ^^  "" ''V'^f'"^''''"  of  Vish 
birthmtbefamflvof  DLatl       '       "'  ^^aster  did  not  take 

as  the  e:.pression  of  a  honl  1  hnJv.    P^-n ^t'^  "^''^^  ^°  interpreted 
ance  from'  the  trVlI  of'tS 'ilrati.Z'  ''''''''  '""'^'^  ^'^--^ 


The  Life  of  KabIr.  5 

pilgrimage  to  the  shrine  of  a  famous  ascetic. 
To  reward  the  devotion  of  the  pilgrims  the  as- 
cetic prayed  that  tho  woman  might  become  tho 
mother  of  a  son.  The  prayer  of  so  holy  a  man 
could  not  fail  to  find  fulfilment  and  in  due  course 
the  Brahman  widow  became  the  mother  of  Kabir. 
The  mother  to  escape  dishonour  exposed  the 
infant,  who  was  discovered  and  adopted  as  her 
own  by  the  wife  of  a  weaver.'' 

Accordinf;  to  another  version  of  this  story 
Ramanand,  who  was  the  ascetic  referred  to,  said 
that  he  could  not  recall  his  blessing  but  would 
arrange  that  the  birth  should  not  be  after  the 
usual  manner,  but  that  the  infant  should  issue 
from  the  palm  of  its  mother's  hand  J  ^  His  pro- 
mise was  realised  and  the  infant  after  birth  was 
placed  on  a  lotus  flower  in  the  midst  of  the 
Lahar  Tank.  It  was  there  discovered  by  Nima, 
the  wife  of  Niru,  and  by  her  taken  to  her  hus- 
band's house. 

The  second  account  is  more  poetical  in  cha- 
racter and  runs  thus  : — 

(9)  Most  of  the  legends  containctl  in  this  Chapter  are 
laken  from  a  Hindi  pamphlet  entitled  Kahir  Kasauti^ 
publinhed  at  Bombay  in  1885.  This  pamphlet  is  the  joint 
production  of  five  members  of  the  Kabir  fanth  and  is  based 
upon  information  gleanwl  both  from  books  and  oral  tradi- 
tion. 

(10)  This  li'^cnd  enables  the  Hindu  section  of  the 
Panth  to  explain  the  name  Kabir  as  a  corruption  of  Kar- 
Bir  or  the  liero  (  born  from  )  the  hand  (  of  a  Brahmia 
woman). 


6  The  Life  of  KARfR. 

Kabfr  descended  from  heaven  to  earth. '^ 
The  lotus  flower  was  blooming  in  the  place  where 
Kabir  was  born.  The  bees  were  tired  of  hum- 
ming. Peacocks,  larks  and  other  kinds  of  birds 
in  their  fli<;ht  passed  circling  round  the  tank. 
Thunder  and  lightning  were  in  llic  air  when 
Kabir  became  manitest  in  the  heart  of  a  lotus 
flower,  in  the  midst  ofthe  Lahar  Tank.  A  feeling 
ofthirst  overcame  Xinia,  the  newly  wedded  wife 
of  Xiru,  the  weaver  as  after  the  marriage  ceremony 
she  was  making  her  way  to  her  husband's  house. 
She  approached  the  tank  but  was  much  afraid 
when  she  there  beheld  the  child.  She  thought 
in  her  heart  'this  is  probably  the  living  evidence 
ofthe  shame  of  some  virgin  widow.'  Xiru  sug- 
gested that  they  might  take  the  child  to  their 
house,  but  Xima  at  first  demurred,  thinking  that 
such  action  might  give  rise  to  scandal.  Women 
would  ask,  "  Who  is  the  mother  of  a  child  so 
beautiful  that  its  eyes  are  like  the  lotus "  ? 
However  laying  aside  all  fears  they  took  pity 
on  the  child.  On  approaching  the  house  they 
were  welcomed  with  the  songs  of  women,  but 
when  the  women  saw  the  child  dark  thoughts 
arose  in  their  hearts  and  they  began  to  ask  "How 
has  she  got  this  child"  ?  Xima  replied  that  she 
had  got  the  child  without  giving  birth  to  it  and 

(II)  lathe  JTahir  Xagaud  thisphra?e  occurs — Sewah  hokar 
■utr:  U  Pirthivci-^ianhi  -'becomin"  a  servant  he  descended  upoa 
this  earth." 


The  Life  of  KauIr.  7 

the  women  then  refrained  from  askhig  further 
questions. 

The  mystery  surrounding  the  birth  of  the 
child  was  further  deepened  when  Niri'i  called  in 
a  Qi'izi''-  and  requested  him  to  open  a  Qoriin 
and  find  for  the  child  a  name.  He  found  the 
name  Kabir,  and  also  from  Ihu  s;ime  root,  Akbar, 
Kubra  and  Kibriya.  Oiifindin)^  these  names  the 
Q{\7.\  was  much  perplexed  and  bit  his  nails  for 
was  not  the  term  Kai)i'r  a  title  applied  to  God  ? 
News  of  wiiat  had  taken  place  soon  spread,  and 
after  a  short  while  live  or  six  mure  Oazi's  arrived 
upon  the  scene.  All  opened  the  Quran,  but  with 
the  same  result.  Tiiey  closed  the  book  in  silent 
astonishment.  It  was  impossible,  they  all 
agreed,  that  a  title  of  such  dignity  should  be 
given  as  a  name  to  a  weaver's  child.  They 
opened  the  Qoran  again  and  found  the  names, 
Zinda,  Khinjar,  Pir  and  Ilaqqa.  Thereupon 
they  said  to  Niru,  'You  must  in  some  way  des- 
troy this  child.'  Nini  in  obedience  to  their 
order  took  the  child  within  the  house  to  put  him 
to  death,  but  before  he  had  time  to  carry  out 
his  intention  the  child  gave  utterance  to  this 
Shabda  : — 

"I  have  come  from  an  unknown  place.  Maya 
has  deceived  the  world  ;  no  one  knows  me,     I 

(12)  Qazi,  a  Muhammadan  judj^e,  whose  serviced  are 
refiuisitione<l  in  connexion  with  births,  inarriaga^  aud  other 
legal  matters. 


^  The  Life  of  KABfR. 

was  not  born  of  a  woman,  but  manifested  as  a 
boy.  My  dwelling  was  in  a  lonely  spot  nigh  to 
Kasi^s  and  there  the  weaver  found  me.  I 
contain  neither  heaven  (air)  nor  earth,  but  wis- 
dom only.  I  have  come  to  this  earth  in  spiritual 
form  and  of  spiritual  significance  is  my  name. 
I  have  neither  bones  nor  blood  nor  skin.  I  re- 
veal to  men  the  Shabda  (word).  My  body  is 
eternal.  I  am  tlie  highest  being.  These  arc  the 
words  of  Kabir  who  is  indestructible.  " 

Thus  were  the  Oazi's  defeated  in  their  object 
and  the  name  Kabir  was  given  to  the  child. '  -^ 

As  a  boy  Kabir  gave  great  offence  to  both 
Hindu  and  Muhammadan  playmates.  When  in 
the  course  of  play  he  cried  out  "Ram,  Ram"  and 
''Hari,  Hari,"  the  Muhainmadans  called  him  a 
Kafir  (unbeliever.)  To  this  charge  he  retorted 
that  he  only  was  a  Kafir  who  did  evil.  One  day 
he  put  a  tUak  on  his  forehead  and  2ijd7ieo  round 
bis  neck  and  cried  out  "Xarain,  Xarain."  This 
action  roused  the  ire  of  the  Brahmins,  since  they 
regarded  it  as  an  infringement  of  their  privileges. 
To  their  protest  he  objected  :— 

"This  is  my  faith,  my  tongue  is  Vishnu,  my 
eyes  are  Ndram,  and  Gobind  resides  in  my  heart. 
What  account  will  you  give  of  your  actions  after 

(13)  Kisi,  the  Hindu  name  for  Benares, 

(14)  For  further  comments  on  this  legend  see  Chapter  II. 


The  Life  of  KABfR.  9 

death  ?  Being  a  weaver,  1  wear  a  thread.  You 
wear  the  sacred  thread,  and  repeat  the  Gyatri 
and  Gita  daily,  but  Gobind  dwells  in  my  heart. 
I  am  a  sheep,  you  are  shepherds;  it  is  your  duty 
to  save  us  from  sin.  You  are  Brahmins,  I  am  a 
weaver  of  Benares.  Hear  my  wisdom.  You  daily 
search  after  an  earthly  king,  while  I  am  contem- 
plating Hari.''^^ 

He  was  further  taunted  with  being  a  ni^nra, 
one  without  the  bcnelit  of  a  spiritual  guide.  He 
was  determined  to  remove  what  he,  as  well  as 
they,  regarded  as  a  reproach.  He  desired  to  be- 
come the  cJietd  (disciple)  of  Ramanand  but  felt 
that  there  were  difTicuUies  in  the  way  which 
could  only  be  overcome  by  means  of  some 
artifice. 

ric  knew  that  if  only  he  could  gain  posses- 
sion of  the  mantra  peculiar  to  this  sect,  his  in- 
itiation must  necessarily  tollovv.  He  learnt  that 
Ramanand  ref^ularly  visited  a  certain  bathing 
ghat  and  determined  to  lie  down  upon  the  steps 
of  that  ^^a/ in  the  hope  that  Rumanand  might 
step  on  him  by  accident.  His  hope  was  rea- 
lised and  the  holy  man  in  his  astonishment  ex- 
claimed "Ram,  Ram."  Kabi'r  knew  that  no  words 
would  rise  so  readily  to  the  lips  of  this  holy  man 
as  the  mantra  ot  his  order  and  so  claimed  that 
as  he  was  already  in  possession  of  the  mantra  he 

(15)  Adi  Granth,  Trurapp's  translation,  p,  661. 


10  The  Life  of  KABfR. 

could  no  longer  be  refused  admission  to  the  or- 
der.16 

When  Kabir  announced  that  he  had  become 
the  chela  of  Ramanand,  both  Hindus  and  !^Iu- 
hammadans  were  dismayed  and  a  joint  deputa- 
tion went  to  inquire  of  Rumanand  whether  it 
were  true  that  he  had  received  a  Muhammadan 
boy  as  one  of  his  disciples.  Ramanand  asked 
them  to  produce  the  boy.  The  people  took  Kabi'r 
to  him.  Ramanand  on  his  arrival  raised  the  curtain 
which  screened  him  from  the  public  gaze  and 
asked  the  boy  when  he  had  !nade  him  his  dis- 
ciple. Kabir  answered,  "Various  are  the  manlras. 
that  Gurus  whisper  iniothe  ears  of  their  disciples, 
but  you  struck  me  on  the  head  and  communi- 
cated to  me  the  name  of  Rdm."  The  Sii;dmi 
recalled  the  circumstance,  and  drawing  aside  the 
curtain  clasped  him  to  his  breast  and  said,  "Be- 
yond all  questioning  you  became  my  disciple." 
The  members  of  the  deputation  returned  home 
disappointed.  Kab'ir  returned  to  the  weaver's 
house  and  set  to  work  on  the  loom.  When  any 
Sadhii  came  to  the  house  he  used  to  have  the 
ground  prepared  afier  the  manner  of  Hindus  and 
got  food  cooked  for  them  in  vessels  not  previous- 
ly used.  He  himself  would  wait  upon  them  while 

(16)  Kabir  Panthis  in  ciin\-ers\tioii  spuak  of  tlicir  mantra 
as  '-Rim  r.am,"  but  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  thcne 
words  constitute  the  viantra  cither  of  their  Hauth  or  of  the 
Ramanandis.  These  viaiitrat  may  not  be  disclosed  to  the 
anluitiateJ, 


The  Life  of  KABfR.  11 

they  took  their  food.  His  mother,  Nimd,  was  an- 
noyed at  these  proceedings  which,  she  said,  were 
not  in  accordance  with  tho  customs  of  the 
family. 

From  the  time  of  his  initiation  Kabi'r  is  said  to 
have  regularly  visited  his  Guru  and,  as  years 
went  on,  to  have  taken  part  in  religious  disputa- 
tions with  distinguished  Pandits  who  came  to  do 
battle  with  his  master.  According  to  tradition 
Kabir  was  not  possessed  of  any  great  amount  of 
booklorc,  but  in  any  case  he  must  have  gained 
through  instruction,  conversation  and  participa- 
tion in  religious  disputations  a  considerable 
knowledge  of  Hindu  philosophical  thought  and 
familiarity  with  such  questions  as  arose  out  of 
the  meeting  of  Hindu  with  IMuhammadan  be- 
liefs. 

It  appears  from  legends  of  uncertain  date  that 
he  continued  to  work  as  a  weaver,  giving  part  of 
his  earnings  to  Niru  and  spending  the  rest  in 
charity  and  more  especially  in  giving  food  to 
Sadhiis.  Stories  are  told  as  to  how  on  several 
occasions  he  mysteriously  disappeared  for  a  while 
from  his  father's  house  and  in  miraculous  ways 
supplied  the  needs  of  others. 

By  some  Kabi'r  is  said  to  have  been  married 
to  a  woman,  named  Loi,  and  to  have  had  by  her 
two  children,  a  son  Kamal  and  a  daughter  Kama- 
li.    The  circumstances  which  gave  rise  to  this 


^  The  Life  of  KABfR. 

conjecture  are  thus  related  in  Kabir  KasautC 

One  day   Kabfr  when  he  was  some  thirty 
years  of  age  was  walking  along  the  bank  of  the 
Ganges  when  he  came  to  a  cottage  belonging 
to  zBanUandtBa^rd.^i 7  He  wentuptothe 
cottage  and  there  sat  down.  After  some  time  a 
girl,  about  twenty  years  of  age,  also  arrived.  To 
her  question  as  to  who  he  was,  Kabir  replied  'I 
am  Kabir.'     She  again  inquired  as  to  his  caste 
and  sect  (B/ies/O.  To  both  questions  he  return- 
ed  the  same   answer,  'KabiV.     The  girl  observ- 
ed that  though  many  Sants  had  come  to  that 
place  none  of  them  had  ever  given  such  a  name 
for  themselves,  their  caste  or  sect.     Kabfr  said 
that  m  saying  this  she  liad  said  what  was  per- 
fectly  true.i«    Meanwhile  more  Sants  arrived 
Presently  the  girl  brought  forth  from  the  house 
a  large  supply  of  milk  which  she  divided  into 
seven  shares.     Five  shares  she  gave  to  the  Sants, 
one  to  Kabir  and  the  remaining  share  she  kept 
for    hers3lf.     Kabir    placed   his   share   on   the 
ground.     The   Sants   drank   theirs   and   asked 
Kabir  why  he   also  did  not   drink  his.     Kabir 

l^ro\l\l.f]:!;'a7''    "  ^"  ^-'"'^^^  '-^PP'-^J   ^«  I^---.is   who 

i^oS'll^l^r.nTii:^^^^^  ^-b<=  '^-^  there 

'lav  be VoStnt.  :i  ™''"  '*''^'''"  .^^ervants  an<l  will  one 

tions;re  So  ;o„^°f  "r^^^^  ^i,:f''  ^^i'":  '^eli,.ou.s  diBtinc 


The  Life  of  KabIr.  13 

replied  that  he  was  keeping  it  for  a  Sadhu,  now 
on  his  v/ay,  travelling  from  the  otl>er  side  of  the 
Ganges.  The  girl  said,  ''Sir,  drink  your  share, 
I  have  plenty  left  for  him."  Kabi'r  iriade  answer 
**My  food  is  the  Word  of  God."  (hu7n  Shabda 
aJuiri  havi).  Shortly  afterwards  the  Sadhu 
arrived  and  the  milk  was  given  to  him.  The 
Sants  asked  the  girl  (Loi)  of  her  parentage 
and  how  she  came  to  be  living  in  so  lonely  a 
spot.  Loi  replied  that  she  had  no  parents 
living,  that  she  had  been  brought  up  by  a  Sant, 
but  that  now  he  too  was  dead  and  she  was 
living  alone.  They  inquired  the  name  ot  the 
Sant  and  the  circumstances  under  which  slie  had 
come  to  be  living  \vi".h  him. 

The  girl,  Loi, replied,  "The  Sant  was  a  Barik- 
handi  Bairdgi  and  he  lived  on  milk  alone.  In 
reply  to  questions  concerning  me  he  used  to  say, 
'I  was  bathing  one  day  in  the  Ganges  when  a 
baskot  struck  against  me.  I  opened  the  basket  and 
found  in  it  a  female  infant.  I  took  the  infant  to 
my  home  and  reared  it  by  means  of  a  wick  soak- 
ed in  milk.  Having  found  the  infant  wrapt  in 
clothes  I  gave  it  the  name  of  Loi  (blanket). 
Such  is  the  account  that  the  Swami  would  give 
to  the  Sants." 

Loi  having  observed  the  gravity  of  Kabi'r 
said  to  him.  *'Swami,  give  me  such  teaching  as 
will  bring  me  peace  of  mind."  Kabir  was  pleased 


14  The  Life  of  KABfR 

"with  the  ob\ious  sincerity  of  the  girl  and  ins- 
tructed her  thus,  "Always  repeat  Saiyd  Nam 
(the  true  Name)  and  spend  your  days  in  the 
service  of  the  Sants."  In  obedience  to  this  teach- 
ing she  laid  aside  all  worldly  thou<;hts,  went  to 
Kasi  and  passed  her  time  in  the  service  ot  the 
Sants.  NiniiX  thought  that  Kabi'r  had  brought 
home  with  him  a  wife  and  asked  for  what 
purpose  he  had  married  her  as  they  did  not  live 
together  as  husband  and  wife. 

On  another  occasion  Kabir  was  walking 
along  the  bank  of  the  Ganges,  accompanied  by 
Shaikh  Taqqi,  when  the  latter  suddenly  caught 
s\i;hi  of  the  dead  body  of  a  child  floating  down 
tlie  stream.  The  Sliaikh  suggested  that  Kabir 
should  call  the  child.  Kabk  whispered  some- 
thing into  its  ears,  whereupon  it  at  once  began 
to  weep.  Shaikh  Taqqf  allowed  that  Kabir  had 
worked  a  miracle.  On  account  ot  its  beauty  Kabir 
named  the  cl>ild  Kainal  (Perfection)  and  made 
it  over  to  Loi  who  leared  it.  The  child  regarded 
Loi  as  its  mother  and  others  seeing  the  child  in 
Loi's  lap  regarded  Kabir  as  a  married  man. 

Some  time  afterwards  Kabir  happened  to  be 
in  the  house  of  a  neighbour  when  his  infant 
daughter  died.  Kabir  sought  permission  to  re- 
move the  dead  body  to  his  house.  The  mother, 
who  had  heard  how  h^  had  brought  Kamal  back 
to  life,  after  some  persuasion  induced  the  fathej- 


The  Life  of  KABiR  15 

to  give  his  consent.  Kabir  recalled  the  child  to 
life  bj  means  of  Shabda,  called  her  Kamali  and 
made  her  over  to  Loi  to  be  reared.  Both  children 
■worked  at  the  loom  and  addressed  Kabir  as 
Siva  mi  ji. 

One  day  vvl\en  Kamali  was  now  20  years  of 
age  she  happened  to  be  drawing  water  at  a  well, 
when  a  Pandit  came  up  and  asked  for  a  drink. 
Having  quenched  his  thirst  he  asked  whose 
daughter  she  was.  He  was  greatly  horrified 
when  he  learnt  that  she  was  the  dau^ihter  of  a 
weaver  and  exclaimed  'You  have  broken  my 
caste.'  Kamali  was  at  a  loss  to  understand  for 
what  reason  he  had  become  so  angry,  and  per- 
suaded him  to  come  and  discuss  mitters  with 
Kabir.  Before  either  had  had  time  to  explain 
matters,  Kabir,  who  could  read  the  thoughts  of 
men's  hearts,  exclaimed,  "Before  drinking  water 
think  on  these  things.  What  is  defilement  ? 
Fishes,  tortoises,  blood,  salt,  rotten  leaves  and 
the  carcases  of  dead  animals  are  all  to  be  found 
in  water.  Croresof  men  have  been  slain  by  Kal  ; 
at  every  step  you  take,  you  tread  upon  the  dead 
body  of  some  man  and  yet  from  such  earth  the 
vessels  from  which  you  drink  are  made.  At 
meal  times  you  take  off  your  clothes  for  fear  of 
defilement  and  wrap  yourself  in  a  dhoti  that  has 
been  woven  by  a  weaver.  The  fly  that  visits 
the  dung  hill  settles  on  your  fojd.     How  can 


16  The  Life  of  KabIr, 

you  prevent  this  ?  Dispel  such  illusions  from  the 
miud  ;  study  the  Vcdas  and  lake  refuge  in  Ram." 

At  the  Pandit's  request  Kabir  gc.vc  him  fur- 
ther instruction  in  the  doctrine  of  Satyd  Nam 
and  gave  him  Kamali  in  marriage. 

The  plain  speaking  of  Kabir  and  his  general 
disregard  for  the  conventions  of  society  raised 
him  up  enemies  on  every  side.  According  to 
Kab'ir  Panthi  traditions  it  was  Shaikh  Taqqi  who 
voiced  the  feelings  of  Muhammadnns  '  '\  This 
famous  Pir  came  before  the  Emperor,  Sikandar 
Lodi  and  accused  Kabir  ot  laying  claim  to 
Divine  attributes.  He  ur^ed  that  such  conduct 
merited  the  penalty  of  death.  Tlie  Emperor  is- 
sued a  warrant  lor  his  arrest  and  sent  men  to 
bring  him  to  the  court.  Not  till  evening  could 
the  men  who  were  sent  persuade  Kabir  to  ac- 
company them.  Kiibir  stood  before  the  Em- 
peror in  silence.  The  Oazi  exclaimed,  "  Why 
do  you  not  salute  the  Emperor,  you  kaftr  ?  " 
Kabir  replied,  'Those  only  are  Pirs  who  realise 
the  pains  of  others,  those  who  cannot  are  kafirs.'' 
The  Emperor  asked  him  why,  when  ordered  to 
appear  in  the  morning,  he  had  not  come  till 
evening.  Kabir  replied  that  he  had  seen  a  sight 
which  arrested  his  attention.  The  Emperor  ask- 
ed what  kind  of  a  sight  could  justify  him  in 

(l?)  On  chronological  and  other  grounds  it  seems  highly 
improbable  that  Shaikh  Taq<(i  played  the  part  assigned  to 
him  ia  this  legend.    Sec  Ckiptei  II. 


The  Life  of  KABfR,  17 

disregarding  his  commands.  Kabir  rejoined  that 
he  had  been  watching  a  string  of  camels  passing 
through  a  street  narrower  tlian  the  eye  of  a 
needle.  The  Kmperor  said  that  he  was  a  liar, 
Kab'ir  replied,  "0  Kmperor,  realise  how  great  is 
the  distance  between  heaven  and  earth.  Innum- 
erable elephants  and  camels  may  be  contained 
in  the  space  between  the  sun  and  the  moon,  and 
all  can  be  seen  tlirough  the  pupil  oftlic  eve  which 
is  smaller  than  the  eye  of  a  needle. "  The  Em- 
peror was  satisfied  and  let  him  go,- but  the  peo- 
ple murmured  and  complained  that  the  Emper- 
or had  disregarded  their  complaints.  Shaikh 
Taqqi  said  that  it  was  contrary  to  the  teaching 
of  the  Prophet  that  a  man  who  claimed  Divine 
powers  sb.oukl  be  allowed  to  live,  and  tluit  Kablr 
should  suffer  as  Mausur  and  Sliams  Tahrc/i  had 
suflercd  of  old. -''. 

The  Brahmins  added  that  he  was  be-dharm 
because  he  had  associated  with  a  woman  of  ill 
fame  and  Rae  Dass,  the  chamdr.'^^  Kabi'r  told, 
the  Emperor  of  his  doctrine,  but  to  no  effect 

(20)  Both  these  men  woro  Huff  paint';.  Mansi'ir  was 
cruelly  t<iitiir('il  and  aftei'v.arJs  hung  for  Kfiyin?  of  himsolf 
"I  am  the  Truth".  Nliams-ud-din  Tiihrezi  was  the  Mumtiid. 
(spiritual  (lirec  or)  of  Jalal-uii-din,  famous  as  tho  author  of 
the  Masnavi.     He  flourished  about  I2f  f. 

(21)  The  Chauu'irs  are  workers  in  leather  and  accounto  I 
of  very  low  ca?te  as  beinj,' a?^oeiated  in  th'-ir  work  with  the 
skins  of  dead  animals.  Scvc^ral  rclii^'ious  reformers  were  men 
of  low  caste  :  i'ae  bass  was  a  rhunnir  ;  Sena  a  barber  ;  Diidii 
a  cotton  cleaner;  NAbhriji,  the  author  of  the  //Af7//f  ,1/fJ/a  ft 
</ow  (<;wceptr). 


1^  The  Life  of  Karir. 

for  he  sided  with  the  people  and  ^ave  orders 
that  Kabir  should  be  put  to  death.    Kabir  was 
removed  and   made   fast  in  chains.     He  was 
then  placed  on  board  a  boat  winch  was  filled 
with  stones.  The  boat  sank,  but  Kabir  re-appcar- 
ed  as  a  boy,   floating  down  the  stream  on  a 
leopard's  skin.^^-'  He   was  a-ain  captured  and 
now  an  attempt  was  made  to  burn  him  alive. 
He  was  locked  up  in  a  hut  which  was  after- 
wards set  on  fire.     When  the  flames  were  e.v- 
tinguished  Kabir  re-appeared  in  a  form  of  great 
beauty.    He  was  now  accused  of  witchcraft  and 
the  people  demanded  that  he  should  be  trampl- 
ed to  death    by  an   infuriated  elephant.     Be- 
tween  the  elephant  and  Kabir  there  appeared  a 
hon,  at  the  sight  of  which  the  elepiiant  took 
fright^.-^     Finally  the  Kmpcrorasked  forgiveness 
01  Kabir  and  expressed  his  willingness  to  un- 
dergo any  punishment  that  he  might  name.   To 
this  Kabir  replied  that  a  man  should  sow  flowers 
for  those  who  had  sown  him  thorns. 

The  stories  so  far  related  speak  of  Kabir  as 
a  resident  of  Kasi  (  Benares  ).  It  is  natural 
that  his  Hindu  followers  should  wish  to  associ- 
ate him  as  closely  as  possible  with  their  sacred 

«t»,5?"^  •  ^'V''^-'-^  '^fff^"  '-••■irry  about  the  Rkin  of  a  doer  or 
?Mf^'S  "f;«'\^^'^-''  ^''<'.v  tak.  their  .oat  upon  the  iomui 
It^^^bohcofahfo   .pent  in  pla.es  apart  fro'm   theC.Us 


The  Life  of  KABfR.  19 

city,  but  there  is  evidence  both  from  the  Bijah 
and  the  Adl  Oranth  to  show  that  he  did  not  at 
any  rate  spend  the  wliolo  ol  his  hTe  in  Benares. 

In  tlic  /j(}(i/i  is  found  a  '^!amaini  which 
ma,  be  interpreted  thus  :— 

"  Kabi'r  settled  for  a  while  in  Manilcpur  hav- 
in^  heard  of  the  praises  of  Shuikh  Taqqi,,  Ho 
heard  also  about  Uji  in  the  district  of  Jaunpur. 
At  Jhusi  he  heard  the  names  of  his  Pirs."-^* 
He  heard  of  twenty-one  Pirs  in  all.  They  preach 
in  the  name  of  the  Prophet.  On  hearing  this  I 
could  not  refrain  from  speaking.  The  people 
have  looked  on  the  shrines  and  gone  astray.  The 
works  of  Habibi  ( Beloved)  and  Nabi  (  Prophet) 
are  all  contrary  to  law  (  hardrn  ).  O  Shaikh 
Aqardi  and  Shaikh  Saqardi,  listen  to  my  words. 
See  the  beginning  as  well  as  the  end  with  open 
eyes,  consider  every  period  of  the  world's  his- 
tory." 

In  the  opening  lines  of  this  Ramaini  Kabir 
seems  to  be  enumerating  the  places  which  he 
had  visited  in  his  search  for  religious  guidance  : 
in  the  closing  lines  to  be  grieving  over  the 
thought  that  more  honour  is  paid  to  the  tombs  of 
the  dead  than  to  the  GoD  in  whose  service  their 
lives  were  spent.--'' 

(24)  His  Pirs, ».  e.  Shaikb  Taqqi  and  his  father   Shabia-ul- 
millat,  who  were  alWays  closely  associated  together. 

(25)  Fui'   further    conimenls    upon    tliis    Bamaiai    aee 
Clmpler  II. 


^^  The  Life  of  KABfR. 

In  the  Adi  GrantJt  these  h'aes  are  put  into 
the  mouth  of  Kabi'r, 

My  Haij  is  on   the   banks  of  the   Gomti  :   where 
dwdJs  my  Pfr,  wearing  a  ydlosv  robe.s*: 

Reference  is  here  appareiUlv  made  to  Jaun- 
pur   wnich  IS  sittiated  on  the  lelt  or  northern 
bank  of  the  Go.nti.     Jaunpur  was  the  capital  of 
a  famous  Muh.immadan  (Sharqi)  dynasty,  lb- 
rauim,oneofthe  kings  of  this  dvnastv  (i^i'>) 
was  a  great  patron  of  Muhammadan 'learning' 
but  v.as  in  this  respect  surpassed  by  Bibi  Rajah,' 
who  Duilt  a  magnificent  Jami  Mosque,  a  College 
and  a  Mona^ery.     She  also  appropriated  large 
sums  of  money   for  the  maintenance   of  those 
leamea  m   Theology  and   the  Sciences.     With 
the  exception  of  the  Mosque  all  these  buildings 
^v;ere  subsequently  destroyed  by  Sikandar  Lodi 
either  on  leiigicus  or  political  gromids.-'" 

Vre  gather  from  this  quotation  that  Kabir 
was  bom  elsewhere  than  m  Jaunpur,  but  that  he 
received  religious  instruction  in  that  city. 

There  are  many  other  stories  connected  with 
the  hfe  of  Kabir,  but  we  wil!  only  reproduce 
one  more  before  passing  on  to  consider  the 
manner  of  his  death.     This  .tory  is  of  interest 

(2C)  Muhammn,!:m  P:rs  wear  yellow  .-arn.cnt. 
tlrappUcU  to  t^->  aTu.™""^  ^,^.^  ^f"  "''-'^^''  '"^  sub.cquen. 


The  Life  of  KabIr  21 

as  it  associates  Kabi'r  with  Central  India  wheie 
at  the  present  time  his  influence  is  most  strong- 
ly telt. 

There  h'ved  in  the  Deccan  two  brothers, 
Tatva  and  JIvh,  who  were  anxious  to  find  for 
themselves  a  spiritual  guide.  Tliey  used  relig- 
iously to  wash  the  feet  of  the  many  Sadhiis 
who  visited  their  house  and  listened  attentively 
to  their  teaching.  At  a  loss  to  discover  which 
of  these  Si'idluis  were  possessed  of  real  spiritual 
power  they  devised  the  following  test.  They 
planted  in  the  courtyard  of  their  house  a  with- 
ered branch  of  a  banyan  tree  and  agreed  to  ac- 
cept as  their  Guru  that  Sadhii  whose  power  was 
Buch,  that  the  washings  of  his  feet  would  avail 
to  restore  the  branch  to  life.  For  forty  years 
they  waited  in  vain  for  one  who  could  satisfy 
the  test  and  were  almost  in  despair  of  ever  find- 
ing the  desired  Guru,  when  Kabi'r  arrived  upon 
the  scene.  The  branch  when  sprinkled  with  the 
water  in  which  his  feet  had  been  washed  imme- 
diately returned  to  life.  Kabi'r  was  accepted  as 
their  Guru  and  gave  utterance  to  these  lines  : — 

The  Sadhiis  are  my  soul  and  I  am  the  body  of  the 

Sadhus ;  I  live  in  the  Sadhus,  as  rain  lives  in  the 

clouds. 

The  SadhuH  are  n\y  Atma,  and  I  am  the  life  of  the 

Sadhus  :    I    live   in    the  Sadhus,  as  glti  lives  in  the 

milk. 


-2  The  Life  of  Kabir. 

The  Sadhiis  are  my  Atma  and  I   am  the  bread  of 

the  Sadhus:   I  live  in  the  Sadhus  as  fragrance  lives 
in  the  flowers.  / 

All  accounts  agree  that  the  earthlv  Vec  of 
Kabi'r  came  to  ?.  close  at  Maghar  in  thp-'distnct 
of  Gorakhpur.  We  are  not  told  wh^^f^r  he  had 
e^er  previously  visited  this  plnee;  but  he  may 
possibly  have  done  so  ^^  hen  on  a  visit  to  Gor:ikh- 
Nath,the  famous  Yogi  aLd  foundcry^/rtho  Shivite 
sect  that  bears  his  name.       y^ 

There  are  lines  in  the^icli  Granth  in  which 
Kabjrrefcis  to  the  au.-i'erities  practised  by  Gor- 
akn  Xdth  and  speaks  of  him  as  having  died  in 
spiteofall.28 

Tradition  relates  that  Kabi'r  died  in  extreme 
old  age,  when  his  body  had  become  infirm  and 
his  hands  were  no  longer  able  to  proc\ice  the 
music  with  which  he  had  in  younger  days  cele- 
brated the  praises  of  Ram.     It  he  had  lost  the 
company  of  earthly  friends  he  felt  more  closely 
unirerl.  than  ever  before,  to  one  from  whom  he 
would  never  more  be  parted.  Such  appear  to  be 
the  thoughts  which  find  expression  in  the  follow- 
ing  lines,  quoted  from  the  Adi  Granth  ;— 
Benares  has  been  left   by  me  and  my  intellect  has 
become  httle  :  my  whole  life  is  lost  in  Shivpuri, 

(2^)  Gorakh  Nath  and  anollier  Jliudu  ascetic,  Muc  iban- 
dar,  -.vho  IS  more  thau  once  referred  to  in  the  i?;>yt  are  aba 
hjuzdiU'ju  as5ociatc-J  with  Jhusi.    See  Alluhabad  Gazetteer 


The  Life  of  KABfR.  23 

at  the  time  of  death  I  have  arisen  and  come  to 
Maghlr. 

0  my  King,  I  am  a  Bairagi  and  Yogi :  when  dyi  ig, 

1  am  not  grieved,  nor  separated  from  Thee. 

The  mind  and  breath  are  made  the  drinking  gourd, 
the  fiddle  is  constantly  prepared  :  the  string  has 
become  firm,  it  does  not  break,  unbeaten  the  fiddle 
sounds.  2 'J 

Sing,  sing,  O  bride,  a  beautiful  song  of  blessing  : 
King  R^in,  my  husband,  has  come  to  my  house. 

It  wa.s  the  wish  of  his  disciples  that  Kabi'r 
should  end  his  days  at  Kasi  where  so  much  of 
his  religious  work  had  been  accomplished.  All 
who  died  in  Kasf,  they  urged,  would  pass 
immediately  into  the  presence  of  Ram,  while 
those  who  died  at  Maghar  would  return  to 
this  world  and  assume  the  form  of  an  ass.  Kabi'r 
rebuked  them  for  their  want  of  faith.  Is  the 
power  of  Ram  so  limited  that  he  cannot  save  his 
servant  because  he  prefers  to  die  outside  Kasf, 
the  city  of  Shiva  ? 

What  Kdsi  ?  What  Maghar  ?  He  who  dies  at  MaghAr 
is  not  dead,  when  Ram  has  taken  up  his  abode  in 
my  heart  :  he  who  dies  elsewhere  puts  Ram  to 
shame. 

A  difficulty  arose  with  regard  to  the  disposal 
ofhis  body  after  death.     The  Muhammadans 

(29)  In  Kabir  literatu  c  the  soul  of  man  is  often  compared 
to  a  strin?.  His  soul  is  now  attuned  to  sine  the  prai«e?  of 
God. 


24  The  Life  of  KABfR 

desired  to  bury  it  and  the  Hindus  to  cremate  it. 
As  the  rival  parties  discussed  the  question  with 
ojowing  warmth  Kabi'r  himself  appeared  and 
bade  them  raise  the  cloth  in  which  the  body  lay 
enshrouded.  They  did  as  he  commanded  and 
lol  beneath  the  cloth  there  lay  but  a  heap  of 
flowers  !  Of  these  Hewers  the  Hindus  removed 
half  and  burnt  them  at  Benares,  while  what 
remained  were  buried  at  Maghar  by  Muham- 
madans,*" 

(30)     A  vcrv  similar  story  ;s  told   in   connexion    witli  the 
dtflth  of  N:inak.     See  Hughes'  Dictionary  of  Islam,  p.  588. 


ADDITIONAL  NOTE, 
Kahir  in  Eistory, 

The  following  abstracts  from  standard  books  of 
reference  will  suffice  to  show  that  the  name 
"Kabir"  is  not  so  rare  as  has  sometimes  been  sup- 
posed. There  is  reason  to  question  the  accuracy 
of  some  of  the  dates  i  and  reason  to  believe  that 
some  of  Kabir's  biographers,  working  upon  the 
assumption  that  there  was  only  one  Kabir,  have 
unhesitatingly  appropiated  details  from  the  lives 
of  several. 

In  Khazinat-til-AsJid  (  Treasury  of  Saints  ),^ 
written  by  Maulvi  Gulam  Sarwar  and  published 
at  Lahore  about  1868,  mention^^  is  made  of 

(i)  Kabir  Cftishit,  Sufi  any  inhabitant  of  Nagore 
who  on  account  of  ill-treatment  at  the  hands  of 
Muhammadans  journeyed  in  the  direction  of  Guj- 
erat  and  died  there  in  1854 

(2)  Shaikh  Kabir  Juliha,  the  disciple  and 
successor  of  Shaikh  Taqqi,  who  is  described  as 
being  one  of  the  great  men  of  his  time  and  a  leader 
among  Thcists.  He  is  described  as  the  author 
of  many  Hindi  writings  which  prove  him  to   have 

(1)  Dates  may  liave  been  transferred  from  the  History  of  one 
man  to  that  of  another  bearing  the  same  name,  or  difHculty 
may  have  been  experienced  in  deciphcrini^j  dates  written  ia 
Persian  figures,  with  mt  an  accompanying  verbal  explanation. 

(2)  In  this  book  Sh-.iikh  Taqqi  is  d(;scribed  as  Haijak,  the 
Arabic  equivalent  of  the  Persian  Jidldha,  He  is  said  to  have 
ilved  at  Jlanikpur  and  to  have  died  in  157'A. 

O 


26  KABfR  IN  History. 

been  a  man  of  great  ability.  He  taught  the 
Sufi  doctrine  of  Wisal  (Union  with  God)  and 
presen-ed  silence  with  regard  to  the  contrary 
doctrine  of  Ftrdq.  (Separation).  He  is  said  to 
have  been  the  first  to  write  anything  about  God 
and  his  attributes  in  the  Hindi  language,  and  to 
have  been  the  author  of  various  Hindi  poems.  On 
account  of  his  religious  toleration  he  was  accepted 
as  a  leader  by  Hindus  as  well  as  by  Muhammadans 
and  styled  by  the  former  Pir  Kahir  and  by  the 
latter  Bhagat  Kabir.  The  date  of  his  death  is 
given  as  1504. 

(3)  Khic'ijiTh  AuUa  Kahir  who  visited  Bokhdrd 
and  died  in  1229. 

(4)  Syed  Kahir-ful-din  Hassan  of  the  same 
family  as  Kabir-ud-din  Ismail,  who  is  said  to 
have  travelled  three  times  round  the  world  and  to 
have  lived  to  the  age  of  180.  He  resided  at  Uch 
in  Balakh  (Baluchistan)  were  he  died  in  1490. 

(5)  SJiaihh  Kahir^  the  son  of  Shaikh  Munawar 
and  resident  of  Bajaora,  who  is  simply  described  as 
a  conceited  man  and  a  victim  of  the  opium  habit. 

In  Sa!r-ul-Aq!ah  (History  of  Pillar  Saints), 
written  by  Shaikh  Allah  Diya,  mention  is  made  of 

(6)  Shaikh  Abdr.l  Knhlr  who  is  said  to  have 
been  a  saint  from  his  mother's  womb  and  to  have 
possessed  a  great  power  of  foretelling  events.  He 
was  known  as  Shailch  Kah'ir  or  Bald  Fir  and  inherit- 
ed the  priestly  robe  of  the  Sufi's  from  his  father, 
Abdul  Cuddus.  He  performed  many  miracles  and  by 


Kabir  in  History.  27 

merely  shaking  the  sleeve  of  his  robe  was  able  to 
cause  a  lion  to  appear.  He  had  a  taste  for  singing 
and  was  lavish  in  his  hospitality.  He  had  four 
sons  and  many  disciples.  The  king  of  Jaunpur, 
Sultan  Sikandar  Lodi,  together  with  his  Vizier, 
Bhura,  and  Mahk  Mahmud,  determined  to  test  his 
powers  as  a  saint.  It  was  arranged  that  they 
should  visit  him  one  evening,  each  having  pre- 
viously in  his  own  mind  thought  of  some  parti- 
cular dish.  If  the  Pir  supplied  the  want  of  each 
he  was  to  be  regarded  as  a  man  of  God.  As  soon 
aH  they  entered  his  house  Kabir  brought  a  dish  of 
venison  sandwiches  and  placed  it  before  the  king  ; 
to  the  Vizier  he  offered  a  bowl  of  soup  and  some 
bread  and  to  Malik  Mahmud  a  dish  of  sweetmeats. 
The  result  was  that  his  guests  begged  forgiveness  for 
having  ever  called  his  powers  in  question.  This 
Kabir  died  in  1539.  He  is  said  to  have  been 
succeeded  by  his  son  Shaikh  Usmim,  who  was  gener- 
rally  known  as  Zinda  Pir.^ 

In  Mntakhib-ul-Tawnrikh  by  Mullah  Abdul  Oidir 
of  Budaon  mention  is  made  of 

(7)  Shaikh  Kab'ir,  a  resident  of  Multnn,  who 
journeyed  northwards  to  Balakh  and  returned  from 
thence  to  India  and  travelled  in  the  company  of 
Akbar.  Owing  to  exhaustion  brought  on  by  the 
severity  of  his  devotions  and  night  watches  he  is 
said  to  have  presented  the  appearance  of  a  drunkard. 
(3)  The  niune  Bald  P'lr  occurs  in  the  list  of  the  Mahants 
of  tlie  Dhaim  Dass  section  of  the  Kabir  Panth  and  the  words 
jiinda  Pir  in  the  legend  of  the  naming  of  Kabir. 


28  KABfR  IN  History. 

Mullah    Abdul  Oadir  liimself  met    this  saint   at 
Fatehpur  in  1585  A.  D. 

In  Akhbdr-vJ.Akhjar  mention  is  made  of 
(8)  Amir  Kahlr  Mir  Syed  Alt  Jldmdani  who  visit- 
ed Kashmir  in  1379  and  died  there  five  years  later. 
After  his  death  a  dispute  arose  concerning  the  dis- 
posal of  his  body  between  the  people  of  Kashmir, 
Sultan  Muhammad  and  Shaikh  Aqwdm-ud-din  of 
Badakhshan.  The  last  named  finally  secured  the 
body,  but  the  people  of  Kashmir  erected  a  cenotaph 
at  the  place  where  he  died. 

In  the  Ferishla  mention  is  also  made  of 
(q)    Syed   Ahmad  Kabi'r,  the   Father  of  Syed 
Jalal-ud-din,  and 

(10)  Kah'ir-nd-d\n  Ismat%  grandson,  disciple  and 
successor  of  Syed  Jalal-ud-din,  otherwise  known  as 
JUahJcdtnn  Jahanian  or  Jahun  GuftJd  Shah  from  the 
fact  that  he  travelled  extensively  to  Mecca,  Balakh 
etc.  Kabir-ud-din  Ismail  also  travelled  extensively 
and  died  in  1421. 

(11)  At  Jaunpur  there  is  a  small  Masjid,  built 
in  memory  of  Divin  Shih  Kab'ir  wlio  was  one  of 
four  brothers,  all  of  whom  lie  buried  in  the  same 
plot  of  ground.  This  Masjid,  which  was  built  dur- 
ing the  reign  or  the  Emperor  Humayan,  is  situat- 
ed in  tha  Muhalla  Tar  Tali. 


Chapter  II. 

The  Life  of  KAsfR  (Contd). 

The  traditional  life  of  Kab\r  has  a  poetical 
beauty  which  in  its  power  to  commend  a 
Muhammadan  Saint  to  Hindu  followers  may  be 
thankfully  regarded  as  a  prophecy  of  the  great- 
er reconciliation  of  conflicting  faiths  to  which 
so  many  of  us  look  forward.  The  veil  that  has 
been  drawn  over  the  first  beginnings  of  an 
important  religious  movement  we  would  rever- 
ently raise,  trusting  tiiereby  to  add  a.jditional 
lustre  to  the  biave  efforts  ot  a  distinguished 
champion  of  religious  truth. 

Prof.  Wilsoii,  llie  distinguished  Sanskrit 
scholar,  to  whose  investigations  every  English 
student  of  Iiuliiin  religions  thouglit  owessodecp 
a  debt  of  gratitude,  writes  of  the  improbability, 
not  to  say  impossibility,  of  Kabir's  having  been 
a  Muhammadan,  and  with  no  more  respect  does 
he  treat  Col.  Malcolm's  suggestion  that  he 
belonged  to  the  Sufi'  sect.  Later  writers  have 
been  content  to  yield  to  authority  and  to 
accept  as  established  truth  the  judgement  of  a 
great  scholar. 

Did  we  believe  that  Prof.  Wilson  had  care- 
fully investigated  all  the  documents  that  are 


30  The  Life  of  KABfR 

now  available  to  students,  we  should  hardly 
presume  to  question  the  accuracy  of  his  judge- 
ment, but  we  cannot  help  feeling  that  in  the 
immensity  of  the  tasks  which  he  imposed  upon 
himself  he  has  overlooked  some  part  of  the 
evidence,  or  possibly  too  readily  accepted  the 
statements  of  fellow  workers  in  the  same  field. 

Any  one  who  has  read  Prof.  Wilson's  ac- 
count of  Kabir's  life  would  carry  away  the 
impression  that  N;ibh:iji,  the  author  of  the 
Bhakta  Mala,  had  recorded  some  at  least  of  the 
legends  which  have  found  a  place  in  the  pre- 
>nous  chapter.  Nabhaji  himself,  to  judge  from 
the  carefully  printed  edition  of  the  Bhakta 
Mala  now  current  in  India,  is  only  responsible 
for  the  following  statement  : — 

"Kabfr  refused  to  acknowledge  caste  dis- 
tinctions or  to  recognise  the  authority  of  the  six 
schools  of  Hindu  philosophy,  nor  did  he  set 
any  store  by  the  four  divisions  of  liie  (AsJm'un) 
prescribed  for  Brahmins.  He  held  that  religion 
without  Bhakti  was  no  religion  at  all  and  that 
asceticism,  fasting  and  almsgiving  had  no  value 
if  unaccompanied  by  worship  (B/iajan,  hymn 
singing).  By  means  of  Ramainis,  Shabdas  and 
Sakhis  he  imparted  religious  instruction  to 
Hindus  and  Muhammadans  alike.  He  had  no 
preference  for  either  religion,  but  gave  teaching 
that  was  appreciated  by  the  followers  of  both. 


The  Life  of  KABfR.  31 

He  spoke  out  his  mind  fearlessly  and  never 
made  it  his  object  merely  to  please  his  hearers," 

This  short  account  describes  a  man  who 
had  no  great  sympathy  with  Brahminical  teach- 
ing, who  believed  in  a  personal  God  and  in 
salvation  by  faith  rather  tlian  by  good  works, 
and  who  delivered  a  message,  re;,'arded  as  God's 
message,  to  Hindus  and  Muhammadans  alike. 

This  is  all  that  is  stated  in  the  text,  but  to 
the  text  ifl  appended  a  commentary  written  by 
alaterhand'.  In  this  coininentary  it  is  stated 
that  Kabi'r  in  his  desire  to  wear  a  Khnnti  round 
his  neck  and  a  tilak  on  his  forehead  (to  attract 
a  Hindu  audience)  made  up  his  mind  to  be- 
come a  disciple  ot  Ramanand  and  achieved  his 
purpose  as  described  in  the  previous  chapter^  ; 
that  Muhammadans  objected  to  the  repetition 
of  'Ram,  Ram/  by  a  co-religionist  and  asked 
Rdmanand  whether  it  were  true  that  he  had 
received  a  ^'wZfl/w  as  his  disciple;  that  Rama- 
nand  at  first  denied  that  he  had  done  so  but 
when  confronted  with  Kabir  acknowledged  his 
mistake.     Mention   is    also  made  of  the   fact 

(1)  AcconliiiG;  to  one  account  Nubhi'iji  wrote  his  acooant 
of  the /yArt^/fl/*  iiifsanskrit  and  asked  his  disciple  PHya  Dass 
to  provide  it  with  a  commentary.  Piiya  made  alK-{:inning  and 
then  handed  over  the  MS  to  Gobardhan  Nath.  Finally  the 
commoiitaiy  was  completcfl  by  Narain  Dass,  a  disciple  of  Go» 
bardhan  Nath  and  published  in  1769. 

(2)  We  gather  from  the  legend  that  Kabir  was  received 
into  the  uiniiinaiidi  Sect  as  a  Hindd  and  that  trouble 
arose  subs([ueutly  when  it  was  discovered  that  he  was  really 
a  Muhan  uailan. 


32  The  Life  of  Kabir, 

that  Kabir  was  charged  before  the  Emperor, 
Sikandar  Lodi,  and  refused  on  that  occasion  to 
salute  the  Emperor,  that  he  was  sentenced  to 
death  and  was  in  succession  thrown  into  the 
Ganges,  committed  to  the  flames  and  exposed 
to  the  fury  of  an  elephant,  but  all  to  no  pur- 
pose. It  is  added  that  the  Emperor,  thwarted 
in  his  desire  to  destroy  Kabir,  recognised  that 
he  had  acted  wrongly,  asked  Kabi'r's  forgive- 
ness and  offered  to  compensate  him  for  the 
injuries  inflicted. 

XAbhaji  may  have  been  acquainted  with  the 
legends  now  appended  to  his  statement  and  his 
editor  may  have  known  of  other  legends  not 
recorded,  but  we  have  no  right  to  assume  such 
knowledge,  nor  are  we  yet  in  a  position  to  say 
at  what  time  other  legends  gradually  became 
current.  All  that  we  know  is  that  such  are 
now  to  be  found  in  various  writings  of  unknown 
date,  but  accepted  as  authoritative  by  members 
of  the  Kablr  Panth. 

We  are  inclined  to  accept  both  of  the  theo- 
ries advanced  by  Col.  Malcolm  and  to  believe 
not  only  that  Kabi'r  was  a  Muhammadan  by 
birth  but  also  that  he  was  associated  with  the 
Sufi  order ;  and  that  the  great  object  of  his  life 
was  to  break  down  the  barriers  that  separated 
Hindus  from  Muhammadans.  We  believe  that 
in  his  desire  to   achieve   this  object  he  actually 


The  Life  of  KabJr.  33 

took  up  his  residence  in  Benares  and  associated 
there  with  the  followers  of  Ramdnand.  We 
can  well  imagine  that  his  teaching  gave  offence 
both  to  orthodox  Muhammadans  and  to  or- 
thodox Hindus,  and  it  is  probable  that  both 
parties  welcomed  the  opportunity  afforded  by 
Sikandar  Lodi's  visit  to  Jaunpur  in  1495  to  wait 
upon  him  with  a  request  that  he  would  rid 
them  of  one  who  despised  tradition  wh^^n  in 
conflict  with  the  truth. 

Sikandar  Lodi  is  represented  by  Muhamma- 
dan  historians  as  one  who  was  zealous  for  the 
faith  and  had  on  one  occasion  put  to  death  a 
distinguished  pandit,  Jodhan  by  name,  because 
he  refused  to  allow  that  Islam  had  a  monopoly 
of  spiritual  truth.  Fortunately  for  Kabir  Mu- 
hammadan  rulers  were  wont  to  allow  Sufis 
considerable  license  in  their  criticism  of  the 
faith,  especially  when  such  Sufi's  combined 
personal  piety  with  poetical  talent.  When  we 
read  how  the  enemies  of  Kabir  reminded  the 
Emperor  of  the  fate  that  had  befallen  Mansur 
and  Sliams  Tabrezi  who  were  both  distinguished 
Sufi  saints,  we  feel  that  they  had  some  know- 
led<;e  of  this  weakness  and  feared  lest  Kabir 
might  on  such  grounds  escape  the  death  penal- 
ty which  alone  would  satisfy  their  embittered 
feelings.  Their  fears  were  realised,  for  we 
gather  from  the  legend  that  the  Emperor  con- 


34  The  Life  of  KabIr. 

promised  the  case  ;  he  spared  the  h'fe  of  Kabir, 
but  banished  him  from  the  city  where  his 
teaching  had  given  so  great  offence. 

That  Kabi'r  had  been  brought  up  in  a  Mu- 
hammudan  family  was  probably  a  fact  too  well 
known  to  allow  of  contradiction.     All  that  his 
Hindu  followers  could  do  was  to  suggest  that 
he  was  not  of  Muhammadan  origin,  but  only  a 
Muhammadan  by  adoption.    The  name  Kabir 
was  also  too  well  established  to  allow  of  any 
alteration.  It  only  remained  to  explain  its  origin 
in  a  way  that  would  commend  itself  to  those 
who  accepted  the  story  of  the  virgin  birth.  Such 
an  explanation  was  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that 
Al  Kabir  is  one  of  the  99  names  of  God  in  use 
among  Muhammadans.  The  name  Kabir  occurs 
in  the  Ooran  six  times  as  a  title  of  Allah  and 
once  as  a  title  of  Al-Rabb. 

The  legend  that  calls  attention  to  this  fact 
presents  a  curious  blend  of  Hindu  and  Muhara- 
madan  procedure.  It  is  customary  for  Muham- 
madans to  open  a  Ooran  and  give  to  the  child 
the  name  on  which  the  eye  of  the  reader  may 
first  chance  to  fall  ;  it  is  customary  for  Hindijs 
to  bestow  upon  a  child  a  name  containing  three 
words  usually  beginning  with  the  same  letter 
and  so  similar  in  sound.  This  name  is  suggest- 
ed by  the  position  of  the  stars  at  the  time  of 
birth  and  is  known  as  the  Rds  or  astronomical 


The  Life  of  KAsfR.  35 

name.  The  three  names,  Akbar,  Rubra  and 
Kibriyk  said  to  have  been  found  by  the  Qkzi  in 
the  Qordn  are  all  derived  from  the  same  root 
KBR 'great'  Of  these  three  names  however 
only  one,  Kibriyd,  is  to  be  found  in  modem 
Qorans.  Of  the  three  nrmes  Zinda,  Khinjar 
and  Pir,  the  first  and  third  are  Persian  words 
and  as  such  not  found  in  the  Qoran.  Khinjar  is 
probably  a  corruption  ofKhizar  the  name  of  the 
saint  who  is  in  the  Qoran  associated  with  Moses. 

A  legend  containing  impossible  details  can 
hardly  be  regarded  as  a  literal  representation  of 
historical  fact. 

Muhammadan  tradition  asserts  that  Kabi'r 
had  a  son,  Kamal  by  name.  This  name  also  is 
of  Arabic  origin  and  so  a  source  of  difficulty  to 
those  who  regard  Kabir  as  a  Hindu  sddhii. 
There  is  a  word  hammal,  a  corruption  of  kam- 
bal  (blanket)  and  in  one  version  of  the  Kamal 
legend  it  is  stated  that  Kabir  caught  sight  of 
the  child  floating  down  the  stream,  wrapt  up  in 
a  blanket  and  cried  out,  not  "  Kamal,  Kama! " 
but  "  Kammal,  Kammal." 

Muhammadan  tradition  implies  that  Kabir 
like  other  Sufi  leaders  was  a  married  man,  but 
as,  in  accordance  with  Muhammadan  custom,  no 
mention  is  made  of  his  wife's  name,  Hindus 
were  free  to  supply  her  with  a  Hindi  name  and 
chose  Loi  which  also  means  a  blanket. 


36  The  Life  of  KABfR. 

There  is  a  possible  reference  to  his  wife  in  the 
following  lines  contained  in  the  Adi  Granth. 

The  first  wife  was  ugly,  of  low  caste,  of  ill- 
boding  feature  :  wicked  in  the  house  of  her  father- 
in-law  and  in  her  father's  house  ; 

The  present  wife  is  beautiful,  intelligent,  of 
auspicious  features,  easily  child-bearing. 

These  lines  may  be  interpreted  to  mean  that 
Kabfr  had  lost  his  wife,  but  found  comfort  in 
closer  union  with  God  ;  or  they  may  mean  that 
the  soul  at  first  united  with  a  material  body  re- 
joiced in  the  thought  of  becoming  spiritually 
one  with  God. 

In  certain  respects  the  legendary  life  of 
Kabi'r  presents  remarkable  parallels  to  incidents 
in  the  life  of  Christ.  After  an  account  of  the 
virgin  birth  we  re:id  that  Kabi'r,  as  a  boy, 
meets  and  worsts  in  argument  a  learned  Pandit; 
he  is  criticised  for  associating  with  the  outcasts 
cf  society  ;  he  miraculously  supplies  the  poor 
with  bread;  he  incurs  the  hostility  of  the  reli- 
gious leaders  of  his  time  ;  he  raises  from  the 
dead  a  boy  and  a  girl  and  is  ministered  to  by 
women.  The  full  account  of  his  appearance 
before  Sikandar  Lodi  presents  in  many  details  a 
striking  resemblance  to  Christ's  trial  before 
Pilate. 

The  books  containing  these  legends  are  of 
comparatively  late  date  and  the  writers  may 


The  Life  of  KABfR.  37 

have  been  influenced  by  a  desire  to  assimilate 
the  life  of  Kabi'r  to  that  of  Christ. 

Many  of  the  legends,  especially  some  which 
have  not  been  mentioned  in  this  chapter  seem 
to  have  originated  in  a  desire  to  explain  the 
circumstances  under  which  some  of  Kabi'r's  best 
known  sayings  were  first  spoken,  or  to  associate 
the  memory  of  Kabir  with  persons  and  institu- 
tions held  in  special  reverence  by  Hindus, 
Several  appear  in  different  forms  and  nearly  all 
contain  details  which  must  raise  difficulties  in 
the  minds  of  all  who  are  not  overcredulous. 

In  the  Dabistan,  a  Persian  history,  said  to 
have  been  written  by  Mohsin  Fani  of  Kashmir 
in  the  reign  of  \kbar,  it  is  stated  that  Kabir  was 
a  weaver  and  a  Muwahid  i.e.  a  believer  in  one 
God.  It  is  further  stated  that  in  his  desire  to 
find  spiritual  guidance  he  visited  Muslim  as  well 
as  Hindu  sages,  and  finally  became  a  disciple 
of  Ramdnand  un<Ier  the  circumstances  already 
recorded  in  this  legend.  Mention  is  also  made 
of  the  following  story  : — 

One  day  when  certain  Brahmins  were  expati- 
ating on  the  purifying  qualities  of  the  Ganges 
water,  Kabir  filled  his  wooden  cup  with  water 
from  the  river  and  offered  it  to  them  to  drink. 
They  were  horrified  at  the  thought  of  drinking 
out  of  the  cup  belonging  to  a  low  caste  man  ; 
upon  which   Kabir  remarked,     "  If  the  Ganges 


38  The  Life  of  KabIr. 

water  cannot  purify  my  cup,  how  can  I  believe 
that  it  can  wash  away  my  sins  7  " 

The  statement  that  Kabir  was  a  JuUh^  and 
Muw^hid  is  confirmed  by  Abul  Fazland  has  never 
been  contradicted.    What  we  have  to  deter- 
mine is  the  exact  meaning  of  the  statement, 
Hindus  have  assumed  that  Kabir  in  early  life 
actually  followed  the  profession  of  a  weaver  and 
have  quoted  his  use  of  weaving  metaphors  by 
way  of  illustration.    This  he  may  have  done, 
but  we  must  also  bear  in  mind  that  it  was  cus- 
tomary for  Muhammadans  of  that  age  to  attach 
to  their  personal  names  the  name  of  the  profes- 
sion with  which  their  family  had  originally  been 
associated.    The  term  Muwahid  was  not,  so  far 
as  I  can  learn,  ever  applied  by    Muhammadans 
to  those  whom  they  regarded  as  idolaters.     It 
implies  that  he  was  a  Thei-t  and  not  a  Panthe- 
ist. The  prevailing  impression  that  Kabir  was  a 
Pantheist  appear^  to  bit  based  upon  two  false 
assumpiions,  (n  that  he  is  responsible  for  all 
the  teaching  given  by  iiis  Hindu  followers  at  a 
later  age  and  (2)  th  tt  all  the  statements  contain- 
ed in  the  Bijak  represent  his  personal   views 
There  is  reason  to  believe  that  insufficient  care 
has  been  taken  in  studying  the  context  in  which 
certain  sayings  occur;  reason  to  fear  that  Kabir 
has  been  credited  with  the  argument  of  Maya 
whom  he  at  all  times  ruthlessly  condemns. 


The  Life  of  KabIr.  3^ 

Great  interest  attaches  to  the  mention,  of 
Shaikh  Taqqi.  According  to  the  Hindu  legends 
Shaikh  Taqqi  was  the  rival  and  opponent  of 
Kabir,  while  Muhammadans  regard  him  as  his 
Pir,  In  the  Ramaini  quoted  in  the  previous 
chapter  there  is  probably  a  reference  to  two 
Shaikh  Taqqis  whom  later  writers  have  not 
been  always  careful  to  distinguish. 

Shaikh  Taqqi  of  Manikpur  Kara  was  a  najdf, 
(cotton  cleaner)  by  profession  and  belonged  to 
the  Chistia  order  of  Sufis.  He  is  said  to  have 
died  at  Bhandarpur  in  1545  but  there  is  probably 
some  mistake  about  the  date.  In  the  Aina 
Oudh  it  is  stated  that  this  Shaikh  Taqqi  was 
the  disciple  and  successor  of  Shaikh  Nathan 
Dana  who  himself  succeeded  Shaikh  Khwajah 
Kargh  and  that  the  last  named  died  in  1305. 
Shaikh  Taqqi  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Makdn 
who  founded  a  village  in  the  Fatehpur  district 
which  is  called  after  him  Makanpur.  His  des- 
cendants are  still  to  be  found  in  that  and  the 
neighbouring  villages.  From  the  statement 
contained  in  the  Ramaini  it  appears  that  Kabir 
visited  Manikpur  and  remained  there  for  some 
time  in  attendance  upon  the  Shaikh  or  his 
successors. 

The  Manikpur  referred  to  is  situated  on  the 
Norther.i  bank  of  the  Ganges,  between  Fateh- 
pur and  Allahabad.     It  was  for  a  short  time  the 


40  The  Life  of  KabIr. 

Mflitaiy  head  quarters  of  the  Emperor  Sikandar 
Lodi.  Near  Manikpur,  but  on  the  Southern 
biink  of  the  liver  is  Kara  crenerally  known  as 
Kara  Manikpur,  at  that  time  a  cily  of  consi- 
derable importance,  the  Muhammadan  capital 
of  the  surrounding  country  Kara. 

Kara  Manikpur  is  the  head  quarters  of  a 
sect,  called  Maluk  Dassis.  Members  of  this  sect 
when  on  pilgrimage  to  Jagannath  are  required 
to  visit  the  Math  of  the  Kabi'r  Panthis  and  to 
receive  there  Kahir  ka  Tardni  which  consists  of 
a  piece  of  bread  and  a  spoonful  of  sour  rice 
water.' 

At  the  same  time  it  would  seem  that  Kabir 
was  more  closely  associated  with  Shaikh  Taqqi 
of  Jhusi"*  or  his  successors  in  office.  This 
Shaikh  was  the  son  of  Shaban-ul-MiUat  and 
belon;:ed  to  the  Soharwardia  order  of  Sufis.  He 
died  in  1429  (A.  H.  785)  and  his  tomb  at  Jhusf 
is  s'ill  a  place  ol  pilgi image.''  Kabir  is  said  to 
have  been  a  young  man  of  about  30  years  of 
nge  when  he  fi:st  made  the  acquaintance  of  the 
Shaikh.  At  tlie  time  he  desired  to  have  as  his 
Pir  one  whose  hand  would   ever  remain  over 

(8")  Maliik  Pd^s  is  said  to  have  been  born  in  \hT\.  The 
Gmiith  of  this  sect  iiicluik-s  Gjan  Dijuik,  Sn/ik  -V/J(i;j  and 
.Vali'.k  T)a.-:s  hi  lihahfi.  The  two  first  arc  Kabir  Pniith 
writin,^     Sec  Wils'Ti,  R.  S.  P.  102. 

(4)  Jluisi  staniis  near  the  confluence  of  the  CanL;esand 
the  Junmo.  in  the  immediate  nci.irhlMiurlidnd  (if  Allahabad. 

(.*))  In  tlie  Aina  Oudh  the  father  of  Shaikh  Ta(nii  is  ^aid 
to  hive  been  born  in  12G1. 


The  Life  of  KABfR.  41 

him  to  protect  him  from  all  evil.  Shaikh  Taqqi 
promised  to  help  him  in  this  way  and  proved 
true  to  his  word,  for  even  in  the  remote  regions 
of  Balkh  and  Bokhara  Kablr  saw  the  protecting 
hand  of  his  Plr  stretched  over  him  as  that  of  a 
guardian  angel."  When  Kabir  returned  from 
his  wanderings  and  repaired  to  Jbusl  to  pay  his 
respects  to  his  ]\Iaster  he  felt  the  pan<^s  of  hung- 
er and  asked  that  he  might  have  some  food. 
The  Shaikh  provided  him  with  some  vegetables, 
cooked  rice  and  some  skimmed  milk  spiced 
with  caraway  seeds.  Kab'ir  regarded  these  sup- 
plies as  inadequate  to  the  occasion  and  exclaim- 
ed :— 

Sag,  bhdt,  jirwdni  mdthi 

Hamre  Pir  ke  yehi  hiti. 

Vegetable,  rice,  skimmed  milk  spiced  with  caraway  : 

These  thingsonly  can  behad  in  the  market  of  my  Pir. 

The  Shaikh  was  vexed  with  his  ingratitude 

and  replied: — 

Yih  chhor  aur  kya  khih  hai  miti, 

Toh  upar  pare  che  mis  ki  tlti. 
Beside  this  what  would  you  eat,  earth? 
May  six  months  disease  come  over  you. 

As  the  result  of  this  curse  Kabi'r  for  six 
months  suffered  severely  from  attacks  of  diarr- 
hoea. He  rolled  on  the  f^round  in  agony  and 
the  two  empty  water  courses  in  which  he  was 

(C)  The  ])eojilc  of  Jhi'isi  were  not  sure  that  Kabfr  tic- 
tuftlly  visiteil  tlio-e  di-^taiit  lands.  They  thou^'ht  it  possible 
that  he  merely  closed  his  eyes  and  visited  them  in  imagination, 

D 


42  The  Life  of  KABfR. 

then  compelled  to  pass  his  time  are  still  to  be 
seen,  the  one  bearing  the  name  of  Kabir  Nala 
and  the  other  that  «f  Lotan  Nala.  At  the  end 
of  six  months  he  was  once  more  permitted  to 
approach  his  Pir.  He  apologized  for  his  past 
ingratitude  and  received  a  blessing  from  his 
Master.  Kabir  besought  the  Shaikh  to  bestow 
upon  him  such  a  blessing  that  he  might  be  en- 
abled to  remove  those  differences  of  belief  which 
separated  Hindus  from  Muliammadans.  Shaikh 
Taqqi  regretted  that  this  lay  beyond  his  power, 
but  said  that  he  would  bring  it  about  that  both 
Hindus  and  Muhammadans  should  regard  Kabir 
himself  with  reverence.  Kamal,  the  son  ol  Kabir 
"when  he  heard  of  his  father's  request  went  to 
Shaikh  Taqqi  and  requested  him  as  his  Pir  to 
release  him  from  all  further  obligations  to  his 
father  for  he  could  never  bring  himself  to  look 
with  favour  upon  Hindus.  The  Shaikh  gave 
Kamal  permission  to  go  and  settle  at  Jalalpur, 
some  ten  miles  distant  from  Jhusi. 

Kabir  was  sorrowful  when  he  learnt  of  his 
son's  determination  and  exclaimed, 

Dubba  bans  Kabir  ka  upj^  put  Kimal 
The  family  of  Kabir  became  extinct  when  his  son 
Kamal  was  born.'^ 

(7)  A  similar  sajiiig  occurs  in  the  Adi  Granth:  The 
progeny  of  Kabir  dead;  there  was  lx»rn  a  sou  KaniAl.  Having 
.eivpn  ap  the  reiuembrance  of  Hari,  he  has  brought  wealth  to 
the  house. 


The  Life  of  KabIr.  43 

Previous  to  the  mutiny  there  was  at  Jhus!  a 
large  Mosque,  associated  with  the  memory  of 
Shaikh  Taqqi  and  endowed  with  landed  property, 
bringing  in  an  annual  income  of  Rs.  100,000. 
After  the  mutiny  the  Mosque  was  destroyed  and 
the  lands  confiscated/'' 

The  various  allusions  to  persons  and  places 
contained  in  the  Ramaini  quoted  in  the  previ- 
ous chapter  have  been  a  great  cause  of  per- 
plexity to  Hindu  readers  of  the  Bijak.  Ma- 
nikpur  they  explained  as  being  the  city  of  the 
man  (mind).  Of  Uji,  a  village  near  Kharaund 
in  the  district  of  Jaunpur,  famous  of  old  as  the 
residence  ot  some  distinguished  Muhammadan 
saint,  they  had  never  heard.  When  the  people 
of  Jhusi  were  asked  about  the  'Ikkis  Pir'  (twen- 
ty one  Pir)  they  at  once  made  mention  of  the 
Akela  Per  (solitary  tree),  a  large  tree  that 
stands  alone  and  under  which  a  Muhammadan 
saint  used  to  take  up  his  abode.  The  prompt- 
ness of  their  reply  suggested  that  the  original 
text  might  have  been  emended  by  some  Hindu 
who  had  never  heard  of  the  Akela  Per.  Shaikh 
Akardi  and  Shaikh  Saqardi  who  became  a  still 
greater  cause  of  perplexity  were  according  to 
local  tradition  the  Tujawar  or  caretakers  of 
Shaikh  Taqqi's  shrine,  who  were  regarded  by 

(8)  Most  of  the  information  concerning  Jhilsi  traditions 
was  supplietl  by  Shah  Fida  Hussain,  Government  Pensioner, 
resident  in  Jhiisi. 


44  The  Life  of  KABfR. 

the  people  with  so  great  respect  that  they  were 
popularly  known  as  Shaikhs. 

We  have  probably  written  enough  to  show 
that  it  is  not  impossible  that  Kabfr  should  have 
been  both  a  Muhammadan  and  a  Sufi.  The 
picture  of  Kabi'r  which  forms  the  frontispiece 
of  this  volume  and  which  is  more  likely  to  have 
been  painted  by  a  Hindu  than  by  a  Muhamma- 
dan represents  him  as  having  Muhammadan 
features,  and  his  grave  at  Maghar  has  always 
been  in  the  keeping  of  Muhammadans.  That 
a  Muhammadan  should  have  been  the  Father 
of  Hindi  literature  may  indeed  be  a  cause  of 
surprise,  but  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  Hin- 
dus also  have  gained  distinction  as  writers  of 
Persian  poetry.  Kabir,  moreover,  was  a  man  of 
no  ordinary  ability  and  determination,  and  the 
purpose  of  his  life  was  to  get  his  message  ac- 
cepted by  those  who  were  best  reached  through 
the  Hindi  language. 


Chapter  III. 

The  Teaching  of  Kabir. 

In  the  days  of  Kabir  the  power  of  the  Brah- 
mins was  very  great.  As  some  would  express 
it,  the  whole  land  was  overcast  by  the  dark 
clouds  of  priestcraft  and  sacerdotalism.  Brah- 
manism,  invigorated  by  its  triumph  over  Buddh- 
ism, asserted  its  authority  over  all,  until  the 
Muhammadans  invaded  the  country  and  gra- 
dually extended  their  influence  throughout 
Northern  India.  Then  people  saw  that  there 
were  men  whose  views  about  reh'gion  were  radi- 
cally different  fr  nn  those  of  their  own  Pandits  ; 
they  became  acquainted  with  men  who  were 
only  with  difficulty  restrained  on  political  grounds 
from  exterminating  ail  who  refused  to  acquiesce 
in  their  own  religious  beliefs. 

We  are  not  in  a  position  to  say  how  far 
religious  thinkers  were  encouraged  by  the  pre- 
sence of  Muhammadans  to  give  expression  to 
the  thoughts  of  their  hearts,  but  there  is  no 
doubt  that  the  presence  of  the  followers  of  Islam 
stimulated  thought  on  such  subjects  as  caste, 
spiritual  birth  and  the  personality  of  God. 
Among  the  Muhammadans  none  were  more 
ready  than  the  Sufis  to  recognise  the  good  in 


•t6  The  Teaching  of  KAsfn. 

every  form  of  belief  and  to  d^-ell  upon  the  love 
of  God  towards  all  his  creatures. 

Before  considering  the  character  of  Kabir's 
teaching  vre  have  first  to  determine  what  his 
teachmg  was.      It  seems  probable    that    the 
teachmg  of  Kabir  was  delivered  orally  and  not 
reduced  to  ^^Titing  till  a  later  age.     The  earliest 
wntmgs  m  which  his  teaching  is  recorded  are 
he  Bijak  and  the  Adi  Granth.    It  is  probable 
that  neither  of  these  books  was  composed  till 
at  least  fifty  years  after  the  death  of  Kablr,  and 
they  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  retaining,  in  all 
passages  the  actual  words  of  the  teacher,  much 
iess  such  words  without  additions. 
^   Though  it  is  inadvisable  to  express  any  defi- 
nite opinion  on  such  a  subject,  until  the  contents 
of  the  Bijak  have  been  carefully  examined  and 
compared  with  the  productions  of  a  later  a-e 
yet  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  teaching' 
of  Kabir  has  gradually  become  more  and  more 
Hmdu  in  form.     At  any  rate  we  have  no  riaht 
to  assume  that  the  teaching  of  Kabir  wa.  iden- 
tical  with  that  given  at  the  present  time  by  the 
Mahants  of  the  Panth  that  bears  his  name. 

So  far  the  content,  of  the  Bijak  have  only 
been  made  known  in  part,  and  all  who  have 
studied  the  book  allow  that  it  contains  manv 
passages  that  are  practically  unintelligible  to  us 
of  a  later  age,  dark  riddles  which  they  are  un- 


The  Teaching  of  KabIr.  47 

able  to  interpret.     An  exposition  of  teaching 
which  is  based  upon  a  selection  from  selections, 
must  of  necessity  be  defective  ;  and  may  possib- 
ly be  misleading,  if  regarded  as  an  interpreta- 
tion of  the  whole.    A  mind  influenced  by  Chris- 
tian thought  is  naturally  inclined  to  dwell  up- 
on teaching  that  seems  to  have  affinity  with 
truths  that  it  is  in   a  position  to  appreciate  • 
Passages  which  to  the  original  teacher  may 
have  seemed  no  less  important  are  hurriedly 
passed  over  because  the  reader  through  lack  of 
knowledge  is  unable  to  estimate  their  value. 
Bearing  in  mind  these  limitations  we  will  pro- 
ceed to  examine  the  teaching  of  Kabir  as  illus- 
trated by  quotations  from  the  Bijak  and  the  Adi 
Granth.i     We  shall  meet  with  teaching  which 
will  immediately  call  to  mind  passages  of  Scrip- 
ture ;2   we  shall  meet  with  condemnations  ot 
falsehood  which,  as  regards  directness  of  speech, 
should  amply  satisfy  the  feelings  of  the  most 
militant  type  of  Missionary.     We  shall  admire 
the  Teacher,  alike  for  his  sincerity   and  his 

courage. 

The  World  and  Religion. 
There  are  men  who  live  in  the   world  as 
though  it  were  their  permanent  abode ;  men 

(1)    Sec  Additional  Note  on  Bijal. 

(2^  To  those  who  have  a  knowledge  of  the  Bubjcct  the 
references  to  Sufi  teaching  will  probably  appear  to  be  Tcry 
numerous. 


48  The  Teaching  of  KABfR. 

•who  take  thought  for  the  body  and  pay  heed 
to  its  desires,  as  though  it  were  a  permanent 
possession  ;    men  who    accumulate  riches  as 
though  they  were  free  from  the  thraldom  of 
death.    Such  men  will  never  obtain  true  happi- 
ness, nor  will  they  unravel  the  knots  by  which 
they  are  bound,  until  tliey  look  to  God  for  help. 
He  who  would  know  God  must  die  to  the  world. 
God  is  a  jealous  God  who  loves  not  those  who 
entertain  in  their  hearts  love  for  another  god. 
Man  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon.    Only 
those  who  give  their  entire  iieart  to  God  will 
realise  their  true  self.    The  knowledge  of  God 
is  as  a  precious  diamond,  recognised  only  by 
those   wlio  are  spiritually   minded.     The   true 
servants  of  God  are  few  in  number,  and  to  the 
"woridly  minded  seem  as  men  who  are  beside 
themselves. 

All  who  live  in  this  wodd  are  liable  to  temp- 
tation ;  the  black  snake  coils  itself  round  the 
sandal  tree.  The  poison  of  the  .snake  received 
into  the  body  works  corruption  and  issues  in 
death.  Those  alone  escape  who  place  their 
trust  in  God. 

Selfishness  and  pride  of  intellect  are  the  ene- 
mies of  spiritual  development.^  Those  only 
see  God  who  have  a  forgiving  spirit.    The  strug- 

(3)  Kabir's  condemnation  of  pride  and  commendation  of 
hiaiiility  are  much  more  in  accordance  with  the  teachin-'of 
Sufi  Saints  thaa  with  the  practice  of  Hindu  pandits.  ° 


The  Teaching  of  KABfR.  49 

gle  against  evil  is  hard  to  maintain,  but  sloth- 
fulness  is  fatal.  The  opportunity  lost  may  not 
recur.  Now  is  the  time  to  prepare  for  the  jour- 
ney that  lies  before  us. 

Illustrations, 

(i).  We  are  idols  of  clay,  to  which  the  name  of 
man  is  given  ;  we  are  guests  of  four  days,  in  a  very 
great  pit  of  fuel  is  our  place.     G.* 

(2).  The  physician  has  died,  the  sick  man  has 
died,  the  whole  world  has  died  ;  One,  O  Kabir,  has 
not  died,  for  whom  is  no  weeper.     G. 

(3).  O  man,  thou  hast  a  precious  body  indeed. 
Thy  flesh  is  not  used.  No  ornaments  are  made  of 
thy  bones  ;  no  drums  are  mounted  with  thy  leath- 
er.    B. 

(4).  Man  in  this  world  is  wholly  sinful  from  his 
very  birth,  and  there  are  many  ready  to  claim  his 
body.  The  parents  say,  ^'  He  is  our  child  and  we 
have  nourished  him  for  our  own  benefit."  The 
wife  says,  ^'  He  is  my  husband,"  and  like  a  tigress 
wishes  to  seize  him.  The  children  gaze  at  him,  and 
like  the  god  of  death,  keep  their  mouths  wide  open 
for  support.  The  vulture  and  the  crow  look  for- 
ward to  his  death.  The  pigs  and  the  dogs  wait  on 
the  road  for  his  bier  to  pass  on  its  way  to  the  burn- 
ing ghat.  The  fire  says,  "  I  shall  not  leave  him, 
until  he  is  utterly  consumed."  The  earth  says,  '  I 
shall  obtain  him.'  The  wind  thinks  of  carrying  him 
off.     O  ignorant  people,  you  speak  of  this  body  as 

(4)  G  in(licatc3  a  quotation  from  tlie  Adi  Graiith  ;  B  a 
quotation  from  the  Bijak. 


50 


The  Teaching  of  KabIr. 


your  house;  do  you  not  see  that  a  hundred  enemies 
hang  about  your  throat  Beguiled  by  the  illusion 
of  this  world,  you  regard  such  a  body  as  your  own 
So  many  desire  a  share  in  your  body  that  you  will 
live  m  trouble  all  your  life.  O  madmen,  you  do 
not  wake  up  to  a  knowledge  of  this,  but  repeatedly 
J=ay,     '  It  IS  mine,  it  is  mine.'    B. 

(5).  Adding  knuri  to  kauri  he  brings  together 
lakhs  and  crores. 

At  the  time  of  departure  he  gets  nothing  at  all, 
even  his  hngoli  is  plucked  away  from  him.     G. 

(6).  To  the  miser  wealth  is  given  for  the  sake 
of  keeping  it.  The  fool  says,  'The  property  is 
mme.' 

When  the  staff  of  Yama  strikes  his  head,  the 
matter  is  decided  in  a  moment.    G, 

(7)  Immense  riches  and  a  kingdom  which  ex- 
tends  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  unto  the  going 
down  thereof  could  not  equal  the  pleasure  arising 
out  of  devotion  (to  God).  Of  what  use  then  is 
wealth  ?    B. 

(8)  Fire  does  not  burn  it,  the  wind  does  not 
carry  it  away,  no  thief  comes  near  it;    collect    the 

wealth  of  the  name  of  Ram,   that   wealth  is  never 
lost.    G. 

(9)  For  gold  he  is  not  obtained,  Rdm  is  obtain- 
ed  for  the  price  of  the  heart.     G. 

(10)  Without  devotion  life  is  spent  to  no  pur- 
pose  ;  without  worshipping  the  Lord  in  the  socie- 
ty of  the  pious,  happiness  remains  in  none.     G. 


The  Teaching  of  KabIr.  51 

(ii)  The  poor  soul  of  man  is  tied  to  this  world 
with  many  knots.  It  cannot  unloose  itself  without 
the  help  of  God.    B. 

(12)  He  (God)  whom  you  seek,  is  near  you.  He 
is  always  near  to  his  devotees  and  far  from  those 
who  do  not  worship  Him.    B. 

(13)  Kabir  says,  Where  shall  I  find  a  supreme- 
ly loving  saint  who  will  give  pleasure,  destroy  pain 
and  remove  all  stains  of  sin  ?    B. 

(14)  Who  whilst  living,  goes  on  dying,  he  lives 
again  ;  in  this  wise  he  is  absorbed  in  space  ;  he 
who  remains  in  the  darkness,  unafTected  by  the 
darkness,  is  no  more  thrown  into  the  sea  of  exist- 
ence.   G. 

(15)  Now  my  mind  on  the  contrary  has  become 
eternal ;  then  the  mind  is  known,  when  one  dies 
when  living.     G. 

(16)  At  the  bank  of  a  river  and  at  a  Tirthd 
there  is  no  reassurance  for  the  mind  of  him  who  is 
clinging  to  light  ways.     G. 

(17)  What  is  muttering,  what  austerity,  what 
vows  and  worship  to  him  in  whose  heart  there  is 
another  love  ?     G. 

(18)  What  is  muttering,  what  austerity  and 
control  of  the  passions,  what  vows  and  ablutions  ; 
so  long  as  the  right,  loving  worship  of  the  Lord  is 
not  known  ?     G. 

(19)  In  the  heart  there  is  a  looking-glass,  the 
face  is  not  seen  in  it  ;  then  only  you  will  see  the 
face  when  the  doubleness  of  the  heart  is  removed.  B, 


52  The  Teaching  of  KABfR. 

(20)  The  pure  diamond  is  sold  for  plates  of 
gold.  He  who  knows  not  its  value,  what  will  he 
do  with  it  ?     B. 

(21)  The  diamond  was  lying  on  the  road,  be- 
smeared with  ashes  :  many  in  their  ignorance  passed 
it  by,  but  the  diamond  specialist  picked  it  up.      B. 

(22)  Pearls  are  scattered  on  the  road  ;  the  blind 
draw  near  and  depart;  without  the  light  of  the 
Lord,  the  world  passes  them  hy.     Q. 

(23)  Tlie  black  snake  is  im  the  heart.  It  has 
deposited  venom  in  the  souls  of  all  ;  the  few  who 
sincerely  worship  the  true  God,  will  be  saved.     B. 

(24)  Why  should  one  suffer  a  dog  to  listen  to 
the  Smritis  ?  why  should  one  sing  the  praises  of 
Hari  in  the  presence  of  a  Snlcat  ?  that  Ram,  Ram 
is  contained  in  all  should  on  no  account  be  told  to 
a  Sal:at  ;  why  should  one  suffer  a  crow  to  feed  on 
camphor?  why  should  one  give  a  black  snake 
milk  to  drink  ?  the  instruction  of  the  foolish  is 
waste  of  knowledge  ;  a  maund  of  soap  cannot  wash 
charcoal  white.     G. 

(25)  Sandal,  restrain  thy  fragrance,  on  thy  ac- 
count the  wood  is  cut  down  ;  the  living  slay  the 
living  and  regard  only  the  dead.     B. 

(26)  He  is  naturally  called  drunk,  who  is  drink- 
ing the  juice  of  Ram  r.nd  meditating  on  Divine 
knowledge.     G. 

(27)  If  one  take  nectar  and  besprinkle  a  tim 
tree,    its  nature  does  not  leave  it,  says  Kabir.     G. 

(28)  Venomous  snakes  have  twined  round  the 


The  Teaching  of  KAsfR,  53 

sandal  tree.  What  can  the  sandal  do?  in  every  pore 
venom  has  soaked  in,  where  shall  nectar  enter  ?  B, 

(29)  The  snake  of  separation  has  attached  it- 
self to  the  body,  and  darted  its  fangs  into  the  heart. 
Into  the  body  of  the  Sadhu  it  finds  no  admission  : 
prepare  yourself  for  what  may  happen.     B. 

(30)  In  the  small  pond,  O  fish,  the  net  is  spread 
by  the  fishcrnuin  ;  in  this  small  pond  thou  wilt  not 
escape,  think  agani  of  the  ocean,     G. 

(31)  The  pride  of  inlcllcct  is  manifold,  now  a 
swindler,  now  a  thief  ;  now  a  liar,  now  a  murderer  ; 
men,, sages  and  gods  have  run  after  it  in  vain  ;  its 
mansion  has  a  hundred  gates.     B. 

(32)  In  pride  there  is  adversity,  in  sin  there  is 
suflcring  ;  in  kindness  there  is  stability,  and  in 
forgiveness  there  is  God.    B. 

(33)  Unless  you  have  a  forgiving  spirit,  you 
will  not  see  God.  You  may  speechify  as  much  as 
you  like,  but  without  a  forgiving  nature  you  will 
never  reach  Him,    B. 

(34)  He  who  enters  into  intimacy  with  the 
highest  light,  he  subdues  the  five  senses.  Religious 
merit  and  demerit,  both  he  discards.     G. 

(35)  What  thou  art  doing  tomorrow,  do  now  ; 
what  thou  art  doing  now,  do  at  once  :  afterwards 
nothing  will  be  done,  when  death  comes  on  thy 
head.     G. 

(36)  Now  is  the  time  to  prepare,  henceforth  the 
path  is  difficult  ;  the  travellers  all  hasten  to  pur- 
chase, where  there  is  neither  trade  nor  market.   B. 


54  The  Teaching  of  KABfR. 

(37)  The  righteous  man  does  not  give  up  his 
piety,  though  he  meet  with  crores  of  wicked  per- 
sons  :  even  as  the  sandal  tree  is  not  deprived  of 
its^  coohng  properties  though  venomous  snakes 
twine  round  it.     B. 

(38).  With  the  Sakat  company  should  not  be 
kept,  one  should  flee  far  from  him;  if  a  black 
vessel  IS  touched,  some  stain  is  received.     G. 

Religion  in  Life. 
God  is  one  ;  how  has  it  come  about  that 
there  are  many  religions  ?    All  men   are  of  one 
blood  ;  how  comes  it  about  that  they  are  sepa- 
rated  by  religion  and   by   caste  ?   God  is  one  • 
the  Hindus  are  therefore  at  fault  in  their  wor' 
ship  of  many  gods.     These   are   in  truth  the 
creation  of  Maya  ;  they  have  their  origin  in  sin 
and  are  themselves  the  cause  of  sin  in  others. 
^    Muharamadans  put  their  trust  in  circumci- 
sion  Hmdus  adore  the  Vedas  and  the  beauties 
of  Mature.      The  things  which   are    seen  are 
transitory-.    True  worship  should  have  as  its 

objecttheunseensourceofall  truth,  the  unseen    ' 
Creator  of  the  universe. 

The  Hindus  bathe  in  sacred  streams,  go  on 
pilgrimage  to  sacred  places,  bow  down  to  images 
ofbrass  and  stone,  and  think  that  in  so  doin- 
they  are  honouring  God.  In  this  they  are 
mistaken.  What  God  desires  is  purity  of  heart  • 


The  Teaching  of  KabIr.  55 

to  rest  in  symbols  that  should  lead  men  on  to 
God  is  to  be  guilty  of  idolatry. 

Hindus  and  Muhammadans  alike  profess  to 
fast,  but  curb  not  the  desires  of  the  flesh  ;  they 
praise  God  with  their  lips,  but  their  hearts  are 
far  from  Him.    All  such  religion  is  vain. 

Muhammadans  repeat  prayers  and  texts  of 
scripture  which  they  cannot  understand ;  Hin- 
dus believe  in  j^'ods  who  destroy  men,  sport 
with  milkmaids  and  assume  the  form  of  ani- 
mals.   All  such  religion  is  vain. 

Vain  too  are  the  distinctions  ot  caste.  All 
shades  of  colour  are  but  broken  arcs  of  light,  all 
varieties  in  human  nature  are  but  fragments  of 
true  humanity.  The  right  to  approach  God  is 
not  the  monopoly  of  Brahmins  but  is  freely 
granted  to  all  who  are  characterised  by  sincerity 
of  heart.  He  who  reflects  on  Brahm  is  rightly 
called  a  Brahmin.  The  distinctions  observed 
by  Hindus  are  merely  productive  of  that  pride 
which  God  abhors.  The  rules  regarding  impu- 
rity deal  merely  with  externals  and  cleanse  not 
the  thoughts  of  the  heart. 

Hindus  believe  in  transmigration.  If  they 
would  be  free  from  the  trials  of  this  world,  let 
them  meditate  on  the  Supreme  and  attend  the 
courts  of  His  temple. 

Above  all  things  let  men  speak  and  practise 
the  truth.    Suffer  all  men  to  worship  God  ac- 


56  The  Teaching  of  KABfR. 

cording  to  their  con\nctions.  Be  not  the  slaves 
of  tradition  and  love  not  controversy  for  its 
own  sake.  Fear  not  to  walk  upon  unbeaten 
tracks,  if  such  tracks  bring  you  near  to  Him 
who  is  the  truth. 

Men  are  saved  by  faith  and  not  by  works. 
None  can  understand  the  mind  of  God  ;  put 
your  trust  in  Him  ;  let  Him  do  what  seemeth 
Him  good.  Spiritual  joy  is  felt,  though  it  can- 
not be  expressed  in  words.  To  set  forth  the 
glory  of  God  is  a  task  beyond  the  powers  of 
human  language.  Those  who  put  their  trust  in 
God  are  no  longer  subject  to  fear.  Perfect 
love  casteth  out  fear. 

Illustrations. 
(3q)  God,  light,  =ound  and  one  woman  ;  from 
these  have  sprung  Hari,  Brahma  and  Tripurari. 
Innumerable  are  emblems  of  Shiva  and  Bhavani, 
which  they  have  established,  but  they  know  not 
their  own  beginning  nor  end.  A  dwelling  has  been 
prepared  for  them  :  Hari,  Brahma  and  Shiva  are 
the  three  headmen  and  each  has  his  own  village.  B. 

(40)  I  and  you  are  of  one  blood,  and  one  life 
animates  us  both  ;  from  one  mother  is  the  world 
bom ;  what  knowledge  is  this  which  makes  us  sep- 
arate? B. 
^  (41)  All  have  come  from  the  same  country  and 
have  landed  at  one  ghat,  but  the  evil  influences  of 
this  world  have  divided  us  into  innumerable  sects.  B. 


iTj 


The  Teaching  of  KAsfR.  57 

(42)  From  whence  have  Hindus  and  Turks 
come?  By  whom  have  these  ways  been  started? 
Having  searched  and  reflected  in  thy  mind  tell  me. 
By  whom  have  Paradise  and  Hell  been  made  ?    G. 

(43)  By  force  and  love  circumcision  is  made: 
shall  not  agree  to  it,  O  brother.   If  God  will  make 

me  a  Turk  by  him  will  I  be  circumcised :  if  a  man 
becomes  a  Turk  by  being  circumcised,  what  shall  be 
done  with  a  woman?  She  must  remain  a  Hindu.  G. 

^  (44)  If  your  Khuda  wished  circumcision,  he 
would  have  sent  you  circumcised  into  the  world.  If 
by  circumcision  you  become  a  Muhammadan  in 
that  case  what  should  you  do  with  your  women.  A 
woman  is  said  to  be  the  half  of  man;  being  so,  would 
she  remain  a  Hindu  ?  If  by  wearing  the  sacred 
thread  a  man  becomes  a  Brahmin  then  what  do 
your  women  wear?  They  by  birth  are  Shudrins, 
why  should  you  being  a  Pande  take  the  meal  placed 
by  them  before  you?  Whence  have  the  Hindus  and 
Muhammadans  come?  Who  has  started  these  religi- 
ous systems.  Think  well  in  your  hearts  who  has 
obtained  heaven.  O  mad  man,  give  up  the  illusion 
of  this  world.  O  brethren,  you  resist  (the  warnings 
of  conscience.)  Kabir  is  on  the  road  to  God  and  is 
marching  on  to  his  end,  forsaking  all  partial  views.  B 

/(45)  Is  Brahma  great,  or  he  by  whom  he  is 
produced  ?  Is  the  Veda  great  or  he  from  whom  it  is 
come?   G. 

(46)     What   thou  seest,   that  is  passing  away: 
whom  thou  dost  not  see,  on  him  continue  to  reflect. 
E. 


58  The  Teaching  of  KABfR. 

^Vhen  in  the  tenth  gate  the  key  is  given :  then  the 
sight  of  the  merciful  one  is  obtained.     G, 

(47)  A  well-made  picture  is  of  high  value; 
leave  the  picture  and  think  of  the  painter.  B, 

Variously  coloured  is  this  immense  world :  leav- 
ing the  picture,  keep  the  painter  in  thy  thoughts.  G, 

(48)  O  Saints,  the  world  has  gone  mad ;  if  I  tell 
the  truth  it  comes  down  upon  me  to  kill  me,  but 
believes  a  lie.  I  have  seen  the  devout  and  the 
pious  who  regularly  bathe  in  the  mornings.  They 
forsake  God  and  worship  stones  ;  in  them  there  is  no 

wisdom They  have  commenced  to  worship 

brass  and  stones  and  are  proud  of  their  pilgrimages. 
They  wear  garlands,  caps  and  frontal  marks  and 
chhaps  on  their  arms,  and  engage  in  singing  the 
praises  of  their  gods;  they  have  forsaken  God."  B. 

(49)  The  beads  are  of  wood,  the  gods  of  stone, 
the  Ganges  and  the  Jumna  are  water.  Rima  and 
Krishna  are  dead.  The  four  Vedas  are  fictitious 
stories.  B. 

(50)  If  by  worshipping  stones  one  can  find  God, 
I  shall  worship  a  mountain  :  better  than  these  stones 
(idols)  are  the  stones  of  the  flour  mill  with  which 
men  grind  their  corn.  B. 

(51)  Although  I  entreat  much,  even  falling  at 
their  feet,  with  tears  in  my  eyes,  the  Hindus  do 
not  forsake  idol-worship  and  the  Muhammadans  are 
too  stiff-necked  to  hear  anything.  B. 

(52)  For  the  sake  of  bathing,  there  are  many 
Tirthas,  O  foolish  mind ;  for  the  sake  of  worshipping 


The  Teaching  of  KABfR.  59 

there  are  many  idols.  Kabir  says,  No  emancipation 
is  thus  obtained,  emancipation  is  in  the  service  of 
Hari.  G 

(53)  If  by  immersion  in  the  water  salvation  be 
obtained,  the  frogs  bathe  continually.  As  the  frogs, 
so  are  these  men,  again  and  again  they  fall  into  the 
womb.  G. 

(54)  A  stone  is  shaped  by  the  hammer  and 
formed  into  an  timage,  with  breasts  and  feet  ; 
If  this  image  be  true,  then  it  will  eat  the  ham- 
merer. G, 

(55)  Kabir  says,  lam  completely  at  a  loss  ;  Is 
the  Tirthi  great  or  the  servant  of  Hari?  G. 

(56)  As  long  as  the  sun  does  not  rise  the  stars 
sparkle ;  so  as  long  as  perfect  knowledge  (of  God)  is 
not  obtained  men  practice  ritualism.    B. 

(57)  The  water  is  near  but  the  cattle  do  not 
drink  in  wading  through  it.  By  continually  re- 
membering Hari  water  issues.  That  water  is  pure, 
says  Kabir.  G. 

(58)  Within  his  heart  is  filthiness  ;  though  he 
bathe  at  a  Tirth^,  he  will  not  go  to  Paradise.  By 
the  belief  of  the  people  nothing  is  effected,  Rim  is 
not  ignorant.  G. 

(59)  The  Hindus  fast  on  the  nth  of  the  light 
half  of  each  month  for  singhara  (a  sort  of  fruit)  and 
milk.  They  give  up  food  during  the  day,  but  do 
not  curb  the  evil  passions  of  their  heart  and  take 
meat.  The  Muhammadans  keep  fasts,  repeat  the 
namdz  and  (early  in  the  morning)  cry  aloud  "Bismil" 


60 


The  Teaching  of  KABfR. 


Kke  the  crowing  of  a  cock Kabir  says,  "O 

saints  do  not  call  on  R^ma  or  Khudi."  B. 

and  jabbenng  you  have  not  found  out  the  one  (true') 
religion.  B.  ^       ' 

(61)     All  have  exclaimed,  Master,  Master,  but 

with  the  Master,  whom  they  do  not  know?  G. 
^      (62)    The  mind  knows  everything  and  know- 
ingly   commits    vices  ;  what    is  the  good   of   the 
lamp,i^withitin  his  hand  a   man  falls  into  the 

(63)     Follow   the  true  Sihib   (God)  who   will 
uphold  you  mail  your  trials.     He  was  not  born  in 
DasraUis  fam.ly  and  did  not  oppress  the  king  of 
i^nka.    Jasoda  did  not  fondle  him  in  her  lap  and 
he  did  not  enter   the  xvomb  of  Devdkf.     He  did 
"ot  ravage  the  world.     He  did  not  descend  into 
Pa;,^todece,veBali.     He  did  not  fight  with  King 
Bah  nor  did  he  kill  Hiranyaksh,  throwing  him  down 
on  the  ground.     He  did  not  assume  the  form  of  a 
boar  nor  did  he  destroy  the  Kshattrfyas.    He  did  not 
hold  the  Gobar  Dhana  on  the  tip  of  his  fingers  nor 
did  he  remain  in  the  jungle  with  the  milkmaids  (of 
Muttra  and  Brindaban).     He  is  neither  sJu.IjrdL 
nor  any  other  stone;  he  is  not  fish,  nor  tortoise, 
dweUers  m  the  water.     He  died  not  at  Dwariwati 
nor  was  his  corpse  buried  at  Jagannith.     Kabir 
proclaims,  let  none  follow  such  teachings;  he  whom 


The  Teaching  of  KabIr.  61 

they  believe  to  be  of  gross  and  material  elements  is 
of  subtle  principles.  B. 

(64)  Brahma  is  dead  with  Shiva  who  lived  in 
Kflshi;  the  immortals  are  dead.  In  Muttra  Krishna, 
the  milkman,  died.  The  ten  incarnations  are  dead. 
Machhindra  Nath,  Gorakh,  Dattdtreya  and  Vy^s 
are  no  longer  living.  Kabir  says,  with  a'loud  voice  ; 
"All  these  persons  have  fallen  into  the  slip-knot  of 
death."  B. 

(65)  Whilst  dwelling  in  the  womb,  there  is  no 
clan  nor  caste  ;  from  the  seed  of  Brahm  the  whole 
creation  is  made. 

Say,  O  Pandit,  When  were  the  Brahmins  made; 
by  saying,  "I  am  a  Brahmin,''  thy  life  and  religion 
are  lost. 

If  thou  art  a  Bralmiin  born  of  a  Brahmin  wo- 
man ;  why  hast  liiou  not  come  in  another  way  ? 

Whose  art  thou,  the  Brahmin  ?  Whose  am  I, 
the  Sudra;  whose  blood  am  I  ?  whose  milk  art  thou  ? 

Kabir  says,  Who  reflects  on  Brahm,  he  by  me 
is  called  a  Brahmin.  G. 

(66)  Colour  proceeds  from  colour,  yet  behold 
all  are  but  one  ;  of  what  colour  then  is  lite  ?  Think 
well  of  this.  G. 

(67)  By  the  touch  of  others  you  Brahmins 
consider  yourselves  polluted.  Let  me  ask  you, 
who  is  lower  than  you  ?  You  are  puffed  up  with 
pride.  Great  pride  never  produces  any  good.  How 
will  he  who  is  called  the  vanquisher  of  the  proud 
bear  with  your  pride  ? 


62  The  Teaching  of  KABfR. 

(68)  There  is  impurity  in  water,  impurity  in 
earth;  there  is  impurity  at  the  time  of  birth,  there 
is  impurity  in  the  hour  of  death,  there  is  impurity 
in  destruction  (corruption  of  the  body  ?) 

In  the  eyes  is  impurity,  in  the  speech  is  impuri- 
ty and  in  the  ears  impurity. 

In  rising  and  sitting  impurity  clings  to  man, 
impurity  falls  into  the  food. 

The  way  of  ensnaring  every  one  knows,  but  few 
only  the  way  of  escape. 

Kabir  says,  those  who  reflect  in  their  heart  on 
Rim,  in  them  no  impurity  is  found.  G. 

(6q)  As  fixed  and  movable  things,  as  worms 
and  moths,  in  many  and  various  ways  have  we 
been  born. 

Man}'  such  houses  will  be  inhabited  by  us,  till 
at  length  we  return  to  the  womb  of  Rim.  G. 

(70)  Having  wandered  through  the  84  lakhs 
of  wombs  he  has  come  into  the  world  ;  now  having 
gone  out  of  the  body  he  has  no  spot  nor  place.  G. 

(71)  Kabir  says,  Meditate  thou  on  the  Supreme. 
Go  to  his  house,  that  thou  come  not  again.  G. 

(72)  Clear  away  the  pain  of  birth  and  death, 
the  pleasure  of  works,  that  the  soul  may  be  libera- 
ted from  rebirth.  G. 

(73)  To  be  truthful  is  best  of  oil,  if  the  heart  be 
truthful.  A  man  may  speak  as  much  as  he  likes  ; 
but  there  is  no  pleasure  apart  from  truthfulness.  B. 

(74)  He  who  has  no  check  upon  his  tongue, 
no  truth  in    his  heart  :    with    such   a  one  keep 


The  Teaching  of  KabIr.  63 

not    company.     He  wiU    kiU  you  on  the  high- 
way. B. 

(75)  No  act  of  devotion  can  equal  truth  ;  no  » 
crime  is  so  heinous  as  falsehood  ;  in  the  heart  where 
truth  abides,  there  is  my  abode.  G. 

(76)  If  you  are  a  true  dealer,  open  the  market 
of  veracity  j  keep  clean  your  inward  man,  and  re- 
pel oppression  to  a  distance.  G. 

(77)  Put  a  check  upon  the  i\e  tongue  ;  speak 
not  much  ;  associate  with  the  wise;  investigate  the 
words  of  the  teacher.  G. 

(78)  Let  truth  be  your  rate  of  interest,  and  fix 
it  in  your  heart;  a  real  diamond  should  be  purchas- 
ed; the  mock  gem  is  waste  of  capital.  G. 

(79)  I  have  examined  the  religious  doctrines 
ofMuhammadans  and  Hindus.  They  do  not  lay 
aside  their  bigotry  for  the  sake  of  relish  for  their 

tongues.  B. 

(«o)     Kabir  cries  aloud  to  his  fellows,  "Ascend  • 
the  sandal  ridge;  whether  there  be  a  road  prepared 
or  not,  what  matters  it  to  me  ?"  G. 

(81)  O  God,  thou  knowest  thine  own  move- 
ments, I  have  no  power  to  know  them.  Kabir  says, 
"In  this  the  worid  has  erred  and  has  been  led  into 

doubt."  B.  _ 

(8  2)    Thy  name  is  my  support,  as  the  flower  will 

grow  out  of  the  lotus  stalk.  Kabir  says,  I  am  the  slave 

of  thy  house,  vivify  or  kill  me,  as  it  pleases  thee  G. 
(83)     As  many  as  are  making  efforts,  they  are  • 

drowned  ;  the  ocean  is  not  crossed  by  them. 


64  The  Teaching  of  KAsfR. 

Though  they  be  performing  works,  and  many 
abstinences,  their  mind  is  burnt  by  egotism.  G, 

(84)  Kabir  says,  I  am  a  sacrifice  to  my  own 
Guni,  by  whom  I  remain  in  connexion  with  the 
society  of  the  pious.  G. 

(85)  0  Madhava,  my  thirst  for  water  does  not 
cease  ;  in  drinking  the  water  the  fire  increases  still 
more. 

Thou  art  the  ocean,  I  am  the  fisli  of  the  water;  I 
*  dwell  in  the  water  ;  without  the  water,  I  am  done 
for.  G. 

(86)  In  me  there  is  nothing  mine  ;  whatever 
there  is,  that  is  thine.  In  entrusting  what  is  thine  to 
thee,  what  remains  mine?  G. 

(87)  If  a  dumb  person  eats  molasses,  what  can 
he  say  about  it  when  questioned  ?  G. 

(8S)  If  I  make  the  seven  oceans  ink,  if  I  make 
the  trees  my  pen,  if  T  make  the  earth  the  paper,  the 
glory  of  Hari  cannot  be  written  ?  G. 

(8q)  If  fear  of  God  springs  up,  fear  goes;  then 
fear  is  absorbed  in  the  fear  of  God. 

If  the  fear  of  God  subsides,  then  fear  again 
cleaves  to  man  ;  when  a  tnaii  loses  the  fear  of  God, 
fear  springs  up  in  his  heart  ;  he  dies.  G. 

(90)  Where  the  fearless  one  is,  there  is  no  fear, 
"where  fear  is,  there  Han'  is  not ;  Kabfr  says,  having 
reflected  in  his  mind  ;  "Hear  this,  O  ye  saints."  G. 

(91)  On  the  day  on  which  I  died,  on  that  day 
joy  sprang  up.  The  Lord  met  with  me,  Govind 
honours  his  own  companion.  G. 


The  Teaching  of  KABfR.  65 

(92)  Death  of  which  the  world  is  afraid,  is  joy 
to  my  mind  ;  by  death  the  full  perfect  joy  is  obtain- 
ed. G. 

The  Way  to  God. 

Kabir  was  a  great  believer  in  quiet  reflec- 
tion as  a  means  of  approach  to  God. 

He  recognised  that  the  ancient  scriptures 
of  both  Muhammadans  and  Hindus  were  of  a 
certain  value,,  but  felt  that  their  value  had  been 
greatly  overestimated. 

Through  the  understanding  of  the  heart  and 
mind  man  becomes  conscious  of  God's  existence. 
Thoughts  and  feelings  arc  expressed  in  words, 
words  are  composed  of  letters.  All  that  is  of 
use  in  communicating  to  man  a  knowlcvlge  of 
God  has  a  si;;niliciincc  that  may  well  be  re- 
garded as  sacred.  What  is  multiform  now  will 
hereafter  be  seen  to  be  single.  The  52  letters'^, 
will  give  place  to  the  one  letter  which  denotes 
man's  union  with  God.  The  revelation  of  God, 
given  in  Ram,  surpasses  all  other  revelations  in 
simplicity  and  purity,  but  the  unity  of  Truth 
has  not  as  yet  been  fully  apprehended. 

Through  his  own  powers  man  cannot  attain 
to  a  knowledge  of  God;  but  God  will  reveal 
Himself  to  those  who  listen  to  his  voice.     He 

(5)  Kiibir  i)r()l)ably  reckoned  that  there  were  5;j  consonants 
in  Sanskrit  and  Ambio,  the  sacred  languages  of  Hindus  aud 
Muhammadans, 


GS  The  Teaching  of  KABfR. 

alone  overcomes  doubts  and  truly  lives  who  has 
welcomed  this  message  in  his  heart. 

Strange  and  sad  it  seems  to  those  who  have 
experienced  a  knowledge  of  the  Truth  that  men 
should  be  content  to  grope  on  still  in  darkness. 
Men  are  not  equally  endowed  with  spiritual 
insight.  The  mass  of  men  must  seek  guidance 
ot  those  who  have,  through  a  knowledge  of  God, 
discovered  for  themselves  the  way.  The  Hin- 
dus trust  in  vain  to  those  who  wear  the  symbol 
of  sacrifice  while  they  lead  lives  of  pride  and 
self-indulgence.  Helmsmen  of  this  kind  will 
never  bring  the  boat  to  the  haven  where  it 
should  be.  Others  there  are  who  practise  all 
kinds  of  austerities,  but  mistaking  the  means  for 
the  end  find  not  the  true  path.  Those  who 
escape  not  themselves  from  death,  are  unable 
to  impart  to  others  the  gift  of  life. 

The  true  guide  is  one  whose  love  is  fixed  on 
God;  who  recognises  his  own  worthlessness 
apart  from  God;  who  lives  for  others  and  god- 
like himself  has  entered  into  life.  For  such  a 
one  death  has  lost  its  terrors.  He  is  the  true 
ascetic  and  walks  in  the  path  of  life. 
lUtistrations. 
(93)  O  Oizi,  What  book  is  expounded  by  thee; 
all  such  as  are  pondering  on  the  book  are  killed; 
no  one  has  obtained  true  knowledge;  give  up  the 
book,  adore  Ram,  O  foolibh  one;  thou  art  practis- 


The  Teaching  of  KabIr.  67 

ing  heavy  oppression.    Kablr  puts    his  trust  on 
Rim;  the  Turks  are  consumed  and  defeated. 

(94)  Thou  expoundest  the  book  right  that 
Allah  is  no  woman  or  man;  but  by  reading  and 
perusing  nothing  is  effected,  when  there  is  no  in- 
formation in  the  heart.     G. 

(95)  By  the  Turk  God  is  known  from  worship, 
by  the  Hindu  from  the  Veda  and  Puranas;  in  order 
to  form  the  mind  divine  knowledge  should  be  read 
to  some  extent.     G. 

(96)  Thou  shouldst  ride  on  thy  own  reflection; 
thou  shouldst  put  thy  foot  into  the  stirrup  of  tran- 
quility of  mind.  Kabir  says,  Those  are  good 
riders  who  keep  aloof  frcim  the  Veda  and  Goran, 
G. 

(97)  I  know  that  reading  is  good,  but  better 
than  reading  is  meditation;  the  attachment  to  Rim 
I  do  not  give  up,  though  people  revile  me.     G. 

(98)  The  52  letters  are  joined  together  by  me, 
but  I  am  not  able  to  know  one  letter  ;  Kablr  tells 
the  word  of  the  true  one  ;  who  becomes  a  Pandit, 
he  remains  fearless. 

The  profession  of  the  Pandit  is  for  the  sake  of 
the  people;  he  who  is  skilled  in  divine  knowledge, 
he  reflects  the  truth.  In  whose  heart  such  an 
understanding  is  ;  he  will  know  it,  says  Ka- 
bir.    G. 

(99)  Remove  doubt,  put  aside  the  paper  ; 
having  investigated  the  52  letters  apply  thy  mind 
to  the  feet  of  Hari.     G. 


GS  The  Teaching  of  KabIr. 

(1 00)  As  the  stars  at  dawn  pass  away,  so  the 
world  passes  away;  these  two  letters  (Rim)  do  not 
pass  away,  them  Kabir  has  seized.     G. 

(loi)     There  are  many  words  and  there  is  a 
great  difference  between   them:   accept  the  true 
word.     Kabir  says  he  who  has  found  the  true  word, 
♦  has  no  pleasure  in  this  life.     B. 

(102)  My  word  is  of  the  word;  hear  it,  go  not 
astray;  if  man  wishes  to  know  the  truth,  let  him 
investigate  the  word.     G. 

(103)  By  the  power  of  the  word  the  sin  of  this 
*, world  is   distroyed.     The   word  makes   kings  for- 

sake  their  kingdoms.     He  who  has  investigated  the 
word  has  done   his  work  well.     B. 

(104)  Without  hearing  the  word  it  is  utter 
darkness  ;  say,  whither  shall  anyone  go  ;  without 
finding  the  gateway  of  the  word,  man  will  ever  be 
astray.     G. 

(105)  Without  the  word  the  Shastras  are 
bhnd.  Say  whither  shall  one  go.>  They  do  not 
find  the  gateway  of  the  word  but  grope  on  still  in 
darkness.     B. 

{106)  There  are  many  words,  but  take  the 
pith  of  them;  he  who  takes  not  the  essence,  says 
Kabir,  will  live  a  profitless  life.     G. 

(107)  Doubt  has  triumphed  over  the  whole 
world.  Ko  one  has  overcome  it.  He  who  finds 
out  the  word  will  overcome  it.     B. 

(108)  Think  whence  the  world  has  come  and 
where  has  it  established  itself.     Kabir  says,  I  am  a 


The  Teaching  of  Kabir.  69 

lover  of  the  word  which  has  shown  me  the  unseen 
(God).    B, 

(109)  I  have  wept  for  this  world  but  no  one 
has  wept  with  me;  he  alone  will  weep  with  me 
who  understood  the  word.     B. 

(no)  All  speak  of  God,  but  to  me  this  doubt 
arises,  how  can  they  sit  down  with  God  whom  they 
do  not  know?     B. 

(in)  Thou  pasturest  us,  never  bringing  us  to- 
the  other  side;  Thou  art  a  Brahmin,  I  am  a  weaver 
of  Kishi,  understand  my  divine  knowledge.  Thou 
petitionest  Kings  and  Rajis,  my  meditation  is  with 
Hari.     G. 

(112)  The  jogis,  ascetics,  austere  devotees  and 
S^nyasis  wander  about  at  many  Tirthas;  those  with 
plucked  out  hair,  those  with  munj  cord,  the  silent 
ones,  those  who  are  wearing  plaited  hair,  all  are 
dying  at  the  end  ;  the  Tantras  are  attended  to  by 
them,  but  not  Ram  ;  on  whose  tongue  is  put  the 
name  of  Ram.  What  can  Yimi  do  to  him  ? 
The  Shastras,  Vedas,  astrology  and  many,  many 
grammars  they  know;  they  know  the  Tantras, 
Mantras  and  all  medicines,  yet  at  the  end  they 
must  die;  they  enjoy  dominion,  an  umbrella  and 
many  beautiful  women;  betel,  camphor,  perfume 
and  sandal,  yet  at  the  end  they  must  die ;  all 
the  Vedas,  Puranas  and  Smritis  are  searched  by 
them  but  in  no  wise  are  they  spared  ;  Kabir 
says.  Utter  Ram,  he  extinguishes  birth  and 
death.     G. 


70  The  Teaching  of  KabIr. 

(113)  "The  Pundits  are  in  error  by  reading 
the  Vedas,  They  have  no  common  sense.  They 
daily  go  through  their  morning  and  evening  rites 
and  other  ceremonies  with  great  punctuality  and 
regularity.  They  have  caused  the  Gayatri  to  be 
read  and  repeated  in  the  four  yugs;  ask  them  who 
has  obtained  freedom  from  sin  by  doing  so?  They 
consider  themselves  polluted  by  the  touch  or 
others:  ask  them  who  is  lower  then  they  are?"     B. 

(114)  Who  wear  dhotis  of  three  yards  and  a 
half  and  three  fold  cords;  on  whose  necks  are 
rosaries,  and  in  whose  hands  are  white  lotas;  these 
cheats  of  Benares  are  not  called  the  Saints  of  Hari 
Ha\-ing  scoured  the  vessels  they  put  them  on, 
having  washed  the  wood  they  light  it;  digging  out 
the  earth  they  make  two  fire  places,  but  eat  whole 
men.     G. 

(115)  If  by  wandering  about  naked  union  with 
Hari  be  obtained;  then  every  deer  of  the  forest 
will  become  emancipated. 

What  are  the  naked?  What  are  those  with  skins? 
When  they  do  not  know  the  Supreme  ? 

If  by  shaving  the  head,  perfection  is  obtained; 
the  i^heep  is  emancipated,  no  one  is  lost. 

Kabir  says.  Hear,  O  man  and  brother;  without 
the  name  of  Ram  no  one  has  obtained  salvation.  G. 

(n6)  In  our  house  the  string  of  the  body  is 
continually  stretched  out;  on  thy  breast  is  a  sacri- 
ficial thread;  Thou  readest  the  Veda  and  Gyatri;  in 
our  heart  dwells  Govind. 


The  Teaching  of  KabIr.  71 

On  my  tongue  is  Vishnu,  in  my  eyes  Narayan, 
in  my  heart  dwells  Govind;  when  at  the  gate  of 
Ydmi  he  will  ask  thee,  O  fool.  What  wilt  thou  say 
to  Mukand? 

We  are  the  cattle,  thou  art  the  cowherd,  O 
Lord,  who  art  our  keeper  through  the  several  births 

(117)  What  can  he  do  whose  teacher  is  blind  ? 
The  blind  pushes  the  blind  and  both  fall  into  a 
well.     B. 

(118)  How  is  it  possible  to  reach  the  city  when 
the  guide  cannot  point  out  the  road ;  when  the  boat 
is  crazy,  how  shall  the  passengers  get  clear  of  the 
ghat?    G. 

(119)  The  man  who  fixes  his  love  on  the  true 
teacher  is  contained  in  him.  They  could  not  be 
separated  they  have  two  bodies  but  one  spirit.     B. 

(120)  I  am  the  worst  of  all,  every  one  is  good 
except  me;  who  considers  himself  in  this  light,  he 
is  my  friend.     G. 

(121)  The  tree  bears  not  fruit  for  itself,  nor 
for  itself  does  the  stream  collect  its  waters;  for  the 
benefit  of  others  alone  does  the  safe  assume  a  bodily 
shape.     G. 

(122)  The  body  is  wounded  by  a  spear;  the 
head  is  broken  off  and  left  in  the  flesh;  it  cannot  be 
extracted  without  the  loadstone;  a  thousand  other 
stones  are  of  no  avail.     G. 

(123)  From  heaven  and  hell  I  am  freed  by  the 
favour  of  the  true  Gurii;  I  remain  in  the  wave  of 
the  lotus  foot  at  the  end  and  the  beginning.    G. 


72  The  Teaching  of  KAsfR. 

(124)  In  this  society  thou  wilt  not  die;  if  thou 
knowest  his  order,  thou  wilt  be  united  with  the 
Lord-  G. 

(1^5)  Death,  by  which  the  whole  world  is 
frightened;  that  death  is  lighted  up  by  the  word  of 
the  Guru.    G. 

(126)  Making  divine  knowledge  and  meditation 
his  patched  quilt,  and  the  word  the  needle,  he  puts 
the  thread  into  the  head  of  the  needle;  making  the 
five  elements  his  deer-skin  he  walks  in  the  way  of 
the  Guru.  G. 


ADDITIONAL  NOTES, 


The  Bijah. 

The  Btjah  C Account  Book  or  Invoice)  is  re- 
cognised as  the  authoritative  exposition  of  Kabir's 
teaching.  It  was  probably  produced  about  1570,  or 
some  20  years  before  the  teaching  of  Nanak  was 
embodied  in  the  Adi  Granth  by  Guru  Arjun,  the  fifth 
Guru  of  the  Sikh  Community.  Most  of  the  sayings 
attributed  to  Kabi'r  in  the  Adi  Granth  are  also  to  be 
found  in  the  Bijak^  though  the  editor  of  the  Granth 
has  not  scrupled  to  re-arrange  the  subject  matter. 

There  are  several  printed  editions  of  the  BijaTc. 
The  two  best  known  editions  are  both  supplied  with 
a  commentary',  the  one  by  Maharajah  Bishwa  Nath 
Singh  of  Rewah*  and  the  other  by  Baba  Puran 
Dass,  The  former  edition  has  been  printed  at 
Benares,  Lucknow  and  Bombny,  and  also  without 
the  commentary  at  Gaya  ;  the  latter  at  Lucknow  and 
Allahabad  (1Q05).  Of  the  former  it  is  said  that  "the 
editor  has  tried  to  expound  the  Sagnna  Upasnna  of 
Rama  through  the  teaching  of  Kabir,  where  by  the 
term  Sagnna  Upasana  is  meant  the  religious  con- 
templation of  Rama  as  the  embodiment  of  all  good 

•In  the  life  of  Kablr  by  Munshi  Mohan  Lall,  Kayasth  of 
Lucknow,  a  work  which  is  l:irn;ely  based  upon  Anur  i<^  Sa<:;ar, 
it  is  statcfl  that  Kablr  visited  Turkistan  and  on  his  return 
Fpentsome  time  with  the  Maliarajali  of  llcwah  by  whom  he  was 
most  hospitably  received.  In  return  for  kindness  received  Ka- 
blr promised  the  Maharajah  who  at  the  time  was  childless  that 
his  ilcsccndant'*  should  sit  upon  his  throne  for  41;   generations, 

F 


74  The  Doctrine  of  Shabda. 

qualities."  This  edition  is  not  well  thought  of  by 
Kabir  Panthis.  The  author  of  the  second  Com- 
mentarj',  Baba  Puran  Dass,  lived  at  Nagjhari,  in 
thedistrir.t  of  Burhanpur,  C.  P.,  and  flourished  about 
1837. 

The  Rev.  Prem  Chand  of  the  Baptist  Mission, 
Monghyr,  had  another  edition  printed  in  Calcutta 
in  1890.    The  editor  of  this  edition  writes: — 

*'Some  thirty  years  ago  I  was  lent  a  manuscript 
copy  of  the  Bijalc^  taken  from  the  Murshidabad 
edition.  This  1  had  copied  out  and  after^vards 
compared  my  copy  with  others  from  different  parts 
of  the  country,  I  found  in  these  a  certain  number 
of  Dohas  Ccouplets)  which  were  not  in  my  copy  and 
these  I  had  printed  at  the  end  of  the  book.  The 
other  poetical  pieces  were  the  same  in  all  editions. 
I  corrected  various  clerical  errors  and  separated 
words  which  had  been  allowed  to  run  into  one 
another  and  added  a  few  foot-noles  to  make  the 
meaning  clear  to  any  ordinary  Hindi  scholar." 

This  edition  contains  (S3  Jiamaiiii\  113  Shahda, 
33  hymns  of  various  kinds  and  364  Salch'is.  To  these 
have  been  added  60  Salcliix  found  in  other  editions. 

The  Rev.  Ahmad  Shah  in  the  translation  of  the 
BijaT:  that  he  has  now  in  hand  will  probably  throw 
additional  light  on  literary  problems  connected  with 
this  book. 

The  Doctrine  of  Shahda  (Word.) 

A  doctrine  which  might  be  so  described  is  taught 
in  many  of  the  Hindu  religious  sects,  but  it  is  not 


The  Doctrine  of  Shabda.  75 

easy  to  determine  in  each  particular  case  either  the 
origin  or  character  of  this  teaching. 

In  the  writings  of  Kablr  three  thoughts  seem  to 
underlie  such  teaching  (i)  All  thought  is  expressed  • 
in  language,  (2)     Every  letter  of  the  alphabet,  as  a  . 
constituent  part  of  language,  has  significance,  and 
(3)  The  plurality  of  letters  and  words  now  in  use  ' 
will   appear  as  one,  when  the   Mdyi  that  deludes 
men  in  their  present  condition  shall  have  been  over- 
come.    The  two-lettered  Ram  seems  to  Kabir  the  • 
nearest  approach  in  this  world  to  the  unity  of  Truth 
or  the  letterless  one. 

A  distinguished  Sanskrit  scholar  e.xplained  to 
me  the  Hindu  conception  of  Shabda  somewhat  in 
this  way.  Man  desires  knowledge.  Knowledge  is 
obtainable  by  means  of  (i)  Perception  and  (2)  Infer- 
ence. These  two  channels  are  acknowledged  by 
all  and  to  them  are  added  by  some  (3)  Shahda,  sound 
(including  the  voice  of  the  teacher?)  and  (4)  Upnr- 
nam  or  reasoning  by  analogy. 

By  Miinansi.stsall  verbal  information  is  regarded 
as  authoritative  in  itself,  unless  it  can  be  shown  to 
be  derived  from  a  corrupt  source.  Those  who  deny 
that  the  Vedis  are  eternal  or  self-derived  should 
prove  that  the  source  from  which  they  are  derived 
is  tainted.  The  Mimansists  do  not  believe  in  a  per- 
sonal God  but  there  are  others  who  accept  this 
teaching  and  also  believe  in  the  personality  of 
God.  Such  regard  the  Vedas  as  a  God-given 
revelation. 


76  The  Doctrine  of  Shabda. 

The  term  Shahda  does  not  occur  in  the  Vedis, 
but  in  one  Hymn  Vale  (Speech)  is  personified. 

For  further  information  this  scholar  referred  me 
to  the  third  volume  of  John  Muir's  Original  Sans- 
krit Texts,  which  deals  with  the  Vedas,  their  origin, 
inspiration  and  authority. 

It  is  not  improbable  that  this  doctrine,  as  set 
forth  in  the  literature  of  the  Kabi'r  Panth  has  been 
influenced  by  the  writings  of  St.  John,  as  is  con- 
fessedly the  case  as  regards  the  teaching  of  the 
Radhi  Swami  Sect  of  modern  origin.  In  the  Hindi 
translation  of  the  New  Testament  Logos  (Word)  is 
represented  by  Bachan  and  not  by  Shahda. 


Cliapter.  IV 

SXKHIS   attributed  to  KABfR. 

All  Kabi'r  Panthis  have  at  their  command  a 
considerable  number  of  Sakhis  or  rhyming 
couplets,  bearing  witness  to  the  truth.  ^  The 
rhythm  ot  many  of  these  is  very  fine,  with  the 
result  that  important  teaching-  given  in  this 
form  is  easily  remembered. 

It  is  not  at  all  likely  that  all  the  Sakhis  at- 
tributed to  Kabir  were  really  uttered  by  him, 
but  most  of  them  are  in  substance  consistent 
with  teaching  to  be  met  with  in  the  Bijak. 
A  good  linguist  '.vouM  probably,  on  linguistic 
grounds,  reject  many  as  of  later  origin. 2 

Many  of  the  Sakhis  embody  teaching  such 
as  was  caiiciit  among  Suh's  and  embodied  in 
Persian  ])oetry.  Some  suggest  verses  of  the 
Bible  or  Qordn,  some  in  a  slightly  difft-rcnt  form 
have  been  attributed  to  other  authors  and  may 
be  regarded  as  expressing  truths  generally  cur- 
rent in  the  country.  We  may  saftly  credit 
Kabi'r  with  a  considerable  amount  of  originahty 

(l)Hakbi  i«thc  corruption  of  a  Snnskrit  word  meaning 

*""' r>y  For  the  boi.etit  oi  Uindl  Bcholar»  thiH  collection  of 
Saklii3  has  alHo  bjon  printed  in  the  oriRinal  I  m<l(.  A  collec- 
tion of  2,600  Kablr  SakluM  has  been  publiBhcd  at  the  Advocate 
Press.  Lucknow,  price  One  Rupee. 


78         SaKHiS  attributed  to   KABfR. 

and,  even  where  originality  seems  unlikely,  feel 
grateful  to  him  for  the  genias  with  which  he  has 
given  expression  to  old  thoughts. ^ 

In  making  this  selection  I  have  been  guided 
by  the  judgement  of  Kabir  Panthis  and  also  by 
own  judgement  as  regards  the  subject  matter 
and  the  rhythm  of  the  original.  I  have  allowed 
a  certain  number  of  Sakhis  to  retain  their  place 
in  this  collection  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  they 
have  been  previously  quoted. 

(i)  My  Lord's  a  store  supplier  great,  in  mer- 
chandise he  deals;  nor  beams  nor  scales,  in  his 
own  hands  this  great  world  weighs  and  feels. 
Fallon. 

Shams  Tabrez  wrote  : — 

Who  is  that  person  who  weighs  and  distributes 
without  scales  or  measure,  yet  his  measuring  and 
distribution  is  correct  ? 

(2)  He  who  made  the  whole  world,  that 
Guru  was  manifested ;  the  Guru  who  saw  him 
with  his  eyes,  that  Guru  revealed  Him  to 
men. 

Cf  I  Jn.  i  3.1. 

(3)  One  poor  spirit  bound  with  many  ties ; 
in  its  own  strength  it  cannot  escape,  till  God 
rescue  it. 

(3)  It  has  seemed  l>est  to  omit  all  reference  to  possible 
sources,  until  so  complicate<l  a  subject  liiis  been  more  thorouHily 
investigated 


SXkhis  attributed  to  KabIr.       79 

Ptw,  the  word  translated  God,  is  a  term  applied 
to  husband  by  wife ;  the  loved  one. 

(4)  The  cheld  whose  Guru  is  blind,  while  he 
himself  is  more  blind  ;  the  blind  one  gives  a 
push  to  his  blind  fellow ;  they  both  fall  into 
the  well. 

Neither  understands  the  truth  ;  one  pushes  this 
way,  the  other  another ;  both  come  to  grief. 

(5)  The  soul  (Atma)  and  the  great  soul 
(Param^tma)  for  many  ages  remained  apart;  the 
true  Guru  came  as  a  dealer  (rfa^/a/)  and  made  of 
them  a  beateous  mixture. 

(6)  A  sinner  from  my  birth,  in  sin  from  head 
to  foot  I  lie  ;  O  generous  giver,  comforter,  but 
listen  to  my  cry.  (Fallofi) 

With  the  reading  in  the  ordinary  Hindi  text, 
translate  second  line,  ''O  God,  remover  of  pain,  de- 
liver me". 

(6)  A  Guru  should  be  as  a  knife  grinder;  the  • 
rust  of  a  life  time  he  removes  in  a  moment. 

(7)  Regard  your  Guru  as  a  knife  grinder,  let 
him  grind  your  heart ;  cleansing  the  heart  from 
all  impurity,  let  him  make  it  bright  as  a  mirror, 

(8)  Kal  hovers  over  the  head,  Kal  comes 
not  into  sight ;  Kabi'r  says,  Lay  hold  of  the 
Guru  s  words(the  Mantra)  that  he  may  rescue 
your  soul  from  death. 

{g)  The  Guru  is  the  potter  and  the  disciple 
the  vessel ;  he  removes  all  defects.  Ho  places  the 


80  SaKHIS  attributed  to   KABfR. 

support  (saMrd)  within  before  with  blows  he 
fashions  the  vessel  into  shape. 

The  Eahdrd  or  Sahara,  is  an  instrument  of  wood 
or  3tone  which  with  one  hand  the  potter  holds 
within  the  jar  while  with  the  other  he  strikes.  In 
this  way  the  wall  of  the  jar  is  able  to  resist  the 
force  of  the  blows  administered  by  the  other  hand 
from  without.  The  public  may  be  deceived  into 
thinking  that  the  Guru  is  cruel  in  his  treatment  of 
the  chela.     See  picture  of  Potter. 

(lo)  As  he  revolves  his  rosary,  life  passes 
away  and  he  knows  not  the  secrets  of  his  heart ; 
throw  away  the  rosary  of  the  hand  and  revolve 
the  rosary  of  the  heart. 

There  is  a  double  play  upon  words  : — 3fan=heart, 
jnanX-a=rosar}';  PAer=secrets,   Pher   also  =  revoIve. 

(ii)  A  man  steals  an  anvil,  and  offers  a  needle 
as  alms  ;  he  climbs  aloft  to  see  how  distant  is 
the  chariot. 

The  man  who  makes  this  miserable  offering 
thinks  that  God  will  be  so  pleased  with  his  genero- 
sity' that  he  will  at  once  send  a  chariot  to  fetch  him 
to  heaven. 

Fallon  translates  thus : — 

He  steals  an  an\-il  and  a  needle  gives  in  charity  ; 
he  then  the  house  top  mounts  to  see  how  far's 
heaven's  chariot  sent  for  me. 

(i2)  Apart  from  life^  life  comes  not  into  ex- 
istence, life  lives  on  life  ;  lefuse  not  to  have 
pity  on  life ;  Pandit,  take  thought  on  this. 


^1 


'^:?\  t 


i\ 


.^; 


•  ,8?t*Jf.-''7-i.'' li^ji*^ 


80  SaKHIS    attributed    to   KABfR. 

?t:pTX)rt  (sc^u^ra:  -"Aithin  before  -wlili  blows  he 
fashions  the  n  >  £  ei  into  shape. 

The  Hiihira  or  Sahdrd  is  an  instrument,  of xvood 
cr  .stone  v.  '-ich  with  ore  ]>.\::  \  the  potter  holds 
within  the  j-tr  whuic  svith  he  strikes.     In 

this  way  the  -srali   o?   l-it.   f^*    i^  -.-is*  the 

force  of  the  blows  aiimiij.:-lervni  hy  ..  ,        ...  vJ 

from  without.  The  public  may  he  'dctCived  ia;o 
thinking  that  the  Guru  is  cruel  in  his  treatment  of 
the  chela.     See  picture  of  Potter. 

(i.};  As  he  revolves  his  rosary,  life  passes 
-t  •  .ly  and  he  knows  not  the  secrets  of  his  heart ; 
li^:o%-  away  the  ro-ary  of  the  hand  and  revolve 
the  fi-ary  of  the  heart. 

as  alms ;   he  climbs  aloft  tu  .  i  ■  Utnt  is 

the  chariot. 

The  naan  v/ho  mak.*.*?;  this  miserable  oiterir.g 
thinks  that  God  -.viU  he  :•    rlv.ised  u-ith  "'■  ,o- 

ii:y  that  he  will  at  once  .^c  "  ;i  ch;iriot  '  .^a 

to  hcavf  n. 

FaJ'.in  translates  thu*-  •  - 

He  steals  an  anWl  and  :■■  Ti-.cdic  giv-.v  in  charity  ; 
he  then  the  house  to]>  :\cuats  to  -v^  how  far's 
heaven's  chariot  sent  for  ^  iC. 

(12;  Apart  from  life,  i-fe  comes  not  into  ex- 
istence, hfe  lives  on  life  ;  lefjse  not  to  have 
pity  on  life;  Pandit,  take  thought  on  this. 


,A':^' 


^ 


< 


^^^' 

■^ 


>^— ' 


\1 


/i^ 


'■"■'^.  ■. 


"V. 


^-  V-- 


/. 


J.,  — ..-'^ 


y 


m 


^>'^ 


;^^HAf 


i  ^  ■  1<^5/  -di  ^  'fe:.j^^fe;.aaJ^'i*<f^^iiw>ai.-^>>>. 


SXKHIS  attributed  to   KABfR.  81 

(13)  Under  the  influence  of  Shabda  one  man 
died  to  the  world,  another  gave  up  his  throne  ; 
those  who  have  understood  Shabda,  their  work 
is  completed. 

(14)  A  man  may  be  a  great  preacher,  as 
the  vulture  soars  in  the  sky  ;  but  its  lood  is 
on  the  earth  ;  does  flying  in  the  air  make  of  it 
a  saint  ? 

Preaching  in  itself  is  useless,  unless  the  life 
corresponds.  The  vulture  may  fly  in  the  sky,  but 
on  the  earth  it  devours  refuse  and  so  can  never  be 
respected. 

(15)  Whatever  I  have  is  not  my  own  it 
is  thine  ;  it  is  thine  own  that  I  give  thee;  what 
have  I ? 

(16)  Strain  your  water  before  you  drink 
it ;  test  your  Guru  before  you  commit  yourself 
to  him. 

(17)  The  humble  obtain  salvation  to  a 
man,  so  many  as  are  submissive  ;  those  sink 
who  are  puffed  up  with  the  pride  of  hi^h  birth. 

The  reference  here  is  to  the  ocean  of  rebirths  ; 
the  humble-minded  reach  the  further  shore  in 
safety  ;  the  proud  sink  in  the  waters  and  escape 
not  from  the  troubles  of  this  world. 

(18)  When  the  Guru  is  covetous,  his  dis- 
ciple will  be  grasping  ;  both  employ  trickery ; 
both  will  be  drowned  in  their  folly,  having 
boarded  a  ship  of  stone. 


S2         SXKHIS  attributed  to  KABfR. 

The  chela  to  protect  himself  from  the  greed  of 
the  Gurii  conceals  the  extent  of  his  possessions. 
At  first  he  was  tricked  into  owning  that  he  had 
property,  but  not  a  second  time  ;  he  tricked  the 
guru.  In  this  way  both  fail  to  cross  the  ocean  of 
rebirths.  In  one  of  the  Kabir  legends,  it  is  said 
that  Kabir  was  placed  on  board  a  boat  loaded  with 
stones  that  it  might  sink  in  mid  stream,  but  he 
miraculously  escaped.  The  idea  may  have  been 
sugge.-ted  by  this  sdhhi. 

(1 9)  From  one  country  have  they  come; 
at  one  ghdi  have  they  disembarked,  Tho.y 
have  breathed  the  air  of  the  world,  and  on 
twelve  paths  have  they  gone  their  way. 

B'rah  hat  is  a  proverbial  expression,  scattered, 
dispersed,  cast  to  the  winds.  All  men  are  of  one 
blood,  all  are  born  of  human  parentage,  caste  dis- 
tinctions, invented  of  men,  are  productive  of  much 
evil.     Fallon  translates  : — 

All  from  one  country  come,  alighted  also  at 
one  port  ;  by  winds  of  wordly  passion  driven,  all 
scattered  are  in  sport. 

(20.)  The  lascivious,  the  ill-tempered  and 
the  covetous,  for  such  devotion  to  Gud  is  im- 
possible. Brave  is  the  man  who  for  devotion 
to  God  is  ready  to  give  up  caste  and  family. 

(21)  Small  is  the  door  of  devotion  {Bhakti), 
as  the  tenth  part  of  a  mustard  seed.  The 
heart  of  man  is  swollen  with  pride  to  the  size 
of  an  elephant,  how  can  he  pass  within  ? 


SAKHIS  ATTRIBUTED  TO  KABfR.  83 

Cf  St.  Matt  xix.  24. 

{22)  The  great  having  attained  greatness 
become  exceeding  proud.  Those  who  have  no 
knowledge  of  the  true  Guru,  whatever  their 
caste,  are  chamdrs. 

Bom  rom  the  hairs  on  the  human  body  ;  there  is 
no  spot  where  there  is  no  hair,  no  point  at  which 
the  great  do  not  display  pride. 

(2^)  The  worship  of  a  devotee  and  the 
"water  of  a  torrent  in  the  rains,  both  flow  deep  ; 
but  that  only  should  be  called  a  river  which 
continues  to  flow  in  the  hot  weather  (Jeth=3 
June.) 

The  devotee  whose  devotion  depends  upon  pros- 
perity is  no  true  devotee. 

.'24)  He  who  sows  for  you  thorns,  for 
him  do  you  sow  flowers  ;  you  will  have  flowers 
at  the  time  of  flowering  ;  he  will  find  a  trisul. 

Trisi'il  may  signify  a  large  thorn  or  it  may 
mean  that  such  a  one  will  be  punished  by  Shiva. 

(25)  Do  not  oppress  the  weak,  their  sighs 
have  great  power  ;  by  the  puffs  of  the  bellows 
iron  is  converted  to  flames  (  or  is  utterly 
consumed.) 

If  the  pufis  from  the  skin  of  a  dead  animal  can 
do  so  much,  how  much  more  will  the  sighs  of  the 
living  efl"ecl.  The  skin  of  goats,  buffaloes  and 
bullocks  are  used  as  bellows. 


S4:  S/KHIS  ATTRIBUTED  TO   KABfR. 

(26)  Be  true  to  God  and  loving  to  his 
servants  whether  your  hair  be  long  or  entirely 
removed. 

iMany  Bairigis  shaved  their  heads.  To  Kabir 
such  matters  were  of  trivial  importance. 

(27)  The  ff/iai  in  wliich  love  dwells  not, 
know  that  ^//a/ to  be  a  burning  g/m(  (Masan); 

^  that  heart  is  as  the  blacksmith's  bellows  which 
breathe,  but  have  no  life. 

There  is  here  a  play  upon  the  word  Ghat. 
<7Aa<which=a  vessel,  is  often  used  of  the  human 
heart.  GAa/,  is  also  used,  as=ghat,  the  burning  Ghat 
where  the  bodies  of  the  dead  are  burnt. 

(2S)  Love  grows  not  in  the  fields  nor  is  it 
on  sale  in  the  bazar ;  the  man  devoid  of  love 
wiU  be  bound  and  cast  into  hell.  ^Vd?npur, 
the  city  of  Yam.  ,• 

(29;  He  may  drink  the  cup  of  love  who 
gives  his  all  (lit.  his  head)  to  God  ;  the  covet- 
ous cannot  give  all,  but  only  know  the  name 
of  love,  or  He  drinks  the  cup  of  love  who  lays 
down  his  life  for  others  ;  he  who  works  for 
reward,  merely  speaks  of  love. 

(30)  A  man  may  read  many  books  before 
he  dies  and  yet  not  be  a  Pandit ;  he  is  a  Pandit 
who  understands  the  two  and  a  half  letters 
which  form  the  word  Love. 

(31)  There  is  no  work  of  merit  equal  to 
truth  and  no  sin  equal  to  falsehood  ;   in  whose 


SXkhis  attributed  to  Kabir.       85 

heart  Truth   dwells,  in  his  heart  dwells  God  « 
himself. 

(32)  Those  who  say  and  do  not  are  great 
liars ;  in  the  end,  when  God  holds  his  Durbar, 
they  will  be  thrust  out. 

Dhalcha  khdnd  is  a  phrase  applied  to  badmishes, 
thrust  out  of  all  respectable  society. 

(33)  When  the  sun  rises,  darkness  disap-  ■ 
pears;  before  the  wisdom  of  the  Guru  the  corrupt 
thoughts  of  men  disappear  ;  covetousness  des- 
troys sound  judgement  and  pride  devotion  to 
God. 

(34)  Weeds  destroy  the  crops  ;  the  igno- 
rant destroy  the  assembly  ;  covetousness  spoils 
devotion,  as  a  mixture  of  earth  destroys  the 
value  of  saffron. 

(35)  Those  who  sought  found,  diving  down 
into  deep  waters ;  the  heron  in  its  helplessness 
remained  sitting  upon  the  bank. 

Fallon  gives  a  diflerent  version  of  this  Snkht 
which  he  translates  : — Who  in  deepwaters.'plunged 
and  sought  have  found  ;  but  foolish  me  sat  by  the 
shore,  through  fear  of  being  drowned.  This  form  of 
the  saying  is  attributed  to  Dharm  Dass. 

(36)  All  say  'Lord,  Lord'  (Sdhib),  but  my 
fear  is  of  a  different  kind  ;  when  I  know  not 
God  by  sight,  where  can  I  take  my  seat  cr  how 
shall  I  sit  down  with  a  God  whom  I  have  not 
known  ? 


86  SXKHIS  attributed  to   KABfR. 

(37)  The  house  of  God  is  distant,  as  is  a 
tall  palm  ;  he  who  climbs  to  the  top,  tastes  of 
heaven  ;  he  who  falls  is  ground  to  pieces. 

(3S)  What  you  would  do  to-morrow,  do 
to-day ;  what  you  would  do  to-day  do  at  once  ; 
in  a  moment  the  deluge  {Parlai)  will  come,  then 
what  time  will  there  be  for  doing. 

Parlai  is  used  of  the  destruction  with  which 
each  of  the  several  ages  closes. 

(39)     When  I  went  in  search  of  evil  men, 

•  none  appeared  to  view  ;  when  I  searched  my 

•  own  h^art,  I  felt  that  none  were  so  evil  as  my- 
self. 

(40;  Full  knowledge  of  God  is  not  attained 
when  the  heart  h?s  not  been  united  with  God  ; 
devotion  is  simply  that  of  imitation,  the  colour 
is  not  fast. 

C41)  A.  cage  with  nine  doors,  in  it  a  bird 
like  air ;  that  it  should  remain  there  is  the 
marvel  ;  what  wonder  if  it  escape  ? 

(42)  In  times  of  trouble  men  remember 
God,  but  not  in  times  of  ease;  should  they  re- 
member God  in  times  of  ease,  would  they  ever 
experience  trouble  ? 

(43)  Live  on  friendly  terms  with  all,  be 
ready  to  speak  about  all  ;  in  word  agree  with 
all  men,  but  abide  in  your  own  abode. 

The  rhythm  of  this  Sakhi  is  so  fine  that  1  cannot 
refrain  from  printing  it  in  Roman  character  : — 


SiKHlS  ATTRIBUTED  TO   KabIR.  87 

Sab  se  hiliye,  sab  se  miliye,  sab  ke  lijiye  naun  ; 

Hinji,  Hanji,  sab  se  kahiye,  basiye  apne  giun. 

This  saying  is  generally  interpreted  to  mean 
that  men  should  be  tolerant  of  religious  beliefs  dif- 
fering from  their  own,  though  in  no  hurry  to  sur- 
render traditional  behefs. 

It  has  also  been  rendered  thus: 

Associate  with  all  on  friendly  terms  ;  address 
every  one  with  respect  (give  them  their  full  t'.tles)  ; 
agree  with  every  one  in  what  he  says,  and  you  will 
have  a  village  of  your  own  to  live  in,  i.e.  Humour  the 
public  and  you  will  soon  have  them  in  your  power. 

(44)  Upon  seeing  the  mill  revolving,  Kabi'r 
wept ;  the  grain  that  falls  between  the  stones 
can  never  escape  entire. 

(45)  All  men  speak  of  the  mill,  but  none 
make  mention  of  the  pin  ;  the  grain  that  abides 
by  the  pin,  even  its  hair  is  not  disturbed. 

The  two  stones  of  the  mill  are  heaven  and  earth, 
nearly  all  who  live  upon  the  earth  are  overcome  of 
evil  ;  the  few  who  escape  are  those  who  abide  by 
the  pin,  i.e.  those  who  call  upon  God. 

(46)  The  Brahmins  of  this  age  are  objects 
of  ridicule  ;  give  not  to  them  alms  :  they  with 
their  families  will  go  to  hell,  and  take  with  them 
their  employers  (i.e.  those  who  give  them  fees 
or  alms.) 

(47)  The  company  of  the  saints  will  make 
your  burdens  I'ght ;  the  company  of  the  evil 
means  quarrelling  throughout  the  eight  watches. 


88  SaKHIS  attributed  to   KABfR. 

This  saj-ing  is  by  Fallon  attributed  to  Tuisi  Dass. 

(48)  That  day  is  blessed  which  causes  you  to 
meet  a  holy  man  ;  as  you  embrace  him  fervent- 
ly, sin  is  driven  from  the  body. 

A  saying  similar  to  this  is  to  l)e  found  among 
the  Muhammadan  traditions  (Hadis). 

(49)  Tiirough  association  with  a  Sadhu  comes 
remembrance  of  God  ;  that  hour  is  recorded  to 
a  mans  credit  in  his  account  with  God  ;  all  the 
rest  is  as  valueless  as  air. 

(50)  The  mirror  of  God  is  the  body  of  the 
Sadhii  ;  he  who  wishes  to  see,  let  him  see  the 
invisible  in  him  (the  Sadhu.) 

(51)  The  Sadhu  is  the  river,  love  is  the 
water  ;  in  that  place  wash  your  body  ;  Kabir 
says,  Be  clean,  in    company   with  the  Sadhus. 

As  people  wash  their  clothes  on  the  banks  of  a 
river,  so  should  they  seek  purity  of  heart  through 
associating  with  Sadhu>. 

(52J  The  tree  does  not  store  its  fruit  for  its 
own  use,  nor  the  river  its  water  ;  for  the  bene- 
fit of  others  has  the  Sadhu  adopted  human  form. 

(53)  Vom  roars  like  a  lion,  cries  aloud  Kabir  ; 
were  not  the  Guru  merciful,  Yam  would  tear 
and  rend. 

(54)  He  who  has  chosen  a  bodily  Guru  and 
has  failed  to  recognise  the  true  Guru;  time  after 
time  he  rises  and  sinks,  ensnared  in  the  ocean 
of  existence. 


SXKHIS  attributed  to  KABfR.  80 

A  bodily  guru  is  one  who  is  a  guru  in  outward 
appearance,  one  merely  qualified  to  give  instruction 
as  to  ritual,  sacrifice,  alms  etc.,  and  not  to  give  spirit- 
ual counsel. 

(55)  The  Chela  should  be  willing  to  give 
everything  to  his  Guru  ;  the  Guru  should  refuse 
to  take  anything  Irom  his  Chela. 

Many  gurus  frequently  visit  the  houses  of  their 
chelas  and  by  noisy  demonstrations  in  which  they 
are  assisted  by  Bairagis  and  curses  extort  offerings 
from  those  who  at  first  declined  to  give. 

(56)  The  true  Guru  took  the  arrow  of  the 
Shabda  and  prepared  to  shoot  ;  that  which  he 
shot  with  love  found  its  home  within  the  body. 

(57)  You  are  the  wife  of  one,  but  have  be- 
come the  prostitute  of  ma  ny  ;  say  with  whose 
corpse  will  you  be  burnt  ?  for  you  are  the  wife 
of  many. 

There  is  one  God  whom  men  should  love  ;  what 
will  be  the  fate  of  those  who  love  false  gods  ? 

(58)  The  true  Gurii  is  a  great  money  chan- 
ger, testing  the  good  and  the  evil ;  rescuing 
from  tho  world  the  good,  he  takes  it  under  his 
own  protection. 

(59)  As  the  snake  when  it  sees  the  man 
who  has  received  the  mantra,  lowers  its  hood  ; 
so  Kal,  awed  by  the  name  written  on  the  Pan 
leaf,  turns  his  head  away. 

G 


90  SlKHIS  ATTRIBUTED  TO  KABfR, 

The  second  line  contains  a  reference  to  the  con- 
secration of  the  Pan  leaf  by  the  Head  Mahant.  See 
Ch.  VI. 

(60)  The  Chakwi  remains  apart  from  her 
in?te  throughout  the  night,  in  the  early  morn- 
ing they  meet  ;  the  man  who  remains  apart 
firom  God  meets  him  neither  by  day  nor  night. 

(61)  He  who  removes  another's  head,  re- 
moves his  own  ;  in  God's  Durbar  the  account 
will  have  to  be  settled. 

(62)  The  power  that  cannot  be  described, 
the  form  that  imparts  life  (the  vision  of  God  is 
life),  whoever  becomes  one  with  him  (as  milk 
with  water)  ;  that  man,  says  Kabi'r  to  Dharm 
Dass,  Kal  cannot  destroy. 

Union  with  the  true  God  who  has  neither  form 
nor  shape  lead?  on  to  the  development  of  man's 
true  self  over  which  death  has  no  power. 

(62)  He  wlio  reproaches  me  is  my  friend ; 
he  supplies  the  soap  to  wash  my  dirty  linen. 

The  man  who  i<  reproached  pays  heed  to  what 
is  said  and  reforms.  A  similar  saying  is  attributed 
to  the  Sufi  saint,  Imam  Ghizdii,  who  used  the  word 
^washerman'  instead  of 'soap.' 

(64)  Made  articles  are  quickly  destroyed 
and  once  destroyed  are  not  put  rifjht;  by  an 
admixture  of  vinegar  milk  is  curdled  and  cannot 
again  be  turned  to  milk. 


SXKHIS   attributed  to   KABfR.  91 

(65)  For  man  to  assume  a  bod)'  is  difficult ; 
it  cannot  be  done  twice.  The  ripe  fruit  that 
falls  to  the  ground,  cannot  again  be  attached 
to  the  tree. 

Hindus  who  believe  in  transmigration  explain 
this  as  meaning  that  many  ages  will  elapse  before  any 
particular  person  will  again  enter  the  world  as  a  man. 

(66)  We  know  not  what  the  quarter  oE  a 
second  may  bring  and  yet  we  make  plans  for 
the  morrow ;  death  comes  suddenly  as  the 
hawk  pounces  down  on  the  partridge. 

(67)  The  gardener  comes  to  the  garden  and 
seeing  him  the  buds  cry  out,  "The  full-blown 
flowers  are  culled  to-day,  to-morrow  our  turn 
will  come." 

(68)  The  earth  said  to  the  potter,  why  do 
you  trample  on  me  ?  the  day  will  come  when 
I  shall  trample  on  you. 

The  potter  tramples  on  the  earth  to  make  it 
workable  and  plastic. 

(69)  Ail  help  the  strong  ;  no  one  helps  the 
■weak.  A  breeze  gives  fresh  life  to  the  fire,  but 
extinguishes  the  candle. 

(70)  What  place  has  the  coward  on  the 
wrestling  ground  ?  when  wrestler  meets  with 
wrestler  then  is  a  real  contest. 

(71)  Consider  him  a  wrestler,  striving  to 
attain  the  fovour  of  God,  who  though  crushed 
to  pieces,  refuses  to  give  up  the  struggle. 


92         SiKHIS    ATTRIBUTED  TO   KABfR. 

In  the  second  line  reference  is  made  to  an  ins- 
truction often  given  to  a  wrestler  by  his  trainer, 
'Crush  him  to  pieces.'  (Us  he purze pnrze  dila  kar  do)- 

{J2)  The  days  of  yore  are  gone  ;  he  loved 
not  God  (  Hari)  ;  of  what  use  is  remorse,  when 
the  birds  have  eaten  all  the  crops  ? 

These  words  are  often  used  of  a  'ne'er  do  well, 
when  on  the  point  of  death. 

■^7},)  The  wood  that  has  already  been  burnt 
(in  the  process  of  conversion  into  charcoal)  that 
too  cries  out.  "If  I  go  to  the  blacksmith's  forge, 
I  shall  be  burnt  a  second  time." 

Sinners  die  once  in  this  world  and  a  second  time 
in  the  world  to  come. 

(74)  Remain  apart  from  the  world,  as  water 
refuses  to  mingle  with  oil ;  deposit  your  heart 
where  is  neither  death  nor  the  dungeons  of  Kdl. 

(75)  ^^^ho  saves  his  head,  loses  his  head  ; 
who  severs  his  head,  finds  a  head  ;  as  the  wick 
of  a  candle  gives  additional  light  when  trimmed. 

The  head  is  regarded  as  the  most  precious  of 
human  possessions  ;  a  man  will  give  his  head  for  a 
friend. 

(76)  The  pearl  is  found  in  the  oyster,  the 
oyster  is  in  the  sea  ;  the  diver  brings  him  up  ; 
with  no  one  else  is  the  power. 

There  is  probably  here  a  play  upon  words.  The 
word  translated  Diver  may  also  mean,  One  who  lives 
through  death,  or  conquers  after  a  hard  struggle. 


SAKHIS  attributed  to  KABfR.  93 

{77)  Consider  the  parable  of  the  sieve  ;  it 
suffers  the  flour  to  pass,  but  retains  the  husk  ;  so 
men  let  pass  what  is  good  and  swallow  what  is 
useless. 

<Sar -that  which  passes  through  the  sieve ;  Asarz^ 
that  which  is  retained. 

(78 )  Consider  the  sugar  cane  press  ;  the 
juice  flows  out,  the  fragments  of  cane  remain. 

His  heart  is  wanting  in  wisdom  who  retains 
thoughts  of  no  value  and  disregards  spiritual  my- 
steries. 

(79)  All  Sadhiis  are  in  appearance  alike, 
resembling  a  field  of  1  oppies  ;  some  few  thinkers 
are  as  red  flowers,  the  rest  are  perfectly  white. 

It  is  the  white  poppy  that  is  cultivated  in  In- 
dian fields  for  the  production  of  opium. 

(80)  Holy  men  will  not  relinquish  holiness, 
though  they  associate  with  crores  of  unholy  men; 
though  snakes  may  cling  to  the  sandal  tree,  it 
will  never  lose  its  coolness. 

(81)  Ask  no*^  a  Sadhu  about  his  caste,  but 
about  his  knowledge  of  God  ;  when  yoo  are 
determining  the  price  of  a  sword,  there  is  no 
need  to  consider  the  sheath. 

The  sword  is  what  you  want,  it  matters  little 
of  what  kind  or  of  what  colour  the  sheath  may 
be. 

(82)  The  methods  of  a  Sadhu  should  be 
those  of  a  winnowing  fan  ;  he  should  lay  hold 


H         SiKHIS  ATTRIBUTED  TO  KABfR. 

of  the  weighty  matters  and  let  subjects  of  h'ttle 
moment  fly  away. 

(8^)  Kabir  says  ;  to  associate  with  a  Sddhii 
is  like  sitting  near  a  seller  of  perfumes  ;  though 
the  seller  sell  you  nought,  yet  you  enjoy  the 
scent  of  his  perfumes. 

(84)  As  an  ant  is  carrying  off  a  grain  of 
rice,  it  falls  in  \\'ith  a  grain  of  da/.  Kabi'r  says  ; 
both  you  cannot  carry  away,  take  the  one  and 
leave  the  other. 

(85)  A  madman  was  beating  the  hole  of  a 
snake,  but  the  snake  was  not  hit ;  fool,  it  is  not 
the  snake's  hole  that  bites  ;  it  is  the  snake  that 
devours  men. 

(86)  Where  is  the  boundary  of  the  heavens? 
what  is  the  weight  of  the  world  ?  wh;it  is  the 
caste  of  a  Sadhu  ?  What  is  the  price  of  the  Al- 
chemist's stone  ? 

(Sy)  The  dog  of  a  Sadhu  is  virtuous,  while 
evil  is  the  mother  of  one  who  becomes  not  the 
chela  of  a  guru  ;  the  one  sits  and  hears  the  prais- 
es of  Han' ;  the  other  speaks  evil  of  gurus. 

(SB)  Learn  to  distinguish  the  honest  man 
and  the  thief  from  their  manner  of  speech  ;  all 
the  works  that  are  within  proceed  forth  by  way 
of  the  mouth. 

Cf  St  Matt,  xii  34.  Out  of  the  abundance  of 
the  heart  the  mouth  cspeaketh. 


SXkhis  attributed  to  Kabir.       95 

(89)  In  the  midst  of  the  highest  heaven 
there  is  a  shining  h'ght ;  he  who  has  no  guni 
cannot  reach  the  palace  ;  he  only  will  reach  it 
who  is  under  the  guidance  of  a  true  Guru. 

(90)  Feel  no  care  ;  be  free  from  care  ;  the 
giver  is  powerful ;  the  beasts  of  the  field,  the 
birds  and  the  insects  have  neither  wealth  nor 
store  house. 

(91)  The  tortoise  takes  care  of  its  egg; 
without  breasts  it  supplies  its  needs  ;  so  God 
provides  for  all  and  makes  provision  for  the 
three  loks  (earth,  heaven  and  hell). 

(92)  Whatever  I  did,  you  did;  I  did  nothing 
myself;  should  man  say,  I  did  it,  it  was  in  your 
strength  that  it  was  done. 

Cf.  Phil.  ii.  13. 

Shiims-i-Tabrez,  the  famous  Sufi,  is  said  to  have 
raised  a  man  from  the  dead.  Three  times  he  address- 
ed the  corpse,  saying,  In  the  name  of  God,  I  bid  « 
thee  rise.  These  words  had  no  effect.  He  then  said, 
'In  my  name  I  bid  thee  rise'  and  the  man  rose. 
The  idea  is  that  man's  real  power  lies  in  the  cons-  , 
ciousness  of  his  union  with  God.  So  long  as  he 
addressed  God  as  one  apart  from  himself,  his  prayer 
was  disregarded. 

(93)  Everything  is  from  God  and  nothing 
from  his  servant;  he  can  change  a  mustard  seed 
into  a  mountain  and  a  mountain  into  a  mustard 
seed. 


96  SaKHIS  attributed  to   KABfR. 

(94)  Should  all  the  earth  be  turned  into  pa- 
per and  all  the  trees  into  pens;  should  the  seven 
seas  be  turned  into  ink,  yet  could  not  an 
account  of  God  be  written. 

(95)  In  blessings,  O  God,  thou  surpassest  all, 
in  thy  dealings  with  men  thou  art  without  a  ri- 

.  val;  God  is  chief  of  all  kings,  and  yet  He  lived 
upon  earth  as  z/aqlr. 

(96)  We  shall  not  die,  though  all  creation 
die;  we  have  found  one  that  quickeneth. 

These  lines  form  part  of  an  introduction  to   a 
Bhajan. 

(97)  Whoever  forsakes  what  is  false  and  pro- 
ductive of  pride  and  becomes  as  dust  on  the 
road,  he  will  find  God. 

(98)  The  difference  between  the  true  and 
the  false  Sadbu  is  as  that  between  the  Am 
(mango)  and  the  Babul  trees;  the  former  bears 
life-producing  fruit,  the  latter  thorns. 

Fhal  (fruity  is  often  used  of  the  results  of  action. 

(99)  When  you  see  a  Sadhu  approaching, 
run,  touch  with  your  hands  his  feet  (and  apply 
them  to  your  forehead).  It  may  be  that  in  this 
form  God  himself  will  meet  you. 

(100)  All  say  'Ram,  Ram,'  but  there  is  a 
difference  in  the  saying;  one  associated  with 
many,  another  was  absorbed  in  one. 


SiKHlS  ATTRIBUTED  TO  KABIR.  97 

The  writer  seems  to  be  here  distinguishing  bet- 
ween Rdm,  the  son  of  Danrjith,  and  Kdm,  as  used  as 
a  title  of  the  one  true  God, 

(loi)  0  NArdyan,  there  have  been  count- 
less mighty  rulers  in  this  world;  they  used  to 
speak  of  I  and  mine,  but  when  they  died  they 
took  not  away  with  them  a  single  straw. 

(102)  If  a  man  be  meek,  humble,  respect- 
ful and  obedient  to  Sadhus,  in  his  heart  I  dwell, 
as  a  fish  dwells  in  the  water. 

(103)  Water  stays  not  at  a  high  level,  but 
descends;  he  who  stoops  down  can  raise  up  the 
water  and  drink;  he  who  remains  standing  must 
go  away  with  thirst  unquenched. 

(104)  Only  the  guru  is  found,  but  no  disciple 
(every  one  presumes  to  teach,  none  are  willing 
to  learn);  there  is  some  hope  of  success,  when  a 
disciple  is  found. 

(105)  What  is  the  use  of  greatness?  the 
palm  is  a  tall  tree,  but  none  sit  under  its  shade 
and  its  fruit  is  out  of  reach. 

(106)  If  you  wish  to  worship  Ram,  worship 
him  at  once  ;  when  will  you  find  another  op- 
portunity ?  The  ^rass  that  now  is  fresh  and 
green  will  shortly  be  dried  as  fuel. 

(107)  Thou  camest  into  this  world  for  gain; 
gamble  not  away  thy  life,  weigh  carefully  in 
thy  mind,  this  moment  will  not  return  again. 


Chapter  V 

The  KABfR  Panth. 

The  Kabir  Panthis  of  Xorthem  and  Central 
India  recognise  two  main  divisions  of  the  Panth, 
one  with  headquarters  at  the  Kabir  Chaura  in 
Benares  and  a  branch  establishment  at  Maghar, 
and  a  second,  founded  by  Dharm  Dass,  with  head- 
quarters in  the  Chattisgarh  District,  in  the  Cen- 
tral Pro^^^ces.  The  former  is  known  as  Bap 
(Father)  and  the  latter  as  Mai  (Mother).  The 
relations  between  these  two  divisions  have  at 
times  been  strained.  The  Math  at  Puri,  where, 
in  the  worship  of  Jagannath,  distinctions  of  caste 
are  disregarded,  is  respected  by  both  as  a  place  of 
pilgrimage.* 

It  is  impossible  in  the  light  of  present  in- 
formation to  determine  the  date  at  which  either 
of  these  di\'isions  first  came  into  existence,  but 
both  were  probably  founded  by  Hindu  disciples 
of  Kabir. 

As  already  stated  Kabir  died  and  was  buried 
at  ^laghar,  in  the  district  of  Gorakhpur.    The 

(1)  The  division  of  the  Panth  into  twelve  branches,  as 
given  in  Wilson,  H.  II.  eeems  to  be  quite  fanciful.  There  are 
other  branches  at  Bombay,  in  Gujerat,  etc.,  but  it  is  doubtful 
whether  these  regard  themselves  as  independent  of  these  two 
main  divisions.  Of  these  two  divisions,  that  which  bears  the 
name  of  Dharm  Dass,  though  barely  mentioned  by  WiLoo, 
is  the  more  influential  at  the  present  time. 


The  KabIr  Panth.  99 

shrine  at  Maghdr  which  has  always  been  in  the 
charge  of  Muhammadans  was  restored  in  1567 
by  Nawab  Fidae  Khan,  the  oflicer  in  command 
of  the  imperial  army  which  occupied  the  city 
in  that  year,^ 

There  are  at  the  present  time  two  Maths  at 
Maghdr,  one  for  Muhammadans,  containing  the 
shrine,  and  another  for  Hindus,  in  the  enclosure 
of  which  is  a  hole  in  which  Kabir  is  said  to 
have  sat,  awaiting  death. ^  Each  of  these  Maths 
which  adjoin  one  another,  has  accommodation 
tor  50  Sadhus,  though  as  a  rule  only  one  Fakir 
or  Sadhu  lives  in  each.'*  About  50  Hindu  Sadhus 
live  in  the  neighbouring  villages  of  Balwa  and 
Khurswal  where  the  Panth  has  property  in  land.* 

At  Maghar  there  are  more  Muhammadan 
than  Hindu  Kabi'r  Panthis.  The  two  sections 
have  little  in  common,  except  their  devotion  to 
Kabk  their  Master.  Each  section  receives 
Prasdd  in  its  own  Math. 

(2)  From  1300  to  1567  A.  D.  Maghar  was  the  capital  <rf 
the  Samet  Kajputs. 

(3)  It  is  stated  in  the  Haiti  Gazetteer  that  a  Hindu 
Mahant  first  arrived  at  Maf,'har  in  1761  A.  D.  According  to 
Kabir  Chaiira  traditions  the  first  four  Mahants  were  buried  at 
Maghar,     Sec  Additional  Note. 

(4)  Tlie  Hindu  Math  is  under  the  management  of  the 
Kabir  Chaura  Mahant.  Tiic  present  Mahant,  Gur  Fnusad  Daas, 
is  specially  interested  in  the  superintendence  of  agricultural 
operations.  In  the  absence  of  the  Mahant  the  Pujari  is 
placed  in  charge  of  the  Kabir  Chaura  Math. 

(5)  This  land  is  chiefly  under  rice  cultivation.  In  1000 
the  land  at  Balwa  supplied  the  Kabir  Chaura  Math  with  750 
maunds  of  rice  and  the  Maghar  Math  with  500  maunds. 


100  The  KabIr  Panth. 

In  connexion  with  the  Muhammadan  Math 
a  largely  attended  Mela  is  held  on  the  last  day 
of  Aghan  (November).  In  connexion  with  this 
Mela  a  sacred  feast  is  held.  The  Mahant  pro- 
ceeds to  the  shrine,  followed  by  the  Di'wan, 
carr}'ing  in  both  hands  a  large  dish  (T/iafnbe) 
containing  KJiichri  (cooked  rice  mixed  with  ddl) 
and  by  a  Banddli  carrying  an  earthenware 
vessel  {Rarwa)  containing  water  and  covered 
over  with  a  white  cloth.  Upon  reaching  the 
shrine  these  vessels  are  placed  upon  the  ground 
and  frankincense  is  burnt  upon  the  tomb,  in  a 
fire  of  cowcJung.*'  The  Mahant  repeats  cer- 
tain prayers  in  which  all  present  take  their  part.'^ 

At  the  conclusion  of  the  prayers  he  takes 
his  seat  upon  the  ground  while  the  Diwan  gives 
to  each  of  the  worshippers  a  small  portion  of 
iheK/iichriand  the  Bandali  pours  from  the  spout 
of  the  Karwa  a  few  drops  of  the  water  into  the 
palm  of  their  hands.  When  all  have  received, 
the  Diwan  and  Bandali  consume  what  is  left. 
More  prayers  are  said,  after  which  the  Mahant 
departs  and  the  gathering  breaks  up.^ 

(6)  These  ashes  are  pa>^e<l  through  fine  iniislin  and 
preserve!  1  in  a  brass  lot^i.. 

(7)  The  Kabir  Panthis  apply  the  term  piTiycr  to  devo- 
tional exercises  which  might  be  more  accurately  described  as 

meditations. 

(S)  It  seemed  best  to  describe  this  feast  here  and  so 
complete  the  account  relatinj^  to  M.ighar.  The  religious 
feasts  of  the  Hindu  Kabir  I'anthis,  which  are  conducte<l  with 
considerably  more  ritual,  are  described  in  Chapter   VI. 


The  KABfR  Panth.  101 

Pilgrims  to  the  shrine  are  expected  to  pre- 
sent a  rupee  to  the  officer  in  charge  and  also  an 
offering  of  rice  and  ddl.  They  receive  in  re- 
turn a  small  portion  of  Khichri  and  a  pinch  of 
the  ashes  that  result  from  the  burning  of  the 
frankincense  and  covvdung,'-^ 

The  Kabir  Chaura  Math  receives  its  name 
from  the  fact  that  it  occupies  the  site  upon 
v/hich  according  to  tradition  Kabir  gave  instruc- 
tion to  his  disciples.  The  Math  consists  of  two 
courtyards,  connected  by  a  bridge  thrown  across 
a  narrow  lane.  Ihe  main  courtyard  contains 
the  preaching  platform,  the  Maudar,  which  is 
occupied  by  a  pair  of  wooden  sandals  (^Khayirdon) 
intended  to  represent  the  feet  of  the  Gurii,^*^  »be 
Gaddi,^  ^  the  SamadhsitomhsV''^  offiveMahants 

(9)  The  Muhaniraadan  members  of  the  Panth  wear  caps 
of  a  different  shape  to  tho-:e  worn  by  the  Iliiulii  BairHgis. 

(10)  Orif,'iiially  there  was  no  .Mandar  (temple)  at  Kabir 
Chaura,  but  in  this  respect,  as  probably  in  others,  the  Kabir 
Pauthiri  have  gradually  assimilatetl  their  own  arrau,t,'enient3 
to  those  of  the  Maths  of  other  reliijious  orders.  The 
Dasnamis  worship  the  feet  of  Sankaracliarya,  carved  in  out- 
line in  stone  or  marble.  It  was  })rubal)ly  in  oider  t<)  csaipe 
the  charge  of  idolatry  that  the  Kabir  Tanthis  substitute<l  for 
the  Charan  Paduhd  a  pair  of  wooden  sandals. 

(11)  The  6'arfrf/ is  literally  the  pillow  upon  which  the 
Ciuru  sits  in  state.  The  O'addi  oi  tliis  Hath  belongs  to  Kabir, 
his   reprcsent;itivc   upon    earth   sits   behind   and  not  upon  it. 

(12)  When  practicable  the  Mahants  are  buried  within 
the  precincts  of  their  Math.  It  is  the  custom  of  this,  as  of 
several  other  religions  orders,  to  bury  and  not  burn  the  bodies 
of  their  dead.  The  custom  which  maj'  be  due  to  Muhamma<lan 
influences  is  explained  b}'  saying  tliat  the  bodies  of  Sants 
who  have  died  to  th.;  world  have  already  been  purified  and  do 
not  rei)uire  the  cleansing  of  fire. 


102  The  KABfR  Panth, 

and  quarters  for  Sadhus.  The  courtyard  across 
the  lane  which  occupies  the  traditional  site  of 
Niru's  house  is  made  over  to  the  female  Bairagis, 
known  as  Mai  Log.'^'^  This  court  contains  the 
Samadhs  of  three  Mahants. 

The  room  in  which  the  Gaddi  is  placed  is 
immediately  opposite  the  entrance  gate.  Over 
the  Gaddi  hangs  the  picture  of  Kabi'r  which  has 
been  reproduced  as  the  frontispiece  of  this  vo- 
lume. In  this  picture  Surat  Gopal  and  Dharm 
Dass,  the  founders  of  the  two  main  divisions  of 
the  Panth,  are  represented  as  kneeling  before 
Kabi'r  while  Kamal  stands  behind  with  a  fan  in 
his  hand.  On  one  side  of  the  picture  hangs  a 
portrait  of  Ramanand  and  on  the  other  a  picture 
of  Rangi  Dass,  the  late  Mahant,  who  died  eight 
years  ago. 

Above  the  pictures  are  hun;;  what  appear 
firom  the  distance  to  be  armorial  bearings,  but 
are  in  reality  designs  in  coloured  cloth,  intended 
to  symbolise  the  five  elements  (earth,  air,  fire, 
water  and  dkhds)  and  the  nine  doors  or  points 
of  entrance  into  the  human  body.  In  front  of 
the  Gaddi  are  placed  two  {lower  vases  and  upon 
the  wall  at  the  side  h^ngs  a  rosary,  composed 

(1.^)  The  female  devotee?  are  i,Mven  the  title  of  Mother 
because  all  Sadhus  arc  rcqiured  to  treat  them  with  the  respect 
due  to  a  mother  from  her  son.  Wheu  a  nr.uricl  man  is 
receivc<l  into  the  order  of  the  DtniU<t  he  applies  nis  lips  tn  tlie 
breast  of  his  wife  to  indicate  that  henceforth  he  stands  to  her 
in  the  relation  of  sou  to  mother. 


The  KABfR  Panth.  103 

of  a  thousand  beads,  which  is  reserved  for  the 

use  of  the  Mahant. 

Daily  semce  is  conducted  in  the  Math,  mor- 
ning and  evening,  by  the  Pujdri,  In  the  morn- 
ing the  Sadhus,  so  soon  as  they  have  bathed, 
assemble  in  front  of  the  Mandar.  Here  takes 
place  the  first  part  of  the  service  which  includes 
the  performance  of  Arti^'^  and  the  washing  of  the 
Guru's  feet.  After  this  the  various  Samadhs 
and  the  Gaddi  are  visited  and  the  Sadhus  re- 
turn to  the  Mandar  for  the  concluding  portion 
of  the  service.  The  morning  service  is  said  to 
occupy  thirty  minutes  and  the  evening  service 
an  hour. 

The  water  in  which  the  wooden  sandals 
have  been  washed,  known  as  Charan  Mitra, 
is  poured  into  a  brazen  vessel.  Three  teaspoon- 
fulsofthis  water  together  with  three  fulsV-*  lea- 
ves, are  given  to  all  who  visit  the  Math  during 
the  day.  At  8  p.  m.  the  doors  of  the  Math  are 
closed  and  any  Chara?i  iWz/^ra  that  remains  over 
is  offered  in  the  first  place  to  such  Sadhus  as 
have  not  previously  received  it.  The  vessel  is 
then  presented  to  the  Mahant  who  after  drink- 

(14)  In  Arti  fire,  usually  the  flames  of  burning  camphor, 
is  wiivoJ  before  (he  object  of  worship. 

(15)  The  Tulsi  loaf  is  sacred  to  Vislmu.  Many  Kabir 
rantliis  feel  tliat  in  thus  sliowini;  reference  to  Vishnu  they  arc 
disret,'arcllng  the  teaching  of  Kabir,  as  by  Mm  he  meant  not 
the  incarnation  of  Vishnu,  but  the  supreme  Deity. 


104  The  KabIr  Panth, 

ing  what  remains  rinses  out  the  vessel  with  fresh 
■water  and  consumes  that  also. 

An  annual  Mela  which  lasts  over  lour  or  five 
days  is  held  at  this  Math  in  the  month  of  Janu- 
ar}\  On  this  occasion  the  large  courtyard  is 
crowded  with  devotees.  Those  who  wish  to 
become  Bainigis  observe  a  fast  for  twelve  days, 
eating  in  the  evening  a  little  gur  (crude  sugar) 
and  rice  cooked  in  milk.  These  candidates  are 
admitted  as  Bairdgis  at  the  celebration  of  the 
Jot  Fershad,  which,  from  a  religious  point  of 
view,  constitutes  the  principal  purpose  of  the 
Mela.^^  Of  the  possessions  belonging  to  the 
Math  the  Kabi'r  Panthis  regard  the  topi  (cap) 
and  sehli  woollen  necklace  of  Kabi'r,  the 
Khajirdon,  the  picture  of  Kabi'r  and  the  Bijak  as 
those  of  greatest  value. 

The  principal  officers  of  the  Math  are  the  Ma- 
havt,  the  Diivdv,  the  Koiwdl  and  the  Ptijdri. 
The  Mdliant  is  responsible  for  the  gsneral  arran- 
gements and  should  be  a  man  of  learning,  quali- 
fied to  give  religious  instruction;  the  Ducdii  is 
the  business  manager  ;  the  Kotwdl  is  responsi- 
ble for  the  maintenance  of  discipline,  while  the 

(IC)  It  is  paid  that  the  Jut  Pershad  w?s  originally 
celcbnitcil  in  this  Math  once  a  month,  but  tliat  this  cusiora 
was  discontinue*!  on  account  of  a  quancl  that  arose  between 
Puran  Diss  and  the  contemporary  Mahant  of  the  Dharm  Diss 
sectii'D,  in  conse>mence  of  which  the  latter  refused  to  supply 
Turan  D;iss  with  somethint;  which  was  reearded  as  essential 
ior  the  proper  conduct  of  this  service,  I'or  an  account  of 
the  Jot  Pershad  sec  Chapter  vi. 


"■ 

^VV-V^-..vV>f:'S--v  ;(.<-:;.:„,  V:>^i,  i> 

'V'^""!:'  "^••'•''    '^■•-■•"■^^'^'    -^"^ 

•      ---i ,     ■   -.;>  ••■..-.        ■   •  - 

■          '            .            .           > 

..         .  \. 

- 

'-^^y_^ 

-  '.■" 

1 

t 

o'-'s.  .-  '                               * 

..^*. 

J 

1 

"♦-■. 

1 

.  '  "-fv^jr-                                        ■■ 

« 

••« 

' 

.  % 

r                   .                                                                  ■  t- 

* 

■i^lt-.* 

'-'"' "     "  •     ■                                                       ■'.*■'''? 

'■•  V    -• 

f  ■ 

■  >■■*- — -• . 

Vv 

X 

— '.y-  ■  i  r  "/^'. 

,' 

.  ly 

^■"■■'   ,          ?      \ 

■  ■"■ 

i         *■• 

,'                  -       •      •                                   7          .        •                                 .                            '"                                                                                                                        '    -■^'                                   ? 

i  -/r"^  .-'-"-^^  ■                         -' 

*   -.'i  /         *^'.4:"^-«>*»=; 

i        '  "                           •             ■"■—..   ..' 

.   *   ■  '.-•'    .' 

•?,;,                                 -Jk^ 

■ ../'  ♦ 

■    ■-■    •  '-a/"^*- 

— 

'•       ■''■*  '    "" 

104  The  KAi^fR  Panth. 

ing  whal  remains  rinses  out  the  vessel  with  fresh 
water  and  consumes  that  also. 

An  nnnu.il  M'  i/i  \vhic:h  lasts  over  lour  or  five 
(].iys  is  held, it  Ihis  ?4ath  in  the  month  ol  Janu- 
ar)'.  On  this  v^r^-ion  the  l;irj,'e  (jOwrt\?.r'J  is 
crowded  with  «ievotees.  Those  v.  ho  v.i"h  fo 
become  Bairagis  observe  a  fast  for  twf-lve  days, 
eating  in  the  evenin.c^  a  httle  gur  (crude  5Ui,'r!r) 
and  rice  cooked  in  milk.  These  candidates  are 
adnntted  as  Bairagis  at  the  celebration  of  the 
jot  I'ershAd,  whicli,  from  a  reh"gious  point  of 
%iew,  constHutes  the  principal  purpose  of  the 
>'.-]a.'''^  O:"  the  possessions  belonging  to  the 
\!;j!h  tht;  Kabfr  Pantliis  reg-ard  the  to^i  (cap) 
and  sehli  woollen  necklace  of  Kabfr.  the 
Khnnraori,  the  picture  o'i  K'tbr  waCx  tU.-  \y.-  -i.  >t» 
those  of  greatest  value. 

The  principal  officer^  oi  Ctu^  U.tVA  :}rc  the  Ma- 
hant,  the  Diadn,  the  A't>/;/.x</  i>.-\  ti-,e  Pujdri. 
The  JiciAa.i/ is  responsible  fc  tic  ,:':neralarran- 
•jeinentsand  should  be  a  man  of  ifarnini?,  quali- 
licd  to  give  religious  insti'Jction  ;  the  V'/v^an  is 
the  business  manager  ;  ih-i  Koiwdl  i>  responsi- 
ble for  the  maintenance  of  discipline,  while  the 

(IG)  U  is.  s.ii.1  t'nat  t,';ic  Jo!:  Ptrilnid  w?s  or-'ginallv 
celobriitci!  in  thi.-i  Malh  once  a  month,  but  that  t)iis  ci-^tom 
was  di.^onf  inue-l  on  :*cc'iui\l.  of  a  quarrtM  that  arose  bclwcfii 
Puran  ri>.-f  and  thr-  oontcinpiirary  Mali.iJit  of  the  Dharm  Diss 
?ev.-tioc.  ia  con.-cjuei.cr  cf  wliichthe  Jartcr  rcfr.i^al  to  supply 
Pnria  Doss  witL  sr.nivtliUiir  wliich  wa.s  re.c^ardcd  as  essential 
if.r  t.)\e  propoJ-  cci-Iuct  of  this  service,  i'or  an  account  of 
tU-:  Jot  Ffjsba.!  sec  Ciiupter  vi. 


^    ; 


.j-5^.;- 


rro>.<i>^. . 


T*  >■'  ^-^  "  ' 


The  KAnfR  Panth.  105 

Puj'dfi  conducts  the /w/tf  (worship)  .and  keeps 
clean  and  in  order  the  Mandar  and  the  Gaddf. 
The  headquarters  of  the  Dharm  Diss  sec- 
tion were  originally  at  Bandogarh  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Jubbulpore  ;  from  this  place 
they  were  transferred  to  Koodarmal  and  once 
again  in  recent  years  to  Dhama  Khera. 

Dharm  Dass,  the  founder  of  this  section,  is 
said  to  have  first  met  Kabir  at  Benares  and  to 
have  been  rebuked  by  him  for  worshipping 
idols.  He  met  him  subsequently  at  Brindaban, 
but  failing  to  recognise  him  said,  "  Your  words 
resemble  those  addressed  to  me  by  a  Sadhii 
whom  I  once  met  at  Benares.  "  On  this  occasion 
Kabir  adopted  stronger  measures  and  threw 
into  the  river  the  idol  which  Dharm  Ddss  was 
worshipping.  Once  more  Kabir  appeared  to 
him  in  his  house  at  Bkndogarh.  Dharm  Dass 
was  a  bunnidh  by  caste  and  possessed  of  con- 
siderable wealth.  Kabir  again  rebuked  him 
lor  practising  idolatry  and  asked  him  how  he 
could  worship  an  idol  made  out  of  the  same 
stone  as  the  weights  which  he  made  use  ot  in 
his  business.  On  this  occasion  Dharm  Dass 
acknowledged  the  lorce  of  his  arguments  and 
both  he  and  his  wife  became  his  disciples. 
According  to  the  account  given  in  Siikrit  Dhydn 
Dharm  D;\ss  was  the  son  ot  one  Mahesh,  and 
was  as  an  infant  saved  from  death  by  Gyani 


106  The  KABfR  Panth. 

( t.  e.  Kabi'r )  who  entered  into  his   body.    He 
was  originally  called  Judawan,  but  objected   to 
this  name  and  received  from  Kabir   permission 
to  change  it  to  Dharm   Dass.     Narayan   Dass, 
his  son,  refused  to  accept   Kabir   as  his  Guru, 
but  through  the  grace  of  Kabir   a   second  son 
was  born  in  1516  and  named  Chuniman.i^  This 
son  was  installed   upon   the    GaJdi   by   Kabir 
himself.     Upon  the  occasion  of  his   installation 
Kabir  foretold  that  his   descendants   should   sit 
upon  the  Gaddi  for  42  generations  (  Bans),  and 
declared   that   the   right  to   communicate   the 
Mantra  would  be  confined  to   his   descendants. 
In   accordance   with    Kabi'r's   instructions    the 
Head  ^Mahant  of  this  section  marries    and   lives 
with   his   wife   till  a   son   is   b(>rn.     After   the 
birth  of  the  son  the  wife   becomes   a    Bairagi. 
The  Mahant  holds  office  for  a  period  of  25  years 
and  20  days  and  is  then  succeeded  by  his  son."* 
In  one  case  the  son  is  said  to  have  died  and   as 
the  mother  had  become  a  Bairagi  the    Mahant 

(17)  This  date  has  apparently  bceii  ch(  sen  to  hring 
the  birth  of  Chur.rodn  within  the  lifetitiiC  uf  Kabir.  N.. 
me-itian  is  maUe  of  the  age  at  which  Churamaii  was  nistaUc<l 
a=.  Mahant  No  importance  can  be  attnchcl  to  datc^  nientioii- 
eilW  connexion  with  the  establ'shment  of  tlie  Panth.  Lg- 
raulm  issiid  to  be  the  V^ih  Mahant.  If  elcveii  Mahant.  occupi- 
ed the  Gaddi  for  twenty  rears  e:icli  and  one  Mahant  for  three, 
the  Panth  would  appear  to  have  been  founded  2.8  vears  pre- 
vious  to  the  installation  of  Ugranam,  i.  c.  about  162o. 

ri8  )  The  Mahant's  son  alone  is  a  member  of  the  Fantli 
br  birth  and  is  initiated  by  his  father.  All  other  member^ 
l^.me  the  children  of  the  Mahant  through  the  reception  of 
I  he  ilnntra. 


The  KABfR  Panth.  107 

lived  with  another  woman  by  whom  he  had  a 
son.  ^^  The  father  of  the  present  Mahant  died 
alter  holding  ofiice  for  a  period  of  three  years 
only,  and  many  wished  that  one  of  his  disciples, 
Jugia  Nand,  should  officiate  as  Mahant  during 
the  remainder  of  his  term  of  office.  To  this 
proposal  the  majority  of  the  members  strongly 
objected  on  the  ground  that  he  was  not  a  descen- 
dant of  Dharm  Dass,  and  Ugranam  was  duly 
installed.  His  grandmother,  known  as  Dadi 
Sahib,  who  was  responsible  for  this  proposal, 
still  exercises  authority  at  Koodarmal,  and 
Ugranam  reigns  in  the  newly  established  Math 
at  Dhama  Khera.  Jugla  Nand  with  other  dis- 
contented Sudhus  retired  to  Bombay,  where  he 
has  published  various  books  bearing  upon  the 
Panth,  Kabir  is  said  to  have  given  instructions 
to  Dharm  Ddss  regarding  the  CJiaiihi  and  the 
Jot  Prasad. 

The  Kablr  Panth  exists  as  a  protest  against 
the  religious  exclusiveness  of  the  twice-born 
castes.  As  a  natural  result  few  but  Sudras  whose 
cause  it  champions  have  associated  themselves 
with  the  movement.  The  Panth  contends  for 
a  truth  which  forms  part  of  the  Gospel  of  Crea- 
tion,  viz.  that  uU   men   have  spiritual  powers 

(19)  The  boy  who  died  is  said  to  have  been  Ohuranian 
who  returned  to  the  world,  but  retired  after  a  s-hort  stay 
as  he  was  uiiwilUiij^  a  second  time  to  sit  upon  tlie 
Oaddi. 


108  The  KabIr  Panth. 

which  should  find  their  natural  expression  in 
communion  with  God,  now  in  this  life.-*^ 

The  sons  of  the  twice-born  as  they  come  to 
years  of  discretion  are  invested  with  the  sacred 
thread  'Janeo)  and  reminded  thereby  of  their 
spiritual  privileges  and  responsibilities.  The 
members  of  this  Panth  wear  round  their  necks 
a  A'G?j//fi  (rosary)  formed  of  beads  made  of  Tulsi 
wood.-^  This  Kanthi  is  naturally  associated 
with  thoughts  of  prayer  and  in  this  way 
reminds  those  who  wear  it  alike  of  their  relation 
to  God  and  of  the  promises  which  they  made  at 
the  time  ot   their   initiation.--     Permission  to 

(20)  The  oxcluoive  spirit  wbich  fimls  expression  in  caste 
and  ajrain-t  wbich  Kabir  and  others  f(ju<,'ht,  has  by  no  means 
been  expelled  from  the  minds  of  Ka}nr  I'anthls.  Members  of 
the  lowest  ctustes  such  as  Mehtars.  Doms  and  Dhohis,  should, 
they  c<>nsi<ler,  join  sects  such  as  that  oi  S/iira  .^aruyan  a.nd 
nr^t  be  permitted  to  wear  k-anfhu. 

(21)  The  kaiUlii  of  the  Kabir  Panfhh  is  formed  of  beads 
made  of  Tulsi  wckxI,  which  are  usually  strung  on  string  of  verj 
inferior  qualiiy.  This  defect  may  result  in  the  loss  of  the 
oeruis,  and  no  member  of  the  Panth  is  under  such  circumstance 
al'.owel  to  worship  or  eat  foo<l  till  the  Ixjiids  have  been  replaced. 
They  are.  however,  allowed  to  wciir  instc.oii  of  thuhuiitlii  one 
lar^-'e  betd  (hira)  st  rung  on  substantial  thread.  Those  vim  live 
in  places  where  a  lost  kanthi  cannot  lie  easily  replaced  usually 
avail  themselves  of  this  alternative.  Some  ^W'U*/"'*  are  made  of 
njaterial  other  than  wo<-k1.  e.g.  grass  or  cocoanut  fibre. 
Some  Sif/uirnis  wear  a  wristlet  made  of  string  in  lieu  of  a  kanthi. 

(22)  Prayer  as  offered  by  tlic  Kabir  Panthis  is  of  an  ele- 
mentary character.  One  s.iys  that  they  pray  tliat  they  may 
..brain  'salvation  (mukhtij  ;  another  says  that  he  sings  the 
pnis*,^  of  2saray.T,n  in  the  morning  and  in  the  evening  prays 
for  prf>tection  'against  evil  spirits.  Tiie  Latter  spoke  of  our 
Church  Services  .a.s  '^pnvctice",  and  regarded  them  as  valuable 
in  as  much  as  they  helped  to  form  a  habit  of  ))unctuality.  It 
would  be  a  great  mistake  to  suppose  that  prayer  mcixns  for  a 
Kabir  Pcinthi  the  same  as  it  does  for  a  I'hristian. 

At  the  time  of  prayer  members  of  the  Panth  make  on  their 
forehead  the  mark  ffilak)  of  Vishnu,  using  for  tlie  purpose 
a  special  kind  of  earth  mixed  with   water  or  with  water  only. 


The  KabIr  Panth,  109 

wear  a  Kanthi  is  granted  to  women  as  well  as  to 
men,  for  they  too  are  spiritual  beings ;  but  no 
woman  may  assume  a  Kanthi  previous  to 
marriage  nor  may  she  become  the  disciple  of 
her  husband's  Guru.-^ 

To  Brahmins  at  the  time  of  investiture  with 
the  sacred  thread  is  communicated  the  Brah- 
minical  Mavira  which  they  are  not  allowed  on 
any  account  to  communicate  to  those  who  are 
not  Brahmins.-*  In  like  manner  at  the  time  of 
initiation  a  Mantra  is  whispered  into  the  ear 
of  Kabir  Panthis.  This  .\iaiitra  serves  as  a  bond 
of  union  between  members  of  the  Panth  and 
also  sufjgests  a  position  of  privilege.*^'"' 

Brahmins  wear  upon  their  forehead  the  sign 
of  the  God  whom  they  worship.     Kabi'r  Panthis 

(23)  If  disciflcs  of  tliosauic  Ciuru  tliey  would  be  rcgartle<l 
as  brother  .itul  bi-^tor  and  6u  their  marriage  would  become  ' 
unlawful.  This,  however,  appears  to  be  a  later  refinement 
as  Dharm  Dass  and  his  wife  were  both  the  disci[)Ies  of  Kabir. 
They  wi.nM  in^l.-iMy  ait;ue  that  this  was  a  matter  of 
iiecc.vsiij,  a>  ai  liiat  tiiuu  there  was  oidy  one  Guru  whereas 
in  mortem  days  there  are  many. 

(24)  The  spiritual  life  of  Brahmins,  Kshattriyas  and 
Vaishyas  is  recognised  from  the  time  when  they  receive  the 
mantra  from  their  Guru  and  are  investetl  with  the  siicrcd 
thrciui.  From  that  time  they  are  subject  to  the  ndcs  of  caste, 
«»nly  those  who  have  reache<l  years  of  discretion  arc  admitted 
as  members  of  the  J'um/t  with  the  pos.-ible  exception  of 
children,  both  of  whose  parents  arc  already  members 

(25)  The  Initiatory  Mantra  of  the  i(abir  I'anth  is  said 
to  contain  five  words  which  represent  one  name  or  revelation 
of  the  one  true  God.  Should  the  c/tela  at  the  time  of  initia- 
tion fail  to  catch  the  words  on  account  of  nervousness  or  the 
noise  of  music,  he  may  have  it  rcpeatetl  to  him  by  some  other 
member  of  the  Panth,  provided  that  this  is  done  in  a  solitary 
place  where  there  i^  no  chance  of  the  words  being  overheard 
by  others. 


110  The  KABfR  Panth, 

also  wear  such  a  mark  (Tika),  as  shown  in  the 
frontispiece. 

In  the  days  of  Kabir  a  knowledge  of  religious 
truth  was  practically  confined  to  those  who 
were  acquainted  with  one  or  other  of  the  two 
sacred  languages,  Arabic  and  Sanskrit,  These 
two  languages  were  employed  both  in  public 
and  private  worship  with  the  result  that  the 
worship  of  the  masses  was  too  often  a  mere 
repetition  of  phrases  which  were  unintelligible 
to  those  who  used  them.  Kabir  urged  that 
religious  books  should  also  bo  written  in  the 
vernacular  that  all  might  obtain  that  knowledge 
of  God  which  was  e-sential  to  spiritual  progress. 

Again  to  the  illiterate  masses  teaching  con- 
tained in  books  was  inaccessible,  and  so  it  is  that 
we  find  Kabir  laying  great  stress  on  the  import- 
ance of  oral  teaching.  Few  men  are  qualified 
to  become  scholars,  but  all  are  required  to  be 
good;  therefore  he  urged  his  disciples  to  associ- 
ate with  good  men  and  through  conversation 
with  them  to  acquire  such  knowledge  as  is  ne- 
cessar}'.  The  study  of  books,  he  thought,  was 
too  often  productive  of  pride;  to  display  learn- 
ing and  intelligence  scholars  were  olten  tempted 
to  enlarge  upon  topics  of  little  spiritual  value, 
while  in  private  conversation  heart  speaks  to 
heart  of  its  own  spiritual  needs.  Such  were  the 
views  of  Kabir  and  in  consequence  the  Gurii  in 


The  KABfR  Panth.  Ill 

this  Panth  occupies  a  position  of  extraordinary 
importance. 

Kabfr  was  a  poet  of  no  mean  order  and 
gladly  consecrated  his  literary  gifts  to  the 
service  of  God.  He  knew  that  religious  instruc- 
tion given  in  the  form  of  poetry  was  easily  re-  . 
membered;  he  knew  too  that  the  singing  of 
Bhajaiis  (Hymns)  was  an  occupation  in  which 
the  people  of  India  took  peculiar  pleasure.  It 
only  remained  for  him  to  compose  hymns  which 
his  followers  could  sing.  This  he  did,  and  up  to 
the  present  day  his  hymns  enjoy  great  populari- 
ty with  the  people  and  in  the  Panth  occupy  a 
prominent  position  in  all  acts  of  public  worship. 

As  the  Brahmins  are  required  to  repeat  the 
Gyatri  daily,  so  are  members  of  this  Panth  re- 
quired to  use  the  following  hymns,  in  the  morn- 
ing and  evening  respectively  :  — 

Morning  Hymn'. — Kabir  said — Spiritual  and 
material  blessings  attend  those  who  wait  upon 
the  Darwesh  ;  their  account  is  safe.  Love  of  you 
pervades  the  whole  body  of  your  devotees. 
You  are  starvation,  unmoved  by  desire,  a  men- 
dicant. You  walk  in  no  one's  footsteps,  you 
seek  ease  in  no  abode.  The  whose  universe  is 
your  body.  You  are  boundless  (a  stream  with- 
out banks).  You  pervade  the  Universe  cons- 
tantly. The  love  which  you  cause  is  profound. 
The  empty  Universe  is  in  me,  says  the  Guru 


112  The  KABfR  Panth. 

(Kabir).  If  we  do  honour  by  fire  to  the  true 
name,  the  body  becomes  pure,  Dharam  Dass 
taking  the  Guru  s  arm  walked  and  found  Kabir, 

Evening  Hymn. — Evening  having  come  on, 
the  day  having  closed,  the  duck  broke  into  wail- 
ing :  *'0  drake,  let  us  go  to  that  country  where 
Day  and  Night  are  unknown."  If  separation 
takes  place  at  night,  the  duck  is  to  be  met  with 
in  the  morning,  but  he  who  is  separated  from 
the  name  (of  God)  regains  it  neither  during  day 
nor  night.  Hear,  O  Gurii,  Treasur}'  of  kindness, 
I  beseech  you  with  clasped  hands.  Mercy, 
humility,  devotion,  equality,  good  nature,  cons- 
tancy, these  are  the  ornaments  of  a  devotee. 
Devotion  to  the  one  without  beginning  is  adorn- 
ment. The  only  name,  the  only  Guru,  is  Kabir, 
the  highest  Pir:^"^ 

Anxious  as  Kabir  was  to  claim  for  all  men 
spiritual  privileges  he  was  no  less  anxious  to 
impress  upon  those  who  desired  to  become  re- 
ligious that  they  must  live  in  a  way  consistent 
with  their  profession. 

All,  therefore,  who  desire  to  become  members 
of  the  Fanth  are  required  to  renounce  poly- 
theism and  to  acknowledge  their  belief  in  one 
only  God  {Parameshiuar).  They  must  also  pro- 

(20)  Tor  these  hhujan^  in  their  oriu'-inal  form  sec  Crooke's 
Tr\ht'*aHil  Cai!trtofN.-V>\  P.  and  Oudh,  Vol.  Ill  pp.  7n-6. 
For  the  tr:iii.-lutioii  ia  the  text  I  am  indebte<l  to  a  resident  of 
fawnporo  who  locally  enjoys  a  reputation  as  a  Hindi  poet. 


The  KabIr  Panth.  113 

mise  to  eat  no  meat  and  drink  no  wine  ;  to 
bathe  daily  and  sing  hymns  to  God,  both  morn- 
ing and  evening ;  to  forgive  those  who  trespass 
against  them  up  to  three  times  ;  to  avoid  the 
company  of  all  women  of  bad  character  and  all 
unseemly  jesting  in  connexion  with  such  sub- 
jects ;  never  to  turn  away  from  their  house  their 
lawful  wife  ;  never  to  tell  lies  ;  never  to  conceal 
the  property  of  another  man  ;  never  to  bear 
false  witness  against  a  neighbour  or  speak  evil 
of  another  on  hearsay  evidence.'-' 

One  prominent  trait  in  Hindu  character,  viz. 
personal  devotion,  finds  ample  scope  for  exer- 
cise in  the  devotion  to  their  Guru  required  of 
all  members  of  the  Panth.  All  who  wish  to 
approach  God  must,  thev  say,  become  th-  dis- 
ciple of  some  Guru  and  to  this  Guru  when  once 
chosen,  the  disciple  must  wholly  submit  him- 
self, mind,  soul  and  body.  To  Kabir,  as  the 
.chief  Guru,  many  of  the  dha/a?is  used  in  public 
worship  are  addressed,  and  marked  reverence 
is  also  shown  to  tlie  living  Guru,  as  God's  re- 
presentative upon  earth. 

(27)  ill  retiuiiiiijj;  sucl'  promises  from  hi.s  folluweis  Kabir 
doul)tk'>s  indicares  those  defects  in  Hintlu  social  life  which 
to  him  apfjoared  most  detrimenti.l  to  the  development  of 
religion.  To  tlie  promise  to  eat  no  laeat  the  greatest  import, 
ance  is  attached  in  ail  the  Vaishnavfte  sects,  as  such  a  habit 
is  supposed  to  devehjp  the  material  and  injure  the  spiritual 
part  of  human  nature.  This  belief  with  reterence  to  CJitinj; 
iiei^h  makes  them  slow  to  realise  that  Christianity,  wliich 
regards  such  questions  as  matters  of  indifference,  can  be  really 
a  spiritual  force. 


ADDITIONAL  NOTE. 


List  of  the  Kahxr  Chaurd  Mahants. 


Name 

of 

Mahant. 

Sh\-am  Dass 

Lai  Dass 

Hari  Dass 

Surat  Gopal  Dass 

Gyan  Diss 

Sital  Dass 

Sukh  Dass 

Hulass  Dass 

Madho  Dass 

Kokil  Dass 

Ran:  Dass 

^Mal^tt  Diss 

Hari  Dass 

Sukh  Dass 

Saran  Dass 

Puran  Dass 

Nirmal  Dass 

Ranghir  Dass 

Gur  Prasad  Diss 


Years 
Samadh  of 

at.  office. 

Maghar  28 

Maghar  22 

Maghar  1 8 

Jagannath  35 
Jagannath  25 
Gay  a  24 

Nirii  Tila  20 
Nirii  Tila  26 
Nirii  Tila  20 
Nirii  Tila  21 
Niru  Tila  29 
Niru  Tila  22 
Niru  Tila  20 
Kabi'r  Chaura  27 
Kabi'r  Chaura  16 
Kabir  Chaura  18 
Kabi'r  Chaurd  22 
Kabir  Chaura  15 
8 


Appro.ximate 
date  of  Instal- 
lation. 

1491  ? 

1 5 1 9  ? 

1 541  ? 

1559 

1594 
1619 
1643 
1663 
1689 
1709 
1730 

1759 
1781 
1801 
1828 
•  1844 
1862 
1884 
l8Qq 


The  above  list  ^0  far  as  the  name  of  Mahant, 
place  of  Samadh  and  tenure  of  office  are  concern- 
ed was  supplied  by  a  Bairagi  at  Benares. 


The  Kabir  Panth. 


115 


The  existence  of  the  first  three  Mahants  is  high- 
ly problematical. 

Surat  Gopal  (A  D  1559)  is  generally  regarded  as 
the  founder  of  the  Panth.  It  is  possible  that  he 
and  the  two  Mahants  who  succedcd  him  did  not 
have  their  headquarters  at  Benares,  but  that  the  Niru 
Tila  compound  was  acquired  during  the  Mahanti  of 
Sukh  Dass.  Bulwant  Singh,  and  his  son  and  succes 
sor,  Cheit  Singh,  were  patrons  of  the  Kabir  Panth 
The  former  died  in  A.  D.  1770.  The  Kabir  Chaura 
Compound  may  have  been   acquired  in  their  time. 

Though  seven  Mahants  are  said  to  have  been 
buried  in  the  Niru  Tila  court  of  the  Math  at  Benares 
only  three  Samadhs  are  conspicuous  at  the  present 
time,     (see  p.  102.) 

List  of  Dharam  Dass  Mahants. 


Name. 

Approximate  date 
of  Iii'-tallacion 

Churamani 

Nam 

... 

1604 

Sudarshan 

Nam 

... 

1714 

Kulpati 

Nam 

... 

1734 

Pramodh 

Nam  Guru 

Bali  Pir 

1754 

Kewal 

Nam 

... 

1774 

Amol 

Ndm 

... 

J  794 

Surat  Sanehi  Nam 

... 

1814 

Haqq 

Nam 

... 

1834 

Pak 

Nam 

..• 

1854 

Praghat 

Nam 

... 

1874 

Dhiraj 

Ndm 

... 

1894 

Ugra 

Nam 

... 

1897 

Day  a 

Nam 

116 


The  KabJr  Panth. 


The  above  have  already  appeared, 
follow  are: — 


Those  to 


Gridhmani  Nam 
Prakash  Nam 
Uditmani  Nam 
Mukundmani  Nam 
Adh  Nam 
Udai  Nam 
Gyan  Nam 
Hansmani  Nam 
Sukrit  Nim 
Agrmani  N^m 
Ras  Nam 
Gungmani  Nam 
Paras  Nam 
Ja^at  Nam 
Ehrinfrhmani  Nam 


Akah  Nam 
Kanthmani  Ndm 
Santokh  Nam 
Chatrik  Nam 
Dadhi  Nam 
Nch  Nam 
Adi  Nim 
Maha  Nam 
Nij  Nam 
Sahib  Dass  Nim 
Udhawa  Diss  Nim 
Karunra  Nrim 
Uddhar  Nim 
Drigh  Nim 
Mahamani  Nim 


The  dates  have  been  calculated  on  the  assump- 
tion that  each  Mahant  held  office  for  20  years  and 
25  days,  except  Dhiraj  Nam  who  is  known  to  have 
died  after  three  years  tenure  of  office.  One  Mahant 
stated  that  the  regular  tenure  of  office  was  for  25 
j-ears  and  20  days.  On  s^uch  a  calculation  the  date 
of  Churamanl  would  be  thrown  back  to  A.  D.  1654. 
In  the  Kabir  Chaura  section  the  average  tenure  of 
office  has  been  for  23  years. 

The  Sukh  Niddn  is  said  to  have  been  written 
during  Pramodh  Nam's  tenure  of  office. 


Chapter  VI. 

The  KABfR  Panth  (Contd.) 

This  Panth,  like  other  reh'gious  institutions 
of  the  kind,  is  founded  on  a  double  basis.  Mem- 
bers may  live  as  householders  in  their  own 
homes,  or  renounce  the  world  and  attach  them- 
selves permanently  to  one  of  the  Monasteries 
belonging  to  the  order.  Those  belonging  to  the 
latter  class  are  known  as  Bairagis.  A  married 
man  may  leave  his  wife,  whom  he  is  henceforth 
to  regard  as  his  mother,  and  become  a  Bairagi, 
provided  that  he  is  the  father  of  at  least  one 
son.  Women,  as  well  as  men,  may  become  Baira- 
gis, if  found  properly  qualified  after  a  probation- 
ary period  of  two  years  J  Conventual  buildings 
exist  both  at  Kabir  Chaura  and  Maghar.  The 
householders  perform  an  important  function  in 
the  economy  of  the  order,  inasmuch  as  they 
contribute  largely  to  the  support  ot  the  Bairagis. 

There  are  a  large  number  ot  branch  establish- 
ments, each  of  which  is  presided  over  by  a  Ma- 
hant  who  spends  most  of  his  time  in  travelling 
round   to  visit  the  disciples  who  acknowledge 

(1)  Female  Bairagis  are  usually  widows  or  tlie  wives  of 
men  who  have  become  Bairagis.  At  Maghar  there  are  saitl  to 
be  about  25  female  Bairagis. 


118  The  KABfR  Panth. 

him  as  their  Gutii.-  He  is  supposed  to  visit  his 
Cheias  at  least  once  a  year,  to  note  the  progress 
they  have  made,  to  give  instruction  to  them  and 
to  their  families,  and  to  examine  and  to  receive 
into  the  order,  if  found  quahTied,  such  candi- 
dates as  may  be  brought  to  him.  On  such 
occasions  he  is  entertained  by  members  of  the 
Panth  and  also  provided  with  travelh'ng  ex- 
penses. 

The  Mahants  of  the  branch  estabh'shments 
receive  authority  to  teach  and  initiate  new  mem- 
bers trom  the  Head  Mahant  of  the  section  to 
which  they  belong.  At  the  time  of  appointment 
they  are  given  to  eat  a  betel  leaf  {Bira)'-^  as  a 
pledge  that  they  undertake  faithfully  to  per- 
form the  duties  of  their  office."^  Each  ]\Iahant 
receives  a  document,  bearing  the  seal  of  the 
Head  Mahant,  and  known  as  the  Panja  Par- 
Tvdna.  Upon  this  document  are  entered  the 
names  of  all  disciples  admitted  by  him  into  the 
order.  The  Mahant  is  required  to  check  this 
list  at  each  place  that  he  visits  and  to  present  it 

(2)  The  Mahants  are  not  allowetl  tu  shave  ;  the  Bairugis 
must  either  shave  entirely  or  not  at  all. 

(3)  In  ancient  days  a  j>aii  leaf  {liiraj  was  thrown 
dovm  as  a  challenge.  This  custom  is  referred  to  in  the 
Udmni/dna. 

(4)  One  of  the  Mahants  at  Lucknow  assumed  office  wiien 
14  years  of  a^e.  Noimally  when  a  minor  is  nominated  for 
succession  an  unljeneficeti  Mahant  is  associated  with  him  in 
f>fBce,  till  he  is  ahle  to  perform  the  duties  unassisted. 


The  KabIr  Panth.  119 

annually  to  the  Head  Mahant  both  for  inspec- 
tion and  the  entry  of  new  names."^ 

As  signs  of  authority  the  Mahant  receives  a 
red  tupi,  a  necklace  of  black  wool,  known  as 
Sel),^'  and  a  special  rosary  known  as  the  I'^nch 

Mai. 

On  the  occasion  of  his  annual  visit  to  Head- 
quarters the  Mahant  is  required  to  present 
twelve  cocoanuts  and  twtlve  rupees  on  his  own 
account  and  one  cocoaniit  and  one  rupee  for 
each  new  name  that  he  wishes  to  have  entered 
on  his  Parwana.  He  also  makes  over  to  the 
Diw^n  all  offerings  made  at  the  Chauka  Arti 
services  at  which  he  has  officiated  during  the 
year. 

A  Mahant  upon  appointment  is  required  to 
make  an  offering  of  cocoanuts.  Kabir  Panthis 
explain  the  peculiar  significance  attached  to  co- 
coanuts in  the  Panth  in  the  light  of  the  following 
facts  : — (i)  it  has  a  face  resembling  that  of  a 
man,  (2)  its  surface  is  divided  into  three  parts 
recalling   Brahma,   Shiva  and  Vishnu,    (3)    its 

(">)  On  tlie  occasion  of  a  visit  to  any  place  tlie  Mahant 
recites  at  cislebiation  of  the  CItavha  Arti  all  the  names  enter- 
ed eitiier  upon  iiis  own  Parioaiia  or  those  of  his  predecessors 
in  oHice,  and  writes  the  words  ^('halana  /;«;• //ay/a' against 
the  names  of  any  who  have  die(^.  In  the  case  of  a  deceased 
Mahant  the  plirase  used  is  ^Sn/iiud/ii  If  IV. 

(<;)  The  Sell  is  very  similar  to  that  worn  by  certain 
followers  of  Nanak.  In  eacli  case  there  are  five  tassels  attach- 
ed to  the  Sdi.  In  the  Kahir  Paiith  Sell  there  are  three  tassels 
placed  together  in  tlie  centre  wiiii  one  on  either  side  :  in  the 
Nanak  6V'// the  five  tafscl-s  are  placed  it  regular  intervals. 
For  shape  of  Toiii  see  frontispiece. 


120  The  KABfR  Panth. 

flesh  is  formed  gradually  as  human  flesh  is  for- 
med and  (4)  it  differs  from  other  fruits  in  con- 
tainmg  no  seed.^  The  breaking  of  the  cocoanut 
is  regarded  as  a  bloodless  sacrifice,  a  peace  offer- 
ing presented  to  Niranjan  to  secure  for  members 
of  the  Panth  admission  into  heaven. 

The  ordinary  Mahants  are  not  men  of  great 
'  learning,  though  they  have  usually  committed 
to  memory  a  certain  number  of  sayings  attribut- 
ed to  Kabir  and  possi])ly  also  some  book  of 
which  they  have  managed  to  secure  a  copy. 
Want  of  learning  is  in  some  sort  atoned  for  in 
the  opinion  of  their  followers  by  a  detailed 
knowledge  of  the  ritual  to  be  observed  in  the 
performance  of  religious  ceremonies.  The  more 
learned  Mahants  have  gen.irally  some  know- 
ledge of  Tuls!  Dass's  JidmdyaJta  and  The  Bhciga- 
wad  Oita. 

Before  giving  an  account  of  the  ceremony 
of  initiation  and  the  two  sacramental  meals, 
the  Chankd  Arti  and  the  j;;/ Pras«(/,  it  seems 
best  to  explain  two  terms  which  are  especially 
associated  with  the  initiation  ceremony  and  the 
J6t  Prasad.  The  two  terms  in  question  are 
Char  an  Miira  and  Parwana, 

Ckaran  Mitra,  the  a?nri/a  of  the  feet,  is 
the  name  given  to  the  water  in  which   have 

(7)     Do  they  wi.h  to  imply  that  the  cocoanut    represents 
'»<xi  made  man,  the  won!  Ix^come  flcs)i  ? 


The  KABfR  Panth.  121 

been  washed  the  feet  of  the   Head  Mahant, 

Kabir's  representative  upon  earth.  This  water 
is  mixed  with  fine  earth  and  then  made  up  into 
pills.  These  pills  may  either  be  swallowed 
whole,  or  pounded  up,  mixed  with  water  and 
drunk. 

Parwdna  (Passport)  is  the  name  given  to 
the  betel  leaf  specially  prepared  a»^  hea'l  quarters 
at  the  time  of  a  celebration  of  the  Jdl  Pras'id. 
A  pile  of  betel  leaves,  sixteen  h  mdhr-a  Iths 
in  height  is  arranged  upon  the  groun'!.  At 
night  time  a  pewter  sane  *r  is  placed  upon  a 
specially  prepared  spot  and  the  dew  collected 
in  this  vessel  is  known  as  am  »r,  \'iater  derived 
from  heaven  direct.  In  the  morning  the  Mahant 
meditates  in  front  of  the  pile  of  betel  leaves  and 
with  the  amar  writes  up  )n  the  ♦^opmost  leaves 
the  secret  name  of  God.  The  belel  leaves  thus 
consecrated  are  made  up  into  small  portions, 
about  a  quarter  of  an  inch  square,  and  distribut- 
ed among  the  Mahants  for  use  at  a  celebration 
of  the  Jui  Prasad  or  for  presentation  to  a 
candidate  at  the  time  of  his  initiation.  The 
Parwdna  is  said  to  represent  the  body  of  Kabir. 
The  ceremony  of  initiation  is  one  of  consi- 
derable solemnity.  The  candidate  in  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Gurii  and  other  members  of  the 
Panth  makes  the  required  promises  and  is 
solemnly   warned  as  to  the  consequences  for 


122  The  KABfR  Panth, 

good  or  evil  that  will  depend  upon  the  way  in 
which  he  afterwards  obser\^es  them.^  While 
bhajans  are  being  sung  by  those  present  half 
of  the  mantra  is  whispered  into  the  left  ear  of 
the  candidate  by  the  Guru,  who  afterwards 
places  in  his  two  outstretched  hands,  placed 
together,  some  grass,  pdn  leaves  and  white 
flowers.  A  Bairagi,  taking  a  brass  vessel  con- 
taining water  in  one  hand,  with  the  other  leads 
the  candidate  to  another  quarter  of  the  room 
where  he  allows  the  p;rass,  etc.  to  fall  upon  the 
ground.  Having  moved  a  short  way  from  that 
spot  the  candidate  again  places  his  hands  to- 
gether and  into  them  the  Bairagi  pours  water 
from  the  vessel.  With  the  first  handful  of  water 
he  rinses  out  his  mouth  ;  with  the  second  he 
washes  his  face.  After  this  the  candidate  is  led 
back  to  the  Guru.  The  Guru  takes  up  a  Kanihi 
and  makes  it  over  to  a  Bairagi  who  takes  it 
round  the  assembly  and  presents  it  to  all  mem- 
bers of  the  Panth  in  turn.  All  touch  it  with 
their  hands  and  it  is  then  returned  by  the 
Bairagi  to  the  Mahant.^     The  Mahant  placing 

(8)  Most  members  fear  to  violate  promises  mnde  in  so 
solemn  a  manner,  le-t  the  wrath  of  God  should  fall  upon  them. 
It  is  said  that  one.  a  seller  of  oil.  drank  some  wine  and  eat 
some  flesh.  He  wa>  expelled  from  the  Panth  and  imme<liately 
fell  ill.  After  si.\  mouths  he  recovered  and  was  readmitted 
into  the  Panth,  bnt  after  an  interval  of  a  year  he  repeated  his 
offence  anil  died  in  consequence.  Another  mcndjer  who  com- 
mitted a  similar  offence  is  said  to  have   lost  the  u-c  of  a  hand. 

(9)  This  process  is  known  as  GinciiJi'i  (Witness). 


The  KABfR  Panth.  123 

the  Kanthi  in  his  open  hands  does  obeisance  to 
the  Gaddi  and  then  stretching  it  between  the 
thumb  and  first  finger  of  both  hands  lets  it  fall 
over  the  head  on  to  the  neck  of  the  candidate, 
as  he  kneels  before  him.i^  At  the  conclusion 
of  this  ceremony  he  whispers  the  whole  mantra 
into  the  right  ear  of  the  candidate.  *  *  So  soon 
as  the  manlra  has  been  communicated  the  new 
disciple  is  warned  that  he  must  on  no  account 
eat  the  fruit  of  the  fig  tree  (sitlar).  In  reply  to 
inquiries  as  to  the  reason  for  this  prohibition,  he 
is  told  that  the  fruit  contains  many  flies  and 
cannot  therefore  be  eaten  without  much  des- 
truction of  life.  From  amongst  the  articles  of 
food  that  have  been  placed  beneath  a  clean 
cloth  the  Guru  then  takes  a  cocoanut  and  places 
it  in  the  two  hands  ol  the  candidate  who  touches 
with  the  fruit  his  right  shoulder,  his  breast  and 
lorehead  and  returns  it  to  the  Guru  with  a  fee 

(10)  None  but  a  ^liiliant  may  invest  anyone  with  the 
Kanthi  of  tlic  order.  A  Cawnporc"  Maliaiit  once  fell  into  the 
liands  of  the  police  who  at  once  (k'stioycil  his  kanthi.  As 
soon  as  the  Alahant  recovered  his  freedom  he  invested  himself 
witli  a  second  Vanthi.  This  irrc:_'ul  «rity  was  at  once  reported 
to  the  Head  .Maliant  and  the  offender  and  another  member 
of   the   Panth   who   was  supposed   to   have  connivo<l   at  his 

offence,  were  immediately  excommunicated. 

(11)  In  the  Krtbir  Cliaura  section  only  one  mantra  is 
<-ommunieated  to  tlie  candidate,  viz  the  Guru  Mantra.  lu 
the  Dliaram  Dass  section  two  mnntras  are  communicated  at 
the  time  of  initiation,  the  Gurii  Mantra  and  the  Tinkjt  Arpan 
mantra,  and  three  more  &nbsoi|uently  in  response  to  in<[uiry, 
viz.  the  Flinch  Nim,  the  Sat  N^m  and  tlie  Har  Nim.  The 
Gurti  Mantra  in  use  in  tlie  two  sections  is  said  to  be  different 
in  form.  In  the  Kabir  (Miaura  section  any  reference  to 
Dharam  Diss  is  avoided  as  far  as  possible. 


124  The  KABfR  Panth. 

of  one  rupee.  The  Guru,  having  washed  the. 
cocoanut  with  betel  leaves  diptied  in  water, 
breaks  it  upon  a  stone.  He  proceeds  with  a  knife 
to  cut  up  the  flesh  ot  the  coco:inut  into  small 
portions  and  deposits  them  in  an  open  dish. 
He  next  pours  into  the  hands  of  the  candidate 
some  Charan  Mitra  which  he  reverently  drinks. 
The  :Mahant  then  takes  a  pin  leaf  and  placing 
upon  it  a  parwdna,  a  portion  of  cocoanut,  some 
laidsa,  gur,^-  raisins  and  currants,  deposits  it 
in  the  outstretched  hands  of  tlie  candidate  who 
transfers  it  to  his  mouth.  After  the  candidate 
has  in  this  way  been  received  into  the  Panth  all 
members  present  receive  at  the  hands  of  the 
Guru  a  betel  leaf  upon  which  is  placed  a  portion 
of  the  cocoanut,  some  laldsa,  gdr,  raisins  and 
currants.  No  portion  of  the  cocoanut  may  be 
destroyed  or  eaten  by  those  who  are  not  mem- 
bers of  the  PayitJi^  ■'  Any  portion  that  remains 
over  is  carefully  preserved  by  the  Guru  and  given 
to  Pajiihls  in  other  places  that  he  mav  visit,  with 
a  statement  as  to  the  name  and  residence  of  the 
new  disciple  at  whose  initiation  it  was  oftercd. 
This  ceremony  is  followed  by  a  feast,  in  which 

(12)  Batasa  13  a  small  su^nry  wafer  in  conunon  use  at 
reli?:ou>  '.'atln-rinirs  :  Clir  is  a  i)rcparat;on  of  siijnir. 

O-i)  A  correspomlinj?  ccieinonv  exists  anion"  orlicr  sects 
but  .lifli-icnt  fruit*  aie  used,  c.  -.  the  foIloAvers  of  TiiUi  Dii^s 
l>arUikeof  a  plantain.  One  plantain  only  is  u-cJ  for  tins  pur- 
pose. If  many  mciubei-s  arc  i.rescut,  it  is  mixed  with  other 
fo.xl  t;il  the  quantity  is  sutlicicnt.  The  namanumUs  cat  the 
leaf  of  the  Tulsi  plant. 


The  Kabir  Panth.  125 

members  of  other  religious  sects  are  also  permit- 
ted to  take  part.  Reverence  is  paid  to  the  Guru 
xind  Parameshwar  and  many  hhajans  are  sung  in 
honour  of  Parameshwar  and  Kabi'r. 

This  ceremony  which  iu  a  measure  corres- 
ponds to  Christian  Baptism  is  known  as  Tinka 
At  pan.  In  the  Dharm  Dass  section  the  candi- 
date presents  one  cocoanut  only  and  one  money 
offering  which  must  not  be  less  than  one  rupee. 
In  the  Kabir  Chaura  section  candidates  are 
required  to  present  no  less  then  sixteen  cocoa- 
nuts,  since  they  say  sixteen  sons  {Sut)  were 
begotten  of  the  Word,  and  with  each  cocoanut 
an  offering  of  money  which  must  not  be  less 
then  four  annas. ^  *  There  is  another  important 
difference  in  the  practice  of  the  two  sections. 
In  the  Dharm  Dass  section  this  ceremony  Tinka 
Arpan,  may  never  be  repeated,  whereas  in  the 
Kabi'r  Chaura  section  it  is  performed  twice, 
once  by  the  candidate's  personal  Guru  and  again 
by  the  Head  Mahant  in  the  Kabir  Chaura  Math. 
This  difference  may  in  part  be  accounted  for  by 
the  fact  that  the  Mahants  of  the  Kabfr  Chaura 
section  are  not  supplied  with  a  parivana  and 
also  by  the  fact  that  in  this  section  any  Bairagi 
is  authorised  to  initiate  new  members. 

(14)  Of  the  sixteen  cocoanuts  four  are  broken  at  the 
Tinka  Arpan  ceremony,  six  arc  sent  to  Magbir,  and  three  are 
broken  at  each  of  the  two  Chauka  Arti  ceremonies  in  the 
months  of  Phi:(rrun  and  Bbddon. 


126  The  KABfR  Panth. 

Every  member  of  the  Panth  is  required  to 
supply  the  material  wants  of  his  Guru  to  the 
best  of  his  ability,  and  also  to  pray  on  his  be- 
half. As  on  account  of  such  material  help  the 
Guru  is  benefited  by  an  increase  in  the  mem- 
ber of  his  chelas,  he  is  not  himself  allowed 
to  m\\\.t  others  to  become  members  of  the 
Panih. 

As  regards  discipline,  any  disciple  who  brings 
discredit  on  the  Panth  by  irregularity  of  life  or 
who  in  other  ways  offends  against  the  traditions 
of  the  order  is  in  the  first  place  censured  by  hi  s 
Guni  and  subsequently,  should  he  refuse  lo  lis- 
ten to  advice,  excluded  from  all  religious  gather- 
ings. His  company  is  avoided  by  other  members 
of  the  Panth  and  his  salutations  disregarded  by 
the  Guru. 

The  oxd.mz.Ty  members  of  the  Pa?iih  believe 
that  the  souls  of  Fanthis  after  death  enter  Heav- 
en (Baikanih)  or  Hell  (i^^ara^)  and  there  re- 
main till  they  have  been  sufficiently  rewarded 
or  punished  for  deeds  done  in  the  body.  They 
then  return  to  earth,  but  always  apparently 
clothed  in  a  human  body.  This  succession  of 
h'ves  continues  till  the  soul  freed  from  desire  be- 
comes absorbed  in  God.  A  member  of  the 
Panth  quoted  to  me  the  following  saying 
attributed  to  Nanak :—  "We  want  neither 
Baikanih  uoi  Narak,hMi  true  li(Q(puri  zindaffi). 


The  KABfR  Panth.  137 

and  that  is  obtained  when  there  are  no  mere 
h'nks  with  this  earth." ^^^ 

Members  of  the  Kahir  Panth  are  encourag- 
ed to  observe  every  Sunday  as  well  as  the 
last  day  of  the  lunar  month  (Puran  Mdsi)  a.s 
a  day  of  fasting,  and  having  bathed  to  assem- 
ble at  8  o'clock  intheevening  to  join  in  a  service, 
known  as  Chauka,^^  which  takes  the  form  of 
a  religious  meal.^^  A  piece  of  ground  measur- 
ing either  5  or  7  yards  square  is  specially  pre- 
pared and  cleaned.  In  the  centre  of  this  square 
is  measured  out  a  smaller  space,  2\  yards  square. 
This  inner  square  is  covered  over  with  flour,  and 
in  its  centre  are  placed  some  flowers*®  imme- 

(15)  We  may  possibly  in  tbi<  beliet  see  traces  of  Muham  - 
niadan  or  Cbristi.in  teaching. 

(16)  Chauka  is  tlic  torm  applied  to  the  portion  of  ^Tound 
specially  prepared  for  the  consumption  of  foo«l.  The  ground 
is  divided  up  into  squaics,  each  one  of  which  is  occupied  by 
one  person. 

(17)  All  who  attend  tlie  Chaukaobserve  a  fast  throughout 
the  preceding  day,  but  are  allowed  to  drink  water  or  water 
sweetened  with  sugar,  if  they  find  their  thirst  oppressive.  The 
majority  of  those  who  belong  to  the  Panth  are  content  to  per- 
form their  devotions  at  home  on  Sundays  and  in  this  case  only 
keep  the  fast  up  to  midday.  The  full  Cliauka service,  followed 
by  a  meal  as  described  below  is  only  performed  of  necessity  on 
two  occasions  in  the  year,  in  the  months  of  I'hdgu/i  and  Bhadon, 
which  rouLjhly  correspond  to  Maich  and  August.  On  these 
occasions  the  Mahant  himself  is  necessarily  present  and  all 
members  arc  re<iuircd  to  attend  Observance  of  the  whole  day 
fast  is  a  necessary  condition  of  attendance  at  a  Chauka  whc» 
thcr  the  Mahant  ia  present  or  not. 

(18)  This  spwially  prepared  ground  is  coTcred  over  with 
an  awning  {Chandwd.').  The  colour  of  the  awning,  as  well  as 
that  of  the  flowers,  is  white  on  festal  occasions;  ral  when  the 
service  is  held  in  memory  of  the  dead.  In  addition  to  the 
flowers  that  lie  upon  the  chauka  a  bunch  of  flowers  is  Buspcn. 


128  The  KABfR  Panth. 

diately  in  front  of  the  service  book(P«no  Granih), 
The  Mahant  sits  in  the  enclosure,  facing  the 
congregation,  with  the  service  book  before  him. 
On  his  right  hand  within  the  smaller  square  are 
placed  (i)  a  small  metal  box  containing  Charayi 
Mifra  and  Parwuna,  (ii)  a  dish  containing  125 
betel  leaves^  ^  arranged  around  the  edge  with 
a  single  leaf  in  the  centre  on  which  is  placed  a 
piece  ol  camphor,  and  (iii)  a  pillar  composed  of 
dough,  constructed  with  a  hollow  top,  in  the 
centre  of  which  is  placed  a  stick  enveloped  in 
cotton  wool.  During  the  service  nhi  is  poured 
over  this  stick  which  is  then  lighted  and  serves 
is  a  candle  throughout  the  ceremony.  On  the 
left  hand  of  the  Mahant  are  placed  (i)  a  dish 
containing  batusa  and  guTy  (ii)  a  cocoanut  and 
(iii)  a  brazen  vessel  {Khalsa)  containing  water. 
At  each  comer  of  the  inner  portion  of  the 
Chauka  is  placed  a  small  earthenware  jar  con- 

dci-i  fiO.n  the  centre  of  the  awiiiiii^. 

Ihe  'Imuka  is  arrangeil  by  the  JIahant.  When  he  is  not 
pra--jnt  the  central  portion  is  not  overlaid  with  flour;  there  ia 
no  box  containiiig  Qharan  Mirra  and  Parwhiia  ;  in  the  place 
of  the  dough-maae  candle-stick  is  placed  a  disli  on  which 
camphor  is  burnt,  the  water  is  pLiced  iu  an  ordinary  lota  and 
not  in  a  hhulta-,  for  the  whole  cocoanut  are  substitutetl  frag- 
ments of  cocoanut  bought  in  the  bazar. 

The  flour  in  the  centre  of  the  inner  portion  of  the  Chauka 
is  fashioned  to  represnt  nine  lotus  flowers  arraiigctl  in  a  circle. 
Upon  these,  which  repre^sent  the  sun,  moon  and  seven  planets 
rest  the  natural  flowers. 

(1?)  To  eat  a  betel  leaf  on  such  occasions  is  equivalent  to 
taking  a  vow  to  loyally  observe  the  rules  laid  down.  The 
Mahant  removes  to  his  own  lodgings  any  betel  leaves  that  may 
be  over  from  the  Uhauka  service,  but  may  only  eat  them  him- 
idl  or  give  them  to  anollicr  member  of  the  Tauth. 


The  KABfR  Panth. 


129 


taining  water  ;  on  this  jar  rests  an  earthenware 
plate  containing  grain,  and  over  this  is  placed  a 
lamp  (chiragh)  fed  with  linseed  oil."'*® 


Men 


Women 


Water 

Water 

O 

P 

Chela  kneels 

bere 

O 

__  \ 

Dlwan  6tanili 
hereto  admln- 
litcr  water 

/ 

/ 

to  receive 
water 

Oy  Kbalsa                         /° 

Jot 

0    Naryal     /  \    Flowers    0 

Pan 

Ohelas  kneel 
hereto  receive 
Par8»d 

OBatasaeto    ZZ    Granth^o 

Obaran  Hitra 

/ 

V       uiwnna 

/ 

Water 

Mahanf  8  Qaddl         Stone     \  ««»» 
0 

Water 
Plnoo  for  newly 
Initiated  Chelas 

The  Mahant,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  service, 
which  he  reads  out  of  the  book,  lights  the 
candle  which  stands  in  the;centre  of  the  candle- 
stick made  of  dough.  He  next  lights  a  piece 
of  camphor   on  a  stone  that  is  set  beside  him 

(20)  The  Rrain  in  the  plate  is  to  absorb  any  oil  that  may 
fall  from  the  lamp  and  so  preserve  the  purity  of  the  water. 
There  is  a  similar  arrangement  in  the  oi>se  of  the  Khalsa.  The 
■water  in  the  earthenware  vessels  is  used  should  the  supply 
of  water  in  the  Khalsa  (a  large  round  brazen  vessel)  prove 
insuflicicnt. 


130  The  KabIr  Panth. 

and  taking  the  cocoanut  pours  water  over  it 
and  then  breaks  it  upon  the  stouc^^,  and 
finally  lights  the  piece  of  camphor  in  the  centre 
of  the  pan  dish  and  while  the  camphor  is  burn- 
ing waves  it  backwards  and  forwards  {Arti.)T\\e 
dish  is  then  passed  round  and  those  present 
place  in  it  a  small  offering.  These  offerings  are 
taken  by  the  Mahant  for  the  use  of  his  Math. 
He  then  takes  ha'fofthe  flesh  of  the  cocoa- 
nut  and  with  a  penknife  cuts  it  up  into  small 
portions  which  he  places  on  a  pewter  plate.  All 
present  approach  the  Mahant  in  turn  -'^  and 
receive  into  the  palm  of  their  right  hand  a 
betel  leaf,  a  fragment  of  cocoanut,  a  little  gi'ir 
and  some  latdsa.  This  they  eat  as  they  kneel 
before  him  on  one  knee,  exercising  the  great- 
est care  lest  any  portion  should  fall  upon  the 
ground.  Each  man  as  he  retires  has  water  poured 
upon  his  hands  for  cleansing  purposes. 

When  all  have  received,  the  Mahant  says 
some  prayers  privately,  then  some  more  aloud, 
and  closes  the  service  with  a  short  address 
in  which  he  lu-ges  all  to  lead  good  lives.    After 

(21)  Tlie  shell  of  the  cocoanut  represents  Sliaitan  (KalJ 
who  wishes  to  keep  from  men  the  blessing  contained  ia  the 
milk  and  milk-formed  flesh  of  the  fruit, 

(-2)  On  great  occasions  there  may  be  as  many  as  200  pre- 
sent, men  and  vromen.  The  men  sit  on  one  side  and  the  women 
on  the  other  facing  the  Wahant,  but  come  up  in  any  order  to 
receive  the  Pra^o^.  It  is  said  that  about  a  fourth  of  those 
present  at  the  Chauka  service  receive  the  Jot  Prasad, 


The  KABfR  Panth.  131 

the  address  the  Gurtl  does  reverence  to  the 
Chauka,  after  which  all  present  do  reverence 
to  him.  This  part  of  the  service  which  is  in- 
terspersed with  the  singing  of  many  hhajans 
usually  concludes  at  .ibout  3  a.  m. 

After  an  interval  of  an  hour  or  so  this  service 
is  followed  by  one  of  a  more  solemn  character 
known  as  Jot  Prasad.  -^  The  Mahant's  servant 
takes  the  dough  out  of  which  the  candle-stand 
was  formed  and  mixing  with  it  additional  flour, 
ghi  and  fragments  of  cocoanut,  with  the  help  of 
others  kneeds  it  up  again  and  makes  it  over 
to  the  Mahant.  Out  of  this  dough  the  Mahant 
makes  a  number  of  small  wafers,  (puri),  mea- 
suring about  two  inches  in  diameter.  When 
these  have  been  prepared  he  calls  aloud  that 
Jol  Prasad  is  ready,  and  all  return  to  their 
places.  The  Mahant  reads  a  short  address, 
after  which  an  interval  is  left  for  private  prayer 
or  meditation.  All  who  feel  themselves  un- 
worthy to  proceed  further  with  the  service  then 
retire  to  a  distance.  Those  who  remain  ap- 
proach in  turn  the  Guru  and  placing  their  hands 
togetlier  receive  into  the  palm  of  the  right  hand 
which  is  uppermost  a  small  pill  of  Charan  Mitrd 
and  a  portion  of  Parwdna,  and  this  disposed  of 
receive  into  the  same  hand  one  of  the  wafers. 
They  then  draw  near  to  the  Diwan,  who  from 

(23.)  Jo^,  the  flame  of  a  candle  ;  Prasad,  consecrated  food. 


132  The  KABfR  Panth. 

a  brazen  vessel  pour?  into  the  palm  of  their 
right  hand  a  few  drops  of  water  which  they 
drink.  After  this  they  retire  to  a  distance  and 
an  attendant  pours  water  over  both  their  hands 
to  cleanse  them  from  contact  with  their  hps. 
This  food  is  regarded  as  Kabir's  special  gift 
and  It  is  said  that  all  who  receive  it  worthily 
will  obtain  eternal  life. 

This  service  is  followed  by  a  substantial 
meal,  which  is  paid  for  by  subscription,  should 
no  wealthy  member  of  the  Panth  have  come 
forward  to  defray  the  cost.  -  * 

After  listening  to  this  account  of  the  service 
I  inquired  of  the  iMahant  as  to  the  fate  of  those 
who  abstained  from  receiving  the  gifts  of  Kabir. 
He  replied  that  all  men  on  their  death-bed 
could  receive  from  their  Mahant  Prasad,  Cha- 
ran  Mitra  and  Parwdna  and  that  in  cases 
^N-here  the  Mahant  lived  at  a  distance  it  was 
usual  to  place  a  certain  amount  of  Charan 
mird  and  Parwdna  with  one  or  more  of  his 

n;AS\\  ^  ^^'''^".,'^  Mahant  is  not  present  these  services  arc  con- 
tra LT/cS  "\^'^  «^^'^^'°-^  cheliisonly  provXcl 
h^-nithlrT^f/^^';;"^'''"'""''^'^^'^'""  ^'f  ^''e  service,  nor  is 
T\fl  \^  to  do  all  that  a  Muhaut  woul.i  do.  Even  ■when 
a  Slahant  IS  present  the  service  on  Sun-lays  is  onh  e-Uc  in 
partan.hsu.ually   brou-^ht   to  a  clo.e  at  mi.Ir  .!°t    ^Thc    uU 

il^Ithc^Ti''  ^"'■^'^  '""r-  ^"^  «^  "'-^  informants  tol<l  me 
ttat  there  were  generally  between  30  and  10  present  at  tho 
Chauka  winch  he  attended  on  Sundays.  ^ 

P,^^/"^  ^"J",  .''"■'■'"'■®  °''  ^'■'^  P^=^^'.  followed  hyjot 
£Sv;i?  ^  ^'''  ^^  ^."^  *'"^^'  'f  some  one  is  willing  to 
?n  I^'  ,  ^-^^^•"r'f'  including  the  cost  of  the  meal  that  follows 
m  accordance  with  custom. 


The  KABfR  Panth.  133 

Chelas  who  could  be  trusted  to  keep  them  safe 
from  all  pollution.  Such  supplies  could  be 
utilised  at  the  close  of  a  Ptiran  mdsi  Chatika, 
when  a  Mahant  was  not  present,  or  in  cases 
of  serious  illness.  Every  Mahant,  he  added, 
kept  by  him  a  certain  amount  of  Prasad^  but 
he  alone  could  administer  or  prepare  this. 

The  Mahant  explained  further  that  it  was 
only  essential  that  the  dying  should  receive 
Charan  Milra  and  Parwdua;  the  lormer  testified 
to  the  Chela's  utter  devotion  to  Kabir,  while 
the  latter  constituted  his  passport  to  the  Gurus 
heavenly  mansion. 

Upon  the  death  of  a  member  of  the  Panth 
two  cocoanuts  are  immediately  purchased.  One 
of  these  is  carried  by  the  bnrber  in  the  funeral 
procession  and  placed  by  the  side  of  the  dead 
body,  immediately  before  cremation  or  burial ;  -•'* 
the  other  is  kept  in  the  house  and  reserved  as 
an  ofiering  at  the  funeral  Cliaiika  to  be  held 
at  some  subsequent  date. 

The  arrangements  in  connexion  with  a 
Funeral  ( 'hauka  differ  from  those  of  an  ordinary 
Chauka  in  that  the  awning  over  the  prepared 
ground  is  of  red  instead  of  while  material,  a 
piece  of  white  cloth  is  placed  over  the  chatikd 
to  represent  the   dead  man's  body    and  the 

(25).  The  bo<lics  of  Biiiri;4is  are  buried  ;  those  of  house- 
holders, unless  tbey  have  received  Hairmj,  are  usually 
crematetl. 


134  The  KabIr  Panth. 

number  of  betel  leaves  is  reduced  to  124,  the 
leaf  removed  representing  the  dead  man's 
portion. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  service  the 
Mahant  prays  silently  on  behalf  of  the  de- 
ceased that  he  may  be  preserved  from,  all 
dangers  on  his  journey.  Upon  the  conclusion 
of  this  pra)'er  five  funeral  bhajans  are  sung, 
after  which  all  present  three  times  do  handogi 
to  the  Guru  and  to  the  piece  of  white  cloth 
that  represents  the  body  of  the  deceased. 

The    cocoanut    which    has    been  specially 
reser\-ed  for  this  service  is  next  washed  by  the 
I^Iahant  and  made  over  to  some  relative  of  the 
deceased  or,  should  there  be  no  relative  belong. 
ing  to  the  Panth,  to  some  member  attached  to 
the  same   Guru  as  the  deceased.     This  man 
after  applying   the   cocoanut  to  his  forehead, 
shoulders  etc,  returns  it  with  an  offering  to  the 
^lahant,  who  breaks  it  upon  a  stone  upon  which 
can^phcr   is   burning.     The  rest  of  the  service 
is  conducted  in  the  manner  already  described. 
The  number  of  cocoanuts  offered   varies  from 
one   to   nine   according   to   the   means   of  the 
Iriends  and  relatives.     Each  cocoanut  involves 
a  separate  offering  to  the  Mahant.  The  flesh  of 
the  cocoanut  or  cocoanuts  is  made  up  with  flour 
etc.  into  small  cakes  which  are  sent  round  to  the 
houses  ot  Kabir  Panthis  by  the  hands  of  Bairagis- 


ADDITIONAL  NOTES. 


The  Bellgtoiis  Orders  of  Islam. 

The  various  orders  of  Darweshes  in  Islam  corres- 
pond in  a  measure  to  the  Sects  of  Hinduism.  An 
interesting  account  of  these  Orders  will  be  found 
in  Essays  on  Islam  by  Canon  Sell.  From  this  ac- 
count it  appears  that  two  at  least  of  these  Orders 
were  probably  established  in  India  previous  to  the 
time  of  Kabir  ;  the  Oadiriyah,  founded  in  1165, 
and  the  Qalandariyah,  who  were  practically  Sufis 
and  founded  in  1232. 

The  following  details  in  the  organisation  of  these 
Orders  are  worthy  of  attention  in  connexion  with 
our  subject : — 

(1)  The  extreme  respect  shown  to  the  Super- 
ior of  the  Order. 

"  The  head  of  an  Order  is  the  spiritual  heir  of 
its  founder,  and  is  called  the  Shaikh.  ...He  is  look- 
ed up  to  with  the  greatest  veneration ;  in  fact  abso- 
lute obedience  to  the  Shaikh  is  the  very  essence  of 

the  system The  adoration  of  the  Master  too 

often  takes  the  place  of  the  worship  of  God,  and 
the  ideal  life  of  a  Darwesh  is  one  which  is  absolute 
conformity  to  the  will  of  the  Shaikh.  Thus,  Thou 
shalt  be  in  the  hands  of  thy  Shaikh  as  a  corpse  in 
the  hands  of  those  who  prepare  it  for  burial.  God 
speaks  to  thee  through  him.  Thou  art  his  slave 
and  thou  canst  do  nothinji  without  his  order.     Pie 


136  The  KABfR  Panth. 

is  a  man  chosen  of  God.  Banish  from  thy  heart  any 
thought  to  whic  h  God  or  the  Shaikh  might  object," 

(2).  Branch  establishments  (Zawiyah)  under 
the  control  of  a  Muqqadini  who  must  be  implicitly 
obeyed  by  all  members  of  the  Order,  living  in  the 
monaster)'. 

(3).  The  spiritual  guide  is  called  a  Pir  (Hindu, 
Guru).  The  ordinary  members  of  the  Order  are 
called  Ikhwan  (  Brothers ),  Ashib  ( companions ), 
Mun'd  (Disciples),  or  generically  Darweshes. 

(4).  There  are  lay  associates,  not  resident  in 
the  monasteries  who  arc  in  possession  of  secret 
signs  and  words,  by  use  of  which  they  can  obtain 
protection  from  the  conmiunity.  Lay  associates 
also  employ  the  rosary  of  the  Order. 

(5).  Once  or  twice  a  year  the  Muqaddims  meet 
in  conference  to  consider  questions  relating  to  the 
well-being  of  the  Order.  This  meeting  is  called 
Hazrat  ;  cf  the  use  of  Huzur  as  applied  bv  Kabir 
Panthis  to  the  Mahant  at  Headquarters. 

(6).  Novitiates  are  required  to  prepare  them- 
selves for  admission  into  the  Order  by  fasting, 
spiritual  retreat,  prayer  and  almsgiving. 

(7).  Newly  admitted  members  are  said  to  have 
entered  upon  the  Tariqa  (path,  Panth). 

(S),  All  members  are  required  to  repeat  daily 
a  special  form  of  prayer  (Zikr). 

Hindu  Monastic  Orders  had  been  previously 
formed  in  India  by  Sankaracharya,  Ramanuja 
Ramanand  etc. 


The  KABfR  Panth.  137 

Nanak,  a  Hindu  by  birth,  was  frequently  ad- 
dressed as  a  Darwtsh  and  associated  much  with 
Muhammadans. 

Earhj  Christian  tnjlnences  in  Northern  India. 

There  have  been  Christians  in  Southern  India 
from  early  days  and  it  is  quite  possible  that  Hindu  re- 
formers, such  as  Sankaricharyaand  R^manuja,  came 
in  contact  with  them.  The  former  was  possibly 
indebted  to  Christianity  for  some  part  of  his  re- 
forming zeal,  while  Rumanuja  and  his  disciple  Rima- 
nand^  seem  also  to  have  been  influenced  by  Chris- 
tian teaching.  From  ancient  times  the  more  reli- 
giously disposed  Hindus  have  been  accustomed  to 
visit  places  of  pilgrimage  in  all  parts  of  the  country 
and  when  on  pilgrimage  to  converse  freely  with  all 
who  enjoyed  a  reputation  for  spiritual  enlighten- 
ment. Christian  thought,  in  varying  degrees  of 
purity,  may  in  this  way  have  penetrated  regions 
unvisited  by  professing  Christians.- 

The  first  Roman  Catholic  missionary  to  India 
of  whose  work  we  have  any  account  was  Friar 
Jordanus  of  the  Dominican  Order.  He  visited  the 
east  in  1321-3  and  again  in  1330.  He  mentioned 
Surat,  Baroch  and  Ouilon  as  places  well  suited  to 
become  centres  of  Missionary  effort.  The  Inquisi- 
tion, established  at  Goa  in  1560,  punished  Muham- 

(1)  In  describing  Rdmanand  as  a  disciple  of  Fimaufija 
I  (io  not  wis'a  to  imply  that  the  two  were  contemporaneous. 
All  tliat  is  certain  is  that  IWmanand  belonged  originally  to 
the  Scliool  of  Kdnianfija, 

(2)  For  further  information  on  this  subject  see  Dr. 
GrierFon'8  lecture  011  Modern  Hinduism  and  its  debt  to  the 
Nistoriang. 


138  The  KABfR  Panth. 

madans  and  oilier  strangers  who  exercised  their 
reh'gion  in  the  countries  subject  to  the  King  of 
Portugal.'^  It  is  probably  to  the  Inquisition  that  a 
Kabir  Panthi  refers  when,  in  describing  the  evils 
which  the  Panth  was  intended  to  remedy,  he  writes 
that  at  one  time  religion  was  so  little  thought  of 
that  a  strange  people  came  from  the  West  and 
made  the  observance  of  religious  rites  a  criminal 
offence,  punishable  with  death. 

We  do  not  as  yet  know  much  about  the  work 
of  Christian  missionaries  in  Northern  India  previ 
ous  to  1570,"*  but  we  know  that  the  Emperor  Akbar 
in  1579  sent  an  envoy  to  the  \'iceroy  of  Goa,  with 
a  request  that  he  would  send  to  his  court  some 
Ciiristian  teachers,  capable  of  holding  controversy 
with  Muhammadan  Mullahs.  In  response  to  this 
request  Father  Rudulf  Aquaviva  and  two  others 
were  despatched  to  the  ro)-al  court  at  Fatehptir 
Sikri.  Rudolf  returned  to  Goa  in  1583.-''  At  the 
request  of  the  same  Emperor  a  second  deputation, 
including  Hieronymus  Xavier  a  grand  nephew  of 
St.  Francis  Xavier.  was  sent  to  Lahore  in  1595. 
For  the  instruction  of  non-Christians  Father  Xavi- 
er wrote  several  books  ;  Dastun  Masih  (Life  of 
Christ),  Dastun  San  Pedro  (Life  of  St.  Peter),  and 

(3)  Sec  T/ir  Si/rian  Cliurcli  in  Iniiia  bv  G.  M.  Rae 
ppl87.8,  198. 

(4)  I  am  iaformeJ  tbat  Father  Felix  is  ei!,ira;,'e<l  in  col- 
lecting material  for  a  book  that  slio'dd  throw  iiiterestin;;  light 
up>on  the  work  of  tlic  lioman  Church  in  Nortliern  India, 
includiuj:  Kashmir  end  Thibet. 

(.5)  For  further  details  alxiut  Father  Rudolf's  Mi^'sion. 
9f£  Ilrst  Cliriiiiiui  Mi-^xion  ti>  the  (irrnt  AJujliiil,  hy  Father* 
GcMic.  publi-hc<l  by  (Jill  and  Son,  Dublin. 


The  KABfR  Panth.  139 

Aina  Ilaqq  luhna  (The  mirror  of  Truth).  Dastdn-i- 
Masth  was  presented  by  him  to  Akbar  at  Agra  in 
1602  and  subsequently  published  with  a  Latin 
translation  by  Ludovicus  de  Dieu  in  1639.  This 
work  is  described  as  "Historia  Christi,  sed  contami- 
nata."  Xavier's  work  entitled  Alna  Ilaqq  nnma  was 
publ'.shed  about  1608  and  provoked  a  reply  from 
Ahmad  Ibn  Zain  to  which  he  gave  the  name  "The 
Divine  rays  in  refutation  of  Christian  error."*'  Dean 
Prideaux  calls  this  book  ''  The  Brusher  of  the 
Glass"  and  (juudagnoli  refers  to  it  as  Folitor  Spc- 
culi.  (iuadagnoli  possibly  nuulc  use  of  an  Arabic 
version  of  the  original  Persian.  The  Jesuits  were 
much  alarmed  at  the  appearance  of  this  Muham- 
niadan  work  and  invited  some  one  to  answer  it 
without  delay.  Bonaventura  Malvasia,  a  Francis- 
can friar  of  ]5ononia,  replied  with  DUvcldntio  Specu- 
It  rernm  moimtraiitis  in  1628  and  Philip  Guadagnoli 
wrote  Apologia  pro  Christiana  rch'jione  which  was 
published  in  Latin  at  Rome  in  1631  and  translated 
into  Arabic  in  1637.  This  latter  essay  contained 
many  appeals  to  Popes  and  Councils  which  would 
carry  little  weight  with  Muhammadan  and  Hindu 
readers. 

(G)  I  have  liad  an  oppoitutiity  of  cxiuiiiniiig  two  inter- 
cslinR  public-atioiis  be:iring  upon  tlic  Hubject,  ri:  "Controver 
sial  Tracts  on  C'liristi^nity  and  Muhiunnia^Janifin"  by  Henry 
Martyn,  edited  by  Kev.  S.  Lee,  Professor  of  Arabic  in  the 
University  of  CKinbridtro  and  published  at,  the  Cambridge 
University  Press  in  1824  ;  and  a  work  by  Dean  Prideaux  of 
Norwich, "first  published  in  ICiO?  entitled  "Tlie  true  nature  of 
imposture,  fully  displayed  in  tlie  life  of  Mnliomet."  This 
Fccond  work  contains  an  interesting  account  of  all  b(X>ks  con. 
«ultcd  by  the  author. 


Chapter  YII. 

The  Teaching  of  the  Panth. 

In  considering  the   teaching   of  Kabir  we 
confined  our  attention  to  two  books,  the  Bijak 
and  the  AH  Granth.    In  that  cass  we  had  prac- 
tically no  choice  in  the  matter  ;  these  were  the 
only  two  books  which  could  be  regarded  as  truly 
representative   of  the   Guru's   teaching.      The 
Hterature  of  the  Panth  is  e^•er  on  the  increase, 
but  the  thoughts  expressed  in  most  of  the  writ- 
ings are  very- similar.'     It  therefore  seems  best 
in  this  case  too  to  confine  our  attention  to  two 
works   which   may   be   regarded   as    represen- 
tative of  the  literature  as  a  whole  and  to  present 
the  reader  with  an  abstract  of  their  teaching. 
The  books  selected  for  this  purpose  are   &nkh 
Kiddn  and  Amar  Mul,  both  of  which  are  closely 
associated  with  the  Dharm  Dass  section  of  the 
Panth. 

The  Sukh  Nidchi  is  highly  spoken  of  by 
Prof.  H.  H.  Wilson,  but  we  have  come  across 
no  evidence  in  support  of  his  statement  that  its 
teaching   *'is   only   imparted   to  pupils  whose 

(1)     For  a  list  of    the  more  important   writings  in   con- 
nexion with  the  Panth,  see  Additional  Note. 


The  Teaching  of  the  Panth.     141 

studies  are  considered  to  approach  perfection."  ^ 
According  to  Kabir  Panth  tradition  this  book 
was  written  about  1729.  The  character  of  the 
language  in  which  it  is  written,  and  the  subject 
matter  of  the  treatise  afford  evidence  in  support 
of  this  tradition.  The  Amar  M21I  is  of  still  later 
origin,  but  more  representative  of  the  teaching 
given  at  the  present  time  to  members  of  the 
Panth.  ^ 

Abstract  of  Stikh  Nidan.* 

Chapter  I.  The  Creator  who  made  all  things 
is  king  of  all.  Ho  is  the  ground,  the  seed,  the 
root,  the  branches  and  the  tree  itself.  Nothing 
exists  apart  from  him.  He  has  existed  in  all 
ages  and  has  admonished  all.  He  is  to  be  found 
in  the  heait  wherein  he  has  settled.  Men  have 
been  led  astray  by  Maya.  From  the  heart  of 
man  springs  good  and  evil  ;  charity,  faith,  right- 

(2)  Prof.  Wilson  scims  to  have  rcgranled  Dliarm  D:iss 
(the  servunt  of  rchgioii)  as  tlie  rcpresciitative  disciple  and 
to  have  received  no  infonnatioii  about  that  section  of  the 
Panth  which  seems  in  many  ways  to  be  the  more  important 
of  the  two. 

(3)  Each  book  belonj;in<j  to  tlie  Dharm  Dass  section, 
and  practically  al;  tlie  literature  does  belong  to  this  section, 
is  prefaced  by  a  list  of  ilahants  up  to  the  date  of  pro<luc- 
tion.  This  practice  should  throw  considerable  light  upon 
the  date  of  production,  but  its  value  is  neutralised  by  two 
circumstances.  The  MSS  are  generally  so  badly  written 
that  the  copyist  prefers  to  copy  the  list  ot  Mahants  trom 
some  printed  book,  while  those  who  do  persevere  in  copying 
from  the  original  often  think  it  more  respectful  to  the  ruling 
Slahant  to  bring  the  list  up  to  date. 

(1)  For  this  abstract  I  am  indebted  to  the  Rev,  Ahmad 
Shah. 


142     The  Teaching  of  the  Panth. 

eousness,  sin,  goodness,  nearness,  distance,  ilraih 
and  fasts. 

Chapter  II.  Dliarm  Dass  was  in  the  habit  of 
worshipping  Sah'g  Rama.  He  used  to  bow 
down  to  Bhagals  and  Bairagis  and  to  entertain 
Sadhus  of  all  kinds.  He  read  the  Hhacrarvad 
GUa  and  honoured  Gopala  in  word  and  deed. 
He  wore  a  tifak  on  his  forehead  and  round  his 
neck  a  tfiila  of  iulsi  wood.  He  visited  Dwarka, 
Jaggannath,  Gaya  and  Benares,  but  failed  to  find 
rest  for  his  souL  He  sang  the  praises  of  Rama 
and  Krishna,  but  all  in  vain.  When  he  was  at 
Mattra  Kabi'r  suddenly  appeared  before  him  and 
asked  what  he  had  been  doing  all  his  life. 
Dharm  Dass  replied  that  lie  had  been  engaged 
in  worshipping  the  gods  and  in  visiting  places 
of  pilgrimage.  Kabir  told  him  that  both  he  and 
the  gods  whom  he  worshipped  had  been  deluded 
by  Maya :  that  god<,  like  Rdma  and  Krishna 
who  did  not  even  know  the  hour  of  their  death 
had  no  right  to  be  considered  omniscient  or 
omnipresent. 

Chapter  III. — Dharra  Dass  was  at  first  dis- 
gusted by  the  teaching  of  Kabir  and  tliought, 
'  This  low  caste  man  \\  ishes  to  lead  me  astray.' 
He  ordered  his  servant  to  make  a  fire  that  he 
might  prepare  food  for  Salig  Rama.  Dharm  Dass 
perceived  that  numberless  ants  together  with 
their  eggs   were   being   consumed   in  the  fire. 


The  Teaching  of  the  Panth.  143 

His  heart  was  touched  aud  he  be^an  to  think 
that  it  was  sad  that  the  preparation  of  food  for 
Sah'g  Rama  should  involve  the  loss  of  so  much 
life.  Kabir  again  appeared  before  him  and  re- 
buked him  for  his  cruelly.  He  implored  him  to 
have  mercy  upon  Jiras,  to  put  out  the  flame 
and  save  as  many  lives  as  possible.  He  once 
more  explained  that  Rama,  Krishna  and  Sillig 
Rama  were  no  gods  and  that  Rdma  himself 
had  been  responsible  for  the  loss  of  many 
lives.  Kabi'r  when  he  saw  that  Dharm  Dass 
was  much  addicted  to  fasting,  rebuked  him, 
saying  that  without  fooJ  or  rest  he  could  not 
expect  to  find  God.  It  was  equally  futile,  he 
said,  to  wander  abou'^  from  one  place  of  pilgrim- 
age to  another.  He  should  look  for  one  in 
whose  heart  was  pity  and  true  religion.  Dharm 
Dass  disregarded  this  advice  and  continued  in 
his  former  course. 

Chapter  IV. — Dharm  Dass  next  visited 
Benares  and  saw  there  an  extraordinary  spect- 
acle ;  learned  Pandits  and  Brahmins  worsted  in 
argument  by  an  ordinary  man.  He  thought 
to  himself,  "  This  must  be  the  Zinda  Funish 
whom  I  met  before  at  Mattra."  He  according- 
ly asked  Kabir,  Who  are  you  ?  Where  do  you 
live  ?  Whom  do  you  worship  ?  Who  is  the 
Creator  of  the  world  and  who  is  the  Master 
of  this  life  ? 


144     The  Teaching  of  the  Panth. 

Kabir  replies,  I  am  Sat  Purush ;  I  am  peace 
and  comfort ;  I  am  Sukrit ;  I  am  Sat  Kabir  : 
I  am  the  Creator  of  this  world.  I  have  created 
the  five  elements  :  I  have  established  three  quali- 
ties. I  am  the  seed  and  the  tree  :  I  am  the 
possessor  of  qualities.  All  are  contained  in  me: 
I  live  within  all  and  all  live  within  me. 

Dharm  Diss  inquires,  If  you  are  all  things 
and  there  is  nothing  apart  from  you,  how  comes 
it  about  that  there  are  heaven  and  hell,  Rama 
and  Krishna,  Hindu  and  Turk  ? 

Kabir  replies — Your  questions  are  reason- 
able, but  remember  earth,  air,  fire,  water  and 
ether  are  but  forms  of  me  :  the  whole  universe 
is  made  of  these.  Therefore  I  am  in  all  and 
all  is  contained  in  me.  Kabir  then  in  a  lengthy 
speech  explained  how  the  universe  came  into 
existence.  This  speech  is  practically  an  exposi- 
tion of  certain  Rcmauiis  and  Shahdas  contain- 
ed in  the  Bijah. 

Cl.apter  V. — At  the  conclusion  of  this 
speech  Dharm  Dass  throvvs  his  Salig  Rama  into 
the  river  Ganges.  He  then  asked  Kabir  how 
he  could  be  described  as  jSirdkdv  (without 
form)  seeiug  that  he  is  in  all  things,  acts  in  all 
things  and  speaks  in  all  things.  Kabir  explains 
at  length  that  Maya  has  deceived  Brahma, 
Vishnu  and  Shiva,  and  that  woman  has  long 
been  notorious  for  her  craftiness.     He  mourns^ 


The  Teaching  of  the  Panth.  145 

for  his  three  sons,  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Shiva, 
who  had  been  deceived  by  Maya,  and  explains 
that  it  is  for  their  sakes,  to  save  them  and  their 
descendants,  that  he  has  appeared  in  the  world 
in  every  age. 

Chapter  VI. — Dharm  Dass  asks,  "O  Zinda 
Purush,  when  there  were  no  fields,  no  trees,  no 
fruitS;  no  herbs,  upon  what  did  you  live  ?"  Kabi'r 
explains  that  his  body  is  immortal  and  re- 
quires no  material  food.  He  again  refers  to  his 
three  sons  and  the  wickedness  of  Maya  and 
relates  the  efforts  made  by  his  sons  to  remove 
the  effects  of  Maya's  evil  doing. 

Chapter  VII. — Dharm  Dass  next  inquires  re- 
garding the  division  of  earth  and  sky,  and  the 
institution  of  places  of  pilgrimage.  Kabi'r  ex- 
plains that  all  this  is  the  doing  of  his  three  sons 
whom  Maya  had  deceived.  He  explains  the 
character  of  the  various  places  of  pilgrimage 
and  the  origin  of  religious  sects  and  caste.  Dharm 
Dass  asks  what  orders  he  has  for  him,  that  he 
may  obey  them.  Kabir  replies  ;  My  only  order 
for  you  is  that  you  should  save  yourself  and 
save  others.  He  concludes  by  declaiming  against 
false  teachers  and  enlarges  on  the  punishments 
that  await  their  followers. 

Chapter  VHI. — Dharm  Dass  gives  expres- 
sion to  a  difficulty  that  perple.xes  him.  Men 
journey  on  pilgrimage  to  every  quarter  of  the 


14G     The  Teaching  of  the  Panth. 

earth,  obsen-e  fasts  and  worship  the  gods,  and 
yet  hesitate  not  to  kill  fowls,  goats  and  even 
cows.  What  will  the  end  of  such  men  be  ? 
This  too,  Kabi'r  explains,  is  the  doing  of  Maya. 
Xo  man  can  be  saved  by  the  mere  singing  of 
God's  praises,  an}'  more  than  a  parrot  can  save 
itself  from  the  cat  by  singing  the  praises  of  God. 
Dharm  Dass  asks  how  salvation  is  to  be 
obtained.  Kabi'r  replies  : — Be  constant,  utter 
not  false  words,  show  love  to  others,  associate 
with  good  people  and  especially  with  Sadhus. 
Gather  wisdom  from  every  source,  attend  to 
the  wants  of  holy  men  :  whenever  they  come  to 
}*our  house,  wash  their  feot  and  drink  the 
Chara?i  Mi'/ra  :  feed  them  and  supply  tbem  with 
ever}'  comfort,  learn  from  them  whatever  of 
good  they  cnn  teach  you.  I  am  the  Sadhu  and 
all  S:idhus  dwell  in  me.  If  you  meet  with  a 
tiue  Sadhu,  then  your  thoughts,  words  and 
deeds  will  become  perfect.  There  are  men  who 
have  disguised  themselves  as  Sadhus,  but  have 
no  right  to  the  title.  Then  Dhaim  Dass  says, 
O  Sat  Guru,  now  I  know  that  you  are  the 
Creator,  the  true  Sadhii  and  all  in  all.  You  are 
my  Master  and  my  place  of  pilgrimage.  I  have 
only  one  more  question  to  ask  :  Those  who 
confess  their  faith  in  you,  dwell  in  you  ;  but 
those  who  fail  to  recognise  you  or  decline  to 
obey  your  commands,   what  will  be  the  end  of 


The  Teaching  of  the  Panth.  147 

sach  men  ?  what  has  become  of  those  who 
in  old  days  were  accounted  sages  but  knew  you 
not  ?  Kabi'r  replied,  All  such  have  been  re- 
warded according  to  their  works.  Some  have 
become  stars,  some  insects  or  moths,  some  have 
become  plants.  Others  have  gone  to  hell  and 
there  they  will  remain  for  many  ages.  All  such 
must  pass  through  84  lakhs  of  forms  before  they 
can  obtain  salvation.  Those  who  believe  In  me, 
become  absorbed  in  me. 

Dharm  Dass  entreats  Kabi'r  to  accomipany 
him  to  his  house  that  he  may  also  instruct  his 
wife  and  son.  When  he  returned  to  his  house 
at  Bandogarh  his  wife,  Ami'ni',  asked  him  why 
he  had  been  absent  so  long.  He  tells  her  that 
he  has  found  in  Kabi'r  him  for  whom  he  had 
been  searchinfr  so  long  at  places  of  pilgrimage 
and  bids  her  also  find  in  him  the  Creator  of  the 
universe,  for  Kabi'r  had  solved  for  him  all  the 
mysteries  of  this  world.  Ami'ni  says,  '  What 
answer  shall  I  give  to  your  request  ?  You 
know  that  some  say  that  the  creator  is  without 
form,  others  that  he  is  to  be  found  in  the 
persons  of  Rama  or  Krishna.'  Dharm  Dass 
relates  his  own  experiences,  after  which  Ami'ni' 
too  becomes  a  disciple  of  Kabi'r.  Food  is  pre- 
pared and  a  cocoanut  and  betel  leaf  are  also 
brought  and  Kabi'r  prepares  for  them  the  Mahd 
Prasad, 


148  The  Teaching  of  the  Panth. 

Abstract  of  Amar  MuP. 

Chapter  I.  Dharm  Dass  explains  that  all  the 
souls  in  the  world  are  overwhelmed  with  troubles 
and  implores  the  Sat  Guni  to  extract  with  all  speed 
the  arrow  with  which  their  heart  is  pierced.  In 
reply  to  this  entreaty  the  Sat  Guru  declares 
that  imniortalily  attaches  to  those  into  whose 
heart  the  immortal  Word  has  entered.  To 
Dharm  Dais's  request  for  an  explanation  ol  the 
mystery  of  union  and  separation,  tlie  Sat  Guru 
replies  that  to  obtain  iNIukhti  an  understanding 
of  the  Letterless  One  is  necessary  with  the  help 
of  the  I'etel  Leaf  and  the  Cocoanut ;  that  the 
Supreme  Being  is  unconditioned  as  containing 
the  essence  of  th^  Letterless  One;  conditioned  as 
manifesting  the  Divine  mystery  to  man;  that  a 
true  behef  in  the  conditioned  and  the  uncondi- 
tioned and  absorption  in  the  Word  are  required 
of  all  who  would  escape  from  the  power  of 
Yama  and  the  toils  of  transmigration. 

Without  a  knowledge  of  the  Name  none  can 
safely  cross  the  ocean  of  existence.  To  four 
Gurus  has  it  been  given  to  convey  souls  safely 
to  the  Satya  Loka  (Paradise),  and  of  these  four 
the  chief  is  Dharm  Dass.  It  is  tor  him  and  his 
42  decerdants  to  rescue  souls  from  the  tyranny 

(3}  This  abstract  was  prepared  from  a  translation  of  Amar 
Jful  made-  for  mc  by  Mr.  U.  R.  iMemcnt,  Head  Master  of  the 
Mission  School,  Indore,  and  formerly  Second  Master  of  the 
Collegiate  School,  Cawnpore. 


The  Teaching  of  the  Panth.  149 

of  Kal,  Of  one  alone  isKal  afraid  and  that  one 
is  the  Word.  The  spoken  word  is  Maya;  the 
unutterable  name  alone  is  true,  the  name  that 
pervades  all  hearts.  When  the  voice  of  the 
Word  was  sounded  the  indestructible  one  took 
form.  As  clouds  obstruct  the  rays  of  the  sun, 
so  does  Mayd  withhold  from  man  true  know- 
ledge. That  soul  alone  attains  perfection  which 
learns  the  secret  of  tbe  immortal  root  {Aniar 
Mul.) 

Dharm  Da^^s  presses  for  a  ftiriher  bx.^lanaticn 
of  tiie  Betel  Leaf  and  the  Cocoanut.  1  he  Sat 
Guiii  replies  th.-it  the  Betel  Leaf  was  not 
produced  in  the  way  of  nature  but  proceeded 
from  the  Word,  and  that  the  Cocoanut  when 
broken  by  the  true  Word  is  accepted  as  a  subs- 
titute tor  the  soul  which,  as  all  else  in  the  three 
Lokas,  has  been  made  over  by  Purusha  to 
Dliamrae,  the  Angel  of  Deatli.  The  Cocoanut, 
the  Betel  leaf  and  the  Word  are  the  three  boats 
in  which  souls  can  safely  cross  the  Ocean  of 
life. 

He  who  would  be  ?aved  must  receive  the 
Betel  Warrant,  serve  the  Sadhiis  with  attention 
and  become  absorbed  in  the  true  Word.  This 
is  the  secret  to  be  revealed  to  the  wise  by  Dharm 
Dass  and  his  descendants. 

Chapter  II.  The  Sat  Guru  explains  that  atma 
and  Brahma  are  one  thrcugh  union  with  Param- 


150  The  Teaching  of  the  Panth. 

atraa.  Atraa  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  Param- 
atmaas  the  wave  to  the  ocean,  the  spark  to  the 
fire  and  the  ornament  to  the  gold  out  of  which 
it  is  fashioned.  The  soul  abides  in  Brahma,  as 
light  shines  in  the  rays  of  the  sun.  Thus  Jiva 
and  Brahma  which  are  commonly  regarded  as 
two  are  really  one.  Those  who  have  gained 
this  knowledge  obtain  emancipation. 

Dharm  Dass  ne.xt  asks  the  t?at  Guru  to  ex- 
plain to  him  the  Letterless  One,  the  bodiless 
^habdiJ  in  the  body.  The  Sat  Gurii  explains 
that  all  who  h;ive  assumed  bodies  have  been 
produced  by  SliabJu.  Shabda  is  perfect  and  all 
else  fragmentary  The  true  Sliabda  reverberates 
in  ihe  Universe.  He  who  knows  the  Letterless 
One  finds  an  abode  in  Satya  Loka.  In  answer  to 
further  inciuiric^s  the  Sat  Guru  explains  that  the 
splendour  of  the  soul  in  Satya  Loka  is  cqu:d  to 
that  of  sixteen  suns  while  the  glory  of  Purusha 
himself  is  indescribable.  The  true  name  is  the 
basis  of  the  soul.  By  a  draught  of  nectar  doubts 
are  removed  and  the  thirst  of  ages  satisfied.  All 
the  souls  in  Satya  Loka  see  with  the  feelings  of 
loveand  never  give  utterance  to  unkind  thoughts. 
Hope  and  desire  find  no  place  there.  The  sins 
of  millions  of  births  are  washed  away  by  the 
influence  of  the  Name.  Without  the  Name  all 
efforts  are  in  vain;  without  the  Name  knowledge 
is  of  no  account.     As  darkness  prevails  where 


The  Teaching  of  the  Panth.  151 

there  is  no  lamp,  so  is  there  darkness  in  the  heart 
that  is  without  the  Name. 

Chapter  III.  To  reach  the  Ocean  of  Bh'ss 
souls  must  s'irve  the  Sutgur  and  so  banish  the 
fear  of  all  ;  they  must  receive  the  sacramental 
food  and  render  acceptable  service  to  their 
Gurii;  tl'.ey  must  promote  the  happiness  of 
others  and  recognise  tliat  the  Guiu  is  identi- 
cal with  the  Lord  ;  they  must  be  simple-minded 
and  drink  the  water  in  which  Sadhus  have 
washed  their  feet ;  they  must  never  speak  ill 
of  their  Guru  and  meditate  on  the  love  of  the 
Letterless  One;  they  must  remember  the  Name 
day  and  night,  and  place  no  trust  in  the  illusion 
of  Karma.  He  who  knows  the  Name  is  of  the 
family  of  Dharm  Dass.  The  Veda  knows  not 
the  extent  of  the  Name.  All  declare,  '  We 
know  not,  we  know  not'.  The  Pandit  reads  and 
gropes  in  the  dark;  he  knows  not  the  existence 
of  the  Adi'  Brahma.  The  acquisition  of  know- 
ledge produces  pride  and  is  of  no  uj-e  in  the 
hour  of  death.  Eighteen  Puranas  have  been 
written  and  of  these  the  Bhagawata  is  the  best. 
It  explains  the  glory  of  Brahma  and  establishes 
the  efficacy  of  devotion.  Fools  read,  but  to 
no  purpose;  they  think  not  of  that  which  is 
obtainable  through  the  intellect.  Those  only 
ooLaii*  w.sdom  who  fall  in  with  the  Sat  Guru. 
Of  what  use  is  the  boat   witliout  the  boatm.m  ? 


152  The  Teaching  of  the  Panth, 

He  who  knows  the  secret  of  the  rosary  is 
absoibed  in  the  true  Name,  Welcome  the  sec- 
ret that  overcomes  fear  in  all  three  forms,  phy- 
sical, mental  and  spiritual.  Escape  thus  from 
the  halter  of  many  births. 

Doubt,  the  angel  of  Kal,  has  taken  up  his 
abode  in  the  hearts  of  men.  Doubt  is  the  off- 
spring of  Diiamia.  He  who  understands  the 
letterless  on?  banishes  doubt  and  enters  into  the 
house  of  innnortality.  Only  through  a  know- 
ledge of  the  Xame  cin  doubc  be  banished  from 
the  heart. 

Dharm  Dass  urges  that  but  few  Ji'vas  possess 
knowledge.  How  then  can  the  world  escape 
destruction  ? 

The  Sat  Guru  replies,  I  impart  to  you  the 
secret  of  him  that  possesses  knowledge.  The 
Hansa  that  receives  the  Betel  warrant  will 
undoubtedly  attain  Xirv-ana.  He  in  whose 
heart  there  is  belief  will  safely  cross  the  ocean 
of  rebirths.  After  receiving  the  Betel  he  will 
speak  the  truth.  He  will  keep  the  feet  of  the 
Satgur  in  his  heart.  He  will  sacrifice  all  for  the 
Satgur  and  attend  to  the  needs  of  the  saints. 
He  will  banish  ail  fondness  for  sons  and  wife  and 
forsake  all  for  the  feet  of  the  Satgur.  He  will 
wash  his  feet  and  drink  of  the  washings.  So 
in  the  hereafter  will  he  drink  nectar  in  Satya 
Loka.  Dharm  Dass  inquires  whether  women  also 


The  Teaching  of  the  Panth.  153 

can  obtain  salvation.  The  Sat  Guru  replies : — 
Women  also  can  cross  the  ocean  by  faith  in  the 
Name.  Women  are  without  knowledge,  there- 
fore they  must  offer  their  body,  mind  and  wealth 
to  the  Sants,  and  serve  them  devotedly.  If 
they  despise  the  Sants  they  will  fall  into  the 
snare  of  Dhamrde.  Those  women  can  escape 
the  noose  of  Kal  who  offer  all  at  the  feet  of  the 
Guru  and  serve  him  day  and  night. 

The  Sat  Guru  exhorts  Dliarm  Dass  to  shake 
off  illusion  and  teach  to  men  devotion,  for  on 
him  has  been  placed  the  burden  of  the  world 
and  it  is  his  seal  that  will  be  every  v/here  respect- 
ed. To  him  too  has  been  entrusted  the  touch- 
stone by  means  of  which  crows  (Jivas')  can  be 
converted  into  swans  (Hansas).  Through  the 
vehicle  of  the  Name  the  shape  and  colour  of 
the  Jiva  can  be  changed. 

Chapter  IV.  Dharm  Dass  inquires  into  the 
meaning  of  the  touchstone  and  is  told  that  it 
varies  in  the  case  of  individuals.  In  the  case  of 
the  wise  it  is  to  be  found  in  a  knowledge  of 
Shabda,  in  tlie  case  of  children  in  the  reception 
of  the  Betel  leaf,  and  in  the  case  of  the  passion- 
ate in  devotion. 

After  all  these  explanations  the  Sat  Guru  is 
angered  when  Dharm  Dass  asks  how  it  is  possi- 
ble  for   the   Sant   to   live  in   this   world,  and 
disappears  from  view.     Dharm   Dass   is  much 
K 


154  The  Teaching  of  the  Panth. 

distressed  and  cries,  ''Be  merciful,  0  Lord,  the 
perfect  Guru.  I  knew  not  that  you  could  read 
ihe  heart;  through  ignorance  I  failed  to  under- 
stand your  teaching.  In  my  pride  I  erred;  pardon 
my  fault.  O  Guru,  you  are  the  true  Guru  ;  like 
unto  Brahma.  I  was  ver}-  proud,  but  when  a 
child  speaks  foolishly  its  parents  hasten  to  for- 
get its  foolishness.  O  Lord,  the  merciful  one, 
have  pity  on  me  now.  If  you  do  not  reveal 
3'ourself  to  me  again.  I  will  destroy  my  life.  It 
-was  you  who  imparted  to  me  this  religion, 
therefore  I  put  to  you  that  question."  Kabir 
had  pity  on  Dharni  Dass  and  again  appeared 
before  him.  The  joy  of  Dharm  Dass  was  as 
that  of  the  Chakor  when  it  beholds  the  moon. 

He  held  fast  to  the  feet  of  the  Guru  and 
worshipped  him  ;  he  washed  his  feet  and  drank 
of  the  water  in  which  they  had  been  washed. 
Then  he  prayed,  *'0  Lord,  give  unto  thy  servant 
Maliciprasdd" . 

At  the  bidding  of  Dharm  Dass  Amini  pre- 
pared a  plentiful  repast  and  Arti  was  offered  in 
a  golden  vessel.  The  wife  of  Dharm  Ddss  and 
all  his  children  fell  at  the  Guru  s  feet  and  drank 
the  water  m  which  they  had  been  washed.  All 
listened  to  the  words  of  divine  knc'ledge. 
The  Lord  Kabi'r  sat  at  the  Chauka.  After  Kabi'r 
had  eaten  and  washed,  he  offered  Prasad  to 
Dharm  Dass   and  all   those   who  were  present. 


The  Teaching  of  the  Panth.  155 

All  that  were  in   the  house   were  filled  with 

joy- 
Then  Amini  prepared  a  bed  upon  which  the 

Sat  Guru  took  his  seat.     Dharm   Dass  fanned 

him,  while  Amini  shampooed  his  feet.    All  the 

Sants  adored  him.    Then   Amini  said,  Lord,  I 

offer  in  thy  service  this  body  of  mine,  my  heart, 

my   wealth  and  all   that  I   possess.     Do  as  it 

please th  thee.     Then  the  Lord  took  her  by  the 

hand   and  set  her   beside  him  on  the  bed.     He 

tested   her  and   placed  his   hand   kindly  on  her 

head   and  said,   Amini,  go  your  way,  I  see  that 

your  mind  is  chaste.     The  mind  leads  one  to  do 

good   and  bad   actions,  and  makes  the  body  act 

according  to  its  pleasure.     For  your  sake  I  have 

renounced  all  desires  of  the  flesh. 

The  Sat  Guru  then  renewed  his  promises  to 
Dharm  Dass  assuring  him  that  he  should  have 
fortv-two  generations  of  children  in  whose  hands 
would  rest  the  salvation  ot  the  world. 

Dharm  Dass  said,  'O  Lord,  grant  unto  my 
descendants  this  blessing  that  through  them  souls 
may  be  set  free.  This  is  my  prayer,  that  my 
descendants  may  be  accounted  as  yours;  then 
all  will  be  saved.' 

The  Sat  Guru  replied,  "In  the  world  the 
Hansas  will  be  set  free  by  the  hands  of  thy 
descendants.  The  children  of  thy  generations 
shall  be  welcomed  as  a  touchstone.    They  will 


156  The  Teaching  of  the  Panth, 

be  free  from  the  disturbance  of  passion,  their 
minds  will  be  absorbed  in  the  contemplation  of 
Shabda,  their  mode  of  living  will  be  serious  and 
collected  ;  their  thoughts  and  words  will  be 
directed  towards  the  truth;  they  will  have  a 
knowledge  of  self  and  subtle  things.  He  is  my 
descendant  who  knows  Shabda.  How  can  he 
be  saved  who  makes  distinctions  in  the  touch- 
stone ?  I  have  revealed  the  path  to  you,  but 
remember  that  there  is  no  sin  so  great  as  that  of 
hiding  the  path  of  salvation.  Those  who  know 
the  word  should  proclaim  it  in  various  countries 
and  liberate  all  Kansas  that  have  intelligence. 
None  can  be  saved  without  tlie  Name.  All  who 
are  without  the  Name  are  proud.  Very  few 
have  experience  of  the  Name.  Dharm  Dass, 
remember,  I  am  day  and  night  with  him  who 
knows  the  ISame." 

Chapter  V.  The  Sat  Guru  explains  that 
Dhamnie  had  objected  to  his  coming  into  the 
world  to  save  souls  since  all  three  Lokas  had 
been  made  over  to  him  by  Purusha,  and  had 
asked  by  what  name  he  hoped  to  liberate  the 
Kansas.  All  who  performed  religious  acts  were 
in  his  power,  including  Shiva,  as  he  sat  with 
pride  in  Sajnddhi;  in  the  great  day  of  destruc- 
tion all  would  be  destroyed  by  him,  even  Vish- 
nu, the  greatest  of  all.  Gyani  had  replied  that 
Dbamrae  tad  acted  as  a  thief,  seekin;;  to  estab- 


The  Teaching  of  the  Panth.  157 

lish  his  authority  where  he  had  no  right  to  rule 
and  that  for  this  reason  he  had  been  sent  forth 
to  rescue  souls  by  Purusha,  the  true  God,  with 
whom  Dhamrae  had  vainly  striven  to  identify 
himselt.  Dhamrae  had  implored  Gyani  to  be 
kind  to  him,  even  as  Purusha  had  been  kind,  but 
that  Gyani  had  only  consented  to  leave  him 
undisturbed  on  condition  that  he  would  promise 
not  to  approach  those  who  had  received  the 
Betel  leaf,  to  treat  with  kindness  all  who  had 
become  Gyani  and  to  show  love  to  all  who  had 
welcomed  Shabda.  Dhamrae  had  accepted 
this  offer,  but  had  at  the  same  time  been  warn- 
ed that  his  rule  would  come  to  an  end  so  soon 
as  Shabda  had  become  established  in  the  world. 

Dharm  Dass  thanks  the  Sat  Gurii  for  having 
thus  cooled  the  loUis  of  his  heart,  and  asks  for 
a  fuller  account  of  Kal. 

The  Sat  Gurii  explains  that  KiU  is  the  cause 
of  all  actions  in  this  world,  that  he  has  deceiv- 
ed the  ten  Avatars  of  Vishnu,  is  the  cause  of 
virtue  and  vice,  is  in  reality  a  form  assumed  by 
Purusha  and  has  power  over  all  but  Shabda. 
Kal  is  the  author  of  that  duality  which  exists 
wherever  the  true  Word  has  not  been  appre- 
hended, Yogf  jnp^  tap,  sacrifice  and  alms-giv- 
ing all  have  their  origin  in  a  fear  of  Kal.  Kal 
is  an  embodiment  of  selfishness  ;  he  devours  all 
who  live  a  life  of  enjoyment.      Through  Kal 


158  The  Teaching  of  the  Panth. 

creation  has  come  into  existence  and  in   KM  it 
will  fade  away. 

In  reply  to  an  inquiry  as  to  which  was  first, 
Purusha  or  Kal,  the  Sat  Guru  explains  that  first 
was  space,  and  that  in  that  space  Purusha  pro- 
duced Shabda  from  Shabda,  that  space  and 
time  ( Kal)  were  really  one,  but  that  so  terrible 
was  Kal  that  none  dare  look  upon  his  (ace.  But 
for  the  noose  of  Kal  there  had  been  no  need 
for  devotion.  Only  through  a  knowledge  of 
the  Name  could  the  fear  ol  Kal  be  overcome. 

Chapter  VI. — In  connexion  with  an  account 
of  the  Chauka  Dharm  Dass  asks  for  how  many 
sins  a  cocoanut  should  be  broken  and  is  told 
that  a  cocoanut  is  broken  fcr  sins  a  lakh  and 
a  quarter  in  number.  He  is  also  told  that  the 
splitting  of  the  straw  will  wash  away  the  sins  of 
many  births. 

The  following  Mantras  are  prescribed  : — 

( I )  At  the  time  of  drink  in<i  water. — Immor- 
tal tank  and  transparent  water.  The  Hansa 
drinks  to  his  satisfaction.  The  body  is  gold,  the 
mind  is  blissful,  the  fear  of  Karma  is  effaced. 

(?)  At  the  time  of  bathing. — The  water  of 
Sat  Sukrit  was  brought  in.  The  child  of  Dhani 
bathed.  He  directed  his  attention  to  the  feet 
of  the  Lord.  Kabi'r  says — Hear,  Dharm  Dass, 
in  the  beginning  and  the  end  there  exists  an 
abode  of  blazing  flame.     The   immortal  name 


The  Teaching  of  the  Panth.  159 

is  peaceful.    In   fourteen  mansions  and    nine 
apartments  there  is  one  true  Kabi'r. 

(3)  At  the  time  of  taking  J ood. — The  Chauka 
is  made  of  the  Word  that  removes  fear;  purifica- 
tion is  the  result  of  satisfaction  and  good  char- 
acter. There  is  the  light  of  love  and  faith ; 
Sat  Sukrit  began  to  dine.  ^Vhen  the  name  of  Sat 
Sukrit  was  pronounced, the  water  became  sacred, 
giving  joy  to  tlie  Sants.  All  the  Sants  united 
to  produce  light.  Father  Kablr  began  to  eat  and 
the  wealthy  Dharni  Dass  was  taking  his  food. 
Then  all  the  Sants  took  Prasad.  The  saved 
enjoyed  the  absence  of  fear. 

Dharm  Duss  makes  inquiry  as  to  what  is 
necessary  for  the  proper  performance  of  Artf. 
He  is  told  that  in  the  first  place  the  house 
should  be  whitewashed.  There  should  be 
provided  seven  cocoanuts,  thirty  and  a  quarter 
maunds  of  sweet  meats  of  eight  different  kinds, 
three  and  a  quarter  pounds  of  sugar  candy, 
twelve  thousand  betel  leaves  and  a  plentiful 
supply  of  sandal  wood,  camphor,  cloves,  betel 
nuts  and  cardamums.  A.  silk  dhoti  should  be 
provided  for  the  officiating  ?'Iahant,  the  canopy 
over  the  Chauka  should  be  made  of  gold  cloth 
and  the  vessel  in  which  the  dew  is  collected 
should  be  of  gold. 

Whoever  celebrates  an  Artf  after  this  manner 
will  pass  immediately  to  Satya  Loka,  provided 


160  The  Teaching  of  the  Panth. 

that  it  is  not  celebrated  from  any  selfish  mo- 
tive. 

Dharm  Diiss  urges  that  in  this  Kali  Yuga 
men  are  poor  and  verj-  fesv  could  afford  to 
celebrate  an  Arti  on  so  liberal  a  scale. 

The  Sat  Guru  replies  that  a  simpler  form 
IS  permissible.  In  this  three  and  a  quarter 
pounds  of  sweets,  one  cucoanut  and  a  hundred 
betel  leaves  will  sullicc,  but  a  new  Dhoti  must 
be  provided  for  tli^  Mahant  and  an  olTcring  of 
money  made  by  il!  prc:icMU  to  the  Sat  Guru. 

He  further  adds  that  when  the  KadJulr 
(disciples)  are  not  in  a  position  to  celebrate  the 
Arti  once  a  month,  it  v/ill  be  sullicient  to 
celebrate  it  twice  in  the  year,  in  the  months 
ofPlKi-un  (February)  aiidofl3hadon  (Au-ust). 
^  In  conclusion  tlie  «at  Guru  warns  Dliarm 
Dass  tliat  the  Guru  who  celebrates  the  Arti 
must  have  a  knowledge  of  the  letter,  otherwise 
both  he  and  his  disciples  will  find  themselves 
in  Hell  (Jam  Loka). 

Chapter  VII.    The  Sat  Guru  discourses  on 
the  four  castes. 

The  special  duty  of  the  Brahmin  is  to  gain 
a  knowledge  of  Brahma.  He  in  vain  repeats 
the  Gydiri,  performs  Sandhya  and  reads  the 
Vedas,  if  he  is  devoid  of  knowledge.  Why  do 
he  Brahmins  confine  their  attention  to  Sans- 
crit ?     Is  the  vernacular  unsaited  to  spiritual 


The  Teaching  of  the  Panth.  161 

instruction  ?  The  Brahmins  in  pride  of  heart 
despise  the  Stldhus  who  are  true  seekers  after 
God  and  taunt  them  with  having  given  up  caste 
for  the  sake  of  their  stomachs.  Those  who 
know  not  Brahma  and  neglect  to  practise 
devotion  cannot  obtain  salvation. 

The  special  duties  of  the  Kshairya  are  to 
protect  cows,  Brahmins  and  women.  But  in 
an  age  when  cows  are  slaughtered,  Brahmins 
draw  their  own  water  and  men  commit  adultery, 
of  what  use  are  the  Kshatryas  ?  They  commit 
murder  and  receive  the  praise  of  men,  but  the 
true  Kshatrya  is  he  who  exercises  forbearance 
and  has  true  sympathy  with  others. 

The  special  duties  of  the  Vaishya  are  to 
have  pity  upon  the  hungry  and  to  go  on  pil- 
grimage, but  it  is  vain  to  strain  water  before 
drinking,  in  the  desire  to  save  life,  if  there  is 
no  faith  in  Huri.  Those  who  indulge  in  sensua- 
lity fall  into  the  power  of  Yamar^j,  and  in  vain 
worship  Parasnath,  the  great,  wise  Guru,  when 
they  disregard  his  counsel.  Let  all  such  fall 
at  the  feet  of  the  Sat  Gurii  and  learn  the  secret 
of  the  Name. 

The  Sudra  whose  duty  it  is  to  render 
service  has  discovered  the  Bhakti  of  the  Satgur. 
He  serves  the  Brahmin  and  has  cast  forth  from 
his  heart  all  desires  of  the  flesh,  anger  and 
avarice.    He  serves  also  the  Kshatryas  and  the 


162  The  Teaching  of  the  Panth. 

Vaishyas  and  is  well  spoken  of  in  Brahma 
Loka.  Other  castes  neglect  their  duties,  but 
the  Sudra  prostrates  himself  at  the  feet  of  the 
Sat  Guru  and  so  finds  his  way  to  Satya  Loka. 

Dharra  Ddss,  you  are  a  Sudra  by  caste,  but 
all  who  honour  the  water  of  your  feet  will 
escape  from  the  ocean  of  rebirths.  The  soul 
that  is  bom  a  Sudra  is  saved,  if  it  meditates  on 
Brahma.  Kal  in  vain  attacks  tlie  soul  that 
knows  the  mystery  of  Shabda. 

Dharm  D.iss  says,  Lord,  through  you  I  have 
obtained  Mukhti,  but  why  has  not  my  family 
also  obtained  it  ? 

Tlie  Sat  Guru  explains  that  his  descendants 
up  to  the  eighth  ;,rcneration  will  he  tainted  with 
pride,  treat  witli  contumely  men  w!io  bear  the 
name  of  Kahfr,  and  seek  lionour  in  the  world 
instead  of  placing  reliance  on  the  Name. 

Those  who  practise  true  Bhakti  save  them- 
selves and  others,  spend  all  that  they  have  in 
feeding  Sadhiis,  speak  the  truth  to  all,  cherish 
the  true  name  in  their  hearts  suffer  not  feelings 
of  anger  to  arise,  speak  under  the  influence  of 
the  Name,  reason  ai)0ut  knowledge  and  preach 
the  doctrine  of  Shabda. 

In  the  eighth  generation  will  be  born  a  child 
who  will  bring  men  back  into  the  true  Path.« 

(6)  Arc  we  to  infer  from  thfs  ?tfitcracnt  that  Amar  Mul 
wao  written  when  tbc  eighth  Mahant  was  on  the  "addi  ? 


The  Teaching  of  the  Panth.  163 

The  Jiva  that  finds  the  immortal  Name  loses 
all  fear.  I  dwell  in  the  heart  in  which  the 
immortal  Shabda  shines.  Regrets  will  be  the 
portion  of  him  who  finds  not  the  immortal 
Name. 

Chapter  VIII.  Dharm  Dass  gives  expression 
to  his  l^elief  that  the  Purusha  dwells  in  the  Guru 
and  that  there  is  no  distinction  between  the 
Guru  and  the  Purusha.  The  S;it  Guru  again 
describes  tlie  work  assigned  to  Dharm  Dass  and 
his  descendants.  Dharm  Da-^s  says  that  with 
the  permission  of  the  Guru  he  will  send  all  the 
children  (disciples)  to  Satya  Loka.  The  Sat 
Guru  reminds  him  that  there  arc  two  kinds  61 
children,  those  of  the  (Itsh  and  those  of  tlie  spirit, 
and  th'.il  the  spiritual  children  are  those  who 
cherish  the  name  of  the  Sat  Guru.  The  time 
will  come,  he  adds,  when  all  creation  will  enter 
Satya  Loka  and  all  animate  beings  become 
absorbed  in  the  Satgur. 

Dharm  Dass  urges  that  the  work  of  saving 
souls  belongs  to  the  Sat  Guru  and  that  he  him- 
self might  well  be  relieved  of  so  great  responsi- 
bility.    This  t:ie  Satgur  declines  to  do. 

Dharm  Dass  inquires  why  he,  being  the  Puru- 
sha, had  visited  this  moital  world.  TheSatguru 
speaks  of  the  time  when  there  was  neither  space 
nor  non-space,  neither  sin  nor  righteousness, 
neither  Shesha   (ser[)ent)  nor   Kal,  neither  the 


164     The  Teaching  oi*  ihe  Panth. 

seven  days  of  the  week  nor  the  fifteen  days  of 
the  lunar  month,  when  Brahma,  Vishnu  and 
Shiva  had  no  existence.  Then  the  Adi  Puru- 
sha  produced  the  world  through  Shabda  and 
Shabda  produced  intelhgence.  Finally  Kal  was 
brought  into  existence  and  began  to  persecute 
the  Jivas.  Purusha  perceiving  this  had  pity 
upon  them  and  sent  the  Satgur  to  rescue  them 
from  the  clutches  of  Kal. 

He  compares  Purushu  to  a  child  who  builds 
a  house  and  then  destroys  it  and  afterwards 
runs  crj'ing  to  his  mother,  saying.  "  Build  again 
for  me  my  house.  "  Such  is  the  sport  of  Puru- 
sha. He  is  foolish  and  he  is  wise,  he  is  proud 
and  he  is  humble,  he  is  true  and  he  is  false. 
Such  teaching  is  only  for  those  who  have  the 
power  to  understand. 

Dharra  Dass  asks  for  an  explanation  of 
Atma  Gyan  that  all  the  Hansas  may  obtain 
salvation.  The  Sat  Guru  explains  that  he  who 
has  divine  knowledge  will  understand  that  the 
Guru  and  the  Chela  are  one.  So  also  the  enemy 
and  the  friend  are  one.  Himself  is  active  and 
himself  is  passive;  himself  shows  and  himself 
sees  ;  himself  causes  birth  and  death,  and  him- 
self is  death;  himselMs  the  image  and  himself 
the  worshipper  j  himself  is  the  branch  and  him- 
self the  tree  ;  himself  is  all  manifest  and  himself 
is  hidden  in  himself. 


The  Teaching  of  the  Panth.  165 

But  why,  Dharm  Diss  asks,  why  if  all  is 
equivalent  to  Brahma,  does  the  Jfva  remain  in 
ignorance  ?  The  Sat  Guru  explains  that  Brahma 
is  the  seed  out  of  which  all  things  are  develop- 
ed and  that  the  Shabda  is  of  subtle  form  ;  that 
the  Jiva  is  in  Brahma  as  the  wave  is  in  the  sea, 
the  ray  of  light  in  the  sun,  oil  in  the  oil  seed 
and  the  scent  in  the  flower. 

Such  is  the  relation  of  Atma  to  Paramatma. 

Chapter  IX.  The  Sat  Guru  explains  that  all 
sense  of  duality  is  due  to  Maya,  that  \A\en  man 
knows  himself  he  becomes  himself,  and  when 
he  realises  himself  he  becomes  Brahma.  Until 
he  knows  himself  he  weeps  and  cries,  and  wades 
through  the  swamp  of  delusion. 

Tho  light  of  knowledge  shines  forth  when 
Brahma  abides  in  the  heart.  Then  Kar?na  znd 
Dhanna  are  obliterated  ;  then  there  is  neither 
coming  nor  ^oing.  As  it  was,  so  it  is,  and  all 
intervening  delusion  disappears.  All  apparent 
contradictions  are  reconciled  in  the  fulness  of 
knowledge,  Brahma  himself  is  the  Word  that 
cannot  be  uttered,  and  liimself  the  Word  that 
speaks  to  all  ;  himself  is  formless  and  himself 
islall  the  forms  ;  he  is  both  Nirguna  and  Sagwia. 
Dharm  Dass  is  warned  that  he  nuist  first  purify 
his  own  heart  and  mind  before  he  can  so  preach 
to  others  that  they  can  obtain  Muhhii  and  es- 
cape  from   the   toils   of  Transmigration.    All 


16G  The  Teaching  of  the  Panth. 

reasonings  and  religious  writings  are  the  work 
of  Maya;  what  is  required  is  devotion  and  Tatt- 
cva^'du,  (the  knowledge  of  essentials).  All 
delusion  {Bharma)  is  removed  through  medi- 
tation. 

The  Sat  Guru  explains  that  he  was  once  in 
Satya  Loka,  or  rather  beyond  it,  and  that  he 
then  saw  what  is  indescribable ;  that  the  form 
of  Purusha  was  wonderful,  to  be  imagined,  not 
described  ;  that  the  abodes  in  Satya  Loka  were 
innumerable  and  that  in  all  Kansas   was   dis- 
cernible the  one  letter.     In  the  Loka  of  Kabir 
he  saw  the  forms  of  many  Kabirs,  but  looking 
again  he  saw  that  it  was  but  one  form  multi- 
plied.    In  the  light  of  the  true  Shabda   all  is 
one,  there  is  no  second. 

The  people  of  the  world  are  taught  by  means 
of  stories,  but  for  those  who  understand,  all 
such  stories  fiill  far  short  of  the  truth.  All  ap- 
parent distinctions  are  the  creation  of  the  mind. 
lie  who  knows  tlie  letter  thoroughly  suffers  no 
duality  to  enter  into  his  mind.  The  only  differ- 
ence between  Brahma  and  Jiva  is  this,  that  the 
latter  is  the  reflection  of  the  former. 

Chapter  X.  The  Sat  Guru  instructs  Dharm 
Diiss  to  act  thus  in  the  case  of  one  who  wishes 
to  become  a  disciple.  In  the  first  place  he 
should  give  him  betel,  then,  if  he  seems  to  pos- 
sess gyd7i,  reveal  to  him  the  majesty  of  Shabda, 


The  Teaching  of  the  Panth.  167 

and  when  his  faith  in  Shabda  is  confirmed  im- 
part to  him  profound  knowledge.  Atraaram 
abides  in  the  heart  of  him  who  has  full  know- 
ledge. When  Atmaram  is  realised,  he  himself 
is  Atmaram ;  he  knows  no  second. 

The  Sat  Gurii  tells  how  once  when  he  was 
in  Satya  Loka  Purusha  appeared  to  him  and 
said  "  Kablr,  j'ou  and  1  are  one  ;  entertain  no 
thought  of  duality.  I  am  in  you  and  my  form 
is  in  all  the  earth.  There  are  eighty-four  lakhs 
of  species  and  I  live  in  all.  Beside  me  there 
is  no  second.  All  creation  is  delusion.  All  the 
countless  gods  and  sages,  even  Brahma  himself, 
are  entangled  in  delusion."  Dharm  Dass  re- 
joir  s,  "O  Guru,  this  is  your  statement.  Is  there 
not  need  of  a  second  witness  ?"  The  Sat  Gurii 
replies  that  he  made  this  statement  in  the  Treta 
age,  and  that  Madhukar,  Brahmin,  is  the  second 
witness.  He  continues,  "Kalnr  is  in  all  bodies; 
the  speaker  is  Shabda.  There  is  one  form  and 
one  Shabda.  There  is  only  one  form,  and  one 
Shabda.  There  is  only  one  form,  one  Shabda 
and  one  Purusha,  manifest  in  all.  He  who 
knows  one  is  one  ;  the  second  is  this  world." 

Dharm  Dass  asks  how  it  is  that  Jivas  fail  to 
realise  their  unity  with  Brahma.  The  Sat  Guru 
replies,  All  the  Jivas  came  from  Brahm  Loka 
undefiled  and  devoid  of  Karma.  The  clouds 
lift  up  tue  Vk'ater  from  the  ocean  and  rain  down 


168  The  Teaching  of  the  Panth. 

pcre  water,  but  in  contact  with  the  earth  the 
^-ater  becomes  impure.    Then  is  the  Jiva  em- 
braced  by  M^ya;  the  body  at  birth  is  defiled  by 
Karma.    As  the  air  purifies  the  impure  water 
so  does  Gyan  remove  Karma  and  the  purity  of 
^the  Jiva  is  restored.     Knowing  itself,  it  sepa- 
ratco  Itself  from  the  water  and   being   disem- 
bodied  reaches  the  Durbar.     The  Atma  mingles 
with    Paramatma,  as  the  rivers  flow   into  the 
ocean.     Only  in   this  way  can  Paramatm.^  be 
found.    The  Atma  without  Shabda  is  blind  and 
cannot  find  the  path.     He  who  sees  Atmaram 
IS  present  ever>'where  ;  all  be  sees  is  like  him- 
self, there  is  nought  else  beside  Brahma.     '^    ' 
am  he,  I  am  he  ;  the  true  Kabfr." 


ADDITIONAL  NOTES. 


'       Literature  on  the  Life  and  teaching  of  Kdbir, 

Names  printed  in  italics  refer  to  writings  that 
exist  in  manuscript  only.  In  the  case  of  printed 
books,  the  place  of  publication  is  added  within 
brackets.  An  asterisk  is  prefixed  to  the  names  of 
MSS  known  only  by  hearsay. 

1.  Achhar  Bhcd  let  Bamainl. 

2.  Achhar  Khand  hi  Bamainl. 

3.  Agddh  Man  gal, 

4.  Agam  TJjvjdr. 

5.  Alif  NCtrnd.     (i) 

6.  AJI/Ndmd.     (2) 

7.  Al!f  Ndmd.     (3) 

8.  Allnh  Talc. 

9.  Amar  Mt'd. 

10.  Ambu  Sugar.     (Bombay.) 

11.  Ami  Rag  S^gar.     (Bombay.) 

12.  Asdr  Grdhi  lio  ang, 

13.  Atam  Annbhau. 

14.  Baldkh  Faij. 

15.  Bhaliti  liO  ang. 

16.  JDhaa  Tdran. 

17.  Bhopdl  Bodh. 

18.  Bdrdh  Mdsa. 

19.  Basant. 

20.  Bijak  with  Commentary  byRaji  of  Rewah, 

(Lucknow,  Benares  and  Bombay.) 


170  Additional  Notes. 


21 

Bfjak  with  Commentary  by  Puran  Diss 

(Lucknow  and  Allahabad.) 

22 

Bfjak  with   notes  by  Rev.  Prem  Chand 

(Calcutta.) 

23 

Chatilca  Tci  Ramdini, 

24 

Cliaxmiisi. 

25 

Garur  Bndh. 

26 

Gaurl, 

27 

Goralch  Gusht. 

28 

Gur  Updesh.     (Bombay.) 

29 

GycLH  DijiaJc. 

30 

Gyci.i  Gvdri. 

31 

Gyan  Sagar.     (Bombay.) 

32 

Hansdicali. 

33 

Hanhv.dn  BbdJi. 

34 

Eorl. 

35 

Uorl  lidm  IJld, 

36 

Kabir  Charitra  Bddh.     (Bombay.) 

37. 

Kab;r  Kasautl.     (Bombay.) 

38. 

Kab'ir  Manshiir.     (Bombay.) 

39. 

Kabir  Up.isna.     (Bombay.) 

40. 

Kabir  Sahib  ki  Sakhi.     (Lucknow.) 

41. 

*Kamdl  Gnzh'.. 

42. 

Kami  Bina  Kntltni  Tco  ang. 

43. 

Kami  Sahi't  Kailcul  Ico  ang. 

44- 

Ki'snngit  Ico  ang. 

45. 

KurmauVt. 

46. 

*2Tadid  B6dh. 

47. 

Mangal. 

48. 

Muhti  2Ial 

Additional  Notes.  171 

49.  Muhammad  BSdh. 

50.  Miil  Ramaini.     (Lucknow) 

51.  *Musa  Bodh. 

52.  Nam  Mahdtam. 

53.  *Ndnak  Gnsht. 

54.  Niranjan  Guild. 

55.  Nirhhai  Gijdn. 

56.  Piya  Pahchan  ko  ang. 

57.  Piino  Mahdtnm. 

58.  Bamanand  Gusht. 

59.  Bekhtd. 

60.  Sadhu  ko  ang. 

61.  Sam  Darsi  ko  ang. 

62.  Savijhe  Ghat  ko  ang. 

63.  Sanlokh  Bodh.     (27  writings,  Bombay) 

64.  Sar'ib  Gijdta  ko  ang. 

65.  <S(n-  Grain  ko  ang. 

66.  Sar  Sangrah  Prishnotar.     (Lucknow.) 

67.  Sdrawag  Saujar  Sanynkt. 

68.  Stit  Kahir  ki  Sdkhi. 

69.  Sat  Kabir  ki  Shatak  Satik.    (Benares.) 

70.  N<i/  Sting  ko  ang. 

71.  S«<  Sang  Mahitiia  ko  ang. 

72.  Shahd  Bhaicani. 

73.  Shdhd  Channtisi. 

74.  Shahd  Piikar. 

75.  *Sikandar  Bodh. 

76.  Sowansa  Guujar. 

77.  (S«/c/t  Nidhan. 

78.  Sukrit  Dhyan. 


172  Additional  Notes. 

79.  UgrGlti.     (Lucknow) 

80.  *Va9ist  Mtan  GusTit. 

81.  Vavek  Sigar.     (Bombay.) 

82.  Vatclc  Sangram. 

In  addition  to  the  above  Prof.  H.  H.  Wilson  in 
Essat/s  on  the  liclnjion  of  the  Hindus,  Vol.  I  pp.  76.7 
mentions 

Anand  liavi  Sajar. 

Bnlnlch  hi  Rnmaini. 

CJiancliaraa, 

Jliiidulds. 

Jhnlanits, 

Kahir  T'aujv 

Shttbddirdll. 

Pandit  Walji  Mat. 
Pandil  Waiji  J>l,ai,  who  worked  for  many  years 
nsa  Pastor  of  the  Irish  IVcshytcrinn  Church  at 
Horsad  u)  the  district  ot  Khaira  in  Gujerat,  devoted 
niuch  time  to  a  study  of  literature  connected  with 
the  Kabfr  Panth  and  the  religion  of  the  Sikhs. 
The  Pandit  was  led  to  believe  that  the  Kabfr  Panth 
was  instituted  by  Jesuits  and  found  confirmation  of 
h:s  behef  in  the  secrecy  observed  by  members  of 
the  Panth  regarding  their  literature  and  teaching 

In  18S1  he  publi.hcd  in  Gujerati  under  the 
name  Kol.  d.nritra  an  exposition  of  his  views  up. 
on  the  subject  which  he  has  elsewhere  sunmurised 
rnus ; — 


Additional  Notes.  173 

1.  In  Kabir's  book  it  is  written  that  when  the 
first  woman  Eye,  being  deceived,  repented  of  her 
sin,  God  promised  that  from  her  sex  a  great  Man 
will  be  born  and  He  shall  overcome  Satan  and  save 
His  people. 

2.  According  to  the  promise,  God  sent  His  Son 
to  save  the  world.  This  Son  lived  with  God  as 
Word  from  the  beginning,  and  at  the  appointed 
time  became  flesh  to  save  His  people  and  was  called 
Kabir. 

3.  He  was  tempted  by  Satan, 

4.  At  last  He  was  nailed  to  a  tree  and  suffered 
agony. 

5.  God's  Son  took  the  burden  of  His  people 
upon  Himself. 

6.  God's  Son  worked  miracles. 

7.  God's  Son  rose  from  the  dead. 

8.  After  God's  Son  rose  from  the  dead  He 
commanded  His  disciples  to  go  to  all  countries  and 
preach  the  Gospel. 

9.  God's  Son  ascended  into  heaven. 

10.  In  Kabir's  books  baptism  and  the  Lord's 
Supper  are  commanded  to  be  observed.  Generally, 
all  the  doctrines  of  the  Bible  are  to  be  found  in 
Kabfr's  books. 

He  further  held  that  N^nak,  the  disciple  of 
Kabir,  was  also  influenced  by  Christian  teaching 
and  that  Hari,  the  name  given  to  the  Sat  Guru  in 
the  Adi  Granth,  was  used  as  a  synonym  for  Christ. 
He  worked  out  his  theory  with  great  industry  and 


1 74  Additional  Notes. 

published  the  results  of  his  studies  in  two  small 
volumes,  Hart  Charitra  and  a  Key  to  the  Adi 
GranihJ 

I  had  some  interesting  correspondence  with  the 
Pandit  which  was  only  interrupted  by  his  death  in 
December  1903. 

The  Pandit's  writings  are  not  marked  by  any 
great  critical  acumen.  Many  of  his  interpretations 
may  be  regarded  as  far  fetched,  while  liis  suggested 
derivations  of  words  are  often  more  ingenious  than 
convincing.  His  hkuu  position  is  undermined  by 
the  assumption  tliat  Kahir  is  responsible  for  all 
literature  connected  with  tlie  Panth.  In  spite, 
however,  of  llie^c  defects  he  has  much  to  say  that 
is  both  interesting  and  suggestive.  ^VouI(l  that 
more  Indian  Cliristians  would  study  the  religious 
reliefs  of  their  country  with  equal  industry  and 
enthusiasm,  and  that  all  Indian  Clergy  were  as 
t'iligent  as  he  in  studies  that  result  in  a  more  per- 
fect understanding  of  the  Scriptures! 
Addenda  and  Corrigenda. 

Page  7.  In  the  Qoran,  Sura  Mariam,  the  infant 
Jesus  is  represented  as  addressing  those  who  were 
perplexed  as  to  the  nature  of  his  birth,  saying 
•'Verily,  I  am  the  servant  of  God  etc."  See  Studies 
in  the  Qoran  by  Rev.  Ahmad  Shah,  p.  106. 

(1)  Both  these  books  were  printed  at  tho  Picsbyterian 
llissioQ  Pres3^  Ludhiana,  Panjab. 


Additional  Notes.  175 

Page  17.  A  short  account  of  Mansur  Al  Hahiz 
(the  cotton  carder)  and  Shams  Tabrezi,  together 
with  extracts  from  the  latter's  writings,  will  be 
found  in  The  Ferstan  Mystics^  Wisdom  the  East 
Series,  Murray. 

Page  26.  Och,  the  place  where  Syed  Kabfr-ud- 
di'n  Hassan  resided,  is  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Balakh,  the  birth  place  of  Jaldl-ud-din,  not  in  Balu- 
chistdn. 

P^'ige  35.  The  statement  that  of  the  names 
Akbar,  Kubra,  and  Kibriya,  Kibriya  alone  is  to  be 
found  in  modern  Oordns,  Ih  inaccurate.  All  three 
names  are  to  be  found.  Akbar  occurs  22  times, 
Kubra  6  limes  and  Kibriya  twice. 

Page  41.  Palakh  in  norlh  Afghanistan  was  the 
birth-place  of  Jalal-ud-dhi  Ruini,  tlic  author  of  the 
Masnaici.  It  is  for  Sufis  a  place  of  pilgrimage. 
Kabfr  is  said  to  have  visited  Balakh.  The  name 
also  occurs  in  the  title  of  two  Kabfr  writings, 
Balakh  and  Balalch  lei  Itamaini 

Page  46.  The  following  Sdkhi  (187)  occurs  in 
the  Bijak : — 

I  neither  touched  ink  nor  paper,  nor  did  I  take  a 
pen  into  my  hand  ;  to  the  sages  of  all  four  ages 
Kabfr  declared  his  word  by  mouth. 


176  Additional  Notes. 

Corrige7ida. 

Page  17.    11. 17  and  25.  For  Tahrezi  read  Tabrezu 
Page  25  1.  13.  For  Chishit  read  Chishiti.' 
Page  27.     1.  6.  For  Bhura  read  Budha. 
Page  31.    1.  12.  For  Khanti  read  Khanthi. 
Page  40.    note  3,  1.  2.  For  Nidan  read  Nidhdn. 
Page  43.     sub.  fin.  For  Akardi  read  Aqardi,  and  for 

Tujawar  read  Mujawar. 
Page  71.     1.  22.  For  safe  read  Sadhu. 
Page  73.     11.  18  and  20.  For  Saguna  reacZ  Sarguna, 
Page  76.  1.  II.  For  Radhi  read  Radha. 
Page  116.  sub.  fin.  For  Nidan  "ead  Nidhan. 
Page  136.     1.  25.  For  Tariqa  read  Tariqat. 


GLOSSARY. 

Achhdr  letter  of  the  alphabet. 

Agtidh  deep,  unfathomable. 

Asam  unfathomable. 

Akhds  the  fifth  element,  ether. 

AH f -noma  account  of  Arabic  alphabet. 

Aviar  immortal. 

Ambu  perception,  mind. 

Avirita  immortal  i  drink),  nectar. 

Anaiid  happiness. 

Avurdf{  (\(i^\xQ, 

Art'i  sacrificial  offering  of  light. 

Aimd  soul. 

BairdfT  renunciation  of  the  world. 

Bandttiji  i'crvice,  respectful  salutation  as  from  a 
slave  to  his  master. 

Barah  twelve. 

Basant  tune  or  hymn  associated  with  the  season 
of  spring. 

Batdsa  small  wafer,  made  of  sugar, 

Be-dliarm  without  religion. 

Bhajan  hymn,  sung  as  an  act  of  worship. 

BhaktC  6.Qvo\.\on. 

Bhawdiii  wife  of  Shiva.  Shabd  Bhawanl,  a  morn- 
ing hymn. 

Bha2i  fear, 

Bhed  secret,  mystery. 

Bodh  knowledge. 

Bunniah  shop-keeper, 

Chdnchard  an  evening  hymn. 
Chart ir a  picture,  biography. 


178  Glossary. 

Chaukd  square  space,  specially  prepared  for  the 

consumption  ot  food. 
Chauniisi  Thirty  four,  letters  of  Hindi  alphabet. 
Cliefd  disciple,   in  relation   to   spiritual   guide 

Guru. 

Dal  the  split  ojain  of  certain  kinds  of  pulse. 
DAoi I  a  cloth,  tied  round  the  waist  and   falling 

over  the  legs. 
LJii/an  attention  to. 
Dipah  lamp. 
Durbar  a  roval    levee,   the   judgement   hall  of 

God. ' 

Garur  a  mythical  bird,  mentioned  in  the  Rama- 
ynna. 

Gauri  a  musical  measure. 

Ghat  mind. 

GMt  flii^ht  of  steps,  leading  down  to  the  river  ; 
used  lor  religious  bathing,  for  the  cre- 
mation of  the  dead  etc. 

GJil  clarified  butter. 

Godri  a  patch-work  coat,  worn  bj'  sddJnis. 

GuJijar  echo. 

Giisht  dialogue,  controversy. 

G^dn  wisdom. 

Gj/'ard  possessed  of  wisdom. 

G?fdta  wise. 

G^atri  a  sacred  verse  from  the  Rig  Veda,  used 
by  Brahmins  and  others  in  their  morning 
devotions. 

Hanzd  goose,  used  figuratively  for  the  soul  of 
man,  as  never  abiding  in  one  place. 

Hindola  hymn,  sung  while  swinging  in  a  sitting 
position. 

Hori  a  musical  mode,  used  during  the  Holi,  a 
spring  festival. 


Glossary.  179 

J&m  angel  of  death.   . 

Jdneo  the  sacred  thread  worn  over  the  left 
shoulder  by  members  of  the  twice-born 
castes  ;  the  Brahmins,  the  Kshattriyas 
and  the  Vaishyas. 

Jap  the  mumblin*];  ot  prayers  or  other  devotion- 
al exercises. 

JhiiUna  hymn  sung  while  swinging,  in  a  stand- 
ing position. 

Jiva  soul,  life. 

Kadhdr  disciple. 

Kafir  unbeliever,  from  a  Muhammadan  point  of 
view. 

Kahara  a  musical  mode. 

Kal  time,  death. 

Kanthl  a  necklace,  made  generally  of  fruit  seeds 
or  wooden  beads. 

Karma  action  as  involving  punishment  or  re- 
ward. 

Kasanii  toudhstone. 

Khand  group,  division. 

Knsangit  associating  with  wicked  persons. 

Ldhh  number,  100,000. 
Langoti  loin-cloth. 
Lil<y  play,  drama. 
Loha  world. 

J/a//(£  prefix  =  great. 

Mahdtam  greatness. 

Mala  rosary. 

Mangal  joy,  hymn  of  praise. 

Mantra  a  verbal  formula,  used   for  religious  or 

semi-religious  purposes. 
Mansliur  spreading  abroad,  publication, 
Mdm  month. 
Math  monastic  btiilding. 


ISO  Glossary. 

MiiJcti  liberation,  salvation. 
Aliil  root. 

KidiUm  mansion,  abode. 

Nirauja7i  void  of  passions,   a  title  applied  to 

God  by  Kabir  Panthis. 
Nirbhai  without  fear. 
^Irfjuna  without  qualities. 

PaJichdn  knowledge. 

P<itj  entry. 

F(vi  betel  leaf. 

Pdiirh  Mdl  rosary  with  five  strings. 

Pande  a  high  caste  Brahmin. 

Pdjiji  path. 

Param-dimd  the  great,  all-pervading  soul. 

Param-t shear  the  great  God. 

Pariodna  authoritative  document,  passport, 

Pir  o^Iuhammadan  saint. 

Piya  husband. 

Prasad  offering  made  to  God. 

Prtshnotar  catechism. 

Piihir  call. 

Puno  the  day  of  full  moon. 

Puno  Grantli  form   of  service   used   at   Purats 

Mdsi 
P-uran  Mdsi  the  festival  of  full  moon. 
Punish  being,  person. 

Ramaini  a  short  exposition  of  religious  truth. 
Rekhta   Poetr}%   written   in    a    mixed    dialect 
(Hindi,  Urdu,  Persian,  Arabic  etc.) 

SddJiit  a  Hindu  monk. 

Sdgar  sea, 

Sagnna  with  qualities. 

Sdkat  man  of  the  world,  unspiritual. 

Samadli  the  tomb  of  a  holy  man. 


Glossary.  Igl^ 

Samddki    the    condition    of    one    completely 

absorbed  in  religious  meditation. 
Sam  Darst  concentration   of  attention  on   one 

object. 
Samjhe  understanding. 
Sdnd/,^a\.hQ  meeting  of  day  and  night ;  a   form 

of  devotion  used  at  that  time. 
bangrah  protection. 
Saiiffrdm  battle,  controversy. 
Sa7ii/aht  union. 
iSdr  whole. 
Sarad  complete, 
Sarawijf/  wliole. 

Sal-sau>/  association  with  good  men. 
Satf/a  true. 
ShaOda  a;vord  or  saying  ;  the  word  of  God,  see 

Add.  Aote  p  74. 
Shaikh  a  ^luhammadan  priest 
Shistras  a  code  of  laws,  the  Hindu  scriptures. 
i^kaUk  one  hundred  approximately 
Smriii  memory,  religious  teaching  based  upon 

tradition.  ^ 

Somtohh  contentment. 
Suwansa  breath. 
Sudra  a  Hindu,  not   belonging  to   one  of  the 

three  twice-born  castes. 
Sakh  peace. 

Siikrit  virtuous.  • 

Swumi -A  Unuhi  religious   teacher,  held  in  great 

respect  by  his  disciples. 

Tap  the  practise  of  religious  austerities. 
laran  enabling  to  cross  (river  or  ocean.) 
lilak  a  sect  mark,  usually  worn  upon  the  fore- 

head. 
Jinkd  straw, 

^^Wca-.'lrj,;«;ahe  offering  of  straw  in  sacrifice; 


182  Glossary, 

the  name  given  to  the  initiatory  service 

in  the  Kabir  Panth. 
Tiriha  a  place  of  pilgrimage. 
Toh  atom. 

U^ra  a  title  of  Shiva. 
Ujij/dr  light. 
Upasna  fasting. 
Updesh  teaching. 

VaveJc  discrimination. 

Vavi  the  angel  of  death. 
Poy  religious  meditation. 
Yu^a  age  in  the  world's  history, 

Ztnda  living. 


INDEX. 


Adi  Graath  2,  46. 

Ahmad  Shah,  The  Rev.  74,141, 

174. 
Akbar  138. 
Amar  121. 
Amar  JJul,  Abstract  of,  148- 

168. 
Amini,    wife  of  Dhann  Dass, 

147,  154. 
Arti  103,  130. 
Atina,  iu  rebition   to   Param- 

atma  149,  165,  168. 
Austerities  condemned  51,  69, 

70. 
Baira'j;i.s  104,  117. 
Balairh  41,  17.->. 
Bandogarh  105,  147. 
Jiang  106. 

Bathinp,  Reliprious  58-9 
Bf'iiarcs,  See  Kasi. 
Betel  leaf  (Bira)  118,  128,  124, 

Hit.     8cc  also  Parwdna. 
Jihn  1(171)1  111. 
Jihuhta  .Vdla  30. 
Jiijah  IG,  73. 
Blind  piiides  70, 
Body,  aniall  v.alue  of  49. 
Braiimius,  the  duties  of  160. 
Brindiibaii  19,  105. 
Burial  133. 
Casic,  Condemnation  of  56,  61, 

93,  107,  160—1. 
Charan  Mitra  103,   124,   128, 

131-3. 
Chanka  Arti  107,  127-30,  132, 

1  b'J-m 
Chauhii,  FuTieral  133. 
Clielas.  Inst  i-uctious  for  dealing 

witli  1<>'"'. 
Christian  influences  in  North- 

em  India.  Early  137. 
Churanian  Idfi-?. 
Circunicibion  ."J?. 


Cocoanut,  Sacramental  use  of 

123-5,  133-4,  149 
Covetousnesa  condemned  81-2, 
Dabistan  1,  17. 
Dadi  Sahib  107. 
Diidu  1,  17. 
Death  ceremonies  133. 
Deccan  21. 

Dhama  Khcra  105,  107. 
Dharm  Da.ss  98.  102,   105 — S 

and  Chap.  VII  pasgim. 
Discipline  in  the  I'auth  126 
Diwan  10;>.  104,  131. 
Duality   attributed    to  Maya 

u;.i. 
Durbar,  The,  ot  God  85,  90, 
Fastin-r,  .'.3. 
Fear,  banished  by  fear  of  God, 

0)4. 
Forgiveness  53. 
Future  life  126. 
Gawa/ii  122. 
God,  Man's  dependence  upon 

51. 
Goomti  20. 
Gorakh  Nath  22, 
O'niar  123. 
Guru,  The  true  71-2,  89.;  Need 

of  a  95,  110.  113;  support 

of  bv  disciples  12(5. 
Gyani  (Kabir),  Agreement  of 

with  Lhamrae  157. 
Gydti'i  111. 

Hari.  a  title  of  God  4,  8. 
Hindu   belief?,  Condemnation 

of  157. 
Hindu  God,-',   Insufficiency  of 

142,  15';,  Km. 
Humility,     Condemnation     of 

157. 
Idolatrv    55  ;     Condemnation 

of  53. 
Initiation  ceremony  121. 


ISi 


Index. 


Ima^ry.  Curdlinp;  of  milk  90 
Bellows  8?,  Bird  ci^e  86, 
Diamond  52,  63.  Dixing 
85,  Eye  of  a  necnlle  17, 
Fish  52,  Journey  '>:^.  Knilc 
grinder  7y.  Lookinj:;,i,'l.is3 
51,  MiiIstonc3  87,  Mu-t;ird 
seed  82,  95,  Ncct<ir  51, 
Picture  58  Potter  79,91 
Pandal  %vo,k1  51,  .-4,,  go, 
Snake  51,  51,  80,  Sy,  94, 
Suijir  cane  press  9:?, 
Wrestlini,'  91. 

Jajrjrannatb  (.   uri)  40,  93. 

Janro  lUS. 

Jaunj)ur  19,  20,  2S. 

Jhu^i  19.  40,  »:{. 

Jordanu-*  i;}7 

M  Vriuad  107,  KH. 

J II  id /id  -t, 

Kabir.  Lifcrary  power  of  3,44; 
rinli  of  3,  5-tj  ;  receives 
his  Jianie  7  ;  received  as 
clu'la  by  Kaniunand  0,10; 
niccis  Loi  12-4  ;  raises 
Kanial  mid  Katn  di  fr<)?n 
tlioil'.'id  il-.'t;  cMOUMtcrs 
Sikandar  i^  o  d  i  lO-S; 
si'llies  at  M.uiikptir  19  ; 
sctili's  at  .JuuMpiir  11)  ; 
<lic-<  at  \ia.;li  ir  22  ;  Pis- 
nii>;d  of  1)1  id  \'  211  ;  pro- 
bablv  a  Slid  J2,  U  ;  l.c- 
jjciulary  life  of,  cotnpar  d 
with  lid.sptd  iiistory  :{''»  ; 
a  Julnlia  ;JH  a  i/inr.'i/ihl 
37-8  :  a  dis'-ipleof  Shaikh 
Ta(iqi4i»,cnr.-od  by  Shaikh 
Ta  iji  41  ;  Tc  idling  of, 
not  necc<sarily  id.iitical 
with  that  of  Ivibir  I'anth 
iC>;  rcproseiitod  by  KaMr 
.  I'antliis  as  crcitor  of  tlic 
tinivcr.-o  144  ;  as  dwel- 
ling in  his  disciples  !4G. 

Kabir,  the  name  of  5,  7,  12, 
2.%8,  34-5. 

Kabir,  certain  who  have  borne 
the  name  25-8. 


Kabir  Chaura  98. 

Kabir  Kasauti  5,  6. 

Kabir    Panth,     conditions     of 

aflmission  to   112-3;  oon« 

jcctured  institution  of,  by 

Ja-;aits  173, 
Kabir  Pantliis,  Census  returns 

concerning  2. 
Kal.  Account  of  157. 
Kainal.  ll,  14,  35,  42. 
K:imai;  11,  1,5,  16. 
Kasi  18,  22-3,  105. 
Kiiowieilge,     Insuificiency  of 

151. 
Koodarmal  105.  107. 
Kotwal  104.. 

Ksh..triy,as,  Tlie  duties  of  161, 
Kaiitlii  |i>H,  12.'-3. 
Karma  108. 
Language,    IlcligicMis     uso    of 

ViTiiaciilar  1 10. 
Legends,     I'ossible    origin    of 

Kabir  37. 
Letters,  the  fifty  two  65,  67. 
Life  th.-.)iigh  ile'illi  51,  91. 
Lip-servl.^;  of  no  value  J 40. 
I.,  i  U,  i:t,  35. 
Magh  ir  2-',  99. 
JAiA.y  l>r,iMd,    1  list ilut  ion   of 

117,  l.-a. 
Malifiiil,    IdO,     103,    101,    100, 

I  17-20. 
Mahaiiis,  l.ist  of  IH-O. 
M'l'  L»j  (.Nuns)  102,  117. 
Malcohii,  ''ol,  29, 
-Maiiik  Da'.sis  40. 
Manikpiir  (K;)ni)  19,  39,  40,43, 
MaiiMir  17,  33,  1  75. 
Mantra,  Tlie,  of    Kabir   Panth 

9,  10,  1 09,  123. 
JIantns  to  be  n^ed  on  special 

occasions  158. 
JIalh  at  Maghar  99,  at  Kabir 

Cnaum  lul, 
]\fattia  !42 
M.ya  38,  54,  145.  165. 
.Melas     connected     with     the 

Kabir  i'antii  lOO,  104. 
Mukti  145,  151-2,  162. 


Index. 


185 


Kabhajl  1,  2.  137,  173. 
Name,  Efficiency  of   tbe   150, 

162,  166,  162. 
Kanak  1,  2,  137,  173, 
Namyan  Dasa  106, 
Niina  5. 
Niru  4. 

Niru  Tilal02,  115. 
J'dn  (Betel)  121-2,  128. 
Yanrh  Mdl  119. 
Pandits,  False  70. 
Pandits,  True  67,  84. 
Janja  I'arwana  118, 
J'arwaua     (Betel)     121,    124, 

i:!I-3.  yeealso  Betel. 
Prcm  Chand,  The  Kcv.  74. 
Pride,    Condemnation   of    48, 

81. 
J'vjtirl  103,  105, 
I'uiio  a  rant  It  128. 
Puraii  Dass  73,  114, 
J'uran  Mhfi  127, 
Qoran  7,  07. 
Kadlia  SwainJH  70, 
Kile  D.iHs  17. 

hum  II  title  of  Clod  8  j  Kablr'fl 

<iiHl)('lii'f   in     divinity     of 

lli^tori('nl    112;  nnnio  of, 

DM  1 1  tie  liclics  r>o, 

Iliun,  Ititrn,  lu  DO. 

Uainiiiiiiiid  5.  0.   10,   31,   10.5, 

13)i,.7, 
Rnniiimija  130-7, 
ltcli^'louH       dilTercnccfl     coi  • 

detnncd  UO, 
Riclies.   Lovo  of,   condemned 

M). 
Rosaiy  80. 

Uudoiiih  Aquaviva  138, 
Saciarntiits,  Kllicacy  of  158, 
SadliuH,  Benefits  of  associatirg 

witli  88,  Mi. 
SakliiH  77  1)7. 

Salvation,    available    for    cU 
1  :">(■>,  163,  See  also  Muktt, 
SanuidliA  101, 
Saiikaraoliarya  137. 
SalijU  Liikii  liO,  106. 
SchU  lUJ,  119, 


Self-Bacrifice  84,  92. 

Sena  17, 

Shahda  (The  word)  8,  74-«,  81 

167  and  Chap  VII  passim. 
Shaikh  Aqardi  ly.  43. 
Shaikh  Saqa.di  19,  43, 
Shaikh  Taqqi  14.  16,  25,  39. 
Phama  Tahrczi  17,  33,  175. 
Sikandar  Lodi,  2,  16-i8,  20,  27, 

82,  33,  40. 
Snake  as  Symbol  of  evil  62. 
Sudras,  The  duties  of  161. 
Sufis  2r,,  29,  33,   45,   47,  136, 

175. 
SulilL    A'idhan,    Abstract     of 

140-7. 
Sunday,  Observance  of  127. 
Surat  (iopal  115. 
TcachiTH,  True  and  I'alae  71, 

Ti'iu  no, 

Tilak   1(18. 

'J  in  lid  Arpan  122,125, 
Tirtlia  51,  59. 
Toleration  8t;-7. 
TonKU(!,  The,  an  unruly  mem- 
bcr  ^\•^^\^. 

Toiicli'-lonc,  Tho  153. 

TraiisrriiKnilion  62. 

Truthfulness  02-3. 

TuM  Das^  1,  88, 

TnW\  li'ives  |o;j,  124, 

Ut,'iaiiain  107. 

Ujl  r.t,  r.i 

Vai'-hynM,  the  duf  le«  of  161. 

Walji'Bhal,  I'andit  172. 

Wilson,  I'rof.    II.   n.   29,   98, 

M". 
NVord.  The  08,  149.    Sec  al«) 

Shab<la, 
Women,  heligioua  position   of 

li)9,  117,  lo3. 
Xavicr,  llit^ronymus  138, 


1 


niMVlfM 


^^360031 8075 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


BL 
2020 
K3A46 
1907a 


IVestcott,  George  H 

Kabir  and  the  Kabir  panth 


