===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.195766.Karma-Yoga--Ed-2_djvu.txt =====

3 

125103 


LliRARY  )$] 
^^•CULCUni^jS*^ 


KARMA-YOGA 

‘ . / 

BV  THE 

8WAMI  VIVEKANANBA. 


SECOND  EDITION. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE. 


Karma  in  its  effect  on  character  , . r 

*Kach  is  great  in  his  own  place**  . • *9 

Unselfish  charity  is  the'  secret  of  saving  work  5 1 

“ What  is  duty  ? 73 

We  help  ourselves,  not  the  world  . . -94 


Non-attachment  is  complete  selfiabnegation  . 115 

Freedom ^*'.•.141 

The  ideal  of  Karma-Yoga  . . . . 168 


Swdini  VIv('K(iikiikI(i. 


KARMA-YOGA. 


KARMA  IN  IT&  EFfECT  ON  CHARACTER. 

The  word  Karma  is  derived  from  the  Sanskrit 
“Kri”  to  do ; everything  that  is  done  is  Karma. 
Teghnically^  thi$  word  also  means  the  effects  of 
actions.  In  ifconnection  with  metaphysics  it  some- 
times means  the  effects  of  which  our  past  actions 
are  the  causes*  But  in  Karma- Yoga  we  have 
simply  to  the  word  “ Karma  as  meaning 

work.  The  go^.  for  all  mankind*  to  aim  at  is 
knowledge  of  trulli ; that  is  the  one  ideal  placed 
before  us  by  Eastern  philosophy.  Pleasure  is  not 
the  goal  of  man,  but  knowledge.  Pleasure  and 
happiness  come  to  an  end.  It  is  a mistake  of 
man  to  suppose  that  pleasure  is  the  goal;  the 
cause  of  all  the  miseries  we  have  in  Ae  world  is 


[ 2 ] 


that  men  foolishly  think  pleasure  to  be  the  ideal 
thing  to  strive  for.  After  a time  man  finds  that  it 
is  not  happiness,  but  knowledge,  towards  which  he 
is  going,  and  that  both  pleasure  and  pain  are  great 
teachers,  and  that  he  learns  to  know  the  truth  as 
well  from  good  as  from  evil.  As  pleasure  and 
pain  pass  before  his  soul  they  leave  upon  it  differ- 
ent pictures,  and  the  result  of  these  combined 
impressions  is  what  is  called  man’s  “ character.” 
If  you  take  the  character  of  any  man  it  really  is 
but  the  aggregate  of  tendencies,  the  sum  total  of 
the  bent  of  his  mind;  you  will  find  that  misdiy 
and  happiness  are  equal  factors  in  the  formation 
of  that  character;  good  and  evil  have  an  equal 
shape  in  moulding  character,  and  in  some  instances 

misery  is  a greater  teacher  than  happiness.  In 

« 

studying  the  great  characters  that  the  world  has 
produced  it  may  be  seen  that,  in  the  vast  majority 
of  cases,  it  was  misery  th,at  taught  them  more 
than  happiness ; it  was  poverty  that  taught  them 
more  than  wealth ; blows  brought  out  their  inner 
fire,  more  than  praise. 


[ 3 ] 


Now  this  knowledge,  again,  is  inherent  in  a 
man ; no  knowledge  comes  from  outside ; it  is  all 
inside.  What  we  say  a man  “ knows, ’’  in  strict 
psychological  language,  should  be  what  a man 
discovers  ” or  “ unveils  f ’ what  a man  “ learns  ’’ 
is  really  what  he  “ discovers, by  taking  the  cover 
off  his  own  soul,  which  is  a >wine  of  infinite  know- 
ledge. We  say  Newton  discovered  gravitation. 
Was  it  sitting  any-where  in  a corner  waiting  for 
him  ? It  was  in  his  own  mind ; the  time  came 
and^  he  found  it  out.  All  knowledge  that  the 
wt)rld  has  ever  received  comes  from  the  mind ; the 
infinite  library  of  the  universe  is  in  your  own  mind. 
The  external  world  is  simply  the  suggestion,  the 
occasion,  which  sets  you  to  study  your  own  mind, 
but  the  object  of  your  study  is  al\^ys  your  own 
mind.  The  falling  of  an  apple  gave  the  suggestion 
to  Newton,  and  he  studied  his  own  mind ; he  re- 
arranged all  the  previous  links  of  thought  \h  his 
mind  and  discovered  a new  link  among  them, 
which  we  call  the  law  of  gravitation.  It  was  not 
in  the  apple  nor  in.  anything  in  the  centre  of  the 


[ 4 ] 


earth.  So,  all  knowledge,  secular  or  spiritual,  is  in 
the  human  mind.  In  many  cases  it  is  not  dis- 
covered, but  remains  covered;  and  when  the 
covering  is  being  slowly  taken  off  we  say  “ we  are 
learning, and  all  advance  of  knowledge  is  pro- 
duced by  the  advance  of  this  process  of  discover- 
ing. The  man  from  whom. this  veil  is  being  lifted 
is  the  knowing  man ; the  man  upon  whom  it  lies 
thick  is  ignorant,  and  the  man  from  whom  it  has 
entirely  gone  is  all-knowing,  omniscient.  There 
have  been  omniscient  men,  and,  I believe,  wil}  be 
yet ; there  will  be  myriads  of  them  in  the  cycles  lo 
come.  Like  fire  in  a piece  of  flint,  knowledge  is 
existing  in  the  mind ; the  suggestion  is  the  friction 

c 

thaU  brings  out  that  fire.  So  with  all  our  feelings 
and  actions-A)ur  tears  and  our  smiles,  our  joys 
and  our'  griefs,  our  weeping  and  our  laughter, 
our  curses  and  our  blessings,  our  praises  and 
blames — every  one  of  these  we  may  find,  if  we 
calmly  study  our  own  selves,  to  have  been  brought 
out  from,  within  ourselves  by  so  many  blows  dealt. 
The  result  is  what  we  are  j all  these  blows  taken 


[ 5 ] 


together  are  called  Karma, work,  action.  Every 
mental  and  physical  blow  that  is  given  to  the  soul 
to  make  it  strike  fire,  discover  its  own  power  and 
knowledge,  is  Karma^  this  Word  being  used  in  its 
widest  sense ; so  we  are  all  performing  Karma  all 
the  time  in  our  lives.  I am  talking,  to  you ; that 
is  Karma.  You  are  listening;  that  is  Karma. 
We  breathe ; that  is  Karma.  We  walk ; Karma. 
We  talk ; Karma.  Everything  we  do,  physical  or 
mental  is  Karma^  and  it  is  steadily  leaving  its 
marV:s  on  us. 

® There  are  certain  works  which  are,  as  it  were, 
the  aggregate,  the  sum  total,  of  a large  number  of 
smaller  works.  If  we  stand  near  the  seashore  and 
hear  the  waves  dashing  against  the,  shingle ''we 
think  it  is  such  a great  noise,  and^  yet  we  know 
that  one  big  wave  is  really  composed  of  milliorts 
and  millions  of  minute  waves ; each  one  of  these  is 
making  a noise,  and  yet  we  do  not  catch  its  sound 
it  is  only  when  they  become  the  big  aggregate 
that  we  catch  the  loud  sound.  So  every  pulsation 
of  the  heart  is  contributing  to  the  grand  total  of 


[■  6 ] 


work ; certain  kinds  of  work  we  feel  and  they  be- 
come tangible  to, us;  they  are,  at  the  same  time, 
the  aggregate  of  a number  of  small  works.  'If 
you  really  want  fo  judge  of  the  cjiaracter  of  a man 
look  not  at  his  great  performances.  Every  fool 
may  become  a hero  at  one  time  or  another. 
Watch  a man  doing  his  most  common  actions ; 
those  are  indeed  the  things  which  will  tell  you  the 
real  character  of  a great  man.  (ireat  occasions 
rouse  even  the  lowest  of  human  beings  to  some 
kind  of  greatness,  but  he  alone  is  the  really  great 
man  whose  character  is  great  always,  the  saifie 

wherever  he  be. 

/ 

.Karma  in  its  effect  on  character  is  the  most 
'tremendous  power  that  man  has  to  deal  with. 

O 

Man  is  ps  it  were,  a centre,  and  he  is  attracting  all 
the  powers  of  the  universe  towords  himself,  and  in 
this  centre  he  is  fusing  them  all  and  ejecting  them 
again  in  a big  current.  Such  a cefttre  is  the  r«al 
man,  the  almighty,  the  omniscient,  and  he  draws 
the  whole  universe  towards  him ; good  and  bad, 
misery  and  happiness,  all  are  running  towards  him, 


[ 7 ] 


and  dinging  round  him;  and  out  of  them  he 
fashions  the  mighty  stream  of  tendency  called 
character  and  throws  it  outwards.  As  h«  has  the 
power  of  drawing  in  anything,  he  has  also  the 
power  of  throwing  it  out  to  act  and  fructify. 

Now,  all  the  actions  that  we  see  in  the  world,, 
all  the  movements  in  human  society,  all  the  works 
that  we  have  around  us,  are  simply  the  display  of 
thought,  the  manifestation  of  the  will  of  man. 
Machines  or  instruments,  or  cities,  or  ships,  or 
men*of-war,  everything  is  simply  the  manifestation 
of'  the  will  of  man ; and  this  will  is  caused  by 
character  and  character  is  manufactured  by 
Karma,  As  is  Karma^  so  is  the  manifestation 
of  the  will.  The  many  men  of  mighty  will 
whom  the  world  has  produced  have  all  been 
tremendous  workers— huge,  gigantic  men,  with 
wide  wills,  powerful  enough  to  overturn  worlds ; 
and  they  got  that  4cind  of  will  by  persistent  work, 
through  ages  and  ages.  Such  a gigantic  will 
as  ^hat  of  a Buddha  or  a Jesus  cannot  be  got  as 
the  result  of  work's  in  one  life,  for  we  know  who 


[ 8 J 


their  fathers  were.  It  is  not  known  that  their 
fathers  ever  spoke  a word  for  the  good  of  man- 
kind. iMilHons  and  millions  of  carpenters  like 
Joseph  have  gone ; millions  are  still  living. 
Millions  and  millions  of  petty  kings  like  Buddha’s 
father  have  been  in  the  world,  fjf  it  is  only  a 
case  of  hereditary  transmission,  how  do  you  account 
for  this  little  pretty  prince,  who  was  not,  perhaps, 
obeyed  by  his  own  servants,  producting  this 
son,  whom  half  a world  worships  ? How  do  you 
account  for  this  gap  between  the  carpenter,  and 
his  son,  whom  millions  of  human  beings  worship 
as  God?  It  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  that 
theory  of  heredity.  This  gigantic  will  which 
Buddha^  threw  over  the  world,  which  rose  out 
of  Jesitj,  whence  did  it  come?  Whence  came 
this  accumulation  of ‘power?  It  must  have  been 
there  through  ages  and  ages,  continually  growing 
bigger  and  bigger,  until;  it  burst  on  society 
ill  a Buddha  or  a Jesus;  and  its  influence 
has  gone  on  rolling  down  even  to  the  present 
day. 


[ 9 ] 


And  all  this  is  determined  by  Karma,  work. 
No  one  can  get  anything  unless  he  earns  it ; this 
is  an  eternal  law ; we  m^y  sometimes  tl^k  it  is 
not  so,  but  in  the  long  run  we  become  perforce 
convinced  that  it  is  so.  • A man  may  struggle  all 
his  life  to  become  rich ; he  may  cheat  thousands, 
but  . he  finds  at  last  that  he  did  not  deserve  to 
become  rich  and  his  life  becomes  a trouble  and 
a nuisance  to  him.  We  may  go  on  accumulating 
things  for  our  physical  enjoyment,  but  only  what 
we.  really  earn  is  ours.  A fool  may  buy  all  the 
books  in  the  world,  and  they  will  be  in  his 
library;  but  he  will  be  able  to  read  only  those 
that  he  deserves  to  read;  and  this  deserving  is 
‘ produced  by  Karma.  Our  Karma*  determines 
what  we  deserve  and  what  we  can  ajsimilate. 
We  are  responsible  for  what  we  are ; and  whatever 
we  wish  ourselves  to  become  that  we  have  the 
power  to  make  of  ourselves.  If  what  we  are 
now  has  been  the  result  of  our  own  past  actions, 
it  certainly  follows  that  whatever  we  wish,  to  be  in 
future  can  be  produced  by  our  present  actions  j so 
B 


[ lo  ] 


we  have  to  know  how  to  act.  You  will  say, 
What  is  the  use  of  learning  how  to  work  ? 
Every  (fie  works  in  some  way  or  other  in  this 
world.’'  But  there  is  such  a thing  as  frittering 
away  our  energies.  With  regard  to  this  Karma- 
Yoga,  it  is  said  in  the  GUd  that  it  is  doing  work 
with  cleverness  and  as  a science  : knowing  how  to 
do  work — that  will  bring  the  greatest  results.  You 
must  remember  that  all  work  is  simply  intended  to 
bring  out  the  power  of  the  mind  which  is  already 
there,  to  wake  up  the  soul.  The  power  is  inSide 
every  man,  and  the  knowledge  is  there ; these 
different  works  are  like  blows  to  bring  it  out,  t6 
cause  this  giant  to  wake  up. 

^an  twdrl^s  with  various  motives ; there  can- 
ndt  be  work  without  motive.  Some  people  want 
to  get  fame,  and  they  work  for  *fame.  Others 
want  to  get  money,  and  they  work  for  money. 
Others  want  to  have  power,  and  they  work  for 
power.  Others  want  to  get  to  Tieaven,  and  they 
work  to  get  to  heaven.  Others  want  to  leave  a 
name  when  they  die,  as  they  do  in  China,  where 


L n ] 


no  man  gets  a title  until  he  is  dead ; and  that  is  a 
better  way,  after  all,  than  with  us.  When  a man 
loes  something  very  good  there,  they  give  a title 
:)f  nobility  to  his  father^  who  is  dead,  or  to  his 
grandfather.  Some  people  work  for  that.  Some 
of  the  followers  of  certain  Mohammedan  sects 
work  all  their  lives  to  have  a big  tomb  built  for 
them  when  they  die.  I know  sects  among  whom 
as  soon  as  a child  is  born,  the  men  begin  to 
prepare  for  his  tomb;  that  is  among  them  the 
mogt  important  work  a man  has  to  do,  and  the 
bigger  and  the  finer  the  tomb  the  better  off  is  the 
man  supposed  to  be.  Others  do  good  work  as  a 
penance ; they  do  all  sorts  of  wicked  things,  then 
erect  a temple,  *or  give  something  tc^  the  priests 
to  buy  them  off  and  obtain  from  them  a passport 
to  heaven.  They  think  that  this  kind  of  bene- 
ficence will  clear  them  and  that  they  will  go  scot- 
free  in  spite  of  their  sinfulness.  Such  are  some 
of  the  various  motives  for  work. 

Work  for  work’s  sake.  There  are  some  who 
are -really  the  ^alt  of  the  earth  in  every  country  and 


[ 12  ] 


who  work  for  work’s  sake,  who  do  not  care  for 
name,  or  fame,  or  even  to  get  to  heaven.  They 
work  just  because  good  will  come  of  it.  There 
are  others  who  do  good  to  the  poor  and  help 
mankind  from  still  higher  motives,  because  they 
believe  it  is  good  to  do  good  and  they  love  what- 
ever is  good.  Now,  to  return  to  this  matter  of 
motives,  those  of  name  and  fame.  These  motives 
Seldom  bring  immediate  result ; name  and  fame, 
as  a rule,  come  to  us  when  we  are  old  and  have 
almost  done  with  life.  If  I,  all  my  life,  work  Jor 
fame,  I generally  find  I get  a little  in  the  long  run ; 
if  I work  for  name,  struggle  all  my*  life  for  it  1 
find^in  the  end  that  I get  a little  name;  similarly 
if  r«want^an.ything  material  I get  it  in  the  long  run, 

c 

and. there  it  stops.  But  if  a man  works  without 
any  selfish  motive  in  view  what  becomes  of  him  ? 
Does. he  not  gain  anything?  Yes,  he  becomes 
the  highest  gainer.  Unselfishness  is  more  paying, 
only  people  have  not  the  patience  to  practise  it.' 

* It  is  more  paying  in  physical  value  also.  Love, 
and  truth,  and  unselfishness  are  not  mer^y  moral 


[ >3  ] 


figures  of  speech,  but  they  form  our  highest 
ideal,  because  in  them  lies  such  a manifestation  of 
power.  In  the  first  place,  a man  who  can  work 
for  five  days,  or  even  for  five  minutes,  without  any 
selfish  motive  whatever,  without  thinking  of  future, 
^ of  heaven,  of  punishment,  or  anything  of  the  kind, 
has  in  him  the  capacity  to  become  a powerful 
moral  giant.  It  is  hard  to  do  it,  but  in  the  heart 
of  our  hearts  we  know  the  value  of  it,  and  what 
good  it  brings.  It  is  the  greatest  manifestation  of 
pow^r — this  tremendous  restraint ; self-restraint  is 
a higher  manifestation  of  power  than  all  outgoing 
action.  A carriage  with  four  horses  may  rush 
down  a hill  without  restraint ; or,  the  coachnwin 
may  restfain  the  horses.  Which  is^  tiie  * greater 
manifestation  of  power,  tO'  let  them  go  ot  to  res- 
train them  ? A ball  flying  through  the  air  goes  a 
long  distance  and  then  falls.  Another  is  cut  short 
in  its  flight  by  striking  against  a wall,  and  intense 
heat  is  generated.  So,  all  this ‘Outgoing  follows  a 
selfish  rimtive  • and  disappears  sooner  or  later ; it 
will  not  cause  power  to  return  to  you,  but  if  the 


[ '4  ] 


self  is  restrained  the  power  will  develop.  Restraint 
of  this  kind  will  tend  to  produce  a mighty 
will,  that  kind  of  character  which  makes  a Christ 
or  a Buddha.  Foolish  men  do  not  know  this 
secret';  they  nevertheless  want  to  rule  mankinds 
The  fool  does  not  know  that  * even  he  may 
rule  the  whole  world  if  he  works  and  waits. 
Wait  a few  years,  restrain  the  foolish  idea  ^of 
governing;  and  when  that  idea  is  wholly  gone, 
your  will  restrain  the  universe.  Men  run  after 
a few  dollars  and  do  not  think  anything  of 
cheating  a fellow-being  to  get  those  dollars; 
but  if  they  would  restrain  themselves,  in  a few 
years  they  would  develop  siich  characters  as 
would  ,brm^  them  millions  of  dollar j if  they 
wanted  them.  But  we  are  all  such  fools!  The 
majority  of  us  cannot  see  beyond  a few  years,  just 
as  some  animals  cannot  see  beyond  a few  steps. 
Just  a little  narrow  circle that  is  our  world.  We 
have  not  the  patience  to  look  beyond  it,  and  we 
thus  become  iinmoral  and  wicked.  This  is  our 
weakness,  our  powerlessness. 


Even  the  lowest  forms  of  work  are  not  to  be 

despised.  Let  the  man,  who  knows  no  better, 

Work  for  selfish  ends,  for  name  and  fame;  but 

everyone  has  always  to  try  to  get  towards  higher 

and  higher  motives  and  to  understand  what  such 

motives  are.  ^^To  work  w^e  h^ve.  the  right,  but 

not  to  the  fruits  thereof.”  Leave  the  fruits  alone, 

leave  results  alone.  Who  care  for  results  ? When 

* 

you  wish  to  help  a man,  never  think  about  what 
the.  man’s  attitude  should  be  towards  you.  Do 
not  tare  to  understand  or  to  appreciate  results. 
If  you  want  to  do  a great  or  a good  work,  do  not 
trouble  yourself  about  what  the  results  will  be. 

There  arises  a difficult  question  for  considera- 
tion in  relation  to  this  ideal  of  wofk.  Intense 
activity  is  necessary ; we  must  always  work*.  We 
cannot  live  a minute  without  work.  What  then 
becomes  of  ideal  rest?  Here  is  one  picture  of 
life-struggle,  work;  in  it  we  are  whirled  rapidly 
round  in  the  current  of  social  life.  And  here  is 
another  picture — that  of  calm,  retiring  renuncia- 
tion ; everything  is  peaceful  around  you^  there  is 


[ >6  ] 


very  little  of  noise  and  show,  and  all  is  only  nature, 
animals  and  flowers  and  mountains.  Neither  of 
these  is  in  itself  a perfect  picture.  If  an  unfit 
man  tries  to  live  up  to  the  ideal  of  renunciation, 
as  soon  as  he  is  brought  in  contact  with  the, 
surging  whirlpool  of  the  world  he  will,  be  crushed 
by  it ; just  as  the  fish,  that  lives  in  the  deep  sea, 
as  soon  as  it^  comes  to  the  surface,  breaks  into 
pieces;  the  weight  of  water  on  it  had  kept  it 
together.  So  these  men,  who  are  always  living 
in  retirement  and  never  attempt  work,  as  soon  as 
they  are  brought  in  contact  with  the  world,  break 
into  piedes.  Can  a man  who  has  been  used  to 
th*e  turmoil  and  the  rush  of  life  Jive  at  all  if  he 

e ^ 

comes 'into ca  quiet  place?  The  only  place  he 
thence*goes  to,  if  alive,  \s  the  lunatic  asylum.  The 
ideal  man  is  he  who,  in  the  midst  of  the  greatest 
' silence  and  solitude,  finds  the  intensest  activity, 
arid  in  the  midst  of  the  intensest  activity  finds  the 
silence  and  solitude  of  the  desert.  He  has  learned 
the  secret  of  restraint ; he  has  controlled  himself. 
He  gl^es  through  the  streets  of  a big  city  with  all 


t *7 


their  traffic,  and  his  mind  is  as  calm  as  if  he  were 
in  a cave,  where  not  a sound  could  reach  him ; 
and  he  is  intensely  working  all  the  time.  That 
is  the  ideal  Karma-Yoga^  and  if  you  have  attain- 
ed to  that  you  have  really  learned  the  secret  of 
work. 

But  we  have  to  begin  from  the  beginning,  to 
take  up  the  various  kinds  of  work  as  they  come 
to  us  and  slowly  make  ourselves  more  and  more 
unselfish  every  day.  We  must  do  the  work  that 
has  fallen  to  our  lot  and  find  out  the  pibtive 
power  that  is  behind  it,  prompting  us  to  do  the 
work ; and,  almost  without  exception,  in  the  jfirst 
years,  we  shall  find  that  our  motives  are  always 
selfish;  but  gradually  this  selfishness*  will  melt 
away  by  our  persistence,  and  at  last  will  come 
the  time  when  we  shall  be  able  to  do  really 
unselfish  work,  at  least  now  and  then.  Then  we 
all  may  hope  that  some  day  or  other,  as  we  roll 
down  the  river  of  life,  will  come  to  us  the  time 

ff 

w;hen  we  shall  become  perfectly  unselfish ; and  the 
H^oinent  become  that,  all  our  powers  will  get 


[ *8  ] 


concentrated,  and  the  knowledge  of  truth  which 
will  then  be  ours  will  become  at  once  quite 
manifest. 


CHAPTER  II. 


EACH  tS  GREAT  IN  HIS  OWN  PLACE/’ 

According  to  the  Sdnkhya  philosophy,  there 
are  in  nature  three  kinds  of  forces  called,  in 
Sanskrit,  Sattva^  Rajas  and  Tamas.  These  as 
manifested  in  the  physical  world  are  what  we  may 
call  attraction,  repulsion,  and  the  control  of  the 
two.  Sattva  is  what  exercises  the  control,  Rajas 
is  the  repulsion,  while  Tamas  is  the  attraction. 
Tanias  is  typified  as  darkness  or  inactivity ; Rajas 
as  activity,  where  each  particle  is  trying  to  fly  off 
from  the  attracting  centre;  and  Sattva  is  the 
equilibrium  of  the  two,  giving  a due  balapcing*of 
both.  . 

Now  in  every  man  there  are  these  three  forces ; 
in  each  of  us  we  find  that  sometimes  the  Tamas 
prevails  ; we  become  lazy ; we  cannot  move ; we 
are  inactive,  bound  down  by  certain  ideas  or  by 
mere  dulness.  At  other  times  activity  will  prevail 
in  us,  and  at  still  other  times  that  calm  balancing 


f 20  ] 


of  both  will  prevail — the  Sattva.  Again,  in  different 
men,  a different  one  of  these  forces  is  generally- 
predominant.  The  characteristic  of  one  man  is 
inactivity,  dulness  and  laziness ; the  characteristic 
of  another  man  is  activity,  power,  manifestation 
of  energy ; and  in  still  another  man  we  find  the 
sweetness,  calmness  and  gentleness  which  are  due 
to  the  balancing  of  both  action  and  inaction.  So 
in  all  creation — in  animals,  in  plants  and  in  men — ► 
.we  find  the  more  or  less  typical  manifestation  of  all 
these  different  tendencies  or  forces.  ^ 

‘ Karma-Yoga  has  specially  to  deal  with  these 
three  elements  or  tendencies  of  nature.  By  teach* 
kig  us  what  they  are  and  how  we  are  to  employ 
them  It  helps  us  to  do  our  work  in  life  the  better. 
Human,, society  is  a graded  organization.  It  is  an 
organism  in  which  there  are  different  grades  and 
6tate$.  We  all  know  about  morality,  and  we  all 
taow  about  duty,  but  at  the  same  time  we  find 
%hat  in  various  countries  the  significance  of  morat 
ity  differs  greatly.  What  is  regarded  as  moral 
in  one-  country,  |n  another  may  be  perfectly 


[ ] 


immoral.  For  instance,  in  one  country  cousins 
may  marry ; in  another  it  is  thought  to  be  very 
immoral  to  do  so ; in  one,  men  may  marry  their 
sisters-in-law ; in  another,  it  is  regarded  as  im- 
moral; in  one  country  people  may  marry  only 
once ; in  another,  many  times ; and  so  forth. 
Similarly  in  all  other  departments,  of  morality  we 
find  that  the  standard  varies  greatly ; yet  we  have 
the  idea  that  there  must  be  a universal  standard 
of  morality. 

So  it  is  with  duty.  The  idea  of  duty  varies 
much  among  different  nation : in  one  country,  if 
a man  does  not  do  certain  things,  people  will  say 
he  has  acted  wrongly ; and  if  he  does  those  vpry 
things  in  another  country,  people  will  ^till  S?ay 
that  he  did  not  act  rightly ; and  yet  we  kr^ow  that 
there  must  be  some  universal  idea  of  duty.  In 
the  same  way,  one  class  of  society  thinks  that 
certain  things  are  among  its  duty,  and  inotfi^ 
class  thinks  quite'  the  opposite  and  would  , be 
horrified  if  it  had  to  do  those  things.  Two  way^ 
are  left  open  to  us— either  ignorant, 


[ 22  ] 


who  think  that  there  is  only  one  way  to  truth,  and 
that  all  the  rest  are  wrong ; — or  the  way  of  the 
wise,  who  admit  that,  according  to  our  mental 
constitution  or  the  different  plane  of  existence  in 
which  we  are,  duty  and  morality  may  vary.  Thus 
the  important  thing  is  to  know  that  there  are 
gradations  of  duty  and  of  morality — that  what  is 
the  duty  of  one  state  of  life,  in  one  set  of  circum- 
stances will  not  and  cannot  be  that  of  another. 

The  following  example  will  serve  to  illustrate 
this<  position  : — All  great  teachers  have  tapght 
**  Resist  not  evir’— -have  taught  that  the  non- 
resisting  of  evil  is  the  highest  moral  ideal  We 
, all,  know  that,  if  every  one  of  us  living  in  this 
e^QiUntry^  attempted  puf  that  m^xim  fully  into 

practice,  the  whol^  locial  fabric  would  fall  to 
pieces,  society  w|>uld  be  destroyed,  the  violent 
and  the  wicked  would^  take  possession  of  our 
, properties  and  our  lives,  and  would  do  whatever 
they  liked  with  us.  Even  if  only  one  day  of  ^uch 
noh-resistanGe  were  practised  it  would  lead  to  the 
utter  dissolution  of  society.  Yet,  intuitively,  , in 


[ 23  ] 


our  heart  of  hearts  we  feel  the  truth  of  the  teach- 
ing, “ Resist  not  evil.”  This  seems  to  us  to  be 
the  highest  ideal  to  aim  at;  yet  to  teach  this 
doctrine  only  would  be  equivalent  to  condemning 
a vast  proportion  of  mankind.  Not  only  so,  it 
would  be  making  men  feel  that  they  were 
always  doing  wrong,  cause  in  them  scruples  of 
conscience  in  regard  to  all  their  actions;  it 
would  weaken,  them,  and  that  kind  of  constant 
self-disapproval  would  breed  more  vice  than  any 
othej:  weakness.  To  the  man  who  has  begun 
to  hate  himself,  the  gate  to  degeneration  has 
already  become  open,  and  this  is  true  of  nations 
as  well. 

Our  first  duty  is  not  to  hate  ourselves ; because 
to  advance  onwards,  we  must  have  faith  ^in  our- 
selves first  and  then  in  God.  He  who  has  no 
faith  in  himself  can  never  have  faith  in  God, 
Therefore,  the  only  alternative  remaining  to  us  is 
to  recognize  that  duty  and  morality  vary  under 
different  circumstances;  not  that  the  man  who 
resists  evil  is  doing  what  is  always  and  in  itself 


[ H ] 


wrong,  but  that  in  the  different  circumstances  in 
which  he  is  placed,  it  may  become  even  his  duty 
to  resist  evil. 

Som^  of  you  have  read,  perhaps,  the  Bhaga- 
md-GUA,  and  many  of  you  in  Western  countries 
may  have  felt  astonished  at  the  first  chapter, 
wherein  our  Sri  Krishna  calls  Arjuna  a hypocrite 
and  a coward  because  of  His  refusal  to  fight,  or 
offer  resistance,  as  his  adversaries  were  his  friends 
and  relatives, — his  refusal  on  the  plea  that  non- 
resistance  was  the  highest  ideal  of  love.  This  is 
a great  lesson  for  us  all  to  learn,  that  in  all  matters 
the  two  extremes  are  alike ; the  extreme  positive 
and  the  extreme  negative  are  always  similar: 
when  tl\e  vibrations  of  light  are  too  slow  we  do 

I; 

not  seejthem,  nor  do  we  see-  them  when  they  are 
too  rapid.  So  with  sound ; when  very  low  in  pitch 
we  do  not  hear  it,  when  very  high  we  do  not  hear 
it  either.  Of  like  nature  is  the  difference  between 
r^tance  and  non-resistance.  One  man  does 
noi  resist  because  he  is  weak,  lasy,  and  cannot ; 
not  be^SQse  he  will  not;  the  other  man  knows 


L 25  J 


that  can  strike  an  irresistible  blow  if  he  likes  j 
yet  he  not  only  does  not  strike,  but  blesses  his 
enemies.  The  one  who  resists  not  from  weakness 

I 

commits  a sin,  and  as  such  he  can  not  receive 
any  benefit  from  his  non-resistance;  while  the 
other  would  commit  a sin  by  offering  resistance. 
Buddha  gave  up  his  throne  and  renounced  his 
position ; that  was  true  renunciation ; but  there 
cannot  be  any  question  of  renunciation  in  the 
case  of  a beggar  who  has  nothing  to  renounce. 
So  we  must  always  be  careful  about  what  we  really 
mean  when  we  speak  of  this  non-resistance  and 
ideal  love.  We  must  first  take  care  to  under- 
stand whether  we  have  the  power  of  resistanpe 
or  not.  Then,  having  the  power,  if  we  renounce 
it  and  do  not  resist,  we  are  doing  a grq^id  act 
of  love;  but  if  we  cannot  resist,  and  yet,  at 
the  same  time,  try  to  deceive  ourselves  into  the 
belief  that  we  are  actuated  by  motives  of  the 
highest  love,  we  are  doing  the  exact  opposite. 
So  Arjuna  became  a coward  at  the  sight  of  the 
mightly  array  against  him;  his  **love"  made  him 
D 


[ 26  J 


forget  his  duty  towards  his  country  and  king! 
That  is  why  Sri  Krishna  told  him  that  he  was 
a hypocrite: — ^‘Thou  talkest  like  a wise  man, 
but  thy  actions  betray  thee  to  be  a coward  ; 
therefore,  stand  up  and  fight ! 

Such  is  the  central  idea  of  Karma-Yoga. 
The  Karma-Yogin  is  the  man  who  understands 
that  the  highest  ideal  is  non-resistance,  and  who 
also  knows  that  this  non-resistance  is  the  high- 
est manifestation  of  power  in  actual  possession, 
and  that  what  is  called  the  resisting  of  evil  is 
but  a step  on  the  way  towards  the  manifestation 
of  this  highest  power,  namely,  non-resistance. 
Before  reaching  fittingly  this  highest  ideal,  man’s 
duty  is  to  resist  evil ; let  him  work,  let  him  fight, 
fet  himu  strike  straight  from  the  shoulder.  Then 
only,  when  he  has  gained  the  power  to  resist, 
wilf  non-resistance  be  a virtue. 

" I once  met  a man  in  my  country  whom  I 
had  known  before  as  a very  stupid,  dull  p^on 
who  knew  nothing  and  had  not  thje  desire  to 
know 'anything,  and  was  living  the  life  of  a brute. 


He  asked  me  what  he  should  do  to  know  God, 
how  he  was  to  get  free.  Can  you  tell  a lie  ? ” 
I asked  him,  No,”  he  replied.  “ Then  you 
must  learn  to  do  so.  It  is  better  to  tell  a lie  than 
to  be  a brute,  or  a log  of  wood ; you  are  inactive ; 
you  are  not  certainly  of  the  highest  state,  which  is 
beyond  all  actions,  calm  and  serene ; you  are  too 
dull  even  to  do  something  wicked.”  That  was  an 
extreme  case,  of  course,  and  I was  in  joke  with 
him ; but  what  I meant  was,  that  a man  must  be 
actiye,  in  order  to  pass  through  activity  to  perfect 
calmness. 

Inactivity  should  be  avoided  by  all  means. 
Activity  always  means  resistance.  Resist  all  evjls, 
mental  and  physical ; and  when  you  have  succeed- 
ed  in  resisting,  then  will  calmness  com^.  ft  is 
very  easy  to  say,  Hate  not  anybody,  resist  not 
any  evil,”  but  we  know  what  that  kind  of  thing 
generally  means  in  practice.  When  the  eyes  of 
society  are  turned  towards  us  we  may  make  a 
show  of  non-resistance,  but  in  our  hearts  it  is 
canker  all  the  time.  We  feel  the  utter  want  of 


[ 28  J 


Calm  of  non-resistance ; we  feel  that  it  would  be 
better  for  us  to  resist.  If  you  desire  wealth,  and 
know  at  the  same  time  that  the  whole  world  is  of 
opinion  that  he  who  aims  at  wealth  is  a very 
wicked  man,  you,  perhaps,  will  not  dare  to  plunge 
into  the  struggle  for  wealth,  yet  all  along  your 
mind  is  running  day  and  night  after  making  money 
this  is  downright  hypocrisy  and  will  serve  no 
purpose.  Plunge  into  the  world,  and  then,  after 
a time,  when  you  have  suflfered  and  enjoyed  all 
that  is  in  it,  will  renunciation  come;  then ^ will 
calmness  come.  So  fulfil  your  desire  for  power 
and  everything  else,  and  after  you  have  fulfilled 
the  desire,  will  come  the  time  when  you  will  know 
that  they  are  all  very  little  things ; but  until  you 
have  WfilleS  this  desire,  until  you  have  passed 
through  that  activity,  it  is  impossible  for  you  to 
come  to  the  state  of  calmness  and  serenity  and 
selfsurrender,  These  ideas  of  serenity  and  renun- 
ciation have  been  preached  for  thousands  of  years ; 
every  body  born  has  heard  of  them  from  childhood, 
and  yet  w see  very  few  in  the.  world  that  have 


really  * reached  that  calm  stage  in  life.  I do  not 
know  if  I have  seen  twenty  persons  in  my  life 
who  are  really  calm  and  non-resisting,  and  I have 
travelled  over  half  the  world. 

Every  man  should  take  up  his  own  ideal  and 
endeavour  to  accomplish  it ; that  is  a surer  way 
of  progress  than  taking  up  other  men’s  ideals, 
which  he  can  never  hope  to  accomplish.  For 
instance,  we  take  a baby  and  at  once  give  him 
the  task  of  walking  twenty  miles  ; either  the  baby 
dies^  or  one  in  a thousand  will  crawl  along  tw^enty 
miles,  to  reach  the  end  exhausted  and  half-dead. 
That  is  like  what  we  generally  try  to  do  with  the 
world.  All  men  and  women,  in  any  society,  are 
not  of  the  same  mind,  of  the  same  capacity,  or  of 
the  same  power  to  do  things;  they  must  have 
different  ideals,  and  we  have  no  right  to  sneer  at 
any  ideal.  Let  every  one  do  the  best  he  can  for 
realizing  his  own  ideal.  I should  not  be  judged 
by.  your  ideal,  nor  you  by  mine.  The  apple  tree 
should  not  be  judged  by  the  standard  of  the  oak, 
nor  the  oak  by  that  of  the  apple.  To  judge  the 


L 30  ] 


apple  tree  you  must  take  the  apple  standard ; and 
for  the  oak,  there  is  its  own  standard ; and  so  it 
is  with  all  of  us.  \'2.5l^3 

Unity  in  variety  is  the  plan  of  the  creation. 
However  men  and  women  may  vary  individually, 
there  is  certainly  unity  in  the  background. 
Nevertheless,  the  different  individual  characters 
and  classes  of  men  and  women  are  natural  varia- 
tions in  the  law  of  creation.  Hence,  wev  ought 
m)t  to  judge  all  of  them  iJy  the  same  standard  or 
put  the  same  ideal  before  them.  Such  a cpurse 
creates  only  an  unnatural  struggle,  and  the  result 
is  that  man  begins  to  hate  himself  and  is  hindered 
frpm  becoming ' truly  religious  and  good.  Our 
duty  is, to  encourage  every  one  in  his  struggle  to 
Jive  unjo  his  own  highest  ideal,  and  strive  at  the 
jsame  time  to  make  this  ideal  as  near  as  possible 
Sto  the  truth.  ' . . 

In'  the  Hindu  system  of  morality  we  find  that 
this  fact  has  been  recognized  from  very  ancient 
] and  jn  their  sipriptures  aijd  books  on  ethics 
different  ;tules  are  laid  dpwn  for  the  different  classes 


[ 31  ] 


! of  men, — for  the  hduseholder,  for  the  Sannyasin 
(the  man  who  has  renounced  the  world),  and  for 
the  student. 

The  life  of  every  individual  in  Karma^  accord-- 

ing  to  the  Hindu  scriptures  has  its  pecuKar  duties 

apart  from  what  belongs  in  common  to  universal 

humanity.  The  Hindu  begins  life  as  a student ; 

then  he  marries  and  becomes  a householder ; then 

after  becoming  old  he  retires,  and  lastly  he  gives 

up  the  world  and  becomes  a Sannyasin,  To  each 

of  these  stages  of  life  certain  duties  are  attached 

which  are  determined  by  its  own  nature.  No  one 

of  these  stages  of  life  is  superior  to  the  other ; the 

life  of  the  married  man*  is  quite  as  great  as  the^t 

of  the  man  who  is  not  married,  but  has  devoted 

■ . ® * 

himself  tb  religious  work.  The  king  on  his  Jhrone 
i5  as  great  and  glorious  as  the  scavenger  in  the 
street  Take  him  off  his  throne,  make  him  do  the 
work  of  the  scavenger,  and  see  bow  he;  fares. 

i 

Take  up  the  scavenger  and  see  hotv  he  will  rule., 
It  is  useless  to  say  that  the  man  who  lives  out  of. 
the  world  is  a greater  man  than  he  Who  lives  iri; 


[ 32  1 


the  world ; it  is  much  more  difficult  to  live  in  the 
world  and  worship  God  than  to  give  it  up  and  live 
a free  and  easy  life.  The  Various  stages  of  life 
have  become  shortened  in  India  tb  two, — that  of 
the  householder  and  then  of  the  preacher.  The 
householder  marries  and  carries  on  his  duties  as  a 
citizen,  and  the  duty  of  the  man  who  gives  up  the 
world  is  to  devote  his  energies  wholly  to  religion, 
to  preach  and  to  worship  God.  Now  you  will  see 
whose  life  is  the  more  difficult  one.  As  I read 
out  to  you  a few  beautiful  passages  from  the 
Maha-Nirmna-T antra ^ which  treats  of  this  sub- 
ject, you  will  see  that  it  is  a very  difficult  task  for 
a,  man  to  be  a householder,  and  perform  all  his 

duties  perfectly. 

€ 

'fhe  householder  should  be  devoted  to  God ; 
the  knowledge  of  God  should  be  his  goal  of  life. 
Yet  he  must  work  constantly,  perform  all  his 
duties ; whatever  he  does  he  must  give  it  up  to 
,God.”  * 

It  is  the  most  difficult  thing  to  do  in  this^- world, 
tb  WjOrk  and  not  care  for  the  result^  to  help  a man 


[ 33  ! 


5iTid  never  think  that  he  ought  to  be  grateful  to 
you,  to  do  some  good  work  and  at  the  same  time 
never  look  to  see  whether  it  brings  you  name  or 
fame,  or  brings  nothing  at  all.  Even  the  most 
arrant  coward  becomes  a brave  man  when  the 
world  begins  to  praise  him.  A fool  can  do  heroic 
deeds  when  the  approbation  of  society  is  on  him, 
but  for  a man  to  do  constantly  good  works  without 
courting  or  caring  for  the  approbation  of  his 
fellow-men  is  indeed  the  highest  sacrifice  any  man 
can  perform.  The  great  duty  of  the  householder 
is  to  earn  a living,  but  he  must  take  care  that  he 
does  not  get  it  by  telling  lies,  or  by  cheating,  or 
by  robbing  others;  and  he  must  remember  that 
his  life  is  for  the  service  of  God,  his  life  is  for 
Service  of  the  poor  and  the  needy, 
r Knowing  that  mother  and  father  are  the 
visible  representatives  of  God,  the  householder 
always,  and  by  all  means,  must  please  them.  If 
the  mother  is  pleased,  and  the  father,  God  is 
pleased  with  that  man.  That  child  is  really  a good 
child  who  never  speaks  harsh  words  to  his  parents; 
£ 


. [ 34  3 

‘‘  Before  parents  one  must  not  utter  jokes, 
iiust  not  show  restlessness,  must  not  show  anger 
Dr  temper.  Before  mother,  or  father,  a child  must 
DOW  down  low,  and  he  must  stand  up  in  their 
presence,  and  must  not  take  a seat  until  they 
Drder  him  to  sit. 

“ If  the  householder  enjoys  food  and  drink  and 
clothes  without  first  seeing  that  his  mother  and 
father,  his  children,'  his  wife,  and  the  poor,  are 
supplied,  he  is  committing  a sin.  The  mother  and 
the  father  are  the  causes  of  this  body,  so  a, man 
must  undergo  a thousand  troubles  in  order  to  do 
jood  to  them. 

• “ Even  so  is  his  dutyN  to  his  wife ; no  man 
should,  scold  his  wife,  and  he  must  always  main- 
:ain  h^r  as  if  she  were  his  own  mother.  And  even 
vhen  he  is  in  the  greatest  difficulties  and  troubles, 
le  must  not  show  anger  to  his  wife. 

“ He  who  thinks  of  another  woman  besides  his 
dfe — if  he  touches  her  mentally  with  tbe  least 
)art  of  his  mind — that  man  goes  to  dark  hell, 
ven  in  private  no  man  ought  to  touch  another 


[ 35  ] 


woman,  or  her  clothes;  even  when  she  is  not 
there  the  clothes  owned  by  any  woman  other  than 
^ his  wife  should  not  be  touched. 

“Before  women  he  must  not  talk  improper 
language,  and  never  brag  of  his  powers.  He  must 
not  say  ‘ I have  done  this,  and  I have  done  that.’ 

“The  householder  must  always  please  his 
wife  with  wealth,  clothes,  love,  faith,  and  words 
like  nectar,  and  never  do  anything  to  disturb 
her.  That  man  who  has  succeeded  in  getting 
the  love  of  a chaste  wife  has  succeeded  in  his 
religion  and  has  all  the  virtues.” 

The  following  are  duties  towards  children  : — 

“ A son  should  be  well  taken  care  of  until  he 
is  four  years  of  age ; after  that  he  should  be 
educated.  When  he  is  20  years  of  age  the  father 

a 

must  not  think  of  him  as  a little  boy ; he  then  is 
his  own  equal,  being  a householder  himself. 
Exactly  in  the  same  manner  the  daughter  should 
be  brought  up,  and  with  the  greatest  care  should 
be  educated.  . And  when  she  marries,  the  father 
. ought  to  give  her  jewels  and  wealth. 


[ 36  ] 


^‘Then  the  duty  of  the  man  is  towards  his 

brothers  and  sisters,  and  towards  the  children 

of  his  brothers  and  sisters,  if  they  are  poor,  and 

towards  his  other  relatives,  his  friends  and  his 

servants.  Then  his  duties  are  towards  the  people 

of  the  same  village,  and  the  poor,  and  any  one 

that  comes  to  him  for  help.  Having  sufficient 

means,  if  the  householder  does  not  take  care  to 

give  gifts  to  his  relatives  and  to  the  poor,  know 

him  to  be  only  a brute ; he  is  not  a human  being, 

**  Excessive  care  in  food,  in  clothes,  and  in 

self-love,  and  taking  excessive  care  in  beautifying 

the  body  and  parting.the  hair  should  be  avoided. 

The  householder  must  be  pure  in  heart  and  clean 

body,  always  active  and  always  ready  for  work. 

“ To  his  enemies  the  householder  must  he  a 
(* 

hero.  Them  he  must  resist.  That  is  the  duty  of 
a householder.”  He  must  not  sit  down  in  a corner 
and  weep,  and  talk  nonsense  about  non-resistance. 
If  he  does  not  show  himself  a hero  to  his  enemies 
he  has  not  done  his  duty.  And  to  his  friends  ahd. 
relatives  he  mus^be  as  gentle  as  a lamb, 


[ 37  ] 


“ It  is  the  duty  of  the  householder  not  to  pay 

reverence  to  thfe  wicked  ; because,  if  he  reverences 

the  wicked  people  of  the  world,  he  patronises 

wickedness ; and  it  will  be  a great  mistake  if  he 
* 

disregards  those  who  are  worthy  of  respect,  the 
good  people.  He  must  not  be  gushing  in  his 
friendships ; he  must  not  go  out  making  friends 
everywhere ; he'  must  watch  actions  of  the  men  he^ 
wants  to  make  friends  with,  and  their  dealings 
with  other  men,  reason  upon  them,  and  then  make 
friends. 

These  three  things  he  must  not  talk  of.  He 
must  not  talk  in  public  of  his  own  fame ; he  must 
not  preach  his  own  name  or  his  own  powers ; he 

must  not  talk  of  his  wealth,  or  of  anything  that 

* 

has  been  mentioned  to  him  privately. 

“ If  he  has  committed  some  mistake,  and  if  he 
has  engaged  himself  in  a work  which  is  sure  to 
fail,  whether  big  or  small,  he  must  not  talk  of 
these  things,  or  make  them  public.^’  What  is 
the  use  of  talking  of  one’s  mistakes  to  the  world  ? 
They  cannot  be  undone.  For  wh^t  he  has  done 


[ 38  ] 


he  must  suffer;  he  as  a householder  must  try  and 
do  better.  The  world  sympathises  only  with  the 
strong  and  the  powerful. 

‘‘  A man  must  not  say  he  is  poor,  or  that  he  is 
wealthy— he  must  not  brag  of  his  wealth.  Let 
him  keep  his  own  counsel ; this  is  his  religious 
duty.’’  This  is  not  mere  world-wisdom  ; if  a man 
does  not  do  so,  he  may  be  held  to  be  immoral. 

The  householder  is  the  basis,  the  prop,  of  the 
whole  society ; he  is  the  principal  earner.  Every- 
body— the  poor,  the  weak,  the  children  ancj  the 
women  who  do  not  work — ^all  live  upon  the  house- 
holder ; so  there  must  be  certain  duties  that  he 
has  to  perform,  and  these  duties  must  make  him 
feel  strong  to  perform  them,  and  not  make  him 
think  tljat  he  is  doing  things  beneath  his  ideal. 
Therefore,  if  he  has  done  something  weak,  or  has 
Committed  some  mistake,  he  must  not  say  so  in 
public;  and  if  he  is  engaged  in  some  enterprise 
and  know^  he  is  sure  to  fail  in  it,  he  must  not 
speak  of  it.  Such  self-exposure  is  not  only  un.- 
called.lor,  bat  also  unnerves- the  man  and  makes 


[ 39  ] 


him  unfit  for  the  performance  of  his  legitimate 
duties  in  life.  At  the  same  time,  he  must  struggle 
hard  to  acquire  these  things — firstly,  knowledge, 
and  secondly  wealth.  It  is  his  duty,  and  if  he 
does  not  do  his  duty  he  is  nobody.  A householder 
who  does  not  struggle  to  get  wealth  is  immoral. 
If  he  is  lazy,  and  content  to  lead  a lazy  life,  he  is 
immoral,  because  upon  him  depend  hundreds.  If 
he  gets  riches  hundreds  of  others  will  be  thereby 
supported. 

there  were  not  in  this  city  hundreds  who 
had  striven  to  become  rich,  and  who  had  acquired 
wealth,  where  would  all  this  civilisation,  and  these 
almshouses  and  great  houses  be  ? 

Going  after  wealth  in  such  a case  in  not  bad, 

^ . 

because  that  wealth  is  for  distribution.  ^ The 
householder  is  the  centre  of  life  and  society.  It 
is  a worship  for  him  to  acquire  and  spend  wealth 
nobly,  for  the  ♦householder  who  struggles  to  get 
rich  by^  good  rtieans  and  for  good  purposes  is  doing 
practically  the  same  thing  for  the  attainment  of 
salvation  as  the  anchorite  does  in  his  cell  when  he 


['  40  ] 


i«  j>raying,  for  in  them  we  see  only  the 'diferent 
aspects  of  the  same  virtue  of  self-surrender  and 
self-sacrifice  prompted  by  the  feeling  of  devotion 
to  God  and  to  all  that  is  His.  ' 

“ He  must  struggle  to  acquire  a good  name  by 
all  means ; and  he  must  give  up  these  things — he 
must  not  gamble ; he  must  not  move  in  the  com- 
panionship of  the  wicked ; he  must  not  tell  lies, 
and  must  not  be  the  cause  of  trouble  to  others.” 

Often  people-  enter  into  things  they  have  not 
the  means  to  accomplish,  and  the  result  is, that 
they  qheat  others  to  attain  their  own  ends.  Then 
there  is  in  all  things  the  time  factor  to  be  taken 
injto  consideration ; what  at  one  time  might  be  a 
failure,  would  perhaps,  at  another  time  be  a very 
great  sjjccess. 

“ The  householder  must  speak  truth,  and  speak 
gently,  using  words  which  people  like,  which  will 
do  good  to  others ; neither  must  he-brag  of  hif  own 
doings,  nor  talk  of  the  business  of  other  man. 

. .VThe  householder  by  constructing  reservoirs  for 
holding. w.water,  by  ^planting  trees  on  the  roadsides) 


[ 4^ 

by  establishing  almshouses  for  men  and  animals, 
by  making  roads  and  building  bridges,  goes  to- 
wards the  same  goal  as  the  greatest  Yog'in!' 

This  is  one  part  of  the  doctrine  of  Karma- 
Yoga — activity,  the  duty  of  the  householder. 
There  is  a line  later  on,  where  it  says  that  “ if 
the  hduseholder  dies  in  battle,  fighting  for  his 
country  of  his  religion,  he  comes  to  the  same 
goal  as  the  Yogin  hy  meditation,'^  showing  there- 
by that  what  is  duty  for  one  is  not  duty  for 
another ; at  the  same  time,  it  does  not  say  that 
this  duty  is  lowering  and  the  other  .elevating ; 
each  duty  has  its  own  place  and  fitness,  and 
according  to  the  circumstances  in  which  we  are 
placed,  so  must  we  perform  our  duties. 

One  idea  comes  out  of  all  this,  the  con- 
demnation of  all  weakness.  This  is  a particular 
idea  in  all  our  teachings  which  I like,  either 
in  ^h^losophy,'  or  in  religion,  or  in  work.  If  yod 
read  tho  Vedas  you  will  find  this  word  always 
repeated— “ fearlessness  ” — ^fear  nothing.  Fear  is 
a :)^gn  of  weakness.  A man  mast  go  about  hid 
F 


[ 42  ] 


duties  without  taking  notice  of  the  sneers  and 
the  ridicule  of  the  world. 

If  a man  gives  up  and  goes  out  of  the  world 
to  worship  God,  he  must  not  think  that  those, 
W^ho  live  in  the  world  and  work  for  the*  good 
of  the  world,  are  not  worshipping  God;  neither 
must  those  who  live  in  the  world,  for  wife  and 
children,  think  that  those  who  give  up  the  world 
are  low  vagabonds.  Each  is  great  in  his  own 
place.  This  thought  I will  illustrate  by  a story. 

A certain  king  used  to  inquire  of  all  the 
Sannydstns  that  came  to  his  country,  Which 
is  the  greater  man — he  who  gives  up  the  world 
and  becomes  a Sannyasin,  or  he  who  lives  in 
the  world  and  performs  his  duties  as  a house- 
holder«?’'  Many  wise  men  sought  to  solve  the 
problem.  Some  asserted  that  the  Sannyasin 

A 

was  the  greater,  upon  which  the' king  demanded 
that  they  should  prove  their  assertion.  When 
they  could  not,  he  ordered  them  to  marry  and 
become  householders.  Then  others  came  and 
said  ”The  householder  who  performs  his  duties 


[ 43  ] 


is  the  greater  man/'  Of  them,  too,  the  king 
demanded  proofs.  When  they  could  not  give 
thetn,  he  made  them  also  settle  down  as  house- 
holders. 

At  last  there  came  a young  Sannyasin,  and 
the  king  similarly  inquired  of  him  also.  Ho 
answered,  “Each,  O king,  is  equally  great  in 
his  place."  “ Prove  this'  to  me,"  asked  the  king. 
“ I will  prove  it  to  you,"  said  the  Sannyasin, 
“but  you  must  first  come  and  live  as  I do  for 
a few  days,  that  I may  be  able  to  prove  to  you 
what  I say."  The  king  consented  and  followed 
the  Sannyasin  out  of  his  own  territory  and  passed 
through  many  other  territories  until  they  can\e 
at  last  to  another  kingdom.  In  the  capital  of 
that  kingdom  a great  ceremony  was  goiqg  on. 
The  king  and  the  Sannyasin  heard  the  sound 
of  drums  and  music,  and  heard  also  the  criers, 
crying ; the  people  were  assembled  in  the  streets 
in  gala  dress,  and  a great  proclamation  was 
being  made.  The  king  and  the  Sannyasin  stood 
thi^e  to  see  what  was  going  on.  The  crier  was.j 


[ 44.] 


prpclaiming  loudly  that  the  princess,  daughter  of 
the  king  of.  that  country,  was  going  to  choose  a 
husband  from  among  those  assembled  before  her. 

It  was  an  old  custom  in  India  for  princesses 
to, choose  husbands  in  this  way;  and  each  one 
of  them  naturally  had  certain  ideas  of  the  sort  of 
man  she  wanted  for  a husband ; some  would 
the  handsomest  man ; others  would  have  only 
the  most  learned  ; others  would  have  the  richest, 
and  so  on.  This  princess,  in  the  most  splendid 
array,  was  being  carried  on  a throne, , and 
the  announcement  was  made  by  criers  that 
the  princess  so-and-so  was  about  to  choose  her 
husband.  Then  all  the  princes  of  the  neighbour- 
hood put  . on  their  bravest  attire  and  presented 
themselves  before  her.  Sometimes  they  too  had 
their  own  criers  to  enumerate  their  advantages 
and  the  reasons  why  they  hoped  the  princess 
^would  choose  them.  As  the  princess  was  taken 
round  and  looked  at  them  and  heard  what  they 
had  to'  offer,  if  she  was  hot  pleased  with  what  she 
saw.  and,  heard,  she  said  to  her  bearers,  '"  Move 


r 45  ] 


on,’^  and  no  more  notice  was  taken  of  the  rejected 
suitors.  If,  however,  the  princess  was  pleased 
with  any  one  of  them  she  threw  a garland  of 
flowers  upon  him,  and  he  became  her  husband. 

The  princess  of  the  country  to  which  our  king 
and  the  Sannyasin  had  come  was  having  one  of 
these  interesting  ceremonies.  She  was  the  most 
beautiful  princess  in  , the  world,  and  the  husband 
of  the  princess  would  be  ruler* of  the  kingdom 
after  her  father’s  death.  The  idea  of  this  princess 
was  jto  marry  the  handsomest  man,  but  she  could 
not  for  a long  time,  find  the  right  one  to  please 
her.  Several  times  these  meetings  had  taken 
place,  and  yet  the  princess  had  not  selected  any 
one  for  her  husband.  This  meeting  was  the  most 
splendid  of  all ; more  people  than  ever  had  come 
to  it,  and  it  was  a most  gorgeous  scene.  The^ 
princess  came  in  on  a , throne,  and  the  bearers 
carried  her  from  place  to  place.  She  does  not; 
seem  to  care  for  any  one,  and  every  one,  becomes 
disappointed  that  this  meeting  also  is  to  bV  broken, 
up  without  any  one  being  chosen Just  jthen 


[ 46  ] 


comes  a young  man,  a Sannyasin,  as  handsome 
as  if  the  sun  had  come  down  to  the  earth,  and  he 
stands  in  one  corner  of  the  assembly,  watching 
what  is  going  on.  The  throne  with,  the  princess 
comes  near  him,  and  as  soon  as  she  sees  the 
beautiful  Sannyasin^  she  stops  and  throws  the 
garland  over  him.  The  young  Sannyasin  seizes 
the  garland  and  throws  it  off,  exclaiming,  ‘‘  What 
nonsense  do  you  mean  by  that  ? I am  a Sannyasin, 
What  is  marriage  to  me  ? The  king  of  that 
country  thinks  that  perhaps  this  man  is  poor,  and 
so  does  not  dare  to  marry  the  princess ; he  says 
to  him,  With  my  daughter  goes  half  my 
kingdom  now,  and  the  whole  kingdom  after  my 
death!’'  and  puts  the  garland  again  on  the 
Sannyasin,  The  young  man  throws  it  off  once 
more,  saying,  What  nonsense  is  this  ? I do  hot 
want  to  marry,"  and  walks  quickly  away  from  the 
a^^embly. 

' Now  the  princess  had  fallen  so  much  in  love 
with  this  young  man  that  she  said,  “ I must 
m^rry  this  man  or  I shall  die and  she  went  after 


[ 47  ] 


him  to  bring  him  back.  Then  our  other  Sannyasin, 
who  had  brought  our  king  there,  said  to  him, 
“King,  let’us  follow  this  pair;”  so  they  walked 
after  them,  but  at  a good  distance  behind.  The 
young  Sannyasin  who  had  refused  to  marry  the 
princess  walked  out  into  the  country  for  several 
miles,  when  he  came  to  a forest  and  struck  into 
it ; and  the  princess  followed  him,  and  the  other 
two  followed  them.  Now  this  young  Sannyasin 
Was  well  acquainted  with  that  forest  and  knew  all 
the  intricate  passages  in  it,  and  suddenly  he 
jumped  into  one  of  these  and  disappeared,  and 
the  princess  could  not  discover  him.  After  trying 
for  a long  time  to  find  him,  she  sat  down  under  a 
tree  and  began  to  weep,  for  she  dici  i^ot  know  the 
way  to  get  out  of  the  forest  again,  Thnsn  our 
king  and  the  other  Sannyasin  came  up  tp  her  and 
said,  “ Do  not  weep ; we  will  show  you  the  way 
out  of  this  forest,  but  it  is  too  dark  for,  us  to  find 
it  nbw.  Here  is  a big  tree ; let  us  rest  xinder  it, 
and  in  the  morning  we  will  go  early  and  show  you 
the  rpad  to  get  out.” 


[ 48  J 


Now  a little  bird  and  his  wife  and  three  little 
baby-birds  lived  on  that  tree,  in  a nest.  This  little 
bird  looked  down  and  saw  the  three  people  under 
the  tree  and  said  to  His  wife.  ‘‘  My  dear,  what 
shall  be  done ; here  are  some  guests  in  the  house, 
and  it  is. winter,  and  we  have  no  fire?”  So  he 
flew  away  and  got  a bit  of  burning  firewood  in  his 
teak  and  dropped  it  before  the  guests,  and  they 
added  fuel  to  it  and  made  a blaijing  fire.  But  the 
little  bird  was  not  satisfied.  He  said  again  to  his 
wife,  “ My  dear,  what  shall  we  do  ? There  is 
nothing  to  give  these  people  to  eat,  and  they  are 
hungry,  and  we  are  householders ; it  is  our  duty 
tC)  feed  any  one  who  comes  to  the  house.  I must 
do  what  I can,  I will  give  them  my  body.”  So 
he  pltiinged  down  into  the  midst  of  the  fire  and 
f)erished.  The  guests  saw  him  falling  and  tried 
to  save  him,  but  he  Was  too  quick  for  them  and 
dashed  into  the  fire  and  was  kill^. 

The  little  bird^s  wife  saw  what  her  Husband 
did,  and  she  said,  ‘^Here  are  three  persons  and 
only  one  little  bird  for  them  to  eat.  It- is  rmt 


[ 49  ]- 


enough ; it  is  my  duty  as  a wife  not  to  let  my 
husband’s  effort  be  in  vain;  let  them  have  my 
body  also,”  and  she  plunged  down  into  the  fire 
and  was  burned  to  death. 

Then  the  three  baby-birds,  when  they  saw 
what  was  done,  and  that  there  was  still  not  enough 
food  for  the  three  guests,  said,  Our  parents 
have  done  what  they  could  and  still  it  is  not 
enough.  It  is  our  duty  to  carry  on  the  work  of 

4 

our  parents  ; let  our  bodies  go  too.”  And  they  all 
dashed  down  into  the  fire  also. 

The  three  people  could  not  eat  these  birds, 
and  they  we*re  amazed  at  what  they  saw.  Some-f 
how  or  other  they  passed  the  night  without  food, 
and  in  the  morning  the  king  and  the  Sannyasin 
showed  the  princess  the  way,  and  she  wenj  back 
to  her  father. 

Then  the  Sannyasin  said  to  the  king,  King, 
you  haye  seen  that  each  is  great  in  his  own  place. 
If  you  want  to  live  in  the  world  live  like  those 
birds,  ready  at  any  moment  to  sacrifice  yourself 
for  others.  If  you  want  to  renounce  the  world  be 
G 


[ 5°  ] 


Ifke  that  yOung  man  to  whom  the  most  beautiful 
woman  and  a kingdom  were  as  nothing.  If  you 
want  to  be  a^householder  hold  your  life  a sacrifice 
for  the  welfare  of  others,  and  if  you  choose  the 
life  of  renunciation  do  not  even  look  at  beauty, 
and  money,  and  power.  Each  is  great  in  his  own 
place,  but  the  duty  of  the  one  is  not  the  duty  of 
the  other.’* 


CHAPTER  III, 

UNSELFISH  CHARITY  IS  THE  SECRET  OF 
^ SAVING  WORK. 

Helping  others  physically,  by  relieving  their 

I 

physical  needs,  is  indeed  great ; but  the  help  is 
greater,  according  as  the  need  is  greater  and 
according  as  the  help  is  far  reaching.  If  a man’s 
want  can  be  removed  for  an  hour,  it  is  helping 
him  indeed ; if  his  wants  can  be  reinoved  for  a 
year  it  will  be  more  help  to  him ; if  his  wants  can 
be  removed*  for  ever,  it  is  sorely  the  greatest  help 
that  can  be  given  him.  Spiritual  knowledge  is 
the  only  thing  that  can  remove  our  miseries  for 
ever ; any  other  knowledge  satisfied  wants  only 
for  a time.  If  the  nature  of  the  man  be  changed, 
then  alone  all  his  wants  will  vanish  for  ever.  It 
is  only  with  the  knowledge  of  the  spirit  that  the 
faculty  of  want  is  annihilated  for  ever ; so  helping 
man  spiritually  is  the  highest  help  that  can  be  given  , 
to  him;  he  who  gives*man  spiritual  knowledge 


[ 52  ] 


is  the  greatest  benefactor  of  fnankind,  and  therefore 
it  is  that  we  always  find  that  those  are  the  most 
powerful  of  men  who  have  helped  man  in  satisfy- 
ing his  spiritual  needs ; indeed  spirituality  is  the 
true  basis  of  all  our  activities  in  life.  A spiritually 
strong  and  sound  man  will  be  strong  in  every 
other  respect,  if  he  so  wishes ; and  until  there  is. 
spiritual  strength  in  mankind  even  physical  needs 
cannot  be  well  satisfied.  Next  to  spiritual  help 
.comes  intellectual  help ; the  gift  of  knowledge  is 
far  higher  than  the  giving  of  food  and  clothes ; it 
is  even  higher  than  giving  life  to  a man,  because 
the  real  life  of  man  consists  in  acquision  the  of 
the  knowledge  of  truth  ; ignorance  is  death,  know- 
ledge is  life.  Life  is  of  very  little  value,  if  it  is  a 
life  in  the  d'ark,  a life  groping  blindly  through 
ignorance  and  misery.  Next  in  order  comes,  of 
course,  helping  a man  physically.  Therefore,  in 
considering  the  question  of  our  helping  others,  we 
inust  always  bear  in  mind  not  to  commit  the 
' mistake  of  thinking  that  physical  help  is  the  only, 
help  that  can  be , given  b^  man  to  man ; physical 


[ 53  ] 


♦ 

help  is  the  last  and  the  least  of  its  kind,  because, 
there  is,  in  regard  to  it,  no  permanent  satisfaction. 
The  misery  that  I feel  when  I am  hungry  > is 
satisfied  by  eating,  but  hunger  returns  again  ; my 
misery  can  cease  altogether  only  when  I am 
satisfied  beyond  all  want.  Then  hunger  will  not 
make  me  miserable ; no  distress,  no  misery,  no 
sorrow  will  be  able  to  move  me.  That  help  which 
tends  to  make  us  strong  spiritually  is,  of  course, 
help  of  the  highest  value ; next  to  it  comes  intel- 
lectual help,  and  after  that  physical  help. 

The  miseries  of  the  world  cannot  be  cured  by 
simply  offering  physical  help;  until  man’s  nature 
changes,  these  physical  needs  will  always  arise, 
and  miseries  will  always  be  felt,  and  no  amount  of 
physical  help  given  to  the  world  will  cure  them 
completely.  The  only  solution  of  the  problem  of 
all  this  evil  and  misery  in  the  world  is  to  make 
mankind  pure.  Ignorance  is  the  mother  of  all  the 
evil  and  all  the  misery  we  see.  Let  men  have 
light,  let  them  be  spiritually  strong ; and  if  we  can 
accomplish  this,  if  all  mankind  becomes  pure  and 


[ 54  ] 


spiritvially  sttong  and  educated,  then  alone  will 
misery  cease  in  the  world,  and  not  before  then, 
We  may  convert  every  house  in  the  country  into 
a charity  asylum ; we  may  fill  the  land  with 
hospitals,  but  the  misery  of  man  will  still  continue 
io  exist  until  man’s  character  changes, 

We  read  in  the  Bhagavat-Gita  again  and 

♦ 

again  that  we  must  all  work  incessantly,  and  that 
all  work  is  by  nature  composed  of  good  and  evil. 
We  cannot  do  any  work  which  has  not  some  part 
of  good  somewhere;  there  cannot  be  any  work 
which  has  not  a tendency  to  cause  some  harm 
somewhere.  Every  work  that  is  done  must 
necessarily  be  a mixture  of  good  and  evil ; yet  we 
are  commanded  to  work  incessantly ; the  good  and 

o ' ^ 

the  evil  will  both  have  their  results,  will , produce 
^ejr  Kat^a ; the  good  action  will  entail  uporr  us 
good  effect ; the  bad  action,  bad  effect ; and  good 
and  bad.  are  both,  bondages  of  the  soul.  The 
(^utioBV  reached  ip  the  GtVo  in  regard  to  this 
be^dage-producing  naturp  of  work  is  that,  if  we 
do. dot  attach  .oursejves  to  the  work  we  4o,  it  will 


[ 55  J 


not  have  any  binding  effect  on  our  soul.  We  shaH 
try  to  understand  what  is  meant  by  this  “non- 
attachment to  work. 

This  is  the  one  great  central  idea  in  the  Gita ; 
to  do  work  incessantly,  but  to  be  not  attached  to 
it  or  its  results.  “ Samskara  can  be  translated 
very  nearly  by  inherent  tendency.  Using  the 
simile  of  a lake  for  the  mind,  every  ripple  or  every 
wave  that  rises  in  the  mind,  when  it  subsides,  does 
not  die  out  entirely,  but  leaves  a mark  t behind  ; 
and  there  is  the  future  possibility  of  that  wave 
coming  out  again.  This  mark,  whatever  may 
be  its  nature,  with  the  possibility  of  the  wave 
reappearing,  is  what  is  caHed  Samskara.  Every 
work  that  we  do,  every  movement  of  the  body, 
every  thought  that  we  think,  leaves  such  ah 
impression  on  the  mind-stuff,  and  even  when  such 
impressions  are  not  obvious  on  the  surface  they 
are  sufficiently  strong  to  Work  beneath  the  surface, 
su#-<ronsciously.  What  we  are  eve^y  moment  is 
determined  by  the  sum  total  , of  such  previous 
impressions  on  the  mind.  WHat  I am  just  at  th\i 


[ 56  ] 


moment  is  the  effect  of  the  sum  total  of  all  the 
impressions  due  to  my  past  life.  This*  is  really 
what  is  meant  by  character ; each  man’s  character 
is  determined  by  the  sum  total  of  these  impressions 
of  past  life  and  thought.  If  good  impressions 
prevail,  the  character  becomes  good ; if  bad  ones 
prevail,  it  becomes  bad.  If  a man  continuously 
hears  bad  words,  thinks  bad  thoughts,  does  bad 
actions,  his  mind  will  be  full  of  bad  impressions  or 
marks ; and  they,  unconsciously,  will  govern  the 
tendency  of  his  thought  ^nd  work.  In  fact,  these 
bad  impressions  are  always  working,  and  their 
expression  in  his  case  must  be  evil ; and  that  mart 
wjll  be  a bad  man ; he  cannot  help  it ; the  sum 
total  of  these  impressions  in  him  create  the  strong 
motive  power  for  the , doing  of  bad  actions ; he 
will  be  like  a machine  in  the  hands  of  his  impre- 
ssions, and  they  will  force  him  to  do  evil.  Similarly, 
if  a man  ^thinks  good  thoughts  and  does  good 
works,,  the  sum  total  of  his  motive-^making  mental 
impressions  will  be  good;  and  they,  in  a similaf 
manner,  will  force  him  to  do  good  even  in  spite  of 


[ 57 

himself^  When  a man  has  done  so  much  good 
work  and  thought  so  many  good  thoughts  that 
there  is  an  irresistible  tendency  in  his  nature  to  do 
good,  then,  even  if  he  wishes  to  do  evil,  his  mind, 
in  the  sum  total  of  its  tendencies,  will  not  allow 
him  to  do  so ; the  tendencies  will  turn  him  back 
from  evil ; he  cannot  but  be  wholly  under  the 
influence  of  the  good  tendencies.  When  such  is 

I 

the  case,  a man's  good  cliaracter  ^s  said  to  be 
established. 

As  the  tortoise  tucks  his  feet  and  head  inside 
of  lf!s  shell,  and  you  may  kill  him  and  break  him 
in  pieces,  and  yet  he  will  not  come  out,  even  so 
the  character  of  that  man  who  has  control  over 
his  motive  centres  and  organs  is  unchangeably 
established.  He  controls  his  own  inner  fprces, 
and  nothing  can  draw  them  out  ‘against  his  will. 
By  this  continuous  reflex  of  good  thoughts,  good 
impressions  moving  over  the  surface  of  the  mind, 
the  tendency  for  doing  good  becomes  strong  and 
the  result  we  feel  able  to  control  the  indriyas 
[the  sensory  and  motor  organs).  Thus  alone  will; 

H • . 


[ S8  ] 


character  be  established ; then  alone  you  get  to 
truth ; such  a man  is  safe  for  ever ; he  cannot  do 
kny  evil ; you  may  throw  him  anywhere ; you  may 
place  him  in  any  company ; there  will  be  no  danger 
for  him.  There  is  a still  higher  stage  than  having 
this  good  tendency,  and  that  is  the.  desire  for 
liberation.  You  must  remember  that  freedom  of 
the  soul  is  the  goal  of  all  our  Indian  Yog'as,  and 
each  of  theA  is  equally  productive  of  the  same 
result.  Just  by  work  men  may  get  to  where 
Buddha  got  largely  by  meditation  or  Christ  by 
{!)rayer.  Buddha  was  a working  Jnant ; Christ  was 
k Bhakta^  and  the  same  goal  was  reached  by 
both  of  them.  The  difficulty  is  here.  Liberation 
means  entirf  freedom — freedom  from  the  bondages 
of  good,  as  well  as  from  the  bondages  of  evil.  A 
golden  chain  is  as  much  a chain  as  an  iron  one. 
There  is  a thorn  in  my  finger,  and  I use  another 
thpm  to  take  the  first  thorn  Out,  and  when  f have 
taken  it  out  I throw  both  thorns  aside ; I have  no 
hecessity  for  keeping  the  second  thorn,  becairse 
both  are  thorns  after  all.  So  the  bad  tendencies 


[ 59  ] ■ 


are  to  be  counteracted  by  the  good  tendencies, 
and  the  bad  marks  on  the  mind  should  be  removed 
by  the  fresh  waves  of  good  impressions,  until  all 
that  is  evil  almost  disappears,  or  is  subdued  and 
held  in  control  in  a corner  of  the  mind ; but  after 
that,  the  good  tendencies  have  also  to  be  con- 
quered; only  thus  the  “attached”  becomes  the 
“unattached.”  Work;  but  let  not  the  action  or 
the  thought  produce  any  strong  impression  on  the 
mind;  let  the  ripples  come  and  go;  let  huge 
action  proceed  from  the  muscles  and  the  brain, 
but  let  thefn  not  make  any  deep  impression  on 
your  soul.  How  can  this  be  done  ? We  may  see 
it  easily  enough  that  the  impression  of  any  action, 
to  which  we  attach  ourselves,  remains  lastingly. 

I may  meet  hundreds  of  persons  during  the 
day,  and  among  them  meet  also  one  whom  I love ; 
and  when  I retire  at  night  I may  try  to  think  of 
all  the  faces  I saw,  but  only  that  face  comes 
before  the  mind— the  face  which  I met  perhaps 
Ofily  for  one  minute,  and  which  I loyed ; all  the 
Others  have  vanished.  My  attachment  to  this 


[ 6o  ] 


particular  person  caused  a deeper  impression  on 
my  mind  than  all  the  other  faces.  Physiologically, 
the  impressions  have  all  been  the  same ; every  one 
of  the  faces  that  I saw  got  itself  pictured  on  the 
retina,  and  the  brain  took  the  pictures  in,  and  yet 
there  was  no  similarity  of  effect  upon  the  mind. 
But  in  the  case  of  that  man,  of  whom  I caught, 
perhaps,  only  a glimpse,  a deeper  impression  was 
made,  because  unlike  his  face,  the  other  faces 
found  no  favourable  association  in  my  mind ; most 
of  them,  perhaps,  were  entirely  new  faces  about 
which  I had  never  thought  before,  but  that  one 
face,  of  which  I got  only  a glimpse,  somehow 
found  favourable  associations  inside.  Perhaps  I 
had  pictured  him  in  my  mind  for  years,  knew 
hundreds  of  things  about  him,  and  this  one  new 
vision  of  him  found  hundreds  of  kindred  things 
inside  my  mind,  and  all  these  associations  w^re 
aroused;  this  impression  on  my  mental  vision 
was  a hundred  times  more  than  the  seeing 
of  all  ‘ those  different  faces  together,  and,  suoh 
feeing  the*  case,  a tremendous  effect  would  be 


[ 6.  ] 

at  once  and  naturally  produced  by  it  upon  the 
mind. 

Therefore,  be  “ unattached ; ” let  things  work ; 
let  brain  centres  work ; work  incessantly,  but  let 
not  even  a single  ripple  conquer  the  mind.  Work 
as  if  you  were  a stranger  in  this  land,  a sojourner ; 
work  incessantly,  but  do  not  bind  yourselves  to 
the  things  of  this  world ; bondage  is  terrible.  This 
world  is  not  our  habitation,  it  is  only  one  of  the 
many  stages  through  which  we  are  passing. 
Remember  that  great  saying  of  the  Sankhya, 
“ The  whole  of  nature  is  for  the  soul,  not  the  soul 
for  nature,’'  The  very  reason  of  nature's  existence 
is  for  the  education  of  the  soul ; it  has  no  other 
meaning ; it  is  there  because  the  soul  must  have 
knowledge,  and  through  knowledge  free  itself.  If 
we  remember  this  always,  we  shall  never  be 
attached  to  nature  j we  shall  know  that  nature  is  a 
book  in  which  we  are  to  read,  and  that  when  we 
have  gained  the  required  knowledge,  the  book  is 
of  no  more  value  to  us.  Instead  of  that,  however, 
we  are  identifying,  ourselves  with  nature  j we  are 


[ 62  ] 


thinking  that  the  soul  is  for  nature,  that  the  spirit 
is  for  the  flesh,  and,  as  the  common  saying  has  it, 
we  think  that  man  '‘lives  to  eat  and  not  “eats 
to  live ; ” we  are  continually  making  this  mistake ; 
we  are  regarding  nature  as  ourselves  and  are 
becoming  attached  to  it;  and  as  soon  as  this 
attachment  comes,  there  is  the'  deep  impression 
on  the  soul,  which  binds  us  down  and  makes  us 
Work  not  for  freedom  but  like  slaves. 

The  whole  gist  of  this  teaching  is  that  you 
should  work  like  a master  and  not  as  a slave  ; 
work  incessantly,  but  do  not  do  slave’s  work.  Do 
you  not  see  how  everybody  works  ? Nobody  can 
bge  altogether  at  rest;  ninety-nine  per  cent,  of 
mankind  work  like  slaves,  and  the  result  is  misery ; 
it  is  ^11  selfish  work.  Work  through  freedom  ! 
Work  through  Jove ! The  word  love  is  very  difficult 
to  understand;  lov^  never  comes  until  there  ip 
freedom.  There  is  no  true  love  possible  m the 
slave.  If  you  buy  a slave  and  tie  him  down  in- 
chains  and  make  him  Work  for  you,  he  will  worft 
like  a drudge,  but  there  will  be  m love  in  him. 


[ 63  J 


So  when  w'e  ourselves  work  for  the  things  of  the 
world  as  slaves,  there  can  be  no  love  in  us,  and 
Our  work  is  not  true  work.  The  same  thing 
applies  to  the  work  done  for  relatives  and  friends, 
more  to  work  done  for  our  own  selves.  Selfish 
work  is  slave’s  work ; and  here  is  a proof  whether 
any  work  is  selfish  or  not.  Every  act  of  love 
brings  happiness  with  it ; there  can  be  no  true  act 
of  love  which  does  not  bring  peace  and  blessed- 
ness as  the  result  of  its  reaction.  Real  existence, 
real  knowledge,  and  real  love  are  eternally 
connected  with  one  another,  and  in  fact  form 
three  in  one  : where  one  of  them  is,  the  others 
also  must  be ; they  are  the  three  aspects  of  the 
one  without  a second — the  Existence- Knowledge- 
Bliss;  When  that  existence  becomes  relative,  we 
See  it  as  the  world ; that  knowledge  becomes  in 
its  turn  modified  into  the  knowledge  of  the  things 
6f  the  world ; and  that  bliss  forms  the  foundation 
of  all  true  love  known  to  the  heart  bf  man. 
Therefore  true  love  can  never  react  so  as  to 
t^auise  pain  either  to  the  lover  or  to  the  beloved 


[ 64  ] 


Suppose  a man  loves  a woman ; he  wishes  to  have 
her  all  to  himself  and  feels  extremely  jealous  about 
her  every  movement ; he  wants  her  to  sit  near  him, 
to  stand  near  him,  and  to  ea^t  and  move  at  his 
bidding.  He  is  a slave  to  her  and  wishes  to  have 
her  as  his  slave.  That  is  not  love ; it  is  a kind  of 
morbid  affection  of  the  slave,  falsely  insinuating 
itself  as  love.  It  cannot  be  love,  because  it  is 
painful ; if  she  does  not  do  what  he  wants,  it 
brings  him  pain.  With  love  there  is  no  painful 
reaction ; love  only  brings  a reaction  of  bliss  ; if  it 
does  not,  it  is  not  love ; we  are  then  mistaking 
something  else  for  love.  When  you  have  suc- 
ceeded in  loving  your  husband,  your  wife,  your 
children,  the  whole  world,  the  universe,  in  such  a 
manner  that  there  is  no  reaction  of  pain  or  jealousy, 

no.selfish  feeling,  then  you  are  in  a fit  state  to  .b© 
% 

unattached. 

/Krishna  says,  “Look  at  me,  Arjuna!  Ifl 
atop  from  work  for  one.  moment  the  whole  universe 
iyi|j.  <iie.  Yet  I have  nothing,  to  gain  from  the 
lam  the  one  Lord;  I have  nothing  to 


[ 65  ] 


gain  from  work;  but  why  do  I work?  Because  I 
love  the  world.”  God  is  unattached  because  He 
loves  ; that  kind  of  real  love  makes  us  unattached. 
Wherever  there  is  mere  worldly  attachment^  the 
tremendous  clinging  to  the  things  of  the  world, 
you  must  know  that  it  is  all  physical,  a sort  of 
physical  attraction  between  sets  of  particles  of 
matter,  something  that  attracts  two  bodies  nearer 
and  nearer  all  the  time,  and  if  they  cannot  get 
nfar  enough  produces  pain ; but  where  there  is 
real  love  it  does  not  rest  on  physical  attachment 
at  all.  Loving  persons  may  be  a thousand  miles 
away  from  One  another,  true  love  will  be  all  the 
same ; it  does  not  die ; and  there  will  never  be  from 
it  any  painful  reaction. 

To  attain  this  unattachment  is  almosta  life^ 
work,  but  as  soon  as  we  get  to  this  point  we  attain 
the  goal  of  love  and  become  free ; the  bondage  .of 
tiature  falls  from  us,  and  we  sec  nature  as  it  is ; 
nature  forges  no  more  chains  for  us ; wc  stand 
entirely  free  and  take  not  the  results  of  work  into 
consideration  ; who  tljien  cares  for  what  the  results 


t 66  ] 


may  be?  The  man  who  works  through  freedom 
and  love  need  not  care  for  results,  as  he  is  himself 
altogether  unselfish  and  his  work  cannot  react  so 
as  to  produce  pain  anywhere. 

Do  you  ask  anything  from  your  children  in 
return  for  what  you  have  given  them  ? It  is  your 
duty  to  work  for  them,  and  there  the  matter  ends. 
Whatever  you  wish  to  do  for  a particular  person, 
a city,  Or  a state,  do  it  by  all  means,  but  assume 
the  same  attitude  as  you  have  towards  ySir 
children-— expect  nothing  in  return.  If  you  can 
incessantly  take  the  positioa  in  which  you  are 
always  the  giver,  in  which  everything  given  by 
you  is  a free  offering  to  the  world,  without  any 
thought  of  any  return,  then  will  not  your  work 
bind  yK>\x  by  attachment.  Attachment  comes  only 
where  we  expect  something  in  return  for  wh^t 
we  do. 

( If  working  like  slaves  results  in  selfishness^  ahd 
attachitient  to  results,  working  as  masters  of  bur 
own  minds  gives  rise  to  the  bliss  of  unatmchrnent* 
We  often  talk  of  right  arid  justice,  but  we  find 


[.67  ] 


that  in  the  world  right  and  justice  are  dealt  with 
like  mere  baby’s  talk.  There  are  only  two  things^ 
that  are  positively  active  in  guiding  the  conduct 
of  men ; they  are  might  and  mercy.  The  exercise 
of  might  is  invariably  the  exercise  of  selfishness. 
All  men  and  women  try  to  make  the  most  of 
whatever  power  or  advantage  they  have.  Mercy 
is  heaven  itself ; to  be  good  we  have  all  to  be 
merciful.  Even  justice  and  right  and  might  stand 
cm  mercy.  All  thought  of  obtaining  any^  return 
for  the  work  we  do  hinders  our  spiritual  progress ; 
nay,  in  the  end  they  bring  much  misery  in  their 
train.  It  is  only  work  that  is  done  as  a free-will 
offering  to  humanity  and  to  nature  that  does  not 
bring  with  it  any  binding  attachment  There  is 
another  way  in  which  this  idea  of  mercy  and  self-, 
less  charity  can  be  put  into  practice ; that  is,  by 
looking  upon  work  as  worship”  in  case  we 
believe  in  a personal  God.  Here  we  give  up  all 
the  fruits  of  our  work  unto  the  Lord ; agd,  wor- 
s,hippir^  Him  thus,  we  have  no  right  to  expect 
anytliing  from  m^kind  for  the  Work  we  da  Thje 


[ .68.] 


Lord  himself  works  incessantly  and  is  ever  with- 
out attachment.  Just  as  water  cannot  wet  the 
lotus  leaf,  so  work  cannot  bind  the  unselfish  man 
by  giving  rise  to  attachment  to  results.  The 
self-less  and  unattached  man  may  go  into  the 
very  heart  of  a crowded  and  sinful  city  j he  will 
not  thereby  become  mixed  in  sin. 

This  idea  of  complete  self-sacrifice  is  illustrated 
in  the  following  story : — After  the  battle  of 
Kuruk|hetra  the  five  Pandava  brothers  performed 
a great  sacrifice  and  made  very  large  gifts  to  the 
poor.  All  the  people  expressed  amazement  at 
the  greatness  and  richness  of,  the  sacrifice,  and 
said  that  such  a sacrifice  the  world  had  never 
seen  before.  But,  after  the  ceremony,  there  came 
a little  mungoose ; half  his  body  was  golden,  and 

o 

the  other  half  was  brown ; and  he  began  to  roll  on 
the  floor  of  the  sacrificial  hall.  Then  he  said  tq 
those  around,  '*You  are  all  liars;  this  is  nq 
sacrifice.?  “What!”  they  exclaimed,  “you  say 
this  is  no  sacrifice ; do  you  not  know  how  money 
and  jewels  were  poured  out  upon  the  poor  and 


[ 69  ] 


every  one  became  rich  and  happy  ? This  was  the 
most  wonderful  sacrifice  any  man  ever  performed.'' 
But  the  mungoose  said,  ^Vjhere  was  once  a little 
village,  and  in  it  there  dwelt  a poor  Brahmin, 
with  his  wife,  his  son  and  his  son's  wife.  They 
were  very  poor  and  lived  on  alms  gained  by 
preaching  and  teaching,  for  which  men  made 
small  gifts  to  them.  There  came  in  that  land  a 
three  years'  famine,  and  the  poor  Brahmin 
suffered  more  than  ever.  At  last  for  five  d^s  the 
family  starved,  but  on  the  sixth  day  the  father 
brought  home  a little  barley  flour,  which  he  fiad 
been  fortunate  enough  to  find,  and  he  divided  it 
into  four  parts,  one  for  each  member  of  the 
family.  They  prepared  it  for  their  meal,  and  just 
as.  they  were  about  to  eat  it  a knock  came  at  the 
door.  The  father  opened  it,  and  there  stood  a 
guest.  Now  in  India  a guest  is  a sacred  person  j 
he  is  as  a god  for  the  time  being,  and  must  be 
treated  as  such.  So  the  poor  Brahmin  said, 
‘ Come  in,  sir ; you  are  welcome.'  He  set  before 
the  guest  his  own  portion  of  the  food,  and  the 


[ 7®  ] 


guest  quickly  ate  it  up,  and  then  said,  ‘ Oh,  sirj 
you  have  killed  me ; I have  been  starving  for  ten 
days,’  and  this  little  l^it  has  but  increased  my 
hunger.^  Then  the  wife  said  to  her  husband, 
‘ Giv6  him  my  share,  ^ but  the  husband  said,  ‘ Not 
^o.’  The  wife,  however,  insisted,  saying,  ‘ Here 
is  a poor  man,  and  it  is  our  duty  as  householders 
to  see  that  he  is  fed,  and  it.  is  my  duty  as  a wife 
to  give  him  my  portion,  seeing  that  you  have  no 
more  to  offer  him/  Then  she  gave  her  share  to 
the  guest,  and  he  ate  it  up,  and  said  he  was  still 
burning  with  hunger.  So  the  son  said,  ‘ Take  my 
portion  also;  it, is  the  4pty  of  a son  to  help  his 
father  to  fulfil  his  obligations/  The  guest  ate 
that,  but  remained  ^still  unsatisfied ; so  the  son’s 
wife  gave  him  her  portion  also.  That  was  suffix 
cient,  and  the  guest  dep^ed,  blessing  them* 
That  night  those  four  people  .died  of  starvation. 
A few  granules  of  that  flour  h^d  fallen  on  the  floor, 
and  when  I rolled  my  body  on.  them  half  of  it 
became  golden,  as  you  see  it  Since  then  I have 
been  all  over  the  world,  hoping  to  find  another 


[ 71  ] 


sacrifice  like  that,  but  nowhere  have  I found  one'^ 
tiowhere  else  has  the  other  half  of  my  body  been 
turned  into  gold,  that  is  why  I say  this  is  no 
sacrifice.” 

This  idea  of  charity  is  going  out  of  India; 
grand  men  are  becoming  less  and  less.  When  I 
was  first  learning  English  I read  an  English  story 
book,  where  the  first  story  was  about  a dutiful 
boy  who  had  gone  Out  to  work  and  had  giveri 
some  of  his  money  to  his . old  mother,  and  this 
was  praised  in  three  or  four  pages.  What  was 
that  after  all  ? No  Hindu  boy  can  ever  under- 
stand the  great  moral  merit  of  that  story.  Now 
I understand  it  when  I hear  the  Western  idea— 
every  man  for  himself.  And  some  irien  take 
everything  for  themselves,  and  fathers  and  mothers 
and  wives  and  children  go  to  the  wall.  That 
should  never  and  nowhere  be  the  ideal  of  the 
householder. 

Now  you  see  what  Karma-Yoga  means ; even 
at  the  point  of  death  to  help  any  one,  without 
asking  questions.  Be  cheated  millions  of  times 


[ 72  ] 


and-  never  ask  a question,  and  never  think  of 
what  you  are  doing.  Never  vaunt  of  your  gifts  to 
the  poor  or  expect  their  gratitude,  but  rather  be 
grateful  to  them  for  giving  you  the*  occasion  of 
practising  charity  on  them.  Thus  it  is  plain  that 
to  be  an  ideal  householder  is  a much  more  difficult 
task  than  to  be  an  ideal  Sannyasin ; the  true  life 
of  work  is  indeed  as  hard  as,  if  not  harder  than, 
the  equally  true  life  of  renunciation. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

WHAT  IS  DUTY  ? 

It  is  necessary  in  the  study  of  Karma-Yoga 
to  know  what  work  is,  and  with  that  comes 
naturally  the  question  what  duty  is.  If  I have 
to  do  something  I must  first  know  my  duty  in 
regard  to  it,  and  then  it  is  that  I can  do  it  well. 
The  idea  of  duty,  as  already  shewn,  is  so  different 
in  different  nations.  The  Mohammedan  says  that 
what  is  written  in  his  book,  the  Quran,  is  his  duty ; 
the  Hindu  says  that  what  is  in  his  book,  the 
Vedas,  is  his  duty ; and  the  Christian  says  that 
what  is  in  his  Bible  is  his  duty.  So  we  find  that 
there  are  and  must  be  varied  ideas  of*  duty, 
differing  according  to  different  states  in  life,  atid 
differing  with  different  historical  periods  and  with 
different  nations.  The  term  ^‘duty,"  like  every 
other  universal  abstract  term,  it:  is  impossible 
clearly  to  define ; we  can  only  get  an  idea  of  it  by 
describing  its  surroundings  and  by  knowing  its 
J 


[ 74  ] 


practical  operations  and  results.  When  certain 
things  occur  before  us  we  have  all  a natural  or 
trained  impulse  to  act  in  a certain  manner  towards 
them ; when  this  impulse  comes  the  min3  begins 
.to  think  about  the  situation ; sometimes  it  thinks 
that  it  is  good  to  act  in  a particular  manner  under 
the  given  conditions,  at  other  times  it  thinks  that 
it  is  wrong  to  act  in  the  same  manner  even  in  the 
very  same  circumstances.  The  ordinary  idea  of 
duty  everywhere  is  that  every  good  man  follows 
the  dictates  of  his  own  mind,  or  conscience  as  it 
is  more  frequently  characterised. " But  what  is  it 
that  makes  an  act  a duty?  If  a Christian  finds 
a*  piece  of  beef  before  him  and  does  not  eat  it  to 
save  his  own  life,  or  will  not  give  it  to  save  the 
life  of  •another  man,  he  is  sure  to  feel  that  he  has 
not  done  his  duty.  But  if  a Hindu  dares  to  eat 
that  piece  of  beef  or  to  give  it  to  another  Hindu, 
he  is  equally -sure  to,  feel  that,  he  too  has  mot 
done  his  duty ; the-Hindu*s  training  and  education 
make  him  feel  that  way.  In  the  last  century 
there  were  recognised  bands  of  robbers  iti  India 


[ 75  ] 


called  Thugs ; they  thought  it  was  their  duty  to 
j kill  any  man  they  could  and  take  away  all  His 
' money ; the  larger  the  number  of  men  they  killed 
* thus,  the  better  they  thought  they  were.  Ordin- 
arily if  a man  goes  out  into  the  street  and  shoots 
down  another  man,  he  is  apt  to  feel  sorry  for  it, 
thinking  that  he  had  done  wrong,  and  that  he 
had  not  clearly  done  his  duty.  But  if  the  very 
same  man,  standing  as  a fighting  soldier  in  the 
ranks  of  his  regiment,  kills  not  one  man  but 
twenty  men  by  shooting  them  down,  he  is  certain 
to  feel  glad  and  think  that  he  did  his  duty  re- 
markably well.  Therefore  it  must  be  easy  to  see 
that  it  is  not  the  thing  done  that  defines  a duty. 
'To  give  an  objective  definition  of  duty  is  thus 
e.ntirely  impossible ; there  is  no  such  thing  as  an 
objectively  defined  duty.  Yet  there  is  duty  from 
the  subjective  side ; any  action  that  makes  us  go 
Godward  is  a good  action,  and  is  our  duty ; any 
action  tliat  makes  us  go*  downward  is  an  evil 
action,  and  is  not  our  duty.  From  the  subjective 
stand-point  we  may  see  that  certain  ,acts  have  a 


[ 76  ] 


tendency  to  exalt  and  ennoble  us,  while  cert;ain 
other  acts  have  a tendency  to  degrade  and  to 
brutalise  us.  But  it  is  not  possible  to  make  out 
with  certainty  which  acts  have  which  kind  of 
tendency  in  relation  to  all  persons  of  all  sorts  apd 
conditions.  There  is,  however,  only  one  idea  of 
duty  which  has  been  universally  accepted  by  all 
mankind,  of  all  ages  and  sects  and  countries,  and 
that  has  been  summed  up  in  a Sanskrit  aphorism 
thus: — ‘‘Do  not  injure  any  being;  not  injuring 
any  being  is  virtue ; injuring  any  being  is  vice.” 
This  is  the  only  universal  and  objective  definition 
of  duty  that  we  can  find.  As  to  the  subjective 
aspect  of  duty  we  cannot  say  more  than  that  the 
spirit  in  which  certain  acts  are  done  happens  to 
be  elevating  and  ennobling,  while  the  spirit  in 
which  certain  other  acts,  are  done  tends  to  lower 
us  often  even  in  our  own  esteem. 

The  Bhagavad-Gita  frequently  alludes  to 
duties  dependent  upoif  birth  and  position  in.  life. 
Birth  and  position  in  life  and  in  society  largely 
determine  the  mental  and  .moral  attitude  of^ 


[ 77  1 


individuals  towards  the  various  activities  of  life. 
It  is  therefore  our  duty  to  do  that  work  which  will 
exalt  and  ennoble  us  in  aicordance  with  the  ideals 
and  activities  of  the  society  in  which  we  are  born. 
But  it  must  be  particularly  remembered  that  the 
same  ideals  and  activities  do  not  prevail  in  all 
societies  and  countries ; our  ignorance  of  this  is 
the  main  cause  of  much  of  the  hatred  of  one 
nation  against  another.  An  American  thinks  that 
.whatever  an  American  does  in  accordance  with 
the  custom  of  his  country  is  the  best  thing  to  do, 
and  that  whoever  does  not  follow  his  custom 
must  be  a very  wicked  man.  A Hindu  thinks 
that  his  customs  are  the  only  right  ones  and  ar^ 
the  best  in  the  world,  and  that  whosoever  does 
not  obey  them  must  be  the  most  wickecj  man 
living.  This  is  quite  a natural  mistake  into  which 
we  all  fall  easily.  It  is  a very  harmful  mistake, 
and  is  the  tause  of  more  than  half  of  the  unchari- 
tableness to  be  foun^  in  the  World.  When  I came 
to  this  country  and  was  going  through  the  Chicago 

I 

Fair,  a man  came  behind  me  and  gave  a very 


[ 78  ] 


violent  pull  at  my  turban.  I looked  back  and  saw 
that  he  was  . a very  gentlemanly-looking  man, 
neatly  dressed.  I talk^  to  him  in  English,  and 
when  I did  that  he  became  very  Inuch  abashed, 
apparently  because  he  did  not  think  I could  talk 
English.  On  another  occasion  in  the  same  Fair 
another  man  gave  me  a push.  * When  I asked 
him  the  reason  why  he  did  so,  he  also  became 
^abashed  and  at  last  stammered  out  an  apology 
and  said,  “ Why  do  you  dress  that  way  ! The 
sympathies  of  these  men  were  limited  within  the 
narrow  range  of  their  own  language  and  their  own 
fashion  of  dress.  That  very  man  who  asked  me 
^hy  I did  not  dress  as  he  did,  and  wanted  to 
ill-treat  me  because  of  my  dress  is  in  all  probability 
a very^good  man;  he  may  be  a good  (father  and  a 
good  citizen  in  everyway;  but  the  kindliness  of 
his  nature  died  out  as  soon  as  he  saw  a man  in  a 
different  dress.  Strangers  are  exploited  in  all 
countries,  because  they  do  not  generally  know 
how  to  defend  themselves  in  the  new  situation ; 
therefore  th^y  carry  home  false  impressions ‘of  the 


[ 79  ] 


peoples  they  see.  Sailors,  soldiers  and  traders 
behave  in  foreign  lands  in  very  queer  ways, 
although  they  would  not  dream  of  doing  any 
such  thing  in  their  own  country ; perhaps  this  is 
why  the  Chinese  call  Europeans  and  Americans 
foreign  devils.’^ 

Therefore  the  one  point  we  ought  to  remember 
is  that  we  should  always  try  to  see  the  duty  of 
others  through  their  own  eyes,  and  never  wish  to 
judge  the  customs  of  other  races  or  other  peoples 
by  our  own  standard.  I am  not  the  standard  of 
the  universe.”  This  i^  the  great  lesson  to  learn, 
I have  to  accommodate  my  self  to  the  world, 
and  not  the  world  to  me.”  Therefore  we  see  that 
environments  change  the  nature  of  our  duties,  and 
doing  in  the  best  way  that  duty,  whicK  is  oiirs  at 
any  particular  time,  is  the  best  thing  we  can  do 
in  this  world.  Let  us  do  that  duty  which  is  ours 
by  birth ; and  when  we  have  done  that,  let  us  do 
the  duty  which  is  ours  by  our  position  in  life  and 
ih  society.  Each  man  is  placed  in  some  position 
or  other  in  life,  and  must  do  the  duties  of  that 


[ 8o  ] 


position.  There  is,  however,  one  great  danger  in 
human  nature,  viz,  that  man  never  looks  clearly 
at  himself.  He  thinks  he  is  quite  as  fit  to  be  on 
the  throne  as  the  king.  Even  if  he  is,  he  must 
first  show  that  he  has  fully  discharged  the  duty 
of  his  own  position ; and  when  he  has  done  that, 
higher  duties  will  come  to  him.  Let  a man  show 
to  the  world  that  he  is  strong  enough  to  do  well 
the  little  task  that  has  been  assigned  to  him ; and 
when  he  has  done  that,  another  and  a higher  task 
will  come  to  him.  When  we  begin  to  work  earn- 
estly in  the  world,  nature  gives  us  blows  right 
and  left  and  soon  enables  us  to  find  out  our  due 
fjosition.  No  man  can  long  occupy  satisfactorily 
a position  for  which  he  is  not  fit.  There  is  no 
use  ill  grumbling  against  nature^s  adjustment  He 
who  does  the  lower  work  is  not  therefore  a lower 
.tnan.  No  man  should  be  judged  By  the  mere 
liature  of  his  duties,  but  all  are  to  be  judged  by  the 
Inanner  and  the  spirit  in  which  they  perform  them. 

Later  on  we  shall  find  that  even  this  idea  of 
has  to  be  changed,  and  that  the  greatest  and 


[ 8'  ] 


the  noblest  work  is  done  only  when  there  is  almost 
no  motive  urging  us  from  behind.  Yet  it  is  work 
through  the  sense  of  duty  that  leads  us  to  work 
without  any  idea  of  duty ; when  work  will  become 
worship — nay,  something  higher,  then  work  will 
stand  alone  for  its  own  sake.  But  that  is  the 
highest  ideal,  and  the  way  to  it  lies  through  duty. 
We  shall  find  that  the  philosophy  behind  all 
conceptions  of  duty,  whether  it  be  in  the  form  of 
ethics  or  of  love,  is  the  same  as  in  every  kind  of 
Yoga — ^^the  object  being  the  attenuating  of  the 
lower  self  so  that  the  real  higher  self  may  shine 
forth  in  glory ; to  circumscribe  the  frittering  away 
of  energies  on  the  lower  planes  of  existence,  so 
that  the  soul  may  manifest  itself  on  the  highet 
and  grander  planes.  This  is  accomplished  by  the 
continuous  denial  of  low  desires,  which  duty 
rigorously  requires.  The  whole  organization  of 
society  has  thus  been  developed  consciously  or 
unconsciously  on  the  land  of  actions  and  in  the 
fiejd  of  experience,  where,  by  limiting  the  low 
desires  of  selfishness,  we  open  the  way  to  an 
K 


[ 82  ] 


unlimited  expansion  of  the  real  higher  nature  of 
man.  It  is  a well  ascertained  law  of  duty  that, 
subjectively  looked  at,  selfishness  and  sensuality 
lead  to  vice  and  wickedness,  while  unselfish  love 
and  self-control  lead  to  the  development  of  virtue. 

And  duty  is  seldom  sweet.  It  is  only  when 
love  greases  its  wheels  that  it  runs  smoothly ; else 
it  is  a continuous  friction.  What  parents  can 
otherwise  do  their  duties  to  their  children  ? What 
children  to  their’  parents  ? What  husband  to  his 
wife  ? What  wife  to  her  husband  ? Do  we  not 
meet  with  cases  of  friction  every  day  in  our  lives  ? 
Duty  is  sweet  only  through  love,  and  love  shines 
aJone  in  freedom.  Yet  is  it  freedom  to  be  a slav^ 
to  the  senses,  to  anger,  to  jealousies  and  a hundred 
other  petty  things  that  must  and  do  occur  every 
day  in  human  life  ? In  all  these  little  roughnesses 
that  we  meet  with  in  life,,the  highest  expression 
of  freedom  and  of  power  is  to  forbear.  Women, 
slaves  to  their  own  irritable,  jealous  tempers,  are 
often  apt  to*  attribute  blame  to  their  husbands, 
and  assert  their  own  ‘freedom,”  as  they  think, 


[ 83  ] 


not  knowing  that  they  are  only  proving  thus  that 
they  are  slaves.  So  it  is  with  husbands  who  are 
eternally  finding  fault  with  their  wives. 

Chastity  is  the  first  virtue  in  man  or  woman, 
and  the  man  who,  however  he  may  have  strayed 
away,  cannot  be  brought  to  the  right  path  by  a 
gentle  and  loving  and  chaste  wife,  is  indeed  very 
rare.  This  world  is  not  yet  as  bad  as  that.  I 
have  heard  much  about  brutal  husbands  all  over 
the  world  and  about  the  impurity  of  men,  but  my 
experience  shows  that  there  are  quite  as  many 
brutal  and  impure  women  as  men.  If  the  women 
of  America  were  as  good  and  pure  as  their  own 
constant  assertions  would  lea-d  a foreigner  to 
believe,  I am  perfectly  satisfied  that  there  would 
not  be  one  impure  man'  in  this  country. . With 
whom  could  men  then  become  impure  ? What 
brutality  is  there  whidh  purity  ai?d  chastity  cannot 
conquer?  A good,  chaste  wife,  who  thinks  of 
every  other  man  except  her  own  husl^and  as  her 
child  and  has  the  attitude  of  a mother  towards  all 
men,  will  grow  so  great  in' the  power  of  her  purity 


[ 84  ] 


that  there  cannot  be  ;a  single  man,  however  brutal, 
who  will  not  breathe  an  atmosphere  of  holiness  in 
her  presence.  Similarly  every  husband  must  look 
upon  all  women,  except  his  own  wife,  in  the  light 
' of  his  own  mother  or  daughter  or  sister..  That 
man,  again,  who  wants  to  be  a teacher  of  religion 
must  look  upon  every  woman  as  his  mother,  and 
always  behave  towards  her  as  such. 

The  position  of  the  mother  13  the  highest  in 
the  world,  as  it  is  the  one  place  in  which  we  are 
to  learn  and  exercise  the  greatest  unselfishness: 
The  love  of  God  is  the  only  love  that  is  higher 
than  a mother’s  love;  all  other  kinds  of  love 
are  lower.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  mother  to  think 
of  her  children  first  and  then  of  herself.  But, 
instead  of  that,  if  the  parents  are  always  thinking 
of  themselves  first,  even  in  such  small  things  as 
food,  taking  the  best  portidns  to  themselves  and 
.fetting  the  children  take  what  they  can,  the  result 
is  that  the  relation  between  parents  and  children 
befcotnes  as  good  as  the  relation  between  birds 
and  their  young  ones  who,  as  soon  as  they  tire 


[ 8s  ] 


fledged,  do  not  recognize  any  parents,  blessed, 
indeed,  is  the  man  who  is  able  to  look  upon 
woman  as  the  representative  of  the  motherhood 
of  God.  Blessed,  indeed,  is  the  woman  to  whom 
man  represents  the  fatherhood  of  God.  Blessed 
are  the  children  who  look  upon  their  parents  as 
Divinity  manifested  on  earth. 

The  only  way  to  rise  is  by  doing  the  duty  that 
is  in  our  hands  now,  and  making  ourselves 
stronger  ; and  thus  go  on  growing  higher,  and 
higher,  until  we  reach  the  highest  state.  Nor  is 
duty  of  any  kind  to  be  slighted.  I say  again  that 
a man  who  does  the  lower  work  is  not,  therefore, 
a lower  man,  than  he  who  does  the  higher  work ; 
a man  should  not  be  judged  by  the  nature  of  his 
duties,,  but  by  the  manner  in  which  he  does  them. 

His  manner  of  doing  them  and  his  power  to  do 
them  are  indeed  the  test  of  the  man.  A shoe-maker, 
who  can  turn  out  a strong,  nice  pair  of  shoes  in  the 
shortest  possible  time,  is  a better  man,  according 
to  his  profession  and  his  work,  than  a professor  » 
who  talks  nonsense  every  day  of  his  life. 


[ 86  ] 


A certain  young  Sannyastn  went  to  a forest 
and  tjhere  meditated  and  worshipped,  and  practised 
Yoga  for  a long  time.  After  twelve  years  of  hard 
work  and  practice,  he  was  one  day  sitting  under  a 
tree,  when  Some  dry  leaves  fell  upon  his  head.  He 
looked  up  and  saw  a crow  and  a crane  fighting  on 
the  top  of  the  tree,  and  they  made  him  very  angry, 
He  said,  What ! Dare  you  throw  those  dry 
leaves  upon  my  head ! ”,  and  as  he  looked  upon 
them  with  anger  a flash  of  fire  burst  from  his 
head — such  ]vas  the  YogtrCs  power — and  burnt  the 
birds  to  ashes.  He  was  very  glad  ; he  was  almost 
pyerjoyed  at  this  development  of  power  in  himself ; 
he  could  burn  at  a glance  the  crow  and  the  crane. 
After  a time  he  had  to  go  into  the  town  to  beg 
his  bread.  He  came  and  stood  at  a dopr  and 
said  Mother,  give  me  food.”  A voice  came 
from  inside  the  house: — ''Wait  a little,  my  son.” 
Tfee  young  man  thought You  wretched  woman, 
how  dare  you  make  me  wait ! You  do  not  know 
my  power  yet.”  While  he  was  thinking  thus,  the 
voice  from  inside  pame  again  : — “Boy,  don’t  be 


[ 87  ] 


thinking  too  n\uch  of  yourself.  Here  is  neither 
crow  nor  crane.^^  He  was  astortished;  still  he 
had  to  wait.  At  last  a woman  came,  and  he  fell 
at  her  feet  and  said : — Mother,  how  did  you, 
know  that  ? ” She  said  : — “ My  boy,  I do  not 
know  your  Yoga  or  your  practices.  I am  a com- 
mon every  day  woman,  but  I made  you  wait 
because  my  husband  is  ill,  and  I was  nursing  him, 
and  that  was  my  duty.  All  my  life  I have 
struggled  to  do  my  duty.  As  a daughter,  when  I 
was  unmarried,  I did  my  duty ; and  now,  when  I 
am  married,  I still  do  my  duty ; that  is  all  the  Yo^a 
I practice,  and  by  doing  my  duty  I have  become 
illumined ; thus  I could  read  yopr  thoughts  and 
what  you  had  done  in  the  forest.  But  if  you  Want 
to  know  something  higher  than  this,  go  to  such 
and  such  a town  and  to  the  market,  and  there 
you  will  find  a butcher;  and  he  will  tell  yo^ 
some  thing  that  you  will '.be  very  glad  to  learn.” 
The  thought  Why  should  I go  to.' 

that  town  and  to  a butcher ! ” (Butchers  are  the 
lowest  class  in  our  country ; they  are  called 


[ 88  ] 


Chandalas ; they  are  not  touched  because  they 
are  butchers  ; they  do  in  addition  to  their  work  as 
butchers  the  duty  of  scavengers  and  so  forth). 

^ But  after  what  he  had  seen,  his  mind  opened 
a little,  so  he  went ; and  when  he  came  near  the 
the  city  he  found  the  market,  and  there  saw,  at  a 
distance,  a big,  fat  butcher  slashing  away  at 
animals  with  big  knives  talking  and  bargaining 
with  different  people.  The  young  man  said, 
“ Lord  help  me  F Is  this  the  man  from  whom  I 
am  going  to  learn  wisdom  ? He  is  the  incarnation 
of  a demon,  if  he  is  anything  at  all.”  In  the 
meantime  this  man  looked  up  and  said,  ‘*0 
Swamin,  did  th^t  lady  send  you  here  ? Take  a 
seat  until  I have  done  my  business.”  The 
Sannyasin  thought,  “ What  is  it  that  comes  to 
me  here?”  And  he  took  a seat;  but  the  man 
went  on,  and  after  he  had  finished  all  his  selling 
and  bargaining,  he  took  his  money  and  said  to  the 
Sunnyasin^  “ Come  here,  sir;  come  to  my  home,” 
Sd  they  went  there,  and  the  butcher  gave  him  a 
seat,  and  Said,  **  Wait  there.”  Then  he  went  into 


89 


the  house,  and  there  were  his  father  and.  mothei;: 
He  washed  them  and  fed  them  and  did  all  he 


could  to  please  them,  and  then  came  and  took  at 

^eat  before  the  Sannyasin  and  said,  ‘‘  Now,  sir, 
* 

you  are  come  here  to  see  me ; what  can  I do  -for 
you,?^'  Then  this  great  Sannyasin  asked  him  a 
few  questions  about  the  soul  and  about  God,  and- 
the  butcher  gave  him  a lecture  which  forms  even 
to-day  a very  celebrated  work  in  India — the 
“ Vyadha-Gita'^  It  contains  one  of  the  highest 
flights  in  the  Vedanta,  the  highest  flight  of 
metaphysics.  You  have  heard  of  the  Bhagavad; 
Gita,  Krishna’s  sermon.  When  you  have  finished 
reading  that,  you  should  read  the  Vyadha^Gita ; 
it  contains  the*  concentrated  essence  of  the 
Vedanta  philosophy.  When  the  butcher  finished 
his  teaching,  the  Sannyasin  felt  astonished.  He 
said,  ^^Why  are  you  in  that  body?  With  such 
knowledge  as  yours  why  are  you  in  a butcher’s 
body,  and  doing  such  filthy,  ugly  Work  ? ” My 


replied  the  €hand(tl<t  “no  duty  is  Ugly,  no  ^ 
^ty  is  impfire.  My  birth,  circumstances  and 


L 


[ 90  1 


environ ruents  were  there  when  I was  born.  In 
my  boyhood  I learnt  the  trade ; I am  unattached, 
and  I try  to  do  my  duty  well.  I try  to  do  my 
duty  as  a householder,  and  I try  to  do  all  I can  to 
make  my  father  and  mother  happy.  I neither 
know  your  Yoga^  npr  have  I become  a Sannyasin^ 
nor  ever  did  I go  out  of  the  world  into  a forest ; 
nevertheless,  all  this  that  you  have  heard  and 
seen  has  come  to  me  through  the  unattached 
doing  of  the  duty  which  belongs  to  my  position.” 

, There  is  a sage  in  India,  a great  Yogtn^  one 
of  the  most  wonderful  men  I have  ever  seen  in 
my  life.  He  is  a peculiar  man ; he  will  not  teach 
aijy  one ; if  you  ask  him  a question  he  will  not 
anSiWer.  It  is  too  much  for  him"  to  take  up  the 
position  of  a teacher ; he  will  not  do  it.  If  you 
ask  a question,  and  ih. you  wait  for  some  days,  in 
the  course  of  conversation  he  will  bring  the 
subject  out  himself,  and.  wonderful  light  will  he 
then  throw  on  it.  He  told  me  once  the  secret  of 
perfect  woi^k,  and  what  he  said  was,  “Let  the  end 
^ the  means  be  joined  into  one,  and  that  is  the 


secret  of  work.”  When  you  are  doing  any  work, 
io  not  think  of  anything  beyond.  Do  it  as 
worship,  as  the  highest  worship,  and  devote  your 
whole  life  to  it  for  the  time  being.  This  worship 
of  work  is  for  its  own  sake.  Thus,  in  this  story^ 
the  butcher  and  the  woman  did  their  duty  with 
cheerfulness  and  whole-heartedness  and  willing- 
ness; and  the  result  was  that  they  became 
illuminated.  Every  duty  is  holy,  and  devotion  to 
duty  is  the  highest  form  of  the  worship  of  God ; 
it  is  certainly  a source  of  great  help  in  enlighten* 
ing  and  emancipating  the  deluded  and  ignorance* 
encumbered  soul  of  the  Baddhas — the  bound 
ones.  This  story  clearly  shows  us  that  the  right 
performance  of  the  duties  of  any  station  in  life, 
without  our  being  attached  to  results  and  conse- 
quences, leads  us  to  the  highest  realisation  of  the 
perfection  of  the  soul. 

Out  duties  are  largely  determined  by  our 
environments,  and  there  can  be  no  high  and 
Ifik-regard  to  them.  -It  is  the  worker  who  is 
attached  to  results  grumbles  about  the  nature 


[ 92  ] 


i&f  the  duty  which  has  fallen  to  his  lot  to  do ; to 
the  unattached  worker  all  duties  are  equally  good, 
and  from  efficient  instruments  with  which  selfish- 
ness, and  sensuality  may  be  effectively  killed,  and 
the  freedom  of  the  soul  unfailingly  secured.  We 
are  all  apt  to  think  too  highly  of  ourselves. 
When  I was  a boy  I used  to  dream  that  I was  a 
great  emperor  and  a great  this  and  a great  that ; 

■ so,  I suppose,  you  too  have  dreamt.  But  it  is  all 
a dream  and  nature’s  justice  is  uniformly  stern 
and  unrelenting.  Therefore  our  duties  are  also 
determined  by  our  deserts  to  a much  , larger  extent 
than  we  are  willing  to  grant.  By  doing  well  the 
dpty  which  is  nearest  to  us,  the  duty  which  is  in 
pur  hands  now,  we  make  ourselves  stronger ; and 
improving  our  strength  in  this  manner  step  by 
step,  we  may  even  reach  a state  in  which  it  shall 
be  our  privilege  to  do  the  most  coveted  and 
honored  duties  in  life  and  in  society.  Competition 
rouses  envy,  and  it  kills  the  kindliness  of  the 
heart.  To  the  grumbler  all  duties  are  distasteful ; 


nothing  will  ever  Satisfy  f)jm,^and  ,his,whole  jife  is 


r 93  ] 


doomed  to  prove  a failure.  Let  us  work  on,  doing  , 
as  we  go  whatever  happens  to  be  our  duty,  and 
being  ever  ready  . to  put  our  shoulders  to  the 
whepl.  Then,  surely  shall  we  see  the  Light ! 


CHAPTER  V. 

WE  HELP  OURSELVES,  NOT  THE  WORLD. 

Before  considering  further  how  devotion  to 
duty  helps  us  in  our  spiritual  progress,  let  me 
place  before  you  in  as  brief  a compass  as  possible 
another  aspect  of  what  we  in  India  mean  by 
Karma.  In  every  religion  there  are  three  parts ; 
first,  there  is  the  philosophy ; thep  there  is  the 
mythology ; and  lastly,  there  is  t)ie  ritual.  The 
philosophy  is,  of  course,  the  essc/nce  of  every  one 
of  the  religions ; the  mythology  gives  expression 
to,  that  philosophy  and  .explains  and  illustrates  it 
by  means  of  the  more  or  less  legendary  lives  of 
great  men  and  stories  and  fables  of  wonderful 
things  atid  so  on;  ritual  gives  ,to  that  philosophy 
a still  more  concrete  form  so  that  every  one  tnay 
grasp  it—ritual  is  in  fact  concretised  philosophy. 
This  ritpal  is  Karma  \ it  is  necessary  in  every 
religion,  because  most  of  us  cannot  undcrstptd 
abstract  spiritual  things  Unti}  we  groY?  y^ry  in.ucii 


[ 95  ] 


spiritually.  It  is  easy  for  men  to  thitik  that  they 
can  understand  anything,  but  when  it  comes  to 
practical  experience  they  find  that  abstract  ideas 
are  oft^n  very  hard  to  comprehend.  Therefore 
symbols  are  of  great  help  and  we  cannot  dispense 
with  th^  symbolical  method  of  putting  things 
before  us.  From  time  immemorial  symbols  have 
been  used  by  all  kinds  of  religions.  In  one  sense 
we  cannot  but  think  in  symbols ; words  themselves 
are  symbols  of  thought.  In  another  sense  every- 
thing in  the  universe  may  be  looked  upon  as  a 
symbol.  The  whole  universe  is  a symbol  and 
God  is  the  essence  behind.  This  kind  of  symbol- 
ogy  is  not  simply  the  creation  of  man ; it  is  not 
that  certain  people  belonging  to  a religion  sit 
down  together  and  think  out  certain  symbols^ 
hands  ^and  feet  and  so  forth  and  bring  them  into 
existence  out  of  their  own  minds.  The  symbols 
of  religion  have  a natural  growth.  Otherwise, 
why  fe  it  that  certain  symbols  are  associated  with 
cef^n  ideas  in  the  mind  of  almost  every  one  ? 
Certa^in  symbols  are  universally  prevalent.  Many 


f 96  ] 


of  you  think  that  the  cross  came  first  into  exis* 
tence  as  a symbol  in  connection  with  the  Christian 
religion ' but  as  a matter  of  fact  it  existed  before 
Christianity  was,  before  Moses  was  bom,  before 
fhe  Vedas  were  given  out,  before  there  was  any 
human  record  of  human  things.  The  cross  may 
be  found  to  have  been  in  existence  among  the 
Aztecs  and  the  Phoeniciens : every  one  seems  to 
have  had  the  cross.  Again  the  symbol  of  the 
crucified  Saviour,  of  a man  crucified  upon  a cross 
appears  to  have  been  known  to  almost  every 
nation.  The  circle  has  been  a great  symbol 

t ' ■ 

throughout  the  world.  Then  there  is  the  most 

c 

universal  of  all  symbols,  the  Swastika,  At  one 
time  it  was  thought  that  the  Buddhists  carried  it 
^1  over  the  world  with  them,  but  it  has  been  found 
out  that  ages  before  Buddhism  it  was  used  ainong 
nations.  In  old  Babylon  and  in  Egypt  it  was  to 
found.  What  does  this  show?  All  these 
-symbols  could  not  have  been  purely  conventional. 
There  must  be  some*  reason  for  fheih,  sdlne 
natural  association  between,  thejn  and  the  human 


[ 97  1 


mind.  Language  is  not  the  result  of  convention ; 
it  is  not  that  people  ever  agreed  to  represent 
certain  ideas  by  certain  words ; there  never  was 
an  idea  without  a corresponding  word  or  a word 
without  a corresponding  idea ; ideas  and.  words 
are  in  their  nature  inseparable.  The  symbols  tq 
represent  ideas  may  be  sound  symbols  or  colour 
symbols.  Deaf  and  dumb  people  have  to  think 
with  other  than  sound  symbols.  Every  thought 
in  the  mind  has  a form  as  its  counterpart ; this  is 
called  in  Sanskrit  philosophy  nanta-rupa — name* 
and  form.  It  is  as  impossible  to  create  by  con- 
vention a system  of  symbols  as  it  is  to  create  a 
language.  In  the  world’s  ritualistic  symbols  we 
have  an  expression  of  the  religious  thought  of 
humanity.  It  is  easy  to  say  that  there  is  no  use 
of  rituals  apd  temples  and  all  such  paraphernalia ; 
every  baby  says  that  in  modern  times*  But  it 
must  be  easy  for  all  to  see  Jihat  those  who  worship 
inside  a temple  are  in  many  respects  different 
from  those ‘who  will  not  worship  there.  Therefore 
tjie  association  of  particular  temples,  rituals  and 
M 


[ ^ ] 


other  concrete  forms  with  particular  religions  has 
a tendency  to  bring  into  the  mind  of  the  followers 
of  those  .religions  the  thoughts  for  which  those 
concrete  things  stand  as  symbols ; and  it  is  not 
isafe  to  ignore  rituals  and  symbology  altogether. 
The  study  and  practice  of  these  things  form  natur- 
ally a part  of  Karma-Yoga. 

There  are  many  other  aspects  of  this  science 
of  work:  One  among  them  is  to  know  the  relation 
between  thought  and  word  and  what  can  be 
^achieved  by  the  power  of  the  word.  In  every 
religion  the  power  of  the  word  is  recognised,  so 
much  so  that  in  some  of  them  creation  itself  is 
s^id  to  have  come  out  of  the  word.  The  external 
aspect  of  the  thought  of  God  is  the  Word,  and, 
God  thought  and  willed  before  He  created,  crea- 
tion came  out  of  the  Word.  In  this  stress  and 
hurry  of  pur  materialistic  life  our  nerves  lose  thing 
sensibility  and  become  hardened  like  an  iron  ropp. 
The  older  we  grow,  the  longer  we  are  knocked 
about  m the  world,  the  more  hardened  da  our 
neiyps  become ; and  we  are  apt  to  neglecrthings 


[ 99  ] 


that  are  even  persistently  and  prominently  happen- 
ing around  us.  Human  nature,  however,  asserts 
itself  sometimes  and  we  are  led  to  inquire  into 
and  wonder  at  some  of  these  common  occur- 
rences; and  wondering  thus  is  the  first  step  in  the 
acquisition  of  light.  Apart  from  the  higher 
philosophic  and  religious  value  of  the  Word  we 
may  see  that  sound  symbols  play  a prominent 
part  in  the  cframa  of  human  life.  I am  talking  to 
you,  I am  not  touching  you;  the  ^pulsations  of  the 
air  caused  by  my  speaking  go  into  your  ear,  they' 
touch  your  nerves  and  produce  effects  in  your 
minds.  You  cannot  resist  this.  What  can  be 
more  wonderful  than  this  ? One  man  calls 
another  a fool,  and  this  other  stands  up  and 
clenches  his  fist  and  lands  a blow  6n  his  nose; 
Look  at  the  power  of  the  word!  There  is  a 
woman  weeping  and  miserable;  another  woman 
comes  along  and  speaks  to  her  a few  gentle 
worda;  the  doubled  up  frame  Of  the  weeping 
womahi  becomes  straightened  at  once,  her  sorrow 
isvg^ne  and'  she  already  begins  to  smile.  Think 


[ ‘OO  ] 


of ‘the  power  of  words!  They  are  a great  force 
jn  higher  philosophy  as  well  as  in  common  life. 
Pay  and  night  we  manipulate  this  force  without 
thought  and  without  enquiry.  To  know  the  nature 
of  this  force  and  to  use  it  well  is  also  a part  of 
Karma-Yoga. 

. Our  duty  to  others  means  helping  others ; that 
is,  doing  gopd  to  the  world.  Why  should  we  do 
good  to  the  world  ? Apparently  to  help  the  world, 
bqt  it  is  really  to  help  ourselves.  We  should 
always  try  to  help  the  world;  that  should  be  the 
highest  motive  in  us;  but,  when  we  analyse 
the  thing  properly,  we  find  that  the  world  does 
not  require  our  help  at  all  This  world  was  not 
made  that  you  or  1 should  come  and  help  it.  I 
once  read  a sermon  in  which  it  was  said ; — All 
tjiis  beautiful  world  is  very  good,  because  it  give^ 

time  and  opportunity  to  help  others.”  Appar- 
ently, this  is,  a very  beautiful  sentiment ; but,  in 
one  sense,,  it  is^uite  a curse  to  think  so;,  for  is  it 
not  ^ blasphemy  to  say  that  theVorld  needs  our 
help  ? We  cannot  deny  that  there  is  m^eh  mjsery 


[ lo.  ] 


in  the  world  \ to  go  out  and  help  others  is,  there«» 
fore,  the  highest  motive  we  can  have,  although, ^ 
in  the  long  run,  we  shall  find  that  helping  others 
is  only  helping  ourselves.  As  a boy  I had  some 
white  mice.  They  were  kept  in  a little  box  and 
had  little  wheels  made  for  them,  and  when  the 
mice  tried  to  cross  the  wheels,  the  wheels  turned 
and  turned,  and  the  mice  never  got  anywhere.  So 
it  is  with  the  world  and  our  helping  it.  The  only 
help  is  that  we  get  moral  exercise.  This  world  ia 
neither  good  nor  evil ; each  man  manufactures  a 
world  for  himself.  If  a blind  man  begins  to  think 
of  the  world,  it  is  either  as  soft  or  hard,  or  as  coM 
or  hot.  We  are  a mass  of  happiness  or  misery,* 
we  have  seen  that  it  is  so  with  us  hundreds  of 
time^  in  our  lives.  As  a rule,  the  young  ar^ 
c^timistic  and  the  old  pessimistic*  The  young 
have  all  life  before  fhem ; the  old  are  cotnplaining  \ 
their  day  is  gone ; hundreds  of  desires,  which  they 
cannot  fulfil,  are  struggling  in  their  hearts.  Life 
is,  .almost  at  an  %nd  for  them.  Both  are  foolish  • 
nevertheless,  This  life  is  neither  good  nor  evil. 


[ ] 


It  is  according  to  the  different  states  of  mind  in 
which  we  look  at  it.  The  most  practical  man 
would  neither  call  it  good  nor  evil.  Fire,  by  itself, 
is  neither  good  mor  evil,  When  it  keeps  us  warm 
we  say: — How  beautiful  is  fire!^’  When  it 
bums  our  fingers  we  blame  the  fire.  Still,  in  itself 
it  is  neither  good  nor  bad.  According  as  we  use 
it,  it  produces  in  us  the  feeling  of  good  or  bad ; 
and  so  also  is  this  world.  It  is  perfect.  By 
perfection  is  meant  that  it  is  perfectly  fitted  to 
meet  its  ends.  We  may  all  be  perfectly  sure  that 
it  will  go  on  beautifully  well  without  us,  and  need 
not  bother  our  heads  wishing  to  help  it. 

^ Yet  we  must  do  good;  the  desire  to  do  good 
is  the  highest  moral  motive  power  we  have,  if  we 
know, all  theHmie  it  is. a pq^^lege  to  help 
others.  Do  not  stand  pn  a high  pedestal  and  take 
five  -cfents  inf  your  hand  and  say,  “ Heret  my  poor 
man,”  but  grateful  that  the  poor  man  is  there, 
ao  that  by  giving*  a gift  ^o  him  you  are  able  to 
yourself,  -it  is.  not  the  receiver  that  is  Messed, 
Imt  it  is  the  giver.  .£e  thankful  that  3rou  are 


[ *03  ] 


allowed  to  exercise  your  power  of  benevolence  and 
mercy  in  the  world,  and  thus  become  pure  and  per- 
fect. All  good  acts  tend  to  make  us  pure  and  per- 
fect. What  Can  we  do  at  best  ? Build  a hospital, 
make  roads,  or  erect  charity  asylums  ! We  may  or- 
ganize a charity  and  collect  two  or  three  millions  of 
dollars,  build  a hospital  with  one  million,,  with  the 
second  give  balls  and  drink  champagne,  and  of  the 
third  let  the  officers  steal  half,  and  leave  the  rest 
finally  to  reach  the  poor;  but  what  are  all  these? 
One  mighty  wind,  in  five  minutes  can  break  all  your 
buildings  up.  What  shall  we  do  then?  One 
volcanic  eruption  may  sweep  away  all  our  roads 
and  hospitals  and  cities  and  buildings.  Let  uS 
give  up  all  this  foolish  talk  of  doing  good  to  the 
worlrf.  It  is  not  waiting  for  your  or  my  help ; yet 
we  ipust  work  and  constantly  do  good,  because  it 
is  a blessing  to  ourselves.  That  is  the  only  way 
we  Can  become  perfect.  No  beggar  whoni  we 
have  helped  has  ever  owed  a single  cent  to  us ; 
^ owe  everything  to  him,  because  he  has  allowed 
us  to  exercise  our  powers  of  piety  and  pity  and 


[ 104  ] 


charity  on  him.  It  is  entirely  wrong  to  think  that 
we  have  done,*or  can  do,  good  to  the  world,  or  to 
think  that  we  have  helped  such  and  such  people. 
It  is  a foolish  thought,  and  all  foolish  thoughts 
bring  misery.  We  think  that  we  have  helped  some 
man  and  expect  him  to  thank  us ; and,  because 
he  does  not,  unhappiness  comes  to  us.  Why 
should  we  expect  anything  in  return  for  what  we 
do  ? Be  grateful  to  the  man  you  help,  think  of 
him  as  God.  Is  it  not  a great  privilege  to  be 
allowed  to  worship  God  by  helping  our  fellow  man? 
If  we  Were  really  unattached,  we  should  escape 
all  this  pain  of  vain  expectation,  and  could  cheer- 
fully do  good  work  in  the  world.  Never  will 
unhappiness  or  misery  come  through  work  done 
without  attachment.  * The  world  will  go  on  with 
its  happiriess  and  misery  through  eternity. 

There  was  a poor  man  who  wanted  some 
money ; and,  somehow,  he  had  heard  that,  if  he 
could  get  hold  of  a ghost  or  some  spirit,  he  might 
command  him  to  bring  money  or  anything  he 
liked ; so  he  was , very  anxious  to  get  hold  of  a 


[ 105  ] 


ghost.  He  went  about  searching  fora  man  who 
would  give  him  a ghost ; and  at  last  he  found  a 
sage,  with  great  powers,  and  besought  this  sage 
to  help  him.  The  sage  asked  him  what  he  would 
do  with  a ghost.  “ I want  a ghost  to  work  for 
me;  teach  me  how  to  get  hold  of  one^  sir;  I 
desire  it  very  much/^  replied  the  man.  But  the 
sage  said,  ‘‘Don't  disturb  yourself,  go  home.” 
The  next  day  the  man  went  again  to  the  sage  and 
began  to  weep  and  pray.  “ Give  me  a ghost ; I 
must  have  a ghost,  sir,  to  help  me.”  At  last  the 
sage  was  disgusted,  and  said,  “ Take  this  charm, 
repeat  this  magic  word,  and  a gho^t  will  come^ 
and  whatever  you  say  to  this  ghost  he  will  do  fot 
you.  But  beware;  they  are  terrible  beings,  and 
must  be  kept  continually  busy.  If  you  fail  to  give 
him  work  he  will  take  your  life.”  The  man 
replied  That’s  easy;  I can  give  him  work  for 
airhis  life.”  Then  he  went  to  a forest,  and  after 
long  repetitipn  of  the  magic  word,  a huge  ghost 
^tppeared  before  him,  with  big  teeth,  and  said  : — 

I am  a ghost.  I have  bto  conquered  by  your 

N 


[ ] 


magic.  But  you  must  keep  me  constantly 
employed.  The  moment  you  fail  to  give  me 
work,  I will  kill  you.^'  The  man  said  : — “ Build 
me  a palace,’^  and  the  ghost  said,  ‘‘It  is  done; 
the  palace  is  built. “ Bring  me  poney,''  said 
the  man.  “ Here  is  your  money,”  said  the  ghost. 

Cut  this  forest  down,  and  build  a city  in  its 
place.”  “ That  is  done,”  said  the  ghost;  “any- 
thing more?”  Now  the  man  began  to  be 
frightened  and  said : — “ 1 can  give  him  nothing 
more  to  do;  he  does  everything  in  a trice.”  The 
ghost  said  : — “Give  me  something  to  do  or  I will 
cat  you  up.”‘  The  poor  man  could  find  no  further 
odcupation  for  him,  and  was  frightened.  So  he 
ran  and  ran  and  at  last  reached  the  sage,  and 
said,  “ Oh,  sir,  protect  my  life  ! ” The  sage  asked 
him  what  the  matter  was,  and  the  man  replied  : — 
“I  haVe  nothing  to  give  the  ghost  to  do.  Every- 
thing 1 tell  him  to  do  he  does  in  a moment,  and 
he  threatens  to  eat  me  up  if  1 do  not  give  him 
work.”  Just  then  the  ghost  arrived,  saying,  “ Til 
you  up,”  and  he  would  have  swallowed  the 


107  ] 


man.  The  man  began  to  shake,  and  begged  the 
sage  to  save  his  life.  The  sage  said; — “I  will 
find  you  a way  out.  Look  at  that  dog  with  a 
curly  tail.  Draw  your  sword  quickly  and  cut  the 
tail  off  and  give  it  to  the  ghost  to  straighten  out.” 
The  man  cut  off  the  dog’s  tail  and  gave  it  to  the 
ghost,  saying,  “ Straighten  that  out  for  me.”  The 
ghost  took  it  and  slowly  and  carefully  straightened 
it  out,  but  as  soon  as  he  let  it  go,  it  instantly 
curled  up  again*  Once  more  he  laboriously 
straightened  it  ouL  only  to  find  it  again  curled  up 
as'  soon  as  he  attempted  to  let  go  of  it.  Again 
he  patiently  straightened  it  out,  but  as  soon  a?  he 
iet  it  go,  it  curled  up  again.  So , he  went  on  for 
days  and  days,  until  he  was  exhausted,  and  said, 
“ I was  never  in  such  trouble  before  in  my  life.  I 
am  an  old  veteran  ghost,  but  never  before  was  I 
in  such  trouble.  I will  make  a compromise  with 
you,”  he  said  to  the  man.  “You  let  me  off  and 
I will  let  you  keep  all  1 have  given  you  and  will 
'promise  not  to  harm  you.”  The  man  was  much 
pleased,  and  accepted  the  offer  gladly. 


[ loS  ] 


This  world  is  that  dog’s  curly  tail,  and  people 
have  been  striving  to  straighten  it  out,  each  in.  his 
own  way,  for  hundreds  of  years ; but  when  they 
let  it  go,  it  has  curled  up  again.  How  can  it  be 
otherwise?  One  must  first  )cnow  how  to  work 
without  attachment,  then  he  will  not  be  a fanatic. 
When  we  know  that  this  world  is  like  a dog’s 
curly  tail  and  will  never  get  straightened  in  the 
way  we  want,  we  shall  not  become  fanatics.  There 
are  fanatics  of  various  kinds,  wtne  fanatics,  cigar 
fanatics  and  so  on.  There  was^a  young  lady  once 
In  this  class.  She  is  one  of  a number  of  ladies  in 
Chicago  who  have  built  a house  into  which  they 
take  the  working  people  and  give  them  some  music 
and  gymnastics.  One  day  this  young  lady  was 
talking  to  me  about  the  evils  of  drinking  and  sltiok- 
ing  and  so  on,  and  told  me  that  she  knew  the 
remedy  for  It  all.  I asked  her  what  it  was,  and  she 
said,  *'D5n*t  you  know  the  Hall  House?”  Evidently 
in  her  opinioi^this  Hall  House  is  a great  panacea^ 
"for  all  the  evils  that  human  flesh  is  heir  to.  There 
are  some  fanatics  in  India  who  think  that,  if  a 


[ >09  ] 


woman  is  allowed  to  have  two  or  three  husbands, 
it  will  cure  all  evil.  All  this  is  fanaticism  and 
wise  men  will  never  be  fanatics.  They  can  never 
do  real  work.  If  there  were  no  fanaticism  in  the 
world,  it  would  make  much  more  progress  than  it 
does  now.  It  is  all  silly  nonsense  to  think  that 
fanaticism  makes  for  the  progress  of  mankind. 
It  is,  instead,  a retarding  block,  because  it  rouses 
hatred  and  anger,  and  causes  people  to  fight 
against  each  other,  and  makes  them  unsympathetic. 
We  think  that  whatever  we  do  or  possess  is  the 
best  thing  in  the  world,  and  that  those  things 
which  We  do  not  do  or  possess  are  of  no  value. 
So,  always  remember  this  curly  tail  of  the  dog 
whenever  you  have  a tendency  to  become  a 
fanaflc.  You  need  not  worry  yourself  or  make 
yourself  sleepless  about  the  world ; it  will  go  on 
in  spite  of  you.  The  Lord  God  is  its  Governor 
and  Maintainer,  and  in  spite  of  wine  fanatics  and 
cigar  fanatics  and  all  sorts  of  mar^ge  fanatics, 
the  world  will  go  on  under  His  care.  When  you 
have  avoided  fanaticism,  then  alone  will  you 


[ no  ] 


Work  well  It  is  the  level-headed  man,  the  calm 
man,  of  good  judgment  and  cool  nerves,  of  great 
sympathy  and  love,  who  does  good  work  and  so 
does  good  to  himself.  The  fanatic  is  foolish  and 
has  no  sympathy;  he  can  never  straighten  the 
world,  nor  himself  become  pure  and  perfect. 

Do  you  not  remember  the  ^^Mayflower'’  people 
in  your  own  history,  and  how  they  came  to  this 
land  as  Puritans  ? In  the  beginning  they  were 
very  pure  and  good,  but  very  soon  they  too 
began  to  persecute  other  people.  It  is  the  same 
everywhere  in  the  history  of  humanity ; even  those 
that  run  away  from  persecution  indulge  in  perse- 
cuting others  as  soon  as  a favourable  opportunity 
to  do  so  turns  up.  I have  read  of  two  wonderful 
ships.  The  first  is  Noah^s  Ark  and  the  second  is 
tfie  “ Mayflower.”  The  Jews  hold  that  the  whole 
of  creation  has  come  out  of  Noah’s  Ark  and  the 
Americas  say  that  out  of  the  Mayflower  ” 
.nearly -half  world,  has  come.  I scarcely ‘meet 
one  in  this  country  who  does  not  say,  My  grand- 
fether  or  great-grAnd-father  came  out  of  the 


[ in  ] 


Mayflower y This  is  fanaticism  of  another  sort.  In 
ninety  cases  out  of  a hundred  fanatics  must  have 
bad  livers,  or  they  are  dyspeptics,  or  they  are  in 
some  way  diseased.  By  and  by  even  physicians 
will  find  out  that  fanaticism  is  a kind  of  disease. 
I have  seen  plenty  of  it — Lord  save  me  from  it  1 
My  experience  has  become  condensed  in  this 
form,  namely,  that  we  should  keep  away  from  all 
sorts  of  fanatical  reforms.  Do  you  mean  to  say 
that  the  wine  fanatics  love  the  poor  fellows  who 
become  drunkards?  Fanatics  are  fanatics  be- 
cause they  expect  to  get  something  for  themselve?S 
out  of  the  fanaticism.  As  soon  as  the  battle  is 
over,  they  go  in  for  the  spoil.  As  soon  as  you 
come  out  of  the  company  of  fanatics  you  learn 
how*to  really  to  love  and  sympathise.  It  will  be- 
come possible  for  you  to  sympathise  with  the 
drunkard  and  to  know  that  he  also  is  a man  like 
you.  You  will  then  try  to  understand  the  many 
circumstances  that  are  dragging  him  down,  and 
feel  that  if  you  had  been  in  his  place  you  would 
perhaps  have  committed  suicide.  I remember  i 


woman  whose  husband  is  a great  drunkard 
complaining  to  me  of  his  drunkenness.  I am 
convinced  that  a large  proportion  of  drunkards 
are  manufactured  by  their  wives.  My  business  is 
to  tell  the  truth  and  not  to  flatter  any  one.  Those 
unruly  women  from  whose  minds  the  words  bear 
and  forbear  are  gone  for  ever,  and  whose  false 
ideas  of  independence  lead  them  to  say  that  they 
want'  men  to  be  down  under  their  feet,  and  who 
begin  to  screatch  and  howl  as  soon  as  men  dare 
to  say  any  thing  to  them  which  they  do  not  like 
r*^such  women  are  becoming  the  bane  of  the  world, 
and  it  is  a wonder  that  they  do  not  drive  half  the 
men  in  it  to  commit  suicide.  These  women  get 
their  half-starved  preachers  to  side  with  them, 
and  say  to  them,  ‘‘Ladies,  you  are  the,  most  won- 
derful beings  ever  made.”  Then  the  women  de- 
clare about  every  one  of  such  preachers,  “This  is 
i the  preacher  for  us,”  and  give  them  money  and 
other  things.  It  is  in  this  way  that  things  are 
jl^oing  on.  Life  is  not  such  a joke  as  t^t ; it  is  a 
little  more  serious. 


'[  1 13  ] 


Let  me  ask  you  now  to  remember  the  chief 
poijits  in  to-day’s  lecture.  Firstly,  we  have  to 
bear  in  mind  that  we  are  all  debtors  to  the  world 
and  that  the  world  does  not  owe  to  us|  any- 
thing. It  is  a great  privilege  for  all  of  us 
to  be  allowed  to  do  anything  for  the  world. 
In  helping  the  world  we  really  help  ourselves. 
The  second  point  to  remember  is  that  there  is  a 
God  in  this  universe.  It  is  not  true  that  this 
universe  is  drifting  about  standing  in  need  of  help 
from  you  and  from  me.  God  is  ever  present 
therein.  He  is  undying  and  eternally  active  and' 

infinitely  watchful.  When  the  whole  universe 

• 

sleeps,  He  sleeps  not ; He  is  working  incessantly  • 
all  the  changes  and  manifestations  of  the  world 
are  His.  Thirdly,  we  ought  not  to  hate  any  one. 
This  world  will  always  continue  to  be  a mixture  of 
good  and  evil.  Our  duty  is  to  sympathise  with 
the  weak  and  to  love  even  the  wrong-doer.  The 
>^orld  is  a grand  moral  gymnasium  wherein  we 
have  all  to  take  exercise,  so  as  to  become  stronger 
and  stronger  spiritually.  Fourthly,  we  ought  not 
o 


[ >>4  ] 


to  be  fanatics  of  any  kind,  because  fanaticism  is 
opposed  to  love.  You  hear  fanatics  glibly  saying, 
“ I do  not. hate  the  sinner,  I hate  the  sin ; but  I 
am  prepared  to  go  any  distance  to  see  the  face  of 
that  man  who  can  really  make  a distinction 
between  the  sin  and  the  sinner.  It  is  easy  to  say 
so.  If  we  can  distinguish  well  between  ' quality 
and  substance  we  may  become  perfect  men.  It 
is  not  easy  to  do  this.  And  further,  the  calmer 
we  are  ^ and  the  less  disturbed  our  nerves,  the 
more  shall  we  love  and  the  better  will  our  work 
be. 


CHAPTER  VI. 


NON-ATTACHIVIENT  IS  COMPLETE 
SELF-ABNEGATION. 

Just  as  every  action  that  emanates  from  us 
comes  back  to  us  In  reaction,  even  so  our  actions 
may  act  on  other  people  and  theirs  may  act  on 
us.  Perhaps  all  of  you  have  observed  it  as  a 
fact  that  when  persons  do  evil  actions  they  be- 
come more  and  more  evil,  and  when  they  begin 
to  do  good  they  become  stronger  and  stronger 
and  learn  to  do  good  at  all  times.  This  intensi- 
fication of  the  influence  of  action  cannot . be 
explained  on  any  other  ground,  than  that  we  can 
act  and  react  upon  each  other.  To  take  an 
illustration  from  physical  science,  when  I am 
doing  a certain  action,  my  mind  may  be  said  to 
be  in  a certain  state  of  vibration;  all  mind  which 
are  in  similar  circumstances  will  have  the  tendency 
to  be  affected  by  my  mind.  If  there  are  different  « 
musical  instruments  tuned  alike  in  one  room,  all 

A - 


1 ii6  J 


of  .you  may  have  noticed  that  when  one  is  struck, 
the  others  have  the  tendency  to  vibrate  so  as  to 
give  the  same  note.  So  in  this  illustration,  it  may 
be  seen  that  the  instruments  had  all  the  same 
tension  and  were  affected  alike  by  the  same 
impulse.  All  minds  that  have  the  same  tension, 
so  to  say,  will  be  equally  affected  by  the  same 
thought.  Of  course,  this  influence  of  thought  on 
mind  will  vary,  according  to  distance  and  other 
causes,  but  the  mind  is  always  open  to  be  affected. 
Suppose  I am  doing  an  evil  act,  my  mind  is  in  a 
certain  state  of  vibration,  and  all  minds  in  the., 
universe,  which,  are  in  a similar  state,  have  the 
possibility  of  being  affected  by  the  vibration  of 
my  mind.  So,  when  I am  doing  a good  action, 
my  mind  is  in  another  state  of  vibration;  and'all 
tnipiis  similarly  strung  have  the  possibility  of 
being  affected  by  my  mind ; and  this  power  of 
t^ind  upon  mind  is  more  or  less  a^ccording  as  the 
force  of  the  tension  is  a greater  or  less* 

Following  this  simile  further,  it  is  quite  possible, 
that^  just  asdight  waves,  may  trayel  for  millions  of 


years  before  they  reaoh  any  object,  so  thought 
waves  may  also  travel  hundreds  of  years  before 
they  meet  an  object  which  will  vibrate  in  unison 
with  them.  It  is  quite  possible,  therefore,  that 
this  atmosphere  of  ours  is  full  of  such  thought 
pulsations,  both  of  good  and  evil.  Every  thought 
projected  from  every  brain  goes  on  pulsating,  as 
it  were,  until  it  meets  a fit  object  that  will  receive 
it.  Any  mind  which  is  open  to  receive  some  of 
these  impulses  will  receive  them  immediately.  So, 
when  a man  is  doing  evil  actions,  he  has  brought 
his  mind  to  a certain  state  of  tension  ; and  all  the 
waves  which  correspond  to  that  state  of  tension, 
and  which  may  be  said  to  be  already  in  the 

atmosphere,  will  struggfe  to  enter  into  his  mind. 

« 

That  is  why  an  evil-doer  generally  goes  on  doing 
more  and  more  evil.  His  actions  become  intensi- 
fied. Such,  also,  will  be  the  case  with  the  doer 
of  good;  he  will  open  himself  to  all  the  good 
waves  ftiat  are  in  the.  atmosphere,  and  his  good 
actions  alsd  will  become  intensified.  We  run, 
therefore,  a twofold  danger  in  doing  evil;  !first, 


['  n8  ] 


"We  open  ourselves  to  all  4:he  evil  influences  sur- 
rounding US;  secondly,  we  create  evil  which  will 
affect  others.  It  may  be  possible  that  our  evil 
actions  will  affect  othears  hundreds  of  years  hence. 
In  doing  evil  .we  injure  ourselves  and  others  also. 
In  doing  good  we  do  good  to  ourselves  and  to 
Others  as  well ; and,  like  all  other  forces  in  man, 
these  forces  of  good  and  evil  also  gather  strength 
from  outside. 

According  to  Karma-Yoga^  the  action  any 
man  has  done  cannot  be  destroyed,  until  it  has 
borne  its  fruit ; no  power  in  nature  can  stop  it 
from  yielding  its  results.  If  I do  an  evil  action, 

I ‘must  suffer  for  it ; there  is  no  power  in  this 
universe  to  stop  or  stay  it.  Similarly  if  I do  a 
good  action,  there  is.  , no  power  in  the  universe 
which  can  stop  its  bearing  good  results.  The 
cause  must  have  its  effect ; nothing  can  prevent 
or  restrain  this.  Now  comes  a very  fine  and 
serious  matter  for  consideration  about  Karma-" 
^namely,  that  these  actions  of  ours,  both 
gopd  apd  evil,  are  all  intimately  connected  with 


[ '19  ] 


each  other.  We  cannot  put  a line  of  demarcation 

and  say,  this  acHon  is  entirely  good  and  this 

entirely  evil.  There  is  no  action  wjiich  does  not 

bear  good  and  evil  fruits  at  the  same  time.  To 

take  the  nearest  example : I am  talking  to  you, 

# 

and  some  of  you,  perhaps,  think  I am  doing  good ; 
and  at  the  same  time  I am,  perhaps,  killing 
thousands  of  microbes  in  the  atmosphere ; I am 
thus  doing  evil  to  something  else.  There  cannot 
be  any  action  of  manes'  which  is  either  entirely 
good  or  entirely  evil.  When  the  action  is  very 
near  to  us  and  affects  those  we  know,  we  say  that 
it  is  very'  good  action,  provided  it  affects  them  in 
a good  manner.  For  instance,  you  may  call  my 
speaking  to  you  very  good,  but  the  microbes  will 
not ; the  microbes  you  do  not  see,  but  yourselves 
you  do  see.  The  way  in  which  my  talk  affects 
you  is  obvious  to  you,  but  how  it  affects  the 
microbes  is  not  ^o  obvious.  And  so,  if  we  analyse 
our  evir  actions  also  we  may  find  that  some  good 
pbssil^ly  results  from  them  somewhere.  He  who 
in  good  jetton  sees  that  there  is  something  evit 


f.  >20  ] 


in  it,  and  in  the  midst  of  evil  sees'  that  there  is 
something  good  in  it  somewhere, — he  has  known 
the  secret  of  ,work.’' 

But  what  is  it  that  follows  from  this  ? It  is 
this  conclusion — that,  howsoever  we  may  try, 
there  cannot  be  any  action  which  is  perfectly  pure, 
or  any  which  is  perfectly  impure,  taking  purity 
and  impurity  in  the  sense  of  injury  and  non-injury. 
We  cannot  breathe  or  live  without  injuring  others, 
and  every  bit  of  the  food  we  eat  is  taken  away 
from  another’s  mouth : our  very  lives  are  crowding 
out  other  lives.  So  says  the  Bhagvad-Gita.  It 
may  be  men,  or  animals,  or  small  microbes,  but 
some  one  or  other  of  these  we  have  to  crowd  out. 
That  being  the  case,  it  naturally  .follows  that  a 
thoroughly  harmless  perfection  cari  never  be 
attained  in  relation  to  any  work.  We  may  work 
through  all  eternity,  but  there  will  be  no  way  out 
of  this  intricate  maze ; you  may  work  on,  and  on, 
and  on  j there  will  be  no  end  to  this  inevitable* 
a^ociation  of  good  and  evil  in  the  results  of 
^ork. 


[ I2I  J 


The  second  point  to  consider  is,  what  is  the 
end  of  work  ? We  find  the  vast  majority  of 
people  in  every  country  believing  that  there  will 
be  a time  when  this  world  will  become  perfect, 
when  there  will  be  no  disease,  or  death,  or  un- 
happiness, or  wickedness.  That  is  a very  good 
idea,  a very  good  motive  power  to  inspire  and 
uplift  the  ignorant ; but  if  we  think  for  a moment 
we  shall  find  on  the  very  face  of  it  that  it  cannot 
be  so.  How  can  it  be,  seeing  that  good  and  bad 
are  the  obverse  and  reverse  of  the  same  coin  ? 
How  can  you  have  good  without  evil  at  the  same 
time  ? What  is  meant  by  perfection  ? A perfect 
life  is-  almost  a contradiction  in  terms.  Life  itself 
is  a state  of  continous  struggle  between  ourselves 
and  everything  outside.  Every  moment  we  are 
fighting  actually  with  external  nature^  and  if  we 
are  defeated  our  life  has  to  go.  It  is,  for  instance, 
cl  continuous  struggle  for  food  and  air.  If  food  or 
iur  fails  we  die.  Life  is  not  a simple  and  smoothly 
flowing  thing,-  but  it  is  a compound  effect.  This 
coniplex  struggle  between  something  insidoand* 

p 


L *22  J 

th6  external  world  is  what  we  call  life.  So^at  is 
qlear  on  the  very  face  of  it  that,  when  thil  struggle 
ceases,  there  will  be  an  end  of  life. 

What  is  meant  by  ideal  happiness  is  that,  when 
it  is  attained,  this  struggle  will  cease  altogether. 
But  then  life  will  cease,  and  the  struggle  can  only 
cease  when  life  itself  has  ceased.  Then  again, 
before  we  attain  even  one-thousandth  part  of  this 
ideal  happiness  this  earth  will  have  greatly  cooled 
down;  and  we  shall  not  be.  So  this  millennium 
cannot  be  in  this  world,  although  it  may  be  any- 
where else.  We  have  seen  already  that  in  helping 
the  world  we  help  ourselves.  The  main  effect  of 
work  done  for  others  is  to  purify  ourselves.  By 
means  of  the  constant  effort  to  do  good  to  others 
we  are  trying  to  forget  ourselves ; this  forgetful- 
ness of  self  is  the  one  great  lesson  we  have  to 
learn  in  life.  Man  thinks  foolishly  that  he  can 
make  himself  happy,  and  after  years  of  struggle 
finds  out  at  last  that  true  happiness  consists  in 
killing  selfishness  and  that  no  one  can  make  him 
happy  except  himself.  Every  act  of  charity,  every 


[ «23  ] 


thought  of  sympathy,  every  action  of  help,  every 
good  deed,  is  taking  so  much  of  self-importance 
away  from  our  little  selves  and  making  U5  think 
of  ourselves  as  the  lowest  and  the  least ; and, 
therefore,  it  is  all  good.  Here  we  find  that 
Jnana^  Bhakti  and  Karma^  all  come  to  one 
point  The  highest  ideal  is  eternal  and  entire 
self-abnegation,  where  there  is  no  ‘‘  I,”  but  all  is 
‘*thou”;  and  whether  he  is  conscious,  or  uncon- 
scious  of  it  Karma-Yoga  leads  man  to  that  end. 
A religious  preacher  may  become  horrified  at  the 
idea  of  an  impersonal  God  ; he  may  insist  on  a 
personal  God  and  wish  to  keep  up  his  own  identity 
and  individuality  whatever  he  may  mean  by  that. 
But  his  ideas  of  ethics,  if  they  are  really  good, 

. canrfot  but  be  based  on  the  highest  self-abnegation. 
It  is  the  basis  of  all  morality ; you  may  extend  it 
to  men,  or  animals,  or  angels,  it  is  the  one  basic 
idea^  the  one  fundamental  principle  running 
.throngh  all  ethical  systems. 

/ You  will  find  various  classes  of  men  in  this 
eWorld.  Krst,  there  are  the  God-men,  whose  self-' 


1 


abnegation  is  complete,  and  who  do  only  good  to 
others  even  at  the  sacrifice  of  their  own  lives. 
These  are  the  highest  of  men.  If  there  are  a 
hundred  of  such  in  any  country,  that  country  need 
never  despair.  But  they  are  unfortunately  too 
few.  Then  there  are  the  good  men  who  do  good 
to  others  so  long  as  it  does  not  injure  themselves  ; 
and  there  is  a third  class,  the  diabolical  people, 
who,  to  do  good  to  themselves,  injure  others.  It 
is  said  by  a Sanskrit  poet  that  there  is  a fourth  un- 
nameable  class  of  people  who  injure  others  merely 
for  injury’s  sake.  Just  as  there  are  at  one  pole  of 
existence  the  highest  good  men,  who  do  good  for 
tlje  sake  of  doing  good,  so,  at  the  other  pole,  there 
are  others  who  will  injure  others  just  for  the  sake 
of  the  injury.  They  do  not  gain  anything  theteby, 
but  it  is  their  nature  to  do  evil.  We  thus  see  that, 
according  to  pur  poet,  the  man  wfio  sacrifices  him- 
self to  do  good  to  others,  the  man  with  the  highest 
self -abnegation,  is  really  the  greatest  man.  ; 

’ Here  are  two  Sanskrit  words.  One  is^Pra- 
vrit^i,”  which  means/ reyplyipg  towards,  ;a'!:xd‘ the 


[ >25  ] 


other  is  “ Nivritti/’  which  means  revolving  aways. 
The  revolving  towards”  is  what  we  call  th0 
world,  the  I and  mine  ” ; it  includes  all  those 
things  which  are  always  enriching  that  me  ” by 
wealth  and  money  and  power,  and  name,  and  fame* 
and  which  are  of  a grasping  nature,  always  tending 
to  accumulate  everything  in  one  centre,  that 
centre  being  myself.”  That  is  the  ‘^pravritti,”^ 
the  natural  tendency  of  every  human  being  j 
taking  everything  from  every  where  and  heaping 
it  around  one  centre,  that  centre  being  man’s  own 
sweet  self.  When  this  tendency  begins  to  break, 
when  it  is  nivritti  ” or  “ going  away  from,”  then 
begin  morality  and  religion.  Both  • * pravritti,” 
and  “ nivritti  are  of  the  nature  of  work,  the 
former  is  evil  work,  and  the  latter  is  good  work.; 
This  “nivritti”  is  the  fundamental ^ basis  of  all, 
morality  and  all  religion,  and  the  very  perfection, 
of  it  is  entire  self-abnegation,  readiness  to  sacrifice, 
mind  and  body  and  everything  for  another  being.. 
When  a%an  has  reached  that  state  be,  has  attained 
to  ithe  perfection  oi  Kar^m^Yoga,  This  is  the 


[ >26  ] 


highest  result  of  good  works.  Although  a man 
has  not  studied  a single  system  of  philosophy, 
although  he  does  not  believe  in  any  God,  and 
never  has  believed,  although  he  has  not  prayed 
even  once  in  his  whole  life,  if  the  simple  power  of 
good  actions  has  brought  him  to  that  state  where 
he  is  ready  to  give  up  his  life  and  all  else  for 
others,  he  has  arrived  at  the  same  point  to  which 
the  religious  man  will  come  through  his  prayers 
and  the  philosopher  through  his  knowledge ; and 
so  you  may  find  that  the  philosopher,  and  the 
worker,  and  the  devotee,  all  meet  at  one  point, 
that  one  point  being  self-abnegation.  However 
much  their  systems  of  philosophy  and  religion 
may  differ  all  mankind  stand  in  reverence  and  awe 
before  the  man  who  is  ready  t<x  sacrifice  Mmsfelf 
for  others.  Here,  it  is  not  at  all  any  question  of 
oreed,  or  doctrine — even  men  who  are  very  much 
opposed  to  all  religious  ideas,  when  they  see  one 
pi.  these  acts  of  complete  self-sacrifice,  feel  th^t 
they  must  revere  it.  Have  you  not  seen  even  a 
tUpst  bigoted  Christian,  when  he  reads  Edwin 


[ >27  ] 


Arnold’s  “ Light  of  Asia,”  stand  in  reverence  of 
Buddha,  who  preached  no  God,  preached  nothing 
but  self-sacrifice?  The  only  thing  is  that  the 
bigot  does  not  know  that  his  own  end  and  aim  in 
life  is  exactly  the  same  as  that  of  those  from 
whom  he  differs.  The  worshipper,  by  keeping 
constantly  before  him  the  idea  of  God  and  a 
surrounding  of  good,  comes  to  the  same  point  at 
last  and  says,  ^‘Thy  will  be  done,”  and  keeps 
nothing  to  himself.  That  is  self-abnegation.  The 
philosopher,  with  his  knowledge,  sees  that  the 
seeming  self  is  a delusion  and  at  once  easily  gives 
it  up ; it  is  self-abnegation.  So  KarmUy  Bhakti 
and  Jnana  al^meet  here ; and  this  is  what  was 
meant  by  all  the  great  preachers  of  ancient  times, 
when*  they  taught  that  God  is  not  the  world. 
There,  is  one  thing  which  is  the  world  and  another 
which  is  God ; and  this  distinction  is  very  true  \ 
what  they  mean  i)y  world  is  selfishness.  Unsel- 
fishness is  God.  One  may  live  on  a throne,  in  a 
golden  palace,  and  ,be  perfectly  unselfish ; and 
thence  lain  God.  Another  may  live  in  a hut  and 


[ '28  ] 


wear  rags,  and  have  nothing  in  the  world  ; yet,  if 
he  js  selfish,  he  is  intensely  merged  in  the  world. 

To  come  back  to  one  of  our  main  points,  we 
say  that  we  cannot  do  good  without  at  the  same 
time  doing  some  evil,  or  do  evil  without  .doing 
^ome  good.  Knowing  this,  how  can  we  work  ? 
There  have  therefore  been  sects  in  this  world  who 
have  in  an  astoundingly  preposterous  way  preached 
slow  suicide  as  the  only  means  to  get  out  of  the 
world  jf  because,  if  a man  lives  he  has  to  kill  poor 
little  animals  and  plants  or  do  injury  to  something 
or  some  one.  So,  according  to  them  the  only 
way  out  of  the  world  is  to  die ; the  Jainas  have 
preached  this  doctrine' as  their  hipest  ideal.  This 
teaching  seems  to  be  very  logical.  But  the  true 
solution  is  found  in  the  Gita,  It  is  the  theory  of 
nbn-attachment,  to  bei  attached  to  nothing  while 
doing  our  work  of  life.  Know  that  you  are 
separated  entirely  from  the  world ; that  you  are  in 
world,  and  that  whatever  y6u  may  be  dbing  in 
if,  jrdu  are  liot  doing  that  for  your  own  ^ake.  Any 
affticm'that  ydu  do  for  yourself  will  bring  it^  effect 


[ »29  ] 


to  bear  upon  you.  If  it  is  a good  action  you  wilb 
have  to  take  the  good  effect,  and,  if  it  is  a bad 
action,  you  will  have  to  take  the  bad  effect ; but 
any  action  that  is  not  done  for  your  own  sake, 
whatever  it  be, 'will  have  no  effect  on  you.  There 
is  to  be  found  a very  expressive  sentence  in  our 
scriptures  embodying  this  idea : — Even  if  he  kill 
the  tv'hole  universe  (or  be  himself  killed)  he  is 
neither  the  killed  nor  the  killing,  when  he  knows 
that  he  is  not  acting  for  himself  at  all.’^  Therefore 
Karma-Yoga  teaches,  “Do  not  give  up  the  world  j 
live  in  the  world,  imbibe  its  influences  as  much  as 
you  can;  but  if  it  be  for'^your  own  enjoyment’s 
sake — work  not  *at  all.  Enjoyment  should  not  be* 
the  goal.  First  kill  yourself  and  then  take  the 
whole* World  as  yourself;  as  the  old  Christians 
used  to  say  “ the  old  man  must  die.’^  This  old 
nian  is  the  selfish  idea  that  the  whole  world  is 
made  for  our  enjoyment.  Foolish  parents  teach 
'tb^eir  children  to  pray,  “ 0 Lord,  thou  hast  created 
this  suti  for  me  and  this  moon  for  me,”  as  if  the 
Lord^  has  had  nothing  else  to  do  than  to  create 


[ 13°  1 

t 

everything  for,  these  babies.  Do  not  teach  youi 
children  such  nonsense.  Then  again,  there  are 
people  who  are' foolish  in  another  way ; they  teacf 
us  that  all  these  animals  were  created  for  us  tc 
kill  and  eat,  and  that  this  universe  is  for  the  enjoy 
ment  of  men.  That  is  all  foolishness.  A tigei 
may  say,  “ Man  was  created  for  me,”  and  pray 
“ O Lord,  how  wicked  are  these  men,  who  do  no 
come  and  place  themselves  before  me  to  be 
eaten  ; they  are  breaking  your  law.’**  If  the  work 
is  created  for  us,  we  are  also  created  for  the 
world.  That  this  world  is  created  for  our  enjoy 
rhent  is  the  most  wicked  idea  that  holds  us  down 
This  world  is  not  for  our  sake  ; millions  pass  oul 
of  it  every  year ; the  world  does  -not  ’ feel  it 
milRons  of  others  are  supplied  in  their  ‘place 
just  as  much  the  world  is  for  us,  we  are  also  foi 
the  world.  • ■ 

To  work  pr6perly,  therefore,  you  have  first  tc 
give  up  Jhe  idea  of  attachment.  Secondly,  dc 
not  mix  iti  the  ffay,  hold  yourself  as  a witness 
and  go  on  working.  My  old  master  used  to  say 


[ >3'  ] 


"Look  upon  your  children  as  a nurse  does.” 
The  nurse  will  take  your  baby  and  fondle  it  and 
play  with  it  and  behave  towards  it  as  gently  as  if 
it  were  her.  own  child ; but  as  soon  as  you  give 
her  notice  to  quit,  she  is  ready  to  start  off  with 
bag  tind  baggage  from  the  house.  Everything 
in  the  shape  of  attachment  is  forgotten ; it  will 
not  give  the  ordinary  nurse  the  least  pang  to  leave 
your  children  and  take  up  other  children.  Even 
so  are  you  to  be  with  all  that  you  consider  your 
own.  You  are  the  nurse,  and,  if  you  believe  in 
God,  believe  that  all  these  things  which  you 
consider  yours  are  really  His,  The  greatest 
weakness  often  insinuates  itself  as  the  greatest 
good  and  strength.  It  is  a weakness  to  think  that 
any  tone  is  dependent  on  me,  and  that  I can  do 
good- to  another.  This  pride  is  the  mother  of  all 
our  attachment,  and  through  this  attachment 
comes  all  our  pain.  We  must  inform  our  minds 
ithat  no  one  in  this  universe  depends  upon  us; 
not  one  beggar  depends  on  our  charity ; not  one 
soul  on  our  kindness ; not  one  living  thing  on  our 


[ *3^  1 


Help.  All  are  helped  on  by  nature,  and  will  be  so 
helped  even  though  millions  of  us  were  not  here. 
The  course  of  nature  will  not  stop  for  such  as  you 
^nd  me;  it  is,  as  already  pointed  out,  only  a 
blessed  privilege  to  you  and  to  me  that  we  are 
allowed)  in  the  way  of  helping  others,  to  educate 
ourselves.  This  is  a greaf  lesson  to  learn  in  life, 
and  when  we  have  learned  it  fully  we  shall  never 
be  unhappy  ; we  can  go  and  mix  without  harm  in 
society  anywhere  and  everywhere.  You  may  have 
wives  and  husbands,  and  regiments  of  servants, 
and  kingdoms  to  govern ; if  only  you  act  on  the 
principle  that  the  wdrld  is  not  for  you  and  does 
i\pt  inevitably  need  you,  they  can  do  you  no  harm. 
This  very  year  some  of  your  friends  may  have 
died.  Is  the  world  waiting  without  going  on,  for 
them  to  come  again?  Is  its  current  stopped? 
No,  it  goes  on.  So  drive  and  thrash  . Out  of  your 
mind  the  idea  that  yoi^  have  to.  do  something  for 
the  world ; the  world  does  not  require  any  help 
from  you.  It  is  sheer  nonsense  on  the  part  of 
any  man  to  think  that  he  is  born  to  help  the 


[ '33.1 


world ; it  is  simply  pride,  it  is  selfishness  insinuate 
ing  itself  in  the  form  of  virtue.  When  you  have 
trained  your  mind  and  your  muscles  to  realise  this 
idea  of  the  world’s  non-dependence  on  you  or  oil 
anybody, . there  will  then  be  no  reaction  in  the 
form  6f  pain  resulting  from  work.  When  you 
give  something  to  a man  and  expect  nothing — do 
fiot  even  expect  the  man  to  be  grateful — his  in- 
gratitude will  not  tell  upon  you,  because  you  never 
expected  anything,  never  thought  you  had  any 
right  to  anything  in  the  way  of  a return ; yoU 
gave  him  what  he  deserved ; his  own  Karma  got 
it  for  him ; your  Karma  made  you  the  carrier 
thereof.  Why  should  you  be  proud  of  having 
given  away  something?  You  are  the  porter  that 
carried  the  money  or  other  kind  of  gift,,  and  the 
world  deserved  it  by  its  own  Karma,  Where  li 
then  the  reason  for  pride  in  you?  There  is  noth- 
ing Very  great  in  what  you  give  to  the  world. 
When  you  have  acquired  the  feeling  of  non- 
attachment,  there  will  then  be  neither  good  nor 
evil  for.yoii.  It. is  only  selfishness  that  causes  thft 


[ >34  ] 


difference  between  good  and  evil.  It,  is  a very 
hard  thing  to  understand,  but  you  will  come  to 
learn  in  time  that  nothing  in  the  universe  ha$ 
power  over  you  until  you  allow  it  to  exercise  such 
a power.  Nothing  has  power  over  the  Self  of 
man,  until  that  Self  ^becomes  a fool  and  loses 
independence.  So,  by  non -attachment,  you  over^ 
come  and  deny  the  power  of  anything  to  act  upon 
you.  It  is  very  easy  to  say  that  nothing  has  the 
right  to  act  upon  you  until  you  allow  it  to  do  so  5 
but  what  is  the  true  sign  of  the  man  who  really 
does  not  allow  anything  to  work  upon  him,  who  is 
neither  happy  nor  unhappy  when  acted  upon  by 
the  external  world  ? The  sign  is  that  it  causes  on 
change  in  his  mind  whether  a mountain  tumbles 
on  him  and  crushes  him  to  pieces,  or  the  ‘'most 
blessed  scenes  come  before  him  arid  the  most 
blessed  things  hap(>cn  to  him ; he  is  the  same  in 
good  fortune  or  in  had  fortune ; in  all  conditions 
he  continues  to  remain  the  same; 

: There. was  ja  great  sage  m India  called  Vyasa. 
This  Vyasa  is  known  as  the  author  of  the  Vedanto 


[ *35  ] 


aphorisitiS;  and  was  a holy  man*  His  father  had 
tried  to  become  a very  perfect  man  and  had 
failed*  His  grandfather  had  also  tried  and  failed* 
His  great-grandfather  had  similarly  tried  and  fail- 
ed. He  himself  did  not  succeed  perfectly,  but 
his  son,  Suka,  was  born  perfect.  Vyasa  taught 
his  son  wisdom,  and,  after  teaching  him  the 
knowledge  of  truth  himself,  he  sent  him  to  the 
court  of  King  Janaka.  He  was  a great  king 
and  was  called  Janaka  Videha.  Videha  means 
''outside  the  body.”  Although  a king,  he  had 
entirely  forgotten  that  he  was  a body;  he  felt 
that  he  was  a spirit  all  the  time.  This  boy  Suka 
was  sent  to  be  taught  by  him.  The  king  kn^vy 
that  Vyasa^s  son  was  coming  to  him  to  learn 
wlsdt»m;  so  he  made  certain  arrangements  before- 
hand ; and  when  the  boy  presented  himself  at  the 
gates  of  the  palace,  the  guards  took  no  notice  of 
him  whatsoever.  They  only  gave  him  a ^ seat, 
and  he  sat  there  for  three  days  and  nights,  no- 
body ^pfeaking.  to  him,,  nobody  asking  him  who 
h^  Wais  or  whence  he  wa^r.  He  was  the  son  of 


[ >36  ] 


d Very  great  Sage;  his  father  was  honored  hy 
the  whole  country,  and  he  himself  was  a most 
respectable  person  ; yet  the  low,  vulgar  guards 
g£  the  palace  would  take  no  notice  of  him.  After 
that,  suddenly,  the  ministers  of  the  king  and  all 
the  big  officials  came  there  and  received  him 
with  the  greatest  honors.  They  conducted  him 
in  and  showed  him  into  splendid  rooms,  gave  him 
the  most  fragrant  baths  and  wonderful  dresses, 
and  for  eight  days  they  kept  him  there  in  all 
kinds  of  luxury.  That  solemnly  serene  face  of 
Suka  did  not  change  even  to  the  smallest  extent 
by  the  change  in^  the  treatment  accorded  to  him  ; 
he  was  the  same  in  the  midst  of  this  luxury  as 
when  waiting  at  the  door.  Then  he  was  brought 
before  the  king.  The  king  was  on  his  throne, 
music  was  playing,  and  dancing  and  other  amuse- 
ments Were  going  on.  The  king  then  gave  him 
a cup . of  milk,  full  to  the  brim,  and  asked  him 
to  go  seven  times  round  the  hall  without  spilling 
even  a drop  of  the  milk:  The  Boy  took  the  cup 
and  went  on  in  the  midst  of  the  music  and  the 


[ »37  ] 


attraction  of  the  beautiful  faces  i 
desired  by  the  king,  seven  time$  did  ne  go  rounUy 
and  not  a drop  of  the  milk  was  spilt.  The  boy’s* 
mind  could  not  be  attracted  by  anything  in  the 
world,  unless  he  allowed  it  to  affect  him.  ■ And 
when  he  brought  the  cup  to  the  king,  the  king 
said  to  him,  '‘  What  your  father  has  taught  you, 
and  what  you  have  learned  yourself,  I can  only 
repeat;  you  have  known  the  truth  ; go  home.” 

Thus  the  man  that  has  practised  control  over 
himself  cannot  be  acted  upon  by  anything  that  is 
outside ; there  is  no  more  slavery  fo-r  him;  His 
mind  has  become  free  ; such  a man  alone  is  fit  to 
live  well  in  the  world.  We  generally  find  mep 
holding  two  opinions  regarding  the  world.  Some 
are  pessimists  and  say  “ How  horrible  this  world 
IS,  how  wicked  1 ” Some  others  are  optimists  and 
they  say  ^'Hpw  beautiful  this  world  is,  how 
Wonderful ! ” ■ To  those  who  have  not  controlled 
thiir  own^  minds,  the  world  is  either  full  of  evil  or 
a ^mixture  of  good  and  evil.  This  very 
world  . will  become  to  us  an  optimis'tic  ^orld  whem 


[ *38  ] 


becdrtie  masters  of  our  own  minds.  Nothing 
will  then  swork  upon  us  as  good  or  evil ; we  shall 
find  everything  to  be  in  its  proper  place,  to  be 
harmonious.  Some  men,  who  begin  by  saying 
that  the  world  is  a hell,  often  end  by  saying  that 
it  is  a heaven  when  they  succeed  in  the  practice 
of  self-control.  If  we  are  genuine  Karma-Yogins 
and  wish  to  train  ourselves  to  the  attainment  of 
this  state,  wherever  we  may  begin  we  are  sure  to 
end  in  perfect  self-abnegation ; and  as  soon  as 
this  seeming  self  has  gone,  the  whole  world,  which 
at  first  appears  to  us  to  be  filled  with  evil,  will 
appear  to  be  heaven  itself  and  full  of  blessedness, 
\ts  very  atmosphere  will  be  blessed ; every  human 
face  there  will  be  good.  Such  is  the  end  and  aim 
of  Karma- Yoga j and  such  is  its  perfectien  of 
practical  life.  Our  various  Yogas  do  not  conflict 
with  each  other;  each,  of  them  leads  us  to  the 
same  goal  and  makes  us  perfect;  only  each  has 
,,to  he  strenuously  practised.  The  whole  secret  is 
in  practising.  First  you  have  to  hear,  then  think, 
and  then  practise.  This  is  true  of  every  Yoga, 


[ »39  ] 


You  have  first  to  hear  about  it  and  understand 
what  it  is ; and  many  things  which  you  do  not 
understand  will  be  made  clear  to  you  by  constant' 
hearing  and  thinking.  It  is  hard  to  understand 
every  thing  at  once.  The  explanation  of  every 
thing  is  after  all  in  yourself.  No  one  was  ever 
really  taught  by  another ; each  of  us  has  to  teach 
himself.  The  external  teacher  offers  only  the 
suggestion  which  rouses  the  internal  teacher  to 
work  to  understand  things.  Then  things  will  be 
made  clear  to  us  by  our  own  power  of  perception 
and  thought,  and  we  shall  realise  them  in  our  own 
souls;  and  that  realisation  will  grow  into  the 
intense  power  of  will.  First  it  is  feeling,  then  k 

becomes  willing,  and  out  of  that  willing  comes  th6 

- \ 

tremendous  force  for  work  that  will  go  through 
every  vein  and  nerve  and  muscle,  until  the  whole 
mass  of  your  body  is  changed  into  an  instrument 
of  the  unselfish  Yoga  of  work,  and  the  desired 
of  perfect  self-abnegation  and  utter  un- 
selfii^ness  is  duly  attained.  This  attainment  does 
depend  on  any  dogma,  or  doctrine^  or  belifefe 


[ MO  ] 


Whether  oite  is  Christian,  or  Jew,  Or  Gentile,  it 
does  oot  matten  Are  you  unselfish?  That  is 
the  question..  If  you  are,  you  will  be  perfect  with- 
out reading  a single  religious  book;  without  going 
into;  a'single  church  or  temple.  Each  one  of  our 
Yogas  is  fitted  to  make  map  perfect  even  >ifithout 
rile  help  of  the  others,  because  they  have  all  the 
same  goal  in  view.  The  Yogas  of'Work,  of  wisdom, 
and  of  devotion  are  all  capable  of  serving  as  direct 
and  independent  means  for  the  attainment  of 
Moksha,  “ Fools  alone  say  that  work  and  philo- 
sophy ftfe  different,  not  the  learned.’  The  learned 
know  that,  though  apparently  different  from  each 
other,  they  at  last  lead  to  the  same  goal  of  human 
perfection.  , 


CHAPTER  VI h 


FRE^OM. 

In  addition  to  meaning  work,,  we  have  stated 
that  psychologically  the  word  Karma  also  implies 
causation.  Any  work,  any  action,  any  thought 
that  produces  an ’effect  is  called  a itarma.  Thus 
the  law  of  Karma  means  the  law  of  causation,  of 
inevitable  cause  and  sequence.  Wheresoevef 
there  is  a cause,  there  an  effect  must  be  produced  ? 
this  necessity  cannot  be  resisted,  and  this  law  of 
Karma,  according  to  our  philosophy,  is  true 
throughout  the  whole  universe.  Whatever  we 
see,  or  feel,  or  do ; whatever  action  there  is  any^ 
wherti  in  the  universe ; while  being  the  effect,  of 
past  work  on  the  one  hand,  it  becomes,  on  thq 
other  hand,  a c^use  in  its  turn,  .and  produces 
its  own  effect.  Jt  is  necessary,  together  with 
this,  to  consider  what  is  meant  by  the  word  law* 
We, may  see  psychologically  that  by  law  is  meant 
the  - tendency  of  a series,  tp  repeat  itselfc  When 


f *42  ] 


We  see -one  event  followibd  by  another,  or  some- 
times happening  simultaneously  with  another,  we 
expect  this  sequence  or  cO-existence  to  recur. 
Gut  old  logicians  and  philosophers  of  the  Nydya 
i^chool  call  this  law  by  the  name  of  Vyapti 
According  to  them  all  our  ideas  of  law  are  due  to 
association.  A series  of  phenomena  becomes 
associated  with  things  in  our  mind  in  a sort  of 
invariable  order,  so  that  whatever  we  perceive  at 
any  time  is  immediately  referred  to  other  facts  in 
the  mind.  Any  one  idea  or,  according  to  our 
psychology,'  any  one  wave  that  is  produced  in  the 
mind-stuff,  chitta^  must  always  give  rise  to  many 
other  waves.'  This  is  the  psychological  idea  of 
association,, and  causation  is  only  an  aspect  of  this 
grand  and  pervasive  principle  of  association/This 
pervasiveness  of' association  is  what  is,  in  Sanskrit, 
cdled  Vyapiu  In  the  external  world  the  idea  of 
few*  is^  the  same  as  in^the  internal  world — ^the 
^ ^ectation  that  a particular  phenomenon  will  be 
followed  by  another,  and  tltat  tKe  series  will  repeat 
itself  so  far  as  'we  can  see;  ’ Really  speaking, 


[ ‘43  ] 


therefore,  lawdpe$^not  exist  in  nature.  Practicalfy 
it  is  au  error  tg  say . that  gravitation  exists 
in  the  earth,  or  that  there  is  any  law  existing 
objectively  anywhere  in  nature.  Law  is  the 
method,  the  manner  in  which  our  mind  grasps  a 
series  of  phenomena ; it  is  all  in  the  piind.  Certain 
phenomena  happening  one  after  another  or 
together,  and  followed'  by  the  conviction  of  the 
regularity  of  their  recurrence,  thus  enabling  our 
minds  to  grasp  the  method  of  the  whole  series, 
constitute  what  we  call  law. 

The  next  question  for  consideration  is  what  we 
mean  by  law  being  universal.  Our  universe  is 
that  portion  of  existence  which  is  characterised  by 
what . the  Sanskrit  psychologists  call  desa-kalar 
nimika,^  or  what  is  known  to  European  psychology 
spaee^  time^  3x\A  causation.  This  universe  is> 
only  one  .part  of  infinite  existence;  one  part  which 
is;  thrown  into  - a peculiar  mould, : or  is  cornposed 
of  space,  , time,  and,  causation.  That  part  of  the 
s^-  tgtah  of  existence  which  filla  this  mould  i3 
wl^  (pm  univerrse.  It  necessarily,  follows 


[ H4  ] 


th'at  law  IS  possible  only  within  this  conditioned 
uhiverse;  beyond  th^t  there  cairinot  be  aiiy  law. 
When  we  speak  of  this  uniVerse,  we  only  niean 
that  portion  of  existence  which  is  limited  by  ouf 
mind ; the  universe  of  the  senses,  that  which  we 
can  see,  feel,  touch,  hear,  think  of,  imagine;  that 
universe  alone  is’undeV  law;  but,  beyond  that, 
existence  cannot  be  Subject  to  law,  because 
causation  does  not  extend  beyond  the  world  of 
our  minds.  Anything  beyond  the  range  of  our 
mind  and  our  senses  is  not  boUnd  by  the  law  of 
causation,  as  there  is  no  mental  association  of 
things  in  the  region  beyond  the  senses,  and  no 
causation  without  association  of  ideas.  It  is  only 
when  being’'  or  existence  gets  moulded  into 
name  and  form  that  it  Obeys  the  taw  of  causation, 
arid  is  said  to  be  under  law;,  because  all . law  has 
its  essence  causation.  Therefore,  we  see  at 
once  that  there  cannot  be  any  such  thing  as  free 
win ; the  very  words  ate  a cor^tradictiori,  because 
is  tvhat  We  know/  ‘and  everything  that  we 
dtriow  is  within  ^ur  umVerse;-  arid  everything  within 


[ '45  ] 


our  universe  is  moulded  by  the  conditions  of  space^ 
time,  and  causation.  Everything  that  we  know, 
or  can  possibly  know,  must  be  subject  to  causa- 
tion, and  that  which  obeys  the  law  of  causation 
cannot  be  free.  It  is  acted  upon  by  other  agents, 
and  becomes  a cause  in  its  turn.  But  that  which 
has  become  converted  into  the  will,  which  was 
not  the  will  before,  but  which,  when  it  fell  into 
this  mould  of  space,  time  and  causation  became 
converted  into  the  human  will,  is  free ; and  when 
this  will  gets  out  of  this  mould  of  space,  time  and 
causation,  it  will  be  free  again.  From  freedom  it 
comes,  and  becomes  moulded  into  this  bondage, 
and  it  gets  out  and  goes  back  to  freedom  again.  ^ 
The  question  has  been  raised  as  to  from  whom 
this  ^iniverse  comes,  in  whom  it  rests,  and  to 
whom  it  goes ; and  the  answer  has  been  given 
that  from  freedom  it  comes,  and  rests  in  bondage 
and  goes  back  into  that  freedom  again.  So, 
when  we  speak  of  man  as  no  other  than  that  infi- 
nite being  who  is  manifesting  himself,^  we  mean 
that  Only  one  very  small  part  thereof  is  man } thi$ 
S 


[ 146  ] 


body  and  this  mind  which  we  see  are  only  one 
part  of  the  whole,  only  one  spot  of  the  infinite 
being.  This  whple  universe  is  only  one  speck  of 
the  infinite  being,  and  all  our  laws,  and  our  bond- 
ages, our  joys  and  our  sorrows,  our  happinesses, 
and  our  expectations,  are  only  within  this  small 
universe,  all  our  progression  and  digression  are 
within  its  small  compass.  So  you  see  how  childish 
it  is  to  expect  a continuation  of  this  universe,  the 
creation  of  our  minds,  and  to  expect  and  hope  to 
go  to  heaven,  which  after  all  must  mean  only  a 
repetition  of  this  world  that  we  know.  You  see 
at  once  that  it  is  an  impossible  and  childish  desire 
to  make  the  whole  of  infinite  existence  conform 
to  the  limited  and  conditioned  existence  which  we 
know.  So,  when  a man  says  that  he  wilt  have 
again  and  again  this  same  thing  which  he  is 
having  now,  pr,  as  I sometimes  put  it,  when  he 
asks  for  a comfortable  religion,  you  may  jcnow  that 
he  has  become  so  degenerate , that  he  cannot 
^ think  of  anything  higher  than  what  he  is  now; 
he  is  just  his  little  present  surrouh4ings  and 


*47 


nothing  more.  He  has  forgotten  his  infinite  nature, 
dnd  his  whole  idea  is  confined  to  these  little  joys 

and  sorrows,  and  heart-jealousies  of  the  moment, 

# 

He  thinks  that  this  finite  thing  is  the  infinite  j and 
not  only  so,  he  will  not  let  this  foolishness  go. 
He  clings  on  desperately  unto  Thrishna^  the 
thirst  after  life,  what  the  Buddhists  call  Tanha 
and  Trissa,  There  may  be  millions  of  kinds  of 
happiness,  and  beings,  and  laws,  and  progress, 
and  causation,  all  acting  outside  the  little  uni- 
verse that  we  know,  and  after  all  the  whole  of 
this  comprises  but  one  section  of  our  nature. 

To  acquire  freedom  we  have  to  get  beyond 
the  limitations  of  this  lyiiverse;  it  cannot  be* 
found  here.  Perfect  equilibrium  or  what  the 
Christies  call  the  peace  that  passeth  all  under- 
standing cannot  be  had  in  this  universe,  nor  in 
heaven,  nor  in  any  place  where  our  mind  and 
thoughts  can  go,  where  the  senses  can  feel,  or 
which  the  imagination  can  conceive.  No  such 
^plaee  can  give  us  that  freedom,  because  all  such 
places  wbvild  be  within  our  universe,  and  it  is 


[ h8  ] 


limited  by  spsice,  time  and  causation.  There  may 
be  places  that  are  more  etherial  than  this  earth 
of  ours,  where  enjoyments  may  be  keener, , but 
even  those  places  must  be  in  the  iiniverse,  and 
therefore  in  bondage  to  law;  so  we  have  to  go 
beyond,  and  real  religion  begins  there  where  this 
little  universe  ends.  These  little  joys,  and 

sorrows,  and  knowledge  of  things  end  thete,  and 
the  reality  begins.  Until  we  give  up  the  thirst 
after  life,  the  strong  attachment  to  this  our  tran- 
sient conditiorted  existence,  we  have  no  hope  of 
catching  even  a glimpse  of  that  infinite  freedom 
‘ beyond.  It  stands  to  reason  then  that  there  is 
- only  one  way  to  attain,to  that  freedom  which  is 
the  goal  of  all  the  noblest  aspirations  of  mankind, 
and  that  one  way  is  by  giving  up  this  little  life, 
giying  up  this  little  universe,  giving  up  this  earth, 
giving  up  heaven,  giving  up  the  body,  giving  up 
the  niihd,  giving  up  everything  that  limited 
and  conditioned.  If  we  give  up  our  attachments 
to  this  little  universe  of  the  senses,  or  of  the 
'mind,  immediately  we  ^hall  be  free!  The  only  | 


[ 149  J 


Way  to  come  outsof  bondage  is  to  go  beyond  the 
limitations  of  law,  to  go  beyond  where  causation 
prevails. 

But  it  is  a most  difficult  thirfg  to  give  up  the 
clinging  to  this  universe  j few  ever  attain  to  that. 
There  are  two  ways  to  do  that,  mentioned  in  our 
books.  One  is  called  the  “neti  neti’',  (not  this, 
not  this,)  the  other  is  called  the  “iti  iti”;  the  for- 
mer is  the  negative  and  the  latter  the  positive. 
The  negative  way  is  the  most  difficult.  It  is  only 
possible  to  the  men  of  the  very  highest  excep- 
tional minds  and  gigantic  wills  who  simply  stand 
up  and  say,  ‘^No,  I will  not  have  this,”  and  the 
mind  and  body  obey  their  will,  and  they  come  put 
successful.  But  such  people  are  very  rare,  the 
vas(t  majority  of  mankind  choose  the  positive  way, 
the  way  through  the  world,  making  use  of  all  the 
bondages  themselves  to  break  those  very  bon- 
dages. This  i^  also  a kind  of  giving  up  ; only  it 
is  done  slowly  and  gradually,  by  knowing  things, 
enjoying  things,  and  thus  obtaining  experience^ 
..ai^d  knowing  the  nature  of  things,  until  the  miifd 


lets  them  all  go  at  last  and  becomes  unattached. 
The  former  way  of  obtaining  non-attachment  is  by 
reasoning,  and  the  latter  way  is  through  work  and 
experience.  Ihh  first  is  the  oi  Jnana-Yoga^ 
and  is.  characterised  by  the  refusal  to  do  any 
building  work;  the  second  is  that  of  Karma-Yogu, 
in  which  there  is  no  cessation  from  doing  work. 
Every  one  must  work  in  the  universe.  Only  those 
who  are  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  Self,  whose 
desires  do  not  go  beyond  the  Self,  whose  mind 
never  strays  out  of  the  Self,  to  whom  the  Self  is 
all  in  all,  only  those  do  not  work.  The  rest  must 
all  work.  A current  rushing  down  freely  in 
accordance  with  its  own  nature  falls  into  a hollow 
and  makes  a whirlpool,  and,  after  running  round 
and  round  a little  in  that  whirlpool,  it  emei|;es 
again  in  the  form  of  the  free  current  to  go  on 
unchecked.  Each  human  life  is  like  that  current. 

It  gets  into  the  whirl,  gets  involved  in  this  world 
> o£  space,  time,  and  causation^  there  whirls  round 
a httle,  crying  out  my,  father,  my  brother,  my 
niriie,  my  fame,  and  so  on,  and  at  l|§t  emerges  • 


L »S'  ] 


out  of  it  and  regains  its  original  freedom.  The' 
whole  universe  is  doing  that.  Whether  we  know 
it  or  not,  whether  we  are  conscious  or  unconscious 
of  it,  we  are  all  wdl-king  to  get  out  of  the  dream 
of  the  world.  Man’s  experience  in  the  world  is 
to  enable  him  to  get  out  of  its  whirlpool. 

But  what  is  Karma-Yoga?  It  is  the  know- 
ledge of  the  secret  of  work.  We  see  that  the 
whole  universe  is  working.  For  what  does  it  do 
so?  For  salvation,  for  liberty;  consciously  or 
unconsciously  every  thing  from  the  smallest  atom 
to  the  highest  being  is  working  for  that ; working 
with  the  one  aim  of  obtaining  liberty  for  the  mind, 
for  the  body,  for  the  Spirit,  and  for  everything ; all 
things  are  always  trying  to  get  freedom,  they  are 
flying  away  from  bondage.  The  sun,  the  moon, 
the  earth,  the  planets,  all  are  trying  to  fly  away 
from  bondage.  The  centrifugal  and  the  centripe- 
tal forces  of  nature  are  indeed  typical  of  our 
universe.  Karma-Yoga  tells  us  the  secret  and 
the  methbd  of  work.  Instead  of  our  beings 
knocked  about  in  this  universe,  and  after  long 


[ 'Si- 3 


delay  and  thrashing,  getting  to  know  things  as  they 

arcy  Karma-Yoga  teaches  us  the  secret  of  work, 

the  method  of  work,  the  organizing  power  of 

Work.  A vast  mass  of  energy  may  be  spent  in 
> 

Vain,  if  we  do  not  know  how  to  use  and  utilise  it. 
Karma-  Yoga  makes  a science  of  work,  you  learn 
by  it  how  best  to  utilise  all  the  workings  of  this 
world.  Work  is  inevitable,  it  must  be  so ; but 
we  have  work  to  the  highest  purpose.  Karma- 
Yoga  makes  us  admit  that  this  world  is  a world  of 
merely  five  minutes ; that  it  is  a something  we 
have  inevitably  to  pass  through;  and  that  free- 
djOm  is  not  here,  but  is  only  to  be  found  beyond. 
To  find  the  way  out  of  the  bondages  of  the  world 
we  have  to  go  through  it  slowly  and  surely. 
There  may  Jje  those  exceptional  persons  about 
whom  f just  spoke,  those  who  can  stand  aside 
and  give  up  the  world,  as  a snake  casts  off  its 
jlkiri  and  stands  aside  and  looks  at  it ; there  are 
ltd  . doubt,  some  of  these  exceptional  beings  ; bqt 
fhe  Vest  of  mMikind  have  to  go  slowly  thVough 
of  Karma^Yoga  shows  uS  the 


[ '‘SS  ] 


process,  the  secret  and  the  method  of  doing  so  to 
the  best  advantage  of  all  coricerned. 

What  does  it  say  ? ' “Work  incessantly^  but 
give  up  all  attachment  to  work.”  Do  not  identify 
yourself  with  anything.  Hold  your  mind  free. 
All  this  that  you  see,  the  pains  and  the  miseries, 
are  but  the  necessary  conditions  of  this  world; 
poverty  and  wealth  and  happiness  are  but  momen- 
tary ; they  do  not  belong  to  our  real  nature  at  all. 
Our  nature  is  far  beyond  misery  or  happiness, 
beyond  every  object  of  the  senses,  beyond  ,the 
hnagination ; and  yet  w^e  must  go  on  working  all 
the  time.  “ Misery  comes  through  attachmentj 
riot  through  work.”  As  soon  as  we  identify  oui^ 
selves  with  the  work  we  do,  we  feel  miserable ; 
but  ifrwe  do  not  identify  ourselves  with  it  we  d6 
not  feel  that  misery.  If  a beautiful  picture  belong- 
ing  to  another  is  burnt,  a man  does  not  generally 
become  very  miserable ; but  when  his  own  picture 
is  burnt,  how  miserable  he  feels  ! Why?  Both 
were  beautiful  pictures,  perhaps  copies  of  the  same 
biijginal ; but  in  one  case  very  much  more  miseiy 
T 


[ >54  ] 


is  felt  than  in  the  other.  It  is  because  in  one  case 
he  identifies  himself  with  the  picture,  and  not  in 
the  other.  This  “ I and  mine  ” causds  the  whole 
misery.  With  the  sense  of  possession  came 
selfishness,  and  selfishness  brought  on  misery. 
Every  act  of  selfishness  or  thought  of  selfishness 
makes  us  attached  to  something,  and  immediately 
we  are  made  slaves.  Each  wave  in  the  “ chitta  ” 
that  says  I and  mine,’’  immediately  puts  a chain 
round  us  and  makes  us  slaves ; and  the  more  we 
say,  1 and  mine  ” the  more  slavery  grows,  the 
more  misery  increases.  Therefore,  Karma-Yoga 
tells  us  to  enjoy  the  beauty  of  all  the  pictures  in 
the  world,  but  not  to  identify  ourselves  with  any 
or  all  of  them.  Never  say  mine.”  Whenever 
we  say  a thing  is  mine,  misery  will  immediately 
come.  Do  not  even  say  ” my  child  ” in  your 
mind.  Possess  the  child,  but  do  not  say  “ mine.” 
If  you  do,  then  will  come  the  misery.  Do  not 
say  my  house,”  do  not  say  “my  body.!’  The 
whole  difficulty  is  there.  The  body  is  neither 
ypurs  nor  mine  nor  anybody’s.  These  bodies  are 


[ >55  ] 


coming  and  going  by  the  laws  of  nature,  but'  we 
are  free,  standing  as  witness. , This  body  is  no 
more  free  than  a picture,  or  a wall.  Why  should 
we  be  attached  so  much  to  a body  ? If  some- 
body paints  a picture,  he  does  it  and  afterwards 
passes  away.  Why  should  he  be  attached  to  it  ? 
Let  it  pass.  Do  not  project  that  tentacle  of 
selfishness,  “ I must  possess  it.”  As  soon  as  that 
is  projected,  misery  will  begin. 

So  Karma-Yoga  says,  first  destroy  the  ten'- 
dency  to  project  this  tentacle  of  selfishness,  and, 
when  you  have  the  power  of  checking  that,  hold 
it  in  and  do  not  allow  the  mind  to  get  into  that 
sort  of  the  Wave  of  selfishness.  Then  you  may 
go  out  into  the  world  and  work  as  much  as  you 
can.*  Mix  everywhere;  go  where  you  please; 
ybu  will  never  be  polluted  or  contaminated  with 
evil.  There  is  the  lotus  leaf  in  the  water ; the  water 
bahnot  touch  and  adhere  to  it ; so  will  you  be  in  the 
World.  This  is  called  ‘Vairagya,^’  dispa^sion  or 

the  lion-attachment  of  Karma-Yoga.  I believe 

• 

I ^ have  told  you  that  without  non-attachment 


[ «56  ] 


there  cannot  be  any  kind  of  Yoga.  Non- 
attachment  is  the  basis  of  ail  the  Yogas.  The 
nian  who  gives  up  living  in  houses,  and  wearing 
fine  clothes,  and  eating  good  food,  and  goes  into 
the  desert,  may  be  a most  attachecl  person.  His 
only  possession,  his  own  body,  may  become  every- 
thing to  him ; and  as  he  lives  he  will  be  simply 
^ruggling  for  the  sake  of  his  body.  Non-attach- 
ment does  not  mean  any  thing  that  we  may  do  in 
Illation  to  our  external  body,  but  it  is  all  in  the 
mind.  The  binding  link  of  “I  and  mine”  is  in  the 
body.  If  we  have  not  this  link  with  the  body 
and  Ivith  the  things  of  the  senses,  we  are 
i^on-attached,  wherever  and  whatever  we  may 
be.  A man  be  oh  a throne  and  perfectly  non* 
attached",  another  man  may  be  in  ragsf  and 
still  very  much  attached.  First,  we  have  , to 
attain  this  state  of  nbn-attacHment,  and  then 
to  work  incessantly.  Karma-Yoga  gives  us  the 
nfihthbd*^  that  \^ll  help  uS  in  giving  up  al! 
aMobm^tv  it  is  indeed  a hard  thing  to  give 
attachihent. 


[ '57  j 


Here  are  the  two  ways  of  giving  up  all  attach- 
ment in  Karma-Yoga,  One  way  is  for  those 
who  do  not  believe  in  God,  or  in  any  outside 
help*  They  are  left  to  their  own  devices;  they 
have  simply  to  work  with  their  own  will,  with  the 
power  of  their  mind,  saying  “I  must  be  nom 
attached,”  and  work  too  with  their  own  power  of 
Viveka  or  discrimination.  For  those  who  believe 
in  God  there  is  the  other  way,  which  is  much  less 
difficult  to  go  through.  They  give  up  the  fruits 
of  work  unto  the  Lord,  they  work  and  are  never 
attached  to  the  results.  Whatever  they  see,  feel, 
hear,  or  do,  is  for  Him,  Whatever  good  work  we 
may  do,  let  us  not  claim  any  praise  to  ourselves 
The  work  is  the  Lord’s ; we  have  to  give  up  the 
fruitsHmto  Him,  The  grandest  work  that  we  may 
do  in^  our  lives  never  let  us  think  that  we  are  to 
reeeive  the  benefits  thereof,  or  that  we  have  done 
any  good  work  at  all..  All  work  is  His.*  Let  us 
stand  aside  arid  think  that  we  are  only  servants 
obeying  the  Lord,  our  master,  and  that  every  im+ 
pulse  for  action  comes  from  him  every  moment. 


[ *58  ] 


Whatever  thou  worshippest,  whatever  thou  per- 
ceivest,  whatever  doest,  give  up  all  unto  Him  and 
be  at  rest.  Let  us  be  at  peace,  perfect  peace, 
with  ourselves,  and  give  up  our  whole  body  and 
mind  and  everything  as  an  eternal . sacrifice  unto 
the  Lord.  Instead  of  the  old  sacrifice  of  pouring 
oblations  into  the  fire,  performs  this  one  great 
sacrifice  day  and  night — the  sacrifice  of  your  little 
self.  “In  search  of  wealth  in  this  world,  thou  art 
the  only  wealth  I .have  found ; I sacrifice  myself 
unto  Thee.  In  search  of  some  one  to  be  loved, 
Thou  art  the  only  one  beloved  I have  found ; I 
sacrifice  myself  unto  Thee.’^  Let  us  repeat  this 
day  and  night  and  sky,  “Nothing  for  me ; no 
matter  whether  the  thing  is  good,  bad,  or  indiffer- 
ent; I do  not  care  for  it;  I sacrifice  aR  unto 
Thee.”  Day  and  night  let  iis  renounce  our  seem- 
ing self  until  it  becomes  a habit  with  us  to  do  so, 
until  it  ^ts  into  the  blood,  the  nerves  and  the 
brain,  and  the  whole  body  is  every  moment  obedi- 
to  this  idea  of  self-renunciation.  Go  then 
inttK  the  midst  pf  the  battle  field,  with  the  roaring 


[ 159  ] 


cannon  a^id  the  din  of  war,  and  you  will  find 
yourself  to  be  free  and  at  peace. 

Karma-  Yoga  teaches  us  that  the  ordinar)^ 
idea  of  duty  is  on  the  lower  plane ; nevertheless^ 
all  of  us  have  to  do  our  duty.  Yet  we  may  see 
that  this  peculiar  sense  of  duty  is  very  often  a 
great  cause  of  misery.  Duty  becomes  a disease 
with  us ; drags  us  ever  forward.  It  catches  hold 
of  us  and  makes  our  whole  life  miserable.  It  is 
the  bane  of  human  life.  ‘This  duty,  this  idea  of 
duty  is  the  mid-day  summer  sun  which  scorches 
the  innermost  soul  of  mankind.’*  Look  at  those 
poor  slaves  to  duty.  Duty  leaves  them  no  time 
to  say  prayers,  no  time  to  bathe.  Duty  is  ever 
on  them.  They  go  out  and  work,  Duty  is  on 
them  I They  come  home  and  think  of  the  ^ work 
for  the  next  day.  Duty  is  on  them  1 It  is  living 
a slave's  life,  at  last  dropping  down  in  the  street 
and  dying  in  harness,  like  a horse.  Thll  is  duty 
as  it  is  understood.  The  only  true  duty  is  to  be 
unattached  and  to  work  as  free  beings,  to  give  up 
all  work  unto  God.  All  our  duties  are  His, 


[ '6o  ] 


Blessed  are  that  we  are  ordered  oiit  hei^.  We 
serve  qur  time ; whether  we  do  it  ill  or  well,  who 
knows  ?’  H we  do  it  well,  we  do  not  get  the 
fruits.  If  we  do  it  ill,  neither  do  we  get  the  care' 
-Be  at  rest,  be  free,  and  work.  This  kind  of  free- 
dom is  a very  hard  thing  to  attain.  How  easy  it 
is  to  interpret  slavery  as  duty — the  morbid 
attachment  of  flesh  as  duty!  Men  go  out. into 
the  world  and  struggle  and  fight  for  money  or  for 
Any  other  thing  to  which  they  feel  an  attachment. 
Ask  them  why  they  do  it.  They  say: — “It  is  a 
duty.’’  It  is  the  absurd  greed  for  gold  and  gain, 
and  they  try  to  cover  it  with  a few  flowers. 

* - What  is  duty  after  all  ? It  is  really  the  im- 
{kilsatibn  of  the  flesh,  of  our  attachment ; and 
when  an  attachment  has  become  established,  we 
call  it  duty.  For  instance,  in  countries  where 
there  is  no  marriage,  there  is  no  duty  between 
husband^' and  wife  j when  marriage  comes,  hus- 
band* and  Wife  live  together  on  account  lof  attach- 
ment; and  that  kind  of  living  together  becomes 
settled  after  generations;,  and  when  it  becomes 


'(  .6.  ] 


SO  settled,  it  beJdbme^  si  duty.  It  is,  so  to  saty,  A 
sdH  6f-  thrdtiie  disease.  Wtt^ri  it  is  acute  wC  call 
if -disease,  wh^n  it  iS  chtottic  Wd  call  it  natufe.  R 
« a diSeiase.  So  wheti  attachment  becomes 
chfortic,  w6  Baptizd  it  with  the  high-soundihg  name 
of  duty*  We  sffew  flowers  upon  it,  trumpets 
sound  for  it,  sacred  texts  are  said  oVer  it,  and  theri 
the  whole  world  fights,  and  rtien  earnestly  rob 
each  other  for  this  duty’s  sake.  Duty  is  good  tO 
the  extent  that  it  checks  brutality.  To  the  lowest 
kinds  of  tfien,  who  cannot  hate'  ariy  other  ideal,  it 
is*  of  some  good  ; but  those  who  want  to  he 
I^arnia^  YoginS  must  throw  even  this  idea  of  diify 
overboard;  There  is  no  duty  for  you  and  meb 
Whatever  you  have  to  give  to  the  world,  do  give^ 
byalkmeans,  but  not  as  a duty.  Do  not  take 
thought  of  that.  Be  not  compelled.  Why 
^uid  ym  be  compelled  ? Every  thing  that  you 
damnier  compulsion  goSs  to  huild  up  alfachnknt 
Why  should  you  have  any*  duty  ? Resign  every 
thiitgv^mto  God/'  this  tremendous  fiery 

fumaoO  where  the  fire  of  di^  scorches  everybod)^^ 

' u 


[ >^2  J 


drink  this  cup  o{  nectar  and  be  happy.”  \Ve,  are 
all  simply  working  out  His  will,  and  have  nothing 
to  do  with  rewards  and  punishments.  , If  you 
want  the  reward,  you  must  also  have  the  punish- 
ment ; the  only  way  to  get  out  of  the  punishment 
is  to  give  up  the  reward.  The  only  way  of  getting 
out  of  misery  is  by  giving  up  the  idea  of  happiness, 
because  these  two  are  inseparably  linked  to  each 
Other.  On  one  side  there  is  happiness,  on  the 
other  there  is  misery.  On  one  side  there  is  life, 
on  the  other  there, is  death.  The  only  way  te 
get  beyond  death  is  to  gpve  up  the  love  of  life. 
Life  and  death  are  fhe  same  thing,  looked  at  from 
different  points.  So  the  idea  of  happiness  without 
misery,  or  of  life  without  death,  is  very  good  for 
school  boys  and  children;  but  the  thinken  sees 
that  it  is  all  a contradictmn  in  terms  and  gives  up 
these  oppositely  related  tWngs.  Seek  no  praise? 
no  rewartj.  for  anything  you  do.  No  sooner  do 
we  perform  a good  action  than  wa  begin  to  desire 
Gca^it  for  it.  No  sooner  do  we  give  money  to 
some  charity  tj^m  want  .to  see  our  names 


[ I'Ss  ] 


blazoned  In  the  pipers.  Misery  must  come  a^‘ 
result  of  such  desires.  The  greatest  men  m 
:he  world  have  passed  away  unknown.  The 
Biiddhis  and  the  Christs  that  we  know  are  but 
sfeeond  rate  heroes  in  comparison  With  the  greatest 
men  of  whom  the  world  knows  nothing.  Hundreds 
of  these  unknown  heroes  have  lived  in  every 
country  working  silently.  Silently  they  live  and 
silently  they  pass  away ; and  in  time  their  thoughts 
find  expression  in  Buddhas  or  Christs,  and  it  is 
these  latter  that  become  known  to  us.  The 
highest  men  do  not  seek  to  get  any  name  or  fame 
from  their  knowledge.  They  leave  their  ideas  to 
the  world ; they  put  forth  no  claims  for  themselves 
and  establish  no  schools  or  systems  in  their 
name*  Their  whole  nature  shrinks  from  such  a 
thing.  They  are  the  pi^re  SdttmkaS,  Who  can 
never  make  any  stir,  but  only^melt  down  in  love. 
I have  seen  one  such  Yogifi  Who  lives  in  a cave 
in  India.  He  is  one  of  the  most  wonderful  men 
I‘  fcave‘  fever  seen.  He  has  so  altogether  lost  the 
sehte  of  his  own  individuality  that  we  may  say 


I 1^4  J 


that  tlie  man  in 'Him  is  completely  gone,  leaving 
behind  only  the  all  comprehending  sense  of  the 
divihe.  If  an  animal  bites  one  of  his  arms,  he  is 
’ ready  to  give  it  his  other  arm  also,  and  say  that 
it  is  the  Lord^s  will.  Everything  tl|at  comes  to 

him  is  from  the  Lord.  He  does  not  shew  him- 

\ 

self  to  men,  and  yet  he  is  a magazine  of  love  and 
of  true  and  sweet  ideas. 

Next  in  order  come  the  men  with  more  Rajas, 
Or  activity,  combative  natures,  who  take  up  the 
ideas  of  the  perfect  ones  and  preach  them  to  the 
world.  The  highest  kind  of  men  silently  collect 
tt'ue  and  noble  ideas,  and  others-r-the  Buddhas 
‘ and  Christs  go  froral  place  to  place  preaching 
them  and  working  for  them.  In  the  life  of 
Gautama  Buddha  we  notice  him  constantly  caying 
' that  he  is  the  twenty-fi^h  Buddha.  The  twenty- 
jfour  before  him  are.unknowh  to  history,  although 
the  Bijddha  known  to  History  must  have  built 
' upon ' foundatidps  laid  hy  theml  The  highest 
men  hre  calm,  silent  ^nd  unktKJWh.  They  are 
t^  men  who  really  ’ktioW  the  pdwer  pt  'thought; 


[.,  165} 

they  arfe  sure  that,  even  if  they  go  into  a cave' 
and  close  the  door  and  simply , think  five  true- 
thoughts  and  then  pass  away,  these  five  thoughts 
of  theirs  will  live  through  eternity.  Indeed  such 
thoughts  will  penetrate  through  the  mountains 
and  cross  the  oceans,  and  travel  through  the  world, 
and  win  enter,  deep  into  human  hearts  and  brains 
and  raise  up  men  and  women  who  will  give  them 
practical  expression  in  the  workings  oi  human 
life.  These  SaUvUca  men  are  too  near  the'  l,prd 
to  be  active  and  to  fight,  to  be  working,  struggU 
ing,  preaching,  and  doing  good,  as  they  .say, 
here  on  earth  to  humanity.  The  active  workers, 
however  good,  have  still  a little  remnant  ^of 
ignorance  left  in  them.  When  our  nature  has 
ye|t  ^me  impurities  left  in  jt,  thpn  alone  can  We 
work.  It  is  in  the  nature  of  work  to  be  impelled 

. ordinarily  by  motiye  and  by  attachment..  In  the 
presence  of  an  ever-active  providence  and  before 
who 'notes  even  the  sparrow^/ fall,  how  can 
.mai): . attach  apy  impurtance  to  his  . own  work  ? 
Will  , it  not  , be  a blasphemy  to  do.  so  when  we 


i i66  .] 


know  that  he  is  taking  care  of  the  minutest  things 
in  the  world.  We  have  only  to  stand  in  awe 
and  reverence  before  him  saying  ‘‘Thy  will  be 
done;^^  The  highest  men  can  not  work,  f<M*  to 
them  there  is  attachment.  **  Those  whose  whole 
sOiri  is  gone  into  the  Self,  those  whose  desires 
are  confined  in  the  Self,  who  have  become -ever 
aifsociated  with  Self,  for  them  there  is  no  work.” 
Such  are  indeed  the  highest  of  mankind ; but 
apart  from  them  every  one  else  has  to  work. 
In  so  working  we  should  never  think  that  we  can 
help  on  even  the  least  thing  in  this  universe. 
We  can  not.  We  only  help  ourselves  in  this 
gymnasium  of  the  world.  This  is  the  proper 
attitude  of  work.  If  we  work  in  this  way,  if  we 
Always  remember  that  our  present  opportunity 
to  work  thus  is  a privilege  which  has  been  given 
to  us,  we  shall  never  be  attached  to  anything. 
Millions  like  you  and  me  think  that  they  are 
great  people  in  the  world;  but  we  all  die,  and 
m,  minutes  the  worid  tvill  have  forgotten  us. 
But  ;the  life  of  God  is  infinite.  " Who  can  live 


[ ‘67  ] 

a poment,  breathe  b moment,  if  this  all  powerful 
One  does  not  will  it  ?”  He  is  the  ever  active 
Providence.  All  power  rs  His  and  within  His 
command.  Through  His  command  the  winds 
blow,  the  sun  shines,  the.  earth  lives,  and  death 
stalks  upon  the  earth.  • He  is  the  all  in  alt; 
He  is  all  and  in  all.  We  can  only  worship  Himv 
Give  up  all  fruits  of  work ; do  good  for  its^  own 
sake;  then  alone  will  come  perfect  non-attach- 
ment. The  bonds  of  the  heart  will  thus  break; 
and  we  shall  reap  perfect  freedom.  This  freedom 
is  indeed  the  goal  of  Karma-Yoga. 


CHAPTER  VUl. 
the  IDEAt  QP  KAAMA-VOGA. 

^ . -The  grandest  idea  Ifl  the  religion  of  A the 
is  that  we  may  reach  the  same  goal  I^y 
difl^^iit  paths]  and  these  paths  1 have  general* 
ieed  iatb  four^vjz,  those  of  work,  love,  psychology, 
► and  knowledge.  But  you  must,  at  the  same 
timei  remember  that  these  divisions  are  not  very 
marked  and  quite  exclusive  of  each  otheri  Each 
blends  into  the  otheri  But  according  to  the 
type  which  prevails  we  name  the  divisions.  It 
is  not  that  you  cannot  find  a man  who  has  no 
other  faculty  than  that  of  work,  nor  that  you 
cannot  find  men  who, are  more  thah  demoted 
^ worshippers  only^  nor  that  there  are  not  men  who 
have  more  than  mere  knowledge.  These^\divi- 
llon^  are^fnade  in  accordance  with  the  type  or 
tendeicy*  that  may  he  seen  to  ^iprevail  in  a 
1^^;,  : in  . the  Onif,  al|  tfi^e 

|gui!^|hs:  j^lj^oligions 


[ '69  J 


and  all  methods  of  work  and  worship  lead  us  to 
one  and  only  one  goal. 

I have  already  tried  to  point  out'that  goal.  It 
is  freedom  as  I understand  it.  Everything  that 
we'perceive  around  us  is  struggling  towards  free- 
dom, from  the  atom  to  the  man,  from  the  insentient, 
lifeless  particle  of  matter  ,to  the  highest  existence* 
on  earth,  the  human  soul.  The  whole  universe  is 
in  fact  the  result  of  this  struggle  for  freedom.  In 
all  combinations  every  particle  is  trying  to  go  on 
its  own  way,  to  fly  from  the  other  particles ; but 
the  others  are  holding  it  in  check.  Our  earth  is 
trying  to  fly  away  from  the  sun,  and  the  moon 
from  the  earth.  Everything  has  a tendency  to 
'infinite  dispersion.  All  that  we  see  in  the*  universe 
has  f6r  its  basis  this  one  struggle  towards  freedbm  ; 
it  is  under  the  impulse  of  this  tendency  that  tht 
saint  prays  and  the  robber  robs.  When  the  line 
of  Action  taken  is  not  a proper  one  we  call  it  evil, 
apd  wh^  the  manifestation  of  it  is  proper  and 
high  we  call  it  gobcf.  But  the  imputee  is  the  same, 
the-  struggle-  towards  freedom.  -The  Saint  is 


V 


f 170  ] 


Oppressed  with  the  knowledge  of  his  condition  of 
bondage,  and  he  wants  to  get  rid  of  it';  so  he 
worships  God.  The  thief  is  oppressed  with  the 
idea  that  he  does  not  possess  certain  things,  and 
he  tries  to  get  rid  of  that  want,  to  obtain  freedom 
from  it ; so  he  steals.  Freedom  is  the  one  goal 
of  all  nature,  sentient  or  jnsentient ; and  consciously 
or  unconsciously,  everything  is  struggling  towards 
the  goal.  The  freedom  which  the  saint  seeks  is 
Very  different  from  that  which  the  robber  seeks ; 
the  freedom  loved  by  the  saint  leads  him  to  the 
enjoyment  of  infinite  unspeakable  bliss,  while  that 
on  which  the  robber  has  set  his  heart  only  forges 
t)ther  bonds  for  his  soul. 

There  is  Jo  be  found  in  every  religion  the 
mateestation  of  this  struggle  towards  frdfedom. 
It  is  the  groundwork  of  all  morality,  of  unselfish^ 
ness,  which  means  getting  rid  of  the  id^that 
men  ate  the  same  as  their  little  body.  When  we 
see  a man  doing  good  work,  helpmg  others,  ^it 
means  that  that  man  cannot  be  confined  within 
the  limited  citcle  of  “me  and  mine/^  There  is 


[ <7‘  ] 


no  Kmit^  to  this  getting  out  of  selfishness.  All 
the  great  systems  of  ethics  preach  absolute  un- 
selfishness as  the  goal:  Supposing  this  absolute 
^selfishness  can  be  reached  by  a man,  what, 
becomes  of  that  man  ? He  is  no  more  the  little* 
Mr.  So-and-So ; he  has  acquired  infinite  expansion^ 
That  little  personality  which  he  had  before  is  now 
lost  for  him  for  ever  ; he  has  become  infinite,  and 
the  attainment  of  this  infinite  expansion  is  indeed  * 
the  goal  of  all  religions  and  of  all  moral  and 
philosophical  teachings.  The  personalist,  when 
he  hears  this  idea  philosophically  put,  gets 
frightened.  At  the  same  time,  if  he  preaches 
morality,  he  after  all  teaches  the  very  same  ideap 
himself.  He  puts  no  limit  to  the  unselfishness  of 
man.  Suppose  a man  becomes  perfectly  unselfish 
under  the  personalistic  system,  how  are  we 

to  dlsWguish  him  from  the  perfected  ones  in 
% 

other  systems?  He  has  become  one  with  the 
universe,  and  to  become  that  is  the  goal  of  ail; 
oi!ly:^he  poor  personalist  has  not  the  courage  to 
follow'  out  his  own  reasoning  to  its  rightconclusiom 


[ '72  ■] 


Karma-  Yoga  is  the  attaining  of.  that  freedom 
which  IS'  the  goal  of  all  human  nature.  Every 
selfish  action,  therefore,  retards  our  reaching  the 
goal,  and  every  unselfish  action  takes  us  towards 
the  goal';  that  is  why  the  only  definition  that  can 
be  given  of  morality  is  this  ~Tiiat  which  is  selfish 
is  immoral,  and  that  which  is  unselfish  is  moral 
’ But,^  if  you  come  to  details,  the  matter  will 
not  be  seen  to  be  quite  so  simple.  For  instance, 
environment  often  makes  the  details  different  as  I 
have  already  mentioned.  The“  same  action  under 
one  set  of  circumstances  may  be  \jnselfish,'and 
under  another  set  quite  selfish.  So  we  can  give 
only’  a general  definition,  and  leave  the  details  to 
be  worked  out  by  taking  into  consideration  the 
differences  in  time,  place  and  circumstance.  In 
one  country  one  kind  of  conduct  is  considered 
' moral,  and  in  another  the  Very  same  is  imihoral, 
'^Wckuse  the  circumstances  differ.  The  goal  of  all 
‘^hSture  h freedom,  and  freedom  is  to  be  attained 
6r\\y  by  perfeel'  unselfishness ; ' every  detibn, 
” thought}  ivdrd  ^ deed  that  is  unselfish  takes  us 


{ >73  ] 


towards  the  goal,  and,  as  such,  is  called  moral. 
That  definition,  you  will  find,  holds  good  in  every 
religion  and  every  system  of  ethics.  In  some 
systems  of  thought,  morality  is  derived  from  a 
Superior  Being — God.  If  you  ask  wl)y  a man 
ought  to  do  this  and  not  that,  their  answer  is, 
“Because  such  is  the  command  of  God.”  But. 
whatever  be  the  source  from  which  it  is  derived, 
their  code  of  ethics  also  has  the  same  central 
idea — not  to  think  of  self  but  to  give  up  self. 
And  yet  sqme  persons,  in  spite  of  this  high  ethical 
idea,  are  frightened  at  the  thought  of  having. to. 
give  up  their  little  personalities.  We  may  ask  the 
man  who  clings  to  the  idea^  of^  little  personalities 
to  consider  the  case  of  a person  who  has  becppie 
perfectly  unselfish,  who  has  no  thought  for  himself, 
who  does  no  deed  for  hirnself,  who  speaks  no  word: 
for  hhnself,  and  then  say  where  his,  “himself  ” is:? 
That  “hirp?elf  ” is  known  to  him  only  so  long  as.he 

thinks,  acts  or  speaks,  for  himself... . If  he  is  only 

• 

conscious  of  otK^s,  .of  the  universe,  and  erf  the 
all,  wherejs.  his  "birasdf  It  is  gone  for,  ever. * 


[ '74  ] 


^ K4rma^YogA^  therefore,  is  a system  of  ethics 
and  religion  intended  to’ attain  freedom  through 
unselfishness,  and  by  good  works.  The  Kama- 
need  not  believe  in  any  doctrine  whatever. 
He  may  not  believe  even  in  God,  may  not  ask 
what,  his  soul  is,  nor  think  of  ^ny  metaphysical 
speculation,  He  has  got  his  own  special  aim  of 
realising  selflessness ; and  he  has  to  work;  it  out 
himself.  Every  moment  of  his  life  must  be  re- 
alization, because  he  has  to  solve  by  mere  work, 
without  the  help  of  doctrine  or  theory,  the  very 
problem  to  which  the  Jnanin  applies  his 
reason  and  inspiration  and  the  Bhakta  his  love. 

Now  comes  the  ilixt  question.  What  is  this 
work?  What  is  this  doing  good  to  the  world? 
C^n  we  dp  good  to  the  world?  In  an  absolute 
seq^;  po ; in  a relative  sense,  yes.  No  permanent 
.everlasting  good  can  be  done  to  the  world  ; 
if  it  cppld  be^done,  the  world  would  npt  be  this 
Wprlfl,  A^e  msiy  satisfy  the  hunger  of  a man  for 
hie  will  be  hun|?y.again,  Every 
y|iic||  we  supply;  a inan  tnay-  be  seen 


[ 175  ] 


to  be  momentary.  No  one  can  pefnanently  cure 
this  ever^recurring  fever’ of  pleasure  and  pain. 
Can  any  pemaneht  happiness  be  given  to  the 
world  ? In  the  ocean  we  cannot  raise  a wave 
without  causing  a hollow  somewhere  else.  The 
siim  totkl  of  the  good  things  in  the  world  has 
been  the  same  throughout  in  its”  relation  to  man’s 
need  and  greed.  It  cannot  be  increased  or  de- 
creased. Take  the  history  of  the  human  race 
as  we  know  to-day.  Do  we  riot  find  the  same 
miseries  and'  the  same  happinesses,  the  same 
pleasures  and  pains,  the  same  differences  in  posi- 
tion ? Are  not  some  rich,  some  poor,  some  high, 
some  low,  some  healthy  some  unhealthy  ? All  this 
was  just  the  same  with  the  Egyptians,  the  Greeks, 
arid  fire  .Romans  in  aricient  times  as  it  is  with  the 
Ariiericanis  to-day.  So  far  as  history  is  known, 

H has  always  been  the  same ; yet  at  the  same 
time,  we  find  that,  running  along  with  all  these  ' 
itteurable  diffetences  of  pleasure  and  pkin,  there 
has  ever  been  the  struggle  %o  allevmte  them, 
Every  period’ ^ Of  Mstdry  ^ has  glv^  birth  'td 


[ ‘76  ] 


thousands  of- men  and  women  who  have  worked 
hard  to  smooth  the  passage  of  life  for  others.  And 
how ' far  have  they  succeeded  ? We  can  only 
play  at  driving  the  ball  from  one  place  to  another 
We  take  away  pain  from  the  physical  plane,  and 
it  goes  to  the  mental  one^  It  is  like  that  picture 
in  Dante’s  hell  where  the  misers  were  given  a mass 
-of  gold  to  roll  it  up  a hill.  Every  time  they  rolled 
it  up  a little,  it  again  rolled  down.  All  our  talks 
about  the  millennium  are  very  nice  as  schoolboy’s 
stories,  but  they  are  no  better  than  that.  AH 
nations  that  dream  of  the  millennium  also  think 
that,  of  all  peoples  in  the  world,  they  will'  have 
the  best  of  it  then  for  themselves.  This  is  the 
wonderfully  unselfish  idea  -of  the  millennium  ! 

We  cannot  add,  happiness  to  this  wbrld; 
.s^larly,  we  cannot  add  pain  to  it  either.'  The 
sum  total  of  the  energies  of  pleasure  ancf  pain 
displayed  here  on  earth  will  be  the  same  through- 
out, ,We  just  push  it  from  this  side  to  the  other 
and  from  tha^  si<}e  to  this,  but  it  will  remain 
the  fame,  because  so  to  remam  vs  its  very  nature* 


[ '77  ] 


This  ebb  and  flow,  this  rising  and  falling,  is  in  thd 
world’s  very  nature;  it  would  be  as  logical  to  hold 
otherwise  as  to  say  that  we  may  have  life  withoiit 
death.  This  is  complete  nonsense,  because,  the 
very  idea  of  life  implies  constant  death  and  the 
very  idea  of  pleasure  implies  pain.  The  lartip  is 
constantly  burning  out,  and  that  is  its  life.  If  ybi^t^ 
want  to  have  life  you  have  to  die  every  moment 
for  it.  Life  and  death  are  only  different  expres- 
sions for  the  same  thing,  looked  at  from  different* 
standpoints  ; they  are  the  falling  ahd  the  rising  of 
the  same  wave,  and  the  two  form  one  whole;  One 
looks  at  the  fall  ” side  and^ecomes  a pessimist, 
another  looks  at  the  “ rise  " side  and  becomes  an^ 
optimist  When  a boy  is  going  to  school*  and 'his 
fatherland  mother  are  taking  care  of  him,  every 
thing  seems  blessed  to  him ; his  wants  are  simple, 
he  is  a great  optimist.  But  the  old  man,  with  his 
varied  experience,  becomes  calmer,)  and  is  sure  to 
have  his  warmth  considerably ' cOoled  down.  So,; 
^d-nations,  with  signs  of  decay  all  ardund^them,'” 
to  , he-  les^s  hopeful  than  new  nations.* 
W 


[ '78  j 


There  is  a proverb  in  India,  “ A thousand  years  a 
city,  and  a thousand  years  a forest.”  This  change 
city  into  forest  and  vice  versa  is  going  on  every- 
where, and  it  makes  peoples  optimists  or  pessimists 
according  to  the  side  they  see  of  it. 

The  next  idea  we  take  up  is  the  idea  of 
equality.  These  millennium  ideas  have  been  great 
motive  powers  to  work.  Many  religions  preach 
this  as  an  element  in  them, — that  God  is  coming 
to  rule  the  universe,  and  that  then  there  will  be  no 
difference  at  all  in  conditions.  The  people  who 
preach  this  doctrine  are  mere  fanatics,  and  fanatics 
are  indeed  the  sincerpt  of  mankind.  Christianity 
Vas  preached  just  on  the  basis  of  the  fascination 
of  this  fanaticism,  and  that  is  what  made  it  so 
attractive  to  the  Greek  and  the  Roman  slaves. 
They  believed  that,  under  the  millennial  religion, 
there  would  be  no  more  slavery,  that  there* would 
be  plehty  to  eat  and  drink;  and  therefore  they 
Jbcked  round  the  Christian  standard.  Those 
idho^  preached  the  idea  first  were  of  course  ignorant 
faMties,  but  very;  sincere.  In  modern  times  this 


[ 179  ] 


millennial  aspiration  takes  the  form  of  equality-^ 
of  liberty,  equality  anH  fraternity.  This  is  also 
fanaticism.  True  equality  has  never  been  and 
never  can  be  on  earth.  How  can  we  all  be  equal 
here  ? That  impossible  kind  of  equality  implies 
total  death.  What  makes  this  world  what  it  is  ? 
Lost  balance.  In  the  primal  state,  which  is  called 
chaos,  there  is  perfect  balance.  How  do  all  the 
formative  forces  of  the  universe  come  then  ? By 
struggling,  competition,  conflict.  Suppose  that 
all  the  particles  of  matter  were  held  in  equilibrium, 
would  there  be  then  any  process  of  creation  ? We 
know  from  science  that  it  is  impossible.  Disturb 
a sheet  of  water,  and  there  you  find  every  particfe 
of  the  water  trying  to  become  calm  again,  one 
rushing  against  the  other ; and  in  this  same  way 
all  the  phenomena  which  we  call  the  universe — 
all  things  therein — are  struggling  to  get  back  to 
the  state  of  perfect  balance.  Again  a disturbance 
potties,  and  again  We  have  combination  and 
creation.  Inequality  is  the  very  basis  pf  creation. 
At  the  same  time  the  forces  struggling  *to  obtain 


[ i8o  ] 


equality  are  as  much  a necessity  of  creation  as 
those  which  destroy  it. 

Absolute  equality,  that  which  means  a perfect 
bala)ice  of  all  the  struggling  forces  in  all  the 
planes,  can  never  be  in  this  world>  Before  you 
attain  that  state,  the  world  will  have  become 
quite  unfit  for  any  kind  of  life,  and  no  one  will 
be  there.  We  find,  therefore,  that  all  these  ideas 
of  the  millennium  and  of  absolute  equality  are 
not  only  impossible,  but  also  that,  if  we  try  to 
cariy  them  out,  they  will  lead  us  surely  enough 
to  the  day  of  destruction.  What  makes  the 
difference  between  man  and  man  ? It  is  largely 
the  difference  in  the  brain.  Now-a-days  no  one 
but  a lunatic  will  say  that  we  are  all  born  with  the 
same  brain  power.  We  come  into  the  worlcf  with 
unequal  endoWnients ; we  come  as  greater  men 
or  as  lesser  men,  and  there  is  no  getting*  away 
from  that  pre-natally  determined  condition.  The 
American  Indians  were  in  this  country  for  thous- 
ands of  years,  and  a few  handfuls  of  your  ancestors 
came  to  their  land.'  What  difference  have  they 


[ <8>  ] 

caused  in  the  appearance  of  the  country?  Why 
did  not  the  Indians  make  improvements  arid  build 
cities,  if  all  are  equal?  With  your  ancestors  a 
different  sort  of  brain  power  came  into  the  land, 
different  bundles  of  past  impressions  came,  and 
they  worked  out  and  manifested  themselves. 
Absolute  non-differentiation  is  death.  So  long  as 
this  world  lasts,  differentiation  there  will  and  must 
be,  and  the  millennium  of  perfect  equality  will 
come  only  when  a cycle  of  creation  comes  to  its 
end.  Before  that  equality  cannot  be.  Yet  this 
idea  of  realising  the  millennium  is  a great  motive  • 
power.  Just  as  inequality  is  necessary  for  creation 
itself,  so  the  struggle  to  limit  it  is  also  necessary. 

If  there  were  no  struggle  to  become  free  and  get 
back  God,  there  would  be  no  creation  dther. 

It  is  the  difference  between  these  two  forces  that 
deterffiines  the  nature  of  the  motives  of  men.  There 
will  always  be  these  motives  to  work,  some  tending 
towards  bondage  and  others  towards  freedom. 

This  world’s  wheel  within  wheel  is  terrible 
mechanism  j if  we  put  our  hands  in  it,  as  soon  as 


[ i8a  ] 

we  are  caught  we  are  gone.  We  all  think  that 
when  we,  have.done  a certain  duty,  we  shall  be  at 
rest ; but  before  we  have  done  a part  of  that  duty, 
another  is  already  in  waiting.  We  are  all  being 
dragged  along  by  this  mighty,  complex,  world- 
machine.  There  are  only  two  ways  out  of  it ; one 
is  to  give  up  all  concern  with  the  machine,  to  let 
it  go  and  stand  aside ; to  give  up  our  desires. 
That  is  very  easy  to  say,  l)ut  is  almost  impossible 
to  do.  I do  not  know  whether  in  twenty  millions 
of  men  one  can  do  that.  The  other  way  is  to 
plunge  into  the  world  and  learn  the  secret  of  work, 
and  that  is  the  way  of  Karma-Yoga.  Do  hot  fly 
away  from  the  wheels  of  the  world-machine,  but 
stand  inside  it  and  learn  the  secret  of  work. 
Through  proper  work  done  inside,  it  is*  also 
possible  to  come  out.  Through  this  machinery 
itself  is. the  way  out. 

We  have  now  seen  whaC  w'ork  is.  It  is  a j>art 
of  nature’s  foundation,  and  goes  on  always.  Those 
that  believe  in  God  understand  this  better,  because 
they  know  that  God  is  not  such  , an  incapable 


[ '83  ] 


being  as  will  need  our  help.  Although  this 
universe  will  go  on  always,  our  goal  is  freedom  ; 
our  goal  is  unselfishness  ; and  according  to  Karma- 
Yoga  that  goal  is  to  be  reached  through  work. 
All  ideas  of  making  the  world  perfectly  happy 
may  be  good  as  motive  powers  for  fanatics ; but 
we  must  know  that  fanaticism  brings  forth  as 
much  evil  as  good.  The  Karma-Yogin  asks 
why  you  require  any  motive  to  work  other  than 
the  inborn  love  of  freedom.  Be  beyond  tlie 
common  wordly  motives.  To  work  you  ha^e 
the  right,  but  not  to  the  fruits  thereof.'^  Man  can 
train  himself  to  know  and  to  practice  that,  says 
the  Karma-  Yogin,  When  the  idea  of  doing  good 
becomes  a part  of  his  very  being,  then  he  will  not 
seek ’for  any  motive  outside.  Let  us  do  good, 
because  it  is  good  to  do  good ; he  who  does  good 
work  ^ even  in  order  to  get  to  heaven  binds 
himself  down,  says  the  Karma-Yogin,  Any 
work  that  is  done,  with  any  the  least  selfish 
motive,  instead  of  making  us,  free,  forges  one  more 
chain  for  our  feet. 


[ >84  ] 


So  th^  only  way  is  to  give  up  all  the  fruits  of 
work,  to  be  unattached  to  them.  Know  that  this 
world  is  not  Ave,  nor  are  we  this  world ; that  we 
are  really  not  the  body ; that  we  really  do  not 
W'ork.  We  are  the  Self,  eternally  at  rest  and  at 
peace.  Why  should  we  be  bound  by  anything  ? 
We  must  not  weep;  there  is  no  weeping  for  the 
Soul.  We  must  not  even  weep  for  sympathy. 
Only  we  like  that  sort  of  thing,  and,  in  our 
imagination,  think  that  God  is  weeping  in  that 
wjy  on  His  throne.  Such  a God  would  not  be 
worth  attaining.  Why  should  God  weep  at  all  ? 
To  weep  is  a sign  of  weakness,  of  bondage?  It  is 
very  good  to  say  that  we  should  be  perfectly  non- 
attached,  but  what  is  the  way  to  do  it  ? Every 
good  work  we  do  without  any  ulterior  motive, 
instead  of  forging  a new  chain,  will  break  one  of 
tfhe  links  in  the  existing  chains.  Every  good 
thought  that  we  send  to  the  world  without  think- 
ing of  any  return,  will  be  stored  up  there  and 
break  one  link  in  a chain,  and  make  us  purer  and 
purer,  until  w become  the  purest  of  mortals. 


[ 185  ■] 


Yet  all  this  may  seen  to  be  rather  quixotic  and  too 
philosophical,  more  theoretical  than  practical;  I 
have  read  many  arguments  against  the  Bhagavad^ 
Gita^  and  many  have  said  that  without  motives 
you  cannot  work.  They  have  nevei*  seen  unselfish 
work  except  under  the  influence  of  fanaticism,  and 
therefore,  they  speak  in  that  way. 

Let  me  tell  you  in  conclusion  a few  words 
about  one  man  who  actually  carried  this  teaching 
of  Karma-Yoga  into  practice.  That  man  is 
Buddha.  He  is  the  one  man  who  ever  carried  tl^is 
into  perfect  practice.  All  the  prophets  of  the 
world,  except  Buddha,  had  external  motives  to 
move  them  to  unselfish  action.  The  prophets  of 
the  world,  with  this  single  exception,  may  be 
divided  into  two  sets,  one  set  holding  that  they 
are  iijcamations  of  God  come  down  on  earth,  and 
the  other  holding  that  they  are  only  messengers 
from  God  ; and  both  draw  their  impetus  for  work 
ftora  outside,  expect  reward  from  outside,  however 
highly  spiritual  may  be  the  language  they  use. 
But  Buddha  is  the  only  prophet  who  has  said,  1 


X 


[ i86  ] 


do  not  care  to  know  your  various  theories  about 
God,  What  is  the  use  of  discussing  all  the  subtle 
doctrines  about  the  soul  ? Do  good  and  be  good. 
And  this  will  take  you  to  freedom  and  to  whatever 
truth  there  is.”  He  was,  in  the  conduct  of  his 
life,  absolutely  without  personal  motives ; and  what 
man  worked  more  than  he  ? Show  me  in  history 
one  character  who  has  soared  so  high  above  all. 
The  whole  human  race  has  produced  but  one  such 
character ; such  high  philosophy ; such  wide 
sympathy ; this  great  philosopher,  preaching  the 
highest  philosophy,  yet  had  the  deepest  sympathy 
for  the  lowest  of  animals,  and  never  put  forth  any 
claims  for  himself.  He  is  the  ideal  Karma-Yogin, 
acting  entirely  without  motive,  and  the  history  of 
humanity  shows  him  to  have  been  the  greatest 
man  ever  born;  beyond  compare  the  greatest 
combination  of  heart  and  brain  that  ever  existed, 
.the.  greatest  souUpower  that  has  ever  been 
manifested.  He  is  the  first  great  ^reformer  the 
world  has  seen.  He  Was  the  first  who  dared  to 
say,  Believe  not  because  some  old  mantiscripts 


[ *8?  J 


are  produced,  believe  not  because  it  is  your 
national  belief,  because  you  have  been  made  to 
believe  it  from  your  childhood ; but  reason  it  all 
out,  and  after  you  have  analysed  it,  then,  if  you 
find  that  it  will  do  good  to  one  and  all,  believe  it, 
live  up  to  it,  and  help  others  to  live  up  to  it.” 
He  works  best  who  works  without  any  motive^ 
neither  for  money,  nor  for  fame,  nor  for  anything 
else ; and  when  a man  can  do  that,  he  will  be  a 
Buddha,  and  out  of  him  will  come  the  power  to 
work  in  such  a manner  as  will  transform  the  world. 
This  man  represents  the  very  highest  ideal  of 
Karma*  Yoga. 


bhakH-yoga. 


Definition  of  Bhakti 


gHA  K T I-Y  O G A is  a genuine,  real 
search  after  the  Lord — a search  be- 
ginning, continuing  and  ending  in  Love.  One 
single  moment  of  the  madness  of  extreme 
love  to'  God  brings  us  eternal  freedom. 
'*BhafU{\  says  Narada  in  his  explaniation  of 
the  Bhakti-A^horismsy  ‘‘is  intense  love  to 
, God.”# — “When  a man  gets  it  he  loves  all, 
hates  none  ; he  becomes  satisfied  fdr  ever.” 
—“This  love  cannot  be  reduced  to  any 
earthly  benefit,”  because  as  long  as  worldly 
desires  last  that  kind  of  love  does  not  come, 
is  greater  than  Karina^  greater  thai^ 

■ — — ..  : — f 

( I— a ) 


4 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


Yoga,  because  these  are  intended  for  an 
object  in  view,  while  Bhakti  is  its  own 
fruition,  its  own  means  and  its  own  end.”* 
Bhakti  has  been  the  one  constant  theme 
of  our  sages.  Apart  from  the  special  writers 
on  Bhakti,  such  as  Sandilya  or  Narada,  the 
great  commentators  on  the  Vydsa-Sutras, 
evidently  advocates  of  Knowledge  (Jndna), 
have  also  something  very  suggestive  to  say 
about  Love.  Even  when  the  commentator 
is  anxious  to  explain  many,  if  not  all,  of  the 
texts  so  as  to  make  them  import  a sort  of 
dry  knowledge,  the  Sutras,  in  the  chapter  on 
worship  specially,  do  not  lend  themselves  to 
be  easily  manipulated  in  that  fashion. 


( 11— 7 ) 

( IV— 25 ) 
4T  ^ imfinKr:  1 

( rv— 30 ) 


DEFINITION  OF  BHAKTI. 


5 


There  is  not  really  so  much  difference 
between  Knowledge  (Jndna)  and  Love 
{Bhakti)  as  people  sometimes  imagine.  We 
shall  see  as  we  go  on  that  in  the  end  they 
converge  and  meet  at  the  same  point.  So 
also  with  Rdja-Yoga,  which,  when  pursued 
as  a means  to  attain  liberation,  and  not  (as 
unfortunately  it  frequently  becomes  in  the 
hands  of  charlatans  and  mystery-mongers) 
as  an  instrument  to  hoodwink  the  unwary, 
leads  us  also  to  the  same  goal. 

The  one  great  advantage  of  Bhakti  is 
that  it  is  the  easiest,  and  the  most  natural 
way  to  reach  the  great  divine  end  in  view  ; 
its  great  disadvantage  is  that  in  its  lower 
forms  it  often  times  degenerates  into  hideous 
fanaticism.  The  fanatical  crew  in  Hinduism, 
or  Mahomedanism,  or  Christianity,  have 
always  been  almost  exclusively  recruited 
from  these  worshippers  on  the  lower  planes 
of  Bhakti,  That  singleness  of  attachment 
{Niskthd)  to  a loved  object,  without  which 


6 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


no  genuine  love  can  grow,  is  very  often  also 
the  cause  of  the  denunciation  of  everything 
else.  All  the  weak  and  undeveloped  minds 
in  any  religion  or  country  have  only  one 
way  of  loving  their  own  ideal,  L e.,  by  hating 
every  other  ideal.  Herein  is  the  explanation 
of  why  the  same  man  who  is  so  lovingly 
attached  to  his  own  ideal  of  God,  so  devoted 
to  his  own  ideal  of  religion,  becomes  a howl- 
ing fanatic  as  soon  as  he  sees  or  hears  any 
thing  of  any  other  ideal.  This  kind  of  love 
is  somewhat  like  the  canine  instinct  of  guard- 
ing the  master’s  property  from  intrusion  ; 
only  even  the  dog’s  instinct  is  better  than  the 
reason  of  man,  for  the  dog  never  mistakes 
its  master  for  an  enemy  in  whatever  dress 
he  may  come  before  it.  Again  the  fanatic 
loses  all  power  of  judgment.  Personal  coh- 
siderations  are  in  his  case  of  such  absorbing 
interest  that  to  him  it  is  no  question  at  €ill 
^hat  ^a  man  says — whether  it  is  right  or 
wrong  ; but  the  one  thing  he  is  always 


DEFINITION  OF  BHAKTI. 


7 


particularly  careful  to  know  is,  who  says  it. 
The  same  man  who  is  kind,  good,  honest, 
and  loving,  to  people  of  his  own  opinion 
will  not  hesitate  to  do  the  vilest  deeds,  when 
they  are  directed  against  persons  beyond  the 
pale  of  his  own  religious  brotherhood. 

But  this  danger  exists  only  in  that  stage 
of  Bhakti  which  is  called  the  preparatory 
When  Bhakti  has  become  ripe  and 
has  passed  into  that  form  which  is  called 
the  supreme  (to),  no  more  is  there  any  fear 
of  these  hideous  manifestations  of  fanaticism  ; 
that  soul  which  is  overpowered  by  this 
higher  form  of  Bhakti  is  too  near  the  God 
of  Love  to  become  an  instrument  for  the 
diffusion  of  hatred. 

^ It  is  not  given  to  all  of  us  to  be  harmoni- 
ous in  the  building  up  of  our  characters  in 
this  life  : yet  we  know  that  that  character 
is  of  the  noblest  type  in  which  all  these* 
three — Knowledge  and  Love  and  Yoga^'^x^ 
harmoniously  fused.  Three  things  are 


8 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


necessary  for  a bird  to  fly — ^the  two  wings 
and  the  tail  as  a rudder  for  steering. 
Jndna  (Knowledge)  is  the  one  wing,  Bhakti 
(Love)  is  the  other,  and  Yoga  is  the  tail  that 
keeps  up  the  balance.  For  those  who  can- 
not pursue  all  these  three  forms  of  worship 
together  in  harmony,  and  take  up,  therefore, 
Bhakti  alone  as  their  way,  it  is  necessary 
always  to  remember  that  forms  and  cere- 
monials, though  absolutely  necessary  for  the 
progressive  soul,  have  no  other  value  than 
taking  us  on  to  that  state  in  which  we  feel 
the  most  intense  love  to  God. 

There  is  a little  difference  in  opinion  be- 
tween the  teachers  of  Knowledge  and  those 
of  Love,  though  both  admit  the  power  of 
Bhakti.  The  Jnanins  hold  Bhakti  to  be^  an 
instrument  of  liberation,  the  Bhaktas  look 
upon  it  both  as  the  instrument  and  the  thing 
• to  be  attained.  To  my  mind  this  is  a **dis- 
tincrion  without  much  difference.  In  fact, 
Bhakti^  when  used  to  signify  an  instrument 


DEFINITION  OF  BHAKTI. 


9 


only,  really  means  a lower  form  of  worship, 
but  this  appears  to  be  inseparable  from 
and  in  continuity  to  higher  expressions  of 
Bhakti  after  realisation.  Each  seems  there- 
fore to  lay  a great  stress  upon  his  own 
peculiar  method  of  worship,  forgetting  that 
with  perfect  love,  true  knowledge  is  bound 
to  come  even  when  it  is  unsought,  and  that 
from  perfect  knowledge,  true  love  is  insepar- 
able. 

Bearing  this  in  mind  let  us  try  to  under- 
stand what  the  great  Vedantic  commentators 
have  to  say  on  the  subject.  In  .explaining 
the  Sutra  Ch.  IV. — I — !♦  Bhagavan  San- 
kara says  “Thus  people  say, — ‘He  is 
devoted  to  the  Gurti  ; they  say  this  of  him 
who  follows  his  Guru,  and  does  so,  having 
tliat  following  as  the  one  end  in  view.  Simi- 
larly they  say — ‘The  loving  wife  meditates 
oft  her  absent  husband* ; here  also  a kind  of 

( Vedanta  Sutras  Ch.  IV-I-I) 


10 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


eager  and  continuous  remembrance  is 
meant.”*  This  is  devotion  according  to 
Sankara. 

Bhagavan  Ramanuja  in  his  commentary 
thus  says  about  Bhakti  : t 

“Meditation  again  is  a constant  remem- 
brance (of  the  thing  meditated  upon)  flow- 
ing like  an  unbroken  stream  of  oil  poured 
out  from  one  vessel  to  another.  When  this 
kind  of  remembering  has  been  attained  (in 
relation  to  God)  all  bondages  break.  Thus 
it  is  spoken  of  in  the  scriptures  regarding 
constant  remembering  as  a means  to  libera- 
tion. This  remembering  again  is  of  the 
same  form  as  seeing,  because  it  is  of  the 
same  meaning,  as  in  the  passage,  ‘When  He 
Who  is  far  and  near  is  seen,  the  bonds  of  the 

K— 

* HUT  ^ trai’mrrw  tfir  h 

H I HHisinrtiT 

Tifit  Tift  I 

(Vedanta  Sutra— Sankara  Bhasya— Ch.  IV— I— I) 
f Vedanta  Sutra  I— I— 2,  Commentary  by  Ramanuja. 


DEFINITION  OF  BHAKTI. 


II 


heart  are  broken,  all  doubts  vanish,  and  all 
effects  of  work  disappear’.  (He,  Who  is  near 
can  be  seen,  but  He  Who  is  far  can  only 
be  remembered.  Nevertheless  the  scripture 
says  that  we  have  to  see  Him  who  is  near 
as  well  as  Him  who  is  far,  thereby  indicat- 
ing to  us  that  the  above  kind  of  remember- 
ing is  as  good  as  seeing.)  This  remembrance 
when  exalted  assumes  the  same  form  as 
seeing Worship  is  constant  remember- 

ing as  may  be  seen  from  the  essential  texts 
of  scriptures.  Knowing,  which  is  the  same 
as  repeated  worship,  has  been  described  as 

constant  remembering Thus  the 

memory,  which  has  attained  to  the  height 
of  what  is  as  good  as  direct  perception,  is 
spoken  of  in  the  SruH  as  a means  of  libera- 
tion. ‘This  Atman  is  not  to  be  reached 
through  various  sciences,  nor  by  intellect, 
norfby  much  study  of  the  Vedas.  Whomso- 
ever this  Atman  desires,  by  him  is  the  At- 
man attained,  unto  him  this  Atman  dis- 


12 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


covers  himself.*  Here  after  saying  that  mere 
hearing,  thinking,  and  meditating  are  not 
the  means  of  attaining  this  Atman,  it  is  said. 
Whom  this  Atman  desires,  by  him  the  At- 
man is  attained.*  The  extremely  beloved 
alone  is  desired  ; by  whomsoever  this  At- 
man is  extremely  loved,  he  alone  becomes 
the  most  beloved  of  the  Atjnan.  That 
this  beloved  may  attain  the  Atman,  the 
Lord  himself  helps.  For  it  has  been  said 
by  the  Lord  : ‘Those  who  are  constantly 
attached  to  me  and  worship  me  with  love — 
I give  that  direction  to  their  will  by  which 
they  come  to  me.’  Therefore  it  is  said  that, 
to  whomsoever  this  remembering,  which  is 
of  the  same  form  as  direct  perception,  be- 
comes of  itself  very  dear,  for  the  reason  that 
it  is  dear  to  the  Object  of  such  memory-per- 
ception, he  alone  is  desired  by  the  Supreme 
Atman,  i.  e,,  by  him  alone  the  Supreme  *At- 
man^is  attained.  This  constant  remembrance 
is  denoted  by  the  word  Bhakti'^ 


DEFINITION  OF  BHAKTI. 


13 


In  commenting  on  the  Sutra  of  Patanjali 
Ch.  I — 23#  z.  e.y  ‘By  the  worship  of  the 
Supreme  Lord,’ — Bhoja  says,  "'Pranidhdna 
is  that  sort  of  Bhakii  in  which,  without 
seeking  results,  such  as  sense-enjoyments, 
etc.,  all  works  are  dedicated  to  that  Teacher 
of  teachers.”!  Bhagavan  Vyasa  also,  when 
commenting  on  the  same,  defines  Prani- 
dhdna  as  “the  form  of  Bhakti  by  which  the 
mercy  of  the  Supreme  Lord  comes  to  the 
yogin  and  blesses  him  by  granting  him  his 
desires.”];  According  to  Sandilya,  “Bhakti 
is  intense  Love  to  God.”§  The  best  defi- 


* (Or  by  devotion  to  Iswara) 

(Patanjal  Sutra  Ch.  I— 23) 

(Patanjal  Sutras— Commentary  by  Bhoja— Ch.  I— 23) 
(Patanjal  Sutras— Commentary  by  Vyasa— Ch,  I— 23) 


(SMdilya  Sutras—Ch.  I— 2) 


14  BHAKTI-YOGA. 

nition  is,  however,  that  given  by  the  king  of 
Bhaktas  Prahlada  : “That  deathless  love 
which  the  ignorant  have  for  the  fleeting  objects 
of  the  senses — as  I keep  meditating  on  Thee 
— may  not  that  (sort  of  intense)  love  (for 
Thee)  ever  slip  away  from  my  heart.”#Z^?2:;^  / 
For  whom  ? For  the  Supreme  Lord  Isvara. 
Love  for  any  other  being,  however  great, 
cannot  be  Bhakti  ; for,  as  Ramanuja  says  in 
his  Sri  Bhashya  quoting  an  ancient  Acharya, 
(a  great  teacher) : “From  Brahma  to  a 
clump  of  grass  all  things  that  live  in  the 
world  are  slaves  of  birth  and  death  caused 
by  Karma  ; therefore  they  cannot  be  helpful 
as  objects  of  meditation,  because  they  are  all 


^ flTmwfWT  mWWITw  I 

(\ridmo  PuiaD,  I—dli.  20»i9) 


DEFINITION  OF  BHAKTI.  1 5 

in  ignorance  and  subject  to  change.”*  In 
commenting  on  the  word  used  by 

Sandilya,  the  commentator  Svapnesvara  says 
that  it  means  1^3,  after, and  attachment ; 
L e,y  ‘‘the  attachment  which  comes  after  the 
knowledge  of  the  nature  and  glory  of  God”;t 
else  a blind  attachment  to  any  one,  e.  g.y  to 
wife  or  children  would  be  Bhakti.  We 
plainly  see,  therefore,  that  Bhakti  is  a series 
or  succession  of  inental  efforts  at  religious 
realisation  beginning  with  ordinary  worship 
and  ending  in  supremely  intense  love  for  the 
Isvara, 


inf^:  v 

^ wifHnngwiw:  i 
^ % tv  i 

(Sandilya  Satraf»  1—2,  Commentary  by  Swapnesvara) 


The  Philosophy  of  Isvara. 


Who  IS  Isvara  ? “From  whom  is  the 
birth,  continuation  and  dissolution  of  the 
universe,’'* — He  is  Isvara — “the  Eternal,  the 
Pure,  the  Ever  Free,  the  Almighty,  the  All- 
Knowing,  the  All- Merciful,  the  Teacher  of 
all  teachers”  ; and  above  all  “He  the  Lord 
is,  of  His  own  nature,  inexpressible  Love.”t 
These  certainly  are  the  definitions  of  a 
personal  God.  Are  there  then  two  Gods  ? 
The  “not  this,  not  this,”  the  Sat-chilamnda, 
the  Existence-Knowledge-Bliss,  of  the  phil- 
osopher, and  this  God  of  Love  of  the 
bhakta  ? No,  it  is  the  same  ^'Sat-chit-anandd' 
wh<#is  also  the  God  of  Love,  the  impersonal 
and  personal  in  one.  It  has  always  to  be 


* jmmm 

(Vedaata  Sutm  Ql  2) 

9 


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  ISVARA.  1 7 

understood  that  the  personal  God  worship- 
ped by  the  bhakta  is  not  separate  or  different 
from  the  Brahman,  All  is  Brahman,  the 
One  without  a second  : only  the  Brahman 
as  unity  or  absolute,  is  too  much  of  an  abs- 
traction to  be  loved  and  worshipped  ; so  the 
bhakta  chooses  the  relative  aspect  of  Brah- 
man, that  is,  Isvara,  the  Supreme  Ruler.  To 
use  a simile  : Brahman  is  as  the  clay  or 
substance  out  of  which  an  infinite  variety  of 
articles  are  fashioned.  As  clay,  they  are  all 
one  ; but  form  or  manifestation  differentiates 
them.  Before  ever  one  of  them  was  made, 
they  all  existed  potentially  in  the  clay  ; and, 
of  course,  they  are  identical  substantially  ; 
but  when  formed,  and  so  long  as  the  form 
remjLins,  they  are  separate  and  different  ; 
the  clay-mouse  can  never  become  a clay- 
elephant,  because,  as  manifestations,  form 
alone  ihakes  them  what  they  are,  though  as 
unformed  clay  they  are  all  one.  Isvara  is 
the  highest  manifestation  of  the  absolute 


2 


1 8 BHAKTI-YOGA. 

reality,  or,  in  other  words,  the  highest 
possible  reading  of  the  absolute  by  the 
human  mind.  Creation  is  eternal,  and  so 
also  is  Is  vara. 

In  the  fourth pada  of  the  fourth  chapter 
of  his  sutraSy  after  stating  that  almost 
infinite  power  and  knowledge  will  come  to 
the  liberated  soul  after  the  attainment  of 
moksha,  Vyasa  makes  the  remark,  in  an 
aphorism,  that  none,  however,  will  get  the 
power  of  creating,  ruling,  and  dissolving  the 
universe,  because  that  belongs  to  God  alone."*^ 
In  explaining  this  sutra  it  is  easy  for  the 
dualistic  commentators  to  shew  how  it  is 
ever  impossible  for  a subordinate  soul,  jiva, 
ever  to  have  the  infinite  power  and  total 
independence  of  God.  The  thorough  dualist- 
ic commentator  Madhvachdrya  deals  with 


(Vedanta  Sustras  Ch.  IV— 4— 17) 


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  ISVARA.  1 9 

this  passage  in  his  usual  summary  method  by 
quoting  a verse  from  the  Vardha-Purdna, 

The  commentator,  Ramanuja,  in  explain- 
ing this  aphorism  says  : — This  is  the  doubt 
here — whether  among  the  powers  of  the 
liberated  souls  is  included  that  unique  power 
of  the  Supreme  One,  of  creation,  etc.,  of  the 
universe  and  also  Rulership  over  all,  or 
wanting  that,  the  glory  of  the  liberated  con- 
sists only  in  the  direct  perception  of  the 
Supreme  One.  Let  us  assume  as  reasonable 
that  the  liberated  get  the  rulership  of  the 
universe  also.  Why  ? Because,  the  scriptures 
say,  the  liberated  soul  attains  to  extreme 
sameness  with  the  Supreme  One  in  the  pas- 
sages— '‘the  free  from  all  stain  attains  to  ex- 
treme sameness”  { Mundaka  III — 3)  and 
“all  his  desires  are  realized.”  Now  extreme 
sameness  and  realisation  of  all  desires  can- 
not 6e  attained  without  the  unique  power  of 
the  Supreme  Lord,  namely  that  of  governing 
the  universe.  Therefore,  by  virtue  of  these 


20 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


assertions  about  the  realization  of  all  desires 
and  the  attainment  of  extreme  sameness  we 
get  that  the  liberated  gain  the  power  of  rul- 
ing the  whole  universe  also.  To  this  we 
reply  that  the  liberated  get  all  the  powers 
except  that  of  ruling  the  universe.  Ruling 
the  universe  is  directing  the  various  mani- 
festations of  form,  life  and  desire  of  all  the 
sentient  and  the  non-sentient  beings,  of 
which  it  is  comprised  and  this  does  not 
belong  to  the  liberated  ones  from  whom  all 
veils  have  been  removed,  and  who  enjoy  the 
glory  of  the  unobstructed  perception  of  the 
Brahman.  This  is  proved  from  the  very  text 
of  the  book  which  has  declared  the  control  of 
the  universe  to  be  the  nature  of  the  Supreme 
Brahman  alone : ‘From  whom  all  these  beings 
are  born,  by  whom  all  that  are  born,  live,  and 
unto  whom  they  departing,  return  ; ask 
about  It,  That  is  Brahman!  Had'  this 
quality  of  ruling  the  universe  been  common 
to  the  liberated  also,  then  this  text  would  not 


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  ISVARA. 


21 


be  applicable,  for  it  defines  Brahman,  through 
this  very  quality  of  rulership  of  the  universe. 
The  uncommon  qualities  alone  are  stated  in 
a definition  as  in  the  following  texts  of  the 
Vedas  : ‘My  beloved  boy  ! alone,  in  the 
beginning,  there  existed  the  One  without  a 
second.  That  saw  and  felt  I will  give  birth 
to  the  many.  That  projected  heat.' — 'Brah- 
man, indeed,  alone  existed  in  the  beginning. 
That  One  evolved.  That  projected  a bless- 
ed form,  the  Kshatra,  All  these  gods  are 
Kshatras  : Varuna,  Soma,  Rudra,  Parjanya, 
Yama,  Mrityu,  Isdna! — 'Atman,  indeed, 
existed  alone  in  the  beginning  ; nothing  else 
vibrated  ; He,  saw  and  felt  like  projecting 
the  worlds.  He  projected  the  worlds  after* 
wains’ — ‘Alone  Narayana  existed  ; neither 
Brahmd  nor  Isdna,  nor  the  Dyava-Prithvi, 
nor  the  stars,  nor  water,  nor  fire,  nor  Soma 
nor  the  Sun,  He  did  not  take  pleasure  in 
being  alone.  He  after  His  meditation  had 
one  daughter,  the  ten  organs.’ — ‘Who  living 


22 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


in  the  earth  is  separate  from  the  earth,  who 
living  in  the  Atman'  etc.* — In  texts  like  the 
above  the  Srutis  speak  of  the  Supreme  One 
as  the  subject  of  the  work  of  ruling  the  uni- 
verse. Nor  in  the  above  descriptions  of  the 
ruling  of  the  universe  is  there  any  position 
ascribed  to  the  liberated  soul  in  the  texts 
quoted — for  the  quality  of  ruling  the  universe 
is  far  away  from  such  a soul  province. 

In  explaining  the  next  sutra^  Rama- 
nuja says,  “If  you  say  it  is  not  so,  because 
there  are  direct  texts  in  the  Vedas  in  evi- 
dence to  the  contrary,  these  texts  refer  to 
the  glory  of  the  liberated  in  the  spheres  of 
the  subordinate  deities.”t  This  also  is  an 
easy  solution  of  the  difficulty.  Although  the 
system  of  Ramanuja  admits  the  unity  of  ^the 
total,  within  that  totality  of  existence  there 
are,  according  to  him,  eternal  differences. 
Therefore,  for  all  practical  purposes,  this 

♦Vedanta  Sutras  IV.— 4— 17,  Commentary  by  Ramanuja 

t Vedanta  Sutras  IV.  4—18,  Commentary  byR  amanuja. 


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  IS  VARA.  23 

system  also  being  dualistic,  it  was  easy  for 
Ramanuja  to  keep  up  the  distinction  between 
the  personal  soul  and  the  personal  God 
clearly  distinct. 

We  will  now  try  to  understand  what  the 
great  representative  of  the  Advaita  school 
has  got  to  say  on  the  point.  We  shall  see 
how  the  Advaita  system  maintains  all  the 
hopes  and  aspirations  of  the  dualist  intact 
and  at  the  same  time  propounds  its  own 
solution  of  the  problem,  in  consonance  with 
the  high  destiny  of  divine  humanity.  Those, 
who  aspire  to  retain  their  individual  mind 
even  after  liberation,  and  remain  distinct, 
from  the  absolute  reality  will  have  ample 
opportunity  of  realising  their  aspiration  and 
enjoy  the  blessing  of  the  qualified  Brahman. 
These  are  they  who  have  been  spoken  of  in 
the  Bhdgavata  Purdna  thus: — “O  king, 
such  are  the  glorious  qualities  of  the  Lord 
that  the  sages  whose  only  pleasure  is  ^ in  the 
Self,  and  from  whom  all  bondages  have  fallen 


24 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


oft,  even  they  love  the  All-Powerful  with  the 
love  that  is  for  love’s  sake.”*  These  are  they 
who  are  spoken  of  by  the  Sdnkhyas  as 
“getting  merged  in  nature”!  in  this  cycle  so 
that,  after  attaining  perfection,  they  may 
come  out  in\the  next  as  lords  of  world-sys- 
tems. But  none  of  these  ever  becomes  equal 
to  God  {/svara).  Those  who  attain  to  that 
state  where  there  is  neither  creation,  nor 
created,  nor  creator,  where  there  is  neither 
knower,  nor  knowable,  nor  knowledge,  where 
there  is  neither  /,  nor  nor  he^  where 

there  is  neither  subject,  nor  object,  nor  re- 
lation, “there,  who  is  seen  by  whom  ?”|— 
Such  persons  have  gone  beyond  everything, 
beyond  “where  words  cannot  go  nor  mind,”§ 

(Bh4gabat,  I— Ch.  VII— io)b 

t 

. t “fW  W,  a ^ I” 


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  ISVARA, 


25 


gone  to  that  blessed  condition  which  the 
Srutis  declare  as  “not  this,  not  this.”  But  for 
those  who  cannot,  or  will  not  reach  this 
state,  there  will  inevitably  remain  the  tri-une 
vision  of  the  one  undifferentiated  Brahman 
as  naiurCy  souly  and  the  interpenetrating 
sustainer  of  both — Isvara,  So,  when  Prah- 
lada  forgot  himself,  by  rising  to  a higher 
plane  of  conciousness  through  excess  of  de- 
votion, he  perceived  neither  the  universe 
nor  its  cause.  All  was  to  him  as  one 
Infinite  Being,  undifferentiated  by  name  and 
form.  But  as  soon  as  he  on  coming  down 
the  ordinary  mental  plane  remembered  that 
he  was  Praklada,  again  appeared  the  uni- 
verse before  him  and  with  it  the  Lord  of 
the  universe — “the  repository  of  an  infinite 
number  of  blessed  qualities.”  So  it  was 
with  the  blessed  Gopis.  So  long  as  they 
had  lost  sense  of  their  own  personal  identity 
and  individuality  by  their  intense  love  and 
yearning  for  Sree  Krisknay  they  all  felt  them- 


26 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


selves  to  be  Krisknas^  and  when  they  had 
begun  again  to  think  of  Him  as  the  One  to  be 
worshipped,  then  they  were  Gopis  again,  and 
immediately  *‘unto  them  appeared  Krishna 
with  smile  on  his  lotus  face,  clad  in  yellow 
robes  and  having  garlands  on,  the  embodied 
conqueror  (in  beauty)  of  the  god  of  love.”* 
Now  to  go  back  to  our  Acharya  Sankara  : 
“Those,”  he  says,  “who  by  worshipping  the 
qualified  Brahman  attain  conjunction  with 
the  Supreme  Ruler  preserving  their  individual 
mind— is  their  glory  limited  or  unlimited  ? 
This  doubt  arising,  we  get  as  an  argument  : 
— Their  glory  should  be  unlimited,  because 
of  the  scriptural  texts  They  attain  their 
own  kingdom— To  him  all  the  gods  offer 
worship —Their  desires  are  fulfilled  in  all 
the  worlds.*  As  an  answer  to  this,  Vyasa 
uses  the  expression  ‘without  the  power  of 

- ■ ■ n 

— ( Bhagabat,  X.  Ch.  31—2 ). 


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  ISVARA.  27 

ruling  the  universe.’  Barring  the  power  of 
creation,  continuation  and  dissolution  of  the 
universe,  the  other  powers  such  as  animay 
etc.,  are  acquired  by  the  liberated.  As  to  rul- 
ing the  universe,  that  belongs  to  the  eternally 
perfect  Isvara.  Why  ? Because  He  is  the 
subject  of  all  the  scriptural  texts  which  speak 
of  creation,  and  the  liberated  souls  are  not 
mentioned  therein  in  any  connection  what- 
ever. The  Supreme  Lord,  indeed,  is  alone 
engaged  in  ruling  the  universe.  The  texts 
as  to  creation,  all  point  to  Him,  and  there  has 
been  used  the  adjective  “ever  perfect  in  re- 
lation to  Him.”  Also,  as  the  scriptures  say 
that  the  powers  animay  etc.,  of  others  come 
from  the  search  after,  and  the  worship  of,  God, 
tl^erefore  their  powers  have  a beginning  and 
. are  limited  ; hence  they  have  no  place  in  the 
ruling  of  the  universe.  Again  on  account  of 
their  possessing  their  individual  minds  it  is 
possible  that  their  wills  may  differ,  so  that, 
while  one  desires  creation,  another  may  desire 


28 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


destruction.  The  only  way  of  avoiding  this 
conflict  is  to  make  all  wills  subordinate  to 
some  one  will.  Therefore  the  conclusion 
is  that  the  wills  of  the  liberated  are  depen- 
dent on  the  will  of  the  Supreme  Ruler. 

Bkakii,  then,  can  be  directed  towards 
only  the  personal  aspect  of  Brahman,  “The 
way  is  more  difficult  for  those,  whose 
mind  is  attached  to  the  Absolute.’’t  The 
Bhakta  sails  smoothly  along  with  the 
current  of  human  nature.  True  it  is  that  we 
cannot  have  any  idea  of  the  Brahman  which 
is  not  anthropomorphic,  but  is  it  not  equally 
true  of  everything  we  know  ? The  greatest 
psychologist  the  world  has  ever  known, 
Bhagavan  Kapila^  demonstrated  ages  ago 
that  human  consciousness  furnishes  only  Ojpe 
of  the  elements  in  the  make-up  of  all  the 
objects  of  our  perception  and  conception, 

o 

* Vedanta  Sutras,  IV,  4—17,  Commentary  by  Sankara. 

(Bhagaba^  Gita,  Ch.  XII-5.) 


THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  ISVARA. 


29 


internal  as  well  as  external.  Beginning  with 
our  own  bodies  and  going  up  to  Isvara,  every 
object  of  our  perception  is  thus  made  up 
of  this  consciousness  plus  a something  else, 
which  is  beyond  and  distinct  from  it  and  t he 
unavoidable  mixture  of  both  these  is  what  we 
see  everywhere  and  think  of  as  reality.  In- 
deed it  is,  and  ever  will  be,  all  the  reality 
that  is  possible  for  the  human  mind  to  know. 
Therefore  to  say  that  Isvara  is  unreal,  because 
He  is  anthropomorphic,  is  sheer  nonsense. 
It  sounds  very  much  like  the  squabble  on 
idealism  and  realism  in  occidental  philosophy, 
which  has  for  its  foundation  the  mere  play 
on  the  word  real.  The  idea  of  Isvara  covers 
all  the  ground  ever  denoted  and  connoted 
by  the  word  real.  Isvara  is  as  much  real  as 
an^hing  else  in  the  universe  ; and  the  word 
real  means  nothing  more  to  us  than  what 
ha^now  been  pointed  out.  Such  is  the  con- 
ception of  Isvara,  in  Hindu  philosophy. 


Spiritual  Realisation,  the  Aim  of 
Bhakti-Toga. 


To  the  bhakta  these  dry  details  are  neces- 
sary to  strengthen  his  will  only.  Beyond 
that  they  are  of  no  use  to  him,  for,  he  is 
treading  along  a path  which  will  soon  lead  him 
beyond  the  hazy  and  turbulent  regions  of 
reason,  to  the  realm  of  realisation.  Soon, 
through  the  mercy  of  the  Lord,  he  reaches 
a plane  where  pedantic  and  powerless  reason 
is  left  far  behind,  and  the  mere  intellectual 
groping  through  the  dark  gives  place  to  the 
daylight  of  direct  perception.  No  more  does 
he  reason  and  believe,  he  perceives.  No 
more  does  he  argue,  he  senses.  And  is  not 
this  seeing  and  feeling  and  enjoying  Gbd, 
higher  than  reasoning  and  arguing  about 
Him  ? Nay,  bkaktas  have  not  been  want- 
ing who  have  maintained  that  it  is  higher 
than  Moksha — liberation  even.  And  is  it  not 


THE  AIM  OF  BHAKTI-YOGA.  3 1 

in  itself  the  highest  utility  also  ? There  are 
people  in  this  world,  and  a good  many  of  them 
too,  who  are  covinced  that  that  alone  is  of 
use  and  utility  which  brings  creature-com- 
forts to  man.  Religion,  God,  Eternity,  Soul, 
none  of  these  is  of  any  use  to  them,  for  these 
do  not  bring  them  money  or  physical  com- 
fort ! To  such,  things,  which  do  not  gratify 
the  senses  or  appease  the  appetites,  are  of  any 
utility.  In  every  mind,  utility,  however,  is  con- 
ditioned by  its  own  peculiar  wants.  To  men, 
therefore,  who  never  rise  higher  than  eating, 
drinking,  begetting  progeny,  and  dying,  the 
gain  lies  in  sense-enjoyments  only  ; and  they 
must  wait  and  go  through  many  more  re-in- 
carnations  to  learn  to  feel  even  the  faintest 
necessity  for  anything  higher.  But  those  to 
whom  the  eternal  interests  of  the  soul  are 
of  much  higher  value  than  the  fleeting 
interests  of  this  mundane  life,  to  whom  the 
gratification  of  the  senses  is  but  like  the 
thoughtless  play  of  the  baby,  to  them  God 


32 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


and  the  love  of  God  form  the  highest  and 
the  only  utility  of  human  existence.  Thank 
God  there  are  some  such  still  living  in  this 
world  of  too  much  worldliness. 

Bhakti-  Yoga,  as  we  have  said,  is  divided 
into  the  gauni  or  the  preparatory,  and 
the  (tpci)  or  the  supreme  forms.  We 

shall  find  as  we  go  on  how,  in  the  prepara- 
tory stage,  we  unavoidably  stand  in  need  of 
many  concrete  helps  to  enable  us  to  get  on  ; 
and  indeed  the  mythological  and  symbologic- 
al  parts  of  all  religions  are  natural  growths 
which  early  environ  the  aspiring  soul  and 
help  it  God  ward.  It  is  also  a significant  fact 
that  spiritual  giants  have  only  been  produced 
in  those  systems  of  religion,  where  there  is 
an  exuberant  growth  of  rich  mythology  and 
ritualism.  The  dry  fanatical  forms  of  religion 
which  attempt  to  eradicate  all  that  is  poetical, 
all  that  is  beautiful  and  sublime,  all  that 
gives  a firm  grasp  to  the  infant  mind  totter- 
ing in  its  Godward  way— the  forms  which 


THE  AIM  OF  BHAKTI-YOGA.  33 

attempt  to  break  down  the  very  ridge  poles 
of  the  spiritual  roof,  and  in  their  ignorant 
and  superstitious  conceptions  of  truth  try  to 
drive  away  all  that  is  life-giving,  all  that  fur- 
nishes the  formative  material  to  the  spiritual 
plant  growing  in  the  human  soul — such  forms 
of  religion  find  too  soon  that  all  of  what  is 
left  to  them  is  but  an  empty  shell,  a content- 
less frame  of  words  or  perhaps  sophistry, 
with  a little  flavour  of  social  scavengering, 
the  so-called  spirit  of  reform.  The  vast 
mass  of  those  whose  religion  is  like  this  are 
conscious  or  unconscious  materialists — the 
end  and  aim  of  their  lives  here  and  here- 
after being  enjoyment.  That  is  why  iJW 
or  works  like  street-cleaning  and  scavenger- 
ing intended  to  increase  the  material  comfort 
of  man  are  to  them  the  alpha  and  the  omega, 
the  “J)e-air’  and  the  “end-all”  of  human  exis- 
tence ! The  sooner  the  followers  of  this 
curious  mixture  of  ignorance  and  fanaticism 
come  out  in  their  true  colours,  and  join,  as 

3 


34 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


they  well  deserve  to  do,  the  ranks  of  atheists 
and  materialists,  the  better  will  it  be  for  the 
world.  One  ounce  of  practice  of  righteous- 
ness for  spiritual  self-realisation  outweighs 
tons  and  tons  of  such  frothy  talk  and  non- 
sensical sentiments.  Show  us  one,  but  one, 
gigantic  spiritual  genius  growing  out  of  all 
this  dry  dust  of  ignorance  and  fanaticism,  or 
if  you  cannot,  close  your  mouths,  open  the 
windows  of  your  hearts  to  the  clear  light  of 
truth,  and  sit  like  children  at  the  feet  of  those 
who  know  what  they  are  talking  about— 
the  sages  of  India  ! Let  us  then  listen  atten- 
tively to  what  they  say. 


The  Need  of  a Q-uru. 


Every  soul  is  destined  to  be  perfect,  and 
every  being,  in  the  end,  will  attain  the  state 
of  perfection.  Whatever  we  are  now,  is  the 
result  of  our  acts  and  thoughts  in  the  past  ; 
and  whatever  we  shall  be  in  the  future,  will 
be  the  result  of  what  we  think  and  do  now. 
But  this,  our  shaping  of  our  own  destinies, 
does  not  preclude  our  receiving  help  from 
outside,  nay,  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases, 
such  help  is  absolutely  necessary.  When  it 
comes,  the  higher  powers  and  possibilities  of 
the  soul  are  quickened,  spiritual  life  is 
awakened,  growth  is  animated,  and  man  be- 
comes holy  and  perfect  in  the  end. 

^This  quickening  impulse  cannot  be  deriv- 
ed from  books.  The  soul  can  only  receive 
impulses  from  another  soul,  and  from  nothing 
else.  We  may  study  books  all  our  lives,  we 
may  become  very  intellectual,  but  in  the  end 
,we  find,  that  we  have  not  developed  sipritu- 


36 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


ally  at  all.  It  is  not  true  that  a high  order 
of  intellectual  development  always  goes  hand 
in  hand  with  a proportionate  development 
of  the  spiritual  side  in  man.  In  studying 
books  we  are  sometimes  deluded  into  think- 
ing that  thereby  we  are  being  spiritually 
helped  ; but  if  we  analyse  the  effect  of  the 
study  of  books  on  ourselves,  we  shall  find 
that  at  the  utmost,  it  is  only  our  intellect  that 
derived  profit  from  such  studies  and  not  our 
inner  spirit.  This  insufficiency  of  books  to 
quicken  spiritual  growth  is  the  reason  why, 
although  almost  every  one  of  us  can  speak 
most  wonderfully  on  spiritual  matters,  when 
it  comes  to  action  and  the  living  of  a truly 
spiritual  life,  we  find  ourselves  so  awfully 
deficient.  To  quicken  the  spirit,  the  impulse 
must  come  from  another  soul. 

The  person,  from  whose  soul  such  impulse 
comes,  is  called  the  guru — the  teacher,  and 
the  person  to  whose  soul  the  impulse  is  con- 
. veyed  is  called  the  sishya — the  student.  Tq 


THE  NEED  OF  A GURU. 


37 


convey  such  an  impulse  to  any  soul,  in  the 
first  place,  the  soul  from  which  it  proceeds 
must  possess  the  power  of  transmitting  it,  and 
in  the  second  place,  the  soul  to  which  it  is 
transmitted  must  be  fit  to  receive  it.  The 
seed  must  be  a living  seed,  and  the  field 
must  be  ready  ploughed  ; and  when  both 
these  conditions  are  fulfilled,  a wonderful 
growth  of  genuine  religion  takes  place.  “The 
true  preacher  of  religion  has  to  be  of  won- 
derful capabilities,  and  clever  must  his  hearer 
be  and  when  both  of  these  are  really  won- 
derful and  extraordinary,  then  will  a splendid 
spiritual  awakening  result  and  not  otherwise. 
Such  alone  are  the  real  teachers,  and  such 
alone  are  also  the  real  students  or  aspirants 
to  spirituality.  All  others  are  only  playing 
wkh  spirituality.  They  have  just  a little 
curiosity  awakened,  just  a little  intellectua 
aspiration  kindled  in  them,  but  are  merely 

(Katha,  II-7) 


standing  on  the  outward  fringe  of  the  hori- 
zon of  religion.  There  is,  no  doubt,  some 
value  even  in  that,  as  it  may,  in  course  of 
time,  result  in  the  awakening  of  a real  thirst 
for  religion.  It  is  a mysterious  law  of  nature 
that,  as  soon  as  the  field  is  ready,  the  seed 
must  and  does  come,  as  soon  as  the  soul 
earnestly  desires  to  have  religion,  the  trans- 
mitter of  the  religious  force  must  and  does 
appear  to  help  that  soul.  When  the  power 
that  attracts  the  light  of  religion  in  the 
receiving  soul  is  full  and  strong,  the  power, 
which  answers  to  that  attraction  and  sends  in 
light,  does  come  as  a matter  of  course. 

There  are,  however,  certain  great  dangers 
in  the  way.  There  is,  for  instance,  the 
danger  to  the  receiving  soul  of  its  mistaking 
momentary  emotions  for  real  religious  year- 
ning. We  may  study  that  in  ourselves.  Many 
a time  in  our  lives,  when  somebody  dies 
whom  we  loved,  we  receive  a blow — we  Teel 
that  the  world  is  slipping  away  between  our 


THE  NEED  OF  A GURU. 


39 


fingers,  that  we  want  something  surer  and 
higher  and  that  we  must  become  religious. 
In  a few  days  that  wave  of  feeling  passes 
away  and  we  are  left  stranded  just  where  we 
were  before  ! We  are  all  of  us  often  mistak- 
ing such  impulses  for  real  thirst  after  religion  ; 
but  as  long  as  these  momentary  emotions 
are  thus  mistaken,  that  continuous,  real, 
craving  of  the  soul  for  religion  will  not  come, 
and  we  cannot  find  the  true  transmitter  of 
spirituality.  So,  whenever  we  are  tempted  to 
complain  of  our  search  after  the  Truth  prov- 
ing vain,  instead  of  so  complaining,  our  first 
duty  ought  to  be  to  look  into  our  own  souls 
and  find  whether  the  craving  in  the  heart 
is  real.  Then  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases, 
it  would  be  discovered  that  we  were  not  fit 
for  receiving  the  Truth,  that  there  was  no 
real  thirst  for  spirituality. 

There  are  still  greater  dangers  in  regard 
to 'the  transmitter,  the  guru.  There  are 
many,  who,  though  immersed  in  ignorance. 


40 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


yet  in  the  pride  of  their  hearts,  fancy  they 
know  everything,  and  not  only  do  not  stop 
there,  but  offer  to  take  others  on  their  shoul- 
ders ; and  thus  the  blind  leading  the  blind, 
both  fall  into  the  ditch.  ‘'Fools  dwel- 
ling in  darkness,  wise  in  their  own  conceit, 
and  puffed  up  with  vain  knowledge,  go  round 
and  round  staggering  to  and  fro,  like  blind 
men  led  by  the  blind.”  m The  world  is  full  of 
such.  Every  one  wants  to  be  a teacher, 
every  beggar  wants  to  make  a gift  of  a 
million  dollars  ! Just  as  these  beggars  are 
ridiculous,  so  are  these  teachers 


• ( Mundaka,  I — 2-8  ) 


Qualifications  of  the  Aspirant  and 
the  Teacher. 


How  are  we  to  know  a teacher  then  ? 
The  sun  requires  no  torch  to  make  him 
visible — we  need  not  light  a candle  in  order 
to  see  him.  When  the  sun  rises,  we  instinc- 
tively become  aware  of  the  fact,  so  when  a 
teacher  of  men  comes  to  help  us,  the  soul 
will  instinctively  find  that  truth  has  already 
begun  to  shine  upon  it.  Truth  stands  on  its 
own  evidence — it  does  not  require  any  other 
testimony  to  prove  it  to  be  true — it  is  self- 
effulgent.  It  penetrates  into  the  innermost 
corners  of  our  nature,  and  in  its  presence  the 
whole  universe  stands  up  and  says,  “This 
is  truth.”  The  teachers  whose  wisdom  and 
tri^fh  shine  like  the  light  of  the  sun,  the  very 
best  that  the  world  has  known,  are  worship- 
ped as  gods  by  the  major  portion  of  man- 


42 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


kind.  But  we  may  get  help  from  a compara- 
tively inferior  class  also  and  as  we  ourselves 
do  not  possess  intuition  enough  to  judge  the 
merits  of  the  man  from  whom  we  are  going 
to  receive  teaching  and  guidance  ; so  there 
ought  to  be  certain  tests,  certain  conditions, 
for  the  teacher  to  satisfy,  as  there  are  for 
the  taught. 

The  conditions  necessary  for  the  taught 
are  purity,  a real  thirst  after  knowledge,  and 
perseverance.  No  impure  soul  can  be  really 
religious.  Purity  in  thought,  speech,  and  act 
is  absolutely  necessary  for  any  one  to  be 
religious.  As  to  thirst  after  knowledge, 
it  is  an  old  law  that  we  all  get  whatever  we 
want.  None  of  us  can  get  anything  other 
than  what  we  fix  our  hearts  upon.  To  pant 
for  religion  truly  is  a very  difficult  thing,  not 
at  all  so  easy  as  we  generally  imagine. 
Hearing  religious  talks,  reading  religious 
books,  is  no  proof  yet  of  a real  want  felt  in 
the  heart  ; there  must  be  a continuous  strug- 


THE  ASPIRANT  AND  THE  TEACHER.  43 

gle,  a constant  fight,  an  unremitting  grap- 
pling with  our  tower  nature,  till  the  higher 
want  is  actually  felt  and  the  victory  is  achi- 
eved. It  is  not  a question  of  one  or  two 
days  or  years,  or  of  one  or  two  lives — the 
struggle  may  have  to  go  on  for  hundreds  of 
life-times.  The  success  sometimes  may 
come  immediately,  but  we  must  be  ready  to 
wait  patiently  for  what  may  look  like  an 
infinite  length  of  time,  even.  The  student 
who  sets  out  with  such  a spirit  of  persever- 
ance will  surely  find  success  and  realisation 
at  last. 

In  regard  to  the  teacher,  we  must  see 
that  he  knows  the  spirit  of  the  scriptures. 
The  whole  world  reads  Bibles,  Vedas,  and 
Qurans  ; but  it  reads  only  the  words,  syntax, 
etymology  and  philology  of  these — the  dry 
bones  of  religion.  The  teacher  who  deals 
too  much  in  words,  and  allows  the  mind  to 
be  carried  away  by  the  force  of  words,  loses 
the  spirit.  It  is  the  knowledge  of  the  spirit 


44 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


of  the  scriptures  alone  that  constitutes  the 
true  religious  teacher.  The  network  of  the 
words  of  the  scriptures  is  like  a huge  forest 
in  which  the  human  mind  often  loses  itself 
and  finds  no  way  out.  “The  network  of 
words  is  a big  forest  ; it  is  the  cause  of 
curious  wanderings  of  the  mind.”*  “The  vari> 
ous  methods  of  joining  words,  the  various 
methods  of  speaking  in  beautiful  language, 
the  various  methods  of  explaining  the  diction 
of  the  scriptures,  as  well  as  the  disputations 
of  the  learned,  are  good  intellectual  enjoy- 
ments, but  do  not  conduce  to  the  development 
of  spiritual  perfection.”  f Those  who  employ 
such  methods  to  impart  religion  to  others  are 
only  desirous  to  show  off  their  learning,  so 
that  the  world  may  praise  them  as  great 

( Vivckachud'amani,  62  sloka  ) 

( Vivekachud'amani,  60  sloka  ) 


THE  ASPIRANT  AND  THE  TEACHER.  45 

scholars.  You  will  find  that  no  one  of  the  great 
treachers  of  the  world  ever  went  into  these 
various  explanations  of  the  texts  ; there  is  with 
them  no  attempt  at  “text-torturing,”  no  eternal 
playing  upon  the  meaning  of  words  and  their 
roots.  They  simply  taught,  while  others  who 
have  nothing  to  teach,  have  taken  up  a word 
sometimes,  and  written  a three  volume 
book  on  its  origin,  on  the  man  who  used  it 
first,  and  on  what  that  man  was  accustomed 
to  eat,  and  how  long  he  slept  and  so  on  ! 

Bhagavan  Ramakrishna  used  to  tell  a 
story  of  some  men  who  went  into  a mango- 
orchard  and  busied  themselves  in  counting 
the  leaves,  twigs,  and  branches  of  the 
trees,  examining  their  colour,  comparing 
their  size,  and  noting  down  everything  most 
carefully,  and  then  getting  up  a learned 
dii^ussion  on  each  of  these  topics,  which 
were  undoubtedly  highly  interesting  to  them. 
But  one  of  them,  more  sensible  than  the 
others,  did  not  care  for  all  these  things,  and 


46 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


instead  thereof,  began  to  eat  the  mango- 
fruit  ! And  was  he  not  wiser  ? So  leave  this 
counting  of  leaves  and  twigs  and  this  note- 
taking to  others.  This  kind  of  work  has  its 
proper  place,  but  not  here  in  the  spiritual 
domain.  You  can  never  see  a strong  spiri- 
tual man  among  these  ‘‘leaf-counters.”  Reli- 
gion, the  highest  aim,  the  highest  glory  of 
man,  does  not  require  so  much  labour  as 
leaf -counting.  If  you  want  to  be  a bhakta, 
it  is  not  at  all  necessary  for  you  to  know 
whether  Krishna  was  born  in  Mathura  or  in 
Vraja  or  what  he  was  doing  all  through  his 
life-time  or  just  the  exact  date  on  which  he 
pronounced  the  teachings  of  the  Gita.  You 
only  require  to  feel  the  craving  for  the  beau- 
tiful lessons  of  duty  and  love  in  the  Giki. 
All  the  other  particulars  about  it  and  its 
author  are  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  learqed. 
Let  them  have  what  they  desire.  Say 
^^Shantih,  ShantiK'  to  their  learned  contro- 
versies, and  let  us  eat  the  mangoes. 


THE  ASPIRANT  AND  THE  TEACHER.  47 

The  second  condition  necessary  in  the 
teacher  is — sinlessness.  The  question  is  of- 
ten asked  : “Why  should  we  look  into  the 
character  and  personality  of  a teacher  ? We 
have  only  to  judge  of  what  he  says,  and 
take  that  up.”  This  is  not  right.  If  a man 
wants  to  teach  me  something  of  dynamics 
or  chemistry,  or  any  other  physical  science, 
he  may  be  anything  he  likes,  because  what 
the  physical  sciences  require,  is  merely  an 
intellectual  equipment  ; but  as  regards  the 
spiritual  sciences,  it  is  impossible  from  first 
to  last,  that  there  can  be  any  spiritual  light 
in  the  soul  that  is  impure.  What  religion 
can  an  impure  man  teach  ? The  sine  qua  non 
of  acquiring  spiritual  truth  for  one’s  self  or 
for  imparting  it  to  others,  is  the  purity  of 
heart  and  soul.  A vision  of  God  or  a glimpse 
of  j:he  beyond,  never  comes  until  the  soul 
is  pure.  Hence  with  the  teacher  of  religion 
we  must  see  first  what  he  is,  and  then  what 
he  says.  He  must  be  perfectly  pure,  and  then 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


alone  comes  the  value  of  his  words,  because 
he  is  only  then  the  true  “transmitter.”  What 
can  he  transmit,  if  he  has  not  spiritual  power 
in  himself  ? There  must  be  an  intense  spiri- 
tual vibration  in  the  mind  of  the  teacher,  so 
that  it  may  be  sympathetically  conveyed  to 
the  mind  of  the  taught.  The  function  of 
the  teacher  is  indeed  an  affair  of  real  trans- 
ference of  something,  and  not  one  of  a mere 
stimulation  of  the  existing  intellectual  or 
other  faculties  in  the  taught.  Something 
real  and  appreciable  as  an  influence,  comes 
from  the  teacher  and  goes  to  the  taught. 
Therefore  the  teacher  must  be  pure. 

The  third  condition  is  in  regard  to  the 
motive.  The  teacher  must  not  teach  with 
any  ulterior  selfish  motive,  for  money,  name, 
or  fame  ; his  work  must  be  simply  out  of 
love,  out  of  pure  love  for  mankind  at  large. 
The  only  medium  through  which  spiritual 
force  can  be  transmitted  is  love.  Any  selfish 
motive,  such  as  the  desire  for  gain  or  for 


THE  ASPIRANT  AND  THE  TEACHER.  49 

name,  will  immediately  destroy  this  convey- 
ing medium.  God  is  love,  and  only  he  who 
has  known  God  as  love  can  be  a teacher  of 
godliness  and  of  God  to  man. 

When  you  see,  that  in  your  teacher  these 
conditions  are  all  fulfilled,  you  are  safe  ; if 
they  are  not,  it  is  unsafe  to  allow  yourself 
to  be  taught  by  him,  for  there  is  the  great 
danger  that,  if  he  cannot  convey  goodness 
into  your  heart,  he  may  convey  wickedness. 
This  danger  must  by  all  means  be  guarded 
against.  “He  who  is  learned,  sinless  and 
unpolluted  by  lust,  he  is  the  greatest  knower 
of  the  Brakman'% 

From  what  has  been  said,  it  naturally 
follows  that  we  cannot  be  taught  to  love, 
appreciate,  and  assimilate  religion  every- 
wh^re  and  by  everybody.  The  “sermon  in 
stones,  books  in  running  brooks,  and  good  in 


( Vivekachud'amani,  54  sloka  ) 


4 


50 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


everything”*  is  all  very  true  as  a poetical 
figure — but  no  man  can  impart  to  another  a 
single  grain  of  truth,  unless  he  has  the  unde- 
veloped germs  of  it  in  himself.  To  whom  do 
the  stones  and  brooks  preach  sermons? -to 
the  human  soul,  the  lotus  of  whose  inner  holy 
shrine  is  already  quick  with  life.  And  the 
light  which  causes  the  beautiful  opening  out 
of  this  lotus  comes  always  from  the  good 
and  wise  teacher.  When  the  heart  has  thus 
been  opened,  it  becomes  fit  to  receive  teaching 
from  the  stones  and  the  brooks,  or  the  stars, 
the  sun  and  the  moon,  or  from  anything  which 
has  its  existence  in  this  divine  universe  ; 
but  the  unopened  heart  will  see  in  them 
nothing  but  mere  stones  and  mere  brooks. 
A blind  man  may  go  to  a museum,  but  he 
will  not  profit  by  it  in  any  way  ; his  eyes 


* And  this  our  life  exempt  from  public  haunt, 

Finds  tongues  in  trees,  books  in  the  running  brftoks, 
Sermon  in  stones  and  good  in  every  thing. 

^Shakespeare’s  As  you  like  it,  Act  II,  Scene  I. 


THE  ASPIRANT  AND  THE  TEACHER.  51 

must  be  opened  first,  and  then  alone  he  will 
be  able  to  learn  what  the  things  in  the  mu- 
seum can  teach. 

This  eye-opener  of  the  aspirant  after  re- 
ligion is  the  teacher.  With  the  teacher y there- 
fore, our  relationship  is  the  same  as  that 
between  an  ancestor  and  his  descendants. 
Without  faith,  humility,  submission  and  vener- 
ation in  our  hearts  to  our  religious  teacher, 
there  cannot  be  any  growth  of  religion  in 
us  ; and  it  is  a significant  fact,  that  where 
this  kind  of  relation  between  the  teacher  and 
the  taught  prevails,  there  alone  gigantic 
spiritual  men  are  growing,  while  in  those 
countries  which  have  neglected  to  keep  up 
this  kind  of  relation,  the  religious  teacher 
has  become  a mere  lecturer, — the  teacher 
ex!J)ecting  his  five  dollars,  the  person  taught 
expecting  his  brain  to  be  filled  with  the 
teacher’s  words  and  each  going  his  own  way 
after  this  much  is  done  ! Under  such  circum- 
stances spirituality  becomes  almost  an  un- 


52 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


known  quantity.  There  is  none  to  transmit 
it  and  none  to  have  it  transmitted  to.  Re- 
ligion with  such  people  becomes  business — 
they  think  they  can  obtain  it  with  their  dol- 
lars. Would  to  God  that  religion  could  be  ob- 
tained so  easily  ! But  unfortunately  it  cannot. 

Religion,  which  is  the  very  height  of 
knowledge  and  wisdom,  cannot  be  bought 
nor  can  it  be  acquired  from  books.  You 
may  thrust  your  head  into  all  the  corners  of 
the  world,  you  may  explore  the  Himalayas, 
the  Alps  and  the  Caucasus,  you  may  sound 
the  bottom  of  the  sea  and  pry  into  every 
nook  of  Thibet  and  the  desert  of  Gobi,  you 
will  not  find  it  any  where,  until  your  heart  is 
ready  for  receiving  it  and  your  teacher  has 
come.  And  when  that  divinely  appointed 
teacher  comes,  serve  him  with  childlike 
confidence  and  simplicity,  freely  open  your 
heart  to  his  influence  and  see  in  him  God, 
incarnated  ! Those  who  come  to  seek  truth 
with  such  a spirit  of  love  and  veneration,  to 


THE  ASPIRANT  AND  THE  TEACHER.  5$ 

them  the  Lord  of  Truth  reveals  the  most 
wonderful  things  regarding  truth,  goodness* 
and  beauty. 


( LIBRARY 


Incarnate  Teachers  and 
Incarnation. 

'Wherever  the  name  of  the  Lord  is 
spoken,  that  very  place  is  holy,” — how  much 
more  so  is  the  man  who  speaks  His  name 
and  with  what  veneration  ought  we  to 
approach  him,  out  of  whom  is  transmitted 
spiritual  light  to  us  ! Such  teachers  of  spirit- 
ual truth  are  indeed  very  few  in  number  in 
this  world,  but  the  world  is  never  altogether 
without  them.  The  moment  it  will  be  absol- 
utely bereft  of  them,  it  will  become  a hide- 
ous hell  and  hasten  on  to  its  destruction. 
They  are  always  the  fairest  flowers  of  human 
life,  "the  ocean  of  mercy  without  any 
motive  !”  * 

‘‘Know  Me  to  be  the  Guru  of  all,”t  says  Sri 


* * • 

( Vivekachud'amani,  35  sloka ) 

t ilt 

( BhAgavat,  Ch.  XI,  17—26 ) 


INCARNATE  TEACHERS  AND  INCARNATION.  55 

Krishna  in  the  Bhdgavat,—2SiA\i\^tr  and 
nobler  than  all  ordinary  ones  is  another  set 
of  teachers  in  the  world,  the  Avatdras  of 
Isvara,  They  can  transmit  spirituality  with 
a touch,  even  with  a mere  wish  ! The  lowest 
and  the  most  degraded  characters  become  in 
one  second  saints  at  their  command  ! They 
are  the  Teachers  of  all  teachers,  the  highest 
manifestations  of  God  through  man.  We 
cannot  see  God  except  through  them.  We 
cannot  help  worshipping  them  and  indeed, 
they  are  the  only  ones  whom  we  are  bound 
to  worship. 

No  man  can  really  see  God  except 
through  these  human  manifestations.  If  we 
try  to  see  God  otherwise,  we  make  for  our- 
selves a hideous  caricature  of  Him,  and 
believe  the  caricature  to  be  no  worse  than 
the  original.  There  is  a story  of  an  igno- 
rant man  who  was  asked  to  make  an  image 
of  the  God  Siva,  and  who,  after  days  of  hard 
struggle,  manufactured  only  the  image  of  a 


56 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


monkey.  So  whenever  we  try  to  think  of 
God  as  He  is  in  His  absolute  perfection, 
we  invariably  meet  with  the  most  miserable 
failure  ; because  as  long  as  we  are  men,  we 
cannot  conceive  Him  as  anything  higher 
than  man.  The  time  will  come  when  we 
shall  transcend  our  human  nature,  and  know 
Him  as  He  is  ; but  as  long  as  we  are  men 
we  must  worship  Him  in  man  and  as  man. 
Talk  as  you  may,  try  as  you  may,  you  cannot 
think  of  God  except  as  a man.  You  may 
deliver  great  intellectual  discourses  pn  God, 
you  may  become  very  great  rationalists  and 
prove  to  your  satisfaction  that  all  these 
accounts  of  the  Avatdras  or  incarnations  of 
God  as  man  are  nonsense—but  let  us  come 
for  a moment  to  practical  common  sense 
and  examine  them.  What  is  there  behind 
these  rational  discourses — how  much  real 
substance  } Zero,  nothing — simply  so  mubh 
froth  ! Hence  next  time  when  you  hear  a 
man  delivering  a great  intellectual  lecture 


INCARNATE  TEACHERS  AND  INCARNATION.  57 

against  this  worship  of  the  Avatdras  of 
God,  get  hold  of  him  and  ask  him  what 
his  idea  of  God  is,  what  he  knows  by  “om- 
nipotence,” “omnipresence,”  and  all  similar 
terms,  beyond  the  spelling  of  the  words. 
He  really  means  nothing  by  them  ; he  can- 
not formulate  as  their  meaning  any  idea 
unaffected  by  his  own  human  nature  ; he  is 
no  better  off  in  this  matter  than  the  man  in 
the  street  who  has  not  read  a single  book. 
That  man  in  the  street,  however,  is  quiet 
and  does  not  disturb  the  peace  of  the  world 
—while  this  big  talker  creates  disturbance 
and  misery  among  mankind.  Religion  is 
after  all  realisation,  and  we  must  make  the 
sharpest  distinction  between  talk  and  intui- 
tive experience.  What  we  experience  in  the 
depths  of  our  souls  is  realisation.  Nothing 
indeed  is  so  uncommon  as  common  sense  in 
regapd  to  this  matter  ! 

By  our  present  constitution,  we  are  limit- 
ed and  bound  to  see  God  as  man.  If,  for 


58 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


instance,  the  buffaloes  want  to  worship  God, 
they  will,  in  keeping  with  their  own  nature, 
see  Him  as  a huge  buffalo  ; if  a fish  wants 
to  worship  God,  it  will  have  to  form  an  idea 
of  Him  as  a big  fish  ; and  man  has  to 
think  of  Him  as  man.  And  these  various 
conceptions  are  not  due  to  morbidly  active 
imagination.  Man,  the  buffalo  and  the  fish, 
all  may  be  supposed  to  represent  so  many 
different  vessels  so  to  say,  with  different 
shape  and  capacities.  All  these  vessels 
go  to  the  sea  of  God  to  get  filled  with  water. 
In  the  man  the  water  takes  the  shape  of 
man,  in  the  buffalo  the  shape  of  a buffalo, 
and  in  the  fish  the  shape  of  a fish.  Now,  as 
each  of  these  vessels,  though  containing  the 
same  water  of  the  same  sea  of  God,^has 
to  appear  according  to  its  own  shape  and 
capacity,  so  when  men  see  God,  they  see 
Him  as  man,  and  the  animals,  if  they  have 
any  conception  of  God  at  all,  must  see  Him 
as  animal,  each  according  to  its  own  mental 


INCARNATE  TEACHERS  AND  INCARNATION.  59 


constitution  and  capacity.  Therefore  we 
cannot  help  seeing  God  as  man  and  are 
bound  to  worship  Him  as  man.  There  is 
no  other  way. 

Two  kinds  of  men  do  not  worship  God 
as  man — the  human  brute  who  has  no  reli- 
gion, and  the  liberated  soul,  the  Parama- 
hamsa^  who  has  risen  beyond  all  the  weak- 
nesses of  humanity  and  has  transcended  the 
limits  of  his  own  human  nature.  To  him 
all  nature  has  become  his  own  Self.  He 
alone  can  worship  God  as  He  is.  Here  too, 
as  in  all  other  cases,  the  two  extremes  meet. 
The  extreme  of  ignorance  and  the  other 
extreme  of  knowledge — neither  of  these  go 
through  acts  of  worship.  The  human  brute 
do^s  not  worship  because  of  his  ignorance, 
and  the  free  souls  (Jivanmuktas)  do  not 
worship,  because  they  have  realised  God  in 
themselves.  Being  between  these  two  poles 
of  existence,  if  any  one  tells  you  that  he  is 
not  going  to  worship  God  as  man,  take  kind 


6o 


BHAKTl-YOGA. 


care  of  that  man  ; he  is,  not  to  use  any 
harsher  term,  an  irresponsible  talker  ; his 
religion  is  for  unsound  and  empty  brains. 

God  understands  human  failings  and  be- 
comes man  to  do  good  to  humanity. 
“Whenever  virtue  subsides  and  wickedness 
prevails,  I manifest  myself.  To  establish 
virtue,  to  destroy  evil,  to  save  the  good  f 
come  in  every  age.”"*^  “Fools  deride  Me,  Who 
have  assumed  the  human  form,  without 
knowing  My  real  nature  as  the  Lord  of  the 
universe.”  f Such  is  Sri  Krishna’s  declaration 
in  the  Gita  on  incarnation.  “When  a huge 


♦ "to  to  fr  mxjfi  i 

TO?wr»t  » 

^ ^ \f 

( Gita,  Ch.  IV.  7-8  ) 

t> 

t lit  ^ TOhW  I 

TOt  m H 

( Gita,  Ch.  IX-ii ) 


INCARNATE  TEACHERS  AND  INCARNATION  6 1 


tidal  wave  comes,”  says  BhagavS.n  Sri  Rdma- 
krishna,  “all  the  little  brooks  and  ditches 
become  full  to  the  brim  without  any  effort 
or  consciousness  or  their  own  part — so  when 
an  incarnation  comes,  a tidal  wave  of  spirit- 
uality breaks  upon  the  world  and  people  feel 
spirituality  in  the  very  atmosphere.” 


The  Mantra  : Om  : Word 
and  Wisdom. 


We  are  now  considering  not  the  Mahd- 
purushas,  or  the  great  incarnations  of  God, 
but  only  the  siddha-gurus,  the  teachers  who 
have  attained  the  goal.  They  as  a rule, 
have  to  convey  the  germs  of  spiritual  wis« 
dom  to  the  disciple  by  means  of  words 
(mantra)  to  be  meditated  upon.  What  are 
these  mantras  ? The  whole  of  this  universe 
has,  according  to  Indian  philosophy,  both 
name  and  form  as  its  conditions  of 

manifestation.  In  the  human  microcosm, 
there  cannot  be  a single  wave  in  the  mind- 
stuff  (ftfC)  unconditioned  by  name  and  form. 
If  it  be  true  that  nature  is  built  throughout 
on  the  same  plan,  this  kind  of  conditioning 
by  name  and  form  must  also  be  the  plan  of 
the  building  of  the  whole  of  the  cosmos. 
“As  one  lump  of  clay  being  known,  all  clay 


THE  MANTRA  : OM  : WORD  AND  WISDOM.  63 

is  known,”  # so  the  knowledge  of  the  micro- 
cosm must  lead  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
macrocosm.  Now,y^?mis  the  outer  crust, 
of  which  name  or  idea  is  the  inner  essence 
or  kernel.  In  the  microcosm,  the  body  is 
the  form,  and  the  mind  or  the  antahkarana  is 
the  name,  and  sound-symbols  are  universally 
associated  with  this  name,  in  all  beings  hav- 
ing the  power  of  speech.  In  other  words, 
in  the  individual  man  the  ‘ thought- waves 
arising  in  the  limited  mahat  mind-stuff) 

must  manifest  themselves,  first  as  words  or 
ideas,  and  then  as  the  more  concrete  forms 
of  speech  and  action. 

In  the  universe  also,  Brahmd  or  Hiranya- 
garbha  (the  cosmic  mahat  or  the  universal 
mind)  first  manifested  Itself  as  name,  and 
then  as  form  or  the  outer  universe.  All 
this  expressed  sensible  universe  is  the  form, 
behind  which  stands  the  eternal  inexpress- 

(Chhdndogya,  VI— I). 


64 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


ible  sphota  or  manifester,  as  Logos  or 

Word.  This  eternal  sphota,  the  essential 
eternal  material  of  all  ideas  or  names,  is  the 
power  through  which-  the  Lord  creates  the 
universe — nay,  the  Lord  first  becomes  con- 
ditioned as  the  sphota,  and  then  evolves 
himself  out  as  the  yet  more  concrete  sensible 
universe.  This  sphota  has  one  word  as  its 
only  possible  symbol,  and  this  is  the  Om 
And  as  by  no  possible  means  of  ana- 
lysis we  can  separate  a sound-symbol  from 
the  idea,  connoted  by  it,  this  Om  and  the 
eternal  sphota  are  inseparable.  And  there- 
fore it  is  out  of  this  holiest  of  all  holy 
words,  the  mother  of  all  names  and  forms, 
the  eternal  Om,  that  the  whole  universe  may 
be  supposed  to  have  been  created.  But  it 
may  be  said  that,  although  ideas  and  souJid- 
symbols  are  inseparable,  yet  as  there  may  be 
various  sound-symbols  for  the  same  jdea, 
it  is  not  necessary  that  this  particular  word 
Om  should  be  the  sound-representative  of 


THE  MANTRA  : OM  : WORD  AND  WISDOM.  65 

the  thought,  out  of  which  the  universe  has 
become  manifested.  To  this  objection  we 
reply  that  this  Om  is  the  only  possible  symbol 
which  covers  the  whole  ground  of  all  possible 
ideas  and  there  is  none  other  like  it.  The 
sphota  is  the  material  of  all  ideas,  and  not 
any  definite  idea  in  its  fully  formed  state. 
That  is  to  say,  if  all  the  peculiarities  which 
distinguish  one  idea  from  another  be  remov- 
ed, then  what  remains  will  be  the  sphota. 
Now,  as  every  sound-symbol,  intended  to 
express  this  inexpressible  sphota  will  so 
particularize  it  that  it  will  no  longer  be  the 
sphota,  that  sound-symbol  which  parti- 
cularizes it  the  least  and  at  the  same  time 
most  approximately  expresses  its  nature, 
will  be  the  truest  symbol  for  it  and  this  is 
the*  O^n,  and  the  Oni  only.  The  three 
letters  A,  U,  M,  ( pronounced  in 

combination  as  Om,  may  well  be  the  general- 
ised symbol  of  all  possible  sounds.  Let 
us  see  how  it  can  be  so.  The  letter  A is  the 


5 


66 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


least  differentiated  of  all  sounds,  therefore 
Krishna  says  in  the  Gita — ‘‘  I am  A 
among  the  letters.”  # Again,  all  articulate 
sounds  are  produced  in  the  space  within  the 
mouth  beginning  with  the  root  of  the  tongue 
and  ending  in  the  lips.  The  throat-sound 
is  A,  and  M is  the  last  lip-sound  and  the 
effort  made  to  produce  the  sound  U exactly 
represents  the  rolling  forward  of  the  impulse 
which  begins  at  the  root  of  the  tongue  till 
it  ends  in  the  lips.  Thus  properly  pronounc- 
ed, this  Om  will  represent  the  whole  pheno- 
menon of  sound-production,  and  no  other 
word  can  do  this.  This,  therefore,  is  the 
fittest  symbol  to  represent  the  sphota,  and  the 
idea  connoted  by  the  word  sphota  is  the  real 
meaning  of  the  word  Om.  And  as  the  sym- 
bol can  never  be  separated  from  the  thing 
signified,  the  Om  and  the  sphota  are  one. 


( Gita,  Ch.  X-33  ) 


THE  MANTRA  : OM  : WORD  AND  WISDOM.  67 


Therefore  the  sphota  is  called  the  Nada- 
Brahma  ( ) or  the  Sound- Brahman. 

And  as  the  sphota^  being  the  finer  side  of 
the  manifested  universe,  is  nearer  to  God, 
and  is  indeed  the  first  manifestation  of  Divine 
Wisdom,  this  Om  is  truly  symbolic  of  God. 
Again,  just  as  the  “one  only”  Brahman,  the 
Akhanda — Sachchidananda,  the  Undivided — 
Existence’ Knowledge- Bliss,  can  be  conceived 
by  imperfect  human  souls  from  particular  and 
limited  standpoints  of  view  only  and  will  al- 
ways be  associated  with  particular  qualities,  so 
the  universe  in  its  entirety,  the  body  of  the 
Lord  will  also  be  thought  of  in  the  same 
manner  by  them.  Now  the  particular  view 
of  God  and  universe  of  a particular  worship- 
peer’s  mind,  will  always  be  determined  by  its 
prevailing  elements  or  tattvas.  And  thus  the 
result  is  that  the  same  God  will  be  seen  by 
varfous  worshippers  as  the  possessor  of 
different  and  not  unoften  contradictory  quali- 
ties, in  His  various  manifestations  ; and  the 


68 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


same  universe  will  also  appear  as  full  of  mani- 
fold unconnected  forms.  In  the  same  way 
again — as  in  the  case  of  the  least  differentiated 
and  the  most  universal  symbol  Om,  idea  and 
sound-symbol  have  been  seen  to  be  insepa- 
rably associated  with  each  other — the  law  of 
the  inseparable  association  of  ideas  and  sound- 
symbols  will  apply  to  the  many  differentiated 
views  of  God  and  universe  and  each  of  them 
will  and  must  have  a particular  word-symbol 
to  express  it.  These  word-symbols,  evolved 
out  of  the  deepest  spiritual  perceptions  of 
sages,  symbolize  and  express  as  nearly  as  pos- 
sible the  particular  view  of  God  and  universe 
they  stand  for.  And  as  the  Om  represents  the 
Akhanda  or  the  undifferentiated  Brahman, 
the  other  sound-symbols  represent  the  khanda 
or  the  differentiated  views  of  the  same 
Being  ; and  they  will  all  be  found  helpful  to 
divine  meditation  and  the  acquisition  of  frue 
knowledge,  by  worshippers  having  respective 
different  views  of  the  Lord  and  the  universe. 


Worship  of  Substitutes 
and  Images. 

The  next  points  to  be  considered  are  the 
worship  of  Pratikas  or  of  things  more  or 
less  satisfactory  as  substitutes  for  God,  and 
the  worship  of  Pratimas  or  images.  What 
is  the  worship  of  God  through  a Pratika  f 
It  is  “joining  the  mind  with  devotion  to 
that  which  is  not  Brahmany  taking  it  to  be 
Brahman!'  Says  Bhagavan  Ramanuja  : — 
“ ‘Worship  the  mind  as  Brahman  ^ this  is  in- 
ternal ; and  ‘the  Akasa  is  Brahman\  this  is 
external”.  The  mind  is  an  internal  Pratika^ 
the  Akasa  is  an  external  one  ; yet  both  can 
be  worshipped  as  substitutes  of  God.  Simi- 
larly Sankara  says — ‘The  Sun  is  Brahman^ 
tljis  is  the  command, ’...‘He  who  worships 
Name  as  Brahman!  and  in  all  such  passages 
the  doubt  arises  as  to  the  worship  of  Prati- 
kas!' The  word  Pratika  means  going  towards, 


70 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


and  worshipping  a Pratika  is  worshipping 
some  thing  which,  as  a substitute,  is  in  some 
one  or  more  respects,  like  the  Brahman,  but  is 
not  the  Brahman,  Along  with  the  Pratikas 
mentioned  in  the  Srutis  there  are  various 
others  to  be  found  in  the  Puranas  and  the 
Tantras.  In  this  “Pratika-worship”  may  be  in- 
cluded all  the  various  forms  of  2LnctsX,ov-(Pitri) 
worship  and  the  worship  of  angels  and  higher 
beings  {Deva  lit.  a shining  or  radiant  being). 

Now  worshipping  Isvara  and  Him  alone 
is  bhakti ; the  worship  of  anything  else,  such 
as  Deva  or  Pitri,  or  any  other  being  cannot 
be  called  bhakti.  The  various  kinds  of  wor- 
ship of  the  various  Devas,  are  all  to  be  in- 
cluded in  ritualistic  Karma,  which  gives  to 
the  worshipper  a particular  result  only,  in  the 
form  of  some  celestial  enjoyment,  but  can 
^either  give  rise  to  bhakti  or  intense  de- 
votion to  God  nor  lead  to  mukti  or  fi;(ee- 
dom  from  all  bondages.  One  thing,  there- 
fore, will  have  to  be  carefully  borne  in  mind. 


WORSHIP  OF  SUBSTITUTES  AND  IMAGES.  7 I 

If,  as  it  may  happen  in  some  cases,  the 
highly  philosophic  ideal  of  the  supreme 
Brahman  is  dragged  down  by  pratika-wor- 
ship  to  the  level  of  the  pratika  or  the  subs- 
titute and  the  pratika  itself  is  taken  by  the 
worshipper,  as  his  innermost  Self  and  the  in- 
ner controler  of  everything  (Antarayamin), 
the  worshipper  gets  entirely  misled,  as  no 
pratika  can  really  be  the  Atman  of  the 
worshipper.  But  where  Brahman  Himself 
is  the  object  of  worship,  and  the  pratika 
stands  only  as  a substitute  or  a suggestion 
thereof — that  is  to  say,  where  through  the 
pratika  the  omnipresent  Brahman  is  wor- 
shipped and  the  pratika  is  being  idealized  in- 
to the  cause  of  the  universe,  as  a means  to 
the  attainment  to  the  Brahman — the  wor- 
ship is  positively  beneficial ; nay,  it  is  abso- 
lutely necessary  for  all  mankind,  until  they 
have*all  got  beyond  the  primary  or  prepara- 
tory state  of  the  mind  in  regard  to  worship. 
When,  therefore,  any  gods  or  other  beings 


72 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


are  worshipped  in  and  for  themselves,  such 
worship  is  only  a ritualistic  karma  ; and  as  a 
vidya  (science)  it  gives  us  only  the  fruit  be- 
longing to  that  particular  vidya  ; but  when 
the  devas  or  any  other  beings  are  looked  up- 
on as  Brahman  and  worshipped,  the  result 
obtained  is  the  same  as  by  the  worshipping 
of  Isvara,  the  Supreme  Ruler.  This  explains 
how,  in  many  cases,  both  in  the  Srutis  and 
the  Smritis,  a god  or  a sage  or  some  other 
extraordinary  being  was  taken  up  and  lifted 
gradually  out  of  its  own  personal  nature  and 
after  being  idealized  into  Brahman^  had 
been  worshipped  as  such.  In  explanation 
the  Advaitin  says,  ‘Is  not  everything  Brah- 
man when  the  name  and  the  form  have  been 
removed  from  it  ?’ — ‘Is  not  He,  the  Lord, 
the  innermost  self  of  every  one  ?’ — says  \he 
Visishtadvaitin.  “The  fruition  of  even  the 
worship  of  the  Adityas  etc.  Brahman  Him- 
self bestows,  because  he  is  the  Ruler  of  all. 
Here,  in  this  way  does  Brahman  become  the 


WORSHIP  OF  SUBSTITUTES  AND  IMAGES.  73 

object  of  worship,  because  He,  as  Brahman, 
is  superposed  on  the  pratikas  just  as  Vishnu, 
and  other  Gods  are  superposed  upon 
images”  * — says  Sankara. 

The  same  ideas  apply  to  the  worship  of 
the  pratimas  or  images  as  do  to  that  of  the 
pratikas — that  is  to  say,  if  the  image  stands 
for  a god  or  a saint  only,  the  worship  is  not 
the  result  of  bhakti  and  does  not  lead  to 
liberation  ; but  if  it  stands  for  the  one  God, 
the  worship  thereof  will  bring  both  bhakti 
and  mukti.  Of  the  principal  religions  of  the 
world  we  see  Vedantism,  Buddhism,  and 
certain  forms  of  Christianity  freely  using 
images  to  help  the  worshipper — and  only 
two  religions,  Mahomedanism  and  Protes- 
tantism, refuse  such  help.  Yet  the  Maho- 
•medans  use  the  graves  of  their  saints  and 
m?irtyrs,  almost  in  place  of  images.  The 

* * I ^ 

inrt;  i 

( Vedanta  Sutras—  BhAsya  by  Sankara  ). 


74 


BHAKTr-YOGA. 


Protestants  alone,  in  rejecting  all  concrete 
helps  to  religion,  drifted  away  every  year 
farther  and  farther  from  spirituality,  till  at 
present  there  is  scarcely  any  difference  bet- 
ween the  advanced  Protestants  and  the 
followers  of  Auguste  Comte  or  the  Agnostics, 
who  preach  ethics  only!  Again,  in  Christianity 
and  Mahomedanism  whatever  exists  of 
image-worship  is  to  be  counted  under  that 
category,  in  which  the  pratika  or  the  pratima 
is  worshipped  in  itself  but  not  as  a “help  to 
the  vision”  of  God  ( ).  Therefore 
it  is  at  best  only  of  the  nature  of  ritualistic 
karmas  and  cannot  produce  either  bhakti  or 
muktt.  In  this  form  of  image- worship  the 
allegiance  of  the  soul  is  given  to  other  things 
than  Isvara,  and  therefore,  such  use  of 
images  or  graves,  of  temples  or  tombs  is  real  * 
idolatry.  Yet  it  is  in  itself  neither  sinful 
nor  wicked — it  is  a rite,  a karma,  and  wor® 
shippers  must  and  will  get  the  fruit  thereof. 


The  Chosen  Ideal. 


The  next  thing  to  be  considered  is  what 
we  know  as  Ishta  Nishtha  or  devotion  to 
the  chosen  ideal.  One  who  aspires  to  be  a 
bhakta  or  devotee  must  know  that  in  the 
matter  of  worshipping  God  “so  many  opi- 
nions are  so  many  ways.  ’#  He  must  know 
that  all  the  various  sects  of  the  various  reli- 
gions are  the  various  manifestations  of  the 
glory  of  the  same  Lord.  “They  call  Thee 
by  so  many  names — they  divide  Thee,  as  it 
were,  by  them — yet  in  each  one  of  these, 
Thy  names,  is  to  be  found  Thy  omnipotence 
and  Thou  reachest  the  worshipper  through 
any  one  of  them ! Neither  is  there  any 
special  time  mentioned  to  take  Thy  name  so 
long  as  the  soul  has  intense  love  for  Thee. 
Thou  art  so  easy  of  approach  ! It  is  my 
misfortune  that  I cannot  love  Thee,  oh ! 


Sayings  of  Sree  R^makrishna. 


76 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


Lord”.  # Not  only  this,  the  bhakta  must  take 
care  not  to  hate  nor  even  to  criticize,  those 
radiant  sons  of  light  who  are  the  founders  of 
various  sects.  He  is  not  even  to  hear  them 
spoken  ill  of.  Very  few  indeed  are  those, 
who  are  at  once  the  possessors  of  an  exten- 
sive sympathy  and  power  of  appreciation, 
as  well  as  an  intensity  of  love.  We  find  as 
a rule  that  liberal  and  sympathetic  sects  lose 
the  intensity  of  religious  feeling,  and  in  their 
hands  religion  is  apt  to  degenerate  into  a 
kind  of  politico-social  club  life.  On  the  other 
hand  ir^tensely  narrow  sectaries,  whilst  dis- 
playing a very  commendable  love  of  their 
own  ideals,  are  seen  to  have  acquired  every 
particle  of  that  love  by  hating  every  one 
who  is  not  exactly  of  the  same  opinion  as 

( Sree  Krishna  Chaitanya  ) 


THE  CHOSEN  IDEAL. 


77 


they  are.  Would  to  God  that  this  world 
was  full  of  men,  who  were  as  intense  in  their 
love  and  as  world-wide  in  their  sympathies  ! 
But  such  are  only  few  and  far  between.  Yet 
we  know  that  it  is  practicable  to  educate 
large  numbers  of  human  beings,  into  the 
ideal  of  a wonderful  blending  of  both  the 
width  and  the  intensity  of  love  ; and  the  way 
to  do  that  is  by  this  path  of  the  Ishta 
Nishtha  or  by  devotion  to  a “chosen  ideal.” 
Every  sect  of  every  religion  presents  only 
one  ideal  of  its  own  to  mankind,  but  the 
eternal  Vedantic  religion  opens  an  infinite 
number  of  doors  for  ingress  into  the  inner 
shrine  of  Divinity,  and  places  before  hu- 
manity an  almost  inexhaustible  array  of 
idgals,  there  being  in  each  of  them  a mani- 
festation of  the  Eternal  One,  With  the 
kindest  solicitude  the  Vedanta  points  out  to 
aspiring  men  and  women,  the  numerous 
roads  hewn  out  of  the  solid  rock  of  the 
realities  of  human  life,  by  the  glorious  sons 


78 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


or  human  manifestations  of  God,  in  the  past 
and  in  the  present,  and  stands  with  out- 
stretched arms  to  welcome  all — to  welcome 
even  those  that  are  yet  to  be — to  that  Home 
of  Truth  and  that  Ocean  of  Bliss  wherein 
the  human  soul,  liberated  out  of  the  net  of 
Maya,  may  transport  itself  with  perfect  free- 
dom and  with  eternal  joy ! 

Bhakti-Yoga,  therefore,  lays  on  us  the 
imperative  command  not  to  hate  or  deny 
any  one  of  the  various  paths  that  lead  to 
salvation.  Yet  the  growing  plant  must  be 
hedged  around  for  protection,  until  it  has 
grown  into  a tree.  The  tender  plant  of 
spirituality  will  die,  if  exposed  too  early  to 
the  action  of  a constant  change  of  ideas  and 
ideals.  Many  people,  in  the  name  of  what 
may  be  called  religious  liberalism,  may  be 
seen  to  be  feeding  their  idle  curiosity  with  a 
continuous  succession  of  different  id&ls. 
With  them  hearing  new  things  grows  into  a 
sort  of  disease,  a sort  of  religious  drink- 


THE  CHOSEN  IDEAL. 


79 


mania.  They  want  to  hear  new  things  just 
to  get  a sort  of  temporary  nervous  excite- 
ment, and  when  one  such  exciting  influence 
has  had  its  effect  on  them,  they  are  ready 
for  another.  Religion  is  with  these  people 
a sort  of  intellectual  opium-eating,  and  there 
it  ends.  “There  is  another  sort  of  men,” 
says  Bhagavdn  R4makrishna,  “who  are 
like  the  pearl  oyster  of  the  story.  The 
pearl  oyster  leaves  its  bed  at  the  bottom  of 
the  sea,  and  comes  up  to  the  surface,  to 
catch  the  rain  water  when  the  star  Svati  is  in 
the  ascendant.  It  floats  about  on  the  surface 
of  the  sea  with  its  shell  wide  open  until  it 
has  succeeded  in  catching  a drop  of  the  rain 
water,  and  then  it  dives  deep  down  to  its 
sea-bed  and  there  rests  until  it  has  succeeded 
in*  fashioning  a beautiful  pearl  out  of  that 
rain  drop.” 

•This  is  indeed  the  most  poetical  and  for- 
cible way  in  which  the  theory  of  Ishta 
Nishtha  has  ever  been  put.  This  Eka 


8o 


BHAKTl-YOGA. 


Nisktka,  or  devotion  to  one  ideal  is  absolute- 
ly necessary  for  the  beginner  in  the  practice 
of  religious  devotion.  He  must  say  with 
Hanumdn  in  the  Rdmdyana — “Though  I 
know  that  the  Lord  of  Sri  and  the  Lord  of 
Janaki  are  both  manifestations  of  the  same 
Supreme  Being  and  therefore  One  and  the 
same,  yet  my  all  in  .all  is  the  lotus-eyed 
Rdma.’”*^ — or,  as  was  said  by  the  sage  Tulasi- 
dis,  he  must  say — “Take  the  sweetness  of 
all,  sit  with  all,  take  the  name  of  all,  and  say 
yea,  yea  to  every  one  but  hold  your  own 
position  firmly.  Then,  if  the  devotional 
aspirant  is  sincere,  out  of  this  little  seed  will 
come  out  a gigantic  tree  like  the  Indian 
banyan  sending  branch  after  branch  and  root 

after  root  to  all  sides,  till  it  covers  the  entire 
« — 

t »rm  i 

Ttaft  Tt#  ^ WIT  TO  » 

— Tulasidds. 


THE  CHOSEN  IDEAL.  8 1 

field  of  religion.  Thus  will  the  true  devotee 
realize  that  He,  Who  was  his  own  ideal  in 
life  is  worshipped  in  all  ideals  by  all  sects, 
under  all  names,  and  through  all  forms. 


6 


The  Method  and  the  Means. 


In  regard  to  the  method  and  the  means 
of  Bhakti-Yoga  we  read  in  the  commentary 
of  Bhagavin  Rim^nuja  on  the  Vedanta 
Sutras : — “The  attainment  of  That  (Brahman) 
comes  through  discrimination,  controlling  the 
passions,  practice,  sacrificial  work,  purity, 
strength,  and  suppression  of  excessive  joy.” 
Viveka  or  discrimination  is,  according  to 
R^minuja,  discriminating,  among  other 
things,  the  pure  food  from  the  impure. 
According  to  him,  food  becomes  impure 
from  three  causes  : namely,  (i)  from  the 
nature  of  the  food  itself,  as  in  the  case  of 
garlic,  etc.  ; (2)  owing  to  its  coming  from 
wicked  and  accursed  persons  ; and  (3)  from 
physical  impurities,  such  as  dirt,  or  hair,  etc. 
The  Srutis  say,  “by  pure  food,  the  Sattva 
element  gets  purified  and  by  that  the 


THE  METHOD  AND  THE  MEANS.  83 

memory  becomes  unfailing,*”  and  RS,m^nuja 
quotes  this  from  the  Ckhandogya  Upanishad, 
The  question  of  food  has  always  been 
one  of  the  most  vital  with  the  bhaktas  or 
devotees.  Apart  from  the  extravagance  in- 
to which  some  of  the  bhakti  sects  have  run, 
there  is  a great  truth  underlying  this  ques- 
tion of  food.  We  must  remember  that,  ac- 
cording to  the  Sankhya  philsophy  the  sattva, 
rajas^  and  tamas^  which  in  the  state  of  homo- 
geneous equilibrium  form  the  prakriti  and  in 
the  heterogeneous,  disturbed  condition  form 
the  universe,  are  both  the  substance  and  the 
quality  of  prakriti  or  the  creative  principle. 
As  such  they  are  the  materials  out  of  which 
every  human  form  has  been  manufactured, 
and  the  predominance  of  the  sattva  material 
is  what  is  absolutely  necessary  for  spiritual 
development.  The  materials  which  we  re- 
ceive through  our  food  into  our  bodies  go  a 

( Chhdndogya  Upanishad,  VII— an  ). 


84 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


great  way  to  determine  our  mental  consti- 
tution ; therefore  the  food  we  eat  has  to  be 
particularly  taken  care  of.  However,  in  this 
matter  as  in  others,  the  fanaticism  into  which 
the  disciples  invariably  fell  is  not  to  be  laid 
at  the  door  of  the  masters. 

And  this  discrimination  of  food  is  after 
all  of  secondary  importance.  The  very 
same  passage  quoted  above  is  explained  by 
Sankara  in  his  bhashya  on  the  Upanishads 
in  a different  way,  by  giving  an  entirely 
different  meaning  to  the  word  dh&ra, — trans- 
lated generally  as  food.  According  to  him— 
“That  which  is  gathered  in  is  dh&ra. 
The  knowledge  coming  through  the  different 
sensations — such  as  sound,  etc., — is  gather- 
ed in  the  mind  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  en- 
joyer  (self) ; the  purification  of  the  know- 
ledge which  thus  gathered  through  percep- 
tion of  the  senses,  is  the  purifying  of  the 
food  {dMra),  Purification-off ood  means 
therefore  the  acquiring  of  knowledge  of  all 


THE  METHOD  AND  THE  MEANS.  85 

the  things  of  the  world,  untouched  by  the 
defects  of  attachment,  aversion,  and  de- 
lusion. Hence,  knowledge  or  dkdra  being 
purified,  the  sattva  material  of  the  mind  or 
antakkarana,  the  internal  organ,  in  which 
is  stored  all  such  knowledge,  will  become 
purified,  and  the  sattva  being  purified,  an  un- 
broken memory  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
real  nature  of  the  infinite  One,  that  has  been 
attained  through  the  scriptures,  will  result.*’  ♦ 
The  explanations  by  Sankara  and  Rdm^- 
nujaof  the  word  are  apparently  conflic- 

ting, yet  both  are  true  and  necessary.  The 
manipulating  and  controlling  of  what  is  called 
the  finer  body,  f are  no  doubt  higher  functions 
than  the  controlling  of  the  grosser  body  of 
flesh.  But  the  control  of  the  grosser  is  ab- 


* ( Vide  Bhashya  by  Sankara  of  the  Chhindogya  Upa- 
nishad^  VII— 26). 

t The  finer  body  or  Sukshma  Sarira  in  man,  is  made 
up  of  the  five  sense-organs  plus  the  five  organs  of  action 
plus  the  Manas  and  Buddhi.  It  is  not  destroyed  by  death  but 
re-incamates  with  all  past  experiences  until  the  soul  reaches 
j[>erfection  or  mukti. 


86 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


solutely  necessary  to  enable  one  to  arrive  at 
the  control  of  the  finer.  The  beginner, 
therefore,  must  pay  particular  attention  to  all 
such  dietetic  rules  as  have  come  down  from 
the  line  of  accredited  teachers  of  bhakti. 
But  the  extravagant,  meaningless  fanaticism, 
which  has  driven  religion  entirely  to  the 
kitchen,  as  may  be  noticed  in  the  case  of 
many  of  our  sects,  without  any  hope  of  the 
noble  truth  of  that  religion  over  coming  out 
to  the  sunlight  of  spirituality — is  a peculiar 
sort  of  pure  and  simple  materialism.  It  is 
neither  jnana,  nor  bhakti  nor  karma.  It  is 
a special  kind  of  lunacy,  and  those  who  pin 
their  souls  to  it,  are  more  likely  to  go  to 
lunatic  asylums  than  to  Brahma-loka  or  the 
highest  sphere.  So  it  stands  to  reason  that 
discrimination  in  the  choice  of  food,  is  neces- 
sary for  the  attainment  of  this  higher  state 
of  mental  composition  which  can  not  be 
easily  obtained  otherwise. 

Controlling  the  passions  is  the  next  thing 


THE  METHOD  AND  THE  MEANS.  87 

to  be  attended  to.  To  restrain  the  Indriyas 
(organs'  from  going  towards  the  objects  of 
the  senses,  to  control  them  and  bring  them 
under  the  guidance  of  the  will,  is  the  very 
central  virtue  in  religious  culture. 

Then  comes  the  practice  of  self-restraint 
and  self-denial.  All  the  immense  possibili- 
ties of  divine  realisation  in  the  soul,  cannot 
get  actualised  without  struggle  and  without 
practice  of  these  qualities,  on  the  part  of  the 
aspiring  devotee.  The  mind  must  always 
think  of  the  Lord.  It  is  very  hard  at  first  to 
compel  the  mind  to  think  of  the  Lord  al- 
ways, but  with  every  new  effort  the  power  to 
do  so  grows  stronger  in  us.  “By  practice, 
Oh  son  of  Kunti,  and  by  non-attachment  is 
the  control  of  mind  attained,”  * says  Sri 
Krishna  in  the  Gita. 

The  devotee  therefore  shall  cultivate  all 
thSse  qualities  which  are  essential  to  attain 

(Gita,  Ch.  VI-35). 


88 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


supreme  devotion  and  must  not  observe  the 
ritualistic  sacrifices,  enjoined  in  some  of  the 
scriptures,  the  sole  object  of  which  is  the 
attainment  of  sense-enjoyments,  either  in 
this  world  or  the  next,  thus  leading  one  to 
greater  and  greater  bondage  and  farther  and 
farther  away  from  the  Lord.  Hence  as  to 
sacrificial  works  it  is  to  be  understood  that 
he  will  have  to  perform  the  five  great  sacri- 
fices ( ) only  and  nothing  more. 

Purity  therefore  is  the  basement,  the  one 
bed-rock  upon  which  the  whole  bkakti-build- 
ing  rests.  Cleansing  the  external  body  and  dis- 
criminating the  food  are  both  easy,  but  with- 
out internal  cleanliness  and  without  purity, 
these  external  observances  are  of  no  value 
whatsoever.  In  the  list  of  the  qualities  con- 
ductive to  purity,  as  given  by  Ramanuja, 
there  have  been  enumerated — Satya,  truthful- 
ness, Arjava,  sincerity.  Day  a,  doing  good  to 
others  without  expectation  of  any  gain  to  one’s 
self ; Ahimsay  not  injuring  others  by  thought, 


THE  METHOD  AND  THE  MEANS.  89 

word  or  deed  and  Abkidkya,  not  coveting 
other’s  goods,  not  thinking  vain  thoughts, 
and  not  brooding  over  injuries  received  from 
another.  The  one  idea  that  deserves  special 
notice  in  this  list  is  Ahimsa,  non-injury  to 
others.  This  duty  of  non-injury  is  obli- 
gatory on  the  devotee  in  relation  to  all  be- 
ings. As  with  some  of  us,  it  does  not  mean 
simply  the  not-injuring  of  human  beings  and 
mercilessness  towards  the  lower  animals — nor 
as  with  some  others,  does  it  mean,  the  pro- 
tecting of  cats  and  dogs  and  the  feeding  of 
ants  with  sugar,  with  liberty  to  injure  brother- 
man  in  every  horrible  way.  It  is  remarkable 
that  almost  every  good  idea  in  this  world 
can  be  carried  to  a disgusting  extreme.  A 
jjpod  practice  carried  to  an  extreme  and 
worked  in  accordance  with  the  letter  of  the 
law,  becomes  a positive  evil  and  it  is  a matter 
ofno  less  regret  that  the  practice  of  non- 
injury too,  has  not  been  an  exception  to 
this.  The  stinking  monks  of  certain  religious 


90 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


sects,  who  do  not  bathe  lest  the  vermin  on 
their  bodies  should  be  killed,  never  think  of 
the  discomfort  and  disease  they  bring  to  their 
fellow  human  beings  ! It  is  a comfort  to 
think,  however,  that  they  do  not  belong  to 
the  religion  of  the  Vedas. 

The  test  of  Ahimsa  is  absence  of  jealpusy. 
Any  man  may  do  a good  deed  or  make  a 
generous  gift  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  or 
under  pressure  of  some  superstition  or  priest- 
craft ; but  the  real  lover  of  mankind  is  he 
who  is  jealous  of  none.  The  so-called  great 
men  of  the  world  may  all  be  seen  to  become 
jealous  of  each  other  for  name,  fame,  and  a 
few  bits  of  gold.  So  long  as  this  jealousy 
exists  in  the  heart,  no  matter  even  if  one  is 
a vegetarian,  one  is  far  away  from  the  perfec- 
tion of  Ahimsa,  The  cow  does  not  eat  meat, 
nor  does  the  sheep.  Are  they  great  Yogins, 
great  non-injurers  for  that  } Any  fool  n?ay 
abstain  from  eating  meat  ; surely  that  alone 
gives  him  no  more  distinction  tha,n  to  herbi- 


THE  METHOD  AND  THE  MEANS. 


91 


vorous  animals.  The  man  who  will  merci- 
lessly cheat  widows  and  orphans,  and  do  the 
vilest  deeds  for  money,  is  worse  than  any 
brute,  even  if  he  lives  entirely  on  grass  alone. 
The  man  whose  heart  never  cherishes  even 
the  thought  of  injury  to  any  one,  who  rejoices 
at  the  prosperity  of  even  his  greatest  enemy, 
that  man  is  a Bhakta,  that  man  is  a Yogin. 
He  is  the  Guru  of  all,  even  though  he  lives 
every  day  of  his  life  on  the  flesh  of  swine. 
Therefore  we  must  always  remember  that 
external  practices  have  value  only  as  helps 
to  develop  internal  purity.  It  is  better  to 
attempt  for  internal  purity  alone  when  minute 
attention  to  external  observances  is  not  prac- 
ticable. But  woe  unto  the  man  and  woe 
unto  the  nation,  that  forgets  the  real,  the 
internal,  the  spiritual  essentials  of  religion, 
and  mechanically  clutches  with  death-like 
^asp  all  the  external  forms  of  it  and  never 
lets  them  go.  The  forms  have  value  only 
so  far  as  they  are  the  expressions  of  the  life 


92 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


within.  If  they  have  ceased  to  express  life, 
crush  them  out  without  mercy. 

The  next  means  to  the  attainment  of 
bhakti-yoga  is  strength  ( ).  “This 
Atman  is  not  to  be  attained  by  the  weak,”  * 
says  the  Sruti.  Both  physical  weakness  and 
mental  weakness  are  meant  here.  “The 
strong,  the  hardy,”  are  the  only  fit  students. 
What  can  puny,  little,  decrepit  things  do  1 
They  will  break  to  pieces,  whenever  the 
mysterious  forces  of  the  body  and  mind  are 
even  slightly  awakened  by  the  practice  of 
any  of  the  Yogas.  It  is  “the  young,  the 
healthy,  the  strong”  that  can  score  success. 
Physical  strength,  therefore,  is  absolutely 
necessary.  It  is  the  strong  body  alone  that 
can  bear  the  shock  of  re-action  resulting 
from  the  attempt  to  control  the  organs.  He 
who  wants  to  become  a bhakta  must  be 
strong — must  be  healthy.  When  the  miset- 

* wr;  i 

(Mundaka  III — 2 -4). 


THE  METHOD  AND  THE  MEANS. 


ably  weak  attempt  any  of  the  Vo^as,  they 
are  likely  to  get  some  incurable  malady;  and 
get  their  minds  weakened  by  it ; and  to 
weaken  the  body  voluntarily  is  really  no 
pr^cription  for  spiritual  enlightenment. 

The  mentally  weak  also  cannot  succeed 
in  attaining  the  Atman,  The  person  who 
aspires  to  be  a bhakta  must  be  cheerful. 
With  many,  the  ideal  of  a religious  man  is — 
that  he  never  smiles,  that  a dark  cloud  must 
always  hang  over  his  face,  which,  again, 
must  be  long-drawn  with  the  jaws  almost 
collapsed.  In  my  opinion  such  people  with 
emaciated  bodies  and  long  faces  are  fit  sub- 
jects for  the  physician.  They  can  never  be 
Yogins,  It  is  the  cheerful  mind  that  is 
persevering.  It  is  the  strong  mind  that  hews 
ks  way  through  a thousand  difficulties.  And 
this,  the 'hardest  task  of  all,  the  cutting  of 
our  way  out  of  the  net  of  Maya^  is  the  work 
reserved  only  for  giant  wills. 

Yet  at  the  same  time  excessive  mirth 


94 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


should  be  avoided  [anuddharshd).  Excessive 
mirth  makes  us  unfit  for  serious  thought. 
It  also  fritters  away  the  energies  of  the  mind. 
The  stronger  the  will,  the  less  the  yielding 
to  the  sway  of  the  emotions.  Excessive 
hilarity  is  quite  as  objectionable  as  too  much 
of  sad  seriousness,  and  all  religious  realisa- 
tion is  possible  only  where  the  mind  is  in  a 
steady,  peaceful  condition  of  harmonious 
equilibrium. 

It  is  thus  that  one  may  begin  to  learn 
to  love  the  Lord,  and  this  is  what  is  known 
as  the  preparatory  bhakti  ( )• 


Para#akti  or  Sopreme  Devotion. 


The  Preparatory  Renunciation. 

We  have  finished  the  consideration  of 
what  may  be  called  the  preparatory  bhaktiy 
and  are  almost  ready  to  enter  into  the  study 
of  the  Para-Bhaktiy  or  supreme  devotion. 
We  have  to  speak  now  of  the  final  prepara- 
tion necessary  to  the  practice  of  this  Para- 
Bhakti,  All  such  preparations  are  intended 
only  for  the  purification  of  the  soul.  The 
repetition  of  names,  the  rituals,  the  forms, 
the  symbols,  all  are  for  the  purification  of 
the  soul.  The  greatest  purifier  among  all 
such  things,  a purifier  without  which  no  one 
can  enter  the  regions  of  this  higher  devotion 
(Para-Bhakli)y  is  renunciation.  It  is  a 
frightening  thing  to  many  ; yet,  without  it, 
there  cannot  be  any  spiritual  growth.  In  all 
the  Togas  thfs  renunciation  is  necessary.  It 
is  the  stepping  stone,  the  centre  and  the  real 
heart  of  all  spiritual  culture.  In  short,  religion 
is  renunciation.  When  the  human  soul  draws 

7 


98 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


back  from  the  things  of  the  world  and  tries 
to  go  deeper  into  the  heart  of  things  ; when 
man,  the  spirit — which  is  here  below,  after 
getting  concretised  and  materialised  somehow 
— understands,  that  he  is  thereby  going  to 
be  destroyed  and  reduced  almost  into  mere 
matter,  and  turns  his  face  away  from  matter 
— then  begins  renunciation,  then  begins  his 
real  spiritual  growth.  The  karma-yogins 
renunciation  is  in  the  shape  of  giving  up  all 
the  fruits  of  his  actions  ; he  must  not  be 
attached  to  the  results  of  his  labours ; he 
must  not  care  for  any  reward  here  or  here- 
after. The  raja-yogin  knows  that  the  whole 
of  nature  is  intended  for  the  soul  to  acquire 
experience,  and  that  the  result  of  all  the 
experiences  of  the  soul,  is  for  it  to  become 
aware  of  its  eternal  separateness  from  nature. 
The  human  soul  has  to  understand*’  and 
realize  that  it  has  been  spirit,  and  not  matter, 
through  eternity  and  that  this  conjunction 
of  it  with  matter  is  and  can  be  only  for  a time. 


THE  PREPARATORY  RENUNCIATION.  99 

The  raja-yogin  learns  the  lesson  of  renunci- 
ation through  his  own  experience  of  nature. 
The  jnana-yogin  has  the  harshest  of  re- 
nunciations to  go  through,  as  he  has  to  realise 
from  the  very  first  that  the  whole  of  this 
solid-looking  nature  is  all  an  illusion.  He 
has  to  understand  that  all  the  manifestations 
of  power  in  nature  belongs  to  the  soul,  and 
not  to  nature.  He  has  to  know,  from  the 
very  start,  that  all  knowledge  and  all  experi- 
ences are  within  the  soul,  and  not  within 
nature.  So  he  has  at  once  and  by  the  sheer 
force  of  rational  conviction,  to  tear  himself 
off  from  all  bondage  to  nature.  He  lets 
nature  and  all  her  things  go — he  lets  them 
vanish  and  tries  to  stand  alone ! 

Of  all  renunciations,  the  most  natural  is 
that  of  the  bhakti-yogin.  Here — there  is 
no  violence,  nothing  to  give  up,  nothing  to 
tear  off,  as  it  were,  from  ourselves,  nothing 
from  4vhich  we  have  violently  to  separate 
ourselves.  The  bhaktcis  renunciation  is  easy, 


ICX) 


BHAKTI-YOGA* 


smooth,  flowing,  and  as  natural  as  the  things 
around  us.  We  see  the  manifestation  of  this 
sort  of  renunciation,  although  more  or  less 
in  the  cause  of  caricatures,  every  day  around 
us.  A man  begins  to  love  a woman  ; after 
a while  he  loves  another,  and  the  first  woman, 
he  lets  go.  She  drops  out  of  his  mind 
smoothly,  gently  without  his  feeling  the  want 
of  her  at  all.  A woman  loves  a man  ; she 
then  begins  to  love  another  man,  and  the 
first  one  drops  off  from  her  mind  quite 
naturally.  A man  loves  his  own  city,  then 
he  begins  to  love  his  country,  and  the  intense 
love  for  his  little  city  drops  off  smoothly, 
naturally.  Again,  a man  learns  to  love  the 
whole  world  ; his  love  for  his  country,  his 
intense,  fanatical  patriotism  drops  off,  without 
hurting  him,  without  any  manifestation  •of 
violence.  An  uncultured  man  loves  the  *pleas- 
ures  of  the  senses  intensely  ; as  he  becomes 
cultured  he  begins  to  love  intellectual » pleas- 
ures, and  sense-enjoyments  become  less  and 


THE  PREPARATORY  RENUNCIATION.  1 01 


less  to  him.  No  man  can  enjoy  a meal  with 
the  same  gusto  of  pleasure  as  a dog  or  a 
wolf,  but  the  pleasures,  which  a man  gets 
from  intellectual  experiences  and  achieve- 
ments, the  dog  can  never  enjoy.  Pleasure 
at  first  is  in  association  with  the  lower  senses  ; 
but  as  soon  as  an  animal  reaches  a higher 
plane  of  existence,  the  lower  kind  of  pleasures 
becomes  less  intense  to  it.  In  human  society, 
the  nearer  the  man  is  to  the  animal,  the 
stronger  is  his  pleasure  in  the  senses  ; and 
the  higher  and  the  more  cultured  the  man 
is,  the  greater  is  his  pleasure  in  intellectual 
and  such  other  finer  pursuits.  So,  when  a 
man  gets  even  higher  than  the  plane  of  the 
^intellect,  higher  than  that  of  mere  thought, 
when  l;ie  gets  to  the  plane  of  spirituality  and 
of  divine  inspir,ation,  he  finds  therein  a state 
of  bliss,  compared  to  which  all  the  pleasures 
of  the  senses,  or  even  of  the  intellect,  become 
as  nothing.  When  the  moon  shines  brightly 
all  the  stars  become  dim,  and  when  the  sun 


102 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


shines,  the  moon  herself  becomes  dim.  The 
renunciation  necessary  for  the  attainment  of 
bhakti,  is  not  obtained  by  killing  anything, 
but  just  comes  in  as  naturally  as,  in  the 
presence  of  an  increasingly  stronger  light, 
the  less  intense  ones  become  dimmer  and 
dimmer  until  they  vanish  away  completely. 
So  this  love  of  the  pleasures  of  the  senses 
and  of  the  intellect  is  all  made  dim,  and 
thrown  aside  and  cast  into  the  shade  by  the 
love  of  God.  That  love  of  God  grows  and 
assumes  a form  which  is  called  Para-Bhaktt, 
or  supreme  devotion.  Forms  vanish,  rituals 
fly  away,  books  are  superseded,  and  images, 
temples,  churches,  religions,  sects,  countries 
and  nationalities, — all  these  little  limitations! 
and  bondages  fall  off  of  themselve^  from 
him,  who  knows  this  love  of  God  ! Nothing 
remains  to  bind  him  or  fetter  his  freedom. 
A ship,  all  of  a sudden,  comes  ‘ near  a 
magnetic  rock  and  its  iron  bolts  and  bars  are 
all  attracted  and  drawn  out,  and  the  planks 


THE  PREPARATORY  RENUNCIATION.  IO3 

get  loosened  and  freely  float  on  the  water. 
Divine  grace  thus  loosens  the  binding  bolts 
and  bars  of  the  soul,  and  it  becomes  free. 
So,  in  this  renunciation  auxiliary  to  devotion, 
there  is  no  harshness,  no  dryness,  no  struggle, 
no  repression  or  suppression.  The  bhakta 
has  not  to  suppress  any  single  one  of  his 
emotions,  he  only  strives  to  intensify  them 
and  direct  them  to  God. 


The  Bhakta’s  Benunciation  Results 
from  Love. 

We  see  love  everywhere  in  nature. 
Whatever  in  society  is  good  and  great  and 
sublime,  is  the  working  out  of  love  ; 
whatever  in  society  is  very  bad,  nay  diabolic- 
al, is  also  the  ill-directed  working  out  of 
the  same  emotion  of  love.  It  is  this  same 
emotion  that  gives  us  the  pure  and  holy 
conjugal  love  between  husband  and  wife, 
as  well  as  the  sort  of  love  which  goes  to 
satisfy  the  lowest  forms  of  animal  passion. 
The  emotion  is  the  same,  but  its  manifest- 
ation is  different  in  the  different  cases.  It 
is  the  same  feeling  of  love,  well  or  ill  direct- 
ed, that  impels  one  man  to  do  good  and  to 
give  all  he  has  to  the  poor,  while  it  makes 
another  man  cut  the  throats  of  his  brethren 
and  take  away  all  their  possessions.  Tfie 
former  loves  others  as  much  as  "the  latter 
loves  himself.  The  direction  of  the  love>  is 
bad  in  the  case  of  this  latter,  and  it  is  right 


RENUNCIATION  FROM  LOVE. 


105 


and  proper  in  the  former  case.  The  same 
fire  that  cooks  a meal  for  us  may  burn  a child, 
and  it  is  no  fault  of  the  fire  if  it  did  so  ; the 
difference  lies  in  the  way  in  which  it  is  used. 
Therefore,  love,  the  intense  longing  for  as- 
sociation, the  strong  desire  on  the  part  of 
two  to  become  one,  and  it  may  be  after  all,  of 
all  to  become  merged  in  one,  is  being  mani- 
fested everywhere  in  higher  or  lower  forms 
as  the  case  may  be.  Bhakti-Yoga  is  the 
science  of  higher  love — it  shows  us  how  to 
direct  it.  It  shows  us  how  to  control  it,  how 
to  manage  it,  how  to  use  it,  how  to  give  it  a 
new  aim,  as  it  were,  and  from  it  obtain  the 
highest  and  most  glorious  results,  that  is, 
how  to  make  it  lead  us  to  spiritual  blessed- 
ness ! Bhakti-Yoga  does  not  say — give  up  ; 
k only  says — love,  love  the  Highest ; and 
everything  low  naturally  falls  off  from  him 
the  object  of  whose  love  is  this  Highest. 

• “I  cannot  tell  anything  about  Thee, 
except  that  Thou  art  my  love.  Thou  art 


I06  BHAKTI-YOGA. 

beautiful,  Oh  Thou  art  beautiful ! Thou  art 
beauty  itself.”  What  is  after  all  really  re- 
quired of  us  in  this  Yoga  is  that  our  thirst 
after  the  beautiful  should  be  directed  to  God. 
What  is  the  beauty  in  the  human  face,  in 
the  sky,  in  the  stars,  and  in  the  moon  ? 
It  is  only  the  partial  apprehension  of  the 
real,  all-embracing  Divine  Beauty.  “He 
shining,  everything  shines.  It  is  through 
His  light  that  all  things  shine.”*  Take  this 
high  position  of  bhakti  which  makes  you 
forget  at  once  all  your  little  personalities. 
Take  yourself  away  from  all  the  world’s  little 
selfish  clingings.  Do  not  look  upon  huma- 
nity as  the  centre  of  all  your  human  and 
higher  interests.  Stand  as  a witness,  as  a 
student,  and  observe  the  phenomena  of 
nature.  Have  the  feeling  of  personal  non- 
attachment with  regard  to  man,  and  see  how 

« ^ I 

TO  y 

(Katha  Upanishada,  H.  5—15) 


RENUNCIATION  FROM  LOVE. 


107 


this  mighty  feeling  of  love  is  working  itself 
out  in  the  world.  Sometimes  a little  friction 
is  produced,  but  that  is  only  in  the  course  of 
the  struggle  to  attain  the  higher  and  real 
love.  Sometimes  there  is  a little  fight,  or  a 
little  fall  ; but  it  is  all  along  the  way  only. 
Stand  aside,  and  freely  let  these  frictions 
come.  You  feel  the  frictions,  only  when 
you  are  in  the  current  of  the  world.  But  when 
you  are  outside  of  it,  simply  as  a witness  or 
as  a student,  you  will  be  able  to  see  that 
there  are  millions  and  millions  of  channels  in 
which  God  is  manifesting  Himself  as  Love. 

“Wherever  there  is  any  bliss,  even 
though  in  the  most  sensual  of  things,  there 
is  a spark  of  that  Eternal  Bliss  which  is  the 
Lord  Himself.’'#  Even  in  the  lowest  kinds 
of  attraction  there  is  the  germ  of  Divine  love. 
One'^of  the  names  of  the  Lord  in  Sanskrit  is 
Hari^  and  this  means  that  He  attracts  all 


I08  BHAKTI-YOGA. 

things  to  Himself.  His  is  in  fact  the  only 
attraction  worthy  of  human  hearts.  Who  can 
attract  a soul  really  ? Only  He ! Do  you  think 
dead  matter  can  trully  attract  the  soul  ? It 
never  did,  and  never  will.  When  you  see  a 
man  going  after  a beautiful  face,  do  you  think 
that  it  is  the  handful  of  arranged  material 
molecules  which  really  attracts  the  man  ? Not 
at  all.  Behind  those  material  particles  there 
must  be  and  is  the  play  of  divine  influence 
and  divine  love.  The  ignorant  man  does  not 
know  it  ; but  yet,  consciously  or  unconcious- 
ly,  he  is  attracted  by  it  and  it  alone.  So  even 
the  lowest  forms  of  attraction  derive  their 
power  from  God  Himself.  “None,  O be- 
loved, ever  loved  the  husband  for.  the 
husband’s  sake  ; it  is  the  Atman,  the  Lord, 
Who  is  inside,  and  for  His  sake  the  husband 
is  loved.”#  Loving  wives  may  know  this  or 


* »T  ^ ^ qw:  -mm  fkfr  mm 

I 

(Brihadiranyaka,  II— 4) 


RENUNCIATION  FROM  LOVE.  IO9 

they  may  not — it  is  true  all  the  same.  “None, 
O beloved,  ever  loved  the  wife  for  the  wife’s 
sake,  but  it  is  the  Self  within  the  wife  that  is 
loved.”#  Similarly  no  one  loves  a child  or 
anything  else  in  the  world  except  on  account 
of  Him,  Who  is  within.  The  Lord  is  the 
great  magnet,  and  we  are  all  like  iron  filings. 
All  of  us  are  being  constantly  attracted  by 
Him  and  all  of  us  are  struggling  to  reach  Him. 
All  this  struggling  of  ours  in  this  world  is 
surely  not  intended  for  selfish  ends.  Fools 
do  not  know  what  they  are  doing,  but  all  the 
work  of  their  lives,  is  to  approach  that  great 
Magnet.  Yea — all  the  tremendous  struggling 
and  fighting  in  life  is  intended  to  make  us  go 
to  Him  ultimately  and  be  one  with  Him. 

The  bhakti-yogin  however  knows  the 
meaning  of  life’s  struggles — he  understands 

firm  I 


(Brihaddranyaka,  II — 4) 


no 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


its  purpose.  He  has  passed  through  a long 
series  of  such  struggles,  and  knows  what  they 
mean,  and  earnestly  desires  to  be  free  from 
the  friction  thereof.  He  wants  to  avoid  the 
clash  and  go  direct  to  the  centre  of  all  attrac- 
tion, the  great  Hari.  This  mighty  attraction, 
in  the  direction  of  God  makes  all  other  at- 
tractions vanish  for  him  ; this  mighty  infinite 
love  of  God  which  enters  his  heart  leaves  no 
place  for  any  other  love  to  live  there.  How 
can  it  be  otherwise  ? Bhakti  fills  his  heart 
with  the  divine  waters  of  the  ocean  of  love, 
which  is  God  Himself — thus  there  remains 
no  place  there  for  little  loves.  This  is  the 
renunciation  of  the  bhakta.  That  is  to  say, 
the  bhaktcis  renunciation  is  that  vairagya,  or 
non-attachment  for  all  things  that  are  not 
God,  which  results  from  anurdga,  or  great 
attachment  to  God. 

This  is  the  ideal  preparation  for  the 
attainment  of  the  supreme  bhakti.  When 
this  renunciation  comes,  the  gate  opens  for 


RENUNCIATION  FROM  LOVE. 


Ill 


the  soul  to  pass  through  and  reach  the  lofty 
regions  of  Supreme  Devotion  or  Para- 
Bhakti.  Then  it  is  that  we  begin  to  under- 
stand what  Para-Bhakii  is — and  the  man 
who  has  entered  into  the  inner  shrine  of  the 
Para-Bhakti,  has  alone  the  right  to  say,  that 
all  forms  and  symbols  are  useless  to  him  as 
aids  to  religious  realisation.  He  alone  has 
attained  that  supreme  state  of  love  which  is 
commonly  called,  the  brotherhood  of  man 
— the  rest  only  talk  of  it.  He  alone  sees  no 
distinctions  ! The  mighty  ocean  of  love  has 
entered  into  him,  and  he  sees  not  men,  anim- 
als and  plants  or  the  sun,  moon  and  the 
stars,  but  beholds  his  Beloved  everywhere 
and  in  everything.  Through  every  face  shines 
to  him  his  Hari.  The  light  in  the  sun  or  the 
moon  is  all  His  manifestation.  Wherever  there 
is  beauty  or  sublimity,  to  him  it  is  all  His.  Such 
bhaktcjs  are  still  living — the  world  is  never 
without  them.  Such,  even  while  bitten  by  a 
serpent,  only  say  that  a messenger  came  for 


II2 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


them  from  their  Beloved.  Such  men  alone 
have  the  right  to  talk  of  universal  brotherhood. 
They  feel  no  resentment  ; their  minds  never 
re-act  in  the  form  of  hatred,  or  of  jealousy. 
The  external,  the  sensuous,  has  vanished 
from  them  for  ever.  How  can  they  be  angry, 
when,  through  their  love,  they  are  always 
able  to  see  the  Reality  behind  the  scenes  ? 


The  Naturalness  of  Bhakti-Yoga 
and  Its  Central  Secret. 

“Those  who  with  constant  attention  al- 
ways worship  You,  and  those  who  wor- 
ship the  Undifferentiated,  the  Absolute, — 
of  these  who  are  the  greater  Yogins  ?”♦ — 
Arjuna  asleep  of  Sri  Krishna.  The  answer 
was — “Those  who  concentrating  their  minds 
on  Me,  worship  Me  with  eternal  constancy, 
and  are  endowed  with  the  highest  faith — 
they  are  My  best  worshippers,  they  are  the 
greatest  Yogins.  Those  that  worship  the 
Absolute,  the  Indescribable,  the  undiffer- 
entiated, the  Omnipresent,  the  Unthinkable, 
the  All-comprehending,  the  Immovable,  and 
the  Eternal,  by  controlling  the  play  of  their 
oigans  and  having  the  conviction  of  same- 
ness in  regard  to  all  things,  they  also,  being 
engaged  in  doing  good  to  all  beings,  come 
to* Me  alone.  But  to  those  whose  minds 

Bhagavat  Git4,  Chapter  XII,  i — 7 Slokas. 

8 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


II4 

have  been  devoted  to  the  unmanifested  Ab- 
solute, the  difficulty  of  the  struggle  along 
the  way  is  much  greater,  for  it  is  indeed 
with  great  difficulty  that  the  path  of  the 
unmanifested  Absolute  is  trodden  by  any 
embodied  being.  Those  who,  having  offered 
up  all  their  work  unto  Me,  with  entire 
reliance  meditate  on  Me  and  worship  Me 
and  is  without  any  attachment  to  anything 
else — them,  will  I soon  lift  up  from  the 
ocean  of  ever-recurring  births  and  deaths 
for  their  minds  are  wholly  attached  to  Me.” 
Jnana-Yoga  and  Bhakti-Yoga  are  both  re- 
ferred to  here.  Both  may  be  said  to  have 
been  defined  in  the  above  passage.  Jnana- 
Yoga  is  grand — it  is  high  philosophy.  And 
almost  every  human  being  thinks,  curiously 
enough,  that  he  can  surely  do  every  thin^ 
required  of  him  by  philosophy  T But  it  is 
really  very  difficult  to  live  truly  the  lifQ>  of 
philosophy.  We  are  often  apt  to  run  into 
great  dangers  in  trying  to  guide  our  life  by 


ITS  CENTRAL  SECRET. 


II5 


philosophy.  This  world  may  be  said  to  be 
divided  between  persons  of  demoniacal  nature, 
who  think  the  taking  care  of  the  body  to  be 
the  be-all  and  the  end-all  of  existence,  and 
persons  of  godly  nature,  who  realise  that  the 
body  is  simply  a means  to  an  end — an  ins- 
trument intended  for  the  culture  of  the  soul. 
The  devil  can  and  indeed  does  quote  the 
scriptures  for  its  own  purposes  ; and  thus  the 
way  of  knowledge  appears  to  offer  justifica- 
tion to  what  the  bad  man  does,  as  much  as  it 
offers  inducements  to  what  the  good  man 
does.  This  is  the  great  danger  in  Jnana- 
Yoga,  But  Bhakti-Yoga  is  natural,  sweet, 
and  gentle.  The  bhakta  does  not  take  such 
high  flights  as  the  jnana-yogzn^  and  therefore 
be  is  not  apt  to  have  such  big  falls.  Yet — 
ufitil  the  bondages  of  the  soul  pass  away, 
it  cannotf  of  course  be  free,  whatever  may 
be^the  path  that  the  religious  man  takes. 

Here  is  a passage  showing  how,  in 
the  case  of  one  of  the  blessed  Gopis,  the 


Il6  BHAKTI-YOGA. 

soul-binding  chains  of  both  merit  and  demerit 
were  broken.  ‘'The  intense  pleasure  in 
meditating  on  God  took  away  the  binding 
effects  of  her  good  deeds.  Then  again  her 
intense  misery  of  soul  in  not  attaining  unto 
Him,  washed  off  all  her  sinful  propensities  ; 
and  thus  becoming  devoid  of  all  bondages 
she  became  free.”#  In  Bhakti-Yoga  the 
central  secret  is,  therefore,  to  know  that  the 
various  passions  and  feelings  and  emotions 
in  the  human  heart  are  not  wrong  in 
themselves.  They  have  to  be  carefully 
controlled  only  and  given  a higher  and  higher 
direction,  until  they  attain  the  very  highest 
condition  of  excellence.  The  highest  direc- 
tion is  that  which  takes  us  to  God  ; every 


I 


(Vishnupurina,  V,  13—21,  22) 


ITS  CENTRAL  SECRET.  II7 

Other  direction  is  lower.  We  find  that 
pleasure  and  pain  are  very  common  and 
oft-recurring  feelings  in  our  lives.  When  a 
man  feels  pain,  because  he  has  not  got 
wealth  or  some  such  worldly  thing,  he  is 
giving  a wrong  direction  to  the  feeling. 
Still  pain  has  its  uses.  Let  a man  feel  pain 
that  he  has  not  reached  the  Highest,  that  he 
has  not  reached  God,  and  that  pain  will  be 
to  his  salvation.  When  you  become  glad 
that  you  have  got  a handful  of  coins,  it  is  a 
wrong  direction  given  to  the  faculty  of  joy. 
It  should  be  given  a higher  direction — it 
must  be  made  to  serve  the  Highest  Ideal. 
Pleasure  in  that  kind  of  ideal  ought  surely 
be  our  highest  joy.  This  same  thing  is  true 
of  all  our  other  feelings.  The  Bhakta  says 
that  not  one  of  them  is  wrong.  He  gets  ■ 
hold  of  them  all  and  points  them  unfailingly 
towards  God. 


The  Forms  of  Love-Manifestation. 


Here  are  some  of  the  forms  in  which 
love  manifests  itself.  First  there  is  rever- 
ence. Why  do  people  show  reverence  to 
temples  and  holy  places  ? Because  the 
Lord  is  worshipped  there,  and  His  presence 
is  associated  with  all  such  places.  Why  do 
people  in  every  country  pay  reverence  to 
teachers  of  religion  ? It  is  natural  for  the 
human  heart  to  do  so,  because  all  such 
teachers  preach  the  Lord.  At  bottom, 
reverence  is  a growth  out  of  love  ; we  can 
none  of  us  revere  him  whom  we  do  not  love. 
Then  comes  priti — pleasure  in  God.  What 
an  immense  pleasure  men  take  in  the  objects 
of  the  senses ! They  go  anywhere,  run 
through  any  danger,  to  get  the  thing  which 
they  love,  the  thing  which  their  senses  like. 
What  is  wanted  of  the  bhakta  is  this  very 
kind  of  intense  love  which  has,  however,  to 


LOVE-MANIFESTATION. 


II9 

be  directed  to  God.  Then  there  is  the  sweet- 
est of  pains,  viraha,  the  intense  misery  due 
to  the  absence  of  the  beloved.  When  a man 
feels  intense  misery — because  he  has  not 
attained  to  god,  has  not  known  that  which 
is  the  only  thing  worthy  to  be  known — and 
becomes  in  consequence  very  dissatisfied  and 
almost  mad,  then  he  is  said  to  have  viraha  ; 
and  this  state  of  the  mind  makes  him  feel 
disturbed  in  the  presence  of  anything  other 
than  the  beloved  ( )■  In 

earthly  love  we  see  how  often  this  viraha 
comes.  Again,  when  men  are  really  and 
intensely  in  love  with  women,  or  women  with 
men,  they  feel  a kind  of  natural  annoyance 
in  the  presence  of  all  those  whom  they  do  not 
love.  Exactly  the  same  state  of  impatience, 
fn  regard  to  things  that  are  not  loved,  comes 
to  the  niind,  when  Para-Bhakti  holds  sway 
oyer  it — even  to  talk  about  things  other  than 
God  becomes  distasteful  then.  “Think  of 
Him,  think  of  Him  alone,  and  give  up  all 


120 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


Other  vain  words.”*  Those  who  talk  of  Him 
alone,  the  bhakta  finds  to  be  friendly  to  him  ; 
while  those  who  talk  of  anything  else  appear 
to  him  to  be  unfriendly. 

A still  higher  stage  of  love  is  reached 
when  life  itself  is  maintained  for  the  sake 
of  the  Ideal  of  Love,  when  life  itself  is  con- 
sidered beautiful  and  worth  living  only  on 
account  of  that  Love  i ).  With- 

out it,  such  a life  would  not  remain  even  for 
a moment.  Life  is  sweet  because  it  thinks 
of  the  Beloved.  Tadiyata  = Hisness) 

comes  when  a man  becomes  perfect  accord- 
ing to  bhakti — when  he  has  become  blessed, 
when  he  has  attained  to  God,  when  he  has 
touched  the  feet  of  his  Lord  and  then  his 
whole  nature  is  purified  and  completely 
changed.  All  his  purposes  in  life  becom^ 
fulfilled  then.  Yet,  many  such  bhakt6^s\\vt  on 

(Mundaka,  II.  2—5) 


LOVE-MANIFESTATION. 


I2I 


after  that  state  is  reached,  just  to  worship  Him. 
That  is  their  bliss,  their  only  pleasure  in  life, 
which  they  will  not  give  up.  “Oh  king, 
such  is  the  blessed  quality  of  Hari  that  even 
those,  who  have  become  satisfied  with  every- 
thing, and  all  the  knots  of  whose  hearts 
haye  been  cut  asunder,  even  they  love  the 
Lord  for  love’s  sake”# — the  Lord  “whom  all 
the  gods  worship,  all  the  lovers  of  liberation, 
and  all  the  knowers  of  the  Brahman!' \ Such 
is  the  power  of  love.  When  a man  has 
forgotten  himself  altogether,  and  feels  that 
nothing  belongs  to  him,  then  alone  he  ac- 
quires the  state  of  tadiyata.  Everything  be- 
comes sacred  to  him,  because  it  belongs  to 
the  Beloved-even  as  in  regard  to  earthly 

II 

Bhdgabat,  I— 7-10). 

(Nrishinhatipani,  V — 2-16). 


122 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


love,  the  lover  thinks  that  everything  be- 
longing to  his  beloved  is  so  sacred  and  so 
dear  to  him.  As  the  human  lover  loves  even 
a bit  of  the  cloth  belonging  to  the  darling 
of  his  heart — in  the  same  way,  when  a person 
loves  the  Lord,  everything  in  the  universe 
becomes  dear  to  him,  because  it  is  all  His. 


Universal  Love  and  How  It  Leads 
to  Self-surrender. 


How  can  we  love  the  vyaskti,  the  particu- 
lar, without  first  loving  the  samashti,  the 
universal  ? God  is  the  samasktiy  the  general- 
ised and  the  abstract  universal  whole  ; and 
the  universe  that  we  see  is  the  vyashtiy  the 
particularised  thing.  To  love  the  whole 
universe  is  possible  only  by  way  of  loving 
the  samasktiy  the  universal— which  is,  the  one 
Unity  in  which  are  to  be  found  millions  and 
millions  of  smaller  unities.  The  philosophers 
of  India  do  not  stop  at  the  particulars.  They 
cast  a hurried  glance  at  the  particulars,  and 
immediately  start  to  find  the  generalised 
form  which  will  include  all  the  particulars. 
*The  search  after  the  universal  is  thus  the 
one  seaVch  of  Indian  philosophy  and  religion. 
’J\itjnanin  aims  at  the  wholeness  of  things, 
at  that  one  absolute  and  generalised  Being, 
knowing  which,  he  knows  every  thing.  The 


124 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


bhakta  wishes  to  realise  that  one  generalised 
abstract  Person,  in  loving  Whom,  he  loves 
the  whole  universe.  The  yogin  wishes  to 
find  and  have  possession  of  that  one  gene- 
ralised form  of  power,  by  controlling  which 
he  controls  his  whole  universe.  Thus  the 
Indian  mind,  throughout  his  history,  has 
been  directed  to  this  kind  of  singular  search 
after  the  universal  in  everything — in  science, 
in  psychology,  in  love,  and  in  philosophy. 

The  search  of  the  bhakta  leads  him  to 
the  conclusion  that,  if  one  goes  on  merely 
loving  one  person  after  another,  one  may  go 
on  loving  them  so  for  an  infinite  length  of 
time,  without  being  in  the  least  able  to  love 
the  world  as  a whole.  One,  therefore,  should 
strive  to  arrive  at  the  central  idea,  that  the 
sum-total  of  all  love  is  God,  that  the  sum-® 
total  of  the  aspirations  of  all  the  souls  in 
the  universe,  whether  they  be  free  or  bound 
or  struggling  towards  liberation,  is  God — then 
alone  it  will  become  possible  for  one  to  put 


UNIVERSAL  LOVE. 


125 


forth  universal  love.  The  bhakta  says  there- 
fore that,  God  is  the  samashti^  and  this 
visible  universe  is  God,  differentiated  and 
made  manifest.  If  we  love  this  sum-total, 
we  love  everything.  Loving  the  world  and 
doing  it  good  will  all  come  easily  then — but 
we  shall  have  to  obtain  this  power,  only  by 
loving  God,  first — otherwise  it  is  no  joke 
to  do  good  to  the  world.  ^‘Everything  is 
His  and  He  is  my  Lover  ; I Love  Him,” 
says  the  bhakta.  In  this  way  everything 
becomes  sacred  to  him,  because  all  things 
are  His— all  are  His  children.  His  body,  His 
manifestation.  How  then  may  we  hurt  any 
one  ? How  then  may  we  not  love  any  one  ? 
With  the  love  of  God  will  come,  as  a 
sure  effect,  the  love  of  every  one  in  the 
universe.  The  nearer  we  approach  to  God, 
the  mor^  do  we  begin  to  see  that  all  things 
a^e  in  Him.  When  the  soul  succeeds  in  ap- 
propriating the  bliss  of  this  supreme  love,  it 
also  begins  to  see  Him  in  everything.  Our 


126 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


heart  will  thus  become  an  eternal  fountain  of 
love.  And  when  we  reach  a higher  state 
even  through  this  love,  all  the  little  differ- 
ences between  the  things  of  the  world  will 
be  entirely  lost — man  will  be  seen  no  more 
as  man,  but  only  as  God  ; the  animal  will  be 
seen  no  more  as  an  animal,  but  as  God  ; 
even  the  tiger  will  no  more  be  seen  a tiger, 
but  as  a manifestation  of  God.  Thus,  in 
this  intense  state  of  bhakti^  worship  is  offer- 
ed to  every  life,  and  to  every  being. 
‘'Knowing  that  Hari,  the  Lord,  is  in  every 
thing,  the  wise  have  thcis  to  manifest  uns- 
werving love  towards  all  beings.”* 

As  a result  of  this  kind  of  intense  all- 
absorbing  love,  comes  the  feeling  of  perfect 
self-surrender  and  the  conviction,  that 
nothing  that  happens  is  against  us 
Then  the  loving  soul  is  able  to  sa^,  if  pain 


UNIVERSAL  LOVE. 


127 


comes,  “welcome  pain’*— or  if  misery  comes, 
“welcome  misery,  you  are  also  from  the  Be* 
loved.”  If  a serpent  comes,  it  will  say  “wel- 
come serpent.”  And  even  if  death  comes, 
such  a bhakta  will  welcome  it  with  a smile. 
He  will  say — “blessed  am  I that  they  all 
come  to  me  ; they  are  all  welcome.”  The 
bhakta  in  this  state  of  perfect  resignation, 
arising  out  of  intense  love  to  God  and  to  all 
that  are  His,  ceases  to  distinguish  between 
pleasure  and  pain,  in  so  far  as  they  affect 
him.  He  does  not  know  now  what  it  is  to 
complain  of  pain  or  misery — and  this  kind 
of  uncomplaining  resignation  to  the  will  of 
God,  Who  is  all  love,  is  indeed  a worthier 
acquisition  than  all  the  glory  of  grand  and 
heroic  performances. 

• To  the  vast  majority  of  mankind,  the 
body  is  •everything.  The  body  is  all  the 
uqiverse  to  them  and  bodily  enjoyment,  their 
all  in  all.  This  demon  of  the  worship  of  the 
body  and  of  the  things  of  the  body  has 


128 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


entered  into  us  all.  We  may  indulge  in  tall 
talk,  and  take  very  high  flights  in  the  reign 
of  reason,  but  we  are  like  vultures  all  the 
same — our  mind  is  directed  to  the  piece  of 
carrion  down  below.  Why  should  our  body 
be  saved,  say,  from  the  tiger  ? Why  may 
we  not  give  it  over  to  the  tiger  ? The  tiger 
will  thereby  be  pleased,  and  that  is  not  al- 
together so  very  far  from  self-sacrifice  and 
worship.  Can  you  reach  to  the  realisation  of 
the  idea  where  all  sense  of  self  is  completely 
lost  ? It  is  a very  dizzy  height  on  the  {|nnacle 
of  the  religion  of  love,  arrd  few  in  this  world, 
have  ever  climbed  up  to  it ; but  until  a man 
reaches  that  highest  point  of  ever-ready  and 
ever-willing  self-sacrifice,  he  cannot  become 
a perfect  bhakta.  We  may  all  manage  to 
maintain  our  bodies  more  or  less  satisfactort- 
ly,  for  longer  or  shorter  intervals  ©f  time — 
nevertheless,  our  bodies  will  have  to  go ; 
there  is  no  permanence  about  them.  And 
blessed  are  they  whose  bodies  get  destroyed 


UNIVERSAL  LOVE. 


129 


in  the  service  of  others.  “Wealth,  and  even 
life  itself,  the  sage  always  holds  ready  for 
the  service  of  others.  In  this  world,  there 
being  one  thing  certain,  namely,  death,  it  is 
far  better  that  this  body  dies  in  a good  cause 
than  in  a bad  one.”  We  may  drag  our  life 
on  for  fifty  years  or  a hundred — but  after 
that,  what  is  it  that  happens  ? Everything 
that  is  the  result  of  combination  must  get 
dissolved  and  die  and  there  must  and  will 
come  a time  for  the  body  to  be  decomposed. 
Jesus  and  Buddha  and  Mahammad  are  all 
dead — all  the  great  prophets  and  teachers  of 
the  world  are  dead.  “In  this  evanescent 
world  where  everything  is  falling  to  pieces, 
we  have  to  make  the  highest  use  of  what 
time  we  have,”  says  the  bhakta,  “and  really 
th§  highest  use  of  life  is  to  hold  it  at  the 
service  ot  all  beings.”  It  is  the  horrible 
body-idea,  just  this  one  delusion,  that  we 
are*  wholly  the  body  we  own,  and  that  we 
must  by  all  possible  means  try  our  very  best 
9 


130 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


to  preserve  and  to  please  it,  that  breeds  all 
the  selfishness  in  the  world.  If  you  know 
positively  that  you  are  other  than  your  body, 
you  have  then  none  to  fight  with  or  struggle 
against ; you  are  dead  to  all  ideas  of  selfish- 
ness.  So  the  bhakta  declares  that  we  shall 
have  to  hold  ourselves  as  if  we  are  al- 
together dead  to  all  the  things  of  the  world 
— and  that  is  indeed  self-surrender.  Let 
things  come  as  they  may — this  is  the  mean- 
ing of  “Thy  will  be  done,”  and  not  going 
about  fighting  and  struggling,  and  thinking 
all  the  while  that  God  wills  all  our  own  weak- 
nesses and  worldly  ambitions.  It  may  be  that 
good  comes  even  out  of  our  selfish  struggles; 
that  is,  however  through  God’s  look  out  and 
no  merit  of  ours.  The  perfected  bhaktds 
idea  must  be  never  to  will  and  work  for  hijn- 
self.  “Lord,  they  build  high  temples  in 
Thy  name,  they  make  large  gifts  ! I am 
poor — I am  nothing,  so  I take  this  body  of 
mine  and  place  it  at  Thy  feet.  Do  not  give 


UNIVERSAL  LOVE. 


I3I 

me  up,  0 Lord  !”— such  is  the  prayer  that 
proceeds  out  of  the  depths  of  the  bhaktcHs 
heart.  To  him  who  has  experienced  it,  this 
eternal  sacrifice  of  the  self  unto  the  Beloved 
Lord,  is  higher  by  far  than  all  wealth  and 
power,  than  even  all  soaring  thoughts  of  re- 
nown and  enjoyment.  The  peace  of  the 
bhaktcHs  calm  resignation  is  a “peace  that 
passeth  all  understanding,”  and  is  of  incom- 
parable value.  His  apratikulya  is  that  state 
of  the  mind,  in  which  the  mind  has  no  interests 
in  anything  whatever  in  this  world  and  natur- 
ally it  knows  nothing  that  is  opposed  to  those 
interests.  In  this  state  of  siiblime  resigna- 
tion, everything  in  the  shape  of  attachment 
goes  away  completely,  except  that  one 
all-absorbing  love  to  Him  “in  Whom  all 
diings  live  and  move  and  have  their  being.” 
This  attachment  through  love  to  God  is, 
indeed,  one  that  does  not  bind  the  soul, 
but  effectively  breaks  all  its  bondages. 


The  Higher  Knowledge  and  the 
Higher  Love  are  one  to  the 
True  Lover. 

The  Upaniskads  distinguish  between  a 
higher  knowledge  and  a lower  knowledge. 
There  is  really  no  difference  between  this 
higher  knowledge  of  the  Upanishads  and 
the  bhaktds  higher  love  [Para-Bhakti), 
The  Mundaka  Upanishad  says  : — “The 
knowers  of  the  Brahman  declare  that. there 
are  two  kinds  of  knowledge  worthy  to 
be  known,  namely,  the  higher  (pard) 
and  the  lower  (apard).  Of  these  the  lower 
knowledge  consists  of  the  Rigveda,  the 
Yajurveda,  the  Sdmaveda^  the  Atharva- 
veda,  the  siksha  or  the  science  dealing  with 
pronunciation  and  accent,  the  kalpa  or  the 
sacrificial  liturgy,  grammar,  the  nirukta  or 
the  science  dealing  with  etymology  ’and  the 
meaning  of  words,  prosody,  and  astrononiy. 
The  higher  knowledge  is  that  by  which  that 
Unchangeable  is  known.”*  The  higher  know- 


THE  TRUE  LOVER. 


133 

ledge  is  thus  clearly  shown  to  be  the  know- 
ledge of  the  Brahman.  The  Devi-Bhdgavata 
gives  us  the  following  definition  of  higher 
love  {Para-Bhakti)  : — “As  oil  poured  from 
one  vessel  to  another  falls  in  an  unbroken 
line,  so,  when  the  mind  in  an  unbroken 
stream  of  thought,  thinks  of  the  Lord,  we 
have  what  is  called  Para~Bkakti  or  supreme 
love.”  This  kind  of  undisturbed  and  ever 
steady  direction  of  the  mind  and  the  heart 
to  the  Lord,  with  an  inseparable  attachment 
is  indeed  the  highest  manifestation  of  man’s 
love  to  God.  All  other  forms  of  bkakti  are 
only  preparatory  to  the  attainment  of  this 
highest  form  of  it,  namely,  the  Para-Bhakti, 
which  is  also  known  as  the  love  that  comes 
;jfter  attachment  ( rdgdnugd  ).  When  this 
supremCylove  once  comes  into  the  heart  of 

^ u iTSTTO  tro  TOt 

^ 1 ^ w w n 

(Munduka.  1.  4,  5.) 


^34 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


man,  his  mind  will  continuously  think  of 
God  and  remember  nothing  else.  He  will 
give  no  room  in  himself  to  thoughts  other 
than  those  of  God,  and  his  soul  by  being 
unconquerably  pure,  will  break  all  the  bonds 
of  mind  and  matter  and  become  serenely 
free.  He  alone  can  worship  the  Lord  in  his 
own  heart  and  to  him  forms,  symbols,  books 
and  doctrines  become  all  unnecessary  and 
incapable  of  proving  serviceable  in  any  way. 
It  is  not  easy  to  love  the  Lord  thus. 

Ordinarily  human  love  is  seen  to  flourish 
only  in  places  where  it  is  returned  and  where 
love  is  not  returned  for  love,  cold  indifference 
is  the  natural  result.  There  are,  however, 
rare  instances  of  human  love  where  we  may 
notice  love  exhibiting  itself,  even  though 
there  is  no  return  for  love.  We  mayicompare 
this  kind  of  love,  for  purposes  of  illustration, 
to  the  love  of  the  moth  for  the  fire.  Tfie 
insect  loves  the  fire,  falls  into  it  and  dies — for 
it  is  indeed  in  the  nature  of  this  insect  to  love 


THE  TRUE  LOVER. 


135 


SO.  To  love,  because  it  is  in  the  very  nature  of 
love  to  love,  is  undeniably  the  highest  and 
the  most  unselfish  manifestation  of  love  that 
may  be  seen  in  the  world.  Such  love  work- 
ing itself  out  on  the  plane  of  spirituality 
necessarily  leads  to  the  attainment  of  Para- 
Bhakti, 


The  Triangle  of  Love. 

We  may  represent  love  as  a triangle, 
each  of  the  angles  of  which,  corresponds  to 
one  of  its  inseparable  characteristics.  There 
can  be  no  triangle  without  all  its  three 
angles,  and  there  can  be  no  true  love  with- 
out its  three  following  characteristics.  The 
first  angle  of  our  triangle  of  love  is  that  love 
knows  no  bargaining.  Wherever  there  is 
any  seeking  for  something  in  return,  there 
can  be  no  real  love.  It  becomes  a mere 
matter  of  shop-keeping.  As  long  as  there 
is  in  us,  any  idea  of  deriving  this  or  that 
favour  from  God  in  return  for  our  respect 
and  allegiance  to  Him,  so  long  there  can  be 
no  true  love  growing  in  our  hearts.  Thosg 
who  worship  God  because  they  wish^Him  to 
bestow  favours  on  them  are  sure  not  to  wor- 
ship Him,  if  those  favours  are  not  forthcotli- 
ing.  The  bhakta  loves  the  Lord  because 
He  is  loveable.  There  is  no  other  motive 


THE  TRIANGLE  OF  LOVE. 


137 


originating  or  directing  this  divine  emotion 
of  the  true  devotee.  We  have  heard  it  said 
that  a great  king  once  went  into  a forest 
and  there  met  a sage.  He  talked  with  the 
sage  a little  and  was  very  much  pleased  with 
his  purity  and  wisdom.  The  king  then 
wanted  the  sage  to  oblige  him  by  receiving 
a present  from  him.  The  sage  refused  to 
do  so,  saying,  “the  fruits  of  the  forest  are 
food  enough  for  me  ; the  pure  streams  of 
water  flowing  down  from  the  mountains, 
give  enough  of  drink  to  me  ; the  barks  of 
the  trees  supply  me  with  enough  of  covering  ; 
and  the  caves  of  the  mountains  form  my 
home.  Why  should  I take  any  present  from 
you  or  from  any  body  ?”  The  king  said, 
“Just  to  benefit  me,  sir,  please  come  with 
me  to  the  city  to  my  palace  and  take  some- 
thing from  my  hands.”  After  much  persu- 
asion, the  sage  at  last  consented  to  do  as  the 
king  desired,  and  went  with  him  to  his 
palace.  Before  offering  the  gift  to  the  sage 


138 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


the  king  repeated  his  prayers,  saying,  ‘'Lord, 
give  me  more  children  ; Lord,  give  me  more 
wealth  ; Lord,  give  me  more  territory  ; Lord, 
keep  my  body  in  better  health  and  so  on. 
Before  the  king  had  finished  saying  his 
prayer  the  sage  got  up  and  walked  away 
from  the  room  quietly.  At  seeing  this,  the 
king  became  perplexed  and  began  to  follow 
him,  crying  aloud,  “Sir,  you  are  going  away, 
you  have  not  taken  my  presents.”  The  sage 
turned  round  and  said,  “Beggar,  I do  not 
beg  of  beggars.  You  are  a beggar  yourself, 
and  how  can  you  give  me  anything  } I am 
no  fool  to  think  of  taking  anything  from  a 
beggar  like  you.  Go  away,  do  not  follow 
me.”  The  above  story  brings  out  clearly 
the  distinction  between  mere  beggars  in  the 
province  of  Religion  and  the  real  lovers  of 
God.  To  worship  God  for  any  other  reward 
or  even  for  the  sake  of  salvation  is  degenerat- 
ing the  high  ideal  of  love.  Love  knows  no 
reward.  Love  is  always  for  love’s  sake. 


THE  TRIANGLE  OF  LOVE. 


139 


The  bhakta  loves  because  he  cannot  help 
loving — just  as  when  you  see  a beautiful 
scenery  and  fall  in  love  with  it.  You  do  not 
demand  anything  in  the  way  of  favour  from 
the  scenery,  nor  does  the  scenery  demand 
anything  from  you.  Yet  the  vision  thereof 
brings  you  to  a blissful  state  of  the  mind  by 
toning  down  all  the  friction  in  your  soul.  It 
makes  you  calm,  and  almost  raises  you,  for 
the  time  being,  beyond  your  mortal  nature, 
by  placing  you  in  a condition  of  tranquil 
divine  ecstasy.  So  is  the  nature  of  real  love 
and  this  is  the  first  angle  of  our  triangle. 
Therefore  ask  not  anything  in  return  for 
your  love.  Let  your  position  be  always  that 
of  the  giver.  Give  your  love  unto  God,  but 
do  not  ask  anything  in  return  even  from 
Him. 

The  second  angle  of  the  triangle  of  love 
is  that  love  knows  no  fear.  Those  that  love 
God  through  fear  are  the  lowest  of  human 
beings — quite  undeveloped  as  men.  They 


140 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


worship  God  from  fear  of  punishment.  He 
is  a great  Being  to  them,  with  a whip  in  one 
hand  and  the  sceptre  in  the  other  and  if  they 
do  not  obey  Him  they  are  afraid  they  will 
be  whipped.  It  is  a degradation  to  worship 
God  through  fear  of  punishment.  Such  wor- 
ship is,  if  worship  at  all,  the  crudest  form  of 
the  worship  of  the  God  of  love.  So  long  as 
there  is  any  fear  in  the  heart,  how  can  there 
be  love  also  ? Love  conquers  naturally  all 
fear.  Think  of  a young  mother  in  the  street. 
If  a dog  barks  at  her  she  is  frightened  ; she 
flies  into  the  nearest  house.  Now  suppose 
the  same  mother  is  in  the  street  with  her 
child  and  a lion  springs  upon  the  child. 
Where  then  will  the  mother  be  ? Of  course 
at  the  mouth  of  the  lion — to  save  the  chilc^ 
Love  does  conquer  all  fear.  Fear  comes 
from  the  selfish  idea  of  cutting  ones  self  off 
from  the  universe.  The  smaller  and  the 
more  selfish  I make  myself,  the  more  is  my 
fear.  If  a man  thinks  he  is  little  or  nothing. 


THE  TRIANGLE  OF  LOVE.  I4I 

fear  will  surely  come  upon  him.  And  the 
less  you  think  of  yourself  as  an  insignificant 
person,  the  less  fear  will  there  be  for  you. 
So  long  as  there  is  the  least  spark  of  fear  in 
you  there  can  be  no  love  there.  Love  and 
fear  are  incompatible.  So  God  is  never  to 
be  feared  by  those  who  love  Him.  The 
commandment,  “Do  not  take  the  name  of 
the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain,’  the  true  lover  of 
God  laughs  at.  How  can  there  be  any  blas- 
phemy in  the  religion  of  love  ? The  more 
you  take  the  name  of  the  Lord,  the  better 
for  you,  in  whatever  way  you  may  do  it. 
You  are  only  repeating  His  name  because 
you  love  Him. 

The  third  angle  of  the  love-triangle  is 
that  love  knows  no  rival,  for  in  it  is  always 
^bodied  the  lover’s  highest  ideal.  True 
love  never  comes  until  the  object  of  our  love 
becomes  to  us  our  highest  ideal.  It  may  be 
tliat  }n  many  cases  human  love  is  misdirected 
and  misplaced— but  to  the  person  who  loves, 


142 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


the  thing  he  loves  is  always  his  own  highest 
ideal.  One  may  see  his  ideal  in  the  vilest  of 
beings  and  another  in  the  highest  of  beings — 
nevertheless,  in  every  case  it  is  the  ideal 
alone  that  can  be  truly  and  intensely  loved. 
The  highest  ideal  of  every  man  is  his  God 
Ignorant  or  wise,  saint  or  sinner,  man  or 
woman,  educated  or  uneducated,  cultivated 
or  uncultivated — to  every  human  being,  his 
highest  ideal  is  his  God.  And  indeed  the 
synthesis  of  all  the  highest  ideals  of  beauty, 
of  sublimity,  and  of  power  gives  us  the 
completest  conception  "of  the  loving  and 
lovable  God.  These  ideals  exist  in  some 
shape  or  other,  in  every  mind  naturally  and 
form  a part  and  parcel  of  all  our  minds.  All 
the  active  manifestations  of  human  nature 
are  but  struggles  of  those  ideals  within  it,  t;p 
become  realised  in  practical  life.  All  the 
various  movements  that  we  see  around 
us  in  society  are  caused  by  the  various 
ideals  in  various  souls,  trying  to  come  out 


THE  TRIANGLE  OF  LOVE.  1 43 

and  become  concretised — for  what  is  in  the 
inside  presses  on  to  come  to  the  outside. 
This  perennially  dominant  influence  of  the 
ideal  is  the  one  force,  the  one  motive  power, 
that  may  be  seen  to  be  constantly  working 
in  the  midst  of  mankind.  It  may  be  after 
hundreds  of  births,  after  struggling  through 
thousands  of  years,  that  man  finds  out  that 
it  is  in  vain  to  try  to  make  the  inner  ideal 
mould  completely  the  external  conditions  and 
square  well  with  them — and  after  realising 
this  he  no  more  tries  to  project  his  own  ideal 
on  the  outside  world,  but  worships  the  ideal 
itself  as  ideal,  from  the  highest  standpoint 
of  love. 

This  ideally  perfect  ideal  embraces  all 
lower  ideals.  Every  one  admits  the  truth 
of  the  saying  that  a lover  sees  Helen's 
beauty  on  an  Ethiop’s  brow.  The  man  who 
is  standing  aside  is  a looker-on,  sees  that 
h)ve  is  here  misplaced.  But  the  lover  sees 
his  Helen  all  the  same,  and  does  not  see  the 


144 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


Ethiop  at  all ! For — Helen  or  Ethiop,  the 
objects  of  our  love  are  really  the  centres 
round  which  our  ideals  get  crystallised.  Now 
what  is  it  that  the  world  commonly  worships  ? 
Not  certainly  this  all-embracing,  ideally 
perfect  ideal  of  the  supreme  devotee  and 
lover.  The  ideal  which  men  and  women 
commonly  worship,  is  what  is  in  themselves 
and  every  person  projects  his  or  her  own 
ideal  on  the  outside  world  and  kneels  before 
it.  This  is  why  we  find  that  men  who  are 
cruel  and  bloodthirsty  conceive  of  a blood- 
thirsty God — because  "they  can  only  love 
their  own  highest  ideal.  That  is  why  good 
men  have  a very  high  ideal  of  God  and 
their  ideal  is  indeed  so  very  different  from 
that  of  others. 


The  God  of  Love  is  His 
own  Proof. 

Now  what  is  the  ideal  of  the  lover  who 
has  passed  quite  beyond  the  idea  of  selfish- 
ness, of  bartering  and  bargaining,  and  who 
knows  no  fear  ? Even  to  the  great  God 
such  a man  will  say — “I  have  given  you  my 
all,  and  I do  not  want  anything  from  you  ; 
indeed  there  is  nothing  that  I can  call  my 
own.”  When  a man  has  acquired  this  stage 
his  ideal  becomes  one  of  perfect  love — one  of 
perfect  fearlessness  of  love.  The  highest 
ideal  of  such  a person  has  no  narrowness  or 
particularity  about  it.  It  is  love  universal, 
love  without  limits  and  bounds,  love  itself, 
perfect  and  absolute.  This  grand  ideal  of 
the  religion  of  love  is  worshipped  and  loved 
absolutely  as  such,  without  the  aid  of  any 
symbols  or  suggestions.  The  highest  form  of 
bhakti  is  the  worship  of  this  all-comprehend- 
lO 


146 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


ing  ideal  as  one's  chosen  ideal.  All  the  other 
forms  of  Bhakti  are  only  stages  on  the  way 
to  reach  it.  All  our  failures  and  all  our 
successes  in  following  the  religion  of  love, 
are  on  the  road  to  the  realisation  of  this 
one  ideal.  Object  after  object  is  taken  up, 
and  his  inner  ideal  is  successively  projected 
on  them  all,  by  the  bhakta,  to  find  that  all 
such  external  objects  are  always  inadequate 
as  exponents  of  his  ever-expanding  inner 
ideal — and  are  naturally  rejected  by  him  one 
after  another.  At  la^  the  aspirant  begins 
to  think  that  it  is  vain  to  try  to  realise  the 
ideal  in  external  objects — that  all  external 
objects  are  as  nothing,  compared  to  the  ideal 
itself.  And  in  course  of  time,  he  acquires 
the  power  of  realising  the  highest  and  the 
most  generalised  abstract  ideal,  entirely  as 
an  abstraction — and  that,  to  him  'becomes 
quite  alive  and  real.  When  the  devotee  h^s 
reached  this  point,  he  is  no  more  impelled  to 
ask — whether  God  can  be  demonstrated  or 


THE  GOD  OF  LOVE. 


147 


not,  whether  he  is  omnipotent  and  omniscient, 
or  not.  To  him,  He  is  only  the  God 
of  Love  ! He  is  the  highest  ideal  of  love, 
and  that  is  sufficient  for  all  his  purposes ! 
He,  as  love,  is  self-evident  to  him — for  it 
requires  no  proofs  to  demonstrate  the 
existence  of  the  beloved,  to  the  lover ! The 
magistrate-gods  of  other  forms  of  religion, 
may  require  a good  deal  of  proof  to  prove 
them,  but  the  Bhakta  does  not  and  cannot 
think  of  such  gods  at  all.  To  him  God 
exists  entirely  as  Love,  and  finding  Him  as 
the  innermost  soul  in  all,  he  proclaims  in 
ecstasy — “None,  O beloved,  loves  the 
husband  for  the  husband’s  sake,  but  it  is  for 
the  sake  of  the  Self,  the  Lord,  who  is  in  the 
hvsband,  that  the  husband  is  loved— none, 
O belove^l,  loves  the  wife  for  the  wife’s  sake, 
but  it  is  for  the  sake  of  the  Self,  the  Lord, 
who  is  in  the  wife,  that  the  wife  is  loved.” 

It  is  said  by  some  that  selfishness  is  the 
only  motive  power,  in  regard  to  all  human 


148 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


activities.  In  my  opinion  that  also  is  love 
lowered,  by  being  particularised.  When  I 
think  of  myself  as  a part  of  the  universal 
Whole  and  love  It — my  love  becomes  univer- 
sal also,  and  there  can  surely  remain  then  no 
selfishness  in  me.  But  when  I,  by  mistake, 
think  that  I am  a little  something  disconnected 
from  the  Whole — my  love  becomes  particular- 
ised and  narrowed.  It  is  a great  mistake  there- 
fore thus  to  make  the  sphere  of  love  narrow 
and  contracted — for ^11  things  in  the  universe 
are  of  divine  origin  and  deserve  to  be  loved. 
It  has,  however,  to  be  borne  in  mind  that 
the  love  of  the  whole  includes  the  love  of 
the  parts.  This  universal  whole  is  the  God 
of  the  bhaktaSy  and  all  the  other  Gods,  or 
Fathers  in  Heaven,  or  Rulers,  or  Creatoi;^, 
and  all  theories  and  doctrines  and  books, 
have  no  purpose  and  no  meaning  for  them— 
for  they  have  through  their  supreme  Idve 
and  devotion,  risen  above  those  things 
altogether.  When  the  heart  is  purified  and 


THE  GOD  OF  LOVE. 


149 


cleansed  and  filled  to  the  brim  with  the 
divine  nectar  of  love,  all  other  ideas  of  God 
except  that  He  is  all  Love,  become  simply 
puerile,  and  are  rejected  as  being  inadequate 
or  unworthy.  Such  is  indeed  the  power  of 
Para-Bhakti  or  supreme  love  and  the 
perfected  bhakta  no  more  goes  to  see  God  in 
temples  and  churches — he  knows  nowhere  to 
go  where  he  will  not  find  Him.  He  finds 
Him  in  the  temple  as  well  as  out  of  the 
temple  ; he  finds  Him  in  the  saint  s saintli- 
ness as  well  as  in  the  wicked  man’s  wicked- 
ness, because  he  has  Him  already  seated  in 
glory  in  his  own  heart,  as  the  one  almighty, 
inextinguishable  Light  of  Love  which  is 
ever  shining  and  eternally  present. 


Human  Representations  of  the 
Divine  Ideal  of  Love. 

It  IS  impossible  to  express  the  nature  of 
this  supreme  and  absolute  ideal  of  love  in 
human  language.  Even  the  highest  flight 
of  human  imagination  is  incapable  of  com- 
prehending it,  in  all  its  infinite  perfection 
and  beauty.  Nevertheless,  the  followers  of 
the  religion  of  love,  in  its  higher  as  well  as 
lower  forms,  have  all  along  and  in  all  coun- 
tries, had  to  use  the  inadequate  human  lan- 
guage to  comprehend  and  fo  define  their 
own  ideal  of  love.  Nay  more — human  love 
itself,  in  all  its  varied  forms,  has  been  made 
to  typify  this  inexpressible  divine  love. 
Man  can  think  of  divine  things  only  in  hig 
own  human  way.  To  us  the  Absolute  can 
be  expressed  only  in  our  relative  language. 
The  whole  universe  ’is  to  us  a writing  bf 
the  infinite,  in  the  language  of  the  finite. 


IDEAL  OF  LOVE. 


ISI 

Therefore  bhaktas  make  use  of  all  the  common 
terms  associated  with  the  common  love  of 
humanity,  in  relation  to  God  and  his  wor- 
ship through  love.  Some  of  the  great  writers 
on  Para-Bhakti  have  tried  to  understand  and 
experience  this  divine  love  in  the  following 
different  ways.  The  lowest  form  in  which 
this  love  is  apprehended,  is  what  they  call 
the  peaceful — the  shanta  When  a 

man  worships  God  without  the  fire  of  love  in 
him,  without  its  madness  in  his  brain — when 
his  love  is  just  the  calm  commonplace  love, 
a little  higher  than  mere  forms,  ceremonies 
and  symbols,  but  not  at  all  characterised  by 
the  madness  of  intensely  active  love — it  is 
said  to  be  shanta.  We  see  some  people  in 
the  world  who  like  to  move  on  slowly,  and 
•others  who  come  and  go  like  the  whirlwind. 
The  sJianta-bhakta  is  like  the  former — calm, 
peaceful,  and  gentle.  The  next  higher  type 
is  that  of  dasya  or  servantship.  It 

comes  when  a man  thinks  he  is  the  servant 


152 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


of  the  Lord — ^when  the  attachment  of  the 
faithful  servant  to  the  master  is  his  ideal. 

The  next  type  of  love  is  sakkya  or 

friendship.  “Thou  art  our  beloved  friend”# 
— exclaims  one,  who  takes  up  this  ideal. 
Just  as  a man  opens  his  heart  to  his  friend, 
and  knows  that  the  friend  will  never  chide 
him  for  his  faults,  but  will  always  try  to  help 
him — just  as  there  exists  in  his  mind,  the 
idea  of  equality  between  him  and  his  friend, 
so  the  same  kind  of  love  flows  out  from  the 
heart  of  the  worshipper  towards  his  God — 
when  this  type  of  love  is  his  ideal.  Thus 
God  becomes  our  friend— the  friend  who  is 
near,  the  friend  to  whom  we  may  freely  tell 
all  the  tales  of  our  lives — and  the  innermost 
secrets  of  our  hearts  we  place  before  Him 
with  the  greatest  assurance  of  safety  andt. 
support.  He  is  thus  the  friend  Whom  we 

here  accept  as  our  equal — as  our  play- mate. 

] • 

tot  I 

(Pdndava  Gita). 


IDEAL  OF  LOVE. 


153 


Indeed  we  may  well  say  that  the  Lord  is 
playing  in  this  universe.  Just  as  children 
play  their  games,  so  is  the  Beloved  Lord 
Himself  in  sport,  creating  this  universe  ! He 
is  perfect — He  does  not  want  anything. 
Then  why  should  he  create?  Activity  is 
always  with  us  for  the  fulfilment  of  a certain 
want,  and  want  always  presupposes  imperfec- 
tion. God  is  perfect.  He  has  no  wants. 
Then  why  should  He  be  ever  active  and  go 
on  with  this  work  of  creation  ? What  pur- 
pose has  He  in  view  ? The  stories  about 
God  creating  this  world,  for  some  end  or 
other  that  we  imagine,  are  good  as  stories, 
but  not  otherwise.  Therefore  it  cannot  be 
otherwise  but  really  in  sport  and  the  uni- 
verse is  His  play  going  on  ! The  whole 
•universe  must  after  all  be  a piece  of  pleasing 
fun  to.  Him  ! So  the  bhakta  says — love  the 
Lord,  the  Playmate  and  enjoy  the  play.  If 
you  are  poor,  enjoy  that’ as  a fun.  If  you  are 
rich,  enjoy  the  fun  of  being  rich.  If  dangers 


154 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


come,  it  is  good  fun.  If  happiness  comes,  there 
is  more  good  fun.  The  world  is  just  a play- 
ground, and  we  are  here  having  a game — 
having  God  with  us  playing  all  the  while ! 
Eternal  playmate — how  beautifully  He  is 
playing ! The  play  is  finished  when  the 
cycle  comes  to  an  end  and  there  is  rest  for 
a shorter  or  longer  time.  Then  again  be- 
gins the  play — again  the  universe  and  every- 
thing come  out  and  play  with  Him — and  so  on 
it  goes  ! It  is  only  when  you  forget  that  it  is 
all  play  and  that  you  are  also  helping  in  this 
play,  that  misery  and  sorrows  come,  the 
heart  becomes  heavy  and  the  world  weighs 
upon  you  with  tremendous  power.  But  as 
soon  as  you  give  up  the  idea  of  serious 
reality,  characteristic  to  us  all,  in  the  chang- 
ing incidents  of  this  life  of  three  minutes,  and*^ 
know  it  to  be  but  a stage  on  which  you 
are  playing  and  helping  God  to  play — at 
once  misery  ceases  for  you.  So  see  Him 
playing  in  every  atom — playing  when  He  is 


IDEAL  OF  LOVE. 


155 


building  up  earths,  suns,  and  moons — play- 
ing with  the  human  hearts,  and  animals,  and 
plants  ! See  that  we  are  but  His  chessmen. 
He  arranges  us  first  in  one  way  and  then 
in  another,  and  we  are  consciously  or  un- 
consciously helping  in  His  play.  And  Oh 
bliss  ! we  are  His  playmates  ! 

The  next  type  is  what  is  known  as  bat- 
salya  (^TT^T^),  or  loving  God  not  as  our 
Father  but  as  our  Child.  This  may  look 
peculiar,  but  it  is  a discipline  to  enable  us  to 
detach  all  ideas  of  power  from  the  concept  of 
God.  The  idea  of  power  brings  with  it  awe. 
There  should  be  no  awe  in  love.  The  ideas 
of  reverence  and  obedience  are  necessary  for 
the  formation  of  character.  But  when  the 
character  is  formed,  when  the  lover  has 
tasted  the  calm  peaceful  love  and  also  a 
little  pf  its  intense  madness,  then  he  need 
talk  no  more  of  ethics  and  obedience  to  the 
fecriptural  forms.  To  conceive  God  as  mighty, 
majestic  and  glorious  Lord  of  the  Universe, 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


156 

or  as  the  God  of  Gods — the  lover  says,  he 
does  not  care.  It  is  to  avoid  this  association 
with  God,  of  the  fear-creating  sense  of  power 
that  he  worships  God  as  his  own  child  ! The 
mother  and  the  father  are  not  moved  by  awe 
in  relation  to  the  child  ; they  cannot  be  said 
to  have  any  reverence  for  their  child.  They 
cannot  think  of  asking  any  favour  from  the 
child.  The  child’s  position  in  regard  to 
his  parents,  is  always  that  of  the  receiver, 
and  out  of  love  for  the  child,  the  parents 
will  give  up  their  bodies  a hundred  times 
over.  A thousand  lives  they  will  sacrifice 
for  that  one  child  of  theirs,  and  therefore 
God  is  loved  as  a child.  Thus  the  idea  of 
loving  God  as  a child,  comes  into  existence 
and  grows  naturally,  among  those  religious 
sects  which  believe  in  the  incarnation  of  God. 
To  the  Mahomedans  it  is  impossible  tp  have 
this  idea  of  God  as  a child — they  will  shrink 
from  it  with  a kind  of  horror.  But  the 
Christian  and  the  Hindu  can  realise  it  easily, 


IDEAL  OF  LOVE. 


157 


because  they  have  the  baby  Jesus  and  the 
baby  Krishna.  The  women  in  India  often 
look  upon  themselves  as  Krishna’s  mothers. 
Christian  mothers  also  may  take  up  the  idea 
that  they  are  all  Christ’s  mothers,  and  it  will 
bring  to  the  West  the  knowledge  of  God’s 
Divine  Motherhood,  which  they  so  much 
need.  Thus  the  superstitions  of  awe  and 
reverence  in  relation  to  God,  deeply  rooted 
in  the  heart  of  our  hearts,  fades  away 
through  the  power  of  love  and  sometimes 
it  takes  long  years  entirely  to  sink  in  love, 
the  ideas  of  reverence  and  veneration,  of 
awe,  majesty  and  glory  with  regard  to 
God. 

There  is  one  more  human  representa- 
tion of  the  divine  ideal  of  love.  It  is  known 
as  the  madkura  ( ).  or  sweet,  and  is  the 
highest  of  all  such  representations.  It  is 
•indeed  based  on  the  highest  manifestation 
of  love  in  this  world,  and  the  strongest, 
known  to  man.  What  love  shakes  the  whole 


1 58  BHAKTI-YOGA. 

nature  of  man  and  running  through  every 
atom  of  his  being,  makes  him  mad,  makes 
him  forget  his  own  nature,  transforms  him, 
makes  him  either  a God  or  a demon — as  the 
love  between  man  and  woman  ? In  this 
sweet  representation  of  divine  love,  God  is 
looked  upon  and  worshipped  as  the  husband. 
The  bhakta  says — indeed  we  are  all  like 
women  dependent  on  the  Lord — and  there  are 
no  men  in  this  world  but  that  One  Man, 
and  that  is  He,  the  Beloved.  Therefore  all 
that  love  which  man  gives  to  woman,  or 
woman  to  man,  has  here  to  be  given  up  to 
the  Lord — and  all  the  different  kinds  of  love 
which  we  see  in  the  world,  and  with  which 
we  are  more  or  less  playing  merely,  have 
God  as  the  one  goal.  Unfortunately,  man 
does  not  know  the  infinite  ocean  into 
which  this  mighty  river  of  love  is  constantly 
flowing,  and  so,  foolishly  tries  to  direct  it® 
often  to  little  dolls  of  human  beings.  The 
tremendous  love  for  the  child  that  is  in 


IDEAL  OF  LOVE. 


159 


human  nature  is  not  for  the  little  doll  of  a 
child.  If  you  bestow  it  blindly  and  exclusively 
on  the  child,  you  will  suffer  in  consequence — 
but  through  such  suffering  will  come  the 
awakening,  by  which  you  are  sure  to  find 
out,  that  the  love  which  is  in  you,  if  given  to 
any  human  being,  will  sooner  or  later  bring 
pain  and  sorrow  as  the  result.  Our  love 
must  therefore  be  given  to  the  Highest  One 
— Who  never  dies  and  never  changes — to 
Him,  in  the  ocean  of  Whose  love  there  is 
neither  ebb  nor  flow.  Love  must  be  directed 
to  its  right  destination— it  must  go  unto  Him, 
Who  is  really  the  infinite  ocean  of  love  ! 
Even  as  drops  of  water  coming  down  from 
the  mountain-side  cannot  stop  their  course 
after  being  formed  into  a brook  or  a river, 
^however  big  they  may  be — but  at  last  find 
their  why  somehow  to  the  ocean — so  God  is 
t^ie  one  goal  wherein  all  our  passions  and 
emotions  will  and  must  go  in  the  end.  There- 
fore if  you  want  to  be  angry,  be  angry  with 


i6o 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


Him — chide  your  Beloved,  chide  your  Friend. 
Whom  else  can  you  safely  chide  ? — For 
mortal  man  will  not  patiently  put  up  with 
your  anger — sooner  or  later  there  will  come 
a re-action  from  him.  If  you  are  angry 
with  me  I am  sure  quickly  to  react,  because 
I cannot  patiently  put  up  with  your  anger. 
So  say  unto  the  Beloved,  “Why  do  You  not 
come  to  me  ; why  do  Y ou  leave  me  thus 
alone  ?”  And  where  is  there  any  enjoyment 
but  in  Him  ? What  enjoyment  can  there  be 
in  little  clods  of  earth  ? It  is  the  crystallised 
essence  of  infinite  enjoyment  that  we  are 
seeking  and  that  is  only  to  be  found  in  God. 
Therefore  let  all  our  passions  and  emotions 
go  up  unto  Him.  They  are  meant  for  Him 
alone — for  if  they  miss  their  mark  and  go 
lower,  they  becom^e  vile.  And  when  they  go 
straight  to  the  mark,  the  Lord,  even  the 
lowest  of  them  becomes  transfigured  ! Thus 
all  the  energies  of  the  human  body  and  mind, 
howsoever  they  may  express  themselves, 


IDEAL  OF  LOVE. 


i6r 


have  the  Lord  as  their  one  goal,  as  their 
ekayana  and  hence  all  loves  and  all  passions 
of  the  human  heart  must  be  directed  to  God, 
the  Beloved ! Whom  else  can  this  heart 
love  except  Him,  Who  is  beauty  itself — sub- 
limity itself?  Who  in  this  universe  is  more 
beautiful  than  He  ? Who  in  this  universe  is 
more  fit  to  become  the  husband  than  He  ? 
Who  in  this  universe  is  fitter  to  be  loved 
than  He  ? So  let  him  be  the  husband,  let 
Him  be  the  Beloved.  And  often  it  so 
happens,  that  divine  lovers  who  sing  of  this 
divine  love,  accept  the  language  of  human 
love  in  all  its  aspects,  as  adequate  to  describe 
it.  Fools  do  not  understand  this  and  they 
never  will.  They  look  at  it  only  with  the 
physical  eye.  They  do  not  understand  the 
•mad  throes  of  this  spiritual  love.  How  can 
they  ? • “One  kiss  of  Thy  lips,  0 Beloved! 
ye  that  has  been  kissed  by  Thee,  his  thirst 
for  Thee  goes  on  increasing  for  ever,  all  his 
sorrows  vanish,  and  he  forgets  all  things 


i62 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


except  Thee”# — aspire  after  that  kiss  of  the 
Beloved,  that  touch  of  His  lips  which  makes 
the  bhakta  mad,  which  makes  of  man  a god  ! 
To  him,  who  has  been  blessed  with  such  a 
kiss,  the  whole  of  nature  changes— worlds 
vanish,  suns  and  moons  die  out  and  the  uni- 
verse itself  melts  away  into  that  one  infinite 
ocean  of  Love ! That  is  the  perfection  of 
the  madness  of  love.  Aye,  the  true  spiritual 
lover  does  not  rest  even  there.  Even  the 
love  of  husband  and  wife  is  not  mad  enough 
for  him.  The  bhaktas  take  up  also  the  idea 
of  illegitimate  love,  because  it  is  so  strong. 
The  impropriety  of  it  is  not  at  all  the  thing 
they  have  in  view  but  its  power  and  intensity. 
The  nature  of  this  love  is  such  that  the  more 
obstructions  there  are  for  its  free  play,  the 
more  powerful  it  becomes.  The  love® 
between  husband  and  wife  is  smooth’ — there 

I 

(Bhdgavat,  Gopi  Gita,  Canto  X.) 


IDEAL  OF  LOVE. 


^63 

are  no  obstructions  there.  So  the  bhaktas 
take  up  the  idea  of  a girl  who  is  in  love  with 
her  own  beloved  man,  and  her  mother  or 
father  or  husband,  objecting  and  obstructing* 
the  course  of  her  love,  the  more  is  her  love 
tending  to  grow  in  strength.  The  author 
of  the  Sreemad-Bhdgavat  has  dealt  with  this 
sort  of  love-representation,  in  trying  to 
relate  the  love  of  the  Gopis  towards  Krishna, 
whom  by  divine  illumination,  they  knew  to  be 
the  incarnated  Lord  of  the  universe.  Human 
language  cannot  describe  how  Krishna  was, 
in  the  groves  of  Brinda,  intensely,  madly 
loved — how  at  the  sound  of  His  voice  all 
the  ever-blessed  Gopis  rushed  out  to  meet 
Him,  forgetting  this  world  and  its  ties,  its 
duties,  its  joys  and  its  sorrows  ! 

Man,  oh  man,  you  speak  of  divine  love 
and  at  the  same  time  are  able  to  attend  to  all 
the  vanities  of  this  world  !-— are  you  sincere  ? 
‘“Where  Rama  is,  there  is  no  room  for  any 
desire  and  where  there  is  any  desire,  there  is 


1 64  BHAKTI-YOGA. 

no  room  for  Rama — these  never  co-exist, — 
like  light  and  darkness  they  are  never 
together  !”♦ 


* 5Brhn  ^ ?rrfT  ^ i 

?rhn  w ^ h etc. 

(Tulsidas.) 


Conclusion. 


When  this  highest  ideal  of  love  is  reach- 
ed, philosophy  is  thrown  away — for  who 
will  then  care  for  it  ? Freedom,  salvation, 
nirvana — all  are  thrown  away — for  who 
cares  to  become  free  while  in  the  enjoyment 
of  this  divine  love  ? “Lord,  1 do  not  want 
wealth,  nor  friends,  nor  beauty,  nor  learning, 
nor  even  freedom  ; let  me  be  born  again  and 
again,  and  be  Thou  ever  my  Love.”#  Aye, 
be  Thou  ever  and  ever  my  Love — and  what 
mor^  can  I want  ! “Who  cares  to  become 
sugar,”  says  the  bhakta,  “I  want  to  taste 
sugar.”t  Who  will  then  desire  to  become 
free  and  be  one  with  God  “I  may  know 
that  I am  He,  yet  will  I take  myself  away 
from  Him  and  become  different,  so  that  I 


(Sree  Krishna  Chaitanya.) 


+ Rimapras^da. 


BHAKTI-YOGA. 


1 66 

may  enjoy  the  Beloved  !” — This  is  what  the 
Bhakta  says.  Love  for  love’s  sake  is  his 
highest  enjoyment.  Who  will  not  be  bound 
hand  and  foot  a thousand  times  over  to 
enjoy  the  Beloved } No  bhakta  cares  for 
anything  except  love, — except  to  love  and 
be  loved.  His  unworldly  love  is  like  the 
tide  rushing  up  the  river — going  madly  up 
against  the  usual  current.  The  world  calls 
him  mad ! Aye — I knew  one  whom  the 
world  used  to  call  mad,  and  this  was  his 
answer — “My  friends  ! the  whole  world  is  a 
lunatic  asylum  ; some  are  mad  after  worldly 
love,  some  after  name,  some  after  fame,  some 
after  money,  and  some  after  salvation  or 
going  to  heaven.  In  this  big  lunatic  asylum 
I am  also  mad — I am  mad  after  God.  If 
you  are  mad  after  money,  I am  mad  after . 
God.  You  are  mad  ; so  am  I.  I think  my 
madness  is  after  all  the  best.*'  The  true 
bhakta' s love  is  this  burning  madness,  before 
which  everything  else  vanishes  for  him ! 


CONCLUSION. 


167 


The  whole  universe  is  to  him  full  of  love 
and  love  alone — that  is  how  it  seems  to  the 
true  lover.  So  when  a man  has  this  love  in 
him,  he  becomes  eternally  blessed,  eternally 
happy  and  this  blessed  madness  of  divine 
love  alone,  can  cure  for  ever  the  disease  of 
the  world  that  is  in  us. 

We  all  have  to  begin  as  dualists  in  the 
religion  of  love.  God  is  to  us  a separate 
being,  and  we  feel  ourselves  to  be  separate 
beings  also.  Love  then  comes  in  the  middle 
and  man  begins  to  approach  God — and  God 
also  comes  nearer  and  nearer  to  man.  Man 
takes  up  all  the  various  relationships  of 
life— as  father,  as  mother,  as  son,  as  friend, 
as  master,  as  lover— and  projects  them  on 
his  ideal  of  love,  on  his  God.  To  him  God 
really  becomes  all  these,  and  the  last  point 
of  his^progress  is  reached  when  he  feels  that 
Jie  has  become  absolutely  merged,  in  the 
object  of  his  worship.  We  all  begin  with 
love  for  ourselves,  and  the  unfair  claims  of 


BHAKTI-VOGA. 


1 68 

the  little  self  make  even  love,  selfish.  At 
last,  however,  comes  the  full  blaze  of  light 
in  which  this  little  self  is  seen  to  have  be- 
come one  with  the  One,  Infinite  ! Man  him- 
self becomes  transfigured  in  the  presence  of 
this  Light  of  Love ! And  thus  his  heart 
being  cleansed  of  all  impurities  and  vain 
desires  of  which  it  was  more  or  less  full  be- 
fore, he  realises  at  last  the  beautiful  and 
inspiring  truth  that— Love,  Lover  and  the 
Beloved  are  one ! 

Recjd. 

R.  R 

Q.kNo...rf(00.^i  


UDVODHAN  SERIES. 


SWAMI  VIVEKANANDA’S  WORKS. 


Books. 

Price. 

Rs.  A.  P. 

Raja  Yoga  ... 

I 0 0 

Jnana  Yoga  ...  ...  1 

n the  Press. 

Karma  Yoga... 

0 12  0 

Bhakti  Yoga ... 

0 10  0 

The  Science  and  Philosophy  of 

Religion  ... 

r 0 0 

A Study  of  Religion 

I 0 p 

Realisation  and  its  Methods 

0 12 

Thoughts  on  Vedanta  ... 

0 10  0 

Religion  of  Love 

0 10  0 

Addresses  at  the  Chicago  Parliament 

of  Religions 

0 5 0 

My  jJaster  ( with  Paramhansa 

^ Ramakrishna  by  P.  C.  Mojumdar) 

0 8 0 

Life  of  Pavharr  Baba  ... 

030 

Valuable  Conversations  with  Swami ' 

Vivekananda  ...  ...  In  the  Press. 


All  the  above-mentioned  books  are  to  be  had 
at  reduced  rates  for  the  subscribers  of  Udvodhan, 
a Bengali  Monthly  Organ  of  the  Ramakrishna 
Mission.  (Annual  Subscription  Rs.  2). 

Besides  the  above,  all  the  original  Bengali 
Works  of  the  Svvami  and  the  Bengali  translations 
of  his  English  works  are  always  available. 

Photos  and  Half-tone  Pictures  of  Sri  Rama- 
krishna and  of  Swami  Vivekananda  are  also  to  be 
had  at 


THE  UDVODHAN  OFFICE, 

12,  13,  Gopal  Chandra  Neogi’s  Lane, 
Baghbazar  P.  0,^  Calcutta, 


