===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.96311.Lectures-On-Bhagavad-Gita--Ed-2nd_djvu.txt =====






Lectures 


ON 


H'ha?Ljava.d Oita. 


adit Bhawani Shankar. 




ON 


Bhagavad Gita 

By 

Pandit BhaWani Shankar 

ibh 

A Foreword hy 

6abn Upendra Nath Basn. 

SECOND EDITION. 


Published by Lalltmohan Banerjee of tbe 
Uttcrpara Theosophical Lodge* 
1923 . 

PRICE TWJ'LVE A\N\S 


1 


All rights reserved. 




77//S i.s not the place lo speak of hnn as he /s h, 
those who lore hnn, nor to nit/iuU into tJte sanctities of 
a sinijularlp noble and happy faniily life, -1 man of 
hnjh spirit Nidiiip of spotless eharacter, ever seel no/ to 
sei I'e, to uplift, to bless. Upend ranatfi Basu irill lonq re- 
main in the heat is of his jriends and eompatnois as an 
exceptionally hiffh example of pure and lojty manhood — 
Dr. Annie Besant, in THE THEOSOPillST 1910. 



Foreword 


^ 717^ kwA I 

irhin nr^ i 

m trcpmrw firfirem n 

Sing well the Lord's song 

That from the lotus lips of Him 
Of lotus-navel hath sprung. 

YHiat need of scriptures many and long? 

Verily the Bhagavadgita is a poem of 
inestimable value to the earnest seeker alike of 
divine wisdom and ethical enlightenment ; and 
language is all too poor adequately to depict 
its exquisite beauty and superb grandeur. 
Within the small compass of 700 mellifluous 
verses it comprises wondrous solutions, for well- 
nigh all known types of thinkers, of the most 
intricate problems that either puzzle the brain 
or perplex the conscience of man. It is a 



beacon to the storm-tossed vessel in the shore- 
less ocean of life, a pole-star to the soul 
Godward bent. One’s voice is hushed at the 
very thought of expounding its profound 
philosophy. Yet many and various have been 
its commentators and exponents, and innumer- 
able the hearts and minds they have soothed 
and illumined by their several interpretations. 
Not only has it poured healing balm upon spirits 
weighed down by doubt and despair and hearts 
agonized ‘by grief and misery, but it has also 
quenched with nectar the thirst of the trans- 
cendentalist, and blessed the devotee with 
vision beatific. Indeed, so catholic is its religion, 
so all-encircling its ontology that the theist and 
tlie rationalist, the pragmatist and the agnostic 
have all their cozy nooks in it side by side, and 
in its singular solidarity they may find a ready 
bond of union. Nor even need the politician 
or the sociologist turn away hungry and dis- 
appointed from its hospitable Hall. 

As sunshine and rain arc to trees and plants, 
so are the teachings of the Gita to the whole 
self of man. Like unto the still waters of a 
dreamy mountain-lake embovSoming the infinite 



Ill 


sky with its countless stars of immensely 
different magnitudes and distances equally vast 
and varying, this marvellous booklet infolds 
in its altruistic embrace the faith and science, 
the emotion and intellect, the wisdom and learn- 
ing of all ages and climes. Its transparent 
pages mirror all the luminaries, great and small, 
dim and bright, that have ever bespangled or 
do still adorn the blue deep of the human mind. 
And behold, they do not stand independent and 
Isolated here, but are fondly locked in one 
another’s arms like kith and kin. As if by 
magic all schools of thought, all sects and creeds, 
in bitter contest elsewhere are, within its charm- 
ed circle, most dexterously organised and syn- 
thesized into one magnificent University, one 
cosmopolitan Church, — explaining and recon- 
ciling all dogmas and paradoxes, melting and 
fusing all inconsistencies and contradictions. 
It is rightly named the song of the Lord ; for, 
all melodies, all notes of the gamut in every 
pitch and scale blend here in an entrancing 
harmony. It is the one monumental poem 
that bears irrefutable testimony to India’s 
ancient glory. It is also India’s greatest gift 
to the world ; and what Schopenhauer said of 



the TJpanishads regarding himself may tritb 
equal truth be spoken of the Gita in respect of 
humanity at large. 

It is no wonder therefore that fresh tracts 
and new volumes are ever pouring in upon its 
saered theme, as if to proclaim the fact that its 
depth is unfathomable, and the last word can 
never be said about it. Each earnest student 
discerns something novel in it, no^ el to him at 
any rate, and if his heart is kindled with love 
of his kind he naturally longs to share the joy 
and benefit of his discovery with his fellow men. 
Thus has Gita literature swelled year by year, 
and may now constitute a library by itself. 
Strange as it may sound, the Biologist of to-day 
will be staggered in his self-gratulation when 
he is told that his latest inductions and deduc- 
tions relating to metabolism and catabolism 
are all foreshadowed in its genesis of the world, — 
a genesis, which one might venture to aver, 
will firmly withstand the meticular scrutiny 
of even a reincarnated Bain and Spencer. 

The present treatise consists of a brief 
outline of only a few out of numerous discourses 



V 


given from one end of the country to the other 
by Pandit Bhawani Shanker, the veteran Theo- 
sophical lecturer, well known to, and much 
loved and respected by Indian fellows of the T. 
8. Those discourses had such a pure and en- 
nobling influence on his audiences, and our 
venerable brother, Sir Subramani Iyer, was 
so struck by the world-disgust and God- hunger 
they stimulated in the attentive listener that 
he more than once expressed a strong wish that 
full notes should be taken of them, so that 
with the necessary touching up they might 
eventually be brought out in book-form, — he 
with the gracefulness, all his own, undertaking 
the financial responsibility for the publication. 
But the paucity of stenographers in those days 
at the several T. S. Branches at which the dear 
Panditji spoke prevented our taking immediate 
advantage of this generous ofier. At long 
last, however, it became the pleasant duty of 
the Independent League of the T. S. with the 
aid of its Calcutta 'Branch to carry out only a 
fragment of the learned Dr. Subramani’s idea. 
The demand for a second edition of the pamphlet 
thus presented to the public is, in the absence 
of any endeavour whatever to promote its 



VI 


circixiation, the best proof of its intrinsic 
worth. 

But the reader must not look in it for either 
the hair-splitting arguments of mediaeval 
theologians or the scholarly disquisitions of 
Telang, Tilak, Aiyangar & Co., nor yet for the 
comprehensive penetration of Subba Eow or 
the metaphysical acumen of the Dreamer. 
This thesis will introduce him to a very different 
and far more enraptured scene, — a scene where 
the eye, tired and aching wdth the lurid glow and 
galvanic vibrations of a splendid but rapidly 
revolving Cinema, finds relief and rest in the 
cool and gentle radiance of the moon as she 
reposes meditatively on the green banks and 
soft-hued beds of sweet scented flowers in the 
garden of Paradise. For, the author is no mean 
denizen of this gross planet, but a rover of 
empyrean space, a dweller on “the floor of 
heaven thick inlaid with patines of bright gold”, 
and is thus able to. shed on us the mellowed light 
which his Bhakti and Vairagya have distille4 
from those resplendent spheres. His whole 
career has been an assiduous preparation for 
this delightful service, which h« joyously renders 



vii 

to all sincere seekers of eternal verities and the 
life immortal. 

A glance at the self-imposed hardship and 
discipline of that uncommon career will be both 
interesting and profitable to the reader as shew- 
ing the rugged path that the disciple or volun- 
tary servant of God and man has to tread in 
order that he may evolve the qualities essen- 
tial for the efficient discharge of the benevolent 
yet humble duties, and the grave yet fascinating 
responsibilities of his pious office. Born in 
August, 1859, of a high Brahman family with 
the pride of blue-blood running in his veins, 
at South Canara, which even now is a strong- 
hold of formal orthodoxy, hemmed in and fet- 
tered by all the cramping traditions and blinding 
superstitions of that dark epoch of Indian his- 
tory, Pandit Bhawani Shanker, at the early age 
of 20, burst through the shackles of pride and 
prejudice alike, and joined the T. S. in March, 
1880, when that obscure body was as much 
under a priestly as under a political ban, with 
the prowess and valour of a young Hercules, 
battling against a whole regiment of barbarous 
troops bent upon strangling it in its infancy. 



At this critical juncture when darkness impene- 
trable brooded over its horizon, our dauntless 
but unassuming Pandit, following solely the 
lead of the star shining within him, not merely 
threw in his lot with the friendless and sus- 
piciously eyed, yet withal sanguine and redoubt- 
able founders of this meteoric society, but 
regardless of all personal consequences tore 
himself off from the afiectionate arms of mother, 
wife and sister, and all the ties of flesh and blood 
— so that the very dawn of the year 1881 found 
him gladly exchanging the pleasant insouciance, 
the safe harbourage of home and hearth for 
the privations and austerities of an ascetic, 
and placing himself under the tutelage and 
training of no less exacting a monitor than that 
strangely complex and mysterious apostle of 
Theosophy, H.P.B. herself. 

For four good years, with promise of no 
reward save the privilege of serving, he submit- 
ted without the faintest grumble to all the 
tests and ordeals of a neophyte, and coming 
out immaculate therefrom, was with fire and 
water tempered and moulded by her masterly 
hand into the purity and elasticity of a disciple. 



is 


So well did he stand all these severe trials and 
90 completely did he surrender himself to her 
modelling that in no time he won her motherly 
love, was allowed glimpses of the Masters, and 
trusted with communications from Them. 
Later on, when H.P.B. departed from India he 
was initiated into some of the hidden laws and 
secret practices of Raj a- Yoga by the famous 
mystic, Subba Row. 

Thus armed and equipped he was sent out 
to inspect and instruct, and much more to enliven 
and enhearten the comparatively few branches 
of the T. S. that were then scattered over the 
country. It was in the course of perhaps his 
second inspection tour that I came across him 
early in January, 1885, and at once conceived 
and sealed a friendship that has grown deeper 
and more intimate with every year, and has 
never known a shadow, but always yielded the 
purest joy and is replete with the most delicious 
reminiscences. So child-like in his simplicity, 
so unconscious of his spiritual development, so 
warm in his selfless aSection and sympathy, 
so ardent in his zeal for true Theosophy, so 
fervid in his devotion to the great Teachers, 



X 


to know him was to love him, and to pass 
a few days in his holy company under the spark- 
ling sunshine of his smiling eyes and lips, in 
the fragrant aroma of his saintly and celibate 
life was to be suffused with a subtle intoxic- 
ation of exalted enthusiasm and transported 
into the iridescent realm of peace ineffable ! 
Oh ! the ecstasy of the weeks we first spent with 
him from mystic twilight to romantic eve, diving 
lustily into the glorious mysteries of Brahraa- 
vidya, eagerly exploring the domains of philcso- 
phy, chanting rapturous hymns to the Masters ! 
We lived as it were the very life of the verse : 

nrww \ 

Our feet scarcely touched the earth ; our souls 
floated along in an Elysian dream-land ! 

Thirty long years he has worked in this 
way, enlightening many minds, gladdening many 
hearts, and above all, uplifting many souls 
throughout the length and breadth of this vast 
peninsula with never a thought of himself 
with never a complaint of any kind o n his lips 
but ever in contemplation raised from the sacred 



XI 


presence of the Masters to the adored lotus-feet 
of the Lord ! Bird’s-eye views of the range 
covered and impression left by him have been 
sketched in the annual Reports of the Society’s 
Convention. He has revelled all his life in 
the study of the Gita and the Upanishads, not 
in mere intellectual reflection, but in devouring 
with his whole self and being, the inmost spirit 
of those sacred scriptures. And these sermons 
are but faint echoes of the divine voice ringing 
inside the core of this devout aspirant, and re* 
dolent of the profoimd serenity and veneration of 
his noble and illuminated soul. They reverently 
touch upon that wonderful feature of the (rita 
which brings home to the readers’ mind that, 
to use the inspired speaker’s own words, “it 
is the concentrated essence of the highest teach- 
ing and tho^ight that is capable of appreciation 
bv man”, that “it is the book of life and em- 
braces in its majestic sweep all phases of life”, 
that it is, I may add, the song of songs— a 
hallelujah of symphony and seraphic choir ! 

Chowkhamba, UrfiNDRA Nath Basu. 
Benares City. 



PREFACE. 


Pandit Bhawanisankar visited Calcutta in 
March, 1914, and delivered a series of 8 lectures 
expounding the 4th discourse of the Gita. The 
lectures were on the following subjects: (1) 
The place of Gnanyoga in the Gita (2) The Pedi- 
gree of the Yoga (3) The doctrine of Avatar (4) 
Jnanyoga as the means to Moksha (5) Prav- 
ritti Marga, Action and Inaction (6) Characteris- 
tics of a Sage (7) Action-sacrifice and wisdom- 
sacrifice (8) The Surest way to Moksha. These 
lectures which were open to all were delivered 
in the palatial residence of Kumar Narendranath 
Mittra. Invitations were issued to those who 
were known to be interested in the study of the 
Git4 and ancient religions and philosophies.. 
The audience numbered about 50 who regularly 
^tt^ndcd the series, following the lecturer keenly 



day by day as he expounded the priceless truths 
contained in the Gita. 

Pandit Bhawanisankar has made the Git4 
his own, and he can expound, as few else can, 
the illumining and soul-satisfying teaching of 
that priceless scripture. It was indeed a relief 
in these days of irresponsible elocution and 
sickening sensationalism to listen to one who 
could strike the true spiritual note and touch 
with his 'moral ardour and devotional fire the 
eternal in us. The lectures gave a fresh in- 
centive to those who see the beauty of a life 
of devotion and renunciation, and humbly strive 
to realise it, and proved what was always felt 
that we want lecturers like Pandit Bhawani- 
shankar in Calcutta, who could quote chapter 
and verse from our own scriptures in support 
of his statements about the spiritual path. 
Calcutta is a very good field for workers like 
him and we wish that he would visit the place 
regularly every year. The substance of these 
lectures is given in the following pages. 






LECTURE I. 


^‘The place ok Jnanayoga in the Gita.” 

This is an introductory discourse which 
dwells not only on the sequential organic connec- 
tion between the disco utses of the Gita but also 
on the intimate connection of the Gita itself with 
the Mahabh^rata, in which Vyasa has set it 
in the most appropriate place. So, to under- 
stand the full teaching of the Gita it should not 
bo studied as detached from the Mahabharata. 
Now the Mahabharata is an Itihiisa, that is, 
a record of events that actually happened, 
deriving all their spiritual significance from the 
great Avatara who is the centre and life of the 
Itihasa. . It is an allegory as well, describing 
the stages of the path which the soul has to 
pass through on its way to emancipation. It 
is also called the fifth Veda, and it marks an 
epoch in the history of our Dharma. For, it 
was in Mahabharata that the great Vyasa 
presented the doctrine contained in the four 



2 


Vedas, giving this doctrine a turn with special 
reference to the great Avatar, round whom the 
chief interest of the Mahabharata centres. 
So, to appreciate fully the doctrine of the Gita, 
all these considerations should be borne in 
mind and it should be studied as part of, and 
as having intimate relation with the Mahabharata 
in the midst of which Vyasa has purposely 
placed it. Looking to the fourth discourse of 
the Gita which deals with Jnana-Yoga, we see 
how appropriately it comes after the first three 
discourses. The first discourse treats of Vishada 
which is also called Yoga, because it is not 
the passing despondency of the disappointed 
man but the deeper deadness felt in the heart, 
which leaves a permanent sense of unreality 
of the things seen and felt by the separative 
self, and which precedes the thirst of the soul 
for the real. And one of the names by which 
Arjuna is called is Nara. The first discourse 
vividly describes the position of the Jivatma as 
it enters the threshold of manhood after passing 
its stages of irresponsible childhood and of 
disciplined youth (the discipline imposed from 
outside by the Shastras and Acharyas). Arjuna 
has controlled the senses and the mind and has 



s 


built up a strong centre of individual eonsdouB' 
ness. But the utter unreality of the external, he 
has still to learn. He has not as yet killed what 
in the “Voice of the Silence” is called the Rkjk 
of the senses, the “slayer of the real”, and deep 
despondency possesses his mind when at last 
he has to pass through the experience. He is 
now called upon not only to kill the 1 1 Akshou- 
Hinis of kinsmen formed of his five senses and 
Six passions (Kama, Krodha &c.) but to slay 
even the Dharmacharyas to whom he was look- 
ing up hitherto for guidance. When the necessity 
arises for such action his whole existence seems 
to Arjuna to have dissolved into nothingness, 
and in one word the Lord conveys to him the 
teaching at this critical juncture. ‘A Pandita, 
oh Arjuna, neither grieves for the dead nor for 
the living.” That is how the teaching com- 
mences in the second discourse which is called 
Sankhya-yoga. A Pandita is he who knows 
the htman, the real as distinguished from the 
false, the permanent from the fleeting. 

The second discourse begins with the 
analysis of man. It shows that man Is not hie 
body, because though the body undergoes 



4 


changes, the sense of self is untouched by them. 
Similarly are pleasure and pain which are neither 
in the senses themselves nor in the external 
objects but are at the points of contact of senses 
and thfeir objects and are therefore imper- 
manent and changing. Amidst this flux and 
change, the self alone is changeless and per- 
manent and because it is so, it is the only reality. 
“For, the unreal existeth not, nor can the real 
ever cease to be.” Thus should the aspirant 
dissociate himself from his body and the sen- 
sations and feelings, and with reason so purified 
realise the self within himself, the self “whom 
weapons cleave not, nor fire burns, nor water 
wets, nor wind dries, the unperceivable, the 
unthinkable and the unchangeable self.” If 
the aspirant is not capable of thus realising the 
self, let him follow Buddhi-yoga. Let him do 
his work casting off attachment, balanced in 
mind whether success or failure falls to his lot. 
By thus giving up the desire for Phalam (fruit) 
and balancing himself under all ups and downs 
of life he will attain to that disciplined and 
one-pointed reason by which he will realise 
the self. He will realise that he is distinct from 
his sensations and perceptions and from feelings 



6 


and emotions, and that pleasures and pains and 
joys and sorrows by which he was measuring 
his life till now, touch not the inner serenity, 
the harmony of the self. Shri Shankaracharya’s 
definition of “phalam” is specially noteworthy : 
“phalgutaya layam adarshanam gachhajtiti pha- 
lam.” Phalam (fruit) implies something that 
vanishes, something unsubstantial. 

For such a Sankhya-yogi, he who has 
realised the harmony of the inner self. Karma 
apparently seems to have no application. Yet 
it is not so. His very knowledge makes him a 
more responsible person. Though he has no 
object to gain by Karma, still to set a good 
example to the ignorant, he must engage himself 
in it. Karma includes not only bodily but 
mental action as well, and as there is no escape 
from Karma for the ignorant it shoxild be well 
directed for the benefit of the World. Nor can 
it be said that after realising his inner self the 
aspirant’s goal is reached. The harmony that 
he has attained is still of the separative self 
depending on the background of the not-self 
for its existence. He must now learn that the 
not-self which he had so long discarded and flung 



6 


&wa7 from himself is not an alien to, but a mani^ 
festation, as his own self is, of the transcendent 
self, the fount of all reality (the light of Ishwara). 
The harmony which he had gained within, must 
now be realised outside as well. So, in the 
**Voice of the Silence” it is taught: “In order 
to become the knower of All self, thou hast, first, 
of self to be the knower. To reach the know- 
ledge of that self thou hast to give up self to 
not-self, being to non-being”. Further, the 
only Mukti worth striving for, is the mergence 
of the individual self into Ishwara through the 
light of Ishwara. And when Bhagvan Himself, 
the Ishwara, comes down and engages Himself 
in action, turns the wheel of life for the good 
of the world, how can the aspirant follow a 
difierent course ? When the aspirant has 
realised the inner harmony of the Jivatma in 
himself, which is the object of Slinkhya-yogs> 
and further, carried it jnto the outer world in 
action also, for which Karma-yoga is enjoined 
in the 3rd discourse, he becomes fit for receiving 
the illumination through the light of Ishwara 
which unifies the self and not-self. Hence 
Jnhna-yoga follows the Shnkhya and Karma 
Yogas in the 6tth. 



7 


LECTURE il. 

The Pedigree op Jnanayoga. 

We have this pedigree given in the first 
sloka of the 4th discourse of the Gita. Bhag- 
wan says: — “I imparted this yoga toVivaswan ; 
Vivaswan imparted it to Manu and from Manu 
Ikshw^iku derived it.” Vivaswan is the sun, 
the Hiranyagarbha-Brahmk, the creator of our 
system. What Bhagwan means is that this 
Hiranyagarbha-Brahma created this world 
through the illumination derived from this Yoga. 
So did Manu create the human race with its 
help, and it was imparted to the Rajarshis like 
Ikshwaku that they may rule their subjects 
having the spiritual welfare of the race in view, 
enforcing conformity to the Pravritti Dharma 
of Varna and Ashrama and keeping the way 
open to the Nivritti Dharma of renunciation. 
The continuity of the tr^rdition of this supreme 
Yoga suffered a break for want of proper dis- 
ciples. For, when this Yoga falls into the hands 
of the weak who cannot control their minds and 
senses or of persons of Ahankara in whom the 
subtle desire for glory and power predominates, 
it decays. The Sloka does not however imply 



8 


tliat the Kshattriyas were the special teachers 
and preservers of the Yoga, for, far higher than 
the Bhjarshis are the Devarshis and Brahmarshis ; 
and there is the historical instance of Vish- 
w^mitra, a Eajarshi, who had to perform long 
and arduotis tapas for becoming a Brahmarshi. 
One important point needs to be emphasised 
in connection with this Sloka, and it is this : 
The brotherhood of adepts or Jivanmnktas 
is as strictly a product of Nature as a tree. It 
has definite and indispensable purpose and 
function in the development of the human race, 
and this function is to keep open the upward 
path through which descend light and leading. 
If on account of increa.se of materialism and 
Adharma, this spiritual connection stops, then 
Bhagvkn Himself takes up the work of the 
brotherhood and provides for the spiritual 
welfare of humanity. “This ancient Yoga has 
to-day been impartec^ to thee by me for thou 
art my devotee and friend ; and this is the 
supreme secret”, so runs the next Sloka. The 
qualifications of Arjuna to be the recipient of 
this supreme secret were that he was both 
a devotee and a friend of Bhagwkn. And 
here let us dwell on the Nava-vidha Bhakti. 



9 


This Nava-viclha Bhakti is not the nine ways of 
devotion — each sufficient in itself but the nine 
stages of the devotee. Reference to the differ- 
ent Slokas in the Gita on this point itself will 
show how one stage comes after the other as a 
natural sequence ; and the Lord’s reference 
specially to the eighth stage of it viz. of Sakhya- 
t^ or friendship, is very significant. Devotion 
to Bhagvan begins when a man acquires the 
control of his senses and mind by following the 
Pravritti Marga according to the injunctions of 
Shastras, and fired by the desire of knowing 
the truth he studies deeply the scriptures. 
WTiere there is this soul-hunger, comes devotion. 
The first stage is called Shravana, because the 
soul is now eager to hear of Bhagvan, and in 
listening to His glories it rejoices ; the second 
stage, Kirtana, is reached when filled with the 
joy it begins to participate it with kindred souls, 
for, out of the fulness of the devotee’s heart his 
mouth speaketh. The third stage is called the 
stage of Smaranam, brooding, when the mind 
always loves to dwell upon Bhagvan ; and then 
comes the fourth stage Padasevana, when his 
love grows deeper, and not satisfied with merely 
brooding on the Lord he seeks to feel his 



10 


solidarity with Him and clings to His blessed 
feet from which flow peace and bliss. Here the 
Bhakta feels the first thrills of the divine life, 
and with it grows his thirst for losing himself 
in that life ; and the fifth stage of Archana 
is reached, when in the deep meditation of 
Bhagwan he forgets himself, and as he continues 
in this stage and when Bhagvan is become en- 
throned in his heart more and more fully, he pas- 
ses into the sixth stage of Yandanam, where 
he feels the presence of the Lord everywhere 
and in everything and like Arjuna begins to 
prostrate before all things both animate and 
inanimate, and when divine life is felt every- 
where and in everything the seventh stage of 
Dasya naturally follows, in which whatever the 
bhakta does, he does it as the servant of Bhagvan, 
keeping Him always as the supreme goal of his 
life. The distance and the dual sense implied in 
this stage of servant and master in course of time 
wears off and the eighth stage of Sakhyata 
or friendship is reached where oneness of the 
devotee with Bhagvan predominates. The 
tradition that Shri Krishna and Arjuna were 
of equal stature seems to have some allegorical 
significance. At this stage the devotee grows 



11 


like unto the object of his devotion ‘just as 
the form to which the clay is modelled is, first 
united with the potter’s mind’, and the devotee 
becomes fit to receive the supreme Yoga, as 
Arjuna as Sakha and Bhakta of Bhagvan was, 
as stated in the Sloka. There is not still the 
complete unity, the thorough oneness which 
is reached at the ninth stage of Atma- 
nivedana when the Bhakta disappears and 
Bhagvin becomes all in all (Vide 73 Sloka of 

Chap : XVIII). \ 

Tra n Arjuna said : “Destroyed is delusion, and I 
have gained recognition through Thy Grace. 0 
Achyuta, I am firm, with doubts gone. I will 
do Thy word.” It is the final surrender of the 
devotee’s self to Bhagvan absolutely and un- 
conditionally. Thus is devotion the potent 
power that leads to and makes possible the utter 
self-renunciation and self-surrender which are 
the only means for receiving spiritual illumina- 
tion. 



LECTURE III. 


The doctrine op avataras. 

The Avatara is one of the most abstruse 
truths of Hinduisrn as it is of Brahma-vidya. 
To have even a very faint idea of the great 
truth it is necessary to know what real spiri- 
tuality is, to have some notion of the spiritual 
ideal of adcptship or Jivanmukti. It is truly 
said that even in this proud age of intellect 
very few can form a correct conception of a 
Jivanmukta. I may here lightly touch upon 
the preparatory qualifications the aspirant for 
spiritual life should acquire. By Karma-marga, 
that is, disinterested performance of religious 
and secular duties, he should control his body, 
subdue his senses, and purify his mind. He 
should strive for the control and concentration 
of mind by Abhyfisa, that is, by practice ; for 
this purpose he should have some fixed time 
in the morning and evening, when he should 
withdraw his mind from all external objects 
and learn to retire within himself. By follow- 
ing this practice regularly he gains habitual 
control of his mind which enables him to 



13 


discharge his duties more effectually and also 
acquire the power of concentration which is so 
essential for deep study and devotion as well. 
The third qualification he should acquire, . is 
by study and deep thinking. He should regu- 
larly study the scriptures, and by deep think- 
ing and cogitation on the profound truths dealt 
with therein, he should develop tl^e penetra- 
tive intellect which can intuite the spiritual 
truths which lie embedded under the apparent 
tangle of scriptural contradictions. By follow- 
ing this Jnanamarga his intellect perceives 
the nature of his own self, its connection with 
Ishwara and the important place of the Guru 
in the pilgrimage of the Jivatma, and as this 
intellectual conviction grows deeper and gains 
strength he begins to offer himself to his 
Gurudeva and Ishta-Deva, and as he surrenders 
himself, he begins to feel the inner peace and 
joy which gradually transform his conviction 
into faith and his intellectual perceptions intb 
self-feeling wherewith true devotion begins. 
By following this fourfold discipline inculcated 
in the four margas of Karma, Abhyasa, Jn&na 
and Bhakti, he in course of time acquires the 
qualifications necessary for a disciple. He 



14 


has developed the physical, astral and causal 
centres and has learnt to surrender them to 
his Guru-Deva and at the proper time receives 
his first initiation. It takes place, as H. P. B. 
says in the “Voice of the Silence”, neither in 
the physical body which she calls the hall of 
ignorance, nor in the astral body Avhich is called 
by her the hall of learning, but it is in the 
Karana-sharira, the hall of wisdom, in his own 
Hridaya (heart), that the disciple sees Him for 
the first time whose life and peace he was so 
long feeling in his heart. Therefore does the 
“Voice of the Silence” teach the aspirant : “Seek 
for Him who is to give thee birth in the hall 
of wisdom”. What hapj)ens is that both the 
physical and astral bodies fall in trance and the 
disciple is in his Karana-sharira, that is, in his 
heart he sees his Guru-Deva, and in the heart 

of his Guru-Deva he sees his Ishtadeva, The 

* 

Ishwara. The Guru-Deva transanits to him the 
life of Ishwara, the only true life, —The Self, 
of which the M^indukya-Upanishad in the 7 th 
sloka speaks as being “shantam, shivam and 
adwaitam. .sa Atma”, peace, bliss and unity, — 
The Mystic Consciousness wherein as in the 
Words of the 29th sloka of the 6th discourse of 



15. 


the Gita “he sees the self abiding in all beings 
and all beings abiding in the self, and sees the 
same everywhere.” 

The unreal life of the false separative self 
with its triple consciousness — the seer, the seeing 
and the seen, falls loosened from him and he 
is awakened in the region of the real. The 
69th verse of Chap. II. of the Gita referring 
to this state truly says, “when it is night to 
all beings the sage is awake and where all beings 
are awake the sage is asleep.” And Shri 
Shankarach&,rya commenting on this Sloka says, 
“To all beings the supreme reality, that is, 
the Divine life, is night, and there, the initiate 
is now fully awake. When all beings are said 
to be awake, i.e., when all beings who in reality 
sleep in the night of ignorance, imbued with 
the distinct notions of perceiver and things 
perceived — that state is night in the eye of the 
Sage who knows the supreme reality”. He 
has realised the unity of life in his Karana- 
sharira and the eSect of this first initiation, 
on his physical ego, is that it becomes a mere 
reflection of the Divine life, in other words, 
his personality has been killed. N6t only has 



16 


his physical centre, ego, become a reflection 
of the life of Tshwara, but as a result of the 
Yoga-fire, the gross particles of his physical 
body have been purified and etherealised, 
making that body a vehicle refined enough for 
the functioning of the higher consciousness (see 
Swethashwetara-Upanishat. part 11. 12th and 
13th sloka). He realises that both his physical 
centre and the physical centre of the Cosmos 
are essentially one, expressions of the same 
Divine Life which expressing itself in them 
transcends both, and he begins to harmonise 
them. He therefore feels compassion for all 
beings (vide Gita VI. 32.) : ‘'Whoso by com- 
parison with ,himself, sees the same every- 
where, 0 Arjuna, be it pleasure or pain, he is 
deemed the highest Yogin”. This cosmic phy- 
sical centre is called in the Upanishads, Vaish- 
wanara and in the Gita, AdhibhUta and is the 
basis of all beings. He feels, both himself 
and the world outside him are but the expres- 
sions of the self-same life. He is therefore 
called a Parivrajaka, a wanderer, because he 
has now realised for the first time that his 
true home is Ishwara from whom he has been 
wandering away and on reaching whom his 



17 


heart is set. Of such an initiate does the 19 th 
sloka of the 1 2th chapter of the G!t& speak 
*‘he is one to whom censure and praise are 
equal, who is silent, content with anyt hing , 
homeless, steadyminded and full of devotiom 
‘‘Such a one,” Bhagw^n says, “is dear to Me”, 
He is silent because his heart is flowing with 
the peace and bliss of Bhagwan’s life, the only 
life he cares for. To hold forth astral peregri- 
nations and astral lectures as objects of spiritual 
endeavour and as credentials of initiation, is 
a perversion of the teachings of Brahma-vidyi. 
It is projecting into the higher regions the 
separative self of the lower, whereas, the true 
goal of a student of Brahmavidya should be 
the killing of the false and separative self with 
the help of the life from on high, the life of 
Ishwara, the one centripetal force in the Cosmos. 
Not to speak of astral world and swarga, even 
residence in Brahma-loka is not desirable for 
a man who cares for Swaswarupa-jnlmam, 
the knowledge of the Self — vide Git^i VIII. 16. 
The only object of the initiate is the religious 
enlightenment of the human race and a per- 
fectly unselfish, self-forgetting, self-annihila- 
ting devotion to that object, — a self abnegation 


3 



18 


which is not temporal and must have no end for 
ever, but is his only talisman of safety as it 
ought to be the only object of his life. For this 
purpose he need not scour the Lokas, for, from 
his own heart always flows a current of living 
moral and spiritual energy for the good of the 
three worlds, more potent and dynamic in 
its purifying and elevating effect than any 
number of lectures and orations whether on 
the physical or astral or some higher planes. 
This current of spiiitual energy flowing from 
the heart of every spiritual man increases in 
volume and force as he grows in devotion and 
self-renunciation. We are not left in doubt 
as to the marks of a real initiate. For, in the 
reply given by Bhagwan to Arjuna's query 
about the marks of a Sthita-prajna we have 
a definite and comprehensive reply. Sthita- 
prajna is one who has perceived the supreme 
reality (Brahman) as his self, according to Shri 
ShankarJicharya’s commentary. This descrip- 
tion is found in slokas 65, 56 & 57 of Chap. II. 
of the Gita. In the 55th sloka we are taught 
the state of the initiate when he is in Karana> 
sharira : “When the man is satisfied in the self 
alone by himself, casts ofl all the desires of 



19 


the mind, then he is said to be Sthita-prajna." 
In the next sloka is described his condition 
when he is in the Sukshma centre : “He, whose 
mind is not distressed in calamities, in whom 
all longings for pleasures are lost, from whom 
attachment, fear and wrath have passed away, 
is called Sthita-Prajna”. And how he de- 
ports when in physical consciousness, is told 
in the Sloka following the above. “He is 
Sthita-Prajna, who without attachment any- 
where, on meeting with anything good or bad, 
neither exults nor hates.” 

In course of time, as the initiate develops 
in an ever-increasing measure, devotion and 
self-surrender to his Gurudeva and Ishtadeva^ 
he receives his second initiation ; and just 
as, after the first initiation his physical ego 
becomes merely the reflection of the Divine 
life and his physical body purified and refined 
by the Yoga-fire becomes a vehicle fit for higher 
consciousness, similarly, as a result of the second 
initiation his astral body becomes a perfect 
mirror, reflecting merely the one life. In the 
“First steps in Occultism” H. P. B. well des. 
cribes his state. In him *the power of passions 



20 


is dead altogether and they have been crashed 
and annihilated in the retort of an unflinching 
will.’ In him “not only all the lust and longings 
of the flesh are dead but also the recognition 
of the personal self is killed out and the astral 
has been reduced in consequence to a cipher”. 
His astral ego is now but a reflection of the 
Divine life and he realises that his astral centre 
or ego and the corresponding cosmic centre 
are in essence one, both reflections of the one 
life, and his sense of separateness between the 
two falls off. This astral cosmic centre is called 
in the Mandukya-Upanishad *‘Taijasa'\ res- 
plendent centre, and in the GiU, Adhidaiva, 
the substratum of all the Devatas. The light 
of Ishwara which his Gurudeva had transmitted 
to him at the time of the first initiation has now 
by his profound devotion and renunciation 
been transmu-ted into electro-spiritual force 
which is called the higher Kundalini and rises 
upwards. It now rises from the heart into the 
head and there brings into full functioning 
aU the spiritual centres in the brain which 
upto now it was vivifying, and it passes onto 
what Shri Shankar^ch^rya calls theDhi-guh^, 
the cave of the intellect, the space between the 



21 


brows, and there electrifies Buddhi into a 
dynamic power resulting in spiritual clair- 
voyance. It then merges in the great Goddess 
seated in the centre of the full-blown Sahasr&ra 
(thousand-petalled lotus). And through these 
higher spiritual centres the initiate subdues 
and controls the lower Chakras. According 
to Hindu books of Yoga, there is in the brain 
the Sahasr^ra Chakram. “It is an unopened 
bud in the ordinary mortal and just as the lotus 
opens its petals and expands in all its bloom 
and beauty when the sun rises above the horizon 
and sheds his rays on the flower, so does the 
Sahasraram of the neophyte open and expand 
when Ishwara begins to pour His life into its 
centre. When fully expanded, it becomes the 
glorious seat of the Devi (Daivi-prakriti), and 
sitting on this flower the great Goddess pours 
out the waters of life and grace for the grati- 
fication and regeneration of the human 
soul”. 

H.F.B. refers to this spiritualjprocess in the 
following passage in ;the “Voice of the Silence” 
and in her notes thereon. “Let not thy heaven- 
born merged in the sea of Mkyk, break from 



22 


tbe univeisal parent (soul), but let the fiery 
power retire into the inmost chamber, the 
chamber of the heart and the abode of the 
world’s mother. Then firom the heart that 
power shall rise into the sixth, the middle 
region, the place between thine eyes, when it 
becomes the breath of the One-Soul, the voice 
which filleth all, thy Master’s Voice.” In 
her note on the words “power” and the 
“world mother” in the above passage she says, 
“these are names given to Kundalini — one of 
the mystic Yogi-powers. It is Buddhi consi- 
sidered as an active instead of a passive prin< 

ciple ” Thus the electro-spiritual force 

called Kundalini is the result of the spiritual 
development of man and has nothing to do 
with physical and mechanical processes. But 
there is the lower Kundalini also, seated in the 
Muladld^ra Chakra, at the base of the spine, 
which Hata-yogis try to awaken by Prknhykma 
(restraint of breath). It is a dangerous process 
and has nothing to do with spirituality. There 
is another set of teachers who, by external 
stimuli such as crystal gazing, and focussing the 
attention and gaze on the Chakra between 
the eye-brows, advocate the development of 



23 


clairvoyance, psychic vision, which is quite 
distinct from spiritual clairvoyance. The tiny 
serpent seen in this Chakram by the psychic 
is not the real spiritual power called Kundalini. 
The psychic sees different objects in a finer 
world just as we see here the physical objects, 
but there is in him the sense of separateness 
as deep, if not deeper, as in the ordinary man> 
and he accentuates this separateness by sett- 
ing his false and petty self against the surround- 
ings, and striving for domination over them. 
This is a process, the reverse of spiritual, a pro- 
jection of the lower and false into the higher 
and the real. Saints and sages have time and 
oft taught, distinguishing real- spirituality from 
these artificial methods which are prompted by 
the thirst for power and Siddhis. Thus the 
great sage Jnaneshwara in his “Dwadashakshari 
(the well-known twelve syllabled ra9,ntra) 
Abhanga” says : “Awakening the serpent by 
the control of the nine gates and passing it 
through Sushumna which is one of the three 
Nkdis, such is not, say the Munis, the path. 
The fount of liberation is in ceaseless con- 
templation of Nara-Hari.” Similarly does 
Machhendra teach his disciple Gorakh while 



24 


tellmg him the real qualifications of a Chela ; 

mfi»% BUT tlurm ^ ftt i 
Btfr urunt unBi% Bfr ubt i 

‘‘Arousing the Kundalini and forcing it 
up to the Brahmarandhia (the crown of the head) 
and thus acquiring the power of walking on 
water and of prophecy, do not constitute a 
spiritual man — such is not fit to be a CheU.” 

Real spiritual clairvoyance develops in 
the initiate as naturally, as a bud at its proper 
time blooms into a flower. It is vision and 
feeling blended into one wherein the separate- 
ness of the seer, the seeing and the seen, is alto- 
gether absent. It is this spiritual clairvoyance 
that Shri Shankar&oh&iya refers to in the 
following ^oka in the Aparoksh&nubhooti. 

fwrot UT trtw i 
ui^niT ^ n 

“Vision is to be concentrated there where 
the triad — the seer, the sight and the seen, 
vanishes, and not on the base of the nose 
(Agneya-chakra).” 



As a result of his harmouising his astral 
centre with the Adhidaiva centre, the basis 
of all devatas, through the higher Kundalini, 
he sees the hierarchies of cosmic intelligences, 
the Devas, and realises them and himself as 
essentially one being, — expressions of the one 
Divine life which, expressing Itself in all these 
and in himself, transcends all and remains 
itself. He has now all the great higher Siddhis 
which are not so much control acquired over 
something outside, but knowledge realised, of 
the inwardness of cosmic processes, — ^the ex- 
pansion of his Buddhi into the cosmic Buddhi. 
With the possession of all these Siddhis the out- 
standing characteristic of the initiate now is 
his utter humility. His Abhim^na, thirst for 
individual power and glory, has vanished. He 
is therefore called a Kuteechaka, one who 
resides in a humble hut of leaves. He has now 
that power which enables him to appear as 
nothing in the eyes of men. “Be humble, if 
thou wouldst attain to wisdom ; be humbler 
still when wisdom thou hast mastered.” 

Then comes his third initiation, and to 
understand the significance of it, even faintly, 



26 


it is necessary to know something about the 
unfolding of the Jivatmh. The Jivhtmh is 
called in our scriptures Hamsa. Hamsa is a 
bird which is known to possess the peculiar 
power of separating ojff pure milk from a mixture 
of milk and water, and Jivhtmh is called a 
Hamsa, because, it, like the bird of the namei 
has the power of discriminating the real from 
the unreal in Samshra which is a combination 
of both. Up till now this Hamsa, that is 
JivMma, had fed itself on the very cream of 
the best and noblest experience gained in in* 
numerable lives. Even at the time of the first 
initiation, the initiate has realised that the 
real self is the Divine Life which transcends 
the self of the Jivatmi. But now as a result 
of further spiritual progress he realises more 
deeply than before the utter unreality of this 
individuality, that it is a thing “which he has 
created with pain for his own use and by means 
of which he purposes to reach to the Life be- 
yond individuality.” He now retires deeper 
within and approaches the sanctuary of the Self 
nearer than ever before and is realising in a 
greater and fuller measure the peace and bliss 
of the one life. This further spiritual progress 



27 


that he has made and which enables him to 
go through the third initiation, involves the 
spiritual transformation of his Karana-Sarira, 
which now becomes an upadhi of pure (Satwic) 
Akhsha. His spiritual ego, the centre of Karana* 
sarira, which at this stage is called Prajna in 
Mhndukyopanishad is seen by him to be a 
mere reflection of divine light and now no more 
being limited by his Khrana-sarira, is realised 
as the cosmic centre of that plane, called Ish- 
wara in the Mandukyopanishad and Adhiyajna 
in Gitk ; and all the rich treasure of knowledge 
and experience gathered by him with pain and 
patience through innumerable lives, and of 
which his K^rana-sarira was built is now gladly 
sacrificed by him to Adhiyajna, and thus is 
increased the fund of cosmic intelligence work- 
ing for the uplifting of the race. He now sees 
that the end and consummation of all know- 
ledge, austerities and sacrifices is the Great 
Goddess, the divine light of Ishwara, at Whose 
Feet he now offers his individuality purified 
and ennobled by the virtuous Karma of a series 
of incarnations. At this stage he is called a 
Hamsa, that is, one who has realised that he 
and the cosmic centre of Adhiyajna are one. 



28 


Now he finds that all the six great Saktis which 
are developed in him are but the manifesta- 
tions of the one self, the Divine Life. These 
six Saktis are : (1), Jnana Sakti, ability to see 
the past and future ; (2), Ichh^ Sakti, the power 
of the will ; (3), Kriy^ Sakti, the mysterious 
power of thought which enables it to produce 
external perceptible and phenomenal results by 
its own inherent energy ; (4), M^trik^ Sakti, the 
power of letters and mantras ; (6) Par&, Sakti 
which includes the powers of light and heat ; 
(6) Kundalini Sakti already mentioned. He 
has now to fight the final struggle against flesh 
that will liberate him once and for ever from 
the bonds of matter, and pass the 4th initia- 
tion. He has now risen above the limitations 
of the three bodies, but he has still to cross 
the neutral barrier. He has to fasten the en- 
ergies of his soul on this supreme struggle. 
When the human monad is completely isolated 
from the three bodies — physical, astral and 
causal, it is as it were at a neutral point of con- 
sciousness and no consciousness is experienced 
by it. It is the Mah& Sushupti, and before the 
monad can be finally liberated, it should cross 
this neutral barrier. Bhagwhn refers to this 



29 


struggle when he says in the 14th Sloka of the 
7th chapter of the Gitk, “Hard is my divine 
Mkyk to surmount. Those who seek Me alone 
pass over this Maya.” The result of this last 
struggle, that is, success or defeat in it, entirely 
depends upon the latent energy of the Jiv^tm^i 
resulting from devotion to Ishwara, its pre- 
vious training and past Karma. It is the real 
Kurukshetra for the Jivatm^ where it hears 
in full the song of life, — ^Mahashmashana, the 
great burning ground, where it hears the voice 
of the cosmic deep and where Ahamkara is 
reduced to ashes. It is Mahashmashana be- 
cause it is the death of the individual man 
from whose ashes the regenerated man springs 
into existence electrified by the song of Life. 
If he has emerged from this final struggle 
triumphant, then he is a full-blown adept, a 
Jivanmukta, who has entirely merged himself 
in the One Life. He is now called a Farama- 
hamsa, that is, one who has realised “That”, 
that is, He the One Life and himself are one. 
He has become “Om” because “sa” and “ha” 
of “Soham” being eliminated in him, he re- 
mains only the “Om”. 



30 


Thus far we have the guidance of the 
M^ndukyopanishad, from stage to stage, in 
the spiritual progress of the Jiv^tma, till the 
liberated man has triumphed over all the 
bonds of matter. He is now a Jivanmukta, 
for whom Sams&ra can weave no illusion, and 
nature holds no secret. He has crossed the 
ocean of Miiya and has fully entered the divine 
light. Even for him there stretch forth fur- 
ther vistas of progress. Saith the “Light on 
the Path” : “For within you is the light of 
the world, the only light that can be shed on 
the path. If you are unable to perceive it 
within you it is useless to look for it elsewhere. 
It is beyond you because when you reach it you 
have lost yourself . It is unattainable because 
it for ever recedes. You will enter the light 
but you will never touch the Flame”. The 
further stages of progress hinted at in this 
passage are also referred to in the Hindu scrip- 
tures which darkly hint at five further stages 
of spiritual height. They involve the most 
arduous Tapas out of all human experience 
and utterly beyond human perception or ima- 
gination. In enumerating the four classes of 
His devotees in the 16th verse of the 7th Chapter 



31 


of the Gita, Bhagawan includes the Jnanin as 
one of those four classes of Bhaktas, and in 
the following 17 th and 18 th verses Bhagawan 
says “among these four classes of Bhaktas, 
who are all noble, the Jn&nin surpasseth all, 
for he is My very Self ; as steadfast in mind, 
he resorts to Me alone as the unsurpassed goal” ; 
and in the following verse, the 19th, Bhagwan 
says, “at the end of many births the Jnani 
comes to Me, realising that Vasudeva is the all ; 
he is the Mahitman, very hard to find”. Again 
in the third verse of the same Chapter of the 
Gita we have the following statement. Bhag- 
wan says, “among thousands of men one per- 
chance strives for perfection ; even among 
those who strive and are perfect only one 
perchance knows Me in truth.” Thus, the 
teaching of the Git^ is clear and points out 
that even after the man has fully entered 
the light and become a Jivanmukta, it is 
possible for him further spiritual heights to 
attain. He has entered the light, but he has 
not merged himself in the divine centre, the 
spiritual sun from whom this light emanates. 
Bhagwan says that even among Mahitm^ one 
who has attained this condition is very hard 



32 


to find. Now turn to the 50th verse of the 
18th chapter of the Gita. The Lord says, 
“How he who has attained perfection reaches 
Brahman, that in brief, do thou learn from me, 
0 son of Kunti, — that supreme consumma- 
tion of knowledge” and in the following five 
verses is treated the ParJibhakti possible only 
to the Jn^lni, by means of which he enters 
Bhagwan and becomes Brahman. Thus run 
these' verses: “Endued with pure reason, con- 
trolling the self with firmness, abandoning sound 
and other objects, laying aside love and hatred, 
resorting to a sequestered spot, eating but little, 
speech and body and mind subdued, always 
engaged in meditation and concentration, en- 
dued withdispassion, having abandoned egotism, 
violence, arrogance, desire, enmity, property, and 
free from the notion of ‘mine’ and being peace- 
ful, he is fit for becoming Brahman. Becoming 
Brahman of serene self, he neither grieves nor 
desires; treating all beings alike, he attains 
supreme devotion to Me. By devotion he 
knows Me in truth, what and who I am ; then 
knowing Me in truth he forthwith enters into 
Me”. Add to this the 4th verse in chapter 
12th referring to this same slate: “Having 



33 


restrained all senses, always equanimous, 
devoted to the welfare of all beings they 
reach Myself (the central spiritual Sun, the 
highest goal).” At the fourth initiation he 
had become a Jivanmukta who has triumphed 
over all matter, one who has liberated himself 
from all bonds of Samsara. He had then fully 
entered the divine light, the veil of Ishwara 
the veil of light through which Ishwara mani- 
fests Himself to the highest spiritual percep- 
tion of a human being. Shri Shankar&chS-rya 
in his “Soundaryalahari” addressing this light 
says, “Thou art the body of Shambhu.” The 
light is, as it were, a cloak or a mask with 
which Ishwara is enabled to make His appear- 
ance. But Ishwara, the real centre of light, is 
not visible even to the highest spiritual per- 
ception of man. Hence in the above quoted 
passage in the “Ligtht on the Path'' it is said, 
“you will enter the light but you will never 
touch the flame.” The goal of Parabhakti, 
which is only possible for a Jnani, is the merging 
into this centre of light, Ishwara, the highest 
goal of spiritual endeavour. This mergence 
of the Jivanmukta into Ishwara may be likened 
to what may happen in the case of the aim when 


4 * 



31 


a comet falls upon it; there is in the case of 
the sun an accession of heat and light ; so 
also, whenever any particular individual reaches 
the highest state of spiritual culture, develops 
in himself all the virtues that alone entitle 
him to a union with Ishwara and finally unites 
his soul with Ishv/ara, there is, as it were, a 
sort of reaction emanating from Ishwara for 
the good of humanity ; and in particular cases 
an impulse is generated in Ishwara to incarnate 
for the«good of humanity. This is the highest 
consummation of human aspiration and end- 
eavour. Even in the earlier stages of his 
spiritual life, an aspirant for the higher life 
becomes a participator of the grand silent 
work in the spiritual enlightenment of his 
race, — the current of the living moral and spiri- 
tual energy flowing from his heart being his 
humble contribution. As he progresses on the 
path his contribution increases till by incon- 
ceivably ardous tapas and renunciation he 
succeeds in bringing down the great Ishwara 
Himself to do this work. This is one aspect 
of the doctrine about Avatara. The subject 
is a profound one and touches one of the most 
jealously guarded secrets of Brahma-Vidyli. 



35 


If the latter-day Theosophical teachers had even 
but the faintest idea of the sanctity and solem- 
nity of the subject we would have been spared 
so much blasphemous talk of preparations 
for an Avatara and such flippant prattle about 
sacred things. We see the wisdom of the 
ancients in drawing the veil of secrecy on these 
high subjects for, when sacred things are 
bandied about, light-heartedly, spiritual de- 
gradation is the result. 

The very word Avatara implies a coming 
down. Viewed from the point of view of the 
Jivaniuukia it is a gradual ascent and the final 
absorption of the human soul into Ishwara, 
but from the stand-point of Ishwara it is a 
coming down of Bhagwan to the plane of 
Jivatma. Ishwara therefore is not a result 
of evolution, but One who makes evolution 
possible. Hence Bhagwan says, in the 6th verse 
of the 4th Chapter, “Though I am unborn, 
of imperishable nature, and though I am the 
Lord of all beings, yet controlling my own 
nature, I take birth through the instrumentality 
of my Miya.” Bhagwan controls his Prakriti 
having three qualities and through the instru- 



36 


mentality of His light, His Yogamay^, He in- 
carnates Himself. Further, in the 7th and 8th 
verses of the 4th Chapter of the Gita, we are 
given not only the time of his coming down 
but also the reason for it. “Whenever there 
is decay of Dharma, that is, religion, and as- 
cendancy of irreligion, then I manifest myself. 
For the protection of the good, for the destruc- 
tion of evil-doers, and for the firm establish- 
ment of religion I am born in every Yuga.” 
If Bhagwan appears as an Avatar at such long 
intervals as is implied by this verse, His Ava- 
taras will not be many, at least so far as our 
humanity is concerned. Tn fact we know 
only of two previous hdraan Avataras, viz : 
of Parashurama, and nf Shri Ramchandra. 
Even supposing that Bhagwan manifested Him- 
self in lands other than our own, His Avataras 
cannot be many. How are we to explain 
then, the statement in the 6th verse— “Many 
births of Mine have passed as well as thine, 
0 Arjuna, all these I know, thou knowest 
them not, 0 harasser of foes”. The many 
births referred to in the verse, include not only 
His human AvaUras but also the many births 
of the great Jivanmukta who had absorbed 



37 


himself in Bhagwan and who, owing to the 
infinite love and compassion he had developed 
in himself for humanity, had generated 
an impulse in Isliwara to incarnate Himself 
for the good of tlie human race. 


LECTURE EV. 

Jnanayoga. 

This yoga is the only means to Moksha 
and has bearing on the 9th and 10th verses 
of the 4th Chapter of the Gita. If Moksha 
means immortality, immortality is not pos- 
sible of attainment even if you reach Brahma- 
Loka, because, even Brahma-Loka dissolves 
at Pralaya, for in the 16th verse of the 8th 
Chapter, Bhagwan definitely says, ‘'All worlds 
including the world of BrahmA are subject 
to returning again, 0 Arjuna, but on reaching 
Me, 0 Son of Kunti, there is no birth,” Unless 
we reach Bhagwan there can be no immor- 
tality for us, and in the 9th and 10th verses 
Bhagwan indicates the necessary conditions 



2S 


» 

for reaching Him, and of thus attaining Moksha. 
The words H^ga (passion), Bhaya (fear) and 
Krodha (anger) in the 10th verse have very deep 
significance ; they imply the limitations to al; 
human endeavours at attainment of liberation, 
when such endeavours take no cognisance of 
Bhagw&n. There are schools of philosophy 
which ignore altogether Tshwara and His Light 
in their speculations and expositions of the 
Universe and man, and which inculcate their 
special methods for attaining liberation. Now 
this verse points out that the highest and the 
most serious of such philosphies can help man 
at the best to realise only his individuality, 
his K&rana-Sharira-Self. By strict and rigid 
practice of the teaching of such a philosophy 
he can rise above the loves and hates, the am- 
bitions and desires, the passions and appetites 
of the average man; for, the Karana-Sarira-Self, 
the higher man, cannot be moved by the mo- 
tives and considerations which are the springs 
of actions of the lower self, the personality. 
Hence the petty desires and passions moving 
the personality are conquered. But that does 
not mean that these passions, fears, likes and 
dislikes have been thoroughly rooted out ; and 



39 


they cannot be eraclicatcJ unlens the sense 
of separateness is entirely got over. The 
Karana-Sarira-Self, great as it is, cofnpared 
to the personality, is still separative, and has 
therefore the higher equivalents of passion, 
fear and hate. What is then the Ilaga (passion) 
of such a philosopher ? By hard struggle 
and exertions he has built up his individuality 
and he is attached to the serenity and calm 
which he enjoys therein. With much patience 
and pain he has vrrought for himself a bed for 
repose which he does not like to quit. What 
then can be his Bhaya (fear) ? The fears of 
ordinary man have no sting for him. Even 
death has lost its power to terrorise him. Still 
he has fear, and it overpowers him when he 
attempts to rise above his Karana-Sarira. By 
his thinking and reasoning he sees the necessity 
for transcending his Kiarana-Sarira, but when 
he makes an attempt to leave it i e finds him- 
self lost as he loses his centre; and as in the case 
of the ordinary man when death overtakes 
him he is seized with terror, so, the philosopher 
feels perhaps a deeper terror when he leaves 
his Karana-Sarira. The reason is, that when 
isolated from its three bodies the Jivatm^ 



40 


passes into Maha-Sushupti, the neutral barrier, 
the Great Sunyam, which can only be passed 
through devotion to Bhagawan. Not, unless 
his Kik.rana-Sarira ego is surrendered to Bhaga- 
wan with deep devotion, and the Real Self, 
the One Life, is realised thereby, is it possible 
to cross this neutral barrier. Further wo have 
the word Krodha (hatred). Now to a philo- 
sopher it is his Not-Self that becomes his enemy. 
He has built up his individuality as against 
this Not-Self, and he feels himself secure, only 
so long as he can keep this Not-Self in subjec- 
tion. Hence there is a perpetual warfare 
between his Self and Not-Self. The only way 
of getting over these three impediments to 
liberation is through devotion and self-surrender 
to Bhagawan. When a philosopher having 
realised his individuality surrenders that in- 
dividuality to Bhagawhn, and thus, develops 
devotion to Him, then he in course of time 
attains the life beyond individuality, realising 
that the Light of Ishwara is the One Life, the 
One Transcendent Self ; and thus attains Wis- 
dom, Jnifna, which Shri Shankar^ch^rya in 
his commentary on this verse says is in itself 
tapas. Now this wisdom-tapas, the entering 



41 


of tlie Light of Ishwara, the realisation of 
the One Life, is the only purifier, because 
it alone can root out the attachment, fear and 
hatred referred to above. His attachment 
goes, because when he realises the One Life 
he realises its peace and bliss whether he is 
embodied or not and amidst all sorts of surround- 
ings which arc to him mere expressions of that 
Life. His fear goes, because once he has 
attained to the Light of Ishwara, the Life 
above individuality, he can cross the neutral 
barrier, for, now he hears the Song of Life 
and wakes up through the Grace of Bhagaw^n 
on the other side of the Cosmos, a regenerated 
man, a Jivanmukta. How then can the 
struggle between the Self and Not-Self remain 
where the very sense of separation between 
himself and his outside is rooted out and where 
Self and Not-Self are realised as expressions 
of the One Life, the only Reality, and in the 
place of his former aversion he feels divine love 
for all ? 



42 


LECTURE V. 

pR aveitti-Marg a . 

Tlie next five verses from the 11th to 15th 
deal with action and inaction. If Moksha 
can be attained by seeking Bhagwan alone, 
the highest goal, how is it, all men do not 
follow this course ; how is it that wc see such 
differences in men that while a very few are 
devoted to Him, a very large majority feel 
no attraction to tliis path ? Is the Lord then 
partial that on a very few only He bestows 
his very Self that is Mokslia, and on few others 
only devotion to Him, while a very large 
majority do not receive even that ? Such a 
question arises, and the 11th Verse gives a satis- 
factory reply, and removes the doubt about 
Bhagv^n’s strict impartiality. Saith the Lord, 
“Howsoever men approach Me, even so do I 
reward them ; My path do men follow in all 
things, 0 Son of Pritha”. He says that whatever 
paths men choose. He meets them there, be- 
cause all forms being filled with His life, all 
paths, are His. But men differ in their choice 
according to their Guna (nature). For, as the 



43 


12tli verse says, “They who long after success 
in actions sacrifice here to the gods ; for soon 
in this world of men success accrues from 
action”. The path leading to Moksha referred 
to in the 10th verse has no attraction for -the 
large majority, because it is an arduous path 
where tangible results are not secured imme- 
diately. Very few are the men who have the 
necessary patience and perseverance to under- 
take and carry on through innumerable lives 
the long and tedious process of self-purification 
and of surrendering the purified self toBhagvan, 
and to cling to Him alone for evermore. Our 
own observation confirms what Bhagavan says 
in the 3rd verse of the ‘ th chapter that scarcely 
one in a thousand strives for perfection. The 
reason is that the large majority of human beings 
are impelled by desires and seek the imme- 
diate fruition of their desires ; hence instead 
of turning their minds and hearts towards 
Bhagvan they worship the minor gods and 
reap according to their sowing. But Bhag- 
vlin’s divine dispensation seeks to provide 
even for these people, and for this purpose 
He says in the 13th verse that “The four- 
fold caste has been created by Me according 



44 


to the distribution of Guna and Karma, 
energies and actions ; though I am the Author 
thereof, know Me as Non- Agent and Immut- 
able”. The Sanskrit word for caste is Varna, 
not the outer colour of the physical body, 
but the colour of the subtler bodies, and the 
very word Varna implies that the four-fold 
caste is no artificial imposition on Man by some 
external authority. It finds its sanction in 
the very constitution of human nature. The 
One life is the light of Ishvara, and when it 
appears through the modifications of Prakriti 
and its Gunas, it appears as different 
colours, Vamas, with different Guna and 
Karma, energies and consequent actions. As 
Bhagavan says in the 40th verse of the 18th 
chapter, “There is no being on earth or 
among gods in heaven who is free from these 
three qualities of matter”, and further in the 
41st verse it is explained, “Of Brahmanas, 
Kshattriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras, O Paran- 
tapa, the duties have been distributed accord- 
ing to qualities born of their own natures.” 
Evolution itself implies different stages of 
growth. The duties of Brahamana, such as 
Mxenity, self-restraint, austerity, knowledge^ 



45 


etc. of Ksiiattriyas, such as prowess, firmness, 
splendour, not flying from battle,— of Vaishyas, 
such as ploughing, protection of kine and trade, 
—of Shudras, the duty of service, fit in with the 
tendencies developed in them through several 
previous births. The scriptures in pointing 
out these several duties as proper for respective 
castes simply reveal the workings of nature’s 
law, and thus giving man an insight into the 
workings, of Nature, help on liuman evolution. 
This four-fold caste with its specific duties 
attaching to each has been devised with the 
double view of ensuring prosperity on earth 
and of gradually leading man on to the path of 
renunciation. It is made attractive to the 
average man by the graduated scheme of re- 
wards (vide Apastamba Dharma Sutra 22-23), 
while the various restraints it imposes make for 
the control of body and senses and the starving 
out of the desire-nature. Moreover, as against 
the modern secular conception of Society as 
being a body politic, the basic idea on which 
the system is founded is a spiritual one in which 
the four castes are considered as forming so 
many limbs of the Purusha, the spiritual Being, 
Prajapati, (Vide Purusha-Sukta). The Bri- 



46 


hrnanas are ITLs mouth, the Kshattriyas are His 
arms, the Vaishyas His thighs and His feet 
are the Sudras. Here there is no question of 
great and small; all are parts of an organic whole, 
and all have to perform their proper functions 
to preserve the welfare of the whole. It made 
the mind familiar with the idea of all work 
being a sacrifice. The Brahmana does his work ! 
80 also the other castes do their works. It 
gave a spiritual direction to all work by holding 
prominently before men this idea of human 
solidarity and sacrifice. Strange as itmay seem, 
this institution of caste founded on the idea of 
a common spiritual origin pointed to an organic 
solidarity and spiritual unity of the race. 
Though the Colours (Varnas) are different from 
each other, the separative element was acci- 
dental, and in reality they are one in their origin, 
the Light. So viewed, the system induced in 
each a sense of duty irrespective of results and 
gradually paved the way for worshipping 
Bhagavhn through devotion to one’s duty 
referred to ' in the 46th verse of the 18th 
chapter : “Him from Whom is the evolution of 
all beings, by Whom all this is pervaded, — by 
worshipping Him with proper duty, man attains 



47 


perfection”. While the fostering of a sense of 
duty attenuates the personality and lifts motive 
out of personal inclination on to the impersonal 
idea of righteousness, the recognition of Bhaga- 
viin as the source of all Life and Dharma curbs 
the Ahankara involved in the separative sense 
of duty, and thus arc laid the sure foundations 
for the life of renunciation, and a hankering for 
liberation, Mumukshutva, is aroused. For action 
in which -attachment and Ahankara are absent 
does not bind. Thus, though Bhagavan in the 
13th verse says that the fourfold caste was 
created by Him, yet in the 14th verse it is 
said “Actions pollute Me not, nor have I a 
desire for the fruit of actions. He who knows 
Me thus is not bound by actions.” The Lord 
says : “Because I have no attachment, action 
does not bind Me.” Similarly if men perform 
action dispassionately and without Ahankara, 
such action will not bind them. Therefore 
proceeds the Lord in the 15th verse : “Thus 
knowing, men of old performed action in the 
hope of liberation; therefore, do thou also 
perform action as did the ancients in the olden 
time.” 



Action and Inaction. 


Why is a reference to the ancients made in 
the previous verse ? Because, as the following 
16th verse says, “What is action ? What is 
inaction 1 — As to this even the wise are deluded. 
I shall teach thee such action by knowing which 
thou shalt be liberated from evil.” Action and 
inaction are not so simple to understand rightly. 
Therefore says the 17th verse, “Thou hast to 
know something even of action, something of 
unlawful action and something of inaction ; 
hard to understand is the nature of action.” 
What then is the Mystery about Action and 
Inaction, on the right understanding of which 
a man is liberated from evil ? The next verse 
hints at this mystery. “He who can see inac- 
tion in action, who can alKo see action in in- 
action— he is wise among men, he is devout, he 
is the performer of all actions”. Bhagavan 
nowhere says that there is a short cut to li- 
beration. He leaves us in no doubt as to the 
high moral and spiritual qualifications necessary 
for an aspirant for Moksha. So insistent is He 
on this point that lest He should be misunder- 
stood, whenever He refers to the attainment of 



49 


Liberation, He invariably describes the marks 
of anch an individual — ^how he conducts himself 
and what moral equipment he should possess. 
Bearing all tliis in mind we shoTiid not lightly 
pass over the above three verses about action 
and inaction. The ultimate right realisation 
of the nature of action and inaction j)resuppo3e3 
therefore, all the high moral and spiritual 
attainments which alone liberate man from the 
bonds of Bamsiira. But the verses have appli- 
cation even to beginners. Thus, as soon as a 
man begins to free himself from the sway of 
desire and strives to replace persornd inclina- 
tion by duty as the motive of acdion. lie sees 
that when the call of duty is not heeded and 
what ought to be done is left undone, he is 
bound by the very non-performance of duty, 
while work done in discharge of duty has no 
power to bind. Thus he begins to see action in 
inaction, and vice versa. The Mumukshu, 
the aspirant for liberation, sees farther than 
this. He sees tliat the only way of rising above 
the binding power of action is through devotion 
to his duty and self -surrender to Bhagavan. 
Duty so performed causes the development of 
knowledge in him which makes possible the 


6 



50 


renunciation of all Karma. In such action, as 
leads to knowledge culminating in renunciation 
of Karma, he sees inaction. And as renuncia- 
tion of Karma or actionlessnesa can *be attained 
through action he sees, in this actionlessness, ac- 
tion which made the attainment of actionless- 
ness possible. But the sage realises the truth of 
action in inaction and vice versa in a still deepe^ 
sense. He sees that the cause of action is 
desire and he sees further that this desire per- 
vades the senses, the mind and the intellect 
(Buddhi). Knowing this he ever keeps himself 
above the three by rooting out desire and es- 
tablishing himself in the Light of Ishvara. In 
the words of the “Light on the Path” he has 
raised his individuality out of the shadow into 
the shine and has, therefore, lifted himself out 
of the region in which Karma operates. He has 
realised the actionless Self, and in all actions he 
sees inaction. Further, as a result of his utter 
purity and rooting out of Ahankara, he has 
becbme a perfect channel of the One Life and is 
at perfect rest and peace. But from him con- 
tinuously flow the divine influences which purify, 
elevate and spiritualise everything about hiin. 
His very presence vivifies and stimulates the 



61 


better nature of those about him, and he draws 
out the best that is in them. Thus, though he 
seems to be doing nothing yet he does all that 
ought to be done. Of such a sage the . 18th 
verse says : “He is wise among men, he is a 
real Yogi, he is the performer of all action." 
A short story illustrates the truth of how 
a sage becomes a performer of all action by 
virtue of his identifying himself with the 
One Self and how a tiny rill of individual 
effort could be made to embrace in its beneficent 
results the whole universe by identification 
with the One Self. Once it is said that Mahh- 
deva, the Great God, had to perform a sacrifice 
(Yajna), and all 33 crores of gods had to be 
invited to this ceremony. So the Great God 
made His son Kartikeya Swami go round and 
invite all the gods to the sacrifice. The vehicle 
of K^irtikeya Swami is a peacock, and bestriding 
this, vehicle, strutted forth Ortikeya Sw4mi 
on his long and tedious errand. Several days 
passed, and the day appointed for the sacrifice 
was very near. But the rider of the peacock 
had scarcely carried the invitation to a tithe 
of the number of the guests, and at this rate it 
became evident that the invitation would not 



52 


reach all the Devas in time. And it became 
necessary to entrust this work to some wiser 
person, and accordingly Ganapati was chosen 
for it. Now Ganapati as his physiognomy 
shows is the wisest of Gods. The large ele- 
phant’s head carries a big brain, and he has the 
skill and craft to support the weight of this 
bulky head and his rotund belly on the back 
of a tiny mouse. Such is Ganesh, the God of 
wisdom — ^He who performs the maximum work 
with minimum labour. What a poor insignificant 
creature is a mouse beside the showy, strutting 
peacock. Yet Ganesh was chosen to do the 
work. The time at his disposal was very short, 
and looking to the number of guests to be invited 
and the vehicle of the invitation, it seemed all 
but a hopeless task. Yet Ganapati thinking 
himself for a. while gathered himself up for 
doing his Father’s bidding. Thrice did he go 
round the great God, and prostrating himself 
before Him, who is the God of gods, invoked all 
the 33 crores of gods in his name and gave them 
the invitation through the Great, and on the 
appointed day came all the guests to the sac- 
rifice. 



53 


LECTURE VI. 

The characteristics oe the sage. 

This discourse was based on the next six 
verses from the 19th to the 24th. The IQth 
verse contains a general definition of a Sage. 
“He whose engagements are all devoid of desires 
and purposes, and whose actions have been 
burnt by the fire of Wisdom, Him the wise call 
a sage.” When a man becomes impersonal, 
that is when he has realised his Self, all desires 
and thoughts of the personal self depart from 
him. But still there is the idea of self and 
not-self, which is the root-ignorance, and unless 
this is dispelled by the Light of Ishwara, the 
seed of Karma is not burnt out. In a sage, even 
this seed of Karma has been burnt out. Hence 
his actions have no binding power, because they 
cannot sprout and grow any longer. Therefore 
are his actions said to be burnt by the fire of 
wisdom in the definition of a sage, which we are 
considering. 

The next five verses describe the two types 
among the Sages defined in the 19th verse. Even 



54 


after liberation, a few men for some reason 
continue to live amongst people and mix with 
them in wotdly vocations. They have no pur- 
pose of their own to serve. But they engage 
themselves in action to set an example to other 
men and body forth in their daily work and 
conduct the ideal of true sacrifice as Janaka did. 
There is a second type of the sage very rare to 
meet with. He lives a life of obscuritv and 
seclusion, at peace with all beings, solely devot- 
ed to the religious enlightenment of bis race. 
He lives unknown and unrecognised, radiating 
in all directions strong spiritual impulses that 
purify and ennoble. Such a type embodies 
the ideal of renunciation. In the five verses 
from 20th to 24th, which we are considering, 
the three verses 20, 23 and 24 refer to the type 
which embodies the ideal of sacrifice, and verses 
21 and 22 to the type embodying the ideal of 
renunciation. Understood in this sense, the 
apparently meaningless repetitions *in these five 
verses gain a deep significance and a perfect 
appositeness. Taking the sage embodying in 
his life and conduct the ideal of sacrifice we 
have in the 20th, 23rd and 24th verses the follow- 
ing statements. The 20th verse runs : “Having 



abandoned attachment for the fruita of action, 
ever content, dependent on no one, though 
engaged in actions, nothing at all does he do.” 
The sage has realised the One Self. He is ever 
established in that supreme Hiss cf the Self 
and is therefore ever content ; he is dependent 
on none, because everything derives its reality 
from the One Self which he has become, and 
though he is engaged in actions for setting an 
example to men, he does not lose his hold of the 
consciousness of the Self, and he is not bound by 
what he docs. He is further described in the 
23rd verse ; “Of the man whose attachment is 
gone, who is liberated, whose mind is establish- 
ed in knowledge, who acts for the sake of sac- 
rifice (Yajna) — his whole action melts away.” 
[Here sacrifice (Yajna) means Narayana, 
Bhagavan. The sage has no attachment what- 
soever and he performs sacrifices to satisfy the 
Yajnapurusha who is Narayana. How his 
whole actidfe is reduced to ashes in this fire of 
wisdom-sacrifice is described in the next 24th 
verse : “Brahman is the offering. Brahman the 
oblation, by Brahman is the oblation poured 
into the fire of Brahman, Brahman verily shall 
be reached by him who always sees Brahman in 



66 


action.” Wbat to the ordinary man appear 
as the five distinct elements in a sacrifice— (1) 
performer of the sacrifice ; (2) the oblation » 

(3) the pouring of the oblation into the fire ; 

(4) tiie fire ; (5), the instniment by which the 
oblation is poured into the fire— all these are 
verily the Brahman to the sage. It is not by 
an intellectual effort that he sees in each of 
these elements Brahman, but there is not present 
to his consciousness anything but Brahman, the 
Self, and thus are all his actions reduced into 
Brahman, the Self, without any residue. 

The second type of the sage embodying the 
ideal of renunciation is extolled in the 21st and 
22nd verses thus : “Free from desire, with the 
mind and the self controlled, having relinquished 
all possessions, doing mere bodily action, he in- 
curs no sin ; satisfied with what comes to him 
by chance, rising above the pairs of opposites, 
free from envy, equanimous in succSess or failure, 
though acting he is not bound.” The only 
comments that can be offered on these verses 
are the following. He has relinquished all pos- 
ipBsions, he is devoid of the sense of ‘mine’ness. 
He does mere bodily action, which means that 



57 


his acticms are strictly restricted to keep his 
body living, as regards which, again, there is 
no idea of possession in him. His body is not 
his, but has now become a temple of Divinity, 
as his Jiva has become Shiva, the Self. He is 
satisfied with what comes to him without effort, 
and is free from the pairs of opposites ; he is the 
same amidst all changes in his environments. 
He is content to be obscure and is not moved 
by jealousy when others are extolled for their 
merits and attainments. 


LECTURE V!l. 

Action-Sacrifice and Wisdom-Sacrifice. 

In the next 9 verses of the 4th chapter, from 
the 26th to 33rd, are enumerated the several 
kinds of sacrifice which people perform with 
definite objects. The 25th verse refers to 
the sacrificial rites in devotion to the 
minor Devas, which Karma-Yogis perform to 
gain some end. In this verse also reference 
is made to Wisdom-Sacrifice to make the 
enumeration exhaustive and also to com- 



58 


pate it with all other Yajnas subsequently. 
This highest sacrifice consists in pouring the 
self by the Self into the fire of Brahman, so that 
the limitations of the conditioned self are des- 
troyed by the fire of the Brahman, and the 
Self so purified and freed of limitations, is 
realised as Brahman itself. The 26th verse 
refers to the restraint of senses and also to the 
sacrifice which consists in directing the senses 
only to such objects as are not forbidden by 
Shastras and restraining them from forbidden 
objects. The 27th verse refers to the efforts 
of the student at concentrating his mind on the 
Self, in which effort the functions of the senses 
and vital airs are suspended as a result of deep 
thinking. The 28ih verse tells us how some 
give away their wealth to the deserving, how 
others observe austerities, while others still 
practice concentration of mind, and still others 
recite the vedic texts according to prescribed 
rules, and others still read scriptures with the 
object of understanding them, while there are 
the ascetics observing particular self-imposed 
vows very rigidly. All such acts arc called 
sacrifices. Hence the word sacrifice as used here 
is very comprehensive. Even the practice of 



59 


Pranayama (restraint and regulation of breath) 
and regulation of food, which are referred to in 
the 29th and 30th verses, are called sacrifices. The 
performers of all these are extolled as knowers 
of sacrifice, and their sacrifices have the efficacy 
of destroying their sins, as against t^ie impious 
who cook for themselves and cat verily sin, — 
who are referred to in the 13th verse of the 3rd 
chapter. The man who is performing even the 
most trivial sacrifice for gaining a trivial object 
is a wiser and better man than one in whom the 
very idea of sacrifice is absent. Because, as 
the follov/ing 31st verse puts it, “Even this 
world is not for the non-sacrificer ; whence the 
other ? 0 best of Kurus." Further, the nature 
of Karma being determined by the motive ins- 
piring it, if the above enumerated sacrifices are 
performed with the object of reaching Brahman, 
that object also is gained in course of time 
through the purification of the mind and in- 
tellect resulting from the performance of the’ 
sacrifices. The 31st verse says : “Eating 
aiubrosia, the remnant of the sacrifice, they go 
to Eternal Brahm-an and Shri Shankara- 
chirya commenting on the verse says : ‘‘Per- 
forming the sacrifices mentioned above, they 



60 


eat at intervals prescribed food, in a prescribed 
manner ; food so eaten is called ambrosia, 
Ainrita. If they wish for Moksha they go to 
Brahman in course of time, not at once, as we 
should understand for consistency’s sake.” 


Then comes the 32nd verse which runs : 
“Thus manifold sacrifices^are revealed at the 
mouth of Brahman ; know them all as bom of 
action. Thus knowing, thou shalt be liberated.” 
This versein one word pointsout the crucial differ- 
ence between wisdom-sacrifice and all the other 
sacrifices enumerated above. The latter, says 
Bhagwan, are all born of action, are of the not- 
self, because the Self is actionless, and if this 
actionless Self is realised one becomes liberated. 
The transcendental superiority of wisdom, 
sacrifice over aU the scarifices is dwelt upon and 
the reason for it is given in the 33rd verse. 
“Superior is wisdom-sacrifice to the sacrifice 
with objects, 0 1 harasser of tby foes ; all 
action without Exception, 0 son of Frithh, is 
comprehended in wisdom”. Wisdom-sacrifice 
transcends all sacrifices with objects, because 
all action is comprehended in wisdom. All the 



61 


good that can be done by actions is achieved by 
wisdom which comprehending all actions trans- 
cends them all. 


LECTURE VIII. 

The surest Wav to Moksha. 

In the 33rd verse wisdom was praised ; 
and in the following verses, i,e,, the 34th and 
onwards Bhagawan describes this wisdom and 
points out the surest means of attaining that 
wisdom. The 34th and 39th verses should be 
read together as having bearing on the means of 
attaining wisdom. The 39th verse brings out 
what the 34th verse contains by implication. The 
34th verse runs thus : “Know this (wisdom) by 
long prostration, by enquiry, by service ; those 
men of wisdom who have realised the truth will 
teach thee wisdom.” This wisdom is ultimately 
to be imparted to his disciple by the Guru who 
has realised the Truth, but what should be the 
equipment with which the disciple should ap- 
proach his Guru ? To understand the full 
significance, “by long prostration”, “by en- 



62 


qx^ry,” “by service” in the above verse we should 
ponder over what the 39th verse says. It 
runs, “He obtains wisdom who is full of faith, , 
who is devoted and who has subdued the 
senses, and having obtained wisdom he ere long 
attains to the supreme peace.” Unless a man has 
faith in the existence of this wisdom, Brahma- 
vidya, and also in the existence of the Jivan- 
muktas who are its custodians his prostration 
cannot be genuine and sincere. When he has 
such faith and also when he appreciates the 
greatness of this wisdom and is convinced of 
its being the only means of triumphing over the 
evil of §ams^ira, then only is it possible for l)im 
to approach the Guru in chat spirit of sincere 
humility and reverence which the physical 
action of long prostration symbolises. Thus 
faith is the first qualification that is necessary 
to rq^y prostrate before the Guru and approach 
him. Added to faith must be the earnest 
devotion I ito wisdom, and without tliis longing 
for wisdom he cannot properly enquire. Before 
this, he had read the scriptures and had tried 
to understand them with a view to know the 
self through the not-self. By prosecuting his 
enquiries on analytical lines he had understood 



63 


what Atma and what Anatma is. But now he 
studies the scriptures to know the mystery of 
the One Life. His enquiries are deeper, they 
run on the lines of synthesis and are transcen- 
dental. He longs to attain to the Vidy^, the 
wisdom that alone can remove the root ignor- 
ance of separativeness — Avidya. He longs to 
know that which is beyond both self and not- 
self and of which both self and not-self alike 
are expressions. The deeper and more earnest 
are his enquiries and longings, the more clearly 
does he see the greatness of the Guru ; for he 
is the embodiment of the divine wisdom ; he 
alone, who is also the representative of Ishwara^ 
can dispel the darkness of Avidya, the false 
separative knowledge, by kindling the light of 
true wisdom. Eealising this, his devotion to 
the Guru increases, and out of devotion and love 
he entirely surrenders himself to the Guru. The 
second qualification is therefore a deep longing 
for and devotion to Wisdom. Says the “Light 
on the Path,” “Those that ask shall have. But 
though the ordinary man asks perpetually, his 
voice is not heard. For he asks with his mind 
only, and the voice of the mind is only heard 
on that plane on which the mind acts. 



64 


To ask is to feel the hunger within, the yearning 
of spiritual aspiration.” The third qualifica- 
tion is “service.” With this goes the subdual 
of the senses in the 39th verse. Hitherto he 
had controlled the senses in order to realise his 
self against his not-sclf. But now the senses 
must be trained and tuned to see the unity, the 
One Life. He must now strive to realise the 
One Life in his action and in his daily life which 
now becomes one service of his Guru. Says 
Bhagawan in the 27th verse of the 9th chapter : 
“Whatever thou doest, whatever thou catest, 
whatever thou sacrificest, whatever thou givest, 
whatever austerity thou engagest in, do it as 
an offering to Me.” Out of devotion and love 
he meditates on and worships his Guru-Deva ; 
and the inner spirit of surrender and worship is 
reduced to practice, and in that all his activities 
become one service of his Guru. The senses 
are thus trained to see and realise unity and 
he realises the presence of his Guru at all times 
and at all places and in all actions. This is 
real Sebii which sees 8a eha d^samanthi — 
“He indeed everywhere.” By such discipline 
he qualifies himself to receive the wisdom 
from his Guru, as the 34th verse says, “those 



65 


men of wisdom who have realised the truth will 
teach thee wisdom.” For, the “Light on the 
Path” says, “when the disciple is ready, the 
Master is ready also.” What this wisdom is and 
what its efficacy is in liberating man from all evil 
and ignorance, are taught in the five following 
slokas from 35th to 39th. “Knowing which,” 
says the 35th verse, “thou shalt not again thus 
fall into error, O Pindava ; and by which thou 
wilt see all beings in thy self and also m Me.” 

This is true Wisdom by which all beings 
from Brahm^i, the Creator, down to the tiniest 
blade of grass, as Shri Shankarach&rya puts it 
in his commentary on this sloka, are seen in 
one’s real Self which is the light of Ishwara, the 
one life, and which is also Ishwara Himself. 
Thus does he realise his identity with Brahman, 
the Self which, expressing itself from Brahma 
down to the tiniest blade of grass, remains 
transcendent. The significance of this profound 
wisdom, the supreme realisation of the self, is 
well brought out in the following story in the 
13th and 14th chapter of the lOthskanda of the 
Srimad Bh&gvata. It is said that once Brahmii, 
the Creator, in order to test the divine powers of 


6 



6G 


Bhagw^n hid away the calves and cowherd* 
boys who were tending the calves, and kept 
them under his M^ya. Sri Krishna out of 
Compassion for the mothers of the Gopas and 
cows, and also with a view to teach Brahmii, 
became himself all the calves and cowherd- 
boys even to the minutest detail of colour and 
dress. About a year passed, and things passed 
on as usual without the parents of the cowherd- 
boys noticing any change excepting that thev 
felt a deeper love for their boys as did the cows 
also for their calves. Balarkma, who until now 
believed that the Gopas were the incarnations 
of the gods and the cows of the Rishis, could not 
account for this sudden increase in the love of 
both human and bovine parents for their off- 
spring evolved from Bhagaw^n’s M4ya. So 
also was Brahma perplexed when he could not 
distinguish between the calves and cowherd - 
boys (whom he had concealed and kept under 
MayS.) and their duplicates which he now found 
engaged as usual in the wood, until Bhagavan, 
out of compassion for Brahmk and with a view 
to show how utterly unreliable outward fonre 
are in disclosing the reality, appeared himyelf 
in.Jdui divine form from each of the c^ves and 



67 


cowherds which He hod created. Balarlima 
also saw the error of considering individualities 
however high as the final reality. All forms, 
processes and individualities derive their value 
and interest as indicating the Self, but utterly 
fail as measures of the immeasurable Self whom 
no number of Brahmandas can exhaust and 
whose mystery Brahma himself cannot fathom. 
Such is the wisdom of the Self that the Guru 
imparts to his disciple, and on gaining which the 
disciple attains, as the 39th verse says. Supreme 
Peace. It is a wise injunction handed down 
by Hindu tradition which says : “Seek not to 
trace back the origin of a Rishi and a river.” 
The Rishi, the Jivanmukta, is par excellence the 
embodinrent of divine wisdom, the wisdom of 
the self, the negation of the separative. But 
man’s ambitious curiosity lays its blasphemous 
hand on the most scared and cherished ideals 
and foists its limitations and imperfections on 
the limitless and perfect. Hence we have the 
sad spectacle- of modern Theosophical literature 
revelling in trivial and weird stories purporting 
to be past lives of Mahatmas, which read like 
third rate novels. Not content with such dese- 
cration we fi.nd even Bhagwiin Himself drived 
0 



68 


down and duplicated to support new fangled 
theories. 

The greatness of divine wisdom as the only 
means of attaining liberation is taught in the 
following three verses, from 36 to 38: “Even 
shouldst thou be most sinful of all the sinfuls, 
thou shalt verily cross all sin by the bark of 
wisdom. As kindled fire reduces fuel to ashes, 
0 Arjuna, so does wisdom-fire reduce all 
actions to ashes. Verily there exists here no 
purifier equal to wisdom. He who is perfected 
by Yoga finds it in time in himself by himself.” 
To the man seeking Moksha even Dharma be- 
comes a sin, because Dharma iteelf is separative, 
and the only bark of safety in which the sea 
of Avidyk of separative life can be crossed is 
Wisdom which by its innate nature, reducing 
evetytihing to unity, burns out all sin. Shri 
Shankarhchhrya, commenting on the state- 
ment in the above veraes that wisdom-fire bums 
actions to ashes as fire bums fuel, says that the 
simile should not be taken literally, but what' is 
meant to be conveyed is that wisdom renders 
idl action impotent as regards its binding power. 
The attainment of wisdom not only enablee; 



69 


man to perform action without being bound 
by it, blit it gives him the power to consume by 
the fire of wisdom even such of his past karma 
as has not begun to work itself out. This 
brings us to the subject of the records of the 
past lives, where they are preserved and how 
and to whom they become accessible. There 
are three records of past events. The physical 
memory of man is a record of past events but of 
this life only and is not of the events of past 
lives. The second record is found in the astral 
light which alone is accessible to the psychic. 
The third record is Akash, the cosmic ether* 
This is the most permanent record and lasts 
for Kalpas and Kalpas. But this is accessible 
only to the initiate who is on the threshold of 
liberation and who has to square up all his past 
account before becoming perfect. This power 
of reading the past comes to him as a result of 
his spiritual progress and the conscqueht illu- 
mination. Therefore does Bhagav^n say in 
the 16th verse of the 15th chapter of the QiU, 
“from Me are memory and knowledge as well 
as their loss, etc.”, and Shri Shankar^ch^irya 
commenting on this says, “Just as^ memory 
and knowledge occur in persons as a result of 



70 


their good deeds, so as a result of their sins, 
loss of memory and knowledge occur in the 
sinful”. Says the “Light on the Path,” “The 
operation of the actual laws of Karma are not 
to be studied until the disciple has reached the 
point at which they no longer affect him. The 
Initiate has a right to demand the secrets of 
nature and to know the rules v/hich govern 
human life. He obtains this right by having 
escaped from the limits of nature and by having 
freed himself from the rules which govern human 
life. He has become a recognised portion of the 
divine element and is no longer affected by 
that which is temporary. lie then obtains a 
knowledge of the laws which govern temporary 
conditions. Therefore you who desire to under- 
stand the laws of Karma, attempt first to free 
yourself from these laws ; and this can only be 
done by fixing your attention on that which is 
unaffected by these laws.” From the above 
authoritative statements it should be clear that 
these records cannot be laid under contribution 
by so called occultists for writing out stories for 
the delectation of their followers, which are taken 
‘to substantiate their claims to occult powerSi 
Perhaps the record in the astral light may be 



71 


within their ken, but the results of such psychic 
visions are not at all reliable, because the psychic 
who has not burnt out the residue of senses, 
mind and individuality in the fire of wisdom, 
cannot but project himself and fancy that he 
reads external records which are nothing but 
his secret thoughts and desires externalised. 
More reliable perhaps are the results arrived 
at by the unpretentious professor Denton 
through psychoihetry published in his book 
called the “Soul of Things” than the weird tales 
of personal loves and hates which are now-a-days 
published in theosophical books as evidences of 
occultism and which are claimed as the results of 
the researches in Akashic record. This is an- 
other instance in which high names have been 
dragged down to the level of modem ignorance. 

It is worthy of notice that at three different 
places in this chapter it has been shown how 
wisdom lifts a man above the operations of 
Karma. These are not meaningless repetitions 
of the same teaching but are meant to show the 
three aspects of wisdom-sacrifice, and how the 
fire of wisdom, by reducing to ashes the triad— 
Kartii the doer, Kriya the deed, and Karma 



72 


the object of the deed, lifts the man of wisdom 
above the operations of the law of Karma, In 
the description of wisdom-sacrifice given in the 
24th verse, it is shown how the Kriyi, the whole 
action with all its accessories, is rendered im- 
potent as regards its power to bind. The des- 
cription in the 25th verse tells us how by the 
identification of the purified self, the Karta, 
with Brahman the One Self, action loses its 
binding power; and lastly how by reducing 
the whole outside world, the Karma (not Self), 
into the Self, action is burnt to ashes is described 
in the 35th verse. There can-die no vain re- 
petitions in the Gita, seeing that it is the con- 
centrated essence of the highest teaching and 
thought that is capable of appreciation by man. 
All that man’s mind can speculate upon and 
man’s spirit c4n yearn for with regard to the 
mystery of life is found deep embedded in the 
apparently simple aphorisms. Attempts are 
always made to read into the Gita one’s own 
pet theories, and partisans have sought its 
high authority to establish their own creeds. 
Some have called it the book of devotion, others 
as inculcating action. But the Gita is as 
comprehensive as life it^lf. It is the Book of 



73 


Life and embraces in its majestic sweep of 
divine teaching all phases of life. It is the glory 
of Bhagv^in’s teaching that out of His infinite 
compassion He limits Himself to suit even the 
narrowest intellect, takes cognisance of lowly 
acts and practices and shows how even these 
can be turned towards Himself and be thus 
spiritualised. Ignoring Him and His divine 
teachings those who hanker after other know- 
ledge are as Uddhava says. 

* 

“He who rejecting Vasudeva goes after 
other gods is like the unfortunate man who 
feeling thirsty on the banks of Gang^, runs in 
search of a well.” 


7 







