===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.195770.Lectures-From-Colombo-To-Almora_djvu.txt =====

3S77 


lectures 

roTOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


h ' 


CONTENTS. 

# 

rvOF. 

f'iRST 

IN  THE  East  (Colombo) 

3 

Veda? 

... 

.. 

I j 

REPLt 

» or  Wkuomk  VI  Pamhan  ... 

.. 

2 1 

A DDR' 

SV  ARVM  Tempi  E on  Revi  Wokmmp 

... 

^3 

Kfpl 

s OF  Welcome  vr  Rvmnvd  ... 

-*5 

„ 

,,  AT  PvRVM  \Kl  III 

... 

O 

M 

VI  Sl\A(,  V.\<.v  VND  ]\I  V\  VM  VDl  K V 

3' 

,, 

,,  VI  \DI  l<  V . . 

3^5 

’1’he 

Vfdvnta 

42 

Kppi  ^ 

* .SS  Ol'  Weicomi-  VI  Mvdkvs  ... 

5 5 

My  ^ 

5'^ 

\'f  u 

IC  VI  ion  lO  I.NDI  V.N  I.IIE 

... 

7^ 

'i'liE 

Vi 

'J'ni! 

s 

(j2 

Tmk 

1 1 

... 

jor 

On 

1 1 1 

Adi 

VIE  PRhSENTED  IN  C VI,<'LIIA  VM)  Svv  \MIjI  s 

vE  PI  Y 

1 I z 

■J’n 

L irs  PlI  Vsl  *, 

120 

Th 

O 1 A 

*35 

Ar 

ME  VI  AiMORV  and  SvvvMIIi's  Ki  PI  V 

140 

\ h ' 

'I'm  Okv  VND  Pkvi  IK  E 

U3 

Hhakti 

144 

1 HE  Common  Bask; 

OF  Hindi  ism  . . 

I4Q 

Biiakii 

*59 

Thk  Vedanta  ... 

160 

Veda  NT  ISM 

... 

181 

'1’he  Influence  of 

Indmn  Spiriti'vi  Tmoughi  in  En(»t  \nd 

... 

185 

Sannyas  : Its  Iiu:Af 

AND  PkvCUCF 

... 

188 

What  HAVE  I LEARNT.'' 

... 

190 

The  KjiUGioN  we  a 

Born  in 

... 

'n 

FIRST  PUBLIC  LECTURE  IN  THE  EAST 

(COLOMBO). 

After  his  memorable  propaganda  in  the  West,  Swami  Vivekananda  landed  at 
Colombo  on  the  afternoon  of  Januaiy  15th,  1897,  and  \\as  gi\en  a light  icnal  lecep- 
tion  by  the  Hindu  community  there.  The  following  address  ot  welcome  was  then 
presented  10  him  : — 

To 

SRIMAT  VIVEKANANDA  SWAINII. 

Revered  .Sir, 

In  pursuance  of  a resolution  passed  at  a public  meeting  of  the  Hindus  of  the 
city  of  Coloml)0,  we  beg  to  offer  you  a hearty  welcome  to  this  Island.  Wc  deem  it 
a piivilegc  to  be  tlie  first  to  welcome  you  on  >oui  iciutn  home  from  your  great 
mission  m the  West. 

We  haye  watched  with  joy  and  thankfulness  the  success  with  which  the  mission' 
has,  uiiderl  God’s  blessing,  been  crowned.  You  have  proclaimed  to  the  nations  of 
Euiope  and  Amciica,  the  Hindu  ideal  of  a univeisal  religion,  haimomsing  all 
cieeds,  pioliding  spinlual  food  for  each  soul  accoiding  to  us  needs,  and  lovingly 
drawing  it  unto  God.  You  have  preached  the  Truth  and  the  Way,  tau'ght  fioin  remote 
ages  by  a 'Succession  of  Masteis  whose  blessed  feet  have  walked  and  sanctified  the 
soil  of  India,  and  whose  giauous  presence  and  inspiration  have  made  her  thiough 
all  her  vici&situdcs,  the  Light  of  the  Woild, 

To  the  inspiiation  of  such  a Mailer,  Sii  Ramakrishna  Paiamahamsa  Deva,  and 
to  your  self-sacrificing  /eal,  wcstein  nations  owe  the  pnoelcss  boon  of  being  placed 
I in  living  contact  w'ith  the  spiiitual  genius  of  India,  while  to  many  of  our  owm  coun- 
trymen, delivered  from  the  glamour  of  western  civilisation,  the  value  of  our  gloiious 
heritage  has  been  brought  home. 

By  your  noble  work  and  example  you  have  laid  humanity  under  an  obligalioni 
difficult  to  repay,  and  you  have  shed  fresh  lustre  upon  our  Motherland.  We  pray 
that  the  grace  of  God  may  continue  to  prospei  you  and  your  woik,  and 

We  remain,  Revered  Sir, 

Youis  faithfully, 

for  and  on  behalf  of  the  Hindus  of  Colombo, 

P.  COOMARA  SAWMY, 

Member  of  the  Legislative  Council  of  Cejion, 

Chairman  of  the  Meeting, 

A.  KULAVEERASINGHAM.  * 

Colombo,  January  i8gj.  Secrtfary. 

The  Swami  gave  a brief  reply,  expressing  his  appreciation  of  the  kind  welc^'me 
he  had  received.  'He  took  advantage  of  the  opportunity  to  point  out  that  the  de- 
monstration had  not  been  made  in  honour  of  a great  politician,  or  a great  soldier, 

» millionaire,  but  of  a begging  Saunyasi,  showing  the  tendency  of  the  Hindu  mind 


4 


LECrURES-FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


towards  religion.  He  urged  the  necessity  of  keeping  religion  as  the  backbone  of  the 
national  life,  if  the  nation  were  to  live,  and  disclaimed  any  personal  character  for 
the  welcome  he  had  leceivcd,  but  insisted  upon  its  being  the  recognition  of  a 
principle. 

On  the  evening  of  the  i6lh,  the  Swami  gave  the  following  public  lecture  in  the 
Floral  Hall : — , 

What  little  work  has  been  done  by  me  has  not  been  from  any  inhere  ^ power  that 
resides  in  me,  but  fioin  the  cheerb,  the  good-will,  the  blessings,  that  havi  , illovved  my 
patii  in  the  West  from  this  our  very  beloved,  most  sacred,  dear  Mothw  Some 

good  has  been  done,  no  doubt,  in  the  West,  but  specially  to  myself,  for  what  before  was 
the  result  of  an  emotional  natme  peiiiaps,  has  gained  the  certainty  of  conviction,  and 
attained  the  power  and  sticnglh  of  dcmonstiation.  Foimeily,  I thought  as  every  Hindu 
thinks,  and  ab  the  Hon.  President  has  just  pointed  out  to  you,  that  this  is  the  Punya 
Bhumi,  the  land  of  Kaima.  To-day  1 stand  here  and  say,  with  the  conviction  of 
truth,  that  it  is  so.  If  tfi^ere  is  any  land  on  this  eaith  that  can  lay  claim  to  be  the 
blessed  Punya  Bhumi,  to  be  the  land  to  w4iich  all  souls  on  this  earth  must  come  to 
account  for  Karma,  the  land  to  which  every  soul  that  is.  wending  its  way  Godw'ard 
must  come  to  attain  its  last  home,  the  land  where  humanity  has  attained  its  highest 
towards  genllene«s^,  towa^s  geneiosity,  towards  puiity,  towaids  calmness,  above  all 
the  land  of  intibspectitQn  and  of  spintuality, — it  is  India,  Hence  have  staited  the 
founders  of  rehgions^fiom  the  most  ancient  limes,  deluging  the  eailh  again  and 
again  with  the  puri^nd  perennial  waters  of  spiiitual  tiuth,  Hence  have  proceeded 
the  tidal  waves  of  philosophy  that  have  coveied  the  earth,  Eak  or  West,  North  or 
South,  and  hence  again  must  suit  the  wave  wdiicli  is  going  to  spiritualise  the  material 
civilisation  of  the  w'orld.  Hcie  is  the  life-giving  waiei  wuili  whicli  must  be  quenched 
the  burning  fiie  ot  rnateiialism,  which  is  burning  the  coic  of  the  hearts  of  millions, 
in  other  lands.  Belie/e  me,  my  frieiuK,  this  i>  going  to  be. 

So  much  I haiJ^  seen,  and  so  far  those  of  you  who  are  students  of  the  history  of 
races  aic  already  awaie  of  this  fact.  'Phe  debt  w'hicii  the  w'orld  owes  to  our  Mother- 
land is  immense.  Taking  couutiy  with  countiy,  there  is  not  one  race  on  tins  earth 
to  which  the  woilJ  owes  so  much  as  to  the  patient  Hindu,  the  mild  Hindu.  “ 'I'he 
mild  Hindu"  sometimes  is  used  as  an  expression  of  reproach,  but  if  ever  a reproach 
concealed  a wondeiful  tiuth  it  is  in  the  term,  the  “ mild  Hindu,"  w'lio  has  always 
been  the  blessed  child  of  God.  Civilisations  have  aiisen  in  othei  paits  of  the  world. 
In  ancient  times  and  in  modem  limes,  gicat  ideas  ha\e  emanated  from  strong 
and  great  lace^.  In  ancient  and  in  modem  times,  w'ondeiful  ideas  have  been  canied 
forwaid  from  one  race  to  another.  In  ancient  and  i.>  modern  limes,  seeds  of  great 
tiulh  and  power  have  been  cast  abroad  by  the  advancing  lidub  of  national  life,  but 
rnaik  you,  my  fi lends,  it  has  been  always  with  the  blast  of  war  trumpets,  and  with  the 
niaich  ot  embattled  cohoits.  Each  idea  liad  to  be  soaked  in  a deluge  of  blood; 
eaeh  idea  hadao  wado  tliiough  the  blood  of  millions  of  our  fellow-bemgs ; each  word 
of  power  had  to  be  follow'ed  h)  ihe  gioaus  of  millions,  by  the  wails  of  oiphans,  by 
the  tears  ol  widows.  This,  in  the  mam,  other  nations  have  taught ; but  India  has  for 
thousands  of  } ears  peacefully  existed.  Heie  activity  prevailed  when  even  Greece 
did  not  exist,  when  Rome  wus  not  thought  of,  when  the  very  lalheis  of  the  modem 
Europeans  lived  in  the  forests  and  painted  themselves  blue.  Even  eailier,  wlicii 
history  has  no  record,  and  tradition  daies  not  peer  into  the  gloom  of  that  intense 
past,  even  from  then  until  now,  ideas  after  idcvis  have  matched  out  from  her,  but 


FIRST  PUBLIC  LECTURE  IX  TIIK  EAST 


5 


every  word  has  been  ‘ipoken  wUh  a blessing  behind  n,  and  peace  before  it  We,  of 
all  nations  of  the  world  have  never  been  a conqueiing  lace,  and  that  blessing  is  on  our 
head,  and  therefore  we  live.  Theie  vvas  a time  when  at  the  sound  of  the  rnaich  of 
big  Greek  battalions,  the  earth  tiembled.  Vanished  tiom  off  the  face  of  the  earth; 
with  not  even  a talc  left  behind  to  tell,  gone  is  that  ancient  land  of  the  Greeks. 
There  was  a time  when  the  Roman  K.igle  floated  over  e\ei  vihing  woi ih  having  in 
this  world;  eveiywhere  Rome’s  power  u.e,  felt  and  piessed  on  the  head  of  humanity  ; 
the  earth  tiembled  at  the  name  of  Rome  But  the  Capitoline  Hill  is  a mass  of 
ruins,  the  spider  weaves  Its  web  where  the  Ctesais  luled  '1  heie  have  been  other 
nations  equally  gloiious  that  have  come  and  gone,  living  a tv,w  boms  of  exultant 
and  of  exuhetaiit  dominance,  and  of  a Wa ked  national  hie,  and  then  vanishing  like 
ripples  on  the  face  of  the  waters,  rims  have  these  nations  nuiie  their  maik  on  the 
face  of  humanity.  But  we  live,  and  if  Mann  laine  back  to  d,u  he  would  not  be 
bewildered,  and  would  not  fiml  himself  m a foieigb  land  '1  In  same  laws  aie  here, 
laws  adjusted  and  thought  out  ihiough  thousands  and  thousands  of  vears;  customs, 
the  outcome  of  the  acumen  of  ages  ami  die  cwpeiiencc  of  tentiiiics  that  seem  to  be 
eternal ; and  as  the  days  go  by,  as  blow  aflei  blow  of  mistoiluuc  has  In-eii  deliveied 
upon  them,  they  seem  to  have  seivcd  one  pm  pose  only,  that  ot  making  ihein  stronger 
’ and  niuic  constant.  And  to  fliul  the  ceiilie  of  all  this,  the  heait  liom  whiih  the 
blood  flows,  the  mrun-bpnug  ol  the  n.Uion.d  life,  Indie' e me  when  I sa\  after  my 
experience  ot  the  woild,  that  it  is  licie.  d'o  theoihci  nations  ot  the  woild,  leligion 
IS  one  among  ihe  many  occupations  of  hie  I'here  is  {<o1uk  s,  tlmie  aie  the  enjoy- 
ments of  social  life,  tlieic  is  .dl  that  wealth  can  buy  oi  povvei  can  bung,  theie  is  all 
that  the  senses  ( an  cn|ov  ; and  among  all  these  vaiioiis  occnpaiions  ot  life,  and  all  this 
seaiching  aftei  sometlnng  whah  can  give  vet  a liille  rnoie  vvheiiing  to  the  cloyed 
senses  -among  all  diese,  iheo'  is  peihaps  a lilile  bit  of  lehgion  But  here,  in  India, 
religion  is  the  one  ami  the  only  ociup.iiion  of  lite  How  niaiiv  of  \ou  know  that  there 
has  been  a t'hino-jajiancsc  w.ii  ^ Veiv  few  of  you.  if  any  'i  hat  ihcie  aie  tremen- 
dous political  movements  and  so(  i.ilisiic  movements  tiy  mg  to  ti.insfoiin  Wosr<-in  society, 
how  many  of  you  know.?  Vetv  tew  indeed,  if  any  But  that  there  vvas  a Parlia- 
ineiil  of  Religions  in  America,  and  that  there  was  a Hindu  Saniuusin  sent  over  there, 
I arn  astonished  to  find  that  evt.m  the  cooly  knows  of  it.  That  sliowss  the  way  the 
wind  blows,  where  die  nalioinl  life  is  I used  to  reavl  books  written  by  globe-tioltiiig 
travellers,  especially  foreigners,  who  deplored  the  ignoiance  of  the  Eastern  masses, 
but  I found  out  that  ii  was  paitly  true  ami  at  the  same  nine  partly  untrue  If  you  ask 
a ploughman  in  i'higl.im),  or  in  America,  or  Fr.ince,  or  in  Germany  to  what  parly  he 
belongs,  he  can  tell  you  whether  he  belongs  to  the  Radicals  or  the  Consei  valives, 
and  for  whom  he  is  going  to  vote.  In  \merica  he  will  say  whether  he  is  Republican 
or  Democrat,  and  even  knows  somcihmg  about  the  silver  question.  But  if  you  ask 
him  about  his  religion,  he  will  tell  you  that  he  goes  to  church,  ami  belongs  to 
a certain  denomination.  TIuit  i.s  all  lie  know’s,  and  he  thinks,  it  is  snffnweiit 

Now,  when  we  come  to  India,  if  \ou  ask  one  of  our  ploughmen,  ■'  Do  you  know 
anything  about  politics  He  will  reply,  “ What  is  th.it  ?”  He  does  not  understand 
about  socialistic  rnovernenls,  the  relation  between  capital  and  laboui,  and  all  that,  he 
has  never  heaid  of  such  things  m his  life,  he  woiks  haid  and  earns  hi.s  biead.  But 
you  ask,  “What  i.s’your  religion?”  he  replies,  “ Look  here,  my  friend,  I have  marked 
it  on  my  foiehead.”  Me  can  give  you  a good  hint  or  two  on  questions  of  religioa. 
That  has  been  my  expen  ence.  That  our  nation's  life.  Individuals  have  each  their 


€ from  Colombo  to  ajmora 

own  peculiantics,  and  each  man  Ims  his  own  method  of  growth,  his  own  life  marked 
out  foi  iuni,  I)}'  the  mfiniie  i)asl  life,  by  all  his  past  Karma  as  we  Hindus  say;  Into 
thus  world,  with  all  the  past  on  him,  the  infinite  past  ushers  the  present,  and  the  way  in 
which  we  use  the  piesenl  is  going  to  make  the  future.  Thus,  everyone  born  into  this 
woild  has  a bent,  a direct  ion  towards  which  he  must  go,  through  which  he  must  live, 
and  what  is  true  of  the  individual  is  equally  tiuc  of  the  race.  Each  race,  similarly, 
has  a peculiar  bent,  each  r.ice  has  a peculiar  raison  d'Ore,  each  race  h . ^ a peculiar 
mission  to  fulfil  in  the  life  of  the  woild.  Each  race  has  to  make  its  m result,  to 
fuliil  its  own  mission.  Political  greatness  or  military  pow'cr  is  never  the  'on  of  our 
race;  it  never  was,  and,  mark  my  words,  it  never  will  be.  But  there  nas  been  the 
other  mission  given  to  us,  which  is  to  conserve,  to  preserve,  to  accumulate,  as  it  were, 
into  a dynamo,  all  the  spiiilual  eneigy  of  the  race,  and  that  concenliated  energy  is 
to  pour  foilh  in  a deluge  on  the  woild,  whenevci  cucumstanccs  are  propitious.  Let 
the  Persian  or  the  Oreek,  the  Roman,  the  Arab,  or  the  Englishman  march  his 
battalions,  conquer  the  world,  and  link  the  different  nations  together,  and  the  philos- 
ophy and  spiiuuality  of  India  is  ever  ready  to  flow  along  the  new-made  channels  into 
the  veins  of  the  nations  of  the  w'oild.  The  Ilindu’.s  calm  brain  must  pour  out  its 
own  quota  to  give  to  the  sum-total  of  human  progiess.  India’s  gift  to  the  world,  is 
the  light  spintual. 

Thus,  in  tlie  past,  we  read  in  history,  that  whenever  there  arose  a great  conquer- 
ing nation  uniting  the  dilTeicnt  laces  of  the  woild,  binding  India  with  the  other  races, 
taking  hei  out,  as  it  weie,  from  her  loneliness,  and  fiom  her  aloofness  from  the  rest 
of  the  woild.  into  which  she  again  and  again  cast  herself,  that  wherever  such  func- 
tion has  been  brouglii  about,  the  lesull  has  been  the  flooding  of  the  world  with 
Indian  spiritual  ideas.  At  the  beginning  of  this  centui)’,  Schopenhauer,  the  great 
Geiman  pliilo'.ophei,  studying,  from  a not  very  clear  tianslation  of  the  Vedas 
made  from  an  old  translaiion  intoPcisian,  and  thence  by  a young  Frenchman 
into  Latin,  say‘<,  ‘‘In  the  whole  woild  there  is  no  study  so  beneficial  and  so 

elevating  as  ih.at  of  the  Up.anishails  It  has  been  the  .solace  of  my  life,  it  will 

be  the  solace  of  my  death”  'Plus  gi eat  Geiman  sage  foretold,  that  “The  world 
is  about  to  sec  a levolution  in  thought  more  extensive  and  more  powerful  than  that 
which  was  witnessed  by  the  Renaissance  of  Greek  I.iteratuie,”  and  to-day  his  pre- 
dictions arc  coming  to  pass,  riiose  who  keep  their  eyes  open,  those  who  under- 
stand the  workings  in  the  minds  of  the  dilToieni  nations  of  the  West,  those  who  are 
thinkers  and  study  the  dilTeicnl  nations,  will  find  the  immense  change  that  has  been 
produced  in  the  tone,  the  proccduie,  in  the  methods,  and  in  the  literature  of 
the  w'pild  by  this  slow,  never-ceasing  permeation  of  Indian  thought.  But  there 
is  another  peculiaiity,  as  1 have  already  hinted  to  you.  We  never  preached  our 
thoughts  with  Hie  and  swoid.  If  there  is  one  word  in  the  English  language  to 

repiesent  the  gift  of  India  to  the  world,  if  there  is  one  word  in  the  English  language 

to  express  ihe^flect  which  the  literature  of  India  produces  upon  mankind,  it  is  this 
one  word,  “ fascination.”  It  is  the  opposite  of  anything  that  takes  you  suddenly  ; 
it  throws  on  you,  as  it  were,  a charm  imperceptibly.  To  many,  Indian  thought, 
Indian  manners,  Indian  customs,  Indian  philosophy,  Indian  literature,  are  repulsive 
at  the  first  sight,  but  let  them  persevere,  let  them  read,  let  them  become  familiar  with 
the  great  piiiiciplos  underlying  these  ideas,  and  it  is  ninety-nine  to  one  that  the  charm 
will  come  over  them',  and  fascination  will  bo  the  result.  Slowly  and  silently,  as  the 
gentle  dew  that  falls  in  the  morning,  unseen,  unheard,  yet  producing  a most  ircmcn- 


Fllisr  PUBLIC  LECTURE  IN  THE  EAST 


f 

dous  result,  has  been  the  work  of  this  calm,  patient,  alUsuffering,  spiritual  race,  upon 
the  world  of  thought. 

Once  more  history  is  going'lo  repeat  itself.  For  to-day,  uiidci  the  blasting  light 
of  modern  science,  when  old,  ami  appaienlly  strong  and  invulnerable  beliefs  have 
been  shattered  to  their  very  foundations,  when  special  claims  laid  u[)on  the  allegiance 
of  mankind  by  different  sects  have  been  all  blown  into  atoms  and  have  vanished 
into  air — when  the  sledge-hammer  blows  of  modem  antiquarian  reseaiches  are 
pulverising  like  masses  of  porcelain  all  soils  of  antiquated  oithodoxies —when  leligion 
in  the  West  is  only  in  the  hands  of  the  ignorant,  and  liic  knowing  ones  look  down 
with  scorn  upon  anything  belonging  to  religion,  here  comes  to  the  fore  the  philos- 
ophy of  India,  which  displays  the  highest  religious  aspirations  of  the  Indian  mind, 
where  llie  grandest  philosophical  facts  ha\e  been  the  practical  spirituality  of  the 
people.  This  natuially  is  coming  to  the  rescue,  the  idea  of  the  oneness  of  all,  the 
Infinite,  the  idea  of  the  Impersonal,  the  wonderful  idea  of  the  eternal  soul  of  man, 
of  the  unbroken  continuity  in  the  inarch  of  beings,  and  the  infinity  of  the  universe. 
The  old  sects  looked  upon  the  wot  Id  as  a little  mud-puddle,  and  ihouglil  that  time 
began  but  the  other  day.  It  was  iheic  in  our  old  books,  and  only  theic  that  the 
gland  idea  of  the  infinite  range  of  lime,  space  and  causation,  and  above  all,  the  infinite 
glory  of  the  spirit  of  man  governed  all  the  seaich  for  religion.  When  the  modern 
tremendous  theoiies  of  evolution  and  con.seivalion  of  cncigy  and  so  foith,  me  deal- 
ing death  blows  to  all  sorts  of  crude  theologies,  what  then  can  hold  any  more  the 
allegiance  of  cultured  Immanity  but  the  most  wonderful  of  convincing,  bioadening, 
and  ennobling  ideas,  that  can  only  be  found  in  that  most  maivcllous  product  of  the 
Boul  of  man,  the  wondeiful  voice  of  God,  the  Vedanta. 

I At  the  same  lime,  I mn'<t  remark,  that  what  I mean  by  our  religion  working  upon 
the  nations  outside  of  India,  comprises  only  the  piinciplcs,  the  background,  the 
foundation  upon  which  that  religion  is  built.  The  detailed  woi kings,  the  minute 
points  which  have  been  worked  out  thiough  centuiies  of  social  necessity,  little  ratio- 
cinations about  manners  and  customs  and  social  well-being,  do  not  lightly  find  a 
place  in  the  category  of  religion.  We  know,  that  in  our  books,  a cieai  distinction 
is  made  between  two  sets  of  truths.  The  one  set  is  that  which  abides  for  ever, 
being  built  upon  the  nature  of  man,  the  nature  of  the  soul,  the  soul’s  relation  to 
God,  the  nature  of  God,  peifeclion,  and  soon;  ihcic  are  also  the  principles  of 
cosmology,  of  the  infinitude  of  ci cation,  or  mote  correctly  spcaking—projeclion,  the 
wondeiful  law  of  cyclical  procession,  and  so  on; — these  aie  the  eternal  principles 
founded  upon  the  universal  laws^n  nature.  The  other  set  compnses  the  minor  laws, 
which  guides  the  working  of  our  everyday  life.  I'hey  belong  moie  pioperly  to  the 
Puranas,  to  the  Smritis,  and  not  to  the  Srutis.  These  have  nothing  to  do  with  the 
other  principles.  Even  in  our  own  nation  these  minor  laws  have  l)een  changing  all 
the  time.  Customs  of  one  age,  of  one  Yuga,  have  not  been  the  customs  of  another, 
and  as  Yuga  comes  after  Yuga,  they  will  still  have  to  change.  Grc^t  Risliis  will 
appear  and  lead  us  to  customs  and  manners  that  are  suited  to  new  environ- 
ments. 

The  great  principles  underlying  all  this  wonderful,  infinite,  ennobling,  expansive 
view  of  man  and  God,  and  the  world,  have  been  produced  in  India.  In  India  alone, 
man  has  not  stood  up  to  fight  foi  a little  tribe  God,  saying  “My  God  is  true  and  yours 
is  not  true  ; let  us  have  a good  fight  over  it.”  It  was  only  here  that  such  ideas  did  not 
occur,  as  fighting  for  little  gods.  These  great  underlying  principles  being  based 


LECTURES~~FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


% 

upon  the  eteinal  nature  of  man,  are  as  potent  to-day  foi  working  for  the  good  of  the 
human  race,  as  they  were  thousands  of  years  ago,  and  they  will  remam  so,  so  long 
as  this  earth  remains,  so  long  as  the  law  of  Kai'ma  remains,  so  long  as  w-e  are  born 
as  individuals  and  have  to  work  out  our  own  destiny  by  our  individual  power. 

And  above  all,  what  India  has  to  give  to  the  world,  is  this.  If  w-e  w'atch  the 
growth  and  development  of  religions  in  different  races,  we  shall  always  find  this, 
that  each  tribe  at  the  beginning  has  a god  of  its  own,  If  the  tribet^trre  allied  to 
each  other,  these  gods  will  have  a generic  name,  as  for  e.xample,  all  tl  Babylonian 
gods  had.  When  the  Babylonians  were  divided  into  many  races  it'  v had  the 
generic  name  of  Baal,  just  as  the  Jewish  races  had  different  gods  with  ^ common 
name  of  Moloch  : and  at  the  same  time  you  will  find,  that  one  of  these  tribes  be- 
comes superior  to  the  rest,  and  lays  claim  to  its  own  king  as  the  king  over  all.  There- 
from, it  natuially  follows  that  it  also  wants  to  preserve  its  own  god  as  the  god  of  all  the 
races.  Baal-Merodach,  said  the  Babylonians,  was  the  gieatest  god;  all  the  others 
were  infeiior.  Moloch- Yavah  was  the  superior  over  all  other  Molochs  ; and  these 
questions  had  to  be  decided  by  the  fortunes  of  battle.  The  same  struggle  was  here 
also.  In  India  the  same  competing  gods  had  been  struggling  with  each  other  for 
supremacy,  but  the  great  good  fortune  of  this  country  and  of  the  world  was,  that  there 
came  out  m tiie  midst  of  the  dm  and  confusion,  a voice  which  declared,  Ekam  sat 
vxprd  bahudhd  vadanti  ( That  which  exists  is  One ; sages  call  It  by  various  names  ). 
It  IS  not  that  Siva  is  supeiior  to  Vishnu,  not  that  Vishnu  is  everything  and  Siva  is 
nothing,  but  it  is  the  same  one  whom  you  call  either  Siva  or  Vishnu,  or  by  a hundred 
other  names.  The  names  are  different,  but  it  is  the  same  one.  The  whole  history 
of  India  you  may  read  m these  few  words.  The  whole  history  has  been  a repe- 
tition in  massive  language,  with  tremendous  power,  of  that  one  central  doctrine.  It 
was  repeated  in  the  land,  till  it  had  entered  into  the  blood  of  the  nation,  till  it  began 
to  tingle  with  every  drop  of  blood  that  flowed  in  their  veins,  till  it  became  one  with 
the  life,  part  and  parcel  of  the  material  of  which  they  were  composed,  and 
thus,  the  land  was  transmuted  into  the  most  wonderful  land  of  toleration,  giving  the 
right  to  welcome  the  various  religions  as  well  as  all  sects,  into  the  old  mother- 
country. 

And  herein  is  the  explanation  of  the  most  remarkable  phenomenon  that  is  only 
witnessed  here,  of  all  the  various  sects,  apparently  hopelessly  contradictory,  yet  living 
in  such  harmony.  You  may  be  a dualist,  and  I may  be  a monist.  You  may  believe 
that  you  are  the  eternal  seivant  of  God,  and  another  may  declare  that  he  is  one 
with  God  Himself;  yet  both  of  them  are  good  Hindus.  How  is  that  possible? 
Read  then — Ekam  sat  viprd  bahudhd  vadanli  ( That  ."hich  exists  is  One;  sages  call  It 
by  vaiious  names).  Above  all  others,  my  countrymen,  this  is  the  one  grand  truth  that 
we  have  to  teach  to  the  world.  Even  the  most  educated  people  of  other  countries 
turn  up  their  noses  at  an  angle  of  forty-five  degrees  and  call  our  religion,  idolatry, 
1 have  seen  that,  and  they  never  stopped  to  think  what  a mass  of  superstition  there 
was  m their  own  heads.  It  is  so  still  everywhere,  this  tremendous  sectarianism,  the 
low  narrowness  of  the  mind.  The  thing  which  a man  has,  is  the  only  thing  worth 
having  ; the  only  life  worth  living  is  his  own  little  life  of  dollar-worship  and  mam- 
mon-worship; the  only  little  possession  worth  having  is  his  own  property,  and 
nothing  else.  If  he  can  manufacture  a little  clay  nonsense  or  invent  a machine,  that 
16  to  he  admired  beyond  the  greatest  possessions.  That  is  the  case  over  the  whole 
world,  in  spite  of  education  and  learning.  But  education  has  yet  to  be  in  the  world, 


PUBLIC  LECTURE  AV  TILE  EAST 


9 


and  civilisation — civilisation  has  begun  nowhere  yet,  ninety-nine  decimal  nine  per 
Cent  of  the  human  race  aic  more  or  less  savages,  even  now.  We  may  load  of 
these  things  in  books,  and  we  hear  of  toleration  in  religion  and  all  that,  hut  veiy 
little  is  there  yet  in  the  world  ; take  niy  cvperiencc  for  that ; ninety-nine  per  cent 
do  not  even  think  of  it.  There  is  tremendous  religious  perseoution  yet,  in  eveiy 
country  in  winch  I have  been,  and  the  same  old  objections  are  laised  against  leain- 
ing  anylliiilg  new.  'I'lie  little  toleiation  that  is  in  the  woild,  the  little  .sympathy 
that  IS  yet  in  the  world,  foi  religous  thought,  IS  piactically  heie,  in  the  land  of  the 
Alias,  and  nowheie  else.  It  H here  ih.il  Indians  build  temples  for  Mohammedans 
and  Cdiiisliana;  nowhere  else.  If  >ou  go  to  other  countiies  and  ask  Mohammed, ms, 
oi  people  of  othei  religions  to  build  a temple  foi  you,  see  how  they  will  lielj).  I’hcy 
will  instead  ti)  to  break  down  your  temple  and  you  loo,  if  they  can.  'I'he  one  gicat 
lesson  tlierefore  that  the  woild  wants  most,  that  the  woild  has  yet  to  Ic.iin  from  India, 
is  the  idea,  not  only  of  toleiation,  but  of  simpalliy.  Well  has  it  been  said  in  tlie 
Mahhtntu  .SVfV/sr As  the  dilTeieiit  riveis,  taking  then  stall  liom  dillercnl  moiiii- 
Liiiis,  lunuing  .stiaight  oi  crooked,  at  list  come  unto  the  ocean,  so,  ()  Siva, 
the  dilleienl  paths  which  men  take  ihiough  dilterenl  lendencies,  vaiious  though 
lliev  ajipeai,  ciookcd  or  sliaighl,  all  lead  unto  d'hce  ” 'I'liough  they  may  lake 
v.ii lolls  loads,  all  are  on  the  way.  Some  may  lun  a little  ciuoked,  others  may 
iLin  siMighi,  but  at  last,  they  will  all  come  unto  the  I.oid,  the  One.  'J'lieii 
iaiid  ilien  alone,  is  youi  JJhakti  and  Siva  com[)lele,  when  you  not  only  see  Hun 
m the  I.ingam,  but  you  see  Him  evciywheic.  lie  is  tlie  sage,  he  is  the  lovei  ol 

llaii,  who  seesllaii  in  cveiytliiiig  .ind  in  everyone.  If  you  arc  a leal  lovei  of  Siva, 

you  must  see  Him  in  c\eiylhing,  aiul  in  eveiyonc.  Vou  must  see  that  cveiy  wor- 
slii[i  is  given  unto  Him,  whatever  may  be  the  name  oi  the  foim  ; that  .ill  knees  bend- 
ing tow  aids  the  Kaaba,  oi  kneeling  in  a Cbiisli.in  C'huidgoi  in  a Huddlusl  Temple, 
aie  kneeling  to  Him,  whether  they  know  it  or  not,  wliethei  they  aio  conscious  of  it 
oi  not,  that  in  whalevei  name  oi  toiin  they  aie  olfeied,  all  those  llow'ci's  aie  laid  at 
His  l'\‘et,  foi  He  is  the  one  Loid  of  all,  the  one  Soul  of  all  souls  Ho  know's  inli- 
nitely  belici  wlial  tins  woild  w'ants,  than  you  oi  I,  It  is  impossible  that  all  dilTeienco 
can  (.ease,  it  nuisl  e\ist ; without  vaiiation  life  must  cease.  It  is  this  clash,  the 
(lillVienlialioii  ol  ihoughl,  that  makes  foi  light,  lor  motion,  foi  eveiything.  Dilfeicn- 
liiiion,  iiifimlel)  contiadictoiy,  must  lemain,  but  it  is  not  uccessaiy  Ih.it  wo  should  hale 
c.icli  oilici,  theiefoie.  It  is  not  nciessary  iheiefoie,  that  we  should  fight  each  other, 
d'herefoie,  we  have  again  to  learn  the  one  cenlial  liuih  that  was  only  j)ieachcd  heie, 
ill  out  rdulhcilaiid,  and  that  once  more  has  to  be  picached  fiom  Indi.i,  Why? 

Ilccaiise,  not  only  is  it  in  our  books,  but  it  iiiiis  thiough  every  phase  of  our  national 

liLei.iliiie,  and  is  in  the  iialioiial  life.  Ilcie  and  heio  .xlone,  is  it  pi.iclised  every  day, 
and  any  man  whose  eyes  arc  open  can  sec  that  it  is  pi.ictised  heie  and  here  alone, 
■I'hiis  we  have  to  teach  religion.  Theic  aie  oihei  and  higher  lessons  ih.ii  India  can 
jte.ich,  hut  they  aie  only  foi  the  Icained,  'I’lie  lessons  of  mildness,  gentleness,  for- 
^eaiance,  toleiation,  .sy in[)athy,  and  brotheihood,  eveiyonc  ni.iy  learn,  whelbor 
fcian,  vvoimiii  or  child,  Icaiiied  oi  uiile, lined,  without  icspecl  of  lace,  ca.sle  (xr  ciecd. 
1“  riioy  call  1 hce  by  vaiious  names  ; 'i'Jiou  ail  One.” 


B 


VEDANTISM. 


The  foiIo-AiriK  Ackhcss  of  wcIcotoc  from  the  Hindus  of  Jaffna  was  presented  tc 
Swami  Vivck.inand.i  •— 

SRTMAT  VIVTKANAXDA  SWAMI. 

Reverfd  Sir. 

We,  the  inhnbltints  of  Jaffna  professing  the  Hindu  r^'ligion,  desire  to  offer  you  a 
most  hearty  xNelcome  to  oni  Ituul,  the  chief  ceiUie  of  Hinduism  in  Ceylon,  and  to 
cxpicss  our  thankfulnc::>s  foi  ) our  kind  acceptance  of  our  imitation  to  visit  this  pait 
of  Lanka. 

Our  anccsiois  settled  iieic  fiom  Sonthv  rn  India.  moiv»  than  two  thousand  years 
ago.  and  biouelu  with  ihem  tlnni  leli^inn,  which  was  patronised  b)  the  Tamil  kings  of 
Jaffna,  bul  when  then  goxeinmciu  was  displatcd  by  tiiat  of  the  Portuguese  and  the 
*Dutcli,  the  obscivance  ol  loligious  nics  was  intcrfeicd  wath,  public  icligions  worship 
was  pioinbilod.  and  the  Satied  'I’empics  including  two  of  the  most  far-famed  Shnnes, 
weie  ra/ed  to  tlic  giouiul  by  the  ciucd  hand  of  peiseciiiion.  In  spile  of  the  persis- 
tent atlcmjits  ol  these  nations  to  toice  upon  oni  forcfuhcis  the  Chiistian  leligion, 
they  clung  to  their  old  faith  firmly,  ami  ha\e  transmitted  u to  us  as  the  noblest  of 
our  hentages  Now,  under  the  rule  ot  Gieat  ihiiam,  not  oni)  ha’,  iheie  been  a 
great  and  intelligent  ic\tval,  bul  the  .sacied  edlhcc^  have  been,  and  are  being, 
restored. 

We  take  this  opportunity  to  exnicss  oiir  deep-hdt  gratitude  for  your  noble  and 
disinteiested  labouis  in  the  cause  of  our  icligion  in  canying  the  light  of  truth,  as 
revealed  in  the  Vedas,  to  the  railiamcnt  oi  Keligimts,  in  disseminating  the  truths  of 
the  Divine  Philosophy  ot  India  in  America  .and  luigland.  and  in  making  the  Western 
ivoild  acquainted  w-iih  the  liiuh',  of  Hinduism  ami  thereby  bringing  the  West  in 
closer  touch  with  the  List,  We  also  evpr.^ss  our  tb  inkfulncss  to  you  for  initiating  a 
movement  for  the  levival  of  oiir  ancient  icligion  in  tins  matciialistic  age,  when  there 
is  a decadence  of  failh  and  a disrcgaul  foi  seau  h after  spnilual  tiuth. 

We  cannot  adeijuateiv  cxpiess  oui  indcbi-duoss  to  you  for  making  the  people  of 
the  West  know  the  catholicity  of  our  leligion,  and  for  impiessing  upon  the  minds  of 
the  sai'iinfs-  of  the  West  the  truth,  lluil  iheic  arc  moio  things  lu  the  Philosophy  of  the 
Hindus  than  aie  dtcMint  ot  hi  the  Philoso[)h)  of  the  West 

We  need  Irard.l)  assure  von  ilni  w?  leave  been  ca.ofuily  watching  the  progress  of 
vour  Iilibsion  in  the  West,  and  always  hcarlii)  lejon  mg  at  voui  devotednesb  and  suc- 
cessful labohrs  in  the  field  ot  Kh'iou  'I  he  appicci.uive  references  made  by  the 
press,  in  the  great  centres  of  intclhwtual  activity,  moral  growth,  and  religious  inquiry 
in  the  We'^l,  to  vou  and  to  your  valuable  conlnbutions  to  our  religious  litcialure,  bear 
eloquent  testimony  to  your  noble  and  magnifuenl  eft.^ts. 

We  Ix^g  to  expioss  oui  hcarUleli  graldicalion  at  your  visit  to  our  land  and  to 
hope  that  we,  wno,  in  common  with  you,  look  to  the  Vedas  as  ‘the  foundation  of  all 
true  spiritu.al  knowledge,  may  have  many  mOiC  occa:>ions  of  seeing  you  in  our 
midst. 


v/:i)AAr/SAf 


II 


May  God,  who  has  hitherto  crowned  your  noble  work  with  conspicuous  success, 
spare  you  long,  giving  you  vigour  and  bircngth  to  continue  your  noble  Mission. 

We  remain,  Rcveied  Sir, 

Yours  faitiirull) , 

for  and  on  behali  of  the  Hindus  of  Jaffna. 

An  eloquent  reply  was  given,  and  on  the  following  evening,  the  Swami  lectured 
on  Vedanfism.  A repoii  of  which  is  here  appciKled 

The  subject  is  veiy  laige  and  the  time  l^  shoit , a full  analysis  of  the  religion  of 
the  Hindus  is  impossilile  in  one  lecluie.  I will,  ihereloie,  present  befoic  you  the 
salient  points  of  our  religion  in  as  s'mple  language  as  I can  The  word  flindu,  by 
which  It  is  the  fashion  now-a-da\s  to  style  oui''elvcs,  has  lobt  all  its  meaning,  for  this 
woid  meiely  meant  those  who  lived  on  llie  other  side  of  the  river  Indus  (in  Sansknt 
Sindhu).  This  name  was  inuideicd  into  Hindu,  liy  llie  ancient  Pcisians,  and 
all  people  living  on  the  other  side  of  die  iivci  ^'indlui  weic  called  b)  them  Hindus. 
Thus  this  woid  has  come  down  to  us,  and  dming  the  .Mohammedan  lulc  we  took 
up  the  word  ouisehes.  I'hcie  may  not  be  any  harm  in  using  the  woid,  of  coutse, 
but,  as  I have  said,  it  has  lost  Us  signiheaiH*-,  foi,  \ou  may  mark  that  all  the  people 
who  live  on  this  side  of  the  Indus,  in  modern  tunes  do  not  follow  the  oume  leligion 
as  they  did  in  ancient  times.  The  woid,  therefore,  co\ers  not  only  Hindus  proper, 
but  Mohammedans.  Chii'iians,  Jams,  and  other  peo[)les  w’ho  live  in  India.  I,  iheie- 
fore,  w'ould  not  use  the  wool  Ilmdu.  What  wuid  should  we  usC  then  ? Tiie  other 
woids  which  alone  we  cmu  use,  aie  either  iiie  Vaidiks,  followeis  ol  the  Vedas,  or 
better  still,  the  Vedantisis,  followeis  of  the  Vediiua  l\Iosi  of  the  great  leligions  of 
the  wxnld  owe  allegiance  to  ceitam  i)Ook^,  wlimh  they  believe  aie  the  woids  of  God, 
or  some  othei  siipenialuial  beings,  and  wlm.h  aic  the  ba^is  of  their  religion.  Now 
of  all  these  hook'*,  accoiding  to  the  modem  of  the  West,  the  oldest  aie  the 

Vedas  of  the  Hindus  A liuie  undeisianJing,  iherefoic,  li  uecessaiy  about  the 
Vedas. 

This  mass  of  writing  called  the  Vedas  is  not  the  utterance  of  peisons.  Its  date 
has  never  been  ficed,  can  never  be  fixed,  and,  accoiding  to  us,  the  Vedas  aie  eternal. 
Theie  is  one  salient  point  whicli  I want  you  to  lemcmber,  that  all  the  other  religions 
of  the  woild  claim  ihcir  autiiorily  as  beung  delivered  by  a peisonal  God  or  a 
number  of  pcisoial  beings,  angels,  or  special  messengers  of  God,  unto  ceitain 
peisons;  while  the  claim  of  the  Iliadns  is,  that  the  Vedas  do  not  owe  iheii  authority 
to  auvbodv,  they  aio  themsehes  the  antlioiity,  being  eternal — the  knowledge  o£ 
God.  'rhev  w'eie  nevci  wiilten,  ne\oi  ciea'.eil,  they  h.ive  i.xMed  thi.»ughout  tune; 
just  as  crea-inn  u infmile  and  etciinl,  without  begmnme  and  without  end,  so  is  the 
knowledge  of  God,  w'lthonl  b.  gi.mmg  and  without  end.  Am!  this  knowledge  is  what 
is  meant  bv  the  Veda->  ( I'zc/ to  knoa).  The  ma^s  oi  knowled.go  called  the  Vedanta 
was  disco\eied  by  pei  son  ages  callml  Rishis.  and  the  Rishi  is  defined  ^as  a Alantta 
Drcnhlti,  a scci  of  ilioughi , not  ih.at  the  thought  was  his  own.  Whenever  you  hear 
that  a eeitaiii  jiassago  of  the  Vedas  came  fiom  .i  ceitim  Ri  .In,  mvei  think  that  he 
wiote  It,  oi  cioated  it  out  of  his  mind,  he  v.?s  the  s<-Ci  (zf  the  ihonglu  wh'ch  alieady 
existed  , it  existed  in  the  univeise  elOinall).  This  s.ige  was  the  discovcei  , the  Rishis 
W'ere  spiiitual  discuvereis. 

This  mass  of  writing,  the  Ved.as,  is  divided  piincipally  into  two  parts,  the  Karma 
Kanda  and  the  Juana  Akz/zz/u— the  avuik  poUion  and  the  knowledge  pen  lion,  the 


13^ 


LF.CTURES—FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


ceiemoninl  anrl  tlic  spiritual.  The  work  portion  consists  of  various  sacrifices  ; most 
of  tliLun  of  late  have  been  f^iven  up  as  not  piacticable  under  present  circum- 
slances  ; hut  others  remain  to  the  piesent  day  in  some  shape  or  other.  1 he  main 
ideas  of  the  Karma  Kau<Ja,  which  consist  of  the  duties  of  man,  the  duties  of  the 
student,  of  the  householder,  of  the  recluse,  and  the  various  duties  of  the  diffeient 
stations  of  life,  are  followed,  more  or  less,  down  to  the  present  day.  Hut  the  spiiitual 
poiiion  of  our  leli^ion  is  in  the  second  pail,  the  the \edanta,  the 

end  of  the  Vedas,  the  .t?ist,  the  goal  of  the  Vedas.  The  essence  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  Vedas  was  called  liy  the  name  of  V’^edanta,  which  comprises  the  Upanishads  , 
and  all  the  seels  of  India,  whether  Dualists,  (lualified  Dualists,  IMonists,  or  the  Siviles. 
Vaisnavites,  .Saklas,  .Souras,  (lanapaltyas — if  there  is  any  sect  in  India  which  dares  to 
come  within  the  fold  of  Hinduism,  it  must  acknowledge  the  Upanishails  of  the 
Vedas.  'I'hey  can  ha\e  their  own  interpretations,  and  can  inlerpict  them  in  theii 
own  way,  but  the)  must  obey  the  authoiity.  That  is  why  w’c  w’ant  to  use  the  woid 
Vcdaiitist  instead  of  Hindu.  All  the  philosophcis  of  India  who  are  orthodox  have 
to  acknowledge  the  authority  of  the  Vedanta,  and  all  our  present-day  religions,  ho\y- 
cver  crude  some  of  them  may  appear  to  be,  howevei  incxjihcable  some  of  their 
puiposes  may  seem,  one  who  undeistands  them,  and  studies  them,  can  trace  them 
back  to  the  ideas  of  the  Upanishads.  So  deeply  ha\e  these  Upanishads  sunk  into 
our  race,  that  those  of  }ou  who  study  the  symbology  of  the  ciudesi  lehgion  of  the 
Hindus,  will  be  astonished  to  find  sometimes  figuiati\e  expressions  of  the  Upanishads 
—the  Upanishads  liecome  symbolised  after  a tune  into  figuies  and  so  foith.  (beat 
spiritual  and  philosophical  ideas  in  the  Upanish.tds  aic  to-<Iay  with  us,  coineited 
into  household  woi.ship  in  the  foim  of  symbols.  Thus  the  vaiioiis  symbols  now 
used  by  us.  all  come  fiom  the  Vedanta,  because  in  the  \edanta  they  aie  used  as 
figures,  .and  these  ideas  sjnead  among  the  nation  and  iieimeated  it  thioughout,  until 


they  became  part  of  thcii  evci)day  life,  as  symbols. 

Next  to  the  Vedanta  come  the  Smiilis.  These  also  are  books  written  by  sages, 
but  the  authority  of  the  Smritis  is  subordinate  to  that  of  the  Vedanta,  because  they 
stand  in  the  same  lelaliou  with  us,  as  the  .Scriptures  of  the  other  leligions  stand  with 
regard  to  them.  We  admit  that  the  Smiitis  hate  been  wiittcn  by  p.ailiculai  sagos  , 
in  that  sense  they  are  the  .same  as  the  .Scriptures  of  other  religions,  but  these  Smiitis 
are  not  final  authoiity.  If  there  is  anything  in  a Smriti  w-hich  contiadicts  the  \ ed.inla, 
the  Smiiti  is  to  be  rejected  ; its  authority  is  gone.  These  .Smiitis,  wa^  see  again  have 
varied  from  lime  to  time.  We  ic.ad  that  such  and  such  Smriti  should  have  authoiity 
in  the  Saiva  Vu-a,  such  and  such  in  the  TreUi  some  in  the  Dnuipara  } u-a, 

and  some  in  Kah  and  so  on.  As  es.scntial  conditions  changed  as  various 

circumstances  came  to  have  their  intliience  on  the  race,  manners  anc  u 
be  changed,  and  these  .Smnlis,  as  mainly  legulating  the  manners  and  customs  of  the 
nation,  had  also  to  be  changed  from  time  to  time.  This  is  a point  I speciahy  ask 
you  to  remember.  The  principles  of  religion  that  are  in  the  Vedanta  are  unchange- 
able. Why  f because  they  are  all  built  upon  the  eternal  principles  that  are  m man 
and  nature  ; they  can  never  change,  bleas  about  the  soul,  going  to  heaven,  and  so 
on,  can  never  change  ; they  w'ere  the  same  thousands  of  yeais  ago,  the}  aie  t c same 
to-dav,  they  will  be  the  same  millions  of  years  to  come.  But  those  religious  practices 

which  arc  based  entirely  upon  our  social  position  and  correlation,  must  change  with 

the  changes  in  .society.  Such  an  older,  therefore,  would  be  good  and  true  at  a cer- 
tain peiiod  and  not  at  another.  Wc  find  accordingly,  that  certain  food  should  be 


VEDA  XT  ISM 


^3 


allowed  at  one  time  and  not  at  another,  because  the  food  \\as  suitable  foi  (hat  lime  ; hut 
climatic  and  other  things  change,  \<uious  other  circumstances  reqiiiic  to  he  met.  so  the 
Srniili  changed  the  food  and  other  things.  Thus  it  naturally  follows,  that  if  in  nuKlein 
times  our  society  reqiiiies  changes  to  be  made,  they  must  be  met,  and  sages  will 
come  and  show  us  the  way  how  to  meet  them  ; but  not  one  jot  of  the  luinciples  of 
our  religion  will  be  changed;  they  will  remain  intact. 

Then  there  are  the  Puranas.  Purthiam  Ponchahihhanam,  which  means,  the 
Puranas  are  of  five  characteristics, —that  which  treats  of  histoiy,  of  cosmologv.  with 
various  .symbological  illustration  of  philosophical  piinciples  and  so  foilh.  'riiesc  weie 
wiillen  to  populaiise  the  religion  of  the  Vedas.  The  language  m which  the  W-das 
are  written  is  very  ancient,  and  even  among  scholars  very  few-  can  trace  the  dale  of 
these  books.  The  Puranas  weie  written  in  the  language  of  the  people  of  thal  lime, 
what  we  call  modern  Sanskiit.  They  w'cre  then  meant,  not  foi  schol.us,  Init  for  the 
ordinary  people;  and  ordinary  people  cannot  understand  philosoph}’.  Such  things 
were  given  unto  them  in  concrete  foi m,  by  means  of  the  lives  of  saints  and  kings 
and  great  men,  and  historical  events  that  happened  to  the  race,  ttc.  The  sages  made 
use  of  these  things,  to  illustrate  the  eternal  piiiiciiilcs  of  religion. 

There  are  still  other  books,  the  These  aie  vei\  much  like  Puraua^  in 

some  respects,  and  in  some  of  them  there  is  an  attempt  to  revive  the  old  saciificial 
ideas  of  the  Karma  Katufa. 

All  those  books  consiiiule  the  Scriptures  of  the  Hindus.  When  there  is  such  a 
mass  of  sacied  books  in  a nation  and  in  a r.icc,  which  has  devoted  the  greatest  pail  of 
its  energies  to  the  thought  of  philosoph}  and  spiiitualily,  (foi  nobody  knows  loi  how 
many  thousands  of  yeais),  it  is  quite  n.alural  that  theic  should  be  so  many  seels  ; 
indeed  it  is  a w’onder  that  theie  aie  not  thousands  more.  I'hcsc  sects  dillei  very  much 
fiom  each  othei  in  ^eilam  jiomts  We  shall  not  have  time  to  uiideisland  the  diffei- 
ences  between  these  sects,  and  all  the  spiiilual  details  about  them  ; thcicfore,  T shall 
lake  up  the  common  ground,  the  jirinciples  of  all  these  sects,  w'hich  every  Hindu 
must  believe. 

The  first,  is  the  question  of  the  creation,  that  this  Nature, /Vr/;<v ///,  d/'.nv/,  is 
infinite,  w'lthoiU  beginning.  It  is  not  thal  this  w'orUl  was  created  the  other  da\,  not 
that  a (lod  came  and  cicaled  the  woild,  and  since  that  lime  has  hetm  sleejiing  ; for 
that  cannot  be.  The  ci call ve  enm'gy  is  still  going  on.  Hod  is  eleinally  creating  - 
is  never  at  rest.  Remember  the  passage  in  the  (iila  vvheie  Knshna  says  : “If  I 
remain  at  rest  for  one  moment  this  umveise  will  bo  desiioyed.”  If  lint  ciealive 
energy  which  is  vvoiking  all  around  us,  day  and  night,  slojis  for  a second,  the  whole 
thing  falls  to  the  ground.  There  never  was  a time  when  that  energy  did  not  work 
throughout  the  universe,  hut  there  is  the  law  of  cycles,  Pra/ava.  Our  .Sanskrit  vvoid 
for  creation  properly  translates!,  should  be  projection^  and  not  n cation.  For  the  vvoid 
creation  in  the  Knglish  language  has  unhappily  got  that  feaiful,  that  most  ciude  idea 
of  soraething  coming  out  of  nothing,  creation  out  of  non-enlily,  and  non-existence 
becoming  existence,  which,  of  couise,  I w'ould  not  insult  }ou  by  asking  you  to 
believe.  Our  word,  therefore,  is  projection.  The  whole  of  this  Naluie  exists,  it 
becomes  finer,  subsides,  and  then  after  a peiiod  of  rest,  as  it  wore,  the  vvliolc  thing 
is  again  projected  forward,  and  the  same  combination,  the  same  evolution,  the  same 
manfestations  appear,  and  remain  playing,  as  it  were,  for  a certain  time,  only  again 
to  break  into  pieces,  to  become  finer  and  finer,  until  the  whole  thing  subsides,  and 
again  comes  out.  Thus  it  goes  on  backwards  and  foi  wards,  with  a vvavc-Iike 


14 


Ll'rri'RE.'s  FRuM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


motion  thi(jr!>,t)<iut  eiornuy  Time,  f^p.^ce  and  causation  are  all  within  this  Nature. 
'I'o  -sa),  tlicKfoic,  that  It  had  a hrginnni;^,  is  iiUci  nonsense  No  such  question  can 
ocun  as  to  Us  hcginniiifr,  oi  its  end.  'I’hendoic,  uheiever  in  our  Scriptures  the 
wuids  licyiniiinq  and  end  .tie  tisod,  von  must  rcMiieinhcr  that  it  means  the  beginning 
Hiid  tile  end  ol  one  paiiiciil.n  c\(lc  , no  moie  llian  ihal. 

Whal  makes  ihii  ci cation  (iod,  Wijat  do  T mean  by  the  use  of  the  Engli' 
word,  God  ? C'eiiainly  not  the  word  as  ordinal ilv  use<l  in  English,  a good  deal  0. 
dilTeieiice  Tiieie  is  lUi  otliei  suitable  woid  in  English.  I would  lathei  confine  my- 
self to  the  San  do  It  wold.  Ihuhnutu,  He  is  the  general  cause  of  all  these  mani- 
fesiaiions.  \\  luil  is  this  Bialinuiti'i  He  is  eternal,  cteinally  puie,  eternally  awake, 
the  almight),  the  all-knowmg  the  all-mciciful,  the  omnipresent,  the  foimless,  the 
paiiless  He  cieitc''  tins  iiuheise.  It  He  is  always  creating  and  holding  up  this 
univeisc,  two  ddliculiies  arise  Wc  see  that  tlieie  is  partialuv  in  the  univeise.  One 
person  is  bom  happy,  and  anoihei  nnhapjiy  , one  is  i ich  and  anoUiei  is  poor ; this 
shows  pailiahtv.  'I  hen,  llieie  is  <.  i mdiy  also,  loi  heie  the  veiy  condition  of  life  is 
death.  One  animal  teais  another  to  pieces,  and  evciy  man  tiies  to  get  the  better  of 
his  own  brolhei  'rius  comjieiuion,  cincity,  hoiioi,  and  .sighs  rending  heaits  day 
and  night,  is  tlie  slate  of  thing-,  in  this  soiiti  of  outs.  If  this  be  the  creation  of  a 
God,  that  God  is  woise  than  ciiid.  woisc  than  an\  devil  that  man  e\er  imagined. 
Ay!  savs  the  Vedanta,  it  is  not  the  latilt  of  God  that  tins  paitiality  exists,  tiiat  this 
competition  exists  Wliu  makes  it \Vc  omseb.es  Tiieie  is  a cloud  shedding  its 
lain  on  all  fields  alike.  Ikil  ii  is  only  the  field  that  is  well-culiivaled,  which  gels 
the  atUantage  of  the  showci  , anothei  held,  which  has  not  been  tilled  oi  taken  care 
of,  cannot  get  that  ad\ aiiiage  It  is  not  the  lauli  of  ihc  cloud  The  mercy  of  God 
is  eternal  and  unchangeable , It  Is  wc  that  make  the  diiTeientiatiun  But  how  can 
this  diffeience  of  some  being  bom  happy  and  some  uuhapjiy  be  explained  ? They  do 
noihingtoin.ikcthaidilEici.ee'  Not  in  this  life,  hut  rhev  did  in  then  last  birth, 
and  ihi?.  dilTerence  is  explained  by  the  action  in  the  punions  life 

We  now-  CO, lie  to  'he  secoinl  piinciple  on  which  we  all  agree,  not  only  all 
Hindus,  but  all  Buddhists,  and  all  Jams.  We  all  agree  that  life  is  eieinal.  It  is  not 
that  it  has  spuing  out  of  nothing,  foi  that  cannot  be.  Such  a life  would  not  be  w’ortli 
having  Even  iluug  that  h.xs  a beginmng  in  time  must  end  in  time,  if  life  began 
but  )esterday,  it  must  end  to-niouow.  and  aumhil.Uion  is  tlic  result.  Life  must  have 
been  cxisliag  It  does  not  now  requiie  much  acumeu  to  see  that,  for  all  the  sciences 
of  modem  times  have  lieeii  coining  round  to  our  help  illusUating  fiom  the  material 
vYOild  the  piMcIples  omliodicd  in  oni  Scnpiuies.  You  know  it  already,  that  each 
one  of  In  Is  the  cdic.r  oi  liie  rn'mite  pisi  , the  child  is  usheied  into  the  woild,  not  as 
something  (lidiiii--  fiom  th'*  ;l-••ids  of  nature,  as  poets  deliglit  .so  much  to  depict,  but 
he  Ikis  the  bui  leu  ot  .in  ’ulmite  pis:  , yood  oi  evil  be  comes  to  woik  out  liis  own 
past  dec'll  s rii.'l  in  dvcs  ihe  ililli  i Million  This  is  the  law  of  Kamta  Each  one  of 
Us  Is  the  niakoi  of  hu  own  tal<  . ddiis  k’  •.  kiiOLks  on  tlie  In'ad  at  cjnce  all  iJoctiines  of 
picdc  'moioii^  ae  I late,  .'ud  gi.c-  iis  ilio  on'y  means  o!  i cconciliaLion  between  God 
and  man.  We,  we,  .lud  no.."  d-e.  .ue  i.'-j)on,Ible  Em  what  we  sulfei.  We  aie  the 
cffeels,  and  wc  .ue  the  ciuses.  We  aie  lice  thciefoie.  If  I am  unhappy,  it  has 
beem  of  mv  own  nrikiiit.  iiul  Ural  \ lliint  sho'vs  that  1 « an  be  hajipy  if  I will.  ]f 
I am  impuic,  that  is  al-o  of  mv  can  miking,  and  that  veiv  thing  shows  that 
I can  be  puie  it  I will  '1  he  human  w ill  ' iiuG  b -vond  all  ciicumslance.  Before  it, 
the  strong,  gigantic,  in.luUe  will  and  fieedom  in  man,  all  the  powers,  even  of  nature, 


VEDA  NTT SM 


15 

rr.ust  bo'v  do^:^n,  siiccnnih,  an<l  hecoinp  its  sen  ants.  This  Is  the  result  of  the  law  of 
Karma. 

The  next  question,  of  couiso.  ivilmnlly  would  he.  what  is  the  soul  ? Wc  cannot 
understand  God  in  <'mr  St  nptiu wiihoui  KuoAinq  the  ^^oul.  'Thorc  have  been 
attempts  in  India,  ami  oiilMdi  ol  Imhitoo,  to  catch  a ;',Iimj)se  of  the  hcioiid  by 
Studying  external  naluie,  and  we  all  knon  wini  an  awin':  lailnie  li.is  been  the  rc'^ult. 
Instead  of  giving  us  a gliinp‘>c  of  tiie  liooud,  the  niiMC  we  study  the  malenal  woild 
the  more  we  tend  to  become  inatenahsml  The  mo:e  ne  liandle  the  material 
world,  even  the  liUle  spuituahl)  which  ve  ]>osSt.s^ed  bcloieM.ini‘-h(‘s.  Theiefoie, 
that  IS  not  the  w.iv  to  spmtuahty,  to  knowlcolge  of  the  lli-liest.  but  it  must  come 
through  the  hcail,  the  human  soul  The  extmnal  woikiui^s  do  urtt  tench  us  an) thing 
about  the  beyond,  about  the  Infmite,  it  is  onl)  the  intcinal  tiuil  can  do  mi.  'I  hiough 
soul,  therefore,  the  analysis  of  the  human  soul  alone,  can  \\<'  undei  stand  God. 
There  aie  dilTeicnces  of  opinion  as  to  the  ii.itme  of  the  hmu.in  soul  anions  the 
vaiious  sects  m India,  but  ihcio  aie  eoitam  pomtN  of  agieomcnt  We  all  agiee, 
that  souls  aie  without  beginning  and  without  end,  and  immoil.il  h\  their  very  natiiie  ; 
also,  that  all  poue-.s.  blessmg.  pm ii\ , ommpies.juc.  ommscience  .ue  hui led  in  each 
soul.  That  IS  a gland  idea  we  ought  to  lemembcr  In  e\'*iv  nnn  and  in  every 
animal,  howevei  weik  01  wi(keci,  gicat  oi  smill,  lesuh's  t!ie  sum'  omnipiescnt,  oinni* 
scient  soul,  'I'he  dillereuce  is  not  m the  soul,  but  in  the  mai.iiest..iion.  between 
me  and  the  smallcbl  animal,  the  dilYcrence  is  only  in  mnnib'stalion,  but  as  a piinciplc 
he  IS  the  same  as  I am,  lie  is  111}  bi other  lie  has  (he  s.inie  soul  as  I ha\c  This  is  the 
greatest  piinciple  that  India  lias  pieaclied.  1 he  talc  of  the  biiUiieiliood  of  man 
becomes  in  India  the  biotliei hoou  of  umveis.a!  lile,  of  animals.  ,ind  of  all  life  doan  to 
the  little  ants, -all  these  aic  out  bodies.  I'hen  as  our  .^ci ijiiurc  sa) s,— “ Thus  the 
sage,  knowing  that  the  same  Loid  mbabiis  all  liodics,  will  woislup  c\ory  body  as 
such.”  That  is  why  in  India  then'  have  been  siu  Ii  men  ilul  ideas  about  the  poor, 
about  animals,  about  ever)  body  and  eveiy  lHmg  else  'I'liis  is  one  of  the  common 
grounds  about  our  ideas  of  the  soul 

Xatuially  we  come  to  the  idea  of  God.  One  thing  more  .about  (he  soul.  Those 
who  study  the  English  language  aio  often  deluded  In  the  wools,  soul  and  mind. 
Oui  Aiman  and  soul  arc  enliicl)  dilToient  things.  WInt  wo  call  Mana^,  the  mind, 
the  western  people  call  soul.  The  West  neiei  had  the  idea  of  soul  until  they  got  it 
through  Sanskrit  Philosophy,  some  twenty  yeais  ago  'I’lic  body  is  heie,  bevond 
that  IS  the  mind,  )'ot  the  mind  is  not  the  Alniau  ; il  is  the  line  I .id),  liiO  SiikiJinia 
5/za;v/'u,— made  of  fine  paiuclcs,  which  goes  fiom  biith  to  death,  and  so  on; 
but  behind  the  mmd  is  the  Alnan,  the  Soul,  the  Self  of  man  It  cannot  be  trans- 
lated bv  the  wmkI  Soul  01  .dind,  s(>  ’\e  have  to  use  the  wool  Afnuiti,  01,  as  Westcin 
philosophers  have  designated  it  by  the  v'Oid.  .Self.  Wliaievci  w'ord  )0U  use,  you  must 
keep  it  clear  in  )oui  niiud,  that  the  Aiman  is  scpaiate  from  the  niiud,  as  w'cll  as 
from  the  bodv,  and  that  this  Aiman  goes  fiom  biilh  and  death,  acccunpanied  by 
the  mind — the  Sukshma  -S/ni/ifa.  And  when  the  tunc  conies  that  if  has  attained  to 
all  knowledge,  and  manifested  itself  to  pcileclion,  then  this  going  fiom  biith  to 
death  ceases  for  it.  d’hen  il  is  at  liberty  cither  to  keeji  that  iinnd,  or  the  Snkshma 
or  to  let  it  go  for  evci.  and  icmain  indopcnclent  and  liee  ihioughout  all 
eternity.  The  goal  of  the  soul  is  freedom.  That  is  no  peculiaiity  of  our  religion. 
We  also  have  heavens,  and  hells  too,  but  these  are  not  infimte,  for  in  the  very  nature 
of  things  they  cannot  be.  If  there  were  any  heavens,  they  would  be  only  repetitions 


LECTURES— FRO^f  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


i6 

of  this  woiM  of  outs  on  a l»isger  bcale,  with  a little  more  happiness,  and  a little  more 
eiijo)  iMcnt,  but  that  is  all  the  woise  tor  the  soul.  There  are  many  of  these  heavens. 
I’eibuns  who  ilo  /,^ooxl  woiks  heie  with  the  thou/^ht  of  lewaul,  when  tliey  die,  are  born 
a^ain  as  ^-odsin  one  of  these  heavens,  as  Indra  and  others.  7'hese  g:ods  are  the  names 
of  certain  slates.  'Phey  also  had  been  men,  and  by  good  work  they  have  bec( 
gotls,  and  those  dirteient  names  that  you  read  of,  such  as  Indra,  and  so  on,  are  . 
the  names  of  the  same  person.  There  will  be  thousands  of  Indias.  Nahusha 
a gieat  king,  and  when  he  died  he  became  Indra.  It  is  a position  ; one  soul  become;’^" 
high  and  lakes  the  India  position,  and  remains  in  it  only  a ceitain  time;  he  then  dies 
and  is  boin  again  as  man.  But  the  human  body  is  the  highest  of  all.  Some  of  the 
gods  may  liy  to  go  higher  and  give  up  all  ideas  of  enjoyment  in  heavens,  but,  as  in 
this  woikl,  wealth  anti  position  and  enjoyment  delude  the  vast  majoiily,  so,  do  most 
ot  the  gods  become  deluded  also,  and  after  wot  king  out  then  good  Kaiina,  they  fall 
down  and  become  human  beings  again.  This  eailh,  thciefoie,  is  the  Karma  Bhumi; 
it  IS  this  cailh  fiom  which  we  attain  to  liberation.  So.  even  these  heavens  aie  not 
worth  attaining  to.  Wh.il  is  then  w'orlh  having  } Atakli,  freedom.  Even  in  the 
highest  of  heavens,  says  oui  Sciiptuie,  you  aie  a slave  ; what  inalteis  it  if  you  aie  a 
king  foi  tw'eiity  thousand  )eais  ? So  long  as  you  have  a body,  so  long  as  yon  arc  a 
slave  to  happiness,  so  long  as  time  woi  ks  on  }ou,  space  woiks  on  you,  you  aie  a 
slave.  The  ulea,  tlierefoie,  is  to  be  fiee  of  exleinal  and  internal  natuie.  Nature 
must  fall  at  }oui  feel,  and  \ou  niiist  tiample  on  it,  and  be  fiee  and  gloiious,  by  going 
be}'ond.  No  inoie  is  theie  life,  tlierefoie,  no  moie  is  tliere  death ; no  more  enjoy- 
ment, theiefoie,  no  moie  niiseiy.  It  is  bliss  unspeakable,  indestiuclible,  beyond 
everything.  What  we  call  happiness  and  good  heie,  are  but  pailicles  of  that  ctcinal 
Bliss  And  this  eternal  bliss  is  oui  goal. 

'Plu'  soul  IS  also  .sexless;  we  cannot  say  of  xhcA/ma?!  that  it  is  a man  or  a woman. 
Sox  belongs  to  the  body  alone.  All  such  ideas,  therefore,  as  man  oi  woman,  aie  a 
delusion  when  sjioken  with  regaid  to  the  Self,  and  aie  only  piojiei  when  sjioken  of 
the  body.  So  aie  the  ideas  of  age  ; It  never  ages;  the  ancient  One  is  ahvays  the  same. 
IIow'  did  It  come  down  to  eaith.'*  There  is  but  one  answ’cr  to  that  in  our  Scrijituios. 
Ignoiance  is  the  cause  of  all  this  bondage.  It  is  through  ignorance  that  we  have 
become  bound  ; knowledge  will  cure  i^,  by  taking  us  to  the  othei  side.  IIow'  will 
that  knowledge  come  ? Through  love,  Bhakti.  By  the  w^oishiji  of  God,  by  loving 
all  beings  as  the  temples  of  God;  He  resides  w’ithin  them.  'I'hus,  with  that 
intense  love  will  come  knowledge,  and  ignoiance  wil'  disajipear,  the  bonds  will 
bleak,  and  the  soul  will  be  free.  'Phere  are  two  ideas  of  God  in  our  Sciiptures  ; the 
one,  the  personal,  and  the  olhei,  the  impersonal.  The  idea  of  the  Personal  God  i.s, 
that  He  is  the  oinnipiesent  cieator,  jneserver,  and  destroyer  of  everything,  the  eternal 
Ikulier  and  ^Mother  of  the  univer.se,  but  One  who  is  eternally  separate  from  us  and 
fioin  all  souls;  and  liberation  consists  in  coming  near  to  Him  and  living  in  Him. 
Then  there  is  l^e  other  idea  ot  the  Impersonal,  where  all  those  adjectives  are  taken 
away  as  supeilluous,  as  illogical,  and  tlieie  remains  an  impersonal,  omnipresent  Being 
who  cannot  be  calleil  a knowing  being,  because  knowledge  only  belongs  to  the 
human  mind.  He  cannot  be  called  a thinking  being,  because  that  is  a process  of  the 
weak  only.  He  cannot  be  called  a reasoning  being,  because  rea.soning  is  a sign  of 
weakness.  He  cannot  be  called  a creating  being,  because  none  creates  except  in 
bondage.  What  boiulagc  has  He  ? None  works  except  forHhe  fulfilment  of  desires  ; 
what  dcbiico  has  He  None  works  except  it  is  to  tupjrfy . somi^  wants;  what  wants 


y^D.Lvr/sj/ 


if 

hds  He  ? In  the  Vedas  it  is  not  the  word  “ He  ” that  is  used,  but  tt’ ; fdr  “ He 
would  make  an  invidious  distinction,  as  if  He  were  a man.  “ It  ” the  impersonlai, 
is  used,  and  this  impersonal  “It,”  Is  pfeached.  This  system  is  called  the 
Advaita. 

And  vi^hat  ire  oiir  relatidris  with  this  Impersonal  Being  ? That  we  arc  rie.  We 
and  He  ire  dne.  Every  one  is  but  a manifestation  of  that  Impersonal,  the  basis  of 
all  being,  and  iitisefy  ednsists  in  thinking  of  ourselves  as  different  from  this  Infinite, 
Impersonal  Being ; atnd  liberation  consists  in  knowing  our  unity  with  this  wonderful 
Impersonality.  These,  in  shdrt,  are  the  two  ideas  of  God  that  we  find  in  our  Scrip- 
tures. Some  remarks  ought  to  be  made  here.  It  Is  only  through  the  idea  ot  the 
Impersonal  God  that  you  can  have  any  system  of  ethics.  In  every  nation  the  truth 
has  been  preached  from  the  most  ancient  tunes— love  your  fellow-beings  as  your- 
selves—I mean  love  human  beings  as  yourselves.  Iil  India  it  has  be'e'd  Jyreached, 

‘ love  all  beings  as  yourselves  ’ ; we  make  no  distinction  between  men  and  animals. 
But  no  reason  was  forthcoming,  no  one  knew  why  it  would  be  good  to  love  other 
beings  as  ourselves.  And  the  reason  why  is  there,  in  the  idea  of  the  Impersonal  God  ; 
you  understand  it — when  you  learn  that  the  whole  world  is  one—the  oneness  of  the  uni- 
verse— the  solidarity  of  all  life,— that  in  hurling  any  one  I am  hinting  myself,  in  loving 
any  one  1 am  loving  myself.  Hence  we  understand  why  it  is  that  we  ought  not  to  hurt 
others.  The  reason  for  ethics,  therefore,  can' only  be  had  from  this  ideal  of  the 
Impersonal  God.  Then  there  is  the  question  of  the  position  of  the  l^crsonal  God 
in  Iti  I understand  the  wonderful  flow  of  love  that  conies  from  the  idea  of  a Personal 
God,  I thoroughly  appreciate  the  power  and  potency  of  Bhakli  on  men  to  suit  the 
needs  of  different  times.  What  we  now  want  in  our  country,  however,  is  not  so  much 
of  weeping,  but  a little  strength.  What  a mine  of  strength  is  in  this  Impersonal 
God,  when  all  superstitions  have  been  thiown  overboard,  and  man  stands  on  liis  feet 
with  the  knowledge  that  I am  the  Impersonal  Being  of  the  woild!  What  can  make 
me  afraid  ? I care  not  even  for  nature’s  laws.  Death  is  a joke  to  me.  Man  stands 
on  the  glory  of  his  own  Soul,  the  Infinite,  the  Kteinal,  the  Deathless — that  Soul 
which  no  instruments  can  pierce,  which  no  heslt  can  dry,  or  fire  burn,  no  water 
melt,  the  Infinite,  the  Birfehless^  the  Deathless,  without  beginning  and  without  end, 
before  whose  magnitude  the  suns  and  moons  and  all  iheii  systems  appear  like 
drops  in  the  ocean,  before  whose  glory  space  melts  away  into  nothingness,  and 
time  vanishes  into  non-existence.  This  glorious  Soul  we  must  believe  in.  Out  of 
that  will  come  power.  Whatever  you  think,  that  you  will  be.  If  you  think  your- 
selves weak,  weak  you  will  be ; if  you  think  yourselves  strong,  strong  you  will  be ; 
if  you  think  yourselves  impure,  impure  you  will  be  ; if  you  think  yourselves  pure, 
pure  you  will  be.  This  teaches  us  not  to  think  oui  selves  as  weak,  but  as  strong, 
omnipotent,  omniscient.  No  matter  that  I have  not  expressed  it  yet ; it  is  in  me. 
All  knowledge  is  in  me,  all  power,  all  purity,  and  all  freedom.  Why  cannot  I express 
this  knowledge  ? Because  I do  not  believe  in  it.  Let  me  believe  in  il*and  it  must 
and  will  come  out.  This  is  what  the  idea  of  the  Impersonal  teaches.  Make  your 
children  strong  from  their  very  childhood,  teach  them  not  weakness,  nor  forms,  but 
make  them  strong,  let  them  stand  on  their  feet,  bold,  all-conquering,  all-suffering,  and 
first  of  all,  let  them  learn  of  the  glory  of  the  Soul.  That,  you  get  alone  in  the  Vedanta, 
— and  there  alone.  It  has  ideas  of  love  and  worship  and  other  things  which  we  have 
in  other  religions,  and  more  besides;  but  this  idea  of  the  Soul  is  the  life-giving 
thought,  the  most  wonderful.  There  and  there  alone,  is  the  great  thought 


IKCTCI^nS—FROM  COtOAfRO  TO  AIMORA 


t3 

that  is.  [^oing  to  revolutionise  the  World  and  reconcile  the  knowledge  of  the 
iiialeiial  \\oild  \Mth  leligion. 

Thus  1 have  tiied  to  biing  before  you  the  salient  points  of  our  religion — the 
pnmjples.  I have  only  to  say  a few  words  about  the  practice  and  the  application. 
A*,  we  have  seen,  under  the  circumstances  e.xisting  in  India,  naturally  many  -"ts 

must  apj»car.  As  a lact,  we  Hud  that  there  arc  so  many  sects  in  India,  and  at 
same  tune  wc  know  this  mysterious  fact  that  these  sects  do  not  quarrel  with  e i 
olhei.  'I'hc  Suite  does  not  say  that  every  V’‘aishnavile  is  going  to  be  damned, 
llie  N'aishnaMle  that  eveiy  Suite  will  be  damned.  The  Sivite  sa)S,  this  is  my  path, 
and  \ou  have  vouis  : at  the  end  we  must  come  together.  They  all  know  that  in  India. 
'J'hu  is  the  Ihcoiy  of  Ish/atn.  It  has  been  recognised  in  the  most  ancient  times 
that  iheie  aie  vaiious  foims  of  woi shipping  (iod.  It  is  also  recognised  that  different 
naluies  lequiie  diHeient  methods.  Voui  method  of  coming  to  (lod  may  not  be  my 
method,  po'^sthiy  il  might  hint  me.  Such  an  idea  as  lliat  there  is  but  one  way  for 
evetybody  is  iiijmioiis,  meaningless,  and  entirely  to  be  avoided.  Woe  unto  the  world 
wlien  eveivone  is  of  the  same  lehgious  opinion  and  takes  to  the  same  path,  'riicn 
all  leligions  and  all  ttiought  will  he  destioyed.  Variety  is  the  very  soul  of  life. 
When  iL  dies  out  ciUiicly  cieation  will  die.  When  this  vaiiation  in  thought  is  kept 
up,  we  must  exist , and  vve  .weed  not  quairel  because  of  that  vaiiely.  Your  waj  is 
vei)  ,£>oml  loi  von,  hut  not  loi  me.  .My  way  is  good  foi  me  but  not  for  you,  l\Iy  way 
IS  called  in  bauskiu,  my  Av///aw.  Mmd  you,  we  Iravc  no  (juairel  with  any  religion 
111  the  vvoild.  Wc  h.ivc  e.ich  our  JshUnH,  But  when  we  sec  men  coming  and  saving, 
“ this  is  the  Old)  way,"  and  trving  to  force  it  on  us  in  India,  wc  have  a word  to  say; 
wc  laugh  at  tlieni.  Foi  such  people  who  want  to  destioy  their  brothers  because 
thev  seem  to  tollovv  addteient  path  tovvaids  God,— for  them  to  talk  of  love  is  absurd. 
'J'heii  love  does  not  count  for  much,  flow  can  they  preach  of  love  who  cannot  bear 
anolhci  man  to  tollovv  a difleient  path  fiom  thcii  own  > If  that  is  love,  what  is  halted  ? 
We  have  no  (piaiiel  with  any  religion  in  the  woild.  whether  il  teaches  men  to  worship 
Chiist,  Buddha  oi  Mahomet,  01  any  other  piophel.  “Welcome,  my  brolhei,"  the 
Hindu  savs,  “ I am  going  to  lielp  you ; but  you  must  allow  me  to  follow  my 
way  too.  'I'liat  is  my  lOifam.  Vciir  way  is  very  good,  no  doubt,  but  il  may  be 
dangerous  for  me.  My  own  expciiencc  tells  me  what  food  is  good  for  me,  and  no 
army  of  doctors  can  tell  me  that.  So  1 know  from  my  own  experience  what  path 
is  the  best  for  me.”  Thai  is  the  goal,  the  hhfam,  and  iheicfore  we  say  that  if  a 
temple,  or  a symbol,  oi  an  image.  Iielps  you  to  realise  *hc  Divinity  within,  you  are 
welcome  to  it.  Have  two  lumdied  images  if  you  like.  If  certain  forms  and  foimu- 

laries  help  you  to  realise  the  Divine,  God  speed  you;  have,  by  all  means,  whatever 
forms,  and  whatever  temples,  and  whatever  ceremonies  biing  you  nearer  to  God. 
But  do  not  quarrel  about  them  ; the  moment  you  quarrel,  you  are  not  going  God- 
waid,  you  arc  going  backward,  towards  the  brutes. 

'I'hese  ire  a few  ideas  in  our  religion.  It  is  one  of  inclusion  of  every  one, 
exclusion  of  none.  Though  our  castes  and  our  institutions  are  apparently  linked 
with  our  icligion,  they  are  not  so.  These  institutions  have  been  necessary  to  protect 
us  as  a nation”  and  when  this  necessity  for  self-preservation  will  no  more  exist,  they 
will  die  a natural  death.  But,  the  older  I grow,  the  better  I seem  to  think  of  these 
time-honoured  institutions  of  India.  There  was  a time  when  I used  to  think  that 
fnany  of  them  weie  useless  and  woithless,  but  the  older  I grow,  the  more  I seem 
to  feel  a diffidence  m cuising  any  one  of  them,  for  each  one  of  them  is  the  embodi- 


y*^I)AXr/SAf 


Weht  of  the  experience  of  centuries.  A child  of  but  yesterday,  destined  to  die  the 
day  after  to-morrow,  comes  to  me  and  asks  me  to  change  all  my  pl.tns.  and  it  I l)ear 
the  advice  of  that  baby  and  change  all  my  surroundings  accoidmg  to  liis  ideas,  I 
myself  should  be  a fool,  and  no  one  else.  Much  of  the  advice  that  is  coming  to 
us  from  different  countries  is  similar  to  this.  Tell  these  wise.acres  : I will  heai  >ou 
when  you  have  made  a stable  society  yourselves.  You  cannot  hold  on  to  one  idea 
for  two  days,  you  quarrel  and  fail  ; you  are  horn  like  moths  in  the  spimg  and  die  like 
them  ill  five  minutes.  You  come  up  like  bubbles  .and  bin  si  like  bubbles  too.  P'iist 
form  a stable  society  like  ours.  First  make  laws  and  institutions  that  remain  iiiuli- 
minished  in  their  power  through  scores  of  centuries.  'Phen  will  be  the  time  to 
talk  on  the  subject  with  you,  but  till  then,  my  friend,  you  arc  only  a giildy 
child. 

I have  finished  what  I had  to  say  about  oiir  religion.  I will  end  by  reminding 
you  of  the  one  pressing  necessity  of  the  day.  Praise  be  to  Vyasa,  the  great  author 
of  the  Mahabharata,  that  in  this  there  is  one  great  woilc.  The  y\f/>ijs 

and  the  other  hard  Yogas  that  were  practised  in  other  do  not  woik  now.  What 

is  needed  in  this  Yuga  is  giving,  helping  others.  What  is  meant  liy  ? The 

highest  of  gifts  is  the  giving  of  spiiitual  knowledge,  the  next,  is  the  giving  of  secular 
knowledge,  and  the  next,  is  the  saving  of  hie;  the  last,  is  gi\ing  food  and  dunk. 
He  who  gives  spiritual  knowledge,  saves  the -soul  from  many  and  many  a hiith.  lie 
who  gives  secular  knowledge  opens  the  eyes  of  Ininian  beings  towards  spiiitual 
knowledge,  and  far  below  lliese,  rank  all  other  gifts,  even  the  sating  of  life.  'I'liere- 
foie,  it  IS  necessary  that  you  learn  this,  and  note  that  all  otliei  kinds  of  woik  aie  of 
much  less  value  than  that  of  imparting  spiiitual  knowdedge.  'The  highest  anil 
gieatest  help  is  that  given  in  the  dissemin.ilion  of  spiritual  knowledge.  'I'lieie  is 
an  eternal  fountain  of  spiiitualiiy  iii  oui  .Sciiptures,  and  nowheie  on  eaith  except 
in  lliis  land  of  renunciation  do  we  lind  such  noble  ex.imples  of  pi.ntical  spiiitualltv. 
1 have  had  a little  expeiience  of  the  world,  Ikheve  me,  theie  is  much  talking  m 
other  lands,  but  the  practical  man  of  religion,  who  has  cariicd  it  into  Ins  hie.  is 
lieie  and  here  alone.  Talking  is  not  leligion ; parrots  may  talk,  machines  ma\  talk 
nowadays.  But  show  me  the  life  of  reuimdalion,  of  spiiitualily,  of  .all-sulkiiiig, 
of  love  infinite.  This  kind  of  life  indicates  a spiritual  man.  Wiili  such  ide.is  and 
such  noble  practical  examples  in  our  country,  it  would  he  a great  pitv  if  the 
treasuies  iu  the  brains  and  licarts  of  all  these  great  Yogins,  were  not  hrouglii  out  to 
become  the  common  property  of  every  one,  lich  and  poor,  high  and  low  ; not  onlv 
in  India,  but  they  must  he  thrown  hioadcast  all  over  the  woild.  Tins  is  one  of  our 
gieatest  duties,  and  you  will  lind  that  the  more  you  woik  to  lielp  olheis,  the  moie 
you  help  )ouiselves.  'Phe  one  vital  duty  incumheul  on  you  if  ^ cm  really  love  our 
leligion,  if  you  really  love  your  couiUiy,  is  that  you  must  snuggle  haul  to  he  up 
and  doing,  w'ith  this  one  great  idea  of  bringing  out  the  tieasuics  fiom  ^mi  closed 
books,  and  delivering  them  over  to  their  iightful  heirs.  And  above  aU,  one  thing 
is  necessary.  Aye,  for  ages  we  have  been  saturated  with  awful  jealousy ; we  aie 
always  getting  jealous  of  each  other.  Why  has  tins  man  a little  precedence,  and  not 
I ; even  in  the  worship  of  God  we  want  precedence,  to  such  a stale  of  slaveiy  have  we 
come.  This  is  to  be  avoided.  If  there  is  any  crying  sin  in  India  at  this  time  it  is 
this  slavery.  Everyone  wants  to  command  and  no  one  wants  to  ohev  : and  this 
is  owing  to  the  absence  of  that  wondeiful  Brahmacharya  of  yore.  Phi  si,  learn 

to  obey.  The  command  will  gome  by  itself.  Aiwa) s fust  leain  to  be  a servant,  ami 


20 


Colombo  to  almora 


then  you  will  be  fit  to  be  a master.  Avoid  this  jealousy,  and  you  will  do  great  w'orks 
fhitt  have  yet  to  be  done.  Our  ancestors  did  most  wonderful  works,  and  we  look 
back  upon  their  work  with  veneration  and  pride.  But  we  also  are  going  to  do  great 
deeds,  and  let  others  look  back  with  blessings  and  pride  upon  us,  as  their  ancestors. 
With  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  every  one  here  will  yet  do  such  deeds  that  will  **''’ipse 
those  of  our  ancestors,  great  and  glorious  as  they  may  have  been.  ^ 


REPLY  TO  THE  ADDRESS  OF  WELCOME  AT  PAMBAN. 


On  the  arri\al  of  Swami  Vivekananda  at  Pamban,  he  was  met  In  Ills  Ilijflmess 
the  Raja  of  Ramnad,  who  accorded  him  a hearty  welcome.  Piepaiaiions  had  been 
made  at  the  landing  whaif  for  a formal  leccption,  and  heie,  under  a pandal  which 
was  decorated  with  great  taste,  the  following  address  on  behalt  of  the  Pamban  people 
w'as  jead 


May  IT  PTKvsK  York  ITolinkss. 

We  greatly  rejoice  to  welcome  Your  Holiness  with  heaits  full  of  deepest  grati- 
tude and  highest  veneration— giatitude  for  having  so  leadily  and  giacioush  consented 
to  pay  us  a flying  visit  in  spite  of  the  numerous  calls  on  von,  and  veneration  for  the 
mail)  noble  and  excellent  qualities  that  ton  possess  and  foi  ilie  great  woik  )ou  have  so 
nobly  undci  taken  to  do,  and  winch  you  have  been  dischaiging  with  conspicuous 
ability,  utmost  zeal  and  eainestnefes. 

We  truly  rejoice  to  see  that  the  efforts  of  Your  Holiness  in  sowing  the  seeds  of 
Hindu  philosophy  in  the  cultuicd  minds  of  the  great  Western  nation,  are  being 
crowned  with  so  much  success,  that  we  already  see  all  aioiind,  the  blight  and  cheer- 
ful aspect  of  the  bearing  of  excellent  fiuits  in  great  abundance,  and  most  humbly 
pray  that  Your  Holiness  will,  dining  your  sojourn  in  Ar}avartha.  be  giaciously 
pleased  to  exert  yourself  even  a little  more  than  you  did  in  the  West,  to  awaken  the 
minds  of  your  brethren  in  this  our  motherland,  fiom  their  dieary  life-long  slumber 
and  make  then)  recall  to  their  inimls  the  long-forgotten  gospel  of  truth. 

Our  hearts  are  so  full  of  the  sincerest  affection,  greatest  reverence,  and  highest 
admiration  for  Your  Holiness  -our  great  spiritual  leader,  that  we  verilv  find  it  im- 
possible to  adequately  express  our  feelings,  and  therefore  beg  to  conclude  with  an 
earnest  and  united  prayer  to  the  merciful  Providence,  to  bless  Your  Holiness  with 
a long  life  of  usefulness,  and  to  grant  you  every  thing  that  may  tend  to  bring 
about  the  long-lost  feelings  of  universal  broiherhooij. 

The  Raja  added  to  tins  a brief  pei'^onal  welcome,  which  was  remaikable  for  its 
depth  of  feeling,  and  then  the  Sw'ami  replied  to  the  following  eftect  : - 

Our  sacred  motherland  is  a land  of  religion  and  philosophy — the  birthplace 
of  spiritual  giants — the  land  of  renunciation,  vvheie  and  where  alone,  from  the  most 
ancient  to  the  most  modern  times,  there  has  been  the  highest  ideal  of  life  open  to 
man. 

I have  been  in  the  countries  of  the  West ; have  travelled  through  many  lands, 
9f  many  races,  and  each  race  and  each  nation  appears  to  me  to  have  a particular 
ideal — a prominent  ideal  running  through  its  whole  life,  and  this  ideal*  is  the  back- 
bone of  the  national  life.  Not  politics  nor  niilitar>  power,  not  commercial  supremacy 
nor  mechanical  genius,  furnishes  India  with  that  backbone,  but  religion,  and  religion 
alone,  is  all  that  we  have  and  mean  to  have.  .Spiiituality  has  been  always  in 
India. 

Great  indeed  are  the  manifestations  of  muscular  power,  and  marvellous  the  mani- 
festations of  intellect  expressing  themselves  through  machines  bv  the  appliances 

2m 

THE  SamaKR'SHNA  mission^ 

INSTI  T'  iT:  Of  . Ill  TilUC  -I  ' 


22 


LECTURKS-FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 

of  science ; yet,  none  of  these  are  more  potent  than  the  influence  which  spirit 
exerts  upon  the  world. 

The  history  of  our  race  shows  that  India  has  always  been  most  active.  To-day, 
we  are  taught  by  men,  who  ought  to  know  better,  that  the  Hindu  is  mild  and  passive, 
and  this  has  become  a sort  of  pioverb  with  the  people  of  other  lands.  I ''ard 
the  idea  that  India  was  ever  passive.  Nowhere  has  activity  been  more  prone  t ed 
than  in  this  blessed  land  of  ours,  and  the  great  proof  of  this  activity  is  tha  Air 
most  ancient  and  magnanimous  race  still  lives,  and  at  every  decade  in  its  glor.ous 
career  seems  to  take  on  fresh  youth-undying  and  imperishable,  'rhis  activity 
manifests  here  in  leligion ; but  it  is  a peculiar  fact  in  human  nature,  that  it  judges 
others  according  to  its  own  standard  of  activity.  'lake,  for  instance,  a shoemaker.  He 
understands  only  shoemaking  and  thinks  theie  is  nothing  in  this  life  except  the  manu- 
facturing of  shoes.  A bricklayer  understands  nothing  but  bricklaying  and  proxes 
this  alone  in  his  life  fiom  day  to  day.  And  there  is  anollier  reason  which  explains 
this.  When  the  vibi aliens  of  light  arc  very  intense,  we  do  not  see  them,  because 
we  are  so  constituted  that  we  cannot  go  beyond  our  own  plane  of  vision,  llul  the 
Yogi  with  his  spiritual  introspection  is  able  to  see  through  the  materialistic  veil  of 
the  vulgar  crowds. 

The  eyes  of  the  whole  world  are  now  turneef  towards  this  land  of  India  for 
spiritual  food,  and  India  has  to  provide  it  for  all  the  races.  Heie  alone  is  the  best 
ideal  for  mankind,  and  Western  scholais  are  now  striving  to  understand  lliis  ideal 
which  is  enshrined  in  our  Sanskiit  Idterature  and  Philosophy,  and  which  has  been  the 
characteristic  of  India  all  through  ihe  ages. 

Since  the  dawn  of  history,  no  missionary  xvent  out  of  India  to  propagate  the 
Hindu  doctrines  and  dogmas,  but  noxv  a w'onderful  change  is  coming  over  us.  Sri 
Bhagavan  Krishna  says,  “ Whenever  virtue  subsides  and  immorality  prevails,  then  I 
come  again  and  again  to  help  the  w'orld.”  Religious  researches  disclose  to  us  the  fact, 
that  there  is  not  a country  possessing  a good  ethical  code  but  has  borrow’cd  something 
of  it  from  us,  and  there  is  not  one  religion  possessing  good  ideas  of  the  immortality 
of  the  soul  but  has  derived  it  directly  or  indirectly  from  us. 

There  never  was  a time  in  the  world’s  history  when  there  was  so  much  robbery 
and  high-handedness,  and  tyranny  of  the  stiong  over  the  weak,  as  at  this  latter  end 
of  the  nineteenth  centuiy.  Everybody  should  know  that  there  is  no  salvation  except 
through  the  conquering  of  desires,  and  that  no  man  is  free  w’ho  is  subject  to  the 
bondage  of  matter.  This  ^reat  truth  all  nations  are  c’owly  coining  to  understand 
and  appreciate.  As  soon  as  the  disciple  is  in  a position  to  grasp  this  truth,  the 
words  of  the  Guru  come  to  his  help.  The  Lord  sends  help  to  His  own  children' 
in  His  Infinite  mercy  which  never  ceaseth  and  is  ever  flowing  in  all  creeds.  Our  Lord 
IS  the  Lord  of  all  religions.  This  idea  belongs  to  India  alone,  and  I challenge  any 
one  of  you  to  find  it  in  any  other  Scripture  of  the  world. 

We  Hindus  have  now  been  placed,  undei  God’s  providence,  in  a very  critical 
and  responsible  position.  The  nations  of  the  West  are  coming  to  us  for  spiritual 
help.  A great  moral  obligation  rests  on  the  sons  of  India  to  fully  equip  themselves 
for  the  work  of  enlightening  the  world  on  the  problems  of  human  existence.  One 
thing  we  may  note,  that  whereas  you  will  find  that  good  and  great  men  of  other 
countries  lake  pride  in  tracing  back  their  descent  to  some  robber-baron  who  lived 
in  a mountain  fortress  and  emerged  from  time  to  time  to  plunder  passing  w-ayfarers, 
we  Hindus,  on  the  other  hand,  take  pride  in  being  the  descendants  of  Rishis  and 


O.Y  REAL  WORSHIP 


23 

sages,  who  lived  on  roots  and  fruits  in  mountains  and  caves,  meditating  on  the 
Supreme.  We  may  be  degraded  and  dcgeneiated  now,  hut  however  degraded  and 
degenerated  we  may  be,  we  can  become  gieat  if  we  only  begin  to  work  in  right  earnest 
on  behalf  of  our  religion. 

Accept  my  hcaity  thanks  for  the  kind  and  cordial  reception  you  have  given  me. 
It  is  impossible  for  me  to  express  my  gratitude  to  H.  H.  the  Raja  of  Ramnad  for 
his  love  towards  me.  If  any  good  work  has  been  done  by  me  and  thiough  me, 
India  owes  much  to  this  good  man,  for  it  was  he  who  conceived  the  idea  of  my 
going  to  Chicago,  and  it  was  he  who  put  tliat  idea  into  my  head  and  persistently 
urged  me  on  to  accomplish  it.  Standing  beside  me,  he  with  all  his  old  enthusiasm 
is  still  hoping  foi  me  to  do  more  and  moie  work.  1 w'ish  there  were  half  a dozen 
inoie  such  Rajas  to  take  interest  in  our  dear  motherland,  and  woik  for  her  amelioi- 
aium  m the  spiritual  line. 


ADDRESS  AT  THE  RAMESVARAxM  TEMPLE 
ON  REAL  WORSHIP. 

A visit  w'as  subsequently  paid  to  the'Ramesvaram  Temple, 'where  the  Swami  was 

asked  to  addiess  a few  words  to  the  crow'd  of  people  who  had  assembled  there.  This 
he  did  in  the  following  terms  : — 

It  IS  m love  that  religion  exists  and  not  in  ceremony ; in  the  pure  and  sincere  love 
in  the  heart.  Unless  a man  is  pure  in  body  and  mind,  his  coming  into  a temple  and 
worshipping  .Siva  is  useless.  'I'he  prayers  of  those  that  are  pure  in  mind  and  body 
will  be  answered  by  .Siva,  and  those  that  are  impure,  and  yet  tiy  to  teach  religion  to 
olheis,  will  fail  in  the  end.  External  worship  is  only  a symbol  of  internal  worship; 
but  internal  worship  and  purity  are  the  real  things.  Without  them,  external  worship 
would  be  of  no  avail.  Therefoie,  you  must  all  try  to  remember  this.  People  have 
become  so  degraded  in  this  Kali  Fuga  that  they  think  they  can  do  anything,  and 
then  they  can  go  to  a holy  place,  and  their  sins  will  be  forgiven.  If  a man  goes 
with  an  impure  mind  into  a temple,  he  adds  to  the  .sins  that  he  had  already,  and  goes 
home  a worse  man  than  what  he  left  it.  Tirlha  (place  of  pilgrimage)  is  a place  which 
is  full  of  holy  things  and  holy  men.  But  if  holy  people  live  in  a certain  place,  and 
if  there  is  no  temple  there,  even  that  is  a Tirlha.  If  unholy  people  live  in  a place 
where  there  may  be  a hundred  temples,  the  Tirlha  has  vanished  from  that  place. 
And  it  is  most  difficult  to  live  in  a Tirlha,  for  if  sin  is  committed  in  any  ordinary 
place  it  can  easily  be  removed,  but  sin  committed  in  a Tirlha  cannot  be  removed. 
This  is  the  gist  of  all  worship,  to  be  pure  and  to  do  good  to  others.  He  who  sees 
Siva  in  the  poor,  in  the  weak,  and  in  the  diseased,  really  worships  Siva ; and  if  he 
sees  Siva  only  in  the  image,  his  worship  is  but  preliminary.  He,  who  .has  served 


H 


LATTr/^^:S—F/WM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


anH  helped  one  poor  man  seeing  Siva  in  him,  without  thinking  of  his  caste,  or  creed, 
or  race,  or  anything,  with  him  Siva  is  moie  pleased  than  with  the  man  who  sees  Him 
only  in  temples. 

A rich  man  had  a garden  arid  two  gardencis.  One  of  these  gardeners  ws>®  very 
la/y  and  did  not  work  ; but  when  the  owner  came  to  the  garden,  the  la.  in 
would  get  up  and  fold  his  aims  and  say,  “ How  beautiful  is  the  face  of  my  ma  ,” 
and  dance  before  him.  The  other  gaidener  would  not  talk  much,  but  would  nk 
haid,  and  pioduce  all  sorts  of  fiuits  and  vegetables  which  he  w'ould  carry  on  his 
head,  to  his  master  who  lived  a lung  vv.iy  off  Of  these  two  gardeners,  who  would 
be  tlie  moie  beloved  by  his  maslei  } Siva  is  that  ma.ster,  and  this  woild  ia  His 
garden,  and  there  arc  two  sorts  of  gardeners  here  : the  one  who  is  laziy,  hypocritical, 
and  does  nothing,  only  talking  about  Siva'y  beautiful  eyes  and  nose  and  other  features  ; 
and  the  other,  who  is  taking  care  of  Siva’s  children,  all  those  that  are  pooi  and 
weak,  all  animals,  and  all  Hia  creation.  Which  of  these  would  be  the  more  beloved 
of  Siva  ? Certainly,  he  that  serves  His  children.  He  who  wants  to  serve  the  father 
must  serve  the  children  fir.st.  He  who  wants  to  serve  Siva  must  serve  His  childien — 
must  serve  all  creatures  in  this  world  first.  It  is  said  in  the  Shaslra  that  those  who 
serve  the  servants  of  God  are  Mis  greatest  servants.  So  you  will  bear  this  in  mind. 
Let  me  tell  you  again,  that  you  must  be  pure  and  help  any  one  who  comes  to  you  as 
much  as  lies  in  your  power.  And  this  is  good  Karma.  By  the  power  of  this,  the 
heart  becomes  pure  {Chitta  Suddht),  and  then  Siva  who  is  residing  in  every  one,  will 
become  manifest.  He  is  aKvays  in  the  heart  of  every  one.  If  there  is  dirt  and  dust 
on  a minor,  we  cannot  see  our  image.  So  ignorance  and  wickedness  are  the  dirt 
and  dust  that  are  on  the  mirror  of  our  hearts.  Selfishness  is  the  chief  sin,  thinking 
of  ourselves  first.  He  who  thinks  * I will  eat  first,  I will  have  more  money  than 
otheis,  and  1 will  possess  everything he  who  thinks ‘1  will  get  to  heaven  before 
otheis,  I will  get  Mukti  before  others,’  is  the  selfish  man.  The  unselfish  man  says 
T will  be  last,  1 do  not  care  to  go  to  heaven,  ‘I  will  even  go  to  hell,  if  by  doing  so  I can 
help  my  brothers.'  This  unselfishness  is  the  test  of  religion.  He  who  has  more  of 
this  unselfishness  is  more  spiritual  and  nearer  ^o  Siva.  Whether  he  is  learned  or 
ignorant,  he  is  nearer  to  Siva  than  anybody  else,  whether  he  knows  it  or  not.  And 
if  a man  is  selfish,  even  though  he  has  visited  all  the  temples,  seen  all  the  places  of 
pilgrimage,  and  painted  himself  like  a leopard,  he  is  still  further  off  from  Siva. 


REPLY  TO  THE  ADDRESS  OF  WELCOME  AT  RAMNAD. 


At  Ramnad  the  following  address  was  presented  to  Swami  Vivekananda  by  the 
Rajah 

His  Mosi  Holiness 

Sn  Paramahamsa,  V athi-Rdja^  Digvijava-KohVuila  Sarvamata^Sanipratipanna^ 
Parama-Yogteswara,  Srimat  Bhagavdn  Stee  Rama  Krishna  Paramahamsa  Kara- 
kamala-Sanpuha^  Rajadhiraja-Sevilha^  SREE  VIVEKANANDA  SWAMI. 

Mav  it  Please  Your  Holiness. 

We,  the  inhabitants  of  this  ancient  and  historic  Samasihanam  of  Selhu  Bandha 
Ritnieswar,  otheiwise  known  as  Ramanathapuum  or  Ramnad,  beg,  most  cordially,  to 
welcome  you  to  this,  our  mothei land.  Wc  deem  it  a very  larc  piivilege  to  be  the 
fust  to  pay  your  Holiness  our  heart *fclt  homage  on  y<nir  landing  in  India,  and  that,  on 
the  shores  sanctified  by  the  footsteps  of  that  great  Hero  .and  our  rcvcrcil  Lord — Sree 
BhagavAn  Raniachandra.  * 

We  have  watched  with  feelings  of  genuine  pride  and  pleasure  the  unprecedented 
success  which  has  crowned  your  laudable  elToits  in  bringing  home  to  the  master- 
minds of  the  West,  the  intrinsic  merits  and  excellence  of  our  time-honoured  and  noble 
religion.  You  have,  with  an  eloipience  that  is  unsurpassed  and  in  language  plain  and 
unmistakable,  proclaimed  to  and  convinced  the  cultured  audiences  in  Europe  and 
America,  that  Hinduism  fulfils  all  the  reqiiiiements  of  the  ideal  of  a univcisal  leligion, 
and  adapts  itself  to  the  temperament  and  needs  of  men  and  women  of  all  races 
and  creeds.  Animated  puiely  by  a disinleicsted  impulse,  influenced  by  the  best  of 
motives  and  at  considerable  self-sacrifice, } our  Holiness  has  crossed  boundless  seas 
and  oceans  to  convey  the  message  of  truth  and  peace,  and  to  plant  the  flag  of  India’s 
spiritual  triumph  and  glory,  m the  rich  soil  of  Eiuope  and  Ameiica.  Your  Holiness 
has,  both  by  precept  and  practice,  shown  the  feasibility  and  importance  of  universal 
biotheihood.  Above  all,  your  labours  in  the  West  have  indirectly  and  toagieat 
extent  tended  to  awaken  the  apathetic  sons  and  d.Lughicrs  of  India  to  a sense  of  the 
gieatness  and  gloiy  of  their  ancestral  f.iith,  and  to  cicate  in  them  a genuine  interest 
in  the  study  and  observance  of  their  dcai  and  priceless  leligion. 

We.  feel  we  cannot  adequaiely  convey  in  w^ouls  out  feelings  of  gratitude  and 
thankfulness  to  your  Holiness  for  youi  pbilanlhiopic  labours  towards  the  spiiitual 
regeneration  of  the  East  and  the  West.  We  cannot  close  this  address  without  refer- 
ring to  the  gre.at  kindness  which  your  Holiness  has  always  extended  to  our  Rajah, 
who  is  one  of  your  devoted  disciples,  and  the  honour  and  piide  he  feels  by  this 
gracious  act  of  your  Holiness  in  landing  first  on  his  ternloiy,  is  nulesciibablc. 

In  conclusion,  we  pray  to  the  Almighty  to  bless  your  Holiness  wil+i  long  life, 
and  health  and  strength  to  enable  you  to  carry  on  the  good  woik  that  has  been  so 
ably  inaugurated  by  you. 

With  respects  and  love, 

We  beg  to  subscribe  out  selves, 

Your  Holiness’s  most  devoted  and  obedient  disciples  and  servants, 

Ramnad,  ') 
acth  January  1897,  j 

D 


*6 


LECTVnKS—FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


The  Swami’s  reply  follows  in  extenso: — 

The  lon,:?cst  night  seems  to  be  passing  away,  the  sorest  trouble  seems  to  be  com- 
ing to  an  end  at  last,  the  seeming  corpse  appears  to  be  awaking,  and  a voice  is  coming 
to  us, —away  back  where  history  and  e\en  tradition  fails  to  peep  into  ih#'  gloom 
of  the  past,  coming  down  from  there,  reflected  as  it  were,  fiom  peak  to  pe.  ^ the 
infinite  Himalaya  of  knowledge,  and  of  love,  and  of  work,  India,  this  mothe^  d of 
ours, —a  voice  is  coming  unto  us,  gentle,  firm,  and  yet  unmistakable  in  its  utte%ces, 
and  is  gaining  volume  as  days  pass  by,  and  behold,  the  sleeper  is  awakening ! Like  a 
breeze  from  the  Himalayas,  it  is  bringing  life  into  the  almost  dead  bones  and  muscles, 
the  lethargy  is  passing  away,  and  only  the  blind  cannot  see,  or  the  perverted  will  not 
see,  that  she  is  awakening,  this  motherland  of  ours,  from  her  deep  long  sleep.  None 
can  resist  her  any  more  ; never  is  she  going  to  sleep  any  more;  no  outward  powers 
can  hold  her  back  any  more  ; for  the  infinite  giant  is  rising  to  her  feet. 

Yom  Highness  and  gentlemen  of  Ramnad,  accept  my  heart-felt  thanks  for  the 
cortlialily  and  kindness  with  which  you  have  received  me.  I feel  that  you  are  cordial 
and  kind,  for,  heart  speaks  unto  heart  better  than  any  language  of  the  mouth  ; spirit 
speaks  unto  spirit  in  silence,  and  yet  in  most  unmistakable  language,  and  I feel  it  in 
my  heart  of  hearts.  Your  Highness  of  Ramnad,  if  there  has  been  any  work  done 
by  my  humble  self  in  the  cause  of  our  religion  and  our  motherland,  in  the  Western 
'countries,  if  any  little  work  has  been  done  in  rousing  llie  sympathie.s  of  our  own 
people,  by  drawing  their  attention  to  the  inestimable  jewels  that  they  know  not  are 
lying  deep  buiifed,  about  their  own  home, — if,  instead  of  dying  of  thiist  and  drinking 
duly  ditch  water  elsewhere,  out  of  the  blindness  of  ignorance,  tliey  arc  being  called 
to  go  and  drink  from  the  eternal  fountain,  which  i.s  flowing  perennially  by  their  own 
homes — if  anything  has  been  done  to  rouse  our  people  towards  action,  to  make  them 
undeistand  that  in  everything,  religion  and  religion  alone  is  the  life  of  India,  and 
when  that  goes  India  will  die,  in  spite  of  politics,  in  spite  of  social  reforms,  in  spite 
of  Kubera’s  wealth  poured  upon  the  head  of  every  one  oi  her  children, — if  anything 
has  been  done  towards  this  end,  India  and  every  country  where  any  woik  has  been 
done,  owe  much  of  it  to  you,  Rajah  of  Ramnad.  For  it  was  you  who  gave  me  the 
idea  first,  and  it  was  you  who  persistently  urged  me  on  towards  the  work.  You,  as 
it  were,  intuitively  understood  what  was  going  to  be,  and  took  me  by  the  hand, 
helped  me  all  along,  and  have  never  ceased  to  encourage  me.  Well  is  it  therefore, 
that  you  should  be  the  first  to  rejoice  at  ray  success,  and  meet  it  is  that  I should 
first  land  in  your  territory  on  my  return  to  Ind  a.  Great  works  are  to  be  done, 
w'onderful  powders  have  to  be  worked  out,  we  have  to  teach  other  nations  many 
things,  as  has  been  said  already  by  your  Highness.  This  is  the  motherland  of  philos- 
ophy, of  spiiituality,  and  of  ethics,  of  sweetness,  gentleness,  and  love.  These  still 
€xi.st,  and  my  expeiience  of  the  world  leads  me  to  stand  on  firm  ground,  and  make 
the  bold  statement,  that  India  is  still  the  first  and  foremost  of  all  the  nations  of  the 
w'orld  in  these  respects.  Look  at  this  little  phenomenon.  There  have  been  immense 
political  changes  within  the  last  four  or  five  yeais.  Gigantic  organisations  underta- 
king to  subvert  the  whole  of  existing  institutions  in  different  countries  and  meeting 
w'ith  a certain  amount  of  success,  have  been  working  all  over  the  Western  world. 
Ask  our  people  if  they  haVe  heard  anything  about  them  ? They  have  heard  not  a 
word  about  them.  But  that  there  was  a Parliament  of  Religions  in  Chicago,  and 
that  there  was  a Sannyfisin  sent  over  from  India  to  that  Parliament,  and  that  he  was 
very  well  received,  and  since  that  time  has  been  working  in  the  West,  the  poorest 


REPLY  TO  THE  ADDRESS  OF  WELCOME  AT  RAMNAD  ^7 

beggar  has  known.  I have  heard  that  our  masses  are  dense,  that  they  do  not  want  any 
education,  and  that  they  do  not  care  for  any  information.  I had  at  one  time  a foolish 
leaning  towards  that  opinion  myself,  but  I find  experience  is  a far  more  glorious 
teacher  than  any  amount  of  speculation,  or  any  amount  of  books  written  by  globe- 
trotters and  hasty  observers.  This  experience  teaches  me  that  they  are  not  dense, 
that  they  are  not  slow,  that  they  are  as  eager  and  thirsty  for  information  as  any  race 
under  the  sun ; but  then  each  nation  has  its  own  part  to  play,  and  naturally,  each 
nation  has  its  own  peculiarity  and  individuality,  with  which  it  is  born.  Each 
represents,  as  it  were,  one  peculiar  note  in  this  harmony  of  nations,  and  this  is  its 
very  life,  its  vitality.  In  it,  is  the  backbone,  the  foundation,  and  the  bedrock  of  the 
national  life,  and  here  in  this  blessed  land,  the  foundation,  tlie  backbone,  the  life- 
centre  is  religion  and  religion  alone.  Let  others  talk  of  politics,  of  the  glory  of 
acquisition  of  immense  wealth  poured  in  by  trade,  of  the  power  and  spread  of  com- 
mercialism, of  the  glorious  fountain  of  physical  liberty,  but  these  the  Hindu  mind 
does  not  understand  and  does  not  want  to  understand.  Touch  him  on  spirituality,  on 
religion,  on  God,  on  the  soul,  on  the  Infinite,  on  spiritual  freedom,  and  I assure  you, 
the  lowe.st  peasant  in  India  is  belter  informed  on  these  subjects  than  many  a so-called 
philosopher  in  other  lands.  I have  said,  gentlemen,  that  we  have  yet  something  to 
teach  to  the  world.  This  is  the  very  reason,  the  raison  d'Sire,  that  this  nation  should 
live  on,  in  spite  of  hundreds  of  years  of  persecution,  in  spite  of  nearly  a thousand 
years  of  foreign  rule  and  foreign  oppression.  This  nation  still  lives;  X\\t  raison 
d'itre  is,  because  it  still  holds  to  God,  to  the  treasure-house  of  religioh  and  spirituality. 

In  this  land,  religion  and  spirituality  are  still  the  fountains  which  will  have  to  over- 
flow and  flood  the  world,  to  bring  in  new  life  and  new  vitality  to  the  Western  and  other 
nations,  which  are  now  almost  borne  down,  half-killed  and  degraded  by  political 
ambitions  and  social  scheming.  From  out  of  the  many  voices,  consonant  and  dis- 
sentient, f 10m  out  of  the  medley  of  sounds  filling  the  Indian  atmosphere,  rises  up 
supieme,  striking,  and  full,  one  note,  and  that  is  renunciation.  Give  up  ! That  is  the 
watchword  of  the  Indian  religions.  This  world  is  a delusion  of  two  days.  The 
present  life  is  of  five  minutes.  IIcyon<l  is  the  Infinite,  beyond  this  world  of  delu.sion  ; 
let  us  seek  that.  This  continent  is  illumined  with  brave  and  gigantic  minds  and 
intelligences  who  even  think  of  this  so-called  infinite  universe  as  only  a mudpuddle ; 
beyond  and  still  beyond  they  go.  Time,  even  infinite  time  is  to  them  but  non- 
existence.  Beyond  and  beyond  time  they  go.  Space  is  nothing  to  them ; beyond 
that  they  want  to  go,  and  this  going  beyond  the  phenomenal  is  the  very  soul  of 
religion.  The  characteristic  of  my  nation  is  this  transcendentalism,  the  struggle  lo- 
go beyond,  this  daring  to  teai  the  veil  off  the  face  of  nature  and  have  at  any  risk, 
at  any  price,  a glimpse  of  the  beyond.  That  is  our  ideal,  but  of  course  all  the  people 
in  a country  cannot  give  up  entirely.  Do  you  want  to  enthuse  them,  then  here  ia  the 
way  to  do  so-.  Your  talks  of  politics,  of  social  regeneration,  your  talks,  of  money- 
making, and  commercialism- -all  these  will  rolloff  like  water  fromjt,  duck’s  back. 
This  spirituality,  then,  is  what  you  have  to  teach  the  worldt.  Have  we  to  learn 
anything  else,  Irave  we  to  learn  anything  from  the  world  ? We  have,  perhaps  to  gain 
a little  in  material  knowledge,  in  the  power  of  organ! satiem,  in  the  ability  to  handle 
powers,  organising  powers,  in  bringing  the  best  results  out  of  the  smallest  of  causes. 
This  perhaps  to  a certain  extent  we  may  learn  from  the  West.  But  if  any  one 
preaches  in  India  the  ideal  of  eating  and  drinking  and  making  merry,  if  any  one  wants 
to  apotheosise  the  material  world  into  a God,  that  maa  is  a liar ; he  has  no  place 


ag  LECTURES--FROM  COLOMBO  TO  AIMORA 

In  this  holy  land,  the  Indian  mind  does  not  want  to  listen  to  him.  Aye,  in  spite  o( 
the  sparkle  and  glitter  of  Western  civilisation,  in  spite  of  all  its  polish  and  its 
vellous  manifestation  of  power,  standing  upon  this  platform,  I tell  them  to  their  face^ 
that  It  is  all  vain.  It  is  vanity  of  vanities.  God  alone  lives.  The  soul  alo'* ' lives. 
Spirituality  alone  lives.  Hold  on  to  that. 

Yet,  perhaps,  some  sort  of  materialism,  toned  down  to  our  own  requiri  -mts, 
would  be  a blessing  to  many  of  our  brothers  who  are  not  yet  ripe  for  the  h ghest 
truths.  Thi.s  is  the  one  mistake  made  in  every  country  and  in  every  society,  and 
it  is  a greatly  regrettable  thing  that  in  India,  where  it  was  always  understood,  the  same 
mistake  of  forcing  the  highest  tiulhs  on  to  people  who  are  not  ready  for  them,  has 
been  made  of  late.  My  method  need  not  be  yours.  The  Sannyasin,  as  you  all  know, 
is  the  ideal  of  the  Hindu's  life,  and  evciy  one  by  our  Shastras  is  compelled  to  give 
up.  Eveiy  Hindu  who  has  tasted  the  fruits  of  ihis  woild  must  give  up  in  the  latter 
part  of  bis  life,  and  he  who  does  inH  is  not  a Hindu,  and  has  no  more  right  to  call 
himself  a Hindu.  We  know  that  ihis  is  the  ideal— to  give  up  after  seeing  and 
experiencing  the  vanity  of  things.  Having  found  out  that  the  heart  of  the  material 
world  is  a mere  hollow,  containing  only  ashes,  give  it  up  and  go  back.  The  mind  is 
circling  forward,  as  it  were,  lowaids  the  senses,  and  that  mind  has  to  circle  back- 
wards ; the  Pravrltii  has  to  stop  and  the  NivtUti  has  to  begin.  That  is  the  ideal. 
But  that  ideal  can  only  be  realised  after  a certain  amount  of  experience.  We  cannot 
teach  the  child  the  truth  of  lenunciation ; the  child  is  a born  optimist ; his  whole 
life  is  in  his  senses;  his  whole  life  is  one  mass  of  sense-enjoyment.  So  there  are 
child-likc  men  in  every  society,  who  require  a certain  amount  of  experience,  of  enjoy- 
ment, to  see  through  the  vanity  of  it,  and  then  renuncration  will  come  to  them. 
There  have  been  ample  provision  made  for  them  in  our  Books ; but  unfortunately, 
in  later  times,  there  is  a tendency  to  bind  every  one  down  by  the  same  laws  as  those 
by  whicli  the  Sannyasin  is  bound,  and  that  is  a great  mistake.  But  for  that  a good 
deal  of  the  poverty  and  the  misery  that  you  see  in  India  need  not  have  been.  A 
poor  man’s  life  is  hemmed  in  and  bound  down  by  tremendous  spiritual  and  ethical 
laws  foi  which  he  has  no  use.  Hands  off ! Let  the  poor  fellow  enjoy  himself  a little, 
and  then  he  will  raise  himself  up  and  renunciation  will  come  to  him  of  itself. 
Perhaps  in  this  line,  we  can  be  taught  something  by  the  western  people,  but  we  must 
be  very  cautious  in  learning  these  things.  I am  sorry  to  say  that  most  of  the 
examples  one  meets  nowadays,  of  men  who  have  imbibed  the  western  ideas,  are 
more  or  less  failuies.  There  are  two  gieat  obstacles  on  our  path  in  India,  the 
Scylla  of  old  orthodoxy,  and  the  Charybdis  of  modern  European  civilisation.  Of 
these  two,  I vote  for  the  old  orthodoxy,  and  not  for  the  Europeanised  system ; 
for  the  old  orthodox  man  may  be  ignorant,  he  may  be  crude,  but  he  is  a man, 
he  has  a faith,  he  has  strength,  be  stands  on  his  own  feet ; while  the  Europeanised 
man  has  no  backbone,  he  is  a mass  of  heterogeneous  ideas  picked  up  at  random 
from  every  source— and  these  ideas  are  unassimilated,  undigested,  unharmonised. 
He  does  not  stand  on  his  own  feet,  and  his  head  is  turning  round  and  rouqd. 
Where  is  the  motive  power  of  his  work? — in  a few  patronising  pats  from  the 
English  people.  His  schemes  of  reforms,  his  vehement  vitiinentions  against  the  evils 
of  certain  social  customs  have,  as  the  main'>pting,  some  European  patronage. 
Why  are  some  of  our  customs  called  eviE  ? Because  the  Europeans  say  so; 
That  is  about  the  reason  he  gives,  I would  not  submit  to  that.  Stand  and  die  in 
your  own  sticngih  , if  theie  is  any  sin  in  the  world,  it  is  weakness  ; avoid  all  weakness, 


REPLY  TO  THE  ADDRESS  OF  WELCOME  AT  RAMNAD  29 

for  w«akntts«  is  sin,  weakness  is  death.  These  unbalanced  creatures  are  not  yet 
formed  into  distinct  personalities;  what  are  we  to  call  them— men,  women  or 
animals?  While  those  old  01  thodox  people  were  staunch  and  weie  men.  There 
are  still  some  excellent  examples,  and  the  one  I want  to  present  !ief ore  you  now,  is 
your  Rajah  of  Ramnad.  Here,  you  have  a man  than  whom'  there  is  a no  more 
mlous  Hindu  throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  this  land  ; here,  you  have  a 
prince  than  whom  there  is  no  prince  in  this  land  better  informed  in  all  affairs,  both 
oriental  and  occidental,  who  lakes  from  every  nation  whatever  he  can  that  is  good. 
“ Learn  good  knowledge  with  all  devotion  from  the  lowest  caste.  Learn  the  way  to 
freedom,  even  if  it  comes  from  a Pariah,  by  seiving  him.  If  a woman  is  a jewel, 
take  her  in  marriage  even  if  she  comes  from  a low  family  of  the  lowest  caste.”  Such 
is  the  law  laid  down  by  our  great  and  peerless  legislator,  the  divine  Manu.  This  is 
true.  Stand  on  your  own  feet,  and  assimilate  what  you  can  ; but  learn  from  every 
nation,  take  what  is  of  use  to  you,  but  remember  that  as  Hindus  everything  else 
must  be  subordinated  to  our  own  national  ideals.  Each  man  has  a mission  in  life, 
which  is  the  result  of  all  his  infinite  past  Karma.  Each  of  you  was  born  with  a 
splendid  heritage,  which  is  the  whole  of  the  infinite  past  life  of  your  glorious  nation. 
Millions  of  your  ancestors  are  watching,  as  it  were,  every  action  of  yours,  so  be  alert. 
And  what  is  the  mission  with  which  every  Hindu  child  is  born  ? Have  you  not 
read  the  proud  declaration  of  Manu  regarding  the  Brahmana  wheie  he  says,  that  the 
birth  of  the  Biahmana  is — “ for  the  protection  of  the  treasury  of  religion.”  I should 
say  that  lhat  is  the  mission  not  only  of  the  Brahmana,  but  of  e\ery  child,  w'hether  boy 
or  girl,  who  is  born  in  this  blessed  land,— “ for  the  protection  of  the  treasure  of 
religion.”  And  every  other  problem  in  life  must  be  subordinated  to  that  •ne  principal 
theme.  That  is  also  the  law  of  harmony  in  music.  There  may  be  a nation  whose 
theme  of  life  is  political  supremacy;  religion  and  everything  else  must  become 
subordinate  to  that  one  great  theme  of  its  life.  But  here  i.s  another  nation  whose 
great  theme  of  life  is  spirituality  and  renunciation,  whose  one  watchword  is,  that  this 
world  is  all  vanity  and  a delusion  of  three  days;  and  everything  else,  whether 
science  or  knowledge,  enjoyments  or  powers,  wealth,  name  or  fame,  must  be  subor- 
dinated to  that  one  theme.  The  secret  of  a true  Hindu’s  character  lies  in  the  subordi- 
nation of  his  knowledge  of  European  sciences  and  learning,  of  his  wealth,  position, 
and  name,  to  that  one  principal  theme  which  is  inborn  in  every  Hindu  child — the 
spirituality  and  purity  of  the  race.  Therefore,  between  these  two,  the  case  of  the 
orthodox  man  who  has  the  whole  of  that  life-spring  of  the  race,  spirituality,  and  the 
other  man,  whose  hands  are  full  of  western  imitation-jewels  but  has  no  hold  on  the  life- 
giving  principle,  spirituality, — of  these,  I do  not  doubt  that  every  one  here  will  agice 
that  we  should  choose  the  first,  the  orthodox,  because  there  is  some  hope  in  him.  He 
has  the  national  theme  and  something  to  hold  to,  so  he  will  live,  but  the  other  will  die. 
Just  as  in  the  case  of  individuals,  if  the  principle  of  life  is  undisturbed,  if  the  principal 
function  of  that  individual  life  is  present,  any  injuries  received  as  regards  other  func- 
tions are  not  serious — other  functions  never  become  constant.  So  long  as  this 
principal  function  of  our  life  is  not  disturbed,  nothing  can  destroy  our  nation.  But 
mark  you,  if  you  give  up  that  spiritiulity,  leaving  it  aside  to  go  .\fter  the  materialis- 
ing civilisation  of  the  West,  the  result  will  be  lhat  in  three  generations  you  will  be 
an  extinct  race  ; because,  the  backbone  of  the  nation  will  be  broken,  the  foundation 
upon  which  the  national  ediiicc  has  been  built  will  be  undermined,  and  the  result  will 
be  annihilation  all  round. 


30 


LECrURES-FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


Therefore,  my  friends,  the  way  out  is,  that  first  and  foremost  we  must  keep  a 
firm  hold  on  spirituality — that  inestimable  gift  handed  down  to  us  by  our  ancient 
foiefalhers.  Did  hear  of  a countiy,  wheip  the  greatest  kings  tried  to  trace 

their  descent,  notJjrolnSB^^  n^  to  robber-barons  living  in  old  castles,  who  \ “’dered 
poor  tiavcllers,  semi-naked  sages  who  lived  in  the  forest?  Did  ever 

hear  of  such  a piid  ? This  is  the  land.  In  other  countries  great  priests  to 
trace  their  descend  to  sotne  king,  but  here,  the  greatest  kings  would  trace \heiT 
descent  to  some  ancient  priest.  Therefore,  whether  you  believe  in  spirituality  or 
not,  for  the  sake  of  the  national  life,  you  have  to  get  a hold  on  spirituality  and  keep 
to  it.  Then  stretch  the  other  hand  out  and  gain  all  you  can  from  other  races,  but 
everything  must  be  subordinated  to  that  one  ideal  of  life  ; and  out  of  that  a wonder- 
ful, glorious,  futuie  India  will  come — I am  sure  it  is  coming --a  greater  India  than 
ever  was.  Sages  will  spiing  up  greater  than  all  the  ancient  sages,  and  your  ancestors 
will  not  only  be  satisfied,  but  I am  sure,  they  will  be  proud,  from  their  positions  in 
other  woilds,  to  look  down  upon  their  descendants,  so  glorious,  and  so  great.  Let 
us  all  work  hard,  my  brethren,  this  is  no  time  for  sleep.  On  our  work  depends  the 
coming  of  the  India  of  the  future.  She  is  theie  ready  waiting.  She  is  only  sleeping. 
Arise,  and  awake  and  see  hei  seated  here,  on  her  eteinal  throne,  rejuvenated,  more 
gloiious  than  she  ever  was — this  motheiland  of  ours.  The  idea  of  God  was  nowhere 
else  ever  so  fully  developed  as  in  this  motheiland  of  ours,  for  the  .same  idea  of  God 
never  existed  anywhere  else.  Perhaps  you  are  astonished  at  my  assertion,  but  show 
me  any  idea  of  God  from  any  other  sciiptuies  equal  to  ours ; they  have  only  clan- 
Gods,  the  God  of  the  Jews,  the  God  of  the  Arabs,  and  of  such  and  such  a race, 
and  theii  Ck)d  is  fighting  the  Gods  of  the  other  races.  But  the  idea  of  that  bene- 
ficent, most  meiciful  God,  our  father,  our  mother,  our  friend,  the  friend  of  our 
friends,  the  soul  of  our  souls,  is  here  and  here  alone.  And  may  lie  who  is  the  Siva  of 
the  Sivaites,  the  Vishnu  of  the  Vaisnavites,  the  Karma  of  the  Kannis,  the  Buddha  of 
the  Buddhists,  the  Jina  of  the  Jains,  the  Jehovah  of  the  Chiistians  and  the  Jews,  the 
Allah  of  the  Mohammedans,  the  Lord  of  every  sect,  the  Brahman  of  the  Ved^ntists, 
He,  the  all-pervading,  whose  glory  has  been  known  only  in  this  land, — may  He  bless 
us,  may  He  help  us,  may  He  give  strength  unto  us,  energy  unto  us,  to  carry  this 
idea  into  practice.  May  that  which  we  have  listened  to  and  studied  become  food  to 
us,  may  it  become  strength  in  us,  may  it  become  energy  in  us  to  help  each  other ; may 
we,  the  teacher  and  the  taught,  nojt  be  jealous  of  each  other  I Peace,  peace,  peace, 
In  the  fiame  of  Hari.  3 § ^ 'T 


REPLY  TO  THE  ADDRESS  OF^J^LCOME 
AT  PAKAMAKUDI.  ^ 

Paramakudi  was  the  first  stopping-place  after  leaving  Ramna<i,  and  there  was  a 
demonstration  on  a large  scale,  including  the  presentation  of  the  following  address : — 

SrEEMAT  VlVEKANANDA  SwAMI. 

We,  the  citizens  of  Paramakudi,  respectfully  beg  to  accord  to  your  Holiness  a 
most  hearty  welcome  to  this  place  after  your  successful  spiritual  campaign  of  nearly 
four  years  in  the  Western  woild. 

We  share  with  our  countiymen  the  feelings  of  joy  and  pride  at  the  philanthropy 
which  prompted  you  to  attend  the  Pailiament  of  Religions  held  at  Chicago,  and 
lay  before  the  representatives  of  the  religious  world  the  sacred  but  hidden  treasures 
of  our  ancient  land.  You  have  by  your  wide  exposition  of  the  sacred  truths  con- 
tained in  the  Vedic  literature,  disabused  the  enlightened  minds  ot  the  West  of  the 
prejudices  enleilaincd  by  them  against  our  ancient  faith,  and  convinced  them  of  its 
universality  and  adaptability  for  intellects  of  all  shades  and  in  all  ages. 

The  presence  amongst  us  of  your  Western  disciples  is  proof  positive  that  your 
religious  teachings  have  not  only  been  understood  in  theoiy  but  have  also  borne 
practical  fruits.  The  magnetic  influence  of  your  august  person  reminds  us  of  our 
ancient  holy  Rishis,  whose  lealisalion  of  the  Self  by  asceticism  and  self-control  made 
them  the  tiuc  guides  and  preceptois  of  the  human  lace. 

In  conclusion  we  most  earnestly  pray  to  the  All-Merciful,  that  your^ollncss  may 
long  be  spaied  to  continue  to  bless  and  spiiitualise  the  whole  of  mankind. 

With  best  regards, 

We  beg  to  subsciibc  ourselves, 

Your  Holiness’s  most  obedient  and  devoted 

Disciples  and  Servants. 


In  the  course  of  his  reply  the  Swami  said, — 

It  is  almost  impossible  to  express  my  thanks  for  the  kindness  and  cordiality 
with  which  you  have  leceived  me.  But,  if  I may  be  permitted  to  say  so.  I will  add 
that  love  for  my  country,  and  especially  for  my  countrymen,  will  be  the  same  whether 
they  receive  me  with  the  ulmost  coidiality,  or  spuiii  me  from  the  country.  For  we 
read  in  the  Gita  that  Sn  Krishna  says — men  should  work  for  work’s  sake  only,  and 
love  for  love’s  sake.  The  woik  that  has  been  done  by  me  in  the  Western  world 
has  been  very  little ; there  is  no  one  present  here  who  could  not  have  done  a 
hundred  times  more  work  in  the  West  than  has  been  done  by  me.  And  I am 
anxiously  waiting  for  the  day  when  mighty  minds  will  arise,  gigantic  spiiitual  minds, 
who  will  be  ready  to  go  forth  from  India  to  the  ends  of  the  world,  to  leach  spiritual- 
ity and  renunciation,  those  ideas  which  came  ,from  the  forests  of  India,  and  belong 
to  Indian  soil  alone.  There  come  periods  in  the  history  of  the  human  race  when,  as 
it  were,  whole  nations  are  seized  with  a sort  of  world-weariness,  when  they  find  that 
all  their  plans  are  slipping  between  their  fingers,  that  old  institutions  and  systems 
are  crumbling  into  dust,  that  their  hopes  are  all  blighted,  and  everything  seems  to 
be  out  of  joint.  Two  attempts  have  been  made  in  the  world  to  found  social  life ; the 


3* 


LECTURES—FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


one  was  upon  religion,  and  the  other  was  upon  social  necessity.  The  one  was 
founded  upon  spnitualily,  the  other  upon  mateiialism,  the  one  upon  transcendental- 
ism, liie  oihcr  upon  realism.  The  one  looks  beyond  the  horizon  of  this  little 
inatciial  woild  and  is  bold  enough  to  begin  life  there,  even  apart  from  ’ other. 
The  other,  the  second,  is  content  to  take  its  stand  on  the  things  of  the  w ^ and 
expects  to  find  a fiim  footing.  Cuiiously  enough,  it  seems  that  at  times  the  . ritual 
side  prevails,  and  then  the  mateiialistic  side,  in  wavelike  motions  following  each  other. 
In  the  same  countiy  there  will  be  different  tides;  at  one  time  the  full  flood  of  materi- 
alistic ideas  prevails ; and  everything  in  this  .life — prospeiity,  the  education  w'hich 
procuies  more  pleisiirc,  more  food — will  become  gloiious  at  first  and  then,  that 
will  degrade  and  degenerate.  Along  with  the  prosperity,  will  rise  to  white  heat  all 
the  inboin  jealousies  and  hatreds  of  the  human  race.  Competition  and  merciless 
cruelty  will  be  the  watchword  of  the  day.  To  quote  a very  commonplace  and  not 
veiy  elegant  English  proveib,  Eveiyone  for  himself,  and  the  devil  take  the  hind- 
most ” becomes  the  motto  of  the  day.  Then  people  think  that  the  whole  scheme  of 
life  is  a failure.  And  the  vvoi Id  would  be  destroyed  did  not  sphiiualily  come  to  the 
rescue,  and  lend  a helping  hand  to  the  sinking  world.  Then  the  world  gels  new 
hope,  and  finds  a new  basis  lor  a new  budding,  and  another  wave  of  spirituality  comes, 
which  in  lime  again  declines.  As  a lule,  spirituality  brings  a class  of  men  who  lay 
exclusive  claim  to  the  special  poweis  of  the  woild.  The  immediate  effect  of  this  is  a 
reaction  towaids  inaleiialism,  which  opens  the  door  to  scoies  of  exclusive  claims, 
until  llie  Lime  comes  when  not  only  all  the  spiritual  poweis  of  the  race,  but  all  its 
mateiial  poweis  and  piivileges  are  centered  in  the  hands  of  a very  few;  and  these  few, 
standing  on  Uie  necks  of  the  masses  of  the  people,  want  to  rule  them.  Then  society 
has  to  help  itself,  and  materialism  comes  to  the  rescue.  If  you  look  at  India,  our 
motherland,  you  will  see  that  the  same  thing  is  going  on  now.  That  you  are  here 
to-day  to  welcome  one  who  went  to  Europe  to  preach  Vedanta,  would  have  been 
impossible  had  not  the  mateiialisrn  of  Europe  opened  the  way  for  it.  Materialism  has 
come  to  the  lescue  of  India  in  a ceitain  sense,  by  throwing  open  the  doors  of  life 
to  eveiyone,  by  destroying  the  exclusive  privileges  of  caste,  by  opening  up  to  discus- 
sion the  inestimable  treasures  which  were  hidden  away  in  the  hands  of  a very  few, 
who  have  even  lost  the  use  of  them.  Half  has  been  stolen  and  lost,  and  the  other 
half  which  lemains,  is  in  the  hands  of  men  who,  like  dogs  in  the  manger,  do  not 
eat  themselves  and  will  not  allow  others  to  do  so.  On  the  other  hand,  the  political 
systems  that  we  aie  stiugglmg  for  in  India,  have  been  in  Europe  for  ages,  have  been 
tried  for  centuiies,  and  have  been  found  wanting.  One  after  another,  the  institutions, 
systems,  and  everything  connected  with  political  goveinments  have  been  condemned 
as  useless,  and  Europe  is  restless,  does  not  know  where  to  turn.  The  material 
tyranny  is  tremendous.  The  wealth  and  power  of  a country  are  in  the  hands  of  a few 
men  who  do  not  work,  but  manipulate  the  work  of  millions  of  human  beings.  By 
this  power  they  can  deluge  the  whole  earth  with  blood.  Religion  and  all  things  are 
under  their  feet ; they  rule  and  stand  supreme.  The  western  world  is  governed  by  a 
handful  of  Shylocks.  All  those  things  that  you  hear  about — constitutional  govern- 
ment, freedom,  liberty  and  parliaments — are  but  jokes.  The  West  is  groaning  under 
the  tyranny  of  the  Shylocks,  and  the  East  is  groaning  under  the  tyranny  of  the 
Priests ; each  must  keep  the  other  in  check.  Do  not  think  that  one  alone  is  to  help 
the  world.  In  this  creation  of  the  impartial  Lord,  He  has  made  equal  every  particle 
in  the  universe.  The  worst,  most  demoniacal  man,  has  some  virtues  which  the 


tlEPtV  TO  THE  ADEEESS  OE  WELCOME  AT  PAEAMAKVDt 

greatest  saint  has  not,  and  the  lowest  worm  may  have  certain  things  which  the  highest 
man  has  not.  The  poor  labouier,  who  you  think  has  so  llUle  enjoyment  in  life,  has 
not  yoiH  intellect,  cannot  understand  the  Vedanta  Phdo-'Opliy  and  so  foith,  but  compare 
your  body  to  his,  and  you  Will  see,  his  body  is  nothing  like  so  sensitive  to  pain  as  yours. 
If  he  gets  severe  cuts  on  his  body,  they  heal  up  more  quickly  than  yours  would.  His 
life  IS  in  the  senses,  and  he  enjoys  there.  His  life  is  one  of  equilibrium  and  balance. 
Whether  on  the  ground  of  materialism,  oi  of  intellect,  or  of  spirituality,  the  com- 
pensation that  is  given  by  the  Lord  to  cvciy  one  impaitiallv,  is  esactly  the  same. 
Therefore  we  must  not  think  that  wcare  the  fl.iviouis  of  the  world.  We  tan  leach  the 
world  a good  many  things,  and  we  can  Icain  a good  many  things  from  it,  too.  We 
can  teach  the  world,  only  w'hat  it  is  w'aiting  for.  The  whole  of  westein  civilisation  will 
ciumble  to  pieces  in  the  next  fifty  years  if  there  is  no  spiritual  foundation.  It  is 
hopeless  and  perfectly  useless  to  attempt  to  govern  m.inkind  with  the  sword.  You 
will  find  that  the  very  centres  from  which  such  ideas  as  government  by  force  sprang 
up,  arc  the  very  fust  centies  to  degrade  and  degenerate  and  crumble  to  pieces. 
Kuropc,  the  centre  of  the  manifestation  of  material  energy,  will  crumble  into  dust 
within  fifty  years,  if  she  is  not  mindful  to  change  her  position,  to  shift  her  ground 
and  make  spirituality  the  basis  of  her  life.  And  what  will  save  Kuropc  is  the  religion 
ot  the  Upanishads.  Apart  from  the  different  sects,  philosophies  and  senptmes,  there, 
IS  one  underlying  doctrine,  the  belief  in  the  saul  of  man,  the  Atman,  common  to  all 
our  sects,  and  that  can  cliangc  the  whole  tendency  of  the  world.  With'  Hindus, 
jams  and  ILuldhists,  in  fact  evciywhcie  in  India,  there  is  the  idea  of  a spiritual  soul 
which  is  the  icceptacle  of  all  power.  And  you  know  full  well,  that  there  is  not  one 
system  of  philosophy  in  India  which  fcachc".  vou  that  you  can  get  power,  or  purity, 
oi  perfection  from  outside,  but  they  all  tell  } ou  that  those  are  v our  birt'^iright.  your 
naluie.  Impmity  is  a mere  sui>er-imposition,  under  which  your  real  nature  has 

become  hidden.  Ibit  the  real  i is  alre.idy  perfect,  alieady  strong.  You  do  not 

require  any  assistance  to  govern  yourself;  you  are  alreadv  self-icstrained.  The 
only  difference  is  in  knowing  it  or  not  knowing  it.  Therefore  the  one  difficulty  has 
been  summed  up  in  the  woid,  avtdya.  What  makes  the  difference  between  Hod  and 
man,  between  the  saint  and  the  sinner?  Only  ignoiance.  What  is  the  difference 
between  the  highest  man  and  the  lowest  worm  that  crawls  under  your  feet  ? Igno- 
rance , that  makes  all  the  difference.  For  inside  that  little  crawling  worm  is  lodged 
infinite  power,  and  knowledge,  and  purity,  the  infinite  divinity  of  God  Himself.  It  is 
unmanifestcd  ; it  will  have  to  be  nianifoted.  This  is  the  one  great  truth  India  has 
to  teach  to  the  woi  Id,  bet  ausc  it  KS  nowhere  else.  This  is  spirituality,  the  science  of 
the  soul.  Wh.at  makes  a man  stand  up  and  work  ? Strength.  Strength  is  goodness, 

weakness  is  sm  If  theie  is  one  woul  that  you  find  come  out  like  a bomb  from  the 

Upanishads,  bursting  like  a bombshell  upon  masses  of  ignoiancc,  it  is  the  w'ord, 
fearlessness,  And  the  only  religion  that  ought  to  be  taught,  is  the  religion  of  fearless- 
ness. Either  in  this  world  or  in  the  woild  of  religion,  it  is  tine  that  fear  is  the  .sure 
cause  of  degiadation  and  sin.  It  is  teir  that  brings  misery,  fear  that  I'rings  death, 
fear  that  breeds  evil.  And  what  causes  fear?  Ignoiance  of  our  own  nature.  Each 
of  us  is  heir-apparent  to  the  Emperor  of  Emperois ; we  arc  of  the  substance 
of  God  Himself.  Nay,  according  to  the  Advaita  vou  are  (iod  Himself  and  you  have 
forgotten  your  own  nature  in  thinking  of  yourselves  as  little  men.  We  have  fallen 
from  that  nature  and  thu.s  make  differences — -I  am  a little  better  than  you,  or  you  than 
1,  and  so  on.  This  idea  of  oneness  is  the  great  lesson  India  has  to  give,  and, 


3+ 


LECTURES~~FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


mark  you,  when  thia  is  understood  it  changes  the  whole  aspect  of  things,  because  you 
look  at  the  world  thiough  other  eyes  than  you  have  been  doing  before.  And  this 
world  is  no  more  a battle-field  wheie  each  soul  is  born  to  struggle  with  every  other 
soul,  and  the  strongest  gets  the  victory  and  the  weakest  goes  to  death.  It  •'omes  a 
play-giound  wheie  the  Loid  is  playing  like  a child,  and  we  are  His  playi.  s,  His 
fellow-woikeis.  This  is  only  a play,  however  terrible,  hideous  and  dangeros  "^it  may 
appear.  We  have  mistaken  its  aspect.  When  we  have  known  the  nature  of  the 
soul,  hope  comes  to  the  weakest,  to  the  most  degraded,  to  the  most  miserable  sinner. 
Only,  declares  your  Shastia,  despair  not.  For  you  are  the  same  whatever  you  do,  and 
you  cannot  change  your  nature.  Nature  itself  cannot  destroy  nature.  Your  nature 
is  pure.  It  may  be  hidden  for  millions  of  aeons,  but  at  last  it  will  conquer  and  come 
out.  Therefore  the  Advaita  brings  hope  to  every  one  and  not  despair.  Its  teaching 
is  not  through  fear  ; it  teaches,  not  of  devils  who  are  always  on  the  watch  to  snatch 
you  if  you  miss  your  footing,—  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  devils, — but  says  that  you 
have  taken  your  fate  in  your  own  hands.  Your  own  Karma  lias  manufactured  tor 
you  this  body,  and  nobody  did  it  for  you.  The  Omnipresent  Lord  has  been  hidden 
through  ignorance,  and  the  responsibility  is  on  youiself.  You  have  not  to  think 
that  you  were  brought  into  the  world  without  your  choice,  and  left  in  this  most 
horrible  place,  but  to  know  that  you  have  yourself  manufaclured  your  body,  bit  by 
bit,  just  as  you  are  doing  it  this  veiy  moment.  You  yourself  eat ; nobody  cats  for 
you.  You  assimilate  what  you  cat;  no  one  does  it  for  you.  You  make  blood,  and 
muscles  and  body  out  of  the  food ; nobody  does  it  for  you.  So  you  have  done  all 
the  time.  One  link  in  a chain  explains  the  infinite  chain.  If  it  is  true  for  one 
moment  that  you  manufacture  your  body,  it  is  tiue  for  every  moment,  that  has  been  or 
will  come.  And  all  the  responsibility  of  good  and  evil  is  on  you.  This  is  the  gieat 
hope.  What  I have  done,  that  1 can  undo.  And  at  the  same  time  our  leligion  docs 
not  lake  away  from  mankind,  the  meicy  of  the  Lord.  That  is  always  there.  On 
the  other  hand.  He  stands  besides  this  tremendous  current  of  good  and  evil;  He  the 
bondless,  the  ever-merciful,  is  always  ready  to  help  us  to  the  other  shore,  for  His 
mercy  is  great,  and  it  always  comes  to  the  pure  in  heart. 

Your  spirituality,  in  a certain  sense,  will  have  to  form  the  basis  of  the  new 
orders  of  society.  If  I had  more  time,  I could  show  you  how  the  West  has  yet  more 
to  learn  from  some  of  the  conclusions  of  the  Advaita,  for  in  these  days  of  mateiialislic 
science  the  ideal  of  the  Peisonal  God  does  not  count  for  much.  But  yet,  even  if  a 
man  has  a very  crude  foini  of  leligion,  and  waris  temjiles  and  forms,  he  can 
have  as  many  as  he  likes ; if  he  wants  a Peisonal  God  to  love,  he  can  find  here 
the  noblest  ideas  of  a Personal  God  such  as  were  never  attained  anywhere  else  in 
the  world.  If  a man  wants  to  be  a lalionalist  and  satisfy  his  reason — it  is  also  here 
that  he  can  find  the  most  rational  ideas  of  the  Impersonal. 


REPLY  TO  THE  ADDRESS  OF  WELCOME 
AT  SIVAGANGA  AND  MANAMADURA, 


At  Manamadura,  the  following  address  of  welcome  from  the  Zemindar*  and 
citizens  of  Sivaganga  and  Manamadura,  was  presented  to  the  Swami  : — 

To  Sri  Swami  Vivekananda. 

Most  Revered  Sir, — 

We,  the  Zemindars  and  citizens  of  Sivaganga  and  Manamadura,  beg  to  offer  you 
a most  hearty  welcome.  In  the  most  sanguine  moments  of  our  life,  in  our  wildest 
dreams,  we  never  contemplated  that  you,  who  were  so  near  our  hearts,  would  be  in 
such  close  proximity  to  our  homes.  The  first  wire  intimating  your  inability  to  come 
to  Sivaganga,  cast  a deep  gloom  on  our  hearts,  and  but  for  the  subsequent  silver 
lining  to  the  cloud  our  disappointment  would  have  been  extreme.  When  we  first 
hoard  that  you  had  consented  to  honour  our  town  with  your  presence,  we  thought 
wc  had  realised  our  highest  ambition.  The  mountain  promised  to  come  to  Mahomet, 
and  our  joy  knew  no  bounds.  But  when  the  mountain  was  obliged  to  withdraw  its 
consent,  our  worst  fears  were  roused  that  we  might  not  be  able  even  to  go  to  the 
mountain,  you  were  graciously  pleased  to  give  way  to  our  importunities. 

Despite  the  almost  insurmountable  difficulties  of  the  voyage,  the  noble  self* 
sacrificing  spirit  with  which  you  have  conveyed  the  grandest  message  of  the  East  to 
the  West,  the  masterly  way  in  wliich  the  mission  has  been  executed  and  the  marvel- 
lous and  unpaialleled  success  which  has  crowned  your  philanthrophic  efforts,  have 
earned  for  you  an  undying  glory.  At  a time,  when  Western  bread-winning  materi- 
alism was  making  the  strongest  imoads  on  Indian  religious  convictions,  when  tha 
sayings  and  wiitings  of  our  sages  were  beginning  to  l>e  numbered,  the  advent  of  a. 
new  master  like  you  has  already  marked  an  cia  in  the  annals  of  religious  advance- 
ment, and  we  hope  that  in  the  fulness  of  time  you  will  succeed  in  disintegrating  tha 
dross  that  is  temporarily  covering  the  geniune  gold  of  Indian  Pliilosophy,  and  casting 
it  in  the  poweiful  mint  of  your  intellect  will  make  it  current  coin  throughout  the 
whole  globe.  The  Catholicity  with  which  you  were  able  triumphantly  to  bear  the 
flag  of  Indian  Philosophic  thought  among  the  heterogeneous  religionists  assembled 
in  the  Parliament  of  Religions,  enables  us  to  hope  that  at  no  distant  date  you, 
just  like  your  contemporary  in  the  political  sphere,  will  rule  an  empire  over  which* 
the  sun  never  sets,  only  with  this  difference,  that  hers  is  an  empire  over  matter,  and 
yours  will  be  over  mind.  As  she  has  beaten  all  records  in  political  history  by  the 
length  and  beneficence  of  her  reign,  so  we  earnestly  pray  to  the  Almighty  that  you* 
will  be  spared  long  enough  to  consummate  the  labour  of  love  that  you  have  so  dis- 
interestedly undertaken,  and  thus  to  outshine  all  your  predecessors  in  spiritual 
history. 

We  are, 

Most  Revered  Sir, 

Your  most  dutiful  and  devoted  Servant*. 


36 


LECTCRES—FROM  COlOMnO  TO  ALMORA 


The  Swami’s  reply  was  to  the  following  effect  * — 

I i annot  express  the  deep  debt  of  gratitude  which  you  have  laid  upon  me  by 
the  kind  and  warm  welcome  which  has  just  been  accorded  to  me  by  you.  ^Infortu- 
natelv  I am  not  just  now  in  a condition  to  make  a veiy  big  speech,  howev  may 
wish  it.  In  spite  ot  the  boauiiful  adjectives  which  our  Sanskrit  fiicnd  has  :n  so 
kind  as  to  apply  to  me,  1 have  a body  afiei  all,  foolish  though  it  may  be,  a i the 
body  always  lollows  t[»e  piomptings,  conditions  and  laws  of  matter.  As  such,  there 
is  such  a thing  as  fatigue  and  weariness  as  legaids  the  material  body.  It  is  a great 
thing  to  see  the  w’onderful  amount  of  joy  and  appreciation  expiessed  in  every  part 
of  the  country,  for  the  little  w'ork  that  has  been  done  by  mo  in  the  West.  1 look 
at  it  only  in  this  way  : 1 want  to  apply  it  to  those  gicat  souls  who  are  coming  in  the 
futiue.  If  the  little  bit  of  work  that  has  been  done  by  me  receives  such  appioba- 
liou  from  the  naticm,  what  must  be  the  approbation  that  the  .sjniitual  giants,  the  woild- 
mo\ers  coming  after  us,  will  get  from  this  nation  t India  is  the  land  of  religion  ; the 
Hindu  undei stands  religion,  »uid  religion  alone.  Centuiics  of  education  have  always 
been  in  that  line,  and  the  result  is,  that  it  is  the  one  concern  in  life,  and  you  all  know 
well  that  it  is  so.  It  is  not  necessary  that  eveiy  one  should  be  a shopkeeper ; it  is 
not  necessaiy  even  that  everyone  should  be  a schoolmaster;  it  is  not  necessaiy  that 
every  one  should  be  a fighlei,  but  in  this  woi Id  ihcic  will  be  dilYeient  nations  pio- 
diicing  the  harmony  of  lesult.  Well,  peihaps  we  are  fated  by  Divine  Providence  to 
play  the  spiiilual  note  in  this  harmony  of  nations,  and  it  icjoices  me  to  see  that 
we  have  not  yet  lost  the  grand  traditions  which  have  been  handed  dowm  to  us  by  the 
most  gloiious  foiefaihcrs  of  whom  any  nation  can  be  pioud.  It  gives  me  hope,  it 
gives  me  adamantine  faith  in  the  destiny  of  the  lacc.  It  cheeis  me,  not  for  the 
personal  attention  paid  to  me,  but  to  know  that  the  heart  of  the  nation  is  iheie,  and  is 
still  sound.  India  is  still  living  ; who  says  she  is  dead  t But  the  West  w'anls  to  see 
us  active.  If  they  want  to  see  us  active  on  the  field  of  battle  they  will  be  disappointed 
— that  is  not  our  field;  just  as  we  wmuld  be  disappointed  if  we  hoped  to  sec  a military 
nation  active  on  the  field  of  spirituality.  But  let  them  come  heie  and  see  that  w’e 
are  equally  active  and  how  the  nation  is  living,  and  is  as  alive  as  ever.  We  should 
dispel  the  idea  that  we  have  degenerated  at  all.  So  far  so  good.  But  now  1 have 
to  say  a few  haish  woids,  which  1 hope  you  will  not  take  unkindly.  For  the  com> 
plaint  has  just  been  made  that  F'uropean  Materialism  has  w^ell  nigh  swamjied  us.  It 
is  not  all  the  fault  of  the  Fairopcans,  but  a good  deal  our  own.  We,  as  Vedintisls 
must  always  look  at  things  fioni  an  introspective  viewpoint,  from  its  subjective 
relations.  We,  as  Ved.\niisls,  know  for  certain  that  there  is  no  power  in  the  universe 
to  injure  us  unless  we  fust  injure  ourselves.  One-fifth  of  the  population  of  India 
have  been  Mahommedans.  Just  as  before  that,  going  further  back,  Iwo-thirds  of  the 
population  in  ancient  times  had  become  Buddhists;  one-fifth  are  now  Mahommedans. 
Christians  arc  already  more  than  a million.  Whose  fault  is  it?  One  of  our  his- 
torians says,  ill  ever-meniorablc  language — Why  should  these  poor  wretches  starve 
and  die  of  thirst  when  the  perennial  fountain  of  life  is  fiowing  by?  The  question 
is,  what  did  we  do  for  these  people  who  forsook  their  own  religion  ? Why  should 
they  have  become  ^lahommedans  ? I heard  of  an  honest  giil  in  k'ngland  who  w'as 
going  to  become  a slieeMvalker.  When  a lady  asked  her  not  to  do  .so,  her  reply 
was,  “ Tliat  is  the  only  vvay  I can  get  sympathy,  I c.m  find  none  to  help  me  now, 
but  let  me  be  a fallen,  down-tiodden  woman,  and  then  peihaps  merciful  ladies  will 
come  and  lake  me  to  a home  and  do  everything  they  can  for  me.”  We  are  weeping 


REPL  Y TO  THE  ADDRESS  OF  WELCOME  AT  MANAMADURA  37 

for  these  renegades  now,  but  what  did  we  do  for  them  befnic  ? Lete\ery  one  of  ns 
ask  ouisebes,  what  have  we  learnt ; have  we  taken  hold  of  llie  toitii  of  ti nth,  and 
if  so,  how  far  did  we  cany  it  ? We  did  not  help  them  then.  Thia  !>»  the  question  we 
should  ask  ourselves.  That  we  did  not  do  so  was  otir  own  fault,  our  own  Karma. 
Let  us  blame  none,  let  us  blame  our  own  Kainia.  Mateiialism,  01  Mahommedanism, 
or  Christianity,  or  any  other  ism  in  the  woild  could  never  ha\e  succeeded  but  that  you 
allowed  them.  No  bacilli  can  attack  the  human  tramc  until  it  is  degiadcd  and  degene- 
lated  by  vice,  bad  food,  piivalion,  and  exposuie ; the  healthy  man  passes  scathle.ss 
thiough  masses  of  poisonou'.  bacilli.  And  yet  there  is  time  to  change  our  ways,  (jive 
up  all  those  old  discussions,  old  lights  about  things  which  are  meaningless,  which  aie 
nonsensical  in  their  very  naluie.  Think  of  the  la^l  six  hundred  or  seven  hundied  )eais 
of  degradation,  when  grown-up  men  by  the  hundicds  have  been  discussing  for  \ears, 
whether  we  should  dunk  a glass  of  watei  with  the  light  hand  or  the  lelt,  whethei  the 
hand  should  be  washed  thiee  times  01  foui  times,  whether  we  should  gaigle  five  or 
SIX  limes  What  can  you  expect  from  men  who  pass  then  lives  in  discussing  such 
inomeiUous  questions  as  those,  and  willing  most  learned  [ihito.sophies  on  them  ! 
'I'here  is  a dangei  of  our  leligioii  getting  into  the  kitchen.  We  aie  neither  Vedanlists, 
most  of  us  now,  nor  Pauiauics,  nor  Tuutrics.  We  aie  just  “ Dou’l-touchists.’  Our 
religion  is  the  kitchen.  (Jur  (iod  is  the  cookmg-pol,  and  our  religion  is  “ Don't 
touch  me,  I am  holy.'’  If  this  goes  on  for  anothei  century,  eveiy  one  of  us  will  be 
in  a lunatic  as)  liiiii.  Ills  a sure  sign  of  softening  of  the  biain  when  the  mind 
cannot  giasp  the  higher  piobleiiis  of  life,  all  01  iginality  is  lost,  the  mind  has  lost 
all  Us  strength,  its  activity,  and  Us  power  of  thought,  and  just  tries  to  go  loutid  and 
round  the  smallest  cuive  U can  find.  This  state  of  things  has  hist  to  be  thrown  ovei- 
boaid,  and  then  we  must  stand  up,  be  active  and  stiong,  and  then  we  shall  recognise 
our  heiitage  to  that  iulimie  treasure,  the  tieasuie  oui  foiefatheis  have  left  for  us,  a 
treasure  that  the  whole  w'oild  letpuies  to-day.  The  woild  will  die  if  this  treasuic  is  not 
disliibuled.  Bung  U out,  disliibule  it  bioadcast.  Says  Vyasa,  giMng  is  the  one  woik 
alone  in  this  Kali  Vui^a,  and  of  all  the  gifts,  giving  spiiUual  life  is  the  highest  gift 
possible  ; the  next  gift  is  scciilai  knowledge  ; the  next,  saving  the  life  of  man,  and  the 
last,  giving  fooil  to  the  needy.  Of  food  we  hate  given  enough ; no  nation  is  more 
charitable  than  we.  So  long  as  there  is  a piece  of  biead  m the  home  of  the  beggar  he 
will  give  half  of  it.  Such  a phenomenon  can  be  ob.scrvcd  only  in  India.  We  have 
enough  of  that,  let  us  go  for  the  othei  two,  the  gifts  of  spiiitual  and  secular  knowl- 
edge. And  if  we  were  all  brave  and  had  stout  hcaits,  and  with  absolute  sincerity  put 
our  shoulders  to  the  wdaeel,  in  tsventy-five  years  the  whole  problem  would  be  solved, 
and  there  would  be  nothing  left  heie  to  fight  about,  but  the  w'hole  Indian  world  would 
be  once  more  Aryan.  This  is  all  I have  to  tell  you  now.  I am  not  given  much  to 
talking  about  plans ; I rather  prefer  to  do  and  show,  and  then  talk  about  my  plans.  I 
have  my  plans,  and  mean  to  woik  them  out  if  the  Lord  wills  it,  and  if  life  is  given 
to  me.  I do  not  know  whether  I shall  succeed  or  not,  but  it  is  a great  thing  to 
lake  up  a grand  ideal  in  life  and  then  give  up  one’s  whole  life  to  it.  For  what 
otherwise  is  the  value  of  life,  this  vegetating,  little,  low,  life  of  man  ? Subordi- 
nating It  to  one  high  ideal  is  the  only  value  that  life  has.  This  is  the  great  work  to  be 
done  in  India.  I welcome  the  prc.scnt  icligious  revival,  and  I should  be  foolish  if  I 
lo.st  the  opportunity  of  sinking  the  iron  wdiile  it  is  hot. 


I 


REPLY  TO  THE  ADDRESS  OF  WELCOME 
AT  MADURA. 

The  Swann  was  presented  with  an  address  of  welcome  by  the  Hindus  of  Madura, 
which  lead  as  follows  : — 

Most  Revkrf.d  Swami. 

We  the  Hindu  Public  of  Madura  beg  to  offer  you  our  most  heartfelt  and  res- 
pectful ^velcome  to  our  ancient  and  holy  city.  We  realise  m you  a living  example 
of  the  Hindu  Sannyasin,  who  icnouncing  all  worldly  lies  and  attachments  calculated 
to  lead  to  the  gratification  of  the  self,  is  woithily  engaged  in  the  noble  duty  of  living 
for  otheis  and  endeavouring  to  laise  the  spiiitual  coiulilion  of  niankiml.  You  have 
demonstiated  in  )oui  own  person  that  the  tiue  essence  of  the  Hindu  Religion,  is  not 
necessarily  bound  * up  with  rules  and  iiluals,  but  that  it  is  a sublime  philosophy 
capable  of  giving  peace  and  solace  to  the  distiessed  and  aflhcled. 

You  have  taught  Aineiica  and  J'uigland  to  admiic  that  philosophy  and  that 
religion  which  seeks  to  elevate  every  man  in  the  best  maniiei  suited  to  liis  capacities 
and  enviionments.  Although  your  teachings  have  foi  the  last  lluce  years  been 
delivered  in  foreign  lands,  the)  have  not  been  the  less  eageily  desouicd  in  this 
country  and  they  have  not  a little  tended  to  counieiact  the  growing  mateiialisin 
imported  from  a foreign  soil. 

" India  lives  to  this  day,  tor  it  has  a mission  to  fulfil  in  the  spiritual  ordeiing  of 
the  univeise.  I'he  appeal ance  of  a soul  like  you  at  the  close  of  this  cycle  of  the 
Kali  Yuga,  is  to  us  a suie  sign  of  the  incarnation  in  the  near  future  of  gieat  souls 
thiough  whom  that  mission  will  be  fulfilled. 

INIaduia,  the  seal  of  ancient  learning,  Madura  the  favoured  city  of  the  God 
Sundaresw'ava,  the  holy  Dwadasantakshetiam  of  Yogis,  lags  behind  no  othei  Indian 
city  in  Its  warm  adrnir.ition  of  your  exposition  rf  Indian  Idiilosophy  and  in  its  grate- 
ful acknowledgments  of  your  priceless  sei  vices  for  humanity. 

We  pi  ay  that  you  may  be  blessed  with  a long  life  of  vigour  and  strength  and 
usefulness. 

The  Swami  replied  in  the  following  lei  ms  : — 

I wish  I could  live  in  your  midst  for  .several  days,  and  fulfil  the  conditions  that 
have  just  been  pointed  out  by  youi  most  worthy  Chairman,  of  relating  to  you  my 
experiences  in  the  W'est,  and  the  result  of  all  my  labours  there  for  the  last  four  years. 
But,  unfortunately,  even  Swamis  have  bodies ; and  the  continuous  travelling  and 
speaking  that  I have  had  to  undergo  for  the  last  three  weeks,  make  it  impossible  for 
me  to  deliver  a very  long  speech  this  evening.  I will  therefore  satisfy  myself  with 
thanking  you  very  cordially  for  the  kindness  that  has  been  shown  to  me,  and  reserve 
other  things  fof  some  day  in  the  future,  when  under  better  conditions  of  health,  we 
shall  have  time  to  talk  over  more  various  subjects  than  we  can  do  in  so  short  a time 
this  evening.  Being  in  Madura,  as  the  guest  of  one  of  your  well-known  citizens  and 
noblemen,  the  Rajah  of  Ramnad,  one  fact  comes  prominently  to  my  mind.  Perhaps 
most  of  you  are  aware  that  it  was  the  Rajah  who  first  put  the  idea  into  my  mind  of 
going  to  Chicago,  and  it  was  he  who  all  the  time  supported  it  with  all  his  heart  and 


REPLY  TO  THE  ADDRESS  OF  WELCOME  AT  MADURA. 


59 


influence.  A good  deal,  therefore,  of  the  praise  that  has  been  bestowed  upon  me  in 
this  address,  ought  to  go  to  this  noble  man  of  Southern  India.  I only  wish  that 
instead  of  becoming  a Rajah  he  had  become  a Sannyasin,  for  that  is  what  he  is  really 
fit  for. 

Wherever  there  is  a thing  really  needed  in  one  part  of  the  world,  the  comple- 
ment will  find  Its  way  there  and  supply  it  with  new  life.  This  is  tiue  in  the  physical 
world,  as  well  as  in  the  spiritual.  If  there  is  a want  of  spiiituality  in  one  part  of  the 
woild,  and  at  the  same  time  that  spirituality  exists  elsewhere,  whether  we  conscious- 
ly struggle  for  it  or  not,  that  spirituality  will  find  its  way  to  the  part  where  it  is 
needed,  and  balance  the  inequality.  In  the  history  of  the  human  lace.  not  once  or 
twice,  but  again  and  again,  it  has  been  the  destiny  of  India  in  the  past  to  supply 
spirituality  to  the  world  ; and,  as  such,  wc  find  that  wheiever  eithci  by  mighty  con- 
quest or  by  commercial  supiemacy,  different  parts  of  the  world  have  been  kneaded 
into  one  whole  race,  and  bequests  have  been  made  fiom  one  corner  to  the  other, 
each  nation,  as  it  were,  poured  foith  its  own  quota,  either  political,  social,  or 
spiritual.  India’s  contribution  to  the  sum-total  of  human  knowledge  has  been 
spirituality,  philosophy.  These  she  contiibuted  even  long  befoie  the  rising  of  the 
Teisian  Knipiie  ; the  second  time  was  dining  the  I'eisian  Empire,  for  the  third  lime, 
duiing  the  ascendency  of  the  (Iteeks;  and  now  foi  the  fouiih  time  during  the  ascen- 
dency of  the  English,  she  is  going  to  fulfil  the  same  destiny  once  more.  As 
Western  ideas  of  oiganisation  and  external  civilisation  aie  perietiating  and  pouiing 
into  our  country,  whether  we  will  have  them  or  not,  so,  Indian  spiiiluality  and  philos- 
ophy arc  deluging  the  lands  of  the  West  None  can  lesist  it,  and  no  moie  can 
we  icsist  some  soil  of  mateiial  civilisation  fiom  the  West.  A little  of  it,  perhaps, 
is  good  for  us,  and  a little  spiriluahsaiion  is  good  foi  the  West;  thus  the  balance  will 
be  piescived.  It  is  not  that  we  ought  to  Icain  evei) thing  from  the  West,  oi  that 
they  have  to  leain  cveiything  fiom  us,  but  each  will  have  to  supply  and  hand  down 
to  future  generations  what  it  has,  for  the  futuie  accomplishment  of  that  dieam  of 
ages,  the  haimony  of  nations,  an  ideal  woild.  Whether  that  ideal  woild  will  ever  ' 
come  I do  not  know,  w'hclhci  that  social  perfection  w'ill  ever  be  reached,  I have  my  | 
own  doubts  about  it;  but,  whether  it  comes  or  not,  each  one  of  us  will  have  to  work 
for  the  idea  as  if  it  will  come 'to-moiiow',  and  as  if  it  only  depends  on  his  w'oik,  and 
his  alone.  Each  one  of  us  will  have  to  believe  that  every  one  else  in  the  w'oild  has 
done  his  woik,  and  the  only  w’ork  lemaining  to  be  done  to  make  the  world  pei feet 
has  to  be  done  by  himself.  This  is  the  responsibility  we  have  to  take  upon  our- 
selves. In  the  meanwhile  in  India  there'lTa'tr^lVicndous  revival  of  religion.  There 
is  danger  ahead,  as  well  as  gloiy,  for,  revival  sometimes  breeds  fanaticism,  sometimes 
goes  to  the  extreme,  so  that  often  it  is  not  even  in  the  power  of  those  who  start 
the  revival  to  control  it  when  it  has  gone  beyond  a certain  length.  It  is  better,  there- 
fore, to  be  forewarned.  We  have  to  find  our  way  between  the  Scylla  of  old  super- 
stitious orthodoxy,  and  the  Charybdis  of  materialism, — of  Europeamsm,  of  soulless- 
ness, of  the  so-called  reform, — which  has  penetrated  to  the  foundation  of  Western 
progress.  These  two  have  to  be  taken  care  of.  In  the  fiist  place  we  cannot  become 
Westerns,  therefore  imitating  the  Westerns  is  useless.  Suppose  you  can  imitate  the 
Westerns,  that  moment  you  will  die,  you  will  have  no  more  life  in  you.  In  the  second 
place,  it  is  impossible.  A stream  is  taking  its  rise,  away  beyond  where  time  began, 
flowing  through  millions  of  ages  of  human  histoiy;  do  you  mean  to  get  hold  of 
that  stream,  and  push  it  back  to  its  source,  to  a Himalayan  glacier  "i  Even  if  that  were 


40 


LECTURES~FR0M  COLO^tBO  TO  AtMORA 


practicable  it  would  not  be  possible  for  you  to  be  Europeanised.  If  you  find  it  is 
impossible  for  the  Euiopean  to  throw  off  the  few  centuries  of  culture  which  there 
is  in  the  West,  do  you  think  it  is  possible  for  you  to  thiow  oflF  the  culture  of  shining 
scoies  of  ceniuries  ? It  cannot  be.  Wc  must  also  remember  that  in  every  little 
village-^od,  and  every  little  supcr'^titious  cU'^tom,  is  that  which  we  are  accustomed 
to  call  our  leligioiis  faith.  Local  customs  arc  iniimte  and  conti adictory  ; which  are 
we  to  obey,  and  which  not  to  obey  ? The  Biahman  in  Southern  India,  for  instance, 
would  shrink  in  honor  at  the  sight  of  anoLher  Buihrnan  eating  meat ; a Brdhman  in 
the  North  thinks  it  a most  glorious  and  holy  thing  to  do — he  kills  goats  by  the 
hundred  in  sacrifice.  If  you  put  forward  your  custom  they  are  equally  ready  with 
theirs.  Various  are  the  customs  all  over  India,  but  they  are  local.  The  greatest 
mistake  made  is,  that  ignorant  people  always  think  that  this  local  custom  is  the 
essence  of  our  religion. 

But  beyond  this  there  is  a still  greater  difiiculty.  There  are  two  sorts  of  truths 
w^e  find  in  our  Shastras,  one  that  is  based  upon  the  eternal  nature  of  man — the  one 
that  deals  with  the  eternal  relation  of  God,  soul,  and  nature ; the  other,  with  local 
circumstances,  environments  of  the  lime,  social  institutions  of  the  period,  and  so 
forth.  The  first  class  of  liulhs  is  chiefly  embodied  in  our  Vedas,  our  scriptures  ; 
the  second  in  the  Smritis,  the  Purdnas,  etc.  VVe  must  remember  that  for  all  periods 
the  \’'edas  are  the  final  goal  an<l  authority,  and  if  the  Puidnas  differ  in  any  respect 
from  the  Vedas,  that  part  of  the  Put  Anas  is  to  be  rejected  without  mercy.  We  find 
then,  that  in  all  these  Smiilis  the  teachings  are  different.  One  Smiili  says,  this  is  the 
custom,  and  this  should  be  the  practice  of  this  age.  Another  one  says,  this  is  the 
practice  of  this  age,  and  so  forrh.  This  is  the  dchAra  which  should  be  the  custom  of 
the  Satya  Fuga,  and  this  is  the  dchdra  w'hich  should  be  the  custom  of  the  Kali  Fuga^ 
and  so  forth.  Now  this  is  one  of  the  most  glorious  doctrines  that  you  have,  that 
eternal  truths,  being  based  upon  the  nature  of  man,  will  never  change  so  long  as  man 
lives;  they  are  for  all  times,  omnipresent,  universal  virtues.  But  the  Smiitis  speak 
generally  of  local  ciicumslances,  of  duties  arising  from  different  environments,  and 
they  change  in  the  course  of  time.  This  you  have  ahvays  to  remember,  that  because 
a little  social  custom  is  going  to  be  changed  you  are  not  going  to  lose  your  religion, 
not  at  all.  Remember  these  customs  have  already  been  changed.  There  was  a lime 
in  this  very  India  when,  without  eating  beef,  no  Biahman  could  remain  a Brahman  ; 
you  read  in  the  Vedas  how,  when  a SannyAsin,  a king,  or  a great  man  came  into  a 
house,  the  goat  and  the  bullock  w^ere  killed ; how'  in  time  it  was  found  that  as  we  were 
an  agricultural  race,  killing  the  best  bulls  meant  annihilalion  of  the  race.  Therefore 
the  practice  was  stopped,  and  a voice  was  raised  against  the  killing  of  cows. 
Sometimes  we  find  existing  then,  what  w'e  now  consider  the  most  horrible  customs. 
In  course  of  lime  other  laws  had  to  be  made.  These  in  turn  will  have  to  go,  and 
other  Smritis  will  come.  This  is  one  fact  we  have  to  learn,  that  the  Vedas  being 
eternal  will  be  one  and  the  same  throughout  all  ages,  but  the  Smritis  will  have  an  end, 
As  time  rolls  on,  more  and  more  of  the  Smritis  will  go,  Sages  will  come,  and  they 
will  change  and  direct  society  into  better  channels,  into  duties  and  into  paths  which 
are  the  necessity  of  the  age,  and  without  which  it  is  impossible  that  society  can  live. 
Thus  we  have  to  guide  our  course,  avoiding  these  two  dangers,  and  I hope  that  every 
one  of  us  here  will  have  breadth  enough,  and  at  the  same  time  faith  enough,  to 
understand  what  that  means,  and  that  what  I suppose  is,  the  inclusion  of  everything, 
and  not  the  exclusion.  I want  the  intensity  of  the  fanatic  plus  the  extensity  of  the 


kilPLY  TO  THE  ADDRESS  OF  WELCOME  AT  MADURA.  4^ 

hlAteiialist.  Deep  as  the  ocean,  broad  as  the  iullnile  skies,  that  is  the  soit  of  heait 
wc  want.  Let  us  be  as  pioi^iessive  as  any  n.ilion  Ihat  L-vcr  cMsicd.  and  at  tlic  same 
time  as  faithful  and  conseivalive  towaids  our  ti.uhlMjus  as  Hindus  ahnie  know  ho\V 
lobe.  In  plain  wouls,  we  have  liist  to  leain  llie  disiinclina  between  the  essentials 
and  the  non-essentials  in  everythin, 'I'lic  essentials  aie  cleinal,  the  non-cssenlials 
have  value  only  for  a ceilain  time,  and  if  aliei  a time  they  are  not  leplaoed  by  some- 
thing essential,  they  aie  positively  daiygcious.  J do  not  mean  that  you  should  stand  up 
and  re\ile  all  30111- old  customs  and  institutions.  Ceitainly  not ; you  must  not  levile 
even  the  most  evil  one  of  them.  Revile  none.  Kven  those  cu'itoms  that  aie  now  apjiear- 
ing  to  be  positive  evils,  have  been  positively  hfe-giving  in  tunes  past,  and  if  we  ha\e  to 
remove  these,  we  must  not  do  so  with  cuises,  but  with  blessings  and  gratitude  for 
tiio  glorious  work  these  customs  ha\e  done  for  the  presoi v.ition  of  0111  lacc.  And 
we  must  also  remember  that  the  leadcis  of  our  societies  have  never  been  cither 
gencials  or  kings,  but  Rishis.  And  who  aie  the  Rishis  ? The  Rishi  as  he  is  called  in, 
the  Upanishads,  is  not  an  oidmary  man,  but  a lie  is  a man  who 

sees  leligion,  to  whom  religion  is  not  meiely  book-learning,  not  argumentation,  nor 
speculation,  noi  much  talking,  but  actual  realisation,  a coming  face  to  face  w'ilh  truths 
which  tianscend  the  senses.  This  is  Rishihood,  and  that  Rishihood  does  not 
belong  to  any  age,  or  time,  01  e\en  to  sects  01  caste  \hils\ .1) ana  sa)s,  liuih  must 
be  lealised — and  we  have  to  lemcmbor  that  3^)11,  and  1,  and  eveiy  one  f>f  us  will  be 
called  uj)ou  to  become  Rishis,  and  w'c  must  have  laith  in  ouisi'hcs,  we  must  become 
woild-movois,  for  o\ei3  thing  is  in  us.  We  must  see  Religion  face  to  face,  cxpciicnce 
It,  and  thus  solve  oui  doubts  about  it;  and  then  standing  u[)  in  the  gloiious  light  of 
Rishihood  each  one  of  us  will  be  a giant,  and  eveiy  word  falling  from  our  lijis  w'lll 
can3  behind  It  that  inlinite  sanction  of  secuiit3',  befoie  us  evil  will  \inish  bv 
Itself,  without  the  necessitv  of  cursing  any  one,  wiihoiil  the  ni.n.soi\  <ii  abu.siug 
any  one,  without  tin'  nc'cessity  of  lighting  any  one  in  the  woild.  May  the  f-ord  help 
us,  each  one  of  us  hcie,  to  icalise  the  Rishihood,  loi  out  own  salvation  and  for  that  of 
otheis. 


F 


THE  MISSION  OF  THE  VEDANTA. 


On  the  occasion  of  his  visit  to  Kumbhakonam,  the  Swamiji  was  presented  with 
the  following  acldiess  by  the  local  Hindu  conimuiiity : — 

REVKREn  SvVAMIN, — 

On  behalf  of  the  Hindu  inhabitants  of  this  ancient  and  religiously  important 
town  of  Kumbhakonam,  we  request  permission  to  offer  you  a most  hearty  welcome 
on  your  return  fiom  the  Western  World  to  onr  own  holy  land  of  great  temples  and 
famous  saints  and  sages.  We  aie  highly  thankful  to  God  for  the  reinaikable  suc- 
cess of  your  religious  mission  in  Amoiica  and  in  Euiope,  and  for  Ills  having  enabled 
you  to  impiess  upon  the  choicest  reprcscntalivos  of  the  woild's  gieat  religions 
assembled  at  Chicago,  that  both  llu*  Iliiulu  Philo-iophy  and  Religion  aie  so  broad 
and  so  laiionally  catholic  as  to  have  in  them  life  power  to  exalt  and  to  liarmonise  all 
ideals  of  God  and  of  human  spiiilualily. 

The  conviction  that  the  cau-^o  of  I’lulh  is  always  safe  in  the  hands  of  Him  who 
is  the  lito  ami  soul  of  the  univeise,  has  been  tor  thousands  of  years  pait  O'f  our 
living  faith  ; and  it  to-day  we  lejoicc  at  liie  lesulis  of  }our  holy  work  in  Ctirislian 
lands,  it  is  because  the  eyes  of  men  in  and  outside  of  India  aie  thereby  being  opened 
to  the  ine'^t^nable  value  of  the  Sf)iiifua!  heiitage  of  the  pre-eminently  religious 
Hindu  nation.  The  success  of  youi  vvoik  has  natuially  added  gicat  luslr-e  to  the 
aiieady  lenowned  name  of  )our  great  Gain;  it  has  also  laised  us  in  the  estimation 
of  the  civilised  vvoild ; moie  than  all,  It  has  made  us  leel  that  we  too,  as  a people, 
have  reason  to  be  pioud  of  the  aclnevomeuts  of  our  past,  and  that  the  ab.sence  of 
telling  aggiessivcness  in  our  civilisation  is  in  no  way  a sign  of  its  exhausted  oi  decay- 
ing concliiion.  With  cleai -sighted,  devoted,  and  altogether  unselfish  vvoikers  like 
you  m our  mulst,  the  future  of  the  Hindu  nation  cannot  but  be  blight  and  hopeful. 
May  the  God  of  the  umveise  who  is  also  the  great  God  of  all  nations,  bestow  on 
you  heallh  and  long  life,  and  make  you  iucieasingly  stiong  and  wise  m the  discharge 
of  )Our  high  and  noble  function  as  a vvoithy  teacher  of  Hindu  Religion  and  Philos- 
ophy. 

A Second  address  was  also  presented  by  the  Hindu  students  of  the  town. 

The  Swanii  then  delivered  the  following  addiess  on  the  iNIission  of  the  Ve- 
•danta  : — 

A very  small  amount  of  religious  work  peiformed  brings  a large  amount  of  result." 
If  this  slatemeut  of  the  Gita  wanted  an  illusUation,  I am  finding  every  day  the  truth  of 
that  gieat  saying  in  my  humble  life.  My  work  has  been  very  insignificant  indeed, 
but  the  kindness  and  the  cordiality  of  welcome  that  have  met  me  at  every  step 
of  my  jouiiiey  from  Colombo  to  this  city,  are  simply  be}OiKl  all  expectation.  Yet, 
at  the  same  tune,  it  is  worthy  of  our  traditions  as  Hindus,  it  is  vvoithy  of  our  race  ; 
tor  heie  we  are  the  Hindu  race,  whose  vitality,  whose  life-piinciple,  whose  very  soul, 
■as  it  were,  is  in  religion.  I have  seen  a little  of  the  woild,  travelling  among  the 
races  of  the  East  and  the  West ; and  everywhere  I find  among  nations,  one  great 
ideal,  which  foinis  the  backbone,  so  to  speak,  of  that  race.  With  some  it  is  polities, 


THE  MISSION  or  THE  VEDANTA  43 

with  others  it  is  social  culture  ; others  again  may'have  intellectual  culture  and  so  on  for 
their  national  background.  But  this,  out  motheiland,  has  leligion  and  leligion  alone  for 
its  basis,  for  its  backbone,  for  the  bedrock  upon  which  the  whole  building  of  its  life  has 
been  based.  Some  of  you  may  lemember  that  in  my  leply  to  the  kind  address  which 
the  people  of  Madias  sent  over  to  nve  in  Amciica,  I pointed  out  the  fact  that  a, 
peasant  in  India  has,  in  many  icspects,  a better  leligious  education  than  many  a 
gentleman  in  the  West,  and  to-day,  beyond  all  doubt,  I myself  am  veiifying  my  own 
Nvords.  There  was  a time  when  I did  feel  rather  discontented  at  the  w.int  ot  infor- 
mation among  the  masses  of  India,  and  the  lack  of  thirst  among  them  for  informa-' 
lion,  but  now  I uiidei  stand  it.  Where  their  inteiesl  lies,  theie  the)'  are  more  eager 
for  information  than,  the  masses  of  any  other  race  that  I have  seen  or  have  tiavelled 
among.  Ask  our  peasants  al)out  the  momciiious  poiuical  changes  in  Europe,  the 
upheavals  that  are  going  on  in  Euiopean  society,  and  tliey  do  not  know  anything 
of  them,  nor  do  they  care  to  know;  hut  the  peasants,  even  m Cc'ylon,  dcuched  from* 
India  in  many  wa\s,  cut  ofT  from  a living  interest  in  India — I found  the  vciy  peasants 
working  in  the  fields  there,  were  alieady  acquainted-,  with  the  fact  that  there  had  been- 
a Parliament  of  Religious  in  Ameiica,  and  lliai  an  Indian  Sunnya^nn  had  gone  over 
there  and  that  he  had  had  some  success.  Where,  ihciefoie,  their  mlcMesi  is,  there 
they  are  as  eagei  for  information  as  any  other  race ; and  religion  is  the  one  and  the 
sole  mteiest  of  the  people  of  India.  I am  not  just  now  discussing  whether  it  is 
good  to  have  the  vitality  of  the  lace  in  religious  ideals  or  in  political  ideals,  but  so 
far  it  is  clear  to  us,  that  for  good  or  for  evil,  our  vitality  is  concentrated  in  our 
religion.  You  cannot  change  it.  You  cannot  destroy  it  and  pul  in  its  place  another. 
You  cannot  tiansplant  a laige  gi owing  tree  from  one  soil  to  another  and  make  it 
immediately  take  root  there.  For  good  or  for  evil,  the  religious  ideal  has  been  flow- 
ing into  India  for  thousands  of  years;  for  good  or  for  evil,  the  Indian  atmosphere 
has  been  filled  with  ideals  of  religion  for  Shining  scores  of  centuiics;  for  good  or 
foi  evil,  we  have  been  boin  and  brought  up  in  the  veiy  midst  of  these  ideals  of 
religion,  rill  it  has  cntcied  into  our  vciy  blood,  and  tingled  with  every  diop  in  our 
veins,  and  has  become  one  with  our  constitution,  become  the  very  vitality  of  our 
lives.  Can  you  give  such  religion  up  without  the  rousing  of  the  same  energy  ia 
reaction,  without  filling  the  channel  which  that  mighty  livei  has  cut  out  for  itself  in 
the  course  of  thousands  of  year5  ? Do  you  want  that  the  Ganges  should  go  back 
to  Its  icy  bed  and  begin  a new  course?  Even  if  that  weie  possible,  it  would  be 
impossible  for  this  country  to  give  up  her  characteristic  couise  of  religious  life  and 
take  up  for  herself  a new  career  of  politics  or  something  else.  You  can  only  work 
under  the  law  of  least  resistance,  and  this  religious  line  is  the  line  of  least  resistance 
in  India.  This  is  the  line  of  life,  this  is  the  line  of  growth,  and  this  is  the  line  ot 
well-being  in  India — to  follow  the  track  of  religion.  Aye,  in  other  countries  religion 
is  only  one  of  the  many  necessities  in  life.  To  use  a common  illustration  which  I 
am  in  the  habit  of  using,  my  lady  has  many  things  in  her  pailour,  and*  it  is  the 
fashion  nowadays  to  have  a Japanese  vase,  and  she  must  procure  it ; it  does  not 
look  well  to  be  without  it.  So  my  lady,  or  my  gentleman,  has  many  other  occupa- 
tions in  life,  and  also  a little  bit  of  religion  must  come  in  to  complete  it.  Conse- 
quently he  or  she  has  a little  religion.  Politics,  social  improvement,  in  one  word, 
this  world.  Is  the  goal  of  mankind  in  the  West,  and  God  and  religion  come  in  quietly 
as  the  helpers  out  of  the  world.  Their  God  is,  so  to  speak,  the  Being  who  helps 
to  cleanse  and  to  furnish  tins  world  for  them ; that  is  apparently  all  the  value  of  God 


'44 


LECTURES— FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


for  them.  Do  you  not  know  how  for  the  last  hundrcfl  or  two  bundled  }'ears  you 
h;uc  been  he.iiiu^  again  an<l  again  out  of  the  lips  of  lucn  who  ought  to  have  known 
liL'ltci,  fK)in  the  iiiouilis  of  Ukjsc  who  piclend,  at  least,  to  know  better,  that  all  the 
aigurnents  they  pioduee  against  the  liuliau  leligion  is  tliis, — that  our  leligion  does 
not  cinuluce  to  well-being  in  this  woild.  lliat  it  does  not  bung  gold  to  us,  that  it 
does  not  make  us  lobbeis  of  nations,  that  it  tloes  not  make  the  stiong  stand  upon 
the  bodies  of  the  weak,  and  teed  thenisebes  with  the  bfc-blood  of  the  weak,  t.'er- 
lainly  oui  leligiou  does  not  do  that.  It  cannot  send  cohoits,  under  whose  feet  the 
eaith  liembles,  for  the  piiijiose  of  destinclion  and  pillage  and  the  ruination  of  races. 
Therefoie  they  bay — wdiat  is  there  in  this  leligion  .?  It  does  not  bi ing  any  gi ist  to 
the  gi  inding  null,  any  stienglh  to  the  muscles;  what  is  theie  in  such  a leligion  ? 
They  little  die  am  that  that  is  the  veiy  aiguincnt  W'llh  wdiich  we  jirove  oui  religion, 
because  It  docs  not  make  foi  this  woild.  Oms  is  the  only  true  religion,  because 
accoiding  to  it,  this  little  sense-woild  of  thiee  days’  diiiation  is  not  to  be  made  the 
end  and  aim  of  all,  is  not  to  be  oui  great  goal,  d'his  little  earthly  hoii/on  of  a few 
feet  is  not  that  which  bounds  the  vmw  of  our  leligion.  (.)uis  is  away  he)ond,  and 
btill  be}ond;  be)Ond  the  senses,  bcwoiid  space,  and  beyond  time,  aw’ay,  away  beiond, 
till  nothing  of  this  woild  is  left  and  the  universe  itself  becomes  like  a diop  in  the 
transcendent  ocean  of  the  gloiy  of  the  Soul.  Uuis  is  the  tine  leligion,  because  it 
teaches  that  God  alone  is  tiue,  that  this  woild  is  false  and  fleeting,  that  all  3 oui  gold  is 
but  as  dust,  that  all  your  powei  is  finite,  and  that  hie  itself  is  oftentimes  an  evil  ; theie- 
foie  it  is,  that  ouis  is  the  tiuc  lehgion.  Oiiis  is  the  liue  lehgion,  because,  above  all,  it 
teaches  lenunciatiou,  and  stands  up  with  the  wisdom  of  ages  to  tell  and  to  declaie 
to  the  nations  who  aie  meie  children  of  yesterda)  in  compaiison  with  us  Hindus, — who 
own  the  hoai)  anticpiily  of  the  wisdom,  disco\eied  by  oui  ancestois  hcic  in  India  to 
tell  them  in  plain  wouls,  “ Childien,  you  aic  slaves  of  the  senses;  theie  is  only 
finitencss  in  the  senses,  there  is  only  luinatlon  in  the  senses;  the  thioe  shoit  da3s 
of  luxury  here  biing  only  luin  at  last.  Give  it  all  up,  1 enounce  the  love  of  the  senses 
and  of  the  W'orld  ; that  is  Ihe  way  of  religion.”  Thiough  lenunciation  is  the  way 
to  the  goal  and  not  thiough  enjoyment.  Theiefore,  oms  is  the  only  tiue  religion. 
Aye,  it  is  a cuiious  fact  that,  while  nations  after  nations  have  come  upon  the  stage 
of  the  w'oild,  played  then  paits  vigoiOusly  for  a few  moments,  and  died  almost 
without  leaving  a maik  01  a ripple  on  the  ocean  of  time,  ''ere,  we  are  living  as  it  weie, 
an  eternal  life.  They  talk  a gicat  deal  of  the  new  iheoiie.s  about  the  suivival  of  the 
fittest,  and  they  think  that  it  is  the  stiength  of  the  muscles  which  Is  the  fittest  to 
survive.  If  that  weie  true,  any  one  of  the  aggressively  known  old~woild  nations  would 
have  li\ed  in  glory  to-day,  and  we,  the  weak  Hindus,  who  never  concpiered  even 
one  other  lace  or  nation  ought  to  have  died  out,  yet  we  live  here  three  hundred 
millions  stiong  ! (An  young  English  lady  once  told  me,  what  have  the  Hindus  done  ? 
They  never  even  contiuered  a single  lace ')  And  it  is  not  at  all  tiue  that  all  its 
energies  aie  spent,  . that  atiophy  has  ovei taken  its  body  ; that  is  not  true.  There  is 
vitality  enough,  and  out  in  toi rents,  and  deluges  the  world  when  the  time 

is  iipe  and  requires  have,  as  it  were,  thiown  a challenge  to  the  whole  world 

fiom  the  most  ancient  times.  Tn  the  West,  they  are  tiying  to  solve  the  problem 
how^  much  a man  can  [lossess,  and  we  are  trying  here  to  solve  the  pioblem  on  how 
little  a man  can  live.  This  stiugglc  and  this  ciiffeience  will  still  go  on  for  some 
cenluiies.  Tuit  if  histoiy  has  any  liulh  in  it,  and  if  prognostications  ever  prove  true, 
it  must  be  that  those  who  tiain  themselves  to  live  on  the  least  and  control  themselve$ 


THE  MISSION  OF  THE  VEDANTA 


45 


well,  will  in  ihc  end  gain  the  battle,  and  that  those  who  run  after  enjoyment  and  luMiiy, 
houever  vigoious  they  may  seem  fui  the  nionuMil,  will  lu\o  to  die  and  betomo  anni- 
hilated. 'rhcic  aie  tiincb  in  the  hisioi)  of  a nnin’t.  life,  nay,  in  die  hisloiy  of  ihe 
lives  of  nations,  when  a soil  of  woild-weaiines.s  becomes  painUilly  piedoiinnant.  It 
seems  that  such  a tide  of  woild-w’eaime''S  has  come  u])on  the  W’eslein  Woild. 
U'heie  too,  they  have  their  liiinkeis,  gieat  men;  and  they  aie  already  finding  out 
that  this  race  after  gold  and  power  is  all  vanity  of  vanities ; many,  nay  most  of  the 
cultured  men  and  women  theie,  ate  alieady  vveaiy  of  this  compctiiion,  this  stiuggle, 
this  biulality  of  their  comrneicial  ciMlisalion,  and  they  aie  looking  foiwaid  towaids 
.something  letter.  Theie  is  a class  which  still  clings  on  to  political  and  social 
changes  as  the  only  panacea  for  the  evils  in  Kutope,  but  among  the  gieai  ihinkcis 
theie,  othei  ideals  are  glowing.  They  have  found  out  that  no  amount  of  political 
01  social  manipulation  cjf  human  conditions  can  ciiie  the  evils  of  life.  It  is  a 
change  of  the  soul  itself  for  the  bettei,  that  alone  will  cuie  the  evils  of  life.  No 
'amount  of  foicc,  or  government,  or  legislative  ciuclty  will  change  the  conditions  of 
a lacc,  but  it  is  spiiilual  culluie  and  ethical  cultuie  alone  that  can  change  wiong 
racial  tendencies  for  the  bolter.  Thus,  these  laces  of  the  West  aie  eagei  foi  some 
new  thought,  for  .some  new  plnlosoph}  ; tliQ  leligion  they  have  h.ul,  Cliiislianily, 
although  good  and  gloiious  in  many  lespccts,  has  been  impcifeclly  undeistood,  and 
is,  as  understood  hitheito,  found  to  be  insunicient.  The  tlioiighlful  men  of  the 
West  find  in  our  ancient  philosophy,  especially  in  the  Vedanta,  the  new  impulse  of 
thought  they  are  seeking,  the  veiy  spiiilual  food  and  dunk  for  which  they  aie  hunger- 
ing and  thii Sling.  And  it  is  no  wonder  that  this  is  so. 

1 have  become  used  to  licar  all  sorts  of  vvorideiful  claims  put  forward  in  favour 
of  every  leligion  under  the  sun.  You  have  also  heaid,  cjuile  within  lecenl  limes,  the 
claims  put  forvvaid  by  Dr.  Bai lows,  a great  fiiencl  of  mine,  that  Chiisiianity  is  the 
only  universal  religion.  Let  me  consider  this  question  awhile  and  lay  befuie  you  my 
reasons  why  I think  that  it  is  Vedanta,  and  Vedanta  alone,  that  can  become  the 
univcisal  religion  of  man,  and  that  no  other  is  filled  for  that  idle.  Excepting  our 
own,  almost  all  the  other  great  religions  in  the  vvoi Id  are  inevitably  connected  with 
the  life  or  lives  of  one  or  more  of  their  founders.  All  their  theories,  their  teach- 
ings, their  doctrines,  and  their  ethics  are  built  round  the  life  of  a peisonal  founder, 
fiom  whom  they  get  their  sanction,  theii  authoiity,  and  their  power  ; and  strangely 
enough,  upon  the  historicity  of  the  founder's  life  is  built,  as  it  were,  all  the  fabiic  of 
such  religions.  If  theie  is  one  blow  dealt  to  the  hisloi icily  of  that  life,  as  has 
been  the  case  is  modern  times  with  the  lives  of  almost  all  the  so-called  foundeis  of 
leligion— we  know  that  lialf  the  details  of  such  lives  is  not  now  sciiously  believed  in, 
and  that  the  other  half  is  seiiously  doubted — if  this  becomes  the  case,  if  that  rock  of 
histoiicity,  as  they  pretend  to  call  it,  is  shaken  and  shattered,  the  whole  building 
tumbles  down  broken  absolutely,  never  to  regain  its  lost  status.  Everyone  of  the 
gieat  religions  in  the  world  excepting  our  own,  is  built  upon  such  histoiical  chaiac- 
teis;  but  ours  rests  upon  principles.  There  is  no  man  or  woman  who  can  claim  to 
have  created  the  Vedas,  They  are  the  embodiment  of  eternal  principles ; sages 
discovered  them;  and  now  and  then  the  names  of  these  sages  are  mentioned,  just 
their  names ; we  do  not  even  know  who  or  what  they  were.  In  many  cases  vve  do 
not  know  who  their  fathers  were,  and  almost  in  every  case  we  do  not  know  when 
and  where  they  weie  born.  But  what  cared  they,  these  sage.s,  for  tlieir  names  They 
\yere  the  preachers  of  piinciples,  and  they  themselves,  so  far  as  they  went,  tried  to 


46 


LECTURES  FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


become  illustrations  of  the  principles  they  preached.  At  the  same  lime,  just  as  our 
God  IS  an  impeisonal  and  yrt  a peisonal  God,  so  is  our  religion  a most  intensely 
iinpeison.il  one,  a religion  h.ised  upon  principles;  and  yet  it  lias  an  infinite  scope  for 
the  play  of  poisons,  for  what  leligion  gives  3011  nioic  Incarnations,  more  prophets 
and  seers,  and  still  w.uls  for  inlnnlely  tnoie  ? The  Ilhag.wad-Gua  says  that  Incar- 
nations aie  infinite,  leaving  ample  scope  for  as  many  as  you  like,  to  come.  There- 
foie  if  any  one  01  inoie  of  these  peisons  in  India's  icligious  histoiy,  any  one  or  more 
of  these  Incarn.uions,  and  any  one  01  moie  of  oui  piophels  are  proved  not  to  have 
been  histoiic.d,  it  does  not  injuie  our  lehgion  at  all ; even  then  it  lemains  firm  as 
ever,  because  it  1^  ha  ed  upon  piinciples,  and  not  upon  peisons.  It  is  in  \ain  to  tiy 
to  gaihei  all  the  peoples  of  the  Moild  around  a •'ingle  pci sonahly.  It  is  difficult  to 
make  tiiein  gather  together  even  louud  cteiiial  and  uuneisnl  piiiiciples.  If  it  ever 
becomes  possilile  to  bung  the  hugest  poiiion  of  humamiy  to  one  way  of  thinking  in 
regard  to  idigion,  maik  }ou,  it  must  he  alwa) s thiough  piinciiiles  and  not  through 
peison.s.  Yet  as  I Inue  s, ud,  out  lehgion  has  ample  scope  for  the  authoiity  and 
influence  of  peisons.  Theie  is  th.it  most  wcmdeitul  iheoiy  of  Ishta,  which  gives  you 
the  fullest  and  the  lieest  choice  possilde  among  these  gicat  leligious  pcisonahtics. 
You  may  take  up  any  one  of  the  piophets  or  tiacheis  as  )oui  guide  and  the  object  of 
your  special  adoiation  ; )ou  aie  even  alhjwcd  to  think  that  lie  wiiom  you  have  chosen  is 
the  gieatest  of  the  piophels,  gicalc'.t  of  all  the  , iheie  is  no  haim  in  that,  but 

you  must  keep  to  a liiui  backgiouiid  of  eteiudly  tiue  piincipIes.  The  stiange  fact 
here  is,  tliat  the  powei  of  oui  lucainaiions  has  been  holding  good  with  us  only  so 
far  as  they  aie  illusiialions  ot  the  piinciples  111  the  Vedas  '1  lie  gloiy  of  Sii  Riishna 
is,  that  he  has  been  the  best  pieacher  of  oui  eternal  icbgion  of  piinciples  and  the 
best  comnieiiiator  on  the  Vedanta  that  ever  lived  in  India. 

The  second  claim  of  the  Vedanta  upon  the  attention  of  the  world  is,  that  of  all 
the  sculptures  m tlie  woild,  it  is  the  one  scnptuie  the  leaching  of  which  is  in  entire 
haimony  with  the  results  that  h.ave  been  aflained  by  the  modem  snenlific  invesiiga- 
tions  of  external  nature.  Two  minds  in  the  dim  past  of  liistoi)-,  cognate  to  each 
other  in  form  and  kinship,  and  sympathy,  staited,  being  placed  In  ihlfcient  routes. 
The  one  was  the  ancient  Mindii  miiul,  and  the  other  the  ancient  Gieek  mind.  The 
formei  started  by  analysing  the  inleinal  woild.  The  latter  stalled  in  search  of  that 
goal  l)e}'ond,  by  analysing  the  external  woild.  And  even  through  the  various  vicissi- 
tudes of  their  Insioiy,  it  is  easy  to  make  out  these  two  vibrations  of  thoughts  as 
tending  to  piocluce  similar  echoes  fiom  the  goal  beyond.  It  seems  clear  that  the 
conclusions  of  modem  maleiiahstic  science  can  be  acceptable,  haimoniously  with 
tlieir  religion,  only  to  the  Vedanlins,  or  Hindus  as  they  are  called.  It  seems  clear 
that  modern  mateiiahsm  can  hold  Us  own  and  at  the  same  time  approach  spiiituality 
by  taking  up  the  conclusions  of  the  Vedanta.  It  seems  to  us,  and  to  all  who  care 
to  know,  that  the  conclusions  of  modem  science  are  the  very  conclusions  the  Vedanta 
reached  ages  ago  ; only,  in  modem  science  they  are  wiiiten  in  the  language  of  matter. 
This,  then,  is  anollier  claim  of  the  Vedanta  upon  modern  Western  minds,  its  ration- 
ality, the  wondeiful  rationalism  of  the  Vedanta.  I have  myself  been  told  by  some 
of  the  best  Western  scientific  minds  of  the  day,  how  wondei fully  rational  the  conclu- 
sions of  the  Vedanta  were.  1 know  one  of  them  personally,  who  scarcely  has  time 
to  eal  his  meals,  or  go  out  of  his  laboiatoiy,  but  who  yet  would  stand  by  the  hour 
to  attend  my  lectuies  on  the  Vedanta ; for,  as  he  expresses  it,  they  are  so  scientific, 
they  so  exactly  haimonisc  with  the  a.spi rations  of  the  age  and  with  the  conclusions 


THE  HFSSrOX  OF  THE  VEDANTA 


M 


t6  which  modem  science  is  comin|jf  al  ihe  prosenl  time.  Two  such  scientific  conclu- 
eions  drawn  from  Compaiali\e  Religion,  1 would  specially  like  to  diaw)our  allenlion 
to;  the  one  beais  upon  the  idea  of  the  umveisality  of  leligions  and  llie  other,  on  the 
idea  of  the  onene'iS  of  things.  We  o])senc  in  the  histoiie.s  of  Dab)  Ion  and  among 
the  Jews  an  inieiesling  religious  phenomenon  happening.  We  find  that  each  of 
these  Babylonian  and  Jewish  peoples  was  divided  into  so  many  tribes,  each  tilbe 
having  a god  of  its  own,  and  that  these  little  tribal  Gods  had  often  a generic  name. 
The  gods  among  the  Babylonians  weie  all  called  Baals,  and  among  them  Baal 
Merodac  was  the  chief.  In  coui.se  of  time  one  of  these  many  lubes  w'ould  conquer 
and  assimilate  the  other  lacially-.illied  tubes,  and  the  natuial  lesult  would  be,  that 
the  God  of  the  conquciing  tube  would  be  placed  at  the  head  of  all  the  gods  of  the 
other  tribe.s,  'I'hus  the  so-called  boasted  monotheism  of  the  Semites  w'as  created. 
Among  the  Jew.s  the  gods  w'ciil  by  the  name  of  Moloch.  Of  these  there  was  one 
Moloch  who  belonged  to  the  tube  called  Isiael,  and  he  w-as  called  the  Moloch  Yahva, 
01  Moloch  Vava.  In  lime,  tins  tube  of  Isiael  slowdy  conqucied  some  of  the  other 
tribes  of  the  same  lace,  destro)ed  then  Muhichs,  and  declaied  its  own  Moloch  to  be 
the  Supieme  Moloch  of  all  the  Molochs.  And  I am  suie  most  of  you  know  the 
amount  of  bloodshed,  of  tyianny,  and  of  biulal  savagery  that  this  lehgious  con- 
quest entailed.  Lalei  on,  the  Babylonians  lued  to  deslioy  tins  supremacy  of  Moloch 
Yahva,  but  couhl  not  succeed  in  doing  so.  it  seems  to  me,  that  such  an  attempt  at 
tubal  sell-assertion  in  ichgious  mattcis  might  have  taken  jilace  on  the  fioiUieis  of 
India  ahso.  Heie  too,  all  the  \auous  lubes  of  the  Ai}ans  niiglit  ha\e  come  into 
confiicr  with  one  anothc'f,  foi  declaiing the  supiemacy  of  iheir  seveial  tubal  gods  ; but 
India’s  history  was  to  be  otheiwise,  was  to  be  dilTerent  liom  that  of  the  Jews.  India 
was  alone  to  be  the  land  of  ail  lands  of  lolciaiion  and  of  spiiiluality,  and  therefoie  the 
fight  between  lubes  and  then  gods  did  not  long  lake  place  hcie.  Foi  one  of  the 
gieatest  sages  that  was  ever  boui,  found  out  here  in  India  even  at  that  distant  time, 
which  hisioiy  cannot  reach,  and  into  whose  gloom  even  liadilion  itself  dates  not  peep 
—in  that  (lustant  time  the  sage  aiose,  and  declaied,  Ekam  sai  viprd  bahudhd 
vjilanh." — He  who  exists  is  one;  the  sages  call  Him  vaiiously.  This  is  one  of 
the  most  menioiable  sentences  that  was  c\ei  uiieied,  one  of  the  giandest  truths  that  w^as 
ever  discoveicd.  And  for  us  Hindus  this  liuih  has  been  the  veiy  backbone  of  our 
national  existence.  Foi  throughout  the  vi.sUs  of  llie  ceiUuues  of  our  national  life, 
this  one  idea,  “ hahudhd  vadantiT  comes  down,  gaming  in  volume 

and  in  fulness  till  it  has  permeated  llie  whole  of  our  national  existence,  till  it  has 
mingled  m our  blood,  and  has  become  one  with  us.  We  io\e  that  grand  liuth  in  every 
vein,  and  our  country  has  become  the  gloiums  land  of  leligious  toleiation.  It  is 
here  and  here  alone  that  they  build  temples  and  chuiches  for  the  lehgions  which 
have  come  with  the  object  of  condemning  our  own  lehgion.  This  is  one  \ery  great 
piinciple  that  the  world  is  waiting  to  Icain  fiom  us.  Aye,  you  little  know  how  much 
of  intolerance  is  yet  abioad.  It  stiuck  me  more  than  once,  that  I should  have  to 
leave  my  bones  on  foreign  shores  owing  to  the  picvalence  of  icligious  intolerance. 
Killing  a man  is  nothing  for  religion's  sake;  to-moriow  they  may  do  it  in  the  very 
heart  of  the  boasted  civilisation  of  the  West,  if  to-day  they  aie  not  really  doing  so. 
OiUcasting  in  its  most  hoirible  forms  would  often  come  down  upon  the  liead  of  a 
man  in  the  West,  if  he  daied  to  say  a woid  against  Iils  couniiy’s  accepted  leligion. 
They  talk  glibly  and  smoothly  here  in  cniicism  of  our  caste  law’S.  If  you  go  to  the 
West  and  live  there  as  I have  done,  you  will  know  that  even  some  of  the  biggest  profes- 


48 


LECTURF.S—FROM  COLOMBO  TO  AtJfORA 


sors  yon  heal  of,  are  ni  rant  rowauh  and  dare  not  say  for  fear  of  public  opinion,  a 
hundic'dlh  part  of  what  they  hold  to  be  leally  line  in  leligions  mailers. 

Theiefore  the  w’oild  is  w'ailin<?  for  this  giand  idea  of  univeisal  toleration.  It 
will  be  a f^ixat  acqni.Mlion  to  civilisation.  Nay,  no  civilisation  can  long  exist  unless 
this  idea  enters  into  it.  No  civilisation  can  grow,  unless  fanaticism,  bloodshed  and 
biutality  slop.  No  civilisation  can  begin  to  lift  up  its  head  until  we  look  chatitably 
upon  one  another,  and  the  first  step  towaids  that  much  needed  charity  is  to  look  chart.* 
tably  and  kindly  upon  the  leligious  convictions  of  others.  Nay  more,  to  understand, 
that  not  only  should  we  be  charitable,  but  positively  helpful,  to  each  other,  however 
different  our  lehgious  ideas  and  convictions  may  be.  Anti  that  is  exactly  what  we  do 
in  India,  as  I have  just  i elated  to  you.  It  is  here  in  India  that  Hindus  have  built  and 
arc  sldl  budding  chui dies  for  (diristians,  and  mosques  for  Mabommedans.  That  is 
the  thing  lo  do.  In  spile  of  their  hatied,  in  spite  of  their  biutality,  in  spite  of  their 
ci nelly,  in  spite  of  their  tyianny,  and  in  spite  of  the  vile  language  they  are  given  to 
ulleiing,  we  wdl  and  must  go  on  building  churches  for  the  Christians  and  nlosque.’l 
for  the  INTahotnmcdans  until  we  conquer  thiough  love,  imlll  we  have  demonstrated  to 
the  world  that  love  alone  is  the  fittest  thing  to  suivive  and  not  liatred,  that  it  is  gentle- 
ness dial  has  the  strength  lo  live  on  and  to  fiuclify,  and  not  mete  brutality  and 
physical  foice. 

The  other  gi  eat  idea  that  the  wot  Id  w’ants  from  us  to-day,  the  thinking  part  of 
Kurope,  nay,  the  whole  world — more,  pieihaps,  the  lower  classes  than  the  higher, 
moic  the  masses  than  the  culluicd,  nioic  the  ignoiant  than  the  educated,  moie  the 
weak  than  the  stiong  -is  that  eternal  grand  idea  of  the  spiritual  oneness  of  the  whole 
universe.  1 need  not  tell  ton  to-day,  men  finm  the  Madias  Univeisity,  how  the 
niotlcin  tescaichcs  of  the  West  have  demonstrated  thiough  )»h}sical  means,  the  one- 
ness and  die  solidaiity  of  the  whole  univcisc;  how,  pliysically  speaking,  you  and  I, 
the  sun,  moon  and  stais,  aic  but  hide  waves  or  wavelets  in  the  midst  of  an  infinite 
ocean  of  mailer;  how  Indian  psychology  dcinonslialed  ages  ago  that,  similaily,  both 
body  and  mind  arc  but  mere  names  oi  I'.lile  wavelets  in  the  ocean  of  matter,  the 
; and  how.  going  one  step  further.  It  is  also  shown  in  the  Vedanta  that, 
behind  that  idea  ol  the  unit}  of  the  whole  show,  the  real  Soul  is  one.  There  is  but 
one  .">uul  thioughout  the  universe,  all  is  but  One  Existence.  This  great  idea  of  the 
leal  and  basic  solidaiity  of  the  whole  universe  has  frightened  many,  even  in  this 
counliy  ; it  even  now  finds  sometimes  mote  opponents  than  adherents ; 1 tell  you, 
iievciiheless,  that  It  IS  the  one  gieat  iifc-giviug  idea  which  the  woild  wants  from  us 
to-day,  aiul  vviiich  the  mule  masses  of  India  want  for  their  uplifting,  for  none  can 
vcgeneiate  this  land  of  ours  without  the  inactical  ajiplication  and  effective  npciation 
of  this  ideal  of  the  oneness  of  thing.s.  The  rational  West  is  earnestly  bent  upon 
seeking  out  the  rationality,  the  raison  d'etre  of  all  its  philosophy  and  its  ethics  ; and 
} oil  all  know  well  that  ethics  cannot  be  derived  from  the  mere  sanction  of  any  person- 
age, howevei  gieat  and  divine  he  may  have  been.  Such  an  explanation  of  the 
auihonly  of  ethics  appeals  no  moie  to  the  highest  of  the  woild’s  thinkers;  they  want 
sonieUiing  more  ih.m  human  sanction  for  ethical  and  moral  codes  to  be  binding, 
they  want  some  eternal  principle  of  truth  as  the  sanction  of  ethics.  And  where  is 
that  cteinal  sanction  to  be  found  except  in  the  only  Infinite  Reality,  that  exists  in  you 
and  in  me  and  in  all,  in  the  self,  in  the  soul  ? The  infinite  oneness  of  the  Soul  is 
the  eternal  sanction  of  all  morality,  that  you  and  I are  not  only  brothers— every 
lileuUure  voicing  nun’s  bliugglc  towards  freedom  has  preached  that  for  you — but 


THE  .UJSSiO.V  OE  THE  I'ED.lXTA  4$ 

that  you  and  I are  leally  one.  This  is  the  dictate  of  Indian  pliilosophy.  This  oneness 
is  the  rationale  of  all  ethics  and  all  spiritu.dity,  Eliidpe  wants  it  to-day  just  as  much 
as  our  down-trodden  masses  do,  and  this  gieat  piiilClple  is  even  now  unconsciousl)^ 
forming  the  basis  of  all  the  latest  political  and  social  aspirations  that  are  coming  up 
in  Kngiand,  in  Geiinaiiy,  in  Fiance,  and  in  Ameiica.  And  mark  it,  mv  Mends,  thill 
in  and  llirough  all  the  lileraluie  voicing  man’s  stiuggle  towards  frcedoni,  towards  Uni- 
ver'^al  fleedom,  again  and  again  yoii  lind  the  Indian  Vedantic  ideals  coming  out  promi- 
nently. Ill  some  cases  the  wi itch's  do  not  know  the  soiuce  of  their  Inspiration,  ili 
some  cases  they  tiy  to  apjiear  very  oiiginal,  and  a few  theie  are,  bold  and  giatefUl 
enough  to  mention  the  souicc  and  acknowledge  their  indebtedness  to  it.  When  I 
was  in  Ameiica,  I heaid  once  the  comidainl  made  that  I was  preaching  too  much  of 
Advaila,  and  too  little  of  dualism.  Aye,  1 know  what  giandedr,  what  oCeans  of 
love,  what  infinite,  ecstatic  blessings  and  joy  iheie  aio  in  the  dualistic  lovC-theories 
of  woiship  and  leligion.  1 know  it  all.  Jlut  this  is  not  the  time  with  us  to  weep, 
even  in  joy  ; wo  liavo  had  weeping  cnougli;  ho  nroie  ia  this  the  lime  foi  us  to  becomd 
soft.  'Fiiis  softness  has  been  With  us  till  we  have  become  like  masses  of  cotton,  and 
aic  dead.  What  our  couiUiy  now  wants,  are  muscles  of  iron  and  neivcs  of  steel, 
gigantic  wills  which  nothing  can  resist,  which  can  penetrate  into  the  mysteiics  and 
the  secicls  of  the  universe,  and  will  accomplish  their  puipose  in  any  fashion,  even  if  it 
meant  going  clown  to  the  bottom  of  the  ocean  and  meeting  death  face  to  face.  'I’hat 
is  what  we  want,  and  that  can  only  be  created,  established  and  strengthened,  by 
undeislanding  and  lealising  the  ideal  of  the  Advaita,  that  ideal  of  the  oneness  of 
all.  Faith,  faith,  faith  in  ourselves,  faith,  faith  In  God, — this  is  the  setret  of  gieat- 
ness.  If  }ou  have  faith  in  all  the  thiee  hundred  and  thirty  millions  of  your  mytho- 
logical gods,  and  in  all  the  gods  which  foreigners  have  now  and  again  introduced 
into  jouimidst,  and  still  liave  no  faith  in  youi  selves,  there  is  no  salvation  for  you. 
Have  faith  in  }Oulsel\es,  and  stand  up  on  that  faith  and  be  strong;  that  is  what  we 
need.  Wliy  is  it  that  wc,  llirce  handled  and  thiity  millions  of  people,  have  been 
uilod  for  the  last  one  thousand  ycais  by  any  and  every  handful  of  foreigners  who 
chose  to  walk  over  our  prostiate  bodies  } Because  they  had  faith  in  themselves  and 
we  had  not.  What  did  I leain  In  the  West,  and  what  did  I see  behind  those 
liothy  savings  of  the  Cliiislian  sects  repeating  that  man  was  a fallen  and  hopelessly 
fallen  sinner?  Tbete,  I sa\V  that  Inside  the  national  hearts  of  both  Europe  and 
Ameiica,  resides  the  tremendous  jiower  of  the  men’s  faith  in  themselves.  An  Eng- 
lish boy  Will  tell  Vou — “ 1 am  an  Englishman,  and  I can  do  anything.”  'I'he  Aiiicilcan 
boy  will  tell  }Ou  the  same  thing,  and  so  will  any  liulopean  boy.  Can  our  boys  say 
the  same  thing  here  ? No,  nor  even  the  boys’  falheis.  Wc  have  lost  faith  in  our- 
selves. Theiefore,  to  pi  each  the  Advaita  aspect  of  the  Vedanta  is  necessary  to 
rouse  up  the  heaits  of  men,  to  show  them  the  glory  of  their  souls.  It  is  therefore 
that  I preach  this  Advaila,  and  1 do  so  not  as  a sc'ctarian,  but  upon  univyusal  and 
ividely  acceptable  grounds. 

I It  is  easy  to  find  out  the  W'ay  of  reconciliation  that  will  not  hurt  the  dualist  or 
he  qualified  nionist.  Tliere  is  not  ouc  system  in  India  which  does  not  hold  the 
loclrine  that  God  is  within,  that  Divinity  resides  w-iihin  al!  things.  Every  one  of 
ur  Vedantic  systems  admits  that  all  purity  and  peifection  and  strength  are  in  the 
3ul  already.  According  to  some,  this  peifection  sometimes  becomes,  as  it  were, 
3ntracted,  and  at  other  times  it  becomes  expanded  again.  Vet  it  is  there.  Accord- 
ig  to  the  Advaita,  it  neither  contracts  nor  expands,  but  becomp^  ..-j 


50 


LEC7URES—FR0M  COLOMBO  TO  ALMOEA 


uncovered,  now  and  again.  PicUy  nmcli  llic  same  thing  in  ellecl.  '1  he  one  may 
be  a more  logical  slatemejil  than  the  othei,  but  as  to  the  losult,  the  piaclical  con- 
clusions, both  arc  about  the  same ; and  this  is  the  one  cenliiil  idea  which  the  woi Id 
stands  in  need  of,  and  nowheie  is  the  want  moie  felt  than  in  this,  oui  own  mother- 
land. Ate,  my  fiiends,  I must  tell  )Ou  a few  hatjsh  tinlhs.  1 lead  in  the  news- 
papers, how,  when  one  of  oui  poor  tcllows  is  muuleied  or  ill-tiealcd  by  an  English- 
man, howls  go  all  o\ei  the  coimtiy;  I lead  and  1 weep,  and  the  next  moment  comes 
to  my  mind  the  question,  who  is  responsilde  for  it  all.  As  a Vedantist  I cannot 
but  put  that  question  to  myself.  The  Hindu  is  a man  of  introspection,  he  wants  to 
see  things  in  and  through  himself,  thiough  the  suhjeclive  vision.  1 theieloie  ask 
inysolf  who  is  lesponsible,  and  the  answer  comes  e\ciy  time,  not  the  English;  no, 
they  aic  not  lesponsilile ; it  is  we  who  aic  icsponsible  for  all  our  misery  and  all 
our  degiadalion,  and  we  alone  uie  icsponsible.  (Jur  aiistociatic  ancestors  went  on 
treading  the  common  masses  of  oui  counliy  under  fool,  till  they  became  helpless, 
till  undei  this  loinienl  the  poor,  pool  people  neaily  foigot  that  they  weie  human 
beings.  They  ha\e  been  compelled  to  be  niciely  hewers  of  wood  and  duuvers  of 
w’.atei  foi  centimes,  so  much  so,  that  the)  luc  made  to  beliesc  that  they  aie  bout 
as  sl.ives,  bom  as  hewers  of  wood  and  diaweis  of  watei.  With  all  our  boasted 
education  of  niodcin  limes,  if  aiqbody  says  a kind  woid  for  them,  I often  liiid 
our  men  slmnk  at  once  liom  the  duty  of  lifting  them  up.  these  iioot  dowii-tiodden 
people.  Not  only  so,  but  1 also  Imd  that  all  soils  of  most  demoniacal  and  biulal 
atgumenls,  culled  from  the  cruile  ideas  of  heredilaiy  tiansmis.sion,  and  other  such 
gibberish  fiom  the  Western  woild,  aie  hioughl  forwaid  in  oidei  to  biuUdisc  and 
tyiannise  ovei  the  poor,  all  the  more.  At  the  Pailiamenl  of  Religions  in  Amciica, 
there  came  among  oiheis,  a young  man,  a Negio  bom.  a leal  Afiican  Ncgio,  and 
he  made  a beautiful  speech.  1 bec.ime  mteiestcd  in  the  young  man,  and  now  and 
then  talked  to  luin,  but  could  learn  nothing  about  him.  But  one  day  in  England, 
1 met  .some  Ameiicans,  and  tins  is  what  they  told  me.  'kliat  this  boy  was  the  sou 
of  a Negro  chief  who  lived  in  the  licait  of  Afiica.  and  that  one  day  another  chief 
became  angiy  with  the  father  of  this  boy  and  inuideied  him  and  murdeicd  the 
molher  also'  and  they  were  cooked  and  eaten:  he  oideicd  the  child  to  be  killed  also, 
and  cooked  and  eaten ; but  the  boy  fled,  and  after  passing  thiough  great  luudshii>s 
liid  having  travelled  a distance  of  seveial  hundieds  of  miles,  he  reached  the  sea-shoie, 
and  lheie"he  was  taken  into  an  Ameiican  vessel  and  bioughl  over  to  Ameiica.  And 
this  boy  made  that  speech!  Alter  that,  what  w^as  I to  think  of  your  doctiine  of 
hciodily!  A>e,  Biahmans,  if  the  Birdunan  has  more  aptitude  foi  learning  on  the, 
vriound  of  heicdily  than  the  Paiiah,  spend  no  more  money  on  the  Brahman’s  eilut.v 
uon  but  spend  all  on  the  Paiiah.  Give  to  the  weak,  for  there  all  the  gift  is  needed. 
If  the  Bu'ihman  is  born  clever  he  can  educate  himself  without  help.  If  the  othen 
aic  not  bom  clever,  let  them  have  all  the  teaching  and  the  teachers  they  want.  Tb 
iuMice  and  reason  as  I understand  it.  Our  poor  people,  these  down-trodden 
liuilses  of  India  thercfoic,  lequire  to  hear  and  to  know  what  they  leally  are.  A>e,  Id 
.veiv  man  and  vvoin.m  and  child,  without  respect  of  caste  or  birth,  weakness  o', 
.iienglh  hear  and  Icam  that  behind  the  strong  and  the  weak,  behind  the  hig^ 
•md  \he’  low,  behind  eveiy  one,  iheie  is  that  Infinite  Soul,  assuring  the  mamte  posM- 
luluv  and  the  infinite  capacity  of  all  to  become  great  and  good.  Let 

wrrf5rgrgfr. — Arise,  awake  and  sto| 


THE  mSEION  OF  THE  VEDANTA 


51 


weakness.  None  is  really  weak ; the  soul  is  infinite,  omnipotent,  anJ  ornniscient. 
Stand  up,  asseil  yourself,  proclaim  ‘the  (lod  within  )ou,  do  not  deny  ! Too  much 
of  inactivity,  too  much  of  weakness,  too  much  of  hypnotism,  has  been  and  is  upon 
our  race.  ye  modern  Hindus,  de-hypnotise  }oui selves.  The  w'.\y  to  do  that,  19 
found  in  yoiu  own  sacred  books.  Teach  youi selves,  leach  eveiy  one  hi.s  leal  natuie, 
call  upon  the  sleeping  soul  to  sec  how  it  awakes.  Power  will  come,  gloiy  wdl 
come,  goodness  will  come,  puiity  will  come,  and  evei} thing  that  is  excellent  wilt 
come  when  this  sleeping  soul  is  roused  to  self-conscious  activity.  Aye,  \i  there  is 
an} thing  in  the  Gita  that  I like,  it  is  these  two  vei.ses,  coming  out  strong  as  the 
very  gist,  the  veiy  essence,  of  Kiishna’s  teaching  “ He  who  secs  the  Supiemc  Loid 
dwelling  alike  in  all  beings,  the  Impenshahlc  in  things  that  peiish,  he  secs  indeed. 
For  seeing  the  f.oid  as  the  same,  e\ei)wheie  piesent,  he  docs  not  destioy  the  Self 
by  the  self,  and  thus  he  goes  to  the  highest  goal." 

'I'hus  there  is  a gical  ojiening  foi  the  Vedanta  to  do  beneficent  work  both  here 
and  elsewheie.  This  wonderful  idea  of  the  sameness  and  omnipiesence  of  the 
Suineme  Soul  has  to  be  pieachcd  foi  the  amelioialiou  and  elevation  of  die  human 
race,  heie  a.s  elscwlieic.  Whcicvei  tlieie  is  e\il  and  wheiever  theic  i.s  ignoiance 
and  w'ant  of  knowledge,  I ha\e  found  out  by  expeiience  that  all  c\il  comes,  as  our 
sciipluics  say,  by  iel)ing  upon  ditfeiences,  and  that  all  good  comes,  fiom  faith  in 
equality,  in  the  undei lying  sameness  and  oneness  of  things.  This  is  the  great 
Vedantic  ideal.  To  h.ue  the  ideal  is  one  thing,  and  to  apply  it  practically  la  thii 
details  of  daily  hie  is  qniLc  another  thing.  It  is  \ery  good  to  point  out  an  ideal, 
but  wheie  is  the  ]iracUcal  wa\  to  icacli  it  ? 

Hole  iialiuall}  comes  the  diOicuIt  and  the  vexed  question,  of  caste  and  of 
social  refoi inalion,  which  has  been  uppciinost  foi  cenliuics  in  the  minds  of  our 
peojile  I must  fiankl)  tell  you  lhai  I am  neither  a caste-breaker  nor  a mere 
soual  lefoimci,  I ha\c  nothing  to  do  diieclly  with  your  castes  or  with  your 
social  icfoinialioii.  l-nc  in  any  caste  you  like,  but  that  is  no  reason  why  you 
should  hale  aiv’iiier  man  01  another  caste.  It  is  love  and  love  alone  that  I 

preach,  find  I ba-^e  my  teaching  on  the  great  Vedantic  truth  of  the  sameness 

and  omnipicsonce  of  llic  .Soul  of  the  Univcise.  For  nearly  the  last  one  hundred 
}cais,  our  country  has  been  flooded  with  social  icformcis  aiul  various  social  reform 
proposals.  Pcisonally,  I have  no  fault  to  find  with  these  leformers.  Most  of  them 
are  good  well-meaning  men,  and  their  aims  too  arc  veiy  laudable  on  certain  points  ; 
but  It  is  quite  a patent  fact  that  ihi.s  one  bundled  yeais  of  social  reform  has  pio- 
duced  no  permanent  and  valuable  result,  appreciable  throughout  the  country.  Plat- 
foim  speeches  have  been  made  by  the  thousand,  denunciations  in  volumes  after 
volumes  have  been  hurled  upon  the  devoted  head  of  the  Hindu  race  and  its  civilisa- 
tion, and  yet  no  good  piactical  result  has  been  achieved  ; and  where  is  the  reason* 
for  that.!*  The  reason  is  not  haul  to  find.  It  is  in  the  dcmmciaiion  itself.  As  I 
told  you  before,  in  the  first  place  we  mu.st'Try  to  keep  our  liistoiically  acquired 
character  as  a people.  I grant  that  we  have  to  take  a gioal  many  things  from  other 

nations,  that  we  have  to  learn  many  lessons  from  outside ; but  I am  soiry  to  say  that 

most  of  our  modern  reform-movements  have  been  inconsiderate  imitations  of 
Western  means  and  methods  of  w^ork,  and  that  surely  will  not  do  for  India ; therefore 
it  is  that  all  our  recent  reform-movements  have  had  no  result.  In  the  second  place, 
denunciation  is  not  at  all  the  way  to  do  good.  That  there  are  evils  in  our  society 
even  a child  can  see,  and  in  what  society  are  lliere  no  evils  ^ And  let  me  take  thia 


53 


lECTVRKS  FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


opportunity,  niy  countrymen,  of  telling  you  that,  in  comparing  the  different  races 
and  nations  of  the  world  I have  been  among,  I have  come  to  the  conclusion  that 
our  people  aic  on  the  whole  the  most  moial  ami  the  most  godly,  and  our  institutions 
are,  in  their  plan  and  puipose,  best  suited  to  make  mankind  happy.  I do  not  there- 
fore want  any  leformaiion.  My  Ideal  Is  grouth,  expansion,  development  on  national 
lines.  As  I look  hack  upon  the  history  of  ni)  country,  f do  not  find  in  the  whole 
vorld  another  country  winch  has  done  (^uite  so  much  for  the  improvement  of  the 
huinap  mind.  'I'hercfore,  I have  no  words  of  condemnation  for  my  nation.  1 tell 
them,  “ You  have  done  well;  only  try  to  do  belter.”  (beat  things  have  been  done 
in  the  past  in  this  land,  and  thcie  is  both  time  and  room  for  greater  things  to  be 
done  yet,  I am  sure  you  know  that  we  cannot  stand  still.  If  we  stand  still  wc.  die. 
Wc  have  either  to  go  forwaid  or  to  go  backward.  We  have  either  to  progress  oi  to 
degenerate.  Our  aticcstor.s  did  great  things  in  the  past,  hut  we  have  to  grow  into  a 
fuller  life  and  march  be} ond  even  their  great  achievements,  ITow  can  we  now  go 
back  and  degenerate  ourselves  ? That  cannot  be  ; that  must  not  be ; going  back 
will  lead  to  national  decay  and  death.  Therefore,  let  us  go  forward  and  do  yet 
greater  things;  that  la  what  I have  to  tell  vou.  T am  no  preacher  of  any  rnomentaiy 
social  refoim.  I am  not  trying  to  remedy  evils,  I only  ask  you  to  go  foiward  and 
to  complete  the  piactical  realisation  of  the  scheme  of  human  progress,  that  has  been 
laid  out  in  tlie  most  peifect  order  by  our  ancestors.  I only  ask  you  to  work  to 
>eabs,<3  more  the  Vedantic  ideal  of  the  solidarity  of  man  and  his  inborn 

divine  nature.  ^ ^ would  gladly  show  you  how^  eveiytliing  wc  have 

pow  to  do,  was  laid  Out  jv.'^rs  ago  by  our  ancient  law-givqrs,  and  how  they  actually 
anticipated  all  the  diO^reut 

in  our  national  in.stitutipns.  They  "also  b.-akers  of  caste,  but  they  were  not 
l|ke  ojir  modem  men.  They  did  not  mean  by  the  breaking  of  caste  that  all  the 
people  in  a city  .should  sit  down  together  to  a dinner  pt  champa^me, 

nor  that  all  fools  and  lunatics  in  the  country  should  marry  whgyu 
Ihpy  pho&e,  and  reduce  the  countiy  to  a lunatic  asylum,  nor  did  they  bobevc  ‘ ^ 

prospeiity  of  a nation,  is  to  be  gauged  by  the  numbei  of  hushaiuls  its  \vidows 
I haye  yet  tp  see  such  a pro.spcioiis  nation. 

The  ideal  man  of  our  ancestors  was  the  Brah'nv.in.  In  all  our  books  stands 
out  prominently  this  ideal  of  the  Brahman.  In  Europe,  there  is  my  Lord  the 
Caid'nal,  w'ho  IS  struggling  hard  and  spending  thousands  of  pounds  to  prove  the 
nobijity  of  his  ancestors,  and  he  will  not  he  sati.sfied  until  he . has  tiaccd  his 
ancestry  to  some  dreadful  tyrant,  who  lived  op  a hill,  and  watched  the  people 
passing  by,  and  whenever  he  had  the  oppoitunity,  sprang  out  on  them  and  robbed 
them.  That  vyas  the  business  of  these  nobility-bestowing  ancestors,  and  my  Lord 
Cardinal  is  not  satisfied  until  he  can  trace  his  ancestry  to  one  of  these.  In 
India,  on  tlie  other  hand,  the  greatest  piinces  seek  to  trace  their  descent  to 
some  ancient  sage,  who  dressed  in  a hit  of  loin-cloth,  lived  in  a foiest,  eating 
roots,  and  studying  the  Vedas,  It  is  there  that  the  Indian  prince  goes  to  trace  his 
ppcestry.  You  are  of  the  high  caste  when  you  can  trace  your  ancestry  to  a Rishi, 
apd  not  otherwise.  Our  ideal  of  high  birth,  therefore,  is  different  from  that  of 
otheis.  Our  ideal  is  the  Bnihman  of  spiritual  culture  and  reniiuciation.  By  the 
Bi^hman  ideal  what  do  1 mean  ? I mean  the  ideal  Biahman-ness  in  w-hich  woildliness 
is  altogether  absent,  and  true  wisdom  is  abundantly  present.  That  is  tlie  ideal  of  the 
JJipdu  rape,  Have  pu  not  heard  how  it  js  declared  tliat  he,  the  Brilhman,  is  not 


THE  MISiSJOK  OF  THE  VEDANTA 


53 


amenable  to  law,  that  he  has  no  law,  that  ho  is  not  .t?oveme<l  by  and  that  his 

body  cannot  be  hurt  ? That  is  j)eifcclly  tuie.  Do  not  undcistand  it  in  the  light 
thrown  upon  it  by  interested  and  ignorant  fools,  hut  undei stand  it  in  the  light  of  the 
uuc  and  original  VedanUc  conception.  If  the  Rruhinan  is  he  who  has  killed  all 
seltishness  and  who  lives  and  woiks  to  acqniic  and  piopagate  wisdom  and  the  power 
of  love, — if  a countiy  is  altogethci  inliabiled  by  such  Hiahnians,  by  men  and  women 
who  arc  spiiitual  and  moral  and  good,  is  it  strange  to  think  ot  that  countiy  as  being 
above  aiul  beyond  all  law  ? What  police,  what  militaiy  aio  neccssaiy  to  go\ein 
them?  Why  should  any  one  govern  them  at  all?  Why  sliould  they  li\e  under  a 
government?  'I'licy  are  good  and  noble,  and  they  aic  the  men  of  (iod  ; tliese  aie 
our  ideal  Riahmans,  and  we  read  that  in  the  Salva-Vii'ya  there  was  only  one  caste, 
ami  that  was  the  Biahinan  We  read  in  the  iMahahh.\rata  that  the  whole  world  was 
in  the  beginning  peopled  with  Hiahmans,  and  that  as  they  began  to  degenerate  they 
became  divided  into  diffeient  castes,  and  that  when  the  cycle  turns  lound  they  will 
all  go  back  to  that  Rrahmamcal  origin.  'I'ltis  cede  is  tuining  louncl  now,  and  I 
draw'  your  allenliou  to  this  fact,  'riiorefoic  oui  solution  of  the  caste  ciiieslion  is  not 
degiadmg  those  who  are  alieady  high  up.  is  not  running  amntk  tluough  food  and 
dunk,  is  not  jumping  out  of  onr  own  limits  iu  older  to  have  moic  enjoyment,  but 
it  comes  by  eveiy  one  of  us  fuKilluig  the  dictates  of  our  Vcdaniic  icligion,  b)’  our 
attaining  spiiiluality,  and  by  our  becoming  the  ideal  Biahman.  There  is  a law  laid 
on  each  one  of  you  in  this  land  by  youi  ancestors,  whellicr  yon  arc  Ar}ans,  or  non- 
Aryans,  Rishis,  or  Bi,\hmans,  or  the  vciy  lowest  outcastes.  The  command  is  the 
.same  to  you  all,  that  you  must  make  progiess  without  slopping,  and  that,  from  the 
highest  man  to  the  lowest  Paiiah,  cveiy  one  in  this  country  has  to  try  and  become 
the  ideal  Biahman.  'This  Vcdaniic  idea  is  applicable  not  only  here  but  over  the  whole 
woild.  Such  IS  our  ideal  of  caste,  as  meant  for  raising  all  humanil)  slowly  and 
gently  towaids  the  realisaucm  of  that  great  ideal  of  the  spiiitual  man,  w'ho  is  non- 
resistiiig,  calm,  steady,  w'orshipful,  puic,  and  meditative.  In  that  ideal  there  is 
God. 

How  aie  these  things  to  be  brought  about?  I must  again  draw  your  atten- 
fioij  to  the  fact  that  cursing  and  \ilif}ing  and  aimsing  do  not  and  cannot  produce 
anything  good.  'Fhey  have  been  tried  foi  years  and  ycais,  and  no  valuable  result 
has  been  obtained.  Good  lesults  can  be  pioduced  only  tluough  love,  tluough 
sympathy.  It  is  a great  subject,  and  it  leqiiiies  several  Iccluies  to  elucidate  all  the 


tha*  ^ in  view,  and  all  the  ideas  that  are,  in  this  connection,  coming  to  my 
^ ^nd  cj  '^’1' day.  1 must  tlierefore  conclude,  only  reminding  you  of  tiiis  fact, 
I } ^ our  nar'‘^ii3  ^ Hindus,  has  been  usefully  plying  here  for  ages,  d'o- 
t atUis  blip  .01  . .-ui-jo- a leak;  to-day,  perhaps,  it  has  became  a little  worn 
day  perhaps,  h ha? 

out,  ant  I sue  is  >o  coiinl'vnien  of  the  danger,  let  them  awake 

tile  eak  and  boles.  Let  ns  te  1 .0u»  , r 

and  help  ns.  I will  cry  at  the  top  of  my  f.'om  one  part  of  tins  country  to  the 

other,  to  awaken  the  people  to  the  sitnatioi)  ?n4  ‘ 

hear  me,  still,  1 shall  not  have  one  word  of  abuse  for  .then*,  ® cursing. 

Great  has  beeti  our  nation’s  work  in  the  past,  and  if  we  paunoi  f ^ I’-  ^ 


in  the  future,  let  us  haye  this  consolation,  that  we  can  sink  and  die  fogetthirT  m peace. 
Be  patriots,  love  tl}c  race  which  has  done  such  great  things  for  us  in  the  pa^f* 
the  more  I compare  notes  the  more  I love  you,  my  fellow-countrymen  | ypu  are 
good  and  pure  and  gentle.  You  have  been  tyrannised  over,  and  such 


54 


LECTURES— FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


the  iioiiy  of  this  material  world  of  Maya.  Never  mind  that;  the  spirit  will  tiiumph 
in  the  lon^r  iLin.  In  the  meanwhile  let  us  work  and  let  us  not  abuse  our  country, 
let  us  not  emse  and  abuse  the  weather-beaten  and  work-worn  institutions  of  our 
thnee-holy  motherland.  Have  no  woid  of  condemnation,  even  for  the  most  super- 
slilious  and  tlie  most  irrational  of  its  institutions,  for  they  also  must  have  seived 
some  good  in  the  past.  Remember  always,  that  there  is  not  in  the  woild  any  other 
country  uhose  institutions  aie  leally  belter  in  theii  aims  and  objects  than  the  institu- 
tions of  this  land.  I have  seen  castes  in  almost  evciy  countiy  in  the  woild,  but 
nowhere  is  their  plan'and  purpose  so  glorious  as  here.  If  caste  is  thus  unavoidable, 
I would  lather  have  a caste  of  puiity  anrl  cultuie  and  .self-sacii(ice,  than  a caste  of 
dollars,  'rhcielore  utter  no  woids  of  condemnation.  Close  your  lips  and  let  ) our 
hearts  open.  Woik  out  the  salvation  of  this  land  and  of  the  whole  world,  each  of 
you  thinking  that  the  entiie  buiden  is  on  your  shoulders.  Cai ry  the  light  and  the 
life  of  the  V’edaiUa  to  every  door,  and  rouse  up  the  divinity  that  is  hidden  within 
eveiy  soul.  'I'hen,  whatever  may  be  the  measuie  of  your  success,  you  will  have  this 
satufaction,  that  you  have  lived,  worked  and  died  for  a great  cause.  In  the  success 
of  this  cause,  howsoe\ei  brought  about,  is  centicd  the  salvation  of  humanity  here 
and  heieafter. 


REPLY  TO  THE  ADDRESS  OF  WELCOME  AT  MADRAS. 

When  Swami  Vivekan.inda  arnved  at  Madras,  an  address  of  welcome  was  present- 
ed to  him  by  the  Madias  Reception  Committee.  It  lead  as  follows  ; — 

Rlnekei)  Smamin.  - 

On  behalf  of  your  Hindu  co-reli^,donists  in  Madras,  wc  offer  yon  a most  hearty 
welcome  on  the  occasion  of  your  return  fiom  your  Religious  Mission  in  the  West. 
Our  object  in  appioaching  you  with  this  address  is  not  the  peiformance  of  any  merely 
formal  or  ceremonial  function ; we  come  to  offer  you  the  love  of  our  hearts  and  to 
give  expression  to  oui  feeling  of  thankfulness  tor  the  seivices  which  you,  by  the 
giace  of  God,  have  been  able  to  tender  to  the  gieat  cause  of  'riulh  by  pioclaiming 
India’s  lofty  leligious  ideals.  Wlien  the  Parliament  of  Religions  was  organised 
at  Chicago,  some  of  oui  countrymen  felt  natuially  anxious  that  our  noble  and  ancient 
lehgion  should  bo  w'oithily  rejnesented  therein  and  projieily  expounded  to  the 
Anieiican  nation,  and  thiough  them  to  the  Western  Woild  at  laige.  It  was  then  our 
piivilege  to  meet  you  and  to  lealise  once  again,  wdial  has  so  often  proved  Hue  in  the 
history  of  nations,  that  w'ltli  the  hour  uses  the  man  who  is  to  help  lorwaid  the  cause 
of  Tiuih.  When  you  iindei took  to  repiesenl  Hinduism  at  the  Paihament  of  Relig- 
ions, most  of  us  felt,  fiom  what  we  had  known  of  your  gieat  gifts,  that  the  cause  of 
Hinduism  would  be  ably  upheld  by  its  lepiesentative  m that  memoiable  lehgious 
assembly.  'S'our  presentaiion  of  the  docliiues  of  Hinduism  at  once  clear,  correct, 
and  aulhoiiiaiive,  not  only  piodticed  a rcmaikablc  impression  at  the  Paihament  of 
Religions  itself,  but  has  also  led  a numbei  of  men  and  women  even  in  foieign  lands 
to  lealise,  that  out  of  the  fountain  of  Indian  spirituality  refreshing  diaughls  of  im- 
moUal  life  and  love  may  be  taken,  so  as  to  biing  about  a larger,  fuller  and  holier 
e\olution  of  humanity  than  lias  yet  been  witnessed  on  this  globe  of  ours.  We  are 
pauitularly  ihanktul  to  you  toi  having  called  the  attention  of  the  representatives  of 
the  Woild’s  Gical  Religious  to  the  chaiacteiisLic  Hindu  doctiine  of  the  Harmony 
and  Biotherhood  of  Religions.  No  longei  is  it  possible  for  leally  enlightened  and 
cainest  men  to  insist  that  Truth  and  Holiness  arc  the  exclusive  possessions  of  any 
pauicular  locality  or  body  of  men  or  system  of  docliiiie  and  discipline,  or  to  hold  that 
any  faith  or  philosophy  will  suivive  to  the  exclusion  and  destruction  of  all  others.  In 
your  own  happy  language  which  biings  out  fully  the  sweet  harmony  in  the  heart  of  the 
BhagavaJ-Giu,  d'he  whole  world  of  religions  is  only  a tiavelling,  a coming  up  of 
dilTeienl  men  and  women  through  various  conditions  and  cucumstances  to  the  same 
goal.”  Had  you  contented  yourself  with  simply  discharging  this  high  and  holy 
duly  entiuslcd  to  your  caie,  even  then,  your  Hindu  co-iehgionists  would  have  been 
glad  to  recognise  with  joy  and  thankfulness  the  inestimable  value  of  your  work. 
But  m making  your  way  into  Western  countries  you  have  also  been  the  bearer  of  a 
message  of  light  and  peace  to  the  whole  of  mankind,  based  on  the  old  teachings  oif 
India’s  “ Religion  Eternal.”  In  thanking  you  for  all  that  you  have  done  in  the  way 
of  upholding  the  profound  rationality  of  the  religion  of  the  Vedanta,  it  gives  us 
great  pleasure  to  allude  to  the  great  task  you  have  in  view,  of  establishing  an  active 
mission  with  permanent  centres  for  the  propagation  of  our  religion  and  philosophy. 


LECTL’RES—FJWM  COLOMJW  TO  ALMORA 


56 

'J'l)c  tilnlcrtakii)^'  to  wliicli  \ou  j)i()j)Obe  to  dexote  xour  encrgieb  ib  \xorlhy  of  the  holy 
tradillons  you  leprestMit  and  w'oiiljy,  loo,  of  the  spiiit  of  the  great  Gum  who  has 

inspired  xour  life  and  its  aims.  We  hope  and  trust  that  it  may  be  given  to  us  also 

to  associate  OLitsehes  with  )0u  in  this  noble  w’oik.  We  feixcntly  pray  to  Him  who 
is  the  all-knoaing  and  all-meiciful  Lend  of  llie  Unixerse,  to  bestow  on  you  long 
life  and  full  sirenglh  and  to  bles^  xoiir  labours  xvith  lli.it  ciown  of  gloi’}  and  success, 
wliicli  exei  deserxes  to  shine  on  the  brow  of  iinnioiial  'riulh. 

Next  xvas  lead  the  following  addicss  fiom  the  Mahaiajah  of  Khelti. 

Yoi’r  lloj.iM  ss  : — 

1 wish  to  lake  ihisieatly  oppoitunity  of  your  airival  and  icception  at  Madias  to 

expiess  my  feelings  of  joy  and  pleasure  on  youi  safe  letuin  to  India,  and  to  offei  my 

heartfelt  congraiuiation  on  the  gieai  success  which  has  attended  xour  unsellisdi  effoils 
in  Western  lamis,  whcie  it  is  the  boast  of  the  highest  intellects  that,  “ Not  an  inch  of 
ground  once  conquered  by  science  has  ever  been  reconqueied  by  Keligioir'  — although 
indeed  Science  has  luudly  ever  claimed  to  oppose  tine  Religion.  'I'his  holy  land 
of  Aryaxarla  has  been  singularly  fortunate  in  haxing  been  able  to  secure  so  xvorthy  a 
lepieseniative  of  her  sages  at  the  Pailiament  of  Religions  held  at  C’hicago,  and 
it  is  cntiicly  due  to  )out  xvisdom,  enteipiise  and  enlhusiasin  that  the  Western  xxoild 
has  come  to  understand  what  an  inexhaustible  stole  of  spuitualily  India  has,  even 
lo-(lay.  Youi  labouis  have  now  pioved  bexond  the  possibililx  of  doubt,  that  the 
contradictions  of  the  xvoild's  numerous  cieeds  aie  all  reconciled  in  the  univeisal 
light  of  the  N'edaiila.  and  that  all  the  jieoples  of  the  xvorld  have  need  to  imdei stand 
iiiul  jiraclically  realise  the  gieal  liulh  that,  ‘ Ibiit)  in  xaiiet)  ’ is  natuie’s  jilan  in  the 
evoluiion  of  the  univcise,  ami  that  only  bx  haimony  and  biotheihood  among  Relig- 
ions and  by  mutual  tolcialion  and  licdp  cun  the  mission  ami  destiny  of  humanilx  be 
accomplished.  Under  xoui  high  and  holx  auspices  and  the  inspiring  inlhience  of 
x'OLii  lofty  teacliings,  we  of  the  present  generation  Jiaxe  the  j)iixilege  of  xvitnessing  the 
inauguration  of  a nexv  era  in  the  xvoild’s  histoiv,  in  which  bigoliy,  hatred  and  conflict 
may,  I hope,  cease,  and  peace,  sympathy  and  love  loign  among  men.  And  1 in 
common  xviih  my  people  pray  that  the  blessings  of  God  may  lest  on  you  and  your 
labouis. 

When  the  addresses  had  been  lead,  tlie  Swaini  left  the  hall  and  mounted  to  the 
box  seat  of  a carnage  in  xxailing  ! Oxving  to  the  intense  cnlliiisiasm  of  the  large 
cioxvd  assembled  to  xvelconie  him,  the  Sxxami  w.ts  only  able  to  make  the  following 
short  reply,  postponing  his  rc])ly  iirojiei'  to  a fuluie  occasion : — 

Man  proposes  and  God  di.sposes.  It  was  pioposed  that  the  addresses  and  the 
replies  sliould  be  cairied  in  the  English  fashion.  But  here  God  dispo.ses — 1 am  speak- 
ing to  a scattered  audience  from  the  chanol>  in  the  Gita  fashion.  Thankful  we  are, 
therefore,  that  it  should  have  hapj>ened  so.  It  gives  a zest  to  the  speech,  and  strength 
to  xvhal  I am  going  to  tell  yon.  1 do  not  knoxv  whether  my  voice  xxill  leach  all  of  you, 
but  I will  tiv  my  best.  1 never  bcfoie  had  an  opportunity  of  addressing  a large 
open-air  meeting.  The  wonderful  kindness,  the  feivent  and  enthusiastic  joy  xvith 
xvhich  1 have  been  leceivcd  from  Colombo  to  Madras,  and  seem  likely  to  be  received 
xvith  all  over  India,  have  passed  even  my  most  sanguine  expectations,  but  that  only 
makes  me  glad,  for  it  piovcs  ibe  asseitiOn  xvhich  1 have  made  again  and  again  in 


n^PLY  TO  THE  ADDRESS  OF  WELCOME  AT  MADRAS  57 

the  past,  that  as  each  nation  has  one  ideal  as  its  vitality,  as  each  nation  has  ona 
particular  groove  which  is  to  become  its  own,  so  religion  is  the  pecuhanly  of  the 
giowth  of  the  Indian  mind.  In  other  parts  of  the  world,  leligion  is  one  of  the 
niany  considerations,  in  fact  it  is  a minor  occupation.  In  England,  for  instance, 
religion  is  part  of  the  national  policy.  The  English  Chuich  belongs  to  the  rul- 
ing class,  and,  as  such,  whether  they  believe  in  it  oi  not,  they  all  support  it, 
thinking  that  it  is  their  Church.  Every  gentleman  and  eveiy  lady  is  expected 
to  belong  to  that  Church.  It  is  a sign  of  gentility.  So  with  other  countries,  there 
IS  a great  national  power;  either  it  is  repicscnled  by  politics  or  it  is  repiesentcd  by 
some  intellectual  pursuits ; either  it  is  represented  by  militaiism  or  by  commer- 
tialism.  There  the  heart  of  the  nation  beats;  and  lehgion  is  one  of  the  many 
secondary  ornamental  things  wliich  th.al  nation  possesses.  Here  in  India,  it  is  leligion 
that  forms  the  veiy  core  of  the  national  heart.  It  is  the  backbone,  tlie  bed-rock,  the 
foundation  upon  which  the  national  edifice  has  been  built.  Politics,  powei,  and  even 
intellect  form  a secondary  consideration  here.  Religion,  thcieforc,  is  the  one  consi- 
deration in  India.  1 have  been  told  a hundied  times  of  the  want  of  infoimation  there 
IS  among  the  masses  of  the  Indian  jieople;  and  that  is  tiue  Landing  in  Colombo 
1 found  not  one  of  them  had  heard  of  the  political  ujiheavals  going  on  in  Europe^ 
the  t hanges,  the  downfall  of  ministries,  and  so  foith.  Not  one  of  them  had  hcaid 
of  what  lis  meant  by  socialism,  and  anarchism,  and  of  this  and  that  change  in  the  poli- 
tical atmosphere  of  Em  ope.  But  that  there  was  a Sannyasin  from  India  went  over 
to  the  Pailiament  of  Religions,  and  that' he  ha<l  achieved  some  soit  of  success,  had 
bee  omc  known  to  eveiy  man,  woman,  and  child  in  Ce}lon.  It  pioves  that  tliere 
IS  no  lack  of  infoimation,  nor  lack  of  desire  for  information  where  it  is  of  the 
character  that  suits  them,  when  it  falls  in  line  with  the  neces.sitie.s  of  their  life. 
lk>liiiLS  and  all  these  things  nevei  formed  a necessity  of  Indian  life,  but  Religion 
and  spii iliialily  hav'c  been  the  one  condition  upon  which  it  lived  and  thrived,  and 
h.is  got  to  liv’o  in  the  future.  'Pwo  gie.U  problems  arc  being  decided  bv  the  nations 
of  the  woild.  India  has  taken  up  one  side,  and  the  rest  of  the  woild  has  taken 
the  other  side.  And  the  pioblem  is  this;  who  is  to  survive  ? Wliat  makes  one 
nation  survive  and  the  others  die  .Should  love  survive  or  hatred,  should  enjoyment 
suivive  or  lenunciation  ; .should  matter  survive  or  the  spiiil,  in  the  struggle  of  life 
AVc  think  as  our  ancestors  did,  away  b.ick  in  pie-hisloiic  ages.  Where  even  tradi- 
tion cannot  pierce  the  gloom  of  that  past,  there,  our  gloiious  anceslois  have  taken 
u])  tbcii  side  of  the  pioblem  and  have  thrown  the  challenge  to  the  world.  (Jur 
solution  is  renunciation,  giving  up,  foailessness  and  love,  these  arc  the  fittest  to  suivive. 
Giving  up  the  senses  makes  a nation  survive.  As  a pioof  of  this,  lieie  is  hisloiy 
to-day  telling  us  of  mushroom  nations  rising  and  falling  almost  eveiy  cenliiiy  — 
starting  up  from  nothingness,  making  vicious  play  for  a few  days  and  then  melting. 
This  big,  gigantic  lace,  winch  had  to  gmpple  w'ith  some  of  the  gioatest  problems  of' 
misfortunes,  dangers,  and  vicissitudes,  .such  as  never  fell  upon  the  head  of  any  other 
nation  of  the  world,  survives,  because  it  has  taken  the  .side  of  i enunciation ; for 
without  renunciation  how  can  there  be  Religion.  Euiope  is  living  to  solve  the 
other  side  of  the  pioblem  as  to  how^  much  a man  can  liavc  ; how  much  more  power 
a man  can  possess,  by  hook  or  by  crook,  by  some  means  or  other.  Compeliiion, 
cruel,  cold  and  hcaitless,  is  the  law  of  Emopc.  Oui  law  is  caste,  the  breaking  of 
competition,  checking  its  forces,  mitig.ating  its  cruelties,  smoolhening  the  passage  of 
the  human  soul  through  tins  mystcrv  of  life, 

11 


58 


LECTURES—FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


At  this  stage  tlic  crowd  became  so  unmanageable  that  the  Swami  could  not  make 
himself  heaid  to  advantage.  He  tlierct'ore  ended  his  address  with  these  words: — • 
Friends,  1 am  very  much  pleased  with  your  enthusiasm.  It  is  maivellous.  Do 
not  think  that  I am  displeased  with  you  at  all ; I am,  on  the  other  hand,  intensely 
pleased  at  the  show  of  enthusiasm.  That  is  what  is  required — tiemendous  enthusi- 
asm. Only  make  it  permanent ; keep  it  up.  Let  not  the  fiie  die  out.  We  want 
to  work  out  great  things  in  India.  For  that  I require  your  help ; such  enthusiasm 
Is  necessary.  It  is  impossible  to  hold  this  meeting  any  longer.  I thank  you  very 
mucli  for  youi  kindness  and  enthusiastic  welcome.  In  calm  moments  we  shall  have 
bettei  thoughts  and  ideas  to  exchange;  now  for  the  time,  my  fiiends,  good-bye. 

It  is  impossible  to  addiess  you  on  all  sides,  therefore  )Ou  must  content  your- 
selves this  e\eningwith  merely  seeing  me.  1 will  leseive  my  speech  for  some  other 
occasion.  I thank  you  veiy  much  for  your  enthusiastic  welcome. 


PLAN  OF  CAMPAIGN. 

{Delivered  at  the  Viitoria  Hall,  Madtas^ 

As  the  other  day  we  could  not  proceed,  owing  to  the  crowd,  I shall  lake  this 
oppoituiiily  of  thanking  the  people  of  Madras  for  the  uniform  kindness  that  I have 
received  at  their  hand.s.  I do  not  know  how  better  to  express  my  gialitude  foi  the 
beautiful  words  that  have  been  expiessed  m the  addresses,  than  by  praying  to  the  Lord 
to  make  me  woithy  of  the  kind  and  generous  expressions,  and  by  working  all  my  life 
foi  the  cause  of  our  religion,  and  to  serve  our  Motherland,  and  may  the  Lord  make 
me  worthy  of  them. 

With  all  my  faults,  I think  I have  a little  bit  of  boldness.  I had  a message  from 
India  to  the  West,  and  boldly  I gave  it  to  the  American  and  the  English  peoples.  I 
want,  before  going  into  the  subject  of  the  day,  to  speak  a few  bold  words  to  you  all. 
There  have  been  certain  ciicumstances  growing  around  me,  tending  to  thwart  rnc, 
oppose  my  progress,  and  ciiish  me  out  of  existence,  if  they  could,  'rhank  God  they 
have  failed,  as  such  attempts  will  always  fail.  But  there  has  been,  for  the  last  three 
years,  a certain  amount  of  misunderstanding,  and  so  long  as  I was  in  foreign  lands, 
I held  my  peace  and  did  not  c\en  speak  one  word , but  now,  standing  upon  the  soil 
of  my  motheiland,  I want  to  give  a few  woids  of  explanation.  Not  that  I care  what 

the  result  will  be  of  these  wouls not  that  I care  what  feeling  1 shall  evoke  from 

you  by  these  woids;  I caie  very  little,  for  I am  tlie  .sanve  Saimyasm  that  entered 
youi  city  alxiivt  foui  years  ago  with  his  staff  and  kamandalu ; the  same  bioad  woild 
is  befoie  me.  Without  further  piefacclet  me  begin. 

Eirst  of  all,  1 have  to  say  a few  words  about  the  Theosophical  Society; 
it  goes  without  saying  that  a certain  amount  of  good  woik  has  been  done  to- 
India  by  the  Society;  as  such,  every  Hindu  is  grateful  to  it,  and  especially 
to  Mrs,  Besant,  for,  though  I know  very  little  of  her,  yet  what  little  1 know^ 
has  impressed  me  with  the  idea  that  she  is  a sincere  well-wisher  of  this  mother- 
land of  ours,  and  that  .she  is  doing  the  liest  in  hei  power  to  laise  our  country. 
For  that,  the  eternal  gialitude  of  every  truc-boin  Indian  is  hers,  and  all  bless- 
ings be  on  her  and  hers  for  ever.  But  that  is  one  thing — and  joining  liie  Society 
of  the  Theosophists  is  anotlier.  Regard  and  estimation  and  love  are  one  thing, 
and  swallowing  everything  any  one  has  to  .say,  without  reasoning,  without  criti- 
cising, without  analysing,  is  quite  another.  There  is  a report  going  round,  that 
the  Theosophists  helped  the  hide  achievements  of  mine  in  America  and  in 
England,  1 have  to  tell  you  plainly  that  every  word  of  it  is  wrong,  every  word 
of  it  is  untrue,  Wc  hear  so  much  tall  talk  in  this  world,  of  liberal  ideas  and 
sympathy  with  diffeiences  of  opinion.  That  is  very  good,  but  as  a fact,  we  find  that 
one  sympathises  with  another  only  so  long  as  the  other  lielieves  in  eveiything  he  has 
to  say,  but  as  soon  as  he  dares  to  differ,  that  sympathy  is  gone,  that  love  vanishes. 
1 here  are  others,  again,  who  have  their  own  axe.s  to  grind,  and  if  anything  arises 
in  a country  which  prevents  the  giinding  of  them,  their  hearts  burn,  any  anaount  of 
hatred  comes  out,  and  they  do  not  know  what  to  do.  What  harm  does  it  do  to  the 
Christian  missionary  that  the  Hindus  are  trying  to  cleanse  their  own  houses  ? What 
injury  will  it  do  to  the  Brahmo  Samaj  and  other  reform  bodies  that  the  Hindus  are 


tKCrVRKS~FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


trying  then  best  to  refoim  thcmsclvc«!  ^ Why  should  they  stand  in  opposition  ? 
should  they  be  the  gieatesi  enemies  of  these  movements?  Why?  I ask.  It  seems! 
to  me  that  their  hatted  and  jealousy  aie  so  bitter  that  no  why  or  how  can  be  asked 
there. 

Four  years  ago,  when  I,  a poor,  unknown,  fiiendlcss  Sannyasin,  was  going  to 
Ameiica,  going  beyond  the  waters  to  vVmoiica  without  any  introduciion.s  or  ft  lends 
there,  I called  on  the  leader  of  the  Thcosophical  Society.  Naturally  I thought  he 
being  an  Ameiican  and  a lover  of  India,  perhaps  he  would  give  me  a letter  of  intro- 
(luction  to  somebody  there.  He  asked  me,  “ VVhll  you  join  my  Society  ? ” “No,” 

I leplied,  “ how  can  I ? For  I do  not  believe  in  most  of  your  doctiines.’’  “Then, 
I am  Sony,  I cannot  do  anything  for  you,”  he  answeied.  That  was  not  paving  the  way 
for  me.  I reached  America,  as  you  know,  through  the  help  of  a few  friends  of 
Madras.  Most  of  them  are  present  heie  ; only  one  is  ab.sent,  Afr.  justice  Subiamania 
Iyer,  to  ^^hom  my  deepest  gratitude  is  due.  He  has  the  insight  of  genius,  and  is  one 
of  the  blaunchesl  fi  lends  I have  in  this  life,  a true  fiiend  indeed,  a true  child  of  India. 

I auived  in  America  several  months  before  the  Parliament  of  Religions  began.  The 
money  I had  with  me  was  little,  and  it  was  soon  spent.  Winter  approached  and  I 
had  only  thin  summer  clothes.  I did  not  know  what  to  do  in  that  cold,  dreary 
climate,  foi,  if  I went  to  beg  in  the  streets,  the  result  would  have  been  that  I 
should  have  been  sent  to  jail.  There  1 was  with  the  last  few  dollars  in  my 
pocket.  I sent  a wire  to  my  friends  in  Madras.  This  came  to  be  kno\\n  to 
the  'riieosophisls,  and  one  of  them  wrote,  Now  the  devil  is  going  to  die ; 
God  bless  us  all,”  Was  that  paving  the  way  for  me  ? I would  not  have  inen- 

lioned  this  now,  but,  as  my  countiymcn  wanted  to  know,  it  must  come  out.  For 

three  5 ears  I have  not  opened  my  lips  about  these  things  ; silence  has  been 

my  motto,  but  to-day  the  thing  has  come  out.  That  was  not  all.  1 saw  some 

Theosophists  in  the  Pailiament  of  Religions,  and  1 wanted  to  talk  and  rntx  with 
them.  I remember  the  looks  of  scorn  which  weie  on  theur  faces,  as  much  as 
to  say — “ What  business  has  the  w'orm  to  be  here  in  the  midst  of  the  gods  ?” 
After  1 had  got  name  and  fame  at  the  Pailiament  of  Religions,  thcnicame  tremendous 
work  foi  me,  but  at  every  turn  the  Theosophists  tried  to  cry  me  down,  Theosophists 
were  advised  not  to  come  and  hear  my  lectures, for  thereby  they  would  lose  all  sympathy 
of  the  Society,  because  the  laws  of  the  esoteric  section  declare  that  any  man  who  joins 
that  esoteric  section  should  receive  instruction  from  Kuthumi  and  Moiia,  of  course 
through  their  visible  representatives— Mr.  Judge  and  Mrs.  Besant.  So  that,  to  join  the 
cBOtenc  section  means  to  surrender  one’s  independence.  Certainly,  1 could  not  do  any 
such  thing,  nor  could  I call  any  man  a Hindu  who  did  any  such  thing.  I had  a great 
respect  for  Mr.  Judge,  lie  was  a worthy  man,  open,  fair,  simple^  and  he  was  the  best 
representative  the  'Fheosophists  ever  had.  1 have  no  light  to  ciiticise  the  dispute 
between  him  and  Mrs.  Besant,  when  each  claims  that  his  or  her  Mahatma  is  right.  And 
the  strange  pait  of  it  is,  that  the  same  Mahatma  is  claimed  by  both.  Lord  knows 
the  truth  : lie  is  the  Judge,  and  no  one  has  the  light  to  pass  judgment  when  the 
balance  is  equal. 

Thus  they  prepared  the  way  lot  me  all  over  America  I They  joined  the  other 
, opposition — the  Christian  missionaries,  Tkere  is  not  one  black  lie  imaginable  that 
these  latter  did  not  invent  against  me.  They  blackened  my  chaiacter  from  city  to 
city,  poor  and  friendless  though  1 was  in  a foreign  country.  They  tried  to  oust 
jme  flora  cvciy  house,  and  to  make  every  man  who  became  my  friend  my  enemy. 


MV  PT.AK  OF  CAMPAfi'.N 


They  tried  to  starve  me  out,  and  I am  ^orry  to  say  that  one  of  my  own  counhy- 
men  took  part  ag-ainst  me  m this.  He  is  the  Ic.ufei  of  the  refoim  party  in  India. 
This  gentleman  is  declaring  everyday,  “ Chiisl  has  come  to  India."  Is  this  the  way 
Christ  is  to  come  to  India  ? Is  this  the  way  to  lefoim  India  ? And  this  gentleman 
1 knew  from  my  childhood ; lie  was  one  of  my  best  fiiends;  when  I saw  him  I 
had  not  met  for  a long  time  one  of  my  countrymen — I was  so  glad,  and  this  was  the 
treatment  I received  fiom  him.  The  day  the  Parliament  cheered  me,  the  da\  1 be- 
came populai  in  Chicago,  fiom  that  day  his  tone  changed,  and  in  an  uruleihand  way, 
he  tiied  to  do  ever;  thing  he  couhl  to  injure  me.  Is  that  the  way  that  C'hiist  will 
come  to  India?  Is  that  the  lesson  that  he  had  learnt  after  sitting  twenty  yeais  at  the 
feet  of  Chiist?  Our  gicai  leformeis  declaie,  that  C'hi istiamty  and  C'hiistian  power 
are  going  to  n])lift  the  Indian  people.  Is  that  the  way  to  do  it  ? Siiiely,  if  that  gentle- 
man is  an  illustration,  it  does  not  look  veiy  hopeful. 

One  word  more  ; I read  m the  oigan  of  the  social  leforiners  that  I am  called  a 
Sudra,  and  am  challenged  as  to  what  light  a Sudi a has  to  become  a Sannvasin.  To 
which  1 reply — ^1  tiace  my  descent  to  one  at  whose  feet  eveiy  Ihahman  lays  flowers 
when  he  utters  the  words  - Yamdva  Dhanna}  iijdva  Chitrat^uptnya  vai  uamah 
whose  descendants  ate  the  purest  of  Kshatlnyas.  If  you  heheve  m your  mvlhology,  or 
your  PoLiramc  sciiptiiies,  let  these  so-called  lefoimers  know  that  my  caste,  apait  fiom 
other  services  in  the  past,  i tiled  h.ilf  of  India  foi  centuries.  If  m\  caste  is  left  out  of 
consideration,  wdial  will  there  he  left  of  the  piesenl-dav  civilisation  of  India  ^ In  Bengal 
alone,  my  blood  has  furnished  them  with  then  gieatest  philo^ophei.  the  gicatest  poet, 
the  greatest  historian,  the  gieatest  aidueologisl,  the  greatest  leligious  pieacheis ; my 
blood  has  furnished  India  with  the  gieatest  of  hci  modem  scientists.  'Pliesc  dctiactois 
ought  to  have  known  a little  of  oui  own  hisioiv,  and  to  have  studied  onr  three  castes, 
and  leaint  that  the  Biahman.  the  Kshaltiiya,  and  the  Vaisya  have  equal  i ight  to  be 
Sannyasms  ; the  Tiaivarmka  have  equal  lights  to  the  Vedas.  This  is  only  by  the  way. 

1 have  just  quoted  this,  but  1 am  not  at  all  hint  if  they  call  me  a Sudra.  It  will  be  a 
little  reparation  for  the  tviannv  of  my  ancestois  over  the  poor.  If  I am  a Panah  I will 
be  all  the  moie  glad,  foi  I arn  the  thsciple  of  a man,  who  — tlie  Biahman  of  BiAhmans 
— wanted  to  cleanse  the  house  of  a Paiiah.  Of  course  the  Paiiah  would  not  allow  him ; 
how  could  he  let  this  Brahman  Sannyasm  come  and  cleanse  his  house  ' And  this  man 
woke  up  in  the  dead  of  night,  entered  surrepUliously  the  house  of  this  Paiiah,  cleansed 
his  latiine,  and  with  his  long  hair  wiped  the  place,  and  that  he  did  day  afiei  day  in  older 
that  he  might  make  himself  the  iervant  of  all.  I bear  the  feet  of  that  man  on  my 
head;  he  is  my  hero  ; that  hero’s  life  I will  try  to  imitate.  By  being  the  servant  of  all 
a Hindu  seeks  to  uplift  himself,  that  is  how  the  Hindus  should  uplift  the  masses,  and 
not  by  looking  for  any  foreign  influence.  Twenty  years  of  occidental  civilisation 
brings  to  my  mind  the  illustration  of  the  man  who  wants  to  starve  his  own  friend 
in  a foreign  land,  simply  because  this  friend  is  popular,  simply  because  he  thinks 
that  this  man  stands  in  the  way  of  liis  making  money.  And  the  other,  is  the  illustra- 
tion of  what  genuine,  orthodox  Hinduism  itself  will  do  at  home.  Let  any  one  of 
our  reformers  bring  out  that  life,  ready  to  serve  even  a Pariah,  and  then  I will  sit  at 
his  feet  and  learn,  and  not  before  that.  One^omtee  of  practice  is  worth  Iwenly- 
thousand  tons  of  big  talk. 

Now  I come  to  the  reform  s6cieties  in  Madras.  They  have  been  very  kind  to 
me.  They  have  given  me  very  kind  words,  and  they  have  pointed  out,  and  I lieartily 
agree  with  them,  that  there  is  a difference  between  the  reformers  of  Bengal  and 


LF.crVRK^-FROM  COT.OMBO  TO  Ar.VORA 


62 

Oiose  of  M.nli.is,  ]\Ian)  of  voii  ^\iU  rememhei  wlut  I ha\e  \e!)  olicn  told  you, 
that  Madias  is  in  a veiy  beautiful  state  just  now.  It  has  not  ROt  into  the  play  of 
action  and  reaction  as  Bengal  has  done  Here,  theie  is  steady  and  slow  piogiess 
all  ilirough  ; here  is  giowth,  and  not  reaction  In  many  cases,  and  to  a ceilain  extent, 
theie  IS  a revi\al  in  Bengal,  hut  in  Madias  it  is  nut  a levival,  it  is  a growth,  a uatuial 
giowth.  As  such,  I entirely  agiee  wnth  wdiat  the  lefoimeis  point  out  as  the  clillerence 
between  the  two  1 aces ; hut  there  is  one  diflerence  which  they  do  not  understand. 
S<iine  of  these  societies,  I am  afraid,  tiy  to  intimidate  me  to  join  them.  That  is  a 
stiange  thing  toi  them  to  attempt.  A man  who  has  met  staivation  face  to  face  for 
founeeii  yea  is  of  Ins  life,  who  has  not  known  whcie  he  will  get  a meal  the  next  day, 
and  whole  to  sleep,  cannot  he  intimidated  so  easily.  A man  almost  without  clothes, 
who  diied  to  live  wlieie  the  theimoineter  legisteied  thiity  degiees  below'  zeio, 
witliout  knowing  wheie  the  next  meal  was  to  come  tiom,  cannot  he  so  easily  intimi- 
dated, in  India,  'i’hi«>  is  the  fust  thing  1 will  tell  them  1 have  a little  will  of  my  own. 

1 have  my  little  expel lence  too,  and  I have  a iness.ige  foi  the  woild  which  I will 
cielivei  without  fear,  and  without  caie  for  the  futuie.  'I'o  the  relorineis  I will  point 
out,  that  I am  a greater  lefoimci  tlian  an\  one  of  them.  'I'liey  w'ant  to  icfoim  only 
little  bits.  I want  loot  an<l-hianch  refotm.  Wheo*  we  diffei  is  in  the  method, 
Theiis  is  the  method  of  desti action,  mine  is  that  of  consti action.  1 do  not  believe 
in  icfmin;  I believe  in  growth.  I do  not  daic  to  juit  myself  111  the  [losition  of  Hod 
and  dictate  to  oni  society  ‘ 'I'liis  way  thou  shonldst  move  and  not  that  I simply  want 
to  he  like  tiie  viuuiel  in  llie  building  of  Rama’s  hiidge,  who  was  (piite  content  to 
put  on  the  budge  his  little  cjnota  ol  sand-dusi.  'J'hat  is  my  position.  This  w’ondei- 
ful  national  machine  has  woiketl  llnough  ages,  this  wondc'ilul  iivci  of  national  life 
is  llowing  hefote  us.  \\  ho  knows,  and  who  dates  to  sa\  whether  it  is  and 

how  It  shall  move''  '1  liousands  of  ciicumstancos  aio  ciowding  lound  it,  giving  it 
a special  impulse,  making  It  dull  at  one  time,  and  (pnckei  at  anoihoi  Who  claies 
command  its  motion  ? Ouis  is  only  to  woik,  as  the  Gila  sa\s,  without  looking  for 
.results.  Feed  the  national  life  with  the  fuel  it  w'ants,  hut  the  giowth  is  us  ow’n  ; none 
can  dictate  its  giowlh  to  it.  F.vils  aie  plentiful  in  oui  socieiv,  hut  so  ate  theie  evils 
in  euMv  othei  society.  Here,  the  eailh  is  soaked  sometimes  w'lth  w’ldows’  teais; 
there,  in  the  W'est,  the  aii.^is  lent  with  the  sighs  ol  the  unmairied.  Here,  poverty 
IS  the  gieai  banc  of  life ; thciei  the  hfe-weai  moss  of  luxuiy  is  the  great  bane  that 
is  upon  the  race.  Hcie,  men  want  to  commit  suicide  because  they  have  nothing  to 
eat;  theie.  they  commit  suicide  because  they  have  so  much  to  eat.  Kvil  is  every- 
where ; it  IS  like  chiomc  rheumatism.  Drive  it  fiom  the  foot,  it  goes  to  the  head  ; diive 
it  from  theie,  it  goes  somewhere  else,  li  is  a cpiestion  of  chasing  it  from  place  to 
place;  that  is  all.  A}c,  children,  to  lemcdy  evil  is  the  ti ue  way.  Our  philosophy 
leaches  that  evil  and  good  are  eleinally  conjoined,  the  obvetse  and  the  icverse  of  the 
same  com.  If  you  have  one,  you  must  have  the  other ; a w'ave  m the  ocean  must  be  at 
the  co^t  of  a hollow  elsewhcie.  Nay,  all  life  is  evil.  No  hiealh  can  be  breathed 
without  killing  some  one  else;  not  a moisel  of  food  can  he  eaten  without  depriving 
some  one  of  it.  'I'his  is  the  law ; this  is  philosophy.  Therefore  the  only  thing  we  can 
do,  IS  to  understand  that  all  this  woik  against  evil  is  more  subjective  than  objective. 
The  work  against  evil  is  more  educational  than  actual,  however  big  we  may  talk. 
This,  lirst  of  all,  is  the  idea  of  w'oik  against  evil,  and  it  ought  to  make  us  calmer,  it 
ought  to  take  fanaticism  out  of  our  blood.  The  history  of  the  woild  teaches  us  that 
wherever  there  have  been  lanalical  icfoirns,  the  only  icsult  has  been  that  they  have 


\ Jiry  p/,A,v  OF  cAjrPAiGy  6? 

defeated  theif  own  ends.  No  gtoatei  upheaval  for  the  estaMishment  of  nglu  and 
liheily  can  be  imagined  than  the  ^^.u  foi  the  ahohuon  ol  slaveiy  m Amenca  You 
all  know  about  it.  And  what  has  been  Us  lesulls  ? The  slaves  are  a lu.nd.ed  limes 
v-oise  off  to-day  than  they  wcio  beh.ic  the  abolition.  lidOre  the  abolition,  these 
poor  negioes  were  llie  piopeily  of  someluKh.  and,  as  piopeiiies,  they  had  to  be 
looked  after,  so  that  lliey  might  not  deleiioiale  To-da)  lhe>  aio  the  piopeih  of 
nobody.  1 hen  lives  aic  of  no  value  , ihev  aie  buint  alive  on  meie  pieleiues  'I'hey 
are  shot  down  without  any  law  loi  then  numleieis  ; foi  the)  aie  niggeis,  thev  aie  not 
human  beings,  they  aic  not  even  animals,  and  lh.it  is  the  elfeU  of  siuh  violent 
taking  away  of  evil  by  law,  oi  b\  lanatuism.  Such  is  the  testmioii}  of  history 

against  cveiy  fanatical  movement,  even  foi  doing  good.  I have  seen  that.  I\Iy  own 

expeiience  has  taught  me  that.  'I'herefoie  I cannot  join  anv  one  of  these  condemn- 
mg  societies.  W'hy  condemn  ? Theie  aie  evils  m eveiv  soi icl)  . evciv bodv  knows 
It,  every  child  of  to-day  knows  it;  he  can  stand  upon  a plalfoim  and  give  us  a 
haiangue  on  the  avvliil  evils  in  Hindu  .Society  hverv  uneducated  foieigncr  who 
comes  hcic  globe-ltolling,  takes  a vanishing  lailway  view  of  Iiidi.i,  and  lectuies  most 
leatnedl)  on  the  awful  evils  in  Jndia  We  admit  ih.il  iher4;  aic  evils.  Kvei^body 
can  show  what  evil  is,  but  he  is  the  fiieiid  of  mankind  who  linds  a way  out  of  the 
difliculty  Like  the  (how ning  bov  ,md  the  philosophei.  when  the  iihilosojihei  was 
lediiimg  him  the  boy  cued  “ 'L-ike  me  out  of  the  vv.Uer  fust so  oui  people  ( ry 

“ W'e  have  bad  lectuies  enough,  societies  enough,  p.tj»ers  enough,  whore  is  the  man 
who  will  lend  us  a hand  to  diag  ns  out  > Whcio  is  the  man  who  leali)  loves  us  ? 
Wheic  IS  the  m.in  who  has  sjnijufliy  with  ns  Ave,  (h.il  man  is  wanted.  That  is 
whcio  I (lillei  entiiely  fioni  these  lelorm  movements  h'oi  a hundied  ycai s they 
h.ive  liccn  hole.  What  good  ims  been  done,  except  the  creation  of  a most  Mtiijieia- 
live,  a most  condcmnatoi)  lilci.itme  ^ Would  to  (iod  it  was  not  iieie  ' 'i'hey  have 
c I ilicisod,  c ondcunned,  abused  the  orthodox,  until  the  orthodox  have  caught  their 
1(jnc,  and  paid  them  back  in  their  (jvvn  C(mi,  and  the  lesult  is  the  creation  of  a litera- 
liiie  m eveiy  veinaculai  which  is  the  shame  of  the  i.ice,  the  sh.nne  of  the  country.  Ii 
this  lofoim  ? Is  this  leading  the  n.ition  to  gloiy  ? Whose  fault  is  this? 

I'lieic  IS.  then,  anothei  great  consideiaiion.  Here  in  India,  we  have  always 
been  governed  by  klng•^ , kings  have  made  all  our  laws.  Now  the  kings  are 
gone,  and  there  is  no  one  left  to  make  a move.  The  Government  daie  not ; it 
has  to  fashion  its  ways  accoidmg  to  the  giowth  of  j>nblic  ojmuon  It  lakes  time, 
i]iiite  a long  lime,  tepmake  a healthy,  stiong,-  public  opinion  which  will  solve  its  own 
piohlems  , and  m the  mleiim  waTshall  h.ivo  to  vvait.  Tim  whole  jiroblem  of  social 
reform,  iherefoie,  icsolves  itself  into  this  wheie  are  those  who  w.mt  lefoim  ? Make 
them  ^n^t.  Whcic  aie  the  jieojile  ? 'J'he  lyianny  of  a mmoiity  is  the  worst  tyianny 
that  the  vvoild  evei  secs.  A few  men  who  think  that  ceilain  things  aie  evil  will  not 
make  a nation  move.  Why  docs  not  the  nation  move  ? First  educate  the  nation, g 
cieate  youi  legislative  body,  and  then  the  law  will  be  foilhcoinmg.  First  cieate  the* 
povvei,  the  sanction  fiom  which  the  law  will  spring.  'J'he  kings  arc  gone  ; where  isf 
the  new  sanction,  the  new  power  of  the  people  ? Hiiiig  it  up.  'riierefoie,  even  for 
bocial  lefortn,  the  fust  duty  is  to  educate  the  people,  and  }ou  will  have  to  wail  till 
that  lime  comes.  Most  of  the  reforms  that  have  been  agitated  for  dining  the  last 
ceniuiy  have  been  ornamental.  Isvcry  one  of  these  reforms  only  touches  the  first 
two  castes,  and  no  other.  'Fhc  question  of  widow  mariiagc  would  not  touch  seventy 
per  cent,  of  the  Indian  women,  and  all  such  questions  only  reach  the  higher  castes 


64 


LECTL'RKS—FRO.if  COLOMBO  TO  ALMOUa 


ol  Indian  people  wlio  aie  educated,  maik  you,  at  the  expense  of  the  masses. 
E\eiy  clToi L has  been  spent  in  cleaning  theii  own  houses,  Ihit  that  is  no  reforma- 
tion You  must  go  iloun  to  the  basis  of  the  thing,  to  the  very  root  of  the  matter. 
'I'lial  IS  what  I call  ladical  lefoim.  Put  the  (iie  there  and  let  it  bum  upwards  and 
make  an  Indian  nation.  And  the  solution  of  the  ptoblcin  is  not  so  easy,  as  it  is 
a big  and  a vast  one.  Be  not  in  a huiiy,  this  problem  has  been  known  several  hundred 
)ears.  'I'o-day  il  is  the  fashion  to  talk  of  Buddhism,  and  Buddhistic  agnosticism, 
especially  in  the  Soulh.  Little  do  they  dieam  that  this  degiadation  which  is  with  us 
to-day  has  been  hdt  b)  Buddhism. 

'Phis  IS  the  legacy  which  Buddhism  has  left  to  us.  You  read  in  books  W’ritten 
by  men  who  had  never  studied  the  rise  and  fall  of  Buddhism,  that  the  spread  of 
Buddhism  was  owing  to  the  wondciful  ethics  and  the  wonderful  personality  of 
(jaulaui.i  Buddha.  1 have  evei}  lespect  ami  veneiation  fot  f.ord  Buddha,  but  maik 
my  words,  the  spiead  of  liuddlustn  was  less  owing  to  llie  doctrines  and  tlie  peisona- 
lity  of  the  gicat  preachei,  than  to  the  temples  that  weie  built,  the  idols  that  were 
elected,  and  the  goigeous  ceieinonials  that  weie  put  before  the  nation.  Thus  Bud- 
dhism piogiesscd  The  little  (iieplaces  in  the  houses,  in  which  the  people  poured 
their  libations  weie  not  stiong  enough  to  bold  their  own  against  these  gorgeous 
icmiiles  and  ceiotnonies,  but  lalci  on  the  whole  tiling  degeneiated.  It  became  a 
mass  of  coiiuiilion  of  vvlucli  1 cannot  speak  befoic  this  audience,  but  those  who  want  to 
know  about  it  may  see  a little  of  it  in  those  big  temples,  full  of  sculpluics,  in  Soulhein 
India,  and  this  is  all  the  inheiilance  we  have  from  the  Buddhists.  Then  aiosc  the 
gieat  lefoiiiKM'  Sankaiach.ii \a  and  his  followeis,  andduiing  these  hundieds  of  yeais, 
since  his  time  to  the  picsent  dav,  iheic  has  been  the  slow  bunging  back  of  the 
Indian  inas-,es  to  the  piisiinc  puiily  of  the  Vedantic  leligion.  'I'liese  leformers 
knew  full  well  the  evils  which  existed,  }el  they  did  not  condemn,  'riicv  did  not  say, 
“All  that  )0U  have  isvviong,  and  you  must  thiow  il  away.”  ll  can  ncvci  be  so,  'Po-day 
I lead  that  ni)  fiieud,  Di.  Barrows  sa\s,  that  in  tliiee  bundled  yeais  C'hnsUanity 
oveilhicw  the  Roman  and  Gieek  leligious  influences.  'Pbat  is  not  the  vvoid  of  a 
man  who  has  seen  Ivurope,  and  Gieecc,  and  Rome.  The  inlluence  of  Roman  and 
Gieek  religion  is  all  theie,  even  in  Protestant  ccuntiies,  only  with  changed  names, 
old  gods  le-chrislened  in  a new  fashion.  The}  change  then  names  , tlie  goddesses 
become  Maiys  and  the  gods  become  saints,  and  the  ceieinonials  become  new';  even 
the  old  title  of  Pontifex  Maximus  is  there.  So,  sudden  changes  cannot  be,  and 
Sankaiachaiya  knew  it.  So  did  Ramanuja.  The  only  vva)  left  them  was  slowly  to 
bring  up  to  the  iiighest  ideal,  the  existing  lehgion.  B'  they  had  sought  to  apply 
the  other  method  they  would  have  been  h>pociitcs,  foi  the  very  fundamental  doctrine 
of  their  religion  is  evolution,  the  soul  going  towauls  the  highest  goal,  tin ough  all 
these  various  stages  and  phases,  which  aie  thcietorc  necessaiy  and  helpful.  And  who 
daics  condemn  them  } 

Il  has  become  a tiite  saving,  that  idolatry  is  wrong,  and  every  man  swallows  it 
at  the  present  time  without  questioning.  I once  thought  so,  and  to  pay  the  penalty 
of  that  1 had  to  learn  my  lesson  silling  at  the  feet  of  a man  w'ho  realised  everything 
through  idols;  1 allude  to  Rarnakiishna  Parainalramsa.  If  such  Rarnaluishna  Parama- 
liamsas  aie  produced  by  idol  woiship,  what  will  you  liave---lhe  reformer's  creed 
Ol  any  number  of  idols } I want  an  answer.  Take  a thousand  idols  more  if  you 
can  ]>iodnre  Ramakii'^lrna  Paiatnahamsas  through  idol  woiship,  and  may  God  speed 
)ou!  Produce  such  noble  natures  by  any  means  you  can.  Yet  idolatry  is  con- 


Afy  P/.AiV  OF  CAJ/PAIG.V 


65 

demlled  ! Why  ? Nobody  kno\Vs.  Because  some  luindieds  of  years  ap:o  some 
man  of  Jewish  blood  happened  to  condemn  it?  That  is,  he  happened  to  condemn 
everybody  else’s  idols  except  his  own.  If  God  is  lepiesented  in  any  beautiful 
foini,  or  any  symbolic  form,  said  the  Jew,  it  is  awfully  bad;  it  is  sin.  But 
if  he  is  represented  in  the  form  of  a chest,  with  two  angeN  sitting  on  each 
side,  and  a cloud  hanging  over  it,  it  is  the  holy  of  holies.  If  God  comes  in  the 
form  of  a dove,  it  is  holy.  But  if  He  comes  in  the  foim  of  a cow,  it  is  heathen 
superstition ; condemn  It ! That  is  how  the  woild  goes.  That  is  wh)  the  poet  s.ns, 
“What  fools  w'e  moitalsbe!”  Howdilliciilt  it  is  to  look  ihiough  eacii  othei's  eves, 
and  that  is  the  banc  of  humanity.  That  is  the  basis  of  hatred  and  jealousy,  of  quaiicl 
and  of  fight.  Boy.s,  moustaclied  babies,  who  never  w^ent  out  of  Madias,  standing  up 
and  wanting  to  dictate  laws  to  three  liundied  millions  of  people,  with  thousands  of 
tiaditions  at  theii  back!  Aic  }ou  not  ashamed  ? Stand  back  ft  om  such  blasphemy, 
and  leain  fiist  youi  lessons  1 Irreverent  boys,  simply  because  }ou  can  .sciawl  a few 
lines  upon  paper  and  get  some  fool  to  publish  them  foi  } 011,  vou  think  vou  ate  the 
cdiicalois  of  the  woild,  you  think  )ou  are  the  public  opinion  of  India’  Is  it  so? 
Tins  I have  to  tell  to  the  social  letoimeis  of  Madias,  that  I have  the  gieatest  lespcct 
and  love  for  them.  1 love  them  for  their  great  hearts  and  then  love  foi  then  countiy, 
fui  the  poor,  for  the  oppiessed.  But  what  I would  tell  them  with  a biothei’s  love 
is,  that  then  method  is  not  light;  it  has  been  tiicd  a hundied  vcais  and  failed.  Let 
us  iiy  some  new  method.  Did  India  ever  stand  in  w'ant  of  lefoimeis  ? Do  you  read 
the  hisloiy  of  India  ? Who  was  Ramanuja?  Who  was  Sankaia?  Who  was  Kanaka 
Who  was  Chaiianya  ? Who  was  Kabira  ? Who  w'as  Dadu  ? Who  weie  all  these  great 
jneacheis,  one  following  the  other,  a galaxy  of  stars  of  the  fiist  magnitude  ? Did 
not  Ramanuja  feel  for  the  lower  classes  ? Did  he  not  tiy  all  his  life  to  admit  even 
the  i’aiiah  to  liis  community  ? Did  he  not  liy  to  admit  even  Mahommedans  to  his 
own  fold  ? Did  not  Nanaka  confci  witii  Hindus  and  Mahommedans.  and  liy  to  bung 
about  a new  slate  of  things?  They  all  tiled,  and  their  woik  is  still  going  on.  The 
(hlferoiice  is  this.  They  had  not  the  faiitaionade  of  the  rcfoimeis  of  to-day ; they 
hail  no  cuises  on  iheii  lips  a.s  modern  rcformcis  liave;  their  lips  jironounced  only 
blessings.  They  never  condemned.  They  .said  to  the  people  that  the  lace  must 
abvavsgiow.  They  looked  back  and  they  said,  “ O Hindus,  w'liat  you  have  done  is 
good,  but,  my  brothels,  lei  us  do  better.”  They  did  not  say,  “ You  liave  been 
wicked,  now  let  us  be  good.”  They  said,  “You  have  been  good,  but  let  us  now  be 
beltci.”  That  makes  a whole  world  of  difference.  Wo  must  grow  accoiding  to  onr 
naUiie.  Vain  is  it  to  attempt  the  lines  of  action  that  foreign  societies  have  engiaftcd 
upon  us;  it  is  impossible.  Glory  unto  God,  that  it  is  impossible,  llial  w'c  cannot 
be  twisted  and  loituied  into  the  .shape  of  other  nations.  1 do  not  condemn  the 
imstitutions  of  otiici  races  ; they  arc  good  for  them,  but  not  for  us.  What  is  meal  for 
them  may  he  poison  for  us.  'I'his  is  the  fiist  lesson  to  leain,  \V''ith  other  sciences, 
oihei  institutions,  ami  other  traditions  behind  them,  they  have  got  then  piesenl  system. 
We,  with  our  liadilioiis,  with  thousands  of  ye.ars  of  Karma  behind  us,  naturally  can 
only  follow  our  own  bent,  lun  in  out  own  giooves,  and  that  we  shall  have  to  do. 

What  is  my  plan  then?  My  jilan  is  to  follow  the  ideas  of  the  gieat  ancient 
Masters.  I have  studied  their  woik,  and  it  has  been  given  unto  me  to  discover  the  line 
of  action  they  took.  They  were  the  great  originators  of  Society.  They  wcie  the  gieat 
givers  of  strength,  and  of  purity,  and  of  life.  They  did  most  maivellous  work.  We 
have  to  do  most  marvellous  woik  also,  t'iicuiiislances  have  become  a little  different, 

I 


66 


coLOiUJso  To  AUiokA 

and  ill  consequence  the  lines  of  action  have  to  be  changed  a little,  and  that  is  all.  I 
see  that  each  nation,  like  each  individual,  has  one  theme  in  this  life,  which  is  its  centre, 
the  principal  note  round  which  every  other  note  comes  to  form  the  harmony.  In  one 
nation  political  power  is  its  vitality,  as  in  Kngland.  Artistic  life  in  another,  and  so  on. 
In  Intlia,  religious  life  forms  the  centre,  the  keynote  of  the  whole  music  of  national 
life  ; and  if  any  nation  attempts  to  throw  off  its  national  vitality,  the  direction  which 
has  become  its  own  ihiough  the  transmission  of  centuiies, — that  nation  dies,  if  it 
succeeds  ifi  the  attempt.  And,  therefoie,  if  you  succeed  m the  attempt  to  throw  off 
youi  religion  and  take  up  eithei  politics  oi  society,  or  any  other  thing  as  your  centie, 
as  tlijg  vitality  of  youi  national  life,  the  result  will  be,  that  you  will  become  extinct. 
To  pievent  this  you  must  make  all  and  eveiything  woik  thiough  that  vitality  of  your 
religion.  Let  all  your  neivcs  vibrate  through  the  backbone  of  }our  leligion. 
I have  seen  that  T r.xnnol  pi  each  even  leligion  to  Americans  without  showing 
them  its  piactical  effect  on  social  life.  I could  not  pieach  religion  in  Kngland  without 
showing  the  wondeiful  political  changes  the  Vedanta  would  bung.  So,  in  India, 
.social  icfoim  has  to  be  picached  by  showing  how  much  moie  spiritu.il  a life 
the  new  system  will  bung;  and  politics  has  to  be  jireached  by  showing  how  much 
it  will  impiove  the  one  thing  that  the  nation  w.xnts, — its  spuituality.  Kbeiy  man  has 
to  make  his  own  choice ; so  has  evciy  nation.  We  matle  oui  choice  .xges  ago  and 
we  must  abide  by  it.  And,  aftei  all,  it  is  not  such  a bad  choice.  Is  it  such  a 
bad  choice  iix  this  woild  to  think,  not  of  in.xltcr  but  of  spiiit,  notof  man  but  of 
(lod.^  That  intense  faith  in  anoilici  woild,  that  mlenso  hatieil  for  this  world,  the 
intense  powei  of  icmincialion,  the  intense  faith  in  God,  the  intense  faith  in  the 
immoilal  soul,  is  in  )ou.  I challenge  anyone  to  give  it  up.  Yon  cannot.  You 
may  tiy  to  impose  upon  me  by  becoming  maleri.xlisis,  liy  talking  materialism  for  a 
few  months,  but  I know  what  you  aie  ; if  T take  you  by  the  hand,  back  you  come 
as  good  theists  as  ever  were  bom.  How  can  you  change  youi  nature  ? 

So  e\eiy  improvement  in  India  requites  fust  of  all  an  upheaval  in  leligion. 
Before  Hooding  India  with  socialistic  or  political  ideas,  fust  ileluge  the  land  with 
Apiiilual  ideas.  The  fiisl  woik  that  demands  our  attention  is,  that  the  most  wonder- 
ful truths  confined  in  oui  Upanishads,  in  our  Sciiptures,  in  onr  Pmanas— must  be 
brought  out  fiom  the  books,  brought  out  fiom  the  monasteiies,  brought  out  fiom 
the  forests,  bi ought  out  fiom  the  possession  of  selected  bodies  of  people,  and 
scalteied  broailcasl  all  over  the  land,  so  that  these  liulhs  may  lun  like  fiic  all  over 
the  country,  fiom  north  to  south,  and  east  to  west,  from  the  Ilimaki) as  to  Comoi in, 
fiom  .Sindh  to  the  Brahmapulia,  Kveiyonc  must  know  of  them,  because  it  is  said, — 
“'This  has  fust  to  be  hcaid,  then  thought  upon,  and  then  meditated  upon."  Let  the 
peojile  hcai  fiist,  and  whoever  helps  in  making  (he  pcojile  hear  about  the  great  liuths 
in  their  own  sciiptuies  , cannot  make  for  himself  a better  Karma  to-day.  Says  our 
Viasa,  “In  this  kaVivui^a  there  is  one  Kaima  left.  Saciifices  and  licmcndous  Tapasyas 
aie  of  no  avail  novv.  Of  Kaima  one  remains,  and  that  is  the  Karma  of  giving. 
And  of  these  gifts,  the  gift  of  spiiiluality  and  spiritual  knowledge  is  the  highest; 
the  next  gift,  is  the  gift  of  secular  knowledge  ; the  next  is  the  gift  of  life  ; and  the 
fourth  IS  tlie  gift  of  food.  Look  at  this  wonderfully  charitable  lace;  look  at  the 
amount  of  gifts  that  aie  made  in  this  poor,  poor  countr)  ; look  at  the  hospitality, 
where  a man  can  travel  from  the  iioilli  to  the  south,  having  llie  best  in  the  land,  being 
ticated  alw.ps  by  evcivonc  as  if  he  was  a fiieiid,  and  where  no  beggar  staives 
ho  long  as  iheic  is  a piece  of  biead  anywhere  ! 


Mr  PLAN  OF  CAMPAIGN 


67 


In  this  land  of  charity,  let  us  take  up  the  energy  of  the  first  charity,  the  diffusion 
of  spiiitual  knowledge.  And  that  diffusion  should  not  be  confined  within  the 
bounds  of  India ; it  must  go  out  all  over  the  woild.  'J'his  has  been  the  custom. 
Those  that  tell  you  that  Indian  thought  never  wont  outside  of  India,  those  that  tell 
yon  that  I am  the  fiisL  Sannyasin  who  went  to  foreign  lands  to  picacii,  do  not  know 
the  hisloiy  of  their  own  race.  Again  and  again  this  phenomenon  has  happened. 
Whenever  the  world  has  requiied  it,  this  peiennial  Hood  of  spiiituahty  has  ovcillowed 
and  deluged  the  world.  Gifts  of  political  kiiovt ledge  can  be  made  with  the  blast  of 
li limpets,  and  the  march  of  colioits.  Gifts  of  secular  knowledge  and  social  knowl- 
edge can  be  made  with  file  anJswoid;  but  spiiilual  knowledge  can  only  he  given 
in  silence,  like  the  dew  that  falls  unseen  and  unlieaid,  yet  hiinging  into  bloom 
masses  of  roses.  This  has  been  the  gift  of  India  to  the  world  agam  and  again. 
Whenever  thete  has  been  a gi  eat  coiupiei  mg  I ace,  bunging  the  nations  of  the  woild 
together,  making  roads  and  tiansit  possible,  immediately  India  arose  and  gave  her 
quota  of  sjiiritual  power  to  the  sum-total  of  the  piogiess  of  the  woild.  ’I'liis 
hai)[)ene(l  ages  befoie  Buddha  was  boin,  and  remnants  of  it  are  still  left  in  China,. 
Ill  Asia  iMinoi,  and  in  the  heaitof  the  Malayan  Aichipel.xgo.  This  was  the  case  when- 
the  gieat  Gieek  compieior  united  the^foui  coiners  of  the  then  known  woild;  then 
lushed  out  Indian  spiiitiiality,  and  the  boa.sted  ci\ihsalion  of  the  West  is  but  tha 
lemnaut  of  that  deluge.  Now  llie  same  opportunity  has  again  come  ; the  power  of 
Kiigland  has  linked  the  nations  of  the  woild  together  as  was  never  done  befoie. 
I-'iiglish  roads  and  channels  of  communication  lusli  fiom  one  end  of  the  woild  to 
the  other.  Owing  to  Knghsh  genius,  the  woild  to-day  has  been  linked  in  such  a 
fashion,  as  has  never  befoie  been  done.  I'o-day  bade  cenlies  have  been  foimed 
such  as  have  never  been  before  in  the  histoiy  of  mankind,  and  immediately,  con- 
sciously or  unconsciousl},  India  lises  up  and  poms  foith  her  gifts  of  sphitiialily,  and 
lliey  will  lush  thioiigh  these  loads  till  they  have  leachcd  the  vciy  ends  of  the  w-oild. 
'J’hat  I w'cnt  to  Ameiica  not  my  doing,  01  }oui  doing,  but  the  God  of  India, 
wlio  is  guiding  her  destiny  sent  me,  and  w’ill  send  hundieds  of  such  to  all  the  nations 
ol  the  wfuld.  No  powei  on  eaiLh  can  icsist  it.  This  also  has  to  be  done.  You  must 
go  out  to  preach  your  leligion,,  pieach  it  to  every  nation  under  the  sun,  pieacli  it  to 
every  j>cople.  This  is  the  fiisl  thing  to  do.  And  after  pieacliing  spiiitual  knowledge, 
along  with  it  will  come  that  secular  knowledge  and  eveiy  other  knowledge  that  you 
want;  Imt  if  yon  attempt  to  get  the  secular  knowledge  without  ic-ligion,  1 tell  you 
plainly,  vain  is  your  attempt  in  India,  it  wmU  never  have  a hold  011  the  people.  Itven 
tlie  great  Buddhistic  movement  was  a failuie,  paitially  on  account  of  that. 

Therefore,  my  fiieiids,  my  plan  is  to  stait  institutions  in  India,  lo-tiain  our  young 
men  as  pieacheis  of  the  tiulhs  of  om  scriptures,  in  India  and  outside  India.  IMcn,  men, 
these  are  TvanteB  : everything  else  will  be  ready,  but  strong,  vigorous,  believing  young 
men  sincere  to  the  backbone,  are  w^anled.  A hundieil  such  and  the  woild,  becomes 
revolutionised.  The  will  is  stionger  than  anything  else.  Eveijthing  must  go  dowii' 
before  the  will,  for  that  comes  from  God  and  God  Himself;  a pure- and  a .strong  waU 
is  omnipotent.  Do  you  not  believe  in  it  ? Preach,  preach  unto  the  world  the  great 
truths  of  your  leligion ; the  woild  wails  for  them.  For  centuries  people  have  been 
taught  theories  of  degradation.  They  have  been  told  that  they  are  nothing.  The 
masses  have  been  told  all  over  the  woild  that  they  are  not  human  beings.  They 
have  been  so  frightened  for  centuries,  till  they  have  nearly  become  animals.  Never 
were  they  allow'ed  to  hear  of  the  Atman.  Let  them  hear  of  the  Atman — that  even  the 


LECTURE S-FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


rtg 

lowest  of  the  low  have  the  Atman  within,  which  never  dies  and  never  is  born — Him 
whom  the  sword  cannot  pieice,  nor  the  fiie  bum,  nor  the  air  dry,  immortal,  without 
beginning  or  end,  the  all-pure,  omnipotentland  omnipresent  Atman  ! Let  them  have 
faith  in  themselves,  for  what  makes  the  difference  between  the  Englishman  and  you  ? 
Let  them  talk  their  religion  and  duty  and  so  forth,  I have  found  the  difference. 
l‘he  dilTeieuce  is  heie,  that  the  Englishman  believes  in  himself,  and  you  do  not.  He 
believes  in  his  being  an  Englishman,  and  he  believes  he  can  do  anything.  That 
biings  out  the  (jod  within  him,  and  he  can  do  anything  he  likes.  You  have  been 
told  and  taught  that  you  can  do  nothing,  and  non-entities  "you  are  becoming  every 
day.  What  we  want  is  strength,  so  believe  in  yourselves.  We  have  become  weak, 
and  tliat  is  vvhy  occulti'^ms  and  mysticisms  come  to  us,  these  cieepy  things;  there 
may  be  gieal  liuths  in  them,  but  they  have  neaily  destroyed  us.  Make  your  neives 
sUong.  What  we  want  is,  muscles  of  iron  and  nerves  of  steel.  We  have  wept  long 
enough.  No  moie  weeping,  but  stand  on  youi  feet  and  be  men.  It  is  a man-making 
religion  that  we  want.  It  is  man-making  theoiies  that  we  want.  It  is  man-making 
education  all  round  that  wo  want.  And  here  is  the  lest  of  truth — anything  that  makes 
you  weak  physically,  intellectually  and  spiiilually,  reject  as  poison,  there  is  no  life 
in  it,  it  cannot  be  tiue,  Tiuth  is  strengthening.  Tiulh  is  purity,  truth  is  all  knowl- 
edge; truth  must  be  sliengthening,  must  be  enlightening,  must  be  invigoialing. 
These  mysticisms,  in  sjiite  of  some  giains  of  liiUh  m them,  aie  generally  weakening-. 
Believe  me,  I have  a life-long  experience  of  it,  and  the  one  conclusion  that  I diavv 
is  that  it  is  weakening.  I have  tiavcllcd  all  over  India,  searched  almost  every  cave 
here,  and  lived  in  the  Himalayas,  I know  people  who  lived  there  all  their  lives.  I 
love  my  nation,  I cannot  see  }Ou  degraded,  weakened  any  more  than  you  aie  now. 
Therefore  I am  bound  foi  your  sake  and  for  truth’s  sake  to  cry,  “ Hold  ! ” and  to 
raise  my  voice  against  this  degradation  of  my  race.  Give  up  these  weakening 
mysticisms,  and  be  stiong.  Go  back  to  your  Upanishads,  the  shining,  the  strengthen- 
ing, the  blight  philosophy,  and  pait  fiom  all  these  mysterious  things,  all  these  weaken- 
ing things.  Take  up  this  philosophy;  the  greate.st  tiiuhs  are  the  simplest  things  in 
the  world,  simple  as  your  own  existence.  Th-*  truths  of  the  Upanishads  arc  before 
you.  Take  them  up,  live  up  to  them,  and  the  salvation  of  India  will  be  at  hand. 

One  word  more  and  I have  finished.  They  talk  of  patiiolism.  I believe  in 
patriotism,  and  I also  have  my  own  ideal  of  patriotism.  Three  things  are  necessary 
for  great  achievements.  First,  feel  from  the  heait.  What  is  in  the  intellect  or  reason  ? 
It  goes  a few  steps  and  there  it  stops.  But  thiough  tlie  heait  comes  inspi- 
ration. Love  opens  the  most  impossible  gates  ; love  is  the  gate  to  all  the  secrets  of 
the  universe.  Feel,  thoiefoie,  my  would-be  refoimeis,  my  would-be  patriots  ! Do 
you  feel  ? Do  you  feel  tliat  millions  and  millions  of  the  descendants  of  gods  and 
of  sages,  have  become  ncxt-dooi  neighbouis  to  biutes  Do  you  feci  that  millions  are 
starving  to-day,  and  millions  have  been  staiving  for  ages  ? Do  you  feel  that  igno- 
rance has  conic  over  the  land  as  a daik  cloud  .i*  Docs  it  make  youicslless?  Does 
it  make  you  sleepless?  Has  it  gone  into  your  ISTood,  coursuVg  thibugh  your  veins, 
becoming  conson'^*"  vvilh  your  heait  beats?  Has  it  made  you  almost  mad?  Are 
you  seized  with  that  one  idea  of  the  misery  of  ruin,  and  have  you  forgotten  all 
about  your  name,  your  fame,  yoUr  wives,  your  children,  your  property,  even  your 
own  bodies?  Have  you  done  that?  That  is  the  first  stop  to  become  a patriot,  the 
very  fust  step  I did  not  go  to  America,  as  most  of  you  know,  for  the  Pailiament  of 
JReligions,  but  this  demon  of  a feeling  was  in  me  and  within  my  soul.  I travelled 


69 


MV  PLAN  OF  CAMPAIGN 

twelve  years  all  ovei  India,  Tindin!^  no  way  to  woik  for  my  counliMnen,  and  tliat  is 
why  I went  to  Anieiica.  Most  of  )ou  know  that,  who  knew  me  then.  Who  cared 
about  this  railiamcni  of  Reli,^ioiis?  Here  was  my  o\mi  llesh  and  blood  sinking 
every  day,  and  who  caied  foi  them  ? This  was  my  hist  step. 

You  may  feel,  then;  but  instead  of  spending  } our  energies  in  frothv  talk,  have 
you  found  any  way  out,  any  practical  solution,  some  hedp  instead  of  condemnation, 
some  sweet  words  to  soothe  their  miseries,  to  bung  tluMii  out  of  this  hung  death? 
Yet  that  is  not  all.  Have  you  got  the  will  to  sui mount  mountain-high  obshuctions  ? 

If  the  whole  wmild  stands  against  you  swoid  m hand,  would  30U  still  daie  to  do 
what  you  think  is  light?  If  youi  wives  and  childien  aie  against  \()u,  if  all  ) our 
money  goes,  3 our  name  dies,  your  wealth  vanishes,  would  you  still  slick  to  it? 
Would  you  still  puisne  it  and  go  on  steadily  towaids  your  owm  goal  ? As  the  great 
King  Tlhartrihari  says  “ Let  the  sages  blame  01  let  them  piaise  ; lot  the  goddess  of 
foitune  come  or  let  hei  go  wheiever  she  likes;  let  death  come  to-day,  01  let  it  come 
in  hundreds  of  years  ; he  indeed  is  the  sleatly  man  who  does  not  move  one  inch  from 
the  way  of  tiuth.”  Have  you  got  that  steadfastness?  If  you  liave  these  thiee 
things,  each  one  of  3^011  will  woik  miiaclcs.  You  need  not  wiile  in  the  newspapers, 
you  need  not  go  about  lecturing,  your  very  face  will  shine.  If  3'oii  li\c  in  a cave, 
your  thoughts  will  peimeale  even  thiough  the  rock  walls,  will  go  vibialmg  all  over  the 
world  for  hundreds  of  }eais,  maybe,  until  they  will  fasten  on  to  some  biam,  and  woik 
out  there.  Such  is  the  power  of  thought,  of  sincerity,  and  of  puiily  of  puipose. 

I am  afiaicl  I am  clela)ing  you,  but  one  woid  moic.  I'his  national  ship,  my 
couiUiymen,  my  fi lends,  my  childien— this  national  ship  has  been  fci lying  millions  and 
millions  of  souls  acioss  the  w'atcis  of  life.  For  scores  of  shining  centmies  it  has  been 
plying  acioss  this  water,  and  thiough  its  agency,  millions  of  souls  have  been  taken 
to  the  other  shore,  to  blessedness.  But  to-day,  perhaps  through  your  own  fault, 
this  boat  has  become  a little  damageil,  has  spuing  a leak,  and  would  you  therefore  curse 
It  ? Is  it  lit  that  you  stand  up  and  pronounce  malediction  upon  it,  one  that  has  ilonc 
more  work  than  any  other  thing  in  the  w’oild?  If  thcie  are  holes  in  this  national 
ship,  this  society  of  ours,  wc  aie  its  children.  r.et  us  go  and  slop  the  holes.  I.et 
us  gladly  do  it  with  our  hearts’  blood,  and  if  w'e  cannot,  then  let  us  die.  We  will 
make  a plug  of  oui  biains  and  put  them  into  the  ship,  but  condemn  it,  never.  Say 
not  one  harsh  w'ord  against  this  sociel3'.  I love  it  for  its  past  gieatness.  I love  you 
all  because  you  aie  the  chiltlien  of  gods,  and  because  you  are  the  children  of  the 
glorious  foiefalhers.  How-  then  can  I cm  sc  you  I Nevei.  All  blessings  be  upon  3 011  ! 
I have  come  to  you,  my  chddicn,  to  tell  you  all  my  plans.  If  you  hear  them  I am 
ready  to  woik  with  you.  But  if  you  will  not  listen  to  them,  and  even  kick  me  out 
of  India,  I will  come  back  and  tell  3011  that  w^e  are  all  sinking  ! I am  come  now'  to 
sit  in  your  midst,  and,  if  wc  are  to  sink,  let  us  all  sink  together,  but  never  let  curses 
rise  to  our  lips. 


VEDANTA  IN  ITS  APPLICATION  TO  INDIAN  LIFE. 

I'here  is  a word  which  has  become  very  common  as  an  appellation  of  our  lace 
and  our  Religion.  The  word  “ Hindu,”  leqiiues  a little  exjjlanation  in  connection 
with  what  1 moan  by  Vcdantism.  This  word  “ Hindu  " was  the  name  that  the  ancient 
Peisians  used  to  apjily  to  the  liver  Sindhu,  Whenever  in  Sanskiit  theie  is  an  “ S ” in 
ancient  Persian  It  changes  into  H,”  so  that  “ Sindhu  ” became  “ Hindu  ” ; and  you 
a,re  all  awaie  how  the  Greeks  found  it  hard  to  pionounce  “ H ” and  diopped  it  alto- 
gether, so  that  we  became  known  as  Indians.  Now  this  woid,  “ Hindu  ” as  applied  to 
the  inhabitants  of  the  other  side  of  the  Indu.s,  \\liate\er  might  ha\e  been  its 
meaning  in  ancient  times,  lias  lost  all  its  foice  in  modern  times;  foi  all  the  people 
that  live  on  this  side  of  the  Indus  no  longci  belong  to  one  icligion.  There  are  the 
Hindus  proper,  the  IMahominedans,  the  Parsecs,  the  Chi istians,  the  Buddhists  and 
Jains.  The  woid  “ Hindu '■  in  its  liteial  sense  ought  to  include  all  these;  but  as 
signifying  the  Religion,  it  would  not  be  pioper  to  call  all  these  Hindus.  It  is  veiy 
hard,  therefore,  to  find  any  common  name  for  our  Religion,  seeing  that  this  Religion 
is  a collection,  so  to  speak,  of  vaiious  leligions,  of  various  ideas,  of  vaiious  ceic- 
monials,  and  forms,  all  gathered  together  almost  without  a name,  and  without  a chinch, 
and  without  an  organisation.  The  only  point  where,  peihajis,  all  our  sects  agiee  is, 
that  we  all  believe  in  the  Sciiptures — the  Vedas.  This  perhaps  is  ceitain,  that  no 
man  can  have  a light  to  be  called  a Hindu  who  does  not  admit  the  siipiemc  authoiily 
of  the  Vedas.  All  these  Vedas,  as  you  are  awaie,  are  divided  into  two  portions~ihe 
Karma  Kanda  and  the  Jnana  Kanda.  The  Kaima  Kanda,  includes  vaiious  saciifices 
and  ceremonials,  of  which  the  larger  part  has  become  disused  iii  the  present  age.  The 
Jnana  Kanda,  as  embodying  the  spiiitual  teachings  of  the  Vedas  known  as  the 
Upanishads  and  the  Vedanta,  have  always  been  cited  as  the  higlile.st  aiuhoiity  by  all 
our  teachers,  philosophers,  and  writers,  whether  Dualist,  or  Qualified  Monist,  or 
Monist.  Whatever  be  his  philosophy  or  sect,  eveiy  one  in  India  has  to  find  his 
authority  in  the  Upanishads.  If  he  cannot,  his  sect  would  be  beterodo.x.  'Pheie- 
fore  perhaps  the  one  name  in  modern  times  which  would  designate  evciy  Hindu 
throughout  the  land  would  be  “ Vedanlist  ” or Vdidik  ” as  you  may  put  it;  and  in 
that  sense  I always  use  the  words  “ Vedantism  ” and  “ Vedanta.”  I want  to  make  it 
a little  clearer,  for  of  late  it  has  become  the  custom  of  most  people  to  identify  the 
w'ord  Vedanta  with  the  Advaitic  system  of  the  Vedanta  Philosophy.  We  all  know 
that  Advaitism  is  only  one  branch  of  tlie  various  philosophic  systems  that  have  been 
founded  on  the  Upanishads.  The  followers  of  the  Visishudvaitic  system  have  as 
much  reverence  for  the  Upanishads  as  the  follovveis  of  the  Advaita,  and  the  Visisht- 
advaitisls  claim  as  much  authority  for  the  Vedanta  as  the  Advaitist.  So  do  the  Dualists; 
so  does  every  other  sect  in  India;  but  the  word  VeJantist  has  become  somewhat 
identified  in  the  popular  mind  with  the  word  Advaitist,  and  perhaps  with  some  reason, 
because,  although  we  have  the  Vedas  for  our  Scriptures,  we  have  Srniilis  and  Puranas, 
— subsequent  writings— to  illustrate  the  doctiincs  of  the  Vedas;  these  of  course 
have  not  the  same  weight  as  the  Vedas.  And  the  law  is,  tliat  wherever  these  Puranas 
and  Smritis  differ  fiom  any  part  of  the  Si»ti,  the  Sruti  must  be  followed  and  the 
Smriti  rejected.  Now  in  the  expositions  of  the  great  Advaitic  philosopher  Sankara, 


VEDAKTA  IK  ITS  APPLICATIOK  TO  IKDIAK  UEE 

and  the  school  founded  by  him,  we  find  most  of  the  authorities  cited  are  of  the 
Upitnishads,  very  rarely  is  an  authoiily  cited  from  the  Sinritis,  except,  perhaps,  to 
elucitlate  a point  which  could  hardly  be  found  in  the  Siutis.  On  the  othei  hand,  other 
schools  take  retu^^e  nioie  and  moie  in  the  Smntis  and  less  and  less  in  the  Srulis, 
and  as  we  go  to  ihe  more  and  more  Dualistic  sects  we  find  a piopoitionate  quantity  of 
the  Smritis  quoted,  whuh  is  out  of  all  piopoilion  to  what  wo  should  expect  fioin  a 
Vedantist.  It  is  peihaps  because  these  gave  such  predominance  to  the  Paiiiamc 
aulhoiilics,  that  the  Advaitist  came  to  be  considered  as  the  Vetlanli.st  par  excellence,  if 
1 may  say  so. 

llowevci  it  might  have  been,  the  word  Vedanta  must  cover  the  whole  ground 
of  Indian  religioui  life,  and  it  being  the  Vedas,  by  all  acceptance  it  is  the  most 
ancient  liteialure  that  we  have ; for  whatever  might  he  the  idea  of  modem  scholais,  the 
Hindus  are  not  ready  to  admit  that  parts  of  the  Vedas  wcie  wiitten  at  one  lime  and 
pal tb  were  wiitten  at  another  tune.  They  of  com se  still  hold  on  to  iheii  belief  that 
the  whole  of  the  Vedas  were  pioduced  at  the  same  time,  rather  if  I may  S{<y 
so,  that  they  were  never  pioduccd,  but  that  they  always  existed  in  the  mind  of 
the  r.ord.  This  is  what  I mean  b)  the  word  Vedanta,  that  it  covers  the  ground  of 
Dualism,  of  (^)ualificd  iNfoiiisiu  and  Advailism  in  India.  Perhaps  we  may  even  take 
in  paits  of  Ihuklhism,  ami  of  J.iinism  too,  if  they  would  come  in, — for  our  hearts  aie 
suflicienlly  laige.  Put  it  is  they  that  will  not  come  in;  we  arc  ready;  for  upon 
severe  analysis  you  will  alway.s  find  that  the  essence  of  Buddhism  was  all  boriowed 
fioni  the  same  Upanishads;  even  the  ethics,  the  so-called  gicat  and  wondeifiil  ethu.s 
of  Buddhisin,  weic  there  woiil  for  woid,  in  some  or  other  of  the  Upanishails,  and 
so  all  the  good  docliine.s  of  the  Jains  were  there,  minus  iheii  vagaiies.  In  the 
Upanishads,  also,  we  find  the  geims  of  all  the  subseiiucnt  development  of  Indian 
lelit^ious  thought.  Sometimes  it  has  been  urged  without  any  ground  whatsoever, 
that  thcic  is  no  ideal  of  Bliakti  in  the  Upanishads.  Those  that  have  been  students 
of  the  Upanishads  know  that  that  is  not  Hue  at  all.  There  is  enough  of  Bhakli  in 
eveiy  Upanishad,  if  you  will  only  seek  for  it ; but  many  other  ideas  which  are  found 
so  fully  developed  in  later  times  in  the  Puianas  and  other  Smntis  are  only  in  the 
geim  in  the  Upanishads.  The  .sketch,  the  skeleton,  was  iheie,  as  it  were.  It  was 
filled  ill  in  some  of  the  Puianas.  But  iheie  is  not  one  full-grown  Indian  ideal  that 
cannot  be  tiaced  back  to  the  .same  souice--the  Ujianishads.  ('crtaiii  ludicrous  attempts 
have  been  made  by  persons  without  much  Upanish.idic  scholarship  to  liacc  Bhakli 
to  some  fuieign  source  ; but  as  )ou  know,  those  have  all  been  piovcd  to  be  failures, 
and  all  that  you  want  of  Bhakli  is  theie,  even  in  the  Samhitas,  not  to  speak  of  the 
Upanishads —it  is  there,  worship  and  love  and  all  the  rest  of  it ; only  the  ideals  of 
Jihakli  arc  becoming  higher  and  higher.  In  the  Samhita  jiortions,  now  and  then, 
you  find  liaccs  of  a religion  of  fear  and  tribulation;  in  the  Samhitas  now  and  then 
you  find  a worshipper  quaking  before  a Varuna,  or  .some  other  god.  Now  and  then 
you  will  find  they  aie  vciy  much  tortured  by  the  idea  of  sin,  but  the  Upanishads  have 
no  place  for  the  delineation  of  these  things.  There  is  no  religion  of  fear  in  the 
Upanishads ; it  is  one  of  Love,  and  one  of  Knowledge. 

These  Upanishads  are  our  Scriptures.  They  have  been  differently  explained, 
and,  as  I have  told  you  already,  whenever  there  is  a difference  between  subsequent 
Pauianic  literature  and  the  Vedas,  the  Puranas  must  give  way.  But  it  is  at  the  same 
time  true  that  as  a practical  result  we  find  ourselves  ninety  per  cent.  Pauranic  and  ten 
per  cent.  Vaidik,  even  if  so  much  as  that.  And  we  all  find  the  most  contradictory 


72 


LECTURES  -FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


iisa;j:cs  pievailinj;  in  our  midst,  and  also  religious  opinions  prevailing  in  societies, 
which  scMicely  have  any  aulhoiily  in  the  Sciiptuies  of  tlie  Hindus ; and  in  many 
cases,  we  lead  in  books  and  see  with  astonishment,  customs  of  the  counliy  that  neither 
liave  their  authoiity  in  the  Ve<las,  nor  in  the  Smritis  or  Puranas,  but  aie  simply 
local ; and  yet  each  ignoiant  villager  thinks  that  if  that  little  local  custom  dies  out, 
he  will  no  moio  lemain  a Hindu.  In  his  mind  Vedantism  and  these  little  local 
customs  have  been  indissolubly  idenlifieil.  In  leading  the  Scnptuies  it  is  hard  for 
him  to  undeisland,  that  what  he  was  doing  has  not  the  sanction  of  the  vScripluies,  and 
that  the  giving  up  of  them  will  not  hint  him  at  all,  but  on  the  otlier  hand  will  make 
him  a better  man.  Sectindly,  there  is  the  olliei  (hnicnlty,  'I'liese  Sciiptures  of  ours 
have  been  vety  vast.  We  lead  in  the  Mahabhash}a  of  Patanjali,  that  gieat  philo- 
logical w'oik,  that  the  Sama  Veda  had  one  thousand  blanches.  Wheie  aie  they  all  ? 
Nobody  knows.  So  with  each  of  the  Vedas;  the  in.ijoi  poilion  of  these  books  has  dis- 
ajipeaicd,  and  it  is  only  the  minoi  poilion  that  icmains  to  us.  They  were  all  taken 
chaigo  of  by  jiailiciilai  families  ; and  cithei  these  families  died  out,  or  were  killed 
under  foreign  iiciseculion,  or  somehow  became  c.\tinct ; and  with  them,  that  bianch 
of  the  leai ning  of  the  Ved.is  they  took  charge  of,  became  extinct  also.  This  fact 
we  ought  to  lemeinbe',  as  it  alwa ys  foi  ms  the  sheet-anchor  in  the  h.ands  of  those 
who  want  to  i)ieach  an) thing  now,  oi  to  defend  anything,  even  against  the  Vedas. 
Whenever  in  India  theie  i.s  a discussion  between  local  custom  and  the  .Siulis,  and 
whenever  it  is  poinlcel  out  that  the  local  custom  is  ag.\mst  the  Sciijilures,  the  aigu- 
ment  that  is  foiwatded  is,  th.U  it  is  not,  that  the  custom  existed  in  the  branch  of  the 
Siutis  which  has  become  extinct ; this  has  also  been  a custom.  In  the  midst  of  all 
these  vaiymg  methods  of  leading  and  commenting  on  our  Sciiptures,  it  is  veiy 
dilhcLilt  Muleed  to  find  the  thread  th.U  luns  through  all  of  them  ; for  w’e  become  con- 
vinced at  once  th.il  there  must  be  some  common  giound  undei  lying  all  these  vaiymg 
divisions  and  sub-divisions ; iheie  must  be  haiinony,  a common  jilan,  upon  winch 
all  these  little  bits  of  buildings  have  been  consliucted,  some  basis  common  to  this 
appaiently  hopeless  m.iss  of  confusion  which  we  call  our  leligion.  (^iheiwise  it 
could  not  have  stood  .so  long,  it  could  not  liave  endured  so  long. 

Coming  to  our  commentators  again,  W'c  hnd  anolher  diHiculty.  The  Advailic 
commenlatoi,  whenever  an  Advaitic  text  comes,  pieserves  it  just  as  it  is;  but  the 
same  comiricntator,  as  soon  as  a Dualislic  text  picscnts  itself,  loiluies  it  if  he  can, 
and  biings  the  most  qneei  meaning  out  ot  it.  Sometimes  the  “Unborn”  becomes 
a “goal,”  such  aie  the  woiideifiil  changes  elfected.  'J'o  s.:’t  the  commentator,  “/lyVi” 
the  “ Unborn  ” is  cxplamctl  as  “ J/V/ ” a shc-goat.  In  the  same  way,  if  not  in  a 
still  woise  fashion,  the  texts  aie  handled  by  the  Dualislic  comrnenUior.  Kvery 
Dualislic  text  IS  piesci  ved,  and  cveiy  text  that  speaks  of  non-dualistic  philosophy,  is 
tortuicd  m any  fashion  he  likes.  'Plus  .Sanskiit  langn.age  is  .so  mtiicatc,  the  .Sanskrit 
of  the  Vedas  IS  so  ancient,  and  the  Sanskiit  philology  .so  peifcct  that  any  amount 
of  discussion  can  be  earned  on  forages  in  regard  to  the  meaning  of  one  word. 
If  a Pandit  takes  it  into  his  head,  he  can  render  anybody’s  jii.altlc  into  coirect 
Sanskiit  by  foice  of  aigument  and  quotation  of  texts  and  lules.  These  are  the 
difliculties  in  our  way  of  undei  standing  the  Uiianishads.  It  was  given  to  me  to  live 
with  a man  who  was  as  aident  a Dualist,  as  ardent  an  Advaitist,  as  aident  a lihakta, 

as  a Jnani.  And  living  w'ilh  this  man,  fust  pul  it  into  my  liead  to  understand  the 
Upaiusliads  and  the  texts  of  the  Scriptures  from  an  independent  and  better  basis  than 
by  blmdl)  following  the  comincntalors ; and  in  my  opinion,  and  in  my  rcscaichcs. 


VEDAl^TA  IN  ITS  APPIICATION  TO  INDIAN  LIPS  7} 

I came  to  the  conclusion,  that  these  texts  are  not  at  all  contradictory.  So  we  need 
have  no  fear  of  text-tortuiing  at  all  I The  texts  are  beautiful,  aye,  they  are  most 
wonderful,  and  they  are  not  contradictoiy,  but  wondeifully  harmonious,  one  idea 
leading  up  to  the  otlier.  Bui  the  one  fact  I found  is,  that  in  all  the  Upanishads,  they 
begin  with  Dualistic  ideas,  witli  woiship  and  all  that,  and  end  with  a grand  rtourish 
of  Advaitic  ideas. 

Therefore,  I now  lind,  in  the  light  of  this  man's  life,  that  the  Dualist  and  the 
Advaitist  need  not  light  each  olhci  ; each  has  a place,  and  a great  place  in  the 
national  life;  the  Dualist  must  remain,  for  he  is  as  much  pail  and  pai cel  of  the 
national  leligious  life  as  the  Ad\auist , one  cannot  exist  without  the  other  ; one  is  the 
fulfilment  of  the  other ; one  is  the  building,  the  other  is  the  top  ; the  one  the  root,  the 
other  the  fruit,  and  so  on.  Theiefore,any  attempt  to  torture  the  texts  of  the  Upanishads 
appears  to  me  very  lidiculous.  I begin  to  find  out  that  the  language  is  wonderful; 
apait  tiorn  all  its  meiits  as  the  greatest  philosophy,  apart  from  its  wonderful  merit 
as  theology,  as  showing  the  path  of  salvaliori  of  mankind,  the  Upanishadic  literature 
IS  the  most  wondc'ihil  painting  of  sublimity  that  the  world  has.  Here,  conies  out 
m full  foice  that  individuality  of  the  human  mind,  that  introspective  intuitive  Hindu 
niiiid.  We  have  paintings  of  snblimtly  elsewhere  in  all  nations,  but  almost  without 
cMeplioM,  yon  will  (iiui  that  their  ideal  is  to  grasp  the  sublime  in  the  muscles.  Take 
foi  instance,  .Milion,  Dante,  Homer  or  any  of  the  Western  poets.  There  are  wonder- 
fully sublime*  ji.issages  in  them,  hut  there,  it  is  always  grasping  for  the  senses,  the 
muscles  getting  the  ideal  of  infinite  expansion,  the  infinite  of  space.  We  find  the 
same  atlernpls  imule  iii  the  .Samhita  poition  You  know  .some  of  those  wondeiful 
liiks,  wfieie  creation  fs  desetihed  , the  very  heights  of  expression  of  the  sublime  in 
expansion,  and  the  nihniic  in  space  ate  attained  ; but  they  found  out  very  soon  that  the 
Infinite  cannot  be  leached  ni  that  way,  that  even  infinite  space  and  expansion,  and 
inlinilt*  exieinal  natuie  could  not  ex|)ress  the  ideas  that  w-ere  struggling  to  find 
expression  in  then  mmds,  and  so  they  fell  back  upon  othci  explanations.  The 
language  became  new'  in  the  Upanishads;  U is  almost  negative,  it  is  sometimes 
chaotic,  soinetime.s  taking  }ou  beyond  the  scn^es,  pointing  out  to  you  something 
which  you  cannot  giasp,  w'hich  you  cannot  .sense,  and  at  the  same  time  you  feel  certain 
that  It  IS  theie.  What  p.issage  ni  the  world  can  compare  with  this.^— ?r  rR"  >Trf?r 
»r  l ‘‘  ’I'heie  the  sun  cannot  illumine,  nor 

the  moon,  nor  llie  stais,  the  Hash  of  lightning  cannot  illumine  the  place,  what 
to  speak  of  tins  mortal  lire."  Again,  where  can  you  find  a more  perfect  expres- 
sion of  the  whole  philosophy  of  the  world,  the  gist  of  what  the  Hindus  ever 
thought,  the  whole  dream  of  human  salvation,  painted  in  language  more  wonder- 
ful, in  figuie  moie  niaivollous  than  this? 

flj  ^ \ 

upon  the  same  iiee  there  aie  two  biids  ot  beautiful  plumage,  mo.st  friendly  to 
each  other,  one  eating  the  fruits,  the  other  sitting  there  calm  and  silent  without  eating; 
the  one  on  the  lower  branch  eating  .sweet  and  bitter  fruits  in  turn  and  becoming 
happy  and  unhappy,  but  the  other  one  on  the  top,  calm  and  majestic  ; he  eats  neither 
sweet  nor  bittei  fiuits,  cares  neither  fc)r  happiness  nor  misery,  immersed  in  his  ow’n 
glory.  This  is  the  picture  of  the  human  soul.  Man  is  eating  the  sweet  and  bitter 


74 


LEC7CRES  FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


frmts  of  this  life,  pursuing  gold,  pursuing  his  senses,  pursuing  the  vanities  of  life, 
hopelessly,  niavlly  caiecmig  he  goes.  In  other  places  the  Upanishads  have  com- 
pared the  human  soul  to  the  cliaiioteer,  and  the  senses  to  the  mad  hoiscs  unrestrained. 
Such  is  the  caieer  of  men  pursuing  the  vanities  of  life,  childien  dreaming  golden 
di earns  only  to  find  that  they  are  but  \ain,  and  old  men  chewing  the  cud  of  their 
past  deeds,  and  yet  not  knowing  how  to  get  out  of  this  nct-w’ork.  7'his  is  the  world. 
Yet  in  the  life  of  every  one  there  come  golden  moments  ; in  the  midst  of  the  deepest 
soiiows,  nay,  of  the  deepest  joys  iheie  come  moments  w'hen,  a pait  of  the  cloud 
lhal  hides  the  sun-light  moves  away  as  it  weic,  and  w'e  catch  a glimpse,  in  sjjite  of 
oursehes,  of  sometlnng  beyond, — away,  aw'ay  beyond  the  life  of  the  senses  ; awMy, 
away  he)ond  its  vanities,  its  joys  and  its  sorrows;  away,  away  beyond  nature,  in  our 
imaginations  of  happiness  here  or  hcieafter ; away  beyond  all  thirst  for  gold,  or  for 
fame,  oi  for  name,  or  for  [losterily.  Man  stops  for  a moment  at  this  glimpse,  and  sees 
the  other  bud  calm  ami  maiestic,  eating  neither  sweet  nor  biltei  fiuils,  but  lmmcl^ed 
in  Ins  own  gloiy,  scll-coiUtnt,  self-satisfied.  As  the  Gita  says, 

I ^ ^ ll  “He  whose  devotion  is  to  the 

Atman,  he  who  does  not  want  anything  beyond  Atman,  he  who  has  become  satisfied  in 
the  Atman,  w'liat  woik  is  theic  foi  him  to  do  Why  should  he  drudge  ? Man  catches 
a glimjise,  then  again  he  foigeis,  and  goes  on  eating  the  sweet  and  bitlei  fruits  of  life, 
and  again  he  foigels ; jxnhajis  after  a time,  he  catches  another  glimpse,  and  the 
lower  bud  goes  ncaici  and  neaier  to  the  higher  bud  as  blow's  after  blow’saie  leceived  ; 
if  he  be  fortunate  to  receive  hard  knocks,  then  he  comes  nearer  and  nearer  to  his 
companion  the  other  bud,  his  life,  his  fiiend,  and  as  he  ajipioaches  him  he  finds  that 
the  light  fiom  the  higher  bud  is  placing  lound  his  owai  plumage,  and  as  he  comes 
neaicr  and  neaici,  lo  ! the  liansformalion  IS  going  on.  The  neaier  and  neaier  he 
comes,  he  finds  himself  melting  away,  as  it  we-rc,  until  he  has  eniiiely  disnppcared.  He 
did  not  really  exist , it  was  but  the  reflection  of  the  other  biid,  who  was  there  calm 
and  majestic  amidst  the  moving  leaves.  It  was  all  his  glory,  that  uppei  biid’s.  He 
remains  without  fear;  perfectly  satisfied,  calmly  serene.  In  this  figure,  the  Upani- 
shads take  you  flora  the  Dualislic  lo  the  utmost  Advailic  conception. 

Endless  examples  can  be  cited,  but  w'e  have  no  lime  in  thus  lecture  to  do  that,  or 
to  show  the  marvellous  poetry  of  the  Ujcinishads,  the  painting  of  the  sublime,  the 
grand  conceptions.  Hut  one  other  idea  I must  note,  that  the  language  and  the 
thought  and  cvcrylliing  come  diicct,  they  fall  upon  you  like  a swoid-blade,  strong  as 
the  blows  of  a hammer  they  come.  Theie  is  no  mistaking  theii  meanings.  Every 
lone  of  that  music  is  firm  and  produces  its  full  efTect ; no  gj  iations,  no  mad  words,  no 
intricacies  in  which  the  brain  is  lost.  No  signs  of  degiadalion  are  there  ; — no  attempts 
at  too  much  allegorising,  loo  much  piling  of  adjectives  after  adjectives,  making  it 
more  and  more  intricate,  till  the  whole  of  the  sense  is  lost,  and  the  biain  becomes 
giddy,  and  man  does  not  know  his  w^ay  out  from  the  maze  of  that  literature.  There 
was  none  of  lhal  yet.  If  it  be  human  litciaturc,  it  must  be  the  production  of  a lace 
which  has  not  yet  lost  any  of  its  national  vigour. 

Suength,  strength  is  what  the  Upanishads  speak  lo  me  from  every  page. 
This  is  the  one  great  thing  lo  remember ; it  has  been  the  one  great  lesson 
I have  been  taught  in  my  life;  sliength,  it  says,  strength,  oh  man,  be  not  w^eak. 
Are  theie  no  human  weaknesses,  says  man?  There  are,  say  the  Upanishads, 
but  will  more  weakness  heal  them,  would  you  try  lo  wash  diit  with  dirt  ? Will 
Bin  cure  sin,  w'cakness  cure  weakness  ? Strength,  oh  man,  strength,  say  the 


DA. VTA  W ITS  APPLICATION  TO  INDIAN  LIFE 


75 


Upanishads,  stand  up  and  be  strong ; aye,  it  is  the  only  liteiatuie  in  the  woild  where 
you  find  the  word,  “ “ fearless,'’  used  again  and  again ; in  no  other  scnpiure 

in  the  world  is  this  adjective  applied  either  to  God  or  to  man.  “Ahhih  *'  “ feaile.ss  1” 
And  m my  mind  rises  from  the  past,  the  vision  of  the  great  Emperor  of  the  West, 
Alexander  the  Great,  and  1 see,  as  u were  in  a pictine,  thegieat  monaich  standing  on 
the  banks  of  the  Indus,  talking  to  one  of  our  Sannyasins  in  tlie  forest;  the  old  man 
he  was  talking  to,  perhaps  naked,  staik  naked,  silting  upon  a block  of  stone,  and  the 
Emperor  astonished  at  his  wisdom  templing  him  wilh  gold  and  honoi,  to  come  over 
to  Gieece.  And  this  man  smiles  at  his  gold,  and  smiles  at  Ins  temptations,  and 
lefnscs,  and  then  the  Empeioi  standing  on  his  authority  as  an  Eanpeioi,  sa)s,  “I 
will  kill  you,  if  you  do  not  come,”  and  the  man  buists  into  a laugh,  and  says, 

“ You  never  told  such  a falsehood  in  your  life,  as  you  tell  just  now.  Who  can  kill 
me  } Me  you  kill,  Kmperoi  of  the  mateiial  world  ' Nevei  ^ Eoi  I am  .Sjiint  uiiboin  and 
undecaying,  never  was  I born  and  ne\er  tlo  1 die,  I am  the  Infnnte,  the  OmnipieseiU, 
the  Omniscient;  and  you  kill  me,  child  that  youaic!"  That  is  strength,  that  is 
stiengtli  ’ And  the  moie  I lead  the  Upanishads,  my  fiiends,  mv  countiymeri,  the 
more  I weep  for  you,  for  ihciein  is  the  gieat  piactical  application.  Siiengih,  strength 
for  us.  What  we  need  is  slieuglh,  who  will  give  us  siiength  ? Theie  are  thousands 
to  w'eaken  us,  and  of  stories  wc  have  had  enough  Every  one  of  oui  Puran.is  if  you 
press  It,  gives  out  stcnics  enough  to  fill  ihiee-fouiths  of  the  Iibiaiies  of  the  woihL 
E\en thing  that  can  weaken  us  as  a lacc  we  have  had  loi  the  last  tliou'^and  yeais. 
It  seems  as  if  during  tliat  period  the  national  lile  had  this  one  end  in  view,  7>iz.,  how  to 
make  us  weaker  and  weaker,  till  we  have  become  leal  earth-worms,  crawling  at  the 
feel  of  oveiy  one  w'ho  daies  to  put  his  fool  on  us.  Tbciefoie  my  fi  lends,  as  one  of 
your  blood,  as  one  that  lives  and  dies  with  )Ou,  let  me  tell  you  that  wc  want  .slicnglh, 
stiength,  and  every  time  sticnglh  And  the  Upanisliads  aic  the  gical  mine  of 
siiength.  Thciein  lies  stiength  enough  to  invigoiale  the  whole  woild  ; the  whole  woild 
can  be  vivified,  made  strong,  energised  thioiigh  them.  They  will  call  with  trumpet 
voice  upon  the  weak,  die  miserable,  and  the  down-tiodtlen  ol  all  laccs,  all  ciccds, 
and  all  sects,  to  stand  on  their  feet  and  be  free  , ficcdom,  physical  fieedom,  mental 
fieedom,  and  spiiilual  fieedom  aie  the  watchv.oids  of  tlie  Upanisliads. 

Aje,  this  is  tlae  one  .Sciiptuie  in  the  woild,  of  all  othcis,  that  does  not  talk  of  salva- 
tion, but  of  fieedom.  Be  fiee  from  the  bonds  oi  nature,  be  free  fiom  weakness  ! And  it 
shows  to  you  that  you  have  this  freedom  already  in  you.  That  is  another  pcculiaiity  of 
Its  teachings.  You  are  aDvaitist;  nevermind,  you  have  got  to  admit  that  by  it.s  veiy 
natuie  the  soul  is  peifect;  only  by  certain  actions  of  the  soul  has  it  become  contuicled. 
Indeed  Ramanuja's  tlieoiy  of  contraction  and  (^xpansion  is  exactly  what  the  modern 
evolutionists  call  Evolution  and  Atavism,  The  soul  goes  back,  becomes  conliacted 
as  it  were,  its  pow-ers  become  potential,  and  by  good  deeds  and  good  thoughts  it 
expands  again  and  reveals  its-  natuial  perfection.  With  the  Advailist  the  one  difference 
is,  that  he  admits  evolution  in  nature  and  not  in  the  soul.  Suppose  there  is  a screen, 
and  there  is  a small  hole  In  the  scieen.  I am  a man  standing  behind  the  screen 
and  looking  at  this  giand  assembly.  1 can  only  sec  vciy  few  faces  here  Suppose  the 
hole  increases  ; as  it  increases  moie  and  moie,  all  this  assembly  is  revealed  to  me, 
until  the  hole  has  become  identified  with  the  screen,  "llieie  is  nothing  between  }ou 
and  me  m this  case  ; neither  )Oli  clianged  noi  1 change.l  . all  the  change  was  in  the 
screen.  You  were  the  same  from  fii-t  to  last;  only  the  screen  changed.  This 
is  the  Advaiiist’s  position  with  regard  to  Evolution  evolution  of  nature  and  mani* 


76 


LECTURES— FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


festation  of  the  Self  within.  Not  that  the  Self  can  by  any  means  be  made  to  con- 
tiact  It  is  unchangeable,  the  Infinite  One.  It  was  coveied,  as  it  were,  with  a veil, 
the  veil  of  .Alaya,  and  as  this  Maya  veil  becomes  thinner  and  thinner,  the  inborn, 
JKitnral  j^loiv  of  the  Soul  comes  out  and  becomes  inoie  manifest.  This  is  the  one 
gieal  (lociiine  which  the  woild  is  wailing  to  leant  fioin  India.  Whatever  they  may 
talk,  howc\ci  thev  may  try  to  Itoast,  they  will  find  out  day  after  day,  that  no  society  can 
stand  without  admitting  this.  Do  you  not  find  how  cveit thing  is  being  levolu- 
tioniscd  } Do  you  not  see  how  it  w’as  the  custom  to  take  for  granted,  that  every- 
thing is  wicked  until  it  pioxcs  itself  good  In  education,  in  punishing  criminals, 
in  tie.tiing  lunatics,  in  the  tieatincnt  of  common  diseases  even,  that  w^as  the  old 
law'.  What  IS  the  modem  law  ? 'J'hc  modern  huv  says,  the  body  itself  is  healthy; 
it  cures  diseases  of  its  owm  natuic.  Med'cine  can  at  the  best  but  help  the  storing 
up  of  the  l>est  m the  body.  What  sa}  sit  of  criminals?  It  takes  for  gianled  that 
how'cyei  low  a ciiininal  may  be,  iheic  is  still  the  divinity  w'lthin,  w'liich  docs  not 
change,  and  we  must  Iteal  ciiminals  atcoidingly.  All  these  things  are  now  changing, 
and  rcfoi  inatoiies  and  penitentiaries  aie  established.  So  with  eveivlhing  ; consciously 
oi  unconsciously,  that  Indian  idea  of  the  duinity  w'illnn  eveiy  one  is  expressing  itself 
even  in  othei  countries.  And  in  youi  books  is  the  explanation,  which  othci  nations 
have  to  accept,  'i'be  tiealmeiit  of  one  man  to  another  will  be  entiiely  revolutionised, 
and  these  old  old  ideas  of  pointing  to  the  weakness  of  mankind  w ill  have  to  go. 
They  will  have  iccejved  then  death-blow  within  this  ceiituiy.  Now  people  may 
stand  up  and  criticise  us.  1 have  been  ciiticised  fiom  one  end  of  the  w'oild  to  the 
other,  as  one  wdio  jircaches  the  diabolical  idea  that  thoie  is  no  sin  ! Veiy  good. 
The  clescendaiUs  of  these  very  men  will  bless  me  as  the  preachei  of  virtue,  and  not 
of  sin.  I am  the  teacher  of  virtue,  not  of  sin.  1 gloiy  in  being  the  preachei  of 
light,  and  not  of  daikness. 

7’hc  second  great  idea  which  the  woild  is  waiting  to  receive  from  our  Upani- 
shads  is  the  solidaiily  of  this  unlveise.  The  old  lines  of  demarcation  and  differentia- 
tion are  vanishing  lapidly.  Electricity  and  steam-power  aie  placing  the  difTerent  paits 
of  the  world  in  iniei communication  w'lth  each  other,  and,  as  a result,  w'c  - Hindus  no 
longei  say  that  every  countiy  beyond  our  own  land  is  peopled  with  demons  and  hobgob- 
lins ; nor  do  the  people  of  Christian  countiles  say  that  India  is  only  peopled  by 
cannibals  and  savages.  When  we  go  out  of  our  country,  w'e  find  the  same  bi other- 
man,  with  the  same  strong  hand  to  help,  with  the  same  lips  to  say  god-speed,  and 
sometimes  they  are  hettei  than  in  the  country  in  which  we  are  horn.  When  they 
come  here,  they  find  the  same  brotherhood,  the  same  cheer,  the  same  god-speed. 
Our  Upanishads  say  that  the  cause  of  all  misery  is  ignorance  ; and  that  is  perfectly 
true  when  applied  to  every  state  of  life,  either  social  or  spiiitual.  It  is  ignorance  that 
makes  us  hate  each  other,  it  is  through  ignorance  that  we  do  not  know,  and  do  not 
love  each  other.  As  soon  as  we  come  to  know  each  other  love  comes,  must  come, 
for,  are  we  not  one  ? I’hus  we  find  solidarity  coming  in  spite  of  itself.  Even  in 
Politics  and  Sociology,  problems  that  were  only  national  twenty  years  ago  can  no 
moie  be  solved  on  national  grounds  only.  They  aie  assuming  huge  proportions, 
gigantic  shapes.  They  can  only  be  solved  when  looked  at  in  the  broader  light  of 
international  grounds.  International  organisations,  inlei nalional  combinations,  inter- 
national laws  aie  the  ciy  of  the  day.  That  shows  the  solidarity.  In  science,  every 
day  they  arc  coming  to  a .smular  brt'ad  view  of  matter.  You  speak  of  matter,  the 
whole  universe  as  one  mass,  one  ocean  of  matter,  in  which  you  and  I,  the  sun  and 


77 


VEDANTA  IN  ITS  APPLICATION  TO  INDIAN  LIFE. 

the  moon,  and  everything,  else,  arc  bill  the  names  of  difTcrent  little  whiilpools  and 
nothing  moic.  Mentally  speaking  it  is  one  uniwrsal  otean  of  thought,  in  which 
you  and  I aie  siinilai  little  whiilpools,  aiui  as  spnit  it  inoveth  not.  it  changeth  not. 
It  is  the  One  Unchangeable,  Unbioken,  Ilomngeneoiis  Atman,  d'hc  ci)  for 
inoiality  is  coming  also,  aiul  that  is  to  be  found  in  oiii  l.ooks.  'I’he  explanation  of 
morality,  the  fountain  of  ethics,  that  also  the  woi Id  w'ants  : and  that  it  will  get  here. 
What  do  we  W'ant  in  India  If  fmeigneis  «ant  these  things,  we  want  them  twenty 
times  more.  Because,  in  spite  of  the  giealness  of  the  Upanishads.  ni  spiie  of  our 
boasted  ancestiy  of  sages,  coniitaied  i<*  nianv  oihei  laces,  ] must  tell  > on  that  we 
aie  wCcak,  \ei}  weak.  iMist  of  all,  is  otii  plnsical  weakness  'I'hat  jilnsital  weak- 
ness is  the  cause  at  least  of  onc-lhnd  of  otu  miseiics  We  aic  la/\  , weiannot 
work;  w-e  cannot  combine  : w'e  do  not  Io\e  oath  oilier  wc  aie  inlmisel)  selfish,  not 
three  of  us  can  come  logcthei  wiihont  hating  each  othei.  wilhoiU  benigljealous  of  each 
other.  That  is  the  state  in  wliuh  we  aie.  -lio])elessl\  disoiganised  mobs,  immensely 
selfish,  fighting  each  other  foi  ccnimie.s  as  to  w hellier  a ceiiain  mail;  is  to  be  put 
on  oui  forehead  this  wa\  oi  that  wa\  . willing  \olmnes  and  volumes  upon  such 
momentous  questions  as  to  wlielhei  the  look  of  a man  spcnls  m^  food  oi  not ' This 
we  have  been  doing  foi  the  last  few  cenimics  We  tannot  expect  aintlimg  high 
fiom  a race  whose  whole  biain  cneigv  has  been  occupied  in  such  womlei fnlh  beauti- 
ful pioblcins  and  icscaiches'  And  aie  we  not  ashamed  of  iniiselves?  Ave,  some- 
times wc  aie,  but  though  w'c  think  these  things  liisolons.  wc  cannot  give  them  up. 
We  think  inan\  things  and  nevei  do  ihem ; paiioi-hke,  thinking  has  become  a habit 
with  us,  and  never  doing.  What  is  the  cause  of  that  .=*  fMnsual  weakness.  This 

soil  of  weak  biain  is  notable  to  do  am  thing  ; we  must  strengthen  it.  Fir.st  of  all, 

our  young  men  must  he  strong  Religion  will  come  afleiwaid.s.  Be  stiong  my 
young  friends,  that  is  ni)  advice  to  v>u.  You  will  he  nearei  to  llea\cn  thiongh  foot- 
ball than  thiongh  the  study  of  the  Ciia.  These  are  bold  w-oids,  but  1 have  to  say  them, 
foi  1 love  you.  I know  where  the  shoe  pinches.  I have  gamed  a lillle  cxpcnience. 
You  will  undei stand  Gita  bettei  with  youi  biceps,  youi  muscles  a little  stionger. 
You  will  undeistand  the  might)’  genius  and  the  mighty  stiength  of  Kiislina  better 
with  a little  of  stiong  blootl  in  you.  \'ou  will  imdeisland  the  Upanishads  belter 

and  the  glory  of  the  Atman,  w'hen  your  body  stands  linn  upon  )oiu  feet,  and  you 

feel  youi  selves  as  men.  Thus  wc  have  to  apply  the.se  to  oui  needs. 

People  get  disgusted  many  times  at  my  jneaching  Advaili^m  1 do  not  mean 
to  pi  each  Advaili.sm,  oi  Dvaiiism,  oi  am  in  the  wnild.  The  only  mw  tiiat  we 
require  now  is  this  wonderful  idea  of  the  soul  — il.s  eternal  might,  its  eternal  stiength, 
its  eternal  purity,  and  Us  eternal  peifecUon  If  1 h.ad  a child  1 would  fiom  its  vet)  biith 
begin  to  tell  it,  '•  Thou  art  the  Pmc  One.'  Yon  have  read  in  one  of  the  Pm  anas 

that  beautiful  story  of  Queei^  MarUlasa,  bow  as  soon  as  she  has  a child  she  puts  her 

baby  with  her  own  hands  in  the  ciadle,  and  how  as  the  ciadle  locks  to  and  fio,  she 
begins  to  sing,  “ Thou  ail  the  Pine  One,  tlic  Stainless,  Sinless,  the  IMighty  One,  the 
Great  One."  Aye,  there  is  iniich  m ihal.  Feel  tliat  von  aie  gi eat  ami  )ou  become 

great.  What  did  I get  as  my  expciicncc  all  ovet  the  w’oild,  is  ihe  qiic'-tiou.  They 

may  talk  about  .sinneis;  and  if  all  F.nglishmen  real!)  believed  that  the)  wcie  sinneis, 
Englishmen  would  be  no  bolter  than  the  Negiocs  in  central  Afiica.  God  bless  them 
that  they  do  not  believe  it  ! On  the  olhoi  hand,  the  F.nglishman  believes  he  is  born 
the  lord  of  the  world.  He  believes  he  is  great  and  can  do  anything  in  the  woild; 
if  he  wants  to  go  to  the  sun  or  the  moon,  he  believes  he  can,  and  that  makes  him 


LECrURKSi^FnOM  COLOMBO  TO  AT.MOBA 


78 

great.  If  he  had  believed  his  priests  that  he  was  a poor  miserable  sinner,  going  tQ 
be  b.iibccued  thiough  all  eternity,  he  would  not  be  the  same  Englishman  that  he  is 
to-day.  So  I find  in  every  nation  that,  in  spile  of  priests  and  superstition,  the  divine 
within  lives  and  assei Is  Itself.  We  have  lost  faith.  VV’ould  you  believe  me,  we  have 
less  faith  than  the  lMii>lishman  and  woman,  a thousand  times  less  faith  ! These  are 
plain  wools,  but  I .say  it,  I cannot  help  it.  Don’t  you  .see  how  Englishmen  and 
women,  when  they  catch  oui  ideals,  become  mad  as  it  were,  and  although  they  aie  the 
luling  class,  they  come  to  India  to  preach  oui  own  religion  notwithstanding  the  jeers 
and  liiliciile  of  their  own  countrymen  ? How  many  of  you  could  do  that?  And  why 
cannot  you  do  that  ? Do  you  not  know  it  ? You  know  inoie  than  they  do  ; you  are 
more  wise  than  is  good  for  you,  that  is  yoiii  dilhcully  ! Simj)!)’  because  your  blood  is 
only  like  waiei,  youi  biain  is  sloughing,  your  body  is  weak  ! You  must  change  the 
body.  Physical  weakness  is  the  cause  and  nothing  else.  You  have  talked  of 
reforms,  of  ideals,  and  all  these  things,  foi  the  last  bundled  years,  and  when  it  comes 
to  piaclice,  you  are  not  to  be  fouml  anvwbeic; — till  you  have  disgusted  the  whole 
woild,  and  the  vciy  name  of  Refoim  is  a thing  of  liilitule  ! And  what  is  the  cause  ? 
Do  you  not  know  You  know  too  well.  The  only  cause  is  that  you  arc  weak, 
weak,  weak,  your  body  is  weak,  your  mind  is  weak,  )ou  have  no  faith  m yourselves  I 
Centuiies  and  centuiies,  a thousand  years  of  c iiisliing  tvianny  of  castes,  and  kings, 
and  foieigneis,  and  your  own  people,  have  taken  out  all  your  strength,  my  hrethien  1 
Yoiir  backbone  is  broken,  you  are  like  down-liodden  woiins ' Who  will  give  you 
strength?  Lot  me  toll  )ou,  .sliongth,  slienglh,  is  what  we  want.  And  the  fiist 
step  in  getting  strengih  is  to  uphold  the  Hpanishads,  and  believe  that  " I am  the 
Soul.”  iMe  the  swoid  cannot  cut;  no  weapons  pioicc;  me  the  fne  cannot  bum;  me 
the  ail  cannot  diy  , I am  the  Omnipotent,  lam  the  Omniscient.”  So  repeat  these 
blessed  saving  words.  Do  not  say  we  are  weak;  wc  can  do  anything  and  everything. 
What  can  we  not  do,  everything  can  be  done  by  us;  we  all  have  the  same  gloiious 
soul,  let  us  believe  in  it.  Have  faith,  as  Nachikcta.  At  the  Lime  of  his  father's 
s.aci dice,  faith  came  unto  Nachikcla  . aye,  1 wi.',!!  that  faith  would  come  to  each  of 

you;  and  eveiy  one  of  you  would  stand  up  a giant,  a woild-movcr  with  a gigantic 
intellect,  an  infinite  Ood  in  every  respect;  that  is  vvliat  I want  yon  to  become.  This 
is  the  slienglh  that  you  get  from  the  Upanishads,  this  is  the  faith  that  you  get  fiom 
there. 

Aye,  but  it  was  only  for  the  Sann}asin!  Raha\Ya  1 The  Upanishads  were 
in  the  hands  of  the  Sannyasin ; he  went  into  the  forest  ! Sankara  was  a little  kind, 
and  says  even  Gi  ihiuthas  may  study  the  Upanishads,  it  will  do  them  good  ; it  will 
not  hurt  them.  But  still  the  idea  is  that  the  Upanishads  talked  only  of  the  foiest 
life  of  the  recluse.  As  I told  you  the  other  day,  the  only  commentary,  the 
authoritative  commentary  on  the  Vedas,  has  been  made  once  and  for  all  by  Him 
w'ho  inspired  the  Vedas,  by  Kiishna  in  the  Gita.  It  is  there  for  every  one  in  every 
occupation  of  life.  These  conceptions  of  the  Vedanta  must  come  out,  must  remain 
not  only  in  the  foiest,  not  only  in  the  cave,  but  they  must  come  to  work  out  at  the 
Bar  and  the  Bench,  in  the  Pulpit,  and  in  the  cottage  of  the  poor  man,  with  the 
fishermen  that  are  catching  fish,  and  with  the  students  that  are  studying.  They  call 
to  every  man,  woman,  and  child,  whatever  be  their  occupation,  wherever  they 
may  be;  and  w-hat  is  there  to  fear'  How  can  the  fishermen  and  all  the.se  carry 
out  the  ideals  of  the  Upanishads  ? The  way  has  been  shown.  It  is  infinite  ; religion 
is  infinite,  none  can  go  beyond  it ; and  whatever  you  do  sincerely,  is  good  for  you. 


VEDAXTA  IX  ITS  APPLICATION  TO  INDIAN  LIFE 


n 


Even  the  least  tiling  well  done  brings  marvellous  results ; therefore  let  every 
one  do  what  little  he  can.  If  the  fisheunan  thinks  that  he  is  the  spirit,  he  will  be  a 
better  fishertnau  ; if  the  student  thinks  he  is  spiiit,  he  will  be  a better  student.  If 
the  lawyer  thinks  that  he  is  spirit,  he  will  be  a better  lawyer,  and  so  on,  and  the 
result  will  be  that  the  castes  will  remain  for  ever.  It  is  in  the  nature  of  society 
to  form  itself  into  moups;  and  what  will  go  will  be  these  privileges  I Caste  is 
a natural  order.  I c.u\  perlorm  one  duty  in  social  life,  and  )ou  another;  }ou  can 
govern  a country,  and  I can  mend  a pair  of  old  shoes,  but  that  is  no  reason  why  you 
are  greater  than  I,  foi  can  )0u  mend  my  shoes?  Can  I govern  the  countiy?  I am 
clevei  in  mending  shoes,  you  aie  clever  in  reading  Vedas,  but  that  is  no  reason  why 
you  should  li ample  on  my  head  ; why  if  one  commils  murdci  should  he  be  praised, 
and  if  another  steals  an  apple  why  .should  he  be  hanged  ! This  will  have  to  go. 
Caste  is  good.  That  is  the  only  natural  way  of  solving  life.  Men  nuistfoim 
themselves  into  gioups,  and  you  cannot  get  lid  of  that.  Wherevci  yon  go  there  will 
be  caste.  But  that  does  not  mean  that  thcie  should  be  these  piivileges.  They 
should  be  knocked  on  the  head.  If  you  teach  Vedanta  to  the  fisheunan,  he  will  say, 

I am  as  good  a man  as  you,  I am  a fisherman,  you  aie  a philosopher,  but  I have 
the  .saihe  God  in  me,  as  you  have  in  you.  And  that  is  ivhat  we  want,  no  privilege 
foi  any  one,  equal  chances  for  all  ; let  ever)  one  be  taught  that  the  Divine  is  within, 
and  every  one  will  work  out  his  own  salvation. 

Liberty  is  the  first  condition  of  giowth.  It  is  wiong,  a thousand  times 
wrong,  if  any  of  you  (hues  to  say  ‘I  will  woik  out  the  salvation  of  this  woman 
or  child.’  T am  asked  again  and  again,  what  I think  of  the  widow  pioblem 
and  w’hat  1 think  of  the  woman  question.  Let  me  answer  once  for  all, — am 
1 a widow  that  you  ask  me  that  nonsense.  Am  I a woman,  that  lOii  ask  me 
that  question  again  and  again?  Who  ate  you  to  solve  women’s  pioblems  ? Are 
you  the  Lord  God  that  )ou  should  rule  ovci  cvciy  widow  and  every  woman  ? 
Hands  off  ! They  will  .solve  theii  own  problems.  Oh  tyianls,  attempting  to  think 
that  you  can  do  anything  for  any  one!  Hands  off!  'I’he  Divine  will  look  after 
all.  Who  aie  you  to  as.surne  that  }ou  know  everything?  How' dare  you  think,  oh 
blasphemers,  that  you  have  the  right  over  God?  For  don’t  you  know  that  cveuy  soul 
is  the  soul  of  God?  Mind  youi  own  Karma,  a load  of  Kaima  is  there  in  you  to 
workout.  Your  nation  may  put  you  upon  a pedestal,  ) our  society  may  cheer  you 
up  to  the  skies,  and  fools  may  piaise  you ; but  He  sleeps  not,  and  ictiibution  will  be 
sure  to  follow,  here  or  hereafter. 

Look  upon  every  man,  woman  and  every  one  as  God.  You  cannot  help 
anyone;  you  can  only  serve;  serve  the  children  of  the  T.ord,  serve  the  Lord 
Himself,  if  you  have  the  piivilege.  If  the  Lord  grants  that  you  can  help  any 
one  of  His  children,  blessed  you  are  ; do  not  think  too  much  of  yourselves.  Blessed 
you  are  that  that  privilege  was  given  to  you,  when  otheis  had  it  not.  Do  it 
only  as  a worship.  I should  see  God  in  the  poor,  and  it  is  for  my  salvation  that 
I go  and  worship  them.  The  poor  and  the  miserable  are  for  our  salvation,  so  that 
we  may  serve  the  Lord,  coming  in  the  shape  of  the  diseased,  coming  in  the  shape  of 
the  lunatic,  the  leper,  and  the  sinner ! Bold  are  my  words,  and  let  me  repeat  that 
it  is  the  greatest  privilege  in  our  life  that  we  are  allowed  to  serve  the  Lord  in  all 
these  shapes.  Give  up  the  idea  that  by  ruling  over  others,  you  can  do  any  good  to 
them.  But  you  can  do  just  the  same  as  in  the  case  of  the  plant ; you  can  supply  the 
growing  seed  with  the  mateiials  for  the  making  up  of  its  body,  bringing  to  it  the  earth. 


8o 


I KC TURKS  FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


the  \\nler,  the  an,  thu  it  want*:.  It  will  lake  ail  that  it  wants  by  Us  own  nature,  ft 
will  .I'^hiiiiil.ile  iiml  ”i()\\  by  us  own  nature. 

Bung  all  light  into  the  woild;  light,  biing  light!  Let  light  come  unto  every 

one ; the  task  will  not  be  finished  till  every  one  has  reached  the  Lord.  Bring 

light  to  the  poor,  and  biing  more  light  to  the  lich,  for  they  require  it  more  than 
the  poor;  bung  light  to  the  ignorant,  and  moie  light  to  the  educated,  for  the 
vanities  of  the  edueatiou  ol  unr  time  arc  ticnicndous  1 'I’hus  bring  light  to  all 
and  leave  the  icst  unto  the  Lord,  for  in  the  words  of  the  same  Lord,  “To 

woik  you  h ive  the  light  and  not  to  the  fiuits  thereof  Let  not  your  work  produce 

results  ior  vou,  and  at  the  same  time  may  you  nevei  l)e  without  work. 

May  lie  who  taught  such  giand  ideas  to  our  loiefathcis  ages  ago,  help  us  to  get 
strength  to  carry  into  piaclice  llis  commands. 


THE  SAGES  OF  iHDtA. 


In  speaking  of  the  sages  of  India,  my  mind  goes  back  to  those  peiiods  of  which 
history  has  no  record,  and  tradition  tries  in  vain  to  bring  the  secrets  out  of  the  gloom 
of  the  past.  The  sages  of  India  have  been  almost  innumeiable,  foi  what  has  the 
Hindu  ntition  been  doing  for  thousands  of  yeais  except  pioducing  sages?  I will  take, 
theiefore,  the  lives  of  a few  of  the  most  biilhant  ones,  the  epoch-makers,  and  piesent 
them  before  you,  that  is  to  say,  my  study  of  them.  In  the  lii.st  place,  we  liave  (o 
understand  a little  about  our  scriptuies.  Two  ideals  of  liulh  me  in  our  .scnpluies, 
the  one  is,  what  we  call  the  eteinal,  and  the  other  is  not  so  aulhoiilative,  yet  binding 
undei  paiticular  ciicumslances,  limes,  and  j)laccs,  The  eternal  lelalions  nhich  deal 
\\ilh  the  nature  of  the  soul,  and  of  God,  and  the  iclations  between  souls  and  (iod, 
aie  embodied  in  what  we  call  the  Srutis,  the  Vedas.  'I'hc  next  .sot  of  tiuilis  is  w'hat 
we  call  the  Smiilis,  as  embodied  in  the  woiks  of  Manu,  Yajnavalkya,  and  other 
writers,  and  also  in  (he  Puianas,  down  to  thcTanlias.  This  second  class  of  books  and 
teachings  is  subordinate  to  the  Siutis,  inasmuch  as  whenevei  an\one  of  these  con- 
tradicts anything  in  the  Sums,  the  Siulis  mtisl  pievail.  This  is  the  law',  d'lie  idea 
IS  that  the  fiamcwork  of  the  destiny  and  goal  of  man  has  been  all  delineated  in  the 
Vedas,  the  details  have  been  left  to  be  w'oiked  out  in  the  Smiilis  and  Piiianas.  As 
foi  gcncial  diiections,  the  Srutis  arc  enough  ; for  spiiitiial  life,  nothing  more  can  be 
said,  nothing  more  can  be  known.  All  that  is  necessaiy  has  been  known,  all  the 
advice  that  is  necessaiy  to  lead  the  soul  to  peifoclion  has  been  completed  in  the 
SiLitis;  (he  details  alone  weie  left  out,  and  these  the  Siniilis  have  supplied  fiom 
time  to  lime.  Another  peciiliaiit)  is  that  these  Siulis  have  many  sages  as  the  lecOrdeis 
of  (he  tiuths  in  them,  mosil)  men,  even,  .some  women.  Very  little  is  known  of  their 
jiersonalilies,  the  dates  of  their  biith,  and  so  foith,  but  their  best  thoughts,  their 
best  disco\eries,  I should  say,  are  piescned  there,  embodied  in  the  sacicd  lilciatuie 
of  oiii  counliy,  the  Vedas.  In  ihe  Smiilis,  on  the  olhei  hand,  personalities  arc  mote 
in  evidence.  Stailling,  gigantic,  impressive,  w'orld-movmg  j)eisons  stand  befoie  us, 
as  It  weie,  fen  the  fust  lime,  sometimes  of  more  magnitude,  even,  than  then- 
teachings. 

This  is  a peculiarity  wdiich  w'c  have  to  understand,— that  oui  leligion  pieaches 
an  Impersonal  Personal  God.  It  pi  caches  any  amount  of  impersonal  laws ///u  any 
amount  of  pcisonality,  but  the  vciy  fountam-head  of  oui  leligion  is  in  the  Siutis, 
the  Vedas,  which  aie  pcifeclly  impersonal ; the  pci. sons  all  come  in  the  Smiitis  and 
Puranas,  the  great  Avatars,  Incarnations  of  God,  Piophcts,  and  so  foilh.  And  this 
ought  also  to  be  observed,  that  except  oui  religion,  cveiy  olhei  leligion  in  the  wold, 
depends  upon  the  life  or  li\es  of  some  peisonal  foundei  or  founders.  Chiis- 
tianity  is  built  ui>on  the  life  of  Jesus  Chiist,  ]\Iahommedanism,  upon  Mahommed, 
Buddhism,  upon  Buddha,  Jainism,  upon  the  Jinas,  and  so  on.  It  natuially  follows  that 
there  must  be  in  all  these  leligions  a good  deal  of  fight  about  what  they  call  the 
historical  evidences  of  these  great  personalities.  If  at  any  time  the  hisloiical  evidences 
about  the  existence  of  these  peisonagesin  ancient  limes  become  weak,  the  whole 
building  of  the  religion  tumbles  down  and  is  bioken  to  pieces.  We  escaped  this 
late  because  our  icligion  is  not  based  upon  peisons  but  on  piinciples.  That  you 

K 


82 


LECTURES— FROM  COLOMBO  TO  AlMORA 


obey  your  religion  is  not  because  it  came  through  the  authority  of  a sage,  no,  not  even 
of  an  Incaination.  Krishna  is  not  the  authoiity  of  the  Vetlas,  hut  the  Vedas  are  the 
authority  of  Krishna  himself,  flis  gloiy  is  that  he  is  the  greatest  preacher  of  the 
Vedas  that  ever  existed.  So  as  to  the  other  Incarnations  ; so  with  all  our  sages. 
Our  fust  principle  is  that  all  that  is  ncccssaiy  foi  the  perfection  of  man  and  for 
attaining  unto  freedom  is  there,  in  the  Vedas.  You  cannot  find  anything  new.  You 
cannot  go  beyond  a perfect  unity,  whichps  the  goal  of  all  knowledge:  this  has  been 
alieady  reached  iheie,  and  it  is  impossible  to  go  be>ond  the  unity.  Religious  knowl- 
edge became  complete  when  'Tai  tivcim  asi  was  discovered,  and  that  was  in  the 
Vedas.  What  remained,  was  the  guidance  of  people  from  time  to  time,  accoiding 
to  dillcient  times  and  places,  accoiding  to  dillerenl  ciicumslanccs  and  environments  ; 
people  had  to  be  guided  along  the  old,  old  path,  and  for  this  these  great  teachers 
came,  these  great  sages.  Nothing  can  boar  out  more  clearly  this  position  than  the 
celcbiated  saying  of  wSii  Kiishna  in  the  Gita — “ W^henever  viiiue  subsides  and 
irrcligion  prevails,  I create  Myself  for  the  protection  of  the  good  ; for  the  desli action  of 
^ill  irnnioialily  I am  coming  from  time  to  time.”  'Fliis  is  the  idea  in  India. 

W' hat  follows  ? That  on  the  one  hand,  there  are  these  ctci  nal  pi  inciples  which 
stand  upon  their  own  foundations,  without  depending  on  any  reasoning  even,  much  less 
•on  the  authoiity  of  sages  however  great,  of  Incarnations  however  biilliant  they  may 
have  been,  W'e  may  remaik  that  as  this  is  the  uniipie  position  in  India,  our  claim  is 
that  the  Vedanta  only  can  be  the  universal  leligion,  that  it  is  alieady  the  existing  uni- 
versal religion  in  the  world,  because  it  teaches  pimciplcs  and  not  peusons.  No  religion 
built  upon  a peison  can  be  taken  up  as  a l)pe  by  all  the  laces  of  mankind.  In  our 
own  countiy  we  find  that  there  h.ave  been  so  many  giand  characlcis;  in  even  a small 
city  many  peisons  aie  taken  up  as  typos  by  the  diffcient  minds  in  that  one  city.  How 
is  it  possible  that  one  person,  as  IMahommcd  oi  liuddha  or  Chiist,  can  be  taken  up 
as  the  one  type  for  the  whole  world?  nay,  that  the  whole  of  moiality,  ethics,  spirit- 
uality and  religion  can  he  true  only  fiom  the  sanction  of  that  one  pci  son,  and  one 
person  alone?  Now,  the  Vedantic  icligion  does  not  requite  any  such  personal 
authority;  its  sanction  is  the  eternal  nature  of  man,  its  ethics  aie  based  upon  the 
eternal  spiiitual  solidarity  of  man,  already  existing,  alieady  attained  and  not  to  be 
attained.  On  the  other  hand,  fiom  the  voiy  eailiest  times,  our  sages  have  been 
feeling  conscious  of  this  fact  that  the  vast  majoiity  of  mankind  require  a personality. 
They  must  have  a Personal  God,  in  some  foim  or  other.  The  very  Buddha  who 
declaied  ■ against  the  existence  of  a Personal  God  had  not  died  fift)  years  before  his 
disciples  manufacluied  a Personal  God,  out  of  him.  This  Personal  God  is  necessary, 
and  at  the  same  time  vs c know  that  instead  of  and  belter  than  vain  imaginations  of 
a Personal  God,  which  in  ninety-nine  cases  out  of  a hundred  aie  unwoithy  of  human 
worship,  we  have  in  this  world,  living  and  walking  in  our  midst,  living  Gods,  now 
and  then.  These  are  moic  woilhy  of  woiship  than  any  imaginary  God,  any  creation 
of  our  imaginations,  that  is  to  say  any  idea  of  God  which  we  can  make.  Sri  Krishna 
is  much  gicater  than  any  idea  of  God  you  or  I can  make.  Buddha  is  a much 
higher  idea,  a more  living  and  idolised  idea,  than  they  ideal  you  or  I can  conceive 
of  in  our  minds,  and  therefore  it  is  that  they  always  command  the  worship  of 
mankind,  even  to  the  exclusion  of  all  imaginary  deities.  This  our  sages  knew, 
and  therefore  left  it  open  to  all  Indian  people  to  woiship  such  great  personjrges, 
such  Incarnations.  Nay,  the  greatest  of  these  Incarnations  goes  further. — “ Wher- 
ever theie  IS  an  exliaoidiimiy  spiiilual  power  manifested  by  external  man,  know 


THE  SAG  EE  OF  INDIA 


S3 


that  I am  tK^ere  ; it  is  from  Me  that  that  manifestation  comes/'  That  leaves  the  door 
opeiv  for  the  Hindu  to  worship  the  Incarnations  of  all  the  counliies  in  the  woild. 
The  Hindu  can  woiship  any  sage  and»any  saint  fiom  any  cotintiy  whatsoever,  and 
as  a fact  we  know  that  we  go  and  woiship  many  limes  in  the  chinches  of  the  Chiis- 
tians,  and  many,  many  limes  in  the  Mahoinmedan  mosques,  and  that  is  good.  Why 
not  ? Ours,  as  I have  said,  is  the  univeisal  leligion.  It  is  inclusive  enough,  it  is  bioad 
enough  to  include  all  the  ideals.  All  the  ideals  of  lehgion  that  alieady  exist  in  the 
woild  can  be  immediately  included,  and  we  can  patiently  wait  for  all  the  ideals  that 
are  to  come  in  the  fuluie,  to  be  taken  in  the  same  fashion,  cnibiaced  111  the  infinite 
aims  of  the  religion  of  the  Vedanta. 

This,  moie  or  less,  is  out  ix)sition  with  regard  to  the  great  sages,  the  Incai na- 
tions of  (iod.  Thcie  aic  also  secondaiy  chaiacteis.  We  find  the  word  Rishi 
again  and  again  mentioned  in  the  Vedas,  and  it  has  become  a common  word  at  the 
piesent  lime.  The  Rishi  is  the  gicat  authoiily.  Wc  have  to  undei stand  that  idea. 
The  definition  is  that  the  Rishi  is  the  Mantra  drashhi,  the  seer  of  thought.  What 
is  the  pi  oof  of  religion  -this  was  asked  in  very  ancient  times.  Theie  is  no  proof  in 
the  senses,  was  the  declaration.  I “ Fiom  whence 

woids  reflect  back  with  thought  without  reaching  the  goal,”  sf 

?fr  »TJfr  I “'rheie  the  eyes  cannot  reach,  neither  can  the  mind, 
nor  any  of  the  oigans,” — that  has  been  the  declaration  foi  ages  and  ages.  Nature 
outside  cannot  give  us  any  answer  as  to  the  cxi.sleiice  of  the  soul,  the  existence  of 
God,  the  eternal  life,  the  goal  of  man,  and  all  that.  This  mind  is  continually 
changing,  always  in  a slate  of  flux;  it  is  finite,  it  is  bioken  into  pieces.  ITow  can 
Natuie  tell  of  the  Infinite,  the  Unchangeable,  the  Unbioken,  the  Indivisible,  the 
Eternal  It  never  can.  And  whenevei  mankind  has  slii\cn  to  get  an  answer  fiom 
dull  dead  matter,  history  shows  how  disaslioiis  the  lesults  have  been.  How  comes, 
then,  the  knowledge  which  the  Vedas  declared  It  comes  ihiough  being  a Rishi. 
This  knowledge  is  not  in  the  senses ; but  aie  the  senses  the  be-all  and  the  end-all  of  the 
human  being?  Who  dates  say  that  the  senses  are  the  all-in-all  of  man  ? Even  in 
our  lives,  in  the  life  of  eveiyone  of  us  here,  theie  come  moments  of  calmness, 
perhaps,  when  we  see  before  us  the  death  of  one  we  loved,  when  some  shock  comes, 
to  us,  or  when  extreme  blessedness  comes  to  us ; m.iny  other  occasions  there  are 
when  the  mind,  as  it  were,  becomes  calm,  feels  for  the  moment  its  real  nature, 
and  a glimpse  of  the  Infinite  beyond,  wheie  w'ords  cannot  reach  nor  the  mind  go,. 
is  revealed  to  us.  This  happens  in  oidmaiy  life,  but  it  has  to  be  heightened,  prac- 
tised, peifectcd.  Men  found  out  ages  ago  that  the  soul  is  not  bound  or  limited 
by  the  senses,  no,  not  even  by  con.sciousncss.  We  have  to  undcisland  that  this 
consciousness  is  only  the  name  of  one  link  in  the  infinite  chain.  Being  is  not  ulentical 
with  consciousness,  but  consciousness  is  only  one  pail  of  Being.  Beyond  consciou.s- 
ness  is  where  the  bold  .scaich.  Consciousness  is  bound  by  the  senses.  Beyond  that, 
beyond  the  senses,  men  must  go,  in  ouler  to. arrive  at  liiUhs  of  the  spiiitual  woild, 
and  there  are  even  now  j>ersons  who.  succeed  in  going  be}ond  the  bounds  of  the 
senses.  These  are  called  Rishis,  because  they  come  face  to  face  with  spiiitual  truths. 

The  proof,  therefore,  of  the  Vedas  is  just  the  same  as  the  proof  of  this 
table  before  me,  pratyahham,  direct  perception.  This  I sec  with  the  senses, 
and  the  truths  of  spirituality  we  also  see  in  a superconscious  state  of  the  human 
soul.  This  Rishi  state  is  not  limited  by  time  or  place,  by  sex  or  lace.  VAtsfiyana 
boldly  declares  that  this  Rishihood  is  the  common  propel ly  of  the  descendant  of 


S4  iKcrrRHs-Fj^oM  Colombo  to  almoba 

tlic  of  the  Aryan,  of  the  non-Aryan,  of  even  the  JMlechcha.  This  is  the  sageship 
of  the  V^ctlas,  and  con*^tHnlly  we  ought  to  remember  this  ideal  of  religion  in  India, 
whieh  I wish  other  nations  of  the  worid  \\ould  also  remember  and  learn,  so  that 
theic  may  be  less  fight  and  less  quairel.  Religion  is  not  m books,  nor  in  theories, 
noi  in  dogmas,  nor  in  talking,  not  even  in  reasoning.  It  is — being  and  becoming. 
Aye,  my  fiiemds,  until  each  one  of  you  has  become  a Rishi  and  come  face  to  face 
M’lth  spiiiiual  facts,  leligious  life  has  not  begun  for  you.  Until  the  supcrconscious 
opens  foi  you,  icligion  is  mere  talk,  it  is  nothing  but  preparation.  You  are  talking 
second-hand,  ihiiil-hanil,  and  hcic  applies  that  beautiful  s.iying  of  Buddha  when  he 
had  a discussion  ^\lth  some  Biahinanas!  They  came  discussing  about  the  nature 
of  Biahman,  and  the  gicat  sage  asked,  “Have  you  seen  Biahman  ?“  “No,”  said 
the  Brahinana  ; “Oi  youi  father  ?”  “ No,  neilhei  has  he  ; ” “()i  your  grandfather  “ I 
don’t  think  even  he  saw  Him.”  “ My  fiiend,  how  can  you  discuss  about  a person, 
whom  your  father  and  grandfather  never  saw,  and  try  to  put  each  other  down  ?’' 
That  is  what  the  whole  world  is  doing.  T.et  us  say  in  the  language  of  the  'Vedanta, 
This  Atman  is  not  to  be  leachcd  by  too  much  talk,  no.  not  even  by  the  highest 
intellect,  no,  not  even  by  the  study  of  the  Vedas  themselves.”  fvct  us  speak  to  all  the 
nations  of  the  woild  in  the  language  of  Ihe  Vedas  . — Vain  aie  youi  fights  and  your 
quai  i els , have  you  seen  God  whom  you  want  to  pieaeh  If  you  have  not  seen, 
vain  is  your  preaching;  you  do  not  know  whatjou  say,  and  if  you  have  seen  God 
you  will  not  quarrel,  ) GUI  vciy  face  will  shine.  An  ancient  sage  of  the  Upanishads, 
sent  Ills  son  out  to  loam  about  Biahman,  and  the  child  came  back,  and  the  father 
asked,  “ What  have  )Oii  leaint.^”  The  child  leplied  he  had  leaint  so  many  sciences. 
But  the  father  said,  “ That  is  nolhing,  go  back."  And  the  son  went  back,  and  when 
he  lelLuncd  again  the  fallier  asked  the  same  question,  and  the  same  number  of 
sciences  was  the  answet  fiom  the  child.  Once  moie  he  had  to  go  back,  and  the  next 
lime  he  came,  his  whole  face  was  shining,  and  lus  father  stood  up  and  declared, 
“Aje,  to-day,  my  child,  youi  face  shines  like  a knower  of  Brahman.”  When  you  have 
known  God  your  vciy  face  will  be  changed,  youi  voice  will  be  changed,  youi  whole 
appearance  will  be  changed.  You  will  be  a blessing  to  mankind  ; none  will  be  able 
to  resist  the  Rishi,  This  is  the  Rishihood,  the  ideal  in  our  religion.  The  rest,  all 
these  talks,  and  reasonings,  and  philosophies,  and  dualisms,  and  monisms,  and  even 
the  Vedas  themselves,  aic  but  pieparations,  sccondaiy  things.  The  other  is  piimary. 
The  Vedas,  Grammar,  Astronomy,  &c.,  all  these  aie  secondary  ; that  is  supreme 
knowledge  which  makes  us  realise  the  Unchangeable  One.  Those  who  realised  are 
the  sages  whom  we  find  in  the  Vedas,  and  we  understand  how  this  Rishi  is  the  name 
of  a type,  of  a class,  which  every  one  of  us,  as  true  Hindus,  is  expected  to  become 
at  some  period  of  our  life,  and  becoming  which,  to  the  Hindu,  means  salvation. 
Not  belief  in  doctiines,  nor  going  to  thousands  of  temples,  nor  bathing  in  all  the 
rivers  in  the  woild,  but  becoming  the  Rishi,  the  il/aw/ra  that  is  freedom, 

that  is  salvation. 

Coming  down  to  later  times,  there  have  been  great  world-moving  sages,  great 
Incarnations,  of  whom  there  have  been  many,  and  according  to  the  Bh^gavatam  they 
also  aie  infinite  in  number,  and  those  that  are  worshipped  most  in  India  are  Rama  and 
Krishna,  Rama,  the  ancient  idol  of  the  Heroic  ages,  the  embodiment  of  truth,  of 
morality,  the  ideal  son,  the  ideal  husband,  the  ideal  father,  and  above  all,  the  ideal 
King,  this  Rama  has  been  presented  before  us  by  the  great  sage  Valmiki.  No 
language  can  be  purer,  none  chaster,  none  more  beautiful,  and  at  the  sanye  time  sipapler, 


THE  S. / GES  OF  IX DI. t fi- 

than  the  language  in  ^vl.ich  the  gical  poet  has  depicted  the  life  of  Rama.  And 
to  speak  of  Sita?  Vou  ma)  exhaiisi  the  liteiatuic  of  the  ^^ol Id  that  is  pa.sl,  and  I 
may  assure  you.  that  ) on  will  lia\e  to  exhaust  the  liteiatuie  ot  the  woihl  of  the 
future,  hefoie  finding  anollier  Sita.  Siia  is  uni(|uc  ; that  chaiaclei  was  depicted  once 
and  for  all.  Ihere  may  have  been  seveial  Ramas,  peihaps,  but  never  moie  than  one 
Sita!  She  is  the  veiy  type  of  the  line  Indi.m  woman,  lor,  all  the  Indian  ideals  of 
a peifected  woman  have  o,o\\n  out  of  that  one  life  of  Sita;  and  heie  she  stands  these 
thousands  of  yeais,  commanding  the  woislnp  ol  cveiv  man,  woman,  and  chihl, 
thioughout  the  length  and  bieadth  of  the  land  ot  Aivavaitha.  Theie  she  will  .always 
be.  this  gfoiious  Sita,  puicr  than  punty  itself,  all  patience,  and  all  suffoi mg.  She 
who  sulTeied  that  life  of  suffeiing  without  a munnui.  she  is  the  ever-chaste  and 
ever-purc  wife,  she  the  ideal  of  the  people,  the  ideal  of  the  gods,  the  gieat  Sita, 
our  national  <iod  she  must  always  lemain.  And  cveiy  one  of  us  knows”  hm  too 
well  to  recpiiie  much  dehneaiion.  All  oui  mvlholog)  ma\  vanish,  even  oui  Vedas 
may  depart,  and  our  Sansknt  language  may  vanish  foi  ever,  but  so  long  as  theie 
will  be  live  Hindus  living  heie,  even  if  only  speaking  the  most  vulgar /wA;/r,  there 
will  be  the  story  ot  Sita  piescnt,  maik  my  w’oids  Sita  has  gone  into  the  verv  vitals 
of  our  lace.  She  is  theie  m the  blood  of  eveiy  Hindu  man  and  woman  ; we  are  all 
children  of  Sita.  Any  attempt  to  inodcinise  oui  women,  if  it  tiios  to  take  our 
women  apart  fiom  that  ideal  of  Sita,  is  immediatelv  a lailuie,  as  we  sec  even  day, 
'I'hc  women  of  India  must  grow  and  develop  in  the  foot-pnnls  of  Sila,  and  that  is 
the  only  way. 

I'he  next  is  He  who  is  woishijiped  in  vaiious  foims,  the  lavoinile  ideal  of  men 
as  well  as  of  women,  the  ideal  of  thildicn,  as  well  as  of  giovvn-up  men.  I moan  He 
whom  the  wiilci  of  the  lihagavad-Hita  was  not  content  to  call  an  Incarnation  but 
says,  “ The  othei  IiK.arnations  weic  but  paits  of  the  f.oid.  He,  Kiishna  was  the 
Loid  Himsell.”  And  it  is  not  stiange  that  such  adjectives  arc  applied  to  him  when 
W'e  marvel  at  the  many-sidedness  of  his  charactci.  He  was  the  most  vvondeiful 
.Sannyasin,  and  the  most  vvondeiful  householder  in  one ; he  had  the  most  wonderful 
amount  of  Ea/tn,  [lOwer,  and  was  at  the  same  lime  living  in  the  midst  of  the  most 
w'ondeiful  renunciation.  Kiishna  can  never  be  undci stood  until  you  have  studied 
the  Gila,  for  he  was  the  embodiment  of  his  own  leaching.  Kvery  one  of  these 
Incarnations  came  as  a living  illustration  ot  what  they  came  to  picach.  Kiishna,  the 
preacher  of  the  Gita,  was  all  his  life  the  embodiment  of  that  Song  Celestial ; he  was 
the  great  illustialion  of  non-attachment.  He  gives  up  his  ihione  and  never  cares  for 
it.  He,  the  leader  of  India,  at  whose  word  kings  come  down  fiom  theii  thrones,  never 
wants  to  be  a king.  He  is  the  simple  Kii.shna,  ever  the  same  Kiishna  who  played 
with  the  Gopis.  Ah,  that  most  maivellous  passage  of  his  life,  the  most  difficult  to 
understand,  and  which  none  ought  to  attempt  to  understand  until  he  has  become 
perfectly  chaste  and  pure,  that  most  marvellous  expansion  of  love,  allegorised  and 
expie.ssed  in  that  beautiful  play  at  Bnndavan,  which  none  can  understand  but  he  who 
has  become  mad  with,  and  diunk  deep  of,  the  cup  of  love  ! Who  can  understand  the 
throes  of  the  love  of  the  Gopis — the  very  ideal  of  love,  love  that  wants  nothing,  love 
that  even  does  not  care  for  heaven,  love  that  does  not  care  for  anything  in  this  world, 
or  the  world  to  come  ? And  here,  my  friends,  through  this  love  of  the  Gopis  has 
been  found  the  only  solution  of  the  conflict  between  the  Personal  and  the  Impersonal 
God.  We  know  how  the  Personal  God  is  the  highest  point  of  human  life  ; w'e  know 
ibat  it  is  philosophical  to  believe  in  an  Impersonal  God,  immanent  in  the  universe,  of 


86 


LECTURES -FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


whom  everything  is  but  a manifestation.  At  the  same  time  our  souls  hanker  after 
something  concrete,  something  which  we  want  to  grasp,  at  whose  feet  we  can  pour 
out  our  soul,  aud  so  on.  'i'he  Personal  God  is  lliercfore  the  highest  conception 
of  human  natuie.  Yet  reason  stands  aghast  at  such  an  idea.  It  is  the  same 
old,  old  question  which  you  find  discussed  in  the  Brahma  Sutras,  which  you  find 
Diaupadi  discussing  with  Yudhisihiia  in  the  forest, ~-if  there  is  a Personal  God,  Jtll- 
meiciful,  all-powerful,  why  is  this  hell  of  an  eaith  heie,  wh;^|ftlid  He  create  this; 
He  must  be  a partial  God.  Theie  was  no  solution,  and  the/C  .solution  that  can 

be  lound  is  what  you  read  about  the  love  of  the  Gcy^Jp  T'  ....ted  'vciy  adjec- 
tive that  was  applied  to  Kiishna  ; they  did  not  cate  to  kpm  as  ....  Loid  of 

creation,  they  did  not  care  to  know  that  he  was  ahjjj^lity  .:y  d''’  ot  care  to  know 
that  he  was  omnipotent,  and  so  foith.  The  only  thfiljj  lOocI  was,  that  he  was 

infinite  Love,  that  was  all.  The  Gopis  undeistooi  ^ only  as  the  Krishna  of 
Biindavan.  lie,  the  leader  of  the  hosts,  the  king  c*-  jfKo  them  was  the  shepherd, 
and  the  shepheid  for  ever.  “ I do  not  want  wei  ^^mor  many  people,  nor  do  I 
want  learning;  no,  not  even  do  1 want  to  go  < ffeaven.  Let  me  be  bom  again  and 
again,  but  Loicl,  grant  me  this,  that  I mo;  ha*'  love  for  Thee,  and  that  for  love’s 
sake.”  A great  landmark  in  the  histoiy  of  religion  is  here,  the  ideal  of  love  for  love’s 
sake,  work  for  work’s  sake,  duty  for  du'^  s sake,  and  it  for  the  fiist  time  fell  from  the 
lips  of  the  greatest  of  Incai nations,  Krishna,  and  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of 
humanity,  upon  the  soil  of  India.  The  leligions  of  fear  and  of  temptations  weie  gone 
for  ever,  and  in  spite  of  the  fear  of  hell,  and  temptation  to  enjoyment  in  heaven,  came 
the  grandest  of  ideals,  love  foi  love's  sake,  duty  foi  duty’s  sake,  work  for  woik’s  sake. 

And  what  a love  ! I have  told  you  just  now  that  it  is  very  difficult  to 
understand  the  love  of  the  Gopis.  There  aie  not  weanling  fools,  even  in  the  midst 
of  us,  who  cannot  understand  the  rnaivellous  significance  of  that  most  mai- 
vellous  of  all  episodes.  There  are,  let  me  repeat,  iinpiuc  fools,  even  born  of  our 
blood,  who  tiy  to  shri^  fiom  that  as  if  fioin  something  impure.  To  them  I 
have  only  to  say,  fiist  mak^youi selves  pure ; and  you  must  remember  that  he  w'ho 
tells  the  history  of  the  love  )f  the  Gopis  is  none  else  but  Suka  Deva.  The  historian 

who  lecoids  this  maivelK  is  love  of  the  Gopis  is  one  w'ho  was  born  pure,  the 

eternally  puie  Suka,  the  s i of  Vyasa.  So  long  as  there  is  selfishness  in  the  heait, 

so  long  is  love  of*  (jod  i 'i^sihle ; it  is  nothing  but  shopkeeping.  I give  you 

something,  Oh  Loid,  you  gi  sdmething  in  letuin.  And  says  the  f.ord,  if  you  do 
not  do  this  I will  take  good  cf  you  when  you  die.  I wll  roast  you  all  the  rest  of 
your  lives,  perhaps,  and  so  So  long  as  such  ideas  aie  in  the  brain  how  can  one 
undeistand  the  mad  throes  o^.lhe  Gopis’  love.?  ‘'Oh  for  one,  one  kiss  of  those 
lips,  one  who  has  been  kissed  "hec,  his  thirst  for  Thee  increases  for  ever,  all 
sonows  vanish,  and  we  forget  ’ove  for  everything  else  but  for  Thee  and  Thee 
alone.”  Aye  ! foiget  first  the  love  .^or  gold,  and  name  and  fame,  and  for  this  little 
trumpery  world  of  ours.  Then,  ’Ofity  then,  you  will  understand  the  love  of  the 
Gopis,  too  holy  to  be  attempted  \Uiout  giving  up  everything,  too  sacred  to  be 
understood  until  the  soul  has  I me  perfectly  pure.  People  w'ith  ideas  of  sex, 
and  of  money,  aud  of  fame,  bul  ig  up  every  minute  in  the  heart,  daring  to 
criticise  and  undeistand  the  love  " the  Gopis!  That  is  the  very  essence  of  the 
Krishna  incarnation.  Even  the  Gita,  the  great  philosophy  itself,  does  not  compare 
with  that  madness,  for  in  the  Gita  the  disciple  is  taught  slowly  how  to  walk  towards 
the  goal,  but  heie  is  the  madness  of  enjoyment,  the  drunkenness  of  love,  where 


THE  SAGES  OF  INDIA 


?7 

disciples  and  teachers  and  teachings  and  books,  and  all  these  things  have  become  one, 
even  the  ideas  of  fear  and  (}od,  and  heaven.  Everything  has  been  thrown  away.  What 
remains  is  the  madness  of  love.  It  is  foigeifulness  of  everything,  and  the  lover  sees 
nothing  in  the  woild  except  that  Kiishna,  and  Krishna  alone,  when  the  face  of  eveiy 
being  become.s  a Kiishna,  when  his  own  face  looks  like  Kiishna,  when  his  own  soul  has 
become  tinged  with  ih^viishna  colour.  That  was  the  great  Kiishna  ! 

Do  not  waste  you?fimc  upon  little  details.  Take  up  the  fiamework,  the  essence 
of  the  life.  Theie  may  be  many  lustoiial  discicpancies,  there  many  be  inteipolations 
in  the  life  of  Kirshna.  All  these  things  may  be  tiiie,  but,  at  the  same  time,  there 
must  have  been  a basis,  a foundaltou  for  this  new  and  tremendous  departure.  Taking 
the  life  of  any  olhei  .sage  oi  piophet,  we  find  that  that  piojihet  is  only  the  evolution 
of  what  had  gone  before  him,  we  lind  that  that  piophet  is  only  pleaching  the  ideas 
that  had  Ireen  scalleied  about  his  own  countiy  even  in  his  own  tunes.  (Irent  doubts 
may  exist  even  as  to  whelhei  that  piophet  existed  or  not.  But  hcie,  I challenge  any 
one  to  show  whether  these  things,  these  ideals— woik  for  work's  sake,  love  for  love's 
sake,  duly  for  duty'.s  sake,  weie  not  oiiginal  ideas  with  Krishna,  and  as  such,  theie 
must  have  been  someone  with  whom  these  ideas  oiigiiuted.  They  could  not  have 
been  boi rowed  fiom  anybody  else.  They  were  not  tioalmg  about  in  the  alinospheie 
when  KTi.shna  was  boin.  But  the  Loid  Krishna  was  the  hist  preacher  of  this;  his 
disciple  Vyasa  took  it  up  and  preached  it  unto  mankind.  This  is  the  highest  idea  to 
picture.  The  lugliest  thing  we  can  get  out  of  him  is  Gopijanavallava,  the  Beloved  of 
the  Gopis  of  Biindavan.  When  that  madness  comes  in  youi  biam,  when  you  under- 
stand the  blessed  Gopis,  then  you  will  undei stand  what  love  is.  When  the  whole 
woild  will  vanish,  when  all  other  considerations  will  have  died  out,  w'hen  you  will 
become  pure-heaited  with  no  other  aim,  not  even  the  seaich  after  liiith,  then  and 
then  alone  will  lush  befoie  you  the  madness  of  that  love,  the  stiength  and  the  power 
cl  that  infinite  love  which  the  Gopis  had,  that  love  for  love’s  sake.  That  is  the 
goal.  When  you  have  got  that  you  have  got  cvciything. 

To  come  down  to  the  lower  stratum, — Kiishna,  the  preacher  of  the  Gita.  Aye, 
there  is  an  attempt  in  India  now  which  is  like  putting  the  cait  before  the  horse.  Many 
of  our  people  think  that  Kiishna  as  the  lover  of  the  Gopis  is  something  rather  uncanny, 
and  the  Europeans  do  not  like  it  much.  Dr.  So-and-so  does  not  like  it.  Cer- 
tainly then,  the  Gopis  have  to  go  ! Without  the  sanction  of  Europeans  how  can 
Kiishna  live?  He  cannot!  In  the  Mahabhaiata  there  is  no  mention  oi  the  Gopi.s 
except  in  one  or  two  places,  and  those  not  vciy  remarkable  places.  In  the  prayer  of 
Diaupadi  there  is  mention  of  a Biindavan  life,  and  in  the  speech  of  Sisupal  there  i.s 
again  mention  of  this  Biindavan.  All  the.se  are  inteipolations  ! What  the  Europeans 
do  not  want  must  be  thrown  oil!  They  are  interpolations,  the  mention  of  the  Gopis 
and  of  Kri.shna  too  ! Well,  with  these  men,  steeped  in  commeicialism,  where  even 
the  ideal  of  religion  has  become  commercial,  they  are  all  trying  to  go  to  heaven  by 
doing  .something  here  ; the  Bunya  wants  compound  interest,  wants  to  lay  by  some 
thing  here  and  enjoy  it  there.  Certainly  the  Gopis  have  no  place  in  such  a system  of 
thought.  From  that  ideal  lover  we  come  down  to  the  lower  stratum  of  Krishna,  the 
preacher  of  the  Gita.  Than  the  Gita  no  better  commentary  on  the  Vedas  has  been 
written  or  can  be  written.  The  essence  of  the  Srutis,  or  of  the  Upanishads,  is  hard 
to  be  understood,  seeing  that  there  arc  so  many  commentators,  each  one  trying  to 
inteipret  in  his  own  way.  Then  the  Loid  Himself  comes,  He  who  is  the  inspiier 
of  the  Srutis,  to  show  us  the  meaning  of  them,  as  the  preachei  of  the  Gita,  and  to-day 


88 


LECTCR KS—FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


India  wants  nothing  belter,  the  woikl  wants  nothing  bcllei  than  that  method  of  inter- 
pietation.  It  is  a wondei  that  subsequent  inieipieieis  of  the  Sciipluies,  even 
commenting  upon  the  Gita,  many  tunes  could  not  catch  the  meaning,  many  times 
could  not  catch  the  diift.  Foi  what  do  you  lind  in  the  Gita,  and  what  even  in  modern 
commentators  ? One  non-dnalislic  commentator  takes  up  an  Upanisliad,  theie  aie 
so  many  dualislic  passages,  and  he  twists  and  toitnres  them  into  some  meaning, 
and  wants  to  bring  tiiem  all  into  a meaning  of  his  own.  If  a dualistic  cominenlalor 
comes,  thcie  aie  so  many  dualistic  texts  which  he  begins  to  torture,  to  bring  them 
all  lound  to  dualistic  meaning.  liut  you  find  in  the  Gita  theie  is  no  attempt  at 
toituimg  any  one  of  them.  'I'he}  aie  all  light,  says  the  Loid  ; for  slowly  and  giadu- 
ally  the  human  soul  uses  up  and  up,  step  after  step,  fiom  the  gioss  to  the  fine, 
liom  the  line  to  the  liner,  until  it  teaches  the  Absolute,  the  goal.  That  is  what  is  in  the 
Gita.  Even  the  Kaima  Kanda  is  taken  up,  and  it  is  shown  that  although  it  cannot 
give  salvation  direct,  but  only  indiiectly,  yet  that  is  aKo  valid  ; images  aie  valid 
indiieclly ; ceieiiionies,  ioims,  cvciitbmg  is  valid  only  with  one  condition,  puiity 
of  the  lieait.  For  woiship  is  valid,  and  leads  to  the  goal,  if  the  heait  is  pure  and 
the  heait  is  sinceie  ; and  all  these  vaiious  modes  of  woiship  aie  nccessaiy,  else, 
why  should  they  be  hcic  Religions  and  sects  aie  not  the  woik  of  hypociiles  and 
wicked  people,  who  iiuenled  all  these  to  gel  a little  money,  as  some  of  our  modem 
men  want  to  think.  However  icasonablc  that  explanation  may  seem,  it  is  not  tiue, 
and  they  weic  not  invented  (hat  way  at  all.  Tliey  ate  the  outcome  of  the  necessity 
of  the  human  soul.  They  aie  all  heie  to  satisfy  the  hankeiiug  and  llmst  of  diftcicnt 
classes  of  human  minds,  and  )Oii  need  not  pieach  against  them,  'I'he  day  when 
that  necessity  will  cease  they  will  vanish  along  with  the  cessation  of  that  necessity, 
and  so  long  as  that  necessity  remains  they  must  be  theic,  in  spile  of  your  picaching, 
in  spite  of  youi  ciiticisms.  You  may  bung  the  svvoid  or  the  gun  into  play,  you  may 
deluge  1 he  vv 01  Id  with  huinaii  blood,  but  so  long  as  iheic  is  a necessil)  foi  idols, 
they  must  leiuaiu.  'I'hese  lotms,  and  all  llie  vaiious  steps  in  leligioii  will  leinain, 
and  we  uiulei stand  fiom  the  f.oid  .Sri  Kiishna  why  they  slumhl 

A latliei  sailtlei  chaplei  of  India’s  hisloiy  comes  now.  In  the  Gila  we  already 
hcai  the  distant  sound  of  the  (.onlluis  of  sects,  and  the  Loid  comes  in  the  middle 
to  haimomse  ihc'in  all;  He  the  gieat  pieachei  of  hainiouy,  tlie  greatest  teacher  of 
liaimony,  Fold  Kiishna  Himself,  He  s\v s,  “ In  Me  they  aie  all  strung  like  peails 
upon  a ihiead.”  We  alieady  heai  the  distant  sounds,  the  miiimurs  of  the  conflict, 
and  po.ssibly  llieie  was  a pel loil  of  liai mon\  and  calmness,  when  it  bioke  out  anew, 
not  only  on  ichgious  giounds,  but  most  possibly  on  caste  giouiuls, — the  fight  between 
the  two  powciful  faclois  in  our  community,  the  kings  and  the  piiests.  And  fiom  the 
topmost  ciest  of  the  wave  that  deluged  India  foi  iiea'lv  a thousand  yeais,  wc  sec 
another  gldi tons  figuie,  and  that  was  cm  Gautama  Sakyamuni.  You  all  know  about 
his  teachings  and  pieachmgs.  We  worship  Him  as  God  incainate,  the  giealesl,  the 
boldest  pieacher  of  morality  that  the  woild  evei  saw,  the  giealest  Kaima  Yogi;  as 
a disciple  of  himself,  as  it  wcie,  the  same  Kiishna  came  to  show  how  to  make  his 
theoiics  practical.  I’hcie  came  once  again  the  same  voice  that  in  the  Gita  preached, 
“ Even  the  least  bit  done  of  this  leligion  saves  from  great  fear.”  ‘‘  Women,  or 
Vais) as,  oi  even  Sudias,  all  leach  the  highest  goal.’'  Bieaking  the  bondages  of  all, 
the  chains  of  all,  dcclaiing  liberty  to  all  to  reach  the  highest  goal,  come  the  woids 
of  the  Gila,  mils  like  thunder  the  mighty  voice  of  Kiishna — ” Plveii  in  this  life  they 
have  conqueied  heaven  whose  minds  aic  fiimly  fixed  upon  the  sameness,  loi  God 


THE  SAGES  OE  IXDI A 


Is  pure  and  the  same  to  all,  therefore  such  are  said  to  be  living  in  God."  “ Thus 
seeing  the  same  T.ord  equally  present  everywhere,  the  sage  does  not  injme  the 
Self  by  the  self,  and  thus  reaches  the  highest  goal.”  As  it  were  to  give  a living 
example  of  this  preaching,  as  it  were  to  make  at  least  one  part  of  it  practical,  the 
preacher  himself  Came  in  another  foim,  and  this  was  Sakyamuni,  the  preacher  to  the 
poor  and  the  miserable,  he  who  rejected  even  the  language  of  the  gods  to  speak  in  the 
language  of  the  people,  so  that  he  might  leach  the  hearts  of  the  people;  he  who 
gave  up  a throne  to  live  with  beggars,  and  the  poor,  and  the  downcast ; he  who 
pressed  the  Pariah  to  his  breast  like  a second  Ruma. 

You  all  know  about  his  great  work,  his  grand  character.  But  the  work 
had  one  great  defect,  and  for  that  we  are  sulTeiing  even  to-day.  No  blame 
atiaches  to  the  J.ord.  He  is  pure  and  gloiious,  but  unfortunately  such  high 
iiioals  could  not  be  well  assimilated  by  the  different  uncivilised  and  uncultured 
laccs  of  mankind  who  flocked  within  the  fold  of  the  Ary.uis.  These  laces,  with 
vaiiclies  of  superstition  and  hideous  woiship,  rushed  within  the  fold  of  the 
Aryan,  and  for  a time  appeared  as  if  they  had  become  cnilised,  Imt  befoie  a 
cenlury  had  passed  they  brought  out  their  snakes,  their  ghosts,  and  all  the 
other  things  their  ancesiois  used  to  worship,  and  thus  the  n hole  of  India  became 
one  degraded  mass  of  supeistition.  The  cailiei  Buddhists  in  their  rage  against  the 
killing  of  animals,  had  denounced  the  sacrilices  of  the  V'odas ; and  these  saciilice-ii 
vised  to  be  held  in  cvciy  house.  Thcic  was  a fire  binning,  and  that  was  all  the 
paraphernalia  of  woiship.  These  .saciifices  were  obliterated,  and  in  Iheii  place 
came  goigeous  temples,  gorgeous  ceiemonies,  and  goigcons  piicsts,  and  all  that 
> oil  see  in  India  in  modern  times.  1 smile  when  I lead  books  wiitten  by  .some 
modern  people  who  ought  to  have  kmnvn  belter,  that  the  Buddha  was  the  destioyer  of 
Hi ahmanical  idolatry.  Lillie  do  they  know  that  Buddhism  cieatcd  Biahinamsm  and 
i(lolati)  in  India.  Theie  was  a book  wiitten  a year  or  two  ago  by  a Russian  gentleman, 
who  claimed  to  have  found  out  a veiy  cuiious  lilc  of  Jesus  ( hiisl,  and  in  one  part 
of  the  book  he  says,  that  Chi ist  went  to  the  Temple  of  Jagannath  to  study  with  the 
BiAhmans,  but  became  disgusted  with  then  exclusiveness  and  their  idols,  and  so  he 
wont  to  the  J.amas  of  Thibet  instead,  became  peifcct,  and  w'cnl  home.  To  any  man 
who  knows  anything  about  Indian  histoiy,  that  veiy  statement  proves  that  the  whole 
thing  was  a fiaud,  because  the  Temple  of  Jagamulh  is  an  old  BuddliisUc  Temi/ic, 
We  took  this  and  others  over  and  re-Ilinduised  them.  Wc  shall  ha\e  to  do  many 
things  like  that  yet.  That  is  Jagannath,  and  there  vvas  not  one  Biahman  iheie  them, 
and  >et  w-e  ate  told  ih.al  Jcsiis  Chiist  came  to  study  with  theBrahmans  thcic.  So  sa>s 
our  gioal  Russian  aicli.Tologist.  Thus,  in  spile  of  the  preaching  of  mcicy  to 
animals,  in  spite  of  the  sublime  ethical  religion,  in  spile  of  the  hair-splitting  discus- 
sions about  the  existence,  or  non-e.\istcnce  of  a permanent  soul,  the  whole  building 
of  Buddlusm  tumbled  down  piecemeal ; and  the  ruin  was  simjily  hideous.  I have 
neither  the  lime  nor  the  inclination  to  describe  Jto  you  the  hidoousness  that  came  in 

the  wake  of  Buddlusm.  The  most  hideous  ceremonies,  the  most  horrible,  the  most 
obscene  books  that  human  hands  ever  wiote,  or  the  human  biain  ever  conceived,  the 
most  bestial  fonns  that  ever  passed  under  the  name  of  religion,  have  all  been  the 
creation  of  degraded  Buddhism. 

But  India  has  to  live,  and  the  .spii  it  of  the  Lord  descended  again.  He  who 
clcclaied  that  “ I wall  come  whenever  viituc  subsides  ” came  again,  and  this  lime  the 
manifestation  was  in  the  South,  and  up  rose  that  young  Brahman  of  whom  it  has 

L 


LECTURES--FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


90 

been  declared  that  at  the  age  of  sixteen  he  had  completed  all  his  writings;  the 
marvellous  boy  Sankaracharya  arose.  The  writings  of  this  boy  of  sixteen  are 
the  wonders  of  the  modern  world,  and  so  was  the  boy.  He  wanted  to  bring  back 
the  Indian  world  to  its  pristine  purity,  but  think  of  the  amount  of  the  task  before 
him.  I have  told  you  a few  points  about  the  state  of  things  that  existed  in  India.  All 
these  horrors  that  you  are  trying  to  reform  are  the  outcome  of  that  reign  of  degrada- 
tion. The  Taitars  and  the  Belluchis  and  all  the  hideous  races  of  mankind  came  Jto 
India  and  became  Buddhists,  and  assimilated  with  us,  and  brought  their  national 
customs,  and  the  whole  of  our  national  life  became  a huge  page  of  the  most  horrible 
and  the  most  bestial  customs.  That  was  the  inheritance  which  that  boy  got  from 
the  Buddhists,  and  from  that  time  to  this,  the  whole  world  in  India  is  a re-conquest 
of  this  Buddhistic  degradation,  by  the  Vedanta.  It  is  still  going  on,  it  is  not  yet 
' ‘finished.  Sankara  came,  a great  philosopher,  and  showed  that  the  real  essence  of 
Buddhism  and  that  of  the  Vedanta  are  not  very  different,  but  that  the  disciples  did 
not  undci stand  the  Master,  and  have  degraded  themselves,  denied  the  existence  of 
the  soul  and  of  God,  and  have  become  Atheists.  That  was  what  Sankara  showed, 
and  all  the  Buddhists  began  to  come  back  to  the  old  religion.  But  then  they  had 
become  accustomed  to  all  these  forms ; what  could  be  done  ? 

Then  came  the  brilliant  Ramanuja.  Sankara,  with  his  great  intellect,  I am 
afraid,  had  not  as  great  a heart.  Ramanuja’s  heart  was  greater.  He  felt  for  the 
down-trodden,  he  sympathised  with  them.  He  took  up  the  ceremonies,  the  accretions 
that  had  gathered,  made  them  pure  so  far  as  they  could  be,  and  instituted  new 
ceremonies,  new  methods  of  worship,  for  the  people  who  absolutely  requited  them. 
At  the  same  time  he  opened  the  door  to  the  highest  spiritual  worship,  from  the 
Brahman  to  the  Pariah.  That  was  Ramanuja’s  work.  That  work  rolled  on,  invaded 
the  North,  was  taken  up  by  some  gieat  leaders  there,  but  that  was  much  later,  during  the 
INIahommedan  rule,  and  the  brightest  of  these  prophets  of  comparatively  modern  times 
in  the  North  was  Cluitanya.  You  may  mark  one  characteristic  since  the  time  of 
Ramanuja, — the  opening  of  the  door  of  spirituality  to  everyone.  That  has  been  the 
watchword  of  all  prophets  succeeding  Ramanuja,  as  it  had  been  the  watchword  of  all 
the  prophets  before  Sankaia.  I do  not  know  why  Sankara  should  be  represented  as 
rather  exclusive  ; I do  not  find  anything  in  his  writings  which  is  exclusive.  As  in  the 
case  of  the  declarations  of  the  Lord  Buddha,  this  exclusiveness  that  has  been 
attributed  to  Sankara’s  teachings  is  most  possibly  not  due  to  his  teachings,  but  to  the 
incapacity  of  his  disciples.  This  one  great  noithern  sage,  Chaitanya,  represented  the 
mad  love  of  the  Gopis.  Himself  a Bruhman,  boi  n of  one  of  the  most  rationalistic 
families  of  the  day,  himself  a professor  of  logic,  fighting  and  gaining  a word-victory, — ■ 
for,  this  he  had  learnt  from  his  childhood  as  the  highest  ideal  of  lite, — and  yet 
through  the  mercy  of  some  sage  the  whole  life  of  that  man  became  changed,  he 
gave  up  his  fight,  his  quarrels,  his  professorship  of  logic,  and  became  one  of  the 
greatest  teachers  of  Bhakti  the  world  has  ever  known, — mad  Chaitanya.  His  Bhakti 
rolled  over  the  whole  land  of  Bengal,  bringing  solace  to  every  one.  His  love  knew 
no  bounds.  The  saint  or  the  sinner,  the  Hindu  or  the  Mahommedan,  the  pure  or 
the  impure,  the  prostitute,  the  street-walker — all  had  a share  in  his  love,  all  had  a share 
in  his  mercy,  and  even  to  the  present  day,  although  greatly  degenerated,  as  every- 
thing does  become  in  lime,  yet  his  sect  is  the  refuge  of  the  poor,  of  the  down-trodden, 
of  the  outcast,  of  the  weak,  of  those  who  have  been  rejected  by  all  society.  But 
at  the  same  time  I must  remark  for  truth’s  sake  that  we  find  this.  In  the  philosophic 


T^E  SAGES  OF  INDIA 


91 

sects  we  find  wonderful  liberalism.  There  is  not  a man  who  follows  Sankara  who 
will  say  that  all  the  different  sects  of  India  are  really  different.  At  the  same  time 
he  was  a tremendous  upholder  of  exclusiveness  as  regards  caste.  But  with  every 
Vaishnavite  preacher  we  find  a wonderful  liberalism  as  to  the  teaching  of  caste 
questions,  but  exclusiveness  as  regards  religious  questions. 

The  one  had  a great  head,  the  other  a large  heart,  and  the  time  was  ripe  for  one  to 
be  born,  the  embodiment  of  both  this  head  and  heart;  the  time  was  ripe  for  one  to  be 
born,  who  in  one  body  would  have  the  brilliant  intellect  of  Sankara  and  the  wonder- 
fully expansive,  infinite  heart  of  Chaitanya ; one  who  would  see  in  every  sect  the 
same  spirit  working,  the  same  God ; one  who  would  see  God  in  every  being,  one 
whose  heart  would  weep  for  the  poor,  for  the  weak,  for  the  outcast,  for  the  down- 
trodden, for  every  one  in  this  woild,  inside  India  or  outside  India;  and  at  the  same 
time  whose  grand  brilliant  intellect  would  conceive  of  such  noble  thoughts  as  woulci. 
harmonise  all  conflicting  sects,  not  only  in  India  but  outside  of  India,  and  bring  a 
marvellous  harmony,  the  universal  religion  of  head  and  heart  into  existence ; such 
a man  w'as  born,  and  I had  the  good  fortune  to  sit  at  his  feet  for  years.  The  time 
was  lipe,  it  was  necessary  that  such  a man  should  be  born,  and  he  came  ; and  the 
most  wonderful  part  of  it  was,  that  his  life's  work  was  just  near  a city  which  was  full  of 
Western  thought,  a city  which  had  run  mad  after  these  occidental  ideas,  a city  which 
had  become  more  Europeanised  than  any  other  city  in  India.  There  he  lived,  without 
any  book-learning  whatsoever;  this  great  intellect  nevci  leaint  even  to  write  his  own 
name,  but  the  most  brilliant  graduates  of  our  university  found  in  him  an  intellectual 
giant.  lie  was  a strange  man,  this  Sii  Ramakii.shna  Paramahamsa.  It  is  a long,  long 
story,  and  I have  no  time  to  toll  anything  about  him  to-night.  Let  me  now  only 
mention  the  great  Sii  Ramakrishna,  the  fulfilment  of  the  Indian  sages,  the  sage  for 
the  time,  one  whose  teaching  is  just  now,  in  the  present  time,  most  beneficial. 
And  maik  the  Divine  power  working  behind  the  man.  The  son  of  a poor  priest, 
born  in  an  out-of-the-way  village,  unknown  and  unthought  of,  to-day  is  worshipped 
literally  by  thousands  in  Kuiope  and  America,  and  to-morrow  will  be  worshipped 
by  thousands  more.  Who  knows  the  plans  of  the  Loid  1 Now,  my  brothers,  if  you  do 
not  sec  the  hand,  the  finger  of  Piovidcnce,  it  is  because  you  are  blind,  born  blind 
indeed.  If  time  comes,  and  another  opportunity,  I will  speak  to  you  more  fully 
about  him.  Only  let  me  say  now,  that  if  I have  told  you  one  word  of  truth  it  was 
his  and  his  alone,  and  if  I have  told  you  many  things  which  were  not  true,  which 
were  not  coirect,  which  were  not  beneficial  to  the  human  race,  they  were  all  mine, 
and  on  me  is  the  responsibility. 


loeciooeeeo* 


I^THE  WORK  BEFORE  US. 

( Delivered  at  the  Triplicane  Literary  Society,  Madras  ). 

The  problem  of  life  is  becoming  deeper  and  broader  every  day  as  the  world 
moves  on.  The  watchword  and  the  essence  have  been  preached  in  the  days  of  yoie, 
when  the  Vedantic  tiiith  was  first  discoveied,  the  solidarity  of  all  life.  One  atom 
in  this  univeise  cannot  move  without  dragging  the  whole  woild  along  with  it.  Theie 
cannot  be  any  piogress  without  the  whole  woild  following  in  the  wake,  and  it  is 
becoming  every  day  clcaier  that  the  solution  of  any  problem  can  never  be  attained 
on  racial,  or  national,  or  nairow  gioiinds.  Every  idea  has  to  become  bioad  till  it 
coveis  the  whole  of  this  woild,  eveiy  aspiiation  must  go  on  increasing  till  it  has 
engulfed  the  whole  of  humanity,  nay,  the  whole  of  life,  within  its  scope.  This  will 
explain  why  our  countiy  for  the  last  few  cenluiies  has  not  been  what  she  was  in  the 
past.  We  find  that  one  of  the  causes  which  led  to  this  degeneiation  was  the  nariow- 
ing  of  our  view,  narrowing  the  scope  of  our  actions. 

Two  cuiious  nations  there  have  been, — sprung  of  the  same  race,  but  placed  in 
different  circumstances  and  environments,  w'Oiking  out  the  pioblems  of  life  each  in 
its  owm  particulai  w'ay.  1 mean  the  ancient  Hindu  and  the  ancient  Gieek.  d'he 
Indian  Aryan  bounded  on  the  noith,  by  the  snow-caps  of  the  Himalayas,  with  fresh- 
water livers  like  lolling  oceans  sui rounding  him  in  the  plains,  with  eternal  forests 
which,  to  him,  seemed  to  be  the  end  of  the  woild, - turned  his  vision  inw'aid;  and 
given  the  natural  instinct,  the  supeifine  biain  of  the  Ai)an,  w'ltli  this  sublime 
scenery  surrounding  him,  the  natiiial  lesult  was —that  he  became  intiospective.  The 
analysis  of  his  own  mind  was  the  great  theme  of  the  Indo-Aiyan.  With  the  Greek, 
on  the  other  hand,  who  arrived  at  a pait  of  the  caith  which  was  more  bcniitilul  than 
sublime,  the  beautiful  islands  of  the  Grecian  Archipelago,  nature  all  aiound  him 
generous  yet  simple, — his  mind  naturally  went  outside.  It  ^y'anted  to  analyse  the 
external  woild.  And,  as  a result  we  find,  that  fiom  India  have  sprung  all  the  analy- 
tical sciences,  and  from  Gieece  all  the  sciences,  of  gencralisaiion.  The  Hindu 
mind  w’ent  on  in  its  own  direction  and  produced  the  most  marvellous  results. 
Even  at  the  present  day,  the  logical  capacity  of  the  Hindus,  and  the  tremen- 
dous power  which  the  Indian  brain  still  possesses  is  beyond  compare.  We  all 
know  that  our  boys  pitched  against  the  boys  of  any  other  country  triumph  always.  At 
the  same  lime  when  the  national  vigour  went,  perhap.s  one  or  tw'o  centuries  before 
the  Mahommedan  conquest  of  India,  this  national  faculty  D».came  so  much  exaggerated 
that  it  degraded  itself,  and  we  find  some  of  this  degradation  in  everything  in  India,  in 
ait,  in  music,  in  sciences,  in  eveiy  thing.  In  art  no  more  was  there  a broad  con- 
ception, no  more  the  symmetry  of  form  and  sublimity  of  conception,  but  the 
tremendous  attempt  at  the  ornate  and  florid  style  had  aiiscn.  The  oiiginality  of 
the  lace  seemed  to  have  been  lost.  In  music  no  more  were  there  the  soul-stirring 
ideas  of  the  ancient  Sanskrit  music,  no  more  did  each  note  stand,  as  it  were,  on 
its  own  feet,  and  produce  the  inaivellous  harmony,  but  each  note  had  lost  its  indivi- 
duality. The  whole  of  modern  music  is  a jumble  of  notes,  a confused  mass  of 
curves.  Thai,  is  a sign  of  dcgiadalion  in  music.  So,  if  you  analyse  your  idealistic 
conceptions,  you  will  find  the  same  attempt  at  ornate  figures,  and  loss  of  originality. 


THE  WORK  BEFORE  VS 


93 


And  even  in  religion,  your  special  field,  there  came  the  most  horrible  degradations. 
What  can  you  expect  of  a race  which  for  hundreds  of  years  has  been  busy  in  discussing 
such  momentous  problems  as  whether  we  should  drink  a gla^  of  water  with  the 
right  hand  or  the  left  ? What  more  degradation  can  there  be  tl^lJfli-^that  the  gieaiest 
minds  of  a country  have  been  discussing  about  the  kitchen  fw  seveial  hundieds  of 
yeais,  discussing  whether  llmay  touch  you  or  you  touch  me,  and  what  is  the  penance 
for  this  touching!  The  themes  of  the  Vedanta,  the  siiblimest  and  the  most  gloiious 
conceptions  of  God  and  soul  ever  pleached  on  earth,  were  half-lost,  buried  in  the 
forests,  pieserved  by  a few  Sannyasins,  while  the  rest  of  the  nation  discussed  the 
momentous  questions  of  touching  each  other,  and  dress  and  food.  The  Mahommedan 
conquest  gave  us  many  good  things,  no  doubt ; even  the  lowest  man  in  the  world 
can  teach  something  to  the  highest ; at  the  same  time  it  could  not  bring  vigour  into 
the  race.  Then  for  good  or  bad,  the  English  conquest  of  India  took  place.  Of 
course  every  conquest  is  bad,  for  conquest  is  an  evil,  foreign  Goveinmenl  is  an  evil, 
no  doubt,  but  even  through  evil  comes  good  sometimes,  and  the  great  good  of  the 
English  conquest  is  this  : England,  nay  the  whole  of  Europe,  has  to  thank  Gieece  for 
its  civilisation.  It  is  Greece  that  speaks  thiough  eveij  thing  m Europe.  Every 
building,  every  piece  of  furniluie  has  the  impicss  of  Greece  upon  it;  Euiopcan 
science  and  ail  are  nothing  but  Giccian.  To-day  the  ancient  Gieek  is  meeting  the 
ancient  Hindu  on  the  soil  of  India.  Thus,  slowly  and  silently,  the  leaven  has  come, 
the  broadening  out,  the  life-giving,  and  the  levivalist  movement,  that  we  see  all  aiound 
us,  has  been  woiked  out  by  all  these  foices  together.  A bioader  and  moie  geneious 
conception  of  life  is  befoie  us,  and,  although  at  first  wc  have  been  deluded  a little 
and  wanted  to  nan ow  things  down,  we  aic  finding  out  to-day  that  these  geneious 
impulses  which  are  at  work,  these  bioader  conceptions  of  life,  arc  the  logical  intcrprc- 
talion  of  what  IS  in  our  ancient  books.  They  aie  the  carrying  out,  to  the  rigoiously 
logical  effect,  of  the  pi  unary  conceptions  of  our  own  ancestors.  To  become  broad, 
to  go  out,  to  amalgamate,  to  uni  vet  salisc,  IS  the  end  of  oui  aims.  And  all  the  lime 
we  have  been  making  ourselves  smaller  and  smaller,  and  dissociating  ourselves, 
contrary  to  the  plans  laid  down  in  oui  scriptuies. 

Several  dangers  are  m the  way,  and  one  is  that  of  the  extreme  conception  that 
we  are  the  people  in  the  world.  With  all  my  love  for  India,  and  with  all  my 
patriotism,  and  venciaiion  for  the  ancients,  I cannot  but  think  that  we  have  to  learn 
many  things  fiom  other  nations.  We  must  be  always  icady  to  sit  at  the  feet  of  all, 
for,  maik  you,  every  one  can  leach  us  great  lessons.  Says  our  great  law-giver,  Manu  ; 

Receive  some  good  knowledge  even  from  the  low-born  and  even  from  the  man 
of  lowest  bulb,  learn  by  service  the  road  to  heaven.’'  We,  therefore,  as  true  childicn 
of  Manu,  must  obey  his  commands,  and  be  ready  to  learn  the  lessons  of  this  life,  or  the 
life  hereafter  from  any  one  who  can  leach  us.  At  the  same  time  we  must  not  forget, 
that  we  have  also  to  teach  a great  lesson  to  the  world.  We  cannot  do  without  the 

woild  outside  India;  it  was  our  foolishness  that  we  thought  wc  could,  and  we  have 

paid  the  penalty  by  about  a thousand  years  of  slavery.  That  we  did  not  go  out  to 
compare  things  with  other  nations,  did  not  mark  the  workings  that  have  been  all 
aiound  us,  has  been  the  one  great  cause  of  this  degradation  of  the  Indian  mind.  We 
have  paid  the  penalty ; let  us  do  it  no  moie.  All  such  foolish  ideas,  that  Indians  must 
not  go  out  of  India,  are  childish.  They  must  be  knocked  on  the  head  ; the  more 

you  go  out  and  tiavcl  among  the  nations  of  the  world,  the  better  for  you  and  for 

your  countiy  If  you  had  done  that  for  hundreds  of  years  past  you  would  not  be 


94 


LECTURES— FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


heic  to-day,  at  the  feet  of  every  nation  that  wants  to  rule  India.  The  first  manifest 
effect  of  life  is  expansion.  You  must  expand  if  you  want  to  live.  The  moment 
)ou  have  ceased  tQ^  expand,  death  is  upon  you,  danger  is  ahead.  I went  to  America 
and  Europe,  to  whiw^u  so  kindly  allude  ; I had  to,  because  that  is  the  first  sign  of 
the  revival  of  national  life,  expansion.  This  national  reviving  life,  expanding  inside, 
threw  me  off  and  thousands  will  be  thrown  off  in  that  way.  Mark  my  words,  it  has 
got  to  come  if  this  nation  lives  at  all.  This  expansion,  therefore,  is  the  greatest  of 
the  signs  of  the  revival  of  national  life,  and  through  this  expansion  our  quota  of 
offering  to  the  general  mass  of  human  knowledge,  our  part  of  the  general  upheaval 
of  the  world,  is  going  out  to  the  external  world.  Again,  this  is  not  a new  thing. 
Those  of  you  who  think  that  the  Hindus  have  been  always  confined  within  the  four 
walls  of  their  country  through  all  ages,  aic  entiiely  mistaken  ; you  have  not  studied 
the  whole  books,  you  have  not  studied  the  history  of  the  race  aright  if  you  think  so. 
Each  nation  must  give  in  older  to  live.  When  you  give  life  you  will  have  life  ; when  you 
receive  you  must  pay  it  by  giving  to  all  others, and  that  we  have  been  living  for  so  many 
thousands  of  )ears  is  a fact  that  stares  us  m the  face,  and  the  solution  that  remains  is 
that  wc  have  been  always  giving  to  the’outside  world,  wh.atever  the  ignorant  may  think. 

Ikit  the  gift  of  India  is  the  gift  of  lehgion  and  philosophy,  and  wisdom, 
and  spirituality,  and  religion  docs  not  want  cohorts  to  march  before  its  path 
and  clear  its  way.  Wisdom  and  philosophy  do  not  want  to  be  carried  on  floods 
of  blood.  Wisdom  and  philosophy  do  not  march  upon  bleeding  human  bodies,  do 
not  march  with  violence  but  come  on  the  wings  of  peace  and  love,  and  that  has 
always  been  so.  Therefore  we  had  to  give.  I was  asked  by  a young  lady  in  London, 
“ What  have  you  Hindus  done  ? You  have  never  even  conquered  a single  nation.’' 
That  is  true  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  Englishman,  the  brave,  the  heioic,  the 
Kshatriya — conquest  is  the  greatest  glory  that  one  man  can  have  over  another.  That 
is  true  from  his  point  of  view,  but  from  ours  it  is  quite  the  opposite.  If  I ask  myself 
what  has  been  the  cause  of  India’s  greatness,  1 answer,  because  wc  have  never 
conquered.  That  is  our  glory.  You  are  hearing  every  day,  and  sometimes  1 am 
sorry  to  say  from  men  who  ought  to  know  better,  denunciations  of  our  religion, 
because  it  is  not  at  all  a conquering  religion.  To  my  mind  that  is  the  argument 
why  our  religion  is  truer  than  any  other  religion,  because  it  never  conquered, 
because  it  never  shed  blood,  because  its  mouth  always  shed  on  all,  woids  of  blessing, 
of  peace,  words  of  love  and  sympathy.  It  is  heie  and  here  alone  that  the  ideals  of 
toleration  were  first  preached ; and  it  is  here  and  here  alone  that  toleration  and 
sympathy  have  become  practical ; it  is  theoretical  in  every  other  country  ; it  is  here  and 
here  alone,  that  the  Hindu  builds  mosques  for  the  Mahommedans  and  churches  for 
the  Christians.  So,  you  see,  our  message  has  gone  out  to  the  world  many  a time,  but 
slowly,  silently,  unperceived.  It  is  on  a par  with  everything  in  India.  The  one  charac- 
teristic of  Indian  thought  is  its  silence,  its  calmness.  At  the  same  time  fhe  tremen- 
dous powxr  that  is  behind  it  is  never  expressed  by  violence.  It  is  always  the  silent 
mesmerism  of  Indian  thought.  If  a foieigner  takes  up  our  literature  to  study, 
at  first  it  is  disgusting  to  him ; there  is  not  the  same  stir,  perhaps,  the  same  amount 
of  go  that  rouses  him  instantly.  Compare  the  tragedies  of  Europe  with  our  tragedies. 
The  one  is  full  of  action,  that  rouses  you  for  the  moment,  but  when  it  is  over  there 
comes  the  reaction,  and  everything  is  gone,  washed  off  as  it  were  from  your  brains. 
Indian  tragedies  are  like  the  mesmeiist's  power,  quiet,  silent,  but  as  you  go  on 
Studying  them  they  fascinate  you ; you  cannot  move ; you  are  bound ; and 


THE  WORK  BEFORE  US  95 

whoever  has  dared  to  touch  our  literature  has  felt  the  bondage,  and  is  there  bound 
for  ever. 

Like  the  gentle  dew  that  falls  unseen  and  unheard,  and  yet  brings  into 
blossom  the  fairest  of  roses,  so  has  been  the  contiibution  of  feidia  to  the  thought 
of  the  world,  bilent,  unperceived,  yet  omnipotent  in  its  effect,  it  has  revolu- 
tionised the  thought  of  the  world,  yet  nobody  knows  when  it  did  so.  It  was 
once  remaiked  to  me,  “ How  difficult  it  is  to  ascertain  the  name  of  any  writer 
in  India,”  to  which  1 replied,  ‘ That  is  the  Indian  idea.’  Indian  writers  are  not 
like  modern  wi  iters,  who  steal  ninety  per  cent,  of  their  ideas  fiom  other 
authors,  while  only  ten  per  cent,  is  their  own,  and  they  take  care  to  write  a 
preface  in  which  they  say,  ‘ For  these  ideas  I am  responsible.’  Those  great 
master-minds  pioducing  momentous  results  in  the  hearts  of  mankind,  were  content 
to  wiite  their  books  without  even  putting  their  names,  and  to  die  quietly,  leav- 
ing the  books  to  posterity.  Who  knows  the  wi iters  of  our  philosophy,  who 
knows  the  wiiteis  of  our  Puianas?  They  all  pass  under  the  generic  name  of 
V) asa,  and  Kapila,  and  so  on.  They  have  been  true  children  of  Sn  Kiishna.  d'hey 
have  been  true  tolloweis  of  the  Gita;  they  piactically  earned  out  the  gieat  mandate, 

“ I'o  woik  you  have  the  right,  but  not  to  the  fruits  thereof.” 

Thus,  India  is  woiking  upon  the  world,  but  one  condition  is  necessary. 
Thoughts,  like  merchandise,  can  only  run  through  channels  made  by  .somebody. 
Roads  have  to  be  made  before  even  thought  can  travel  fiom  one  place  to  another, 
and  whenever  in  the  history  of  the  woi Id  a gieat  conquenng  nation  has  arisen,  link- 
ing the  dilfeient  paits  of  the  world  together,  then  has  poured  through  these  channels 
the  thought  of  India,  and  thus  enteied  into  the  veins  of  every  race.  Befoie  cvtui 
the  Buddhists  w'ere  boin,  iheie  aie  evidences  accumulating  eveiy  day  that  Indian 
thought  pcnctiated  the  world.  Before  Buddhism,  Vedanta  had  penetialed  into  China, 
into  Peisia,  and  the  Islands  of  the  Kastern  Archipelago.  Again,  when  the  mighty 
mind  of  the  Greek  had  linked  the  different  paits  of  the  castcin  woild  together, 
Iheie  came  Indian  thought ; and  Cluistianity  with  all  Its  boasted  civilisation  is  but  a 
collection  of  little  bits  of  Indian  thought.  Ours  is  the  religion  of  which  Buddhism, 
with  all  Us  greatness,  is  a lebel  child,  and  of  which  Christianity  is  a veiy  patchy 
imitation.  One  of  these  cycles  has  ag.un  ariived.  There  is  the  tremendous  power 
of  England  which  has  linked  the  dillerent  parts  of  the  woild  together.  English 
loads  no  mote  are  content  like  Roman  roads  to  run  over  lands,  but  they  have  also 
ploughed  the  deep  in  all  directions.  Fiom  ocean  to  ocean  run  the  roads  of  Fmgland. 
Flveiy  Iiait  of  the  world  has  been  linked  to  every  other  pait,  and  electiicity  plays  a 
most  marvellous  part  as  the  new  messenger.  Under  all  these  circumstances  we  find 
again  India  leviving,  and  ready  to  give  her  own  quota  to  the  progiess  and  civilisation  of 
the  world.  And  that  I have  been  forced,  as  it  were,  by  nature,  to  go  over  and  preach 
to  America  and  England,  is  the  result.  Every  one  of  us  ought  to  have  seen  that  the 
time  h^ad  arrived,  Ivveiything  looked  propitious,  and  Indian  thought,  philosophical 
and  spiritual,  must  once  moie  go  over  and  conquer  the  woild.  I he  problem  before 
us,  therefore,  is  assuming  larger  proportions  every  day.  It  is  not  only  that  we  must 
revive  our  own  country, — that  is  a small  matter ; I am  an  imaginative  man,  and  my 
idea  is  the  conquest  of  the  whole  world  by  the  Hindu  race. 

There  have  been  great  conquering  races  in  the  w'oild.  We  also  have  been  great 
conquerors.  The  stoiy  of  our  conquest  has  been  desciibed  by  that  noble  Emperor 
of  India,  Asoka,  as  the  conquest  of  religion  and  of  spiiituality.  Once  more  the 


96 


LECTURES—FROM  COLOMBO  TO  AlMORA 


woi Id  must  be  conquered  by  India.  This  is  the  dream  of  my  life,  and  I wish  that 
each  one  of  you  who  hear  me  to-day  will  have  the  same  dream  in  your  minds,  and 
stop  not  till  you  have  realised  the  dream.  They  will  tell  you  every  day  that  we  had 
better  look  to  our  own  homes  first,  and  then  go  to  work  outside.  But  I will  tell 
you  in  plain  language  that  you  work  best  when  you  work  for  others.  The  best 
work  that  you  ever  did  for  yourselves  was  when  you  worked  for  others,  trying  to 
disseminate  your  ideas  in  foreign  languages,  beyond  the  seas,  and  this  very  meeting 
is  proof  how  the  attempt  to  enlighten  other  countries,  with  your  thoughts  is  helping 
your  own  country.  One  fourth  of  the  effect  that  has  been  produced  in  this  country 
by  my  going  to  England  and  America  would  not  have  been  brought  about  had  I 
confined  my  ideas  only  to  India.  This  is  the  great  ideal  before  us,  and  every  one 
must  be  ready  for  it, — the  conquest  of  the  whole  world  by  India, — nothing  less  than 
that,  and  we  must  all  get  ready  for  it,  strain  every  nerve  for  it.  I^t  foreigners  come 
and  flood  the  land  with  their  armies,  never  mind.  Up,  India,  and  conquer  the 
world  with  your  spirituality  I Aye,  as  has  been  declared  on  this  soil  first,  love  must 
conquer  hatred,  hatred  cannot  conquer  itself.  Materialism  and  all  its  miseries  can  never 
be  conquered  by  mateiialism.  Armies  when  they  attempt  to  conquer  armies  only 
multiply  and  make  brutes  of  humanity.  Spirituality  must  conquer  the  West.  Slowly 
they  are  finding  out  that  what  they  want  is  spirituality  to  preserve  them  as  nations. 
They  are  wailing  for  it,  they  are  eager  for  it.  Where  is  the  supply  to  come  from  ? 
Where  are  the  men  ready  to  go  out  to  every  country  in  the  world  with  the  messages 
of  the  great  sages  of  India  ? Where  are  the  men  who  are  ready  to  sacrifice  every- 
thing, so  that  this  message  shall  reach  every  corner  of  the  world  ? Such  heroic 
souls  are  wanted  to  help  the  spread  of  truth.  Such  heioic  workers  are  wanted  to 
go  abroad  and  help  to  disseminate  the  great  truths  of  the  Vedanta.  The  world 
wants  it ; without  it  the  world  will  be  destroyed.  The  whole  of  the  Western  woi  Id 
is  on  a volcano  which  may  burst  to-morrow,  go  to  pieces  to-morrow.  They  have 
searched  every  corner  of  the  world  and  have  found  no  respite.  They  have  drunk 
deep  of  the  cup  of  pleasure  and  found  it  vanity.  Now  is  the  time  to  work  so  that 
India’s  spiritual  ideas  may  penetiate  deep  into  the  West.  Therefoie,  young  men  of 
IMadras,  I specially  ask  you  to  remember  this.  We  must  go  out,  we  must  conquer 
the  world  through  our  spirituality  and  philosophy.  There  is  no  other  alternative, 
we  must  do  it  or  die.  The  only  condition  of  national  life,  of  awakened  and  vigorous 
national  life,  is  the  conquest  of  the  world  b)-  Indian  thought. 

At  the  same  time  we  must  not  forget  that  what  I mean  by  the  conquest  of  the 
world  by  spiritual  thought,  is  the  sending  out  the  life-giving  principles,  'not  the 
hundreds  of  superstitions  that  we  have  been  hugging  to  our  breasts  for  centuries. 
These  have  to  be  weeded  out  even  on  this  soil,  and  thrown  aside,  so  that  they  may 
die  for  ever.  These  are  the  causes  of  the  degradation  of  the  race  and  will  lead 
to  softening  of  the  brain.  That  brain  which  cannot  think  high  and  noble  thoughts, 
which  has  lost  all  power  of  originality,  which  has  lost  all  vigour,  that  brain  which  is 
always  poisoning  itself  with  all  sorts  of  little  superstitions  passing  under  the  name 
of  religion,  wc  must  beware  of.  In  our  sight,  here  in  India,  there  are  several 
dangers.  Of  these,  the  two,  Scylla  and  Charybdis,  rank  materialism  and  its 
rebound,  arrant  superstition,  must  be  avoided.  There  is  the  man  to-day  who  after 
drinking  the  cup  of  western  wisdom,  thinks  that  he  knows  everything.  He  laughs 
at  the  ancient  sages.  All  Hindu  thought  to  him  is  arrant  trash,  philosophy,  mere 
child’s  prattle,  and  religion,  the  superstition  of  fools.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is 


THE  WORK  BEFORE  CS 


97 


(he  niAii  oduLMlcel,  bill  a bOil  ol  nionomani.ic,  ulio  iiins  lo  llie  oilioi  ivlieinc,  and 
lo  explain  ihc  omen  uf  ihi'j  ami  Uial.  lie  has  pliilu^ophieal  and  incUpliybical, 
and  Luid  knows  what  other  iiueiiie  cxpianaliniis  loi  c\eiy  sii[)('ibiilion  that  l)elongs  to 
111-,  peculiar  laee,  or  las  [)cculiai  ^^ods,  oi  his  peculiar  villai^e.  Kveiy  little  villaj^c 
buper^liUon  is  to  him  a mandate  of  the  \"edas.  and  ii[)on  the  cari) ing  out  of  it, 
aecoiding  to  him,  depends  the  national  hie.  Vou  must  bewaie  of  this.  I vonld 
lathcr  see  everyone  of  >oii  lank  atheists  than  siipeostitious  tools,  for  the  atlieibt 
is  alive,  and  you  can  make  something  out  of  him.  Ikit  if  supeistition  entcis,  the 
biain  is  gone,  the  brain  is  softening,  degradation  ha.s  seized  upon  the  life.  A\oid 
these  two.  Iliave,  bold  men,  the.se  aie  what  we  \tant.  What  we  want  is  vigour 
in  the  blood,  strength  in  the  iieives,  iron  muscles  and  nerves  of  steel,  not  .softening 
namby-pamby  ideas.  Avoid  all  these.  Avoid  all  rn)stety.  There  is  no  m)steiy 
m leligion.  Is  there  any  mysteiy  in  the  Vedanta,  or  in  the  Vedas,  or  in  the 
Samhitas,  or  in  the  Puranas  ? What  set  ret  societies  did  the  .s.rges  of  )Oie  establish 
to  pieach  their  leligion  ? What  sleight-of-hand  trieks  are  Iheie  recorded,  as  used 
by  them  to  luiiig  their  giand  truths  lo  humanity?  Mysteiy-mongeiing  and  supeisti- 
lion  aie  always  signs  of  weakness.  These  are  alwa)s  signs  of  degiadatiou  ami  of 
death.  Theiefore  beware  of  them;  be  st long,  and  slaiid  on  youi  own  feel,  Gieat 
things  aic  theie,  most  marvellous  things.  We  may  call  iheiir  supeinatuial  things 
so  far  as  our  ideas  of  natuie  go,  but  not  one  of  these  things  is  a myslciy.  It  was  never 
pleached  on  this  .sod  that  the  liulhs  of  religion  were  m)steiies  or  that  they  weie 
the  po^P^'i'ty  s>ocictie.s  sitting  on  the  snow-caps  of  ihe  Tlim.rlayas.  T liave 

been  m the  Himalayas.  You  have  not  been  thcie;  it  is  sevcml  humheds  of  miles 
liom  }oui  lionies.  lama  Samr>asin,  and  I have  been  for  the  last  louiteen  years 
on  my  feet.  These  mysleiioris  societies  do  not  exist  ainwheie.  Do  not  inn  after 
those  supeisUlrons.  Detlci  for  you  and  for  the  uu c ih.U \ou  bee  mie  rank  atheists, 
because  you  would  have  sliength,'btil  ihesc  are  degiadaiion  .uid  de.uh.  Shame  on 
humaniLy  that  stiong  men  should  spend  ihcii  lime  on  iheso  sai.eiSLuioiis,  spend  all 
ilieirtimcin  inventing  allegoues.  to  e.xplain  the  most  loiten  supeisblions  of  the 
world  He  bold  ; do  not  liy  to  explain  cveiylhmg  that  w.iy  d'ho  fact  is  that  we  have 

rii.iny  supeistitions,  m.any  bid  spots  and  soios  on  oui  bod)  -these  have  to  be 
excised,  cut  oil,  and  destroyed  -but  these  do  not  desio.y  oui  religion,  our  national 
hlo,  our  spiiitu.tlu>.  Tvei)  piinciple  of  u bgimi  is  safe,  md  the  sooner  the.se  black 
spcAs  are  puiged  away,  the  belter  the  piinciiiK  s w.ll  shine,  the  moie  gloiiously.  Stick 


to  llum.  , ...  , , 

You  hear  claims  made  by  cvciy  religion  as  being  the  nniveisal  o^ligion  of  he 
woild  r.et  me  tell  you  in  the  fust  pl.ice  inal  pei Inin  iheie  nevei  will  be  .such  a 
thing,  but  if  there  IS  a religion  uhmh  can  lay  claim  to  th.tt,  it  is  only  onis  and 
none  else,  because  every  olhei  lehgiou  depends  on  smne  peison  oi  peisons  All  the 
olhei  religions  have  been  built  round  die  hie  caf  wl.at  ihe)  ihmkar,  h.sionca  man,  and 
what  Ihev  think  the  strength  of  religion  is  reali)  llie  weakness,  hu  dispiove  the  histon- 
cahty  of  the  man  and  the  whole  fabiie  tumbles  to  the  giound  Hall  the  lives  caf  lhe.se 
great  founders  of  religions  irave  been  broken  inro  pieces,  and  ll.e  other  ha  f dorrbted 
very  seriously  As  such,  eveiy  t.uth  that  liad  its  ..ruction  only  m then  vvonls  vanishes 
into  air  But  the  tuiths  of  om  religion,  although  we  h.oe  pcisoiis  by  the  sune.  chmiot 
depend  upon  them.  'Ihe  gloiy  ol  Kndnu  is  riot  that  he  vvas  kn.hma  but  that  he 
was  the  groat  teacher  of  Vedauta.  If  ho  had  rrot  been  so,  hrs  name  would  bavc  died 
out  of  India  m tire  same  way  as  the  uaniv.  ot  HuJdiia  ha^  done,  ihus  our  allegiance 


LECTURES~i'ROM>  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


is  lo  the  piinciplcs  always  and  not  to  the  persons.  Persons  arc  but  the  cmbodi- 
menls,  the  illustrations  of  the  principles.  If  the  piincipies  arc  iheie,  the  persons 
\mII  come  by  the  thousands  and  millions.  If  the  piinciple  is  safe,  persons  like 
Puddha  will  be  boin  by  the  hundreds  and  thousands.  Put  if  the  piinciple  is  lost 
and  loi gotten  and  the  whole  of  national  life  tiies  to  cling  round  a so-called  histoiical 
person,  woe  unto  that  religion,  danger  unto  that  religion  I Ouis  is  the  only  religion, 
that  does  not  depend  on  a person  or  persons ; it  is  based  upon  piincipies.  At  the 
same  lime  theie  is  lOom  for  millions  of  persons.  There  is  ample  ground  for 
intioilucing  pet  sons,  but  each  one  of  them  must  be  an  illustration  of  the  jiiinciples. 
We  must  not  foiget  that.  These  piincipies  of  our  religion  arc  all  .safe,  and  it 
should  be  the  life-work  of  every  one  of  us  to  keep  them  .safe,  and  to  keep  them  free 
from  the  accumulating  diit  and  dust  of  ages.  It  is  strange  that  in  spite  of  the 
degiadation  that  seized  upon  the  lace  again  and  again,  these  piincipies  of  the  Vedanta 
weie  nevei  tarnished.  No  one,  howevei  wicked,  evei  dared  to  throw  dirt  upon  them. 
Our  sciipturcs  ate  the  best  pieserved  sciijitiucs  m the  woild.  Compared  to  other 
books  thcie  have  been  no  mteipolations,  no  texl-loituiing,  no  destioyiiig  of  the 
essence  of  the  thought  m them.  It  is  iheie  just  as  it  was  at  first,  diiecLing  the 
human  mind  towatds  the  ideal,  the  goal. 

You  find  that  these  texts  have  been  commented  ujion  by  different  commentaloi  s, 
preached  by  gieat  teacheis,  and  sects  founded  ujion  them,  and  you  find  that  in  these 
books  of  the  Vedas  there  aic  vaiious  appaienlly  contiadicloiy  ideas  There  aie  ceilain 
texts  which  ate  cnliiely  Dualistic,  otheis  aic  enliiely  Monistic.  The  Duahslic  com- 
mcnlatoi,  knowing  no  betlei,  wishes  to  knock  the  Monistic  texts  on  the  head. 
Tieacheis  and  piiesls  w.aiit  to  explain  them  in  the  Duahslic  meaning.  The  Monistic 
commcnlatoi  solves  the  Dualistic  texts  in  a similar  fashion.  Now  this  is  not  the  fault  of 
the  Vedas.  It  is  foolish  to  attempt  to  piove  that  the  whole  of  the  Vedas  is  Dualistic. 
It  is  equally  foolish  lo  attempt  to  piove  that  the  whole  of  the  Vedas  is  iion-Dualislic. 
They  are  Dualistic  and  non-Dualistic  both.  We  undeisland  them  bettei  lo-da}  in 
the  light  of  nevvci  ideas.  'I'hesc  aie  but  different  conceptions  leading  lo  the  final 
conclusion  that  both  Dualistic  and  i\Tonisiic  conceptions  aie  necessary  foi  the  evolu- 
tion of  the  mind,  and  therefore  the  Vedas  jircach  them.  In  meicy  to  the  human 
lacc  the  Vedas  show  the  various  steps  lo  the  higher  goal.  Not  th.il  they  aie  conlia- 
dictoiy  vain  vvoids  used  i)y  the  Vedas  to  delude  childicn  ; they  aie  necessai) , not 
only  foi  children  but  foi  many  a gi own-up  man.  So  long  as  w'e  have  a body  and 
so  long  as  vve  aie  deluiled  by  the  idea  of  the  identity  of  the  body,  sp  long  as  we 
have  five  senses  and  see  the  external  vvoild,  wc  must  have  a Personal  God.  For 
if  vve  have  all  these  ideas,  wc  must  take,  as  the  great  Ramanuja  has  pioved,  all  the 
ideas  about  God  and  Natuie  and  the  individualised  soul ; ^’hen  you  lake  the, one  you 
have  lo  take  the  whole  tiiangle — we  cannot  avoid  it.  Therefoic  as  long  as  }ou  see 
the  external  vvoild,  to  avoid  a Peisonal  God  and  a peisonal  soul  is  aiiant  lunacy. 
Pnit  there  may  be  times  in  the  lives  of  sages  when  the  human  mind  tianscends  as 
it  were  its  own  limitations,  when  man  goes  even  beyond  Natuic,  and  even  beyond 
where  the  Siuti  declaics — “From  whence  woiJs  fall  back  with  the  mind  without 
reaching  It.  Theie  the  c}es  cannot  leach  nor  the  cars,  w'O  cannot  say  that  we  know  It, 
we  cannot  say  that  vve  will  know  It.”  Kven  there  the  human  soul  tianscends  all 
Innilalions,  and  then  and  then  alone  flashes  into  the  human  soul  the  concejilion  of 
Monism-  -I  and  the  whole  univeise  arc  one,  I and  Biahman  aie  one.  And  this  conclu- 
sion you  v\  ill  Inul  has  not  only  been  leached  ihiough  knowledge  and  jihilosophy^ 


THE  WORK  BEFORE  US 


99 


but  parts  of  it  through  the  power  of  love.  You  read  in  the  Bhagavala  wlicii  KiMuia 
disappeared  and  the  Gopis  bewailed  his  disappcaiance,  that  at  last  the  tliouglit  of 
Kiibhna  became  so  prominent  in  tlieir  minds  that  each  one  foigot  hei  own  body 
and  thought  she  was  Kiislina,  and  began  to  decoiate  hciself  and  to  play  as  he  did. 
We  understand  therefore  that  this  identity  comes  even  tlnough  love.  Theie  was  an 
ancient  Peisian  Sufi  poet,  and  one  ot  his  poems  sa)^— “I  came  to  the  Beloved 
and  beheld  the  door  was  closed;  I knocked  at  the  dooi  and  from  inside  a voice 
came,  ‘ Who  is  there  ? ’ I leplied  ‘ I .am  ’ A .second  lime  I came  and  knocked  .at 
the  door  and  the  same  voice  asked,  ‘ Who  is  Iheie  ? ’ ‘ T am  so-and-so  ’ d'he  (haor 

did  not  open.  A third  time  I came  and  the  same  voice  asked  ‘ Who  is  thcie  ? ’ ‘I 
am  Thyself,  my  Love,’  and  the  door  opened.'’ 

There  are  theiefore  many  stages  and  we  need  not  cpiaiiel  about  them,  even 
if  there  have  been  cjuarrels  among  the  ancient  commenlaloi.s,  whom  all  of  us 
ought  to  revere,  foi  there  is  no  InniUtion  to  knowledge,  iheie  is  no  omni- 
science exclusively  the  propeily  ol  any  one  m ancient  oi  modem  times  If 


there  have  been  sages  and  Jvishis  in  the  past,  be  sine  th.il  theie  will  be  many 
now.  If  theie  have  been  Vyasas  and  Valmikis  and  Sankaiaehaiyas  m ancient 
times,  why  may  not  each  one  of  }Ou  become  a Sankaiachaiya .?  'i'his  is  another 
])oint  of  our  religion  that  you  must  always  remembei,  that  iii  .all  othci  sciipluies 
inspualioia  is  quoted  as  their  authoiil),  but  tins  inspii.ttion  is  limiled  to  a voi)  few 
poisons,  and  tlnough  them  the  tiiuh  came  to  the  masses,  and  we  luve  all  to  obey 
them.  Truth  came  to  fesus  of  N.i/aieth  ami  we  must  all  obey  him.  And  the  liiilh 
came  to  the  Rishis  of  India  the  manh a-drashhls.  the  seeis  of  thoughi -and  will 
come  to  all  Rishis  in  the  fuluie,  not  to  lalkeis,  not  to  book-swallowcis,  not  to  sclufiais, 
not  to  philologists,  but  to  seeis  of  thought.  The  self  is  not  to  be  leached  by  too 
much  talking,  not  even  by  the  highest  intellects,  not  even  l>y  the  study  ol  the 
Scrqiliiies.  The  Sciipluies  lliemselves  say  so  Do  you  fmd  in  any  other  Sciipluies 
such  a hold  asseition  as  that— not  even  by  the  study  of  the  Ved.as  will  )ou  leacb 
the  Atman  You  must  open  yoni  heail.  Religion  is  not  going  to  chmch,  oi  putlmg 

maiks  on  the  foiehcad,  or  dicssmg  in  a pecuh.ai  f.ishion  . you  m.iy  jiamt  )omsel\es 

in  all  the  colours  of  the  lainbow,  but  if  the  heail  has  not  been  oiiened,  it  ) on  have 
not  le.ahscd  God,  it  is  all  vain.  If  one  has  the  colour  of  the  heait  ho  does  not  want 
.any  external  coloui.  That  is  the  true  religious  re.alisation  We  must  not  foig.'t 
that  cnlonis  and  alltbesc  things  aie  good  so  fai  as  they  help,  so  lai  they  aic  ;dl 
welcome,  but  they  are  apt  to  degenerate  and  instead  of  helping  they  leUrd  , and  a 
man  identifies  lebgiou  with  exleinalilics  Going  to  the  temple  becomes  lan.amonnt 
to  spiritual  life.  Giving  something  to  a piicst  becomes  tantamount  to  ic  igious  lile. 

These  are  dangerous,  and  pernicious,  and  should  be  at  once  clieckcch  Om  sciip- 

tuies  declare  again  and  again  tlul  even  the  knowledge  of  the  external  senses  ,s  not 
lelKuon.  That  IS  icligion  w'luch  m.ikcs  us  le.ilisc  the  uiuh.mgcihle  One  .ind  that 
,s  the  leligum  for  evei>  one.  He  who  real.sc-s  transcendental  liuths.  hu  who  le  dises 

the  Atman  m his  own  natuie,  he  who  comes  face  to  f.ice  willi  iO(  w'cs  a oiu. 

in  evenlhing,  has  become  a R.sh.  And  theie  is  no  icugious  life  loi  )Ou  uiuil  }ou 

have  hccomc‘  a Rishi.  Then  alone  leligion  begins  foi  voa,  now  is  omy  the 

tiori.  Phen  lehgion  Lawns  upon  >ou,  now  you  aic  onl)  uudeigomg  nUclleclual 

gvmnasLics  and  [)h}sical  toi lutes.  i , .1  1 ,.i„ 

Wemusltterororeremcmbcillivl  our  ruliK^on  la;,  doun  dNincil;  ami  Ur.iily, 
lhal  eve.)  one  who  wants  salvation  must  i-ass  through  the  stage  ol  Ivishihood, 


JOO 


LECTrmES-^FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


■ — must  become  a mantt a-drasht<1,  mu's!  see  God.  d'hal  is  salvation,  that  is  the 
law  laid  down  by  our  .sciipimes.  TIumi  it  becomes  easy  to  look  into  the  sciip- 
ture  With  ovn  own  ewes,  untleisiand  the  menninp^  for  oiuselves,  to  analyse  just 
what  we  wain,  and  to  uiulci stand  the  tiulh  foi  ouiselvcs.  This  is  what  has  to 
be  done.  At  the  same  lime  we  must  pay  all  leverence  to  the  aneient  sages  for 
their  woik.  They  weie  great,  these  ancients,  but  we  want  to  be  greater.  They 
did  great  work  in  the  past,  but  we  must  do  greater  woik  than  they.  They  had 
hundieds  of  Rishis  in  ancient  India.  We  will  have  millions— w'e  arc  going  to  have, 
and  the  soonei  every  one  of  you  believes  in  this,  the  betiei  for  India  and  the  better 
forthewoild.  Whatever  you  believe  that  you  will  be.  If  you  believe  youiselves 
to  be  bold,  bold  you  will  be.  If  }Oii  believe  your.sclvcs  to  be  sages,  sages  yon  w'ill  be 
to-morrovv.  1 here  is  nothing  to  obstruct  you.  Foi  if  theiei.soiie  eomnion  doctiine 
that  runs  thiough  all  oui  appaiently  lighting  and  contiadictoiy  sects,  it  is,  that  all 
glory,  power  and  purity  are  withm  the  soul  alieady , only  accoitling  to  Ramanuja  the 
soul  contracts  and  expand'j  at  times,  .rnd  accuidmg  to  Sankaia,  it  comes  under  a 
delusion.  Nevci  mintl  these  difleiciiees  All  admit  the  liuth  that  the  power  is 
there— potential  or  manifest  it  is  there— and  the  .sooner  you  believe  that,  the  boiler 
for  you.  All  power  is  within  }ou;  you  can  do  an) thing  and  eveiything  Believe 
in  that,  do  not  believe  that  )(m  aie  weak;  do  not  believe  that ) on  aie  half-cia/y 
lunatics,  as  most  of  us  do  nowatlay.s.  But  \ou  can  do  anything  and  evei) thing 
without  evem  the  gmdaiue  of  any  one.  All  j>ow('i  ib  tlieic,  .Stand  up  and  e.xpiess 
the  Divinity  that  is  within  )on. 


THE  i'TJTHRE  OF  INDIA.*' 

This  is  the  anctcnl  land,  whoic  widsotn  nia{lc  ils  home  indole  it  went  into 
ether  country,  the  i^aine  Indi.i  whose  inllux  ol  spiiituahly  is  icpieseiiled,  as  it  \\ci  j,  on' 
tiie  maleiial  plane,  by  lollmg  iiveis  like  oceans,  where  the  eternal  Himalayas,  ii.siM 
liei  above  tier  with  their  snow-caps  lookiuL*  as  it  weie,  into  the  vciy  mysleiics  of  hcavef 
Ileie  is  the  same  India  whose  soil  ha.s  been  tiodden  by  the  feet  of  the  gieatest  sag*.'? 
that  evei  lived.  Ileic  fust  sprang  up  inqmiies  into  the  natiiic  of  man,  and  into  the 

internal  woild.  Ileie  fust  aiosc  the  dotliines  ol  the  nnmoilahty  of  the  Soul,  the 

existence  of  a supeiviMiig  Hod,  an  immanent  Hod  in  Naim e and  in  man,  and  here 
the  highest  ideals  of  leligion  and  philosophy  have  attained  their  culminating  points. 
This  is  the  land  from  whence,  like  the  tidal  waves,  spiutualii)  and  philosophy  have 
again  and  again  rushed  out  and  deluged  the  world,  and  this  is  the  land  from  whence 
once  more  such  tides  must  proceed  in  older  to  bung  life  and  vigour  into  the 
decaying  laces  of  mankind.  It  is  the  same  India  which  has  withstood  the  shocks  of 

cenluiics,  of  hundreds  of  fQt^ijyn  invasions^  of  himdie.ds  i>t  and 

customs.  It  is  the  same  land  which  stands  fiimer  than  any  lock  in  the  woild,  with  its 
undying  vigour,  indestiuciible  life.  Its  life  is  of  the  same  naluie  as  the  Soul,  without 
beginning  and  without  end,  immoital,  and  we  aic  the  childicn  of  such  a country. 

Childien  of  India,  I am  hcie  to  spea-lt  to  you  to-day  about  some  practical 
things,  and  my  object  in  lemindmg  you  about  the  gloiics  of  the  past  is  simply  this 
Many  times  have  1 been  told  that  looking  into  the  past  only  degcnciato.s  and  leads 
to  nothing,  and  that  we  should  look  to  the  fiUuic.  That  is  true.  But  out  of  the 
past  is  built  the  future.  Look  back,  thcicfoie,  as  far  as  you  can,  drink  deep  of  the 
eternal  fountains  that  aie  behind,  and  after  that,  lock  forwaid,  match  foiward  and 
make  India  biightei,  greater,  much  higher  than  she  ever  w'as.  Our  anccstois  were 
great.  We  must  first  recall  that.  We  must  loam  the  elements  of  our  being,  the 
blood  that  courses  in  our  veins  , w'e  must  have  faith  in  that  blood,  and  what  it  did 
in  the  past ; and  out  of  that  faith,  and  con.sciousncss  of  past  greatness,  we  must 
build  an  India  yet  gieatei  than  what  she  has  been.  Theie  have  been  peiiods  of  decay 
and  degradation.  I do  not  attach  much  importance  to  them ; we  all  know  that. 
Such  peiiods  have  been  nccc&.saiy.  A mighty  tiee  pioduccs  beautiful  ripe  fiiiil. 
That  fiuit  falls  on  the  ground,  it  decays  and  rots,  and  out  of  that  decay  spiings  the 
root  and  the  futuie  ticc,  perhaps  mightiei  than  the  first  one.  This  period  of  decay 
through  which  wc  have  passed  was  all  the  more  necessaiy.  Out  of  this  decay  is 
coming  the  India  of  the  fuluie;  it  is  spiouting,  its  fust  leaves  are  ahead/  out,  and 
a mighty  gigantic  tree,  the  Ur<JlrdU}muhw\  is  here,  ahead/  beginning  to  appear,  and 
it  IS  about  that,  that  I am  going  o ’.j>eil:  to  )(ri 

Ihe  problems  in  India  aie  moie  com]dicaled,  moie  momentous,  than  the 
problems  in  any  olhei  counn;,.  Rac-'  icligion,  ling  i ige,  Go\ei nment— all  these 
together  make  a nation  Tlu.  cl  monts  wli.  b re-mj  tl.e  iiilioa?  of  the  woild  are 
indeed  veiy  few  t-ihing  la.v  afl  o nro,  cnmpar?d  tn  tb  oonni.y.  Heie  ha\e  been 
the  Aryan,  the  Di.ivuliaii,  the  J'aitH  the  'Toik,  t^'e  f'b’gul  the  Ivaiopean,  - all  the 
nations  of  the  world  as  i'  were  j'.oniing  theo  blood  into  ih's  land  (Jf  languages 
the  most  wonderful  cciiglomeiatiou  IS  here  • of  maniieis  and  customs  there  is  more 


loa  LECTURES— FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 

difference  between  two  Indian  races  than  between  the  European  and  the  Eastern 
races. 

The  one  common  ground  that  we  have  is  our  sacred  traditions,  our  religion. 
7'hat  is  the  only  common  ground,  and  upon  that  we  shall  liave  to  build.  In  Europe, 
political  ideas  form  the  national  unity.  In  Asia,  religious  ideals  foim  the  national 
unity.  The  unity  in  religion,  therefore,  is  absolutely  necessaiy  as  the  first  condition 
of  the  future  of  India.  There  must  be  the  recognition  of  one  religion  throughout 
the  length  and  bieadth  of  this  land.  What  do  I mean  by  one  religion  ? Not  in  the 
sense  of  one  leligion  as  held  among  the  Cliiistians,  oi  the  JMahommedans,  oi  the 
Buddhists.  We  know  that  our  leligion  has  ceitain  common  giounds,  common  to 
all  our  sects,  however  varying  their  conclusions  may  be,  however  different  their 
claims  may  be.  So  there  aie  ceitain  common  giounds,  and  within  thcii  limitation 
this  religion  of  ours  admits  of  a maivellous  vaiiation,  an  infinite  amount  of  libeity 
to  think,  and  live  our  own  lives.  We  all  know  that,  at  least,  those  of  us  who  have 
thought,  and  what  we  want  is  to  bring  out  these  life-giving  common  principles  of 
our  religion,  and  let  eveiy  man,  woman  and  child  throughout  the  length  and  bieadth 
of  this  countiy,  understand  them,  know  them,  and  tiy  to  bring  them  out  in  their 
lives.  This  is  the  first  step,  and  therefore  it  has  to  be  taken.  We  see  how  in  Asia,  and 
especially  in  India,  race  difficullies,  linguistic  difficulties,  social  difiiculiies,  national 
difhculties,  all  melt  away  before  this  unifying  power  of  leligion.  We  know  that  to 
the  Indian  mind,  theie  is  nothing  highei  than  leligious  ideals,  that  this  is  the  key- 
note of  Indian  life,  and  we  can  only  woik  in  the  line  of  least  resistance.  It  is  not 
only  true,  that  the  ideal  of  leligion  is  the  highest  ideal ; in  the  case  of  India  it  is  the 
only  possible  means  of  work ; work  in  any  other  line,  without  first  slicngthening 
this,  would  he  disastious.  Therefore,  the  fust  plank  m the  making  of  a futuie  India, 
the  first  step  that  is  to  be  hewn  out  of  that  lock  of  ages,  is  this  unification  of  leligion. 
All  ot  us  have  to  be  taught  that  we  Hindus, — Dualists,  qualified  Monists,  oi  Monisls,  or 
any  other  sects,  such  as  Shaivas,  Vaishnavas,  Pashiipalas,-- -all  these  vaiions  denomi- 
nations, have  ccitain  common  ideas  behind  them,  and  that  the  time  has  come  when 
for  the  well-being  of  ourselves,  for  the  well-being  of  our  race,  we  must  give  up 
all  our  little  quairels  and  dilTercnces.  Be  suie  these  quarrels  arc  entirely  wrong ; 
they  aie  condemned  by  our  scripluies,  forbidden  by  our  foiefalhers  ; and  those  gieat 
men  fiom  whom  wc  claim  our  descent,  whose  blood  is  in  our  veins,  look  down  with 
contempt  on  their  childien  quarrelling  about  minute  differences. 

With  the  giving  up  of  quarrels  all  olhci  improvements  will  come.  When  the 
life-blood  is  strong  and  piiie  no  disease  germ  can  live  in  that  body.  Our  life-blood 
is  spirituality.  If  it  flows  clear,  if  it  flows  strong  and  pure  and  vigorous,  eveiy- 
ihing  IS  right ; political,  social,  any  other  material  defcv*^s,  even  the  poveily  of  the 
land,  will  all  be  cured  if  that  blood  is  pure.  For  T the  disease  germ  be  ihiown 
out,  nothing  will  be  able  to  cntei  into  the  blood.  To  take  a simile  from  modem 
medicine,  we  know  that  theic  must  be  two  causes  to  pioduce  a disease,  some  poison 
geim  outside,  and  the  state  of  the  body.  Until  the  body  is  in  a stale  to  admit  the 
germs,  until  the  body  is  degiaded  to  a lower  vitality  so  that  the  germs  may  entei  and 
thiive  and  multi jfly,  thcie  is  no  power  in  any  germ  in  the  woild  to  pioduce  a disease 
in  the  body.  In  fact,  millions  of  geims  are  continually  passing  tlnough  everyone’s 
body;  but  so  long  as  it  is  vigoious  it  ncvci  is  conscious  of  them.  It  is  only  wlien 
the  body  is  weak  that  these  goims  take  possession  of  it  and  pioduce  disease.  Just 
SO  vMth  the  national  life.  It  is  when  the  national  body  is  weak  tliat  all  sorts  of 


THE  FUTURE  OF  INDIA  103 

disease  prms  in  the  polilical  slate  of  the  races  or  in  its  social  stale,  or  in  its  educa- 
tional, intellectual  slate,  crowd  into  the  system  and  produce  disease.  To  remedy 
It,  therefore,  we  must  go  to  the  loot  of  this  disease  and  cleanse  the  blood  of  all 
impuiilies.  The  one  tendency  will  be  to  strengthen  the  man,  to  make  the  blood 
pure,  the  body  vigorous,  so  that  it  will  be  able  to  resist  and  thiow  off  all  external 
poisons.  We  have  seen  that  our  vigour,  our  strength,  nay,  our  national  life  is  in  our 
religion.  I am  not  going  to  discuss  now  whether  it  is  right  or  not,  whethe;  it  is 
collect  or  not,  whether  it  is  beneficial  or  not  in  the  long  lun,  to  have  this  vitality  in 
religion,  but  for  good  or  evil  it  is  there  ; you  cannot  get  out  of  it,  you  have  it  now 
and  for  ever,  and  you  have  to  stand  by  it,  even  if  you  have  not  the  same  faith,  that 
I have,  in  our  religion.  You  are  bound  by  it,  and  if  you  give  it  up  you  are  smashed 
to  pieces.  That  is  the  life  of  oui  race  and  that  must  be  .strengthened.  You  have 
withstood  the  shocks  of  centuries  simply  because  you  took  great  care  of  it,  you 
sacrificed  eveiything  else  for  it.  Your  forefathers  undeiwent  everything  boldly, 
even  death  itself,  but  preserved  their  religion.  Temple  after  temple  was  broken 
down  by  the  foreign  conqueror,  but  no  sooner  had  the  wave  passed  than  the  spiic 
of  the  temple  lose  up  again.  Some  of  these  old  temples  of  Southern  India,  and 
those  like  Somenalh  of  Gujerat,  will  teach  you  volumes  of  wisdom,  will  give  you 
a keener  insight  into  the  histoiy  of  the  lacc  than  any  amount  of  books.  Maik  how 
these  temples  beai  the  maiks  of  a hundred  attacks  and  a hundred  regeneialions, 
continually  destroyed  and  continually  spiinging  up  out  of  the  ruins,  lejuvcnated 
and  stiongas  evei  ' Tliat  is  the  national  mind,  that  is  the  national  life-current. 
Follow  It  and  it  leads  to  gloiy.  Give  it  up  and  you  die  ; death  will  be  the  only 
Jesuit,  annihilation  the  only  effect,  the  moment  you  step  beyond  that  life-current. 
1 do  not  mean  to  say  that  other  things  are  not  necessary.  I do  not  mean  to  say  that 
political  or  social  irnpiovcmcnts  are  not  necessaiy,  but  what  I mean  is  this,  and  I 
want  )ou  to  bear  it  in  mind,  that  they  are  sccondaiy  heie,  and  that  religion  is 
piirnary.  The  Inch.m  mind  is  first  icligious,  then  anything  else.  So  this  is  to  be 
slicnglheiied,  and  how  to  do  it?  I will  lay  before  you  my  ideas.  They  have  been 
in  my  mind  foi  a long  time,  even  }eais  before  I left  the  shores  of  Madias  for 
Ameiica,  and  that  I went  to  Ameiica  and  England  was  simply  for  pi opagating  those 
ideas.  1 did  not  care  at  all  for  the  Pailiament  of  Religions  or  anything  else  ; it  was 
simply  an  oppoitunity;  for  it  w'as  really  those  ideas  of  mine  that  look  me  all  over 
the  woild. 

My  idea  is,  first  of  all  to  biing  out  the  gems  of  spiiitiiality  that  are  stored  up 
in  oui  books,  and  in  the  possession  of  a few  only,  hidden,  as  it  weie,  in  monasteries 
and  in  foiests— to  biing  them  out ; to  bring  the  knowledge  out  of  them,  not  only  fiom 
the  hands  where  it  is  hidden,  but  fiom  the  still  more  inaccessible  che'Jl,  the  language 
in  which  it  is  preset ved,  the  inciustation  of  centuiies  of  Sanskrit  words.  In  one 
word,  I want  to  make  them  popular.  I want  to  biing  out  these  ideas  and  let  them 
be  the  common  properly  of  all,  of  every  man  in  India,  whether  he  knows  the 
Sanskrit  language  or  not.  The  great  difficulty  in  the  way  is  the  Sanskrit  language, 
this  glorious  language  of  ours,  and  this  difliculty  cannot  be  removed  until,  if  it  is 
possible,  the  whole  of  our  nation  are  good  Sanskiit  scholars.  You  will  understand 
the  difficulty  when  I tell  you,  that  I have  been  studying  this  language  all  my  life, 
and  yet  eveiy  new  book  is  new  to  me.  How  much  more  difficult  would  it  then  be  for 
people  who  never  had  lime  to  study  the  language  thoroughly  I Therefore  the  ideas 
must  be  taught  in  the  language  of  the  people;  at  the  same  lime,  Sanskrit  education 


rFrTl^RE^  -FK()^f  cor.omio  to  a/j/ora 


ro4 

rtiiisl  iro  on  ,ilf)nq:  wiili  it  l^ecau'^c  tliu  \ci}  sound  ol  Sansknt  wouls  ^4t\<.‘S  a picstit^e 
and  a pnwci  and  .i  stion!.;lh  to  ilio  latf  d lu*  .ill<  nipis  ol  tlic  K'‘Mt  Kamannja,  and  of 
( liailaiiya  and  of  Kalni  to  i oso  llu'  lowai  cl  (d  India,  sh(nv  that  maivcdlous  icbults 
c\(‘i 0 altaiiif'd  (lui m_i4  Ihc  lil<  liin^  s ot  iIiosl  140  it  j)io|dn.is,  }ct  the  latei  failuics 
have  to  lie  cxjiI.iiikmI,  md  v iioc  s|;,,„’ii  ali\  iIk  elivct  ol  then  li‘arhinyjs  suipped 
almost  within  a ceiilui)  ol  ihe  [>a-sin_i;  av.a)  ol  tin  se  ;.Meat  iMasteis  I’he  secicl 
IS  here,  d'hey  laixed  the  lower  classes,  they  had  all  the  wash  that  these  should 
come  uj),  hut  they  did  not  .ipj)l)  ihmr  eneiepes  to  the  spreading  of  the  Sanskrit 
language  among  the  masses  Isven  the  gicat  Jhiddha  made  fine  false  step  when 
he  stopped  the  Sanskiit  language  fiom  hemg  studied  hy  the  masses,  lie  wanted 
lapid  and  immedi.ile  lesulis,  anil  tianslated  and  jneached  in  the  language  of  the 
day,  Pfih  That  was  giand.  he  spoke  in  the  language  of  the  people,  and  the  peojile 
undeistood  him.  That  was  gical , it  spicad  the  ukas  ijuu  kl)  and  made  them  leich 
far  and  wide,  hut  along  with  lliat,  .Sanskiit  ought  to  have  spicad  ivnowledge  came 
but  the  piestigc  was  not  theie.  cultuie  was  noi  theie  It  is  t iilluie  that  wiihstamls 
shocks,  not  a simple  mass  ot  knowledgis  You  can  put  u mass  of  knowledge  into 
the  w'oild,  but  that  will  not  do  it  much  good  Theie  must  come  cullute  into  the 
blood.  We  all  know  in  modem  times,  of  nations  which  have  masses  of  knowleilge, 
but  what  of  them  ^ 'I'licy  aie  like  tigeis,  ilu*y  aio  like  savages,  because  cultuie  is 
not  there  Knowledge  is  only  skin-cKo'p,  as  civilisation  is,  and  a little  scralch  bungs 
out  the  old  savage;  .such  things  hapjien  , this  i»  the  daiieei  Teach  the  masses  in 
the  vei nacLilais,  give  them  ideas  , the)'  w'lll  gi  l mloimalioii,  but  something  moie  is 
necessaiy;  give  them  iiihuic  Until  \ou  give  them  that,  theie  can  be  110  ])cimanence 
in  the  raised  coiuhlion  of  tlu'  masses  Theie  will  he  .inolhci  caste  cieated,  having  the 
advantage  of  the  Sanskiit  language,  whii  h wilt  (pnckly  get  above  the  nst  and  lule 
ihcun  all  the  same  'I'he  only  safotv,  1 led  3011  men  who  belong,  lo  the  lowci  c. isles, 
the  only  way  to  laise  30111  comiuion  is  10  sindv  S msknt,  ind  thn  fighting  md  willing 
and  fiothing  ae'vinst  the  highei  easti^s  is  in  vain,  il  does  no  good,  and  il  cieales 
fight  and  (luaiiel,  <ind  this  i.icig  unloi innately  aluadv  divi  leil,  is  eoing  to  he  divided 
moie  and  more.  I'he  only  way  to  hung  about  the  levelling  of  castL  is  to  appio- 
priate  the  cultuie,  the  education  which  is  the  siieiiglh  of  the  hi.^lici  castes  'J'hat 
done,  3 on  have'  vvhai  3 on  want 

In  (onneclion  willi  this  T want  to  discuss  one  <|uc  lion  which  has  'i  paiticular 
bcaiing  with  legaul  to  Madias  Theie  is  .1  tlieoi\  ihaltluiewis  a 1 ice  oJ  mankind 
in  Southern  India  called  l)i a\ idians  eiiluely  dillei  mg  Mom  motlici  lace  111  Noilhein 
India  called  the  At)  lus,  .Old  ill. il  till'  Southei n Indi.i  Ihahin.ius  a.e  the  only  Aivans 
that  came  fiom  the  Noilh,  the  oihei  men  ol  S-.iitluin  Indta  h‘d>  ng  u.  an  cniiiel)' 
diffci eiU  caste  and  1 ace  to  those  of  Soulhcin  India  ihah.uaixs  Now  I beg  30111' 
])aidon.  Ml.  I'hilologisl,  this  is  eniiieiy  imlonnded  d'he  only  puad  of  it  is,  that 
theie  IS  a dilfcieiice  of  language  l.etween  the  Noilh  and  llu*  South.  T do  not  see 
any  olhei  diffeienre  \V<i  aio  so  many  Noilliei n min  Inie,  and  I a-^k  nr,  Kniopeaii 
fi lends  to  pick  out  th(.  Noi thei n and  .Sonthem  men  horn  ihis  assimhl)  AVheic  is 
the  diffeicnce?  A little  diffeience  of  langn.ige  Ihil  the  Ihahman'i  aie  a lace  that 
came  hcie  speaking  the  .Sanskiit  hingiiage  ' Well  then,  they  look  up  the  Diavidian 
langn.ige  and  foigol  then  Sanskiit  AVli)  sliouM  not  the  oduci  castes  have  dune 
the  same  ? W’h)'  should  not  all  the  othci  c.isIls  have  come  one  aftei  the  othei  horn 

NoUhi'iu  India,  t.ikcu  up  Ihe  Di.nidian  1 ingii.ig<',  and  so  foigotten  tlieii  own  ^ That 
is  an  aigumeut  vvijikm"-  lioih  ways  Do  not  heliev-,  in  sucli  s|l!\  ihmgs  TIrac  may 


THE  FUTURE  OF  WDIA 


to5 

have  been  a Dravidian  people  who  vanished  from  here,  and  the  few  who  remained 
lived  in  forests  and  other  places.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  language  may  have  been 
taken  up,  but  all  these  are  Aryans  who  came  from  the  Noith.  The  whole  of  India 
is  Aryan,  nothing  else.  Then  there  is  the  other  Idea  that  the  Sudra  caste  are  surely 
the  aborigines.  What  are  they  ? They  are  slaves.  They  say  history  repeats  itself. 
The  Amei  leans,  Knglish,  Dutch,  and  the  Portuguese  got  hold  of  the  poor  Afi  leans,  and 
made  them  work  hard  while  they  lived,  and  their  children  of  mixed  birth  were  bom 
in  slavery  and  kept  in  that  condition  for  a long  period.  From  that  wonderful 
example,  the  mind  jumps  back  seveial  thousand  years  and  fancies  that  the  same 
thing  happened  here,  and  our  archeologist  dieams  of  India  being  full  of  dark-eyed 
aboiigines,  and  the  bright  Aryan  came  from— the  Lord  knows  Avhere.  Accoriling 
to  some,  they  came  from  Cential  Thibet,  others  will  have  it  that  they  came  fiom 
Cenlial  Asia.  Theie  are  paliiotic  Englishmen  who  think  that  the  Aryans  weie  all 
red-haired.  Olheis,  according  to  their  idea,  think  that  they  were  all  black-haired.  If 
the  writer  happens  to  be  a black-haiicd  man,  the  Aryans  were  all  black.  Of  late, 
there  was  an  attempt  made  to  prove  that  the  Aryans  lived  on  the  Swiss  lakes.  I 
should  not  be  sorry  if  they  had  been  all  diowned  there,  theoiy  and  all.  Some  say 
now  that  they  lived  at  the  Noith  Pole.  Lord  bless  the  Aryans  and  their  habitations  ! 
As  for  the  truth  of  these  iheones,  there  is  not  one  word  in  our  .sciiptuies,  not  one, 
to  ptove  that  the  Aiyan  ever  came  from  anywhere  outside  of  India,  and  in  ancient 
India  was  included  Afghanistan.  'Pheie  it  ends.  And  the  theoiy  that  the  Sudra 
caste  were  all  non-Aiyans  and  they  were  a multitude,  is  equally  illogical  and  equally 
iiiational.  It  could  not  have  been  possible  in  those  days  that  a few  Aryans  settled 
and  lived  there  with  a bundled  thousand  slaves  at  their  command.  These  slaves  would 
have  eaten  them  up,  made  ‘ chutney  ’ of  them  in  five  minutes.  The  only  cxiilana- 
lion  is  to  be  found  in  the  IMahabharata,  which  says,  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  Satya 
Vuga  there  was  one  caste,  the  Brdhmans,  and  then  by  difference  of  occupations 

they  went  on  dividing  themselves  into  diffeient  castes,  and  that  is  the  only  true  and 

rational  explanation  that  has  been  given.  And  in  the  coming  Satya  Yuga  all  the 
olliei  castes  will  have  to  go  back  to  the  same  condition.  The  solution  of  the  caste 
problem  in  India,  thcicfoie,  assumes  this  foim,  not  to  degrade  the  higher  castes,  not 
to  ciush  out  the  Brahman. 

The  Biaiimanhood  is  the  ideal  of  humanity  in  India,  as  wonderfully  put  forward 
by  Sankaracharya  at  the  beginning  of  his  commentary  on  the  Gita,  wheie  he  speaks 
about  the  reason  for  Krishna’s  coming  as  a preacher  for  the  preservation  of  Biahman- 
hood,  of  Biahmanuess.  That  was  the  great  end.  This  Brahman,  the  man  of  God, 
he  who  has  known  Brahman,  die  ideal  man,  the  perfect  man,  must  remain ; he 
must  not  go.  And  with  all  the  defects  of  the  caste  now,  we  know  that  we  must  all 
be  ready  to  give  to  the  Biahmans  this  credit,  that  from  them  have  come  more  men 
with  real  Brahmanness  in  them  than  from  all  the  other  castes.  That  is  true.  1 hat 
is  the  credit  due  to  them  from  all  the  other  castes.  Wc  must  be  bold  enough,  must 
be  biavc  enough  to  speak  of  their  defects,  but  at  the  same  lime  we  must  give  the 
credit  that  is  due  to  them.  Remember  the  old  English  proverb,  ‘ Give  every  man  his 
due.’  Therefore,  my  fiiends,  it  is  no  use  fighting  among  the  castes.  What  good 
will  it  do?  It  will  divide  us  all  the  more,  weaken  us  all  the  more,  degrade 
us  all  the  more.  The  days  of  exclusive  privileges  and  exclusive  claims  are  gone 
gone  for  ever  fioni  the  soil  of  India,  and  it  is  one  of  the  great  blessings  of 
the  Biitish  Rule  of  India.  Even  to  the  I^Iahommcdan  Rule  wc  owe  that  great  blessing, 

N 


LECTURES--FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


Jo<5 

the  destruction  of  exclusive  privilege.  That  Rule  was,  after  all,  not  all  bad  ; nothing 
Is  all  bad,  and  nothing  is  all  good.  The  Mahommedan  conquest  of  India  came 
as  salvation  to  the  down-trodden,  to  the  poor.  That  is  why  one-fifth  of  our  people 
have  become  Mahommedans.  It  was  not  the  sword  that  did  it  all.  It  would  be  the 
height  of  madness  to  think  it  was  all  the  work  of  sword  and  fire.  And  one-fifth — 
onc-half— of  your  Madras  people  will  become  Christians  if  you  do  not  take  care, 
Wats  there  ever  a sillier  thing  before  in  the  world  than  what  I saw  in  Malabar  country  ? 
The  poor  Pariah  is  not  allowed  to  pass  through  the  same  street  as  the  high-caste 
man,  but  if  he  changes  his  name  to  a hodge-podge  English  name,  it  is  all  right ; or  to  a 
Mahommedan  name,  it  is  all  right.  What  inference  would  you  draw  except  that  these 
Malabaris  are  all  lunatics,  theii  homes  so  many  lunatic  asylums,  and  that  they  are 
to  be  treated  with  derision  by  every  race  in  India  until  they  mend  their  manners 
and  know  better.  Shame  upon  them  that  such  wicked  and  diabolical  customs  are 
allowed;  their  own  chddien  arc  allowed  to  die  of  starvation,  but  as  soon  as  they 
lake  up  some  other  religion  they  are  well  fed.  There  ought  to  be  no  more  fight 
between  the  castes. 

The  solution  is  not  by  bringing  down  the  higher,  but  by  raising  the  lower  up 
to  the  level  of  the  higher.  And  that  is  the  line  of  work  that  is  found  in  all  our 
books,  in  spite  of  wliat  you  may  hear  from  some  people  whose  knowledge  of  their 
own  scriptures  and  whose  capacity  to  understand  the  mighty  plans  of  the  ancients 
are  only  zero.  They  do  not  understand,  but  those  do  that  have  brains,  that 
have  the  intellect  to  grasp  the  whole  scope  of  the  work.  They  stand  aside 
iind  follow  the  wonderful  procession  of  national  life  through  the  ages.  They 
can  tiace  it  step  by  step  through  all  the  books,  ancient  and  modern.  What  is 
the  plan  ? The  ideal  at  one  end  is  the  Brahman  and  the  ideal  at  the  other  end  is 
the  Chandirla,  and  the  whole  work  is  to  raise  the  Chandala  up  to  the  Brahman. 
Slowly  and  slowly  you  find  more  and  more  privileges  granted  to  them.  There  are 
books  where  you  read  such  fierce  words  as  these  : “ If  the  Sudra  hears  the  Vedas, 
fill  his  cars  with  molten  lead,  and  if  he  remembers  a line,  cut  his  tongue  out.  If 
he  says  to  the  Brflhman,  ‘ You  Brihman,’  cut  his  tongue  out.”  This  is  diabolical 
old  barbarism,  no  doubt,  that  goes  without  saying ; but  do  not  blame  the  law-givers, 
who  simply  record  the  customs  of  some  section  of  the  community.  Such  devils 
sometimes  arose  among  the  ancients.  There  have  been  devils  everywhere  more  or  less 
in  all  ages.  Accordingly,  you  will  find  that  later  on,  this  tone  is  modified  a little ; 
as  for  instance — “ Do  not  distuib  the  Sudras  but  do  not  teach  them  higher  things.” 
Then  gradually  we  find  in  other  Smritis,  especially  in  those  that  have  full  power 
now,  that  if  the  Sudras  imitate  the  manners  and  (,.:stoms  of  the  Bifihmans  they 
do  well,  they  ought  to  be  encouraged.  Thus  it  is  going  on.  I have  no  time  to 
place  before  you  all  these  workings,  nor  how  they  can  be  traced  in  detail ; but  coming 
to  plain  facts,  we  find  that  all  the  castes  are  to  rise  slowly  and  slowly ; however, 
there  arc  thousands  of  castes  and  some  are  even  getting  admission  into  Brfihman- 
hood,  foi  what  prevents  any  caste  from  declaring  they  are  Brahmans  ? Thus  caste, 
with  all  its  rigour  has  been  created  in  that  manner.  Let  us  suppose  that  there  arc 
castes  here  with  ten  thousand  people  in  each.  If  these  put  their  heads  together  and 
say,  wc  will  call  ourselves  Brahmans,  nothing  can  stop  them ; I have  seen  it 
in  my  own  life.  Some  castes  become  strong,  and  as  soon  as  they  all  agree,  who  is 
to  say  nay  ? Because  whatever  it  was,  each  caste  was  exclusive  of  the  other.  It  did 
not  meddle  with  others’  affairs ; even  the  several  divisions  of  one  caste  did  not 


THE  FUTURE  OF  INDIA  toy 

meddle  with  the  other  divisions,  and  those  powerful  epoch-makers,  Sankaracharya 
and  others,  were  the  great  caste-makers.  I cannot  tell  you  all  the  wonderful  things 
they  fabricated,  and  some  of  you  may  resent  what  I have  to  say.  But  in  my 
travels  and  experiences  I have  traced  them  out,  and  have  arrived  at  most  wonderful 
results.  They  would  sometimes  get  hordes  of  Beluchccs  and  at  once  make  them 
Kshatriyas,  also  get  hold  of  hordes  of  fishermen  and  make  them  Bi'fihmans  forthwith. 
They  were  all  Rishis  and  sages  and  we  have  to  bow  down  to  their  memory.  So, 
be  you  all  Rishis  and  sages ; that  is  the  secret.  More  or  less  we  shall  all  be  Rishis. 
What  is  meant  by  a Rishi  ?— the  pure  one.  Be  pure  first,  and  you  will  have  power. 
Simply  saying  “ I am  a Rishi,”  will  not  do,  but  when  you  are  a Rishi  you  will  find 
that  others  obey  you  instinctively.  Something  mysterious  emanates  from  you,  which 
makes  them  follow  you,  makes  them  hear  you,  makes  them  unconsciously,  even 
against  their  will,  carry  out  your  plans.  That  is  Rishihood. 

Now,  as  to  the  details,  they,  of  course,  have  to  be  worked  out  through  generations. 
But  this  is  merely  a suggestion  in  order  to  show  you  that  these  quarrels  should  cease. 
Especially  do  I regret  that  in  modern  times  there  should  he  so  much  discus- 
sion between  the  castes.  This  must  stop.  It  is  useless  on  both  sides,  especially 
on  the  side  of  the  higher  caste,  the  Brahman,  because,  the  day  for  these  piivilcges 
and  exclusive  claims  is  gone.  The  duty  of  every  aristocracy  is  to  dig  its  owa 
"lavc,  and  the  sooner  it  does  so,  the  better.  The  more  it  delays,  the  more  it  will 
fester  and  the  worse  death  it  will  die.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  Brahman,  therefore,  to 
\vork  for  the  salvation  of  the  rest  of  mankind,  in  India.  If  he  does  that  and  so  long 
as  he  docs  that,  he  is  a Buthman,  but  he  is  ho  Br.^hman,  when  he  goes  about  making 
money.  You  on  the  other  hand  should  give  help  only  to  the  rightful  Brahman,  who 
deserves  it ; that  leads  to  heaven,  but  sometimes  a gift  to  another  person  who  docs 
not  deserve  it,  leads  to  the  other  place,  says  our  scripture.  You  must  be  on  your 
guard  about  that.  He  only  is  the  Brahman  who  has  no  secular  employment.  Secu- 
lai  employment  is  not  for  the  Brahman  but  for  the  other  castes.  To  the  BnlUmans  I 
appeal,  that  they  must  work  hard  to  raise  the  Indian  people  by  teaching  them  what 
tlu'y  know,  by  giving  out  the  culture  that  they  have  accumulated  for  centuries.  It  is 
cleaily  the  duty  of  the  Bic^hmans  of  India  to  remember  what  real  Brahmanhood  is. 
As  Manu  says,  all  these  piivileges  and  honours  are  given  to  the  Brahman  because,  “with 
him  is  the  treasury  of  viitue.”  He  must  open  that  treasuiy  and  distribute  its  valuables 
to  the  woild.  It  is  true  that  he  was  the  earliest  preacher  to  the  Indian  races,  he  was  the 
fust  to  renounce  everything  in  order  to  attain  to  the  higher  realisation  of  life,  before 
olheis  could  reach  to  the  idea.  It  was  not  his  fault  that  he  marched  ahead  of  the  other 
castes.  Why  did  not  the  other  caster  so  undei stand  and  do  as  they  did  ? Why  did 
they  sit  down  and  be  lazy,  and  let  the  Barhmans  win  the  race  ? But  it  is  one  thing  to 
gain  an  advantage,  and  another  thing  to  preserve  it  for  evil  use.  Whenever  power 
is  used  for  evil  it  becomes  diabolical ; it  must  be  used  for  good  only.  So  this 
accumulated  culture  of  ages  of  which  the  Brahman  has  l>ccn  the  trustee,  he  must 
now  give  to  the  people  at  large,  and  it  was  because  he  did  not  give  it  to  the  people, 
that  the  Mahommedan  invasion  was  possible.  It  was  because  he  did  not  open  this 
treasury  to  the  people  from  the  beginning,  that  for  a thousand  years  we  have  been 
trodden  under  the  heels  of  every  one  who  chose  to  come  to  India ; it  was  thiough 
that  we  have  become  degraded,  and  the  first  task  must  be  to  break  open  the  cells  that 
hide  the  wonderful  treasures  which  our  common  ancestois  accumulated;  bring 
them  out,  and  give  them  to  everybody,  and  the  Brdhman  must  be  the  first  to  do  it. 


LECTURES— FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


108 

There  is  an  old  superstition  in  Bengal  that  if  the  cobra  that  bites,  sucks  out  his  own 
poison  from  the  patient,  the  man  must  survive.  Well  then,  the  Brdhman  must  suck 
out  his  own  poison.  To  the  non-Brdhman  castes-I  say,  wait,  be  not  in  a hurry.  Do 
not  seize  every  opportunity  of  fighting  the  Brdhman,  because  as  I have  shown,  you 
aie  suffering  from  your  own  fault.  Who  told  you  to  neglect  spirituality  and  Sanskrit 
learning.?  What  have  you  been  doing  all  this  lime?  Why  have  you  been  in- 
different ? Why  do  you  now  fret  and  fume  because  somebody  else  had  more  brains, 
more  energy,  more  pluck  and  go,  than  you  ? Instead  of  wasting  your  energies  in 
vain  discussions  and  quarrels  in  the  newspapers,  instead  of  fighting  and  quarrelling 
in  your  own  homes, — which  is  sinful, — use  all  your  energies  in  acquiring  the  culture 
which  the  BrAhman  has,  and  the  thing  is  done.  Why  do  you  not  become  Sanskrit 
scholars  ? Why  do  you  not  spend  millions  to  bring  Sanskrit  education  to  all  the 
castes  of  India  ? That  is  the  question.  The  moment  you  do  these  things,  you  are 
equal  to  the  BrAhman.  That  is  the  secret  of  power  in  India. 

Sanskrit  and  prestige  go  together  in  India.  As  soon  as  you  have  that,  none  dares 
say  anything  against  you.  That  is  the  one  secret;  lake  that  up.  The  whole 
universe,  to  use  the  ancient  Advaitist’s  simile,  is  in  a state  of  self-hypnotism.  It  is 
will  that  is  the  power.  It  is  the  man  of  strong  will  that  throws,  as  it  were,  a halo  round 
him  and  brings  all  other  people  to  the  same  state  of  vibration  as  he  has  in  his  own 
mind.  Such  gigantic  men  do  appear.  And  what  is  the  idea  ? When  a powerful 
individual  appears,  his  personality  infuses  his  thoughts  into  us,  and  many  of  us  come 
to  have  the  same  thoughts  and  thus  we  become  powerful.  Why  is  it  that  organisations 
are  so  powerful  ? Do  not  say  organisation  is  material.  Why  is  it,  to  take  a case  in 
point,  that  forty  millions  of  Englishmen  rule  three  hundred  millions  of  people  here  ? 
What  is  the  ps)chological  explanation  ? The.se  foity  millions  pul  their  wills  together 
and  that  means  infinite  power,  and  you  three  hundred  millions  have  a will  each  separate 
from  the  other.  Therefore  to  make  a great  future  India,  the  whole  secret  lies  in  organi- 
sation, accumulation  of  power,  co-ordination  of  wills.  Already  befoic  my  mind  li.ses 
one  of  the  marvellous  verses  of  the  Atharva  Veda  Samhita  which  says.  “ Be  thou  all 
of  one  mind,  be  thou  all  of  one  thought,  for  in  the  days  of  yore,  the  gods  being 
of  one  mind  were  enabled  to  receive  oblations.  That  the  gods  can  be  worshipped 
by  men  is  because  they  are  of  one  mind.”  Being  of  one  mind  is  the  secret  of 
society.  And  the  more  you  go  on  fighting  and  quairelling  about  all  tiivialilies 
such  as  “Dravidian”  and  “Aryan,”  and  the  question  of  BrAhmans  and  non-Brdhmans 
and  all  that,  the  further  you  are  off  from  that  accumulation  of  energy  and  power 
which  is  going  to  make  the  future  India.  For  mark  you,  the  future  India  depends 
entirely  upon  that.  This  is  the  secret,  accumulation  of  will-power,  co-ordina- 
tion, biinging  them  all,  as  it  were,  into  one  focus.  Each  Chinaman  thinks  in  his 
own  way,  and  a handful  of  Japane.se  all  think  in  the  same  way.  and  you  know  the 
result.  That  is  how  it  goes  throughout  the  history  of  the  world.  You  find  in 
every  case,  compact  little  nations  always  governing  and  ruling  huge  unwieldy  nations, 
and  this  is  natural,  because  it  is  easier  for  the  little  compact  nations  to  bring  their 
ideas  into  the  same  focus,  and  thus  they  become  developed.  And  the  bigger  the 
nation,  the  more  unwieldy  it  is.  Born,  as  it  were,  a disorganised  mob,  they  cannot 
combine.  All  these  dissensions  must  stop. 

There  is  yet  another  defect  in  us.  Ladies,  excuse  me,  but  through  centuries 
of  slavery,  w'c  have  become  like  a nation  of  women.  You  scaicely  can  gel  three 
women  together  for  five  minutes  in  this  country,  or  any  other  country  but  they 


THE  FUTURE  OF  INDIA  ,09 

quarrel.  Women  make  big  societies  in  European  countries,  and  make  tremendous 
declarations  of  women  s power  and  so  on  ; then  they  quaiiel,  and  some  man  comes 
and  rules  them  all.  All  over  the  woild  they  still  lequirc  some  man  to  rule  them. 
We  are  like  them.  Women  we  are.  If  a woman  comes  to  lead  women  they  all 
begin  immediately  to  ciilicise  her,  tear  her  to  pieces,  and  make  her  sit  down.  If 
a man  comes  and  gives  them  a little  harsh  treatment,  scolds  them  now  and  then, 

It  is  all  light,  they  have  been  used  to  that  sort  of  mesmerism.  The  whole  world  is 
full  of  such  mesmerists  and  hypnotists.  In  the  same  way,  if  one  of  our  coimti>men 

stands  up  and  tiies  to  become  great,  we  all  try  to  hold  him  down,  hut  if  a foieigner 

comes  and  tries  to  kick  us,  it  is  all  light.  Wc  have  been  used  to  it,  have  we 
not  ? And  slaves  must  become  great  masters  ! So  give  up  being  a slave.  For  the  next 
fitty  years  this  alone  shall  be  our  keynote,— this,  our  great  Mother  India.  Let  all  other 
vain  Gods  disappear  for  that  time  from  our  minds.  This  is  the  only  God  that  is 
awake,  our  own  race,  eveiywhere  His  hands,  everywhere  His  feet,  everywhere  His 
eais,  He  coveis  everything.  All  other  Gods  are  sleeping  What  vain  Gods  shall  w'e 
go  after  and  yet  cannot  w'oiship  the  God  that  wc  sec  all  round  us,  the  Vird/,  When 
we  have  worshipped  this,  we  shall  be  able  to  worship  all  other  Gods.  Before  we 
can  crawl  half  a mile,  wc  want  to  cross  the  ocean,  like  Hanumdn  ' It  cannot  be.  * 
Everyone  going  to  he  a Yogi,  cveiyonc  going  to  meditate  ! It  cannot  be.  I'he  whole 
day  mixing  with  the  world,  with  Kaima-kaiula,  and  in  the  evening  sitting  down  and 
blowing  through  your  nose'  Is  it  so  easy?  Should  Rishis  come  lljing  ihioiigli 
the  air,  because  you  have  blown  three  times  through  the  nose  ? Is  it  a joke  ? It  is  "all 
nonsense.  What  is  needed  is  ChUtiuhnddbi,  purification  of  the  heart.  And  how  does 
that  come  ? The  fust  of  all  woiship,  is  the  w-orship  of  the  Virdt,—oi  those  all  around 
us.  Worship  It.  Woiship  is  the  exact  equivalent  of  the  Sanskiit  wwd,  and  no  other 
English  word  will  do.  'I'hesc  are  all  our  Gods,— men  and  animals,  and  the  first  Gods 
we  have  to  worship  are  our  own  countrymen.  That  is  what  wc  have  to  woiship,  instead 
of  being  jealous  of  each  other  and  fighting  each  other.  It  is  the  most  tciiible 
Karma  foi  which  we  are  siiffeiing,  and  yet  it  does  not  open  our  eyes  ! 

Well,  the  subject  is  so  great  that  I do  not  know  where  to  stop,  and  I must  bring 
my  lecture  to  a close  by  jdacing  before  you  in  a few  words  the  plans  I w.ant  to 
cairy  out  m Madras.  Wc  must  have  a hold  on  the  spiiitual  and  secular  education 
of  the  nation.  Do  you  understand  that  ? You  must  dream  it,  you  must  talk  it, 
you  must  think  it,  and  you  must  work  it  out.  Till  then  there  is  no  salvation  for 
the  race.  The  education  that  you  are  getting  now  has  some  good  points,  but  it  has 
a tremendous  dis.advantage  which  is  .so  great  that  the  good  things  aie  all  weighed 
down.  In  the  first  pl.^ce  it  is  not  a man-making  education,  it  is  merely  and  entirely  a 
neg.ative  education.  A negative  education  or  any  training  that  is  given  to  negation, 
is  worse  than  death.  The  child  is  taken  to  school,  and  the  first  thing  he  learns  is 
that  his  father  is  a fool,  the  second  thing,  that  his  grandfather  is  a lunatic,  the  third 
thing  that  all  his  teachers  are  hypociites,  the  fourth,  th.at  all  the  s.acred  books  are  lies  1 
By  the  time  he  is  sixteen  he  is  a mass  of  negation,  lifeless  and  boneless.  And  the 
result  is,  that  fifty  years  of  such  education  has  not  produced  one  original  man  in  the 
three  Presidencies.  Every  man  of  oiiginality  that  has  been  produced  has  been 
educated  elsewhere,  and  not  in  this  country,  or  they  have  gone  to  the  old  universities 
once  more  to  cleanse  themselves  of  .supcistitions.  Education  is  not  the  amount 
of  mfoimation  that  is  put  into  your  biain  and  runs  riot  there,  undigested,  all  your  life. 
We  must  have  life-budding,  man-making,  character-making,  assimilation  of  ideas. 


110 


LECTURES— FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


If  you  have  assimilated  five  ideas  and  made  them  your  life  and  character,  you  have 
moie  education  than  any  man  who  has  got  by  heart  a whole  library,  anrr 

%TTr  ^ l “ The  ass  cariying  its  load  of  sandalwood  knows 

only  the  weight  and  not  the  value  of  the  sandalwood.”  If  education  is  identi- 
cal with  information,  the  libraries  are  the  greatest  sages  in  the  world,  and  en- 
cyclopaidias  are  the  Rishis.  The  ideal  therefore  is,  that  we  must  have  the 
whole  education  of  our  country,  spiiilual  and  secular,  in  our  own  hands,  and  it 
must  be  on  national  lines,  thiough  national  methods,  as  far  as  practicable.  Of 
course  this  is  a very  big  scheme,  a veiy  big  plan.  I do  not  know  whether  it  will 
ever  work  out.  Rut  we  must  begin  the  work.  But  how  ? Take  Madras,  for 
instance.  We  must  have  a temple,  for  with  Hindus,  religion  must  come  first.  Then, 
you  may  say,  all  sects  will  quairel  about  it.  But  we  will  make  it  a non-sectarian 
temple,  having  only  “ Om,”  as  the  symbol,  the  greatest  symbol  of  any  sect.  If 
there  is  any  sect  hcie,  which  believes  that  “ Om”  ought  not  to  be  the  symbol,  it  has 
no  light  to  call  itself  Hindu.  All  will  have  the  light  to  interpret  Hinduism,  each 
one  according  to  his  own  sect  ideas,  but  we  must  have  a common  temple.  You 
^ can  have  your  own  images  and  symbols  in  other  places,  but  do  not  quarrel  here  with 
those  who  differ  from  you.  lleie  should  be  taught  the  common  grounds  of  our 
different  sects,  and  at  the  same  lime  the  diffeient  sects  should  have  perfect  liberty 
to  come  and  teach  their  doctrines,  with  only  one  lestiiction,  that  is,  not  to  quairel 
with  other  sects.  Say  what  you  have  to  say,  the  world  wants  it,  but  the  world  has 
no  time  to  hear  what  you  think  about  other  people  ; you  can  keep  that  to  youi .selves. 
Secondly,  in  connection  with  this  temple  there  should  be  an  institution  to  tram 
teachers  who  must  go  about  preaching  religion  and  giving  secular  education  to  our 
people  ; they  must  cairy  both.  As  we  have  been  already  carrying  religion  from 
door  to  dooi,  let  us  along  with  it  carry  secular  education  also.  That  can  be 
easily  done.  Then  the  work  will  extend  through  these  bands  of  teachers  and 
preachers,  and  gradually  we  shall  have  similar  temples  in  other  centres,  until  we 
have  covered  the  whole  of  India.  That  is  my  plan.  It  may  appear  gigantic,  but 
it  is  much  needed.  You  may  ask,  where  is  the  money.  Money  is  not  needed. 
Money  is  nothing.  For  the  last  twelve  years  of  my  life,  I did  not  know  where  the  next 
meal  would  come-fiom  ; but  money  and  everything  else  I want  must  come,  because 
they  are  my  slaves,  and  not  I theirs  ; money  and  everything  else  must  come.  Must, 
— that  is  the  word.  Whcie  aic  the  men  ? That  is  the  question.  Young  men  of 
IMadias,  my  hope  is  in  you.  Will  you  respond  to  the  call  of  your  nation?  Each  one 
of  you  has  a gloiious  futuie  if  you  dare  believe  me.  Have  a tremendous  faith  in  your- 
selves, like  the  faith  I had  when  I was  a child,  and  which  I am  working  out  now.  Have 
that  faith,  each  one  of  you,  in  yourself,  that  eternal  power  is  lodged  in  every  soul, 
and  you  will  revive  the  whole  of  India.  Aye,  we  will  then  go  to  every  country 
under  the  sun,  and  our  ideas  will  before  long  be  a component  of  the  many  forces 
that  are  woiking  to  make  up  every  nation  in  the  world.  We  must  enter  into  the  life  of 
every  race  in  India  and  abroad  ; we  shall  have  to  work  to  bring  this  about.  Now  for 
that,  I w'ant  young  men.  “ It  is  the  young,  the  stiong,  and  healthy,  of  sharp  intellect, 
that  will  reach  the  Loid,”  say  the  Vedas.  This  is  the  time  to  decide  your  future — ■ 
while  you  possess  the  energy  of  youth,  not  when  you  aie  worn  out  and  jaded,  but  in 
the  fieshness  and  vigoiu  of  youth.  Work;  this  is  the  time,  for  the  freshest,  the 
untouched  and  imsmellcd  flowers  alone  are  to  be  laid  at  the  feet  of  the  Lord,  and 
such  He  receives.  Rouse  yourselves,  therefore,  for  life  is  shoit.  There  are  greater 


THE  FUTURE  OF  INDIA  1 1 x 

works  to  be  clone  than  aspiring  to  become  lawyers,  and  picking  quarrels,  and  such 
things.  A far  greater  work  is  this  sacrifice  of  yourselves  for  the  benefit  of  your  race, 
for  the  welfare  of  humanity.  What  is  in  this  life  ? You  are  Hindus,  and  there  is 
the  instinctive  belief  in  you  that  life  is  eternal.  Sometimes  I have  young  men  come 
and  talk  to  me  about  Atheism  ; I do  not  believe  a Hindu  can  become  an  atheist. 
He  m^y  reatrEuropcau  books,  and  persuade  himself  he  is  a maleiialist,  but  it  is 
only  for  a time.  It  is  not  in  your  blood.  You  cannot  believe  what  is  not  in  your 
constitution ; it  would  be  a hopeless  task  for  you.  Do  not  attempt  that  sort  of 
thing.  I once  attempted  it  when  I was  a boy ; but  it  could  not  be.  Life  is  shoil,  but 
the  Soul  is  immortal  and  eternal,  and  one  thing  being  certain,  death,  jet  us  thciefore 

take  up  a great  ideal,  and  give  up  our  whole  life  to  it.  T.ei  this  be  our  determination, 
and  may  He,  the  Lord,  who  “ comes  again  and  again  for  the  salvation  of  Ills  own 
people,”  to  quote  fiom  our  sciiptures,— may  the  gieat  Kiishna  bless  us,  and  lead  U3 
all  tQ  the  fulfilment  of  our  aims  1 


ON  CHARITY. 

During  his  stay  in  Madras  the  ^wami  presided  at  the  annual  meeting  of  the 
Chennapun  Annaclana  .Samajam,  an  institution  of  a chaiilable  nature,  and  in  the 
course  of  a brief  address  leferred  to  a icmark  by  a piovious  spicakcr  deprecating 
special  alms-giving  to  the  Biahman  over  and  above  the  other  castes.  Swainiji  pointed 
out,  that  this  had  its  good  as  well  as  its  bad  side.  All  the  cultmc  practically,  which 
the  nation  possessed  was  among  the  Bifihmans,  and  they  also  had  been  the  thinkers 
of  the  nation.  Take  away  the  means  of  living  which  enabled  them  to  be  thinkers, 
and  the  nation  as  a whole  would  sulTer.  Speaking  of  the  indiscriminate  charily  of 
India  as  compared  with  the  legal  charily  of  other  nations,  he  said,  the  outcome  of 
Iheii  system  of  relief  was,  that  the  vagabond  in  India  was  contented  to  icccive  icadily 
what  he  was  given  readily,  and  lived  a peaceful  and  contented  life  : while  the  vagabond 
in  the  West,  unwilling  to  go  to  the  poor-house, — for  man  loved  lilieily  more  than 
food — turned  a robber,  the  enemy  of  society,  and  nccessiUled  the  oiganisalion  of 
a system  of  magistracy,  police,  jails,  and  other  establishments.  Poverty  there  must 
be,  so  long  as  the  disease  known  as  civilisation  existed : and  hence  the  need  for 
relief.  So  that  they  had  to  choose  between  the  indiscriminate  charity  of  India,  which, 
in  the  case  of  Sannyasins  at  any  rate,  even  if  they  were  not  sincere  men,  at  least 
forced  them  to  learn  some  little  of  their  scriptures  before  they  were  able  to  obtain 
food ; and  the  discriminate  charity  of  Western  nations  which  necessitated  a costly 
S)stcm  of  poor-law  relief,  and  in  the  end  succeeded  only  in  changing  mendicants 
into  criminals. 


ADDRESS  OF  WELCOME  PRESENTED  IN 
CALCUTTA  AND  SWAMIJTS  REPLY, 

On  his  arrival  in  Calcutta,  the  Swami  Vivekananda  was  greeted  with  intense 
enthusiasm,  and  the  whole  of  his  progress  through  tlie  decorated  streets  of  the  City 
was  thronged  with  an  immense  crowd  waiting  to  have  a sight  of  him.  The  official 
reception  was  held  a week  later,  at  the  residence  of  the  late  Raja  Radha  Kanta  Deb 
Bahadur  at  Sobha  Bazar,  when  Raja  Benoy  Krishna  Deb  Bahadur  took  the  chair. 
After  a few  biief  introductory  remarks  from  the  Chairman,  the  following  addicss  was 
read  and  presented  to  him,  enclosed  in  a silver  casket : — 

To  Srimat  Vivekananda  Swami. 

Dear  Brother, — 

We,  the  Hindu  inhabitants  of  Calcutta  and  of  several  other  places  in  Bengal, 
^offer  you  on  your  return  to  the  land  of  your  birth  a hearty  welcome.  We  do  so  with  a 
sense  of  piide  as  well  as  of  gratitude,  for  by  your  noble  woik  and  example  in  various 
paits  of  tlie  world  you  have  done  honour  not  only  to  our  religion,  but  also  to  our 
country  and  to  our  province  in  particular. 

At  the  great  Pailiamcnt  of  Religions  which  constituted  a Section  of  the  Woild’s 
Fair  held  in  Chicago  in  1893,  you  presented  the  piinciples  of  tiie  Aryan  religion. 
The  substance  of  your  exposition  was  to  most  of  your  audience  a revelation,  and  its 
manner  overpowering  alike  by  its  grace  and  its  stiength.  Some  may  have  received 
it  in  a questioning  spii it,  a few  may  have  criticised  it,  but  its  general  effect  was  a 
revolution  in  the  religious  ideas  of  a large  section  of  cultivated  Ameiicans.  Anew 
light  had  dawned  on  their  mind,  and  with  their  accustomed  eaineslness  and  love  of 
trqth  they  determined  to  take  full  advantage  of  it.  Your  oppoitunittes  widened ; 
your  work  grew.  You  had  to  meet  call  after  call  fiom  many  cities  in  many  States, 
answer  many  queries,  satisfy  many  doubts,  solve  many  difficulties.  You  did  all 
this  work  with  energy,  ability  and  sincerity ; and  it  has  led  to  lasting  results.  Your 
teaching  has  deeply  influenced  many  an  enlightened  circle  in  the  American  Common- 
wealth, has  stimulated  thought  and  research ; and  lias  in  many  instances  definitely 
altered  religious  conceptions  in  the  direction  of  an  inci eased  appieciation  of  Hindu 
ideals.  The  rapid  growth  of  clubs  and  societies  for  the  co-operative  study  of 
religions  and  the  investigation  of  spiritual  truth,  is  witness  to  your  labour  in  the  far 
West.  You  may  be  regarded  as  the  founder  of  a College  in  London  for  the  teach- 
ing of  the  Vedanta  philosophy.  Your  lectures  have  been  regulaily  delivered,  punctu- 
ally attended  and  widely  appreciated.  Their  influence  has  extended  beyond  the 
walls  of  the  lecture-rooms.  The  love  and  esteem  which  have  been  evoked  by  your 
leaching  are  evidenced  by  the  warm  acknowledgments,  in  the  address  presented  to 
you  on  the  eve  of  your  departure  from  London,  by  the  students  of  the  Vedanta 
philosophy  in  that  town. 

Your  success  as  a teacher  has  been  due  not  only  to  your  deep  and  intimate 
acquaintance  with  the  truths  of  the  Aryan  religion,  and  your  skill  in  exposition  by 
speech  and  writing,  but  also,  and  largely,  to  your  personality.  Your  lectures,  your 
essays  and  your  books  have  high  merits,  spiritual  and  literal'}',  and  they  could  not 
but  produce  their  effect.  But  it  has  been  heightened  in  a manner  that  defies  expres- 


kEPI.r  TO  THE  ADDREPS  OF  WELCOME  IN  CALCUTTA 


Sion,  1)>  the  cx.implo  of  youi  simple,  sinccic,  self-denying  life,  your  modesty,  devo- 
tion and  earnestness 

While  acknowledging  your  services  as  a teacher  of  the  sublime  Itulhs  of  our 
religion,  we  feel  that  we  must  tendei  a tribute  to  the  memoi)  of  youi  levcied  jnccep- 
loi  Sii  Ramakiishna  Paiamahamsa.  'I'o  him  we  laigch  owe  even  )ou.  With  his 
laie  magical  insight  he  eaily  discoveied  the  heavenly  sj)aik  in  you,  and  jneduted 
foi  you  a careei  which  happily  is  now  in  couuse  of  leahsation.  lie  it  was  that 
unsealed  the  vision  and  the  faculty  <h\ine  with  which  God  liad  blessed  you,  gave  to 
join  thoughts  and  aspiiatiuns  the  bent  that  was  awaiiting  the  holy  touch  and  aided 
youi  pui suits  in  the  icgion  of  the  unseen.  Ills  most  piecious  legacy  to  posterity 
was  yourself. 

Go  on  noble  soul,  woiking  steadily  and  valiantly  m the  path  you  have  chosen. 
Yon  have  a woild  to  conquer  You  have  to  mtcipiet  and  vindicate  the  religion  of 
the  Tlindus  to  the  ignoiaiil,  the  .sceptical,  the  wilfully  blind.  You  have  liegun  the 
woik  in  a spiiit  which  commands  oiii  admiiation,  and  have  aheady  achieved  a success 
to  which  man}  lands  hcai  witness  Hut  a gieal  deal  >et  lemains  to  he  done  ; and  our 
own  countiy,  or  lather  we  should  say \oiu  own  comiliv,  waits  on  }ou,  'I'lie  liullis 
of  the  Hindu  lehgion  have  to  be  expounded  to  huge  numbers  of  1 lindiis  themselves, 
lhace  youi  self  then  foi 'the  giaiid  e.xeition.  We  have  conlidem  e in  vou  and  in  the 
le-hteousness  of  om  cause  Om  national  lelignm  seeks  to  win  no  malcnal  tmimphs. 
Ils  pui puses  aie  similual  , its  weapon  is  a irulh  whirl)  is  hiiMen  aw.av  fiom  mateiial 
eves  and  yields  only  to  the  rdloclive  leason  Call  on  the  woild,  and  whcie  nccessaiy, 
on  Hindus  tlieiuMdvcs,  to  open  the  innci  eye,  to  tianscend  the  senses,  to  icad  lightly 
the  sacit'd  iioi lies  in  face  the  siipieme  lealiU  and  lealise  tlieii  posilion  and  destiny 
vs  men  No  r.ne  is  hel'.  i liU-d  than  yiwnself  to  giv.‘  the  awakemng  oi  make  tiic  call, 
',na  wv  can  01,1}  assme}oi,  ot  cm  heail}  sympalhv  and  lo\al  copemion  m that 
V, oik  which  is  appaivntl}  }om  nm-ion  oidamed  by  Heaven 

We  rem.am  den  Inoihei, 

Vom  luvM  ^ fnend-,  A adiniieis. 


The  Sw, ami’s  lepl}  was  as  follows  - 

0„(,  ,,,1^  io  loM  ih-'  cm  eis>!  m the  imhvi.Uial,  one  lenonnres.  flies  oil,  and 

lues  to  cut  Imnsjf  oil  l.om  J’  asMti  Mlions  of  the  body,  of  the  piM.  one  woiKs  haul 
to  lou-et  even  that  he  u-  a mm  , ad  in  the  lioaitol  ho  hcail,  thme  is  a. soil  sound,  one 
01,0  ul'.J,  l.-lls  hi,„,  F.,M  oi  WV-I,  l,o,„0  ,.  Ivs,  C.li/.o,,', 

„l  iho  o,ilolil  of  ,1,10  Foil', 10,  Kfolo  ,0',  1 0t„„d,„ot.X0f,S,„ii,M0,„.  „o,  iiolcer. 
.,0  0 n.o.uhor,  h.„  I oo,«o  iH-fo.c  ,1..  C ,lo  ,U.,  l.o,  ,o  l.llk  ,o  you  us  I „s,  ,1 

10  ,lo  Avo,  I ,1.1  ,0  o;  ,1,0  .lost  ol  ,l,<- s„.Tls  ol  ll,.sc,ly,-u,„l,  u„l, 

11,0  li.'odoii,  of  .-liiUllioo'l,  0,h:.,  ,11)  ,0  y.iu  my[»oll,cis  ilioirfo,.-. 

,„vl,oa,l-Wl  tli.mlts  fo,  tl„s  v,,.i.l  ll.;,l  you  h.ive  „sul,  " Itiol.ie,  Vos,  I 

u,;,  you,  luolhor.  .tn.l  ,o.,  t.o  u,y  l-ioll,.  ,••  1 «as  asko.l  h,  ,,n  Itnol.si,  f„en.l  ou 

,1,0  ovo  of  ,uv  <Hn,l,.,c,  ■ Sn,.„„, 

yisus'oxpeiiouccof  ll.olu'tu.ious,  ;!l.„,.m'-.  I o-oul.  only  .insiu,. 

“lu.kal  losocl  iK-fo.c  1 c.„.,c  a,v,u.  ,.„n  tho  u-, v dust  of  Iml.a  h,,s  hocouio  l.oly  U, 

0, 11,0  vo,y  a,.  ,s  to  ,uel,ol,,„,.uo-.v  the  holy  hud,  ,',o  pbco  ol 

Ih.-  T„//,.r  Ciuo-nsol  Cdcita  bioih..-,-, - I P,-U'  ».o  lo 

lor  tilo  ktuduoss  y.u,  hwo  a,olv„,  ,,Uho.  1 shoul.l  not  ihauk  you  ,U  ,.11,  fur 


114 


LECTURES—FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


you  arc  my  brotlieis,  you  have  done  only  a brother’s  duty,  aye,  only  a Hindu  brother's 
duty,  foi  such  family  ties,  such  relationships,  such  love,  exist  nowhere  beyond  the 
bonds  of  this  motheiland  of  ours. 

I'hc  Parliament  of  Religions  was  a great  affair,  no  doubt.  From  various  cities 
of  this  land,  we  have  thanked  the  gentlemen  who  organised  the  meeting,  and  they 
deserved  all  our  thanks  for  the  kindness  that  has  been  shown  to  us,  but  yet  allow 
me  to  construe  for  you  the  history  of  the  Parliament  of  Religions.  They  wanted  a 
horse,  and  they  wanted  to  ride  it.  There  weie  people  there  who  wanted  to  make  it 
a heathen  show,  but  u was  ordained  otheiwisc  ; it  could  not  help  being  so.  Most  of 
them  were  kind,  Inil  we  have  thanked  them  enough. 

On  the  other  hand,  my  mission  in  Ameiica  was  not  to  the  Parliament  of  Religions. 
That  was  only  something  by  the  way,  it  was  only  an  opening,  an  oppoitunity,  and  for 
that  we  are  veiy  thankful  to  the  members  of  the  Pailiamcnt;  but  really,  our  thanks 
are  due  to  the  great  people  of  the  United  States,  the  American  nation,  the  warm- 
hearted, hospitable,  great  nation  of  America,  where  more  than  anywhere  else  the 
feeling  of  brotherhood  has  been  developed.  An  American  meets  you  for  five  minutes 
on  board  a train,  and  you  arc  his  friend,  and  the  next  moment  he  invites  you  as  a guest 
to  his  home,  and  opens  the  seciet  of  his  whole  living  there.  That  is  the  character 
of  the  American  lace,  and  we  highly  appreciate  it.  Their  kindness  to  me  is  past  all 
nai ration,  it  would  take  me  years  yet  to  tell  you  how  I have  been  ticated  by  them, 
most  kindly  and  most  wonderfully.  So  arc  our  thanks  due  to  the  other  nation  on 
the  othei  side  of  tlic  Atlantic.  No  one  ever  landed  on  English  soil  with  more 
hatred  in  his  heait  for  a race  than  I did  for  the  English,  and  on  this  platform  are 
present  English  friends,  who  can  bear  witness  to  the  fact;  but  the  moie  I lived  among 
them,  and  saw  how  the  machine  was  woiking, — the  English  national  life,  — ainl 
mixed  with  them,  I found  where  the  heart-beat  of  the  nation  was,  and  the  moie  I 
loved  them  There  is  none  among  you  here  present,  my  brothers,  who  loves 
the  English  people  more  than  I do  now.  You  have  to  see  what  is  going  on  there, 

and  you  have  to  mix  with  them.  As  the  philosophy,  our  national  philosophy  of 

tlie  Vedanta,  has  snmmai  iscd  all  misfortune,  all  misery,  as  coming  from  that  one 
cause,  ignoiancc,  herein  also  we  must  understand  that  the  diflkullies  that  arise  between 
us  and  the  Jhighsh  people  are  mostly  due  to  that  ignorance  ; we  do  not  know  them, 
they  do  not  know  us.  Unfortunately,  to  the  Western  mind,  spiiiluality,  nay,  even 
morality,  IS  eternally  connected  w’lth  w'orldly  prospciity,  and  as  soon  as  an  English- 
man or  any  othei  Western  man,  lands  on  our  soil,  and  finds  a land  of  povcily  and 
of  misery,  he  foitluvith  concludes,  that  there  cannot  be  any  religion  here,  theie 
cannot  be  any  morality  even,  llis  own  expeiience  is  true.  In  Europe,  owing  to 
the  inclemency  of  the  climate  and  many  other  circumstances,  poverty  and  sin  go 
togethei,  but  not  so  in  India.  In  India,  on  the  other  hand,  my  experience  is,  that 
the  poorer  the  man  the  better  he  is  in  point  of  morality.  Now  this  lakes  time  to 

undci stand,  and  how  many  foieign  people  ar^lhere  who  will  stop  to  understand 

this,  the  very  seciet  of  national  existence  in  India  ? Few  are  there  who  will  have  the 
patience  to  study  the  nation  and  understand.  Here  and  here  alone,  is  the  only  race 
where  poverty  does  not  mean  ciimc,  poverty  does  not  mean  sin,  and  here  is  the  only 
lace  where  not  only  povcity  docs  not  mean  crime,  but  poverty  has  been  deified, 
and  the  beggai's  gaib  is  the  gaib  of  the  highest  in  the  land.  On  the  other  hand, 
we  ha\e  also  similaily,  patiently  to  study  the  social  instiUitions  of  the  West,  and  not 
lush  into  mad  judgments  about  them.  Their  mteimiiigling  of  the  bexc*s,  their 


REPLY  TO  THE  ADDRESS  OF  WELCOME  IN  CALCUTTA  cr5 

clifTerent  customs,  their  manners,  have  all  iheir  meaning,  have  all  their  gmnd  sides 

If  you  have  the  patience  to  study  them.  Not  that  I mean  that  we  are  going  to  1>omow 

their  manners  and  customs,  not  that  they  aie  going  to  bonow  oms,  for  the  manneis 
and  customs  of  each  race  are  the  outcome  of  centuiies  of  patient  giowlh  in  that 
race  and  each  one  has  a deep  meaning  behind  it,  and  theiefoie  neilhei  aie  they  to 
ridicule  our  manners  and  customs,  nor  we  theiis. 

Again,  I want  to  make  another  .statement  before  this  assembly.  ]\Ty  woik  in 
England  has  been  more  satisfactory  to  me  than  my  woik  in  America.  The  bold, 
biavc  and  steady  Englishman,  if  1 may  use  the  e.vpiession,  with  his  skull  a little 
thicker  than  those  of  other  people — if  be  has  once  an  idea  put  into  his  biain,  it  never 
comes  out,  and  the  immense  practicality  and  energy  of  the  lace  makes  it  sprout  up 
and  immediately  bear  fruit.  It  is  not  so  in  any  other  countiy.  That  immense 
practicality,  that  immense  vitality  of  the  race,  >ou  do  not  see  anywhcie  else.  There 
is  less  of  imagination,  but  more  of  woik,  and  who  knows  the  well-.spnng,  thenvain- 
spring  of  the  English  hcait  ? flow  much  of  imagination  and  of  leeling  is  theie  ! 
They  are  a nation  of  heiocs,  they  are  thetiue  Kshatri)as , then  education  is  to  hide 
their  feelings  and  never  to  show  them.  From  then  childhood  thev  have  been  educated 
up  to  that.  Seldom  will  >ou  find  an  Englishman  manifesimg  feeling,  nay,  even  an 
Englishwoman.  I have  seen  Englishwomen  go  to  work  and  do  deeds  which  would 
stagger  the  biavest  of  Ilengalees  to  follow.  But  with  all  thi.s  heioic  supeisti ucture, 
behind  this  covering  of  the  hghter,  thcie  is  a deej)  spilng  of  feeling  in  the  English 
heart.  If  you  once  know  how  to  reach  it,  if  you  get  theie,  if  }ou  have  peisonal  contact 
and  mix  with  him,  ho  will  open  his  hcait,  he  is  your  friend  foi  evei,  he  is  your  servant. 
Therefore  in  my  opinion,  my  woik  in  England  has  been  moie  satisfactory  than  any- 
where else.  I firmly  believe  that  if  I should  die  to-moirow,  llie  woik  in  England  would 
not  die,  but  would  go  on  expanding  all  the  time. 

Brothers,  you  have  touched  another  choid  in  my  hcait,  the  deepest  of  all,  and 

that  is  the  mention  of  my  teacher,  my  mastei,  my  hero,  my  ideal,  my  (jod  in  life Sri 

Ramakrishna  Paraimhamsa.  If  theie  has  lieen  anything  achieved  by  me.  by  thoughts, 
or  woids,  or  deeds,  if  from  my  lips  has  ever  fallen  one  woid  that  has  helfxid  any 
one  in  the  world,  I lay  no  claim  to  it,  it  was  his.  But  if  there  have  been  cm  SC'S  falling 
fiom  my  lips,  if  there  has  l:>een  hatied  coming  out  of  me,  it  is  all  mine,  and  not  his. 
All  that  has  been  weak  has  been  mine,  and  all  that  has  been  life-giving,  strengthening, 
pure,  and  holy,  has  been  his  mspiialion,  his  woids,  and  he  himself  Yes,  my  fi lends, 
the  world  has  yet  to  know  that  man.  Wc  read  m the  history  of  the  woild,  about 
prophets  and  their  lives,  and  these  come  down  to  us  ihiough  centimes  of  wnlings 
and  workings  by  their  disciples.  Through  thousands  of  years  of  chiselling  and 
modelling,  the  lives  of  the  gieai  prophets  of  yore  come  down  to  us ; and  yet,  in  my 
opinion,  not  one  stands  so  high  in  biiliiance  as  that  life  which  I saw  with  my  own 
eyes,  under  who.se  shadow  I have  lived,  at  whose  feet  1 have  leaint  everything, — the 
life  of  Ramakrishna  ParamahamsI#  Aye,  fi lends,  you  all  know  the  cclebiatcd  saying 
of  the  Gita ^ ft  ^4^  i i» 

“Whenever,  O descendant  of  Bhaiata,  thoio  is  decline  of  Dharma,  and  rise  of  Adhar- 
ma,  then  I body  Myself  forth.  I'or  the  protection  of  the  good,  for  the  desi ruction 
of  the  wicked,  and  for  the  establi.shmcnt  of  Dhaima,  I conies  into  being  in  ever}  age.” 

Along  with  it  you  have  to  understand  one  thing  moie.  Such  a thing  is  before 
US  to-day.  Before  one  of  these  tidal  waves  of  spiiituality  comes,  there  aie  wiiiiipools 


LECTURES  -FROai  COLOMBO  TO  ALa/ORA 


ii6 

of  lesser  manifeslation  all  over  society.  One  of  these  comes  up,  at  first  unknown, 
unpcrccived,  and  unihought  of,  assuming  proportion,  swallowing,  as  it  weic,  and 
assimilating  all  the  other  little  whiilpools,  becoming  immense,  becoming  a tidal 
wave,  and  falling  upon  society  with  a power  which  none  can  resist.  .Such  is  hapjiening 
before  us.  If  you  have  eyes  you  will  sec  it.  If  )our  heail  is  open  you  will  icccivo  it. 
If  you  are  truth-scckcis  )ou  will  find  it  Blind,  blind  indeed  is  the  man  who  does 
not  sec  the  signs  of  the  «1ay'  Aye,  ihis  bo)  born  of  pooi  Biahman  paienls  in  an 
out-of-the-way  village,  of  which  very  few  of  you  have  even  heaid,  is  liteially  being 
worshipped  in  lands  which  have  been  fulminating  against  heathen  worship  for  centuiies. 
Whose  powci  is  it  ? Is  it  mine,  or  youis  ? It  is  none  else  than  the  powei  which 
was  manifested  here  as  Ramakrishna  Paiamah.tm^a  For.  you  and  I,  and  sages  and 
prophets,  nay,  even  Incai nations,  the  whole  universe,  me  but  manifestations  of  power 
more  or  less  individualised,  nioie  oi  less  concentrated.  Hcie  has  been  a manifesta- 
tion of  an  immense  power,  just  the  vciy  beginning  of  whose  worldngs  we  aic  seeing, 
and  before  this  gcneiation  passes  away,  you  will  see  more  wondei ful  w'Oikings  of 
that  pow’cr.  It  has  come  just  in  lime  for  the  regcuei alien  of  India,  for  we  forget 
irom  time  to  time  the  vital  power  that  must  always  w^oik  in  India. 

Kach  nation  has  its  own  peculiar  method  of  w'oik.  Some  woik  through  politics, 
Bome  through  social  lefoims,  some  thiough  <*lhei  lines.  With  us,  lehgion  is  the 
only  ground  along  w'hich  w'c*  can  move.  'I'hc  Englishman  can  undei stand  religion 
even  through  politics.  IVihaps,  the  Amencau  can  understand  re'igion  even  ihiough 
pocial  reforms.  But  the  Hindu  can  imdei stand  even  politics  when  it  is  given  thiough 
rehgiQn;  sociology  must  come  thiough  religion,  evciything  must  come  thiough 
religion.  For  that  is  the  theme,  the  lest  aic  the  vaiiations  in  the  naiional  life-music. 
And  that  w'as  in  dangei  It  seemed  that  we  weie  going  to  change  this  theme  in  our 
national  life,  that  wc  w'crc  going  to  exchange  the  backbone  of  oni  existence,  as  it 
weie,  that  we  weie  trying  to  replace  a spiritual  by  a iiolilual  backbone.  And  if  we 
could  have  succeeded,  the  icsult  would  have  been  annihilation  But  it  was  not  to 
be.  So  this  power  became  manifest.  I do  not  care  in  what  light  you  undeistand 
this  great  sage,  it  matter.s  not  how  much  respect  you  pay  to  him,  but  I challenge 
you  taco  to  face  with  the  fact,  that  heie  is  a manifestation  of  the  most  marvellous 
power  that  has  been  for  scvcial  centuiies  in  India,  and  it  is  youi  duly,  as  Hindus,  to 
Bludy  this  power,  to  find  what  has  been  done  for  the  regeneration,  for  the  good  of 
India,  and  foi  the  good  of  the  whole  human  race  through  it.  Aye,  long  befoic  ideas 
of  universal  religion  and  brothcily  feeling  between  different  sects  had  been  mooted 
and  discussed  in  any  country  in  the  world,  hcie.  in  sight  of  this  city,  was  living  a 
man  whose  whole  life  was  a Parliament  of  Religions,  as  it  should  be. 

Tlie  -highest  ideal  in  our  Scriptures  is  the  lmperson.J,  and  would  to  God  every- 
one of  us  heie  were  high  enough  to  realise  that  Impersonal  ideal;  but,  as  that 
cannot  be,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  vast  majority  of  human  beings  to  have 
a Personal  ideal ; and  no  nation  can  rise,  can  become  great,  can  work  at  all,  with- 
out enthusiastically  coming  under  the  banner  of  one  of  these  gieat  ideals  in  life. 
Political  ideals,  peisonages  lepiesenLing  pol.tical  ideals,  even  social  ideals,  commeicial 
ideals,  would  have  no  power  in  India,  Wc  want  spiiUual  ideals  before  us,  we  want 
enlhusiablic^lly  to  gather  round  grand  spiiitual  names  Our  heroes  must  be  spiritual. 
Such  a hero  has  been  given  lo  us  in  the  j;eison  of  Ramakiislma  Pdiamahamsa  If 
this  nation  w.ants  to  rise,  take  my  woid  for  it,  it  will  have  to  lallj  enlluisiasiically 
round  this  name,  ll  does  not  matter  who  pleaches  Ramakrishna  Paianiahaujsa, 


REPLY  TO  THE  ADDRESS  OF  WELCOME  IN  CALCUTTA  ir; 


whclhei  I,  or  you,  or  anybody  else.  But  him  I place  before  you.  and  it  is  for  you 
to  judge,  and  for  the  good  of  our  race,  for  the  good  of  our  nation,  to  judge  now, 
what  you  shall  do  with  this  great  ideal  of  life.  One  thing  we  are  to  rcmembei,  that  it 
was  the  purest  of  all  lives  that  you  have  ever  seen,  or  let  me  tell  you  distinctly, 
that  you  have  ever  read  of.  And  before  you  is  the  fact  that  it  is  the  most  maivellous 
manifestation  of  Soul-power  that  you  can  read  of,  much  less  expect  to  see.  Within 
ten  years  of  his  passing  away,  this  power  has  encircled  the  globe  ; that  fact  is  befoic 
you.  In  duty  bound  therefore  for  the  good  of  our  race,  for  the  good  of  our  religion, 

I place  this  great  spiiitual  ideal  before  you.  Judge  him  not  thiough  me.  I am 
only  a w’eak  instiument.  Let  not  his  character  be  judged  by  seeing  me.  It  was  so 
gie.at  that  if  I,  or  any  other  of  his  disLiples  spent  hundreds  of  lives,  we  could  not  do 
justice  to  a millionth  pait  of  what  he  really  was.  Judge  for  youi selves ; in  the 
hcait  of  youi  hearts  is  the  Eternal  Witness,  and  may  He,  the  same  Ramakiishna 
Paramahamsa,  for  the  good  of  our  nation,  for  the  welfare  of  our  counliy,  and  for  the 
good  of  humanity,  open  your  hcails,  make  you  tiue  and  steady  to  w'oik  for  the 
immense  change  which  must  come,  whether  we  cxcit  ourselves  or  not.  For,  the  woik 
of  the  Lord  does  not  wait  for  the  likes  of  you  or  me.  He  can  raise  His  workers 
fiom  the  dust  by  hundreds  and  by  thousands.  It  is  a gloiy  and  a privilege  that  w'e 
aie  allowed  to  woik  at  all  under  Hun. 

Fiom  this  the  idea  expands.  As  you  have  pointed  out  to  me,  we  have  to  con- 
quer the  world.  That  \ye  have  to ! India  must  conquer  the  woild,  and  nothing  less 
than  that  is  my  ideal.  It  may  be  veiy  big,  it  may  astonish  many  of  you,  but  it  is  so. 
We  must  conquci  the  w'oild  or  die.  There  is  no  other  alternative.  The  sign  of 
life  is  expansion  ; wc  must  go  out,  expand,  show  life,  or  degrade,  fester  and  die. 
There  IS  no  olhci  alternative.  Take  either  of  these,  either  live  or  die.  Now,  we  all 
know  about  the  petty  jealousies  and  quarrels  that  we  have  in  our  country.  Take 
my  w'Oid,  it  is  the  same  everywhere.  The  other  nations  with  their  political  lives 
have  foieign  policies.  When  they  find  too  much  quairelling  at  home,  they  look  tor 
somebody  abroad  to  quarrel  with,  and  the  quarrel  at  home  stops.  We  have  these 
quairels,  without  any  foreign  policy  to  stop  them.  This  must  be  our  eternal  foreign 
policy,  pleaching  the  truths  of  out  Shaslras  to  the  nations  of  the  world.  I ask  you 
who  arc  politically-minded,  do  you  require  any  other  proof  that  this  will  unite  us 
as  a race?  This  very  assembly  is  a suflicient  witness.  Secondly,  apart  fiom  these 
selfish  considerations,  there  arc  the  unselfish,  the  noble,  the  living  examples  behind 
ns.  One  of  the  great  causes  of  India’s  misery  and  downfall  has  been  that  she 
narrowed  herself,  went  into  her  shell,  as  the  oyster  does,  and  refused  to  give  her 
jewels  and  her  treasures  to  the  other  races  of  mankind,  refused  to  give  the  life-giving 
liuths  to  thirsting  nations  outside  the  Aryan  fold.  That  has  been  the  one  great 
cause,  that  wo  did  not  go  out,  that  we  did  not  compare  notes  with  other  nations,— 
that  has  been  the  one  great  cause  of  our  downfall,  and  every  one  of  you  know  that 
that  little  stir,  the  little  life  that  you  see  in  India,  begins  from  the  day  when  Raja 
Rammohan  Roy  broke  through  the  walls  of  that  exclusiveness.  Since  that  day, 
history  in  India  has  taken  another  turn,  and  now  it  is  growing  with  accelerated 
motion.  If  we  have  had  little  rivulets  in  the  past,  deluges  are  coming,  and  none 
can  resist  them.  Therefore  we  must  go  out,  and  the  secret  of  life  is  to  give  and 
take.  Aie  we  to  lake  always,  to  sit  at  the  feet  of  the  Westeineis  to  learn  everything, 
even  religion  ? We  can  learn  mechanism  from  them.  We  can  learn  many  other 
things.  Cut  we  have  to  leach  them  something,  and  that  is  our  religion,  that  is  our 


LECTUEES~-FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


spiiilualily.  I'or  a complete  civilisation  the  woild  is  waiting,  waiting  for  the  treasures 
to  come  out  of  India,  waiting  foi  the  marvellous  spiritual  inheritance  of  tlie  lace, 
which,  through  decades  of  degiadalion  and  misery,  the  nation  has  still  clutched'  to 
hei  breast.  The  world  is  waiting  for  that  treasuie  ; little  do  you  know  how  much  of 
hunger  and  of  thirst  iheie  is  outside  of  India  foi  lhe.se  wondetful  tieasures  of  our 
foicfathers.  We  talk  here,  we  quairel  with  each  oth.u',  we  laugh  at  and  we  ridicule 
cvcr)lhing  sacied,  till  it  has  become  almost  a national  vice  to  lidiculc  everything 
holy.  Little  do  we  understand  the  heait-pangs  of  millions  wailing  outside  the  walls, 
stretching  foilh  their  hands  foi  a little  sip  of  that  nectar  which  our  foiefathers  have 
pieserved  in  this  land  of  India.  Theietorc  we  must  go  out,  exchange  our  spirituality 
for  anything  they  have  to  give  us;  for  the  maivels  of  the  legion  of  spirit  we 
will  exchange  the  maivels  of  the  region  of  matter.  We  will  not  be  students  always, 
but  teachers  also.  There  cannot  be  fiieiidship  without  equality,  and  there  cannot 
be  cipiality  when  one  party  is  always  the  teacher  and  the  other  paity  sits  always  at 
his  feet.  If  you  want  to  become  eipial  with  the  Englishman  or  the  Ameiican,  you 
will  have  to  leach  as  well  a.s  to  leain,  and  you  have  plenty  yet  to  teach  to  the  world 
for  centuiies  to  come.  This  has  to  be  done.  Fire  and  enthusiasm  must  be  m our 
blood.  We  Bengalees  have  been  credited  with  imagination,  and  I believe  we  have 
it.  We  have  been  lidiculed  as  an  imaginative  lace,  as  men  with  a good  deal  of  feel- 
ing. Let  me  tell  you,  my  fiiends,  intellect  is  great  indeed,  but  it  stops  within  certain 
bounds.  It  IS  through  the  heait,  and  the  heart  alone,  that  insjiiiation  comes.  It  is 
thiough  the  feelings  that  the  highest  seciets  aie  reached,  and  therefoie,  it  is  the 
Bengalee,  the  man  of  feeling,  that  has  to  do  this  woik. 

I “Awake,  aiise,  and  slop  not  till  the  desired 
end  is  leached.’’  Young  men  of  Calcutta,  arise,  awake,  lor  the  time  is  piopi- 
tiouS.  Already  everything  is  opening  out  befoie  us.  Be  bold  and  fear  not.  It 
is  only  in  our  .scriptuies  that  this  adjective  is  given  unto  the  LoiA—AhhiJi,  Ahhih. 
We  have  to  become  Ahhik,  feailess,  and  our  task  will  be  done.  Aiise,  awake,  for 
youi  counliy  needs  this  liemendous  saciihce.  It  is  the  young  men  that  will  do  it. 
“The  young,  the  eneigelic,  the  stiong,  the  well-built,  the  intellectual,”— for  them  is  the 
task.  And  we  have  hundieds  and  thousands  of  such  young  men  in  Calcutta.  If, 
as  you  say,  1 have  done  .something,  rcmembei  that  I was  that  good-for-nothing  boy 
playing  in  the  stieets  of  Calcutta.  If  I have  done  so  much,  how  much  more  will  you 
do  } Aiise  and  awake,  the  woild  is  calling  upon  you.  In  other  paits  of  India,  theie 
is  intellect,  there  is  money,  but  cnthu.siasm  is  only  in  my  motherland.  That  must 
come  out,  and,  theiefoie  arise,  young  men  of  Calcutta,  with  eiuhiisiasm  in  your 
blood.  Think  not  that  you  aie  poor,  that  you  have  no  fi lends.  A\e,  whoever  saw 
money  make  the  man;  it  is  man  that  ahvays  makes  ino.^ej . The  whole  woild  has 
been  made  by  the  energy  of  man,  by  the  powei  of  enthusiasm,  by  the  powei  of  faith. 

Those  of  you  who  have  studied  that  most  beautiful  of  all  the  Upanishads,  the 
Kaiha,  will  leinember  liow  the  king  was  going  to  make  a great  saciifice,  and,  instead 
of  giving  away  things  that  were  of  any  woith,  he  was  giving  away  cows  and  horses 
that  were  not  of  any  use,  and  the  book  says  that  at  that  time  ShraddM  entered 
into  the  heart  of  his  son  Nachiketa.  I would  not  translate  this  woid  Shraddhd.  to 
you,  It  would  be  a mislako  ; iL  is  a woiidciful  word  to  undei.sland,  and  much  depends 
on  11 , we  will  see  how  it  woik.*:,  for  immediately  w'e  find  Nachiketa  telling  himself,  “ I 
am  superioi  to  many,  I am  infeiioi  to  few,  but  riowheio  am  1 the  last,  I can  also  do 
something.”  And  this  boldness  increased,  and  the  boy  wanted  to  solve  the  problem 


REPLY  TO  THE  ADDRESS  OF  WELCOME  IN  CALCUTTA  119 

which  was  in  his  mind,  the  problem  of  death.  The  solution  could  only  be  got  by  going 
to  the  house  of  Death,  and  the  boy  went.  Thcie  he  was,  brave  Nachiketa,  waiting 
at  the  house  of  Death  for  three  days,  and  you  know  how  he  obtained  wliat  he  desiied. 
What  we  want,  is  this  §hraddhih  Unfortunately,  it  has  neaily  vani.^hed  from  India, 
and  this  is  why  we  aie  in  our  piesenl  state.  What  makes  the  dilTerenre  between 
man  and  man  is  the  difference  in  this  shraddhh,  and  nothing  cl.se.  What  makes 
one  man  great  and  another  W'eak  ami  low,  is  this  shraddhd.  My  Master  used  to  say, 
he  who  thinks  himself  w-eak  will  become  w'cak,  ami  ih.it  is  tiue.  This  diraddht\ 
must  enter  into  you.  Whatevei  of  maleiial  power  you  see  manifested  by  the  Western 
races  is  the  outcome  of  this  <ihiaddha,  because  they  believe  in  ihcii  muscles,  and 
if  you  believe  in  your  spiiit,  how  ijiuch  moie  will  it  woik  Believe  in  that  Infinite 
Soul,  the  Infinite  Pow'er,  which,  with  consensus  of  opinion,  your  books  and  sages 
pi  each.  That  Atman  which  nothing  c.an  desiioy,  in  It  is  Infinite  Bowei  only  waiting 
lo  be  called  out.  For  here  is  the  gieat  dilfeiencc  between  all  othei  philosophies, 
and  the  Indian  Philo.sophy.  Whethei  Dualistic,  qualified  Monistic,  01  Monistic,  they 
all  firmly  believe  that  cveiything  is  in  the  soul  itselt  , it  has  only  to  come  out  and 
manifest  itself.  Theiefoie,  this  shraddha  is  what  I want,  and  wdiat  all  of  us  here 
want,  this  faith  in  ourselves,  and  befoie  )ou  IS  ibc  gie.al  task  to  get  that  f.iith,  (b\e 
up  the  awful  disease  that  is  creeping  into  oui  national  blood,  that  idea  of  lubculiog 
cverylbing,  that  loss  of  seiiousncss.  Give  that  up.  Be  sliong  and  have  this  shaddhd, 
and  everything  else  is  bound  to  follow. 

I have  done  nothing  as  yet ; )0u  have  to  do  the  task.  If  I die  to-monow  the 
woik  will  not  die.  I .sinceiely  believe  that  llieic  will  be  ihous.ands  coming  iqi  liom 

the  lanks  to  take  up  the  w'Oik  .111(1  cairy  It  fill tbci  and  fuithci,  l)e)ond  all  my  most 
hopeful  iniagiu.il ion  evei  p.iiuUHl  I h.ive  f.uth  in  in)  counliy,  and  espcciall)  in 
the  youth  of  my  country.  The  )outh  of  Bcng.il  have  the  gicatesl  of  all  tasks  that 
has  ever  been  pl.iced  on  the  sbouldcis  of  voung  m.in  1 have  liavelled  for  the  last 
ten  years  01  so  ovei  the  whole  of  India,  and  my  coiiMclion  is,  that  fiom  the  youth 
of  Bengal  will  come  the  pow-ei  which  will  laise  India  once  moie  lo  liei  pio[)cr 
spiritual  pl.icc.  Aye.  fiom  the  youth  of  Beng.il,  with  tins  immense  amount  of  feel- 
ing and  cntluisi.isin  in  the  blood,  will  come  those  heroes,  who  will  niarcli  fiom  one 
conier  of  the  eaith  to  th(‘ oiIhm . pitMcbing  and  leai  hmg  the  elein.d  spiiiUi.il  tmlbs 
of  our  forefathers.  And  this  is  the  gieai  woik  beloie  )ou.  Theiefoie,  let  me  con- 
clude by  icmimhng  you  ome  moie,  “Aiise,  aw.ike,  and  stop  not  till  the  desned 
end  is  icached.”  Be  not  ali.iid,  for  all  gieat  pow-ei,  ihiouglioul  the  histoiy  of 
linm.iiiily,  has  been  w'lth  the  people.  Fiom  out  of  then  lanks  h.ue  come  all  the 
giealest  geniuses  of  the  w'orld,  and  bisloiy  can  only  lepc.il  itself  Be  not  afi.ud 
of  anything.  You  will  do  maivdlons  woik.  The  moment  )ou  feai,  you  are  noliody. 
It  IS  fear  "that  is  the  great  cause  of  miseiy  m the  woild.  It  is  feai  that  is  the  gieatcst 
of  all  superstitions.  It  is  fear  that  is  the  cause  of  our  woes,  ami  it  i.s  fcailcssnc.s.s 
that  biings  heaven  even  in  a moment.  Therefoie,  “ Aiise,  awake,  and  stop  not  till 

the  goal  is  reached.”  , t 1 

Gentlemen,  allow  me  to  thank  you  once  more  foi  all  the  kindness  that  I have 
received  at  youi  hands.  It  is  my  wish— my  intense,  sinceie  wish  to  be  even  of  the 
least  SCI  vice  to  the  woild,  and  above  all  to  my  own  counliy  and  countiymen. 


THE  VEDANTA  IN  ALL  ITS  PHASES. 

( Delivered  in  Calcutta.  ) 

Away  back,  where  no  lecorded  histoiy,  nay,  even  the  dim  light  of  tradition,  carl 
pencil. He,  has  been  steadily  shining  the  light,  sometimes  dimmed  by  external  circnm- 
slanccs,  at  otheis  elTalgent,  but  undying  and  steady,  shedding  its  light  not  only  over 
India,  but  permeating  the  whole  ihought-woild  with  its  power,  silent,  unpercei\ed, 
gentle,  yet  omnipotent,  like  the  dew  that  falls  in  the  moinmg,  unseen  and  unnoticed, 
yet  bunging  into  bloom  the  fairest  of  roses— this  has  been  the  thought  of  the  Upani- 
shads,  the  philosophy  of  the  Vedanta.  Nobody  knows  when  it  first  came  to  flourish 
on  the  soil  of  India,  (kicss-woik  Ha^>  been  vain.  The  guesses,  especially  of  Western 
writers,  have  been  so  conflicting  that  no  certain  date  can  be  asciibed  to  them.  But 
we  Hindus,  from  the  spiritual  standpoint,  do  not  admit  that  they  had  any  origin. 
This  Vedanta,  the  philosophy  of  the  Upanish.idS,  I would  make  bold  to  stale,  has 
been  the  fiist,  as  well  as  the  final  thought  on  the  spiritual  plane  that  has  evci  been 
vouchsafed  to  man.  Fiom  this  ocean  of  the  Vedanta,  waves  of  light  from  lime  to 
tune  have  been  going  Weslwaid  and  Eastward.  In  the  days  of  yore  it  travelled 
Westward  and  gave  its  impetus  to  the  mind  of  the  Greeks,  cilhci  in  Athens,  oi  in 
Alexandiia,  or  in  Antioch.  The  S.tnkhya  system  must  clearly  have  made  its  maik 
on  the  minds  of  the  ancient  Gieeks,  and  the  Sankhya,  and  all  other  S} stems  in 
India,  had  that  one  authoiily,  the  Upanishads,  the  Vedanta.  In  India,  too,  in  spite 
of  all  these  jailing  sects  that  we  see  lo-d.\y  and  all  those  that  have  been  in  the  past, 
the  one  authoiity,  the  basis  of  .til  these  systems,  has  yet  been  the  Upariisliads,  the 
Vedanta,  Whcthei  you  arc  a Du.tlisi,  oi  a Qualified  IVIoni.sl,  an  Advaiiist,  oi  a 
Visishtadvaitist,  a Shuddhadvailist,  or  any  other  Advailisi  or  Dvaitisi,  oi  whatever 
you  may  c.all  youiselt,  theie  .stands  behind  you  as  authority,  )Oui  Shasiras,  your  sciip- 
tures,  the  Upanishads.  Wh.xtevci  .sy.stcni  in  India  does  not  obey  the  Upanishads 
cannot  be  called  oithodo.x,  and  even  the  systems  of  the  J.nns  and  the  Ihiddhisis 
have  been  lejecled  from  the  soil  of  India,  onlj  because  they  did  not  beai  allegiance 
to  the  Upanishads.  Thus  the  Vedanta,  whethei  ae  know  it  or  not.  has  penetialed  all 
the  sects  in  India,  and  what  \vc  call  Hinduism,  this  mighty  Banyan  with  its  immense, 
almost  infinite  ramifications,  has  been  thioughouL  inlei pencil ated  by  the  influence 
of  the  Vedanta.  Whethei  we  aie  conscious  of  it  oi  not,  we  think  the  Vedanta  ve 
live  in  the  Vedanta,  we  breathe  the  Vedanta,  and  we  die  in  the  Vedanta,  and  eveiy 
Hindu  does  that.  To  preach  Vedanta  in  the  land  of  India,  and  befoie  an  Indian 
audience,  sccm.s,  therefore,  to  be  an  anomaly.  But  it  is  the  one  thing  that  has  to  be 
])i cached,  and  it  is  the  necessity  of  the  age  that  it  must  be  pieaclied.  For,  as  I have 
just  told  you,  all  the  Indian  sects  must  bear  allegiance  to  the  Uiianishads,  but  among 
these  sects  there  are  many  appaient  contradictions.  Many  times  the  gieat  sages  of 
yoie  themselves  could  not  undeistand  the  undeilying  haimony  of  the  Upanishads. 
Many  limes,  even  sages  quarrelled,  and  so  much  so  that  at  times  it  became  a proveib, 
that  there  aie  no  sages  who  do  not  differ.  But  the  time  requires  that  a belter  inter- 
pretation should  be  given  to  this  undeilying  harmony  of  the  Ujianishadic  texts; 
w'helher  they  are  dualistic,  or  non-dualislic,  quasi-duali.stic,  or  so  forth,  it  has  lo  be 
shown  before  the  woild  at  huge  ; and  this  woik  is  lequiicd  as  much  in  India  as  out- 


"THE  VEDANTA  IN  ALT  ITS  PHASES  tit 

side  of  India,  and  I,  through  the  grace  of  God,  had  the  great  good  fortune  to  sit 
dt  the  feet  of  one)  whose  whole  life  was  such  an  interpretation,  whose  life,  a thousand- 
fold more  tham  whose  teaching,  was  a living  commentary  on  the  tests  of  the  Upani- 
shads,  was  in  fact,  the  spirit  of  the  Upanishads  living  in  a human  form*  Pethaps 
I have  got  a little  of  that  harmony ; I do  not  know  whether  I shall  be  able  to  express 
it  or  not.  But  this  is  my  attempt,  my  mission  in  life,  to  show  that  the  Vedantic  Schools 
are  not  contradictory,  that  they  all  necessitate  each  other,  all  fulfil  each  other,  and  one, 
as  it  were,  is  the  stepping-stone  to  the  other,  until  the  goal,  the  Advaita,  the  TaHvahUhi, 
is  reached.  There  was  a time  in  India  when  the  Kanna-kanda  had  its  sway.  Theie  ale 
many  grand  ideals,  no  doiibt,  in  that  poition  of  the  Vedas.  Some  of  our  present  daily 
woiship  is  still  according  to  the  piecepts  of  the  Kaima-kanda.  But,  with  all  that, 
the  Karma-kanda  of  the  Vedas  has  almost  disappeared  ^m  India.  Very  little  of  our 
life  to-day  is  bound  and  regulated  by  the  ordcis  of  the  Karma-kanda  of  the  Vedas. 
In  our  ordinary  lives  we  are  mostly  Pauranics  of  Tantrics,  and,  even  where  some 
Vcdic  texts  arc  used  by  the  BiJihmans  of  India,  the  adjustment  of  the  texts  is  mostly 
not  according  to  the  Vedas,  but  according  to  the  Tanlias  or  the  Puranas.  As  such, 
to  call  ourselves  Vaidiks  in  the  sense  of  following  the  Kaima-kanda  of  the  Vedas, 

I do  not  think,  would  be  proper.  But  the  other  fact  stands,  that  we  aie  all  of  us 
Vedantists.  The  people  who  call  themselves  Hindus  had  better  be  called  Vcdanlisis, 
and,  as  I have  shown  you,  under  that  one  name  Vaidantika,  come  in  all  our  various 
sects,  whether  dualists  or  non-dualists. 

The  sects  that  are  at  the  present  time  in  India,  Come  to  be  divided  in  geneial 
into  the  two  great  classes  of  dualists  and  monists.  The  little  dilTercnces  which 
some  of  these  sects  insist  upon,  and  upon  the  authority  of  which  want  to  take  new 
names,  as  pure  Advaitists,  or  qualified  Advaitists,  and  so  foith,  do  not  matter  much. 
As  a classification,  either  they  are  dualists  or  monists,  and  of  the  sects  existing  at 
the  present  time,  some  of  them  are  very  new,  and  olheis  seem  to  be  reproductions 
of  very  ancient  sects.  The  one  class,  I would  present  by  the  life  and  philosophy  of 
Ramanuja,  and  the  other,  by  Sankaracharya.  Ramanuja  is  the  leading  diulistic  pliilo- 
§oplier  of  later  India,  whom  all  the  other  dualistic  sects  have  followed,  diieclly  or 
indiiectly,  both  in  substance  of  their  teaching,  and  in  the  oiganisations  of  their 
sects,  even  down  to  some  of  the  most  minute  points  of  their  organisation.  You 
will  be  astonished,  if  you  compare  Ramanuja  and  his  woik  with  the  other  dualistic 
Vaishnava  sects  in  India,  to  see  how  much  they  resemble  each  other  in  organisation, 
leaching,  and  method.  There  have  been  the  great  Southern  preacher  IM.idhva  Muni, 
and  following  him,  our  great  Chaitanya  of  Bengal,  who  took  up  the  philosophy  of 
the  Madhvas,  and  preached  it  in  Bengal.  I’here  have  been  some  other  sects  in 
Southern  India  also,  as  the  qualified  dualistic  Shaivas.  The  Shaiv.as  in  most  pails  of 
India  arc  Advaitists,  except  in  some  portions  of  Southern  India,  and  in  Ceylon. 
But  they  also  only  substitute  Shiva  for  Vishnu,  and  are  Ramaniijists  in  eveiy  sense 
of  the  term  except  in  the  doctrine  of  the  soul.  The  followers  of  Ramanuja  hold 
that  the  soul  is  Ann,  like  a particle,  very  small,  and  the  followers  of  Sankaracharya 
hold  that  it  is  Vib/iu,  omnipresent.  There  have  been  several  non -dualistic  sects.  It 
seems  that  there  have  been  sects  in  ancient  limes  which  Sankara’s  movement  has 
entirely  swallowed  up  and  assimilated.  You  find  sometimes  a fling  at  Sankara  him- 
self in  some  of  the  commentaries,  especially  in  that  of  Vijnana  Bhiksliu  who, 
although  an  Advaitist,  attempts  to  upset  the  Mdydvdda  of  Sankara.  It  seems  there 
were  schools  who  did  not  believe  in  this  Mdydvdda,  and  they  went  so  far  as  to  call 

B 


tij  LECTURE^—FnoM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 

Sankara  a crypto-Buddhist,  Prachhchhanna  Bauddha^  and  they  thoughtUhis  Mh'dvddd 
was  taken  from  the  Buddhists,  and  brought  within  the  Vedanlic  fold.  However 
that  may  be,  in  modern  times  the  Advaitists  have  all  ranged  themselves  under 
Sankaracharya ; and  Sankaracharya  and  his  disciples  have  been  the  great  preachers 
of  Advaita,  both  in  Southern  and  in  Northern  India.  The  influence  of  Sankara- 
charya did  not  penetrate  much  into  our  country  of  Bengal,  and  in  Cashmere  and 
the  Punjab,  but  in  Southern  India  the  Smarlhas  are  all  followers  of  Sankarachaiya,  and 
with  Benares  as  the  centre,  his  influence  is  simply  immense,  even  in  many  pails  of 
Northern  India. 

Now  both  Sankara  and  Ramanuja  laid  aside  all  claim  to  originality.  Rama- 
nuja expressly  tells  us  he  is  only  following  the  great  commentary  of  Bodhkyana. 

I “ Ancient  teachers  abridged  that  extensive  commentary  on  the  Brahma 
Sutras  which  was  composed  by  the  Bhagavan  Bodhayana;  in  accordance  with  their 
opinion  the  words  of  the  Sutra  are  explained.”  That  is  what  Ramanuja  says  at 
the  beginning  of  his  commentary,  the  Sri-Bhashya.  He  takes  it  up  and  makes 
of  it  a Satikshipiivn,  and  that  is  what  we  have  to-day.  I myself  never  had  an 
opportunity  of  seeing  this  commentary  of  Bodhayana.  The  late  Swami  Dayananda 
Saraswati  wanted  to  reject  every  other  commentary  of  the  Vyasa  Sutras  except 
that  of  Bodhayana,  and  although  he  never  lost  an  opportunity  of  having  a fling  at  Rama- 
nuja, he  himself  could  never  produce  the  Bhodhayana.  1 have  .sought  for  it  all 
over  India,  and  never  yet  have  been  able  to  see  it.  But  Ramanuja  is  very  plain  on 
the  point,  and  he  tells  us  that  he  is  taking  the  ideas,  and  sometimes  the  very  pass- 
ages, out  of  Bodhayana,  and  condensing  them  into  the  present  Ramanuja  Bhashya. 
It  seems  that  Sankaracharya  was  also  doing  the  same.  There  are  a few  places  in 
his  Bhashya  which  mention  older  commentaiies,  and  when  we  know  that  his  Guiu, 
and  his  Guru’s  Guru,  had  been  Vedantists  of  the  same  school  as  he,  .sometimes 
even  more  thorough-going,  bolder  even  than  Sankaia  himself  on  certain  points,  it 
seems  pretty  plain  that  he  also  was  not  preaching  anything  very  original,  and  that 
even  in  his  Bhashya  he  himself  had  been  doing  the  same  work  that  Ramanuja  did 
with  Bodhayana,  but  from  what  Bhashya,  cannot  be  discovered  at  the  present  time. 
All  these  Darsanas  that  you  have  ever  seen  or  hcaid  of  are  based  upon  Upanishadic 
authority.  Whenever  they  want  to  quote  a Sruli,  they  mean  the  Upanishads.  'rhey 
are  always  quoting  the  Upanishads.  Following  the  Upanishads  there  come  other 
philosophies  of  India,  but  every  one  of  them  failed  in  getting  that  hold  on  India 
which  the  philosophy  of  Vyasa  got,  although  the  philosophy  of  Vyasa  is  a develop- 
ment out  of  an  older  one,  the  Sankhya,  and  every  philosophy  and  every  system  in 
India— I mean  throughout  the  world— owes  much  to  Kapila,  perhaps  the  greatest 
name  in  the  history  of  India  in  psychological  and  philosophical  lines.  The  influence 
of  Kapila  is  everywhere  seen  throughout  the  world.  Wherever  there  is  a recognised 
system  of  thought,  there  you  can  trace  his  influence  ; even  if  it  be  thousands  of  years 
back,  yet  he  stands  there,  the  shining,  glorious,  wondeiful  Kapila.  His  psychology 
and  a good  deal  of  his  philosophy  have  been  accepted  by  all  the  sects  of  India,  with 
but  very  little  differences.  In  our  own  country,  our  Naiyayik  philosophers  could 
not  make  much  impression  on  the  philosophical  world  of  India.  They  were  too 
busy  with  little  species  and  genus,  and  so  forth,  and  that  most  cumbersome  termi- 
nology, which  it  is  a life’s  work  to  study.  As  such,  they  were  very  busy  with  logic, 
and  left  philosophy  to  the  Vedantists,  but  every  one  of  the  Indian  philosophic  sects 


the  VEDANTA  IN  ALL  ITS  PHASES  1*3 

in  modern  times  has  adopted  the  logical  terminology  of  the  Naiyaylks  of  Bengal. 
Jagadish,  Gadadhar,  and  Siromani  are  as  well-known  at  Nnddea  as  in  some  of  the 
cities  in  Malabar.  But  the  philosophy  of  Vyasa,  il»e  Vyasa  Sutras,  Is  firm-seated, 
and  has  attained  the  permanence  of  that  which  It  intended  to  present  to  men,  the 
orthodox  and  Vedantic  side  of  philosophy.  Reason  was  entirely  subordinated  to  the 
Srutis,  and  as  Sankaracharya  declares,  Vyasa  dfd  not  care  to  reason  at  all.  His  idea 
in  wiiting  the  Sutras  was  just  to  bring  together,  and  with  one  thread  to  make  a 
gailand  of  the  flowers  of  Vedantic  texts.  His  Sutras  are  admitted  so  far  as  tliey  are 
subordinate  to  the  authority  of  the  Upanishads,  and  no  further. 

And,  as  I have  said,  all  the  sects  of  India  now  hold  these  Vyasa  Sutras  to  be^ 
the  great  authority,  and  eveiy  new  sect  in  India  starts  with  a fiesh  commentary  on  the 
Vyasa  Sutras  according  to  its  light.  The  difference  between  some  of  these  com- 
mentators is  sometimes  very  great,  sometimes  the  texl-lortuiing  is  quite  disgi^cfeig; 
The  Vyasa  Sutras  have  got  the  place  of  aulhoiity,  and  no  one  can  expect  to 
found  a sect  in  India,  until  he  can  write  a fresh  commentaiy  on  the  Vyasa  Sutias. 

Next  in  authority  is  the  celebivUcd  Gita.  The  gieat  glory  of  Sankaiacharya  was 
his  preaching  of  the  Gita.  It  is  one  of  the  greatest  woiks  that  this  great  man  did 
among  the  many  noble  woiks  of  his  noble  life— the  pleaching  of  the  Gita,  and  writing 
the  most  beautiful  commentary  upon  it.  And  lie  luvs- bcciv  followed  by  cvciy  founder 
of  an  oithodox  sect  in  India,  each  of  whom  has  wiiltcn  a commentary  on  the  Gila. 

Tlie  Upanrshads  are  many,  and  said  to  be  one  hundred  and  eight,  but  some- 
declaie  them  to  be  still  huger  in  niHiiber.  Some  of  them  aic  evidently  of  a much 
later  date,  one,  for-  instance,  called  the  Allopani.shad,  in' which  Allah  is  pi aised,  and 
Mahomet  is  called  the  Rajasulla.  I have  been  told  tluat  this  was  written  dining  the 
reign  of  Akbar,  to  biing  the  Hindus  and  Mahommedans  logethei,  and  sometimes  they 
got  hold  of  some  word,  as  Allah,  or  Ilia  in  the  Samhilas,  and  made  an  Uiianisliad 
on  It.  So  in  this  Allopanishad,  Mahomet  is  the  Rajasulla,  whatever  that  may  mean. 
Thcie  are  othci  sectarian  Upanisliads  of  the  same  species,  whfeh  you  find  to  be 
enliiely  modern,  and  it  has  been  so  easy  to  wiite  them,  seeing  that  this  langira,ge  of 
the  Samhita  portion  of  the  Vedas  is  so  arclwic  that  ihcie  is  no  grammar  to  it.  Years- 
ago  I had  an  idea  of  studying  the  grammar  of  the  Vedas,  ami  I began  with  alf 
earnestness  to  study  Panrni  and  the  Mahabhashya,  but  to*  my  surpri.se  1 found  that 
the  best  pail  of  the  Veche  giammar  consists  only  of  exceptions  to  rtries.  A rule  is 
made,  and  after  that  comes  a statement  in  tlie  Vedas, — “ Ttws  rule  will  be  an  excep- 
tion.’' So  you  see  what  an  amount  of  hberty  there  is  for  anybody  to  write  tmy- 
Ihing,  the  only  safeguard  being  the  dictionary  of  Ydslca.  Still,  iiv  this  you>  will  find, 
for  the  most  part,  but  a large  number  of  synonyms.  Given  all  that,  Im>cv  easy  it 
IS  to  write  any  nunrber  of  Upanishads  you  please-.  Just  have  a little  knowledge  of 
Sanskrit,  enough  to  make  words  look  like  the  old  archaic  woids,  and  you- have  no* 
fear  of  grammar.  Then  you  biing  in  RajasullUy  or  rwiy  other  SfA/a  you-  like.^  In 
that  way  many  Upanishads  have  been  manufactured,,  ami,  I anv  told- that,  tlmt  is  being" 
done  even  now.  In  some  parts  of  India,  I am  perfectly  cetlain,  they  are  trying  to 
manufacture  such  Upanishads,  among  the  diffeient  sects.  But  among  the  Ui>ani- 
shads  are  those,  which,  on  the  face  of  them,  bear  the  evidence  of  genuineness,  and 
these  have  been  taken  up  by  the  great  commentators  and  commented  upon,  especiall/ 
those  which  have  been  taken  up  by  Sankara,  followed  by  Ramanuja,  and  all  the  rest. 

There  are  one  or  two  more  ideas  with  legard  to  the  Upanishads  which  I want 
to  bring  to  your  notice,  foi  these  are  an  ocean  of  knowledge,  and  to  talk,  about  the 


124 


LECTURES-FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


Upanishads,  even  by  an  incompetent  person  like  myself  takes  years,  and  not  one  lecture 
only.  I want,  therefore,  to  bring  to  your  notice  one  or  two  points  in  the  study  of  the 
Upanishads.  In  the  fiist  place,  they  are  the  most  wonderful  poems  in  the  world. 
If  you  read  the  Samhita  portion  of  the  Vedas,  you  now  and  then  find  passages  of  most 
marvellous  beauty.  For  instance,  the  famous  Sloka  which  describes  Chaos — ffif 
“ When  daikncss  was  hidden  in  darkness,”  so  on  it  goes. 
One  reads  and  feels  the  wondeiful  sublimity  of  the  poetry.  Do  you  mark 
this,  that  outside  of  India,  and  inside  also,  there  have  been  attempts  at  painting 
the  sublime,  But  outside,  it  has  always  been  the  infinite  in  the  muscles,  the  external 
world,  the  infinite  of  matter,  or  of  space.  When  Milton  or  Dante,  or  any  other  great 
Euiopean  poet,  either  ancient  or  modern,  wants  to  paint  a picture  of  the  Infinite, 
he  liies  to  soar  outside,  to  make  you  feel  the  Infinite  thiough  the  muscles.  That 
attempt  has  been  made  heie  also.  You  find  it  in  the  Samhitas,  the  Infinite  of  exten- 
sion, most  marvellously  painted  and  placed  before  the  readers,  such  as  has  been  done 
nowhere  else.  Mark  that  one  sentence  Tama  tuti  tama^i)  gudham^zxiCi 
the  description  of  darkness  by  tluee  poets.  Take  our  own  Kalidasa— “ Darkness 
which  can  be  penetiated  with  the  point  of  a needle”  ; then  INIilton — “ No  light  but 
rather  darkness  visible,”  but  come  now  to  the  Upanishad,“Darkness  was  covering  dark- 
ness,” “ Darkness  was  hidden  in  daikness.”  We  who  live  in  the  tropics  can  under- 
stand it,  the  sudden  outbuist  of  the  monsoon,  when  in  a moment,  the  horizon 
becomes  darkened,  and  clouds  become  covered  with  moie  and  more  rolling  black 
clouds.  So  on,  the  poem  goes,  but  yet,  in  the  Samhita  portion,  all  these  attempts 
arc  e.stcrnal.  Like  everywhere  else,  the  attempts  at  finding  the  solution  of  the  great 
problems  of  life  have  been  through  the  external  wojld.  Just  as  the  Greek  mind,  or 
the  modem  Fuiopean  mind  wants  to  find  the  solution  of  life  and  of  all  the  sacred 
problems  of  Being  by  searching  into  the  e.xternal  world,  so  also  did  our  foiefathcrs, 
and  just  as  the  Europeans  failed,  they  failed  also.  But  the  Westerns  never  made 
n move  more,  they  remained  there,  they  failed  in  the  search  for  the  solution  of  the 
great  problems  of  life  and  death  in  the  external  world,  and  theie  they  remained, 
stranded  5 our  foiefathcrs  also  found  it  impossible,  but  woie  bolder  in  dcclaiing  the 
Utter  helplessness  of  the  senses  to  find  the  solution.  Nowhere  else  was  the  answer 
better  put  than  in  the  Upanishad.  I “ From  whence 

the  word  comes  back  reflected  by  the  mind,”  ^ ^ ^ I 

Thetc  the  eye  cannot  go,  nor  can  speech  reach.”  There  arc  vaiious  sentences 
which  declaicd  the  utter  helplessness  of  the  senses,  but  they  did  not  stop  there ; 
they  fell  back  upon  the  internal  nature  of  man,  they  went  to  get  the  answer 
from  their  own  soul,  they  became  introspective ; they  gave  up  external  nature  as  a 
failure,  as-  nothing  could  be  done  there,  as  no  hope,  no  answer,  could  be  found  ; 
they  discovered  tliat  dull,  dead  matter  would  not  give  them  truth,  and  they  fell  back 
upon  the  shining  soul  of  man,  and  theio,  the  answer  was  found, 

“ Know  this  Atman  alone  ” they  de- 
clared,  “ give  up  all  other  vain  words,”  and  hear  no  other.  In  the  Atman  they 
found  the  solution — the  greatest  of  all  atmans,  the  God,  the  Lord  of  this  Universe, 
Jiis  relation  to  the  atman  of  man,  our  duty  to  Him,  and  through  that  our  relation 
to  each  oiherr  And  herein  you  find  the  most  sublime  poetry  in  the  world.  No  more 
Is  the  attempt  made  to  paint  this  Atman  in  the  language  of  matter.  Nay,  even  for 
It  they  have  given  up  all  positive  language,  No  moie  is  there  attempt  to  come  to 
the  senses  tQ  give  them  the  itlea  pf  the  Infinite,  no  moie  \$  there  an  external,  dull, 


THE  VEDANTA  IN  ALL  ITS  PHASES 


125 

dead,  material,  spacious,  sensuous  infinite,  but  instead  of  that  comes  something, 
which  is  as  fine  as  even  that  mentioned  in  llie  sa)ing, — 

*T  ?nr  ^ 1 

^ ?Tf*PTwr  11 

What  poetry  in  the  world  can  be  moie  sublime  than  this  ! “There  the  sun  cannot 
illumine,  nor  the  moon,  nor  the  stars,  there  this  Hash  of  lightning  cannot  ilUmiinc  ; 
what  to  speak  of  this  mortal  fire  ! ” Such  poetiy  you  find  nowheie  else,  'lake  that 
most  marvellous  Upanisliad,  the  Kalha.  What  a wonderful  finish,  what  a most  mar- 
vellous art  displat-ed  in  that  poem  ! How  wondei fully  it  opens,  with  that  little  boy 
to  whom  ShradJhd  came,  who  wanted  to  see  Yama,  and  how  that  most  maivellous  of 
all  teachers,  Death  himself,  teaches  him  the  great  lessons  of  life  and  death  ! And  what 
was  his  quest  ? To  know  the  secret  of  death. 

The  second  point  that  I want  you  to  remember  is  the  perfectly  impersonal 
character  of  the  Upanishads.  Although  we  find  many  names,  and  many  spcakcis, 
and  many  teachers  in  the  Upanishads,  not  one  of  them  stands  as  an  aulhoiity  of  the 
Upanishads,  not  one  verse  is  based  upon  the  life  of  any  one  of  them,  'I'liese  aie 
simply  figures  like  shadows  moving  in  the  background,  unfelt,  unseen,  unrealised, 
but  the  real  force  is  in  the  marvellous,  the  brilliant,  the  effulgent  ic,\is  of  the  Upani- 
sliads,  peifectly  impersonal.  If  twenty  Yajnavalkyas  came,  and  lived,  and  died, 
it  does  not  matter;  the  te.\ts  are  there.  And  yet  it  is  against  no  personality  ; it  is 
broad  and  e:tpansive  enough  to  embrace  all  the  personalities  that  the  woild  has  yet 
produced,  and  all  that  are  yet  to  come.  It  h.is  nothing  to  say  against  the  woi ship 
of  persons,  or  Avatais,  or  sages.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  always  upholding  it.  At 
the  same  time,  it  is  perfectly  impersonal.  It  is  a most  maivellous  idea,  like  the 
(Jod  it  preaches,  the  impersonal  idea  of  the  Upanishads.  At  the  same  lime,  foi  the 
sage,  the  thinker,  the  philosopher,  for  the  rationalist  it  is  as  much  impeisonal  as 
any  modern  scientist  can  wish.  And  tliese  are  our  sciipliircs.  You  nuis.t  lemeinber 
that  what  the  Bible  is  to  the  Christians,  what  the  Quoran  is  to  the  iMahommedaus, 
what  the  Tripitaka  is  to  the  Buddhists,  what  the  Zend  Avcsla  is  to  tliu  Faisis,  so  these 
Upanishads  are  to  us.  These  and  nolliing  but  lliese,  arc  our  scriptures.  The 
Puranas,  the  Tantras,  and  all  the  other  books,  even  the  Vyasa  Sutias,  aie  of  secoudaiy, 
leiliary  authority,  but  piimaiy  are  the  Vedas.  l\Ianu,  and  the  Puianas,  and  all  the 
other  books  are  to  be  taken  so  far  as  they  agiec  with  llie  authority  of  the  Upanishads, 
and  when  they  disagree  they  are  to  be  rejected  without  mercy.  This  we  oujihl  to 
lemcmber  always,  but  unfortunately  for  India,  at  the  pie.scnt  time  we  have  foi gotten  it. 
A petty  village  custom  seems  now  the  real  authoiily  for  the  teaching  of  the  Upaui- 
shads.  A petty  idea  current  in  a wayside  village  in  Bengal  seems  to  have  the  authoiity 
of  the  Vedas,  and  even  something  better.  And  that  word  “oithodox,  ’ how  wondeiful 
its  influence  ! To  the  villager,  the  following  of  every  little  bit  of  the  Karnia-kanda  is  the 
very  height  of  “ orthodoxy,”  and  one  who  does  not  do  it  is  told,— “ (u>  away,  you  aie 
no  more  a Hindu,”  So  there  are,  most  unfoitunatcly,  in  my  mothei land,  pei  sons 
who  will  take  up  one  of  these  Tantras  and  say,  that  the  practice  of  this  'I’anira  is 
to  be  obeyed  ; be  who  does  not  do  so  is  no  moie  oithodox  in  his  views.  Thcrcfoie 
it  is  better  for  us  to  remember  that  in  the  Upanishads  is  the  piimary  aulhoiity,  even 
the  Grikya  and  Srauta  Sutras  are  subordinate  to  the  aulhoiity  of  the  Vedas.  They 
are  the  words  of  the  Rishis,  our  forefathers,  and  }0u  have  to  believe  them  if  you 
want  to  become  a Hindu.  You  may  even  believe  the  most  peculiar  ideas  about 
the  Godhead,  but  if  you  deny  the  authority  of  the  Vedas,  you  are  a Nasiika. 


126  LECTURES— FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 

Therein  lies  the  dilTcrcnce  of  the  scriptures  of  the  Christians  or  the  Buddhists  ; they 
are  all  Puranas,  and  not  sciiptures,  because  they  describe  the  history  of  the  deluge, 
and  the  history  of  kings  and  reigning  families,  and  record  the  lives  of  great  men, 
and  so  on.  'Phis  is  the  woik  of  the  Puranas,  and  so  far  as  they  agree  with  the 
Vedas,  they  are  good.  So  far  as  the  Bible  and  the  scriptures  of  other  nations  agree 
with  the  Vedas,  they  are  perfectly  good,  but  when  they  do  not  agree,  they  are  no  more 
to  be  accepted.  So  with  the  Quoian.  There  are  many  moral  teachings  in  these, 
and  so  far  as  they  agree  with  the  Vedas  they  have  the  aulhonty  of  the  Puranas,  but 
no  more.  The  idea  is  that  the  Vedas  were  never  wiitten,  the  idea  is  they  never  came 
into  existence.  I was  told  once  by  a Clnislian  missionary  that  their  scriptuies  have 
a hislorial  character,  and  therefore  ate  true.  To  which  I leplied,  “ Mine  have  no 
historical  character,  and  iherefoie  they  tye  true;  yours  being  historical  they  were 
evidently  made  by  some  man  the  other  day.  Yours  aie  man-made  and  mine  are 
not;  their  non-historicality  is  in  their  favoui.”  These  aie  the  relations  of  the  Vedas 
with  all  the  other  sciiptures  at  the  present  day. 

Wo  now  come  to  the  teachings  of  the  Upanishads.  Various  texts  are  there. 
One  is  peifectly  dualistic.  What  do  I mean  by  dualistic  ? There  aie  certain  doctrines 
which  are  agieed  to  by  all  the  different  sects  of  India.  First,  theie  is  the  doctrine  of 
Sanuiira,  oi  re-incai nation  of  the  soul.  Secondly,  they  all  agiee  in  their  psychology; 
first  there  is  the  body,  behind  that,  what  they  call  the  Sukshma-Sharira,  the  mind,  and 
behind  that  even,  is  the  Jiva.  That  is  the  gieal  dil'leience  between  Western  and  Indian 
Psychology  ; in  the  Western  Psychology  the  mind  IS  the  soul,  heie  it  is  not.  The 
Anldhktirana,  the  internal  insliument,  as  the  mind  is  called,  is  only  an  instrument  in 
the  hands  of  that  Jiva,  through  w'hich  the  Jiva  works  on  the  body,  or  on  the  external 
woild.  Here  they  all  agree,  and  they  all  also  agree  that  this  jiva,  or  Atman,  Jivhtman 
as  it  is  called  by  vaiious  secb,  is  eternal,  without  beginning;  and  that  it  is  going 
fiom  biith  to  biith,  until  it  gets  a final  lelease.  They  all  agiee  in  this,  and  they  also 
all  agiee  in  one  other  most  vital  point,  which  alone  maiks  chaiactenstically,  most 
prominently,  most  vitally,  the  diffeience  betw'cen  the  Indian  and  the  Western  mind,  and 
it  is  this,  that  everything  is  in  the  soul.  There  is  no  inspiiation,  but  propeily 
speaking,  expiration.  All  poweis  and  all  pmily  and  all  greatness  -everything  is 
in  the  soul.  I’he  Yogi  would  tell  you  that  the  Siddhis — Aninu),  Lnghinia,  and  so 

on that  he  wants  to  attain  to,  are  not  to  be  atiained,  in  tlie  proper  sense  of  the 

word,  but  aie  alieady  theie  in  the  soul ; the  work  is  to  m.tke  them  manifest.  Patanjali, 
for  instance,  would  tell  you  that  even  in  the  lowest  worm  that  crawls  under  your 
feet,  all  the  eightfold  Yogi’s  powers  are  already  existing.  The  diffeience  has  been 
made  by  the  body.  As  soon  as  he  gets  a better  body  the  pow^eis  will  become  mani- 
fest, but  they  aie  there.  “ Good  and 

bad  deeds  are  not  the  diiect  causes  in  the  transfuiination  of  nature,  but  they 
act  as  breakers  of  obstacles  to  the  evolutions  of  nature  : as  a faimer  breaks  the 
obstacles  to  the  course  of  water,  which  then  runs  down  by  its  owm  nature.” 
Here  Kapila  gives  the  celebrated  example  of  the  cultivator  biinging  water  into  his 
field  from  a huge  tank  somewhcie.  The  lank  is  already  filled  and  the  water  would 
flood  his  land  in  a moment,  only  ihete  is  a mud-wall  betw'cen  the  tank  and  his  field. 
As  soon  as  the  baiiier  is  bioken,  in  rushes  the  water  out  of  its  own  power  and  force. 
This  mass  of  power  and  puiily  and  pcifection  is  in  the  soul  already.  The  only 
diffcicncc  is  this  cmiru/za— this  veil  — that  has  been  cast  over  it.  Once  the  veil  is 
removed  the  soul  attains  to  purity,  and  Us  powers  become  manifest.  This,  you  ought 


THE  VEDANTA  IN  ALL  ITS  PHASES 


127 


to  remember,  is  the  great  difference  between  Eastern  and  Western  thought.  Hence 
you  find  people  teaching  such  awful  doctrines  as  lliat  we  are  all  boin  sinners,  and 
because  we  do  not  believe  in  such  awful  doctrines  we  are  all  born  wicked.  They  never 
slop  to  think  that  if  we  are  by  our  very  nature  wicked,  we  can  never  be  good— 
for  how  can  nature  change  ? If  it  changes,  it  contradicts  itself ; Jt  is  not  nature. 
We  ought  to  remember  this.  Here  the  Dualist,  and  the  Advaitist,  and  all  others  in 


India  agree. 

The  next  point,  which  all  the  sects  in  India  believe  in,  is  God.  Of  course 
their  ideas  of  God  will  be  different.  The  Dualists  believe  in  a personal  God,  and 
a personal  only.  I want  you  to  understand  this  word  personal,  a little  more.  This 
woid  personal  does  not  mean  that  God  has  a body,  .sits  on  a tin  one  somewhere,  and 
rules  this  world,  but  personal  means  \\ith  qualilie.s.  There  are  many  descrip- 

tions of  the  personal  God.  This  personal  God  as  the  Ruler,  the  Creator,  the  Tre- 
server,  and  the  Destroyer,  of  this  universe,  is  believed  in  by  all  the  sects.  The 
Advaitists  believe  something  more.  They  believe  in  a still  higher  phase  of  lhr.s 
personal  God,  which  is  personal-impersonal.  No  adjective  can  illustrate  where 
there  is  no  qualification,  and  the  Advaitist  would  not  give  Him  any  qualities  cxcei^ 
the  three— Sat— Chit— Ananda,  Existence,  Knowledge  and  Bliss  Absolute.  This  is  what 
Sankara  did.  But  in  the  Upanishads  themselves  you  find  they  peneliate  even  further, 
and  say,  nothing  can  be  piedicaleil  of  It  except  fie/i,  fie/i,  “not  this,  not  this.’’  Here  all 
the  different  sects  of  India  agree.  But  taking  the  duahslic  side,  as  1 have  said,  I will 


take  Ramanuja  as  the  typical  dualist  of  India,  the  gicat  modem  repiesenlaiive  of  the 
dualistic  systems.  It  is  a pity  that  our  people  in  Bengal  know  so  very  little  about 
the  great  leligious  leaders  in  India,  who  have  been  born  in  other  pait.s  of  the  country  ; 
aivrfor  the  matter  of  that,  dining  the  whole  of  the  Maliommedan  jKriod,  with  the 
exception  of  our  Chailanya,  all  the  great  religious  leadcis  wcic  born  in  .Southern 
India,  and  it  is  the  intellect  of  Southern  India  that  is  ically  governing  India  now ; 
foi  even  Cluuianja  belonged  to  one  of  these  sects,  a sect  of  the  Madbv.as.  According 
to  Ramanuja  these  three  entities  arc  eternal— God.  and  soul,  and  Naluie.  The  souls 
aie  eternal,  and  they  will  remain  ctcinally  existing,  individualised  through  eternity, 

and  will  letain  their  individuality  all  through  Your  soul  will  be  different  from  my 
soul  llirough  all  eternity,  says  Ramanuja,  and  so  will  this  Nature,  which  is  an  existing 
fact,  as  much  existing  as  the  existence  of  soul,  or  the  existence  of  God— this  will 
remain  always.  And  God  is  interpenetrating,  the  essence  of  the  soul.  He  is  the 
Aii/ivyn/fiin  ; in  this  sense  Ramanuja  sometimes  thinks  that  God  is  one  with  the  .soul, 
the  essence  of  the  soul,  and  these  .souls —at  the  lime  of  Prahn><t,  when  the  whole 
of  Nature  becomes  what  he  calls  SaMiiia,  conlracted, -become  contmeted  and 
minute,  and  remain  so  for  a time.  And  at  the  beginning  of  the  next  cycle  they  all 
come  out,  according  to  their  past  Karma,  and  undergo  the  effect  of  that  Karma. 
Every  action  that  makes  the  natural  inborn  piuity  and  peifeclion  of  the  soul,  get 
conliactcd,  is  a bad  action,  and  cveiy  action  that  makes  it  come  out  and  expand  itself, 
is  a good  action,  says  Ramanuja.  Whatcvei  helps  to  make  the  Vtbhha  of  the  soul 
is  good,  and  whatever  makes  it  Sanhuhila  is  bad.  And  thus  the  soul  is  going  on, 
expanding  or  contracting  in  its  actions,  till,  th.ough  the  grace  of  God  comes  sa  vat.on 
And  that  grace  comes  to  all  souls,  says  Ramanuja,  that  aie  pure,  and  struggle  for  that 


^"^^^Thcre  is  a celebrated  verse  in  the  Srutis,  mfWmt 

U,  ‘‘When  the  food  Is  puie  then  the  Sa//va  becomes  pure;  when  the 


128 


LECTURES~FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


S(jf/7'a  is  pure  ihcn  ihc  Smiiii,”  the  mcmoiy  of  the  Lord,  or  llic  memory  of 
our  own  peifcction — if  you  are  an  Advailisl — “becomes  truer,  steadier,  and  abso- 
lute.” Ileie  IS  aigicat  (hsenssion.  First  of  all,  what  is  this  A(?//7v/ We  know  that 
aecoiding  to  the  S.uikli) a— and  it  has  been  admitted  by  all  our  sects  of  philosophy — 
the  body  is  composed  of  three  soits  of  inateiials — not  qualities;  it  is  the  geneial 
idea  tliat  .Sattva,  Kajas  and  'I'anias  are  qualities.  Not  at  all,  not  qualities  but  the 
mateii.ils  of  this  nniveisc,  and  with  lihara-suthihi,  when  the  food  is  pure,  the  S<?//r'rt: 
matciial  becomes  puie.  The  one  theme  of  the  Vedanta  is  to  get  this  Sattva<  As  1 
ha\e  told  you,  the  soul  is  alieady  pine  and  peifcct,  and  it  is,  according  to  the  Vedanta, 
covered  uj)  b)  Rajas  and  Tamas  particles.  The  S.altva  particles  are  the  most  lumi- 
nous, and  the  elfulgence  of  the  soul  penetiates  through  them  as  easily  as  light 
ihiough  glass.  So  il  the  Rajas  and  I'amas  paiticles  go,  and  leave  the  Sattva  particles, 
in  this  slate  the  powei  and  jiuiity  of  the  soul  will  appear,  and  leave  the  soul  more 
in  am  test, 

Theiefore  it  is  necc.ssary  to  have  this  Sattva.  And  the  text  says,  “When  the 
(lhara  becomes  puie.’”  Ramanuja  takes  this  woid,  .Ihaia,  to  mean  food,  and  he  has 
made  it  one  of  the  turning  jioints  of  his  philosophy.  Not  only  so,  it  has  affected 
the  whole  of  India,  and  all  the  dilTeient  sects.  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  for  us  to 
understand  what  it  means,  for  that,  accoidmg  to  Ramanuja,  is  one  of  the  piincipal 
factois  in  oui  dlu'n a-suddhi.  What  makes  food  im[)ure,  asks  Ramanuja.'*  Thiee 
soits  of  defects  make  food  impuic — iwsi,  joii-do^ha,  the  defect  in  the  very  nature 
of  the  class  to  which  the  food  belongs,  as  the  smell  in  onions,  gailic,  and  such  like. 
I'lie  next  is  dshyaya-dosha,  the  defect  nr  the  poison  fiom  whom  the  food  comes;  food 
coming  fioin  a wicked  jieison  will  make  }ou  impure.  I myself  ha\e  seen  many 
gieat  sages  in  India  tollowing  stiictly  that  advice  all  their  lives.  Of  couise  they  had 
the  power  to  know  who  biought  food,  and  even  who  had  touched  the  food,  and  I 
have  seen  il  in  my  own  life,  not  once,  hut  hundieds  of  times.  Then  Nimilta-doshay 
the  defect  ot  iinpuie  things  oi  inlhionces  coming  in  contact  with  food  is  another. 
We  had  bettei  attend  to  that  a little  moie  now  It  has  become  too  pievalent  in  India 
to  take  food  with  diitand  dust  and  hits  of  haii  in  it.  If  food  is  taken  fiom  which  these 
ihice  defects  h.ive  been  removed,  that  makes  Sat ti'a-suddhi the  Salii'a,  Religion 
seems  to  he  a vmy  easy  task  (hen.  'I'lien  eveiyone  can  have  lehgion,  if  it  comes 
1))'  ealmg  jiure  food  only  'I'lieie  is  none  so  weak  oi  incompetent  in  this  w'Oild,  that 
1 know,  who  cannot  save  himself  fiom  these  defects.  'I'hen  comes  Sankaiachai) a, 
who  s.iyb  tins  woid  dlidr,}  means  thought  collected  in  the  mind  ; when  that  becomes 
jane,  the  Sd/fvii  becomes  pine,  and  not  holoie  that  You  may  eat  wlial  you  like.  If 
lood  alone  would  puiify  the  SijUxhi,  then  feed  the  monkey  with  milk  and  lice  all  its  life  ; 
would  It  become  a great  Yogi  Then  the  cows  and  the  deer  would  be  gieat  Yogis. 
As  has  been  said,  if  it  is  by  bathing  much  that  heaven  is  reached,  the  fishes  will  get  to 
heaven  liist.  If  by  eating  vegetables  a man  gels  to  heaven,  the  cows  and  the  deer  will 
gel  to  heaven  fust. 

Ikil  what  IS  the  solution?  Both  are  neces.saiy.  Of  course  the  idea  that  San- 
kaiachai va  gives  us  of  d/idra  is  the  piimaiy  idea.  But  pure  food,  no  doubt,  helps 
puie  thought : it  has  an  intimate  connection ; both  ought  to  be  theie.  But  the 
defect  is,  tiiat  m modem  India  we  have  forgotten  the  advice  of  Sankarachaiya  and 
taken  only  the  “ puie  food  ’ meaning  That  is  why  peojile  get  mad  with  me  when 
1 s.'i\,  religion  has  got  into  the  kitchen,  and  if  you  had  been  in  Madras  with  mo  you 
would  liave  agieed  with  me.  The  Bengalees  are  belter  Ukui  that.  In  Madias  they 


li'ttE  Vedanta  in  all  ith  Eitm^kS  129 

throw  away  food  it  anybody  looks  at  it.  And  with  all  ihit.,  I do  not  see  that  the 

people  are  any  the  belter  there.  If  only  eating  this  and  that  soil  of  food,  and  saving 

,t  fioin  the  looks  of  tliis  peison  and  that  person  would  give  them  peifection,  you 
would  e.Kpect  tlient  all  to  be  peifect  men,  which  they  afe  not 

Thus,  although  these  aie  to  be  combined,  and  linked  together  to  make  a peifect 
whole,  do  not  put  the  cait  befoie  the  hoise.  Theie  is  a ciy  iiowada\«,  about  this  and 
that  food,  and  about  Vanuhhrama,  and  the  Bengalees  aie  the  most  vocifeioiis  in  these 
(.lies.  I would  ask  eveiy  one  of  )ou,  what  do  you  know  about  this  V,ir}i,lshrama  P 

Where  are  the  four  castes  to-day  in  tins  countiy  ? Answei  me  ; I do  not  see  the 

foul  castes.  Just  as  om  Bengalee  pio\eib  has  it,  ‘ As  headache  without  a head,’ so 
jou  want  to  make  this  Vai  nushrama  lieie  Thcie  aic  not  foui  castes  heie.  I see  only 
the  Bi^hman  and  the  Sudia.  If  theie  are  the  Kshatiiyas  and  the  Vaisyas,  where  are 
they,  and  why  do  not  you  Bialimans  order  tliem  to  take  the  Va'iuopavita  and  siud^  the 
Vedas,  as  eveiy  Hindu  ought  to  do  .?  -and  if  the  Vais^as  and  tlio  Ksliatiiyas  do  not 
exist,  but  only  the  Bi.\hmans  and  the  Sudias,  the  Sastias  sa)  ilial  the  Brahman  must  not 
hve  in  a countiy,  wlicie  ibere  aie  only  Sudras  ; so  dcpail  bag  and  baggage  ’ Do  you 
know  what  the  Sasti as  say  about  people  who  have  been  eating  mleJufiha  food,  and 
lumg  under  a GoveinmeiU  of  the  mln/uhho^,  as  jouhave  foi  the  last  ihoiisaiid  )eais  ? 
Do  you  know  the  penance  foi  that.?  The  penaiiee  would  be  burning  one’s  self 
will)  his  own  hands.  Do  } ou  w'anl  to  pass  as  leacheis,  and  walk  like  hypocrites?  If 
)ou  believe  in  your  Sastias  bum  yomsolvos  lust  like  the  one  griMt  BiAliman  did, 
w'lio  went  with  Ale.xandcr  the  (Beal,  and  burnt  himself  l)ccause  he  thought  he  had 
eaten  the  food  oi  inleJnhha  Do  like  liiat  and  )uu  will  sec  lliat  the  whole  nation 
will  be  at  }OUi  feet.  Vuti  do  not  believe  m youi  own  Sastias  and  )et  wauU  to  make 
olheis  believe  in  them.  B you  think  )ou  are  not  able  to  do  that  in  this  age,  admit  )om 
weakness  and  excuse  the  weakness  of  olhcis.  take  the  otiiei  castes  up,  give  llieni  a 
heliiing  hand,  let  tiiein  study  tlie  \ edas,  and  become  jusi  as  good  Aryans  as  any  other 
Ai)ans  in  the  woild  and  be  you  likewise  Ai\ans,  jou  Bi.'ihinans  of  Bcng.ii. 

Give  up  this  filthy  Vdmddair.L  that  is  killing  \oui  country.  Von  have  not  seen 
the  otlici  parts  of  India.  When  I see  hov'  much  the  h.\s  enlcicd  our 

soticly,  1 find  it  a most  disgmceful  pl.tco  with  all  Us  l)oast  of  culture  These  Vdrnd-  , 
ebud  sects  aie  honeycombing  our  society  m Bengal.  Those  who  tome  out  in  the 
da)  tunc  and  pi  each  most  loudly  about  u,  It  is  they  w'ho  cairy  on  the  lioiiible 
dcbanchery  at  night,  and  are  backed  by  the  most  dieadful  books.  They  are  oideied 
by  the  books  to  do  tliese  things.  You  who  are  of  Bengal  know'  it.  The  Bengalee 
Sastias  aie  the  Vmnachaia  'J'antias.  The}  are  published  by  the  carldoad.  and 
) ou  poison  the  miiuls  of  )oiir  cliildien  w’lth  litem,  instead  of  teaching  lliem  }oui 
Sinus.  Katheis  of  (’alculta,  do  }au  not  feel  ashamed  that  such  hoiiihle  slulT  as 
these  N’ainachai  a Taiuras,  with  iranslation.s  too,  should’  be  put  mlo  the  hands  of 
}uur  1)0) s and  gills,  and  their  minds  poisoned,  and  that  they  should  be  biought  up 
with  the  idea  llial  these  aie  the  Sastias  of  the  Hindus?  If  you  aie  ashamed,  lake 
them  away  fiom  your  childien,  and  let  them  lead  the  true  Sastias,  the  Vedas,  the 
Gila,  the  Upanishads, 

Accouling  to  the  dualisiic  sects  of  India,  the  individual  souls  remain  as  individ- 
uals throughout,  and  God  creates  the  univeise  out  of  pre-oMsling  material,  only  as  the 
ellieieni  cause.  Accoiding  to  the  Atlvaiti'>ts,  on  the  oilier  hand,  God  is  both  ths 
mateii.d,  and  the  cthcieiil  cause  of  the  universe.  He  is  not  only  the  Creator  of 
the  umveise,  but  He  cieatcs  it  out  of  llunself.  That  is  the  Advailist  position. 

Q 


130 


LECTURES— FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


There  are  crude  dualistic  sects  who  believe  that  this  world  has  been  created  by  God 
out  of  Himself,  and  at  the  same  time  God  is  eternally  sepaiale  from  the  univeisQ, 
and  everything  is  eternally  subordinate  to  the  Ruler  of  the  umveise.  There  are  sects 
too  who  also  believe  that  out  of  Himself  God  has  evolved  this  universe,  and  individ- 
uals in  the  long  run  attain  to  Niiv?ina,  to  give  up  the  finite  and  become  the  Infinite. 
But  these  sects  have  disappeared.  I'he  one  sect  of  Advaitists  that  you  see  in  modern 
India  is  composed  of  the  followers  of  Sankara.  According  to  Sankara,  God'  is 
both  the  material  and  the  efficient  cause,  through  Maya,  but  not  in  leality.  God  has 
not  become  this  universe,  but  the  universe  is  not,  and  God  is  This  is  one  of  the 
highest  points  to  undeislandof  Advaila  Vedanta,  this  idea  of  Maya.  I am  afraid  I have 
no  time  to  discuss  this  one  most  difficult  point  in  oui  philosophy.  I'hose  of  you 
who  are  acquainted  with  Wcstcin  philosophy  will  find  something  vciy  similai  in  Kant. 
But  I must  warn  you,  those  of  you,  who  have  studied  Piofessoi  .ALu  Alullei  's  wiitmgs 
on  Kant,  that  tlieie  is  one  idea  most  misleading.  It  was  S.inkaia  who  liist  found 
out  the  idea  of  the  identity  of  time,  space  and  causation  with  Alaya,  and  I had  the 
good  foitune  to  find  one  or  two  passages  in  Sankaia’s  comnieniai les  and  send  them 
to  my  fiiend  the  Piofessor.  So  even  that  idea  was  heie  in  India  Now  this  is  a 
peculiar  theory— -this  Maya  thcoiy  of  the  Advaita  V'cdanlists.  The  Brahman  is  all 
that  exists,  but  differentiation  has  been  caused  by  this  Alaya.  Unity,  the  one  Biahman, 
is  the  ultimate,  the  goal,  and  heiein  is  an  ctoin.al  dissension  again  between  Indian 
and  Western  thought.  India  has  thrown  this  challenge  to  the  woild  foi  thousands 
of  years,  and  the  challenge  has  been  taken  up  by  (lilTeienl  nations,  and  the  lesult 
is  that  they  all  succumbed  and  you  live.  Tins  is  the  challenge,  that  tins  woild  is  a 
delusion,  that  It  is  all  Alaya,  that  whethei  you  cat  off  the  gunind  with  youi  fmgeis, 
or  dine  off  golden  plates,  whether  you  live  in  palaces,  and  aic  one  of  the  mightiest  of 
monarchs  or  are  the  poorest  of  beggais,  death  Is  the  one  lesult;  it  is  all  the  saine, 
all  Maya.  That  is  the  old  Indian  theme,  and  again  and  again  nations  aie  spiinging 
up  trying  to  unsay  it,  to  dispiovc  it ; becoming  great,  with  enjoyment  a.s  their  watch- 
word, power  in  their  hands,  they  use  that  power  to  the  utmost,  enjoy  to  the  utmost, 
and  the  next  moment  they  die.  We  stand  for  cvei  because  we  .see  that  eveiylhmg 
is  Maya.  The  childien  of  Maya  live  for  ever,  but  the  children  of  enjoyment  die. 

Here  again  is  anothei  gical  difference.  Just  as  you  find  the  attempts  of  Hegel 
and  Schopenhauer  in  German  Philosophy,  you  will  find  the  veiy  same  ideas 
bi ought  forward  in  ancient  India.  Fortunately  foi  us,  Hegelianism  was  nipped  in  the 
bud,  and  not  allowed  to  spiout  and  cast  its  baneful  shoots  over  this  motherland  of 
ouis.  Hegel’s  one  idea  is  that  the  one,  the  absoUuo,  is  only  chaos,  and  that  the 
individualised  foim  is  the  greater.  The  world  is  greatei  than  the  non-woild,  Samsaia 
is  greater  than  salvation.  That  is  the  one  idea,  and  the  moie  you  plunge  into  this 
Samsara,  the  more  your  soul  is  covered  with  the  woi kings  of  life,  the  bettci  you  aie. 
They  say,  do  you  not  see  how  we  build  houses,  cleanse  the  streets,  enjoy  the  senses 
Aye,  behind  that  they  may  hide  lancour,  misery,  hoiror — behind  every  bit  of  that 
enjoyment.  On  the  other  hand,  our  philosophers  have  fiom  the  very  fust  dcclaicd 
that  every  manifestation,  what  you  call  evolution,  is  vain,  a vain  attempt  of  ihe 
unmanifested  to  manifest  itself.  Ay^e,  you  the  almighty  cause  of  this  universe,  tiying 
to  reflect  yourself  in  little  mud  puddle.s  ! But  after  making  the  attempt  for  a time 
you  find  out  it  was  all  in  vain,  and  beat  a retreat  to  the  place  from  whence  you  came. 
This  is  Vairdgya,  or  renunciation,  and  the  vciy  beginning  of  leligion.  How  can 
rehgtou  or  morality  begin  without  renunciation  itself } The  Alpha  and  Omega  is 


THE  VEDANTA  IN  ALL  ITS  PHASES 


^3' 


rcnilnciation  ; ‘‘j^ive  up,”  says  th(i  Veda,  “give  up.”  Thai  is  the  one  way,  “give  up.” 

^ JTITJir  ?Tr*T%^  I — ” Neither  ihrougii  wealth,  nor  through  progeny, 

bul  by  giving  up  alone  that  iinuiortaliiy  is  to  be  reached.”  That  is  the  dictate  of  the 
Indian  hooks.  Of  couise,  there  have  been  gieat  giveis-uj)  ot  the  woild,  even  sitting  on 
till  ones,  bul  even  Janaka  himself  had  to  I'enounce;  who  was  a gicater  rcnouncer  than 
he  ? But  in  modem  times  we  all  want  to  be  called  Janakas  ! 'Bhey  are  all  Janakas* 
of  childien, — unclad,  ill-fed,  miseiable  childien.  The  word  Janaka  can  be  applied 
lo  them  in  that  sense  only ; they  have  noiH)  of  the  shining,  God^like  thoughts 
as  the  old  Janaka  had.  These  are  oni  modem  Janakas!  A little  less  of  tins' 
Janakism  now,  and  come  straight  to  the  niaik!  It  you  can  give  up,  you  will 
have  religion.  If  you  cannot,  you  may  lead  all  the  books  that  are  in  tiic  world,  from 
East  to  West,  swallow  all  the  libiaiies,  and  become  the  greatest  of  Pandits,  but’  if 
you  have  Karma-kanda  only,  yon  are  nothing,  tlrerc  i's  no  SJm•ituallly^  Thfouglt 
lenunciatiou  alone  this  immoilality  is  to  be  leached.  It  is  the  power,  the  great  ])owei, 
that  caies  not  even  for  the  universe,  then  it  is  that  ifrsTTWfT The  whole 

univeise  becomes  likes  a hollow  made  by  a cow’s  foot  ” Renuiicialioii,  that  i.s  the 
Hag,  the  bannei  of  India,  floating  over  the  woild,  the  one  undying  thought  whicE 
India  sends  again  and  again  as  •a  warning  to  dying  r.xccs,  as  a warning  to  all  tyranny', 
as  a warning  to  wickedness  in  the  woild.  Aye,  Hindus,  let  not  your  hold  of  that 
bannei  go.  Hold  it  aloft.  Even  if  you  aie  weak,  and  cannot  icnouncc,  do  not 
lowci  the  ideal,  ."^ay  1 am  weak  and  cannot  renounce  the  woild,  bul  do  not  tiy  to- 
be  hypocrites,  loriui  mg  texts,  and  making  specious  aigumcnts,  and  Hying  lo  thiovv 
dust  m the  eyes  ot  people  vvho  ought  to  have  known  belter.  Do  not  do  that,  but 
own  you  aie  weak.  Eoi  the  uka  is  gieat,  that  of  i enunciation.  What  matteis  it  if 
inilliuns  Kill  in  llw  allempt,  it  ten  soklieis,  oi  even  two,  letuin  victorious ! Blessed- 
be  the  millions  dead  ' 'I'heri  blood  has  bought  the  vicloiy.  This  reimndalioii  i.s 
the  one  ideal  thioughoul  ihe  diltoieiit  Vcdic  sects  execpl  one,  and  that  is  the  Vallabha- 
eh.iiya  sect  111  Bombay  fhesidemy,  and  most  of  you  aie  awaie  what  comes  where 
lenunciatiou  does  not  exi-t.  We  want  oilhodoxy,  even  the  hideously  oitliodox,  eveiv 
those  who  smolhei  themselves  with  ashe.s,  even  those  who  stand  with  then  hands  iii). 
Idled  Aye,  we  want  them,  nun  Uuial  though  they  be,  foi  standing  for  that  idea  of  giving, 
igi,  and  acting  as  a waimng  to  the  lace  against  succumbing  lo  the  effeminate  luxuiies 
that  aie  cieeping  into  India,  eating  into  oui  veiy  vitals,  and  lending  to  make  the  whole 
i.ice  a lace  ol  liy  port  lies  We  want  to  have  a little  of  a.sceticism.  Renunciation  has 
conipieied  India  in  days  ot  yore,  it  has  still  lo  comjuer  Imlia.  Still  it  stands  gicalest 
and  highest  of  Imii.ui  ideals, — (his  lenunciatiou.  Ihe  land  of  ]>uddha,  the  land  of 
Ramanuja,  of  Kamakiishna  Pai.amahamsa,  the  land  of  renunciation,  the  land  whcie, 
tiom  the  days  of  yoie,  Kamia-kanda  was  pieachecl  against,  and  even  to  day  there  arc 
hundieds  who  have  given  up  everything,  ami  become  yivanmuklas--^yG,  will  that 
land  give  up  Us  ideals?  Ceilamly  not.  Theie  may  be  people  who.se  brains  have 
become  turned  by  the  Western  luxuaious  ideals , there  may  be  thousands  ami  hundieds 
of  thousands,  who  have  diunk  deep  of  enjoyment,  this  curse  of  the  We.st,  tl>e  sensc.s, 
the  cuisc  of  the  vvorhl,  yet  for  all  that,  there  will  be  other  thousands  in  this  mother- 
land of  mine  to  whom  ichgion  will  ever  be  a reality,  and  wlio  will  be  ever  ready  to 
give  up  without  counting  the  cost,  if  need  be. 

Another  ideal  veiy  common  in  all  our  sects,  I want  to  place  before  you  pi 
also  a vast  subject.  This  unuiue  idea  that  teligioii  is  to  be  realised,  is  in  India  alone. 

* The  vvoul  JuHuka  lit,  uiortus  a tatlicj. 


132 


lECTURES-FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


5T>4r  ^ ^ W ^ ^f^Tf  ^%5T  I— “ This  Atman  is  not  to  be  reached 
by  too  much  talking,  nor  is  U to  be  leachcd  by  the  power  of  inlellocl,  nor  by 
much  study  of  the  sciiptiires,”  Nay,  ours  is  the  only  sciiplure  in  the  woild 
that  declares,  i70t  even  by  the  study  of  the  striptures  can  the  Atman  be  realised-— 
not  talks,  not  lecturing,  none  of  that,  but  It  is  to  bo  lealised.  It  comes  fiom  the 
teacher  to  the  disciple.  When  this  insight  comes  to  the  disciple,  everything  is  cleaied 
up  and  lealisation  follows. 

One  more  idea.  Theie  is  a peculiar  custom  in  Bengal,  which  they  call  kulagtirti^ 
of  hereditaiy  Omnship.  “ j\Iy  father  was  your  Ouiii,  now  I shall  be  yoni  Ouiu. 
JNIy  father  was  the  Guru  of  youi  father,  so  shall  1 be  yours,”  What  is  a Gum? 
Let  us  go  back  to  the  Srutis, — “ He  who  knows  the  secret  of  the  Vedas,”  not 
book-woims,  not  giammarians,  not  Pund.ts  in  gcneial,  but  he  who  knows  the 
jneaning.  »T  ^ “An  ass  laden  with  a load 

of  sandal-wood  knows  only  the  weight  of  the  wood,  hut  not  its  precious  quali- 
ties so  are  these  Pandits ; we  do  not  want  such.  What  can  they  teach  if  they 
have  no  realisation  ? When  I was  a boy  here,  in  this  city  of  Calcutta,  I used 
to  go  from  place  to  place  in  seaich  of  religion,  and  every wheie  I asked  the 
lectuier  aftei  hearing  veiy  big  lectuies,  “ Have  you  seen  God  The  man  was 

taken  aback  at  the  idea  of  seeing  God,  and  the  only  man  who  told  me,  ” 1 ha\c,” 
was  Ramakiishna  Paramahamsa,  and  not  only  so,  but  he  said,  “I  v/ill  ppt  )ou 
in  the  way  of  seeing  Him  too.”  The  Gum  is  not  a man  who  twists  and  lor- 
tuies  lexis.  ^ ^ i 

“ l)ilfeicnt  w'a)S  of  throwing  out  woids,  diflcicnl  ways  of  explaining  te^ls  of  the 

sciiptuies,  these  aie  foi  the  enjoyment  of  the  learned,  not  foi  ficedoin  ' Sraliiyit, 
he  w'ho  knows  the  secicl  of  the  .Smlis,  Avnjuid,  the  sinh'ss,  and  un- 

piciced  by  dcsite,-  he  who  does  not  want  to  make  money  by  teaching  jou— he  is  the 
fsanta,  the  S^dhu,  wdio  conies  as  the  sjuing,  which  bungs  the  leaves  and  blossoms 
to  vaiioLis  planU,  but  does  not  ask  an) thing  fiom  ihe  plant,  for  its  veiy  natuio  is 
to  do  good.  It  docs  good  and  iheie  it  is  .Such  is  the  (jiim.  rfpnt 

5r?TT:  |— ” Who  has  himself  ciossed  this  tciiible  ocean 

of  life,  and  williout  any  idea  of  gam  to  himself,  helping  olheib  to  cjoss  the 
ocean  also.”  This  is  the  Guru,  and  maik,  that  none  else  can  be  a Gum,  for 
pni  'TfTiTrfWTi^jrHr:  i qn 

Xhemsclves  steeped  in  daikiiess,  but  m the  piule  of  their  heads 
thinking  they  know  cveiything,  the  fools  want  to  help  othcis,  and  they  go  round  and 
jound  in  many  ciooked  ways,  staggering  to  and  fio,  and  thus  like  blind  loading  tlie 
blind,  both  fall  into  the  ditch  ” ’I'hus,  say  the  Vedas  rompaie  that  and  youi  present 
custom.  You  are  Yedanlists,  you  aie  very  oithodox,aro  you  not  ? You  are  gieat  Hindus, 
and  very  orthodox.  Aye,  what  1 want  to  do  is  to  make  you  more  oithodox.  'I'he  moic 
oithodox  you  are  the  more  sensible,  and  the  more  }0u  think  of  modern  orthodoxy  the 
more  foolish  you  aie.  Go  back  to  your  old  oilhodoxy,  for  m those  days  every  sound 
that  came  fiom  these  books,  every  pulsation,  was  out  of  a strong,  steady  and  sincere 
heart ; eveiy  note  was  true.  After  that  came  degradation,  in  art,  in  science,  in  religion, 
in  evc’rythmg,  national  degradation.  We  have  no  lime  to  discuss  the  causes,  but  all  the 
books  wiiUen  aboqt  that  period  biealhe  of  the  pestilence,  the  national  decay;  instead 
of  vigour,  only  wails  and  cries  Go  bgck,  go  back  to  the  old  days,  when  there  was 
t>treugili  and  vilaliiy.  Be  strong  once  more,  drink  'ioep  of  this  fountain  of  yore,  and 
that  IS  the  only  condition  of  life  in  India, 


Iiir.  yiU}M\' TA  JN  ALL  ITS  PHASES  133 

Accoiding  10  the  Adsaiti.t,  (Ins  induid.nhtv  which  u<:  hive  to-dav  is  a delusion 
This  has  been  a haul  nut  to  c.ack  all  ovci  (he  ii.Mld.  Foithwith  you  (ell  a man 
he  IS  not  an  mdividual,  he  is  so  much  afiaid  that  hi.  mdiMdudU).  uhatexei  (hit  m ly 
be.  will  be  lost,  but  the  Advailist  sa)s  Uie.e  mnci  has  been  an  mdiMduahlv,  loii 
Ime  been  chan.mno  evoiy  moment  of  your  hie.  You  weic  a child  and  thomdu'  in 
one  way,  now  )ou  are  a man  a.ul  ihink  another  way,  a-ain,  you  will  be  an  old  man 

and  think  differently.  Kveiylmdy  is  chan-mjr  If  .o,  uheie  1.  your  mdividiialily  ? 
Ceitamly  not  in  the  l)ody.  01  m the  mmd,  01  m thought.  Alulbe^on<llhatlsyonr 
Atman,  and,  says  the  Ad\ailist,  this  Atman  IS  the  Hinhman  Itself  Thcie  camun  be 
tuo  Infinites.  'I'heie  is  only  one  individual  and  it  is  InfmUe  In  pliin  wools,  we 
aie  lational  bem^^es,  and  w-e  want  to  leasoii.  And  wh.ii  i.  le.ason  ^ .Moie  01  less  of 
classifKation.  until  yon  cannot  go  on  any  Imihei  And  the  infmile  canon!)  find  its 
ultimate  rest  when  it  is  cl-issifird  into  the  Infinite  ( lo  on  Ukino  up  a Vimte  and 
finding  its  reasons,  and  so  on,  but  yon  find  rest  nowliero  until  yon  icacli  the  ultimate, 
01  Infinite,  and  that  Infinite,  says  (be  Ad\aitjst,  is  wb.n  alone  exists  K\ei ylhing  else 
IS  Maya,  nothing  else  has  leal  existence  , whalcvei  is  of  existence  m any  maioiiarihmjr 
is  this  Ib.ihman  ; we  ar(‘  this  Jhahman.  and  the  shape  and  c\ei)thmg  else  is  Mata, 
'l  ake  away  the  foim  and  shape,  and  yon  and  I aie  all  one  But  wo  ha\e  to  gnaid 
against  tiie  woid.  ‘ I.’  Gcneially  people  say,  ‘ If  I am  the  Biahnian  why  cannot  I do 
this  and  that,’  but  this  is  using  the  woid  m a dillcicnt  sense  As  soon  as  )om  think 

)on  aie  bound,  no  moie  \ou  aie  Biabinan  the  Self,  who  wants  nothing,  whoso  li'*ht 

IS  inside.  All  Ills  pleasuies  and  bliss  aic  mside  , pcifec  ib,  satisfied  with  Ilunself 
He  wants  nollung,  cjtpccts  nothing,  poifectly  feailess.  jieileclly  fiee  That  is  Biahnian. 
In  That  v\e  aio  all  one 

Now  this  sei-ins,  theiefote,  to  Ik‘  the  gieal  puml  of  diffeience  between  the 
Dualist  and  the  Aihaitist  Von  Inut  twen  gieal  comnieiil.uois  like  Sankauu  har) a, 
making  mcauiiigs  0*  lexis,  whuh,  lo  mv  mind,  sonu  tunes  do  not  seem  to  he  )usulied. 
Sumelimcs  vou  find  Uamaiuija  dealmg  wiih  texts  m a wa)  (h.il  is  not  \ei\  deal  'I'he 
idea  has  been  c^en  among  oui  Pandit,  tliat  onl)  one  ol  llie^e  s«.cts  can  be  tine  and 
the  K'si  false  . — allliongb  the)' ba\e  the  uiea  in  the  Sinli.,  the  most  wondeifiil  ide.i 
that  India  has  )ct  to  give  to  the  woild,-  rri^JT  I — “ That  w ha h 

exists  IS  One  ; sages  call  It  by  \ai ions  names"  'Plial  lias  lieeii  the  ibemc,  aiul  ihe 
woikmg  out  of  the  whole  ol  this  hfe-pioblein  of  the  nation  is  the  woi kmg-ont  ol 
that  theme-- I Vea,  except  a vei)  few  le.iined  men,  I 
mean,  harnng  avci)  tew  simitnal  men,  m India,  we  alwats  foiget  this  W’e  fnigel 
this  great  idea,  and  you  will  find  that  iheic  aie  pei.ons  among  Pandits —I  should 
think  nnK't)-eight  pci  cent  — who  .ne  of  oimnon  that  (‘iihei  the  Adv.iitist  wdl  he  tine, 
01  the  Vishisluadvaitist  will  be  line,  01  the  l)\aiiisl  will  be  Uue,  and  if  )ou  go  lo 
Bcnaies,  and  sil  foi  five  minutes  m one  of  the  llieie,  )oa  will  have  demonsiia- 

tion  of  what  I sa)’  You  will  sec  a icgtilai  bull-light  going  on,  about  these  vaiious 
sects  and  things 

I'hns  It  icmains  Then  came  one  whose  life  was  the  c.xplanation,  whose 
life  was  the  woiking  out  of  the  hannony  that  is  the  background  of  all  the 
different  sects  of  India,  I mean  Ramakiishna  Ikuamahamsa.  It  is  his  life  that 
explains  that  both  of  these  aic  ncce.ss.aiy,  that  they  aic  like  the  geocentric  and  the 
hchocentiic  in  astrononi).  When  a chil<l  is  taught  astronomy  he  is  taught  the 
gcocentiic  fust,  and  woiks  out  simil.u  ideas  of  astionomy  lo  the  hehoccntiic.  But 
Atheii  he  comes  to  finci  s)  stems  of  astionomy,  the  liehocenliic  will  be  necessary, 


34 


LECTURES—FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


and  he  w ill  niuici  stand  it  better.  J^ualism  is  the  natural  idea  of  the  senses  ; as  long  as 
\vc  aio  bound  by  the  senses  we  aie  bound  to  see  a (jod  who  is  only  Peisonal,  and 
jKJthing  but  Peibonal,  we  aie  bound  to  see  the  woild  as  it  is.  Says  Ramanuja,  “ So 
long  as  you  think  you  are  a body,  and  you  think  you  aie  a mind,  and  3011  think  you 
aie  a Ji\a,  cveiy  act  of  peicejition  will  gi\e  }ou  the  thiec,-  -God, and  Natuie,  and  some- 
thing as  causing  both."  , Rut  jet,  at  the  same  time,  even  the  idea  of  the  body  disap- 
pe.iis  where  the  mind  itself  become'^  finei  and  tinei,  nil  it  has  almost  disappeaied,  when 
all  the  ddfeient  things  that  make  us  feu,  make  us  weak,  and  bind  us  down  t(^  this 
botl\ -life,  • have  disappeaied.  'I'lien  and  then  alone  one  finds  out  tlie  tiuth  of  that 
gland  old  leaching — What  is  the  teaching 

jjtqr  \ 

>r  r^FTP  11 

IGcn  in  this  life  the)  have  coiujucied  he.uen,  whose  minds  are  rum-fixed  on 
the  sameness  of  cveij  thing,  foi  (iod  is  puie,  and  the  same  to  all,  and  theiefoie,  such 
aie  said  to  be  luiiig  in  God.’' 

ft  I 

^ ?T^r  jrfJT’T  ii 

‘‘Thus  seeing  the  Loid  the  same  e\eiywheie,  he,  the  sage,  does  not  huiL  the  Self 
by  the  self,  and  so  goes  to  the  highest  goal." 


»i<CCOOCC«=»' 


THOUGHTS  ON  THR  GITA. 


Diirinpf  liis  sojourn  in  Calcutta  in  iSyy,  S^\amiJi  used  to  stay  for  llie  mo.st 
pait  at  the  Math,  llie  licatlqnaiteis  of  the  Kamakiishna  Mission,  located  tlun  at 
Aliiinh.i.'.ai  Duiinq  tins  tiiuo  sevcial  young  men,  \\lu)  had  hcon  jiicpaiing  iIkmu- 
selv'c's  foi  soniotime  pieviously,  gaihcicd  lound  him  and  took  the  \o\\s  of  Hiahma- 
clni}ain  and  Sannyas,  and  Swamiji  l)e^an  to  iiain  them  foi  fniiiic  woi k,  !>)  holding 
classes  on  the  Cita  and  \'cdanla,  and  initiating  them  into  the  prat tices  of  nitMlilation. 
In  one  of  these  classes  he  talked  eloipientl)  m Bengali  on  the  (Iita.  'I’he  following  is 
the  uanslalioii  of  the  smnmaiy  of  the  discouise  as  it  was  enteied  m the  Math  diaij  ; — 

The  hook  known  as  the  (ola  foims  a pait  of  the  Mahabhniala.  In  iiiidci siandiitg 
the  Cita  piopeily,  scweial  things  aie  \(My  impoitant  to  know,  h'lisi,  whelhci  it  loiiiied 
a p.iU  ol  the  Mahahhaiata,  i e .whilhei  the  anihoislup  altiibuled  to  \’cda  \'),'isa  was 
tine,  01  if  It  was  iiKiel)  inteipolaled  within  the  gietl  epic,  secondly,  whollier  llieic 
was  anv  hislotical  jfCisonahty  of  the  name  of  Kiidma,  thiidh',  whelhei  the  great 
w’li  ol  Ism iikshelia  as  mcntiom'd  in  the  (Iita .itluall)’  look  place  ; and  louithl)',  whether 
Aijiina  and  raheis  weie  leal  histoiical  peisons 

Now  ill  the  Inst  phue,  let  ns  see  whalgiounds  there  aie  foi  such  cn([iiiry  Wo 
knoA’ that  iheK' we'tc  man)  w'ho  went  h\  the  atm e of  Wala-Vj .Is.i , and  among  them 
wlio  was  the  leal  authoi  ol  iho  Cita  the  Badti.nana  V)asa  oi  Dvaipat ana  Vyasa  ? 

' V\,'isa'  was  onl\  a lillo  An)  one  who  composed  a now  Piiiana  was  known  hv  ihc 
name  of  \’).is.i,  like  the  woul,  \'ikiam.'ldit) a.  which  w.is  also  a gencial  n.imc  Aiiollior 
point  IS,  the  lujok,  Ciiit,  was  not  much  known  to  the  gencialih  of  jieople,  before 
Sankai achai) a made  it  famous  by* wntmg  his  great  commeiil.ii)  on  it.  i.oiig  befoic 
that,  llieie  wMs  cmicnt,  actoidmg  to  many,  the  commentaiy  on  it  h\  Bodh.tvana  If 
this  could  l)(‘  plumed,  it  would  go  a long  wa)  no  doiihi,  lo  ost ibhsh  the  aiitiqiiil)  of 
the  Cila  and  the  aiillioiship  of  \')asa  But  the  Bodhlvana  Bh.tshva  on  the  \ edaiita 
Siilias— fioni  which  Bamaimja  compiled  his  Si i-Bhash) a,  wliith  S.inkarath.ii ya 
meniions  and  eseii  quotes  in  ptrL  here  and  theie  m his  own  commentaiy,  and 
which  was  so  gicatly  discussed  by  the  Swami  J)a) anauda— not  a copy  ewen  of  that 
Bodlhuana  Bh.ishya  could  I lind  while  tia\clhng  ihioughoul  India.  It  is  said  that  oven 

Ivvmanuja  compiled  his  Bhash\a  from  a woim-caton  inaimstiipl  whuh  he  happemod 
to  fiiid  When  even  this  gical  Bodh.nana  Bh.ish).!  on  the  Vedinta  Sntias  is  so  imich 
enshrouded  in  tlic  daikness  of  unceilainty.  it  is  simply  useless  to  It y lo  esiablish 
the  e.xislence  of  the  Bodhayana  Bhash)a  on  the  Gita.  Some  infer  llial  Sankai  achai  ya 
was  the  audioi  of  the  Gita,  and  that  it  was  he  who  foisted  it  into  the  body  of  tlie 

Mahabhaiala.  . , , t 

'I'lieu  as  to  the  second  point  in  question,  much  doubt  exists  about  the  personality 

of  Ktishna.  In  one  place  in  the  Ghbandogya  Upanishad  we  find  mention  of  Kiislma, 
the  son  of  Devaki,  who  icceived  spintual  msiiiiclion  fiom  one  Ghoianama,  a Yogi.  In 
the  Mahabharata,  Kiishna  is  the  king  of  Dwaiaka,  and  in  the  Vislinu  Pnrana  we 
lind  a dcsciiption  of  Kiishna  playing  with  llic  Gopis.  Again  in  the  Bhaga\atam, 
the  account  of  his  R<'nhhl<)  is  detailed  at  length.  In  veiy  ancient  times  in  oiir 
country,  there  was  in  vogue  an  Ulsab  called  Madaiwlsah  (celebialion  in  honour  of 
Cupid).'  That  very  thing  was  transformed  into  Dol  and  ihiust  upon  the  shoulders  of 


136  LECTURES-  f'ROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 

Krishna.  Wlio  can’ve  so  bold  as  lo  asscrl  tlmt  the  Rd^hlila  and  olhei  things  con- 
nected with  him  \veie  not  similarly  fastened  upon  him  ? In  ancient  limes,  theie  was 
vcMy  little  tendency  in  om  ctiuniry  to  find  out  liiilhs  by  hislonc.il  icscaich.  So 
any  one  could  say  what  he  thouj’ht  best  without  substantiating  tt  with  pioper  facts 
and  evidence.  Anolhei  thing,  in  those  ancient  limes,  there  was  veiy  little  hankering 
after  name  and  fame  in  men.  .So  it  often  happened  that  one  man  composed  a book 
and  made  it  pass  ciuient  in  the  name  of  histjmuorof  spme  one  elae.  In  such 
cases  it  is  very  h.uai dons  foi  the  investigator  of  histoncal  facts  lo  gel  at  the  tinlh. 
In  ancient  times  they  had  no  knowledge  whatever  of  geogiaphy —imagination  ran  liot, 
and  so  we  meet  with  such  f.inlastic  creations  of  the  btain  as  sweet-ocean,  milk-ocean, 
claiilied-bullei  ocean,  curd-ocean,  kc  ! In  the  Pnianas,  we  find  one  living  ten  thousand 
yeais,  anolhei  a huiuhed  thousand  }ears!  Hut  the  Vedas  say,-  “ JMan 

lives  a hundred  yeais  " Whom  shall  we  follow  heie  } .So,  to  reach  a collect  conclu- 
sion in  the  case  of  Kiishna  is  well  nigh  impossible. 

It  IS  human  naluie  lo  build  round  the  leal  character  of  a great  man  all  sorts  of 
imaginaiy  superhuman  attiibutes.  As  legaids  Kiishna  the  same  must  have  happened, 
bill  it  seems  (juite  jirobable  that  he  was  a king.  Quite  probable  1 said,  because  in 
ancient  times  in  our  country  it  was  chielly  the  kings  who  excited  tliemsclves  most 
in  the  preaching  of  Hrahma-Jn.tna.  Another  point  lo  be  especially  noted  heie  is, 
that  whoever  might  have  been  the  author  ol  the  (lita,  we  find  its  teachings  the  same 
as  those  in  the  whole  of  llie  M.ihabh.ii.ita.  Fiom  this  we  can  safely  infei  that  in  the 
age  of  the  IMaliabhaiata  some  gical  manaiose  and  jneached  ihe  Hialima-Jnana  m this 
new  garb  lo  llie  then  existing  society.  Anoilici  lad  conics  lo  ilic  loie  that  m the  olden 
days,  as  one  .sect  aftei  anolhei  aiosc,  thme  abso  c.ime  into  existence  and  use  among 
them,  one  nesv  sciiptiue  01  anolhei.  It  hapjicned  too,  llnil  in  the  lapse  of  lime  both 
the  sect  and  ils  scnixme  died  out,  or  tlie  sect  ceased  lo  exist  hut  its  scripluie 
remained.  .Similai ly  it  was  cpiite  piohahle  th.u  the  Gita  was  the  scri[)luie  of  such  a 
sect,  which  had  embodied  its  higli  and  noble  ideas,  in  this  sacied  houk. 

Now  lo  the  thud  point,  beating  on  the  sul)3oct  of  the  Kuiukslietia  Wai,  no 
special  evidence  in  suj-poil  of  it  can  be  adduced.  Hut  there  i^  no  doubt  that  iheie  was 
a wai  fought  between  the  Kurus  and  the  IVinchakas.  Anothei  thing  How  could 
theie  he  so  much  discussion  alioul  Jnana,  Bhakti  and  Voga  on  the  baltle-lu'ld,  wheie 
the  huge  army  stood  in  battle  ana)  leady  lo  fight,  jicsi  waiting  lor  the  last  signal  ? 
And  was  any  shoilhand  writer  picsent  theie  to  note  down  eveiy  woid  spoken  betw'eeii 
Krishna  and  Aijuna,  in  the  dm  and  luimoil  of  the  battle-field  ? Accoiding  to  some, 
this  Kuiukshelia  War  is  only  an  allegory.  When  we  sum  up  its  esoteric  significance, 
it  means  the  war  which  is  constantly  going  on  within  man  between  the  tendencies  of 
good  and  bad.  This  meaning  too,  may  not  he  11  rational. 

About  the  fourth  point,  theie  is  enough  giound  of  doubt  as  regaids  the  hisloiicily 
of  Arjuna  and  ollieis,  and  it  is  tins  . — Salapalha  Biahmana  is  a veiy  ancient  book.  In  it 
are  mentioned  somevvheie  all  the  names  of  those  wlio  weie  the  peifoimeis  of  the 
Abhvamedha  Yajiia,  but  in  those  places  theie  is  not  only  no  mention  but  no  hint  even 
of  the  names  of  Aijuna  and  otheis,  though  it  speaks  of  Janmejaya,  the  son  of 
Paiikshil,  and  grandson  of  Aijuna.  Yet  in  the  INIahabhai ala  and  other  books  it  is 
stated  that  Yudhishlhira,  Arjuna  and  otheis  celebiated  the  Ashvan^edha  saciifice. 

One  thing  should  be  especially  reinembeied  heie,  that  there  is  no  connection  be- 
tween those  liisloiical  researches  and  our  ical  aim  which  is,  the  knowledge  that  leads 
to  the  acquiicincnt  of  Dharnu.  Kven  if  the  historicity  of  the  whole  thing  is  proved  to 


moifGfrfS  01^  fttE  GtfA  4^7 

he  ahsolulely  false  to-day,  it  will  not  in  the  least  be  any  loss  to  Us.  Then  what  is  the 
'use  of  so  much  historical  research,  you  may  ask.  It  has  Its  use,  because  we  have  to  get 
at  the  tiuth  I it  will  not  do  for  us  to  remain  bouna  by  wrong  ideas  due  to  ignorance. 
In  this  country  people  tliink  very  little  of  the  importance  of  sucli  enquiiies.  Many  of 
the  sects  believe  that  in  older  to  preach  a good  thing  which  may  be  beneficial  to  many, 
Iheie  is  no  haim  in  telling  an  untruth,  if  that  helps  such  preaching,  or  in  other  Words,’ 
the  end  justifies  the  means.  Hence  we  find  many  of  our  Tantias  beginning  with, — 
‘Mahadeva  said  to  Paivati.’  But  our  duty  should  be  to  comince  ourselves  of  the 
tiuth,  to  believe  in  truth  only.  Such  Is  the  power  of  siipeislitioii,  oi  faith  In  old 
iraditions  without  enquiry  into  its  truth,  that  it  keeps  men  bound  haml  and  foot,  so 
much  so,  that  even  Jesns  the  Cliiist,  Mahommed  and  other  gteat  men  belie\ed  in 
many  such  superstitions  and  could  not  shake  them  off.  You  have  to  keep  )our  eyo 
alwaj’S  (keel  on  tiuth  only,  and  shun  all  superstitions  completely, 

Now  it  is  for  us  to  see,  what  thele  is  in  the  (uta.  If  we  study  the  Upanishads  we 
notice,  in  wandeiing  thiough  the  mazes  of  many  iiielcvent  subjects,  suddenly  the 
intioduction  of  the  discussion  of  a gicat  truth,  just  as  in  the  midst  of  a huge  wilder- 
ness a travellei  unexpectedly  comes  acioss  here  and  there  an  exquisitely  beautiful 
lose,  with  its  leaves,  thoi ns,  loots,  all  entangled.  Compared  to  that,  the  Oita  is  like 
these  truths  beautifully  aiianged  together  in  their  proper  [ilaces— like  a fine  gailand  or 
a bouquet  of  the  choicest  (lowers.  The  Upanishads  deal  elahoiately  with  Shraddli.l 
in  many  places,  but  baldly  mentions  Bliakti,  In  the  (iita  on  the  othei  hand,  the 
subject  of  Bhakti  is  not  only  again  and  again  dealt  with,  but  in  it,  the  innate  sjiuii  of 
Bh.ikti  has  attained  its  culmination. 

Now  let  us  see  .some  of  the  main  points  discus.scd  in  the  Gita.  Wliereiii  lies 
the  oiigmalily  of  the  (Jita,  which  distinguishes  it  fiom  all  piccecling  sciiptuics.^  It 
is  this  : 'rhough  bcfoie  its  advent,  Yoga,  jnana,  Bhakti,  had  eath  its  stiong 
adlieients,  they  all  quarrelled  among  themselves,  each  claiming  siipeiiorily  for  his  own 
path  of  devotion;  no  one  ^yer  tiied  to  seek  for  reconciliation  among  these  dilfeicnt 
paths.  It  was  the  author  of  the  Gita  who  for  the  first  lime  tiled  to  harmonise  these, 
lie  took  the  be.st  from  what  all  the  .sects  theff  e>,isting  had  to  offer,  and  threaded 
lliem  in  the  Gila.  But  even  where  Kiislma  failed  to  show  a complete  reconciliation 
{Hamanvyii)  among  these  warring  sects,  it  was  fully  accomplished  by  Kamakiishna 
Baiamahamsa  in  this  nineteenth  century. 

The  next  is,  Nishkilma  Karma  or  work  without  desire  or  attachment.  Peojile 
nowadays  undei stand  what  is  meant  by  this  in  vaiious  ways.  5ome  say,  what  is 
inijilied  by  being  unattached  is  to  become  j7ui posele.ss  ! If  that  were  its  real  mean- 
ing, then  heailless  biutes  and  the  walls  would  be  the  best  ex'poncnts  of  the  peifoiineis 
of  NishkAma  Kanna.  I\Iany  others  again,  give  the  example  of  Janaka,  and  wisli 
themselves  to  be  ecjually  recognised  as  past-masters  in  the  piaclice  of  Nislikama 
Raima  I Janaka  did  not  acquire  lliat  distinction  by  bringing  foilh  children,  but  these 
people  all  want  to  be  Janakas,  with  the  sole  qualification  of  being  the  falheis  of  a biood 
of  cliildien  ! No!  'I'be  Hue  Ni.sbkaim  Kaimi  ([lerfoiiiK^  of  woik  without  desiie)  is 
ncilher  to  be  like  a biiite,  iioi  to  he  ineit,  nor  heaitles.s.  lie  is  not  I amasic  but  of 
puie  Sattva.  IBs  heart  is  so  full  of  love  and  sympathy,  that  he  can  embrace  the 
whole  world  with  his  love.  The  woild  at  laige  cannot  geneially  comprehend  his  all- 
embiacing  love  and  sympathy. 

The  leconciliation  of  the  different  paths  of  Dhanm,  and  work  without  desire 
or  attachment — these  are  the  two  special  characteristics  of  the  Gita, 

R 


LECTURES^-FROiM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


138 

Let  us  now  read  a little  from  the  second  chapter. 

u 

II 

^T^'T^’iTTT^  I 
iRii 

^ m «Tnf  1 

^ ?nRfrf%1?  TtrTT  ll^ll 

“ Sanjaya  said : 

To  him  who  was  thus  overwhelmed  with  pity  and  sorrowing,  and  whose  eyes 
were  dimmed  with  tears,  Madhusudana  spoke  these  words  : 

The  Blessed  Lord  said  : 

In  such  a strait,  whence  comes  upon  thee,  O Aijuna,  this  dejection,  un-Arya-like, 
disgraceful,  and  contrary  to  the  attainment  of  heaven  ? 

Yield  not  to  unmanlincss,  O son  of  Prithit ! Ill  doth  it  become  thee.  Cast  off 
this  mean  faint-heaitedncss  and  arise,  O scorcher  of  thine  enemies!  ” 

Tn  the  slokas  beginning  with  ^ f^Tf  f>V4tRg.  how  poetically — how  beautifully 
has  Aijuna’s  leal  position  been  painted!  Then  Sii  Kiishna  advises  Aijuna;  and 
in  the  woids  jnT*T  *T»t:  «Tr^  why  is  he  goading  Aijuna  to  fight?  Be- 
cause it  was  not  that  the  disinclination  of  Arjuna  to  fight  arose  out  of  the  over- 
whelming predominance  of  pure  Sattva  Guna ; it  w'as  all  Tamas  that  brought  on 
this  unwillingness.  The  natuic  of  a man  of  Sattva  Guna  is,  that  he  is  equally 
calm  in  all  situations  in  life — whether  it  be  prospeiily  oi  adversity.  But  Aijuna 
was  afraid,  he  was  overwhelmed  with  pity.  That  he  had  the  instinct  and  the 
inclination  to  fight  is  proved  by  the  simple  fact,  that  he  came  to  the  battle-field  with 
no  other  pin  pose  than  that.  Frequently  m our  lives  also  such  things  aio  seen  to 
happen.  INTany  people  think  they  are  SalUic  by  natuie,  but  they  are  really  nothing 
but  Tdmasic.  Many  living  in  an  uncleanly  w'ay  logaid  themselves  as  Baramahamsas  ' 
Why  ? Because  the  Slustras  say  that  Baramahamsas  live  like  one  ineit,  or  mad,  or 
like  an  unclean  spiiit.  Baramahamsas  are  compared  to  children,  but  here  it  should 
be  understood  that  the  comparison  is  one-sided.  The  Baramahamsa  and  the  child 
are  not  one  and  non-different.  They  only  appear  similar,  being  at  the  two  exti ernes 
of  a pole,  as  it  were.  One  has  reached  to  a slate  beyond  Jnanam,  and  the  othci  h-'s 
not  got  even  an  inkling  of  Jnanam.  The  quickest  and  the  gentlest  vibialions  of  the 
moloculai  atoms  of  light  aie  both  beyond  the  learh  of  our  spectacular  vision  ; but 
in  the  one  it  is  intense  heal,  and  in  the  other  it  may  be  said  to  be  almost  W'ithout  any 
heat.  So  it  is  with  the  optiosite  ciualilics  of  the  Saliva  and  the  Tamas.  They  seem 
in  some  respects  no  doubt  to  be  the  same,  but  there  is  a world  of  difference  between 
them.  The  Tamoguna  loves  very  much  to  array  heiself  in  the  garb  of  the 
Sattva.  Here,  in  Arjuna,  the  mighty  warrior,  ishc  has  come  under  the  guise  of  Da>a 
(pity)  I 

In  Older  to  remove  this  delusion  which  had  ovei taken  Aijuna,  what  did  the 
Bhagavhn  say  ? As  I always  pi  each  that  you  should  not  deciy  a man  by  calling  him 
a siiinci  but  that  you  should  draw  his  attention  to  the  omnipotent  power  that  is  m 
him,  in  the  same  w'ay  does  the  Bhagavan  speak  to  Arjuna ; - 

It  doth  not  befit  thee ! Thou  art  that  Atman  imperishable,  beyond  all  evil.  Having  for- 


THOUGHTS  ON  THE  GITA  ,39 

gotten  Ihy  real  nature  thou  haat,  l>y  thinking  thyself  a sinner,  as  one  afflicted  with  bodily 
evds  and  mental  g,, of, ^hou  hast  made  thyself  so, -tins  doth  not  befit  thee  I So 
says  the  Bhagavan : ,^<1  W.  Tf^  -Yield  not  to  unnianlincss,  O son  of 

Pntha  . I here  IS  111  the  world  ncithei  sin  nor  misery,  neither  disease  nor  grief  - if 
theie  ts  anything  in  the  woild  which  can  be  called  sin,  it  is  this--'  fear  ” ; know  that 

any  work  ivhichbiings  out  the  latent  power  in  thee,  is  Puny, t;  and  that  which  make, 

thy  body  mid  mind  wet*  is,  verily,  sin.  Sh.ake  off  this  iveakness,  this  faint-hcarted- 
ncss  iffw  iTifi  -TTSf,  d'hou  ait  a hero,  a Fir,i ; “ this  is  inibecoiniiig  of  thee.” 

Jl  you,  my^  sons,  can  proclaim  this  message  to  the  world— "W  ™ to-  wrf 
ffff?^cg>JTWff"-lhcn  all  this  disease,  giicf,  sin  and  sorrow  will  vanish  fiom  off  the 
lace  of  the  eatth  in  three  days.  All  these  ideas  of  we.ikiiess  will  be  nowhere  Now 
it  IS  cveiywhere-this  cuirentof  the  vibiation  of  fear.  Revci.se  the  current  • bring 
ill  the  opposite  vibiation,  and  behold  the  magic  tiansfoimation  I Thou  art  omnb 
potent  ;-go,  go  to  the  mouth  of  the  cannon,  fear  not  I Il.itc  not  the  most  abject 
biniicr,  look  not  to  his  exterior.  Turn  thy  gaze  inw.iid,  where  resides  the  Pai-am- 
.atiiian.  Proclaim  to  the  whole  woild  with  trumpet  voice  ; “ ■I-hcrc  is  no  sin  in  thee, 
theie  is  no  misery  in  thee;  thon  art  the  reservoir  of  oninipotent  power.  Arise 
awake,  and  manifesl  the  Divinity  within ! ” ' ’ 

Jt^  one  reads  this  one  sloka,-^,p^  i,XOT  mn  VftTtffirjrrTCI^  I ^ 

'it'TTII— he  gets  all  the  moi  its  of  leading  the  entile  Gila;  lor^ni  tins  one 
bloka  lies  imbedded  the  whole  Message  of  the  Gita. 


ADDRESS  OF  WELCOME  AT  ALMORA  AND 
SWAMIjrS  REPLY. 

On  hjs  arrival  at  Almora,  Swamiji  received  an  Address  of  Welcome  in  Hindi 
from  the  citizens  of  Almora,  of  which  the  following  is  a translation 

Great-soulcd  one.-— Since  the  time  we  heard  that,  after  gaining  spiritual  con- 
quest in  the  West,  you  had  started  from  England  for  your  motherland,  India,  we 
were  naturally  desirous  of  having  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you.  By  the  grace  of  the 
Almighty,  that  auspicious  moment  has  at  last  come.  The  saying  of  the  great  poet 
and  the  prince  of  Bhaktas,  Tulsidas — “A  person  who  intensely  loves  another  is 
sure  to  find  him,”  has  been  fully  realised  to-day.  We  have  assembled  here  to 
welcome  you  with  sincere  devotion.  You  have  highly  obliged  us  by  your  kindly 
taking  so  much  trouble  in  paying  a visit  to  this  town  again.  We  can  hardly  thank 
you  enough  for  your  kindness.  Blessed  are  youl  Blessed,  blessed  is  the  reveied 
Ourudeva  who  initiated  you  into  Yoga.  Blessed  is  the  land  of  Bhdrata  where,  even 
in  this  fearful  Kaliyuga,  there  exist  leaders  of  Aryan  families  like  your.self.  Even 
at  an  early  period  of  life,  you  have  by  your  simplicity,  sincerity,  character,  philanthropy, 
severe  discipline,  conduct,  and  the  preaching  of  knowledge,  acquired  that  immaculate 
fame  throughout  the  world,  of  which  we  feel  so  proud. 

In  truth,  you  have  accomplished  that  diflicult  task  which  no  one  ever  undertook 
in  this  country  since  the  days  of  Sri  Sankaracharya.  Which  of  us  ever  dreamt  that  a 
descendant  of  the  old  Indian  Aryans,  by  dint  of  (apas^  would  prove  to  the  learned 
people  of  England  and  America  the  superiority  of  the  ancient  Indian  Religion  over 
other  creeds.  In  the  World’s  Parliament  of  Religions  held  in  Chicago,  before  the 
represeniativQS  of  different  religions  assembled  there,  you  so  ably  advocated  the 
Buperiovily  of  the  ancient  religion  of  India,  that  their  eyes  were  opened.  In  that 
great  assembly,  learned  speakers  defended  their  respective  religions  in  their  own  way, 
but  you  surpassed  them  all.  You  completely  established  that  no  religion  can  compete 
with  the  religion  of  the  Vedas.  Not  only  this,  but  by  preaching  the  ancient  wisdom 
at  various  places  in  the  continents  aforesaid,  you  have  attracted  many  learned  men 
towards  the  ancient  Aryan  religion  and  philosophy.  In  England,  too,  you  have 
planted  the  banner  of  the  ancient  religion,  which  it  is  impossible  now  to  remove. 

Up  to  this  time,  the  modern  civilised  nations  of  Europe  and  America  were 
entirely  ignorant  of  the  genuine  nature  of  our  religion,  but  you  have  with  your 
spiritual  teaching  opened  their  eyes,  by  which  they  have  come  to  know  that  the 
ancient  religion,  which  owing  to  their  ignorance  they  used  to  brand  ” as  a religion 
of  subtleties  of  conceited  people,  or  a mass  of  discourses  meant  for  fools,”  is  a mine 
of  gems,  Certainly,  “ It  is  belter  to  have  a virtuous  and  accomplished  son  than 
to  have  hundreds  of  foolish  ones.”  “ It  is  the  moon  that  singly  with  its  light  dispels 
all  darkness  and  not  all  the  stars  put  together.”  It  is  only  the  life  of  a good  and 
virtuous  son  like  yourself  that  is  really  useful  to  the  world,  IMother  India  is  consoled 
In  her  decayed  state  by  the  presence  of  pious  sons  like  you.  Many  have  crossed 
the  seas  and  run  to  and  fro,  but  it  was  only  through  the  reward  of  yonr  past  good 
Karma  that  you  have  proved  fhe  greatness  gf  our  religion,  beyond  the  seas.  You  have 


ADDRESS  OF  WELCOME  AT  ALMORA  SWAMIJFS  REPI.Y  141 

iDiide  it  the  sole  aim  of  your  life  by  word,  thought  and  deed,  to  impart  spiritual 
instruction  to  humanity.  You  are  always  ready  to  give  religious  instruction. 

We  have  heard  with  great  pleasure  that  you  intend  establishing  a Math  (IMonas- 
tery)  here,  and  we  sincerely  pray  that  your  efforts  in  this  direction  may  be  crowned 
with  success.  The  great  Sankaracharya  also  after  his  spiritual  conquest,  established 
a Math  at  lladarikdsrama  in  the  Himalayas  for  the  protection  of  the  ancient  religion. 
Similarly,  if  your  desire  is  also  fulfilled,  India  will  be  gieatly  benefited.  By  the 
establishment  of  the  Malh^  we  Kumaonees  will  deiivc  .special  spiiilual  advantages, 
and  we  shall  not  see  the  ancient  religion  gradually  disappearing  from  our  midst. 

From  time  immemorial,  this  part  of  the  country  has  been  the  land  of  asceticism. 
The  greatest  of  the  Indian  sages  passed  their  time  in  piety  and  asceticism  in  this 
land,  but  that  has  become  a thing  of  the  past.  We  earnestly  hope  that  by  the 
establishment  of  the  Math  you  will  kindly  make  us  realise  it  again.  It  was  this 
sacred  land  which  enjoyed  the  celebiity  all  over  India,  of  having  true  leligion, 
Kaima,  discipline,  and  fair  dealing,  all  of  which  seem  to  have  been  decaying  by  the 
efflux  of  time.  And  we  hope  that  by  your  noble  exertions  this  land  will  icveit  to  its 
ancient  religious  slate, 

We  cannot  adequately  express  the  joy  we  have  felt  at  your  arrival  here.  May 
you  live  long,  enjoying  perfect  health  and  leading  a philanthropic  life  ! I\Iay  your 
spiritual  powers  be  ever  on  the  increase,  so  that  through  your  endeavours  the  unhappy 
stale  of  India  may  soon  disappear ! 

Two  other  addresses  were  presented,  to  which  the  Swami  made  the  following  brief 
reply 

This  is  the  land  of  dreams  of  our  forefathers,  in  which  was  born  P;\rvati,  the 
Mother  of  India.  This  is  the  holy  land,  where  eveiy  ardent  soul  in  India  wants  to 
come  at  the  end  of  its  life,  and  to  close  the  last  chapter  of  its  mortal  caieer  here. 
On  the  tops  of  the  mountains  of  this  blessed  land,  in  the  depths  of  its  caves, 
on  the  banks  of  its  rushing  torrents,  have  been  thought  out  the  most  wonderful 
tboughts,  a little  bit  of  which  has  drawn  so  much  admiration  even  fiom  foielgnci.s, 
and  which  have  been  pronounced  by  the  most  competent  of  judges  to  be  fneom- 
paiable.  This  is  the  land  which,  since  my  very  chihlhood,  I have  been  dreaming 
of  passing  my  life  in,  and  as  all  of  you  arc  awaie,  I have  attempted  again  and 
again  to  live  here,  and  although  the  lime  was  not  lipe,  and  I had  woik  to 
do  and  was  whiiled  outside  of  this  holy  place,  yet  it  i.s  the  hope  of  my  life  to  end  my 
days  somewhere  in  this  Father  of  mountains,  where  Rishis  lived,  where  philosophy  was 
boin.  Perhaps,  my  fi  lends,  I shall  not  be  able  to  do  it,  in  the  way  that  I had  planned 
before — how  I wish  that  silence,  that  unknownness  would  be  given  to  me, — yet  I 
sincerely  pray  and  hope,  and  almost  believe  that  my  last  days  will  be  spent  here,  of  all 
places  on  earth. 

Inhabitants  of  this  holy  land,  accept  my  gratitude  for  the  kind  praise  that 
has  fallen  from  you  for  my  little  work  in  the  West.  But,  at  the  same  time, 
my  mind  does  not  want  to  speak  of  that,  either  in  the  East  or  in  the  West. 
As  peak  after  peak  of  this  Father  of  mountains  began  to  appear  before  my  sight, 
all  the  propensities  to  work,  that  ferment  that  had  been  going  on  in  my  brain  for 
years,  seemed  to  quiet  down,  and  instead  of  talking  about  what  had  been  done,  and 
what  was  going  to  be  done,  the  mind  reverted  to  that  one  eternal  theme  which  the 
Himalayas  always  teach  us,  that  one  theme  which  is  reverberating  in  the  very  atmos- 


142 


LECTCrRES—FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


phcic  of  the  pl.iLO,  the  one  theme  the  murmur  of  whose  dreams  I hear,  the  one 
lliinii:  that  I heal  iii  tlie  lushin^;  wliiilpools  of  its  ii\eis — renunciation  ! VTJff- 

“ J*lver)lhino  m this  life  is  fiaui^ht  with  fear.  It  is  lenun- 
cialion  alone  that  inalvcs  one  leailess.”  Yes,  this  is  the  land  of  i enunciation. 

'I'he  time  will  not  j)ei mil  me,  and  the  ciicumstances  ate  not  fitting;  to  spe.ik  to 
you  lully  1 shall  have  to  conclude,  theiefoio,  hy  poinli'ii^  out  to  )ou  that  the  Ilima- 
l,i)as  stand  foi  that  lenunciation,  and  the  j^iand  lc.sson  we  shill  ever  teach  to  hunianity 
will  he,  renunciation.  As  oui  foicfatheis  used  to  be  altiacletl  towaids  it  in  the  latter 
da\s  of  then  lives,  so,  stioni^  souls  liom  all  (piaiteis  of  this  eaith,  in  tune  to  come,  will 
be  attracted  to  this  Father  ol  mountains,  when  all  this  flight  between  sects,  ami  all 
those  dilleiences  in  dogmas,  will  not  be  remembeied  an)  moie,  and  (|uaiiels  between 
youi  relyeion  and  my  lelioion  will  ha\e  vanisheil  altogether,  when  mankind  will 
undeibt.ind  that  thoie  is  but  one  eternal  leligion,  and  th.at  is,  the  perception  of  the 
Dnine  within,  and  the  lest  is  meie  fiolh  such  aident  s«)uls  will  come  hcie  knowing 
that  the  woild  is  but  vanity  of  \aniiios,  knowing  that  cvei) thing  is  useless  except 
the  woiship  of  the  I oid  and  the  Loid  alone. 

I'liends,  you  have  been  veiy  kind  to  allude  to  an  idea  of  mine,  which  is  to  staiL 
a centre  in  the  nimala)as,  and  peihajis  1 have  sulliciently  explained  why  it  should 
be  so,  why  above  all  otheis,  this  is  the  spot  winch  I want  to  select  as  one  of  the 
gieat  centies  to  teach  this  universal  leligion.  'I'hesc  mountains  aie  assoii.ited  with 
the  best  memoiies  ot  oui  lace  ; if  these  Himalayas  aie  taken  away  liom  the  histoiy 
ol  leligious  India,  theie  w'ill  be  veiy  little  left  behind,  lleie,  tlieiefoie,  must  be  one 
of  those  centies,  not  merely  of  activity,  but  moie  of  calmness,  ot  meditation,  and 
of  peice,  and  I hope  some  day  to  leahse  it.  1 ho[)e  also  to  meet  )ou  at  othei  limes, 
and  ha\e  belter  oppoilunilics  of  lalking  to)Ou.  k'oi  the  piesonl,  let  mo  thank  ) ou 
again  foi  all  tlie  kindness  ih  vl  has  been  shown  to  me,  and  let  me  lake  it  as  not  only 
kimlness  .shown  to  me  in  poison,  but  as  to  one  who  lepresents  our  leligion  ; may  it 
novel  leave  oui  lieaiK.  May  we  alway.s  lemain  as  pine  as  we  aie  at  the  piesent 
moment,  and  as  enthusiastic  foi  spuiiuahly  as  we  aie  just  now. 


VEDIC  TEACHING  IN  THEORY  AND  PRACTICE. 

When  the  Swami’s  \ibit  w.ib  drawing  to  a close,  liis  fiiemh  m Almoia  invilccl 
liim  to  give  a Icctuic  in  lliiuli.  lie  consenletl  to  make  the  attempt  lor  the 
first  time.  He  began  slowly,  and  soon  wanned  to  his  theme,  and  loiind  himself 
building  his  phiases  and  almost  his  woids  as  he  went  along  Those  best  .uiiiiamted 
with  the  dilTiciiUies  and  limitations  of  ihe  I liinli  language  as  a medinrn  hn  oiatory, 
exiaessed  then  opinion  that  a tiinmjih  had  been  achieved,  piol)abl)  imn|ne  of  its  kind  ; 
as  well  as  being  piofoundly  inleicsiing  ; and  the  lecluiei  had  pioved  bv  his  masterly 
use  of  it,  that  the  language  iiad  m it  undreamt  ol  possibilities  of  development  m the 
diitclion  of  oiatoiy. 

The  subject  was  “ Vedic  Teaching  in  Theory  and  Piactice  ” vV  shoil  his- 
torical sketch  of  the  lise  of  the  woislnp  of  the  tubal  (Jod,  and  its  spieatl 

thiough  corKjutst  of  other  tubes,  w.is  loHowed  by  an  account  of  the  \T'das, 

'I'heir  naluie,  chaiacter  and  teaching  weie  biielly  touched  ujion.  d’lien  the 
Swami  spoke  about  the  soul,  com|)aiing  the  \\  estein  method,  winch  siaks  foi  the 
solution  of  vital  and  religious  mysteiies  m the  outside  woild,  with  the  Jvaslein 

mclhod,  wlinh,  finding  no  answer  in  natuie  outside,  tinns  it.s  eminiiy  within.  He 

jnsilv  (.  1. limed  tor  his  nation  the  gloiy  of  being  the  disroveieis  of  the  inti ospective 
method  jiecnliar  to  themselves,  and  of  having  given  to  Immamty  the  piiciless 
tieasiiies  ot  spiiitualil),  vvhnh  aic  the  lesnll  ol  ih.U  method  alone,  rassing.  fioiii 
this  theme,  naluially  so  dcai  to  the  heait  ot  a Hindii,  the  Swami  leachcd  the  climaK 
ot  his  jiowei  its  a sjmilual  leachei  when  he  desciibcd  the  lel.ition  of  the  soul  to  (lOil, 
Us  asjiiialion  and  leal  unity  with  (Jod  lun  sometime  it  seemed  as  though  the 
Teachei,  his  wouis,  his  audience,  and  the  spiiiL  peivadmg  them  all,  weie  one.  No 
longei  was  iheic  any  consciousness  ol  " I " and  “ I'hon,  »*!  “ I’liis  ‘ oi  “ I hat  1 he 
dilleient  units  colleded  ihcic,  weie  foi  the  lime  bring  lost  and  meiged  into  the 
sjiiiiliiil  ladiaiu  c wine  h eman.ilcd  so  powcifiilly  lioin  the  gieal  Teachei,  and  lield 
them  all,  moie  ih.ui  spell-bound, 

Tliosc  that  have  fieiinriitlv  hcaid  him  will  iccall  and  lecognise  a similar 
expel leiK  0,  — a monieiU  when  lie  ccMses  to  be  Swann  \ ivekauanda  Inluiiiig  to 
ciitual  and  attentive  hcaici ail  delaiK  and  pei  ^onaliiie'.  <iie  lost,  names  and  tonus 
disa])))eai,  Old)  the  Sjuiil  icinaiiis,  uinling  Sjieakei,  Hcaici,  and  spoken  Woicl 


-c»ccocceoo= 


BHAKTl. 

( Delivered  at  Sialkofe^  Punjabi  ) 

In  rcspon«;c  to  iiuitalions  from  the  Punjab  and  Kashmir,  the  Swami  Vivekananda 
travelled  ihiough  those  parts.  lie  stayed  in  Kashmir  for  over  a month  and  his  work 
there  was  very  much  appreciated  by  the  Maharajah  and  his  brothers.  lie  then  spent 
a lew  days  in  visiting  Muiree,  Rawalpindi  and  Jammu,  and  at  each  of  these  places  he 
delivered  leCluies.  Subse<piently,  he  visited  Sialkotcand  lectured  twice,  once  in  English 
and  once  in  Hindi.  'I’he  subject  of  the  Swamiji’s  Hindi  lectuie  was  Bhakti,  a 
summary  of  which,  tianslated  into  Engli.sh  is  given  below  : — 

The  various  religions  that  exist  in  the  world,  although  they  differ  in  the  form  of 
the  worship  they  take,  are  really  one.  In  .some  places,  the  people  build  temples 
and  worship  in  them;  in  some,  they  w'oiship  fiie,  in  others  they  prostrate  them- 
selves before  idols,  while  there  are  many  who  do  not  believe  at  all  in  God.  All 
aie  ti lie,  for,  if  you  look  to  the  real  woids,  the  leal  religion,  and  the  truths  in  each 
of  them,  they  aie  all  alike.  In  some  religions  (Jod  is  not  worshipped,  nay,  His 
existence  is  not  believed  in,  but  good  and  w'orlhy  men  are  woi shipped  as  if  they 
were  Gods.  The  example  worthy  of  illuslialion  in  this  case  is  Buddhism.  Bhakti 
is  cvei)  where,  whether  directed  to  God,  or  to  noble  persons.  UpiUand  in  the 
foim  of  Bhakti  is  everywheie  supreme  and  Bhakti  is  more  easily  attained  than  Jndna. 
The  latter  requires  favouial)le  circumstances  and  strenuous  practice.  Yoga  can- 
not be  pi  opcily  piactised  unless  a man  is  ph}Sically  veiy  healthy,  and  free  from 
all  w'orldly  attachments.  But  Bhakti  can  be  more  easily  practised  by  pet  sons  in 
every  condition  of  life.  .Sandilya  Rislii  who  wTote  about  Jihakti,  says,  that  Parama 
Anuniga  in  hhvara  is  Bhakti.  I’rahHda  speaks  to  the  same  effect.  If  a man  does 
not  get  food  one  day,  he  is  lioubled,  if  his  son  dies  how  agonising  it  is  to  him.  The 
tine  Bhakta  feels  the  same  pangs  in  his  heait  when  he  yearns  after  God.  The  great 
quality  of  Bhakti  is  that  it  cleanses  tlie  mind,  and  the  firmly  established  Bhakti  in 
the  Parameshvara  is  alone  suflicient  to  puiify  the  chitia,  “ 0 (lod,  Ihy  names  are 
innumerable,  but  in  every  name  Thy  power  is  manifest,  and  every  name  is  pregnant 
with  deep  and  mighty  significance."  We  should  think  of  God  always  and  not  con- 
sider time  and  place  for  doing  so. 

I'lie  dilTerenl  names  under  which  God  is  worshipped  are  apparently  different. 
One  thinks  that  his  method  of  worshipping  God  is  the  most  eflkaciou.s,  and  another 
thinks  that  his  is  the  moie  potent  process  of  attaining  salvation.  But  look  at  the 
tiue  basis  of  all,  and  it  is  one.  The  Shaivas  call  Shiva  the  most  pow'erful ; the  Vaish- 
navas  hold  to  their  all-pow-eiful  Vishnu;  the  worshippers  of  Devi  will  not  yield  to 
any  in  their  idea  that  their  Devi  is  the  most  omnipotent  Power  in  the  universe.  I.,eave 
inimical  thoughts  aside  if  you  want  to  have  permanent  Bhakti.  Hatred  is  a thing  which 
greatly  impedes  the  course  of  Bhakti,  and  the  man  who  hates  none  reaches  God. 
Even  then  the  Bhakti  of  one’s  own  Ishta  is  necessary.  Hanuman  says,  “ Shiva, 
Vishnu,  Rdma,  I know,  are  all  one  and  the  same,  but  after  all,  the  lotus-eyed  Rdma  is 
my  best  lieasuie."  The  Bhdva,  or  the  peculiarities  which  are  born  with  a person,  must 
remain  with  him.  That  is  the  sole  reason  why  the  world  cannot  be  of  one  religion; 


U5 

dnd  God  forbid  that  there  should  be  one  religion  only ; the  world  would  be  a chaos 
and  not  a cosmos;  a man  must  follow  the  tendencies  peculiar  to  himself ; and  if  he 
gets  a teacher  to  toll  him  more  and  to  advance  the  knowledge  of  his  own 
he  will  pi  ogress*  That  Bhavd  is  to  be  cultivated.  We  should  let  a pet  son  go  the 
way  he  intends  to  go,  but  if  we  liy  to  force  him  into  another  path,  he  will  lose  what 
he  has  already  aliaincd  and  will  become  woiihless.  As  the  face  of  one  person  does 
not  resemble  that  of  another,  so  the  PtahUi  of  one  diffets  from  that  of  another, 
and  why  should  he  not  lie  allowed  to  act  accoidingly*  A liver  flows  in  a certain 
diieclion,  and  if  you  diiect  the  couisc  into  a legular  channel  the  curieiil  becomes 
moie  rapid  and  the  force  is  inci cased,  but  tiy  to  divert  it  from  its  pioper  course 
and  you  will  see  the  result;  the  volume  as  well  as  the  force  will  be  lessened, 
d'his  life  is  very  impoilant  and  it  theiefoic  ought  to  be  guided  in  the  way  one's 
Tihdva  piompts  him.  In  India  theie  was  no  eniiiily  and  every  religion  was  left 
unmolested,  so  religion  has  accoidingly  lived.  It  ought  to  be  remembered  that  quarrels 
about  leligion  aiisc  from  thinking  that  one  has  the  tiuth,  and  whoever  does  not 
believe  as  one  does  is  a fool;  while  another  thinks  that  the  other  is  a hypociite, 
for  if  he  were  not  so,  he  would  follow  him. 

If  God  wished  that  people  should  follow  one  religion,  why  have  so  many 
religions  spuing  up INlcthods  have  been  vainly  tiicd,  to  foice  one  leligion  upon 
cvciyonc.  Kven  when  a swoid  was  lifted  to  make  all  people  follow  one  leligion, 
hisloiy  tells  us  that  ten  religions  sjuang  up  in  its  place.  One  religion  cannot  suit  all. 
Jdli  IS  the  pioduct  of  two  foices,  action  and  icaclion,  which  make  a man  think.  If 
such  foices  did  not  c.xeicise  a man's  mind  he  would  be  incapable  of  thinking.  Man  is 
a creature  who  thinks;  l\liinmhya  is  a being  with  Alanas,  and  as  soon  as  this  leaves 
him,  his  thinking  power  goes,  and  he  becomes  nothing  better  than  an  animal.  Who 
would  like  such  a man  ? God  foihid  that  any  such  slate  should  come  upon  the  people 
of  India.  Variety  in  unity  is  neccs.sary  to  keep  man  as  man.  Vaiiely  ought  to  be 
pieseivcd  in  everything ; for  as  long  as  there  is  variety  the  world  will  exist.  (Jf  course 
vaiiety  does  not  merely  me.m  that  one  is  .small  and  the  other  is  gicat,  but  if  all  play  their 
pails  equally  well  in  their  iesj)ecllve  position  in  life,  the  variety  is  still  preserved.  In 
cvciy  lehgion  there  have  been  men  good  and  able,  thus  making  the  religion  to  which 
they  belonged  woithy  of  respect,  and  as  there  are  such  people  in  evciy  religion, 
theie  ought  to  be  no  haired  for  any  sect  whatsoever  Then,  the  question  can  be  asked, 
should  we  lespect  that  religion  which  advocates  vice  ? The  answei  M ill  he  ccitainly 
in  the  negative,  and  such  a religion  ought  to  be  expelled  at  once,  because  it  is  pro- 
diRlivc  of  harm.  All  religion  is  to  be  based  upon  iii/i  (law),  and  ikMm  (personal 
puiity)  is  to  be  counted  supeiior  to  Dharma,  In  this  connection  it  ought  to  be  known 
that  fh/zd/vr  means  puiity  inside  and  outside.  External  purity  can  be  attained  by 
cleansing  the  body  M'lth  water  and  oilier  things,  which  aic  recommended  in  the 
Shtistias.  The  internal  man  is  to  be  puiilied  by  not  speaking  falscliood,  by  not  drink- 
ing, by  not  doing  immoral  acts,  and  by  doing  good  to  others.  If  you  do  not  com- 
mit any  sin,  it  you  do  not  tell  lies,  if  you  do  not  diink,  gamble  oi  commit  theft,  it  is 
good.  Hut  that  is  only  your  duty  and  you  cannot  be  applauded  for  it.  Some 
paropakdra  is  also  to  be  done.  As  yon  do  good  to  yourself,  so  you  must  do  good  to 
others.  Here  I shall  .say  something  .iboul  Bhojon  (the  laws  lelaling  to  eating).  All 
the  old  customs  have  faded  away  and  nolliing  but  a vague  notion  of  not  eating  with 
this  man  and  not  eating  with  that  man  has  been  left  among  our  countrymen.  Shuchi 
(pmity  by  touch)  is  the  only  basig  relic  left  of  the  good  rules  laid  down  hundreds  of 


LECTURES-FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


146 

jears  ago.  Tliicc  kincK  of  food  arc  forbidden  in  the  Sh^stras.  Fiist,  ydli-(hsh(ty—^ 
wliuh  means  the  defect  that  is  in  the  food  itself,  as  in  gai lie  or  onions.  If  a man 
eats  loo  niiu'h  of  them  it  cieales  passion,  and  he  may  be  led  to  commit  immorali- 
ties, hateful  both  to  ( tod  and  man.  Second,  eating  in  unclean  places.  We  ought  to 
select  some  place  (luite  neat  and  clean  in  which  to  lake  our  food.  Thirdly,  we  should 
avoid  eating  food  touched  by  a wicked  man,  because  contact  with  such  produces  bad 
ideas  in  us.  Kven  if  one  be  a son  of  a Ibihman,  but  is  pioHigatc  and  immoial  in 
his  habits,  we  should  not  eat  food  from  his  hands. 

Ikit  the  spirit  of  these  observances  is  gone.  What  is  left  is  this,  that  we  cannot 
eat  fiom  the  hands  of  any  man  mIio  is  not  of  the  highest  ca.stc,  even  though  he  be  the 
most  wise  and  holy  jierson.  The  disregard  of  tho.se  old  rules  is  ever  to  be  found  In 
the  confectioner’s  shop.  If  you  look  there  you  will  find  flies  hovering  all  over  the 
confeclioneiy.  and  the  dust  fiom  the  load  blowing  upon  the  sweetmeats,  and  the  con- 
fectioner himself  in  a dress  that  is  not  veiy  clean  and  neat.  Puichaseis  should  declare 
with  one  voice  that  they  will  not  bu\  sweets  unless  they  are  kept  in  glass-cases  in  the 
halwars  shop.  That  w'O’ild  have  the  salutary  effect  of  pievcnling  flies  fiom  convc}ing 
choleia  and  other  plague  germs  to  the  sweets.  We  ought  to  impiove,  but  instead 
of  improving  vve  have  gone  back.  Maim  says  that  we  should  not  spit  in  water,  but  we 
throw' all  soil. s of  filth  into  the  river.s.  Considering  all  these  things  wo  find  that  the 
putificalion  of  one’s  outer  self  is  very  necessary.  'I’he  Shastiakaras  knew  that  very  well. 
But  now'  the  real  spirit  of  this  observance  of  Shut  hi  and  Ashuchi  is  lost  and  the 
letter  only  remains,  'rinevcs,  diunkards,  and  ciiminals  can  be  our  caste-fellows, 
but  if  a good  and  noble  man  eats  food  with  a person  of  a lower  caste,  who  is  (inilc 
as  respectable  as  himself,  he  will  be  out-cas‘ed  and  lost  for  ever.  This  custom  has 
been  the  bane  of  our  coiintiy.  It  ought  theieforc  to  be  distinctly  undei stood  that  sin 
is  got  by  coming  in  contact  with  sinness,  and  nobility  in  the  company  of  good 
persons;  and  keeping  aloof  fiom  the  wicked  is  the  external  purification.  The  internal 
purification  is  a U^k  much  more  severe.  It  consists  in  speaking  the  truth,  serving 
the  poor,  helping  the  needy,  kc.  Do  vve  always  speak  the  tiiilh  ? What  happens 
is  often  this.  People  go  to  the  house  of  a lich  person  for  some  business  of  their 
own  and  flatter  him  by  calling  him  benefactor  of  the  poor,  and  so  forth ; even  though 
that  man  may  cut  the  throat  of  a poor  man  coming  to  his  house.  What  is  this  ? 
Nothing  but  falsehood.  And  it  is  this  that  pollutes  the  mind.  It  is  therefore  truly 
said,  that  whatever  a man  says  who  has  puiificd  his  inner  .self  for  twelve  years  without 
entertaining  a single  vicious  idea  dining  that  period,  is  suie  to  come  tine.  ’Phis  is 
the  power  of  truth,  and  one  who  has  cleansed  both  the  inner  and  the  outer  self,  is 
alone  capable  of  Bhakti.  Rut  the  beauty  is  that  Bhakli  itself  cleanses  the  mind  to 
a great  extent.  Although  the  Jews,  Mahommedans  and  Chii  tians  do  not  set  so  much 
importance  upon  the  excessive  external  puiilication  of  the  body  as  the  Hindus  do,  still 
they  have  it  m some  form  or  other;  they  find  that  to  aceitam  extent  it  is  always 
required.  Among  the  Jews,  idol  worship  is  condemned,  but  they  had  a temple,  in 
which  was  kept  a che.st  which  they  called  an  aik,  in  which  the  Table.s  of  the  T.aw  were 
pieserved,  and  above  the  chest  were  two  figures  of  angels  with  wings  outstretched, 
between  which  the  Divine  Presence  was  supposed  to  manifest  Itself  as  a cloud 
That  temple  has  long  since  been  destroyed,  but  the  new  temples  are  made  exactly  after 
the  old  fashion,  and  in  the  chest  religious  books  are  kept.  The  Roman  Catholics 
and  the  Creek  Chiistians  have  idol  worship  in  ceilain  forms.  The  image  of  Jesus, 
and  those  of  his  father  and  mother,  are  worshipped.  Among  Piotestants  there  is  no 


BHaKTI  147 

idol  worship,  yet  they  worship  God  in  a personal  form,  which  takes  the  place  of  an 
idol.  Among  Pat  sees  and  Iianians  fire-woiship  is  caiiied  on  to  a great  extent. 
Among  Mahommedans  the  Prophets  and  great  and  noble  persons  aie  worshipped,  and 
they  turn  their  faces  towards  the  Kaaba  when  they  pray.  These  things  show  that  men 
at  the  lirst  stage  of  religious  development,  have  to  make  use  of  something  externaf^ 
and  when  the  inner  self  becomes  puiified  they  turn  to  more  abstract  conceptions. 
When  Brahman  is  united  with  Jiva,  and  Jnanais  piaclised,  k is  Madhyanui.  Japa  is 
the  adhama  (lowest  foim),  and  external  worship  is  the  adhama  of  adhama,  that  is,  tlie 
lowest  of  the  low.  But  it  should  be  distinctly  understood  that  even  in  practising  thJ  last 
theie  is  no  .sin.  Everybody  ought  to  do  what  he  is  able  to  do,  and  if  he  be  dissuaded 
fiom  that  he  will  do  it  in  some  other  way  in  order  to  attain  hrs  end.  .So  we  .shonfd  not 
speak  ill  of  a man  who  worslnps  idols.  He  is  in  that  stage  of  giowth,  and  therefoie 
must  have  them  ; wise  men  should  try  to  help  forward  such  men,  and  to  get  them 
to  do  better.  But  there  is  no  use  iii  quai idling  about  these  various  fioits  of  woiship. 

Some  persoirs  woiship  God  for  the  sake  of  obtaining  wealth,  otliers  l:)ecau8e  they 
want  to  have  a son  ; and  tliey  think  themselves  lihd^ravats.  This  is  no  Bhakii,  and  they 
aie  not  tiue  IUhlir  avals.  When  a Sadhu  comes  who  professes  that  he  can  make  gold, 
they  lun  to  liim,  and  they  still  consider  themselves  Bhairavah.  It  is  not  Bhakti  if  we 
worship  God  with  the  desire  for  a son;  it  is  not  Bhakti  if  we  worship  w-itli  the  desiie  to 
he  iich  ; it  is  not  Bhakti  even  if  w^e  have  a dcsiie  for  Sivarga  ; it  is  ik>1  B-luikti  if  a man 
w 01  ships  with  the  desire  of  heiirg  saved  fiom  the  toi tines  of  hell.  Bhakti  is  not  the 
outcome  of  feai  or  gieediiiess.  He  i.s  the  tiue  Bhdgavat  who  says  — “ O God,  I do 
not  want  a beautiful  wife,  I do  not  w-ant  knowdedge,  nor  salvation,  let  me  Ixf  lx>riv  and 
die  hundieds  of  times,  what  I want  is  that  I should  be  ever  engaged  in  Thy  service.” 
It  is  at  this  stage,  and  when  a man  sees  God  in  everything,  and  everything  in  God, 
th.it  he  attains  pel  feet  Bhakti.  It  is  then  tlrat  he  sees  Vishnu  incarnated  in  evciy- 
tlimg,  fiom  the  miciobe  to  Brahm.d,  and  it  is  then  that  he  sees  (iod  manifesting  Him- 
self in  everything,  it  is  then  that  he  feels  that  Ibeie  is  nothing  withom  God,  and  u 
then  and  then  alone  that  thinking  himself  to  be  the  most  insignificant  of  all  beirrgv  he 
worships  God  with  the  true  spiiit  of  a Bliakta.  He  then  leaves  Tirthas  and  e.\:teinal 
foims  of  w'Oiship  far  behind  him,  he  sees  every  man  to  be  the  most  perfect  De7j<)faya. 
Bliakti  IS  clcsciihcd  in  several  ways  in  the  AZ/Jj/zt/r.  We  say  that  God  is  our  Father, 
In  the  .same  way  we  call  Him  .Mother,  and  so  on.  These  relationships  are  conceived  in 
order  to  stiengthen  Bhakti  in  us,  and  make  us  feel  neaier  and  dearer  to  God.  Hence 
these  names  are  justifiable  in  one  way,  and  that  is,  that  the  woids  are  simply  woiJs 
of  endearment,  the  outcome  of  the  fond  love  which  a liue  feeF  for  (iod. 

Take  the  story  of  Railha  and  Kiishna  in  BdsHla.  The  stoiy  simply  e.xemjdifies 
the  tiue  spirit  of  a Bliakta,  because  no  love  in  the  w'oild  exceeds  that  existing  Ixkweeii 
a man  and  a woman.  Where  there  is  such  intense  love,  there  is  no  fear,  i>o  other 
attachment  save  that  one  which  binds  that  pair  in  an  inseparable  and  all-absoibtng 
bond.  But  with  legard  to  patents, love  is  accompanied  witli  fear  di>e  to  tl>e  reverence  we 
have  for  them.  Why  should  we  caie  whethei  God  created  anything  or  not,  wl>at  have 
we  to  do  with  the  fact  that  He  is  oui  preset  ver.  He  is  our  only  Beloved,  and  wc  should 
adore  Him  devoid  of  all  thoughts  of  fear.  A man  loves  God  only  when  be  has  no 
olhei  desire,  when  he  thinks  of  nothing  else  and  when  be  is  mad  after  Him.  That  love 
which  a man  has  for  his  beloved  can  illustrate  the  love  we  ought  to  have  foi  God. 
Krishna  is  the  God  and  Rddha  loves  Him  ; lead  those  books  which  describe  that  story, 
and  then  you  can  imagine  the  way  you  should  love  God.  But  bow  many  understand 


T48 


LECTURES— FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


this  ? How  can  people,  who  are  vicious  lo  their  very  core,  and  have  no  idea  of  what 
morality  is,  understand  all  this  ? When  people  drive  all  sorts  of  worldly  thoughts  from 
their  minds  and  live  in  a clear  moral  and  spiiitual  atmosphere,  it  is  then  they  under- 
stand the  abstruscst  of  thoughts  even  if  they  be  uneducated.  But  how  few  are 
there  of  that  nature  ? There  is  not  a single  religion  which  cannot  be  perverted  by  qian. 
For  example,  he  may  think  that  the  Atman  is  quite  separate  fiom  the  body,  and 
so,  when  committing  sins  with  the  body  his  Atman  is  unaffected.  If  religions  were 
truly  followed  there  would  not  have  been  a single  man,  whether  Hindu,  Rlahommedan, 
or  Christian,  who  would  not  have  been  all  putity.  But  men  aie  guided  by  their 
own  Praknti,  whethei  good  01  bad  ; there  is  no  gainsaying  that.  But  in  the  world, 
there  arc  always  some  who  get  intoxicated  when  they  hear  of  God,  and  weep  tears  of 
joy  when  they  read  of  God ; such  men  are  true  Bhaktas. 

At  the  initial  stage  of  leligious  development  a man  thinks  of  God  as  his  I\Taster 
and  himself  as  His  servant.  He  feels  indebted  to  Him  for  pioviding  for  his  daily 
wants,  and  so  forth.  Put  such  thoughts  aside.  There  is  but  one  attractive  power, 
and  that  is  God  ; and  it  is  in  obedience  to  that  attractive  power  that  the  sun  and  the 
moon,  and  everything  else  moves.  Kverythiug  in  this  woild,  whether  good  or  bad, 
belongs  to  God.  Whatever  occuis  in  our  life,  whether  good  or  bad,  is  biinging  us 
to  Hun.  One  man  kills  another  because  of  some  selfish  purpose.  But  the  motive 
behind  is  love,  whether  for  himself  or  for  any  one  else.  Whether  \\e  do  good  or 
evil,  the  piopeller  is  love.  When  a tiger  kills  a buffalo,  it  is  because  he  or  his  cubs 
are  hungry. 

God  is  Love  personified.  He  is  apparent  in  everything.  F.verybody  is  diawn 
to  Him  whether  he  knows  it  or  not.  When  a woman  loves  her  husband,  she  does 
not  undei  stand  that  it  is  the  Divine  in  her  husband  that  is  the  great  atti  active  power. 
The  God  of  Love  is  the  one  thing  to  be  woishippcd.  So  long  as  we  think  of  Him 
only  as  the  Creator,  and  Pieserver,  we  can  offer  Him  external  woiship,  but  when  we 
get  beyond  all  that,  and  think  Him  to  be  Love  Incainate,  seeing  Hun  in  all  things 
and  all  things  m Him,  it  is  then  that  Supieme  Bhakti  is  attained. 


■o 


THE  COMMON  BASES  OF  HINDUISM. 

On  his  ariival  al  Lahoie  on  51)1  Novemboi  1S97.  the  Swamiji  \\as  accovdofl  a grand 
reception  by  Ibo  leadcis,  both  of  the  A') a Saniaj  aiiil  ot  the  Sniatan  IlHiaima  Sablia. 
Dining  his  brief  stay  in  Lalioie  Swaniiji  (idueieil  lliiee  lectures.  'I'lic  fust  of  these 
was  on  “ 7’be  Common  Ibises  of  fJimluism  ” ; the  seiond  on  “ Hbakti  " ; am!  the  third 
one  was  the  famous  lecluie  on  “ The  Vedanta.’'  On  the  first  occasion  he  spoke  as 
follows  : — 

This  is  the  land  which  is  held  to  be  the  holiest  even  in  holy  Aryavarta ; 
this  is  the  llrahmavaita  of  which  out  gieat  Alanu  speaks.  This  is  the  land 
from  whence  arose  that  mighty  aspiration  after  the  Spiiit,  aye,  ^^hich  in  limes  to 
come,  as  history  shows,  was  to  deluge  the  woild.  This  is  the  land  wheie,  like  its 
mighty  rivers,  spiritual  aspiialions  have  aiisen  and  joined  then  sliength,  till  they 
tiavclled  over  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  woild,  and  dcclaied  themselves  with  a 
voice  of  thunder.  This  is  the  land  which  had  tin  si  to  beat  the  brunt  of  all  inioads 
and  invasions  into  India;  this  heroic  land  had  lirst  to  baie  its  bosom  to  evciy  on- 
slaught of  the  outer  barbaiians  into  Ai>  aval  la.  I'his  is  the  land  which,  after  all  its 
suffeiings,  has  not  yet  entirely  lost  its  glory  and  its  stiength,  Heic  it  was  that  in 
laier  times  the  gentle  Nanak  preached  his  marvellous  lo\e  for  the  woild.  lleie  it 
was  that  his  bioad  heart  was  opened,  and  his  arms  ontstrctcheil  to  embrace  the  whole 
woild,  not  only  of  Hindus,  InU  of  Mahommedans  loo.  Hcie  it  was  that  one  of  the 
last  and  one  of  the  most  gloiious  of  oui  lace,  (nmi  Govinda  Singh,  aflei  shedding  his 
blood,  and  that  of  his  dcaiest  and  ncaio.st,  for  the  cause  of  icbgion,  e\cn  w'hen 

desciLcd  by  those  for  svbom  this  blood  w-as  shed,  rcliied  into  the  South  to  die  like  a 

wounded  lion  stiuck  to  the  heart,  and  without  a word  against  his  countiy,  without  a 

single  word  of  muiniur,  disappeaied. 

Here,  in  this  ancient  land  of  ours,  children  of  the  land  of  five  rivers,  I 
stand  befoie  you,  not  as  a leacliei — for  I know  very  little  to  leach,  but  as  one 
who  has  come  fiom  the  East  to  exchange  words  of  gi cell ng  with  the  brothers 
of  the  West,  to  compare  notes.  Heie  am  1,  not  to  find  out  differences  that 
exist  among  us,  hut  to  find  wheic  we  agicc.  lleie  am  1 li)mg  to  undei  stand 
on  what  ground  we  may  al\\a)S  remain  brothers,  upon  what  loundalioiis  the 
voice  that  has  spoken  from  eternity  may  become  stronger  and  sliongcr  as  it 

grows.  Here  am  I trjing  to  piopose  to  yon  something  of  constructive  work  and  not 
destructive.  For  cnlicism  the  days  .are  past,  and  we  arc  wailing  for  consli active 
work.  The  woild  needs,  at  times,  ciiticisms,  even  fierce  ones  ; hut  that  is  only  for  a 
time  and  the  work  for  eternity  is  progress  and  constiuclion,  and  not  ci  iticism  and 
destruction.  For  the  last  bundled  years  or  so,  there  has  been  a Hood  of  criticism 
all  over  this  land  of  ouis,  wheie  the  full  play  of  Western  .Science  has  been  let  loose 
upon  all  the  dark  spots,  and  as  a result  the  corners  and  the  holes  have  become  much 
more  prominent  than  anything  else,  Naturally  enough  thcic  arose  mighty  intellects 
all  over  the  land,  great  and  gloiious,  with  the  love  of  truth  and  justice  in  their  hearts; 
in  their  hearts,  the  love  of  their  country,  and  above  all,  an  intense  love  for  their 
religion  and  their  God  ; and  because  these  mighty  souls  felt  so  deeply,  because  they 
loved  80  deeply,  they  criticised  everything  they  thought  was  wrong.  Glory  unto  these 
mighty  spit  its  of  the  past ! 'Phey  have  done  so  much  good ; but  the  voice  of  the 


150 


LECTURES— FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


present  dav  is  coming  to  us,  telling,  “ Knough !”  There  has  been  enough  of  criticism, 
there  has  been  enough  of  faull-linding,  the  time  has  come  for  the  rebuilding,  the  recon- 
sliucling  ; the  time  has  come  for  us  lo  gather  all  our  scattered  forces,  to  concentrate 
them  into  one  focus,  and  thiough  that,  lo  lead  the  nation  on  its  onward  march,  which 
for  centinies  almost,  has  been  slopped  The  house  has  been  cleansed;  let  it  be 
inhabited  anew.  The  road  has  been  cleared : march  ahead,  children  of  the  Aryas  ! 

Clenilemen,  this  is  the  molue  that  brings  me  before  you,  and,  at  the  stait,  I may 
declare  to  you  that  I belong  to  no  paily  and  no  sect.  They  are  all  gieat  and  glorious 
to  me,  1 love  them  all,  and  all  my  life  I have  been  attem|)ling  to  find  what  is  good 
and  true  in  them.  Theiefore,  it  is  my  propo.sal  to-night  to  bring  before  you  points 
where  we  are  agieed,  to  find  out  if  we  can,  a giound  of  agreement;  and  if  through 
the  grace  of  the  Lord  such  a state  of  things  be  possible,  let  us  take  it  up,  and  from 
theory  carry  it  out  into  practice.  We  are  Hindus.  I do  not  use  the  woid  Hindu 
in  any  bad  sense  at  all,  nor  do  I agree  with  those  that  think  there  is  any  bad  meaning 
in  it.  In  old  times,  it  simply  meant  people  who  lived  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Indus,  to-day  a good  many  among  those  who  hate  us  may  have  put  a bad  interpretation 
upon  it,  but  names  are  nothing.  Upon  us  depends  whether  the  name  Hindu  will  stand 
for  everything  that  is  glorious,  everything  that  is  spiritual,  or  whether  it  will  remain 
a name  of  oppi,obrium,  one  designating  the  down-tiodden,  the  woithless,  the  heathen. 
If  at  piesent  the  word  Hindu  means  anything  bad,  never  mind;  by  our  action  let  us 
be  ready  to  show  that  this  is  the  highest  word  that  any  language  can  invent.  It  has 
been  one  of  the  principles  of  my  life  not  to  be  ashamed  of  my  own  ancesiois.  I 
am  one  of  the  proudest  men  ever  born,  but  let  me  tell  }0u  frankly,  it  is  not  for 
myself,  but  on  account  of  my  ancestiy,  The  more  I have  studied  the  past,  the  more 
I have  looked  back,  mote  and  more  has  this  pride  come  to  me,  and  it  has  given 
me  the  stiength  and  courage  of  conviction,  raised  me  up  fiom  the  dust  of  the  eaith, 
and  set  me  woi king  out  that  great  plan  laid  out  by  those  gieat  ancestors  of  ouis. 
('hildren  of  those  ancient  Aryans,  through  the  giace  of  the  T.oid  may  you  have 
the  same  pride,  may  that  faith  in  your  ancestors  come  into  your  blood,  may  it  become 
a part  and  parcel  of  your  lives,  may  it  work  towards  the  salvation  of  the  woild  ! 

llefoie  trying  to  find  out  the  precise  point  where  we  are  all  agreed,  the  common 
ground  of  our  national  life,  one  thing  wc  must  remember.  Just  as  there  is  an  indivi- 
duality in  eveiy  man,  so  there  is  a national  individuality.  As  one  man  diffeis  from 
another  in  ccitain  paiticulars,  in  certain  chaiaclensiics  of  iiis  own,  so  one  lace  differs 
fiotn  another  in  ceitain  other  characteiistics ; and  just  as  it  is  the  mission  of  eveiy  man 
to  fulfil  a ceitain  puipose  in  the  economy  of  naluie,  just  as  it  is  a pailicular  line  set 
out  for  him  by  his  own  past  Karma,  .so  it  is  with  nations — each  nation  has  a destiny 
to  fulfil,  each  nation  has  a message  to  deliver,  each  nation  has  a mission  to  accom- 
plish. Therefore,  from  the  very  start,  wc  must  have  to  understand  the  mission  of 
our  own  race,  the  destiny  it  has  to  fulfil,  the  place  it  has  to  occupy  in  the  march  of 
nations,  the  note  which  it  has  lo  contiibiUe  lo  the  harmony  of  laces.  In  our  country, 
when  children,  wc  hear  stoiies  how  that  some  serpents  have  jewels  in  their  heads, 
and  whatever  one  may  do  with  the  serpent,  so  long  as  tlie  jewel  is  there,  the  serpent 
cannot  be  killed.  We  hear  stories  of  giants  and  ogres  who  had  souls  living  in 
ceitain  little  birds,  and  so  long  as  the  bird  was  safe,  there  was  no  power  on  earth  to 
kill  these  giants,  you  might  hack  them  to  pieces,  or  do  what  you  liked  to  them,  the 
giants  could  not  die.  So  with  nations,  there  is  a certain  point  wlieie  the  life  of  a 
nation  unites,  wheie  lies  the  nationality  of  the  nation,  and  until  that  is  touched,  that 


THE  COMMON  BASES  OF  HINDUISM  151 

nation  cannot  die.  In  the  light  of  this  we  can  understand  the  most  marvellous 
pfienomenon  that  the  histoiy  of  the  world  has  e\er  known.  Wave  after  wave  of 
baibaiian  conquest  has  rolled  over  this  de\oted  land  of  ours.  “Allah  IIo  Akbai ! ’' 
has  rent  the  skies  for  hundieds  of  yeais,  and  no  Hindu  knew  what  moment  would 
bo  his  last.  1 his  is  the  most  suflering  and  the  most  subjugated  of  all  the  histoiic 
lands  of  the  world.  Vet  we  still  stand  piactically  the  same  lace,  re.iily  to  face  difli- 
cullies  again  and  again  if  necessary,  and  not  only  so,  of  late  theic  have  been  signs  that 
we  are  not  only  strong,  but  ready  to  go  out,  for  the  sign  of  life  is  expansion. 

We  find  to-day  that  our  ideas  and  thoughts  aie  no  more  cooped  up  within  the 
bounds  of  India,  but  whether  wc  will  11  or  not,  they  are  maiching  outside,  filteiing  into 
the  htciature  of  nations,  taking  their  place  among  nations,  and  in  some,  even  pelting  a 
commanding,  dictatoiial  position.  Behind  this  wc  find  the  explanation,  that  the 
gieat  contiibulion  to  the  sum-total  of  the  world’s  progress  fiom  India  is  the  greatest, 
the  noblest,  the  sublimest  theme  that  can  occupy  the  mind  of  man-  -it  is  philosophy 
and  spiiituality.  Our  ancestors  Hied  many  other  things;  they,  like  other  nations, 
fust  went  to  biing  out  the  scciets  of  external  Nature,  as  we  all  know,  and  with  their 
gigantic  brains  that  marvellous  race  could  have  done  muacles  in  that  line  of  which 
the  woild  yet  cannot  dieam.  But  they  gave  it  up  fot  something  higher;  something 
better  rings  out  from  the  pages  of  the  Vedas  “ 'I'hat  science  is  the  greatest  which 
makes  us  know  Him  who  never  changes  I " The  science  of  Nature,  cljangeful, 
e\anescent,  the  world  of  deatli,  of  woe,  of  misery,  may  be  great,  great  indeed  ; but,  the 
science  of  Him  who  changes  not,  the  Blissful  One,  wheie  alone  is  peace,  where  alone 
is  life  eternal,  where  alone  is  perfection,  wheie  alone  all  misery  ccascs,~lhat,  accord- 
ing to  our  ancestors,  w'as  the  sublimest  science  of  all.  After  all,  sciences  that  can 
give  us  only  bicad  and  clothes  and  pow'cr  over  our  fellowmcn,  sciences  that  can  only 
teach  us  how  to  conquer  oui  fellow-beings,  to  rule  over  them,  which  teach  the  sliong  to 
domineer  over  tfie  weak,  -those  they  could  have  discovered  if  they  willed  ; but  praise  be 
unto  the  Lord,  they  caught  at  once  the  other  side,  which  was  grander,  infinitely  higher, 
infinitely  more  blisstul,  till  it  has  become  the  national  characteristic,  till  it  has  come 
dowm  to  us,  inheiited  from  father  to  son  for  thousands  of  years,  till  it  has  become 
a part  and  paicel  of  us,  till  it  tingles  in  every  diop  of  blood  that  runs  thioiigh  our 
veins,  till  it  has  become  oui  second  nature,  till  the  name  of  religion  and  Hindu  have 
become  one.  This  is  the  national  characteiislic,  and  this  cannot  be  touched.  Bar- 
baiians  with  sword  and  fire,  barbaiians  biinging  barbarous  religions,  could  not  one 
of  them  touch  the  core,  not  one  could  touch  the  ‘jewel,’  not  one  h.ad  the  pow’er  to  kill 
the  ‘bird’  which  the  soul  of  the  lacc  inhabited.  'I’his,  therefore,  is  the  vitality  of  the 
race,  and  .so  long  as  that  remains  there  is  no  power  under  the  sun  that  can  kill  the 
race.  All  the  tortures  and  the  miseries  of  the  woild  will  pass  over  without  hurting 
us,  and  we  shall  come  out  of  the  flames  like  Piahlad,  so  long  as  w'c*  hold  on  to  this 
giandest  of  all  our  inheiitances,  spiiituality.  If  a Hindu  is  not  spiiilual  I do  not 
call  him  a Hindu.  In  other  countiies  a man  may  be  political  first,  and  then  he  may 
have  a little  religion,  but  here  in  India  the  liist  and  the  foremost  duty  of  our  lives 
is  to  be  spiiitual  fiist,  and  then,  if  there  is  time,  let  other  things  come.  Bearing  this 
in  mind  w'e  shall  be  in  a better  position  to  undci stand  why,  for  our  national  welfare, 
we  must  fiist  seek  out  at  the  present  day,  all  the  spiiitual  forces  of  the  race,  as  was 
done  in  days  of  yore,  and  will  be  done  in  all  times  to  come.  National  union 
in  India  must  be  a gafclieiing  up  of  its  scattered  spiiitual  foices.  A nation  in  India 
must  be  a union  of  those  whose  hearts  beat  to  the  same  spiritual  tune. 


LECTURES— P'ROM  COLOMRO  TO  ALJfORA 


tSi 

Thcie  ha\e  been  seels  enoii^li  in  this  counliy.  There  arc  seels  enough,  and 
ihc  ie  will  he  enough  in  the  fiUiiie,  because  this  lias  been  the  pcciiliarily  of  our  religion, 
that  in  absliaet  piinciples  so  much  lalilude  has  been  given,  that  although  afterwaids 
so  much  detail  has  been  woiked  out,  all  these  details  ate  the  xvoiking  out  of  principles, 
bioad  as  the  skies  above  our  heads,  eternal  as  Natuie  heiself,  Sects,  iherefore,  as  a 
matter  of  course,  nuiM  exist  hcie,  but  what  need  not  exist,  is  scctaiian  quarrel.  Sects 
must  be,  l)nt  sectarianism  need  not.  The  woild  would  not  be  the  better  for  sectari- 
anism, l)ut  the  woild  cannot  move  on  without  having  sects.  One  set  of  men  cannot  do 
evei)  thing.  The  almost  infinite  mass  of  cncigy  in  the  woild  cannot  be  managed  by 
a small  number  of  people.  Heie,  at  once  we  see  the  necessity  that  forced  this  division 
of  laboui  upon  us — the  division  into  beds, — for  the  use  of  spiiitual  forces  let  theie  be 
seels,  but  is  there  any  need  that  wc  should  qiiairel,  when  our  most  ancient  books 
declare  that  this  tliffeientiation  is  only  appaicnl,  that  in  spile  of  all  these  dilTciences 
theie  is  a ihiead  of  haimony,  that  beautiful  unity,  lunning  thiough  them  all  } Our 
most  ancient  liooks  have  declared  : Ekum  sai  viprd  bahudha  vadanii. — “ That 
wliich  exists  is  One;  sages  call  Plim  by  vaiioiis  names.”  Theiefoie,  if  there 
are  these  sectaiian  stiuggles,  if  theie  aie  these  fights  among  the  dilTeicnl  sects,  if 
there  is  jealousy  and  bailed  between  the  different  .sects  in  India,  the  laud  whcie  all 
sects  have  alwa)s  been  honouied,  it  is  a shame  on  us  who  dare  to  call  oui selves  the 
descendants  ot  those  fathers. 

There  are  ceitain  gicat  principles  in  which,  I think,  wc  arc — whether  Vaishnavas, 

. Saivas,  S.iktas  or  GAnapalyas,  whelhci  belonging  to  the  ancient  Vedanlists,  oi  the 
modern  ones,  whelliei  belonging  to  the  ohl  ligid  ^ects,  oi  the  modem  lefoiin  ones  -- 
we  aic  all  one,  and  whoevci  calls  hiinsell  a Hindu,  believes  in  ceilain  pimciples.  Of 
course  theie  is  a dilTcronce  in  the  intcipiotalion,  in  the  explanation,  of  these  pimciples, 
and  that  dirteience  should  be  theie,  and  it  should  be  allowed,  foi  our  standaid  is  not  to 
bind  eveiy  man  down  to  our  own  position  ; it  would  be  a sin,  to  force  every  man  to 
work  out  our  ow'ii  inlet prclalion  of  things,  and  to  live  by  our  own  methods,  reihaps 
all  who  are  heie  will  agiee  on  the  fust  point,  that  we  believe  the  Vedas  to  be  the 
eternal  teachings  of  the  seciets  of  Religion.  We  all  believe  that  this  holy  liteiaturc 
is  without  beginning  and  without  end,  coeval  with  Naluie,  which  is  without  beginning 
and  WMl bout  end ; and  that  all  our  religious  dilfeiences,  all  our  religious  struggles 
must  end  when  we  stand  in  the  presence  of  that  lioly  book ; we  are  all  agreed  that 
this  is  the  last  court  of  appeal  in  all  our  spuiiual  dilfoicnces.  Wc  may  lake  different 
points  of  view  as  to  what  the  Vedas  are.  Theie  may  be  one  sect  which  rcgauls 
one  portion  as  more  sacicd  llian  another,  but  that  inatleis  little,  so  long  as  w'e  say 
that  we  arc  all  brotheis  in  the  Vedas,  that  out  of  these  venerable,  eternal,  marvellous 
books,  has  come  everything  that  we  possess  to-day,  g )od,  holy,  and  pure.  Well, 
therefore,  if  we  believe  in  all  this,  let  this  principle  first  of  all  be  preached  bioadcast 
throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land.  If  this  be  true,  let  the  Vedas  have 
that  pioininence  which  they  ahvays  descivc,  and  which  we  all  believe  in  ; fust  then  the 
Vedas.  The  second  point  we  all  believe  in  i.s  God,  the  creating,  the  pieseiving 
Power  of  the  whole  universe,  and  unto  whom  it  peiiodically  returns,  to  come  out 
at  other  periods  and  manifest  thi.'s  wondeiful  phenomenon,  called  the  universe.  We 
may  differ  as  to  our  conception  of  God.  One  may  believe  in  a God  who  is  entirely 
peisonal,  anolhei  may  believe  in  a God  who  is  personal  and  yet  not  human,  and 
yet  another  may  believe  in  a God  who  is  enliiely  impeiscJbal,  and  all  may  get  their 
support  fioin  the  Vedas.  Still  wc  ate  all  belicvcis  in  God ; that  is  to  say,  that  man 


Wt!  CoMMOK^  nASES  OE  ttWEVlSM  153 

ivho  does  tlol  believe  in  a most  nIarveiloUs  Infinite  Power,  from  which  everything  ha3 
come,  111  ^vhlch  everything  lives,  and  to  which  everything  must  in  the  ertd  return, 
cannot  be  called  a Hindu.  If  that  be  so,  let  us  try  to  pi  each  that  idea  all  over  the 
land.  Preach  whatever  conception  you  have  to  give,  there  is  no  difTerence,  we  are 
not  going  to  fight  over  it,  but  to  pieach  God;  that  is  all  we  want.  One  idea  may 
be  better  than  another,  but,  mind  you,  not  one  of  them  is  bad.  One  is  good,  another 
is  better,  and  again  another  may  be  the  best,  but  the  word  bad  docs  not  enter  the 
category  of  our  religion.  Therefore,  may  the  Loid  bless  them  all  who  preach  the 
name  of  God  in  whatever  form  they  like.  The  moie  He  is  picachcd,  the  better 
for  this  race.  T^et  our  children  be  brought  up  in  this  idea,  let  this  idea  enter  the 
homes  of  the  pooicst  and  the  lowest,  as  well  as  of  the  richest  and  the  highest, — the 
idea  of  the  name  of  God. 

The  thiid  idea  that  I will  present  before  you  is,  that,  unlike  all  other  races  of  the 
woild,  we  do  not  believe  that  this  woild  was  cieated  only  so  many  thousand  years 
ago,  and  is  going  to  be  destroyed  eternally,  on  a certain  day.  Nor  do  we  believe 
that  the  human  soul  has  been  created  along  with  this  universe  just  out  of  nothing. 
Here  is  another  point  I think  we  arc  all  able  to  agree  upon,  We  believe  in  Nature 
being  without  beginning  and  without  end,  only  at  psychological  periods  this  gioss 
matciicd  of  the  outer  unlver.se  goes  back  to  its  finei  state,  thus  to  remain  for  a 
ccitain  period,  again  to  be  piojected  outside,  to  manifest  all  this  Infinite  panorama 
we  call  Naluic  ; this  wave-like  motion  is  going  on  even  before  time  began,  through 
eternity,  and  will  lemain  for  an  infinite  period  of  time.  Next,  all  Hindus  believe 
that  man  is  not  only  a gross  material  hrody,  not  only  that  within  this  there  is  the 
finer  body,  the  mind,  but  theio  is  something  yet  greater;  for  the  body  changes,  so 
does  the  mind,  but  something  beyond,  the  Almain— I cannot  translate  the  word  to 
you,  foi  any  lianslation  will  be  wiong— that  there  is  something  beyond  even  this 
fine  body,  \\hich  is  the  Atman  of  man,  which  has  neither  beginning  nor  end,  whieft 
knows  not  what  death  is.  And  then  this  peculiar  idea  different  from  that  of  all  other 
races  of  men,  that  this  Atman  inhabits  body  after  body  until  there  is  no  moie  interest 
foi  it  to  continue  to  do  so,  and  it  becomes  free,  not  to  be  born  again.  I refer  to 
the  theory  of  Samsdra  and  the  tlieoiy  of  eternal  souls  taught  by  our  .Shastras.  'I'his 
is  another  point  wliere  we  all  agioc,  whatevci  sect  we  may  belong  to.  There  may 
be  diffeicnccs  as  to  the  relation  between  the  soul  and  God.  According  to  one  sect 
the  soul  may  be  eternally  different  ftom  God,  according  to  another  it  may  he  a spark 
of  that  infinite  fire,  yet  again  accoiding  to  othcis  it  may  be  one  with  that  Infinite. 
It  does  not  matter  what  our  inteipretation  is,  but  so  long  as  we  hold  on  to  the  one 
basic  belief  that  the  soul  is  infinite,  that  this  soul  was  never  cieated,  and  theiefore 
will  never  die,  that  it  had  to  pass  and  evolve  into  vaiious  bodies,  till  it  attained 
peifection  in  the  human  one — to  that  we  are  all  agreed.  And  then  comes  the  most 
diffeieniiating,  the  grandest,  and  the  most  wonderful  discovery  In  the  realms  of 
spirituality  that  has  ever  been  made.  Some  of  you,  peihaps,  who  have  been  study- 
ing Western  thought,  m.ay  have  observed  already,  that  there  is  another  radical  dif- 
ference seveiing  at  one  stioke  all  that  is  Western  from  all  that  is  Eastern,  It  is  this 
that  we  hold,  whether  we  are  .Saktas,  Sauias,  or  Vaishnavas,  even  whether  we  are 
Rauddhas  or  Jainas,  we  all  hold  in  India  that  the  soul  is  by  it.s  nature  pure  and 
perfect,  infinite  in  power  and  blessed.  Only,  accoiding  to  the  Dualist,  this  natural 
blissfulness  of  the  soul  has  become  contracted  by  past  bad  woik  and,  through  the 
grace  of  God,  it  Js  again  going  to  open  out  and  show  its  perfection,  while  according 


LECTURES— FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


»54 

to  the  ironist,  even  this  idea  of  contraction  is  a partial  mistake,  it  is  the  veil  of  Maya 
that  causes  us  to  think  the  soul  has  tOst  its  powers,  but  the  povvers  are  there  fully 
manifest.  Whatever  the  difference  may  be,  we  come  to  the  cential  core,  and  there 
is  at  once  an  irreconcilable  diiTeienco  between  all  that  is  Western  and  Kastern.  The 
I'astern  is  looking  inward  for  all  that  is  great  and  goo<l.  When  we  worship,  we  close 
our  e}es  and  tiy  to  find  God  within.  'I'he  Western  is  looking  up  outside  for  his  God. 
To  the  Westerns  their  religious  books  have  been  inspired,  while  with  us  our  books 
have  been  expired  ; breath-like  they  came,  the  breatli  of  God,  out  of  the  hearts  of 
sages  tlicy  sprang,  the  Manlra-draihlds. 

This  is  one  great  j>oint  to  understand,  and,  my  friends,  my  brethren,  let 
me  tell  you,  this  is  the  one  point  we  shall  have  to  insist  upon  in  the  future. 
For  I am  firmly  convinced,  and  I beg  you  to  undci  stand  this  one  fact, — no 
good  comes  out  of  the  man  who  day  and  night  thinks  he  is  nobody.  If  a 
man,  day  and  night  thinks  he  is  miserable,  low  and  nothing,  nothing  he  becomes. 
If  }’ou  say  yea,  yea,  I am,  I am,  so  shall  you  be ; and  if  you  say  I am  not,  think  that 
you  are  not,  and  day  and  night  meditate  ujion  the  fact  that  you  aie  nothing,  aye, 
nothing  sliall  you  be.  That  is  the  great  fact  which  you  ought  to  remember.  We  arc 
the  children  of  the  Almighty,  we  are  spaiks  of  the  infinite,  divine  fire.  How  can 
wc  be  nothings  ? We  aic  everything,  ready  to  do  everything,  we  can  do  everything, 
and  man  must  do  everything.  This  faith  in  themselves  was  in  the  hearts  of  our 
ancestors,  this  faith  in  themselves  was  the  motive  power  that  pushed  them  foiwaid 
and  forwaid  in  the  march  of  civilisation,  and  if  there  has  been  degeneration,  if  there 
lias  been  defect,  maik  my  words,  you  will  find  th.it  degradation  to  have  staited  on  the 
day  our  people  lost  this  faith  in  themselves,  loosing  iaith  in  one's  self  means  losing 
faith  in  God.  Do  you  believe  in  that  Infinite,  good  Providence  woiking  in  and 
through  you  If  you  believe  that  this  Omnipresent  One,  the  Aniaryamin,  is  present 
in  cveiy  atom,  is  through  and  through,  as  the  Sanski it  woid  goes,  pene- 

trating your  body,  mind  and  soul,  how  can  you  lose  heart } I may  be  a little  bubble 
of  watci,  and  you  may  be  a mountain-high  wave  ; never  mind  ! The  infinite  ocean 
is  the  background  of  me  as  w'ell  as  of  you.  Mine  is  also  that  infinite  ocean  of  life, 
of  powder,  of  spiiitualily,  as  well  as  yours.  I am  already  joined. — from  my  very 
biith,  from  the  very  fact  of  my  life — 1 am  in  Yoga  with  that  infinite  life,  and  infinite 
goodness,  and  infinite  power,  as  you  are,  mountain-high  though  you  may  be.  'I'here- 
foie,  my  biethien,  teach  thi.s  life-saving,  great,  ennobling,  giand  doctiinc  to  your 
children,  even  from  their  veiy  biith.  You  need  not  leach  them  Advaitism  ; teach 
them  Dvaitism,  or  any  ‘ ism  ’ you  please,  hut  we  have  seen  that  tliis  is  the  common 
‘ism’  all  through  India  ; this  marvellous  doctrine  of  the  soul,  the  peifection  of  the  soul, 
is  commonly  believed  in  by  all  sects.  As  sa)s  our  g.eat  philosopher  Kapila,  if 
purity  has  not  lieen  the  nature  of  the  soul,  it  can  never  attain  puiity  aflerw’ards,  for 
anything  tliat  w'as  not  pel  feet  by  natuic,  even  if  it  attained  to  perfection,  that  peifec- 
lion  w'ould  go  away  again.  If  impuiily  is  llie  nature  of  man,  then  man  will  have 
to  remain  impure,  even  though  he  may  be  piue  for  five  minutes.  The  time  will 
come  when  this  purity  will  w'ash  out,  pass  away,  and  the  old  natural  impurity  will 
have  its  sway  once  more.  Theieforc,  say  all  our  philosophers,  good  is  our  nature, 
perfection  is  our  nature,  not  imperfection,  not  impurity, — and  we  should  remember 
that.  Remember  the  beautiful  example  of  the  great  sage  who  when  he  was  dying, 
asked  his  mind  to  remember  all  his  mighty  deeds  and  all  his  mighty  thoughts.  Theie 
you  do  not  find  that  he  was  teaching  hjs  mind  to  remember  all  his  w’eakness  and 


TIJE  COMMON  BASES  OF  HINDU JSAt 


»55 


all  his  follies.  Follies  there  are,  weaknels  there  must  be,  but  remember  your  real 
nature  always, — that  is  the  only  way  to  cure  the  weakness,  that  is  the  only  way  to  cure 
the  follies. 

It  seems  that  these  few  points  are  common  among  all  the  various  religious 
sects  in  Itulia,  and  perhaps  in  fuiuie  upon  this  common  platform,  conservative  and 
libeial  religionists,  old  type  and  new  t)pe,  may  shake  hands.  Above  all,  there  is 
another  thing  to  remember,  wRich  I am  sony  we  foiget  from  time  to  time,  that 
leligion,  in  India,  means  realisation  and  nothing  shot l of  that,  “believe  in 
the  doctrine  and  you  arc  safe,’'  can  never  be  taught  to  us,  for  we  do  not  believe  in 
that;  you  are  what  you  make  )Oui selves.  You  aic,  by  the  gi ace  of  God  and  your 
own  exertions,  what  you  are.  Meie  believing  in  ceilain  iheoiies  and  doctrines  will 
not  help  you  much.  The  mighty  vvoid  that  came  out  fiom  the  sky  of  spiiitiialily  iii 
India  was  Anubhuti,  realisation,  and  ours  aie  the  only  books  which  dcclaie  again 
and  again:  Lord  is  to  be  seenA  Bold,  brave  words  indeed,  but  tiue  to 

their  very  core  ; eveiy  sound,  every  vibration  is  tiue.  Religion  is  to  be  realised,  not 
only  heard;  it  is  not  only  that  ,some  docltinc  should  be  learnt  like  a pai lot.  Not 
only  is  there  intellectual  assent ; lliat  is  nothing;  but  it  must  come  into  us.  Aye, 
and  iheiefore  the  greatest  pi  oof  that  wc  have  of  the  existence  of  a God  is  not 
because  our  reason  says  so,  1ml  because  God  has  been  seen  by  the  ancients  as  well 
as  by  the  motloins.  We  believe  in  the  soul  not  only  because  theie  are  good  reasons 
to  prove  its  existence,  but,  above  all,  because  theie  have  been  in  the  past,  thousands 
in  India,  there  >el  aic  .still  many  who  have  lealised,  and  there  will  be  thousands  in  the 
tulizie,  who  will  realise,  and  see  theii  own  souls.  And  theie  is  no  salvation  foi  man 
until  he  sees  God,  realises  his  own  soul,  'rheiefore,  above  all,  let  us  understand 
this,  and  the  more  we  undei stand  it  the  less  vve  shall  have  of  sectarianism  in  India, 
foi  it  is  only  that  man  vvlio  has  lealised  God  and  seen  Him,  who  is  leligious.  In  him 
the  knots  have  been  cut  asunder,  in  him  alone  the  doubts  have  subsided  ; he  alone 
has  become  free  fioin  the  flints  of  action,  who  has  .seen  Him  who  is  ueaiest  of  the 
near  and  farthest  of  the  far.  Aye,  we  often  mistake  nieie  prattle  for  i el igious  tiulh, 
mere  intellectual  peroiations  foi  gieal  spiiitnal  icalisauon,  and  then  comes  sectaii- 
anism,  then  comes  fight.  If  vve  once  ^uulel^land  that  this  realisation  is  tlie  only 
religion,  vve  shall  look  into  oui  own  hearts  and  find  how  far  wc  are  towaids  lealising 
the  iriilhs  of  leligion.  Then  we  shall  undci stand  that  vve  ourselves  are  groping  in 
darkness,  and  aie  leading  oiUeis  to  giope  in  the  .same  daikness,  then  we  shall  cease 
fioni  sectai ianism,  cjuaiie!  and  fight.  Ask  a man  who  wants  to  slait  a sectaiian  figlit, 
“ Have  you  seen  God  ? Have  )ou  seem  the  Atman  ? If  you  have  not,  what  nght  have 
}ou  to  pieach  Ilis  name, — }Ou  walking  m daikness  to  lead  me  into  the  same  daik- 
ness,— the  blind  leading  the  blind,  and  both  falling  into  the  ditch  ?” 

Theieforc,  take  more  lliouglil  befoic  you  go  and  find  fault  with  others.  Let  them 
follow  their  own  path  to  icalisation  so  long  as  they  snuggle  to  see  truth  m then  own 
hearts  ; and  wlien  the  bioad,  naked  tiiUh  will  be  seen,  then  they  will  find  tliat  wonderful 
blissfulness  which  marvellously  enough  has  been  testified  to  by  cveiy  seer  in  India,  by 
everyone  who  has  realised  the  truth.  1 hen  vvoids  of  love  alone  will  come  out  of  that 
heait,  for  it  has  already  been  touched  by  Him  who  is  the  essence  of  Love  Himself. 

Then  and  then  alone,  all  sectarian  quai  l els  will  cease,  and  we  shall  be  in  a position 

to  understand,  to  biing  to  our  heaits,  to  embrace,  to  intensely  love  the  very  word 
Hindu,  and  evciy  one  who  bears  that  name.  INIark  me,  then  and  then  alone,  you 
are  a Hindu,  when  the  very  name  sends  through  you  a galvanic  shock  of  strength. 


LECTURES-FROM  COLOMBO  TO  AtMORA 


Then  and  then  alone,  you  aie  a Hindu  when  every  man  who  hears  Ihe  name,  from 
any  counlry,  speaking  our  language  or  any  other  language,  becomes  at  once  the 
nearest  and  the  dearest  to  you.  Then  and  then  alone,  you  are  a Hindu  when  the 
distress  of  anyone  beaiing  that  name  comes  to  your  heart  and  makes  you  feel  as  if 
your  own  son  were  in  distiess.  Then  and  then  alone,  you  are  a Hindu  when  you 
will  be  leady  to  bear  eveiything  for  them,  like  the  great  example  I have  quoted  at 
the  beginning  of  this  lecture,  of  your  gi eat  Guru  Govuid  Singh.  Diiven  out  fioin 
this  country,  fighting  against  its  oppressors,  after  having  shed  his  own  blood  for  the 
defence  of  the  Hindu  religion,  after  having  seen  his  childien  killed  on  the  battle-field, 
— aye,  this  example  of  the  great  Guiu,  left  even  by  those  for  whose  sake  he  was 
shedding  his  blood  and  the  blood  of  his  own  nearest  and  dearest, — he,  the  wounded 
lion  retired  from  the  field  calmly  to  die  m the  .South,  but  not  a wotd  of  curse  escaped 
his  lips  against  those  wiio  had  ungiatefully  foisakcn  him  * INTark  me,  every  one  of 
you  will  have  to  be  a Govind  Singh,  if  )ou  want  to  do  good  to  your  country.  You 
may  see  tliousands  of  defects  in  your  countrymen,  but  maik  then  Hindu  blood. 
They  aie  the  fiisl  Gods  }Ou  will  h.ave  to  worship,  even  if  they  do  eveiything  to  hint 
you  ; even  if  everyone  of  them  send  out  a cui.se  to  you,  you  send  out  to  them  aoids 
of  love.  If  they  diivc  you  out,  letiie  to  die  in  silence  like  that  mighty  lion,  like 
Govind  Singh.  Such  a man  is  woi  thy  the  name  of  Hindu;  such  an  ideal  ought  to 
be  before  us  always,  AH  our  hatchets  let  us  bury  ; send  out  this  grand  cm  lent  of 
love  all  lound, 

T.ct  tliem  talk  of  India’s  legeneiation  as  they  like;  let  me  tell  you  as  one 
who  has  been  woiking — at  least  lining  to  work --all  his  life,  that  iheie  is  no 
regeneration  for  India  until  you  be  spiiilual,  Not  only  so,  but  u])on  it  depends  the 
\yelfare  of  the  whole  woikl.  b'or  I must  tell  you  frankly  that  the  vet)  foundalions 
of  Western  civilisation  have  been  shaken  to  their  base.  'I'he  mightiest  bnildings,  if 
built  upon  the  loose  sand  foundations  of  matcnalism,  must  coine  to  giief  one  clay, 
must  tottei  to  then  destiuction  some  day.  H'he  histoiy  of  the  woild  is  our  witness, 
f^alion  after  nation  has  aiisen  and  based  its  gtealness  upon  maleiialism — man  was 
all  matter,  it  declared.  Aye,  in  Western  language,  a man  gives  up  the  ghost,  but  in 
our  language  a man  gives  up  his  body.  The  Weslcru  man  is  a body  lust,  and  then 
he  has  a soul ; with  us  a man  is  a soul  and  spint,  and  he  has  a body,  Theicin  lies  a 
woild  of  difference.  AH  such  civilisations,  tlicicfoic,  a.s  have  been  based  upon  such 
sand  foundations  as  material  comfoit  and  all  that,  have  disappeaied  one  after  the 
other,  after  shoit  lives,  fiom  the  face  of  the  world  ; but  the  civilisation  of  India  and 
Ihc  other  nations  that  have  stood  at  India’s  feet  to  listen  and  learn,  namely,  Japan  and 
China,  live  even  to  the  present  day,  and  there  are  signs  ^ven  of  revival  among  them, 
Their  lives  are  like  that  of  the  Phoenix,  a thousand  times  destioyed,  but  icady  to 
spring  up  again  more  gloiious.  Hut  a mateiialisiic  civilisation  once  dashed  down, 
never  can  come  up  again ; that  building  once  thrown  down,  is  broken  into  pieces 
once  for  all.  Therefore  have  patience  and  wait,  the  future  is  in  store  for  us. 

Do  not  be  in  a hurry,  do  not  go  out  to  imitate  anybody  else.  This  is  another 
great  lesson  we  have  to  remember ; imitation  is  not  civilisation.  I may  deck  myself 
out  in  a Haja’s  dress  ; but  will  that  make  me  a Raja?  An  ass  in  a lion’s  skin  never 
makes  a lion.  Imitation,  cowardly  imitation,  never  makes  for  progress,  It  is  verily 
the  sign  of  awful  degradation  in  a man.  Aye,  when  a man  has  begun  to  hate  him- 
pelf,  then  the  last  blow  has 'come.  When  a man  has  begun  to  be  ashamed  of  his 
ancesiois,  the  end  has  ggme.  Here  am  I,  one  of  the  least  of  the  Hindu  race,  yet 


THE  COMMON  BASES  OF  HINDUISM  157 

{)rouil  of  my  race,  proud  of  my  ance«.tors.  I am  proud  to  call  myself  a Hindu,  I am 
proud  that  I am  one  of  your  unworthy  servants.  I am  pioud  that  I am  a counlrymarii 
of  yours,  } ou  the  dc&ceiulanls  of  llic  saj^es,  you  the  descendants  of  the  most  glorious 
Rihhis  the  world  ever  saw.  Therefoje  have  faith  in  yourselves,  be  proud  of  your 
ancestors,  instead  of  beiny  ashamed  of  them.  And  do  not  imitate;  do  not  imitate! 
Whenever  you  aie  undei  the  thumb  of  otheis,  you  lose  your  own  independence.  If 
you  aic  working,  even  in  sjiiiitud  things  at  the  dictation  of  others,  slowly  you  lose  all 
faculty  even  of  tliought.  Ihiug  out  thiough  your  own  c.Kcitions  wliat  you  have, 
but  do  not  imitate,  yet  take  what  i.s  good  fiom  others.  Wo  have  to  leain  fi6m  others. 
You  put  the  seed  in  the  gtound,  and  give  it  plenty  of  earth,  and  air,  and  water  to 
feed  upon;  w-hen  the  seed  glows  into  the  plant,  and  into  a gigantic  tiOe,  does  it 
become  the  eaith,  does  it  become  the  air,  or  docs  it  become  the  water  ? It  becomes 
the  mighty  plant,  the  mighty  tree,  after  its  own  natuie,  having  absorbed  everything 
that  wa.s  given  to  it.  Let  that  be  youi  jiosition.  We  have  indeed  many  things  to 
leal  11  from  others,  yea,  that  man  who  lefu.ses  to  Icaiii  is  aheady  dead. 

Declale^  our  Manu  : W 5«fi5TRf4ll 

“lake  the  jewel  of  a woman  for  your  wife,  though  she  be  of  infeiior  descent. 
Learn  supieme  knowledge  with  seivice  even  fiom  the  man  of  low  biilli;  and 
even’ from  the  C’handAla,  leain  by  seiving  him  the  way  to  salvation.”  Leain  every 
thing  that  is  good  fiom  otheis,  but  bring  it  in,  and  in  yoiu  own  way  absoib  it ; do 
not  become  others.  Do  not  be  diaggcd  aw-ay  out  of  tins  Indian  life  ; do  not  for  a 
moment  think  that  it  would  be  beltei  for  India  if  all  the  Indians  dressed,  ate  and 
behaved  like  another  lace.  You  know  the  difliculty  of  giving  up  a habit  of  a few 
yeais.  The  T,oid  knows  how  many  thousands  of  years  are  in  your  blood;  this 
national  .specialised  life  has  been  flowing  in  one  way,  llie  Loid  knows  for  how  many 
thousands  of  yeais  ; and  do  you  mean  to  say  that  that  mighty  stream,  which  has  nearly 
leached  its  ocean,  can  go  back  to  the  snows  of  its  Himalayas  again  ? That  is  im- 
possible' Tiie  snuggle  to  do  so  wouhl  only  break  it.  Theiefore,  make  way 
for  the  life-cuiienl  of  the  nation.  Take  away  the  blocks  that  bar  the  way  to  the 
pi  ogress  of  this  mighty  river,  cleanse  its  path,  clear  the  channel,  and  out  it 
will  lusli  by  its  own  naluial  impulse,  and  the  nation  will  go  on  caieeriiig  and 
progjessing. 

Tliese  arc  the  lines  which  I beg  to  suggest  to  you  for  sjiiiitual  vvoik  in  India. 
There  are  many  other  gieat  juoblems  which,  for  want  of  time,  I cannot  bung  before 
you  this  night.  For  instance,  theie  is  the  vvondeiful  quc.slion  of  caste.  I have  been 
studying  tins  cjueslion,  its  pro^  and  cons,  all  my  life  ; I have  studied  it  in  nearly  every 
province  in  India.  I have  mi,xed  with  people  of  all  castes  nearly  in  every  part  of 
the  country,  and  I am  too  bewildered  in  my  own  mind  to  grasp  even  the  very 
significance  of  it,  'I’lie  nioie  I liy  to  study  it,  the  more  I gel  bewildered.  Still,  at 
last  I find  that  a little  glimmer  of  light  is  before  me,  1 begin  to  feel  its  significance 
just  now.  Then  there  is  the  other  gieat  problem  about  eating  and  drinking.  That 
is  a gieat  problem  indeed.  It  is  not  so  useless  a thing  as  we  generally  think. 
I have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  insistence  which  we  make  now  about  eating 
and  drinking,  is  most  cmious  and  is  just  going  against  what  the  Shdstras  required, 
that  is  to  say,  we  come  to  grief  by  neglecting  the  proper  purity  of  the  food  we  eat 
and  diink  ; we  have  lost  the  Hue  spun  of  it. 

There  are  seveial  othei  (]ueslions  which  I want  to  bring  before  you,  and  show 
bow  these  problems  can  be  solved,  how  to  work  out  the  ideas;  but  unfortunately 


158  LECTURES— FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 

tlic  meeting  could  not  come  to  order  until  very  late,  and  I do  not  wish  to  detain  you 
any  longer  now.  I will  therefore  keep  my  iileas  about  caste  and  other  things  for  a 
future  occasion. 

Now,  one  word  more  and  I \vill  finish  about  these  spiritual  ideas.  Religion  for 
a long  lime  has  cotne  to  be  statical  in  India,  what  we  want  is  to  make  it  dynamical. 
I waul  it  to  be  brought  into  the  life  of  ever}  body.  Religion,  as  it  always  has  been 
in  the  past,  must  enter  the  palaces  of  kings  as  w-ell  as  the  homes  of  the  poorest 
peasants  in  the  land.  Religion,  the  common  inheritance,  the  univcr.sal  biithright  of 
the  race,  must  be  brought  free  to  the  door  of  everybody.  Religion  in  India  must  be 
made  as  free  and  as  easy  of  access  as  is  God’s  air.  And  this  is  the  kind  of  work 
we  have  to  bring  about  in  India,  but  not  by  getting  up  little  sects  and  lighting  on 
points  of  dilTeiencc.  Let  us  pieach  where  we  all  agiee,  and  leave  the  diffeiences 
to  remedy  themselve.s.  As  I have  said  to  the  Indian  people  again  and  again, 
if  there  is  the  daikness  of  cenluiies  in  a lOom,  and  we  go  into  the  room  and  begin 
to  ciy,  “ Oh,  it  is  dark,  it  is  daik  ! ” will  the  daikness  go?  Biing  in  the  light  and 
the  daikness  will  vanish  at  once.  Tliis  is  the  seciet  of  reforming  men.  Suggest 
to  tfiem  higher  things ; believe  in  man  first.  Why  start  with  the  belief  that  man  is 
degraded  and  degeiieiated  ? I have  never  failed  in  my  faith  in  man  in  any  case,  even 
taking  him  at  his  woist.  Wherever  I had  faith  in  man,  though  at  first  the  prdspect 
was  not  always  bright,  yet  it  tiiumphed  in  the  long  lun.  Ila\e  faith  in  man,  whether 
he  appears  to  you  to  be  a very  learned  one  or  a most  ignoiant  one.  Have  faith  in 
man,  w'hether  he  appeals  to  be  an  angel  or  the  veiy  devil  himself.  Have  faith  in 
man  first,  and  then  having  f.iith  in  him,  believe  that  if  there  are  defects  in  him,  if  he 
makes  mistakes,  if  lie  embraces  the  crudest  and  the  vilest  doctrines,  believe  that 
it  is  not  from  his  real  nature  that  they  come,  but  from  the  waint  of  liighcr  ideals.  If 
a man  goes  towMids  what  is  fal.se,  it  is  because  he  cannot  get  what  is  true.  'I'here- 
fore  the  only  method  of  correcting  what  is  false  is  by  supplying  him  with  what  is 
true.  Do  this,  and  let  him  compaic.  You  give  him  the  tiulh,  and  there  your  work 
is  done.  Let  liiin  coinpaie  it  in  his  owm  mind  with  what  he  has  alieady  in  iiim  ; 
and,  mark  my  words,  if  you  have  really  given  him  the  liuth,  the  lalsc  must  vanish, 
light  must  dispel  dai kness  and  liulh  will  biiiig  the  good  out.  This  is  the  way  if 
you  want  to  lefoim  the  counliy  spiiiiually ; this  is  the  way,  and  not  by  fighting,  not 
even  by  telling  people  that  what  they  are  doing  is  bad.  Put  the  good  before  them, 
.see  liow  eageily  they  take  it,  see  how  the  I)i\ine  that  iie\ci  dies,  that  is  ahvays  living 
in  the  Iiuman,  comes  up  awakened  and  slretclicb  out  its  hand  for  all  that  is  good,  and 
all  that  is  gloiious. 

]May  He  who  is  the  Creator,  the  Pieservcr  and  the  Piouc^'tor  of  our  race,  the  God  of 
our  foietatheis,  whether  called  by  the  name  of  Vishnu,  or  Shiva,  or  Shakti,  or  Ganapati, 
whether  He  is  woishipped  as  Saguna  or  as  Niiguna,  whether  He  is  worshipped 
as  pei.sonal,  or  as  impel sonal,  may  He  w^hoiii  our  foicfalheis  kndj|^4nd  addressed 
by  the  words— That  which  exists  is  One;  sages  call 
Him  by  various  names  ’ — ^may  He  enter  into  us  with  His  mighty  love,  may  He  shower 
Hib  blessings  on  us,  may  He  make  us  understand  each  other,  may  He  make  us  work 
for  each  other  w'ilh  real  love,  with  intense  love  for  truth,  and  may  not  the  least 
desiie  for  oui  own  pci  sonal  fame,  our  own  pei  sonal  pieslige,  our  owm  personal 
advantage,  entei  into  this  gicat  woik  of  the  spiiUual  regencialion  of  India. 


In  his  second  lecture  on  Bhakli,  Swamiji  was  very  emphatic  in  his  insistence 
upon  practical  woik  bein^  more  necessaiy  in  India  than  mere  thcoiy,  of  which  he 
believed  the  country  has  had  enough  and  to  spare.  The  starving  millions,  he  urged, 
cannot  live  on  metaphysical  speculations,  what  they  require  is  biead.  He  suggested 
that  the  best  religion  for  to-day  is,  that  evciy  man  should,  according  to  his  means, 
go  out  into  the  slioets,  to  seaich  for  one,  two,  six  or  twelve  " hungry  Naiayans/’  take 
them  into  his  house,  feed  them,  clothe  them,  and  offer  them  all  the  worship  he 
would  give  to  his  Devahi.  ]\Ian  is  the  highest  temple  of  Hod,  and  the  worship 
of  God  ihiough  man  is  theiefore  of  the  highest.  In  such  work  he  should  alw a) s 
lemembei  that  accoiding  to  the  Hindu  religion,  the  icceivei  is  giealer  than  the  giver, 
because,  foi  the  time  being,  the  leceuei  is  (h)d  Himself.  He  added  that  lie  bad 
seen  cbaiily  in  man)  countnes,  and  the  leasbn  for  its  failuie  was  the  spiiit  in  which 
it  was  earned  out.  The  spiiit  elscwlieie  was,  ’‘Here,  take  this  and  go  away.'* 
(diarity  belied  its  name  so  long  as  it  was  given  to  gain  name,  or  the  applause  of  the 
woild.  In  conclusion,  he  again  mged  the  young  men  of  Lahoie,  to  cieate  at  once 
an  association  of  an  entirely  unsectaiian  chaiacler,  foi  working  duiing  the  evenings, 
among  “the  pool  Naiayans" — the  giving  of  food,  the  nuising  of  the  sick,  and  llie 
education  of  the  ignoiaiU,  on  simple  and  populai  lines. 


"THE  VEt)ANTA, 


{Ddivired  at  Lahot'e  on  the  ulh  November  1897,) 

Two  worlds  there  are  !ri  which  we  live,  one  the  external,  the  olht'r,  internal. 
Human  progress  has  been  maile,  from  days  of  yore,  almost  in  j>arallel  lines  along 
^ both  these  woilds.  'I'he  search  began  in  the  external,  and  man  at  first  wanted  to  get 
answers  for  all  the  deep  problems  from  outside  nature.  Man  wanted  to  satisfy  his 
thiri»t  for  the  beautiful  and  the  sublime  from  all  that  suiiounded  him  ; he  wanted  to 
expicss  himself  and  all  that  was  within  him  in  the  language  of  the  concrete  ; and 
grand  indeed  were  the  answers  lie  got,  most  marvellous  ideas  of  God  and  worship,  and 
most  rapturous  expressions  of  the  beautiful.  Sublime  ideas  came  from  the  external 
world  indeed.  But  the  other,  opening  out  for  humanity  later,  laid  out  before  him 
an  universe  yet  subllmer,  yet  more  beautiful,  and  infinitely  more  expansive.  In  the 
Karma-kanda  portion  of  the  Vedas,  we  find  the  most  wondeiful  ideas  of  leligion 
Inculcated,  we  find  the  most  wondeiful  ideas  about  an  ovci-ruling  Creator,  rreserver 
and  Destroyer  of  the  universe  presented  before  us,  in  language  sometimes  the  most 
soul-stirring.  Most  of  you  peihaps  remember  that  most  wondeiful  sloka  in  the 
Rig  Veda  .Samhita  where  )ou  get  the  description  of  chaos,  peihaps  the  .sublimest 
that  has  ever  been  attempted  yet.  In  spite  of  all  this,  we  find  it  is  only  a painting 
of  the  sublime  outside,  we  find  that  yet  it  is  gioss,  that  something  of  mailer  )et 
clings  to  it.  Vet  we  find  that  it  is  only  the  e.xpiession  of  the  Infimle  in  the  language 
of  matter,  in  the  language  of  the  finite,  it  is  the  infinite  of  the  muscles  and  not  of 
the  mind ; it  IS  the  infinite  of  space,  and  not  of  thouglit.  rheiefoie  in  the  second 
portion  or  Jnana-kanda,  we  find  there  is  altogethei  a dilTcient  pioceduie.  The  fust 
was  a search  in  external  nature  for  the  liiiths  of  the  univeise;  it  was  an  attempt  to 
get  the  solution  of  the  deep  problems  of  life  fiom  the  mateiial  woikl. 

Whose  glory  these  Himalayas  declaie.”  'hhis  is  a grand  idea, 
but  yet  it  was  not  grand  enough  for  India.  The  Indian  mind  had  to  fall  back, 
and  the  research  took  a diffeicnt  diioction  altogether,  from  the  external  the  search 
came  to  the  internal,  from  matter  to  mind.  I'heic  arose  the  ciy,  “ When  a man 
dies,  wh.tt  becomes  of  him  &c.  “ Some  say  that  he  exists, 

■ others,  that  he  is  gone;  say,  O king  of  Death,  what  is  Tniili  ?”  An  entirely 
different  procedure  we  find  here.  The  Indian  mind  got  all  that  could  be  had 
from  the  external  world,  but  it  did  not  feel  satisfied  with  that;  it  named  to  seaich 
further,  to  dive  into  its  own  soul,  and  the  final  answer  came. 

The  Upanishads,  or  the  Vedanta  or  the  Aranyakas,  or  Rahasya,  is  the  name 
of  this  portion  of  the  Vedas.  Here  we  find  at  once  that  icligion  has  got  rid  of  all 
external  formalities.  Here  we  find  at  once  that  spiritual  ihings  are  told  not  in  the 
language  of  matter,  but  in  the  language  of  the  spirit,  the  supeifine,  in  the  language 
of  the  superfine.  No  more  any  grossness  attaches  to  it,  no  more  is  there  any 
compromise  with  things  of  worldly  concern.  Bold,  brave,  beyoml  the  conception 
of  the  present  day,  stand  the  giant  minds  of  the  sages  of  the  Upanishads,  declaring 
the  noblest  truths  that  have  ever  been  preached  to  humanity,  without  any  compromise, 
without  any  fear.  This,  my  countrymen,  I want  to  lay  before  you.  Even  the  Jnana- 
kanda  of  the  Vedas  is  a vast  ocean;  many  lives  ate  necessary  to  undeistand  even 


TITE  VEEAXTA  ,9, 

« lUtle  ofit  Truly  hns  it  been  said  of  the  Upanishads,  by  Ramanuja,  that  the 
Vedanta  is  tlie  head,  tiie  siiouicieis,  the  crested  foim  of  tiie  Vedas,  and  surely  enough 
the  Upanishads  have  become  the  liible  of  modem  India.  Tiie  Hindus  Lve  tL 
greatest  respect  tor  the  Kaima-ltanda  of  the  Vedas,  hut,  for  all  pr.actical  purposes,  we 
know  that  or  ages  by  Srul,  has  been  meant  the  Upanisliads,  and  tiie  Upanisliads  ai;ne. 
W e know  that  al  our  great  pi, ilosophcis,  eitlier  Vjasa,  l>alanjali,  Gautama,  and  eve-i  the 
father  of  all  philosophy,  the  great  Kapila  himsell,  whenever  they  wanted  an  authority 
or  what  they  wrote,  everyone  of  them  found  it  in  the  Upanishads,  and  nowheic  else, 
for  therein  aie  llie  truths  that  remain  foi  ever.  . 

There  are  truths  that  are  true  only  in  a certain  line,  in  a ceilain'diicction,  under 
certain  arcumstances,  and  for  ccilain  tunes,  those  tl.u  a.e  founded  on  the  institutions 
of  the  tiniess  Theie  ate  other  tmths  wl.ich  a.e  based  on  the  nature  of  man  hi.nselt 
and  which  must  endure  so  long  as  man  hunself  endu.cs.  These  a.e  the  liuths  that 
alone  can  be  uni ve. sal,  and  in  spite  of  all  the  changes  that  have  come  to  India  as  to 
our  social  surioumlings,  our  methods  of  di ess,  our  manner  of  eating,  our  modes  of 
worship,— these  universal  truths  of  the  S.utis,  the  marvellous  Vcdantic  ideas,  .stand  out 
in  their  own  sublimity,  immovable,  i.nvanquisbable,  deathless,  and  immortal.  Yet  the 
genus  of  all  the  ideas  that  weie  developed  in  the  Upanishads  had  been  taught  alieady 

in  the  Kaima-kanda.  The  idea  of  the  cosmos,  which  all  sects  of  Vedanti sis  had  to 

lakcfoi  gianlcd,  the  ps)chology  which  has  foimed  the  common  basi.s  of  all  the 
Indian  schools  of  thought,  had  ihcio  been  woikcd  out  already  and  piesenled  befoie  the 
woiKl.  A few  words,  iheiefore,  about  the  Kaima-kanda  are  necessaiy  befoie  we  be<>in 
the  spiiiiual  poilion  of  the  Vedanta,  and  first  of  all  I should  like  to  explain  the  sense 
in  which  I use  the  word  \'cdanla. 


Unfoilunatcly  there  is  the  mistaken  notion  in  modern  India,  that  the  void  Vedanta 
has  lefeienco  only  to  the  Adxaila  .system,  but  )ou  must  alway.s  icmeinber  that 
in  model  11  India,  the  thice  Piuislluiiuis  aic  considered  equally  impoilant  in  the 
study  of  all  the  s) .stems  of  leligion.  Fii.st  of  all  there  are  the  Revelations,  the  Siuiis, 
by  which  I mean  the  Upanishads.  Secondly,  among  our  philosophies,  the  Sulias 
ol  Vyasa  ha\o  the  gicalost  piominence,  on  account  of  ihcii  being  the  consummation 
of  all  the  pieccding  systems  of  philosophy.  I'liese  .systems  are  not  conliadicloiy 
to  one  anollici,  but  one  is  based  on  another,  and  there  i.s  a giadual  unfolding  of  the 
theme  which  culminates  m the  Sutias  of  V)asa.  Then,  between  the  Upanishads  and 
the  Sulias,  which  aie  the  .systematising  of  the  maivellous  truths  of  the  Vedanta,  comes 
111  Sn  Gila,  the  divine  commcntaiy  on  the  Vedanta.  The  Upanishads,  the  Vjasa 
Sutias,  and  the  Gila,  thercfoic,  have  been  taken  up  by  every  sect  in  India  that  wants 
to  claim  authoiity  for  oilliodoxy,  whether  Duali.si,  or  Wishn.avist,  or  Advaitist ; the 
authoiities  of  each  of  these  are  the  Ihiee  Praslhiina^,  We  find  that  a Sankaia- 

chaiya,  or  a Ramanuja,  or  a jNIadhwacharya,  or  a Vallabhachaija,  or  a Chaitanya, 

any  one  who  wanted  to  piojiound  a new  .sect— had  to  take  up  these  thicc  .sj  stems 

and  wiite  only  a new  commentary  on  them.  Therefoic  it  would  be  wiong  to  confine 

tlie  woid  Vedanta  only  to  one  sy.stem.  which  has  aiisen  out  of  the  Upanishads.  All 
these  arc  coveied  by  the  woul  Vedanta.  The  Visishladvailist  has  as  much  light  to  be 
called  a Vedanlist  as  the  Advailisl;  in  fact  I will  go  a lillle  fuUhcr  and  .say  that  what 

we  leally  mean  by  the  woid  Hindu  is  leally  the  same  as  Vedantist.  1 wanljouto 

note,  that  these  three  systems  have  been  cm  lent  ih  India  almost  fiom  time  iinmemoiial 


■ — for  you  must  not  believe  that  .Sankai a was  the  inventor  of  the  Advaita  system  ; it 
existed  ages  befoie  Saiikaia  was  boin  ; he  was  one  of  its  last  representatives.  So  with 

U 


62 


LECTURES~FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


the  VisislUadvaila  system  ; it  existed  ages  before  Ramanuja  appeared,  ns  we  already 
know  fiom  the  commeiitaiies  he  has  wiittcn  ; so  wiili  the  Dualistic  systems  that 
have  existed  side  by  side  \\ilh  the  othcis.  And  wilii  my  little  knowledge,  I have 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  they  do  not  contradict  each  other.  Just  as  in  the 
case  of  the  six  J)itrt/iafi(U,  we  find  they  are  a gradual  unfolding  of  the  grand 
principles,  ^vhose  music  beginning  fai  back  in  the  soft  low  notes,  ends  in  the  tiium|)hant 
blast  of  the  Advaita,  so  also  in  these  thiee  s} stems  we  find  the  giadual  working  up 
of  the  human  mind  towaids  higher  and  higher  ideals,  till  ever) thing  is  merged  in 
that  wondciful  unity  which  is  reached  m the  Advaita  S)Stem.  Theiefoie  these  three 
are  not  contiadictoiy.  On  the  other  hand  I am  bound  to  tell  }OU,  that  this  has  been 
a mistake  committed  by  not  a few.  We  (ind  that  an  Advaitist  teacher  keeps  intact 
those  te.xts  whicli  especially  leach  Advailism,  and  lues  to  interpiet  the  Dualistic  or 
(JualKied-non-dualisiic  tcMs  into  his  own  meaning.  .Kimilaily  we  (ind  l,)ualislic  teachers 
trying  to  lead  iheii  Dualistic  meaning  into  Advailic  texts.  Durtiuius  were  great  men, 
)et  there  is  a sating  as,  “ luen  the  faults  of  a (bun  must  be  told.”  I am  of  opinion 
that  in  this  only  they  weic  mistaken.  We  need  not  go  into  text  toitming,  we  need  not 
go  into  any  sort  of  religious  dishonesty,  we  need  not  go  into  any  .soil  of  giammalical 
twaddle,  we  need  not  go  about  li>ing  to  jnit  our  own  ideas  into  le.xls  which  wcie 
never  meant  for  them,  but  the  work  is  plain  and  becomes  easiei,  once  you  uiidei stand 
tlu;  inaivellous  docliine  of  Adh  'ikth  ahheda. 

It  is  line  that  the  Upanisbads  bate  this  one  theme  liefoie  them,  eKf^'»T5f 
I — ‘MVhal  IS  that  knowing  w hit h we  know  etei tilling 
else  V'  In  modem  language,  the  theme  of  the  l'|)anishads  is  to  (ind  an  ullimale  unity 
of  things.  Knowledge  is  nothing  but  (jiuling  unity  in  the  midst  ol  liiveisity.  Dti  iy 
science  is  based  upon  this,  all  human  knowlt'dge  is  baseil  upon  the  (iiuliug  of  unity 
in  the  midst  of  dp.eisii)  ; and  if  it  is  the  task  oi  small  fiagmeiUb  of  human  kiKJtt ledge, 
vthjch  w'c  call  our  sciences,  to  (ind  unitt  m the  midst  of  a few  (liffiMenl  pluMionn'ii.i, 
the  task  becomes  stupendous  when  the  theme  beb)re  us  is  to  (ind  unity  ui  the  midst  of 
this  martellously  divcisified  uiiitcise,  whcie  piotail  unmnnbeied  dilfeienccs  in  name 
and  form,  in  mailer  and  spun,— each  thought  diOoimg  fiom  evei\  othcM  iboughl,  each 
form  differing  fiom  eveiy  olhei  foim.  Yet,  to  haimomse  these  man}  planes  and  unend- 
ing in  the  midst  of  this  mlinile  vaiiety  to  find  unity,  is  the  theme  of  the  I'pani- 

fchads.  On  the  olhei  hand,  the  old  idea  of  Arunii/utii  AV./'i  .r  applies.  To  show-  a man 
the  fine  star  Arundhali,  one  takes  the  big  and  biilliant  star  ncaicst  to  it.  upon  which  he 
ii»  asked  to  fix  his  eyes  (list,  and  then  it  becomes  quite  easy  to  diiecl  Ids  sight  to 
Amndhati,  d'his  is  the  task  hcfoie  us,  and  to  piove  my  idea  I have  simpl)"  to  show 
you  the  Dpanishads,  and  you  will  see  it.  Nearly  every  chapter  begins  with  Dualistic 
leaching,  upitsand.  Latei  on,  (Jod  u first  taught  as  some  one  who  is  the  (dcalor  of 
this  univeise,  Us  Pioserver,  and  unto  whom  eveit thing  goes  at  last,  lie  is  one  to 
be  woi shipped,  ibe  Rulci,  the  Ouide  of  nature,  cxlemal  and  internal,  }c*t  as  if  Ho 
weie  something  outside  of  nature  and  external.  One  step  fuither,  and  we  find  the 
same  teacher  leaching  that  tins  (Joil  is  not  outside  of  nature,  but  immanent  in 
nature.  And  at  last  both  ideas  are  discarded,  and  w'hatevcr  is  loal  is  lie  ; there  is  no 
dilfeience.  " ‘^^t-’b^kelii,  That  thou  ait.”  That  Immanent  One  i.s  at 

last  declaied  to  be  the  same  that  is  in  the  human  soul.  Here  is  no  compiomise  ; heie 
is  no  fear  of  othei's  opinions.  Tiuth,  bold  tiiith,  h.is  been  taught  in  bold  language, 
and  we  need  not  fear  to  pi  each  the  tiulli  in  the  same  bold  language  to-day,  and,  by 
the  giace  of  God,  1 hope  at  least  to  be  the  one  who  Uaies  to  be  that  bold  picacliei. 


THE  VEDAXTA 


163 

To  go  back  to  our  prellmiiiarieSf  Th«rc  are  fiist  two  things  to  be  understootl,— 
one,  the  psychological  aspect  criininon  to  all  the  Vedantic  schools,  and  the  other,  the 
cosmological  aspect.  1 will  fiist  lake  up  the  lattef’.  To-day  we  find  wonileiful  disco\eiies 
of  modern  science  coming  upon  us  like  bolts  from  the  blue,  opening  our  eyes  to 
maivel.s  We  ne\el  dreamt  of.  Ilut  many  of  tliese  ai'e  only  re-discoveiies  of  wh.il  had 
been  found  ages  ago.  It  was  only  the  oihei  day  that  modem  science  found  that  even  m 
the  midst  ot  the  \aiicly  of  f(jices  iheie  is  unity.  It  has  just  discoveied  that  what  it  calls 
heat,  magnetism,  electiicii^,  and  so  foith,  aie  all  con\eiiible  into  one  unit  foicc,  and  as 
such,  it  expiesse's  all  these  by  one  name,  \\hate\ei  )ou  may  choose  to  call  it.  but  this 
has  been  done  even  in  the  .Samhila ; old  and  ancient  as  it  is,  in  it  \vc  meet  with  this  \eiy 
ulea  of  fuice  1 was  icfenmg  to.  All  the  forces,  whelhei  yon  call  them  gia\itation,  or 
atli action,  or  lepiilsion,  whether  expressing  ihcmseKes  as  heat,  01  electricity,  or 
magneiism,  aie  nothing,  Imt  the  vaiiaiions  of  that  nnil  eneigy.  Whelhei  they  expiess 
themselves  as  thought,  lellected  fiom  nnfithkdrdtht imiei  oigans  of  man,  or  Iroin  one 
oigan,  the  unit  lu)m  which  they  spiing  Is  what  is  called  the  Piana.  Again,  what  is 
Piaiia.?  Pian.i  is  01  vibiation.  When  all  this  iiimeise  shall  have  lesobed 

liack  int(7  Its  [iiimal  stale,  what  becomes  of  this  inlmile  foite  ? Do  they  think  that  it 
becomes  e.slincL  Of  course  not  If  it  became  cxlincl,  what  would  be  the  cause  of  the 
next  wave,  because  the  motion  is  going  m w.ive  foiins,  using,  falling,  tiMng  again,  fall- 
ing again  ? Ileio  is  the  word  srishfi,  w'liicb  expiesscs  the  nnueisc.  Maik  that  the  woid 
does  not  mean  ciealion.  1 am  helpless  in  talking  Kngli.sh  ; 1 have  to  lianslalc  the 
.Saiiski  It  woids  as  best  as  1 can.  It  is.v//n////,  pioieilion.  K\ei}lhing  becomes  finer 
and  fiiuM  and  is  lesolvcd  back  to  the  piimal  slate  lioni  which  it  spiang,  and  tlieie  it 
remain®;  loi  a time,  (juiesienl,  leady  to  spiing  foith  again.  'J’hai  is  snsh/i,  piojeclion. 
And  wliat  becomes  of  all  these  foiies,  the  Pi.inas  ^ 'I'hey  aic  lesolved  back  into  the 
piimal  Pi.'uia,  and  this  Piaiia  bet omes  almost  inoiionless  -nolentiiely  niolnmless, — but 
almost  imaionless, — and  llial  is  wliat  is  desciibed  in  the  N'edic  Su/d4i  “ It  vibialed 
without  vibiaLions  'Pheie  aie  many  dilficnlt  lexis  in  the  Upanishads 

to  undeisland,  especially  in  the  use  of  technical  |)hiases.  Por  instance,  the  woid 
rv/i'//,  to  mov(‘ ; many  times  it  mc.ins  an  and  many  limes  motion,  and  often 
peopU;  confuse  oue  witli  the  olhei  We  1111191  gnaid  against  that.  And  what 
becomes  of  what  you  call  mallei  ^ 'Fhc  foicos  peimcate  all  mattei  ; they  all 
dissobe  into  elhei,  fiom  which  they  again  come  out;  and  the  first  to  come 
out  IS  i'lk'hhd.  Whether  you  translate  it  as  elhcM,  or  an) thing  else,  the  idea  is  that 
this  IS  the  jiinnal  foim  of  mallei . 'I'lns  d/v/v/zu  vibrates  undei  the  action  of 

Pi  ana,  and  when  the  next  o/rZ/A  h coming  up,  as  the  vibialion  becomes  quicker,  the 
iikds'ha  IS  lashed  into  all  those  wave  foims  winch  we  call  suny,  and  moons,  and 
s}  stems. 

Wo  read  again  • miiT 

“ I'beijlhing  in  this  univcise  has  been  piojecled,  I’ldna  vibrating.'’  You  must 
maik  the  w'ord  zyu//,  because  it  comes  Iroin  fja,  to  vibrate,  nihsntavi  pic)jecled,;Wzt/tzw 
Zv;/z//u--whatevei  is  this  universe. 

This  is  a pait  of  the  cosmological  side.  There  are  many  details  working  into  it. 
For  instance,  how  the  pioccss  takes  ])lace,  how  there  is  fiist  ether,  and  how  from 
the  ethei  come  other  things,  how  that  ether  begins  to  vibrate,  and  from  that  vdy\i 
comes.  But  the  one  idea  is  heie,  that  U is  from  the  finer  that  the  giosaer  has  come. 
Gloss  matter  is  the  last  to  emeige  and  the  most  external,  and  this  grpss  matter  had 
the  finer  matter  before  it.  Yet  we  see  that  the  whole  thing  has  been  resolved  into 


4 


i64 


LECTURES  -FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


two,  but  there  is  not  yet  a final  unity.  There  is  the  unity  of  force,  Pr^na ; there  is  the 
unity  of  matter  called  dkdsha.  Is  thcie  any  unity  to  be  found  among  them  again? 
(’an  they  l)e  melted  into  one?  Our  modem  science  is  nmte  here,  it  has  not  yet 
found  its  way  out ; and  if  it  is  doing  so,  just  as  it  has  been  slowly  finding  the  same 
old  IhAna  and  the  same  ancient  dkdsha,  it  will  have  to  move  along  the  same  lines. 
'I'he  next  unity  is  the  omnipresent  impersonal  being  known  by  its  old  mythological 
name  as  BiahmA,  the  four-headed  Biahma,  and  psychologically  called  Mahat.  'J'his  is 
wheie  the  two  unite.  What  is  called  ) our  mind  is  only  a bit  of  this  Al.ihat  caught 
in  the  tiap  of  the  biain,  and  the  sum  total  of  all  biains  caught  in  the  meshes  of  Mahat 
IS  what  you  call  samashU,  the  aggiegate,  the  universal.  Analysis  had  to  go  fiiither  ; it 
was  not  yet  complete,  lleie  we  were  each  one  of  us,  as  it  were,  a miciocosm,  and  the 
world  taken  altogether  is  the  macrocosm.  But  whatever  is  in  the  vynLiti,  the  particular, 
we  may  .safely  conjecluie  that  a similar  thing  is  happening  also  outside.  If  we  hail  the 
power  to  analyse  our  own  minds  we  might  .safely  conjecture  that  the  same  thing  is 
happening  in  the  cosmic  mind.  What  is  this  mind  is  the  question.  In  modem  limes 
in  Western  countries,  as  physical  science  is  making  rapid  progress,  as  physiohigv  is 
step  b}  step  conqueiing  stionghold  after  stionghold  of  old  leligions,  the  Western 
people  do  not  know  where  to  stand,  because  to  theii  gieat  despair,  modem  physiology 
at  every  step  has  klentilied  the  mind  with  the  brain.  Ibit  w’c  in  India  have  known 

that  always.  That  was  the  fust  pioposiiion  the  Hindu  boy  should  learn,  that 

the  mind  is  matter,  only  finer.  The  body  is  gross,  and  behind  the  body  is 
what  we  call  the  snkshma  the  fine  body  or  mind,  'i'his  is  also  maleiial, 

only  finer;  and  it  is  not  the  Atman.  1 will  not  translate  this  woid  to  you  in 
English,  because  the  idea  docs  not  exist  in  baiiope;  it  is  nntransl.itable.  The 
modem  attempt  of  (jerinan  pliilosopheis  is  to  tianslate  the  w'oid  Atman  by  the 

woid  ‘ Sell,’ and  until  that  woid  IS  univei.sally  accepted  il  is  impossible  to  use  it. 

So,  call  it  as  .Self  or  anything,  it  is  oui  Atman.  This  Atman  is  the  leal  man  behind. 
It  IS  the  Atman  that  uses  the  maleiial  mind  .as  il.s  instiument,  its  (inta/ikmutiii,  is 
the  psycliological  term  for  the  mind.  And  the  mind  by  means  of  a senes  of  internal 
organs  woiks  the  visible  organs  of  the  body.  What  is  this  mind  ? It  was  only  the 
othei  day  that  Western  philosopheis  have  come  to  know  that  the  eyes  aie  not  the 
real  organs  of  vision,  but  that  beluiKl  these  are  other  organs,  the  imlriva^,  ami  if 
these  are  destroyed,  a man  may  have  a thousand  eyes,  like  India,  but  tlieie  will  be 
no  sight  for  him.  Aye,  your  philosophy  starts  with  this  assumption,  that  by  vision 
is  not  meant  the  external  vision.  The  re.il  vision  belongs  to  the  internal  oigans, 
the  brain  centres  inside.  You  may  call  them  wdiat  y'ou  like,  hut  it  is  not  that  the 
inJriyas  are  the  eyes,  or  the  nose,  or  the  eais.  And  the  sum  total  of  all  these 
indt\ya<!  plus  the  manas,bu(hlhi,  chitta,  ahamkdra^kc.^x^  'hat  is  called  the  mind,  and 
if  the  modern  physiologist  comes  to  tell  you  that  the  brain  is  what  is  called  the  mind, 
and  that  the  brain  is  foimed  of  so  many  oigans,  you  need  not  be  afraid  at  all  ; tell  him 
that  your  philosopheis  knew  il  always;  it  is  one  of  the  very  fust  piinciples  of  your 
religion. 

Well  then,  w^e  have  to  undei  stand  now  w’hat  is  meant  by  this 
chittii,  ahamkdra,  etc.  Fiisl  of  all,  let  us  take  ch'itia ; it  is  the  mind-stuff; — a 
part  of  the  Mahat — it  is  the  geneiic  name  lor  the  mind  itself,  including  all  its 
vaiious  states.  Suppose  on  a summer  evening,  there  is  a lake,  smooth  and  calm, 
without  a ripple  on  its  surface.  vVnd  suppose  some  one  throws  a stone  into 
this  lake.  What  happens?  First  there  is  the  action,  the  blow  given  to  the 


THE  VEDANTA 


165 

'W'ater ; next,  the  water  rises  and  sends  a reaction  towards  the  stone,  and  that 
reaction  takes  the  foim  of  a wave.  I'iist  the  watei  vihi.ites  a little,  and  iminedialely 
Sends  back  a teaciion  in  the  fonn  ol  a \\a\e.  The  ihitlo  let  us  coinpaie  to  this 
lake,  and  the  external  objects  are  like  the  stones  thrown  into  it.  As  soon  as  it  comes 
in  contact  with  any  external  object  by  means  uf  lhe^e  /W/ /n/i -the  Muiriyas  must 
be  there  to  cany  these  exlcinal  ol>jecl.s  mside— iheie  is  a \d)iaiion,  w lui  is  called 
{he  manas,  indecisive.  Next  there  is  a leaclion,  the  detoiminaiive  facidl), 
and  along  with  this  butidki  flashes  the  idea  of  aham  and  the  external  object. 
Suppose  theie  is  a mos{juito  silling  upon  my  hand.  'J’his  sensaii(jn  is  cairied  to 
my  ch'MtiX  and  it  vibrates  a little;  this  is  the  psychological  'I'hen  tlieie 

is  a reaction,  and  immediately  comes  the  idea  that  I ha\e  a mosquito  on  ni)'  hand, 
and  that  I shall  have  to  diive  it  olf.  Thus  these  stones  aie  thiown  into  the  lake,  but 
in  the  case  of  the  lake  every  blow  that  comes  to  it  is  fiom  the  external  woild,  while 
in  the  case  of  the  lake  of  the  mind,  the  blows  may  eilhei  come  fiom  the  extei nal 
woild,  or  the  internal  world.  1 his  whole  senes  is  what  is  called  the  ontahkiH  iVia, 
Along  with  it,  you  ought  to  understand  one  thing  more  that  will  help  us  in  under- 
standing the  Advaita  system  later  on.  It  is  this.  All  of  you  must  h.we  seen  peails  and 
most  of  you  know  how  pearls  aie  formed.  A grain  of  sand  cnleis  into  the  shell  of 
a peail-oyslcr,  ami  sets  uj)  an  inilalion  theie,  and  the  ojslei’s  body  leads  lowaids  the 
inilation  and  covers  the  little  particle  with  il.s  own  juice.  That  citstalli.ses  and  foims 
the  pearl.  So  the  wlude  nnivcise  is  like  that,  it  is  the  peail  which  is  being  fonned  by 
us.  What  we  gel  fiom  the  external  woild  is  simply  the  blow.  K\en  to  he  conscious 
of  lliat  blow'  we  have  to  leact,  and  as  soon  as  we  react,  we  leally  pioject  a ])oilion  of 
oiir  own  mind  towards  the  blow%  and  wdien  w'c  conic  to  know'  of  it,  it  is  leallv  our  own 
mind  as  it  lias  been  shaped  by  (he  blow'.  Therefoie,  it  is  clear  even  to  those  who  w.int 
to  l)elie\e  in  a hard  and  fast  icalisin  of  an  exlei nal  woild,  and  whic  h they  cannot 
hut  admit  in  these  days  of  plqsiology,  — that  supposing  wc  lepiesenl  the  exlcinal 
woild  hy  “X,”  what  we  really  know  is  “X"  plus  iniiul,  and  this  mind-clement  is  so 
gieat  that  it  has  co\crcd  the  whole  of  that  ‘‘X,”  which  has  leinained  unknown  and 
unknowable  throughout,  and  therefoie,  if  llieie  is  an  external  woild  it  is  always 
unknown  and  unknowable.  What  we  know'  ol  it  is,  as  it  is  moulded,  fonned,  fashioned 
by  our  own  mind.  So  with  the  internal  woild.  The  s.une  apjdies  to  oui  own  soul, 
the  .\tman.  In  oider  to  knoiv  the  Atman  wc  shall  hate  to  know  it  thiough  the  mind, 
and  therefore  what  little  wc  know'  of  this  .Atman  is  simply  the  Atman  plus  the  mind. 
That  is  to  .say,  the  Atman  covered  over,  f.isluoncd,  and  nioukled  hy  the  mind,  and 
nothing  inoic.  We  shall  1 etui  11  to  this  a little  later,  but  we  will  leinember  it 
here. 

The  next  thing  to  understand  is  lliis.  The  question  arose,  that  this  body  is  the 
name  of  one  continuous  sLieam  of  mallei  ; eveiy  moment  we  aie  adding  material  to 
it,  and  every  moment  inaiciial  is  being  thrown  olT  by  it,  like  a tiver  conliimally  flowing, 
vast  masses  of  water  always  changing  places  ; yet  all  the  same,  we  lake  up  (lie  whole 
thing  in  imagination,  and  call  it  the  same  liver.  What  do  we  call  the  liver  Every 
moment  the  walei  is  changing,  the  slioie  is  changing,  cveiy  moment  the  environ- 
ment is  changing;  w'lial  is  the  rivei  ihen  It  is  the  namc‘ of  this  seiies  of  changes. 
So  with  the  mind.  That  is  the  gieat  Kshanika  Vijiuina  Vuhi  doctiine,  most  difficult 
to  undei stand,  hut  most  ligoiously  and  logically  w’oiked  out  in  the  Ihuldhisiic 
philosoph}',  and  this  arose  aKo  in  Tmlia  in  ojiposition  to  some  part  of  the  Nk^danta. 
That  had  to  be  answered,  and  we  will  see  how,  later  on,  it  could  only  be  answered 


Li:cTrRJ':s-  FRo.ir  Colombo  to  at.mora 

by  AcUailisin  aiul  by  nolbing  else.  We  will  sec  also  how,  in  spite  of  peoiile’s  curious 
nulioiis  ciboiil  AcKaittsin.  people's  fi about  Ailvaiti'^in,  it  is  the  sahalion  of  the 
woil'l,  because  theiein  alone  is  to  be  found  the  leason  ul  ihinj^s.  Diialisui  and  other 
isins  aie  vei\  <;f)od  as  means  of  uoiship,  vei)  satishini,^  to  the  mind,  and  ina)  be,  they 
ha\e  helpe<l  the  mind  onwaid  ; but  if  man  \\anls  to  be  lalional  and  icligious  at  tile  same 
tune,  AiKaita  is  the  one  s\ stem  in  the  woild  for  him.  Well  now,  we  uiil  ief,Mi(l  the 
mind  as  a simdni  luci,  conlmually  lilhn.<;  itself  at  one  end,  and  empt}iiyij  itself  at  the 
oiher  end.  Wheio  is  that  unity  w Inch  we  call  the  Atman  ? 'I'lie  itlea  is  this,  that  in 
b])ite  of  tins  coniiiiuuus  t hain^e  in  the  body,  and  in  spite  of  this  continuous  chan<^e  in  the 
mind,  iheie  is  iii  us  s<mn'lhing  that  is  unchangeable,  oui  ideas  of  things  aie  unchange- 
able. When  ia\s  of  light  coming  from  dilleient  ipiailei s,  fall  upon  a scicen,  or  a 
wall,  or  uiion  something  that  is  not  changeable,  then  and  then  alone  it  is  possible  for 
them  to  lonn  a unity,  then  and  then  alone  it  is  possible  foi  them  to  foim  one  complete 
whole.  Wheie  is  this  unity  in  the  human  oigans,  falling  upon  which,  as  it  weie, 
the  vaiious  uleas  will  come  to  unity  and  become  one  complete  whole  } 'I'liis  ceitainly 
cannot  be  the  mind  itself,  seeing  that  it  also  changes.  Theietoie  theie  must  be  some- 
thing whu  h is  neithei  the  body  nor  the  mind,  something  which  changes  not,  some- 
thing peimanenl,  upon  which  all  out  ideas,  our  sensations  fall  to  foim  a unity,  and  a 
complete  whole,  and  this  is  the  leal  soul,  the  Atman,  of  man.  And  seeing  that  evei)- 
thing  malciial,  wliethci  )Ou  c.ill  it  fine  matter,  oi  mind,  must  he  changeful,  seeing  that 
what  vou  call  gross  mallei,  the  external  woild,  must  also  he  changeful  in  compaiison  to 
tUil.  -this  unchangeabh*  something  cannot  he  of  mateiial  substance,  ihelefoie  it  i.s 
s[Miilual,  that  is  to  sa\ , it  is  not  mallei  , it  is  indesii  uclible,  unchangeable. 

Next  will  come  anolliei  (juosiion — apail  tiom  those  old  aigumenls  which  only  iise 
in  the  cxlcinal  woild,  the  aigumenls  in  suppoit  of  Design — who  ciealed  this  external 
woild  who  cieated  mallei,  Ac  ? 'Die  idea  heie  is  to  know  liiilh  only  fiom  the 
iimei  natuie  of  man,  and  the  (inestion  aiises  jnsL  m the  same  \\a\  as  it  aiose  alxmt 
the  soul,  'raking  foi  gi anted  that  there  is  a soul,  unchaugealilc,  in  each  man,  which 
IS  iicMihei  the  mind,  noi  the  boil_\ , theio  IS  still  a unity  ol  idea  among  the  souls,  a 
unii)  of  teehiig,  of  suupathy.  How  is  it  jiosuble  that  my  soul  can  act  upon  our 
Soul,  wlieie  is  the  medium  ihiough  which  it  can  woik,  wheie  is  the  meiiiuin  ihiongh 
which  It  can  act'  How  is  it  I c.m  feel  an\ thing  about  t oui  souls-'  What  is  iL  that 
1-,  in  touch  both  with  youi  soul,  and  with  my  soul  ^ 'riidctoie  llieie  is  a metaphysical 
uecessit\  ot  adinilliiig  anolhei  soul,  toi  it  must  be  a soul  which  acts  iii  contact  with 
all  the  dilleicnl  souD,  and  in  .uul  ihiongh  mallei  , one  .^onl  whuh  co\eis  and  inlei- 
pcMicliates  all  the  ndinite  numbei  ot  souls  in  the  woild,  in  and  thiough  which  they 
li\e,  in  anti  thiough  whkh  lluy  s\inpalhise,  and  lo\e,  ami  woik  tm  one  another. 
x\ml  this  itnneisal  Soul  is  i’aiaina'in  in,  the  f-oid  (iod  </  the  univeise  Again,  it 
follows  that  because  the  sinil  is  not  made  of  maltei,  siiuc  it  is  spmuial,  it  cannot 
obey  the  laws  of  mallei,  it  caiuiot  be  judged  liy  the  laws  oi  mallei.  It  is  iheiefoie 
uucoiKjueiable,  biilblcss,  dcallilcss  and  changeless. 

^ jt  srr^ftr  »Trrrr-  ii 

“This  Self  weajions  cannot  pieice,  noi  file  can  bum,  water  cannot  melt,  nor  air 
can  di)  up.  Cllangcles^,  albpeit.idiiig,  unmoving,  immo\able,  eternal  is  this  Self 
of  man."  We  leain  actoidmg  to  llie  Gila  and  the  Vctlanla,  that  this  individual  Self 
is  also  vibhu,  and  atcoiduig  to  Kapila,  is  omnipicsent.  Uf  couise  there  aie  sects 


THE  VEDANTA 


167 


in  India  who  hold  that  the  Self  is  ami,  infinitely  small ; hut  what  they  mean  is  anu  in 
manifestation  ; us  leal  naluie  is  v'lbhu,  all-pci\adm^. 

1 tieie  comes  anolhei  idea,  staiilini^  peihaps,  ^et  a chaiacteristically  Indian  idea, 
and  it  theie  is  any  idea  that  is  common  to  all  om  sects,  it  is  this,  'riieiefoic 

I be^  }OU  to  pay  attention  to  this  one  idea  and  to  lememhci  it,  foi  this  is  ihe  very 

toLindaiion  ot  e\eiy thing  that  we  have  in  India.  The  idea  is  this.  You  ha\e  heaid 
of  the  docpine  of  ph}sical  evohuion  pieaLhed.in  the  Wesiein  wotld,  by  ilie  Geiman 
and  the  Knglish  sa\anls.  It  tells  us  that  the  bodies  of  the  dilTeieiu*  animals  aie 

le.dly  one,  the  dilTeienccs  that  we  see  aie  but  dilteieiit  expiessions  r)l  ihe  s.imc 

senes,  that  fioiii  the  lowest  woim  to  the  highest  and  the  most  samilv  man  il  is  but 
one,  the  one  changing  into  the  othei,  aiul  so  oil,  going  up  and  up,  higliei  and 

bighei,  until  it  allains  jieifection.  We  had  that  idea  also.  Detlaies  oui  \’ogi 

I^U a njah -- I ()nespeiies  the  /<///  is  species-  i liangc.s  into 
anolhei  species  e\olulion  , pat  ina/nah  means  one  thing  (.hanging  into  aiK)lhci,  just  as 
one  specie.s  changes  into  <inolher.  Wheie  do  we  dillei  liom  the  I'aiiopeans  I’aiaiijali 
sa}s.  Pi  akt  UvapH)  iit  “Ih  ihe  inlilhng  of  n.Ume."  'J  he  I'anopean  sais,  u i>,  cimipili- 
tion,  naluial  and  sexual  selection,  i'll  ,that  loices  oiU‘  bml)  to  take  the  loiin  ol  another. 
Jhit  heie  is  anolhei  idea,  a still  beltei  an.tbsis,  going  deepei  into  the  thing,  and 
saMiig--"  I5y  the  mlilling  ol  natuie.’’  What  is  meant  b)  this  mlilhng  ol  natiiic' 
We  admit  lh.it  the  aimeba  goes  Ingdiei  and  highei  until  it  becomes  a Ihiddha  , we 
admit  lli.U,  blit  we  aie,  at  the  same  time,  as  much  ceilam  th.ii  \ou  < annot  gel  an 
amount  ot  woik  out  of  a imuhine  unless  you  h.ne  put  it  m m some  sh.i[ie  01  other. 
'J  he  sum  tot.il  ol  the  eneigy  lemains  the  same,  wh.itecei  the  foims  it  ma\' t.ike. 

II  )’on  want  a mass  of  eneig\  at  oiu'  end  \ )li  ha\e  got  to  pul  it  in  at  tlu'  othei  end,  it 

may  be  in  anotliei  loim,  but  the  amoiinl  ol  eneig)  that  should  be  pioduced  ot  it  must 
be  the  same.  'IhiMctoie,  if  a lJuddhaisthe  one  end  ol  the  change,  the  \ei  \ .11110 ba  must 
ha\e  been  the  lUiddh.i  .dso.  Jl  ihe  Ihiddha  is  the  ewobed  aino  ha.  the  anneb.i  w.is 
the  ni\oI\ed  Ihiddha  also  II  this  unucise  is  the  mamlestalion  ol  an  alinosi  iniimte 
amoiniL  of  eneig\,  when  this  uinveise  was  in  a stale  i)\pialava,  it  must  lia\e  le- 
piesentcd  the  same  aniomil  ot  imoKed  eneigv  II  < aniiol  have  been  othei  w ise  As 
such  It  follows  that  e\ei)  soul  is  nilimte.  l''iom  the  lowest  woim  ih.U  ciawls  undei  our 
feel  to  the  noblest  and  giealest  s.iinls,  all  have  this  inlimte  powei,  intmiie  ])Uiil),  and 
inlimte  e\ei\ tiling,  (duly,  the  ihlleieucc  is  111  the  degiee  ol  mamleslaltoii.  I he 
woim  IS  only  manifesting  pisl  a little  hit  ol  that  eneigv  ; \ou  h.ue  mamlesied  moie, 
.anolhei  god-man  has  inauifestcd  sidl  nioie,  that  is  all  the  diHeienee.  Ihil  that  inlimte 
powci  IS  theie  all  the  same,  S.i)  s Patanjali  • - rt?r  I “ just  .\s  ihi‘ peasant 

nii<;almg  his  lield,"  'i’inoiigli  a little  eoiiiei  ol  his  held  he  hiings  w.Uei  liom  a 
leseivon  soiiiewlicie,  and  peih.ips  he  li.is  got  a little  lock  that  piewenls  the  water 
fioin  iiishing  into  Ills  lield.  When  he  wants  watei  lie  has  simply  to  open  the  lock, 
and  in  lushes  the  watci  of  Us  own  power.  The  powei  li,\s  not  l<^  be  added,  it  is 
already  there  in  the  icseivoii.  So  evciy  one  of  us,  evei)  liemg,  lias  as  his  own  back- 
giouud  such  a icscMoii  of  stienglh,  mlinile  ])Owei,  iiilmilc  puiiU,  mlmile  hliss,  and 
existence  innnilo,— -only  these  h^cks,  these  bodies,  aie  liiiuleimg  us  fiom  exinessmg 
W'linl  we  really  aic  to  llie  fullest. 

And  as  these  bodies  become  more  and  moie  finely  oiganised,  as  the  iamvouiui 
becomes  the and  as  the  lojoyjiua  becomes  saliva  ymm,  moie  and  moic 
of  this  power  and  puiity  becomes  manifest,  and  llierefoie  it  is  that  om  people 
have  been  so  caieful  about  eating  and  dunking,  and  the  food  question.  It  may 


168 


LECTirRES-~FR(m  COLOMTiO  TO  ALMOUA 


be  lliAl  the  ule.is  have  been  lost,  just  as  with  our  marriage-  >vi)ich,  though  not 

belonging  to  llio  subject,  1 ina)  take  as  an  evample.  If  I have  another  oppoilimily  I 
will  talk  to  )Ou  about  these;  but  let  me  tell  >ou  now  that  the  uleas  behiiul  oui  maiiiage 
s\slem  aie  the  onl}'  ideas  thiough  which  theie  can  be  a leal  coihsalion.  'Iheie  cannot 
be  an}thing  else.  If  a man  oi  a woman  weie  allowed  the  fiecilom  to  lake  up  aii)  man 
or  woman  as  wife  oi  husband,  if  Individual  pleasuie,  if  salislaciion  of  animal  instincts, 
vveie  to  be  alloweil  to  lun  loose  iq  society,  the  lesult  must  be  evil,  eyil  childien, 
wuked  and  demoniacal.  Aye,  man  in  eveiy  countiy  is,  on  the  one  hand,  piodiKing 
these  biiual  childicii,  and  on  the  other  hand  inultipl) mg  the  police  loice  to  keep 
tliese  billies  down.  ‘J'he  (piesiion  is  not  how  to  destio)  evil  that  way,  but  how  to 
prevent  the  vei')'  biilh  of  evil,  and  so  long  as  vou  live  m society  ) our  mai i lage 
ceitainly  alteclsevei}  ineinbei  of  it , and  iheieioie  society  lias  the  light  to  dictate  whom 
toil  shall  many,  and  whom  )ou  shall  not.  And  great  ideas  ol  this  kind  have  been 
behind  tile  s)  ^tem  oi  maiiiage  heie  ; vvliat  they  call  the  astiological  jtih  ot  the 
bride  and  biidegioom.  And  in  passing  1 may  remaik,  that  accoiding  to  Manu  a 
child  who  is  boin  of  lust  is  not  an  At) an.  'I'he  child  whose  veiy  conce}»tion 
and  whose  death  is  accoiding  to  the  lulcs  of  tlie  Vedas,  such  is  an  Ai)an.  Ve.s, 
and  le^s  of  these  Ai)an  chddien  aie  being  pioduced  m eveiy  couiiliy.and  the  lesnllis 
the  mass  ol  evil  winch  we  call  Kali  3 But  we  have  lost  all  these  ideals  , it  is  line 
we  cannot  cany  all  these  ideas  to  the  fullest  length  now,  it  is  peifeclly  tine  we  have 
made  almost  a caiicaluie  of  some  of  tliese  .gicat  uleas.  It  is  lanientahly  tiue  that  iho 
fatheis  and  motheis  aie  not  what  llu-y  wcie  in  old  limes,  neithei  is  sociel)  so  educated 
as  It  ii.sed  to  1)0,  neilliei  has  society  that  love  loi  individuals  that  it  used  to 
have.  But,  liowevei  lauliy  the  woiking  out  imi)  be,  the  pimciple  is  sound  ; and  il  its 
application  lias  become  deleclive,  it  one  method  has  faded,  take  up  the  piiiicii)le  and 
woik  u out  belter,  vvli)  kill  the  piincii)Ie  ^ 'I'lio  same  ajiplies  to  the  lood  (luesiion  . the 
w'oik  ami  details  aie  bad,  veiy  bad  indeed,  but  that  does  not  hull  the  piiiu  iple.  I'lie 
piinciple  Is  eleinal  and  must  be  llioie.  Woik  il  onl  aiiesh,  and  make  a re-ioimed 
application. 

'I’his  !•.  the  one  gieal  idea  of  the  Atman  which  eveiy  one  of  om  sects  in  India 
has  to  believe,  only,  as  vve  will  lind,  the  Dualists  pieach  that  this  Atman  hy  evil  woiks 
becomes  Sankiulii/a,  t.e.,  all  Us  povveis  and  its  naluu'  become  coniiactcd,  and  by  good 
woiks  again  that  nalme  expands.  And  the  Advaitist  savs,  that  the  Atman  never 
expands  iioi  conliacls,  but  seems  to  do  so,  it  ajipoais  to  have  become  contiacled.  'I'liat 
is  all  the  dilfeience,  but  all  have  the  one  ulea  that  om  Atman  has  all  the  powers  already, 
not  that  ail)  thing  will  I'ome  to  it  fiom  oulsule,  not  that  anyllimg  will  diop  into  it  fioin 
the  skies.  iMaik  )on,  your  Vedas  aie  not  inspncd,  hut  expiied,  not  that  they  came 
fiom  anyvvheie  outside,  bill  thev  aie  the  eternal  laws  living  m every  soul.  The  Vedas 
aie  111  the  soul  oi  the  ant,  m llie  soul  ol  the  god.  The  ant  has  only  to  evolve  and  get 
the  body  of  a sage  or  a Kisbi,  and  tlie  Vedas  will  come  out,  eleinal  laws  expiessing 
themselves,  'l'lu>  is  the  one  gieat  idea  to  imdei stand,  that  om  i)owei  is  alieady  ouis, 
om  salvation  is  ahead)'  within  ns.  Say  eilhei  that  it  has  become  coniiactcd,  oi  sa)  that 
It  has  been  cov'ered  with  the  evil  of  iMa).‘i,  it  inalleis  little  ; the  idea  is  tlieie  alieady; 
)oii  must  have  to  believe  m that,  behev'c  in  the  po'^sibihly  of  evei)hod)  ; even  m 
the  lowest  man  theie  is  the  same  possibility  as  in  the  J3uddha,  This  is  the  doctrine 
of  the  Atman. 

Bui  now  comes  a tremendous  light.  Ileie  are  the  Budilhists,  who  ctpially  analyse 
the  bod)  into  a maleual  stieam  and  as  ecpially  analvse  the  mind  into  anolliei.  And  as 


Tm  VEDANTA  ,6^ 

;ihout  this  Atman  they  state  that  it  i»  unnecessary ; so  we  need  not  assume  the  Atman  at 
all.  What  use  of  a substance,  and  qualities  adhering  to  the  substance  ? We  s^gu^as, 
qiiahlies,  and  qualities  alone.  It  is  illogical  to  assume  two  causes  where  one  will 
explain  the  whole  thing.  And  the  light  went  on,  and  all  the  iheoiies  which  held  the 
doctrine  of  substance  were  thrown  to  the  giound  by  the  Buddhists.  There  was  a 
break-up  all  along  the  line  of  those  who  held  on  to  the  doctrine  of  substance  and 
(]ualities,  that  you  have  a soul,  and  I have  a soul,  and  every  one  has  a soul  scpaiate 
fioni  the  mind  and  body,  and  that  each  one  is  an  individual.  So  far  wc  have  seen  that 
the  idea  of  Dualism  is  all  right ; for  thcie  is  the  body,  there  is  then  the  tine  body-lhe 
mind,  there  is  this  Atman,  and  in  and  thiough  all  the  Atmans,  is  that  Param^tman, 
God.  I’he  dillicully  is  hcie,  that  this  Atman  and  Paramatman  are  both  so-called 
substance,  to  which  the  mind  and  body  and  so-called  substances  adhefe  like  sp 
many  (pialilios.  Nobody  has  ever  seen  a substance,  none  can  ever  conceive  ; what 
is  the  use  of  thinking  of  this  substance  ? Why  not  become  a KshanikavAdin , and  say 
that  whatever  exists  is  this  succession  of  mental  cuirents  and  nothing  moie.  They 
do  not  adhere  to  each  other,  they  do  not  foim  a unit,  one  is  chasing  the  other,  like 
waves  in  the  ocean,  never  complete,  never  forming  one  unit-whole,  Man  is  a 
succcs.sion  of  waves,  and  when  one  goes  away  it  generates  another,  and  the  cessation 
of  these  wavc-foims  is  what  is  called  Nirvana.  You  see  that  Dualism  is  mule  befoie 
lliis,  it  is  impossible  that  it  can  bring  up  any  argument,  and  the  Dualislic  God  also 
cannot  be  retained  here.  The  idea  of  a God  that  is  omnipicsent,  and  yet  is  a Peisoii 
who  creates  without  hands,  and  moves  without  feet,  and  so  on,  and  who  has  created 
the  univeise  as  a khumbhakdra  (poltei)  cieates  a ghata,  the  Buddhist  dcclaies, 
is  cliildish,  and  tliat  if  this  is  God,  he  is  going  to  fight  this  God  and  not  worship  it. 
'Phis  universe  is  full  of  iiiisciy ; if  it  is  the  woik  of  a God,  we  are  going  to  fight  this 
Goil.  And  secondly,  this  God  is  illogical  and  impossible,  as  all  of  you  are  aware. 
We  need  not  go  into  the  defects  of  the  ‘design'  theory,  as  all  our  Kshanikas  had  to 
show,  and  so  this  personal  God  fell  to  pieces. 

Truth,  and  nothing  but  tiulh,  is  the  w-alchword  of  the  Advailist.  Salyameva 
jayale  mUuiitani  saivmaiva  panthd  vUato  Truth  alone  tiiuinphs, 

and  not  untiiuh.  Thiough  truth  alone  the  way  to  Devaydna  lies."  lueiy- 
bocly  marches  foiwaid  under  that  bannci  ; aye,  but  it  is  only  to  crush  the 
weaker  man’s  position  by  Ids  own.  You  come  with  your  Dualislic  idea  of  God 
to  pick  a quaiiel  with  a poor  man  who  is  worshipping  an  image,  and  you 
think  you  aie  w’ondei fully  lational,  you  can  confound  him,  but  if  he  turns 
round  and  shalteis  your  own  peisonal  God,  and  calls  that  an  imaginaiy  ideal,  where 
aie  you  ? You  fall  back  on  faith  and  so  on,  oi  laisc  the  cry  of  Atheism,  the  old  ciy 
of  a weak  man— whosoever  defeats  him  is  an  atheist.  If  you  arc  to  be  rational,  be 
rational  all  along  the  line,  and  if  not,  allow  others  the  same  privilege  w hich  you  ask  for 
yourselves  IIow  can  you  prove  the  existence  of  this  God  ? On  the  other  hand  it  can 
be  almost  disproved.  There  is  not  a shadow  of  proof  as  to  His  existence,  and  there 
are  very  strong  arguments  to  the  contiaiy.  How  will  you  pi ove  His  existence,  with 
your  God,  and  His  and  an  infinite  number  of  souls  which  .are  substance,  and 

eacli  soul  an  individual  ? In  what  aie  you  an  individual  ? You  are  not  as  a body, 
for  you  know  to-day  belter  than  even  the  Buddhists  of  old  knew',  that  what  may 
have  been  matter  in  the  sun  has  just  now  become  matter  in  you,  and  w'lll  go  out  and 
become  matter  in  the  plants  ; then  whcie  is  your  individuality,  Mr.  so  and  so  ? The 
same  applies  to  the  mind.  Wheie  is  your  individuality?  You  have  one  thought 


LECTURES—FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


to-nighf  and  another  to-morrow.  You  do  not  ' think  the  same  way  as  you  thought 
when  you  were  a child,  and  old  men  do  not  think  the  same  way  as  they  did  when 
they  were  young.  Where  is  your  individuality  then  ? Do  not  say  it  is  in  conscious- 
ness, this  ahamkdra^  because  this  only  covers  a small  part  of  your  existence.  While 
I am  talking  to  you,  all  my  oigans  are  working  and  I am  not  conscious  of  it.  If 
consciousness  is  the  proof  of  existence  they  do  not  exist  then,  because  I am  not 
conscious  of  them.  Where  are  you  then  with  your  personal  God  theories  ? How 
can  you  prove  such  a God  ? Again,  the  Buddhists  will  stand  up  and  declare  not 
only  is  |t  illogical,  but  immoral,  for  it  teaches  man  to  be  a coward  and  to  seek 
assistance  outside,  and  nobody  can  give  him  such  help.  Here  is  the  universe,  man 
made  it;,  why  then  depend  on  an  imaginary  being  outside,  whom  nobody  ever  saw 
or  felt,  or  got  help  from  ? Why  then  do  you  make  cowards  of  yourselves,  and 
teach  your  children  that  the  highest  state  of  man  is  to  be  like  a dog,  and  go  crawling 
before  this  imaginary  being,  saying  that  you  are  weak  and  impure,  and  that  you  are 
everything  vile  in  this  universe  ? On  the  other  hand,  the  Buddhists  may  urge  not  only 
that  you  tell  a lie,  but  that  you  bring  a tremendous  amount  of  evil  upon  your  children, 
for,  mark  you,  this  world  is  one  of  hypnotisation.  Whatever  you  tell  yourself  that 
you  believe.  Almost  the  first  words  the  great  Buddha  uttered  were  What  you 
think,  that  you  are,  what  you  will  think,  that  you  will  be.”  If  this  is  true,  do  not 
teach  yourself  that  you  aie  nothing,  aye,  that  you  cannot  do  anj tiling  unless  you  are 
helped  by  somebody  who  does  not  live  here,  but  sits  above  the  clouds.  The  result 
will  be  that  you  will  be  more  and  more  weakened  cveiy  day ; by  constantly  lepeating, 
“ We  are  very  impure,  f.ord,  make  us  pure,”  the  result  will  be  that  you  will  hypnotise 
yourselves  into  all  sorts  of  vices.  Aye,  the  Buddhists  say  that  ninety  per  cent,  of 
these  vices  that  you  see  in  every  society  are  on  account  of  this  idea  of  a peisonal 
God;  this  is  an  awful  idea  of  the  human  being  that  the  end  and  aim  of  this  expicss- 
ion  of  life,  this  wonderful  expression  of  life,  is  to  become  like  a dog.  Sa3s  the 
Buddhist  to  the  Vaishnava,  if  your  ideal,  your  aim  and  goal  is  to  go  to  the  place 
called  Vaikuntha  where  God  lives,  and  there  stand  befoie  Him  with  folded  hands  all 
through  eternity,  it  is  better  to  commit  suicide  than  do  that.  The  Buddhists  may  even 
urge,  that  that  is  why  he  is  going  to  create  annihilation,  Nhvdna,  to  escape  this. 
I am  putting  these  ideas  before  you  as  a Buddhist  just  for  the  time  being,  because 
nowada}S  all  these  Advaitic  ideas  are  said  to  make  you  immoial,  and  I am  tiding 
to  tell  you  how  the  other  side  looks.  Let  us  face  both  sides  boldly  and  bravely. 

We  have  seen  first  of  all  that  this  cannot  bo  proved,  this  idea  of  a peisonal 
God  creating  the  world  ; is  there  any  child  that  can  believe  this  to-day  ? Because  a 
kumbhakdra  creates  a gha/a,  therefore  a God  created  the  world ! If  this  is  so, 
then  your  kumbhakdra  is  God  also,  and  if  arty  one  tells  you  that  he  acts  without 
head  and  hands  you  may  take  him  to  a lunatic  asylum.  Has  ever  your  Personal  God, 
the  Creator  of  the  world,  to  whom  you  cry  all  your  life,  ever  helped  you,-- -is  the  next 
challenge  from  modern  science.  They  will  prove  that  any  help  you  have  had 
could  have  been  got  by  your  own  exertions,  and  better  still,  you  need  not  have  spent 
your  energy  in  that  crying,  you  could  have  done  it  better  without  that  weeping  and 
crying.  And  we  have  seen  that  along  with  this  idea  of  a Personal  God  comes  tyranny 
and  priestcraft.  Tyranny  and  priestcraft  have  prevailed  wherever  this  idea  existed, 
and  until  the  lie  is  knocked  on  the  head,  say  the  Buddhists,  tyranny  will  not  cease.  So 
long  as  man  thinks  he  has  to  cower  before  a supernaluial  being,  so  long  there  will  be 
priests  to  claim  rights  and  privileges  and  to  make  men  cower  before  them,  while  these 


THE  VEDANTA  ,7, 

poor  men  will  cotitinile  to  ask  some  priesl  to  act  as  interceder  for  them.  You  may 
do  away  w.ih  the  Rralimana,  but  mark  me,  that  tlrose  wlm  do  so  will  put  themselves  In 
h.s  place,  and  will  be  vorse,  because  the  Biahatatra  has  a certain  amount  of  generosity 
in  liim,  but  lliesc  tipstarts  are  always  the  wotst  of  lyrannisers.  If  a beggar  gets 
wealth  he  thinks  the  whole  wo,  Id  is  a hit  of  straw.  .So  these  priests  there  must 
he,  so  long  as  this  Personal  God  idea  persists,  and  it  will  be  impossible  to  Ihh.k  of 
any  great  morality  In  society.  Pileslcralt  and  lytanny  go  hmul  in  hand.  Why  was 
it  invented  f Because  some  sttong  men  in  old  times  got  people  into  their  hands 
and  said,  you  must  obey  us  or  we  wili  desttoy  you.  That  was  the  long  and  short 
of  it.  SMayam  rajramudyalam.  It  is  the  idea  of  the  thunderer,  who  kills  every 
one  who  does  not  obey  him.  ^ 

Next  the  Buddiiist  says,  you  have  been  so  rational  up  to  this  point  that  yob  say  that 

eveiylhing  is  the  result  of  the  law  of  Karma.  You  believe  in  an  infrniiy  of  souls 
and  that  souls  are  wilhom  biiih  or  death,  and  tins  infinity  of  souls  and  the  belief  iii 
the  law  of  Kaima,  is  peifeclly  loi^dcal  no  doubt.  Theie  cannot  be  a cause  without  an 
cffocl,  the  picsent  must  have  had  its  cause  in  the  past,  and  will  have  it»  effect  in 
the  future.  The  Hindu  says  the  Karma  is  jada  and  not  ihaitanya,  therefore  some 
ihailanya  is  necessary  to  brin^^  t!,is  cause  to  fiuiiton.  Is  it  so,  that  is 

neccssaiy  to  bring  the  plant  to  fruition?  If  I plant  the  seed  and  add  water,  no 

chiUianya  is  necessary.  You  may  say  there  was  some  original  chaitanva  there,’  but 
the  souls  themselves  weie  the  nothing  else  is  necessary.  If  human  souls 

have  it  too,  wh.at  necessity  is  there  for  a God,  as  say  the  Jains,  who,  unlike  the  Bud- 
dhists, believe  in  souls,  and  do  not  believe  in  God.  Where  are  you  logical,  where 
aie  you  nioial  ? And  when  you  criticise  Advaitism  and  fear  that  it  will  make  for 
immoiality,  just  read  a little  of  what  has  been  done  in  India  by  Dnalislic  sects. 
If  there  have  been  twenty  thousand  Advaitisl  blackguards,  there  have  been  more 
than  twenty  thousand  Dvaitist  blackguards.  Generally  speaking,  there  will  be  more 
Dv.ailist  blackguards,  because  it  takes  a belter  ty|>e  of  mind  to  understand  Advaitism, 
and  Advaitisis  can  scarcely  be  fiiglitcned  into  anything.  What  remains  for  you 
Hindus,  then?  There  is  no  help  for  you  out  of  the  clutches  of  the  Buddhist. 
You  may  quote  the  Vedas,  but  he  does  not  believe  in  them.  He  will  say,  “ My 
Tiipiiakas  say  olheiwisc,  and  they  are  without  beginning  or  end,  not  even  written  by 
Buddha,  for  Buddha  says  he  is  only  reciting  them  ; they  are  eternal."  And  he  adds, 
that  yours  are  wrong,  ours  are  the  true  Vedas,  yours  are  manufactured  by  the 
Biahman  piiests,  therefore  out  with  them.  How  do  you  escape  ? 

Here  is  the  way  to  get  out.  Take  up  the  first  objection,  the  metaphysical  one, 
that  substance  and  qualities  are  different.  Says  the  Advaitisl,  they  are  not.  There 
is  no  difference  between  substance  and  qualities.  You  know  the  old  illustration, 
how  the  rope  is  taken  for  the  snake,  and  when  you  .see  the  snake  you  do  not  see  the 
rope  at  all,  the  rope  has  vanished.  Dividing  the  thing  into  .substance  and  quality,  is  a 
metaphysical  something  in  the  brains  of  philosophers,  for  never  can  there  be  an 
effect  outside.  You  see  substance  if  you  are  an  oidinary  man,  and  qualities  if  you 
are  a great  Yogi,  but  you  never  see  both  at  the  same  time.  So,  Buddhists,  your 
quarrel  about  substance  and  qualities  has  been  but  a miscalculation  which  does  not 
stand  in  fact.  But,  if  substance  is  unqualified,  there  can  only  be  one.  If  you 
take  qualities  off  from  the  soul,  and  show  that  these  qualities  are  in  the  mind,  really 
superimposed  on  the  soul,  then  iheio  can  never  be  two  souls,  for  it  is  qualification 
that  makes  the  difference  between  one  soul  and  another.  How  do  you  know  that 


1J72 


LECTURES— FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


one  soul  is  different  from  the  other  ? Owing  to  certain  differentiating  marks,  certain 
qualities.  And  where  qualities  do  not  exist  how  can  there  be  differentiation  ? There- 
fore there  aie  not  two  souls,  there  is  but  One,  and  your  Paramdtman  is  unnecessary, 
it  is  this  vciy  soul.  That  One  is  called  Paramdtman,  that  very  One  is  called 
jivdiman,  and  so  on  ; and  you  Dualists,  such  as  the  Sdnkhya  and  others,  who  say 
that  the  soul  is  v'lbhn,  omnipresent,  how  can  you  make  two  infinUes  .?  There  can 
be  only  one.  What  else  ? This  One  is  the  one  Infinite  Atman,  everything  else  is 
Its  manifestation.  There  the  Buddhist  stops,  but  there  it  does  not  end.  'J'he 
Advaitist  position  is  not  merely  a weak  one  of  criticism.  The  Advaitist  criticises 
others  when  they  come  too  near  him,  and  just  throws  them  away,  that  is  all,  but 
he  propoijnds  his  own  position,  lie  is  the  only  one  that  ciiticises,  and  does  not 
stop  with  ciiticisin  and  showing  books.  Here  you  are.  You  say  the  univeise  is 
a thing  of  continuous  motion.  In  vyaLiti  everything  is  moving,  you  aie  moving, 
the  table  is  moving,  motion  everywhere;  it  is  samxdra,  continuous  motion ; it  is 
jai((it.  Therefoie  there  cannot  be  an  individuality  in  this  jagat,  because  individuality 
means  that  which  does  not  change;  theie  cannot  be  any  changeful  individuality,  it  is  a 
contradiction  in  terms.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  individuality  in  this  little  vvoild  of 
ouis,  the  ja}^at.  Thought  and  feeling,  mind  and  body,  men  and  animals  and  plants 
are  in  a continuous  state  of  Ilux.  But  suppose  you  take  the  universe  as  a unit  whole  ; 
can  it  change  or  move?  Clertainly  not.  Motion  is  possible  in  compaiison  with 
something  which  is  a little  less  in  motion,  or  entirely  motionless.  The  universe  as 
a whole,  theiefoie,  is  motionless,  unchangeable.  You  arc,  therefore,  an  individual 
then,  and  then  alone,  when  you  aie  the  whole  of  it,  when  the  realisation  of  “ I am 
the  universe”  comes.  That  Is  why  the  Vedantist  says  that  so  long  as  theic  are  two, 
feai  does  not  cease.  It  is  only  when  one  does  not  see  another,  does  not  feel  another, 
when  it  is  all  one, — then  alone  fear  ceases,  then  alone  death  vanishes,  then  alone 
xamuira  vanishes.  Advaita  teaches  us  therefore  that  man  is  individual  in  being 
universal,  and  not  in  being  particular.  You  are  immortal  only  when  jou  aie  the  whole. 
You  are  feailess  and  deathless  only  when  you  are  the  univeise  : and  then,  that  which 
you  call  the  universe  is  the  same  as  that  you  call  God,  the  same  that  you  call  existence, 
the  same  that  you  call  the  whole.  It  is  the  one  undivided  Existence  which  is  taken  to 
be  the  manifold  world  as  we  see  it  and  others  also  who  aie  in  the  same  state  of  mind 
as  we.  People  who  have  done  a little  better  Karma  and  get  a better  state  of  miml, 
when  they  die,  look  upon  it  as  svarya,  and  see  Indras  and  so  forth.  People  still  higher 
will  see  it,  the  very  same  thing,  as  Brahma  T.oka,  and  the  perfect  ones  will  neither 
see  the  eaith  nor  the  heavens,  nor  any  Loka  at  all.  This  univeise  will  have  vanished, 
and  Brahinan  will  be  in  its  stead. 

Can  we  know  this  Brahman  ? I have  told  you  of  the  painting  of  the  Infinite 
in  the  Samhita.  Here  we  shall  find  another  side  shown,  the  infinite  internal.  That 
was  the  infinite  of  the  muscles.  Heie  we  shall  have  the  infinite  of  thought.  There, 
the  Infinite  was  attempted  to  be  painted  in  language  positive  ; here,  that  language 
faded,  and  the  attcmjit  has  been  to  paint  it  in  language  negative.  Here  is  this 
universe,  and  even  admitting  that  it  is  Brahman,  can  we  know  it  ? No!  No!  You 
must  understand  this  one  thing  again  very  clearly.  Again  and  again  this  doubt  will 
come  to  )Ou.  if  this  is  Brahman,  how  can  vve  know  it  ? VijmUdramare  kena  vijdniydt — 
By  what  can  the  knower  be  known”  ? How  can  the  knower  be  known  ? The  eyes  see 
evei ) thing ; can  they  see  themselves?  They  cannot.  The  very  fact  of  knowledge 
is  a degradation.  Children  of  the  Ar^as,  you  must  remember  this,  for  herein  lies 


THK  VEMNTA  ' ,73 

a Ws  story  All  the  Western  temruiion,  U«i  come  to  you.  hnve  their  mctnphvsical 

basts  on  that  one  Hung  tb,,e  „ sense-knowlcige.  In  ti.e'Kast, 

ave  say  m our  \cda,  that  tins  knotvWge  is  loner  than  the  thing  itself,  because  it  ,s 

altvavs  a inn, tat, on.  When  you  „.n,t  to  know  a tlting,  ii  i,n,nediatelv  hecon.e, 
bnnletl  by  your  tnnttl.  1 l,ey  say.  refer  hack  to  tl,,,t  inst.tnce  of  the  ovcer  rnakntw 
a peail  anti  see  how  knoulecige  is  In.ntation,  g.tthenn.g  a ttnng,  fnineing  it  n,to 
conscousness,  and  not  known, g n as  .t  uhole.  This  „ une  ahoul  all  knot,  ledge,  and 
can  It  be  less  so  about  the  liifinue  ? Can  yon  thus  btuit  linn  who  is  the  suh.iance  of 
all  knowleclftc,  Ili.n  who  is  the  S^ihhi,  the  Witness,  without  w'honi  vou  cannot  have  any 
knowled-c.Ifnnwho  has  no  qualities,  who  is  the  Witness  of  the  whole  univcise,  the  Wit- 
ness in  our  owMi  souls?  IJow  can  you  know  Him  ? liy  what  means  can  ^on  bind  Him 
up  ? Ever) thing,  the  whole  universe,  is  such  a false  attempt.  This  Inlinite  Atman  is, 
as  it  were,  trying  to  see  liis  own  face,  and  all,  tiom  the  IowctI  animals,  to  the  lii^liost  of 
gods,  are  like  so  many  minors  to  lellecl  himself  m,  and  he  K taking  np  siiirotheis, 
hnding  them  insullicient,  until  in  lire  Imnnn  hod.^  he  comes  to  Know  that  it  is  the  liniie 
of  the  (iuile,  all  is  finite,  ihcie  cannot  he  any  expression  of  the  Infinite  in  the  finite. 
I hen  comes  the  retiograde  maich,  and  this  is  what  is  called  icnunciaiion,  vairni^  vttni , 
Hack  fiom  the  senses,  hack  ' do  not  go  to  the  senses,  is  the  walchwoid  of  va'n 
I'his  is  the  walchwoid  of  all  moialiiy,  this  is  the  watchword  of  all  w'cll-hemg  ; for  )ou 
must  icmemher  that  with  us  the  univcise  he, gins  in  Ar/ijMv/,  in  renunciatioH ; and  as  jnu 
go  hack  and  back,  all  the  forms  aic  being  manilosted  hefoic  }ou.  and  they  aic  left 
aside  one  after  the  othei  until  you  I emaiii  what  )0u  really  aie.  This  is  viokshii,  or 
ii  he  I at  ion. 

This  idea  we  have  to  \\w>Scxh[?y(\(\.-"Vi}n.U(lnvtuvc  kena  vij<Unv(U.  “I  low'  to 
know  the  kiiower  j the  knowci  cannot  he  known,  because  if  it  w'eic  known  it 
will  not  he  the  knower.  If  )ou  look  at \oui  eies  in  a miiioi,  the  lellection  is 
no  more  your  eves,  hut  something  else,  only  a lefleciion.  Then  if  this  Soul,  this 
Universal,  Infinite  Heing  which  you  are,  is  only  a witness,  what  good  is  it?  It  cannot 
li\e,  and  nio\e  about,  and  enjoy  the  woild,  as  we  do.  People  cannot  undeisiand 
how  the  witness  can  enjoy,  “ Oh,"  they  say  “ you  Hindus  have  become  quiescent, 
and  good  for  nothing,  ihioiigh  this  docli me,  that  you  are  witnesses  I'drsl  of  all,  it  is 
only  the  witness  that  can  enjoy.  If  there  is  a wieslhng  match,  who  enjoys  it,  those 
who  Uke  pait  in  it,  or  those  who  ate  looking  on,  the  oulsideis?  'Phe  moie  and  more 
you  aic  the  witness  of  anything  in  life,  the  moie  joii  enjoy  it.  And  this  is  (hiani/nm, 
and  therefoie  infinite  bliss  can  only  he  yours  wdien  you  have  become  the  witness  of  this 
universe,  then  alone  you  arc  a mukia  pmusha.  It  is  the  witness  alone  that  can  woik 
without  any  desire,  without  any  idea  of  going  to  heaven,  without  any  idea  of  blame, 
without  any  idea  of  piaise.  The  witness  alone  enjoys,  and  none  else. 

Coming  to  the  moral  aspect,  theie  is  one  thing  between  the  melaphjsical  and  the 
moial  aspect  of  Ad\ailism  , it  i.s  the  theory  of  IMaja,  Everyone  of  these  points  m 
the  Advaita  system  requires  yeais  to  undeisiand  .ind  months  to  explain.  Therefore 
you  will  excuse  me  if  1 only  just  toiicli  them  rn  passani.  This  theory  of  Maya  has 
been  the  most  difficult  thing  to  understand  in  all  ages.  Let  me  tell  yon  in  a few'  words 
that  it  is  surely  no  theoiy,  it  is  the  combination  of  the  three  ideas  Desha-kdla-nimitia. 
— space,  lime,  and  causation— and  this  time  and  ^pace  and  cause  have  been  furtj^r 
reduced  into  ndma  rupa.  Suppose  ihcie  i.s  a wave  in  the  ocean.  'J'he  wave"  Is 
distinct  from  the  ocean  only  in  its  foim  and  name,  and  this  form  and  this  name  cannot 
have  any  separate  existence  fiom  the  w'ave  ; they  exist  only  with  the  wave,  'i'lie  wave 


174 


LECTURES-FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ATJ/ORA 


may  subside,  but  the  same  amount  of  water  remains,  even  if  the  name  and  form  that 
ueie  on  the  wave  vanish  for  ever.  So  this  Maya  is  what  makes  the  chfteience  between 
me  and'you,  between  all  animals  and  man,  between  gods  and  men.  In  fact,  it  is  tins 
Maya  that  causes  the  Atman  to  be  caught,  as  it  were,  in  so  many  millions  of  beings, 
and  these  are  distinguishable  only  through  name  and  foim.  If  you  leave  it  alone,  let 
name  and  form  go,  all  this  vaiicty  vanishes  foi  ever,  and  you  are  what  you  really  are. 
This  is  INfaya.  It  is  again  no  theory,  but  a statement  of  facts.  When  the  lealist  statesj 
that  this  table  exists,  what  he  means  is,  that  this  table  has  an  independent  existence  of 
its  own,  that  it  does  not  depend  on  the  existence  of  anything  else  in  the  univeise,  and 
if  this  whole  universe  be  destroyed  and  annihilated  this  table  will  icniain  just  as  it  is 
now.  A liltle  thought  will  show  you  that  it  cannot  be  so.  Everything  here  m the  sense- 
woild  is  dependent  and  inter-dependont,  lelalive  and  co-i dative,  the  e.xistence  of  one 
depeuilmg  on  the  other.  Tliere  aie  thice  steps,  therefore,  in  our  knowledge  of 
things;  the  first  is,  that  each  thing  is  indiviilnal,  and  separate  from  every  other ; 
and  the  next  step  is  to  find  that  there  is  a relation  and  co-relation  between  all  tilings ; 
and  the  thiid  is  tliat  there  is  only  one  thing  which  wc  see  as  many.  The  fust  idea 
of  God  with  the  ignoiant  is  that  this  God  is  somewhere  outside  the  univeise,  that  is  to 
say,  the  conception  of  God  is  cxtiemely  human  ; He  does  just  what  a man  does,  only  on 
a bigger  and  higher  scale.  And  we  have  seen  how  that  idea  of  God  is  proved  in  a few 
words  to  be  unreasonable  and  insufficient.  And  the  next  idea  is  the  idea  of  a power 
we  see  manifested  cverywheie.  This  is  the  leal  personal  God  we  get  in  the  Chandi, 
but,  mark  me,  not  a God  that  you  make  the  rescivoir  of  all  good  qualities  only.  You 
cannot  have  two  Gods,  God  and  Satan ; you  must  base  only  one,  and  daie  to  call 
Him  good  and  l)a<l,  but  have  only  one,  and  take  the  logical  consequences.  We  read  in 
the  Chandi — “We  salute  'Fhee,  O Divine  Mother,  who  lives  in  every  being  as  peace. 
We  salute  Thee,  O Divine  Mother  who  lives  in  all  beings  as  puiily.”  At  the 
same  time  we  must  take  the  whole  consequence  of  calling  Him  the  All-formed. 
“All  this  bliss,  O Gaigi,  wherever  there  is  bliss  theie  is  a poition  of  the  Divine.” 
You  may  use  it  how  you  like.  In  this  light  before  me,  you  m.ay  give  a poor  man 
a hundred  rupees,  and  another  man  may  forge  your  name,  but  the  light  will  be  the 
same  for  both.  This  is  the  .second  stage  ; and  the  third  is  that  God  is  ncillier  outside 
nature  nor  inSide  nature,  but  God  and  natuie  and  soul  and  univeise  aie  all  convertible 
tcims.  You  never  sec  two  things;  it  is  your  metaphysical  vvouls  that  have  deluded 
you.  You  assume  that  you  are  a body  and  have  a soul,  and  that  you  are  both 
together.  How  can  that  be?  Try  in  your  own  mind.  If  there  is  a Yogi  among 
you,  he  knows  himself  as  chaifanva,  for  him  the  body  has  vanished.  An  ordinaiy 
man  thinks  of  himself  as  a body;  the  idea  of  spii it  has  vanished  from  him  ; but 
because  the  metaphy.sical  ideas  exist  that  man  has  a body  and  a soul  and  all  these 
things,  you  think  they  are  all  simultaneously  there.  One  thing  at  a lime.  Do  not 
talk  of  God  when  you  see  matter  ; you  see  the  effect  and  the  effect  alone,  and  the 
cause  you  cannot  sec,  and  the  moment  you  can  see  the  cause  the  effect  will  have 
vanished.  Where  is  this  world  then,  and  who  has  taken  it  off  ? 

“One  that  is  present  always  as  consciousness,  the  bliss  absolute,  beyond  all 
bounds,  beyond  all  compare,  beyond  all  qualities,  ever-ficc,  limitless  as  the  sky, 
without  parts,  the  absolute,  the  perfect, — such  a Brahman,  O sage,  O learned  one, 
shines  in  the  heart  of  the  Jnanin,  in  Samiidhi.” 

Where  all  the  changes  of  Nature  cease  for  ever,  thought  bey6nd  all  thoughts,  who 
is  equal  to  all  yet  having  no  equal,  immeasurable,  whom  the  Vedas  declare,  who  is 


THE  VEDANTA 


*75 


the  essence  in  xvhat  we  call  our  existence,  the  perfect, -such  a Brahman,  O sage, 

O learned  one,  shines  in  ihe  licait  of  ihc  Jnaiiin  in  Saniadlii.” 

Beyond  all  biuli  and  deadi,  ilie  Inliniic  One,  incomparable,  like  ths  whole 
un  verse  deluged  in  water  in  »«W//',t/,yu,_waier  above,  water  Iwneath,  water  on  all 
stdes,  and  on  the  face  of  that  water  not  a wave,  not  a ripple,- silent  and  calm,  all  visions 
have  died  out,  all  fights  and  qnai  rehand  the  war  of  fools  and  saints  have  ceased 
for  ever such  a Bralintau,  (J  sage,  O learned  one,  shines  in  the  heatt  of  the  Jnaiiin  in 
samddht," 

I'hat  also  comes,  and  when  that  comes  the  world  has  vanished. 

Wc  have  seen  then,  that  this  Brahman,  this  Reality  is  unknown  and.  unknowable, 
not  in  the  sense  of  the  agnostic,  but  because  to  know  Him  would  l:>e  a blasphemy] 
because  you  aie  He  already.  Wc  have  also  seen  that  this  Biahman  is  noj  this  table 
and  yet  is  this  table.  'I'ake  o(T  the  name  and  form,  and  whatever  is  reality  is  He.  He 
is  the  reality  in  everything. 

“ I'hou  ait  the  woman,  thou  the  man,  thou  ait  the  boy,  and  the  giil  as  well,  thou 
the  old  man  suppoitest  thyself  on  a stick,  thou  ait  all  in  all  in  the  Universe.”  That  is 
the  theme  of  Advaitism.  A few  woids  mote.  Herein  lies,  we  find,  the  explanation  of 
the  essence  of  things.  We  have  seen  how  heie  alone  we  can  lake  a film  stand  against 
all  the  oniush  of  logic  and  scientific  knowledge.  Here  at  last  reason  has  a firm  foumla- 
tion,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  Indian  V^edantist  does  not  emse  the  preceding  steps ; he 
look-s  back  and  he  blesses  them,  and  he  knows  that  they  weie  tine,  only  wrongly  per- 
ceived, and  wrongly  stated.  They  were  the  same  truth,  only  seen  thiough  the  glass  of 
Rlaya,  distorted  it  may  be, —yet  truth,  and  nothing  hut  truth.  The  same  (Jod  whom 
the  Ignorant  man  saw  outside  nature,  tlie  same  whom  the  little-knowing  man  saw  as  . 
interpenetrating  the  univcise,  and  the  same  whom  the  sage  realises  as  liis  own  self, 
as  the  whole  univeise  itself,— all  aic  One  and  the  same  Ik'ing,  the  same  entity  seen 
fioin  dilTerent  standpoints  of  view,  seen  thiough  dilTerent  glasses  of  Maya,  perceived 
by  dilTeienl  minds,  and  all  the  diffeieiice  was  caused  by  that.  Not  only  so,  hut  one 
view  must  lead  to  the  other.  What  is  the  dilfcrence  between  science  and  common 
knowledge  } Go  out  into  the  streets  in  the  dark,  anil  if  something  uiuisiial  is  hapiiim- 
ing  there,  ask  one  of  the  passers-by,  wdiat  is  the  c.uisc  of  it.  It  is  ten  to  one  that 
he  will  tell  you  it  is  a ghost  causing  the  phenomenon.  He  is  always  going  alter 
ghosts  and  spiiils  outside,  because  it  is  the  nature  of  ignoiance  to  seek  for  causes 
outside  of  elTccts.  If  a stone  falls  it  has  been  thrown  by  a devil  or  a gho.st,  says 
the  ignorant  man,  but  the  scientific  man  says  it  is  the  law  of  natiiie,  the  law  of 
gravitation. 

What  is  the  fight  betw'een  science  and  religion  everywhere  ? Religions  are 
encumbered  with  such  a mass  of  explanations  which  are  outside — one  angel  is  in 
chaigo  of  the  sun,  another  of  the  moon,  and  so  on  ad  infinitum  ; every  change  is  caused 
by  a spiiit,  the  one  common  point  of  agreement  being  that  they  are  all  outside  the 
thing  ; while  science  means  that  the  cau.se  of  a thing  is  sought  out  by  the  nature 
thing  itself.  As  step  by  step  science  is  progre.ssing,  it  has  taken  the  e.xplanation  ’ iciT 
natural  phenomena  out  of  the  hands  ofUpirils  and  angels.  Because  Advaitism  has  done 
likewise  in  spiritual  matters,  it  is  the  most  scientific  religion.  This  universe  has  not  ; 
been  created  by  any  extra-cosmic  God,  nor  is  it  the  work  of  any  outside  genius.  It  is  the  i 
self-creating,  self-dissolving,  self-manifesting,  One  Infinite  Existence,  the  Brahman,  v. 
Tatfvamasi  Sve/akeio^"  That  Thou  art,  O Svetaketu !”  Thus  you  sec  that  this, 
and  this  alone,  and  none  else,  can  be  the  only  scientific  religion.  And  with  all  the 


176 


LECTURES—FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALJfORA 


ptalile  about  science  that  is  going  on  daily  at  the  present  time  in  modern  haU- 
educated  India,  \>ilh  all  the  talk  about  rationalism  and  reason  that  1 hear  every 
day,  1 expect  that  whole  sects  of  you  will  come  over  and  dare  to  be  Advaitists, 
and  (.lare  to  preach  it  to  the  woiUl  in  the  wouis  of  llutldha,  Bahujana  h 'ltiiya 
bahiijana  Snkfidya—^'^  h'or  the  good  of  many,  for  the  happiness  of  many,”  If 
you  do  not,  1 take  }Ou  for  cowards.  If  you  cannot  get  over  your  cowaidice, 
if  your  fear  is  your  excuse,  allow  the  same  libeity  to  otheis,  do  not  try  to 
44p  the  poor  idc)l-worshi[)per,  do  not  call  him  a devil,  do  not  go  about 
‘g  to  every  man  that  does  not  agiee  entiiely  with  you;  know  first,  that 
yoit  awards  ;oiu selves,  and  if  society  fiighteiis  )ou,  if  3our  own  supeistitions 

of  trrei|®p  liighten  you  so  much,  how  much  moie  will  these  bin>erstitions  fiighien 
and  Db.  .down  those  who  are  ignoiant?  I'liat  is  tlie  Advaita  position.  Have 
mcicy  V ■'theis.  Would  to  God  that  the  whole  world  were  Advaitists  to-moiiow, 
not  Old}'*’.  01  y,  but  in  realisation.  Hut  it  that  cannot  be,  let  us  do  the  next  best 

thing  ; let  take  the  ignoiant  by  the  hand,  lead  them  always  step  by  step  just  as 

they  can  , ami  know  that  every  step  in  all  religious  giovvth  in  India  has  been 

progiessive.  i is  not  fiom  bad  to  good,  but  fiom  good  to  better. 

Somethin^  inoie  has  to  be  told  about  the  nioial  relation.  Our  boys  blithely  talk 
novYada}s,  they  leai  11  fiom  somebody — the  Loid  knows  from  whom — that  Advaita 
makes  people  immoral,  because  if  we  are  all  one  and  all  (Jod,  what  need  of  morality 
will  thcie  be  at  all!  In  the  fust  place,  that  is  the  argument  of  the  brute,  who  can 
only  be  kept  down  by  the  whip.  If  you  aic  such  biutes  commit  suicide,  rather  than 
pass  foi  human  beings,  who  have  to  be  kept  down  by  the  whip.  If  the  whip  is  taken 
away,  you  will  all  be  d '*'s!  You  ought  all  10  be  killed,  if  such  is  the  case  ; theie 
is  no  help  foi  you  ; pffl  must  alvva}s  be  living  under  this  whip  and  lod,  and  there 
is  no  salvation,  no  esc,  tor  you.  In  the  .second  place,  Advaita  and  Advaita 
alone  explains  moiality.  Ivery  religion  preaches  that  the  essence  of  all  moiality  is 
to  do  good  to  otlieis.  Mid  why?  He  unselfish.  And  why  should  I ? Some  God 
has  s.iid  it  ? He  is  not  foi  me.  Some  texts  have  declaied  it  ? Let  them  ; that  is  nothing 
to  me  ; let  them  all  tell  it.  And  if  they  do,  what  is  it  to  me  ? ICach  one  foi  liimsolf, 
and  somebody  take  the  hindermost;  that  is  all  the  moiality  in  the  woild,  at 
least  vvilli  many.  What  is  the  reason  that  I should  be  moral  ? You  cannot  explain 
it  except  when  youjAne  to  know  the  tiuth  a^  given  m the  Gita  He,  who  secs  cveiy 
one  111  himself,  andn^scll  in  eveiyone,  thus  seeing  the  same  God  living  in  all,  he,  the 
sage  no  moie  V .s  the  self  by  the  self.”  Know  through  Advaita  that  whoever  }ou 
hint  you  lig^youiself ; they  aie  all  )ou.  Whcthei  you  know  it  or  not,  ihiough  all 
hands  yoi^MDik,  Ihiough  all  feet  you  move,  you  aie  the  king  enjoying  in  the  palace, 
you  aro^^ie  beggar  leading  that  miseiable  existence  mi  the  street ; you  are  in  the 
i;'  ^ well  as  in  the  learned,  you  are  in  the  man  who  is  weak,  and  you  are  in 

th(j(<J»^v#g  ; know  this  and  be  sympathetic'.  And  that  is  why  we  must  not  hint  olheis. 
y 4 why  1 do  not  even  care  whether  I have  to  starve,  because  theie  will  be 
^ns  of  mouths  eating  at  the  same  time,  and  they  aie  all  mine.  Theiefore  I 
/ yffd  not  caie  vthat  becomes  of  me  and  mine,  for  the  whole  universe  is  mine,  I 
'.am  enjoying  all  the  bliss  at  the  same  time;  and  who  can  kill  me,  or  the  univeise  ? 
^leiein  is  moialUy.  Here,  in  Advaita  alone,  is  moiality  explained.  The  otheis  teach 
^1,  but  cannot  give  you  its  reasem.  Then,  so  far  about  explanation. 

What  is  the  gam  ? It  is  stiength.  Take  off  that  veil  of  hypnotism  which 
you  have  cast  upon  the  woild,  send  not  out  thoughts  and  wouis  of  weak- 


' ftiE  VEHaNTA 

heS8  Unto  liumanity.  Know  that  all  sms  and  all  evils  can  be  sommed  up 
itt  that  one  woi\l,  weakness.  It  is  weakness  that  is  the  motive  power  in  all' 
evil  doing  ; it  is  weakness  that  is  the  source  of  all  selfishness ; it  Is  weakness  that 
makes  men  injure  others ; it  is  weakness  that  makes  them  manifest  what  they  arc  not 
In  reality.  f.et  them  all  know  what  they  arc  ; let  them  repeat  day  and  night  what  they 
are.  Soham — Let  them  suck  it  in  with  their  molhcis’ milk,  this  idea  of  strength — I 
am  He,  I am  lie.  This  Is  to  be  heald  fiisl.— etc<  And 
then  let  them  think  of  it,  and  out  of  that  thought,  out  of  that  heait  will  pioceed  woiks- 
such  as  tho  world  has  never  seen.  What  has  to  be  done } Aye,  this  AdvaUa  is 
said  by  some  to  be  impracticable  j that  is  to  say,  it  is  not  )et  manifesting  itself  on 
the  mateiial  plane*  To  a ceilain  extent  that  is  tiuc,  for,  icmcmber  thc-saying  of 
the  Vedas—  * ^ 

argi  «Tt  i 

frg;  ti 

“ Om,  this  is  the  great  secret ; Om,  this  is  the  giealcsl  possession ; he  who  knows 
the  secret  of  this  Om,  whatever  he  desires  that  he  gets.”  .\yc,  ilieietorc  hist  know  the 
secret  of  this  Om,  that  you  are  the  Om  ; know  the  secret  of  this  'J.\\ll;\viuisu  .iud  then 
and  then  alone,  whatever  you  want  shall  come  to  you.  If  you  want  to  be  gieal  matetially, 
believe  that  you  are  so*  I may  be  a lillle  bubblCj^  and  you  may  be  a wave  iiiouiilam- 
high,  but  know  that  foi  both  of  us  the  infinite  ocean  is  the  backgiouiid,  the  infinite 
Biahman  is  our  maga/.ine  of  powei  and  sticnglh,  and  we  can  diaw  as  nmeh  as  wo  like, 
both  of  us,  I the  bubble  and  you  the  niounl.ain-liigh  wave*  Believe  theicfoie  m 
yourselves,  The  seciet  of  Advaila  is — Believe  m yomscives  fust,  and  then  believe 
in  ail) thing  else.  In  the  hisioty  of  the  woild,  you  will  fi»»'^fhat  only  those  nations 
that  have  believed  in  themselves  have  become  great  and  stioiig.  In  the  hisluiy  of  each 
nation,  you  will  alw.ays  find  that  only  those  individuals  who  have  believed  in  themselves 
have  become  gicat  and  strong.  Ileic,  to  India,  came  an  I'higli.shinaii  who  was  duly 
a clerk,  and  for  want  of  funds  and  olhei  leasons  he  twice  Hied  to  blow  his  bi.iins  out, 
and  when  he  failed,  he  believed  in  himself,  he  believed  that  be  vv.ts  bom  to  do  gieat 
things,  and  that  man  became  Lord  Clive,  the  foundei  of  the  Kmpiie*  If  he  had 
believed  the  pddris  and  gone  ciavvling  all  his  life— “ Oh  Loid  I am  weak,  and  1 am 
low  ■’ — wheie  would  he  have  been  In  a lunatic  .isylum.  You  also  aie  made  limaiics 
with  these  evil  teachings.  1 have  seen  all  the  world  over,  vie  bad  ellecLs  of  these 
weak  teachings  of  humility  destroying  the  human  race  Our  childien  aic  bioiight 
up  in  this  way,  and  is  it  a wonder  ihai  they  become  semi-lunalics. 

This  is  teaching  on  the  piactical  side.  Believe,  ihercloie,  in  yomscives,  and  if  you 
want  mateiial  wealth,  work  it  out ; it  will  come  to  you*  It  you  want  to  bt  inlelleclual, 
work  It  out  on  the  intellectual  plane,  and  inlelleclual  giants  you  shall  be.  Aud  if  you 
want  to  attain  to  fieedom,  work  it  out  on  the  spiiUual  plane,  and  fiee  you  shall  be,  and 
shall  enter  into  Nirvana,  the  blissful.  But  one  defect  which  lay  m the  Advaiia  vjas,  its 
being  worked  out  so  long  on  the  spiiilual  plane  only,  and  nowheie  else  ; now,  the  time 
has  come  when  you  have  to  make  it  piactical.  It  shall  no  moie  Ive  a Rahcnya,  a scciet, 
it  shall  no  more  live  with  monks  in  caves  and  forests,  and  in  the  Himalayas , it  must 
come  down  to  the  daily,  everyd.vy  life  of  the  people ; it  shall  be  worked  out  in  the 
palace  of  lire  king,  in  the  cave  of  the  recluse,  it  shall  be  vvoiked  out  in  the  cottage  of 
the  poor,  by  the  beggar  in  the  stieet,  cvcrjcfcvheie,  tmyvvheie  it  can  be  vvoiked  ou 
Therefore  do  not  fear  whether  you  aie  a vjjjjjman  oi  a Sudia,  foi  this  leligion  is  so 

great,  says  Lord  Kiislma,  that  even  tire  least  done,  brings  a gieat  amount  of  good. 


178  LECTURES—FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 

Therefore,  children  of  the  Aryas,  do  not  sit  idle  ; awake,  arise,  and  stop  not  till 
the  goal  IS  reached.  The  time  has  come  when  this  Advaila  is  to  be  worked  out 
practically.  Let  us  bring  it  down  from  heaven  unto  the  earth  ; this  is  the  present 
dispen.sation.  A}  e,  the  voices  of  our  forefathers  of  old  are  telling  us  to  bring  it 
down  from  heaven  to  the  eaith.  Let  your  teachings  permeate  the  world,  till  they 
have  entered  into  every  pore  of  society,  till  they  have  become  the  common  propeity 
of  everybody,  till  they  have  become  part  and  parcel  of  our  lives,  till  they  have 
entered  into  our  veins  and  tingle  with  every  drop  of  blood  there. 

Aye,  you  may  be  astonished  to  hear,  that  as  piactical  Vedantists  the  Americans  are 
better  than  we- are.  I used  to  stand  on  the  .sea-shore  at  New  Yoik,  and  look  at  the  emi- 
grants coining  fiom  different  countries,  crushed,  down-tiodden,  hopeless,  unable  to  look 
a man  in  the  face,  with  a little  bundle  of  clothes  as  all  their  possession,  and  these  all  in 
rags  ; if  they  saw  a policeman  they  were  afiaidand  tried  to  get  to  the  other  side  of 
the  footpath.  And,  maik  }Ou,  in  six  months  tho.se  very  men  were  walking  erect, 
well-clothed,  looking  eveiybody  in  the  face;  and  what  made  this  wondeiful  differ- 
ence ? Say,  this  man  comes  fiom  Armenia,  or  somewhere  else  where  he  was  crushed 
down  beyond  all  recognition,  where  everybody  told  him  he  was  a born  slave,  and 
born  to  lemain  in  a low  state  all  his  life,  and  where  at  the  least  move  on  his  part  he 
was  trodden  upon.  'I'heie  ever) thing  told  him  as  it  were,  “ Slave  ! you  are  a slave, 
remain  «o.  Hopeless  you  were  boin,  hopeless  you  must  remain.”  Kven  the 
very  air  murmured  round  him  as  it  weie,  “There  is  no  hope  for  you,  hopeless 
and  a slave  you  must  remain”;  while  the  stiong  man  ciiished  the  life  out  of  him. 
And  when  he  landed  in  the  streets  of  New  Yoik,  he  found  a gentleman,  well- 
dressed,  shaking  him  by  the  hand;  it  made  no  diffeience  that  the  one  was  in  lags 
and  the  other  well-clad.  He  went  a step  fuither  and  saw  a restaurant,  that  theie 
were  gentlemen  dining  at  a table,  and  he  was  asked  to  take  a seat  at  the  corner  of  the 
same  table.  lie  went  about,  and  found  anew  life,  that  there  was  a place  wheie 
he  was  a man  among  men.  Perhaps  he  went  to  Washington,  shook  hands  with 
the  Piesident  of  the  United  States,  and  perhaps  there  he  saw  men  coming  from 
distant  villages,  peasants,  and  ill-clad,  all  shaking  hands  with  the  Piesident.  Then 
the  veil  of  Maya  slipped  away  from  him.  He  is  Brahman,  he  who  has  been  hypnotised 
into  slavery  and  weakness,  is  once  more  awake,  and  he  rises  up  and  finds  himself  a 
man,  in  a woild  of  men.  Aye,  in  this  country  of  ours,  the  very  birthplace  of  the 
Vedanta,  our  masses  have  been  hypnotised  for  ages  into  that  stale.  To  touch  them  is 
pollution;  to  sit  with  tlujin  is  pollution!  Hopeless  they  were  born;  hopele.ss 
they  must  remain  I And  the  result  is  that  they  have  been  sinking,  sinking,  sinking, 
and  have  come  to  the  last  stage  to  which  a human  being  can  come.  For  what  country 
is  theie  in  the  world  where  man  has  to  sleep  with  the  cattle ; ai  d for  this  blame  nobody 
else,  do  not  commit  the  mistake  of  the  ignoiant.  The  effect  is  here  and  the  cause  is 
here  too.  We  are  to  blame.  Stand  up,  be  bold,  and  take  the  blame  on  your  own 
shoulders.  Do  not  go  about  throwing  mud  at  others ; for  all.the  faults  you  suffer  from 
you  are  the  sole  and  only  cause. 

Young  men  of  Lahore,  understand  this,  therefore,  this  great  sin,  hereditary 
and  national,  is  on  your  shouldeis.  There  is  no  hope  for  us.  You  may  make 
thousands  of  societies,  twenty  thousand  political  assemblages,  fifty  thousand  institu- 
tions. These  will  be  of  no  use  ufttil  there  is  that  sympathy,  that  love,  that  heait,  that 
thinks  for  all ; until  Buddha’s  heart  comes  once  more  into  India,  until  the  words  of 
IvOid  Kiishna  aic  brought  to  their  piactical  use,  thete  is  no  hope  for  us.  You  go  on 


the  VEDA.WA  17, 

imitating  the  F.uropeans  and  their  so'dieties  and  their  assemhlages,  but  let  me  tell 
you  a story,  a fact  that  I saw  with  my  own  eyes.  A company  of  Burmans  was 
taken  over  to  London  by  some  persons  here,  who  turned  out  to  be  Kuraslans.  7'hey 
exhibited  tliese  people  in  London,  took  all  the  money,  and  tlien  took  these  Burmans 
ovei  to  the  Continent,  and  left  them  there  for  good  or  evil,  ’riie.se  poor  people  did 

not  know  a word  of  any  European  language,  but  the  Knglish  Consul  in  Austiia  sent 

them  over  to  London.  They  were  helpless  in  London,  witlioiit  knowing  anyone. 
But  an  English  lady  got  to  know  of  them,  took  these  foreigneis  from  Burma  into 
her  own  house,  gave  them  her  own  clothes,  her  bed,  and  eveiything,  and  then  sent 
the  news  to  the  papers.  And,  mark  you,  the  next  day  the  whole  nation  was,  as  it 
weie,  roused.  Money  poured  in  and  these  people  were  helped  out  and  sent  hack  to 
Buima.  On  this  soit  of  sympadiy  are  based  all  their  political  and  other  insiitnlions  ; 
it  is  the  rock-fonndalion  of  love,  for  themselves  at  least.  They  may  tiot  love  the 
woild  ; and  the  Burmans  may  be  their  enemies,  but  in  England,  it  goes  without  saying, 
tbeie  is  this  great  love  for  their  own  people,  for  truth  and  justice  and  charity  to  the 
sti anger  at  the  door.  I should  be  the  most  Jingrateful  man  if  I did  not  tell  you  how 
woudei fully  and  how  hospitably  I was  received  in  every  country  in  the  West,  Where 
is  the  heart  here  to  build  upon  1 No  sooner  do  we  stait  a little  joint-stock  company 
than  we  try  to  cheat  each  olhei,  and  the  whole  thing  comes  down  with  a crash. 
You  talk  of  imitating  the  English,  and  building  up  as  big  a nation  as  they  ate.  But 
where  are  the  foundations  ? Ours  arc  only  sand,  and  therefore  the  building  comes 
down  with  a crash  in  no  lime. 

'Iheiefore,  }Oung  men  of  T.ahoie,  raise  once  more  that  mlgHty  banner  of 
Advaila,  for  on  no  other  ground  can  you  h.ave  that  wondeiful  love,  until  you 
see  that  the  same  T.oid  is  present  eveiywhere.  Unfuil  that  banner  of  love! 
" Aiise,  awake  and  stop  not  till  the  goal  is  reached.  ” Atisc,  aiise  once  more, 
for  nothing  can  be  done  without  renunciation.  If  you  want  to  help  others,  your  little 
self  must  go.  In  the  woids  of  the  C'hiistians— you  cannot  serve  God  and  Mammon 
at  the  same  lime.  Have  Vtii/ diryiun — your  ancestors  gave  up  the  woild  for  doing 
gie.it  things.  At  the  present  lime  theie  aic  men  who  give  up  the  w'oild  to  help 
their  own  salvation.  'I'hiow  away  everything,  even  your  own  salvation,  and  go  and 
help  otheis.  Aye,  you  are  alw.ays  talking  hold  woids,  hut  heie  is  piaclical  Vedanta 

beloie  you.  Give  up  this  little  life  of  yours.  What  matters  it  if  you  die  of 

slaivation,  you  and  I and  thons.ands  like  us,  so  long  as  this  nation  lives?  The 
nation  is  sinking,  the  cnise  of  unnumbered  millions  is  on  our  heads;  -those  to 
whom  we  have  been  giving  ditch-water  to  di ink  when  they  have  been  dying  of  thirst 
and  while  the  peiennial  river  of  water  was  flowing  past ; the  unnumbered  millions 
whom  we  have  allowed  to  starve  in  sight  of  plenty  ; the  unnumbered  millions  to 
whom  we  have  talked  of  Advaita  and  whom  w'e  have  hated  with  all  our  strength  ; 
the  unnumbered  millions  for  whom  we  have  invented  the  doctiine  of  LoMchdra; — 
to  wlK»m  we  have  l.ilked  theoretically  that  we  are  all  the  same,  and  all  are  one 
with  the  same  T.ord,  without  even  an  ounce  of  practice.  “ Yet,  my  friends, 
it  must  be  only  in  the  mind  and  never  in  practice  I”  Wipe  off  this  blot.  “Arise 

and  awake.”  What  matters  it  if  this  little  life  goes ; everyone  has  to  die,  the  saint 

01  the  .sinner,  the  rich  or  the  poor.  The  body  never  remains  for  anyone.  Aiise  and 
awake  and  be  peifeclly  sincete.  Oui  insincerity  in  India  is  awful ; what  we  want  is 
chaiacter,  that  steadiness  «and  chaiacter  that  make  a man  cling  on  to  a thing  like  grim 
death. 


i8o 


LFXTURES~FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


“ Tx't  the  sages  blame  or  let  them  praise,  let  Lakshmi  come  to-day  or  let  het  go 
away,  let  death  come  just  now,  or  in  a hundied  years  ; be  indeed  is  the  sage  who 
does  not  make  one  false  step  from  the  right  path.”  Arise  and  awake,  for  the  time 
is  passing  and  all  our  eiieigies  will  be  flittered  away  in  vain  talking.  Arise  and 
awake,  let  minor  things,  and  (piarrels  over  little  details,  and  fights  over  little  doctrines 
be  thrown  a',ide,  lor  here  is  the  gieatcst  of  all  woiks,  here  are  the  sinking  millions. 
When  the  Mahommedans  fust  came  into  India,  what  great  numbers  of  Hindus  were 
heie  ; but  maik,  how  to-day  they  have  dwimlled  down.  Every  day  they  will  become 
less  and  less  till  the  whole  disappear.  Let  them  disappear,  but  with  them  will  disap- 
pear the  maivcllous  ideas,  of  which,  with  all  their  defects  and  all  their  misrepresenta 
lions,  they  still  stand  as  rcpiescnlalives.  And  with  them  will  disappear  this  marvell- 
ous Advaita,  the  crest-jewcl  of  all  spiritual  thought.  Therefore,  arise,  awake,  with 
youi  hands  stretched  out  to  protect  the  spiiltuality  of  the  world.  And  first  of  all, 
^YOl■k  it  out  foi  your  own  countiy.  What  we  want  Is,  not  so  much  spirituality  as  a 
little  of  the  biinging  down  of  the  Advaita  into  the  mateiial  woild.  First  bread  and 
then  religion.  We  stutf  them  too  much  with  religion,  when  the  poor  fellows  have  been 
starving.  No  dogmas  will  satisfy  the  craving  of  hunger.  There  are  two  curses 
here,  first  our  weakness,  secondly,  our  haticd,  our  diied-up  hearts.  You  may  talk 
docliines  by  the  millions,  yon  may  have  sects  by  the  hundicds  of  millions;  aye, 
but  it  is  nothing  until  you  have  the  heart  to  feel,  feel  for  them  as  your  Veda  teaches 
yon,  till  you  find  that  they  are  pails  of  your  own  bodies,  till  you  realise  that  you  and 
they,  the  poor  and  the  lich,  the  saint  and  the  sinner,  are  all  paits  of  One  Infinite 
Whole,  which  }Ou  call  Biahman. 

Gentlemen,  I have  tiicd  to  place  before  you  a few  of  the  most  biilliant  points 
of  the  Advaita  system,  and  now  the  time  has  come  when  it  should  bo  cai lied  into 
practice,  not  only  in  this  countiy  but  everywhere.  Modem  Science  and  Its  sledge- 
hammer blows  are  pulveiiMiig  the  poicelain  foundations  of  all  Dualistic  religions 
everywhere.  Not  only  here  aie  the  Dualists  toi luring  texts  till  they  will  extend 
no  longer, — for  texts  aie  not  India-iubber, — it  Is  not  only  here  that  they  are  Hying 
to  get  into  the  nooks  and  comers  to  protect  themselves,  it  is  still  more  so  in  Kuiope 
and  Amciica.  And  even  theie  something  of  this  idea  will  have  to  go  from  India.  It 
has  all eady  got  there.  It  will  have  to  giovv  and  increase,  and  save  their  civilisations 
too.  For,  in  the  West,  the  old  order  of  things  is  vanishing,  giving  way  to  a new  order 
of  things,  which  is  the  worship  of  gold,  the  woiship  of  Mammon,  'rims,  this  old 
crude  B>siem  of  leligion  was  heltei  than  the  modern  system,  namely,— competition  and 
gold.  No  nation,  however  strong,  can  stand  on  such  foundations,  and  the  history 
of  the  world  tells  us  that  all  that  had  such  foundations  aiC  dead  and  gone.  In  the 
first  place  wo  have  to  stop  the  In-coming  of  .such  a wave  in  India.  Therefore,  pieach 
the  Advaita  to  every  one,  so  that  religion  may  vvilhsland  the  shock  of  modern  science. 
Not  only  so,  you  will  have  to  help  others ; your  thought  will  help  out  Europe  and 
Anieilca.  Bui  above  all,  let  me  once  more  remind  you  that  here  is  need  of  practical 
woik,  and  the  fiisl  part  of  that  js,  that  you  should  go  to  the  sinking  millions  of  India, 
and  take  them  by  the  hand,  remembering  the  words  of  the  Lord  Kiishna 

ft  agr  asifoi  % flw:  n 

“Even  in  this  life  they  have  conquered  heaven  whose  minds  are  firmed-fixed 
on  the  sameness  of  everything,  for  God  is  pme  and  the  same  to  all ; therefore,  such 
Ale  said  to  be  living  in  God.” 


VRDANTISM. 


At  Klietri  on  20lh  December  1897,  Swami  Yivekananda  delivered  a lecture  on 
Vedanlism,  in  the  ball  of  the  I\[aliarajA’s  bun}?alow  in  which  he  lodged  with  his 
disciples.  'Phe  Swami  was  introduced  by  the  Rajaji,  who  was  the'  president  of 
the  meeting,  and  spoke  for  more  than  an  hour  and  a half.  The  Swami  was 
at  his  best,  and  it  was  a matter  of  regret  that  no  shorthand  w liter  was  present 
to  repoit  this  interesting  lecture  at  length.  The  following  is  a summaiy  from’ notes 
Laken  down  at  the  time  ; - 

Two  nations  of  yore,  namely  the  Oieck  and  the  Aryan,  placed  in  different 
environments  and  circunistances,—the  formei,  suiiounded  by  all  that  was  beautiful, 
sweet,  and  tempting  in  Nature,  with  an  invigoiating  chmatc,  and  the  latter,  suiiounded 
on  every  side  by  all  that  was  sublime,  and  boin  and  nuitmed  in  a climate  which  did  not 
allow  of  much  physical  exercise, —developed  two  peculiai  and  dineiciit  ideals  of 
civilisation.  The  study  of  the  Greeks  was  the  outer  infinite,  while  that  ot  the  Ai}ans  was 
the  inner  infinite  one  studied  the  macrocosm,  and  the  other,  the  iniciocosm.  Js.uh 
had  its  distinct  part  to  play  in  the  civilisation  of  the  woild.  Not  (hat  one  was  leipiircd 
to  horiow  from  the  other,  hut  if  they  compared  notes  both  would  be  the  gamers. 
The  Aryans  were  by  nature  an  analytical  race.  In  the  .sciences  of  matbemalics  and 
giammar  wondciful  fruits  were  gained,  and  by  the  analy.si.s  ol  mind  the  full  tree  was 
developed.  In  Pythagoras,  Socrates,  Plato,  and  the  Egyptian  neo-Plalonist.s,  we 
can  find  traces  of  Indian  thought. 

The  Swami  then  traced  in  detail  the  induence  of  Indian  ihoughl  on  Europe, 
and  showed  how  at  different  periods  Spain,  Germ.my,  and  other  Kuiopcan  countiies, 
were  greatly  influenced  by  it.  I'he  Indian  piince,  Dani  Shuko,  tianslated  the  Upani- 
shads  into  Persian,  ami  a Latin  translation  of  the  same  wms  seen  by  Schopenhauer, 
whose  philosophy  was  moulded  by  these.  Next  to  him,  the  philosophy  of  Kant  also 
shows  traces  of  the  teachings  of  the  Upanisliads.  In  Europe  it  is  the  inteiest  in  roin- 
paiative  philology  that  aitiacts  scholais  to  the  study  ot  .Sanskiit.  though  there  are  men 
like  Deussen  who  take  interest  in  philosophy  for  its  own  sake.  The  Swami  hoped  that 
in  future  much  more  interest  would  he  laken  in  the  study  of  Sanskiit.  He  then 
showed  that  the  word  “Hindu”  in  foimcr  limes  was  full  of  meaning,  .is  lefcriing 
to  the  people  living  beyond  the  Sindhu,  or  the  Indus  ; it  is  now  meaningless,  lepreseu- 
ting  neither  the  nation,  nor  their  religion,  for  on  this  side  of  the  Indus,  various  nations 
professing  differ«nt  religions  live  at  the  pre.sent  day. 

The  Swami  then  dw'clt  at  length  on  the  Vedas,  and  stated  that  they  were  not  spoken 
by  any  person,  but  the  ideas  were  evolving  slowly  and  slowly  until  they  were  embodied 
in  book  form,  and  then  that  book  became  the  auiboiily.  He  said,  that  various 
religions  were  embodied  in  books  ; the  power  of  books  seemed  to  be  infinite.  The 
Hindus  have  their  Vedas,  and  will  have  to  hold  on  to  them  for  thousands  of  years 
more,  but  their  ideas  about  them  are  to  be  changed  and  built  anew  on  a solid  founda- 
tion of  rock.  The  Vedas,  he  said,  were  a huge  literature.  Ninety-nine  per  cent,  of 
them  were  missing;  they  were  in  the  keeping  of  certain  families,  w'lth  whose  extinc- 
tion the  books  were  lost.  But  still,  those  that  are  ktt  now,  could  not  be  contained 


iSi  LECTURES  -FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 

even  in  a large  hall  like  that,  'rtiey  were  written  in  language,  archaic  and  simple  ; 
their  grammar  was  veiy  etude,  so  much  so,  that  it  was  said  that  some  part  of  the 
Vedas  had  no  meaning. 

He  then  dilated  on  the  two  portions  of  the  Vedas--lhe  Karma-kandam 
and  the  Jnana-kandam.  'I'he  Karma-kandam,  he  said,  were  the  Sainhitas  and  the 
Ihalunana'^.  The  Biahmanas  dealt  with  sacniices.  The  Samhilas  weie  songs  com- 
posed in  ihhandiis  known  as  Anushthup,  Trishtup,  Jagati,  c'i:c.  Generally  they  piaised 
deities  such  as  Vanina  or  India,  and  the  (jue.stion  arose  who  were  these  deities,  and 
if  any  thcoiy  was  raised  about  them  they  weie  smashed  up  by  other  theoiies,  and 
so  on  It  went. 

'I'lic  Swami  then  pioceeded  to  explain  different  ideas  of  w’orship.  With  the 
ancient  Babylonians,  the  soul  was  only  a double,  having  no  individuality  of  its  own  and 
not  able  to  bieak  its  connecliou  with  the  body.  'I'his  double  was  believed  to  suffer 
hunger  and  thiist,  feelings  and  emotions  like  that  of  the  old  body.  Another  idea 
was,  that  if  the  fust  body  was  injured  the  double  would  be  injuied  also  ; when  the 
first  was  annihilated,  the  double  also  pciished  ; so  the  tendency  grew  to  preserve  the 
body,  and  thus  mummies,  tombs,  and  graves  came  into  existence.  'I’lie  Isgyptians,  the 
liabylonians,  and  the  Jews  never  got  any  farther  than  this  idea  of  the  double  ; they 
did  not  leach  to  the  idea  of  the  Atman  beyond. 

Pi  of.  I\Iax  Muliei’s  opinion  was,  that  not  the  least  trace  of  ancestral  worship 
could  be  found  in  the  Rig- Veda,  'riierc  we  do  not  meet  with  the  lion  id  sight  of 
mummies  staling  slaik  and  blank  at  us.  'I'here  the  gods  w'ere  fi iendly  to  man  ; 
communion  between  the  woishipper  and  the  woishippcd  was  healthy.  Theie  was 
no  moroseness,  no  want  of  simple  joy,  no  lack  of  smiles,  or  light  in  the  eyes.  The 
Swami  said  that,  dwelling  on  the  Vedas  he  even  seemed  to  hear  the  laughter  of  the 
god^!.  The  Vedic  Rishis  might  not  have  had  finish  in  their  expression  hut  they 
weie  men  of  culluie  and  heait,  and  we  arc  brutes  in  compaiison  to  them.  Swamiji  then 
lecited  sevcial  Manilas  in  confirmation  of  what  he  had  just  said.  “Cairyhimto  the 
place  where  the  Kailiers  live,  where  there  is  no  giief  or  soriow.”  &c.  Thus  the 
idea  aiose  that  the  sooner  the  dead  body  was  cremated  the  belter.  By  and  by  they 
came  to  know  that  there  w-as  a finer  body  that  went  to  a place  wheic  ihcie  was  all 
joy  and  no  soirow.  In  the  Semitic  type  of  religion  there  was  tiihulalion  and  feai  ; 
it  was  thought  that  if  a man  >aw  God,  he  would  die.  But  according  to  the  Rig- 
Vetla,  wlien  a man  saw  God  face  to  face  then  began  his  leal  life. 

Now  the  question  came  to  be  asked,  w'hat  were  these  gods.  Sometimes  Indra 
came  and  helped  man  ; sometimes  Indra  diank  too  much  Soma.  Now  and  again, 
adjectives  .such  as,  all-powei  fill,  all-peivading,  were  alliibu^ed  to  him;  the  same  was 
the  case  with  Vaiuna.  In  this  w.iy  it  went  on,  and  some  of  these  Mantras  depicting  the 
chaiacteiibtics  of  these  gods  w-ere  maivellous,  and  the  language  w-as  exceedingly 
grand.  The  speaker  here  repeated  the  famous  Nd'iadiya  Sukla,  which  describes  the 
Prala)a stale,  and  in  which  occuis  the  idea  of  ‘Daikness  coveiing  darkness,’  and  asked, 
if  the  persons  that  desciibed  these  sublime  ideas  in  such  poetic  thought  w'cre 
uncivilised  and  uncultured,  what  can  we  call  our.selves  ? It  was  not  for  him,  Swamiji 
said,  to  criticise  or  pass  any  judgment  on  those  Rishis  anil  their  Gods — Indra, 
or  Vaiuna.  All  this  was  likje  .\  panoiama,  unfolding  one  scene  after  another, 
and  behind  them  all  as  a background  stood  out  “ I ” “That 

which  exists  is  One;  sages  call  It  yaiiously.”  The  whole  thing  was  most  mystical,  mar- 
vellous, and  exquisitely  beautiful.  It  seemed  even  yet  quitd  unapproachable, — 


VEDANTISM  183 

tlie  veil  was  so  thin  that  it  would  rend,  as  it  were,  at  the  least  touch  and  vanish 
like  a mirage. 

Continuing  he  said,  that  one  thing  seemed  to  him  quite  clear  and  possible,  that 
Aryans  too,  like  the  Greeks,  went  to  outside  Nature  for  their  solution,  that  Nature 
tempted  them  outside,  led  them  step  by  step  to  the  outward  woi Id,  beautiful  and 
good.  Hut  here  in  India  anything  which  was  not  sublime,  counted  for  nothing.  It 
never  occuried  to  the  Gieeks  to  piy  into  the  secrets  after  death.  But  here  fiom  the 
beginning  was  asked  again  and  again,  “ What  am  f ?"  *•  What  will  become  of  me  after 
death.^”  There  the  Greek  thought,,  the  man  died  and  went  to  heaven.  What  was  meant 
by  going  to  heaven  ? It  meant  going  outside  of  everything ; there  was  nothing 
inside,  everything  was  outside  ; his  search  was  all  diiected  oul.side,  nay,  he  himself  v\as, 
as  it  were,  outside  himself.  And  when  he  went  to  a place  which  was  very  much  like 
this  woild  minus  all  its  sorrows,  he  thought  he  had  got  everything  that  was  desirable 
and  was  satisfied ; and  there  all  ideas  of  religion  stopped.  But  this  did  not  satisfy 
the  Hindu  mind  ; in  its  analysis,  these  heavens  were  all  included  within  the  rnatciial 
univcise.  “Whatever  conies  by  combination”  the  Hindus  said,  “dies  of  annihila- 
tion.” They  asked  extcinal  Nature,  “Do  you  know  what  is  soul?”  and  Nature 
answered,  “ No.”  Is  there  any  (jod  ?”  Nature  answcicd,  “ I do  not  know.”  'rhen 
they  tinned  away  from  Nature.  They  understood  that  external  Nature,  however 
great  and  giand,  w'as  limited  in  .space  and  lime.  Then  there  arose  another  voice  ; 
new  sublime  thoughts  dawned  in  their  minds.  That  voice  .said—”  AWi,  A’eli," 

“ Not  this,  Not  this.”  All  the  different  gods  vvcie  now  leduced  into  one  ; .suns, 
moons,  and  slurs,— nay,  the  whole  univeise— were  one,  and  upon  this  new 
ideal,  spiritual  basis  of  leligion  was  built. 

“ There  the  sun  doth  not  shine,  neither  the  moon,  nor  stars,  nor  lightning,  what 
to  speak  of  this  fiie.  He  .shining,  everything  doth  shine.  Through  Him  evciy- 
thmg  shmeth.”  No  more  is  there  that  limited,  ciude,  personal  idea;  no  more  is 
there  that  little  idea  of  (jod  silling  in  judgment;  no  more  is  that  search  outside, 
but  hencefoilh  it  is  directed  inside.  Thus  the  Upanishads  became  the  Bible  of  India. 

It  was  a vast  literature,  these  Upanishads,  and  all  the  schools  holding  diffeient 
opinions  in  India  came  to  be  established  on  the  foundation  of  the  Upanishads. 

The  Svvami  passed  on  to  the  Dualislic,  Qualified  Dualislic,  and  Advaitic  ihcniics, 
and  lecoiiciled  them  by  sav  ing,  that  each  one  of  these  was  like  a step,  by  which 
one  passed  before  the  other  was  reached ; the  final  evolution  to  Advaitism 
was  the  natuial  outcome,  and  the  last  step  was  “ 'rallvamasi.”  He  pointed  out 
where  even  the  great  commentators,  .Sankaiacharya,  Ramamijacharya  and  IMadhvva- 
ciuirya  had  committed  mistakes.  Each  one  believed  in  the  Upanishads  as  the  sole 
authotily,  but  thought  that  they  preached  one  thing,  one  path  only.  Thus  Sankara- 
chaiya  committed  the  mistake  in  supposing  that  the  whole  of  the  Upanishads  taught 
one  thing,  which  W'as  Advaitism,  and  nothing  else  ; and  wherever  a passage  bearing 
distinctly  the  Dvaita  idea  occurred,  he  broke  and  tortured  the  meaning  to  make  it 
support  his  own  theory.  So  with  Ramanuja  and  Madhvvacharya  when  pure  Advaitic 
texts  occurred.  It  was  perfectly  true  that  the  Upanjshads  had  one  thing  to  teach, 
but  that  W'as  taught  as  going  up  from  one  step  to  another.  Swamiji  regretted,  that 
in  modern  India  the  spirit  of  religion  is  gone  ; only  the  externals  remain  ; the  people 
are  neither  Hindus,  nor  Vedanlisls ; they  arc  incicly  don't-touchists ; the  kitchen  is  their 


LECTURES— FROM  COLOMBO  TO  AlMORA 


184 

temple  and  hatufi  bar/am  (cooking  pots)  are  their  dera/d  (object  of  worship), 
U'his  state  of  tiling  must  go.  The  sooner  it  is  given  up  the  better  for  obf 
religion.  I^et  the  Upanishads  shine  in  their  glory,  and  at  the  same  time  let  not 
quarrels  exist  amongst  different  sects. 

As  Swamiji  was  not  keeping  good  health,  he  felt  exhausted  at  this  stage  of  hia 
speech  ; so  he  took  a little  test  of  half  an  hour,  during  which  time  the  whole  audfence 
waited  patiently  to  hear  the  rest  of  the  lecture.  He  came  out  and  spoke  again  for 
another  half  hour,  and  explained  that  knowledge  was  the  finding  of  unity  in  diversity, 
and  the  highest  point  in  every  science  was  reached  when  it  found  .the  one  unity 
underlying  all  variety.  This  was  as  true  in  physical  science,  as  in  the  spiritual. 


THE  INFLUENCE  OF  INDIAN  SPIRITUAL  THOUGHT 
IN  ENGLAND. 


The  S\vami  Vivekananda  presided  at  a meeting  at  which  the  5>ister  Nivedita 
(jMiss  M.  K.  Noble)  delivered  a lecluie  on,  “The  Influence  of  Indian  Spiritual  Thought 
in  Kngland,”  on  the  nth  IMaich,  i8y8,  at  the  Star  Theatie,  Calcutta*  Swaiiii  Vivcka- 
nanda  on  lising  to  introduce  Miss  Noble  spoke  as  lollows 

Ladies  and  Gentlemen, — 

When  I was  travelling  through  the  Kastern  parts  of  Asia,  one  thing  especiall)* 
struck  me,  that  is,  the  prevalence  of  Indian  spiiitual  thought  in  Eaj>tern  Asiatic 
countiies.  You  may  imagine  the  suipiise  with  which  I noticed  wiillcn  on  the  walls 
of  Chinese  and  Japanese  temples,  some  well-known  Sanskiit  Mantras,  and  possibly 
it  will  please  you  all  the  moie  to  know,  that  they  w'ere  all  in  old  Bengali  characters, 
standing  even  in  the  present  day,  as  a monument  of  missionaiy  eneigy  and  zeal 
displayed  by  our  foiefaihers  of  Bengal. 

Apait  from  these  Asiatic  coimtiie!!,  the  work  of  India’s  spiritual  ihouglu  is  so 
wide-spiead  and  unmistakable  that  even  in  Western  countiics,  going  deep  below  the 
suiface,  I found  tiaces  of  the  same  inHucncc  still  present.  It  has  now  become  an 
histoiical  fact  that  the  spiiitual  ideas  of  the  Indian  people  tiavcllcd  towards  both  the 
East  and  the  West  in  days  gone  by.  Kveiyhody  knows  now  how  much  the  woild  owes 
to  India’s  spiiitualily,  and  what  a potent  factor  in  the  present  and  the  past  of  humanity 
have  been  the  spiiitual  powers  of  India.  These  have  taken  place  in  the  past.  I 
find  another  most  remarkable  phenomenon,  and  that  is,  that  the  most  stuiycndous 
powers  of  civilisation  and  [irogress  lowaids  humanity,  and  social  progress,  have  been 
elTecled  by  that  wonderful  uce— I mean  the  Anglo-Saxon.  1 may  go  fuithcr  and 
tell  you,  that  had  it  not  been  for  the  power  of  the  Anglo-Sa-xons  w'c  should  not  have 
met  here  to-day  to  discuss  as  we  are  doing,  the  influence  of  our  Indian  spiritual 
thought.  And  coming  back  to  our  own  country,  coming  from  the  West  to  the  East, 

I sec  the  same  Anglo-Saxon  pow'eis  woiking  here  w'ith  all  theii  defects,  hut  lelaining 
their  pecLiliaily  chaiacteiistic  good  features,  and  I believe  that  at  last  the  grand 
result  is  achieved.  The  Biilish  idea  of  expansion  and  progress  is  forcing  us  up, 
and  let  us  remember  that  the  civilisation  ol  the  West  has  been  diawn  from  tlie 
fountain  of  the  Greeks,  and  that  the  gieat  idea  of  Greek  civilisation  is  that  of 
expression.  In  India,  we  ////V/zt— but  unfoitunately  sometimes  we  think  so  deeply 
that  there  is  no  power  left  for  expression.  Giadually  therefore,  it  came  to  pass  that 
our  force  of  expiession  did  not  manifest  itself  bcfoie  the  world,  and  what  is  the 
result  of  that  ? The  result  is  this— we  woiked  to  hide  everything  we  had.  It  began 
first  with  individuals  as  a faculty  of  hiding,  and  it  ended  by  becoming  a national  habit 
of  hiding— there  is  such  lack  of  power  of  expic.ssion  with  us  that  we  aie  now 
considered  a dead  nation.  Without  expression,  how  can  we  live?  1 he  backbone 
of  Western  civilisation  is-expansion  and  expression.  This  side  of  the  w^ork 
of  the  Anglo-Saxon  lace  in  India  to  which  I diaw  your  altenlion,  is  calculated  to 
rouse  our  nation  once  moie  to  express  itself- and  is  inciting  it  to  bring  out  its 
hidden  tieasuies  before  tlie  woild  by  using  the  means  of  communication  provided 

X 


i86 


lECTUJiES—FR03I  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


by  the  same  mighty  race.  The  Anglo-Saxons  have  created  a future  for  India,  and 
the  space  through  which  our  ancestral  ideas  are  now  ranging  is  simply  phenomenal. 
Aye,  what  great  facilities  had  our  forefathers  when  they  delivered  their  message  of 
truth  and  salvation  ? Aye,  how  did  the  great  Buddha  preach  the  noble  doctrine  of 
universal  brothei hood  ? There  were  even  then  great  facilities  here,  in  our  beloved 
India,  for  the  attainment  of  real  happiness,  and  we  could  easily  send  our  ideas  from 
one  end  of  the  woild  to  the  other.  Now  we  have  even  reached  the  Anglo-Saxon 
race.  Tins  is  the  kind  of  interaction  now  going  on,  and  we  find  that  our  message 
is  heard,  and  not  only  heard  but  is  being  responded  to.  Already  England  has  given 
us  some  of  her  gieat  intellects  to  help  us  in  our  mission.  Every  one  has  heard  and 
is  peihaps  familiar  with  my  friend  Miss  Miillei,  who  is  now  here  on  this  platform. 
This  lady,  boin  of  a veiy  good  family  and  well  educated,  has  given  her  whole  life 
to  us  out  of  love  for  India,  and  has  made  India  her  home  and  her  family.  Every 
one  of  you  is  familiar  with  the  name  of  that  noble  and  distinguished  Englishwoman 
who  has  also  given  her  whole  life  to  w'ork  for  the  good  of  India  and  India’s  regenera- 
tion, I mean  Mrs.  Besant.  To-day,  we  meet  on  this  platfoim  two  ladies  from 
America  who  have  the  same  mission  in  their  hearts ; anil  I can  assure  you  that  they 
also  are  willing  to  devote  their  lives  to  do  the  least  good  to  our  poor  country, 
I lake  this  opportunity  of  reminding  you  of  the  name  of  one  of  our  countiymen — 
one  who  has  seen  England  and  America,  one  in  whom  I have  gieat  confidence,  and 
whom  I respect  and  love,  a,nd  who  would  have  been  present  heie  but  for  an  engage- 
ment elsewhere — a man  working  steadily  and  silently  for  the  good  of  our  countiy — a 
man  of  great  spiiitualily — I mean  Mr.  Mohini  Mohun  Cliatterji.  And  now  England 
has  sent  us  another  gift  in  Miss  Margaret  Noble,  from  whom  we  expect  much. 
Without  any  more  woids  of  mine  I intioducc  to  you  Miss  Noble,  who  will  now 
address  you. 

After  .Sister  Nivedita  had  finished  her  interesting  lecture,  the  Swami  rose  and  said  : — ■ 

I have  only  a few  words  to  say.  Wc  have  an  idea,  that  we,  Indians,  can  do 
something,  and  amongst  the  Indians  we  Bengalees  may  laugh  at  this  idea,  but  I do  not. 
My  mission  in  life  is  to  rouse  a struggle  in  you.  Whether  you  are  an  Advaiiin, 
whether  you  are  a qualified-Monist  or  Dualist,  it  does  not  matter  much.  But  let 
me  diaw  your  attention  to  one  thing  which  unfortunately  we  always  forget,  that  is, 
“ O man,  have  faith  in  yourself.*’  That  is  the  way  oy  which  we  can  have  faith  in 
God.  Whether  you  are  an  Advailist  or  a Dualist,  whether  you  are  a believer  in  the 
system  of  Yoga  oi  a bclievei  in  .Sankaracharya,  whether  you  are  a followei  of  Vyasa 
or  Visvamitra,  it  does  not  matter  much.  But  the  thing  is,  that  on  this  point  Indian 
thought  differs  from  tliat  of  all  the  rest  of  the  world.  T.et  us  remember  for  a moment 
that,  whereas  in  every  other  religion  and  in  every  other  country,  the  power  of  the 
soul  is  entiiely  ignored — the  soul  is  thought  of  as  almost  powerless,  weak,  and  inert, 
we  in  India  consider  the  soul  to  be  eternal,  and  hold  that  it  will  remain  perfect  through 
all  eternity.  We  should  always  bear  in  mind  the  teachings  of  the  Upanishads. 

Remember  your  great  mission  in  life.  We  Indians,  and  especially  those  of 
Bengal,  have  been  invaded  by  a vast  amount  of  foreign  ideas  that  are  eating 
into  the  very  vitals  of  our  national  leligion.  Why  arc  we  so  backward  now- 
adays? Why  aie  ninety-nine  per  cent,  of  us  made  up  of  entirely  foreign  ideas 
and  elements  ? This  has  to  be  thrown  out  if  we  want  to  rise  in  the  scale  of 
nations.  If  we  want  to  rise,  we  must  also  remember  that  we  have  many  things 
to  leain  from  the  West.  We  should  learn  from  the  West  her  arts  and  her 


INFLUENCE  OF  INDIAN  SPIRITUAL  THOUGHT  IN  ENGLAND  187 

sciences.  From  the  West  vve  have  to  learn  the  sciences  of  physical  nature,  while 
on  the  other  hand  the  West  has  to  come  to  us  to  learn  and  assimilate  leligion 
and  spiritual  knowledge.  We  Hindus  must  believe  that  we  are  the  teachers 
of  the  world.  We  have  been  clamouiing  here  for  getting  political  rights  and  many 
other  such  things.  Very  well ; lights  and  piivileges  and  olhei  things  can  only 
come  through  friendship,  and  fiiendship  can  only  be  expected  between  two  equals. 
When  one  of  the  paities  is  a beggar,  what  friendship  can  there  be?  It  is  all  vciy  well 
to  speak  so,  but  I say  that  without  mutual  co-operation  we  can  never  make  ourselves 
strongmen.  So,  I must  call  upon  you  to  go  out  to  luigland  and  America,  not 
as  beggars  but  as  teachers  of  religion.  The  law  of  exchange  must  be  applied  to 
the  best  of  our  power.  If  we  have  to  learn  from  them  the  ways  and  methods  of 
making  ourselves  happy  in  this  life,  why,  in  return,  should  we  not  give  them  the 
methods  and  ways  that  would  make  them  happy  for  all  eternity  ? Above  all,  work  for 
the  good  of  humanity.  Give  up  the  so-called  boast  of  your  narrow  oilhodox  life. 
Death  is  waiting  for  every  one,  and  mark  you  this — the  most  marvellous  hisioiical 
fact — that  all  the  nations  of  the  world  have  to  sit  down  patiently  at  the  feet  of  India 
to  learn  the  eternal  truths  embodied  in  her  literature.  India  dies  not.  China  dies 
not.  Japan  dies  not.  'I'hereforc,  we  must  always  remember  the  backbone  of  our 
spiiituality,  and  to  do  that  we  must  have  a guide  who  will  show  the  path  to  us,  that 
path  about  which  I am  talking  just  now.  If  any  of  you  do  not  believe  it,  if  theie 
be  a Hindu  boy  amongst  ns  who  is  not  ready  to  believe  thatdiis  leligion  is  pine  spint- 
ualily,  I do  not  call  him  a Hindu.  I reinember  in  one  of  the  villages  of  Cashmeie, 
while  talking  to  an  old  Mahommcdan  lady,  I asked  her  in  a mild  voice,  “ What 
religion  is  youis?”  She  replied  in  her  own  language,  “ Piaisc  the  T.oid  ! Ily  the 
mercy  of  God,  I am  a Musalmnn.”  And  then  I asked  a Hindu,  “ What  is  your 
leligion  ? ’ He  plainly  replied — “ I am  a Hindu.”  I remember  that  grand  word  of 
the  Kalha  Upanishad — ''  Shraddhd,"  or  maivellous  faith.  An  instance  of  Shraddhd 
can  be  found  in  the  life  of  Nachiketas.  To  preach  the  doctrine  of  Shraddhd  or 
genuine  faith  is  the  mission  of  my  life.  Let  me  lepeat  to  you  that  this  faith  is  one 
of  the  potent  factors  of  humanity,  and  of  all  icligions.  First,  have  faith  in  your- 
selves. Know  that  one  may  be  consideied  a little  bubble  and  another  may  be 
mountain-high,  but  behind  both  the  bubble  and  the  mountain,  there  is  the  infinite 
ocean.  'I'licrefore,  theic  is  hope  for  eveiy  one.  There  is  salvation  for  eveiy  one. 
Every  one  must  sooner  or  later  get  rid  of  the  bonds  of  Maya.  I'his  is  the  first 
thing  to  do.  Infinite  hope  begets  infinite  aspnation.  If  that  faith  comes  to  us,  it  will 
bring  back  our  national  life  as  it  ivas  m the  days  of  Vyasa  and  Aijuna—the  days 
when  all  our  sublime  doctrines  of  humanity  were  preached,  'i'o-ilay  we  are 
far  behindhand  in  spiritual  insight  and  .spiritual  thoughts.  India  has  plenty  of 
spirituality,  so  much  so  that  her  spiritual  greatness  has  made  India  the  greatest  nation 
of  the  existing  races  of  the  world;  and  if  traditions  and  hopes  aie  to  be  believed, 
these  days  will  come  back  once  more  to  us,  and  that  depends  upon  you.  You, 
young  men  of  Bengal,  do  not  look  up  to  the  rich  and  gieat  men  who  have  money. 
The  poor  did  all  the  great  and  gigantic  woik  of  the  woild.  You,  poor  men  of 
Bengal,  come  up,  you  can  do  eveiything,  and  you  must  do  eveiything.  Many  will 
follow  your  example,  poor  though  you  are.  Be  steady,  and,  above  all,  be  pute  and 
sincere  to  the  backbone.  Have  faith  in  youi  destiny.  You,  young  men  of  Bengal,  are 
to  work  out  the  salvation  of  India.  l^Iaik  that,  whether  you  beliete  it  or  not.  Do  not 
think  that  it  will  be  done  to-day  or  to-morrow.  J believe  in  it  as  I believe  in  my 


188  LECTURES—FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 

own  body  and  my  own  soul.  Therefore,  my  heart  goes  to  you — young  men  of 
Bengal.  It  depends  upon  you  who  have  no  money  ; because  you  ate  poor,  theicfore, 
you  will  woik.  Because  you  have  nothing,  therefore,  you  will  be  sinceie.  Because 
you  are  sincere,  you  will  be  ready  to  renounce  all.  That  is  what  1 am  just  now 
telling  you.  Once  more  I repeat  this  to  you.  This  is  your  mission  in  life,  this  is 
my  mission  in  life.  I do  not  care  what  philosophy  you  take  up ; only  I am  ready 
to  prove  here  that  throughout  the  whole  of  India,  there  luns  a mutual  and  coidial 
string  of  eleinal  faith  in  the  perfection  of  humanity,  and  I believe  in  it  myself,  And 
let  that  faith  be  spiead  over  the  whole  land. 


SANNYAS  : ITS  IDEAL  AND  PRACTICE. 

A parting  Address  was  given  to  Swamiji  by  the  junior  Sannyasins  of  the  Math  , 
(Belur),  on  the  eve  of  his  leaving  for  the  West  for  the  second  lime  (i9lh  June,  1899). 
The  following  is  the  substance  of  Swamiji’s  reply 

This  is  not  the  time  for  a long  lecture.  But  I shall  speak  to  you  in  brief  about 
a few  things  which  I should  like  you  to  carry  into  practice.  Fii.st,  we  ha\e  to  under- 
stand the  ideal,  and  then  the  methods  by  which  wc  can  make  it  practical.  'I'hose  of 
you  who  are  Sannyasins  must  try  to  do  good  to  others,  for  Sannyas  means  that.  There 
is  no  time  to  delivei  a long  discourse  on  ‘Renunciation,’  but  I shall  very  briefly  charac- 
terise it  as  love  of  death."  Worldly  people  love  life.  The  Sannyasin  is  to  love 
death.  Are  we  to  commit  suicide  then?  Far  fiom  it.  For  suicides  are  not  lovers 
of  death,  as  it  is  often  seen  that  when  a man  liying  to  commit  suicide  fails,  he  never 
attempts  it  for  a second  time.  What  is  the  love  of  death  then  ? We  must  die,  that  i.s 
certain  ; let  us  die  then  foi  a good  cause.  Let  all  our  actions — eating,  di  inking,  and 
everything  that  we  do— lend  towards  the  saciifice  of  our  self.  You  nouiish  your 
body  by  eating.  What  good  is  there  in  doing  that  if  you  do  not  hold  it  as  a 
sacrifice  to  the  well-being  of  otheis?  You  nourish  your  n inds  by  reading  books. 
There  is  no  good  in  doing  that  unless  you  hold  it  also  as  a saciifice  to  the  whole 
world.  It  is  right  for  you  that  you  should  serve  your  millions  of  brothers  rather 
than  aggrandise  this  little  self.  Thus  you  must  die  a gradual  death.  In  such  a 
death  is  heaven,  all  good  is  stored  therein — and  in  its  opposite  is  all  that  is  diabolical 
and  evil. 

Then  as  to  the  methods  of  carrying  the  ideals  into  practical  life.  First,  we  have 
to  understand  that  wc  must  not  have  any  impossible  ideal.  An  ideal  which  is 
too  high  makes  a nation  weak  and  degraded.  This  happened  after  the  Buddhistic  and 
the  Jain  reforms.  On  the  other  hand,  too  much  practicality  is  also  wrong.  If  you 
have  not  even  a little  imagination,  if  you  have  no  ideal  to  guide  you,  }ou  arc  simply  a 
"brute.  So  we  must  not  lower  our  ideal,  neither  are  wc  to  lose  sight  of  practicality. 


ITS  IDEAL  AND  PE  AC  TICE  189 

Wo  must  avoid  the  two  exli ernes.  In  our  country  the  old  idea  is,  to  sit  in  a cave  and 
meditate  and  die.  do  go  ahead  of  otheis  in  sahation  is  wrong.  One  must  learn 
sooner  or  later,  that  one  cannot  get  salvation  if  one  does  not  try  to  .seek  the  .salvation 
of  ids  biothcifi.  \ oil  must  ti}  to  combine  in  your  life  immense  idealism  ^\ilh  immense 
piacticahty.  You  must  be  prepared  to  go  into  deep  meditation  now,  and  the  ne.xt 
moment  you  must  be  ready  to  go  and  cultivate  these  fields  (Swamiji  said,  pointing 
to  the  meadows  of  the  Math).  You  must  be  piepared  to  explain  the  diflicult 
inliicaciesof  the  Sliastias  now,  and  the  next  moment  to  go  and  sell  the  pioduce  of  the 
fields  in  the  maiket.  You  must  be  prepaied  for  all  menial  services,  not  only  heie, 
but  elsewheie  also. 

The  next  thing  to  remember  is,  that  the  aim  of  this  Institution  is  to  make  men. 
You  must  not  merely  leain  what  the  Rishis  taught.  Those  Rishis  are  gone,  and 
their  opinions  ate  also  gone  with  them.  You  must  he  Rjshis  yourselves.  You  are 
also  men  as  much  as  the  gieatest  men  that  weie  evei  hoi n — even  our  Incain.ttions. 
What  can  mere  book-leaining  do  ? Wh.at  can  meditation  do  even.?  What  can  the 
Manli.vs  and  Tantrasdo?  You  must  stand  on  your  own  feet.  You  must  have  this 
new  method — the  method  of  man-making.  The  true  wan  is  he  who  is  sliong  as 
slicnglh  itself  and  yet  possesses  a woman’s  heart.  You  must  feel  foi  the  millions 
of  beings  around  you,  and  )et  you  must  bo  strong  and  inflexible,  and  you  must 
also  possess  obedience  ; though  it  may  seem  a little  paiadoxical---you  must  possess 
these  appaiently  conflicting  viitues.  If  your  superior  order  you  to  ihiow  youisclf 
into  a river  and  catch  a crocodile,  you  must  fust  obey  and  then  icason  with  him. 
Kven  if  the  01  dei  be  wrong,  first  obey  and  then  conliadict  it.  The  bane  of  sects, 
especially  in  IJengal,  is  that  if  any  one  happens  to  have  a difterent  opinion  he  imme- 
diately stalls  a new  sect,  he  ha.s  no  patience  to  wait.  So  you  must  have  a deep 
regal  d for  3'our  Su/ig/iii.  There  is  no  place  for  disobedience  here.  Ciush  it  out 
without  mercy.  No  disobedient  membeis  hcic,you  must  tuin  them  out.  There  must 
not  be  any  tiaitors  in  the  camp.  You  must  be  as  free  as  the  air,  and  as  obedient  as  this 
plant  and  the  dog. 


WHA'r  TIAVK  1 LEAKNT? 

( iJtlivered  at  Dana,  J\lanh,  kjoi.) 

At  Dacca,  Swainiji  tlclueied  two  lecluies  in  En‘,disli,  the  fust  one  was  on,  “What 
have  I leaiiU  ?’’  and  ihc  second  one  was  on,  “ 'I'lie  Religion  we  aie  boin  in.’’  The 
following  is  translated  fioin  the  report  in  Rengali  by  a disciple,  and  contains  the 
substance  of  the  hist  leciuie:-- 

First  of  all,  I must  express  my  pleasure  at  the  opportunity  afforded  me  of 
coming  to  Eastern  Bengal,  to  acquiie  an  intimate  knowledge  of  this  pait  of  the 
countiy,  which  I hilheity  lacked,  in  spite  of  my  wandeiings  through  many  civilised 
countries  of  the  West ; as  well  as  my  giatification  at  the  sight  of  majestic  livers, 
wide  feitile  plains,  and  pictuiesipie  tillages  in  this,  my  own  country  of  Bengal,  which  I 
had  not  the  good  fortune  of  seeing  for  myselt  before.  I did  not  know  that  theie  w'as 
eveiywheie  in  my  countiy  of  Bengal — on  land  and  water — so  much  beauty  and  chaim. 
But  this  much  has  been  my  gain,  that  after  seeing  the  various  countiies  of  the  woild  I 
can  now  much  moie  appieciate  the  beauties  of  my  own  land.  In  tlie  same  w’ay  also,  in 
search  of  lehgion,  I had  travelled  among  various  sects, — sects  which  h.id  taken  up 
the  ideals  of  foieign  nations  as  their  own,  and  1 had  begged  at  the  door  of  otheis,  not 
knowing  then  that  m the  religion  of  my  country,  in  oui  national  leligion,  iheie  was  so 
much  beauty  and  grandeur.  It  is  now  many  )eais  since  I have  found  Hinduism  to 
be  the  most  perfectly  satisf)ing  lehgion  in  the  woild.  Hence,  I feel  safl  at  heart 
when  I see  existing  among  my  own  countrymen  piofessinga  pceiless  faith,  siicli  a wide- 
spread indiffeience  to  our  lehgion, — though  I am  veiy  well  awaie  of  the  unfavoinable 
mateiialistic  conditions  in  which  they  pass  theii  lives,  owing  to  the  diffusion  of 
Kuiopean  modes  of  thought  in  this,  oui  great  motheiland. 

There  aie  among  us  at  the  piesent  day,  ceitain  leformcis  who  want  to  reform 
our  religion,  or  rather  lain  it  topsy-turvy,  with  a view  to  the  regeneration  of  the 
Hindu  nation.  Theie  are,  no  doubt,  some  thoughtful  people  among  them,  but  theie 
are  also  many  who  billow  otheis  blimlly  and  act  most  foolislily,  not  know'ing  what 
they  are  about.  This  class  ot  refoi meis  aie  veiy  enlhusiaslic  in  inlioikicing  foieign 
ideas  into  our  religion.  They  have  taken  hold  of  the  woid  ‘ idolatiy,’ and  aver 
that  Hinduism  is  not  true,  because  it  is  idolatrous.  'I'liey  nevei  seek  to  find  out  what 
this  so-called  ‘ idolatry  ’ is,  vvhethei  it  is  good  oi  bad  ; only  taking  their  clue  from 
this  woid  they  are  bold  enough  to  shout  down  Hmdinsiii  as  uiiLinc.  Theie  is  another 
class  of  men  among  us  who  aie  intent  upon  making  out  some  slippery  scientific 
explanations  of  any  and  eveiy  Hindu  custom,  iite,  Ac.,  and  who  aie  always  talking  of 
electiicity,  magnetism,  ail  vibration  and  all  that  sort  of  thing.  Who  knows,  but  they 
will  pcihaps  someday  define  God  Himself  as  nothing  but  a mass  of  elcctiic  vibia- 
lions  ! However,  iMother  bless  them  all ! She  it  is  who  is  having  Her  work  done 
in  various  ways  thiough  mullifaiious  natures  and  tendencies. 

In  conlradislinction  to  these,  there  is  that  ancient  class,  who  say, — “I  do  not  know, 
I do  not  caie  to  know  or  understand  all  these  your  haii-splilling  ratiocinations ; 
I want  God,  I want  the  Atman,  1 want  to  go  to  that  Beyond,  where  there  is  no 
universe,  vvheie  there  is  no  pleasure  or  pain,  vvheie  dwells  the  Bliss  Supreme”; — who 
say,  “ I believe  in  salvation  by  bathing  in  the  holy  Ganges  with  faith”  ; — who  say, 


WHAT  HA  VE  I LEARNT  ? 


191 


“Whomsoever  you  may  worship  wilh  singleness  of  faiih  and  devotion  as  the  one  God 
of  the  iiniveifte,  in  whatsoever  foim,  as  Shi\a,  Rama,  V'ishmi,  &c.,  you  will  gel 
Moksha"  to  that  stuidy  ancient  class  I am  pioud  to  belong.  'Ihen  theic  is  a sect 
who  advise  us  to  follow  God  and  llie  woiUl  together.  They  aie  not  sinccie,  they 
do  not  expiess  what  they  feel  in  their  heails.  What  is  the  leaching  of  the  Gieat 
Ones? — “ Where  there  is  Rama,  theie  is  no  Kdmn)  where  theie  is  A'lf/iia,  theic 


Kama  is  not.  Nighl  and  day  can  nc\er  exist  togeiliei.  ’ The  voice  ol  the  ancient 
.sages  pioclaim  to  us  that,  " If  you  dcsiie  to  attain  God,  )ou  will  have  to  renounce 
* Kdma-Rdnchana'  (lust  and  possession).  This  wSains.iia  is  untcal,  hollow,  void 
of  substance.  Unless  you  give  it  up,  you  can  never  leacli  (Jod.  liy  howevci  you  may. 
If  you  cannot  do  that,  own  that  you  ate  weak,  hut  by  no  means  lower  the  Ideal. 
Do  not  cover  the  coiiuplmg  coipse  wilh  leaves  of  gold  !"  So  accoiding  10  them,  if 
you  want  to  gain  spiiiluahty,  to  attain  God,  the  fust  thing  that  you  have  to  do  is. to  give 
up  this  playing  ‘hide-and-seek  with  your  ideas,’ this  dishonesty,  this ‘theft  within  the 
chanibei  of  thought.’ 

What  have  I leaint } What  have  I learnt  from  this  ancient  sect?  I have  learnt,— 
5^  1 


“Veiily,  these  thiee  aic  raic  to  obtain,  and  come  only  thiough  the 
giacc  of  God --human  biilh,  desiic  to  obtain  Moksha,  and  the  company  of  the 
gicat-souled  ones.”  The  hist  thing  needed  is  Mauushvalvam,  human  biith,  because 
it  only  IS  favouiahle  to  the  attainment  of  Mukli.  The  next  Mitmukshali'om. 
Though  out  means  of  lealisalion  vaiy  accoidmg  to  the  diffeiencc  in  sects  and 
indivuluals,- -ihoLigh  dilTcicnt  individuals  can  lay  claim  to  their  .sjtecial  lights  and 
means  to  gam  knowledge,  which  vaiy  accoidmg  to  their  dilTeient  stations  m lile,  - yet 
it  can  be  said  in  geneial  without  feai  of  contradiction,  that  without  this  Mumukshald, 
lealisalion  of  God  is  impossihlc.  Arumukshatvam  It  is  the  strong  desiie 

for  Moksha  - -earnest  )eaining  to  gel  out  of  the  spheie  of  jiain  and  plcasuie— iillei 
disgust  for  the  world.  When  that  intense  buinmg  dcsiie  to  see  (lod  comes,  then 
you  should  know  that  you  are  entitled  to  the  leali.sation  of  the  Supieme. 

Then  anolliei  thing  is  ncccssaty,  and  that  i.s,  the  coming  111  diiecl  contact  with 
the  Mahapunishas,  anil  thus  moulding  oui  lives  accoidmg  to  those  of  the  greal-souled 
ones  who  have  icachcd  (he  Goal.  Even  disgust  will,  the  wo, Id  and  a hmiimg 
desiie  foi  God  aie  not  snflicient.  Initiation  by  llie  (hiiu  is  necessaiy.  ^\  by  ? becanso 
ills  the  biingiiig  of  youtself  into  connection  with  that  gieal  souice  of  powei,  which 
has  been  handed  down  through  generations,  from  one  Gum  to  anolliei  m uninter- 
uipled  succession.  The  devotee  must  seek  and  accept  the  Guru  or  spnilual  {ircceptor, 
as  his  counseller,  philosopher,  friend  and  guide.  In  shoit,  the  Gniu  is  the  .n.r  .jua  non 
of  progres.s  in  the  path  of  spiiituahly.  Whom  then  shall  I accept  as  my  Guru  ? 

“ Ut-’  "ho  ««  versed  m the  \ ^ as,  vvil  ' 

unhuit  by  desiie,  he  who  ,s  best  of  the  knowei.s  of  Ihahman.  Ah ro/nya-h^  ^^ho 

is  not  only  learned  in  the  Shastias,  but  who  knows  then  subtle  secrets,  who  has 

realised  their  true  import  in  their  lives.  ‘‘ 

they  have  become  only  panols,  and  not  Pandits.  He  indeed  . 

who  has  gained  Prema  (Divine  Love)  by  leading  even  one  word  o ^ 

Mere  book  learned  Pandits  arc  of  no  avail.  Nowadays,  everyone  ^ 

even  a poor  beggar  wants  to  make  a gift  of  a lac  of  Rupees!  Then,  the  Guru 
IZ  L wRhout  a touch  of  cahu;  aud  he  must  be  by  any 


192 


LECTURES—FROM  COLOMBO  TO  AIM  OR  A 


desire, — he  has  no  other  motive  except  that  of  purely  doing  good  to  others,  he  whe 
is  the  ocean  of  mercy-without-reason,  he  who  does  not  impait  religious  leaching 
with  a view  to  gain  name  or  fame,  or  anything  pertaining  to  seliish  interest.  And  h( 
must  be  the  intense  knower  of  Brahman,  that  is,  one  who  has  realised  Biahman,  evei 
as  tangibly  as  an  Amlaki-fiuit  in  the  palm  of  the  hand.  Such  is  the  Guru,  says  th( 
Sruti.  When  .spiiitiial  union  is  established  with  such  a Guru,  then  comes  realisatioi 
of  God-  then  God-\isiou  becomes  easy  of  attainment. 

After  initiation,  theie  should  be  in  the  aspiiant  after  Tiuth,  ahhyuU,  or  earnest  anc 
repeated  attempt  at  practical  application  of  the  Truth  by  piesciibed  means  0 
constant  meditation  upon  the  chosen  Ideal.  Even  if  you  liave  a burning  ihirs 
for  God,  or  have  gained  the  (juru,  unless  you  have  along  with  it,  the  ahhyiUa,  unles 
you  practise  what  you  have  been  taught,  you  cannot  gel  realisation.  When  all  thesi 
are  liimly  established  in  you,  then  you  will  reach  the  Goal. 

Theiefore  I say  unto  you.  as  Plindus,  as  descendants  of  the  glorious  Aryas,— 
Do  not  forget  the  great  ideal  of  our  religion — the  gieat  ideal  of  the  Hindu, — whic! 
is,  to  go  beyond  this  Sams.lra, — not  only  to  renounce  the  world,  but  to  give  u; 
heaven  too ; aye,  not  only  to  give  up  evd,  but  to  give  up  good  too;  and  thus  to  gi 
beyond  all,  beyond  this  phenomenal  existence,  and  ultimately  realise  the  “ SauChil 
Anandam  Brahman  ” — the  Absolute  Existence-Knowledge-Bliss,  which  is  Brahman. 


THE  RELIGION  WE  ARE  BORN  IN. 

At  an  open-air  meeting,  delivered  at  Dacca,  on  the  31st  March  1901,  the  Swamiji 
spoke  in  English  for  two  hours  on  the  above  subject  before  a vast  audience.  The 
following  is  a translation  of  the  lecture  from  the  Bengalee  report  of  a disciple  : — 

In  the  remote  past,  our  country  made  gigantic  advances  in  spiritual  ideas.  Let  us, 
to-day,  bring  before  our  mind’s  eye  that  ancient  history.  But  the  one  great  danger 
in  meditating  over  long-past  greatness  is,  that  we  cease  to  exert  ourselves  for  new  things, 
and  content  ourselves  with  vegetating  upon  that  by-gone  ancestral  glory,  and  priding 
ourselves  upon  it.  We  should  guard  against  that.  In  ancient  times  there  • were,  no 
doubt,  many  Rishis  and  Maharshis,  who  came  face  to  face  with  Truth.  But  if 
this  recalling  of  our  ancient  greatness  is  to  be  of  real  benefit,  we  too;  mu.st 
become  Rishis  like  them.  Aye,  not  only  that,  but  it  is  my  firm  conviction  that  we  shall 
be  even  greater  Rishis  than  any  that  our  history  presents  to  us.  In  the  past,  signal 
were  our  attainments, — I glory  in  them  and  I feel  proud  in  thinking  of  them.  I am 
not  even  in  despair  at  seeing  the  present  degradation,  and  I am  full  of  hope  in  picturing 
to  my  mind  of  what  is  to  come  in  the  future.  Why  ? Because  I know,  the  seed  under- 
goes a complete  transformation,  aye,  the  seed  as  seed  is  seemingly  destroyed,  before 
it  develops  into  a tree.  In  the  same  way,  in  the  midst  of  our  present  degradation 
lies,  only  dormant  for  a time,  the  potential  potency  of  the  future  greatness  of  our 
religion,  ready  to  spring  up  again,  perhaps  more  mighty  and  glorious  than  ever  before. 

Now  let  us  consider  what  are  the  common  grounds  of  agreement  in  the  religion 
we  are  born  in.  At  first  sight  we  undeniably  find  various  differences  among  our  sects. 
Some  are  Advaitists,  some  are  Visishtadvaitists,  and  others  are  Dvaitists.  Some  believe 
in  Incarnations  of  God,  some  in  Image-worship,  while  others  are  upholders  of  the 
doctiine  of  the  Formless.  Then  as  to  customs  also,  various  differences  are  known 
to  exist.  The  Jats  are  not  outcasted,  even  if  they  marry  among  the  Mahommedans 
and  Christians.  They  can  enter  into  any  Hindu  temple  without  hindrance.  In 
many  villages  in  the  Punjab,  one  who  does  not  eat  swine  will  hardly  be  considered  a 
Hindu.  In  Nepal,  a Bdhman  can  marry  in  the  four  Frt/'//(W ; while  In  Bengal,  a 
Brahman  cannot  marry  even  among  the  sub-divisions  of  his  own  caste.  So  on  and 
so  foith.  But  in  the  midst  of  all  these  differences  we  note  one  point  of  unity  among 
all  Hindus,  and  it  is  this,  that  no  Hindu  eats  beef.  In  the  same  way,  there  is  a great 
common  ground  of  unity  underlying  the  various  forms  and  sects  of  our  religion. 

First  in  discussing  the  Scriptures,  one  fact  stands  out  prominently,— that  only 
those  religions  which  had  one  or  many  Scriptures  of  their  own  as  their  basi.s 
advanced  by  leaps  and  bounds,  and  survive  to  the  present  day  notwithstanding  al 
the  persecution  and  repression  hurled  against  them.  The  Greek  religion,  wuh  al 
its  beauty,  died  out  in  the  absence  of  any  Scripture  to  support  it ; but  the  rehg.on  of 
the  Jews  stands  undiminished  in  its  power,  being  based  upon  the  authority  of  he 

Old  Testament.  The  same  is  the  case  with  the  Hindu  religion,  w.th  its  Scripture  the 

Vedas,  the  oldest  in  the  world.  The  Vedas  are  divided  into  the  Karmayanda  and  the 
Jnana-kanda.  Whether  for  good  or  for  evil,  the  Karraa-kanda  has  fallen  into  disus 
in  India,  though  there  are  some  Brahmans  in  the  Descan,  who  still  perform  d'r.y.mr  now 

and  then  with  the  sacrifice  of  goats ; and  also  we  find  here  and  there,  traces  of  the 

Vedic  Kriya-kanda  in  the  Mantras  used  in  connection  with  out  marriage  and  Shtiddha 
ceremonies,  &c.  But  there  is  no  chance  of  its  being  rehabilitated  on  its  original 
footing.  Kumarilla  Bhatta  once  tried  to  do  so,  but  he  was  not  successful  in  his  attempt. 


94 


LECTURES— FROM  COLOMBO  TO  ALMORA 


The  Jnana-kanda  of  the  Vedas  comprises  the  Upanishads  and  is  known  bj 
the  name  of  Vedanta,  the  pinnacle  of  the  Srutis,  as  it  is  called.  Wherever  you  find 
the  Acharyas  quoting  a passage  from  the  Srutis,  it  is  invariably  fiom  the  Upanishads 
The  Vedanta  is  now  the  religion  of  the  Hindus.  If  any  sect  in  India  wanti 
to  have  its  ideas  established  with  a firm  hold  on  the  people,  it  must  base  them  or 
the  authoiity  of  the  Vedanta.  They  all  have  to  do  it,  whether  they  aie  Dvaitists  or 
Advaitists.  Even  the  Vaishnavas  have  to  go  to  the  Gopiilati^pani  Upanishad  to  prove 
the  truth  of  their  own  theories.  If  a new  sect  does  not  find  anything  in  the  Siutis 
in  confirmation  of  its  own  ideas,  it  will  go  even  to  the  length  of  manufacturing  a 
new  Upanishad,  and  make  it  pass  curient  as  one  of  the  old  original  productions. 
Theie  have  been  many  such  in  the  past. 

Now  as  to  the  Vedas,  the  Hindus  believe  that  they  are  not  mere  books  composed 
by  men  in  some  remote  age.  They  hold  them  to  be  an  accumulated  mass  of  endless 
Divine  Wisdom,  which  arc  sometimes  manifested  or  at  other  times  lemain  unmani- 
fesled.  The  Siiyanachaiya  says  somewheie  in  his  woiks,  5^r 

— “Who  cieated  the  whole  univeise  out  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Vedas."  No  one 
has  ever  seen  the  compiler  of  the  Vedas,  and  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  one. 
'i'he  Rishis  were  only  the  discoveicrs  of  the  Mantras  or  Eternal  Laws ; they  merely 
came  face  to  face  with  the  Vedas,  the  Infinite  mine  of  knowledge,  wdiich  lias  been 
there  fiom  tini'^*  w-ithout  beginning. 

Who  are  these  Rishis  ? Vatsayana  says, — “ He  who  has  attained  thiough  pioper 
means  the  diiect  realisation  of  Dhaima,  he  alone  can  be  a Rishi,  e\en  if  he  is  a 
by  biitli."  Thus  it  is  that  in  ancient  times,  Vasishtha  boin  of  an  illegill- 
male  union,  Vyasa  the  .son  of  a fisheiman,  Naiada  the  son  of  a maid-seivant  w iih 
uncei tain  parentage,  and  many  others  of  like  natuie,  attained  to  Rishihood.  I'liily 
speaking,  it  comes  to  this  then,  that  no  distinction  should  be  made  with  one  w’ho  has 
icaliscd  the  Truth.  If  the  persons  just  named  all  became  Rishis,  then.  O yii  Kulin 
Ihahmans  of  the  piescnt  day,  how'  much  greater  Rishis  you  can  become  ' Stii\e  alter 
that  Rishihood,  stop  not  till  you  have  attained  the  goal,  and  the  whole  woild  will  of 
il&elf  bow  at  your  feet  I ]?e  a Rishi, — that  is  the  secret  of  powei. 

This  Veda  is  oui  only  authority,  and  cveiyone  has  the  light  to  it. 

I ” ll  d ims  sais  the 

Std/a  Yajur  Veda.  Can  you  show  any  authority  fiom  this  Veda  of  ouis,  that  e\ei}one 
has  not  the  right  to  it } The  Puianas,  no  doubt,  say  that  a ceilain  caste  has  the  light  to 
such  and  such  a recension  of  the  Vedas,  or  a certain  caste  has  no  light  to  sliuh  them, 
oi  that  this  portion  of  the  Vedas  is  for  the  Satya  Yitga  and  that  poition  is  foi  the  Kah 
Yuga.  But,  inaik  you,  the  Veda  docs  not  say  so  ; it  is  omy  your  Bui  anas  that  do  so. 

But  can  the  seivant  diaate  to  the  master  ? The  .Smitis,  Buiauas,  d’antias — -all  these  are 

aec(fj>tahle  only  so  far  as  they  agree  with  the  Vedas  ; and  wherever  they  are  conlia- 
diLUii’},  the)  aie  to  be  loiecled  as  uniehable.  But  nowadays  we  have  put  the  Ihiranas 
on  e\en  a higher  pedestal  than  the  Vedas  ' The  study  of  the  Vedas  has  almost  dis- 
api)eaied  fiom  Bengal.  How  I w'ish  that  day  will  soon  come,  wlien  in  ewery  liome 
the  Veda  will  be  w'or.shipped  together  with  the  SalagrAma,  the  household  Deitv, 
when  the  young,  the  old,  and  the  women  will  inauguiate  the  w'oislnp  of  the  Veda. 

1 have  no  faith  in  the  theories  advanced  by  Western  Savants  with  legaid  to 

the  Vedas.  They  are  to-day  fixing  the  antiquity  of  the  \Tdas  at  a ceilain  peiiod, 

and  again  to-moiiow  upselling  it  and  biinging  it  one  thousand  years  forwaid,  and 
soon.  IIowc\er,  about  the  Puranas,  I base  told  you  that  they  are  aulhoiiiative 


THE  RELIGION  WE  ARE  BORN  IN, 


. 195 

.Mly  in  so  far  as  they  agree  with  the  Vedas,  otherwise  not.  In  the  Puranas  we  find 
*Mny  things  which  do  not  agree  with  the  Vedas.  As  for  instance,  it  is  written  in  the 
I tiranas  that  some  one  lived  ten  thousand  years,  another  one,  twenty  tliousand 
rais,  but  in  the  Vedas  we  find--^^^^;— “ Man  lives,  indeed,  a hundred 
i us.”  Which  are  we"  to  accept  in  this  case?  Ceitainly  the  Veda.  Notwith- 
.•tU-nding  statements  like  these,  I do  not  depieciate  the  Puianas.  They  contain 
,,-  'ny  beautitul  and  illuminating  teachings  and  woids  of  wisdom  on  Yoga,  Bhakti, 

' .ana,  and  Karma;  those,  of  course,  we  should  accept.  Then  there  are  the 
i mtras.  The  real  meaning  of  the  woid  Tantia  is  Shastia,  as  for  example,  Kiipila 
i iiitia.  But  the  word  Tantra  is  generally  used  in  a limited  sense.  Under  the  sway 
1.;  kings  who  took  up  Buddhism  and  preached  broadcast  the  doctiine  of  Ahimsd, 

' peifoimances  of  the  Vedic  Tdgit  Tajuas  became  a thing  of  the  past,  and  no 
could  kill  any  animal  in  sacrifice,  for  fear  of  the  king.  But  subsequently 
.n  mgst  the  Buddhists  themselves — who  weie  converts  fioin  Hinduism — the  best 
, . I s of  these  y<ig(t  Vajnas  were  taken  up,  and  piactised  in  secret.  Pioni  those 
-ng  up  the  Tantias.  Baning  some  of  the  abominable  things  in  the  Tantias,  such 
he  Vamdehara  &o.,  the  I’antias  arc  not  so  bad,  as  people  are  inclined  to 
I*.  Theie  are  many  high  and  sublime  Vedantic  thoughts  in  them.  In  fact,  the 
I mana  poitions  of  the  Vedas  weie  modified  a little,  and  incorpoiated  into  the 
; of  the  Tantras.  All  the  foims  of  our  woiship  and  the  ceieinonials  of  the  present 
1 i- , compiising  the  Kaima-kanda,  aie  observed  in  accoidance  with  the  Tantias. 

Now  let  us  discuss  the  pi inciples  of  oui  religion  a little.  Notwithstanding  the 
. srences  and  contiovcisies  existing  among  our  vaiious  sects,  there  are  in  them 
seseial  grounds  of  unity.  Fust,  almost  all  of  them  admit  the  existence  of  three 
! gs— ihiee  entities-  Islnaia.  Atman,  and  the  Jagat.  Ish\aia  is  He  who  is  eternally 
ting,  [u-cseiwing  and  destioying  the  whole  universe.  Fxcepling  the  Sllnkhyas, 

' the  others  believe  in  this.  Then  the  doctiine  of  the  Atman,  or  the  re-incaination 
he  sou!  , it  maintains  that  innumerable  individual  souls  having  taken  body  after 
again  and  again,  go  loiind  and  lound  in  the  wheel  of  bhth  and  death  accoid- 
to  then  icspectiie  Kaunas  ; this  is  Siimsdi ai'dda  01  as  it  is  commonly  called,  the 
. line  of  le-biiih.  Then  Iheie  is  this  Jagat  01  uni\cise,  without  beginning  and 
i iOuL  end.  Though  some  hold  these  three  as  different  phases  of  one  only,  and 
■ s olheis  as  thiee  distinctly  diffeicnt  entities,  and  otheus  again  in  vaiious 
..u  w'ays,  yet  they  aie  all  unanimous  in  believing  in  these  ihice. 

Here  I should  ask  you  to  reinemhei  that  Hindus,  fiom  tune  iinmemoial,  knew  the 
> \n  as  scjiaiatc  ficin  Manas,  mind.  But  the  Occidentals  could  nevci  soai  be)ond 
Mind.  The  West  knows  the  imiveMC  to  be  lull  of  happiness,  and  as  such,  it  is  to 
' ( 't  a place  wiicie  they  can  enjoy  the  most ; but  the  Fast  is  born  with  the  couMCtiou 
hib  Sam<'ai a,  this  ever-changing  exiiilence,  is  full  of  misery,  and  as  such,  it  is 
..criiiing,  nolhmg  but  unieal,  not  worth  baiLeiing  the  soul  foi  its  ephemeral  joys  and 
possessions,  I'oi  this  veiy  leason,  the  West  is  ever  especially  adioit  in  organised 
Action, and  so  also, the  J'.ast  is  cvci  bold  in  seaich  of  the  inysteiies  of  the  internal  woild, 

I Let  us,  liow'eicr,  turn  nowMo  one  or  two  other  aspects  of  Hinduism,  There  is 
doctiine  of  the  Incarnations  of  God.  In  the  \ edas  we  find  mention  oi  iMaliva 
Avaldra,  the  Fish  Incai nation,  only.  Whether  all  believe  in  this  doctime  or  not  is  not 
the  point ; the  real  meaning,  however,  of  this  Avohiraidda  is,  the  woiship  of  Man,  to 
see  God  in  man  is  the  leal  God-vision.  The  Hindu  does  not  go  through  Nature 
to  Natuie’s  God, — he  goes  to  the  God  of  man  thiough  Man. 


lh»,'!^®  ■°^  «*|ftin  8 y . - . external  worshi)?  of  Images  jiiSt., 

bn4#e;4lfi«««  "“f  H in  ^UuTshlstmn;  the  bivest  of  all  the  lovr  forms  of  V.:- 
|i6wfl*ri,b<!?«i  descnbed  in  all  o thing  to  do.  ' Despite  the  many  ■•>- 

»MP»  that  does  " XVrf  . 

'fH'fl  dTrlln  rXe  'tere  «ouW  I have  been,  if  I had  not  been  bles  - 
i ,d^^ol  condemn  i . ^ ’ orthodox  imaee-worshippl^g  Brahman  1 

Viih  itie  d»j9t  of  the  holy  feet  of  1 1 . worshio  or  what  they  denounce  ^ 

fdolatry.-to  them  I say,  h ^7  ^o  you  condemn  others  who  cannot  ■ . 

discarding  any  external  help,  , „lnrious  r»lic  of  a hoary  antiquity  has, 
the  same  f A beautiful  large  edi  ice,  ^ ^o^jition ; accumulations  of  dirt  ■>.’ 

Pf  neglect  or  disuse,  fal^n  ° “"1  portions  are  tumbling  do., 

dust  may  be  ^>'"8 ''''’■J''!  . / > \yill  you  take  in  hand  the  necessary  del  i.- 

to  the  ground.  What  ' J'lX  you  pull  the  whole  edifice  d. ' 

ing  And  repays  and  thus  resto  Id^^^^^^  Us  place,  after  a sordid  modem  Jil 

to  the  ground  se«^  to  ^ ^o  reform  it,  which  Uuly  mMu 

whose  permanence  has  y necessary  cleansing  and  repaiis,  not  by  demolishi^i 

to  make  ready  or  perfect  by  -L^rm  ends  When  the  work  of  renayaU'^; 

the  whole  thing.  T'’-* , “X"  td Jles  U -rve  f Do  that  if  you  can,  if  n. 

•the  old  is  finished,  what  further  ‘J;'  , „ jUe  contiary,  to  bui 

hands  off ! ' The  band  of  re  however,  done  good  work ; may  tl. 

Up  a separate  sect  of  their  o\  . y ^ » should  you,  Hindus,  wai 

.blfessings  of  God  be  fold  ? Why  should  you  feel,  asham.= 

to  'lseparate  ^du  tvhich  is  your  greatest  and  most  glorious  possessio; 

to  take  the  name  of  Hind  , Immoitals  my  countrymen,  has  lx 

Tbisjiational  ship  of  ours,  ye  enriching  the  whole  world  with  its  inev 

plying  for  ages,  carrying  ‘‘''f'^  ^g  centurs  tWa  national  ours  has  b. 

mable  treasures.  For  f d^has  taken  millions  of  souls  to  the  other  sho 

ferrying  across  the  ocean  o ,<  . „ ^ leak  and  got  damaged,  thro>i 

beyond  all  misery.  But  to-day  it  ‘ ^ j ® \Vhal  would  you,  who  have  pli 

yourselves  in  it,  do  now  ? wouia  )o  8 slop  .v 

-'I';  " 

And  to  the  Brdhmans  I say,-W  am  have  no  more  now,  be- 

Shake  it  off.  Brihroanhood,  Va  AcMa  kings.  If  you  at  all  believe  in  thej 

cause,  you  have  for  so  long  lived  .f^ffmoment  and  make  expiation  by  enter-j 
words  of  your  own  ancestors,  then  go  t Kumdrilla  Bhatta,  who  witk; 

ing  into  the  slow  fire  kindled  \>y  Tusha  > of  the  Buddhists  and  thel 

once  more  their  just  and  -* 


j.  iij 


