===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.22323.The-Life-Of-Ramanujacharaya_djvu.txt =====










THE 


LIFE OF 

RAMANUJACHARYA 


THE EXPONENT OF THE 


VISISHTADVAITA PHILOSOPHY 


HT 


A A \ 

Alkondaville Govindacharya 


AUTHOR OK 

Bhayuvudgila with Hainan uj a s C U>mmentar ies^ The Lives 
nj the brand a Saints , The Devine Wisdom of the 
Drdvida Saints , The Vedanta and the 
Pancharna (Jwstinn. $ v \, A’c., tyc. 


/fca&ras ; 

S. MUBTHY Sc CO., 
305 , THIMBU CHETTY STREET, 

1906. 

( Copyright Registered .) 



MADRAS : 

PRINTED AT THE KAPALEE PRESS, 
305 , T HUM DU (HETTY STREET. 



INSCRIBED 


(by permission) 

TO 

A 

His Highness , Sri Krishnaraja Wodeyar Bahadur 

MAHARAJA OF MYSORE 


USING 

A DEVOUT DISCIPLE 


OF 


SRI RAMANUJACHARYA 




THE 


LIFE OF RAMANUJA 

AND OTHERS. 


INTRODUCTORY. 

After the Azhvars come the Acharyas. The former we 
have called “faints,” and the latter we shall designate as the 
“Sages,” Both Saints and Sages possess the two-fold, 
characteristics of “ Knowledge '* and “ Love ” t.e., Knowledge 
of God and Love to God. Whereas the Saints are pre-emi- 
nently of the order of Lovers of God, the Sages are of the 
order of Knowers of God. Both Saints and Sages are Servants 
of God. 

We have written the Holy Lives of the Saints already. 
And now by God’s grace, we write the Holy Lives of the 
Sages. These are headed by the Blessed Nathamuni(gal) t 
(ranking as the Eighteenth in the Hierarchic Table attached to 
our Lives of the Azhvars). The substance of the present work 
is the Life of Ramanuja. 



cu. I. 


THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


CHAPTER I. 

NATHAMUNI. 

A lung time elapsed between the Azhvars (Saints) and the 
Aclmryas (Sages). At the date 916 A.D. or when the Sage 
Yamunftcharya was born, Nathamuni, bis grandfather, was 
alive. We have in record, that Wara-bhatt*Azhvar was the 
father of N&tha-muni ; and Isvara-muni was his (Natlia- 
mani’s) son. All the three together lived in Viran&rayana- 
puram 1 where exists tlie Holy Shrine of Mannar K6il ; the 
Resident Deity, there manifest, being Mannanar ( — Lord 
Krishna or Raja-Gopala). 

God so manifest was their household Deity. One day, the 
father, son (Nathamuni) and grandson went to the Shrine, and 
submissively petitioned of Mannanar to permit tlgnn to under- 
take a pilgrimage to the North of India, where they were 
anxious to visit all those Holy Shrines to Himself, or at which 
He hud incarnated 2 in various forms, in order to accomplish 
the threefold object of saving the good, punishing the wicked, 


1 This plaoo is about, 15 miles 
from Chidambaram (Chitrakutum 
and where the famous tank Virauam 
(abbr: for Yira-nurAyanapuram) is 
situate. Hrl-rimga-Nathamuni is 
the full name of the Hugo. 

:i Much has been written on the 
subject of Divine Incarnations in 
tho works (1) TaUradmtja and Ra- 
Umaht of Image Worship by IVirtha- 
KHrnthi, Yogi (2) Our Hhiujuvnd<}itu, 
(8) Live s of A:h rdrs, amt (4) Divine 
Wtedom of Drdnda Saints. VYo again 
call the attention of our readers 
to verso II. Lee. IN of our Gita ; 
and Vishnu-PuF&na verse 
Ac. [v. ). 51, and v. 9. 33 to 25] 
and state further that by “ Incarn- 
ation ** we do not mean that God 
who is everywhere and eternal, 
changes His place, m»r at one mo- 
ment He is in Heaven, and at ano- 
ther on Earth j nor does lie under- 


go any change in His essence or 
substance. RAmanuja has ex- 
plained this in Ms preface to Gita 
thus : “ He, being the vast Ocean 
of intiuito Mercy and Condescen- 
sion, Lovo and Houuty, willed to 
assume (material) forms similar to 
those of Ilis creatures, without 
abandoning His own essential divine 
(immaterial! nature [Fp : 8*9.] 
The same that wo say of our Lords 
Matsya, Krishna, (fee,, tho Christians 
say of Lord Jesus Christ. “ We can 
no more” say they, “gaze upon 
His ineffable brightness than we 
can look upon the noon-day sun. 
Then God in His boundless Morey 
shaded his brightness in tho clouds 
of hutruim nature— veiled Ilia face, 
so that through the veil of human 
flesh, human deeds and human 
w ords, we might look upon God and 
live.” [Epiphany, I\ 6, Jan ; jOth 
1903]. 



CH. I. XATHAMUNL 


3 


and establishing virt ue in the land {ride Bhagavad-Gita. IV-8), 
— such Shrines as Mathura, Gdkula, Brindavamt, the Holy 
banks of Yamuna (Jumna), Govardhana, Dvaraka, Ayodhya, 
Salagrama, Badarikiisrauia, Naim Warn ny a, Nrisimha-gm and 
others. 

Lord Mannanar deigned to give them permission to do so. 
They started forthwith with their families, and in the course 
of their holy peregrinations, they came upon a place called 
Cidvardhaua-pnra, situate on the banks of Holy Yamuna, and 
there paid their homage to Lord Krishna, known to the Dravi- 
dians as Yamnnai-i-i uraivan [vide Tiruppdvai by St. Andfil v. 
5]. The Lord and all the surroundings were so fascinating as 
to induce them to decide to spend the rest of their days here. 
Time agreeably sped thus. But on a certain night, Sage Nftthu- 
mnni had a dream in which Lord Mannanar appeared and 
commanded his devotee to return to Vi ra -N aray arnmi . % 

The Sage was vividly impressed by this experience, ami 
resolved to return to his Native Land, Ho accordingly sub- 
mitted his desire to Yamunai-t-t uraivan, who gladly accorded 
his sanction and honored the sago with the Holy tirtha and 
prasdda. 

Bidding adieu to the place, they bent their steps to the 
Purushottama-Kshetra, where Lord Jagannatha is resident. 
After paying reverence to the Lord here, they next w T ent on to 
Simh-adri or Ahobilam where Lord Nrisimha sheddeth his 
saving radiance around , and thence they pursued their journey, 
till they arrived at the Sacred Hill of Tirupati, celebrated as 
the abode of Lord Srinivasa, — the abode on this earth which He 
is said to have particularly chosen as His centre for the salva- 
tion of mankind, after having alighted thereon from His celes- 
tial abode Sri Vaikuntha, or what is called Paramapada, 
Param-akaSa, <kc. This locality again was so prepossessing 
that it bid Nathamuni to dwell there permanently ; but 
Mannan&r’g commands imperiously required his return home. 
The Sage could not resist this ; and so left the Holy Tirupati, 



CH. I. 


4 THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


and en route visited, among others, the holy spots known as 
Ghatik&chala (of Lord Xrisimha), Hastigiri (or Kanchi of 
Lord Yarada-Raja), Tiruvahlndra-pura ( — near modern Cudda- 
lore — of Lord D&va-N&yaka), Tirukkdvalur (of Lord Trivik- 
rama), Srtrangam (of Lord Rangan&tha), Tirukkudandai 
( — or Kumbhakfrnam — of Lord Ar&-v-amudu or Sarungapani) ; 
and finally returned to his native place Vlra-Narayanapuram. 
Here the sage received an ovation from the holy inhabitants, 
and was conducted in procession to Mannanar. The Lord was 
highly pleased and made His wishes known to the assembled 
community that thenceforward, they must look upon the Sage 
as His specially blessed devotee, provide him with suitable 
lodgings, and all other necessaries of life ; and take such other 
care of him as his favourite deserved. All this they gladly 
did. And NAthamuni(gal) made a flow er-garden for the Lord, 
and employed himself in its care, serving the Lord with the 
Offerings of garlands, scents, lights ; and in suchwise use- 
fully spent his time in the company of wise and holy men, in 
the cultivation of Divine Knowledge and its propagation. 

One day, there came a party of Sri-vaishnavas from the 
uplands (or the table-lands to the north of Trichinopoly), to 
visit Mannan&r, and they were heard to sing the sacred Hymn, 
“ Arir-v-amudu” or the Decad : V-8 of St. Namm&zhv&r’s 
Tiruv&y-Mozhi, and ending with the 11th verse of the same, in 
which it is said : "This Ten out of the Thousand , sung by Kuru - 
gut Sathagopar” N&thamuni, hearing this, begged of the 
visitor to repeat the “ One Thousand ” But they said they 
only knew this fragment of Ten and no more. On being again 
asked whether any one else knew the same, or whether there 
were written records preserved of the same, they confessed 
that they knew nothing whatever of it. The sage dismissed 
them with the usual holy Tirtha and Prasdda from Mannanur. 

N&tha was anxious to trace out the rest of the Prabandha 
(the Dravida Hymns of the Saints are so called) ; and surmised 
that they might in all likelihood prove recoverable in the 
Kurugu Land ( = Azhvar Tirunagari near Tinnevelly). He 



Cfl. I, 


NATHAMUNI. 


ft 


travelled south to this place, and paid due honors to St. Nam- 
mAzhvAr, and Lord Polindu-umra-Piruu (or Adinutha) and set 
about inquiring for the missing Prabandha. He met ParAn- 
kusa DAsar, a disciple of Madhurakavi(gal) 1 ; and asked him 
for information. He said : — * Sire ! Not only the TirnvAy- 
Mozhi of St. Nammazhvar but the Prabandhas as well of the 
other Azhvars have almost been forgotten, as a very long time 
has elapsed since the clays of their composition. My 
Acharya, St. Madhurakavi(gal), has left this message that 
whosoever will concentrate his mind, fixing himself in a Yoga- 
posture before St. Nammuzhvilr’s (Holy Image) and repeat 
the ten-versed Hymn, the Kanninun-Siruttambu, twelve 
thousand times, all the time devoutly dwelling on the Holy 
feet of the Saint, will place himself eii rapport with the Saint, 
who will then bless the devotee with the vision of himself. 

Nathamuni was rejoiced to hear this. He fell at the feet* 
of ParAnkusa-Dasar and imploied him to teach the (Mantra-like) 
Kanninun-SiruttAmbu. Dusar finding Nathamuni a fit soul for 
the communication, taught him thisDecad; and Nathamuni 
with due preparation and in all austerity, sat down in medita- 
tion for the term required, and duly invoked Nammazhvar by 
the twelve thousand-times* repeated Mantra, as enjoined. 

Entitled as lie was to an ex tmord inary revelation, by the 
qualifications lie possessed of a true disciple, vis , : “ Faith, 
virtue, devotion to God, serenity, wisdom and courage 2 ”, Sri, 
the Universal Lady of Mercy, commanded St. NammAzhAr 
to appear to NAthamuni. As if a voice came from Heaven, 
the holy Image of the Saint opened its mouth and asked 
Nathamuni the object of his invocation. NAthamuni submitted 
to him his prayer ; to recover the lost knowledge of the Pra- 
bandha. Thereon the Saint was pleased to dictate to him— 
present to his spiritually opened sight, like the sight Lord 

1 See his life in our Holy Live* of the Aihrdr*. 

[PsinrharAtra] 



$ THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. OH. I. 


Krishna gave to Arjnna 1 — the Holy Tiruvay-Mozhi of 1000 
verses, as well as the 3000 verses of Hymns sung by the other 
saints who appeared before and after St. Namm&zhv&r ; and 
in addition taught him the holy Doctrine of Die Three 
liahasyfts [Vide P. xxi-xxii of Intro : to Lives of Azhvftrs], 
as well as the secrets of Yoga (or the physio-phychological 
way of approaching God.) 2 

NAthamum(gai) felt himself blessed ; and remained in 
Tirunagari absorbed in the services of Azhvar and Adiaatha. 
But lord Mannan&r again appeared to him in a dream, which 
was to the effect that what Nuthamuni(gal) learnt should be 
rehearsed before him. He communicated the dream to Lord 

A • 

Adin&tha and Azhvar, whereupon lie was permitted to return to 
his native placo and was further enjoined to spread the instruc- 
tion ho had received, among such Krivaishnavas as were fitted 
"by their spiritual character, viz., virtues such as sama and 
damn (or conquest of the senses and the mind). 

Nttthamum(gal) bent his steps homewards and on the way 
visited many Holy Shrines and learnt much of the traditional 
lore connected with them, and finally reached Viranurayana- 
puram. Here he went to Lord Mannanar and as commanded 
in the dream duly recited all the Prahandhas, he had now 
received, before Him. 

The Lord after thus giving audience to Nfttlia thought to 
Himself thus That the souls may have life, AVe provided 
them with bodies and senses ; AVe gave them Sastras to guide 
them in the right direction ; Wc ourselves often took upon Us 
flesh (incarnations) ; and yet Our work (of wholesale salvation) 
remains incomplete. The Prahandhas of the Azhvars are a 
valuable moans by which to effect this regeneration. They 


* [Bh: GitA. XT] ^ Cp: Bh:Oi: 1V-1 to 3. Also 

'TVqrH Vedas are often lost, recovered, or 

Divine knowledge is thus often reveale djsgaiu and again : — ^ 
lost and often recovered. WwT* ** II 

9 See note on Yoga further on. 



CH. I. 


nS.tha.muni. 


7 


therefore ought never again to be allowed to fall out of use. 
So thinking, He commanded Nathamuni(gal) to set them to 
music and in this manner disseminate Holy Knowledge. 

In obedience to this command, Natlianiiini (gal ) set the 
Holy Frabandbas to music — celestial music, it is written — 
with the help of his nephews Kizhai-akatt-Azhvan and M&lai- 
akatt-Azhvan ; and the Prabandhtis being now like the YMfis, 
associated with the tluee-fold intonation of Uddtta , AnmhUtu 
and Svarita , spread from that time onwards far and wide in 
the land. 

King Chdla is said to have ruled in those days in a place 
called Gangai-konda-chbzha-puram, when two courtesans came 
to him. One could sing according to the mode called dSva-gdna 
(celestial mode) ; the other according to the mode called maun - 
shya-gnna (human mode). ftaeh thought she excelled the* 
other ; and the object of their approaching the king was to 
have the dispute settled between them as to who actually was 
the better. The king ordered a council to meet, before which 
the singers were made to perform their parts. The dispute 
was decided in favour uf the vianushya-gdua ; and rich presents 
weie bestowed on that performer, while the other was con- 
sidered to have failed. 

The lady of the deva-gdun thought thus: — “My method 
of singing, these manlings cannot appreciate ; and I shall con- 
secrate the same therefore to the davits (celestial beings), 0 
So she went from one Holy Shrine to another, everywhere dis- 
playing her art to the Deity therein manifest. She in due 
course reached VSra-narayanapuram and as was customary 
with her she went to the Shrine of Mannanar and there sang 
her song in the audience of our sage Nathamuni(gal). He 
heard and understood her mode ; and mightily pleased, vouch- 
safed to her as a mark of his appreciation, the tir ilia and prasdda 
of Lord Mannanar. She now purposely retraced her steps to 
king Chola and spoke thus : — “ There is one soul, at least, 0 
King, who can understand the beauties of my dJva-gdna. H? 



8 


CH. I. 


THE LIFE OF BAMANXJJA. 


is by name Nalhamuni(gal), tlie blessed votary of Lord Man- 
nanar at V^ra-narayanapuram/ , 

The king’s curiosity was roused. He sent messengers to 
Nathamuni(gal), begging him to deign to visit his court. He 
on his side, on receiving the invitation, thought thus : — “ We 
have set the Blest Prabandhas to exquisite music. Let us visit 
the king’s court, and take this opportunity of making these 
known to the world/’ Thus he directed his steps to the king’s 
court. On his arrival, the king rose and welcoming the Sage 
with every mark of honor, offered him a suitable seat. Whereon 
the Sage blessed the king, and inquired as to his object in 
inviting him. The king said : — “ Holy Sage ! canst thou 
distinguish between the tlrvu-gdna and the manushya-gdna of 
these minstrels P” The Sage then requested that the perform- 
ance be given before him. When this was done, lie addressed 
the king thus : — k * Yemen have ears for the mannshya-gdna 
pnly. Only the Devascan understand the other.” “ But”, the 
king respectfully asked, “how, Sire, can we be made to 
hoar it P” Thereon the Saire directed that the 400 kinds of fdla 
(rhythm) be marked, and explained to the king the rate of 
each. The king understood from this explanation the regular 
harmonica! progression and symphony which this method lent 
to the drva-gdna music, which produced in him a bliss never 
before experienced. It is also related that a pair of cymbals was 
placed near a consecrated post, and the drva-gdna was sung, 
when it was found that the post began to melt. They stopped 
the music, and when they attempted to lift the cymbals, they 
stuck to the post, ; and when they began the music and lifted 
them, they came off. The king w ent into raptures over this, and 
falling at the feet of the Sage proposed to reward him abund- 
antly. But the Sage, to whom even the offer of Lordship over 
Worlds was no temptation, politely declined the presents 
offered ; and blessing the king, returned to Vira-narayana- 
puram. 

Light disciples had our Sage: — (1) Uyyokkondar, 
(2) Kurukai-k-kaval-appan, (3) Nambi Karunakara Dasar, 
(4)Kru-tiru-vudaiyar, (5)Tiru-k-kanna-mangai-andati,(6) Vana- 
ruamalai Devi-y-audau, (7) Urup-pattur-Acchan-pillai, and 



OH. I. 


nXthamuni. 


9 


(8) Sokattur-Azhvan. They were disciples of the description 
given in Jay a- Samhif a (of Pancharatra) : — 

“ He indeed is a true disciple 
Who owns, sole for the Guru’s sake, 

All riches — all wisdom — 

All works — his body itself!** 

Such deserving disciples then, Nathamuni(gal) initiated 
into all the Holy Mysteries of Religion, taught them theDivya- 
Prabandhas, and left a legacy of works, like the Purusha- 
nirnaya, and Nyaya-tatva treating of Sublime Truths of Reli- 
gion, beginning with God, the Lord of the Kosmos ; and also a 
work on Yoga (or the art of communian with God), called the 
Yoga-rahnsya. He himself retired from active habits of life and 
became immersed in the contemplation of the Blessed Deity 
fixing His resplendent Form ever before his mental gaze. 

This smandhi state of the Sage came to be known to tin? 
outside world and finally reached the ears of king Chbla. To 
see the wonderful Sage and pay homage to Lord Mannanar as 
well, he left his capital and, accompanied by his consorts, 
reached Vim-Namyana-purain. There he saw Nathamuni(gal) 
absorbed in Yoga (meditation) and, lost in respect and wonder 
at this unusual sight, was quietly retracing his steps. But the 
sage took them for Lord Krishna and His Holy Consorts ; 
that they had been pleased to visit him. Thus fancying in his 
delirium of Yoga, he ran after them. Uyyakkondar and others, 
his disciples, observing this divine hallucination, pursued the 
Sage and meeting him at Gangai-konda-Chozhapuram besought 
an explanation from him as to the apparently insane nature of 
his conduct. He told them that in his eyes, they appeared as 
Lord Krishna and His Consorts and this vision threw him into 
a frenzy of love. The disciples reminded him that service to 
God and the Godly were the highest aim, and that when this 
demanded waking life on his part, he was not to allow himself 
to be ecstasized in this manner to the prejudice of such service. 
He came to himself and returned to his Divine Service at Lord 
Mannanar’s. 


2 



10 


CH. I. 


THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


Matters went on thus for a certain length of time, and the 
Sage became more and more absorbed in bis illumination. 
On a certain day he called in his disciple Kurugai-k-kaval 
Appan, and commanded him to learn the Eight Mmbcd Yoga 1 , 
and taught him the same. 

The Sage now called his other intimate disciple Uyyak- 
kondar and asked him also to practice the Yoga method. But 
he humbly answered the Sage : — “ Holy Sire, while I still 
carry the corpse with me, how is marriage possible? 2 It tvill 
be time for me to consider the matter when 1 am about to give 
up my body.” “ Then ”, said the Sage, “ employ thyself in the 


dissemination of the Sastras an< 

1 This Yoga is not on the lines of 
the Yoga as taught by Pataiijali, 
iuasmui'h ns the latter is repudi- 
ated as un-Vedic in the Brahma. 
*Sutra : “ Ktc.ua Yngah jn'uhjuktah *’ 

[11-1. IlJ, and inasmuch im it 
postulates God as but the mfitru- 
mental cause of the Universe, thus 
detracting from the omnipotoucc 
of the (»o<l-head ; and at the same 
time looking upon God as but the 
Means of procuring Kaivahja , or re- 
alization of one’s own soul, not as 
the Knd itself to be aspired after. 
The True Eight-limbed Yoga of the 
God-aspirant (hhakba) is described 
in Pp : lib-lilt) of the 1st Volume 
of the Uhugavud Vishnya, Telugu 
Edition, 1871, Madras; but we 
can subjoin here only an abstract of 
t he same : The Eight are (l) Yuma , 
(2) n'ljama, (3) a sunn , (4) promt- 
iuhna, ( 5 ) jiratijuhuTH, ( 6 ) dhdrana, 
(7) dhydna t (8) sttmddhi. The lower 
four are external processes, the 
tipper three are internal ; (l) and 
(2) are as described in the Vishnu- 
puratrn VI, 7 — Celibacy or conti- 
nence; llariulessitess ; Truthful- 
ness; Non-covetousness ; Non-ac- 
ceptance of gifts ; Scripture-read- 
ing; Purity (outer and inner) ; Con- 
tentment ; Austerities (such as 
fasts) ; Inclining the mind to God. 
{ii) is Postures (.Isaac) described 


the Prab audit as.” 

as Padmnsa na &<\, which lielp to 
produce comfort, attention ami 
steadiness of mind, [as described 
by Vusishlha and others]. (4) is 
the regulation of breath (Prana ■ 
i/d mu) divided into Rechaka, Pitruku 
and Knmbhnka [as described in the 
Vfiyu-puranaj. These processes 
help to steady the wandering mind. 
(5) is Sense-conquest ( Pruttjahuru ), 
or makingthc senses obey the mind, 
not the mind the senses, as des- 
cribed by Purasara [Vishnu-Pu. 
YJ, 7J. (0) is fixing (Dhdrana) 

the mind on the Pure Person of 
God [as described by SaunakaJ. 
(7) is concentration, (Dhi/dna) or 
the continued Girt tiro of the mind 
on one subject, [as described in 
Vishnu-Pu. VI, 7, 91]. And this 
is of five kinds. (8) is absorption 
or immersion, {Stnnadh *), or realiza- 
tion of God [as described in ViBh- 
nu-Pu. VI, 7, 92]. 

2 Marriage means Union ( i.c. 
Yoga) with God. This is not pos- 
sible so long as the body hangs 
on the soul like a corps*?. The 
God-ward always look ori the body 
as a detestable corpse to be east 
away as soon as possible. Read, 
“ Mey kumlamaka virumbuvare, 
[4th Tiru-vandadij verse 75j. 



CH. I. 


NaTHAMUXI. 


II 


The Sage now called his son Isvara-Muui and said; — 
11 Son, thou shalt have a son. The name ‘ Yamunai-Mnraivar \ 
thou shalt give him.” And he commanded his disciples 
Uyyakkondar and K. Appan to communicate in due course to 
this would-be son, all the knowledge of the Sastras and the 
Toga he had imparted lo them. Leaving his instructions thus, 
he resumed his Yoga. 


Time passed. King Ohola had gone out into the country 
with his followers on a hunting excursion, and lie happened to 
pass by Viranarayanapuram on his journey hack. Our Sage’s 
young daughter watched the grand cortege, with hows arrows, 
female attendants monkeys and what not. But to her it all 
seemed like a vision, which, running up to her father, she 
described as if two men with hows, a woman and a monkey 
called at his place and inquired for Nat ham uni (gal) and wen[ 
their way. And our Sage at once construed this (in his Divine- 
filled imagination) as if Lord Kama himself, with His brother 
Lakshmana following Him with bows and arrows (as 11 is body- 
guard), with Queen Sit fi between them, condescended to visit 
him, as described in Rfuniiyana [III. 11.]: — 

“ Kama went foremost of the three, 

Next Situ followed, fail* to see, 

And Lakshman with bis bow in hand 
Walked hindmost of the little band/’ 


Forthwith he started from his Yoga-seat and went in 
search of this Holy Band, and asking those whom he met on tin* 
way, for traces of their journey. They said : t; Go this way, go 
this way,” evidently fancying that he was in search of the 
king and his retinue. He increased his speed and arrived 
in the vicinity of Gangaikonda-S-puram ; and asking the 
residents there to direct him further on the way where the 
Holy Band went, they said they had not seen any. He looked 
farwai*d and far out and sideways, and seeing nothing of what 



THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


CH. I. 


V> 


his heart yearned for, heaved a deep sigh, wept and swooning 
away, fell on the ground and departed from this world. 

^rwrnt^Tf^ri n 

ft^nurr^ ^ %?cw^pTr : i 
vwpmtfcw wfSrTT : u 
%mrif t i 

iTCRmTOftf «UT- II 

r rhe disciples and the son, of our Heaven-departed Sage, 
received the tidings of this extraordinary translation and 
eouhl not hear the pain of separation; but fate must be sub- 
mitted to by all. So they travelled to where the Sage was 
lying in state, and after prostrating themselves before the 
dead body, duly cremated him according to the Brahma -inedh a 
ritual prescribed in the Vedas. Returning home, all the i-est 
of the ceremonies were duly performed by Isvaramuni(gaJ), the 
son. And Kurugavnl-Appan selected a place near where his 
Master was accustomed to sit in Yoga, and steadily practised 
Yoga. The Sage is said to have lived 540 years. 1 

The memorial verse to him runs thus : — 

^ flT'UTr IWTf^ fKffrWT3L I 


1 Adam lived 1)30 years and so on. Read the Chronological index 
to the Old Testament. See denexis V. 5. 



CH. II. UY YAKKONDAR AND HANAKKAL-NAMBl. 


13 


CHAPTER If. 

UYYAKKONDAR AND MANAKKAL-NAMBI. 

Uyyakkondiir is the same as Pundarikaksha(r) 1 . Uyyak- 
kondar is a name which has an interesting story connected 
with it. Once on an occasion, Vangi - puratt- A echi , the father- 
in-law of Nathamuni(gal), sent a request to his son-in-law to 
send his wife (t.e., Acchi's daughter), Aravinda-Puvai on a 
visit. Nathamuni(gal) sent her, escorted by Pundarikuksha(r), 
his trusted disciple. Some of the dependents of Aechi looked 
down upon him as of an inferior caste, he being a pih'va-sihhi 
(that is, of that class among Brahmans, whose custom is to 
wear a tuft of hair right on the ci*o\vn of the head) ; and there- 
fore they fed him on stale food. But he nevei resented this 
treatment. He, on the other hand, considered it as the 
gi*eatest blessing that was conferred upon him. He returned • 
home, and pressed by Nuthamuni(gul) to narrate all that took 
place at Acchi's residence, related with joy the happiness he 
derived from eating stale food j when asked how it could be so, 
he answered that it was certainly so on the principle ex- 
plained by St. Tondaradippodi-Azbvar ; — 

“ If hut then* broken bread the saints will grant 
Indeed it shall my nature purify. ” 

[Tirumulai, verse 41.] 

On hearing this, Nathamuni(gal) embraced his disciple 
and exclaimed : “ Thou art my saviour.” Thus Uyyakkondiir 
means : he who practised the highest precepts of religion 
taught by his Master. 

Such was Uyyakkondar or Pundarik-aksha. He had 
many disciples under him with whom he was happily engaged 
in the delightful study and expositionof the Utterances of the 

• ____ 

1 Born at Tiruvallarai, A.C. 826, Viile No. 19. Hierarchic Table, in 
our Lives of Azhvdrs . 



14 


CH. II. 


* THE LIFE OF RAM AN OJA . 


Holy Azhvars. The chief of these disciples were five, viz., 
(1) Manakkal Nambi, (2) Tiruvallikkeni Punperumal Arayar, 
(3) Sottaip-pRsi-Sendalankarar, (4) Sri Pundanka-dasan, and 
(5) Ulagu-perumal Nangai. Of these disciples, Manakkal - 
Naiubi or Sri Itama-misra(r) was the greatest, inasmuch as 
he bore to his Guru (Uyyakkondar) the i elation of Lakshmana 
to his Master and Brother Sri Ramachandra 1 . This was so 
much the case that when the Guru's wife Andalamma died, 
Rarna-misra did all the menial services that thus necessarily 
devolved on him in the household of the Guru. In illustration 
of this implicit servitude to his master, it is recorded that on a 
certain occasion, lie accompanied the two daughters of his Guru 
on pilgrimage to a bathing place. They were returning and 
the damsels shrank at a small stream in their path, because it 
was sloughy, Rama-misra saw the situation and immediately 
coming to their rescue, stretched himself at length across the 
* channel, and let them walk over on his back ! The Guru heard 
this incident, and drawing the disciple to him with exclama- 
tions of joy, touched his head with his feet — a favour not 
bestowed on all indiscriminately. “Is there any thing more 
that 1 can do to thee ? further asked the Guru. “ What 
more can 1 ask,'* said the disciple, “ than that, having already 
attained my highest ambition, viz., that of serving at your 
Holy Feet, this service should be continued to me for ever ” ? 
Uyyakkondar was overcome with this exemplary attitude 
and in his irrepressible wish to do to his disciple the highest 
good, commended to him once more for meditation the Dvaya- 
Mantra 2 , the efficacy of which has been described thus in the 
Pancharatra : — 

^?rRfR?TirR I 

1 «ik#KR«<tn% ifisr^rrwT i [Ramayaua.J 

* Vide pajye xxii. Introd : to The Holy Lives of the Ayhv&rs, 


4 



CH. II. 


UYYAKKONDAK AND MANAKKAL-NAMBI. 


15 


Uyyakkondar’s sojourn in this earth was now approaching 
its end and Ruma-misra(r) 1 , reverently broached to him the 
subject of who after him wits to bear the aposfcleship for their 
Blessed Dispensation. u Well, my son,” said he, “ I lmd hoped to 
carry out myself the behests of my Holy Master Nathamuni (gal), 
communicated to me when he was passing away, viz., to expect 
the arrival of a grandson for him, son to Isvara-nmni(gal)), 
to whom to impart all the Mysteries of our Faith, naming him 
Yamunai-t-turaivar, as my Guru willed ; but Providence has 
willed it otherwise. This duty therefore devolves on thee, the 
next and my most, trusted disciple, and thou therefore wilt 
beqeath our mysteries to posterity in the Holy Softai line of 
descent.” So delivering the message, Uyyakkondar left his 
body, seating himself in the V ad in -a* ami posture, and uniting his 
heart with the Holy feet of his A chary a, Sri Nathamuni (gal). 

Neither Ruma-misra(r), nor his brethren, could bear this # 
pang of separation, but gradually they recovered and girded 
themselves to carry out the lust mu* vices and sacraments for 
the departed ; which they did with all due ceremony and 
solemnity. The memorial verse dedicated to him on the 
occasion is thus recorded : — 

W-TTTWTIpr 1 

Kama-misra was now, with his disciples, engaged in the 
work of furthering his holy mission, all the time in eager 
expectation of the hoped-for holy son to be horn to isvara- 
muni(gal). This happy event came about in the month of Adi 
under the asterisk U t farad a. J oy overspread their countenances, 
and they forthwith went about administering to the child all 
the sacraments tit for the occasion, through the medium of the 
father, ending by naming the child Yamunai-t-turaivar 
(according to the wisheR of Nathamuni) and observing all the 


1 Vide No. 20, Hierarchic Table to our Lives of Azhvars, 



16 


CH. II. 


THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


needful preliminaries presciibed for the Vaislinavas according 
to the PaBcharatra text: — 

armis^nwr i 
iTRffeTs^.'^rt wnw ii 

Wlio was this holy child, but Yamunachfiryu 1 (the Sams- 
krit synonym) ; Alavandut' (the Tamil name), — the famous 
forerunner of Sri Ramanuja, who was to come 2 


1 We were much am used to read 
in SvAroi Dayanamla Sarasvati’s 
8aty tWtha- Prakftsa, I’d m u tut eh dry a 
transmuted into Yavauuchdrya 
who it is further naively added 
is “born of a Greek or Moslem 
family”!!! [Tide p. 62, English 
translation by Durga Prasad of 
Lahore, 1900]. And again in page 
73, it is written ;■ — 41 The first 
teacher of this faith (Vaishnavism) 
was SathakApa, who according to 

the Bhaktam&hX written by Nabha, 
was of the Doom (low caste) tribe. 
For, it says that the Yogi Satha- 
kdpa used to make and sell winnow* 
inn fans 

that is to say he was born of the 
tribe of Kan jar. When he had 
Wanted to read with the Brahmins 
or to hear their Scriptures, they 
must have treated him with con- 


tempt. lie then might have coin- 
ed new things against the Brah- 
mins and their Scriptures such as 
the forehead mark, cauterising the 
forearms with the discus, &c. His 
disciple was Munibahan, born of a 
Chandul or low caste family He 
had a disciple, named Yavana- 
chArya, born of a Moslem or Greek 
family. But his name was changed 
to YaHmnacharya. ,, Our readers 
have only to read the Lives of 

A 

A/.hvars written by us and this 
life of Yamuna, and then he may 
more than smile at the ridiculous 
account given by Dayanand. 

2 This is very much parallel to 
John the Baptist preceding Jesus. 
Vide No. 21 a Hierarchic Table in 
our Lives of Azhvtir*, Born 916 A. C. 
at Kuppangali, one mile from 
Kattumannar-koil. 



CH. III. ALAVANDAR. 17 

CHAPTER IIL 

ALAVANDAB. 

Such was the advent of Alavandar, which had been foreseen 
by his predecessors ; — an advent destined to inaugurate a sys- 
tem of thought which was thenceforward to grow, amplify 
and vivify the nascent religious sense in man. Alavamhlr 
signified literally : “ He who has come to reign *’ f.e., to reign 

in a system of religious thought, which was do glow in man's 
heart uplifting him to God in love. 

Duly were performed, as he grew, the sacred rites of 
t mna-prdsanti , chauhi and upauayana ; and the life of the student 
began in earnest. Alavandar would attend the school fora day 
and stay away at home. Questioned by his fellow-students as to 
the cause of his absence, he would tell them *. — “Ye are learn- 
ing the same things again and again." Questioned by his 
parents, he would say: — “They are reading the same thing* 
over and over ; but I have learnt it all already.” A preco- 
ciously clever boy thus, Alavandar was ; and he was excused 
regular attendance at school. He finished his student/fl career 
rapidly ; and the next stage of life, wedlock, was duly enteied 
into. By this time the end of Is vara muni(gal) drew near, 
and he bid farewell to all with the consoling reflection of having 
left a model son for the service of the world . The noble sou 
had all the sacramental routine for his departed parent strictly 
gone through ; and now set out to fulfil his own vocation. 

Grammar, logic, philosophy and allied subjects were taken 
up. And he studied them assiduously under Maha-bh&shyu- 
bliatta. There was at this time an Akki-y-azhvan, residing in 
the court of the monarch of the country as Pandit and royal chap- 
lain. He was thus, in his own opinion, the head of all the literary 
men in the country, from whom lie assessed tributes as a recog- 
nition of his suzerainty. The tribute was dasabandhnm or one- 
tenth of the income of each learned man. A demand for this 
was sent out to M-bhatta, who thereon was troubled in mind. 
On Alavand&r inquiring and being told all the circumstances 
of Bhatta's discomfiture, he received the demand-notice and 

3 



18 


THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


CH. III. 


tore it into pieces in the presence of the royal messengers who 
had con/eyed it. They returned and narrated the occurrence 
to Akki, Who again sent men to Bhatta to know whether it 
was a new poet or a man of letters, who had dared so to affront 
him. A lavandar again interfered between his teacher and the 
men and sent them hack with the answer : — 

Akki had felt his pride already piqued and now the second 
message set him ailame witli rage. ‘ k Is there a scholar to 
oppose me cried he frantically, and appealed to his king 
for protection and redress against the insult he had received. 
It was not Alahabhashya Bhatta, but an insolent boy of bis party, 
who had thus insulted him, — was of course the report of the 
men. The king now despatched some messengers with a written 
command to the hoy to come to his presence ; but the proud 
* boy as unceremoniously destroyed the royal mandate, and let the 
messengers depart. The king was duly told of the indignity so 
offered. He reflected a moment and thought to himself that it 
must be no ordinary person who could command courage to 
slight even royalty ; he would therefore send envoys with 
escort and letters —a formal invitation to the extraordinary 
boy to come and grace the royal court with his august 
presence. This was appropriate to him, and so the boy 
accepted tin* invitation and arriving, alighted in the royal hall 
of audience with all honors paid. All assembled to receive 
the curious visitor. Akki of course was present to witness the 
prodigy, of a boy come in this style, and feverishly fearing 
what the next event would prove to be His fears were well- 
founded however, for it was like a bomb bursting before him, 
when a scrap of paper was thrown by the distinguished visitor 
before the royal pandit. It was at once a gauntlet and dial* 
let) go. The scrap contained this famous verses — 

hIhiwtr* i 

mm 



CH. III. 


19 


alavaxdak. 


1 Find, if you will, than me a second soul. 

Who wots entire all Vedic dogmatics, 

In all the stretch from Uni (;\)-t read Him&lay, 

To Rama's bridge —the joy of Sita’s soul — 

Or East to West, which mountain ranges bound, 

With suit and moon in turn, their crests adorning.’ 

On reading this, Akki’s wrath grew : turning to the king: — 
“ My royal patron! ”, implored he, <£ permit me to argue this 
boy out of his intolerable vanity, and crush him before ye nil.” 
The king gently asked the hoy if lie was capable of standing a 
combat such as his pandit would give. Most certainly, your 
Majesty ! give me leave,” answered he, “ but you will not be 
capable of judging between us and deciding as between the 
winner and the loser ; nor can we own to you our mutual victory 
or defeat. Appoint, pray, judges versed in the matters of* 
our contention.” “ Well said,” agreed the king and selected 
fit umpires to adjudge the issues of the intellectual contest 
pending. It was an unparalled and exciting scene. And so 
the king and his consort both took their seats to watch the 
interesting proceedings. 

The queen saw the hoy and with her keen insight and 
penetration decided to herself that lie was going to he the 
victor. My lord ! she said, addressing the king, “ if this boy 
wins not, throw me to the dogs.” u If lie wins,” exclaimed the 
king in his turn, “ I will part with half my kingdom for him.” 

Anon, Akki spoke : — “ Vain stripling ! No drawn contest 
between us is needed. A mere trick suffices to put thee down 
before this august assembly, “ witness ye all !” he said to 
the assembly, and turning to Alavandar said : “ if thou, proud 
boy, sbouldst say ‘ yes ’ in any matter, I will prove the ‘ no ’ 
of it ; and vice versa, ‘ yes ’ to thy 4 no ’ ; and the winner in the 
end shall touch the head of the loser with his foot.” 

41 Agreed,” promptly retorted Alavandar ; and without further 
ado, made three short statements and challenged Akki to 



C H. IIL 


20 THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


negative them if lie could. Listen, proud pedant, to these and 
disprove i.f thou canst ; — 

(1) - -Thy mother is not a barren woman. 

(2) = --This king is paramount. 

(8) TIWTT = = This queen is a good wife. 

Akki was simply stupefied, as he could not dare to dis- 
prove these facts ; and therefore kept helplessly silent. 

They now entered the arena of literary debates ; and here 
also Akki was beaten. Alavandar addressing his opponent 
said : — 44 As for the victor touching the head of his victim, 0 
Pandit! — for that was our agreement— I shall desist from so 
base an act, though agreed to by thyself and in consideration of 
thy grey hairs and thy eminent status as Guru in the Royal 
household.*’ On hearing this declaration, the learned assembly 
applauded Auivandar s attainments and noble demeanour and 
worshipped him with the honors of a Brahma -rat ha (.— a 
triumphal procession, Ac.) 

The Queen was overjoyed to find that her insight had not 
belied her as to the results of the combat and drawing the con- 
queror-horo to her breast exclaimed: — ‘ Yennai Alavandiro ij\ 
4 Didst thou come to fulfil me ’ ? Alacanddr thus means : “ He 
who came to fulfil *’ i.e. t (1) fulfil his spiritual mission on earth, 
and (2) jtdjil .the queen's provision of his success. With the 
king, tlu? queen, — Alavandar with her— entered the inner 
apartments, her joy knowing no bounds. 

The monarch, true to his promise, invested Alavand&r 
with half his kingdom. In royal bliss thus did Alavand&r and 
his holy wife, who by this time joined him, remain. 



CH. IV. 


ALA VANDALS SPIRITUALIZATION. 


21 


CHAPTER IV. 

AltAVANDAB’S SPIRITUALIZATION, 

Rama-Misra was watching silently the eminence which 
Alavandar had reached so rapidly ; and when he heard of 
Akki’s ignominious defeat, and Alavandar becoming a king, 
his joy knew no bounds and lie danced with Rags in hand. 
He now thought of carrying into effect the commission he 
had received, of making Alavandar the future Apostle of the 
Faith. So, he went to the palace, but the guards obstructed his 
entrance. He found his way however into the kitchen where 
contracting friendship with the cooks , 1 2 he ascertained from 
them the potherbs that pleased Alavandar most. Tftduvalai, 
or 2 he daily took to the kitchen for 

a period of six months ; and yet no notice was taken of it. 
Wearied, he stopped away for a few days. Alavand&r 
finding his favourite dish missing from his dinner so sudden- * 
ly, enquired of the cooks the reason. They informed him of 
an old Brahmana having, for six months uninterruptedly, 
brought the green herb and having stopped the supply for a 
few flays. “ If he should return again,’* commanded tho king, 
after chiding them, “ inform me at once." Rtima-misra thought 
lie would try again, and so put in his appearance with the 
favorite vegetable, after some interval. The king was im- 
mediately informed ; and he ordered the venerable man being 
conducted into his presence. When he duly arrived, the king 
rose, and making obeisance, seated him with every mark of 
respect; and asked how he may reward him for his services, — by 
money or by lands. Misra said : — u Good king, these riches 
I do not need from thee ; for I have precious riches, amassed 
by your ancestors, to give thee ; and I shall show thee where 
they lie treasured up. Till I put thee in possession of these, 
let me be admitted to thy presence without hindrance by the 
guards at thy gates. Alavandar was taken out of himself by 

1 In Hindu households in India, caste, and they must be holy people, 
the cooks must be of the same caste holier than the rest of the house* 
as the employer, or above their hold. 

2 A thorny shrub bearing edible fruit. 



22 


THE LIFE OF RAM AN OJA. 


CH. IV. 


this unexpected revelation, and placed his men under instruc- 
tions to admit the worthy visitant freely without caring for 
ceremony. 

Mi^ra now began to teach Alavand&r the Bhagavadgitd, — 
the essence of all the Upanishads. As Alavandar listened 
attentively through the eighteen hooks of this Sublime Poem, 
his spiritual sense was awakened, and a craving caused in his 
heart to realize God, as is spoken therein. “ How shall I 
realize Him ?” asked he of li is Acharya. “ That is taught in 
the Great Charama SlAka 1 ”, promptly responded the teacher and 
taught its significant mysteries. The more Alavandar meditat- 
ed on these, the more they entered deep into his heart. The sav- 
ing Grace taught therein made him more and more inclined to 
surrender himself to God, and more and more cultivate the sense 
of resignation to His will. His soul bent more and more to Him 
' with the nourishment the teachings gave, just as the ripening 
grain-stalks bend as they receive more milk. As days passed, 
his love for the Merciful grew warmer and warmer ; and as 
this love increased, his attachment to other things became 
weaker and weaker. The Teacher watched the spiritual progress 
of his disciple, and thought the time was ripe for leading him 
to where his promised patrimonial wealth lay hidden. He 
led him therefore to the Holy Shrine of Srirangam, where, 
pointing to God reposing therein in the serene glory of His 
presence, to all worshippers accessible, he said : — 

I 2 i.e., “ Who will 

not worship Nan gain, the most Holy , — if he he wise ? for doth 
not wisdom blomrM here and keep Yam a {death) ovt of sight?” 
This is your trove, your heritage, and my trust, which 1 here 
discharge on this auspicious day.” 

Alavandftr, with the spiritual vision with which he was 
by God’s Grace endowed, saw in the Holy Image of Ranga 

1 The 66th verse Rk. XYHI, Bh : Gt. Vide p. xxii, In trod ; hires of 
Azhvdr*, 


* Sr ( nt nga-M (i h d tim/n, 1 , 80 , 



CH. IV. 


ALAVANDAK’S SPIRITUALIZATION. 


the Treasure of the Universe enshrined ; and exclaimed, with 
(a) feelings of l’emorse in his heart for past days, which had 
been spent without this Blessed Vision, and (6) feelings of 
bliss overflowing in streams of loving tears, at the fascinating 
sight he enjoyed : — 1 O Blissful God * exclaimed he, 4 many days 
have I lost in the vain pursuits of the world. I mourn for this. 
No>v I have seen Thee reclining on Thy Sesha. 1 I serve Thee 
for evermore. I find myself reclaimed from the death of worldly 
enjoyments, and initiated into the life of Thy service. 

gsfWJTT-- ( TW*J?TI% I 
II s 

‘ Lord! h nid a and jriends and r idas , 

Sons a)id icices , cattle and houses , — 

Vo him irho has thy service tasted , 

Hateful objects become they.’ 

After this, a determination came to him to renounce the „ 
world, and don the robes of the Sanyasin, inasmuch as the love 
of the world and of God were incompatible with each other. 
Thenceforward he devoted himself to divine contemplation 
and service. 

Alavandar’s spiritual fame attracted to him many disciples,!/ 
of whom the following were notable . — Periya-Nambi, Tiruk- 
kbttiyiir-Nambi, Periya-tirumalai Nambi, MAraneri-Narnbi, 

T ir uk -kacch i - N a mbi , A 1 a vand Ar - Ash v Ar, T i r u m Alai -y - And An , 
Vanamamaiai-y-andan, Taiva-vAri-y-Andan, Isan-AndAn, Jiyar- 
Andan, Tiiukriuirugur-Appan, Tirumbhur-Appan, TirumbliAr- 
misran, Taiva-p-perumal, Vakul-abharana-SomayAjiyAr, Tiru- 
k-kurugur-dAsar, Tirumal-irunjoIai dAsar, Vada-madurai-piran- 
dAr, Alkondi-ammangi, twenty in all. They were all learned { 
and became evangelists as well of the Faith. ' 

1 Fur a lucid description of the have in the text a representation of 
symbolism conveyed by this name one mode of dhtjtina or contclnpla- 
und representation of the Godhead, tion,in which the thoughts are more 
the nailers are referred top. 31 ff. readily concentrated by Iwiing ad* 
Esoteric Hinduism, Fart 1. Wilson dressed to a sensible emblem, 
says in his Vi*hnn purduy : We instead of an abstract truth 

B Bra hunt Purtina , 8, 32. 



THE LIFE OF BAMANUJA. 


on. iv* 


24 


ManakkAl- N ambi (RAma-misra), who had five disciples, viz,, 
AlavandAr himself, Taivattuk-k-araSu-Nambi, Gomatbattut- 
tiruvinnagar-appan, Sirup-pul] ur-udaiya-Pillai, and Yangi- 
puratt-Acchi, was now to deliver his last message to AlavandAr. 
“ To Kurugai-k-kAval -appan has been entrusted another Mystery, 
viz,, the Yoga (*>., the process by which to know Gpd, — not 
merely to conjecture or believe — by deep introspective medita- 
tion), which thou shalt learn from him/’ said he to AlavandAi, 
and explained, when the latter asked why he could not him- 
self impart the Mystery : — “ My Guru UyyakkondAr to whom 
your grand sire NAihamuni(gal) wished to impart this science, 
expressed himself as unworthy to receive the same in the 
words: — “ When the corpse lieth, where is wedlock.” P 1 I did 
not therefore receive the science. Nathamuni entrusted it 
to his other intimate disciple K. Appan. Learn it from him. 
And I am now going to depart ; to my disciples, give all learn* 
t ing and instruction, and make Srirangam your capital, and 
pass on to posterity the Faith bequeathed to us by NAtliamuni, 
your spiritual as well as bodily grandsire.” So deliver, 
ing himself, he passed away, with his heart fixed upon the holy 
feet of his Guru. His memorial verse runs thus : — 

^P?r ^ ’TFrPfiSrc-.'TP ” 

W- <T TTW Wre*T?J I’’ 

Time passed with AlavandAr happily in the work of pro* 
pagating the faith and writing works, of which those that are 
extant are the iStotra^ratna, Hiddhi-traya and A g a ma -pro. many a, 
— the bulwarks of the VisishtAdvaita-VedAnta. At this stage he 
bethought of visiting Kurugai-k-kaval-appan. Accompanied by 
his disciples, he proceeded thither and finding Appan was 
absorbed in Yoga, approached the sanctuary with the utmost 
caution and reverence, and planted himself by the wall on the 
other side of which Appan was seated. Withal, Appan 
exclaimed Is there one of the Sottai-race (i.e., descendant 
of NAthamuni) standing there ? ” Surprised and with fear, 


1 (&rp«« mean a body, Wttllock means the union of soul with God or Yoga, 




m . IV. ALAVANDAB’S SPIRITUALIZATION. 25 


Alavand&r ventured to speak thus “ Holy Sire, yes, I am a 
most humble scion of that race ; my name is Yamunai-t-tur&ivar 
(Y&mun&ch&rya). I am come here to do thee obeisance.” 
So saying, he went forward and fell at Appan’s holy feet. 
Eising, after being blessed, he asked of Appan, how despite 
caution on his part, he had been discovered by him. To which, 
Appan said : — “ Son, when God is with me, He so loves me 
as to be listless to all else ; even Sri, Ilis Spouse, is unable to 
withdraw His attention while He is so engaged ; but now He 
looked away from me three or four times. 1 concluded thence 
that none other than a child of Sott&i race was close by.” 
At which account, Alavand&r was delighted; and entreated 
Appan that the Yoga-Mystery might be revealed to him, as 
directed by his Guru Manakkiil-Nambi ; for he had come in 
questrof it. “Certainly it is intended for thee, son,” said Appan, 
“ But I can only impart it at the moment of my death That 
moment comes the next Pushya-month, Guru-pushya-yoga, 
Abhijin-muhfirta. Take this scrap on which the time is noted so 
as to put thee in mind of it. Come precisely at that moment .” 
Prostrating to Appan, YamunAcharya returned to Srirangam. 

Adhyayan-utsava, or one of the great annual festal celebra- 
tions, in connection with the Holy Temple here, came round. 
It is the festival when all the 4Q99. Prabandhas of the Azhvars 
are sung anfciphonally. In the course of this recital, the 
Araiyar, 1 * * * * * * or the chief chorister of the Temple sang the verse 
of Tiruvay-mozhi 8 , viz. Kahivinai (X. 2. 8), in which occurs the 
passage : — Nadamino nawarga ! tdltr etc., meaning ; — 

‘ Speed, good souls , to Atlanta- Say ana , B 

Remind li e fins— speed, oh speed. 1 


1 Tiru-v-aran^a*p*porumal Arai- 

yar, son of Yamuna. Tfc may be 

noted here that while Yamuna was 

a Griht, he had four sons : Tevvattu- 

k - karasu - Nambi, Pillai - arasu- 

Nambi ; S >ttai -Nambi and Tiruva- 

rauga-p-perumal. The son of the 

first of these sons is Srt-saila- 


ptirna or Periya-tirumalai-Nambi, 
the maternal uncle of RArnAnuja 
(vide Ramanuja's life). 

2 8eo our Azhvdr's Live#, pp. xxii, 
205 and 22i, and our Divine Wisdom 
of Drdvida Saints. 

* The Holy Shrine of Atlanta- 
padma-NAbha (Trevandrttm, Tra- 
vancore.) 


4 



oh. ry\ 


26 


THE LIFE OE EAMANUJA. 


This passage reiterated by Ar&iyar was taken by Yamuna- 
charya as a sign that a shrine so dear to Saint Nammazhviir 1 
viz., Ananias ay ana, was one, which to visit became impera- 
tive on him. He immediately rose and, placing his disciple 
Toy vavari-y-&nd&n in charge of his mathara (monastery), 
went on a pilgrimage to AnantaSayana, where he visited the 
Lord Seshasayana by way of the three-doored sanctum. Some 
time passed thus. He suddenly remembered the scrap given 
Mm by Appan, and calling for it found to his surprize 
that it was the very moment he ought to have been with 
Appan for receiving the Yoga-Mysteries. With sorrow indes- 
cribable, he chid himself for his forgetfulness and wished, in 
his agony, for a J’mhpaka-vrmrina 2 to waft him instantly to 
Appan! Helpless and in sheer anguish he left AnantaSayana 
and started back for Srirangam. 

In Srirangam, meanwhile, Tey va-vari-y-flndan was unable 
to bear the separation of his Guru, Yamun&chftrya, and conse- 
quently became ill and wore away daily. Physicians were 
brought by his friends to examine the patient. They all # 
declared that some deep mental affliction was at the root of 
his illness. But asked the friends : “ Is it wordly affliction 
of any kind, — may be woman — gnawing at your heart ? ” 

“ No affliction/' said he, “ troubles me, but affection which I 
have for my Guru ; hence, if I am conducted to him promptly, 

I may hope to live." Despairing of his life, the friends laid 
him on a stretcher and carried him towards AnantaSayana. 
As they proceeded on their journey, Andan daily picked up 
strength and revived sufficiently to be able to go on foot. At 
Karaimanai river-side, the Guru and the disciple met. The 
latter fell Hat on sighting his Guru, — overcome by joy. The 
Guru, finding him thus lying motionless, addressed him thus : 
u Sri Hama was a Master, hence He had the power to make 
his brother Bharat a carry out his behest, (viz., to stay at 
Ayodhya till he returned from his exile in the forest) ; but T 

1 Bee his life in Lire* of Azhmrs. 

a A aerial vehicle such as that noy from Lanka to Ayodhya 
used by RAmachandra for his jour- „ [R&m&yana.] 



CH. IV. ALAYANDAE’S MISSION. 27 


seem no such master to thee, as I am powerless like R&trnt. 
to exact obedience from thee.” TliiB sarcastic remark penetrat- 
ed deep into the heart of Andan, and he felt that by trans- 
gressing the commands of his Guru to remain in Srirangam, 
he had disobeyed him. Speechless therefore he lay. 

The Guru taking compassion — his anger at the disobedi- 
ence of Andan abating by this time — said : — “I believe, son, 
thou desireat to re-establish with me the relationship of mas- 
ter and disciple. Tf so I bid thee rise.” On hearing this, An- 
dan rose, trembling with fear and stood dumb. The good men 
standing near remarked that And An's temperament was like 
that of Lakshmana, who said that his Reparation from Rftma 
would be like taking the fish out of the water | RamA.yu.na 11. 
53. 31 ]. YA.munachA.ry a hearing this said : — u AndA,n ! disciples 
constituted like thee are rare. I am proud of thee. But oh, 
much distress I find in thee. Take courage.” So saying, he ( 
softly stroked him and bid him go and visit Ananta^ayana. 

“ Thou art my AnantaSayana. 1 know no other ”, burst out 
Andan, opening bis mouth for the first time. YA.munAchA.ry a 
was struck with the extraordinary character of his disciple 
and taking him to be for one who answers the descriptiou : — 

?j^rr i ” 

“ That, Teacher is all who Faith bestows on his disciple 

He is Vaikuniha itself , the Milk-sea and the Dvdraka 

led him back to Srirangam, which they all reached in due 
course. 

In the company of his faithful followers, YA.munAcha.ry a 
was here engaged in the prosecution of his spiritual mission ; 
but a thought now began to ban-ass him that to carry on the 
good work he had begun, no competent soul was yet found 
among his disciples. 

1 Vaikuntha is Parama-pada or the the Nebula, said to be the source of 
Spiritual Universe ; Milk-sen is the all Systems). bvaraka is the place 
centre which in the Material Uni- where Krishna, one of the Incar- 
verse, God has made for Himself, nations, established Hirnself on 
and which is the source of all In- earth and in India, 
carnations (like the Milky Way or 



cm. v. 


THE LIFE OF KAMANUJA. 


CHAPTER V. 

RAMANUJA. 

His birth and studies. 

Y&mun&charya was thus troubled in his mind as to a com- 
petent successor to whom to hand, '^n Hie Torch of Faith for 
posterity His disciple Nambi or MaSapurna 1 had proceeded 
to The Holy Mount of Tirupati to live there for a time in the 
service of the Lord seated therein (Venkat&chala-pati). He had 
two sisters, Bhumip-pitatfi and Periya-piratti, or Bhu-d6vi and 
Sri-d£vi. The elder Bhu-devi was married to Asuri KeSavap- 
perumal, the performer of many Yagas,— residing at Sri- 
pcrurnbMur. 2 * SrbdevPwas married to Kamalanayana-bhatta 
of the Yafta-mani clan, residing at Mazhalai-mangalam. 


Of Bhd-devi 4 * was born Ramanuja, the Great Reformer and 
Religionist of the 12th century, 6 7 just as Rama was born of 
Kausalya and Krishna of Devaki. Of him it is written : — 

qtm si ?m- tth; i war 

“ It is the First Ananta that became Laks/nnana next , 

And Balabhadra next , again the One next in Kali” 

And this One was the Great Ramanuja born in the Kali 
Age, as the Spiritual Sun to dispel the darknes of sin and 
ignorance, reigning rampant as said in the verse : — 

: g!w 4m qf?mT fw i 

*tp![ ’sr *t vior:ii T 


I See No. 23, Hierarchic Table, Lives of A z it cars. 

* Near Madras. 

s Also called Dvutimati. 

4 Also called Kan ti math 

’ See No, 27, Hierarchic Table to our Lives of A At ears, (A. C. 1017). 

II Yadavayiri-muhatmifa, I, 32. 

7 Bhaii&hyvt-purdnu, 



CH. V. 


HIS BIRTH ANI) STUDIES. 


29 


“ The Scripture s are lost , and the Traditional Laws, 

The t trice- born have become degenerate, 

The allied sciences as well are wrecked, 

Oh, hotv Kali ( Troti age) grows in power ! ” 

To Han't* Rishi was also, by God, foretold the coming of 
the Great Luminary, RAmanuja, as follows : — 

h&Tt ^ wf \ wm m n l * 

Jn thy line, Harita ! will be bom Stsha himself — 

My Own — for worlds ’ Sulcatum. 

Thus then was ushered into the world a Great Saviour, in 
the fulness of his own age. 

T i rumalai -N am hi 4 (the disciple of YAnniuAchArya) got 
tidings of this birth, and forthwith proceeded to Sri-perumbii- 
dur (10 miles from the station of Tiruvallur, Madras Railway), 
to visit the child. Seeing his friend Asuri KAsava, he con- 
gratulated him on the auspicious event and said : — “ Friend, I 
see the blessed child. He is above his kind. The light in his 
face indicates this. He possesses, in embryo, all the qualities 
which shall make him a sage, learned and wise. Name him 
therefore Lakshmana as he will be to God as Lakshmana was to 
Rama. Lakshmana (llaiya-perumaj) is incarnated as Rama- 
nuja, (llui-Azhv&r). As the illustrious child grew , the several 
sacraments binding on the Brahmanas were duly administered 
till he came to be full sixteen years of age ; and by that time, 
he had passed through the student’s course, viz. the learning of 
the Vedas and all that appertains to that study. He was now 
married; or as the Vaidikas say, he duly entered into the 
Order of the Householder after Brahmacharya. He left his 
home in search of a competent teacher who would teach him 
the VedAnta and found one in Yadava-prakA^a, living at 
Tiru-p-putkuzhi in the neighbourhood of Perum&l-kdil, or 
KAnehipuram (Conjivaram) ; audheie he joined other students 
learning under that teacher. 


1 Bh utapuri-mdhdlmya, III, (104-5). 

* Called Sri-saila-pArna, the maternal unde of H&roAnuja. 


THE LIFE OF BAMANUJA. 


Cfi. T. 


Meanwhile, Kamala-nayana-bhatta at Mazhalai- manga- 
lam, 1 became the father of a boy, the mother being his wife 
Sri- dev i as noted. Tirumalai-Nambi receiving the new's, has- 
tened to the place and congratulating Bhatta on the happy 
event, foretold that the child was one of great promise ; he 
would grow to be very wise and good and unworldly, and an 
ardent Champion of Religion. He was to be named Gdvinda.® 
All the Samsk&ras (sacraments) were regularly administered 
in his case. He came of age and also entered the order of the 
householder. Hearing of his cousin- brother studying under 
Y&dava-prak&sa, he gladly joined him to prosecute studies 
in his good company. 

In the course of their readings, Y&dava came across the 
passage:— ffr* WrT [Taitt : Up: II , 1. t] and lie ex- 
plained it in a way most repugnant to the spirit of the 
r passage itself. For the passage means : — 

“Brahman (God) is Truth ( sattyam ), Knowledge 
( jh/mam ), and Infinity ( auantam ).*' 

But Y&dava said that the attributes of Truth , Knowledge 
and Infinity could not co-exist in Brahman, inasmuch as broken - 
hom-ne8s } horn-leamess, and jnll-hornness, could not co-exist in a 
cow, for example; i. e a cow cannot have broken horns f no 
horns and be fully horned at one and the same time ; and 
therefore Brahman cannot simultaneously possess various 
attributes. Brahman with attributes >vas therefore a logical 
impossibility. R&m&nuja protested with his teacher that this 
Upanisbad passage could not be thus misinterpreted and 
so tortured as to suit his own imaginary Brahman. Challenged 
by the teacher to furnish his own explanation, R&m&nuja 
argued thus: — “To begin with, a sentence cannot mean other- 
wise than what it is intended to mean. “ That Brahman is 
Truth etc.” is what is evident in this passage. It does not 
run thus: — “ Brahman is not Truth/* so as to make Brahman 

1 Now known as Mudhura-mangalam (near Conjivaram.) 

1 Or Emb&r, No. 81 of Hierarchic Table in our It* Live* of Azlnar*, 




OH. V. 


HIB BIRTH AND STUDIB8, fU 


devoid of any attribute, thus reducing It to a non-entity. 
And then, if there is Brahman, It must have attributes ; for an 
attributeless Brahman can have no existence (truth}. A thing 
must be something, not nothing. And thirdly the attributes 
Truth Ac. are not inconsistent with each other so as to preclude 
their co-existence in Brahman, such as the inconsistency of 
light and darkness co-existing in space for example. The 
attribute Truth is meant to show that Brahman exists not at 
one moment merely, and ceasing to exist beyond that moment. 
Brahman is Truth is there fore intended to establish Brahman’s 
existence in eternity , or Its eternality in time. Brahman is 
Knowledge is next intended to. establish that Brahman is Spirit, 
for Knowledge means Though Thought means Intelligence, Sen sate * 
ness and so on. And thus Knowledge is an inseparable adjunct 
of Brahman, for otherwise Brahman would be no Spirit, but 
simple non-intelligent or non-sensate or non-thinking staff like 
lifeless matter. Brahman is Knowledge therefore establishes* 
that Brahman is Spirit or Life. Brahman is Infinity is next 
intended to establish that Brahman is without limits or con- 
ditions, or Its infinity in space and mode. Truth therefore is 
the term which characterizes Brahman as Eternal , distinguish- 
ing It from what is non eternal ; Knowledge is the term which 
characterizes Brahman as Spirit or Life , distinguishing It from 
what is non-spirit or non-life ; and Infinity is the term which 
characterizes Brahman as Infinite , distinguishing It from what 
is non-infinite (or conditioned by space-limits or mode-limits). 
And these attributes and infinite others can co-exist in Brahman 
without mutual contradiction, as redness, softness, perfume Ac., 
can harmoniously co-exist in the flower. The analogy of the 
cow is not appropriate in this case ; the analogy of the flower 
as quoted, or the sun having light and heat co-existing, are 
appropriate. And therefore to try to postulate au attributless 
Brahman, or a Brahman in whom different attributes cannot 
co-exist, is neither logical nor consistent with the aflflrmatory 
character of the Vedic passage in question.” Y&dava after 
hearing this, simply said in disdain : u Thou , to argue with 
me f” and kept silent. 




OH. V. 


THB LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


On another day, R&m&nuja, — disciple as he was — was 
anointing his Guru Y&dava w ith oil ; when Y&dava took into 
his head to descant on the Vedie verse : — 

im w yTTffar "rn [Chhand, Up. I, 6, 7] 

‘Brahman,’ he said, ‘(or He who is the Golden-hued in the 
Sun), has his eyes red like the posteriors of the monkey/ 1 
When R&m&nn ja hoard this, lie felt a pang shooting across his 
heart to find that he should hear noble Vedic passages thus 
abused and ill-treated by Yadava. His grief was so keen that a 
hot tear stole in to his eye, and dropped on the lap of Y&dava, 
as R&m&nnja was bending over him to rub his head with oil. 
The drop scorched Y&dava. He started and looked up. See- 
ing R&rnftnuja troubled, “ What ails thee V ” asked he. “ I am 
grieved,” he said, “that beautiful Vedic lines are so awkwardly 
construed/' “ What is thy interpetation, then ? ” angrily 
vociferated Ytklava. “ Sir,” cried RamAmuja, u can you not see 
that ka means wafer, and pilot i means to drink. Water-drinker 
is thus leapt, the sun, or the lotus -stalk. Asa is to open ( vika - 
sane) or to rest (upa rasane) . Fund anka is the lotus. And there • 
fore God in the Sun is He whose eyes are like the lotus which 
blooms under Ihe balmy beams of the sun, or lotus which rests on 
its stalk below ? It is to repudiate God to demy Him Person ; and 
when Vedas postulate such a Personality, it is doubly to 
repudiate Him by reading blasphemous similes into the 
Vedas, where reverential gravity and grandeur are intended. 
Such constructions betoken nothing short of heresy.” Yadava 
heard this irresistible oration of Ramanuja, and flared up 
saying • — •“ Haughty youth ! if thou canst not abide by my 
instruction, thou must leave me." Ramanuja spoke not a 
syllable in reply, but took his departure. 

The surprising intelligence of Ram&nuja, his original ways, 
and divinely disposed heart, all combined to set Y adava 

1 Unfortunately, even Sankara, had liked, seen through the blinds, 
who preceded V&dava.persi&tsinthis He however adds a clause in his 
offensive interpretation though commentary that this illustration 
as a Vedic scholar he could, if he ia not meant in derision. 



CH. T. HIS BIRTH AND STUDIES. S3 


thinking ; and his cogitations landed him in vice inasmuch as 
he believed that R&m&nuja was a rival, who would any day 
be his supeiior in learning, subversive of his philosophy of 
advaita (monism) ; in short an oddity who may injure his re- 
putation as the teacher in the land, and a possible revolutionist 
whom it was expedient to put an end to. 

Thus thinking, lie called together those disciples who were 
after his ways and said : “ Look, all of you do quietly subscribe 
to my views, but this R&manuja alone is adverse and perverse, 
and entertains opinions opposed to mine. He is likely to 
become our declared enemy. Can you devise some means by 
which to do away with him r” They suggested many ways of 
disposal, but none of them recommended itself to Yadava, as 
it meant sinning, for which S&stras declared that one must 
expiate and suffer ; and secondly in whatever way R&ru&nuja 
was to be done away with, that must be above suspicion, « 
After much consultation and deliberation, they pitched upon a 
plot, viz., to invite R&m&nuja back into their fold, treat him as 
their best friend — as one without whom they could not live— 
and then they would stait on a holy pilgrimage to V&r&nasi 
(Benares) and there drown R&m&nuja in the Ganga (Ganges) 
river, near Manikarnikil-gh&t— the ostensible object being 
pilgrimage, the real one being Ram&nuja’s death — death 
which, taking place in the Holy Ganga, w ould be counted as 
an affair of merit, w hich they thought would not involve the 
actors in sin ! What travesty of spiritual ethics, by YMava !! 
A veritable whited sepulchre he must have Ijeen. 1 

Into a hellish conspiracy such as this then, YMava and 
his accomplices entered, even as Duryodhana did as regards 
Dharmaputra and his brothers, whom he had contrived to kill 
in a wax-house. They therefore invited R&m&nuja to join 
them as without him they said they felt uncongenial, and 
begged of him to prosecute his studies as he willed, undis- 
turbed. Some time passed thus. 


1 Probably Y&dava’s moral (im- of the world, whioh thug see mg to 
moral) sense took refuge in his pan- provide no strong motive for 
theistic theory of JM71 ya, or illusion strenuous effort after holiness. 

$ 



84 


OH. V. 


THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA* 


Y&dava now announced his intention of going on a pilgri- 
mage to K&si (Benares) ; and making due preparations, started 
on the journey with It&inannja of course, Govinda-bhatta, 
Tl&m&nuja’s maternal cousin, following. Govinda somehow got 
scent of the evil designs of Yadava on Ramanuja. The other 
disciples too had their suspicion that Govinda might divulge 
and defeat their machinations. They took care therefore to 
keep him and R&mAntija apart as far as possible. They had 
now arrived at the Vindhya-range of hills, and while crossing a 
valley, R&rnftnuja stopped a little behind for purposes of nature. 
And Govinda contrived to tarry with him The others were 
a little in advance. Govinda took advantage of this seclusion 
to disclose to Ramanuja the designs of YAdava in as few words 
as possible and advised him to escape. So saying he left 
RAmAnuja, 

RAmAnuja taking the hint, left the main path and turned 
aside, soon hiding himself in the wilderness of the Yindhya. 
He roamed about in the jungle aimlessly, the tierce sun heating 
upon his head, and stones and thorns hurting his feet, drawing 
forth blood. Wandering away thus into unknown regions for 
some time, he was fagged out ; and hungry, thirsty and footsore, 
was unable to advance fnrtlier. “ Only greatest sinners,” 
he cried, u deserve this fate. Hence it is written : — 
qrg g'araftmtrfrr i e . g. “ rw? «■/„> 

steal others' land are born in the waterless wilds of the Yindhya, 
as dark snakes lodging in dry anthills He was bewildered, 
not knowing where to go and what to do. He looked round 
for help, mind- troubled and lieart-sick. While he was in this 
state, all on a sudden burst upon his sight- a Fowler and His 
Wife. 

Godhas defined himself as One who can have noj< y without His 
jaithjul ones'. and One who incar- 

nates with bou\ arrow , sword and even a wife, to befriend His faith- 
jtd in times of peril : J 

SRT^PII 2 . Seeing them, RAmAnuja heaved a sigh and was 

1 VishmuT)harmti f 62, 31. 8 BmhmAnda-Purdna, 



Cl* 


His BIRTH AND STUDIES. 




comforted at the thought that some one had come or been 
deputed by God to succour him in his distress. B&m&Dtija ac- 
costing them asked who they were and whither they were going. 
“We are Fowlers coming from Siddh&srama in the North and 
are wending our way to Satyavrafca-kshetra 1 * * in the South/’ 
said they. “ May I accompany you to that Holy shrine P* 
asked R&m&nuja, “ Most willingly ”, said they, “ follow us.” 
They leading, Ramanuja trudged on, till VindhyA was now out 
of sight, and the sun was setting. Rd.ni Ann ja performed his 
evening prayers. And as it was getting dark, all the three sat 
down under the shelter of a big tree, and were sinking into the 
soft embraces of sleep. The Fowler’s wife addressing her hus- 
band said: — “Dear, can you get me a drink of water to allay 
my thirst P’ “ Wait a little,” answered the husband, “ directly 
it dawns, I promise to find you close by a Iteautiful pond, full 
of cool and fragrant water.” Ramanuja overbeard this eon* 
versation and thought : “ 01», if only it. were in my power to do 1 
this kind Pair a service now, at least as a requital for their 
kinducss to me ! Hut I am in unknown regions.” And lie 
dozed away in such reflections. 

The night had now nearly worn away, a flush suffused the 
Fast, and a morning breeze gently began to blow. It&m&nuja 
rose with thoughts of God in his breast, and off erred up his 
morning prayers. After this he looked round for his Guides, 
in order to pursue the journey, but to his amazement he did 
not find them. He called for them aloud and searched in 
every direction, but all to no purpose. He proceeded a few 
steps in alarm, not knowing whither he was going. Rut by 
tins time the sun bad appeared above the Eastern horizon. 
RAmAnuja could see his surroundings better; and he heard 
peoples’ voices. He took heart and, a few steps more, dis- 
covered a pleasant garden, a pond 8 and a few men standing 
by. “What a contrast this day is with yesterday,” gladly 


1 The pnrdnic or legendary name of Gonjeevaram. 

* This is called Sdlni-k-Kinar, still existing and from which water 

is daily brought to Lord Vuradarajusvami for ablution. 



36 


OH. V. 


THE LIFE OF HAMAH UJA. 


cried he, astonished. “ What country could this be ? Is there 
any town close by ? ” he asked himself. 

The people gazed at him wonderingly, saying : u Art thou 
mad, Br&hraana? Dost thou not see before thee the bright Punya- 
kdti-viioAnam r'” At this RAmanuja looked up and saw the high 
Gopuram (or cupola) of the Temple of Lord Varadaraja, the 
worshipful Deity of Kanchipnram. He was struck dumb with 
delight and astonishment. It now dawned upon him that He 
who had directed his steps in the Yindhyan wilds was no other 
than God himself, who not only guided him but miraculously 
transported him over a distance of nearly 1,000 miles in a 
night !! Like the joy that thrilled SitA when she heal’d of 
RAv ana's fall, like the joy that ravished RAma when he heard 
HanumAn say : “I have found.SitA ”, like the joy of Hanuman 
when he entered the Hadhuvana on his return from Lanka, was 
RAmAnuja’s joy after the wonderful adventures he had recently 
passed through. He simply fainted away with delight, espe- 
cially when he reflected how God descends to the weak and 
helpless, even as Saint ParAnkusa fainted when he reflected 
how Krishna, though God, submitted to be bound by a rope 
by Yasodal Charmed into ecstasy, he cried: — “To Arjuna, 0 
God ! Thou revealedst Thy Beatific Form, 1 hut to me Thou 
hidst Thyself under the guise of a Fowler. I took Thee fora 
mere Fowler arid I beseach Thy pardon for taking Thee for an 
ordinary creature. Even as Arjuna besought Thee, so do I : — 
“ Krishna ! YAdava ! Achyuta ! Overlook it, if taking Thee for 
friend, I called Thee by names such as these, unmindful of 
Thy Greatness as God ; remit, 0 God ! any slight I may have 
unwarily shown Thee, while we moved together, sat together 
and ate together and joked together, as equals.” 3 RAmAnuja 
was thus drowned in rapturous delight after the wonderful 
experiences he had. Out of sheer joy he fell prostrate, rose, 
fell again, shed tears of joy, was bathed in perspiration — in 
short, felt his whole being divinely transported beyond him- 
self* From that day on, he c arried water daily from the holy 
well (Ktthu«k-kinar) to the Lord YaradarAja. 


1 BUagavatfgUA, Xlth Book* 


3 Bkaga\ adgita, XI. 41, 42. 


CH. VI. TADAVA, GOVINDA AND RAMANUJA. 


Si 


CHAPTER VI. 

TADAVA, GOVINDA AND RAMANUJA. 

Y&dava-prakaSa and his. disciples, finding that ft&m&nuja 
did not follow, stopped and waited for him for some time. 
Govinda came up however and joined them. “ Youfhavo come, 
but where is Ram&nuja asked Yadava. “I never stopped 
with him,” said Govinda in reply, “ I walked my own way, 
and so I am not aware of what has become of him. Y&dava 
sent his disciples in search, but they returned unsuccessful. 
44 What could have happened to the poor youth, Oh !*' thus did 
they all feign grief. Baulked thus in their intentions, they 
continued their journey sullenly to on Kasi. 

They duly arrived there. It was the month M&gha, aud 
they went to bathe in the Holy Ganga. While bathing, 
Govinda found a Sivcdingam (phallus-stone) floating up into 
his hand. He showed this to Yadava, who said : — “ You are a 
most fortunate ma n. Gangadhara (Siva) himself has appeared 
to you. From this day you are most dear and venerable to us. 
Your name from this day shall be : — “ Ullangai-konarada- 
N&yan&r (he who brought in his palm)/’ They all now started 
homeward for Kanehipuram, visiting on tlieir way Jagann&tha, 
Ahobilam and other shrines. Before reaching K&nchi, 
U, Nayauar took leave of Yadava, saying he would instal the 
Sivalingam in a suitable place and then join them. Y&dava 
permitting, Nayan&r went to his birth-place Mazhalai- 
Mangalam, and there with the help of the learned men of the 
place installed the Sivalingam , and remained in its staunch 
service. K&lahasii is a place sacred to Siva. It is written 
that this Siva appeared to N&yan&r in his dream commanding 
him to join his Temple-service at K&lahasti. A dream was 
dreamt by the Temple-authorities of the place also, commanding 
them to proceed and bring Nayan&r with honors. They did 
so, and bringing N&yan&r in festive fashion, made him the 
dignitary of their temple, investing him with the signet-ring 
and other insignia of that office. 



38 


THE LIKE OF RAMANUJA. 


CH. VI. 


Y&dava-prak&sa, as already said, had amved at K&nchi. 
Here to his astonish rhent he found Ram&auja, who he had 
believed had been lost in the jungles. He feigned joy however 
at seeing him and said; — “Our grief at your loss in the 
Vimlhyan wilds, was very great ; at seeing you now, it has 
given place to boundless joy.” Ramanuja narrated to him 
how he lost sight of them as they were much in advance, how 
he lost his way ; and how while wandering sick and sore in 
the mazes of the forest, a Fowler broke upon his sight sud- 
denly; and how He guided his steps so that to his wonderment, 
he found he had traversed a great distance while he thought 
he slept under a tree, but waking up to find he had been brought 
to Kiln chi. This account made Yadava to stare at R&manuja 
in combined fear and wonder ; whom he now looked upon as 
a being not of the ordinary run of mankind ; not to be despised 
but looked upon as one deserving reverential regards ; and 
’ feeling remorse in liis heart for his evil intents towards him. 
Ho could not therefore but turn his hate into love for him ; and 
therefore invited R&nnlnuja to grace his school with his presence 
and to complete his studies if he so willed. 

While these events were passing at K&uoln, two Sri 
Vaishnavas 1 of K&nclii travelled to Srirangam, to pay their 
devotions to RangamUha, which they did and then went to 
Alavandtlr (Y&muudch&rya), the great apostle of the Faith who 
was there teaching at the time 2 . After due exchange of 
courtesies, Y&munAeharya asked them for any news of an in- 
teresting nature at K iinch i . They related to him how a youth 
R&tn&nuja by name, born at Bliutapuri (Sri Perumbudur) 
came to K&cicM to read VedAnta under a uni-staffed® Sanyasi, 
Y&dava-prakAsa ; how in the course of theii readings, differ- 
ences rose between them as regards intepretations of Veda- 
texts, — YtVdaVa contending for a quality -less God, and Hama* 
mtj& for a quality-full One, and so on—, and how, on a certain 

1 Devout followers of Vishnu. the Advalta School, and the TW- 

* Vide his life. staffed to the Visihfcftd vaita school* 

* Pwostaffed Sanvae ins belong to The etaff is made of bamboo sticks. 



YADAVA, GOYINDA ASB BAMASUJA. 39 


day, a certain blasphemous exegetio by Y&dava of a Yeda- 
passage excited and pained Ramanuja and drew forth burning 
tears from his eyes, which accidentally falling on Yftdava’s 
thigh scorched him like fire ; how on his challenging, R&uiiVnuja 
gave his beautiful interpretation that the passage meant that 
God's eyes resembled the lotus opening under the sun’s rays, 
and fiow this and other disputations of the sort led to their 
separation; Yadava\s plot on his life and the rest of events, 
adventurous and miraculous, which followed thereafter in 
succession. 

YiiinunA.ohA.rya heard this account with rapt attention and 
exclaimed : — 

“ The b(u1 are legion like fere sparks in a furnace. 

Bat the good, if found in the fire, are like lotuses therein , M 

So saying fie felt a great longing to immediately go and 
see Ramanuja. He repaired to the Lord RangamUba and taking 
leave of Him, left Srimngam with his followers. On his way, 
paying honors to God NYiyanar and the Three First Azhv&rs at 
Tirukkoilur 1 , reached Kitnchi in due time. 

Tirukkacohi-numbi,* on hearing his Aeh&rya coming, 
gathered together tin* holy people of Kanclii, and with Sri 
Sathagopa, Ti rtha an 1 Praia la of the Holy Temple of Varada- 
raja, went forward to nmet and welcome him. Y&mun&ch&rya 
received the Holy gifts of God, and seeing Tirukkacchi-Nambi, 
his disciple, lying pros irate at his feet for joy and veneration 
for the Guru, lifted him up with affection and inquired: — 
41 Gaj&ndrad&sa ! n art thou steady at thy fanning service to 
Lord Var.ida *f ” ** Ry your grace, Sire, The Lord is accept- 
ing my humble services,” said he. And then they proceeded 

1 See Lives of Azhvars. 

* No. 3G, It/ id, Hierarchic Table. Here read pp. 3409, Vo!. VH. 
Bhfljsgavadvishaya A nt ndalran. 

8 A Sanskrit name for Tirukkacchi-Nambi, 



49 


CH. VI. 


THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


together to the Temple, where Yamun&chirya paid due honors 
to the Lord Varada. 

While he was thus employed, Y&dava-prak&sa came on a 
visit to the temple, with his followers. Ytlmunacli&rya saw 
them, and asked who among his followers was R&mAnuja. 
They pointed him out. “That bright and glorious central 
figure,” said they, “ possessing those fme shoulders, broad and 
long, like Rama Himself,— that is Ramanuja.” Yamumlchaiya 
drank him in with bis eyes, and sent his prayers after him, as 
the host was moving away. 

Yilmun&ch&rya now mounted up to the Central Shrine of 
Lord Varada (called Hastigiri) and standing before the Deity 
sent up a prayer to Him thus “0 Great Lord! grant me a 
boon. Thou art Vara -da (Boon-G ranter), for q^q qqRqwqr # 

qqiqffT ^ <rrw; i spq: qqyqrq gqsrqq q- g»jqf ^ ^ 

’G TR W 'MTSflN II i.e. 1 By thy favour, the deaf hears, the lame 
runs, the dumb speaks, the blind sees, and the barren bears. I 
have sought Thee.’ Grant me then, that this RAmilnuja shall 
become the bearer of the Torch of our Faith.” An urgent call 
from Srirangam now obliging YAmun&charya to return im- 
mediately, he found no leisure to do anything more, nor time 
even to say something to Tirukkaechi-Nambi, about his wishes 
and future plans. To Srirangam thus lie returned. 



CH.VIL R&M&NUJA — CONTROVERSIES AND MIRACLES. 41 


CHAPTER VII. 

RAMANUJA— CONTROVERSIES AND MIRACLES. 

YAdava praka^a was conducting his VedAnta classes as 
usual. It so happened that the princess of the then RAja 1 of 
the dominions, to which Ranchi had then belonged, became 
obsessed with an evil spirit (brahma rakshas). The Raja was 
endeavouring to find an able exorcist of demons. He was told 
that Yadava was well versed in such lore. The RAja sent men 
to invite him. They went and told him the state of affairs 
with the princess and that lie was wanted. YAdava said to 
the men :— 11 Go ye back and tell the spirit: “ YAdava com* 
niandetli thee to leave the princess.” They returned and 
delivered the message: “Yadava comma ndeth. Leave thou 
the princess,” they demanded of the spirit. “ Go back,” 
bellowed the rakshas , “ and tell Yadava from me, to depart from 
this country.” The Raja’s men ran to Yadava again and 
delivered this message from the rakshas. Y adava now' went him- 
self with a troop of his disciples, and stationing himself before 
the obsessed princess, began to mutter poteut magical incanta- 
tions and showing his fist, bid the devil depart. Rut the devil 
(i.e., princess) stretched its legs and pointing them towards 
Yadava said, in sovereign contempt of him : — “ Thinkest thou 
Y Adava ! that I do not know thy magic*, and magical formula 1 ? 
Know est thou not I am a brahma-rahshas ? Neither thy mantra 
nor thy person can be efficacious as against me. Thou hast no 
knowledge of me, nor hast knowledge of thyself. Get thee gone.” 
“But,” put in Yadava, “hast thou knowledge of me, and of 
thyself as thou boastetli ? ” “ Learn then from me,” retorted 
the rakshas , “ thou wert a guana in thy past birth, living in 
the holes of the hank of the MadhurAntaka tank. A batch of 
Sri-Vaishnavas were travelling to Tirumalai (Tirupati) on a 
holy pilgrimage. They stopped at the tank, cooked, ate and left 
the place. They had left the leavings of their food, and had 
spilt some water. Thou didst then scamper to the place and 

1 VSrarAjemlra and bis successor time in possession of Conjeverarn 

Parakesari Varma; as also the [Sontl, Indian Inscription Vol. II. 
Western Chalukyas W'ere about this p. 117 ff.J 



42 


THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


CH. VII. 


ate of that food and drank of that water. This foitnitoos merit 
brought thee to this present janma (birth) of thine as a 
Hrahmana with learning. As for myself, J was a Brithmana 
•in my past birth. I began to perform a Yaga (a Br&h- 
nmrlc sacred ritual), but there were omissions in the regular 
chanting of the mantras, and the acts connected therewith. 
And hence the rdhsham-jaunia has devolved on me. Seest 
thou how I have knowledge, and than hast not”? “Very 
good,” said Yadava, “ tell me then who will make thee dislodge 
from the princess ? ” “ There,” said the devil, pointing with its 
hands folded in fear and worship, “ in thy ranks there is that 
angel from Heaven incarnate among men, whom thou hast the 
glory of counting as thy student, and whose name is Ramanuja. 
At his bidding I must lice 1 Yadava turned to Ramanuja and 
hogged of him to command the evil spirit to leave. Ramanuja 
did so. “ But T will not”, it said, u unless, 0 Holy soul, thou 
place thy Holy Feet upon my head.” Ramanuja did so. “I 
now salute thee Holy Ramanuja,” said the spirit in a loud tone, 
“ I am leaving the princess.” “ Hut stay,” said Ramanuja 
“ how shall we know that thou hast left?” By this sign” 
replied the spirit, “ into that asoatlha tree yonder, I shall 
enter, the evidence thereof shall be the breaking of a branch.” 
And so it happened. The Raja was overjoyed, and loaded 
them with presents and honors. Yadava-prakaSa showered 
plaudits on RAmunuja and glad at least that his prestige was 
somewhat saved by his noble disciple, returned to his retreat. 

In Sriraugam, Yanmnaeharya was in the meanwhile con- 
ducting his expositions of The Faith, of which the Four-Thou- 
sand Rnibandlias' constituted the chief documents. When he 
came across St. NammAzhvAr’s verse (Tiru-vdi-mozhi IV, 10. 5) 
which proclaims that there is but One God, “ On whom, all 
ye, 0 Laingas, Santanas and Sakyas*, shall believe ”, he felt 

1 Cp. Luke IV. 33—35. And in the synogogue...aii unclean devil 4c. 
Aleo Luke X. 38 ff. 

8 See our A: It vdr'* Lives. 

* &<»*««((*» Jatttas, Sdktjmt — Hauddhaa. 



CH. VII. RAMANUJA- CNNTR0VKRS1ES AND MIRACLES, 


43 


more anxious than ever to find a capable successor ; and still 
more fervently prayed to Lord Varadaraja to wean Ramanuja 
from the heretical associations of Y&dava, and appoint him for 
The Faith. In answer as it were to his ardent petition, a crisis 
was preparing. 

For, YcXdava was one day explaining the Vedanta-texts 
jpg, 1 and ^ JfTSW as if they meant that soul 

(man) and God were identical*. The first passage means ; — All 
this indeed ls Brahman , and the second means : — There is not 
the least diversity here. According to Yadava, the first passage 
meant that all this Cosmos is God : the second passage meant 
that all the diversities that are seen in the Cosmos are illusory . 
Ramanuja took objection to these interpretations and said that 
the cosmos can never be identical with Brahman (God) nor can 
it he proved unreal. For the first passage : all this indeed is 
Brahman meant that the cosmos is permeated with His Spirit, 
i e . full of God : in other words the cosmos has no existence 
independent of God ; it exists by His will. lit' is its Creator, 
Preserver and Destroyer. He is its Uuler and rules by Ilis 
immanence. And the second passage meant that the diversity 
is of the cosmos and real inasmuch as it is sustained by the 
Unity of God ; that therefore whoso sees the diverse cosmos 
as severed from God sees not aright. There is but One God, 
neither two nor many. In Him is all. That is the meaning 
of the text. Cosmos is not denied inasmuch as its existence 
is eternal substantially, though it exteriorly undergoes adjec- 
tival change. It is an axiom that nothing can route out oj 
nothing : ah nihil nihil jit . The cosmos is real. It is in God, 
who is thus one only, not many. This passage is thus an asser- 
tion, not a negation, of the cosmos. 

J Chhdudoyyu i'pani^und. III. 14-1. 

2 Drihaddmuya. Vp. VI. 4-10. 

8 A Christian writer says : “To centuries haw been leading India 
say that man. with all his passionate ever further along the path of 
tempers, his deceitful ways, his foul decadence.” [Ejiiphnnt/. p. J4f» y 0 p 
imaginations, his hard uncharitable XXJT. DH)4.J We Visihtad vaitins 
thoughts, is God, is the fatal and 8 av exactly the same thing, hut 
destructive error which for so many which the Christian knows not yet. 



cn. va 


U the life of kAmAnuja. 


As obstinately as Yadava preached his pantheism, so 
obstinately did Ramanuja rebut him. Yadava got enraged at 
last. “ No more can you read with me, Sir ” he cried, “ you 
must henceforth find your own congenial teacher.” 

R&m&nuja was glad to leave this teacher of impossible and 
absurd pilosophy. Straight borne went he, and informed his 
mother Sri-Devi of all that happened. “ Enough of thy 
studies, son ! ” said she ; there is Tirukkacchi-Nambi who is in 
great favour with Lord Varada-Raja. Seek his advice and 
service, and abide by his will. That will do thee all the good.” 
Il&m&nuja at once sought T. Nambi and besought him to employ 
him in divine services in the Temple, even as Lakshmana 
besought of Rama : — 

[U'imUjana 71 1. W. 7.] 

“ Rama ! ^ay : 4 do/ and 1 am thy servant.” 

S, Nambi said ~ u Lord Varadataja much likes the water 
from the Stilai- well you were once bringing him. Fetch the 
same daily and serve Him/' Thus therefore did Ramanuja 
employ himself. 



CU.V11I. ALAVANDAK’S LAST DAYS AND LAST WORDS. 45 


CHAPTER VIII. 


ALAVAH DAR’S LAST DAYS AMD LAST WORDS. 

We shall for a moment turn to Srirangam. Y Annina was 
aging now. He became ill. TiiuvarangappcruinA] Ayaiyar 1 
.approached him, followed by Yamuna's disciples Tirukk6Hi- 
yur-Nambi 2 * and Periya-NambP . The latter prayed to him to 
give them the best salvatory advice. YAmuna spoke thus : — 
“ Good souls, look upon the shrine of R&nganatha as your very 
life ; the Great God enthroned in that shrine as your Saviour ; 
make Tirupp&nazhv&r, — the Panchama Saint 4 — who is the 
beloved of this Great God, your ideal for loving contemplation. 
This holy Saint is to God Ranga (of Srirangam) as Kurumba- 
rutta-Nambi 5 — the potter — is to God Venkatesa (of the Tiru- 
pati Hill) ; as Tirukkaechi-Nambi - the Vaisya 0 — is to God 
Varada-Raja (of Kanehipuram). This Saint, to you, sire,’’ 
addressing Ayaiyar, “ is your very soul.” And continued: — 
What is dear to you, Holy Sire, is dear to me ; the means of 
your salvation, are my means as well. Araiyar, prostrating 
to Y&muna said : “ Sire, you now seem to talk as if you are 
envisaging truths as exist in Nitya-vibhuti ( = Kternal or 
Unvarying Cosmos — Heaven). It makes me almost envious to 
study you thus.” “Sire”, Yamuna said, “ how can you he 
envious of me, if f goto Nitya-vibhuti before you do? Can 
great and good men like you be enviouB of others’ fortune ? 
So, if I leave you all in advance, reconcile yourselves thus.” 
Now to all his disciples, he administered general instructions 
thus : — “ Hear me, sons ! A pmpanna is he who has absolutely 
resigned himself to God. If after professing so, he should 
still entertain doubts as to whether his soul is at all in the safe 


1 Vide No. 22 Hierarchic Table, Lire* of Azhnlr ft. 

2 Vide No. 24. Ibid. 

R Vide No. 23. Ibid. 

i See his Life and foot note to pa??fe 137 Ibid , and onr recent Lecture 
on the Dan chain as. 

5 bee Venkatiehala Mali atm va. He is called Bin nm, the potter . 

The third lower caste from the Brabroana. 



46 


THE LIFE OF BAmaNUJA. 


CH. VIII. 


keeping of God, that very doubt is proof of his want of trust in 
God. A true believer in God is only he who feels quite sure 
of his soul's safety in His arms, and that his body is a tempo- 
rary form begot by Karina* ceasing when Karma ceases. A 
prapanna ia thus one who has intellectually divested himself 
thus of all concern, either as regards his soul or his bccty, both 
being in the keeping of two divergent determining agents. 
This resigned attitude of the mind constitutes the tru v prapanna 
(believer). Dwell on the sense contained in the Holy Name 
NAr&yanu, as it contains the sum of all divine wisdom. It is 


1 Karma means net. This is the 
inherent will in the soul. This 
will is subjective. This shapes out 
an objective, for which matter is 
associated with. Like Hoi, Soul is 
eternal, like thoetortmlity of God’s 
attributes,"- because of God’s ctor- 
nality. Karma,, or will which is 
innate in the soul, is eternal with it. 
A Christian might say : ‘ that this 
dogma puts a limit to God’s power, 
inasmuch as Karma or soul is some* 
thing which He did not make, 
and therefor© circumscribing the 
sovereignty of God. Karma be- 
comes therefore another “Unknown 
God containing in itself possibili- 
ties for the soul’s future, and there- 
fore the soul can strive for itself 
without or independent of God. In 
short, by the dogma of Karma , God 
is made dependent, if not altogether 
rendered nugatory. Karma there- 
fore is incompatible with an inde- 
pendent sovereign God.” To this 
we say, that Karma, by itself as a 
fact inherent in the soul, eternal 
with it, and as operative on the 
destinies of the soul, is all that, by 
virtue of an eternal (rod eternally 
so willing. If God is capable of 
willing something hi tune, his capa- 
bility is all the more greater, when 
He can will things from all eternity. 
This is called the nityu-ranlalpti 
power of God. With this basis 
then of God’s Hemal will, there is 
nothing contradictory or interfer- 
ing with God’s paramount©/. If 


the Christian in order to invest 
God with all-power, demurs to Kar- 
ma being owned by the sold, is hu 
then prepared to transfer all Karma 
to God, and in order to maintain 
that God must create soul, Karma 
and all in lime Then the soul is 
exonerated of all personal responsi- 
bility. It has neither merit nor 
demerit} rewards and punishments 
are not for it. A 11011-eternal will, 
as creation supposes, therefore dero- 
gates from Owl’s power rather than 
enhance and glorify it, as when 
Ho is endowed with eternal will. 
Time-limitations on God is thus as 
bad atheism, as that of identifying 
man with God, postulated by 
monism. Karma in soul, not origi- 
nating in time, and its being so by 
God’s eternal will, reconciles at 
once, soul’s responsibility for his 
acts (Karma), and God’s supreme 
power to rule over this state of 
things as long as He may please, 
and reserving to Himself the power 
which may be called grace, by 
which to annul Karma in toto, and 
gather His Hock to Himself. Eter- 
nal Karaia therefore is compatible 
with sovereign God’s Oneness, His 
unrestricted Power and His uncon- 
ditional Grace. To call in question 
therefore the power of God to 
eternally order things is to limit 
Him. To endow Him with eternal 
will is to truly conceive of His 
Infinite nature. If it still be con- 
tended that Karma, oven when ©ter- 



CH. VIII. AL AVAN DAB’S LAST DAYS AND LAST WORDS. 47 


the Name signifying : — “ We are in Him, and He is in us,” 1 
t; He is in us proves the bond between Him and souls, (lie bond 
by which Hb is bound by His Grace to save us. 11V arc in Him 
proves that we can freely and wholly trust Him for all our 
welfare. Anything less than this trust savours of ditfidenco, 
or which otherwise constitutes the rebellious attitude of the soul. 
On the other hau l, to compel God to save us by* our impor- 
tunities, also savours of disobedience and to think that God 
must bo one at our beck and call, is equally impious and dis- 
loyal. Absolute trust is when we think of ourselves as des- 
tiued by Him to serve some mighty purpose of His, and as 
mere instruments, required in willingness to do His bidding 
so that what His purpose may be, may be fulfilled. There is 
no purpose of our own as apart from His. God is the Pro- 
prietor and we are His property*, of which He alone has the 
full power of disposal; in other words, He is the Master and 
we are If is vassals.” The disciples asked again ; Sire, what 
are our Mean* and our Go//?” The Master said: — “Your 
Saviours ai\? the but do not think I am one. In this 

matter, it is not forme to dictate, you must use your own 
judgment. Again Your Saviours are the tjo.il nn well. To serve 
them eternally is the yoal. An l these Saviours are one with 
God as their minds are eu mjjjj >rt with Him, so that to serve 


nully willed by God makes God 
a dependent li dug, i c., depend© .t 
on Karma, then it may be equally 
argued that a p< tmaker who him- 
self collet*-* a'l mater. als to make a 
pot with, is (Id'H'H : e: t OH those 
materials; no enj«>> or of fo.nl, who 
himself a- quires a'l the ingredient* 
for the fwo l is de/ten lent on the 
food; a d Hinr of gifts to a lwodv 
person, moved to pity by the donee’s 
petition’s, is dependent on his pity 
or the donee’s petition ! If God is 
still thought dependent, how con 
He have the power of annulling 
Kunm / 1 in other words possess the 
sovereign gift of grace ‘r When 


Gol shows grace, we cannot say 
He i < dejwndent upon his grace to 
save us. Again this eternal Karma 
is quite eompitible with a most 
indep *nd«*nt God. Kami a, we said, 
vv ts act. We must he understood 
to mean by this term the inherent 
e.ip.irkv or potency in the soul to 
act. This is free-will (will atualixed 
into act) in other words; and this 
is l ©stowed on the soul by God from 
eternity. If it is pertinent to say 
that Karma cannot be eternal, it is 
a* well pertinent to say that Ood 
mast have l»een created by some- 
body. See Krirangar.\ja*Stava H, 
43 “ 8vddh tne.” 


1 Equivalent partially to, * We live and move and have our being in 
Him. 



48 


THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


CH. VIII. 


them is to serve Him, ami what pleases them pleases Him. 
Find your temple of bliss (bhoga) in the Tirumantra , your 
temple of flowers ( push pa ) in the Charamashka and your 
temple of bounty (tyaga) in the Dcuya\ I echo but what our 
Saints have said before.” On hearing these, T. Araiyar 
said : — “ Oh, Sire, after your departure to Parama-pada (- 
Heaven), what matters it, if worms, like us, die P” Y&muna, 
hearing this, made no reply to such a token of affection ; and 
fearing lest such praise inflame his pride and destroy humility. 

T. Araiyar, Periya-nambi and others went to the Temple 
and there in the presence of Lord Kanganatha stood revolving 
in their minds as to what had transpired. Periya-nambi and 
others said they had decided to give up their lives, if Yamuna 
passed away, for they could hardly bear such separation. 
JlnnganAfcha read their thoughts and a voice came : “ I con- 

jure you all not to think in this wise. You must abide bv 
My will as to how long it may please Me to keep men on earth 
and when I may choose to dismiss them from there. Take 
Araiyar for your guide after Yamuna's departure.” They all 
heard this divine mandate, and speeding to Y&muna related to 
him the extraordinary occurrence. He said : — “ I echo the 
mandate. Grudge me not that celestial bliss into which I am 
aliout to enter, nor grudge the service which Kanganatha will 
demand of you for some time to come after me. But if over- 
come by grief at having to leave me, you persist in your inten- 
tions to give up your lives on my account, it will be most 
hostile to the will of our Masters, Uyyakkondftr and others, 
that a continuous succession of spiritual teachers of your faith 
shall bo maintained. Do not then lose heart. Resigned to His 
will, live on.” They were still unpacified. To put heart 
into them, the Master continued “ Know these truths again. 
Endeavour to see no difference between God and God’s saints. 
In God’s saints, God Himself is present. On the other hand, 
know that when yon do a service to your disciples, you shall 
take no credit to yourselves for doing it. The credit belongs 

1 Consult our Lt ves of Azhviirs nmi Divine Wisdom of DrdvitU * Saints 
fox explanation of those mysteries. 



CH.VIII. ALaVANDAR’S LAST DATS AND LAST WORDS. 


to the Masters of whom know yon are the accredited agents. 
And when you serve God, think your services are transmitted 
to Him by the Saints and Sages, whom you succeed. Fur* 
tiier, when yon dispense to your disciples, let the motive for 
such dispensing (i.e.. imparting instruction or bestowing gifts 
<fee.) be not one of selfishness (t e., for a return from them of 
money, or satisfaction of a worldly end). If a spiritual 
preceptor has such motives, and if he ever consider himself 
superior in the midst of an assembly of holy men, he deserves 
to be discarded.” The disciples were still dejected, and the 
Master again continued his discourse thus : — “ Fix your hearts 
on Lord Ranganatha. He is your sole End and Aim. Enough, 
if the first thing you do every morn is to lay a flower at His feet. 
Here are three objects for your worship : — God, the Guru, 
and His Faithful. In the middle of these three terms centres 
the ideas of the first and the last terms. This concentering in 
a Guru who is sensibly present, will be your means to cross 
the sea of this world. I consign you then, dear disciples, 
into the hands of T. Araiyar.” T. Araiyar now addressed the 
disciples: — “Hearken to the parting words of our Master. 
Take courage. I also lay it upon you not to think of dying, 
because the Master leaves us. If you break these commands, 
you shall forfeit both the Land of Bliss and the Union with 
the Blessed. After hearing these assu ri ng words of Araiyar, 
YAmun&chftrya found peace in his soul. 

* 

Y&mun&oharya recovered somewhat ; and took his bath of 
health. For joy, they made great feast and in a body proceeded 
to the Temple to pay honors to Lord Ranga , 1 accompanied by 
Y&muna. The curtain across the sanctum was drawn aside. 
The congregation was full. Y&muna stood silent for a while 
before the Deity with folded hands, and then spoke thus : — 
“Sttrange, is this Heaven? Am I among the Celestials, 
the Angels ?“ As he uttered this, the garland of flowers from 
Lord Rangan&tha’s neck slipped and dropped on the ground, 
T. Araiyar promptly picked it up and put it on Al&rand&r’s 
neck, saying : — “ I suppose, sire, your wishes are now fulfilled.” 
Dismissed by Ranganatha 1 with tirtham and pragrfdam, they all 

1 Ranga is abbreviation for Ranganatha. 



oh, vm 


50 THE LIFE OF BAmAkUJA. 


returned to Alavand&r’s monastery. Here, after seeing every 
one partake of holy food, Alavand&r prostrated before them all 
and asked forgiveness of them all for any wrongs. u IJow can 
yon do throng, Sire, and what is there for us to forgive ? ” So 
saying, T. Ataiyar raised him up in reverence. The master 
now tbok his food, and went on saying many precious things, 
knowing that his end was fast approaching. 

Something more was yet in store, before God was pleased 
to take to himself this Pioneer of the Visishtadvaifa Faith. 
Nows reached Kslnclu of the critical state of Y amu n ach ary as 
health. Two Sri Vaishnavas hastened to Srirangam to visit 
the sage, perhaps fo" the last time. Yamuna received the 
visitors with great earnestness and asked them to tell him how 
things wero going with Ramanuja. They informed him 
that owing to an altercation between Yadava and Ramanuja, the 
latter had severed his connection with him and was employed 
solely in the services of Lord Varadaiaja. “ God has granted 
my fervent prayers then, and be He praised”, cried Yamuna, 
elated with joy. He called Peviyanambi ( = Mah*\piirna) to 
his presence and said : — “ Here are glad tidings for ns. Rama- 
nuja is happily disconnected from Yadava. Goforth at once to 
KAnclit and bring him to me.” Mahftpurna immediately left. 

But YAmuna in the meanwhile got worse, despite his 
will to live till Raimluuja’s arrival. And all the disciples were 
made uneasy, and hoped against hope that the Master might, 
live. It was the month Vaiyasi, and the usual temple-jubi- 
lationfi of the season were proceeding. The avabhrita 1 (clos 
ing) day came; and Yamuna went to the Temple, and paid 
his last worship and homage to RangamUlm, whom, as well 
as Saint l 1 i r u p p an itz h v ar, stationed at His feet, he devoured 
with his eyes from too to top, and top to toe. Receiving 
tirlha a and prasdia, n he returned to his monastery; and 


1 Ablution after a sacrificial ceremony. 

9 Water consecrated to the Piety during the worship and distri- 
buted to the devotees. 

* Flowers, fool drc., ottered to God and distributed to the Faithful, 



CH. Vlll. ALAVaNDARS LAST DAYS a m LAST WOBDS. 


gathered together all his disciples and temple-authorities 
round him. Be fell prostrate before the assembly, and once 
more craved their pardon for all his faults. In one voice they 
cried: — “ Holy Sire, why speakest tlitm of faults ? ” He now 
addressed them thus : — “ I beseech ye all to take care of the 
venerable Avaiyar. O ye officers of Ranga’s Shrine ! t pray 
to you to conduct all the several items of worship, such as 
mantrapmhpa 1 to LordKanga, punctually ; and distribute holy 
food to all your gurus and holy souls of the place, and to all 
pilgrims coming from all quarters to visit the Shrine.” “ These 
must he his Last words," thought all, sorrowing much in their 
hearts. Turning to Yamuna, they said : — “All shall be done 
Sire, as you wish.” Sri Yamuna now aZ&mcd the pa dmdsana 1 
posture, held his breath, and fixing alt bis mind and heart on 
the Holy feet of his A chary a 2 * 4 5 * * Manakkal-^ambi, commanded 
the disciples to repeat loudly the BrahmaealH* Bhriguvtilli* 
Tunisha-snhta , 8 Archir(Ub', A Siish-vtsmnbn* Ac. And as the 
moment Abhijit (midday), coupled with Sr&vana constellation 
arrived on the sixth day of Vftiy&si, and as trumpets began 
to blow, the Holy Sage was elevated to Niiya-vibhuti (Eternal 
Realms). 


Hoic A lav and dr teas interred S' 

Tiruvaranga-p-perumal Avaiyar and others fell to the 
ground senseless with grief at this bereavement which was so 
hard to bear. But they had to perform all the services for the 
departed ; and rallying therefore to the task, they bade the 


1 See any work on Yoga. 

2 Spiritual preceptor and guide ; called also Guru. 

R See Taittiriya Upanishat. 

4 See Cbandogya Up. and one of the 18 Kaliasyus of Lokacharya. 

5 Tiru rAi-mozhi, X, 9-1. 

f ' We had thought of omitting the Oriental Scholar.- 1 , we have trans- 
details of this last sacrament ad- lated the same as host as we can. 
ministered on Sanyasins (monos- Also it is a study in Indian “Mag- 

tics). But thinking that an ae- netics*’ which maybe interesting 

count may be of much interest to to thauinaturgists. 



5g VM LIFE OF hAmAnUJA. CH» YIU. 

fr - , — : 

Ron of the £age (i.e., son before he took the robe of Saay&sin) 
to do wh^t was necessary. 

They sprinkled water, oyer the place (sthala-suddhi) after 
sweeping ; constructed a fore-poled mauiapam (booth or 
bovver^ and adorned it with festoons of darhha (sacred 
grass), and sengazhu-ntr flowers ; silk hangings were hung and 
chiUnaia* (choleric* or streamers) were arranged in tassels. To 
the four posts were tied young plantain trees with bunches of 
green areca-nut at the capitals. Fruits of different kinds were 
lmng from the canopy, and a flag hoisted at one corner. To 
the four faces, East, South, West and North, weie hung respec- 
tively festoons of tender foliage, of paidsa, asvattha, khddira , 
and udumbara . Paddy grain was spread on the floor (of the 
bier), and pa rHa-kumbha (water-tilled vessel) was planted in 
its midst, and four others at the corners. Twelve more vessels 
were placed outside the bower, at different corners, repeating 
the Twelve Holy Names, KeSava &c. Their necks were wound 
with kttfia, dated, darhha, uishnn-krdntha , and various flowers ; 
these wei*e worshipped after repeating the Vv ay a -mantra along 
with the names of the guru-pat ampaui (the apostolic series), 
and with the Twelve Holy Names, Kesava &c they were 
consecrated. Leaving the vessel in the i««nyo-quarter (North- 
East) called the Sankarsh ana- vessel, the four others were taken 
up, and w ith them they laved the body of the Sage after the 
panch-dnirita (the five articles of milk, butter, honey, curds 
and coooanut -water) ablution was over, repeating the Purmha - 
sdkta all the time. The gentry of the place ( mudahs ) now 
took up the remaining twelve vessels outside the bier, and 
ablutions were performed with these after presenting the 
assembled magnates with rolled Ik lei and lint (pdn-mpdn) 
and obtaining their permission, after dextro-ambuiating them. 
The place at the outer -door was ne\t cleaned with cow-dung, 
and over the space so consecrated, rice grain was spread. A 
mortar and pestle were brought and sacrificially washed with 
water, ami new pieces of cloth were tied to them. Turmeric 


1 The bier of the Aryans 



*CH.Ym. ALAVAND^^ INTEBMENT. 53 



was placed in the mortar. Dthte (or maid -servants) stamped 
with the holy Chakra and Sankha — thus consecrated to Vishnu 
— draped themselves in washed garments and decked them, 
selves according to the occasion, and going round the Holy 
Trivikraman Street, approached the door ; and prostrating 
before the holy assembly, with their leave, the Afcm-god- 
representing pestle was taken up, and repeating the Twelve 
Holy Names, the turmeric in the mortar was pounded, called 
Sri-Vhtirna. Now came Arniyar and others. They drew on 
the paddy a figure of earth with its nine divisions ( hharata - 
khnnda fyc.). At the eight corners of this space were placed 
eight vessels filled respectively, with holy powders, holy un- 
guents, holy scents, holy flowers, holy htja (fried rice), holy 
milk, holy curds, and holy water; and decked with the buds 
of darbha , nxvattha &c., repeating Dcaya-mmitra all the while. 
To the East, they placed a w innow-basket filled with liuskless 
Idja ; fo ihe West a vessel filled with Sri-Vaishnava-foot- 
washed water ; to the North, money and other presents to be 
distributed to the Sri-Vaishnavas ; to the South, a golden 
•platter filled with the garland, raiment, &e., worn by Laml 
Ranganatha. Then prostrating to the sanctified image of the 
Sage, they went round it, and rehearsed Tiru-p-pallandu, 
Kanninun-siyuttainbu, Suzh-visumbani niukil. 1 Ayaiyar then 
went round the holy streets of Syirangam with music, chanting 
the Tiru-viruttam and coining back to the monastrey, sang the 
finishing hymns. Then the eight vessels of holy milk Ac., were 
emptied over the Sage's body, which was then adorned with 
Lord Ranga’s gifts of garland, raiment and other things. They 
all then distributed among themselves as prastida, the remnants 
of all that was offered fo the sage, and earnestly gazed at his 
figure so as to distinctly retain it in their hearts for ever 
afterwards. They then threw themselves at the Sage’s feet 
which they devoutly pressed against their eyes, hearts and 
heads ; and now completely overcome, gave vent to their grief 
which they could not control, by torrents of tears trick- 


1 See our Lives of Aziivurs, 



u 


THE LIFE OF Jj^tyAXUJA. 


CH. VIII. 


ling down their cheeks, and sent forth loud lamentations. 
The worthies of the place pressed round the mourners, and by 
kind words assuaged their grief. They then lifted the bier, 
the Sage seated in it, on to a stretcher (or litter), which they 
l»er© reverently on their shoulders, and carried in splendid 
procession in the streets, conches blowing, music discoursing, 
and men and women setting up a sacred dance. The Praban- 
dhas were recited in the front, Veda-p;trayana bringing up 
the rear. White cloths were laid in the streets in front of the 
procession, the members of which bore sugar-cane sticks in 
their hands, and carried bright vessels filled with water on 
their heads. As the procession wended its way, laja flowers 
and scented powders were broadly showered over all, the 
vestal virgins of the sanctuary hearing torches aloft and 
leading, i'hthnarax (ehowi its) waved on cither side, and white 
cloths wore brandished in the air . 1 And to crown all, bugles 
and trumpets proclaimed as it were : — “ The Great Sage Ala- 
vand&r, the Defender of our Faith, lias gone forth to Heaven.” 
After thus peregrinating the Holy Streets, the Sage was 
carried to Tirtikkurantbun-lurui, a spot dose by the South 
bank of Coleroon (Kolia dam) river in the North, and there 
purifying the spot with the unused water of the Sankarshana 
vessel (kept in reserve), all the sacramental litual enjoined for 
Sany&sins (monastic order ) 2 3 was gone through punctiliously. 
The Sage was now duly installed in a cavern made in the 
gruuml. We shall leave the elders and dignitaries of the temple 
thus busy, and turn for a moment to events which were in the 
meantime transpiring in K&nclii. 

1 Cloth is foldc?d nt one end ami held in the hand, the other end 

flourished in the air, producing a circle or the figure of an umbrella. 

3 Consult Vat idharma SatHucrhaya by Y&dava. 



CH. IX. 


ALAVAN»^r,AND KAMANUJA. 


$5 


CHAPTER IX. 

ALAVANDAR AND RAMANUJA. 

We saw Mahapflrna sent to invite Ram&nuja to Srlrangam 
to join the holy fold of the Faithful. He duly reached K&nchi, 
and deli vered the message of his Achdrya to Kitnchi-pbrna, in 
whose holy company, he duly paid his devotions to Lord Vtmtda- 
raja ; and taking the patli loading to Sdlai well,— from which 
Rani&nuja was bringing his customary water for the sendee 
of Lord Varada — he went on reciting his Achdrya Yamuna’s 
hymn : — 

44 Ndrdyana ! , u'ho, in Vedas versed, trill dispute Thy Natural 
(Ire ah/ ess and Sovereignty cast ; for know they not that Brahma , 
Siva , Indra and celestials all , are hut as drops of foam upon 
the Ocean of Thy Glory 

Ramanuja was coming from the well and he heard this 
•leoitation. Not only was his attention arrested hy it hut was so 
struck with its beauty, sense, pathos and literacy, * that he 
anxiously inquired of the reciter (whom he <1 id not know' yet 
of course) wlio was its worthy author. 44 Whose could such 
words be save in}* Acharya Yamuna-muni's r ' 99 readily res- 
ponded Mnbapfnra. 44 1 must tlun visit this great soul,” said 
Ramanuja. “ I shall certainly take you to him,’’ replied 
Pftrna, jubilant at the success of his mission. 

The tiru-wanjanam (holy ablution) water, Raman uja 
duly delivered at the Shrine ; and ho submitted to Lord Varada 
his great wish to visit Yamuna ; and taking His leave as also 
KA.nehLpiirna’R, he immediately proceeded in ^iahii-pdrna’s 
conqmny and by forced marches, reached the Kaveri river. 
They saw from that distance great crowd 4 gathered, and 
employed evidently in very serious work. u What is all 
the bustle about ? ” asked Rftmftnuja anxiously of some way-. 

1 The beauty of this can only bp realized by those who can under 
gtaml the original. U sxiffers in the translation. 



THE MF1 OF B^fANUJA. 


OH. IX. 


farers They said that YAmuna was no more. This news 
made MahA-p&rna and RAmAnnja distraught, and the shook 
prostrated them and struck tliem senseless. Recovering 
somewhat, they wept inconsolable tears, as ail their plans 
were felled, and hopes blasted. An irreparable loss, it was. 
MabApurna found Ramanuja disconsolate, and fearing worse 
consequences, forgot his own grief for the moment in order 
to pacify RAmAnnja, in the manner, it is sad, that ‘in the 
sword-cut, the sc );*pi mating is tjrgjfij.r' Rjjivnhug 
breath somewhat, he exhorted him thus : “Take heart, Rama- 
nuja ! knowest thou not the saying 

> f\«. “Obstacles to virtue attack even 
great men ; but when vice sets in, obstacles flee somewhere ! ” and 
rawing RAmAnuja in his arms, led him by the hand to where the 
Sage YAmuna was lying in state. u f have at least been 
able to see this,” said RAmAnnja, and drauk as it were, with his 
©yes, the Holy Figure ; but as he scanned it up and down, he 
discovered to his surprise that three of the five fingers of the 
right palm of the Sage wei*e closed. He turned round to the 
assembly and questioned them about this strange sight. “ We 
never marked this before, Sire/’ they said. RAmAnuja reflect- 
ed for an instant, and imagining that the Sage might havo 
some ardent wish in his mind unsatisfied, which he pro- 
bably so indicated, asked the bystanders if they were aware of 
any specific wishes of the Sage expressed to them at any time 
in the course of his religious talks with them. “ We are not 
particularly a\varb of any such directly,” they said; M but 
indirectly we know that he often used to say that he wished 
very much to see three things perpetuated. Firstly, gratitude 
inust be shown to the memory of Krishna- VyAsa and ParAsara. 
& vmndly, a tribute of love should be paid to St. NammAzhvAr. 

thirdly, YyAsa-Sfttras or Brahma-Sfitras must be com- 
fcented on to bring out the real VisishtAdvaita sense contain- 
ed in them.” 1 

1 VmthMratiH means, organic imja's commentaries, Pro. M. Ran - 
utomain j in other words, — if it may tfAeh&rya'a SrMJhftshya, and Dr. 
be so called, —a Trinity in Unity. Thihaot’s Introduction to Ved&nta- 
Bead our BhagavadffhA with HAmA SAtris, Sankara bhAshya. 



CH. IX. 


AL A V A KDAJrA N D RAMANUJA. 


57 


Riimanuja heard this and said : — “ 0 Holy Sage/’ address- 
ing his Figure, u if this is thy mind, I promise I shall 
carry it out, provided I have the health, provided thy grace is 
on me, and provided God grants my prayers.” No sooner this 
was said than the three bent fingers of the Sage opened out, 
as if to say : 4 aye ' ! The whole assembly was witness to this 
miracle, and in one voice fhcy all declared : — “ Sire, doubt not 
that the Sage’s grace is fully on you ; the very power and glory 
of his spirit will enter into you ; you are the next fit successor 
to him for the evangelical work of our Faith. We all anoint 
you here for the task.’’ Ramanuja lovingly and steadily 
gazed at. the Holy Figure of the Sage, and contemplating Him 
to his fill, pressed His feet to his heart and eyes, and bathing in 
the river — as the Iasi service rendered to the departed— took 
leave of Mali a- P urn a and started im mediately back for KAndii^ 
not caring to visit Lord Ranga, on account of the sore dis- 
appointment which had been caused. It is chronicled of 
Ramanuja, that he of leu used to express to his holy assembly 
that if he had hut been permitted for one single day to he in 
•the living company of Sri Yamuna, he wotdd have construct- 
ed a staircase to Heaven and procured free admission to all 
thereto. 

The magnates of the place then did tha remaining part of 
the interment, conducted with duo obsequial liturgy and in due 
course raised a cenotaph (brimldvanam) 1 and mantaptm 2 over 
the site. Memorial verses were thus sung : — 

frwTragqis’m.ii 

wrfNwpjrffer srm^ff^rsrfrf^ p:q! ’rrg^p.faii 


An ornamental short pedestal with a basil plant planted on top. 
A stone pavilion over (I). 



58 


THE LIFE OF U^mInTJJA. 


CH. X, 


CHAPTER X. 

BAMANXJJA AND KANCHI-PUENA. 

Ramanuja, with a heavy heart reached Kanchi, and 
recountinl the events he had first witnessed, to K&ncht-purna. 
Pinna mourned much over the loss of his Achdrya , aggravated 
by the thought that all the projects they had formed in their 
minds were thus frustrated ; but reviving, comforted Rama- 
nuja by saying ; — u Lord Vavada is all-knowing and all-power- 
ful, Let us submit to His will. He will make good our loss by 
appointing you in bis stead, for our Faith.” So saying, lie 
conducted Sri-chnrna-paripdlana^ and Tirn-v-adhyayana* for 
bis Achdrya, 

RAjn&nuja again employed himself as before in the Tiru* 
manjaua* service to Lord Varada, and as friendship and respect 
for K&nch! pftrna deepened, be found much spiritual worth in 
this itauuch devotee of Lord Varada. One day, Ram&nuja 
earnestly begged of him to become the sponsor for his soul. 
“ Come, Holy Ram&nuja ! ’’ said Pmna, u You desire this of me, 
because you think I am worthy of such position, but know 
that I am an unworthy non-entity, whom Lord Varada has per- 
haps chosen to think of as some body. And you are evidently 
intent on acting on the principle : — 

II 4 

4 Vogts (or spiritual men) are born among all castes ; and no 
caste •odium shall hold in their cases , jor they have seen their 
souls* Lord 

This dictum holds good as regards our soul-relation, but 
it cannot be applied as regards our external conditions of 
birth and social polity as ordained by the Scriptures (Vedas). 

1 The ceremony of the turmeric-powder (vide p, 53), applied to the 
face. 

4 The funeral ceremonies of the Srf-vaishnavas, when the Trahan - 
dims are recited antiphonally, and a great feast is given. 

n Carrying water-pots for ablution -ceremony to the Deity. 

4 lihartf f f rn -Snmh ifii, 1, 44. 



CH. X. 


59 


rAmXnUJA AND K&NCHtptlRNA. 


You shall not therefore externally profess to me bonds which 
militates against the typical social system of Varna 1 aud 
Asra'nia.* Yours is Brdkmana-hody and mine a l a/sya-body, 
and as long as these last, we must respect temporary distinc- 
tions for the sake of the safety of our social fabric, which we 
cannot violate without injury. 


3 Varna sm the four typical castes 
of Brdhmana, Kshatriya, Vaisyaand 
Sudra. Asrama — the four typical 
orders of life, viz., Brahmacharya 
(Student), Grihastha (householder), 
Vdtiaprastha (anchorite), and San- 
nydsa (monastic). A recent speech 
by Mr. N. N. Ghose at the Hare 
Anniversary Meeting (1904) is im- 
portant as bearing on the vexed 
questioa of caste in India, which 
the Christian will not under- 
stand. He said The division 
into castes cannot be understood by 
any one who does not realise that 
all Hindu institutions were inspired 
* by one principle. It was not politi- 
cal expediency, not social conve- 
nience, not the happiness of the 
greatest number, not the develop- 
ment of fighting capacity. Mate- 
rial good was a subordinate end. 
The ruling principle was the spirit- 
ual evolution of man, the perfec- 
tion of character, realisation of 
the self. For the purposes of 
spiritual evolution, a segregation of 
classes and occupations was con- 
sidered necessary. The Brahmans, 
for instance, were to be devoted to 
religious work and meditation and 
the function of teaching, and so on 
with other castes. It was no mere 
division of labour that was thus 
accomplished. It was an institu- 
tion meant to prevent the spiritual 
degradation of inon by the mixing 
up of finer and courser spiritual 
natures. The four leading castes 
were marked off from each other 
by characteristics that could not 
be mistaken. The division was not 
arbitrary. All experience shows 


that men are not equally endowed 
on the spiritual side. Then it has 
to be remembered that the law of 
Karma was one of the root concep- 
tions of the caste-syBtem. Men 
were born into a particular caste 
by their Karma of a previous lifo. 
Men of lower castes could go up to 
the higher in another life if they 
had made spiritual progress enough 
in this life. No mere intellectual 
qualifications or material conditions 
would raise a man to a highor 
caste. Each man was born into 
the caste for which he was destin- 
ed by his own susceptibilities. 
There was room enough for ad- 
vancement and usefulness within 
the limits of his own caste. But 
he was not to be permitted to spoil 
his own breed by marrying in a 
lower spiritual plane, or spoil the 
breed of a higher caste by marry- 
ing on a higher piano. Modern life 
may make it difficult or impossible 
to carry out these ideas. But in 
them is to be found the interpreta- 
tion of an ancient system which 
has puzzled and provoked men 
whose ideals are different from 
those of our ancient ancestors. 
Not muscles and intellect, not 
happiness, not political ascen- 
dancy, but spiritual perfection and 
purity were the only end.” The 
warning voice against promiscuous 
intercourse aud admixture of 
castes is found in the Bhagavad- 
Gita, 1,40 to 44 j which may be 
read by all the devotees of this 
lloly Bible, and laid to heart before 
venturing to anathematize the 
caste-institution of India. 



60 


THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


CH. X. 


Ram&nuja admitted the legality and expediency of the caste 
system, and yet he felt it ought to he disregarded in special 
cases where such spiritually advanced souls as K&nchi-purna’s 
were concerned. He therefore resolved the next day to invite 
Prtrna to his house for a repast. “ Accept, Sire, an entertain- 
ment in my hut,” prayed Ramanuja. “ Most gratefully ”, said 
Pinna, not to disappoint him. Ramanuja was rejoiced at the 
prospect of obtaining the remnants of food eaten by a spiritual 
elder, albeit lie belong to a low class in society. Going home, 
he ordered his wife to prepare a sumptuous meal for a distin- 
guished guest. And he himself bathed, performed all the 
ceremonies ordained for the householder, carried the daily - 
service-water to Lord Varada, and performing worship to his 
household Lord, also Varada, left home to bring his guest 
to his door. He went by the South Street, and turned West 
towards the retreat of Purna. Hut Puma had already left 
his place, taken another direction, prayed to Lord Varada as 
usual, and doing his daily services there, had proceeded to the 
cottage of RAmanuju. Here, not finding him, he begged the 
wife to give him food immediately ns he had to return to the, 
Temple for urgent service. She did so, and he left. She then 
pushed away the leaf, from which Purna bad eaten, by means 
of a stick, purified the place with water and eowdung and con- 
sidering herself impure by this act, bathed again. Ramanuja 
finding Pftrna absent from his cloister had retraced his steps to 
his hut, and finding that his wife had bathed fora second time, 
asked her why ? She said :■ — u Sire, your Sitttdda (non-Brah- 
man) guest came and having eaten is gone. Being a low' caste 
man, l have purified the place where lie ate, and have myself 
bathed/* “ Ignorant woman!" he cried in anger 41 what 
hast thou done 1 How thou hast frustrated my plans ! ” 

u What shall 1 do next r " Ramanuja pondered, “ what 1 
had wished has failed. Pcihnps it is God’s will that I should 
not violate caste restrictions tvtn in special cases. Re it so.” 
.And lie again l(to<k hiimclf to Puma’s cloister. “Sire! 
pardon me for constraining yon to do a thing against your will, 
lut m-w do iiu nm tlur lnuur. I have a fnv dc ubts in my 



OH. X. 


RAMANUJA AND K&NCIll.rtBXA. 


<51 


mind. I beg of you to have them Rolved by Lord Yarada, 
whose beloved worshipper you are.” u W illinglv I shall submit 
them to Him,” he promised Ramanuja That night, when all 
the formal duties of the temple were over, Mah&purna stood 
before Lord Yarada in silent contemplation, hands folded. “ 1 
think thou hast something to ask of me,” Lord Yarada said. 
“Yes, Most High ! Ramanuja lias a few doubts, which ho has 
asked me to submit to you and obtain answers, — somo doubts, 
lie has not told me what.” “ J know them,” said Vurada, “ ho 
is asking me these doubts, in the manner I myself once asked 
Sandipani 1 for knowledge. He knows the sweets of God-service 
by birth-right, and knows my will and acts up to it. He has 
learnt many things and in many quartern. Now he has six 
doubts in his mind. Here are the six answers theieto : — 

1. / am the Supreme Truth ( para-tal cam), 

2. T and souls arc different ( bheda ), 

o. By faith shall men reach Me , t licit salvation. 

4. Thought of Me at time <>J (hath ( anfima - smriti) 

is tod cotnpuhnry (ott My Jaithfuf ), 

5. Uelea^e from hondaye(moksha) follows immediately 

on death (of body), 

G. 1‘hoos'- Mahdpnrnu fory<>ur Achdtya} 

Kanchi-purna reverently recei\ed this message and with- 
drew. The next morning, he hailed Ramanuja with intense 
joy and communicated to him the divine message. “ Were 
these your doubts, Sire!” he asked. “Yes, your Holiness 
1 prostrate to \ou for it most heartily,"' said Ramanuja, 
ih'irna was struck by this strange coincidence, and henceforth, 
(suiting the action to the word) looked upon Ramanuja as the 
destined Saviour. 


1 Road Krishnavadira in Yishn u-pn rana. 
- This is put in a verso thus : 


(1) ww'jirH 

(:i) (4) . 

(•>) (<•) nwiiwwii w i 



62 


THE LIFE OF kAmANUJA. 


CH. XI. 


CHAPTER XL 

RAMANU J A*S CALL TO SRIRAtf GAM. 

Leaving Ramanuja at Kanchi for a while, we shall turn 
back to Srirangam. The Faithful of the place felt now a great 
blank amongst themselves and in their hearts, after the pass- 
ing away of A’avamlar, their Spiritual Guide. How to fill 
up this vacancy, $as their haunting thought. They resorted to 
Mahaphrna and prayed to him to devise proper means for a fit 
successor. Mali ftp ft rna looked at them and said : — “ Forget 
ye the past signs given us ? Did not Ajavandar himself, 
while he was in Kanchi, point out Ramanuja to us as his succes- 
sor Y Do ye not reracmW the miracle of the closed 
lingers of that Sage, opening at his utterance ? Ramanuja 
tlien is our successor. Our Acharya could not have been mis- 
taken in his wise selection.” “ Well said, well said,” cried the 
whole community, “ we pray to you, Sire, to bestow your serious 
though t on this matter, kindly seek out Ramanuja and prepare 
him for his high office, and conduct him hither, to Srirangam.” 
Mahapftrna gladly assented, and immediately made prepara- 
tions to start. His wife was to accompany him. He went to 
Lord lianga, and obtaining his leave to proceed on the holy 
errand left Sriraugam, and readied by rapid marches Madhu- 
rantakam (near Kanchi), and there stopped for the day in the 
Shrine of fi ri-kiUta-jw'ttmttl y or He who protects the tank. 1 


looked toby many a village (pound, 
for tho watering of their green 
fields. 

Its storage capacity was im- 
mense, and every year, after the 
copious rain full, the vast volume of 
water would wash away tho Kal in- 
gai (waste-weir) on the rough, 
stone-built outlet of the tank, thus 
defying every effort to find tho 
needful element to the required 
quantity. More than once during 
bii regime, Mr. Price re-built the 
thing stronger than of old, as ho 
thought, but nil to no purpose ; the 
next rains would mercilessly laugh 
away the nascent structure. 


1 This tank is noted as under I lie 
special protection of the Local 
Beity, Sri-HAina, and hence He is 
called the “ Tank-Guard Even 
recently, a story is thus told : — 
“The incident to bo related bap- 
pended about 25 years ago, at 
Madhurantakum, a small town, a 
few miles to the south of Madras. 
Those were tho days of John Com- 
pany, and a Collector of the namo 
of Mr. Trice ruled the district of 
Chingalpet, of which Madhuranta- 
kam is a Taluk. Soon after he 
came to his Office, he had to super- 
intend certain repairs in the big 
reservoir of the place, which was 



CEL XI. 


RAMANUJA'S CALL TO Silt RANG A M, 


63 


R&manuja also bad in the meantime resolved to proceed to 
Srlrangam and accept Mahapurna his Aohnrya for having been 


While this was the caae here, the 
Collector happened to visit the in- 
terim* of the town, accompanied by 
the Tahsildar aud other subordi- 
nates. While approaching the 
Binall, neit-lookiig town-pond in 
the middle, ho saw an old, vener- 
able-looking temple of modest di- 
mensions, situated to the west of it. 
When he came before its front, he 
stopped, and knowing the deep 
conservation of his subjects in 
matters religious, he asked his 
Tahsildar whether he might ven- 
ture in. By this time, many Brtih- 
manas that were inside the f-hiirie, 
knowing that the great Collector 
Sahib was waiting outside, rushed 
out and seeing that he wanted to 
come in, told him that : “ his Honor 
need not fear any objection to enter 
the outer precincts of the temple.” 
The Collector, glad of the conces- 
sion granted, entered in with his 
men with an amused smile. What 
a place of vvorship ! How different 
from the ones he was accustomed 
to! Instead of the “ long-dratvn 
aisles” and “fretted vaults.” the 
magnificently wrought pillars and 
ravishingly stained windows of his 
Bplendid abbeys and churches, he 
sees before him a humble edifice of 
stones j*ii posing only by its great 
age, evidenced by the hoary moss- 
grown parapet and the half-crnm- 
bling cupola. The structure is a 
pretty large parallellogram, a 
third of it intercepted to form the 
inner “ holy of holies,’ while the 
rest is vaca» t, the roof upheld by 
stone-pillars. Bight against the 
entrance is the invariable Dhraja * 
ttambham or the flag-staff, a huge 
timber raised perpendicularly, with 
rough ornamentations thereon. 
Observing all this in a few minutes, 
the kind Officer turned to the left 
of the main building, into the open 
clearing about 50 feet broad that 


runs round the sanctuary. At the 
end of »t there stood another small 
building, and in front of it many 
newly- hewn stones and slabs were 
gathered, thua showing t-ome con- 
struction wap on hand. The Officer, 
observing this, turned round on 
the priests, when they hastened to 
explain that they had wanted to 
enlarge the Devi’s Shrine, but that 
funds falling low, they had to 
stop work. Then another began to 
expntiate on the great merits of 
their Janaki-Devi (Hama’s Queen), 
how s lie chased aw r ay sorrow*, 
poured plenty on all, and was ever 
solicitous for her devotees; graci- 
ous — “ hold ”, cried the English- 
man smiling, “ if, as you say, your 
Devi is all that is ascribed to her, 
let me propose here one thing. I 
am very much put out by the con- 
stant collapses of your great tank’s 
Knl in (jal. Even now it is being re- 
built. T f this would stand the rush 
of the next showers, then I should 
attribute it certainly to your Devi, 
and I myself will build Her the 
needed shrine. If it happens other- 
wise, then you all should allow 
that She does not deserve the en- 
comiums you heap on her.” Asto- 
nished beyond bounds, that even 
thus half in play, their Sircar Lord 
should condescend to notice their 
Dovi, and half-doubting if all this 
w*ere not a pleasant raillery on the 
part of their ruler, “agreed,” cried 
they, merely to put an end to the 
collo<juy. Mr. Price passed out 
*****, A few months passed. 
The new outlet was built and 
fini.-hed. The rainy season began, 
and it began in earnest. Great 
masses of clouds canopied the land, 
and poured uni n term it tent showers 
on the terrified earth below*. Tank?, 
ponds, rivers, all conceivable hoi 
lows were glutted, and miles 
around the land was inundated 



64 


THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


CH. XI. 


bo commanded by Lord Yarada. Taking leave of Him and 
K&ndM-pui-na, lie arrived at Madhurautakam. They met. 


forming local seas, and all living 
being* shut themselves into their 
homes and ►hive red. 

Two days before this rain, Mr. 
Price came and camped at Madhu- 
rantakum, anxious to test the 
Kalin gal’s fate for the fourth time. 
Ho had not forgotten his speech 
at the temple a few months 
ago. Indeed long ago, occasional 
rumours had reached him through 
his menials, that the people at 
large believed that the oft-re- 
curring danger to the lake was 
due to the disreputable lack of 
supervision of the temple-managers 
over its affairs. This was in part 
what induced him the other day 
to my the words he said, even 
though lightly. Well ho was 
thinking of all this, us he was 
tossing on his bed on the third 
night of the storm. It was a tre- 
mendous downpour that day. 
Ever since noon there had been 
no intermission. News was brought 
to Mr, Price that evening that the 
big reservoir was nearly full. It 
was eleven at night. It must bo 
overfull. Indeed a hoarse, thun- 
derous noise as of the great rush of 
vast volumes of water reached Ins 
ears, Ho was sure it was the 
breaking up of the outlet. At twelve 
the storm’s fury lessoned. Ho 
could restrain his impatience no 
longdr. H© wanted to seo how 
great the damage was. Pear after 
year this work was proving futile ; 
and a waste of money to the Gov- 
eminent, a waste of lands of the 
ryots, besides danger to public 
security were the results. This 
year ho had employed experts and 
great care had been Iwstowod in 
the work/ Ue would go and see. 
Amidst all these, the small leaven 
of curiosity was working in him 
anent the promise made by the 
Bruhmanas, of the Devi’s protec- 


tion. “ Hah, what a fool I am,” 
cried he, aucl started to the scene 
ot turmoil. Many of his servants 
ran before him holding lamps and 
leading the way. All the camp 
clerks about him got up too and 
followed him out of respect, ft is 
pitcli dark. The deep noise of roll- 
ing waters smites their ears as they 
come nearer the bund. But it is 
that of the majestic roll of waters 
contained within bounds, and not 
that cf giant masses dashing beyond 
control. Somewhat reassured, the 
Collector eagerly straining his eyes 
in the direction of the new built 
outlet, could descry a blue, ethe- 
rial radian co playing lambent above 
the Kafingal . He felt surprised and 
a little thrilled. He advanced and 
when near the place— what did he 
behold ! He stopped short, his 
whole frame thrilled, and lie was 
spell-bound. Large drops of sweat 
stood on his brow, Not master of 
himself then ho threw down his 
umbrella, with one arm he swept 
his hat off, and in the wet, oozy 
ground overrun with pools of waiter, 
he suddonly fell on his knees, and 
prayed, prayed, fervently and long 
all the time not removing his eyes 
from the place. His servants 
observing the sudden action of 
their master were thunderstruck. 
They thought he was suddenly gone 
mad. They rushed to him, throw- 
ing off their fear, to raise him. 
Then he seemed to recollect them. 
He got up and cried out: ** Don’t 
you see ; see, see, see there, you 
idiots ! Why do yon stare at me so ? 
Don’t you see those glorious, trans- 
cendant beings standing there, on 
oil her side of the Kalingal with 
draw’ll arrows ? How splendid they 
are ? What magnificently propor- 
tioned men ! How* luminous their 
faces ! They smile at—, Oh, they 
have vanished.” 



Oil. 3CI; 


65 


eA.mA.NUJA’8 CALL TO SHtBANGAM. 


R&m&nuja was thrilled with joy and surprise at this unexpected 
meeting. He exclaimed: — “0 my heart! seest thou how thy 
desire has met thee ? ” and prostrated before Mahapurna. 
Mah&purna was equally overjoyed at finding that his mission 
was so soon and so readily to be fulfilled, and raised Ramanuja, 
fondly holding- him to his breast. 44 Here and now,” prayed 
Ramanuja, “ admit me as your disciple and teach me all that 
is good for my soul ” Mahapurna said : 44 So near are we to 
the Holy Hastigiri ” l , where Lord Varada resides, we shall go 
there for the initiation you so much desire.” 44 No, Sire, not a 
moment is to be lost/’ said Ramanuja, “ is not the example of 
our Y&niun&ch&rya still fresh, viz., his 1 laving breathed his last 
just when I was about to see him ? This is a warning against 
waste of time. Are not our lives hero of lightning duration ? ” 
So saying, he dropped at his feet again. Piirna raised him up 


(Note from page 04 --contd.) 

The truth dawned after all on the 
men. How could it be otherwise ? 
They were Hindus, the time, place, 
the fact of the Collector’s wager 
with the Brahmunas, all combined 
to flash on them the truth ! The 
Englishman has seen the blessed 
vision of glorious Rama and Laksh* 
inana , espousing the Devi’s cause ; 
“ Jai, Jai, Sita-R&ma ” cried they ; 
“our Lord hath seen the vision.” 
And so crying, they rushed into the 
sleeping town. The inhabitants 
awoko. “ What devil’s riot is this ?” 
cry they. Then the fact becomes 
known* And all, crying in a body, 
“ Jai, Jai, SitA-RAma,” rush to the 
Collector’s camp. There he is 
seated in the front, bright light 
before him. He seems composed 
now. Grave and dignified he looks. 
Some of the important people that 
throng to him, ho receives and 
makes them sit. “ Gentlemen,” says 
he, “ why come in this night here, 
and why so much excitement ? The 
outlet is not broken, nor will it 
ever be. I solemnly tell you I 
have received a lesson to night, that 


I will never forget. I always more 
or less believed that God was not 
the monopoly of the Christian 
Church. I am sure of it now. So 
do you all go to your homes. Early 
in the morning shall the Devi’s 
temple begin to rise.” 

So said he ami dismissed them. 
The temple was built, and now in 
its front it has engraved on it on 
a stone, how it was built by Mr. 
Thomas Price, Collector, in the year 
18S4(?). — And there are greybeards 
now, who talk of it solemnly of an 
evening, from one of whom the 
writer learnt it. [K. E. Central 
Hindu College Magazine, p. 173 ff. 
Vol. IV, 1904]. 

The following inscription appears 
on the stone beam of the Devi’s 
Temple in Tamil darn mam 

Kumpini jdgir Kalektar Lionel Price 
darai aver gal adu (Collector Lionel 
Price) and another inscription is 
near the waste Weir. [Read the 
kindly letter to me dated 13th 
October 1904, by Mr. P. Seshagiri 
Row, Tahsildar of MadhurAntakam.] 


1 K4uohi„ (Conjeveram). 


9 



66 


OIL XL 


'f&E LtFB OF RAMANUJA. 


lovingly. “ What zeal ! indeed/’ lie said, “ it shall be as you 
wish” And leading him to the Holy Yakula tree near the 
(Tank- Guard) Temple, and placing him on his right, perform- 
ed all the sacraments of initiation as laid down in the P&ncha- 
r&tra-S&stra. 1 That process is briefly thus : — 

‘ Preparatory discipline for mantrie initiation requires the 
mark of the discus (Chakra), or of the live weapons (of 
Vishnu, viz., Chakra, Satikha , Gadu , Khadga and Chapa) being 
stamped (on the several parts of the body), with appropriate 
mantras. This is enjoined for the sake of rendering the mantras 
imparted, efficacious. The wearing of these chakra and other 
marks, is to signify that the soul has been wedded to God, 
as the wearing of bangles Ac by a dame, signifies that she is 
joined in all faith to a husband. The disciple (or the postulant) 
shall sit before the Guru, humble, with joined palms. The 
Guru shall meditate on his Guru and all the others preceding 
him upostoiioally, and impress the chakra symbol on the disci- 
ple’s right shoulder ; and then placing his right palm on the 
head and the left palm on the heart of the disciple, and look- 
ing at him with eyes beaming with grace, shall repeat the 
Gem of Mantras (mantra- rat na), and make the disciple repeat 
the same with him, along with the Chhandas and the llishi 
attached to the mantra, v In tli is manner, Mah&pftrna, placing 
R&m&nuja to his right, called to mind his Guru Alavandar’s 
feet, and speaking in the right ear of Ramanuja, imparted to 

1 i 

ii 

f i 

it 

II 

* We hjwl again thought of omit* sacraments make a formal or ex ter 
ting these details; bat Oriental nal Srtvaishnava, like the sacra 
Scholars may require to know what meat of the Christian Baptism, Ac. 



CH. XI, 


RAMANUJA INITIATED. 


67 


him the Mantra-Gem (Dvayam) with all its adjuncts, and 
solemnly ordained him thus: — “ l adjure thee, holy son, most 
solemnly, to deem thyself as the next appointed of Y&rnuna. 
He has departed, know thou, placing his holy feet on thy head, 
consecrating thee to fulfil His holy Mission on earth, in the same 
way as Rama, placing His sandals on the head of Bharat a, 
departed to the forest to carry on the work of His Kingdom.” 
Next to Y a mun ach Ary a thus, succeeded RAm&nuja, Mtih&purna 
playing hut the part of an instrument of the former in ordain, 
ing R&m&nuja. This succession, Pill ai Amudanaror Tivuva- 
rangatt-amudanAr 1 recorded in his Ramanuja- mitt andadi. 2 * * B a- 
manuja, reverently asked Malnlpurna to explain to him the 
triplicity, viz. (1) Pramdna (2) Prameya and (II) Pramdta , or 
literally the (1) measure, (2) the measured, and (3) the measurer. 
Purna explained thus : — “ Pramdna, or the measure of God- 
knowledge, is the authoritative Re relations, the essence of 
which is contained in the Pvaya-Mantra, (or (he Mantra which 
explains the dual nature viz., the Mother-Father, of the Deity) ; 
Prameya or that which is measured by this measure of Revela- 
tions, is God Himself, the Mother- Father ; Pramdta or the 
measurer is the prophet or seer, who knows God and so know- 
ing, makes others to know Him. This measurer is yourself.” 
So saying, they both paid obeisance to Rama, ihe Tank-Guard, 
saying: — “Thou art leallv Hama, or He who delights the 
world. By Thy blessing, there shall be one undivided faith in 
the world, so that all men may love each other and live in peace. 
This is Ra'ma.” They now both left for Kanehi to visit Lord 
Varada. Kanchi-pfirna met them on the wav in due humility 
and conducting them to Kanehi and to the Hastigiri Shrine, 
invoked Lord Varada to manifest Himself to the worthy visi- 
tors, even as Raraa-misra called upon Ranga to manifest Him- 
self to Alavandar. 8 They were blessed with the Beatific 
Vision of God which they rapturously enjoyed. 


1 Disciple and contemporary to MmAnnja. 

* Read Verso 21: — “ Nidiyai etc.’* This work sets forth the glory 

of R Am Jinn j a and his mission on earth. 

R Read Y am a nac h arv a’ s Life, ante. 



68 


TI1E LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


CH. XI. 


R&m&nuja led his Guru Mahapurna and his consort to his 
house, and accommodated them in the upper story, providing 
all other comforts necessary. For six months, R&manuja sat 
at the feet of his Guru, and received from him important les- 
sons on the DiAvida Scriptures and other Mystery-loi'e of the 
Srl-vaishnava Faith. 

On a certain morning two Sri-vaishnavas came to R&m&« 
nuja, and did him the service of anointing with oil. They asked 
for food as they were hungry. Ramanuja inquired of his wife, 
if she had any food remaining from over-night. “No, not so 
much as a grain of it,*’ she said ; but Ram&nuja suspected her 
sinoerety, and bidding her go on other business, entered into 
the cook-room and examined the vessels, and lo, he found food 
hidden away. He called his wife and angrily spoke to her 
thus : — “ Art thou capable of this, that when hungry souls are 
waiting at the door, thou liest V Is there worse meanness than, 
in this wise, refusing food to those who come in dire need ? 
And a lie added to the meanness ! Oh, sin ! ” 

On another day, llAmAnuja was out for his morning ablu* 
tions. His wife and the Guru’s wife met at a well for drawing 
water. An altercation ensued between them as to the com* 
parative purity of the pots they held. Purna was observing 
this. As soon as his wife returned home, he thought it wise 
to pack up immediately and actually left K&nchi for Sriran- 
g&m, after soundly chastising his wife for the unpleasant 
occurrence, of which he held her to be the cause. R&m&nuja 
returned home, and as usual went to visit his Guru, but 
be found him not. Ho asked the people about the place to 
account for his sudden absence. They said : — u Sire, your lady 
and your Guru’s lady had a quarrel near the w r ell over a pot. 
The Guru took his wife to task for giving occasion for this, and 
thinking that if he stayed longer under your roof, her conduct 
might again give rise to unpleasantness, he considered it 
expedient to leave the place forthwith. R&m&nuja was white 
with rage on hearing this, and recovering, addressed his wife 
thus : — “ Thrice art thou sinner, base woman! My Guru 
K&nchiptirna came and took his food under my roof in my 



OH. XI. 


RAMANUJA BECOMES SANYASIN. 


69 


absence, and thou tookest the very leaf from which he ate 
as unholy and polluting. This was thy first guilt. Hungry 
souls came craving for food. Thou didst deny it and thou 
didst lie. This was thy second guilt. And now thou hadst 
had the audacity to pick a most unseemly quarrel with my 
venerable teacher’s consort. This is thy third and crowning 
crime. No more art thou fit to remain with me. Thou art 
a worldly woman, blind to spiritual interests. Take all this 
money, for that is thy meet share. That is the stuff that well 
suits a shrew and a scold like thee . 1 Well do the S Astras 
say : — “ Woman is at the bottom of all crime.” 8 They further 
declare “ When house-keeping suits not, enter the monas- 
tery” 8 ; for that is the true house where strangers and guests 
find a ready welcome ; but thou hast defiled my roof by thy 
unworthy conduct offensive to my sense of propriety and 
decency. It is meet therefore that thou shouldst return to 
where thou earnest from.’’ So saying he swiftly despatched 
her to her part^ds’ abode. 

“This world is hateful. Indeed, I must abjure all con- 
cern with it,” thus did RAinAnuja seriously reflect. It is said: — 
“ Bathe in the holy pond called Ananta^aras, shadowed by the 
cupola oj the Holy Temple , resolving that nothing in the world 
bestows real bliss. All sins shall depart. Seek Lord Varada 
as the Refuge ; and one shall gain the blessed rogions of 
Vishnu .” 4 And so R&in an uja bathed in the Ananta-pond, and 
resolved to become a Sanyasin. It is laid down; “ One shall 
receive the holy order of the Sany&sin either from a mendi- 
cant Sanyasin or from God direct.” 5 And thus resolving 


1 Cp. Yajnavalkya and li in two wives in the Brihad&ranya : Up, 

8 l^aruda-Pttftina], These incidents show how 

Ram&mtja was against caste-pride, 

,n ** IUaram-allel tnra-v-aram.” 


1 (imsf^r^ipapr i 

A\ 





H [Brahms, lld>*1igiri-M&hdtmya, 15*23 ff} 
5 [Yati-dttarmu satnucchayfQ* 



70 


THE LIFE OF R&M&NUJA. 


OH. XI. 


R&rnanuja betook himself to Varada, and there prostrating 
before Him, prayed thus: “0 G ranter of boons! Warder of 
death ! Bestower of the Land of the Angels! I have seen 
enough of all the varieties of worldly delusions, fathers and 
mothers, wives and children and all worldly goods. I feel 
sure that these ties block one's way to Thee, Thine and Spiritual 
Preceptors. I value them not ; I value Thee and Thy Holy 
Blessed feet alone. Grant me deliverance from those and 
service to these. Invest me therefore with all the insignia of 
the Vaislinava ascetic : the Triple-staff, the Holy -thread, the 
Under -cloth, the Loin-cloth, the Upper-cloth and the begging 
hoop (or rope-swing for receiving alms) 1 ” So did Ram&nuja 
supplicate. Lord Varada was pleased, and through His official 
agent (arehaka), He was pleased to grant his prayers, and gave 
him from that day the name of Ramanuja-muni. “ My own 
R&m&nuja, thou shalt don the robe of the Sany&sim and serve 
Me ”, was the command given through KAnehi-purna. Receiv- 
ing this command in due humility, Rain&nuja retired and 
became a Sany&sin from that day. 

wwriTOg’rar ii [ Yati-dhn rm a ■ za ni u erh a ya ] . 



CH. XII. 


71 


KAMaNUJA'S chief disciples. 


CHAPTER XII. 


BAMANTTJA’S CHIEF DISCIPLES, Ac. 

Bo R&manuja had now weaned himself from fhe world. 
The discipline and daily routine ordained for monastics, he 
went through punctiliously; and was glad within himself to 
find that Yam umich ary a\s eyes of grace, which had fallen on 
him, had wrought wonderful results in removing all obstacles 
in the way of serving God alone, and in causing all conveni- 
ences for leading such a life. It was time now to think how best 
to carry out the (post-moi tal) wishes of that pioneer-sage of the 
Faith, Sri Yamuna. Alone, he could not accomplish it; he 
wanted a competent colleague. He could think of no one better 
fitted than Govinda- llhatta, who had all the threefold qualifi- 
cations of fidelity (to him), abdication (of the world), and 
enthusiastic faith (for spiritual science). 11 But he had turned an 
arrant Saiva; a zealot in Siva’s service at K&lahasti as already 
related. Which saint was there to show him that the palm 
which touched the limja was really stinking Y Who would show 
him that there was the One God whom Scriptures declared as ; 
** All-scent and Ail-savour Y” 1 So he must d, and his thoughts 
lighted on Tirumalai-Nambi (SrPaila-Pui na), the venerable 
worshipper of Venkafe^a at Tirupati, learned in the Vedas, 
versed in the neotareous Prabamlhas, and otherwise possessing 
spiritual qualities calculated to influence men of Govinda’s 
stamp and redeem them from their wrong ways. He des- 
patched a confidential Sri Vaishnava accordingly to Nambi, 
(Purna) ; and to deliver to him a message thus : — “ Holy sire! 
your nephew Vafta-mani Govinda-Bhatta was my school-mate. 
Influenced by evil association;;, his mind went wrong. He is 
now lost in the thick tangle of the KiBabasti- wilderness. 1 
pray you for my sake to extend your grace to him ; and 
redeem him to your blessed feet.” 

In the meanwhile, Kurattazhvan, called Tirumaru-m&rban 
of the Harita-family, and Mudali-y-tlnd&n of fhe Kand&dai- 
f amity, heard of Ramanuja having joined the monastic order. 


1 {Chh : Up : III. 14. 2]* 



n 


THE LIFE OF 1? AMANUJA. 


CH. Xil. 


They were rejoiced and forthwith proceeding to K&nchi, fell 
at his feet an i prayed that they may be taken into the Sri- 
Vaishnav.i fold by the sacrament of Pancha-samskdra &c, 
R&mAnuja welcomed them, a id ordained them as they desired. 
And as stated in : *“ After receiving the mantra, the Doija shall 
V'orship his Ach'irya, and in all purity rear remain implicitly in 
his seruic 1 they remained devoted to RamAnuja. (In the 
sequel, we shall use (die Sanskrit names of these disciples, viz., 
Kuranatha or Kuresa for Kiirattazhvan, and DaSarathi 2 for 
Mudali-y-ftnd&n). A coterie of pupils were thus gathering 
round the future Pontiff of the Yaishnava Church. 

As to YiVlava-prakiVa, a new chapter in his life was 
about to open. For his mother was a good woman. She was 
a frequent visitor to Lord Varada ; and had won the good 
graces of Sage Ranch t-purna. She had fiiendly conversation 
often too with lii\manuja. All these forces combined to mould 
her disposition for the New Faith ; and at last made her to 
wish that her son Yadava had also belonged to this band. 
With this wish strong in her, she was one day mounting the* 
steps to Lord Varada s Shrine, when she overheard some one 
ejaculating: u so be it.” She construed this to bo good augury 
for her; and on returning home informed her son of what had 
happened, and exhorted him to give up his single staff of the 
advaitin and wear, like Kamauuj t, the triple-staff, sacred thread, 
and sikha (tuft of hair on the head), thereby embracing the 
Vaishnava faith. For a long time, Yadava had begun to doubt 
the soundness of ad vaitism Ramanuja's reasonable and decent 
interpretations of Vedic texts as agairnst his own, were working 
strongly in his mind; and, of the greatness of Ramanuja himself, 
the Brah ma-rakshas, or the spirit which had possessed the prin- 
cess, had clearly proved. The divine succour which God, disguis- 
ed as Rama, had rendered to Ramanu ja, whom he had beguiled 
on the sanctimonious pretext of a Kasi-piigrimage, and the 


1 <aprt*.sf%;Sift3r i 

II [Sritvata Samhttri :J. 

3 See 30, Hierarchic Tabic in our Lives of Azhrur*. 

Da su vat hi is nephew (on sister's side) to Kamauuja. 



CH. XII. 


YADAVA BECOMES VAISHNAVA. 


73 


sincere exhortations of his own mother to boot, had further all 
contributed to dispose his heart. There he was converted, but, 
“ Mother ” he said, “ as a monk of the advaita-persuasion, I had 
divested myself of the tuft and holy thread ( Yajnopa-vtta ) j to 
wear them again, a penance has to be performed by me ; and that 
is laid down to be a journey round the world. I am old and unfit 
for such a task. Indeed I know not how to go.'* Y&dava was 
harrowed by these thoughts, day after day. But one night 
he had a dream. The Lord Varada appeai*ed and said: — 
There is no need to go round the world, Y&dava ! That is done 
by going round our Ramanuja. Do it then and bear the insignia 
of the New Faith which he may present to you.” Y&dava woke 
but had yet no faith in the dream . So he betook himself to Kan- 
chi-p&rna, and begged of him to consult Lord Varada — Piirna 
l>eing a favourite votary of Him — as to some matters agitating 
his mind. That same night, Kanchi-Purna submitted to Lord 
Varada, Yadava’s petition. “ I know it all,” said Lord Varada. 
“ His mother had already persuaded him to become a three- 
staffed Sanyasin, but a doubt as to how it was possible to amend 
the past by Ih n •prad akshina, preyed upon his mind and I have 
by a dream quieted him by suggesting that instead, he need 
but go round R&manuja. Being a dream as it was, he lacks 
faith and refers it to thee again.” The following morning, 
Piirna delivered this message to Yadava, w ho was now satisfied. 
Straightw'ay he went to R&in&nuja, and asking his forgiveness 
for all the past, begged to be ordained as a monk and admitted 
to the New r Faith. “But propitiation before conversion is 
demanded by our Laws, and that in this case is circumambu- 
lating the world once,” said R&manuja. “ Enough to go round 
thee, sire, so coramandeth Lord Varada,” explained Y&dava 
penitently, and putting the same in execution without waiting 
for a reply, stood before R&manuja with folded hands. Kuresa 
and D&sarathi, the new disciples, watched these events in in- 
finite wonderment and exclaimed : — “ If some reach God by love y 
others reach Him by hate as well ? ” 1 II ‘May he join our holy 


1 t 

II [ Bhdgaiaia J. 


10 



74 


THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


CH. XII. 


band.* 1 ” R&m&nuja was mightily pleased at the valuable ad- 
herent won to his cause, made Yadava undergo all the 
sacraments for the Br&hmana over again, such as Chaula 
and Vpanayana , invested him with the triple-staff, &c., and 
named him Govinda-jiya, stamped him with the holy symbols 
of Sankha and Chakra , gave him the Holy Mantra , and enjoined 
him to write a work on Yati-dhanna 2 (or the Institutes of 
monks), showing the harmony that exists among various texts. 
Govinda-jiya accordingly wrote a work of eleven chapters, 8 
each chapter treating of an aspect and submitted the same to 
Ramanuja, lie read it and expressed his approval of the same* 
Not long however was Govinda-jiyar spared to serve his 
Achiiry A. ; for he soon after left the earth and drew himself away 
to the Great Beyond. 

K ure? a and D&Harathi were much attached to Ramanuja, 
who look them through a course of the Two Mimamsas (the two 
Exegeses on the ritualistic and the contemplative Divisions of 
the Veda). While such studies were being prosecuted, the 
tidings travelled to Srirangam of the assumption by Ramanuja 
of the Snny&sin order, and other events rapidly succeeding it. 
Mahapftrna and other disciples ot Yamunacharya received the 
tidings with joy, and longed for Ramanuja’s coming to Sriran- 
gam, making it his permanent quarters. But they were helpless ; 
and K&m&nuja too had once before in grief and despair, returned 
from the place without even visiting Lord Ranga, being dis- 
appointed at the sudden death of Yamuna. So, they went 
in a body to Lord Ranga and petitioned to Him to prevail 
upon His Type at Kauohi, — the Lord Varaila — to spare Rama- 
nuja for them. So a message from Lord Ranga, who granted 
their petition, was sent to Lord Varada. But a reply came to 
the effect : — “ If it is possible for one to forego his love, I too 


I 

II [lUimdyana VI. 18. 38 j. 


* Called Y<(ti»dhfinna-8<nnncchay(i' 


••nwiflTsrciwK ii ft»i. .• at. i. *-s,j 



CH. XII. 


RAMANUJA’S CALL TO SfitBAXGAM. 


75 


can part with my Rd.ma.nuja/’ On li earing this, Mah&purna 
and other worthies were much disconcerted, but after some 
deliberation, determined to depute an elder in person to approach 
Lord Varada and persuade Him by hymns to grant them 
Ramanuja inasmuch as the Lord's very name Varada meant: 
“ Grantor.” They besought accordingly Tiruvaranga-p- 
permnal Araiyar, tlie Venerable Elder of the place *, to 
march to Kanchi on their behalf, and so extol Lord Varada 
as to make Him condescend to grant them Ramanuja. Arai- 
yar immediately left Srirangam on this holy errand, after 
obtaining leave to do so from Lord Ranga. On his nearing 
Kanchi, his relative there by name Vara nta rum PerumAl Arai- 
yar met him and escorted him to the Holy City, and tended him 
under his roof as befitted a distinguished visitor. The next 
morning, in due fashion, Araiyar proceeded to Oie Temple. 
Lord Varada had that day taken His august seat in the pavilion 
called KacchiH'ii-V'hjttnn, surrounded by the Holy Assembly ; 
Kanchi -purna stationed before the Lord reverently doing his 
allotted service of fanning. Ramanuja stood by his side devoutly 
• uttering the Veraraja-Aslilahi hymn sung by Purna. Ramanuja 
saw Araiyar, went forward and received him most cordially. 
“ May *1 be allowed to pay my obeisance to Lord Varada ? ” 
enquired Araiyar. Purna led him to His august presence, in 
full Holy Council seated, and Araiyar fell prostrate beforo 
Him, repeating Yamuna’s verse : “ Oh, when, () St rider of the 
Three Spheres, will Thy Lotus-Feet, decked with all the signs 
such as the discus, bedeck my head > ’ 2 . Rising, he was 
honored with tWtha, jjiasdda and S rS Sathagopa. Araiyar then, 
set to celestial music (< devtiguna ), chanted a select number of the 
Lyrical Psalter of the Azhvars (Saints) ; and as he sang, danced 
and went into raptures. 

“When His faithful sing and dance for joy, God Himself 
keeps time,’ - it is said. So, Lord Varada was pleased with 

i See Life of Yamuna. He is also called Rangn-iiiUha-Ciayaka, (rule 
No. 22, Hierarchic Table to our Lives* of *S (lining. 

^ " IStntra-nitna.] 



76 


THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


OH. XII. 


the devotion of Gay aka, and vouchsafed to Him all the honors 
belonging to His Shrine. “ Why do I want these ?” said 
G Ay aka, “ my wish is not for these. Pray grant me a boon, 
as Thou art, O Clod, famous as the “ Boon-Giver.” And so say- 
ing, he continued his song and dance with more fervour. 
Pleased, Lord Varada spoke thus: “ Ask, my beloved, any- 
thing, except Me and My Consorts.” “Him, pray grant,” 
readily replied G Ay aka, pointing to Bamaruja, who was close 
by. “ Oh lost,” exclaimed the Lord u I wish I had the fore- 
thought to include RamAnuja on the side of exceptions. How- 
ever, son, except RAmAnuja, ask for any other boon.” “ But,” 
remonstrated GAyaka, “dost Thou retract also like mortals P 
Are not Thy own words these : “ Rama hath no two tongues” ! ? 
On hearing this, Lord Varada had no alternative but to reluct- 
antly say: — “Well, we grant you RamAnuja; take him. And 
we bestow on him the title, Yatiraja.” No sooner was this said, 
than almost convulsively GAyaka grasped RAmanuja by the 
band and said: — “ Proceed, Sire RAmAnuja said not a word. 
He fell prostrate before Lord Varada, and saying : “Thy will 
be done, ” he, immediately started, not even caring to enter 
his cloister. As he went, he merely ordered his pupils Kuresa 
and DAsarathi to bring up his chapel image, Varada. RAmA- 
nuja thus followed GAyaka to Srirangani. KureSa after 
escorting RamAnuja some way, returned to KAnchi, but Dasa- 
rathi accompanied. DAsarathi was RAmanuja’s sister’s son, but 
be was the only relative whom he retained. 

Looking steadily towards Srirangam, his future home — a 
borne, the vestibule of the Eternal Home— with joy bounding 
in his heart, went RAmAnuja. In due time the north branch 
(Kolladam = Coleroon) of the Kaveri, encircling the Holy Island 
of Srirangam, was reached. RamAnuja tarried here to take a 
holy bath and deck his body with the twelve marks, consecrated 
by the Holy Names of KeSava and so forth. In the mean- 
while, news had sped to Srimngam of the arrival of the Holy 
Personage. MahApurna and other disciples of YAmunAchArya, 





CH. XII. 


b.UjAnuja’s reception. 


77 


the elders of the place, the monks and acolytes (ekdngis) and 
others were rejoiced at this good fortune, and proceeding in a 
body to the Temple, delivered the tidings to Lord Ranga. 
Thereupon His Command issued thus : u 0, my faithful, march 
ye forth in full congregation, office bearers and all men, laic 
and cleric, with all the holy paraphernalia of my Temple and 
every honor, to meet and receive my Ramanuja. ” The popu- 
lace formed itself into a grand procession, which with music 
discouring and flags Hying, headed by Vishvaksena ( = S£nai- 
mudali), 1 * * streamed forth towards Kolladam even as the celes- 
tials and angels, headed by Cherubs and Seraphs* go forth 
from the gates of Heaven to the shores of the Vi raja 8 river, to 
meet and welcome the faithful, who have finished their pil- 
grimage on earth, and are reaching the portals of the Reful- 
gent City of God. They met Ramftnuja; and after mutual 
exchanges of religious courtesies, the procession turned towards 
Srirangam. Thus led, R&m&mija crossed the river, neared the 
Tinkadi rampart, and the Damodaran turret, where he laid 
himself at full length on the ground ; then rising, lie rever- 
ently threaded the Ti 'ru m alai-tanda- Pern null Street, (begin- 
ning always from the east and turning to the west, by south 
= pradakshina ), and again he went round the inner Trivik - 
raman -Street, reaching in due course the big sacrifice-altar 
(bali-pitha), where be prostrated himself again; then he went 
to the Mother's shrine, paying homage to Mother Sri-ranga- 
N&yaki, the blessed Consort of Sri-Ranga ; next the Chandra - 
pmhkarint pond was reached, where he sipped the holy water; 
and then wheeling round, the next southern entrance was 
reached, guarded by XAyanars (gate-watchers), and all the 
Saints from St. Namm&zhvar downwards — who are called the 
Prospering Indoltnfs 4 — were visited in order, not omitting fhe 
numerous other shrines dotted round the Temple. Next the 


1 See 18. p: Iviii, of Our Lit'ee of Azhvtirs, 

* Those terms we appropriate, as onr terms have no equivalents. 

8 This is the ultimate river- boundary between the material and the 
spiritual spheres, where all sins get washed ; lienee vi-rajd. 

4 This is the phrase used in verse 38 of St. Tondsradi-p-podi'g Tiru- 
tn&lai. It means the ** Saints who are dead to the world, but nitre to Ood. 



78 


THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


cn. xir. 


courtyard called the Ani-y -araugan - Tiruniuttam was entered, 
where RAm&nuja prostrated again, and wheeling round the 
inner corridor, loving eyes fixed on the Pran&va- like vimdna, 
(the gold-covered cupola over the sanctum sanctorum), the 
shrine of Vishvaksena was reached, where making obeisance, 
he was now in the precincts of the central Father’s shrine. In 
this place, which goes by the name of Azhagiya-manavdl an- 
tirumantapam, the Lord Ranga (the moveable Image called 
N amber utfidl) came forth in advance to meet RAmAnuja, even 
as the Lord in Heaven leaves His Throne of Glory to go and 
embrace and welcome the souls who are saved and are ariving 
at the golden gates of Heaven. RAmAnuja was thrilled with 
joy. Bliss possessed him. He fell clown, rose, fell again and 
held his hands up, fell again, and rose ; thus did he reverently 
pace up to the Holy of Holies, where supporting himself against 
the mana-t-tiln pillar, he saw the blessed figure of Ranga 
reclining on His An ant a -couch, 1 and ri vetting His eyes on the 
Holy Figure, enjoyed tho Blessed vision in the manner enjoyed 
by St. TiruppAnAzhvAr in his Amalan ddippiran* ; and recited 
in accents of bliss the Tirnppall-dndu of St. Peri-y-AzlivAr, 8 
and the following bewitching verses of YAmunAchArya : — 

Bow to Thee , Bate to Thee , beyond reach of word and' thought ; 
Bow to Thee , Bow to Thee , reachable by word and thought ; 
Bow to Thee , Bow to Thee , Infinite in Richer ; 

Bow to Thee , Bow to Thee , Infinite in Mercy * 

Know I not virtue, aye , blind to my rout, 

Nor do I love Thy Holy Blessed Feet ; 

Wayless and Goal-less , 7, 0 Refuge ! 

Meekly seek and fall at Thy Holy Feet. 5 

The Lord Ranga was enchanted with these outpourings of 
R&mAnuja’s heart, and was pleased to place on his head His 


‘This ineani “God, the cosmic Dramatist on the stage of Eternal 
Time.*’ For symbological explanation, refer to p. H. and lii of our Lives 
of Axhvdrs, 

* Read this Saint’s Life in onr Lives of Azhvdrs. 

* Road his life in our Lives of Azhvdr*. 

4 itso, verse St. 5 Ibid, verse 22. 



CH. XII. 


RAMANUJA INSTALLED. 


79 


Blessed Feet, 1 * * which .Ramanuja received in humility as the 
greatest honor and blessing conferred on a mortal ; and stood 
transfixed with the thought that from that day onwards he had 
become one whose life was to be solely dedicated to the service 
of God. As he was thus ruminating, Lord Ranga ( = Periya Pe- 
rumal, or Lord stationary resting on Serpent Sesha) spoke thus : 

“ All the riches of our Kingdom here and of Our U pper Regions, 
are given to thee, and to thy followers. The title Udayavar * is 
conferred on thee. Take charge of Our household here, f of which 
We appoint thee guardian and trustee, and manage all its affairs 
wisely Ramanuja received the mandate humbly and turning 
to Maha-purna said : — “ What blessings belong not to those who 
have trusted Acharyas like you, Sire ? To my spiritual con- 
nection with you, is due the extraordinary favour Lord Ranga 
has bestowed upon me this day.’' Puma said : “ 0 noble pupil 
of mine, the prophecy of St. Nammazhvar, to which we were 
keenly looking forward, has this day come to pass. The pro- 
phecy is that contained in his verse : 0 Men t learn that Kali 

will soon come to an end ” iJ ; and this is with reference to 
yourself. Pray then enter on your holy duties without further 
thought.” Ramanuja obeyed, and assumed charge of his 
exalted position. Taking his seat in the Hall called the Fenya 
Tirumandapam , he instituted searching enquiries as to whe- 
ther the weights and measures used in the Sri-bhanddra (stores) 
were correct ; whether the fiower 4 -service, sandal-paste 6 
service, food ‘^-service, light ^service, and all such services 
were all duly done ; whether the Temple-servants were carefully 
selected and cared for; whether the public works 8 of the 
Shrine’s noble structures were duly attended to ; whether the 
flower gardens 9 attached to the Temple were properly tended 
and conserved ; and whether the land 10 and other properties 


1 Called the Satha-Gopa. 

8 Literally “ He who has got,” meaning “ He w ho has been given the 
Kingdom of God, as bis property/’ 

8 Ttru-vdy-Mozh i. V. 2. 7 Tiru-vi)akku. 

4 TirumAlai. * Tiru-madil-tiruppani. 


& EAttu-p-padi. 
li Amudtt*padi. 


9 Tiru-v-anandawaimm. 

10 Tirn-viJaiyAtta-cchtmai. 



80 


THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


CH. XII 


pertaining to the Temple were well looked after. And thus 
from day to day was Ramanuja engaged in restoring order and 
system in the vast concerns of the Temple. He picked out 
AAaLa^a-Natt-Azhvan, 1 and making him his disciple, set 
him over the Temple as his assistant ; and saw to the strict 
and punctual discharge of all the ceremonial duties connected 
with the daily, fortnightly, monthly and yearly festivals of 
the shrine. 


1 His wife is Tripurddeui, vide p. 2009. Vol. IV/ Bhagavnd- viaha yam 
(1st Telugu Edition.) 



CH. XIII. 


KtTRESA JOINING RAMANUJA. 


81 


CHAPTER XHI. 

KURESA JOINING RAMANUJA. 

Kur&3a having despatched Ramanuja, returned to K&nchi. 
From here he went to his village Kura, about three miles to 
the west of Kanclii. Being the lord of this village and very 
rich, he was called Kuranatlia or Kureaa. He was as bounteous 
as rich. From morn till late in the night, the blind} lame, 
poor and disabled were freely served with food and clothing. 
One night, when the day’s duties were over, the brass -made doors 
of his mansion were closed violently. This made such a ring- 
ingnoise that it was heard at Kanchi. Lord Varada’s Consort 
Lakshmi questioned Him as to the cause of the noise. The Lord 
explained to Her the greatness of KureSa. “ Then I wish to 
see him,” said She. K&nchi-purna was commanded to go and 
fetch him. Purnaduly came and was welcomed with every wor- 
ship due to such a distinguished guest. Piirna then disclosed 
the object of liis mission, resulting from the deliberations which 
Varada and Lakshmi held on hearing the creaking of his brass 
doors. ICuresa was dismayed on hearing this. “What!" he 
cried, “ a sinner like me, a wretch, a worm, to appear so big 
in the Lord’s Eye. Crawling insect that I am ! My doors to 
create disturbance in God’s House! Pride hampers salvation ; 
humility paves the way for it. So reflecting, KureSa 
formed a resolution to forsake all and join lUm&nuja at Si i- 
rangam. He put his resolution into execution at once by 
abandoning all his riches, houses and lands, 1 11 which be gave 
away in charity to all that came, and bidding his wife And&l- 
a mnia give up every article dear to her without regret and 
accompany him, left Kura. 

Purna returned to K&nchi, and recounted the extra- 
ordinary deeds of sacrifice following on repentance, and the 
departure, of Kftresa. Lord Varada was astonished at such 

1 Op. “ Sell all thou hast and give to the poor and follow me, and I 
will give yon peace ** [Matt, 19-21.] 

11 (live up all and follow Christ, & ” 


II 



Hit 


THE LIFE OF IUM&NUJA. 


CU. XIII, 


swift operation of His Grace on Kuresa’s heart, and told his 
Consort: “Well, you have had your wish fulfilled now.” 

Kuresa was now well on his way. Without fear he trud- 
ged on. They were, wife and husband, threading their way 
through a thick forest, and night also fell over them. The 
wife, unaccustomed to travel in this manner, dreaded thieves 
in such forsaken tracts, and turning to her husband asked him 
trembling, whether there was no fear in such places. He 
quickly answered : — “ Dear, if thou hast stuff anywhere hidden 
in your person, there is fear. Fish feed on water-worms. 
Fowls feed on land-worms. Death feeds on life. And so 
thieves feed on riches. I suspect, dear, thou hast some- 
thing with thee, though I commanded thee to relinquish 
all behind.” “ Pardon me, lord,” said Andftlamma, “ I have 
left all behind, but thinking you might need a cup to drink 
from, on your long journey, I secreted but a golden cup.” So 
saying, she unfolded the vessel from her cloth, and shaking 
with fear, handed it to her husband. He took it and threw it 
away into the jungle, and said to his wife: “Now, lady, walk 
on. Thy fear has been cast out.” Thus did this matchless pair 
travel on and in time reach Srirangam. Rarn&nuja was jubi- 
lant at his arrival ; and sent out his pupils to receive him 
with every mark of respect, and conduct him to his Math . 
R&m&nuja, on his approach, rose and, warmly enfolding him in 
his arms, welcomed him to Srirangam, to himself, and to all the 
great work that jointly they were destined to accomplish in 
the near future. Kuresa thus forsook his rich home and all at 
Kfira, and made Srirangam henceforth his permanent residence, 
subsisting here by alms. Thus did a great and most import- 
ant personage for the life-work of Ram&nuja, join him. We 
shall leave him for a time and see how fared Govinda at 
K&lahnsti. 



OH. XIV. 


GOVINDA’S CONVERSION. 


S3 


CHAPTER XIV. 

GOVINDA’S CONVERSION. 

A Sri-vaishnava had been despatched, it will be remember- 
ed, to Sri-Saila-Purna (= Tirumalai Nambi), to deliberate on 
the mode of reclaiming Govinda, who had accidentally become 
a Sami, and had been made the director of the K&lahasii- 
Temple. The messengers returned with a joyful countenance 
to Ramanuja. Before they broke the tidings, RAmanuja saw 
by his face there was success, and baSe him recount what 
had taken place. He began thus : — u Holy Sire, with your 
holy leave, I reached Tirupati in due time, and making obei- 
sance to Purna, conveyed to him the intelligence you had 
entrusted me with. Purna was rejoiced to find that what he 
himself had contemplated doing with regard to Govinda, was 
Ramanuja's wish as well, and that his own intention was there- 
by sweetened. So saying, he immediately started with a knot 
of followers, including myself. We reached Ktllahasti, and 
Purna seated himself under a tree near the 1 emple-pond. 
U 1 1 angai- Kon aranda- N Ay an A.r 1 (= Govinda) came there with 
vessels to the pond in order to catry water for the ablution- 
ceremony of Siva, all the time chanting songs of His praise. 
Purna said: — u What fruit U’ill you get y hy cold-bat hnig the Kuniai- 
decked Thing ? 2 Govinda heard this, looked up in Purna’s face, 
smiled and went his way. “ This will do for once. Let God 
work upon his heart,” Purna exclaimed to himself, and return- 
ing to Tirupati, attended to his usual studies and teachings. 

Sri-saila-Purna now made another venture. He went to 
the same tree and pond as before in Kalahari. NAyanar 
(= Govinda) was coming as usual with vessels to fetch water. 
Pfir^a thought he would try a plan even like the plans of God, 
who works without being seen, and is unknown by men as the 
Planner. To the world, God seems as if sleeping, but He is all 
wakeful. So reasoning within himself, Purna wrote his Guru 
Y&m una’s verse : 

1 Tins wan the name he bore as a San a. It means : “ he who fom»0 
the lingo, in his palin.” See Chapter \ I. 

2 Meaning Siva who is fond of konroi-Qo wers. 



m 


THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


OH. XIV. 


Svabhdvikcmavadhiht , &e. [See p. 55.] 

on a piece of palm-leaf, and allowed it to lie in the path of 
Nayan&r, who of course was unaware of the design. He came. 
The piece arrested his sight. He took it for curiosity, read it 
but threw it away and went on his errand. But as he was 
returning with his pots full, he felt an impulse to pick up the 
piece again, and read the contents once more deliberately. He 
did So and looked round. There we were seated under the tree, 
He came near and said 4 The wail has turned into verse,’ 1 
said Yalmtki, and like him reflecting over his spontaneous utter- 
ance, I have been reflecting over the meaning of this chance- 
found strip. Did you, sire, throw it ? Is this your property ? 
addressing Purna. On this the following conversation 
ensued : — 

Ndyanttr : Have you lost you property 2 

Pttrya: We cannot lose our property. Others only lose 
theirs (meaning, we cannot lose our God. You have lost our 
God). 

N. Never mind that. How is it you are all assembled in 
one body (/. th, you are all belonging to one cult, and seem to 
pursue a peculiar path). 

P. Well, we have been brought together, as various ways 
meet here (*\e., the Path to God we are pursuing is the One 
Path into which all other paths issue). 

N, But is there a Path for those who stand aloof like 
you ? (t.e., aloof -ness or isolation or Kaivahja is the state of 
souls which on the one hand have eschewed material fetters, 
but on the other hand have not recognized God. This isola- 
tion is what in modern days called the JEonic suspension of 
Souls, equivalent to eternal damnation.). 

1 [Rdnidyarut IT, 40], Y&lmfki uttered a cry 

of distress when he saw a fowler killing an innocent curlew but Y&l- 
wtkt to hie surprise found he had uttered a verse. 

2 The whole conversation has Tamil words having double meanings. 
Wo have tried to make it as dear as possible by parenthetical explana- 
tions. 



OH. XIV. 


GOVINDA'S CONVERSION. 


85 


P. We are not aloof in your sense. The aloof are those 
who have discarded their real property (God); but we hold 
our property (God) firm in our hands. We are thus God-sided 
(i.e., God-partisans) if you please. 

N. Never mind this. Have you now come here to leave 
your relatives ? (/.e., to leave more converts like me for Siva). 

P. No, We have come here to buy ktne P (*. e., to 
reclaim or convert those who belong to the bull (kine)*riding 
God (Siva) ). 

N. Is not the dust of kino said in the SiVstras to be sacred 
or sin-purifying ? (hinting that Siva’s bull is thus a sacred 
animal, whose hoof-dust is purifying to all men). 

P. No dust is sacred except it be beaten up by kine of the 
Sacred Land (of Vishnu) 1 ; but not that beaten up from the 
unholy burning (or cremation) ground, where Siva dwells, 

N. Never mind that. What difference is there between 
horizontal and vertical ? (/. e. f is it not immaterial whether we 
paint our foreheads horizontally or vertically). 

P. Yes, there is as much difference between as between 
beast (horizontal) and man (vertical ) 2 . 

N . I suppose, this is the language and cult of a New 
Style (i.e., a New' Dispensation P ) 

P. Nothing new is ours. It is as old as time, and sanc- 
tioned by authority (Veda, Ac.,) (Lt\, our Vaisbnavism is not 
born to-day. It is as old as the Vedas ) 

N. But if we inquire into Sacred Authorities, it is found 
to embody all sorts of cults. 


* Like Brinddvana &c, the Holy Laud of the Holy neat-heard 
Krishna. 

% Beast walks horizontally, man walks erect. It is a significant fact 
that in all paintings and sculptures, where the Dev~<Uura war, Or war 
between Gods and Demons, is represented, marks horizontal 
dra) are shown on the foreheads of Demons, and upright marks (Crdhiu- 
pun dr a) on the foreheads of Gods. 



|6 


TAB LIFE OF BiMlKUJA. 


cm. xiv* 


P. Exactly, xlud that is the reason why you should 
fully inquire, dive into the very depths of knowledge as to what 
is the Highest Truth in the Universe ; and diving, bring up 
the Pearl of truth from all the mud and ooze, ( i.e ., find out 
N&r&yana from all the tangled skein of the Vedas.) 

N. N&yauar thus was dumb-founded. He simplynodded 
his head, scanning Purna all the while from top to toe, and went 
his way with clear signs of serious thought in his heart visible 
in liis countenance. 1 

Purna now thought thus : “ Yes, his heart has now quick- 
ened, 2 the rest is God’s own work. I consign the troubled 
soul there to Him.” So saying he returned to the Holy Hill 
(Tirnmalai -=Tii upat!).” 

Thus did the Srivaishnava narrate to R&manuja the re- 
sult of his mission to reclaim Goviuda to Vaishnavism. R&m&- 
nuja on hearing this, went into a paroxysm of joy, and turning 
to Dilsarathi and other disciples, said : — “Look, liow our great 
Guru Y&mniift’s Holy voice has found its entry into Govinda’s 
heart; and how Govinda played a burlesque and spoke to our 
Sri-Saila-Pftrna thereon in sarcastic quibbles. And see how 
our Pinna retorted to Govinda in the same clever sarcastic 
style. Being well versed in Sastric lore, see liow Govinda 
acknowledged Pilrna's significant sarcasms, and allowed him- 
self to bo beaten into silence. What a polemical victory ? 
And hear me now expound to you the meaning of their cypher- 
repartee. I simply cite a number of authorities bearing on the 
question.* 1 

(1) 44 There are two things Kuhani and Akshara. Ktthara 

is all this being; Akshara is liberated souls. And different from 
these is Puruehottanut , Myself, the Person par excellence Ac.” 
[Bhagavad-GU«, XV. 16 to 19]. 

1 Headers arc invited to the perusal of Bhayavdvinhayam. Vol. IV 
or Tira-v&y-moxM, Onm m-fencm. 

8 [Sittvaia-Samhttti] 

a The reader must be satisfied with reading the citations merely. 
This is no place for expansion thereof. 



C It, XIV. 


OOVINDA’S CUN’VKKSION. 


87 


(2) “He (Vishnu) is the first of the Immortals, and 
Prior to them” [Prabandha~], 

(8) “ The Soul of those who walk virtue’s path ” 

[Naradiya]. 

(4) He is the Door to Salvation” [ Prabamlha ] . 

(5) “ Hardly one knows Me truly ” [Gita : VII-3]. 

(6) “ I am Thine, and Thou art mine ” [T. V. Mozhi, 
II-9-9]. 

(7) “He must be classed with leasts who has no know- 
ledge (of God).” [Hitopadem] 1 

(8) “ How else will they spend their time, (if not by 
thinking of Vishnu) ?” \_Periya-tiru-v-and<ulii v-86], 

(9) “ Those who wear vertical marks on their foreheads, 
Ac., are Vaishnavas” 2 [Sri-Bhagavata]. 

(10) “Sprinkle the Holy Dust of the feet of godly men ” 
[ T-vay-Mozlri , IV. 0*5]. 

(11) “All twice-born shall wear vertical marks” 8 
[ Yajnya-valkya] . 

(12) “ Vedas are the source of authority 4 [Manu. II *0]. 

(13) “ Saf, 0 Sanmya, was in the beginning [Aitareya 
Up: VI-2]. 

(14) “At m a, Saumya, was in the beginning” 8 [Aitareya 
Up : 1-1]. 


1 I 

1 

TOePTRT II 

ft _ ^ * * -ffS. - ^ 



THE LIFE OF eAm^NUJA. 


CH. XIV. 


(15) Btahman , 0 Saumya, was in the beginning” 1 [VAja- 
saneya : III-4]. 1 

And if it be asked who is the Sat , the Atma, the 
Brahman. 

(10) “Indeed, it is the one XArAyana” 2 [Mahopani- 
shat: 1]. 

(17) (N&r&yana or) Vishnu is the highest God ; and 
Agni is the lowest. All other gods go between ” 8 [Aitareya 
Brdkmana , 1 - 1 - 1 ]. 

(18) “ The Pranava is the bow, AtmA is tho arrow, and 
Brahman is the Target. The wise man shall hit the Target 
and become filled with It” 4 [Mund: Up: II-4], 

(14) “From NArAyana is BrahmA born, from NArAyana 
is Budra (Siva) born [ Narayana t/jp.]. 

* S ' 

And Smritis, Pur An as. and ItihAsas support these autho- 
rities, for see Bliagavad-Gtta , X-2, XI-37, IX-10 ; Manu-Smriti 
1-8, XII-132 ; Vishnu-Purana I, 1-32, I, 2-20, IV, 1-39, I, 22-64 
and 78, VI, 4-10 ; Mahd-Bhdrata , Sdnti- Moksha , 168-78 and 
79 ; 169-19, 30 and 31, ITdyoga , 67, and Hart rams a, 32, 223-39, 
279-47, Ac., Ac. 


ii 

* I WWT^lTJTn^ II 

Note i— From (8) to (6), it may portant to us than the greatest con- 
be observed how the conception of quests of the Kings of Egypt or 
God evolved from the term Sat up Babylon. Not one of our greatest 
to Hdtdyana. If our readers are explorers has unearthed with his 
etymologists, they will at once on- spade or pickaxe more splendid 
defeetand the splendid discovery of palaces and temples, whether m 
JUm&nuja in the intricate windings Egypt or in Babylon, than the ety« 
of the Vedas. Says Max Muller x — mologiBt. Every word is the palace 
“ Every new work was a discovery, of a human thought.” [V, 17* 
and these early discoveries, if but Vol. I, Trows: of the Ninth Interna* 
properly understood, are more itn* tioual Congress of Orientalists}. 



CH. XIV. 


GOVINDA’S CONVERSION. 


89 


When therefore Sri-saila Purna answered NAyan&r in his 
own riddles, he was convinced inasmuch as he was well-versed 
in S&stras. And Purna feeling sure that N&yanAr w as well oa 
the way towards conversion, returned to Tirumalai, How 
clever of Purna! ” So saying, RAmAnuja congratulated the Sri- 
Vaishnava who had returned. ** And what next ?'* asked he. 

“ Sire,” continued the Vaishnava, “ listen to the results 
of the third sally of Pitrna. He made obeisance to Lord 
Sriniv&sa of Tirupati and entered the purlieus of KAlahasti 
and camping there in a tope, spent his time in teaching his 
disciples the commentaries on Tirumy*mozhi t (t.e. Bhagavad - 
Vishayaw ) . Nay Anar came that way and got up a trumpet- 
flower tree (pddirito cull flowers for Siva's worship), Purna 
had taken up Tinnan-vUju or Cent: II, Dec. 2 ofSt.Nam- 
m&zhvAr’s Tiru-vay-mozhi, for comment ; and as he went on 
reciting and explaining, Nayanar attentively pursued the dis- 
course. Purna came to the fourth verse thereof, w hich ended 
with: — 4 Except the One God (Krishna), which other deserves 
flower or worship /” On healing this, NayanAr jumped down 
the tree at once, flung away his flower-reticule, tore away the 
rudrdkshu 1 heads he was wearing, and fell at the feet of Ptlrna, 
overcome with emotion, and exclaimed: — “ No, no ; no one else 
can deserve. Holy Sire ! I am an ignoramus, and apostate 
and am unclean and wallow ing in the mire of worldliness. 2 
Save me, save me. Alas that when God of the two Universes, 
(N&rAyana) has been, I professed fealty to the 4 Nude deity of 
the Dishevelled Hair (Siva) ’ ; when we have had the 4 Love - 
beaming Lotus-Eyed ( Vishnu), ' I placed my affections on 
1 Fire-vomitting Ugly -Eyed (Siva) * ; when we have had 
Krishna, the sea-and-land Swallower, [ worshipped the 4 Poi- 
son-dark-necked ’ (Siva) ; when we have had the Kalpaka- 
tree which had saved the herds and herdsmen from Indra’s 
hail and storm (Krishna), I honored the ‘ Dead-skull-handed 
(Siva) ; when we have had the Sri-breasted (Vishnu), I boqgpd 


1 The berries of Usocarpu* Gan it run, sacred to Siva. 


12 



90 


THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


CH. XIV. 


to the * Beggar (Siva) ’ ; when we have had the glorious ‘ Silk- 
mantled (Vishnu) \ I was an abject slave to the 4 Tiger-skin- 
m an tied (Siva)’ ; when we have had the ‘ Ganga-toed (Vishnu)*, 
I cironmuiabulated the 4 Grave-yard -stalker (Siva)* ; when we 
have had the God of the fragrant Tulasi 1 , I resorted to the 
4 BtlrdVfond (Siva ) 1 and wasted tnv strength by pouring pails- 
ful of water over the vile phallus ” So went on N&yan&r, 
now really Govinda, going tii rough the whole gamut of the 
Vishnu-Siva legends ; and very contrite at heart for his vag- 
rancy, supplicated Purna to save his soul, lost in the wilds of 
false faiths. Govinda thus lay prostrate. Purna looked at 
his disciples and saying : “ JEtepentanee has washed this sonl 
clean, and Alavandfir will now accept the purged heart, 1 * lifted 
him up with loving hands, patted him on the back and dis- 
coursed to him in soothing tones, “ drinking Govinda, as it 
were, with his gracious eyes, and hugging him as it were to 
his heart." ” 

The Sivito residents of Kakhasti came to know of N&ya- 
nilr s remorse, recantation and redemption and hemming round 
Purna, remonstrated with him thus :—* 4 How eanst thou 
entice, Sir, our Nayanfir, by mesmerizing him with charm - 
dust. 4 ? “Why do ye ask me?" retorted Purna, “there is 
your Nilyan&r ; ask him. Know, our ways are hidden to you, 
and we never swerve to others’ ways.** Then they turned to 
N Ay amir, and seizing his hand, 44 Come,** said they. Govinda 
swiftly snatched his hand away from their clutch and said in 
anger : — “How dare ye pollute my hand with your touch ? 
Here, take away the temple-keys, the signet.-ring and other 
articles of your cult and creed. My connection with you 


1 The basil sacred to Vishnu (road p. Ivii, of onr Lire * Azhrdrs .) 

9 .Kffle Marmelo#, leaves of sacred to Siva. 

II [BwHiiwo-P«r.] 

* Ammdn.pmli in Tamil, a magic-dust supposed to possess the pro. 
peHy of subjugating another's will to one’s own. 



m „ xiV. 


GOVINDA’S CONVERSION. 


91 


has from this moment ceased ; and I have nothing more to do 
with you. I am entirely rid now of old shackles.” So saying, 
he suited action to word, by clapping his bauds, 1 and turned 
his face away from them. Thus beaten they said to Puma, : — 
“ Sire, we had known all this yesterday *, and yet we thought 
we would go to you and make a stand and try to force or 
persuade Nftyanar buck to us, but it is hopeless, we find. Hear, 
however, the dream which we had. Our God of Kftlahasti 
(Siva) appeared to us aud spake thus ; — “ Listen, my faithful ! 
In the old days, the Vedas and Sastras suffered at the hands of 
the PAsli and iris, Baudd lifts and Chftrvftkfts. They were restored 
by the three-staffed Sanyftsin, Dattfttreya. Again now, as of 
old, the Vedas have suffered by heretical vandalism. To re- 
establish them, the celestials Viehvaksena, Ananta and Vaina- 
teya have become incarnate on earth, under the names of 
Yftmuna, Rftmftnuja and Govinda. To help them, the Divine 
Symlsds of Vishnu — the Conch and the Discus — have appeared 
as Dftsarathi and Kui*6sa, respectively. So, the Vedic Vaighnu- 
vism which is going to revive under these Masters is a system 
which is after my own heart. Govinda had entertained a 
wish once for living in Kftsi ; and this desire i fulfilled by 
appearing as the lintja in his palm, and giving him thus a 
chapter of Saivism ; so that he may be in a position to show 
and prove to others the comparative merits of the two sys- 
tems, which can best be done only after personal experience. 
Vaishnavfts are a free people. Interfere not. Let them alone.” 

‘ Such was our dream,’ the Saivas represented, ‘ and so, Sirs, 
you are free, and we return.’ Pftrna’s plans were thus worked 
out. He took Govinda to his home at Tirupati, and has had, 
as expiatory, the tonsure, &r., performed as also the five-fold 
Sacraments® of the Vaishnavas — on the shores of the Holy 
Pond, called the Svami-Pushkarini — administered. After this 
the Holy Teachings contained in the Prabandhas of the *S«int« 
(Azhvftrs) were duly imparted, aud the Five Fundamental 


1 This means : washing one’s hands off. 

« lXd*9*ptt-8umhM . J 



m 


THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


OH. XIV. 


Truths 1 of religion wei'e explained to him, thus making Govinda 
an all-round Vaishnava for evangelistic work with R&m&nuja. 
Govinda looked upon Purna, his Master, as God Himself. He 
knew of no other God except his Saviour, Purna, to whom he 
was a servitor, in thought, speech and deed, even as Laksh- 
in ana was to R&machandra . 2 

And I, Master, remained with them so long, enjoying their 
company as well as studies.” Thus related the Vaishnava to 
R&mAnujn. 

On hearing this, Ramanuja rapturously eyed the Srivaish- 
nava and uttered blessings. The first successful evangelistic 
work of Ramanuja had thus been accomplished, by the recovery 
of Govinda from his apostasy. 


1 The ArtUa-puH<‘haka, or the nature of (L) God, (2) Soul, (‘6) Goal 
(4) Means, (5) Sin. A separate treatise on this topic comprises one of 
* ho eighteen Mystery- Hooks of Sago Pillai Lokacharva. 

2 WSMWMfWrll : II. 31. 27.] 

‘ Thou shalt with thy Yidehun spouse, 

Recline upon the mountain’s brows ; 

Ho mine the toil, be mine to keep 

Watch o’er Ihee, walking or asleep.’ [GWflViJ*.] 



GH, XV. 


rIm&nuja and mantra. 


m 


CHAPTER XV. 


RAMANUJA AND MANTRA. 

Sri R&m&nuja had not; yet formally seen his Guru Sri 
Mabapurna, at his residence, after his arrival at Srlrangam from 
Kanchi. And, two, through his wife, he had possibly offended 
him. But he had abandoned her on that account and donned the 
Sannyasin robes. Was this sufficient amends to appease the 
Guru? Such thoughts embarrassed R&mAnuja. He would how- 
ever go and tender ample apologies. So he walked on to his 
Guru’s dwelling. In an attitude of veneration and humility, 
he prostrated himself, and telling him how he had made expia- 
tion for his past conduct, begged of him to panlon that for 
which he was not personally ltJsponsible. Purna said lie never 
knew there was anything to pardon, but that on the other hand 
Ramanuja was daily growing in his estimation. “ Sire,’’ said 
Ramanuja, rising, “to till the blank causd by Yilmuna’s sudden 
departure, to supply yourself the lack caused by my having, 
by a hair's breadth, missed conversing with him cm matters 
spiritual, deign to impart to me all t lie mystt rios of religion, that 
great Guru of mine lias entrusted to you for the purpose.” 
“With the greatest delight,” replied Purna, “I have been 
eargerly looking out for an occasion like tin's. There shall be 
no more delay. The essence of our Holy Faith, know, is embed- 
ded in the Dvaya-nmntra. * O, its greatness! its power and 
strength ! A gem, eternal, holy, — the very gist of the Vedas! 
Purifying, meritorious! Rich, world-winning, and healing M . 
So saying, he briefly imparted to Raimlnuja the essentials of 
religion contained in it, viz., There is but Out God. He is All - 
merciful , and is there) ore our Wat/. He is All -knowing and 
All-mighty , and is therefore Our God . The souls 9 end and aim is 
therefore eternal living service it His Holy Feet. There are 
glorious amplifications of this truth yet. Learn these at the 

1 wiMqtqq-Wgq i 

II tKiUyapa-Sumluto,.} 


Oil. XV. 


94 THE LIFE OF ltAMANUJA. 

feet of Tiru-k-k6Miyur Nambi ( = Groshtlii-Purna), who was 
au intimate disciple of Y&umna. 

R&mamija took leave and proceeded to Tiru-k-koftiyur 
(near Pudukbta); and, on arriving there asked the passers-by 
where Gbshthi-Purna was living. “There, in that poor low 
hut/’ said they, pointing. Ramanuja fell on his knees, and all 
the way from where he stood up to the hut, be went prostrate. 
Only those knew Nambi well, who knew liow not to see defects 
in their Masters, but only saw perfections, and these to exag- 
geration.* R&m&nuja approached Nambi and falling at his 
feet prayed : “ Teach me, Holy Sire, all the recondite doctrines 
of our Faith. I am the humble ft j ct* of Maha-purna.” In order to 
tost the strength of R&m&uuj’a professions, Goshthi-Pilrna said 
in an off-hand manner : 44 What have I to tell, and to whom 
and gave him no countenance. Ramanuja never spoke another 
word, either of supplication or of reproach; but simply pros- 
trated himself and returned to Kbil (=:Srirangam). 

G. Pftrna had to visit Srirangam for the season's festivi- 
ties connected with that Holy Fane. He came and paid homage 
to the Lord llanga, who was pleased to dower him with all 
honors, and commanded, through the officiating priest, : — “In- 
struct our R&m&tiuja in all the occult lore of the Faith.” 44 But, 
0. Glorious God!’ said G. Purna, 44 It is Thou who hast 
ruled : Tell not those who have not been apprenticed at least for a 
I/ear.* Reveal not high truths to the non-serious , nan-dutiful , 
who love we not, fyc. ? So that if I have to carry out the 
strict letter of Thy law, I must wait and try Thy Rdm&nuja.” 

1 See Hierarchic Tabic, No. 24 in our Lives of Azhv&rs. 

3 This attitude of mind towards a these things prepare the soul to 
Teacher constitutes a real disciple t recognise his Guru when he ap- 
and only then is his successful pears. Many a cue misses his 
spiritual career assured. “The teacher by the mental habit of 
glad and cordial recognition of ex- fixing the attention on blemishes 
oetlence,” says A. Bosant, “vrher- rather than on beauties, by seeing 
ever found, the checking of the only the sun-spots and not the 
critical and carping spirit that Sun.” [Value of Devotion, p. 263 f. 
fixes cm defects and ignores virtues, Theos : Review. Yol. XXY1], 

* This is the Indian idiom for a “ true disciple.*’ Let our readers 
become accustomed to it. 

4 [Bh. lit, X 7111-64 j 



CH. XT. 


RAMANUJA AND MANTRA. 


05 


“ Not so in his case,” answered Ranga, “ as he is fully quali- 
fied according to the requirements of the text : — 

Body , wealth , mind , life itself, belong to the Gum , $*c., 1 and 
therefore he may be instructed. 

“ Come to my place,” said G. Purna to RAmanu ja. and left 
Srirangam. R&uuinujawent all the way, as directed. toT. Kdtti- 
yur again. But when he went there ; “Not this time; can you go 
now and come again ?” told Purna. Ramilnuja never thought of 
a protest, and never felt irritated, but simply obeyed the com- 
mand, and returned to Srirangam. Eighteen times , 8 thus, it is 
chronicled, did R&manuja journey to T. K&tfiyftr and return, 
each time being told the same thing. G. Pthna had at the 
same time no other idea except that of testing R&m&nuja’s 
faith and zeal, and testing him through an ordeal of novitiate 
probation, to see if his spirit was strong and capable of over- 
coming passions of the mind. Had his will been weak, he 
would long ago have given up his endeavor as unworthy of 
of pursuit. Had he succumbed under the weight of disap- 
pointment and chagrine, that would have proved him an un- 
worthy disciple, to whom it would have be* u useless to reveal 
occult truths. Such wen 4 Puma’s thoughts. And on the other 
hand, R&nu\nuja’s tenacity of purpose was raising him every 
time in Purna’ s estimation. When he returned to Srirangam 
for the eighteenth time, however, he felt somewhat, and was 
moved to tears at the futility of his repeated efforts, and was 
fouud deeply revolving in his mind, r s to what he should do 
next; when a disciple of G. Purna chanced to come from T. 
Kftttiyur, and came on a visit to Ramfluuja. Ribmlnuja, bid- 
ding him be seated, and after preliminaries were over, poured 
before him his bitter grievances, and consulted him as to how 
he should make himself worthy. And he finished, the consulta- 
tion by saying Is not God pledged to save us from evil, 
and grant us bliss Y Even so are God’s regents on earth. How 
am I to become worthy, if by the worthy, my unworthiness is 
not effaced ; and unless the benefactor gives, how is the receiver 

4 See Mu >n uhshupprtdt, Intro : to Charuma-Sloka. 



96 


THE LIFE OF RAMANUJA. 


CH. XV. 


to be blessed P ” The disciple returned to T. Kottiyfir, and told 
his master how R&manuja was pining for knowledge. u Has 
he such keen appetite ? Then I must at once feed him. A 
moment’s delay more on my part brings sin. Let R&m&nuja 
come to me alone with his staff and pennant. 1 So did G. Purna 
exclaim ; and bade the same disciple go forth at once and bring 
Rilmanuja to him. Swiftly came lie, and prostrating himself 
before R&m&nuja begged of him to proceed. He started 
immediately;, taking his two intimate disciples with him, 
KvtrdSa and D&?arathi ; and fell at Purna’s feet. “ These 
instead of thyself alone, as I had commanded ! ” exclaimed 
Pdrnairate. “Holy Sire!” explained Itamanuja, “ ‘come 
with staff and pennant’ was thy order. So I have come.” 
“ Staff and pennant !, which is thy staff, which is thy pennant ? ” 
asked Purna. “ Sire, DaSarathi is my staff ; K fires a is my 
pennant. I am never without them, nor they without me.” 
Pftrna’s irritation vanished and he was moved by Ramanuja's 
exemplary conduct and astuteness. “ Well,” spoke Purna — who 
by the bye had been commanded by Lord Ranga in a dream 
again, to unbosom Holy secrets to Ramanuja, as the latter was no 
other than Adisesha himself incarnated — “ I make exceptions of 
these, thy Inseparables ; 1 command thee that to no others 
shalt thou impart the sacred truths I am going to divulge to 
thee.” So saying, he led Ram&nuja to a secret corner of his 
hut, and there revealed to him the hidden truths of the Tim - 
mantra , or the Mantra of the Aslitaksbara-Upanisliad, the eight- 
syllabled and three* worded Mantra, the gravity of which is thus 
described : — “ Pranava the first ; Namas the middle ; and X<1rd- 
yana the last. So runs the Light-syllabled Mantra, to be 
ever used in prayer by seekers after God. It is the granter 
of every boon, and promote!- of devotion and dispassion.” 2 


1 Staff is th e Tridandu of the Sanvasin, and pennant is the colored 
piece of cloth attached to its top. 

gi%gfowrcg.i 

„ II [ Sdivatn-Samhitaf] 

Also see our Lives o f Saints and Wisdom of Saints for detailed 
explanations. 



ctf. XV. 


KAM^NUJA’S PROCLAMATION. 


97 


u This, 1 * he said, “ is the Mantra which all our Saints and* 
Sages constantly recited and pondered over. It is the besi- 
ower of eternal bliss.” Ramanuja reverently received the 
teachings, and considered himself now as regenerated and 
saved. But he could not contain the truths within him, though 
imparted under pledge of secrecy. “ Why are such truths so 
jealously guarded from all mortals ? If God is not for sinners, 
from whom is He P And therefore is not His Holy Word a mes- 
sage for all P Why should mortals be denied its saving power ? 
But I shall not make a secret of it. I shall divulge it to all 
regardless of consequences." So did Ritmanuja reflect and 
reason. Compassion for all men burned in his heart. So ho 
made up his mind to proclaim the Word to the public. 

The next day, he entered into the big and elevated hall 1 
of Terk-k&zhv&n, or the Lord Nrisimha, Resident of Tiru-k* 
kottiyur, invited all to assemble there ; and his full heart flowed 
to them in the revealing of the precious truths reflating to Spirit, 
which he had learnt from G. Purna, under vow of secrecy. 
This news reached and roused the indignation of G, Purna. 
He commanded R&miinuja to appear before him ; and asked 
in tones of anger : — “ Culprit ! did we not strictly enjoin 
thee not to reveal our noble truths of religion to the 
undeserving vulgar P How durst thou misbehave, and outrage 
promises made ?’ “ Revered Sire," submitted Rilm&nuja, 

“I confess 1 am guilty of disobedience. But I taught the truths 
to others to glorify thee and thy lore." “ That is not it/* retorted 
Pfirna, “ the disobedience on thy part is the question. That, thou 
hast glaringly shown. What is thy punishment for it ?” “ My 
punishment is certainly hell, Sire,” submitted Ramanuja. 
That thou well knewest," protested I'Arn.i, “ and yet what made 
thee to violate my law P” “ Sire,” said R&m&nuja, pray 
listen to me calmly. Disobedience surely deserves hell. I 
must be sent there, no doubt. But, holy Sire, may I submit 
that it is but little sacrifice for one sinner to make, inasmuch 

1 This is railed fclie gopnnun or pinnacle, as sung by AndLv.a'ippang&r 
in his Kam&ii u ja-n md n ntha-sta ra :« — 


13 



08 


liAMAXUJA’S DEFENCE. 


OH. XV. 


as it brings salvation to many. 1 Moreover all the merit of that 
whole-sale salvation goes to you, because of the Holy Secret 
ha\ing emanated from your great self? These reasons embol- 
dened me to infringe thy holy command. It was compassion 
for mankind that rendered me blind to thy injunctions. 2 * I ask 
forgiveness. Do with mo, holy Sire, what thou wilt.” Gr. Purna 
was struck dumb at this reasoning and his own heart moved. 
‘Oh, that this idea never entered my crippled heart,” said he 
excitedly, “my heart, which would not ere this warm with 
love for mankind. I am hated. Strange I never felt the all- 
embracing love of Kiltnanuja. Ramanuja ! Yatiraja! Indeed 
thou art He, come on earth. I see it all now.” Thus 
vehemently venting forth the new and strange emotions stirr- 
ing in his breast Pftrna rushed forward and embracing Rama- 
nuja continued : — “Holy son, thou art mine, my own indeed 
art thou. Thy name shall henceforth be Ember iimdndr . The 
creed that 1 gave thee was hither! o known as the Greed of 
the flujh Vedanta, but henceforth it shall be known to the world 
as the Creed of K mbertomhid r. Not only that, which thou hast 
already heard from me, shalt thou proclaim from the house-tops, 
but more shalt thou hear from me. Secrets there are yet. Come, 
wilt thou be, or art thou, satisfied, as thou seemest, with what 
thou bast got Y' 9 So went on Purna, in the exuberance of his 
strangely awakened love for Ramanuja. “ Holy Sire,” softly said 
IlAnuinuja”, I am not to lay down law for you. Had l in the least 
thought that there were yet other Secrets than those you have 
already so graciously divulged, and therefore stood in need, that 
would prove lack of trust in me; as if I harboured doubts 
as to your sincerity. But if I say now : ‘ 1 need no more/ that 
would prove that I had not well understood the bearings of the 
first set of secrets given me. So I hold my peace. It is for you 
therefore, Master, to decide in these circumstance and from 
events which have iianspired, what I deserve.” My own sou, 
Ramanuja, dear !” said Purna, “ then let it be deferred. Go 


1 Op. this what lUmanuja (i. <?., Lakshin aim) said :~~ 

“ [U tiara It&m ; 105-8], 

* Read Pp. ?.5Gl, Bhagavad vishay a m . Vol. VII. End. (TVlngu edition.) 



CH. XV, 


FURTHER MYSTERIES. 


99 


now and come again, but mind, come alone. ** RAm&nuja 
stretched himself before his Guru, rose and left for Srirangam 
with h;s 4 staff and pennant.’ 

Some time after, Ramanuja journeyed, as bidden, to his 
Master for further instructions, and humbled himself before 
him. “ Come now,” said G. Purna, clasping Ramanuja’s hand 
lovingly. Taking him to a sequestered spot and adopting every 
precaution that no one may disturb them, 44 touch my feet ' 9 
said lie, and promise thou wilt not venture on further dis- 
closures of our most cherished secrets.” On RAmanuja solemnly 
plighting his word, Purna began in the manner of Lord 
Krishna : — 

1 Listen, Arjuna, again , to My lofty speech, the Sea it of 
Secrets. I say it as it is good for liter, ami as thou art my friend 
and devotee: [Ilk : Gi. XVI 1 1. 61 ] 

44 It is the Last Word (Ohara mu -stole a) of the spiritual 
science, contained in the Lord’s verse ” said Purna, Thus: — 

“ Give uji entirely all other Ways, 

( 7/' s >se Me ahotr as Th y 1 f ay ; 

Thee, from all sins , I will absolve, 

No more then shaft thou mourn X J Bit : (}i. XV III. 66,] 

“ Son, reveal not these lloly Truths to the unprepa red, un- 
deserving, unserving , and haters of God (Me).'* [Jilt : Gi. XVII f. 
67. j Ramanuja, if you value these Truths, then let not atheists 
and heretics hear them. Guard them against such. 

“ Let it be, Sire, as thou wilt ” said Ritnianuja, “ but may 
I not make exceptions of such worthy God-loving souls as 
KureSa. How can 1 conceal from him ? ” 4k He may he worthy” 
enjoined Purna,” but our Systran lay conditions such as : — 

44 One year, half year , quarter year at leaM, shall the postulant 
he examined in every tvay • and then shall the Guru initiate him, 



100 


KftBESA TAUGHT. 


OH. XV. 


graciously , disinterestedly } And therefore, after putting him 
to test and seeing that he really craves for knowledge during 
this trial-period teaehe him.” R&m&nuja received these com- 
mands and returned to Srirangam as a victor returning home 
after a successful campaign. He thought to himself that even 
like the Eighteen Chapters of the Gita preached by Sri Krishna, 
befoie the Last Word (Gharama-slolca) was revealed, in order 
to test Arjuna’s mind, were the eighteen trips imposed upon 
him by his Guru. “I aui Crown Prince now,” he exclaimed 
rapturously, “and I am heir to the Kingdom of God/’ 

Kuresa was now longing to learn this Truth. He was 
anxiously waiting for au opportunity to declare his mind. Ho 
found one and throwing himself at the feet of Ramanuja said : 
“ Holy Sire! how 1 realise the effects of Yamuna’s petitions to 
Lord Varada. By them have you become the Pioneer of our 
Faith after discarding all wordly concerns. A holy band is 
gathering round you. 1 am happily one. See, how again 
Yamuna’s disciple, G. Prtrna, has dowered you with his special 
grace. May I not he so blessed by you in turn P ” “Son, 
Injloved,” said RamAnuja, “ you must bide your time one year. 
That is my command.” “Master,” humbly submitted Kilr^sa, 
“ One year! Ah, it is intolerably long. Can 1 stand it ? Shall 1 
live 80 long, so long ? I have heard that one month’s fasting and 
lying at the door of the Master, is considered a good equivalent 
for the year’s probation ” So saying, Kurd 3a put his word 
immediately into execution. Ramanuja was moved by pity, and 
at the end of the month, lie initiated him into the tinal princi- 
ples of the Gita 1 2 

Dasamth i was watching all the while. He found no rest 
for his mind till he learnt the saving truths. So he approached 
Ramanuja and fell at his feet. “Teach me, also, I pray, 
Master,” said he. “ Son, my permission was for Kuresa only. 
You must go to P&rfta and obtain his permission.” D&sarathi 
ran to T. KbUiytir, and threw himself before Purna. But 
Ptirna never gave him countenance. D&s&rathi held to his 


1 Soe Chapter VI, p. 40. 

a See Mu mn1t$hv ppttdi t Introct : to Chura wu-S l oka. 




CH. XV. 


dAsarathi taught. 


101 


resolve, and repeated his importunity ; but Purna as resolutely 
turned away from him. This went on for six months. If 
D&Sarathi had any pride of birth or learning, this probation 
was good for him. He humbled himself again. Purna now 
glanced at him. “You are one of Ram&nuja’s favoured, I 
surmise,” asked he. “Yes, Sire ! I am known as D&sarathi; 1 
am come to learn the cream of Git ^teachings from yon.” Purna 
said: “Let every trace in thee cease, of the threefold egotism 
which troubles mankind, that of talent, wealth, and ancestry* 1 
Ramanuja will be the best judge of thee in these matters. Go 
to him and wait on his will and pleasure. He will bless thee.” 
“ Be it as you will, Sire,” said 1) as a rath i and humbly retired to 
Srira ngani. DadarathPs return, R&manuja was ivatching, and 
when he cauie and fell at his feet, and related all that took 
place at T. Kottiyur, Ramanuja, in the midst of many assembled 
disciples, said : — “ Do you see ? IMsarathi is now a changed 
person. If he had any notion of self-esteem before, how it hath 
disappeared now I What a transformation effected by my Guru \ 
Rise, Dasarat hi ! thou art now qualified to hear high lessons 
of the Spirit. I will reveal them at once.” So saying, he 
communicated to him the quintessence of the GitiVteachings, 
and exclaimed joyously. *• Aye, now indeed, J may claim as 
my own, my Staff and Vmmint A 2 

1 i 

2 I.e. t the two dose disciples, Kurdu ami Dasarutiii. 



102 


RAMANUJA’S INTERPRETATIONS. 


CH. XVI. 


CHAPTER XVI. 

RAMANUJA’S INTERPRETATIONS. 

Some time elapsed thus. Goshthi-Purna came on a visit 
to Srirangam, where he met his college friend Tiiumalai- 
Atidtln (Maladhara), 1 * * He took him with him and went to see 
R&tinmuja in his retreat. Ramanuja on seeing his Guru come, 
rose and receiving him with due respect, entered into conversa- 
tion. “R&m&nuja! " he addressed, “you are now to hear the 
utterances of our Holy Saints, the Tiru-vay mozhi of St. Nam- 
mazhvar, to begin with. I commend you to the care of my 
friend Maladhara, who has been full well instructed in that 
lore by YA-murnlch&rya.'* So saying, ho placed Ramanuja's 
hands in those of Maladhara, and begging of the latter to take 
his (rust through a course of the Prabandhas, left for his own 
town. 

They began the new course of studies. Rut as Maladhara 
gave out the explanations o*f each verse as he had heard them 
from his Guru, Yamuna, Ramanuja gave expanded or im- 
proved versions of the same. Maladhara used to say that he 
never remembered such explanations given out by Yamuna 
“ But they are right, Sire! and Yamuna's mind was really 
that,” Ramanuja used to reply. In due course, they came to 
the verse: Ariyndc-kdlaffu [ T. Vay-mozhi II, 3, 3]. Mala- 
dhara explained it thus :~() God, when I was ignorant, thou 
g a vest me the k)it>wledge of my relation to Thee , and yet Thou 
hast confuted me in this carcase icin' ch destroys this knots! edge 9 
“This cannot be, Sire ! ” protested Ramanuja. “ if you consider 
the trend of the whole decad here [II, 3], it is an acknowledg- 
ment of all the manifold good, God did to the Saint. While 
so, one verse in the middle of the Decad cannot convey an 
accusation against God. So, by a transposition of the terms of 
the verse in question, the meaning becomes : — “ 1 teas 

yet confined in this carcase which destroys knowledge , thou were 
pleased to bestow knowledge of my relation to Thee, () God !”' 1 “I 

1 See No. 25, Hierarchic Table, in oar Lives of Azhmrs . 

3 React vi r ought to read the original of this in the 2nd Volume of 

Bhuyu uttl* visit e i a w , if they with to fully enjoy this intellectual banquet. 



ClI. XVI. 


R A M A XU J .VS 1 XT RRPUKT ATIOXS. 


103 


don’t remember Yamuna so explaining to me,*’ expostulated 
MalMhara, 44 1 like not such interpretations from thee.” So sav- 
ing, he ceased teaching further. The news of this interruption 
of studies reached the ears of G. Ptlrna. He journeyed thereon 
to Srirangam to inquire into the cause. Meeting Maiadhara, he 
asked for an explanation : — “ Compeer 1 ” began Mabldlmra, 
u our studies never go on smoothly, for Kuniilnuja, I had, is too 
much for me. He has an eternal store of new interpretations. 
For instance, we had a passage-at-arms over St. NammAzh- 
var’s verse Ariyn Ac. [II. 3. 3.]. Whereas I construed it as 
conveying a spirit of invective against God for His ways of 
dealing with souls, Ramanuja construed it as an expression of 
gratitude to God, so as to make verse 3 harmonize with the 
other verses of this Deead. Such a pi*otesting spirit* seemed 
to me a violation of a disciple’s decorum, while his constructions 
also seemed at vai iance with our Yamuna’s mind. Hence I had 
to stop studying with an eccentric pupil like Ramanuja ” “ Hut, 
pardon me,” interrupted Purna, Ramanuja is right, for / 
remember our Yamuna having so explained. Yon seem to have 
forgotten. Friend ! Knmanu ja is incapable of going wrong. 
If any one knows Yamuna’s mind, it is he. Look upon him as 
like another Krishna who went to Sandipani 1 for instruction. 
Yon are but a pretence. He knows all. No more l>e under the 
delusion that you are teaching him truths not already known to 
him. So, permit me as a fiiend, to lay it on you henceforth 
as a sacred duty to continue the Tiru -vay-mozhi from where 
you dropped it ; even if, to do so, it were necessary on your part 
to wait on RArnanuja, instead of his waiting on you. He is 
such disciple as his Gurus must go to him ” So saying, 
G. Purna went to Ramanuja’s monastery, accompanied by 
MAiiklhara and Mali a purna. Seeing them, Ramanuja rose 
exultingiy, an 1 prostrating himself, welcomed them all. 
G. Purna thus made peace and saw to the Prabandha-studies 
being again pursued in right earnest. 

They sat to the study again under these terms of concilia- 
tion. A passage was again being explained by Maiadhara. “ Not 

1 Consult ITs/i »«•/*« rri tin. 



104 


ttX&lANUJA’S GLIEATNESS. 


CH. XVI. 


80, Sire! '* interrupted RAm&nuja. Yamuna meant it another 
w ay/* “ How dost thou know Y&muna ? ** excitedly queried 
M&l&dhara,of R&m&nuja, “ thou hast never conversed with him 
once m thy days. Thou but sawst him after his death. And 
yet Thou darest to interpret his mind to me 1 ** “ With thy leave, 
Master/* submitted Ramanuja, “ look upon me as the Rkalavya 1 
to Ytauna, That will explain how I understand him.’* “ I 
understand thee now, Holy Ramanuja. I find the words of my 
friend G. Pdrna indeed confirmed by my own experience of 
thee. Thou art even an Avat&ra. To me art thou teacher, not 
/ to thee. I have learnt from thee many things that I had not 
learnt fron Y&muna.” So saying, M&l&dhara rose and made 
obeisance to Ramanuja. 

V 

Thus, without further impediments to progress, the study 
of a course of the Prabandhas was in due time completed. 
Mah&phrna now suggested to Ramanuja that there were other 
mysteries yet, which if he so desired, he might learn from the 
venerable Tiruvaranga-p-perumal Araiyar. Ram&nuja took 
the hint at once, and from that day forward engaged himself 
for six months to offer milk daily to Araiyar as a premium for 
learning. And to this he added the service of preparing for 
Araiyar a turmeric -paste ( ’maujal-bifvpu ) for ablution-purposes, 
when tire adhyayau a- festival came round in the year. One day 
the preparation was found not quite to Araiyar’s liking. R&- 
m&nuja threw it away, and immediately prepared it anew. 
Araiyar was watching this solicitude on Ramanuja’s part. 
“ He loves me as one may love God. He loves me, a son of 
God, as God Himself incarnate/* thought Araiyar. “ Come, 
noble disciple/' said he, “ you are fit to know the highest my- 
stery. By your services to me you have earned it. So you 
lay claim to all that I have. Know then that God's apostles 
and representatives on earth are God Himself visible in that 
form. Our S&stras hence proclaim : — 


1 See 132nd Adhy&ya, Adi-Parva, Mah&bh&rata for the Story, fika* 
lavya made a mud-image of Drdna, and learnt from this mere image of a 
Guru, all the science of archery. 



CH, XVI. 


SAVIOUR’S GREATNESS. 


105 


“ The Guru is Parabrahinan Himself ; is one's real Wealth; 
is the Object oj love , and our Itejuge. He is our Wisdom and the 
Way. Who f reaches such a Saviour , is the Saviour of Saviours." 1 * * 
“ Know that God asleep is the Guru awake ; God invisible is the 
Guru visible and moving. The Gurus bring messages of God. 
They are God's mouthpieces. Through them, God chooses to 
teach mankind. Look upon the Guru (Saviour) then as God 
Himself on earth. Look upon him as St. Madhurakavi a looked 
upon St. Hammazhvar, as Lakshmana upon Kama and 
Safcrughna on Bharata. This is called the Punch a niupdya* or 
the fifth and ultimate means of reaching God.” Thus did 
Araiyar descant on the greatness and virtue of Saviours, as 
the constituted channels through which God becomes most 
accessible to mankind. “ They are appointed and sent by God 
to perform the functions of salvation. They are empowered 
mediators between man and God. Who reject them reject God, 
and their salvation U imperilled thereby. This truth is hard to 
be realized by mankind, which is apt to deny the Saviour by 
the very fact of His moving with them, living with thorn and 
sharing with them all their joys and sorrows. The very inti- 
macy breeds contempt. Those only steer clear of this danger 
of denial, who can pierce through the veil of the* visible sym- 
bol of the Guru. Kamanuja! seriously reflect over this truth 
and be blessed.” Obtaining this truth, Kutnanuja became 
supremely happy. 4 


1 t ti 

l Ku « i fit j x( .§« m h iUi J . 
iicharntru}. 

* Read his life in our Lives of b.hrur *. [See No. 10 in the Table, 
Ibid]. 

8 The other four Means being Karma, Juana, Bhakti and Prapatli. 
It is also called the Churtnua-purvu, Sec Table of Soteriology, pp. 
573-574, onr lihugavad-yHd. 

* I and mtj Father avu one , said Christ. Our U paid shads say: — 
WtU [Subtila: Up. end j. 

That this is an old Indie doctrine may now be understood by all 
who may have doubted it ere this. 


14 



106 


MANY GURUS EXPLAINED. 


CH. XYI. 


Here it may be asked, how one disciple can have more than 
one Guru V It was Mah&purna who acted the first sacramental 
Guru to Ram&nuja, at MadhuiAntakam, as already narrated. 
And ^et we find Ramanuja resorting to many Teachers for 
instruction. There is no serious spiritual objection to such a 
procedure, it is stated. For a king may entrust more than 
one minister of his, with the wealth of his realm, to be made 
over to his heir when he comes of age. Each minister dis- 
charges his particular trust in due season. Such was the case 
with R&m&nuja. For the great Y&muna had made many, the 
custodians of Spiritual Truths, which were to be imparted to 
llamftmija, each in his turn. Ramanuja was to have received 
them directly from Yamuna, hut fates had ordained otherwise. 
Ritm&nuja’ft hopes, which had been dashed to the ground when 
Yilmuna suddenly passed away, were now fulfilled. Y&mnna 
had signified to his disciples that R&manuja was to be the 
High Pontiff of their resuscitated Ancient Church ; and the 
deposit of spiritual truths lie had left with them was to be 
placed in his hands. The Gurus of Ramanuja therefore were 
thus bound to discharge their sacred trust. When they did so, 
each in his time, they were relieved and happy. It may be 
the teacher, or the disciple. The canon laid down is that 
whoso is qualified to receive spiritual truths must be told them, 
regardless of formalities otherwise prescribed, for the disciple 
to wait on the teacher and so on. A teacher, it is even said, 
becomes a teacher only when he has found a fit pupil, only 
when he has transferred to him liis wisdom. Thus RAmanu- 
ja^s teachers became entitled to that honor only after teaching 
R&m&nuja, and disciples became true disciples only after be- 
coming disciples of R&manuju, R&nu\nuja is therefore des- 
cribed as the Central Gem in the precious necklace made up of 
the gems of Teachers and Disciples of the Yaishnava apostolic. 



CH. XVII. 


UNITY OF GODHQOD. 


107 


CHAPTER XVH. 

RAMANUJA’S MINISTRY BEGINS. 

Ramanuja’s studentship was now complete. He was 
already spiritual before intellectual. The naturally spiritual 
man was by means of intellectual accomplishments, to bequeath 
a legacy to the world in the shape of written works. He com- 
posed three in the beginning embodying the principles and prac- 
tices of the Vaishnava faith. These were the gadya-traya (The 
Three Proses), the Daily Worship- Manual called the Nitya, 
and the Commentaries on the Bhagavad-Gitd} The cardinal 
doctrine established by him in these works is the Unity of 
Godhood expressed by the term N ar ay ana of the Taittirlya 
Upanishad and others . 1 2 And Ramanuja disseminated the 
doctrines among many who were gathering about him ; and 
thus did his ministry begin. 

It was the practice of Ramanuja, as a mendicant who had 
abandoned the world, to visit seven houses daily and collect 
alms. Only upon this is the Sany&siu to subsist, according to 
the Yati-dharma. Alms-begging is enjoined on the principle that 
the ascetic has nothing to call, or ought not to own, any wordly 
goods as belonging to him, as such owning begets a series of 
attachments necessarily and weds him again to wordly interests ; 
and to show to the world that the world to the spiritual man is 
beggared before God ; in other words, beggary means death to 
the world in order to live unto the spirit. This is the spiritual 
interpretation of the donee’s mendicancy compassing eleemosy- 
nary merit to the donor. Both are abused in India. The world- 
ly man ought not to beg, and the spiritual man ought not to 
bestow, — this is reversed in modern times. The law is : the 
material man is the custodian of the spiiitual man’s body, 
and the spiritual man, of the material man's soul. The com- 
modities of exchange between the two are substance and spirit. 
Each party has his laws and conditions for the exchange. 
Hence a spiritual-beggar is no burden upon society. Other 

1 This is the one we have English-translated. 

• Fide Introduction to our Lives of Saint#, and Topic $4 in our Diving 
Wisdom, for a disquisition. 



108 


RATIONALE OF BEGGING, Ac. 


OH. XVII. 


beggars are indeed so, and ought to be interdicted from their 
'provisional preying upon others’ honest labour. A spiritual 
beggar is a benefactor inasmuch as his very presence among 
men, not to say of the influence of his words on them, is a 
great moral and spiritual influence, elevating them from the 
gross to the etherial, from the fleeting to the lasting. Such a 
monk-mendicant was our Ramanuja . 1 

We have said above that Ramanuja’s main endeavour was 
to establish the Unity of Godhood. In doing so, he did not 
abstract God from His Universe,- — a process tried by monism 
ending in negation -, but restored God to His Universe in 
all the fullness of His Infinite nature, so to say. By his 
practice, he illustrated it, even when he went about his begg- 
ing excursions. For it is chronicled that Ramanuja, while so 
engaged one day in the throughfarcs of Srirangam, a few boys, 
form mere frolic, waylaid him and pointing to a figure like man 
which by their toes they drew on the dust, said : “ Boasted 
friar, here is your God. If Ho is everywhere, here He. must 
be. Worship Him then.” Ramanuja was delighted to hear 
the boys sermon to him thus. Anon ho put bis bowl down, 
prostrated himself before the Figure on the floor, and thank- 
ing the boys went his way. 

On another occasion he came across a number of boys in 
the streets. They were enacting all that they saw their elders 
doing in < he Teuiplc. They had described in the dust a diagram 
of the Srirangam Temple, with several chambers allotted 
therein for God, for His Consort, His Saints and so on. Regular 
worship they commenced, and it was now time to offer food to 
the several Deities. The boys procured the food easily ; for 


i 


Apaatambu in hits D bar nm- Sutras, says fll. 5, 10J : — 

feifi w iilti 


mv i'wtjj ii2ii 


Li iliKiftw ii3ii 


The gi»t of this is that unless conditions stated are present, begging 
is to be discouraged. Read infra, Ramanuja’s explanations to Kongil- 
pinitti, on why great men go to poor houses making bagging but a 
pretext. 



CH. XVII. 


kAmAnuja.foisoneix 


109 


they gathered the road-dust, made it into convenient heaps, 
and offered the same to their God pictured on the ground. 
Food so consecrated should be distributed next, to all the 
worshippers. That is the rule. So the boys did ; and finding 
Ram&nuja in their midst: “Gods food, Sire, take,” cried they. 
R&m&nuja fell reverently on the floor, and rising, as reverently 
stretched his hands and received the food and went his way. 

Ram&nuja's stewardship in the Temple necessarily gave 
rise to bickei'ings on the part of the priests. They were 
jealous of his discipline and his growing power. Why not do 
away with this Sanyasin, and let us freely revel in corruption ? 
thought they. They would poison him, decided they. To 
one of the seven houses which Ramanuja was found frequenting 
for alms, they went and prevailed upon the owner to mix 
poison with the alms and give it to him. In India, the house- 
wife is to perform the duty of doling out alms. So the husband 
told the house-wife to do the nefarious deed. She objected, but 
he persisted. She was obliged to obey. Ramanuja came. With 
hands somewhat trembling, she doled out poisoned food to him, 
and prostrating herself before him, abruptly retired with eyes 
downcast. Her manner, lie observed, was somewhat peculiar 
that day. This raised suspicion. He thought he would place 
the food before a dog. He did, and lo i it made the dog sick and 
giddy ; it fell and died. “ This is jood with poison (sa-yara)” 
cried Ramanuja: “ Let the poison (gara) go to its birth-place 
(sfigara)” 1 So saying with a pun on the word sagara , he cast 
the food into the waters of the Kaveri river close by . 1 

From that day Ramanuja would fast, but soon news of this 
flew to G. Purna who left from T. Kottiyur for Srirangam to set 
matters right before it was too late. Purna had neared Sriran- 
gam and was crossing the dry bed of the Kaveri river in the 
midday sun, which was scorching the head and the feet. 
R&manuja, with his chosen, went to meet the Giun, and fell 
prostrate before him on the burning sands. Purna did not bid 

1 This has reference to the Churning of the Milk-See Legend, when 
poison was one of the products of that sea. 



110 


kidImbi-Icchan. 


CH. XVII. 


him rise. Kid&mbi-Aceh&n by name, a disciple of B&ra&nuja, 
who loved him much and who had accompanied him, watched 
this with painful expectancy. Finding the suspense insupport- 
able, and provoked beyond patience, he cried to Purna : “ Sire ! 
are these the exactions of civilities between Teachers and Dis- 
ciples ? Doth thy code of etiquette permit such infliction of cruel- 
ty P Doth thy stony heart demand, that a tender flower like my 
R&manuja should be fried and roasted before thee like this ? 
Hast thou sense P Hast thou the milk of humanity ? I care not 
for thy absurd regulation.” Thus fulminating his objurgation 
at the Guru, he swiftly raised Ramanuja and hugged him to his 
breast. A moment of the must painful anxiety and suspense, 
it was too, for Purna ; for he was by this means trying to find 
out the person, who truly loved Ram&nuja. Looking now at 
Aoeban with eyes beaming with approbation, Purna said : 
“ Acch&n, thou art the sort of person I have been looking for. 
Now that I have found thee, my fears for Ramanuja’s future 
safety are dispelled. I appoint thee his body-guard ; and no 
one but thyself shall cook for R&m&nuja. Thou alone shalt 
discharge that most important and holy duty henceforth.’’ 
K id bi- Aeolian became thus the M ah cm asdch dry a , or Rama- 
nuja's Master <f the Hearth. 

Thus shielded from schemes against his life, Ram&nuja 
was spiritedly diffusing to all earnest comers, the philosophy 
of true religion. An important event came about at this junc- 
ture* A profound Brahmau scholar there was, by name 
Yajna-miirti, Wherever he went, lie entered into debates with 
learned men on knotty points of the Ved&nta, invariably 
carrying off the palm of victory. He went for a bath in holy 
Ganga, and there also he entered the arena of Ved&ntic dis- 
cussion and vanquished the disputants. He became the one- 
staff ed Sany&sin, — a proclamation this that be was professor in 
the successful establishment of the Mdyd-vdda , or the iilusori- 
ness of the Kosmos. 

Fascinated by subtilities of his sophistry, many became 
adherents to his cause ; and he rose in fame, and pride as well. 
But he was told that there was a R&ra&nuja at Srirangam, and 
until he crossed swords with him, his victory would not be 




CH. XVII. 


yajna*m6rti. 


Ill 


complete. This roused his vanity. Mightily did he prepare 
himself for the contest. He armed himself with heaps of 
hooks and arguments, and came down to Srirangain, with his 
band of disciples, and with all the ostentation and demonstration 
of a big Pandit. Dashing up to Ramanuja in all the style of 
an egotist, he invited him to an intellectual warfare. RAmA- 
nuja declared he was ready. “ What is the wager for our 
combat ? ”, he asked of the savant. “ If I am defeated,” lie 
said, “ I will embrace your faith.” “ If you win,” said RAmA. 
nuja, “ I shall give up my ministry in the world.” So staking, 
they fixed eighteen days for the discussion. For sixteen days 
it waxed hot ; and yei there appeared no odds between them. 
But on the seventeenth day, the balance began to swing in 
favour of Yajivi-mucti, Ramanuja having felt the want of an 
argument to overpower the fiery array of them on the side of 
the adversary. Yajna-miirti, leading the signs of discomfi- 
ture, and puffed with pride, left RAmAnuja in that situation, 
as if in contempt, and stalked out of the monastery for that 
day. RAmAnuja felt the situation keenly, and poignant grief 
entered into his heart. Tortured w ith thought, he shut himself 
up in the chapel, and after worshipping his own Lord Yarada 
there in the usual routine, prayed to Him thus in agony : 
— “ Holy God ! if I, a weak mortal, am repulsed in the fight, 
Tky Cause can never be repulsed — a cause which has been esta- 
blished on earth of yore, by such saints as NammAzhvAr and 
sages as YAnmnAchArya. So far, the success attending our Dis- 
pensation is because of Thy will. By Thy Holy Word (Reve- 
lations), Thou hast been justified and demonstrated in all Tby 
variety of manifestation as well as essence. Now it hath 
pleased thee to pitchfork a false prophet on Thy world -stage 
and let him dance. Let it be, if such is Thy will.” Imploring 
thus, RAmAnuja fasted and slept. The Lord Varada appeared 
to him in a dream and thus spoke : — “ Beloved, be not vexed. 
We are giving thee an able adherent to help Thy mission. 
To-morrow, the last day, level at Yajna-murti all the quiver- 
full of arguments against mdydvdda, to be found in the works 
of thy Grand-Guru Yamuna. RAmAnuja bounded with joy, 
and performing all the routine duties of the day, and prostrat- 
ing to his chapel-God, ventured forth into the debating ball. 



112 


yajna.mCuti. 


CH. XVII. 


Yajila-muiti was already there. Ramanuja’s dignified man- 
ner, stately gait, and glory of countenance, struck terror 
into him. A presage of defeat, it seemed to him already. 
“ What a contrast,” exclaimed he, “ between the state in which 
I left him yesterday, and that in which T see him this day ! 
He b advancing towards me in all the majesty of a mad ele- 
phant. This is surely extraordinary. He must be more than 
human.” So thinking to himself, he instinctively rose, and 
advancing towards RarmXnuja, cried : “ Sire, no more words 
between us, I pray. 1 confess I am beaten.” As he said, he 
placed RiXrmXnuja’s sandals on his head, and implored him to 
deign to gather him to his holy fold.” “ What is this ? ” said 
lUmtinuja, surprised, “ I never expected this from yon. Our 
ease is still contested, Let us argue it through and see where 
it will land us.” “ Pardon me, She,” submitted Yajiia-murti, 
“ w« more fight. When I actually see you are one with God, 
l dare not open my mouth again.” “And yet,” rejoined 
Ramanuja, “ 1 wish to say that the Mdydvthla or illusion-doc- 
trine necessarily strips God ( Para-brahman ) of any attribute. 
Hut from our Scriptures we derive no support for an attribute- 
less God. Such texts as that 1 God is Truth * Ac,, become 
untruthful. Rut if you justify the God of attributes, because 
of His becoming so conditioned by uculya (ignorance), then 
* * 8 8 ueh a God, who allows His Light to be eternally 

obscured by such ignorance, ever to get rid of it P ' 1 If 
you say, what of it, then you will thrust yourself into a 
position from which there is no escape. For, you will have 
postulated two eternal things : God and ignoiance, or knowledge 
and non-knowledge, which is dualism and thei-efore antagonistic 
to monism. In your attempt to establish monism or non- 
dualism, you necessarily negate every thing else than Brahman ; 
but in that very act, you posit a duality, viz., ignorance, which 
eternally thwarts that Brahman ! The pampered elephant of od- 
vaita (monism) therefore gets all unawares, stuck in the mire of 


1 i 

u [ifr* mdnuja 

This is the controversy turning round the term }*>r tonality, again 
and again cropping up in all Yi*ishfc&dvaita works. 



CH. XVII. 


mAyA-vAda. 


113 


dualism . 1 Thus did RAmanuja preach. Yajna-murti fol- 
lowed the speech in rapt attention, and when it ended broke 
his staff and bending himself before RAm&nuja implored his 
blessings. R&manuja drew Yajha-murti to his breast, and 
blessing him. took him through a series of expiatory ceremo- 
nies 2 , as the latter had discarded the holy thread Ac., and con- 


1 Our readers may be curious to 
know what the indyd-edda is. We 
shall let Ltila Baijnath, Chief 
Justice of Indore speak:- “The 
later Ved&ntic philosophers of 
India, including Sankaraelmrya, 
have, however, pressed these teach- 
ing to mean that the world is 
“ Maya,” a baseless illusion to bo 
destroyed b}^ knowledge. This is, 
however, not the true philosophy 
of the Upanishads. In none of 
them, except the SvetiV*vatara- 
Upanishad, does the word Maya, 
which supports the illusion-theory, 
occur, and even in the Svetasvatara, 
the word mdyd is used synor^- 
mously with prrd'riti, undifferent- 
iated matter. 4 ‘ Know the Maya 
to be Prakriti, and the Lord of 
Maya to be Mahesvara; this whole 
world i 3 pervaded by power which 
are his parts” [Svet. Up : IV, 10J. 
To say that the objects of the 
world are as unreal and have as 
intangible an existence as those of 
dreams, the great doctrine preach- 
ed by Sankaracharya and his fol- 
lowers, or that the world does not 
really exist, is therefore wrong. 
The Upanishads do not support a 
<pariydnia-vdda. The process of 
manifestation of the universe is 
according to them a real and not 
an illueory process. When they 
say that all name and form are 
merely nominal, that earth in jars, 
pots, - &c., or gold in every orna- 
ment, is only true, they mean, not 
that pots or ornaments do not exist, 
but that they do not exist apart 


from the earth or gold. The same 
is true of Brahman. The world does 
not exist in its present form, and it 
does not exist apart from Brahma. 
It is not an erroneous appearance, 
as that of a rope mistaken for a 
snake, but it has no individual or 
separate existence. This is per- 
haps the great oiror into which the 
later Vedantis have fallen, and 
which has been the causo of their 
teachings not guiding popular 
religion. In fact, the second Sutra 
of Vyftsa, which is that Brahman is 
that from which the origin, subsis- 
tence, and dissolution of this world 
proceed, does not at all support the 
illusion-theory. Tho Sutra proves 
that tho world owes its existence 
and subsistence to God ; that it 
dissolves into Him; that while tho 
real nature of Brahman is satynm, 
jmhuun, and anantiun , the true, tho 
intelligent, the limitless, the crea- 
tion, &c., of tho world are only such 
of his attributes as reside within 
Him at certain times and not at 
others. It also proves that the 
world, differentiated by names and 
forms, containing many agents 
hud enjoyers, the abode of the 
fruit of actions, these fruits having 
definite times, places, and causes, 
and tho nature of whose arrange- 
ment cannot be conceived by the 
mind, cannot proceed from any but 
a Lord possessing tho above quali- 
ties.” [Pp. 63-64, Vol. I, Tran* : 
of the Ninth International Conyresn 
of Orientalists, London, in 1892.] 






gspRWnOnp’T ll tTali-dharMa-Bamwehayd]. 

15 



114 


dkvarAt installed. 


CH. XVII. 


furred on him all the sacraments of a Yaishnava , 1 an l the name 
of ArulAla-p-perumA] Emberumanar, which was his own name 
combined with that of the Lord Varada, by whose grace he was 
enabled to acquire a golden convert to his Faith. The Samskrit 
of this is Devaruja-muni or Devarat. Ramanuja led him to 
Ranga’s temple, where he was made a recipient of all the 
honors due to a member of the Faith, and brought him back to 
his monastery, where lie was introduced to the worship of his 
Lord Varada, and consecrated food thereof given him. The par- 
taking of food completed the initiation and the convert became 
a part and parcel of the Yaishnava community. A course of 
studies relating to the Prabandhas and other esoteric teachings 
was gone through ; and the love-religion of the Vaishnavas was 
thus spread before him, at which his heart melted and the 
intellect bowed. 

Ufum\nuja had in Devarat a great access of strength. His 
addition made his flock brilliant. He joined the other two 
jewels of R&mftnuja’s band, Dasarathi and Kiir&Sa. Classes in 
philosophy Ac., wore ably conducted with these members. 
H&m&nuja s fame went abroad. Anand-azhv&n or Anantasuri , 2 
Ecchiki, Tondanur n -Nambi and Marudiir-Nambi, hastened to 
become his disciples. When they came, lie directed these to 
DevariU for initiation into the Faith. He obeyed hut declared 
that R&tn&nuja was thus trying to hang heavy stones to the 
neck of a poor sparrow ! “ Beware ”, he said to the new disciples, 
I am but his vassal, his tool. Ramanuja is your real Saviour. 
Me, forget ; but him, remember.” 

1 l 

tfi^rorrfs#tT<ni 
Twwrftsrfnj- 1 
JTflnwwmigro, 11 [rw<*]. 

* No. 28 ,|Hierarchu* TuWe, [see our Livoa of Azhvars.] Ho was 
horn in Kiraugilr, near Sriran^ipatna, Mnisur. 

* A holy place near Melkote where the hi% Motitatev peart-tunic 
is situated, See infra when Ram&uuja oomesto this place. 



OH. XVtii, 


ANANTA-StrtR. 


115 


CHAPTER XVIII. 

RAMANUJA’S FIRST TOUR. 

Ramanuja’s school was thus filling. A course of studies 
in the Prabandhas was beflig conducted, and the verse in 
St. Nammazhvar’s Tiru-vay-mozhi : Uzhivil-hUam, was reached. 
This verse is of the Decad III. 3, addressed to Lord Venkata- 
pati or Srinivasa of the Holy Tirupati-Hill. It says : — 

Ever joined to Thee at all times, 

Services all , we must render Thee , 

0 Father ! and Light of the Hill , 

From which limpid rills trickle down ! 

On reading and explaining this Ramanuja went to the 
Sacred Hill, called Pushj>a-mantapa l in ecstatic thought, and 
glancing on the assembly of scholars before him, asked: “ Is 
there any one amongst ye, prepared to stay in Tirupati, make 
flower-gardens, and daily serve SrinivAsa with flowers thereof P” 
Ananta-Suri stood up, “ Bid me go, Sire/’ said he and quickly 
went to Tirupati and there getting up a flower-garden, carried 
flowers daily to the Lord there. He called the garden Hdm(L 
nnjam. 

Ramanuja was informed of all this from time to time, and 
he longed to visit Tirupati himself. For this purpose, he 
swiftly went through the Tiruvdymozhi course, and proceeding 
to the Temple, prayed to the Lord Ranga therein to permit him 
to go on a tour to Ranch t, Tirupati, and other shrines. 
“Granted, but return soon/' was the reply that came. 

Obtaining thus the holy permission of Lord Ranga, RamA- 
nuja left Srirangam with his disciples on a tour, the first of 
the kind after his anointment as the Pontiff of the rising Vaish- 
nava- faith. On his way north, he visited Mahita-kshMra, and 
other shrines, arriving at DAkuli-Nagara, or Tiru-k-khvalur, 
where he rendered homage to Lord Trivikrama, who appeared 
to the Three First AzhvArs. 2 Thence he proceeded to Chitra- 

1 See p. 206, for this and other terms, of our Lives of Azhv&rg. 

2 See their account in our Lives of AzhvAre^ 



116 


YAJNESA AND VARA DA. 


CH. XVIII. 


kuta or Chidambaram, but bearing that it was infested with 
the most bigotfced Saivas, left the place thinking that it would 
not be possible for him to introduce any reform in the place 
in a hu»ry. 

* 

Hu next arrived at Ashta-sahasra-grama-, where he had 
two disciples by name Yajnesa and Ya rad ary a . 1 Of these, 
Y iijfuVsa was very rich and Varada very poor. To the former 
Ram&nuja sent two of his disciples to announce his arrival, and 
ask him to be his good host during his halt. Yajh&sa, when 
the disciples came, was in an arrogant mood and heeded them 
not; thinking that when KAmanuja cl lose to come himself to 
his doors, lie would receive him in proper form. At this cold 
treatment, the disciples returned to Ramanuja with fallen faces 
and reported to him the conduct of Yajnesa. “ Then we shall 
not enter his doors,” said Ramanuja, we shall go to our poor 
disciple Varada at once and without notice.” So saying, they 
threaded their way to Varada’s lowly hut. But ho was absent 
on his daily begging rounds. His wife, the good Parutti-k- 
kollai, espied them coming. She wished to step forward and 
welcome them, but she had such a thread-bare garment to 
cover her— owing to abject poverty — that she could not with any 
decorum show herself to any. So, she sheltered herself behind 
a door, and clapped her hands so that Ramanuja might take it 
for a signal of welcome, and not go away elsewhere, as that 
would be disastrous to her sonPs welfare, inasmuch as Rama- 
nuja’s condescension in having come to her poor house would 
prove profitless. UanuRmja at once understood the delicate situ- 
ation in which the poor lady was placed, and taking off the 
colored cloth which covered his head, flung it through a window 
into the house. She picked it up and wearing it, approached 
Rilnulnuja whom, in welcoming to her house, she prostrated 
most humbly and said 1 “ O nay gracious Guru, you are most 
welcome to my bumble cottage. Pray accept this water for 


1 The hitter’s full name is Puruth.k-lioUai VaradRohirya, and hie 
wife is the famous ParuttUk-kvllai Naechiyar, Sanskritued into K&rpas- 



CH. XVIII. 


PARUTTI-K-KOLLAI, 


117 


washing your hands and feet ; and be seated here.” She then 
thought to herself like this : — 1 * What mighty merit must mine 
have been what austerities must I have done, wdiat gifts must 
1 have bestowed, in order that Ramanuja, who is Vishnu 
Himself incarnate, come on earth to save mankind, should come 
to our house. Divine grace has descended upon our undeserving 
selves. For the Guru (Saviour) is God Himself, He is the Good. 
All our goods, body and soul are His. The true disciple is he who 
thinks and acts thus. So do our Scriptures say. But I have 
not a handful of grain in my house, nor a single coin where- 
with to worship the worthy Sanny&sin. My husband is out on 
begging, but his petty pickings will not suffice for the worthy 
guests. To honor a guest like Ram&nuja, I will even sin- 
St. Parakala, in the old days, robbed and cheated people in 
order to serve God. He ensconced himself in fastnesses^ 
waylaid men, stripped them of their goods, and offered them 
to God. Even Lord Ranga Himself was once eased by him of 
all his precious jewels ; and with them feasts were given to the 
faithful. 1 Creatures whirl round the wheel of Sawsdra, but 
the Guru comes with his teachings, and extricates them from 
this; and gives them God. To repay the Guru for this is 
impossible. Hence 1 will even sell my body and worship him 
wherewith. For God Himself has said : — “ If for My sake thou 
sinnest, it beeometh merit ; all merit without reference to 
Me beeometh sin.” 2 The Guru is even greater than God. 
Therefore I shall have recourse to the rich merchant of this 
place, who lias been casting his adulterous eyes on me for 
a long time. I shall now let him have his wish, let him feed 
on this wormful body. The wealth he will on this account 
bestow on me, shall all be used for the entertainment of my 
honored guests.’' So thinking she addressed R&mAnuja thus : — 
“ Holy Sire, rest here but a moment. By your grace, you shall 
anon Eee my house filled with articles to feast you and yours 
with.” So saying, the virtuous lady left the house and hur- 


3 Head his life in oar Lives of Saints. 



118 


vauadIkya. 


CH. XVIII. 


ried to the merohaiit, and forcing a most bewitching smile into 
her face to please him, said : “ Good man, time has now arrived 
for the fulfilment of thy long-cherislied desire. My Guru 
is pleased to come to my house. And I have to entertain 
them, for which all food-stuffs and vessels are wanted. Please 
order them at once.” The merchant, studying the standing 
beauty more than ever, and inflamed at the overtures she her- 
self made this time, obeyed her commands without a word, and 
sent an abundance of tilings with her. The good woman stood 
before RAmanuja in all humility with these things. He was 
struck with her devotion and commanded that she should her- 
self cook for him, — a great privilege, indeed, bestowed on a 
woman by a holy person (in India). She did so. And Rama- 
nuja and his disciples, after bathing and worshipping God, 
partook of the holy food, offered him in love, and rested in her 
house, his whole being pulsating with blessings for her. 

While thus RArnAnuja was resling in his loving votary’s 
house, Varad Ary a, the husband, returned home after his begging. 
The good wife related to him all the circumstances beginning 
with the Guru’s arrival and up to the repast which she was able 
to spread before him during his absence, and the worship and joy 
which she, in his absence, was able to give to the illustrious 
guest. u Madam,” said the husband jubilant, “ though thou art 
young, thy wits are eld ; else how couldst thou have done such 
a grand task ? Thou art not a wife, but a goddess I ken thee. 
Nor art thou a nominal disciple, for, for thy saviour, thou hast 
sacrificed all, even thy woman's honor.” Applauding her thus, 
he went to RAmanuja and clasped his feet firmly ; then rising 
and with palms joined, praised him thus: “0 Prince of men! 
King of ascetics! a thousand salutations to thee. For the 
redemption of things life-ful and lifeless, thou art born amongst 
us, Vishnu. Himself, the Lord of the Universe. Thou art all- 
knowing, and all-wise, and art the very reflection of Hari. As, 
in a deep dark well, wallow creatures entangled in the meshes 
of their varied deeds, who else but thou art able to lift them 
from this dismal abyss ? who but the. magician can draw the 
venom out of the cobra- bitten person? who but the sun can 
dispel darkness ? what but cool water can allay a man’s thirst ? 



CLI. XVIII. 


PENITENT MERCHANT. 


119 


1 he sain.su r a- smitten sinner finds relief only by worshipping 
thy holy feet. Praise be to my Guru, by whose magic the 
evil spirit left the princess and itself was redeemed. Hadst 
thou not appeared amongst us, how could a sinner like me 
have been saved ? Learned men theie are by the hundred, bui 
their ways are ptishanrfu, leading them downward. How 
gracious! thy holy steps were directed to the abode of a poor 
creature like myself. The very sight of thee has absolved me 
of all my sins. I am content. 1 rest in peace ; and so do my 
ancestors/' Ramanuja blessed him and giving him the S/7- 
; 'puda-tutha , let him partake of food ( prasdila ). He was 
struck with joy at the unity of heart and purpose, this excellent 
pair possessed, and dwelt with them for some time. 

The pair now thought of returning the kindness of the 
merchant. They both went with Ramanuja’s tirtha and pu- 
sdila 1 and delivering them to him, asked him to partake of the 
same, and then do what he liked with the wife. He left. The 
merchant's heart leapt with joy, but when he drank the holy 
water and ate the holy food, lie felt within him a strange revolu- 
tion. His carnal intent for the damsel gave way to wisdom and 
worship. He walked round her and threw himself before her, 
and with hands upraised in devotion said : — “ Madam, thou art 
my mother, and thy husband is my father. The darkness of un- 
wisdom had overspread my mind, making me a fool and lusting 
after thee. I fall at thy feet, mother. Pardon me Protect me. 
Take me to your great Guru and throw me, a slave, at his holy 
feet. Subject me to any penance by which my sin may be ex- 
piated. Let me walk in the path of righteousness any- 
how.” The good dame told her husband of all this lemorseful 
confession and begged him to quiet the convulsed soul of 
the merchant. All this was marvellous. Anon Varad&rya 
bent his steps to the penitent man and leading him to R&m&- 
nnja, cast him at his feet. Ram&nuja, who inquired how all 
this came about, was told all. His surprize was equal to his 
joy. He had made a good disciple, to whom therefore he duly 
administered all the five Vaisbnava sacraments. 1 It is ehroni- 

1 i,e. The Paiicha-Sirmskdra, already described. Cp : “ He shall 
baptixe you with the Holy Oho fit and Fire [S. Luke, III. Hi]” 



YAJNESA REPENTANT. 


OH. XVUI. 


120 


cled that this disciple thenceforward shone as bright as the 
summer moon, having placed all his wealth at the disposal of 
K&m&nuja, whose fame thus spread all over the country. 

YajhSsa, the rich disciple, knew nothing of all this. 
Whereas he expected RtLtn&nuja would be coming to him ; 
probably he was on his way. So lie had gathered together many 
things at home to feast his Guru ; and was prepared in other 
ways to receive him, as he thought. He waited thus with his 
relatives, hut there was no sign of R&manuja coming. This set 
him pondering, and he left home in quest and despatched other 
men also. They learnt that It&m&nuja had bent his steps to 
V&rad&rya’H house, after the indifferent manner in which his 
two messengers had been treated by Yajn6?a. These tidings 
carried they to Yajhesa. On hearing it, befell to weeping; 
and hurrying to Varad&rya’s house, cast himself at the holy 
feet of JR&m&nujft, beseeching his pardon. Ramanuja lovingly 
lifted him up and read to him a sermon thus, calculated 
to be useful to the whole world : “ YajnGsa, listen. What I 
utter is good for thy soul. A Vaishnava should require the 
five Bamsk&ras, should know tho five Truths, ami follow 
his saviour. But more than all this is the service to those 
who are godly. The two messengers that came to thee were 
Yaishnavas, godly men. They came as guests besides, 
and wore way-worn. Hut them thou didst eject from thy 
threshold. This did not become thee. Thou shouldst have 
welcomed them, washed their feet, fanned them, fed them 
and worshipped them in every way befitting Vaishnava- 
visitors. They are Vishnu Himself in that form. After they 
had eaten, thou shouldst have eaten what was left as thy 
pnudda. When this course is strictly followed, that shows areal 
Vaishnava. Rut when it is followed for the sake of show, 
fame or gain, it is as good as not done. Houses of show, fame 
or gain, Yajhesa, are not our houses. What pleases God is 
sacrifice made without motive (sdtvika-iidna)” Yajhesa heard 
this and was ashamed. 14 Lord,” he prayed lowly, “I am 
undone, extend to me forgiveness, and accept me.” u Son, 
listen,'* said R&m&nuja, “ thou shalt make amends by daily 
washing clean the clothes of the Yaishnavas here, and tlms be 



CH. XVIII. 


VISIT TO RANCHI 


121 


saved.” So commanding, Ram&nuja left; Ashta-aahasra-gr&ma 
with his disciples and by way of Tirukkbval&r or D6hali- 
nagara, — where he visited the ancient shrine of Trivikrama and 
the Three First Azhvars 1 — leached Kahchi. He first entered 
the monastry of Kanehi-purna, who was still living, and pros- 
trated himself before the venerable sage, dedicating a verse 
to his memory : — 

The joy of Purna at seeing Ramanuja covered with glory, 
knew no bounds. He led him lovingly to the Temple of Lord 
Yarada— the God of Kahchi, it will be remembered, who granted 
Ramanuja to Lord Ranga of Srirangam. As he reverently 
walked, he fell on the floor before the entrance-cupola, (the 
Gopura) and the Anai-kdtta deity there. He entered the gate 
and washed himself in the holy pond Ananta-saras. With the 
twelve holy names of God he consecrated his body next, and 
visited Judna-p-ptrdn (Varaha) in the outer enclosure. Pro- 
ceeding further, he bowed successively to the Azhvars, Bali - 
pitha, and the Jaya-vijayds, the celestial Door-keepers. Wind- 
ing round, he saluted Adi-sesha or Ananta, , and the Holy Ant-hill, * 
and the great hall to the east of it where Yamun&’s gracious 
eyes had for the first time descended on him and elected him as 
the future Minister of the Faith. Here he repeated the memo* 
rial verse for Y&munA : — 

HHHHWWT mtpTRmW I 

Thence he visited Kariya-mdnikyat-t-emberumdn and 
looked up reverently to the vim&na {tower) over the Holy of 
Holies, then bowed to the goddess of the culinary apartments, 

1 See their account in our Lives of Azhv&ra. 


16 




122 


VISIT TO TIRUPATI. 


CH. XVIII. 


and then Per un-ib 1 ci t the Consort of Lord Varada, dedicating to 
Her the verse : — 

1,1 

Thence Ohakra-U-dzhvdn (the Archangel Discus), Gar at man 2 3 , 
called the Large-foot ( Pcriya-timvcuji ), Vishvakasena, the Lord 
of Hosts, and then ascending the steps of the Hasti- Girt (or 
Elephant-Hill), Lord Varada was readied, Kanclu-purna all 
the time leading, and Ramanuja following. Ramanuja threw 
himself before his old Patron God, and receiving tirtha, prasdda 
and Sathaknpa , returned with mind steeped in divine bliss. 

He informed Purna of his intention te proceed north to 
Tirupati to visit the Lord Yenkata. Pin na congratulated Rama- 
nuja on the joy that was in store for him by the intended trip, 
and bade him god-speed. He was journeying on thus with his 
adherents, when he lost his way. On looking round, a man 
was found drawing water from a well . “Show us the way, 
good man/’ lie asked. “This way, gentlemen ’, said he 
showing the way. “ In what way can 1 show my gratitude to 
this person V” Questioning himself thus, Kamanuja prostrated 
himself before the pikotta-man. Seeing this, all the disciples 
did the same, astonished though at Ramanuja’s spiritual views 
of men and things, — uncommon of course to other men. The 
* track shown was a straight one, and led unmistakably to the 
foot of the Holy Tirupati Hill. Here the ’Ten Azhvars are 
enshrined. Due obeisance was made to them and the Holy Hill 
itself, rising from theie in sacred grandeur. Ramanuja would 
not mount the hill for fear of desecrating it with the touch of 
his feet ; and so remained at the foot for some time, when 

1 Moaning:-- -Spouse beloved of Varada, praise to Thee. 

In traits Throe, perfect, In Lotus ever abiding, 

Mother of all tho worlds. 

The Throe Traits are JLmji ya rhui- Clod.” These are mysteries of re. 
r«, Ananyafieahatra^ and Aminya- ligion which can never be properly 
hluHjotra, meaning the Three re- understood by means of even the 
lntionships in which souls stand to best translations. Our first dilB- 
God, i.e. “ Destined for God,” “ Dis- cultv is the want of appropriate 
posable by God,” “ Enjoy aide by words. 

3 Tho Ke rub, 



oil. xviir. 


Xing vitthala-d£va. 


123 


Vitthala-Deva, tlie king of the Tondira country, struck with 
the fame of Ramanuja, became his disciple, and brought to him 
abundant wealth, with which he established a village of thirty 
houses, with thirty small estates attached to each, and granting 
them to thirty deserving families attached to his band, 
named the village Jla Mandayam. The news that Ramanuja 
had arrived reached the ears of the venerable Srisaila-Purna 
and others residing on the Hill. They swiftly descended and 
heartily greeting Ramanuja, asked him to go up the hill with 
them to see the Lord Venkata (Appu//). u Look, Sire,” Rama- 
nuja addressed Pinna, “ the Ten Azhvars have remained at 
the foot without daring to tread on the Hill. How can I do so 
now V It satisfies me quite to remain with t lie Azhvars here, and 
do them services. if you won’t go, Ramanuja,” said Purna 
“ neither shall we go.” “ Then he it as yon will, Sire,” so 
saying, Ramanuja bathed, and proceeding to the Tamarind tree, 
at the foot of the Hill, did obseianee to the Holy Hill ; and say- 
ing : “By the foot, he ascends, * 1 i remblingly climbed he As 
he crossed the seven hills and dales, he enjoyed the charming 
panaroma of nature presented to his sight, the nils trickling 
down the hill slopes, vegetation low and high adorned with 
flowers of all imaginable colors and the hills and the valleys 
teeming with animal life — the most interesting and mischievous 
of these being the monkeys. Purna had gone in advance, and 
by the time Ramanuja reached the Tiru-p-jjariyatia rock, he 
returned with Lord Venkata’s tirtha and prastula, to welcome 
him. “ Could not some youngster be deputed for this work, vene- 
rable Sire, instead of yourself coming to do me these honors V” 
asked Ramanuja of Purna. He replied : — 44 Sire, I searched all 
the four corners of this place for one younger than myself. I 
could not find one. 1 am the youngest, hence 1 have come to 
welcome you.' On hearing this language of humility on the 
part of a venerable person like Purna, Ramanuja and his fol- 


1 Poryanlea-rid yd 

is one of the God-meditations 
taught by the Upanishads [nde 
No. 11, in the Table of the Vidyils, 
p. 129 of our Bhagavad-GSta]. The 
aspirant to God, when he proceeds 


to Yaikontbam is said to ‘place 
hie f cot on the Boly Seat of God/ 
even as a child fearlessly treads on 
its mother’s lap. See Xauehitakl 
U pa nib hat, 1st Chapter. 



124 


TIRUPATI. 


CH. XVIII. 


lowers expressed wonder, and humbly accepting the honors 
that had been brought, proceeded to the stone-fencing, where 
all the monks, recluses, acolytes, the elders and all the estab- 
lishment attached to the Holy Fane, met him in a great body, 
and escorted him. R&tn&nuja now came in sight of the Fane 
itself, and prostrating himself before the Vaikuniha-g ate, bathed 
in the Konni (a tank), decked himself with the Twelve 
Holy Marks, went round the four streets, drinking in with his 
eyes the handsome dwellings of the Faithful, — the ramparts, 
cloisters, collonnades, — then saw the flower-garden tended by 
Ananta-suri 1 who had gone to live there, upon his direction ; 
there, from sheer delight, he embraced his faithful disciple, 
saying : “ having nursed thee, I now reap the fruit.” He 
enjoyed the surrounding scene of gardens thick with Yakula , 
Pdtala , Punndga and other trees, fragrant and flowing with 
honey, affording eternal shade to weary travellers, and delight- 
ing their vision with bunches of flowers hanging from their 
branches, and ontertaining their ears with strains of music 
jKmred forth by bees and all kinds of beautiful-plumaged 
birds. Here and there embosomed in the gardens, were cool 
ponds, covered with white and violet lotuses, in the midst of 
which swam and danced cranes and storks and all sorts of 
water-birds, in all the voluptuousness of nature's bounty. 
Passing on from these bewitching scenes and songs, he went to 
Var&ha's Shrine, before which he bowed and then to the gate 
of Ardr-ara-cchnzhnddn and the Athxni Tamarind Tree, and 
then the Bali- pillar, ami then tlio pavilion called Yamunai - 
UuTaiv^r. He then sipped the holy water of Svd mi-Pmhk arint y 


1 Bonis inscriptions! informa- 
tion may bo useful to our readers : 
£l\ 24, V*A. W, Epigraphm Varna- 
tam+bg Ji. L. Eire]: — 44 It records 
the grant of Maiulya, otherwise 
called Krishtmr&yapura,io Govinda- 
RAja, a descendant of Anant&chAr* 
ya, on whom (thegod) Ve»katesa(of 
Tirupati) bad placed the garland. 
Auant&ob&rya (or Stiri) it appears, 


was a disciple of the reformer R&- 
m&nujitch&rya, and the only one 
among his disciples who volunteered 
to accept the duty of daily prepar- 
ing the garlands for the Gt d Ven- 
kat^a of Tirupati. This he did 
solely from bhakti or devotion to 
hiB guru” His memorial verse is 
as follows : — 





OH. XVIII. 


TIRUPATI, 


12ft 


entered the gate Sanbaka , visited in order Madai-ppaHi (cook- 
rooms), Ydga-sala and Tint -md-niani-mand apa, Yuhvaksena 
and Vengada-tt-ari (Nrisimha). Here he looked up reverently 
at the Ananda nilay a vim&na, (cupola over the Holy of Holies), 
crossed the Kulasekhara threshold, until at last his vision 
was blessed with the Blissful Image of Sriniv&sa within — the 
God in the Heart— resplendent with all the Holy Weapons and 
Ornaments, and Sri in His Bosom . 1 “ Abode of Grace (Srini- 
v&sa) ! ” R&m&nuja exclaimed, 44 I have fallen at Thy Holy 
Feet,” and so saying, he stretched himself before God, and 
rising, stood transfixed before the Beatific Spectacle, with hands 
raised and folded. Tirtha and prasdda were given, which he 
received in all humility and stayed to see the ablution-cere- 
mony ( Tirmnatijanam ), and the Ba/t-f estival of Azhaga-p-piriln. 
“ This is indeed Heaven/’ he cried, “ this is indeed the abode 
of angels ; I must not stay here long lest I desecrate the Holy 
Place.” “ But three days in a Holy Shrine, the visitor ought 
to stay,” remonstrated Purna. 44 So be it,” said RAm&nnja, 
and after three days were over, he walked into the Shrine, Ptlrna 
leading, to take leave. As he stood before Lord SrSniv&sa, a 
voice came from Him ( i.e , the Image) : “ Have we not already 
conferred on thee in our Southern House ( = Srirangam) both 
the kingdoms, the material as well as the spiritual ( Ubhaya - 
vibhnti) ? ” 44 Thy pleasure, Almighty ! ” responded R&m&nuja ; 
and descended the Holy Hill with Purna. 

In the Lower Tirupati, Ramanuja sojourned for a year in 
the house of Srisaila-purna, partaking of his food there and 
reading with him the Rdmdyana, the first of the Jtihdsa*. 
Here he found Govinda — his maternal cousin — engaged in doing 
all kinds of services to Purna. One day, R&ra&nuja found him 
prepare the bed for his Guru, and sleep on it first himself. 
He reported this strange conduct of Govinda to Purna, who 
sent for him and asked for an explanation, enquiring further 
what punishment a disciple, who so behaved, deserved P 


1 Sri* the Logos = the Sophia— the Son in the bosom. Cp : John I, 
18 : “ The only-begotten Son who is in the lonw of the Father/' Seo 
Topics 185 and 137 in our Divine Wixdom, 



GOVINDA’S DEVOTION. 


OH. XVIII t 


126 


Govinda submissively said : “ Sueli an act, Sire ! surely 

deserves perdition, but listen. If by my trying your bed 
myself beforehand, I make myself sure there be nothing in 
it rough or knotty which may press against your soft body, 
sure there be no insect to bite and disturb you when you sleep, 
it matters little if I go to hell.** Ramanuja was delightfully 
astonished at this strange explanation, and his love towards 
Govinda increased. 

On another day, Rftmanuja had gone out on a visit to 
Puma's Holy Garden ; while lie was returning, on the way he 
observed Govinda put his fingers into the fangs of a snake 
and withdrawing them go to bathe, and proceed to Purna’s 
house to perform the usual services. Feeling curious at this 
unusual act of Govinda's, he questioned him. He explained 
that he saw the snake open its mouth as he approached and he 
found, on exam initiation, that it had a thorn on its tongue. He 
extracted the same from it to relieve the suffering creature, and 
then went about his business. “ What a tender heart posses- 
ses! thou, Govinda ! *' said Rftmanuja to him, struck with 
wonder. 

The reading of the Holy Rannlyana was now finished. 1 
And R&mftauja humbly begged Purna’s permission to return to 
SrSrangaiu. You have come so far, noble soul/’ said Pilrna 
“ what have 1 done for you ? ” “ Sire,” answered Ramanuja, 
“when I learnt that our dear Govinda went astray, it caused 


1 The following inscriptionai 
notes will be useful :-~[pp. 28*29, 
Yol. 111. Epigraphia Curnataca, 
by B. L. Rice] : — “ The grant in 
this ease was made, it is said, to a 
grandson of Srisailapdrna or Tat ft - 
chftrya, who had received the name 
of Tftta from (the God) Ye»kat£*a 
(of Tirupati), and was guru to the 
author of the Blmshya ; (meaning 
thereby Rftmftnujftoharyo, who 
wrote the Visishth&dvaita-vedanta- 
bhftshya). The reference hero is to 
the story about Srisailapftrnn, 
known as Bhftri-Smailapurna (in 
Tamil, Periya Tiruumlai Numbi), 
the maternal uncle of Ruwmuujft- 


charya, that one day when he was 
engaged in the service of God 
Vonkatesa at Tirupati, the God was 
heard to say to him, “ Give me 
water, Tata ! whence he acquired 
the name of TntAehatya. 

The following memorial verse, 
recited even now by all Srivaish- 
navas before coin men cingita wdi/u. 
wh, was dedicated to Pftroa: 

iX^I eptH H<l if I 

11 He is said to have ex- 
plained the JRdn<dr/«»i« in 24 differ- 
ent ways, or with 24 different 
meanings, to Ram&nujach&rya* 



ca. xvm. 


GOmDiL. 




me heartache ; I was pondering how to reclaim him, when yon, 
Sire, fulfilled my heart’s wish by circuhi renting the poor heretic, 
by preaching to him the True Faith, pointing out to him the 
dangers of the path he had strayed into and otherwise convinc- 
ing him of the Truths of our Religion: and thus by destroy- 
ing the perverse notions be had formed in his wandering 
mind, restored him to our holy told. What better achieve- 
ment can be effected than this ? Permit me to ask yet 
another favour of you, Sire, — can you part with him, and let 
me have him ?” Without a moment’s thought, “ come, Govinda,” 
called Piir na, “thou art from this moment, R&m&nuja's own. 
I make a free gift of thee to him. Go with him and be to 
him, I command, all that thou hast been to me. Nothing less 
will please me.” 

Govinda said not a word, but followed Ram&nuja, after 
prostrating himself before his Guru. They all now left Tiru- 
pati, and visited on their way home the Holy Places of GhafikA- 
chalam, Tiru-p-putkuzhi — where the holy well Gridhra Saras 
and other holy waters are situate — , and Tiruvehkft, and in 
due course reached Kanchi, whereto he was welcomed as usual 
by Sage K&nchi-pArna. 

Govinda was found to grow cheerless, and was day by day 
losing health. Rannlnuja was watching him decline; and 
divining that separation from his beloved Ach&rya must be 
gnawing at his heart, producing all the outward symptoms of 
grief, he thought it prudent to send him back to Tirupati. So, 
be bade him depart, giving him two Srivaishnavas as escorts to 
see him safe to his destination. Govinda reached Tirupati, 
and stood outside his Acharya's house, in mute devotion. The 
attendants entering informed Sri sail a of the return of his old 
disciple, — who was standing at the door. PArna was displeased 
and indignantly cried : — u Let the mail fellow depart. He 
ought not to cross my threshold.” Purna’s vnfe watched this 
and interposing begged her husband that one who had come 
so far and hungry and tired, should not be so summarily dis- 
missed, but that he might be permitted to have rest and food 
“No,” gruffly said the husband, “no such consideration can 



128 


RETURN TO SBtRA.NGAM. 


CH. XVIII. 


be shown to a sold thing. A sold cow cannot be given grass. 
Let hrm be off.” 

Govinda spoke not a word, and tired and hungry as he 
was, he left with the t^o Srivaishnavas Immediately, and 
reaching K&nehi — where K&manuja was still sojourning — stood 

before him like a dumb statue. The Srivaishnavas told 

#• 

nuja all that had taken place at Tirupati. R&m&nuja admired 
the farsightedness on the one hand of Srisaila, and on the other, 
the implicit obedience of Govinda, whom he gradually won 
over, with kind treatment and sage counsels to himself. 
Govinda thus became in time reconciled to his new environ- 
ments. 

R&m&nuja now bade adieu to K&iichi and PArna, and duly 
taking leave of Lord Varada, left the place, and in due time 
returned to Srirangam. He was met by all the notables, 
elders and dignitaries of Ranga’s Fane, and conducted thereto 
with joyful ceremony. “ Hast thou, beloved, visited My North 
Abode (Tirupati) ?” thus enquired Lord Ranga of Ramanuja 
who stood reverently at the door ; and bestowing on him tirthq 
and pra*dda , bade him go to his old monastery and resume hi 8 
holy ministry to the growing congregation. 



CH. XIX. 


GOYINDA’S CHARACTER. 


129 


CHAPTER XIX. 

GOVINDA’S CHARACTER. 

Thus did R&m&nuja make bis first holy pilgriuuige, and 
was now settled again for another term in Srirangani, impart* 
ing instruction to his followers on the holy science of Vedanta, 
both in Girrdna and Thdvida. Govinda, amongst them, drank 
deeply of this knowledge, and felt more and more attracted to 
Ramanuja, in mind as well as in heart, — an attachment which 
was enhanced moreover by the fascination of R&nntnuja's 
glorious person and services rendered to him, with unilagging 
solicitude. 

One day, Ramanuja was conducting his ministry in a large 
assembly of the faithful, when the latter applauded Govinda 
for his estimable qualities, such as wisdom devotion, self- 
abnegation, and devotedness to his spiritual preceptor, Govin- 
da, all the while, nodded assent. RamAnuja observing, ques- 
tioned : “How is it, Govinda, whilst it is seemly for others to 
heap plaudits on thee for thy perfections, thou dost not think 
it unseemly to accept them all ? When others exalt us, we 
must not allow ourselves to be piqued, but profess humility. 
That would be more becoming indeed!” “Noble Sire,” said 
Govinda, “ pardon me if I explain to you why I nodded as- 
sent. Their praise moans: — ‘Dog, thou art, — <j unitrust seeds 
round thy neck, — running hither and thither wiih poi -fulls of 
water to KAlahasti-gods !, To this I mutt nod ‘yes.’ Their 
praise next means 4 Divine thou art, that thou hast been 
redeemed from evil paths by our Saviour Ram&nnja — a very 
God on earth. Not like ourselves, but sunk as thou were in 
abysmal depths of rottenness, thou hast been lifted by Ramti- 
nuja, and elevated to a state where thou hast good reason to 
exclaim : ‘ Who is etjual to me on earth ? Who is equal to 
me in heaven ? \ Heart ! good, good, glory thou hast won.' 
To this again I must nod 4 yes.’ For where their eulogy of mo 
is but commendation of yourself and your glory on earth, I 
have no other alternative but to say ‘yes.’ On hearing this, 
Ram&tmja was simply enchanted with Govinda, and saying, 
good, good’, drew him warmly to his bosom, and cried : — 

17 



130 


GOVINDA'S CHARACTER, 


CH. XIX. 


“ Govinda ! embrace me that I may become as enlightened as 
tb on t;rt. By this embrace, convey to me some of thy grace.” 

One day, Govinda was found standing at the door of a 
strumpet's, stupefied as it were. This looked strange to peo- 
ple who passed that way. Kews of it reached R&manuja. He 
sent for him and asked : “ wliat made thee, brother, linger at 
the doors of infamy ? ” “ Sire,” he said, “ the inmates, there 

whoever they were (I do not know), were singing your praises. 
This fascinated me so much that 1 was rooted to the spot, and 
so loug as the music of your praise rang in my ears and lifted 
me into bliss, I could not stir from the spot.” R&manujn 
made inquires whether they were really hymning his praises 
there ( tdldtiu ), and found it was true. “ An angel on earth, 
thou art, Govinda ! can such love as thine be found on this 
dust V ” exclaimed R&m&nuja. 

It is written that Govinda was an extraordinary soul, 
who had realized in his life what it was to lead a spiritual 
life. This was further displayed in a crowning event in his 
chapter', of life. In Ram&nuja lie realized God, ever-present- 
This presence made him ever feel that there was neither soli- 
tude nor darkness. God in R&m&nuja's form ever filled his 
outer eye as well as his mental vision. Hence he felt no soli- 
tude. Constant spiritual illumination and light of God filling 
all space made anything like night or darkness impossible for 
him. He never left Ramanuja, and was ever engaged in listen- 
ing to his expositions of the Divine Science. One day, while 
they were so engaged, Govinda’s mother found occasion to 
enter the halt and within R&m&nuja’s hearing informed her son 
that his wife had come of age. Govinda told her: “If so, 
mother, let her come when there is solitude and darkness.” 
But the mother waited for days and failing to find her son in 
* solitude ’ and in ‘darkness,’ complained to R&m&nuja about 
his waywardness and probable unwillingness to keep house 
with his wife, in the manner of the world. R&m&nuja thereon 
called on Govinda to abide by his mother’s pleasure, and for 
One night at least, to remain with his wife. He bowed assent. 
And they made feast for the nuptial ceremony, and put Govinda 



OH. XIX. GOVINDA'S CHARACTER. p| 


and wife together in a bed-room and went their way. Left 
alone with his wife, he began a discourse on theology and 
theosophy, and all the night through preached to her, God and 
His Glories, His Riches and His Wonders, His Blissful Pre- 
sence in the heart and His Love to His Creatures, and so on 
himself, as he preached, revelling in the rapturous enjoyment of 
God. It was now morning, and relatives came to offer congra- 
tulations on the happy state of the couple. But the mother was 
aware, by overhearing, what had all night transpired within 
doors. “ How is it, son,” remonstrated the mother, “you seem 
to have been engaged otherwise with your wife. We could hear 
a regular religious sermon in a nuptial chamber ! ” “ Mother,” 
replied Govinda, “ when God is in my heart, and is everywhere 
present, and ever watching me, how can I escape from Him, 
and feel lonely enough to he able to do any other work than 
that of His contemplation, and praise H With no solitude, no 
secret act is possible ; with no darkness, no dark act is possible.” 
This interview between son and mother was reported to Ramft- 
nuja. “ Govinda,” he said, calling him to hia side, “ so, thou 
hast passed the greatest or deal which can he put upon a pure 
soul like thee. Thou caust never be a worlding, seeing how 
thou hatest things of that sort. But, come, S&sfcras require 
every man to belong to some one definite Order 1 ; and as thou 
canst not be a householder, be of the Order of the Sanny&sin. 
This was exactly the wish of Govinda, and he begged that he 
be so ordained at once. It was done, and Ramanuja conferred 
upon him his own name of EmfarumAndr. 44 Thai, noble Sire,” 
said Govinda, 44 is too great an honor to put upon an humble 
creature like me. Bless me with a name which a shadow like 
me deserves. “Then”, gracefully said R&m&nuja, “let it be 
Emhdr, the shadow (or abbreviated form) of Emb(ernmdn)dr '* 


1 [Yati-dharma-snvnio'hftytf.] 



132 


DEVABAT. 


CH. XX. 


CHAPTER XX. 

DEVARAT. 

With R&m&nnja and Lis exemplary adherents, like Govin- 
da, days were thus passing in Divine Discourses, Divine Inci- 
dents, and Divine Occupations. In a previous chapter we left 
Yajna-murti, re-named A. P. Ember um&udr, 1 after his conver- 
sion by R&munuja. To this sage some incidents happened 
about this time. A number of Srivaishnavas from a foreign 
land came on a visit to Srirangam and inquired of the street- 
goers where the monastery of Emberuman&r was located. 
“Which Emberumtin&r ? ” they asked. The travellers feel- 
ing si range, asked whether there were two such sages for 
the Faith? “Xo, but here is A. I\ Emberumfm&r beating 
that name, a name after RitmrLnuja. Hence onr question. If 
you mean H&mftnuja himself, there is his monastery. ” So 
instructed, the travellers found their way to R&manuja. This 
conversation however accidentally reached the ears of A. P. 
Kmberiim&n&r ; and it grieved him much to think that he 
should be confounded with Rftm&nuja, “ Xo such con- 
fusion, bo thought, “ would have arisen, had I not lived 
apart from R&mftnuja in a separate monastery ; and that with 
his name, as if 1 were a rival here set up against him ! My 
dwelling hence ought not to stand.” So saying, he immedi- 
ately pulled it to pieces ; and hastening to R&m&nuja, clasped 
his feet, crying : “ Oh, my Holiness ! was it not enough 
that this sinful soul of mine had in all the past eternity 
been estranged from Thy Holy Feet, and why should this 
alienation yet persist?” “Beloved,” said R&m&nuja, “thou 
art talking in riddles ; what is the matter with thee ? Why art 
thou in such great aflliction ? if Holy Sire,” said he, after nar- 
rating to him the street-conversation of travellers ” and how it 
affected Lis reputation, “ no more can I live apart from Thee 
— a contingency this, which gives occasion for mistakes which 
are injurious to the well-being of my soul, and which jeopardize 
its eternal interests. My soul can only thrive by being made to 
live ever with thee and move about as the marks of thy sole 


1 Called Vev'tnijii-mnhif or Devar&t in Sani&krit. 



CII. XX. 


devarAt. 


m 


and as thy shadow ; and to he allowed to do thee every service.” 
“ Be it as thou wiliest, ” said R&m&nuja, graciously lifting the 
prostrate form of Devar&t, for whom he composed a work 
called Nit-yam , or the method of worshipping God, and appointed 
him to the dailj^-worship-duty in the math . From that day 
forth, he never left Ramanuja’s side, and drank deep all 
the precious truths of philosophy and religion which flowed 
like honey from R&m&unja’s holy lips. These sterling truths 
of the Vedanta, he embodied in t wo short treaties of his, com- 
posed in Tamil verse, called Jildna-sdra, and Pram&jasdra} 
The substance of these works is (1) that to the true disciple,the 
Teacher himself is God visible, and (2) that services at his feet 
are the crowning joy of the soul. 


1 Those have been latterly comm on tod on by Manav&la MaM-muni- 
gal [A. C. 1370. No. 39 in the Hierarchic Table of our Lives of Azhv&ra.] 



DISCUSSIONS. 


CH. XXI- 


m 


CHAPTER XXI. 

SRI-BHASH Y A AND OTHER. WORKS. 

Of the most tried fidelity and consummate learning, were 
now his four disciples, viz., KurSsa, D&sarathi, Devar&t and 
Emb&r (Goviuda). There were counties others, of course, 
in his congregation. Daily classes on theological subjects 
were conducted- As they were reading St. Namra&zhvar's 
Tiruv&ymozhi, they came across the verse : — Dlingatditta • 
purdnattirum, Samaftarum Sdkkiyarvni &c., [IV-10-5.] is* 
Diverse faifhs, as taught by the Lihga-purdna ( = Saiva ), the 
Santanas (Jainas) and Sdhjas ( Bauddhas ), <fcc. And they 
discussed the defects of these systems, as also those of the 
advaita dictum that liberation (moksha) is made sure on the 
mere knowledge of the meaning of such Vedic texts as Tattva - 
rnast y — Thou art That, i e, Thou, Soul, art That, God ; of the 
system of those who maintain that not mere knowledge alone, 
but works as well as knowledge, combined, bring about deliver- 
ance (moksha). None of these systems, they argued, have hit 
the true spirit of the Vaidika-religion, t.e., Vedanta and that 
where they have hit the truth, it is partial. The final verdict 
of the Vedas is : By love to God is emancipation (moksha) to 
be won. Love to God or God-love is what is intended by such 
terms as Vedaua, Dhydna , Updmna and Bhakti, Such love is 
fostered by good works and knowledge of God. Mere know- 
ledge of God as learnt from Vedic texts is inefficacious, as also 
are good works done without a heart for God. Whereas know- 
ledge and good works are calculated to lead to love, and love 
alone secures salvation (moksha), knowledge or good works, 
without love, jointly or separately, cannot directly lead there- 
unto. Thus they discusBed, and arrived at a decision that a 
true interpretation of the Ved&nta, accordant with these views, 
should be systematically made and Bamanuja accordingly sat 
down to prepare a standard work embodying an exhaustive 
refutation of monism (advent a) and similar theories and a 
consequent defence of rtsuAkbircuto or qualified monism, 

K&reaa was selected to help B&m&nuja in this grand 
task* Before he began, R&m&nuja enjoined upon Kftr£?a that 


Cl. XXI. K<JRESA AND LEIGESHTP TO GOD. ifft; 


if in the course of his reducing to writing his dictation, he 
should find anything not agreeing with his views, he should 
cease writing. Thus was Sri Bh&shya, the stupendous stan- 
dard work on Visishtadvaita philosophy of the Ved&iita — or a 
commentary on Brahma-Shtras — begun to be written. As the 
work was progressing, R&m&nuja dictated a passage wherein lie 
gave the definition of soul (dhnd =. jivdtmd ) as that which is 
conscious or that which has cognition alone as its distinguishing 
attribute. Here Kftr&3a ceased writing, fur to him such a defi- 
nition, though valid, was as good as no definition, inasmuch 
as the most essential characteristic of the soul, namely, its 
allegiance or leigeship to God ( Seshatva ), was a serious omis- 
sion ; and that such an all-important omission was tantamount 
to defining the soul as identical with the body itself*; for 
no basis for true religion was raised by merely apprehending 
the soul as that which is characterised by consciousness , unless 
the sonl is also the sole property or possession of the Uni- 
versal soul, God. Defining sonl as that which has consciousness 
merely, without any reference to its being essentially related 
to God, as quality is related to thing, or as property to a base, 
or as mode to substance, as light to the sun, or scent to the 
flower, amounted to tacitly ignoring such essentail relation- 
ship ; and that without this relation to God first emphatically 
asserted and defended, anything said of the soul was ineffec- 
tive, inasmuch as a soul without God is non-existent, in the 
same way as without the sun, light is non-existent. What 
made the soul really soul was its indiscerptible relation to 
God, otherwise it is non-existent. And where was the beauty 
or utility in loading such a separated soul, or soul orphaned 
of God, with any number of attributes such as consciousness 
and bliss ?* Such was the train of thought running in the 
mind of Kurdsa and hence, when E&m&nuja defined the soul 
as that which is conscious , he stopped transcribing the same. 
But Ram&nuja was absorbed in his thoughts ;*and continued 


1 Similarly the identity of Universal Soul with Individual Soul, of 
4&ie Ad vat tin, is as good as materialism. 

* We invite our readcxs to peruse the Chapter on soul, m Chit* 
pralmrana in the Tat ua -tray a by Yogi S. Parthas&rathi. 




136 


K^RESA'S EXEMPLARY TEMPER. 


CH. XXI. 


dictating farther bat Kftr&sa had come to a full stop. This 
incensed RamAnuja, who cried : — “ Sir, if you mean to write the 
commentary on the Vydsa- Sutras (= Brahm Sutras ), you may 
do so/* and kicked him and ceased dictating. But Kftr&9a was 
neither taken aback nor ruffled but remained imperturbably 
cool and collected. But friends vexed him with the question : 
M How dost thou view this affront ? ” “ Comrades/’ he replied, 
I have no view other than that I am my master’s property 
(chattel), which he is at liberty to use or treat in any manner 
he thinks fit.” RArn&nuja, by this time, reflected over the 
whole position in his retreat; and it flashed on him that his 
omission to define the soul as that winch is a belonging of God, was 
a grave mistake inasmuch as this essentiality of soul was the 
very foundation of his theology. If that were missed, all the 
superstructure was built on air. Kur&sa did well in ceasing 
to write to E&mAuuja’s dictation, but it was at variance with 
the right view of the question which Km Asa knew, being a 
perfect savant as he was. Also Kur&sa’s own behaviour after 
the harsh treatment was an actual illustration of the view he 
so rightly entertained. These thoughts converted R&m&nuja’s 
rage into repentance ; and calling Kur6sa at once lovingly to 
hu side, 4 ‘ Son, you are right,” said he apoiogizingly ; “ now 
pray write down the true nature of the soul as that which is 
God\ and let us proceed with the rest of our work.” 

In this manner did R&m&nuja compose the standard works : 
SrUBhdshya , Veddnta~J)ipa 9 Vedanta- Sara, Veddrtha- Saugraha, 
and Bhayavail-Gitti-lhlshya. And thus did he fulfil one of the 
wishes of Y&imin&ch&rya. 1 


1 Read p. 56. 



co. xxn. 


rXmXnujvb travels. 


IS? 


CHAPTER XXII. 

RAMANUJA’S TRAVELS. 

The worthies of R&m&nujVs congregation, who had ho long 
listened to his teachings and who had the good fortune as well 
to see all the tenets of his faith perpetuated in treatises, rose 
one day and reverently bowing to Ram&nuja said;— “Holy 
Master, your system is now perfect, and it must he made 
known to the world at large. The ways to God are diverse, 
and confusing. Let the true way, you have discovered to us, 
be made accessible to all. Pray then undertake a tour of 
ministry and as a tour, it shall have the added object of visit- 
ing Holy Shrines.” 44 So be it,” said R&mannja, and repre- 
senting his intention to Lord Ranga, he obtained his permission* 
With his elect, he left Srirangam, and visited Tira-k-kudandai 
(Kumbhakonum) and other places in the Clio]a-mandalam, 
and won victories there by theological disputations. Thence he 
benthissteps toTiravMi-Tirunagari, the nativity of St, Parak&la 
or Tirumangai-Azhv&r. 1 Here an interesting incident happened. 
R&manuja was devoutly making his round of several holy 
shrines encompassing the Central Shrine Tirunagari, when ho 
met a Chand&ia woman approaching. R&m&nuja, in order to 
avoid pollution by her proximity, commanded her to hold off? 
so that he might pass on. But she without moving away 
addressed R&m&naja and said : — “ Sire, which side shall I 
move? Here befoie me stands thy holy self, a Br&hmau 
whom I cannot approach lest I pollute thee by my nearness. 
Behind me is the Holy Shrine Nil-nil&muttara (=Tiruk-kanna- 
puram) ; to my right are the T i ru manan -kollai (where St, 
Tirumangai waylaid the Lord) and Tiruv*ara?u (the Pipal 
tree used by the St. as his watch tower) $ and to my left is Lord 
Tiruv&li-Manavilan. There h thus purity all about me here, 
which side then can my impurity turn?” R&ra&nuja was 
struck dumb at this unexpected answer from an unexpected 
quarter. “ Forgive me, madam,” he said,” nor did I divine 
such spirituality in a low-caste woman as thou art. But for 
all that thou art holier than myself. So saying he administered 


19 


1 Bead oar “ Holy Lives 0/ the Saint* 




188 


ramAndja teaches god. 


CH. XXII. 


to lier the holy Vaisbnava sacraments ; and allotted her 
a place in the Shrine, where her image is to this day seen 
and reverenced by all the visitors. Thence he turned 
to the south, going to Tirumdl-irun-j61ai (10 miles north of 
Madura), and other Shrines, in the Pandya-mandala and held 
disputations there with the learned on philosophy and won 
laurels. Thence he travelled to Tiru-p-pull&ni (Darbhasayanam 
near R&mnM), S6tu (or R&mAs Bridge), and returned to Tiru- 
nagari, the birth-place of St. Namro&zhv&r, 1 before whom he 
reverently repeated the Kanninun-Siru-t-t&mbu of St. Madhura- 
Kavigal*. The Saint was delighted with RAm&nuja’s devotion 
and blessed him with ttrtha, prasdda , and other honors. And 
R&mftnuja, dodicating the verse : 

Wi ’ft W 1 
l wsmwu* 


took leave of the Saint after visiting the Holy Tamarind Tree 
under which ho is enshrined, and Lord Adinfttha resident there* 
The various Shrines in the vicinity were all visited, engaging 
in polemic controversies wherever he went and overthrowing 
his opponents.* Duly he reached Tiru-k-kurungudi (Kuranga- 
nagari about 20 miles south of Tinncvelly), and visited the Lord 
Nambi. A voice came from him thus R&m&nuja, we have 
often incarnated on earth, as Rama, Krishna, and bo on in 
order to save mankind ; but we have never been able to persuade 
people to Our ways as thou hast done. How dost tbou do it P 
“ Almighty,” said R&manuja, “if thou wilt ask me in the way 
that a disciple or a pupil is required to ask his teacher or 
tutor, I will answer thee.” Nambi understood R&m&mija, and 
commanded a throne being brought and begged Ram&nuja to 


h 8 Head the Lives of these 
Saints in our lives of Axhvttr*. 

8 Another version lias that BfanA- 
nuja. went from hero to Tiru*v« 
anantapuram (Trivendram) first. 
And here he wished to introduce 
the PAriehar&ira mode of worship, 
but the NambAdri BrAhmans, the 
priests of the Temple, objected. 
Riun&niijji persisting, the Lord 
Ananta-padmunAbha, siding with 
Ri$ old priests, transported BA mu* 


nuja when ho was asleep to a rock 
(called Pavidhdna >mla) on an islet 
in the Siudhu river, a mile from 
Kuranga-Nagori, Finding himself 
alone, he called for a disciple of his 
by name Nambi. But Lord Nambi 
appeared in the guise of this dis- 
ciple, served him and led him to 
the Temple, where however He va- 
nished out of sight, to Ram&nuja’s 
great astonishment* 



CH f ?xn. 


TRIP TO NORTH AN p'*K iSH M t R 


1#9 


be seated there and from that position answer the question. 
R&m&nuja mentally placed his Ach&rya, Mahitpilrna, on the 
throne and taking his stand before it, whispered into Lord 
Nambi’s right ear thus ; — 

“ Of all the mantras, the Mantra-ratna> and the Dvatja are 
great. Easily do they carry one to the Supreme State. Those 
teach that the way of Resignation or Surrender to God vari- 
ously called ny«$a, prapatti , sarandgati , is the most beneficial 
to man and compasses tor him every good.” 1 

“Thus, Great God,” said Ramanuja, “ by Thy own best 
instruments of salvation, have I prevailed upon the hearts of 
men.” Lord Nambi was mightily pleased with this declaration 
and proclaimed that He was henceforth Rarndnujauai^tafaydu* 
R&milnuja gave Nambi the Holy Name of Srivaishnava-Natnbi 
and tendering his apologies * for what had occurred, left 
Kuranga-nagari. 

From here R&m&nnja entered into the Mai ay 6,1 am (Mala- 
bar) country, visiting the Shrines Tiruvan-parisaram, Tirnvftttt\r, 
and others and paid homage to Lord Ananta-padma-n&bha in 
Tiruvananfapuram (Trivendram), through the three doors of 
this Sanctum, and left the place after overcoming opponents 
and establishing a Rftm&nuja-Math there with the help of the 
then king, who became a disciple of his. He proceeded north 
along the western sea-coast of the Peninsula to such Holy 
Shrines as Mathura (Muttra), Nanda-vraja, Govardhana, 
Brindavana, and others and S&lagr&ma, MuktimUha-Kshetre, 


1 q 5 epc#gprmR. » 

grft ftwiwfrfa I tl iPAficha-rAtra}. 

On 3fan*ra*rflinn and Dray a, consult Pp, xxii. Introd : to ©nr Live# of 
JLzhr&rs. 

* Means : u We who have RAm&nuja m Our own." 
s This is embodied in the verse : 



no 


bSmANUJA AND IABASYAtI 


€B. XXlh 


Gandaki-river; (“ S&lagrama BiR” is stated in another 
work. ' It most be a part of the Himalayas. Vaikundana, 
D*'&raka, and Ayodhya, Badurik-asrama), Naimis&ranya and 
Puabkara, and thence on to Bhatti-mandapa j (this is pro- 
bably Bhatti-mandak near Lahore),, and Kashmir, the seat of 
Sarasvati, the Goddess of Learning, was now reached. Saras- 
rati requested B&m&mija to expound the meaning of tb© 
Yedic passage : Ramanuja did so 

at great length and embodied it in the verse : — 

On hearing this, Sarasvati said : — “ Kftminaja ! Sankara had 
ere this unhappily interpreted this as “ monkey’s posteriors”* 
and I was much grieved at his perverse understanding and 
warped heart. Thou hast now wiped my tears ” So saying, 
she placed Rftm&nuja's Sri -Bh ashy a* on her head, drew R&mA- 
xtuja to her breast, and gave him the title BhUhya-Mra and 
handed him the Image of Haya-giiva for worship. 

The pandits of the place, on seeing these special favors of 
Sarasvati bestowed an Ramanuja grew envious, and called upon 
him for a disputation. This was granted and in the end they 
were routed. The king of Kashmir silently watched these 
events j and when he found the pandits discomfited, he looked 
upon R&in&nuja as no ordinary mortal and permitted himself 
to be enlisted into his fold. The king asked R&m&nuja to ex- 
plain the Traditions on which he based his Visisht&dvaita 
interpretation of the Brahma- Sutras. R&mazmja said that the 
old Traditions were the Bodh&y&na-Yritti, and the glosses by 
X&nka, Guhadeva, Kapardi, BhAruchi, and others. The king 
went with him and the pandits into his library, and had a search 


1 Ch&nfogya Up. b$, 7. The 
senders are referred top. 82, where 
the controversy with Y&dava is 
fully explained. 

* Ian ia sailed Kapi t because he 
drinks (jabot*) water {lorn). Sruti 
Itself explains K«jw to mwn sun’s 
rays s — 44 Jfojrff pahhmBti &ja*am. n 

i* then that which, by 
says, is blown to 

expand) j and that is the lotus. A 


full-blown beautiful lotas is thus 
a simile for the beautiful eyes of 

6 ©a. 

8 Bead lankara-bh&shya on the 
Ch : bp: here. His interpreta- 
tion is a reproach on his reputation 
as a Yedie scholar. 

* BAmAnuJa Bb&shya on Brahma- 
ultras was se named, fj., &ri~ 
BhAahya, 




ch xxn. k£besa and bodhAyana-teitti. 


141 


made for such wot ks. They were found, and on a perusal it was 
found that R&m&nuja’s exposition was correct, R&m&nuja and 
KuiAsa took this opportunity of studying the Bodh Ay ana- Yr i fcfci 
better, as the Pandits would not allow the work to be taken 
away by him, R&m&nuja was anxious to secure the work, but 
objections to his taking the book away were insurmountable; 
He felt grieved, but Kftr&sa assured him that he had retained 
the cardinal passages in his memory, and could reproduce the 
same whenever wanted. This allayed R&m&nuja’s anxiety ; and 
he allowed the Vritti, though very reluctantly, to be restored to 
the Library, at the King’s request, as the latter knew his Pandits 
would otherwise give trouble and would not hesitate even to 
kill R&m&nuja. 1 And yet the Pandits resented all this, as their 
prestige suffered so much ; hut being powerless to openly harm 
R&m&nuja, as the king was already on his side, they entered 
into a dark conspiracy to kill R&m&nuja by black magic. This 

1 The following extracts from Max phioal treatises, each defending an 
Muller’s Theosophy or Psychological independent view of the S&tras, 
Religion are interesting to the stn- and indirectly of the Upanishads.” 
dent of philosophy : — “ ••R&m&mija [P. 10 1 .] 

does not represent himself as stat- u * * I have generally followed 
ing a new theory of the Vedanta, the guidance of Sankara, as 
but he appeals to Bodh&yana, the he seeing to me to carry the Ve- 
author of a Vritti or explanation of dAnta doctrine to the highest 
the Bbrama-siitras, as his authority, point, but I feel bound to say that 
nay be refers to previous com- Professor Thibaut has proved that 
men taries or Vritti- k&r&s on Bod h&- BAmAnuja is on many points the 
yana as likewise supposing his more faithful interpreter of the 
opinions. It has been supposed V edanto-Sfitras* #•## if or was 
that one of these, D rami da, the R&m&nuja a mere dissentient from 
author of a Dramida-bh&shya or a Sankara. Be claimed for his in* 
Commentary on Bodh&yana, is the terprefcation of the Ved&nta the 
same as the Dr&vida whose Bb&- authority of philosophers more 
shya on the Chh&ndogya-U pa- ancient even than Sankara, and, of 
nishad is several times referred to course, the authority of the Ve- 
by Sankara in his commentary on dint a- Sutras themselves, if only 
that Upanishad, and whose opinions rightly understood. RAm&nuja’s 
on the Ved&nta-S&tras are some- followers do not posses now, so far 
times supported fay Sankara (See as I know, manuscripts of any of 
Thibant 8.R.E. XXX iV, p. xxii)’* these more ancient commentaries, 
[P. 100.] but there Is no reason to doubt that 

«# s * We have thirdly the com- Bod b Ay ana and other philosophers 
mentaries of Sankara, BodhAvana, to whom BAmAnuja appeals were 
B&m&nnja and' many others. These real characters and in their time 
commentaries, however, are not influential teachers of the Ve- 
mere commentaries in our sense of d&uta/* [P.813.] 
the word, they are really pbiloio* 




142 RAMANUJA’S RETURN SOUTH. OH: XXII. 


came to his knowledge ; but spiritual giant as he was he re- 
mained * undaunted, and simply watched* how events would 
develop themselves. They resorted to black magic, but 
instead of their plans succeeding, it had a contrary effect; for 
they were all suddenly seized with madness, end began to ravo 
and play such antics, as to be ridiculed by all. The king saw 
this, aud pitying $he poor wretches, approached Ramanuja, and 
falling at his feet* implored him to relieve them, as he could 
not look on their sufferings. R&m&nuja, by a simple act of his 
wilf, cured them; and the king made them members of the 
Faith, aud escorting B&m&nuja with ail his staff, a few stages 
on his return journey, took leave and joined his capital. 

Rarm\nuja took the road towards Varanasi (Benares), 
which he reached in due time, and bathing in the Holy Ganga 
(Ganges), and visiting the Lord of Kandaraennum Kadinagar 1 
proceeded south to Purushottama-KshiHrft (Jagann&tha or 
Puri, on the east-coast of the Indian Peninsula). Here also 
were disputations held on philosophy and religion, R&mannja 
coming off victorious ; and a Ramanuja-Math also was estab- 
lished. Here, on his attempt to introduce the worship, as laid 
down in the Pancharfttra, into the Temple there, the priests 
objected ; but as U&m&uuja still resolved to reform the practices 
prevalent there which were not cleanly and to his liking, Lord 
Jagannfttha is said to have appeared to him in his dream and 
prevailed upon him not to attempt the reforms, as his priests 
were much attached to Him with their old ways of worship, 
which therefore he might not disturb. And when R&m&nuja 
awoke, he found to his surprize he had been transported all 
the way to Srl-Kurma. Here he paid homage to the Lord in 
the Kurma-form and journeyed on to Simhagiri (Ahobila), 
and other shrines. Winning his way throughout by polemical 
triumphs he finally arrived at Tirupati. Here a Saiva-Vaish- 
nava controversy of a curious character had been waging. 

St, P&y&zhv&r, who lived centuries before Rkmanuja, had 
sung of the Lord of Tirupati, as wearing both the Saiva 
emblems, such as matted locks and serpent girdle, and the 

1 Dev»‘j»rayag on the way from Iluridv&r to Badurlu&th. 



CM, XXIX* TIRG PATI-G OD — VIS11XU OR SIVA P 148 


Vaishnava ones, such as the Discus and the golden girdle, and 
the Saint expressed his wonderment at Vishnu having chosen 
to appear to him in this dual character of Hari-IIara, or 
Vishnu -Siva. 1 On the authority of this verse, in all probabi- 
lity, the Saivas made an attempt to claim Tirupati as their 
own exclusive Saiva Shrine j but R&m&nuja contended it was 
Vaishnava, but the Saivas would not give in. RAm&nuja 
proposed that both Saiva and Vaishnava emblems, such 
as Trisula and Damaruka t and Chakra and SanJcha, be 
placed in front of VenkateSa’s Image in the sanctum sane * 
torum , and the doors he closed and securely locked, after 
carefully examining the chamber that no one lay hidden there; 
and the character of the Deity might be determined by the 
choice of the emblems made by Him. This test was gladly 
agreed to by all. The emblems were accordingly prepared and 
placed before the Image. Next day, both the parties came in 
a body with eager expectations of their own opinion being 
realized. Hut when the doors were thrown open in full day -light 
and in the presence of the whole assembly, it was found that 
the Lord had assumed the Vaishnava-emblems, w ith the Saiva 
emblems lying unused on the floor. R&m&nuja’s joy knew no 
bounds. He sang and danced, eyes streaming with tears of 
delight at the miraculous event and the Beatific Vision pre- 
sented to his view. The Saivas were thus ousted.®. 


1 Read verse 63 of 3rd Tirav- 
and&di : “ Tazh-Sadaiyum, Ac. 1 * 
N&r&yana includes Siva. In Nara- 
yanans (or Vishnu's) body, a place 
is assigned to Siva in the same 
manner as his navel i« assigned to 
the four faced BrahinE, and his 
bosom to Sri or Lakshin! (Logos 'l . 
Read Bhagavnd-GU&. xi-15. Pastjdttu, 
d'v ,and numerous other authorities. 
So then this dual appearance proved 
Vishnu, not Siva exclusively, as 
Saivas thought. 

•Apiece of Epigraphic Infor- 
mation is here annexed for the use 
of o nr readers ; — 

“We liavereceived this year a very 
interesting report from the Epigra- 


phisfe to Government [1903- 
1904 A-C ] 

The Epigrapliist has meanwhile 
inferred from a set of very dubious 
conclusions as to the ruined temple 
and TiruofaclAnur, that Tirupati 
temple whs perhaps originally 
Saiva in character. From the fact 
that the temple is mentioned in 
the inscriptions as ilangoyil and 
that the same word is used in the 
Saiva Periyapnrdnam and in another 
inscription as the name of a tem- 
ple which must certainly have been 
Saiva and that another inscription 
says that the temple now in ruins 
was built as an accompaniment to 
the shrine at Tirupati, he first in- 
fers that the Tirucbchanar temple 



144 


TIRTJPATI-GOD— VISHNU OR SIVA P CH. XXII, 


(Continued) foot note on page 143. 


mast be Saiva and that a fortiori 
the shrine’at Tirupati for which the 
former wan meant as an accompani- 
ment, must also be a Saivite one. 
We fear* every link iii this argu- 
ment is hopelessly weak. Mr. 
Veukayya has not shown satisfac- 
torily that the TtrachcMiiftr rained 
temple was as a matter of fact, 
built as an accompaniment to the 
Tirupati tomplo whatever that ex- 
pression may moan. The Ganga- 
Pallava inscription of Dantivikrama 
Varinan which is said to prove this, 
he neither quotas from nor gives 
the contents of. This example will 
emphasize the necessity of the 
Government insisting upon a publi- 
cation of all the inscriptions col- 
locted every year, so that independ- 
ent scholars might work at them 
and deduce from them all the his- 
torical connection they are capable 
of yielding, Again it is not quite 
so certain that the Tiruchchftnftr 
temple was solely Saiva. It might 
most probably have been a combi- 
ned Saiva-and* Vishnu temple as the 
one at Chidambaram and many 
other places. It is a fact that 
many important Saiva temples have 
a shrine of Vishnu towards the 
west, generally mentioned in the 
inscriptions as iielai Sri Koil. At 
any rate the Tirupati temple was 
undoubtedly Vaishnava m the 4th 
century during the reign of the 
Chola king R&jarAja, the great., who 
gave grants to the Vaishnava God 
there. It must certainly have been at 
least claimed as Vaishnava during 
the times of the three great Saiva 
Saints, the authors of the Tecantm , 
Sam band nr, Appar and Sundarar, 
who sang Thiropparankuiiram, 
Tiruvanmiyur, Kaiabasti and other 
places in the neighbourhood, and 
omitted all reference to Tirupati. 
flat there was a long standing 
dispute as to the real character of 
the Deity of that place is certain. 
The old Vaishnava Saint, Peykxhv&r, 
sings in the lyarppA, that the God 
of Tirum&iai wore the symbols of 
both Siva and Vishnu and it is 


noticeable in his vers© that he 
always mentions the Siva emblem 
This dual character seems 
to have continued till the time of 
R&m&nuja in the 12th century, 
when this curious incident is re- 
lated by the Tamil liamanuj&rya- 
Divyacharita of Fillailokanjiyar to 
have taken place. Ramanuja was 
annoyed that owing to this dual 
character of the Deity, the Sivites 
worshipped him as their Navanar or 
God. He therefore proposed a 
scheme by which to test which way 
the God leaned and said that 
the emblems of both Siva and 
Vishnu should be placed in the 
innermost shrine which was to be 
carefully locked up till the morning 
and that according to the emblems 
the God should be found wearing in 
the morning, his real character was 
to be judged. When the Garbln i- 
griha was opened in the morning 
the God was seen resplendent with 
the conch and the Siva emblems 
were found carelessly thrown at 
his feet. After this explicit decla- 
ration by the divinity himself there 
could be no question as to his real 
nature and he has continued Vaish- 
navite ever since. The facts go to 
show that if the Tirupati Temple 
was at all exclusively Saiva, which 
seems to be unlikely, it must have 
been so considerably prior to the 
authors of the Tevaram. [Hindu,'} 

Another extract : — “In his 
latest Report on Epigraphy, Mr. 
Vonkayyahas opined that there is 
an air of truth in the popular belief 
that the temple on the Tirumalai 
was originally a SAivit© one. In 
his “ly&rpa,” stanza 63, Pey-*zlivAr 
distinctly mentions the dual ap- 
pea rai ice of the Image. The stanza 
referred to might be rendered into 
English thus s— 

w How wonderful ! our Lord who 
is on the Sacred Hill (Tirupati) 
which is bathed by the great noun* 
tain streams surrounding ft on all 
aides combines in himself the two 
forms (of Siva and Viaimu) by his 
appearing * with Sowing matted 



OH. XXIL 


VISIT TO OTHER S URINES, 


m 


R&m&nuja made the circuit of the Shrine, 1 and descending 
the Holy Mount, did homage to the Azhv&rs enshrined ailte 
base, and thence proceeding to KAnehi and other Shrines such as 
Sri-perambudur (his birth-place), Tiruvallikkeni (Triplicane) 
and Tirn-ntr-inalai, and thence crossing over to Madhur&nta- 
kam and the Holy Vakula tree there, under which his Guru 
Mahapurna gave him the first initiation, and thence on to 
Tiru-vay indra-puram (Tiru-vendi-puram near Cuddalorc), 
where he tendered his salutations to Lord Deva-n&yaka, and 
vanquished disputants wherever met, and thence on to Vlra- 
n&r&yanapura uj , the Holy Place of sago N At ha .mini [the place 
where he sat for Yoga (meditation)] and Lord Manna-nar there, 


Foot note on page 144 (continued). 


locks and high diadem, with the 
beautiful Ma&hu . , and discus and 
with a serpent and a golden waist- 
cord entwined (round his waist).” 

Therefore, it is evident that the 
God of Tirmttalai was worshipped 
as Vishnu in the days of the early 
Vaishriavite Saint Pey-Azhv&r. 

Clearer still is the allusion to the 
Vaishnava nature of the deity, in the 
classical Tamil poom “ SilappadigA- 
ram/’ lstCentury,A.C., where the au- 
thor describes the god as “ standing 
on the top of Vcingadam, like a blue 
cloud with the conch and discus 
(which are compared to the sun and 
moon)” (KMukAn-KAdai, 11. 41-51) 


l There is a legend related here. 
There was a person by name T41- 
p&kkam CHannayya. He was a 
favourite of God SriuivAsa of this 
Shrine, go much so that when he 
•ahg hymns to Him, He kept time 
by dancing to it. HAmAnuja came 
to know this, and asked the de- 
votee to kindly ascertain from 
hie God whether he (B&m&nuja) 
may hope for Moksha (Salvation). 
Channayya, when he next sang and 
the God danced to him, reverently 
submitted to him BitnAnoja’s peti- 
tion. God answered : — '** Certainly 
he shall be saved/* 44 And I, Lord V* 


“ M. N.”, in his reply to Mr. 
Venkayya’s rejoinder in the Hindu, 
ling proved that in the days of the 
DAv&ram Hymners, the temple 
might not have been Sdiva, and 
that llajaraja, the great Chela King, 
himself a Sftiva, has made grants 
to the Vishnu on the hill. 

In the face of these explicit 
statements in early Tamil litera- 
ture; it is really incredible how 
Tirumalui could be doubted to have 
perhaps been Saiva. Let us hope 
that in the examination of tho in- 
nermost prdkdra, more light will bo 
thrown on this rather important 
question. [A. Yaishnava in Mad- 
ras Mail, 9th December 1904.) 

asked Channayya. “ No ” was the 
answer.” Hut have l not sung toThee, 
Lord, all these days?, protesfcrdChftn- 
nayya. ” But have I not danced to 
thee, son, as often as thou sangest? M 
reported He. “ Then I am undone, 0 
Lord ! Pray show me the way of 
salvation. By no means can I forfeit 
that state.” The Lord answered : 
“Go to that SanyAsi, our B&nt&nuja, 
fall at His Holy Feet and win it. 
He is fit to give Moksha to whom- 
soever he will.” This story illus- 
trates that salvation is won, not by 
bargain, but by grace, 

10 



146 


RETURN TO SRkANGAM. 


CH. XXII. 


returned to his head-quarters, Srirangam. He proceeded to the 
Temple to visit Lord Ranga, announcing his arrival ; and after 
the usual ceremonies, Ranga’s voice came inquiring: “Art 
thou satisfied F R&m&nuja answered : “ Holy Lord, how can I 
be otherwise, when thy Blessed Vision is ever reflected in my 
mental mirror wherever I may he. I have but fulfilled Thy 
holy errand on earth.” Ranga commanded ttrtha and prasdda 
to be given him. R&m&nuja thence bent his steps to his own 
monastery, his soul steeped in peace and bliss. 



OH. XXIII. 


KtFBESA'S FAST. 


147 


CHAPTER XXIII. 

THE BIRTH OP VYASA-BHATTA AND 
FARASARA-BHATTA, 

Thus had our Bh&shya-k&ra 1 * * * * accomplished his second 
pilgrimage through Bharata-khanda. Those were days of 
religious rejuvenescence in India brought about by the inspired 
personality of our Ram&nuja. For his influence spread from 
house to house, village to village and throughout Bharata- 
land, and his spirit fanned the fire of religion, smouldering in 
human hearts. 

KurGsa was the very soul and shadow of R&m&nuja. In 
erudition he was a savant; in conduct, he was a paragon of 
excellence. Never a day was he found remiss in all the duties 
of the day, classed as Abhigamana , Updddna , Ijyd, Svddhydya 
and Yoga a . 

We have already told our readers that Kftre^a lived by 
alms ; because lie had given away his all at Kura and come 
to Sprang am to live with Ram&nuja. 8 One day, it rained all 
the morning till it was past the Sangava or the U^tdddna time, 
which is set apart for excursions for collecting alms. Kuresa’s 
strict rule it was, to beg each day’s requirement at the 
houses of virtuous folk, and never to store a second day’s pro- 
visions in his house. Prevented then by the rainy day from 
stirring out, KureSa and his pious wife And&lamma fasted, 
after takiug the usual bath, performing the morning sandhyd and 
other ceremonies and offering to his Chapel Cod, a fruit and 
gome water/ which latter, sipped, being sacramental. It was now 
evening, and Kur6aa, performing the evening sandhyd , never 
bestowed a thought for his hungry stomach, but devoutly went 
through a reading of the Tiru-Wty-mozhi (Prabandha) consider- 
ing this as bis manna, and thus went to sleep. But the wife 

1 See page 140 for Kdm&nuja winning tide name. 

3 A work recently published in Madras (1004) by D. T. Srlniv&8&- 

ch&rya, called Pa ii cUu gives full details of these live-fold 

day-occupations. 

8 See Chapter XIII. 


4 See Shagavud-GiU, IX, 20. 



140 k$b£sa and ms wife. oh. xxjh. 


wm awake and was sore grieved at heart that her god-like 
husband Was fasting. As she sat, she heard the temple drums 
and bogles announcing that Lord Ranga was having his night- 
offering* of food, called the Periya-avasaram. This disturbed 
Iter* nursings ; and she gave vent to her feelings thus ; — 
“ Ranga, when thy bhakta is fasting, how eanst thou revel thus 
in (eastings A cry of distress like this was of course heard 
by the Lord ; and the cry, it is said, pierced his ears like 
arrows. * 

Uttaniananibi, a temple-functionary, was asleep on a 
pifti ; and he dreamt a dream in which Ranga appeared to him 
and commanded him thus:—* 1 Nambi, my bhakta KureSa is 
fasting ; rise, go to my Temple, and carry on thy head the holy 
Aravanai-iood which has just been offered me, in right proces- 
sional style from the Temple to his house. Lttama-Nambi 
awoke, startled, and hastening to the Temple, did as com- 
manded. As the music and other din of the procession reached 
Kfir^a’s doors, he was disturbed from his sleep, and awoke f 
wondering what was happening at that hour of the night ; met the 
processionists and inquired of them what brought them them 
Uttama-Numbi said : u Sire, Lord Ranga bid me carry you 
His holy food. Pray accept./’ received the same devoutly 

but he would not have the whole quantity. He said to tho 
messengers : — ” Holy sires, 1 should not deprive the Lord of His 
income by disposingof this food as usual. But I cannot refuse 
it altogether, as it has been so graciously sent by Him. 1 
should but take two morsels, one for myself, and the other for 
my wife. Lord Ranga has bo fully made me His own that I 
do not stand in need of anything on earth. I thank yon, 
sires ; please retire with the remaining food to the Temple,” 
After thus dismissing the Temple servants, KftrOsa sat down 
and asked his wife whether she thought of any thing in particu- 
lar when he was asleep. She confessed to him she did so* She 
said she envied Ranga enjoying his last sumpinouscourseof food 
for the day, while His bhakta was hungry. “ Good lady,” mid 
petulantly, “ you should not have been thus guilty. 
l>o not this again.” And they both devoutly partook each, 
mm Of Hie two morsels that had been retained; and 


on. xxm. ramAnuja blessing the babies. t# 


went to bed again, somewhat out of humour with his wife. But 
he had a dream. Lord Ranga appearing spoke to him : “ M y 
beloved, the two morsels you have eaten, will be the seed for 
raising two precious sons in your family. They shall be oonsi* 
dered as my own sons. As sons, 1 myself choose to appear in 
furtherance of my own future purpose, in the same manner as 
I chose to appear as R&ma, the son of Dasaratha, and Krishna 
the son of VasudCva.” The dream was over. K&resa awoke, 
and related it to his wife and others, and attended to his duties, 
quietly expecting events to develop in their own good time. 

Some time went by. In due course, two sons were born 
to Kill Asa as predicted by Lord Ranga. The ten days of 
puerperal sfitaka were over, but Kiiresa never concerned 
himself about the name-giving and other sacramental rituals, 
which the Vedas require to be administered to new-born 
infants. His idea was that to his Ramanuja's spiritual family 
the children belonged, an 1 it was for RAmAnnja therefore 
to do the needful. Ramanuja, however, now made Ms 
appearance, accompanied by Govinda ; and commanded him to 
bring the little ones to him. Govinda sped in all earnestness 
to AndAlamma, and lovingly hugging the two gems of babies, 
ran to R&manuja, muttering all the way the Holy Dvaya- 
Mantra as a protective shield for the babies against evil influ- 
ences ; and lovingly lifted them up to RAmAnuja. RAmAnuja 
graciously scanned them with his love-moistened eyes, and 
observing the splendid appearance and glorious looks of the 
infants, blessed them heartily, and addressing Govinda, said:— 
<# Brother, what didst thou ? The smell of the Dvaya-Mantra 
comes to me from the babies.” “ Sire, yes, ” replied Govinda, 
“as I was conveying the precious charges to you, I shielded 
them with the power of that Mantra.” “ Then brother,” 
commanded RAmAnuja, “ as thou hast constituted thyself the 
guardian of the bodies of these gems, thou shalt be the guar- 
dian as well of their souls. And these two infants are no 
other, than the two sentences of the Dvaya itself, made mani- 
fest in their persons thus.” Bo saying he stroked the infants 
with his hands, adorning them with the Pmlch^dyudka orna- 
ment; and in due time made Govinda administer the Patlcha* 


yXmunA’S wishes fulfilled. 


OH. XXIII. 


ISO 


mmtUra, naming the infants ParkSara Bhattarya, 1 and 
Vyftsa-BhattArya,* thus fallfilling another of the three wishes 
of his Great Guru, Yfl,munilchft,rya.» Thus were two great 
luminaries for the Faith ushered into the world— in the wake 
of R&m&nnja. 

Uttama-Nambi, in a work called Lakshmi-Kdvya, composed 
bjr him, sings of them thus : - 

*m’sftutrci%w it 


Another event also occurred about this time enabling 
Ra.mft.nnja to fulfil the remaining wish of his Great Guru 
Yamuna : to name some fit person by the name of Parfiakusa or 

Namm&zhv&r in perpetuation of the memory of the Saint of 
tlmfc name. 


The reader will recollect the redemption of Govinda by 
Srtsaila-1 firpa of Tirupati, described in a previous chap- 
ter. When Govinda joined the Vaishnava-baml, he felt so 
blesBod in his regenerate life that he would not allow his newly 
awakened delight to rest in himself alone. So he souid t 
out his own brother by name Siriy-Govinda-p-perenutl, and 
explained to him the beauties of the New Faith.’ He 
brought liim to Pftrna, who graciously accepted him as 
his disciple. Govinda and G. PerumAl Lad thus become 
spiritual associates as well, and had both come to live with 
R&m&nuja at Srirungam, 

The event which came about wns that G. Pciumil hail a 
non born to him, and this, to RAmiiuuja, was another valuable 
acquisition to his Faith. So ho hurried to PorumAl’s place 
amt blessing tlie child, named biui PaiankuSa 4 - Nuwbi. Xbis 


‘ See No. 82, In U.e Hierarchic Table of our LUt* oj lzhv& r ». 
lai ia aacrthur name. 

* W * 1 l'urAiiLu^a^St. Nainm^iiv^x. 



CH. XXIII. YAMUNA’S wishes fulfilled. 


isi 


fulfilment of YAmuua’s third wish 1 was recorded by Uttama- 
Nambi in his Lakshmi Kavya> thus ; — 



1 * 


We shall close this chapter by asking our readers to re- 
member the “ three-fingei*miracie ” of YAmuna, related in 
chapter IX and that the three fulfilments thereof by RAmAnuja, 
on whom had devolved that sacred duty, were, in order, the com- 
position of Sri-BhAshya, the Commentary on the Brahma- 
Sfltras ; the naming of two children in memory of Parft^ara and 
YyAsa ; and a third child, in memory of St. NammAzhvAr. 


1 See page 50, 




m BOW THE BHATTABS GBEW*. Oft. XXI t. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 

BH ATT ARY A. 

Oaf readers, in this Chapter, will he treated to the interest- 
ing traits which the new luminary PaiAsara Bh at (Ary a, or 
simply Bh&fctArya, displayed as he grew. 

Lord Ranga commanded the two little brothers to be con- 
veyed to His Pane, and adopting them, as fashion required, as 
his own sons, had cradles swung there in His own chamber, 
called the Manatt&n and Himself and His Consort Lakshin! 
taking care of them in every way. The Lord had willed that before 
He accepted the courses of daily food offered to him, the children 
should be first served ; nay, that they should help themselves 
to what dishes they pleased by allowing them to toddle about 
to the place where the food in several dishes was spread before 
Him. 

One day the children, as usual, stole about at pleasure and 
helped themselves to the viands that had been placed before 
Ranga that day as the special service of the R&ja who then 
ruled. The priests were offended that day at the conduct of 
the children, and handling them somewhat roughly, conveyed 
them outside the Temple premises. That night the R&ja had 
a dream. The Lordlappearing to him, declared : “ I had just 
tasted your food-service. When the fools of my officiating 
priests interfered with my children, the Bhattars, preventing 
them from having their full share, and treated them ronghly, 
I could not partake of thy food any more. I am this day not 
pleased with thee/* The RAja awoke and making inquiries, 
found his dream to be correct, and strictly decreed that services 
should thenceforward be conducted in Hie manner which best 
pleased the Lord. 

Bhatt&rya was now & boy of five years, and showed signs 
of extrao^nary intelligence for his age. His father KfirO$a 
was one day reciting the Decad of St. NammAshvAr, beginning 
With Ne4umdrk-adimm (viii. 10. 1). In this Decad, the 
greatness of God's Saints is described. In the Hurd verse, the 




OHL XXIV. 


BHATT^EYA, 


US 


description runs thus : Sira-md-viamsar ” i.e. God's Saints are 
small-great. The boy, who was attentively listening to the 
recitation, stopped the father at this place, with the eager 
query : u Father, how can a thing be both small and great at 
on© and the same time, for thou saidsfe smalUgreat ” <s My 
dearest, what an unexpected question from a stripling like thee 1 
But it would be a bard task on my part to convince thee of 
the justness and beauty of the apparently contradictory terms, 
by resorting to learned discourses on it, based on S&straa. But I 
shall try by other easier means to make thee understand this 
puzzling passage of our Holy Saint. Dost thou see our Sages 
of Srirangam, Siriy-kcch&n, A. P. Emberum&n&r and others 
like them ? See, they are small in stature, but very great in 
knowledge and wisdom. So, dost thou now see how contradic- 
tory things like small and great can yet be harmoniously 
combined in one and the same thing F” The young questioner 
was satisfied. 

The boy was a budding genius, as became evident from 
another incident which happened at about this time. There 
was a learned man by name Sarvajna-bhatfca, who was proud 
of his erudition, and had successfully carried on a warfare 
of polemics in V&r&nasi and other places ; and who had now 
arrived at Srirangam. To show to all how great a man he 
was, he installed himself in a sedan chair and paraded himself iu 
the streets, with his followers before and behind, proclaiming 
his fame and titles, and announcing that he was the Sarvajfia- 
bhatta, meaning one who is all-knowing. Bhattar, the boy, was at 
this time playing with the dust in the street. He heard the 
name Sarvajiia dinning in his ears, and he got irate at it, 
u What P* exclaimed he, “ while there are such alt-knowing 
giants amongst us, as RAm&nuja, Kur6?a, D&Sarathi, D6var&t 
and others, who dare call himself by the proud name Sarvajna, 
all-knowing ?” So saying he took a handful of dust in Ms hand, 
and running up to the sedan, in which the Pandit waft seated, 
spoke mockingly at him thus : — Halloo, man, stop, and answer 
me this before you step further. If you are ail-knowing, aft 
yon call yourself, tell me what quantity of dust I have in my 
hand.” This sudden and curious interrogation, by a mere boy, 

m 



154 FH ATT ARY A. CH. XXIT. 



checked the Pandit, and he was so confounded and confused 
that he could not compass a ready answer “ I see,” cried the 
hoy, “ yon are dumbfounded by the paltry question of a boy. 
Go tile, ypu not say : * you have a handful of dust ? T you don’t 
deserve the title all-knowing. 9 * So saying, the impertinent 
little boy turned to Sarvajna’s attendants and asked them never 
more to exhibit their poor master pompously in the streets, and 
exhorted them in the sweet words of five, to drop the insignia 
they were carrying, and cease blowing the trumpets.” The sur- 
prize of the Pandit at this strange behaviour and talk of a mere 
urchin, now turned into wonder and admiration. He inquired 
of the by -slanders whose son was this prodigy ? They said: — 
“ Sire, he is the Ron of Kftr&sa, the soul of our Guru R&m&nuja, 
the Pontiff of our Faith.” Sarvajna exclaiming : “ The fledge- 
ling surely flies, not creeps,” lovingly lifted the little marvel 
into his sedan, and moved on till the procession approached, the 
house of KAr6?a. Pon-miyechiy&r or Kanak&mba, the good wife 
of IHmnurdAsa, 1 was standing at the door watching. Espying 
the boy BhattArya seated in the sedan with a strange peison, 
she ran up, and drawing him from the vehicle, covered hint 
with her garment, and rushed with him into the house, mut- 
tering the Tti'aya-Mautra , and delivering the precious load 
unto the arms of its mother Andftlamma, chided her for having 
allowed her gem to stray out thus into the streets and expose 
himself to ‘evil eyes * ; and anxiously sprinkled him with R&mft- 
nuju’s Srt-pdila water,* to ward off evil influences which might 
have injured the boy. She also vaguely feared, lest such a 
prodigy as her boy would be allowed to live long on earth !f 

Bhatt&rya grew older About eight he was now, and the 
holy-thread ceremony, Upanmjana, was duly made; and he wa® 
sent to school to learn the Vedas and other subjects. The boy 
attended the first day and learnt some Veda. The second day r 
when ho went to school, he found the teacher repeating the 
same lessons as those of the previous day to the boys. He 
therefore left the school and went to play. His parents finding 

1 Rond next, chapter 

s Holy water washed off the foot of MmAnuja ; water thus consecrat- 
ed l» considered an antidote to every kind of evil, or spiritual. 



m. XXIV. BHATTaKYA. 155 


him thus employed, questioned him as to why he did not attend 
school. “I did attend, father,” said he, “ bat they were rend- 
ing the same lessons again, and so I left it.” “ Bat did you 
learn the lesson in one day ? ” asked Kurds a. “ Yes,” was 
the ready answer. “Then let me hear it,* 1 demanded the 
father. The boy repeated his lesson without a flaw, even in 
the difficult intonations of the Vcdio syllables, called the ud/Uta, 
anuddtto and si --aritcu The precocity of Bbatt&rya terrified the 
parents, who seriously thought of delaying his education for 
some time. In due course, however, the boy rapidly picked up 
all learning, Kurdsa and Gov inda personally instructing him in 
the artha , and the tatva, Sastras. 

It has already been said that Lord Ranga and His Consort 
Lakshmi were the adoptive Father and Mother of Blmttarya, 
As a child and hoy, he really looked upon them as such, But 
he had now grown up into youth, and was taught that Ranga 
and Lakshmi should be adored as God and Goddess of the 
cosmos. Well, the youth was once on a visit to the Temple, 
when Ranga and Lakshmi were having their retired moments 
after ail the bustle of the day’s worship had subsided. Ranga, 
in feigned anger, bade Hhatt&iya depart. The youth went a 
few paces, when Ranga ordered him hack. He obeyed. And 
Ranga asked him * “ when thou didst visit us now, what didst 
thou think us to be.? ” “ As God and Goddess of the universe, 

Lord,” meekly replied Bhattarya. “But,” asked Ranga, 
w what, didst thou think us to be before this?” “As my 
Father and Mother,” responded he. “ Think of us in this 
relation always. That pleases us more than the relationship 
of G>d and slave.” Toe reader will gather from this that 
God is more in search of men’s hearts than their heads. 

Another incident is related about this time. A Sm&rta 
pandit took it into his head to test Bhatt&rya. He entered a# 
the latter was seated in his house, and after preliminaries asked 
him to explain how a Yaishnava is distinquished from a 
Sm&rta. Bhatt&rya did not care to enter into an elaborate 
controversy with his adversary on this question, delicate in 
as? much as it is a bone oi contention between the two great 



bhattArya, 


oh. xxnr. 


divisions of BrAhmanas in India, the SmArtAs (admitim) md 
the Vaishnavas (wstsht-ddvaitins) ; but simply called the ques- 
tioner^ attention to the signs of Chakra and Sankha inscribed 
on both his arms — a sacrament enjoined by S Astras on all 
Vaishnavas. “ I see ”, the Pandit sAid / u but what authorities, 
master, can you quote from the SAstras, justifying you to 
set to yourself this kind of custom F ” queried he. “ Sir, 
replied Bhatt&rya,” I shall not trouble you with all that, for 
when I shall quote one authority, to which we in common 
profess allegiance, you shall go satisfied. Hast thou not learnt 
the first sfitra of Apastamba-Dharma, which says 

i.e., the wise 'practices of our wise elders are our best 
authority ; then come the Vedas ? My father Kur&sa observed 
the sacrament in question and therefore I do. Enough ; for do 
you not follow in the footsteps of your elders P ” The Pandit 
was thus silenced and went his way . 1 

The young student's course was now finished and it wa$ 
time that a mate should be found for him. As the reader 
knows, Kftrdsa hail left his kith and kin in the K&nchi land 
and had adopted Srirangam for his country. So, when the 
marriage-question of his boy came up, Kftr&sa did not know 
where to bring a girl from. “ Hence ,’ 1 appealed he to RAmA- 
nuja : “ site, Hot only have I no relations of mine in these parts, 
but those others who may willingly offer a girl belong to a lower 
rank in society. Contracting matrimonial alliance therefore 
with them can only be distasteful to us as unworthy of our 
status. What shall we do in this fix ? ” Such was the great 
social question which RAmAnuja had to solve in those days. (We 
know how this same question is still unsolved in our days). 
RAmAnuja said: — “We have our Mah&purna and his people. We 
must choose from them. As for Sutra, Sdkha, Brdhmana and 
Ymshfava, our two clans agree. But they are of the Brihu- 
ccliarana set.* This is the only difference, which I think may 

1 See ChftkrAnkana-vij&ya and other work® on this Vaishnava Sacra- 
ment. It is like the fire-sacrament which obtained among the primi- 
tive Christians. 

* The MahApArttae belong to this denomination. The Vedamas have 
m consanguinity with them. Marriages now take place between the 
Shatters and Periya-Nambis. 





CH. XXIV. BH.VFrABVA. lH 



be overlooked. These considerations satisfied them and they 
applied to this clan for a girl But they could not give one, said 
they, with impunity, for the hard and fast harriers dividing 
clan from elan for a long time, would not permit it, though 
they would heartily wish for a junction with snch a worthy 
clan as that to which Kftr&sa belonged, and considering mor* 
ever the exemplary personal character of Kftr$$a himself, 
apart from every other consideration. So here was a stumb* 
ling block though there was willingness on both sides. No 
further steps were taken; they could notin the face of snch 
insuperable sentimental difficulties. But Shatter was ad vane* 
ing in years, and must be married at once or all thought of it 
must once for all be abandoned His mother And&lamma was 
in a perplexity. She made bold to twit her husband on 
his stolid indifference in such an important affair. “ Qwr 
neighbours are laughing at us, Sire,” she finished. But KftrGsa 
told her in a careless way : “ Chafe not, old lady ! I am help- 
less in the matter. Knowest thou not that our children belong 
to Lord Banga ? I have resigned them to His care. Let His 
will be done, whatever it be.” With these soothing words, he 
left his.wife and going to the Temple, laid the case before 
The Lord and returned home. That night, M&h&pftrna’s rela- 
tives had a dream, in which Ranga commanded them to make 
matrimonial alliance with Kur6sa without ado. They rose 
and what they had rejected when proposed by, they now 
voluntarily offered to, Kftr6?a. For, two maidens by name 
Akkacchi and Manni were gladly given in marriage to our 
Bhatt&rya. A social qnestion — a very hard one indeed— was 
thus solved in those days ; and onr hero of this Chapter was 
thus installed in the order of the householder. 





18 $ 


DHANURDASA, 


cm. xxr f 


CHAPTER XXV. 

DHANUBDASA. 

In the last Chapter, appeared two new characters, as our 
readers are aware. They are Kauak&ngauV who was standing 
at the door of Kftr&5a’s house, and her husband Dhanurd&sa, 
(In Tamil, Pillai-Urangft-villi-dftsar). They became disciples 
of R&m&nnja. How they became is what shall be narrated in 
this Chapter. 

In Niehul&puri or Modern Uraiyur (near Trichinopoly) 8 
dwelt Dhunurd&sa, so called because he was a good athlete and 
archer, belonging to the Malla* caste. To his caste-men, he 
looked as terrible as death. He loved a girl by name Kana- 
k&mbA, who was very beautiful. So much was he enamoured 
of her that he never left her side for a moment and never took 
his eyes off her moonlike face. The Chaitra festivities of Lord 
R&nga now came round. Kanak&mba was anxious to witness 
tlioin, and so she left Uraiyur. The lover of course would not 
let her go alone. So he accompanied her, and walking by her 
side, held his coverlet over her head in great solicitude to screen 
her handsome face from the sun’s rays. Not a ray., should 
even steal in. So eagerly did lie watch her face. 

R&m&nuja was returning from his ablutions in the Kaveri 
river, surrounded by his disciples, to join the procession of 
Lord Ranga. As he was coming, his eye fell upon this loving 
pair, and wondering at the intense care the lover was bestow- 
ing upon his baloved, turned to his disciples and said : — “ Sons, 
look at this curious spectacle. Here is a despicable specimen 
of humanity who is the slave of a woman ! Shameless, in 
the public streets, see, he pays such attentions to a courtesan l 
Man may be blind with bve for a girl ; but he generally keeps 
it all a secret ; but here it is a bold outrage on public decency. 
It is interesting to me however to see how love can be blind. 


1 Or KauaMmh& 1 the Tamil name being Pon -n Ayech 13* Ar. 
f See St TiruppAmuhv&r iu own Lives of AzbvArs. 

* A iniJ^d tribe (wrestlers), by an oufc oaete Kfehatriya on a Xtha- 
triya woman. 



ctt* xxy. 


dhanurdAsa. 


m 


Lei me try to turn this man's love from the girl to Lord Ranga.’* 
So saying, he set a few disciples to shadow the pair and find 
where they lived ; and return with news. On his disciples 
bringing him the necessary intelligence, R&mftnuja sent for 
Dhatmrd&sa, and looking on him most graciously, asked who he 
was and what brought him to Svirangam. The looks of R&ra&* 
nuja, tilled with kindness, acted on him like a spell ; for Dhanur- 
dasa made obeisance and explained that hi8 residence was Urai- 
yur, where he was a renow tied gymnast, and that he came to 
Sidrangam on a holy visit to Ranga. “ But,” said R&m&nuja, 

“ wilt thou allow me, son, to chide thee for thy open violation 
of public morality P Thou sayest thou art a powerful gymnast ; 
but how is this consistent with thy open love-makings to a girl, 
shamelessly P A sense of shame stole on Dhanurd&sa at this 
well-meant rebuke, but he replied : “ Holy Sire, how can I help 
it P She is so lovely, this dear Kanak&mbtV Her ayes are more 
beautiful than the lotus. My heart and those eyes are one. The 
least exposure to the sun, how can those charming eyes bear ? 
Did they fade, my heart would burst. This is the truth, 0 
Saint ; now tell mo if I am wrong.” R&m&nuja listened to this 
guileless speech, in silence, and looking on Dliauurd&ja with 
pity, said:— “But, son, if I could show you bettor eyes than 
those P ” — “ Ah, Sire,” interrupted Dhanurd&sa, “ if so, it 
were a great gain to me ; and that by your favour.” “Come 
then at once ” ; so saying, R&m&nnjaled him in to the Temple* 
and showing him Ranga’s Figure, recumbent on His couch* 
S^sha, “ look at those bewitching eyes,” said he, catching hold 
of his hand, “they are the eyes of Ranga, Lord Ranga, 
the Father of this universe; look steadily and study their 
beauty.” Dhanurd&sa did so, and he saw something there 
extraordinary, divine, and he found he could neither stir 
from the spot where he stood, nor move his eyes from the 
Vision before him. He was completely hypnotized as it were* 
“God’s grace has descended on this person,” murmured 
R&m&nuja to himself, as he watched and left for his 
monastery Dhanurdlsa gave up food and sleep from that day 
and was daily found in the temple, looking on Ranga with 
straining eyes. R&m&nuja now sent for him and asked him 



m 


DHANURDA8A. 


CH. XXT. 


how >0 felt. Ho said : “ Master ! how can I be grateful 
enough to you for the bliss into which you have deigned 
to fteep a wretch like myself. Make me thy slave and 
conipljfte the work of salvation you have, unasked, taken 
into your hands.” R&m&nuja smiled and conferring on him 
the sacramental Pan cha-samskdra, took him into his flock. 
Kanak&mM came to know of all this, and a wish rose in her 
mind to become herself a disciple. So she sped to R&m&nuja, 
and repentantly implored him to take her also into his Vaish- 
nava fold. R&m&nuja, overcome by her solicitations, did so, 
and joining her with her lover, — now as wife to husband,— 
blessed them both, and allowed them to work in his math m 
his most dutiful servants. It is chronicled that the wife 
even excelled her husband, in wisdom and all other spiritual 
prefeotious, by the wonderful grace shed by the Holy Feet of 
R&m&nuja. Like Uanum&n, who did every service to R&ma 
was this pair to R&m&nuja 

Dhanurd&sa had so far been metamorphosed, that he 
became the greatest favourite of R&mannja ; so rare too was his 
piety, that though he belonged to a lower caste, he had privi- 
liges conferred upon him. For often, R&mAnuja was found 
returning from his river-bath leaning on the shoulders of Dhft- 
nurd Asa ; though when he went to the bath he lean on D&sarathi, 
ft Br&htn&ua. A Br&hin&na is unclean before bath, and clean 
after it ; and thus Dkanurdasa as a Sfldra, and D&sarathi as a 
Br&hm&na must have changed places. But R&m&imja had it 
the other way, as told above, which much exercised the minds 
of bia BrAbmana disciples. They once made bold to ask him 
for an explanation, which he condescended to tender thus — 
11 0 Yaifthnav&s, have ye not heard that learning, riches and 
high -birth swell a fool with pride, but adorn a wiseman P, 1 
This Malta is utterly destitute of this threefold vice^bitt ye are 
not. Hence be is At enough to be touched by me and to prop 
on” On bearing this, the disciples bent their heads in shame, 
and dared make no protest ; but all the same, malice rankled in 


wiwiflww wiiii w a 




BR&HMaVa AND sf DBA. 


CH XXV, 


101 


their breasts against DhanurdAsa, that he a Sudra should stand 
so high in their master’s estimation, their own prestige 
as BrAhmAnas being jeopardized thereby. RAmAnuja was 
aware of this and wished to care his BrahmAna disciples 
of the disease, which in his opinion was spiritually fatal. 
To convince them of their error, he resorted to a device. He 
called one of his intimate disciples privately, and ordered 
him to secrete all the clothes of the objectors, at night when 
they were asleep — clothes which it is our custom daily to 
wash and hang np to dry. The order was duly carried out. 
The disciples rose in the morning, and finding their clothes 
were missing, fell foul of each other and made a great hub- 
bub. RAmAnuja was witnessing all this fiaeas, unseemly to a 
BrAhmana in his opinion ; and smiled. To put a stop to fur- 
ther disturbance, he called them all to order, and putting on 
the mien of a judge, listened to their complaint, and condoning 
them for their loss, advised them to be reconciled to each other, 
and wait for better luck whenever it might please Providence 
to send it them. He let some time pass thus, and one night, lie 
called DhanurdAsa to his side, and was engaged in conversation 
with him* alone for some time. He now called the aggrieved 
parties, and in the hearing of DhanurdAsa, spoke to them thus : 
“ Sons, I remember well your grief and strife at the loss of 
your clothes some time ago. I will now tell you something 
which will fetch you much profit. Indeed it will very much 
more than compensate for your loss. See, DhanurdAsa is with 
me. I will keep him here engaged. You will proceed to his 
house unobserved. As it is very late in the night, you will 
find his wife KonakAmbA drowned in sleep. She has a lot of 
precious jewels about her person. Go and cleverly strip her of 
them all and come away.” Taking these orders, th© BrAh- 
manas stole to DhanurdAsa’s house like thieves. They effected 
entrance, and to their joy found KanakAmbA fast asleep on her 
bed, decked out in all her splendid finery. They approached 
her softly, and deftly stripped her of all her jewels on one side, 
as She lay sideways. As they were doing it, she awoke, but 
just opening her eyes a little, closed them again, lest they 
might flee away in fright. Nor did she moVe a limb, lest they 
might be disturbed in the middle of their work. For she saw 



KANAKAMBA. 


CH. XXV. 




they wer© Vaishnavas, for whom she had nothing but love 
and reverence. She was glad they were taking away but their 
own property ; for whatever effects she owned in this world 
were not really hers but entrusted to her for their sake. This is 
how property is to be spiritually viewed ; and we have al- 
ready said that in spiritual perfections, Kanak&mbA excelled 
even her husband. Well, she lay thus quiet till every one of the 
jewels was removed from one side. She was now anxious that 
the Vaishnavas should complete their work, and not go away 
with only half work done. She therefore gently rolled over 
to her other side, as if in sleep. This movement however 
created fright and put the thieves to flight. They returned. 
Il&m&nuja seeing them back, gave leave toDhanurd&sanow to go 
home, as it was unusually late. As soon as he went a few 
steps, R&m&nuja called the robber-disciples, and taking from 
them the jewels, bid them dog the footsteps of Dhanurdasa in 
the dark, unobserved by him, and watch all that might take 
place in his house and report the same to him correctly. They 
did so. In the house, KanakambA was expecting her husband 
back from his rather long absence that night, and when she 
heard his footsteps, she rose and washed his feet and welcomed 
him home. He looked at her, but she looked very strange with 
one side of her bare and the other side only decked with orna- 
ments. u What is this, lady ? " he cried, taken aback. “ Noth- 
ing wrong, Lord,” said she soothingly, “ 1 will explain all and 
you will be pleased. The BrAhm&nas, who you know are our 
Gurus, came here, and I was lying as if asleep. They laid 
hands on me and took all the jewels on my right side. Our 
effects are theirs, Sire, as yon know. So to let them have 
all, I quietly turned round on to my left side. With ail my 
care in doing so, — to make them believe I was fast in the arms 
of sleep — it gave them alarm, and they, to ray great regret, 
ran away.” On hearing this, DhanurdAsa flew at her in rage, 
saying:— u Foolish woman! thou [hast spoiled the work. It 
was thy duty to have lain quite motionless. If thy jewels 
were theirs, theirs also was the liberty to take them in their own 
way. But instead of letting them exercise that liberty^ thou 
didst dare exercise it in allowing thyself to move just when they 
had don© half their work. They would probably have turned 



£!& XXtf. 


VIRTUE MORE THAN CASTE. 


lea 


thee round, hadst thou been perfectly still. Well, thou hast 
spoilt it all. At any rate, half thy jewels have been well 
invested ; the other half is vanity.” Thus half consoled as it 
were, he went to sleep, with his thoughts fixed on the Holy 
Feet of Ramanuja. 

The Vaishnava Br&hmanas who were outside, eavesdrop- 
ping, heard all this conversation and hurrying back to R&m&- 
nuja, gave him a full report of it. Ramanuja on receiving it 
addressed them thus : — tk O wiseacres, do you now see P Some 
fellows, fools very likely, made away with your clothes some 
time back. But on that trifling account, you fell to quarrel- 
ing and, calling each other names, made such an inglorious 
uproar. But here is Dhanurdasa, whose mind was not in the 
least disturbed, albeit he lost so many valuable jewels. PleaSe 
tell me, sirs, whose wisdom is great, yours or his P Know 
then that caste is of no importance. It is virtue that is most 
prized.” Thus did Ramanuja sermon to the disciples who bore 
a grudge against Dhanurdasa. They were crest-fallen and 
spoke not. 

The night was spent thus. The next morning, he sent for 
Dhanurd&sa, and drew from him an account of all the incidents 
which took place in his house, and restoring to him his jewels, 
blessed him. Dhanurdasa never refused what was given him, 
for, if lie did so, it w T ould be like opposing his Guru which 
behoves not a true disciple. Unquestioning obedience to the 
spiritual preceptor is one of the most important canons laid 
down by Vaislinavism. And this, the hero of this chapter 
observed to the very letter. It is recorded that Dhaxrard&sa’s 
regenerate life was full of such incidents. One such interesting 
event is recounted by Periya-v-&cchftnpillai in his commentary 
on St. Namm&zhvar’s Tiruviruttam, v: 99: “ Inacchol 
Kftrfcsa read Tiruv&ymozhi, and Dhanurdasa, who heard it, 
melted into tears. Observing this passionate ebullition of 
feeling, Kuresa exclaimed: “ Fie on us, beloved Dhanurdasa! 
We are known to fame as very clever dialectic gymnasts over 
knotty questions of philosophy and all that sort j but none of 
ns can claim the privilege of thy birth which brings to* thee 
a love-lorn heart, which we so hardly struggle to possess/’ It 



164 


bAmAnUJA, THE 8AVIO0B. 


CH. XXV. 


is related again in the 36,000 commentary on Tiruv&ymozhi 
{VIT-4-1 “ Azhi)” that Dhanurdasa was called '• Mahamati ” 
oy the worthies of Srirangam, inasmuch as his love for Ran- 
ganfttha was so intense that whenever, the Lord was taken in 
processions in the streets, 1 Mahamati ’ walked in front with 
ns sword drawn, so that he may cut any who dared to do any 
act, in the least offensive to the Deity. Vidura of the MahA- 
bh&rata fame was called Mahamati, inasmuch as his love for 
Knshna made him to examine the seat, which he had himself 
prepared for him in his own house, lest he might have unwitt- 
ingly allowed any danger to lurk in there. Mahamati literally 
means mtt-r than wisdom, this expression having the force of 

m ’ d0m hhn,hd ln J lov ‘f 0 ‘- Chd. DkanurdAsa also was thus so 
wise, *• so love-blind as to fear danger for one (God), who 
is above all dangers. 

KanakAmbft, the wife of Dhannrdasa, proved to be an 
exemplary devotee of lUmAnuja, for she looked upon him as 

2d r°.“ r ; ” re ' ated that " nU “ ber ° f di8ci Pl- approa- 

cl ed the lady one day and expressed to her their doubts as to 

int°hei, eJ U,d l°° k UP ° n aS tboir true Bav 'our, for it was 

lud thL i er ‘ enCe ” ,any pr ° feSSed th ^^elves as saviours, 

s^itulft ?7 , allyo r dt0 B0 " than 0“ preceptor the 
spmtua! know edge which they had received and the good- 

eTdt^lr f rT , ad ° Pt,3d iD th0ir Hfe ; a “ d - thus 

evident that if Ramanuja was to be looked upon as saviour, 
here were others as well to whom a measure of this qualifica- 

2Lr , i r n , J ., Kanak&tDb4 on hearing this! simply 
fleumhed her locks end gathering them together inio a kno( 

tied it up with a red thread, and kept silent. The disciples 
understood what she meant to convoy by this behaviour. The 
numerous black hairs signified many teachers but the saviour 
was K&tu&nuja alone, represented by the red thread, -RAmanum 
who crowned them all and bound them all together into his 
representative self; i n other words united So his unique 
powon, all the functions of minor teachers who went before 
and came after him. The disciples wondered at her steadfast- 
pe « aud fidelity to RAmAnuja, and went away congratulating 
her on her spiritual eminence. * 



m . xxvi. 


DASARATHI. 


im 


CHAPTER »XVI. 

BASARATHI ; MARANERI-KAMBI. 

Such were the additions that were being daily made to 
R&m&nuja’s holy band. 

We have seen in a previous chapter that Mudali-y-and&n 
or D&sarathi was Ramanuja’s sister’s son. A few particulars 
about this sage are related at this juncture. We have seen in 
the last chapter that when Ramanuja went to the river Kavexi 
for his daily bath, he would lean on D&surathi for support, 
and when returning from the bath he would lean on Dhanur- 
d&sa. One day R&manuja was asked why, when he donned the 
i*obes of the Sanny&sin (ascetic), he did not" give up D&sarathi, 
inasmuch as that order demanded that ail kith and kin should 
be renounced. R&m&nuja said that JD&sarathi was an excep* 
tion to this rule, for he was to him as valuable as his triple- 
staff (iridanda) . When he w ent to K6ttiyAr to receive instruc* 
tions from Gdshthi-Purna, lie had told the latter the same 
thing. “ So, gentle-folk,” said he to the questioners, 44 if it is 
possible for me, an ascetic, to give up my staff, only then can 
D&saratlii leave me. He, though a bodily relation, is yet a kin 
to my soul.” 

R&m&xnija was once teaching D&Sarathi Tiru-vdy-mozhi, in 
all his leisure moments. One day, as lie was teaching it from 
his couch, D As a lathi was so overcome by the sentiments of love 
to God contained therein, that he stopped i-epeating the verses 
with R&m&nuja as is usually done. R&m&nuja saw this and 
was glad to see D&?arthi so sensitive to devout emotions, 
such as characterize real mystics. 4 * Son,” he said, 44 it is no 
wonder our love-saints so move your heai’t. For the Vedas 
themselves have been given out to the world in the shape of 
the Dravida-Prabandhas, even as 4 the Vedas themselves are 
said to have incarnated as Ram&yana, when the Lord of the 
Vedas himself incarnated on earth as R&ma * n *. 


1 I 





m 


dAsarathi. 


CH. XXVI. 


Thus were many days* spent in useful occupation, and in 
thinking out projects for the amelioration of the world. One 
day, AttuzbAy, the daughter of MahApurna, left her mother- 
in-laws’s house to her father’s. “ What is the matter, daugh- 
ter?/’ he asked her. “ Father/’ she complained, “you know 
we women have to goto the river to bathe, after our monthlies. 
I asked my mother-in-law to accompany me, girl as I am and 
having to go alone. But she chose to be ill-tempered and 
further taunted me by saying : ‘ Your parents have indeed 
sent so many servant girls as a part of your trousseau ( strut - 
kana) ; why not take one of them with you instead of asking 
me * ! I felt this jeer so kneely that I have come to you.” 
“I do not know anything of these matters, poor girl! ” said 
he coaxingly, “go and inform RAmAnuja, who is our Head.” 
So At tu /.hAy hastened to RAmAnuja and laid her grievance 
before him. “ Oh, I see your mother-in-law wants a servant 
for thee at her house/' said RAmAnuja, “ here is one, take 
him.” So saying, he called DAsarathi and bid him accom- 
pany the young lady, and work under her orders, consider- 
ing himself as part of her strulhana. DAsarathi immedi- 
ately obeyed, and following the young lady tc thp river 
where she bathed, worked in her house like a slave. The sud- 
den advent of DAsarathi, and that for purposes of menial ser- 
vice, excited the curiosity of the members of the household, 
for they knew him as a venerable person attached to RAmA- 
nuja, and for whom they had devout regards. So, they 
asked him to say what made him leave RAmAnuja and come 
to their house unasked, and that for gratuitous service ? 
“ Friends/ 1 he said, “ I am not master of myself, nor can I 
judge why my Master RAmAnuja wishes me to serve in your 
household. He bid mo go with this maiden and be at her 
service. I have done so. For reasons and motives, if you are 
particular, 1 must refer you to our RAmAnuja.” They all ran 
to the monastery and humbly falling at the feet of RAmAnuja, 
besought him to say why such a high personage as DAsarathi 
was directed to go to their humble dwelling for drudgery. They 
submitted further that this measure imperilled the safety of 
their souls inasmuch as they were put to the necessity of using a 



CH. XXVI 


mArankri-nambi. 


167 


saint as a slave. 44 We are already sinners, Sire/' pleaded they, 

44 pray let not this addition be made.” RAmAnuja simply an- 
swered Good men, we sent our DAfaratlii as a part of our 
bride’s outfit, for the little AttuzhAy is my guru’s daughter, 
and therefore our daughter. If you are not willing to accept 
what, in duty bound, we have sent, you are welcome ti return 
it.” They returned home and bogged DA«arathi to kindly 
return to RAmAnuja. 

At this time another momentous question turned up. One 
of YAmuna’s disciples was MAraneri-Namln of MAraneci, of the 
PAndya country. He was a Siidra t. e., a member of tho 
fourth caste of tlie Hindu social system. He lived with 
MahApurna, who was a disciple himself of YAmuna, and a 
BrAhmana. Maraud ri being a beloved disciple of YAtnuna, 
MahApurna bad great regards for his master’s man. M&ran&ri 
fell sick. He prayed to MahApurna thus : — 44 Sire, though my 
body is of the Siidra, it is one which by service to my master 
YAmuna, is sacred. It- is going to die now. Pmy cast it not 
to dogs. Who will throw to dogs the oblations (punkhtsa) set 
apart for Devas ? My body belongeth to YAmuna.” Pftrna 
quieted Id m by saying that he need have no anxiety on that 
account; that all would go well. With this assurance, MAra- 
n&ri breathed his last, ami Pftrna cremated him — instead of 
burying, which is the custom for tho Sftdras — and had the 
Brah mam edit a rites performed, which is only ordained for the 
BrAhmanas, 

RAmAnuja, — PArna’s disci pie, —came to know this. Though 
he was himself a reformer, yet, in his opinion, time was 
not yet ripe for extending all Brah manic privileges to SAdras. 
They must he gradually raised, first in spirit, i. e,, in prin- 
ciples and customs and morals, and then only such social 
privileges granted, as may not outrage at once the com- 
munal sense of the composite body of the Aryans. RAma- 
nuja was doing this work cautiously, even so having to 
face much obloquy from the higher caste-men. While so, for 
Mah&p&rna to have extended the highest privileges of a fir Ah- 
mana, viz., the Brahma- Medha obsequies, to a Sudra, however 



168 


M&RAN&RI-NAMBI. 


OH. XXVL 


high he may be spiritually, was a shock to the communal feel- 
ing which it was not expedient to deliver. R&m&nuja going to 
Mah&purna, and making due obeisance, argued with him in 
this manner and finished by saying: “Sire, I am building a 
system, but you are pulling it down.” To which, Purna an- 
swered thus:— “ R&manuja, I admit the force of your objections. 
But I am for radical reforms, not half -me as ares, and then, we 
ought to have a margin for signal exceptions like M&raneri* 
Besides, have I not precedents to justify my present act ? Am 
I superior to R&rna, the Hero of the Ikshv&ku race, ? Is 
M&ran&ri inferior to the Bird Jat&yu, for whom R&ma perfor- 
med the Brahmamedha? 1 Am I greater than Dharma-putra ? 
and is M&ran&ri lower than Vi dura, to whom the same Sams- 
k&ra was administered ? And are the truths uttered by 
St. Namm&zhv&r, in his Tirnv&ymozhi : “Payilum” [iii-7] 
and “ Nedam&l ” [viii-10], descanting on the greatness of godly 
men, irrespective of caste and color, mere senseless babble?.” 
On hearing this, R&m&nuja was silent. “ But in my turn . 
1 have to propose to you one question,’' began Pflrna “and 
that is this. How is it that I found M&ran&ri, uttering neither : 
4 Ranga is my refuge,’ nor ‘Y&muna is my refuge,’ when he died? 
You know this is what is enjoined on all the Faithful at time 
of death,” R&m&nuja said : “ Such an omission is no ground of 

accusation against him. For I know he had abandoned himself 
entirely at that moment to God, trusting Him in His promise 
that : ‘ at the time of death, it is not for the dying man to 
remember or say anything, but for God to remember the dying 
man and do the needful. 1 2 “ But ” retorted Purna, “this 
is a Promise made by Var&ha, when he when he was con- 
sumed with love for His Consort Bhu. How can such a 
Madman’s Word be depended upon ? R&m&nuja answered; 
44 Know you not, Sire, that our salvation is sure when our 


* R&m&yana, 111*66.— 

“ hibationg of the stream they poured 
In honor of the vulture lord, 

With solemn ritual to the slain, 

As scripture's holy texts ordain.” 

* [rordim PurAna] 



CH. XXVI. 


DUMB MAN. 


MB 


Father and Mother are ever together 1 P&rna was pleased 
with this apt and intelligent answer. 

At this time happened another incident, Sri R&manujn 
was one day observed leading a poor dumb man with him and 
shutting himself up with him in the monastery in a private 
chamber. KdrSaa was watching this unusual conduct on the 
part of the high pontiff: ; and looking through a chink in the 
closed door, observed Ram&nuja showing the dumb man by 
means of signs, his own holy feet, and making him understand 
thereby that their contemplation would be the sole means of 
his salvation, Kur&sa, on seeing this supreme act of grace, 
soliloquized to himself thus : “ Alas that I have been born 
Kur^Sa, a man of learning and wisdom ; I had fain been born 
dumb and boorish to have deserved such precious free grace as 
this man!” It is said, that Kuresa swooned away under the 
weight of this reflection. 

About this time, R&m&nuja undertook a journey to T. K6t- 
tiyur on a visit to his Ach&rya Goshthi Puma. He was found 
seated in a high loft in his house absorbed in contemplation, 
R&rn&nuja waited for an opportunity and submissively asked 
what it was he so intently dwelt on ; in other words what was 
the mantra he muttered to himself and the dkydna or object of 
his thought. Purna said : — u Noble son, my only mantra is 
the Holy Name of Y&muna and my only dhydna is his blessed 
figure (vigraha) which fascinated me as I studied it when he 
was bathing in the holy Kaveri waters. “The Guru’s Holy 
Name is our hymn and his image the object of our loving con- 
templation ” 2 as say the Sastras. R&m&nuja prostrated him- 
self before his Guru and returned to Srirangam. 


1 u When the son is ever with the F ather,” as a Christian would say. 

8 


n 



170 saiva Biwrar. m. xxvxi. 



CHAPTER XXVII. 


CHOLA’S PERSECUTIONS. 

14 is written : “ When the gracious eyes of a good Guru 
fall on a person, his salvasion is sure y be he dumb or deaf y fool 
or wise, old or young,” 1 Ramanuja was showering his graces on 
all in this way ; and was holding bis Y ed&nta-discourses in 
splendid style with a splendid array of disciples, beaded by such 
Illustrious personages as KCtaAsa, D&Sarathi and Devar&t. The 
Chola-king, for the time being, happened to be a most bigoted 
Sftiva. He was bout upon destroying Yishnu temples, and 
otherwise prosecuting Vaishnavas, though his son (Vikrama 
Chola. 1113 — 1128A.C), wisely hinted that he had set to him- 
self an impossible task, inasmuch as he could never destroy 
the two strong props of the Vaishnavas, the Tiruodymozhi of 
St. NammiUhvkr and Rduidyana of Yalimki. The Saiva system 
is anti-Yedic, and Vaishnavas condemn it as un-Aryan and 
errOneoua. The king, then resident at Chidambaram (or Gan- 
gaikonda Ohotapuram) was so bigotted an adherent of this sys- 
tem that he adopted coercive measures to bring men of all 
other faiths into its fold. For this purpose, he had a procla* 
mation issued in which was written: “There is no (God) 
greater than Siva a and every one, especially every learned 
man, was commanded to affix his signature to the document in 
proof of his assent to this proposition. Many obeyed either for 
fear of being punished, in case of refusal ; or on grounds of con* 
science, or enticed by hopes of rewards of land and money from 
the king ; and others deserted the country and hid themselves. 
N&lur&n, a disciple of Kur&$&, happened to be the king’s minis- 
ter* u What is the use, your Majesty !” said he “ of your obtain- 
ing signatures from ail men indiscriminately. Ho good purpose 
is served thereby. If you can obtain the signature of the two 
veterans of the Vaislmava faith, Kur&sa and R&m&nuja, living 
in Srir&ngam, that will be a capital stroke of policy, and yonr 
declaration about Siva's pre-eminency will only then have 

fall U 

1 



B&M&NttJTA/tf ANXIETY. 


OS. XXVIT. 


171 


received irrefutable testimony.” Choi a immediately directed 
messengers to go Srirangam and bring R&m&nuja. They 
arrived and standing before tire gate of the monastery, declared 
their errand, aud said that R&m&nuja must go with them to 
the King’s Court forthwith. The door-keepers rushed inside 
and whispered the news softly to Kfir&sa, 1 who was then 
engaged in serving bath-water to R4mA.nu ja. K tires a foresaw 
the dangers of persecution that threatened ; and without tell- 
ing R&m&nuja what he meant doing, lie donned the colored 
robes of Ramanuja, and taking up his tridanda, emerged from 
the monastery ; and saying : “ 1 am R&m&nuja, proceed,” to the 
King's men, stepped on. M&h&purna, observing this, followed 
K&r§?a on this ominous expedition. 

R&m&nuja, coming from his bath, called for his colored robe 
and staff, but D&Sarathi told him that Kurosa had worn them 
and departed with the King's messengers, who had come for 
R&m&nuja, in order to compel them to sign a declaration- 
paper maintaining Siva’s superiority over all other gods. On 
hearing this, Ramanuja exclaimed in sore distress of heart 
thus : — “ Oh, what will become of Kitr&sa and Mah&purna,in this 
war of bigotry ! Pray let me wear the white garments of Kur&^a, 
that 1 may not be discovered by that heretic-chiefs myrmi- 
dons !” “ You must not, Holy Sire, even remain in this spot,” 
submitted D&sarathi in fear, “ lest harm should come to your 
valuable life/' R&m&nuja’s fears were further aroused, but he 
knew not how he should act in such an emergency ; and so he 
harried to his Chapel — Deity Varada, and made supplication to 
him meltingly to ward off the evil which threatened to engulf 
them all and to obliterate, by one stroke, all the good work that 
had for years been so patiently done. And in giving vent to his 
feelings, he prayed in the fashiou of 8t. Bhakt&nghri- ltenu * 
thus : — 

“ If the luckless Buddhas, Jains and those, 

That follow Rudra’s feet, in poignant words, 


1 Read Topic 146 Pp. 161 ff. io our Divine Wisdom of Dravida 
Salute.” 

* Bead his life 'in our Liven (f A&hrdftt* The verse is the 8th in hie 
Tirtun&Iai “ fVr«|»|xodw &amunar } 4*?.’* 



m 


RAMAXUJA PURSUED. 


oh. xxrn. 


Do hateful talk of Thee, 0, Lord l Thy slavey 
With anguish keen pierced, sure sickening die. 

Hence Thou, that swellest Rangam huge, pray list, 

|f chance e'er throws athwart my furious path, 

Such God -denying souls, hut righteous work I ween r 
I then and there their heads lay low/’ 

“ Good Gori, ,, u said he ” the Chola king is very powerful just 
now. I leave to Thee how and when thou wilt do away with 
him. I will now leave this country ; and elsewhere, I will, if 
necessary, resort to measures which will hasten this tyrant’s 
destruction.” So saying, he looked northward in the direction 
of Melkote, 1 and taking his disciples with him, left Srirangam 
with a heavy heart. In the meanwhile, Chola’s men coming 
to know that it was not the real R&m&nuja who was trapped, 
came in pursuit. By this time Ram&nuja was crossing a 
broad sandy river ; and sighted the pursuers. “ What shall 
we do P ” he cried, addressing his disciples, “ let us take hand- 
fuls of sand and with this mantra * repeated over it, throw 
them in their path as we proceed ; and leave the rest to God.” 
They all did as he said. When the royal emissaries trod on 
the enchanted sand, their feet stuck, and their pursuit ^as thus 
cheeked, u All, these Br&hmanas have used magic against 
us ” exclaimed they, and heat back in confusion. R&manuja 
proceeded now on his way with Lord Ranga for his help. 

They threaded their way through trackless wilds and 
before they arrived at the base of the Nilagiri Hills, R&mftnuja 
and bis disciples missed each other in the wilderness. They 
were wandering in search of each other, when one disciple met 
a few forest men busy ploughing land. These happened to be 
the disciples of Tirumalai Nall&n Chakravarti, — an old disciple 
of RAm&nuja. Meeting a Srivaishnava, they naturally felt 
themselves attached to him, and accosting him asked:— 
“ Sire, whence art thou coming t*' u From Srirangam, good folk,” 

1 Or Srt-N&r&ynna-puram, on & hill, 30 miles north of the city of 
Msustir. 

* The 4th verse ; ** KttdaUkudmndu ** of Periy&zhvkrNi Tirummhi, 
(V *4*4.3 



CH, XXVII. 


RAMANUJA'S WANDERINGS. 


m 


he replied. There, is our Ramanuja doing well F Is ail going 
on well with our blessed Lord Ranga P” asked they. “ Good folk, 
where is God ? What do we care for His blessed state P Know 
that our Master Ramanuja had to desert Sriraugam on account 
of Chola’s persecutions, and we know not whither he has 
strayed away in this wilderness ”, replied they in grief. On, 
hearing this, the men ceased their work in the fields, and fot 
six days searched for R&manuja without food and water. On the 
sixth night, in the gloom, they heard men’s voices. They were 
sure the voices were like the voices of Br&hmanas. They 
listened. R&m&nuja’s party also had sighted a fire which the* 
searching party had lit on a field to warm themselves. For it 
was a dark night, rainy and chilly. R&m&nuja had reached 
the foot of a hill and his other disciples had joined him. They 
were all wet and hungry and shivering with cold. And R&mdr 
nuja, after descrying the light, was asking his disciples to 
carry him thither. The search-party guessed already they 
must be the objects of their search ; but of course were not 
sure ; and so, as soon as they heard their conversation, cried 
out : — “ Hither, sirs, come hither, we shall show you the way.” 
They joined one another. The guests were led to the blazing 
fire and warmed ; dry clothes were provided and every service 
was gladly rendered to make them comfortable. And then they 
inquired : “ Whence are you all coming, sirs P” “ From Srl- 
rangam,” they said. “ What is our R&mAnuja doing there P” 
they queried. R&manuja kept silent, but his disciples asked ; — 
u How do ye, good men, know R&m&nuja ?” “ Sirs,” they said,, 
“our guru is Nall An Chakravarti . 1 The last advice he left 
with ns was that RamAnuja should be cherished in our hearts 
as the Grand Guru ; and that His holy feet alone were our Way 
to salvation. Thus we know R&m&nuja.” “ Then here he is.” 
So saying, they pointed out R&m&nuja amongst them. On this 


1 This was the personage who performed cremation to a Chanel Ala's 
dead body which came floating down the Vaigai river near KAnchi, inas- 
much as the body bore the marks of Discus and Conch, the symbols 
of Tishnn. The townsfolk resented this, bat Lord Varada said 
* MMl®d@uGuiT&)®)irm 9 su>£(giBiteiirdF* i.e., “ He is bad to you, 
but good to mo.” 



FOREST-MEN AND KONGIIi. 


CH. XXVII 


174 


discovery, they fell on their faces and. clinging fondly to his feet, 
wept for joy. They then brought grain and honey in abnnd^ 
Mice $ and new pots, in which to fry the former, pound it into 
powder, and mix with honey and eat it. Ram&nuja and his 
men gratefully partook of the same, after having been greatly 
exhausted by journeys and elemental inclemencies ; and retired 
for a long-wished-for rest. 

The next morning, they were all up and prepared to 
continue their journey northwards towards the hills and 
beyond. One of the forest-men and one disciple 1 were 
chosen to Cany tidings to Srirangam and inquire how* it fared 
with Kur&sa ; and the rest — forty-flye disciples, it is written — 
journeyed noithward, guided by the forest-men. They perform- 
ed about six days’ journey and reached a certain fastness in 
the heart of the Nilagiri Hill range, where the chief of the 
forest-men lived. The chief was gone out hunting. The guides 
conducted their holy party however to his house, where they 
were introduced to the chief’s wife, whom, as their high mis- 
tress, they addressed thus : — “ Madam, these holy men are our 
Gurus ; we commend them to your care. Pray attend to all 
their wants, and whatever it may cost, debit it to us and write 
off the same in the accounts against wages due to us by your 
master.” Thus entrusting their holy burden to good hands, 
they departed. The chief now returned from his hunting, and 
was told all. “ How can we eat, while these good men are 
hungry,” he said, and despatched his men to conduct them to 
a neighbouring village, to the house of a Br&hmana, named 
KfcU&lai-v&ri, sending an abundance of provisions to entertain 
them with, without the least delay. The messengers saw this 
done and returned and reported the same to their chief. 

The wife of KaMalai-v&ri was the reputed Kongil-pir&tti 
or Chel&fiehalknb& *. She prostrated herself before them 
and asked whether she might not cook for them. They replied 
in the negative. w To whose feet* sirs, do ye belong f* sho 


* This Is said to bo M&ruH-y4nd&u. Another, AmmartgikmmfU, is 
sold to have also accompanied them. 

* For brevity, we shall call her Kongd. 




CH. XXVII. 


KONGIL’S ACCO0NT. 


175 


inquired. “ R&m&nuja,” they replied. “ Doubt not* sirs, I 
also belong to him,” rejoined she. “ Strange* pray give an 
account how that came about/’ asked the guests. “Sirs/* 
she began* “ once rains failed* and famine was on the land. We 
therefore left our native land and went to Srirangam j where 
myself and my husband engaged a house* living on the second 
floor thereof, I was daily watching R&m&nuja emerging into 
the streets, after his morning’s duties in the temple were ful- 
filled, for the sake of entering seven houses to collect his daily 
alms. As his holiness strolled in the streets like a very god on 
earth, many people fell at his feet ; among the number 1 parti- 
cularly observed Akalankan^Ltt-Azhv^n, the husband of Tripurfc- 
d&vi. One day, R&m&nuja entered my poor house. Observing 
it, I ran down the stairs and stood behind a door, attentive. 
“ Good dame, what is in thy mind,” he asked me, and I 
humbly said: — “Holy Sire, thou comesfc a-begging to poor 
peoples* houses, whilst I see kings fall at thy feet in the 
streets. Please solve this mystery for me.” He said Dear 
daughter, I tell these men bits of news about God ; and they be* 
come attached to my person. And it is my duty to go to poor 
houses, and go anywhere where there may be people who wish 
to hear good tidings of God.” Then, Holy Father,” said I» 
“ may I not be tlie recipient of a little of it ?” “ Surely,” said 
he, “and he told me what was good for me and took his depar- 
ture. Now rains fell, and famine had left our land, and we 
resolved to join our native country j but I bad forgotten 
the good advice given to me by R&ra&nuja. I was troubl- 
ed and did not know what to do. As I was pensive how- 
ever, R&m&nuja suddenly dropped into our poor house 
again. I ran down the stairs to meet him and excusing 
myself for my bad memory, begged of him to tell the 
tidings of God once more to me, as I was about to leave Sri- 
rangam for my native village . Looking upon me graciously* 
be impressed upon me once more the Dvaya-mantra* along 
with the Holy Names of all the Apostles of our faith* God 
downwards and ending w ith himself. He was leaving me ; but 
I entreated him to stay a while and bestow on me something 
which I might carry in remembrance and which I might 



174 


KOmiVB TESTS. 


Cft XXV IT. 


Worship as my saviour. And lie was so kind as to grant me his 
holy sandals. And then myself and my husband returned 
home with this blessed gift. Never since have I had the joy 
of seeing Mm&nuja again. It is many years ago now.” Rama- 
nuja heard all this, but he was half in cognito , wearing the 
white garments of Ktir&sa and many days had gone past, so 
that Kongil had not recognised him yet. Learning, as he did, 
the account given, he gave her permission to cook and com- 
manded a disciple of his to watch her performances. She left and 
her procedure was thus : — By repeating : * Blessed be R&mft- 
Wuja,’ she sprinkled her head with water so consecrated. She 
washed the whole house with cowdung and water, took fresh 
pots, and wearing a clean washed cloth, cooked meals, all the 
time mutturing the holy prabandha , and after placing the viands 
in clean baskets, entered into her chapel. Here she placed 
B&mknuja’s sandals on a raised dais, and repeating : “ R&m&- 
nuja’s Holy Feet are my sole refuge,” offeied the viands she 
carried, and returning to the guests, begged them to wash 
their feet and get ready to discuss the meals before it became 
cold. The disciple, told out to watch her, was now called aside 
by Rfcm&nuja to give an account and he recounted eatactly all 
that she did, but he said •“ It was dark in the chapel. There 
were two black objects, which looked long, which she worship- 
ped and to which she offered food.” “ Daughter,” called her 
R&m&nuja, ** please let us see what you worshipped in the dark.” 
She brought them and said : — “ Holy Sire, these are the sandals 
of my R&mAnuja, which he gave to me at Srirangam. I daily 
worship them and eat only after offering food to them. And 
this day I did the same. Nothing more.” R&m&nttja mea- 
sured them with his feet, and said : — “ Curious enough, they 
suit me ; but come here, daughter.” She approached and he 
whispered into her ears thus : — “ Daughter, know that these 
disciples of mine are very strict. They see the sandals suit my 
feet, but this does not quite satisfy them however, please let mo 
hear what B&m&nuja taught thee.” Kongil repeated the mantra 
taught her before. u Good, but dost thou discover R&manuja 
in this band ? ” asked R&m&nuja. Kongil returned inside and 
bringing a light examined R&m&nuj&’s feet, and exclaimed : — 



cn. xxvil 


ramXnuja journeys on. 


w 


<< Sire, your feet are indeed like RAmanuja’s, but you wear white 
robes which lie did not and could not as a Sany&sin. I am con* 
fused, Father.” R4m&nuja, moved by her anxiety and no longer 
wishing to hide himself from her said : — “ Dear daughter, I 
am R&m&nuja.” On hearing this, her confusion turned into joy 
and wonder. She fell on her face and nestling to his feet, 
wept for joy. “ Disciples,” said R&m&nuja, turning to them : 
u now there need be no more hesitation on your part to eat her 
food. Sri Krishna ate Vidura’s food, for it was pure and 
good. 1 Such is our Kongil’s food. Go and eat” They did 
so, but Ramanuja did not. So Kongil was troubled and cried * 
“ Rut bow about you, father?” “Daughter,” he said, “you 
see the food has been offered to my sandals. So I cannot eat 
that.” “ Then, father,” said she, “ I shall bring milk and 
fruits ; offer them to your God and eat.” Rftmannja did so. 
and all then rested, steeped in bliss. 

The devout Kongil collected the remnants of food left, 
after they all ate, and taking it and the foot-washed water of 
Ram&nuja to her husband, who was sleeping aloft, roused him 
and let him eat. But he saw her fasting. “ Why dost thou 
not eat, dear?” asked he. “Lord,” she answered, “Il&mA- 
nuja and his disciples have come to our house from Sri- 
rangam, and they have slept away without taking food.” 
“ What can I do, lady ?” he asked. “ Cannot you, Lord, be- 
come Ramanuja’s disciple?” “If you please,” said he, On 
obtaining this promise on the ruse, she ate and went to rest 
after her hard day’s loving labour. Next day, she awoke and 
approaching Ramanuja, entreated him to etay yet longer, and 
deign to take her husband to his fold by administering to him 
necessary Vaishnava-sacraments. II© gladly consented and 
did every thing needed and reading to them many a useful 
lesson for their future welfare, sojourned in their good home 
for a few days, and taking leave of the good pair by blessing 
them, pursued his journey. 

1 [Maluibhdrata, Udyoga : 90-12. j 


523 



m 


sAligrAma. 


ch. xxvin. 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


BAMANTJJA AND MAISUB. 

The N iUgiri Range was thus traversed, and threading their 
way with toil north-west , 1 * * they reached Vahni-Pushkarini 
Resting here for a few days, they made their way to Mifchild- 
S&ligrilma.* Here they found the place full ©f Ylra-Saivas, or 
staunch adherents of Sivaism, who gave the new arrivals scant 
or no welcome. Ram&nuja hit upon a method to turn their 
minds. He called D&sarathi to his side and said:— “Son, 
hero is the fountain from which the village folk carry their 
drinking water for their households. Unnoticed by them, dip 
your feet into the water and watch the effect.” He did as hid. 
The villagers drank the water and their hostility for the new 
comers turned into civility. They even went bo far as to 
become R&m&nnja’s followers in Faith. A memento of this 
incident of the water, magnetized by the holy feet of the best of 
his disciples, effecting a miracle, is to this day still preserved in 
the shape of a small shrine erected on the spot, in which are in- 
stalled the feet ©f R&mftnuja for devout worship by all, and 
tho holy fountain is closo by, connected with the shrine by a 
flight of steps, by which every pilgrim descends into it and 
reverently sprinkles the waters over his head. “The town 
deserves the name of Sdligrdma , i. the stone symbol of 
Vishnu,” said R&inknuja in joy, on account of this strange event. 

Of the many who embraced the Faith here, tho chief was 
Vaduga-nambi or Andhra-purna , 4 who became a most devout 
and intimate follower. R&manuja taught him all the arcane 
truths of religion for days, in the Temple of the Lord Nara- 


1 The exact route is not recorded 
Ml far as oar information goes. 

Mnianuja seems to have followed 
the course of the K&vori as far as 
Satyamangaiam, then taking a 
chord line, reach K&veri again at 

Mum n ft t h a gt tu*aiu. 

# Ha in mi t.Ii pu r> on the Kaveri 
Hirer, about 40 miles* nest of 
X) sore. 


8 Now known as Mirle and S&li- 
grama, two villages, about 80 miles 
west of Mysore. 

4 The Shrine above named belongs 
to the descendants of this disciple 
who are related to myself, the writer 
of this book. The village is reput- 
ed to be unaffected by cobra-poison, 
for K&iu&r.uju is Sesha. 


CH. xxvnr. 


KING VITHALA-DEVA. 


179 


simha, in the outskirts of the village. And here also, it is 
chronicled, R&manuja prayed fervently to Lord SrinivAsa of 
Tirupati to put an end to the cruel Par&ntaka or the Chola king 
and heretic, his tormentor, persecutor and the declared enemy of 
the Srivaishnava-faith. It would appear that this intense 
invocation to the Deity produced its effect inasmuch as Ch6la 
found a carbuncle — the king’s evil — forming on the nape of his 
neck, festering with worms, and eventually killing him after 
much torment. Hence he is known as Krimikmtha Chola, or 
worm-necked Ch6]a, 

R&m&nuja now left Saligr&ma and proceeded eastwards 
to Tondanur, which seems to have been then the capital or a 
capital outpost of the Hoysala Ball Ala kings of the Jain 
persuasion ruling at Dv&ra-samudra or Haldbid. 1 2 * 4 Vithala- 
Deva-R&ya was the name of the ruling king and he had his 
head quarters at the time, at Tondanur.* He had a daughter 
whom an unclean spirit had taken possession. The king had 
called many physicians and magicians to treat her, but it was all 
in vain , and he was very grieved. There was a good man 
in the town by name Tondanur-Nambi, who lived by alms. He 
used to frequent the palace, and one day finding the queen, Stln- 
tala-D&vi 8 in grief, asked her the cause thereof. She explained 
that it was due to the condition in which her daughter was 
found, who even shamelessly ran about the streets naked, and 
did other antic things, all in consequence of the devil which 
had entered into her. T. Nambi said ; “ Noble Queen, may 

I tell you that a great and holy man, by name Rtkn&nuja, 
has arrived at our town. I have become his disciple ; and 
I have learnt that he once treated a similar case to that 
of your daughter, and succeeded in delivering a princess' 
from an evil spirit — a Brahma -rakshas} If you will get him 


1 Vide Biceps Gazetteer of Mysore. 

2 Known now as Tonn&r, about 16 miles north of Mysore on the 
way to MeluVote. Even so late as 1316 A.C. the kings used to retire to 
Tondanur. [Pp: £41 ~2 Vel. I Bioe’s “ Mysore Gazetteer.”] 

• See p. 41 Introd : Kice r o * Belagoia Inscription*/' 

4 See page* 41, 42, 




m 


KIND’S INVITATION. 


ch. xxvm. 


to se,e jour daughter with his gracious cjes, I have hopes of a 
speedy Cure for her.” The queen was overjoyed at this revela- 
tion and communicated it at once to her royal spouse. He 
said ■ •“ Lady, if R&m&nuja will cast the devil out of our 
daughter and restore her to a sense of shame, we shall fall at 
his feet and accept him as our guru.” 

In the meanwhile, the king intended to give a feast to his 
caste- men, the Jainas who abounded in the country. The queen 
however warned her husband thus: — ‘‘Lord, thou givest a 
feast no doubt, but thy castemen, the Jainas / will reject thy 
invitation on the score that thou art wanting in a finger of thy 
hand.” “How can they dare refuse a king’s invitation?” 
said the king irritated, and consulted his kinsmen about 
it. They said: — “King, the Turuslika 1 emperor of Delhi, 
captured thee and thy country j and set a mark on thee to 
show that thou hadst lost thy independence and sovereignty, 
by depriving thee of a finger. But our custom does not allow 
us to oat in the house of a fmgcr-less man. Dost thon forget 
thou art called Ih*£H-d6va, 2 or the fiuger-lbord ?. We refuse to 
eat in thy house.” This greatly incensed the king and |ie 
vowed vengeance against them. f 

The queen approached Bifcti-deva and said “ Lord, why 
art thou concerned thus ? What care we for our kinsmen ? Let 
us dissociate ovrselves from their community and join the 
Yaishnava lanks by becoming disciples of R&m&nuja. Hast 
thou forgotten what our Nambi told us about him ? And is 
not our mad daughter also to be set right ?” “ Well said, we 

shall at once send for R&mauuja,” said Bitti-deva, and sent out 
men to invito Rtkn&nuja to his palace. But when the men 
delivered their message to R&manuja, who had camped outside 
the town limits, he told them that he would not plant his foot 
in kings’ cities. Nambi was there at the time. He rose and 
falling before Ram&nuja, pleaded thus : — “ Holy Sire, we 
beseech thee not to be so determined, but enter the king’s house. 

1 Or Turk, a general name for all foreign invaders, except the Yava» 
mm and the Feringbees. Bead A. Barth’s Mi&ion* of India : I\ 2 H. 

* Converted into Sanskrit as V»ff/taZu-dev a. 





ce. xxvru. 


VISHNU-VARDHANA-RAYA. 


181 


He will be an invaluable gain to our faith. Melokote or Tiru- 
NarAyana-puram, 1 about w'hich thou hast been dreaming, is 
situate in this king’s dominions. Thy desire is to restore this 
old and forgotten place of worship. To do this we want 
a king to espouse the cause. So we earnestly pray thee 
not to reject the king’s overtures. Enter his house and 
shower on him thy graces.” R&m&uuja was won by this 
persuasion and immediately made his entry into the city and 
the king’s mansion. Bitti-deva 'was elated with joy, and as the 
holy sage advanced, he ran to him and threw himself at his 
feet. Ram&nuja made kind inquiries, and entering the royal 
apartments was told the sad plight in which the king’s daugh- 
ter was. He commanded his disciples to have the girl brought 
before him and sprinkle her with the water made holy by the 
washing of his feet. This they did. And lo, the evil spirit 
left her ; she was no more demented but returned to a sense 
of shame, ran into the inner apartments and shrouding herself 
in garments, returned and fell before Ram&nuja, saying ; “ Holy 
Saint, thou art no ordinary mortal. Thou art a celestial being 
descended from heaven. Else I should not have recovered. 
Praise be to thee. I bow to thee.” Vitthaia-deva was simply 
carried out of himself on witnessing these miracles, and need- 
less to say, at once became a disciple of RAm&uuja, and 
devoted himself to his service for ever. Ram An uja bestowed on 
him the name of Y i shnu- V ardh ana -RAy a.* 


3 Ram&nnja knew of this from tho 
Yddaragiri-MAhdtmya contained in 
the Nora da and the Mafsya Fur&nas. 

8 The Indian Antiquary Yol. II. 
May 1873 quotes a passage from 
Sr&vana Belagula Sthalapurana 
thus : — “ In Saka year 1039, Dor 
mnkhi ( = lll7 A. C.), Betta-var- 
dhaiia, under the taunts of his 
favourite concnbine(?)and the argu- 
ments of Bam b n u jac hiiry a, received 
Tapta-mudrA (mark of religion) and 
thus became a convert to the Yaish- 
nava religion. He then changed his 
name to Vishrm-vardhana, and with 
ft bitter hatred against this (Jaina) 
religion, discontinued or abolished 


all the indm s, destroyed 790 Basti 
temples, and set up Pancha NAr4- 
yanas, viz : — Chennigi-N&r&yana at 
BtMitru, Ktrti-N&rilyana at Talak&du, 
Vijaya-N&r&yana at Gadugu, and 
Lak sh ini* N 4r&y ana at Haradana- 
halli, transferring to these all the 
8vd*thya» or in&uis that had former- 
ly been given to the Basti temples. 
He built the tank at Tondandru 
from the stones of the destroyed 
Basti temples and called it Tira- 
malas&gara. Having abolished 
different kinds of Jaina in Am 8 
* # • he established below 

this tank Tirum&las&gara ehatra fov 
the feeding of the BAm&nnja-kfttm* 



182 \XOTOET OVEE J AINAS. OH- XXVIII. 


Th© Jainas rose in revolt against R&m&nuja. It is said 
that a body of 12,000 of them marched to R&m&nuja, who had 
taken his abode in Lord Nnsimha’s temple at Tondanur, and 
demanded of him that he should first argue with them on 
religion and philosophy, before he interfered with their king, 
li&m&nuja seeing this tremendous onslaught of an infuriated 
crowd, thought to himself thus : — “ In order to escape from 
lightning, I have courted thunder ; fearing the scorpion, I 
have fallen a victim to the fangs of a cobra ; breaking away 
from fetters, I have thrust myself into stocks. What is the 
way now ? ” Nambi, finding his guru thus embarassed, said :~r 
“ Holy Sire, thou art no ordinary mortal. Is not it thy 
worth while at such a crisis to reveal thy true celestial nature ? 
May not all men realize thy greatness and be saved P ” Rama- 
nuja, saying : “let it be so then/' retired into an ante-chamber 
in the temple, and commanding a curtain to be hung up 
between him and the crowd, became a thousand-headed ser- 
pent, 1 and argued with the Jaina disputants in a thousand 
ways, vanquishing them completely. This incident is memo- 
rialized to this day by means of a painting of R&m&nuja, over- 
shadowed by the thousand heads of S&sha, on a wall in the 
Nri&imha temple, existing to this day in good repair in Tonda- 


(Continued) foot note on page 181. 

He gave the name of Mtduk&te and A. C). So E&ra&nuja must have 
Tirunkriyapsparain to the village lived for not less than 20 years in 
dt Doddagur uganaha] 1 i, constr acted the Mysore country* Mndaliytin- 
several temple® and places, and d&n (D&sarathi) was deputed to 
caused steps to be erected to the Beldr (=* Vel&pura) to inaugurate 
hill of Melukoto.** According to the N&rayana there. So sings the 
Beldr inscription : NAr&yana Pra- verse 
tlshfchh took place in ‘ 1039. S »(U17 

e&^&Lj&grrewrLjrfafr Q&§$irQ*fr6Vs&(3<&&(t2«tfl 

aeasf^esr l 9 ir ^hl.&DL^U6m&ssfJ, (BfHr®st*uu$u9w 

j$esr6on$.etDU} ujr^GDiDwu^^QiiTjsmws 
sir pjd^Qu&ar 

[P t Ei8, KAm&mi ju-Di vya-C haritam J 

1 RAmhnuja being known as the Adi-SSsha, is the Lakshmana of RAmA- 
and Bslsrkma of Mabft-Rliarato [See p : xiv.—eur Mt*gamd*gtt4 
sdih BimAunja’s commentary.} 



CH; XXVin. TANK CONSTRUCTED. 


183 


nur (called Chaturvedi-mangalam.) Most of them embraced 
the Vaishnava faith by becoming the disciples of R&m&imja. 
Y ishnu* V ardhana, the king of the Poysala (Hoysala) country 
became more and more attached to R&m&imja, Out of the 
materials of Jain temples pulled down, he got a tank con- 
structod, intercepting the drainage of the river Y&dava coming 
down from M61uk6te or Yadavagiri, 10 miles to the north. 1 


X A few notes bearing on these 
events may be of use to the reader. 

(A) Rice’s Mysore Gazetteer Vol. II, 
p.274 [1897] Moti Tal&b” or 
take of pearls, a large tank at Ton* 
ndr in Seringapatna Taluq. It is 
formed by an embankment carried 
across a gap between two rocky 
hills, which stems the water of the 
Y&dava-nadi and other mountain 
torrents that there unite their 
streams. The mound, whose di- 
mensions are given as 78 cubits 
high* 150 long, and 260 thick at the 
base, is said to have been construct* 
ed by B&m&rjuj&ch&rya, the 8rl 
Vaishnava Br&hman reformer, who 
had taken np his abode at the neigh- 
bouring flown of MAlukoto. He 
named the tank Tirumalas&gara.” 

(B) Ibid, Vol. I, p. 474:— “Ho 
(It&manuja) then travelled over 
great parts of Southern India, de- 
fending and expounding the Vaish- 
nava creed. lie established seve- 
ral maths, the principal one being 
at Ahobala. He also converted or 
restored many Siva temples to the 
worship of Vishnu, among others 
tho celebrated temple of Tirupati. 
The Chola King Karikftla Chola, 
in whose dominion Sri Banga was 
situated, was an un-compromising 
Saiva, and on RamanujachArya 1 ' 1 
return thither after these religions 
successes he was required in com- 
mon with all the Brahmans to 
subscribe to a declaration of faith 
in giva. To escape persecution 
he fled to the Hoysala kingdom in 
Mysore. Here he converted from 
the Jain faith the king thencefor- 
ward known as Vishnu vardhana, 
;ke date assigned to 'this event 


being 1117 (?). Having put down 
the Jains by the severest mea- 
sures, ho settled under the royal 
favour and protection at Melukote, 
and there established his throne, 
which is still occupied by the guru 
known sb the Parak&lasv&nri (?) 
After twelve years, onthe death of 
the Chol& king, he returned to Sri- 
ranga and there ended his days.” 

(C) Ibid, Vol . I, p. 888, — An im- 
portant event in his (BallAla or 
Bittideva) career was his conver- 
sion from the Jain faith to that of 
Vishnu by the apostle BAmAnujA- 
ch&rya, who had taken refuge in 
the Hoysala territory from tho 
persecutions of the Chola king, au 
uncompromising Saiva. This stop, 
accompanied by a change of hia 
name to Vi shnuvard liana, by which 
ho is principally known, was pro- 
bably takon in about 1117 (?), Diffe- 
rent reasons aro given for it. One 
is that he bad a daughter who was 
possessed ; the Jains being unable 
to effect her cure, it was undertaken 
by K&zn&nuja, who cast out the evil 
spirit, and further, in eighteen days 
of public disputation, refuted the 
Jains and convicted them of heresy * 
those who after this would not 
submit being ground in oil-mills (?) 
Another version is, that tho king 
had a Vaishnava wife who, by in- 
stigation of B Amino ja, hinted to 
him that the Jaina priests were so 
haughty they would not even accept 
food at bis hands. He was indig- 
nant at the idem and resolved to put 
it to the proof. Now the king had 
lost a finger, a mutilation that 
would prevent the Jain priests' from 
eating with him. When, therefore, 



GAZETTEER NOTES. 


CH. XXV Hit 


134 


(Continued) foot note on page 183. 


ho found himself dishonoured by a 
refusal of his invitation, he went 
over in resentment to the other 
side, and abandoned tho Jains to 
persecution, Jt&ra&naja demolished 
nearly all the Jain temples at the 
capital, said to have been 720 in 
number, and used the stones in 
embanking the large tank.'* 

(D) Ibid , Vol. //, p. 295 !-“* * 
Subsequently, about 1X17, (P) R&m&- 
nojUoh&rya, the celebrated apostle 
of the Vishnuvite sect, on fleeing 
from Dravida to avoid a confession 
of faith prescribed by the Chola 
IUja to bo made by all his subjects, 
which was to establish the supe- 
riority of Siva over Vishnu, took 
refuge in the Mysore country, 
whore he succeeded in converting 
from tho Jain faith the powerful 
Hoysala king, BittrDeva, thence- 
forth known as Vishnuvardhana. 
This royal convert conferred on his 
apostle and his followers the tract 
of country on each side of tho river 
KHvori at Brirangaputna, known 
by the name of Ashtagrilma or 
eight townships, over which ho 
appointed Ins own officers under the 


ancient designations of Prabhus 
and Hebb&rs.'” 

(E) Rice's Sravana Belgola Inscrip* 
tions (No. 53), P. 48 : — (Ipltntala-D&vi, 
Queen of Vishnuvardhana). “ Some 
details are also given of her family, 
from which it appears that her 
father was the senior preggado 
Narasinga, a Saiva, while heir 
mother was M&chikabbe, a devoted 
Jaina. The conflict between her 
own position as a Jaina and as the 
queen of tho now Vaislmava 
monarch Vishnu- vardhana is recon- 
ciled by the statement that Jinan&s 
tha was her favourite and Vishnu 
her God.” 

Rice's Mysore Gazetteer Vol . II , P. 
£50.—“ Belur, in the Puranas and 
ancient inscriptions, bears the name 
of Velapura and Velur, and is 
stylod the Dakshina V&ranusi or 
Southern Benares. Its sanctity is 
due to the colebrated temple of 
Chenna-Kesava, erected and endow- 
ed by tho Hoysala King Vislmuvar- 
dhana, on tho occasion of his 
exchanging the Jain faith for that 
of Vishnu, in the beginning of the 
I2tli century.” , 



CH. XXIX. ItfeLEKOTE Ott SRI-XARAYANAPCRAH. 


CHAPTER XXIX. 

MELUKOTE OR SRI-NARAYANAPURAM. 

R&manuja was thus employed. He not onjy expounded 
the profound truths of the Ved&nia in Nrisimha's temple at 
Tondamlr, luit with those truths converted thousands of alien 
faiths to the royal roads of Vedantic Vaishnavism, While 
thus employed he ran short of Tiruman, 1 or the holy white 
earth, with which Srivaishnavas are required to illumine their 
foreheads. To go without this distinguishing mark 1 is the 
.greatest misfortune to Sri-Vaishnavas. .Naturally therefore 
Ramanuja was much concerned. Me had a dream in which Lord 
Sri-Nar&yanuof Meiukote appeared and spoke thus : — “ 1 am very 
near thee, R&m&nujn, on the Yadugiri hill, awaiting thy arrival ; 
and there thou shalt have thy Tiruman 1 also as well. Come 
soon.” R&m&nuja awoke and related his wonderful dream to all 
his comrades, and sending for Vishnu- Vardhana, the king, 
delivered to him the message. The king marvelled and im- 
mediately ordered gangs of men to clear the forests in the 
direction indicated by Ramanuja, and as JiAm&nuja advanced, 
the- king devoutly followed him behind. Steadily progressing 
thus, they arrived at the foot of the Yadugiri hill, and ascend- 


1 Some notes from Kicc’s Epigra- 
ph ka Carnatakn VoL III. p : 20, are 
here added ; ** — Insert ption 80 Sr. 
records the griftst of the title to the 
sacred earth at Meiukote, which, it 
is said, was discov ered by Emberu- 
manar, or K&manujticharya, the 
great Vaishnava reformer. It is a 
fine white clay or decayed schistose 
mica, which is used by the Srlvaish- 
nava Brahmans for making the 
ndma or sectarian marks on then 
foreheads ; and is in such demand 
for this purpose, on account of its 
purity, that it is transported to 
distant places, even as far as 
Benares. It i« failed to have beet* 
brought to Meiukote by Garntrnan, 
the bird of Vishnu, from Swcta* 
dvtpa in the Ksbirasamudra or 
milk-ocean. 

" Borne Vaishnavas work it by 


digging the whole sutofcanoe out of 
the beds in whicli it lies, and throw- 
ing it into )*trgo vt^sels of water, 
it is stirred about ; and while the 
mica swims, the lag men t« of quarto 
remain at the bottom and are taken 
out by the hand. The unua, is then 
allowed to subside and forms into 
a which is divided into small 

pieces, and afterwards made into 
balls by being moistened in water. 
These are sold for use, and are per- 
fectly white ” [Jfuchmtan. I, 848] # 

s Cp. (o) ** We sign the ser- 
vants of God in their foreheads 
[Bev. 7. 3]. 

(h) “ Which have not the seal of 
God in their foreheads” f Itcv. Jh 4J. 

(r) “ Having his Father’s i*»me 
written in their forehead#*’ [Kev. 


M 



186 


NARAYLVNA DISCOVERED. 


CH. XXIX. 


ing it, arrived at the fountain called VMapushkarini, and 
Righting the holy slab, ( paridhecnasila ), where of yore Dat- 
t&trcya had worn his ascetic robes, Ram&nuja bathed in the 
fountain and laying aside KurSsa,’s w bite robes, worn when leaving 
S i irangam, put on his colored ascetic robes. The date of entry 
into Yadugiri is chronicled as the Bahudhanya year, in the month 
of Tai (or about 1090 A. C., or when Ramanuja was about 80 
years of age). 1 Prom the V&da-pushkarint, they silently 
walked forward in search of where Lord Naray ana ( i.e , His statue) 
lay hidden. They failed that day to find the place Ramanuja 
however saw in a vision vouchsafed to him that He lay covered, 
up in an ant-hill, between a Champaka and a Vakula tree on 
either side, and to the south-west corner of the Kaly&ni-pond, 
and that the ant-hill was overgrown with the sacred basil. He 
also saw that the place where tiruman was deposited lay to the 
north-west corner of the same Kalyani-pond, and lie also heard 
as if Narayana telling him that fragments of basil leaves would 
bo strewn along the path which lay between Ram&nuja and the 
places indicated. R&m&nuja awoke from his reverie and followed 
the directions given. This led to Kalyarn, and thence on to the 
ant-hill. This was covered with basil as prophesied. RAtnanuja 
was transported with joy and prostrating himself before the 
place, removed the earth, and lo, the statue of Narayana was 
found underneath. Inexpressible joy animated the devout band 
who were privileged to be present on this most auspicious and 
blissful occasion ; and the divine sight ho intoxicated them that 
they deliriously danced, chanted praises, sent forth peals of 
hand* clappings and ejaculations, and with king Vishnu-vardham* 
in their midst, celebrated the occasion with a blast of trumpets 
and a beat of tom-toms and a burst of instrumental and other 
music- — all, a united outburst and demonstration of the intense 
spiritual glow in which they had become enveloped by an event, 
the most unusual and extraordinary in the annals of mankind. 
Pails of milk were brought and emptied over the Holy Statue 

1 Mr. Itiee puts 1117 A.C., ns the year of Bitti-Deva’s conversion. 
This must he wrong. Bahudhitnva tallies with 1099, A.C., when R&* 
MLUiuuja was exactly 82 years of age. 



CH XXIX. 


KAXAPRIYA AT UKUIL 


187 


followed by a detail of ritual prescribed by the Pancharaira 
Sastra. Ramanuja himself personally worshipped the Deity for 
three days, and X&rayunit was thus reinstalled after ages of 
oblivion, and the deead of St. NamtnA/.hvdr, beginning with 
Oru-udyakani [Tiruvay mozhi, v-i], was dedicated to this God, 
inasmuch as R&m&imja was the rightful inheritor of all the 
spiritual wealth of the apostles proceeding him , 1 and was thus 
the authority to interpret forgotten traditions. 

Ramanuja next proceeded to the north-west corner of f he 
Kalyani-pond, and made a furrow on the ground with his holy 
staff. It revealed white beds of clay, and thus was another act 
of his vision realized, to the marvel of all present. R&m&nuja 
thus obtained the holy earth he wanted, (described in the begin- 
ning of this Chapter), with which he signed himself on the 
twelve parts of the body prescribed, and to his great delecta- 
tion. 


The jungle over the summit of the Mclukote (Y&davagiri) 
hill was cleared away, streets were aligned, rows of houses 
built, a temple erected for Lord Xarayana over the ant-hill ; 
and a series of festivals, monthly, annual and so on were insti- 
tute;!. But an utsava (processional) image was wanting — an im- 
age cast of a compound of five select metals in fixed proportions. 
But this was difficult of accomplishment, and Ramanuja fell to 
musing deeply as to how r this difficulty was to be overcome. Ho 
was again given a vision, in which Xarayana appeared to him 
and spoke thus : — “ Raimtnuja, our moveable representative is 
alive, named R&nmpriya, which is now in Delhi with the Turk 
Emm&du Raya. Proceed there and bring it. Raman uja 
accordingly made preparations and journeyed all the way to 
Delhi and there meeting the Raya or king, prevailed upon him 
to grant his request. The Turk king gave orders that Rama- 
nuja be taken to the apartments where his plundered treasures 
were hoarded. There were many idols, but Ramanuja failed 
to find among them R&mapriya; and he fell into a reverie as ho 


1 Read verse: dj® Gu^if^ n [U&m&nuj.Va tuniyan by Anan- 

d&zhv&n or Anantastiri.) 



sampatkumara installed 


CH. XXIX; 


ibg 


pondered bow to trace it. He was given a di*eam in which 
R&mapriya appeared and said : — “ I am with the daughter of 
the king. She has made a plaything of me. To her dally* 
ings and caresses, I axn a living person. Come there and find 
me/* Ramanuja awoke and reported to the king that the idol 
he sought was with the Sult&ni. The king y s curiosity was 
roused at the revelations, a foreign S any asm of a different 
persuasion was making to him; and not only cun osity but respect 
and adoration for the holy saint. The King took the Sanyasin 
Rtaikmja into the seraglio, where no other man dared enter ; 
and wonderful to relate, Ilam&priya was there found, fondled by , 
the Sult&ni, his daughter, to whom He played the husband. 
R&m&nuja, entering, called Him by His name, and lo, the Image 
jumped down from the couch on which the Sult&ni had placed 
Him, and walked to where Ramanu ja stood, in all the glory and 
grace of an incarnated deity, embellished according to all the 
ideals of taste natural to Aryan imagination. R&m&nuja 
embraced the advancing Divine Beauty with all the fondness of 
a parent finding his long-lost son ; and in commemoration of the 
discovery, called him by the endearing name of Selva- p-pillai, 
which in Samskrit is Sampatkumara, by which name the Image 
is still called. The king, who witnessed all this procedure was 
simply astonished beyond measure, and loading Ram&nuja with 
gifts and honors, sent him back from the scene of his holy 
mission. 

The daughter Sult&ni would not hear the separation from 
the, to her, living doll. She wanted it hack for herself. But 
the father said : “ It is their god, daughter ; how can we claim 
Him ? ” “ Then,” cried the Sult&ni piteously to her father : 

“Send me with my God. “ Most cheerfully,” said the father, 
and allowed her to depart with untold wealth and other 
things, telling R&in&nuja “ Holy hermit, thy God goes 
not alone, but with a wife as well — a precious wife. I con- 
sign her to thy care. 1 * R&m&nuja proceeded wdth his Divine 
treasure, and reached Y&davagiri in due time. Here he 
inaugurated Sam pat -ku mar a in all ceremony, and instituted all 
the festivals which must be celebrated throughout the year, 
with the necessary establishment to conduct them for all time k> 



CH. XXIX. 


THE MOSLEMS (EMM AD) 


come . 1 And Ramanuja assured all who made Y&davagiri their 
holy residence, that they would be entitled to attain to the 
same spiritual state as himself. By the name N&rAyarhUiri in 


1 Our readers, we are sure, would 
like to have some historical light 
thrown on this most curious inci- 
dent in the life of Ramanuja. W e 
shall try how far it can be thrown. 
The word Emtn&du is a clue, — a 
philological clue which comes to 
our help. Eminkdu is a most pro- 
bable corruption of the word Ma- 
hornmed, Mahmud, Ahmed, Masud 
or Modhd. These are the names 
of the Turk Kings of Ghazni and 
Mahmtid of Ghor, at the period 
between about KM) and 1102, A C. 
1090 A.C., is the probable year of 
KAmauuja’s entry into Yadavagiri 
or Melukote * and the probable year 
in which or before which the Jain 
King of the Hoysalas, Vittala-deva, 
was converted to Vaishnavisin, re- 
ceiving the name of Vishnu-var- 
dhana. The death of this king was 
about 1133 A.C., as we learn from 
Rico's Sr&vana Belagoja inscrip* 
tions. [In trod : p. 23] . 

Puranas (read Yd.iuvagiri-M&hdt • 
m*/a) tell us that R&mapriya, the 
image descended as a holy heritage 
from R&tna of the Solar Race to 
Kuna his son and came to Krishna 
of the Lunar Race, as dowry, who 
worshipped Him as his tutelary 
God. 

Mahmud ( EmmAdu ?) or Mahom- 
ined of Ghazin’s various expedi- 
tions into India are known, and his 
foundation of the MusulrnAn Em- 
pire at Lahore in A C. 1922 [See 
p. 6, Ch. II, Lethbridge’s History 
of India], the sack of the SomnUth 
Temple in A.C. 1026-27, when R&j- 
pufc princes from all parts flocked to 
defend their holiest shrine assem- 
bled In the sacking and booty 
obtained thus from various parts, 
Ramapriya appears to have been 
carried away. How He was car- 
ried away from Mel u koto is buried 
in the obecnre tradition of pre- 
historic days. Mahmud died in 
A.C, 1030. Ahmed ( Eminddu ?) 


succeeded him, and then came 
Maaud the Second (Emmddu ?) in 
A.C. 1098 who resided chiefly at 
Lahore, and whose generals carried 
his arms beyond the Ganges [vide 
p 305, Elphinstone's History of 
India]. Then comes Modud (Km- 
mad ?), and lastly Mahmhd (Ein- 
m&d) of Ghor. The latter establish- 
ed the Delhi empire no doubt in 
1191, but he had exploited often in 
India, Rut he might be left out 
of account for our purpose. 

Ramapriya’s image seems to have 
been carried hither and tin i her in 
these days of turmoil, and thrown 
into lumber in Delhi or perhaps 
Lahore gaurded by some king, a 
general or viceroy of any of the 
Emtudduf, at the time K&m&nuja 
visited the place. 

It is probable that by the chief 
name Mahmhd (or EmmAdu), any 
king, or his general or viceroy 
who stationed himself at the time 
at Delhi, was known in the far 
south. And even a Hindu sove- 
reign at Delhi might have been 
called by that name, if there w r ns 
one at the time, inasmuch as he 
was subjected to the ouslaughts of 
Musalmans of the period. But an 
account given by Buchanan [p. 85 l f 
Vol. I], confirms what otherwise 
would be a mere conjecture. He 
says : — “ Near the place (Tonda- 
nur), there is* a monument dedi- 
cated to one of the fanatical fol- 
lowers of Mahmud Ghazni , who had 
penetrated this length, and had 
here suffered martyrdom” By 
this it is clear that Mahmud 
Ghazni's depredations bad extend- 
ed as far as Melukote, the temple of 
which he would surely have dese- 
crated and despoiled of its riches. 
If all this is not quite satisfac- 
torily tenable, we must speculate 
upon R&mAnuja’s visiting Lahore or 
Ghazni itself; but then we have no 
tradition to that effeet unless by 




190 


THE PANORAMAS. 


CH. XX*X ( 


the Krita-yage, Vedadri in the Trita-age, and Yadavadri or 
Y&davagiri in Dv&para age is the holy hill of Melukote known, 
and in the Kali-age, as having been restored by the Yati 
(ascetic) RamAnuja, it is called Yati-Saila. Thus it is written 
in Sdlvata-Samhita 1 (PAncharAtra). 

Foot note on page 189 (.continued). 


the general term Delhi, any chief 
city or even the country generally 
of the Musalmans in the far north- 
west of India, was understood by 
the far Southerns of India in those 
days. 

Uuchanan’s account of this in- 
cident given in his Journals, I, 
842, is very interesting, and deals 
with what became of the Moslem 
Sultftni as soon as she arrived at 
Melukote; and how the Pariahs or 
Chatnars or Pauehanias who assist- 
ed R&m&nuja were givon by RamA,- 
mija the honorific title of Tint-k- 
kulattdr , &e. This word means : 
The blessed caste. RAmftnuja gave 
them the privilege ot' entering into 
the Holy Temples of Melkote, Sri- 
rangam and Belur (in Mysore), once 
in the year. R&i D&s, a Pariah or 
Chamor, and a disciple of Rfuna- 
naiuli, the disciple of Rtumtnuja, 
set afoot a movement for the re- 
generation of his class, between 
1820 and 1830, in the district of 
Chattisgarh. The}' called them- 
selves Satnamis. Readers are re- 
ferred to Pp : 206, ff. of Theoso- 
phist, Vol. XI, 1890, for an account 
of this reform. We refer our 
readers to our pamphlet on the 
Patlchaums, and also to pp. 272-8, 
of Rice’s Gazetteer, Vol. II, 1897, 
where other interesting informa- 
tion as regards Melukote Temple 


and its endowments is given, as 
also the fact of the Maharajas of 
Mysore having been Vaislmavaa. 
We shall add an interesting account 
which may be of some philological 
use, even though the account may 
not be true. A work called Yavani- # 
parinaya has been written by Pra- 
bhakara, the subject matter being 
the mairiage of Sampat-kumara 
with the Sultaui. It is usual in 
Hindu-marriages to read the lineal 
pedigree of both the bride and the 
bridegroom. For Sampafc-kurn&ra, 
Harita-gotra is assigned as He is the 
holy son of Rfun&nuja, and for Sul- 
t&ni, who is Yavani, G&rgya-gotra 
is assigned. To Hindus, all foreig- 
ners are Yavanas and Mlecches. 
So the Turk-girl is Yavani. The 
philological interest to us here con- 
sists in introducing Rishi G&rgya. 
Yavanas proper are Greeks; and 
Gargya is said to have beirotton 
Kkltt- Yavana ; and thus G&rgya 
(Greek) becomes the patriarchal 
progenitor of the Greeks. Vishuu- 
pur&na V. 23, 4 and 6 : — u 

i *rra tr^m - 
ii a^rar^Hur, 

<Sic. Also see Harivamsa : 115-16 : — 

“ ^Tg^TTiwriqt i 

<wiww«Tisrr*r 11 » 

See also Asiatic Researches Vol. VI. 


p. 606; Vol. XV. p. 100. 

[47-48, yftdavagiri-Mftliatmya.] Also in if vara Samhita, 20-278 ff 

f*Fn*rmts§ 11 

jfFnfavWfrjira ii 



CH, XXIX, 


THE PAN Oil AM AS. 


191 


[In the stupendous work involved in the institution of this* 
Holy Shrine, and the, in those days, hard journey s to distant coun- 
tries which had consequently to be undertaken, the Fafichamaft 
or the Pariahs or those low-caste Hindus who are relegated to 
a place in the Hindu Society beyond the pale of the law-sanc- 
tioned Chiifitr-vM-nya (i.e , the four constituted members of the 
Hindu polity, the Br&hmana, Kshatriya, Yaisya and Sudra), 
were, so says our tradition, of great help to Sri R&m&nuja. 
He gave them the title of Tmikkuiatt&r ” or the “Blessed 
Descendants,” and fuither allowed them.the piivilege of entering 
•into the Holy Temples to certain limits, viz., the outer gate 
near the altar (Dhvaja-Stambha, or Bali-pffha), this practice 
remaining in force even up to this day, in the Temples of 
Srirangam, Melukote, and Belur (Hassan District). They are 
allowed to bathe in the Holy Ponds attached to the Temples, 
to which on other days than those allowed, this privilege is 
strictly disallowed ; and the highest class, viz., the Br&hmanas y 
cannot during the privileged days allotted to the Tiruk-kulat- 
tilrs, complain of contamination when they may chance to 
rub shoulders with each other in the holy streets. Rftin&nnja 
opened the doors of religious instructions for these classes, as 
well as certain modes of ritual and other privileges peculiar 
to Sri-Yaishnavas, such as the Pancha-SamskAra or the Fine 
Holy Vaishnava Seeraments. It is thus evident how seriously 
had R&m&nuja bethought of elevating the low-classes as 
regards their eligibility for salvation. Kam&uuja had already 
confirmed too in his own days, what his predecessors had 
ordained, viz., the enshrinement of saints in the Temples, to 
whatever caste they might belong. 1 ] 


1 Read St. Tiruppani Azhvar’s 
lib* in tli e Livrs of DrAvida Saints. 

Recently a Pundal was erected in 
Bangalore bearing the inscription : 
“ TirnkknlatlAr,” to greet Their 
Royal Highness (5th February 
3tH>6), and the following remarks 
were recorded by the Hindu of 
this date : — “ * * * nothing 

is of greater historical interest 
than the word TirnkkulaUdr. * * 
When Sri Raman upicharya* the 


immortal founder of the Vaislmava 
sec*;, went to Melkotc in the Mysore 
Province, the Pariahs made them- 
selves so useful to that sago that 
he felt for their hard lot. To ele- 
vate them socially fa 1 ! gave them 
the name of Tirukkulutt&r, which 
means people of high or noble des- 
cent. His great aim was to abolish 
the word Pariah and thus to put a 
stop to the degradation of a section 
of the people of this country. lie 



yatirAjamath. 


CH. XXIX 


192 


R&m&nuja also established a see of his at Yati-Saila, called 
the Yatir&ja-math, where a Sany&sin is always to live and 
manage the affairs of the Fane. The building still exists intact, 
and the monastery has had a line of illustrious successors to this 
day. An old badari tree still lives in it. 

During the time R&m&nuja was so installed in his high 
pontificate, he is said to have gone to Padmagiri , 1 and engaged 


Foot note on page 191— (continued), 


also awarded to them the rare and 
valued privilege of visiting the 
temple at Melkote three days in the 
year. Thus the emancipation of 
tho Pariah commenced long ago, 
and if it has not been yet accompli- 
shed, the cause is not solely the ab- 
sence of consideration for t ho class 
on the part of some of the most illus- 
trious founders of religious sects in 
India. Though at the prosent dry 
the followers of Sri R&rm\nnj&- 
chariar form probably the most 
exclusive among the Brahman com- 
munity, stilt the fact remains that 
the founders of the sect laboured 
for the elevation of the depressed 
and despised castes # # # ti Ae 

hallowed name of TirukkulattAr 
carries us back to those good old 
days when the practice and the 

1 The Bauddhas and Jainas are 
grouped together in the one cate- 
gory of anti-Vedic. But Bauddhas 
seem to be the first who came to 
Mai stir, followed by the Jainas, as 
theSravana Belagola Inscriptions, 
by It ice, tell us. Padmagiri appears 
to be one of the names of this place. 
The following extract is from ltioe’s 
Belagola Inscriptions: — [P. 37]. 
“We now come to a series of ins- 
criptions connected with Clanga 
Baja. The first of them are the 
last lines in Nos. 75 nnd 76, 
which state, in Jaiua, Mahara- 
shtri and Hale Kannada respec- 
tively, that Ganga Baja had the 
enclosure or cloisters round (sn ttd- 
to it a >n) made for the colossal statue 
of Gomatcsvara. The inscriptions 


preaching of religion meant really 
the elevation of men, and the 
greatest of saints considered it a 
part of their duty to minister to 
the religious cravings of the lowest 
classes of people.” 

In these days we have the spec- 
tacle of a Miradas a Mahomedan, 
who has embraced Vaishnavism, 
and is performing Ilarikathas all 
over ihe country and of a Chenclm- 
dAs, (a TirukkulattAr), at Kolar 
(Mysore State,) who is working for 
the religious elevation of his class, 
bv establishing temples, Muths and 
Bhajana-kfttas, and to whom hi# 
spiritual guru, of Tirukkot alur, has 
delegated the privilege to adminis- 
ter himself, to his men, the Pane ha- 
samskara sacraments and receive 
dues ealled the Pancha-k&nikas. 

are on either side the image, im- 
mediately below those of Chamunda 
Raya, and in characters to corres- 
pond. Their date, for the reasons 
already given (p. 23), is fixed as 
A.D. U16. The erection of this 
enclosing parapet wails and other 
buildings Wound has certainly 
detracted from the imposing and 
picturesque effect the gigantic 
image must previously have pre- 
sented when standing alone in its 
naked sublimity on the summit of 
the hill. But probably the walls 
were now required for its protec- 
tion from injury. For when it was 
erected the Jainas were in the 
ascendant, and Jainism wag the 
state religion. But, with the con- 
version to the Vaishnava faith of 



CH. XXIX, 


VICTORY OVER BAUDD&&&. 


m 


there with the Ban* Id has in a philosophical controversy. He 
succeeded in vanquishing the atheists, and owing to a wager 
made evidently by them that, in the event of defeat, they would 
submit themselves to be ground in an oil-null *, iu ease they 
were not with' mi to become adherents to the new faith, they 
seem to have been allowed to undergo the self dm posed punish* 
merit. 


Foot note on page 192— <continuocl). 


the Hoysala king Bitti Deva (subse- 
quently culled Vishnu Vartlhana), 
in pjobably this very year, by 
the reformer Raman u jachar y u , 
great animosity was excited against 
the Jainas, albeit they were too 
powerful to be altogether set aside. 
There are even stories of Ramanuja- 
chary a’ 8 having mutilated the imago, 
so as to ruin it as an object of wor- 
ship. No trace remains of such 
injury, unless it be that the for©- 
1* tiger of tuo left hand which is 
shorter than it should be, had a 
niece struck off below the first 
joint and was afterwards sculptur- 
ed into a perfect linger again. This 
particular form of revenge would 
easily have suggested itself if it be 
true, as one tradition states, that 
the change of the king’s religion 
was in some degree brought about 
by the refusal of his Jaina guru 
to take food wir,h him because the 
Icing was mutilated, having lost 
one of its fingers. 

1 As for the grinding in oil-raills, 
this seems to have been a stock- 
punishment, either true or an alle- 
gory to express the total, overthrow 
of the disputants in wordy war. 
Such oibmill-g' itiding accounts are 
commou aa between Baud dims and 


Jai nits, hnd Jainas and Raivaa* 
[Vide p, 15, Rice’s Sravnna- Rela- 
gola inscriptions and" p. *171, Vol. 
I, Rice’s Mysore Gazetteer 1 Ml 7 
in the latter Rumania having 
ground Rand has and Jairitts to- 
gether]. If this was literally true, 
then wo have parallels in Jesus 
Christ, of whom we are thus told 
in the Epiphany , p 14, Ja n t/, 'J 4, 
1903, I of. XXI, Calcutta . : ‘‘The 
hands that worked loving miracles 
of mercy, lifted also the lash of 
cords, to scourge the sacrilegious 
and the covetous out of the temple 
courts. Terrible words issued from 
those lips so full of grace. * * * 
‘ Depart ye cursed into everlasting 
fire prepared for the devil and his 
angels I ’ Such were some of the 
sayings of the Incarnate Love of 
God. — Actions, utterances, which 
those who seek to emasculate that 
Character into an ‘Oriental Christ,” 
destitute of everything but a weak 
tolerant benevolence, are fain to 
ignore or obscure, as scarcely to bo 
fitted into their imagined scheme 
of human perfection.” frk* if Itfinul* 
nuja is not to be emawttbtftd, we 
may also credit him hferwJly with 
the mill-grinding story ! 



194 


KING CHOLA AND KtnftSA. 


CH. XXX. 


CHAPTER XXX. 

CHOLA’S PERSECUTIONS. 

.Twelve years, it is written, did R&mauuja stay in the 
Maisur Country, with his head-quarters at Sri-Nantyanapura 
(MAluk&te). All this time he had no news of what events 
transpired at Srirangam, which he had left owing to the Sivite 
king Kriraikantha-Chola’s persecutions. Now a Sri-Vaishnava 
arrived, and fell with his face flat before R&mtauja. Raisin- 
him, RAmftnuja eagerly inquired “ Is all going on well with 
Lord Ranga and all His holy affairs ? ” “ All is well, Sire,’! 
said he, “ save that you are very much missed.” “ But ” asked 
lUmanuja with a fluttering heart, “how did KflrfiSa -md 

„ ho « re foml to , pp ,„ 

t.i.W 1 Choja ? Sii-e," ho lioga.i, “ tho two good men, n, yon m-e 
aware, were takon to C kola’s presence, and Chola commanded 
them to set their signatures to the written declaration • No 
higher being than Siva exists. But KiireSa poured out before 
him voluminous authorities from the Vedas, Upanishads, 
bmritis and Pur Anas, proving that Nartyana was the Highest 
0od, being the Cause of the cosmas, as also its Author for 
creation, sustention, and dissolution, and therefore the only 
Object of worship and contemplation ; and that Chatur-mukha 
BrahmA and Rudra were respectively His son and grandson - 
and cited other verses to demonstrate his position ». But 
Chola after all said in angry tones “ Look here, thon art 
indeed a very clover person, and therefore capable of interpreting 
antlioritative texts to suit thy own preconceived prejudices. I 
will not hear all this Here is my circular containing the 
statement : “ There is no higher than Siva.” I command thee 
to sign it without another word of protest”. Kur6?a took the 
paper, but before attaching his signature thereto, wrote 


Two are cited here for the use of our readers : 


«WTt, ll [RUrfisa] 

[Bh&gavata. III. 28-22.] 



OIL XXX. 


EYES PLUCK m. 


m 


* I)r on am mti tat ah par am,' and then signed his name under it. 
The meaning of this passage is : u But drona is higher than 
that." This, and u Sirdt parataram ndsti" meaning : 1 there 
is no higher than Siva/ together make a couplet in Sanskrit 
verse. Taken togther, they read : — * fc There is no higher than 
Siva; but Drona is higher than that (Siva).” By this K&tAaa 
implicated a pun on the terms Siva and Drona; Siva meaning 
a small measure, and Drona , a greater measure. This play on 
words was taken as a slight and affront which necessarily 
threw the king into a rage, who exclaimed: “ Puli out the 
pyes of this daring jester/' “ But ” exclaimed Kftr&sa in 
return, u thou needst not take that trouble, tyrant ; I will 
do that act with my own hands, for my eyes ought not to 
remain after seeing a sinner like thyself.” 1 A martyr to the 
cause of Vaishnavism, Kur^a, so saying, gouged out his eyes, 
striking terror into all who witnessed this blood-curdling scene. 
The cruel king now turned to the venerable old dchdrya 
Mah&pftrna, and cried : — “ Now, Sir, will yon sign this circular 
or no ? ” Pftrna said he could not, supporting his refusal by 
citations from various scriptures. On thi s, the king commanded 
his myrmidous to catch the dissenter and pluck out his eyes. 
This cruelty having been inflicted the king drove the two 
martyrs out of his palace. 

Blood streamed out of the eve -less cavities of old Ptlrna, and 
the poignant agony consequent may be better imagined than des- 
cribed. Purna’s daughter At-tuzhay-amra&l had followed the 
martyrs unobserved. When they emerged from the palace with 
gore dripping and drenching their persons, she ran to them, aud 
leading them by their hands, passed out of sight, and comforted 
and consoled them as best as she could, wiping their bloody 
faces, bathing with water, and thus doing her best to stop the 
blood and alleviate their terrible sufferings. Kftr&sa was 
middle-aged, and had besides a strong will, which he farther 
Strengthened by the reflection : 44 Ah, God, what grace of Thine 
indeed that thou hast chosen me as Thy vessel to give eye far 

* Per ether particulars of conversation, see Topic 101, in our 
Divine Wisdom of Dravida Saints, p. 118. 



m 


MAU&F&KNA’S DEATH. 


CH. XXX. 


wye,” the second eye meaning faith — the Vai s h na va • faith . Thus 
be bore the pain with a courage, superhuman But Pffrna was 
hi his declining years, and tottering as he was in the weakness 
of old age, found the pain beyond his powers of endurance, and 
therefore laid himself dowu on the way in the open, his head 
resting on the lap of Kur6sa ; and his feet on his poor daugh- 
ter’s lap. “ Holy Sire,” said they to him, “ what cruel fate 
lias befallen us, and you in particular. Your birth-place is 
Srirangam, your God is Ranga, and your disciple is Ram&nuja 
himself ; and yet to think that destiny should have ordained 
your grave in an out-of the way field near Gangai- 
konda-sfizha-puram ! Does this cause you glief?’* To this, 
Purna said : — “ My beloved children, have ye not heard that 
1 wherever a Vaishnava may chance to die, there God is 
present with him 9 1 even as Blessed Rfima was present 
at the dying of Jat&yu, in the wilderness ? * And have ye not 
heard that, u the best place for a Vaishnava to die is on a 
Vaishnava’s lap or in a Vaishmva’s house ? ’ B And this besides 
is holy land too where I am dying, for it is where our holy 
ancestors N&thamuni and Kurugai-k&val-appan died. Also 
know that if we grieve, because we did not die at Srirangam 
itself, all our posterity will think that for salvation, death in 
Srirangam alone is necessary. No, no, our rule is that a good 
soul, which has capitulated to God ( prapanna ) may meet his 
death anywhere, and yet be Bure of God beside him there.” So 
speaking, Mah&purna expired with his last thoughts lovingly 
fixed on Y&mun&eh&rya, his Guru, and sped to ineffable Rest 
in the bosom of God. 4 

According to custom, Pftrna had to be cremated with due 
ceremony and honors. There came some way-farers and said : 

* i 

* Mmdyana iil, 69. 

* It 

* A place called Pasupati Koil, about 7 miles from Kaudiyur 
(Tjwijore District) is pointed out as the place where Makap&rna breathed 
his last. 



tfH. XXX. 


NAKHATIOK TO KAmaXUXA, 


id? 


“ 0 man, you have a corpse, aud we help those who are alwm- 
doned by all, as you evidently are.’* Kfir&3a cried : — “ Sirs, 
God is with ns ; so proceed on your way and succour those who 
are really abandoned. These searches, then, after andt&a-preta* 
(helpless corpses) went their way. And now turned up sud- 
denly Srivaislinavas, people of K urea’s own faith, by tbo 
help of whom he cremated Pftrna by the special rite called the 

Brahrtia-mvdha. 9 

Kur&sa was now gently led to a shelter, and after resting 
there for a while, after the tremendou serials he had undergone^ 
•was brought to Srirangam by night-marches to elude pursuit 
by the king’s emissaries, if he still did intend to persecute* 
the fugitives. Kurina was spending weary days lamenting 
over what had happened, and grieving that he was denied the* 
privilege of dying with the veteran Mah&purna. 

One day, Kurfisa desired to visit Lord Ranga, for the first 
time after the chapter of disastrous events related above. 
Being blind, he slowly groped his way to the shrine. But king 
Chola had strictly decreed by his royal mandate that none 
should be allow ed to enter it, who w as a follower of R&m&nuja. 
When £hen Kfir&sa was about to step into the Temple, the 
guards said : “ Sire, our orders are strict. No one belonging to 
li&m&nuja are to be admitted. But you are a good man par ex- 
cellence, and so we make of you an exception. Enter, but pray 
make an avowal that you have seceded from R&m&nuja.” On 
hearing this, Kur6sa closed his ears and said : “ Good guards, 
what have I heard ? If I have to secede from R&m&nuja, and 
recant as you wish, I had better give up this God Ranga. 
Without R&m&nuja, no God exists for rue.” So saying, Kur&sa 
groped his way back, bent with grief, and fell on the ground 
weeping, uttering, in despairing tones, the holy verses of saints. 
Soon after, he left Srirangam, with his two children, to Tiru- 
m&lirunjolai (near Madura) to spend his days there in grief 
and solitude* 

Such was the narrative given by the guest who had 
arrived at Melukote from Srirangam. R&m&nuja listened to the 
bitter tale, which was to him like molten lead poured into his ears* 



198 


GOSHTHLpCbNA’S death. 


CH. XXX. 


With difficulty he suppressed his rising emotions ; and at last, 
containing himself no longer, hurst into a passion of grief, 
dropped on the ground like a felled tree and roUed in the dust, 
wetting it with his burning tears. His disciples gathered 
round him and did their best to console him. And he resigned 
himself at last, thanking God that Kur6sa at least was alive, 
whom thus he had yet a chance to see, though the thought of 
the loss of his eyes was to him unbearable. 

Mah&purna, being his Guru, all the sacraments to be 
celebrated after death were duly performed such as Sri-chdrna - 
paripdlana , and memorial verses 1 were dedicated to him. 

R&m&nuja’s heart was wrung with agony. He called 
M. M. Aiidftn * to his side, and directed him to proceed to Sri- 
rangam, carrying condolences and a budget of news to Kur&sa, 
and retarn with all the intelligence of that place ; and engaged 
himself more vigorously than ever in prelections on the 
Ved&nta which he delivered to his devoted audiences. 

About this time, Goshthi-phrna, one of the Gurus of 
R&m&nuja, also died. Hie diciples gathered round him and 
asked him what were his thoughts in his last moments. He 
said he was thinking of Ills Guru Y&mun&ch&rya, and the 
meaning of his verse : — 



4 0 Rdma Great , who forgave the miscreant Kaka ! 

0 Krishna Great , who forgave the miscreant Chaitya ! 
How can my sin persist against such grace of Thine ? 

So saying Pftrna died. And Terk-Azhv&r, his son, performed 



fSwr m<re?r<iWt ; ii 






* Full name — Mar *onrt l Id -Martt ti-y n dd « , 



CH. XXX. 


OTHER GURUS ALSO PASS A WAY. 


m 


all the funeral ceremonies. Memorial verses were dedicated to 
him . 1 

Tirum Alai -And &n®, Tiru-v-aranga-p-perum&l-Amyar,* Srt* 

Saila-pitrna , 4 and K&nchi-pftrna , 6 the other gurus of RAmtauja 
also soared to the Etermal Regions, at this time ; and memorial 
verses were dedicated to them as custom demanded. 

Thus ends a black chapter.** 

[It is ehronielied of K&nchi-purna that it was a very dark 
night at the close of a day, when he had finished his services to 
Lord Varada, and had to go home. A torch-bearer by name 
Aral a] an attached to the Temple was found on the premises. 
Purna begged of him to conduct him back to his retreat light- 
ing the dark way with his torch. But he excused himself Bay- 
ing he was much tired that day, and slipped away, to sleep 
snug in a corner. Purna thought he would find his way in the 
pitch-dark night as best as he could ; but hardly bad be crossed 
the threshold of the Temple-gate, when there was found a torch- 
bearer with his torch, ready to conduct him home. Purna was 
glad that the man had kindly changed bis mind for his sake. 
The next morning, however, when Ptlrna came to the Temple 
to do £he round of his duties, the torch -bearer ran towards 


1 




I 


“ Yes they are gone, aiul round us, too, the night, 

In ever*ueariug circle weaves her shade.” [Matthew Arnvtd.] 



200 


CHRONICLES OF KANCHtpt T RNA. 


CH. XXX. 


him, and with a look of great repentance, fell at his feet crav- 
ing pardon for his refusal, the previous night, to light him home. 
Purna was taken aback at this demonstration, for he had had 
him actually the previous night. It now however flashed upon 
his mind that it must have been Lord Varada Himself after all 
(whose tarnil name is Arluftlan also), who had personated the 
torch -bearer. With joy bubbling in his breast at this addi- 
tional evidence of God’s love for his humble votaries, he dis- 
missed the real torch -bearer, of course forgiving him. 1 ] 

[A tradition also lias been handed down, with regard to 
Aral A.lan that he was the favorite of KAnchipftrna, so much so 
that he daily received from the latter the remains of Varada- 
offered food in the temple, after having been eaten by him. 
One day Purna gave the food on a leaf to Arulalan. Somehow 
a leaf had found its way into one of the holy vessels with which 
food was offered to Lord Varada ; and Purna was shown this. 
He identified it with the leaf he had given to Arulalan ; and 
the latter, when asked, said he could not explain how it found 
its way into the shrine and into a holy vessel. Of course the 
temple-officials resolved to perform a great purificatory cere- 
mony, But Lord Varada declared to them that he would 
brook no fjuoh ceremony, inasmuch as Arnl&lan was such a dear 
servant of his, and Purna was a sacred person, whose touch of 
the food and Arul Alan’s touch of it again made the leaf so holy 
that he would rather have the day’s food served to him with 
the leaf. This was accordingly done and no purificatory ritual 
customarily binding, was gone through. It is said that R Am Ai- 
nu ja had come to learn the extraordinary sanctity of Purna and 
of ail that concerned him and of the esteem in which Lord 
Varada held him ; and that it was ou this account RA.mA.uuja 
had been eager to partake of the food first taken by Purna. it 
was for this purpose, it may be remembered, that R&manuja 
invited Filina to his house ; but he was thwarted in the design 
by the indiscretion of his wife — which has already been related 
on page. 70 .] 

1 This account fortuitously [a miracle I should say] foil into my 
hands on the day of my paying a chance visit to the Holy Shrine of 
KovihvU (Tanjorc District) on the 21st February 11*05, vide Pruyinrha 
Mitmu (Tamil) dated Friday 17th February 1905. 



CH. XXXI. 


NEWS OF CHOLAS DEATH 


201 


CHAPTER XXXI. 

RAMANUJA’S RETURN TO SRIRANGAM. 

M. M. An dan, who was despatched by K&mauuja (o Srt- 
rungam, arrived there in duo time and making obeisance to 
Kurdsa, announced himself to the now blind but heroic martyr. 
K tires' a fell into ecstasy and looked upon AridAn as Ram&nuja 
li ini self arrived, and hurriedly asked, in anxious tremulous 
tones, how it was faring with lulmftnuja. Said And tin: — 
“ lie is well enough ; but bis grief at^ what lias happened 
here and especially at the loss of your eyes, is inconsolable*, 
lie has sent me to tender you his heart-felt sympathies \ 
“ Good/’ said Kurcsa, ‘‘but inform my master that so long as 
his life has been saved from the bigot Chcda — a life which 
sustains the world — the loss of my eyes is of no account what- 
ever. 7 ’ 

Intelligence arrived at this time that kingOhola bad died 1 
of a carbuncle on his neck, festering with worms. Andftn, to 
make sure of this, journeyed to Gangai-konda-Sozhapuram 
(near Chidambaram r), and obtaining corroboration of the glad 
news, hurried on to Melukote, taking with him Ammaugi- 
ammftl, whom he met on his way. 

In due course they arrived at Melukote, and finding RtlmA- 
nuja busy at the time bathing in the holy pond Kalyilni, fell 
before him, and shedding tears of joy, related to him the news 
of Choja’s death. Ramanuja was transported with joy at the 
death of the sworn enemy of his Faith, and raising up the two 
disciples, embraced them, himself shedding tears of joy and 

1 From inscription*) it is made Hoy sal a, who is found at YAdava- 
oufc that Kulottunga Chola 1 or pura (Melukote) in 1125 A.C. (No. 
Vira-Chola or Efija-Bajendru Cho* 10, Inscription, Mysore.) IIo in 
la’s tint*? was 1064 to LI I'S A.C. Ami also known as Krimi-kaiitha and 
he is said to have died a few years also Karikala, as is seen in the 
earlier than Vishnu Vardhuna of ver.-.e : — 
uasii—ppssitL/ip 

L^€Seanu\S[jsmL-jT uGs>i—;j <*> 
snuu jpQwear &i~ G&xr&sr 22 &n 
&$&(T60#Q#/r gV&T QingpfirftG&h 

; Ka 1 i u gi t U n pparani , ] 

2 (> ’ 



202 


RAMANUJA LEAVING MELCKOTE. CU. XXXI. 


said: — ‘0 faithful sons, how far indeed have you travelled, 
hearing so many hardships simply to carry fne this joyful mes- 
sage ! How can l sufficiently reward you ? The Lest that 1 
can give you is the Holy Dvay a -mantra. Receive it So say- 
ing he initiated them in the Holy Formula ; and looking round 
to the group of followers who had surrounded him, addressed 
them thus : — “0 my faithful, our bitterest foe is gone. Our 
faith has stood this most severe and crucial trial. This holy pond 
Kaly&ni is really katydid, auspicious , and this M&ruti-Aiid&n 
is really mdruti , Hamiman.” 1 “Yea,” all cried jubilantly. 
In a body they all mounted the sacred Hill of Lord Nrisimha., 
rising from the edge of the pond. Prostrating himself before 
Nrisimha, Ramanuja praised him thus: — “0 Slayer of llira- 
nya, of yore, even now hast thou slain Chola, the demon. Even 
as thou saved st thy devotee Prahlada then, hast thou saved 
KurGfta now.” T triha and prasdda were duly bestowed on 
R&m&nuja who thereon descended the hill, and entering the 
adytum of Narayana, asked leave of Him to return to Sri ran- 
gam, now that his work was completed. Narayana returned 
no answer for a long time, when R&manuja urged his request 
again : “ Almighty, Ranga’s command was that I should stay 
for ever in Srirangam. Owing to unexpected calamities, f was 
forced to leave the place. Now that all lias been accomplished 
here, may I not return?” Lord Narayana’ s voice now came; 
4k Re it so, then.” 

KAmatiuja had established in Melukote, fifty-two officers 
(Aiinbat(iruvar) for the restored Fane of Narayana. These 
magnates, hearing that Ramanuja was about to leave them, 
fell at his feet weeping, and said : “ Holy Sire, how can we live 
without you ?” K&m&nuja raised them up lovingly and brush- 
ing away their tears, said : — “ Take heart, sons, I shall let an 
image be cast after my own likeness, and leave it here, tilled 
with my power. It shall answer all your purposes. Further, 
I lay it on you all to take care of our Sampat-kum&ra brought 
from Delhi. He is like my son standing near the brink of a 
well. Such is my love for Him. See to tire proper discharge 


1 The messenger who brought Kama the joyful tidings of SHa. 




CH. XXXI. 


INSTRUCTIONS AND PROOFS. 


20;* 


of all the sacred functions connected with Nar A y ana’s Temple. 
See that you do not cheat God of what is due to Him, or ckoat 
each other. Remain ever firmly friendly to one another, and 
be not remiss in your loving services to God whom wc* have 
installed in this country.” 

Leaving besides a detailed code of temple -procedure, he 
left. Melukote, after passionate grief had been displayed, by him 
on the one hand at having to part from his beloved Sampat- 
kumara and his disciples, and on the other hand by his disci - 
pies and all at having to part from tlieir cherished master 
and pontilf. Ramanuja's progress thus from the Temple 
was very slow for some distance out of the town. He 
looked back at every step, drinking in with his eyes, the 
sight of the temple, its turrets, corridors, the streets, and 
the homesteads which had risen all round, and with a heart 
overflowing with kindness for all that he was going to leave 
behind. Nor would the townsfolk allow him to depart quietly. 
After he had gone some way forward, they waylaid him and 
cried :• — u Sire, how can we be sure you arc in your Image ? 
Give us evidences ; else you eaniyt lea>e us in bereavement.” 
“ Belovqtl men,” said he, 14 return, and standing before my 
image, call me by my name.” They ran back and did so. 
u Ramanuja, our Lord 1”, cried they. Yes, 1 am here and for 
ever,” 1 came the voice from the Image. They wen 1 satisfied, and 
running back to Ramanuja, fell before him and after a vehement 
outburst of grief and of gratitude, an 1 cons dal ion by Ka.mA.nuja, 
he was allowed to bid adieu to them all. 

In rapid marches, — love for Sam pat -kumara restraining 
him, but prospect of seeing Lord Rang:! urging him forward — - 
he arrived at the hanks of Kaveri at Srirangam. He stopped 
there to bathe and decorat * himself with the twelve holy 
marks and make other preparations before planting his foot on 
the sacred land. In the meanwhile, the magnates of Sriran- 
gam were apprised of his arrival. Their joy was indescribable. 
They all ran up to him in breathless excitement, and wel- 

1 Cp. “ For where there are two gathered in my name, there am I 
in the midst of them”. [Mat: XVIII, 20]. “ Behold I am with you all 
days, even to the consummation of the world ” [Mat. XXVIII. 20]. 



SEl BANG AM— MEETING KftK&SA. 


CH. XXXI. 


20* 


coined him back home with a salvo of greetings. After having 
been away for nearly twenty long years, he was now making 
triumphal entry in the midst of a seething crowd, — all eyes 
aud hearts turned to him — alter having undergone so many 
hardships and trials for the Faith. A ceremonial entry was 
made into the adytum of Ranga, with prostrations at every 
step. 44 Son/’ said the Lord, opening His mouth, 4 * thou hast 
been away from Us far and long ; sure thou must be very tired. 
“ Merciful God,” replied R&ni&uuja, 44 while Thou art alive with 
■Thy elect by Thy side, there is no fatigue to me or all the 
universe put together.” Ranga was pleased and commanded 
tirthn and prasdtla to be administered, and granted him leave 
lo go and join his monastery and rest after his toils and trials. 

But as RAm&nuja threaded his way round the streets of 
Srirangam, where he gladly witnessed the charming scenes 
which he had long missed, his thoughts were occupied with 
Xu res a, and the first thing that lie would, and did, do was to 
step into his dwelling. Of coarse blind Kuresa, who had ere 
tiiis returned from Tirumalirunjolai (irnr Madura), was inform- 
ed beforehand of his master’* return; and u.s he heard Rama- 
nuja approach, rushed forward from his door, and prostrat- 
ing himself, firmly clasped RAmana ja’s feet, and bathed them 
in a flood of tears, and lay there speechless like one bewitched 
and stricken. RAmfinuja was himself greatly moved. He gently 
lifted up and firmly embracing him, was himself made 

speechless by the mingled sentiments of joy and grief shak- 
ing the very foundations of his soul, with great difficulty, ob- 
structed by tears and by voice made tremulous with emotion and 
refusing utterance, spoke the one phrase : 4 ‘ Kuresa, thou 
hast given thy eye — the eye of our faith — for the faith ! ” Kiirdsa 
who had lost his voice so long, recovered somewhat, and was 
able to say : — 44 Master, beloved ! I must at least have sinned 
by thinking, ‘this man’s mark on the forehead is crooked/ 
Hence my punishment is deserved.” RAmannja said ; 44 Beloved, 
thou, to sin ? Rather mine must be the sin, for which thou 
hast atoned. Come, let us go.” So saying, RAmanuja reached his 
own monastery, leading KurAsa lovingly by the hand, followed 
by the immense host of devotees and others mustered thick. 



CH. XXXTT. 


CIHTRAIU TA AND TILLAI, 


205 


CHAPTER XXXIT. 


SHORT EXCURSIONS AND INCIDENTS. 

After twelve (or some my fourteen) years 1 of absence, 
R&manuja had returned to his central see, the centre of his opera- 
tions. The faithful gathered round him. Love and veneration 
for him had multiplied and deepened ; and thy all said : — 
“Worshipful master, by the loss of Malutpurna, a blank has been 
created in our hearts, and by the loss of our Kure?a’s eyes, a 
sore. Have we lived to see you, — a salve for our ills V Listen, 
master, the apostate (infidel) Chola not. only persecuted us and 
our leaders, but carried his vandalism to great excess by 
destroying our Yaishnava temples everywhere. He had 
thus demolished the Vishnu Images in ChitrakiHa,— about 
which you shall anon hear more, and was on his way to Sri- 
rangam to do the same. Hut when he halted for the night in 
a village, he was suddenly taken ill, a fatal sore burst out on 
his neck,* and killed him after terrible suffering. Srirangaiu, 
the centre of our faith, was thus miraculously saved. Listen 
now to what happened at Chitrakuta (Chidambaram). The 
place, you are aware, is infested with Saivas, and their leader 
Chela, had torn up Lord Govinda-raja from His seat — both the 
mnla and the utsnvn linages — , and had directed their being cast 
into the sea. But there was a courtesan by name Tilya (or 
Tillai) who is a staunch Yaishnava devotee . She managed to 
divert tho king's attention at tlm time, so far as to enable the 
Yaishnava adherents of the place to avert the sea-grave form 
their Lend, and secretly make away with Him to Tirupati up in 


1 Like R:\ma who would not 
return to Axodhva fur 14 year.-* 
in spite of Bharata’s prayer* ‘lie 
Lord Ranga would not fulfil Rama- 
nuja’s prayers to end Chola’a per- 
secution, till he also (being Rama’s 
brother) travelled for 14 years. 
According to a Belur inscription 
(vide foot note 1, p. 182) Dasarathi 
established the Belur Temple in 1039 
Baka, (A.C« 1117), so that taking 


Ramanuja’s entry into Melukotc as 
about 1009 AC, it gives 18 years 
for Ramanuja's sojourn and plus 2 
years for travel, makes in all 
20 years as the interval between 
Ramanuja actually leaving Sriruu- 
gam and rejoining it, 6 years being 
allowed for his travels to other 
Shrines <$rc., after leaving and 
again joining Srirangaiu. 


* This is said to have been caused by God Venkate : a striking lii# 
neck with the discus, is answer to Rlmanuja’s prayer*. 



govixdaraja. 


CTI. XXXII. 


20 r> 


the north.” Kara an uja heard all this vandalistic tale with a 
troubled heart, and hot tears rolled down his cheeks. “ Beloved 
disciples, take heart and be comforted, I will set matters right.” 
So buying, he again girded himself up for action, though now 
very old and exhausted . 1 u Start,” commanded he, u let us go 
to Venkatftsa.” So they all went to Tirupati, arriving at which 
place, R&manuja had a temple built at the foot of the liill, by 
the h lp of a Yfldava-r&ja or Katiiyadeva , 2 and had Govinclaraja 
of Chitrakuta installed there. He called Him by the name 
Tilhu-Govindar&ja , 8 anc| created a town round the Temple, 
Govimhu'aja-pMitaua ^Pildapuri), which is still flourishing at the 
present time. UamA-uuja now recollected the old Saint's verse : — 

C»pb~jrfibV<&V /7 <3Tv_i — pQ pmQ&G0QJt£6I 

LdlhW <<;jp lc>&' Lf ,$&j(Lclo U <o2jti'Si—pQpm ; 

and wondered how prophetic it was of the Saint to have sung 
the Shrine of Tirupati along with the Shrine of Chitrakuta m 


1 RAmanujarya-Divya-Ohurita of gives the (late of the destruction 
thiH Vishnu Shrine by Kulottungu Chola as : — 

Sj wQutr jb 0 $ u p.Q pam i ipmi ®j it <ql^ p ppp 
Qpm urr &vC). &csr ot£ eon p gprL&m , 


pm Bear jy 9 jsvQ fits Karr perm . 

t\«., 1000 Baku a l OS 7 A.C., so 
that it must have been ju*t im- 
mediately or after Ramanuja left 
Brtrangum for the table-land of 
Mysore. 

1117 A.G. finds lUumlnujaat Mobi- 
le otc, and thus lie must lui\e now 
been past his centenary, when he 
was back at Srirangam 2i> years 
more brings it to llo7 A.C., the 
year of bis death. 

a See p. 86, VenkatAchal-ctihAsa* 
mitlft. His capital is said to have 
been N&raymm-pura. 

8 The reader will perhaps run 
away with the idea that the Y&iah- 
navas are polytheists — not mono- 
theists as we profess— inasmuch as 
we speak of God Ranganatha, God 
Varada,God Venkatesaand so forth. 
These names are various names given 
to but one God, a different name 
far a different Shrine. The Names 


have also their etymological signi- 
fications and associations. We are 
thus rigid monotheists. It is the 
One God under different symbols 
ami images, one Light lighted from 
another Light as we say: Dipdd- 
u t pint mi -}>m dipumit ; — one God pro- 
latmg or hypostasixing so to say. 
This reminds us of what Dionysius 
the Areopagite said, though ho said 
it with reference to another matter, 

44 That light is one and entirely 
the same through all things and 
although there is diversity of ob- 
jects, the light remains one and 
undivided in different objects, so 
that, without confusion, variety 
may be assigned to the objects, 
identity to the light.” [P. 474, 
Max Muller’s Psychological Religion j. 

Bee Topic 171 in our Divine 

Wisdom . 



cri. xxxi r. 


the xrrv.v. 


207 


in one verse 1 He then ascended the High Holy Hill of Tiru- 
pati to pay his homage to the Lord VenkatoSa. Here, Rain a- 
nuja imparted the Art of worshipping (Sod in His Images 
( Aradhuna), — '•ailed the Nihja — to his two disciples Kut^Sa and 
Hannmnd-I )asa. There was another disciple Vangi-p-Purattu 
Namhi, to whom he had promised this knowledge for some 
time, hut an opportunity had not presented itself so far. As 
however he was concluding his instructions, V. P. Nambi sud- 
denly presented himself before Ramanuja, who felt somewhat 
difficult therefore in the dedicate situation, viz., his unbosoning 
secrets to some, while he had not done so to those whom lie had 
promised ; but R&manuja excused himself to Nambi thus : — 
“ Listen, Nambi! Hitherto I could not solve to myself the 
riddle how Lord Krishna who is (rod all-powerful, submitted 
himself to be bound by a rope by an ordinary woman Yasoda. 
To-day 1 find the solution inasmuch ns by the importunity of 
my disciples Kuresa and Hanumad-Das, my own strong will 
bent to impart knowledge to them though 1 had promised 
H thee first. My own experience then, of how supplication 
made rny own will to give in, supplies me with the key how even 
(lod will allow his resolve to melt before the tire of His 
votaries’ love. So saying, lie gave the promised knowledge to 
Nambi. 2 

Ritmanuja took leave of the Lord and descending the Holy 
Hill, wended his way back to Srirangani via KanchL Settled 
thus in his see, the High Pontiff dispensed bis teachings to 
crowded audiences, who received them, it is said, as cool 
showers and balmy zephyrs lulling their parched souls to 
heavenly rest. 

Kulottunga Chola II (1128 — 1158 f) or Vikrama-Chftla 
(1113 — 1128) who perhaps was also called Kulottunga, the son 

1 Consult pp. 87 ff. of VenkatA- Varahe], On Venkatesa, see Rig 
chaletihasam&la for fnrthei details. Veda VIII, 8, 18. 41 1 if*W5! T^> if *] - 
Hence in the Ashtottara Hymn to I 

Srinivasa (Vcnkatesa), His naimo £ 3 1 577 a n t jrfffr |j 

G S^ : II 1 ' id® Commentaries on Tiru. 
[P. 78, Venkatackala- Mak&tmya* 



208 


TEMPLE ADMINISTRATION. 


oh. XXXI I. 


of KvimikaiiH»a-Ch6];!. who was a pro-Yaishnavite and who 
had in vain tried to convince his father of -the futility of his 
scheming* against the Yaishnavas inasmuch as their strongholds, 
the R&mayanaand the Mahabharata could never be repressed, 
though he might demolish all the Vaishnava temples on earth, 
and had also suffered reverses of fortune 1 on account of ihe 
sins of his father, hearing of R&rnanuja’s arrival, repaired to 
Srirangam in haste, taking with him the P Andy a and Chera 
Kings. Approaching KAm&nuja, lie fell at his feet and craved 
pardon for his father’s fauifs. From the largeness of his heart, 
R&m&nuja granted it; and took Kulottunga, hy his request, 
into the Vaishnava foid by administering due sacraments and 
made him a disciple of DA Marathi. “ No more ”, cried the king, 
“shall I exorcise any jurisdiction over the Temples August 
Sire, I pray you to assume t lie entire control yourself from 
this day.” Kam&nuja consented, and calling Dasarathi, had 
the entire administration of the Temple formally bestowed on 
him as a gift in the manner prescribed by the Sastras. it is 
written in the work, called Koil-ozhugn, that a stone inscrip- 
ton to this effect was caused lo he installed at the Arya-bhat- 
tftl gate.® R&in&nuja is stated to be past his centenary by this 
time. 

1 These reverses appear to have pp. 97-99, it may be seen that the 
boon an invasion by the l'and vans, grant of Vira-Chola, or son of 
and subsequent vassalage tinder t he Kulottunga 1 gives more than 245 
king* of Yijayaiingiiraiu. [Pu/e p Vaishnava names; showing how 
87, Contributions to the Imperial Sri-Vaisbnavism had been well 
Gazetteer, Trichinopoly, 1904 A.U.J established and its adherents vono- 
9 See No. 28, Map of Temple t,» rated. And Vitlmla, a Madhva 
the eecond rollertion of Papers re- sang of lt&m&nujn thus (Hev. 
biting to Srirangam, 1894, A.C. Kittel’s Translation in Indian Anti - 
From Epigraphiea Indioa, Vol. V, quary Vol II). 

Refrain. 

B&mAnuja, Doctrine-supporter ! 

Bod for the great mountain of Dark heretics ! 

Song. 

**They nay the Ch61a put up a post (Kambha) saying:— 

* He with the eye on his forehead (Siva), and no other Godhead 
there is * ! 

The Master of the Yafcis (Yatipati) seized and flayed him alive, 



XXXII, kCr&SA’S prayee for eyesight. 


R&m&nuja was sore at heart at Kur£sa’s having become 
blind. One day, he called him anxiously to his side and 
said : — 44 Son, beloved ! Lord Yarada of K&iichi is, as we know, 
a i-eady grantor of wishes. I enjoin thee to sing a hymn to 
Him to bestow sight on thee again.” 4 * Sire,” submitted Kui*&b;t, 
44 this material sight, I desire not.” 4< Hut, beloved, do as I 
desire,” often exhorted Raman uja. Kun6s& accordingly sang 
the hymn khown as Varadar&ja-stava — one of the five $tav»as — 
liegirming with : — 

^ H l rj M Y IT • I 

* Hari ! who deck the top of the Hasti-Hill, whom the Vedas 
declare as to have neither equal nor superior, bless me.’ And 
in the twenty -third stanza, he prayed: — 

4 Hast i- Lord of bluish line! Reclineron A nan to ! I beseech 
Thee to ever let my sight see Thy bewitching beauty.* That 
very night, the Lord appeared in his dream and said : 44 granted,” 
Km Asa. rose next morning with a joyful heart, and after per* 
forming # the day’s ablutions, do., finished the stava, and pro- 
ceeding to Ramanuja, repeated before him the whole stava , and 
said : — “ Sire, the previous night, the Lord appeared in my 
dream and he has granted me such spiritual sight as is able 
ever to enjoy his Beatific Vision — Vision such as obtains in 
Vaikuntha, according to the verse:— 


(Continued) foot note on page 238. 

Ami made a Chela Shed {Chsippurtt, a shed of the Ch&la skin) f 
See. my brother ! [rer.-t? I] 

Saying ; — 4 It is a Vvasa-Toju l they (the Lingayatas), not mind- 
i» K, 

Fasten a bull (Nandi) to a standard (Dhvaja) and worship it. 
Hear ! 

For one (or, for that one) Vyasa-T6]a, our master (Ayya) [RamA- 
nuja] 

Strij pod of a thousand arms of Siva’s followers (Samoa), 

f verm // J 

27 




210 • RECOVERY OF SIGHT. CH. XXXIX. 


‘In that Vnikuntha, beyond the risible universe, the 
Immortals see the Eternal Lord with their spiritual eyes/ 

“ My beloved, that is not what I want ; come let us pro- 
ceed to Lord Varada,” said Ramanuja, annoyed, and went with 
him to K&hchi, and bade him repeat the Stava. Kur&sa began 
and as he was proceeding, Ramanuja was obliged to leave the 
place for a few minutes on some business. But before he re- 
turned, Kur£sa had gone to the end of his Stava ; and Lord 
Varada having appeared and hidden him to ask what he wanted, 
he had absent-mindedly prayed that N&luran might be saved 
even as he might be saved. 1 ‘ Be it so,’ said the Lord. By 
this time Ramanuja ran in, and learning what had taken place 
in his absence, chided Kuidsa thus :~- s ‘ Son, thou hast acted 
contrary to my wishes. Thou has spoilt matters. Oh Lord, 
canst Thon not deign to grant my prayer that K lire? a regain 
(physical) sight ?” The Lord was moved at this earnest appeal 
of Ramanuja, and spoke thus: — u Wc grant 3dm that sight; 
but except Me and thee, he shall see no other material object/’ 
R&mftmija was at least satisfied with this, and immediately put 
Ktlrflaa to test by asking him to look at Lord Varada, and 
describe Him. Kur£?a did so. 4 And now describe me/ asked 
he next. K ur6sa, his face lit up with heavenly joy, described 
his preceptor’s person accurately in all detail. Ram&nuja was 
satisfied and taking leave of the Lord, returned to Srirangam. 

R&rmlnuja was, after his return, engaged with his disciples, 
in reading St. And ill’s Hymnal, the Nayechiy&r-Tirumozhi ; 
and coming to verses IX. 6 and 7 : Xaru-narum and Jnru - 
vandu , in which the Saintess declared that “ she would place 
before the Lord Surulara-raja of Tirumalirunjolai, one hundred 
vessels of nectareous food ; and if He but came down and ate 
it all, she would place a hundred thousand more.” Ramanuja 
stopped at this and looking at his disciples, said : — u Why do 
not we proceed to the Holy Shrine at once and carry out her 
wish?” So saying, they all rose and journeyed to the place, 
mid spread a great feast liefore the Deity. Ramanuja pro- 
ceeded thence to S ri- villi putt ur, the birth-place of St. Aud&l, 

1 This was the person who instigated Chola to send for Ramanuja to 
sign the Taper of his faith. Ho is a disciple of Ktirfro. See p. 170. 



Cif. XXXII, 


T III r K K O L C K - A M MAI. 


-II 


and us he was standing before her, lost in devotion, the Saintessg 
by the voice of her priest on duty, conferred upon him the title 
of Kdil-armar.' Ramumija next proceeded to Tirunagari of St, 
Nammazhvar. From Tirunagari, Ramanuja paid a visit to 
Tirukkolur, about two miles north of it ? the birth-place of 
St. Madhurakavi. As he was proceeding, he met a damsel by 
name Tiruk-kblur Ammai coming from Tiruk-kolftr. 4 Whence 
art thou coming ?’ asked lie of her. 44 From Tiruk-kblur,” said 
slie. To this, Ramanuja chidingly said : — 44 1 wonder, lady, thou 
shouldst emerge from a Holy Place, into which, according to the 
, verses of St. Namnutashv&r, every one should enter * 4 To this, 
Ammai gave the following long reply* : — 

Holy Sire ! who am 1 to deserve to live in such a Holy 
Place ? for : — 

1. Did I go on such a holy mission as Akrura ? 

2. Did I entertain in my house like Vidura? 

ft. Did I cast off my body like the Rishi’s wife ? 

4. Did I cause a Ravana to be killed like Sita V 

5. Did 1 raise the dead like Tondaman ? 

6. Did 1 offer a corpse like Ghantakarna v 

7. *Did 1 adorn (a Sit A) like Anasuya ? 

8. Did I seek for a Father like Dhruva ? 

y. Did I repeat the Three-letterd Name like Kshatra* 
bandhu ? 

10. Did I get trodden like Ahalya ? 

* See Topic 117 and foot note thereunder, p. 133, Ihvme Window o 
Drdvida Saints. 

1 Yiehmi-Purana, 

a Mab&>bharata, Sabha-Parva. 

* Sri Bh&sravHta, X, 23, 38 d'riffWSTTO \ 

» Sudar^ana of Itihasa-aamuccUaya(?) 

* Ramayana. 

6 Mah&lakshmi, Karma’s wife, Yerikate«a~MiUi&tmya (Bhaviah* 
yottara, 14th Adh). 

6 Harivamsa. 

7 Ramayana. 

8 Vishnu-purana. 

* Yishnu-dharma. The Name ia Go-vin-da ; alao see TirnmMat, 2, 4, 

M R&mAyana, or Adbyatma-Ram&yana, 14tl» Adh. 



tieukkolC^ammat. 


OH. XXXII. 




11. Did I ripen, while jet raw, like Andal P 

12. Did I establish (or proclaim) Narayana like St. Peri- 
yAzhv&r P 

13. Did I ransack religions like St. Tirumazhisai ? 

14. Did I know Him as “the Subtlest” like St. Nam* 
m&zlivkr P 

15. Did I saj : “ anything,” like St. KulaSekhara P 

16. Did I say : “ I pledge my word,” like Krishna P 

17. Did I give clues (to Rdmk), like Kabaudha P 

18. Did I reveal sscrets like Trijata P 

19. Did I rocognize God (in Rama) like Mandodari ? 

20. Did 1 say : “ I know Thee,” like Visvamitra ? 

2-1. Did I say : “ I know of no other God,” like St. Ma~ 
dhurakavi ? 

22. Did I gi ve birth to a God like Devaki ? 

23. Did I say : “conceal Thy discus,” like Vasud6va ? 

24. Did I bring np a Cowherd like YaSoda P 

25. Did I do a mite (of service) like the squirrels ? 

26. Did I take fried rice like Kuck&la ? 


» A 

£r.hvdrs. 

precocious 

prodigy in 

divinity. Bead her life in our Lives o/ 

m Bead his life in our Lives of Azhv&rs. 

18 

Bo. 

do. 

, and verse Pun il Ay a in Tiru- 
cchanda-viruttam. 

u 

Do. 

do. 

Also v. 75 w Puviyam *’ of Peri- 
ya-Tiruvand&di may be read. 

15 

Do, 

do. 

ver3e IV, 10. Perum&J Tiru- 


mozhi, 

16 Bhagavad-git&* XVIII, 65 : Also Bh&rata 

story is referable, where a dead boy was restored to life by Krishna— 
afl others having failed. He is said to have spoken thus 

I It Alao “» Asvame. 

Aha-Parva, 70 and 18-ff. beginiuug with *c. 

»’ »> >» R&mhyana. 

* Do. w?*™. I.W.H. 

11 Verse T£vn-matt-ariyt*t lu Kanninun-Sirutt&mbu. 

» Mi. ii Vishnu *Purana. 
u PAdma-purkna (?), Also v. 27, TUumojL 

* Sri Bh&gavata. 




oh xxxri. 


tikukkolCk-ammai. 


SIS 


27 . 

28 . 

29 . 

30 . 

31 . 

32 . 


33 . 

34 . 


35 . 


36 . 

37 . 

38 . 

39 . 

40 . 

41 . 

42 . 

43 . 

44 . 

• 


Did I bestow weapons like Agastya F 
Could I enter the seraglio like Sanjaya ? 

Could I, by 4 works' obtain bliss like J&naka F 
Did I bite the toe and see Him like St. Tirumangai ? 
Did I become the umbrella and so on, like Adi- Stadia F 
Did I carry Him, like G a rut man ? 

Did 1 keep promise, like Nam-p&duvdn ? 

Did I behold God in a nook, like the First Azhvars P 

Did I guard two princes, like*Yatmiki P 

Did I offer two garlands, like St. Tondaradippodi F 

Did I obtain truths, like Tiru-k-kaochi-nambi P 

Was I absorbed into God, like St. Tirup-p&n&zhv&r P 

Did I say : w Rend” like Vasislitha P 

Did I worship sandals, like Kongil-piratti ? 

Did I offer clay-flowers, like Kuruva-nambi P 

Did I vociferate : “ Oh : Tlie Origin like Gajendra P 

Did I offer scents, like the hunchback Kubj&P 

Did I offer w reaths, like the M&l&k&ra ? 


97 RAmAyana. 

** Sri Biuigavata and BhArata. 

99 Bhagavad-gita, III, 20, Karmayaivahi , Ac. 

80 Read his life in our Lives of Azhvars. 

M Stotra-Ratna v, 40; and v. 63, Saundl , 1st Tiruvandfi.dk 
u See Oajendra-Moksha, Bhagavata. 

88 Kamka-purana.. 

84 See our Lives of AzhvArs. 

Vi RAmayana, the two princes being Lava and Ku?a* 

88 Read bis life in our Lives of AzhvArs. Flower-wreath and Hymn- 
wreath (Tirumalai). 

87 See Life erf RAmAnuja. 

88 See his Mfe in our Lives of Aahvfira. 

m BAm&yana (sending RAma with Vi^vAmitrAX 

40 Read Lite of RAmanuja. (Ramanuja’s Sandals), p. 176, 

& Kuruva-nambi or Bhirna. [Venkat£*a MAhAtmya, l&avishyottara* 

1 4 th Adh.3 

48 BhAgavata. 
m and u y ishnu- pur&na* 



m 


tirukkolCr-ammai. 


CH; XXXII. 


45. Did I keep my assigned place, like Bharat a ? 

46. Did I serve on the way, like Lakshmana P 

47. Did I land on the other shore, like Guha ? 

48. Did I fight with the demon, like Jat&yus ? 

49. Did I land on this shore, like Vibhishana P 

50. Did I offer sweet fruits, like Sabari P 

51. Did I say : “ Here He is/’ like Prahl&da P 

52. Did I hide (Krishna) like Dadhibhknda P 

53. Did I go to the forest, like R&ma P 

54. Did I praelaim discovery (of Sit&), like Hanum&n ? 

55. Did I relinquish both hands, like Draupadi ? 

56. Did I say the excuse ; u milk boils over,” like 
Yadnga-nambi ? 

57. Did I hold my throat, like Selvappillai ? 

58. Did I deserve the command ; “ stop here,” as Idaiyd- 
ttru-k-kudi N ambi P 

*\ 40 rmd « Ram ay an a. 

fil Vislmu-purana., 

5a This is said to be related in Agneya, Mahabh&raia or Rrind&vana. 
MihAtmya? Dadhibb&nda was a curd -seller. He is said to have given 
shelter to Lord Krishna when Ho was hotly pursued after by His>associa* 
las in the play called hide and seek and when Krishna asked the curd* 
sailer to ask his reward, he asked for Moksha for himself and for those 
who belonged to him, down to tho curd-pot in which Krishna had hid 
himself. This was granted. 

W * M R&m&yana. 

M Mah&bh&rata, Sabh4-P<m>a. 

M Yadnga-nambi alias Andhra-purnn. See his life p . 221. 

87 It appears one day very hot milk was offered to the Lord at 
Tirmi&r&yanapiiram (Melukote). SolvappijTai, who was a great devotee 
felt the milk scorch his throat ; and hence held it in pain. Also the 
Incident of Lord Sampatkum&ra embracing R&m&nuja is referable. 

w By oversight we omitted this Topic in our Divine Wisdom of 
the DAvida Saints. I. K. Namhi was a regular visitor to Srirangam 
when festivities of Lord Ranga came on. After one set was ever and 
before another came on, he constantly dwelt in the interval in his mind 
on the happy scens which he witnessed during the previous festivities. 
Another season of celebrations came round. But Nam hi had grown 
nearly a hundred years old, and could not go to the first day of the 
ceremonies (Anhur-drpana). But Lord Ranga was never happy without 
his devotee being present. He was lwewever able to attend on th «ix*h 



€H. XXXII. T!rukkol6h ammai. 2 tH 

59. Did I carry the message : “He is dead,” like M&ruti- 
y&nd&n ? 

60. Did I go in pursuit (of God) like NAthamunigal P 

61. Did I say : “ I want Him not,” like ? 

62. Did I refute Advaita, like R&m&nuja ? 

63. Did I see the discus, like Nall&n ? 

64. Did I go to Anantapuram (Trivendram), like Ala- 

Vand&r ? 

65. Did I feel separation like Tey va-vAriyftndAn P 

66. Did I compose And Adi like Amudan&r ? 

67. Did I give counsel, like MAlyav&n? 

68. Did I opine* 4 mere ocean-roar/ like Mah&pftrna ? 


Foot note on page 214 (continued). 

day, when the Lord asked : “ what can we do for thee, beloved ? ’* 
4 ‘ Lord,” he said, “ so long has the body, Thou gavest me, served me well } 
now it is so old and worn out that it cannot serve any good purpose. It is 
on that account that I have this season been for five days absent.” “ In 
that case return no more from Us,” said the Lord. And by the time tho 
Lord’s procession approached the middle entrance of the Temple, Nambl 
had shuffled off his mortal coil. 

69 Read lUm&nuja’s Life. He refers to Krimikantha*Ch6ja [Bhaga 
vad-vishaya Yol. VII, p. 3538, Vdykku m VII, 1U, 4.J 

60 Read his life. 

61 Where KdrSsa refused to enter Lord Ranga’s Shrine [Page 197J. 

62 See RAm&nuja’s Life. 

68 NaMn was a Brahman disciple of Ramanuja, and a great devotee 
of Lord Varada of K&hchi. He saw a corpse floating down the river 
Vaigai which bore on its arms the Vaishnava symbols of discus. This 
was enough for Nallan to drag it to shore and perform funeral rites. 
The Brahmanas of Kaiicki resented this and declined to eat with him. 
But Lord Varada put on a Bra hm ana’ 8 disguise and attended the funeral 
meals. The Lord thereon gave him the title: Nattukku polldn, Xamakku, 
nalldn ’ i.e. ‘ Though the whole world is against him, we are for him/ 

64 See V&mun&ch&rya’s Life. 

65 See Y Amun&'s disciple who wasted away without his guru. 

® Bisciple of Ramanuja who composed R&manuja-Nutt-and&di in 
praise of Ramanuja. 

67 Ramavana. M&lyav&n’s advice to R&vana. 

® See Ramanuja's Life, with reference to funerals performed on ft 
Sudra, Marancri-Nambi, which when R&manuja objected, Pnrna declared 
all the ordinary regulations on the subject, having strict reference to caste 
etc., were as useless as the ‘ roar of the ocean.' [Pp s 167468]* 



TiRUKKOLUR-AMMAI. 


OH* XTXXt 


m 

69. Bid I exact promise, like Gdshfht-Purna ? 

70. Bid I obtain mercy like the dumb -per son ? 

71. Bid I give up my body, like Tiru-naraiyftr-araiyar ? 

72. Bid I profess insignificancy, like Sri sail a-pftrna ? 

73. Did I thrust my finger into the snake’s mouth like 
Bmb&r ? 

74. Bid I vanquish (a Pandit) by showing marks on 
arms, like Bhatt&rya ? 

75. Did I seek a secluded spot like Villiputtfir Bhagavar ? 

76. Did I jump into water like Kanapuratt-ammai ? 

On hearing this, R&m&nuja wns thunderstruck and taking 
Ammai with him back to Tirukkolur, rested under her roof, 
and partook of the food prepared by her as a token of his 
admiration and appreciation of her spiritual enlightenment and 
attainments evinced by her most erudite discourse. Before 

09 Rfim&nojn’s Life, where Purna exacted a promise of secrecy from 
lUm&nuja not to divulge religious secrets, but which Riim&nuja in- 
fringed. [P. 97.] 

w R&mlhuja’s Life where he gave salvation, unsolicited, to a poor 
dumb creature. [P. 169.] , 

71 See Sri-Vauhann-Bhushan I. In order to quench the flames in 
wkfoh the Lord’s car had by accident been enveloped, he rushed into 
the flames with his sons and perished in the act. 

79 R&mAnujs’s Life where Sri Saila came in advance to meet 
R&ra&nujft on the Tirnpati-HiU. 

78 See Rfunanuja’s Life. 

71 See page 166. 

78 He was a SanyAsin. When he went to a bathing place which was 
resorted to by ail, he left the crowds and sought out a secluded spot. 
Jildna-Sdn of A. P. Emberumanar, verse 13 : “ Panda ” and Periya Jiyar’s 
Comment thereon, may be consulted. 

70 This lady is said to have been a disciple of Sage Yamuna. He 
was once crossing the KAveri iu full flood— from Ufctawmrkoi! (Kararn- 
ba«Ar) to Srirangam, in a boat, The boatman complained of too much 
load* He was rowing in midstream with all his might, and now feared the 
boat Would sink. K. Ammai, in order to save the life of her guru and 
others in the boat, undertook to ease the boat by jumping into the river. 
The boat, thus believed, was rowed away iu safety to the shore. Rut Pro- 
ridenoe saved the lady’s life, for when she jumped, she found herself 
landing on a took just below the water-surface. 



OH. XXXII. 


THIS WASHERMAN. 




returning, he blessed her, and saw to the due performance of 
all festivals connected with Lord Nikshepavitta and St. Mad- 
hnrakavi. R&m&nuja now returned to Srirangarn. 

An interesting incident is chronicled 1 as having occured 
about this time. The washerman employed to wash the clothes 
of the Srtvaishnavas of Srirangarn, one day washed Lord 
Ranga’s garments as well. He brought them and showed to 
R&m&nnja. R&m&nuja was so pleased with him that he took him 
to the Lord in the Temple and prayed to Him thus: “ Lord, 
deign to notice the careful way in whfeh this washerman has 
’washed Tby garments. Indeed, with these wound round Thee, 
Thou wouldst appear to such advantage.” Lord Ranga accept- 
ed the recommendation and replied to Ramanuja thus : — “ For 
the loving services rendered to us this day by this washer- 
man, we forgive the offence of his ancestor, the washerman of 
our Krishna-avat&r.” 2 To this day it is the custom for the 
Lord to receive the clothes from the washerman just as he 
brings them and use it for the Lord. This is a privilege inas- 
much as in Indio Society, the washerman is a low-caste man and 
the clothes brought by him have to Ik> washed again before a 

Br&hmana, will wear them . 

* 

It is here chronicled that there was a disciple of R&m&nnja 
called Pattini-p-perum&l. He is said to have been of low- 
caste. He lived away from the sacred town of Srirangarn, in 
an out-of-the-way hut; and used to drawn himself in the joy 
of singing the psalms of the Holy AzhvArs. R&m&ntija's way 
from the river Kaveri to Srirangarn lay where this disciple 
thus lived. One day he was returning from his bath accom- 
panied as usual by a large number of his followers. He stopped 
short at the hut, and bidding his followers leave him and pro- 
ceed to Srirangarn, entered the hut, and spent the time with 
the disciple as long as it pleased him, in the sweet ecstasy 
brought on by the singing of the Holy Hymnal. Had an ordi- 
nary person consorted thus with a low caste man as R&mA 

* Vide Bhagavad * vis haya, on Tiruvaymozhi V, 10, 0, Kinra-vdrum 
also Topic 68 of our Divine Wisdom of Drdvidd Saint*. 

1 Read the story in foot-note, op. cit. 



CH, XXXU. 


21$ PATTIKI.P.PKBTlMiL. 

nuja did, he would have been outeasted, but they dared not 
niter a syllable of reproach against R&m&nuja's doing it — ano- 
ther illustration of the canon that great men alone can do such 
things,, as laid down in the D barman Astras, ‘ the 

daring acts of the Mah&traas,’ and of Srimad 

Bh&gavata. No reproach thus attaches to the character of 
glorious souls. Such incidents though trivial in themselves, 
are fraught with great significance and important issues as 
affecting and moulding the organic -character of anew commu- 
nity which would at tke time be taking definite shape and 
acquiring special functions in the body-politic of the Aryan- • 
Dr&vidas. 

This new community of Sri-Vaishnavas was not confined 
exclusively to the Br&hmanas. It was catholic and entertained 
in its fold every man and woman regardless of caste or color. 
The community was growing fast and counted millions, of 
which a definite number as constituting the elite, and as calcu- 
lated to carry on the evangel set on foot by R&m&nuja, is memo- 
rialized in the verse : — I 

II t e. “ The Kir-g of the asce* 
tics, Rfibm&uuja, had in his following (700) 4 seven hundred Yatis 
(ascetics), (74) seventy-four (episcopal) Thrones, known as the 
Aoh&rya-purushas, and countless others, — (12,000) twelve- 
thousand Hkftngis (monks of all classes), (300) three-hundred 
Kotti-ammais (nuns), many kings, and others both ‘of the 
Holy Thread ’ and ‘ the Threadless (S&tt&davar) * A list of the 
names will be given separately And here, only the chief 
members with the work allotted to them in the immediate 
establishment attached to the see, will be noted KureSa, 
D&$arathi, Nad&dftr Alvfcr, and the Bhattars were to attend 
Srl-Bh&shya Discourses ; Yajna-mtirti ( Aral &la-p-perum41- 
Eiuberum&nkr) was to attend to the worship of the chapel ; 
Kid&robi-p-perumal and Kid&mhi-fitccb&n were to superin- 
tend the culinary department; Vatn-pdica or Andhra-pfirna 
( ss Yaduga-nambi) was for oil -bathing and other sundry ser- 
vices to B4m4uuj& ; Gomatham Siriy-fidvan was to carry the 
kamandalu (vessel) and sandak ; Dhanurdasa was to be the 
treasurer, Ammangi was to boil milk $ UkkaMdv&u was to 



CH. XXXII. 


RiMiNCJX’B FOLLOWING. 


serve meals ; Ukkalammfl.1 was to fan ; M4r ati-p- periytedio 
was to minister on occasions of natural impulses ; MaroarillA. 
Mtouti-y4nd&n was to be the steward ; Tuy a-muni -velam was 
to be the waterman ; Tiru-v-aranga-m&ligai was to be the 
storekeeper ; Vandar and Sundar were to take service under 
kings and fill the see-coffers ; Rauianuja-v£laikk&rar was to be 
the body-guard ; and Akalanka-n&tt&lv&n was to win polemical 
victories over dissenters. 



VATU-PIJRNA. 


CH. XXXIII. 


220 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 

VATTT-PtlRNA OB AWDHRA-PUBNA. 

Vatu-ptirna or Andhra- pfirna, whose first entry into onr 
history may be remembered as having taken place when Rama- 
nuja was at S&ligr&ma (Mysore), 1 is known, above all other dis- 
oiples, to have been the closest attached adherent of R&m&nuja, 
and the staunchest follower of the Path, known as the Pancha- 
raop&ya, or the Fifth Path — the Achary&bhim&na, 2 in other 
words, unswerving faith placed in the Saviour, who is incar- 
nated on earth, and never dividing such faith between a saviour 
who has taken on humanity, and God who ever remains Divine. 
Vatu-p&rna was not a mere theoretical believer in this mode of 
salvation, but exemplified it forcibly by his personal example. 
In the exclusive worship he paid to Ramanuja's Holy Feet, he 
excluded all thoughts of God. His Saviour was his God. He 
recognized no other rival Saviour -God to his visible human 
Saviour. Once on an occasion, Ram&nuja went to the Holy 
shrine Tiruvellarai (about 10 miles north of Srirangam). 
Vatu-pfirna followed him of course, carrying the Tiruppul- 
kftdai ^containing washed clothes, images, articles of worship; 
&c, Ram&nuja, after reaching Tiruvellarai, went to bathe and 
returning, opened the cover of the wallet to find to his surprise 
and chagrin that his own sandals had been placed on the top 


1 The descendants of this dis- 
ciple are close relatives to the wri- 
ter of this work; and to this day 
enjoy the rights and privileges of 
the shrine built over Bam&nuja's 
Holy Feet at this place —a place of 
holy pilgrimage to this day. In 
the days of Krishna-raja Odeyar, 
two brilliant lights of this family 
known as Sidlaghatta SiuUmanft- 
oh&rya and feangach&ry a (brothers) 
shed their Vaidio glory in his 
court j and wrote many w orks such 
as Charamftrtha-vivriti, Ghata-Kar- 
para-Bhedi, Pada-renukA-Sahasra, 
BAtnAnuja-SArva-bhauma-S a taka, 
YAdavAdrt-vilAsa, a S&tra-BhAshya, 

KamalApta-karAnvaya, Bhaja-yati- 
rAja-Stotra, Bhaje-bh&shyakAra 
Sintra, SiddhAnta-bheri (iiAtak,) 


Acharya-stuti, and many songs in 
Sanskrit, Telugu and Kannada. 
Their descendant B&m&eh&rya has 
been winning laurels in the court of 
the Baroda Maharaja and has made 
many disciples in Bombay and 
Guzerat side. Their memorial 
vere is thus snug ffi wmg W rei - 

3 For which, see our Soteriogical 
Table, pp, 573-4 of our Bhagavad- 
gitA. That Vatu-purna is an illus- 
trious example of this Path is pro- 
minently shown in LokAch&rya’s 
Srivachana-Bhdshana, and Feriya- 
TSyaFs Arti-prabandha. 

8 A kind of wallet or portman- 
teau made of reeds. 



€H. XXXIII, 


VATU-Pt T BN T A, 


221 


of fill other things Irate, he called Purna and asked him to 
explain this sacrilege — the sacrilege of placing his sandals over 
the heads of his holy Images of worship! “ Sire,” promptly 
answered Pftrna, “how is my God inferior to thine 

Ramanuja went to visit the Lords in the temples, but 
Purna’s gaze was steadily fixed on Ramanuja’s handsome per- 
son. R&m&nuja often marked this ; and once remarked : “ Son, 
why dost thou not direct thy sight to the charming eyes of the 
Lord ?” Pftrna then looked at the Lord and looked at R&mft- 
nuja alternately for a few f seconds and\hen exclaimed ; “ Sire, 
the eyes that have seen thee cannot see other objects.” 1 

R&m&nuja used to hand over the remains of food, after he 
had eaten, to Purna to eat ; the latter, after eating, wiped his 
soiled hands on his head. R&m&nuja fretfully chided him for 
this slovenly habit and directed him henceforth to wash his 
hands with water. “ Yea,” said Purna. The next day, 
R&m&nuja handed over to him to eat consecrated food given to 
him in the Temple. Purna ate and washed his hands with 
water. “ What hast thou done, son exclaimed R&m&nuja, 
“ the Lord’s food is too holy to he thus washed away, thou 
oughtesfc to wipe it on thy head.” “ Sire,” reported he, 44 1 
have done as thou badest me yesterday.” R&m&nuja simply 
said : “Son, thou hast overcome me.” 

On another occasion Pftrna was busy boiling milk fo* 
R&m&nuja in the Math, when Lord Ranganatha was conveyed 
in procession, decked in all the glory of decorative art 
R&m&nuja rose to go, see and pay homage to the Deity, calling 
Pforna, as he went, to come and do the same with him. But 
Purna, immediately excused himself saying : “ Holy sire, if I 
come out to see thy God, the milk that is on the fire for my 
God (R&m&nuja) will boil over.” 

At one time, some kinsmen of his came to his house as 
guests, and used his cooking pots for preparing their meals. 
But as soon as they left him, Pfirna broke them ail and threw 
them into the rubbish heap ; and picking up cast-away pets in 

1 wpQ&m 



VATO-P tlNA. 


m. xxxm. 


8Bi 


tie backyard of P&sarathi, brought them home and used them ;* 
thug showing that everything that belongs to the Saviour is 
holy* and all eke is unholy. This demeanour proves the 
acme of the state of a spiritually risen soul dissevered from 
all touch of worldliness (vairagya.) 


P&rna wag strict as regards the taking of Sri-p&da-tirtha, for 
he sipped no water washed off any other’s foot save that of his 
Saviour, R&m&nnja. He memorialized this faith of his, by shap- 
ing an image of his feet and setting them up for worship for 
all time to oome at the village of S&ligr&ma — as the most 
cherished treasure for himself and all posterity j and that it* 
must be looked upon as such by all the coming generations, was 
the most solemn trust which he imposed on those near and dear 
to him, at the time of his translation from the mundane. Yatu- 
ptirna is thus assigned a place in the inner circle of R&m&nuja’fi 
hierarchical institutions, called the Ashta-diggajas, or the 
Might Elephants of Faith to guard the eight cardinal points of 
tie wratpass. 1 * * * * * * * 9 This sage it was who sang the famous hymn to 
R&m&nuja, called the R&m^nuj4sthottara-Sata-n&ma, sung 
©very day by every Srivaishnava. The last verse runs thus 



1 The meaning of this is that 
when a spiritual relation with 

spiritual men is established, that 
becomes holy, and all affections 

contracted with kinsmen who are 

Worldly are contaminations. Their 

very touch is considered as antago- 

nietio to the growth of the now 

spiritual relation. The parallel to 

this idea is Jesus Baying : 41 Every 

one that hath left house, or bro* 


them, ot sisters, or father, or mo- 
ther, or wife, or children, or lands 
for my name’s sake Ac.” [Eat. 
XIX, 29] j and “ if any man com© 
to me and hate not bis father, and 
mother 4c ” [Luke XIV, 28]. 

3 The holy descendants of Pfirna 
mentioned on page 220, foot note *!, 
have sung thus in their Yatir&ja- 
s&rv».bbaun»a*Satakft 

ipMPill ®e. 



CH. XXXW. 


anasta-sOri. 


2SB 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 

ANAHTA-Sfoai OR ANANTACHIrYA. 

Some interesting incidents in the life of Annnt&rya, 
another staunch disciple of RAmAnuja, are related thus. From 
previous pages it is known that he was the person who had 
undertaken to settle in Tirupati and do all ihe services of Lord 
SrinivAsa. It may also be remembered that he had created a 
flower garden to which he was paying personal attention. He 
now wished to construct a small reservoir for water for that 
purpose. He began excavating it by his own manual labour, 
# But a Brah machar in suddenly put in his appearance and 
saying : “ Aged sire, the task is too much for thee. Let me help 
and lighten it,” stretched his hand to take off his head the 
basket, in which he was carrying earth. AnantArya arrested the 
boy’s band and said : — “Son, if I resign my basket, I shall 
faint ; if you take my basket, you will faint.” But he was a 
stubborn boy and rejoined : — “ No fear of that, Sire, trust me.” 
AnantArya remonstrated and said Son, this service is my 
life ; if you also want life t go, fetch your own basket, and 
carry it.” The boy disappeared for the present. AnantArya 
went oa with his work and piessed his poor wife into thd 
service, though she was pregnant at the time. She was em- 
ployed in carrying loads of earth and emptying the same on M 
the bank. Her returns were at first slow, but they became soon 
rapid. An ant Ary a remarked it with surprize and asked her to 
explain how she managed to return so rapidly. She naively 
Said: — “A BrahmachArin hoy ” sire, “meets me half the way, 
carries the load for me and brings me back the basket. Hence 
Sire, your work is done more speedily.” “ Who is that imperti- 
nent urchin meddling with my work, uninvited ! n fulmi- 
nated AnantArya in anger, and running after the hot, gave 
him a poke under the chin with his crow-bear, saying: 
“Take that for thy trouble, and get thee gone” The boy 
took to Ms heels as if in fright. Bat the temple authorities 
found, and AnaniArya too after, that Lord SrinivAsa in the 
shrine was profusely bleeding in the chin. This they stopped 
by stuffing camphor into the wound. [This is done even to this 
day, and the camphor is distributed to devotees as pratflda]. 




ANANTA-8UEI. 


CH. XXXIV. 


As Anant&rya was fast progressing with his work, he was 
one day bitten by a cobra. But he went simply to the holy 
Sv&n^Pushkarini pond, bathed and returned to his work. 
People observed to him that he should put hijnself under treat- 
ment, Unless he meant to die. But he quietly^ remarked : “ No 
treatment is needed.” Be now went to the Temple on a visit 
to Lord SrinivAsa, when the Lord remarked : — ■“ Son, beloved, 
what was thy thought when thou wouldst do nothing to ex- 
tract the fatal poison from thy system ?” “ Lord,” said hey “if 
the bitten serpent (i.e^ I) is more powerful, it will simply 
bathe in thy holy pond and do service here below ; but if the 
biting serpent is more powerful, the bitten serpent (t.e., I) will 
bathe in the Viraj A- Stream and do service there above (in Thy 
Heaven). This was my thought when the cobra bit me.” 

Anani&rya, once upon a time, left Tirupati to go to his 
native land, Pbsala-country 1 * * taking food for the journey. 
After doing a stage, feeling hungry, lie sat down to discuss it ; 
hut lo, when he opened the box, he found the food swarming 
with ants. “ Curse me, I have sinned,” cried he, vexed. “The 
best Saints have desired to live on the Holy Hill of Tirupati, 
even as stocks and stones. a And I a sinner, have deprived 
these holy ants of their holy abodo.” So saying, he carefully 
closed the box and retracing his steps, hungry as he was, 
released the ants on the hill, and went his way, 

Yamunai-t-turaivan is a chamber in the Tirupati Temple 
premises, named after sage Y amun &ch&ry a. Anant&ry a sat here 
usually to make dower* garlands for the Lord. When he was 
once thus busy and had not finished, he was called to atten d on 
some other work in the Temple, but he refused to stir. And 
when he went there with the finished garland, the Lord asked 
him to explain his disobedience. Anant&rya said : — “ What 
have I to do with Thee, Lord, when my flowers are just bios- 
Homing, and I should not delay stringing them together lest 
their fragrance be lost for Thee.” The Lord said: — 4 what if we 

1 Present Mysore. Ilia birth place is Kirangftr (Siruputt&r) near 

Hrirangapatna, 

Op. St, Kulasekhar-Athvar’s Tirumoxhi : €T thQuQ^ititTGk Qfj/resr • 



OH, XXXIV. 


ANANTABYA’S CLAIM. 




dismiss thee from this place ?* u Lord, our Saints have snug 
that Thom art a* • sojourner on this Hilt 1 like myself ; Thou 
migbtest hare come to stay here a little earlier than itself ; 
and that is all the difference between us. This Hill is there* 
fore not Thine, l| is our common property. Thou hast no 
authority therefore to dispossess mo of it.” The Lord was 
mightily pleased with His curious devotee, which Anant&rya 
was. 


1 f ‘ ux&rQ&oifrj&Q&iT 



£26 i^R^SA OBTAINS SALVATION. OH. XXXV/ 


CHAPTER XXXV. 

THE SALVATION OF KTJRESA. 

♦' . . 

Tradition here takes up the finishing episodes in the life 
of the most exemplary disciple and martyr Sri KutAsa. It is 
said that his figure forms the alto-relievo in the Life of il&radr 
nuja, and his exit from the world’s stage takes place in advance 
of that of his revered Master, Sri If am ami j a as will appear in 
the sequel. 

R&manuja must hdve been about 110 years and even more 
by this time. As redoubtable as lie was in his championship of 
Vaishnavism, he was in his strength and zeal unflagging. A 
recluse, in quiet seclusion, he was importing to his hosts of 
disciples the quintessence of the doctrines it was his mission to 
propagate. One day, KureSa went to visit, Lord Rauganat ha 
all by himself. “Thou see ms t as if thou hast something in 
thy heart to tell me,” said the Lord. KurAsa broke out into 
praise which took the shape of a splendid Sanskrit verse, — 
gifted poet as he was- -which he explained at great length 
by his own commentaries. The Lord was so pleased as to 
pvess KflrftSa to ask any favour of him. But KuiAsas humbly 
Said that lie had every favour bestowed on him; there was 
nothing more to ask. “ No,” said the Lord, “ once more ask, 
and ask for more, if not for thee, for the love that I bear to my 
beloved Hpouse, Sri, and love for my Ramanuja. Kui£sa 
submitted his wish that he be released from the prison of 
the body, and he gathered to His Feet. “Ask some other 
thing than that,” the Lord said; but Kur&*a declared 
that he could think of nothing else. 1 “Let it be so, then,” 
the Lord said ; “ what thou askest shall not only be boon 

for thee, but a boon conferred on every one that lias any sort 
of relation with thee.” KureSa, receiving this message, 
walked out from the sanctum in all the dignity and glory of a 
crown-prince, soon destined to occupy the throne in the King- 
dom of Parama-pada ; and instead of going to his own house, 
sped beyond the outermost rampart of the Temple and took 


1 fITihQioUGgtgQw Siri&Qw tf f£. [2«d T. Andudi. 02]. 



OH. XXXV. bAmAnUJA’S JOY AND GBIKP. 


227 


shelter in Azhvar’s (his father ?) house. Intelligence soon 
reached R&ra&nuju as to what had happened. Agreeably 
startled, he stood up, and flung his upper garment into the air 

an expression of infinite joy. The disciples who witched 
this, failed to understand what Rttm&nnja meant by this act, 
and humbly asked him to explain. “ My faithful/* he said 
“ I bear also relationship with Kuresn. My salvation, about 
which I may have doubts, 1 is thus made safe and sure.” This 
explains the important consequence that follows from the spiri- 
tual relation into which a Master and his disciples may enter; 
and that is, that saving power is ns truly vested in a qualified 
disciple with regard to his Master, as is in a qualified master 
with regard to his disciple. Rut Raimirinja’s joy soon gave 
way to grief, at the impending prospect of separation from his 
dearest disciple and associate, Sri Kuresa, the like of whom 
there was none ; and lie forthwith left his Math with all his 
assembly to meet KfirGsa ensconced in the Saint’s shrine. They 
met and R&m&nuja chidingly remonstrated with KurGsa for hav- 
ing done an act without previously taking counsel with him. 
Kuresa kept submissively silent. “ Why dost thou not speak, 
Azhvan,” addressed RAin&nuja, “ What was thy object in asking 
the Lord to let thee go to the Blessed Realms in advance of 
me r 1 ” “ Holy Sire,” now spoke Kuresa. “ My object was to 
preserve the order of precedence there.” “ Speak not, beloved, 
in conundrums, ” returned R&m&nuja, “ explain thyself.” 
“ Sire,” began Kur&s&, u the saint’s hymn : * mudiyudai ’ tells 
us that the angels who are our elders in Heaven come out of 
its gates to welcome those younger brothers of theirs, who pro- 
ceed thither from here This is out of order ; for younger ones 
should always go and welcome the elders. This is the order 
I wish to preserve. Hence I go in advance and welcome my 
Master when he comes.” Ramanuja said : — “ My most beloved, 
thou forgettest the rule that obtains in heaven ; 

1 How could Ram Anu ja, himself a obeyed, by revealing the mysteries 
Saviour, doubt bis own salvation ? of religion kept so long sacred, and 
is a question which will naturally this doubt vanished by the Lord’s 
arise. The doubt had come to him gift to Ktir£?a, to whom B&jn&uuja 
on the occasion of his incurring the bore spiritual kinship, Head verse 
displeasure of his gum of Goshtbh at the end of this chapter, 
purna (vide P : Ob.), whom he dis- 



rAmAnuja’s grief fob k^ bAba . 


CH. XXXV, 


Bldiffenmces »nd distinctions disappear there; and yet thou 
to Pel ' PetUate even there the rel ^on that obtains here 

4 tXZ rr r ,rL di r ple - In aU the 8pb -*> * there 

restrain te» °* IT f° ^ rolce out ^Amauuja, and could not 
restrain tears trickling down his cheeks, attended by so • but 

o serving t lat Khr6sa had little time now, checked himself and 

approaching closer, hngged him to his bosom and whispered 

oH’ 8 "V 1 ' 6 H ° ly ^Mantra; and Jni^ lTh e 
spectators whose curiosity was evidently roused by this act of 

"T f 4 ”'*”’' °« K doOT not 

last r 41 ° f any k ' nd ’ and y et 1 administer it in the 
of , e “* B ’ leflt our spiritual prince Kilresa miss the bliss ’ 

of hearing the sacramental formula fmm my lips even like the 

EEStSf 

Dvaya is his dail '“TT “ To our K6r ^ a , the 

time » ^v lTrTi r d 1 mU8t 8erve i4 for *• last 

*° n ’ belovetJ AzhvAn,” he said, now turning to 
tho “«* very soul, how can I part with thee P 

Srven Wht T V T . thy MaSter P Take witJr tbee to 

[On page 2527 T TT ! 1 J ° 7 Heaven wi ^out him P 

v l ,2 un f, ° f tHe TelUSa Bditio “ o* the ' Bhaga . 

* f W tho conversation is thus recorded Wbik I 

r?/?i ere ’ 8 ° n ’ hOW Wert thon a ™« for Heaven P “ S re » 
aaid K^sa, “in the depth of my thoughts for Z Jiseri 

£>*% existence, 1 forgot this point Pray foZ Z ” 

sa,d, “if Lord Kanga could grant Ihee a Zon he 

t A So 1 wiu g ° and « k ^ to\^X 

shrine h Bamtou i a ’ went a f «w paces towards the 

• ’ ba 8 ° Ppiid abru P%. ““d reflected thus “ God’s will 

Bin to change ,t P Peocavi. Let me submit and he resigned 

Z jT^fT" S ° 8ayi ^ b « retraced his steps £ 
ottowed the further conversation with Kflrtsa]. How can I 

Z^Tth^ u*** AlM> * he M in heaven has 
^bwcted thee, though our Lord BanganAiha here possesses 

T tbe ”’ th °’ 1 %*>K from thy 

g P HaPW ' “ * he Ij0rd in Heaven and happy His celestial 



GH. XXXV. K&&&SA TAKING FINAL LEAVE. 


m 


Hosts to claim tiiee as their own ! Luckless are w© Her© and 
this sleeping Lord* here, Hanga, to lose thee! But let me not, 
my dearest, change thy mind and disturb thy plans. Be it as 
thou wiliest. All hail to thee, my son ; go, go to the Blessed 
Eternal Kingdom and rule there in eternal peace and bliss !! ” 
So saying, Ramanuja drew him closer into his embrace and 
fondly stroking him on the back, continued : — 

“ Azhv&n ! I salute thee ; thou hast now my leave to 
depart.” Kth&^a spoke not a word. “ His heart was too full 
for expression. He fell at R&mannjjFs feet like a senseless 
“block of wood. Ramanuja speedily raised him up, when 
Kur6sa pressed his holy feet on his head and to his breast, and 
prayed for the administration of the holy water washed of his 
feet. Ramanuja administered it in serene solemnity and Kftr&Sa 
took it 1 after addressing the memorial verse ; — 

u Ramanuja’s Holy Feet are my Refuge — Ramanuja, my 
blessed guru ; the Ocean of Mercy, — Ramanuja who bo loves 
the gold of God s Feet that all else to him is dross.” 

Ramanuja made a move now towards his Math, towards 
the North River (Kollad&m), Kftr6sa following him a little 
distance. “ Pray stop now,” enjoined Ramanuja and Kftr6sa 
with folded hands retraced his steps to a panda! close by 
Ashvar’s house. He now called his wife Andal-ammai to his 
side and asked her what her wish was. She said : “ August 
Sire,, thy wish is my wish. My own, I have none.” So saying 
she fell on his feet with folded hands. He now called his sous 
Bhattarya and Sri-RAma-p-pUlai to his side, and counselled 
them thus : “ Dear children, ye have no bereavement to be- 
moan, for ye have Lord Rauga, your Father, and His Holy 
Spouse is your Mother. By them ye have been brought up. But 

1 Washing the feet of holy men among the Srivaiehnavas is done in 
is an oriental ceremony, which order to imbibe the magnetic in- 
Chrut himself did to his disciples. Suence of the spiritual person, as 
The sipping of the water (known acuie loth for physical as well as 
as SripAdatirtha) which prevails psychical ills. 



230 


KtafesA PASSES AWAY. 


OH. XXXV. 


forget not that R&manuja is your Saviour. Be obedient to 
And4l, By thought or speech or deed sin* not against Holy 
Afen; on the other hand ever seek their company/’ The sons 
wept and fell at their father’s feet. “ Weep not, dear children,” 
cried Ktir&Sa, fondly raising them, “ for if your grief is caused 
on account <*f temporal relationship, ye meddle with spiritual 
relationship, ye hold with Ramanuja ; but if it is due to our 
soul-relationship, then ye call it in question by such grief. 
Either way ye have no cause for regrets. Cease then and rise 
above such worldly weaknesses.” So exhorting, Kuresa laid 
himself down, — head towards the Temple, resting on the la}), 
of PUlai-p pil jai-Ashv&n, and feet resting on the lap of Andal 
nmmai — and dismissing from his mind every other thought 
than that of the Holy Feet of Ramanuja, winged his way into" 
the ethereal spaces. R&m&nuja was soon apprised of the 
event. Ho at once hastened to the spot and consoled BhaMarya 
who was weeping, and telling him that no tears should be shed 
over an auspicious event, directed him to attend to the funeral 
ceremonies/ The Brahma-inedha ritual combined with 
that of the Vaishnava, was duly performed ; 2 and the fol- 
lowing verse was composed to his memory : — 


l («) 

^*1 II 

[Y&jnyavalkya Smyiti.]it>> Mr. Lead- 
beator says:— **’ All the ghastly para- 
phornalin of woe the mutes, the 
plumes, the black velvet, the crape, 
the mounting garments, the black - 
edged note paper — all these are 
nothing more than advertisements 
of ignorance on the part of those 
who employ them. The man who 
begins to understand what death 
is at once puts aside all this mas- 
querade as ehitdish folly, seeing 


that to mourn over the good fortune 
of his friend merely beeauso it in* 
volvos for himself the pain of an 
apparent separation from that 
friend, becomes, as soon as it is 
recognized, a display of selfishness.’* 
fl'p. r>9-(50. Outline of Theosophy}* 
(r) Head St. Paul’s Epistles to the 
Thessalonians IV, 12 to 17, of which 
12 runs thus: — “ And we will not 
have you ignorant, brethern, con- 
cerning them that are asleep, that 
you be not sorrowful, Ac. And 17 : 
“ Wherefore comfort you one an- 
other with these words.” 


t The following authorities may of be uso to onr readers on this subject : 

& . 4 


‘it. 


wcpwifwtar m 


CH. XXXV. 


MKM0K1ALS. 


281 


Our Elders repeat the following beautiful \icrse in praise 
of Kiiresa on his birth day every year : — 

^ ^ q'^ r rq‘fTf%:^r^rrgr% jqrr^- 1 

‘ How can KurOsa be (illy praised, by (whom evert Ramfi* 
nuja’s salvation is made sure, — R&mftnuja, who is the sure 
passport to others’ salvation ? l . 

Tradition says that while Ramanuja or (Lakshmanaehtirya) 
is Lakshmana himself of the Ibimayani fame, Km As a is 
R&ma himself, horn again to rentier 1>ack to Lakshmana, all 
the services which Lakshmana rendered to him in those by- 
gone days. 

It is said that without Kuio-ui, RA.mA.mija would not have 
been what he lias been. A. P. Kmbernmanar sung the praises 
of RamAnuja in his Dravida Ram&nuja-nuttran-dadi, in imita- 
tion of Andhra- Pilrna’s ftamskrit KA.miA.iuj j-Ashtoltara ; but 
when RA.md.nnja heard it. he rejected it as it contained no re- 
ference to Kiu*£ Ha . Verse 7. tk Mozhiyai ” was then introduced. 
Then (he hymn was sanctioned and assigned a place ahmg with 
the 4,000 Prabandlias. 

Foot note on page 230 (continued). 

II 

5T«m<wr4; i 

jrmmirwfr *sfctf»nppnpj n 
sTr^TW^pfr W^3Tsrr5**TH i 
II 

Hpnln?*#* n^efT i S'TP?? i 
flfwflrem-wr 11 

w^in^m'Tw i 

?if5r#i*rsrw%m i 

?r^’7ifs:3f^ h 

ii 

1 See foot note I on page 275. 



232 


BHATTAttYA TO SUCCEED. 


CH. XXXYI. 


CHAPTER XXXYI. 

RAMANUJA’S LAST DAYS. 

ParAsara-BhattArya, or BhattArya shortly, the son of Kuresa, 
had now come to the estate of his father ; — spiritual estate. 
RAmAnuja of course know from the moment of BhAfctArya’s 
entry into this world, that ha was 'destined to be the apostle of 
the VisishtAdvaita Dispensation — having been presented to the 
world by Lord RauganAtha Himself as His own (God-)son. 
Providence designed that Kfht^a should make his exit from the 
episcopal stage — for he was too saintly and retired from the '• 
world to be an active worker, the requisite for a propagandist. 
BhattArya was of this type. So RAmAnuja led the budding 
young man one morning to the Holy Temple, to present him 
formally to the Lord, so as to make him the anointed, to 
authoritatively transmit to posterity the great Message he had 
brought from Heaven. Ramanuja led then this juvenile 
apostle-delegate to the Lord, and presented him. “ We again 
repeat and confirm out God-fathership to thee, son. We 
consecrate it by giving thee this tnrmuric-water to drink. 
Grieve not for the loss of our K tires a, thy Father, .for we 
stand to you in that position, more so even.” So spoke 
the Lord. RAmAnuja interrupted: — “Majestic Lord! Bless 
this scion with long life ; and I will give him all education.” 
Lonl Ranga did not deign to reply, but simply gave them 
leave with his blessings, symbolized by the serving of ththa 
and prasdda. RAmAnuja returned to his see and calling EmbAr 
(Govinda-Jiyar), assigned to him the sacred task of preparing 
BhattArya thoroughly for the position he was to occupy, by a 
complete course of studies, in doctrine as well as discipline. 
After thus discharging the sacred trust which had been vested 
in him, RAmAnuja settled down once more quietly, to spend his 
time usefully in imparting instruction to his large congregation 
in BhAshya and Bhaga vad - vi sh ay a. 

KandAdai-AndAn, the son of DAsai athi, one day approached 
RAmAnuja reverently and said : — “ Holy Sire, thou art to us in 
this Kali- Age, God Himself incarnate, come on this earth to 
establish D harm a, like Lord Krishna in DvApara-Age. If 



CH. XXXYT. 


RAMANUJA’S IMAGE. 


233 


is said to Him, thou art : m^FrTWW I 

^WHiT'K^RT II RAm&nuja the Sun, incarnated, to 

open the lotus of virtue, and dissipate the darkness of vice.” So, 
Holy Father, permit us to instal in Sri-Perumbiidur (Bhilta- 
puri), thy image, tliat all posterity to the end of time may be en- 
abled to know thee, love thee and serve thee as their Saviour, and 
secure their salvation.” Ramftnuja granted the prayer. And an 
accordingly brought a statuary to study It&mAnuja’s figure 
and reproduce it in metal. This was done and shown to Rfimfi- 
nuja. He scanned it closely from t.op«fco bottom. Being satis- 
• lied , 2 he embraced the statue pouring into it ail the spiritual 
power and grace he had possessed, for the benefit of posterity 
and commanded that it be installed in Bhuta-puri in the month 
of Pushya when Jupiter would bo in that coustallution.* Andftn 
carried the Image in state to ilhuta-puri, and installed it along 
with the Mula or fixed Image, sculptured out of stone, exactly 
in the month and on the day fixed by Rftmauu ja. As the installa- 
tion ceremonies were being proceeded with at Bhuta-puri, 
Ramanuja at Srirangam was suddenly taken ill. He was 
startled at this, but recollecting that that was the moment his 
Image .was being inaugurated at Bhuta-puri, understood the 
meaning of his illness. This he also took as a foreboding of the 
end of his stay on earth and the completion of his vocation. He 
therefore sent a message to Andan to return immediately. 
And An obeyed the summons and joined Ram&nuja. 

R&manuja had thus all his band of disciples and devotees 
remain by his side, and gave them the quintessence of his 
teachings thus : — “Listen, sons beloved,” began he ; “Men are of 
three distinct types, the Hod-ward ( anukula ), the God -against 
(pratiktUa) and the God-indifferent (anubhaya). The first type 

1 Bhagavad-gita IV 8. 

2 The figure answered the description *. — 

i * i 

It is of this Image,— the frontispiece to this work. 

8 This star, it is significant, is the star of Sri Hama’s coronation. 



234 


FINAL TEACHINGS. 


CH. XXXVI. 


are the Sri-Vaishnavas ; the second are the antitheists ; and 
the third are the wordly ( sammrins ). If you meet with the 
men of the first class, joy as if you found flowers, scents, 
aromatics and so forth ; as if the blush of moonshine spread 
about you, and zephyrs softly crept over you ; as if you 
met your own most near and dear kith and kin. If you come 
across men of the second stamp, fear as if you faced a venomous 
reptile, fire and so forth. If you chance to meet men of the 
third description, mind them not as you would not mind the 
stocks and stones that lie on your way. If you discover wil- 
lingness in them, teach them things of the spirit ; if otherwise, 
treat them with pity. Why these men are turned away from 
God is because of their love for lust and lucre. 

If out of pride consequent on lust and lucre, men con- 
demn Sri-Vaishnavas it is nothing short of contempt for 
God Himself. If to such pride, holy men descend to 
paying courtship, it is like the king’s wife wandering in the 
streets for begging. If to samsdrins, holy men allow themselves 
to be lured on account of their wealth and so forth, vain is 
their wisdom, as they have not learnt to distinguish between 
gem and glass, WsRdi IU I W-Nf, sppqgc- 

There aie six ways by which you can usefully spend your 
days : 1. Head Sri BMshya and teach it to otheis. 2. If that is 
above your level, read Tiruvaimozhi and make others lead it. 
3. If that is beyond your ken, build a hut in any holy land, 
and live there. 4. If that is impracticable, do services in a 
Temple. 5. If that is inconvenient, dwell ever on the profound 
truths contained in the Holy Dvaya-Mantra. 6. If that also 
is difficult, take shelter or service under a holy man. 

ii&iu&nuja now sent for all the servants of the Blessed 
Fane of Range, and addressed them thus : — “ O Faithful 
Servants of our Lord, my time is over, and my services in 
your company have to come to an end. In the performance 
of my duties with you, I may have offended some and pained 
othm*s. As I am now about to leave you, it is seeming that I 
ask of you, one and all, to forgive me for my short-comings.” 
41 Holy Sire , f said they ail in one voice,. “ Why do you speak 



C1I. XXXVI. ADVICE TO TEMPLE SERVANTS, 


235 


thus to us your humble servants ¥ your speech is strange — not 
only strange, but. drives fear into our breasts I You, beloved 
father, to leave us orphans ? You, the soul of the worlds, to 
leave us lifeless corpses “ Speak not so, sons/ slid Ram A 
nuja, comforting them : — “Ye lose nothing by losing me; for 
there is Your Lord Hanga here, ever ])resent, and who never 
leaves you. He is safe sleeping on his serpant-couch and 
steadily gazing to the South, — for his Bhakta, Vibhislmna 
dwells there. Never be sparing in your services to Him. lie 
vigilant and devout. T wish you all the constant company of 
the Lord’s own elect, — the Sri-Yaislinnvas. Farewell/’ So 
exhorting them and assigning to select disciples the care 
of the different sections ol his large following, Sri Ram&nuja 
led Bhattarya. to Lord Ranga’s presence, and lot him receive 
the tirt/ia and praxdda, prior to him -—signifying by this act 
that Bhattarya was to be the Head of the Srivaishnava Church 
after his departure — and turning to his disciples, said : — “Hen- 
tie folk, he shall be next to me in succession. Look upon him 
as such.” Turning to I>1 1 at tarya, he Raid : — “Sou, there in a 
servant of repute, by name Vedanti in the uplands (Mysore). 
Go there, win him by polemics, and convert him to our Faith.” 
After finis consecrating Bhattarya, Ramanuja returned to his 
Math, and once more addressing the assembly ot his disciples, 
commanded them not to stray from the Path when he passed 
away ; not to t;Ufe his loss so much to heart as to interfere 
with the due performance of duties falling to their share, 
“for,” said he, “ you will then forfeit your connection with 
me, Mahapurna and Y&muna ; and you will moreover act con* 
trary to the will of our St. StahagOpa. Approach me, then, 
each of you, and swear by my holy feet, that you will carry 
out my behests, and will never swerve from the lines of virtue, 
I have marked out for you ill.” 

R&m&nuja now commanded that they should retire and 
return after eating of the consecrated food prepared for them. 
They obeyed ; and when they returned, Sri Ramanuja gave 
his last words and last blessings ; and withdrawing himself 
gently,— as if he was falling into a quiet natural sleep-closed 
his eyes, and laid himself down, his head turned towards the 



rAmanuja’S exit. 


OH. XXXVI. 


Temple, and rested on the lap of Emb&r, and feet placed on 
the lap of Vat a -puma (Andhra-purna). 

The whole Srirangam and his wife crowded to the Math 
to witness the last moments of the Great Ramanuja. A party 
of the elders, in solemn tones, sang the Brahmavalli and the 
Bbriguvalli of the Vedas ; and another party sang the hymns 
of the Drftvida-Prabandhas. As they watched Ram&nuja 
lying in state, their hearts heating with the importance of 
the supreme moment, the crown of his head (at the pineal- 
gland) 1 hurst and the holy Ambassadar of God winged his 
way hack to the Native *Land the feed souls, the Empyrean of 
the perfect. 

Like the mighty trees of the forest, uprooted and blown 
down by the fierce blasts of the hurricane, did the assembly 
fall flat on the ground, senseless; when to recovering sense 
only to feel all the more the keen agony of their irreparable 
loss, followed by an uproarious outburst of grief, unparalleled 
by any other event of the kind. Torrents fell from their 
blinded eyes, and they ejaculated inarticulate words from their 
choked throats shaking with passion ; and in short, their 
litnbs lay as if bereft of motion by the paralytic stroke dealt 
by RAmftnuja's passing away from the sphere of his labours, 
up to Heaven, — His Native Home, — to enjoy that unutter- 
able rest there — the reward of all the benefactors of mankind. 
“ Indeed/’ cried they, “ have we realized the truth of 
and H t>., when you sprang into our midst, we obtained 

the * light of knowledge’ ; and now your exit envelops us in 
the * gloom of evil / ” R 

When RAm&nuja’s Grand Guru Yamuuacharya ascended 
to Heaven, a routine of observances and sacraments, proces- 
sions and interment was gone through as prescribed by the 
S&stras for a Vaishnava and a Sanyasin. All this, even to 
minuter elaborations, and greater detail was solemnly gone 
through. Tims passed away the Great R&m&nuja. 

1 The Brahma-raudhra. 

9 This is a muemograra indicating the birth-date of Ramanuja 
Sakn, 931) (1017 A.C.) 

* Another muemograin enshrining the date of his departure • Saka 

1059 (1137 A.C.) 



CH, XXXVII. 


RAMANUJA’S GREATNESS. 


237 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


RAMANUJA’S GREATNESS. 

“ Endless are the incidents in the Chapters of R&m&nuja’s 
life. It would he impossible to record them all. Only the 
salient features have been recorded,” so says our chronicler, Pin- 
balagia-Perumal-Jiyar. He collects now in one summarized 
compass all the evidences eloquently testifying to the great- 
ness of Ramanuja. 

1. Lord Ranga declared with hi# own lips that all the 
* riches of the Kingdom of Heaven as well as of .earth were 

placed at Ramanuja’s disposal. 

2. Lord Srinivasa confirmed this grant by His holy word 
also ; and to prove that this was not mere flattery, it is written 
that a milkmaid by namcTumbaiyui Kondi, was supplying curds 
to Ramanuja. When lie was once on his way to Tirupati, 
the woman appeared and presented her bill for payment. 
Ramanuja commanded Kidambi-Acchan to give her food 
in the Math. She ate and coming to lltlmanu ja, prostra- 
ted to him and submitted to him that she had a favour to 
ask. bade her ask it. She said:— ‘‘Holy sire, I desire 
not payment in coin for my curds, but grant me Moksha 
iu stead.” 1 

u Rut that power I possess not,” replied Ramanuja, “ Lord 
Srinivasa alone can grant thy prayer.” “ Then give me a 
written permit, sire, to take to the Lord” asked she. R&m&nn ja, 
over-come by her faith, gave her one. She forthwith ascended 
the Sacred Mount, but she bad hardly reached the summit, 
before the Lord Himself met her on tin* way, and receiving the 
permit, gave her Moksha on the spot. 

3. Lord Varadaraja of Ranch ipura proved Ram&nuja on 
two occasions, when He appeared once in Yadava-prak&sa's 
dream and commanded that circumambulation of the world 
enjoined for a would-be San sy as in was accomplished by 
once circumambulating round R&manuja ; and when hot de* 

1 Liberation. 



238 


BiMXNUJAS GREATNESS. 


CH f XXXVI I. 


bates on philosophy waged between RamAnuja and Yajna- 
murti,’and the latter was scoring points for victory, the Lord 
appeared in RAmAnuja’s dream and suggested certain Vedie 
passages 1 being quoted as those would level the adversary 
to the ground. Next morning the oppeneut was vanquished. 

4. Lord NArAyana of Melukote, proved Ramanuja by His 
showing the way for RAmAuuja’s future in a dream when he was 
staying at Tondanfn/; and further condescending to assume the 
position of a loved Son to R'Amanuja — Sampat-kumara. 

c 

5. Lord Sundara-RAja of the Azliagar-Hill near Madura, •' 
proved by summoning one day all the disciples of RAmAnuja 
before Him. They obeyed, but the kinsmen of MabA-purna 
(the AchArya of R Am Aim j a), stopped away. Purna asked them 
why. “ We are your kinsmen, aren’t we? And RAmAnuja is 
our disciple therefore,” said they. The Lord on hearing this 
spoke : — “Your taking Ramanuja for a disciple is only matched 
by Uasarathi and Yasudeva taking Rama and Krishna for 
their sons respectively. On another occasion Kidambi-Acchan 

repeated before the Lord the verse : Aparddha 3 in which 

the expression ayatim : 4 way less ’ occurs. 44 How darisst thou 
utter this,” interrupted the Lord, 44 when thou hast RAmAnuja 
for thy 4 way ’ ?'* 

6. Nambi, the Lord of Tiru-k-kurungudi, proved by 
expressing surprise that Ramanuja should be able to bring 
many souls to God’s fold, while He Himself could not ac- 

1 n 

[Mum] -Up. II, 2-4. Dhy&na-B, Up, 19.] 

(*) WmvmWj * niR i 

[Stofcra— Ratna by Y&inunJu] 

** Freighted alas ! with a thousand sins, 

A wreck in the dreadful sea of death, 1 pine ! 

Ac?## »> my way, O Lord, my God ! 

1 yield me up to thee j 
Thy grace alone must save, 

Ah l make me thine,** 



CH. XXXVII. RAMANUJA'S GREATNESS. 


complish so much, despite His repeated Incarnations 1 on earth ; 
and He retired ©very time sad with the thought that souls 
were more prone to roll down and down into the depths of 
samsdra , than climb up to Him.* “ Would est Thou know 
the secret, Lord ?’*, said RAni&nuja, ‘then put thyself in the 
position of a disciple. 1 * Nambi did so, and R&m&nnja whispered 
the secret of his success into the Lord’s ear; and ever after- 
wards, Nambi prided Himself on this kind of spiritual tie 
established with R&m&nuja. 

7. St. Namni&zhv&r felt so mifeh compassion for the 
sinful world that he laid a wager with God Himself. “See, 
Lord, I shall convert the world unto Thee.”* “Know they 
not Thy Greatness, that I should tell T H and so forth. But 
when he saw the world averse to his preaching, ho retired dis- 
appointed, crying : — “ Is it possible for me to correct this large 
world ?” 5 ; “Enough, myself and my mind have yielded to 
Him.” 8 But again when he looked forth into the future, he 
saw hope and exultingly cried . — “ This dark world shall yet be 
set right. Yet, this dark age shall bring salvation ” 7 Thus did 
this Saint; refer to the advent of R&mAnuja, as the coming 
Messiah. Sage N&thamunigal prophesied Rumftnuja’s advent 
by saying : ‘ A plasb may quench a sparrow’s thirst ; but a loch 
will feed a vale.* 1 By loch he symbolized RAmftnuja. Em* 
Mr sang ibis by the following beautiful metaphor: 

Hi r q ^FTT^ I 
- h u 

I * II 

\ &c - [Bh. Gila, IV, 5.] 

*. Ac '» C Bh - fdta, XVI, 20] 

<ssr, [1 • Viruttam JO] 

4 , © 1 urr®Ju> uitQlo ! [T. V&ymozhi, IT, 2-2J 
\ jtl&cSL- pan piunufrdjK&J [P. T. And&di, 26,] 

®, irr Qjsffr t$,iQ girth [P. T. And&dt, 20.] 

*. &sS!iL f thQs(du)&ett®Q3r^uSG fr . [T. V&y-raozhi, \ . 2-1,] 

ir it it it&k*l{ 7 pQ pffluSQeo 



240 


RAMANUJA’S GREATNESS. 


CH. XXXVH 


8. * Y&mun&eh&rya when he was at K&nehi-pura on a visit, 
and saw R&m&nuja, following in the train of Y&dava-prak&Sa, 
pointed him oat to his disciples, saying “ Look, He will be 
the first leader of onr faith/’ 

9. Mah&p&rna proved Ramanuja’s greatness thus : — One 
day he and his daughter AttuUy-amma, were seated in their 
house, when ll&mftnnja happened to enter with his train of 
disciples. M&hApftrni at once got up and prostrated himself 
before him. His daughter asked him how he could do such 
an act of obeisance to R&m&nuja, who was his disciple. Purna f , 
replied : “ Those feet and this head are a match to each other.” 1 
Another day R&m&uuja was returning from his hath in the 
K&veri, when Mah&purna meeting him did obeisance. But 
R&m&nuja stood erect instead of returning this customary 
homage, and simply lifted up his Guru. R&m&nuja’s disciples 
Asked him to explain his unusual conduct. He said ; “ My 
Guru wishes to please himself by honoring ine. If that is his 
pleasure, it is my pleasure. I should not cross him The 
disciples next asked Pftrna to explain his unusual behaviour. 

“ He said Sirs, I saw in R&m&nujamy own Gain — Y&muna 
after my own Guru, all the perfections of a Guru find their 
haven in Rftm&nuja.” And Pftrna made his own son Pundari- 
k&ksha the disciple of U&mftnuja. 

10. It has already been related, that Goshthi-purna — the 
second Guru of R&m&nuja, — revealed the secrets of religion to 
R&m&nttja by exacting a promise that he would not impart the 
same to others ; hut that R&m&mtja broke the promise anon by 
openly declaring the secrets to all in the Temple ; that Purna 
became wroth on coming to know this and demanding an expla- 
nation from R&m&tiuja, the latter confessed his fault, but sub- 

1 Sathajit the cloud, from Srisa’a Sea of Grace 
Drunk deep, rains down on N&tha-Hill ; 

RAtna, Padm&ksh, two rills thence rippling clown 
Unite in Y&mun- Brook, to gulf 
Yntir&ja’s Lotus-Lake, by countless Floodgates 
To flood the Pastures of parched souls. 



f H* XXXVII. bAmAhtIJA'S 0BEATNBS& 


m 

imfcfced that if his disobedience did entail on him hell, he had 
the SAtis faction of thinking that thousands were saved^ 
great price to get in return — ; and that, Purna, on hearing 
this embraced R*hnauuja exclaiming: “What a largo heart 
thine for others ; my shallow heart did not warm like this ! 
Ihou art no other than he (YAmima).” And he made his son 
TerkAlv&r, R&m&nuja’s disciple. 

11. Tirumalai-Hambi or Srisaila-Pftrna — another Guru— - 
it has already been narrated, replied, — when questioned by 
B&manaja why an elderly person lijce himself came to meet 

• him on his way up the Holy Hill of Tirupati, when there were 
many young persons, any one of whom ho could have des- 
patched, -^that with respect to R&m&nuja, he could find no 
other person younger than himself. And furthei Purna made 
a gift of Km bar to Ramanuja, and made his son R&nutnuja to 
become his, disciple. 

12. Tirumalai-Audan or Mal&dhara — another Guru — was 
teaching Tiruvaymohzi to Ramanuja. When the verso 1 Ariy&k- 
k&lattu ’ [If. 3 3], was explained, Ramanuja gave his own 
interpretations. This gave offence, the Guru ceasing to teach, 
Goshthi Purna, coming to hear of this speedily appeared on 
the scene, and gave Maladhara to understand that RAtn&nuja’s 
interpretations were correct, as they were those of YAmun&- 
charya ; and that he must look upon R&manuja in the light of 
such a disciple as Lord Krishna was to Sandipa. On another 
occasion, when Ramftuuja, gave out an explanation, which, he 
said, was according to Y&muna, “ thou hast never spoken to 
Y&muna, how dost thou know ? ” cried Mal&dhara. “ Sire n 
replied R&m&nuja, “am I not Ekalavya to Y&muna *f " The 
Guru anon fell on the ground, saying: “ Indeed thou art an 
avatAra," and made his son Sundarab&hu, Rain&nuja’s disciple* 

13. R&m&nuja did humble service to the venerable 
Tiruvaranga-p-perumal-Araiyar, when the latter, one day, 
said : — u The price of thy services, E&m&mija, is my all", and 
h© taught him the secrets of the Fifth Way ( Paneham-op&ya), 
and made his son Tiruv&ymozhi Araiyar his disciple. 

14. Andhra-Purca was a linn believer in this Fifth Way, 
which to him was the Holy Feet of Ram&nuja. 


31 



bAmAnuja’S gbeatnbss. 


tm. xxxvii. 


15. Kaniyanfir Siri-y-Acch&n, declared on oath (i.e., when 
remaining half immersed in water) that faith in R&m&nuja was 
the only road to salvation. 

16. Yajnanuirti (a convert from Advaitism), whom R&mA- 
nuja set up in a separate see, as abbot, and to be looked upon 
as a second R&m&nuja, declared to his intimate disciples, 
Ecch&n, Anand&lv&n, Tondanur-Nambi aud Marudur-Nambi 
that Ramanuja was the real Saviour, and his second R&manujA- 
ghip was only a gracious honor bestowed on him, inasmuch as 
he felt it as a millstone liung round a sparrow’s neck. 

17. P i 11 ai -p -p i 1 1 ai -y - Azh v An became tl^e disciple of 
Kur6sa. The latter when asked his pastoral fee (acharya- 
dakshina), stated it as the curbing by him of his three 
instruments of thought, speech and deed against offending- 
holy men. Rut the disciple found it very difficult to carry 
this advice into practice, and evinced great perplexity. 
Kdr&sa observing it, called him and said*. — “Here is a 
way out of thy difficulty, son ! Thou canst avoid hurt by 
deed, for thy foe will return it, or the king will punish for it. 
Thou canst avoid hurtful speech, if thou wishest to keep peace 
with the world *, for so says a stanza: — 

fon I urvr^ r fr f^ nr. This is to thy advantage. 

There remains now thy thought which is difficult to curb. 
Hence if thou wishest thy mental sins not to offend God, 
trust to R&m&nuja’s feet for reconciliation. 

18. Milag-Azhv&n challenged D&sarafchi for a debate. 
The latter consented and asked for a wager. “ If I am beaten/’ 
said Azhv&n, “ I will carry thee on my shoulders.” This was 
agreed to ; and D Ararat hi won. Azlivan, true to his word lifted 
the victor on to his shoulders, ran a few paces, aud setting 
him down asked forgiveness for his impudence. DAsarathi 
lead him to RAmAnuja, and said : “ There is thy forgiveness — 
his holy feet.” 

19. EmbAr counselled BhatiArya thus : — “ Son, vaunt 
not thyself that thou art the Godson of Lord Ranga, KurAsa’s 
son, and a servant. Faith in RAxnamija alone will save thee.” 



oh. xxxvti. 


RAMANUJA'S greatness. 


249 


20. Bhatt&rya counselled Nanjiyar thus: — “Son! pique 
thyself not on being a great Vedantist, on thy becoming my 
disciple, and on thy giving up all thy wealth to me, m my fee. 
But firmly believe in R&m&nuja as our Saviour/’ 

21. Nanjiyar warned Nambillai thus : — “ Grow not haughty 
that the world calls t hee : 1 World* teacher ’ (Lok&ch&rya) ; that 
thou art a clever expert in expounding the Prahundhas. 
R&m&nuja’s feet alone can save thee. 

22. One day Numbi lai took holtj of the hand of Siva-k* 
karai-p-pillai, to go out; and as he crossed the threshold of 
his house, he discovered a holy man asleep on the pial out- 
side. S. pillai called out to him to withdraw his legs as his 
master was there. NamhiPai immediately let go his hold of 
S. pillai saying: — “Son, our saints have declared that the 
legs of holy men are holy legs. To call them “ legs ” in deri- 
sion is against thee a proof of disrespect and ignorance. Be- 
gone from me:” S. pillai went to his village in disgrace 
and set up loud wailing, and cried : — “ Oil muster ! thou 
hast cast me away like the st one in a sling, from thy holy place 
between the two rivers.” Nambillai on hearing this repen- 
tance, sent for him and enjoined : — “ Trust in K&mftnuja, all 
thy faults are remitted.” 

23. Tiru-k-kurngai-p-pir4 n Piiian was once in a place 
called Siru-p-puttur. Sbmasi-y-And&n read Sri - Bbilshya 
under him three times. Pillan left the place for his native 
country, when Andan pleaded : Sire, I live in this country 
far from you. Deign to i#ll me the choicest article of 
faith for my life** To this Pillau replied : — “ Son, keep off 
intumescence that comes of thy ability to descant on the 
science of Purva-MimAmsa, and to discourse on Sri- Bh&shya ; 
hut place implicit faith in our Saviour Ramanuja.” And 
Gomathatha-p-pi llan bade in a similar manner his disciple 
K^kkai-p-p&di-y-acchan-Pillai. 

24. “ When God was angry with you, what didst thou do S'” 
asked EngalAahv&a of K. P. A. Pillai “ I resorfcad at. such 
times to the appeasing power vested in our Saviour, R&raA* 
nuja he replied . 



244 RAMANUJA'S GREATNESS. CH. XXXVlI. 


25: A coterie of disciples read Srt-BhAshya under Nadd- 
dAr-AmmAj. They asked “ Father, Bhaliti (love to God), 
we find is a hard thing to do.” AmmAl taught them the way 
of Prapatti (faith in God). They again pleaded : “ Sire, it is 
hard to get faith.” “ Then,” taught Animal, “ your only way 
is to depend on Ramanuja.” Naduvil Azlivdn administered 
similar instructions to his disciples Vangipuratt aechi and 
others. 


26. “ This is a mighty torrent, this Sri-Iihashya,” com- 
plained the Aimbatt-irnvar (52) magnates of TirunArAyana- 
pnram (Mfilukote) when Veda-vy Asa-Bliattar expatiated on it 
liefore RAmAnuja’s shrine in the Temple. “Then,” said 
Bhattur, “ trust solely to your household-God RAmAnuja, 
and that is enough.” So again did Naduvil-Tiruvidhi-p-piljai- 
Bil attar comfort his disciple Klaiya v-alagiyAr. 

27. Andhra-pftrna often reproached KiirOsa and DA3a- 
rathi for double heartedness inasmuch as they wavered in then- 
devotion between God and RAmAnuja, the Saviour; whereas 

he was single-hearted as being firm in his trust in the latter 
alone. 

i * 

2K. lhe devil Bralmia-rakslias signified RamAnuja's 
greatness, by so declaring it. to YAdava-piak&sa. 1 


2t>. 'I'he dumb lad was another illustration. He was born 
m KAnchipuram, dumb. After his fifth year he was found 
missing for two years. Ho suddenly appeared again People 
surrounded him and ipiestione^him as to whither he had gone. 
He replied that ho had been charmed away to KshfrAbdbi 
(Milky Sea). “ hat is the news there,” asked they. “The 
only news of any importance,” said he, “ was that on earth 
an avatAr in the shape of RAmAnuja has descended.” The bov 
was not seen again, after ho delivered this message. This 
story, the holy Bhagavat-scnApati.Jtyar took pride in often 
relating, to vouch farther for the greatness of RAmAnuja- 

30. As among Divine Incarnations, those of RAina and 
Krishna are notable; Vydsa, ParASava, Snka, and Sannaka 
amimg the Rishis ; Srtrangam, Tirnpati, KAnchi and Melnkot* 



CH. XXXVII. 


RAMANUJA’S GREATNESS, 


245 



among the Holy places ; St, NamraAzhvAr among the Saints ; 
SO is RAmAnuja among the Acharyas (Apostles), sach as NAtha* 
moni. 


31, The importance of R&m-Avatara consists in 
declaring the Divine Gift of Free Grace to all who may ap- 
proach Him, irrespective of caste or creed, color or condition ; 
in seeking friendship of humble folk like Gtiha : in performing 
the obsequies of a BrAhmana for JatAyn ; in accepting food 
from the hands of a Sabari ; in eating in the company of 
HanurnAn ; and so forth. 1 

The importance of Jvrishn-Avatara consists in Krishna’s 
delivering the Apocalypse of Bhagavad-gitA, with its Charama- 
Sloka ; 2 in rejecting the hospitality of Ilhishma and Drona 
for that of Yidura *,* and so forth. 

The 2 *eputation of Srirangam comes of Lord Ranga’s 
having mixed with the (Pariah) Saint TiruppAnar, as inti* 
mately as body and soul; that of Timpati comes of Lord 
SidnivAsa’s having spoken to and moved freely with such souls 
asBhijna, (Kurumb-arntta-nninbi), tho potter, and Tondaman; 
that of KAnchi (PcrumAbkfiil) conies of Lord Varada’s having 
been so intimate with KAnch S-purna ; that of Melnkote, of Lord 
IV Ar Ay arm’s having eaten of the food offered by Sucharita’fl 
son ; and of His having deigned to become the son of RAmAnuja 
— hence called YatirAja-sampar-kumAra. 

The distinction earned by Veda-Yy&sa is localise of his 
V ed Ant a-S utras and t lie SAtfika Pur Anas, by all of which he 
proclaimed the Ultimate Truth by his finishing stanza : — 


He 1 



"I declare, once, twice, thrice. 


1 See KAmAvana. 

* GitA, XVlIl’d6. 

* Sst W lft fgt . [Bl>4r»ta, Udyoga Parv*.] 



bAmAnuja's greatness. 


246 


OH, XXXVII, 


There is no Scripture like the Veda, nor God like KAsavA/ 
that earned by ParAsara is because of his Vishnu-purAna, 1 in 
which he gives a dear dehnition of the Three Eternal Verities, 
God, Soul and Matter, — hence styled by Sage Yamuna as 
‘ The Magnificient ;’ 2 that earned by Suka is by his Bh&gavata 
by declaring in it the greatness of Vishnu and his earning 
immediate mukti t that earned by Saunuka is by his 

famous work Vishnu-Dharma ; that earned by NArada is 
because of his declaration . as the slave of the holy Vaish- 
navas. 1 * The distinction of St. Nammazhvar arises from 
his composing four Prabandhas analogous to the Four 
Vedas, thus popularising Scriptures, and his revealing to 
Sage NAthamuni the Four-Thousand Prabandhas, thus estab- 
lishing the Vaishnava Dispensation. But above all towers the 
reputation of IlAmAnuja, inasmuch as he unbosomed to all, 
the Holy Sense of the Charama-Sloka, made clear the obscure 
and abstruse texts of the Vedas, made manifest the truths of 
St, NammAzhvAr’s TiruvAymozhi, wrote exegeties on Brahma- 
Sfttras according to the Canons established by Sages HAtha- 
muni and YAmuna in their Treatises ; wrote other indepen- 
dent works such as the Gadyatraya; won victories over false 
prophets and philosophers ; thus bequeathing to posterity a sys- 
tem pre-eminently known ns Jidmarntja's system, though it is a 
system of thought co-ctcrnal with God Himself. 

32, RAmAnuja was one day conducting his ministry in 
his congregation, taking up the Doctrine of God’s Free Grace 
to frail humanity, as illustrated by RAmAyana. Vibhtshana, 
though born among the demons (RAksliasas), was angelic in 
nature. H© tried to dissuade his brother RAvAna from his evil 
ways, but he would not listen ; so he severed himself swiftly 


1 1 


« 





[Stotra -Batna, 4.] 




OH; 'XXXVII. 


RAMANUJA’S GREATNESS. 


m 


from all connection with him, and soaring into the sky, cros- 
sed the ocean with four attendants and coming to Lord RAma* 
who was encamped with his army on the other shore, cried 
thus : — 

‘O Kama/ thu6 he cried, ‘ in me 
Vibhishan, RAvAn's brother, see. 

By him disgraced thine aid I seek, 

Sure refuge of the poor and weak. 

From LankA, friends, and wealth I fly. 

And reft of all on Thee rely. * 

On Thee, the wretch’s firmest friend, 

My kingdom, joys and life depend. [RAmAyana, VI, 19,] 
* 

* «= 

I left my children and my wife 

And fly to Raghu’s sou for life. [RAmAyana, VI, 17.] 
And yet the VAnar-chiefs of Lord Rama said to Him * 
‘ RAma! 

We wait thy word : the order give 
And these thy foes shall cease to live. 

•Command us, mighty king, and all, 

Lifeless upon the earth shall fall. [RAmAyana, VI, 17.] 

On hearing this, DhanurdAsa stood up and cried ; — 
u Godsire, if Vibhfshaua, who left wife, children and all in 
order to seek refuge with RAma, deserved to be stoned by 
RAma’s V Anar-chief s, how much more indeed do 1 deserve that 
treatment, — I, who have made no renuneieation at all like 
Vibhtsbana !! ” “Peace/’ cried RAmAnuja, “Listen to me, 
my son, 1 will unfold to thee the secrets of salvation. Sri, the 
spouse of Lord NArAyana, ever stands by Him as our Mother* 
mediator. She is the personification of tho most exalted 
attribute of God, viz., Grace or Mercy *. When our Lord 
through SrS is ever anxious to shower His mercy unstintingly 
on His erring children on earth, what fear is there for ns P 

1 Sri also symbolizes to re of God for Tnau arid fore of man for God, 
She ever dwells in the bosom of God, like tho Christ, the Son [John I. 



bAmAnuja's greatness. oh* x^stvir. 


We have an unbroken chain of apostles, reaching down to us 
from God, of which the first link is God, and His Grace, Sri, 
the next. St. Sathagopa is the next important link ; and he 
has declared in unmistakable terms that he has obtained 
Heaven (moksha) 1 . If he has won it, N&tkamuni has 
won; if NAthajnuni has won, Y&muna has won; Y&muna 
winning, my next guru above me, Mahapftrna, has won. If 
Purna has won, I have surely won. When I have, ye have all 
indeed won. Take comfort then from this thought. Dvaya- 
Mantra, which I have taught thee, declares, as thou art aware, 
he indissoluble unity of God with His Grace, Sri ; and an 
unbroken chain binds God and His creatures in one bond, from 
which it is impossible to escape and stand aloof. With me 
goes my flock. What I share it undoubtedly shares. The 
areca tree is watered by the gardener, but the plantain trees 
round it take the moisture as well. I and my church are 
linked together for one testing. My destiny shall invariably 
be its destiny. When Yibhishana was after all allowed to 
approach Lord ll&ma, no separate invitation to the four 
RAkshasa-men, who companied with him, was needed, nor when 
the YAnai -chiefs wished to diive him away, did they think of 
driving those four persons separately In other words, the 
four persons counted with Yibhishana as one, in gains or 
losses. Kven thus counts my flock with me. 3 Hence, son ! 
thou inayst rest assured that if Heaven is mine, it is thine 
without question. As St. BhaktisAra has said ; ‘ the flock has 
even more merit tlian the shepherd / 3 Satrughna lias more 
merit in following Bharata, than Bliarata, Lord RAma; St. Had- 
ji urakavi than St. Sathagopa ; St. Andaj than St, Yishna- 
Chitta, her father ; and so forth. 

1 strum. 

* Cp. («) ** WUoro I urn, there aho shell my minister be. If any man 
minUter to me, him will my Father honor.’* 

[John, XXI, M] 

(b) “ And I, if I he lifted tip, will draw all men unto me.*’ 

[John, XII, SI] 

*a&fi&(£UUtrfT#jfQiUi, [4th T. Aud&dt, IS.] 



CH. XXXVII. bXmAncJA'B obbatxkss. 


m 


33 Hence Amudan&r in his immortal work Ramannja- 
nfttt-Andftrdi, sung- daily by all the Vaishnavas and in all the 
Vishnu Temples, testifies tp R&m&uuja’s greatness as Saviour 
of mankind, thus : — 

“ Our elders aver that (iod dwells in His Holy Shrines 
in heaven and on earth, hut His Holiest Shrine is the Holy 
Heart of R&m&nuja. Hence we worship God by worshipping 
R&m&nuja; byresorting to Rftm&nuja we shall have resorted 
to all the Holy Shrines.” 1 

34. Nadadftr Am null declared, tfiat the way to salvation 
is not by works (karma), not by knowledge (jndna or gnosis), 
not by devotion ( bhaktt ), not by faith ( prapatti ), but by implicit 
trust placed in R&m&nuja ; and this was the ultimate truth 
proclaimed to all by Amudanar in his R. N. And&di. * 

35. “ Here are two Holy Names,” KftrGsa often said, 
“ namely, N&-nVya-na and RAmA-nu-ja, each is made up of 
four syllables. But Nar&yana as denoting God, can both save 
and damn, but Ramanuja as Saviour, can only save. In this 
consists our stay, strength and safety. 

36? “ R&ui&nuja,” exclaimed Amudan&r, “ it matters not 
where I am, hell or heaven, but let thy Beauteous Figure 
haunt me ever. To this bliss, I will forego even the Lord 
whom thou canst show upon thy hand.” * “Where those great 
souls, Ramanuja’s servants, dwell, that is my Empyrean/’ 4 
“ R&m&nuja,” said he addressing him directly, “ My very 
bones may split in agony, but let me at ail times and all places 
indulge in love for Thy servants.” 5 It is chronicled that so 
addressed, Ram&nuja looked on Amudan&r with eyes beaming 
with benevolence and passed on. And Amudan&r put a finis to 
his hymnal by the verse : — “ I seek Sri, the spouse of Ranga, 
that she may bless me with the bliss of crowning my head with 

1 Op. cit 106 : H ^qul§l~u> Ac.” 

* Op. cit., 76*. (t £&r paiaks &c. n and 45 : u QuQgfeorjpf 

tup 

* 4 4 R. N. And&di, 105, msSeosafi. 

* Do. 107, $&rL{pp. 


32 



250 


B^M&NWA’S GREATKES&. 


CH, XXXYII. 


the bloom* of R&m&nuja’g Feet — blooms of the plant of love 
growing in my heart.” 1 

Lord Ranga declared : “ Both Heaven and Earth are 
granted thee, R&in&nuja.” 2 * * * 

37. One clay Si Kulaflekhara’s verse: jt. p pQ^eoirib was 
teing read. This meant that when RAmm left Ayodhya for the 
woods, the whole Ayodhya’s kith and kin of R&ma accompanied 
him. But some one in th^ auditory objected : “ They only 
accompanied a little wgy off and then returned. How then 
did this Saint say they companied with him throughout P ” 
R&m&nqja answered : “When Lakshmana who said : “All 
services I shall dp,” 8 followed, it is as if all followed, referring 
to himself thus. 

Thus was the greatness of Ram&nuja. 


1 B. N And&di, 108, 

3 Cp Jesus saying : — <! All power is given unto me in heaven and in 

earth ” [Mat. XXVIII, 18.] 

B “Aham sarvum karishyilmi.” [Mm. 11,31,25 ] This is an in, 

direct reference to himself. 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


ANCIENT AUTHORITIES ON RAMANUJA. 


it 20 wurfa 11 

v ?rwTW : ii wtowtih %| 4 h«r' 

ii i f srcfafi mil « u 

frowst *? 1 «ra$f*rft 3 fwr I cffawir-wl 11 

W'W II qrcsri*tftw?«f II 1. 32 II 
* 

wmi rarfisRrwreurr i ^^r%i? r ^fr ii 

fifra^i ii stfin , 4f?pmrcr n wwwgn'-fm i h^tr- 

rtrhtHir ?pHTMwg<f^ ii ^rrfrT^rwrTr^^aii fjRf%: i ^wor^wfar 61 !?! 

Fgiwm%'kw it mw^^'Tw^wRtrrffw it 


CTJIRR^WfflTf^ II ftf^rSTO^PrTTIHTT^^Tt: I »Tr r 4l%^lRT«F5T»pwr- 

ii qrp^^i^Tr«nr^Ffi^.r^ : i ni^swnriHW'-q- 

i 

HjTsfrmu?^ ii 3 104 5. 

1 wT^r5 i ™'ro j 4^#*ril'aT% ii 

29 v ii 5nF^!%>uirFi3tnfTn5 ! P :, Tt(H» i r#rf*<ir>r«%-- 
mwrnwfyf' 5 F : ii ^^ 5 Ttf[=TOtfnrnVwmw i *wif*mwr! jrnr% 
f iioti! « TOfr^Mv^iinTr^rgw: i n%^%TTO7*s^iF»rpft;ii : ii 

’sfarrerafr ii 

^itoWRI# fTerMStWnn I rTV?l^fRranj<T m^Srifflia^PK: II 

i ii 



ST^m^l^ilHI^Ht' 1 l*M| 4 ri T 44 l ^»3 II 

Hr#^i^w%%r#irn?VF : I 4TTF 



APPROXIMATE DATES IN THE CHIEF 
EVENTS OF RAMANUJA’S LIFE. 


1. Birth at SriperumbiVlftr ... A.C. 1017 (Sfilivkhana 

Sakai 939) . 

* t 

2. Study with Y&davaprak&sa ... ... A.C. 1033 

3. First entry to Srirangam to see Alavanditr. „ 1042 


4. 

Taking holy orders 

„ 1049 

5. 

Flight to Mysore (under King Chola’s 



persecution) ... 

„ 1096 

6. 

Convension of Uittwleva, the King of the 
Hoysala Country (Maisur), and 



naming him Vishnu -vnrdhana 

, 1098 

7. 

Installing Lord SrLN&r&yana at Melukote. 

„ 1100 

8. 

Stay in this Country up to ... 

„ 1116 

9. 

Bet mm to Srirangam 

„ 1H8 

10. 

Finis to earthly career 

., 1137 


Total length of life, years 120 






(Fully Translated into English) 

* I ' 

TranSHtefcatedfi '*trte- #■<&** 

dynasty— mfe 1 of «i#$2 principal modes of lfe^lion as 
laid in the Upini^ads— fab|e of Cosfladfofefy fencing to 
Visitftbh'afft J^dSJd^efrS-fTable of the Ways of '^alva- 
ticm''ff?W^iotowy) "fo'Mtflated toy the Ramwipja S'chooK 

i 

sno p^StifR Board Rs. 5. 

« r j'he student of Gita who will peruse this will find 
himself introduced to a nufeib^r#"works extant in Southern 
India on VisisMadvaita literature, and other works 
also outside that .fbfe r «i pd^ ofe^j^omparison and 
edification.” 


paints (Harare.) 


Table of Saints and Sages from God downwards— 


CONTENTS. 



St. Tondar-adi-ppodi 
Azhvir. <• .-I! i 
St. Peri-y-Azhv&r. 


St. Andil. 

i St» Poygai Ti 4»lw#s. 

,i (St..pftda*^A#n#. 

. Sfc Pey-AzhvAr* t 

Sfc Wp-¥Pf%Mr4shsir . 

I ,§t. ykfcjqr ;44^r, 

St. Tiru-p-pan-Jzhv^r. 

St. Tiru«ma??gai-^lzlivar. 

i 

St. Namm&zhvftr. 


} 



( Mtoid^IhrfrBfta M. 


11 This work deals with the Qualified Monistic (Vi*hi.vh- 
tadvaita) Philosophy and the manner in which it is written 
is quite unique. The author is the first to place the phi- 
losophie literature of the QimllfiedTKonistt to the Western 
people. Therefore the author cite$ the t||(r^e^ds of the 
Western Philosophers, whenever possible, conveyed 

the higher philosophic conceptions^ fee Mw<m better, to 
them, t bm did his own.” 


SBout^lIs discourses on^lie^lghest 
Mystery, namely, Wisdom matured into Love o! God, the 
, object being, to give a few gems from the treasury of 
DivimH of a 
few truths culled Qut of tea voluminous quarto tomes of 
the Bhagavad-Trahdf#^ an¥* Vllows what wealth of 
thought and sentiment lie buried in the vast storehouse of 
dravidian Intellect and Heayrt, 

“ The plan followed is division into short topics, each 
complete and ind^ndaidL in ^nd jfcjstrated by con- 
versations and Anecdotes/ thus for ihe first time giving to 
the Western world an idea of ihe Eastern method of incul- 
cating spiritual instruction. Mfioltier 1 novel feature consist 
in its having copious footnotes which are mostly correspon- 
dency oufc ©f a Wide railgef of ilrbrkaf of 

Westerh Divines so as to show how religious ideas have 
unity and uji\ ersahty. This is inviting even tp a casual 
readerlLj^Sfcf^ttlfer i jS4n^enM^ thU4 j &race~ of 

God sole means of salvation. In this work 

ppint * lather Ml* * *S*e 
PfinhrpKI^^^^p-n. For easy reference a synopsis of 

Him ||aalso. be need for reference on the 

explanation ideals by means of examples 

from the sacjffli^^iy^ofeti* BtadWK*. *>** 


tsb natioNALE 


IMAGE WORSHIP 


xorns, 



'V*JM M*« Aciaos i . 

Mfe <# Vikanlfc* Dfeild^&f^aL' s 


io1fejr4 



<% mp i ^ ( 

iMjttAiaHaiQia'- 




