===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.21294.The-Life-And-Teaching-Of-Tukaram_djvu.txt =====

The Ramakrishna Mission 
Institute of Culture Library 

Presented by 

S. M- 


THE RAMAKRISHNA MISSION INSTITUTE OF CULTURE 
LIBRARY 

GOL PARK, CALCUTTA.29. 

OPEN 10 A.M. to 8-30 TEL. 

LATE FEE : 5 paisa per cm, iter the last date stamped below 


RENEWALS : By post, telephone or in person. Please quote 
the number stamped on the pocket opposite and 
last date below. 









POEMS OF TUKARAM 




TeachMg of Tukiram 


BY THE LATE 

J. NELSON FRASER, m.a. 

Indian Edngation Department, Joint-Author of The Poems 
of Tukdrdm 


AND THE 

Rev. J. F. EDWARDS 

Author of The Holy Spirit , The Christian Dynamic and the 
Article on ‘Tukaram* in Hastings’ Encyclopedia of 
Religion and Ethiqs 


CHRISTIAN LITERATURE SOCIETY FOR INDIA 

MADRAS ALLAHABAD CALCUTTA RANGOON COLOMBO 

1922 




faiAeriCedt &/Y./L 



TO THE 


STUDENTS AND PUNDITS 
OF THE LANGUAGE SCHOOL, 

mahAbaleshwar, 


PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE 




PREFACE 


This book was promised many years ago by the late Professor 
James Nelson Fraser, Principal of the Training College in Bombay 
for Teachers in Secondary Schools, who passed away after but a 
few days* illness on March 12, 1918, 1 and some eighty pages may 
be regarded as coming from his pen. They are distributed among 
the first eight chapters as follows : six pages in chapter I, five in 
chapter II, six in III, twenty-three in IV, seven in V, five in IV, 
six in VII, twenty in VIII and two in appendix II. These pages 
I have carefully worked over and rewritten in the light of the latest 
findings, but whenever possible I have allowed his material to stand 
unchanged : e.g., page 28, the first half of page 32, and the third 
paragraph on page 123 are almost exactly as I found them. His 
one desire was ‘ to add a brick to the fabric of oriental learning 
as he wrote in a letter three years before his untimely death. 

For the remainder of the book, over two hundred pages, includ- 
ing the whole of the last two chapters and appendices I, III-V, as 
well as the footnotes throughout the work, I must accept full 
responsibility. Often has it seemed as if the many claims of work 
in a city like Bombay would preclude the completion of the ta$k, 
but the preparation of a great part of the book for lectures to the 
Language School at Mababaleshwar has helped to make it possible, 
and I have been sustained by the two* fold conviction that study of 
India’s poet-saints is a sure road to unity between East and West, 
and is a master-key to unlock the treasures of religious aspiration 
in the soul of India. 

Numerous and generous have been my helpers, their generosity 
being indicated by the fact that some prefer to remain anonymous. 
Some obligations must, however, be discharged. My first Marathi 
pandit, Mr. Krishnarao Vitthal Kandhalkar, rendered much assis- 
tance to Mr. Fraser, as he has done also to myself ; Dr. Macnicol 
has not only secured the loan from the Association Press of the 

\ Mr, Fraaef's collaborator in tbe t^ree volumes of English translations, 
The Poems of Tuk&r&m (published by the C. L. S., Madras at Rs 2-8 per 
vol.), was the late Rao Bahadur Kashinath Balkrishna Marathe, passed away 
eight months later on November 13, 1918. 



viti • PREFACE 

block of Vithobi but has given invaluable counsel lit different 
stages ; the Bhdrata Itihasa Sanshodhak Mandala of Poona has 
kindly lent three other blocks ; Mr. Vinayak Laxman Bhave of 
Tbana gave me a photograph of SantijI Tell Jaganade’s manus- 
cript and rendered much other priceless help besides ; Mr. W. H. 
Warren, formerly of the Cambridge University Press and now of 
the C. L. S., has carried through a difficult piece of work with 
unfailing courtesy ; and last but not least, the Honourable Or. Sir 
Nirayan G. Chandavarkar, after reading through the book in page- 
proof, has most -generously found time to write a Foreword which 
in itself is a worthy contribution to English-MarathI literature. 

Should this • work, despite its many imperfections, lead other 
investigators, Indian and non-Indian, further to explore the— as yet 
— latgely-unworked gold-mine of the Maratha Poet-Saints, I shall 
feel amply compensated. 

Byculla, Bombay 1 J. F. EDWARDS. 

December, 1921 1 



CONTENTS 


Chap. 1. 


M 


II. 


M 


III. 


IV. 


M 


V. 


VI. 


»» 


VII. 


FOREWORD. By the Hon. Dr. Sir Narayan 
G. Chandavarkar 

THE LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM. ... 
THE VAISHIJAVA HINDU ISM OFTUKARAM'S 
, DAY ... 

THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANpHARPUR; A 
Study in India’s Religious Aspiration . . 
THE BIOGRAPHY OF TUKARAM 
Preliminary Considerations: ... 

(1) The Biographical Sources 

(2) The Probable Biographical Facts ... 

(3) The ‘ Legendary* Element 
TUKARAM’S AUTOBIOGRAPHY 

(1) The Critical Problem 

(2) The Literary Characteristics 

(3) Tukaram's Picture of Himself 
TUKARAM*S ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL 

HINDUISM ^ ... 

TUKARAM’S PERMANENT PLACE AND IN- 
FLUENCE 


* (1) His Influence among His Countrymen 

(2) Tukaram’s Permanent Place in Religion 
VIII. ^UKARAM’S LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS ... 

(1) God and His Relation to the World... 

(2) God’s Relation to His Worshippers... 

(3) Sin 

(4) The Means of Salvation ... 

(5) The Obstacles to Salvation 

(6) The Religious Life 

(7) The Moral Ideal 

(8) The Saints ... 

(9) Duty towards Animals ... 

(10) Reincarnation and the State after 
. Death ... •»• , »»♦ 


Pages 

xi 

, 1-22 
24-43 

V . 

44-64 

66- 117 

67- 68 

68- 75 
76-106 

107-117 

118- 144 

119- 126' 
127-133 
134-144 

146-166 

168 185 
169-179 
179-185 

186- 213 

187- 190 
190-193 

193- 194, 

194- 198 

198- 199 

199- 202 
202-206 
206-208 

209- 210 

210 - 213 



X CONTENTS 

Chap. IX. TUKARAM’S EXPERIENCE OF BHAKTI RELI- 
GION ... ... ... 214-231 


X. IS TUKARAM’S RELIGION ADEQUATE FOR 



TODAY? 

232-268 

APPENDIX I. HINDU A VATARAS ANDTHECHRISTIAN 



INCARNATION 

269-273 

ft 

II. VERBAL PARALLELS BETWEEN TUKA- 

• 


RAM AND THE NEW TESTAMENT ... 

274-278 

** f 

III. TUKARAM’S ALLEGED INDEBTEDNESS 



TO CHRISTIANITY ... ... 

279-285 

1* 

IV. ADDITIONAL NOTES 

286-295 

♦» 

V. BIBLIOGRAPHY 

296-298 

INDEX OF ‘ ABHAftGS* 

299-302 

•* 

AUTHORS ... ... 

302-304 

•i * 

SUBJECTS 

305-323 


ILLUSTRATIONS 




Page 

i. 

The View From Dehu, Tukaram’s Birthplace 

5 

2. 

Vithoba of Pandharpur 

53 

3. 

Mahlpati, The Biographer of Tukaram 

70 

4. 

Samples of Mahipati’s Handwriting 

74 

• 5. 

Image of Jijabal (or Avalibai), Tukaram’s 



Wife, now Worshipped at Dehu 

OO 

6. 

The River IndrayanI where Tukaram threw 

♦ 


his Poems and where he ‘ disappeared ’ 

105 

7. 

A Page of Santaji Te}i Jaganade’s MS. 6? 



. Tukaram’s A bhangs 

122 

8. 

A Sample of what is claimed to be Tukaram’s 



Handwriting 

127 

9. 

The Takpithya (Imitation) Vithoba at Pap- 



dharpur... 

156 

10. 

Baburao Hari Devadikar of Papdharpur, a 



Blind ' Haridas ’ (Preacher) and ‘ Warkarl ’ 

- ,« 


who knows Tukaram’s thousands of Abhangs 



by heart . ... .... . 

170 

11. 

Temples on the River Bank at PapdharpQr ... 

229 

12- 

A Kirtan Band such as Tukar&m led f. 

276 



FOREWORD 


Saint Tukaram has so deeply entered the soul of the people of 
Maharashtra that the attempt made by Mr. Edwards and the late 
Mr. Fraser in this book on the life, teachings and influence of this 
saint deserves to be cordially welcomed by those who work for 
India's good and greatness. In these days when more than ever 
before it has become necessary for the East and the West to grasp 
each other's hands in the spirit of brotherhood and promote the 
world's peace, we can only serve that end by finding the throbbings 
of that spirit in each country's poets and saints that have been. 
Of no country is that true moretfian of India; and of the poets 
who were also saints and who have more than anyone else striven 
to give her, and through her to the world, the best of thoughts and 
life, the poet-saints of Maharashtra appeal to us peculiarly by their 
directness and sturdiness of teaching and life. Dnyaneshwar, 
Namdev, Eknath and last but not least of all, Tukaram, the subject 
of *the following pages — to name but a few and those few who are 
familiar as household words in Maharashtra — are the glory of the 
Maratha race ; and of these Tukaram is the most popular. 

Nearly sixty years ago the late Sir Alexander Grant, 1 then 
Principal of Elphinstone College, Bombay, read a paper on Tuka- 
ram as a poet of Maharashtra at a meeting of the Bombay Branch 
of the Royal Asiatic Society with a view to acquaint Europeans 
with the character of the saint's teachings. A few years later the 
late Rev. Dr. Murray Mitchell, 3 of the Free Church of Scotland, 
published a pamphlet, giving his (Dr. Mitchell's) view, from the 
Christian standpoint, of the religious principles taught by Tukaram 
arid the influence his teachings had on his people. Both these 
attempts to interest Europeans and Americans in the saint's worth 
a$d work were but of a fragmentary character. Rev. Dr. Macnicol 
of Poona, 8 who has made it for years his life's mission to live 
and move among the people of the Maharashtra country and whose 
genuine sympathies for those people have endeared him to a large 
ndmber of them, has brought more close to the European mind the 
beauty of Tukaram’s saintliness by a sweet rendering into English 
verse of some of the hymns of the saint. These, read by the light 
o l the Wilson Philological Lectures of the late Mr. W. B. Pat- 
wardhan, Principal, Fergusson College, Poona, delivered at the 
tlniversity of Bombay a few years ago, ought to go a great way 

r I See pp.* 163, 184, 190 of the present work. 

, * 2 See 'Authors* Index’ for references in this book, especially Appen* 
:d& III, 

. 3 For references in this work see ' Authors* Index*. 



xii FOREWORD 

to instruct and interest Europeans and Americans in the character 
of the vast influence which Tukaram has exercized for nearly four 
hundred years over ' the masses of, people in the Maratba country. 
The present book by Mr. Edwards and Mr. Fraser is even a more 
valuable addition to the English literature on Tukaram, inasmuch 
as it goes more exhaustively into life and teachings of the saint, 
and analyses with care the different stages of Tukaram’s religious 
faith and the spell he has held over the mind and heart of 
Maharashtra. 


The Growth of the Soul of India 

To understand Tukaram aright it is necessary, I venture to 
think, to trace the origin of the Devotional School of religion in 
India to which he belonged. That School was but a natural and 
necessary stage in the growth of the Soul of India, and its influence 
eRnnot be discerned in its true perspective unless we examine the 
conditions which gave it birth and led to its rise. Broadly viewed 
from the historic point the religious and social life of India, so far 
as its lines can be traced with distinctness, divides itself into four 
successive stages, viz., (l) the Age of the Vedas, (2) the Age of 
the Upanishads, (3) the Age of Buddha and Buddhism, and (4) the 
Age of the bhakti or Devotional School of which Tukaram stands 
as one of the most prominent members. But for the Vedas there 
would be no U panishads ; but for the U panishads there would be 
no Buddha. These four stages are interdependent. Each led to the 
next and all ihe^fust thrdfe culminated in the bhakti or Devotional 
School. ' 


The Vedic Ideal 


The Vfedic ideal of life, as we father from the Vedas, so-called, 
and in particular the Rig Veda j may be said to have consisted, 
generally speaking, in the joyoysness of life. The world to the 
Vedic age with all its mysteries and miseries was made for man ’to 
acquire wealth, enjoy life and make the best of this world’s goods. 
Their prayer was, in the words of a Vedic hymn, ‘ Give me health, 
wealth, children and cattle.’ To the question, who is the righteous 
man?, the Vedas answered : ‘ He who is active, acquires wealth and 
then offers libations and performs sacrifices.’ This view of Jifp 
arose from what our Vedic ancestors in the infancy of their life 
saw of external Nature. Witnessing its operations they held that 
the universe was made by one Primordial Spirit whom they called 
Brahma the Creator, and who having created the upivefse made 
over its government to various gods, as his agents. Of Brahma, 
this primordial Spirit, they thought and said nothing beyond this, 
that he was the Creator, the Eternal, the truth, the only truth 
and reality that always exists. Man’s direct concern — sq 



FOREWORD xiii 

they reasoned-— is with the gods to whom Brahma has delegated 
the government of the world. In the operations of external 
Nature they witnessed regularity and fixed order of ceaseless 
activity. 4 Why do not waters, seeking after truth, ever repose ? 
Why does not the wind rest ? * asks a hymn in the Vedas. So 
questioning they concluded that this ceaseless activity of the gods 
reigning in external Nature produced food and other means of life, 
happiness and enjoyment in this world for men. This moral law 
of order and activity the Vedas called Rita, the equivalent of which 
in English is 4 the law of right \ the principle of righteousness. The 
author of that law f according to the Vedas, is the god dwelling in 
and governing from the sky, 4 the head * or brain of the primordial 
spirit Brahma. This Varuna, who laid down the law of Rita or 
right, is described in the Vedas as ‘the righteous lord, who wields 
the supreme sceptre of universal sway. Both men and gods obey 
his law and the haughtiest yield to his decree*. Him therefore 
they regarded as the king of all kings among the gods whose 
ordinances are fixed and steadfast and who having laid down the law 
of Rita, has taken a vow, from which he has pledged himself 
never to depart but to abide by it unflinchingly. On that account 
and in that belief they called him Dridha-Vrita , ‘ firm vowed*. 
Further, the Vedas reasoned that Varuna’s law being the law of 
right , and as it serves to give men food and other means of a life 
of happiness and enjoyment, men are bound to obey that law by 
following the example of external Nature as their teacher and like 
it leading a life of work and activity on the one hand and on the 
other acquiring as its result wealth which is tbtf god V$truna*s boon 
to all who observe his law of Rita or right with blind knd unques- 
tioning obedience. As we do not know more at this Varuna than 
that his law of Rita is a law of orderliness, prescribing work acti- 
vity and enjoyment of the good things of this world, resulting from 
them, that is the only portion of Truth giVen for man to know and 
fallow. Satya or truth, which is Brahma* is the root; Rita, right 
^righteousness, is its fruit. Of the root what can we know — it is 
behind the gods and therefore beyond our ken except that it bids 
tfs obey the law of Rita, or moral order governing the universe ? 
Ours is merely 'to .praise truth, and live in obedience to that law 
and work, enjoy and earn paradise after death by a life of cheer and 
work in this world. This law of Rita, which the Vedas discern in 
external Nature, calling man to a life of work, wealth, and enjoy- 
ment, is described in a hymn of the Rig Veda . Of that hymn and 
discovery of the law of moral order in the universe operating as 
tlie law of righteousness the late Prof. Max Muller in his Studies 
. tit Sanskrit Literature has said that there is nothing like it in 
rather Greek or Roman literature. Imperfectly conceived though 
If was by the Vedas, this law of Rita or moral order became for 
'subsequent ages in India the starting point for the further quest 
Of truth. 



.xiv FOREWORD, 

The Age of the Upanishads 

The second stage of the Indian evolution of truth was the age 
of the Upanishads. If the Vedas defined Truth as Brahma the 
Creator, the only reality because the only imperishable life, that 
was, is, and shall be, incomprehensible to men, behind the law of 
Rita or righteousness reigning as moral order in the universe, the 
Upanishads turned from Nature outwards to the mind of man 
inwards. Adopting from the Vedas their doctrine that the law of 
Rita was the fruit, and Brahma, i.e., Truth, its root, they main- 
tained that man was able to see that law in external Nature just 
and only because the Truth lay in his own soul dwelling in the 
secret cavity of his heart, and discernible there by his mind, as the 
eye of that soul. Therefore, while by no means contemning the 
gospel of an active life of work, wealth and enjoyment taught by 
the Vedas in obedience to the law of Rita as a portion of Truth, 
but on the other hand accepting that gospel as laying down a 
necessary law for man’s life in this world, the Upanishads main- 
tained that not Nature external but the soul of man is the Truth. 
To it, they declared, he must retire by contemplation to realize it in 
actual life. It is by meditation upon this indwelling soul, (said 
they) and not by mere works or acquisition of wealth or sacri- 
fice of animals to gods, that man can know and do the 
the Truth. To the theory of the Vedas that behind the god 
Varuna, who laid down the law of Rita or moral order, there was 
one primordial spirit, the Creator of the whole Universe whom they 
called Brahma the Truth*, but who they declared was beyond the 
comprehension of man, the Upanishads said that that primordial 
spirit was comprehensible, if not fully, at least sufficiently for life’s 
purpose, by steady contemplation, because He dwells in every human 
hpart as man’s Soul. This teaching of the Upanishads that Truth 
means the' Soul is best comprehended, if, from amidst all that they 
have said in a variety of ways on the subject, we turn to the 
homely conversation between the Indian sage Yajnyavalkya and 
his wife Maitreyi recorded in ohe of those ancient scriptures of 
India. Yajnyavalkya figures there as a householder, who, while 
leading a family life, served his country as its spiritual guide and 
also philosopher. Having grown old in that service and having 
felt that the evening of life was closing on him, he one day called 
his wife Maitreyi to his side and opened to her the cherished wish 
of his heart to give up home and country and society, now that bp 
had done all he could to serve them, and to retire into the forests to 
lead there alone and by himself a life devoted to the contemplation 
of God until death parted him from this mortal existence. Yajnya- 
valkya, who bad (so we gather from this story) trained his wife in* 
the philosophy of the Soul as Truth, used that philosophy to win 
her consent to his wish. His reply to his wife contains the faith of 
the Upanishads : * Know the Soul a)one. Leave off all other talk/ 



FOREWORD xv 

And be expanded that idea in his own words which may be 
paraphrased as follows: ‘ Maitreyi, my dearest, you are right 
when you tell me that we have loved each other as husband and 
wife. But have you thought over this question ? What is that 
love, whence is it, and for what is it ? When the husband loves 
the wife and the wife the husband, do you mean to say that the 
husband qua - husband loves the wife qua wife and vice versa ? If 
that were so, it could be no love at all. The relation of wife and 
husband is the relation of the Soul of the one to that of the other. 
So is it with all other human relations. They are schools for 
training us in Soul-Love and thereby going to the Soul of all 
Souls, viz. God. The Soul of each human being mixes with the 
Souls of others and forms the tie of those human relations which 
we call home, society, country, etc., because it is the bond which 
unites us all, makes us members of one another, and leads us by 
its passage of human love to Love Divine, which is God, the 
Over-Soul. It is our duty therefore, to win that Over-Soul by 
contemplation in solitude. And therefore, having trained my Soul 
by its human relations of home, etc., I have now arrived at a 
period of life when I should seek repose by lonely contemplation 
of the Soul of all Souls.’ This soul-doctrine of the Upanishads, 
which they express through Yajnyavalkya, is the same that we find 
over and over again expounded by the poet Browning, and nowhere 
more lucidly expressed than in his Cristina ; 

Ages past the soul existed, 

Here an age ’tis resting merely, 

And hence fleets again for ages, 

While the true end, sole and single, 

It stops here for is, this love-way, 

With some other soul to mingle. 

* 

The reader will detect in this doctrine of the Soul as Truth 
and comprehensible by contemplation and realizable by the human 
relations of husband and wife, parents and children, citizen and 
state, country and patriot, the humanistic motive, a tone of 
pragmatism, leading to the inference, that, in spite of the fact 
that the Upanishads emphasize in so many words that Truth is 
absolute because the Soul is absolute as being the same with 
Brahma, the Creator, the Over-Soul, the Upanishads deal with 
Truth as if it is not absolute, because there are passages in 
them to indicate that it is as relative as it is instrumental, 
as human as it is useful. That is the inference which the 
late Mr. Josiah Royce, the American philosopher of the Absolute, 
has drawn in writing about the enquiry of the Upanishads 
into the problem of Truth. The explanation of that seeming 
contradiction is that the authors of the Upanishads as successors 
of the age of the Vedas did not wish to break away from 
the past to which they had succeeded but, like all wise sages 



and reformers of their country, aimed at building upon that past 
and thereby improving it. The theory of Truth in the Vedas was 
humanistic and pragmatic, inasmuch as that Was Truth for them 
which proved useful in human life*as preserving that life and 
rendering it stable by winning success, as the world ordinarily 
understands it. The Upanishads did not oppose that theory; 
they proclaimed that the humanistic and pragmatic motive of 
Truth gave only a partial view of it, and that, if man would but 
turn to his Soul within by contemplation, he should find that Truth 
transcended the limits imposed by that motive and had its birth 
and source in the Absolute, of which the Soul was the best 
expression. Therefore, they laid stress on contemplation as the 
highest means of realizing by degrees Truth as Soul Force and 
and defined Truth as the Soul. They taught that to know the 
Soul as Truth by meditation is not only a form of worship but it 
is| real worship. 

Buddha’s Gospel of Nirvana 

But, notwithstanding the teaching of the Upanishads, the 
people of India continued, generally speaking, to be dominated by 
the humanistic motive of Truth. The acquisition of riches and 
material comforts, the pursuit of life for enjoyment, the killing of 
animals as sacrifices to the gods for the purpose of winning their 
favour and securing health, wealth, and happiness in this world 
and the next, went on as. during the Vedic age. That rush for 
life figured side by side with suffering and misery. This led 
Buddha to preach his gospel of Nirvana or renunciation. He 
did not condemn either the Vedas or the Upanishads for their res- 
pective interpretations of Truth. But he denounced the killing 
of animals for sacrifices as sinful. Hence his doctrine of Ahimsft 
(abstention from injury) to all creatures as the highest religion. 
He did not differ from the Upanishads as to the great value of 
contemplation . Rather, he accepted it and emphasized its 
necessity, but he discerned that the contemplation doctrine of the 
Upanishads, which taught men to realize Truth by meditation of 
the Soul, because the Soul was Truth, only led to the creation of 
an intellectual aristocracy in India, divorcing it id point of fellow-- 
feeling from the masses, and did not serve to lift from off their 
lives the oppressive burden of misery and sin which lay heavily 
on them and made this world a scene of woe. Of what use is 
it to ask people to realize Truth in the Soul by contemplation so 
long as the passions and appetites of the body make a brute of: 
him, lead him to the infliction of suffering on himself and others 
and to sacrifice animals to gratify his tastes and pacify the goda 
in the name of religion ? So reasoning, Buddha put his greatest , 
emphasis on the body of man as man’s enemy* He preached^ 
‘Overcome the body; extinguish its burning lusts that consume 



xvii 

man/ And both by precept and his own example he proclaimed 
his gospel of Nirvana, basing it upon his view of the world that 
‘all is void*. By Nirvfifta, literally meaning extinction of self, he 
understood as explained by Buddhistic scholars, not the extinc- 
.. SsuL. JbsJL-Jthfi- - expulsion of the cravinf^sf^ carnal 
appetites and of the three passions of lust, hatred, ^nd delusidn. 
AhfhQw accordihg tb^ Buddha is the self to be so extinguished ) 
His answer was by contem plation leading to kind deeds and 
compassion for all creatures in a ll the details of pracUcaTTife. 
■TBatHe^ called A hints# t which, meaning RteraTly absfeirfiSh^from 
-injury, he explained as cultivation of * good-will to all beings with- 
out measure, unhindered love and friendliness towards the whole 
world, above, below, around* (Rhys David’s Lectures on The 
Origin and Growth of Religion, p. 111). All this, he maintained, 
must be attained by the extinction of the carnal appetites. That 
is Nirv&na. That, then, was Truth for Buddha— there is no other 
truth that man can know and realize. 

India’s Devotional School 

This definition of Truth as NirvUna or extinction of the self 
was bound to fail to make Buddhism the people’s cult in India. 
If the Upanishad conception of Truth as the Soul, realizable by 
contemplation was too intellectual for the masses, Buddha’s con- 
ception of it was too rigid, ascetic, and cold for them. Buddhism 
after having for some hundreds of years prevailed mainly because 
of its democratic character— its sympathy for all and its protest 
against caste — was driven out by Sri Sankaracarya, the greatest 
apostle of. Hinduism known to India. It had done its best work; 
it had brought the killing of animals as sacrifice and for food into 
disrepute ; it had made people love peace and hate war ; it had 
popularized the principles of meekness and charity. But the 
misses felt that Buddhism was a negative creed — it taught extinc- 
tufti of the self without putting in man anything positive instead. 
§rl 6ankaracarya professed himself a follower of the devotional 
school of religion which had begun to rise in India before his 
birth. The country had produced saints previously who had 
appealed to the masses more feelingly than other schools because 
thby taught the doctrine of God as Truth, and Truth as Love for 
alt without distinction of caste for creed. These saints came 
after Sankara from all castes and creeds, even from the lowest castes, 
which to this day are despised by the higher castes as untouchable 
aft# unapproachable and subjected to utter social degradation, 
"These saints took up the problem of Truth where Buddha had left 
it$md improved upon it and 1 also the Vedic and Upanishad concep- 
tion of it. They accepted the view of the four Vedas that life should 
beflwte of activity and enjoyment but they counselled moderation 
off enjoyment. They praised family life and looked askance at 
c 



jcviii FOREWORD v 

asceticism which abandoned the world. They differed, from the, 
Vedas which said that God is as incomprehensible as Truth.; 
Agreeing with the Upanishads they held that truth was in man's* 
Soul ; but that mere contemplation was not enough to realize, 
that truth for man, God being Love and that Love shining in the. 
Soul it should lead to deeds of peace, forgiveness, and mercy,; 
Where these are, there only is God the Truth/ That sums up 
their creed in essence. Then as to Buddha, the saints accepted 
his gospel of Akims# (abstention from injury); also his condemna- 
tion of caste ; but they ruled out his theory of the body as the 
enemy of man as impracticable for the very purpose of the 
human-hearted and universal love and good-will to all without 
measure, which he had preached and practised. 

Their teachings on this head may be put in some such lan- 
guage as this ; * You, Buddha, start by holding the body as man's, 
apemy because of its passions and you ask man to extinguish them, 
first by contemplation and then by good deeds of love to all with-,, 
out measure. But how can man contemplate and do deeds of love, 
mercy and good-will without his body ? Those who seek to find 
salvation by merely burning their passions in the fire of contempla- 
tion are like a man who walks on the shelterless, slippery and 
sundered edge of a mountain precipice. Those who again seek to 
burn them in that fire by contemplation of something vague and 
indefinable such as your Nirvana are like an unmarried woman, 
seeking salvation by doing Sati, i.e., burning herself in the pyre 
of an imaginary husband to find salvation. You say the body is 
man’s enemy because of its passions and that therefore the 
passions must be expelled. That you call Nirvana . But if the 
passions are our enemies, are they not also our friends ? Is it not 
because of our passions turned to good thoughts and thereby to 
good deeds that we are able to do what you, Buddha, enjoin, 
viz., a life of benevolence and love to all ? The germ of these 
thoughts and deeds which is in man’s self — whence is it? It must 
be from some higher self. Look at the river. It cdmes from 
the springs in mountains formed by the rain water from the sea,' 
flows outside, fertilizes fields and serves men, and at last joins 
the great Ocean from whence it had taken its birth in the springs. 
Similar is the case of man’s Self called the Sbul encased in his 
body. Turn that Soul to its source — have God as Truth as your 
goal —run your life’s course with that goal always in view and 
that is real Nirvana. That alone is Peace. What is peace but 
doing good to all, even those that have done evil to you ? But 
such peace can become accessible' to all, high or low, only if 
they yoke the Soul to the Over-Soul by love; to Him and through 
Him to %11 JHjs creatures.* • . 

Reasoning in this manner , and borrowing the best and dis* 
carding thp rest from the Vedas, the Upfmisbads, and Quddjba* 
the saints ;,of India, gave her and the world the following 



FOREWORD 


xix 


definition of Truth: * Truth is sama dar shana *. i.e. T * Truth js, 

lo ving othe rs as thy own self/ Because Rita, the law of right* 

emisness discovered by the Vedas first, flowed from Brahma as 
Truth, the Saints identified Rita with Truth and called falsehood 
Anrita , that which is not Rita . Because the Upanishads defined 
Truth as tho Soul, residing in man’s heart, they held that it is 
the Soul which binds us all through the Over-Soul, God, and 
therefore is the seat of Love. Hence Truth is Love. 


Saints and Scriptures of Maharashtra 

This definition of Truth as Love of others as thy own self 
is given in the Bhdgavat Purdna which is universally regarded as 
the standard authority of the devotional school second only to the 
Bhagavadgltd or the Celestial Song, worshipped as India’s New 
Testament. In fact the former is in substance a rendition of the 
latter. The Bhagavadgltd nowhere defines it. Butin so many words 
truth as the Bhdgavat Purdna defines it. But in several places it 
expressedly declares that he is the highest Yogi (man of contemp- 
lation and action) who looks upon and treats others as his own self. 
Taking up that teaching, Dnyaneshwar, the premier saint of Maha- 
rashtra, to whom all succeeding saints thereof, including Tuka- 
ram, owed a good deal of their religion, and who is regarded as 
the progenitor of Maratha nationality, which culminated in the 
great 6ivajf s Maratha Empire, declared that there is no acquisition 
equal to that of Saniya , i.e., the power of regarding others and 
treating them as your own seif. If we interpret that by the light 
of the texts in the Upanishads and the books of our Saints, which 
say that there is nothing higher than or even equal to Truth, we 
come to the same idea of Truth as that defined in the Bhdgavat 
Purdna . That is made clear beyond doubt by SivdjTs spiritual 
adviser, Saint Ramdas, who defined Truth in the Marathi langu- 
age of Western India as Ananyapand , i.e., * the condition of 
loving others as thy own self’. These Saints reverenced the 
Vedas and the Upanishads but they declared that those scriptures 
were partial to the three twice^born castes and neglected women and 
the lowest fourth caste called Sudra or servile, consisting of persons 
whose lot it was to serve the former* remain in ignorance, and live 
a life of servility. The Maratha Saint, Dnyaneshwar, himself a 
Brahman, who lived in the thirteenth century after Christ, says in 
hik poetic gloss on the Bhagavadgltd which preaches the doctrine 
of devotion to God as the highest and the easiest way to salva- 
Jipn because it is open to all, not merely to the twice-born but to 
w^men and Sudras as well: ‘The Bhagavadgltd is but the Vedas 
'transformed into liberality. Therefore, it is superior to the Vedas. 
True, the Veda is wealthy ; but there is no miser like him and that 
because he whispered his doctrines into the ears of the three 
twice-born castes only. And then he sat quiet, pretending he had 



FOREWORD 


xx 

no time to communicate his secret to people, like women and 
&udras f who are distressed by the pain and the miseries of this life 
and its cares. But, methinks, that, as time wore on, the Veda’s 
conscience pricked him and exposed to him his own littleness. 
Therefore, feeling that he should cast it off and acquire true glory, 
he proclaimed himself to all classes and castes even to women and 
Sudras without distinction. So he, the Veda, took the form of the 
Bhagavadgltft and brought salvation to all. 1 These Saints further 
taught that the golden age for India is not in the past but in the 
present and the future. The Bhdgavat Purdfta distinctly praises 
the present and future as superior to the past, because of the 
doctrine of equality of all castes and of women and men, held up as 
their hope by the gospel of truth defined as love of others as one’s 
own self. For instance the Maratha Saint Tukaram sang in that 
strain and proclaimed : * The fulness of salvation has come for all. 
Its market is free. Come one, come all, partake of it with rejoic- 
ing* Here there is no distinction of caste, high or low, man or 
woman, Brahman or Sudra' What does it mean but that the age 
of Truth was not that of the Vedas, or of the Upanishads, or of 
Buddha, but that of the Saints who held that Truth means not 
mere truth-telling but the practical regulation of life by deeds of love 
to all as one’s own self turned to God as Truth and therefore Love. 
These Saints who so defined Truth were not dreaming optimists. 
Their teachings abound with counsel that in this world we should 
enjoy life by work, rest and sobriety of enjoyment and attain to 
Truth by stages of steady, persevering, continuous practice in the 
art of contemplation and deeds of love. Man, they said, cannot 
like a bird fly up and at once pluck a fruit hanging on a branch of 
a tree. He must climb up to the fruit by steady steps. By such 
practice (they said) man can conquer Nature — he can cross 
mountains, navigate rivers, bridge distances of space and time and 
even learn to fly in the air. Here in this declaration the Saints 
anticipated and by necessary implication paid a tribute of respect 
to and admiration for man’s discoveries, such as the telegraph, the 
aeroplane and all those arts of life of modern civilization which 
some condemn as materialistic. They took ‘ the forward view of 
life ’ (to use an expression which Meredith has made familiar to us); 
to them 1 the golden age ’ is not the Past but the Future. Far from 
sharing the popular belief which has prevailed for centuries in India 
that the present Age is the Age of Kali , 6f decay and degeneration, 
they hold that this is the best Age, because it has made God 
accessible to all and opened the gate of life to even the most degra- 
ded and sinful. This optimistic faith finds its most terse expression 
in Tukaram ; and — to use the words of one of his most inspiring 
hymns: 4 Who dare disregard the devotee of God who holds by 
that faith unflinchingly ?’ 


N. G. Chandavarkar. 



ABBREVIATIONS USED 

B. G. Bombay Gazetteer, Bombay, 1885. 

E. R. B. Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, vols. i-xii, 
Edinburgh, edited by Dr. Hastings, 1908-21. 

F. and M. Fraser and Marathe’s Poems of Tukdrdm, 3 vols. 
Madras, 1909-15. 

F. C. M.\ Fergusson College Magazine, Poona, 1910-21. 

H, M. P. History of the Mardthd People, vol. i, by Kincaid 
and Parasnis, Bombay, 1918. 

I. I. Indian Interpreter, a Quarterly Magazine, Madras, 
1906-21. C. L. S. 

I. P. Indu Prakdsh edition of Tukaram's Poems in Marathi, 
Bombay, 1869. 

/. R. M. International Review of Missions, a Monthly Maga- 
zine, London, 1911-21. 

J. R. A. S. Bo. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Bombay 
Branch. 

M. Mahipati, Tukaratn’s Biographer. Seepp. 69 ff. 

M. Sar. Mahdrdshtra Sdraswat (History of Marathi Litera- 
ture, From its beginnings to 1818), a Marathi work by V. L. 
Bbave, Poona, 1919, 

M. IV. Marathi Writings and Lectures of Dr. Sir R. G. 
Bhandarkar, a Marathi work edited by D. G. Vaidya, with Life 
of Dr. Bhandarkar by Sir. N. G. Chandavarkar, Bombay, 1919. 

O. R. L . I. Outline of the Religious Literature of India 
Dr. J. N. Farquhar, London, 1919. 

P. M. S. Psalms of Mardthd Saints, Dr. N. Macnicol, 
Calcutta, 1919. 

S. T. C. &rt Tukdrdmdce Caritra (Life of Tukaram in 
Marathi), Mr. L. K. Pangarkar, Poona, 1920. 

V. S. M. R. S. Vaishnavism, Saivism and Minor Religious 
Systems, Dr. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar, vol. iii, part 6 in the Grun - 
dries, or Encyclopedia of Indo- Aryan Research , Strassburg, 1913. 



CORRIGENDA 

* f 

\ 

Page 6 line 3 for eldest read youngest and posthumous 
„ 6 „ 43 for 1650 read 1650 (but see p. 77) 

„ 9 „ 33 for Apte in rearf Xpte and Mr. V.W. Bhidein 

. „ 18 „ 13 (add 31) for 165Q read 1650 (but see p. 77} 

„ 20 „ 36 for Mahipati read Mahipati' , 

„ 21 ,i 4 (and 10) for Mahlpatl read Mahipati 

„ 21 „ 12 for Nabaji read NabhajI 

„ 27 „ 9 for Bhagavadglld read Mahabharata 

„ 29 ,, 10 for September, 1919 read Feb. 1, 1920 

! n >t >> 1 8 for Purdna read Purua (full) 

„ „ „ 18 for Antes read A msha (partial) 

# „ 30 „ 30 for Veda read Vedas 

„ 40 „ 44 for Vithoba, read Vithoba.’ 3 

„ 40 footnote 1 for 1 G.R. Navalkar, etc. read 1 Rise of the 
Mardthd Power, pp. 9-1 1.' 
a G. R. Navalkar, etc. 

„ 42 line 31 for Mhanotii read Mhanoni 
49 footnote 4 for para. 1 read para. 2 
„ 50 footnote 1 for Chap. 8 read Chap. 5. 

■ „ ' „ 1 for under 2 read under 4 

„ 51 line 35 for para. 11 read para. 10 
„ 55 „ 27 for sectipn 6 read section 7 

,i *, „ 28 for 7 read 8, 

„ 76 „ 35 for mantra read mantra 

. ,. 87 „ 32 for beads read garland 

„ 98 „ 44 for chapter 6, section 9, read chap, x, p. 265 

99 „ 29 for him. read him’.* 

„ 99 footnote 6 for part II, sect. 3 read pp. 123 ~5. 

„ 105 line 33 for Kejuskar read Keluskar 
„ 137 „ 11 for brings read brings’ 

„ 143 „ 21 for viii. 3 read viii. 2 

„ 150 footnote 4 for 152-3 read 155-6 

159 line 42 for 1227 read 1727 
,. 174 „ 11 for Part II tead pp. 188-9 

„ 177 headline for II read VII 
„ 188 line 37 for 218-9 read 216-7 

„ 194 „ 16 for 225-7 read 223-5 
„ 195.,, 20 for 218-9 read 216-7 
„ 216 „ 35 for 227, 230 read 225, 228 

„ 244 „ 8 for Prabhakarrao ; read PfabbakarraoV 

„ 278 „ 10 for place read places 

„ 282 ., 32 for resemblances read resemblance 

„ 296 „ 8 for letters read' titles 

298 „ 25 for 75 read 76 



System of Transliteration 

3T a, 3TT a, 5 i, | i K u, 35 u, ^ r, it e, fr ai, 3ft o, 3^ au, 
35 k, *sf kh, iT g, gb, W:n;.„:3.c f 3 ch, 3T j, g.jh, Bj.fi; Z t, 

3 th, 3 d, 9 dh, *T n ; rT t, s* th, S d, q dh, 5J n ; qp,tR ph, 

4 b f «? bh, ?J m ; 3 y, ^ r, <3 1 , 3 v, 5T 6 , ^ s, *T s', ? h, &'). 


‘Abhang ’ : Definition and method of quotation. 

Abhang is the Marathi word for hymn or lyrical poem. 
Abhangs have peculiar metres of their own, and rhyme and divide 
their verses irregularly, the last couplet opening .usually with the 
authors name, e.g., 'Tuka says.’ Abhangs may be limited, to two 
or four lines, or they may have, as many as thirty, and even 
more. 

Whenever, in this book, abhangs Site quoted with merely a 
number following in brackets, e.g., on p. 135 where half a dozen 
are thus referred to, the reference is always to Fraser and 
Mar&the*s English translations, The Poems of Tukctrftm, 3 vols. 



THE GREAT HEARTED 


Who day and night are from all passion free— 
Within their holy hearts I love* to be, 

Dwelling in sanctity. 


They bathe in Wisdom ; then their hunger stay 
With Perfectness ; lo, all in green array, 

The leaves of Peace are they. 


With pearls of Peace their limbs they beautify; 

Within their minds as in a scabbard I, 

The All-Indweller, lie. 

Therefore their love waxes unceasingly — 

These greatsouled ones ; not the least rift can be 
Between their hearts and me. 

Translated from Dnyiineshwar (13th Century) 

P. M. S. p. 35. 


‘O HASTE AND COME # 


Dost thou behold me perishing ? 

0 haste and come, my God and king. 

1 die unless thou succour bring 

O haste and come, my God and king. 

To help me is a trifling thing ; 

Yet thou must haste, my God and king. 

O come (how Nama’s clamours ring) 

O haste and come, my God and king. 

Translated from Namdev (14th Century) 

P. M. S. p. 43. 


RELIGIOUS UNREALITY 


Ah, he speaks the wotds of heaven 
With a heart to murder given—’ * * 

Loudly praise to God he sings, 

But his soul to lucre clings — 

Tuk& says — A wretch so base — 

Smite him, slap him on the face ! 

Translated from Tukaram (1608-49) by Dr. J. Murray Mitchell, 
The Indian Antiquary, March, 1882, p. 61, 



Chapter I 

The Land and People of Tnkaram 

. 1. Maharashtra 

The land of Tukaram is that region of Western India which 
bears the ancient name of Maharashtra. By old tradition it com- 
prises the Western Deccan, from Nagik and Poona to Sataraand 
Kolhapur. 4 In shape a triangle, its base is the sea from Daman to 
Karwar, the perpendicular side a line running from Daman beyond 
Nagpur, the hypotenuse an irregular line from beyond Nagpur to 
Karwar. The area of this tract is over 100,000 square miles and 
its population exceeds thirty millions.’ 1 Speaking quite strictly, 
it does not include the country below the Ghats, the Konkarj. The 
people of the latter speak the language of Maharashtra and its history 
has at times been closely. connected with that of the table-land above 
the Ghats, but it probably witnessed no part of Tukaram’s life and 
we need give little thought to it here. It is a country of flat rice- 
fields with groves of trees here and there and straggling villages 
beneath their shade. The whole year is hot and moist and for 
several months everything is drenched in rain. Above the Ghats 
we are in a different world. The sea disappears from our thoughts ; 
all round us on every hand stretches the Deccan plain. Some- 
times it is perfectly flat and treeless, but more often it. rises and 
falls in gentle undulations and it is seldom that hills or mountains 
are not seen rising in the distance. Tukaram’s home was not 
very far from the edge of the table-land and the Ghats themselves. 
A few miles from Dehu, his birthplace, the cultivated fields run up to 
the mountains and quite close to the village there are solitary hills. 
Trees are not wanting, the thorny bftbhal on the waste land and 
mangoes near the. village being cultivated for their shade and their 
much-appreciated fruit. When the fields are green with crops the 
whole scene is pleasant to a visitor’s eye, and the contrast of 
mountain and plain is stimulating. The air too is fresh and pure 
and the visitor for a moment may easily dream that he has lighted 
on one of the happiest retreats on earth. 

The dream, however, would be dispelled by reflection. The 
Deccan soil for the most part is poor, the rain is uncertain, and 
scarcity of food has always been a recurring incident in men’s 
lives. The extreme heat and the extreme, cold are both trying, and 
the plagues of tropical life, fever, guinea- worm and so forth, molest 
the> people of Maharashtra as much as others. 



2 . LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM >ch. 

The people inhabiting Maharashtra had no early history of 
importance. On the sea-coast arose prosperous ports, like Kalyan, 
but inland there was no seat of empire till the bounds of 
Maharashtra were passed. We must think of the early Marafhas 
as a village people leading hard industrious lives and waiting for 
a later hour to summon them to take part in history. 


2. The Maharashtriyans or Marathas 

Who were the Marathas ? In Asoka’s inscriptions the people 
of the Western Deccan are called Rathikas (Sanskrit Rdshtrika ). 
Soon after his time they passed under the Andhras, a ‘ Dravidian * 
people of Southern India who ruled the peninsula from sea to sea till 
J;he third century after Christ. These were followed in time by 
various ‘ Rajput * kings, of whose origin we know nothing. One 
of their dynasties, the Rashtrakutas, ruled at NaSik, and lasted till 
the Muhammadan invasions. It is tempting, of course, to connect 
this name with that of Maharashtra, but all that is certain about 
the latter is that it came into general use after the invasions; how 
much older it was we do not know. 

Kincaid and Parasnis, in their History of the Mardthd People , 
have shown that far back in the early history of Western India, 
Maharashtra bore the name of Dandakaranya or the Dandaka 
Forest. Indeed, even stjjl, whenever Marathi-speaking Brahmans 
in their religious sacrifices refer to the country, they do not call 
it Maharashtra but Dandakaranya. How then did Dandakaranya 
come to be called Maharashtra ? Its inhabitants maintain that 
Maharashtra means the great country, while Mr. Molesworth, 
the well-known Marathi scholar, hints that the name may mean 
the country of the Mahars, but there are sufficient grounds 
for rejecting this view. The Mahars, are not a people but are 
merely a debased section, and , their name is a corruption of 
the^ word Mrityuhar or ‘ remover of the dead \ Surely from so 
abject a community no country would take its name. Moreover, 
the words Mrityuhar Rdshtra could not, according to the ordinary 
laws of linguistic corruption, become the name Maharashtra. 
Instead of armies, Asoka sent forth in every direction ministers 
of religion to teach the principles of Buddha. These missions 
are recorded in inscriptions carved on rocks all over Northern 
India, and on no less than four of those still surviving Asoka 
states ‘ that he had sent missionaries to the Rastikas. These 
Rastikas or Rashtrikas were the dwellers in the Dandaka Forest. 
Proud of their independence, or for some kindred reason, they 
came in later years to call thenttselves Maharashtrikas, and so 
the country which they occupied came to be known as Maha- 
rashtra and its people as Marthas \* In Mr. Rajwade’s 

1 tf.Ar,?.,p P .4-7 



i LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM 3 

Mah&r&shtrttcha Vasahnt Kal (the colonization of Maharashtra) 
the position is laid down that Maharashtra comes from Rashtrikas, 
the leading men of the Rashtra, or country, and that the 
Word Maharashtrikas refers to chiefs among the leading men. 

3. The 5haka Era of A. D. 78 

Following on the Buddhist Empire which terminated in 185 
B.C. after the death of Asoka, * the Andhra kings * who were 
formerly vassals of the Buddhist Emperors overran the whole 
of Maharashtra and remained in power for about three centuries, 
their dominance receiving a check at the hands of a tribe named the 
Shakas, or Scythians, who gave their name to the Shaka era by 
which legal and religious documents of Hindus in N. and S. India 
are dated. The Shaka era began seventy-eight years later than the 
Christian, and Kincaid and Parasnis point out, relying on the 4 sur- 
mises’ of Dr.R.G. Bhandarkar in his Ancient History of the Deccan , 
that 4 the resemblance between the word Shaka and the Shaka 
era . . . could hardly be fortuitous. Now if the Shaka era was 
founded by the Shakas, they did it in all probability to celebrate 
some great achievement. Thus the Shakas probably conquered 
the Deccan when the Shaka era began, that is to say in a.d. 78. 
. . . • These foreign kings did not long vex Maharashtra . . . 
Before A.D. 150 Shaka rule in Maharashtra had vanished. . . . 
In a.d. 78 the Shaka chief forced his way either through the 
Vindhyas or along the Konkan sea board. For some fifty years 
he and his descendants occupied Maharashtra’. 1 It seems unlikely 
that an era of 4 foreign kings* should have been used for religious 
purposes in so ancient a religion as the Hinduism df Maharashtra 
especially when that ‘foreign’ rule was only fifty years in dura- 
tion. This same view, however, is held by SirJ. F. Fleet who 
pronounces as ‘ fiction 9 the popular belief that the Shaka era was 
founded by a King Shalivahan who reigned A. D. 78 at Pratish- 
thana the modern Paithan on the Godaveri. 2 

4. The Marathi Language 

The language of the Marajhas has been classified by science 
as ‘ Aryan’. But no one has really enquired how much it has in 
common with the tongue of the Rig Veda, and the view may be 
hazarded that its non-Aryan elements are large and significant. 
ll{r. V. L. Bhawe believes it to be extremely probable that there 
most have been a kind of mutual influence and admixture of the 
language of the highly intellectual Aryans and of the language 

1 H. M. P., p. 10 

2 E . R. E Vol. xi. p. 96 ; also Ettcyelopcedia Britannica (lltb edition), 
Vol. xiii. pp. 497-8. 



4; LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

spoken by the aboriginal dwellers in Maharashtra, that the language 
thus formed was called 4 Maharashtrl * and that from thj$ has 
arisen the language known to-day as 4 Maharashtrl * or 4 Marathi * 
or 4 DeshI V 

On this subject Professor Patwardhan observes in his Wilson 
Philological Lectures : 4 There is hardly, anything of a reliable 
character established beyond the possibility of question or con- 
troversy as regards the time and date of the makers of Marathi 
and Marathi Literature. . . . Nothing is definitely known, it must 
be admitted at the outset, as regards the origin of the Maratbas 
and Marathi. Maharashtra and Maharashtrl are very old words 
indeed. . . . Maharashtrl was a current language in the days of 
Vararuchi .... Vararuchi wrote .... about 380 years before 
Christ. In that case .... the word Maharashtrl is as old as 
388 B.C. if not older still .... From the third century B.C. to 
^he tenth century a.d. the literary history of Maharashtra is yet to 
be written. With the exception of few literary remains we have 
practically no material to hand to bridge the gulf. And yet it 
appears, on the face of it, improbable that there was no literature. 
For the literature of a people rises or falls according as the 
people themselves rise or fall. . . . That Marathi in its Marathi 
form has come from Maharashtrl, is only a developed form of 
Maharashtrl, is generally admitted, and may. be clear to any one 
who compares the vocabulary of Marathi with that of Maharashtrl 
and especially certain pronominal forms, indeclinables, verbal 
roots, in the two. But when exactly the Marathi forms, Marathi 
idiom, and Marathi words sprang into being from the original 
Maharashtrl it is difficult to say. There are, I understand, only 
four or five inscriptions wherein Marathi forms of words and 
Marathi structure of sentences can be identified. But nothing of 
a literary character that belongs to the period before the tenth 
century after Christ has so far been discovered.* * 

Closely connected with this question of philology, and illustrat- 
ing the early beginnings of the Marathi language^ is a lfegend given 
by Kincaid and Parasnis which shows the Andhra period to 
have been one not only of military and mercantile, but also of 
literary, activity. A certain ghost named Kanabhuti brought to 
one Gunatjbya, a minister of King Shalivahan, seven volumes of 
stories all written in blood. Gunadhya accepted these and offered 
them as a gift to his royal master. Disgusted with the strange 
language and the stranger script, King Shalivahan returned the 
books to his minister who, furious at the failure of his present, burnt 
six of the seven volumes. The remaining volume fell into tl?e 
hands of Gunadhya’s pupils or clerks who being acquainted 
with 4 the ghost language pronounced the book charming. When 

1 See V. L. Bhawe, Stir, p. 8 

* W. B. Patwardhan, F. C. M. t Vol. viii. No. 3, Dec. 191?, pp. 104-U0 





THE VIEW FROM DEHl*, IUKARAM’s BIRTHPLACE 



I LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM 5 

their verdict came to Shalivahan’s ear he made a further effort to 
read Kaoabhflti’s stories, and once he had mastered the difficulties 
of Kanabhuti’s literary medium he was as charmed with the tales 
as Gunaclhya’s pupils. It seems probable that the ghost language 
of Kanabhuti was the Maharashtrl dialect, born of the efforts 
of the Rasbtrikas to speak Sanskrit, and Jibat the reign of 
Shalivaban, that is, the period when the Andhra kings held 
smy, first saw the use for literary purposes of that ‘vigorous, 
supple, graceful and copious tongue 9 which we call Marathi. 


5 . Dehu, Tukaram’s Village : Past and Present 

The village life of the Deccan has changed in some details 
during British rule but the present is still so much like the past 
that thoughtful observers can easily recall the latter as it was in 
Tukaram’s day. To do something of the kind let us go to Dehu, 
the poet’s birthplace on the right and south bank of the IndrayanI, 
a large stream flowing into the Bhima. In the rains this stream is 
broad and rapid ; in the dry weather it is little more than a chain 
of pools with # rill of turbid water sometimes connecting them, 
sometimes vanishing in its pebbly bed. Round the village are 
still visible fragments of the old wall, emerging from thickets 
of prickly pear. Within it the houses, of bricks or mud, stand 
thickly crowded together. There is only one passage that can 
be called a street. Here are a few shops that deal in grain or 
cloth but they are not the only centres of trade in the village, for 
on market days a bazar is opened under the peepal tree and 
various products are exchanged. One of the changes since Tuka* 
ram’s day is probably the greater importance of the shopkeeper and 
the diminished importance of the bazar. The ruinous, uncared-for 
appearance of the village probably recalls his own time. Nothing in 
India is ever repaired ; and the houses in an Indian village, like the 
trees in the jungle, run their natural course from youth to age and 
death without interference from man. If this fills the village with 
eyesores nobody .much minds them, any more than people mind the 
boulders in the unpaved, unlevelled pathways or the smells 0 $ an 
age preceding sanitation. 

Accessible to the modern sightseer, Tukaram’s birthplace is 
situated three miles from the Bombay*Poona trunk road at the 
vefcy end of a country lane branching off from the former near the 
98th milestone from Bombay and the 15th from Poona, less than 
ten . minutes’ walk from Sbelarvacji railway station. When we 
visited the village on October 25, 1920 the motor-car took us 
right up to the walls of Vithoba’s temple overlooking the IndrSyauI. 
Ari expert on anthropological research in Hinduism has laid down 
tha following golden rules on visiting Hindu temples: ‘ You must 
have a pair t>£ holeless stockings, some knowledge of the vernacular 



6 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


CH 


and charming manners ; armed with these, you can enter any- 
where. . . . Even if it is not absolutely necessary, take your shoes 
1 off; that is an outward and visible sign which any Indian can read 
that you are visiting the temple in a spirit of sympathy. Explain 
to the priest exactly what you want to see, and if you are writing a 
book, tell him so.* 1 By a stroke of good fortune the first priest 
we met was the leading Gosavl 2 among Tukaram’s direct des- 
cendants who number some 250 out of Dehu’s present population 
of 1722. The great pride with which everything relating to the 
17th century poet-saint is preserved and explained was at once 
manifest. In at least three directions, indeed, this natural pride 
goes to an extreme against which we have little doubt Tukaram 
would have made his remonstrance, viz ., worship of himself, 
polytheism, and caste-prejudice, though we shall see later how often 
our bhakti poet ‘limped between two opinions*. To-day, despite 
tiis vehement protests in some of his poems against certain forms of 
idolatry, Tukaram is not only made an object of worship himself, in 
Dehu, but within the same sacred enclosure there is a veritable 
pantheon dedicated to Rama, Maruti, Ganpati, Garud, etc. in 
addition to the poet’s own Vithoba, from whose threshold people 
accounted of low-caste origin are kept away, darshan in such cases 
having to be taken at a distance. The inconsistency of this last 
$ with Tukaram’s own somewhat democratic inclinations we ventured 
to point out to our Gosavl guide who took our gentle expostulation 
good-naturedly. A short distance from Vithoba’s shrine we came 
. to the inevitable temple with its inevitable worship of Tukaram, on 
the spot where four centuries ago stood the poet’s humble hut, and 
a few paces away was the small cottage dedicated to the worship of 
J'ijabai his longsuffering wife. We then saw the tomb of Tukaram’s 
eldest son, Narayanrao, who like Dnyaneshwar before him took 
sthala-samadhl (getting oneself buried alive). Immediately 
behind this rest the ashes of several famous GosdvJs in Tukaram’s 
line. Lastly, less than half a mile away we came upon the shrine 
visited yearly on certain days in Phalgun, the twelfth Hindu 
month 8 , by a festival crowd that numbers anything from twenty 
to forty thousand people ; the reason for their coming being given 
in a, Marathi inscription which translated reads: ‘ From this place 
Tukaram took the form of Brahma and ascended to Vaikuntha 
(Paradise) *. We noted however that opposite this spot deemed 
most holy by millions of intelligent Hindus, is the deepest part 
of the Indrayaiil— a part which always has deep water, said our 
guide, and we wondered therefore whether a more natural explana- 
tion for the ‘ ascension * of 1650 might not fit the facts. 4 

3 Mrs. Sinclair Stevenson, I.R.M* October, 1920. 

2 A Gosavl is ‘aSudra (and sometimes a Brahman) who has renounced 
worldly business, pleasures and affections’, J. T. Molesworth, Mardthl and 
English Dictionary , p. 249, col. 1 

8 This year (1920) these days came on March 6-8 

4 See the end of Section ii, Chapter iv 



I 


LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM 


7 


6. Deccan Villages— Then and Now 

As for life’s experiences in the Deccan, past and present are much 
the same. The same crops are planted and by the same methods ; 
the thoughts of men are centred on weather and prices. The 
present differs from the past in its greater security. When the rain 
fails in any district life is not immediately threatened. Local war 
is no more a feature of the times. The outlook of men has also 
broadened. The cheap post, newspaper and day-school have made 
themselves felt in the village : there is some knowledge of the 
world. The isolation of the people has been disturbed. The public 
services in police, education and other matters, bring it into touch 
with other villages and remind it that there is a central power 
directing things for a common good. In Tukaram’s day certainly 
such a central power existed, that of the Mogul Emperors directed 
from Ahmednagar, but its proceedings were far less methodical 
than those of modern government and if it sometimes interfered in 
small affairs which to-day would be left alone, in many directions 
where the official hand is now felt daily the village went its way 
without interference. 

It seems idle to ask the question whether people were happier 
in those days than in our own, and we may leave the comparison to 
those bold enough to make it. No doubt local interests were 
stronger in the days of primitive isolation, and local gossip was 
more absorbing. This means also that local feuds were more bitter, 
and these feuds have always been the curse of Indian village life. 
We may suppose, if we like, that simple piety was commoner ; 
but dark superstitions were common too, the dread of evil spirits 
more burdensome, dark and cruel rites more prevalent. Of all this, 
as we shall see, Tukaram’s poems furnish their own evidence. 

What is true of India as a whole is true of that part of India 
called the Deccan : if you would influence the people of India you 
must get to know something of the 750,000 villages in which nine- 
tenths of India’s mighty population live. This was well put in a 
paper on Spiritual Forces in India by Dr. Macnicol in the Con- 
temporary Review some years ago. ‘ Every one who would touch 
the heart anil mould the life of India must go down among the silent 
masses of the people. They must turn their backs upon the cities 
and the life of the cities. It is a commonplace of commonplaces 
in regard to India to say that it is a land of villages. It is this 
fact, no less than the tenacity of their minds and the elusiveness of 
their thoughts, that has made it appear so often as if messages 
conveyed to the people of this land were writ on water. For the 
most part it is probable that they never reached their ears. If 
anyone would know what India will be, if he would guess what 
forces are still dormant in her and of what she dreams, and especi- 
ally if he desires to move and mould her future, he must sit with 

* September 1900, pp. 284-294, > 



8 t LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

the villager at his hut-door, buy with him and sell at his weekly 
market, and journey with him when he takes his pilgrim’s staff 
and sets forth to some distant shrine. If he is a foreigner it is 
difficult indeed for him to come close enough to those simple 
children of the earth to form any true conception of the dim 
thoughts and impulses that move them. The nearest he can come 
to them, perhaps, is when he pitches his tent close by their village 
and gathers them around him to speak with them of whatever 
troubles them, and, by what means he may, to win their hearts. 
It is no easy thing to do in India*. 

7. Maratha Religious Life 

It will be best therefore at this point to give some proportionate 
Account of the religious life and organization of a Maratha village. 
That life is best viewed in its general aspect as a life of domestic 
religious rites. Every respectable Hindu family has in its house 
a small shrine for domestic worship, where the head of the family 
every day performs the ceremonies needed for its wellbeing. There 
will be found the images of the chief gods, and especially of any 
god to whom by tradition the worship of that family is offered. 
Over these images scented oil is poured, then they are bathed in a 
saucer kept close by for sacred purposes, dried, replaced, besmeared 
with a sandal- wood preparation, after which flowers are offered 
them, lights are waved round them, a small bell is rung and food 
is presented to them before the family sit down to their own meal. 
During this puja (worship) prayers are uttered ; the whole cere- 
mony, which must be performed either by the male head of the 
household or by the family priest, occupying about half an hour 
before the morning meal, the chief meal of the day. These sacred 
images, however, do not take their places or receive these obser- 
vances till they are duly consecrated by the Brahmans. So here 
the sef^ices of the priest are needed, as they are* needed at 
every special ceremony in the life of a Hindu (on which see 
Mrs. Sinclair Stevenson's Rites Of The Twice-Born). They are 
not needed, on the other hand, when he visits a shrine where 
some image of a god stands in public waiting for its worshippers. 
As in his own house, he approaches it directly, salutes it and 
departs. Almost all images, however, have their Brahman attend- 
ants and no pious worshipper will neglect these, if they are present. 
Small popular shrines where no attendant waits, the red-coloured 
images of Maruti or Hanuman who watches over all Deccan 
villages, are visited by their votaries who paint them and place 
garlands on them when they feel disposed. The little temple 
of &iva, found in every Deccan village, is visited morning and 
evening by all whose inclinations lead them therfe, 

These ceremonies and visits to temples make up the round of 
ordinary worship. Once a year there is a special occasion of 



I LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM 9 

quite another kind, the $hr&ddh f or offering to the spirits of departed 
ancestors. This arises partly from the view that departed souls 
require nourishment and partly from the belief that they must 
expiate in hell the offences of their last incarnation till, the 
penalty having been duly paid, they depart to enjoy the reward of 
their merits for a period in heaven. The faith of their descendants 
manifested in the shr&ddh accelerates their liberation, and the rite 
is esteemed by all Hindus as one of the most serious duties of 
religion. In addition, the daily round of temple visits is often 
supplemented by pilgrimages to famous shrines. 

Correcting a misconception by no means rare in the West, 
Dr. Macnicol, whose authority in this matter will at once 
be recognised by Western readers, remarks : ‘ No greater mistake 
could be made than to suppose that there is no strength of purpose 
or resolution in the people of India. How else have those 
hill-sides been furrowed so deep by the feet of pilgrims that have 
come and gone throughout a thousand years ? What strength 
of soul was theirs who, in the still more distant past, carved deep 
out of the solid rock cells for themselves and great cathedrals for 
their gods .... Wherever one goes, the prints of pilgrims’ feet 
are 44 numberless and holy all about him ”. No doubt much of the 
reality and power that lay in former days behind those facts has 
passed away from them to-day .... Nor can one wonder, with 
the constant pressure of poverty upon them, that in the case of the 
great majority of all classes their worship, in the expressive 
language of a proverb, is given first to 44 Potoba, and only then to 
Vithoba,” and perhaps there is more excuse for such worship in 
India than in most other lands’. 1 These worshippers of ‘ Potoba 
so accurately described in the Pauline phrase 4 whose god is their 
belly,* may serve as a reminder to foreigners — both missionaries 
and officials — that a useful point of contact with the people is 
provided by the study of Marathi proverbs, on which Mr. Manwaring 
in English and Mr. Apte in Marathi have written excellent books. 

8. Deccan Temples 

It is difficult to obtain any correct idea either of the number of 
Hindu temples in those early times or of the proportion of temples 
given up to the various Hindu deities. In an examination of 
4 the Selections from the Peshwas Diaries ’ by Justice Ranade, we 
read the following : 4 The last portion of the Selections gives a list 
of some 250 temples, which were of sufficient importance to 
receive State-help in 1810-11. The relative popularity of the 
several deities will appear from the analysis which shows that there 
were fifty-two temples of Maruti, the attendant of Rama, while 
Rama himself jbad eighteen places of worship. The temples 

4 I The Contemporary Review , Sept, 1900, pp. 284-94. 

2 



10 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

dedicated to Vishnu were nine, to Vithoba thirty-four, to Krishna 
as Balaji twelve. Rama and Krishna incarnations had thus 
seventy-three places of worship. The most popular gods with 
the Brahmans were Mahadeo who had forty temples, and 
Ganpati who had thirty-six temples. Judged by the number of 
temples, the worshippers of Siva and Vishnu were thus nearly 
equal. The old aboriginal gods had in all thirty-two places of 
worship ; the Devi had ten ; Dattatreya had only one temple for 
his worship, and there were eight places of Muhammadan Dargas 
held in veneration’. 1 


9 . Bhajans and Kirtans 

The formalism of Hindu ritual, now as in Tukaram’s day, is 
•.counterbalanced by meetings for common worship in which no 
priest takes any leading part or is necessarily present at all. Such 
meetings need not even be held in a temple. It is solely a matter 
of convenience where they are held and often the courtyard of some 
large house is the scene of a bhajan , hatha or klrtan. Bhajan is 
the name of a choral service in which all present take an equal 
part: a klrtan is a service in which one leader expounds the theme 
and invites the company to join him in song : a katha seeks to 
inspire patriotic and religious fervour by narrating the exploits of 
gods and heroes. The leader on all such occasions may be a 
Brahman but this is by no means necessary, perhaps not even 
usual. A klrtankdr is simply a man of respectable station who 
has felt drawn to the religious life, possesses the gift of exposition, 
and, what in India is closely allied to it, the gift of song. He is as 
it were a Moody and a Sankey in one. He may or may not make 
religious teaching the sole business of his life, but no doubt the 
most successful among the kirtankdrs occupy themselves with 
nothing else. There is nothing in the way of a school or centre for 
training but to some extent they learn from each other. Among 
them are men of great reputation, who attract very large gatherings 
and undoubtedly exercise a real influence for good. And it appears 
that they very seldom make any charge for their services or accept 
anything more from their friends than subsistence. 

Services of this kind may be connected with the worship of any 
god but in practice they are chiefly held to magnify Rama, Krishna 
and Vishnu. They have been developed by the followers of the 
Bhakti-Marga t the path of loving devotion. • To a Protestant eye 
they are the most edifying of Hindu religious observances. Tl\ey 
combine something of the oratorio with something of the service of 
song, and no one whose inclinations lead him in these directions 
will fail to enjoy or even to take some involuntary part if he is 
present in a klrtan . (See the section on this subject in chapter 7) 

1 Justice M. G. Ranade, Miscellaneous Writings , 1915 % pp. 375-6. 



I LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM II 

10. Religious Superstition 

On the other handit is not to be forgotten that religious senti- 
ment led and leads many of these same villagers in very different 
directions. It leads them for instance to propitiate evil spirits. There 
is much less of this practice in Maharashtra than in many parts of 
India ; it exists, however, and outside the town or village often 
stands the shrine of Vetal, the prince of these demons *. To this 
repair those who believe themselves in trouble from his myrmidons, 
and by the offering of a cocoanut (representing perhaps the human 
head of a remote antiquity) seek to purchase life. A foreigner of 
course can offer no opinion how often this happens, but probably it 
does not as often happen in Maharashtra as elsewhere. In times of 
special trouble, such as cholera or plague, an image of the cholera 
or plague spirit may be set up outside the village and honoured 
there in the hope that it may not come inside, and there are some 
quaint ways of inducing it to turn its attentions to other villages. , 

As for witches and* wizards and dealers in spells and curses, 
potions and incantations, they are not unknown in the Deccan but 
probably much less is heard of them than in Southern India. Such 
persons are seldom found to reside in one place like the village 
witch of old England who has scarcely any counterpart in old 
India. The sorcerers of the country belong to the vast order of 
wandering ascetics, for ever coming and going, frightening women 
very much and occasionally doing great harm. But the Deccan 
on the whole is much more free from these troublers of men’s 
spiritual peace than other parts of India. 

In a deeply interesting section entitled ‘Superstitions’ relating 
to the Maratha Government of the Peshwas, Justice Ranade 
supplies the following facts: ‘ Belief in omens and prognostics 
was common to all classes. It is recorded that a student cut off his 
tongue and another GujarathI devotee cut off his head by way of 
offering it to the deity he worshipped, and in both cases, the events 
were reported to the Government by the local officials, and large 
sums were spent to purify the temples and ward off the dangers 
threatened by these unholy sacrifices. People were filled with 
alarm, when it was reported that an earthquake had disturbed the 
Kalyan Taluka. A fortress on the Ghats was believed to have 
suffered injury from the influence of evil sight, and another 
fortress a few years later was rendered unfit for occupation by the 
prevalence of an unaccountable disease. In all these three cases, 
steps were taken to pacify the elements by general purification. The 
d ctaee of a Jabagir village prayed to Government to resume the 
grant'and exchange it for some other, as the gift became undesir- 
able on account of the prevalence of evil spirits. Partial and 

1 ' Rings of while stones representing Vetal, the ghost-king, and bis troopers 
are often to be seen outside Deccan villages' (H.M.P., p. if). Inside these 
rings village athletes both wrestle and worship. » 



12 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

local famines gave frequent trouble in those days, and large sums 
were spent in employing Brahmins to drown the gods, or pour 
water over them for days and weeks together. Sacrifice of buffa- 
loes to a goddess at Trimbak, which had been stopped for some 
years, was resumed by the order of the Government at the instance 
of Brahmin devotees. When a man-eating tiger appeared on the 
Saptashringl Hill in the Na£ik District, the Kamavisdar was 
ordered to consult the pleasure of the goddess, and if she 
consented, to employ men to shoot it. A lizard having fallen on the 
body of the idol at Pandharpur, a great penance was ordered in 
which Brahmins took part. The sale of cows to butchers was 
strictly prohibited throughout the country. Some Muhammadans, 
who were guilty of breaking the law, were severely punished, and 
a Brahmin, who cut off the tail of a cow, was sent to prison.* 1 

ii. Social Life and General Culture 

Maharashtra is, probably, on the whole, the most orderly corner 
of Hindu society. The village system is more clearly defined than 
it is elsewhere, the status and mutual services of the castes are 
placed on a clearer footing, there are fewer of the miserable hangers- 
on, the forlorn classes, than there are in the Hinduism of other 
parts. And the dress of Maharashtra is the most practical and for 
women the most becoming dress worn by the peasantry of India. 
On the other hand it is -the least courtly part of the country, 
perhaps the least artistic. The Marathas during all their history 
built nothing whatever, and art does not seem to owe anything to 
their patronage. They have one hero and one heroic period but in 
the leading position which they then assumed they did little of 
lasting value for India as a whole. Beginning with plundering the 
Moguls they freed the country, it is true, from Muhammadan rule, 
but created no system worthy of their vigour or of their shrewdness 
of character. When, through their own ceaseless quarrels, the 
sceptre departed from them, the mass of the people retained nothing 
inspiring from two centuries of martial authority. 

On the other hand, recent investigation shows that in every 
stage of society, high and low, poets were highly honoured and 
received the popular homage. (See section 20 of this chapter on 
the ‘ Democratizing Influence of Maratha Poets.’) Moreover, the 
Peshwas all encouraged learning and education. Mr. V. L. Bhawe 
points out that in the case of every Maratha author of importance 
either he or his descendants received a gift from the Peshwas *to 
encourage him in his literary work.* Mr. K. V. Subramanya Aiyar, 
the author of Historical Sketches of Ancient Deccan , has pointed 

I Justice M. G. Ranade, Miscellaneous Writings, pp. 374-5. 

a Se*,Mr. V. L. Bhawe, M. £u?r.,, e.g. p. 379, Mahipati’s case; p. 316, 
Niranjaa s case. 



LAND AND PEOPLE OP TDK ARAM 


13 


out the interesting fact that in the ancient Deccan * the poet was 
better favoured than even the king’s nearest relations and there was 
nothing to compare with his status, honour and esteem.’ 1 This 
fact helps us to understand Tukaram’s popularity both in his own 
day and now. 

As for the tastes of the Maratha people of the present day, 
‘ I may be forgiven if I pause to combat the disastrous idea', says 
Mr. Sedgwick, one of the all too few Englishmen who know the 
richness of Marathi literature, ‘ that Marathi poetry is neither read 
by Marathi speaking gentlemen, nor worth reading. Literature for 
its own sake is perhaps not so much followed in the East as in the 
West. But such students of literature as there are in the Deccan 
read the Marathi poets. Abhahgs and pothls are sung or read at 
every festival. Children in the smallest as well as the largest 
schools are taught the poetical language as soon as they can read 
and write reasonably correctly. A not inconsiderable amount of 
research work and literary criticism is being done in Marathi 
through the medium of periodicals. . . Last but not least we 

have at the present moment in Poona a group of Indian scholars 
calling themselves the Tukarftm-maiidall , which is preparing a 
critical edition of the works of Tukaram wilh an exhaustive and 
scholarly commentary. All this is indicative of the fact that 
Marathi poetry is read and studied more than ever before*. 3 

Even the rank and file have their literary interests of a kind. 
It has been truly said that * in every town and village in the Deccan 
and Konkan, especially during the rains, the pious Maratha will be 
found listening with his family and friends to a recitation of the 
Poihl of Shridhar (1678-1728), and enjoying it indeed. Except an 
occasional gentle laugh, or a sigh, or a tear, Pot a sound distutbs 
the rapt silence of the audience, unless when one cf those passages 
of supreme pathos is reached, which affects the whole of the 
listeners simultaneously with an outburst of emotion which drowns 
the voice of the reader’.' 5 

12. The Power of the Brahmans 

The Brahmans undoubtedly retain the tradition that they are 
the class entitled to control and direct affairs. In this part 
of India they have assumed a position quite unique, furnishing the 
priests, politicians and, formerly, the warriors of the country. 
Their position as priests may be parallelled elsewhere, but 
nowhere have they monopolized all administrative power as they 
hdve done here. Even in the Maratha army many of the officers 
were Brahmans, and they filled almost all posts in the civil service. 
It is difficult to account for this, and difficult to say how exactly it 

1 Indian Social Reformer , August 4, 1919, p. 614. 

3 Mr. L. J. Sedgwick, I. C. S R. A. S. Bo ., 1910, Vok 23, No. 65, p. 110. 

Acworth\i3a//<rds, xxvii. _ _ 



14 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

affected the country or the Brahmans themselves. On the whole 
there was probably not much friction between them and the other 
classes; their predominance was accepted both in secular and 
spiritual affairs. Though exclusive they were not offensively 
arrogant or at least were not felt to be such by the non-Brahman 
classes who felt the Brahman influence to be humanizing after the 
harsh cruelties of Muhammadan rule. Non-Brahmans became 
content to leave politics alone and when the Government of 
Bombay, regarding the Peshwa as incorrigible, annexed his terri- 
tories the peasantry did not feel that any rights of theirs were 
being taken away. In religious matters, as we have seen, the 
common people had always a large sphere of their own and one 
iri which they found a leading interest of their lives. Doubtless 
the view they took of Brahmans at that time approximated to the 
view taken of them by low-caste people to-day, as expressed in the 
sgying : * Brahmans are like palm-trees, very high, but giving little 
shade to us poor people \ 

Careful observers have pointed out that Maratha Brahmans 
are among ‘the most capable Hindus in the Empire’. 1 This, 
moreover, is the view they take of their own position. ‘ Maratha 
Brahmans . . . regard themselves as the elite of mankind, not 
only because they are Brahmans, but also because they believe 
themselves superior to all other Brahmans in India. To them 
Gujralh Brahmans (the Brahmans of Gujarat) are only a caste 
of water-carriers, and Telang Brahmans (Tilanga or Carnatic 
Brahmans) are a caste *of cooks. They look upon Sarasvat 
Brahmans and the Brahmans of Northern India as degenerate 
because the latter are “fish-eaters”. They again believe that all 
other Brahmans, like those of Northern India, are unable to 
pronounce Sanskrit speech correctly. On account of their preten- 
sions to political and scholarly wisdom the Maratha Brahmans are 
far from popular . . . They have a power of conferring Vedic and 
Puranic sacraments, as they are the priests of the nation, but the 
possibilities of this power, and the good uses to which this power 
can be applied, are not yet fully realized by them . . . The 
Peshwas are gone, and so is the power of the Sbastrls and Pundits 
in Poona. They still like to play their excommunication forma- 
lities. They often excommunicate persons, either those who have 
returned from England, or married a widow, or drank tea with 
Englishmen.’ 3 Those acquainted with recent Indian history will 
recall the instance of the late Mr. Bal Gangadhar T>|ak who only 
a few weeks before his death on August 1, 1920 underwent the 
ceremony of prdyaschit (purification) in consequence of visiting 
England. On Western India Brahmans Mr. R. E. Enthoven’s 
Tribes and Castes of Bombay, Vol. i., pp. 213-54 should be carefully 
studied. 

1 E . R. E . article Bombay , Vol. 2, p. 788 (a). 

a E . P. K.^article Hinduism , Vol. 6, pp, 692-3. 



I 


LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM 


15 


13. The Maratha Character 

Marathas should be thought of chiefly as a hard-working, 
home-keeping, religious people. This judgement departs widely 
from that usual in our histories. Tennyson has fixed for us the 
Maratha character in one of his trenchant phrases, 1 the wild 
Maratha battle*, and the name of Assaye (however little the common 
man knows about it) stands for a day-long struggle against a host 
of indomitable swordsmen. Now the Marathas undoubtedly did a 
good deal of fighting. But in the last days of their exploits, when 
we examine the roll of their troops, it is astonishing how many of 
them were Arab mercenaries or predatory scoundrels from all parts 
of India. And without doubting that the famous cavalry always 
included the more adventurous of the young Marathas it is very 
uncertain how long after ShivajI’s time the Maratha army 
continued to be a really national force. Perhaps it is enough 
to say here that in this as in all reflections on character, whether 
national or individual, we soon light on those contradictions which 
further knowledge seems only to emphasize. A certain shrewd 
and pushing worldliness being quite characteristic of the country, 
especially among those Brahmans who have taken to worldly life, 
a roving, sword-clashing sort of Maratha there must once have 
been, but the conception with which this paragraph started comes 
ultimately as near the central type as any other. Of course we 
constantly fail to allow for varieties of type within a people, but 
Tukaram’s pages in themselves are sufficient proof that very 
different characters might have been found within the walls of 
any village in his day. 

How the Maratha army came to be so largely mercenary 
Justice Ranade has shown in his exhaustive examination of the 
Peshwa's Diaries . ‘The army’, says he, ‘in fact represented the 
Maratha nation more faithfully than any other single section of the 
population. ShivajI commenced his work of conquest of the forts 
round about Poona and in the Konkan with the help of the Mavajes 
and the Hetkaris. The army then consisted only of the Hasbam 
Infantry, who were armed generally with swords and matchlocks. 
When, later on, he descended into the plains, the cavalry became 
the chief agency of offensive warfare in the hands of the Marfithas. 
The old Mavales and Hetkaris were retained, but chiefly in 
command of the hill-forts. The cavalry, thus brought into 
existence, fought with the Moguls under Aurangzlb, and spread 
the terror of the Maratha name throughout India. They were not 
mercenaries in the usual sense of the word. They enlisted in the 
army either singly, or with their horses and men, for the fair 
season of the year, and when the rains approached, they returned 
to their homes, and cultivated their ancestral lands . . . The 
strength of the Maratha cavalry continued to be the most 
distinguishing feature till about the year 1750, when contact with 



16 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

the French and British armies . . . induced the Martha leaders 
to have recourse to this new agency, ... the Gardisor the trained 
battalions. The weakness of this new addition to the military 
force consisted in the fact that unlike the Mavales or the 
Shilledars, who each owned his plot of land and served the State, 
not as mercenaries, but as militia, the Gardis were mercenaries, 
pure and simple, made up of foreign recruits of different nationali- 
ties, who had to be paid fixed salaries all the year round, and only 
owed loyalty to the commanders who paid them their wages. 
There ivas no national element in this new force . . . The army, 
instead of being national, became mercenary in the worst sense of 
the word. Attached to the regular armies, there was a licensed 
host of free-booters, called Pendharls who . . . made a living by 
pillage of the enemy, and ultimately of their own people . . . The 
old infantry and cavalry had lost their stamina, and the new 
mercenaries, without leaders and without any knowledge of military 
science except the drill, were as ineffective as the Pendharls who 
accompanied them. It was this change which paralyzed the 
nation \ 1 

Later history has shown what wonderful fighters modern 
Marathas are and the world itself has resounded with the deeds 
of Maratha gallantry on many fields of action. Speaking in the 
Viceroy’s Council shortly before the conclusion of the world-war 
in 1918, the Hon. Mr. C. A. Kincaid observed : * Resourcefulness, 
courage, fertility of invention, endurance, all these qualities have 
been abundantly shown by Maratha regiments at the front . . . 

1 felt a glow of pride and pleasure when I learnt of the gallant 
deeds of the Maratha regiments who sailed ... to Irak, who 
occupied Basra, who took Kurna and won at Saiba . . . They 
fought in a way which would have roused the envy of the veterans 
of the Bhosles and the comrades of ChimnajI Appa*. * 

14. Maratha Family Life and its Women 

The Maratha bond is in all cases a strong one. In the case of the 
Brahmans it brings together various families under one roof in a 
common life to which Western institutions have no parallel. The 
imagination of a Western critic cannot in the least conceive in 
detail the positions and sentiments to which this gives rise; they 
belong to a world into which he has no means of entering. The 
only thing that need be said about it is one which is obvious, that 
it fetters the movements of its members, especially in youth, tq,a 
degree unknown among ourselves. That the movements of a 
Hindu are closely prescribed for him is indeed a matter of general 
knowledge but perhaps this knowledge usually takes account only 

1 Justice M. G. Ranade, Miscellaneous Writings , pp. 352 — 55. 

* Dnydnodaya , * Maratha Gallantry’, November 28, 1918. 



I LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM 17 

of the incidence of rules regarding food and so forth. To this we 
have to add such things as the influence of a horoscope and above 
all the social pressure of the joint-family system, which even in 
practical affairs never leaves a boy a moment’s freedom from the 
hour of his birth. It seems a marvel how any one born in this 
system can retain any sort of enterprise or self-determination, 
but we have always to remember that human nature reasserts 
itself in the most unexpected ways. As to what has actually hap- 
pened in the Hindu families we are much in the dark. No people 
have ever been so little given to self-revelation. 

Maratha women are of course not personally known to the 
foreigner. The women of the upper classes stay within their houses 
as much as possible; the peasant women may be seen at work 
everywhere and if you can speak their language are not always 
averse to a brief chat with you. Their language is racy and 
unrestrained and fully imbued with that humour which — though 
some people may not think so — is engrained in most Hindus. It 
would appear that they have, if not votes, yet substantial rights 
secured by custom, and are well able if these are invaded to defend 
themselves. Whatever tyranny is suffered by the child-wife or 
child-widow, it is at least inflicted chiefly by their own sex. 

15. Heroic Age of the Marathas 

We stated above that the Maratha. people had one hero, Shivaji, 
and one heroic age which was approaching when Tukaram was born 
in 1608. According to the commonly accepted date Shivaji was 
born in 1627, though as Jadunath Sarkar says: ‘The Zcdhe 
Chronology , which gives original and surprisingly coirect dates 
about later events in Shivaji’s life-story, places his birth in February 
1630\ l Investigation has established Shivaji’s character both as a 
man and a ruler. By one of those revolutions which the spirit of 
history loves he appears on the scene a few years after the great 
Akbar, from whom India seems about to receive an impulse towards 
unity, political and religious, that will mould all her future history. 
The hope thus held forth is at once by destiny dispelled. With 
Akbar the Mogul system culminates and with him it disappears. 
His principles and visions vanish. His narrow-minded successor 
sweeps all. away, and creating nothing to replace what he destroys, 
leaves chaos behind him after two generations of power. The re- 
constructing force comes from a quarter where no one looks for it — 
the Deccan, regarded by Aurangzlb as ‘ infidels’ land 
• 

16. Shivaji, Tukaram and Ramdas 

Maharashtra cannot have seemed a region specially fitted to 
produce a revived and energetic Hinduism. But it was there that 

1 Shivaji and His Times published by M. C. Sarkar & Soi^s, Calcutta. 

3 



U LtFE A HD TEACHING OF TUEARaM cH. 

the hour found the man. Among the few good families of the 
country was that of a small jaglrdclr near Poona in which Shivaji 
was born. He was from his earliest years a strict and earnest 
Hindu and among the sentiments of his early manhood was a 
keen resentment against the slights and injuries which his faith 
suffered from the Government of Aurangzlb (1658-1707). He knew 
the natural sources of military strength in the Deccan, and what 
is even more important there breathed through his actions a 
rude democratic spirit which woke his countrymen into vigorous life 
and made them devoted and fearless soldiers. It would be outside 
the scope of these pages to follow his career. We need at present 
only notice that Tukaram lived in the darkness preceding this dawn. 
He died in 1650 when Shivaji was dreaming dreams of a perilous 
future. There is nothing in Tukaram’s poems to show that he 
gave much thought to the Mahommedans or considered that what 
The times needed was a political revolution. His brief connection 
with Shivaji will be discussed elsewhere. 

Born in the same year as Tukaram, the poet Ramdas (1608- 
1681) outlived him by more than thirty years. Just as Shivaji's 
connexion with Tukaram is surrounded with a measure of un- 
certainty, so also experts have differed as to the extent of the 
relation between Shivaji and Ramdas. Some have held that 
Ramdas was the ‘ guide and inspired of Shivaji’s whole policy 
through the critical years which led up to Shivaji's kingship, 
thus wielding potent influence in the building up of the Maratha 
kingdom. Others hold it*to be ‘ proved conclusively that Ramdas 
had nothing to do with the great work of winning independence 
from the Mahommedan which Shivaji had undertaken and brought 
to a successful issue even before they met in 1672 *. if this latter 
conclusion be accepted then the reference to Ramdas in the letter 
to Shivaji from Tukaram — who died in 1650 — must be regarded as 
an interpolation. The whole subject, however, is still under 
discussion. 1 


17. The Greeting of Hindus 

Though it probably takes us beyond TukaratiTs day there is one 
story told of Shivaji and Ramdas which is worth repeating since it 
refers to the supposed origin of those well-known words Ram Ram 
by which Maratbas in Western India greet one another. If is said 
that Shivaji begged Ramdas to live with him and let him serve 

1 See Prof. Bhate’s Marathi book, Sajjangad and Samarth Ramdas ; /. /, 
Jan. 1919, vol. xiii, pp. 157-68 where the authorities on both sides are given; 
Jan. 1916 vol. ix, pp. 197-8; Mr. G. K. Chandorkar in Kesari, June 26, 1906, 
Mr. K. A. Kduskar’s Life of Shivaji in Marathi, pp. 507-14,551-62 where 
other conclusive evidence is adduced; Kincaid and Parasnis, in //, M. P, pp. 
191-2, and Mr. V. L. Bhawe in Af, Say. (pp. 219,415), with the Marathi daily 
LG/c Sangnthm for April 25, 1920 giving a lecture by Mr. D. Potdar. 



I 


LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM 


19 


him as he had done for a single day at Jaranda. Ramdas requested 
in return that, instead of serving him, ShivajI would grant him 
three boons. ShivajI said that he would do so gladly. The third 
one was that ShivajI should honour the hero- god Ramchandra by 
ordering his subjects when they met to say to each other by way 
of greeting, Ram Ram . ShivajI granted these boons and Ram Ram 
are still the words of greeting used by Marathas when they meet, 
Mahars, Chambhars and other depressed castes using the word 
Johar ,‘ the ancient form of salutation, just as Brahmans use 
Namaskar .* The above legend may have to be rejected as 
unhistorical, seeing that Tukaram himself has an abhaiig with the 
words of this same greeting, though of course the abhaiig itself 
may be an interpolation. 

1 8. The Maratha National Movement 

It only remains to note the fact, all-important for gaining any 
true conception of the heroic age of the Marathas, that in the days 
of Tukaram, ShivajI and Ramdas there was a linking together of 
the forces of the Maratha nation, both material and moral, which 
contributed to a movement of enduring significance in Indian 
history. This has been very happily expressed by Prof. Limaye : 
1 We are inclined to hold that there were two factors in the national 
movement of Maharashtra. That representing material power was 
contributed by the Maratha nobles who opposed ShivajI in the first 
instance. The moral force of the movement was derived from the 
preaching of the great saints, while ShivajI stands for the synthesis 
of the two. Himself the son of a great Maratha nobleman and 
as such possessed of power and influence, he was thoroughly imbued 
with the spirit of the teaching of the saints. Inspired by their 
high ideals, he strove to realize them in his life, and, in doing so, 
was prepared to risk both his power and position. That is the 
significance of Shivajl’s life-work, and it is this which entitles him 
to rank by the side of the greatest of the world’s heroes \ 3 Hence 
it can be said with truth that ‘the Marathas are a nation, and from 
the.Brahman to the ryot they glory in the fact .* 4 

If, then, Shivajl’s glory consists in the fact that he welded the 
scattered Marathas into a kingdom, why was this kingdom so short- 
lived, suffering disruption less than nine years after Shivajl’s death ? 
Dr. Rabindranath Tagore thus explains: ‘ShivajI aimed at 
preserving the rents and holes in our body social ; he wished to save 
from the Mog;ul attack a Hindu society of which ceremonial 
distinctions and isolation of castes are the very breath of life. He 
wanted to make this heterogeneous society triumphant over all 
India ! He wove ropes of sand ; he attempted the impossible. It is 

1 Originally a war-cry of the Rajputs. 

* H. M. P„ pp. 91-2. 

8 Professor H. G. Limaye, m.a., F. C. Af,, February 1919, p. 167. 

4 Ac worth's Poicadas , or Marathi Ballads, celebrating the exploits of 
fyfarltha heroes, iii. * 



20 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM c». 

beyond the power of any man, it is opposed to the divine law of 
the universe, to establish the swarctj of such a caste-ridden, isolated, 
internally-torn sect over a vast continent like India.’ 1 

With this diagnosis agrees that of the Maratha historian, 
Justice Ranade, who has shown that while the kingdom of, the 
Peshwas anticipated some of the modern Maratha movements fpr 
social refotm, it contained within itself the seeds of its own 
decay. The later decline must not, however, be allowed to obscure 
the view first advocated by the late Hon. Mr. Justice Telang in his 
Gleanings from the Bak heirs that the Maratha rulers, showed 
4 greater moral courage and liberality of sentiment* than people 
have been disposed to give them credit for, 9 Nevertheless, 
4 it is a matter of history that the Maratha Confederacy or Empire— 
the most considerable Hindu national achievement in historic 
times — broke on the rock of caste’, the effect of this being felt 
‘*pven to-day in, the embittered feelings between the Brahmins and 
the Marathas round about Poona V s 

19. The Literature of the Maratha Bhaktas (Saints) 

If we are to understand the true origin and force of the 
Maratha movement and its significance for the India of to-day we 
must add to the ‘two factors’ of Prof. Limaye a third force 
which was at work — that of literature and specially the literature 
of the Bhakti movement in Maharashtra. There can be no 
question that this literature has been greatly underrated by 
Western scholars, but of late years it has been coming to its 
own. Prof, Patwardhan in his Wilson Philological Lectures 
has shown that * Marathi literature, even before it came into 
contact with the literature of the West, had reached a state of 
development and growth both quantitatively and qualitatively 
that the people of Maharashtra may well be proud of, and much 
the same has been said by Mr. L. J. Sedgwick, I.C.S. : 6 *‘ Western 
scholars may hardly be aware that there exists in Marathi a 
bhakti literature, which in age, in volume, and in quality can 
equal, if not surpass, the Hindi. Indeed 1 would go further, 
and say that viewed from any standpoint of criticism the ovi 
poems of Mahlpatl, and the abhahgs of Namdev, Eknath, Tukaram 
and Ramdas must be placed among the finest of the poetic 
productions of the world .... We are in the presence of 
a strange world of saints and poets, ... a religion which had 
dominated the thoughts of the lower and middle classes in the 
Deccan. Bhakti in this part of India centres entirely round this 

1 Quoted by Jadunath Sarkar in Shivaj 1 and His Times , pp. 483-4 

2 Justice M. G. Ranade, Miscellaneous Writings , pp. 372-80. 

8 The Indian Social Reformer , October 17, 1920* 

4 F.C.AP; July 1912, pp. 31-2. 

A .S. Bo„ Vol. 23, No. 65, pp. 109-10, 



I 


MjAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAMi 


21 


one god—the god Vifboba . . * - Upon the worship ©£ this deity 
there has been built-up in Marathi a literature of great extent :and 
beauty. 1 1 covers a period from about a.d. .1290, to the present 
day, but the best period ends with the death 6f Mahipati in 1791 
A.D. It may be divided into two main portions : hymns, mostly in 
the tnetrical form known as abhaugs but also partly in other formri, 
and especially narrative-lives of the saints in the metre known as 
the ovt\ Of the former the four great exponents are Namdev, 
Eknath, . Tukaram and Ramdas (the last-named being a Rama 
worshipper), while the latter is represented mainly by Mahipati, 
whose Bhaktivijdya , BhaktilihJmrita, etc. were suggested by the 
JBhakiamdla of Nabaji, the Hindu ppet. . . „ Of the three 
Vitthcila bhakta abliaiig writers Tuktiram is by the far the most 
popular/ 

^o. Democratizing: Influence of the Maratha Poets 

The unique service rendered by the saints and prophets of 
Maharashtra was long ago pointed out by the late Justice M. G. 
Ranade who showed that as a result of their work ‘ there came 
into existence the beginnings of a national feeling’ which represen- 
ted nothing less than ‘ spiritual emancipation of the national mind \ 
This has been dealt with more recently by Prof. Patwardhan who 
states : * For five successive centuries Maharashtra was the abode 
of that noblest and truest of all democracies, the democracy of 
the Bhokti school. The whole of the Marathi Literature of 
those centuries is a literature of Spiritual Democracy — it breathes 
the breath of equality, of fraternity and of spiritual liberty. . . . 
The Blicikti school democratized literature, so that all those that 
would, could and did bear their share in the building up of the grand 
edifice. There were Brahmans, Sudras, Shimpis or tailors, Kum- 
bhars or potters, Nhavls or barbers, even Mahars or low castes, 
that felt the call of the Divine Muse, and contributed their own 
little streamlet to the general flood. . . . The democratization 
of Literature had one inevitable result. It was to nationalize it. 
. . . The literature was no longer of the Brahmans or Sudras or 
Mahars. It was Marathi Literature and every one, whatever his 
caste or creed, trade or profession, learned to love it and labour 
for it. . . . The Bhakti school poets thus not only made the liter- 
ature but also made the people a nation. They nationalized the 
literature’. 1 * How far these facts bear on the modern history of 
India has been shown by Jadunath Sarkar : ‘ The Marathas 
have a historic advantage of unique importance in the India of 
to-day. Their near ancestors had faced death on a hundred battle- 
fields, ba*J led armies and debated in the chamber of diplomacy, 
had managed the finances of kingdoms and grappled with the 
problems of empire ; they had helped to make Indian history/ 8 

1 F. C. M. July 1919, pp. 34-5. / (j Q 

a Skiviljl and Ilis Times , pp. 20-21. ® 



i ; 

LI.. 


*'•'» Kim on 
- — UjfU 



22 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 

Sir C. Sankaran Nair has similarly explained the uniqueness of 
Maratha influence in the making of India. In a remarkable 
address at Leeds University, September 7, 1920, after speaking of 
the 1 great national revival in the Maratha country \ he quoted 
with approval the following opinion of Major Evans Bell : 4 The 
last chapters of self-development and self-independence in India 
belong to the Western region. The Maratha Confederation 
emancipated the Hindus and ... set up religious and social 
tolerance. . . . The Hindu revival of the seventeenth and eight- 
eenth centuries which paved the way for British intervention, 
was a movement of social and political progress, in which the 
Marathas took the lead,, it maybe said, unconsciously, instinctively, 
without premeditation or prevision/ 1 

If the political 4 courage ’ of the city of Bombay is evidenced 
by its ‘anxiety to enfranchise five million (Indian) women at the 
same time as five million men* as was affirmed by Sir J. D. 
Rees, * a courage, he added, which is in deep contrast with 4 the 
conservatism of rural India*; and if Lord Sinha, first Indian 
Governor, could say that 4 it was to the political leaders of Bom- 
bay that he always looked for instruction and guidance* ; a then 
such high political distinction is to be traced back to the nation- 
alizing and democratizing influence of the Maratha poet-saints. 
The greatest of these nationalizing and democratizing forces in 
the life of Western India — Tukaram — we are to study in this 
book. 

• 

1 The Indian Social Reformer , Nov. 14, 1920. 

2 Fortnightly Review , 1920. 

H A speech in Bombay, Dec. 5, 1920. 




Vaishnavism is admittedly what is called the Bhakti or Devotional wor- 
ship which is inconsistent with the spirit cf caste. 

Sir C. Sankaran Nail* at Leeds University, September 7, 1920 
THE BESETTING GOD 

Of God my meat and drink I ipake, 

God is the bed on which I lie. 

God is whate’er I give or take ; 

God’s constant fellowship have I 

For God is here and God is there — ** 

No place that empty is of him. 

* Yea, lady Vitim, I declare, 

I fill the world up to the brim. 

Translated from Janabal, NAmdev's domestic servant (Hth 
century), by Dr. Macnicol, Psalms of Marti tha Saints, 
p. 50. 


THE SCOKNER 

Who praises and who scorns me too, 

Both are my mother. Ay, I view 

My scorners as my mother true. 

• 

For such are kind to me. They say 
Hard words that wash my soil away. 

As does a mother's bathing. They. 

Are friends indeed and strength supply 
To me. Were I to blame them, why, 

The guilty one would then be I, 

O sweet is scorning, setting free * 

From bondage of duality. 

A gracious benefactor he. 

Before the scorner bow we low. 

Blest be his mother ; for 1 know 
Who suffer scorn to Freedom go. 

Translated from Bhdvdrtha Rdmdyana (chap I) of Ekanath 
(1548-99) by Dr. Macnicol, Psalms of Mardthd Saints, 
p. 53. 



Chapter 2 

The Vaishnava Hinduism of Tnkaram’s Day 

Before introducing Tukaram it is necessary to say something 
about the religious system with which he was connected. 

i. Characteristics of Hinduism in General 

It was not until the Mohammedan invasions that the name 
‘ Hindu* passed into use for the people of India. Occasionally 
lawgivers have found themselves compelled to try to define a Hindu. 
The attempt has always failed, since, in practice, those Indians 
are Hindus who are neither Mohammedans nor Jews nor Parsis nor 
Christians nor members of any other Indian community that can 
be defined or disposed of. Nevertheless, something may be done 
to understand a word so often used, if we are careful not to beg any 
questions. If we use the word of the prevalent type of life and 
belief which the Mohammedans found in India we may describe 
Hindus as marked by the following characteristics. Their social 
system is based on caste and they recognize the spiritual ascen- 
dancy of the Brahmans. They venerate the Vedas and the cow. 
They worship and believe in one or more of the usual Hindu gods, 
in Vishnu or his avataras , in Siva or in others. They believe 
in the cycle of rebirth. They use images in religious worship. To 
these characteristics others might be added, frequently but not 
invariably associated with them . 1 

Research is made difficult by the great paucity of Indian 
historical works. * Hindus wrote no formal history at any period; 
for the early centuries there are no archaeological remains that 
throw any light on the course of events ; nor is any definite 
information provided by nations outside India ’. 2 Nor is research 
made any easier by the pantheistic bent of the Indian mind. It 
might be said with truth that the popular mind is always careless of 
distinctions, but this indifference is more prevalent in India than in 
any other country. In points of daily routine vital to the caste 
system the sense of distinction is acute and active but in other 
matters it hardly exists. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar has more than 
cfnce pointed out this weakness o£ Indian research. In his 
Vaishnavism he writes : 1 Unfortunately the historical spirit has 

1 See Dr. Farquhar’s concise Primer of Hinduism , especially chapters xiii 
and xiv on 1 What it is to be a Hindu to-day ’ and * The religion of the lower 
classes *. 

* J. N. Farquhar, O.R.L.I., p. 3. 



26 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

by no means been the distinguishing feature of the intellectual 
life of us Indians, and we often confuse different persons together 
and attribute to one what belongs to another , . 1 2 In a remarkable 
paper prepared for the Oriental Conference held in Poona, 
November, 1919, he diagnosed this weakness as follows: ‘A 
young man, the editor of a good many Sanskrit works, asks me 
with a derisive smile what the necessity was of naming a MS., 
of showing the country it came from and the age in which it was 
written. He did not know that when a judge noted down the age 
of a witness appearing before him, the name of the caste, or the 
community, or country to which he belonged, he got information 
from him which had a value in the estimate of the evidence. 
Similarly another young man, not fully acquainted with the critical 
method, said that Namdev and Dnyandev were contemporaries, 
but that difference between their languages was due to the 
mtstakes of successive scribes. Marathi literature which has come 
down to us is full of such strange theories. It is a very disagreeable 
matter to dwell at this length on the faults of our Indian scholars, 
but it is an allegiance which I owe to truth/ 

This spirit in religious enquiries means that you soon reach 
the point where you are told that one god is the same as another, or 
that God is the same as the world — Pantheism, which is not so 
much a system as a bent of mind. 

One more characteristic mark of a Hindu worth noting here, 
and one which illuminates one aspect of the enduring religiousness 
of India, is his willingness fo believe that every man should follow 
the dictates, and observe the practices, of that religion in which 
he was born. This helps to explain on the one hand his tolerance 
of the Christian religion and on the other hand his slowness to 
accept any form of faith other than that handed down from his 
forefathers. 


2. Vishnu’s Place in the Hindu System , 

Among the puzzling problems of the Hindu religion one of the 
most puzzling and interesting is the question who Vishnu is and 
what part he has played in the Hindu system. The question is all 
the more important because the type of Hinduism prevalent in 
Tukaram’s land, and the popular literature of Tukaram’s people, 
both belonged largely to the Vaishnava school. 3 It is a question 
taking us to the very heart of the religion of Tukaram, for the 
name Vithoba itself, the name of the god so closely identified 
with Krisna and so dear* to Tukaram, is viewed by the beet 
authorities as a corruption of the name Vishpu, 

Vishnu is a Vedic god, being regarded as one of the upper gods 
in the Vedas. He is by no means supreme even in the two great 


1 V.S.M.R.S . , etc., p. 92. 

2 Vaishnava is the adjective from Vishnu. 



ii VAISHNAVA HINDUISM OF TUKARAM’S DAY 27 


epics of India, the Mahdbhdrata and the Rftm<Zyana % though both 
books were written with a view to exalting his position. He is the 
centre of the first real sect, the Vaishnavas, who derive their name 
from him, and who gave forth a hook which has come to be 
regarded as India’s most sacred book — the Bhagavadgita. By 
means of this book the followers of Vishnu created the first Hindu 
theism, their method being to unite Vishnu on the one hand with 
Brahman and on the other with Krisna. The chapter in the 
Bhagavadgita containing the thopsand names of Vishnu is one of 
the greatest treasures of devout Vaishnavas. 1 

Since ‘ the Vaishnavas of the Maratha country are Bhagavatas* 9 
it is well to note specially the place occupied by Vishnu in the 
religion of the Bhagavatas. ‘The word Bhagavata has two 
meanings in modern Hinduism. It is first an epithet used of 
Vaishnavas generally, as those who use the Bhagavat-Sastra, or 
body of works which revere Vishnu as Bhagaviin. It is used, in 
the second place, of a special community of Vaishnavas . . . who 
really adore Vishnu, but recognise the equality of the two gods *, 
Vishnu and Siva, and retain Vedic rites. 8 When we realise that it 
was probably, between A. I). 200 and A. D. 550 that the worship of 
Vishnu and Siva as equal, or as one, was instituted, we might 
agree to the theory that 4 the worship of Siva and Vishnu as one 
was a compromise meant to reconcile warring sectaries*. Investi- 
gators, however, suggest another explanation, viz., that ‘the 
metaphysical equality of Vishnu and Siva* had its origin in the 
Bhagavata community referred to above. How very closely 
connected all this is with the subject of this book is shown by 
another excerpt. ‘ The Bhagavatas of the Maratha country to-day 
form a popular bhakti movement. . . . The god is -Vitthal or 
Vithoba; both these names are local variations of Vishnu. The 
chief centres are Pandharpur, Alandl and Dehu, but there are 
numerous shrines throughout the country. In the chief temple of 
Pandharpur, Vitthal wears a curious sort of crown which the 
priests say is Siva’s linga ; so that the image, standing for both 
gods, is truly Bhagavata \ 4 (See a paragraph on &iva in chap. 6). 

How Vithoba of Pandharpur, so dear to Tukaram, comes to 
have any connection with Vishnu will become clearer in light of 
later paragraphs. 


3. The Vaishnava Idea of Avatara 

One of the most interesting features of Vishnu is his recurring 
avataras. The conception will bear more enquiry than it has 
received, for 4 we do not know how the Vaishnavas were led to 

1 See J. N. Farquhar, O.R.LJ.i Index under the word ‘Vishnu’, p, 449, 

• Ibid., p. 234. 

* Ibid ., p. 142. 

4 Ibid., p. 301. 



28 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

develop the doctrine. The idea appears suddenly/ 1 We have 
here three aspects calling for elucidation, viz., the exact meaning 
of the word avatdra — one of the most important words in 
Vaishnavite Hinduism; the important place occupied in the 
Vaishnavite religion of Tukaram by the idea of avatnra\ the 
fundamental difference between this idea and the Christian 
doctrine of incarnation. The first two we deal with now, the 
last in a brief appendix (see Appendix 1). 

i. The word avatdra meaps by derivation a descent or 
appearance on a scene. It has been used and might still be used 
of the appearance of mortal men ; e.g., Tukaram is commonly 
regarded as an avatclra of his predecessor Namdev. 

ii. It is specifically used of the sudden appearance of a deva 
(god). The devas (gods) in general were conceived as possessing 
the power of rendering themselves visible or invisible at will, and 
ofrtransporting themselves at will to any part of the world. We 
read of various deities doing this, even minor deities. 

iii. In the case of Vishnu we have the added idea that his 
manifestations were always for the purpose of helping men (or 
animals like the elephant Gajendra) in distress. 

iv. The word avat&ra thus became specially connected with 
Vishnu. It is now seldom used in connection with any other deity. 

v. The English term ‘ incarnation ’ is a dangerous equivalent 
for it : the questions which this word suggests never presented 
themselves to the Hindu mind. An avatara is a very simple 
expedient. 

vi. As to the origin of the conception it is not necessary to 
trouble ourselves much. It is not Vedic. It is, however, very 
natural and one rather wonders that more is not heard of avatdras 
among other races. The Greeks, for instance, found it easy to 
believe that the gods appeared on the battle field to help men : 
Hercules in the story appears to the distressed carter. These 
are avatftras , but such occurrences play no great part f in Greek 
legend as a whole. We may say perhaps that the work performed 
by the Hindu avataras is performed for the Greeks by heroes — 
the slaying of demons and so forth. The Greeks were a self- 
reliant race. 

vii. It may be asked if the deva (god) is related to the body 
which he assumes in the same way as the human spirit is related 
to its bodily tenement. Probably, however, the question has not 
struck Hindu theologians. 

4. Elasticity of the Vaishnava Term Avatara 

In modern times the chief avataras of Vishnu have been 
listed and fixed at ten : fish, tortoise, boar, the man-lion, the dwarf, 
Parashuram, Rama, Kjrisna, Buddha, Kalki. This, however, 
1 See J. N. Farquhar, O.R.LJ., pp« 84-5. 



II VAISHNAVA HINDUISM OF TUKARAM’S DAY 29 


is'quite a modern idea. In older writers the number varies a good 
deal. It is a curious fact that Buddha, has somehow found a 
place in the list. Who would suppose that Buddha was the for- 
midable enemy of Vishnu and indeed of all gods ? Now, however, 
that all danger from Buddha has passed away, due respect is paid 
to his eminence by transforming him into a god himself! A 
positivist might sigh for the accommodating disposition of the popular 
mind which solves a cardinal problem with such ease. How the 
number ten actually obtained currency does not seem to be known. 

In The Indian ^ Social Reformer of September 1919, Mr. 
Manilal Parekh, in a letter which the editor published under the 
heading ‘ The Hindu Appreciation of Christ,' observed : ‘ The 
word avatdra is very loosely used by the majority of Hindus. 
Most people entirely overlook the serious differences that have been 
made between one avatdra and another by such Theistic schools 
of thought as the Vaishnava. Most of these schools, which alone 
can consistently use that term L look upon only Krisna as the 
Purdna Avatdra , and others as Amcd avatdra . This practically 
means that Krisna is the avatdra for them in the same sense in 
which Christ is the avatdra for the Christians.’ The same journal, 1 
as an illustration of what ‘ represents the attitude of India to 
Christ ', stated : * One of the most powerful Hindu religious 

reformers of recent years was the late Swami Vivekananda. He 
had a profound reverence for Christ, and so had his Master, 
Ramkrishna Paramahamsa. Pandit Sivanath Sastry in his book 
Men I Have Seen relates that a Christian preacher who was the 
Pandit’s friend once accompanied him on a visit to Ramkrishna. 
When he introduced his friend to the Paramahamsa, Ramkrishna 
bowed his head to the ground and said, “ l bow again and again at 
the feet of Jesus.” The Christian gentlemen asked : “ How is it, 

Sir, that ypu bow at the feet of Christ ? What do you think of 
Him ?” “ Why, I look upon him as an incarnation of God— an 
incarnation like our Rama or Krisna. Don't you know there is a 
passage in the Bhdgwat where it is said that the incarnations of 
Vishnu or the Supreme Being are innumerable ?” ’ 

How fundamental to Vaishnava Hinduism is the theory of 
repeated avatdras and how great a part it has played in India’s 
religious history Dr. Soderblom shows : 2 * * The conception of the 
solitary incarnation of deity is peculiar to Christianity. In India 
the development of the idea resulted in an exactly opposite view, 
. . . constant increase in the number of embodiments — we find 
successively the figure ten, twelve, twenty-two, twenty-four, twenty- 
eight — until at length they are spoken of as innumerable so that the 
great teachers of any religion whatever . . . could be numbered 
among the avatdras .’ Prof. Jacobi remarks, 8 that ‘when a local 

1 The Indian Social Reformer , September 14, 1919. 

fl E. R . E. Vol. vii, p. 184. 

» E, R . E . Vol. vii, p. 197. 



30 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


saint has a proper shrine where he is worshipped, and his fame 
continues to increase, a legend is sure to be fabricated which 
.declares him an avcitUra of some god or rishi.' Every part of 
India can provide its'own illustrations of the above. 

5. Vishnu’s Most Popular Avatftra 


We may next consider what is commonly stated to be the 
most popular avatdra of Vishnu. Vasudeva appears as a com- 
mon name of Vishnu and as an epithet of Krisna. There is 
scanty but genuine evidence of a worship of Vasudeva which Sir 
R. G. Bhandarkar is inclined to date very early and to rate very 
highly as an impulse towards monotheism, which played an 
important part in later Hinduism. In the Veda Krisna is only 
the name of a rishi or sage and it is uncertain whether at the later 
stage Vasudeva is to be considered as personally identified with the 
rishi Krisna. If Krisna the warrior prince whom we meet in the 
Bhagavadgltd was a historic personage, then he has been trans- 
formed into a religious teacher and an avatdra of the supreme 
spirit Vishnu. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar surmises that there may have 
been a historic Krisna born among the pastoral tribe called the 
Ahirs, and his fame may have led to his identification with Krisna, 
the warrior prince, who was already identified with the much older 
Vishnu and Vasudeva. 1 Krisna and Vasudeva on this theory are 
distinct, the latter teaching his people monotheism as early as the 
sixth century B.c. Some scholars hold this view to be unhistorical 
on the ground that 1 there is certainly no clear evidence of the 
existence of a monotheistic faith during those early centuries \ 2 

6 . The 4 Historicity * of Krishna 

The whole question of Krisna and his ‘historicity’ has in 
recent years been engaging the attention of Indian scholars. In 
the month of July, 1920 Pandit Sitanath Tattvabhushan contri- 
buted to The Indian Messenger , the organ of the Sadharan Brahmo 
Samaj, a series of articles on * The Bhagavat Dharma \ described 
as 1 a grand and far-reaching movement * which 4 has affected all 
Indian forms of religion \ The purpose of the articles was 
stated thus : 4 Vasudeva was originally only a particular conception 
of God and not a historical person and Krisna’ s historicity 
as a religious teacher is more than doubtful.’ After speaking of the 
4 fictitious nature of the Mahdbhdrata story, specially of its 
central figure, Krisna,* the Pandit went on to say : 4 As • to 
Krisna, his relation with the main story of the Mahdbhdrata is 
slight, and in the original narration of the war he may have been 
quite absent. Even when introduced into the poem, he was 

1 V.S.M.R.S., p. 37 

9 J. N. Farquhar, O.R.LJ . , p, 50. 



II VAISHNAVA HINDUISM OF TUKARAM # S DAY 31 


perhaps only a hero and politician, and not God incarnate. 
The Bhagavadgltct and the other Glids and religious dissertations 
in the Mahctbhctrata in which Krisna appears prominently as a 
religious teacher and God incarnate, are evidently very late 
additions to the original epic. This is clear from the abrupt way 
in which some of them, specially the Bhagavadgltci , are introduced 
into the body of the poem, like patches of new cloth sewn with 
an old piece, and from the knowledge of later times, manners 
and religious doctrines which they betray. But there are indica- 
tions, however slight, to show that the worship of Krisna as a hero 
or demi-god existed in the country as early as 300 B.C. . . . 
The temptation to invent a god or to develop and popularize 
a god already receiving worship from some people, was very 
great. The secret of the spread of Buddhism must soon have been 
found out by the Brahmans. It was the position of Buddha as 
the central figure in his religion. The &istras appeal only to 
the learned few; a person — one realising to some extent at 
least the popular ideals of excellence — appeals to all. Before the 
rise or popularization of Krisna-worship the rapid progress of 
Buddhism must have deeply alarmed the leaders of Vedic society 
and set them thinking of the best way to stem the tide. Besides the 
other methods adopted, of which we need not speak, the setting up 
of a rival to Buddha must have commended itself as the most 
important . . . And as Buddha was by birth a Kshatriya and by 
character a religious teacher, so was his rival, Krisna, conceived 
to be, though perhaps the warlike predilections of the epic poets 
made him more of a warrior than became his mission as a 
religious teacher. This seems to us to be the origin of the 
so-called Bhagavat Dharma, which was indebted not only for 
many of its teachings, but also for the conception of its central 
figure, to Buddhism. Krisna Vasudeva was not its author, but its 
product . . . How then was Vedic theism to be conserved ? On 
what line should it develop ? How were the broken forces of 
Brahmanism to be rallied ? The Bhagavat Dharma, or, to call it by 
its more correct name, Vaishnavism, was an answer to these 
questions ... It was given mostly in the name of one fancied 
teacher, that of Krisna Vasudeva. The earlier Vaishnavas knew 
he was not historical.’ We have seen no answer to this statement. 

7. Modern Indian Views of the Krishna Legend 

•If the Vaishnavite or devotee of bhcikti has not been burdened 
with relics of nature-worship which cling to some forms of 
Hinduism, he has had his own burden in the legends connected with 
Krisna as the * cowherd \ 1 Perhaps indeed we ought not to call 

1 For an English translation of TukSram’s poems on this unsavoury topic 
see F. and M% % Vol. ii, pp. 1-29. • 



32 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

them a burden, for they have been immensely popular, but the more 
elevated spirits in Hinduism have wondered what to make of them. 
Of course they have tried allegory, that easy refuge of the inter- 
preter, but they have probably wished the problem did not lie 
before them. Perhaps, indeed, the most interesting difference that 
has arisen between the various Vaisbpava schools has been the 
problem as to what attitude they should adopt towards these 
legends depicting Krisna as taking supreme pleasure in sexual inter- 
course and enjoying it on a vast scale, especially with a favourite 
mistress named Radha. It is possible to allegorize all this, and 
to say that ultimately nothing is meant except that to the pure all 
things are pure. In practice, however, the prominence given by 
some Vaishnavas to this aspect of Krispa’s activities has had 
most unpleasant results and the nobler spirits in Hinduism have 
turned their thoughts to other aspects of his story. Some suppose 
these legends are deliberate allegory. Now allegory has certainly 
played a part in the expository methods of Hinduism as of some 
other faiths, but as to how large that part was or how far it may 
have determined the developments of Hinduism there is room for 
vast difference of opinion. We will only say that the critic who 
tries to explain things allegorically is a lost man. It is so easy, 
so tempting a procedure that he soon sets no limits to its use : he 
considers it a way out of every difficulty. Certainly if the Krisna 
legends were allegories, those who devised them conferred a great 
disadvantage on their system. 

Sir R. G. Bhandarkar has described the 4 frolic ’ legends as 4 an 
after-growth 9 in the remarkable sentence : 4 The dalliance of 

Krisna with cowherdesses, which introduced an element incon- 
sistent with the advance of morality into, the Vasudeva religion, 
was also “an after-growth.” Mr. M. K. Gandhi has applied the 
allegorizing method to the Gltd so far as to say that 4 the Gltd is an 
allegory in favour of the doctrine of non-resistance.’ t)n this The 
Indian Social Reformer for August 24, 1919 made the pertinent 
comment : 4 This is sheer casuistry.’ Concerning the moral diffi- 
culty surrounding Krisna’s name the Reformer remarked : 4 If 
people would use their common sense — even apart from all question 
of charity — it must be obvious that the 44 eroticism ” of, Krisna’s 
youth is merely the exuberance of the poetic chroniclers.’ But 
even the most bountiful supply, whether of 4 common sense * or of 
‘charity \ will not solve what is one of the most baffling problems 
connected with the historical developments of India’s chief religion 
and to fall back upon 4 the obvious 4 is to give up the case in sheer 
despair. This book is not the place for entering at length on ‘such 
questions as whether there was such a person as Kpspa, whether 
the Kpspa of the Gltd was the Krisna of the Purdna , whether 
the Gltd was composed by Krisna at all, whether Kpspa is a 
Hinduised edition of Christ.’ 9 Still further is it from the purpose of 

* \ V.S.M.R*S, t p. 38. 

* Indian Social Reformer , September 7, 1919. 



l% VAISHNAVA HINDUISM OF TUKARAM'S DAY 33 


this book to go about 4 trying to discredit names and ideas held in 
deep veneration by the people *. 1 When, however, we are told 
positively that 4 Krisna was the great leader and teacher who at a 
time of dire peril and confusion gave India the watchword which 
has preserved her to this day something is stated as a historic 
fact which by such a first-rate authority as Sir R. G. Bhandarkar 
is only hazarded as a possibility and even then only by virtue of 
4 the Hindu habit of thought of identifying one god with another 
by regarding the latter either as forms or incarnations of the former 
and thus evolving monotheism out of polytheism. ’ 2 


8. The Text-Book of Vaishnavite Bhakti 

The teachings by which the figure of Vishnu-Krisna has kept 
its place in India are found in their authoritative form in the 
Bhagavadglta. Though not very short, this is condensed and 
intricate and presupposes ages of philosophic discussion. Some 
have held it to be at the bottom a compromise between different 
views, but see below for other possibilities. Its method has been 
compared with that of the Anglican Prayer-book, in the form for 
the rite of the Eucharist, where the consecrated bread is handed 
to the worshipper with a formula which places side by side two 
opposite views of its nature. The result has been — whether inten- 
tionally or not — that just as members of the Church have been 
divided as to which view the Church holds, so Hindus are divided 
as to whether the Gita takes the dvaita or the advaita (pantheistic) 
view of the divine nature. 

Without pretending to expound the Gita or to sum up its views 
we may safely call it the text-book of bhakti , a word which means 
loving devotion, the bhakti school being those W’ho hold that man’s 
salvation (however this may be defined) is accomplished by loving 
devotion to God as personal. Whether the author of the Gita was 
trying to reconcile the various schools of thought in his day, or 
whether his is the fountain from which those schools subsequently 
flowed, the ideas of the book, once launched into the Hindu world, 
have had a long history and a powerful influence over men. 

Dr. Farquhar considers the enquiry concerning 4 the far-famed 
Bhagavadglta ’ has advanced a distinct stage. He states that 
4 most modern scholars recognize that, in its present form, it can 
scarcely be earlier than the first or second century a.d.,* whereas 
the late Justice Telang and Sir R. G. Bhandarkar have held 
it * belonged to the fourth century B.C. The Vaishnavas or 
worshippers of Vishnu, at first only a heterodox sect, were 
finally established as a real force in Hinduism under the powerful 
influence of the two great reformation movements represented by 

1 Indian Social Reformer, September 7th, 1919. 

2 V. S. M. R. S., p. 19. 

5 



34 


LIFE AND* TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


CH. 


Buddhism and Jainism, and the Gita is their product. If it is ‘the 
expression of the earliest attempt made in India to rise to a theistic 
faith and theology,* then the earliest Indian Theism is much later 
than has been hitherto supposed. The poem seeks to give all 
Vaishiiavas a truly spiritual religion by bringing ‘ release* within 
reach of all men and women of the four chief castes, in itself a 
religious revolution, the Gita thus becoming ‘ the layman’s Upan- 
ishad*. This it does by instituting a new method in Hinduism, 
the bhaktimarga or path of loving devotion. Viewed at first as a 
heterodox book, since it sprang from 4 the young Vaishnava sect* 
itself then viewed as heterodox, the Glicl is now read by half the 
population of India as 4 the very cream of orthodoxy and it is 
probable that the poem is purely of Indian origin* without any 
Christian influence. 1 


9, Vaishnava and Orthodox Hinduism 

It is worth noting the relation of this influential Vaishnava 
sect in Hinduism to those viewing themselves as orthodox. The 
Vaishnava devotees have sometimes been described as revolting 
from orthodox Hinduism in some such way as Protestant re- 
formers from the Church of Rome. This view of them is, however, 
only partly correct and is mostly misleading. Side by side with 
Vaishnava Hinduism ran another line, the line of Saivite worship 
holding the advaita creed (pantheism) in its extreme form. 
Naturally the Vaishnava system with the dvciitci (duality) creed 
that accompanies it has occasionally looked like a reformation or 
a reaction against the other, but there does not seem to have been 
any acute conflict between the two.. 

We may admit an occasional clash. The Vaishnava system 
tends to reject caste and of course the Brahman ascendancy. But 
it never carries the tendency far. A foreign observer is astonished 
that it does not follow out its apparent principles, but though it 
stumbles across the objection to caste it does not act on it. There 
were revolts against caste in the history of Hinduism but the 
remarkable thing is they have seldom proceeded from the 
Vaishnavites. 

Vaishnava saints have written more in the vernacular than 
the advaita philosophers and this reminds the European of the 
Protestant movement. There is some real resemblance, yet it may 
easily be exaggerated and it should be observed that the Vaishnava 
writers did not pretend to publish the truth of the Vedas in the 
vernacular so much as attempt to provide the unlearned man 
with a simple devotional literature. So far the Brahmans had no 
objection to their programme and we must not think of the 
Brahmans fighting the bhakti-marga or the Vaishnava saint with the 
l See 0. R . L. pp^ 86-92 



i! VAISHNAVA HINDUISM OF TUK ARAM'S DAY 35 


feelings of a Roman towards a Protestant. There was plenty of 
wrangling between the dvaita and advaita schools of philosophy 
but each school had its Brahman champions. And the Brahmans 
always took possession of the Vaishnava shrines and administered 
them; an amicable arrangement was observed, ‘either by the 
appointment of real Vaishnavas as ministrants, or by the 
recognition of the actual incumbents as Vaishnavas/ 1 

This leads to the question as to how the Brahman priests 
acquired their great ascendancy even in the reformed type of 
Hinduism which Vaishnavism presents to our view. Probably the 
simplest and truest explanation of this priestly ascendancy in 
Vaishnava Hinduism is the fact that adaptation to the changing 
circumstances has ever been the law of the Brahmans. 2 

Whatever the status of priests in Aryan or pre-Aryan days the 
priest of later Hinduism was the recognised head of all the castes, 
and one much wonders how he got and kept the place. Even so, 
the Brahman position has not been equally strong in all parts of 
India. In Bengal, for instance, the Brahmans appear to be almost 
a depressed class compared with what they have been in the 
Deccan. Some dissenting bodies of Hinduism, the Lingayats, for 
instance, have their priests, but they keep them in their place. 
The Parsls have priests but do not yield them any ascendancy, and 
it appears to be perhaps an accident of destiny that so high a rank 
has been conceded to the Brahman. 


io. Differing Elements in Vaishnavite Bhakti 


It will already have become clear that the influence of Vaishnava 
bhakti has neither been simple nor has it given rise to a united 
school of believers. The erotic manifestations of bhakti in some 
parts have presented a bhakti of an essentially different type from 
that in Maharashtra, where its literature has exercised an influence 
of a democratizing national value. Side by side with these types 
other developments have arisen sometimes resembling the 
Vaishnavite system, but certainly often differing from it, and bhakti 
belief and practice have often absorbed alien elements. This is so 
in the religion of every country, for men are not and cannot be 
wholly consistent in their religious and moral systems, but in India 
the capacity for inconsistency is greater than elsewhere. 

Dr. Farquhar has shown that for nearly five hundred years 
(a* d. 900 to 1350) the development of Hinduism was largely 
influenced by the various sects that arose and that these sects were 
themselves greatly influenced by 4 wandering singers’ and their 


1 O. R. L. /., p. 51 

2 On the ‘ unfailing adaptability ’ of the B nth man see Sir Valentine Chirol 
in Indian Unrest , p. 34 and Sir Alfred Lvall, p. xii in the same book, 

3 See also section 12, chap. 1. . 



36 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

1 enthusiastic bhakti \ This development went on until the middle 
of the sixteenth century by which time these religious sects were 
very considerable in both numbers and influence. From 1700 
this important factor of the religious sects became a diminishing 
quantity. ‘Multitudes have drifted back to undifferenced poly- 
theism, carrying with them the merest shreds of the old thought. 
Uneducated pujarts (temple-ministrants) with their numerous 
images and mongrel ritual strengthen the reactionary movement. 
The mass of 6udras belonged to no sect but worshipped now one 
god, now another. 11 In these long centuries the important 
Bhagavat religion, with its bhakti and its equalizing of Vishnu and 
Siva, was laying hold of the country, and since Maratha saints 
were Bhagavatas it behoves us to understand what the nature of this 
religion was. Of its chief scripture, the Bhilgavata Purctna , 
Dr. Farquhar says; ‘What distinguishes it from all earlier 
literature is its new theory of bhakti ; and therein lies its true 
greatness. Some of its utterances on this subject are worthy of a 
place in the best literature of mysticism and devotion. A careful 
study of those passages will convince the student that they are 
expressions of a living religious experience. ... In this rich 
religious element lies the chief source of the power of the Bhagavata . 
Hence the hold it has had oil some of the best Vaishnava com- 
munities and on many of the noble minds of India.’ 2 

Such facts as the foregoing will help us to understand some- 
thing of the religious condition of India, as we watch the rising 
influence of the various bhakti sects in South, North and Western 
India. 


ii. Early Bhakti of South India Vaishnavism 

While the earliest references to the worship of Vasudeva 
appear to belong geographically to North-West India, to Rajputana 
and to the Mafatha country, the Vaishnavite bhakti system seems 
to have reached its vigour earlier in the South than elsewhere. 
This was due to the influence exerted by a set of Vaishnava 
poet-musicians named the Alvars whose religion was one of 
passionate emotion and who wandered from shrine to shrine in the 
Tamil country, composing hymns and singing them in ecstasy. 
Though they were the leaders and teachers of the Sri-Vaishnava 
sect, a sect very strict in all caste matters, they yet taught Sudras 
and out-castes as well as caste people. Not only are their hymns 
collected and arranged to-day, but their images are ev£fl worshipped 
in the temples. The teaching of the Alvars culminated in 
Ramanuja, whose birth is fixed in a. D. 1016 and his death in 1137 
at 120 years of age. He was a Brahman of Conjeeveram, and is 

1 O. R. L. pp. 292, 220, 82, 

2 Ibid , pp, 229-230. • 



II VAISHNAVA HINDUISM OF TUKARAM’S DAY 37 

regarded as ‘the philosophical theologian of the bhakti school* 
supporting the Vaishnava worship with an interpretation of the 
ancient writings which preserves the personality of God as an 
ultimate truth. This leaves the devotee free to believe that bhakti 
or personal adoration is actually offered to the Supreme and 
human worship can go no further. Ramanuja was followed by 
Madhva who established much the same conclusion by different 
trains of reasoning. These two are the two great theologians of 
the Vaishnava school, though they are not, as an example of life, 
so cherished as are other less learned saints, and having written in 
Sanskrit they are not understood of the people. 1 


12. The Bhakti of North India Vaishnavism 

Of the sect of Ramanuja, and some three and a half centuries 
later, was Ramananda (circ. 14C0--I470) a famous ascetic of Benares 
whose name is still surrounded with obscurity. 3 He taught that all 
God’s servants are brothers, that faith in God, and neither caste 
nor position, is the thing that matters. ‘ Let no one ask a man’s 
caste or with whom he eats. If a man shows love to God he is 
God’s own Of his twelve apostles two were women, Padmavati 
and Surasuri. 

In Northern India the Vaishnava creed received a great impulse 
towards the end of the sixteenth century, its chief exponent being 
TulsI Das (1532-1623)., who devoted himself to Rama, an avatdra 
of Vishnu, and identified the cult with a spirited and noble morality. 
If Krisna is the most popular Hindu hero, ‘ Rama is, perhaps, 
the most venerated as embodying the highest Hindu ideals. 
‘The pole-stars of his life are devotion to duty and self-sacrifice. 
He gives up a kingdom to maintain his father’s word. He gives up 
a peerless wife to please his people.* But he embodies the Hindu 
social polity also in ‘ some of its weaknesses such as the surrender 
of judgement to popular clamour and the unquestioned acceptance 
of the current system as divinely ordained.’ '* 

Vallabha and Chaitanya worshipped Krisna, the latter ( 1 486— 
1534) spreading the Krisna cult through Bengal, where the bloody 
sacrifices to Kali and the dark superstitions of the tantra worship 
struck him with horror. He must be reckoned a reformer, but his 
presentation of the Vaishnava system is in many ways unedifving. 
On the one hand he spins endless subtleties about the different kinds 
of love enjoyed by Krisna and Radha, thus reproducing the very 
atmosphere of dialectic which the bhakti school wishes to leave 
behind. On the other hand, his corrective seems to have been an 

1 On Ramanuja and Madhva see Dr. Macnicol’s Indian Theism, chaps, vii 
and viii. 

2 Farquhar, 07?.L./., p. 323. 

a Indian Social Reformer , August 24, 1919. , 



38 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

endless round of dancing and swooning before the god. Chaitanya's 
emotion leads to something like hysteria, while sensuality results 
from that of the Vallabhas. The unbridled emotionalism of the 
latter sect was exposed ,in the Bombay Courts in 1863, as it had 
long before been expressed by Mira Bal, queen of Udaipur in the 
fifteenth century : ‘ There is but one male in existence, namely my 
beloved Kanai Lai (Krista), and all besides are females.’ 1 

Chaitanya seems to have been related to the shrine at Jagannath 
much as Tukaram was to Pandharpur. This famous shrine is 
better known to Europeans than Pandharpur, probably because it is 
nearer to a city like Calcutta, and because somebody at some time 
or other invented the fantastic myth about Jagannath’s car. The 
poems about Jagannath at Puri are all cries for mercy, resembling 
those of Tukaram, when in that frame of mind. They are, however 
wanting in the moral sturdiness of Tukaram. 


13 . Marat ha Bhaktas and Their Bhakti 

Tt is into a very different atmosphere we pass when we begin to 
study the bhakti school of Maharashtra, where the chief names are 
Dnyaneshwar of the thirteenth century, Namdev of the fourteenth, 
Eknath of the sixteenth and Tukaram of the first half of the seven- 
teenth. 

The first of these, Dnyaneshwar , commonly referred to as ‘ the 
father of Marathi poetry ’, is famous as the author of the Marathi 
poetical commentary on the Bhagavadglta called the DnyaneshwarJ 
and as the one whose name is to-day coupled with that of Tukaram 
by pilgrims on their way to Pandharpur as they march on chanting 
the names of their two greatest teachers: Dnyanoba, Tukoba; 
Dnyanoba, Tukoba. 2 The lofty spirit of Dnyanesh war’s teaching 
may be inferred from his prayer at the close of the Dnydneshwarl , 
a portion of which runs as follows : 3 ‘ May God the Universal Soul 
be well-pleased with the offering of my words, and being pleased, 
may He grant me this favour — that sin may depart from the 
wicked ; that in them the love of good works may increase, and 
that mutual friendship may grow in the whole of the race. May 
the darkness of sin disappear, may the Universe behold the sun of 
righteousness, and may the longings of mankind attain satisfaction. 
May all three worlds be perfected in joy and for ever worship the 
Supreme Being \ 

Ntfmdev, who was famous among his own people as the kutumb - 
kavi because every member of his family, even the maid- 
servant, could compose poetry, is the first Maratha poet to 
denounce idolatry with real force. With him it was always plain 

1 E.R.E. Vol.9. p. 116 b, 

2 Sometimes varied as : Dnyandev, Tukaram ; or, Gyandev, Tukaram. 

3 Questions of text arise in some of the following phrases, the translation of 
which would* need to be modified accordingly. 



II VAISHNAVA HINDUISM OF TUK ARAM’S DAY 39 


speech : * They are fools lost to anything good who worship gods of 
stone : those who say and those who believe that a god made of 
stone speaks to his devotee are both stupid But Namdev con- 
tinued the» use of idols! The legend is told of Namdev that, being 
a robber, he was driven to ‘ make a friend of repentance * by the 
sorrows of a lonely widow whose husband had been killed by 
Namdev’s band. Finding no mercy in a Saivite temple, he 
plunged a knife into his own head as he stood before Siva, the 
blood spurting forth and defiling the god. Cast out in anger by 
the people, he heard in his bitterness a voice bidding him go to 
Pandharpur: ‘its patron god, Vitthal, will purge thee of thy 
sins, and thou shalt not only obtain salvation, but renown as one of 
God’s saints \ 

Eknath had his poems publicly thrown into the Godfivari river 
because he practised the principle laid down in the Bhagavadgitii 
that ‘ a man of knowledge looks with the same eye upon a Brahman 
well-versed in learning, upon a cow, or an elephant or a dog or an 
out-caste*. So completely was this principle observed by Eknath 
the Vedantist, the Brahman, the idolater, that on one occasion he 
lifted on to his own shoulder an out-caste Mahar boy whose feet 
were burning on the hot sand ; on another occasion he took and 
befriended a Mahar thief after the latter’s release from punishment 
in the stocks ; on a third occasion some poor Mahars having 
expressed a longing for a feast similar to one Eknath had prepared 
for a company of Brahmans, they were invited to join in and at his 
wife’s suggestion the whole of the Mahar community were later fed 
in Eknath’s compound ; while on a fourth occasion Eknath went 
so far as to accept an invitation to dine at the house of a Mahar, 
though in the account of this last incident his biographer makes 
out that Eknath’s god took Eknath’s form. The following story 
is also told of him. Returning from his morning bath in the holy 
Godavari, a Mohammedan spat on him. Without a word he went 
back and bathed again. Once more the man met him and repeated 
the insult. As Eknath calmly turned round and walked back 
towards the river a bystander asked him why did he not curse the 
wretch. ‘Why should I curse my benefactor?’ was the reply; 

‘ but for him I should have bathed only once in the sacred stream.! 
Now I have bathed twice, and I must needs go again.* 

Though all these Deccan bhaktas have something of true 
nobility, none has the deep personal interest of Tukaram. He must 
have known their writings well and no doubt owes to them many 
of his phrases. It is curious, however, that he does not often 
directly mention this debt : it was perhaps sufficiently known to his 
audience. Tukaram describes himself as initiated into the Vaish- 
nava order by a wandering devotee whose name was BabajI : this 
man in turn gave the names of his own teachers as Raghava- 
Chaitanya and Keshava-Chaitanya, but there is nothing to show 
who these men were, 



40 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 
14. Vafshnavite Revival in Vithoba’s Land 

How great and far-reaching was the influence exerted by these 
bhaktas of the Deccan has been set forth by the late Justice 
M. G. Ranade who shows that the political revolution which 
stirred Maharashtra towards the close of the sixteenth century was 
preceded and in fact to some extent caused, by a religious and 
social upheaval which moved the entire population. As in Europe 
in the sixteenth century, so the contemporary Reformation in the 
Deccan was religious, social and literary, not Brahmanical in its 
orthodoxy, but ethical and heterodox in the spirit of protest against 
all distinctions based on birth, a reformation which was the work 
of the people, of the masses not of the classes. The movement 
was led by saints and prophets, poets and philosophers, who sprang 
chiefly from the lower orders of society — tailors, carpenters, potters, 
gardeners, shop-keepers, barbers and even Mahars. ‘What 
Protestantism did for Western Europe in the matter of civil 
liberty was accomplished on a smaller scale in Western India. The 
impulse was felt in art, in religion, in the growth of the vernacular 
literature, in communal freedom of life, in increase of self-reliance 
and toleration .* 1 From the twelfth to the seventeenth centuries 
there are no less than fifty names of popular leaders in this great 
movement. 

For the explanation of this reviving, purifying and democrati- 
zing of the Hinduism of the Deccan we have to go to Pandharpur 
and there learn what little the muse of history will reveal concern- 
ing that god who was enshrined in the thought and affection of 
the poet-saint of Dehu. If we could forget Tukaram’s veneration 
for the image of Vithoba we^could hail him as a fellow-Protestant, 
but that would be to forget half of Tukaram’s spiritual life, 
wrapped up as it is so closely with the condescending love which 
he supposed God to have shown in accepting the incarnation at 
Pandhari. We cannot afford to forget that if he were alive to-day 
Tukaram might show himself disagreeably obstinate about the 
historic authentic character of Vithoba’s avatara , for he regarded 
Pandharpur as a holy place because it was at Pandharpur that 
Vishnu seemed to stand incarnate and visible, Tukaram in Someway 
identifying that incarnation with the figure on the brick, exactly 
how, he does not say. He * wanted some material effigies on which 
he could set his eyes and which he could clasp with his hands; and 
he found that satisfaction in the stone god Vithoba. He daily 
visited him ; he decked him with flowers, offered incense to bim, 
and pressed him tenderly to his bosom, addressing him in language 
of fond affection. Hence the mad devotion of Tukaram for 
Vithoba.’ 

1 G. R. Navalkar, Tukaram , The Maharashtrian Poet and Saint pp. 29, 
30, 32 and 33 # , 



ll VAISHNAVA HINDUISM OF TUKARAM’S DAY 41 
15 . The Name Vithoba — Its Origin and Significance 

Efforts have been made by scholars to elucidate the problem of 
the origin of the god Vithoba and the etymology of the name. 

(1) Sir R. G. Bhandarkar believes * the full name of the god is 
Vitthal* and that the corruption of the Sanskrit name Vishnu in the 
Kanarese language is probably Vitthu, the terminations ka and la 
being* appended to the name Vishnu or Vitthu to indicate the sense 
of tenderness or reverence. 1 

(2) This is supported by Pandit Bhagwanlal Indrajf 2 who 
holds the name Vithoba to be a short form of Vithalbava, that is, 
Father or Dear Vitthal, the Yadav inscriptions making it probable 
that the oldest of these names is Vitthal and probably Kanarese. 

(3) Similar to this is the conclusion reached by Dr. William 
Crooke 8 who suggests the name may be ‘ a corruption of Vishnu- 
pati, lord Vishnu’, through a local form Bistu or Bittu, the name 
Pandurang, usually understood to mean * white coloured being 
probably a Sanskritized form of Pandaraga, ‘ belonging to 
Pandarge *, the old name of the place. According to this view 
Vithoba would appear to be a local deity admitted into Hinduism 
as a form of Vishnu. The term Vithoba thus being traced back to 
Vitthal, what of the latter ? 

(4) Mr. L. J. Sedgwick sets forth three possible etymologies 
for the word Vitthal, one being that it stands for Ishtisthal , ishfi 
being used for a brick and also a special form of sacrifice ; another 
being that it comes from the Marathi words vlt -loathing, and 
talne — to avoid ; a third being that it is connected simply with the 
Marathi word it = a brick (often pronounced vif), and meaning* the 
Vishnu of the brick ’. On the story of Pundallka, whose filial 
devotion Krisna is said to have so appreciated as to consent to 
become incarnate in an image which should always * stand on a 
brick ’ ( — Vithoba), 4 Mr. Sedgwick theorizes that about the middle 
of the I2th century Pundallka brought to Pandharpur a statue found 
in some other part of India and under the name of Vitthala set it up 
in a disused temple of Mahadev. If it be asked why did Pundallka 
call the statue Vitthala, Mr. Sedgwick concludes this may have been 
the name of Pundalika’s father and that ‘ the statue was intended by 
him to be merely a commemoration of his deceased parent ’ whom 
he worshipped to the end of his life. 5 

(5) Rao Sahib P. B. Joshi hints that the name Vitthala may 
come from Vishtrashravas , ‘ the far-renowned *, this being a rare 
classical epithet of Vishnu and Krisna, Vistara aud Vitthala being 
philological parallels. But it is not proved either that the 

1 V.S.M.R.S., p. 87. 

2 B.G. Vol. xx, p. 423. 

3 Art. Pandharpur in E.R.E., Vol. ix, pp. 601-2. 

4 See F. arid M. Poems of Tukardm, Vol. 2, p. 452. 

sJ.R'A.S . Bo., Vol. 23. No, 65, pp. 123-5. 

6 



42 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

Parujharpur statue was ever called Vishtrashravas , or that the 
first half of the word, which is meaningless, usurped the place of 
the whole. 1 

(6) Most picturesque of all is the derivation given by Moles- 

worth in his monumental Marathi and English Dictionary 9 
and accepted by the Rev. Ganpatrao R. Navalkar 8 who points 
out that to Brahmans * the initial letter Vi of the name Vitthala 
indicates knowledge or understanding, it being a form of the 
Sanskrit root vid, to know or understand ; tha means a cypher, i.e,, 
privation, destitution ; and la stands for late , he takes*. In this 
way Vit, tha 9 la form Vitthala and the word may be interpreted 
to mean : 4 Receiver of the ignorant and those destitute of under- 

standing’, or in Scriptural terminology, 4 the Friend of publicans 
and sinners ’, as it has been rendered in poetry : 

Sinners are we— I and you; 

• Vithoba alone is true, 

He receives the fallen too. 

(7) In support of the second etymology under para (4) above 
it q lay be pointed out that Pundalika is said to have been reclaimed 
from an irreligious life by the earnest piety of a Chambhar or 
cobbler and this heterogeneous character of Vithoba’s worshippers 
is witnessed on festive occasions in the fusion of all castes. With 
the Brahmans politically dominant in the country they must have 
felt a deep resentment against the god whose worship caused such 
pollution, a vital on so great a scale. What wonder they called 
this god Vital (pollution), the impersonation of defilement and 
abomination ! So runs the popular argument. 

(8) It is worthy of note that some authorities attach the 
highest importance to Tuka*am’s own couplet on Vithoba’s name, 

Vied held thoba 
Mhanoni ttdva to Vithoba 

numbered 4118 in the Indu Prakdsh edition and translated by 
Fraser and Marathe (2828, vol, iii) : ‘a pillar of wisdom he made 
himself, hence his name is Vithoba.* Translating the Marathi note 
by Mr. V. N. Joga, the late Brahman leader of the Warkaris 9 in 
his valuable commentary on Tukaiam’s abhahgs (vol. 2, p. 314) we 
get the following English rendering of Tukaram’s lines : Vi has 
become thoba and thus His (God’s) name is Vithoba. Of the two 
important Marathi words in the first line, vi stands for vid, know- 
ledge, as in para (6) on this page, while thoba (a meaningless term 
whose nearest Marathi word is thomba , a shapeless block of wood) 
takes the sense of akar 9 shape or form. Tukaram’s couplet would 
thus appear to mean that the Formless (Brahma) has assumed a 
form, that Divine Knowledge (vid) has taken concrete visible shape, 

1 J.R.A.S. Bo., -Vol. 23, No. 65, p. 234. 

2 See under the word Vitthal, p. 757, col. 2. 

3 Tukdrdm, Maharashtrian Poet and Saipt , pp. 5-6. 



II VAISHNAVA HINDUISM OF TUKARAM’S DAY 43 

that the Impersonal has become Personal, that God Impersonal 
and Unseen has become Personal and Manifest. This interesting 
interpretation, if it can be sustained, is in compltete harmony with 
the conception of the Divine Being and its manifestation held by 
the Vaishnava bhakti school dealt with in this chapter. Some 
students of Tukaram, however, taking thobd in Tukaram's couplet 
to refer to thombd in the other sense of the latter word which makes 
it refer to ‘an ignorant fellow’, hold that Tukaram makes the name 
Vithoba signify that Vi, Knowledge or the All-Knowing, has 
condescended to manifest or incarnate Itself in what to outward 
seeming is an ignorant and unthinking material object. See further 
on Tukdrdm's Idolatry , chapter 6, section 1. 

We are bound to conclude, however that the difficult problem 
of the origin of the god Vithoba and the etymology of the name 
must be regarded as yet unsolved. 

Our study thus far has brought us to Pandharpur, the home of 
Vithoba and the pilgrim city of Tukaram. In our next chapter we 
shall with him ‘go to Pandharpur’ and in imagination ‘be a 
pilgrim there \ 



A REMONSTRANCE 1 


Graciously thy heart incline : — 

Open to me, brother mine ! 

He's a saint who knoweth how 
To the world's abuse to bow. 

• • * • 

Surely he whose soul is great 
Is to all compassionate. 

Thou pervading Brahman art. 

How should anger fill thy heart ? 

Such a poised soul be thine. 

Open to me, brother mine ! 

Muktabai (13th century) P, M. S. t p. 41, 


A BITTER CRY 

When will the end of these things be ? 

Ah, tell me, Lord of Pandharl. 

When wilt thou save unhappy me ? 

O tell me, tell me true, for I 
Cry to thee with a bitter cry. 

Why speakest thou not ? Ah, Vitthal, why 
Thus silent ? Whither shall I fly ? 

Who else will bear my sore distress ? 

Smite me not in my helplessness. 

As to the child is wholly sweet 
His mother,— -so to me thy feet. 


N5mdev (14th century) P. M. S., p. 44. 

GOD W&O IS OUR HOME 

To the child how dull the Fair 
If his mother be not there ! 

So mv heart apart from thee, 

O thou Lord of Pandharl ! 


As the stream to fishes thou, 

As is to the calf the cow. * 

To a faithful wife how dear 
Tidings of her Lord to hear ! 

How a miser’s heart is set 
On the wealth he hopes to get ! 

Such, says Tuka, such am I ! 

But for thee, I’d surely die. * 

Tukaram 1608-50 P. M. S., p. 57. 

1 This Abhaitg is said to have been addressed by Muktabai to her brother 
Dynanegvar on an occasion when the door of bis hut was closed against her 
and she supposed him to? be angry. 



Chapter III 

The Pilgrimage To Pandharpur 
A Study in India’s Religious Aspiration 

i. Tukaram and the Pilgrim City 

Papdharpur having exercised a unique influence both on 
Tukaram’s personal experiences and on his writings, it is important 
to consider what is known of this great pilgrim centre. How 
Tukaram viewed the pilgrims with whom he must so often have 
journeyed is shown in Fraser and Marathe’s translation of the 
following abhahgs : 1499, 1500, 1512-14, 1523, 1530-9 in vol. II. 
On Pandharpur as a pilgrim centre, whole sections are taken up 
with it, e.g., section xv. in vol. Ill beginning with the words, ‘Go, 
go to Pandharpur ; be, be a pilgrim there ! * Before, however, we 
consider the subject of pilgrimage in Tukaram’s day and in the city 
so dear to him it may be well, by way of preface, to consider the 
subject of Indian Pilgrimage in general and note how passionate is 
that religious aspiration to which it is an index. 


2. Moksha and Self-Torture 

For three thousand tragic years Moksha has been the religious 
quest of India. This supreme aspiration after union with God, 
which is rightly considered ‘ the pith and kernel of the religious 
faiths of India’, runs through the Bhagavadgita> that sacred book 
held dear by no less than one hundred and fifty millions of India’s 
people. This great desire— often despite unworthy accompani- 
ments — is the inspiring motive of India’s astonishing asceticism, 
with its five and a half million mendicants, Sadhus and ascetics, 
whose self-mortification goes to extremes which are disastrous both 
socially and religiously. These austerities are practised both by 
&aivite and Vaishnava Hindus but mostly by the former. What 
soul can remain unmoved as it contemplates the indescribable self- 
torture inflicted to win emancipation ? As part of their tapas - 
charyd or austerities some lower grades of sadhus , and occasionally 
sddhvls (female ascetics) too, practise self-mortifications repellent 
and disgusting in the extreme, though with a motive investing them 
with noble pathos. Such are the Panchatapas or Panchadhuni 
whose penance consists in enduring the heat of five fires around 
them, the fifth sometimes being that of the sun with its fierce heat 



46 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch> 

pouring down on their unclothed bodies ; the Ordhvabahu who 
extend one or both arms over their head until rigid and atrophied; 
the Urdhvamukhin or BhUmintukhin who for half an hour or 
more hang downwards from the bough of a tree, head nearly touch- 
ing the ground ; the Akctsmukhin who keep the neck bent back as 
they gaze on a sky of brass ; the Nakhiti who let finger-nails grow 
to inordinate lengths ; the JaUiidyl who spend the whole night 
immersed in water; the Phaldhdri who subsist on fruits; and the 
Dudhahari who live solely on milk. Other forms of self-torture 
consist in sitting or sleeping on a couch studded with nails or on a 
bed of spikes (a Brahman ascetic at Benares lay naked thus for 
thirty-five years) ; while others observe a vow of silence for years, 
or chew live coals, or thrust knives or skewers into their flesh, or 
tread on glowing ashes, or allow themselves to be buried alive. 
Some of the higher grades of Sannydsis , especially the Dandl 
SannydsTs — so named from the wand ( dand ) which they carry — 
have to undergo a probation of twelve years which is spent in 
wandering about in all weathers ; some of them go naked, others 
refuse food unless supplied by the hands of a virgin. There are 
others who practise ashtadandvata , measuring the ground by 
prostrations of the eight parts of the body — forehead, breast, hands, 
knees and insteps, in this way taking long pilgrimages to sacred 
places by slow marches which necessitate hundreds of thousands of 
painful prostrations. In such cases the pilgrims’ hands are some- 
times covered with padded wooden clogs, the soles being studded 
with hob-nails, some devotees in the performance of vows crawling 
the last stage on their sides or on their ankles, completing the jour- 
ney by standing on their heads before the idol . 1 

An impressive example ih the Marathi country, illustrating the 
deep pathos of India’s religious quest, is supplied by the case of 
Joga Paramanand, a poet and bhakta of Vithoba, long before 
Tukaram’s day. One day, when measuring his body from his 
house in Barsi to the temple of Bhagwan in the town, at each 
prostration repeating a sloka from the Bhagavadgitd , as was his 
daily custom, a rich merchant vowed he would give him a costly 
silk garment if he got a son. On the arrival of a son the *vow was 
fulfilled and Joga had to wear che costly covering in place of his 
rags. Prostrating himself as usual, but more carefully, lest the 
garment be spoiled, the saint reached the temple a few moments 
after morning pftjd (worship) was over. Whereupon he bitterly 
blamed the newly acquired garment, tore it to pieces, and ever 
after wore his rags . 2 

1 E.R.E,, Vol. 2 , pp. 87-96, Art. Asceticism (Hindu), A. S- Geden ; Vol. 6, 
p. 701 b. Art. Hinduism , W. Crooke; Vol. 10, p. 26a, Art, Pilgrimage 
{Indian), W. Crooke; Vol. 11, p. 330a, Art. Sects {Hindu), W. Crooke; and 
J. C. Oman, Cults , Customs , and Superstitions of India, p. 9. 

9 V. L. Bhave, M. Sar p. 70. 



Ill THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANDHARPUR 47 
3« Pilgrim Centres in Western India 

A brief consideration of what goes on in at least two other 
pilgrim centres in Tukaram’s India — Maharashtra — will enable us 
better to appreciate Pandharpur. 1 

Na£ik is an object of pilgrimage because situated on one of 
India's sacred rivers, the Godaveri. According to one estimate no 
less than thirty million pilgrims are expected to visit Na6ik during 
the Sinhasth , a festival which occurs every twelve years when 
Jupiter is in the constellation of Leo, a season considered by Hindu 
authorities a favourable period for the washing away of sins. In 
the present year (1920), this ‘ duodecennial ’ festival which usually 
lasts eighteen months and which started on July 14 was practically 
over before Christmas, that is in less than five months. The 
disappointed Pujctrls (ministrants) gave two reasons for the failure, 
viz., famine conditions and the spread of education, some Sddhus 
bemoaning the fact that many of their clients who used to come 
from a distance by train and motor-car had not appeared this year. 

Jejuri , on the Southern Mahratta Railway thirty-two miles 
south-east of Poona, is sacred to Khandoba, a god worshipped by 
the middle and low castes of Maharashtra and the cause of much 
obscenity. Khandoba is of the family of Siva who represents all 
that is most repulsive in India’s worship, who attracted to himself 
much of the sordid worship of the aborigines of the land, and who 
about the 12th century appears to have instigated a terrible perse- 
cution of Vaishnavas, Buddhists and Jains. The 4 dogs of 
Khandoba \ as his devotees are called, are slaves of passion ; boys 
born after a vow to Khandoba merely adding to the number of 
India’s 1 holy beggars while girls are doomed to lifelong degrad- 
ation. 9 See also chapter 5, 1 1 , 10 on 4 doubtful religious characters ’. 

, If Khandoba, the Saivite god of Jejuri, shows Hinduism on its 
darker side, the Vaishnava idol Vithoba represents Hinduism 
almost at its best. Far and away the most sacred city of Maha- 
rashtra is Pandharpur in the Sholapur District of the Maratha 
country, on which we are to concentrate our attention in order to 
learn with what passionate purpose Hindus in Western India seek 
after moksha. ‘ You can buy liberation there for nothing ’ is the 
verdict of Tukaram, the most famous of the singers of Pandharpur. 
The chief sacred days are those in Ashadh (June or July) and Kartik 
(October or November) when most of the visitors come from the 
Deccan, and with railway facilities the number is very large. At the 

# 1 This is not a section on ' sacred places ’, otherwise we should have to deal 
with many places, e. g«, Walt on the Krisna river, with a large Brahman 
population^ many temples and bathing ghats , and notable in Sivajl’s 
wanderings, one incident in GolewadI village near by illustrating the purity 
of his personal character. See H M. P., p. 153. 

3 On Jejuri see B. G , Vol. xviii, part iii, pp. 132-9, and part i, pp. 476-7 
also Contemporary Review, September 1909, pp. 289-90. 



4 8 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

Ashadhi Fair of 1919 no less than 140,000 pilgrims 1 * entered the 
town, nearly 12,000 taking darshatt daily, many of these taking 
the recognised pilgrim route which includes Dehu, Tukaram’s 
birthplace 3 and Aland!, the samftdhi of Dnyane^war, and thence 
to Pandharpur. The god Vithoba, whose darshatt so many 
eager §ouls aspire after, and said to be standing on the 
brick thrown to Krisna by Pundalika when the former told the 
latter to worship him as Vithoba (in other words as ‘ him who 
stood upon the brick*), has for its companion in the innermost 
shrine the image of Rukhmini, Krisna's consort, since her flight 
and subsequent discovery were the cause of Krisna’s visit to 
Pandharpur. It is from this event that the town dates its import- 
ance in the history of Vaishnava religion/ 

4. On the Way to Pandharpur 

How do Vithoba’s 140,000 pilgrims reach Pandharpur? The 
answer to this question not only vindicates the claim that 
Vaishnavism is the most genuine religion in Hinduism, but shows 
how closely linked with song is India’s spiritual development. A 
section in our last chapter gave the names of the chief poets 
enshrined in the heart of the Maratha nation. The depth of the 
people’s devotion to their poet- saints is seen in the part the songs of 
these saints play in the annual pilgrimages. Pilgrims reach 
Pandharpur from all quarters and each company carries its own 
palkhl (palanquin) containing the pftduka (or footprints) and 
as is believed the spirit of their bygone saint, whose praise they 
sing in his own or some other poet’s verse, the leading refrain of 
these pilgrim songs being Dnyclnoba , Tukoba . A prominent 
member of the Bombay Prarthana Samaj, in an article describing 
his visit to the Ashadhi festival on June 26, 1920, writes: ‘ For the 
last three or four centuries, it has become customary to send 
on this Ekddashl day Palkhis or Palanquins from several 
places in Maharashtra and Berar connected with saints like 
Tukaram, Dnyandev, Muktabai and others. Stone images or 
paduk&s of these saints are carried in these palkhis and a 
large number of pilgrims numbering from 100 to 2,000 accom- 
pany them. They come from long distances of fifty to a 
hundred miles travelling at the rate of eight to ten miles daily. 
They ali come to a place five miles from Pandharpur on the 
morning of the Ek&dashi day. In the evening these palkhis 

1 The 1920 Ashadhi Fair was attended by 124,775 pilgrims, the decline 
being attributed to the ‘Sinhasth* Fair (Government of Bombay, General 

Department, Order No. 941, January 26, 1921). 4 

*See section 5, Chap. 1. 

» See H.M.P. Chap, xi, ‘The Pandharpur Movement, a. d. 1271 to 1640’, 
where the information given needs supplementing by study of the Marathi 
sources. 



m THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANDHARPUR 49 

start in a procession under police supervision so as to reach Pandhar- 
pur by 8 p.m. It is a really inspiring sight to see this procession. 
It lasts for nearly four hours. In front of each Palkhi there are 
trumpets playing and wind-pipes blowing followed by kirtan - parties 
enthusiastically singing and dancing, clapping their hands.* 1 

Official figures show that out of Vithoba's 140,000 worshippers 
attending the AshadhI Fair, 55,923 travelled there by train. 
Pilgrimage by railway train is one example of changing India. 
This means that over 84,000 came by road and what pilgrimage to 
Pandharpur meant for some of them is indicated by the Bombay 
Gazetteer in its seventy pages on Pandharpur. Its section on 
Pilgrims contains the following : ‘ As soon as the pinnacle of 
Vithoba’s temple comes in sight, the pilgrim stops and throws 
himself on the ground in honour of the god. Some pilgrims, who 
have taken a vow to that effect, continue to prostrate till they 
reach the town, or throw themselves at full length on the ground 
making a mark ahead as far as their hands can reach, then rise, 
walk up to the mark again, prostrate themselves, and so in this way 
reach the holy city. Some pilgrims roll on the ground all the way 
from Barsi Road (31 miles) or Jeur (45 miles). Cases are said to 
have occurred of pilgrims rolling from Benares, Nagpur, and 
Haidarabad in fulfilment of vows *. 2 Dr. J. Murray Mitchell gives 
a similar account of what he saw in 1881, telling of one man who 
4 had come, rolling like a log at the rate of two miles a day, from 
the neighbourhood of Nagpur, occupying about two years in the 
achievement.’ 3 As recently as 1919 a Mamlatdar in government 
service, a devoted Vaishnava of b.a. attainments, distressed by his 
brother’s mysterious disappearance, vowed he would go to Pan- 
dharpur by the method of dandavat (personal prostrations) if only 
his missing brother were found. To his astonishment he discovered 
the latter that very day, so bracing himself up for the hardship and 
possible ridicule, after a few days* practice of dandavat he obtained 
leave and made prostrations all the way from Hubli to Pandharpur, 
the journey taking several weeks. 

These tragic methods of religious quest adopted in Hinduism 
against which the Arya and Prarthana Samajes utter so honour- 
able a protest must have been well-known to our bhaktl saint and 
poet Tukaram who if he ever practised them, which is more than 
doubtful, did so only to reject them, for he knew that by none of 
these things could his accusing conscience find rest. 4 

5. The Self -Accusations of Deccan Pilgrims 

How stinging these accusations, despite Tukaram’s personal 
popularity, his abhang numbered 1334 in the Indi.^.ak&sh 

1 Subodh Patrika , July 18, 1920. 

2 B. G. Vol, xx, p. 470, 

* The Indian Antiquary , Vol. xi, 1882, p. 155. 

* See chap. 6, sect. 2 ; chap 8, sect, iv, para, l ; also chap. 9, .sects, 8 and U, 

7 



50 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 


edition and 126 in Fraser and Maratbe shows: i * 3 4 Oh sages, hear 
this what I say ; I am a great fallen sinner, Why do ye love me 
with such tenderness? My heart is witness to me that I am not 
redeemed ?’ Or take his abhang numbered 476 in the above edition 
and translated by Fraser and Mara{he (number 343) in words 
which, though expressive, cannot convey the pathos and plaintive- 
ness of the original Marathi : ‘ Fallen of fallen, thrice fallen am 

I ; but do Thou raise me by Thy power. I have neither purity of 
heart, nor a faith firmly set at Thy feet : I am created out of sin. 
How often shall I repeat it? says Tuka.’ And listen yet again 
to the piercing cry : 1 How can I be saved ? Tell me O ye saints, 
and pacify my mind. How shall the sum of my past perish ? 
I know not the secret, and hence I despair. How can I make 
myself pure? I weigh this thought continually day and night; 
I am disquieted. Tuka says, I have no strength of my own, to 
bring me to this final repose.’ 1 

Nor was Tukaram alone, among Hindu pilgrims, in the 
possession of a sense of sin. ‘ Not to lay too much stress on a mere 
matter of words, the whole Karmic philosophy of Hinduism, the 
pilgrimages to rivers and shrines, the conception of heavens and 
hills, the innumerable pr&yaschittams that abound in the moral 
code, all these testify to the presence of a sense of moral unworthi- 
ness.’ 2 The Nagik festival of the Sinhasth referred to’above affords 
incidental proof that the sense of sin is by no means absent from the 
consciousness of the earnest Hindu pilgrim. This same festival 
affords also interesting evidence as to what the Hindu pilgrim 
feels he must do for the washing away of his sins. During this 
favourable period, says Sir Ramkrishna Gopal Bhandarkar, 

‘ Hindus go to holy places* such as Nasik, shave their heads and 
moustaches and bathe in the river. * 8 How clearly Tukaram saw 
the futility of such methods and how fearlessly he criticized them 
is shown by his striking abhang numbered 2,869 in the Indu - 
Prakdsh edition and translated by Sir R. G. Bhandarkar as 
follows: * When the auspicious juncture of Sinhasth comes, it 
brings fortune only to barbers and priests. There are crores of 
sins in the heart, but externally a man shaves the hair on the head 
and the beard. What has been shaved off, has disappeared. 
Tell me what else has changed. The vicious habits are not 
changed, which might be regarded as a mark of the destruction of 
sins; says Tuka, without devotion and faith everything else is 
useless trouble.’ 4 


i F, and M. 363; Induprakdsh G19. See further Chap, 8 section iii, paras 

under 2 on Tukaram's Sense of Sin. 

3 Christian Patriot % Madras, June 19, 1920. 

8 V.S, M.F. 8., p. 94. 

4 For other renderings of this see P, S. t No, ciii, p. 88, and F, and M., 

No. 2599, Vol. iu p, 415. 



ill THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANDHARPUR 51 

6. Pandharpur and its Temples 

The town of Pandharpur stands on the West bank of the Bhima 
in the hollow of a great bend of the river. The bank itself is high 
and steep and below it there is a vast expanse of sand and gravel. 
On this ,are several temples in the usual Deccan style approached 
from the town by flights of steps or ghats. From the opposite bank 
the little town half-buried in trees presents a picturesque sight with 
spires of temples emerging from among the tree-tops. The 
pilgrim coming from distant villages by road crosses the river by a 
ford, unless the water is too high, in which case there are large 
barges with curious equine figure-heads painted a bright red wait- 
ing to transport him. 

The town itself wears a thriving appearance. Some small manu- 
factures are carried on, a kind of decorated cloth being one of them. 
A mixture of resin is squeezed on to the cloth through a stencil and 
mica is dusted over the resin. The result is a bright glittering 
pattern. Pandharpur’s resident population in the census of March 
18, 1921 was about 25,530. 

Pandharpur, however, from the religious point of view is not a 
town but a holy place where many temples have been built, and we 
must begin our serious acquaintance with it by visiting these 
temples. They are numerous. Every god of importance has his 
place or places of worship. The following is a conspectus of the 
chief among them, there being many others not mentioned here. 1 

Shiva : There are many temples, large and small, insignificant 
and famous, of Siva. Perhaps his most popular manifestation is 
simply the linga set up by Pundalika, known as Pundalika's temple. 
These are gracious manifestations, but there is also the temple of 
Ktila-bhairava , with an image in black stone where the menacing 
aspect is displayed. His consort has shrines under the names of 
Sh&katnbari , Ambabdl and Mahisasura-mardini . These two latter 
represent her as a friend of man, the destroyer of the buffalo demon. 

Khandoba : There is also a temple of the warrior god of the 
Deccan, about which no more need be said than appears in section 3 
above, and in para 11, section II of chapter 5. 

Ramchandra’s Temple : This temple contains the images of 
Ganpati, Rama, Lakshman, and Sita. There is also a portrait image 
of Ahalyabai, the builder. Such images are very rare in connection 
with Hinduism. 

Ganpati’s Temple : The original temple of Ganpati was 
destroyed by the Mahommedans, the present one being built in the 
reign of the last Peshwa, A stone marks the grave of Cokhameja, 
a Mahar devotee of Vithoba. 

The Chophala Temple : This contains the Panchiiyatan, 
or five images of Visnu, Amba, Ganpati, Mahadev and Surya. 

l Full details are to be found in B.G., Vol. xx. in its fine section on Pandhar- 
pur to which We are indebted for much in this chapter. * 



52 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM* ch. 

• ' j ' <■ ; 

This is a popular combination bringing together the gqdsf whose 
temples are usually separated. V # 

Vyasa: The author of the Uafi&bhdrata is honoured with a 
temple to himself - * • 

* Chandrabhaga : The spirit of the river is represented by a 
black stone image of a woman. On the top of the jporch is (among 
other figures) a representation of the four-headed Bramha, who 

* never has a temple to himself, though he is quite familiar as a figure 
on other gods* temples. Chandrabhaga is the name give# to Tfche river 
Bhrma in and around Paptjharpur because the bend of the river at 
this point assumes the form bf the crescent moon ( chandra ). This, 
and other details concerning Pandharpur are given by Mahipati 
in his book Pcinduicfmg Mahigtmya written in 1766. 1 

Maruti : This popular guardian of Deccan towns and villages, 
the famohs monkey god, has two shrines pr rather images, one black 
and one red. The red one owes its colour to the red paint lavished 
upon it and it is a conspicuous sight under a peepal tree in the 
town of Paiidharpur. 

* Vishnu : Besides the temple of Vithoba there are various other 
shrines of Visnu, A little to the south of the town in the bend 
of the river there is a holy spot known as Vishnupada. Here on 
the rocks there are a few rough cup-shaped indentations, whiclf 
are said to be the foot-prints left by Krisna's cows when he 
brought them here on his wanderings in search of Rukmini. It 
was here he found her and here a feast was held to celebrate 
their reconciliation. Accordingly a temple has been built here and 
here shrCtddh ceremonies are performed. Not far from this spot 
is the village of Gopalpur, where there is another temple of 

LKrisna, a fairly large structure in a courtyard enclosed by 
cloisters. Here we are shown a big jar where Yashoda used to 
make butter and the place is connected with Krisna’s name by 
various tales. In Pandharpur itself there is a temple of Krispa 
represented as Murlidhar, the flute-player : there is also one of the 
Dattatreya incarnation of Visnu. 

All the temples mentioned above are places of note : smaller 
temples and shrines abound. In some cases their origin is known, 
in others it is not, in no case does it appear to be of aify interest 
or connected with any legend except that of the Takpithya Vithoba. 
This is the name of a small image erected by a Brahman widow 
who was crowded out of the temple and sat disappointed and 
fasting for fifteen days after which she fell asleep and on waking 
found this image miraculously presented to her by the god. 

7 . The Temple of Vithoba 

We may now proceed to visij: the sacred temple of Vithoba 
itself. It stands in the very centre of Pandhri-kshetra , the 
holy city of Papuan. Round it is a courtyard, measuring 350 
* 1 See V. L. Bhave, M. Sar., pp. 382-3. 




VITHOBA OF PANOH Uil’t/K 




m THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANDHARPtJR 53 

feetby 170. The chief entrance to this is by the East gate called 
the Namdev gate. As the floor of the courtyard is above the level 
of the surrounding ground the gate is reached by twelve steps. On 
the lowest of these steps is placed a brass bust of Namdev who 
with bis family took samitdhi there, the step being plated with brass 
on which are stamped the figures of Namdev holding a Klrtan and 
of the women of his family clapping their hands in accompaniment 
to his music. Inside the courtyard are many little shrines, to 
Ganpati, Maruti and Rama and even £iva and Bhairava, and there 
are small living rooms, storehouses and other chambers for pur- 
poses connected with the temple. The central shrine has been 
constructed at various times. Its core appears to have been in the 
Hemadpanti style of the twelfth century, a style which though 
simple is one of the truly artistic styles of Hindu architecture. 
The shrine itself is approached by a long vestibule, with a flat roof 
and Westerners are allowed access to this roof from which part of 
the courtyard can be seen. It is all that they see of the interior, 
which is rigidly closed to all but Hindus. This is in contrast with 
our experience at Dehu whereon October 25, 1920, we were allowed 
to stand on the temple threshold examining by the aid of a hand- 
mirror the faces of Vithoba and Rukmini ; at Pandharpur, how- 
ever, access to the central shrine can only be gained by crossing 
the above-mentioned courtyard where un-Hindu feet never tread. 

8. The god Vithoba 

Western eyes, accordingly, do not gaze on the sacred image of 
Vithoba at Pandharpur and his shrine is small and dark, little being 
distinguished except by lamplight. Copies of the image are made 
and sold, one of which may be examined in the picture opposite. 
It is probably not unlike the original. This is three feet nine 
inches high, cut, probably, out of black trap rock. The upper part 
of the body is usually nude ; round the waist is a waist-cloth ; on his 
neck the god wears a collar with a jewel set in it ; in his ears are 
the fish ear-rings. The image stands with arms akimbo and hands 
on hips, one hand carrying a conch-shell, the other a discus, Visnu’s 
emblems. On his forehead is the sexfcarial mark of Vispu. His 
feet are evenly set on the square brick so often mentioned in the 
poems. Perhaps the most remarkable fact of all, and one we 
learned from a Pujart (ministrant) on the spot during our visit on 
October 27, 1920, is the fact that Vithoba wears a curious tope-like 
crown, which the priests say is Siva’s lihga ; as is affirmed also in 
a n abhang of Nivrittinath, the older brother of Dnyaneswar, and 
in a well-known line of Ramdas’s Manohodh } 

The copy of the image here presented is probably if anything 
superior to the original as a work of art and Western critics 
might conclude that whatever impression Vithoba has produced 

5 See cbap. 6, sect. 4 on Sira. % 



54 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

upon mankind is not due to any aid from plastic art. With 
reference to the same picture in Dr. Macnicors Psalms of Mar<ff h8 
Saints , Miss Evelyn Underhill writes as follows : 4 To the Western 
mind it seems almost incredible that the image of Vithoba, which 
forms the frontispiece of this volume, ceuld arouse ardent feeling 
of any kind save that of repulsion ; but we must remember that an 
ancient Greek would probably have found a Byzantine crucifix 
equally grotesque, 4 and been wholly unable to understand the 
emotional glamour with which devotion has surrounded it.’ 1 
It may be that Hindus are desirous of emphasizing their theory 
that their idols or sculptures are swayambhti , self-formed or self- 
created. This was what Dr. J. Murray Mitchell was told about 
Vithoba on his visit to Pandharpur in December 1881 : * We were 
told it had not been fashioned by human hands but was swayambhu 
i.e., self-produced. 2 * 4 We were further informed that in the morning 
it looked like a child, at noon like a full-grown man, in the evening 
like an old man.*” On some occasions during the pressure 
of Ashadh and Kdrtik observances the god 4 is popularly 
represented as being tired out and his bed-chamber is closed.* 4 


9. Vithoba and Caste -Distinction 

On the question of the equal privileges of all castes at 
Pandharpur there may easily be confusion. While it is quite correct 
to say that history shows 4 Vitthala is quite free to all castes * and 
that 4 in the 13th to 16th centuries distinction of caste was not 
observed in and about the temple precincts at Pandharpur,’ 5 it 
is yet true that the Mahar poet and saint Cokhamela who is 
said to have died in 1338 (traditional date) was forbidden to enter 
Vithoba's temple ? The only reason assigned is that he was an 
4 untouchable *, a Mahar 4 out-caste *, and that 4 out-castes * as such 
have never been allowed within the sacred precincts. This agrees 
with what Dr. J. Murray Mitchell saw on the spot: 4 It is often 
asserted that caste is disregarded at Pandharpur ; but we found 
that Mahars were not allowed to approach beyond a certain point. 
This led us to ask for an explanation : and we quoted one of 
Tukaram’s most remarkable abhangs , beginning 

’Twixt the low and lofty, God no difference knoweth, 
Still to faith He sheweth 
All his glory, 

1 Westminster Gazette, Feb. 14, 1920. The review from which the abQve 
is taken is not signed with Miss Underhilfs name but ‘E. U.' is sufficient indi- 
cation of the writer, 

2 The present writer was told the same in October, 1920. 

15 The Indian Antiquary , Vol. xi., 1882, p. 151. 

4 L. J. Sedgwick, I. C. S., ./. R. .4. S. Ho., Vol. 23, No. 65, p. J26. 

’ Ibid., p. 134. 



Ill 


THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANDHARPUR 


55 


in which the poet declares that the god Vithoba assisted the Mahar 
devotee Cokbameja even to bear off dead cattle — which is one of the 
most humiliating of employments. “ Why then/ 1 we asked, “exclude 
Mahar worshippers now ?” “ That was all very well for the god, ” 
was the reply ; “ he may do as he pleases ; but men must obey the 
rules of caste/’ * 1 

The principle applied always at Pandharpur, the understanding 
of which will prevent any possible confusion as to the practice 
obtaining there, is that low castes are admitted to Vithoba’s shrine, 
while owf-castes or ‘untouchables’ are excluded, and always have 
been. Nevertheless, all that was said at the close of chapter I on 
1 the democratizing influence ' of the Maratha bhaktas holds true, 
with the result that in Vithoba’s presence there is a cosmopolitanism 
found very rarely in Indian temples. This fact doubtless largely 
explains Vithoba’s popularity with the masses of the people. 
Even those Wffrkarts 2 * who are of low-caste origin, as well as 
other low-caste devotees of Vithoba, are allowed to embrace him in 
his innermost shrine, just like those of higher birth. It seems all 
the more unfortunate therefore that out- castes are not allowed at 
all within the precincts of Vithoba’s temple, but must worship at 
the image of the Mahar saint Cokhamela on the other side of the 
street opposite Namdev’s staircase. 

It must be regarded as one of the many irreconcilable incon- 
sistencies of Hinduism that in spite of bhakti's ‘democratizing 
influence ‘no out-caste is admitted to Bhagavata temples in 
Maharashtra *. 8 And Vithoba’s temple is a Bhagavata temple. 4 On 
this subject see also section 6, ‘ Tukaram as Reformer,’ and section 
7, Tukaram and Caste,’ in chapter 6. 

io. Vithoba’s Temple-service 


* 


It will be of interest to note what are the services performed in 
Vithoba’s temple and who perform them. It would appear that no 
other Vaishnava temple in India possesses a similar image, served 
as it is by a colony of Desastha Brahmans, including priests 
(badvcls), ministrants, choristers, bath-men, singers, barbers, mace- 
bearers, and lamp lighters. Five times every twenty-four hours 
the round of service is performed. About three a.m. a priest begs 
the god to wake. The door being opened, food placed in the bed- 
chamber the previous day is removed, butter and sugar-candy are 
laid before the god, and a torch made of muslin soaked in butter is 
waved before him from head to foot. Many votaries come to 
behdld Vithoba at this time, after which he is again fed, butter and 
sugar being placed in his mouth. Lights perfumed with camphor 
$re waved, faded garlands are removed, the feet of the image are 


l Tfie Indian Antiquary % Vol.xi.. 1882, pp. 151-2. 

* See section on these in Chapter 7. 

» O.R.L.I., p. 301. 4 See para 2, chapter 2. p. 27. * 



56 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

washed first in milk and then in water, and the service proper (pUjft) 
then begins. The image is unrobed and bathed, a sheet being held 
before the door, while he is naked. Before the 1873 attack on 
Vithoba by the Saivite enthusiast (see section 14 below) the god was 
washed in warm water, but since the left leg had to be cemented it 
is said that cold water mixed with saffron has been used. After 
his bath he is dried and dressed in new robes, his face being wiped 
and rubbed with scented oil until it shines. A turban is bound 
round his head and garlands of flowers are hung on his neck, while 
the barber holds a mirror before him. His feet are washed and 
rubbed with sandal, and sandal paste is applied to his brow. About 
three in the afternoon the god is again dressed, the ministrant 
bathing and adorning him. Wednesday and Saturday are days 
specially sacred to the god unless these fall at the conjunction of 
sun and moon or at ominous conjunctions of planets, and as with 
all Vaishnavas, the eleventh day in each fortnight of the lunar month 
(< ekadashi ) is a fast day. 1 

ii. The Pilgrim’s Priest and Ceremonies 

Having learned what there is to see with the bodily eye at 
Pandharpur we may now follow the pilgrims on their arrival there 
and observe what use they make of their time. Each pilgrim on 
arrival is bound by custom to enroll himself as the client of 
some priest. Strictly speaking, indeed, he should engage three 
priests, a Badvd to conduct him to Vithoba, an Utpat to conduct 
him to Rukmini, and an ordinary local Brahman to perform the 
river-side ceremonies. To^mix with the crowd and salute the god in 
passing requires no priestly help, but most pilgrims come desirous 
to accomplish something more. They have no difficulty in finding 
priests, for records are kept of all visitors and the priest who has 
once served a family has a right, and his family inherit a right, to 
serve its descendants. Every pilgrim is met on his arrival and 
handed over to his proper priest, who generally makes all necessary 
arrangements for his stay. 

Early on the morning after his arrival the pilgrim goes down 
to the river to perform the Gangd-bhet % the ceremony of meeting 
the Ganges, as the Bhlma is called for the time being. He 
places on the ground a cocoanut, some sandal paste, tulsi leaves 
and a few grains of rice. He addresses the river thus : ‘ I offer a 
cocoanut, sandal paste, tulsi leaves and rice/ and at the same time 
he places these articles on the sand before him. The priest then 
says : 1 1 bow, Ganga, to thy lotus feet : I bow to thee, Chandra- 
bhaga The ritual which follows is a little more complicated if 
the pilgrim is a Brahman than if he belongs to the lower castes. 
In the former case he enters the water till his head is submerged, 
faces the East, sips water thrice from the palm of his hand and 

1 See B. G., Vol. xx. pp. 415 ff ; E.R % E*> Vol. ix, p. 602 a. 



in THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANDHARPUR 


37 


repeats the twenty-four names of Vispu which he invokes in his 
daily devotions. He then sprinkles water on the river and prays 
in Sanskrit : ‘ Come, Sun, with thy thousand rays, thou mass of 
glory, and ruler of the world, accept this my worship and this 
offering of water : I bow to thee.’ He takes a little earth from the 
bed of the river and rubs it on his chest, saying in Sanskrit ; ‘ Earth ! 
free me from my sins and misdeeds, that my sins being destroyed 
by thee I may win heaven.’ He makes another dip in the water 
and turning to the West takes a little cow-dung from the priest 
and rubs it on his body saying in Sanskrit: ‘Cow-dung, that 
belongest to the wives of bulls who roam from wood to wood eating 
herbs, thou that dost cleanse the body, remove for ever all my 
ailments and sorrows.* He dips again in the water, rubs ashes on 
his chest, and recites a Vedic hymn. Then still standing in the 
water he takes water in both hands and pours it out as an offering 
to the river, saying : 4 In this South-flowing Bhima on the West 

bank, in the holy Lohadand, in the holy town of Pandhri, near 
Pundalik, near the holy pipal Narfiyan, and near the cow and the 
Brahman, O Bhima ! by thy favour guard me, who am the image of 
sin, a sinner above other sinners, whose soul is a sinner and born 
in sin. 1 To put away the miseries and sins whose source is the 
body, the speech, the mind, the touch of others or the neglecting 
to touch others, eating or refusing to eat, drinking or refusing to 
drink, and all small and secondary sins, to put away these I 
bathe in the Chandrabhaga on this auspicious day.’ After this 
ceremonial bathing, if he wishes, he may proceed to personal 
ablutions. 

If a Brahman pilgrim has his wife with him the ends of their 
clothes are tied in a knot before they enter the river. The wife 
does not rub her body with earth, cowdung or ashes, nor does she 
repeat her husband’s prayers : she merely follows her husband’s 
actions in dipping in the water. 

In the case of a non-Brahman pilgrim these ceremonies are 
much abridged, the rubbings being omitted. The pilgrim salutes 
the river in the first words we have given and then enters the water 
while the priest says : ‘ In this holy place on this holy day I shall 
bathe in the Chandrabhaga to remove all sins of body and mind due 
to touch or caused by speech.’ 

12. The Pilgrim’s Gifts 

Jhe pilgrim then, if a well-to-do man, proceeds to make certain 
offerings to the river : sandal-paste, rice, flowers, sugar and fruit. 
Offerings are also made to the priest : (i) Possibly the clothes in 
which the pilgrim bathed are presented to him. (ii) Some money : 
it is a rule that whatever else is given to a Brahman some money 
must accompany it. (iii) If the pilgrim is a married man his wife 

1 B. G. (xx., p. 475) here inserts ; * 6iva ! destroy my sins \ 

8 



58 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

may make a present to the priest’s wife. This takes the form of a 
winnowing fan, in which are laid various articles partly symbolic, 
such as rice and plantains, partly valuable such as ornaments or 
dress, (iv) A cow may be given to the Brahman. The pilgrim 
seldom is rich enough to make this present but a pretence of 
making it is gone through. The priest brings forward a cow which 
he keeps for the purpose, the pilgrim lays a little money beside her, 
Worships her and walks round her, while the priest says: ‘All the 
sins and misdeeds of this and other births are destroyed at every step 
of the round.* Then the pilgrim grasps the cow’s tail and places 
it in the priest’s hand and the priest says on his behalf : * The cow 
in whom live fourteen worlds and who therefore is able to do good 
in this world and the next, this cow whose god is Rudra, who has 
golden horns, silver hoofs, a copper back, with a milking pot and 
a bell round her neck, this cow I give to thee who art learned 
in the Vedas, who hast committed them to memory, who hast a 
wife, (this do) that Visnu may be pleased and I may be saved 
♦from hell.* After this comes the gift of a shaligram stone made 
with similar ceremonies. This gift, it appears, is more usual from 
pilgrims from the Southern Deccan or Telugu country. 

Then comes the ceremony called shraddh or funeral rite, in 
memory of the pilgrim’s ancestors. As the Bhima flows into the 
Krisna and not into the sea, these ‘ mind-rites ’ at Pandharpur are 
less availing than at Gaya or Na£ik. Brahmans therefore seldom 
perform them at Pandharpur ‘ and when they do the moustache is 
not shaved,* 1 an additional reason being that the worshipper is 
viewed as still having a father and mother in the god Vithoba and 
the goddess RakhumaT. • The shraddh ceremony should properly 
be performed on the banks of a river flowing into the sea, the 
Bhima being the only river allowed as an exception to this rule. 

- The Bombay Gazetteer adds that some Madras pilgrims 
treat Papdharpur as they treat Benares or Gaya. ‘ The women, 
though their husbands are alive, make the hair offering or venldan 
(vent, braid; dfitt, gift), that is, they have their heads shaved as 
Brahman women's heads are shaved at Gaya. The ceremonies may 
either be spread over three days or crowded into otfe, according 
to the time and money the pilgrim means to spend’. 2 

13 . Darshan (vision of the god) 

After these duties are accomplished the pilgrim proceeds 
to the worship of the god. In its simplest form this is nothing 
more than a darshan or a setting of one’s eyes upon him. But 
the usual method of darshan in Vithoba’s temple in .Pandhar- 
pur is marked by a feature said to be found nowhere else in the 
whole of India. No pilgrim to Vithoba at Pandharpur considers the 

1 B t G. Vol. xx, p. 478. 

8 Ibid, p,48l. 



hi THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANDHARPUR 59 

darshan ceremony complete unless he touches the feet of Vfihoba 
with his head. In order to ensure decorous performance of this 
ceremony, bars are placed beyond which only one worshipper can go 
at a time. Darshan at Pandharpur thus includes embracing the 
image, laying one’s head on its feet, waving money, laying money 
before it, placing round its neck a flower garland and tulsl leaves, 
and offering acocoanut or sugar and incense. Till this is done the 
pilgrim has no rest, for to most pilgrims the sight of Vithoba is their 
dearest hope on earth. They beam with joy as they leave his 
presence, their longing to throw their arms round his knees at last 
realized. 1 

It often happens that a pilgrim reaching Pandharpur late in the 
evening goes straight to the temple and accomplishes a dhnl- 
darshan or visit for this purpose with the dust (dhiil) of his journey 
still on his feet. There is nothing formal about such a visit. But 
more ceremonious visits may be paid. Two of these have been 
recognized, the mahapiljd and the piidyapuja. In the former the 
pilgrim pours over the image the five nectars and usually presents 
offerings of considerable value, such as jewels. Owing to some 
dissensions between the priests official permission for this mahapiljcl 
has now to be obtained. The padyapuja is more common. In 
the course of this the pilgrim washes the feet of the image, sprin- 
kles them with sandal-paste and rice, throws a garland of flowers 
round its neck, waves lighted sticks of camphor incense round it, 
and finally lays a cash present 2 before it. The image is then decked 
in its ornaments, and sweetmeats are offered to it. This being 
accomplished the pilgrim proceeds to worship Rukminl. Here 
he still has choice of forms of ceremonial corresponding to the two 
recognized in the case of Vithoba. The details are in each case 
much the same. It is to be noted that in 1873 various innovations 
were intrdtluced into Vithoba’s worship owing to the injuries in- 
flicted on him (on which see following page). 

The visit to the chief gods being finished the pilgrim makes a 
circuit of the holy district H and salutes the deities at their temples. 
There are two recognized routes, one longer 4 than the other. 6 Once 
in his life every devout worshipper makes the longer circuit, over 
seven miles. When he stays a day or two in Pandharpur he makes 
it a point to see the daily ministrations offered to the image as often 
as possible. Nor does he neglect to feed a company of Brahmans, 
large or small according to his means, especially if his visit has 
been a ceremonious one. If his visit falls during the sacred seasons 
its closing scene will be enacted at the Gopalpur temple, where the 
pilgrims partake of a mixture of dried curds together in memory of 
the joint-meal by Krisna and the cowherds. 

ifl. G. xx.. p. 473. 

2 Dakshind. 

8 Pradakshind. 

1 N agar pradakshind, town-circuit. 

5 Devpradakshind . god-circuit. » 



60 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch- 

14. Vithoba’s Calamity in 1873 

On Sunday, July 20, 1873, while four or five Gosilvl 1 mendicants 
were embracing the idol Vithoba, one of them pushed it over and 
as it fell it broke its legs between knees and ankles. The priests 
refused to divulge exactly what happened, the local belief being 
that the mendicant threw a stone at the idol because it did not eat 
fruit which he had offered, ‘ But this is less likely *, says the 
Bombay Gazetteer , ‘ than the story that the image was thrown 
over by a shove either wilful or accidental. To avoid inquiry and 
noise the Badvds silently drove out the mendicants and kept the 
temple closed for two or three days. According to one story during 
those days a new image was installed, but examination shows that 
the present image is the old image patched at the break, it is said, 
by iron or copper rods from within. Besides being mended the 
image has also been strengthened by a support from behind up to 
the knee/ a 

Newspapers of the time enable us to supplement the above 
record in various details. The Arunodaya published at Thana 
affltmed positively that a stone was thrown, while a Bombay 
correspondent after careful investigation wrote to the Indtt- 
Prakash that the stone thrown was the size of a cocoanut, adding 
that a new idol of Vithoba was erected as nearly like the old one 
as could be made, but dissimilar in important respects which he 
mentions. 

How terrible the presence of a broken idol at Pandharpur must 
have seemed will appear from a few sentences by Mrs. Sinclair 
Stevenson : ‘ If in the process of time the ear or nose of an idol, 
or any of its limbs, gets broken or crumbles away, the belief is that 
the spirit of the god escapes* through the opening thus made. . . . 
One of the most illuminating ways to study idolatry sympathetically 
and scientifically is to watch what is done with a broken idol V* In 
VitKoba’s case, it was no mere 1 crumbling away * but a violent 
attack upon him resulting in grave injury. 

A sure index to the gravity of the affair is supplied by a secret 
meeting of the temple priests and the resolution they passed of 
which the following is a rough translation : * This affair must not 
reach the outside world, for we have already many foes and this is 
31 most critical occasion. Therefore without complete unanimity 
we cannot possibly preserve secrecy. Remembering then our 
ancient ancestors, let us make no more ado but all pull together and 
reseat Vithoba on his throne. Putting aside our differences regard- 
ing temple-rights let us labour with one accord, for we are 0 all 
dependent solely on him. All wrangling at the time of worship 
should cease forthwith and we should all toil witfy one end in view. 
When people come to offer sacrifice we should ask of them gifts 

1 See second footnote, p. 6. 

* B.G. Vol. xx, p. 423. 

1 o The Rites of the Twiee-Born, pp. 415-6. 



m THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANDHARPUR 61 

only in accordance with established rules, gladly accepting what is 
gladly given. Whenever Vithoba is worshipped arrayed in his 
ornaments, all must be present, each doing service strictly according 
to his hereditary right. This resolution is passed unanimously and 
our earnest request to all Wdrkarls and their followers is that 
they read and carefully ponder over it, and that without fail they 
impart wisdom to the common people by pointing out the advantages 
of coming to Panclharpur,* The crisis thus led to self-reformation 
by the priests and a consolidation of their ranks. 

Needless to say, confusion reigned supreme not only in Pandhar- 
pur but throughout Maharashtra, for it was found impossible to con- 
ceal the fact that so grave a disaster had happened in the holy city. 
The iconoclast himself spread the knowledge, for he went about 
bragging of his deed until the angry citizens, two days later at 7-30 
in the evening, set on him so furiously with cudgels that he fell 
senseless and the police had to remove him to hospital. Others were 
arrested on suspicion but released on a security the next day 
owing to lack of evidence. How deeply Maharashtra was moved is 

clear from the newspapers of the time Indu-Prakdsh , Armio - 

daya t Berdr Samdchar , and the Dnydnodaya. One Hindu 
gentleman writing to the proprietor of the first-mentioned paper 
gave expression to what must have been a widespread doubt : 
1 With broken leg how could Vithoba any longer be viewed as “ self- 
existent ” as indicated in the favourite term applied to him, 
swayambhfl *? And among the Warkaris , the innermost sect of 
Vithoba’s devotees, there was a wailing as if a member in each 
family lay dead. 1 

*5- Pilgrims, Missionaries and Indian Reformers 

Writing in The Indian Antiquary for June 1882 (pp. 149-156) 
the Rev. Dr J. Murray Mitchell gives an interesting account of 
a visit toPandharpur in which he reports that in conversing with the 
people and in preaching he met no bitter opposition, many express- 
ing a desire to hear him again. The mental state of the pilgrims 
is illustrated by the following typical conversation. ‘ You good 
friends are very much in earnest. Some of you have come 600 
miles to this festival. The expense, the labour, is very great ; the 
risk to life not small; for you all know how frequently cholera 
breaks out at these gatherings. You expect much from this pilgri- 
mage. How sad if you do not get what you want ; but what do 
you want? ' ‘ We bathe in the Bhima, and gaze on the god ; and 

SO all sin is removed, and much righteousness acquired*, was the 
usual answer. * Are you sure that bathing in the Bhima washes 
away sin V * Why, who doubts it ? have not I come hundreds of 
miles to be purified so ?* Dr. Mitchell reports perpetual confusion 

1 Dnyanodaya, Vol. 32. July 31, 1873, pp. 245-7, 251-2; August 7, 
1873, pp. 237-9 ; Vol. 71, August 1 , 1912, pp. 243-4. 



62 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

between the material image and an unseen Vithoba, * Vithoba ’, 
said one of the hearers, ‘ is almighty and omnipresent. 1 ‘ Is 

he in your own village ? ’ * To be sure . f 4 Then why travel 
hundreds of miles to see him here ? * * Ah ! but this is a special 
Vithoba ; this is a swayambhii image.* 4 Well ; but is it the image, 
or the deity, you trust in ? * 4 The deity.’ The doctor made efforts 

to discover what precise meaning was affixed to the phrase heard 
continually, that the waters of the Bhlma 4 washed away sin.* The 
pilgrims believing that the guilt of sin was removed, to discover 
whether they held that their hearts were purified questions were 
put. 4 Unless our hearts are purified,* said one man, 4 there is little 
good in our coming here’. But did experience show that they 
were purified? On one or two maintaining this, they were easily 
silenced by proverbs current all over India about those who go on 
pilgrimage generally coining back worse than before. ‘Visit 
Benares thrice’, runs one Marathi proverb, ‘and you become a 
thorough scoundrel.’ So the doctor asked: 4 When a pilgrim 
visits Panclharpur, does he not usually carry home a load of pride 
and self-conceit ? * 4 Too often,’ was the reply. 4 Has he then got 
any good by bathing in the Chandrabhaga ? * 4 Very little.’ 4 Has 
he not got harm ? * 4 Perhaps.* 

A similar impression was left on the mind of an Indian Reformer 
belonging to the Bombay Prarthana Samaj whose visit to Pandhar- 
pur on June 26, 1920 we have already referred to. He writes as 
follows: 4 One cannot avoid thinking when he sees this vast 

humanity on Ashadhi Day in Panclharpur that people do 

not get true spiritual benefit. After all it is a religious feast which 
affects only the outside. The hearts of the devotees are not touched 
and their life is not renovated. The pilgrim does not leave the 
place morally or spiritually transformed. He thinks his sins are 
washed away, but he has no determination not to err again. How 
to preserve this valuable asset of bhakti and make it spiritual is 
the problem to which the thoughts of a Brahmo naturally turn 
when he sees this religious feast.’ 1 

1 6. Government and Pilgrim Festivals 

In the essay on Panclharpur referred to above, Dr. Murray 
Mitchell writing in 1882 showed the grave need of public control in 
connection with the two great annual festivals. The crowding of 
the worshippers into Vithoba’s small apartment often resulted in 
women being injured in the crush, sometimes they were subjected to 
indignities, sometimes had their ornaments torn off. A thoughtful 
English magistrate had ruled, a few years before, that as fat 1 as 
possible, men and women should be kept separate on the great day 
of any feast. Even so, the scene was one of terrible confusion, the 
unutterably filthy condition of the town making one of the doctors 
party seriously ill. On another occasion cholera broke out, and they 
• 1 Subodh PatriUd) July 18, 1920. 



hi THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANDHARPUR 63 

had to minister to the bodies as well as the souls of the pilgrims. 
Happily, however, ‘ Pandharpur has developed into a decent-looking, 
clean town, with a plentiful water-supply.' 1 

How this improved condition of affairs in this great pilgrim 
centre has been brought about and how it is still maintained 
appears from the annual Government reports on the Ashddhi 
Festival. In the report from the Collector of Sholapur to the Com- 
missioner, C. D. dated the 11th November 1919, we are told 
supervision was exercised as usual by the Collector, the District 
Deputy Collector, the District Superintendent of Police, and the 
Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, the Sanitary Commissioner also 
encamping at Pandharpur during the Fair. In addition to the 
ordinary police stationed at Pandharpur, a force consisting of one 
Inspector, eight Sub- Inspectors, six jamadars, twenty-three Head 
Constables and one hundred and thirty- five constables from other 
parts of the District were drafted into Pandharpur. From other 
districts also detectives were called in to watch their own local bad 
characters. Sanitary arrangements were completed in good time 
before the Fair in a way reported to be ‘ very creditable to the 
Municipality.’ One hundred and thirty-eight extra bhangis and 
one Sanitary Inspector were emplQyed by the Municipality, who 
had arranged to stock sufficient quantities of disinfectants freely 
used during the Fair. Water-supply was adequate. Ten men 
were appointed to prevent waste, and only on one day was 
want of water felt in places of high levels. The usual precautions 
of closing step-wells, and of treating all wells on the pdlkhl routes 
with permanganate of potash, were adopted. * The pilgrims as 
usual took river-water in spite of advice from the police.* The 
medical arrangements showed twenty-eight Sub-Assistant Surgeons 
employed on special duty. There was no indigenous cholera at 
Pandharpur, but it broke out with the Aland! pdlkhl and thus 
infection was brought to Pandharpur, a few cases from NaSik, 
Jalgaon and Umraoti also being imported. After the big day the 
cholera cases were almost confined to the followers of the Alandi 
pdlkhl, and three Sub- Assistant Surgeons were sent with the pdlkhls 
of Dnyanoba, Nivrittinath and Tukaram for two marches of their 
return journey. The Hindu division of St. John’s Ambulance 
Brigade attended the Fair as usual and rendered great assistance. 

17. The Disastrous Pilgrimage of the Last Peshwa 

It would have been strange if so famous a religious centre as 
Pandharpur was for probably a thousand years 2 had not figured in 

1 The Indian Antiquary , Vol.xi, 1882, pp. 153-6. 

* ‘ In the thirteenth century Vitthal was already a god of long standing. . . 
The general workmanship of the image is earlier than the mediaeval Rajput 
Style of the Anhilvad Chaulukyas (943-1240), ... or the Ajmer Chohans 
(685—1193). The dress and ornament of the image belong to . . . probably 
not later than the 5th or 6th century after Christ,* This image of Vithoba 
resembles sculptures 'of the 4th century’. 13. G., Vol. xx, pp. 420, 424, 430. 



64 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM cm 

the historical vicissitudes of the country. Within the walls of 
Pap<Jharpur, a stone’s throw from Vithoba’s temple, Vithoba’s 
devotees who were for the time being residing in the sacred enclo- 
sure, in 1815 committed a foul murder. This murder of Gangadhar 
Shastrl, the Gaikwar’s agent at the Poona court, effected with the 
complicity of Trimbakjl Denglia, the favourite of Bajirao the last 
Peshwa (1796-1817), was one of the chief causes of the downfall 
of Maratha rule. The official chronicle runs : 1 Gangadhar Shastrl 
had gone to Poona under British guarantee to settle some money 
disputes between the Gaik war and the Peshwa, but finding his 
efforts fruitless he had determined to return to Baroda and leave the 
settlement to British arbitration. This disconcerted Bajirao's 
plans, whose real object was to arrange a union with the Gaikwar 
against the English, and he and Trimbakjl after much persuasion 
induced Gangadhar to stay. In July (1815) Bajirao went to 
Panclharpur on a pilgrimage and took with him Trimbakjl and 
Gangadhar Shastrl. On the 14th of July the Shastrl dined with 
the PeshwS, aifd in the evening Trimbakjl asked him to Vithoba’s 
temple where the Peshwa was. Gangadhar who was unwell 
excused himself, but was pressed by Trimbakjl and went to the 
temple with a few unarmed attendants. After a prayer to Vithoba 
he talked with Trimbakjl and then went to pay his respects to the 
Peshwa who was seated in the upper verandah of the temple and 
treated him with marked attention. When the visit was over, 
Gangadhar started for his lodging in high spirits. He had scarcely 
gone 300 yards when he was attacked in the street by assassins 
hired by Trimbakjl and was almost cut to pieces’ 1 . The treacher- 
ous murder of a Brahman in the holy city, the proved guilt of the 
Peshwa’s representative, thfc intrigue and duplicity of the Peshwa 
himself, the assassination of one for whose security the British had 
pledged themselves, these things led on to war and the issue was 
only* determined by the complete defeat of the Peshwa’s army on 
the battlefield of Kirkee, November 5, 1817. 


Having thus acquainted ourselves, in our introductory chapters, 
with Tukaram’s land and people, with the religion of his day, and 
with the city he has made famous in his verse, let us now enter 
upon our study of the bhakti poet himself as far as the biographical 
material at our disposal will permit. 


1 H.Q., Vol. xx, pp. 484-5. 




THE PRIDE OF KNOWLEDGE i 


Though I’m a man of lowly birth 
The saints have magnified my worth. 

And so within my heart to hide 
Has come the great destroyer, pride. 

In my fond heart the fancy dwells 
That I am wise and no one else. 

O, save me, save me, Tuka prays ; 
Spent like the wind are all my days. 


WITHIN MY HEART 1 


I know no way by which 
My faith thy feet can reach 
Nor e’er depart. 

How, how can 1 attain 
That thou, O Lord, shalt reign 
Within my heart ? 

Lord, I beseech thee, hear 
And grant to faith sincere. 

My heart within, 

Thy gracious face to see, 
Driving afar from me 
Deceit and sin. 

O come, I, Tuka, pray. 

And ever with me stay, 

Mine, mine to be. 

Thy mighty hand outstretch 
And save a f^Jlen wretch, 

Yea, even me. 


GOD IS OURS 1 


God is ours, yea, ours is he, 

Soul of all the souls that be. 

God is nigh without a doubt, 
Nigh to all, within, without. 

God is gracious, gracious still ; 
Every longing he’ll fulfil. 

God protects, protects his own ; 
Strife and death he casteth down. 

Kind is God. ah, kind indeed ; 
Tuka he will guard and lead. 


1 Translated from Tukaram, P.M.S., pp. 77, G2, 73* 



Chapter IV 

The Biography of Tukaram 


Preliminary Considerations 

With regard to the date of Tukaram’s birth there is a difference 
of opinion, some Marathi authorities holding it to have taken place 
in 1598, others in 1588, while other schools hold to 1577 or 1568. 
We however may adopt the traditional date of 1608 based on 
Mahlpati’s record, until better available evidence points to the 
contrary. 1 2 * This means that Tukaram Bolhoba Ambile 8 was born 
the same year as John Milton. If Milton’s mission was to herald 
the golden age both of English Protestantism and English literature, 
that of Milton’s contemporary, Tukaram, was to give expression to 
the protest of India’s heart against the Hindu scheme of things 
which had reduced religion to a philosophy and to express that 
protest in verse that was to become dear to Indian prince and 
peasant alike. Tukaram’s value, therefore, in the words of Prof. 
W. B. Patwardhan of Poona, is that of ‘ a poet-saint who lived and 
moved just when Maharashtra was in labour over the birth of a 
new spirit. A new life was stirring the hearts and a new warmth 
was felt in the blood that surged in the veins of Marathas of the 
time and it may be that non- Indian students of Maratha history 
will discover material here to estimate the under-current of thought 
and feeling of the Maharashtra of the sixteenth and the seventeenth 
century In the happy simile of Dr. Mackichan, Tukaram is ‘ the 
Robert Burns of India*. 4 

In writing any biographical account of Tukaram we are confronted 
with two serious problems. The first one arises from the fact that 
the existing Marathi ‘Lives’ of Tukaram are indebted to one 
authority. Up to the present hour indeed (1921) almost all the 
available information concerning Tukaram’s life comes to us from 

1 See the Marathi discussions in L. K. Pangarkar’s (1920) pp. 7-46, 

in the Vividh Dnyiin Vistdra , September 1920, pp. 105-114, and January 1921, 
pp. 25-36, and in Nawa Yuga , March 1921, pp. 137-9, summarized p. 76 below. 

2 ‘More* is the family surname given by some authorities including Sir 
R. G. Bhandarkar (V.S.M.R.b., p. 92). This is traceable to the bakhar 
of Rdmdas whose authority in a matter of this kind cannot be regarded as 
equal to that of the official records of a Nasik priest who used to serve Tukaram 
and his descendants on their visits there and whose records give the signature 
of Tukaram’s son Nsirayan with ‘Ambile* as the family surname, ‘More* 
being: given as that of the family lineage (M. Sdr ., p, 172, footnote 2), 

:l /. October. 1910, p. 114. 

4 /. /., January, 1913, p. 173. , 



68 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

that same source, Mahipati, the famous biographer of the Maratba 
4 saints* who wrote a century and a quarter after Tukaram’s death. 
It is true that some of these details are confirmed by other sources, 
but in the main we are depended on this one authority. The 
other difficulty referred to concerns the fact, admitted by Hindu 
biographers and commentators (see helow), that Mahipati, on whom 
we are so dependent, has interwoven with his story much that is 
obviously miraculous and legendary. In view of these facts it seems 
best to divide this 4 biographical * chapter regarding the poet and 
saint who marks 4 the era of the efflorescence of Maharashtra’s 
people’ 1 into three distinct parts : I. The Value of our Sources; II. 
the Probable Biographical Facts; III. The Legendary Additions. 


I. The Biographical Sources 

i. Fact and Tradition in 4 Lives’ of Tukaram 

• Prefixed to the standard Marathi edition of Tukaram's poems 
published by the Indu-Prcikcish Press, is a biographical essay by 
Janardan Sakharam Gadgil where it is stated : 4 The biographer’s 
task, in writing a faithful life of any of the guiding spirits who in 
their time influenced the Hindu nation, is extremely difficult. The 
idea of recording events faithfully for the information of after-ages 
never existed in the nation. Whenever the influence on the 
succeeding generations of any of the important personages has been 
great enough to induce somebody to write his biography, the ten- 
dency towards deification has been so great, that the little of real 
events that has descended by tradition has been mixed up with 
fable to such a degree as almost to defy all attempts at separa- 
tion What has been aimed at, therefore, in this 

notice, is to bring together the several passages in the following 
collection bearing on the poet’s life, linking them together by 
the light furnished by the mythological account of Mahipati.’ 8 

In the above observations there are three phrases used — 4 the 
tendency towards deification,’ 4 tradition mixed up yrith fable,’ 
4 the mythological account of Mahipati ’ — which, when joined by a 
fourth at the conclusion of the same essay, 4 the legends of Mahipati ’ 
(Ibid. p. 32), give abundant reason for caution in reading the 
Marathi ‘Lives’ of Tukaram who is 4 par excellence the poet of 
Maharashtra.’ 3 Should the verdict in the Indu-Prakfish edition 
of 1869 be challenged as out of date, a similar verdict by Prof. 
Patwardban in April 1912, may be more readily accepted. He 
says : 4 We have, in the first place, no authentic and properly sifted 

1 Dr. Mackicban, /. /., January 1913, p. 165. 

2 Poems of Tukaram , 7.P. edition, Vol. I., p. 2. 

3. Dr . Mackichan , /./ f January 1913, p. 173. 



IV 


BIOGRAPHICAL SOURCES 


69 


account of his life. There is a mass of legends and traditions 
that have gathered round Tukaram. These are implicitly believed 
in by those who are avowedly Tukoba’s followers* and equally by 
those who, though not followers of Tukoba’s school, are innocent 
admirers of everything connected with the saint of Maharashtra-’ 1 
Again he says : 1 As in the case of Tukaram, so in that of Namdev, 

I have to sound a note of complaint at the outset. There is hardly 
any authentic information available as regards his life and work. 
Most of the accounts that have come down to us are vitiated by 
adventitious matter mixed up with and added to the little that is 
genuine history. It is everywhere the same old story ; miracle and 
wonder-working have obscured the field. Take any of the saint-* 
poets of Maharashtra from Dnyaneshwar . . . . , his life-story is 
shrouded with mystery — hidden behind a dense overgrowth of 
superstitious tradition and fantastic invention. In the case of 
Tukaram we had at least some facts of historical accuracy to start 
with.* 2 3 On the other hand, ‘it is a great relief,’ says Dr. P. R. 
Bhandarkar, ‘to find Tukaram working no miracles. Tradition has 
credited him with having performed many, but he personally does 
not lay claim to any.’* 


2. Tukaram’s Biographer: Mahipati 

Who was this Mahipati, concerning whose poetical accounts 
of the Maratha saints the late Maratha Christian poet Narayan 
Waman Tilak once said that they ‘ remind one of Foxe’s Book of 
Martyrs'} And what led Mahipati to write the ‘lives’*of his 
country’s saints? Born in 1715, from his earliest days Mahipati 
gave proof of a religious temperament. At five years old he 
joined a company of pilgrims to Panclharpur, and from that time 
made an annual pilgrimage to the great shrine. On his father’s 
death he succeeded him as kulkarnl of Taharabadbut soon resigned 
Government service because the Mussulman jaghlrddr who was 
his superior forced him to work when he (Mahipati) desired to 
pray. Leaving his pujd and carrying out the order, he told the 
jdghfrddr when he had completed the task, 1 1 have obeyed your 
command, but no more of this*. He had learned that he could not 
serve two masters, the State and his god, so he laid his pen at 
Vithoba’s feet, devoted himself to Vithoba’s service for ever, and 
vowed that neither he nor any descendant should ever again serve 
the State, a vow which was kept for generations. One night 
Tukaram appeared to Mahipati in a dream and bade him write the 
lives of Maratha bhaktas . He began the Bhakta Vijdya , his 

1 April 1912, p. 19. 

2 April 1913, p. 11. 

3 Two Masters ; Jesus and Tukdrdm , p. 28. 



70 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

chief work, finishing it in a. D. 1762 or 1763. Its completion 
was anticipated by his Santa LTlfimfita in 1757. KathCt S&r&mrita 
was finished in 1765 and Bhakta Lllcimrita in 1774, His S>anta 
VijUya was incomplete when he died in A. D» 1790. 1 His fife of 
Tukaram occupies twenty-one chapters in all, five in the Bhakta 
Vijftya (48-52) and sixteen in Bhakta Lllfimfita (25-40). 

We have already quoted one English critic’s estimate of Mahl- 
pati’s literary merit (see pp. 20-1). Another, Mr. C. A. Kincaid, 
affirms: 'Had Mahipati used a linguistic medium more widely 
known than Marathi, he would have ranked high among the 
world’s poets. Even a foreigner can appreciate the easy flow of 
his stanzas, his musical rhymes and above all his unrivalled 
imagery.' 2 One of the greatest needs in Marathi literature to-day 
is a critical investigation of what have been called Mahlpati’s 
1 legends of mediaeval bhaktas. ' * 


3. Mahipati an Honest Author 


America joins in this chorus of praise from foreign critics 
concerning the author of the Acta Sanctorum of the Marathas. 
We are indebted to Dr. Justin E. Abbott of New Jersey, 
United States, and formerly of Bombay, for the following critical 
notes. They reached us on different dates and we give them as 
we received them, (a) and (b) respectively, to which we add a 
paragraph (c). 

(a)* * Mahlpati’s account of Tukaram is almost the sole source 
from which the different Marathi “ lives of Tukaram " draw. The 
question then is : Is Mahlpati’s account true to facts? Tukaram 
died in 1649 (traditional date) 4 and Mahipati wrote his account in 
1774, or 125 years after Tukaram’s death. Not very long, but long 
enough for legends to grow. I regard Mahipati as an honest writer, 
that he used honestly the material at his disposal. He was not 
a t “ higher critic ”, but used as truth whatever j:ame to him in the 
form of MSS or oral tradition. I think I can produce convincing 
evidence of this honesty. He had evidently a good ’library of 
manuscripts. I have the names of some he possessed, or was more 
or less familiar with. I find this list in his own writings. But 
as poet he avows the principle of expanding the facts at his disposal, 
"as a seed expands into a tree.”- This is indeed a habit of Indian 
poets. „ ; 

•* ' I; 

1 See M. Sar, t pp, 378-388 for biographical details. 

a Tales of the Saints of Pandharptlr, pp. 3-4. 

3 L. J. Sedgwick, J.R.A.S. Bo>, VoJ. 23, No. 65, pp- 127-8. .*■ 

4Tt>e brackets are our own, as various dates are held by Scholars — 1648, 
1649, 1650 and 1652 : see our note at the end of the list of dates, Part II. 1, 



MAH IP ATI, THE BIOGRAPHER OE TUKAKAM 





71 


IV BIOGRAPHICAL SOURCES 

* What MSS or what oral tradition did Mahlpati use? This 
is as yet an unsolved problem, with this exception, that a few 
sources are known. Among the MSS he uses are the Abhangs 
by Tukaram’s brother Kanhoba (see Bhakta Llldmrita , cb. 40. 
198 and following) and abhangs of Rameshwar [Bhakta LUamrita , 
ch. 4(h 209). There is also now published Niloba’s Gatha. Nijoba 
was a disciple of Tukaram’s. 1 He gives some account of Tukaram, 
and Mahlpati knew of Nijoba, so probably knew of his abhangs 
(Bhakta Lllftwrita , ch. 40. 238.) The last part of Mahlpati’s chapter 
40, which describes Tukaram’s “ ascension,” mentions many indivi- 
duals who must have passed on to the next generation their knowledge 
of Tukaram. 

* It still remains true that all modern accounts of Tukaram’s 
life are to be traced to Mahlpati as the practically sole source of 
information. Perhaps some time Mahlpati’s sources will be better 
known. 

‘ This being so we cannot now know what are facts and what 
are fiction in Mahlpati’s account, it will not do merely to deduct 
the manifestly legendary, and call the balance facts, as seems to be 
the general practice. The only honest way for any modern writer, 
is to give Mahlpati credit for the account the writer gives, and give 
it as Mahlpati gives it, legend and all, leaving it to the future, for 
possible discoveries, to settle what are the real facts of Tukaram’s 
life. Much of Mahlpati’s account may be facts, but I think events 
in Tukaram’s life should not be recorded as facts until they can be 
substantiated from other and earlier sources.* 

(b) ‘As I have before remarked I regard Mahlpati as an honest 
historian. He wrote from books before him, and from oral tradition. 
He anticipated the charge that he drew from his own imagination 
and says iri Santa Lllfimrita (1. 67-69) : “ You will raise this doubt 
in your mind and say : You have drawn on your own imagination. 
This is not so. Listen. Great poet-saints have written books in 
many languages. It is on their authority that 1 write this Santa 
LTlamrita. If I wrote on my own authority my statements would hot 
be respected. The Husband of Rukminl is witness to this, who 
knows all hearts.” 

* In Bhakta Vijaya ( 1 .37) he says : “ You will say I have compiled 
this book on my own authority. This indeed is not so. Hold no 
doubts in your minds.” He then quotes Nabhajl and Udhavchid- 
ghan as authorities ; ” Joining these two together, Bhakta Vijaya 
was begun ” (1, 39). For a list of saints with whose names and 
books Mahlpati was familiar see Bhakta Vijaya (1. 19), Bhakta 
Vijdya (57. 169-201) and Bhakta Lfldtnrita, chap. 51, where there 
are 127 saints mentioned by name. 

‘ His story of Dnyjlneshwar in Bhakta Vijaya (chap. 8) he took 
from Dyftndevficht Adi (Dnyandev’s Origin) by NamdeV. His 


1 A posthumous disciple: see sect. 4 (0), p, 73 below. 



72 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM Cff. 

story of Mirabai in Bhakta Vijciya (chap. 38) he took from 
Mirctbfilche Charitra (Life of Mirabai) by Namdev. His story of 
Gora Kumbhar in Bhakta Vijciya (chap. 17) he took from 
Gordba Kumbhar&che Charitra (Life of Goroba Kumbhar) by 
Namdev/ 

4 So far as evidence goes he conscientiously used his sources, 
as an honest recorder of what he believed to be true. If he expanded 
meagre statements into fuller detail it was not to add facts but to 
give a fuller understanding of them. To use his own words he 
44 expanded facts just as a tree is the expansion of a seed. ” By 
this I understand that he embellished but did not add imaginary 
accounts, that what he wrote he feit he had good authority for. 

4 The faithfulness of Mahipati in recording the traditions received 
by him, either through books or oral sources, does not ensure the 
truth of those traditions, which must be established on other 
grounds, but it is satisfaction that one can depend with good assu- 
rance on his honesty as a writer, and that he did not draw on his 
imagination more than he feit necessary for poetic reasons/ 

• (c) In addition to the above from Dr. Abbott on the honesty and 

trustworthiness of our chief authority, Mahipati, we shall do 
well to note a striking illustration of Mahlpati’s candour as provid- 
ed by his faithful account of the attitude adopted towards caste by 
one of his Brahman ‘ saints \ Dr. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar has 
pointed out that Mahipati makes 4 one of his Brahman saints 
declare that there is no caste among devotees of God and repre- 
sents him to have drunk the holy water given to him by a chdmbhCir 
or leather-worker'/ That Mahipati, a ‘ RigvedI VasiStha Gotrl 
Degasth Brahman/ 2 should have faithfully recorded that another 
Brahman winked at carfte in relation to religious matters and 
should have portrayed him as receiving water at the hands of one 
of the lowest of India’s out-castes is a remarkable illustration of 
Mahlpati’s honesty as an author. He sometimes even revises an 
earlier account of his own (see footnote 2 on sect. 15, Part II). 


4 . Sources Earlier than Mahipati ( 

What are the possibilities of substantiating or correcting Mahl- 
pati’s account 4 from other and earlier sources * ? 

(1) First and most important of all we must never forget the 
rich mine of information in Tukaram’s own autobiographical poems, 
the investigation concerning which we leave until the chapter on 
Tukaram’s Autobiography (see chap. 5, Part 1). 

(2) Next in real value come the abhahgs of Rameshwar 
Bhatt» a leading disciple of Tukaram’s referred to in the notes from 
Dr. Abbott on the previous page as one of Mahipati’s own sources. 

1 /. /./April 1914, p. 26. * M, Sar., p.378. 



IV 


BIOGRAPHICAL SOURCES 


73 


The importance of Rameshwar Bhatt in this connexion is three- 
fold : (a) as having been used by Mahipati we are able to test the 
accuracy of the latter* (6) as being one of Tukaram’s own circle 
we have invaluable contemporary data % and (c) as formerly keenly 
hostile to Tukaram, and then his follower, he is in himself an 
abiding testimony to the influence of Tukaram’s character and 
work in the poet-saint’s own lifetime (see sections 29-30, Part II 
of this chapter). 

(3) A third source is provided in a short life of Tukaram by 
his grandson (son of Tukaram's own son) named Gopal Boa. 1 

(4) Another of Tukaram's immediate disciples, a woman 
named Bahinabai (1628-1700), whose Marathi shows her to have 
had some literary ability, dictated her autobiography to her son. a 
Among other things she confirms the incident concerning MumbajI 
(Bee sect. 31, Part II, present chap.) whose house she occupied 
but from which she says she was expelled because she attended 
Tukaram's kfrtans. Not «only does she confirm the account of 
Mumbaji's hostility to Tukaram but she gives the names of some 
of the leading personalities in Tukaram’s circle, including that of 
the Patll (chief village officer) and others. s 

(5) In 1674, only a little more than twenty years after 
Tukaram’s death, there was written a book on Keshav Chaitanya 
Sampradaya by one named KrishnajI Bairagya. This authority is 
quoted by name and his facts are given in detail by one Niranjan 
who supplies from this source priceless information from which we 
come to know the succession of gurus — Keshav, Raghav and 
BabajI — leading up to the ‘call' of Tukaram. It was from the 
last of these that Tukaram says he obtained in a dream his guru- 
mantra 4 which not only initiated him finally into Hinduism, 
investing him with complete authority, but was felt by him to be a 
divine afflatus marking out his future career. The fundamentally 
important dates of this crucial spiritual experience and of Tukaram’s 
birth itself are regarded as being settled by this ancient authority, 
which takes us back to a source nearly a century earlier than 
Mahipati. * 

(6) Almost equally ancient is Niloba of Pimpajner, one of the 
most famous of Warkart leaders, the priest (josht ) and revenue 
officer ( kulkarnl ) of his ancestral Sirur in the Poona district, who 
has left abhaiigs descriptive of Tukaram dated no later than thirty 
years after Tukaram’s death. From his ‘ Life’ which Mr. Pangar- 
kar has borrowed from descendants and examined, it appears 
Niloba was born after Tukaram died, that he saw Tukaram in a 

*Af. S5r«, p. 186 footnote. 

9 See ' The Autobiography of Bahinabai ' in Marathi published by Mr. 
D. V. Umarkhane (Chitra Shala Pres9, Poona) and an English Note on this in 
the Dyndnodaya , March 10, 1921. 

8 M. S<fr., pp. 242-5. 193, and L. R. Pangarkar, S.T.C., pp. 468-74. 

* See sect. 22, Part II of this chapter, and Muzurodar’s view given there, 

8 M. Sdr., p. 190, note 1, 

10 



74 LIFE AND TEACtilWG PF TDEARAIi CH. 

4 - * 

dream about 1675-80, heal#! the POfll (chief village officer) of 
PitapBjner, on going to live there received the honours of a sOdhu, 
gave up secular service because it interfered with his devotions, 1 * * 
And wrote a Gatha of which \5S\abhatiga are published, many of 
them, especially Nos. 869-890, being written in praise of Tqkltfm 
And his kirtans, thus confirming Mahipati’s narrative of nearly a 
century later in this important matter.* 

Some authorities would add a seventh source other than Mahl- 
pati— Narahari Malu, author of Bhakti Kathamjita , who wrote 
fifty years later. He must, however, be pronounced an utterly 
untrustworthy guide though he has unfortunately been followed by 
various Marafha writers.* 


5 . The Biography on the whole Trustworthy 


How far- then may. the existing biography of Tukaram be 
, regarded as reliable ? In view of Tukaram’s picture of himself in 
bis own moving poems, the contemporary evidence of his own 
disciples, the record of a by no means distant relative, and the 
important testimony surrounding his guru-mantra, we are justified 
in believing that while there is much unsifted tradition, ' miracle 
and wonder-working,’ Mahipati’s interesting account has a solid 
substratum of historical accuracy. As far as we can test his 
sources he gives us a large body of fact on which we can safely 
rely. We are confirmed in reaching such a conclusion when we 
learn that Mahlpati went, for example, to Tukaram’s own des- 
cendants and obtained Jrom them what evidence he could, 4 in one 
case information concerning the facts of Tukaram’s youth and 
early manhood between the ages of 13 and 21, at which age and 
.during a severe famine Tukaram’s father died. Of these and other 
facts we have independent confirmatory evidence. Our confidence 
ipv Mahjpati is strengthened when we further discover that in 
writing his ‘lives of the saints’ he used the works of earlier 
authorities withsuch discrimination that when he found any of 
them not as informing or as useful as he had expected he laid them 
aside, e.g., N&bhaji, the Nagar Brahman of the late 17th century 
whose Bhakta Mala was of service when Mabipati 'began* his 
Bhakta Vijaya, but whom he set aside later, because of his 
preference in favour of better authorities.' 

1 See the parallel of Mahlpati in sect. 2 above. 

9 See Bhakta Vijaya, chap. 56, 147-187, L. R. PSngSrkar, S.T.C.l pp. 
474-80 and The Gatha of Kilobit's AbhaAgs, by Trimbak Him; AWte, esp. 
pp. 195-200. 

* M. Sdr., p. 391. 

4 M. Son, p, 381. 

B See flf.-Ser., pp. 372-4; on the whole question of Mahipati’s sources, 
IS. Sdr., pp, ^78-88 are worthy of careful study. 






IV BIOGRAPH ICAL SOURCES 73 

Wilb such a conclusion before us we are surely justified in 
separating. the probable historical element in . the malarial that has 
come downita ttsfrom what appears to be legendary, ad we do in 
the two remaining parts (II and III) of this chapter, always 
.remembering, as the reader must, the possibility of error in the 
results presented. This course we follow, though Dr. Abbott would 
himself prefer to have the account * as Mahlpati gave it, legend 
and all ’, leaving the future to settle what are the true facts of 
Tukaram’s life. We have however, adopted a compromise — see 
Part II, the italic type at the close of section 1. The Western 
reader needs the additional reminder that even the probable biogra- 
phical facts, in part II, are of necessity presented in that Hindu 
dress with which Tukaram’s Hindu biographer has clothed them, 
Parts II and III being in the form of translated excerpts from 
Mabipati's 4 biographical ’ record in Bhakta Lllllmrita (chaps. 
25—40) and Bhakta Vi jay a (chaps. 48-52). 



II. The Probable Biographical Facta in the Life of 

Tukaram 


i. Chief Events with Approximate Oates 1 


A. D. 

1608. Tukaram’s Birth (see sect. 3 below). 

This is the traditional date, being the one adopted by Mahipati 
in Bhakta Llldmrita (oh. 28. 132-8) ; the late Janardan Ramchandra 
held to 1588 ; the genealogical records at Dehu and Pandbarpur 
give 1598 ; other authorities affirm 1577 ; while Prof. Rajwaije, on 
the basis of an ancient genealogy found with a Witrkarl near Wai, 
maintains 1568. At present certainty is impossible. See Bhawe, 
M. Sar., p. 194, note; Pangarkar, S.T.C., pp. 20-32 ; Gadre in 
Vividh Diiydn Visldra, September 1920, pp. 105-114, and Bhide 
in January 1921, pp. 25-36 ; also P. R. Bhandarkar, Nawa Yuga, 
March 1921, pp. 137-9. 

1621. Tukaram’s father turns over to him the burden of the 
business (see sect. 5). 

1621-3 ( circ .) Tukaram is married to Rakhmabal and then 
to Avajibai, otherwise called Jijabai (see sect. 8). 

1625. Death of Tukaram's parents and of his eldest brother’s 
wife (see sect. 10). 

1626. His eldest brother Savaji becomes a sanyasi (see 
sect. 10). 

1628. Tukaram resolves to put aside his indifference to 
worldly affaifs and to give himself to the management 
of his business in company with his two wives and his 
eldest son (see sects. 5, 7-8). 

1629. Business failure and bankruptcy. Beginning of a famine 
(see sects. 10-11). 

1630. Famine at its worst, during which Rakhmabai dies 
of hunger; death of eldest son, after which, in utter 
indifference to worldly things, he retires tq Bhambanath 
Hill and receives a ‘ revelation ’ (see sects. 10-1 1). 

1631. Rebuilding of the temple in Dehu; continuous attend- 
ance at Klrtans (sect, 13). 

1632-5. Tukaram’s call to become a poet (sect. 19); he 
receives the guru-mdntra (sect. 22). See however foot- 
note, sect. 30, for Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar’s view. 

« 

i These dates are taken from the Marathi ‘ Life ’ by Mr. L. R. Pangarkar 
(1920), pp, 45-6, embodying the results of a careful discussion of Tukaram 
chronology. We have added in brackets after each event a reference to our 
own sections in the following Part 11 and a note where we differ. 

1 We have here taken a slightly different order from Pangarkar in accord- 
ance with yrbat we believe to be Mahlpati’s order. 



IV PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 77 

1638 (circ.) Tukaram persecuted by R&meshwar Bhat t 
and sustained by a special 2 * 4 * * * * revelation 1 (sects, 29-30), 

1649 Tukaram's end. 

This is the date given by Tukaram's grandson Gopai Boa and 
Matupati in his Bhakta Llltimrita (chap. 40, 183); Mr. Pangarkar 
adopts March 9, 1650 ; Prof. Raj wa<Je holds to 1648; while Mr. 
Bhawe prefers 1652. On this difficult question, which with present 
available material, is probably insoluble, see Bhawe, M. Stir., pp. 
189, 186n, Assal G tithti, p. 13; Pangarkar, S.T.C., pp. 14-20; 
Gadre in Vividh Dttyan Vistdra , September 1920, pp. 105-114, 
and Bhide in January 1921, p. 27 ; also P. K. Bhandarkar in Naxva 
Yuga , March 1921, pp. 138-9. 

In the following narrative , footnotes: are given to indicate 
where lines or paragraphs have been deleted , as belonging to 
what the best authorities would probabfy agree are ‘ legendary 
additions \ These lines and paragraphs omitted from Part 
II are inserted in Part III (‘ Legendary Additions') of this 
Chapter and anyone desirous of reading Mahipati's story 
consecutively may do so by following the guidance of the foot- 
notes . Occasionally this * legendary 9 dress will be found clinging 
even to the narrative in Part II. In most such Cases we have either 
introduced Mahipati f s name or the device of quotation marks 
or that of a special footnote . In the last -mentioned the letter 
4 M ' refers to Mahlpati , and it is to be carefully distinguished 
from 4 F and M 9 which refers to Fraser and Mar tithe's Transla- 
tion of Tuktirdm 9 s * Poems 3 vols t and from * M. Stir. 9 which 
refers to V . L . Bhawe' s ‘ Maharashtra Stiraswat \ 

2. Tukaram's Ancestry 

Our knowledge of Tukaram begins with a forefather named 

Vtevambhara who was a tradesman at Dehu and, at the same 

time a devout worshipper of Vithoba. He was a truthful and fair- 

dealing man ; his business throve, so he spent his profits entertain* 

ing holy men and Brahmans who were bound on pilgrimage. By 
night he would assemble his neighbours and sing the lives of Ram 
and Krista till all worldly impulses died away in him. 

At length he was advised by his mother to follow an old 
custom of his family and make the pilgrimage to Pai?dharpur. 

He listened to her advice, visited Pa$<Jhari, subdued his mind to a 
frame of repentance, bathed in the Chandrabhaga, gazed on the 
god and returned home filled with joy. After his return he had no 
p&ce for thinking of Paiadharl. His eyes were for ever full of 
tears, sobs choked his throat; he was like a miser brooding on his 
gold or a cow on her calf. So he returned to Pai&lhan and there told 
his distress. 4 Know you not that there is no place void of me even 
fora moment ?* was the voice he seemed to hear. Wherfevfet you 
call upon my' name, there assuredly I am present.’ 



7d LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM cR. 

Then Vigvambhara went homei but every fortnight he made a 
pilgrimage to Papuan, and after nine months, one night in a 
dream he saw Hari* who said : ‘ Vidvambhara, my friend, you have 
made me your debtor, and I have come here to stay with you/ So 
saying, he vanished, and 2 Vigvambhara took and set up an image 
near the river Indrayaiil; then calling in Brahmans skilled in 
vedic lore they performed the installation ceremony, 8 poured over 
the image the panch&mritd 1 and arranged it in silk, with a crown 
and earrings, offered it food and sang a song of praise. 

Vigvambhara then begged of Vithoba that his family might 
always serve him ; and some time later he passed away leaving 
behind him a wife Amabai and two sons, Hari and Mukunda. 
His wife was a devout woman, who asked heaven for no worldly 
blessings, and though she showed no interest or special skill in 
business, everything for a time went smoothly in her house. 
Amabai’s two sons were worldly men ; they persuaded her to 
leave Dehu, and soon after they perished in war. She too lost 
everything and one of her daughters-in-law burned herself with her 
husband’s (Mukunda’s) corpse. Her other daughter-in-law (wife 
of Hari) had meanwhile given birth to a son, Vithoba, by whom 
the family was continued. 


3. Birth and Naming 

The ‘family tree’ gives us the names Vithoba, Padaji, Sankar, 
Kanhaya and Bolhoba sometimes called Bolhaji, this last, whose 
wife was named Kanaka!, becoming*' the father of Tukaram. 
Bolhoba spent twenty years in pilgrimages and other religious acts, 
at the end of which period he, had three sons/ 

For the birth of her second child, Tukaram, Kanaka! went to 
a lonely temple, and when she looked on his face an incredible 
lustre dazzled her eyes, and she read in his countenance a rapture 
of devotion and peace. 

Twelve days later she took the child to the temple, laid it at the 
feet of Pandurang and asked that he might be named. Receiv- 
ing the assurance that every blessing should attend him, she laid 
him in a cradle and this cradle song was sung for him : — 

‘ Where the Eternal, the Undeveloped, the Void of name and 
form rejoices, sleep there, O child of mine ! Where ‘ I am I’ and 

1 One of Krisna’s names popularly understood to mean * sin-remover \ 
a When ViSvambhara awoke, M. says, he called together all the wor- 
shippers of Vishnu, and paying no heed to scoffers and scorners, went with them 
in procession, singing Hari’s praises, to a mango-grove near Dehu. They 
found it pervaded by a wondrous fragrance coming from an image of PIncJu- 
raftg with RukminI beside him. 

8 See Chapter 6, sect. 1 on Tukaram’s ‘Idolatry’ for the significance of this 
ceremony which is called p rdti prati&thd. 

4 Thp Jpanch&mrita is an anointing by curd, milk, honey, ghee and sugar 
being pqurtd overall images, both in temples and in Brahman houses.' \ 

* See sect. *1. Tukaram’ s Birth ’ in Part III of this chapter. 



IV PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 79 

‘ I am he 1 are heard no more, where monism and dualism are 
each half true, sleep there, O child of mine ! Where Knower, 
Knowledge and Known cease to exist, sleep there, O child of 
mine ! On the place where the saints declare knowledge to be per- 
fect knowledge, the place where desire is not, in the home where 
delight is the soul's own delight, setting there your heart, sleep 
there, O child of mine ! On the feet of Pantjurahg, where the 
Undeveloped, the Unknowable, through his worshippers' love has 
assumed a form, setting there your affection, sleep there, O child 
of mine !’ 

Then she called the child Tukaram. 

4. Home Influences 

Her husband never failed to worship the Lord of Pandharf, 
and God gave wealth and children, 4 the fruit of ancient merit.* 
TKtee sons were born to them — SavajI, Tukaram and Kanhoba. 
Their natures were like others but they were destined to lead 
mankind to devotion and repose. Friends increased around them, 
the Brahmans wedded them with lavish outlay, and their mother 
rejoiced. A son, a son's wife, possessions, and a living husband, 
these are what Hindu women delight in and she had them all. 
The Merciful One suffered nothing to go amiss with them. 
While attending duly to their affairs they forgot not the highest 
purpose of life; he truly is severed from the world who never 
says to himself, ‘ It is I who do this.' The saints, like other 
men, carry on business but their feelings towards it are different. 
The ignorant imagine that their own efforts bear fruit and that their 
own skill saves them from confusion. They are imprisoned in 
their self-conceit ; but the wise are they who know that* God 1 alone 
acts. Such a one was Bolhoba. As the lotus grows in the pool, 
yet no water clings to it ; as the sun is reflected in the water-vessel, 
yet it is not wetted ; so the servants of God 2 live under the illusion 
of the world and traffic therein, yet they forget not Him. 

On Dehu, the scene of Tukaram's early home-life, see pages 5 
and 6. 


5. Tukaram enters Business 

When Bolhoba grew old, he called his eldest son and bade him 
take charge of the business. But SavajI, when he heard his father's 
words, and looked at the stock and ledger, fell at his father’s feet, 
and* declared that he abhorred the world and its ways. 

The father then turned to Tukaram, who accepted the task, and 
won praise from everybody by his management of the business. 

1 M’s word is Hari, a name of Vishnu (see footnote 1 on previous page), 

* M’s word is Vishnu. 



80 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM cm. 

His father’s mind was at peace and for a few years Tukar&m appears 
to have prospered. But grief follows joy — this is a truth im- 
memorial ; darkness follows day ; scarcity follows a good harvest ; 
sickness good health ; and so it was with Tukaram. His father and 
mother passed away. Savaji's wife died and SavajI became 
a religious mendicant: he subdued the flesh and attained 
to happiness and peace. Tukaram found himself losing money 
in the business, his capital disappearing like clouds in summer. 
But he felt his duty as head of the family and he made 
every effort to succeed. He toiled day and night, loading the 
bullocks with his own hands, enduring heat and cold and loss of 
sleep. He raised fresh capital and started new transactions; but 
he made no profit . 1 All the time, however, he dealt with his 
customers honestly ; he never gave anyone short measure ; he never 
uttered a falsehood ; Hari’s name was ever on his lips ; and his 
actions towards all creatures were compassionate. 

At last all his own means were exhausted. His friends met and 
set him up once more with a little money. They also offered him 
their advice : ‘ Day and night you are crying on Hari’s name, this 

is what has ruined you. A devotee of Vishnu cannot thrive in the 
world. Our fathers always said so and now you know it is true ; 
you have brought yourself to beggary.’ His wife added her com- 
plaints. Still Tukaram called on Hari’s name and still misfortune 
followed him. Mahlpati adds: ‘ Hari was trying to see if Tukaram 
would give him up.’ 


6. The Fallen Sack and the Sympathetic Stranger 
• 

One night as he was travelling in the way of business, his com- 
panions having gone on ahead, a dreadful storm fell upon him, a 
storm of wind and rain and lightning, and he saw beasts of prey 
around. Then his sorrows broke forth and he cried : ‘ The filthy 

world! I have embraced it ! Hence my troubles! My father is 
dead; my brother has abandoned everything; I am bankrupt; 
hence my shame. Here I am ; my companions have left me ; no 
one will lend me a hand with this sack ! O Hari, god of gods, I 
have no friend but thee ! Run to help me ! ’ As he spoke he saw 
a wayfaring man beside him — ‘it was Hari who had come to help 
him,’ says Mahlpati. ‘ Who are you ? * asked the stranger , 4 block- 
ing up the road in this way ? ’ ‘ I am a dealer in grain,’ said 
Tukaram ; ‘ Here’s a sack fallen and I have no one to help me with 
it; and my companions are gone ahead/ Then, according to "our 
authority, the sympathetic stranger put forth his band and in a 
moment laid the sack on the ox. After that he stepped forward and 
showed Tukaram the way, till they came to the Indrayani river 

* M, gives as the reason : ‘ Hari never helped him.' 



IV PROjBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 81 

which was high in flood, but the stranger led the way and they 
crossed safely. Tukaram stood amazed and ‘ suddenly says 
Mahlpati triumphantly! ‘a flash of lightning showed Tukaram 
that his companion wore the pitflmber (the usual yellow silk robe of 
Vishiiu), that at his throat a kciustubh jewel sparkled, and. a rosary 
of TuJ6i beads hung round his neck.* Nothing was said, however, 
and they went. on to Dehu together, where Tukaram's companion 
left him. 


7. In the Chilly Trade 

There is always enmity between the world and spiritual aspira- 
tion, and Tukaram continued solitary among his fellow-villagers. 
They went on scoffing at him. Then the rains failed and a sore 
drought prevailed. In the hope therefore of making a little money 
Tukaram set out with bags of chillies 1 for the Konkan and as 
he went along, the name of Vitthal 2 was ever on his lips. When 
he reached the sea he unloaded his oxen beneath a peepal tree, 
near the temple of Siva, and spread his wares on the ground. 
Then he sat down beside them, forgetting all about himself and 
thinking on nothing but the form of Pandurahg. The villagers 
came and asked his prices. He answered : ‘ You know the usual 
price, don't you ? Take what you want,’ and he let them fill the 
measure themselves. At first they feared he would check them, 
but his thoughts were far away, and he never interfered with 
them. The news spread through the village, and people came 
tumbling over each other. ‘ We will pay you later on,’ said they. 

4 Very good,* said Tukaram. Some took handfuls, others maunds, 
according to their strength, and at last one rascal made the remark: 

* I have plenty of money at home, I want a sack of chillies.’ 1 1 
will trust you,' said Tukaram. Even so pious men understand 
God’s purposes, but not the hard hearts of the wicked.. 

Now Tukaram felt pleased to think he had finished his busi- 
ness, so he set a little rice cooking and sat watching it with a 
thankful heart. Meanwhile 1 the kindly stranger who on the 
stormy night some time before had helped him now entered the 
village, represented himself as belonging to Tukaram and said 
politely to the people : ‘ It is time we were going, please let 
us have our money.’ ‘What money?’ said they; 4 he never 
measured anything out to us, we don’t know what we owe him.’ 
Then he told each one exactly what he had taken and they were 

1 Dr. Murray Mitchell's translation of Mahipati’s Bhakta Llldmrita in 
J.R.AS. Bo., January 1849, pp. 15-29, at this point says: ‘Tukaram filled 
three sacks with pepper and proceeded to the Konkan’. There are two mistakes 
here, one a confusing of the word tnirchl (chillies) with mirl (pepper), the 
other that Tukaram would not take pepper to the Konkan where pepper was 
grown and sold : this would be like ( taking coals to Newcastle. ’ 

2 Another name for Vithoba, see sect. 15, chap. 2, pp. 41-3, 

9 Hari took the form of a man, says M. , 

11 



82 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TtJKAftAM cm. 

stupified ; they paid up at once. So he went through all the 
village and collected all Tukaram’s debts. 1 There remained only the 
rascal who carried off the whole sack. ‘ He is the worst of the lot' 
said Tukaram's representative, * what am 1 to do with him ? * So 
he took a rope and tied it round his neck and cried, ‘ Pay me or I 
will hang myself and ruin your whole village !' Then the villagers 
all cried, ‘ Shame on the rogue,' and they fell on the rascal with 
kicks and fisticuffs till he paid up in full. So off went the stranger 
to Tukaram, and gave him the price of his chillies. Tukaram 
mistook him for the village watchman, and begged him to go and 
buy him a little ghee. He brought so much that Tukaram was 
astonished and he said, ‘Ghee is very cheap here! Stay and share 
my meal.’ ‘Very good,’ said he, and with them also sat down an 
unbidden guest. 8 Tukaram bade him welcome, and when the meal 
was finished both 8 departed and were seen no more. But when the 
villagers came to see Tukaram and learned that he sent no one to 
collect his debts, there was great astonishment and Tukaram could 
say nothing but ‘Unfathomable are the ways of Hari/ 

8. The Rogue with Gilded Bracelets 

So Tukaram went off singing Hari’s name and on his way he 
met a rogue who had some gilded bracelets, 4 and these he offered 
him for sale. Tukaram protested he was too poor to buy them, 
but the rogue offered to take part payment in cash and trust him 
for the rest. Tukaram accordingly bought them; he went home 
and tied up his oxen, and went to pay off his debt to money-lenders. 
But when they tried his bracelets on the touchstone there was a 
loud laugh, and scorn ^as poured on Tukaram and Vithoba and he 
must needs go woefully home. 

Now Tukaram had two wives. The elder one named Rakhma* 
bal had become 4 constitutionally asthmatic and so he had married 
another, the daughter of AppajI Gulve, a well-to-do shopkeeper of 
Poona. 6 The younger wife Avail, who was also called Jijabaf, lamen- 
ted loudly the misfortune of the brass bracelets. Bringing forth her 
own jewels she pledged them and raised two hundred pieces of 
silver. With these she bade Tukaram go forth and* trade, and he 
purchased a commodity of salt and took it to Baleghat. Much she 
admonished him as he went, to take care of his money and not 
lavish it on beggars. And Tukaram reached Baleghat android his 
salt, and bought sugar and sold It again for cash. 

i Hari never thinks of his own dignity ; he forgets everything but his 
worshipper’s love, says M. , 

Who according to M. was * Siva* 1 

3 M. means Hari and £iva. 

4 M. says these bracelets were of brass gilded over. 

5 W. B. Patwardhan, F.C.M., vol. 1, No. 3, p. 1; Bhawe, Af. 5<fr. p. 172. 

6 In accordance with Hindu practice, these marriages would be arranged 
by Tukaram’s father, Tukaram being 13 or 14. See S.T.C., p, 77 where Pgng&r* 
kar’s figure^ do not harmonise with those on his p. 46, 



PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS $3 
9* Helping a Brahman Debtor 

In one city which he entered he met a Brahman with a long 
untrimmed beard, a wooden plough strung round his neck, 1 and 
who cried to everyone, ‘Help! Help!* The avaricious people 
of the town gave him a few coppers, but Tukaram asked the reason 
of his plight. Whereupon the Brahman answered : * My kinsmen 
have wrested my inheritance from me ; they bribed the court and 
threw me into prison. The raja was a man of no judgement and I 
was fined three hundred rupees. Fifty I have paid, and the rest I 
am begging; there is a constable in charge of me and he gives me 
no rest.’ Tukaram was moved with compassion and he gave two 
hundred and fifty rupees to the Brahman who sent the constable 
with it to the court. Then Tukaram had the Brahman shaved and 
fed his family and ten other Brahmans 2 3 and they all gave him 
their blessing. 1 The villagers of Dehu were now satisfied that 
Tukaram was a lunatic. When he returned home, they put a 
necklace of onions round his neck, mounted him on a donkey and 
paraded him through the streets to be mocked at by the crowd. * n 


to. Adversity and Self-Dedication 


After this a sore famine broke out, the great famine of Tuka- 
ram’s life time being in 1629, and it is to this that Tukaram 4 
probably refers in abhahg No. 113 of Fraser and Marathe’s transla- 
tion. The rains failed utterly and the cattle died of hunger. Tuka- 
ram’s family began to starve and in vain he entreated neighbours 
to help him. One day he sold his last possessions, a few old sacks 
and a pack-saddle, and purchasing a little grain he made some thin 
porridge for his family. When that was finished t}ie neighbours 
asked scornfully what Vitthal was doing for him ? He felt 
as a man feels when an ulcer is opened up with a lancet, but 
he answered them quietly. The husbandman’s toil is long and 
weary but he rejoices when the harvest ripens ; ‘ even so the 
spiritual struggle is long drawn out but it ends in the joy of experi- 
ence. This is what Tukaram found.’ At 13 he entered business; 
when 17 his parents died and soon afterwards occurred the death 
of his sister-in-law, Savaji’s wife. When Tukaram was 18 this 
elder brother Savajl became a sanyasi and said good-bye to Dehu 

i This is in accordance with an ancient custom still prevalent in some 

parts of India, debtors being compelled to wear a small hand-size plough 
around the neck as the sign to all they meet or from whom they beg that they 
are in debt. Such a debtor is usually pursued by some representative of his 
creditor with whom he must share all his takings, whether food or money: 

3 Highly meritorious acts. 

3 //. M. P. p. 181. 

4 See V. L. Bbav^s M. San p. 192. * 



84 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

and his family. Now at 21 Tukaram had become * bankrupt and 
— ‘sorrow’s crown of sorrow* in India — he had to face famine, 
bankruptcy and bereavements. He lost his eldest son ; his favourite 
wife Rakhmabai died crying for bread ; and he began to reflect on the 
world 1 2 * : * How many years I have wasted ! The time that is left let 
me give to Hari.’ Reflecting thus, he closed his eyes and cried: 
* Hari, O Lord, can I behold thee ? How can I bring thee before 
my eyes? IIow shall I deal with the world?* So crying, he 
called to memory the image of Paijdurahg, and for seven days he 
sat with his eyelids closed. The silence was at length broken, 
says Mahipati, by a divine voice. How the bankrupt and grief- 
stricken merchant of Dehu came to view all this painful discipline, 
and how sorrow and self- dedication became strangely mingled, we 
shall see in our next chapter. 


ti. Tukaram withdraws from Business 

Tukaram then went to a waste place and his younger brother 
Kanhoba went to look for him, night and day searching among 
the hills. At last he came to Bhambanath and there he saw an 
amazing sight : Tukaram was rapt in worship.'* In the words of 
Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar: * It was on the hill named Bhambanath, 
Tukaram tells us, that he had the revelation in which “ formless 
Vithoba appeared unto him ”.' 4 

The two brothers went back to Dehu together. As soon as 
they got home Tukaram threw into the river the papers which 
showed that people owed his father money. 4 It is idle to read 
books,’ said he, 4 unless* we learn by experience to appreciate them. 
I am resolved myself to be a beggar ; as for the business, you must 
carry it on.’ And Kanhoba did so, while Tukaram withdrew from 
the world. Very little food he ate, so that his limbs wasted away. 
He allowed himself neither sleep nor rest and poured himself 
out in repentance. In the morning he would bathe and visit 
Parujurang’s temple, then he would go to the forest. West of Dehu 
is Bhantjara Hill where he would sit alone rapt in contemplation. 
1 Since God has visited you,’ men would say, ‘ why need you subdue 
your senses ?’ ‘ When the sun rises,’ replied Tukaram, ‘every eye 
beholds him, but no one can keep him from his course a moment. 
God indeed has visited me once, but I mean to keep Him with me 
always. The Ganges flows into the sea not once but continually, 
so must God’s worshippers part from Him only to meet Him 
again.* In short, he gave up the world entirely, and worshipped 

1 * I became bankrupt and was crushed by the famine ’ are his words in 
abhang 113 (F and M).« 

2 See sect. 4 2. Adversity and Self-Dedication * in Part III of this Chapter. 

3 For the detail by M. see sect. 3 in Part III of this Chapter. 

4 Two Rf asters ; Jesus and Tukdr&m, p. 12. 



IV 


PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 65 

God day and night 4 1 trust in Thy name alone : it is to me family 
and wealth, and the merit of fierce austerities ; its glory is known 
to all the saints/ Each evening Tukaram would return to Dehu. 
Many voices spoke, some approving and some disapproving, 
but none of them troubled his mind. He was like an elephant 
walking on a royal road, with dogs barking at his heels. 

12. How he watched the Cornfield 

Near the place of his meditations a peasant had a crop of corn 
and one day he made Tukaram a proposal. ‘Sit and watch my 
field/ said he, ‘ I will give you half a maund of grain. You can 
go on worshipping Hari .’ ‘Very good/ said Tukfiram # for he 
was always ready to help any one. So the peasant led him off 
and gave him a sling, and he promised to stay till the crop 
ripened. 

There was a watchman’s scaffold in the field and Tukaram sat 
himself down on it. Soon came the birds and settled fora meal, 
and Tukaram said to himself : * These too are God’s creatures and 
all of them hungry; last year there was famine, this year God has 
sent us a crop; I call myself a worshipper of Vishnu; I must not 
chase these away or I shall be guilty of wrongdoing.’ When 
two watches of the day had passed, the birds began to sing sweetly ; 
they had filled their stomachs and they flew away to drink. Mean- 
while Tukfiram’s wife wondered where he was, and she sent her 
daughter to look for him. __ Ka3i ran and found him, but Tukfiratn 
refused to go home, so Avail sent him some food to the field. 
And there he stayed day and night, save for his morning visit to 
the temple. Every evening he said to the birds, 1 Be oil ! Be off! 
It will be dark soon and you will not be able to see your way! 
Come back to-morrow morning.’ And be looked on them with ad- 
miration and said, ‘They eat only a few grains here and take 
nothing home with them. When, O God, wilt Thou let me live like 
them ? Away with the illusions that bind me ; let me trample on 
names and forms, let me see my own self in every one and forget 
my body. As dead leaves are whirled about by the wind, such 
be my comings and goings ; let me look on gold and pebbles 
as the same ; keep evil hopes far from me ; let me listen neither 
to praise nox censure ; let me see the Life of the World in ail 
living things.’ 

While he was thus meditating all the birds in the village 
flocked to the field. Tukaram rejoiced to see them feed, as a 
gederous man rejoices to feed rows of Brahmans, but later on came 
the peasant and he found every ear in his field empty ! He 
visited every corner of it, and everywhere birds flew away, like 
Brahmans at the approach of an out-caste. ‘ You have ruined me ! ’ 
he cried to Tukaram, and he dragged him off to the panchayat 
(village jury ). Tukaram told his story very simply and everyone 



86 


LIPS AND TEACHING GF. TUKARAM CM. 

burst into laughter. * How much have you lost ? ’ said the jury 
to the peasant. ‘ Two khandu 1 ’, he replied. Then the jury agreed 
that Tuklram must make it good, or the Government official 
would be displeased, since he was insisting on payment of the 
taxes due from the grain. So the jury went off to estimate the 
damage, but — so runs the story of Mahipati — when they-reached 
the held, lo I every ear was full of grain, not a trace of damage 
could be seen ! And when the field was, reaped, seventeen khafttfts 
of grain were recovered from it ; such r a harvest had never been 
seen before. There were many opinions. what should be done with 
it, but finally it was agreed by the jury that Vifhoba had sent it for 
Tukaram and that two khahdls should be given the peasant, the 
rest to Tukaram. He however refused to take it, ‘ for to expect no 
fruit of our actions is the chief sign that a man is a true devotee 
and that his spirit is at peace.’ Many are ready to serve such a 
man — and such a man was Tukaram. The balance of fifteen 
khaiujita of grain were left in custody of Mahadajipant Deshpande, 
the revenue official already referred to. 

13. Tukaram and the Temple Repairs 

Tukaram’s wife was very bitter over his refusal to accept 
the grain, but Tukaram heeded her not. He turned his thoughts to 
the old temple of Papdurarig in the village which was falling down 
through age. He took a pickaxe in his hand and also set to work 
mixing clay and water. Mahadajipant at this time had a dream in 
which he seemed to hear Hari bidding him help Tukaram. He 
obeyed the call and sent workmen to repair the temple, paying their 
wages out of the balance of grain left in his hands. Tukaram 
reflected sadly that he ought now to feed Brahmans, and he had no 
means of doing so: Once more Mahadajipant remembered * that 
. Tukaram had never been paid his half maund for watching the 
field. The village jury was again summoned and they called on the 
peasant to pay up his debt. Many of them added something them- 
selves, and Tukaram finished his labours on the temple by feasting 
the Brahmans, while a consecration ceremony 8 was performed for 
the image. * 

Tukaram then formed the idea of conducting Klrtans, and he 
began by committing to memory the lines of old saints like N&mdev 
and Kablr, Dnyaneshwar and Eknath. He sat on Bhanqlara Hill 
and learned them. He read the Bhagvadglld and searched out its 
meaning, his wife bringing him food daily. To be sure, she was a 
shrew, but she respected her husband and laid all the blame for his 
foolishness on Viffbal. 

1 A khandi is 20 Bombay maunds by measure, roughly lj»s. 1600 or oyer 
cwts. 14. . • 

.a M. says : 4 Hari reminded Mahadajipant \ ~ 

'} The Prafisfha ceremony, on which see chapter 6, sect. 1 on 

4 Tukirim^ Idolatry 




IMACH OF JIJABAl (or AVATJBAi) TUKARAM’s WIFE, NOW 


WORSHIPPED AT DE1IU 



IV PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL PACTS ‘ 87 

14 . The Troubles of His Wife 

Well, one day Avajl was carrying him bread and a gourd full of 
water. The sun was very hot, the path very rough and thorny, and 
she was almost fainting with fatigue. She spilt the water and her 
bitterness broke forth in loud complaints. A thorn got into her 
foot and she could walk no further, when suddenly it was as if there 
stood by her side one glittering in silk and jewels. * The wretch ! * 
said Avail, 4 what does he want ? He has driven my husband mad, 
and he has come to laugh at my troubles.* So she turned away, 
but, whichever way she looked, it seemed as though Hari was 
reflected in a house full of mirrors. She closed her eyes, but a 
voice seemed to say, ‘My daughter, why do you take me for an 
enemy? You say I have turned your husband against the world; 
not so, it is only that the plant has borne its own fruit, and the 
Wind has blown it from the tree. How am I to blame in this ? ' 
And! with this Avajl felt the thorn had left her foot. Then she 
stood and cried : * I am losing time ; that lunatic is sitting there on the 
hill/ and off she started, finding some fresh water and supplying her 
husband's needs/ 1 


15. Avail Loses Her Robe 

One day she was bathing and had hung on a wall her one and 
only robe, while her husband despite their deep poverty was sitting 
near singing of Hari. Just then there came past a poor old Brah- 
man woman 2 who begged Tukaram for a dress. His heart was 
filled with pity and he signed to her to take the robe ; she did so and 
gave him her blessingjmd departed. Then Tukaram went off to 
the Indrayai^I, leaving Avail much perplexed by the loss of her robe. 3 
At length the children told her what had happened and her lamenta- 
tions were loud and long. 4 Curse the old woman/ she said, * he's 
given her my clothes and gone off to the forest without a word to 
me ! My husband indeed ! I never ate the food he earned. He tied 
the beads 4 on me and made himself my master; he never did any- 
thing for me. One wife of his died in the famine ; she was very lucky 
to go before me.’ Just at that moment relatives called inviting her 
to a wedding ceremony and this added fuel to the fire of her wrath. 
Just as she was all aflame with passion, says Mahipati, she had a 
vision of Hari standing offering her a silk robe — and the vision 

acted like rain on the fire ! She put on the dress and went abroad, 

« 

* For M*s embellishments see sect. 4 in Part III of this chapter. 

2 So says M. in Bhakta Vijdya , but in his later Bhakta Lllamrita he 
says Rakhum&l came in the guise of a Mabarani. 

3 S.T.C. has a chapter (14) on ‘Tukoha and Jijabsr (Avail) which raised 
in the press a fruitless discussion on 4 Who was to blame ? * 

* A necklace of flowers, like the ring in the European ritual, is the symbol 

of marriage among Hindus. . 



88 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


CH. 


her friends astonished to see her splendour. One said : * She must 
always have kept it hidden ! ’ And another: ‘Tukaram pretends to 
be an ascetic, but look what he’s given his wife ! ’ 

1 6. Tukaram as a Vaishnava Saint 

Gradually Tukaram became known as a Vaishnava and even 
Brahmans began to honour him, but his humility did not forsake 
him. When other Vaishijavas gathered to dance and sing he would 
sweep away the pebbles from the ground with his own hands and 
stand behind them and take up the refrain. All his actions were 
„ those of a true saint. 4 What is a true saint ? ’ asks Mahlpati. 
^ * One who grieves equally whether his own child or another man’s 
cries, who is not vexed when a thief carries off his goods, who feels 
equally honoured when a king gives him a jewel and a peasant a 
few vegetables. Such was Tukaram.’ He would sit by the river 
humbling himself before God and when night came on he would 
return to the temple. Sometimes he would determine to keep 
awake all night in meditation, but he would find himself growing 
sleepy. 4 For though a man may have left the world, yet some 
weaknesses of the flesh will cling to him, as a fragrance lingers 
where camphor has been burnt, or as the potter’s wheel goes on 
whirling when he has withdrawn the stick, or as leaves tremble 
when the storm is over, or twilight lingers when the sun has set.’ 
What did 4 the prince of Vaishnavas * do ? In order to ensure 
constancy of devotion he tied his shendl — the sacred lock of long 
hair worn by a Hindu — to a nail above him, and thus for four days 
he abstained from sleep, and for four days he banished all thoughts 
of ease. 4 Probably Mahipati has based his statement on tradition ; 
but if it be his own invention, he must evidently have made a 
close study of Tukaram’s works, a fact which is borne out by 
* other evidence also. For Tukaram feelingly refers again and again 
to his own laziness and the loss of time in sleep, so that nobody 
need wonder if he actually tried the arrangement which some over- 
zealous students sometimes resort to even in these days.’ 1 

In every possible way Tukaram served other men. He assisted 
i pilgrims. When he found in the jungle old cattle thrned loose to 
shift for themselves, he brought them grass and water and fondled 
them. In hot weather he provided water for wayfarers and when 
he found any sick he brought them into the temple and gave them 
medicine. In short, he performed any service required of him and 
he never failed in his word. 

17. His Commission in Oil 

Once when he was sitting on the bank of the IndrayanI, people 
going to market bade him come with them. 4 Very good/ said 

1 Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar, Two Masters : Jesus and Tukaram, p, 19. 



IV 


PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 


89 


Tukaram, and he joined them, but so as not to be idle a moment, 
he sang as he walked. Now there was an old Brahman woman in 
the company, very feeble on her legs, and Tukaram felt so sorry 
for her that he offered to carry her on his back. 1 Better if you 
went to the bazar for me, and brought me my oil ! * 1 Very good,' 

said Tukfiram, and next day he brought her oil. And some days 
later she was telling everyone that the oil never ended ! And some 
people said: ‘He ought to be ashamed of himself! His own 
children haven’t enough to eat.* But others sought to turn the 
occasion to their own advantage, and they sent Tukaram to buy oil 
for them , loading him up with many vessels and bottles. He 
accepted the commission, and went to the bazar, where he helped 
visitors to stall and feed their horses, then going to the temple to 
worship. Afterwards he took the vessels to the dealer in oil and 
handed him his money, but he* had no idea how much oil ought to 
go in each vessel. 

Tukaram’s wife was very bitter when she saw him working for 
others and others taking advantage of him. But her friends said : 
‘ Every man suffers for his qualities ; the parrot wouldn’t be impri- 
soned if Jbe couldn’t talk ; if a cow has a white tail we cut it off.’ 
And so Ava]i was silenced, but she was very discontented. 


1 8. The Holy Day of His Forefathers 

Aval.! addressed him one day and said : ‘ To-day is the holy day 
of your forefathers and we have nothing to offer them.’ ‘ I will go 
to the forest,’ said Tukaram, ‘ and bring some herbs for an offer- 
ing. You may eat them and feast our forefathers.’ So off he went, 
singing loudly the name of Hari : ‘ My burden is all on thy head ; 

do with me as thou wilt.’ As he passed by a spot where some 
reapers were at work, they shouted to him to come and help them. 
They were labourers who were working half-heartedly but Tukaram 
helped them with all his might. He forgot all about the herb he 
wanted . 1 

After some hours Tukaram came home from his labours, with a 
bundle of wheat the reapers had given him. And as he passed along 
he disturbed a bees’ nest, and the bees swarmed out and settled on 
him. But Tukaram would not drive them off. ‘ This body of 
mine,' said he, ‘ is doomed to perish ; let it spend itself in the service 
of other creatures. To-day is the holy day of my forefathers; 
per^dventure they have come to visit me in the form of these 
bees.* Then the bees left off troubling him and he reached home 
without more annoyance . 2 Bidding his wife cook the corn and 
make a feast for their forefathers, he prayed : ‘O merciful Mother 

1 For another aspect of this episode see sect. 5 in part III of this chapter. 

2 M. says: ‘Hari drove the bees away.’ * 

* n 



90 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

Vithoba, unless thou dine with me I will not dine!* ‘Then/ says 
Mablpati, 4 Hari heard his words and appeared, and he and his 
Lord sat down together. This was the work and effect of faith. 
God ate with him and vanished from his sight/ 1 2 


19. his Call to Become a Poet 

The breathing into Tukaram of the spirit of poetry took place 
in a dream in which Namdev in the company of Hari appeared to 
Tukaram/ ‘ Rise up, Tukfi/ said a voice to him, 4 and listen to me. 
Behold Nam a, my worshipper, who vowed he would write me a 
hundred crores of abhahgs. Before he finished his task he passed 
away. Now you finish it for him. * When Tukaram awoke he 
felt mightily rejoiced, and set to work at once, making himself 
books of rough paper and learning the Bctlbhodh letters. * Nine 
hundred 4 verses he wrote and they were heard with delight by 
Hari’s worshippers. Then he began to compose ahhangs and fast 
they flowed from him : ‘ As when the rain pours down, unnum- 

bered shoots of grass spring up, even so verses poured forth ’ from 
Tukaram.® 


20. His Daily Offering 

Tukaram used to give milk daily to Vithoba, pouring it over his 
image. Avail greatly disapproved of this. She said : ‘ lie gives 
that black fellow a pot^of milk daily ; why ever does he do it ? We 
have a troop of children at home; and not enough milk left to make 
a little curd for them/ Now her little daughter Bhfiglrathi always 
went with Tukaram to the temple, so Avaji said to her: ‘The 
milk your father takes to the temple, does that black fellow 
really drink it V 4 Indeed he does/ said the little girl, ‘and if there 
is any left he gives me some and drinks the rest himself/ Avaji was 

1 The last few lines offer a striking Hindu parallel to the Christian’s ‘ grace 
before "meat 1 and to Brother Lawrence's Practice oj the Presence of God. 

2 This story is recorded in Tukaram’s own Gdtha , abhahgs 1320-1321, 
lndu Prakash edition and 103-4 l\ and M. t hut Dr. l\ R. Bhandarkar 
rejects them and this story also on the ground that in abhahg 1333 in which 
Tukaram gives a summary of his life, 1 this dream is not referred to while the 
other one (see section 22 below) in which his guru appeared is mentioned.’ 
This seems to us inconclusive, for Tukaram was not bound to give every detail 
of his life in this one abhahg *, moreover the incident of the guru-mcyitra 
referred to by him was by far the more important of the two. See Two 
Masters: Jesus and Tukaram , p. 9. 

In which Sanskrit is usually written. 

1 Only 102 of these have been published. They arc given in the /• P. edition, 
Vol. 2, pp. 655-717. 

r ’ On the subject of this sect, and sect. 22 below, see L. R. P5ngarkar. 
S.T.C., chap. # 7, and \\ R. Bhandarkar’s later view in footnote, sect. 30 below. 



IV 


PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL PACTS 


91 


astonished, and oYie day she said to Tukaram, * I am going to give 
him some milk myself/ ‘ Very good/ replied Tukaram. Mahlpati 
adds: ‘ The Lord of Pandhari was perplexed. He knew Avail had 
no faith in him and if he did show any sign or wonder, she would 
only torment her poor husband.’ Now when Avail brought the milk 
it was too hot, but she had no gentle feelings towards the god, and 
she never thought of cooling it. So when she put the vessel next to 
his lips 4 and burned them \ she was greatly astonished, and said : 
4 This black fellow looks like a stone, but there seems to be life in 
him for all that/ Then Tukaram was sorely distressed and went 
off to the temple, where tears streamed from his eyes. 1 Even as he 
wept, however, the blister went down/ adds the devoted biographer 
of the Maratha saints. 


2 i. The healing' of His Sick Boy 

Tukaram had now two soils, Mahadev and Vithoba and one 
time Mahadev fell very ill. Avaji tried many remedies, whatever 
were proposed to her, and she sent for adepts who were masters of 
evil spirits. She tied threads and charms on the boy and waved holy 
lights round him. All was idle, however ; the boy wasted away, 
though drugs were poured down his throat. 'The neighbours told 
her that it was Hari that had sent the misfortune, and her feelings 
were roused to the uttermost. She took her dying son and went off 
to the temple to beat Pandurarig. Having reached the temple 
Avab listened in amazement to the prayers and looking upon 
her son she saw that he was healed. So she took him home and fed 
him and his sickness returned no more. But when Tukaram heard 
of this he exclaimed: ‘Alas! you have laid a burden on the Lord 
of Pandbarl/ 


22. Tukaram’s Dream and the Mantra 

A small band of followers now began to write down his poems, 
which task was entrusted to Santajl Jaganade the oilman/ There 
was also a*Brahman member of the band named Gangaji Mavala; 
day and night they went to the temple to sing and to worship Hari. 
At that time Tukaram dreamed that he met a saint while going to 
bathe. Laying his hand on Tukaram’s head the saint imparted to 
him. the mantra : ‘ Ram- Krisna- Hari/ adding that his own name 
was BabajT and his predecessors Raghav Chaitanya and Keshav 
Chaitanya. Tukaram then begged that he would go home with 

I Some of these poems are now published from Sanlajl’s manuscripts by 
Mr. V. L. Bhawe in his Tukaramacc Assert (original) Gutha , 1920-1 ; see our 
chap. 5, I, sect. 1. , 



92 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

him and sanctify his house; he would give him food and he should 
cook it himself, 1 * 3 4 5 Give me, then,* said the saint in the dream, ‘ a 
quarter-seer of ghee and I will come with you/ This far went 
Tukaram’s dream and he awoke . 1 4 Mahipati suggests that Tukaram 
did not like to resort to a guru, because according to the usual 
custom the latter would have put forth for the acceptance of 
his disciple the doctrine of advaitism or pantheism, for which he 
had a great repugnance. The difficulty was solved when Tukaram 
had a dream, in which appeared a person who declared his name to 
be Babaji Chaitanya of the line of Raghava Chaitanya and Keshav 
Chaitanya and who gave him the sacred formula, not 4 tattwamasi *, 8 
but “ Ram, Krisna, Hari “ The Prince of Teachers,’* says Tuka- 
ram, told me the simple sacred formula of my liking that will not 
lead to any entanglement anywhere *’/ : 

In a paper before the Bhiiratci Itihdsa Sanshodhaka Mandala, 
Poona, May 29, 1921, Mr. A. Muzumdar said four newly-discovered 
saitads showed Keshav and Babaji as one and not two individuals, 
that Babaji die<j shake 1493, Tukaram receiving the gurumantra 
in shake 1523. This view runs counter both to the traditional date 
df Tukaram’s birth and to the definite statement of Bahinabai — see 
I, 4 (4) above — that Raghav, Keshav, Babaji were three distinct 
persons. 


23 . Avali and Her Moods 

His wife’s conduct much chagrined him, and much he remons- 
trated with her. ‘ P and u rang/ said he, ‘is our father; he will not suffer 
us to want anything. If you will listen to me, we shall gain a 
glorious name in this world. Cast aside worldly hopes; forget that 
you have any children : go to the saints for protection, and call 
on the name of Vithoba/ Eleven a bhangs in this strain he 
addressed to her/ For a time she was moved by his own spirit 
oT devotion, and one day, early in the morning, she called in a 
party ol Brahmans, and bade them carry off all their household 
goods ; she even gave the ashes on the fireplace to a sanyasi, 
to smear his body withal. After this she went to the temple 
and there came up an old Mahar woman, a beggar, and asked for 
a cast-off dress, whereupon Tukaram gave her one ’of Avail’s 
that was hanging on the wall. The children of the* village told 
this to Avail, and she was bitterly incensed ; she took a stone 
and went to the temple to break the image. There Avaji 
poured out her wrongs against Rukhmini. 6 * (See footnote 3. Sect. 15). 

1 See footnotes at the end of sect. 19 above, and on sect* 30 below.* 

-The Sanskrit for 'Thou art that.’ 

3 Dr. P. K. Bhandarkar, 7 Vo Masters: Jesus and Tukaram, p. 9 . 

^Abhangs numbered 1573a to 1573k in volume 2 of F. and M. 

5 M. says Rukminf gave her a handful of gold pieces and a dress, but when 

Tukaram saw her returning he said, 4 Greedy creature 1 ’ took the gold pieces 

and gave them away to Brahmans* 



IV 


PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL PACTS 
24. Dining with the Chinchwad Brahman 


93 


At Chinchwad lived a Brahman named Chintamani Dev, who, 
hearing of Tukaram's fame, sent him an invitation to dine with 
him. Tukaram reached the house just as Chintamani Dev was at his 
morning devotions. He approached unperceived and heard Chinta- 
mani in the midst of recitations giving orders to the gardener and 
scolding him for neglecting the plants. When Chintamani came 
forth, Tukaram laid himself in the dust before him ; but Chinta- 
mani scorned to make any reverence to a Sudra. ‘ I am glad to 
see you/ said he, 4 when did you come ? * 4 I came/ said Tuka- 
ram, ‘ when you were seated at your morning devotions and just 
as you (mentally) went into the garden/ Chintaman/s conscience 
smote him. 4 Truly/ remarked he, 4 you are well said to be a 
searcher of hearts. But tell me ! They say Vishnu eats in your 
company ! Is it so ? Will you show me this marvel ?’ So saying 
he offered Tukaram a seat and a plate, for even a beggar 
has a right to such if he comes at the moment when 
the fire oblation is offered. Hovvbeit, Tukaram’s plate was 
set four cubits’ distance from the Brahman’s. Then Tukaram set 
put two other plates and Chintamani asked him for whom they 
were. 4 One/ said Tukaram, 4 is for my god Hari, the other for 
your god Ganpati. Now you call on Ganpati to join us.’ And 
Chintamani did so, but in vain, whereupon Tukaram said : 4 Know 
that, while you were calling, a devotee of Ganpati was drowning ; he 
remembered Ganpati, who ran forthwith to save him. If you doubt 
this, wait a while and see/ And according to the picturesque narra- 
tive of Mahipati, 4 an hour afterward Ganpati came to join them, his 
silken robes dripping with salt water/ and Tukaram bade Chinta- 
mani invite him to dinner. 4 How can he dine with us ? ’ said 
Chintamani, ‘ when we oiler him sacred food, he accepts but the 
odour/ * 1 shall not be comforted/ said Tukaram, ‘ unless he dines 
with us.’ And he ‘turned to Ganpati ’ and saluted him : 4 Glory 

to thee ! Giver of all accomplishment, saviour of thy worshippers 
in all extremities, dispeller of the ensnaring world ? 9 Then, so runs 
the Hindu story, did Ganpati, ‘ a visible presence, sit down before 
them ; and Tukaram closing his eyes called on Pandurang, and he 
came in all his glory and joined them. And they ate and were 
satisfied and departed/ Then Chintamani laid himself in the dust 
before Tukaram but Tukaram raised him up and said : 4 My lord, 

it is more fitting that I should reverence your feet.’ 

This remarkable event can best be understood by reading care- 
fully Tukaram’s own abliarigs 1373 L to 1573 P in the second 
volume of the Poems, 1 especially 1573 O, where Tukaram says: 4 It 
is Narayan who eats the food. At every mouthful let us utter the 
name of Govinda ; it is enough that the worshippers eat — God eats 


t F. and M. 



94 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKAkAM eft. 

through' them.’ Or as Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar translates this 
important abhang : 1 ‘ If at every mouthful a man has faith theh 
God dines in his person. Keep hold of the essential thing 
which is to remember God, then the distance between is not great. 
^lf you enjoy a meal in faith, God sits down to dine with you.* The 
Hindu story thus supplies an interesting parallel to the sacramental 
significance given by Quakers to every meal. 


25. Tukaram’s Six Children 

Now Tukariim had the following children: three daughters — 
Kaslbai, Bhaglrathl, and Gangabai, and three sons — Mahadev, 
Vithoba, and Narayan.' 2 His daughters had come to be of 
marriageable age, and Avail pressed their marriage upon him. So 
one day Tukaram went into the road and there saw three boys of 
his own caste playing together; he called them to the house, sent 
for a Brahman and forthwith he got them married to his daughters. 
Friends met and a marriage feast was duly held, Tukaram’s fellow- 
devotees making contributions towards the expenses of the four 
days* wedding festivities. ‘Truly God protects those who make 
friends of Him ; and the world shows itself merciful to them,* is 
the comment of Tukaram’s biographer. 


26. The Haughty Brahman Deshpatide 

A Brahman named Deshpande there was who sat and fasted 
and practised austerities, hi the hope that he might comprehend the 
Puranas. Ten days he sat fasting, till jn a dream he heard Hari 
bid him go and worship at Ajandi. To AJandi therefore he went and 
twelve days he fasted before Dnyaneshwar’s tomb, till he was 
bidden rise and visit Tukaram. Then Deshpande awoke and the 
counsel displeased him, for Tukaram was a Sudra. Nevertheless 
he went to Dehu and told his tale to Tukaram, who said in dismay : 
* O Hari ! all that I utter is but the words thou dost whisper in 
my ear. What can I do to instruct this man ? * And he composed 
for him eleven abhaiigs under the title ‘The Best Knowledge*, and 
with these gave him a cocoanut ; but the Brahman was wroth and 
said : 1 It is the old Puranas I desire to comprehend, not this 
Prakrit* of yours.' And he refused Tukaram’s offering of fruit 
and away he went back to Aland! and complained to Dnyaneshwar. 
But again he heard the same voice as before, this time saying: 
‘Your base suspicions are the fruit of your own past. You sat 

1 Two Masters : Jesus and Tukdrdm , p. 31. 

2 Narayan was born four months after TukSrSm’s death (see Part III, 
sect. 18). 

a The common dialect of the people as contrasted with the sacred Sanskrit. 



IV PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 95 

under the tree of wishes and tied up your wallet and disdained to 
put therein what it gave you. In Tukaram’s abhangs is the very 
essence of the holy scriptures, but you despised them because they 
were written in PrUkfit.' 

27. The Pearls in the Cocoanut 

Thus it was in Deshpande's case. But there was another 
Brahman named Kondoba, a stout jolly fellow, unlettered and void 
of self-conceit, who did reverence to Tukaram and accepted from 
him the cocoanut which Deshpande had refused. He found inside 
it a number of costly pearls valued at a lakh of rupees! For a 
banker of Ahmedabad had offered these pearls to Dnyaneshwar at 
AJandi and he had been told at Dnyaneshwar’s tomb to give them 
to Tukaram. In sending them to Tukaram the banker put them 
inside a cocoanut, knowing as he did that Tukaram must accept a 
cocoanut in accordance with the courtesies of the country, whereas 
he would be sure to refuse pearls. This cocoanut Tukaram then 
gave to the Brahman, and as the story goes, along with these 
precious pearls inside the cocoanut Kondoba received the knowledge 
of Sanskrit. 


28. Tukaram’s Kirtans at Lohogaon 

Tukaram’s fame continued to spread and one day the people of 
Lohogaon begged him to pay them a visit and sanctify their village. 
He consented and went and held a klrtan there. One month he 
stayed with them, and at last a Brahman widow begged him to 
perform a klrtan in her house. When he saw her devotion he 
consented, but before the day came there was a storm of rain and 
the wall of her neighbour’s house threatened to fall ip. She went 
to Tukaram in great distress, but he assured her the wall should 
not fall until the service was finished So four days passed safely, 
the service was completed, the feast was held, the house was 
emptied and then the wall fell. Tukaram bade the people build 
her a new house, and he held a service there too. 

29. Rameshwar Bhatt 

Some men, however, cannot bear the sight of goodtiess, just as 
the fevered stomach rejects milk; such an one was the Brahman 
Rameshwar Bhatt- A learned student of the scriptures, he lived at 
Wagholi, and Tukaram’s fame moved him to anger. Resolving to 
drive him from the countryside, he sent a complaint to the Court, 1 

1 A Mahommedan Court, the country at that time being subject to Aurang- 
zlb. The Court might presumably take cognisance of any actions that disturbed 
existing customs and so threatened the public peace. , 



LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


cir. 


9fi 

that Tukaram, a Sadra, was studying the scriptures and holding 
klrtans and that even Brahmans were saluting him. The simple 
people were deluded when they heard this complaint, even the 
District Officer being incensed, so he ordered the Pcltll of Dehu to 
drive forth the offending poet-saint. On this being made known, 
Tukaram went to see Rameshwar Bha{t and deprecated his wrath. 
But Rameshwar told him unauthorized preachers such as he would 
go to hell and he enjoined silence upon him. ‘ You Brahmans,’ 
said Tukaram , 4 are visible images of the Lord; I will obey your 
command; I will speak no more. But what of those poems of 
mine that are written down ? * 4 Throw them into the river,* said 

Rameshwar. 4 Very good,’ said Tukaram. 

So back went he to Dehu, and entering the temple, there 
cried : 4 O thou that doest all deeds, at thy behest I have uttered 

these irregular words ; now I must throw them in the river.’ 
Then with his own hands he committed every sheet to the water, 
tying them in a cloth and sinking them with a stone, calling on the 
name of God 1 as he did so. And the malicious said : 4 Ha ! the 

•butterfly has lost his colours! Rameshwar is a wise man; like a 
second sun he has chased away the darkness of falsehood.* Tuka- 
ram was at first quite cheerful, and for five days he continued 
praising God as before ; at last, however, he began to feel men’s 
derision. 4 You threw away the deeds of your property ; now you’ve 
thrown away your poems. Aren’t you ashamed to look us in the 
face?* When he heard these biting words, his heart failed him, 
and he sat down on a stone outside the temple, feeling ashamed 
before the world. 4 Speak a word, O Yitthal,’ he cried, 4 ere yet I 
destroy myself; if I do not reach thee I must perish.’ And he 
closed his eyes, firmly fixed his thoughts on God 2 3 4 5 , ate not nor drank 
nor gavre any sign of life. In his silence he composed a number of 
moving abhahgs about the sad event.” 

* Though Rameshwar was a learned Brahman, yet, in the words 
of our narrator, 4 his enmity towards Vishnu’s worshipper destroyed 
the merit he had won V One day he came to Poona to salute 
Siva — let us see what happened to him. At Poona there lived a 
great faklr y Anagadasbah by name ; Rameshwar Bhatt unwittingly 
entered his garden and seeing before him a pool of clear water 
began to bathe. The fakir heard him at his devotions and he 
was mightily incensed. 4 You have polluted my sanctified water/ 
said he, * your body shall be burned without fire.’ And as the 
story goes, Rameshwar Bhatt soon felt himself aflame; sleeping, 
rising or walking, an inward fire consumed him; he knew not what 
to do.* Thoughtful people said, however, 4 This is the wratfi of 

1 ‘ Vit^hala,' says M. 

2 ' Hari’s feet,* says M. 

3 These abhangs are 1549-73 in F. and M., with commento, p. 439, vol* II. 

4 As a Westerner would say : * He was ruined by his jealousy/ 

5 1, e., his«conscience became a hell of torment. 



IV PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 97 

God ; Anagadashah is His instrument.' And at last he went to 
inland! and sat in mute entreaty before the image of Dnyandev. 

30. Recovery of Tukaram’s Poems from the River 

Meanwhile God 1 laid His comforting hand on Tukaram, saying: 

‘ I am thy protection. Many saints have I protected And He 
settled * like a bee in the lotus of the poet's heart \ and Tukaram felt 
glad once more. That night He showed himself in a dream to 
many of the village and said to them : 1 I have kept dry all Tuka- 

ram’s papers ; they are even now coming to the surface of the river. 
Make haste and take them out *. So in the morning they hurried to 
the river, and, behold ! the papers were floating like gourds on the 
water. Great was the joy among the poet’s friends as some of them 
swam out and brought the papers to shore. And Tukaram opened 
•his eyes and sang a hymn of praise : 4 One fault I acknowledge,’ 

said he, 4 that i have troubled Him who wears the woodland 
wreath. I have no right to lay my burden upon Him.’ 2 

The Indu Prakdsh edition * presents the above remarkable story 
as follows, adding 4 that the difficulty arising 4 can easily be explain- 
ed on rational grounds ’ : 4 Tukaram threw the books into the river 
IndrayanI with his own hand, taking care, says Mahlpati, to cover 
them on either side with thin slates of stone and wrapping them up 
in a cloth. . . With his poems all drowned in the river, and he 
forbidden to compose any new ones, he seemed destined to live a 
life of nonentity, . . . leaving the world to his persecutors, who 
evidently thought they had gained everything they wanted. But no ; 
by that inherent force of truth to triumph and to outlive, and by 
that unforeseen and unexpected succour which the truly faithful and 
sincere receive from quarters unknown, call it miracle or anything 
else, Tukaram and his poems outlived his persecutors and inculcated , 
in the Maratha nation the great doctrine of Salvation by Faith. On 
the 13th day according to Mahipati’s account of the event, the 
drowned books began to float on the surface of the water and were 
taken out by the people.’ Such considerations will weigh differently 
with different minds. Some might be disposed to consider favour- 
ably the possibility that after several days in the river the cloth 

1 Hari, says M. 

2 Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar would here insert the narrative of Tukaram’s call 
to become a poet already given in sect. 19 above, urging as he does that the 
' call ’ came after the recovery of Tukaram's poems from the river, and that for 
the occasion Vishnu came to the poet under the guise of a child. But it is 
clear*that Tukaram was already famous as a poet before the poems were con- 
signed to the river, as sect. 29 above shows, and to put his call to be a poet 
after the recovery of poems which had made him famous seems an unjustifiable 
reversing of MahTpati's order of narrative (Nawayuga, March 1921, pp. 
145-9). 

3/. P., Vol. I„ p. 11-12. 

4 Ibid p, 20. % 

13 



98 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

wrapping may have been washed away, followed shortly after by 
the 4 thin slates of stone ; * the bundle of papers then increasing in 
bulk, as suggested by Mr. V. L. Bhawe’s word 1 phugUn — swollen, 
they would naturally rise to the surface. A modern parallel was 
the recovery from the sea of MSS belonging to the late Archdeacon 
Dennis of the Niger Mission, who, returning to England in August 
1917 on the S. S. Karina was sunk by a German submarine. His 
sunken MSS — linguistic notes and the bulky typescript of his 
English- Ibo dictionary — were sometime after washed up on the 
coast of Wales and are now at Salisbury Square, London. 

The story spread abroad like the fragrance of a bed of flowers, 
while all the time Rameshwar Bhatt was sitting at Aland!. At last 
in the temple of Dnyaneshwar he received this message : ‘If you 
assail the servants of Hari no sacred waters will wash your guilt 
away ; you must go and implore Tukaram for help and your misery 
will end*. Then Rameshwar repented and wrote a letter, sending it 
Tukaram by the hand of one of his disciples saying : * I write to 

you in fear and trembling for I have greatly wronged you.’ Tukaram 
s was moved by compassion, and he sent him an abhang : ‘ If your 

mind is pure, your enemies will be your friends, tigers and serpents 
will approach you but they will not devour you. If men revile you, 
you will think they are speaking gently to you ; flames of fire will 
feel cool to you, 1 2 

When Rameshwar read this, he rose and went to visit Tukaram 
and praised his greatness and goodness. But Tukaram said : ‘ I am 
a man of low degree ; I beg you will show me your kindness and 
favour*. And the other answered : ‘ I shall go home no more but 

shall make my home for ever at your feet \ And so he did. n 

Shortly afterwards the fakir heard the story, and he set out to 
visit Tukaram. When he arrived at Tukaram’s house, Aval! 
received him with a curse, but little Ganga, Tukaram’s daughter, 
dropped a little flower into his bowl. The child’s mother, Aval!, 
thereupon grasped Ganga’s hand, seizing some of the flour left 
there, but Ganga managed to throw a little more, filling the fakir s 
vessel. ‘What! and are you Tukaram?’ he asked in astonish- 
ment. ‘Are you a fool?* replied Ganga, ‘Tukaram is in the 
temple *. Hearing this he went to the temple and paid Tukaram 
a visit, laying himself in the dust before him. Two days he stayed 
listening to Tukaram’s klrtans and then he went back home. 

Among those who came to the Dehu tempie was a young 
woman, a stranger, and very beautiful, who one day when she found 
Tukaram alone besought him to sin. Whereupon he trembled with 
horror, spoke to her two abhangs — 121 and 122 on which see 
chapter 6, section 9— and rebuked her. 

1 M.Sdr., p. 178 

2 See Abhang 146G, Fraser and Marathe. 

a M. hei;e gives 4 The Coppersmith and His Wife ’ in sect. 6, part iii, 



IV 


PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 
31. Mumbaji the Jealous Brahman 1 


99 


There was living at Chinchwad a Brahman named Mumbaji who 
became an ascetic and changed his place of abode to Dehu. 
As Tukaram’s fame increased Mumbaji despised him as being a 
6udra by caste and a grocer by vocation. Now it happened that 
Avail’s father had given her a buffalo, and one day this creature 
went into Mumbaji’s garden and ate some of the plants there. 
Mumbaji cursed the buffalo and closed the path to his garden with 
thorns. In so doing, however, he also closed the way round the 
temple, and next Ekadashl 2 3 when the pilgrims came, Tukaram 
opened it. Mumbaji burst into furious wrath, seized Tukaram 
and severely beat him. Tukaram offered no resistance and no 
word of remonstrance, merely calling devotedly on the name of Hari. 
But Mumbaji went on beating him as a thresher beats ears of 
corn ? 

When all was over Tukaram went into the temple.'* It was 
soon time to begin the service, but Tukaram insisted they should 
wait for Mumbaji. When they sent to remind him, however, he 
sent word that he could not come. His body was aching all over ! 
On hearing this, Tukaram went himself to the house of Mumbaji, 
gently rubbed the aching body of the man who a short time before 
had been thrashing him, and then brought Mumbaji to the temple 
service. Thus was Mumbaji put to shame by Tukaram's meekness 
and spirit of forgiveness. Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar well says that 
it was ‘ a realization of the precept of Jesus “ that ye resist not evil ” 
in Matthew v. 39-40/ 4 * 6 Mahlpati rightly adds: ‘ Towards friend 
and foe alike Tukaram showed the same kindly disposition. Free 
from ill-feeling or resentment of any kind he won the love of 
all around him \ 


32. Shivaji and Tukaram h 


Tukaram’s fame now came to the ears of the future Maratha 
King Sivaji, who said: 4 I will call Tukaram here and listen to his 
kTrtan myself.’ So he sent a horse with a torch and umbrella and 

1 This story of Mumbaji, in all the Marathi 4 lives ’ of Tukaram, is placed 
very much earlier, before the incident of Rameshwar Bhatt and the loss and 
recovery of Tukaram’s poems. On the evidence of Babinfibfu— recently 
brought to light (see page 73 above and M. Sdr, p. 103) — who distinctly states 
that previous to the Mumbaji incident Rameshwar Bhatt was a disciple of 
Tukaram, we have placed this story after that of Rameshwar Bhatt. 

For definition see p. 56, 

3 On a glance from Hari all his wounds were healed, adds M. 

1 Two Masters : Jesus and Tukaram, p, 10. 

6 M. here relates 4 Vithoba and the Thieves \ sect. 7, part iii. 

6 On the historicity of this event see Chapter V, part II, sect. 3. 



100 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


CH* 

a clerk in charge of them. The clerk found Tukaram at Lohogaon 
and delivered him the Raja's message. He was much distressed 
when he heard it, a$d wrote four abhangs excusing himself, which 
he gave the clerk to take. 4 Sit on the horse’, said he, ‘you will 
soon get back.’ ‘ I dare not sit on him', replied the clerk, ‘he is too 
fiery m his temper.' Then Tukaram patting the horse, his temper 
was subdued, and the clerk took the following message: 

4 Torches, umbrellas, and horses, these are not among things 
good for me. Why, O Lord of Panclhari, dost thou entangle me 
amongst such ? O God, says Tukaram, run to set me free from 
this. . . I feel that I should avoid society. . . It is my 

pressing request that you will not even talk of seeing me. The 
rock is an excellent bed to sleep on and I have the sky above me 
for a cloak. If 1 saw fine apparel and men wearing jewels, it 
would at once be the death of me. Let me tell you this surprising 
news, there is no happiness like the beggar’s. . . . There is 

one thing that brings a blessing, and its purport is this, learn to see 
one spirit in all created things.* 1 

£ivajl was amazed when he read the message and he resolved to 
*visit Tukaram himself. He set out in full state, with all his minis- 
ters in attendance and went to Lohogaon. He made his way at 
once to Tukaram and laid himself in the dust before him. Then 
with his own hands he put a garland of till si on his neck, and laid 
a plate of gold coins before him. With a struggle Tukaram spoke 
and said : ‘ What need have I of gold ? Vitthal is enough for me. 
Thy fame, my lord, I know well ; to-day I know thy generosity. 
Yet a man needs no lamp when he has the sun to give him light; 

( the Himalaya needs no fan to keep him cool ; the wealth you have 
brought me is as cow’s flesh to my senses. Now let me give you 
this counsel, to ensure you peace ; let your only ornament be the 
till si garland, your only observance the ekadashl , 2 and call 
yourself the servant of Vithoba.’ A t this the Raja was well-pleased, 
and the money he had brought he gave to Brahmans. That 
night he spent listening to Tukaram’s klrtan. * The world is 
perishable ’, so he sang ; ‘ it will perish ; it will pass away ; worship 
God 3 , and you will save yourself and your fathers ’. As the Raja 
listened, the message sank into his mind and he said to 'himself : ‘ I 
will renounce my kingdom and sit in the forest praising God 4 \ and 
he took off his headdress 6 and laid it on the ground. Next morning 
he sent away his ministers and gave himself up to the bliss of 
devotion. 

1 We have given Tukaram’s message to Sivaji in summary only, the 
message being given fully in vol. 2 of F. and M., abhangs 1468-1474. 

2 For definition see p. 56. 

!l * Vithobii *, says M. 

1 ‘ Hairi*, says M. 

6 Dr. J. Murray Mitchell (J.R.A.S.Bo,, Jany, 1849, p. 23) wrongly translates 
• crown \ the Marathi word meaning simply a head»covering. # 



IV 


PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 
33. Message to Shivaji 


ioi 


Then they wrote and told Sivajl’s mother what had happened, 
and Jijabal exclaimed, ‘ This is bad news;. Tukaram has ruined 
the kingdom ? * Nor was it long before she reached Lohogaon and 
flung herself on the ground before the poet. ‘ My son,* she said, 

‘ has given up the world ; he has no child, and who will guide the 
kingdom ? * So Tukaram bade her take comfort. That evening 
after the kirtan he thus addressed the Raja : ‘ To cross the sea of 
the world there is but one rule ; observe the duties of your own y 
station. Should fish leave the water for the air. or birds the air for 
the water? Should an Arab horse be set to draw a plough, ora 
soldier to ride a bullock ? Has not God set the sea round the earth 
to contain it ? He has appointed to the Brahman in his student 
days to learn the scriptures, as a householder to perform the six 
rites 1 , and as a recluse to overcome his passions; now listen while 1 
tell you the duties of a kshattriya . He must conquer his enemies 
and protect his own faith; reverence the Brahmans; see the 
Supreme in all creatures ; oppress none; delight in worship ; speak j 
no falsehood; feed the hungry; and remember God 2 continually. 
Such an one may live without misgiving in the world— why should 
he go to the jungle ? God visits him in his own house ’. 

When the Raja heard these words tears came into his eyes, and 
he took up his clothes from the ground. His mother fell at Tuka- 
ram’s feet, exclaiming, ‘ How can I ever repay you? ’ Four days 
later SivajI departed, but, ere he went, he begged a boon of the 
poet, that he would give him as a present a piece of bread if the 
kingdom was to be delivered, and a piece of cocoanut if he was to 
have a son. Howbeit Tukaram gave him both.” 

34. Tukaram’s Disciples; Way with Pilgrims 

By this time Tukaram had a circle of disciples, several of whom 
had been his bitterest enemies, the principal ones being Ramesh- 
war Bhatt whose change of attitude is related in sections 29-30 
above ; Kanhoba the poet’s own younger brother who relieved him 
of all business cares as stated in section 1 1 ; Gangaram Mavaja 
Kaduskar the Brahman, and Santaji Tell Jaganade who were his 
two chief assistant ktrtankdrs and writers, Santaji’s MS. having 
recently been published; 4 Kondoba, Brahman reader of Puranas 
who took Tukaram’s messages to distant holy places — see section 
17 in part III ; NavajI the flower-seller ; Sivaba Kasar the copper- 
smith of whom the story is told in section 6, part III ; Malaji Gade, 

1 The six rites are study, teaching, sacrificing, causing sacrifices to be made, 
bestowing gifts, receiving gifts. 

8 ' Hari says M. 

3 M. here gives * The Kunbi’s Cucumber ’ in sect. 8, part III. 

4 See sect. 1, part I, chap. 5. , 



102 LIFE AND TEACHING OP TUKARAM CH. 

husband of Bhaglratbi, Tukaram’s daughter; Malharp&nt, one of 
his cymbal* players; Mahadajipant the kulkdrnl of Debft referred 
to in section 12 above; Ambajipant the kulkarnl and fortune- 
teller of Lohogaon; Kaceswar, a Brahman versed in Vedic lore ; 
Bahinabal — see paragraph (4), section 4, part I ; and Gavar£et the 
Lingayat grocer referred to in section 19 of part III . 1 

Four months later there passed Tukaram’s house a company of 
pilgrims bound for Bhlmasankar and when he saw them he laid 
himself in the dust before them. He found among them Chinta- 
mani Dev and they were glad to meet each other again. Chinta- 
mani asked him for a mark of his favour, whereupon Tukaram 
brought forth flour and herbs. Enough for one only he brought 
forth, but every pilgrim begged for a portion. Then the saint was 
perplexed, and he prayed that his little store might be enough for 
all, whereupon, so runs the story, when Tukaram’s flour was divided 
each had a full share. Then the pilgrims embraced him lovingly, 
prepared a meal, sat down and made Tukaram join them. 2 

Again he succoured another company of pilgrims which had to 
► pass through a wild country where there was a fierce overgrown 
dog that no one could master. Tukaram went along the path and 
the dog flew at him, but the saint was undismayed. ‘ I do 
not growl at you,* said he, ‘why do you growl at me ?’ As he spoke 
the dog was pacified and lay down like a tame cat. So the 
pilgrims passed on, and when Tukaram returned, the dog followed 
him and ever afterwards attended his kirtans 


35 . Protest Against Pantheism 


Once it chanced that a certain Brahman had copied Mukund 
Raja’s Hindu book Vivck Sindhu 1 expounding the Vedanta, and he 
visited Tukaram and sought permission to read this book to him. 
Now Tukaram would not dishonour the Brahman, so he granted 
him permission and sat down before him, but he kept his head 
shrouded in a blanket, for, said he, the sight of the world disturbed 
his attention. For an hour the Brahman read, and Tu&aram stirred 
not nor spoke, till at length the Brahman lifted the blanket, and 
behold ! Tukaram sat with his fingers in his ears ! ‘What is this \ 
said the Brahman, ‘ why are you wasting my time ?* * I cannot 

listen’, said Tukaram, ‘to the doctrine that God and His worshipper 
are one. 6 If everything is a form of Bramha, then why this howl 

1 On these disciples see L. R. Pangarkar, S.T.C . , chap. 13. 

Here M has sect. ‘9, How Tukara n Helped the Needy’, Part 111, 

Here come the stories 10-14 in Part III entitled: ‘A Brahman Boy 
Healed*, ‘A Scribe’s Unauthorized Alteration*, ‘A Miraculous Visit- From 
Siva *. 1 Tukaram’s Letter of Apology to Vithoba ’, 1 Supplying Oil and Alms.’ 

1 Dated A. n. 1188 see flf. Sirr, p. 26. 

• The advaita or pantheistic doctrine. 



IV 


PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 


103 


about gain or loss? Between Himself and His worshippers God 
has drawn a line ; that line we must recognize, A man may have 
perfect insight into God’s nature, but he does not acquire God's 
power to create, preserve and destroy ; these attributes belong to 
God alone. So long as God in His three forms exercises these 
powers Himself let us mortals be humble and claim no identity 
with Him.’ 

There lived at Lohogaon a certain Vaishnava who was devoted 
to Tukaram and thereby offended his wife. She resolved to test 
the saint, and one day when her husband was away she cooked some 
bitter gourds and invited Tukaram to her house to eat them. But 
Tukaram had fully conquered his senses; he knew nothing of what 
happened to his body; and he ate the bitter gourds with pleasure 
and even asked for more. 1 


36. External Methods Unavailing for Salvation 

Once upon a time, according to a story that runs everywhere 
in Maharashtra, several of Tukaram’s devotees were to visit the 
seven holy places of India and Tukaram gave them a bitter gourd, 
bidding them bathe it in every sacred river they visited. On their 
return a feast was held in celebration of the event and Tukaram 
bade them divide the gourd among the assembled guests at the 
feast. Each guest exclaimed that it was just as bitter as before 
and asked in surprise why bathing it in holy rivers had not taken 
away its bitterness. Whereupon Tukaram pointed the moral that 
all external means, including sacred rivers, would thus fail miserably 
in effecting their salvation. 


37, Shivaji’s Escape from Tukaram’s Kirtan 

It happened once that Sivaji came to Poona to visit Tukaram. 
Sivaji fell at his feet, and the kirtan began, nothing wanting to 
complete the general delight. But it chanced that the Mahomme- 
dan official at Chakan heard of Sivajl’s visit and he sent a troop 
of soldiers to seize him. News was brought to Sivaji and he rose 
to leave the kirtan . Then Tukaram prayed aloud for help : ‘ I fear 
not death myself, but l cannot bear to see all round me troubled.* 
And a message 2 came and comforted him; ‘Be at ease; go on 
with the service; J, the Life of the World, will protect Sivaji ’. 
According to Mahlpati, Hati 1 took on himself the form of Sivaji, 
and so multiplied himself that when the Pathans entered, whichever 

1 M.here has sects. 15-16 * The Fortune-Teller’s Son Raised’ and ’Tukaram 
and the Sanyasis' in Part III. 

9 Hari, says M. 



104 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM cti. 

way they looked, they saw Sivaji 1 . And as they pursued he led 
them on, till within an hour they were miles away in the forest. 1 
Meanwhile Tukaram full joyously was singing the praise of God 
in a stream of names which be poured forth, while his throat was 
choked with sobs, and tears streamed from his eyes. 1 

&ivajl was amazed at his escape, and he set off himself for 
'Singhad. But first he asked Tukaram for a mark of his favour, and 
the saint gave him a handful of horse-dung. This §iv5jl accepted 
with humble thankfulness and Tukaram returned to Lohogaon.” 


^ 38 . Other- Worldliness 

Tukaram was now victor over all enemies of the flesh. All 
earthly riches he rejected ; but little he ate and at every mouthful 
he called on the name of God . 4 Sometimes he would visit another 
village, but if anyone asked him where he was going he would 
ever answer : * To the City of Vaikuntha / 6 He never spoke save 
in abhaitg verse, and was received by all as a true saint. Often he 
would go and humble his soul in the temple, confessing his sins and 
rebuking himself. One day some birds flew away from him and 
he became so distressed at their being afraid of him that he said : 
4 l look on all the world as myself, and yet the birds.fly away from 
me ! Truly all I have done is wasted. I have renounced name and 
family, I have offered my body to Him to Whom it belongs. Yet 
all is wasted; the birds fly away from me! There must be some 
duplicity in me So he became very down-hearted, and again 
rousing himself and giving himself up to religious contemplation he 
cried ; * O Merciful Lord.! As a blind man leans on his guide, so do 
l lean on thee, I follow thee to salvation; yet l have stumbled into 
a devious pat]j, save me ! O save me !* So saying he stood still 
without breath or motion, till the birds settled on him without fear, 
and though he moved they were no more startled than they are 
startled by a moving bough . 6 

• 1 The story of ‘angels at Mons’ is an interesting parallel to this story, 

whether or no we believe either story. * 

a In view of the ‘legendary’ atmosphere of Mahlpati's story as given above 
it is worthy of note that the modern historian confirms it. ‘ One of the most 
picturesque stories of his career*, says Professor H. G. Rawlinson in his book 
Sivdjt The Marathd (p. 31), 'relates how, at the risk of his life, be once 
stole through the Mussulman lines, into the heart of his enemy's camp at 
Poona, to listen to a kathd\ And again: ‘The story is well known, how, 
when Shayista Khan held Poona, £ivaj! stole down through the enemy’s 
lines to attend a festival at which TukarSm’s hymns were chanted.' fp. 86) 

8 Here comes M's story in section 17. part III on ' The Coin and Letters to 
Holy Places 

* ‘ Hari ' says M. 

5 The nearest Hindu parallel to the Jewish Paradise. 

6 This story is rejected by Rev. N^hemiah Goreh (Tenets of Tukardfy, 
p. 72) on what appear inadequate grounds, 




THE RIVHR INDKAVANI WHERE TUKAUAM THREW H IS l’OEMS AND WHERE HE DISAPPEARED 




tv PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 105 
39* Tukaram’s End 

Mabfpati has expended ail his powers in describing the end of 
Tukaram and the account will be found in its proper, place at the 
conclusion of Part III. 1 The only safe verdidt, however, is that 
of the Indu Prakdsh edition : * Very great obscurity prevails as to 
theepd oLTukarain’s earthly existence. The popular Hindu belief 
is that he ascended alive to Heaven in the Car of Vishpu . . . A . 
, copeistent meaning might be made out of the abhangs 2 and they 
would seem to point out, that Tukaram . . . thought that his 

worldly duty was over, wished to be rid of that visible existence 
which. . . separates man from the everlating, . . . and therefore 
’ went on pilgrimage with the intention of never returning to Dehu, 
and probably of putting an end to his existence.’ 8 With this agrees 
Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar’s suggestion * that he ended his life by means 
of jalasamCtdhi , drowning himself in the neighbouring river. Some 
of Tukaram’s own abhangs show that he was aware of his ap- 
proaching separation from the people and was constantly expecting 
God to come and take him away ; and other evidence makes it 
probable that he met his death by drowning. But whether the 
drowning was a pre-arranged affair, that is to say a jalasamCtdhi , 
or whether the constant expectation of God’s coming to fetch him 
away produced an illusion, and in obeying a fancied call from the 
opposite bank he ran into the river and was drowned, it is very 
difficult to say. But taking into consideration ail facts, I am * 
inclined to take the latter view, that is to say, if we are to believe 
that Tukaram met his death by drowning.’ 4 * It is believed ’, says 
the Rev. Ganpatrao R. Navalkar, 1 that he drowned himself in the 
holy river of his native village, as is the custom of the Indian 
Sitdhus,' 5 Parallel instances of Indian saints who have ended their 
lives by jalasamCtdhi will occur to students of Maratha history, e.g., 
Eknath in 1599, Nijanand the guru and father of Ranganath in 
16+2, Brahmanand in 1775 and in recent years a Mr. and Mrs. 
Kejuskar who both took jalasamCtdhi simultaneously. An equally 
striking instance is that of Dnyaneshwar, the father of Marathi 
poetry, Who took sthalasamCtdhi (getting oneself buried alive) in 
1296, the moving story of which event may be read in Mr. Bhave’s 
fascinating Marathi work. 6 On the date of Tukaram’s end see 
section 1, Part II (p. 77) and footnote to Section 18, Part III 

(p. 116). * , 

: An interesting feature of Tukaram’s disappearance is the dis- 
covery of his blanket and cymbals a few days later, which fact 

ii i See section 18, Part III, “‘Ascension ” of Tukaram*, which should be 
read at this point. 

2 Numbered 1444 tb 1459, F. and M. 

3 Indu-Prakash edition, pp. 21-23. 

4 Two Masters: Jesus and Tukaram, p. 11. 

5 Tukardm, the Maharashtrian Poet and Saint , p. 2. 

•M. Sdr . P. 51-2. 



106 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH, IV 

some would adduce as evidence in favour of the theory of drown- 
ing, while the biographer of the 1 Saints \ whose narrative is given 
in section 18 of Part III, regards it as proof that ‘he had been 
received into Vaikuntha \ a phrase which' the modernist Hindu 
might be justified in explaining as a Hindu poetic way of saying 
that Tukaram's ‘ spirit had taken its flight \ 

On Tukaram’s supposed ‘ influence after death f see section 19 
in Part III of this chapter. 



111. The ‘ Legendary ’ Element in Tukaram’s Biography 


The order and numbering of sections are explained on 
page '77, Part II of this chapter. Doubtless many of the 
* traditions' given here have a substratum of fact , e.g., much of 
section 16 below. They are given in the form of a fairly literal 
translation from Mahlpati s Marathi narrative , without comment 
of our own . 


i. Tukaram’s Birth 1 

After some generations it happened on one occasion when the 
great devotees were seated round Hari in Vaikuntha — like stars 
round the moon, or ascetics round Siva, or mountains round Mount 
Meru — that Hari addressed them and said: ‘In the family of 
Vi^vambhara there is now a saint named Bolhoba ; I am resolved to 
present him with a son who shall be a world-saviour and a world- 
teacher.' The saints acclaimed this resolution, and Hari then led 
aside Nama 2 and reminded him that he had never finished the 
hundred crores of abhahgs he promised to write ; this then should 
be his opportunity to assume the flesh again and finish the task. 
Nama replied that in this Kali Yuga, Krisna had assumed his 
Buddha form and gave no answer to mankind. 3 * * But Krisna 
answered that he would show himself to the world again if Nama 
would return there. Thereupon Nama fell at his feet, and he 
raised him up and embraced him. Thus Tukaram, who dwelt in 
God’s heart, was set in Nama's heart : whereby God filled Nama's 
heart with the nectar of love, and God offered Nama his own 
power of creation and destruction, and that devotion which lies 
beyond liberation. This peculiar treasure of His, Tukaram who 
was part of His innermost nature, He thus by an embrace 
conveyed to Nama, and as He did so, He said : ‘ Help each other to 
know what love is.' Then said Nama, ‘ Where shall I assume 
flesh ? Tell me some holy family,’ and Hari pointed out to him 
Vtevambhara’s house. 

Then even as the Lord of avataras descends into the ocean shells 
and forms pearls therein, even so the Spirit of Loving Devotion 
entered the womb of Kanakal and Tukaram was conceived. 

1 To be read in connexion with sect. 3, Part II of this chapter, p. 78. 

2 ‘Nama * refers to Namdev, the Maratha poet saint of the 14th century. 

* This silence of the Buddha form of Krisna is entirely characteristic of 

Buddha, one of the names of Buddha meaning, ' meditator ’ or, 1 one who 

ttmains dumb.' 9 



108 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 
2 . Adversity and Self- Dedication 1 

Then did Hari make himself like the Great Serpent of Siva, 
and He encompassed Tukaram, loudly hissing with his hood 
uplifted, and he bade Tukaram open his eyes and look upon him. 
But he answered : ‘If God has visited me in this Serpent form, 
assuredly I will not look upon Him. I am a servant of Pantjuraiig, 
no other will I behold' ’ When Hari thus learned Tukaram’s 
innermost thoughts, he came before him in his true form, with his 
four arms, his conch and disc, and Tukaram opened his eyes and 
beheld him. 4 5 My darling, * said he, 4 1 have never forgotten you/ 

3. Withdrawal from Business 2 

When at last Kanhoba came to Bhambanatha he saw there an 
amazing sight — Hari glittering in his robes and jewels, with Tuka- 
ram seated on his thigh, and he heard Hari say : 4 From age to age 
I show myself in the world : it is for my votary’s sake. For 
Pundalika’s sake 3 I stand by the Bhlma with my hands upon my 
hips ; for ViSvambhara’s sake I stayed at Dehu ? And Tukaram 
fell at his feet — the spot is known to this day ; Kanhoba carved a 
pair of feet there. 

4. The Troubles of His Wife 4 

Off Avail started, * with Hari behind her/ if we are to follow 
Mahipati. Tukaram, the prii\ce of Vaisnavas, when he saw them 
was astonished but also very pleased, and all three sat down to- 
gether. Then Tukarafli bade Avaji offer him food, but she answer- 
ed, * 1 have brought only one cake, it will not be enough for two.’ 
Avail in confusion opened the bundle, and lo ! it was full of dishes, 
for Hari had previously eaten. 4 Surely,’ she said, 4 my family god 
has come to help me/ But nevertheless she found it hard to believe 
in his power. So she went on serving her husband in silence, till 
he needed water. Now she had spilt her water on the way; and 
there was none on the hill. Hari suggested her going to the dell 
and when she went and lifted a stone, she found a spring of clear 
water and brought and gave it 1 them’ to drink. 

5. The Holy Day of His Forefathers ' 

Tukaram having forgotten all about the herb he wanted, Hari 
took pity on him and assuming the form of Tukaram, went to his 

1 To be read with sect. 10, Part II according to footnote 2, p. 84. 

2 To be read with sect. 11, Part II, see footnote 3, p. 84. , 

3 See pp. 41-2, 48, 51 and chap 6, sect. 4. 

4 To follow on sect. 14, Part II of this Chapter ; see footnote L p. 87. 

5 To be r$ad with sect. 18, Part II; see footnote 1, p. 89. 



TRADITIONS 


109 


iv 

house with a load on his head, gave the stuff to Avail and told her 
to start cooking. Wheat and pulse and ghee he gave her and every 
sort of sugar and spice. Then he went through the village and 
invited everyone to the feast. He brought them to the IndrayapI 
and showed them all due respect, set them down and pressed upon 
each of them the food he preferred. And they said to Avail : * This 
is astonishing ! Tukaram has turned_his thoughts to the world 
again.* 1 My mind misgives me,’ said Avail. Then the Mahars and 
the beggars came forward for a share which they obtained. At last 
Hari saw the dishes washed, restored his own dish to every guest 
and then vanished. 

6. The Coppersmith and His Wife 1 

A Brahman, having to pay a debt of ten thousand rupees, was 
sitting in supplication before Dnyanoba’s temple, in a vision he 
was instructed to go to Tukaram. He did so and was again sent 
to a kdsdr (coppersmith) who gave him two small copper coins in 
charity. Tukaram took them, and touching them with a stone 
turned them into gold ; but as this w,as not sufficient, he turned 
his copper sacrificial vessels also into gold. The kctsdr seeing this 
thought Tukaram must be possessed of the parisa ; 2 and began to 
pay him court in every possible way. After a year, a wonderful 
event occurred. The kasclr had procured thirty-six bullock loads 
of tin from Bombay, all of which was turned into silver. On this 
the kctsdr gave up the world, became Tukarfim’s disciple and, with 
his money, built a well, still called 1 the kasar's well,’ The 
wife of the kasar was exceedingly angry with Tukaram on 
account of the change that had taken place in her hus- 
band. She one day pretended to make a feast on his account, and 
when he went to bathe, she poured down upon him vessel after 
vessel of boiling water. The god however turned it into cold 
water. She then set food before him, with poison -in it; but that 
too the god rendered harmless. Over the body of this woman there 
immediately appeared leprosy, and she was exceedingly distressed. 
She then obtained relief by taking (at the suggestion of Rameshwar 
Bbatt) some of the clay from the place where Tukaram had bathed, 
and anointing her body with it/ 

7. Vithoba and the Thieves 4 

The buffalo given by Avail’s father and which had done the 
damage in Mumbaji’s garden was once carried off by two thieves. 

1 This sect, comes in sect. 30 of Part II; see footnote 3, p. 98. 

2 A stone, the touch of which turns metals into gold. 

3 Sects. 6-11 and 14 are here given as translated by Dr. J. Murray 
Mitchell in J.R,A,S.Bo^ 1849, Vol. Ill; pp. 19-26. 

4 This story comes between sects. 31 and 32 in Part II; see footnote 5, p. 99. 
The story of Mumbaji being placed in part II later than is usual 
(see footnote 1, sect. 31 in Part II) necessitates also our placing later thah is 
usual this ‘buffalo ’ story. 



HO LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM *H. 

They had gone a considerable distance when Vithobi appeared in 
the shape of a tall black figure* with a huge cudgel over his 
shoulder* right in front of them. The thieves turned to one side* 
but so did it. Whenever they tried to turn off, the terrible bhut 
(ghost)-looking shape posted itself in the way. The thieves became 
terrified, and taking back the buffalo, bound it in the place whence 
they had carried it off. ‘Now 1 thought they, ‘we shall get off/ 
But no ! for there stood the ghost, as frightful as ever. So they 
went to Tukaram, and confessed all they had done. ‘ If you want 
the bullock, take it/ said Tukaram. 4 No/ said they, ‘ we only 
want to be delivered from that frightful ghost/ On this Tukaram, 
by mental vision, perceived that the god was not there and he began 
to invoke his presence. Whereupon, in the sight of all, Vithoba 
entered the temple, with a huge cudgel over his shoulder. 

8. The Kunbi’s Cucumber 1 

A certain Kunbi (peasant) was a very religious man. He brought 
a small cucumber to Tukaram out of affection. Tukaram divided it 
into four parts, and had eaten three of them when his disciples said, 
‘ Kindly give us part of the fruit/ Tukaram replied, ‘ This is not 
good to eat ; but never mind; take this, and give the dumb Brahman 
half/ As the Brahman ate, his speech returned. When the other 
disciples began to eat the other half, they all cried : * Oh, how 
bitter 1 1 and secretly spit it out. 

9. How Tukaram Helped the Needy 2 

A Brahman who wished to pay off a debt was sitting before 
Dnyanoba’s temple, and by him was spnt to Tukaram, who again 
sent him to the Kdsdr mentioned above. The Kftsctr gave him four 
iron pds (bars), a load which the Brahman could not carry, so that 
he hid three, and came with one to Dehu. Tukaram turned it into 
gold ; whereupon the Brahman went back, and searched for the 
three others, which however he could not find. 


10. A Brahman Boy Healed 3 

About this time too a Brahman sent for Tukaram to his house 
and entreated him to help his son. He was a boy of eight years, 
who was dumb from his birth, and his thread ceremony could not 
be performed. Tukaram caused the boy to be brought to him and 
bade him cry * Vitthal * and immediately the boy spoke. 

1 To be read with sect. 33, Part II; see footnote 3, p. 101. 

2 To be reed with sect. 34, Part II ; see footnote 2, p. 102. 

3 Stories, 10rl4 follow section 34, Part II ; see footnote 3, p. 102. 



nr TRADITIONS ill 

ii» A Scribe’s Unauthorized Alteration 1 

Tukaram was composing abhat'igs, and in celebrating the sports 
of Kri£pa, he said, ‘ His face was dirty/ Rameshwar Bhatt thought 
this would never answer, and he changed it to ‘His face was pale/ 
Whereupon the god appeared to him in a vision and reproved him. 
* Was I afraid ?* said the god. 1 What could make me pale ? My 
face was dirty ; in my childhood I was eating dust ; Tukaram was 
quite right/ So Rameshwar corrected to what Tukaram had 
written. 


12. A Miraculous Visit from Siva 1 

Once in the month of Chaitra Tukaram went on a pilgrimage 
to a temple of &iva; the journey took six days and on the seventh 
they descried the temple. Then Tukaram faithfully greeted it 
with a prostration. Kothaleshwar was the name of the hill whereon 
it stood; at its foot there was a tank, where people bathed 
before visiting the temple. But ere they climbed the hill Tukaram 
bade them cook a meal and conceiving his purpose they cooked a 
meal and set out dishes for four. Then suddenly a naked form, 
sky-clothed, appeared before them, the very Lord of Kaihlsa, with 
braided locks and ashes smeared upon him. ‘ Give me food/ said 
he, ‘I am hungry/ ‘Very good/ said Tukaram, and he bade his 
companions serve the guest first. Then did the Lord of Kailftsa 
refresh himself, and he ate all the food that Tukaram and his 
friends had prepared for the party, and after that he blessed them 
and went his way. They must needs send to the village for more 
victuals, but when they opened their pots (for they had tied them 
up to keep the flies off), behold they were full of food ! 

So Tukaram and his friends knew that undoubtedly it was 6iva 
who had visited them, and they ate themselves and climbed the 
hill and saluted the god. And then they returned and on their way 
they met a householder who was troubled by a Brahman ghost. 
Now the ghost had said to him: ‘Offer a solemn sacrifice, and 
bestow on me the merit thereof, and I will trouble thee no more/ 
But the householder was too poor to offer the sacrifice, and his 
spirit sank at the words of the ghost. Wandering from house to 
house, he begged men to help him, and many regions he had passed 
through before he reached Lohogaon. ‘ If any has the merit of a 
sacrifice, pray let him give it to me/ he cried, and there was one 
that heard him, a follower of Tukaram, that uttered the name of 
Vitthal as he passed along the road, and every time he did so tied 
& knot in a cord. When he heard him he cut off a knot and bade 


x See footnote on sect. 10 above. 



H2 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

him steep it in water and drink it. And he did so, and the instant 
he drank it the evil spirit departed from him and he fell down as 
one dead. 


13. Tukaram’s Letter of Apology to Vithoba 1 

Once it chanced that Tukaram fell sick and on the eleventh day 
he could not visit Pandharl. So he wrote a letter and sent it by 
the hand of a pilgrim. He laid before Hari all his longings and 
the weakness of his limbs and he cried to him for help. The 
pilgrim took the letter and went with his company to Pandharl, 
and there he read it before Vithoba. Then Vithoba felt his throat 
choke with sobs, and he said to Rukhmini, ‘Tukaram, my faithful 
servant, is ill ; he cannot come to Pandharl ; shall I go and visit 
him?’ And Rukhmini answered, ‘ Nay, rather send Garud and 
bring Tukaram here/ So Hari called for Garud, who came and 
did obeisance to him, and he sent him whirring away to Dehu. He 
found Tukaram with little life in him, but all his thoughts devotedly 
fixed on the Lord of Pandharl. Gently he roused him and gave 
him a letter from Vitthal, bidding him take his seat on the sacred 
bird. But tears came into Tukaram’s eyes. ‘How can I presume 
to do this ? * said he, * it is your office to bear my lord ; I beseech 
you, tell my lord how I am, and beg him to visit me/ And Garud 
went and told Hari, and Hari came flashing through the sky in all 
his splendour, and he alighted and embraced Tukaram. And 
Tukaram slowly opened his eyes, and when he saw his lord before 
him he fell down and kissed his feet. 

Then Hari taking Tukaram’s hand went into the house with 
him — a broken-down hut it was, open to the wind on every side. 
*JL am" hungry, * said the god of gods, * give me a meal. * And 
Avajl gave him a simple meal, such as the Bhll woman once gave 
him and he ate till he was satisfied and then departed. 


14. Supplying Oil and Alms 1 * 

A Brahman made a feast for Tukaram on a Monday. At the 
proper time of dining, the oil was deficient, and the lamp was going 
out. The Brahman was distressed, but Tukaram said, ‘jLook into 
the skin-bottle and see/ His wife went to look, and saw a large 
quantity of oil, and the oil lasted afterwards as long as the 
Brahman and his wife lived. 

There was a stone before the door of a patti's house in that 
village, on which Tukaram used to sit. He was sitting there one 

, 1 See footnote on sect. 10 above. 



i*r TRADITIONS |« 

day when a very poor man came and asked alms. At Tukaram’s 
command he went and begged in the village, and some pieces of 
iron were given him. Coming ba€k, he said, 1 1 have got this iron,’ 
and laid a piece down before Tukaram on the stone. It was 
immediately changed into gold. He put down another, and another 
which were changed in like manner. The people of the village 
seeing this wonder, brought pieces of iron and laid them on the 
stone but no change took place in these. 


15. The Fortune-Teller’s Son Raised 


Many miracles did Tukaram perform. 2 He turned salt water 
sweet and filled vessels with oil for the needy and faithful. And 
once at Lohogaon when he was holding a kirtan the joshl’s (sooth- 
sayer's) son died, and the father said to him : 1 If you are truly a 
servant of Vishnu, raise up my son again.’ Thus the service was 
interrupted and the worshippers were distressed. Then Tukaram 
closed his eyes, and centred all his thoughts on the Lord of Pap<J- 
hart. ‘ From of old,' said he, ‘ the saints have given thee a good 
name, do thou establish it now in the sight of us all. If thou 
comest not now to our help I will not consent to live more\ 
Then the Lord of Pandharl came speedily, and he roused Tukaram 
and said : ‘ O crest-jewel of devotion ! have you not in the worship 
of Hari the very water of life?’ Then Tukaram rejoiced and he 
called on the worshippers to sing, and for an hour they glorified 
Hari till Tukaram's spirit dwelt no more in his body. Meanwhile 
the corpse was laid in the assembly and when the hour had passed 
it lived again, and the young man sat up and praised Hari. 


16. Tukaram and the Sanyasis 


Two Sanyasis heard the recitation of Tukaram, and going to 
Dadu Kond Deva, a high authority in Poona, complained that 
Tukaram was destroying the Karma Mfirga, and that Brahmans 
Were falling down at his feet. Dadu Kond Deva, on this, fined 
the Brahmans of Lohogaon fifty rupees and summoned Tukaram. 
The Brahmans said: ‘ How can we pay fifty rupees ? ’ Then they 
accompanied Tukaram. At the Sangam where they rested, people 
came to see Tukaram in numbers like an army ; and Dadu Kond 
Deva himself proceeded to pay reverence to him. In the first 

; 1 This story and the next one (seotion 16) follow on section 35 in Part II 
see footnote I, p. 103. 

2 On this claim see the last sentence in first paragraph, p. 69, 

3 See footnote 1 on preceding section 1$. • 

15 



m life AND TEACHING t>F TUKARAM CH. 

recitation a great avadhuta 1 appeared, naked, with his body shining 
with dazzling brightness and with the ensigns of a Gosfivf*. He 
embraced Tukaram, and made obeisance to him* * I longed to see 
you.’ said the wonderful visitant, * now I have done so . 1 * 3 So 
saying he went up into heaven. Thereupon the people said : 
* Surely that was Mahadev or Dattatreya.’ 

Next night, in Poona during the recitation — the*Sanyasis that 
complained, as well as a great number of other people, being present 
— the Sanyasis were seen to rise up and prostrate before Tukaram. 
Dadu Kond Deva was exceedingly angry that the men who 
complained so bitterly of Tukaram should do this. ‘ But,’ said 
they, * he now appeared to us in the form of Narayan (Vishnu) 
four-armed and resplendant.* On this Dadu Kond Deva ordered 
them to have their hair shaved off in five lines, to be mounted on 
the back of an ass and led round the city. All was ready for this, 
but Tukaram interceded on their behalf and the punishment was 
not inflicted . 8 


17. The Coin and Letters to Holy Places 4 5 * 

There went from Lohogaon a disciple of Tukaram’s named 
Kondoba as a pilgrim to Kcisl and Tukaram wrote and sent 
abhangs as letters with him. To help the pilgrim on his visits 
Tukaram gave him a gold coin saying, 4 When you change this, 
always set aside one piece for next time, binding it carefully, and 
it will become a gold coin too.’ 

The first letter was to the 4 Lord of Creation ’ : 4 This mar- 

vellous universe, this ts thou, O Lord of Kailasa, therefore thou 
art called Lord of the world. Pity then the feeble and lowly that 
approach thee. O AsakI with the braided locks, give me a morsel 
of thy favour ! * And the second letter Tukaram wrote to Bhagl- 
rathi : 5 4 O mistress of all holy waters ! The very sight of thee 
cleanses from the greatest sins ; and he attains to liberation who 
believes and bathes in thee. I, Tukaram, the foster-child of the 
saints, send thee a flower of speech.’ And the # third letter he 
wrote to Vishnupad : 4 Greater art thou than Gaya ! Whoso lays 
a ball of rice on thee, he pays off all the debt he owes his fathers*’ 
These three letters Kondoba took to Benares, and he first read the 
letter to Bhaglrathl. Then a hand rose from the water, with a 

1 A term describing a roaming, naked Brahmin or Gosavl (on which term see 
p, 6, footnote 2) who is considered to be an avatara of 6iva or Dattatreya and 
Who recites metrical pieces from the Bhagavata Purana , 

9 See p. 6, footnote 2: 

3 Translation of this sect. 16 is taken frdm J.R.A.S . Bo., p. 26-27 by Dr, J, 
Murray Mitchell. 

4 This story follows section 37 , Part II ; see footnote 3, p. 104. 

5 i.e., a part of the Ganges, see F. and M. 1462-3 with ‘Notes', vol, 2, 

p. 438. 



IV 


Traditions 


115 


jewelled arm flittering like the sun, and Kondoba placed within th$ 
hand the letter and it closed on it and disappeared. Then Kondoba 
read the letter to Siva, and the Holder of the Trident slowly 
moved from side to side, while a shower of bell-flowers fell from 
heaven. And last, at Gaya, he performed a srfiddh % and then came 
back to his own country. When Kondoba returned home Tuka-' 
ram asked him for the gold coin. Kondoba falsely told him it 
was lost. When he went home and looked for it, thd coin had 
really disappeared, but the knot in which he had tied it, was still 
there. 


18. ‘Ascension ’ of Tukaram 1 

Now if you ask, what was the divine purpose of Tukaram's 
incarnation, I reply : 2 3 What avails a mirror if there be none to 
observe his features in it ? What avails a scented flower, if there 
be no nostril to smell it ? God’s mighty power is nothing unless 
there be a worshipper to recognize it ; for this reason, then, God 
has divided Himself, that He might worship Himself. Hence did 
Tukaram assume his incarnation that he might show, as the 
Bhctgawat declares, that Loving Devotion is the highest worship. 

And the Lord of the World, with the saints around Him, took 
their seats in their chariots and descending to the earth they came 
to Dehu, embracing Tukaram and saying to him : ‘ Without thee 

Vaikuntha is a wilderness ! ’ And for five days they held high 
festival by the IndrayanI unseen by all save Tukaram. Never- 
theless, all the village sat listening to Tukaram ; and though the 
Shiytgft* fell at that time no one joined in the Shimga mirth; a 
spirit of peace and heavenly joy possessed them all. 

Then Hari bade Tukaram accompany him, but he fell at Hari’s 
feet and said: ‘Nay, my lord, here is Pandharpur, a very 
Vaikuntha on earth — why need I go hence?’ ‘Pay me but one 
visit,’ said Hari ; 4 1 will show thee my glory on the sea of milk ; 
if thou livest for ever in the world the fond desires of men 
will be unsatisfied.’ Then Tukaram answered in four abhahgs 
proclaiming his freedom from the earth and earthly passions, 
and the gods listened to him with joy and wonder ; 4 Blest, indeed/ 
said they, 4 is our lot that hear him.* 

Then said Hari, 4 Let us go to Vaikuntha,’ and Tukaram sent 
for his wife and said to her, ‘ Behold, I go to Vaikuntha ! Come 
with me \ But she answered : ‘ I am five months gone with 
child — there's a buffalo at home to look after — the children, too, 

1 This section should be read before section 39, Part II on pp. 105-G. 

2 Says Mahipati. 

3 A. Hindu annual festival called * The Holi 

4 See F. andM. 1389, 587, 1586— three remarkable abhangs , whose genuihe- 

ness is doubtful, one abhang not being in the /. P. edition and therefor^not 
translated in F. and M. , 



m life and TEACHING Of TUKARAM ch* 

who will take care of them ? * And the saint was amazed and said f 
‘ She is still in love with her house ; the Lord of Vaikuntha calls 
her, but she will not go with him !* Yet it was not her own fault, 
for often Tukaram had said, when she asked where he was going, 
* I am going to' Vaikuntha ’. So now once more she only thought, 
1 The fool is going to some village or other.* 

Then Tukaram moved away, but his followers understood not 
that he was leaving them for ever ; they supposed he was setting 
off on a pilgrimage. ‘ He is weary of us,* they said , 1 so he jour- 
neys to the Himalaya Mountains.* And other abhangs he spoke 1 
till a great marvel took place, chariots appearing in the sky, 
wherein were seated Narad and Tumbara singing, and Parvati and 
the Lord of Kaiiasa, and Brahma and Vishnu and Rudra: The 
lustre of the sun was dimmed by their splendour and mortal men 
closed their eyes, as they close them when lightning flashes in 
the sky. Then Tukaram sat himself in a chariot, and began his 
journey through the sky. 

When his followers opened their eyes, behold ! he was with them 
no more . 2 * * * * * 8 Loud were the voices of lamentation ; and Avail 
lamented with them, crying : * He told me to come with him, but I 
thought he was lying. The fiery flame of his renunciation burned 
my own body, and, before our eyes, he has gone away ; if I had 
known he was going I should have clung to his robe.* And she 
fell on the ground and swooned. 

Three days and three nights Tukaram’s followers sat lamenting 
for him when suddenly there fell from the sky his cymbals and his 
blanket. Then- they knew he had been received into Vaikuntha, 
for his cymbals were sent them as a sign of farewell. 

On Tukaram’s End see further the last eight lines on page 126. 


19 . Influence after Death 

Tukaram while yet on earth had promised a Lingayat Want to 
appear to him at his death. a Accordingly when the Want felt his 
death approaching, he sent to Dehu for Rameshwar, # for Tukaram’s 

1 Of these some are translated in F. and M . edition (e.g„ 513) . Some are 
in the /. P. Ed. (e.g, 10, 28, 8, 9, 11) but not translated by F, and Mr, 
others are not in the /. P. Ed. None has any special propriety in this context. 

8 The date is given : In the year 1571 of tl e Sake era, the year Virodhi, oft 

Monday the second day of the latter half of the month of Phalgun (Feb-March) 

between 6 a.m. and 9 a.m. This has usually been thought to indicate a.d» 1649 
as the year of TukSram’s end, but L R. Pangarkar’s book published in 1920 
(p. 19, footnote) concludes in favour of March 9, 1650, while on the evidence of 

SantajI the oilman, and the Hindu almanacs (as he writes in a personal letter), 
V. L. Bbave, Ttikaramace Assai Gathd , vol. 2, p, 13, M Sar., p. 189, be- 

lieves Tukaram 'left this world' when Shaka 1572 was completed, that is, 

in Shaka 1573 or 16th Feb* 1652. See further Sect. 1, Part II. 

8 Modern parallels to this are provided by the cases of dying saints who 
gssure grief-stricken loved ones that in some way or other they will help -them. 



tv 


TkAJDltlOttS 


111 


younger brother, and for his younger son. When they arrived, 
Tukaram appeared. The Wilnl alone perceived him and made 
obeisance to him and put sweet-smelling powder on his forehead 
and garlands on his neck. The two then spoke together, and all 
around marvelled, for they saw nothing but the garlands of flowers, 
which seemed as if suspended in the air. To faithful men Tuka- 
ram still appears. Of this we have many witnesses. To Niloba 
Gositvl of Pimpalner, to Bahinabai, and Gangadbar he appeared 
in vision, and gave them instruction . 1 The last three lines may be 
viewed as an anticipation of modern spiritualism by the eighteenth 
century biographer of the Maratha saints. 

1 Up to this point this sect. (19) is from Dr. Mitchell's translation, J.R.A.S. 
Bo., Vol. Ill, p. 29. 



Mfe MISERABLE 


Since little wit have I, 

0 hear my mournful cry. 

Grant now, O grant to me 
That 1 thy feet may see. 

1 have no steadfastness. 
N&rayan, 1 I confess. 

Have mercy, Tuka prays, 
On my unhappy case. 


BEYOND THE MOUNTAINS, GOD 

Here tower the hills of passion and of lust,— 
Far off the Infinite ! 

No path I find and all impassable 
Fronts me the hostile height. 

Ah, God is lost, my friend. Narayan * now 
How can I e’er attain ? 

Thus it appears that all my life, so dear, 

I’ve spent, alas, in vain. 


THOUGH PIE SLAY ME 

Now I submit me to thy will, 

Whether thou save or whether kill ; 

Keep thou me near or send me hence, 

Or plunge me in the war of sense, 

Thee in my ignorance I sought, 

Of true devotion knowing nought. 

Little cot^ld I, a dullard, know, 

Myself the lowest of the low. 

My mind I cannot steadfast hold ; 

My senses wander uncontrolled. 

Ah, I have sought and sought for peace. 

In vain ; for me there’s no release. 

Now bring I thee a faith complete 
And lay my life before thy feet. 

Do thou, O God, what seemeth best ; • 

In thee, in thee alone is rest. 

In thee I trust, and, hapless weight. 

Cling to thy skirts with all my might. 

My strength is spent, I, Tuka say ; 

Now upon thee this task I lay. 


1 That is, the Supreme Being. 

The poems on this page are translations from TukSiram’s A bhangs , P t M.S„ 
pp. 62, 67, 69, 



Chapter V 

Tnkaram’s Autobiography 


From the writings of Mahlpati we pass to the poems of 
Tukaram himself, so many of which are purely autobiographical. 
The treatment of Tukaram’s autobiography as found in his abhangs 
presents itself naturally under three aspects : First, the critical 
problem arising in connection with Tukaram’s autobiographical 
poetry; second, the literary characteristics of the autobiography; 
and third, Tukaram’s picture of himself. 


I. The Critical Problem 

i. Variant Editions of Tukaram ’s Poems 

One of the most serious difficulties confronting the student of 
Tukaram arises from the existence of several different collections 
of his poems, each of which has a system of numbering of its own. 
The edition which has been widely accepted as the best, the 
Indu Prakdsh edition of 1869, subsidized by the Bombay 
Government at a cost, it is said, of no less than Rs. 24,000 ' has for 
many years been out of print. With other editions adopting 
different texts and numberings of the poems, these being arranged 
variously by different editors on their own principles, we have a 
perfect illustration of * the disorganized state of the literary world 
of India’. 9 Truly a heavy task, and a worthy one, awaits the 
Tukdrdm Mandall and the Bhfirata ltihds Sanshodhaka Mandala 
of Poona, Until a really scientific attempt has been made to 
settle the true authentic text of Tukaram’s abhangs many funda- 
mental problems affecting his biography must remain unsolved and 
any correct .estimate of him is impossible. An interesting dis- 
cussion of the question, without anything new, appeared in the 
Subodh Patrikd of Dec. 14, 1919. 

The following is a list of the various editions of Tukaram’s 
poems with their dates and other details" the last one in the list being 
added by us. By 4 editions’ in the whole of this discussion is meant 

1 V. L. Bhave, Tukaramace Assal Gatha,v ol. 2, p. 2. 

2 Preface to Vol. Ill, F. and M, 

3 The list is taken from V- L. Bhave’s Tukaramace Assal Gfithd , Vol. 2. 

f>. 1. 



120 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

of course Marathi editions, the only English edition being that by 
Fraser and Marafhe which contains translations of 3721 abhatigs. 


o 

£ 

Date of 
publics- 

Place of 
Publics- 

Name of Publish- 
ing Press. 

Name of Editor. 

Number 

of 


tion. 

tion. 


abhaAgs 

1 

1867 

Bombay 

G. Krishna jl ... 

G. Krishnajl ... 

4500 

2 

1869 

do 

Indu Prakdsh ... 

Shankar PSndu* 



1886 



rang 

4621 

3 

do 

Kir nay a Sagar 

V. Madgaokar ... 

4645 

4 

1889 

do 

Suhodh Prakdsh 

Tukaram Tatya 

8441 

5 

1901 

Poona 

Indira 

Messrs. Jog & 






Gulve 

4575 

6 

1903 

Bombay 

Indu Prakdsh & 

K. Heralekar ... 

4476 



Chandrodaya 

(Poona.) 




7 

1909 

Poona 

J agaddhitechhu 

V. N. Joga 

4149 

8 

1912 

Bombay 

Nirnaya Sagar 

V, L. Pansikar ... 

4505 

9 

1913 

Poona 

Aryahhushan ... 

Dravid and Apte 

4092 

10* 

1913 

Poona 

J agaddhitechhu 

V. N. Godbole ... 

4499 

11 

1920 

Thana and 

Aryahhushan ... 

V. L. Bhave 

1323 


Poona (incom- 

plete) 


Since the publication of the above list in Mr. Bhave’s book and 
whilst our own book is passing through the press a 12th edition 
has been published, in Bombay, by S. Narayan & Co., edited by 
R. T. Padwal, containing 9,000 abhangs . 

Of these variant editions three call for special mention. (1) 
The Ittdu Prakdsh collection, referred to as No. 2 above, contain- 
ing 4621 abhangs and — rara avis— has a 4 critical preface \ Even 
in this edition, however, the problem of a critically ascertained text 
of Tukaram’s poems, one of the most difficult and most important 
problems in the whole range of Marathi literature, is dismissed in ft 
page and a half. Moreover, the principles followed leave much to 
be desired. None of the MSS on which the editors base their 
text is described in any detail. Of these the best would hppear to 
be the 4 Dehu MS* and the 4 Kadusa MS’ the others being the 
4 Talegaon MS' and the 4 Pancjharpur MS*. The two former are 
superior only because the Dehu MS is ( said to have been written ’ 
by Tukaram’s eldest son, Mahadev, no proof of any kind being 
adduced, and because the Kadusa MS is * said to have been written ’ 
by Gangajl Mavaja — who is described as 4 the person who put down 
in writing what Tukaram composed’. As for Mahadev, had he 
indeed written his father’s abhahgs % as is affirmed, surely Mahlpati 
would have known and mentioned the fact. As for Gangajl 
Mavaja, he cannot be allowed to occupy his position of solitary 
distinction as TukariUn’s amanuensis, for there were at least two 



y * t URARAM'S AUTOBf OGR APH% 121 

others who are mentioned as having done similar work — Rfimeshwar 
Bhattand Santajlthe Oilman, 1 and the editors do not appear to have 
obtained any original writing of GgngajI, while there is room 
for doubt whether they made the best use of what MSS 
they did see. Since therefore they appear to have accepted 
mere traditions as trustworthy evidence, our faith is somewhat 
shaken in the value of the critical principles adopted by them. The 
lndu Prakdsh editors are honest enough to tell us that some of the 
MSS on which they rely had been * corrected \ 4 further corrected 1 
and ‘ arranged ’, all of which are very damaging terms, indicating a 
grave diminution of value in any of the MSS so doctored. It is 
unsafe to conclude, therefore, that the text lying behind the lndu 
Prakdsh edition is either the best text or that it has reached us in 
its original form. At the same time this edition may be regarded 
as exceedingly well-edited, the aim of its editors being "faithfully 
to reproduce' the text they considered available in 1869, and 
though their basal MSS should eventually have to be considered 
imperfect, the editors were conscientious enough ‘ not to leave out 
any word or verse even where it appeared indecent’/ 

2. If such are the methods obtaining in the only ‘critical 
preface’ found among all the editions published up to 1920, what 
shall be said of those collections which conceal their methods from 
our view? The late Vishnuboa Joga’s edition of 4149 abhaitgs 
(numbered 7 in the list above), with its excellent commentary, must 
be pronounced the best edition from the standpoint of interpretation 
and for that reason it is approved by the Wdrkaris (see chapter 7, 
sec. 2), though its text is probably not of the best. The edition of 
Tukctrdm Tdtya (No. 4) is well-described by Dr. R. G. Bhandarkar* 
as ‘ uncritically made and oftentimes one same piece is given 
a second time with the opening lines omitted. Still, this. . . . 
contains abhangs. . . quite in the style of Tukaram with the usual 
fervent devotion and purity of thought*. For this reason the 
Pr&rthana Samaj have taken several of their hymns from this 
edition. The late Hari Narayan Apte took a leading part with 
Mr. Dravid in editing the collection numbered 9 in the list given 
above, embodying an order of the poems accepted by the Wdrharis 
of Pandharpur but as this is based on the Pap<Jharpur MS already 
referred to, and of secondary value, being characterized by the 
Inau Prakdsh editors as ‘very recent', * modernized ’ and ‘less 
accurate *, we may safely leave it out of our reckoning. Numbers 
L&hd 10 in the list are based on W&rkari MSS of doubtful authority 
while the editions numbered 3, 5, 6 and 8 were prepared from other 
printed collections such as the lndu Prakdsh . 

■# , 3. We come to the last and most recent edition in our list, the 
ox|e which presents the nearest approach to critical principles, 

i See pp. 73, 101. 1 11, and 122. 

r a lndu Prakdsh , Vol. I, p. 2, . 

v / 3 V\ S. M . R, S., p. 94, 

16 



122 LISJS AND TEACHING OP TUKARAM cn. 

though still incomplete* It is a collection claiming to be 1 Tuka- 
rSm's Original Gatha * (Tukdrdtttdce Assal Gitthd, 2 vols*), edited 
by Mr. V. L. Bhave of Thana, Bonjhay. Two volumes ohly have 
been published, the first containing 865 abhangs^ the second 458. 
In his preface to the first volume Mr. Bhave points out that 
‘original ' poems may be of three kinds — those written by the poet 
himself, those dictated by him, and those corrected by him after 
being written by someone else. Mr. Bhave claims that his collec- 
tion is one of poems of the second order, having been written by a 
disciple of Tukaram, either as Tukaram uttered them or— a modi- 
fication of the same principle — as the disciple remembered them 
afterwards. The particular disciple in this case is one Santaji the 
Oilman, or, to give his name in full, Santaji Tell Jagnade who along 
with Gangaji Mavaja and Rameshwar Bhaft wrote down Tukaram’s 
verses, and one of whose MSS bears a date a few years previous to 
that of Tukaram’s death along with what is claimed to be Santaji’s 
signature. This MS itself has been in Mr. Bhave’s possession 
and photographs of the MS show up this very early date quite 
•i clearly. One is reproduced on the opposite page. Santaji's 
descendants affirm that he wrote four volumes of Tukaram’s 
abhangs and Mr. Bhave claims thus to have discovered an early 
authority consulted by no previous editor, not even the Indu Prak&sh . 
It is much too early to say whether Martha scholars will accept 
the authenticity and uniqueness of this MS of Santaji, and all that 
can be said at the present stage of investigation is that it represents 
a worthy attempt to solve a most baffling problem. Mr. Bhave’s 
22-page critical discussion at the beginning of his second volume 
is, up to the time of writing (early 1921), far and away the most 
praiseworthy effort made at elucidating the difficult questions raised, 
the old spelling of Marathi words also being preserved, and probably 
their pronunciation as in Tukaram’s own day. 1 


2. Poems of Doubtful Authenticity 

It appears fairly certain that of Tukaram’s fourteen disciples 
no less than three — Rameshwar, Gangaji and Santajl-^are known to 
have written down his poems as they remembered them, but how 
faithfully we cannot say. No doubt there were many poems 'which 
they did not preserve, many also which were preserved but did not 
find their way into well-known MSS, whilst other poems may have 
been inserted which are not authentic. Tukaram’s style is easily 
imitated and we have seen that one collection has nearly twice as 
mftny poems as the Indu Prakfish edition, many abhangs probably 
existing also which have never been printed but which pass from 
mouth to mouth throughout the MarathS country. 

* See Df%yanodaya f Dr. J. E. Abbott’s Notes on the Marat ha Saints, No. 9, 
April 28, 1921* 





V 


TUkarAm’s AUTOBIOGRAPHY 12$ 

This state of things is annoying in two ways. First, there are 
many poems eVen in widely accepted collections which are possibly 
not Tukaram ‘s and there is no means of distinguishing them* A 
good judge of Marathi can sometimes form an opinion from the 
language, but the critic who begins in this way is soon in danger of 
/ejecting lines because the sentiment does not seem to be Tukaram 4 s 
and such a proceeding may take us any lengths. 

3. Shivaji’s Visit — Apocryphal or Qenuine? 

Put in this doubtful class sometimes are some abhafigs whose 
rejection would modify seriously Tukaram’s biography, those 
describing tbe visit of the rising prince and future king Sivaji 
( abhangs 1468-74 in F. and M ,). 1 It is impossible in the present 
stage of investigation in Mara{ha history and literature to pronounce 
definitely either way. We shall therefore content ourselves with 
presenting the evidence as it appears to both sides in the matter, 
first stating the point of view of those questioning the historicity of 
Sivajl’s visit and the authenticity of Tukaram’s verses on the 
subject, and then giving briefly what is said in reply by those who 
are inclined to accept both the visit and the verses. The ground 
common to both sides is that Tukaram wa^ probably born in 1608 
and died sometime between 1648 and 1652, while Sivaji was born 
in 1627 though some think a little later (see p. 17), all these dates 
being subject to alteration (see pages 76-7). 

Those who consider the visit and the verses apocryphal make 
the following points, (l) When Tukaram died SivajI was still a 
young man with all his future before him. (2) In 1640 Sivaji 
was just beginning his operations against the Deccan hill-forts and 
his coronation did not take place till 1674. (3) His system of 

government cannot possibly have been in operation by the time 
when Tukaram died. (4) Had there ever been such an episode as 
a projected retirement of Sivaji from the world in the train of 
Tukaram surely he would at some time in his life have shown some 
interest in Pandhari or Vi^hoba’s shrine. But nothing of the kind 
is recorded. Sivaji on the contrary maintained a close connection 
with^the family shrine of Tuljapur and never visited Paiidhari. 
(5) Sivaji had his own guru in Ramdas, a most interesting person, 
who forms a remarkable contrast with our poet. He was politician 
as well as devotee, a patriot as well as a sage, a shrewd and 
amusing moralist, and a more useful auxiliary to the warrior prince 
than Tukaram could have been. (On Ramdas see p. 18). 

Answering the above points in seriatim , those who are inclined 
to hold &iv£ji requested Tukaram to go to him and that in declining 
to do so the poet sent the prince the verses, do so for the following 
reasons. (1) The first point in the above stated by a Westerner 

and for Western readers, sounds very plausible. When, however f 

% 

1 See pp. 99-101 above. 



124 LIFE AND TEACHING OP TUKAEAM ch. 

it is remembered that Sivaji was very precocious as a boy, even 
at 8 or 9 cherishing ideas of wresting independence from the 
Muhammadans, that he was married at 16, had two wives before 
Tukaram died, and had already made a great mark in Maharashtra, 
to say that Sivaji had ‘ all his future before him* is not strictly correct. 
(2) In reply to the second point, Sivaji had already, when Tukaram* 
died, captured the famous Torna fort and several others, including 
some in Tukaram’s own neighbourhood, thus extending his kingdom 
over the Poona district. Moreover, the royal title chatrdpati is 
found ascribed to Sivaji as early as 1647, at least a year or 
two before Tukaram’s death. 1 2 (3) The very special circumstances 
of the time when Sivaji and his followers were in open revolt 
against the Muhammadan power, rule out any dogmatic statement 
such as is made under (3) above. Moreover the royal title already 
mentioned carries with it the existence of ‘ministers of state* such 
as Tukaram referred to in his verses. Besides which, a document 
dated shortly after Tukaram’s death proves the full 4 system of 
government* to have been in operation under Sivaji. (4) The 
• 4 projected retirement * referred to above was nothing but a passing 
mood, the result of the poet’s moving kirtan , 9 and there was 
therefore no necessity for Sivaji to visit Panclharpur. But who 
can say for certain that he ‘never* went there? This is an 
argument from silence, which is always perilous. Sivaji’s greater 
devotion to Tuljapur must be accounted entirely natural because 
it was ‘ the family shrine (5) The fifth point above far outruns 
the evidence. Granting, however, that Sivaji had Ramdas as his 

? \uru at that time — though this point is somewhat fiercely debated 
see Chap. 1, p. 18 of this book) — no one suggests that there was 
any idea of Tukaram supplanting Ramdas as Sivaji’s preceptor and 
guide. Indeed, assuming for the moment the authenticity of the 
verses, Tukaram discourages Sivaji’s clinging to him and directs 
attention to his own guru : ‘ Fix your thoughts on the good teacher, 
Ramdas : do not swerve from him.* (See a bhang 1471, F. and M.). 
Further, that Sivaji already had a guru in Ramdas is no argument 
against Sivaji visiting Tukaram. Some of the greatest Hindu 
saints have had more than one guru . Indeed, Sivaji^ himself had 
accepted as guru, and taken a guru-manlra from, a Brahman at 
Mahableshwar, the original sanad given by Sivaji being still in the 
possession of the Brahman’s descendant and now published. (6) In 
addition to the above are the considerations arising from the 
topography of the neighbourhood and Sivaji’s close proximity to 
Tukaram at that time, the altogether unique position occupied in 
Maratha public affairs by Sivaji’s mother, Jijabal, and the fact that 
she and Sivaji’s preceptor DadojI Kondadev were of such a deeply 
religious turn of mind. All these considerations taken together 
make it at least highly probable that Jijabal and DadojI would wish 

1 V. L. Bhave, M. Sar., p. 186 footnote 1. 

2 See pp. 100-1. 



V TUKARAM’S AUTOBIOGRAPHY 125 

the greatest saint of the time, and one residing so near, to 
give his blessing to the young prince, and it is not at all unlikely 
that they arranged it. (7) Sivaji’s sanad (grant) of four villages 
to Tukajam’s posthumous son Narayan 1 after the poet’s death 
must be given some significance in this connexion. (8) The 
preponderance of Indian opinion should be given its true value. 
The incident is not only recorded in Mahlpati and in MSS of 
Tukaram 's poems considered by the Indu Prakttsh editors as 
the best, one of them being the MS * said to be in the hand- 
writing of the eldest son of Tukaram ’ and therefore probably dated 
before Sivaji’s coronation ; it is also found in those trustworthy 
historical authorities, the early Marathi bakhars (historical 
memoirs). Sir R. G. Bhandarkar accepts both visit and verses 
(see his V aishnavism> p. 94), as did also the late Christian 
poet Narayan Vaman Tilak who in an unpublished essay 
observes: ‘Sivaji had paid his homage to Tukaram and was 
greatly impressed by the latter’s saintliness.’ We may add that 
both visit and verses are accepted by Prof. H. G. Rawlinson in 
his book on Shivaji the Mardthd published in 1915 (see pp. 86, 
113-4. See also L. R. Pangarkar’s Marathi work, pp. 436-46) 
and Prof. N. S. Takakhav’s English translation of Mr. K. A. 
Keluskar’s Marathi Life of Shivaji . 

On the whole we incline to ihink the balance of evidence is in 
favour of the historicity of Sivaji’s request to Tukaram and subse- 
quent visit, the authenticity of the poet’s verses perhaps not being 
in quite so strong a position. It is due to Mr. Fraser to say that 
the first of the last two paragraphs - the one viewing verses and 
visit as apocryphal — was found among his papers just as it is given 
above, the latter of the two paragraphs coming entirely from the 
pen of his co-author. 

4. No known Chronological Order 

The second annoying result referred to above affects the 
biography in another direction, for we are unable to fix the chrono- 
logical order of the autobiographical abhaugs. This appears, indeed, 
well-nigh impossible in the present state of our knowledge. The 
effort, however, may well be made, and those making it will find 
that all the editions of Tukaram, without exception, have thrown 
to the winds all idea of any possible chronological order, and what 
is worse, they have modified the language by attempting to moder- 
nize it, though Mr. Bhiive’s edition is an exception on this last 
point. This means that the task of discovering any possible 
chronology in Tukaram’s poems is made much more difficult than 
it might have been. In view of these facts, therefore, we cannot 
say, for instance, whether Tukaram moved, as time went on, 


* See footnote 2, p. 94. 



i26 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKaRaM CH. 

towards or away from the advaita position, towards or away from 
idolatry. We cannot say if he found more or less peace of mind. 
One would like to think his devotion did not go unrewarded. But 
on this point as on others certainty is not possible, and indeed 
Tukaram’s own moods and views may have gone on varying to the 
day of his death. In the English translation 1 the abhaiigs are 
presented in a sort of ideal order, the problem poems coming before 
the poems that find solutions, but no reader must infer that they 
were written in this order. 


5. Genuineness of the Autobiography 

Despite many unsolved problems, however, we need have no doubt 
that the abhaiigs describing Tukaram’s feelings and habits of life 
are quite genuine. And they appear to be exceedingly sincere. 

•This is not said without the full sense of the difficulty of judging 
the sincerity of words. The portraits which writers give of them- 
selves are usually false, and false, one may say, in proportion to 
their air of candour. But Tukaram's self -revelation seems to leave 
no room for suspicion of pose. The things he says of his weakness 
and misery are not the things men say to add to their merit. What 
he might say to his own credit he leaves unsaid. We learn nothing 
for instance, from his own lines, of the unselfish kindness to his 
neighbours that strikes us so much in Mahipati’s biography. And 
the inconsistencies of view and conduct that come to light in study- 
ing them are laid before us with such simplicity that we may 
justifiably trust well-nigh the whole record. Unquestionably, there 
are incidents which never happened. We have for instance a 
number of abhaiigs purporting to give his last words {abhaiigs 
1444-1459 F. and M.) These fit in with Mahipati’s account, but 
cannot be received as authentic, unless the reader is ready to 
believe that Hari really did come whirring through the air and 
carried off Tukaram in a vim&n (balloon or aeroplane}* The 
account by Mahlpati will be found on pages 115*6 and a brief 
discussion on pages 105-6. We only need add here a view 
prevalent among Tukaram students, one helping to an intelligible 
understanding of the abhaiigs on the subject. It seems that when 
Hindu saint dies, his body is usuailly carried in a framework 
resembling a virndtu for burning or burial as the case may be. 
Tukaram’s abhaiigs concerning his going to Vaikuntha (‘heaven ’) 
are therefore regarded as nothing more than a symbolical forecast 
of bis approaching death. 


1 By F. and 





v LITERARY CHARACTERISTIC^ 127 

. II. The Literary Characteristics of the 
Autobiography 

i. Tukaram’s Verse Extempore and Original 

Tukaram’s verses were probably all extempore* and there is 
little reason to think that he either prepared or revised them* though 
we have seen that a well-founded belief exists that his abhaitgs 
were written down by at least three disciples during his lifetime. 
Distinction or fame as a writer Tukaram was probably far from 
courting. He speaks of his own accents as stammering and 
childish. They are the feeble means he possesses to utter his 
message and make known his Master’s glory. It does not occur to 
him that along with the message there was sent any gift of 
speech. 

In this modest view of his literary merits the modern critic 
must in the main acquiesce. The abhangs as a whole do not rise 
above rustic simplicity. Many are quite prosaic. But others are 
fully inspired by the spirit of poetry. ‘ His ahhaiigs are not mere 
paraphrases ; they are original effusions, the outcome of the poet's 
own inward experience and of his observation of the facts of 
human life. They are full of shrewd and often-times humorous 
delineation, and they reflect unmistakably the features of the poet’s 
character . . . They reveal a strange mixture of religious ideas, 

high spiritual aspirations mingled with the infatuations of idolatry, 
explicable partly by the underlying pantheism in all Hindu thinking 
and partly by the fact that Tukaram saw beyond his time and with 
a true spiritual instinct.’ 1 

2 . His Debt to Predecessors 

That Tukaram’s poems are to be regarded as * original effusions’ 
does not mean that he owed no debt to the bhakti poets who had 
preceded him. On the contrary, he himself states plainly in more 
than one place that ‘ some words of the Saints he had committed 
to memory with reverence and with faith. On this important 
subject Mr. Pangarkar has an exhaustive and informing chapter 
(the sixth in *his book) in which he shows, on the basis of clear 
quotations from Tukaram's own poems and of the confirmatory 
testimony of Mablpati in his Bhakta Lllantrita (chapter 30) that 
tukaram bad given special attention to Dnyaneshwar, Namdev, 
Eknath and Kablr. The last-mentioned, who had preceded the 
poet-saint of DehG by more than a century and a quarter, Tuk&ram 
may have come to know on his visit to Benares referred to by him 

i Dr. Mackichan, 1. Vol. VU. No. 4, January 1913, pp. 173 and 175. 

? See (xbhaUg 101 in F- and M., 1333 in /. P. 



128 LI#E AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

in his abhaiig numbered 2488 in the Ittdu Prakdsh edition. 1 2 * It 
is suggested that the Bhagavadgltd and Bhftgavata Pur&na , the 
scriptures of the Bhagavata Religion of Maharashtra (see our 
chapter 2, p. 27), had been*the objects of Tukaram’s special study*, 
from which conclusion the deduction is made that Tukaram had also 
become sufficiently acquainted with Sanskrit to study Sanskrit 
works with avidity (Pangarkar, 178, 214), some even affirming, 
though on what grounds is not indicated, that soon after he had 
renounced the world, Tukaram spent a few months at the important 
centre of Paithan on the Godaveri river where from a devout 
Shastrl he learned much sacred lore. 8 

This much at least is certain, that, compared with his predeces- 
sors, Tukaram’s religious ideas are both more mature and more 
advanced, that there is much greater variety of subject-matter, of 
expression and of imagery, and that Tukaram himself admits his 
indebtedness to those predecessors. ‘Indian writers have always 
exhibited a marvellous power of working up into new shapes again 
and again the same material of metaphor and phrase ’, 4 and we shall 
gee that Tukaram was no exception. 

3. His Brevity, Obscurity and Metaphors 

The best of Tukaram’s abhaugs , from the point of view of 
literary merit, are those distinguished for their vigour. He is 
able, on occasion, to speak with good point and force. Indeed he 
never wastes any words, and his defect is that he sometimes falls 
into obscurity. To the foreigner, one may say, he is almost always 
obscure, the ellipses of true vernacular Marathi being confounding 
in the extreme, but even the Indian is often perplexed by Tukaram’s 
inconsiderate brevity. There is always a meaning inside the un- 
promising shell of his language, and the student (like the student of 
Browning) ends by admiring the form of expression. It has cost 
him so much labour to master that he is more inclined to love it 
than to pardon or to apologize for it, but perhaps he has reached a 
point where he may no longer speak as a literary critic. We only 
need add that the linguist and philologist would find a study of 
Tukaram’s expressions repaying. 

Tukaram’s style is enlivened by a copious use of metaphor, most 
likely influenced by his close study of Dnyaneshwar and Eknath 
who are masters of metaphor in Marathi. The conventions of 
Asiatic literature do not forbid a poet enriching himself by borrow- 
ing from his predecessors, and a good metaphor once discovered 
becomes common property for ever. Tukaram borrows in this way 
quite freely, while he is also able to use his own opportunities and 

1 L, R. M. Pangarkar, S.7\C., pp. 203, 95. 

2 Ibid. pp. 161-3. 

» Ibid. p. 179. 

• 4 L. J, Sedgwick, J.R, A. S. Bo Vol. 23, No. 65. 



V 


LITERARY CHARACTERISTICS 


129 


invent images for himself. The most interesting of these are the 
images derived from his life as a grocer, which we shall presently 
collect, having first brought together some examples of figures no 
less striking but perhaps less congenial. 

4. Pictures of Life in the World 

The world of sensation is a mirage; the world of desire a net ; 
the task before us to tear up the very root of desire, so that it* 
may never sprout again. Otherwise, desires flourish like wild 
creepers ; it is no use hacking them down, you must dig up their 
roots. The victim of desire passes through one wretched life after 
another like the pots that ascend and descend on the Persian wheel ; 
what he needs is to make a bonfire of the past, similar to the 
bonfire of the Holl l * * . Like a man caught in a press gang the 
victim of desire toils and gains nothing by his toil ; like a bee 
with a string tied to its foot, the plaything of a child, he starts off to 
force himself and finds himself a prisoner. In this bondage, life 
slips by, and death is waiting for him like a cat waiting for a mouse. 
In its confusion life resembles a village fair; in its perplexity 
a trackless forest. Hari’s name is like a moist shadow in a 
parched land, it is a flowing spring" of delight. His grace flows 
like the Ganges in flood, freely offered to all, like the sunlight. Life 
is a delirious fever ; a swollen river that lies before a traveller; how 
can he cross it ? There is a boat ready waiting for him, the boat of 
Hari’s name ; he has only to sit in it, he will be carried over the 
stream. This metaphor of the river is characteristically Indian, 

4 Perhaps the symbol that, more than any other, takes the place 
in Indian mysticism that is taken in the mysticism of the West by 
the pilgrimage of the soul is that of the crossing of the river in a 
boat. By the Maratha saints and by Kablr, in the meditations of 
Maharshi Debendranath Tagore and in the poems of his son, this 
picture is again and again made use of to represent man’s perilous 
passage to what is sometimes God’s bosom and sometimes a land 
unknown, but what is perhaps to most, both of these at once. It is 
strange that to the West, death is the dark river to be crossed, but 
to India it is not death but life. “ Your friend,” says Kabir, 
“ stands on the other shore.” Taking a wise guru for his ferryman, 
and embarking on the boat of a surrendered spirit, the traveller 
crosses the perilous waters safely to the place of union and of bliss .’ 8 

* 5. The Motherhood of God 

The way of God with his worshippers is like the way of a 
mother with her child. However ugly he may be, she loves him 

1 An annual Hindu Festival. 

9 Perhaps rather * well*’ ; springs are rare in India. 

, 9 Dr. Macnicol, /. R. M., Vol. 5, No. 18, April 1916, p. 216. • 

17 



130 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

none the less; she is patient with his ill humours, she interprets 
and fulfills his wishes and she is satisfied to be thanked in such 
imperfect accents as he can command. He does not understand 
the depth of her devotion, but he trusts her, and with this she is 
content. (See further chap. 6. sect. 1 ; and chap. 8, II, 3). 

As the fruit corresponds to the seed in the field, so the fruit 
corresponds to the seed in spiritual things. Sow the seed of faith 
if you wish to gather the fruit of spiritual bliss. Listen to instruc- 
tion, whoever offers it you. It is the Saints who instruct mankind 
by their example, as a teacher shows children how to form the 
letters by drawing them on a slate. 


6. Similes from Animal Life and Business 


Countless illustrations are drawn from animal life. The 
passions are like unruly cows that struggle and break into pastures 
► and defy the herds, man's efforts being to drive them into their 
shed and tie them up. The snake drinks the same water as the 
people but his spittle turns to poison. The worldling’s life is like 
the daily round of a blinded ox turning an oil mill. Why do 
ascetics pride themselves on ceremonies and needless austerities? 
Tukaram cries for mercy as a nestling cries with open beak for 
food, as a calf or a fawn in the jungle cries after its mother. 

Tukaram’s special property no doubt are the similes drawn 
from business. He often compares himself and the Saints to 
dealers in God’s mercy ; they have opened a shop where full value 
is given, the only coin Ihey take is faith. There is no fear of the 
stock running short ; it can be measured out for ever and ever and 
the store will never decrease. Then at other times he refers to the 
-anxiety attending worldly business, to the perplexities of account- 
keeping, and to the misery of debt, and he rejoices that he has done 
with it all, for God manages the affairs of the godly. Also he 
compares himself to the measure with which corn is measured out ; 
a thing of no value in itself, thrown aside when it is empty. 


7. Tukaram’s Gravity and Humour 


Though usually a very grave philosopher Tykaram does 
occasionally smile. In this he is not unlike his countrymen. A 
general misconception among Europeans is that Hindus have no 
sense of humour, those who have never met them supposing that 
they are all as sad and silent as ascetics and those who live among 
them being surprised that they cannot understand foreign jokes in 
a foreign tongue. The fact is that Hindus are for the most part 
very humorous and their popular religion has a humorous vein, This 



V LITERARY CHARACTERISTICS 131 

is not in the least incompatible with the melancholy and pessimistic 
philosophy common among them. Human nature is capable of 
anything in the way of paradox, and the alliance of humour and 
melancholy is one of the most usual that it admits. 

Tukaram’s humour, to be sure, is seldom blithe. In a lighter 
moment he says : ‘ We beggars are lucky folk : thieves are 
frightened when they come near us. We have wealth and grain in 
every house, for we live on every one’s charity.* But for the most 
part his humorous jests are biting sarcasms levelled, like those of 
Solomon, against every sort of fool. The rich man’s spoiled wife 
( abhang 1070), and the hen-pecked husband, are vigorously hit off 
here and there. The seamy side of married life seems to have caught 
his eye pretty often. If he laughs at it his laugh passes quickly 
into stern denunciation. 

Allied to Tukaram’s humorous vein is that in which he rallies 
Vithoba on his treatment of men. His favourite idea is that 
Vithoba is a thief, who runs away with men’s property and leaves 
them penniless. He is a cheat, and cheats men out of their 
worldly goods. This is only an affectionate way of saying that 
Tukaram thinks they get something better instead. We notice 
those ab ha tigs here only as a point in his literary method. 


8. Allegorical Value of Common Life 


A curious group of poems is formed by those which make an 
allegorical use of images drawn from common life. Many of them 
are based on games. Hindu boys have many games and these 
must be understood in order to follow the poems, the explanations 
given in the notes 1 being perhaps sufficient. In general we 
must distinguish two kinds of games, those in which there is 
rivalry and those in which there is only common effort. Where 
there is rivalry the boys of one side are trying to catch or 
beat the boys of the other, probably one representative boy of the 
other. Such a game therefore is an image of the contest of the 
soul and the world. The soul is struggling to escape, the world is 
trying to detain* it. In the poem on AtyClpatyd , rather unexpec- 
tedly the soul is represented by the side that guards the base (as 
we should say in prisoner’s base), the player that struggles to get 
through is a passion. These images, it appears, illustrate the hard 
struggle that lies before the man who seeks salvation by works, 
good deeds or austerities or the observation of ceremonial law. 
Contrasted with his case is that of the devotee of Vitthal who joins 


1 At the end of each volume of F. and Af. 



132 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


Cfi. 


in loving union with God, just as two players do in the friendly 

recreation of tipari. 1 2 3 

1 

9. Images from Low Caste People 

Of the same type are poems employing images from village 
characters. In a Hindu village there are various low caste persons 
who perform services to the community, to Government, to passing 
strangers, and are paid by a share in the village produce. Such 
are the Mahars who live on the outskirts of the village but perform 
services of importance, such as carrying the revenue to the 
treasury, a common salutation of theirs being the cry ‘ johdr'? In 
abhahg 1351 the Mahar calling for the revenue typifies the world 
or the claim of karma which calls on a man for the penalty of 
his actions, in contrast with the devotion to Vitthal which either 
cuts that short or enables a man to view it with indifference. The 
allegory here is clear enough, but such is not always the case, indeed 
allegory is always a treacherous form of exposition, losing its 
message as soon as it comes to details. 

10. Images from Doubtful Religious Characters 

Tukaram employs images from religious characters, some of 
them religious mendicants of a sorry and disreputable kind. 
These have not been included in the translation by Fraser and 
Marathe but may be mentioned here. One of the reprehensible 
customs of the country is that of marrying girls to a god, in which 
case they fall back on .prostitution for a living, while at the same 
time they go about singing the praises of the god. We have 
already seen that in the Deccan the god to whom they are usually 
. married is Khancloba, n more or less identified in popular opinion 
with Siva. Murall is the name given to these unfortunate girls, 
while that of the boys is Wcighyd , the male devotees and mendi- 
cants of Khancloba. On behalf of a woman thus devoted to this 
god at Jejuil, Tukaram writes a poem in which she describes 
her life. The language is so chosen as tc suggest that instead of 
what she possesses or thinks she possesses she ought to turn to 
Vitthal and accept the treasures which he can give. In a 
similar vein Tukaram writes a poem on behalf of an adulteress, 
making the guilty love suggest the divine love which she is neglect- 
ing. The double meaning can scarcely be rendered in English. 

It is a question how far in these poems the poet is inspired by 
anything like the pity which a modern observer might feel for the 

1 See the whole Section on Games numbered xxx, pp. 41-50, Vol, II, F . and 
M. with a ‘Notes’, pp. 433-5. 

2 See p. 19. . 

3 See Chapter 3, page 47, also Molesworth’s Marathi-English Dictionary, 
p. xxvi, footnote. 



V LITERARY CHARACTERISTICS 133 

victims of destiny. Probably this sentiment did not pass through 
his mind : it does not belong to his age. He would think of them 
as mortals besotted by the world, as a grasping tradesman or a 
cavilling Brahman might be, but not specially as creatures whose 
case called for the philanthropist. 

The interpretation of these poems is obscure, their subject un- 
pleasant and it is a relief to turn to others in which the fidelity of 
the day-labourer and of the pctlk (see abhangs 1344-54) or the joint 
labours of two women grinding together furnish images of sturdy 
piety or faithful trust. By a pCllk is meant an armed attendant, a 
peon, messenger or courtier, and around th eabhangs on the subject 
(numbered 3655-3665 in Vishnuboa Joga’s commentary which see) 
has raged a controversy in the Maratha country as to whether 
Tukaram enfeebled Maharashtra by directing its attention exclu- 
sively to things spiritual. Those who argue thart Tukaram advocated 
military virtues are answered by those who affirm that while the 
language of these abhahgs is secular their meaning and message 
are distinctly spiritual. 

ik Popularity of Tukaram ’s Style 

A poet whose verse is quoted by millions of peasants as a final 
authority and who supplies some of India’s greatest reformers 
with religious nourishment must be regarded as having couched 
his message in a popular style. And such is the case with the 
poet-saint of Dehu. The late Christian poet, Nariiyan Vaman 
Ttlak, no mean judge either of poetic power or of popular taste, 
observes in an unpublished essay we have quoted elsew here : 1 That 
Tukaram is still the most popular Marathi poet of the day even in 
the 20th century shows how TukiiranTs literary characteristics 
appealed to the people of Maharashtra and still’ appeal. As 
Shrldhar, 1 a poet born a generation after Tukaram’s death, remark- 
ed • 41 1 fully sympathize with the common people who do not 

understand the Sanskrit language ; they are like thirsty persons 
standing by the side of a deep well without either a rope or 
a vessel, knowing that the well has no steps to go into it, and that 
their hands can never reach the surface of water in it.” So Shrldhar 
provided this rope and this vessel as Tukaram bad done more than 
half a century before him. Tukaram is still unequalled among ail 
the Marathi poets. The flow and force of Tukaram’s music is 
simply wonderful, his diction is easy, his illustraiions are homely 
and exact; he had glimpses of the past, but he mainly dealt with 
the present and the future. He was an investigator and a painter of 
human nature and he did his work so well that none among the 
Marathi poets merits comparison with him. 1 


1 See p. 13, end of Section 11, chap. 1. 



134 


LIFE AMD TEACHING OF TUKARAM 

UK Tukara/s Picture of Himself 


CH. 


1. A Trustworthy Picture 

From Tukaram’s own poems, assisted by the pages of Mahlpati, 
we have no difficulty in drawing a portrait of his character which 
is almost as full as we could wish and as we have seen (see Part I, 
this Chapter), probably quite trustworthy. His own account of 
himself is frank and simple and clearly inspired by nothing else 
than a desire to be useful. There is no trace of egoism about it 
and no affectation of any kind. His religion was nearly his all in 
all. This is illustrated by what the late Narayan Vaman T*lak sets 
forth : 4 lie walked with his god, talked with him, took him to task, 
settled quarrels with, him, consulted him, shared his lot with him. 
None other and nothing else was so dear and so near to him as his 
Vithoba. This attitude of his mind has made his devotional flights 
so real that while reading his poetry one finds one's self as it were 
, in the midst of a new life, not merely of thoughts. Excepting a 
few abhangs , all his poetry had for its theme his own experiences 
in his relation to the world and to his god, Thus Tukaram him- 
self is the hero of most of his poems, and his presence goes with 
a reader of them, and makes them exceedingly charming. One 
cannot get half of Tukaram’s meaning unless one has first read 
and studied his life thoroughly well, and unless one has learned to 
sympathize with him in his wisdom and folly alike/ 

2. An Honest Tradesman 

• 

We notice that he did not wholly give his heart to God till he 
was laid prostrate by misfortune. At his father’s request he took 
over the family business and, no doubt, had prosperity attended 
him he might have continued all his life a thriving and respected 
tradesman. An honest tradesman we need not doubt, and a devout 
man, but perhaps not the author of our poems. It was calamity 
that made him change his path in life. We may therefore con- 
trast his experience with that of other Indian devotees who have 
left the world in the hour of success and glory. As for example 
Ramavalabhdas, son of the Prime Minister of Devgiri (Daulata- 
bad) and a contemporary of Tukaram, who during the plunder 
which followed a successful battle by chance found a copy of 
Eknath's Bhdgwat and viewing this good fortune as a divine 
favour he gave himself up entirely to religious meditation. 1 

A similar example of Indian renunciation, though one con- 
nected with another of India's faiths — Jainism — and another part 

1 See V. L. Bhave, San p. 163 ; in the same volume see also the cases of 
Dasopant, p, 417, Kesarlnith, p. 350, and BanSji, p. 135-6, footnote. 



V 


PICTURE OF HIMSELF 


135 


of the country, is one many travellers have come across, viz., the 
Jain princes and princesses whose names are inscribed on the rock 
at Sravana Belgola, with a record testifying that they who took their 
seats upon that rock had closed their lives by starvation, because 
they had found that worldly pleasures were unsatisfying. 

3. His Failures in Business 

Of his life in the world before he retired from business Tuka- 
ram has little to say. It is summed up in abhangs 101-126, 
He does not specially complain of hard treatment from man or 
destiny or accuse himself of wanting the qualities needful for 
success. He never gives us to understand that he failed because 
he was too good for a wicked world. His view of the world is 
more detached, as he makes sufficiently plain. Human life fills him 
with extreme horror. ‘ The whole world is an eddy of misery. I 
cannot bear it : adamant would break beneath it: my soul is filled 
with trembling fear : I utterly shrink from the tale of this fetid 
world' (361). Many poems dwell in detail on the guilt and 
misery of men and there is nothing to tell us that Tukaram ever 
lighted on any scene with satisfaction save the assembly of 
Vaishnava Saints. 


4. Conviction of Sin 

Meditation brought a great conviction of sin. Very numerous 
and most earnest are the poems that speak of self-accusation. The 
poems on this subject number several hundreds out of the whole 
collection. They speak chiefly of sloth that wastes time, of desire 
that longs for pleasures. We need not think that Tukaram any more 
than John Bunyan was worse than his neighbours : he has learned 
to reproach himself. We cannot date these poems, and neither 
psychological nor chronological principles justify the supposition 
that they must have heen written in the first days of spiritual 
struggle. How utterly overwhelming was Tukaram’s sense of sin 
may be gathered from the poems. Without commenting we give 
a brief selection in addition to the renderings on page 50 : 4 O God, 
protect me and still my agitated soul. Cast no reproach on me; 
receive within thyself, says Tuka, the million offences I have 
committed’ (347). ‘Regard not my mountainous guilt' (348). 
1 1 see that my own heart is not pure ; I have fallen 
into the destructive power of the senses. O Hari, do thou 
swiftly cut off this evil that clings to me. Other evils too why 
need I count up? sinful illusions, evil affections. I am tortured by 
lust and rage ; who but thou can set me free ? ’ (353) ‘ Though I 
speak gentle words, yet lust and rage flourish within me; my 
spirit is not pure, as the saints describe purity ' (354). * ‘ O God, 



136 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

«... do thou banish all in me that is deceitful and come in thy 
genuine nature to dwell within me. Sinful as I am, let thy power 
save me ’ (356). ‘ Where there is falsehood, there is a heap of sin ’ 
(364). ‘ O best of beings, pity my sins, past and future ’ (365). 
‘ What purity have I, of descent, lineage or action, that thy secret 
should be revealed to me ? ’ (372). f 

‘ I have sought thee because 1 was fallen * (1869). Why dost 
thou consider my faults or merits ? I am altogether a heap of sins, 
yet am united to the Saviour of the sinful* (1870). We cannot 
see how to unwind these meshes. We are beset by the dogs of 
rage and lust, we are fallen into the whirlpool of temptations’ 
(1879). 4 1 am vicious, guilty, how guilty, how can I tell ? (1881). 

‘ Give me, O God, the happiness of solitude ; take away all that 
brings ruin on my soul. 1 am a heap of sin, says, Tuka, O set me 
behind thy back ’ (1891). 1 O ye Saints, I am a sinful man ’ (3009). 

4 Who would care to enquire into my merits ? Thy name is Puri- 
fier of the Sinful. We are fast bound by greed and error. Truly 
I am a sinful man, but I seek shelter in thee * (3026). 1 am nothing 
but a heap of sins ; thou art altogether the best of all beings 
(3030). See also section 7 of chapter 9, also chapter 8, III. 

So striking indeed is the sense of sin evinced by lukaram that 
we could well imagine some of his despairing cries had been taken 
from the pages of the 4 Penitential Psalms.* There is perhaps an 
even more instructive parallel in this matter of a sense of sin and 
unworthiness between St. Paul and Tuka ram St. Paul s descrip- 
tion of himself as 1 the least of the apostles (1 Cor. 15 : 9), less 
than the least of all saints’ (Eph. 3 : 8), and 4 the chief of sinners* 
(1 Tim. 1: 18) finds a worthy echo in the penitential cry of 
Tukaram for mercy :* 4 I am helpless, guilty and chief among 
sinners* (1609) ; 4 1 am a depraved sinner, O God, and I have come 
to seek Thy mercy : put me not to shame. I do not know how 
many men thou hast saved, but this I know that I am the worst of 
them all .... I am a supplicant for Thy mercy ; cleanse thou me 
completely from my sin, O God.’ 1 This sense of personal sinful- 
ness in Tukaram is all the more impressive when we remember 
that there is little of this quality in the Maratha poets^ before him. 
None of his predecessors 4 was so thorough-going \ says Prof. 
W. B. Patwardhan, ‘in his rage of self-examination and self- 
exposition ; none before him was so subtly sensible of his own 
defects, so keenly conscious of his evil doings and evil tendencies; 
of the erring habits of the mind and predilections to evil and sin. 
No one before him has so lively a sense of the power of passion 
and sensual affections, of the weakness of man when beset with 
temptation in the outer world and torn asunder by conflicting 
promptings of the flesh. His outlook upon life and the world 
may be right or wrong. But the intensity with which he feels the 

I Rev. G. R. Navalkar’s translation in Tukaram, the Maharashtrian 
Poet and Saint , pp. 23-4. 



V 


PICTURE OF HIMSELF 


137 


need of divine grace and support and the anguish and agony with 
which he realizes the tyranny of the world on the soul of man, the 
imaginative vividness of his apprehension of the vanity of all 
pomp and splendour, of the futility of learning and logic and 
philosophy, the sincerity of his cry for help, and the whole hearted- 
ness of his devotion, these are points of TukaranTs life and work 
that cannot fail to strike any one who reads his abhatigs 1 * * 

In view of these facts we are unable to agree with Dr. 
Macnicol in his exquisite Psalms of Manltha Saints (p. 33) where 
he says that in the Bible there is * a profounder sense of human sin 
and the alienation that it brings than there is in Tukaram, nor can 
we agree to his observation that Tukaram was a stranger to the 
truth ‘that the sacrifices of God are a broken heart * 9 (P.M.S. 
p. 33). If ever there was ‘ a broken heart *, broken because so deeply 
conscious of its wrong and plague, it was the heart of Tukaram. 
His hundreds of abhangs on the subject are sufficient proof of this. 
We would agree that the sense of sin is not so constant a feature 
as the Christian Scriptures show, probably due to the abiding sense 
of the stainless purity of God in the latter, but in our view the 
Bible itself has no more poignant cries of shame than those which 
escape Tukaram’s lips. For ourselves the essential difference 
between this Maratha saint and the saints of the Bible lies in 
another direction. We would place him in the school of Romans 
vii. 7-24. The self-analysis there fits Tukaram’s case perfectly, for 
he realizes most painfully his ‘ moral impotence*. What is missing 
from Tukaram is the song of complete deliverance in the last verse 
of that chapter and in chapter viii with its experience of a final 
moral and inward emancipation. The Christian’s deep sense of sin 
is what the theologians call ‘ a saving sense’ while that of Tuka- 
ram was nearly always a cry of despair : ‘ my heart testifies to me 
that I am not redeemed’ (126). 4 Whomever I meet on this road 

I enquire of him: Will God be merciful to me?' (19) That he 
had fleeting glimpses of something else we shall see in Section 8 
below. 

5. ‘ De Profundis * : Saved by Misfortune 

This conviction of personal guilt is accompanied by a dreadful 
sense of the inscrutable problem of the world. Some of his poems 
testify to an extreme depression of mind. 4 * False alike are laughter 
and tears, the false nature flees to falsehood. False is “mine”, 
false is “ thine”, the false nature bears a false burden. There is 
falsehood in thought and falsehood in song. The false finds its way 

1 F. C. Af. February 1919, pp. 140-1. 

2 The same idea appearing in his illuminating article on ‘The Indian Poetry 

of Devotion * ( Hibbert Journal , October 1917, pp. 74-88) where he say9 : 1 the 

dark barrier of a sense of sin does not lower above them as it does above the 

saints of Israel. * * 

18 



138 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH; 

to the false. False is the life of senses and false renunciation : 
the ascetic is false, the world an illusion. False is Tuka, false 
is his faith ; he speaks falsehood to the false 9 (2345). This is per- 
haps the De Profundis of our poet, though it possibly belongs to 
time when he had already begun to teach and preach. After this 
we can believe him when he says, * My words are not figures of 
rhetoric ; I beseech thee in accents of true misery * (1886). 

In this harsh scene of suffering Tukaram comes before us as a 
common man with no claims to any kind of worldly distinction. 
Strenuously he repels the idea that he has any kind of unusual gift, 
an attitude in which he may be compared with Walt Whitman. 1 I 
am neither learned nor skilled in debate or pure in lineage * (358). He 
does not even allow that by nature or early instinct (like his brother) 
he was drawn to the religious life. It was misfortune that saved him. 
‘ It is well, O God, that I became bankrupt, that I was crushed by 
the famine ; this is how I repented and turned to thee, so that the 
world became odious to me' (113). He began his religious life 
modestly, listening to the songs of the Saints and the sermons of the 
preacher, taking up the refrain at their meetings and finally ventur- 
ing himself to preach. He spent much time outside the village in 
solitary meditation among the hills. 


6. Sorrow and Self- Dedication 

Weaving together Mahipati’s story and Tukaram’s own autobio- 
graphical abhaugs we see clearly that it was sorrow that led to his 
self-dedication. The death of both his parents and his brother’s 
wife followed by that of his own wife and eldest son filled the cup 
of his sorrow and he decided to retire into solitude. In the words 
of Prof. W. B. Patwardhan : 4 The vanity of human wishes and 

worldly pursuits came bitterly home to him and there was 
nothing left in the world of men which could give him peace of 
mind. He would seek the life that could not die, and the wealth 
that could not run short. He would have nothing to do with a 
world that had so much suffering, so much misery,* so much that 
could not last. That which would never fade, never wither, that 
which cloyed not, died not, that would he seek and in that would 
be rest. Nothing short of the eternal and the absolutely good 
would satisfy him. So complete was the change of spirit that 
came upon him, so long and hard and potent was the conflict 
raging in his heart, so profound the gloom that sat brooding over 
his soul, that he emerged a new man, purified and chastened and 
illumined. Tukaram the Warn, Tukaram the worldly, Tukaram 
the son, the brother, the husband, the father was no more, and 
there lived, moved and had his being Tukaram the spiritual seer, 
Tukaram the saint, Tukaram the prophet, Tukaram the moral 
teacher, Tukaram the servant or bandsman of Vithoba. . . , 



V 


Picture of himself 


139 


That it was the series of afflictions that befell him and the 
bitter experiences and the cruel reverses of fortune he was subject 
to that brought on the spiritual transformation is apparent from 
the poet's own words.’ 1 


7. ‘ Spiritual Growth * 

Tukaram’s autobiography shows how steep and rugged was 
the ascent he climbed before he could say* ‘ In the Stainless One 
1 have established my home ; in the Formless One I abide * 
(2755); * Tuka has his Home in the Inconceivable* (1578); 4 my 
simple-minded faith has put an end to pilgrimage to and fro’ 
(2773) ; 4 rank, race, colour, creed and caste — all are gone ’ (2790). 
A worthy 4 tentative ’ effort at delineating this long inward struggle 
has been made by Prof. W. 13. Patwardhan in his paper on 
‘TukaranVs spiritual growth* which occupies nearly sixteen 
pages, the Marathi original being given along with English trans- 
lation ; the following continuous extract is in his own words 
without indicating the explanatory context. 

4 For days and months and perhaps yeais, Tukaram appears to 
have been groping about for want of a sure guide. In vain did 
he pass from gosiivi to gosavl with a view to secure a pilot who 
could steer him straight to the other and safer shore. Just then 
he came upon a band of Varkaris — annual pilgrims to Pamjhari, 
contact and conversation with whom reassured him that he had 
hit upon the right path. 44 Take up the 777/ (a kind of musical 
cymbol) and the DindT (a stringed instrument), and dance for 
love of God,” said they. What with the spontaneous impulses 
of his heart and the words of confidence from the Saints, 
he applied himself wholly and entirely to the pursuit of the 
blessing. He would sing to his god, dance to him, pray to him, 
and concentrate his eye upon him. With all that, he was where 
he had been spiritually. 44 I have put on this outward mask. But 
there has been no renunciation from within. 1 have no experience 
of awakening. My heart has not yet emerged out of the toils of 
the world. Devotioqal practices have been mechanical. They are 
neither spontaneous nor soul-affecting. ” His heart had not yet 
been purged of a fond attachment to the domestic and worldly 
life. But there were others that were deeper-seated, viz., his 
passions. 44 Sexual desire and angry passion are still alive in me. 
My mind has not been purified. No advance towards spiritual 
well-being is possible unless the heart is washed clean of all evil 
taint,*’ He was an earnest seeker after God — after the Divine 
Presence, after Divine Love. Tukaram has now arrived at a very 
delicate stage. The goal is not yet in sight ! The world around 
him, on the other hand, points the finger of scorn at him, scoffs at 


1 F . C. AT, Vol. I. No. 5, September 1910, pp. 2-3/ 



140 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH, 

him. Friends and foes alike set him down for a madcap. 
Tukaram was human and like all human beings apt to lose heart 
and waver. His is an intensely emotional soul — timid, gentle, and 
yet sturdy and strong in its own sphere. What is he to do now 
when his doubts have grown insistent ? Whom shall he consult ? 
He will again go to his god, and ask him what he should do. “ Who 
will put heart in me ? lam neither an expert in the Shastras , 
nor a learned man, nor again am I a member of the pure caste. I 
have no secure anchorage — no piece of firm ground to stand upon. 
Now I will take this whole-hearted resolve. I will not consult 
others hereafter. 1 will be thy subject — thy bondsman — earmarked. 
“That is,” saysTukaram, “the firm and settled purpose of my heart.” 
Yet the expected and long-wished-for bliss does not come. The 
vision makes no approach to reality. In the yearning impatience 
of soul he breaks into a pathetic cry : “ Come O Vitthal, do come, 

my life bursts with imploring. Bitterly does the heart repine : it 
seems thou hast deliberately kept me at a distance. We are sheer 
orphans having no anchorage. Verily the land is come to be deso- 
late of God.” After this long trial Tukaram’s long-cherished wish 
is realized. His spiritual craving is satisfied, and he feels within 
himself, with all the authority of his own experience, that eternal 
Love is won only by devoted patience. Now that he has discover- 
ed the way, he must show it to others. He therefore proclaims 
to them : “ The only thing to do is to have patience. Do not give 
up taking food ; do not retire to a wood, to solitude ; only think of 
Narayan in all your experiences of pain or pleasure. All other 
notions should be lopped off. Commit everything to the care of 
God and proceed — go on, neither involved in enjoyment or suffering, 
nor making an ado of renunciation.” Here it appears to me,’ says 
Prof. Patwardhan, ‘ is the process of spiritual evolution in 
‘Tukaram complete. It has been a long and laborious circle no 
doubt.’ 1 See also chap. 10, sect. 2, where Prof. Patwardhan 
characterizes Tukaram’s bhakti as * individual ’ and * one-sided 

8. Life after Self- Dedication 

Of his life after dedication we have sometimes a picture that 
presents him as going quietly on with his business. 4 I go on with 
my daily business, yet 1 love thy feet. I keep thy form ever before . 
my eyes, though outwardly I acknowledge the tie of the world. 
I govern my actions according to the occasion but with my speech 
I sing thy praises. Like a pressed man I walk the round of 
worldly duties. I am like a puppet that life sets in motion. I am 
resolved that my soul shall not be parted from thee 1 (2311). 
Clearly this is not a solution of the problem of life, though it shows 

T 4 Some Abhangs of Tukaram’ F. C. M. Vol. I. No. 3. September 1910, 
pp. 4-16. « 



V 


PICTURE Of HIMSELP 


141 


that Tukaram’s thoughts were once approaching a solution, and we 
need not be surprised that he left the world for the life of the 
professed devotee. Of his sentiments then the following abhahg 
speaks : * I have grown heedless of the body ; I care for one thing 

alone. Wealth and poverty are the same to me : 1 have weighed 
them aud set them aside ’ (885). 4 I stand outside the courtesies 
of life, the proceedings in which men display their pride and love 
of honour * (3451). 

Let us note how he escaped from his slough of despond. * I 
have come to know God by serving him * (566). We may take 
this as probably the profoundest truth that he utters, but Tukaram 
is perhaps too modest to repeat it often. He prefers to speak of 
God’s generosity and condescension, of the Hood of love that the 
worshipper feels to be poured into his soul, and of the ‘ ecstaLy ’ that 
comes with it. To take a few sentences quite at random from one 
section headed 4 triumphant happiness’ where these are placed : 4 1 
have found a sea of love, an inexhaustible flood, I have opened 
a treasure of spiritual knowledge, it diffuses the lustre of a 
million suns arisen in thy worshippers' souls. Unexpectedly, 
without an effort, I have heard the eternal secret, I have learned 
to know God. The very joy of peace and compassion is found 
in this joy that accompanies the knowledge of the being and 
knowing God* (573). And in this mood he speaks often as if no 
relapse was possible . 4 1 have crossed over : 1 have justified my 
confidence: 1 have spoken thy name: 1 have dismissed the world. 
I am tied to nothing now ' (879). This mood was, however, far 
from abiding and would seem to have come mostly in ‘gatherings 
of the Saints ’. See chapter 9, section 12 and chapter 10, sections 6 
and 8 where N. V. Tilak reminds us that such 4 ecstasy * is not 
devotion, or salvation. 


9 . Changing Moods 


There is an oscillation of view between a humble and a lofty 
view of himself. There are poems in which there is quite a note 
of self-esteem. - 4 A pebble may look beautiful till the diamond 
flashes forth ; a lamp may look beautiful till the sun rises. Men may 
talk about saftits till they have seen Tuka ’ (1422). Were these 
really his own words ? Probably they were, but in any case they 
were not many. We may be sure that he speaks more in his 
habitual mood when he tells us how he despises himself if any feel- 
ing of self-complacency rises up in his mind. 4 1 have become 
skilful in m,y own conceit ; I have given up faith for idle self- 
satisfaction ’ (351). And 4 I dislike to hear my praises ; when men 
extol me they weary my soul 9 (476). He knows his business 
better: 4 My chief duty is like a servant to forward my lord's 
purposes ’ (690). • 



142 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKAKAM cii. 

He speaks much and no doubt with justice of his simplicity and 
sincerity. 4 1 utier fond and foolish words but they come straight 
from the core of my being * (3407). This remains perhaps the 
strongest impression that his character leaves upon us. Along 
with it we may place a passionate desire to save and serve mankind. 
There is no doubt about the horror with which he sees men ‘run- 
ning to hell '. He speaks of human wickedness with nothing short 
of horror and agony, and his language of indignant reproof 
is in marvellous contrast with the sweetness of persuasion with 
which he lays before them the bliss and rapture of the devotee’s 
life. We may sometimes feel that he overdoes the language of 
mere rage and denunciation, especially when the poems of this 
type are collected together, but viewing the case in a just per- 
spective we shall see that he did not rest satisfied as the censorious 
do with mere denunciation, but that he showed the way to 
something better, though sometimes in rough, and even coarse, 
terminology — on which coarseness see V'. L. Bhave, M . Sdr ., p. 182. 

’ io. Service for Others 

An unselfish desire to raise the world around him is the noblest 
feature of Tukarfnn’s character, and, breathing as it does from so 
many poems in one form or other, remains the final impression. 
On this question we are compelled to take a different view from 
that adopted by Dr. Macnicol in Psalms of Mardthd Saints 
(pp. 31-2) and by Dr. Farquhar in An Outline of the Religious 
Literature of India (p. 300) : ‘ His own need and his own concerns 
absorb him,’ says the former ; 1 it is hisown religious life that occupies 
his soul/ says the latter. That Tukaram, however, had a true 
concern for others also is very manifest throughout the whole of 
Mahipati’s narrative, as will be seen from many incidents recorded 
in our chapter 4. There we see Tukaram spending his time help- 
ing anybody he finds in need. When we come to his autobiogra- 
phical poems it is clear that for Tukaram religion does not mean 
a selfish concern for one’s own soul or concentration on religious 
exercises only, for he speaks of ‘ wearing out his own body * by 
4 serving others */ How emphatic a place this practical principle 
occupies even in his poems is shown by those classified by Fraser 
and Marathe under the heading ‘The Service of Others’, a classi- 
fication found in each of the three volumes, the following being 
samples from the first only. * Whoso makes himself the friend of 
the oppressed, recognize him for a true saint, know that God 
dwells in him. He who takes the. unprotected to his heart, Tuka 
says — how often shall 1 tell you?— he is the very image of the 
Divine? * (709). ‘ He who serves other creatures and shows them 

compassion, in him the supreme spirit dwells’ (710). 4 Merit 


i A bhang 101. F. and Af. # 1333 /. P. 



V 


PICTURE OF HIMSELF 


143 


consists in service to others’ (711). In 712 we have interesting 
examples of this practical benevolence in the lives of Kabir, 
Namdev and Venkoba. ‘Blessed in the wot Id are the compas- 
sionate ; their true home is Vaikuntha, but they have come here to 
serve mankind ’ (713). ‘A benefactor knows not the difference 
between himself and others’ (715). ‘One whose mind is for 
ever unquiet and discontented, let me never meet such a man, he 
knows not the highest word of all, do good to others * (717). ‘ We 
should use our best endeavours for the afflicted ' (720). 

On this subject Mr. Pangarkar has some excellent observations, 
particularly on pages 131-6 of his Marathi biography of our poet- 
saint. He not only refers to the remarkable chapter 31 in 
Mahlpati’s Bhakta Lildmrita which we have summarized in our own 
chapter 4, but he points out a striking ahhang of Tuk arum’s own 
which Fraser and Marathe have classified in their second volume 
under ‘ Peacefulness ’ and numbered 2200. In this abhaug Tuka- 
ram propounds the problem : ‘ Are you in need of God ? * and he 
supplies a twofold answer. ‘The ideal method is to sing His 
praises with devotion, or with faith (bJirfva) ’, but another method 
is: ‘ Do good to others, whether it be much or little ’. (See also our 
Section on ‘The Saints’, Chapter 8, Section viii. 3, ‘Their Service 
to Men ’. 


ii. His Mission as a Preacher 

Our last glimpse of Tukaram leaves him pictured in our 
memory as a preacher. In Mahipati’s pages ws find him helping 
poor widows or working miracles, but his own portrait of himself 
is that of a preacher, though conscious of his unworthiness. His 
native equipment is small; he has little intelligence, he is wholly 
unlearned, he knows nothing of the Vedas. ‘What knowledge 
have I ? What authority have I ? ’ (1134). Put this question he 
answers — he bears a message, he is sealed with the seal of a mighty 
prince (70-71), He feels his language is childish and feeble, and 
all Tukaram can say is that God makes it sufficient to convey the 
message. Tukaram is but the measure that measures out the 
truth ; 4 the measure says, “ I measure out all/* yet its master 
fills it and lay** it aside empty * (70). At other times, however, he 
seems to think his poems are powerful because they are not his 
own, because his master speaking through him inspires him with an 
eloquence not his own.’ These are not my words, I am a hired 
messenger of Vithoba* (1420). He has a strong sense of the need 
for preaching and for good honest preachers. He denounces the 
professional orator who takes money for holding a lnrtan . Making 
terms and extorting money Tukaram always reprehends. The 
numerous poems on this topic are amusing and one gathers that 
religious imposters turned up in the Deccan as regularly as tramps 
in England or America. Like these gentlemen too they found 



144 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

their chief supporters among such women, as were impressed 
and indeed misled by their magic and false pretensions. They are 
often accused of over-eating— over-drinking not being a Hindu 
failing — and of smoking bh&ng and of gratifying their lust with 
women. ‘Their desires are set on shawls and pots and money' (1196). 
‘ They shall not escape hell, says Tuka ' (1195). And he adds in 
one place, If I have polluted my tongue in making these wretches 
ashamed of themselves, O purify me * (2028). 

Inspiration is needed by the preacher. Tukaram is honest 
enough to admit that this rule has its exceptions: ‘There are 
people who follow crooked paths and yet point out straight paths 
to others ’ (2398). But he does not dwell much on this paradox — 
indeed the subtlety of human nature is a thing that Hindu moralists 
hardly ever handle. He prefers to insist on the straightforward 
view that the teacher must be sincere. ‘ Matted hair and ashes 
are a scandal when the mind has neither patience nor forbearance* 
(1199). ‘ If God ceases to speak to a man, he too ought to be 

silent; Tuka says, People act very differently — when God has 
'ceased to speak to them they go on talking about Him* (561). 
And the preacher must not spare his efforts. ‘If a man stands 
up to preach and spares his energy who can measure his guilt ? * 
(2525). The right conditions, however, being fulfilled, the preacher 
‘rescues others by the sweet perfume of his words’. But the 
listeners must do their part. Tukaram denounces with unsparing 
energy those who sleep while the speaker holds forth, those whe 
talk and above all those who raise cavilling objections to the 
discourse. No doubt his patience was often tried. ‘Such people 
sink themselves and destroy the ship of salvation.* 


Our study of the biographical and autobiographical facts of 
Tukaram's life having brought him before us as a preacher, we are 
now to learn what his themes are, first by noting his attitude to 
contemporary Hinduism (chapter 6), second by enquiring in which 
directions he may be influencing men to-day (chapter 7), and third 
by seeking to discover what may be regarded as his religious tenets 
(chapter 8). 




THE HYPOCRITE 


Possessed with devils they grow long their hair. 

No saints are they, nor trace of God they bear. 

They tell of omens to a gaping crowd. 

Rogues are they, Tuka says ; Govind's i not there. 


WITHOUT AND WITHIN* 


Soon as the season of Sinhasth 2 comes in. 

The barber and the priest-— what wealth they win ! 
Thousands of sins may lurk within his heart, 

If only he will shave his head and chin ! 

What is shaved off is gone, but what else, pray ? 
What sign that sin is gone ? His evil way 
Is still unchanged. Yea, without faith and lo%>e 
All is but vanity, I, Tuka, say. 


DROWNING MEN * 


For men’s saving I make known 
These devices — this alone 
My desire. 

Can my heart unmoved be 
When before my eyes I see 
Drowning men ? 


LOVE FINDS OUT GOD * 


Thv nature is beyond the grasp 
Of human speech or thought. 

So love I’ve made the measure-rod, 

By which I can be taught. 

Thus with the measure-rod of love 
I mete the Infinite. 

In sooth, to measure him there is 
None other means so fit. 

Not Yoga’s power, nor sacrifice, 

Nor fierce austerity, 

Nor yet the strength of thought profound 
Hath ever found out thee. 

And ao, says Tuka, graciously, 

Oh Ke£av,3 take, we pray, 

Love's service that with simple hearts 
Before thy feet we lay. 


Goviitd * Krisna. 2 see pp. 47, 50 of this book, 3 Keiav- Krisna, 
Translated from Tuk Sr am, PM. S., pp. 90, 88, 73, 



Chapter VI 


Tukaram's Attitude to Conventional Hinduism 


This chapter is net intended to be a criticism either of 
Hinduism or of Tukaram but an enquiry into the relation of the 
latter to the former. On every side Tukaram found himself 
surrounded by the conventional beliefs and practices of Hinduism. 
The question presents itself : Which of these did he adopt or 
sanction? How far was he a reformer ? It is a question not a 
little difficult to approach or solve, for inconsistencies and contra- 
dictions of thought appear on well-nigh every page. So true is 
this that very different schools of interpretation claim him as 
favouring their views. What we need to remember throughout is 
that he was a poet with a poet’s varying moods and that he was 
also a Hindu, the Hindu's ability to accept positions which to 
others are mutually exclusive being the constant despair of the 
Western enquirer. 


i. Tukaram’s Idolatry 

No better illustration can be found of the folly of trying to 
reduce Tukaram’s attitude to one of logical consistency than his 
relation to the all-surrounding idolatry of his day. The lofty 
theistic aspirations of the small but influential community of the 
Prarthana Samajists and the sordid — though sincere — idolatry of the 
vast multitude of Tukaram's Deccan followers to-day are both able 
to turn to his pages for confirmation of their respective tenets. 
His irreconcilable views on the subject of idolatry are accounted 
for by the fact that the worship of Vithoba, the idol at Pandharpur, 
with all its traditional ceremonies, Tukaram regarded as sanctioned 
by time and custom on the one hand and by the wish of the god 
on the other. At the same time he desired something very much 
higher than the .ceremonies of the central shrine at Pandharpur, 
something much more inward and spiritual, but he nowhere 
condemns those particular ceremonies and he believes that they 
make some sort of impression on the divine nature. 

This raises the whole question of images or idols in worship, a 
feature of Hinduism which has naturally struck the world but has 
received very little scientific attention either from the Hindu 
theologians or others. A few words are therefore advisable on the 
views and practices of Hindus. Not long ago it was unnecessary 
to distinguish between the educated and uneducated in this matter, 



148 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

though educated men, one may suppose, cannot ever have looked 
on images or idols with the simple unquestioning faith of the 
masses. 

With the Hindu masses the use of an image or idol is the 
natural way of approaching the divine, and for this purpose 
the Hindu view is that the image must be one definitely con- 
secrated to the god and accepted by the god as a place of resi- 
dence. The consecration ceremony must always be performed by a 
Brahman and is called Prfinapratisth& % This important cere- 
mony was defined nearly a century ago by the great reformer Ram 
Mohun Roy in words reproduced by The Indian Messenger , the 
Sadharan Brahmo Samaj organ of Calcutta, which we give below. 
Ram Mohun Roy was refuting the position of those Hindus who 
maintain that an image or idol is merely a lifeless symbol meant to 
remind the worshippers of the One Living God. As proof that the 
worshippers do not take this view the reformer stated: * Whatever 
Hindu purchases an idol in the market, or constructs one with 
his own hands, or has one made under his superintendence, it is 
his invariable practice to perform certain ceremonies called Prfina* 
pratistha or the endowment of animation, by which he believes 
that its nature is changed from that of the mere materials of which 
it is formed, and that it acquires not only life but supernatural 
powers. Shortly afterwards, if the idol be of the masculine gender, 
he marries it to a feminine one with no less pomp and magnificence 
than he celebrates the nuptials of his own children. The 
mysterious process is now complete and the god and goddess are 
esteemed the arbiters of his destiny, and continually receive his 
most ardent adoration. At the same time the worshipper of the 
images ascribes to them at once the opposite natures of human 
and superhuman beings. In attention to their supposed wants as 
living beings, he is seen feeding them,' 1 If it be asked what is the 
result of such a ceremony, the Hindu reply is that a portion of the 
god’s own nature is infused into the image. It is then possible for 
the worshipper to meet the god by adoring the image or idol. 
The god once present is always present, unless the image somehow 
gets polluted, in which case the god forsakes it, though it can be 
reconsecrated. 

What is Tukaram’s view? The only way to answer the question 
is briefly to review the facts. How utterly devoted to Krispa was 
the saint of Dehu is indicated by such abhahgs as number 245 in 
Fraser and Marathe’s translation : * Krisna is my mother and father, 
sister, brother, aunt and uncle. Krisna is my teacher and boat of 
salvation. He bears me over the river of the world. Krisna is 
my own mind, my family, and my bosom friend. Tuka says, Holy 

i Quoted from The Indian Messenger in Dnydnodaya , April 10, 1919. 
On this ‘ life-implanting ceremony ‘ see further Mrs. Sinclair Stevenson, 
The Rites of The Twice Born, the section entitled ‘ Consecration of Idols’, 
pp. 409-15. • 



VI ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL HINDUISM .145 

Krisna is my place of repose ; I am resolved I will not be parted 
from him/ With questions affecting Krista’s historicity, his rela- 
tion to Vishnu, etc., we have dealt on pages 29-33. 1 That Tuka- 
ram’s mind dwelt sometimes on the amorous character of his god 
is clear from the 29 pages of abhahgs in Fraser and Marathe given 
up to this unsavoury topic, on which there is no need to add to what 
we have said on pages 31-33. A point of interest arising out of 
Tukaratrds relation to Krisna is the view held by some that*for a 
part of his life it was the idol-form of the child Krisna that he 
worshipped, one proof of this being the dream he had after the 
recovery of his poems from the river, in which dream Krisna 
appeared in the guise of a child ; J and that there was a time when 
Tukaram viewed the Pandharpur idol as being the image of Kris- 
na’s wife Rukmini, exactly at what stages of his life he held these 
respective views it being impossible to say, since there is little or no 
available historical evidence \ 

It is in the poet’s relation to Vithoba, Krisna’s ‘ incarnation * at 
Pandharpur, a relation alternating between rapture and despair, that 
his devotion to Krisna is chiefly manifested. For the rapture see 
abhahg 136 which we quote only in part : 4 Vitthal is onr life, our 
ancestral god, treasure, family and spirit; Vitthal is the darling 
of our hearts, our gracious and tender master, the embodiment of 
our love; our father, mother, uncle, brother, sister ; apart from him 
we care not for our family; Tuka says, Now we have none but 
him*. For the despair see chap. 9, sect. 6 and chap. 10, sect. 5 To 
understand this relation of Tukaram to Vithoba and the develop- 
ment which led to Vithoba’s exalted position at Pandharpur, see the 
various sections on Vithoba in chapter 2. Like most other Vaishna- 
vas or devotees of the Blidgavata religion of Maharashtra, Tukaram 
recognized also the equality, if not the oneness, of Vishnu and Siva, 
on which see page 27 above and section 4 in this chapter on 1 Siva 
and Vithoba’. 

In Tukaram’s pantheon other deities were included as the 
objects of his praise and homage, for the Blidgavata religion or 
Vaishnavism of Pandharpur recognized a plurality of gods; see 
chapter 3, section 6. It will suffice here to refer by number only to 
the abhahgs employing stories from mythology in F. and Af.vol. 2. 
Those numbered 1281-94 are written in praise of Rama, 1295-6 
in praise of Ganpati (or Ganesha), 1297-1300 in praise of MarutI 
(or Hanuman, or Hanumant), while 1301-5 contain the amorous 
4 complaints 1 of Radha, Satyabhama and SIta. In abhahg 1462 
we learn that he offered worship some time or other to the Ganges, 
the Bhagirathi there referred to as ‘ cleansing from sin 9 being a 
sacred tributary. Vet other deities are mentioned in 147, while in 

1 See further chap 10, sect. 6, especially Pandit Tattvabhushan's view 
regarding Vishnu. 

2 See footnote 2, p 97. 

3 Dr. P. H. Bhandarkar, Navayuga. March 1921. pp. 145-9„159. 



1$0 # LtEE AND TEACHING OE TUKARAM OH, 

991 ( the evil age 9 has for one of its characteristics that a man 1 2 * does 
not revere his village god 9 . 

Of coarse it is possible, in seeking to harmonize the above 
facts with the lofty spiritual aspirations and monotheistic utterances 
of the preceding chapter (see pp. 134-144) and of our ninth chapter, 
to adopt the ‘ easy 9 solution offered by the Prarthana Samajists 
as expressed by Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar: ‘It is evident that at an 
early, stage of his religious life Tukaram was a pure idolator and a 
polytheist, but it is easy to trace his progress to monotheism.’ 1 It 
would be an iuviting solution of a perplexing problem could we 
accept it, but formidable difficulties of chronology and the lack of a 
critical edition of Tukaram’s writings present an insurmountable 
obstacle. It is doubtless allowable to use in a monotheistic sense 
for devotional purposes, as does the Prarthana Samaj, abhciiigs 
which have no specific mention of Krisna or Vithoba, e. g., ‘make 
this your gain, the contemplation of God, with a mind centred in 
Him * (953), though it is probable that even in such abhangs the 
bhaktcts thought was of his beloved Vithoba at Pandhari. 

Mr. L. K. Pangarkar categorically affirms, without any quali- 
fication, that Tukaram was an idolator outright to the very end, and 
he points out that in the satiad or government grant of property to 
Tukaram’s son Narayanrao at Dehu there is the definite 
statement that ‘Tukaram the Gosdvi a used to do ptljd to 
the god with his own band. 9 r In defending the lifelong idolatry 
of his hero, Mr. Pangarkar observes that the reason idolatry is not 
understood by those not practising it is that its secret lies in 
the complete identification of the worshipper and his god. The 
scathing reply of the Prarthana Samajist compares idolatry to 
a carriage meant for coitveying the spiritually lame, the carriage to 
be cast aside when its invalid occupants are able to walk, otherwise 
they become ‘confirmed invalids who when they see anyone else 
moving along without any such adventitious aid infer that the 
carriage is hidden away in some mysterious fashion. 4 Idolatry 
and its evil effects have indeed no more scathing critics anywhere 
than the leaders of the Indian Samajes. As far as Tukaram’s own 
attitude is concerned we are probably quite safe in concluding, 
despite the additional considerations given later in this section, that 
he was probably never quite as denunciatory of idolatry as was his 
predecessor Namdev, on whom see pp. 38-9. In the picturesque 
metaphor applied to him, Namdev burnt all his boats, (i.e., his idols), 
hitherto used by him in crossing life’s river, while the saint of Dehu 
never took so daring a step. 5 Nevertheless, as we observed on page 

1 Two Masters : Jesus and Tukaram , pp. 32-3, the same view appearing 
from the same writer in Navayuga , March, 1921, p. 152. 

2 See p. 6, note 2, for a definition. 

3S. T. C, pp. 332-4. 

4 Dr. P.R. Bhandarkar, Navayuga, March 1921, pp. 152-3. 

6 Ibid, p. 162. 



VI ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL HINDUISM 151 


39, even Namdev continued idolatrous practices, his denunciations 
notwithstanding. 

Tukaram's prevailing view, therefore, as far as his poems show, is 
that God is really present in the image or idol and he gives reasons 
why he consents to this manifestation : ‘ He assumes name and form 
to protect devotion, to show how God and worship are related * 
(2603). Without some bodily aspect, says our poet, the moral mind 
cannot grasp God : 1 2 * Give something visible to pray to, let someone 
fulfil my helpless desires 9 ( 1153 ). In another place he describes 
himself as ‘supported by the beauty of God’s visible form ’ (2036). 
This is expressed in a fanciful poem where the bodily members 
all demand that Vithoba shall be made accessible to them : ‘ My 
mouth sings thy attributes, my ears listen ; but, say the other 
members, such is not our case ; the sight of thee alone can gratify 
all, whereby each shall receive his own portion* (3143). It is to 
comply with this longing that Vithoba takes form, but Tukaram 
goes 6n to add that Vithoba is not really present unless the wor- 
shipper brings faith with him : * It was our faith that brought about 
your full incarnation’ (288) ; ‘ the essence of the matter is faith ; it 
is a matter of experience that stones become gods* (2605) ; ‘men 
give the name 4 god 1 * to a stone and faith in it can save a man f 
(3203); 'if a stone be placed on the highest seat it should not be 
treated as a common stone * ( 907 ) ; ‘ by singing his praises we have 
induced the formless to assume a form* (282). 1 

There are various passages showing that Tukaram was alive to 
the mysteries, perplexities and inconsistencies of this view and 
those perplexities and inconsistencies lead to moments when Tuka- 
ram’s faith is so much shaken that it almost vanishes : ‘ we have 
formed a Vishnu of stone but the stone is not Vishnu ; the worship 
of Vishnu is offered to Vishnu, the stone remains in the form of a 
stone’ (1144). Commenting on this last abhatig , the Marathi gram- 
marian Ganpatrao R. Navalkar, Fellow of Bombay University, 
observes: ‘ The mind is so constituted that it cannot separate in 
worship, the image from the object it represents, and the image 
itself becomes a god and receives the worship.* * Sir P.. G. 
Bhandarkar, writing out of a full and sympathetic understanding of 
Tukaram’s whole position, describes him as ‘a devotee only of 
Vithoba of Pandharpur and a monotheist in this sense*, adding that 
‘ though he worshipped the idol at the place, still he had always 
before his mind’s eye the great Lord of the universe.’” 

It is interesting to note how Tukaram recoiled from the 
inconsistencies we have indicated and how he retained his own hold 
on the Divine Personality in ‘ an atmosphere of idolatry Though 
God was worshipped idolatrously by all the people in Tukaram’s 


1 See also L. K. Pangarkar, S.T.C. p. 130. 

2 Tukaram the Maharashtrian Poet and Saint } p. 10, 

« V.SM.R,S„ p. 95. 



152 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

envMmment, yet the following threefold position appears from a 
careful survey of his poems on this subject : 

(1) No special image of God is necessary: ‘If you mean to 
worship Him then conceive Him as the Universe, it is vain to limit 
Him to one spot * (224) ; * my spirit is at peace because I see thee 
in every quarry 9 (2588); ‘ wherever I look, there I see God — give 
me such faith as this * (3117); 4 one whose god is a stone will reap 
fruits like his faith ; preserve your faith ; you will prove the sweet- 
ness of it, though hindrances arise to part you from it ; God is 
secured by faith * (2598). 

(2) The true image of God is His faithful people: ‘In holy 
places we find water and an image of stone, but in the society of 
good men we have the actual presence of God * (926) ; it is the 
saints who are gods ; images of stone are pretences * (2606) ; 
* through love to men he dances and sings in the person of the 
saints * (287). 

(3) Mere idolatry, accompanied by external rites without inward 
# religion, he condemns outright : ‘ Why do they worship stone and 

brass and the eight metals? The wretches have no faith. ? Tis 
faith that moves us and is fitly called the means of salvation. 
What avails your rosary ? ’Tis only pleasures of the senses you 
count on it. What will you do with your learned tongue ? It will 
make you proud and conceited. What will you do with your skill 
in song, as long as your will is foul within you ? If you serve God 
without faith, says Tuka, how will you become fit for Him V (2597) 
4 Diversity of gods is an offspring of our own thoughts ; there is no 
truth an it ; God is one ( 1 84) ; 4 these gods and goddesses smeared 
with vermilion — who could worship such masters? ... I have 
known what it is to wait on them; it is in truth a base and vile 
inclination; . . . only beggars call such things gods* (1169). 

(4) The seemingly insoluble riddle presented by the various 
contradictory elements in Tukaram’s belief as regards idols is 
perhaps brought nearest to a solution by an aspect well brought 
out by Prof. W. B. Patwardhan who shows that Vithoba — how, we 
are not told — had come to embody for Tukaram the conception of 
God as a Mother, which conception solved for Tukaram himself 
most problems about the Divine Being. ‘ This phase of Tukaram’s 
faith/ says Professor Patwardhan, ‘is particularly remarkable 
since it emphasizes the personality of God. To those who have 
never been idolators it is perhaps a difficult task to conceive 
an impersonal God in a personal aspect. But to Tukaram it was 
an easy thing. He had been brought up in an atmosphere of 
idolatry and the idol at Pandharl was to him for along time invested 
with a glory and splendour and grace nowhere else realized 
on earth, endowed with a presence and power that could be 
visualized only in moments of rare bliss. In course of time 
the ecstatic frenzy of Tukaram rose to a height wherein the idol at 
Pan^hari ceased to be an idol ; the dead material image was 



VI ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL HINDUISM 153 

nowhere ; and he was wrapped up in a personal presence of Vitthal 
like that of bis mother, only with a halo of glory around her. All 
the devotional raptures of Tukaram’s poetry are due, perhaps, to 
this personal element in the conception of God’s Motherhood.’ 1 

That God is our Mother is an Old Testament view (Isaiah 66 : 
13), just as His Fatherhood is the note of emphasis in New 
Testament teaching. On the Divine Motherhood it has been 
pointed out that 4 the worship of the Mothers* has often been 
among the grossest forms of popular superstition. 4 How far these 
associations mingle with Tukaram's fervent expressions of affection 
we cannot say, but there is little doubt that even on his lips it is an 
imperfectly moralised relationship.’ 2 Nevertheless it is at this point 
that Tukaram’s idea of God approximates most closely to the 
Christian conception; see chap. 8, II, 3. 

It is impossible to leave this subject of idolatry without 
observing the unfortunate consequences of Tukaram’s ambiguity on 
so vital a matter. It must be regarded as one of the saddest 
aspects of the popular Hinduism of Maharashtra, that there are 
millions of Marathi-speaking Hindus who, forgetting the lofty 
principles of the saint of Dehu, follow only the idolatrous part of his 
example, viz., his worship of the idol Vithoba at Pai?<Jharpur, 
while those who follow the nobler part of his example, viz., 
his earnest quest for inward purity revealed in many of his abharigs, 
are probably to be counted only by thousands, possibly hundreds. 
It would gratify us to be shown that this diagnosis of ours is not 
correct and to learn that more people follow Tukarfun the bhakta 
than Tukaram the idolator, but all our information points the other 
way. 3 

To Tukaram’s ambiguity is probably due another result. 
During 1920 a curious development took place in the Bombay 
Prarthana Samaj on the question of 4 idolatrous rites *, confirming 
one item in Dr. Farquhar’s description of the . Samaj 4 to 
the effect that there are some members who 4 have banished 
neither idolatry nor caste from their homes*. At a meeting held 
in June 1920 the two following resolutions were proposed with 
regard to this: 4 (1) That at the time of becoming a member 
each applicant be required to declare : 44 I undertake to perform all 
domestic and other ceremonies according to theistic rites, discarding 
idolatry.” The.resolution was carried, 19 members voting for it and 
12 against it. The second resolution was : (2) That the following 
rule be added to the rules of the Samaj : 44 Any member who performs 
a domestic or any other ceremony with idolatrous rites or worships 

1 /. April, 1912, pp. 25-26. 

•Macnicol, ‘Indian Poetry of Devotion,* The Hibhert Journal, October 
1917, pp. 74-88. 

3 The last twelve lines we wrote in the Dnydnodaya of July 1, 1920 and we 
have not yet (August 1921) seen them controverted. 

4 E, R . E %% vol, 9, Art, Prarthana Satndj, p. 151-2. 

20 



154 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 


any idols while performing such rites will ipso facto cease to be a 
member of the Bombay Prarthana Samaj.” The resolution was 
lost, only 7 members voting for it.’ 1 

2. Holy Places, Holy Rivers, Holy Seasons 

Another feature always conspicuous in Hinduism is the belief 
in pilgrimages to holy places, 2 3 lustrations in holy rivers and strict 
observance of holy seasons. The belief holds that the water of 
holy places can wash away sin, and it leads to vast and constant 
pilgrimages to such places. The sense of sin is no doubt present 8 
in Hinduism, but it is mostly identified with ceremonial unclean- 
ness, though often it has been purely moral. The whole subject 
raises one of the most intricate problems that the moralist can 
attempt. On this subject as with regard to images, Tukaram 
halts between two opinions. In several places he maintains the 
value of pilgrimages. He mentions among unacceptable people the 
man whose 4 feet move not to holy places, and who says, Why should 
I spend money on them ? ’ (1043) Several times he mentions the 
Ganges with respect : ‘He who attributes impurity to the Ganges 
and to fire he is a miscreant’ (1007) ; ‘dwell alone and bathe 
in Ganges water, worship god and walk round the tulil * (731); 

* fail not to visit holy places * (722). On the other hand : 4 If I go on 
a pilgrimage, my mind goes not with me * (615). He even condemns 
those who 4 pride themselves on pilgrimages and austerities , they 
glory in a thing unreal ; they are sunk in the pit of rules and pro- 
hibitions* (2531). God is present to the faithful everywhere: 

4 We may go to all countries: thou art ready for us* (1714). ‘A 
man’s own parents are his true Kasl (Benares) ; he need not visit 
any holy place’ (2230). * Being now under the inspiration of God 

I need not go anywhere * (3165). 4 Ill-starred is he who sets off on 
the path to a holy place, the very place he reaches becomes 
an obstacle to him’ (3195). Besides his deprecation of religious 
austerities noticed above, we may add one interesting passage ; 
4 Do not put an end to your own life : he knows not his own true 
good who throws away a treasure lodged within him f (2232). 

It is fairly certain that he always observed the ekadashl 4 fast in 
spite of his objection to fixed seasons : * He who observes not the 
11th day know him for a living corpse* (1054). 

Sometimes he uses language condemning unsparingly rites 
and practices which are merely, external, proclaiming plainly 
their utter inability to wash away the sins of the heart, as for ex- 
ample in his abhang numbered 4733 in Tukaram Tatya’s edition 

1 Subodh Patrika , June 27, 1920 and Dnyanodaya , July 1, 3920. 

2 Ste pp. 43-9. 

3 See Chap. 3 especially, pp. 49-50 ; also pp. 135-7 ; and Chap. 9, sect, 7, 

4 For definition see p. 56. 



Vi ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL HINDUISM 155 

and translated by Sir R. G. Bhandarkar as follows : * What hast 
thou done by going to a holy river ? Thou hast only outwardly 
washed thy skin. In what way has the interior been purified ? By 
this thou hast only added a feather to thy cap (literally, prepared a 
decoration for thyself). Even if the bitter vrattdftvana fruit is 
coated with sugar, the settled quality of the interior (bitterness) is 
in no way lessened. If peace, forgiveness and sympathy do not 
come in, why should you take any trouble V 1 

* 

3. His Idea of Pandharpur and its Practices 

Much that Tukaram saw at Pandharpur must have vexed his 
soul or at best must have seemed to him wasted devotion. The 
veneration of the image of the river, the red paint bestowed on the 
great Hanuman, all the homage to the minor deities represented on 
the river banks — all this lies probably outside the system which he 
personally regarded as fundamental. But he does not attack it, or 
he only does so when he sees anything definitely degrading or 
leading to immoral practices. His denunciations indeed are some- 
times so fierce as to pass over into coarseness, on which we need 
add nothing to what Mr. V. L. Bhave has said in his Marathi 
work on the History of Marathi Literature, page 182. Among 
his abhangs are those denouncing the worship of powers that lick 
up bloody sacrifices or of powers that offer magical accomplish- 
ments. We have also constant denunciation of all religious 
impostors, among whom are the sleek rogues who cheat women, the 
pretenders to magical powers and the disputatious self-important 
pundits. These and their victims are vigorously denounced, some- 
times in language of incisive sarcasm. 

Pandharpur has been dealt with in an earlier chapter, but 
we may note here the difference between the ancient view of 
Paptjharpur and that characteristic of Tukaram. To him the 
river appears nothing like as important. He seldom recommends 
the rite of bathing in it: ‘ Let your bathing be in the Chandra- 
bhaga * (1634) is a kind of advice very rare. He often, however, 
speaks of the joys of the pebbly shore, but they are the joys of 
the klrtans held there in praise of Vi^hoba. We need not doubt 
that when he went to Pandhari he bathed in the stream, for that 
would be part of the routine of the visit though in all probability 
he rejected the idea of the waters of tbe Bhlma having any power 
to cleanse from sin (see pages 56-9, 61-2).* But there can be few 
cities on earth whose praises or merit-imparting values have been 
more sweetly chanted than those of this city on the banks of the 
Bhlma : 1 Be a pilgrim and gaze on Papcjharl ; why need you prac- 

tise other means of salvation * (154) ; ‘ no guilt enters ten miles of 

t See also the paragraph on ' Self- Accusations of Deccan Pilgrims 
pp 49-50. , 4 



I$6 LlJ*E k AND TEACHING OE TCKAftAM Ctt. 

its circuit * (157) ; 1 you can buy liberation 1 there for nothing, for 
nobody wants it * (159); 1 when I see the spire of the temple, weari- 
ness, sleep and hunger will vanish ’ (1627) ; 1 happy are they who 
dwell in Papdbari; they have no pride of caste’ (see pages 54-5), 
f they are all emancipated souls’ (2827); ’the spirit which none 
could control was nailed by Pundalika to this spot ’ (2836). 

Paodhari, in his view, owes no sanctity to any such source as 
a triumph of the devas (gods) ovefr the asuras (demons) : it is holy 
as^he spot where Vishnu stands ‘ incarnate’ before his worshippers. 
This 1 incarnation ’ Tukaram does not connect with the story of 
Rukmini’s bad temper or Krista’s search for her. Such an expla- 
nation he would probably have rejected as paltry and absurd. 
Allegory is not in Tukaram’s line nor is controversy, and these old 
legends he neither explains nor controverts. He has his own views 
and he remains content to place these before the world. To him 
the * incarnation * is vouchsafed to Pundalika in reward of his filial 
love, which somehow — Tukaram never says how — is identified with 
the figure on the brick. 

> 

4. Relation Between Shiva and Vithoba 

One of the most important aspects of Vaishnavism or the 
Bhdgavata religion in Maharashtra is the equality, possibly one- 
ness, of Vishnu and Siva referred to on page 27 and in other places 
in this book, and in order to understand Tukaram’s attitude on 
some questions, particularly his attitude towards Siva and the 
Saivites, we need briefly to dip into the far past. Inscriptions 
indicate that in the 12th century Pancjharpur bore two names — 
Paundarlka Ksetra and Panclurangpur or city of Pan<Jurahg, the 
local name of Siva. The most important temple on the sandy 

’ beach is that of Pundalika (on whom and on ‘ the name Vithoba’, 
see pages 41-3 and 48), in which temple is worshipped the Siva- 
linga . How Vithoba or Vitthal came to receive the Saivite name 
of Pap<Jurahg it is impossible to say, save to suggest that it possibly 
represents one of the many efforts of the time to unite Siva and 
Vishiju, Pundalika being the agent in this particular effort. This 
is the line on which Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar attempts a solution and 
he suggests that as the name Vitthal may be a Kanarese form of 
the Sanskrit Vishnu, and as the worship of Rakhumai (Kjrispa’s 
wife) followed on that of Vitthal, therefore the worship of Krisna 
and RukminI must have been brought from South India where an 
inscription of the 10th century shows this worship to have been 
prevalent, confirmatory evidence being supplied by the fact that 
though the outward garb of RukminI at Paiictoarpur is Mara{ha in 
character, yet that carved on her image is undoubtedly of a South 

1 On this important word see chapter 8, part IV, section 




THK ‘taKPITHYA* (IMITATION) VI1NOT3A AT PANJ )II ARPU R 




Vi ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL HINDUISM 157 

Indian pattern. This line of reasoning would appear to be supported 
by an abhaAg of Dnyaneshwar indicating that Vitthal and its 
worship came from the Carnatic,, while another of Nivrittinath's 
affirms that Pundalika ‘brought Siva with Vishpu to Paii^hanV a 
joint-worship very ancient and images of which belonging to the 
8th and 9th centuries are found in various parts of India. The 
present image, however, is that of Vishpu only, the severe persecu- 
tion during the Mohammedan invasions, as well as other reasons, 
necessitating the removal of the original image which never 
returned.* A popular tale runs to the effect that the present image 
is the original one, stolen by some marauding king and brought back 
by Pundalika at Vithoba’s command in a dream. 

These facts, taken along with others* affecting the BhClgavata 
religion of Maharashtra (see page 27), may help us to understand 
both Tukaram’s recognition of Siva and the paucity of his references 
to the subject : * I love the town of Pandharl, . . . the liiiga and 
Pundalika’ (2326). No need therefore, in light of the above considera- 
tions, to conclude as Fraser and Marathe did on page 333 of vol. 3, 
English translations, that ‘the mention of the liiiga is unparalleled 
in Tuka and suggests that this abhang is spurious’. That it is not 
unparalleled, indeed, abhaiig 1579 in the Ittdu PraJcdsh edition 
shows: ‘ Having worshipped the liiiga, Tuka stands with folded 
hands and makes a request to which, O Siva ! kindly pay attention : 
Let my mind remain always at thy feet’. And similarly, 2484 in 
F. and M.’s own translation, where in his picture of the mean man, 
Tukaram says ‘ he never dreams of worshipping the village liiiga \ 
For though the original image representing the Hari-IIara worship 
of Vishnu-Siva may not have returned, yet the liiiga is still present 
in Pandharpur, and not in Pundallka’s temple only. The tope-like 
crown on the head of Vithoba — see page 27 and the picture opposite 
page 53 — clearly symbolizes the presence of Siva worshipped 
along with the ‘ incarnation * of Krisna. That this topedike crown is 
the Siva.-linga is accepted as ‘unquestionable ’ by some scholars. 
We would humbly suggest to the latter that it is worthy of investi- 
gation whether the present one may not be the original image 
after all i * 3 4 and whether the mark of Siva on Vithoba’s head may not 
be what Nivrittinath refers to in his abhaiig. 

It is in iight of these ctmsiderations that we are to interpret 
Tukaram’s attitude towards Siva and the Saivites. He often uses 
the common joint form of the names Hara and Hari, a feature of 

i Nivrittinath's abhang translated reads: ‘None can describe the good 
fortune of Pundalika who brought 6iva along with Vishnu to Pandhari on the 
banks of the Bblma.’ 

* Br. P. R. Bhandarkar, Navayuga , March 1921, pp, 155-9, 168d. 

3 This is Mr. L. R. Pangarkar’s verdict in a personal communication to us 
dated Feb. 1, 1921 in which, besides Nivrittinath’s abhang , he quotes also in 
support a 4 well-known verse’ from the Mattobodh of RamdSs. 

4 'Without prejudice * to the 4 new image * theory on pp. 60 in our chap. 3. 



158 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKAftAM c». 

the Bhdgavata religion of these parts, the former being of course a 
name of Mahadevor £iva, while the latter refers to Krista, There 
are, it is true, one or two passages in Tukaram where the worship 
of Siva is discountenanced, but we cannot feel sure they are 
genuine, for in one of the most popular of his abhangs Tukaram 
observes: ‘Siva is made of mud, but the mud itself continues 
to be called mud, and £iva alone receives the worship, mind 
turning to mind’ — see Fraser and Marathe (1144) for another 
translation. In one place, indeed, Tukaram bids us ‘raise no 
question whether Haraor Hari (i.e., Siva and Vishnu) be different; 
one resides in the other as sweetness resides in sugar; , . . it 

is but a vilanti that marks the difference* (176), the vildtitl being 
the minute Marathi sign 'distinguishing between two particular 
vowels. 


5. Shakta Worship, Sati, Brahmans 

On the other hand we need not doubt that he is quite fairly 
represented in the attacks on idkta worship. This, as is well 
known, is a form of worship of the female energy of Siva. Its 
details are repulsive, and the sdkta meetings often appear to end in 
nothing but licence and gratification of any sensual passion that 
presents itself. Dr. Farqubar points out that the literature of the 
sdkta sects shows 4 some * of them have 4 foul, gruesome and degra* 
ding practices.’ 1 The extent of its prevalence in India is difficult 
to estimate, for it comes to light unexpectedly. In this matter 
Tukaram departs from his usual rule of not criticising his neighbours 
and he attacks sdkta worship in language of the most exasperating 
hostility. 

Passing on to the field of morals one may note with interest 
certain practices which Tukaram leaves quite unassailed. One is 
sail, although even as far back as the 7th century a.d. we hear a 
note of protest against satl in a well-known passage in the Kddam- 
bar J of Bana Bhatta, a work regarded as the best extant prose in 
Sanskrit literature. Tukaram refers more than once to the rite as 
an example of fortitude. He commends the woman who walks 
firmly to the pyre and speaks of the holy joy which she feels in the 
act. But it does not occur to him that social pressure may drive 
women to it, that it is a form of cruelty, and that after all it is an 
undesirable way of testifying to faithful love. He seems to feel 
towards the rite just as an orthodox Hindu of those days felt, that 
it was a commendable piece of devotion. 

There is no hostile tone in his poems towards Brahmans. 
Passages even occur in which men are censured for not freely 
supporting them : ‘ We should pay reverence to sages and Brahmans ; 
we should not accept it ourselves’ (2621). Here is his description 


1 O. R L* p. 167. 



m ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL HINDUISM 159 

of a worldly man : 4 To support a cow never enters into his 
thoughts ; he never says, Let me bathe the feet of the Brahmans’ 
(3605). ‘He who never worships holy men, visits no holy spot, he 
is a dowry of hell * (1066). He even goes so far as to say : ‘ Should 
a Brahman lose all his attributes, still, says Tuka, he is supreme in 
the three worlds’ (3352b). There are passages, however, in which 
Brahmans who neglect their duties are censured. How Tukaram 
reverenced Brahmans has already been made clear by several 
stories in his biography (see pp. 83, 93, 96-9). 

We may note, also, that he has no belief in any magical 
or mystic power of Brahmans. There is for instance no reference 
,to their recognized right or privilege to consecrate an image, 
described earlier (p. 148) in this chapter. And in general Tukaram 
shows no leaning towards the occult. Of omens he says : 1 All the 
good omens I recognise are the feet of Hari in the heart’ (2254). 
So too of auspicious moments : ‘ You need not seek the proper 
moment for a good deed, an unsought time is the best for it * 
(2224) ; ‘ charms are impracticable, likewise acts and seasons pre- 
scribed’ (263). He does occasionally mention mystic powers but 
in so slight a manner that their mention appears to be little more 
than a figure of speech. 


6. Cows, Vedas, Puranas, Ceremonies 


From several passages we see that he shared the feeling of his 
country about cows : 4 He alone will reach the highest life, who is 
compassionate towards all creatures, a protector of cows, who 
supplies them with water when they are thirsty in the wilderness' 
(2313). But there appears no definite statement showing he believed 
that the excreta of the animal have the power to cleanse mankind 
from sin, a belief well-nigh universal among Hindus. 

Passages about the Vedas, like those on other subjects, fall 
into two divisions : ‘ Study the Vedas before you sing the attributes 
of Hari' (2620) ; ‘ Tuka looks into the arts which the Vedas teach 
and speaks by the favouring grace of Vitthal' (527). It is un- 
certain if this means that Tukaram had read the Vedas or that he 
considered Vitthal had spared him this labour by revealing their 
meaning to him, but in any case it is a passage upholding their 
value as authorities. On the other hand Tukaram points out that 
the Vedas are unintelligible : ‘Teachers themselves do not under- 
stand the Vedas’ (265). He occasionally speaks slightingly of 
them and professes his own independence of this source of enlight- 
enment : ‘ We waste our time over the dots and dashes of the 
Vedas’ (1227). Finally : ‘The recitation of the Vedas cannot equal 
this name, nor pilgrimages to PrayClga (Allahabad) and Kail 
(Benares) and all holy places* (1740) ; ‘his name is more glorious 



160 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

than the Vedas’ (281). Mr. L. R. Pangarkar 1 has given references 
to the poems showing, first, that Tukaram felt that he had no 
authority himself to read the Vedas, in accordance with the view 
common among Hindus that no one but Brahmans may study the 
sacred books ; second, that his knowledge of them he owed to 
reading predecessors like Dnyaneshwar ; and third, that while he 
accepts the Vedas, the Puranas, and the words of the ‘Saints’ as 
authorities, he yet always despises those whose attitude towards 
these has degenerated into one of mere formalism. 2 

Here we should note that Tukaram is fully familiar with all 
the old purfinic legends about Vishnu and Hari and accepts them 
all. He is fond of mentioning one after another the marvellous 
deeds of the ‘ incarnations especially those which show the con- 
descending kindness of God. 

The general impression to which the poems lead is that 
we have in Tukaram a man naturally and by reflection 
averse to ceremonies, averse to magic and averse to every- 
thing that interposes even with the offer of aid between 
man and his Maker. We see him advancing with halting 
steps towards clear views in these matters and to watch him is 
an occupation of profound interest. 

7. Tukaram No Reformer 

Great caution is to be observed in reading him and drawing 
conclusions. Our uncertainty about the text prevents us from 
being sure on many individual points affecting his attitude to the 
Hinduism of his time. • Since we know nothing of the chronological 
order of the poems we must avoid drawing conclusions as to the 
development of his views. It is always possible that he kept to the 
last some sympathy with ideas really hostile to his own and even 
expressed it. 

We should greatly misconceive Tukaram if we thought of him 
as a reformer setting out to attack abuses. He is primarily a 
servant of Vithoba, whose object is to sing his master’s praises. 
It is only by accident that he is led into conflict with other people’s 
creeds or religious practices : 4 You need not abandon your own 
order of life or the pious ways which have grown up in your own 
family’ (1172). 

Certainly there are things which he does attack. First, 
pretences of magical power : 4 To procure intelligence of past? 
present or future is an achievement of worthless people* (1163). 
Then all sclkta worship. Also the worship of various gfteedy 
menacing deities. Some of these gods are denounced as 4 stone 
gods : ’ 4 They offer vows to their stone gods ’ (3566). But a passage 

* S. T. C., chap. 6, pp. 148-155. 
a See further, chap. 8, II, 4. 



VI ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL HINDUISM 161 

•of this type must not be mistaken for a denunciation of idolatry. 
Tukaram only means that the images of these people not being 
consecrated by the needful faith remain but stone. 

Writing of Tukaram and other Maratha bhaktas the late 
Rev. N. V. Tilak said: ‘ They are considered as Hindu religious 
reformers by some, but in my humble opinion they were sages who 
had hardly any idea of reforming Hinduism on national lines, but 
who had lofty visions, were personally true to them, enjoyed them, 
tenaciously treasured them and thus became examples and gurus 
to their co-religionists. They caused a powerful religious revival 
among the Hindus, and thus gave Hinduism a new impetus which 
preserved it from the fearful downfall which was anticipated in those 
days/ 

Prof. Patvvardharf has attempted to show that this feature, 
what we may call, for want of a better term, Tukaram’s ‘ easy-going 
tolerance,’ is characteristic both of the spirit of bhakti and of the 
Maratha people. ‘ The fact is,’ he says, ‘ that the saints of the 
bhakti school were of a pacific turn of mind and did not love con- 
troversy or contest. I may go still further and say that is the frame 
of mind of Maharashtra. The people of Maharashtra are imbued 
with the spirit of conciliation, of quiet resignation and catholic 
toleration. A sense of the inherent defectiveness of human 
reasoning, of all human systems, be they of government, of religion, 
of morality, or any other, is ingrained in the blood, and hence 
thp militant dogmatism and the furious fanaticism that stir and 
make or mar other races or other peoples have been generally 
conspicuous by absence in Maharashtra. We Marathas would 
mind our own business, and would not quarrel with our neighbour. 
Let him be a Parsi, a Muhammadan, a Jain, a merchant, a tailor, a 
government officer, a fakir , a Sadhu, or a Sanyasi, we would 
let him pursue his line unmolested as long as he does not molest us. 
We lack the conviction that we alone are in the right and all the 
rest of the world in the wrong. Consequently we are very rarely 
fired with the fury of the fanatic. Being the eloquent embodiment of 
the peace-loving spirit of Maharashtra, the saints of the bhakti school 
have always been eager to reconcile the conflicting systems . . . . 
Their principle was the principle of conciliation.’ ' And again : ‘ The 
bhakti school neither started as a revolt against nor aimed at the 
demolition of any established system. It has been the special 
feature of all Indian movements in the past — and especially of 
Maratha movements — that they assimilated more than discarded. 
They disarmed opposition and contest by assimilation. It may be 
that Jndia and Maharashtra have had to suffer in the struggle for 
existence and for supremacy among the nations of the world, for 
want of that militant spirit and self-assertive energy.’ a 

* F. G. M., February 1919, p. 142. 

*lbid t July 1919, pp. 33-4. 

21 



162 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


CH. 


8. Tukaram and Caste 

We need all the illumination we can derive from Prof. Patwar- 
dhan’s exposition of the Maharashtrian spirit of toleration in order 
to understand Tukaram’s attitude on caste. It is a principle 
fundamental with Tukaram that God does not consider a man’s 
caste, that all worshippers are equally dear to Him, and yet we find 
Tukaram doing practically nothing to enforce this far-reaching 
principle. Some of his predecessors among the bhaktas had uttered 
noble words against caste. This had been the message of Eknath, 
a De^asth Brahman who a generation before Tukaram’s day had 
been out-casted, his poems being thrown into the river Godaverl 
because he would persist in ignoring caste-distinction and in 
recognizing the ‘luxuriant foliage of devotion to the Highest* 
wherever it might be found.’ 1 On this matter we have some of the 
loftiest utterances in Tukaram’s poems : ‘ Our Lord knows nothing 
of high or low birth ; he stops wherever he sees devotion and 
# faith . . . Blessed is his story ’ (20 77 ) — the whole of this remarkable 
abhaiig should be studied. Many other similarly high utterances 
on this subject have we from our poet-saint : ‘ Consider him as a 
Brahman, vile though his birth may be, who utters correctly the 
name of Rama Krisna ’ (266) ; 4 a Vaishnava is one who loves God 
alone, his caste may be anything at all * (942). Abhang 4297 in the 
Indu PrakdsJi edition, too long for quotation, is specially worthy 
of study with its long list of ‘ people of the lowest castes who have 
been saved \ including Mahars like Cokhameja, and ‘of whom even 
the Puranas became the bards \ 

1 His name belongs to no race or creed or caste ; all are free to 
utter it’ (1744); 4 Tuka has nothing to do with a man’s caste; he who 
utters the Name is truly blest * (2395). In this group of sayings we 
have the plain assertion that the worship of Vithoba is open to any- 
one and that devotion is equally welcome to Vithoba from whatever 
human being it proceeds. The question then naturally arises 
whether Tukaram drew the practical inference that the observance 
of caste should be abolished. One or two abhangs $eem to show 
that he was moving in this direction : 4 I find the whole world 

peopled with relatives, I see nothing to cause contamination of man 
by man’ (832) ; 4 is the world divided into parts to hold the various 
castes ? * (945) 4 We think not of times or seasons or of any man’s 
caste’ (2259). 

We must however be cautious how we draw any extended in- 
ference from these sayings, which are few compared with the * mass 
of the poems, and there is nothing in Tukaram’s biography to 
suggest that he appeared as one who took any strong line against 


> See p. 39 for EknSth’s disregard of caste in everyday life. 



VI ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL HINDUISM 163 


caste. In practice most probably he acquiesced in it, relaxing its 
rules only so far as to permit all worshippers of the upper castes to 
mix freely in the gatherings on the shore of the Bhima. He appears 
to have seen without protest the ‘ untouchables’ excluded, as they 
still are, from the temple ; and probably it never entered his head 
that there was anything open to criticism in the ordinary treatment 
of the ‘pariah* classes. 

Sometimes the fact that Tukaram had his daughters married to 
men of their own caste 1 * is adduced as proof that he observed caste 
practices. This incident, however, is probably to be viewed in the 
same light as the custom prevalent among people in the West 
according to which they generally prefer relatives to marry those of 
their own social rank or station. Similarly, the Prarthana Samaj, 
whose aim is to abolish caste and idolatry, though but gradually 
as we have seen above (pp. 153 -4), and one of whose chief tenets 
is that all men and women are children of the one Supreme God, 
yet marry their children within their own caste.” 

There appears, however, no cause to doubt that Tukaram 
accepted caste as an institution of the Hindu world and that he 
looked upon it as an inevitable part of India’s social organization. 
The only way in which it might have troubled him was that it 
prevented humble men from embracing Vithoba’s feet and that some 
of his worshippers were denied the comfort and satisfaction granted 
to others. One feels that Tukaram was called upon to demand the 
right of admission to the temple for all worshippers alike. That he 
did not do so, and that many were denied this common right in a 
temple of religion, seems to be overlooked by Prof. Patwardhan 
when he says : ‘There isno bar herein this land of bhakii . Here 
all are admitted, all have a right to enter. Love of God and service 
of God, hence service of man, are their birthright. Everyone, man, 
woman, child, rich and poor, Brahman and non- Brahman, is a privi- 
leged heir to this sweet legacy. It is the most romantic democracy.’ 3 
Romantic, true, but what of Cokhameki, cast out of the temple at 
Pandharpur when he had crossed its threshold moved as he claimed 
by a divine impulse ? We have already shown how the treatment 
meted out to this Mahar saint and poet bears on the question of 
caste prejudice : see the section entitled ‘ Vithoba and Cafete Distinc- 
tion’, pages 54-5 in chapter 3. In addition to what is stated there, 
reference may, be made to Mahipati’s beautiful poem on Cokha- 
me]a's persecution by the high castes after he had left his native 
place at Anagod near Pandharpur and, grateful for Vithoba’s help 
in his Mahar duty of dragging a dead cow, had taken up his abode 
in the sacred city itself. Refused entrance into the central shrine 


1 See p. 94. 

a Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar, Navayuga , March 1921, p, 152. 

3 F. C. M. vol. ix. No. iv, Feb. 1919, p, 143 ; see also our own sec*. 20. 

Chapter 1. , 



16 « 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 


by the Br&hmans, Cokhame|a retorted in moving words translated 
by Mr. C- A. Kincaid thus : 

Base though I be, no evil have I done 

Him in whose eyes all castes and creeds are one ; 

and he reminded his high caste persecutors of an even deeper 
principle : 


But if He finds no temple in your heart, 

Close to His shrine, you yet are far apart. 

Many years after Cokhamela’s death, from the crashing down of an 
unfinished wall he was building with other Mahars, a divine direction 
came to the tailor-poet Namdev to collect Cokhameja’s bones 
and take them to Pandharpur where opposite Nfimdev’s staircase 
leading up into Vithoba’s temple, on the opposite side of the 
street, Cokhamela’s tomb was erected. Here in Tukaram’s day, 
as in our own, the untouchable Mahars offered their worship to 
.Vishnu, worship which Vithoba 7 is represented as accepting, for 
Tukaram clearly states : ‘God does not feel ashamed to help anyone; 
He seeks to comfort people of all conditions’. Such cosmopolitan 
teaching it was that, despite the glaring contradiction of it presen- 
ted by the persecution of out-castes like Cokhamela, welded the 
Marathas into a nation as is affirmed at the close of chapter l. 1 
Hence it comes about that Tukaram can claim, in an abhatig left 
untranslated by Fraser and Marathe : T have been to Benares, 
Gaya and Dwarka, but they cannot be compared with Pandharl. 
At Pandharl no one is proud and people fall at each other’s feet/ 2 
This last mentioned practice is still in vogue among the Warkaris 
without any distinction of caste; see page 171 below. 

When, however, the fullest possible weight has been given toall 
*the considerations in this and the preceding section, this must 
needs be said concerning the absence of any effective protest by 
Tukaram against caste, that a unique opportunity was surely missed 
when a man of his convictions and influence failed to demand 
for every worshipper the right and privilege of admission to 
Vithoba’s temple, and when he failed to realize the rlational evil of 
caste as a thorough-going reformer would have done. ‘ In personal 
inward religion Tukaram was democratic enough but he was too 
much of the “ mild Hindu ” to fight the battle of religious rights 
and privileges’.” He had practically the same freedom-loving 
instincts as his far-off contemporary the English Milton, but training, 

See Ishtur Phakdc by C. A. Kincaid, especially chaps. V, ‘ An Un- 
touchable Saint : Cokhamela’, and VI, ' The Saints of Pandharpur : The Dawn 
of Maratha Power’. 

2 Abhatig No. 2488, 7.P. edition; 1728 in Joga, where the comment should 
be noted. 

3 This sentence we have taken from our arp. Tukaram , E . R . B. Vol. 12. 



vi ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL HINDUISM 165 


environment, and religious system were all against him. There- 
fore to call Tukaram a ‘revolutionist ’ as does M. M. Kunte 1 is to 
misunderstand him. 

Whether, therefore, Tukaram’s mild teaching against caste 
lapsed through lack of courage or of conviction or of inspiration, we 
see one consequence in the paradox with which the bhakti school 
presents us. While this movement stirred the soul of an emotional 
people, and while its leaders sought to abolish the priestly caste, to 
substitute heart-religion for ceremonial formalism, and to make the 
worship of God open to all irrespective of caste, the historian’s 
verdict is that ‘ the movement had little real effect upon Indian 
life and to this day, Brahmans who recite with admiration the 
verses of Tukaram hold jealously to caste-distinctions ’. 3 

9. Ambiguity and Self-Contradiction 

Impartial study of Tukaram’s poems yields the inevitable con- 
clusion that his spirit of compromise, ambiguity of expression, and 
lack of reforming zeal arise from what must be described as a lack 
of religious certainty, and from what Westerners cannot but regard 
as acquiescence in mutually exclusive principles. Both these points 
are characteristic not only of Tukaram but of most other Indian 
sages. They certainly explain much of the self-contradictoriness 
of Tukaram which meets us on almost every page. 

In one abhang he will address his god in the most endearing 
terms, in another upbraid him with the harshest epithets imagin- 
able ; on one page he will condemn idol-worship unsparingly, on 
another approve it. And so we might go on compiling a list of 
ambiguities, many of them affecting fundamentals. We are com- 
pelled to fall back finally on Sir Alexander Grant’s conclusion* that 
Tukaram 1 is never really philosophical — only always moral and 
devout’. 

Narayan Vaman Tilak, the late Christian poet* wrote eight 
abhahgs 1 in which this feature of Tukaram’s self-contradictoriness 
was well brought out. Seldom has Tukaram been extolled in 
warmer terms than by this Christian bhakta whose ‘ rank as a poet 
is very high * and who has been sometimes called the ‘ Rabindranath 
Tagore of Western India’ 5 as said Mr. N. C. Kelkar, editor of 
the Kesari. But the praise is discriminating. After pointing out 
that anyone who fails to recognise Tukaram as the very home of 
spiritual devotion is void of all sense of appreciation, he says 
Tukaram must be acknowledged as a king among Indian saints, but 


» Vicissitudes of Aryan Civilisation in India , pp. 279, 595. 

2 The Times of India, Oct. 8, 1919. 

3 Fortnightly Review , Jan. 1867, 

4 Dnydnodaya, May 24, 1917. 

5 /. I. April, 1915. 



166 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


also as a seeker often given to self-contradiction. Now he views 
God as tndbap (father and mother) and lord, now as man’s oppo- 
nent ; now God is personal, now impersonal ; now He is the embodi- 
ment of sagacity, now a simpleton. The chief defect of Tukaram, 
says this appreciative critic, is that of moulding God according to 
his own changing ideas, instead of letting God mould the 
ideas. So at one time Tukaram appears as an idolator, while at 
another he is angry with the very notion. Is then Tukaram hypo- 
critical? A thousand times no. He is merely inconsistent and 
self-contradictory. In one mood he says : ‘ Had the good God not 
made me a humble peasant I had been swallowed up of pride’ ; in 
another he declares that ‘ a Brahman is superior in the three worlds 
though he fails in duty’. In his speech there is no consistency — 
the opinion prevailing with him to-day is just as true as will be its 
opposite on the morrow. Despite it all, Tukaram is true-hearted 
and devoted — let none doubt that. One day he may be — indeed he is 
— a dvailist , the next day an advaitist , and then the third day he is 
found halting between the two. Nevertheless, the Christian 
> poet solemnly declares that he will persist in regarding ‘all India’s 
saints as so many Providential boons and divinely ordained paths 
to God/ and to the saint of Dehu he owes a specially sacred 
obligation : see chapter 10, section 3. 


Therefore, though Tukaram far too often speaks with two 
voices regarding the Hirtduism of his day, he has nevertheless come 
to wield among his people an influence of an altogether unique 
kind. This influence, and the position it seems to mark out for 
him in India’s religious history, we are to examine in our next 
chapter. 




BY FAITH ALONE 


In God, in God — forget him not! — 

Do thou thy refuge find. 

Let every other plan or plot 
Go with the wind ! 

Why toil for nought? Wake, wake from sleep 
By learning’s load weighed down, 

Thou in the world’s abysses deep 
Art like to drown. 

O, flee from thence. Only by faith 
Canst thou to God attain. 

And all thy knowledge, Tuka saith, 

Will prove in vain. 


A STEADFAST MIND * 


Honour, dishonour that men may pay. 
Bundle them up and throw them away. 

Where there is ever a steadfast mind, 

There thou the vision of God shalt find. 

Whereso the fountains of peace abide, 
Stayed is the passage of time and tide. 

Calm thou the impulse that stirs thy breast ; 
Surely, says Tuka, a snail request. 


THE DEDICATED LIFE * 


Ah, wherefore fast or wherefore go 
To solitude apart ? 

Whether thou joy or sorrow' know 
Have God within thy heart. 

If in his mother’s arms he be 
The child knows nought amiss. 

Cast out, yea, cast out utterly 
All other thought than this. 

Love not the world nor yet forsake 
Its gifts in fear and hate. 

Thy life to God an offering make 
And to him dedicate. 

Nay, Tuka says, ask not again. 

Waking old doubts anew. 

Whatever else is taught by men, 

None other word is true. 

* Translated from Tukaram, P. M. S„ pp. 33-4. 



Chapter VII 

Tukaram’s Permanent Place and Influence 
I. His Influence Among his Countrymen 

This obviously is a subject on which foreigners must express 
themselves with caution and what we offer here are personal 
impressions based on reading and observation. 

i. His Popularity with Peasants 

Tukaram is best known among the twenty million peasant 
people of Western India. His language, difficult even to a 
Deccan Hindu, would seldom be intelligible to readers from other 
parts of India. In the Deccan he is exceedingly well known to 
the peasantry. Almost all of them know a few sayings or lines 
from his abhangs and many know much more. There are some 
who commit many of them to memory. Amongst these classes 
the pilgrimage to Pandharpur is often undertaken, some devotees 
being such as retire from worldly life and spend a great part of 
their time in pilgrimage between the holy places associated with 
Tukaram and Vifhoba — Dehu, Aland! and Pandharpur. The 
influence of these devotees of Tukaram, who bear the name of 
Wclrkari, and who include both men and women, has probably 
been the chief factor in the popularizing of the Dehu hhakti poet. 
That a grocer, one of the despised Sudra caste, should have been 
accepted as a religious guide in the face of Brahman pretensions, 
helps to explain his becoming literally the idol of the people’s 
devotion and his being worshipped to-day all over the Deccan as 
an 4 incarnation ’ of the divine. When we remember, too, that the 
cosmopolitanism of Vithoba’s worship referred to in chapter 3, 
section 9, 1 which makes it so acceptable to the masses, finds remark- 
able expression in 4 the Wclrkari preachings of equality’, we have 
sufficient explanation of Tukaram’s unique position in the religious 
life of Western India. That these Wclrkari teachings find willing 
hearers everywhere is in no way surprising, in view on the one 
hand of the history of Brahmanism, and on the other of the fact 
that the Marathas of the Deccan, ever since the golden age of 
§ivaji, have always manifested a hankering after equality with 
the highest of their countrymen. This democratizing enthusiasm 

1 See pp. 54-55 and chap. 6, sect, 8, pp. 163-5 for the sad exception of the 
4 untouchables ’. , 

22 



170 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

and disregard of caste, 1 * * partial and defective though it was, provided 
‘a valuable counterpoise to Brahman domineering * after $ivaji's 
death, in the century of Brahman rule (1714-1813) which was 
probably ‘ the only time during the last two thousand years when 
Brahmans united political and religious power in the Deccan.' 1 
N <p wonder then that th ebhakti poets enjoy such popularity among 
the Deccan peasantry, especially Tukaram the greatest of them, 
who has been so devotedly preached by the sect ^of the 
WUrkctrls. - 


2 . 4 Warkaris ' and the Religion of Maharashtra 

Who are these WdrkarTs , the most devoted of Tukaram's 
followers ? And what are the principles which have enabled them 
up to the present hour to provide Maharashtra with an effective 
offset to Brahman exclusiveness ? Their name Wtfrkarl means 
literally 4 time-keepers ' and indicates simply their habit of 
travelling regularly on pilgrimage between the places named in 
the preceding paragraph. A few of them know no less than four 
thousand of Tukaram’s abhangs by heart, a statement which 
may stagger Western readers but which can be substantiated. 
The sect is said to have been founded by Dnyaneshwar in the 
13th century and consolidated, either by Tukaram himself or 
by his immediate followers in the 17tb/ but the whole subject 
calls for careful investigation. They are divided into several 
groups or schools, each of which has its acknowledged head. 
For an account of them in English which is reliable as far as 
it goes, though it needs supplementing in important particulars, 
The Bombay Gazetteer (vol. xx. pp. 471-3) should be read, 
while those able to read Marathi should not fp.il to master 
chapter 5 given up to this sect in the Marathi Life of Tuka- 
ram by Mr. L. R. Pangarkar, himself a present-day Brahman and 
a respected leader of the Wdrkarl sect, a chapter let us add whose 
information needs confirming in some particulars by other authorities. 4 

So simple and catholic are the beliefs of the Wdrkarts or 1 time- 
keeping pilgrims’ that most of their number are (brawn from the 
lower classes of the people, while some members are. even Moham- 
medans. Each WdrkarJ must travel to Pan<Jharpur so as to be 
present on the great ektfdasJri 5 days, which are the 4 elevenths* of 
A shadh (June or July) 0 and Kclriik (October or November), and for 
such other ekcldasht days or 4 monthly elevenths * as are technically 

i See last three sections of chap, 1. 

54 B. G vol. xx, p. 473. 

f B. C. vol. xx p. 471. 

4 See Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar, Navayuga , March 1921, pp. 149, 168. 

6 For definition of ekddashl see p. 56, sect. 10, last two lines. 

0 See pp. 48-9, 62-3. 



BABUKAO H AH I DK VADIK AH OF PANDHAKPL'R A BLIND 

‘haridas’ (preacher) AND ‘warkarI’ WHO KNOWS 
TUKARAM's THOUSANDS OF c ibhaugs BY HEART 




Vix HIS INFLUENCE AMONG HIS COUNTRVMEN 171 

called Vans (periodical pilgrimages). From the known attendance 
of pilgrims at theiannual festivals (see page 48), and from the fact 
that other followers of Tukaram go up to Pandharpur for this pur- 
pose, it may be inferred that the Warkdris cannot exceed 100,000 
^even if they reach that number, but certainty is impossible. All the 
taembers are on an unusually equal footing and anyone, man or 
woman, anxious to become a WcJrkati may do so by merely indicating 
his or her wish to the head of the sect he or she desires to join. 
While ekcldashi days are regarded as the luckiest, a person may 
join at any time by bringing a rosary or necklace of basil or ttdsl 
beads and an ochre-coloured swallow-taiied banner. The leader 
then bids the candidate lay the rosary upon Dnyanesh war’s com- 
mentary on the Bhagvadgita named the Dnydneshwari kept in a 
niche of every Wdrkarl monastery. Taking back the rosary the 
candidate then puts it round his or her own neck and falls at the 
feet of the leader by way of salutation who returns the salutation 
in the same way whatever be the caste of either party — an unusual 
feature in Hinduism. The candidate is told regularly to visit 
Pandharpur on the ekcldashi days, the rule is urged that no Weir - 
karl can serve two* masters, since Vithoba cannot tolerate worldly 
rivalries, and the principle is enunciated that to serve Vithoba 
well a Wdrkarl should remain poor, seeing Vithoba dwells 
chiefly with the poor and lowly. The only books a Wdrkarl is 
expected to read besides the Gita and BJidgawat are the follow- 
ing ten, all being works of the four great Marfitha bhaktus : Dnya- 
neshwar’s Dnydnoshxvari, his Abhahgs and Atnrifdtmbhav ; Ek- 
nath’s Bhdgwat , Abhahgs , Bhdvdrth Rdmdyan , Rukminl Svdy - 
anivar , and Hastdmalak ; Namdev’s Abhaugs ; and Tukaram’ s 
Abhahgs. Other * saints * are regarded as less important and their 
writings are not quoted. Of the four great bhahtas a traditional 
.interpretation is preserved among the Wdrkarls who will produce 
it if requested, but it is often uncritical and unsatisfactory in 
obscure passages. A step in advance was taken by the late 
Mr/Joga, head of one of the Wdrkarl schools, when he produced a 
large commentary on Tukaram’s Gdthd, and it was highly fitting 
that his remains were buried at Ajandi near the samddhi of 
Dnyanesh war. 

If the chapter on the Wdrkarls by Mr. L. R. Pangarkar may 
be trusted as free from the over-statement due to the special 
pleading of a case, then they are to be considered the chief 
repositaries of the Bhagavata Religion of Maharashtra (on which 
see page 27). He sets forth their tenets under 15 separate heads i 1 
(l) Their chief object of worship is Vithoba, though the formless 
Brahma and his manifestations under various forms are regarded as 
one and indivisible, all the avatdras of Vishpu being accepted (see 
chap. 2, sects. 3-4), especially Rama and Krisna. (2) Their 


i See S. T. C., pp. 113-5. 



\iz Life and teaching of tukaEam 


Ctt. 

authoritative Sacred Books are the Bhagavadgltd and the Bhdgwat % 
the two chief scriptures of the Bhagavata Religion, along with the 
others already indicated. (3) Their Ideal or Goal is that of 
becoming one with God, by deep devotion to a God regarded as 
Personal, thus ultimately realizing unity in diversity. (4) Their 
chief Methods for attaining the Goal are the nine forms of devotion— 
sravana (hearing), kirtans (praise), smarana (meditation), p&dasc- 
vana (worshipping the feet), arcana (worshipping an image), 
wandana (salutation), dclsya (attendance), sakhya (friendship), and 
iltmanivedana (communion), with special emphasis on smarana % 
rememberingor repeating the name of God, and on fortafis performed 
disinterestedly. (5) Their chief Mantra being Rdma-Krisita-Harii 
all the thousand names of Vishnu are worthy of remembrance. 
(6) Their Bhakta-Raj (exemplars for all devotees) are Pundallka, 
Garud and Hanumant. (7) Their great Pioneer is Shankar, there 
being no distinction between Hari and Hara, i,e., Vishnu and Siva, 
a characteristic Doctrine of the Bhagavata Religion (see pp. 27, 
•156-8). (8) Their chief 1 * * 4 Saints’ are ancient ones like Narad and 

Pralhad, 1 and modern ones like Dnyaneshwar, Sopan, 3 Muktabai, 8 
Eknath, Namdev and Tukaram. (9) Their Doctrine is that by 
remembrance of the 4 Saints ’ comes salvation just as it comes by 
remembering the names of gods, in line with the principle that ‘the 
gods are saints and the saints are gods’. (10) Their objects of 
Veneration are ‘Saints’, Cows, Brahmans, Guests and the TuliX 
plant (11) Their chief Observances are — ekcldashi for Vishnu 
and each Monday for Siva; pilgrimage to Pandharpur during 
Ashadh and Kdrtlk being essential save under exceptional circum- 
stances, and even then ^t least one visit must be paid ; the Mahd - 
Sivrdtra (the great night in the Hindu year devoted to worship of 
Siva) also being essential. (12) Their chief Holy Places are the 
river Chandrabhaga and the town of Pandharpur, Trimbakeshwar 
near Nasik, Aland!, Paithan, Saswad, Dehu, these being viewed as 
sacred because of ‘ Saints 1 who lived there ; the Ganges, Jumna 
and Godaveri as sacred rivers; and Benares, Dwarka and Jagannath 
as pilgrim centres. (13) Their Prohibitions are — another’s wife, an- 
other's wealth, speaking ill of others, also the use of flesh and wine; 
ahimsit is obligatory under all circumstances, the taking of any life 
being utterly forbidden at all times and in all places. (14) Their 
Rules of Conduct are all caste, sub-caste and family observances, 
with performance of duty according to life’s four stages, 4 all rites 
and duties to be performed with a view to pleasing the Unseen. 
(15) Their Vow is that of Benevolence, based on the principle that 

1 0n these two see F. and Af,, vol. I. p. 408. 

8 Brother of Dnyaneshwar. 

* Sister of Dnyaneshwar. 

4 Bramhacarya (unmarried life of a student), griha&thasrama (life of a 

householder), vanaprastha (the life of meditation or of preparation for the 

ascetic stage), sanyasa (abandonment of the world)* 



vii Mis influence among his countrymen 173 

the Divine is present in all beings, that every man we meet is God 
Himself ; therefore to help every man is to do the service of 
God. 1 


3. Popular Kirtans and Kathas 

Acknowledged authorities on Tukaiam and his views serve the 
cause by holding kirtans at Tandharpur and other places for the 
exposition of his principles, both to praise the god and to explain 
the poet’s lines. Special kirtans or kathas 3 are held on the famous 
shore of the Bhima and they may best be seen and their effect 
appreciated at this spot. The arrangements are simple. An 
awning is spread on bamboo poles sufficiently large to shelter 
perhaps a thousand people sitting closely together on the ground. 
A narrow circle is left empty for the ktrtankdr or leader of the 
service who stands there waiting for the gathering to compose 
itself into a reverent attitude before he begins. As they enter, the 
more devout of the visitors make their way into his presence and 
fall down and embrace his feet — whatever be his caste, whatever be 
theirs — setting apart the recognized ‘ untouchables * : this is per- 
mitted or even enjoined. 

Round the klrtankar stand a small group with little cymbals in 
their hands who are ready to support him by taking up the refrain 
when he quotes any well-known poem. Anyone who feels inclined 
may join their number. The performance may begin at any hour 
but as a rule it occupies the night, starting say about eight and going 
on sometimes till dawn. It begins with a few well known lines of 
invocation and then proceeds with exhortation to a devout life, 
interrupted by illustrations of God’s dealing with men drawn from 
the well-known purclnic stories which Tukaram sometimes introdu- 
ces. As far as a foreigner can judge or conjecture these addresses 
appear to be always on well known lines. They contain no study 
of Tukaram’s character, no discussion of doubtful points and no 
interpretation of obscurities. They are straightforward exhorta- 
tions to praise and trust Vithoba whose incarnation on the brick 
stands before them as a proof of his unwavering goodwill to 
men. 

Marathi-knowing readers will do well to supplement this section 
and section 9 in chapter 1 (page 10) by reading Mr. L. R. Pangar- 
Icar’s pages (123-8) on the subject. 

1 In view of the above tenets it is perhaps not surprising that the Warkarls 
are sometimes criticized for not helping on the nationalistic spirit of Maha- 
rashtra as the somewhat similar sect of the Ramadasls— devotees of Ramdasr- 
are supposed to have done. The Warkarls , nevertheless, are not without 
«their modern defenders (ste Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar, Navayuga , March 1921, 

vp. 168k 1. 

a See sect. 9, chap. 1. # 



174 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 
4 . Tukaram and Indian Pessimism 

It is not unlikely that much stress is laid by klrtankdrs on those 
poems in which Tukaram speaks of the unreality of the world and 
the path of escape from it. Hindu sentiment always moves in this 
direction, just as clouds which appear stationary in the sky are 
nevertheless always falling. It by no means follows that Tukaram 
succumbed to this impulse himself but his followers seem to prefer 
the lines written under its influence. And some of his admirers are 
ready to place him among the thorough-going advaita philosophers, 
to whom the deep-seated unreality of the world is the most profound 
of spiritual truths. Enough is said elsewhere in this book — see 
chapter 8, Part II — to show that this may be an imperfect view of 
Tukaram’s teaching, but it certainly is one which some of his 
admirers support. 

These admirers are to be found among Brahman pundits. It is 
somewhat of a mystery why men of this class are always such 
•ardent friends of the pessimist view. Perhaps it is the view which 
comes nearest to suiting the requirements of the systematizing 
temper which seems to be the Hindu temper in things intellectual. 
Certainly many obscure questions of human nature and of Hindu 
psychology are involved. It is easy to understand why the country 
people of the Deccan like to listen to those poems of Tukaram that 
deal with the darker side of things. The Deccan as elsewhere 
stated has its pleasant aspects but as one goes into the interior it 
grows very dry, very stony and very unpropitious to the agricultura- 
list (see pages 1, 9). When bad seasons predominate as they hare 
done sometimes for years together, though much less now than 
formerly owing to British irrigation, life is one long dreary struggle. 
Crops are sown that never yield return. Harvests are gathered 
that permit the maintenance of life to the next scanty harvest only 
with the most penurious management. 1 The water is scanty and 
bad, overhead there is always the scorching unpitying sun and on 
earth nothing to relieve the weary eye or take the thoughts 
pleasantly away from the struggle for existence. And it is easy to 
see that times of this kind are not good for human relations. They 
encourage parsimony, even dishonesty, in the bazar and check 
generous impulses. The whole round of life becomes in every way 
a trial to be borne and the pleasantest thing you can hear about it 
is that it will some day pass out of existence. 

Such reflections will certainly rise on the mind at the sight of 
the crowds that assemble on the pebbly bank at Papdbarpur, 
especially if they are seen at the close of a long period of hard 
years. The battered features of the people tell unmistakably of 

1 4 In the terrible fiurga Dcvd famine of 1396-1408, no rain at all fell for 
twelve whole years, and for two decades the land was a desert,’ H. G. Rawlin- 
son, Shiva jl the ASaratlul , p. 14. 



VII HIS INFLUENCE AMONG HIS COUNTRYMEN 175 


want and toil. Clearly what they come to Pandharl to enjoy — if 
you were to ask them-— is the thought of a gracious Being whose 
love is not like the seasons, capricious and unaccountable, but 
eternal and inexhaustible, nor like the small measure of grain 
bought after long haggling in the bazar, scanty and grudgingly 
doled out, but free and abundant. As this assurance steals on their 
minds they pass into ecstasy, and the outpouring of song and joy 
that fills the night at a Hari-kirfat: provides a demonstration that 
only deep religious passion can evoke. Whether this is rightly or 
wrongly based is not just now before us. That the ecstasy is there 
is unquestionable, and the worshipper puts away from him, at least 
for the time, the throng of cares and duties, and the world recedes 
into the far distance. It is most likely, however, if only we could 
find out, that life as a whole for the Deccan millions is one of blank 
pessimism and that the incessant struggle with poverty and with 
other ills compels the vast majority to take the dark view of life 
just as some interpreters of Tukaram do. We cannot say how far 
this pessimistic impulse is influenced in saner, quieter hours by a 
truer estimate of Tukaram ’s teaching. That would require a 
knowledge of the Hindu people which foreigners do not possess. 
But we may surmise that Indian pessimism in Maharashtra as 
elsewhere is ‘ environmental, temperamental and speculative * and 
has become quite stereotyped and conventional . 1 It would be a 
service to the present generation to induce the Marathu people to 
see that in this aspect their favourite is not seen at his truest and 
his best . 2 


5 . Tukaram and the Prarthana Saniaj 

The poems of Tukaram have been largely used by the Prarthana 
Samaj of Western India both for private reading and for public 
worship. The Samaj js a body whose views with certain essential 
differences resemble those of the Brahmo Samaj in Bengal. Its 
members’ list, however, is much smaller in number, though includ- 
ing a few distinguished men who may be said to possess wide 
influence on the political and religious life of India. The student 
of developments finds it interesting therefore to note that such a 
body has given prominent place to Tukaram in its religious litera- 
ture. They hold that Tukaram’s spiritual experience is genuine 
and that the same experience is accessible to each devout wor- 
shipper of God. a An informing lecture on the relation between 
Tukaram and the Prarthana Samaj may be found in that * unique 
Marathi book,’ Religious Writings and Sermons , (the latest edition 
# 

1 H. D. Griswold, E. R.E., Art, ‘ Pessimism (Indian)’. Vol. 9, p. 813. 

2 For another ‘antidote to Indian Pessimism ' see The Holy Spirit the 
Christian Dynamic , p. 293. 

3 p. E. E. Art, Prarthana Samaj , Vol. 9, pp. 151-2, 



176 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch< 

of which was published in 1919) by Dr. Sir R. G. Bbandarkar, *aa 
attempt to purge the existing Hindu religion of its accumulated 
dross of superstitions and to impart to it its pristine purity’. 1 2 3 The 
following paragraph summarizes Sir Ramkrishna’s Marathi narra- 
tive of facts on pages 506-513 of his book. 

Founded in 1867, it was not until more than two years later that 
the Prarthana Samaj began the devotional use of Tukar&m, the 
first occasion being some annual festival when four or fiveofliis 
abhangs were printed on a hymn-sheet to the great delight of those 
present. Thus far religion had been viewed by the Prarthana 
Samajist as an intellectual and philosophical matter, but the 
influence of Tukaram meant the spiritualizing and individualizing 
of religion. The Samaj had had no hymn-book worthy of the 
name but now a hymn-book was produced largely of Tukaram’s 
verse. In each succeeding edition more and more of Tukaram’s 
aspirations have been embodied, until in the present edition, the 
ninth, there are no less than 550 of his abhangs. The monotheism 
pf the Samaj a had strictly limited the number of Tukaram’s 
abhangs in the first three or four editions, his usual terms of 
Vithoba, Panduraiig, Keshav, etc., being inadmissible to ekeswarls 
(worshippers of one God). The difficulty has, however, been over- 
come by these names being changed to * God 4 Hari 4 Narayana,' 
etc. Besides providing assemblies of the Samaj with material for 
their songs, Tukaram began to supply their preachers with themes 
for their sermons and a verse of his, as often as not, is given out 
as the text in much the same way as Christian preachers take a text 
out of the Bible. It has been Tukaram’s insistence on faith in God, 
on heart-devotion, on the % necessity of minute self-examination, and 
on prayer, that has won for him this exalted place, despite changing 
times and customs. That Tukaram has become so great a factor 
in the life of the Prarthana Samaj, some of whose members are 
among the leading social reformers in India, illustrates the extent 
of Tukaram’s influence in the India of the twentieth century. 

If we remember, too, that many of his verses are household 
words among the twenty millions of the Marathi-speaking popula- 
tion, the grocer who failed in business at Dehu may be said to 
occupy a unique position among his countrymen. Probably there 
is an element of truth in such criticisms as Father Nehemiah Goreh 9 
a generation ago, and the Rev. G. R. Navalkar in more recent years 
(see page 179 below) expressed, that the Prarthana Samaj hgs 
sometimes put Tukaram in too exalted a place, reading a lofty theism 
into abhangs which have either been interpolated or have been 
interpreted in light of later Christian knowledge. Against all such 
c false scents * the honest expositor must ever be on his guard. 

1 Prof. G. E. Bhate, Indian Social Reformer , Sept. 14, 1919. 

2 On the attitude of the Prarthana Samiij to idols, see pp. 150, 153-4. 

3 The Tenets of Tukardniy pp. 1-4. 



I! HIS INFLUENCE AMONG HIS COUNTRYMEN 177 


6. Tukaram’s Usefulness for Religious Exercises 

It is of more than passing interest to note to what elements in 
Tukaram’s poems his present-day followers attach most importance. 
We are enabled to do this by the seventy-six abhangs translated 
by Dr. Macnicol in his Psalms of Marcfthfi Saints , for most of these 
were supplied by Dr. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar, as a list of those 
which he himself uses daily in his own personal religious exercises. 
‘To anyone who knows Sir Ramkrishna Bhandarkar as not only a 
great oriental scholar, but the outstanding representative in India 
to-day of the ancient school of bhakti, the fact that these psalms 
minister nourishment to a spiritual life so beautiful and so sincere 
is in itself sufficient testimony to their religious value.' 1 A similar 
list of about forty abhangs * which the ideas of the Prarthana 
Samaj would select as most valuable from a devotional point of 
view* was kindly supplied for the purposes of this present work by 
Sir Narayan Chandavarkar whose letter 2 stated : ‘ I have selected 
these because ever since I joined the Samaj in 1882 I have heard 
them more often than any other abliahgs chosen for prayer and 
sermon.’ 

One of the most interesting features in recent years of the 
Marathi portion of the weekly Subodh Patrika , organ of the 
Bombay Prarthana Samaj, has been a series of articlesexpounding 
the more devotional abhangs appearing in the Prarthana Samaj 
hymn-book referred to above. Some of these Marathi expositions 
of Tukaram, as also a few by Sir Narayan Chandavarkar in his 
published (English) Speeches and Writings , and particularly the 
Marathi work containing Dr. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar's Religious 
Writings and Sermons , provide the student with some of the 
richest devotional reading we know. Doubtless a deeper meaning is 
imported into some of Tukaram’s seventeenth century terms than 
they would then have yielded, possibly even theistic interpretations 
may be foisted on to language originally idolatrous. Nevertheless, 
though these expositions may occasionally reveal historical 
anachronisms, their value in purging the Hinduism of Maharashtra 
from its grosser and more debasing elements cannot be estimated, 
and it is such work as reformers of every religious creed should 
heartily encourage. 

7 * Tukaram’s Claim on Christian Missions 

Tukaram makes a special claim on the Christian missionary 
who is working among Tukaram’s own people. The claim is that 
TukarSm’s verse shall be carefully studied. Some careful students 

* P.M.S., Preface, p, 5, 

9 Pound by me among the late J. Nelson Fraser's papers in March, 1918, 
Sir Narayan ’s letter being dated Jan. 21, 1916— J.F.Js. # 

23 



178 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH 

of India’s religious literature hold that, along with Tulsidas, the 
saint of Dehu represents India’s closest approximation to Christian 
truth and that a study of his poetry is the best possible introduction 
to the treasury of Indian religious devotion. Tukaram may therefore 
be regarded as a true index to the depth and nobility of those 
religious aspirations the satisfying of which is the acknowledged 
aim of Indian Christian missions. There are two reasons why the 
foreigner should utilize all the available treasures of Indian religious 
literature; first, as supplying a most excellent means of bringing 
about that union of the various races in India without which 
British rule cannot achieve its ideals; and second, because it is 
through the avenues of a people’s own literature and through sym- 
pathetic study of its inner life that any people can best be 
understood. Happily this duty is recognised to-day in Indian 
missions more fully than ever. This was amply demonstrated by 
a questionnaire sent out in preparation for the World Missionary 
Conference of 1910. ‘The replies, one and all, lay emphasis upon 
the necessity that the missionary to Hindus should possess and not 
merely assume, a sympathetic attitude towards India’s most ancient 
religion. They emphasize, too, the need of prolonged and patient 
study, in order that sympathy may be based upon knowledge and 
may not be the child of emotion or imagination. . . . Even 

when a missionary has got some hold on the intricacies of practical 
Hinduism, in its mixture of philosophy and ceremonialism, in its 
innumerable connections with almost every detail of human life, he 
may still be an outsider if he has not mastered the third and most 
essential part of his study, the religious life of the individual. 
Below the strange forms and hardly intelligible language, lies life, 
the spiritual life of human souls, needing God, seeking God, laying 
hold of God, so far as they have found Him. Until we have at 
least reached so far that under the ceremonies and doctrines we 
have found the religious life of the people, and at least to some 
extent have begun to understand this life, we do not know what 
Hinduism really is, and we are missing the essential connection 
with the people’s religious life. . . . Nothing is more re- 

markable than the agreement that the true method is that of 
knowledge and charity, that the missionary should seek for the 
nobler elements in the non-Christian religions and use them as 
steps to higher things, that in fact all these religions without 
exception disclose elemental needs of the human soul which 
Christianity alone can satisfy, and that in their higher forms they 
plainly manifest the working of the Spirit of God’. 1 For mission- 
aries and Indian Christian leaders there could be no better 
example of the ‘religious life of the individual’ within the pale of 
Hinduism than Tukaram affords. That his is also the religious 
life of one enshrined in 'the hearts of the people of Maharashtra 

* The Missionary Message , (1910), Vol, iv, pp. 171-2, 2C7, 



Vlt HIS PERMANENT PLACE IN RELIGION 179 

further enhances his claim to be carefully studied by missionaries 
and the Indian Church. On this subject Miss M. M. Underhill 
(Oxford), a missionary in Western India since 1904, 

reviewing the Psalms of the Marctthd Saints said : ‘ There is a 
wealth of love and faith and devotion in these poems which ought 
not to go unknown or disregarded by either the Indian Christian or 
the European missionary. ... As a missionary from Western 
India the reviewer would like to see some of these hymns used in 
the worship of the Christian Church in India.” Not all would 
approve of this last suggestion as readily as they would to the 
further observation that the following verse by Tukaram better 
expresses the feeling of an Indian Christian congregation than do 
some of the English and American hymns in use at present. 

The duty of the man of faith 
Is trust and loyalty, 

A purpose hid within his heart 
That cannot moved be. 2 


II. Tukaram’s Permanent Place In Religion 

We shall attempt to indicate very briefly in this Part the 
type of student who may expect to learn from Tukaram or obtain 
through him religious edification. We do not here seek to evaluate 
his religion : that will be done in the last chapter. 

1. Erroneous Attempts to Classify Tukaram 

Sufficient has been said to demonstrate the erroneous character 
of most modern attempts to classify Tukaram. The commonly 
accepted biographical facts and the trend of his writings alike show 
that none of the resemblances fit his case. ‘ While the Prarthana 
Samajists have transformed Tukaram into a deist, believing in 
nothing but in the unity and supremacy of a personal God that has 
not revealed Himself in human form or in a book-revelation ; and 
the Vedantists represent him as a transcendentalism to whom the 
deity was a vast abstraction, the Universe a dream, and moral duty 
the creation of a morbid imagination ; some Christians would regard 
him as almost a Christian believer’/ We believe all three are 
in error, the two former for reasons which this book should already 
have made clear, the last for reasons which will appear. 

Let us state at once that there are whole classes who from the 
personal religious standpoint have but little to gain by reading 

1 I.R.M. , April 1920, pp. 299-300. 

2 P.M. S.. p. 72. 

3 Rev. G. R. Navalkar, Tukaram the Maharashtrian Poet and Saint f 

Introduction. « 



180 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

Tukaram, though they may learn something of value as to how 
best they may approach his type of religious experience. Such are 
all those who have attained a matured faith according to any systema- 
tic or widely-accepted form of religious belief. To all those living 
under the protection of any organized religious system no spiritual aid 
from an ‘ outsider * like the bhakta and poet of Dehu is necessary. 
What is needful on their part, if they are at all to understand and 
appreciate this * gentile * of the seventeenth century who lighted 
on many aspects of truth, is to approach him with sympathy. In 
short, they must approach Tukaram with a mind freed from all 
dogmatic prepossessions. They must be willing to accept that 
striking principle laid down by the greatest Teacher of all, that 
He ‘ has other sheep which do not belong to this fold .’ 1 

a. Tukaram and the Religious ‘Outsider’ 

Tukaram is of most value as a religious teacher to that large 
number of human beings who follow no definitely organized 
religious system. A great English thinker once said he would give 
his right hand to be able to believe some things, and it may be that 
there is a type of temperament unable to accept systems. They 
see the blanks in all the systems, their assumptions, their fallacies. 
They realize the danger of accepting as solutions of problems what 
are really restatements of them, the possibility of the covert 
reintroduction of principles professedly rejected, in short the laxity 
which often lurks under the guise of theological definition. 

It is a matter of regret that such men who revolt against 
organized system cannot all be brought into general accord under 
the guidance of some Simple interpretation of the world. Often 
they drift through life undecided, wanting in impulse, neglectful of 
opportunities, sometimes melancholy at heart and mostly ineffective. 
Any definite appeal to men of this type is hardly likely to create a 
‘ mass movement’ among them. But more religious writing might 
with good results be directed to their case, and the testimony of 
religious experience outside stereotyped forms might be presented 
to them. Tukaram’s writings may be regarded as ft testimony of 
this kind, living as he did in contact with a gigantic religio- 
philosophical system but standing somewhat outside it, and attain- 
ing a religious experience far above its level. 

3. Essential and Non-essentials In His Message 

As we read Tukaram’s poems we find that spiritual contact with 
God is almost the whole of what he means by religion. In a 

1 Moffett's rendering of St. John x. 16, on which verse Dp. Westcott has 
the significant comment: * He (Christ) “knows” others as His whom we 
cannot recognize. . . He “has” other sheep, who even if they know Him not 
are truly His/ 



VII HIS PERMANENT PLACE IN RELIGION 181 

casual way he holds certain traditional tenets of India. He does 
not reject the dogma of reincarnation. But with him it is so small 
an affair that you may reject it without altering the centre of gravity 
in his world of thought, while under the management of a skilled 
theosophist it becomes a 'monster of such prodigious dimensions 
that almost all one’s energy is needed to comprehend, accept and 
live up to it. The embodiment of God in the stone image of 
Vithoba occupies a very different position, for he is very serious about 
that. If you take this away you do certainly dislocate his position, 
for the fact of the image standing there is what proves to Tukaram 
that God sympathises with man’s needs. An atheistical reader may 
very well say: ‘If you take away this proof what is there in 
Tukaram to turn anyone to religious faith ? ’ But Tukaram has no 
message at all for such a reader. It is for those whose impulses 
bring them on the side of religion but find a difficulty in taking the 
definite step of faith. To these it may be pointed out that though 
Tukaram thought his faith was established by the fact of God 
standing there on the brick, sober psychology, not to mention any 
other factor, forbids us to suppose the contemplation of a stone 
image was the whole cause and explanation of his spiritual 
experiences. The truth is that he had these experiences because, 
though in his thought he apprehended Vithoba, in the real longing 
of his spirit he approached the living God. And what is reassuring 
to us is that even he could make this approach. He had 
his ‘treasure in an earthen vessel’ but it sufficed for him 
to carry it. Tukaram’s example shows clearly how little 
the ‘vessel’ really matters, and we can see this the more easily 
because it is only Vithoba, a stone idol, dumb, lifeless and unattrac- 
tive. And among his abhahgs there are some which show that 
Tukaram could and did often take the view that the stone idol was 
a mere stone, neither embodying nor even symbolizing the divine 
presence, as we have seen in the section on ‘ idolatry 1 in chapter vi. 

4, His Influence often Christian in Type 

Even to sketch a view of Christian belief would be quite beyond 
the province of this book : we are only concerned to show what help 
a writer like-Tukaram can give to the religious enquirer who is not 
built on organized lines. And so we place first his daily testimony 
to the fact of spiritual experience, to the fact of God’s personality, 
and to the condescension of the divine nature to the needs of man, 
in whatever way these be manifested. Let us add that Tukaram’s 
morality is often of a Christian type and those who accept this type 
will surely accept the aid of a writer who puts the call of morality 
into such emphatic and moving words- From him we learn the 
need of constant watchfulness and of resistance to temptation. We 
hear nothing of ingenious arguments of self-indulgence* of pleas for 



182 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKAEAM crt. 

more enjoyment, though we may suppose sophistries of the kind 
were not unknown in his day. Tukaram stands as a great example 
of the austere type of moralist. 

It is from this point of view that we may observe him with great 
admiration and pleasure. There is nothing much in his surround- 
ings to produce him. Whatever the ‘ saints * may have taught him, 
the ordinary village life in the Deccan of his day assuredly did not 
contain much to encourage the life of a self-denying saint. It is not 
easy to say what does do so and perhaps we shall never get further 
than to remember that* the wind blows where it lists', that ‘ there is 
a light that ligliteth every man \ We may say, however, in a 
narrower sense that the encouragement of help and approbation was 
not specially bestowed on Tukaram and that what he accomplished 
was accomplished only by exertion. Perhaps it was his view 
of God as Mother which gave him most practical encourage- 
ment, a view which brings his religious thinking nearer to the 
Christian plane than does any other factor in his whole system. 
See chapter 8. II. 3, and Prof. Patwardhan on this idea in chapter 
6, pp. 153-3. 


5. Tukaram’s Mystical Conflict 

His spiritual struggles we may view variously. We should 
know better what to make of them if we knew something of the 
chronology of his writings. It is possible that they belong chiefly 
to his early years, but it is just as probable that his inward conflict was 
lifelong. There are so many abhahgs speaking of spiritual desola- 
tion and they are so scattered throughout his other poems and so 
interwoven with them that it seems unlikely they were all produced 
at one epoch. We must suppose Tukaram had many oppressive 
hours even after he had seen all the final truths he ever saw. This 
is a saddening conclusion whichever way we look at it, though our 
chapter 9 will confirm our previous conclusion that he had glimpses, 
and let us hope more than glimpses, of something brighter. And in 
any case his inward conflict, so intensely personal apd mystical in 
character, has stamped upon it throughout something of the true 
nobility of all spiritual struggle. To the very end, however, he 
appears to have been deeply sensible of the mysteries of the world, 
feeling acutely all the perplexities of the universe, the inscrutable 
ways of God, the unsounded depths of human nature. What 
sustained his soul, probably, was his favourite doctrine that man 
must somehow live in companionship with God, whatever the form 
of His manifestation. This is a deep mystical truth which knows 
no East nor West, for it is applicable to all people in all 
climes. 

It is therefore by his mystical vein, found in so many of his 
poems, that Tukaram makes a religious contribution of enduring 



Vif HIS PERMANENT PLACE IN RELIGION 183 


value, expressed though his mysticism was often in rough and 
uncouth phrasest and often again in terminology tinged with 
idolatry ; but it was always religious passion none the less, and very 
often religious passion of the noblest kind. The mystical aspect of 
religion, being timeless in character, is independent of either time 
or place, and it is from this timeless element, which breathes in all 
his poems, that the saint of Dehu must be given a place in the rank 
of the world’s teachers. T ukaram teaches his fellow-men not chiefly 
by what he says, though that is worthy of attention, but by what 
we realize him to have felt and experienced of aspiration, conflict 
and communion. As a poet he belongs to India ; as a true 
mystic he belongs to humanity. Being a mystic, his worth 
is further enhanced when we remember that compet- 
ent observers consider the mystical aspect of religion to have 
been invested with richer significance by the world-war and its 
aftermath. One scholar of world-repute, 1 2 speaking of * the 
increasing sympathy with mystical types of religion’, affirms that 
‘ far more people than we should ever suspect, not recluses but 
ordinary citizens, have been drawn to the mystical view of life ’ and 
that many of the religious developments of our time are ‘due to 
the interest we now take in religious experience, as distinguished 
from abstract doctrine By his repeated emphasis therefore on 
experimental religion as distinct from doctrine and dogma Tukaram 
may perform a ministry of lasting value not only for his modern 
countrymen but for men of other races who have similar aspira- 
tions. 

Dr. T. R. Glover has suggested that Tukaram’s mystical vein 
gives him deep affinities with Madame Guyon, the French Mystic 
and Quietist whose life was beginning — she was born in 1648 — 
just as Tukaram’s was closing. ‘ Some of Dr, Nicol Macnicol’s 
verse renderings of Tuka,’ says Dr. Glover, ‘ might be interpolated 
among Cowper’s poems from Madame Guyon, and not be detected 
without reference to the French.’ J Nor is the parallel inapt, for 
Madame Guyon’s ‘ obscure night of the soul’ in 1680, occasioned 
by successive bereavements and much personal suffering of her own, 
followed as it was by a new ‘unitive’ state in which the old 
‘self-me’ was supplanted by a new ‘ God-me*, s has some resem- 
blance to the inward experience the saint of Dehu had gone through 
some fifty years before, as outlined in part iii of chapter 5 on the 
Autobiography. The heroism and solitude of Tukaram’s ‘obscure 
night of the soul \ with but little in his immediate environment to 
help him, invest his deep and prolonged inward conflict with 
something of an epic character. 


1 Dr. Ernest F. Scott, Union Theological Seminary Bulletin , New York, 
Jan. 1921, vol. iv. No. 2, pp. 14-5. 

2 Jesus in the Experience of Men % Jan. 1921, p. 40. 

$ J2. R . vol. x. p^536, art. Quietism . * 



184 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


CH. 


6. His Place in Theism 

It is comforting to feel in reading Tukaram that his devotion, 
like that of ail true men, was known to the same God and Father 
and was accepted by Him. This great truth is open to abuse and 
in no country more so than in India. But that need not prevent us 
from recognizing it and feeling grateful for it and making it a 
working principle in our dealing with those of other faiths. The 
conceptions which men have formed of God have varied, but in so 
far as they have been the fruit of reverence and of true devotion, 
the supplications of men have never failed to reach His ear. 
Tukaram teaches, especially his fellow-Hindus, that it is a man’s 
duty to seek still to purify his faith, and to accept light from what- 
ever quarter it comes. This does not mean that any creed will do 
if only it saves us the trouble of reflection. * It is still and always 
our duty to purify our faith, and even to bear patiently with 
error where it is not such as arises from spiritual pride or self- 
deception. 

In the absence of a critical edition of Tukaram’s writings and 
of any approximate chronology of his religious experience it is 
impossible to reach any accurate estimate of his place in Indian 
Theism, though praiseworthy efforts have been made with the 
available material. 1 Unless, however, interpolation has taken 
place in the poems on a far more extensive scale than in the present 
state of our information seems probable, the Prarthana Samajists 
are likely to be correct in assigning him a high place in Indian 
Theism though we cannot cajl him a monotheist. This twofold 
position is largely owing to the fact that though he was unquestion- 
ably an idolator, and recognized Siva, Ganpati, Maruti and Ganga, 
etc., as deities — see our section 1, chap. 6 — yet his worship was 
offered mainly to one idol only, and that one of the purest, Vithoba 
being an ‘incarnation* of Krisna whose worship is not vitiated by 
erotic accompaniments as elsewhere, for as Dr. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar 
has pointed out, Vithoba is regarded not as the lover of a mistress, as 
Krisna so often is with lamentable results, but as a husband and con- 
sequently ‘the Vaishnavism of the Maratha country is more sober and 
is purer’ (V. S.M. /?. S«, p. 89). And as Vithoba is pure in compari- 
son with most other Indian idols, so is Tukaram one of the purest 
and most high-minded of Hindu devotees. How closely, indeed, 
he approximates to the theistic position of many Western Theists, 
particularly those of the Unitarian type, may easily be seen by 
changing the name of his god, as the Prarthana Samajists do so 

* Dr. Sir R. G, Bhandarkar in V. S . M. R. S., pp. 92-101 ; Dr. Macnicol 
in P. M. S., pp. 18-33, Indian Theism, pp. 122-6,217-9, and scattered articles 
in /. /., /. R. M., and Hibbert Journal ; also Dr. Sydney Cave in Redemption , 
Hindu and Christian , pp. 110-9. 



VII HIS PERMANENT PLACE IN RELIGION 185 

freely, and substituting for it such divine appellations as obtain in 
the religious literature of the West. It then appears that on most 
of the fundamentals of Theism, such as a consciousness of indwell- 
ing sin, prayer, faith, sense of the Divine Presence, longing for 
union with God, personal experience as the essence of religion, etc., 
Tukaram makes a contribution of surpassing interest as we shall 
see in our next two chapters. What finer, for example, can 
Western teaching, merely Theistic, show than Tukaram’s query, 

‘ If the ears drink no nectar of God’s glory, what use are they ? ’ 
(151). Or than his affirmation, ‘God is my bosom friend; the 
bosom friend of this helpless creature : according to Mis glorious 
might let Him adorn us with purity ' ? (771) 

Finally, though the claim of novelty is to be admitted with care 
in an age which has so many cranks, yet in a reasonable way it 
may be admitted and even urged as a reason for the study of alien 
books of devotion. Old truths shine forth occasionally with greater 
force in unfamiliar language and the problem how we are to 
sanctify our daily life receives fresh light when considered in the 
light of human experience amid different surroundings. Tukarfim’s 
language and his abJiangs often illustrate this, and his rugged 
diction, his quaint examples, as well as his occasional beauties of 
expression and his command of the language of religious passion, 
make him an author for whom the Westerner may have a great 
regard. As Sir Alexander Grant, a former Vice-Chancellor of 
Bombay University, wrote in 1867 : ‘ If intense personal religion can 
be found anywhere it can be found in Tukaram. It is impossible 
to avoid comparing his songs with the Psalms of David. They are 
the natural expression of a mind holding constant communion with 
God, poured out like the notes of a bird, in all the occasions and 
various moods of life.* 

This chapter on Tukaram’s place in religious thought may fit- 
tingly close with his description of ‘ the heart to which God makes 
Himself known The crowning-point of all Tukarfim’s teaching 
has an imperishable message for Occident and Orient alike : 
4 Where pardon, peace and purity dwell, there God abides’ (706). 
4 Blessed are the pious, for their heart is pure’ (894). 


Having concluded that our Indian poet-saint of the early 17th 
century must be given a worthy place in man’s agelong story of 
quest after peace, another conclusion is forced upon us, viz., that 
his Religious Ideas may be worthy of sympathetic investigation. 


24 



CANNOT UNDERSTAND; I LOVE 1 * 


Thy greatness none can comprehend ; 

All dumb the Vedas are. 

Forspent the powers of mortal mind; 

They cannot climb so far. 

How can I compass him whose light 
Illumes both sun and star? 

The serpent of a thousand tongues* 
Cannot tell all thv praise; 

Then how, poor 1? Thy children we, 
Mother of loving wavs ! 

Within the shadow of thy grace, 

Ah, hide me, Tuka says. 



THE INWARD J ‘UR FOSE* 


To keep the Holy Order pure,— 
This ever is my purpose sure. 

The Vedio statutes I proclaim ; 
To imitate the saints m> aim. 

For, with no firm resolve within, 
To (put the world is deadly sin 

Vile he who docs so, Tuka says,- 
Fvil ^he worship that he pays. 


I LONG TO SEE THV FACE 


l long to see thy face, 

Hut ah, in me hath holiness no place. 

Uy thy strength succour me, , 

So only, only I t^y feet may see I 

Though Sadhu's robes I've worn, 

Within I’m all unshaven and unshorn. 

Lost, lost, O God, am I, 

Unless thou help me, Tukfi,— me who cry ! 


* The serpent of a thousand tongues, Sesa, the thousand-headed snake 
which is at once the couch and canopy of Visnu and which upholds the 
world. 

* Translations from Tukaram, P.M.S , pp. 67, 85, 64. 



Chapter VIII 

Tukaram’s leading Religious Ideas 

This is to be a chapter on Tukaram’s teaching, and his poems 
are our chief, almost our sole, authority. Our investigation cannot 
pretend to be anything like exhaustive, either as to range of subject 
or extent of treatment. As to the latter we shall let him, in the 
main, speak for himself ; as to the former, the subjects will comprise 
his teaching about God, God’s Worshippers, Sin, Salvation, the 
Religious Life, the Moral Ideal, the ‘Saints’, Animals, Reincarna- 
tion, Death and the Hereafter. It will be noted that nearly all 
these subjects are practical and experimental. We attempt no 
final synthesis of his teaching, this being impossible without a 
critical edition of his writings. 

1. God and His Relation to the World 

i. The Divine Existence: ‘Lila’ 

Tukaram enters into no formal proof of the existence of God, 
nor does he contemplate the downright atheist among the en'emies 
he has to face. 

He seems in many passages to accept most of the orthodox 
answer of the Hindu system. God dwells apart from the world: 
He is formless and void of qualities. Personal, no doubt; we do 
not think that Tukaram ever inclines to the view that the supreme 
Spirit slips off personality along with other limitations, but he 
sometimes tends to think that God has no dealings with the world. 
But this does not always content him. Elsewhere he says that 
God at once pervades the world and is left outside it, and again 
that ‘God makes and unmakes the world: it is He who makes 
all action visible ’ (406). How or why has this come about ? The 
answer is.that the world is a diversion (itlci) of the eternal Spirit : 
‘You have created amusing games to soothe your eyes with 
watching them; apart from that end we all know what the 
world is, a wooden tiger and a wooden cow’ (221). Being 
void of qualities He had sought diversion in the drama of the world 
(1286). 

This lilci, however, when it meets our eyes, becomes a vetl that 
hides God from us. ‘ Take off the veil of illusion that thou hast 
spread between us and thee’ (442). False is the world; Han 
alone is reaL, apart from him all the senses are futile ’ (1665). ‘ ’Tis 
Thou, O Vitthal, art real. Why then hast thou shown us this 



183 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


CH. 


outward form of the world ? Thou hast given a name to a thing 
that has truly no form * (3427). Tukaram here drifts towards the 
advaita view, yet he always seemed to be hovering near the 
discovery that the world which is a lllfi of God’s, may become 
the same thing to us as to God if we look at it in the same spirit. 
It will then be as permissible for us to enjoy it as for God to 
create it. 


2. Was Tukaram a Pantheist? 

What is Pantheism ? We really do not know any meaning for 
the word except a loose and evasive way of talking as though the 
world was God and God was the world. This sort of talk is 
commoner in popular Hinduism than in other popular religions, 
just in proportion as Hinduism concerns itself more with cosmo- 
gony than other systems do. But it is paying it too much of a 
compliment to treat it seriously as a system of thought. When 
Tukaram says that God pervades the world he really means, though 
he does not quite say so, that God directs the world so that it all 
serves a divine purpose. God with him is always a Being, an over- 
ruling Being. If he had gone a little further we might say a 
Providence. 

As to whether, therefore, Tukaram is to be regarded as an ad - 
vaitist or Pantheist, opinions differ violently and it is well-nigh 
impossible to say more tl^n that he sometimes seems to incline 
towards the advaitist position and sometimes towards its opposite, 
the dualist. We have on the one hand Mahipati’s story of 
Tqkaram sitting under a blanket, with his fingers in his ears as a 
protest against the act of a Vendantist who was reading to him an 
advaitist treatise (seepage 102) ; also Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar’s sug- 
gestion that Mahlpati views the receiving of the guru- mantra in a 
dream as a Providential interposition saving Tukaram from the 
repugnant advaitist tenets which any guru of the time would have 
been certain to pour into his ear had Tukaram needed to obtain a 
mantra in that way* (see pages 91-2); and lastly the note of 
triumph with which Tukaram himself dismisses the advaita 
philosophers: ‘Away with knowledge of Bramha and intuitions 
of the self within the self* (518).. See further pp. 194-5 below 
and also 218-9. On the other hand we have references in his 
poems which appear to show that it was only when the advaitist 
became ‘void of devotion ’ that he raised any serious objection to 
his teaching : * Listen not to such a one ; the wisdom he dis- 
courses is like chaff, void of devotion. He extols the doctrine that 
seeks absolute union, he sets aside devotion .... Saying “ I am 
Brahma”, he nourishes his own person; we should not speak to 
such a disputant as he 1 (1177) . For both sides, see on the one 
hand, the thirty abhangs in Fraser and Marathe’s translations 
under the heading, ‘ Distinction From God Necessary * ; and on the 



vni 


HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


189 


other, see Mr. L. R. Pangarkar’s Marathi Life of Tukaram , p. 114, 
etc, and Joga’s Commentary , Vol. 1, p. 280. 

Some students, however, would state Tukaram’s inclination 
towards advaita far more strongly, adducing as evidence in their 
favour all the abhangs in Fraser and Marathe’s translation bearing 
the headings, ‘Union with God Necessary,’ — 54 in all — and ‘The 
All-Pervading Character of God 1 numbering 36, in particular such 
abhangs as : ‘ Pamjurang has truly shown us his grace by driving 

out of us all doubts, all sense of difference from him f (2866) ; ‘ I 
am melted, I am lost in Thee ; when fire and camphor mingle, is 
blackness of any sort left behind ? My flame and thy flame, says 
Tuka, are become one’ (1679); ‘God and his worshippers are 
bound together, they appear separate but they are really one’ (201); 
‘ God and devotee, Lord and servant — this duality had its birth in 
unity, there is no difference here, says Tuka; the devotee is God 
and God is devotee ’ 1 ; and the pathetic cry in 200, an abliatig 
reminiscent of the bhakta's heavy bereavements : ‘ Many have died 
who were dear to me ; how is it, O Hari, you have survived them ? 
. . . Thus I conclude that all men, myself too, have to be placed 
in you as a deposit 1 3 . Those who believe Tukiiriim hold the 
advaitist position have in their favour the fact that the Bhctgavata 
Purana is regarded by most an advaitist book, and the Bhagavad- 
gltct also, in spite of the bhakti dominating them, these two 
great works being the most sacred books of the Vaishnavism or 
Bhdgavata religion of Maharashtra. J 

Modern scholars are equally divided on this subject. Dr. 
Farquhar concludes — though his dealing with questions of Maratha 
religion is necessarily scanty — that ‘ so far as philosophical thinking 
may be traced, Tukaram tends to be a monist.’ ‘ Concerning the 
24 abhangs narrating the end of Tukaram the writer of the brief 
English sketch of the poet’s life in the Indu Prakdsh edition says 
he ‘ was absorbed in contemplation and the actual realization of the 
Vedantic doctrine of Pantheism though we need to add that these 
abhangs can scarcely be regarded as other than spurious. 4 In his 
Tenets of Tukaram the converted Brahmin, the late Rev. Nehemiah 
Goreh, strenuously argues for the advaitist character of all Tuka- 
ram’s teaching, seeking to harmonize its many contradictions by 
his theory that from the worldly standpoint of practical everyday 
life the poet was certainly a dualist, while from the spiritual or 
‘other-worldly’ point of view he was a pantheist, a view which, 
however tempting and convenient, cannot be accepted as solving 
the real difficulty. On the other side, among those who regard the 
saint of Dehu as a dualist, are to be reckoned the Prarthana 


1 See F. and M. 823 for another rendering. 

% £5ee pp. 171-2 and Dr. Justin E. Abbott, Dnyanodaya , June 9, 1921. 

3 O. R. L . p. 300. 

4 See p. 126 above. # 



190 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


CH. 

Samajist thinkers whose authority concerning everything relating 
to Tukaram, their chief guru, is indisputably high, the Prarthana 
Samaj position being represented by Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar 1 with 
whom agree Dr. Murray Mitchell who wrote about the middle of 
last century and Sir Alexander Grant who wrote in 1867. The 
last-mentioned regrets that Tukaram * impairs his poetry by the use 
of the metaphysical terms of Vedantism' and that he is 1 extremely 
wavering in his point of view ’, his apparent pantheism being 
merely an intense form of devotion. 

Could we have asked Tukaram himself as to his true position he 
would probably have pointed to his words in abhaitg 1924: ‘ We 
will give up this dispute ; let us go before the saints to settle this \ 
meaning, ‘ Let us grant that the monist position is strictly correct, 
that God has not really created us as beings with individualities of 
# Qiir own. . . Still, why not leave it so ? Why not let the attitude 
of worshipper and worshipped continue ? ’ * He would probably 
have summed up the discussion in the words of the cradle-song 
sung over him by his mother : ‘ Monism and dualism are each half 
true 1 — see page 79. See also Dr. Macnicol’s similar conclusion. 8 

II. God's Relation to His Worshippers 

i. God's Way of realizing Himself 

Tukaram is not greatly interested in cosmogony and he spends 
no time in speculating how the separation of the human soul from 
God became possible or was accomplished. But he has no doubt 
of the purpose in view when the development took place. It is only 
through this that God realizes Himself, that He becomes truly 
God. 1 God becomes what we make Him ’ (586). ‘ It is our faith 

that makes thee a God’ (1795). ‘ What is the head without the 

feet? We are the feet that suffer and bear thee’ (1787). With- 
out His worshippers God would not know the bliss Of receiving 
devotion and sharing in mutual love : ‘ What does the lotus flower 
know of its own perfume ? * (207) * Water cannot taste itself nor 
trees their own fruit. At the sight of the child the milk comes 
into the mother’s breast. What delight there is when they meet 
each other’ (211). Accordingly, ‘God calls Himself His wor- 
shippers’ debtor : He is even grateful to them. He feels especial 
delight in the helpless, because He can do most for them ’ (282). 
‘In those who are helpless He feels His chief delight* (286). 

‘ Had I not been a sinner how could there have been a Saviour ? ' 
(213). Much is said of the delight shared by the worshipper and 
the God who is worshipped : ‘ ’Tis like a father with his child, who 
feels and gives pleasure at once ’ (210). 

1 Two Masters : Jesus and Tukaram , pp. 35—45. , 

2 See F. and M . vol. 2, ‘ note ’ on p. 444. 

3 P, M, pp. 21, 25-6. 



VIII 


HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


191 


2. Unity of the Divine and the Human 

Tukaram strongly maintains the unity of the divine with the 
human spirit : ‘That my soul is the soul of all things — who can rob 
me of this truth ?’ ( 1698 ). * Narayana gives and himself enjoys the 
gift * (227). This means that it is the same spirit that is active in 
both the giver and receiver, the same thought being expressed 
in the lines, ‘If we are burned or fall into fire it is Narayana 
that suffers in us ’ ( 1802 ). ‘ He pervades my frame, yet he keeps 

our two beings distinct* (1130). Tukaram does not feel called 
on to reconcile the opposing aspects of the divine nature, 
indeed he seems rather to rejoice in the thought that God is 
‘ incomprehensible by mind or reason * ( 1657 ). And time after time 
he tells us that ‘ He exists and exists not in all things r ; ‘ He is all 
and none of us ; * ‘ not by knowledge pr reflection canst thou be 
comprehended, nor can any system search thee out' ( 3213 ). Rut 
he looks with horror on a final emancipation or absorption into 
Brahman that will leave behind no sense of personality, because 
it will rob him of the joy of union, devotion and service. See 
further, all the abhaugs in F, and M. in each volume under the 
heading ‘ Union with God Necessary \ 

We may note other ideas of God’s relation to His worshippers. 
He knows what they need without being told : ‘ Thou knovvest 
our hearts though we tell thee nothing; thou dost pervade the 
world, there is no need to tell thee aught ’ (307). 

3. Divine Accessibility and Condescension 

God makes Himself accessible to the infirm apprehensions of 
the worshipper: ‘He has embodied himself in forms to suit our 
pleasure : he has laid out paths such as we can discern and follow, 
while he himself, beyond our comprehension, surveys the circle 
of the skies’ (1753). This refers partly to the embodiment 
in an image, partly to the willingness of God to receive humble 
devotion. Tukaram insists often on the feebleness of human 
devotion and hugs the thought that God is pleased with the stam- 
mering childish accents of humanity. Then again God accepts as 
evidence of devoted faith the mere utterance of His name— it is 
little, but if offered in the right spirit it is enough. Thus ‘God 
meets every man in a shape fit for him * (1757) ; ‘ God conforms 
himself to every man’s speech * (1756). 

This leads to a very trustful relation between God and His 
worshippers. The image of the child and his parents may even 
seem to us somewhat overworked by our poet and his language of 
fond familiarity somewhat wanting in due gravity : ‘ We are God’s 
companions, his old crazy frolicsome friends : he led us by the 
hand '(2164). Sayings such as this justify the observation that 



192 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

the relation between man and God as conceived by Tukaram may 
occasionally to a Christian seem wanting in dignity or reverence, 
and that he presses the image of a playful childhood too far. It 
is only a partial truth that ‘ men are but children of a larger 
growth* and Hegel with greater insight than Tukaram has observ- 
ed that we are not to be little children but to become as little 
children. Let us not forget the pleasing simile in which he points 
out that * the bee has no fear of being imprisoned in the flower 
that encloses it’ (2601). At the same time the figure of Mother 
and child as applied to God and His worshippers is Tukaram's 
closest approximation to the Christian idea of God. See also 
quotation from Prof. Patwardhan on pp. 152“3. 

4 . Ancient Scriptures and ‘Authority’ 

• 

The general tone of Tukaram’s writings shows he is not in the 
least a theologian. He seldom raises and still more seldom answers 
the thousand and one questions that delight theologians. The exact 
extent of Tukaram’s learning we do not know. See pp. 127-128. It 
is possible that he picked up a little Sanskrit and read some of the 
iclstran in the original tongue and even drew some of his ideas 
from them, but he never admits anything of the kind. We must 
remember that the Vedas in the strict sense were quite unintelligi- 
ble both to him and to anybody he ever met and even the great 
commentators were probably beyond him. It is not surprising 
therefore that he sometimes regards the written word — the word of 
tradition — as unimportant. Along with the place of the Scriptures 
we have to settle the place of authority and the extent to which an 
immediate revelation is vouched to the enquirer who seeks it. 

Hinduism, one need hardly say, has no centre of dogmatic 
authority, that is to say, no living centre. 1 Hindu bodies look 
mostly to their scriptures, but even here there is no absolute 
agreement as to which scriptures are inspired. It appears however 
from Tukararn’s example that a Hindu may almost throw off the 
authority of the scriptures altogether. 2 * One must be careful however 
not to press this point too far, in view of abhang 2561 : * He who 
admits not the authority of Scripture — his face you should not see.* 

1 For several centuries past Hinduism has recognized the authority of four 
£ankaracharyas whose ‘four spiritual seats are — Joshi Math in the Himalayas, 
Northern India, in the district of Garwal ; Sarada Math in Dwaraka, Western 
India, in the State of Baroda; Sringeri Math in Sringeri, Southern India, 
within the Mysore State; and Govardhan Math in Puri, Eastern India , , . 
Two Gddls in those of Sarada Math and Joshi Math are at present without 
their recognized Spiritual Heads. . ’. As regards the Sarada Math various 
complications have arisen ’ (Mahamandal Magazine , May, 1921). Of 
interest to Maratha students is the fact that there is also a Karvir Math in 
Kolhapur State. 

2 4 1 believe our present knowledge of the Hindu scriptures is in a most 

chaotic state* said Mr. M. K, Gandhi in Young India of October 6, 1921. 



VIII 


HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


193 


An abhaiig like this shows he was not a rebel against the Vedas. 
He probably thought that Vedic authority if duly explored would 
be found on his side, that the Vedas were obscure, that many 
interpretations were against him, that many scriptures of less but 
much- vaunted authority supported views which he rejected, and that 
the study of all scriptures led to much wrangling. Simple devotion, 
on the other hand, was rewarded by peace and light and for him at 
least this was sufficient. What chiefly roused his anger was a 
merely formal devotion to external ‘authority’ without any corres- 
ponding inward religion of one’s own : ‘What have they achieved 
by committing texts to memory? They kept their self-sufficiency. 
They have a scrap of knowledge ; they are puffed up with pride ; 
they are scoundrels, saysTuka, batter in their faces ’ (2544) ; ‘ it is 
in vain you have studied the Vedas, unless you feel sobs of love rise 
when you hear God preached (2543). 1 See further pp. 159-60. 

In the brief account which he gives of his spiritual life we learn 
that he met a guru who placed him in touch with his Vaishnavite 
predecessors, and we may recall the importance he attaches to 
intercourse with the * saints * (see section viii in this chapter). It 
is they who preserve doctrine in its purity, they who point the 
enquirer to the source of light. Thus tradition plays a great part in 
Tukaram’s system, though he never asks in a critical spirit how 
tradition is related to personal experience ; it is on practice that he 
lays the greatest weight. 


III. Sin 

The natural state of the human soul, Tukaram would say, if he 
knew what * natural * meant, is union with God in mutual love. 
What is the state in which men’s souls actually are ? How has it 
arisen ? It is a state of separation. The first beginning of this is 
a matter on which Tukaram offers no speculations — indeed the 
Hindu speculations concerning the origins of things, though in 
general more elaborate than Christian, do not much discuss the 
fall of man. At, least they do not treat it from the human side ; 
they consider more how the divine nature may be supposed to 
have thrown off emanations. That these emanations should be 
sinful is perhaps thought to follow without further explanation, 
as a matter of course. In Tukaram the sinful nature of man 
appears as a matter of common knowledge. Thus, sin consists 
in (i) breaking the appointed rules of caste; (ii) breaking the 
rules of morality in a narrower or wider sense as we may variously 
phrase it ; and (iii) indulging the sense of tnlpana. 

The first (i) and second (ii) we may leave aside for the present 
and examine the notion of tnlpana (self-centredness). This offence 
is often and strongly condemned by Tukaram, yet he never tells 
exactly what he means by it. Nor is it a thing easy to express 
in English. It is not selfishness nor self-indulgence nor even 

25 



194 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


CH. 


self-satisfaction or self-conceit, though these last come near to it. 
An exact equivalent would be the word ‘ egoism* if it were not so 
often used in conversation for boring other people by talking about 
oneself. Mlpana means wilfully dissociating oneself from God, 
nourishing the feeling of independence instead of gratefully leaning 
upon Him. It may easily but not necessarily be associated with 
pride. A man may be guilty of it without taking any exaggerated 
view of his own merits. 

Anyhow this fault separates man from God and is, one might 
say, a mortal sin in Tukaram’s theology. God does not willingly 
see this separation. He perpetually offers all men the opportunity 
of reunion : ‘ All are empowered to approach Him, Brahmans. 

Kshatriyas, Vaisyas , Sudras and low-caste men, children and all 
others’ (247) ; 4 Hari does not remember a man’s origin* (228); 
‘here prince and peasant are alike’ (532). On Tukaram’s own 
sense of sin see pp. 135-7 and 225 -7. 

IV. The Means of Salvation 

i. Tukaram’s Attitude to ‘Moksha’ or ‘Mukti’ 

It is necessary to remember what a Hindu means by ‘ salvation.’ 
One of the many striking aspects of Tukaram’s teaching is the 
energy with which he sometimes dissociates himself from the 
common Hindu desire for moksha or mukti , which terms he uses 
synonymously (see below). On this subject it is not sufficiently 
recognized that when the Hindu speaks of ‘ liberation the usual 
translation of the Hindu terms niokslia and mukti , and the 
Christian of ‘ redemption ’ or ‘ salvation they are usually moving 
in different worlds of thought, the Hindu referring to liberation or 
release from rebirth, the bondage of karma , the Christian to deliver- 
ance from the guilt and power of sin. 1 In Tukaram, however, there 
would appear, as far as we can understand him, to be an approxi- 
mation to the latter idea seldom found in Hinduism (see also 
pp. 196-7 below). We have already seen how ambiguous and 
uncertain the saint of Dehu was concerning the Vedantist view 
of the Impersonality of God — see pp. 187-90, this chapter. 
Similarly he seems to waver between acceptance of and opposition 
to the Vedantic idea of 1 liberation * for which he uses moksha and 
mukti alternatingly. Again and again, however, he definitely 
disclaims the desire for such ‘ liberation * in the common Hindu 
sense of cessation from personal existence. See p. 211 below 
on Reincarnation, especially two striking abhaiigs there (3134 and 
3325), in which he states positively that he ‘ desires not liberation ’ 
and 1692 where he prays, ‘ O Panljurang, grant me not liberation ’ ; 

1 See E . R . E. vol. xi, pp. 132-7. 



VIII HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 193 

also 211: * I am thoroughly resolved to desire liberation no more * — 
in all of which the word mukti is used ; and note 208 and 209 where 
the twin word nioksha is used : * Liberation belongs to you, 
O God ; keep to yourself that hard acquisition ’ (208) ; * your 
worshippers do not seek liberation ' (209). Another of Tukaram's 
strong disclaimers has been turned into English poetry by 
Dr. Macnicol, the abhahg numbered 763 in Fraser and Marathe 
and 1462 in the Indtt Prakdsh edition, the word used being mukti 

Hear, O God, my supplication — 

Do not grant me liberation. 

* Tis what men so much desire ; 

Yet how much this joy is higher ! 

But that name how strangely dear 

That in songs of praise we hear ! 

Ah, says Tuka, it is this 

Makes our lives so full of bliss. 1 

Nothing short of a critical edition of Tukaram’s poems, followed by 
an exhaustive investigation, can determine exactly how far 
Tukaram was either consistent or whole-hearted in his disclaimer of 
‘the great release’ ( mukti ot nioksha ) — see further pp. 21S-9 in 
chapter 9 — but it is a disclaimer characteristic of bhakti which 
prefers to continue in the fellowship of the saints on earth, singing 
God’s praises and doing His service. This follows on the rejection 
by bhakti of the view that the Supreme Spirit is impersonal. 

2. Hindu Methods which Tukaram Rejects 

What are the means of salvation ? We shall begin with cc rtain 
things that Tukaram rejects. He rejects (i) The complete fulfil- 
ment of the rules of caste. This is out of the question, no matter 
how much we strive after it : ‘ You may give up doing or undoing 
or looking into sacred texts' (273); ‘this business of rules and 
prohibitions is heart-breaking ’ (540) ; * not through the burden of 
rules and prohibitions mayest thou, O generous lord, be found ’ 

(1727). . , u 

(ii) Austerities. ‘ By sacrifice and austerity and union with the 
body or by recourse to contemplation thou canst not be found ’ 
(231) ; ‘ such men (i. e., those who practise austerities) cast rudely 
from them the rug they long have worn ; this is an impediment to 
service, it is a craving too hastily conceived ’ (336). 

(iii) Mystic intuition. ‘ We trust not to knowledge of Brahman 
or union with the supreme soul' (204). Doubtless Tukaram 
joined Kabir in protesting against the immoral doctrine that reading 


1 See P. M. S. pp. 83-4 for the whole abhang. 



196 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

and hearing Purftnas destroys sin and that a man may be absolved 
from the guilt of murder if he hears scores of Purftnas ; though see 
abhatig 265 quoted in line 7, page 198 below. 1 

3 . Tukaram’s Way of Salvation 

Then what is the right path ? (i) Repentance. The necessity of 
repentance, though implicit in Tukaram’s system, is notemphasized 
in the same clear language as we find in the New Testament and in 
Christian writings generally. He speaks often of the purifying 
effect of God’s grace and of course there can be only one motive 
for seeking it, but the actual moment or mood of repentance is not 
prominent in his lines. This does not mean that he is silent on the 
•subject : 4 Through repentance, guilt vanishes in the twinkling of an 
eye and the transgressor remains at peace ; this is the true cere- 
mony of purification', to bathe the mind in repentance ; sin cannot 
touch repentance ’ (486). 

(ii) Following on repentance there must be goodwill towards all 

creatures: ‘ if he be merciful towards all living creatures, be he 
learned or ignorant, the infinite one loves him more than his own 
soul* (487); ‘to lay aside hatred is the secret of attainment; 
other rules of renunciation are waste of words * (489). And to this 
we may add : 1 If you would attain means of salvation you must 

be calm and silent * (549). You must also be humble : 4 With the 

exalted he is exalted, with the lowly he is lowly ; you cannot seize 
him by an effort of strength ’ (294). 4 Conquer your senses, control 

your mind, lay aside pleasure; this is how to secure salvation. 
Some fast and break their fast, others persevere with texts ; these 
practices will bear fruit only if they are quite void of error. You 
will find fruit where the root is. Make haste to seek shelter in 
God (2538).’ 

(iii) Most ^important of all is faith, the firm belief that God is 
able to save : 4 you will reach God by faith (bhctvci) ; by efforts to 
know him you will not understand him ’ (505). ‘The joy of faith 
(bhakti ) . enlightens the ignorant through their own fond desire* 
(233). ‘Faith (< bhava ) controls God Himself’ (2034), 4 Faith 
(bhtfva) is the all-sufficing principle of the saints * (889). One 
of Tukaram’s richest abhangs on the futility of external rites 
reads : 4 Why do they worship stone and brass and the eight metals ? 
The wretches have no faith. *Tis faith (bhfiva) alone that moves 
us and is fitly called the means of salvation. What avails your 
rosary ? ’Tis only pleasure of the senses you count on it. What 
will you do with your learned tongue ? It will make you proud and 
conceited. What will you do with your skill in song, as long as 
your will is foul within you? If you serve God without faith 


1 See also E . R. E. vol. xi, p. 562 a. 



VIII HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 1-97 

( bhava ), says Tuka, how will you become fit for him ?’ (2597). 
Concerning the object of faith see chapter X, section 6. 

As for the content of Tukaram’s idea of salvation it is probably 
not incorrect to conclude that sometimes he looks towards the 
commonly accepted Hindu idea of moksha and sometimes towards 
the ethical deliverance connoted by our term ‘salvation 1 . See 
p. 194 above on these terms. 

4. The Question of Merit 

The question may be raised whether the power to accept what 
God bestows in salvation is a reward of merit. This brings us to 
the troublesome question how merit is conceived by Tukaram. 
We doubt if any particular answer can be given to this question. 
That there is such a thing as merit he does not doubt ; he is always 
talking about it but he never defines it. 

As a rule Tukaram is quite clear that God’s grace is not bestowed 
as a consequence of merit: ‘ He requires no store of merit* (304). 
But passages may be quoted in flat contradiction of this: ‘ If you 
have merit stored up from the past you may suddenly meet with 
perfect satisfaction ’ (524) ; * my merit has bestowed it on me ’ 
(324) ; 1 this immeasurable flood of nectar — it is due to our great 
merits that it runs along this path * (338) ; ‘if merit is stored up 
grain by grain then this is the reward after many lives’ (339); 
‘my store of merit has found its consummation * (1831). Every 
man’s future thus corresponds to his store of merit. 

The above passages, however, do not represent Tukaram’s most 
habitual or profound conviction. What he really feels is that the 
whole problem of the place of merit is troublesome and insoluble, 
and it does not repay men to hunt after its solution. Arguments 
on the point belong to that verbal theology which he deprecates. 
He would say plainly that to suppose God saves us because we 
deserve salvation is a piece of presumption, and he would r.ot 
countenance this. On the other hand he would have said just as 
plainly that if merits do not count then the action of God may be 
called capricious. He would have seen these issues had they been 
presented to him, but as a matter of fact they were not so present- 
ed, for Hinduism has not debated this point with the persevering 
interest of Christian theology. It faintly emerges in Tukaram’s 
poems but the conclusion to which he hastens is that the man who 
seeks salvation should waste no time in argument but throw him- 
self at the feet of God. And he consequently expresses his own 
joy that he is done with the tormenting question whether his merits 
are sufficient or not : 4 The Vaishnavas have brought down heaven 

to earth with Vittho the chief thereof ; merits past, present and to 
come, are all buried deep; they are driven forth as feeble creatures 
into exile’ (3476a); ‘exertions will leave you nothing but exertions, 



198 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

if you embrace peace it will bestow joy upon you * (327). Various 
lines dwell on the ease with which this great acquisition may be 
made: * Vitthala stands forth easy to attain by songs of praise* 
(287); ‘unexpectedly without an effort I have. heard the secret, I 
have learned to know God’ (573). Much is said of the power of 
God’s name: ‘ Uttering his name it takes not one instant to burn 
up millions of the five great sins ’ (265). 

V. The Obstacles to Salvation 

Of the obstacles that hinder men from approaching God, from 
seeking and finding salvation, we can make a long and interesting 
list from Tukaram. We might place at the head of it the habit of 
saying to oneself * 1 I and ' Mine ‘ Mine for Tukaram often 
blames this, but strictly speaking this is not the cause of separation 
but the separation itself : ‘ If a man keeps within him his private 

purpose — were it as small as a sesamum seed — or his sense of 
self, Narayana will not draw near him ’ (3207). 

Perhaps the same might be said of desire or the habit of indul- 
ging desires. The propensity of the mind to form desires is 
compared to the exuberance of a wild creeper just as the headlong 
impetuosity of the mind is compared to that of an unruly horse. 
All this we can understand, but there is one curious uncertainty 
about Tukaram’s position ? we do not learn whether he teaches that 
it is the pains or the pleasures of life that most keep us from God, 
though we are quite certain that it was life’s pains that led him to 
God: 1 ‘ Wasted is labour on wife, son and wealth, where the fruit 
is sorrow the seed is sorrow ’ (1730); ‘ through the attractive power 
of life, the mind is filled with hopes’ (3183); ‘the world is an 
imposing uproar of pleasures’ (1842). His thoughts often dwell 
on the misery of life, the disappointments that befall the votary of 
pleasure, and then again he observes that men are often ’swallowed 
up by worldy pleasures so that all serious thoughts escape them. 
Putting the difficulty another way we may say that if by a pessimist 
we mean one who holds that human life is usually or always 
wretched, by an optimist one who holds that it is or may be always 
enjoyable, Tukaram is neither an optimist nor a pessimist. He 
has not realized the question or analysed the case. Nor has he any 
firm hold on the difference between pleasure and happiness, though 
this is essential to a philosophic statement of his views. He really 
gets no further than a perception of the fact that a man who is 
busy with the pursuit of objects of desire cannot open his mind to 
the love of God. 

He sees al§o that fear of ridicule keeps many men from God. 
Much as. Indian sentiment has always respected the devotee, men 


3 See pp. 83-4, 137-8. 



VIII 


HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


199 


have never been wanting in India — any more than in other 
countries — who have been swayed by worldly sentiment and have 
laughed at religion or at least at any religion that calls for the 
sacrifice of comfort: ‘Shame and prosperity stand in the path* 
(324). 

Above all he is afraid of learning. The most hopeless of men 
in Tukaram's eyes is the theologian : ‘ God is hidden by arguments 
good and bad and by the reasoning of theologians ’ (556); ‘know- 
ledge of God sets us far from God* (551) ; 4 search not the forest 
.of philosophy’ (509); ‘discussions of thy nature are a maze of 
error, let me refuse to enter into them* (217); 4 annihilate this 
separation, the fruit of learning, between us ; save me, O Vitthal, 
I am better off as an ignorant servant’ (463). The source of 
separation is partly the pre occupation with arguments, partly the 
pride which learning fosters. Nothing parts man and God more 
than pride, but to him who bends, God bends Himself; He is 
not found where pride rules. 

How great a hindrance to salvation was encountered in 
philosophical disputation, as Tukaram saw and heard it, is clear 
from the following vigorous words : ‘ If you would attain to means 
of salvation, be calm and silent. Tuka says, Verbosity has ruined 
crowds of Brahmans ’ (549) ; ‘ O ye pious, quit the company of 
reasoners ’ (2542). The love of disputation was certainly associated 
in Tukaram’s mind with the champions of the advaita philosophy, 
though it must not be forgotten that this system lias its practical 
side and a monist might rely on its central doctrine of maya and 
yet might protest against a disposition to dialectics as much as 
Tukaram. Actually, however, the advaita schools are more verbal 
and verbose than the other, though Chaitanya is fond of disquisition 
about the various sorts of love enjoyed between Krisna and Radha. 


VI. The Religious Life 

. i. Renunciation and Trust 

How will the believer treat the world ? There are passages 
in which he is exhorted to leave it behind him, to thrust it away 
from him with violence: ‘There is peril in worldly affairs: seek 
shelter in God* (2305); ‘resign the world’ (841) ; ‘1 am angry 
against the world ; it is a poisonous snake gleaming before the 
eyes * (322) ; 4 take not on your head at all the burden of ihe 
world; devotion itself compels you to cast everything aside’ 
(846); ‘if pleasure seeks me out I will renounce it forthwith* 
(850); ‘the saints look on birth and death as a dream* (888) ; 
‘avoid the world, let no stain of affection come upon thee* 
(510). He who has conquered his senses and destroyed his 
desires, thereafter fortns no designs: ‘Tuka takes a stick and 



200 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

fiercely assaults his body; he has made it pay for all the luxuries 
it has enjoyed 1 (842) ; ‘ strip the trees of their foliage and eat 
it ; pick up rags and sew them together with a thread and cover 
your loins therewith 1 (2329); ‘reduce your speech to silence, 
keep it away from all objects of sense* (277); ‘there was one 
who lived a life of fourteen ages, yet he took shelter under a 
bundle of straw * (2328). 

We have quoted a number of these passages in order to 
present fairly what Tukaram actually does say, but they probably 
do not represent his final or most characteristic view. We may 
now turn to those in which a different opinion is expressed. In 
some moments Tukaram seems to think that the religious man 
will simply look on at the activities of his body in a detached 
sort of way like a spectator. This is summed up in many passages 
about the body: ‘A vigorous body is the instrument needed for 
your service ’ (480) ; ‘ let the body be treated with all respect, for 
thereby we attain to all happiness through the recitation of his 
name’ (820); see also 825, 829 and 836. This idea, however, 
is only fugitive, and the same may be said of pain and pleasure : 
* Pleasure and pain we should view as coming of themselves ; our 
business is to store up merit* (2298); ‘labour suffices your belly 
but never forget Rama ’ (834). 

His final principles appear to be these: (l) Mere renunciation 
leads to nothing: 4 What avails to live in a glen of forest if peace 
be absent ? * (828). The essential thing is that we should not place 
ourselves in the power of desires : ‘ If you are to become an ascetic 
do it in this spirit: renounce desires of the world— -it matters not 
then whether you live in a town or a forest, sleep in a cot or on a 
rock’ (2316). 

(2) Let the satisfaction of desire be viewed as an offering 
to God : ‘ I go on eating and drinking but I keep the account in 
thy name * (1798) : ‘ in eating or drinking alike say : It all passes 
ontoGovinda’ (1802); ‘renunciation leaves room fdr pleasure; 
.... what keeps God away from us, that is sin* (822) ; see also 
3414. 

(3) Thus the right course is certainly to stay in the world and 

go on with our duties : ‘ Whatever I do, O God, I offer thee as a 
service 9 (193) ; ‘ your proper course is to ask nothing of God, but 
to do the work appointed you to do, provided it be not done through 
any sort of desire* (3199) ; * let us return to our tasks but refuse 
to identify ourselves with them * (183); 4 it is not murder when a 
soldier does his duty, for he seeks no personal gain from the action ’ 
(2400) ; 1 entrust your body to God but employ its strength in due 
season yourself* (3189); see also 222. Such passages may be 
contrasted with those in opposition to them : * God does not suffer 

His worshippers to follow any worldly vocation* (3188); 4 worldly 
life and life with the highest— he who acts both parts together, in 
the end achieves neither * (3465) ; see also 494. 



VIII 


HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


201 


(4) There is thus no objection to pleasures that come in. the 
course of our duties : ‘ Be ready to honour pleasure when it comes : 
do not moan over sorrows’ (3477). 

(5) Tukaram deprecated anxiety about our worldly lot. It is a 
common thought that God takes sufficient care of His own: ‘God 
undertakes the care of acquiring and keeping for them ’ (286). Perhaps 
it is in this connection that we should take the lines: 4 If God is 
friendly to you then all the world is kindly to you* (243) ; ‘ God is 
bound to feed all animals, we need not trouble ourselves what we 
shall get to eat * (1653). The result is the devotee enjoys true and 
perpetual peace, the passionless state, vairagya : * I enjoy peace 
because my thoughts are fixed on him ’ (2272). Resignation is 
mentioned, but it is hardly conspicuous : * Silence now my foolish 
speeches, what the Giver resolves will come to pass’ (1817). 
Those are condemned who approach God for wealth : 4 The ignorant 
seek for wealth through devotion ; how can there be any true 
perception in their souls ? They perform rites with their thoughts 
set on gain ’ (3466). For himself he says: 4 If I cannot fill my 
belly with food I will eat dust, <Dut I will not lay a burden on thee * 
(3323). Words like these reveal the depth and disinterestedness of 
Tukaram's religious devotion. 

2. Religion an Experience 

Some of Tukaram’s most valuable observations are concerning 
the necessity and value of personal experience in religion and the 
worthlessness of all else without it : 4 If you have no experience 
do not assume the exterior of knowledge* (560) ; ‘ you must pass 
along the road if you mean to reach the spot ; it is no use listening 
to mere tales of it * (554); 4 if God ceases to speak to a man, he 
too ought to be silent ; people act very differently — when God has 
ceased to speak to them they go on talking about Him’ (561); 
4 if we do not meet him face to face, what is the use of dry talk 
.about him ? Listen to the evidence in your own hearts * (584). 
Apart from inward religious experience the 4 holiest of holy places ’ 
will bring no blessing to men : 4 What good will Kasl and the 

Ganges do you if you are not pure within ? A man who talks 
without love is merely barking ’ (543); ‘without the sweetness of 
spiritual experience both teacher and taught increase their tribula- 
tion * (549). With these statements agrees the striking saying of 
Eknath a generation earlier than Tukaram : 4 You may visit one 
ttrtha (holy place) after another, but if you have not forgiveness in 
your heart your merit vanishes.’ Without such heart-experience of 
religion all profession is mere words: ‘Till a man has some experi- 
ence of his own, who would honour mere words ? ’ (2081). 4 The 

man has a crooked perverse heart, let not him wear the garland; 
the man with no sense of religious duty, void of compassion and a 
26 



20 2 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

peaceful spirit, let not him put ashes on his person * (2089). A 
religious experience of one’s own is all-sufficing : ‘ Look at my 
experience ; 1 have made God my own. I need only speak what he 
puts into my mouth * (3230) ; ‘experience will enlighten the mind 
in its own season * (3231) ; ‘ you must make experience your own, 
by putting up a prayer to God ’ (3233). 

It goes without saying that Tukaram has many poems dealing 
with the ecstasy of communion : 4 1 feel an inward sweetness 
as I gaze upon my treasure of faith: God is my bosom friend* 
(771). The thought is many times expressed in general terms, but 
it is an intercourse marked by a special limitation. One charac- 
teristic of Tukaram is that he appears to know nothing of the 
prayer of petition or intercourse in the New Testament sense. 
Prayer in a general sense — prayer for grace, for spiritual help, for 
•purification — is found on every page of Tukaram, but prayer in 
detail is not customary with him. We read nothing for example 
of prayer against a specific failing, e.g., against falsehood or 
cowardice, or of prayer for material wants. ‘Give us our daily 
bread ’ is a form of petition we have not met in Hinduism. It is 
replaced in practice by the vow. For instance a woman will 
not pray that she may have a son but she will vow a certain 
offering or pilgrimage if a son is born to her. Tukaram has 
nothing to say about such vows, though there are passages in 
which he deprecates asking God for worldly blessings. Some 
might say he held the tfiew that God ‘ knoweth that we have 
need of such things. 1 Nor does he mention prayer on behalf of 
others, even for spiritual blessings. ‘ The fact that there is in it no 
impulse to intercession for men’ would appear to argue a grave 
‘lack in Hindu mysticism even at its highest’ as seen in Tuka- 
rarn. ‘The prayers of the Hindu saints are for their own needs*, 
not ‘ for the sake of sinning, suffering men.’ 1 

VII. The Moral Ideal 

i. Tukaram’s Picture of a Good Man 

It will be understood that v/e leave out of account here the 
qualities of devotion that have been dealt with in connection with 
the religious life. We are counting up the common virtues that 
are needed in daily life. In a good man then we shall find : 

(a) Humility. This means not simply the absence of tnlpana 
but the simple absence of a high opinion of one’s merit : ‘ Possessing 
all accomplishments, the saints claim no knowledge; one who 
knows all, yet keeps as still as though he knew nothing— such a 


t /. R. Vol. 5, No. 18, April 1916, p. 220. 



VIII 


HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


203 


one the saints come to visit B (888) ; 1 give me, O God, a humble 
condition, for grandeur brings sharp torments * (362) ; see also 702. 

(6) A peaceable disposition : * As we utter Krista’s name a 
peaceful love to all men is born within us* (3403). This will show 
itself for one thing in avoiding argument: ‘We ought to answer 
yes to every argument, to show that we have no mind for disputa- 
tion; we ought to pursue no controversy* (2536); ‘hate none; be 
jealous of no being* (3346); ‘much the best thing is meekness’ 
(3362). 

(c) Kindness : ‘ The saints cannot bear to see another hurt ; it is 
a sort of pain to themselves; they feel the soul in all creatures is 
the same; this is the law of morality; this is what is meant by 
worship ; it keeps the soul at peace ’ (3477). 

(d) Truthfulness: ‘When a man speaks the truth, pleasures 
come welling up * (364) ; ‘ a man whose spoken words take effect, 
who leaves no debts unpaid, who restores loans to those who lent 
them, such a man is esteemed ’ (2196). 

(e) A cheerful contented disposition : ‘ Each should take refuge 

in his lot * (3370). Perhaps along with this we may put the lines 
— all too few — in which he recommends a brave heart : ‘ Why 
should we lead abject lives ? Our past brings us into the world ; the 
right thing then is a steady spirit of courage ; whatever can betide 
us can be no great disaster * (3434) ; ‘ you should be ready for the 
lot that overtakes you ; you should not throw your troubles on God * 
(2219). The Christian would have left .out this last negative 
because of his different conception of God. 

(f) Simplicity, Though this is not often mentioned expressly, 
no doubt it should receive a prominent place in Tukaram’s moral 
ideal, as instances in the biographical chapter show. It means 
an absence of duplicity, of concealed motives, of a calculating 
disposition, even though the objects of the calculation may not 
be discreditable. Tukaram would in any case think that very 
little in the way of prudence goes far enough. Not that he is 
without an occasional trait of shrewdness, which is amusing, even 
refreshing, in so unworldly an author: ‘ If a man irritates us it is 
best to keep away from him ’ (3373) ; ‘ we should give food to all 
creatures, but money only after a due consideration of their fitness* 
(3354) ; ‘ speech brings its own evils but a silent man is like a 
dumb post ; avoid too much and too little, this is the wise plan ; let 
your speech and silence be both appropriate * (984). 

2. Hindu Toleration: ‘The same to All Men’ 

Perhaps the most generally received, the most often quoted, 
maxim of Hindu morality is that we should be the same to all men. 
It is usually enforced by some illustration, such as that of the tree 
which offers its shade to the man who waters it and to the man who 



204 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

cuts it down. Clearly, however, this elegant simile does not clear 
up the exact meaning of the maxim, concerning which one is 
generally left in doubt. There appear to be the following possible 
interpretations: — (I) Weought not to allow any feeling of displeasure 
or anger to arise in our minds over bad actions or of pleasure over 
good actions. (2) We ought not to seek to injure men guilty of bad 
actions, even though they cause us displeasure : we ought to seek 
only to make them better. (3) Identical with this is perhaps the 
doctrine that we ought not to feel any warmth of love towards the 
good nor any hatred towards the bad. It is possible to add either 
that we ought to love all men or that we ought not to love any, but 
remain wholly unmoved towards all men. 

In its essential meaning, the maxim ‘ the same to all men* seems 
to hover between these various positions and those who use it seem 
•reluctant to define it. In practice it has done good as a force 
against harsh judgements and malevolence ; it has also done much 
harm as an excuse for the lazy toleration of other people’s mis- 
conduct, or for compromise in matters of principle. It is certainly 
abused in India. 

How far does this maxim appear in the writings of Tukaram ? 
When we meet with it, it is never far from something that 
interprets it as a practical rule : ‘ God is bound to enquire into 
guilt and merit: to us all men alike are good ’ (1653). This sounds 
in strange contrast with Tukaram’s wrathful denunciations not only 
of mankind and of wholo classes of men but even of individuals, 
including those who went to sleep in his gatherings or interrupted 
him with objections. Possibly Tukaram, who freely confesses his 
own shortcomings, would have admitted that he broke his own 
precepts occasionally in rebuking evil-doers with such personal 
severity. But under no circumstances would he have maintained 
that we are not to distinguish between right and wrong conduct. 
Probably, however, if pressed he would have said that we have no 
right to decide the degree of guilt in any particular ac'tion ; we can 
only say that in our opinion it is right or wrong. And probably, 
too, he would if pressed have told us that he saw the difference 
between the warm love which the saints feel towards each other 
and the benevolence which the good man feels towards all 
companions of his human lot. He would have seen too that 
punishment, involving pain, is often necessary to save offenders 
and is not in the least the same thing as vengeance. 

All these positions seem to be implicit in his sayings, but he 
does not make any of them quite explicit. With this admission we 
quote a few passages, but to estimate their meaning it would be 
necessary to read all the poems — not very numerous — in which 
Tukaram discusses our attitude towards mankind.: ‘ Let me not 
distinguish the guilty, the vicious, the holy, wise; they are all 
forms of thine, O God ; let me bow with my whole heart and serve 
them* (2238); ‘a cloud distinguishes not a dunghill and a field; 



VIII HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 205 

consider not what the result will be ; devote yourself to the work in 
hand * (2242) ; 4 God is our friend ; through Him all are our friends’ 
(22+7); see also 2246 and 3372. 

3. Vices, Despondency, Ecstasy 

A very large number of the poems are devoted to censure of 
vice. If we enquire what are the faults chiefly rebuked our list 
will comprise — (a) lust, especially running after other men’s 
wives; (6) slothfulness; (c) a fault-finding and quarrelsome dis- 
position ; this appears to have been the commonest fault that met 
Tukaram’s eyes, at least it is the fault of which he speaks most; 
combined with it appears the love of gossip and ill-natured 
criticism of one’s neighbours; (d) meanness and stinginess; (<*) 
hypocrisy and false pretence of piety ; (/) gambling, though we 
do not hear much of this; (g) lying, though this again is not very 
often mentioned, and rather curiously there is little about dishonesty 
in trade ; though Tukaram must have seen a good deal of this and 
even suffered from it : ‘he who swears falsely in court he is a 
sinner in the worst degree’ (3592) ; ‘doubtless the liar will fall into 
hell ’ (2495) ; ( h ) all faults are deepened when they are combined 
with hostility to the ‘saints’ and Tukaram does not spare those 
who disparage them or refuse to help and cherish them. 

On the whole he takes a desponding view of humanity : 1 I am 
sick of mankind ; I cannot contain my disgust for them* (994). He 
is strongly impressed by the difficulty of reforming the wicked. 
Their obstinate self-conceit and love of error seem , beyond the 
reach of instruction, for some men are just like animals; you can 
do nothing to help them : ‘ The heart of the wicked cannot be 
penetrated though you reason with him all his life long ’ (2455). He 
heaps simile upon simile to illustrate this melancholy truth. 

Tukaram never turned his eyes to schools or to schooling as an 
instrument for elevating our race. Indeed he has hardly anything 
to say about the young except for the constant use he makes of the 
image of the child and the mother to illustrate our relation with 
God. 

It will be seen that Tukaram really escapes from the perplexities 
of the problem of the state of mankind by dwelling on the duty to 
serve all men. His strong sense of this duty swallows up all minor 
difficulties as to how we should judge them or even how we should 
feel towards them. We shall return to this point when we speak 
of the 4 saints \ 

Notice too that Tukaram has no doubt about the duty of 
examining and judging oneself. We should sit down and examine 
ourselves, like a tradesman does : * When his accounts will not fit, 
he lights a lamp and sits examining them ’ (2194). When we find 
anything wrong let us freely take all possible blame : Let the 



206 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

object of our irritation and resentment be ourselves, then the rest 
of the world we shall look on as Hari* (3380). 

What is his view of the worship we should offer to God? 
Tukaram by no means rejects outward ceremonies, as we see in 
another place, but here we may notice what he requires as an 
attitude of mind. There are places where he says : ‘ To contem- 
plate God is to serve Him * (106) ; 4 blessed is the time that is spent 
in contemplation* (201). But mere contemplation is not enough 
for his ardent spirit. He longs to fling himself at God’s feet — 
literally at his feet in the temple, to roll in the stone courtyard in 
ecstasy. He loves to find himself in the joyous gathering of saints, 
with his cymbals in his hand, lost in rhapsody. Whatever else 
the pious devotee will do he will find time for these seasons of 
ecstasy and rejoicing. (On the distinction between ecstasy and 
devotion see chapter x, sections 6, 8.) 

• But we must credit Tukaram with a more practical piety than 
that of the mere ecstatic or enthusiast. A man’s daily life must 
prove his devotion : ‘ Work for the master, devotion to the teacher, 
obedience to parents, service to the husband, these are the solemn 
service of Vishnu : it cannot otherwise be experienced ’ ( 2059 ) ; 
‘ every action should be offered to God ; this is the only worship that 
reaches Him’ (1126). 


VIII. The Saints 

i. Their Calling and Character 

’Tukaram often refers to ‘the saints by whom he appears to 
denote the body of devotees who undertake no worldly duties, look 
to the faithful for support, and spend their days praising Vishnu. 
Such people existed in the Deccan, as they do still, and it is certain 
that Tukaram looked on them with no unfavourable eye. 1 He 
probably thought that the world was at least none the worse for 
the example of these simple, trustful, harmless enthusiasts, but 
if we weigh all his utterances concerning the religious life we 
shall feel that he did not think this retirement from practical life 
either a positive duty or a plan to be deliberately encouraged. One 
wishes he had spoken more plainly on the point; we should at 
least be more certain what his opinion was, but Tukaram leaves 
many things doubtful and the nature of the saint’s calling is one of 
them. He leaves us in no sort of doubt, however, as to their great 
helpfulness personally. On this see page 139 and section 12 
in chapter 9. 

Tukaram would not have denied the name of 4 saint ’ to any man 
whose life was saintly. What this means may be gathered from 

i See section on * The Warkaris \ pp. t70-3. 



VIII HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 207 

the passages already quoted concerning the religious life. Many 
others may be added from the pages given up to the subject of the 
saints * in the volumes of the poems. To take the first volume 
alone 1 Tukaram emphasizes (l) their humility and unselfishness: 
4 Possessing all accomplishments, they claim no knowledge; they 
cannot tell their own from what is other men’s’ (888); (2) their 
purity: ‘Blessed are the pious, for their heart is pure. The saints 
worship the visible God, they testify that they have faith therein. 
They know nothing of rules and prohibitions; their hearts are 
filled with devoted love’ (894); (3) their happiness: Here come 
Tukaram’s priceless words on the peace of the saints : 4 Wherever 
we be, our minds are at peace in themselves* (897): ‘mercy, 
forgiveness, and peace — where these are, there is the dwelling 
place of God * (706) ; (4) their other- worldliness : * We tell you we 
live in heaven, but we have no dwelling of our own place * (896) ; 
(5) their love : 4 A Vaishnava is one who loves God alone, his 
caste may be anything at all ’ (942). 


2 . Their Service to Men 


Tukaram dwells with special earnestness on the services of the 
saints to mankind. Time after time he says something like this: 

4 They wear out their bodies in serving others ; forbearing love is 
their stock-in-trade ; their happiness is in the happiness of others * 
(2375). Of what service is he thinking ? He does not make this 
point clear, but evidently religious and moral instruction is part of 
it. From the saints men learn what devotion is; they practise it 
and preach it. But it is probable that Tukaram included in the 
service of men the most ordinary help in the recurring needs of 
daily life. His own practices described by Mahlpati would bear 
out this view and it is a little curious that he does not explain his 1 
meaning more clearly. His influence for good would probably 
have been largerif he had been more concrete in dealing with the 
practical aspect of his teaching, though he gives us suggestions 
that help us. 

Note the part of the ‘saints’ in helping to save mankind. 
There is no idea that they intercede for men or that their merits 
are in any way imputed to others, but they remain always a channel 
through which the grace of God is poured forth and made accessible 
to the world. Perhaps this is only through their spiritual example 
but Tukaram does not consider .this a trivial service. On the 
contrary he is always brimming over with gratitude to the great 
company of the saints and exhorting his fellow mortals to fall at 
their feet: ‘Cling to the robe of the saints' (232). In particular, 


i F. and M. vok I, pp. 238-304, 



208 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

the saints help to save mankind by serving their fellows : — (i) by 
means of their own companionship and fellowship : ‘ In the society 
of good men we have the actual presence of God * (926) ; * make 
me a servant of the servants of saints; let all my thoughts be 
employed on service to the saints * (236) ; * let me sacrifice my life 
to win the company of the saints* (917 ; ‘let me keep company with 
the saints in any guise ; let me lie at their doors like a dog * (948) ; 
(ii) by the peace they impart; 1 To converse with them is perfect 
peace; ... I ask not who or whence they are; . . . true heroes, 
pure in spirit, every one of them * (930) ; ‘it is a blessed season 
when you have met the saints and embraced their feet; the knot 
of doubt is unravelled; there is calm within the heart * (931); ‘in 
the village of the saints there is a full harvest of love, there is no 
pain or disquietude’ (911); (iii) by the message they give: 
‘•When shall I hear the saints tell me, Pandurang has accepted 
thee ? After that my spirit will be at rest ; I shall feel assured that 
I am saved * (937) ; (iv) by the way they ignore caste and give every 
man his true value : ‘ A Vaishnava, his caste may be anything at 
all * (942) ; ‘ shame on a Brahman who is void of devotion ’ (946) ; 
‘one who sells his daughter, his cow or his sermon, he is rightly 
called a low-caste wretch ; the standards of goodness are merits and 
demerits; God considers not a man’s caste ’ (944). (V). We have 
already seen (at the close of chapter l) what the ‘saints’ or 
bhaktas did towards building an Indian Democracy. 

There appears to haVe been no definite organization of the 
‘saints’ but since Tukaram does not raise the point we are left 
largely to surmise. Those professed devotees of Vithoba who had 
left the world and who gave themselves wholly to religious exercise 
were not ascetics in the usual sense. They practised no austerities. 
But neither did they do any work or earn money in any way. They 
seem to have trusted for support to the less thorough-going 
votaries of the god, who entertained and fed them and in Recompense 
'for this received spiritual instruction. This life as we have said 
Tukaram does not in set words either encourage or forbid. We 
may suppose he thought it a noble life for those who felt called to 
it, but there is a vein of common sense running through his poems 
and he was no doubt quite able to see that without pious friends 
these teachers would perish and that such friends must help them 
whenever needed. There are passages where he clearly says that it 
is permissible for a man to live in the world and to be a faithful 
servant of God, and he probably remained satisfied that most men 
should take this line. His genius was remotely averse to any sort 
of organization and he seems to have done nothing in the way of 
organizing the saints in spite of the Bombay Gazetteer assertion 
that he organized the Wfirkaris . l 


1 B. G. xx. p. 471-3. 



VIII HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 209 

IX. Doty towards Animals 

i. Tukaram and ‘Ahimsa* 

The doctrine of ahimsa is that it is wrong to take animal life. 
This doctrine has been stated to be a deduction from the doctrine 
of transmigration, the inference being that the slaughter of any 
animal interferes with the process by which a soul is working its 
slow way towards emancipation, but this is very doubtful. It is, 
however, certain that we have here a reflex influence of philosophy 
on life. The doctrine is by no means accepted by all Hindus. In 
the Deccan for instance many Hindus are flesh-eaters and are no 
more scrupulous about mutton than anybody else. Maharashtra 
Brahmans, of whom there are twelve divisions, all abstain from it, 
save the Janals who are fish-eating Brahmans. 1 The doctrine of 
ahimsa makes its appearance in Tukaram’s pages. Strange to say, 
the caste to which he belonged, the Marathas, do not hold it, the 
use of animal food being common amongst them, though Tukaram 
shakes his head over the taking of animal life: ‘What have the 
water creatures done to the fishermen that he seeks to destroy 
them ? ’ (2523). But his most devoted followers, those belonging 
to the Warkarl school of thought, hold tenaciously to the principles 
of ahimsa. See their principle numbered 13, on page 172, in 
accordance with which all Warkarl pilgrims to Ajandl, Dehu and 
Pandharpur are vegetarian in their habits. 

2 . Affection for Animals, especially Dog's 

He recognizes duties towards animals : ‘ Despise dogs and pigs 
for their bodies, but show them respect for their souls — embrace 
spiritually beasts and trees’ (876).* This vein of reflection is not 
much worked and Tukaram does not, for instance, offer any 
suggestion how the needless suffering of animals may be averted. 

On the other hand his attitude towards animals is extremely 
sympathetic and he shows a degree of observation rare in his 
country. He makes use of images from animal ways to illustrate 
all sorts of spiritual truths. Some of the images are drawn from 
the quaint old beliefs about animals that abound in every unsophis- 
ticated land. As the flamingo can separate milk and water with 
the tip of his break so Tukaram can distinguish the true and false 
doctrine. It is believed that the chataka bird will not drink water 
from the surface of the earth but waits for it to fall from the sky 
into his mouth (2144) ; in the hot weather therefore he has to 
exercise a good deal of patience; in the same way will Tukaram 
wait for God’s blessing. 

i See R. E. Enthoven, Tribes and Castes of Bombay, pp. 241-2, 24G, 

27 



210 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

Other images again are drawn direct from nature. Some may 
be stereotyped. Tukaram cries for mercy like a nestling crying 
with open beak for food, like a fawn for its mother when 
it is wearied by hunger and thirst in the jungle : 1 What messenger 
need go to the ants* house? At the sight of sugar they come 
running’ (2422). So too, he thinks, it should be unnecessary to 
proclaim the mercy of God, or tell men it is offered them since they 
feel the need of it themselves and know their own instincts. And 
Tukaram recalls in beautiful language the Purdnic stories of the 
birds and the hunter (318), the hunter, and the deer (238), Gajendra 
(150), the birds on the battlefield of Kurukshetra (1782), to show 
how God protects His people when they call upon Him. 

Finally one recalls, even with amusement, the similes that 
Tukaram produces from his own observation. On one occasion he 
.remarks how people are deceived about the importance of their own 
affairs : ‘ A bedstead is a mountain fortress to a bug ; how much he 
has to climb up and down * ! (2572). This will only be appreciated 
by those who have climbed up and down the mountain fortresses of 
the Deccan. ‘ A false teacher is as greedy as a cat, he goes 
begging from door to door f (1187). 4 We may beat a thievish dog 

on the head; he howls but he does not give up his tricks * (996). 

This mention of the dog, however, reminds us that the most 
beautiful and interesting of all Tukfiratn’s animal similes are to be 
found in the series on dogs. The dog is not a favourite in India, 
as he is generally a mere, scavenger, a lean, mangy, cowardly brute 
who picks up a disgusting living on the heaps of filth that surround 
the village. His humble condition makes him to Tukaram an 
appropriate image for the devotee of God, and at the same time he 
shows a surprising sense of the affection of the dog for the human 
species and his capacity for being trained. We cannot say if this 
vein is quite peculiar to Tukaram, since our knowledge of Hindu 
literature is so small, but we do not know of anything like it else- 
where. The abhangs concerned are 2143 and 2708 tb 2712 : ‘If 
a dog be encouraged he hovers round his master’s feet ; so it is with 
me — I keep close beside thee *; (2143); as dogs suspect strangers, 
so ‘ Tuka trusts nobody but God ’ (2710). 

X. Reincarnation and the State After Death 

i. Reincarnation 

That reincarnation is accepted by Tukaram as by all Hindus is 
a simple fact which needs no proof. The continuation of individual 
life through various stages appears to him no more difficult to 
comprehend than its continuation through waking days interrupted 
by nights of sleep. The soul may pass from a human body to 
an animal tenement and back again to a human : ‘If you behave 
like an owl* you will return to birth as a pig ’ (972). 



VIII HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 211 

Holding this view, most Hindus hold that the final end of the 
spiritual life is to escape from this cycle of rebirth, from personality 
at the same time, and to enter the state of final * liberation * concern- 
ing which the only statement you can make is 4 not that, not that' ; 
nothing you could say about it would be true. This idea of final 
beatitude is by no means shared by Tukaram. He seems to think 
that it is somehow possible for those who desire it, but for his part 
he would reject it with horror. 

What is it then to which he aspires? We get contradictory 
answers to this question. Complete faith in Vithoba transports the 
votary after death to swarga or vaikuntha , (Paradise) where he en- 
joys the bliss of devotion : 1 Men of low degree that might not hear 
the Vedas have found a place in vaikuntha ’ (2394); ‘utter this 
name which will save you from the cycle of rebirth’ (1730); ‘the 
worshippers of Hari have gained an everlasting gain ; they will 
return to the womb no more ; they will enjoy supreme bliss in the 
highest Brahman ; there is one alone who passes not into the 
womb, it is the servant of Vishnu ’ (2146); ‘the name of Hari 
drives away death and incarnation 9 (248) ; ‘ supplicate Pfinilurang, 
save yourself from the 84 lakhs of rebirths* (320). 

At other times, however, Tukaram seems to reject the escape 
even into vaikuntha and goes so far as to express a positive pre- 
ference for mortal rebirth, as it will afford him an opportunity to 
praise Vithoba and glorify Vithoba: ‘Make me servant of the 
servants of the saints, then I will gladly return to the womb till the 
end of time 1 (936) ; ‘ grant me future lives wherein I may serve thy 
feet ; I shall rejoice to be born again ; great is the gain if one goes 
time after time to Pandharl * (2304) ; 4 we desire not liberation nor a 
place in Vaikuntha ’ (3325) ; ‘ I desire not liberation, I should re- 
joice to be born again into the world * (3134) ; * O God, grant me 
this boon that I shall not forget thee; all my wealth is with love 
to sing thy praise ; I desire neither muMi, wealth nor offspring; 
only give me the constant companionship of the saints ; if not, then 
grant me rebirth’ (Translated from Indu Prakdsh 2306). 

We do not see that any reconciliation of these conflicting 
views is possible as a matter of strict system. But Tukaram 
leaves the question of rebirth to his master, provided he is not cut 
off from personal service and from the joy of praising him. 

2. Penalty of Evil-Doers 

So far, however, we have only considered the reward of the 
really good, but there is the question what becomes of those who 
do not reach this level but die like ordinary mortals with their 
imperfections on their head. With regard to these Tukaram adopts 
the usual Hindu view that they are allowed a period of reward or 
of punishment according to their merits, after which they return to 
the earth in a form appropriate to those merits. Thvs period is 



212 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

spent in Vaikuntha or in Pftt8la % (a place of punishment corres- 
ponding to the Christian hell), Tukaram has, however, very few 
references to the good man's days of happiness in heaven : ‘What 
shall I ask for ? Should I ask for the joys of Swarga ? When my 
merit is exhausted I must return here again * (3135). On the other 
hand he has many references to the pains of hell, of which vivid 
descriptions are given. The ruler of this realm is Yama who is the 
agent of eternal justice, but not like Satan a tempter of mankind : 
‘ The stern servants of Yama beat and cut and thrash them in 
countless ways ; they make them pass over the edges of swords, 
over glowing coals of khaira wood ; they roll them on the burning 
ground; they make them clasp fiery pillars * (1033). Illustrations 
of these proceedings may be bought anywhere in India. 

This sojourn in hell is part of a man's karma , though as we 
4iave seen, Tukaram does not solve the question how merit can be 
stored up and operate. He does not try to solve the question how 
karma operates, and for himself he prays only that his karma may 
be broken up and dispelled by the power of God’s name. But 
when he is reasoning with the wicked he makes much use of the 
threats of hell ; he considers it certain the wicked will eventually 
land wickedness does not pay. For this reason he often stands 
amazed at their folly. And having this certainty of punishment 
in view he feels acutely how urgent it is that men should reform 
while there is yet time. Western thinkers have sometimes con- 
sidered that the Hindu system perhaps encourages a procrastinat- 
ing attitude towards moral reformation, for if accordingj^to the 
karma philosophy we have endless ages to accomplish the reforma- 
tion, it is easy to postpone this ; especially if after all it is not oneself 
that will suffer but some other person theoretically identical. 
Whatever is true of Hinduism as a whole, there is one place in 
Tukaram’s system for this comfortable quiescence: the evildoer will 
suffer in hell with a full recollection of himself and his offences. 
To learn what Tukaram says on this whole subject alf the poems 
in Fraser and Marathe should be studied under the headings: ‘The 
impossibility of escaping our past ', and ‘ Rebirth ’. 

Many are his vigorous appeals to men to be prompt and wise. 
Make the most, he says often, of what your merit has already 
brought you: ‘After many lives you have at least been born a 
man ; now make yourself a friend of God ' (3537) ; ‘ after many a 
birth you have secured this gain, you have entered a human body ’ 
(958). But how fast the opportunity passes away : ‘ Measure in 
hand, Time sits measuring out your days and nights ; as thieves 
follow short cuts, so must we run ahead of time ’ (2302) ; ‘ no one 
can avoid the end ; I have seen hair cherished with scented oils yet 
in the end it turned grey ’ (2322). Men interest themselves in 
perishable things, acquiring them by questionable means: ‘What 
will they do when Death with his adamantine chain seizes and 
binds them*?' (1029) ; ‘ neither millions of wealth can follow us nor 



VIII 


HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 


213 


the rag upon our loins ' (2326). Yet the lesson is lost upon men : 

‘ You know you are to die, yet you look for foundations to build a 
house upon earth* (439) ; ‘ you watch the bodies of your fellow* men 
burned, how is it the sight does not awake you ? * (2396). Such 
sentiments inspire the most powerful of Tukaratn’s poems. 

3. The Future Life 

Tukaram does not share the Christian interest in the Future 
Life. In this he resembles his countrymen who have given little 
thought to this matter. Hindu speculation is much more con- 
cerned with the question how the world began than with the 
question how it will end. It is perplexed as to why the Indivisible 
Eternal Spirit came to take the step — so unnecessary, so deplor- 
able— of suflering portions of Himself to pass out of Ilis control, 
but as to how this step in the end will be retraced they have much 
less to say. Tukaram follows their lead in directing his specula- 
tive interest to cosmogony rather than eschatology. He does not, 
however, debate matters much. He finds it sufficient that God 
created man, created His own ‘ incarnation ' in order that the bliss 
of mutual love might be enjoyed between them. As regards the end 
of the world he is quite obscure. Of one thing he is sure, that 
the wicked are punished after death. And he seems to regard 
‘ liberation ’—the end of personal feeling — as a possibility, for he 
often says he does not want it; he even paradoxically seems to think 
that a man might go to Paradise, but he does not want that; the 
only tl^jjig he cares for is that the true devotee may on earth 
experience the bliss of the spiritual union with God. 

If you ask his followers where he is they will tell you that he is 
in Vaikuntha , the Paradise of Vishnu — not devoid of personal 
feeling but a glorified spirit. You may suggest that it is curious 
that Tukaram does not say more about his hope of attaining this 
end and some will 'answer that his modesty prevented him from 
anticipating such a reward. On the other hand in Mahipati’s record 
it is said that whenever Tukaram was asked where he was going he 
used to say he was going to Vaikuntha (see pages 105, 115-6, 126), 
and such a belief may without difficulty be attributed to him. 
From all the above it follows that there is nothing in Tukaram’s 
teaching corresponding to the Christian faith in the resurrection. 


Our enquiry in this chapter has sufficed to demonstrate the 
impossibility of seeking to reduce Tukaram’s religious ideas to 
anything like a system. A man’s own religious experience, how- 
ever, may both be deeper and more consistent than his terminology 
would indicate, particularly if as in this case the terminology is that 
of a religion dominated by a time worn philosophy. In the two 
remaining chapters, therefore, we shall examine lukarams per- 
sonal experience of bhakti religion and estimate the value of that 
religion for the life of to day. , 



MAN'S EXTREMITY 


Ah, then, O God, the efforts all are vain 
By which I’ve sought thy blessed feet to gain. 

First there was loving faith, but faith I've none; 
Nowise my restless soul can I restrain. 

Then pious deeds, but no good will have I 
For these ; nor wealth to help the poor thereby ; 

I know not how to honour Brahman guests; 
Alas ! the springs of love in me are dry. 

I cannot serve the guru or the saint ; 

Not mine to chant the name, with toil to faint, 
Perform the sacred rites, renounce the world. 

I cannot hold my senses in restraint. 

My heart has never trod the pilgrim's way ; 

The vows I make I know not how to pay. 

‘ Ah, God is here,’ I cry. Not so, not so. 

For me distinctions have not passed away. 

Therefore, I come, O God, to plead for grace, 

I, worthy only of a servant’s place. 

No store of merit such an one requires. 

My firm resolve is taken, Tuka says. 

THE SECRET OF PEACE * 

Calm 1 is life's crown ; all other joy beside 
Is only pain. 

Hold thou it fast, thou shalt, whate’er betide, 
The further shore attain. 

When passions rage and we are wrung with woe 
And sore distress, 

Comes calm, and then — yea, Tuka knows it — lo ! 
The fever vanishes. 

HE LEADETH ME * 

Holding my hand thou leadest me, 

My comrade everywhere. 

As I go on and lean on thee, 

My burden thou dost bear. 

If, as I go, in my distress 

I frantic words should say, 

Thou settest right my foolishness 
And tak’st my shame away. 

Thus thou to me new hope dost send, 

A new world bringest in ; 

Now know I every man a friend 
And all I meet my kin. 

So like a happy child I play 
In thy dear world, O God, 

And everywhere — I, Tuka, say 
Thy bliss is spread abroad. 


talm , or Peace (Santi). * Translated from TukSram, P. M, S„ 



Chapter IX 

Tnkaram’s Experience of Bhakti Religion 

There is no need at this stage of our investigation either to argue 
the case for the inward character of Tukaram's bhakti religion or 
to seek to establish the real moral strain marking it throughout. 
Both points should be clear from the preceding pages. Our 
remaining task is twofold : to delineate, as far as the available 
materials will allow, Tukaram’s own personal experience of the 
bhakti faith ; and then to evaluate his bhakti as a religion for the 
India of the twentieth century. The former enquiry is the subject 
of our present chapter, the latter that of the concluding chapter of 
the book. 


I. Importance of the Bhakti School 

We fail to reach the heart of our Dehu saint [until we seek to 
understand his experience of that Indian bhakti which transformed 
Hindu philosophy into a religion, effected in India a reformation 
and revival contemporaneous with Europe’s religious awakening 
out of her long sleep of the Middle Ages, and introduced into Hindu 
thought a spiritual element which represents India’s closest 
approximation to the Christian faith. We are not here called upon 
to trace the origin of this doctrine of bhakti ‘ professed by at least 
one hundred and fifty millions of the inhabitants of India ’ 1 nor to 
show how in bhakti 4 India rediscovered faith and love * a . This 
has been done in the luminous article on the Bhakti-Mfirga by 
Sir George Grierson in the Encyclopccdia of Religion and Ethics 
and by Dr. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar in Vaishuavism r Saivistn and 
Minor Religious Systems . Suffice to say that apart from bhakti 
we shall miss the deepest secret of Hinduism, its enduring past, its 
present trend and its probable future, for bhakti has been the 
watchword of that purer and more democratic type of Hinduism 
which has enabled the system to adapt itself to all conditions 
through the changing centuries. The secret of the enduring 
character of Indian bhakti lies in its aspiring aftera personal relation 
to a deity conceived as personal, in its use of the people's own 
vernaculars as distinct from the Sanskrit of the Vedas, and in its 
predominantly emotional character. In contrast with that type of 
Hinduism concerning which Tulsi Das complained that ‘the worship 

i E.R.E.,V ok 2, 539a. 

a Ibid 550b. 



216 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


CH. 


of the impersonal laid no hold of my heart \ the religion of bhakti 
may be defined in general as a ‘clinging of the heart’ 1 * 3 4 5 or a 
* personal faith in a personal God, love for Him as for a human 
being, the dedication of everything to His service, and the attain- 
ment of moksha by this means, rather than by knowledge, or 
sacrifice, or works \* Such a religion, after ages of barren Hindu 
philosophy, could not but make a moving appeal, besides which, 
bhakti s power of adaptation to differing environments is greatly 
assisted by the fact that ‘the highest bhakti may be directed not 
only to the Adorable in His highest form, but also to any of His 
incarnations \ * 


2. Moksha, Yoga, Bhakti in Indian Mysticism 


We have already seen ‘ the attitude of disclaimer adopted by 
bhakti ' and particularly by the bhakta of Dehu, towards the 
Vedantic conception of moksha* How far Tukaram was consistent 
and whole-hearted in this attitude we cannot say, but it seems 
certain that some of the stages leading to moksha or nmkti were 
regarded by him as both attainable and desirable. For moksha or 
mukti % the goal of an orthodox Hindu’s religious quest, has four 
stages : salokatd , dwelling in the neighbourhood of the Paramdtman 
or Supreme Spirit ; sanfipatd , nearness to God, * as near as a 
a nestling child to its mother * ; sarupatd , likeness to God, reflect- 
ing His glory ‘ as the glory of the moon is reflected in a clear still 
like * ; and sdyujyatd , complete union with God, absorption in 
Him, 1 as the river is lost in the sea, or as the nectar of a flower is 
merged in the sweetness of honey \ 6 There were blessings ob- 
tainable eit route to this last goal of moksha — those of salokatd , 
samlpatd and sarupatd — which Tukaram doubtless desired. But 
connected with the highest stage of all, sdyujyatd or absorption in 
the Supreme Spirit, there are two features which Tukaram often 
controverts : ‘ there is no persistence of personality ’ 6 and as a rule 
it is held that the highest stage of religion can only be gained by 
Yoga . Both these aspects are disliked and often rejected by the bhakti 
school and Tukaram. For the latter see chapter 8, IV, 2, ‘ Hindu 
Methods Rejected \ and in the present chapter pp. 227, 230. How 
emphatic Tukaram can be against the notion that man must 
lose his personality in order to scale the summit of devotion, the 

1 A. S. Geden, Studies in the Religions of the East, p. 351, 

2 L. J. Sedgwick, I.C.S, J. R. A. S. Bo., Vol. XXIII, No. LXV, (1910), 
p. 109. 

3 E.R.E., Vol. 2, p, 539 b. 

4 See chapter VIII. pp. 194-5. 

5 Mrs. Sinclair Stevenson, Rites of the Twice Born , pp. 197-8, 

0/6id,p 4 198. 



rx 


HIS EXPERIENCE OF BHAKTI 


217 


following utterances indicate : 4 This doctrine that God and I are 
one is false, I shall not let it interfere with me* (212); 4 the 
servants of Vishnu are separate from him 1 (1685) ; 4 Thou art void 
both of guilt and merit : we carry them in our hearts, whether 
washed away or still clinging to us* (1686); ‘had 1 not been a 
sinner, how could there have been a Saviour ? ’ — a profound sugges- 
tion. See also 1695 with Fraser and Marathe’s note upon it, p. 443, 
vol. II. It follows therefore that of the three chief Hindu 
4 Ways’ to salvation, Tukaram appears to have decisively rejected 
both the Dnydn Mdrga , the Way of Knowledge, and the Karma 
Mdrga , the Way of Works, while the Bhakti Mdrga, the Way of 
Loving Devotion, has had few nobler devotees. 

India's mystical tendency, of which Tukaram is so outstanding 
an example, has followed, generally speaking, two chief lines of 
development, one of Yoga , the other of Bhakti . Devotees both of 
yoga and of hliakti have experienced a mysticism of a unique kind, 
but in the case of the former it has been linked with an asceticism 
absent almost entirely from the latter. Kknath, Tukaratn’s 
predecessor, well expressed the difference between yoga and 
bhakti : 4 The senses that yogis suppress, bhaktas devote to the 
worship of Bhdgavat . The things of sense that yogis forsake, 
bhaktas offer to Bhdgavat . Yogis forsake the things of sense, and 
forsaking them, they suffer in the flesh ; the followers of bhakti 
offer them to Bhdgavat , and hence they become for ever emancipat- 
ed V The two types have been further distinguished as follows : 

‘ The Yogin seeks the bliss of contact with the Absolute by rigour 
and self-discipline ; the bhakta seeks it through the beauty of song, 
dance and hymn. The former tries to suppress his desires, the 
latter to express them. The watchword of the former is 
44 concentration ", mainly an intellectual effort ; the watchword of the 
latter is 44 devotion,” largely emotional 41 abandon To the Yogin , 
Peace is the goal of the mystic quest ; to the Bhakta , Joy. The 
former tries to satisfy man's craving for the changeless by penetra- 
ting ever deeper into the spiritual profound ; the latter is allured by 
exuberant vitality, expressed symbolically in movement and rhythm. 
The former is individualistic, preoccupied with solitary meditation ; 
the latter is social, deriving joy and inspiration from the company 
of kindred souls. The Yogin neglects the accompaniments of 
sacerdotal worship, and loves the seclusion of forest or cave. The 
bhakta makes full use of temple, idol, hymn. The former may 
adore Eternal Being whether personally or impersonally conceived ; 
the latter’s rich and full devotion is directed towards a Rama 
or a Kjrisria who represents the supreme Divinity in human 
form/ 2 

1 Dr. Macnicol, Indian Theisnl , p, 270. 

2 W. B. Streeter and A, G. Appasamy, The Sadhu , a Study in Mysticism 
and Practical Religion , pp. 238-242, 

28 



218 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

3. Bhakti— Pure and Impure 

It is true that the bhakti faith has often grown in unpromising 
soil, that it is found linked with pantheism and idolatry, that in the 
words of Grierson the karma philosophy * hangs like a pall over it’, 
and that the blessing it has imparted has too often been as fugitive 
and fleeting as the emotionalism accompanying it. The divinities 
to which some forms of bhakti have offered their devotion have 
occasionally been somewhat ‘ misty \ and the extravagances of 
some other forms have degenerated into gross sensuality, the 
female element being so idolized as to lead to disgusting corruptions. 
But these degrading elements have been the debasement of bhakti 
and from these grosser aspects Tukaram’s experience of bhakti is 
well-nigh free, though abhahgs like 539, 1301-5, 53, 2495 (and 
p. 667 Itidu Prakashi , vol. 2) cannot be overlooked. 1 ‘There 
are bhakti sects which can justly claim a place among the 
higher religions of the world. There are others which counten- 
ance, some which even aim at, a religious exaltation which finds 
symbols of mystic union in rites of an immoral character.’ 2 

Happily the bhakti experience of the saint of Dehu belongs to 
the former type, the erotic imagery familiar to some other forms of 
bhakti being rare in his poems, thus giving the student the pleasant 
task of studying bhakti at its best. Such a student, moreover, is 
driven to the conclusion that he is studying one to whom bhakti is the 
whole sum and substance of religion, of whom it might be said, what 
was said of Kablr, that to him ‘religion without bhakti was no 
religion at all.* 

What Tukaram’s experience of bhakti meant to him has already 
been partly set forth in chapter 5 on the ‘ Autobiography*, while 
our eighth chapter sets forth much of his teaching gathering 
around the bhakti ideal. In the sections dealing with the Ideas of 
God, Sin, the Means of Salvation, the Obstacles to Salvation, the 
Religious Life, The Moral Ideal, The Saints — in all these sections 
the exposition of ‘ Tukaram’s Religious Ideas* deals with most of 
the fundamental aspects of Tukaram’s bhakti. It only remains there- 
fore to bring together Tukaram’s personal experience of bhakti and 
his teaching about it, seeking to trace the deep underlying idea of 
the whole — the soul’s quest after God, its faith in God, its devotion 
to God. 


4. Bhakti Poetry and Terminology 

In all study of the experience of Maratha bhaktas two or three 
preliminary cautions are necessary. The first is a repetition of 
something fcaid more than once in the preceding pages, viz., that we 

* On these see chap. X, sect, 5, 

• * Streeter and Appasamy, p. 238. 



IX HIS EXPERIENCE OF BHAKTI 219 

cannot be sure of the authenticity of our documents or of the 
chronology or correct sequence of the poems on which we have to 
rely in our study of Tukaram's experience and teaching. This makes 
impossible any deductions as to the stages of his inward progress. 

The second reminder is that a poet has his moods and that the 
religion of every bhalcti poet was largely a religion of emotion. 
Says Sir Narayan Chandavarkar, one of the most enthusiastic of 
Tukaram’s modern admirers : ‘ To understand the hymns of 
Tukaram aright we must. . . trace the different phases of transi- 
tion through which his soul had passed. . . ( 1 ) exaltation, ( 2 ) 
humiliation, ( 3 ) self-abnegation or self-surrender. Of the experience 
of Tukaram while he passed through his mood of exaltation we 
know nothing with certainty .’ 1 

The third reminder, perhaps the most important of all, is that 
it is impossible always to be certain regarding the exact content of 
the terms he employs in expressing the yearnings of his soul. It 
is probably as incorrect to read into these terms all the commonly- 
accepted orthodox Hindu connotation as it is to give them the 
Christian interpretation sometimes adopted. Wc know his envi- 
ronment was entirely Hindu and that the ancient Hindu heritage 
had been handed down to him from his fathers. We know too that 
he by no means succeeded in breaking loose from that heritage, 
even if he consciously attempted to do so. That much of his 
religious terminology bore the Hindu stamp is therefore quite 
certain. But when we ask how much and how far, our difficulties 
begin. And yet the question is of the utmost importance when we 
deal with fundamental terms such as ‘Sin’, ‘Salvation*, ‘ Faith * 
and many others. We are probably safe, however, in concluding 
on the one hand that such terms conveyed to him far more than 
the merely ceremonial or philosophical implications held by most 
Hindus of the time, and on the other hand that they could not have 
for him that full ethical and spiritual significance with which they' 
are invested in the New Testament documents and later Christian 
literature. For example, we cannot afford to forget the probable 
chasm between his view of God and that held by most of his 
modern readers, his own educated followers not excepted ; for even 
his loftiest flights of religious communion were probably more or 
less connected in some way with the image of Vithoba at 
Pandharpur. Of course on a matter like this, no one can be 
dogmatic, but it would appear unsafe in light of his poems to rule 
out the possibility of his having held communion with God of a 
purely spiritual character, altogether unconnected with the idol. In 
many abhahgs there would appear to be a measure of approximation 
to the richer moral meanings of some of the fundamental terms of 
religion, such an approximation indeed as to justify present-day 
bhaktas and expositors of Tukaram like Sir Ramkrishna 

1 Speeches and Writings of Sir Ndrdyan Chandavarkar , pp. 525, 557. 



220 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

Bhandarkar in attaching some deeper significance to Tukaram’s 
devotional phraseology, as we do in the following exposition. But 
so many keys to the understanding of Tukaram are yet missing, 
that it is well to premiss the possibility that there may be whole 
tracts of Tukaram’s experience concerning which every modern 
interpreter has gone wrong, ourselves included. 

5 . Divine Presence and Guidance 

Alternating rapture and despair have left a deep mark on all 
Tukaram’s pages, but on one theme he is unvarying and consistent : 
* Cling to God always; think of God always; make God part and 
parcel of your life.’ This is the one steady beacon-light that shines 
through all his poems. ‘ If you place your hopes in anything but 
God you will surely be disappointed ;. . . when God is made the 
settled goal, He bears the burden of that man’s welfare and does 
not forsake him.' 1 2 3 ‘ No particular time is necessary for the 
contemplation of God, says he: it should be done always. That 
mouth is pure which always utters the name of God. . . So 
preaches Tukaram to all people V a ‘Tukaram has his home in the 
Inconceivable* (157s). ‘ In the Stainless One 1 have established my 
home; in the Formless One I abide. In the unconscious I dwell 
serene* (2755). ‘God is ours, certainly ours, and is the soul of all 
souls. God is near, certainly near, outside and inside. God is 
benignant, certainly benignant, and fulfils every longing even of a 
longing nature. God protects us, certainly protects us, and subdues 
strife and death. God is merciful, certainly merciful, and protects 
Ttika *. 8 * When thou takest service from anyone, it is service 

beyond measure ; when thou givest, O God, though givest without 
measure. . . . When thou leavest us, thou leavest us far from 
thee; when thou drawest near, thou dwellest in the very heart * 
(1663). ‘My spirit is firmly lodged at thy feet; wherever I am 
I will keep my eye on them. Tuka says, I am able to speak 
of thee, because God is contained in my heart* (1670). ‘Thy 
feet are lodged in my heart, they point me out thy secret, O God. 
Thy feet guide my blindness, in thy wisdom thou leadest me; my 
mind is at rest, my senses repose; this is no strength of mine, O 
God. The difference of guilt and merit — this darkness thou hast 
removed. . . . Tuka says, This is an act of thy valour, O 
Generous One, I know it who seek thy aid’ (2147). There comes 
next to the last abhatig in the order of the English translation, one 
which might well have been a Hebrew psalm: ‘Wheresoever 1 go, 
thou art my companion ; thou takest me by the hand and guidest 

1 I. }\ abhatig 661. Transited by Dr. P. R, Bhandarkar, Two Masters : 
Jesus and Tukdram, p. 18 

2 Sir N. G. Chandavarkar's translation, Speeches and Writings, p. 527. 

3 Sir R. G. Bhandarkar’ s trs., V.5.M.R.S., p. 95. 



tx HIS EXPERIENCE OF BHAKTI 221 

me. As I walk along, I lean on thee, thou goest with me carrying 
my burden. If I speak wildly, thou orderest my words ; thou hast 
taken away my shame, I am made bold. I look on all mankind as 
gods and protectors ; they are kindred and dear to my soul. Now, 
says Tuka, I pray with childish delight; I feel thy bliss within 
and without me* (21+9). Of this beautiful hymn Dr. Macnicol has 
given the charming translation, with the title ‘ He Leadeth Me*, 
which we have quoted opposite the title page of the present chapter. 
In a sermon on this abhatig Sir Narayan Chandavarkar has the 
illuminating comment : ‘ Mark the successive changes of the 
relation. We start in life with God as our Master; we begin by 
obeying him ; His will is our law ; and soon the Master develops 
into our Friend as we go on serving Him ; then the Master and the 
Servant begin to be familiar; and the Master stoops to serve the 
Servant. . . The nectar of Tukaram’s hymns is shed for us when 
they are sung ; and of this hymn it is especially true. It has no 
falls — line rises upon line, thought grows with thought, and the 
poet pictures to us our God changing from Master into Friend, 
Teacher, Lover until at last His companionship turns Him into 
our very being, . . And growth from within means walking with 
God, feeling His touch, realizing His presence and communing 
with Him, filling ourselves with the spirit of what the Bible speaks 

of as the Holy Ghost and the Upanishads term i 

6. The Non-plussed Bhakta 

This ‘ pilgrim of eternity*, however, had passed through many a 
‘slough of despond* ere he reached so exalted a summit. 4 0 God/ 
he cries in one place, ‘how many days I have spent in meditation 
and in praise of Thee ! To meet with Thee and to enquire of Thee 
I came, but Thou dost not even turn to look at me. Not one word 
dost Thou speak of concern for my condition. Thou art altogether 
silent. I am in distress. For some word of comfort from Thy 
lips I waited, but Thou art so unconcerned that it seems as if Thou 
hast covered Thyself with a cloak lest my very shadow should 
defile Thee. I am ashamed at being called Thy servant.* a Many 
passages of Tukaram’s passionate pleading with his god remind us 
forcefully of that non plussed prophet of the Hebrew Old Testa- 
ment, Jeremiah, who in the paroxysms of his doubt and grief accused 
God of having 4 played with him and made a fool of him *, as well 
as having deceived His own people. 4 Ah, Lord God !* the prophet 
cries, ‘ surely thou has greatly deceived this people and Jerusalem, 
saying, Ye shall have peace, whereas the sword reacheth unto 
the soul. . . O Lord, thou hast deceived me and I was deceived ; I 
am become a laughing stock’ (Jer. iv. 10, xx. 7). 4 No need to 

1 Sir N. G. ChandSvarkar'S Speeches and Writings* pp. 629-31. 

2 Translated from M. W. etc., pp. 177-8. 



222 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch* 

tone down the complaint of deception/ says Dr. A. B. Bruce/ * let 
it stand there in its unmitigated bluntness. The Divine Spirit, 
Author of all noble impulses, judges men by the habitual bent of 
their will, not by the verbal escape of their dark doubting moments/ 
Nor must we judge the earnest bhakti pilgrim when he cries out to 
his god, ‘ Thou art jesting, thou art joking with me/* or ‘ Thou 
hast begun to play with me \ 8 The Hebrew prophet had exclaimed : 

* And if I say, I will not make mention of Him, nor speak any more 
in His name, then there is in my heart as it were a burning fire 
shut up in my bones, and I am weary with forbearing and I cannot 
contain * (Jer. xx. 9) ; and our Maratba bhakta cries out : ‘ Effect 
my salvation or acknowledge defeat ; stand fast, O God, by the 
words Thou hast spoken. ... I have ciung fast to Thee. ... I 
am sorely cast down; I cry to Thee, O God, for mercy* (1938). 
Ah d he waxed even bolder in remonstrance with his god : * You are 
cruel and inconceivable, you are stern and heartless ; you do what 
should not be done ; what no other has done, you do. You took 
from Harishchandra his glory. . . You brought together Nala 
and Damayanti, and you parted them ; this all the world knows. . . 
Those who worship you are brought to such straits as these. Tuka 
says, We know not what you will do in time to come* (426). 
But just as the prophet, despite the self-contradiction, resumed his 
mission in spite of his repugnance towards it, so Tukaram, in spite 
of the disappointing attitude of his god, will still cling to him in loving 
loyalty. Despite the utfer unconcern in place of the desired 
response, the longsuffering Tukaram resolves he will persist in his 
devotion. 

It must be faithfully recorded, however, that Tukaram sometimes 
expresses views that cannot be harmonized with any worthy 
conception of the divine. Along with our bhakta' s earnest remon- 
strances with his god there are reproaches which go far beyond 
either reverent doubt or good-humoured raillery : ‘ God # is a timid 
creature ; when He sees violence coming He hides Himself * (1755). 

‘ Why dost not Thou run to my cry ? Thou art keeping thy own 
body secure ; for all thy strength thou art turning a rogue ’ (1963) ; 

* I have now-well learned the nature of God ; . . . people know 
thee for a thief and vicious wretch. . . Many found thee false in 
days gone by; this has been my experience too; Tuka says, 
O hypocrite, thou hast moved me to anger; now I cannot restrain 
my mouth * (2138). Such abuse of his god, however interpreted — 
and there are various interpretations — must be regarded as a dark 
trail across the bright path of the noblest bhakti 4 as is also the 
strange idea of sin in abharig 1862 : * Fail not in thy duty, O Lord 


1 The Providential Order , p. 349. 

' 1 2 3 4 Translated from M. W . p. 180. 

3 F. and M. 294-6. 

4 See further chap, x, sect. 5. 



IX 


HIS EXPERIENCE OF BHAKTI 


223 


of Rakhumal ; it is appointed to us to sin ; it is thine to save the 
fallen ; our part we have carefully performed ; thy share must be 
done as it will/ That Tukaram had other ideas about sin our next 
section will show. 


7. Bhakti and the Sense of Sin 

How grave an obstruction, in his great quest, was his sense of 
sin, Tukaram has made abundantly clear, as we have already seen 
on pages 135-137 of chapter 5. Since that section was prepared 
for the press there has appeared the eleventh volume of Dr. 
Hastings * monumental Encyclopaedia 0 } Religion and Ethics with 
an exposition of the Hindu teaching on Sin by Dr. A. Berriedale 
Keith, Regius Professor of Sanskrit and Comparative Philology in 
the University of Edinburgh. It must be pronounced inadequate. 
Apart from the statement that ‘ the (Gita) doctrine of grace in 
effect overthrows the whole rationale of the karma theory, without 
substituting for it any basis of a moral system’, and the mention 
of Kablr’s ‘indignant protest * against ‘ sin-destroying ’ ceremonies 
that are either non-moral or immoral, there is no recognition of the 
depth of moral feeling which characterizes the sense of sin in not 
a few bhakti devotees. ‘The later Hinduism of the Puranas and 
the law digests,’ says Prof. Keith, ‘ devote their energies to multi- 
plying the number of sins, ceremonial, social and moral, between 
which they make no distinction, but at the same time regard all 
those offences, of whatever degree, as capable of expiation by 
pr&ya£chittas , ... or by the saving grace of a sectarian deity 
whose favour can be won by acts of pilgrimage or devotion of 
purely formal character — doctrines wholly incompatible with the 
development of any deep moral sense/of the heinousness of wrong- 
doing in itself \ 1 This imperfect characterization entirely overlooks 
the deep-rooted sense of personal sin and of moral need which finds 
expression in South Indian Saivite saints like Apparswami and 
Manikka Vasahar 2 as well as in our own Vaishnavite Tukaram: 

‘ The Endless is beyond, and between him and me there are the 
lofty mountains of desire and anger; I am not able to ascend them, 
nor do I find any pass/” ‘ I know my faults, but I cannot control 
my mind; O Narayana, stand before me to shield me ; prove thou 
art truly called a sea of mercy ; I speak but I find it hard to act, 
I am a slave of the senses ; 1 serve thee as best as I can, says 
Tuka, be not heedless of me, O Narayana!’ (1369); ‘call this 
sinful one to thee; do not rake up any memories; root out my 
sinful acts' (1503); ‘ I know not how to cleanse me of sin, so I 
have seized thy feet. . . . Tuka says, if thou dost take a thing in 

1 E . R. E., vol. xi. p. 562a. 

* See Hymns of The Tamil Saivite Saints t Heritage of India Series, 
pp. 43-7, 97-9, 101. 

1 V. S. M . R, S„ p. 96. 



224 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CHi 

hand, what is impossible? ’ (2035); * thy title “ Lord of the humble*' 
is justified in the eyes of men , thou hast saved many a humble, 
many a guilty, many a sinful man; Tuka dwells at thy feet; 
preserve him, O God ! * (248) ; ‘ my strength was wasted by the 
long drag of the senses * (768) ; ‘ what can I do now to this mind 
of mine? In spite of all my prayers it will not stand still; ... it 
seeks to drag me down to hell ; . . . it is full of eddies of sensual 
pleasure; . . . hopes and projects are full of sin; they have 
ruined me altogether’ (3031) ; ‘ I heard thy name, thy established 
fame as Saviour of the Sinful, therefore 1 hoped on ; now I have 
found thee pitiless; I have lost all hope, says Tuka’ (3036). 

‘ What prayer can I put up ? Who will decide that what I say 
has found favour ? O Store of Grace, I can form no inference 
concerning this ; most piteous cries have l uttered ; no answer 
have I heard ; up till now, 1 felt sure that some of my service had 
been accepted ; Tuka says, now nothing but the struggle is left me; 
I see no sign of assurance in him who stands hand on hip * (3010). 

I am a mass of sin ; 

Thou art all purity ; 

Yet thou must take me as I am 
And bear my load for me;i 

1 though I made myself ceremonially pure, some impurity would 
cling to m<?. . . In every eeremony, errors arise, a fruitful cause of 
sin * (2968). 

So remorseless was his introspection that even in his kirtans 
and in the popularity resulting therefrom he saw ‘the snare of 
pride’ within. Abhaiig 1858 in Fraser and Marathe has been 
rendered by Dr. Macnicol : 

None skilled as I in craft of subtle speech ; 

But, ah 

Who knows my inward part ? * 

I proud became from honour that men paid 

To me, and thus my upward growth was stayed. 

Alas 1 the way of truth I cannot see, 

Held fast by self in dark captivity -2 

In a sermon on this abhaiig preached at the Golden Jubilee celebra- 
tion of the Poona Prarthana Samaj, the Hon'ble Dr. Sir Narayan 
Chandavarkar said: * In this abhaiig , Tukaram warns us against 
the danger of self or conceit, showing how every moment of our 
life we are apt to be victimized by it. . . He says, I started with 
the idea of conquering myself but in the very process people come 
and praise me which is apt to swell my head. . . . They call me 
saint, but they do not know how much of sinfulness there is in me. 
They do not know how I have to struggle with myself.’ 1 

1 P.M. S.,p. 65. 

2 Ibid p. 76. 

.1 Subodh Patrikd, May 22, 1921. 



IX 


HIS EXPERIENCE OF BHAKTI 


225 


In view of the foregoing and of many other proofs of a ‘deep 
moral sense* in Hindu bhaktas , Dr. Keith and other scholars need 
greatly to revise their estimates if they are rightly to understand 
India's agelong religious passion. 

8. The Quest for Inward Purity 

Inward purity thus becomes a prime necessity in order to achieve 
the quest for salvation. ‘ I heed not ascetics and preachers of 
Hari, their views are many and diverse ; I may salute them out of 
courtesy, says Tuka, but what 1 delight in is purity of heart 1 
(2632) ; ‘ let this be your renunciation, to expel the sense of self . . 
what you need, says Tuka, is a clean heart and a spirit at peace ' 
(2309) ; ‘ blessed are the pious, for their heart is pure ; the saints 
worship the visible God, they testify that they have faith therein; 
they know nothing of rules and prohibition; their hearts are 
filled with devoted love * (894). 

How shall this needed purity be found ? Not by ceremonies 
nor yet by pilgrimage . 4 What hast thou done by going to a holy 
river? Thou hast only outwardly washed thy skin. In what way 
has the interior been purified ? . . . If peace, forgiveness and 
sympathy do not come in, why should you take any trouble ? 91 
4 Do not give up food ; do not betake yourself to a forest-dwelling 
. . . Dedicate everything you do to God, and have done with it ; 
nothing else is to be taught but this .’ 9 Not by anything which this 
‘helpless sinner ’ can do will he win the haven of rest : 4 We cannot 
reach this God by hypocritical words; He knows the smallest thing 
that keeps you from Him* (2187); ‘when I look for some means 
of escape, I am caught in such a strait that my intellect and 
force are reft away, ... I am held as in a cleft by rules and 
prohibitions, ... I am tortured by the desires that pursue me ; 
now set me free; I am altogether feeble, O God!' (334). For 
Tukaram has full confidence that God can satisfy His child’s 
desire: ‘Tuka says, When God assists, He makes the incomplete 
complete* (2218). 


9 . Where the Path of Blessing? 

How then obtain the divine blessing ? It is a great question 
and Tukaram has a great answer : ‘It is faith ( bhdva ) that procures 
the grace of God' (812); ‘my single-minded faith {blidva) has 
put an end to pilgrimage to and fro' (2773); ‘Tuka says, the 
chief thing needed is faith {bhdva ) ; God comes quickly and stands 
where He finds faith’ (3671) ; ‘it is faith {bhdva) that moves us 
and is fitly called the means of salvation. ... If you serve God 

1 V.S.M.R.S., p, 95. 

29 


% Ibid p. 97, 



226 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

without faith ( bhclva ), says Tuka, how will you become fit for 
Him?* (2597); ‘says Tuka, without devotion {bhakti) and faith 
( bhUva ) everything else is useless trouble; 1 * 3 ‘ lay reasoning or learning 
aside in a bundle, for here faith {blictva) is the one great criterion ; ’ a 
or as translated in Fraser and Marathe : ‘ Wrap up and put away 
your knowledge; here faith is what you must trust to * (558). In 
Tukaram’s own mind there appears to be no doubt that bhdva^ 
translated as faith in all the above cases, is the path of blessing. 
But when we ask his modern interpreters what the word bhclva 
means they seem to speak with muffled sound. Sir R. G. Bhandar- 
kar defines it as ‘faith, love, or the pure heart’ {V.S.M.R.S., p. 109); 
and again he says it has different meanings in different contexts and 
it is necessary to examine each case;* in the last instance given 
above the word meaning simply that heart-religion whereby the 
knowledge and vision of God are attained without conscious effort ; 
and he supplies a deeply instructive parallel from the Svetctsvatara 
Upanishad referring to ‘ those who by the heart know the Supreme 
Spirit who dwells within *. 4 5 6 7 Without importing into the word too 
much it would certainly appear to be on one side of it a 
remarkable anticipation of that heart-trust in God’s mercy which 
alone brings peace to the troubled conscience. On its more practical 
side, what We may call its ethical aspect, Sir Narayan Chandavarkar 
well points out that ‘ this faith on which Tukaram insists’ has for 
its ‘ basis’ the ‘three principles of Dan, Daman , Dharma — charity, 
self-restraint and self-reverence. . . . The cultivation of these 
three virtues constitutes faith and we say with the saint that it is 
-practical for ordinary men to live the life described by Tukaram ?'* 
It is, however, with the inward aspect that bhakti is most concerned, 
what Tukaram alludes to when he says: ‘The great precept of 
religion is to hear God in the heart* (812). 

• 

10. Change of Heart necessary 

Without this personal experience of religion, both purity and 
comfort will remain as strange to us as sorrow is to a Gujarati 
woman who will readily feign grief and will mourn to order for a 
few annas a day. 0 ‘ Fortunate, indeed, are those persons in whose 
heart dwells forgiveness, . . . who both internally and externally 
are pure like the Ganga and whose heart is tender .’ 1 The great 
problem resolves itself therefore into one of change of heart, 

i V.S.Af.R.S., p. 05. 

* Translated from M. XV. % p. 223. 

3 M.W., p. 187. 

4 Translated from Ibid , pp. 187-8. 

5 Sir N. G. Chanda varkar’s Speeches, pp. 577-0. 

6 M.W., p. 248-9. 

7 R. G. Bhandarkar’s tr. of abhatig number 5383 in TukSrSm TatyS’s 

edition, p. 97. 



IX HIS EXPERIENCE OF BHAKTI 227 

as many abhangs quoted above have already shown* ‘ Whether I 
am indeed God’s child* truly accepted by Him, how am I to know ? 
How shall I know of a surety that my heart is purer, my mind less 
tainted with anger? For if love be not in my heart how has 
my heart been changed ?’ 1 This wonderful seeker, says his greatest 
interpreter, points out three ways aspired after in his own experience 
of bhakti : (l) personal meditation and worship, in which the whole 
powers of mind and heart are concentrated on God, Ilis words and 
saints, the latter especially; (2) personal self-examination, so 
intense as to root out pride and self esteem, and Tukaram’s 
self-examination — an essential part of his bhakti — was of a most 
merciless type; and (3) personal self-surrender to God, taking 
refuge in Him, so that there is no need of man or of his approval, no 
voice being desired but the voice of God, for man is the child of 
God his Mother and in that experience he may find a peace 
affecting the whole range of conduct. 51 If Sir Eamkrishna Bhandar- 
kar’s richly-laden Marathi paraphrase of one cry of Tukaram has 
not read too much into the bhaktas simple words — a possibility 
against which we always need to guard — then in one abhahg 
Tukaram has brought all the above three ‘ means * together. Sir 
Ramkrishna’s Marathi paraphrase we translate thus: ‘ How sinful 
my body was, O God ! But by meditation, by self-inspection, and 
repentant prayer my sin is cleansed and now my mind is full of 
love 1 . 3 Fraser and Marathe render as follows: ‘My body was 
filthy, but it was cleansed by thy name ; my heart was washed 
clean with love ; penitence brushed off the dirt ; the chain of my 
deserts was severed; Tuka says, I laid my body at thy feet and 
bought myself off ’ (2064). With this agrees the commentary of 
Mr. V. N. Joga, 1 the meaning of the phrase ‘the chain of my 
deserts was severed’ being that his ‘ karma was broken’, 
illustrating how orthodox Hindu ideas and deeply devotional 
aspirations are mingled throughout. 

ii. The Steep Road to Bhakti’s Summit 

It was a long, rough road this pilgrim had to travel in quest of 
peace of heart. He confesses that his mind by turns is fickle, dull 
and restless. Often have faith and devotion been preached to him 
but what they really are and how they are attained he does not 
know. Let God therefore do with him what He will ; let Him 
save or let Him kill; let Him be near or far away ; at His feet 
this seeker will persist in staying, tarrying there in the spirit of a 
deep humility, a simple faith in divine protection, and a despairing 

* Translated from Af. W. p. 315. 

« See V S.M . /?. S., 10, 55 ; and Af. U\, 315-21. 

3 Translated from M. W. pp. -143-4. 

4 See Joga’s edition, vol. 11, p. G75 on abhang 3937. ^ 



228 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

abandonment of self and its whole powers. 1 Deeply moving is the 
abhang expressing this resolve, too long to quote in full : ‘ Now 
thou shalt do as seems fit to thee ; I have sought thee, 
all ignorant, ... I cannot rule my wayward senses; I have 
exhausted every effort ; peace and rest are far from me. I have 
offered thee perfect faith ( bh&va ) ; I have laid my life at thy feet ; 
do now as thou wilt, I can only look to thee ; O God, I trust in 
thee, I cling firmly to thy robe. Tuka says, It is for thee to deal 
with my efforts ’ (92). In reaching so noble a resolve, despite its 
note of half despair, Tukaram reached bhakti's summit, though he 
knew it not. In making the steep ascent, he had been compelled 
to leave behind much that had encumbered him, for only by the 
bhakti path could the Eternal be discovered, and the path was 
narrow as well as steep. Not by yoga could union with the 
SupremeSpirit be attained, nor by mantras . ‘ The five fires’ 2 3 brought 
much torture but not God. Utterly vain too were all other austeri- 
ties, and all mere knowledge. Not by these could the assurance of 
the Divine Presence be imparted to the soul. ‘ So devotion has been 
invented to measure thee withal, . . . for verily there isnoother way 
to do it. By sacrifice and austerity and union through the body, by 
recourse to contemplation, thou canst not be found 1 (23 1). Thus it 
is only by single-hearted devotion ( bhakti ) that God is realized. 
To such a heart He appears everywhere and creates therein 
penitence for all wrong, says Tukaram ; losing himself in God, such 
a one is filled with joy and his life becomes entirely fruitful*. 
On bhakti's summit Tukaram discovered a trio of graces — pity, 
pardon, peace — of which he grew especially fond, for we find 
them again and again in the hymns he sings. The Vishnu-das 
or servant of Vishnu he describes thus: ‘He who gives to God 
simple-hearted devotion which manifests itself in manifold ways, 
within his soul there dwells that spirit of pity, pardon, peace which 
keeps pain far away ;’ 4 5 6 7 * there is no Saviour of the needy save 

God alone ; for in Him are pity, pardon, peace and those other 
eternal graces which are the secret of bliss;’ 8 4 where pity, pardon, 
peace abide, there God dwells; thither He runs and makes His 
home, for spirit is the place of His abiding, and where these graces 
hkve free play He tarries;' 0 ‘when I attain the bliss of him who 
sees Brahma in all mankind then shall the ocean of my life swell 
with billows of> joy, my heart will be turned from lust and other 
sorrows and in their place pity, pardon, peace will have free 
Play.” 

1 Paraphrased from M. W. pp. 461-2. 

2 See p. 45, last two lines. 

3 Paraphrased from M . IV'. 179-82. 

* Translated from Ibid 436 ; see also F. and M . 1707. 

5 Translated from Ibid 5S1. 

6 Translated from Ibid 535-36 ; see another translation, F. and M . 706. 

7 Translated from I P. 2467 ; See also F. and M . 2189, 





THMPM-IS OX THE RIVER BANK AT PA NPHAKPl’R 




IX 


229 


' HlS EXPERIENCE OF BHAKTI 

12. The Fellowship of the Bhaktas 

We noted above in passing that Tukaram attaches special 
importance to meditation in company with saints. ‘ One special 
characteristic of the bhakti school/ says Sir Ramkrishna Bhand- 
arkar, 1 * 3 * is that all the devotees meet together, enlighten each other 
as to the nature of God and contribute by discourses on Him to 
each other’s elevation and gratification. This is almost a charac- 
teristic mark of bhaktas as distinguished from the Yoglns> who 
have to go through their exercises singly and in solitude \ * In the 

Marathi bhakti poets’, says Mr. Sedgwick, a ‘the saints, i.e., 
bhaktas , men whose spiritual life is already developed are treated 
with extraordinary honour. Their society is to be continually 
enjoyed According to Namdev, the true disciples of bhakti must 
‘abide ever near the saints *. We may be very sure therefore that 
Tukaram’s eager spirit was not out of their company for long. 
For the place they occupy in his system see the section on * The 
Saints’ in the last chapter. Here we are concerned with their 
place in his own experience of bhakti : 4 I learned by heart some 
speeches of the saints, being full of faith in them ; when others 
sang first, I took up the refrain, purifying my mind by faith ; I 
counted holy the water wherein the feet of the saints had been 
washed. . . I honoured the instruction my teacher gave me in a 
dream, I believed firmly in God’s name. . . God never neglects 
his worshipper; I have learned that he is merciful* ( 1 0 1) ; 4 O 
Lord, thou art impatient to serve thy devotees. . . Sages and 
saints without number have learned what thy great purpose is ; 
imperishable is the bliss thou hast bestowed on those that have 
altogether ceased to heed the world* (7 47); ‘there is unending 
peace with the saints ’ (749) ; ‘ they dance and clap the hands and 
roll on the earth in a transport of love ; my friends are the saints, 
the simple and faithful people of Hari ; they have no concern 
with the world*’ (895) ; ‘the meal which the saints have partaken 
of is a plate of nectar ’ \ On the defective aspect of this ecstasy 
among the saints, see chapter 10, sections 6 and 8. 

13. ‘Unsatisfied Religious Anxiety’ 

Stimulated in his inward conflict by the examples of the saints, 
and buoyed up by personal faith, Tukaram would appear to 
have reached some kind of goal in his soul’s great quest. What 
goal he did reach, and how intense a 4 lover of God ’ Who had led 
him there he became, is hinted in hymns like the following : 4 I 
feel an inward sweetness, as 1 gaze upon my treasure of faith ; God 

1 V. S. M. R. S . p. 20 

2 /. R. A. 5. Bo., vol. xxiii, no. Ixv, 1910, p. 133. 

3 L. J. Sedgwick, ’s J.R.A .S. vol. xxiii, No. Ixv, 1910,. p»133. 



230 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

is my bosom-friend, the bosom-friend of this helpless creature: 
according to his glorious might let him adorn us with purity. 
Tuka says, God eats with us, to give us a share in his love ’ (771) ; 
* If I praise any other than thee let my tongue rot away. If I care 
for any other, let my head be crushed. If I find pleasure in others, 
surely it is sinful that very instant. If the ears drink no nectar of 
God’s glory, what use are they? Tuka says, If I forget thee for 
one moment, what purpose can life serve?’ (151). How he 
solved that other problem of his haunting guilt the following stanzas 
show : 

Guard me, O God, and 0, control 
The tumult of my restless soul. 

Ah, do not, do not cast on me 
The guilt of mine iniquity. 

My countless sins, I, Tuka, say, 

Upon thy loving heart I lay 1 

And again : 

The self within me now is dead, 

And thou enthroned in its stead. 2 

Students of Tukaram find themselves longing that the above 
might be regarded as describing the final haven of rest reached by 
our ‘wrestler with the troubled sea’ but we cannot be quite sure 
that they express more than a passing phase of emotional ecstasy, 
not uncommon with devotees of bhakti. If so, we have to fall back 
upon Dr. Wilson’s diagnosis of Tukaram's highest attainment as 
having been one of ‘ unsatisfied religious anxiety’ \ 

That there is real ground for this view is shown by the following 
considerations regarding our preceding paragraph, illustrating the 
constant need of the watchfulness spoken of on page 221 above. 
First, the lofty abhang 151, just quoted, is addressed to his 
favourite Hari, that name of Vishnu which characterises him as 
‘sin-remover’. 4 Second, the first three stanzas quoted above in 
poetical form are given in Fraser and Marathe (347) as a bitter cry 
arising from a poignant sense of sin not yet wholy appeased; ‘ Still 
my agitated soul; cast no reproach on me ; receive within Thyself 
O God, the million offences I have committed \ Third, the last 
poetical couplet on 4 the self * belongs to a class concerning which 
there is a violent cleavage of opinion ; in place of the triumphant 
note of self-surrender, one school of thought representing some of 
the best authorities interprets the whole clause as expressing the 
destruction of personality itself through its becoming absorbed in 
the Supreme Spirit.* 

* p. 76. 

2 Ibid, p. 79. 

3 J. T. Molesworth’s Marathi-English Dictionary , p. xxvii. 

4 See note in V.N. Joga’s edition, vol. I, p. 87 on abhang 260 there. 

* Ibid , vcl. II. p. 153 on abhang 2611. 



IX 


HIS EXPERIENCE OF BHAKTI 


231 


Thus our bhakta had not discovered any sure inward stay, but 
advanced and receded by turns, suffering as a victim of bhakli's 
moods possibly to the end. All these possibilities are indicated in 
1434 : * Such faith ( bhdva ) as once I had 1 have not now. . . I see 
a loss of my capital before me ; I think of the faults of others whom 
I see around me, to exalt myself thereby ; 1 am like a cock, says 
Tuka, who goes on scratching the dung-hill and knows not if he is 
gaining anything or not.' By the very honesty of his introspection 
Tukaram here enables us to draw three inferences : first, that his 
faith was no abiding refuge— probably because it had no sure basis 
(see section 6, in chap. 10) ; second, his inward life suffered 
from a corrupt environment, leading to self-comparison with 
imperfect standards ; third, he was still far from the goal of final 
spiritual assurance, for he ‘ knows not if he is gaining anything’. 
As we leave him, his heart is all ‘ agitated’ with deep dissatisfaction 
concerning his own inward life and concerning his god : what these 
meant ‘ once ’ to him they mean ‘ not now 


One task remains to complete our inquiry, that of estimating 
the adequacy of Tukaram’s religion for the needs of present-day 
India. 



A TRUE DEVOTEE 


A true devotee, says Tukaram, is one who not only takes delight in singing 
God’s praises but holds fast by Him and implicitly reties on Him, one too who 
is holy ; and humble in his dealings with others and for whom no distinction of 
' mine ’ and * thine ’ exists. How is such devotion to be attained ? It is pri- 
marily a work of self-discipline to which grace may in time be added. To 
promote such self-discipline is the object of this and other Samajes. As such 
their work can never come to an end. Nor can they show quick results. 
Tukariim’s abhangs are sufficient evidence of the long and laborious journey 
which spiritual progress involves and the ups and downs to which it is liable. 
None therefore need despair but all should faithfully and earnestly strive for 
their moral and spiritual uplift till death itself releases them from the perpetual 
effort and the never-ending strife in whidh they are placed in this world. 

Part of a sermon preached by Mr. V. G. Bhandarkar, B.A., LL.B. at 
the Opening Divine Service of a Prdrthand Samdj Anniversary. 

• Subodh Patrikd, May 4, 1919. 


THE DEVOTEE'S PERPLEXITY 

What may I know ? What may I not know ? 

To turn to Thee for light is the thing. 

What may I do? What may I not do? 

To turn to Thee for light is the thing. 

What may I speak ? What may I not speak ? 

To turn to Tfcee for light is the thing. 

Where may I go? Where may I not go? 

It is well now to remember Thee. 

Says Tuka, What thou doest is easy. 

Righteous acts become sins in our eyes. 

Translated from Tukaram in Subodh Patrikd, Aug. 21, 1921. 


THE DEVOTEE’S IDEAL 


* Blessed are they who in their sojourn in this world carry mercy in their 
hearts ; who came hither for doing good unto others, but whose abode is in 
Heaven ; whose words never come untrue and who are indifferent to their own 
bodies ; who have sweet words on their lips and big hearts within : so says 
Tuka . 1 

Translated from Tukaram, Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar, Two Masters ; Jesus 
and Tukdrdm , Foreword. 


INDIA’S DESTINY 


With a liberal manhood, with buoyant hope, with a faith that never shirks 
duty, with a sense of justice that deals fairly to all, with unclouded intellect and 
powers fully cultivated, and lastly, with a love that overleaps all bounds, reno- 
vated India will take her proper rank among the nations of the world, and be 
the master of the situation and her own destiny. This is the goal to be reached, 
this is the promised land, 

Mt G, Ranape, 



Chapter X 

Is Tnkaram’s Religion adequate for To-day? 


i. Conclusions reached : Remaining 
Problem 

Our studies thus far have established the unworldliness and 
other-worldliness of Tukaram’s character, the nobility of his long 
inward struggle, and the fact that while he largely acquiesced in the 
Hindu formalism of his day there was yet burning in his heart the 
lamp of a fervent faith whose light is reflected in his verse. We 
have heard his poignant cries for inward peace and through the 
three intervening centuries have felt something of his travail of 
spirit with his aching heart unsatisfied. His life-story represents 
the revolt against the ceremonialism and intellectualism of the 
contemporary Hinduism and illustrates once more the truth of 
Augustine’s prayer, ‘ Thou hast made us for Thyself, and our 
hearts are restless till they rest in Thee*. Tukaram's religion was 
essentially personal and experimental, surrounded though it was by 
a desert of pantheism and a wilderness of polytheism. He supplies 
an instance of that epic struggle for a living religion that must have 
gone on in many another heart during the long milleniums of 
Hindu history. In him we see Hindu bhakti as a religion of spirit 
with marks of the flesh still clinging to it. That bhakti should have 
blossomed at all in the soil of medieval Hinduism is proof of some 
seeds of a divine life within it, and the combination in Tukaram of 
religious fervour and practical kindness establishes in a measure the 
ethical value of his bhakti though it often took quixotic forms e. g. # 
his attitude to wife and home. His religious life was thus full of 
antinomies and incongruities and part of our task in this remaining 
chapter is to discover whether these arise from merely tempera- 
mental defects or whether they are the warp and woof of his bhakti 
faith. In short, we are to try and get behind his heredity and 
environment, his emotions and his moods, and see if his religion 
can hop 6 fully to satisfy the heart and reason of modern India. 

We shall more fully appreciate the wonder of Tukaram’s bhakti 
religion if we frankly recognize the dark setting of its background. 
His bhakti was never entirely free from coarse and gross elements, 
for polytheism and pantheism were never far away. It was still 
a bhakti devoted to an idol and in tracing out the path he trod we 
have to pass through many a jungle of popular mythology. Nor 
did his fellow bhaktas always worship the same God, Ramdas the 

30 



234 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

contemporary of Tukaram being as devoted to Rama as our poet is to 
Vithoba, and in the surrounding society the superstitions of 
animism were all-too manifest. Oftentimes, indeed, our bhakta 
himself is found worshipping more idols than one, 1 and it has to be 
admitted that irreconcilable inconsistencies concerning the nature 
of true religion meet us in almost every one of Tukaram’s hymns. 
It is not surprising therefore that rapture and despair are strangely 
mingled and that to the very end he appears to experience far more 
yearnings than satisfactions. These and many other defective 
elements pointed out in the preceding pages must be faithfully 
recorded and they may appear of themselves to answer in the 
negative the question at the head of this chapter. Despite, 
however, the inevitable influence upon him of the conventional 
Hinduism of the 17th century, what we see in Tukaram of Dehu is a 
living religion asserting itself in face of the lifeless formalism or 
world-illusion of his day. The cry of his heart reveals a deep and 
real hunger of the soul. We believe every unbiassed student of 
Tukaram will be driven to conclude that in the religion of bhakti 
he was treading the highest * way of salvation * of which he knew, 
that amid a superstitious environment he somehow communed 
with the Supreme Spirit Who as a Personal Being had won his 
heart’s devotion, and that he possessed that element of true 
bhakti which consists .in ‘ surrendering all actions to God 1 , in 
* feeling the greatest misery in forgetting God ’,and in experiencing 
4 the enjoyment of bliss which the soul finds in God \ 2 

In seeking to evaluate, in this last chapter, the contents of 
Tukaram’s bhakti , and to measure its adequacy for the life of 
present-day India, there is great advantage in concentrating our 
attention upon an individual Hindu instead of roaming over a 
system, for Hinduism is not one religion but many, and its 
amorphous and encyclopedic character, which successfully defies 
analysis in any single treatise, is not sufficiently recognized by 
Western authorities. Seeing the term Hindu covers so great a 
variety of religious beliefs and practices as to make it impossible to 
point out any single one as all-essential, it is beneficial in every 
way to limit our study to a single individual. Moreover, in 
Tukaram we have an example of introspective piety of the very 
highest type Hinduism can show, one to which increasing prominence 
is being given in the writings of modern Hindus, a type indeed in 
which the ideals of Christ and of a 4 Christianized Hinduism * are 
more and more claimed as being found reflected. In our poet- 

1 Hindu students of Tukaram surmount this difficulty by pointing to such 
abhangs as 176 on p. 15S which teach the oneness of Vishnu and £iva and by 
taking a similar view to that of Sir R. G. Bhandarkar on p. 151 (4th and 5th 
lines from bottom of page) to the effect that all idols symbolize one God. R5m 
Mohun Roy’s view quoted on p. 148 and our views set forth in section 5 below 
are a sufficient reply to these contentions, 

2 Bhakti Sutras of N draft a. 



X IS TUKARAM’S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 235 

saint we thus see Hindu bhakti at its highest, and as with persons 
so with religions, we do not know them thoroughly until we see 
them at their best. Moreover, in Tukaram we are able to judge 
Hinduism by its aspirations, for all his ideals and longings are 
claimed as having been thoroughly Hindu. And in our final 
investigation we need to remind ourselves once more that Indian 
bhakti is largely emotional and liable to fluctuations, now exalted 
in ecstasy, now following the philosophical path to impersonality 
and uncertainty. This will help to save us from misunderstanding 
and censoriousness. Tukaram is a rebel spirit inside Hinduism, 
but, whether from want of conviction or of inspiration, he lacks the 
courage to become a reformer, a consideration that will help us to 
understand his instability, his ambiguities, his hesitations, help us 
also to sympathize with his sense of desolation and weariness. An 
additional attraction in favour of this individual method of studying 
the chief religion of India is that in hundreds of Deccan villages 
the beliefs of Tukaram matter ten thousand times more than do the 
tenets of the Sanskrit Scriptures. For the problem is exactly this : 
Are these beliefs adequate as a moral and religious force to-day for 
the millions in the Deccan, educated or illiterate ? 


2 . W. B. Patwardhan’s Verdict : Tukaram 4 One-Sided * 


Indian scholars have faced the problem and, despite their 
veneration for Tukaram and his principles, have not been 
unwilling to indicate what they feel to be his deficiencies. 
Perhaps the best instance is supplied by a discriminating 
essay of Principal W. B. Patwardhan’s in The Indian Interpreter 
on 1 Tukaram’s Doctrine of Bhakti \ The whole essay of 
twelve pages is worthy of the closest study and though 
compelled to abbreviate it, we give its substance as nearly as 
possible in his own words. 

First comes the important reminder that ‘it is very difficult to 
say what exactly Tukaram preached on any particular activity of 
the human mind’, chiefly because his poems ‘often present a 
conglomeration of contrary and contradictory statements, and there 
is hardly any clue to lead to a decision*. Even the order of his 
verses ‘ in the various editions varies in every case ; nor do the 
manuscripts that have been preserved agree in the order of abliahgs .* 
Moreover, there is * no standard edition available’, and with ‘hardly 
any men among us who have made a close study of our literary 
masters* and the needed research on 1 the individual works of 
Tukaram’ still awaiting those who may undertake ir, ‘it is very 
difficult to say what exactly Tukaram was, what he felt and thought.* 
Therefore the 4 tentative character ’ of all conclusions must never 
be forgotten. 



236 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

Secondly, we have an excellent sketch of Tukaram's bhakti 
experience, and of the conflict within when in ‘ disgust and despair’ 
he turned away from the world. ‘ Where was he to go? He did 
not know, he only felt he was a blind man groping in the dark.' 
Suddenly he falls in with the Wdrkarts (on whom see pp. 170-2) 
and following their advice he ‘adored with his whole heart the idol* 
at Papdharpur. ‘ Sing the name of Vitthal and you will be blessed ’, 
said they, and ‘ this counsel was like a straw at which the drowning 
man clutched'. But ‘ soon the first fervour was over’ and ‘recitation 
of the name lost its novelty’, so that * he felt he was as far from his 
destination as ever’. To make matters worse, ‘he discovered he 
had lacked the very first principle of bhakti * which was ‘ bhdva 
(With)*. Nothing could make up for this- ‘ All my days, O God, 
have been wasted.’ 1 The question suggests itself : ‘ Was he an 
atheist ? The fact remains that he often castigates himself for 
want of bhctva\ He soon discovered ‘ it was not enough to believe 
in God, but that he must also believe in the power of God \ And 
after all, ‘ was not Vithoba — called Krpasdgara (ocean of grace) — 
as full of pity as the ocean is of water ? ’ Moreover, ‘ the Lord of 
the distressed is my Father’. 2 3 * And ‘ He was also the Mother. Ah ! 
the Divine Mother’, and in this ‘profound conception’ Patwardhan 
sees ‘ an explanation of the ardour and enthusiasm that has gathered 
round Mary the Virgin Mother of Christ ’, for * the conception of 
the Motherhood of God is perhaps the greatest, the most inspiring 
contribution that the Hindu theology, or rather the Vaishnava 
school of bhakti , has made to the religious thought of the world’. 8 
Nevertheless, Tukaram ‘ experienced a conflict between his faith 
and the tendencies of his flesh . . . Anger and rage and cupidity — 
all these passions were still tumultuous’. He therefore tried 
‘ rigorous discipline’, looking upon ‘wife and children ,as entire 
Strangers with whom he had nothing to do ’ and he sought ‘ to lose 
his being in the service of Vitthal’. He resolved to ‘attain to this 
standard of bhakti — would, and perhaps did, live in God will in 
will, thought in thought and heart in heart ’. But ‘ the blessings 
that result from bhakti . . . I do not propose to dwell upon, for 
the fact is that bhakti . . . . became perhaps an end in itself. . • • 
What does life in this world signify when man can go through the 
round of its routine without conscious participation therein, when 
he can remain in entire aloofness therefrom ’? 

Thirdly, W. B. Patwardhan proceeds to ‘ examine Tuka’s 
doctrine of bhakti \ He willingly grants that ‘it has been able to 
superinduce in Tuka the most ecstatic flight of devotional imagina- 
tion ’ and continues: ‘But while admitting that, I cannot bring 


i F. and M. 1872. 

a /.P,. 3S39. 

3 At this point come a few lines quoted in our section on *Tukar£m’s 

Idolatry 1 , pp.^ 152-3. 



X IS TUKARAM’S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 23 

myself to be oblivious of the fact that all this is a superstructure 
upon a view of life that was at best one-sided. The first turn of 
feeling came on the heels of a series of severe afflictions and 
bereavements. . . . Tuka’s soul naturally under the severe condi- 
tions was almost crushed, and unfortunately for us it received a 
bent and bias that left much to be desired. His outlook upon 
human life and its conditions was warped permanently. . . . He 
was driven to despair. It was the sense of his own utter helpless- 
ness and a desire to get rid of this besetting evil that turned him 
to bhakti . His end was individual, the peace and solace and 
beatific rest of his own restless soul. . . . Such a view of life 
appears to ignore more than half of our life. A view of life to be 
a sound basis of our philosophy of life — to be the guiding force of 
our life — needs to be many-sided. Our outlook on life in these days 
has immensely changed. Life with us is infinitely fuller. The 
fulness of life and its alhsidedness, as some of the gifted among us 
can view it, leave no room for the one-sidedness of pessimism . . . 
Tukaram was far in advance of his own time perhaps, but he was 
withal a creature of his time. He just moved in the direction in 
which his Vaishnava predecessors had gone before him. In fact, 
he walked in their footsteps. If, therefore, his view of life was in 
a way narrow, he could not help it. Any view of life that looks at 
only one side of it is narrow, be that side the pain or pleasure side. 

. . The bhakti of the future, therefore, ought to be broader based, 
fuller veined and larger souled. . . It ought to learn to reconcile 
the apparent discord, and value both as two halves of onfe whole. 
The diversity of life is perhaps as real as its unity. The bhakti of 
the past, as we have seen, would have very little to do with what 
appeared to it of this earth earthy. The bhakti of the future ought 
to blend earth and heaven. It ought to be able to live this life as a 
whole, wherein every power and faculty has full scope to grow to its 
fullest stature, and is employed in an endless process of develop- 
ment and adjustment of present ends to that vast infinitely distant 
end. That is to me the sanest bhakti.' 1 

We havequoted Principal Patwardhan’s view fairly fully because 
it is not only the view of an Indian scholar of accepted repute but 
as preparing the reader for our own conclusions in subsequent 
sections. 


3. N. V. Tilak’s 4 Bridge to Christ’ 


With the above verdict agrees that of another great Indian, one 
who was * in the true succession of the Maratha bhaktas * and who 
on the occasion of his public break with Hinduism showed in a 


1 /. L April 1012, Vol. vii, pp. 19 - 30 . 



238 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

hymn he composed that he was in no sense breaking with India but 
was rededicating himself to her service ; 

My wealth, my thoughts, ay, verily, 

My life itself I give to thee, 

My Hindistan so dear to me ! 1 

We refer to the late Christian poet Narayan Vaman Tilak * whose 
glory,’ says Sir Narayan Chandavarkar, ‘rests in the fact that he 
reminds us of the poets of the great Marathi bhakti school, . . . 
not a poet lost to other-worldliness,’ but one who 4 speaks to the 
heart of India because he has upon him the stamp of Dnyaneshwar ’ 
and who 4 wished to dedicate himself to the service of his mother- 
land by poetry, politics and social service.’* How this patriotic 
poet of modern Marathas estimated Tukaram’s religious value we 
have already seen (pp. 165-6), the Christian bhakta pronouncing 
those void of appreciation who do not find in Tukaram the very 
soul of religious devotion. Tukaram’s chief defect, in the eyes of 
his Christian critic, is that he makes God conform to his own 
changing ideas, thus making religion a sport of the human intelli- 
gence, instead of allowing the conception of God to shape his ideas. 
So changeful and inconsistent indeed is he that today’s opinion is 
just as true as tomorrow’s opposite will be. Is it possible, asks the 
Christian poet, to accept as final guide and helper one so fickle and 
with a mind tossed to and fro so much by pros and cons ? Among 
seekers he must be esteemed the prince, seekers after the true God, 
seeking always, seeking to the end, but among those who have 
‘attained’ he may not be numbered. Such is N. V. Tilak’s verdict. 
By the bhakti mdrga was God’s blessing sought by this prince of 
bhaktas whose personal character must shame many of the great, 
the most signal service he has rendered being that in his own land 
he has spread religion from house to house, bringing spiritual vision 
to the despised, leading them to aspire after knowledge and salva- 
tion. Then comes the most striking tribute of all from the once 
Chitpavan Brahman: ‘As for myself, it was over the bridge of 
Tukaram’s verse that I came to Christ.’ 3 

It is a great testimony, witnessing on the one hand to Tuka- 
ram's enriching ministry and on the other to his inadequacy as a 
moderp religious guide, testifying also to the fact that since 
Tukaram’s day another name has begun to send forth its perfume 
through the Deccan country. N. V. Tilak’s words, our translation 
of which fails to convey anything like the rich fullness of his 
vigorous Marathi, are invested with the authority of one intimately 
acquainted with Vedic and Hindu philosophical literature, of 

'l I. July, 1919. 

2 Dny cl noday a, Sep. 11, 1912. 

3Trs. from N. V. Tilak’s Marathi Ab hangs numbered 44-51 in Dtiydnodaya % 
May 24, 1917. 



X IS TUKARAM’S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? . 239 

whom a Calcutta weekly said * it was of no account to him whether 
God sent His light via Benares or Jerusalem or Medina*. His heart 
and mind having been captivated by a copy of the New Testament 
handed to him by a courteous European on a railway journey, on 
three successive nights he had the same dream in which -he heard a 
voice, 4 Follow Him and fear nothing,’ and in his introductory 
* apologia’ to his poem, the Christdyan , singing of his new Guru to 
Whom he had been 4 led across the Tukaram bridge*, this loyal- 
hearted Nationalist dedicates his motherland to that Guru in the 
assurance that between serving Christ and serving India there is no 
distinction. 

Patwardhan and Tilak by different routes thus reach the same 
conclusion, that Tukaram’s bhakti faith is inadequate for modem 
India, Tilak the poet adding a supplementary conclusion that 
Tukaram nevertheless supplies an ideal preparation for something 
higher. See further his balanced view quoted towards the close 
of the next section, pp. 244-5. 

4* Indian Comparisons between Tukaram and Jesus 

In 1903 an English essay of 55 pages entitled Two Masters: 
Jesus and Tukardm, was published by Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar, 
while on June 8 , 1921, the Hon’ble Dr. Sir Narayan Chandavarkar, 
President of the Bombay Legislative Council, stated in The Times 
of India , that 4 the best minds of India * were 4 striving to diffuse 
among the masses the best that is in the Indian religions and to 
show that the best is not different from but is the same as Christ’s 
teachings Since, therefore, on the one hand, our query regarding 
the adequacy of Tukaram’s religion has presented itself in this 
comparative form to Indian thinkers of our time, and since on the 
other hand there are students of Tukaram who for one reason or 
another may feel the incongruity of such comparisons, the suggested 
parallels and contrasts between the Maratha and the Nazarene call 
for consideration. Moreover, since this opens up the question of 
the * comparative study of religion * we may as well here state our 
attitude to the ‘comparative ’ principle in its relation to Tukaram’s 
case. We regard it as an advantage every way to have a definite 
criterion whereby to measure Tukaram’s ideals, and that Indian 
scholars have themselves adopted Jesus as their standard of com- 
parison is matter for thankfulness, for it is against such a back- 
ground that we are able more surely to discover the deficiencies of 
Tukaram's position. We have striven throughout this work to 
present Tukaram sympathetically and appreciatively, at each point 
giving him the benefit of every doubt, and we believe him to be one of 
the worthiest representatives of that Indian bhakti which is 4 the 
nearest approach to Christianity among India’s many cults.’ 1 So 


i October 1915, p. 131. 



240 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

many, indeed, are the points of contact between Tukaram’s writings 
and the devotional terminology of the New Testament that the ques- 
tion has been raised whether the Maratha bhakta may not in some 
way have been indebted to Christian influence. See Appendices //. 
///. Happily, educated Indians of all classes more and more 
manifest a disposition to investigate the respective claims of the great 
complex called Hinduism and of its greatest 4 organized rival*. As 
Narayan Vaman Tilak observed as far back as 1903, ‘ail modern 
thought has been touched by Jesus with penetrating energy, and 
Hinduism is by no means an exception.’ 1 If only we can ensure 
that there is no mixing up of Christ and Krisna as by the Isamoshi- 
panthis in South Behar, and no such unschoiarly syncretism as that 
of a Sanskrit pundit who told his class that the mystic syllable Otn 
was the equivalent of the Three Persons in the Christian Trinity, 
then we may hope that the Indianizing of Christian theology, the 
naturalizing of Christianity in India and the Christianizing of 
India’s bhakti poetry by the Indian Church will enable India 
to make a contribution to world-religion of unique and enduring 
value. While there can be no tampering with historic facts in the 
praiseworthy effort to Indianize Christ’s message, yet it is a great 
gain that leaders in the Indian Church are seeking to produce a 
true Indian bhakti with Indian methods of expression and a heart 
wholly Christian. 

It is in the spirit indicated above that we apply the aims and 
methods of the comparative study of religion to Dr. P. R. Bhan- 
darkar’s detailed comparison between Tukaram and Jesus in his 
English essay of 1903 and— in a later section of this chapter — to 
his remarkable Marathi article of about 40 pages in the monthly 
magazine Nava Yuga for March 1921, when he administered a 
public and, as we believe, a well-merited rebuke to Mr. L. R. 
Pangarkar for his uncritical and fulsome panegyric of everything 
pertaining to Tukaram in his $ri Tukdrdnulce Garitra (Life of 
Tukaram in Marathi). Dr. Prabhakarrao a is deeply impressed, in 
Two Masters , by the great number of coincidences of teaching in 
Tukaram’s GctthCt and the four Gospels, particularly by the * great 
resemblance between the strictures * hurled against Pharisees on the 
one hand and Brahman pundits on the other. 4 Woe to you, you 
impious scribes and Pharisees,* says Jesus * ; 4 a Pundit by his fault* 
finding leads others to ruin,* says Tukaram. ‘ They talk but do not 
act/ says Jesus 4 ; ‘the Brahmans have worked their ruin by disputa- 
tion/ says Tukaram. 4 They make their phylacteries broad, they wear 
large tassels/ says Jesus 5 ; 7 how can Hari be reached by rosaries and 

1 Dnyanodaya , July 9, 1903. 

* He is thus referred to by Marathi writers, partly to avoid confusion with 
his honoured father, Dr. Sir K. G. Bbandarkar. 

3 Moffett's translation St. Matthew xxiii. 13. * 

4 Ibid, xxiii. 3. 

8 Ibid, xyiii. f. 



X IS TUKARAM’S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 241 

markings and such shams ? 9 asks Tukaram. 1 2 * 4 Irreligious Scribes 
and Pharisees are like tombs whitewashed,’ says Jesus 1 ; ‘ GosavTs a 
profess that they beg no alms ; they bring disgrace on their garb, 
though they try to play the part,’ says Tukaram.” Other parallels 
in expression between the Prophet of Nazareth and the poet of 
Dehu will be found in Appendix II, the poet on occasion also 
displaying remarkable similarity of disposition, so that the bitterest 
of foes became the most ardent disciples, e.g., the case of 
Rameshwar Bhatt in sections 29-30 and that of MumbajI in 
section 31 of our chapter 4. Calling attention to the invectives 
employed both by Jesus and Tukaram against religious formalism 
Dr. Prabhakarrao notes the price both had to pay. Not only did 
both denounce 4 those people whose sole religion consisted in strict 
religious observances, in not eating or touching what in their view 
was unclean, in avoiding contact with people whom they considered 
to be low, etc., while great moral laxity prevailed below these 
appearances \ but * we know the outcome of this war with 
prevalent religion. One Master was crucified by the hard Jews 
and the other was persecuted by the mild Hindus’. 4 The enquiry 
is cpncluded thus : ‘ Who is the greater of the two Masters ? The 
question is no sooner asked than answered. One is the Master of 
almost the whole of the civilized world, . . . the other is hardly 
known outside Maharashtra . . . We plainly see that it has pleased 
God to glorify Jesus, and let no man attempt to take away 
from the glory. But who was the better of the two Masters? It 
is not possible for us to answer this question. . . There is 
no room for such rivalry. And I have at times pictured to 
myself the pair, Tukaram calling Jesus, “ Rabbi, Rabbi and 
Jesus declaring to the world, <4 1 am in Tuka and Tuka is in 
Me” . . . But if this essay of mine leads one Hindu to 
read the Gospels with reverence, and one Christian to read 
Tukaram with the same reverence I shall consider myself to be 
amply compensated ’. 5 As, however, Dr. Prabhakarrao takes 
up some curious and untenable positions before reaching his 
indeterminate conclusion it is obvious the matter cannot rest 
here. 

Discussing the ‘ historical values ’ of Gospels and Gathfi, our 
author takes up an attitude which would be sustained in no reliable 
quarter concerning either set of documents. If Dr. Prabhakarrao 
still believes that the Gospels are 4 mixed up with legend 1 we can 
only refer him to a host of works disproving the contention, 
the Roman historians themselves not being higher authorities 
concerning the life of the first century a. d, than, for example, 

1 Ibid , xxiii. 27. 

2 See footnote 2, p. 6 for definition. 

" F. and M . 1205. 

* Two Masters ; Jesus and Tukaram , p, 8. 

5 Ibid., pp. 52-5. , 


31 



242 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


CiJ. 

St. Luke’s writings. 1 * * Still more unfortunate is the Doctor's char- 
acterization of the Gathd as being ‘ with very few exceptions a 
faithful collection of the Tukaram’s own sayings’, for the answer to 
which uncritical assertion we will simply refer to Patwardhan’s 
view in section 2 above (pp. 235-7) and to our discussion on 
pp. 119-26 in chapter 5. 

There can be no doubt what would have been the attitude 
of our broken-hearted bhakta to any comparison between him 
and the Man concerning whom even a Roman judge declared 
after full investigation, ‘I can find no fault in Him** ‘and 
who on one occasion confronted hostile critics with the 
question, ‘ Which of you convicteth Me of sin ? * n . Contrast 
•with this consciousness of sinlessness, a consciousness unshaka- 
ble to the end and accepted by the world’s thinkers as in 
no way inconsistent with matchless humility — contrast this with 
what Tukaram says of himself. We have already quoted on 
pages 50, 135-7 many abharigs indicating his desolating sense 
of sin. Here is one of Dr. Prabhakarrao's own renderings : 
‘Hear these words of mine, oh saints! I am a great sinner; 
why do you love me with such tenderness ? My heart is 
witness unto me that really I am not redeemed. People take 
outward appearances for realities ( F . and M., 126, translate : Men 
look upon me with honour, because I follow a track that others 
have laid down). Much was I vexed with family affairs. . . I cut 
off connection with wife, sons and brother, and thus necessarily 
became a dull, unlucky wretch. I could not show my face to the 
public, and (therefore) sneaked into a corner. By the (cravings of 
the) belly I was extremely tormented. My forefathers served God 4 
and hence I naturally worship Him ; let none take it for (my own) 
faith, says Tuka.* 5 6 Is there a single living thinker, either in East 
or West, who could for one moment imagine words coming from 
the lips of Jesus expressive of such moral distress as the above ? Can 
it therefore be a matter for surprise that many people in 1903 felt 
‘ the incongruity of the comparison ’ 8 Dr. Prabhakarrao had drawn 
between sin-stricken Tukaram and One accepted by millions as their 
Sinless Redeemer ? This matter merits closer attention. ‘ Is there 
anything in Tukaram’s Gdtha\ asks our author, ‘which supplies 
a want not satisfied by the Gospels ? Most assuredly yes . . . 
Tukaram has left us for our guidance an invaluable record of his 
doings— of his double strife with the world outside and his own mind 
inside . He has shown us by his own example “ that of our vices 

i See the works of Sir W. M. Ramsay, Dr. Hastings’ Bible Dictionary , 
etc., where full bibliographies will be found. 

* St. Luke xxiii. 14 ; St. John xviii. 38. 

8 St. John viii. 46. 

4 ‘This God F. and Af., 126. 

6 Two Masters , p. 5. 

6 Dnyapodaya> Oct. 8, 1903. 



x IS TUKARAM’S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 2+3 

we can frame a ladder ”... as a pattern after which to 
construct our own and scale the heights.* 1 There is, however, 
in all this not a word regarding the conviction of millions of people 
all over the world that in the Jesus here made the standard of 
comparison there were no ‘ vices ’ of any kind, nor any ‘ strife with 
His own mind inside \ Possibly Dr. Prabhakarrao would say that 
this claim is part of the ‘distorted image of Jesus presented by the 
Gospels \ a But such an evasion does not explain the fact that 
millions of sin-laden souls affirm they have ‘ really been redeemed * 
by this sinless Jesus. Since, however, the ‘ladder ’ of Tukaram’s 
lifelong conflict with * his own mind inside* is actually set forth as 
the one point of superiority to Jesus and as ‘a want not satisfied by 
the Gospels’, the question presses for an answer, which of the 
‘Two Masters’ is more likely to be of help, the Sinless One who 
says, * I voluntarily lay down my life for my lost sheep or the 
despairing bhakta who cries, ‘ I have sought thee because I am 
fallen ’ (i860) ; ‘ I am vicious, guilty, how guilty, how can I tell ? 9 
(1881) ; ‘what shall I do with this mind of mine ? If I restrain it, 
it chafes the more and leaps down into a wrong place ... It 
likes not to worship God or to hear about Him, and runs at the 
sight of sensual objects’/ 

When we examine the Tukaram ‘pattern after which’ we are 
‘ to construct our own 9 we find in it several aspects for which 
Dr. Prabhakarrao honestly feels he must apologize, affecting both 
Tukaram’s life and teaching. We shall have to note in a later 
section (see section 8), how he apologizes for Tukaram’s ‘ far from 
dignified’ way of speaking of women, and indeed on this question 
he knocks away the Tukaram ‘ ladder * altogether, for in his 
Marathi article in the Nava Ytiga he states quite plainly 
that Tukaram cannot be regarded as a ‘ pattern ’ in any of 
the problems affecting India’s women. He further apologizes 
for Tukaram’s coquetting with the pantheism of his country, 
for his inability completely to understand it, and for the in- 
consistencies that mar his teachings at every stage. And, gravest 
necessity of all, he has to apologize for Tukaram’s idolatry, though 
he minimizes its gravity by bringing forward the Prarthana 
Samaj theory that it was only ‘ at an early stage (our italics) 
of his religious life he was a pure idolator and a polytheist’, on 
which theory see our second paragraph, p. 150 above. It seems 
tragic that there should be any need to ask the obvious question 
whether Jesus was ever an idolator ? Dr. Prabhakarrao has unfortu- 
nately defaced the pages of his book by the five words we italicize 
at the end of the following sentence! ‘ It is true that Tukaram 
never looked upon idolatry as an absolute sin— no Hindu would, 
and perhaps no man should .* There is no need to answer this 

1 Ibid., pp. 50-2. our italics. 

1 Ibid., Foreword page. 

3 Ibid., p. 19. 



244 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch- 

conclusion, unpardonable as coming from a Prartbana Samajist, 
for its author himself in his later article in the Nava Yuga wrote 
burning words on idolatry, words which leave little to be desired. 1 * * 
But we press one question arising : If Tukaram's bhakti tolerated 
idolatry, one of India's most degrading forces, is it possible for such 
bhakti to purify and uplift India’s millions ? See further in our next 
section, pp. 246-50 ; also our 4 Additional Notes * in Appendix IV, 
where we reply to Dr. Prabhakarrao ; criticism (of the above 
position) published in the Subodh Patrikd of Oct. 30, 1921. 

Two other Indian scholars of deserved repute rejected Tukaram 
as a religious guide largely on account of his attitude to idols. 
Ganpatrao R. Navalkar, famous as grammarian of the Marathi 
language, at the end of a dispassionate investigation concludes that 
Tukaram * was not repelled by the gross immoralities of the 
Avatctrasj 1 while the Rev. Nehemiah Goreh, formerly known as the 
Brahman Nilakanth Shastri Gore, in a treatise extremely, perhaps 
unduly, unfavourable to our poet throughout, affirms that Tukaram 
‘believes like other Hindus in Krisna’s immoral acts’.” 

Where such extremes meet, with Pangarkar and Prabhakarrao 
Bhandiirkar on one side and Navalkar and Goreh on the other, 
something has clearly gone wrong with the principles of interpreta- 
tion. These conflicting views appear to be reconciled in the 
reasoned conclusion of The late Narayan Vaman Tilak, in an 
unpublished paper he handed to us when it seemed probable he 
would be a collaborator in publishing this book. Of the poet 
Whose verse had been a ‘bridge over which he came to Christ ’ 
(see page, 238 in this chapter), he observes: ‘ You can find much in 
Tukaram’s poetry that runs parallel with the teachings of Christ, 
save its principles and spirit. These latter, eclectics such as the 
Prarthana Samajists easily read into his words, and when they 
cannot do so they put them there. Tukaram’s poetry is based on 
his own experience of life, which makes his poetry like a picture 
gallery where his own life is exhibited in pictures, and since the 
lives of Christ and Tukaram differ, their teachings must necessarily 
differ. As a religious enquirer, 1 made a careful comparative study 
of Jesus and Tukaram, because I first tried to follow Jesus without 
being His, and I found out that, since merely ethical maxims and 
sentiments are not enough to make a religion, Tukaram has nothing 
in common with Jesus. But he was a saint. Of these Hindu 
saints I have said in my Christayan : 4 “ They are far from Thee, 
and yet they are Thy devotees — none need doubt this; they are 
genuine saints who live for Thee.” Tukaram was one of the 

1 See our p. 150. 

3 Tukardm, Maharashtrian Poet and Saint , p. 33 . 

* Tenets of Tukaram , pp. 1 1-2. 

4 N. V. Tilak’s posthumous Marathi poem of the Life of Christ in which 
the poet had nearly completed the Incarnation section when he passed away, 
May 8, 1919. 



% , 


IS TUKA RAM’S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 245 


greatest saints of India, and as such he has influenced and is still 
influencing the devotional trend of his people. In the case of us 
Christians, he is one of the most powerful of sidelights. Only a 
a few weeks ago he threw me into the very arms of my Lord.’ 

Our own study of Tukaram’s experience and autobiography 
has convinced us that could the message of Christ have fallen 
upon his ears it would have met with a favourable reception by 
the Maratha saint. His heart was so utterly broken by his sense 
of sin and of moral inability, his yearning after God was so 
insatiable, his inward despair seemed so far from final satisfaction, 
his rapture so ecstatic whenever he seemed to have a glimpse 
of the distant goal, that we believe he would have felt every 
problem of his soul had found solution had he heard of Him whom 
the New Testament proclaims as the living Christ, God’s Revealer 
to men, man’s Saviour from sin’s guilt and power, and the Sender 
of the indwelling Comforter as man’s * Friend-in-Need *. Could 
the poet saint of Dehu only have heard Christ presented as the 
manifestation of God’s redeeming love to a world of sinners, we 
believe his despairing heart would have leaped for very joy. Ir> 
addition to what is stated in Appendix III regarding ihe improbabil- 
ity of Tukaram’s ever having directly heard of Christ or of his 
ever having come under definite Christian influence, we would 
point out certain Christian fundamentals which are missing from 
his pages, truths which would so completely have harmonized with 
his deepest aspirations. The Resurrection has already been alluded 
to in passing (see p. 213) a truth which we believe would have 
assured Tukaram of the Living Divine Companion he so often 
longed for in seasons of disappointment with his god. To this may 
be added that other fundamental truth of the redemptive sacrifice, 
which would have answered his haunting sense of guilt. The 
all-enriching conception of the indwelling Spirit of God would have 
satisfied his yearnings for union with the Unseen, supplying him 
with a reforming, dynamical energy in place of the static, traditional 
system of the surrounding Hinduism. And lastly the avatctra on 
the brick at Paijdharpur meant so much to him that could he have 
known of the wondrous Incarnation ‘ beneath the Syrian blue ’ we 
can easily believe it would have satisfied every longing of his 
aching heart. As Ganpatrao Navalkar observes : ‘ The times in 
which Tukaram lived and preached were characterized by an 
intense nationalism, just as the present, and at such times what is 
new and foreign does not command serious attention. Still we 
may believe that one who had known so much of higher truth and 
expressed it with extraordinary power might have been attracted 
by the glorious embodiment of it in a living person and that he 
would have offered Him his heartfelt homage. . . . Tukaram 
would not have approved a narrow patriotism, ... for he enjoins 
the universal acceptance of the supreme claims of truth ’, un- 
influenced ‘ by considerations of the source from which it is derived*, 



246 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

teaching that ‘ when one stands in need of sugar, he should not 
enquire into the caste and family of the grocer who sells it.’ 1 See 
further our paragraph in Appendix IV, ‘ Additional Notes,’ relating 
to Dr. P. li. Bhandarkar’s attack on the ‘child-like faith’ of 
the Dnyanodaya. 

5. Has Tukaram a Soul-Sustaining View of God? 

True religion, such as shall sustain the soul in all life’s crises, 
must be rooted and grounded in a worthy conception of God. As 
an English thinker has put it : ‘In religion we should take care of 
the great things, and the trifles of life will take care of themselves.’ 
Probably all will agree that the greatest thing religion has to ‘take 
care of ’ is its doctrine of God. We have already noted our saint’s 
profound religious aspiration, into what transports of. ecstasy his 
soul can soar, and as an American preacher states, ‘in regard to all 
religious feeling we must ask of its parentage and its offspring’. 
Of what divine ‘parentage’ is Tukaram’s bhakti the offspring? 
When a man spends so much time in the company of his god as 
does our bhakti devotee it means that that god is leaving an 
ineffaceable impress for either good or evil. What then is the 
character of Tukaram’s deity ? 

Religion, if it is to quicken conscience and sustain the soul, 
must be unshakably founded on the Holiness of God, and Tukaram 
has but a varying conception of this cardinal doctrine ; he certainly 
does not realize that this truth is cardinal. Many sections in this 
book have pointed to this conclusion, especially such a section as 
that on ‘ Tukaram’s idolatry ’ at the beginning of chapter 6, but to 
see his experience of bhakti in its true perspective and tq estimate 
its religious value for to day we need always to bear the matter in 
mind. We may safely pass over unessential details marring 
Tukaram’s conception of the divine— for many such elements India’s 
educational advance will of itself sweep away — and concentrate on 
the fundamental aspects. That God is eternal, true, illimitable, 
ultimate is clear from Tukaram’s verse. But what of the all- 
essential Holiness? Here is an element on which we must 
always insist. What sordid aspirations sometimes mar the 
earnest longings of our bhakta is clear from an abhang like 539 
in Fraser and Marathe on the unchastity of the cowherdesses : 

4 The wives of the cowherds became immoral and unchaste 
and committed adultery with God : but what he gave to them he 
gave to none other, for he became entirely one with them. Unholy 
deeds we should commit, if they bring the possession of God.’ 
Such words as these, however interpreted, mean at least two 
things: first, that the idea of God inspiring T’ik5ram’s bhakti 

' Tukardtn, Maharashtrian Poet and Saint, pp. 22, 33. 



X 


IS TUKARAM’S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 247 


needs much purifying before it can regulate man's wayward 
conscience; second, the bhakti itself needs to be ethicized if it is 
not to degenerate into moral turpitude. Both needs are clear also 
from Tukaram’s lines numbered 25-30 on page 667, vol. 2 of 
the Indu-Prahfish edition, lines not translated by Fraser and 
Marathe: ‘By the touch of Hari they became Hari themselves and 
were unable to .express their joy. While following the traditions 
of their families they enjoyed the Endless One by adultery, Hari 
enters their hearts, refusing his presence to all others, and blessed 
are they who live in him. He never permits them to lack anything 
and he keeps them safe everywhere. The ways of God are mys- 
terious even to Brahma and others. Such a God the Gopls made 
their own (or, God is what His devotees make Him, i.e., He does 
things to satisfy His devotees). Blessed is their adultery, says 
Tuka, for they have secured unbounded bliss.’ We have already 
explained on pages 31-33 why the allegorical interpretation of 
such things cannot be accepted as worthy of religion and we will 
only add that even if such a line of interpretation were eventually 
established it would still remain true that such expressions are the 
wrong way of conveying truth. Similar deflections concerning the 
divine character are found in the ‘complaints* of Radha, Satya- 
bhama and Sita in Fraser and Marathe (1301“5), while abhaiig 53 
has the pernicious notion that the utterance of a mere mantra with 
the name of God in it will palliate sin, and 2495 encourages the 
dangerous doctrine that God may sin through human agency : 

‘ Narayan compelled Dfcarmaraja to utter a falsehood Since our 
enquiry in this section is entirely concerned with the doctrine of 
God in its bearing on Tukaram’s adequacy as a religious guide 
to-day, it would not be allowable, in extenuation, to trace these 
things back to his ancient teachers or recognized scriptures, for that 
would necessitate an enquiry into the teaching of the two foundation 
scriptures of Maharashtra, one of which, the Bhclgwat Purflna , 
among other grave aberrations on the part of the gods, in X. 33, 
30-35 says : 4 The transgression of virtue and the daring acts which 
are witnessed in gods ( Isvarandm ) must not be charged as faults 
to these glorious persons . . . Let no one other than a god even 
in thought practice the same . . . The word of gods is true, and 
so also their conduct is sometimes correct.’ 1 Where there are such 
aberrations in conceptions of the divine character itself, it means 
that the polestar of true religion has become a shifting factor, for 
what is not good can never be divine, and where ‘adultery with 
God’ is pronounced ‘ blessed', even though it be by way of allegory, 
the inevitable result will be that man must ‘ relax into an adultery 
of the soul’, which is exactly what we find in the idolatrous condi- 
tions of Tukaram’s land. 

i Our italics ; ref. from Crown of Hinduism ; see also pp. 398-99 
for similar teaching by Ramanuja, the greatest of bhakti theologians, by TulsI 
Das (pp, 395-434) and by Govindacharya (p, 320). , 



248 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

Multiplicity, as well as immorality, has deformed the idea of 
God in Tukaram’s pages, and this robs God of His supremacy, just 
as the other factor robs Him of His purity. But the Living God 
must not only be pure, He must be One and Alone. Wherever 
there is a host of gods and demons, as there is in well-nigh every 
village in the Deccan, wild confusion is introduced into man’s 
conceptions of the Universal Ruler. The bewilderment of 
polytheism is always closely linked with the absence of a supreme 
Holiness, as the bewildering and immoral stories of the Puratias 
show. Let men go wrong in their view either of the divine unity 
or of the divine purity, they will go wrong on all else besides. 
Tolerance of evil or of disunity in God will mean confusion in the 
whole of man’s religious ideas. Hence the belief that the agelong 
proximity of Muhammadanism, with its stern view of the oneness 
of God, to polytheistic Hinduism may be part of India’s Providential 
preparation for a purer faith. Tukaram it is true sometimes 
condemns the gods in the village pantheon, as for example, 

A stone with red lead painted o’er, 

Brats and women bow before ; 1 

but it is mere denunciation and is only occasional, for in other 
places he can say that whtfTe ‘village gods’ are neglected it is a sure 
sign of the Kali Yuga or dark age. It is therefore quite gratuitous 
for Dr P. R. Bhandarkar to pronounce as ‘perverse* those who 
cannot agree with him when he affirms that ‘ even a cursory 
reading of Tukaram’s works will show that he uses these words 
(Pandurang, Ke6av, Vithoba, etc,) merely as synonyms for God’. 2 
The mass of evidence, some of which we have given in the section 
on ‘Tukaram’s idolatry* in chapter 6, cannot be so evaded. Dr. 
P. R. Bhandarkar must surely know that these and many other 
deities are so consistently viewed by the people as living beings 
that the god Vithoba is regarded as going and staying permanently in 
several places at the same time, a place like Vitthalwadfi, 20 miles 
from Poona, for instance, to receive the worship of a particular 
bhakta . Are such deities to be viewed ‘ merely as synonyms for 
God.’ If so, then the unity of God is reduced to a mere phrase, 
and confusion of a perilous kind is introduced into man’s whole 
conception of the Divine Being. Not by such ambiguous methods 
did the monotheistic prophets of Israel overcome the idolatrous 
tendencies of their people. Neither is it in this way that Deccan 
idolatry will be extirpated. ‘ In every age,’ says a Basel com- 
mentator, Dr. C. Von Orelli, ‘ambiguous language has helped to 
distort religion.* Hence the uncompromisingly clear message 
through the prophet : 1 1 will take away the names of the Baalim 
put of her (Israel’s) mouth’ (Hosea. ii. 18-9). By ‘the Baalim * 

1 P.M.S. p. 23. 

a Two Masters , p, 34. 



X IS TUKARAM’S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 249 

were meant the different varieties of the one national deity wor- 
shipped in different places, and as Dr. Cheyne says on the passage, 
the danger to the religious purity of Israel is viewed as being so 
grave that, ‘ tenacious as the popular memory is, the unholy names 
shall be expunged from it \ A later prophet declares on Jehovah’s 
behalf: ‘ I will cut off the (very) names of the idols out of the land* 
(Zechariah. xiii. 2). And as with the Israel of the 8th century B. C., 
so with the Deccan of the 20th century A. D., the only possible 
antidote to idolatry is its utter abolition and the complete removal 
of all possibility of such compromise and ambiguity as may arise 
from identifying idols with the Living God. 

When an educated Hindu brushes aside this question of idolatry 
with the remark that an idol is a mere Symbol reminding' the wor- 
shipper of the Living God, he is able to refer to some of Tukaram’s 
abhangs which look in this direction. See p. 152. But this 
attractive theory is completely negatived by the ‘life-implanting* 
ceremony called pnlnapratisthii — see p. 148; it concedes a great 
deal too much to the ‘spiritually lame’ who thereby become 1 con- 
firmed invalids* (see p. 150), for the masses of the people can 
hardly be expected to draw the fine distinction between a symbol 
which is not to be worshipped and the Living God said to be 
symbolized; besides which, it overlooks the terrible results of 
religious ambiguity as seen in the widespread character of Deccan 
idolatry — see p. 153. Behind the first and second commandments 
given to Israel on Sinai there lies a religious philosophy, infinitely 
wise and far-seeing. Just as the first commandment, ‘Thou shalt 
have no other gods in front of Me * \ has in view the sin against 
God's unique Personality, so the second commandment, ‘ Thou 
shalt not make unto thee a graven image ’, has in view the grave 
offence of sinning against the spirituality of God’s Nature, seeing 
it is impossible to represent His spiritual Being by any material 
likeness. When Israel ‘heard the Voice* of God they ‘ saw no 
form and therefore to 1 no form ’ or image must they yield 
homage, ‘ lest they corrupt themselves * (see Deuteronomy iv. 1 2—6). 
Hence the sternness of the second commandment against image- 
worship with its terrible words about the ‘ jealousy ’ of God lest 
any image, even of Himself, should be worshipped. In its last 
resort, the sin of worshipping idols as mere symbols of God — were 
such worship possible, which is doubtful — is the sin of misrepre- 
senting the Supreme Being, for God is Spirit , and no symbol or 
idealization or personification can ever ‘photograph’ Him to the 
human mind, since the loveliest of external images is inferior to the 
lowest of spiritual ideas. Therefore, to seek to satisfy our concep- 
tion of God by localizing Him is to limit and fetter our thought of 
Deity, so that the ‘ great fathomless, shoreless Ocean of the Divine 

1 The rendering of the Hebrew in Exodus xx. 3 by Dr. Driver, whose note 
on the phrase ‘in front of Me is, ‘obliging Me (unwillingly) to % behold them ,* 

32 



250 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


CH 


Nature’ becomes a ‘ closed sea’. To change the figure, idols or 
images inevitably mean a petrifying of those spiritual ideas which 
should ever be expanding, and substitute a visible fellowship for 
spiritual communion with the ‘Father of our spirits’ (Hebrews 
xii, 9). Nor does it mean only limitation and petrifying of our ideas 
about God, for degradation soon sets in. The Brahmo Pandit 
Sitariath Tattvabhushan has shown that the degradation of Vaish- 
liava worship ‘from spiritual contemplation resulting in exalted 
feeling, to the worship of images with material offerings’ is to be 
clearly traced to the fact that ‘the Supreme Being was represented 
as of the human form with a female consort, both having human 
passions and appetites *, as set forth in the Brahma-vaivarta * 
Pur&ha . 1 All these implications lay behind St. Paul’s argument 
against idolatry before Athenian philosophers (see especially Acts 
xvii. 29) and behind his scathing exposure of idolatrous conditions 
in the Roman world when he denounced ‘ the folly of misrepresent- 
ing the majesty of the immortal God by making images of mortal 
men . . . and calling them representations of Him* (Romans 
i. 23, A. S. Way’s translation). On this matter of such fundamental 
importance Tukaram must therefore be pronounced an unsafe 
guide and our conclusion is that, if Tukaram’s people are to 
receive the needed conception of God as far as His unchallengeable 
Superiority and Holiness ire concerned, then Tukaram as a teacher 
for to-day must be deemed insufficient. 

This is not a treatise on Hinduism in general, but it must be 
pointed out that Tukaram’s view of God is further hampered by 
the presuppositions of all Hindu thought, such as Pantheism, 
Karma and Transmigration, by his coquetting with them much 
too often, and by his halting between two opinions regarding them. 
We only need refer to the relevant sections in our previous chap- 
ters, and point out the bearing of his ambiguities and contradictions 
upon his working conception of God. ‘ India is radically pan- 
theistic from its cradle onward ’ says Barth, and Tukaram dallies 
with the idea sufficient to make impossible a religion of assurance 
and trustful certainty — hence his many cries of despair. The 
Pantheistic idea of God is a total denial of divine freedom, robs 
life of the comfort arising from Providential control, and takes from 
prayer its nerve and soul. Not for ever will educated India be put 
off with this time-worn philosophy — for it cannot be called religion 
— which holds no comfort for life’s lonely crises. ‘ Can’t you tell 
me something which will comfort me ’? was the touching appeal of 
a Bombay Indian lady who had lost her only daughter. As sure as 
the stars move in their courses, India will refuse to he comforted by 
a philosophy which robs God of all power to help the broken- 
hearted or to heal the sin-stricken spirit. Pantheism, Karma and 
Transmigration are a poor substitute for the Living Father. They 


1 Indian Messenger , October 23 , 1921, 



X IS TUKARAM’S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 251 

crush hope out of man’s soul, so that the music of God’s forgiving 
love cannot be heard within. We would not deny to our lonely 
bhakta the one crumb of comfort which according to W. B. Patwar- 
dhan he enjoyed : ‘ The infinite round of reincarnation itself loses 
all its terrors before the prospect of the continuance of the 
privilege of association with God in bhakti . If Tuka could keep 
on serving his Lord, if he could practise bhakti as he finally came 
to conceive it, he would not mind, yea, he would even pray for, a 
return again and again into this world *. 1 Of this morsel of comfort 
we would not rob the despairing saint, though W. B. Patwardhan him- 
self admits it was but an anodyne, deadening the effect of the fanciful 
reincarnation ‘terrors’ and the bhakti which could do no more 
than this was indeed ‘ an end in itself \ much too ‘ individual ’ in its 
goal, with no assurance of immortality for Tukaram’s many friends 
snatched from him by death’s cruel hand (see pages 83-4, 138-9) 
or for himself when his own turn came. As one thinks of the oft- 
bereaved bhakta in the quiet town of Dehu he finds himself longing 
that the sorrowing man might have been supported by the soul- 
sustaining truth set forth in St. John’s Gospel, chapter xi, and in 
chapter xv of St. Paul’s first letter to the Corinthians. 

6. Can Tukaram’s 4 Avataras 1 Assure Salvation ? 

Tukaram’s religious life, or the greater part of it, is wrapped up 
with Vithoba’s ‘ incarnation 1 (aratdra) of Vishnu, the latter being 
regarded as existing in five forms — as absolute, by emanations, 
‘incarnations’, saints, and images. We have already seen on 
pages 26-33 how great a place the whole idea of * incarnation 1 
(avatdra) has in India, one of the strongest possible testimonies to 
India’s innate religiousness and its agelong passion for salvation, 
the latter term in this section meaning not release from rebirth but 
deliverance from sin. Incarnation, if it is to assure salvation to 
men, must be supported by two kinds of evidence, the first histori- 
cal, the second ethical and spiritual. There must be historical 
certainty, and there must be the moral and religious assurance of 
lives transformed and of hearts and consciences set at rest. 

Does the ‘ incarnation ’ worshipped by Tukaram, and implored 
by him for salvation, stand the historic test? Is there historical 
certainty regarding the Krisna ‘incarnation’ who stands on the brick 
at Pagujharpur ? Since God is separated from man and must choose 
some means of spanning the dark ocean that lies between Himself 
and man's despairing heart, what kind of historical proof is there 
that He has spoken to man in Kps$a? Since Tukaram’s intense 
bhakti must be regarded as that cry of the human heart for com- 
munion with God which He must answer, have we reasonable 


1 /. April. 1912, p. 25. 



252 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM * ch 

assurance, nay unbreakable certainty, that He has manifested 
Himself through Krisna — the Krisna about whom we have some 
thirty pages of poems from Tukaram in F. and M's translations? 
And since the comparison with Christ has been brought in by Indian 
thinkers (see section 4 above), and since for His Incarnation there 
is the twofold assurance required (see below), can it be said that 
Krista’s claims as an 4 incarnation’ are in any sense comparable 
with His ? The historic spirit is so much at work to-day in India, 
producing innumerable modifications in the whole idea of incarna- 
tion, a process intensified by Christian influence, that many thought- 
ful minds are asking the question : What if, after all, the avat&ras 
are shown to be mythical ? A sample of this process is given on 
pages 30**3 and in view of the considerations there set forth it is 
surprising to read in a journal like The Indian Social Reformer 
for August 28, 1921 that, although, as is admitted, ‘there is no 
reference to Krisna in contemporary foreign literature, 1 yet * to the 
Hindu there can be no doubt about’ his historicity, no grounds of 
any kind being assigned for this wholesale swallowing of a difficulty 
which constitutes to-day probably one of the most haunting problems 
in thousands of Indian minds. Such haunting doubt is in accord 
with the protestantism of Kabir who plainly declares the ten 
avatdras to be ‘ dead*, a point our Tukaram never seems to reach. 
The bhakti theory being that God’s manifestation and man’s salva- 
tion are both to be accomplished through the medium of avatdras, 
it. becomes a matter of the highest importance that each avatara 
must bear the closest possible historical scrutiny, for if it appears 
that the avatara is but ‘ a cosmic legend,’ then the solid usefulness 
of bhakti as satisfying either heart or intellect will be gravely 
diminished. For the very essence of Tukaram’s bhakti is in its 
being lavished on the idol supposed to embody the ‘ incarnation ’, 
and if this latter will not bear the searchlight of ordinary historical 
investigation, it means the bhakti is misplaced and misdirected. 
Hence the ever-recurring unsatisfiedness of heart and mind in our 
earnest bhakta , such as none but the Living God, manifested in a 
Supreme Person, can ever appease. The great initial advantage 
yielded by the historicity of the Incarnation of God in Christ does 
not depend on the * few and vague references * to Him * by contem- 
porary Roman writers,’ 1 but on the fact that the historic reality of 
Jesus has withstood the most searching investigation in the history 
of mankind, and on the further fact that the purifying power of His 
personality has become a historic factor testified to by millions of 
witnesses representing every race. 

But what of the actuality and personality of those ‘ incarnations ’ 

(i avatdras ) of Vishnu to which Tukaram pinned his faith ? The 
Brahmo Pundit Sitanath Tattvabhushan of Calcutta affirms: ‘ The 
Vishpu of the Purdhas is the universe conceived as a person. . . 

\Jhc Indian Social Reformer t August 28. 1921. 



X IS TUKARAM’S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 2bi 

* 

The Pur&nas represent what is only a figure of speech as a person 
in flesh and blood moving about and conversing with his creatures. 
The ignorant and thoughtless reader of the Purctnas does not see 
that their authors are indulging in poetic fancy and takes them as 
stating facts. . . But the writers of the Purclhas can hardly be 
blamed for this. They make no secret of the fact that the repre- 
sentation of Vishnu as an embodied person with limbs and organs 
like those of a man is purely metaphorical.* 1 In face of these 
withering words, can the historic reality of Vishiiu’s 4 incarnation * 
at Pa 9 <Jharpur be regarded as tenable ? 

If, then, the historic test fails when applied to Vishnu’s 4 in- 
carnation * worshipped by Tukaram, what of the ethical and spiritual 
test? Is there evidence that man’s insatiable craving is satisfied 
by the avatdras of Tukaram’s belief, a craving for communion with 
the Unseen, all barriers of sin removed ? Since Deity transcends 
human apprehension, the bhakii theologians hold that only by a 
mediating ‘incarnation * can God speak with man or act on him, or 
man worship God and be saved from sin, hence Tukaram’s astonish- 
ing devotion to what he deems such a manifestation. Is there 
convincing evidence that by the particular 1 manifestation ’ in 
Vithoba the sickness has been cured which another Hindu bhakta 
diagnoses as 4 the pain of separation from God ’? For though, says 
this same bhakta , 4 a man should have thousands of devices, even 
one would not assist him in obtaining God.’ 2 * Does the device of 
avatdras avail to 1 obtain God ’? Here we are confronted with the 
perplexing paradox that while the avatdras and their images are in 
theory supposed to 4 symbolize ’ the divine presence, hey have in point 
of fact been the most degrading force in India’s history, leading to 
religious confusion, barrenness and formalism as anyone may 
discover by trying to count and characterize the deities in nearly 
every Deccan village. When we ask why these ‘ incarnations ’ have 
exercized a degrading, rather than a saving, influence we find the 
Vaish^avite khakt<z y despite his longing for purity, has either to 
allegorize, or apologize for, the impurities attributed to the god he 
worships, and stamped on the scriptures he reads. Fraser and. 
Marathe’s thirty pages in volume 2 of their Tukaram translations 
quite suffice for the purpose, though the matter is made much more 
luminous when reference is made to some of the scriptures on which 
Tukaram sought to nurture his soul. Not only is ‘incarnate* 
KjrisQa viewed in Tukaram’s favourite Bhdgwat Purdiia merely ‘as 
a partial incarnation of God * but the same scripture sets forth 
Kjrisija as bearing grave 4 moral stigma,’ his character being sorely 
marred by 4 illicit love \ When we go to others of the eighteen 
Purdfias at whose sullied fount Tukaram drank, some of them are 


1 Indian Mes$enger % ]utie 26, 1921. 

2Nanak, Japi I quoted in Indian Theism from MacauliffesSfk/t Religion , 

I, p.196. 



254 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

popular only because of their 'outrageously indecent descriptions 
of the Rasallla and the loose ideas of morals permeating ' 1 them. 
This is sorry stuff on which to build a hope of salvation, for it 
brings in moral confusion of all kinds instead of assurance of 
pardon for man's soul. It would have been a surprising thing if 
assurance of salvation from sin could have reached Tukaram 
through such channels. 

Disillusionment and bitterness of soul were thus often the lot of 
our bhakti poet, as of one Akho in Gujerat who ‘compared his guru 
to an old bullock yoked to a cart he could not draw, a useless 
expense to his owner, and to a stone in the embrace of a drowning 
man which sinks where it is expected to save.* 8 Tukaram’s 
Unsystematic utterances on the one hand reveal his many disappoint- 
ments with the god whom he roundly abuses. On the other hand 
they represent a religious revival in Maharashtra which expressed 
the deep cry of men's hearts for true salvation and a revolt from 
pantheistic formalism. It was, however, a revival with but little 
ethical content, consisting as it did so largely of ecstasy in the 
idolatrous atmosphere of the avatfiras; and as Narayan Vaman 
Tilak has told us, ecstasy is not devotion, still less is it salvation 
from moral despair as Tukaram’s dark moods too plainly show. 
N. V. Tilak tells of an acquaintance really devoted to God, but 
who thought he had not felt such devotion as Hindus feel, the 
reason being that ‘ he mistook the Hindu idea of ecstasy for 
devotion ; Hindus,' continues the Christian bhakta % ‘ whether 
followers of the knowledge theory or the devotion theory, whether 
holding the pantheistic idea of liberation, or the dualistic principle 
of assimilation, aspire to lose the very consciousness of self, and 
there to stand still in a state of ecstasy,* this being regarded as 
1 the summum bonum of all knowledge, of all devotion.* n Hence 
we read that Gora the potter, not a Bramhavadln but a bhakta , i.e., 
a believer in a personal God, one day forgot himself and the world 
around him so much as to tread on his own child and crush it 
while singing and dancing in the ecstasy of what he and others 
called devotion. Similariiy, Tukaram’s bhakti is too deeply rooted 
in the emotions to set at rest a troubled conscience, or soothe a 
broken heart or satisfy an enquiring intellect. That this is still the 
case with bhakti inspired by Vithoba we have already seen on 
page 62 where a Bombay Prarthana Samajist says of his visit 
to Panclharpur’s chief religious season in 1920 : ‘ People do not get 
true spiritual benefit’. From all this it is clear that Origen’s 
point in the third century still holds good for India in the twentieth, 
that transfigured lives are far superior to images for setting forth 
God's love and purity and spirituality. 

t Pundit Sitanath Tattvabhushan, Indian Messenger, Sept. 11 1921. 

9 Indian Theism , p. 129. 

8 Dnydnodaya , July 9, 1903. 



X IS TUKARAM’S RELIGION ADEQUATE? 255 

Still the longing for salvation by Tukaram’s modern devotees 
must somehow be met. * Had I not been a sinner, how could there 
have been a Saviour ? So my name is the source, and hence, O 
Sea of mercy, comes thy purifying power, . . Tuka says, through 
the petitioner’s faith comes the honour of the tree of wishes / 1 
The very despair in Tukaram’s sin-laden soul assures him there 
must be relief somehow, somewhere — some Saviour, some way of 
true salvation. The Christian position is that his yearning hope 
has been filled with historic content by means of the Cross and 
Resurrection of Christ and by the resultant Pentecost when the 
Incarnate One sent the Incarnating Spirit of His Own Personality 
to apply redeeming love to men’s hearts and assure them of their 
place in it. Tukaram’s way of salvation is much too subjective 
either to give solid assurance or to be ‘ethically enduring * Where 
faith is, there is God’ is the fundamental principle of his bhakti % 
which means that faith has to create its own object, shaping that 
object according to the bhakta's own imperfect longings and 
shifting ideas. This is to rob inward religion of all guarantee of 
steadfastness, besides being unsatisfying to the mind. For the 
object of such faith being self-created, the whole tenor of the 
religion must suffer in consequence. In place of this subjectivism 
and emotionalism the Christian message substitutes an ever-present 
Supreme Person as faith’s object, One Whose actual example 
quickens conscience, and Whose tender love provides a personal 
motive for daily conduct — * for My sake Only on such definite 
concrete lines can the soul hope to receive an answer to its prayer: 

Dwell further in that doubt than go, 

And make 4 1 hope ’ become 4 1 know 

Who can listen to Tukaram’s oft-repeated cry for full satisfaction 
without being deeply moved ? His uncertainties and ambiguities 
on well-nigh every subject are an index to his mental and spiritual 
conflict. His disillusionments with his god, his deep and constant 
discontent, drove him to the anodyne of quietism to deaden the 
effect of his wearisome struggle. Despite occasional ecstasy, the 
notrf of sustained joy is conspicuous by its absence, and his ex- 
perience is mostly that of 4 the dark night of the soul 9 / If he did 
obtain any blessing he certainly shows but little concern that others 
should get it, and intercession or prayer for others is entirely absent 
from bis pages. 

If ‘the universe conceived as a person ’ be the highest position 
modern Indian thought can yield to Vishpu, the source of India's 
‘ incarnations 9 , if one in the great Triad thus fails to minister 
salvation, if ‘ erotic ’ Vaisbnavas are 1 evidently conscious * of 
« narrating deeds worthy of condemnation * * , what shall be said of the 

1 F. and M. 213. 

2 See sect. 3 above, also pp. 133-8. 

9 pandit $itan&th Tattvabhushan. Indian Messenger , August, 28, 1921, 



256 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

particular 4 incarnation * on which Tukaram lavished his love ? 
The narrative in section Hof chapter III on the calamity to Vithoba 
in 1873 is left to make its own impression, but nearly thirty years 
later, in 1902, a serious quarrel between the Badvas (or Brahman 
trustees of Vithoba’s temple) and the pujarls who perform the menial 
offices of bathing and dressing the idol, regarding certain gifts offered 
by worshippers, went to such lengths that for eight days the god 
Vithoba had no bath, no offerings, no flowers, no food. From the 
statements made in the Bombay High Court it appeared that many 
of Vithoba’s worshippers were unable to take their own food or 
bath in consequence, with possible risks to health, besides which, 
the public peace was in risk of being endangered owing to the 
irritation of disappointed pilgrims at the approaching festival. 1 * 3 
The whole story illustrates a truth driven home by the monotheistic 
prophets of Israel — the contrast between idols which have them- 
selves to be 4 carried ’ and the Living God Who is the Burden-bearer 
of His children. Instead of being a help to his devotees, Vithoba 
had been to them the occasion of trouble, loss and anxiety, a con- 
trast similar to that between 4 the dead-weight of the idols ’ in Isaiah’s 
day and 4 the living and lifting God’ Who in the Person of His 
Incarnate Son ‘ bears our griefs and carries our sorrow a 

Indian bhaktis dream has, however, been more than realized. 
4 He, the jewel from eternal ages incorrupt, has come ’ and every long- 
ing bhakta may pray : * Gfant grace to me to find the path that leads 
unto Thy feet.* 3 4 God is love ’ and He 4 so loved that He gave His 
Son’, the true 4 image of God 1 , the one and only ‘image * it is safe 
for man to worship, for in worshipping Him they 4 will be like 
Him*. Worthy indeed is the Incarnation seen in Him, for He is 
veritably 4 the image of the invisible God being 4 stamped with 
God’s own charcter’, ‘the image that bodies out for us the essen- 
tial Being of God 4 the expression of His Essence ’, 4 tjie outflash- 
ing of ’God’s glory, the perfect expression of His Personality’. 4 
Any other 4 image ’ leaves room for the bewildering multiplicity of 
polytheism, but this true 4 Image of God ’ is unique and apart. This 
Incarnation, Who offered Himself for man’s sin, meets the aspira- 
tions alike of those noble Samajists who long for a true Theism 
and of the illiterate mutitudes given up to idols. Bhakti of 
any other type than that must be pronounced inadequate for India’s 
needs. 

Assurance of salvation is the topic of this section, for India’s 
quest has ever been after certitude in the things of religion, and 
despite much that is excellent in Tukaram's poems, there is no 
abiding certitude. 4 1 see no sign of assurance in him who stands 
band on hip ’ (3010) is one of his most characteristic lines. So 

1 Dnyanodaya t September 11, 1902. 

• See Isaiah 46, 3-7 and 53, 4. 

3 Manikka Vasaharin Hymns of the Tamil Saivaite Saints , pp. 97, 107. 

Colossijms i. 15 and Hebrews i. 3 trs. by Moffatt, Way, Westcott, Weymouth. 



X 


IS TUKARAM’S RELIGION ADEQUATE? 257 


often do we seem to hear from his lips the * orphaned cry ' 
of the Psalmist : * My soul crieth out for God* for the living God \ 
and so often do we find him unsatisfied, 4 leaning on a wreath 
of mist*. Hence his constant wavering between Yes and No on 
almost every fundamental of religion. But the conception 
referred to in our preceding paragraph, that Christ is 4 the visible 
Representation of the invisible God,’ 1 4 the exact Representation 
of His Being,* 9 conveys the heart-assurance that every such 
‘ orphaned cry ’ has been answered, for 4 in Christ* the unknow- 
able God becomes knowable and 4 in Him * men gain spiritual 
vision of 4 the King Invisible and go on unflinching’ (Hebrews 
xi. 27). Dwelling for ever in the glorious privacy of light* 
with the Eternal, Christ Jesus ‘shines within the heart to 
illumine men with the knowledge of God’s glory ’ (2 Cor. iv. fi). 
Invincible certainty is the hall-mark of this Image, for the 
ambiguity, uncertainty and hesitation which so often tantalize 
the reader of Tukaram have no place here. St. Paul has a 
fine passage where he affirms that ‘Jesus Christ, the Son of God, 
did not show Himself a waverer between Yes and iVo, but it 
was and always is Yes with Him; the Divine Yes has at last 
sounded in Him, for in Him is the Yes that affirms all the 
promises of God ; in the proclamation of Gcd’s Son Jesus there 
was never any wavering affirmation and negation ; no ! by the 
inspiration of God it was ever one consistent affirmative.’ ” In 
Christ Jesus, Revealer of God and Saviour of men, 4 an Eternal 
Yea has come into being \ a sure antidote to the doubtfulness 
and vacillation of Tukaram and to the waywardness of Hindu 
speculation. 

7. Does Tukaram's Religion Supply Dynamic Power ? 

Any true pathological analysis of India’s condition — her 
society petrified by caste, her very air vitiated by idolatry and its 
infamies — leads to the conclusion that the only remedy is a ‘divine 
energy, exhaustless vigour, and resistless power ’ such as never 
meet us in Tukaram’s pages. Our bhakti poet has a lofty ideal 
of character before him, but nowhere does he indicate by what 
power his readers may achieve it. What could be nobler than the 
following abhahg , a 4 song of songs which has passed into the mouth 
of every man in the street in Maharashtra,* and which Sir Narayan 
Chandavarkar paraphrases as follows ? 4 I bow down before him 

who lives up to what he utters in words; I bow down to him whose 
life is a continuous movement forward to the goal he sees ; I would, 
like a menial, sweep clean the courtyard of his house; so low 

1 Lightfoot and Weymouth’s rendering in Colossians i. 15. 

* Weymouth in Hebrews i. 3. 

8 2 Cor, i. 19 as rendered by Weymouth, Moffatt and A. S. Way. 

33 



258 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ? ch. 

would I humble myself before him. I would be his loyal disciple, 
entirely at his service in thought, word and deed. Whosoever has 
God truly enshrined in his heart, him will I implicitly obey. 
To him I offer my faith, my allegiance.’ 1 Nothing could be more 
beautiful as an ideal and Tukaram shows that the only secret of its 
achievement is inward. But all depends on what is truly ‘ en- 
shrined in his heart’, seeing it is not impossible for the two 
Marathi words that yield this fine phrase to mean that the man is 
mentally occupied with the Pandharpur deity, though this inter- 
pretation Sir Nariiyan and every other Samajist would probably 
repudiate. Even assuming that the term refers to the True and 
Living God, still the question remains: How shall man attain the 
experience of that Indwelling Presence — a question to which 
'I'ukaram gives no satisfactory answer. Could he have known of 
the ‘ radical supernaturalism * assured by that other Guru Who 
always ‘acted as he spoke*, we believe Tukaram would indeed 
have offered Him his ‘faith’ and ‘allegiance’. That he often 
sinks into wild despair, becoming a victim to the pessimism 
of the Deccan, 2 3 means that he knows nothing of that divine 
dynamic which assures ‘ not only inward deliverance from 
the power of sin, but ultimate deliverance from everything that 
cripples and depresses the entire life of man .’ :i That the bhakti 
of Tukaram fails to stand the test laid down by the anthropologist 
who says that ‘ the function of religion is to restore men’s confidence 
when it is shaken by a crisis’, is clear from our biographical and 
autobiographical chapters. 

By way of contrast, turn to one of the most fascinating figures 
in the Christian history of the early first century, one called 
Hermas, just such another man as our own poet. He followed the 
same trade of shopkeeper, was unhappy at home, lost all his 
property, occasionally gave himself up to fasting and trances, and 
had the same temperamental weakness, ‘ the hesitating, wavering 
spirit of timidity that destroys faith and depresses the spiritual 
life.' He wrote a book called The Shepherd of Hermas whose 
message shows that Hermas had discovered. the antidote to both 
doubt and gloom : ‘ The Spirit of Godendureth not sadness, neither 
constraint; therefore clothe thyself in cheerfulness'. 4 Another 
book which serves as a window through which we can clearly see 
Christian bhakti at work in men’s hearts, sustaining them in those 
dark days, is one called The Odes of Solomon , probably several 
decades earlier than The Shepherd . Every sentence ends with a 
Hallelujah , with ‘ never a trace of that pathetic occasional reaction 
from faith to uncertainty, from ecstasy to despair’ so familiar to 

1 Subodh Patrika , Jan. 23, 1921 : see F. and M. 3339 for another rendering. 

s See sect, on ‘ Tukaram and Indian Pessimism \ pp. 174-5 above. 

3 The Missionary Message in Relation to Non-Christian Religions, 
Vol.'iv. World Missionary Conference, 1910 Report, p. 250. 

4 The Ancient Church and Modern India , pp. 90-1. * 



X 


IS TUKARAM'S RELIGION ADEQUATE? 259 


the student of Tukaram. How that ‘reaction* was prevented is 
indicated by such words as these : ‘ As the wings of doves over 
their nestlings, and the mouth of their nestlings towards their 
mouths, so also are the wings of the Spirit over my heart ; my 
heart is delighted and exults ; . . . for faithful is He in whom I 
believed . . . Thou hast given us Thy followship ; it was not that 
Thou wast in need of us, but that we are in need of Thee.’ 1 
This last phrase shows how different is the spirit of true Christian 
bhakti from that of Tukaram who can say : ‘ How happy we are 
that such a God makes himself our debtor.* 2 3 

Doubtless many of Tukaram’s present-day followers are ready 
to admit i»to their secret pantheon the true Source of this dynamic 
energy, just as Tukaram was willing to let other gods into 
Vithoba’s shrine, and as Vishnu and Siva are side by side in 
almost every Deccan village. But we believe the dynamic 
Spirit of God is narrowing down the solemn issue in many Indian 
hearts to that confronting a modern poet : 4 the light hath Hashed 
from heaven and 1 must follow it.* n India's cardinal religious 
defect is clearly her lack of a moral dynamic. Her aching heart, 
at the end of her long history of renunciation, sacrifices and 
pilgrimages, argues the absence of a satisfying power. 4 Disputa- 
tion has turned to waste the places of Brahmindom * says Tukaram. 
But let religion be viewed as a matter of dynamics, let it be 
experienced as an enabling force, then there must be an effectual 
closing up of India’s ‘ great gulf between assent and conviction, 
and of the still greater gulf between conviction and action \ Let 
the whole religious issue in India be regarded as a dynamical one — 
and any other is a mockery of needy men -.-then teachers of religion 
everywhere will realize their chief responsibility to be one of giving 
to India such a dynamical faith as transforms and uplifts. For 
such a task the enunciation of mere ethics will be utterly inadequate ; 
the ethic must be cndynamited . The one Divine Spirit in place 
of popular idolatry, the Personal Spirit of God in place of the 
impersonal essence of the Vedanta, the rich dynamic or motive 
power of the indwellng, all-enabling Spirit of Christ instead of the 
mere ideals, however lofty, of the bhakti movement — this is surely 
the message to meet India’s needs. Upon the leaders of the bhakti 
movement a heavy weight of responsibility devolves, for if India is 
to advance to the light of the truest bhakti , that centred in Christ, 
it will be as the devotees of the purer bhakti of Tukaram and 
Tulsidas lead the way. 

In the constancy of that indwelling presence of God’s Spirit 
set forth by Christian bhakti there is more than compensation 

1 Ibid pp. 84-5. 

2 See and M. 1389, also PJ/.S., pp. 27, 82. 

3 From this point to the end of this section 7. we slightly modify one or 
two paragraphs from our chap. 1. in The Holy Spirit , The Christian Dynamic , 

on ‘ India’s Need of the Dynamic of the Spirit.’ 



260 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch. 

for ‘the innumerable incarnations* of Hindu bhakti , for there 
is thereby assured a power not ourselves, working in us 
and through us for righteousness, always present and always 
within, which is surely more satisfactory than innumerable 
interventions on our beha,lf. This is the power Tukaram needed, 
though he knew it not, and must be regarded as his bhakti s missing 
link, a driving force enabling every bhakta to realize bhakti s 
highest ideals. One branch of the bhakti school does indeed 
conceive God as pervading all things as their i antarydmln * or 
inward Restrainer, but man needs a mighty Constrainer also. 
Duty is a great word in the bhakti movement, but * duty is a 
grievous burden and a hard yoke unless there is the sense of power 
abundant to discharge it*. Here is the grand question by which 
every system must be tested. How is the power to be appropriated? 
Christian bhakti's answer is that * in the communion of the Holy 
Spirit is an exhaustless source of abundant power*. Such religion 
is dynamical, while every other religion is static. With all its 
excellencies, and it has many, Hindu bhakti is utterly unable to 
rid itself of its intimate connexion with a static religion, hence its 
inadequacy for this age of progress. Only by Divine Power 
dwelling in man may the bhakti ideal be realized. This indwelling 
Energizer alone can empower the soul to a daily realization of that 
still loftier ideal of bhakti, namely, love. For, inevitably, the 
question arises — How is this loving and dutiful devotion to be 
inspired in man’s unresting soul ? To this question of questions in 
religion Tukaram gives no satisfactory reply. ‘ Where pity, 
pardon, peace abide, there God dwells’, says our poet, but how 
man’s sin-stained soul shall receive that Holy Guest we are not 
told. Tukaram’s bhakti here, as often, sets up an ideal without 
showing what will empower men to achieve it. But the clear 
answer of New Testament bhakti is that ‘ the harvest of the Spirit’s 
sowing is love, joy, peace \ l 

8. Will Tukaram’s Bhakti Build an Enduring 
Social Order 

A religion that has to satisfy the needs of modern India will 
need to be intensly democratic, meeting the desperate case alike of 
India’s sixty million out-castes and its down-trodden women. How 
does Tukaram's bhakti stand this test? On both subjects he 
halts and wobbles, for, though the ‘ social * principles of his bhakti 
were far superior to the orthodox Hinduism of his time, Tukaram 
was never able to say with the much earlier Christian leader 
Tertullian : 1 Here I stand, this truth I will never forsake ; you 

1 Gal. V. 22 A. S. Way’s translation. 



x IS TUKARAIVTS RELIGION ADEQUATE? 261 

may disgrace me, make me poor, kill me, but you cannot make me 
conceal my faith*. There is no subject on which Tukaram’s 
ambiguities and compromises are so fatal as in this matter of a 
healthy social order for his country. In order to be concrete, we 
confine ourselves to three questions: caste, woman and world- 
outlook. 

(1) Caste 

Tukaram’s social ideals as represented by his position on the 
caste question have already been left far behind by Indian thought. 
India’s educational aspirations, its growing passion for nationalism, 
along with widespread Christian influence, have combined to 
initiate one of the most tremendous social reform movements 
ever seen in any land, a campaign for the abolition of 4 untouchabi- 
lity\ This campaign is in the very teeth of Tukaram’s own 
easy-going tolerance. We have already seen on pp. 54-55 and 162- 5 
that three centuries before his day a poor Mahar was thrown out of 
Vithoba’s temple at Pandharpur simply because he was an 
‘ untouchable * and that at his monument on the other side of the 
street to that leading into the great temple, the 4 out-castes * of the 
Deccan, excluded from Vithoba’s presence, have worshipped ever 
since. It was a wrong against which Tukaram should have 
protested with all his might, but since his bhakti tolerated it, the 
wrong has been perpetuated to this hour. Shortly after the High 
Court case reported on page 256 when the idol was neglected for 
days together on account of squabbles over temple dues, a Chambhar 
woman went regularly into the Pandharpur temple for a fortnight 
giving out that she was a pure Maratha. When it was discovered 
that she was a despised Chambhar, there was a great hue and cry 
that Vithoba had been defiled. She was arrested and placed before 
the magistrate who very properly, according to the laws in British 
India, dismissed the case. It was not stated whether the cause of 
offence was that the idol, or his worshippers, observed caste nor why 
anyone must worship at a side shrine. It is not surprising therefore 
that Dr. Rabindranath Tagore declares 4 the regeneration of the Indian 
people, to my mind, directly and solely depends upon the removal 
of this condition of caste*. Probably Maharashtra is freer from 
caste-prejudice than any other part of India (see close of first 
chapter), but the struggle going on all over the Deccan, as we write, 
between Brahmin and Non- Brahmin, throws a lurid light on 
the caste question even in our comparatively ‘cosmopolitan’ 
Maharashtra. 

How deeply Tukaram’s modern disciples are concerned over 
this problem and yet with what 4 distressing timidity ’ they approach 
it have often been illustrated at Social Reform conferences in 
recent years. We have more than once in this book referred to 
Dr. Sir Ramkrishna Gopal Bhandarkar as being oneof the greatest 



262 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

of Tukaram’s followers both in point of learning and of true bhukti 
spirit. Yet in his presidential address at the Provincial Social 
Conference held at Sholapur in 1902, after stating that to eradicate 
the germs of caste was 4 perhaps as hopeless as drying up the 
Indian Ocean \ and that Europe had 4 destroyed those germs in 
their infancy by using the antidote of the spirit of nationality \ 
Sir Ramkrishna went on to say that his view of his people was 
that 4 the great Shastra or spiritual adviser whom they obey is 
custom \ and that 4 the only efficacious way is to devise a radical 
course of reform based upon the reform of the Hindu religion’, 
though, he concluded, 4 for obvious reasons I must not go into the 
question further.’ 1 In both their nobility and their insufficiency 
those words were characteristic of a great disciple of Tukaram, and 
vfe believe fndian reformers are increasingly realizingthat they must 
4 go into the question further \ that Sir Ramkrishna’s remedy of a 
mere ‘ reform of the Hindu religion ’ will not suffice, and that caste 
and orthodox Hinduism are largely synonymous. That the doubt 
he expressed on that occasion concerning 4 forming a nation with 
caste* was well-grounded has since then been conclusively shown 
all too often. During a debate in the Bombay Legislative Council, 
July 1919, the Hon. Sir George Curtis showed how caste defies 
even the force of nationality and obstructs the benign process of 
self-government. Sir George told of a Makar whose bravery had 
been recognized by the. tithe of Sirdar Bahadur but whose presence 
had been objected to as a representative on a Municipality, his 
fellow-members sending in 4 a representation to the Collector that 
all the business should be conducted by correspondence so that 
members might be saved the disgrace of sitting with a Mahar.’ a 
In the same debate, the Director of Public Instruction had to 
report concerning the Deccan that 4 many of the Primary Schools 
in villages were held in temples, which prevented the depressed 
classes from availing themselves of these schools’. In the same 
session a simple proposal to make wells available for ‘the untouch- 
able classes’ was lost by vote, the Hon. Mr. Paranjpe plainly 
telling the high caste members that ‘it was inconsistent to ask for 
rights from Government* when they themselves were refusing to 
their own lower classes the 4 most up-to-date democratic right * of 
drinking-water. Such plain speaking by Indian statesmen is a 
welcome sign of progress, for several years ago a Mahar at Jamkhed 
in the Deccan was convicted by a Brahman magistrate and fined 
eight rupees or in default a fortnight’s imprisonment for having 
gone to a public spring built with public money, on the ostensible 
ground of having polluted the water thereby. The British Magis- 
trate of Ahmednagar referring this decision to the Bombay High 
Court, the conviction was quashed and the fine ordered to be 
refunded. 

1 Dnydnodaya, Nov. 13. 1902, 

2 Bombay Government Gacette % July, 1919. 

/ 



X IS TUKARAM’S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 263 

Indian leaders are openly acknowledging that India will never 
attain to any true nationhood apart from the emancipation of the 
* untouchables ’ and that this emancipation can be affected only by 
religious reform. Take the following, which illustrates the force 
of Mr. Gandhis public statement that the New Testament has 
been one of the greatest influences on his life and ideals. Speaking 
at Ghatkopar near Bombay on June 15, 1921 he stated, with 
reference to ‘several threatening letters he had received from 
Vaishpavas because of 9 his campaign for the recognition of ‘un- 
touchables’ as common citizens, that ‘if Vaishnavas did not want 
to have anything to do with the untouchables, then they were not 
real Vaishnavas but only godless and sinful people. . . . If Vaishna- 
vism taught them to despise their fellow-creatures, then he for one 
could not call it a religion but a monstrous perversion of religion. . . 
For what was religion without love for the oppressed and the 
depressed?* 1 There is true Christian teaching in this, but a 
campaign for * untouchables ’ is certainly not Vaishnavism, else 
that greatest of all Maratha Vaishnavas, our own Tukaram, 
would have passionately denounced the necessity for * untouchables * 
in Pandharpur and every other place having to worship across the 
street. 

To the same effect, the words carrying us a stage nearer our 
goal, are the words, spoken the very same day as the above, by 
Mr. K. Natarajan, editor of The Indian Social Reformer, that most 
fearless of journals. Presiding over the Mysore Economic Confer- 
ence, Mr. Natarajan said : ‘ So far as I know there is no word in 
our vernaculars conveying the precise idea of what is connoted by 
“neighbourliness”. There is plenty of the thing itself but that is 
mostly in places where neighbours are generally also people of the 
same caste ... “ Love thy neighbour as thyself To the extent 

that we succeed in inculcating this idea in the minds of the people 
... to that extent we shall lay truly and firmly the foundation of 
the quality on which alone can be raised a superstructure of high 
public spirit and patriotism.’ 2 This is clearly stated and our one 
criticism is that it does not take us far enough. How is the 
‘neighbourliness’ to be acquired? What power is to breathe 
within India's millions of hearts the spirit of 1 love to one’s 
neighbour’ though that neighbour be of a different caste ? Is there 
any power other than the Spirit of Christ, that divine dynamic 
power which alone can overcome all such obstacles ? This is the 
Christian message to such noble movements as the Depressed 
Classes Mission and a hundred others all over the land, which, 
against the agelong prejudice of two hundred millions of 
Hindus, are working in a truly Christian spirit for India’s 
uplift. 


i Bombay Chronicle , June 16, 1921. 

a Times of India , June 17, 1921. 



264 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


CH 


Unprejudiced observers of India’s progress are more and more 
ready to admit that Christ has proved to be the greatest solvent of 
caste prejudice not only in Tukaram’s country but all over India 
and that the only principle on which any lasting social fabric can be 
built in India is that expressed by Lactantius in the fourth 
century : ‘ Slaves are not slaves to us ; we deem and term them 
brothers after the spirit*. The essential principles on this matter 
were fought out once for all in the early Church on the basis of 
complete equality in Christ 1 and in so far as the Indian Church, Be 
it Roman Catholic or Protestant, departs from those essential 
principles, the Church will lose her power and will discover what 
one of her truest leaders means when he warns her of the grave 
danger of 4 elephantiasis 9 in the Church’s feet, this elephantiasis 
being the spirit of caste . 2 3 Exclusiveness in the Church, be it in 
India, Europe or America, is utterly un-Christian. 

(2) Woman 

That no society can ever rise above the level of its women is 
axiomatic, and Tukaram writes about woman as if she must for ever 
occupy the narrow and confined sphere allotted to her in the 
Hinduism of his day. His poems have no recognition of her true 
place in society and of her # needed restoration to her proper position 
in the world. In view of the fact that women are numbered among 
bhakti saints and poets before Tukaram’s day it is all the more 
surprising that ‘Tukaram speaks of women in a manner that is far 
from dignified \ Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar, who makes this last state* 
ment, urges in palliation: ‘We must make special allowance in 
Tukaram’s case, seeing how unfortunate he was in having a wife 
who could not understand him or give him sympathy. When all 
this is taken into consideration we can hardly wonder at'Tukaram’s 
attitude towards women He urges the still more extenuating 
circumstance that in the Hinduism of Tukaram’s environment the 
relation between men and women was so narrow and constrained. 
Such were the considerations advanced in 1903. 

In this connection it is well to remember that everywhere in the 
Roman Empire of the first century woman was equally despised. 
‘The radical disease, of which, more than of anything else, ancient 
civilization perished ’ was ‘an imperfect ideal of woman * says one 
historian. A different method of treatment, however, inspired by a 
worthier ideal, has enabled woman to fulfil her mission as the 
ministering angel of the race. 

l See a helpful discussion on 1 the caste question * by G. E. Phillips, The 
Ancient Church and Modem India , pp. 28-31. 

a Sadhu Sundar Singh in The Sadhu , chap, on 'Indian Christianity* 
pp. 230-1. . • . 

3 Two Masters : Jesus and Tukartfm, p. 14. 



X IS TUKARAM'S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 265 

Students urge as a further palliative that Tukaram was concerned 
only with his own religious life, but in his much later Nava Yuga 
article of March, 1921, Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar frankly confessed 
Tukaram’s attitude towards women to be one of his chief defects, 
puoting the poet’s prayer in abhaiig 121 to be saved from 
‘ the fellowship of women *, following on the incident referred 
to on page 98 (last paragraph), and his resolve in 122 now 
‘ to look on other women like Rakhumai \ two conclusions 
are drawn: first, that his minute self-introspection revealed a 
self-honesty and self-triumph rare among men ; and second, that his 
withdrawal from feminine society was a course impossible to-day 
and thus the example of Tukaram could not be followed by his 
modern disciples in this important matter. The same article 
forcibly set forth that since Tukaram believed a man should treat 
his wife with no more affection than his maidservant, the women 
of modern India will never attain to self-realization or to their 
destined ministry for mankind on the lines indicated by the saint 
of Dehu. 1 

If there is any Indian question to-day requiring the ‘inherent 
vital energies’ of the gospel of woman’s greatest Guru , it is this. 
Whether as seed or as leaven, Christian principle is prevailing in 
India to such an extent that thousands of India’s best men and 
women are seeking to extirpate some of the most blazing wrongs 
against women that ever spoiled the fair fame of any country — 
enforced widowhood, child-marriage, the sale of girls for infamous 
purposes in temples, and other crimes. The same Christian 
dynamic, working unconsciously in many places but no less surely, 
is transforming woman’s position to-day in India as it did in the 
Roman Empire of the first century. ‘ Woman never did have a 
Vedic value’ says Cornelia Sorabji ; she certainly never has such 
value in Tukaram’s eyes. Contrast with this the view of Augustine 
who says : * The Saviour gives abundant proof of the dignity of 
woman in being born of a woman’; and that of Chrysostom: ‘They 
surpass us in love to the Saviour, in chastity, in compassion for the 
miserable*. How noble woman can be is shown by her place in 
‘the noble army of martyrs’; how truly wonderful Indian women 
can be is shown by such Indian Christian women as Pundita 
Ramabal, rescuer of thousands of helpless widows among Tukaram’s 
own people. 

(3) World-Outlook 

In the new era upon which mankind has entered since the 
world*war, no race of people can expect to build an enduring social 
order save as part of an international society enriched by the ideals 
of other lands. We have already seen that no true nationality 

1 Nava Yuga , March 1921, pp 164-5 

3+ 



266 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. 

can be created unless every class is included, be it the despised 
out-caste or despised woman. Similarily, so absorbingly ‘individual* 
is Tukaram’s whole idea of God in all his poems, so entirely is his 
bhakti ‘an end in itself’, that he is utterly unconscious of the big 
throbbing world outside his own little Dehu or Pandharpur, save 
as once and again he thinks of bathing in the distant Ganges or 
other holy rivers. It is no fault of Tukaram that he cannot 
help us here, for he was the child of his age and of a faith in no 
sense universal in its scope or sweep. His limitation of outlook so 
much affects him that he never appears to consider the case even of 
the Muhammadans of his day whom he knew so well. It did not 
strike him that his teaching might interest, or possibly help, them. 
If he gave the matter a thought he no doubt rested vaguely content 
•with the idea that Islam was sufficient for the Moslem, just as for 
the Hindu there was the worship of Vitlioba. He has none of the 
broad horizons of the prophets in Old Testament page who address 
their message of righteousness to surrounding nations, nor of the 
New Testament apostles whose hearts are so moved with pity that 
they are equally concerned for the needs of far-off races as for 
their own kith and kin. It required the sovereign conceptions of 
God’s impartial righteousness and universal love to give to these 
inspired teachers, though they lived millenniums before Tukaram’s 
(fay, such national and international ideals that the world is still 
striving after their attainment. If we would realize the full force 
of this factor, then, over against Tukaram’s religious exclusiveness 
whereby India’s sixty million ‘ untouchables’ are denied their rights, 
should be set the universal outlook of Biblical prophets and 
apostles whose large-heartedness leads them to see the whole world 
as a unit under One Control and to treat humanity as one vast 
whole, subject to the same imperial laws of righteousness and love. 
That Tukaram’s moral world is bounded by the confines of Maha- 
rashtra is due to the fact that his god Vithoba is limited to the 
same territory, authority over which is shared by a multitude of 
deities of doubtful character. Not on such an unstable foundation 
can a successful theodicy be worked out or an enduring social 
order be constructed. What is needed is a God, supreme in right- 
eousness, belief in whose over-ruling Providence is the inspiring 
factor towards world-unity and world-progress, a Providence in 
whose hands nations are employed as divinely appointed agents for 
the overthrow of the tyrants of mankind. Such a faith is the only 
possible basis for a stable nationalism as it is the only guaranfte 
for that world-democracy which means liberty, equality, fraternity 
for all classes and conditions. To ‘make the world safe for democ- 
racy* something far superior to Tukaram’s bhakti is required, for he 
did not ensure true democracy even for his own Maharashtra. This 
qan be secured only by faith in the One Supreme God, who as 
* infinite' ' JHigh ’ treats all men with equal justice and as ‘infinitely 
Near * the very lowest of the low in all life’s detailed needs. 

, / 





TUKAKAM LKD 




X IS TUKARAM’S RELIGION ADEQUATE? 267 

By whatever test, then, it is measured, whether by the caste 
problem, or the needs of woman, or by its limited world-outlook, 
Tukaram’s bhakti is found to be insufficient to build up a stable 
India. Bhakti principles are far and away the loftiest in Indian 
religion, but they fail to follow out their implications, probably 
because bhakti has seen no Supreme Person embodying them in 
sinless form and because it is without the dynamic energy to carry 
its ideals into practice. But whatever the reason, we have such a 
bhakta as Tulsidas offending every ethical and democratic principle 
by affirming that ‘ a Brahmin must be honoured though devoid of 
every virtue’, a sentiment like that of our own bhakta when he 
says ‘a Brahman is superior in the three worlds though he fail in 
duty V On such lines no true democracy can ever be founded. 
For an increasing number of Indian reformers the two regnant prin- 
ciples are the Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood of Man, 
and on these two bedrock Christian principles a new India is being 
built. Reformers of every school, those who call themselves Chris- 
tians included, must now go on to recognize that apart from daily 
imitation of the burden-bearing Saviou*', of the example of social 
service in the Pentecostal Church, and of the social service of Spirit- 
filled men and women in every age, India’s problem will remain 
unsolved. None but the indwelling Spirit of Christ can supply the 
supernatural motive of benevolence or inspire a worthy cosmopoli- 
tan benignity. It is by the welding together of dynamical religion 
and social reform that India will enter upon her greatest era. 

There is a final lesson for every Christian student of Tukaram’s 
bhakti . One of its chief methods is that of song, and one of 
Tukaram’s greatest contributions to the Indian Church may 
prove to be that of Kirtans. At the same time, the Christian 
Church may well take warning from the fact that Tukararn must 
often have spent himself on Kirtans when lie should have been 
exerting himself on behalf of his out-caste brethren and sisters, 
kept outside Vithoba’s temple while he inside was singing and 
dancing to his god.* This is still one of the perils of the Vaisbpa- 
vism of Pancjharpur. It was an unforgettable sight when in October 
1920 we gazed down from the famous roof of Vithoba’s temple on 
the singers below who for full three hours had been shouting and 
dancing in their rapture, at the close the leader reverently flinging 
himself prostrate before the idol. It was a moving spectacle as we 
gazed upon it, though as N. V. Tilak reminds us, ‘ecstasy is not 
devotion \ In this connection we may add that it is not service. 
For as we went back through the alleys. of Pandharpur— not before 
we had visited the Prarthana Samaj Orphanage there and had 
seen the Mission Dispensary workers— and as we came back 
through the needy Deccan we wondered what value to the 
struggling millions in Tukaram’s land was that rapturous bliss. It 


F. and A/.» 3352b. 



268 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM cH. x. 


is a lesson we all need to learn, that to sing ourselves away, 
whether in Christian Church or Hindu temple, is not enough. 
India’s poverty is almost unparalleled on earth, and the^economic 
condition of the Indian Christian community itself is probably 
lower than that of any other Christian community in the world. 
India’s supreme need therefore is a practical religion, for econo- 
mists tell us India’s resources are quite sufficient to maintain her 
mighty millions if only those resources are distributed on Christian 
principles. Happily Tukaram’s modern disciples are taking a 
worthy lead in Indian reform of every kind, and the benevolent 
activities alike of the Prarthana Samaj and of the Poona and 
Indian Village Mission in Tukaram’s sacred city are an illustration 
of that work of social uplift which is uniting all races and creeds 
in India. 



Appendix I 

Hindu Avataras and The Christian Incarnation 

The fundamental distinction between the Hindu theory of 
avataras and the Christian doctrine of the Incarnation, which has 
not always been sufficiently recognized, is worthy of exhaustive 
treatment based on such an investigation of the two religious systems 
as cannot possibly be attempted here. All we can do is to call 
attention to a few scattered articles on what is a vast subject, 
illustrating the wide distinction between the Hindu and Christian 
conceptions. 

India’s yearning after avataras or ‘incarnations’ which shall 
bring God near to man must be regarded as a God given instinct* 
In the famous text of the Bhagvadg7td t expounded in the repeated 
teachings of Tukaram himself, the aim of an avatara is thus 
defined : 4 Whenever, O descendant of Bharata, there is a decay of 
righteousness and an ascendancy of unrighteousness, then I create 
myself ; for the protection of the good, for the destruction of evil- 
doers and for the establishment of righteousness, I am born in 
every age.’ Hence the innumerable avataras in Hinduism (see 
pp. 27-30 of this book). As the Bhaktakalpadruma states: 

4 When He seeth His servants in sorrow He tarrieth not but Him- 
self cometh as an incarnate Deity to save them/ The loftiness of 
this conception has been universally recognized by Christians and 
Hindus alike. In The Catholic Herald oj India for April 7, 1920, 
the Hindu stand point^as sympathetically expressed by the Rev. 
W. Wallace, S. }., M. a., in his article entitled ‘From Evangelical 
to Catholic by Way of the East’: 4 The Hindu doctrine of numer- 
ous incarnations seemed in some way superior to our doctrine of a 
unique descent of the supreme. Their God had come down time 
after time, when dharma was neglected, when the good needed 
support, and the wicked repression. Our God had only spent 
thirty-three years on earth, and then had left mankind to its fate 
without voice to speak from on high, without divine presence in its 
midst, without guide, without consoler.’ 

Under the title of V aishnava and Christian Doctrines of In- 
carnation there appeared in the Indian Messenger for March 20, 
1921, organ of the Sadharan Brahmo Samaj in Calcutta, the 
substance of a deeply interesting lecture in Bengal by the Brahmo 
Pundit Sitanath Tattvabhushan. ‘The popular Vaishnava theory 
of Incarnation,' said the learned pundit, ‘ is a theory of special, 
occasional incarnation/ Since 4 the immanence of God, in man and 
nature, which seems to be ignored ' in the above oft-quoted GltCt 
text, is a prominent feature of the philosophy of the Gita , this text 



270 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 

is given more in concession to popular opinion than as a part of its 
serious teaching. The basis of the philosophical doctrine of incar- 
nation taught in the G?/a, the Bhdgavata Purdna and other later 
sacred books of the country, is to be found in a text of the Kaushi- 
taki UpanisJtad where Indra teaches Fratardana that man’s highest 
good is to know him, 1 the Infinite One who is manifest in every 
person as his true self’. The Vaishnava Purdnas ‘ pander ever and 
anon to the popular view that particular persons are incarnations of 
God in a special sense*. Careful examination leads to the conclu- 
sion that ‘neither the old nor the new exponents of Vaishpavism 
have any definite theory of the distinction of God and man on which 
alone a true doctrine of bhakti can be based’, it being clear that to 
the author of the Bhdgavata Purdna more than anyone else, the 
peftonality of God is 4 purely imaginary but nevertheless necessary 
for cultivating bhakti religion.’ On June 26, 1921 the above- 
mentioned journal had a paper on ‘ The Bhdgavata Dharma * by the 
same Brahmo scholar who observed that what the Purdttas set forth 
‘ as a person in flesh and blood ’ is really 4 only a figure of speech’, 
their authors merely ‘ indulging in poetic fancy’, for their 4 represent- 
ation of Vishnu as an embodied person is purely metaphorical’, 
(see p. 252 for fuller quotation). On August 28, 1921, writing on 
* the Old and New Schools of Vaishnavism,’ he pointed out that the 
‘ manifestation of God ’ which constitutes an 1 incarnation ’ is seen 
to be ‘ conscious only in rare*individuals * and even in these it comes 
only ‘in rare moments and disappears’, Krisna being made to say 
in the Anugitd in reply to Arjuna’s request to repeat his teachings 
that be had ‘lost the state of Yoga in which he had given out those 
utterances and therefore could not repeat them’, while the old 
Purdnas , including the Bhdgavata , speak of Krisna ‘as a partial 
incarnation of God’, and ‘only a particle of the Supreme Being’, an 
idea which ‘must have humbled all thoughtful VaishnavasJ as must 
also the ‘ new erotic Vaishnavism 9 of Purdnas like the Bralimavai • 
varta where, in the Krisnajanma Khanda even Radha says to 
Kpsna, 4 O licentious person, your conduct is always like that of 
men ; so be born as a man. . . and go to India.* We have seen 
no reply to this series of expositions. 

Pundit Tattvabhushan then turns to ‘ the Christian theory of 
incarnation* which he characterizes as one which is ‘even more 
dualistic than the popular Vaishnava theory, and totally ignores the 
immanence of God in man and nature.’ We are not concerned 
here to rebut the charge of ‘dualism’, for Christian teaching has 
always insisted on the reality and distinctness of Divine and human 
personality and so has rejected the opposite of ‘dualism ’ which is 
pantheism. The Christian view is that the 4 immanence of God in 
man and nature * is fully upheld in the Christian doctrine of the 
Holy Spirit, a truth which is held to ensure in actual experience 
the fullest possible realization of the Divine Immanence and of the 
untold riches which such a truth brings to men. The Pundit goes 



APPENDIX I 


27 i 


on to observe that the Christian ‘ recognition of the presence of 
divine power in man is based on the doctrine of miracles — occasional 
interferences with the established order of nature.’ With the first 
part of this sentence Christians would have no quarrel, for the 
elimination of the miraculous is held to be tantamount to eliminating 
God. Similarly, when the Pundit defines 4 miracle 9 as he does he 
would appear to be assuming that man knows what that 4 established 
order of nature * is which meets with the 4 occasional interferences \ 
After all, may not God have under His control a 4 law of miracles ' 
just as He has many other laws ? Then comes an irradiating 
expression of the Christian doctrine of Incarnation in both its 
4 popular ’ and 4 philosophical ’ aspects, both of which, in general, 
Christians would accept, despite the Pundit’s statement that 4 we 
in this country never or scarcely ever hear anything about the latter, 
4 either because the generality of Christian missionaries sent to this 
country do not know it or choose to hide it from us,* the said view 
being that Christ’s unity with the Father ‘ could be communicated 
to other men if they observed the eternal laws of the spiritual 
world \ Then comes the observation that * philosophical * Christi- 
anity teaches a more exact method than is taught in 4 the higher 
Hindu Scriptures’, and the ‘popular’ is distinguished from 
‘philosophical’ Christian teaching on the Incarnation as follows: 
4 The prophets prove themselves as agents of God by their power 
over nature and by the foretelling of events in human history. But 
these manifestations of divine power are not instances of incarna- 
tion. Christianity recognizes only one incarnation of God, and 
that is Jesus Christ, the evidences of whose divinity are both in his 
supernatural power and his moral perfection. His unity with the 
Father as His “ only begotten Son ” is unique, and cannot be shared 
in by any other man. . . . Side by side with this popular view 
there has always been in Christian history a philosophical theory of 
divine incarnation which has commended itself to the greatest 
Christian intellects. . . . This philosophical view cites several 
passages of the New Testament in its support, for instance, the 
prologue to the fourth gospel and the long prayer of Jesus in chapter 
xvii. of the same gospel. . . . Our ethical experience — our sense of 
sin, our moral struggles, our aspirations after perfection — all reveal 
the presence of the perfectly Good and Holy in us as our Higher 
Self. The whole of Reality, comprehending everything and every 
self, is the Father. The manifestation of God as the finite self of 
man is the Son. The Son’s consciousness — awakened through the 
grace of God — of his unity with the Father is the Holy Spirit. 
The last is the highest and most concrete manifestation of God. . . 
The everlasting existence of the Son in conscious unity* in-difference 
with the Father is the most important lesson taught by philoso- 
phical Christianity.* Pundit Tattvabhushan has succeeded in 
making a clear philosophical statement of a profound Christian 
truth* 



272 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 

A Marathi Note by the late Narayan Vaman Tilak in the 
Dnyftnodayctj April 8, 1915, may be summarized in English as 
follows: The differing conceptions of Hindus and Christians con- 
cerning ‘ incarnation * affect the form it may assume, the number 
possible, and its mission. Hindus are believers in the idea that an 
avatdra or ‘ incarnation ’ may be in part only, in the sense that any 
particular 4 incarnation ’ may be described as a portion of God Him- 
self. Christians hold that an ‘ incarnation 1 of only a part of the 
Almighty must be regarded as an impossibility, for if God incarnates 
Himself at all, His Incarnation must be in itself complete and 
perfect. Hindus cling to the belief that by their faith they can 
bring Rods into being, so that they are able to accept and worship 
any number of gods which their faith may create. 4 It is our faith 
that makes thee a God ’ says Tukaram (1795 F. and M.). All else 
naturally follows. This being a mark of the Hindu religion, it 
comes to pass that in case of need, besides the avatdras or 4 in- 
carnations * made famous in the Purdnas , even King SivajI can be 
made an avatdra or 4 incarnation ’ of Shankar. Christianity holds 
tenaciously the opposite view, viz., that none t but God creates or 
inspires faith, that just as the mother necessarily precedes the 
mother’s love, so God comes first, faith second (reversing the 
Hindu order), and, therefore, that to forsake the One Living God 
by conceiving other gods must be held to be sin. Of necessity 
therefore Christians hold the very idea of a multitude of 4 incarna- 
tions * to be an impossible one. Moreover, the work of the number- 
less avatdras or ‘incarnations’ in Hinduism is usually the same : 
entering the family line of someone who has acquired the fruit of 
some penance or merit, their work is that of slaying demons, acting 
in defence of gods, cows and Brahmans, or, in the language of 
the Bhagoadgltdy to protect those esteemed as saints and destroy 
those believed to be sinners. The mission of the Incarnation of God 
in Christ, on the other hand, is solely to seek the lost, welcome the 
despised, save the fallen, and establish the kingdom of God among 
men. In short, the fundamental differences concerning the ideas 
of ‘incarnation* arise entirely from fundamentally different con- 
ceptions regarding God. 

In addition to the foregoing the Christian answer usually takes 
the following line. The difference between the Hindu and Chris- 
tian conceptions is indicated by the different terms employed, 
4 avatdra* and ‘incarnation’ not only being different words but 
connoting different ideas. By avatdra is meant 4 descent \ but it is 
a descent which may be followed, and is followed, by a withdrawal, 
this being again followed by other descents. But incarnation 
means humanity being laid hold of by God, and entered by God, 
who thus manifests Himself in and through man. This divine act 
effects such wonders that no repetition of it is required. 4 Once 
done it is done forever.’ 1 A new power is poured into the very 

1 Dr. Mapnicol, Dnydnodaya % March 4, 191$, 



APPENDIX I 


273 


heart of the race and a wholly new relation between man and God 
is thereby manifested, mediated and assured. On this account the 
Incarnation of Christ is viewed not as a mere incident in history 
but as initiating a new moral and spiritual development in the 
human race of which Jesus Christ is the most distinguished member, 
while He is at the same time God Incarnate in human form. As 
Mr. Manilal Parekh stated the case in the letter referred to on page 
29: ‘The Christian conception of avatctra is altogether qualitative. 
The Christian can say, however, that God, though He incarnates 
Himself in Jesus Christ alone, did speak 41 by divers portions and 
divers manners ” not only in the Jewish prophets, but in the 
teachers of other nations as well.* The true Christian view there- 
fore 1 is that the Incarnation in Christ is unique as the grand 
climacteric manifestation of God in human history, a manifestation 
that creates a new humanity and leaves behind as a moral dynamic 
for the whole race the Incarnating Spirit of God who effected the 
manifestation. According to this view, the lack of the innumerable 
4 incarnations ’ of Vaishnava Hinduism is more than compensated 
for by the constant indwelling Presence of God’s Spirit, imparted 
to the soul as the result of the work of the Incarnate Saviour ; 
that is to say, a Power not ourselves, making for righteousness in us 
and through us, always present and always within us — this is the 
distinctive Christian conception and it is held to be worth incom- 
parably more to feeble humanity than innumerable interventions 
on man’s behalf. 

Contrast this lofty conception of the supremacy and sufficiency 
of the Divine Spirit in the life of man, with the deifying of the 
lover of Radha, the displacing of the spiritual by the sensuous, 
and the degrading of the whole idea of 4 incarnation ’ (see also 
p. 250) as seen in the Radha- Krisna cult, with whose 4 promulga- 
tion ’, said Pundit Sitanath Tattvabhushan in The Indian 
Messenger for November 20, 1921, 4 the worship of God, the 
Absolute Spirit, practically ceased in Vaishnavism, and the imagin- 
ative and sensuous worship of Krishna, conceived as a hero, 
specially as the lover of Radha, became the predominant, almost 
the sole, element in the spiritual excercises, if they can be so 
called, of the new schools. Krishna indeed was believed to be 
the incarnation of the Supreme Being, or else he would not be 
worshipped, but his attributes as the upholding and guiding Spirit 
of nature and immanent in it and as the Inner Self of man, ceased 
to have any attraction for the Krishna-worshipper, and his whole 
attention was absorbed by Krishna’s Brindaban-lila, specially his 
amorous dealing with the Gopis. In short, it is not as God, but as a 
man, in his bodily form and human dealings, that Krishna now began 
to receive worship. To those unfamiliar with latterday Vaishnava 
literature this may seem an over-statement, but a close study of 
Vaishnava works on devotions following the writing of the Brahma - 
vaivarta Purana leaves no doubt of the truth of our statement.* 

1 We here adapt a sentence or two from our book, The Holy Spirit the 
Christian Dynamic , p. 115, 

35 



Appendix II 

Verbal Parallels Between Tnkaram and 
The New Testament 

No one can read Tukaram without being struck by the many 
turns of thought and speech which recall the New Testament. In 
the following list will be found a number of the closer parallels ; 
we refrain, however, from drawing any specific inferences. For 
one thing, there is no authoritative text and it is not impossible 
that some passages are the result of interpolation. In each parallel 
the reference to Tukaram in this list comes first, the numbers 
referring to Fraser and Marathe’s three-volume translation of 
Tukaram’s poems. 

1656 : We know the fact, O God, that thy illusive ways cannot 
be fathomed. 

Romans xi. 33: IIovv unsearchable are his judgments and his 
ways past finding out. 

17 : It is worship that Narayan desires: God is a spirit. 

John iv. 14; God is a Spirit and they that worship Him must 
worship Him in spirit and in truth. 

545 : It is something the spirit finds in itself. 

Luke xvii. 21 : The Kingdom of God is within you. 

1713 : He gave his life as sacrifice : he saved all feeble folk. 

John x. 15 : I have laid down my life for my sheep. * 

2041 : The soul has first to perish and then to live. 

Matthew x. 39: He that loseth his life for my sake shall 
find it. 

355 : Thou knowest the inward parts. 

Acts i. 24 : Thou, Lord, knowest the inward parts of men. 

1755: God is a timid creature. 

James iv. 6: God giveth grace to the humble. 

1769: Who shall slay the man whom God protects? 

Romans viii. throughout, ending: Who shall separate us from 
the love of Christ ? 

496: Though you perform the austerities carefully yet one 
mistake annuls them : you must observe your duties strictly or all 
your labour will be wasted. 

James ii. 10: Whosoever shall keep the whole law and yet 
offend in one point he is guilty of all. 



APPENDIX II 


275 


3+65 : Worldly life and life with the highest — he who acts both 
parts together, in the end he achieves neither. If a man seeks to 
lay his hands on two grain-pits at once, he will end by destroying 
himself. 

Matthew vi. 24 : No man can serve two masters : for either he 
will hate the one, and love the other ; or else he will hold to one, 
and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon. 

2588: Where now shall I set my foot? What stone shall I 
trust to? My spirit is at peace, because I see thee in every 
quarry. There is nothing that I need ; thou art all to me every- 
where. 

Psalm cxxxix. 7: Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? Or 
whither shall I flee from thy presence ? 

1187 and 1189: When the preacher is fond of money, the 
listeners are alarmed. They say, he knows not what he sings, he 
opens his mouth to get something given him. If the preacher is 
fettered by desire of money and the listeners fearful of expense, 
the worship is all in vain. 

1 Peter v. 2: Tend the flock of God which is among you, 
exercizing the oversight, not of constraint, but willingly, according 
unto God ; nor yet for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind. 

1042: A hypocrite is smooth-tongued, but his inner purpose is, 
different. 

Romans iii. 13: Their throat is an open sepulchre ; with their 
tongues they have used deceit. 

812 : The great precept of religion is to hear God in the 
heart. 

Romans ii. 29. But he is a Jew, which is one inwardly ; and 
circumcision is that of the heart. 

1417 : Who cares for a letter ? What men respect is the seal 
on it, and that is -what makes the bearer respected, 

2 Tim. ii. 19 : Howbeit the firm foundation of God slandeth 
sure,* having this seal : The Lord knoweth them that are His. 

1366: Why should I enquire into the virtues and faults of 
others — what lack of faith is there in me ? 

Matthew v. 3 : Why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy 
brother’s eye ? 

933 : Amid a pile of pots one is used for cooking, another to 
hold filth : such are the different lots of men. 

Romans ix. 21 : Hath not the potter power over the same clay 
» to make one vessel to honour and another to dishonour ? 

3369 : If a blind man grasps a blind man's stick both leader 
and follower will come to grief at once. 

Luke vi. 39: Can the blind lead the blind ? 



276 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 

2507 : You may wear rosaries and maduras , but how can you 
reach God by appearances? 

Matthew xxiii. 5 : But all their works they do for to be seen of 
men : for they make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the 
borders of their garments. 

1093 : He who is void of moral conduct and of faith ; who 
brings evil on others or cavils at them with superior wit ; he, like 
a dog, pollutes sweet food when he touches it. 

Matthew xxiii. 13: But woe unto you, scribes and pharisees, 
hypocrites! because ye shut the kingdom of heaven against men : 
for ye enter not in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are 
entering in to enter. 

* 1205: Our Gosavis profess that they beg no alms; they set 
their disciples to preach- They bring disgrace on their garb, 
though they try to play the part. 

Matthew xv. 14: Let them alone: they are blind guides. 
And if the blind guide the blind, both shall fall into a pit. 

976 : Listen to this easy secret. 966 : Receive God without 
price. 

Matthew xi. 30: My yoke is easy and my burden is light. 

1813 : Every drop that is saved from the thief (time and death) 
must be accounted gain. 

Eph. v. 16: Redeeming the time. 

501: Whatever keeps you from God, be it your father or 
mother, give it up. 

Matthew x. 37 : He that loveth father or mother more than me 
is not worthy of me. 

Blessed are they who came hither for doing good, but whose 
abode is in heaven. Also 713 : their true home is Vaikuntha. 1 

Phil, iii, 21 : Our citizenship is in heaven. 

3530 : The birds and wild creatures that live on the earth, 
Hari never forgets them. 909 : Birds and beasts gather up no 
store yet the Infinite One protects them. 1653: God is bound to 
feed all animals ; we need not trouble ourselves what we shall get 
to eat ; the tall trees throw out shoots in the hot weather, who 
supplies them with water ? 1777: My poor weak mind, why are 

you always dejected ? Your only solicitude is about your food ; 
better than you are the blessed birds. Mark certain animals in 
flood and field : what food do they find ? 

Matthew vi. 26-28 : Behold the fowls of the air ; . . . your 
heavenly Father feedeth them. . . . Consider the lilies of the 
field. f 

2052 : He dearly loves the ignorant if they have simple- 
minded faith in him. 

1 P R. Bhandarkar : Two Masters. 



APPENDEX II 277 

1 Cor. i. 27 : God hath chosen the foolish things of the world 
to confound the wise. 

894 , Blessed are the pious for their heart is pure. 

Matthew v. 8: Blessed are the pure in heart. 

I am a depraved sinner, O God, and I have come to seek 
thy mercy : put me not to shame. I do not know how many 
men thou hast saved, but this I know that I am the worst of 
them all. Tuka says, I am a supplicant for Thy mercy : cleanse 
thou me completely from my sin, O God. 1 

1 Tim. i. 15: Faithful is the saying, and worthy of all 
acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save 
sinners ; of whom I am chief. 

It is essential to have a spiritual guide ; we must submit to 
him. He at once changes men into his character ; none need 
wait for experiencing the transformation. 2 

2 Cor. iii. 18: But we all, with unveiled face reflecting as a 
mirror the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same 
image from glory to glory, even as from the Lord the Spirit. 

Tuka says, he who will lay his burden on the Friend of 
the poor, will not fail to experience His mercy. 3 

1 Peter v. 7 : Casting all your anxiety upon Him, because He 
careth for you. 

Faith is the source of everything ; if is the realization of 
salvation; it accomplishes the final complete redemption. It is 
impossible, says Tuka, to obtain grace by works that are destitute 
of faith. 1 

Romans iii. 28 : We reckon therefore that a man is justified 
by faith apart from the works of the law. 

See many passages in the sections on The Saints ’ in F. and 
M ; also on pp. 206-8. 

Romans xii. 13 : Communicating to the necessities of the 
saints. 

See the stories of Rameshwar Bbatt and Mumbaji (pp. 95-9), 

Romans xii. 21 : Overcome evil with good. 

706: Mercy, forgiveness, and peace— where these are, there 
is the dwelling-place of God. 

Romans xiv. 17: The Kingdom of God is righteousness and 
peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. 

In many places the much- vaunted knowledge of the Vedas, 
according to Tukaram’s view, is superfluous as compared with the 
practical experience of religion. 

I Cor. viii. 1 : Knowledge puffeth up, but charity edifieth. 

t G. R. Navalkar, Tukaratn, the Maharashtrian Poet and Saint , p, 23. 

a Ibid., p. 24. 8 Tbid. t p. 25. 4 Ibid., p. 72. 



278 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


Tukaram : The antithesis of the letter and the spirit is implicit 
in Tukaram but not explicit. 

2 Cor. iii. 6 : The letter killeth but the spirit giveth life. 

Tukaram: The idea of man’s weakness and God’s power is 
very characteristic of Tukaram. 

2 Cor. iv. 7 : We have this treasure in earthen vessels that the 
excellency of the power may be of God. 

549. Verbosity has ruined crowds of Brahmans; or as Sir 
Narayan Chandavarkar translates this, 4 Disputation has turned to 
waste the place of Brahmindom.’ ( Speeches and Writings , p. 598) 

Col. ii. 8: Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy 
and vain deceit. Also Rom. xiv, 1 : Not to doubtful disputations. 
Also 1 Tim. i. and vi., about strifes of words. 

67 : To each has been shown a path according to his own 
capacity ; he will learn to know it as he follows it. 

John vii. 17 : If any man willeth to do His will he shall know of 
the teaching. 

This list might be extended if we sought parallels from the 
Old Testament, e.g., 

What hast thou done by bathing in the sacred river ? Thou 
hast only washed clean thy skin. Thou hast not cleansed 
thy heart. 1 • 

Micah vi. 7 : Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of 
rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil ? Shall I give my 
firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin 
of my soul ? 

Tuka says, God’s treasury is full ; it is never exhausted. 2 

Psalm lxv. 9 : The river of God is full of water. 

952: A meal is delightful if it be eaten in peace, be the food 
rich or poor. 

Prov. xvi. 1: Better is a dry morsel with quietness than a house 
full of sacrifices with strife. 

1805 : In thee I am placed on a firm base. 

Ps. lxi. 2: Lead me to the rock that is higher than I. 


1 Ibid., p. 25. 


2 Ibid., p. 26. 



Appendix III 

Tukaram's Alleged Indebtedness to Christianity. 

As explained on pp. 240-1 the striking analogy between Tuka- 
ram and the New Testament has attracted the attention of widely 
divergent schools of thought. We may at once dismiss from our 
present consideration 4 the wonderful acts ascribed to Tukaram ’ 
and considered by Dr. J. Murray Mitchell 1 to be 1 coincidences * with 
scriptural miracles which ‘appear too numerous and too marked to 
be merely accidental*. We may dismiss them for three reasons: 
first, because these miraculous ‘acts’ are presumed to have been 
the invention of Tukaram’s biographer Mahlpati : ‘ tradition has 
credited Tukaram with having performed many miracles/ says 
Prof. P. R. Bhandarkar, 2 4 but he personally does not lay claim to 
any :* second, because Mahlpati invented them, so Dr. Murray 
Mitchell suggests, 4 to glorify his Vaishnavite hero by investing him 
with attributes and honour rivalling in Hindu estimation those of 
Jesus Christ Himself*; although, thirdly, it is not proved that 
Mahlpati himself had ever heard of Jesus Christ (see below). 
Moreover, the crowning 4 miracle’ of Tukaram's career was that 
which Marathi legend gives as the manner of its close, that ‘ Tuka- 
ram ascended to heaven without dying/ but this supposed 4 coincid- 
ence ’ with the ascension of Jesus disappears, Dr Murray Mitchell 
himself pointing out that the story 4 approximates rather to the 
ascent of Elijah than to that of Christ/ For these and other 
reasons therefore all supposedly miraculous* coincidences' may be 
left out of our reckoning. 

When we come to consider the 4 verbal parallels* given in 
Appendix II, it is to be borne in mind that 4 many of Tukaram’s 
ideas are certainly not Brahmanical’, that much of his 4 moral tone 
differs from that of genuine Hinduism * and 4 frequently approxi- 
mates to that of the Christian system*. The question comes to be 
therefore whether the cumulative weight of these and other facts 
make the conclusion tenable that in Tukaram’s writings we see 
Christian ideas leavening * a non-Christian system, as Dr. Murray 
Mitchell suggested in 1849. It is evident that the whole subject 
demands close investigation, based upon an amassing of facts not 
yet available. When that investigation is entered upon, Dr Murray 
Mitchell’s essay will have to be carefully considered. That the 
investigation remains practically where it was over seventy years 
ago shows how much lee-way has to be made up in the study of 

1 J.R. A. S. Bo , vol. Ill, p?rt I, 1849. pp. 1-29. 

2 Two Masters : Jesus and Tukaram p,29. 



280 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


comparative religion in the Maratha country-a challenge to Indian 
and foreign scholars alike. The following points merit attention. 

Are we to pre suppose such an 4 intermixture of Christian ideas 
with the Marathi legends’ as Dr. Murray Mitchell suggests, and if 
there be such * intermixture’, can it be ‘easily explained* by the 
facts he sets forth ? From the early part of the sixteenth century, 
Portuguese missionaries were actively, even fanatically, endeavour- 
ing to extend the Christian faith, particularly in Western India. In 
the Maratha country Portuguese settlements sprang up at Goa, 
Bassein, Revadanda and Bombay, numbers of 4 conversions ' taking 
place. Looked at in the dry light of history there are some shame- 
ful aspects to the religious part of the story. 4 The Portuguese 
dominion,’ says an Oxford scholar in The Cambridge Modern 
History 1 * was at once impecunious and corrupt, and was rendered 
intolerable to the native mind by its close connexion with the 
aggressive methods of the Catholic Church. . . The ruthless 
propagation of the Gospel by means of the power of the State was 
in the long run as much against the spiritual interest of the Church 
as it was against the political interests of the Portuguese.* Such is 
the historian’s verdict concerning 4 the first western nation to appear 
in Hindustan,* a verdict covering the first half of the seventeenth cen- 
tury, the period covered by Tukaram’s own life. 4 From 1650 *, the 
period of Tukaram’s death, ‘^Portuguese annals form a dreary record 
of degeneration. The Portuguese were absorbed and degraded by the 
conquered, for the Portuguese. . . intermarried with native races * 
(Cambridge Modern History , vol. v, p, 695 ). In the absence of all 
evidence up to the present, can we at all regard it as possible or 
probable that Tukaram came in contact with either the Portuguese 
or any of their ‘converts *? From the last of the settlements men- 
tioned above, Bombay, Tukaram’s birth place was about 100 miles 
distant and he is said to have descended the Ghats fo» business 
in the Konkan (see page 81). 

The very violence of the Portuguese in propagating their 
religious views must have 4 conspired *, says Dr. Murray Mitchell, 4 to 
direct the attention of the Marathas to the Christian religion. 
It is hardly conceivable that Tukaram should not have heard of the 
religion of the war-like, energetic and proselytizing foreigners who 
had been in the neighbourhood for 150 years. The biographer of 
Tukaram, who wrote 125 years later still, cannot surely with any 
shadow of reason be imagined ignorant of an event so vitally 
affecting the destinies of his own nation and religion, as the 
extension of the Portuguese dominion and the Christian faith.’ 9 
Should the objection be raised that over against the suggested 
approximation of some of Tukaram’s ideas to Christian teaching 
there is yet too great and essential a difference to allow the 

1 Vol. IV. chap. XXV. (p,743), by Hugh E. Eger ton, m.a., Beit Professor of 
Colonial History, Oxford, 1906. 

* J.R. A. S. Bo vol. Ill, part I (1849), pp, 9-10. 



APPENDIX III 


281 


theory of ‘Christian leavening’ to stand, Dr. Murray Mitchell 
replies: 4 Every day's experience proves that when Christian ideas 
are inculcated on those who are familiar only with Hinduism, they 
are seldom at first rightly apprehended ; the shape, the colour they 
assume are so far changed that a careful scrutiny is required 
before the parentage is detected . . . It may be observed that if the 
view now supported ... be correct, one might expect that the 
influence of Romanism . . . might be pretty distinctly marked . . . 
and such would seem in fact to be the case. The reader who is 
acquainted with the Acta Sanctorum or books of a similar 
character will occasionally fancy he hears in the history of Tukaram 
the echo of monkish legends and the achievements of “saints” of 
the middle ages.’ 1 * 

Skilful as is the above reasoning, we are bound to say the 
case for Christian influence on Tukaram must be regarded 
as nonproven. The 100 miles that separated Bombay and 
the area of Roman Catholic influence from Tukaram’s country 
region included a range of hills two thousand feet high, a 
barrier quite sufficient in those days to prevent much intercourse. 
History is not without parallels of peoples equally near to 
one another yet with equal dissimilarity in religious faith and 
practice, the nations that surrounded ancient Israel being 
an example. Moreover, the Portuguese incursion and intoler- 
ance were a part of ‘ the medieval struggle between Christendom 
and Islam’, affecting the fortunes ol the Muhammadan faith more 
than the Hindu and there is little or no evidence in Tukaram’s life 
and writings of any contact between him and the Moslems. Our 
own view is rather of the nature of an argumcntum silentio, perilous 
in some circumstances we know, but Tukaram’s seemingly com- 
plete ignorance of the name of Jesus Christ and of the fundamental 
facts and doctrines of the Christian faith (see page 245) is to us an 
insuperable difficulty in the present state of information. We 
would prefer to say that any supposed ‘coincidences* are illustra- 
tions of the principle, so happily phrased by Dr. Murray Mitchell, 
that * the human mind amid endless variety of outward circumstan- 
ces, remains true to certain grand original laws impressed upon it 
by the Author of our being.’* Professor W. B. Patwardhan, who 
admits the coincidences but no more, states : * That there is some- 
thing in common between the love as preached by Christ and that 
inspired by the saints of Maharashtra is beyond question. It is, 
however, equally beyond question that the Mabarastra school of 
devotion owed nothing to Christianity.' 3 Dr. Macnicol’s conclusion 
is that ‘either Tukaram was actually in contact with Christian 
teaching, which is by no means improbable, or he was a remarkable 


i J. A. S. Bo., vol. Ill, part I (1849), pp. 10-13. 2 Ibid., p. U. 

3 /. I, October 1910, pp. 113-4. 


36 



282 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 

instance of a mens naturalter Christiana 1 Our conclusion 
inclines in the latter direction, Tukaram thus affording a remark- 
able illustration of the striking saying of the second century Ter- 
tullian, the Vakil (lawyer) who became a Christian apologist and 
who speaks of the testimonium Animae naturaliter Christianas 
(the testimony of the soul naturally Christian). In the same class 
are probably to be placed Guru Nanak, Tills! Das and Kablr. 

Our conclusion is in no way invalidated by any considerations 
arising from the Marathi ‘ Christian Parana brought to light again 
in the first decade of the present century, ‘ the only song of Christ 
written in Marathi by an Englishman \ ‘ Father Estevam,’ or 

Thomas Stephens, was a Jesuit father who died in 1619 (Tuka- 
rqm being perhaps 11 years old) after forty strenuous years of 
Christian activity among ‘ Brahman Roman Catholics ’ of the Goa 
territory, at least 250 miles from Dehu and 150 from Pandbarpur. 
He is chiefly known by his Marathi Christian poem, published in 
Goa, probably in 1616, intended to become ‘to the Christians what 
their Purdnas were to the Hindus ’, a work containing Old Testa- 
ment history and the life of Jesus Christ with which much legendary 
matter was mixed up. Written for the middle and lower classes, its 
Marathi, given in the manuscript in a Roman transliteration, is 
that spoken south of Ratnagiri, modified by the KonkanI dialect 
and a sprinkling of Kanar^se words. Its teaching is suffused with 
Roman Catholic theories and ‘converted’ Hindus have left on it 
their stamp, ‘in the two centuries that preceded the arrival of 
Protestant missionaries and before the Bible came into the hands 
of the people, this “ Purana ” was in Western India a light that 
burnt brilliantly,’ says Canon D. L. Joshi, who adds a sentence we 
may adopt as our own : 1 How far its contents affected the thoughts 
of some of the Maralha poets like Tukaram we have no 
evidence.* 2 • 

Possibly the partial resemblances between Tukaram 's reformed 
Hinduism and the Romish Christianity of Western India in the 
seventeenth century is capable of another explanation, these parti- 
cular elements in his teaching not impossibly being the result of a 
probable Christian influence on that Vaishnava Hinduism which he 
had received as a heritage from the past. How far this might 
carry us in a scientific enquiry of Tukaram’s teaching it is im- 
possible to say. The Glta y a product of Vaishnava Hinduism, is 
held by some to 1 betray Christian influence, but it seems rather 
more probable that the poem is purely of Indian origin. n Other 
passages there are in Vaishnava theology in which ‘a number of 
scholars have believed they detected distinct traces of Christianity,’ 

1 Indian Theism , p. 279. 

2 Canon Joshi’s paper, ‘ The Christian Purana \ in /, vol. VI, part 4, 
pp. 166-75, and that by Dr.J. E, Abbott in the Dnydnodaya , May 12, 1921, are 
both worthy of careful study. 

B Dr. Farquhar, O. R, L. /., p. 92. 



APPENDIX III 


283 


but the discussion so far has yielded 1 rather doubtful results.’ 1 The 
Christian reader, however, so often finds the New Testament recalled 
by Tukaramas to make easily believable a theory that Christianity, 
or an imperfect form of it, may have entered India in certain indirect 
ways extremely early. It is sometimes overlooked that among 
the many facts of Indian history which we cannot explain is 
that of an early Indian Christian Church in Malabar whose 
existence and hoary antiquity historians such as Mr. Vincent 
A. Smith accept as undeniable. Even if the legend of the Indian 
activity of St. Thomas must be given up, as scholars like Garbe 
and Keith affirm it must, 2 * there still remain the following facts: the 
well-attested visit to India, probably Malabar, about A.l). 185, of 
Pantaenus, head of the catechetical school at Alexandria, who 
is said to have been invited by 4 an Indian Christian embassy 1 sent 
from an already existing Indian Christian community ; that John 
the Persian was present at the Church Council of Nicea in A.l). 325 
as 4 Bishop of Great India * ; that the great Sankaracharya and the 
chief (Vaishnavite) Alvars (see p. 36) of Malabar were born and 
brought up amid these Syrian Christians, resulting as some believe 
in a Christian substratum to Tamil philosophy ; that there were 
other early Christian communities in Mylaporenear Madras, Ceylon 
and the Konkan, the first-named being near the birthplace of that 
great bhalzti theologian, Ramanuja (see pp. 36-7) who initiated 
what is called ‘ the first great theistic movement of India’, leading 
not a few scholars to the conclusion that Christian influence on 
Indian bhakti is ‘ possible and even probable ’ (A. B. Keith, J.R.A.S. 
Oct. 1915) ; and that the vigorous Graeco- Roman commercial inter- 
course with India, via Alexandria, as far back as three centuries 
before Christ and up to A.L). 215, may have resulted in India 
receiving certain Christian ideas of an Alexandrian stamp. ’ The 
Catholic Herald of India during August and September, 1921 
had a thoughtful series of papers on 4 St. Thomas and San Thom&, 
Mylapore \ showing that Alexandria gave to India St. Pantaenus 
in A.D. 185 and St. Frumentius in A.D. 327, the latter being 
identified by Mgr. Zaleski in his Saints of India (1915) with 
a certain Thomas of Cana to whom Portuguese historians and 
Malabar ballads at times attribute things 4 which, it would seem, 
happened to St. Thomas the Apostle and vice versa,' a confusion 
which may have had serious consequences both for 4 Malabar 
Traditions ’ and historians of the Indian Church. 

Pointing in the same direction are some curious coincidences in 
the birth stories of Krispa and of Christ regarding which Dr. Sir 
R. G. Bhandarkar makes an interesting suggestion not accepted by 
all, that the Abhlras, who according to his theory conveyed the 

I O. R. L. /., p. 99. - See J.R A.S. October 1915. 

3 ‘Christian influence in Indian Culture.' The Madras Christian College 

^ Magazine, 1920 , pp. 168-77. 



284 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


Krisna legend, ‘ possibly brought with them the name of 
Christ also. . . The Goanese and the Bengalis often pronounce 
the name Krista as Kusto or Kristo, and so the Christ of the 
Abhlras was recognized as the Sanskrit Krisna.’ 1 Dr. Grierson 
goes so far as to say that it is 4 perhaps probable that the worship 
of the infant Krisna was a local adaptation of the worship of the 
infant Christ introduced to India from the North-West, and the 
ritual of Krisiia’s birth-festival has certainly borrowed from 
Christian authorities. But it was in Southern India that Christianity, 
as a doctrine, exercised the greatest influence on Hinduism general- 
ly , In this reformation India rediscovered faith and love.' 
Grierson even quotes Hopkins statement with approval: 4 In all 
probability the Hindus of this cult . . . have in reality, though 
unwittingly, been worshipping the Christ-child for fully a thousand 
y'ears.* 2 Dr. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar agrees that ‘some of the finer 
points * in bhakti 4 may be traced to the influence of Christianity.* a 
If this partial Christianizing of Indian bhakti can be fully esta- 
blished it may solve many problems affecting Vaishnava Hinduism, 
Tukaram included. Historial investigation 4 would appear to have 
demonstrated on the one hand that the bhakti professed by 
150 million Indians is 4 native to India * and on the other hand that 
Christianity has left a deep mark on the later development of the 
idea. That the threefold conception of a God of Grace, of 
personal faith in Him, and of belief in the soul's immortality 
is indigenous to India, being directly traceable to the Bhag- 
vailgltd, certain sections of the Mahabhdrata , the Bhdgavata 
Parana, the Bhakti Mala , and other works constituting ‘the New 
Testament of the Bhagavata religion,’ is fairly well established 
by that trio of scholars, Dr. Bhandarkar, Dr. Garbe, and Dr. 
Grierson — an Indian, a German and a Briton. The Indian origin 
of bhakti and the partial Christianizing of its later stages appear 
thus to be equally indubitable conclusions. We can therefore adopt 
the following statement on this subject: 4 With both these creeds 
(Christianity and Buddhism) Hinduism in the days of its greatest 
plasticity and receptiveness was in long and intimate contact ; . . . 
but sufficient evidence is not available to indicate with certainty the 
doctrines or elements of belief derived from a foreign source. The 
fundamental thought of bhakti , ... is certainly of Indian origin, 
and served as a religious motive in India long before Christianity 
entered the country. In its development and progress it may have 
owed much to Christian teaching and example. From the first, 
however, salvation through bhakti has laid greater stress upon 

i v.s.m.r.s., p. is. 

* E*R.E* % vol. II, Art. Bhakti Marga , pp. 548-50. 

3 V.S.M.R.S . , p. 57. 

1 The next three sentences are from our own book The Holy Spirit the 
Christian Dynamic , p. 19-20. 



APPENDIX III 


285 


emotion, upon feeling, and the play of the affections, than Chris- 
tianity. . . has done . 9 1 

No more can probably be said at present than this : If 4 Chris- 
tian elements have been incorporated with the story of Tukaram 9 
then they have probably come through the indirect channels indi- 
cated in the last paragraph. In that case, Principal Patwardhans 9 
phrase about Tukaram’s bhakti 4 owing nothing to Christianity 9 is 
too sweeping. 

It would take us beyond the scope of our present note to enquire 
how far Christian teaching has influenced the interpretation of 
Tukaram. It is our conviction, however, that just as all modern 
reform movements in India — Brahmo Samaj, Sadharan Samaj, 
Prarthana Samaj and others- have come under Christian influence, J 
so most if not all of Tukaram’s modern interpreters have come so 
definitely under the influence of the New Testament that many of 
their expositions of Tukaram are ‘hardly distinguishable from 
Christian formulas’. This may be said of many of the weekly 
sermons preached in the Bombay Prarthana Samaj Mandir and 
published in the Subodh Patrikd , and of the published writings of 
Sir Ramkrishna Bhandarkar and Sir Narayan Chandavarkar. 


1 Dr. Geden E. R.E. , vol. XI. p. 136. 

2 See Dr. i'arquhar’s Modern Religious Movements in India , passim, 
and Dr. Geden, E, R. E., vol. xi. p. 136. 



Appendix IV 
Additional Notes 

(The figures in brackets refer to the pages of the present work) 

Maharashtrian or Marat has (pp. 2-3) 

While this book was in the press there appeared a discussion on 
‘ T*he Origin of the Marat has ’by Mr S. M. Edwardes, G.s.l., G.V.O. 
in the ‘ Introduction ’ to his new edition of Grant Duffs History 
of the Mahrattas (1921) pp.xlii lix, embodying a valuable ethno- 
graphical note from Mr. R. E. Enthoven, C.I.K., for many years 
in charge of the Ethnographical Survey of the Bombay Presidency. 
In addition to the considerations we have set forth on p. 2, and in 
development of our line of argument, it is pointed out that a cave 
inscription of the first century a.d. at Bodsa, Poona District, 
applies the term 4 Maharathini to a princess, while the term 
‘ MaharathI 1 has been fount] in a cave at Nanaghat, Poona District, 
4 Maha ' probably being an honorific affix. This would negative 
the suggestion made in the Census of India , 1911, vol. vii, 
Bombay y Part /, Report , p. 2S9, that the word ‘ Maratha ’ comes 
from maha meaning ‘great’ and rat hi t warrior*. In A.D. 640 
the Chinese pilgrim Hiuen Tsiatig referred to the Deccan 
as Mo^ho-lO’Cha, the Chinese equivalent of Ma-hd rd-tha. From 
A.D. 753 Rashtrakutas or Rattas ruled for two and a half centuries 
and again from the eleventh to the thirteenth century. 'Whether, 
however, the Maratha people derive their name from the country 
Maharashtra or whether the latter geographical name springs 
from the tribes inhabiting the land, is still matter for conjecture. 
There is much to show that the term 4 Maratha' has been loosely 
used and that it may have ‘meant originally nothing more than a 
person dwelling in Maharashtra or using Marathi as his home- 
tongue,' the term being found with such varying meanings, some- 
times as describing ‘a member of the superior Maratha land- 
owning or fighting class,* sometimes as 4 a member of the ordinary 
cultivating caste ’ or Kunbi, the latter term signifying a 
‘cultivator * of 4 inferior social status’, while it appears 4 a Ku^bi 
may, if successful, rise to the superior Maratha status the facts 
even showing that 4 there is by no means an insuperable barrier 
between Kuobls and the tribe of Kolis, an undoubtedly aboriginal 
tribe’. We have therefore Maratha Sutdrs (carpenters), Maratha 
KumbhdrS (potters), Maratha Lohars (blacksmiths), Maratha 
Parits (washermen or dhbbis). Higher class Marathas are held to 



APPENDIX IV 


287 


be of identical origin with the agricultural Kunbi tribe, these two 
being differentiated only by social status, and ‘in both the 
Maratha and the Kunbi there is a distinct aboriginal strain \ from 
which it is to be inferred that Mara{has are descendants of Deccan 
primeval tribes. The ‘ spurious distinction drawn between the 
upper-class Maratha and the lowly Kunbi cultivator * was protested 
against by the All-India Maratha League in its Memorandum of 
July 31, 1919, submitted to the Parliamentary Joint Committee 
on Indian Constitutional Reforms Bill of 1919 when they stated: 
‘There is no difference whatsoever between a Mahratta and a 
Kunbi . . . Since long days ago in the antiquarian history of this 
country they are related by blood to each other. . . . The terms 
“ Mahratta ” and “Kunbi” are synonymous; the educated and 
well-to-do portion of the community styles itself (as) Mahrattas, 
while the ignorant and the rural passes under the name Kunbi, 
though the former is akin to the latter as members of the same 
caste/ This was also the weighty verdict of Mountstuart Elphin- 
stone, statesman and historian, a century ago, the ‘ Mahratta chiefs/ 
he says, being ‘ all Sudras, of the same caste with their people, 
though some tried to raise their consequence by claiming an 
infusion of Rajput blood/ 

The Mar dt hi Language (pp. 3-4) 

Almost simultaneously with the above ‘ Introduction ’ by S. M. 
Edwardes which contained 16 useful pages on ‘ Marathi Litera- 
ture ’ prefaced by a brief note on the language, there appeared an 
able Marathi essay by Rao Bahadur P- B. Joshi, F. R. G. S., in 
the second volume (pp. 241-258) of the Vividha Dayana Vi star 
Jubilee Memorial publication (1921). Both these support the 
considerations set forth in our first chapter (pp. 3-4) and help 
forward the discussion. The Maharashtri language from which 
Marathi has sprung was a Prakrit, meaning a vernacular dialect, 
natural and unartificial, in contrast with the purified and literary 
Sanskrit language. As a dialect under the name of Saurashtrl it 
was connected with another Prakrit, Magadhi, and as Maharashtri 
it was the language of ‘charming lyrics’ and ‘epic poetry/ 
while ‘ the popular vernaculars which formed .,tbe original basis 
of these polished literary dialects were styled Apabhramsa , i.e., 
corrupt, decayed ; these Apabhramsas , used by the lowest classes 
of the people, in time, like the Prakrits, receiving polish and 
being put to literary use. Marathi, the home language of the 
Maratha people, is the direct descendant of the Apabhramsa of 
Maharashtri'. ( Imperial Gazetteer , 1908.) Exactly when Marathi 
took its present form is an unsolved problem, but it is known 
that literature flourished from the sixth to the tenth century, that 
at the beginning of the eleventh century the country suffered 
it frightfully from invasion during which thousands of libraries 
l and temples were destroyed, and that intellectual darkness settled 



288 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 

on the people until the thirteenth century when literature revived 
under the Yadava dynasty, one of whose kings, Ramachandra or 
Ramdev (a.d. 1271-1309), appears at the end of the Dnydttesh - 
wart as a sort of royal patron of Dnyaneshwar, * the father of 
Marathi poetry’, whose moving story and that of his successors is 
referred to in our second chapter (pp. 38-40). 

The Andhra Kings (pp. 3-5) 

See further an article, ‘ On the Home of the So-called Andhra 
Kings* in the Annals of the Bhanddrkar Institute , vol. i, part 1, 
pp. 20-42. 

GosifvJ (p. 6, footnote 2). 

# The 1911 census reported 678 GosdvJs in Bombay Presidency. 
A corruption of the Sanskrit GosvdmJ, ,the term means one who 
has mastered his passions. GosdvJs are Saivites, just as Havas are 
Vaishnavas, both terms describing religious mendicants who as 
vagrants go about in the name of religion. Most GosdvJs are 
celibates, but have mistresses whose children they recognise as 
their own, some being rich money-lenders, traders, husbandmen and 
even writers. See above-mentioned Census of India , 1911 vol. p. 
260. 

Importance of Deccan Villages (pp. 7-8). 

Eighty-two per cent of the population in Bombay Presidency 
resides in villages of less than 5,000 inhabitants ( Census report 
p. 15.) 

Domestic Religious Rites (pp. 8-9). 

The Census volume for 1911 has an interesting section on 
'daily worship’ (p. 61), pointing out that ‘Marthas, Rajputs, 
Kuribis and the artisan castes are expected to worship 'the house 
gods after the morning bath before eating, or to visit temples. . . . 
The worship of the house gods should be performed by the head or 
other elder of the family ; but it is generally entrusted to the drone 
of the family, if there be one. It is often delegated to boys, and 
even to women as a last resort. . . , Castes below the Kupbls and 
the impure castes have generally no house gods.* 

See also illuminating paragraphs on ‘ceremonies connected 
with agriculture’, setting forth* the field rites of the Maratha 
Kupbls * (p. 64 of 1911 Census Report). 

Bhajans and Klrtans (p. 10). 

In recent years a well-organized school has been formed iu 
Bombay for giving a systematic training to would-be Kirtankdrs f 
and a monthly periodical bearing the title of Klrtan has also been 
started for their training. There are now professional Ktrtankdrs 
who charge fees for their services, their fees varying in proportion 
to their attainments and popularity. 



APPENDIX IV 


289 


Power of the Brahmans (pp. 14, 35). 

‘ Brahmans are not always the priests of the important temples 
in the Deccan. . . Some of the officiating priests at Pamlharpur are 
Bhagvats , that is, worshippers of both Vishnu and Siva/ (Census 
of India vol. above-mentioned, p. 68), See further the paragraph 
below on 4 Bhagvata Devotion / 

Democratizing Influence of the Bhakti Poets (pp. l ( >-2 2). 

In his ‘Introduction’ to the new edition of Grant Duffs 
History of the Mahrattas , (pp. lxxiii. iv.) S. M. Kdwardes calls 
into question the democratizing influence of the bhakti poets. He 
observes: 'There is a tendency among some writers to over-esti- 
mate the influence upon the public mind of Maharashtra of the 
message of the Marathi poets of the bhakti school. They 
would have us believe that these poets welded the different and 
often mutually hostile groups composing the population of Maha- 
rashtra into one people, that they made the Marathas a nation . . . 
It cannot be gainsaid that the remarkable literary movement which 
centres so largely about the god Vithoba and Panel harpur. . . . 
embraced persons of various castes, and elevated to sainthood re- 
presentatives of even the lowest classes in Maharashtra. . . Yet 
it is doubtful whether the poetry of the saints and writers of the 
bhakti school ever reached, or made such impression upon, the 
general mass of the people. . . Far more efficacious than the devo- 
tional teaching of the poets in suppressing caste exclusiveness, and 
fostering a sense of 44 nationhood ” was the rise to power of the 
Sudra, Sivaji, and his constant association with himself 
in the task of political and military administration of men, who, in 
many instances, were not Brahmans'. Unfortunately for the 
objection raised, no explanation is offered as to why Maharashtra 
accepted the leadership and even kingship of a Sudra, and ivhy the 
‘administration of men who were not Brahmans’ was tolerated. 
But surely such a remarkable phenomenon calls for some explana- 
tion and until an alternative one is forthcoming it is safe to hold 
the view that ‘ the devotional teaching of the poets in suppressing 
caste-exclusiveness' exercized a sufficiently democratizing influence 
to weld the people into one under a Sudra king with his non- 
B rah man ministers. That this democratizing influence was but 
partial we have shown on pp. 55, 163-5, 261-4, and we can 
therefore agree with the observation that ‘ when Sivaji’s descend- 
ants degenerated into a line of royal phantoms and the Peshwas 
usurped all power, the ancient spirit of caste-exclusiveness reassert- 
ed itself with redoubled force, and the passionate cry of the 
Marathi poet, 44 Find, O find, some means or other, To bring God 
and man together," was forgotten amid the caste disputes and the 
class-intrigues of that era of Chitpavan predominance,’ 

37 



290 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 

Indian Scholars (pp. 25-6). 

In his Inaugural Address at the opening of the Bhandarkar 
Institute, (see Annals of the Bhandarkar Institute , July 1919, 
pp. 2-5), Dr. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar remarked that 4 the peculiar 
temptation of an Indian scholar ’ is that 4 he is prone to see good 
in everything old 

The 4 Historicity ’ of Krisna , (pp. 30-2). 

In the same Inaugural Address (p. 5) Sir R. G. Bhandarkar 
referring to the Mahclbhcfrata (and Rdmdyana ), the fountain-head 
of information concerning Krisna, said : 4 The occurrences reported 
itkthem cannot be regarded as strictly historical \ See also our pp. 
252-3. 

After pointing out that various names of Abhlras ‘are all 
synonyms of the god Siva’, Tribes and Castes of Bombay , 
pp. 17-34, goes on to say : * Hence the conclusion may be safely 
drawn that the Abhlras were by no means connected with Krisna 
and his cowherds .... Only one conclusion is possible, viz., 
that the Abhiras did not originally represent the gopas of Krisna. 
, . . The traditions which are now current among the Ahirs and 
which connect them with Krisna, Mathura and the gopas are only 
later inventions . . . The influence of fiction on the disintegra- 
tion of a formerly uniform conmmunity or on the amalgamation of 
different tribes need not be dwelt upon.’ 

Dnyattesh war's Prayer (p. 38). 

For a translation of this wonderful prayer a little more in 
detail than we have given in chapter II, and based on a critical 
text, see an article by Dr. J. E. Abbott, * Dnyaneshwar’s Prayer ’, 
in the Dnyifnodaya , May 5, 1921. f 

Modern Hindus and the Krisna Legend (pp. 31-3). 

In the last of the series of articles on The Bhagavct Dharma 
to which we have already referred, Pandit Sitanath Tattvabhushan 
in The Indian Messenger for Nov. 27, 1921, quotes a passage on 
Chaitanya’s bhakti f giving asterisks in place of * a passage which 
would offend not only the taste, but even the moral sense of the 
reader ’, and he asks : 4 Can such an “ idea of God ”... ever save 
any church from moral corruption ? ’ In working up to this, the 
final conclusion of sixteen articles, extending over nearly eighteen 
months, he points out ; 4 The Krispa legend continually grew at 

the hands of successive Vaishpava poets, the later ones making 
fresh additions to what they had received from their predecessors. 
Poets know what poetry is and evenwhat it is not. Minute details 
of sayings and doings ascribed to individuals, such as we find in 
the Purdrias belong not to history, but to poetry and fiction. But 
the age which followed that of the creative Vaishpava poets seems 



APPENDIX IV 291 

to have been singularly credulous and unimaginative. It took all 
poetry as history. It regarded every detail of the epic and P uranic 
account of Krisna as true and based its religious life on them as on 
a system of theology. Half a century of liberal education, largely 
scientific, teaching at any rate how to distinguish between dogma 
and reasoned truth, between fact and fancy, between history and 
poetry, has effected a revolution in the religious attitude of those 
who have received the blessings >f such an education. They see 
that they must reject the old theology as based on mere poetry, or 
if they are to retain it in any shapo* they must interpret the legends 
invented by the poets as allegorical representations of spiritual 
truths. Gravely questioning whether the story of an unholy love 
can be thus interpreted with any show of reason and without serious 
injury to the moral life of those who would accept such an inter- 
pretation, . . , one thing we are most anxious to emphasise, and 
that is that neither the authors of the Ptirduas nor their latter-day 
exponents and followers, including Chaitanya and his disciples, 
offer even the slightest clue to such an interpretation 

VitJioba’s Name (pp. 42-3). 

In a critical review of Mr. L. R. Pangarkar’s Sri Tukaramacc 
Caritra Dr. Prabhakar R. Bhandarkar, in the Nava Ytiga for 
March, 1921, affirmed that the reading Vied keld thobd given by 
Tukaram himself suggests a derivation that is imaginary (see our 
pp. 42-3), and he himself would suggest a different meaning for 
the words, so as to yield the sense — ‘rebirth was stopped \ No 
reason, however, is assigned for so attractive an interpretation. 

Impossibility of defining the Term * Hindu ’ (p. 25). 

The Census of 1911 (pp. 55-6) shows that 91 per cent of the 
people in the Konkan and Deccan are Hindus. Referring to 1 the 
impossibility of framing a comprehensive definition of Hinduism 
intelligible to the average enumerator and of drawing a hard and 
fast line between Hinduism and other religions, Jainism, Islam, 
Animism and Sikhism ’, there being in Bombay Presidency ‘ 35,000 
Hindu- Mohamedans whose creed and customs partake of both 
religions', the Report states: ‘ Various tests have been suggested 
to fix what constitutes a Hindu, but finally it was decided to treat 
all who call themselves Hindu as Hindus.’ 

The God Khandobd (pp. 47, 132). 

In his ‘ Introduction ’ to the new edition of Grant Duff’s 
History of the Mahrattas , published while the present volume 
was in the press, S. M. Edwardes gathers together much useful 
information concerning Khandoba, * the tutelary deity of the 
Deccan’ as well as a popular household god, whose name is 



292 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 

derived from Khande-aba , 4 sword-father \ Besides its chief 
temples at Jejurl, Poona District And Pal, Satara District, it has 
many other temples, the officiating priests often being non- 
Brahmans, the officiants in Khandoba’s three Bombay temples being 
a Brahman a Kamathi and a Murall (on which word see pp. 47, 132) 
respectively. Besides being ‘absorbed into the neo-Brahmanic 
pantheon * as an avatdra of Siva under the names Malhari or 
Martand, Khandoba is a vegetable deity, turmeric powder being 
applied to his devotees and carried in tiger-skin bags by the males 
{Wdghyds) dedicated to him. He is also an animal god, always 
accompanied by a black dog, and is the god of the Ramoshl 
(watchman) caste and of Dhangars (shepherds), robbers often 
cnaking vows to Khandoba when starting on robbing expeditions, 
their war-cry of old being El-kot , El-kot , referring to the 
4 70 million* demons slain by him in conflict. It is, however, in 
his connection with * religious prostitution or sanctified harlotry ’ 
that Khandoba exercizes his most widespread influence, even 
married women becoming Mur alls sometimes, forsaking husbands 
and children. As the lesull largely of missionary effort it has 
become an offence under the Indian Penal Code to dedicate a girl 
to Khandoba, though there are still women who 4 serve as the 
brides of Khandoba and the mistresses of men 

In view, however, »f the fact that the Bombay Gazetteer 
(vol. xviii, part i, pp. 476-7) in 1885 reported only five Wdghyds 
and sixteen Mur alls in Poona District, within whose boundaries 
Jejuri, their centre, is situated, the question calls for further 
investigation, though missionaries at work among the people 
would probably doubt the accuracy of the Gazetteer figures in this 
particular. 

Caste and Untouchables (pp. 54~5, 162-5). • 

‘The touch of the Bhatigi, Chatnar, Dlied, Holiya, Mhar, Mang 
and Mocbi is unclean, and none of these castes are allowed within 
the interior of the ordinary Hindu temples* {Census vol. referred 
to above, p. 66. See also the excellent note on ‘ Mabars 9 , p. 287). 

4 In Bombay Presidency alone,’ said The Times of India Decern' 
ber 1, 1921, 4 there are somewhere about a million people who 
by the rest of the population are regarded on religious grounds 
as pariahs and outcastes, whose touch is regarded as a defilement, 
who are not allowed to draw water from the village well, whose 
children are not allowed even to enter the ordinary schools. 
These disabilities are in force altogether apart from the personal 
cleanliness or position of the individual and are solely based upon 
caste.’ 

Idolutors and Monotheists in the Deccan (p. 153). 

* The bulk of the people are polytheist, not many are monotheists 
pure and simple.’ ( Census 1911 Report, p. 67). 



APPENDIX IV 293 

Bhftgavata Devotion to Vishnu and Siva (pp. 156-8, and 27). 

1 If a coolie or a cartman were asked if he were a Vaishnava ora 
Saiva he would not understand the question. . . . The inhabitants 
contribute to the local festivals of both religions alike, there is no 
conception of the idea that the two religions are mutually exclusive. 
The Brahman recognizes differences of sect and would be able to 
say whether he was a follower of Vishnu or Siva, but the ordinary 
villager ... is content to worship the village godlings to whom 
he looks for rain, etc. . . . There are, as it were, two religions; a 
work-a-day religion to meet the requirements of everyday existence 
and a higher religion, known only to the Brahman who is called in 
to officiate on great occasions, which the average man does not 
attempt to understand. . . . Their death bed mantras would be 
invocations to Siva and Vishnu respectively. A curious instance 
of a death-bed mantra which combines the names of both deities 
is to be found anmng the Bhdgvat sub-sect of the Shenvi Brahmans, 
who say ‘‘Siva, Siva, Narayan " when they are about to die. . . . 
Some of the officiating priests at Pandharpur are Bhagvatas that is, 
worshippers of both Vishnu and Siva. They may owe their 
standing in a Vaishnava temple to the legend that the founder of 
the Vithoba shrine housed his idol in a disused temple of Mahadev ’ 
{Ibid. pp. 66-8). 

On the problem of how Vishnu and Siva became one in worship, 
S. M. Edwardes believes that foreign invaders led to ‘a reconcilia- 
tion between the two warring sects of Saivas and Vaishnavas, 
which is symbolized in the installation of an image of Vithoba 
(Vishnu) in the temple of Tamilian . . . and its association with 
the lihga of Siva ’ C Introduction * to new edition of Grant Duffs 
History of the Mahrattas, p. Ixv). 

Tukdram No Reformer (pp. 160 5.) 

S. M. Edwardes {Ibid, p. 68) has fallen into the error of M. M. 
Kuntewhen the latter described Tukaram as a ‘revolutionist’, the 
former speaking of Tukaram’s ‘ crusade ' against Brahman ritual, 
ceremonial and priestcraft, but if our argument holds good Tukaram 
was no ‘ crusader \ 

N . V . Tilak as a poet (pp. 165, 238) 

In his Presidential address to the Conference of Marathi 
writers held at Baroda, November 26, iy2|, Mr. N. C. Kelkar, 
editor of the Kesarl , said that among present-day Marathi poets 
N&rayan Vaman Tilak, ‘ received and deserved the honour of 
elder/ See Kesarl , Nov. 29, 1921. 



294 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 
The Upanishads on Inward Religion (p. 226 ) 

In his Thirteen Principal Upanishads ( p . 405, Dr. R. E. Hume 
of Union Theological Seminary, New York, gives the subject-title 
* The Saving Knowledge of One, Kind, Immanent Supreme God of 
the Universe* to the stanzas IV. 11-20 of the S vetdtivatara 
Upanishad, translating stanza 20 thus: 

His form is not to be beheld. 

No one soever sees Him with the eye, 

They who thus know Him with heart and mind. 

As abiding in the heart, become immortal. 

Similarly, on p. 396, he gives the subject-title 4 The All-Pervad- 
mg Soul *, to stanzas I. 15-16 of the same Upanishad, and trans- 
lates 15 : 

As oil in the sesame seeds, as butter in cream, 

As water in river-beds, and as fire in the friction-sticks 
So is the Soul (Atman) apprehended in one’s own soul. 

If one looks for Him with true austerity ( tapas ). 

To stanzas IV 22-13 in the Katha Upanishad he gives the 
title, 4 The Eternal Lord Abiding in one’s self ’, with the twelfth 
stanza thus translated : 

A Person of Uie measure of a thumb 
Stands in the midst of one’s self (atinan). 

Lord of what has been and of what is to be. 

One does not shrink away from Him.’ 

See also his translations of Svetdsvatara Upanishad, III. 13 
and Katha Upanishad, VI. 18, on his pp. 401, 361, Dr. P. K. 13han- 
darkar and the present writer p. 246. 

4 As for the argument with Dr. Prabhakarrao, who in the 
Subodh Patrika had observed that the present writer was 4 child- 
like (I had almost used an allied word) in his faith/ and * blinded 
by gross prejudice/ we assured him of two things, first, that 
our faith was every bit as 4 child-like * as he had suggested, and 
secondly, we pointed out that in repudiating the distinction we had 
drawn between sin-stricken Tukaram and the sinless Redeemer 
he had taken up an attitude to Jesus which no school of Christian 
thought would support and which our accepted principles of 

scientific interpretation could only pronounce as untenable 

Our position, in conversation with our critic, was that the lifelong 
miracle of Christ’s character was of far deeper significance as a 
miracle than either the miraculous birth or the miraculous resur- 
rection : grant the sinlessness, then every other miracle was 
possible. The striking fact, as we pointed out, is that all schools of 
Christian interpretation accept whole-heartedly the sinlessness of 
Jesus, so that our friend Dr. Prabhakarrao could not pit any liberal 
or modernist school against the orthodox editor who bad so dis- 
turbed his peace We concluded by urging that the record, 



APPENDIX IV 


295 


in the four Gospels themselves be carefully studied to see if a view 
so universally accepted by millions of thinking people the world over 
could be so wide of the mark as our learned friend had suggested. 
And this is our plea with every thinking Indian who has difficulty 
about the Lord Jesus Christ. Study methodically the record of 
His life with an open mind, pray (in your own way) for light as you 
read, and resolve by God's help to follow whatever light comes.’ 

{Dnyffttodaya Nov. 24, 1921, from an account of an interview 
between Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar and the present writer). 



Appendix V 
Bibliography 

A selection of the relevant literature on the subject is indicated 
in the footnotes throughout this book and the aim of the present 
bibliography is merely to bring together the chief authorities and 
so guide the student of Tukaram as to what are likely to be the 
most helpful aids to further study. In the following list, which in 
n<5 way claims to be exhaustive, the bracketed letters (E) and (M) 
signify that the book or article is in English or Marathi respect- 
ively. See page of 4 abbreviations 1 for explanation of those letters 
not given in full. 

I. Historical and Philological 

Bombay Gazetteer (1885) vol. xx. (E), the section on Pandhar- 
pur ; full of information unobtainable elsewhere. 

V. L. Bhave's (M) History of Marathi Literature up to 1819 
(1919) is far and away the best work dealing with the wonderful 
literature of the Marathas.* 

Grant Du(Ts (E) History of the Mahrattas in 2 vols. newly 
edited by Mr. S. M. Edwardes, g.s.i., g.v.o., with an ‘ introduction * 
(1921) on Maratha 4 origins ’ and 4 literature * etc., and annotations 
throughout. The only authoritative complete work covering the 
whole Maratha period, though some of the author’s views are 
contested by Indian scholars. 

4 C. A. Kincaid and D. B. Parasnis ’ (E) History of the Maratha 
People (1918). Only vol. 1 is thus far published, dealing with the 
period to the death of Sivaji; the forthcoming second volume is to 
bring the story up to a.d. 1750, and the 3rd to A.D. 1818, with short’ 
appendices on the Maratha States between 1818 and now. Com- 
parisons with Grant Duffs work impossible until completed. 

C# A. Kincaid's (E) Tales of the Saints of Pandharpur (1919). 
Traditions of Maratha Saints translated into English. 

Molesworth’s Marathi and English Dictionary (1857). Must 
be reckoned one of the finest dictionaries in India, but needs bring- 
ing up to date in certain parts. 

W. B. Patwardhan’s (E) Wilson Philological Lectures (1917) 
on ‘The influence of the Saints of the Bhakti School in the 
Formation and Growth of Prakrit Literature*, published in the 
F. C. M., Dec, 1917 to July 1919. The most useful account, 
from the popular standpoint, of the history and influence of the 
Maratha saints and their books. 

M. G. Ranade’s (E) Rise of the Mar&thd Power (1900). 
A brilliant fragment. 



APPENDIX V 


297 


N. B. Ranade’s Twentieth Century English Mar at hi Dic- 
tionary (1916). Embodies conclusions as to Marathi renderings 
of modern English words up to 1916. 

1 1 Biographical 

Mahipati’s (M) Bhakta Llldmrita (1774), chaps. 25-40, and 
Bhakta Vijdya (1762-3), chaps. 48-52, are the foundation of 
everything both in Marathi and English. See our pp, 69-77 and 
20-21 for estimates of the value of Mahipati’s works. 

Dr. Murray Mitchell's ( E) translation of part of the Bhakta 
Llldmrita in J.R.A.S. Bo Jan. 1849, is the only one we know and 
has supplied three or four pages in our chapter IV (see p. 109, 
footnote 3 ; p. 114, footnote 3; p. 117, footnote. See further 
Appendix III). 

Several Marathi ‘Lives’ have been published, the latest by Mr. 
L. R. Pangarkar (M), Sri Tukdrdmdce Caritra (1920) probably 
being the best, though the work must be pronounced deficient, 
fir^t from the standpoint of the inadequate biographical material 
included and second because Mr. Pangarkar has unfortunately 
accepted all the traditions regarding Tukaram without any critical 
examination of any kind. There are other useful Marathi ‘Lives/ 
among them being those by K. A. Keluskar and V. Madgaokar, 

III Editions of Tukaram’s Poems 

See the list given on page 120 with the discussion on their 
respective merits. 

The (M) Indu Prakilsh (1869) still retains the premier position 
and it has also a brief biography both in English and Marathi. 

On Mr. V. N. Joga’s edition with its commentary, see under 
‘ interpretation. 1 

V. L. Bhave’s (M) Tukdrdmdcl .4 ssal Gdthd (1920) embodies 
the latest findings. See our pp. 121-2 and since then an article 
by B. A. Bhide in Vtvidha Dnydna Vistdra . 

Fraser and Marathe’s (E) The Poems of Tnkdrdm in 3 vols. 
Prose translations (1909-15) of 3721 of Tukaram’s abhangs , 
arranged under order of topics with notes and appendices. Though 
not a ‘complete English translation 1 as erroneously stated by Dr. 
Farquhar (O. R. L. /. p. 374) and though some renderings are 
disputed by Marathi scholars this still remains the only English 
work giving anything like an adequate idea of the number and 
variety of Tukaram’s verses. 

# IV Interpretation of Tukaram 

Dr. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar’s (K) V.S.M.R.S. (1913), chapters 
xxv-vi, pp. 92-101. An authoritative statement of Tukaram’s 
38 



298 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


place in the Bhakti School of Vaishnavism. The same authors 
(M) Writings and Lectures (1919) on religious subjects, with 1 )0 
pages of a (M) biography of this great bhakti scholar by S r 
N, G. Chanda varlcar. A unique volume of expositions of Marathi 
bhakti . 

Dr. Prabh ikar R. Bhandarkar’s (E) Two Masters: Jesus and 
Tukdrdm (1903). See chapter x, section 4. The same author’s 
(M) article in Nava Yuga , March, 1921, ably criticizing Mr. Pan- 
garkar’s book referred to above. This criticism has since been 
been reprinted in pamphlet form. 

Rev. Nehemiah Goreh’s (M) Tenets of Tukdrdm (1892). Too 
unsympathetic, though correct on some points. 

For a systematic study of Tukaiam's poems, the 2 vols (M) 
by the late Mr. Vishiiuboa N. Joga, an edition of 4149 abhahgs 
(1909), is far the best. See p. 121 in our chapter v. A running 
paraphrase unravels many hard knots, though a line of interpreta 
tion is often adopted which other schools reject. 

Dr, Hastings' B. R. B. English articles on Bombay , vol. 2 
(Crooke), Bhakti Mdrga, vol. 2 (Grierson), Mysticism ( Indian ), 
vol. 9 (Macnicol), Prdrthand Samdj , vol. 9 (Earquhar), Tukardm , 
vol. 12 (Edwards). 

Dr. MacnicoFs (E) Psalms of the Mardtha Saints (1919). 
The best presentation by a missionary, from the appreciative 
standpoint, of the whole spirit of Marathi bhakti , and showing its 
approximation to Christian truth, with 75 of Tukaram’s abhahgs 
translated into felicitous English poetry, though some Marathi 
interpreters would not accept all the renderings given. 

Dr. MacnicoFs (E) Indian Theism (1915). An illuminating 
book, pp. 120-8 particularly useful on present subject. See also 
its index under Tukaram. • 

Rev. G. R. Navalkar's (E) Tukardm , Malidrdshtrian Poet 
and Saint (1908). A treatise full of true discernment and 
embodying the Christian point of view. 

Periodicals : 

Subodh Patrikd (E & M), weekly organ of the Bombay 
Prarthana Samaj: Dnydnodaya (E A M), weekly organ of seven 
Missions; V ividh-Dnydna-Vistdra, (M), monthly; Indian Inter- 
preter^ (E) quarterly; all four have occasional articles on subjects 
related to Tukaram. 

The quarterly publication of the Bhdrata Itihdsa Sanshodhak 
M and ala , an institution of which-every student of Tukaram should 
be a member; office; 314, Sadashiv Peth, Poona. Also The 
Annats of the Bhanddrkar Orient'll Research InstitutS \ Poona. 

The ,/. /?. A . S. Bo., especially an article (1910,' vol. 23, 
{ No 65) bv L. J. Sedgwick, l. C. S. A notable exposition of 
Marathi bhakti . ^ 



INDEX OF ‘ABHANGS 


Since this book has mainly English readers in view the following list of 
Tukariim’s abhangs has reference to the only English edition approximating 
to anything like completeness, viz , Fraser and Marathe’s prose translations 
of 3721 abhangs out of the 4621 in the -so far- standard Marathi edition 
published by the Indu Prakash press. As the corresponding numbers in the 
latter edition are given at the end of vols. It and 111 of F. and M. there is 
no need to repeat them here, save in a few cas^s where s))ec»al reference has 
been made, which cases are dealt with by the letter 4 f \ Similarly with 
Dr. Macnicols poetical translations of 76 of Tukar.im’s abhangs in his 
Psalms of Maratha Saints {numbered xxxiii to oviii.); out of these the 
present work has referred to 27, which will he found indexed in the following 
columns by the letter ‘8’ after the number referring to P. and M's. prose 
numbers To summarize, left-hand hgures in the columns below refer to the 
order of abhangs in Fraser and Ma»\ithe’s Poems of Tukanlm y referred to 
throughout the present work under tin* abbreviation F . and M ; right-hand 
figures refer to the pages of the present book ; the letter 4 1 * to the hulu 
Prakash edition; and the letter ‘S' to Dr Macnie.ol's Psalms of Muruthd 
Saints. A separate list is added of a few abhangs not translated by 
F. and M. 


F. & M. 

Page 

F. & M 

Page 

F. & M. 

Page 

19 

137 

213 

190, 253 

327 

198 

49 S 

186 

217 

199 

334 

225 

52 S 

146 

221 

187 

336 

195 

53 

218, 247 

*) •) o 

Vv'* 

200 

338 

197 

70 

143 

224 

J52 

339 

197 

92 S 

US 

227 

191 

343 I 

50 

92 

22S 

228 

194 

347 

135 

101 I 

90 

231 8 

146 

347 8 

230 

I 

127 

231 

195, 228 

348 

135 

101 

135, 229 

232 

207 

351 

141 

103 -4 I 

90 

233 

196 

353-4 

135 

106 

206 

236 

208 

355 

275 

113 

83 f, 138 

238 

210 

35 i S 

66 

121 2 

265 

243 

201 

‘dMi 

136 

126 I 

49 

245 

148 

358 

138 

126 

135, 137, 242 

247 

194 

361 

135 

136 

149 

248 

211,224 

362 

203 

147 

149 

263 

159 

363 1 

50 

150 

210 

265 

.159, 196, IDS 

364 

136 

151 

185, 230 

266 

J62 

365 

136 

154 

155 

273 

1 45 

372 

136 

157, 159 

156 

277 

200 

406 

187 

176 

158, 234 

281 

160 

426 

222 

183 

200 

282 

151, 190 

439 

213 

184 

152 

286 

190, 201 

442 

187 

193 

200 

287 

152, 198 

448 S 

118 

200 

189 

288 

151 

463 

199 

201 

189, 206 

294-6 

196, 222 

476 

141 

204 

195 

304 

197 

480 

200 

207 

190 

307 

191 

486 

196 

208 

209 

318 

210 

487 

196 

210 

190 

320 

211 

489 

1.96 

211 

190, 195 

322 

199 

494 

200 

212 

217 

324 

i97, 199 

496 

274 



300 

LIFE AND 

TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


F.& M. 

Page 

F. & M. 

Page 

F.&M. 

Page 

501 

276 

836 

200 

1195 

144 

505 S 

168 

841 

199 

1196 

144 

505 

196 

842 

200 

1199 

144 

509 

199 

846 

199 

1205 

241, 276 

510 

199 

850 

199 

1209-80 

31, 252 

513 

116 

876 

209 

1281-1305 

149 

518 

188 

879 

141 

1301-5 

218, 247 

524 

197 

885 

141 

1344 1354 

132-3 

525 S 

168 

888 

199, 203, 207 

1369 

223 

527 

159 

889 

196 

1389 

115 

532 

194 

894 185 

,207,225,277 

1389 S 

259 

539 

218, 246 

895 

229 

1417 

275 

540 

195 

896 

207 

1420 

143 

543 

20 L 

897 

207 

1422 

141. 

545 

274 

907 

151 

1428 S 

66 

549 196, 

199, 201, 278 

911 

208 

1434 

231 

551 

199 

917 

208 

1442 S 

66 

554 

201 

926 

152, 208 

1444-1459 

105, 126 

556 

199 

930 

208 

1462 

114, 149 

558 

226 

931 

208 

1463 

114 

560 

201 

933 

275 

1466 

98 

561 

144, 201 

936 

211 

1468-1474 

100, 123 ff 

566 

141 

937 

208 

1499-1500 

45 

573 

141, 198 

942 

162, 207-8 

1503 

223 

584 

201 

944 

208 

1512-14 

45 

586 

190 

945 

162 

1523 

45 

587 

115 

946 

208 

1530-39 

45 

615 

154 

948 

208 

1549-1573 

96 

615 S 

214 

952 

278 

1573 a-1 573 k 92 

651 S 

168 

953 

150 

1573 i- 1573 p 93 f 

690 

141 

958 

212 

1578 

139, 220 

702 

203 

972 

211 

1586 S 

its 

706 185, 207, 228, 277 

976 

276 

1589 S 

186 

709 

142 

984 

203 

1609 

136 

710 

142 

994 

205 

1627 • 

156 

711 

143 

996 

210 

1634 

155 

712 

143 

1007 

154 

1653 

201, 204 

713 

143 

1029 

213 

1656 

274 

715 

143 

1033 

212 

1657 

191 

717 

143 

1042 

275 

1663 

220 

720 

143 

1043 

154 

1665 

187 

722 

154 

1054 

154 

1670 

220 

731 

154 

1066 

159 

1679 

189 

747 

229 

1070 

131 

1685 

217 

749 

229 

1093 

276 

1686 

217 

763 8. 1, 

195 

1126 

206 

1692 

194 

768 

224 

1130 

191 

1695 

217 

771 

185, 202, 230 

1134 

143 

1698 

191 

776 8 

214 

1144 

151, 158 

1707 

199, 228 

812 

225, 226, 275 

1153 

151 

1713 

274 

820 

200 

1163 

160 

1714 

154 

822 

200 

1169 

152 

1727 199 (corrigenda), 

825 

200 

1172 

160 


195 

828 

200 

1177 

188 

1730 

198,211 

829 

200 

1185 S 

146 

1740 

. 159 

832 

162 

1187 

210, 275 

1744 

. c» . 162 

834 

200 

1189 

275 

1753 

iii 




INDEX OF ‘ABHANGS 

» ■ . 

301 

F.&M. 

Page 

F. & M. 

Page 

F.&M. 

Pag® 

1755 

222, 274 

2232 

154 

2790 

139 

1756 

m 

2238 

204 

2813 S 

186 

1757 

191 

2242 

205 

2826 

157 

1769 

274 

2246 

205 

2827 

156 

1777 

276 

2247 

205 

2828 

42 

1782 

210 

2254 

159 

2836 

156 

t787 

190 

2259 

162 

2866 

189 

1795 

190, 272 

2272 

201 

2968 

224 

1798 

200 

2298 

200 

3009 

136 

1802 

191, 200 

2802 

213 

3010 

224, 256 

1805 

278 

2304 

211 

3026 

136 

1818 

276 

2305 

199 

3030 S 

136 

1817 

201 

2309 

225 

3036 

224 

1831 

197 

2311 

140 

3J17 

152 

1842 

198 

2313 

159 

3134 

194, 211 

1858 S 

224 

2316 

200 

3135 

212 

I860 

136, 243 

2322 

213 

3143 

151 

1862 

222 

2326 

213 

3165 

154 

1866 

275 

2328 

200 

3183 

198 

1870 

136 

2329 

200 

3188 

200 

1872. 

236 

2345 

138 

3189 

200 

1879 

136 

2375 

207 

3195 

154 

1881 

136, 243 

2394 

2 LI 

3199 

200 

1886 

138 

2395 

162 

3203 

151 

1891 

136 

2396 

213 

3207 

198 

1924 

190 

2398 

144 

3213 

191 

1938 

222 

2400 

200 

3230-1 

202 

1963 

222 

2422 

210 

3233 

202 

2028 

144 

2455 

205 

3323 

201 

2034 

196 

2484 

157 

3325 

194, 211 

2035 

224 

2495 205, 

218, 247 

3339 

258 

2036 

151 

2507 

276 

3346 

203 

2041 

274 

2523 

209 

3352 b 

159, 267 

2052 

276 

2525 

144 

3354 

203 

2059 

206 

2531 

154 

3362 

203 

#064 J 

227 

2536 

203 

3369 

275 

2017 

162 

2538 

196 

3370 

203 

2081 

201 

2542 

199 

3372 

205 

2089 

202 

2543 

193 

3373 

203 

2138 

222 

2544 

193 

3380 

206 

2143 

210 

2561 

192 

3403 

203 

2144 S 

44 

2572 

210 

3407 

142 

2144 

• 209 

2588 

152, 275 

3414 

200 

2146 

211 

2597 152, 

197, 226 

3427 

188 

2147 

220 

2598 

152 

3434 

203 

2148 S 

214 

2599 T 

50 

3451 

141 

2149 

221 

2599 S 

.146 

3465 

200, 275 

2164 

191 

2601 

192 

3466 

201 

2187 

225 

2603 

151 

3474 S 

230 

2189 

228 

2605 

151 

3476 a 

197 

2194 

205 

2606 

152 

3477 

201, 203 

2196 

203 

2620 

159 

3530 

276 

2200 

143 

2621 

158 

3537 

212 

2218 

225 

2632 

225 

3566 

160 

2218 

203 

2707-2722 

210 

3592 

205 

2224 

159 

2755 

139* 220 

3605 

159 

2230. 

154 

2773 

139, 225 

3671 

225 


39 



302 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TDK ARAM 


* Abhangs ’ not translated In F. and M. 

From Indu Prakdsh Edition Page 


(1) 

8-11 ... 

... 116 


28 ... 

... 116 


1579 ... 

... 157 


2306 ... 

... 211 


2488 ... 

... 164 


3839 ... 

... 236 


4297 ... 

... 162 


4420 ... 

... 118 


Lines 25-30, p. 667 vol. II, 218, 

218, 247 

(2) 

From Psalms of Mar&tha Saints 



Liv (p, 67) 

... 118 

(3) 

From V. N. Joga 



1728 ... 

... 164 

(4) 

From TukarSra Tatya’s Edition 



4733 (vol. I, p. 684) 

... 154 f 



INDEX OF 

Abbott, 70 ff, 75, 122, 189, 283, 291 

Acworth, 13, 19 

Aiyar, 12 

Akho, 254 

Apparswami, 223 

Appasamy, 217 

Apte, Harr Narayan, 121 

Apte, V, G., 9 

Augustine, 233 

Awte, Trimbak Harr, 74 


Sana Bhatta, 158 
Barth, 250 
Bell, 22 

Bhandarkar P. R., 69, 76 f, 84, 88, 
90, 92, 94, 97, 99, 105, 149 f, 156 f, 
163, 170, 173, 188 ff, 220, 232, 239 ff 
248, 264 f, 276, 279, 291, 295 f, 298. 
Bhandarkar, R. G., 3, 25 f, 30, 32 ff, 
40, 50, 67, 72, 1*1, 125, 151, 155, 
175 ff, 184, 215, 220, and chap, ix 
passim , 234, 240, 261 f, 285, 290, 
299 

Bhandarkar, V. G., 232 
Bhate, G., 18, 176 

Bhave, V, L.3f, 12, 18, 46, 52, 67, 70, 
72 ff, 76 f, 82 f, 91, 98 f, 102, 105, 116, 
119, 122, 124 f, 134, 142, 155, 297 f 
Bhide, B, A.,76f. 298 
Bhide, V. W., Corrigenda 
Bruce, A. B., 222 


Cave, 184 

Chandavarkar, Sir' N. G., 177, 
219 ff, 224, 238, 239, 257 f, 298 
Chapdorkar, G. R., 18 
Cheyne, 249 
Chirol, 35 
Chrysostom, 265 
Cokhamela, 164 
Crooke, 41, 46, 298 


Driver, 249 

Duff, Grant, 287, 296 f 


Edwards. 164, 175, 259, 273, 285, 299 

Edwardes, 286 ff 

Egerton, 280 

Ekndth, 217 

Enthoven, 14, 209, 286 f 

39A 


AUTHORS 


Farquhar, 25,27f, 30, 33 ff, 55, 142. 
153, 158, 175, 189, 247, 282, 285. 
297 f 
Fleet, 3 

Fraser and Mara the, passim 


Gadgil, Janardhan Sakharam, 68 

Gadre, 76 f 

Gandhi, K., 32, 192 

Garbe, 284 f 

Geden, 46, 216, 285 

Glover, 183 

Goreh, Nehemiah, 104, 176, 189, 
244, 298 b 

Grant, Sir Alexander, 165, 185, 190 
Grierson. 215, 284, 298 
Griswold, 175 


Hastings, E . R. E ., Edited by, 3, 
14, 29, 38, 56, 183, 194, 196, 215 f, 
242, 298 
Hegel, 192 
Hernias, 258 
Hume. 294 


Indrajl, Pandit Bhagwanlal, 41 


Jacobi, 29 f 

Joga, V. N., 42, 133, 227, 230, 297 
Joshi, D. L., 282 
Joshi, P. B., 41, 287 


Kablr, 196 
Keith, 223 ff, 283 
Kelkar, N. G, 165 
Keluskar, K. A., 18, 125, 297 
Kincaid, Iff, 4, 11, 16, 18 f, 47 f, 70f, 
83, 164, 296 
Kunte, M. M., 165 


Lactantius, 264 
Lawrence, Brother, 90 
Lightfoot, 257 
Limaye, Hi G., 19 f 
Lyall, 35 



*04 LIFE ANP TEACHING OF TPKAKAM 


Maoauliffe, 253 
Mackichan, 67 f, 127 
Macniool, 7, 9, 37, 129, 137, 142,; 153, 
177, 184, 190, 217, 221, 272, 281, 298 
Mahlpati, 52 and passim 
Minikka Vaaahar, 223, 256 
Manwaring, 9 

Marathe, Fraser and, passim 
Mitchell, Murray, 49, 54, 61 f, 81, 
100, 109, 1 U, 117, 190, 280, 297 
Moffatt, 180, 256 f 
Molesworth, 2, 6, 132, 296, 230 
Muzumdar, A., 73, 92 


Nair, Sir Sankaran, 22 
Nftnak, 253 
Ndrada, 234 
Natar&jan, 263 

Navalkar, G. R., 40, 42, 105, 136, 
151, 176, 179, 244 f, 277, 298 
Nlvfittinath, 53, 157 


Oman, 46 
Orelli, 248 


Pangirkar. L. R., 67, 73 f, 76 f ? 82, 
87, 90, 102, 116, 125, 127 f, 143, 
150 f, 157, 160, 170 ff. 189, 240, 
244, 291, 297 

Pafasnis, D. B, and Kincaid, 1 ff, 4, 
11, 18 f, 47 f, 83, 296 
Parekh Manilal, 29 
Patwardhan, W. B., 4, 20 f, 67 f, 82, 
136, 138 ff, 152, 161 ff, 235 ff, 239, 
251, 281, 285, 296 
Phillips, 258, 264 
Tofcdar, D., 18 


Rajwide, 2f, 76 f 
Ramchandra, Janardan, 76 
Ramdas, 53, 157 
Ram Mohun Roy, 148 
Ramsay, W, M., 242 


Rinade, M.G., 9ff, 12, 15 f, 20f, 
40, 232, 296 
Ranade, N. B n 297 
Rawlinson, 104, 125, 174 
Rees, 22 


Sadhu Sundar Singh, 264 
Sarkar, Jadunath, 17, 20 f 
Sastri, Pandit Sivan&th, 29 
Scott, E, F., 183 

Sedgwick, 13, 20, 41, 54* TO, 128, 216, 
229, 298 
Sederblora, 29 

Stevenson, Mrs,, 6, 9, 60, 148, 216 
Streeter, 217 
Smith, Vincent A., 284 
Sorabji, Cornelia, 265 


Tagore, Maharshi Debendranath, 
129 

Tagore, Rabindranath, 19, 261 
Takakhav, N. S., 125 
Tattvabhushan, Pandit Sitanath, 
30, 250 ff. 269 ff, 273 f 
Telang, 20, 33 
Tertullian, 260, 282 
Tilak, N. V., 69, 125. 133 f, 141, 161, 
165, 237, 240, 244, 254, 267, 272, 
293 

Tulsi Das, 215 f, 247 


Umarkhane, D. V. f 73 
Underhill, Miss. 54, 179 


Wallace, 269 
Way. 250, 256 f. 260 
Westcott, B, F., 180, 256 
Weymouth, 256 f 
Wilson, 230 


Zaleski, 284 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


AbhaAgs, defined xxiii; as hymns. 
21, 176; at festivals, 13; literary 
merit of, 20f ; democratizing 
influence of , 21f ; Ddyfineshwar's, 
157, 171 ; Eknath’s, 24, 171, 201 ; 
JanflbSi's, 24; Kanboba's, 71; 

* Muktabai's, 44 ; Namdev's, 20, 44, 
90, 171; Niloba's, 71ff; NivriUi- 
nith’s* 53, 157; Kamdas’, 20; 
Rameshwar Bba^t’s, 71ff ; Tuka- 
ram's 20, 116ff, 176 and Passim 
Abhiras, 284, 290 
Absorption in Supreme Spirit, 230 
Acta Sanctorum , 281 
Adequacy of Tukaram’s religion, 
chap x. passim 
‘ Adultery with God,' 246f 
Advaita, 33ff, 92, 126, 166, 174, 
188f, 199, 217 

Adversities of Tukaram, 80, 83, 108f, 
138f 

Affection for animals, Tukaram’s, 
209 

Afflatus, Divine, 73 
‘ Agitated,' Tukaram, 231 
Agricultural ceremonies, 288 
Ahalyabai, 51 
rAhimsd , 172, 209 
Ahirs, 30 
Ahmedabad, 95 
Ahmednagar, 262 
Ajmer Chohans, 63 
Akdimukhin , 46 
Akbar, 17 
Akbo, 254 

Aland!, 27, 48. 63, 94, 97, 169, 171ff 
I Alexandria, 283 

Alleged debt to Christianity, Tuka- 
ram’s, Appendix III 
Allegory in Hinduism, 32, 247 
Almanacs, Hindu, 116 
Alvars, 36f 
Amabai, 78 

Amanuensis, Tukaram’s, 120f 
Amba, 51 
Ambdbaiy 51 
Ambajlpant, 102 

Ambiguity, Tukaram’s 153, 165f 
194f, 238, 256f. 

Ambile, Tukaram's family surname, 
67 

Anibuiance, St. John's, 63 
American scholarship, 70 
Amorousness, 149 


Amraoti, 63 
Amritanubhav , 171 
Anagadashah, 96 
Aaagod, 163 

Ancestors, §rdddh to, 58 ; of Tuka- 
r*m. 77f 

Attdhras, 2 f, 288 
Angels at Mons, 104 
Anglican Prayer Book, 33 
Annilvad Chaulukyas, 63 
Animals, Affection of Tukaram for, 
209; teaching on duty to, 209 ff ; 
metaphors from, 130 
Anodyne, Tukaram’s, 251 
Anxiety deprecated by Tukaram, 
201 ; his ' unsatisfied religious a/, 
229 f 

Antarydmln , 260 
Apabhramsuy 287 
Apocryphal verses, 123 ff 
Apology to Vi^hoba, 112 
AppajI Gulvi, 82 
ApparswamI, 223 

Approximation to Christian truth, 
Tukaram’s, 177 ff 
Apte and Dravid's edition, 120 f 
Arcana , 172 

Archdeacon Dennis’ M.S. recovered 
from the sea, 98 
Argumcntum Silentio % 281 
Army, Mardtha, 15 
Art in Hinduism, 12, 53 f 
A runodaya , 60 f 
Arya Samdj, 49 
Aryan, 3 f ; 35 
Asaki, 114 

‘Ascension* of Tukaram, 6, 71, 105, 
115 f. 126, 279 
Asceticism, 45 ff 
Ashddhy 47 ff, 54, 170ff 
Ashddhl, 48 ff, 62 f 
A£tadaiuj,vata % 46 
Asiatic literature, 128 
Aspirations of Hindus, 235 
Asoka, 2 f 

Ass, Punishment of riding an, 114 
Assassination of a Brahman in 
Pan^harpur, 64 
Assaye, Battle of, 15 
Asuras (demons), 156 
Atmanivedanay 172 
Attack on Vi^hoba, 56, 60 f 
Attendance at Partdharpiir festivals, 
171 

Afyapafya 131 
Aurangzib, 15, 17 f, 95 



306 


UFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


Austerities, 45 ff, 85, 94, 146, 195, 
228 

Authenticity of Tuk&ram’s poems, 
122 ff, 219 

Autobiography , of Bahlndbal, 73, 
92, 99, 102, 117 ; of Tukaram, 72, 
chap, v., passim 

Avadhuta , 114 

Avallbai (or Jijabai), second wife of 
Tukaram, 6, 76, chap, iv, part II 
passim 

Avatdras , of Vishnu 27 ff ; a 
Vaishnavite idea, 27 ff; place in 
Hinduism, 28 ff; definition and 
number 28 ; differing from Christian 

« incarnation, 28 ff, appendix I ; of 
Siva, 114 ; Tukaram and A., 251 ff ; 
sect. 6 ; salvation and A., 21 ff ; 5 
Vithobaand A., see Vithoba ; Lord 
of Avataras,’ 107 


Baalim, 248 f 
Babaji, 39, 73, 91 f 
Bacfvds , 55 ff, 60, 256 
Bahinabal, woman disciple of Tnka- 
ram, 73, 92, 99 n, 102, 117 
Bairagya Krisnajf, 73 * 

Bajirao, 64 
Bakhars, 20, 125 
BalajI, 10 

Bdlbodh letters, 90 
Baleghat, 82 
Bana Bhatta , 158 
Banajf, 134 

Bankruptcy of Tukaram, 76, 84 

Barber poet and bhakti , 21, 146 

BarsI, 46, 49 

Baroda, 64 

Bassein, 280 

Bathing, 61 f 

Havas, 288 

Beads (necklace or garland) of 
flowers in marriage, 87 
Bedsa, 286 

Bees, Tukaram and the, 89 f 
Beggars, 47 

Beliefs of WSrkarls, 171 f 
Belgola, Sravana, 135 
Benares (or KasI), 37, 49, 114, 127, 
154, 159, 164, 172 
Benevolence, The Wdrkarj's, 172 
Bengal, 35. 37 
Berar, 48 

Berdr Samdchdr , 61 
Bereavements of Tukaram, 84 
Bhagavadgttd: Krisjjf in, 3b ff; 
M. K. Gandhi on, 32; a seal- 
promise, 33 ; fetfbbodk til bhakti, 


33 ; Telang and Bhandfirkar on 
date of, 33 ; layman’s Upanishad, 
34; popularity of 34; pkinciples, 
39; moks ha in, 45 f; read whilst 
rolling, 46; Tukaram’s study of, 
86; a chief scripture of Maha« 
rashtra, 128, 189 ; in every War- 
kart monastery, 171 ; an advaita 
book. 189 
Bhagwan, 27, 46 

BhagirathI a tributary of Ganges, 
114, 149; Tukaram s daughter, 
90, 102 * 

Bhairava, 53 

Bbandarkar, (Sir R.G.) as a bhakta , 
177. See Authoi’s Index 
Bhandarkar Institute, 288, 298 
Bhagavata (or Bhdgwat) 1 the 
meaning of the word, 27; the B. 
community, 27 ; B. Marathi 
centres, 27; Maratha B., 27 ; 
relation to Vaishnavas, 27 ; B. 
relig on, 27, 30, 36; 55, 128, 149, 
156 ff, 171 ff. 247, 253, 269, 293 
Bhiigwat (Bhagavata) Parana, 29, 
36, 247, 253; origin of, 31; 
Krisna in, 32 ; reading from, 114 n, 
115; an advaita book, 189, 128{ 
117 

Bhdgavata-sastra, 27 
Bhajans, 10, 173, 288 - 

Bhakta (see Bhakti) 
Bhaktakalpadruma , 269 
Bhaktakathdmrita , 74 
Bhaktamald , 21, 74 
Bhakta Raj, 172 

Bhakti ; in klrtans , 10; movement, 

20 ff ; 39 ff ; literature, 20 ff, 21, 
75, 81 n, 87 n, 127, 143, 215; and 
Brahmans, 21, 34 ; B. and barbers, 

21 ; B. and Mahars, 21 ; among 
the Bhagvatas , 27; devotees, 31; 
Vaishnavites, 33 ff; text -book of, 
33 ff ; enthusiastic and emotional, 
36,215, 219; sect in, 36; theolo- 
gians, 37; Marathi, 28ff; in the 
Deccan, 39; among Pandbarpur 
pilgrims, 62 ; Patwardhgn on, 161 ; 
and caste, 162 ff; paradox of, 
165; liberation and 194 f ; inward 
nature of, 215; moral strain in, 
215; importance of, 215; inward 
and widespread character of, 215 ; 
democratizing influence of, 2tf, 
215, use of vernaculars in, 215; 

* defined, 216 ; power of adaptation, 
216 ; and Yoga differentiated. 216 f, 
229; pure and impure, 218; the 
essential element in feligidb, 21$; 
poetry and termiftnlogy of, 218; 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


307 


sense of sin in, 223 ff ; steep road 
to summit of, 227 ; emotional, 36, 
219 ; moods of, 231 ; a religion of 
spirit, 233 f; dark background of, 
233 f; and idolatry, 233 f; eva- 
luation of Tukaram ’s, chap, x, 
passim ; Christian B. chap. x. 
sects*, 5-8; and reincarnation, 
211, 251; and salvation, chap, x, 
sec. 6 ; Christianizing of, 258 ff . 
267 f 

Bhakti Vijaya , 21, 69, 71 ff, 74 f, 
87 

Bhakti Litdmrita , 21, 75, 81, 87, 
Bhakti Kathdmrita , 74 
Bhambandth Hill, 76, 84, 108 
Bhanddra Hill, 84, 86 
Bhang , 144 
Bhangls, 63 

Bhdrata Itihds Sanshodhak Man - 
dal , 92, 119, 299 

Bhatt, Rameshwar, sec Ramesh- 
war 

Bhdvd (faith), 143, 168, 196, 197, 
225 U 255 

Bhdvarth Rdtnayan, 171 
Bhave, V. L., edition, 120, sec 
Author’s Index 

Bhima river, 15, 51 ff; 56ff; 61 f, 
108, 155, 163, 173, 175 
Bhimadankar, 102 
Bhil, 112 
Bhosles, 16, 

Bhutnimukhin , 46 
Bhut (ghost), 110 

Biblical idea of sin, Tukaram’s com- 
pared, 137 

Birds and Tukdrdm, 85, 104 
Birth, date of Tukaram’s, 67 ff, 76 f 
Birth and naming of Tukaram. 78 f 
Bistu (Bittu), 41 
Blessing longed for, 225; 

Bolhaba (or Bolhapi) father of Tuka- 
ram, 76. 79, 107 
Boar, 28 

Boat, as a metaphor, 129 
Bombay. 22, 38, 48. 62, 262 
Bombay Chronicle , 263; chap. II 
passim, 170, 208 
Btahma, 6. 42, 52, 102, 116, 171 
Br&bmanand, 105 
Brahmacbarya, 172 n 
Brahmavaivarta Parana, 250 
Brahmans: adaptability of 35; 
Marathi-speaking, 2, 13 f ; place in 
idol worship, 8, 148; ascendency 
of, 25; ascetics, 46; in kfrtans , 
10 { interceding with Government, 
* 124 accept penance 12 : offences, 
of, 12; power and limitations, 


13, 289 ; priests, 13, 56 ff; low-caste 
view of, 14, 35; wife of a, 57; 
Gujarati, Telang, Carnatic, and 
Saraswat, 14; N. Indian, 14; 
fish-eating, 14, 209 ; as priests, 14, 
35 ; Deshastha, 55; widow’s gift, 
52; in military life, 15; family 
life among, 16 ; greeting, 19 ; 
bhakti and, 21, 34; ascendancy of, 
25 ; in Vaishnava shrines, 35 ; 
feeding of, 59 ; murder of a, 64 ; 
B. attitude to caste, 14, 72, 85; 
debtors of Tukaram, 83; Tukft- 
ram’s relation to, 83, 85 ff, 89, 
92 ff. 96, 101, 110, 112 f, 158 f; 
the B. at Chinch wad, 93 f ; naked, 
114; and Tukaram’s poems, 165; 
domineering, 170; veneration by 
Hindus, 172 ; admirers of Tuka- 
ram, 174 ; and non- Brahmans, 261 ; 
Tulsidas, on 267; and Roman 
Catholics, 283 ; Shenvi Brahmans, 
293 

Brfihmaism : reviving of, 31, re- 
jected by Vaishnavism, 34 
Brahmo, 62 

Brahmo Samaj, Ssdharan, 30, 
Bracelets bought by Tukaram, 82, 
130 ff 

Brevity of Tukaram, 128 
Brick at Pandharpur, 40 ff, 48 
British, 5, 22,’ 261 f 
Broken idol of Vithoba, '60 
Brotherhood of man, 267 
Browning. 128 
Buddha. 2ff, 28 f, 107 
Buddhism, 31,34,47 
Buffalo of Tukaram’s home, 99, 10 , 
115 

Bunyan and Tukaram compared, 
John, 135 

Business experience of Tukaram, 
79 ff, 88, 108 f 

Byzantine crucifix, compared with 
idols, 54 


Calcutta, 38 

Call of Tukaram to poetry, 73, 76, 
90, 97. 

Car of Vishnu, 105 
Carnatic Brahmans, 14 
Caste : in Maharashtra, 12 ; 261 ; 
and Marafba disruption, 19 f; m 
Vaishnavism, 34; at Pandbarpiir, 
42; and Vi^boba, 54 ff; Dr. Murray 
Mitchell on* 54 ; Brahman attitude 
to, 14, 72 ; Eknath and, 39, 162; 
and bhakti , 162 ff ; breaking rules. 



LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


of .caste a sin, 193 ; in Tukaram 
and Christianity, chap, x, 261 ff, 
Europe and, 262; nationality and, 
262 f; municipalities and, 262; 
water supply and, 262. Hon. Mr. 
R. P. Paranjape on, 262 ; Christ 
and, 264 
Casuistry, 321 

Catholic Herald of India, 269 
Caution in Tukaram study, 160 
Cavalry, Mara^ha, 15 
Census of India, 289 ff 
Ceremonies, 8 f , 56, 160, 223, 225, 
292 

Chaittanya, 37 ff, 73, 91 
Chaitra, a Hindu month, 111 
Chakan, 103 
Chamar, 292 

Chambhar, 19, 42, 72, 261 
Chandavarkar, Sir Narayan on Tuka- 
ram’s hymns, 177 ; on Hinduism 
and Christianity. 239 
Chandra, 52 

Chandrabhaga, 52, 56 ff, 62, 155, 172 
Chataka bird, 209 
Chatrapati, a royal title, 125 
Cheerfulness, 203 
Children of Tukaram, 94 
Chilly trade, Tukaram in the, 81j 
Chimnajl, Appa, 16 
Chinchwad, Tukaram and Brahmans 
at, 93 f, 99 

Chintamani Deva, 93, 102 
Child and parents, Tukaram’s meta- 
phor on, 191 f, 205 
Chitpavan, 238, 281 
Cholera, 61 f 
Chophala temple, 51 
Christ : Hindu appreciation of, 29, 
in what sense an avatdra , 29; 
Hinduised in Kpsna. 32; Tukaram 
compared with, 239 ; would Tuka- 
ram have accepted, 245 f ; and caste, 
261 ff ; and woman, 264 f 
Christayana , 239, 244 
Christian bhakti ; chap. x. sects 5-8; 
interpretation of Tukaram, 219; 
Missions and Tukaram, 177 ff; 
Church, 267 ; truths not found in, 
Tukaram, 245 ; leavening in Tuka- 
ram, 281 ; the Marathi Christian 
Puratla 282 ; see Christ 
Christian Patriot , 50 
Christians and Tukaram, 177 ff 
Christianity; popularand philosophi- 
cal, 271 alleged debt of Tukaram to 
Appendix iii; comparison between 
Tukiram and C. in general, 219, 
chap, x. parts 4-*8 ; as to iqcar. 
nation, 28 ff, App. i; God, 153, 


181, 240 if i morality, 181 ; spiritual 
experience, 160, 181 ; watchfulness, 
181 ; sin, faith, Divine Preseoce, 
personal religion, -185, chap, x, 
parts 6-7; repentance, 196; prayer 
and trouble, 202 f ; future life, 213 ; 
Holy Spirit, 221 ; Social life, 260 ff 
Christianized Hinduism, 234 ff ; 
bhakti, 240 ff 

Chronological order in Tukaratn's 
writings, No 125f, 219 
Church, The Unitarian, 184 
Classifying Tukaram, impossibility 
of. 179 
Cocoanu*, 95 

‘ Coals to Newcastle, Taking 81 
Coarseness in Tukaram, 142, 155 
Coincidences, 281 
Coins, 114, 159 

Cokhameja, 51, 54 ff. 162 f, 261 f 
Comparisons between Tukaram and 
Christ, chap, x, sect. 4 ; St. Paul, 
136 f, Walt Whitman, 138, Madame 
Guyon, 183, Jeremiah, 221 
Comparative study of religion, 
239 

Confederation, Maratba, 20, 22 
Conjeeveram, 36 

Constitutional Reform, Indian, 287 
Contemporary data for Tukaram ’s 
life, 73 

Contemporary Review , 9, 47 
Coppersmith story, 109 
Cornfield, Tukaram watching the 
85 f 

Coronation of SivajI, 125 
Cosmogony, 190 

Cosmogony, 190; Hindu fondness 
for, 213 * 

Cosmopolitanism, 54 ff, 162ff, 169 f, 

261 

Cowherds. Krisna and, 31, 59 
Cows : sale prohibited to butchers, 
12 ; Mohammedans and, 12; vener- 
ated by Hindus, 125. 159, 172; of 
Kyisna, 52 ; dung of, 57, 159 ; as a 
gift, 58 f 

Cradle song of Tukaram’s mother, 

78 f 

Criterion applied to Tukaram, 239 
Critical edition of Tukaram’s poems, 
Need of, 184 

Critical problem of Tukaram’s poems, 
119 ff, 242 

Crusader, Tuk&rem no, 293 
Cultivator, 287 
Curtis, the Hoe. Sir G., 262. 
Customs in Indie* 262 
Cymbal of Tukaram, 105, , 116r; 
C. player, 102 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS 309 


D 

Dadojl Kondadev, 124 
D5du Kond Dev, 113 
Dnkshlm ?, 59 
Daman, 4 
Damayanti, 222 

Dan , Daman , Dharnta , the practi- 
cal basis of faith, 226 
Dancing, see Ecstacy 
Dand (wand), 40 
Dandavat , 49 
Dandakdranya % 2 
Dandi Sanyasi, 46 
Darshan. 6, 48, 58 ff 
Dasopant, 154 n 
Diisya, 172 

Dates in Tukaram’s life, 67 ff, 123 ff 
Dattatreya, 10, 52, 1 14 
Daughters of Tukaram, 94, 102, 163 
Death, State after death, chap, viii, 
part x 

Death-bed mantras, 293 
Debasement of bhakti , 218 
Debt of Tukaram to Christianity, 
Alleged, App. iii 
Debtors, 83, 109 

Deccan : chap, i, passim : see 
Maharashtra, Maratha, etc. * in- 
fidels* land,' 17; military strength, 
18; Bhaktas of, 39 ff; reforma- 
tion in, 40; its temples, 9f ; Poets 
honoured in, 13 
Dedication, 188 

Dehu, 1, 5 f, 27, 48. 53,76ff. 83 ff, 
86, 94, 102. 105, 108, 116, 169, 
172 

Dehu MS., 120 ff 

Democracy: under Sivaji, 18 ff; 
inspired by Maratha poets, 21 f, 
55 ; of the Bhakti' School 21 f ; 
caste and, 163 f ; Tukaram and, 
260 ff 

Denglia Trimbakji, 64 
Dennis, Archdeacon, 98 
Devpradaksh iiui , 59 
Depressed Classes Mission, 263 
De Profundis of Tukaram, 137 
Degastha Brahmans, 55 
Deshl , 4 

Despair and ecslacy, 137 ff, 141, 152, 
175, 202, 205 f. 221, 231, 235, 254, 
258, 267 f 

Deshpande, Mahadajipant, 86 
Deshpande, The Brahman, 94 f 
Dcvtf(s), 28, 156 
Dev girl (DoulatabSd), 134 
Dettf, 10 

Deva, Chintamapl, 93 f 

40 


Devotional use of Tukftrfim, 175 ff 

Dhangar, 292 

DharmarajS, 247 

Dhcd, 292 

Dhobi , 286 

Dhul-darshan , 59 

Ditull , 139 

Dining, with Ganpati. 93 
Dwarka, 164, 172 
Disspnters in Hinduism, 35 
Disciples, List of Tukarfma’s, 101 f 
Disputation a hindrance to salva- 
tion, 199 

Dissatisfaction, Tukariim’s condition 
one of, 231 

Dnydndevs Origin , 71 
Dnyiineshwar, (Dnyandev), 6, 26, 38, 
44, 48, 53, 63, 69, 71. 86. 94 ff, 98, 
105, 109 f, 127 f, 157, 160, 170 ff, 
238, 288, 290 
Dnydncshwarl , 171,288 
Dnyanoba, 38 

Dnydnodaya , 16, 61, 73, 122, 148, 
153 f, 165, 189, 238, 240, 242, 254, 
256, 262, 272. 282. 290, 295 
Dogs in Tukaram’s life, 102, 209 f 
Domestic religious rites, 288. 291 f 
Domestic worship, 8 
Doubtful religious characters in 
Tukaram, 132 f 
Doulatabad (Devgirl), 134 
Dravid and Apte, (edition), 120 f 
Dreams, 69, 90 
Drowning men, 146 
Drowning of idols, 12 
Drowning theory of Tukaram’s end, 
105 

Dualism ( Dvaitism ), 33 f, 166, 189 f 
Dudhdhari , 46. 

Dung: of cows, 57, 159; of horses, 
104 

Duty to animals, 209 ff 
Dvaitism (duality), 33 f, 166. 189 
Dwarf, 28 

Dynamic power in religion, chap, x, 
sects. 7-8 


E 

Ecstacy and despair, see Despair 
Ecstacy not devotion, 254, 267 
Editions of Tukaram’s poems, 119ff 
Ekddashl 48, 56,99f, 154, 170, 172 
Ekcswarls , 176 

Eknath, poetic power, 20; date 24; 
life and teaching, 39; studied by 
Tukaram, 86; jalasamddhi of, 
105; Tnkaram’s debt to, 127; 
metaphors, of 128; Bhdgwat of, 



310 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


134 ; attitude to caste* 39, 162 1 the 
caste of, 162; works of 171; as a 
Bhdgavata saint, 172; on visiting 
holy places, 201 ; on difference 
between yoga and bhakti , 217 
Elephantiasis, 264 
El-kot s 292 

Ellipses in Marathi poetry, 128 
Klphinstone, Mountstuart, 287 
Emotionalism of bhakti , 219 
Emancipation, 45 
Encyclopedia Britannica, 3 
End of Tukaram, 104 f, 126 
English-lbo language. 98 
Enthusiasm of bhakti , 36 
Environment on Tukaram, Influence 
of, 231 

Equality among Wdrkaris , 169 ff 
Eroticism in Hinduism, 32, 35, 218 
Eschatology, Hindu dislike of, 213 
Essentials and Non-essentials of 
Tukfiram’s message, 180 f 
Esievan, Father, 282 
Estimates of Tukaram by R, O. 
Bhandarkar, 150 f, Farquhar, 142, 
Goreh, 189 f. 244, Sir Alex. 
Grant 165, 185 ; Mackichan, 67, 
Macnicol, 137, 142, Mitchell, 190, 
Navalkar, 151, 244 f, Patwardban, 
67, 136 f, N. V. Tilak, 133 f. 165, 
238. 244, Miss Underhill, 179, 
PrSrthana Sam&j, 150 
European misconceptions, 130 
Evidence assuring of salvation, 
251 ff 

Evil age, 1 50 

Evildoers, Penalty of, 211 f 
Evil spirits, 1 1 

Examining oneself a duty, 205 
Excommunication, Formalities of, 
14 

Excreta of cows, 159 
Experience, Religion an, 201 
Extempore, Tukaram's verse, 127 
Extremity, Man’s, 214 


Fact and fiction in Mahipati, 71 ff 
Faith (bhdva), 143, 168, 190, 196, 
219, 225 f, 236, 252, 255, 272 
Fakir , 96 ff 

False scents in Tukaram study, 176. 
Family life, Maratha, 16 
Famine, 12, 76, 83 ff 
Fast, 56 

Fatherhood of God, 267 
Fault-poding, 205 
Fear of ridicule, 198. 


Fellowship of the 1 saints 208, 229 
Fergusson College Magazine , 20 f, 
82, 137 ff, ,161 ft 
Ferryman as a metaphor, 129 
Festivals, Indian, 48 ff 
Fish, 28; fish-eating Brahmans, 14 
Five fires, 45 f, 228; nectars, 59 
Fortnightly Review , 22, 165 
Fortune-teller, 102, 113 
Four stages of Brahman's life, 172 
Future life, 213. 


Gaik war of Baroda. 64 
Gajendra, 28, 210 
Gambling, 205 
Game metaphors, 131 
Gandhi, M.K., on Hindu scriptures, 
192 ; on untouchability, 263 
Gangd bhet , 56 

Gangabai, daughter of Tukaram, 94, 
98 

Gangadhar, disciple of Tukaram, 
117 

Gangadhar Sastri’s assasination, 64 
Gangaji Mavala Kaduskar, 91, 101, 
120 f 

Ganges, 56, 129, 149, 154 f, 172, 266 
Ganpati (Ganesh) the god. 6, 10, 51, 
53, 93, 149 
Gardis , 15 
Garud, 6, 112, 172 

Gdtha of Tukaram, 71, 73, 90, 122, 
241 

Gavarset, the Lingayat disciple of 
Tukaram, 102 
Gaya, 58, 114 f. 164 
Gentile, Tukaram as a* 180 
Genuineness of Tukaram's autobio- 
graphy, 126 ff 

German submarine story, 98 

Ghats, 1,11 

Ghatkopar, 21 

Ghosts, 11, 110 f 

Gifts by pilgrims, 57 ff 

Gyandev, 38 

GltS) see Bhagavadgltd 

Gita , Other, 30 

Goa, 280, 282 

God ; personality of, 37, 43, 151 f. 
249; motherhood of, 129, 152 f, 
182, 192, 236; apprehended by 
love, 146 ; idols in relation to, 148 ; 
as Mdbdp. 166; or existence 
of, 187 f ; relation to His worship- 
pers, 190 ; man's unity with, 191 ; 
accessibility and condescension of, 
191 f ; the grace of, 197 ; presence 
and leading of, 214, 220 ; spiritual 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


m 


character of, 219; Tukaram ’s un- 
* worthy ideas of, 222; man's 
personality lost in God, 230; 
Fatherhood of, 267 ; holiness of, 
246f ; spirituality of, 249 f, the 
Spirit of, 249, 259 f 
Gods, Aboriginal, 10 
Godavari, 3, 39, 47, 128, 172 
Godbole's Edition of V. N. f 120 
Golewadi, 47 

Good man, Tukaram’s picture of a, 
202 

Goodwill to all creatures, 196 
Gopal Boa, grandson of Tukaram, 
73, 77 

Gopalpur, 52, 59 
Gopts, 253, 273, 290 
Gora Kunibhar, Life of 72, 254 
Gosdvh 6, 60, 114, 139, 150,288 
Gosvdtni , 288 
Gospels, 241 
Gourds, Stories of, 103 
Government, 48, 62 ff. 69, 86, 1 19 
Govardhan Math, 192 
Govind, 93, 146 
Gravity of Tukaram, 130 f 
Greek heroes and gods, 28, 54 
Greeting: Hindu; Maratha, 18; 
Mahar, 19, 132; ChambhSr, 19; 
Br§hman, 19 
Grihasthasram , 172 
Grocer, Tukaram the, 102, 116, 129, 
246. 

Growth. Tukaram's spiritual, 139 
Guests, 172 

Gujerati Brahmans, 14 ; women, 226 
Gulve's edition, Jog and, 120 
Gunadhya, 4 f 
Guru of Tukaram, 193 
Guru-mantra , 73 ff, 76, 90 ff, 124, 
188 

Guyon, Madame, 183 


Haidarabad, 49 
Happiness, 207 

Hangman (Miruti), 6, 8, 149, 155, 
172 

Hari, 78 ff, parts ii, ni, chap, iv, 
passim 

Hari-Hara (Vishnu-Siva), 157 ff, 
172 

i$chandra, 222 
•%*Klrtan> 175 
fAsham infantry, 15 
Hast&mcqfak, 171 
Headdress of Sivaji, 100 
Healing of Tukar&m's son, 91 


Heart«religion longed for, 226 
Heralekar's edition, K„ 120 
Heroes and heroic age, Martha, 17 
Hitkaris, 15 
Hiuen Tsiang, 286 
Historical values of Gdthd and 
Gospel, 241 

‘ Historicity ’ of Christ, 25J! ; of 
Krisna, 30, 252 ; of Siv&jt*s 

request and visit to Tukarfim, 
123 ff 

//o/7, the Hindu festival, 115, 129 
Holiya, a Hindu caste, 292 
Holy Places, rivers, seasons, 154 f 
Holy Spirit, The, 249, 258 f 
Home influences of Tukaram, 79 
Honesty of Mahipati, 70 ff 
Horse-dung, 104 
Hostility to saints, 205 
Hubli, 49 

Humility and unselfishness, 202, 
207 

Humour among Hindus, 17 ; in 
Tukaram, 130 

Hymn-book, Tukaram’s poems as a; 
176 

Hypocrisy, 205 
Hindi literature, 20 
Hibbert Journal, 137, 153, 184 
Hemadpanti architecture, 53 
Himalayas, 116 

Hindu documents, 3 ; temples-vhow 
to visit them, 3f; festivals. 6 
family religious life. 8 f , 16 f ; 
sraddh ceremony, 9; deities 9; 
temples, 9 ; superstitions, 11 f ; 
social life and culture, 12 ; humour, 
17, 130 f ; greetings, 18; revival, 
22 ; term defined, 25, 234 ; research, 
25 ; idea of avatdra y 27 ff ; appre- 
ciation of Christ, 29; reformers, 
29,37, 101, 267; Theism, 31, 34; 
habits of thought, 33 ; conventional 
H ideas, chap, vi, passim ; 
parallel to Christian * grace before 
meat \ 90; parallel to Quakers at 
meals, 94; almanacs, 116; saints’ 
death, 126; barbers, 146; view of 
idols, 147 ft; attitude to cows, 
Vedas, etc., 159; ‘the mild H. 
164; observances, 172; pessimism, 
174; religious life of individual 
H., 178 f ; idea of God and 

scriptures, 187, 192 ; idea of prayer 
contrasted with the Christian idea, 
202; toleration, 203 ff ; speculation, 
214; teaching on sin, 223 ; ideas 
of bhakti % see under Bhakti ; 
doctrine of God, see God ; * H. 
Muhammedans', 291 ; advantages 



312 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


o! studying an individual H., 234 ; 
presuppositions, 250 
Hinduism: tolerant spirit of, 26; 
puzzling problems of, 26 ; Bhdga- 
v&tct school of, 27 ; saints in, 30 , 
monotheism in, 30, 184, 248 ff ; alle- 
gory in , 32 ; nobler spirits of, 32, 36 ; 
eroticism in, 32, 35 ; reformation 
of, 33 ; pantheism in, 34 ; orthodox 
and Vaishnava, 34 ; revolts in, 34 ; 
dissenters in, 35 ; sects in, 35 f ; 
song and singers in, 35 ff* 48 ; 
polytheism in, 33, 36 ; divine 
personality as viewed by, 37, 249 ; 
protestantism in, 40 ; democratiz- 
ing of, 21 f. 40; sense of sin m, 
47 ff, 50 ff, 57 ff; Karma in, 50, 
113, 132, 194 f, 212; Siva in, 51 ; 
inconsistency of, 55; ritual in, 
56 ff; initiation into, 73; chief 
delight of women in, 79 ; place of 
guru in, 124; covenfional H., 
chap, vi , passim; mutually con- 
tradictory beliefs in, 146; idols in, 
147 ff, 248 ff; *ati and sakta in, 
158 ; reform in, 161, 261 f, 267 ; caste 
in, 162 ff, 261 f; no living centre 
in', 192; reincarnation in, 210 ff; 
deepest secret of, 215 ; democratic 
type of, 215 ; revolt against, 233 f ; 
amorphous and encyclopedic cha- 
racter of. 234; Christianized H., 
234 ; aspirations of, 235 ; avatdras 
and salvation in, 251 ff ; salvation 
as viewed by, 194 ff, 219, 251 ff; 
domestic religious rites in, 291 f ; see 
4iva, Vaishnavisni, Vithoba, etc. 


Ibo language, 98 
Iconoclasm at Pandharpar, 61 
Idols or images: in Hindu homes. 
8; of cholera or plague spirits, 1 1 ; 
their place in Hinduism, 25, 147 fl ; 
of the Alvars, 36; Tukaram’s 
veneration for, 40 ff; pilgrimage 
to, 46 ; of Vithoba described, 53 ff ; 
artjstic aspect of, 53 f ; attack on 
Vithoba, 60; broken, 60; Tuka- 
ram’s attitude to and teaching on. 
147 ff; in the Deccan, 147 ff; 
educated and uneducated view of, 
147ff ; consecration of, 148; Prar- 
than5 SamSj and, 153 f ; Tukaram 
as an, 169 f; viewed as symbolising 
the Divine presence, 181, 220, 249 ; 
and bhakti, 218, 234; Dr. P. R. 
Bhandarkar on, 150, 243, 248; 
synonyms for God, 248. 


Images, see Idols 

Immorality among the god*i 246 f 

Impersonal worship unsatisfying, 215 

Incarnation; actuality and ‘histori- 
city ’ of the Hindu, 30 ff, 251 ff, 
291 ; wherein different from Hindu 
avatdras , 28 ff, 252 ff, App. i. 
See avatdra 

Inconsistencies of Tukaram, 151, 
165 f 

Inscriptions, 4, 6, 41 f , 156 

Indebtedness of Tukaram to the New 
Testament, Alleged, App. hi 

India (n) ; villages, 5 ff, 132 ; long 
religious history, 9; caste, 20; 
conservatism in rural parts, 22; 
research, 25 ; historical spirit lack- 
ing in, 25, 70; faults of scholars, 
26, 290 ; pilgrimage, chap, iii, 
passim ; Asceticism, 45 ff ; Sddhus 
and Sddhvls , 45 ff ; repulsive 

worship in, 47; sacred rivers, 47; 
beggars, 47 ; festivals, 48 ff ; art in, 
12, 53; debtors, 83; literature, 
129; wells and springs, in, 129; 
European misconceptions of, 130 f ; 
renunciation, 134 f ; pessimism, 174; 
reasons for studying its literature, 
178 f. Church and Tukaram, 179; 
rediscovered faith and love in 
bliakti , 215 ; the deepest secret of 
I/s Religion, 215; mysticism in, 
216; customs, 262; women and 
widows, 264 f ; poverty, 268 
Indian A ntiquary , 1. 49, 54 f, 63 
Indian Interpreter , 18, 67 ff, 72, 127* 
153, 165, 184, 237 ff, 251, 281, 298 
Indian Messenger , 148, 250, 253 ff, 
273, 290 * 

Indian Social Reformer, 12, 20, 22* 
29, 32 ff, 37, 176, 252, 263, 
Individual Hindus, Religious life of, 
178, 234 
Indra, 270 

lndrayan! river, 5 f, 78, 80, 87 f, 96 f, 
10 9, H5 

Indulgence of desire. 198 
Indu Prakdsh , edition, 68, 90, 97, 
105, 1 15 f, 119 ff, 189, 236,247 
Indu Prakdsh newspaper, 61 
Infantry, Maratha, 15 
Intercession absent from Hinduism, 
202 

International ideals, 265 ff 
International Review of Missia&L 
6, 129, 179. 184, 202 ^ 

Interpolations in Tukaram’s poems, 
184 « 

Interpretation of Tukaram, 146 ff, 
219 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


313 


I nJtrospcction.Tukaram’s honest, 224, 
231, 

Intuition, Mystic, 195 f 
Invective in Tuk&rflm, 241 
Inwardness of Tukaram, 186, Ishti , 
41 

Israel, Saints of, 137 ; Tivarandm , 


Jagannftth, 38, 172 
Jahdglr ( dar ), 11, 18, 69 
Jala&ayd, 46 
Jainism, 34, 47, 134 f 
J alsamddhl , 105 
Jalgaon, 63 
Jamkhed, 262 
Janabal, 24 
Janals, 209 
Jaranda, 19 
Jejurl 47. 292 

Jeremiah and Tukariim compared, 
221 f 

Jesus and Tukaram compared, chap 
x, sects. 4-8, passim 
Jlur, 49 t 

Jijabat, mother of SivSjl, 202, 124 f 
Jijab3I (Avallbiu) wife of Tukaram, 
chap, iv, parts ii, iii, passim 
Jog and Gulve’s edition, 120. 

Joga Paraman,tnd, 46 

Joga edition, V. N., 120 f, 132, 171 

fohdr 19. 132 

Joint-family system, 17 

Joshi , 73. 113 

Joshi Math , 192 

Journal of Royal Asiatic Society , 
Bombay Branch, 20. 41 f, 54, 71, 
81, 100, 109, 114, 117, 128, 216, 
229 

Jumna, 172 

K 

Kabir, 86, 127, 129,* 143. 195 f. 218, 
223, 252 

Kaceswar, Brahman disciple of Tuka- 
ram, 102 
Kadambari. 159 
Kadusa, MS.,120ff 
KailSsa, 111, 114 
Kdla-bhairdva , 51, 

Kali, 37 

Kali Yaga, .107, 248 
Kalkl . 28 
Kalyan, 2, 11. 15 
Kan abhuti, 4 f 

Kanakai, mother of Tukaram, 78, 

107 

Kam&lhi, 292 

41 


Kamavisdar, 12 
Kanarese. 156 f 

Kanhaya, ancestor of Tukaram, 78 
Kanhoba, brother of Tukaram, 71, 
79, 84. 108. 

Karina, S. S., 98 

Karma, 50, 113,142, 194, 212, 218, 
223, 227, 250 
KaitJk, 47, 54, 170 ff 
Karvir Math, 192 
Karwar, 1 

Kdsdr (coppersmith), 101, 109 f 
Kdslr (Benares), 114, See Benares 
Kaslhal, daughter of Tukaram, 85 
Kathd , 10, 70, 173 
Kathd Sdrdmrita , 70 
Kxmshitaki Upamshad, 270 
Kaustubh , Jewel, 81 
lveiuskar’s Jalasamadhl , Mr. and 
Mrs., 105 
Kcsarl, 18 
Kesarinath, 134 
Kcsav (Krisna), 146, 176 
Keshav Chaitanva, 39, 73, 91 f ' . 

Khande-aba, 292 
Khandl, an Indian measure, 86 
Khandoba the god, 47, 51, 132, 291 f 
Kindness, 203 
Kirkee, Battle of, 64 
Kir tan 10. 49, 53. 73 f, 76, 86, 95 f, 
98 ff, 101 ff, 113, 124 f, 155, 172 ff, 
267, 288 

Klrtankdr, 10; sec Klrtan 
Knowledge, Mere, 228 
Koli(s), 286 

Kondoba the Brahman disciple of 
Tukaram, 95, 101, 114 f 
Konkan, 1 ff, 13, 81, >80 
Kothaleswar, 111 
Krapdsdgara , 236 
Krisna: temples of, 10; in klrtans , 
10; avatdra of, 28 ff; place in 
Bhagavadgita, 30; 4 historicity * 
of, 30 ff ; worship of, 31 ; the cow- 
herd. 31 ; sexual intercourse of, 
32; Christ 4 Hinduised ’ in, 32; 
popularity of, 37 ; at Pan<Jbarpur, 
48; the Buddha form of, 107; 
sports of, 111; dirty face of, 111; 
TukaranTs devotion to, 148f; in 
form of a child, 97, 149; ‘incar- 
nation’ claims of, 251. ff; Vaishna- 
vism and, 252 ; in Anuglta, 270 
Krishnaji BairSgya, 73 
Krishnaji's edition. G„ 120 
Krishnajanma Khanda, ... 
Kshattriya. Duties of a, 101 
Kumbbar, 21, 72, 286 
Kulkarni. 69. 73, 102 
Kunbi 110, 286 ff 



314 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


Kurukshetra . 210 
Kutnmb'kavl , 38 


Lakshman, 51 

Language, Marathi, See Marathi 
Lawrence, Brother, 90 
Leavening in Tukaram, Christian, 
281 

Learning an obstacle to salvation, 
199 

Legends: Kanabhuti, 4 f ; origin of 
Rdm % Ram % 19; of gods and 
rishis , 30 ; of Krisna, 31 ff, 290 ; 
df Namdev, 39 ; of Tukaram, 68 ff, 
104, chap, iv, part iii, passim ; of 
medieval bhaktas , 70 ; of Christian- 
ily, 241 ; ‘cosmic legends * of the 
avatar as* 252; of the Purdnas , 
160; of St. Thomas, 283 
Liberation, 47, 107, 156. 194 f, 211 f 
Linga of Siva. 27, 51, 53, 157, 293 
LingSyat(s), 35, 102, 116 
Literary characteristics of Tukiiram, 
chap, v, part ii. passim 
Literature, Marathi, 4 f. 13, 20 ff, 
see Abhaiig, Mahlpati, Namely, 
Eknath, DnySneshwar, Ramdas : 
Hindi, 20 
Lohadand, 57 
Lohdr , 286 

Lohogaon 95, 100, 102 ff, 111 ff, 114 
Lok Sangraha , 18 
London, 98 

Love in bhakti , 146, 186, 207 
Low castes and Brahmans, 14; 
metaphors, 132 

Lunatic, Tukaram viewed as a, 83 
Lust denounced, 205 
Lying, 205 

M 

Mdbdpy God as, 166 
Madame Guvon, 183 
Madgaokar’s edition, G-, 120 
Madhav, 37 
Madras, 58, 

Madras Christian College Maga- 
zine , 283 
Mag.dhi, 287 
Magic in TukarSm, 160 
Mahdbhdrata , 27, 30 ff, 51, 284 
Mababaleshwar, 24 
Mahadfljepant Despantje, 86, 102 
Mahadev (£iva), 10, 41, 51, 114; 

son of Tuk5ram, 91, 120 f 
Mahdmanddt Magazine , 192 
Mahdp j< f, 59 


Mahar(s) : a caste, 2; greeting, 19 ; 
and bhakti , 21 ; Ekn<Uh*s kindness 
to, 39, Cokhamela, 51, 54 f, 162 ff ; 
Avail’s dress given to |a, 92; fed 
by Tuk&rSm’s wife, 109; occu- 
pation, 132, 163 f; bravery. 262; 
rights as to drinking-water, 262 ; 
Christianity and, 264 
Maharashtra: the country, chap, i 
passim; superstitions, 11; social 
life and culture, 12 f; women’s 
dress, 12 ; political revolution, 40 ; 
pilgrim centres, 47 ff ; the religion 
of, 170 ff 

Mahfirashtri, 4, 287 
Maharasthrivans, 2 ff 
Maharathi, 286 
Maharatbinl, 286 
Mafia- tiivrdtra, 172 
Mahdtmya Pandurang , 52 
Mahlpati : encouraged by Peshwas, 
12 ; place as a poet, 20 f ; Pandu- 
rang Mahdtmya by, 52 ; Bhakti 
Vi jay a, 21, 69, 71 ff, 74 f, 87; 
Bhakti Lildmrita , 21, 75,81,87, 
127, 143; Tukaram dates by, 67 ff; 
chief source of information about 
TakarSm, 68 ff; historical and 
legendary elements in. 68 ff, 104, 
chap, iv, parts ii, iii, passim ; 
Patwardhan on biographical value 
of, 69; miracles in records by, 69, 
279 ; life of, 69 ; N. V. Tilak on 
writings of, 69; chief works by, 
70; Santa Lildmrita , 70; Kathd 
Sardmrita 70 ; Santa Vijaya , 70 ; 
estimates of by L. J, Sedgwick, 
20 f, J.E. Abbott, 70, C. A. Kincaid, 
70 ; Honesty of, 70 ff ; MSS. 
used by, 71 ff; fact and fiction in, 

71 ff; authors quoted by, 71 ff; 
facts expanded by, 72; candour of, 

72 ; caste of, 72 ; sources for Tuka- 
ram earlier than, 72 ff; literary 
methods of, 72, 74; order and 
details of Tukaram narrative by, 
75 ff. 87. 90. 97, 99, 109; views 
Tukaram as a dualist, 188 

Mahisdsura-MardinT 51 
MalajlGade, TukSram’s disciple and 
son-in-law, 101 f 

Malharpant, Tukaram’s disciple, 102 
Malabar, 283 ff 
Malhan, 292 

Mamlatdar on pilgrimage, 49 
Mandalh Tukaram , 15, 119 
Mang, 79, 292 
Man-lion, 28 
Mannikar Vasahar, 223 
Manobodh of Ramd&s, 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


315 


Mantra , 91, 172, 228, 293, see guru- 
mantra 

Manuscripts thrown in the river, 
TukSrSm’s, 96 f 

MarStha(s) : villages, 7 f ; religious 
life, 8; domestic religious rites, 8 ; 
proverbs, 9, 62 ; art, 12, 53 , super- 
stitions, 11 ; government and rulers, 
11, 20 ff; women, 12, 17; poets, 
12 ff ; literary tastes, 13 ; army, 13, 
15 f ; Brahmans, 13 f ; character, 
15 ; Tennyson on, 15 ; at battle 
of Assaye, 15 ; soldiery, 15 ; military 
prowess, 15; nationality, 15, 19; 
mercenaries, 15 f ; militia, 16; 
gallantry, 16; family life, 16; 

1 eroes and heroic age, 17 f; greet- 
ing, 18; moral force, 19; ryots, 
19; caste among, 19 f ; confederacy, 
20, 22; democracy, 21 f, 55; and 
British, 22; Bhagavata religion 
among, 27, 170 ff; sacred books of, 
171 f; origin of, 286; tolerant spirit 
of, 161 ; use of animal food among, 
209 ; League, 287 

Marathi : language, 2ff, 287 ; litera- 
ture, 4, 13, 20 ff, 26, 74, 120 ff; 
poetry, 13 

Mdrga : Dnydn , 217 ; Karma , 217 ; 
Bhakti , 217 

Marriage: seamy side of, 131 ; of 
TukSram's daughters, 163 
Martand, 292 

Maruti (Hanumiin), 6, 8 f , 52 f. 149 
Mass movements: Neglect of Tuka- 
ram's type by, 180 
Maund, an Indian measure, 85 
Mavales, 15 f 

Meanness and stinginess, 205 

Meditation, Personal, 227 

Merit, 155, 197 ff 

Meditator, 107 

Mendicants, 45 ff, 60 

Mercenaries, 16 

Message of the saints, 208 

Metaphors of Tukaram, 128 ff, 191 f 

Middle Ages, 215 

Mild Hindu. 164 

Militia, 16 

Milton, contemporary of Tukaram, 
67, 164 

Mind-rites, 58 
Ministers of SivajX, 124 
Mlpana, 193, 198, 202 
Mira Bai, 38, 72 

Miraculous element in Tukaram 
record, 69, chap, iv, part iii, App. 
iii 

Mirage, Life a, 129 
Missionaries, 179, 267, 271, 282 


Missionary Message in Relation to 
Non-Christian Religions, 258 ff 
Moguls, Sec Muhammadan 
Moholecha , 286 

Moksha or Mukti , 45 ff, 94 f, 197, 
216 

Monotheism, 30, 33, 150, 176 f, 184 f 

Monism, 189 

Mons, Angels at, 104 

Moods, of Tukaram, 141 f 

Moral impotence of Tukaram, 137; 

ideal of man, 202 ff 
Moi «•, the family lineage of Tukaram, 
67 

Motherhood of God. 129, 152 f 
Mrityuhdr, 2 

MSS. of Tukdram’s poems, 120 ff 
Muhamniadan(s) 10, 12, 14 f, 17, 19, 
39, 51, 69, 95, 103 f, 124, 157, 26G, 

286 

Muktabaf, 44, 48, 172 

Mukti or moksha. See Moksha 

Muknnda, 78 

Mukund Raja, 102 

Multiplicity of gods, 248 ff 

Mumhajl, 73, 99 f, 109f. 241 

Mu rail, 132, 292 

Murder at Panndharpfir, 64 

Mtirliddr , 52 

Mylapore, 283 

Mysore, 263 

Mystic intuition, 195 f 

Mystical conflict of Tukaram, 182 

Mysticism, Indian, 216 

Mythology in Tukaram, 149 


N 


Nabaji, 21 
Nabhaji, 71, 74 
N agarpradakshind , 59 
Nagpur, 1, 49 
Nakhin , 46 
Nala, 222 
Namaskdr , 19 

Nam dev: poetic power, 20; poem 
by his domestic servant, 24 ; date, 
26, 39; Tukaram an avatara of, 
28 ; life and teaching of, 38 f ; 
attitude to idolatry, 38 f, 150 f ; bis 
poetry, 44 ; N. gate at PandharpTir, 
53, 55, 164 ; Patwardhan on bio- 
graphical material concerning. 69 ; 
writings of, 71 f ; studied by Tuka- 
ram, 96 ; place in Tukdram’a call 
to poetry, 90; his short name 
Nam a. 107; TukarSm's debt to, 



316 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


127 ; practical benevolence of, 143 ; 
' A Bhagavata saint, 172 ; on the 
atints, 229 

Names of Vishnu, 27, 57 
Narad and Praihad, 172 
Narabari Main, 74 
Narfiyana, 57, 93, 114, 118, 125, 176, 
‘247 " 

NarSyanrao, TukSram’s posthumous 
son, 6, 67, 94, 150 
Nagik, 1, 47, 50, 58, 63, 67, 172 
Nationality; and caste, 262; Manl- 
(ha, 15 

Nflvfejl, TukarSm’s disciple, 101 
Nava Yuga, 67, 97, 149 f, 157, 163, 
170, 173, 240, 243 f, 265 
Nectars, The five, 59 
Need of critical edition of Tuka- 
ram’s poems, 184 
Neighbour! iriess, 263 
New Testament parallels to Tuka- 
ram, App. ii 

New Testament, Tukaram’ s alleged 
debt to, App. iii 
Nhavis, 40 
Niger Mission, 98 
Niganand, 105 

Ni|obft of Pimpalner, 71, 73, 117 
Nfranjan, 12, 73 
Nivfittin&th, 53, 63, 157 
Non-Brftbmans, Brfihmans and, 261 
Non-plussed bhakta , Tukaram the. 
221 

Non-resistance. 32 


Obscene element in Tukarams 
poems, 128 

Obscure night of the soul, Tuka- 
rftm’s, 183 

Observances, Hindu, 172 
Odes of Solomon,' The , 258 
Om, the mystic syllable, 240 
Omens, Ilf 

One-sidedness of Tukaram, 235 
Order of TukiirSm narative, 75 ff, 
87,90*9 7, 99, 109; of the poems, 125 
Organisation of the saints, No, 208 
Oriental Conference, 26 
Origent 254, 

Original Gdtha or verse, Tukaram’ s, 

122, 127 

Otherworldliness, TukirSm’s, 104, 

207 

Oat-caste (s), 55, 85, 261 ff 
Outsider, Tukaram a religious, 180 
Oft metre. The 20 f 


Padaji, Tukaram’s ancestor, 78 
Padasevana , 172 
Padmavati, 37 
Padukd , 8 

Padwal’s edition, R. T., 120 
PadytTpujdt 59 
Paik , 133 

Paithan, 3, 128, 172 
Palkhl (palanquin), 48, 63 
Panchadhuni % 45 f 
Panchdmrita , 78 
Panchatapas , 45 f 
Panchayat , 85 
Panchdyatan s 51 
Pandaraga, 41 
Pandarge, 41 

Pandharl, See Pandharpur 
Pandharpur; lizard on idol at, 12; 
a Bhagavata centre, 27 ; 6iva at, 
27, 51 ff ; Namdev sent to, 3°; 
‘incarnation’ at, 40 ff ; Tukaram 
and, chap. iii. passim ; location, 
trade and population, 51 ; temples, 
51 ff; river Bhlma or Chandra- 
bhaga at, 52 ; Fandurang Mahdt - 
mya bv Mahlpati, descriptive of, 
52; Pandri-kshetra , 52; icono- 
clasm at, 61 ; Dr. Murray Mitchell 
on bathing at, 61 f; festivals at, 
62 ff ; sanitary arrangements, 63 ; 
antiquity. 63; assassination, 64; 
records, 76 ; Tukaram’s ancestral 
relation, 77 f; ‘ P* MS. of Tuka- 
ram’s poeins, 120 ff; Sivaji, and, 
1 24 f ; T ukaram’s attitude to, 155 f ; 
old name of Paundarika Kshetra 
or Pandnrangpur, 156; caste at, 
54 f, 162 ff, 261 ff ; Chiimbhars at. 
261 ; Mabars at, 54 f, 162 ff, 261 ff ; 
untouchables at, 54 f ; 162 ff, 

261 ff ; Vaishnavism at, 149 ff. 

261 ff, missionaries and reformers 
at, 61 ff. 267 f 

Panduraiig, 41. See VithobS 
Pantaenus, 283 

Pantheism, 25 f, 33, 92, 102, 218, 
233 

Pantheist, Was Tuk&ram a? 188 f 
Paradox of bhakti , 165 
Parallels between Tukaram and New 
Testament, App. ii, 240 
Paramanand, Joga, 46 
Paramhamsa, 29 

Paranjpye, on caste, The Hon. R. P., 

262 

Parekh, Mr. Manilal, on incarnation, 
29 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


317 


Pariah classes, 163 
Parisa, 109 
Partts , 286 
ParshurSm, 28 
Parsis, 35 
Parvatl, 116 
Pas, 110 
Patala , 212 
Pathans, 103 f 

Pathological analysis 6 £ India, 257 
Patll, 73 f. 96, 1 12 £ 

Paul and Tukaram compared, St., 
136 £ 

Pausikar’s edition, V. L., 120 
Peace, The secret of, 214 
Peaceableness, 203, 208 
Pearls presented in a coconut, 95 
Penalty of evildoers, 211 f 
Penance, 45 ff 
Penitential Psalms, 136 
Pepper (mirl) confused with chillies 
(mirclil), 81 

Personality: of God, 37, 43, 151, 
249; destruction of human, 230 
Personal experience needed, 226, 
meditation, 227 ; self-examination, 
227 ; self-surrender to God, 227 ; 
religion helped by Tukaram, 180 
Pendharis, 16 

Peshwa(s) : diaries of, 9, 15 ; 

government of, 11, 14, 20; their 
encouragement of learning, 12; 
the last, 63 f 
Pessimism, 174, 198, 237 
Petition and intercession absent 
from Tukaram and other Hindus, 
202 

Paldhdri, 46 
Phalgun, 6, 116 
Pharisees and Pandits, 240 
Philosophical and popular Christian- 
ity, 271 

Phugun (swollen), 98 
Picture of himself, Tukar Jim’s, chap, 
v, part iii, passim 

Pilgrimage and Pilgrims in India, 
47 ff; and sense of sin, 50 ff; 
Brahmans on, 57 ff ; gifts on, 57 ff ; 
Dr. Murray Mitchell concerning, 
61 f; mental state of those on, 
61 f ; government and, 62 ff ; last 
Peshwa’s, 63 f, chap, iii, passim ; 
in Tukaram’s teaching, 154 f 
Plpal tree, 57 
Pitdmber , 81 
Places, Holy, 47 f, 154 
Pleasures and duties, 201 
Plough round debtor’s neck, 83 
Plurality of gods, 149 
Poems of Tukarim, chap, v, passim 

42 


Poets; place among Marathas, 12; 
democratizing influence of, 21 f, 
289 ; habits of Indian, 70 f 
Poetry among Marathas, 13, 20 
Poona, 13, 15, 20, 82, 96, 104, 113 f, 
124 f, 224, 286 ; and Indian Village 
Mission, 2G8 
Polytheism, 33. 36 

Popularity of Tukaram, 133, chap. 

vii, part i, passim 
Portuguese, 280 

Posthumous son Narayanrao, Tuka- 
rfim's 6, 67, 94, 125 
Potobds 9 
Pot hi, 13 
Pradaks h i n d, 59 
Prakrit , 94 t, 287 
Praldya, 213 

Prarathana Samaj, 48 f, 62 f, 121, 
147, 150, 153 f, 163, 175 ff, 179 f, 
184 f, 189 f, 224 f, 243 f, 258, 268 
Pralhad and Narad, 172 
Prat&rdan, 270 

Prdn pratistha , 78, 86, 148, 249 
PratisthSn, 3 
Pravaga, 159 
Prayascit , 14, 50, 223 
Prayer in Tukaram and New Testa- 
ment contrasted, 202 
Priests: among Marathas, 14, 55 ; 
Brahman, 35 ; Pars!, 35 ; dissen- 
sions among, 59 f 

Preacher : Tukaram as,. 143 f ; who 
smokes bhang , 144 
Predecessors, Tukaram’s debt to, 127 
Presuppositions, Hindi!, 250 
Prohibitions, Warkdrl, 172 
Protestantism, 40 
Proverbs in Marathi, 9, 62 
Pundalika, 41 ff, 48, 51, 108, 15Gf, 172 
Pujd, 8, 46, 56, 59, 69 
Pu/drls , 36, 47, 53, 256 
Pundita RSmabai, 265 
Pundits, Pharisees, and SSstrls. 14, 
240 f 

Publishers of Tukaram’s poems, 120 
Pur finds, 32, 94, 101, 162, 173, 250. 
253, 270 ; Tukaram’s attitude to, 
159, 196, 210, 253; Christian P\ 
282 ; Bhdgavata P. see 
Pun, 38 
Purification, 14 
Purity, Quest for inward, 225 
Poverty, India’s, 267 f 


Quakers at meal, Hindu parallel' to, 
94 

Quarrelsomeness, 205 



315 


L, ittL AINU l&ftUMIJNU Ul- 1UMKAM 


e llbat fat Inward purity, 225 
dtetitfm, 183 

■ 

Racial unity, Hdw to promote, 
177 

Radha, 32, 37 

Rlghava Chaitenya, 39, 73, 91 f 
Rajputana, 36 
Rajputs, 2, 19, 63, 287 
Rakha nabai, Tukaram’s first wife, 
76, 82 ff 

Rakhumai. See Rukhmini 
Ram Ram, 18 f 

Rama, 6, 9f, 10, 21, 28, 37,51,53, 
*149, 171, 234 
Ramahal, Pundita, 265 
Rftmchandra, 19, 51 
Rdmaddsls 173 
Ramananda, 37 
Ramabalabhdas, 134 
Rdmdydna , 27 
Ramanuja, 36ff, 247 
RAmdas: date, IS; and TukarSm, 
18; and Sivaji, 18; poetic power, 
20; worshipper of Rama, 21; 
Manobodh of. 53, 157 ; bakhar of, 
67 ; guru of £iviijl, 123 ff • 
Rfimdev or RAmchandra, 288 
Rameshwar Bhatt, 71, 77, 95, 99. 

109, 111, 11*, 121,241 
Rftm Krisna-Hari, 91 172 
Ram Muiiun Roy, 148 
Ramoshi, 292 
Ranganath 105 
Rapture, see ecstasy 
Rarer Aids among Tukaram editions, 
120 

RasalJla, 254 
Rfistrakutas 2 f, 286 
Ratihtrik, 2 f 
Ratnagiil, 282 
Rebirth, 25, 211 
Records kept by priests, 56 
Reforms in Hinduism, 29, 37, 40, 
161, 176, 262. 267 
Reincarnation, 210 ff 
Release, 34 

Religion of Marathas, 8; TukarSm’s 
ideas on, chap, iii, passim, an 
experience, 201 : See Rhakti , 
Christianity, Hinduism 
Religions, Nobler elements in non- 
Christian, 177 

Religious anxiety, Unsatisfied, 229 ff 
Renunciation, 134; and trust, 199 f 
Repentance in Tukflr&m’s teaching, 
196 

Research, Indian, 25 


Revsdanda, 280 ; Revolts in Hindu- 
ism, 54, 149 

Revolutionist, Tukaram no, 165 
Rishl, 30 

Ritual, Hindu, 56 ff, 101 
Rivers, Sacred, 103, 154 
River metaphor in Indian literature* 
129 

Robe of Avail given away, 87 
Rolling on pilgrimage, 49 
Roman Catholic Church, 264, 281 ff 
Roman Empire, 264 f 
Rosary, 171 

Royal title given to Sivaji, 124 
Kudra, 58, 116 

Rukhmini, 48, 52 ff, 56, 58, 71, 78, 
92, 112, 149, 156 f, 223, 265 
Rukhmini Svdyamvar , 171 
Ryots, 19 


S 

Sacred books of Maharashtra, 172 : 
days, risers and places, 56, 103, 
154 f 

Sadhdran Brahmo Samaj, 30, 148 
Sddhus , 45 ff, 74, 186 
Sadltvls. 45 ff 

Saints: in Hinduism, 30; instructors 
of the people, 130 ; company satis- 
fying, 135; influence on Tukaram, 
138, 167; Providential boons, 166; 
in the Bhdgavata religion, 172; 
salvation through remembrance 
of, 172 ; hostility towards S. a sin, 
205 ; their call and character 206 f ; 
service to men, 207 ; f attitude to 
caste, 208 ; democratizing influence 
of, 21 ff, 208; no definite organi- 
zation of, 208 ; £aivite, 223 ; Tuka* 
ram’s debt to, 229 
Saivites, 56 
Saka era, 3, 116 
Sakti worship, 158 
Sakhya , 172 
Salokatd , 216 
Salt-trade, TukarSm's* 82 
Salvation; by faith, 97; by sacred 
observances, 103 ; by remember- 
ing the saints, 172; TukarSm’s 
teaching on, 194 ff ; Hindu 
methods of S. rejected, 193 ; Tuka- 
ram’s way of, 190 f ; obstacles to, 
198 ; meaning of the term in Ttika- 
ram, 219 ; see chap, x, sect. 6 
Salutation. See Greeting 
Samddhl , 48, 53, 105, 171 
Same to all men/ ‘The, 203 ff 
Samlpatd , 216 



319 


INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


Sanad (grant), 92, 124 f, 150 

t arlkar, ancestor of Tukatam, 78 
ankaracharya, 192, 

Sangam, 113 

Sanitary arrangements at festivals, 
63 

Sannydsls , 46, 76, 83, 113 f, 172 
Sanskrit, 95, 128, 158 
SantajI Tell Jagan&de, 91, 101, 116, 
121 f 

Santa Llldmrlta , 70 ff 
Santa Vi jay a, 70 
Saptashringi Hill, 12 
Sarada Matb, 192 
Saraswat Brfihmans, 14 
Sarupata, 216 

6astri, Murder of Gangadhar, 64 
^astri, Pandit Sivanath, 29 
SdstrTs and Pandits, 14, 140 
Sasvad, 172 
Satl % 158 
Satyabhima, 149 

Savaji, Tukaram s eldest brother, 
76, 79 f, 83 
Sdyujyatd, 216 

Schools absent from TukSram's 
poems, 205 
Scribe, Story of a, 111 
Scriptural authority, 192 
Scythians, 3 
Seasons, Holy, 154 f 
Sects among Hindus, 33 ff 
Self absorbed in Supreme Spirit, 
230 

Self-centredness, 193 f 
Setf-comparison with imperfect 
standards, 231 
Self-examination, 227 
Self-surrender to God, 227 
Self-torture, 46 

Serpent of Siva, 108; of a thousand 
tongues 186 
Sesa, 186 

Service to men, Tukaram and, 142, 
205 

Sexual intercourse : Krisna and, 32 ; 

desire in TuktlrSm, i49 
Shdkambart , 51 
ShSyista, Khan, 104 
ShaligrSm stone, 58 
Shaltvghan, 3 ff 

Shankar Pandurang. editor, 120 
Sholarv3dI, 5 
Shdndi, 88 

Shenvi Brahmans, 293 
Shepherd of Hermas, 238 
Shilledars, 16 

Shiinga, a Hindu festival, 115 
SHimpis and bhakti, 20 
Shotapur, 47, 63, 262 


Shop metaphors in Tukgr*m, f 30 
Shrewdness of Tukaram, %03f 
Shridhar, Marathi poet, 13 t 13$ 
Sickness of Tukar&m, 112 
Simplicity and sincerity, TukirUm's 
142, 203 

Sin, Sense of ; 47 ff, 50 ff. 5/ (f, 13$, 
154, 223 ; Tukaram on, 193, 242 
Singers and soug in Hinduism, 5, 
48 T 

Sinhasth , 47 f, 50, 146 
Sirur, Poona district, 73 
Slta, 51, 149 

Swa; temples of, 8, 10; place iia 
Hinduism, 25; $. Ling (f at £fcin- 
dharpur, 27, 51, 53 (f f 157 f; 
Namdev and, 39; family of, 47; 
prayer to, 57 ; Rameshwar Bhay 
and, 96; serpent of, 108; miraculous 
visit of. 111; avutdra of, 114; 
ascetics of 107; relation ro Vithoba 
(Vishnu), 156 ff, 172 ; £ankar as 
another name of, 172; Saivite 
saints, 223 

Sivaba Kasar, TukSrflm's disciple, 

- 101 • 

Sivaji: army of, 13; date of birth, 
17; character, 17, 47; birthplace, 
18 ; a Hindu, 18; early years, 18; 
demociatic spirit, 18; relation to 
Tukaram, 18, 99 ff, 103 f, 123 ff; 
the king and his kingdom, 18 ff, 
123 ff; wanderings, 47 ; relation to 
VithobS, 123; boyhood. 124; 
marriage, 124; and the Muham- 
madans, 124 f; captures forts, 124; 
royal title of, 124; ministers of, 
124; golden age of Mar&th&i, 
109 f; descendants of, 289 
Six rites of Brahman, 101 
Slavery, 264 
Sloka, 46 
Slothfulness, 205 
Smarana , 172 

Smoke bhang, Preachers who, 144 
Social Order, Tukaram and Christia- 
nity on, 260 ff 

Social Reform, Need of 260 ff ; con- 
ferences on, 261 ff 
Soldiers, Mara;ha, 15 
Solomon , The Odes of y 238 
Sons of Tukaram, 91, 94, 120 f 
Sopan, 172 
Sorcerers, 111 

Spirit of God, The Holy Spirit or, 
178, 259 

Sources of Tukariim’s information, 
68 ff, 72 ff 

Spiritual growth of Tukar&m, 139 
Springs and wells in India, 129 



320 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


Sraddh, 9, 52, 58, 115 
Hravana , 172 
Sravana Belgola, 135 

Tukardmace Charitra by L. R. 
PangSrkar, see Authors’ Index 
Sorabji, on women in India, Miss C, 
265 

Vishnava sect, 36 
Sringeri Math, 192 
Staying in the world preferred, 200 
Steadfastness, 168 
Sthalsamddhl , 6, 105 
Stigma on Krisna, Moral, 253 
Stinginess and meanness, 205 
Subodh Patrikd , 49, 62, 119, 154, 
177, 232, 258 

Sudra caste, 6, 21, 36, 93,96, 169, 
261 

Supreme Spirit, 195, 226 ; Person, 
230, 234 
Surds nr i, 37 

Surname of TukarSm’s family, 67 
Surya , 51 

Sutdrs, 286 

Svetdtvatara Upanishad, 226 

Swarga, 211 f 

Swanfj, 20 

Swayambhu, 54, 61 f 

Sun, Prayer to the, 57 • 


Tagore on Caste, Dr. Rabindranath, 
19 f, 261 
Taharabad, 69 
Tdkpitya Vithoba, 52 
Tai, 139 

Talegoan MS., 120 ff 
Tumbftra, 116 
Tamils, 36 f 
Tapasacharya, 45 ff 
Tattvamasi , 92 

Tatya's edition, Tukaram, 120 ff 
Teaching, TukSram's practical, 187 
Telang on BhagavadgXtd, 33 
Telang Brahmans, 14 
Telugu country, 58 
Tenets of the Wdrkarls, 171 ff 
Tennyson on the Marathis, 15 
Tertullian, 260, 2 82 
Theism, Vedic, 31 ; in BhagavadgJta 
34, Tukaram, 184 

Theistic interpretation of Tukaram, 
177 

Theologian, Tukaram no, 192 
Thief, Vi|hoba as a, 131 
Thieves, Story of, 109 
Thoba , 43 
ThombUy 43 


Tilak, Mr B. G.. 14 

Tilak, on Mahlpati, Rev N. V., 69 

Times of India , 165 

Tiparl, 132 

Tlrtha (Holy places), 201 
Tolerant sprit of Hinduism, 26 
Toleration, 203 
Torna fort, 124 
Tortoise, 28 

Tradesman, Tukaram as, 79 ff. 108 ff, 
1 30 ff, 134 ff 
Tramps, 143 
Transmigration, 250 
Triad, The Hindu, 255 
Tribes and Castes of Bombay, 14, 
209 

Trident, Holder of the, 115 
Tnmbakji Denglia, 64 
Trimbakeshwar, 172 
Trinity, The, 240 
Trio of graces, 225 
Trust and Renunciation, 199 f 
Truthfulness, 203 
Tuljapiir, 123 ff 

Tulsl plant, 56, 59, 81, 100, 171 f 
Tulsi Das, 37, 178, 215, 247 
Tukaram, Tuka, Tukoba: birthplace, 
5 f ; worshipped, 6, 169 ; and 
Sivaji, 19; and Muhammadans, 
18; democratically inclined, 6; 
wife J i ja bill, 6, chap, iv., parts ii, iii, 
passim ; youngest (and posthum 
ous) son Narayanrao, 6, 67, 94, 
150; ‘ascension,’ 6,71, 105, 115 f 
126, 279; abhaiigs , 20, 119ff, 176 
and passim ; literary power, 20 ; 
avatara of Namdev, 28; attitude 
to Krisna, 31, 148; veneration for 
Vithoba, 40 ff, 149; poetry, 44; 
full name, 67 ; contemporary of 
Milton, 67 ; two difficulties ir 
biography, 67 f ; family surnam 
and lineage, 67 ; sources of infor 
mation, 68 ff, 72 ff ; Jantrd 
Sakharam Gadgil on life of, 
supposed miracles, 69, 279, and 
P. R. Bhandarkar on these, 69 
biographer of, 69 ff ; autobio 
graph y, 72 ; contemporary data 
73 ; grandson, Gopal Boa, 73 , 
BahinabSt, woman disciple, 73 ; 
call of, 73 ; guru-mantra , 73, 76 ; 
trustworthiness of biography, 74 f"* 
chief events with dates, 76 1 
business, 76, 79 ff . 108, 135 ; two 
marriages, 76, $2 ; bereavements, 
76; eldest brother SavajI, 76; 
bankruptcy, 76; first wife and 
eldest son die, 76; famine, 76; 
retires to Bhambanath Hill, 76, 8 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


321 


108 ; repairs Dehu temple, 76, 86 ; 
attendance at Klrtans t 76, 86 ; 
call to become a poet, 76, 90, 97 ; 
Rameshwar Bbatt’s attitude, 77 ; 
* ascension ’ or end, 77, 105, 115, 
126; probable facts distinguished 
from legends, 77 ; ancestry of 77, 
89 ; birth and infancy, 78 f ; home 
influences, 79; sorrows, 80, 83 f, 
108 ff, 138 f; deceived by rogues, 
81 ff ; attitude to, and teaching on, 
Brahmans, S3, 85 ff, 89, 92 ff, 96, 
99 f. 101 f. llOf, 112 f, 158 f; viewed 
as a lunatic, 83; leaves business, 
84 ; watches the cornfield and birds, 
85, 104 ; his daughter Kftsi, 85 ; 
study of earlier poets, 86; a 
Vaisbnavite saint, 88 ; shendi, 8S ; 
oil commission, 88 ; his sons, 
Mahadev, VithobS. Narayanrao, 
91 ; disciple SantajI, 91 ; his "six 
children, 94, 163; at Lohogaon, 
95 ; throws poems in the river, 96; 
tempted to sin, 98 ; meekness, 99 ; 
relation to Sivaji, 99 ff, 103 ff; 
list of disciples, 101 f; attitude to 
dogs, 102; to pantheism ( advaita ), 
102 f ; otherworldlmess, 1C4 ; his 
blanket and cymbal found after 
departure, 105 f, 116; supposed 
influence after death, 106, 116f; 
sickness of, 112; supposed mira- 
c‘es, 69, chap, iv, part iii passim ; 
critical problem of his poetrv, 
1 19 ff ; self-revelation, 126, chap, 
v, part iii; Sanskrit, 128; rallies 
Vithoba, 131, 222; popularity, 
133; estimates by P. G. Bhan- 
darkar, 150 f ; Farquhar, 142 ; 
Goreh, 189 f, 244; Sir Alex. Grant, 
165, 185; Mackichan, 67; Mac- 
nicol, 137, 142: -Mitchell, 190; 
Navatkar, 151, 244; Patwardhan, 
,67. 136 f; N. V. Tilak, 133 f, 165, 
*238, 244; Miss Underhill, 179; 
Prarthana Samfij, 150; picture of 
himself, 134 ff; tradesman, 79 ff, 
108 ff, 134 ff; compared with St. 
Paul, 136 f; with Walt Whitman, 
138, Madame Guyon, 183, with 
Jeremiah, 221 ; with Jesus, chap, 
x, part iv ; moral impotence, 137 ; 
as a preacher, 143 ; interpretation 
of him, 146 if ; a life long idolator, 
150; a Gosdvl, 150; teaching on 
idolatry, 151 ; inconsistences, 151 ; 
ec stacy and despair, 141, 152; 

ambiguity. 153, 165 f ; attitude to 
Pandharpur, 155; coarseness, 142, 
155; on £iva, 158; on and 

43 


sail , 158 ; cows, Vedas, Purahas 
and ceremonies, 159f; not are- 
former, 160 ff, 293 ; toleration 
and compromise, 161; attitude to 
caste, 161 ff ; place and influence, 
169 ff ; devotional usefulness 
175 ff; claim on Christian Mis- 
sions, 1 77 ff ; approximation to 
Christian truth, 177 ff; his mysti- 
cal conflict, 182 f; place in 
Theism. 184 f; teaching on God, 
worship, sin, salvation, religious 
life, moral ideal, saints, animals, 
reincarnation, death, future life, 
death, hereafter, 187 ff, and chap, 
viii passim ; no theologian, 192; 
experience of bhakti , 215 ff, and 
chap, ix passim ; sense of sin, 
47 ff, 50 ff, 57 ff, 135, 154 f, 223 ff ; 
honest introspection, 234, 231 ; 
God his Guide, 226; non-plusstd, 
227 [ ; quest after inward purity, 
275 f *, faith the road, 225 f ; change 
of heart desired, 2 26 f ; bhakti's 
summit, 227 f ; fellowship ot the 
saints. 229; unsatisfied religious 
anxiety, 229 ff ; self -dissatisfaction, 
231 ; living religion, 233 ; his 
bhakti Evaluated, chap, x, passim ; 
one-sidedness, 235 ff; a ‘bridge. to 
Christ \ 237 ff ; Christianity com- 
pared w ith, 239 ff ; Jesus and 
Tukaram, 239ff ; teaching on God, 
salvation, incarnation, moral and 
spiritual power, social responsi- 
bility examined, chap x, part.* 
v-viri ; attitude to women, 264; 
his limited world-outlook, 265 ff 

U 

Udaipur, 38 
Udhavchidghan, 71 
Unsatisfied religious anxiety, 229 ff 
Upanishads. 221, 226, 254 
Utpat (priest) 56 

Untouchables, 54 f, 163 ff, 169, 173, 
261 . 292 

Unworldlmess of Tukaram, 233 
Urdhvabdhiit 46 
U rdhvamukhin , 46 


Vaikuntha , 6, 104 ff, 107, 115 f; 

126, 143, 211 ff 
V air a fly a, 201 

Vaisbnavism : defined, 24, 26; a 
sect, 27, 33 ff; theism in, 27; 
place of Rhdgavataa , 27 ; chief 
Maratha centres, 27; origin, 31; 



322 


LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM 


schools, 32 ; spiritual religion and 
34 ; caste * in, 34, 162 ; rejects 
Brahman ascendancy, 34; verna- 
cular literature, 34; place of 
Brahmans 35 ; its bhakti , 35, 251 ; 
eroticism, 35; South India V., 
36 f; in N. India, 37 f; revival, 
40; genuine religious aspect of, 
48; Tukaram a V. saint, 88; V. 
saints’ company satisfying, 135; 
at Pandharpur, 149 ff, 251 ; attitude 
tp-untouchability, 263; incarnation 
in, 28 ff, App. i; Christian in- 
’ fluence on, 282 
Vallabha, 37 f 
fynaprastha, 172 f 
Vararuchi, 4 

Variant editions of Tukaram, 119 ff 

Varls. 171 

Vasudeva, 30, 36 

Vedantic conceptions, 216 

Vedantists and Tukaram, 179, 216 

Vedas r Rig Veda, 3 ; venerated by 

Hindus. 25 ; theism in, 31 ; hymns 

( of, 57;Tukaram’s idea of, 143, 

’ and attitude to, 159f, 192 

Vegetarian habits of Warkarts, 209 

Veneration, Hindu objects of, 172j 

Ventdan (women’s hair-offertng), 
’ 

Villages in India, Importance of, 7f, 
; 288 

Venkoba, 143 

Verbal parailells between Tukaram 
and the New Testament, App. ii 
Vetal the demon, 1 1 
Vices censured by Tukaram, 205 
Vildntl , 158 
Vitndn, 126 
VindhyS Hills, 3 
Virodhi % a Hindu year, 116 
V^hnu : temples, 10 ; in kirtans , 
10 ; place in Hinduism, 25 ff ; in 
the Vedas, 26 f : and Brahma, 
27; ,and Kristta, 27; thousand 
names, 27; as Bhagw&n, 27; 
equality with Siva, 27 ; place in 
Bhdgavata community, 27 ; rela- 
tion to Vithoba (Vitthal), 27,41 ff; 
avatdra{ s) of, 251 ff; five images 
of, 51; emblems of, 53; twenty- 
four names, 57; child-form, 97; 
vimdnf car) of, 105; a stone yet 
not a stone* 151 ; paradise of, 213; 
five forms of, 251 ; merely meta- 
„ phorical; 253 
Ymhnu-desy 228 
Vi*hnup^J», fZ, U4 
Vjshnupati, 41 
Vishtrashrdvas , 41 


Vigvambhara, 77, 107 
Vistara, 41 
Vital (pollution), 42' 

Vitthal. £ee Vithoba 
Vitthalwada, 248 

Vijhoba: ancestor of Tukaram, 78; 
the idol-god : at Dehu, 5 f ; and 
Potoba, a Marathi proverb, 9; 
temples of 10, at Pandharpur, 52 ; 
as inspiring bhakti, 20 ; the name, 
its origin and significance, 26,41 ff ; 
TukarSm's veneration for, 40 tf ; 
avatdra of, 40 ff ; Tdkpithya V„ 
52, details of V. temple ai 
Pandharpur, 52 ff ; and caste, 54 ff 
162 ff ; popularity, 55 ; attack on, 
56, 60 ff; days sacred to, 56; 
defilement of, 56, 60 ff, 256, 261 ; 
antiquity, 63 ; Mahipatis devotion 
to, 69 ; temple service of, 55 ff ; 
intervention of Tuk&ram’s behalf, 
80 ff, 84, 109 f ; TukarSm’s apology 
to, 112; relation to £ivajl, 123 f, 
156 ff; rallied by Tukaram, 131, 
222; as a thief, 131; bondsman 
of, 138; as an ‘incarnation’, 156; 
graciousness of, 175 ; central to 
TukSram’s religion, 181 ; worship 
not erotic, 184 ; religious value 
examined, chap, x, parts v-x 
Vitthu See Vithoba 
Vivekanand, Swami, 29 
Vlvek Sindhn by Mukundraj, 102 
Vivid h Dnydna V'tstdra, 67 f, 287 
Vows, 46 

Vranddvana fruit, 155 
VySsa, 52 


W 


Wagholi, 95 
Wdghya, 132, 292 
Wai, 47, 76 
Wandana , 172 

Want, 116 f, 138 - 

Wdrkaris , 42, 55, 61, 73, 76, 121. 

139, 164, 169 ff, 236 
Walt Whitman, 138 
Walter supply, Caste and, 262 
Wells in India, 129 
Western India, see Maharashtra and 
tfardthd 

Westerners and Indian studies, 123 if 
Westminster Gazette, 54 
Widow’s gift, A Brahman, 52* 

Wife of a brahmin, '57; Of Tukaram, 
see Av&iibai and R&khmab&i 



INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


323 


Wilson Philological Lectures , see 
Patwardhan in Authors' Index 

Witches, 11 

Women: among the Mariithas, 12; 
enfranchisement of, 22 ; hair offer- 
ring by, 58; chief delight of Hindu 
w., 79; and satt, 158; Christ and 
Tukaram on, 264 f; wrongs against 
Indian, 264 f; Tukaram's teaching 
on, 264 f 

World Missionary Conference ques- 
tionnaire, 178 

World-outlook of Tukaram, 265 ff 


Worship: repulsive forms of, 47; 
and worshippers, Tukaram's 
teaching on, 206 


Yadav inscriptions, 41 
Yogis and bhaktas distinguished, 
216 f, 229 
Yama, 212 
Yashoda, 52 

Yoga , 146, 216 f, 228 ; and bhakti, 
216 f 








922.94TLK 



64069 



