===== Internet Archive OCR: 22504.178%20C%20469_djvu.txt =====

Himalayan Series.—No. XXII. 
slide Aan at intake 


eomeires 







THE LIFE * 2 SN 
SWAMI. VIVEKANANDAS<. = « 


BY 
HIS EASTERN AND WESTERN DISCIPLES, 
THE ADVAITA ASHRAMA, HIMALAYAS. 


nO 000ter 


THE SEMI-CENTENARY BIRTHDAY MEMORIAL EDITION. 
, IN THREE VOLUMES. 


VOL. L 


PUBLISHED BY THE SWAMI VIRAJANANDA FROM. THE 
PRABUDDHA BHARATA OFFICE, ADVAITA ASHRAMA, 


MAYAVATI, ALMORA, HIMALAYAS. 
1912. 
[All Rights Reserved. ] 


Price, cloth, each Vol. Rs, 3-4 As. Foreign, $th, or 6 Shillings: 
3 Vol. Full-Morocce, Rs. 22, or $8, or #45. Half-Moroceo, Rs. 7, or $6, or ags. 


Il: * 
Ili, 


IV. 

V. 

Vi. 
VIL 
VIEL 
IX. 

x, 

XI 
XILe” 
XHL 
XIV, 
XV, 
XVI 
XVII. 
XVUIL. 
XIX, * 
XX, 
XXL 
XXIL 
XXIIL. 
XXIV, 
XXV, 
XXVL 
XXVIL 


XXVIIL 


XXIX.« 
XXX, . 


Table of Gontents. 


Preface .. os ae <I 
Introduction ass * eee XVII 
“Even with the Generation ‘Anccctral ia I 
The Triumph of Renunciation .. 8 
The House and Home of the Lordly Duttas, 
A Princely Father oon oe) 1G 
The Dream of Bhuvaneswari MAt4 ies: SOL, 
' The Birth and Name of the Master 
The Period of Childhood ie «e634 
The Choice of Gods ask +. 40 
In the Deeps of Meditation... se 46 
The Vision of the Luminous Figure oe 53 
Dedicated to Saraswati ast oe 59 
Play Days: An Accident wile oe «65 
Some Characteristics: A Prophecy «ig BE 
Other Days and an Hour of Trial ows §=79 
Parental Guidance—A Mother... ve = 86 
Further Glimpses of Boyhood... aay ~ 93 
Collegiate Days... vee 102 
The Drift of Tendency: A Death ves TUL 
Struggles and Hardships wes we 117 
The Tyansitional Period oe ee 124 
The Wonder of the Lord’s Song vos 132 
The Vision of the Exalted Life... + 139 
The Dawn of the Intellectual Life ss 147 
The Tempest of Thought .., vee 155 
In Various Meods ... oes ws 164 
A Fellow-Student’s ‘Reminiscences se 172 
The Man in the Making ase ee 178 
The Coming of the Light aie ss 187 
The Brahmo Samaj, vee 197 
“Mahdsaya, Have You Seen God a vee 208 


Ideals in Hinduism wah vee 216 


viii 


PAGE. 
XXXL The Mystical Consciousness..." id, BEF 
XXXIL Ramakrishna—Kali—Brahman ws 239 
XXXHI The Dakshineswar Kali-Barhi wee 248 
~XXXIV,. At the Touch of the Master ... wee 254 
XXXV. The Disciple’s Meditation ... ae 264 
XXXVI. As Others Saw the Master ... wel 272 
XXXVII. The Son of His Mother... a 282 
XXXVI. Guru and Disciple 3 see 289. 
XXXIX, The Monastic Consciousness : 
Renunciation—Purity ... ; wes 297 
XL. Days of Ecstasy at Dakshineswar ... 304 
XLI. The Method of the Master's Teaching ... 311 
XLII. Initiation into Advaita Vedanta see 319 
XLII, On the Loom of Discipleship wee 328 
XLIV. In the Weaving of the Web ... e-. 340 
XLV. , Glimpses of Personality “... ae 346 
XLVI. As the Master Saw Norendra eee 355 
XLVIL The Greatness of the Master... “363 
XLVI. Towards the Goal nes we 371 
XLIX. The Great. Understanding ... ws 378 
L. In the Group of Disciples ... - we 385 
LL In the Garden-House at Cossipur on 393 
LIL At Buddha-Gaya and Ghazipur vee G00 
, LIL In the Nirvikalpa Samadhi ... i. 408 
, LIV, Nirvana ase a wee 423 


THE LIFE 


OF THE 


SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 





SRIMAT Swami Vivekananda. 


Himalayan Series.—No. XXII. 
slide Aan at intake 


eomeires 







THE LIFE * 2 SN 
SWAMI. VIVEKANANDAS<. = « 


BY 
HIS EASTERN AND WESTERN DISCIPLES, 
THE ADVAITA ASHRAMA, HIMALAYAS. 


nO 000ter 


THE SEMI-CENTENARY BIRTHDAY MEMORIAL EDITION. 
, IN THREE VOLUMES. 


VOL. L 


PUBLISHED BY THE SWAMI VIRAJANANDA FROM. THE 
PRABUDDHA BHARATA OFFICE, ADVAITA ASHRAMA, 


MAYAVATI, ALMORA, HIMALAYAS. 
1912. 
[All Rights Reserved. ] 


Price, cloth, each Vol. Rs, 3-4 As. Foreign, $th, or 6 Shillings: 
3 Vol. Full-Morocce, Rs. 22, or $8, or #45. Half-Moroceo, Rs. 7, or $6, or ags. 


& PRINTED BY K. C. GHOSH 
ae" at The Lakshmi Printing Works, 
ie) 64-1, Sukea’s Street, CALCUTTA. 


COPYRIGHT RECISTERED UNDER ACT XX OF 1847. 


i All rights of translation “and reproduction are strictly 
veserved by the Swami Vivajananda, President, Advaita Ashrama. 
Permission for translation will be granted on certain terms. 


For particulars enquiries have fo be made to him. 


DEDICATED TO 


BuaGavan Sri RAMAKRISHNA, 

SRimatT Swami VIVEKANANDA, 
Tue Discretes or Sri RAMAKRISHNA, 
Tue Discretes or Swamr VIVEKANANDA, 
ALL Lovers or Trutu, 

7 AND TO 


“INDIA AND THE Wor~p. 


OM BRAHMARPANAMASTU ! 





Il: * 
Ili, 


IV. 

V. 

Vi. 
VIL 
VIEL 
IX. 

x, 

XI 
XILe” 
XHL 
XIV, 
XV, 
XVI 
XVII. 
XVUIL. 
XIX, * 
XX, 
XXL 
XXIL 
XXIIL. 
XXIV, 
XXV, 
XXVL 
XXVIL 


XXVIIL 


XXIX.« 
XXX, . 


Table of Gontents. 


Preface .. os ae <I 
Introduction ass * eee XVII 
“Even with the Generation ‘Anccctral ia I 
The Triumph of Renunciation .. 8 
The House and Home of the Lordly Duttas, 
A Princely Father oon oe) 1G 
The Dream of Bhuvaneswari MAt4 ies: SOL, 
' The Birth and Name of the Master 
The Period of Childhood ie «e634 
The Choice of Gods ask +. 40 
In the Deeps of Meditation... se 46 
The Vision of the Luminous Figure oe 53 
Dedicated to Saraswati ast oe 59 
Play Days: An Accident wile oe «65 
Some Characteristics: A Prophecy «ig BE 
Other Days and an Hour of Trial ows §=79 
Parental Guidance—A Mother... ve = 86 
Further Glimpses of Boyhood... aay ~ 93 
Collegiate Days... vee 102 
The Drift of Tendency: A Death ves TUL 
Struggles and Hardships wes we 117 
The Tyansitional Period oe ee 124 
The Wonder of the Lord’s Song vos 132 
The Vision of the Exalted Life... + 139 
The Dawn of the Intellectual Life ss 147 
The Tempest of Thought .., vee 155 
In Various Meods ... oes ws 164 
A Fellow-Student’s ‘Reminiscences se 172 
The Man in the Making ase ee 178 
The Coming of the Light aie ss 187 
The Brahmo Samaj, vee 197 
“Mahdsaya, Have You Seen God a vee 208 


Ideals in Hinduism wah vee 216 


viii 


PAGE. 
XXXL The Mystical Consciousness..." id, BEF 
XXXIL Ramakrishna—Kali—Brahman ws 239 
XXXHI The Dakshineswar Kali-Barhi wee 248 
~XXXIV,. At the Touch of the Master ... wee 254 
XXXV. The Disciple’s Meditation ... ae 264 
XXXVI. As Others Saw the Master ... wel 272 
XXXVII. The Son of His Mother... a 282 
XXXVI. Guru and Disciple 3 see 289. 
XXXIX, The Monastic Consciousness : 
Renunciation—Purity ... ; wes 297 
XL. Days of Ecstasy at Dakshineswar ... 304 
XLI. The Method of the Master's Teaching ... 311 
XLII. Initiation into Advaita Vedanta see 319 
XLII, On the Loom of Discipleship wee 328 
XLIV. In the Weaving of the Web ... e-. 340 
XLV. , Glimpses of Personality “... ae 346 
XLVI. As the Master Saw Norendra eee 355 
XLVIL The Greatness of the Master... “363 
XLVI. Towards the Goal nes we 371 
XLIX. The Great. Understanding ... ws 378 
L. In the Group of Disciples ... - we 385 
LL In the Garden-House at Cossipur on 393 
LIL At Buddha-Gaya and Ghazipur vee G00 
, LIL In the Nirvikalpa Samadhi ... i. 408 
, LIV, Nirvana ase a wee 423 


PREFACE, 


It is now ten years since the Swami Vivekananda entered 
FINAL ILLUMINATION; it is fifty years since his persorfality 
was ushered upon earth. It is therefore befitting that these 
events should be conterminous with and celebrated by the 
publishing of the life he lived. For years it has been the desire 

” of the Eastern and Western disciples at the Advaita Ashrama 
to publish an authoritative biography of their teacher so as to 
present to the world at large and to posterity the vision, the 
ideas, the work and the greatness of that personality which 
the Swami’s life embodied. 

In the beginning it was planned to incorporate a bio- 
graphical sketch ia the last volume of the Mayavati Memorial 
Edition of “The Complete Works of the Swami Vivekananda”, 
but both by reason of the supreme import of the Swami’s life 
to the world and the vast collection of biographical facts of 
the most interesting nature and of far-reaching significance, 
gathered during the last seven years, this idea was abandoned. 
Instead, the life is now presented in three separate volumes, 

+ Much has been written in this work in the way of interpre- 
tation, for many of the facts in the Swami’s life, without ex- 
planation of the Hindu religious and social ideals and without 
some reference to the psychology of the mystical conscious- 
ness, would be likely to confuse the casual reader and might 
even seem improbable. The world knows the Swami as a 
giant intellect, a great scholar and orator, a Patriotic Hindu 
and a powerful preacher of the Vedanta, But that is know- 
ing only one phase of this many-sided genius, Even to those 
who knew him personally, the Swami, both as a lad and asa 
man, was too complex a character to be readily understood, He 


was a man of original thoughts and numerous moods, each a 


world fn itself, and when any single one of them came upon 

him he was so intense that for the time being he would iden- 

tify himself solely with that particulsy state of mind above 
ol 4 = * a Nis 


~ 


x 


all others, Thus it happened that many persons saw him 

. from widely varying angles and spoke of him chiefly in the 
sense in which they personally understood him, This accounts 
for the many differing presentations of the Swami. Efforts 
have been made in this work to present the Swami in 
all his moods and varied illumination so as to reveal 
the man as ke was.) 

Great pains have been taken to authenticate all the pri- 
vate and public sources of information in connection with the 
biographical facts, and much discretion has been exercised 
in embodying these, so asto offer to the public a complete 
and reliable work. An excellent advantage was that most of 
those who knew the Swami intimately are still alive. There are- 
many disciples, both of the Swami himself and of his spiritual 
Master, Sri Ramakrishna, whose reminiscences by means of 
talks and writings, and whose private dia~ies and published 
works have given every opportunity for ascertaining the ac-. 
curacy of statements. Then there are the numerous letters ‘and 
writings, published and unpublished, of the Swami himself 
from which to verify the character and the development of his 
mind and his entire personality. We heartily acknowledge our 
indebtedness to all these valuable authorities and sources. 
of information, too numerous to mention individually here. 
Everything in the way of illuminating anecdote and .inter- 
pretation has been included, and all accounts have been dil- 
igently studied so as to keep within the bounds of legitimate: 
biographical treatment. 

In order to facilitate the reading and to render the treat- 
ment of the lengthy history of the life easier of approach, it 
has been presented in a series of short chapters under descrip- 
tive headings, The attempt throughout has been to portray 
the elements of life, character, growth and work in as simple- 
and direct a manner as possible and to picture, in particular, 
the conditions under which the Swami’s life was developed and 
expressed. This necessitated an exposition of the ideas and: 
activities ef the Modern Transition in India, and a compre- 
heasivé sketch of the Ffe and teachings of Sri Ramakeishna,,. 

e Ps © 


xi 7 


who is regarded as the unique spiritual character of Modern 
India ; it necessitated also the recital of the Modern 
Religious Transition in the West, because of the Swami’s 
multifarious work there, and also the rise and development of 
the monastic order of which he was the moving spirit, and of 
the great philanthropic -Organisation, known as the Rama- 
krishna Mission, which he founded, 
The first volume presents the narrative of his personality 

until his twenty-fourth year and the training he underwent 
at the Feet of his Master for the attainment of spiritual in- 
sight and realisation, It takes into account the theme around 
which the Swami’s life is drawn,—the theme of Hinduism, 
its setting, its basis and its structure. It reveals the growth.“ 
of a gigantic mind through modern agnosticism into complete 
saintship. It presents the character of the Swami’s Master 
in the light in which the Swami himself understood him. The 
reader will become familiar with the Swami in the first wots) 
as *N oren”, or “Norendra”, the name by which he was | 
known both to the Master and to his brother-disciples and i 
friends, as his proper name was N orendra Nath Dutta} 
The first volume shows how Noren, having become de-Hin- 
duised became re-Hinduised through his perception of the 
‘Synthesis of Hinduism as lived and realised by his Master, 
For the sake of aclear understanding of the process by which 
this was effected, several chapters of the first volume are de- 
voted to the elucidation of the Hindu religious and philo- i 
sophic consciousness, One sees in the first volume the man, ‘ 
‘the saint, and the Prophet in the making. : 

The second volume deals with the narrative of the Swami 
life as the wandering monk, and later on as the bearer of the: 
message of Hinduism to the West. It takes the reader through 
the scenes of the Swami’s life of intense austerities and s4- 
-dhands in the Baranagore Math, of his travels and silent preach- 
ing throughout the length and breadth of Hindusthan, prior to 
his departure for America, and of his triumphant public career 
as the apostle of Vedantism during his sojourn in the West, It 
‘showshow at the Parliament. of Religions held in Chichgo, in 

es e 


xii 
1893, the Swami became a world-wide figure and the Prophet 
of Hinduism. And it dwells on the momentous significance: 
_ of his ideas and of his work as the spiritual teacher. 
‘The third volume speaks of the Swami’s attempts at re- 
‘modelling the Indian thought-world, of his re-stating the: 
entire contents of the Sandtana Dharma and the ancient Azyan. 
‘culture, and of his bringing about a wave of religious revival: 
fin India. It reveals him as the founder of monasteries and 
centres of public service, as the Man of Sorrows, whose heart 
bled for the millions of India’s poor and distressed, and also 
as the Man of Joys, thundering at all times, in the hearing of 
his co-religionists the glories of Hinduism and the bright future- 
of his race. It records his activities during his second visit. 
to the West, and gives a vivid picture of his subsequent life in. 
India. Finally, it speaks of the Swami’s influence on Indian 
life, and of his message and mission as a whole ; and, 4lso,. 
it speaks of the end. 2 
The publishers are well aware that this great life has been 
lived too recently for the public to gauge fully the import and: 
the possibilities it represents ; they know that many of the: 
statements and interpretations concerning the Swami recorded: 
in this work, may not meet with universal acceptance; but 
they are firmly convinced that time will substantiate their: 
value. It matters not in what light the present generation, 
by reading this life, may regard the Swami, be it as a teacher, 
patriot, prophet, or saint; it matters not whether they accept. 
his teachings and his ideas only partially or in their 
entirety, but all will have to admit that in his life there was. 
made manifest a tremendous force forthe moral and spiritual: 
welfare and uplifting of humanity, irrespective of caste, creed,. 
nationality or time, and that as such it. commends itself for 
careful study and reflection. . 

Those who have produced this work are the Swami’s out- 
spoken followers ; nay moré than that, they are his disciples 
and co-workers, representing as they do the Brotherhood of 
the Advaita Ashrama founded by the Swami himself. "They 

J have nfade every endegvour to give a true and comprehensive: F 


xii 


revelation of their Master. They fully realise that theirs 
is an enormous undertaking and responsibility. They real- 
ise, also, how difficult it is to bring the san into the narrow: 
compass of a biography. This is true of every great life, but 
it is particularly true of the Swami Vivekananda. The limi- 
tatiens oP biographical treatment and description have been 
constantly before them. On the other hand, even the telling 
of this life is sufficiently inspiring, as of itself it affords a 
Revelation, They earnestly believe that the more the life and 
teachings of the Swami are made known the more will the 
spiritual perspective of humanity be widened, and the more 
will the Hindus take up the methods set forth by him for the 
reorganisation of their Dharma in consonance with modern 
needs and modern problems, They therefore make no apol- 
ogies as to their understanding of him or for the method in 
whith they have Presented him. They have been actuated 
by ghe spirit of discipleship. In sending out this work into. 
the world, they are guided by the hope that many a seeker 
after Truth, having adeeper knowledge of this great life, may 
be helped to solve the problem of existence, and having an 
entrée into a world of richer spiritual insight may be inspired 
to follow his example to travel upon that Path of Righteous- 
ness which the Swami pointed out, in the words of the 
Vedas, to be—Atmano Mokshdrtham fagaddhitdyacha—for 
the Salvation of one’s own soul and fdr the good of the 
World”. : 

THE EASTERN AND WESTERN DISCIPLES, 

The qth of July, THE ADVAITA ASHRAMA, 
7912, . MAYAVATI, HIMALAYAS. 


INTRODUCTION. 


* 


Coming from Afar are the Voices of the Silence. Rarely 
are they heard, save by the Mystics and the Sages, And 
when one of these Voices becomes embodied as Sound 
audible to.mortal hearing,—blessed is the time and blessed 
are those that hear. Formless is the Spirit and subjective 
is the vision thereof ; dense is the illusion that hangs as the 
cosmic veil before Reality! How divine, therefore, is the 
personality, which makes objective the vision of the Spirit t 
How priceless the history of one who has lifted even a fringe 
ofthe Veil! The opaqueness of illusion becomes transparent 
by the effulgence of a spiritual personality. Verily, the 
Spirit [tself becomes revealed ; and those who see are brought 
face % face with Reality! . 

To introduce the life of the Swami Vivekananda is to 

introduce the subject of the spiritual life itself. All the 
intellectual struggle, all the righteous doubting, all the 
‘burning faith} all the unfolding process -of the spiritual 
‘illumination were revealed in him. Asa Man and as a 
Vedantist he manifested the Manliness which was Sanctity, 
and thé Sanctity which was Manliness; he manifested the 
Patriotism which came from the vision of the Dharma, and 
he manifested’ the life of intense activity as well as of 
. Supreme Realisation, as the fruit of the #rue Insight of Divine 
Wisdom. He revealed throughout the glory of the Supra- 
sensuous Life. $ 

The history of his life is the history of. great ideas, of 

. Spiritual impulses and of monastic glory. It is the history 
of the Sou!’s own. Revelation, beautifully Harmonising the 
dualistic vision of the Lover and his God, the monistic vision 
of the Self realised and the consciousness of the Divinity 

_ of Mar. It is enfolded within the gospel of a newer vision, 

¢ with faler apocalyptic revelatjons, ogncerning the Raner 

F. Nature of Mag. ee > - 


xviii 


The life of the Swami Vivekananda was as a scroll, 
gradually unrolled, on which were written alt the aspirations 
and all the greatness of human nature. It was alife like 
that of all other luminous souls who soared into the region 
of the Spirit arid brought back visions of Truth for those who 
were blinded by nescience. It was a life, not only of revela- 
tions, but of human events, developed under ordinary 
conditions of experience, that formed the meeting-ground 
between lovable human personality and the light and 
awesome majesty of the highest consciousness. 

In the reading of the life of the Swami Vivekananda, 
one is admitted into a world rich with spiritual contents and 
events and surrounded by a rich spiritual atmosphere. One 
seems to be, as it were, in a sanctuary before an. altar, upon 
which burns‘the perpetual lamp of the Soul revealing, in 
sacramental glory, the Mystery of a great life, in ail its 
developments, its renunciation, its self-sacrifice, its divinely 
human worth and its spiritual illumination. There are many 
happenings in the way of insight and prophecy and experi- 
ence, even from his early boyhood, that take one into 
the world where saints kneel in prayer and -where sages, 
in meditation, enjoy the.Beatific Vision. Psychology and 
spiritual philosophy go hand in hand in the understandirig 
of the Swami’s life, illustrating the mystical events therein 
as radiant instances of the development of the powers and 
potentialities of human faculty, so that even in this materi- 
alistic age of scepticism and religious indifference, there is 
added, in brilliant letters, a marvellous chapter-to “The Lives 
of the Saints of the World”. > : 

As the Light within the glory of the Swami’s life shines 
forth the Personality of one who is known, revered and 
verily adored by thousands in India‘as an Avatéra or Incar- 
nation of Divinity—Bhagavan Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa 
Deva. The Swami Vivekananda could not speak too, highly 
of Sri Ramakrishna. Aye, in one of his most exalted moods, 
he spoke ‘of him as the greatest of Avatdras, It this 
Pfophet of the Yost High wha drew out the,-powers and 


a 
XIX 


possibilities of the young Norendra thereby making possible 
the life and illumination of the Swami Vivekananda, The 
process was throughout deeply mystical. The world in 
which the Swami was spiritually born was a world of spiritual 
facts and realities, not of idle speculations and complacently 
accepted dogmas. Prior to his meeting with the Master, 
when he was as yet only the soaring intellect, the life of the 
future Swami was one of painful intellectual inquiry, and 
of great agony of spirit in the longing for Truth ; he was then 
steeped in the culture of the Western world and was a critical 
analyser of the religion and the society of his own people. 
But when he met the Master, from that time he was the 
Swami Vivekananda in the making, The Dakshineswar ! 
Temple-garden, on the banks.of the Ganges, near the city ; 
of Calcutta, was the place of his Illumination, as it had ° 
been that of his Master ; ; it was there that the sun of the 
Swami’s soul travelled in radiance across the heavens of his . 
life to the full zenith of spiritual effulgence. ; 

Those who have the vision of To-Day witness in the train- 
ing and discipleship of Norendra the struggle, the trend 
and the promise of the Modern Transition in India; for 
he represented all that was New in the thought-world of foata,| 
while his Master embodied all that was Old. And in the‘ 
story df the blending of these two lives one sees how the New . 
must be and is being reconciled to the Old and how the Old . 
must be and is being saturated with the New. Therefore, ' 
for an understanding of the Swami Vivekananda an under- i . 
standing of his Master is imperative. Being as he was the - 
most famous Man of Godin India for several centuries, : - 
recognised as having exerted a profound and abiding in- i 
fluence upon Indian ideals and, finally, as being the spirit 
itself of a Re-presented Hinduism, Sri Ramakrishna and his 
life and teachings must be carefully taken into account 
in studying the career of his chief disciple. 

~ Sri Ramakrishna is indeed the Central Figure in the life 
of the Swami Vivekananda ; not alage that, but* also the 
Centra Figuge in Modern Hinduiam. alt was this Man of 


xX 


God, whose life of Divine Realisation and whose teaching 
stemmed the tide of Western theological influence over the 
Hindu consciousness. By sitting at his Feet, the Swami Viveka- 
nanda became the spokesman-in-chief of his message, both 
to the peoples of the East and the West. And the central 
episode in the preaching of this message occurred in the 
World’s Parliament of Religions at Chicago, when several 
thousand people stoad to their feet, struck with the tremen- 
dous magnetism of the Swami’s personality breathing, as it 
did, an extraordinary spiritual power, at the very first utterance 

_which came from his lips. Sri Ramakrishna the Teacher, 

; Vivekananda the Preacher,—Sri Ramakrishna the Man of 
: Insight, Vivekananda the Prophet of that Insight—these 
i two were as one ; through them both shines the effulgence 
‘of the Spirit, and the life of the one is incomplete without 
the life of the other. Indeed, the life of the one is, ifi the 
deepest sense, the unfoldment and expansion, the explangfion 
and interpretation ef the other. 

Since his meeting with the Master the career of the 
Swami is a career of spiritual romance, a career that gives 
a wondrous vision of that which is to come in the way of an 
iHumined religious consciousness and a reinvigorated spirit of 
true renunciation. From the time when the Master entered 
Nirvana the chief disciple is seen alone—alone—in the 
silence and the light of his own soul, digesting the teachings 
he had received, studying the contents and problems of the 
Indian experience, seeking methods for the practical appli- 
cation of the Sanatana Dharma to modern life, and finding 
out his own mission. The vision of,him is unforgettable as 
he wanders along, staff in hand, in utter defiance of the world, 
himself, as it were, a Shiva incarnate. One sees him, later on, 
before men and women of learning, wealth and distinction, 
in the rich and powerful West, and one sees himin the 
Silence before his Master in the chapel of the monasteries 
at Baranagore and Belur,—but the picture of him as he goes 
along the highways of Hindusthan,wandering for many, many 
months, with only his ( own, sout for ie cao is “unfor- 


xxi 


gettable. He wanders along impelled by an irresistible power, - 
throwing him hither and thither in the deeper solitudes of 
his own concentrated personality—aye, the picture of him is 
unforgettable, 

The next vision is that of the indefatigable spiritual 
worker, carrying the message and the wisdom of the Rishis 
to the West, cheerfully undergoing hardships and difficulties 
and ultimately achieving greatest triumphs. One sees him 
in the world of human divinity and in the world of divine 
humanity, suffering, hoping, loving, loyal, irritated at the 
workings of destiny, impatient with his surroundings in 
one moment, and joyous, all-tender, all-sweet, all-patient 
in another,—but in heart always resigned to the Lord, One 
sees him in many moods, now sublime, now sweetly human, 
now in the august consciousness of the “One without a 
secoild,—the Para-Brahman, the Impersonal Supreme”, and 
then, in the consciousness of the devotee of the Mother of 
the Universe, One sees him, now in India, then in America and 
in Europe, now with Eastern, then with Western disciples, 
preaching at all times the beyond-body idea and ‘infusing 
into them the strength and the consciousness of Pure Spirit. 
One sees him, in the early days of his wandering monastic 
life, in poverty and surcharged with the spirit of renuncia-’ 
tion, and then one sees him in America surcharged with spirit. 
ual omnipotence in the giving of his message and filled 
with the spirit of a prophet, One sees him thundering forth 
the gospel of Strength and Illumination before thousands 
‘inthe East andthe West and then, perhaps, with a few 
devotees, silently moulding their lives and training them to 
carry on his work, or with his brother-monks, living the life 
of the ascetic ideals. At all times one sees in him a gigantic 
soul, making every endeavour to burst the bonds of flesh, 
and soar into the Vastness of the Spirit. From the years 
when as a lad the Swami struggled to see God and know 
the Highest Truth, through the time when he experienced 
‘the Sugreme Realisation, until the time when he *became a 
“World® iguge and the Prophg? of the Wlodera Gospel of the, 


xsil 


Sandtana Dharma—one sees constantly in him, as numerous 
persons have said, “A God in the Revelation.” 

For those who see deeper the Swami is always at the 
Feet of his Master, one who had given himself attermostly in 
spiritual abandonment, as a child, to the Mother of the Uni- 
verse, and who had realised the Impersonal Absolute in the 
Nirvikalpa Samadhi. Thus in the Swami one sees combined, 
in wonderful spiritual harmony, the dualistic and the monistic 
vision ; for he possessed the love which is inexpressible for 
the Personal God, and yet he, likewise, possessed the im- 
measurable knowledge which is the immediate insight into the 
Divine Nature, wherein the soul itself is realised as one 
with the Para-Brahman. 

Though the utterances of Sri Ramakrishna are mainly 
those of the Lover for the Lord, still when it is remembered 
that it was he who gave his chief disciple the spirit and the 
consciousness of the Advaita, one realises the supreme rur- 
pose of the Master that the future message of the Swami 
was to be that of the Advaita Vedanta, wherein all sense of 
duality and distinction is swallowed up in the perception of 
Unutterable Oneness, One also realises that verily in the 
personality of the Swami Vivekananda the Master himself 
visited the farthest Western shores and the farthest corners 
of Hindusthan. It isthe Voice of Dakshineswar which is 
heard at the Parliament of Religions ; it is the “Voice of 
Dakshineswar which preaches, throughout Bharatavarsha, 
the Reawakening of the Ancient Dharma. 

Though the inter-relatedness of the lives of the ‘Swami 
Vivekananda and his Master, and theinestimable influence of 
the latter upon the former, in things spiritual, are admitted 
facts, yet it must not be forgotten that the Swami himself 
possessed inherent greatness and uhique potentialities and 
spiritual powers for moving the world, as many significant 
utterances of Sri Ramakrishna point out. The Swami 


himself was born with a mission to fulfil. Sri Rama- | 


krishna, if is true, had (fiven his him the spirit, but the-Gwami 
eyorked" out that sprit into ipnumerable new ford! of his 


xxiii 


own, The flow of the perennial thought and the indomitable 
energy of his soul made its course through untrodden fields, 
His long, lone marches over the extents of his land as the wan- 
dering monk, when he attained the very highest flights of the 
monastic-consciousness,were inspired by his own personal long- 
ing to touch, for himself, the Spirit of Things, and to find new 
application and undreamed-of expression of the culture and 
the attainments of the Old India in the New. He was 
inspired by his own nature to sound its own depths by its 
own aid, and to give away the fruits of his realisations freely 
for the material and the spiritual salvation of others, 

Previously one will have had the vision of the Swami 
in communien with the Master, but later one finds him 
communing with his own soul, as did the Rishis of old, 
receiving newer and newer inspirations, going beyond all 
gods'and all forms and all Masters in the Supreme Realisa.: 
tionof the Brahman, Thus in the reading of his life one is 
brought face to face with a world of majesty and power and 
sublimity where the panorama of the highest spiritual order is 
always present before the eye, 

Not only as a monk does he travel, but as a prophet and 
patriot, observing constantly the customs, the usages and the 
culture of Hindusthan in all its parts. He busies himself 
with historic memories of the Past and with historic visions 
of the Future ; he prays and weeps and hopes for a Better 
To-Morrow in the land of his birth ; and he is exultant and 
enthusiastic at what he perceives to be its inherent powers 

“for constant Rejuvenescence and Adaptation, He becomes 
a Seer of the intrinsic superiorities in its Dharma and of the 
ultimate purposes of its social forms, He feels the heart- 
beats of the nation and comes to know wherein its life lies, 
He analyses and sees tlie strength and the greatness of the 
Hindu spiritual outlook, though he does not spare vigorous 
criticism of the way in which its highest ideals are being 
betrayed. Aye, even prior to the acquisition of his fame-in 
the Wgst, the Swami was the truest o€ patriots, 5 

Add yeR again, the Swami Viyekananda, as an origifial, 


XXIV 


thinker and a spiritual genius, was the scatterer of luminous 
ideas which were his own, seeds whose growth is visible 
in various theological movements throughout the world. 
It is certainly within the province of legitimate statement 
to say that the Swami Vivekananda was one of the main 
channels through which flowed the mighty currents of the 
Modern Spiritual Transition. His masterly address at the 
Parliament of Religions alone entitles him to the high status 
of the Arch-Prophet of Hinduism. He was the foremost of 
those spiritual waves, the tumult of which as it dashed 
against the shores of present time, thundered the spiritual 
ideals and contents of the modern religious epoch. Like a new 
Sankaracharya he became the foremost spokesman of Indian 
Idealism in his time. His was a new vision of religious 
philosophy. He infused new blood into the Vedanta, that 
synthesis of Indian thought systems, and’ breathed into it 
a new life so that it might become once more a living reaAty, 
a concrete, moral and emotional power in the practical life 
of the masses, whilst meeting the requirements of thg highest 
minds which yearn to transcend all limitations and attain the 
Freedom of the Divine Consciousness, He infused into 
philosophy the burning fires of his own passionate longing 
for and his illumination of the Truth. He insisted upon the 
mystical experience as the only guarantee of spiritual terti- 
tude and discovery. He preached a Gospel to which scholastic 
theology must ever be subordinate, the Gospel whose 
message throbs with luminous personal awareness, the Gospel 
whose sole authority is Spiritual Realisation. Such indeed 
is the impression upon the minds of those with whom he had 
intimate spiritual and intellectual relationship, 

In India, it goes without saying that the Swami Viveka- 
nanda was a unique personality. In the reading of his life 
one sees how he emphasised the Unification of Hinduism, 
reconciling the various conflicting thought-systems pf the 
Indian pluralistic and monistic outlook in an eclecticism hither- 

* to unthpught of. He "was the prophet of the Upanfshads, 


XXV s 

Service, thus preaching the ideals of Siva and of Seva. He 
declared with an apostolic fervour that Brahman is to be realised 
not only by worship and meditation but also by serving 
others, seeing the Divinity in them. He laid stress not only on 
the Dharma of Sanny4s but on the Dharma of Citizenship as 
well, pointing out the opportunity for the realisation of the 
Spiritual consciousness in all the walks of life. As will be 
seen he was the founder of a new order of philosophical 
thought, a new order of religious statement, a new order of 
national righteousness, and the founder of a new order of 
monks and a new spirit of monasticism, In the final under- 
standing of the Swami one finds him a Hindu and an Indian 
to the core of his heart. One sees him pondering upon the 
incomparable ideals and realisations of the Indian experience, 
championing the cause o his Motherland wheresoever he 
went in the years of his intensely active career, With the 
spitit of true patriotism he fulminated against the super- 
stitions, weaknesses and shortcomings of his own people ; but 
he also mercilessly denounced those who heaped upon Hindu 
culture malicious or ignorant criticism. He was intensely 
an Indian ; but above all things he was intensely a seer 
and an upholder of Truth, He was inherently cosmo- 
politan ; he loved the whole world as he loved India, His sym- 
pathies were world-wide ; he saw greatness wheresoever it 
manifested itself, 

So far as India is concerned, the Swami, when he returns 
from the West, becomes the preacher of a fiery gospel, the 
Gospel of Karma Yoga. The ‘conquest of the whole world 
by Indian spirituality ahd the raising of the masses became 
his mottoes for bringing about the redemption of India, and 
he at the same time pointed out the methods and the means 
of carrying them into effect. Unlike the Rishis of old, 
whose sole concern was their pessonal salvation and whose 
sole bliss was to be immersed in the deeps of meditation, the 
Swami advocated a Practical Vedanta, a Vedanta making 
for afnew national spirit, a,spirit cf public servite, wherein 
the subjective vision of the One sioulé be transformed ints 


XXvi 


objective service for the Many, And one still hears his 
voice crying out to serve the Narayana in the poor, the sick, 
the downtrodden and the oppressed. He knew that the 
Modern Transition in India could not come to full fruition if 
the People were not taken into account, Therefore,’ while in 
the West one finds him uttering constantly the philosophy of 
the highest Vedanta, urging the Western world to medita- 
tion, in the East one finds him preaching the spirit of public 
service, the spirit of a religious national life, the spirit of 
social unity and the spirit of a social reform whose method 
is to be a “growth ffom within”. After his return from 

. the West, therefore, one finds him establishing monasteries as 
centres of training and preaching, and organising centres of 
service; by the influence of his moving spirit the monks of 
Ramakrishna and the Sannydsin disciples of the Swami, 
become the founders of charitable dispensaries, Sevashramas 
and orphanages, as well as workers for the relief of famine 
and other kinds of distress and suffering. Thus the Swami 
embodied in his own nature the four Mérgas or Paths of 
the Dharma,—that of Insight, of Contemplation, of Love and 
that of Service, He was, in truth, the very Synthesis of 
Hinduism as it should be. 

But the story must be told even as it is told of every man, 
—“And he was born in the city of—and in the year of—.” 
But what a life was his! The dream of childhood he 
passed as all others ; the dream of youth——but what a dream ! 
He would see the Heavens roll back, revealing the Presence 
of the Most High! He would pierce, even as youth, through 
all the childish struggles and childish dreams of man, at 

: once into the Tabernacle where God dwells! He would see 
God as Man, and Man as God; he would see the Divinity 
Within, and the Divinity Without! [llumination Itself is 
God ; and he had That; he was That! Then the years of 
Silence as a wanderer over the face of his land! Then the 

- years of his Message and his triumph! Then the end and 
the breaking of the flream, in the Final and Nigyikalpa 
panadhi—and now, the Power of his ZJumitiation ! 


XXVii . 


O the halo of the most sacred sanctuary now about 
him! 

To the task of writing the life one sets fervently, with 
folded thought, kneeling in soul and in conscious un- 
worthiness, for who can know the inner self of even the least 
of men, much less the soul of a Vivekananda ! And who 
can sound the depths of his personal realisation! The task 
is almost beyond thinking,—and yet must the world know the 
greatness of that life which has thrilled through its Eastern 
Heart and Western Mind, 

Thought cannot pierce the veils as much as prayer and 
religious intent. So let these be the spirit of the work. And 
may that Silent Watcher in each heart, on Whom he so cons- 
tantly meditated, the Message of Whose Supreme Life he so 
wonderfully gave, and unto Whom he has now been caught up 
in Sipreme Realisation, guide us in our work and be with 
us aad the reader now and forever, 


Hari Om Tat Sat. 


EVEN WITH THE GENERATION ANCESTRAL. 


Streams of consciousness which flow into the river of 
family are here and there characterised by the likeness of 
personality and sameness of tendency. Thus, it is often seen 
that the third or the fourth generation takes on the qualities 
of the great-grandfather, or of some other distant ancestor 
Then it is said, “It is in the blood.” It is the only account- 
able reason for those remarkable and reiterated croppings- 
up of family tendency. 

With him who became known to the world as the Swami 
ViveRananda, it was in the blood—the tendency to that 
life and thought which made him the foremost Indian monk 
of his time and the teacher of the West. Dowa the river of 
tendency we gliinpse the cause. 

A youth of twenty-five, with all the promise of the: world 
before him,—a career of unusual promise beckoning, himself 
peculiarly fit in education, versed in Persian and Sanskrit, 
gifted in song,—could not understand the world. It wasa 
riddle,to him. Religion had grown reality tohim. God called 
—deeply, insistently. The call could not be withstood. With 
Christ he felt that urge, “Who is my mother and who are my 
brethren!” And he heard the voice, “ He who loveth father 
or mother more than Me is not worthy of Me.” The man 
clad in a beggar’s rags forsook home, wife, child, comfort—and 
plunged into forgottenness, as a lion goes into the forest,— 
free, strong and of iron bent, 

The wife and child were cared for by the relatives, The 
wife understood and, understanding, loved the deeper. For 
in India where consciousness is losked upon as the reality in 
man—it is known that such exalted heights of feeling and 
vision may be attained, that a man is cast by the gempest of 
his ows souls the life of the worla into eternal thinkipg 

* N 


a7 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


upon God. This is the ideal, Blessed is the family in which 
one attains such a state of God-striving and God-conscious- 
ness! The soul has become the reality. By the husband 
having become aware of it, the wife if raised ; by the wife 
having become aware of it, the husband is raised, For that 
is the purpose of man—the beatific vision of the soul. And 
though the humanity of the wife, or of the mother, or of the 
husband, or of the father may long for the absent one, still 
does the soul know, “ All is weil,” and the bonds of the re- 
lationship are knit closer because one of the circle has seen 
God. He of whom this is said—the youth of twenty-five, 
was Durga Charan Dutta, the paternal grandfather of the 
Swami Vivekananda. 

Let it not be imagined that the mind of Durga Charan 
Dutta was like that of a visionary, or of a fanatic. Quite 
the contrary. Some of the greatest saints have been of the 
most practical turn, Only remember that wonderful woman. 
Saint Theresa of Jesus, of the Roman Catholic Church. How 
she was at once the admirable Saint and the capable execu- 
tive of the affairs of a large order of nuns! So in this case, 

Durga Charan was not a dreamer—or rather, he was a 
dreamer, but one of those dreamers who carry dreams into 
the field of reality, carving out all the exquisiteness of ideal 
things from this rough marble world of real things. Master 
of languages, he was also master of the law. His father, 
Ram Mohan Dutta, was by profession a lawyer and was well 
known. In consequence of his proficiency the family had 
become possessed of much worldly goods. The Duttas were the 
owners of large estates and of a comfortable income, and 
the family house was in the Simla District of the city of 
Calcutta. And Durga Charan Dutta was so well versed 
in the law that his father made him partner in his affairs. 
The son soon equalled his father in reputation. He, too, 
grew wealthy. ° 

Therefore, it was a genuine case of renunciation.” Only 
he who hgs can give i and only he who has bad the where- 
withaf fo enjoy, can renoynce.© That is why ther renfyciation 

¢ r 


EVEN WITH THE GENERATION ANCESTRAL, 3 


of Saint Francis of Assisi was so exalted. The intensity of 
insight and of feeling that brought on the renunciation was 
so divine, that forsaking his family, nobility of name and 
great fortune was really nothing to him. Renunciation, if it 
is real, is always a joyous giving-up of that which is nothing 
in comparison to what has been found. There is nothing 
greater than the soul. There can be nothing more than 


God, The saint of the East and the saint of the West are 


one in this, 

But where was the direction of the quest of forgottenness 
when illumination came? No one knows. Was it Benares, the 
city of learning and the city of saints? Who knows? At all 
events, something occurred some time later in Benares which 
leaves no doubt that this was one of the sacred places the 
world-forsaking monk had in mind. For there are many, many 
places unimaginably holy to the wandering monk. There are 
‘the sacred birth-places where saints have come into the world, 
and the more sacred places of renunciation where saints 
have seen God beyond the world, There is Buddha-Gaya, 
where Buddha saw Truth, just as man sees an object. There 
is Brindaban where Sri Krishna, the Indian Christ, spent 
the days of His childhood, and where He later on won the 
hearts of the Gopis,—who represent - human souls, all 
through their lives consciously or unconsciously drawn to the 
Lord. Then there is Hardwar, beautiful Hardwar, with its 
neighbour, Hrishikesh—the gateway of those mighty 
mountains, the Himalayas, And at Hardwar there are in- 
numerable monks, Some of them have been everywhere in 
India. Their feet have travelled the wandering courses of 


all its rivers, from their sources, along their lengths, down to’ 


where they lose themselves in the ocean. They have, seen 
‘the plateaus and the plains and the lesser ranges that kneel 
from north to south, or from east to west, as lesser angels, 
before the great Himalayan peaks, Then there are the gteat 
monasteries founded by the boy-saint and boy-thinker, 
Shankaracharya, who re-made and re-introduced Hiaduism and 
wrote gill hig commentaries, Gh thy endless Vedas beloreshe 

. a 


« 


4 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


had reached his sixteenth year. Then there are the monastic: 
centses founded by other lesser mystics, but all interesting 
to the monk-wanderer who desires no roof under 
which to rest, but only the presence of the Inner Wisdom, 
and who makes it his business to repeat the Name.of God, 
or else plunge into eternal meditation upon His reality 
and beatitude. 

O the quest to be alone, the long silence and solitude and 
the joy of being alone under starry skies with God! O the 
unquenchable sense of perfect freedom as the monk unseen 
goes along great byways of land and stream and hill! Othe 
freedom from tumultuous gatherings of men, the joy of call- 
ing out the Name of God where none will hear and where he 
can call as loud as his voice will carry in speech the sacred 
thought! Think of his bliss in the wilderness and forest 
where the monk depends for his very susténance on Him, 
who spreads the wings of the birds for, flight! Think of the 
consciousness that “ All is He, ” even when danger. threatens 1 
There was the case of that man who cried out, “I am one 
with the Lord ! I am one with the Lord !” even when in the 
mouth of the jungle-tiger ; and the on-looking villagers said 
to themselves, wher their terror had subsided, “ He is with 
God.” Othe plenitude of that life and its richness ! “ Give 
up all, O fool,” says the monk. Or he says, as he did to the 
rich man, “It is not I who have renounced, but thou.” 
Heights and depths of everlasting consciousness! The pres- 
ence of God, the consciousness of the soul always with one! 
Like a king is the monk, like a fearless lion is the wandering 
monk. He has left the world as it, was said of Rama, the 
Warrior-God, “He plunged into the forest as the sun enters 
amass of clouds.” Who would not give up the trinkets of 
the world for That! 

And the sublime romance of the ‘soul going out as a lover 
to find its God! Passing’ many nations and many peoples, 
seeing them only with mortal sight, because the vision is 
fixed on God! Passing the extents of many lands, but ever: 
sesidifig in the Place and peace of the Most High ! There- 

rd € 


va 


’ 
EVEN WITH THE GENERATION ANCESTBAL. 5 


fore, how can the monk take heed of physical things ? 
Sometimes he has gone so far beyond worldly-consciousness 
that he’ goes about like a child, unaware of the body. That 
is the highest state of blessedness, the state of the Parama- 
thamsa, or Great Swan of Soul who, though residing in the 
waters of this world, knows he is not of it, for he floats upon 
its surface, gifted with the royally divine knowledge that he 
is the free. What cares he for conventions ? 

They ate just like children, the great monks, Some of. - 
them wear their hair just as it grows. Some shave it off to — 
the crown. Some roll it up in great masses and knots. 
Some leave their beard to grow. Some feel it a hindrance 
and shave it off. Some clothe themselves in a rag. Some 
do not even do that. Some wear long, flowing robes. Some 
carry a cloth which they wear when they approach the 
haunts of man,’ O the joy of that freedom when the body 
is weated by each one just in that very way whereby he 
most easily forgets it} And then to have no home! What 
home can hold the monk ? What occupation will he have, 
fut the thought of God? Food ? That comes as it will, 
Sometimes it is the fare of John the Baptist. Sometimes 
it is the fare that Christ had when in the desert, before 
the world knew Him, Sometimes it is several days’ fast- 
ing. *Yes, there are times when there may be a complete 
absence of food. When the play is over the monk goes 
into Illumination. 

All this Durga Charan Dutta saw at twenty-five, A 
great vision for a lad! Most men, at that age, are occupied 
in thought with other things. But there was no half-way 
method with this young man. He could not serve God and 
Mammon at one and the same time. So he served God— 
and chose the better part. He had often seen Sadhus, as 
monks are called in India, or, Sannyasins, as they are’ 
othetwise known. He used to have them come to his house , 
and he would feed them. He would see them wandering . 
‘with their staff and begging-bow! through the streets of the | 


city, Which Sadhus sometimes visit, and would See to 
7 ~‘ 


’ 


6 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


come. They would come, because they were attracted to 
him. A Sadhu knows men, and because of his knowledge 
he avoids or associates with them, 

There would be great talks between the monks and 
Durga Charan Dutta. They would tell him of realisations. 
and thoughts that are above the ordinary man’s under- 
standing, as the stars. And there would be ecstasy and 
the scaling of mountains of feeling which few mortals know.. 
But to gain that consciousness permanently—one must 
renounce everything. But who would not do this if he 
knew ? 

So the eye of the mind follows Durga Charan Dutta—no. 
more known by that name, however, for the monk, whether 
he be of the East or of the West, forsakes all name except 
that of God or Saints. Instead of the family name he 
assumes the name of some attribute of deity or soul, Yor 
example, he might have been known as Paramananda, which 
means, “Bliss in the Supreme.” But he might not have 
taken any name. He might have wandered along, covered 
with ashes, refusing to speak, even to ask for food. There 
are monks even of this severe ascetic type, who receive food 
only when it is offered, unasked for by themselves. These 
are the great ones who never stay in any village or city 
for more than three days, lest attachment for the place-or a 
person of the place capture the heart. Sometimes this. 
extends even to trees. There was once a saint who lived 
under a banyan tree in the depth of a forest for twelve years. 
And at the end of that time a voice came to him and said, 
“Get out from under this tree. It has become Maya to you.” 
And Maya is the name for the illusion of the senses and 
thought, which obsesses even the wisest of men ; itis the 
name for bondage in any form. And the saint left that 
place and wandered like an elephant evermore without any 
permanent abiding-place. ~ 

The grandfather of the Swami Vivekananda had become. 
such a man,, or is “man” not sufficiently defining a name for 
one , WhO, has had this romance &f the soul, this oypookmupes. 

a € 


o 


EVEN WITH THE GENERATION ANCESTRAL. 7 


lite? He had forgotten all about the world, even of home, 
just as Lord Buddha had forgotten. And the mind’s 
eye sees him wandering through forests and cities, vill- 
ages and mountainous retreats. 

Five-or six years had passed—then he was in Benares, 
But before he went there, it might have been that he 
had scaled the interminable heights of the Himalayan. 
snows, even visiting that region of eternal snows, where 
the Lord dwells on the sacred Kailas peak. Above the 
marts of men, in eternal purity and silence, He dwells 

as Shiva, God of monks, immersed in eternal medi- 
* tation, while the world rumbles on. There with the 
snows and the silence and with God—many a saint 
has soared on the pinions of highest thought—and 
transcending even thought, found his soul in the pres- 
ence of the Lord. 

«How strange is life! How complex the incidents 
that are ‘of the weaving of destiny! It-was at Benares 
that an event happened full of the most touching 
humanity for him who was the monk. At that time 
even renunciation might have been a pang,—so deep aye, 
so divine is the love. between the soul of a man and 
the soul of a woman, But to the story ! 


Tease 


If 


THE TRIUMPH OF RENUNCIATION, 


Pilgrimage! Around it India gathers from north to . 
south, from east to west in a fervour of triumphant 
unity. Here, and in religion, and in the spiritual outlook, 
India is one. Need one wonder then, that the bereft 
wife of him who was Durga Charan Dutta should take 
to pilgrimage ? All these years—what had she been ? 
What had been her soul’s inmost intention during this 
long period of separation? Only to bedimmed eyes, to 
eyes of self could there have been separation. The wife 
and the husband were one, for the wife had, from the Gay 
of her husband’s setting out on the divine quest, given ber 
thought and all her life to God, joining in his desire, 
becoming one with him in the flame of his intention. 

And there was Visvanath, the son. Even the sense 
of mother she had transcended. This boy was hers in 
a larger trust only, not as a possession. All these years 
she had been what a mother should be, hut selflessly 
so. And he had grown up, strong and vigorous, child- 
ish, turbulent and full of joy. 

When the time was ripe and the boy had outgrown 
the helplessness of earliest childhood, she made up her 
mind to carry out into action her desire to go to Benares. 

Benares ! What romance the name has spelt throughout 
the ages! It has ever been the feudal centre of Hinduism. 
The greatest thinkers of India, all its heroes, all its saints 
have, at one time or another in their lives, visited this city. 
It is even to this day what it was in the days when the foot- 
prints of- Lord Buddha weré impressed upon it,—the seat 
of Brahmanical learning, the fountain-centre of orthodoxy, 
the ecclesiasfical Rome India, All the romance, all the 
* struggles all the realisation eof fae Indian Sages > ia engom- 

Pe 
ma 


THE TRIUMPH OF RENUNCIATION. z 9 


ipassed there. What Jerusalem was to the early mediaeval 
‘pilgrim, that even to this very moment is the city of Benares 
‘;to Hinduism. All'customs gather here, for all India’s people 
‘come here, This is the heart of Hinduism. Old age moves 
‘to death -most willingly in this place ; and in this place the 
dl deathly sick consider it their privilege to be released from 
i pain. Every Hindu dreams of Benares as a place sometime, 
{ somehow to be visited. 
“There it is—in a great semi-circle to-day, laved by the 
waters of the imperious Ganges. Temples and palaces rise 
sheer from the water’s edge upon high embankments of 
stone and bricks. Here and there one sees the pinnacle 
of a temple, or the cornice or the pillar of a palace peering 
above the water's surface. It had long since fallen out of 
place by the strong currents of the flooded waters. Along 
tHe lihe of the river rise the spacious Ghats. Thousands are 
lways there, bathing and praying. Bathing, as of olden 
times, in India, is with the Hindus a sacramental act. There 
—behold the buming-ghats and the smouldering heaps of 
charred bodies from which the soul has found escape ! 
And there sits one in meditation, lost to the world. And 
‘through the motley crowd, past crowded bazars, full of 
Oriental life and colour, past magnificent temples and 
through narrowest by-lanes, here and there a Sadhu is 
observed, bent on reality, His external appearance may be 


terrible, with its manifest asceticism, but O for the thought” 


of the man ! O for the thought of the hundreds of thousands 
who come from the ends of India to pour forth their soul 
in prayer and in realisation here ! 

To-day there are trains, but in those other distant days, 
trains. were unknown ; and thus we find mbther and son 
housed, among other pilgrims, in a big boat that moved by 
the oars of many men from Calcutta to Benarés, a distance 
-of about five hundred miles. There . were hardships and 


romance combined. New cities, new scenes, new customs, - 


new peoples, even a new language, came-by the,way as the 
boat, an its long journey, took"the inmates on and og. And 
i . - a 


™ 


10 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


then—of the river, the water, with all its interminable . 
length and diverse paths, was holy, as holy as the baptismal 
water which washes whiter than snow the sin-stained soul, 
For so the Hindu believes. It was “Ma Gang&”, Mother 
Ganges. For the Hindus the river is a goddess—a great, 
self-conscious entity that moves, with imperious grandeur, 
over the extent of the Indian soil. There is the old, old 
story of how this is but the shadow of the heavenly Ganges 
that Brahma, the Creator, caught up in his water-carrying 
bow! and poured upon the Feet of the Lord of the universe. 
How thence it fell upon the matted locks of Shiva, the Lord 
of monks, and how thence to earth and the plains of Hindu- 
sthan, is a many-times told tale. 

Six weeks a wanderer in a boat! Six weeks of the 
Ganges! Six weeks of daily excitement! Six weeks of 
sunrise and sunset on this, the queen of India’s riers ! 

’ How impressionable the mind of a child! All this whila@the 
future father of the Swami Vivekananda was gathiering, into 
one great emotional ensemble, the unforgettable pageant of 
this journey which, in its turn, became one of those primal 
elements in the making of that romantic temperament which 
the Swami inherited from his father. And here was the 
sense of adventure and learning and love for the beautiful! 
instilled, all at one and the same time. How were the days 
filled ? With long readings aloud from the epics and the 
Puranas, Now the story of Rama, the King-warrior Incarna- 
tion, was told; and His love for Sita and the great struggle 
through which the lovers passed were dwelt upon. Or there 
were the many stories of the Indian Christ-child, Sri Krishna. 
For example, how one day His mother gazing into the 
mouth of her Child saw the whole universe resting there. 
And so on, and many hundred- other legends, similar 
to this, _ ; 

O the fresh mornings and the cool, starry nights on the 
tiver with the rising sun or moon! O the hushed silence of 

- early dawp and fater evening, broken only by the sound of 
the splashing oars! O he ‘thant of the boatmen as they 
ae 


eat THE TRIUMPH OF RENUNCIATION. . rr 
swung their oars! The boat was a huge thing; and while 
some rowed, others paced a few steps and punted with long 
bamboo poles. And the sails when the wind was up! How 
picturesque! Then there were the days of anxious ex- 
pectancy. - They were counted by the pilgrims,—ten, seven, 
five, three days—and then the boat would find its way 
through avenues made by other boats, into the circular sweep. 
of the Ganges at Benares ! 

Each morning the sun was worshipped and at each noon 
and evening, as the symbol of the Divine Vivifier of the 
universe and of the understanding, Then there were hours 
of story-telling and hours of chant, hours of play and serious 
hours for meditation. Then there were hours for cooking 
and times for eating ; and then, there were the cool, cool 
nights when sleep was blessedness. 

B&t what tragedies may happen on a holiday !. Some- 
times death comes near. It came in this case with frightful 
menace. On a certain morning, just as the long journey 
was fast nearing its completion, Visvanath who loved the 
boat as a huge interesting live thing, was, as usual, prying 
into its nooks and corners, when an old board on which he 
had jumped too hard, gave way. It was just on the edge, 
and the boy toppled over into the water. The mother was 
looking on. She could not swim, but © the love of a 
mother! A great splash! She had jumped overboard 
in a hopeless effort ‘to snatch the child from the river. 
The current was swift. Both were sinking, but the mother 
had caught hold of the child by the hand, and death, itself, 
could hold no tighter -than she did at that time. The 
men who had seen the-terrible occurrence were at a loss. 
as to what to do. The two had drifted behind the boat. 
Then one saw the long, long raven-black hair on the 
yellow water. He plunged in. Another, to whom he called, 
plunged in after him. A third and a fourth were in the 
water.. Several energetic movements and the first man 
had the long mass of hair in a tight grasp. That saved 
the mother., It also saved the .child. The mother had 

se ener 


12 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


not let loose the intensity of her gripon the child’s hand. 
Though semi-conscious, she still held on with a death- 
grip. All his life long the child bore the marks of this 
overwhelming love and sacrifice of his mother. 

Another day—and there was Benares, the long-expected ! 
How happy were the hearts of the weary pilgrims! All 
the long, anxious expectancy had served to intensify the 
joy of this moment. Yes,—there was Benares! O all the 
sacred memories of tales of this city! Happy, happy, thrice 
happy were the pilgrims—and of all of them, hardly anyone 
was as eager with joy and keen anticipation of the many 
joyous days to come, as was the self-sacrificing mother of 
Visvanath, Then, also, there was the joy of meeting the 


group of relatives of the Dutta family. 
O the ecstasy of life in Benares! Each temple would be 


visited. Daily the bath should be taken from the Great, 
sacred bathing-ghats, There was the Golden Temple of 
Visvanath, the Lord of the universe, Then there was the 
temple of Vireswar, or Lord of heroes,—and who is the 
Lord of heroes? Why, Shiva, the God of monks! And 
she particularly selected this temple as the especial shrine 
of her devotion. Her heart desired to offer prayer for one 
who had become the servant of Shiva. 

The stress of incessant prayer and pilgrimage was relieved 
‘by the splendid panorama life offers in Benares. The heart- 
throbbings of a whole world are here and the whole heart 
throbs to things of the soul. Here is the place of the 
deification of man, of the constant worship of God in man. 
The ecstatic state remains longer with the soul in this spot 
that is like a colossal cathedral in which all thought is prayer 
and all desire, aspiration. As a perpetual light before the 
sacred Presence, is the prayer that rises unto God in Benares, 
Though all noise is hushed in silence at night in the holy 
city, the sound of ascending prayer continues ever, For 
prayer is never-ending in Benares. 

One day after anothes the pilgrim mother made her way 


te 
THE TRIUMPH OF RENUNCIATION. 13. 


‘Temple of Visvanath, the Lord of the universe. Many Sadhus 
had passed her. She had seen them all. She thought— 
but why! Was it some wild, unimaginable hope ?-—~ 
He might be among them? On a certain day, after 
she had been to the bathing-ghat, she betook herself, as usual, 
to this temple, and had almost reached its sacred precincts. 
when a monk cried aloud, “O, Mother has fallen !? and ran 
to her assistance. Aye,—she had fallen to the ground, struck 
faint with astonishment and overwhelming emotion. “It 
was he; it was he /” And now that very monk, not knowing 
who she was who had fallen, picked her up tenderly and laid 
her gently on the temple steps. She awakened from her 
dazed state. Their eyes met, and in an instant what worlds 
of different feeling played in their hearts ! But the man had 
renounced. Aye, even so had the woman done. He was seen 
a moment later, walking at a rapid pace, murmuring, “O the 
Maya! O the Maya !” ; 

And she—she had crossed the temple-compound and was 
kneeling at the Feet of the Lord. In the depth of her soul’ 
she was glad. For while there was renunciation for them both 
——there was the holiness of God in his face and the peace of 
the Lord in her heart ! 


Ill 


THE HOUSE AND HOME OF THE 
; LORDLY DUTTAS. 


A PRINCELY FATHER, 


Few are the echoes of that life which was saved by 
‘the love of a mother in the Ganges years ago. But 
here and there we are privileged with a vision, and it 
is always one of greatness. He who became the Swami 
Vivekananda said, speaking of his father in much later 
days, “Wherever my father’s blood went, there was greatness,” 
A romantic nature, fully emancipated from pettiness and 
narrowness in any line—the father of the Swami 
Vivekananda was a prince among those with. whom he 
moved. It was in his time that the family acquired that 
splendid title, “The Lordly Duttas,” 

In the city of Calcutta there is a large district, Simla by: 
name. Fifty years ago there was an atmosphere about 
it which spoke of rank and wealth, To-day the onward 
business pressure of a city’s growth has crowded out 
the spacious compounds and gardens that once surrounded 
the houses, and it has turned the out-houses of many of the 
vesidences into scores of tiny shops. Narrow lanes have been 
made by the too close crowding of buildings on either side. 
The lane that leads to the premises of the house of 
the Duttas,—for now it is only a lane~is known as 
“Gour Mohan Mookherjee’s Street,” Formerly things were 
different. There it stands, as of old, the ancient house, 
Because of the straitened circumstances of the family, 
a whole section, serving formerly as a temple-compound 
where the members worshipped, has gone into the hands 
of others, And the same must be told of other’ parts 
and land¢ that were fhe Duttas’ in other times, The 

¢ € s ~ . 


“i i er 


THE HOME OF THE LORDLY DUTTAS, 15 


hhouse itself still stands. The ‘doorway that fronts upon 
the street is massive. It might have served the purposes of 
a@ gateway. Certainly in the room built to the left, the 
old days saw a Durwan in constant attendance. But now 
the room is gray with age; and on the other side one 
sees the relic of a great chair that the father used in 
his lifetime, over which his famous son, as a boy, used 
to scamper, and which is now cherished in sacred memory, 
These are touching memories of old days. But in those 
days there were several such doorways,—themselves proud 
sentinels of the inmates behind their visible strength 
In observing so many Hindu doorways one is translated 
into the periods of Egyptian architecture with its massive 
and yet intense simplicity. The covered hall with the 
room on one side and the sitting-space on the other, is 
an approach to a second doorway. Behind this is the 
courtyard with the’ living-houses limiting its compound, 
in India houses are inevitably built about a courtyard, 

What memories are those of Indian courtyards ! Here 
is the romance of the Indian world. Here the children 
make their playground and play. Here the strict guard 
of the zenana is softened—and here, in this particular 
house, if one is so privileged, he sees maidens with deep, 
dark yes, attending to the duties of the household, 
Here are the utensils of shining brass, And here are the ring. 
ing merry laughter and the talking and the freedom that are 
‘always locked up in inscrutable silence and behind a veiled 
countenance to the outside of the great doorway. Here the 
babies play, with nothing as dress save a silver chain to re- 
‘lieve the brown velvet of their skins. And here their eye- 
lashes and the spaces above and under their eyes are painted 

. tomake it cool for them to see, when the sun is fierce with 
heat. And here are the old and tried servants, What an 
endeared position they hold in the’ Indian family. It is even 
tothis extent, that the children of the family must look 
upon the servants of their father and their mother as, brothers, 

: Sons,and daughters of the house&old, And it may be that*over 

; eA : oS 


16 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


the whole household, as its guardian angel watches the aged. 
venerable widow, the mother of the house and its head. 

In this particular house, to the right are the rooms for. the 
men members, And just before the entrance rooms is the 
long veranda where feasts are spread in the great entertain- 
ments. This is but one story in height. Facing the doorway 
to the house, and across the courtyard, adjoining the compart- 
ment for the men members, rises the zenana, two stories in 
height. Below, is the Oriental kitchen in all its convenient 
simplicity. Above, are the dwelling chambers, From the lattic- 
ed enclosure the purdah ladies could see into the courtyard 
when the great Pujas, or religious ceremonies, were performed 
in the old days, to the beating of drums and the blowing of 
conch-shells and the prayers of many on-lookers. It was 
here that the semblances of the gods were worshipped on the 
occasion of their respective festivities, All the art of the 
artisan is spent in beauty upon these images which are made 
of clay ; and yet so resplendently are they decorated anu ex- 
quisitely wrought. Following the Puja the image is borne. 
to the river with lights and bands playing music, to be 
consigned to the sacred waters of the Ganges. From the. 
purdah enclosure the ladies can watch the assembled male 
guests and see their rejoicings at the time of festival and 
friendship. The purdah is the privileged part. All the niceties. 
and all the richness of the family life are here, and what a 
life! No intruder! Only the faces of those who are well- 
beloved are seen; and here are heard the prattle of the 
children and the voices of love. : 

But the blessing of every Hindu household is the roof. 
It is the sought-out place for the evening and the night. But. 
this is Oriental from the Bay of Bengal to the hilis of far-off 
Judea. It was of old; it is so even now. There is only ‘the 
deep Indian night, only the mystic canopy of stars for roof. 
And every house-roof is such that it excludes the eyes of 
strangers. Here one is alone, except with the love of the . 
family and the sanctity.of home, Resting in comfort upon 
the roof, the children dream h~ppy dreams, and the maidens. : 


ne 


A PRINCELY FATHER, 17 


discuss in soft tones the destinies which will be theirs. Or it 
may be that the bride-maiden, returning for a few days to the 
housé of her father, will bring her silent meditation here, 
And the worries and the weariness are forgotten here in the 
coolness and the freshness of the evening’s breeze, 

Year in and year out this was thé day’s atmosphere and 
this was the home of Visvanath, who was last thought of with 
his mother in Benares. They had returned, the mother to her 
assemblage of domestic duties, the boy to play with his 
fellows and to be initiated into the mysteries of school, 

The years rolled by from day today, The boy had grown 
to be the pride of the Duttas. He ranked high in his youthful 
accomplishments and the hearts of his people were set upon 
him in hope and expectation—and there was every promise 
of fulfilment. . 

It Was in the twelfth year of his life that one day a San- 

nyasim walked with that freedom which years of life in the 
open give, info the courtyard of the Dutta home. Instinc. 
. tively, the boy ran to him. But instead of being caught up in 
the arms of the monk he found that he was being blessed, 
The hand of benediction fested on his head—and the boy 
bowed down and took the dust of the wanderer’s feet, which 
is the Oriental form of most respectful salutation. 

There are rules that guide the life of the wandering monk, , 
One of them enjoins, not so much as a duty but as a pious 

' observance, that he visit the place of his birth when twelve 
years of that life in the thought of God have been completed, 
By that time all attachment has been erased for those out- 
ward relations that deperid on form and qualities of form. 
Then, too, the body of the monk is considered dead, The 
consciousness of the monk is one-d with Shiva, There 
is a“ picture of Shiva filled with deep, wondrous sym- 
bolism. He carries with Him a dead body, or rather the 
dead body is bound to Him. And the monk himself is 
Shiva—the Great Monk, and to his own soul the body he 
wears is dead ; and thus in his own casé the symboli¢ picture 
“of Shivads made incarnate, | * 

’ 


18 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


It was 4e once more. But that he had come to his own 
house was a matter, not of his own will, but at the insistence 
of a friend and neighbour at whose house he had called. The 
latter informed the family and they brought him to his own 
former home. The monk was locked up asif .he werea 
priceless treasure. It was insisted that he must return to the 
world, for the son’s sake, if for none other. What tempta- 
tion! He must leave. He had not expected this, Three 
days he was kept—but on the fourth day he made his escape. 
In coming to his place of birth it was but a sacramental act 
he had performed, an injunction of the Law. 

On the highway again! What thought of wife and son! 
Yes, the son he had seen, but then it was the Lord’s child, 
not his. The wife? He had not seen her. While the birth- 
place must be visited, those mortal sentiments that renew 
bondage may not be awakened. Dead to the world is the 
monk! Had he thought of her? Aye,—but she had- been 
dead a year since, glorying all the while in his triumphant 
renunciation, and herself breathing the same spirit of renun- 
ciation tothe end. He heard this;—and breathing a great 
prayer for the casting aside of all illusion, he went forth into 
the open and into the future—heard of nevermore. There- 
after there was much inferring by the loved ones left behind, 
but never was there knowledge of his whereabouts. . 

And Visvanath grew up to man’s estate, versed in the 
languages and all the modes of Oriental thought. He adopt- 
ed the legal profession as a family inheritance; and he made 
his knowledge of the law felt in distant parts of the land, as 
well as at.home ; even so did his réputation grow. He wasa 
man of means, and one who believed in living life intensely. 
It was for this reason that he lived that life which made the 
family of the Duttas enviably famous as “ lordly.” . He felt 
freedom with all the intensity of a passionate understanding; 
He moved and thought and lived as he felt; and he lived as 
the wind. But, withal, he was a man who loved the depth of 
learning. A scholar‘was he of that ardent type which seeks 

“for r€ality in thought ard knowledge. But te hims what to 


A PRINCELY FATHER, ’ ig 


‘others was study, was natural illumination. He played with 
knowledge ; for the greatness of his intellectual capacity 
Mmadé it all play to him. History was his intellectual inten- 
‘sity. How he loved to classify the tempests of the nations 
into world: syntheses and conceptions, carving out from the 
perusal of the world’s experience that sublime morality which 
sees deeper than good and deeper than evil ! 

He had that master-understanding of men and a conse- 
‘quent compassion for the afflicted which made him known 
for charity and sympathy. Criticised at one time for having 
given something to an inveterate drunkard, he replied in that 
‘deep spiritual way he had, “ What does it matter? Life is so 
‘wretched as it is ; it will not hurt to make a poor fellow for- 
get the wretchedness of it for a moment, even if he does 
‘spend the money on drink.” It was his belief that only in 
‘experience does the soul grow, not through any reform 
meth€d, Only when a man has had all his desires that are 
-of a lesser order fulfilled, wili he awaken within himself a 

‘ehigher order of reality both in thought and in desire. 

He was always at odds with life, Unconsciously he sensed 
‘himself greater than the farce of it all. It was wretched- 
ness as commonplacely lived. So he lived it intensely and 
tomantically, No one knew at what time he would leave 
bome for distant parts. His reputation was such and his 
learning and his capacity for friendship were so great that he 
could not escape being well-known 3 and soon the news of his 
whereabouts would reach his Calcutta friends, He was a man 
who realised from a mere worldly point of view that the net- 
work of society with its struggles and its faws was a very 
inferior thing, no matter how important people might believe 
their own will-o’-the-wisp chasing to be and-that there must 
be something in the way of higher reality beyond, 

Indeed, he was one of the “grand men” of Calcutta, 
But he possessed much sweetness, as well, His family was 
closest to his heart, He was proud of his bequest to the 
immediate generation, He simply knew that things Yyould ‘be 
well with theschildren—aye, sarticWarly.wigh that imperial- 


20 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


minded son of his, Norendra, the future Vivekananda. So 
he took not much care, as over-anxious people do,—for he 
knew himself and he knew them. In all things a connois- 
seur, it is not strange to find him foremost in the arts of the 
commonplace kitchen. Something startlingly new must 
always happen in the realm of the kitchen—and so, every 
day a new dainty dish must be prepared for the guests and that, 
too, by his own hand. This man was a king amongst enter- 
tainers, a most surprising host. He entertained in such 
fashion, that even to this day it is a memory. As to charity, 
he was a man whom the poor loved, and for very good reason, 
for Visvanath Dutta was a father to the poor. 

As an instance of the character of the man,—there was a 
time when Norendra, his eldest son, came to him with the 
question, “ What have you done for me ?” Instantly came the 
reply, “Go, look at yourself in the mirror!” And there was 
understanding at the moment for the son. He knew that his _ 
father was a king amongst men, verily as the Vedas say, “a 
bull among the herd.” 

There was another time, also, when Norendra came to 
him for instruction in the ways of the world, asking his father 
what were the elements of real good manners. And the 
father said, “ Never show surprise !” Was it this laconic 
counsel from his parent that, followed out, made it- possible 
for Vivekananda in his later life to walk with equal dignity 
into the palaces of the East and West-and into the huts and 
hovels of the poorest of India’s poor ! 

Still does one come across aged persons who knew the 
father of the Swami Vivekananda. When his nameis referred 
to, however, it is as of one who created unforgettable impres- 
sions and made great friendships wherever he went—and as 
of one who, in all conditions of life and circumstances of 
fortune, was every inch a man, every inch a king, 


IV 


THE DREAM OF BHUVANESWARI MATA. 


Whosoever knows the longing of a mother that a son shall 
be born to her, enters into the world where Bhuvaneswari Dutta, 
the wife of the princely Visvanath Dutta, hoped and prayed. 
Ata certain time, when she had already given birth to two 
daughters the desire for a son came upon her with all that 
intensity of blessed pain and silent and patient expectancy 
that makes of a woman, the transfigured human personality. 
Two tiny girls played before her, but she, the wife and mother, 
was wrapt in solitude of thought. Ever and anon she would 
breathe’ prayer aloud. Those who loved and knew her, read: 
intensity of longing in her eyes and they knew, but spoke 

; nothing. Every Hindu mother and every Hindu father look 
forward to the birth of a son as the efflulgent climax of their 
fortune, for then the injunction of the Shastras, or Laws, has 
been kept, and there shall be the line of posterities and the 
link shall have been forged, out of the materials of love and, 
suffering, between the future and the past. 

__ The mother is the first in the household to welcome the 
dawn; and her round of daily duties finished, she betakes 
herself to prayer and spiritural thought. As soon as the 
eyes have been opened from sleep, the first word uttered by 
Hindu lips must be the Name of the Lord. This, too, must 
bé the last thought and thé fast utterance when sleep closes 
the weary lids. But with Bhuvaneswari Mata, added to the 
morning and evening prayer was the silent thought, the silent _ 
hope that the’ Lord would be merciful to her particular wish. 

In Benares lived an old aunt of the family. Now it was 
customary in those days—as it still is—that when one living a . 
long distance from Benares was in dire need, or jn great hope 
that some special desire should come to Pass, one made offer- 
éngs and merits to Shiva through relgtivesand friends tMere, * 


22 JHE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


for the particular necessity. To this old aunt Bhuvanesward 
Mita had recourse. She wrote a lengthy epistle to this old 
lady, asking her to have prayers and ceremonies made to 
Vireshwar Shiva, that a son might take birth in her family. 
The old aunt was equal to the message. Ancient with age, 
she managed daily to thread her way, staff in hand, from her 
home to the great temple with flowers and Ganges water and 
there offer prayers and sacrifice. 

When Mata Bhuvaneswari received a letter some long 
weeks later, written by aged hands, informing her of the daily 
offerings and prayers made to Shiva in Benares, she became 
glad with hope. The intensity of her expression relaxed, 
and those who knew and loved her, saw her, as of old, the 
joyous mother of daughters, the proud wife of Visvanath 
Dutta, For even unto her-dying day was this woman a queen, 
While other Hindu women are brought up in the thought that 
good manners consist in complete retirement, even <to the 
point of shyness,—she had always been full of the fire a woman 
sometimes embodies, when born, as it were, to regal estate. 
Even in her old age was Bhuvaneswari Mata a “great lady.” 
Those who found themselves in her company instinctively 
made way for her, whether in thought or in the precedence of 
manners, Power and reserve characterised this Hindu woman, 
and in ‘her aged days, these’ characteristics were stamped 
indelibly. There was a consciousness of superiority with her- 
that made one feel as if he were in the presence of a woman, 
indeed a queen—and that it was a privilege to be near and be 
with her, She was known for her unusual readiness and ten- 
acity of memory ; and she knew by heart, as one says, whole 
Passages from the old Indian epics, the Ramayana and the 
Mahabharata. What worlds of thought and culture and feel- 
ing and historic and race conscicusness these epics contain t 
And Bhuvaneswari Mata, was the master of these and of the 
culture, as well, to which they are the key. She was con- 
scious of that culture as of a privilege and a blessedness, And ~ 
she. bequeathed this* right foyally to her children, as their ~. 
‘grea(est inheritance. And it was this bequest-that throbbed, 3 


THE DREAM OF BHUVANESWARI MATA. - - 23 


in the personality, behind the race pride and the race con- 
sciousness of her son, the Swami Vivekananda, 

‘The woman in India is the custodian of the culture.* 
She is the vessel into which is Poured the treasure of the © 
race’s outlook on life, its capacities for feeling and idealisa- 
tion. Her career lies in the conscious acceptance and under- 
standing of this as her mission ; and that is why the career 
of the Hindu woman is always in the domain of the feelings 
and why it inevitably spells character. There is religion in 
India for the woman in the spiritual possibilities of the domes- 
tic life. There is religion for her in the highest conception of 
husband and in the duties and in the divinity of mother- 
hood,—that wondrous opportunity of giving likeness of express- 
ion and likeness of life to other souls about to come into 
this world. The Hindu woman is all a woman can be who has 
the exalted vision of the true and the spiritual womanhood, 

Withal,—to return to Bhuvaneswari Mata,a queen amongst 
Indian women—she was a woman and a mother, and so 
the news from Benares gave her high hope. Days passed 
into weeks, and she was glad. Her whole soul rejoiced in 
the news ;—and her whole soul was in that atmosphere of 
Constant recollectedness and her thought was fixed in 
holiest love for Lord Shiva, She needed no sacred city 
of Benares with its temples, for her own very thought was 
Benares ; her own very thought was the dwelling-place of 
Shiva, the Most High, She felt ; aye, she knew that the oi 
Lord of life would hear her prayers, She redoubled them. 
With what fervour she prayed ! Surely God was there in 
her heart ; for He is bound by the love of His devotees, as 
He Himself has said. Love on the part of His devotees 
makes Him the Fulfiller of all their desires. And even in 
the psychology of things, is this true ; for when the soul 
longs, when the great spiritual force of the self reaches out,— 
what, in all the’ universe, shall ‘hinder it from attaining 
that unto which it aspires! The faith inherent in a great 

- desire verily removes mountains. Spwitual earnestness is the 
highest, of all powers, . 


rtd : 


— 


24 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


Vision follows Bhuvaneswari Mata into the inmost 
recesses of her home and finds her in constant communion 
with the’ Lord, even while performing the humble duties of 
the household. Like another Mary she is, at all times, wrapt 
in prayer. The members of the household spoke of that 
time, saying that the very house radiated with ecstatic 
power. Of course they knew not why ; they only knew that 
Bhuvaneswari MatA had become saintly. O nothing can 
limit the wonders God may bring about! And a wonder 
was to be, a wonder of God’s own planning—as the 
days revealed ! 

Often, often did the soul of Bhuvaneswari Mata go forth 
longingly and in pious desire to Benares, She was present 
in thought while the venerable aunt poured the sacred 
water of the Ganges upon the emblem of the Most High, 
and with joy worshipped Him with flowers and Mantrafns. 

O if she could only be in Benares and hear the thoustnds 
murmur, “Shiva! Shiva! Hara! Hara! Mahadeva!” in 
recollected thought. Every bather in the flowing Ganges 
there is a soulin sacramental atmosphere. And there the 
Mother dances in the field of Shiva—which is the burning- 
ground. That is why He is-called Shmashdneswar or Lord 
of burning-grounds. For Mother is the Destroyer as well, 
the Destroyer of the unreal. So the body which is the 
greatest superstition is Her field of destruction. And in the 
curling smoke which rises from the pyre, in the flames which 
lick the stiffened corpse to ashes, in the devouring heat She 
is there while Her Consort, the Lord of the Universe, is 
close at hand, dwelling within the Ocean of His Thought, for 
He dwells in Absolute Knowledge, and not in form. 
And the burning of the whole world could be nothing 
to Him ! ° 

It was He, they say, that took on the appearance of a 
great swan, and sailing majestically towards that point where 
four sages sat in meditation, began to address them upon 
the illusion of the worldf Who were these sages, it is asked ? 
Tkey ‘had been created hy Biahma, the Creatog of the uni- 


€,. 


THE DREAM OF BIIUVANESWARI MATA. 25 


verse, to propagate the world. But by their nature,they 
were pure. So they were lost in meditation, sitting on the 
“panks of the sacred lake, Manassarovar, at the foot of 
Kailash in the inner regions of the vast Himalayas, Lord 
Shiva’s abode, when they were drawn out fram meditation 
by the voice of the Lord, Who queried as to their purport, 
They told Him that Brahma had instructed them to 
propagate the world. Then said Shiva, “This world isa 
prison-house. Have nothing to do with it whatsoever !” 
And they heeding these words sank into Eternal Meditation 
and were lost to the intention of Brahm4 ; and they went 
unto Shiva, Who is Eternal Consciousness beyond the 
ehanges of the changing world, And Brahma, in his 
dilemma, had to create ten lesser gods to do his bidding. 
So runs the story, 

And yet, the Destroyer of Illusion is so compassionate,— 
ay@ He gives unto all whatsoever they ask, leading them, 
through the fulfilment of all lesser wishes, ever towards that 
goal which is the Real. Is not the story beautiful, of the 
low-caste hunter and the compassion of the Lord ! Lost in 
the forest at dead of night, he had climbed the v7/va-tree 
near by to take refuge from the beasts, Thoughts came to 
him of his starving wife and child at home, and_ tears 
flowed from his eyes ; and they fell on the leaves which 
thereupon dropped, falling upon an image of Shiva which 
had been erected beneath the tree which isso sacred to 
Him. This unconscious worship had its reward. That 
night a black snake became the messenger of the Lord. It 
bit the hunter and he was released from the body, and went 
.with the aid of the Lord’s attendant spirits, into the high 
heaven where dwell the Sons of God. Dispute arose among 
the gods and crying qut they said, “What hath this mortal 
done that he should come to this >” And the Lord, hearing 
this dispute, entered into the héarts of the speakers, saying, 
“For he has worshipped Me with tears, and with the leaves 
of My vzlva-tree he has awakenec’My compassion.” And 


then ghe gods rejoiced, because the Lord was pleaseds * . 
~ 


26 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


Was Bhuvaneswari Mata pursuing some such trend of 
thought concerning the Lord! Certainly He had been in 
her mind every hour of the days since her vows were made 
of fasting, meditation, worship and of other asceticisms, 
Legends of Him, tales of His mercy and of His greatness 
ran through her mind. She found herself constantly call- 
ingon Him. Daily she had worshipped Him before His 
own special image with garlands of flowers and with other 
accustomed offerings. And all that thought had been with 
her for many days. All that love for the Lord which His 
servants know came upon her, stealing even the thought 
from her for which she temporarily had taken upon herself 
the vowed life of the ascetic, the vowed life of the servant 
of Shiva, 

That final morning when vision was to be hers, she had 
been meditating upon Him as the Lord of monks, She “had 
been thinking of Him in that ardent depth of insight when 
the soul sees the Lord as the Breaker of all Dreams, the: 
Harbinger of Everlasting Things. “And what is His appear- 
ance in that form! O His form is white with ashes, even 
as the mighty Himalayas are white with snows! His locks 
of hair are matted, and above them is the spread hood of 
the cobra, which serves Him for the covering of head. And 
the cobra is the great symbol of wisdom, And about His loins, 
He wears a tiger’s skin, and above His head there shines, 
effulgent,—the new, the crescent moon ! He is mightier than 
the mightiest! He has nothing! He is everything! In Him 
the worlds move ; but He is unconscious of the world in the 
Sublimity of His meditation. Lost, lost, lost in the abysm 
of His Godhead—Immovable as are the Himalayas, whose 
peaks rise so high above the sound of life, that they alone 
join in His Peace, His Bliss. Aye, He is the Essence of the 
Soul of man! 

Evening came. She had spent the day at His shrine, 
Evening came and glided gently by, bringing on the depth 
of night. And O the wdaders of that night! Bhuvaneswari 
Mata felkasleen, Hushed incilefre wac the heauccehknld hos 


THE DREAM OF BHUVANESWARI MATA, 27 


in silence and in rest. Then in the highest heavens the hour 
struck, the time was when the soul of the saintly woman had 
touched the Feet of the Lord, and a wonderful compassion 
came over Him. And then the Lord Shiva, so she thought in 
her remarkable dream, came presently from the depth of His 
Transcendent Meditation, taking form even as her own son, 

She awoke. Was the ocean of light in which she thought 
herself bathed but a dream ? 

Shiva! Shiva! Lord God of monks ! Thou fulfillest in. 
various ways the prayers of Thy devotees, 


Vv 


THE BIRTH AND NAME OF THE MASTER. 


Great saints are like stars, dwelling in a firmament by 
themselves, above the world of ordinary life—and yet, be- 
cause of their exalted height, they can be seen by all the 
peoples of the earth in all times, And the radiance of these 
great lives shines equally, in their spiritual circumference, 
upon all men. 

Itis said that the star rose in the East. ‘That firmament 
is always Eastern in which the greatest stars shine forth. 
It was Eastern again. It may be that invisible choirs did 
not sing a “Gloria” at the birth of the child of Bhubaneswari 
Mata. But certainly her heart went up to the Lord of Beittg 
in a grand “Magnificat.” And she felt that the Lord had 
blessed her. 

And there was a blessed excitement in that household, 
‘and they who had long expected this and had prayed 
for it were exultant in their joy. A son! A son! Truly! 
Happy, happy mother! Her eyes were bright with a glorious 
meaning and her thoughts at that moment were above the 
world. The long months of expectancy had met with 
most happy fulfilment. And she felt that she had reason 
to call herself blessed among women, and from her very 
inmost soul the joy of the spirit welled up. 

O the worlds through which each mind has passed— 
if one looks with Emerson upon every individual as an 
adult at birth! The body just born,—but what timeless 
age of soul, what multitudes of lives behind the net-work 
of mind! And certainly, a great mind comes from an 
enormous distance in the Ilfimitable Past ; and certainly 
the force born with it represents the accumulated intensity 
of ages upon ages of experience. O the wonder that 
each ssouileis! But the depth Gf the wonder of a great 

a & aes 


THE BIRTIT AND NAME OF THE MASTER, 29 


soul overshadows man with awe! And one dreams of 
God and the verities beyond as true, Every man coming 
into this world has woven about him the texture of a 
far-reaching Past, and at bottom—if one could but see— 
is the same, all-unifying splendour of divinity, To become 
conscious of this is the work of myriad lives. Command- 
ing then, of itself, is the spirit incarnate that has 
worked and lived to this end, consciously, through many 
life-times, There is something inscrutable in the make-up 
of the personality that borders upon divinity, something 
compelling. Reverence becomes instinctive. And even 
from earliest childhood are there characteristic signs and 
foreshadowings. 

The light of the world dawned for the first time to 
the future Swami Vivekananda on the twelfth of January, 
eighteen hundred and sixty-three, several months following 
the vision of Bhuvaneswari Dutta at the ending of her 

“ fasts and prayers. As chance would have it, that very 
date was a day of universal festive rejoicing in Bengal— 
the last day of Paush, which is the ninth month of the 
Bengali year—when everybody is happy because it is 
heyday and one of the great festivals of Mother Ganges, 
the time of Makar-Sankranti, the time of harvest, when 
the- Indian house is renewed, when the door-sills are painted 
and even the animals are adorned with flowers, 

It is by the light and the changes of the moon that 
days and dates are measured in India. That is why 
. festivals are movable. And that is why the birthday of 
a boy or girl is kept according to the calendar of the 
moon, Just so is the fixing of the Easter-day with the 
West—it is an ancient inheritance from those other 
Orientals, the peoples of old Judza. 

Good reason was there for much heightened joy, did 
the people of India but know that on the last day of 
Paush in that year he first saw the light who should alter 
the destinies of the land. Now’ of course, @illions know ., 
ang knowing, celebrate this festive day of the*birta of 


% 


jo THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


him who reorganised the whole spiritual and national 
‘consciousness of Hindusthan and became the Great Apostle, 
‘another Paul, preaching unto the Gentiles of the West 
the gospel of another redemption—the message of Hinduism. 
But he upon whom such greatness and responsibility 
was to fall lay as a babe in the mother’s arms, content 
‘as all other babes to rest there where’love is deepest, most 
selfless and most self-sacrificing. And he was inbreathing 
all the greatness of that thought the mother had dreamed 
so long since in profoundest worship at the Feet of Shiva— 
aye, and perhaps the inmost contents of that vision. 
And that relationship was in the making which was to 
‘be the background, with other forms of culture and ex- 
perience, to that wonderful consciousness he displayed, 
in later times, before the greatest religious assembly the 
world has ever known—the Parliament of Religiong at 
‘Chicago in America. For the Hindu mother’s heart is 
the treasure-place of the nation’s lore and of the nation’s 
life. Here does the child gather, unconsciously, the 
association of those things which make him feel proud 
of being of the Hindu race whose outlook on life is far 
beyond its mortal forms, and whose penetration passes the 
wealm of things earthly into the consciousness of the Spirit 
Itself. Here, in short, he imbibes Hinduism. . 
And the mother treasured unto herself each and every 
faint reaching-out of the soul at consciousness and expression. 
What is deeper than the gaze of a babe? And how 
‘many things does the trained eye see in the lineaments 
of its countenance! Sometimes it’ is unspeakable age. 
Sometimes it is the learning of the sage. Aye, the gaze 
of a babe often disconcerts the wisest of men. Who cart 
tell what the old soul may be tracing on the baby face? 
A babe is a babe only in its lack of expression ; otherwise 
what gospels and what tales would it tell! Its knowledge 
is the simplest and yet the most wonderful in the world. 


‘But mothess are wiser “than the wisest and what they see, 
Oh aes aack A eal ate at lois oe eta 2s an ta 


THE BIRTH AND NAME OF THE MASTER, 3r 


Babyhood is ever only in appearance. It is the veil 
which the years tear, revealing the mind, the personality, 
the conscious being. And there are devils and there are 
angels—aye, and there are even gods who slumber, 
impotent of expression, in the mother’s arms, And all 
the while there are Great cycles of change and instinct 
that move in formation in the greater world of the sub. 
conscious self—ready, in the flowing of the years, for 
the new human revelation, whatever be its character or 
intensity in the degree. And who knows what former visions 
of mind, aye even of soul, are merging into the tendency 
which is to become the future life! There is always the 
stream of the making of tendency. If one fastens attention 
upon the mind, adult even in the babe just born, he grows 
aware of the incalculable mental past. The murderer or the 
sain’, the god or the demon is in the contrast, And ia 


the® case of the saint that is to be,—on what subtle and’ 


exalted planes does his mind move, even though the form be 
that of the babe ! What visions and realisations of the past 
is he transforming into the channels of instinctive tendency ! 
The nearness that was felt by his mind in former lives to God, 
is fixing itself for the future becoming of a powerful faculty 
for prayer and meditation, The aspirations of the great 
past of its mind are forming, in the dim consciousness of the 
infant, to become methods, later, of approach to the divine 
and of sensing the reality. 

But all these things are wisely hidden from the knowledge 
of men. Otherwise the great order of human development 
would be disturbed, and too much would be known of what 
was to be, And many thresholds of future greatness would 
be closed by those who were willing to stifle the birth 
of redeeming events, just as Herod, the king of Judza, 
would frustrate Christianity. in the murderous intention 
he had. O the man that lurks in the child, the man that 
the years draw out ! Buddha, Saint Francis of Assisi, Christ, 

- Napoleon, Nero, all these are ther’, in the ages, behind that 
infagt form ! » 
-@ 


~~ 


32 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


He was born a Kayastha by caste } and the Kayasthas 
are second in rank of India’s social body in Bengal. This 
was the family’s caste, and it was as proud of its lineage 
as kings are proud of theirs. The Kayastha is a branch 
of the great community of Kshattriyas, which .is the 
caste of warriors ; and all kings are of this caste. 

The members of the household were surprised at the 
features of the new-born babe. They believed that they 
resembled, in so many ways, those of the grandfather, Durga 
Charan Dutta, of Sadhu memories. They thought, was it 
that the monk, having passed through the transition of 
death, was now come again! And the infant grew, and the 
days passed into weeks and the weeks into months ; and 
the time came when a name had to be given him. There 
was speculation and much exchange of words as to the 
name. Some thought that it should be Durgadas after the 
grandfather who had renounced the world. But when (aey 
had asked the mother, she looked into the depths of the 


‘ child’s eyes, as if she would find out his very soul. There 


was a strange stillness for some moments, Then she turned 
to them and with much depth of feeling said, “His name ; let 
it be Vireswar! So shall he be called.” And those who 
heard this were satisfied. They knew what the mother felt. 
Seriousness subsided. Human thoughts and human feelings 
had way, He wasa babe ; she was the mother ; and they 
were men and women in years. They called him “Bileh’ 
for short. “Vireswar,” however, was what parents call the 
“Rdshi-ndma” which is determined by the constellation in 
which one is born, Later there is a ceremony when the 
name, by which the child is known to the world at large, 
is given, ‘“Vireswar” became Norendra Nath, and Norendra 
Nath means the “Lord of the Princes of Men.” 

Shiva! Shiva! From Thy Yoga-seat in Kailash, Thou 
surveyest the Eternity of God. Thou Thyself art That. 
Allin All, yet Thou choosest for Thyself what others will 
not have. . Casting asile the richness of the world, Thou 
goest farbed in ashes, faring, navght for easthly things, 


THE BIRTH AND NAME OF THE MASTER, 33 


Tadwelling in each soul as God, Thou Spurnest all the 
tfeasures that follow in the wake of desire, the constant 
handmaiden of worldly illusion. Those who know, renounce, 
and thus merge in Thee, Thyself do they become: And 
every monk is Thine Incarnate Thought. The Great Monk 
is verily Thyself ! 


Vie 


THE PERIOD OF CHILDHOOD. ; 


And there Bileh sat where his mother had put him with 
the cool water flowing from the tap upon his head! He had 
been naughty. What a self-willed child he was! And he’ 
would tear the family peace inté shreds as often as it came 
to him to do so. And then the whole family would be at a 
loss. Those who could not stand the turmoil would flee 
from the scene, leaving the mother to battle with her boy. 
No remedies were of any avail. She did not know what to 
do. with. the child. She had scolded ; she had threatened ; 
she had carried out her threat, but all to no purpgse. At 
last-—a discovery, the tap and the water ! So she took her 
three-year-old son, dressed in his little silver chain about 
the waist,—he screaming at the top of his voice,—and set 
him down: under the tap and turned the water on. Mean- 
while she murmured, “Shiva ! Shiva !? And then to the 
family she would say, “Here I have prayed to Shiva for a 
son, and He has sent me one of His demons !” But this 
shower-bath was invariably effective. And she would threat- 
en him, “Shiva will not let you come to Kailas if you don’t 
behave yourself !” And he would stop scteaming and ina 
few minutes he would be his eager, joyous self again. 

In her old age Bhuvaneswari Dutta was telling this tale 
to a group of disciples her son had gathered in the West ; 
and there was laughter, and the mother smiled in a character- 
istic reminiscent. way. And her mind went back to other - 
things. “Was he turbulent >?” asked one. “Well, I had to 
have two nurses for hii constantly,” she replied. 

And she told of the fancy he had for wandering 
monks, Whenever’ they would come, nothing would hold 
hiss back. Did they, asi for anything, he would give it. 
And this often” caused great embarrassment, Fer example, 


‘ i 


THE PERIOD OF CHILDHOOD. 35 


he had just been given his first garment, a hand-embroidered 
dhoott, when a Sadhu came -into the doorway with 
begging-bowl calling in the way wandering monks announce 
their approach, “Narayana Hari! Narayatia Hari !” which 
are the names of the Lord ! That would invariably send 
a shiver of delight through the child, Noren,—as he was 
called, because “Norendra” was so long and formal—and 
he would dance with glee. On this occasion the monk asked 
for a cloth, a dhootz, Noren was immediately equal to the 
occasion. He was proud of his new dhoote, It gave him pres- 
tige over the other little fellows—and he did love Prestige, 
Off the dhootd went though. The Sadhu was amused, Why, it 
would not go even twice about his loins, But yet he accepted 
the offering and left with Noren’s dhooti fashioned into a 
turban on his head. The family of course knew what had 
happertd, a few minutes later. And as the result Noren 
had a® unforgettable impression ! Thereafter close guard was 
kept on him, Many Sadhus came to the Dutta home, They 
knew that they were always welcome, The father was most 
hospitable. And there was with him the memory of his 
father, the Sadhu ! - 


But whenever any monk put in his appearance thereafter, 
Noren was seized and locked up until the wanderer had 
taken his departure, But that did not disconcert the child, 
He took whatever his hands could find in the way of com. 
fortable presents for the Msitor, and threw them out of the 
window when the family back was turned, He would have 
his way—and_ then he would dance with excitement, turning 
up his nose in triumphant defiance at the family distress, 

What a tease he was! . There were his two elder sisters, 
And elder sisters, sometimes, do not get on with their little 
brothers. He would tease, tease, tease! And the sisters 

_ Would be furious ; and there would. be a chase, Just at the 
very moment when they thought that they had him and 
were meditating dire vengeance, he would fly “to the open 
drain, and then grin and make faces, And he coukd make 
such hidgous faces, they say ! The sisters could not approach" 

-s : 


36 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


the drain ; that would render them unholy. But he did not 
care in the least for the holiness or unholiness, and would irri- 
tate them the more with his triumphant challenge of, “ Catch 
me ! Catch me!” Play, play, play is the vision of childhood 

How endeared to the Hindu household is the gentle cow! 
How many are the sweet traditions that gather about her ! 
Giver of milk, the drink of life, she is raised in the national 
estimation from the mere’animal regard into a personality,— 
aye, even to the dignity of motherhood. And one can see- 
any day how the Hindu woman, going afield to fetch the- 
cow, will call,“ Esko Ma! Esho £’ which means, “Come 
Mother ! Come !” And the cow puts up her ears and looks: 
with all the love that an animal knows and comes happily in 
the direction of the calling voice. What spirit of tenderness. 
this engenders ; what noble thoughts towards the animal 
selves! Any day one may see cows strolling through the 
narrow lanes of any Hindu city and oftentimes entering the- 
courtyards of Hindu homes, pushing their way through the 
partly-opened doors. Or one may see them lying comfort- 
ably upon the city-streets, or feeding from the hands of 
shopkeepers in the crowded bazaars. The family cow was one 
of the playmates of Noren. And one can see him, as it were, 
assisting his sisters on the festive occasion when they adorn 
‘mother.cow’ with garlands of flowers and bow down to her. 
How touching are the relations of the daughters of the Hindu 
household with the cow, the benefactress of the home! But 
Noren had other playmates in his childhood, amongst them 
being a monkey, a goat, a peacock and, best of all, a group 
of pigeons and two or three white mice, These were his 
comrades and he would feed them with his own hands. Thus 
was marked out in his early childhood and in boyhood that: 
fondness for animals which he had unto his dying day. 

Then there was the noisy rumpus through the narrow. 
lanes. What mysteries there were on the broad street to which, 
the lane leads | How-gtealthily did he leave the premises of 
thé jhofise to watch the er‘lless going-past of garries. The, 
garry is the charactegistic Jndian vehicle which, .in older 


THE PERIGD OF CHILDHOOD. 37 


times, served altogether the Purposes of the modern tram 
which has since crept in. The £arriwallahs, the drivers, were 
exalted beings in Noren’s mind. What great men they were ! 
Everybody had to deal with them ! O to be the driver of 
@ pair of Horses and to sit on the coach and flourish the whip, 
and to drive to mysterious corners of the city he had never seen! 
Of course, there was the family-coach. He had been to see 
the great outside world in that, sitting on his mother’s lap 
and busying his father with a storm of questions. “ What do 
you want to be when you grow up, my little man?” asked 
the father one day of Noren. “Oa Syce, or a coachman, 
father !" came the hurried response. The syce is the man 
who has the care of the horses. He wears a state-turban on 
his head and is so important! Then he wears such grand 
livery !O to be a syce or a coachman is everything ! This was 
the height of his ambition. Noren ‘felt that the driver and 
the groom were the greatest of personages, So he was wont 
to make the stables his headquarters, and watch every turn 
of the men’s duties, And how he loved horses | 

The courtyard is the centre of play. Here all the tricks 
are devised, all the mischief is done ; and above are heard the 
Women’s voices and the bustling of the women at their work, 
Thus the day is spent. The Hindu child is like any other 
child, if anything, a little more serious, possibly because of 
the wonderful something which rests like solemnity all over 
theland, Still he is happy in childhood, and like all other 
children has his memories, With Noren, when he became 
the Swami Vivekananda, there were many reminiscences ; 
and he spent a very happy childhood as things go, 

The family tells to this day. how he would Scamper away’ 
to anybody who would take him on his lap. He was one of 
those children who trusted all implicitly and felt with joy 
each moment of that period during which the world is a con- 
stant surprise, ; 

He told in his later years how hisamother had made an 
effort toteach him the first words Wf English he knew, ahd pow, 
he masteged thelphabet under Ser tutorshi >. At her feet, also, 


38 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


he heard in these years the tales of the great ancestors of the 
Hindi nation which are told in the Mahabharata, and of the 
gteat war of the five Pandava brothers against their hundred: 
cousins, that was fought so many thousand years ago. He 
sat and listened with eagerness, and perhaps here in the hear- 
ing he acquired that original faculty of telling a tale which 
was one of the peculiar traits of his genius after he had 
grown to ripe intellectual estate. Aye—the first education 
is always at the knees of the mother. 

So much of the day of the Hindu is taken up with prayer 
and worship that it would have been, indeed, strange had 
Noren not been initiated in these his tenderest years into the 
ritual and methods of worship. In the early hours of the 
morning there is service to the gods—but all gods in India 
are aspects of the One Eternal Reality which is Brahman, 
the Ineffable, the Supreme. And Brahman is that Absolute 
Knowledge, that Absolute Existence, that Absolute Bliss 
which the Vedanta, the crowining philosophy of the Vedas, 
proclaims as the highest condition of Being. 

Nor are the Hindus worshippers of mere images. How 
unromantic, how narrowed the vision that sees thus and 
criticises! In so far as even astone is of the Divine Reality 
is the Hindu a worshipper. The sensing of the Presence is 
all a matter of a developed consciousness. Those who have 
not caught the spirit, verily unto them is only the form. He 
that resideth within all things, speaking through the mouth. 
of that other Oriental said, “Lift the stone and thou shalt 
find Me; cleave the wood and there am I!” Break the 
image ! Is it that the Divinity has been crushed ! The image 
is the outer form. And in so far even as forms are real are 
the images of the gods, the forms of Brahman, divinely real. 
Then, too, there is heard that Voice thundering through the 
ages, “ In whatsoever way My devotee shall call upon Me, in 
that very way shall I come unto him.” 

He comes,—everyenight into every home, the Lord of 
thé yniverse in that very fray in which He is called upon. . 
Throughout the land tHe hour of evening twilight is the 


THE PERIOD OF CHILDHOOD. 39 


hushed hour of prayer, the hour of thinking upon the Lord, 
and the hearts of the millions mount up as clouds of incense 
“unto Him. Every dwelling-house is a temple and from 
every home ‘one hears the thrilling sounds of conch-shells, 
the joyous clanging of the gongs, and the beating of the 
drums in praise. Silence-—then the chanting of sacred 
Slokas or hymns as the Rishis or the seers chanted them ages 
ago in the forests whence rose the song of the early Aryan. 
The incense rises, and with it the perfume of the flowers : 
and from His tabernacle the Lord looks down upon the 
group of devotees. High overhead lives eternally the Spirit 
of That Which is One; and for the time the unnumbered 
million souls of Hindusthan are caught up into This in which, 
above all other things, rests their unity, invincible and im- 
movable as Death,—for this is the Spirit of God. And this 
essenpial consciousness of unity, when the soul rises above 
the furmoil of the world, is the consciousness of Him Who is 
the Silent Watcher of Things, Shiva—wrapt in the shroud of 
Eternal Meditation, which is the inner covering of the Flame 
of Soul, burning alike as One Reality in All. 


Vil 


THE CHOICE OF GODS. 


Rama and Sita! Worlds of thought are called up 
with the names. Rama, the ideal king; Sita, the ideal 
wife. Rama, the King-warrior Incarnation of the Lord, 
with Sita, pure Sita, as His Consort. These are the ideals 
of the domestic Hindu life. They also make up the 
contents of a great mysticism, Sita is the individual soul 
and Rama is the Lord. Rama and Sita come forth from 
the historic dawn of Hindu life, The story of their lives 
is told in the Ramayana, the great epic which the masses, as 
a whole, know throughout the land. Replete with worslrous 
characters is the Ramayana. Never was knight so henfmed 
in by difficulties as was Rama. Never were there greater 
obstacles, Never were there more powerful foes to over- 
come, Who knows the Ramayana knows India. Therein 
is told the tale of caste and custom. Therein are found 
all the traditions that mould the racial thought. 

The image of Rama and the image of Sita; these are 
the treasures of many Hindu households. The story of 
their lives is as Scripture to millions upon millions. Every 
woman prays that she may be a Sita in loving devotion 
to her husband. Every man holds that there is no greater 
manliness than was revealed by Rama, the king of strength, 
the prince in chivalry, And all hope to be like Hanuman, 
who served the needs of the Lord in His Incarnation as 
Rama the King, most admirably. It was he that bounded 
with one leap across the ocean having faith in the name 
of Rama and desirous to serve Him. It was he who brought 
news of Sita and helped Rama to bridge the ocean 
that his hosts might cross from India to Ceylon and rescue 
fair Sita from the caftivity in which Ravana, the king 
of,thatglatd, had put her, tbping against hope that she 

. rs @ > aaeks a 


THE CHOICE OF GODS. 4t 


would yield to his wishes. The conquest was made, and 
Sita was again the happy wife, the happy queen of 
"Rama. And yet even the ten-headed Ravana obtained 
salvation. For it is said that even the thinking of- the 
Lord as.an enemy,—because of the intensity of the thought 
directed against Him, even though it be evil,—is a form of 
meditation, and that in its greatest height, the soul of the 
‘enemy of the Lord takes wing, above all evil, unto Him. 

The Ramayana thrills with the freshness of the historic 
‘dawn, One feels translated to most ancient times and’ 
to events hoary with historic age. There is the odour of 
green virgin forests never seen before. There is the vision 
of embattled Aryan hosts, making friendship with the 
aboriginal hordes, that dwell in undiscovered wildernesses, 
and in hitherto unvisited regions where everything is 
of sugBrising order and where there are giant-powers and 
nove: things. 

Noren had heard of Rama and Sita at the feet of his 
mother. He had followed up the long, long story of the 
struggle and the conquest of Rama with all the thrill of 
personal romantic adventure. He saw the family at 
worship, saw how Rama and Sita were adorned with 
flowers and how the elders of the house sat in meditation- 
‘posture before Their Presence, with closed eyes and 
concentrated thought. 

It dawned upoh Noren that he, too, should worship 
Rama. Near his house lived a Brahman boy. One day 
Noren and this playfellow went with a few pice to the 
bazaar and, peering as high as their heads could reach 
above the stand on which the little figures-were arranged, 
pointed simultaneously to a clay image of the Lord as 
Rama-Sita. Triumphantly they returned to Noren’s home 
with their purchase. Noren looked about. No one was 
near, and then he and the little Brahman boy climbed 
the stairs that led above the ladies’ Quarters up to the roof. 
Qn one side of the roof wag a by-room. They entered 
this, having oe securely closed” the entrance door’to the 


3 


een cence 


42 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


roof. The Rama-Sita image was installed by the Brahman 
boy with appropriate ceremonies. Then the two sat in 
meditation with eyes closed to the outer world, and they 
meditated upon the heroic greatness of the King and of 
the great love of the beautiful, devoted Sita. 

Hours went by. Hours of silent posture are nothing 
to a Hindu child. It is a racial faculty of which the West 
is not possessed. Meanwhile the parents of both lads 
noticed their prolonged absence. The ladies of both. 
households were much upset. The male members started 
in search of them outside. Everywhere there was search- 
ing, but no finding. The roof, thought one! Strange 
that the door to it should be locked! They knocked, 
but there was no response! At last, the strong blows of 
the men smashed the latch and the door flew open. The 
Brahman boy had his meditation disturbed at tif first 
ominous signal and fled down the stairs, past the tumult 
of loud voices and distressed people, to his own house, 
finding refuge there. But Noren did not hear. The roof 
was searched. Not there! Surely he could not be in the 
by-room! Yet it would be well to see. The half-opened 
door was widely opened. There he was, sitting in for- 
gottenness, discovered like another Mozart, but with the 
more wonderful music of thought! He was shaken from 
his meditation, but he insisted on being !eft alone to meditate 
upon the name and great career of Rama. So they let 
him remain as they found him, knowing not what to 
make of him, for this indeed seemed to them very strange 
at his age ! 

“Heartily know 
When half-gods go— 
The gods arrive.” 

Now comes the tale of how it came to pass that Noren 
thought of Rama and Sita as half-gods, and how the real 
God came to him. Of course, this was but a child’s 


e 
thought, ,for there was no por devotee of Rama. and 
Pa TR, REE ER RRMEORS NT NO" APSO Oe, 5. Cee, RES. 


TUE CIIOICE OF GODS. As 


The all-knowing syce created the disturbance. When- 
ever young Noren desired illumination on any subject, 
‘concerning which he would rather not trouble the family 
heads, he fled to the stable and the syce. Something or 
another called him to the syce’s quarters on this special 
day. The conversation drifted from the problem solved 
to other things. No one knows how the thread of talk 
was woven, but it drifted to marriage. The syce for some 
‘ unknown reason denounced marriage in forcible language. 
At all events marriage was something intolerable to this 
man, and with the learning of some deep experience he 
told young Noren of the difficulties and supposed absurdi- 
ties of married life. To be bound down, to have to deal 
with temperament and temper, to be the father of trouble- 
some babes, to have to succumb to the trials of married 
ble&edness,—the tale was so graphically told, that when 
the syce stopped his volume of verbosity, Noren, with bated 
breath and excited countenance, stood as if terror-struck 
and as if already the spectre of matrimony had come in 
closest approach. No, never should he be married! The 
free life for him} He would be a monk! He would wander 
all over the land of Ind when he grew up, breathing in the 
great freedom of the monastic life! 

Rama and Sita married! Rama, the great god, tied 
down to such mortal ties! He had heard of the poetry of 
it all, but all of a sudden, the prosaic elements of that great 
romance came upon him. Yes, he had been often told 
by his mother the tale of Rama and Sita being married. 
He had known of their love. He had known of their 
adventures! He had admired their loyalty, one to the 
other. But the syce had thrown too significant a meaning 
over the idea of marriage. And that Rama and Sita were 
married—that was enough ! 

How are the play-thoughts of childhood and childish 
impulsiveness often the note of g deeper phase of things! 
In childhood, how many gre the protestatiqns’ or the 


sudden inclinations of instinct by {which later on is ineasttred 
an) 
‘ 


44 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


the great problem or the deep understanding! Canildish 
instincts may often be premonitions of what will in the 
future come to pass in the awareness of the intellectual 
life. The instinct is later understood as having been 
the subconscious sensing of fact, the subconscious classi- 
fication of experience into that knowledge which shall 
some day burst upon consciousness as clear conviction. 
So it was to be in this case, Not to be ensnared in the 
tumult of sense, not to be caught in the bondage of 
sentiment, was unconsciously the dominant note in the 
outburst of Noren. Ever should the soul be free! Freedom 
from bondage however sweet, was the unconscious quest ! 
Noren wandered to the ladies’ quarters. Tears were 
in his eyes, One of the golden dreams of childhood was 
broken, © the dreams of childhood that are broken! 
Poorer than the man whose wealth has been seized isthe 
mind of a child when bereft of its earliest ideals. The 
mother saw his tears and inguired what made him sad. 
There was silence,—and then a sobbing aloud. She gathered 
him up in her arms as in the days of his babyhood. She 
pressed him to her heart. She and her boy were alone. 
All was still and quiet. The boy had told his mother the 
full tale of his disillusion. Then, as light bursts after the 
darkness, came to the mind of Bhuvaneswari Dutta the 
thought of Shiva. She addressed her little son not as Noren 
but as Vireswar, and said, “There is Shiva to worship |” 
Shortly after, Noren left that silent room, Unseen in 
the fast approaching night, he climbed the stairs to the roof. 
Overhead was the splendid canopy of the Indian stars. He 
stole across the floor of the roof. He opened the door of 
the by-room where he had been that very morning, seated 
in meditation. He sighed for a single moment and then, 
with triumph on his face, he seized the clay image of Rama- 
Sita and smashed it into bits on the road below, 
‘The next day saw him wandering alone to the bazaar 
to buy,an image of Shiva. His fnother had given him the 
necessary pice. He point€d at -once to an image of Shiva, 


z 


THE CHOICE OF GODs. 45 


, 38 He is in His Reality, plunged in an Abyss of Meditation, 
.and it was given to him. An hour later—and it. was en- 
throned on the very spot whence Rama and Sita had been 
dethroned ; and he was seated before Shiva, with eyes closed: 
to all outer things, in the depth of meditation. 

Two images there were, one the meditating God, the other,. 
the meditating child ! And in the intensity of that childish 
meditation, who knows—the two may have become One ! 

Shiva! Shiva! Thine own do come to Thee ! Across. 
the ocean of the world they sail as ships, proudly conscious 
of their destination, unto Thee! All shall come to Thee t 
But there are those who reach Thee in the stretch, and with 
the speed, of thought ! 

Shiva! Shiva! Shiva! Thou art the Real ; Thou art: 
the Real! From the Unreal lead us unto Thee ! 


Vil 


IN THE DEEPS OF MEDITATION. 


To sound the depths of the soti—that is the aim of med- 
itation ! What worlds lie at the end of the microscope ; 
what worlds at the end of the telescope! What worlds of 
insight and illumination may lie at the very threshold of 
-consciousness ! 

Man is acquainted with the external world. The oudsede 
is his reality. He stops in wonder at the extent of things. 
Is there, however, not an inner order of‘life ? Are there not 
heights and depths of inward realities? Are there not fathom- 
less and abysmal orders of the spiritual consciousness ? 4), 

Idealism conditions everything with, It gives the 
diagram of the universe as mental. But mysticism sets 
itself to a deeper task. It plunges consciousness into 
normally inconceivable states and unfolds unto the soul 
the possibilities in the direction of the expansion of con- 
sciousness. It lays claim to this: that if the soul looks 
deeper and more intensely into itself, worlds upon worlds 
of inner, and of innermost reality come to view in the un- 
folding processes of the personal illumination. The mightiest 
objective things are lost in that final consciousness when 
man stands on the border land of reality, gazing across the 
shoreless ocean of the Soul. 

World-dreams arise that -man has dreamt in all the 
magnitude of the conception, Immortality—the idea it- 
self—is of the very profundity of thought. Then there is 
the invincible consciousness of the soul ; the knowledge of 
the Deathless and of the Indestructible within, The world is 
an idea, so they say. If this is true then, indeed, the ela- 
boration of the mind will create or destroy a thousand 
worlds, for.even a thousand woglds are relative to the ‘Soul 


are pies ee ne 


IN THE DEEPS OF MEDITATION. 47 


A veil of consciousness may separate such different 
worlds as that of the poetic and the ‘commonplace. The 
artist and the labourer see the same sunset, but with what 
a different state of awareness! Who knows, therefore, but 
that in the development of the mystical consciousness uni- 
verses of experience might reveal themselves which are 
unknown to him whose sole interests lie in material things, 
In the expansion of consciousness even the Beatific Vision 
itself can be had,—and in this the Immensities and the 
Eternities are lost in the Consciousness of God. 

Meditation is old, very old. The mystics of the West 
were all geniuses in this respect, But in India the knowledge 
has been ancient, most ancient. Here the meditation has 
been set to psychological formula. So, say the sages, 


and jin this manner must the mind proceed, following first - 


thisfthen that method of dfscipline. All the psychological 
accompaniments of the mystical state have been classified 
and brought to a crowning synthesis, And the way through 
the world of illusion was found in that intense conscious- 
ness when all the faculties were directed to the same pur- 
pose,—and that purpose the realisation of God. 

Long, long were the ages of experiment, Dim were the 
beginnings when doubt was rife and knowledge small. Then, 
often madness came upon those who strove. Nevertheless, 
in the course of the ages, and by reason of the accumulated, 
experience of innumerable souls, the end was attained. 
The mind is brought back to those venerable days when 
the forest was the school of the saints, and when Scriptures 
were handed down by word of mouth, froma generation 
of masters to a generation of disciples. 

The mighty hunter knew the tracks that ‘led through 
the wilderness of forests upon ‘forests, remote from the 
capitals of kings and the noise of great assemblies of men. 
Here was the abode, the hermitage of those whose conscious- 
ness fathomed the truths of the Scrjptures of Hinduism, that 
have flowed perpetually down the ages, from Spyrtual father 
to spuitaale son. The fire js lighted. The teacher‘is seated 


x 
s aa 


~ 


48 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


ashen-clad before it. This is thé great fire of which all reli- 
gions dream and which, in a sameness of symbolic meaning, 
the vestal virgins kept alight in ancient Rome. About him, as. 
the radii about a circle’s centre, are the group of disciples. 
Some of them are old, having renounced the world and for- 
gotten it years ago. Some, though old, are young in their: 
renunciation. Some, though young, have known no other 
life. Here they live, reared in the company of the blessed. 

One of these, young in years yet old in renunciation, 
arises and, as if addressing all the blessed Sages of the 
past as well as those before him, even as if addressing those 
great souls invisible, who dwell on the highest planes, 
cries out, “Hear ye children of Immortal Bliss! Even those 
that reside in the higher spheres! I have found the 
Ancient One Who is beyond all darkness, all delusion. 
Knowing Him alone, ye shall be saved from death over 
and over again!” Who is this Ancient One? He is the 
Indestructible Self in whom all the worlds are contained, 
who regards the world as illusion and rests in bliss unlimited, 
and in ‘endless consciousness and everlasting knowledge 
within the Fathomless Reality of Himself! 

Here is the challenge to all illusion! The Self-discovered 
soul has made the retreat from the external to the 
innermost inwardness, And of that it is said in the Scrip- 
tures, “The Self-existing One pierced the openings of the 
senses: For this reason a man looks outside the Self and 
not within. There were the wisest ones, however, and they, 
meditating, escaped from death. These looked innermost 
within themselves and found that Self.” Again, “Looking out- 
ward fools pursue the outward course, whipped by outward 
longings, and they fall into the all-pervading trap of death. 
On the contrary, the wisest ones, thinking of that Death- 
lessness, desire nothing in the realm of things below.” 
This is the essence of the meditation that leads to that 
incommunicable state, -past speech, of whose reality no 
thought can take form. It ig* That the Sages seek, and 
which men dream of in kndwledse. AOS 


IN THE DEEPS OF MEDITATION, 49 


Flowing in a perpetual stream there is the long, contin- 
uous and ineffable realisation of the saints, This is . the 
imperishable treasure of Hindusthan—the bequest of spirit- 
ual realities by the Rishis to the people. This is the very 
basis of Hindu spiritual lore, the foundation-ground even 
ofits social life,—the mystical consciousness of the saints 
and sages, For in custom there is seen the attempt at 
preservation, Every wandering monk has this high state 


. Woven about him by the earnestness of his own soul, by the 


love of the people and by their capacity for Spiritual idealism, 
For this reason is he ‘the king of men ; for this reason 
is every monk’ the fulfilment of Hindu striving, the apex 
of the Social and spiritual aspiration of the multitudes, 
For this reason is. the home of the householder open to. 
the monk as shelter ‘for food and comfort, For this reason 
is the Mnonk the hero of the nursery tale ;—for the monk 
is the embodiment, the personification of the ideals of the 
people, and his ts the mystical consciousness, 

And for this zeason young Noren knew all about the 
monks, and how ‘they meditated—but the reason why 
he especially loved the monastic atmosphere is inscrutable, 
It might have been woven with the past of his personality 
in the profundities of that awon-old mind which was his, 
bearing here: and there the newness of the form, knowing 
here and there the mysteries of soul and having gazed 
oftentimes through the experience of ‘death ° into the 
Glorious Beyond. ° : 

“What is this?” asked the mother in. excitement, “Why 
Noren, what are’ you-up to?” The child was nude except 
for a narrow Strip of pink-coloured cloth, He had run 
joyously to the family circle and to his mother’s knees, 
proud and triumphant, crying out in glee, “I am Shiva } 
Look, I am Shiva? This is the manner in which those 
monks are ‘dressed who have almost forgotten that the 
body exists. The elders of the household had told him, 
in fun, that if one «meditated’, his hair would become as 
long and ag snatted’ as’ that af the inonks, He had looked 

a Ni . 


- -. ae . 


50 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


with delight upon the knotted mass of hair which is fashioned 
so artistically, that from a distance one thinks it is a head- 
gear. And the naivity of him—he had put on the narrow 
strip of cloth that the great ascetic monks wear, and had 
been meditating to make his hair grow long and matted, 
That is, he had been sitting with one leg crossed above. 
the other as he saw the family sit when at worship, and. 
just as the monk sits in meditation. He had folded his 
hands, closed his eyes and he had tried to regulate his 
breathing just as the elders did, breathing in as long as 
he could, then retaining the breath as long as possible, 
and then seeing how slowly he could breathe it out again, 
At the end of an hour, or maybe longer, the thought 
of his hair came to him. Had it grown! Maybe it wasa 
great knot by this time! He thought that he would feel it t 
He did so. No! There was no mass of hair. Scyhe ran 
in childish bewilderment to learn the reason why, and yet 
he was joyous because he knew how much surprise his 
strange costume would excite, 

He told his tale ; the mother consoled him in the best 
way she knew, telling him that it would take many, many 
days, yes, many,, many months before the matted knots of 
hair could be grown. Then the talk drifted to many, many 
things. It turned to the Shiva-image he had bought a few 
days before. He said that, while he had sat before the image 
that morning, the thought of his mother’s words had come 
to him so forcibly, that.he had been sent away from the reat 
Shiva because he had been naughty. Reincarnation is 
accepted, unconsciously, as a fact by every Hindu child. So 
he added, “I think that I have been a Sadhu once. Wilt 
Shiva let me come back to Him if [am good >” The mother 
answered, “Yes.” But her heart sank while she thought, that 
perhaps he, like his grandfather, would return to Shiva, 
but she banished the thought. There were many years yet 
before he could grow up into that discrimination when he. 
weujd feel all the joys of th? world as an intolerable burden, 


IN THE DEEPS OF MEDITATION, 51 


Somehow or other, thereafter, the family often found 
little Noren playing at meditation, They saw him absorbed, 
What could be the contents of his mind ? It was not so very 
strange to find him sitting for a long time quietly. With 
Noren it was not a mere fixity of body, a languorous restful- 
ness, an indomitable patience, for he would fry, in his 
childish way, to keep his thought upon the Lord Shiva. He 
succeeded ; and there were times when those grew grave 
who shook him from that state back into the normal condi- 
tion of a child. | For it grew more and more difficult to rouse 
him from his thought. Was it play ! Or was it medita. 
tion! He was only a child} Yet, many a monk would 
envy such an accomplishment, such fixity of thought upon 
the Lord ! 

Dead to the outside ! The world is gone! Only thought 
is aliv’, and that the highest ; and on the wings of highest 
thought the soul speeds into Reality ! Such are the possibili- 
ties, such the realities of the highest meditation ! 

The race dreams in the child, but with Noren the dream 
was almost an awakened reality. The seriousness of the 
race, its high philosophical outlook, which later on possessed 
his entire life, were characteristically foreshadowed in the 
Play of this Hindu child. It is not wonderful. When the 
race is perfect, the childhood of the race will then dream 
perfectly ; it will play perfectly. There are some features » 
of childhood which already betoken that state. Now and 
then they arise as prodigies, Was the Indian race dreaming 
perfect dreams in this child’s mind ! At all events he later 
shook the foundations of the world and remodelled Hinduism 
as few others have done, in the history of the Past, in the 
direction of . spiritual things. The play of this child, the 
race’s dream within him, rose in later times to great levels 
of thought. On a future Occasion, all the potentialities of 
that dream became reality for him. The tumult of the 
world had become silence to his hearing. On the broad 
wings of meditation he, while “Yiving, burst the bSnde*of a 
limitations and, soaring high abeve all thought, sped 


52 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


fast into that - Illumination which is the Presence of 


the Real, 

From the Effulgence of that Illumination he borrowed a 
refracted light which found concrete form in the message of 
the Modern Gospel. That given, he sped anew, as do ali 
saints who leave this world, unto the Blessedness of the world 


of Eternal Meditation. 


IX 


THE VISION OF THE LUMINOUS FIGURE. 


O the things that the saints see which others see not! O 
the world into which they have been born! No wonder the 
monk is glad to die, so to speak, to earthly things, to leave 
off the family name and family ties and be re-born asa 
child of reality with another name,a name that makes one 
remember God. And the ancient Rishis, desiring to bind 
in fast and indissoluble ties the body of society with the 
higher thought, instituted the custom that even every layman 
must hve a name of God, 

Often has the vision of the saint been that of Light. 
Some have realised God as Infinite Effulgence, 

Noren’s nights were strange nights, indeed. Strange 
beyond words was the manner in which he was ushered into 
sleep. What is sleep? The total absorption of man into 
Self, or is it that, the body deserted, the soul moves on 
subtler planes of being > What of the dream-state ? Is the 
awakened state only a certain portion of the sleep-state 
intensified, even as personality may be only a point of con- 
densation on the surface of the Infinite Ocean of Con- 
sciousness ? Is the awakened state also a dream-state ? Aye, 
it is all a dream; all states are dream-states ; the outer 
world is not so different from the dream-world. There are 
times when the latter seems even more real. There are 
other times, too, when the dreamer dreams that he is dream- 
ing. O to have that consciousness intensified so as to cover 
the entire dream of life ! ~To be aware of life as a dream ! 
But this is the business of the saints, 

Noren has-been told to retire to bed. He has done so. 
"Drowsiness has come upon him, The Guter things are faint 
and undefined, The brain receives jts impressions Stupidly, 
Then it coméy—the light, a*/yoti> a gfeat ball of light, 


54 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


being kicked, as it were, by a boy and speeding towards 
the drowsy Noren. The mind tums its attention instinctive- 
ly to this and the body falls into sleep. The sleeping boy 
plunges into the light. The ball ef light and himself become 
one| Whither has he gone? Where is he? Every night 
the same occurrence. Strange,—but not to him. Nightly he 
curled himself up in a comfortable position on his bed and 
drowsiness overtook him, Then the light appeared. He 
became one with it and was lost in sleep, He never men- 
tioned this, however; until long after, and that to a school- 
mate whd had been his companion for several years. He 
asked him, ‘Do you seea Nght, a /yot/; when you go to 
sleep ?” The boy answered in the negative. “What, don’t you 
see it every night ? It comes from a distance, ag if kicked by 
a boy down a long avenue of light. Then, when it comes just 
between the eyebrows, you,—you go into it and then fall 
asleep 2?” “Why, no, Noren !” came the flurried response. 
The other boy did not know what to make of his questioner. 
What was the matter with Noren? He had heard something 
of the sort about certain great souls but, of course, he did 
not associate Noren with such wise ones. But boys are 
not serious, and it was soon forgotten. Play erases all 
serious impressions, 
There was some one else, however, who put this question 
. to Noren in later years, “Noren, my boy, do you see a light, 
a Jyoti, whenever you go to sleep >?” The questioner was his 
spiritual teacher. This will be heard of, again, later on. At all 
events, until his tenth year Noren had no idea that his sleep 
differed from any other person’s. Everybody, he imagined, 
went to sleep in the same strange manner that he did. 
This condition of sleep atcompanied him until the end, 
although in the latter part of bis life it was not so frequent 
or intense. ’ - 
Light ! What is it? The maker of the -conditions for 
life ; perhaps it is Iffe. Without it there is darkness and 
chaos ; ‘and the first mandste of God was), “Let there be 


Se ee ae eee ee Ce, ae 








THE VISION OF THE LUMINOUS FIGURE. 55 


the true, with the beautiful, with the good. It arises as 
the companion to aspiration, becoming the Flame. Light 
and knowledge are always conterminous in the thought of 
the saint. There is the expression - with regard to new 
knowledge, “Light has been thrown on the subject.” What 
is dark, unknown, dead, absent, becomes luminous, known, 
alive and present with the bursting of the effulgence of light, 
Light has been associated with the intellect as illumination, 
The domain of the intellect is the domain of illumination, 
The senses are in the dark ; therefore are their impressions 
erroneous. The light of the intellect dispels the darkness, 
and a new world dawns. The “patines of bright gold” 
which are the splendours of the firmament become suns of 
the first. magnitude. A drop of water becomes an ocean 
of life with the light of knowledge. Radiance is of the 
soul ;‘and radiance is God. Thus has He been conceived 
of by the world. Thus have the Scriptures of the nations 
described Him. The Incarnate God is the Light of the world, 
Thus it has always been that Light. is to the saints the 
symbol of Truth everlasting, Thus it is that Radiance is God, 
God is the Ocean of Radiance. There have been saints 
who have said, when asked to define God as they knew 
Him, “He is Light! Boundless Light! A Shoreless 
Sea of Light 1” 

Noren, when he became the Swami Vivekananda, often 
‘described God in this way. It may be because he had’ seen 
this Light in the days of his childhood. Years after, one 
‘who had become his brother-monk, begged him to show him, 
if he could, that Radiance of Divinity of which he was so 
“onscious. The monk says, to this day, that when the 
Swami Vivekananda touched him on his forehead the whole 
external world of things- changed, and in its place was the 
Ocean of Radiance of which the saints speak, 

This is the result of meditation, the seeing of effulgence, 
: With Noren this light coming to him» in his early boyhood - 
bespoke hosts of things, It told, assuredly, of, a, great 


a 





Pt oe, a ae ee ny ae ee 


56 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


into the waters of meditation. It proved that meditation, 
which is so much a part of consciousness in the striving of 
the monk, had become an instinct with him. Yes, he might 
_ Play at meditation as a child,—for this, the greatest achieve- 
ment,——concentration of thought upon the Most High—had 


become as play to him, _ 
The Scriptures of Hinduism say that all worthy things, 


and all knowledge are the fruit of meditation, Of course, 
the quality of the meditation and the character of the know- 
ledge that comes altogether depend on the object. The 
highest meditation is the meditation upon God. Thatis. 
why the monk, the saint, is the most perfect of beings. His 
life is a meditation upon God, and from that meditation, 
verily comes the Realisation of the Most High, 

Life itself is meditation—a prolonged meditation, but with 
most it is the meditation of the lesser self upon” minor 
realities. The life of the saint is a great’ meditation, 
Were it not for those interruptions that one is subject to by 
reason of being possessed of a body, his would be a stead- 
fast, deep and immutable consciousness of God, As it is, in 
meditation the soul is in divine etstasy while the body is 
held in intensity of suspense. In that exalted state what 
novel readings of sound and colour might take place t 
What bewilderment of beauty may come upon one and what 
glorious confusion of sense} How have the psychologists 
pondered upon this and, as the result, how have some gone 
with the mystics in declaring that the world is of the Self 
that perceives it,—the Self being real ! 

Evelyn Underhill, in her remarkable book “Mysticism” 
gathers together, as a reflection upon this, a beautiful collec- 
tion of thoughts: “The late Professor James once suggest- 
ed as a useful exercise for young idealists a consideration of 
the changes which would be worked in our ordinary world if 
the various branches of our receiving instruments happened 
to exchange duties; if for instance, we heard all colours 
and saw ail.sounds, Such a remark as this throws a sudden. 


oe a ME 


THE VISION OF THE LUMINOUS FIGURE. 57 


visionary Saint-Martin, ‘I heard flowers that sounded and 

saw notes that shone’ ; and on the reports of certain other 

taystics concerning a rare moment of consciotisness in which 

the senses are fused into a single and ineffable act of per: , 
ception ; and colour and sound are known as aspects of 
the same thing.” 

Wonderful is that world of meditation in which such dis~ 
placements of the ordiftary world come to the mystic. He: 
makes little of these, however, keeping his vision fixed 
unalterably on God. She continues, “Since music is but an 
interpretation of certain vibrations undertaken by the ear, 
and colour an interpretation of other vibrations performed 
by the eye, all this is less mad than it seems. Were such an 
alteration of our senses to take place the world would still 
be sending us the same messages—that strange unknown 
worl’ from which, on this hypothesis, we are hermetically 
sealed—but we should have interpreted them differently. 
Beauty would still be ours, though speaking-another tongue. 
The bird’s song would then strike our retina as a ‘pageant of 
colour : we should see all thé “magical tones of the wind, 
hear as a great fugue the repeated and harmonised greens of 
the forest, the cadences of stormy skies. Did we realise 
how slight an adjustment of our own organs is needed to 
initiate us into such a world, we should perhaps be less 
contemptuous of those mystics who tell us that they appre- 
hended the Absolute ‘as ‘heavenly music’ or ‘Uncreated 
Light, less fanatical in our determination to make the ‘real 
and solid world of common sense’ the only standard of 
reality.” The glories and rhapsodies of the inner world to which 
meditation is the key, are past the understanding of those 
who take for real‘only that which the senses happen to assimi- 
late. Better are they wha keep to the vision of the intellect, 
less the prey of the will-o’-the-wisp of things. Those have 
the Seership who have gone to the Soul as the true Knower. 

Young Noren played at meditation in those days, On 
the intensity of inner thought, though it was play,, deep 
spiritual feqlings were awakened* He would have the knoe 


58 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


of the neighbourhood play with him, and they imitated him 
in covering themselves with loin-cloths and with ashes, 

Theré was a certain evening when play became strange, 
They had seated themselves in meditation posture in the 
worship-hall, The, meditation began. Then one noticed a 
great cobra gliding along the stone-paved floor. He could 
not contain himself. With a shout he announced the new- 
comer. Others sprang to their feet in terror. Noren remained 
there,’ lost in meditatian. His friends called, but no re- 
sponse, Terrorised, they fled to the guardians of the lad, 
These came dn haste. What horror was theirs when they 
saw a cobra with its hood spread, as if strangely fasci- 
nated! And overhead was the crescent moon that had 
already risen, They were afraid to call out, lest they disturbed 
the snake and, angered, it might strike, Suddenly the cobra 
glided away, A moment later—it could be nowhere {Ound, 
When his parents inquired, Noren said, “I knew nothing of 
the snake or anything. I was feeling inexpressible Anandam.” 
And Anandam is bliss! And the cobra and the cresecent 
moon and the state of meditation—these are in the Vision 
of Shiva! ~ ; 

Not long after this, so Noren told when he had become 
the Swami Vivekananda, he sat in meditation, absorbed, 
Suddenly, light burst upon him, He had often seen the light, 
but on this occasion, suddenly from the effulgence stood 
forth a form divine with a staff and sacred water-vessel that 
monks are wont to carry inhand. Upon the countenance 
was ineffable peace, It gazed at him for a moment ; then it 
seemed about to speak, But-an overwhelming awe, a divine 
fear came upon Noren and he fled from that. place. What 
was this? Whose was this shining form? It was the luminous 
figure of the Buddha, as he in later life believed it to be. At 
other times he made frequent efforts to call back that shining 
form, realising that he had been foolish in his fear. But 
it never came~—was itcbecause the luminous fifure of the 
Incarnation, had: merged in thie very Buddha-like nature 


x 


DEDICATED TO SARASWATI. 


Five or six years pass as five or six days in the counting 
up of life. Noren wandered along to the pdthsd/4, the old- 
fashioned Indian school, at the age of six, a mat under his 
arm—for each child brought his own dsana or sitting-mat, 
From his waist dangled the little reed pen held fast by the 
jong string. He was in a“ brand new” dhooti and felt him- 
self, as do all boys, verysuperior. And the little fellows with 
whom he played but who were not so privileged as to go to 
schoah regarded him as important, 

But schools are often strange places and one is apt to © 
meet with strange comrades. No wonder, then, that after a 
few days’ achievements he had an array of language that 
quite upset the family’s sense of propriety. Never again, de- 
termined all the household, should he go to school. He 
must give it up. Instead, a private tutor was engaged. 
Noren felt no compunctions of conscience, however, and it 
was only when his father had instructed him that he had 
committed wrong, that he forgot, at least by word of mouth, 
what he had so precociously assimilated in his few days’ at- 
tendance at the pdthsdld, It was a novelty—that school ; and 
there was regret at the thought that it was all over. New 
acquaintances, the teacher, the fun of writing figures on 
palm-leaves with ink made from charred rice crushed ; all this, 
‘he thought, was gone. It wasterrible. Still, there was no 
need for too much grief. Probably there would be some new 
surprises in his relationship with the private tutor; then, 
too, his father had spoken of having some of his playmates 


who were relations study with him. 


That first day at school had beer an important one. for 
him. Early in the day, beigre he went to schoal, the priest 
of the famity had called hina for the ceremony that is per- 


60 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


formed when a boy first goes to school. All the family were 
present and Noren felt quite overwhelmed. After the recitation 
ofa few prayers, and the dedication of the lad to Saraswati, 
who is the presiding goddess of learning, the priest took the 
right hand of Noren, putting into ita piece of black chalk 
and then guiding it, wrote out upon the ground the first 
letters of the alphabet saying, “This is ka, this is kha,’ and 
Noren repeated after him, “ This is 4a, this is Zha.” 

All along his family found him most amenable to kind. 
ness, but infuriated by harsh words, Severe treatment made 
him worse’and more restless, This was true of his life at 
school ag Well. The tone in which he was addressed 
changed his attitude at once. Even in later life this was so, 
Gentle words always won him over. Otherwise he was as 
irresistible as a tempest at sea, i 

Noren was the leader among his fellows. Even at' that 
early age he Asserted himself as master. Whenever the occa- 
sion offered he put himself at the head. It was the last day 
of Paush, that day on which he was born, and it was also the 
holiday when all the boys worship Mother Ganges and the 
people think it most auspicious to bathe in the sacred waters, 

The boy insisted that this festival should accordingly be 
celebrated. He begged his father for permission and for the 
necessary expenses, which were granted. The Private tutor, 
or as he was called the Gury Mahéshaya, was instructed by 
the father to teach the boys, whom Noren had gathered as 
his companions in the celebration, the songs that are sung 
to the glory of Mother Ganges. On the appointed day the 
long procession of little fellows headed by Noren, left the 
Dutta home and marching with flying standards, and with gar- 
lands of flowers in their hands went the length of the streets to 
the Ganges side, All the while they were singing with Noren for 
leader, and when they teached the River they sang that song 
which all Hindu children know so weil, “Worship the Mother 
Ganges,” and then threwtheir garlands of flowers upon the 
flowing .waters. That evening, they again repaired to the 
River, and makine gysroersty bnnte nut oo uk. 


DEDICATED TO SARASWATI. 61 


banana stems, fastened at their prows the lights of reverence. 
What a pretty sight! All along the river there were these 
play-boats. Noren’s was only one of many parties; and all 
along for miles the Mother’s waters were lighted by the 
love of the children. 

Memory was the chief faculty of Noren’s mind in this 
school period, The boy had a peculiar way with him of clos- 
ing his eyes and sitting motionless when in attendance at the 
classes. The private tutor who had been engaged did not 
understand this peculiarity in his charge, at first. At last 
he became quite provoked, What was the boy but a dunce 
who slept while the lessons were being taught! There were 
the other boys, as well, who were the classmates of Noren ; 
some were cousins of his and others the children of the 
friends of his father. All met with the favour of the tutor 
but Noren, Patience gave way finally and the teacher 
caught hold of his pupil shaking him rudely, as if to arouse 
him from his constant somnolence, Noren opened his eyes 
in wounded surprise. “He listened to the angry words of his 
tutor, Then, in self-defence, he recited word for word the 
whole text that had been read the hour before. This caused 
such great astonishment that ever afterwards the tutor re- 
garded his pupil with something akin to admiration, for never 
had he, in his long acquaintance with boys, found sucha 
genius for memory. 

At night Noren slept under the protecting presence of an 
old relative, who was much learned in Sanskrit lore, This 
man thought that the wisest method of training the mind and 
character of youth was through the memorising of: difficult 
intellectual subjects, Every night, therefore, he taught the 
boy several verses of the. Amarakosa, which is a thesaurus 
of Sanskrit. In those evenings he read by candle-light the 
first beginnings of that life to which Sanskritic learning is the 
open door, ,This went on for months, In a year’s time 
Noren had mastered a considerable portion of its contents. 
It might have been this training in his early boyhogd that 


62 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


wonderfull knowledge in this respect which he possessed in 
his later years. Certainly this was one of the formative ele- 
ments towards it. ‘ 

The Sanskrit language is the classic language of Hindu- 
ism. It had its being long before any historic date of which 
there is knowledge. The Vedas, the Scriptures of Hinduism, 
which are the oldest writings in the world, are written in 
Sanskrit characters, The language was dead in its popular form, 
long before the days of Buddha, in the sixth eentury before the 
Christian era, It was only with the learned even in that day. 
To-day it is regarded as the basis of the national life, for it 
contains the literature of Hinduism. In later times, the 
Swami Vivekananda acquired the consciousness of the need 
of such conservation of language and culture, and became 
the ardent champion of the revival of the language and of 
the culture it represents and preserves. 

Indissolubly connected with the national life of Hinduism: 
is the assemblage of the traditions and the learning which the 
Sanskrit language conserves. Whoever masters the language, 
masters the spirit of Hinduism to a large extent. How neces- 
sary that the language be common knowledge among the 
people throughout theland! What unity and what conscious- 
ness of unity it implies! This is of the soul of the people. 
From north to south and throughout the breadth of Hindu- 
sthan this is the underlying current of its vitality,—this and 
the spirituality of the Hindu outlook on life. Should these 
ever go into the paths of forgottenness, then, indeed, all 
hope would be at an end. The Sanskrit language is thé root, 
the mother-tongue of all the dialects spoken in India. It is 
thus the ubiquitous racial unit. It is thus one of the syn- 
thetic elements for the conservation of the culture ; it is thus. 
the embodiment of the national spirit. 

It was fortunate for Noren that he studied under one to 
whom the learning of this tongue was as a religigus acquire- 
ment. Grammar and religion are closely related in India. 


Indeed.the father of the grammarian classic is looked upon 
[ee en ne oe Meee ee | 





DEDICATED TO SARASWATI, : 63 


the consciousness beyond all learning. The solemn utter. 
ances of the greatest knowledge are as child’s lisping com- 
pared to the consciousness of absolute “reality, Saraswati 
is, indeed, a form of the Mother of the Universe Herself. 

How many are the elements which go to the make-up of 
the Hindu character ! How deep are they, as well! The ap. 
pearance decgives, What to the West.ts learning only, is to’ 
this land the very thought by which one speeds to God. It 
is all unconscious—the Process of the unfoldment of that which 
is the Hindu consciousness. The earliest impressions of sense 
are associated with thoughts beyond their Scope, thoughts 
of great truths and of realities that are super-sensuous. 
and divine, 

And in Saraswati there is seen -the same deification 
of thought and learning as characterised the worship of the 
Muses in ancient Greece. Running as the string in a neck- 
lace of pearls is here: in India the religious consciousness 
amid all mortal things. Asin Greece of old here are ever 
the presiding Gods and Goddesses. To them must worship. 
be ere a task be commenced, Their invocation brings about 
Success, Thus is the lad led to the Feet of Saraswati before 
he utters the first letters of the alphabet which is the key to 
learning. Because of this one reads in the opening paragraph 
of the Upanishads, which are the essence of the gospel of 
Hinduism, the invocation to the seers and to the Gods and to 
the Divinity Most High. 

Coupled. with the birth of learning is the necessity of 
personal austerity, For the goddess of learning in India 
gives only of the wealth of thought. In this She is so dis- 
.tinct from the character of Lakshmi, who is the giver of 
material riches. These two,—Saraswati and Lakshmi, though 
both are forms of Her in Whose keeping is the movement of 
the universe—are stationed as Opposite to each other as are 
the poles. For Lakshmi unravels the thread-ball of sense, 
while Saraswati draws inward andéoa centre the threaded 
strings of sense, making these serve the purposes of, Mind, 


Saraswati ig the Minerva of Hinduism and She brooks’ 


iad ) 


64 ; WHE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


no loud noise. of sense within the sacred precincts of 
Her shrine. 

But there are other thoughts. Higher than Saraswati 
reigns the Soul and She is only the-guiding-star upon the 
paths of Soul, So that in the Upanishads though one reads 
‘the invocations to the Gods and to the Great Protectors of 
the worlds, still there sounds above the chant of all minor 
invocations, the grand theme of the Highest Self. 


—_——_ 2 0... 


XI 


PLAY DAYS: AN ACCIDENT. 


Acknowledged as the leader wherever he went in the 
course of his life, the peer among his contemporaries, the 
Prince of the disciples who sat at the Feet of his Master in 
early manhood, the chief thinker later on in the intellectual 
circles of East and West, Noren was also the king among 
his playmates. His playfellows thought him the all-in-all 
of their little world, Wonderful are the relations between 
play-days and life, The Napoleon of the play-days of 
childhood is likely to be a Napoleon in the serious affairs of 
later life, ; 

There is something that binds the playmates of child. 
hood in pleasant bondage'and in teady obedience where the 
Sreat are concerned. Instinctively do they gather about 
themselves the company of those who become the instru- 
ments of their will, What was so surprising ia the particu- 
lar instance of Noren was the fact that the playfellows of 
his early life, who visited his home in his boyhood days, 
likewise visited the home he built in the years of his man- 
‘hood, along the Ganges side, the monastery of the order of 
the monks of Ramakrishna near Calcutta at Belur. 

He was the ‘king’ in play. “I am the Samrat, the king of 
kings,” shouted Noren as he scampered to the highest step 
of the stairs, that led from the ground-floor of. the courtyard 
to the great puja-hall, and sat himself down as the lord of 

. men. Pointing to the steps below, he told two of his fellows 
to stand before him as Prime Minister and Commander- 
in-chief, Lower on the'stairs he bade five others stand as 
tributary princes. To his courtiers he gave the privilege 
of sitting one step lower than, the princes, He then 
formally opened his durbar, Ope by one the princes, 
the higher officials of State and the courtiers Prostrated 


a 


ane : 


a 


66 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


themselves in Oriental fashion, lengthwise before the Imperial 
Presence, addressing him as the son of Solar splendours, 
the lord of lands and seas and the protector of Dharma, 
The ceremony over, the king enquired of the welfare of his 
realm and listened to the grievances of his subjects A 
criminal was then brought before him, andthe grave accu- 
sations against him being proved, His Majesty exclaimed, 
“Off with his head! Ho! Guards!” Ten lads, who had been 
commissioned as guards, sprang upon the offender. But 
he, anwilling to surrender, sped to the entrance door of 
the Dutta home and a wild chase ensued. It was past the 
noon hour and the whole house was rudely roused from 
a pleasant siesta. The servants over whose prostrate forms 
the boys had tumbled were most irritated, and gave chase 
to the fleeing crowd of notables, but returned defeated in 
the chase by the swift-running lads. But Noren Stood his 
ground, eyeing them triumphantly. What could they do? 
He was the lord of the house. 

There used to come to Noren’s house many clients of 
bis father. They were of various castes. They sat together 
chatting with each other until their turn for consultation 
came, Each one held his own fooka, or Oriental pipe. 
Only in the excited exchange of thought and in the volume 
of ascending smoke were they one. In one corner was a 
Mohammedan who eyed the rest with something resembling 
compassion, He took no part in the conversation. Only 
here and there was his silence broken and then it was 
always the same words and in the same tone, as if he 
were tired of living, “Allah be praised! Allah be praised ! 
There is no God but Allahy’ Here he puffed at the hooka— 
and then, in accents as though a world’s we rested on his 
shoulders, “And Mohammed is His Prophet!” And then 
another long, gurgling puff! The others of different castes 
and creeds dropped the conversation at this, as though it had 
been a heavy weight. Silence, and then there were excited 
puffings from seven or eight Lookas—and clouds of smoke} 
Again the conversation was raised to excitement and then 


PLAY DAYS: AN ACCIDENT, 67 


‘anew, “Allah be praised! Allah be praised !” and with the 
“Nate of praise went upa long, loud patient yawn, 

In came Noren with his body bare, except for a dhoots 
around his waist. “O Noren! Noren !” they cried. And from 
the end of the room came a voice broken with gurglings of the 
hooka, “OQ Allab ! It is thou, lad! Come hither ?" Norert 
went gladly. The Mohammedan was @ staunch friend: 
and one of the well-known clients of Noren’s father, 
Whenever he came he piled the Parlour cushions about 
him and, testing like a Nawab amongst them, smoked 
his hooka forgetful of all earthly things. But Noren he 
loved, and Noren’s entrance always Called him from his 
hooka reverie, . 

In India everybody sits comfortably on the floor, In 
houses ofthe rank of Noren’s father there were grand 
carpet-cloths, soft and inviting. There was an array of 
Sreat cushions upon which to rest luxurfously, There were 
hooka-stands, chased in silver and ookas of all descriptions 
and for all castes and creeds. There were also magnificent 
Sorh-goorhis, with ‘tube-stems attached of such length that 
one could sit or lie down at a distanee of several feet from 
it and smoke. This is of the luxury of the Orient. 

Noren sat close to his Mohammedan “ancle,” as he was 
wont. to call him, and listened eagerly to the long, long 
Stories of caravan trips with camels and elephants: through 
the plains of the Punjab to Afghanistan, There was no end 
to the tale-telling. Such adventures and such long journeys ! 
“Take me with you,” said Noren. “To be sure,” answered 
the follower of Mohammed. “When you grow just one inch 
taller,” he would say. Noren felt that he had grown any 
“number of inches taller since hg knew this Moslem “uncle,” 
But he rejoiced in the futurity of the Promise and he always 
loved this strange “uncle” of his, , 

The others, they of Noren’s belief. and of various 
castes, looked on appalled. Here was Noren breaking <astes 
and eating Sandesh, which is a gelicigus Sweet, from the 
Moslem’s hands, ‘Sforrors ! Horrors !” thought the others 


68. THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


- and puffed more profusely. Then the father entered. He 

smiled at the wry faces that were turned at the Mohammedan 

and at the looks of severe criticism that were directed to 

_ hisson, He was aman who laughed at all caste and loved 
all creeds, 

Noren scampered off to play when the business began. 
Every house in India is home and office at one and the same 
time. The business of the law went onin the parlour of Noren’s 
house, Then all the clients would leave for their respective 
homes, in their garries that waited in the lane. The father 
would accompany them to the front entrance. Noren would 
take advantage of their absence to go into the parlour and 
try the Aookas of the separate castes and creeds. But the 
Mohammedan’s /oota was his favourite. There was 
something special in the perfumed flavour of the *ebacco in 
it, he thought. 

Caste was a mystery to Noren, Why should one not eat 
with any other? What would happen if one did? Would 
the roof of the house fall upon him? Would he suddenly 
die ? He wondered and then boldly rax the circle of hooka- 

stems through his lad’s mouth and took a whiff from each 
and-every one of them. No, he was not dead !‘The world 
had not crumbled because he had done so. Everything was 
quite the same and so was he. Just then his father entered, 
“What are you doing, my boy ?” questioned the father. “O: 
father, why, I was trying to see what would happen if I broke 
caste !? ‘The father laughed heartily, and witha knowing 
countenance walked into his private study. 

Again, in the play- pranks of childhood was foretold the 
serioushess of later age. Even then in the childishness of 
those early days was he the breaker of caste, but not rudely, - 
or as a reformer, but just as a boy. When reprimanded as to 
this, he would say, “I cannot understand what difference it can__ 
make.” He had not the caste-consciousness. He believed, ' 
in later life, that any change of custom that India, asa whole, | 
must make in ordes tht the ancient spirit of Hindusthan 

* be equal to its modern heeds, must cogié organically and 


PLAY DAYS : AN ACCIDENT. , 69 


from within. It ‘must be the result of enlarged vision and 
not of prejudicial and fanatical reform,—not through denun- 
‘ciation, but through a healthy and normal chahge: 
On another day, the guests and clients were assembled 
‘in the parlour. The perfumed smoke from the Zookas scaled 
to the ceiling in gorgeous circles of great clouds. Noten: 
had had his conversation with his Moslem “uncle” ant! had 
gone back to play a game of hide-and-seek. There’ was-& 
lot of happy boys at play. | In the parlour, even the Mos- _ 
lem had bestirred himself and joined in the conversation 
which chanced to be about Akbar’s times, Akbar, that Grand 
Mogul, who was the seer of an Indian nation, composed of 
the amalgamation of castes into tribes and of tribes into na- 
tional wholes, with which should be united the dssembly of 
the Moslem peoples. He died before it could be accompli- 
shed, and the difficulties were enormous, Both the Moslem 
and the Hindus in the parlour of Noren’s father. were lauding 
the tendency the Emperor had to renounce all power and 
take to the monastic life, They also spoke of the memory 
that followed Akbar by which he knew that ina past life he 
had been a monk, but through some failing had to be born 
asa king’s son, for so the monks are born into the world 
sometimes, Their penances, in their previous life as monk, 
‘aise them above the fortune of the ordinary man, 
A piercing scream ! “The whole house was in commotion, 
The playfellows of Noren were crying aloud for help. 
Noren had missed his footing and fallen from the upper floor 
‘down the long flight of stairs, He had been searching for 
. ahiding playmate on the upper floor, Not finding him he 
had run in excitement, but had stumbled, missing his footing, 
. and fallen headlong down the stairs, He lay at the bottom, 
unconscious. His mother bad run to the scene, and ‘his 
father jumped up, at the first cry, from his business and 
tushed to the foot of the stairs. The clients were anxious, 
,Noren was injured ! He was Carried up the stairs into the 
dinner rooms, Here he was nursed by his mother and, his 
sisters. The father was frantic. “Doctors were called. 
: 4 


go THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


There was infinite relief when it was known an’ hour or 
So later that it was not a fatal injury. As the result, how- 
ever, Noren bore throughout his life a scar just above his 
tight eye. 

The sage who was his teacher in later life said of this, 
“Had Noren’s powers not been checked by this accident 
he would have shattered the world }". As it was, he raised: 
the world ! 


XU 
SOME CHARACTERISTICS: A PROPHECY. _ 


Noren grew in grace as he grew in years, as the old 
saying goes. At the passing of his boyhood into youth he 
revealed some characteristics that marked him out among 
the others. Though he was in his school days he was 
by no means unlearned in deep things. He had been: 
trained, as all Hindu children are, defore they go to school 
to learn the rudiments of the arts and sciences of Western 
learning. He knew passages of great length from the 
Ramayangz and the Mahabharata and was proficient, for a 
child, in his own tongue. Often the singers who wander 
in the streets of Calcutta with their instruments and their 
special role of songs, stopped at Noren’s'héme and would 
sing for a pice or ‘two, or a handful of fice, Some of them 
who worshipped the warrior-God Rama, sang His praises 
in verse from the Ramayana. Noren listened with tapt 
attention. He loved singers. On a certain occasion a party 
of singers came and sang, making, however, several mistakes 
in the repetition of the text, Noren stopped them and 
pointed out their errors. They were surprised to find how 
well he knew the stanzas in which they specialised. They 
were greatly pleased and purchased sweetmeats for him, 
and wished that he could join their party, but of course 
that was out of the question. 

That Noren was so familiar with stanzas and Slokas 
from the Ramayana was of little wonder, for Rama, in the | 
lad’s earlier years, had been, as was seen, the idol of his 
heart; and the story is told how at that'time he was So 
enamoured of, Hanuman, the. marvellous . Monkey-Servant 
of the Lord, marvellous for his doings, but marvellous far 
more for his wonderful love for the Lord Rama, that giade 
him the King ef Shaktas. The lad desired to see Hanuman, 

4 


. 


72 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


He was told, accordingly, that he could do this by medita- 
ting upon the famaus Servant of the Lord. In those earnest 
days of childhood he would run anywhere to hear the chanting 
of the Ramayana. He would chant and sing with the chanting 
and the singing until his whole frame was shaken with the 
ecstasy of song, and he would dance and dancé with the 
‘joyous and devout shouting-out.of “Rama! Rama! Jaya Raja 
Rama! Rama! Rama! Jaya Sita Rama!” And he would lose 
himself and becoming dead as it were to all the noise and 
trouble of this weary world he would live With the heroes , 
‘of the ‘great epic. If was in one of these ‘moods that on 
a certain occasion he went to hear the recital of the 
Ramayana by 4athakas, in the course of which he heard from 
the venerable narrator that Hanuman lived in plantain- 
groves, .Noren who was anxious to seé the Megpkey-God 
asked, “Can I see Hanuman there?” And the kathaka told 
him, to satisfy his childish—or perhaps it was spiritual— 
curiosity; “Yes, my child, you may do so,” On his way back 
he remembered a plantain-grove near hi§ home. He at once 
made his way there, sat down under a plantain tree and 
prayed Hanuman to show himself to him, He sat and sat and 
sat; and he meditated, and meditated, and meditated, but 
Hanum4n did not come. He was bitterly disappointed. 
And they told him, at home, in order to solace him, “Noren, 
dear! Hanuman more than likely has gone forth to-day 
on some errant mission of the. Lord.” That quieted him. 
In after life, when he was the great Sannyasin, Swamiji 
spoke of this with much joyous remembrance, but he also 
spoke very much and seriously of Hanum4n Mahavira, and 
those hearing would be transported and would cry out the 
name of the Monkey-God ; and it was his intention in 
those great days of his life ta erect a stone image of the 
God somewhere in the monastery grounds at Belur. 
Fascinating are the singers that sing in the city streets, 
Sometimes they come in large parties ; it may be asa 
family who are in straitened circumstances, But they are, 


SOME CHARACTERISTICS 3 , A PROPHECY. 73 


Mother. Or it may be that a father’ will ‘come with his 
‘boy dressed as Sri Krishna, with: silver anklets _tinging 
ashe dances to the song, while: the father sing$ #1 a deep 
basso, beating time on the tom-tom. From hotge'to house 
they go, singing joyously, Beggars though they are in 
appearance, in the ecstasy which they arouse, they have: a 
8reat hold on the spiritual sense of the ‘people, Offen 
and often they came to Noren’s house and his mother 
always bade them welcome, for his sake. 

It was an intimate education into the Hindu consciousness 
that was thus afforded to Noren. He delighted in it and 


‘spent a large part of his time reading the stories that the - 


singers told in song. His mother encouraged him in these 
pursuits, realising that the more a child is initiated into 


the natignal culture, the better and the truer man does he - 


becoine ; and also that he becomes a servant in the cause of * 


the preservation of such ‘culture. 


During the first days of Noren’s attendance at the 


Metropolitan Institution the father dressed him in trousers 
but he tore them everyday owing fo his restless habits. 
He was unusual in his restlessness, and they say of-hity 


that in school he never managed .to really sit at his desk. 


It was a sort of compromise between sitting and standing 
with chuch exchange of posture. He was the boy among 
them all, in all things. When he played, he played furjously, 
The games were marbles, jumping, running, boxing. He 
was first in play, and it was left to him to arrange the play- 
Programme for the following day. Disputes often arose as 
they do among boys, and it was to Noren that the disputants 
came as to a court of arbitration, He disliked quarrelling ; 
above all, he could not bear a coming to blows. Did such 
a climax occur he would rush between the contending 
Parties, oftentimes at the risk of getting the blows of both 
‘opponents upon himself; but he was master of the situation, 
for he knew boxing, even at this early age, 

Withal, he was a “dare-deyil,” as he himself expressed it 
in his own way to a disciple, of bis in later years, saying, 

a. : 


74 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


“From my very boyhood I am a dare-devil ; otherwise could 
I have attempted to make a tour round the world, almost 
without a penny in my pocket ?” 

He was kindness itself to those whom he loved among 
his playfellows. There ‘was often strenuous argument 
amongst them as to whom he loved most, each believing 
that he, particularly, was most beloved. Was anyone hurt 
or ill in a party he had taken for a boyish excursion, he would 
give up the prospect of fun, to attend to the injured lad. 
‘Such an instance occurred when he went with twenty or 
more boys to see the Calcutta Fort. One of the party com- 
plained of much pain. The others joined in a merry laugh 
at the sick lad’s expense. They went on ahead, but the boy 
sat down on the ground ; his pain grew worse. Noren had 
gone on with the party, but suddenly he turned saying, “It 
may be that he is seriously ill. You boys runon. One of 
us must go back to him. So I will go.” He retraced his. 
steps just in time. The boy had been seriously attacked 
with the raging fever that so often comes upon one in the 
tropics, He assisted him, half-carrying him to a garri near 
by and accompanied him to his home. It was this spirit in 
Noren that made him the idol of his fellows, and so deep 
was the impression with most of them that they followed 
him as their.leader in the serious affairs of his college-days, 
when Hinduism was inundated by the tides of so-called 
reform that threatened to sweep away the very structure of 
Hindu civilisation. They thought as he thought ; they did 
as he did. ‘ 

J At this time he also saved a child and its mother from 
being run over by a carriage and seriously injured. Hastily 
snatching the child in one hand he pulled the mother out of 
danger with the other. 

Kindness he inherited from both his father and mother, 
but there is one special “instance in which his . mother, 
Bhuvaneswari Mata, exhibited remarkable generosity, show- 
ing the character and the intensity of this tendency as 


a a ae ea he eee Sey eT ee ee ee 


SOME CHARACTERISTICS : A PROPHECY. 75. 


wife a mortgage on a house belonging to a Mussulman 
family who had been hard-pressed for money. When the 
time for paying off the mortgage came, the elders of the 
Mussulman family were ata loss to procure the money for- 
the purpose and feared a foreclosure. They tvere in great 
distress, and starvation threatened them. They told.their- 
tale to Bhuvaneswari Mata. She listened calmly.: Taen 
without any comment on her action she straightway handed * 
oyer to them the mortgage deed and cancelled their debt, ° 

These two traits, restlessness and kindness, were amongst 
. the prevailing characteristics of Noren’s family and of Noren 
himself. They continued to be so until the end of his life, 
It was a restlessness that was expressive of the tendency 
he had, later, to see and travel, and gather all possible infor: 
mationgand experience. It was a spirited, eager restlessness, 
Restlessness is also the natural outcome of the ideal of 
the monk. His is a great spiritual restlessness. The 
wandering monk must not stay in one place longer than 
three days, lest attachment for it may arise within his heart. 
Restlessness, with Noren, was always the constant effort to 
be saved from sameness ef. surroundings and from monotony 
of circumstance ; it was an effort to be saved from sameness 
of ideas and, generally put, from stagnation of any sort. 
His two brothers, much younger than himself have seen the 
world because of this characteristic family restlessness, and 
his brother, Mohendra, wandered from London to Constanti- 
nople, and thence to Jerusalem and Persia, coming to his 
native land by way of the Persian Gulf. 

It was this same spirit which made Noren’s father a 
wanderer, as it were. He would often leave Calcutta. When 
Noren was some fourteen years of age his father had gone to 
Raipur in the Central Provinces. Thither the family soon 
followed, and Noren spent about two years in that distant 
place. His father would leave without any explanation, but 
whensoever his family came to him, or he returned to his 
Caleutta home, he was ever the loving parent and husband. 
Wihile? dao Rainae thnnoh Woek@ dad noe ethene cobs be 


76 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


nevertheless busied himself with the gathering of much infor- 
mation, sitting at the feet of his father, who was well learned 
in the ways of the world, and who was, above all other 
things, a man of many ideas. These Noren assimilated, 
both consciously and unconsciously. Hot discussions often 
“took place between the father and son, and Noren did=not 
anind opposing his father if he thought he was in sthe right, 
Sometimes the father won and sometimes the son. The 
mother felt gladdened at heast when the latter was the case. 
Kindness continued to be one of the chief qualities of 
Noren throughout. From the financial remunerations he 
received in the West asa lecturer on India, and from the 
gifts that were offered to him by his disciples he gave right 
and left to the needy and the poor. Many are the tales 
that are told to this day of his personal charities, W 
Soon after his entrance into the Metropolitan Institution 
at the age of seven he was told that he would have to learn 
the English language. He was-unwilling todo so. It wasa 
foreign language, he said, so why should one learn it? Why 
should one not, first of all, become master of his own tongue, 
he thought, He would not learn it. He persisted, He went 
home crying to his father and mother. - They said it was 
necessary. Then a friend of Noren’s family, of whom Noren 
was especially fond, heard of his obstinacy in refusing to 
study the foreign language. This old man was the father of 
Ramchandra Dutta, who introduced Noren, in later years, to 
Bhagavan: Sri Ramakrishna. The old man took Noren 
aside and talked, quietly to him, but to no purpose. It was 
only after several months that he followed his advice and 
studied English ; but then he studied it with an earnestness 
that surprised everyone. It was the English language in which 
the was to give his message to the West, yes;and in greater 
Part even to India herself. He became the master of English. 
’ This was needed, imperatively. For was he not tobe the 
spirit incarnate of a newoperiod | His words in this language 
{ have sipce become a new gospel, «The language served him 


Na ak, 8 traci casipiatit laa gE eM a Es ee, Be eS ate ee ntnch 


SOME CHARACTERISTICS : A PROPHECY. 77 


spiritual world-impulse. Without it his life would not have 
been that of the Swami Vivekananda. 

‘There were those who saw marks of his future great- 
ness even at this time. In the year 1869, Kali Prasad 
Dutta,. Noren’s grand-uncle and the head of. the Dutta. 
house, lay on his death-bed. When he found that he” 
was to live but a few hours more, he called in his, 
whole family, and then asked any one of the childrex 
to read to him passages from that great epic, the 
Mahabharata, so that his soul could pass on to another: | 
sphere with the thoughts therein contained, All were disin- 
clined to do so on account of shyness except Noren and 
one of his sisters. Noren took up the heavy volume, and 
placing it on his lap turned page after page of the great 
story while his voice, loud and clear, rang with the glories. 
of the heroes and the Lord. He was reading that particular 
portion where Garuda flew off with his mother Vinatd on 
his shoulders,—which is, spirjtually, the sythbol of the soul 
rising on the wings of knowledge to blessedness, . The* 
breathing of Kali Prasad becamé slower and slower. Then 
he spoke in an undertone,—and yet with all the burning: ~ 
certainty of vision that the dying sometimes show,—“Child, 
you have a great future before you.” Having uttered these 
words his soul passed out into higher spheres on the image 
of that thought which symbolised the freedom of the soul 
from bondage. And the words of the dying man have been 
fulfilled. Noren not only carved out a great future for 
himself, but for India and the world as well, through the 
grandeur of his spiritual message. 

Those who are to change the thought of the world as 
did Plato and as did Aristotle, they who are to change the 
. destinies of the world as did Alexander and Ceesar—are from 
their childhood, aware of Power; from their childhood 
they are instinctively aware of the gteatness whith is to 
come, Noren who changed the «destinies of India and 
the thought of the Western Hemisphere to a great 


7 ee a 





rey ae ee oy eS ee 


78 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


childhood. He felt power. He saw things to which others 
of his age were blind. It was within him, He felt already, 
in the feeble and yet certain ways ofa child, the struggle 
which was to be his for expression, This accounted 
for that restlessness which was one of the charms of 
his personality, and which is inevitably a characteristic 
ofthe great. But at the same time he was steady in his 
practice of meditation. Much intenser than the joy of play 
was that duandam or bliss he experienced at the time of 
meditation. Visions continued to be with him, Amongst 
other things, the light that he saw in the moments before he 
entered sleep he saw also in the state of meditation, but at 
first minutely, as one sees the light of a fire-fly, Afterwards 
he saw a jyote, a cloud of light, proceeding froma mass of 
light until it became an intense illumination, rectanglar in 
shape. This corresponds to the mystical triangle of Indian, 
Egyptian and Christian symbolism in the centre of which is 
the “eye”, the outward sign of the inner vision when one 
perceives the reality and the spiritual essence of things, 

Fixed in meditation the spiritual consciousness ascends 
and ascends, freeing itself from all falseness of thought and 
falseness of sense, ultimately becoming aware, within itself, 
of the Highest Consciousness or God. 


—— eo oe 


XII 


OTHER DAYS AND AN HOUR: OF TRIAL, 


At the Metropolitan, Institution Noren was still the boy. 
Many stories are extant of him with regard to this period . 
that reveal him full of force and vitality, eager in play and 
diligeat in boyish delights. Like all other lads he played 
pranks and called his class-mates and friends by nicknames, 
preferring the short and characteristic epithets of his own 
imaginative faculty to their dignified proper names. He had 
also gathered some of the more appropriate names from story- 
books ang fables, and from various other sources, . 

Noren was still the devout admirer of the mendicant 
monks. Wherever he found one, whenever he saw one it was 
a moment of pleasure for him, He anticipated the Sadhu’s _ 
desires as far as he could, if the mMfeeting took place at his 
home, And the monks always blessed him, for his eyes 
spoke volumes, and it is in the eyes that the monks see the 
soul reflected. The desire to be himself a monk had never 
left Noren. He always thought of the time when he should 
be free to follow that life, and in his boyish excitement he 
would tell his friends what he would do and whither he would. 
travel and soon, until he became radiant’ in his own en> 
thusiasm, making others about him as eagerly anxious to see 
through his perspective the glories and the brightness of the 
monastic life, Often he questioned a newcomer to the 
Metropolitan Institution as to whether there was an ancestor, 
more particularly, a grandfather in the family. who had 
adopted the SannyAsin’s life, If there had been any’ one in 
their family who had renounced the world he would regard 
the new lad with especial favour. Sometimes the boys would 
gather togetlier and in play attempt go read one another’s 
palms, thereby to forecast the future. Noren was the Palmist of 
them al] He said to them that he Twanld han CAOhes THe 


: 80 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


was no mistake about it. “See!” he would remark triumphantly, 
“There is the sure sign of a SannyAsin !” And he would point 
certain lines on his hand which an old man had told him were 
characteristic of the*tendency to Sadhuhood. The others were- 
eager fo learn their fate in this respect. All of them wanted 
to be Sannydsins because Noren woald be one. But they 
were disappointed, as fate would have it. 

Then there would be long conversations as to what con- 
stituted: the Sadhu’s life. They would romance and romance: 
about it, They would build air-castles upon air-castles 
through the vividness of their boyish imagination. Noren 
contended that the superior Sadhus dwelt iff the regions of the 
trackless Himalayas, and that these could always see the 
Lord, Shiva Mahadev, the Great God of monks, living in 
the Silence of His Soul. Those who wanted te, become 
SannyAsins, he told them, must go to these sages and, wor- 
shipping them, ask to be initiated into their exalted con- 
sciousness, And then, said Noren, they would _make the 
applicant’ lie on along bamboo and, could he sleep on it, 
they would initiate him as an ochre-robed Sanrtydsin. O- 
the fancies of childhood! O the dreams of a boy! And 
yet there is truth in it all, for though the test of the bamboo 
be all a myth still it is suggestive to those’ of a richer and 
deeper understanding of the truth, that only those are fit to 
be monks who have transcended the binding consciousnéss of” 
body. Only those are monks to whom bothrheat and cold are 
one and the same, to whom even life and death are one and 
the same. Noren said, “These great Sadhus sit bolt upright like 
the images of Shiva, Nothing daunts them,” The conversa- 
tion would end with a song in praise of the Lord of monks. 

- To the house of a certain friend of his, Noren would often 
have recourse, as-to a refuge from the monotonous moments 
that occur even to boys. There wasa favourite tree from 
which Noren loved to dangle, head downwards, feet up- 
wards, and less of the heat of the noon-day sun. This 
was.a.Champak tree the flowers of which are a special 


OTHER DAYS AND AN HOUR OF TRIAL. 81 


tong way to secure. It was the flowers of this tree that 
: Noren loved. One day as he was swinging from the tree, 
the old and nearly blind grandfather of the house came 
to Noren, whose voice he knew and loved so well, 
And because of his uneasiness’ about the danger of the 
boy’s climbing that tree and also for fear of losing. bis 
flowers he told Noren that he must not climb that speciad 
tree. Noren asked the reason for not climbing this parti. 
cular tree. The old man answered, “Because there is ‘a 
Brokmadaitya, a ghost of a Brahman, in that tree, and at 
night he goes about, dressed all in white, and he is terrible 
to look upon.” This was strange news to Noren who wanted 
to know what else this ghost could do besides wandering 
about, and the old man rejoined, “And he can break the 
necks of feose who climb the tree.” Noren said nothing. 
The old man went away smiling to himself in triumph, 
As soon as he had gone some distance Noren climbed the 
tree again just to spite the ghost of the Brahman. His 
friend remonstrated, “Surely the Brakmadaitya will catch 
you and break your neck.” Noren laughed heartily at the 
seriousness’ of the other, “What a silly fellow you are!” 
he said. “Don’t believe everything just because some one 
telis you so and so !. Why, my neck would have been off long 
before this if the old grandfather’s ghost story were true !” 
Only a child’s story is this. It happens to many a child, 
But what is surprising is the answer Noren made to the 
remack of his friend, telling him not to believe everything, 
“just because someone tells you so and so!” There is a 
serious echo to this boyish philosophy in the insight and 
the utterance of a much later day when the Swami Viveka- 
nanda told to large audiences and also to his disciples, 
“Do not believe a thing because you read it ina book! Do 
not believe a thing because another has said itis so! Find 
out the truth for yourself! That is realisation !” Truly, not 
belief, but realisation was the coxe of his*teaching. 
The father of this boy friend of Noren’s loved him-very 


Pet: SE Lae ede Cee ae 


82 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


finding him dangling from the “forbidden” tree he called 
him into the house and asked, “Do you play all day going 
from one house to another? Do you ever read?” Noren 
answered, “Sir, I both read and play.” Then Noren was 
put to the test. He was examined in geography, mathe- 
matics, and made to recite poems, to the surprise of the 
strenuous examiner, for Noren acquitted himself well. 
Then the questioner blessed Noren and asked him, “Who 
is there to guide you, my son? Your father is in Lahore.” 
Yes, his father had gone into the extreme north of India 
on some pressing business. Noren assured the father of 
his friend that he read in the morning and that his mother 
directed him. And the former, though he said little of the 
matter for fear of flattering him, saw the greatness of 
Noren’s intellect at once, Thereafter he watches\the career 
of Noren with the keenest interest and saw the whole perspec- 
tive of the fulfilment of what he had predicted, “My boy, you 
will be a man among men! I give you my blessings.” 
Another delightful story is told of him. When he was 
in his eleventh year, a British man-of-war visited the port 
of Calcutta. Noren’s friends urged him to try and secure 
a pass for them all to go over the dreadnought. . To get the 
pass it was necessary to see the Bava-sahzb, the chief English 
_ official When Noren put in his appearance, the attendant 
at the door told him to go about his business and that he 
was altogether too young to go on board a_ war-ship. 
Noren looked dismayed. Then his face suddenly lighted 
up. He saw a staircase to the rear which he thought might 
lead to the Bara-sahzb’s office. Stealthily he made his way 
up these stairs, pushed aside a curtain and found that 
he was in the right room. He made his way into the crowd. 
It came to his turn, He laid his own application and 
that of his friends before the official, and he readily signed 
it. As he left the room he went out by the regular way 
and passed the door-keeper.. The latter was amazed, “How 
did. you get in?” he auee’s “Q I know magic!” Noren said, 


in ed Mietbiwine a ink: nt ae: 





OTHER DAYS AND AN HOUR OF TRIAL, 83 


- “He was a boy in every way. He played as other boys 
played. He felt as other boys felt. Only in the solitude 
does one see him as he is, when he rises to exalted things, 
beyond the normal consciousness of childhood, in the state 
of meditation, or when he addresses and worships the 
wandering monk, or when he goes into transports of boyish 
enthusiasm over the vision of the Sannydsin life. In these 
things the boy was father to the man. Otherwise he was 
assertive and pronounced in all his actions and the chief 
element presiding over his personality was the spirit of 
an indomitable independence. 

The mind follows him almost in reverence to his mother’s 
feet, in whom he saw intensely the ideal all Hindus must 
see,—the Divine Mother incarnate as She is in every form 
of mother af@ in all the acts and in all the love of mother- 
hood. This is an unforgettable vision with the disciples of 
the Master. He was so ardently, in later years, the wor- 
shipper and devotee of the Great Mother of the Universe, 
because he had seen something of Her in the worship at his 
own mother’s feet. In India, a son is always ason, Even 
before he is a man, even before he is a husband, is he son 
of his mother. 

His mother was always the confidante of Noren, There 
were mat trying times in his boyhood, but never was there 
amore difficult experience than that he had one morning 
in the class-room, Those were days when corporal punish- 
ment was meted out to the offender, however slight his 
offence. It was not only a custom in India, but in all lands, 
Now it is no longer permitted, but in each case where it 
has been stopped, it was because of some unusually brutal 
attack upon a child. That it was put a stop to in the 
Metropolitan Institution was -because, amongst other things, 
Noren was made to suffer in a manner most uncalled for, 
A boy in the class, whose curious personality was a source 
of amusement both to himself and to* his - fellows, was 
naughty in the class and was Severely taken to- task, 


Instead of being overwhelmed, ahe btoke out into a fit of 
a 


. 


84 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


laughter. The others could not restrain themselves. Noren 
was the nearest to the teacher and the latter turned his. 
increased anger upon him, beating him upon the head 
and pulling his ears until one of them bled profusely, 
Humiliated and hurt, Noren took his books and was about 
to leave the class-room. At that moment Vidyasagar 
Mahashaya entered the room. He was the greatest man 
of his day in education. He founded several schools. He 
was a great scholar. He gave shape and dignity to moderna 
Bengali literature. His name is known throughout India, 
He was known by the name of Vidyasagar, which means. 
the very ocean of learning. He was rarely addressed by 
the name of his family. He has become a hero to the people 
of Bengal, and his statue adorns a prominent place in the 
city of Calcutta. Vidyasagar MahAshaya saw thevituation ata 
glance. He made inquiries into the system of punishment. 
Thereafter, all the teachers who had inflicted corporal punish- 
ment were warned, and since then corporal punishment has 
been unknown in that Institution. He turned upon the 
teacher who had beaten Noren and said, “I thought you were 
aman. I see you are a brute.” He then consoled. 
Noren, but the classmates of the lad were infuriated at the 
unjust treatment he had received. He was their idol, He. 
was first in the class. They were at peace only when the 
teacher was severely reprimanded. , 

Even asa boy Noren was strong-minded and fearless. 
Before the foregoing instance, in his younger days, he had 
been assaulted by another teacher who thought he had made. 
a mistake in geography. Noren insisted that he was in the 
right. Angered, the teacher ordered him to stretch out his 
hand. Noren did so and was beaten on his palm time and . 
again. He did not murmur. Shortly after the teacher saw 
that it was he himself who had been in error and apologised | 
to the boy, and thenceforth held hint in respect. F 

On both occasions Norep went to his mother, She con- 
soled kim and said, “If you are tight, my boy, ‘what does it 
matter? It is unjusf and, unpleasant, but do what you 

r 


OTHER DAYS AND AN HOUR OF TRIAL, 85 


think is right, come what may.” Noren carried out this 
motto-to his dying day. Many times he suffered, many 
times he was misunderstood even by those nearest and 
dearest to him when he adopted a course that seemed in- 
‘evitable because, in his opinion, it was right. Another motto 
he had learned in those days and which he also followed in 
life was, “Stick to your guns, dead or alive !” 

His mother meant much to Noren. To his last days, even 
ds the famous Swami Vivekananda, he repaired to his mother 
in her moments of depression to cheer and help her. This 
was right. She and her son had passed through experiences 
of grief and deprivation and sorrow and distress—after 
the passing away of his father,—of which the tale can never 
be told in full, unless one can reveal what direst poverty is, 
and the faci‘ig of misery and even of starvation, For so did 
it come to pass. Noren and his mother knew suffering to 
its bitter end. For this reason was their love for each 
other a blessedness and joy. Now,—beyond both the hopes 
and miseries of life, they are one-d in the Eternity of God. 


XIV 


PARENTAL GUIDANCE—A MOTHER. 


Undoubtedly the parental consciousness descends upon 

the child in two different lines of influence. All children 
Owe something to the father and something to the mother, 
It is generally an intellectual inheritance with a broad- 
ness of outlook on life which the father bequeaths, 
The mother's bequest is generally the moral vision and 
the life of’the heart. This may have an intellectual 
bearing, however, for sometimes, particularly in the lives 
of great men, the moral vision becomes thts support of 
the intellectual consciousness, indeed, at times, its very 
basic principle. It may be that he was referring to some 
such realisation when later in life, Vivekananda said 
once with collected thought and much pride, “I owe my 
intellectual life to my mother.” 
, Simple are the words of counsel from a mother’s lips. 
Every mother utters them, but some mothers have a greater 
power of intensity in the vision of character than others. 
Such mothers are the makers of men whom the world calls 
great. Their personality isa rich enforcement behind the 
words of their advice, which thus weighs deeper in the mind 
of the child, 

It was the custom of Bhuvaneswari Dutta to speak to 
her children, as their memory recollects,in some such way 
as this, “Be truthful even unto death! Be chaste! Be 
always dignified and respect the feelings of others! Do not 
interfere with the liberty of others! Be gentle to the ex- 
treme, but be also firm and remain unmoved and unchanged 
in times of necessity.” These, above all other words, were 
the counsel-thoughfs of the mother. In brief, “To feel nobly, 
torthink highly and tg act rightly” was the moral tradition 
she handed down, ¢ . . 


. 


PARENTAL GUIDANCE——-A MOTHER. 87 


The sense of freedom which became the dominant note 
in Noren’s life was developed in reflection on that portion 
of fhe mother’s wish, “Do not interfere with the liberty of 
others !” For this reason he, as the Swami Vivekananda, 
tet those who became his followers and disciples avail them- 
selves of the rare privilege of developing along their own 
lines, He never dictated or superimposed ideas. He would 
confer the spirit, With that spirit they were to do as they 
deemed wisest. He was the apostle of freedom, not alone for 
himself, but for every one. He despised that special form 
of tyranny which is so often exercised under the name and 
plea of education, when ideas and ideals are propagated 
with special policies behind them. One sees the fountain- 
source of this great love for freedom in his realisation of his 
mother’s cffinsel. 

His mother was the concern of his heart. He would 
obey her unquestioningly. To his father he was deeply 
respectful. He revered him as a giant in intellect and a 
prince among the personalities of his time. But if he felt 
that he himself was in the right, he would oppose his father 
even as he opposed his spiritual teacher in the years of his 
early manhood. It was an opposition, however, not of will, 
but. of thought. He fought every inch of the way in matters 
of vision and consciousness, and in this his father himself 
had initiated him. 

Visvanath Dutta drew out the intellect of his son. He 
would hold long conversations with him upon topics that 
demanded depth, precision and soundness of thought. He 
would give the boy free intellectual rein, believing that 
instruction is not the super-imposition of ideas upon the 
mind of the child, but the stimulus to a self-awakening of 
thought. He believed that memory should not be the chief 
factor in the assimilation of culture, but a developed 
discrimination, a developed faculty of judgment. To’ his 
father Noren owed the capacity of grasping essentials and 
generalities in the field of knowledge, of seeing truth from 
the widest and most synthefic intellectual outlook. _ and. 


88 > THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


also, of realising the groundwork of any subject under 
discussion, With his father’s help he was enabled to com- 
Prebend fundamentals in thought, not to lose himself 
and his subject in the devious paths of argument and to 
express ideas in the simplest and in the most direct 
manner, From his father also he inherited the passion for 
history, and the love of such learning as improves the 
outlook on life and bears practical relations to a higher 
understanding of personal duties and responsibilities, Visva- 
ath Dutta cared nothing for thought-diagrams except 
‘in so far as they were capable of being transferred into the 
concrete realities of life. It may have been this characteristic 
which compelled Noren to demand the essentials in reli- 
gion instead of being satisfied with simple theological and 
metaphysical phases, and make realisation the baiden of his 
message, in place of belief. 

Noren’s father was broad-minded, and counted friends 
among all classes, other than those of his own caste and 
creed. Manliness was his idea of privilege, and not caste, 
This Noren saw and followed, He also witnessed in his 
father’s character a deep respect and a righteous pride for 
national traditions ; and in this Noren followed him as well. 

Christianity was active at that time in its propaganda, 
and was gaining much ground. The father would often try 
to bring out, in the conversations with his son, a sense of con- 
trast between it and his own faith, always demanding, how- 
ever, that the sense of respect for one’s own national religious 
tradition and culture be kept safe and intact, For what, after 
all, thought Visvanath Dutta, is religion but the highest con- 
ception of life, and why should one civilisation with ages of 
race-culture as the background of its religious outlook, change 
this for a creed which, in comparison, is only of yesterday ! 
He asked, “Are not all religions different languages for the 
same great thought ; are they not all visions ,of the same 
reality? And is not its own ,language and vision best for a 
particular civilisation ?” _ Visvanath Dutta believed and im- 


PARENTAL GUIDANCE—A MOTHER. 89 


his own historic past, he cannot have any self-respect, and 
faith in himself. He realised that conquest is not of the body, 
or by the sword, but in the infusion of a foreign culture, 
When the mind of a people is conquered, then is there con- 
‘quest, in fact, A 

“No man was ever great who never literally worshipped 
his mother,” Noren used to say when he had become a man 
of world-wide influence, Indeed, the mother in India stands 
first in society, above the wife, for motherhood is held more 
sacred than wifehood. Wifehood, it is held, is always per~ 
sonal, but motherhood is the abandonment of personality, the 
core of renunciation. The mother is the goddess of the 
household. Before ought else, the mother stands. Her wish 
islaw. Glorious is the Hindu conception of wifehood. Even 
greater, However, is that of motherhood, So deep is the 
reverence for motherhood in India that, it is not strange that 
motherhood should have been deified. The Mother of the 
Universe is the highest ideal of the Personal Godhead in 
India, Why ? Because the mother is easiest of approach, 
However steeped in guilt Her child may be, She is always the 
loving Mother. Closest of human relationships, the ideal of 
motherhood is also the closest in the divine relationship, 

One can even become impatient with the mother, just as 
children do. It is not that violent impatience, however, which 
means uncontrollable selfishness ; it is the great liberty of 
being quite natural and unconventional, even though the ex- 
Pression be in a form of impatience, by virtue of the depth 
and intensity of love which is between the mother and child, 
In India, this idea of passionate freedom in love is extended 
to include the relationship between God and His child, She 
is spiritual love, the Divine Mother, and of Her it can be said 
what Mohammed said of the Divine Person, “Verily My 
Compassion overcometh My wrath. The idea is, if one can- 
not be free .with Her, with whom, then, shall one be free ? 
The enormity of one’s sins is ¢overed* over by the infinity of 
Her love. The human mother is,Her earthly intarnation, 


90 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


child, Therefore, shall one not literally worship the mother > 
She is called “MA” the child’s simple name for mother ; She, 
the Divine Person, is likewise called simply “M4.” O if we 
could realise God as Mother, what freedom with divinity, 
and what consequent intensity of realisation, born of this love 
which knows no fear, would be ours ! 

Noren was the virtual worshipper of his mother. For 
his mother’s sake and because of the great poverty of his 
family which bordered on starvation, some years later, he 
did fot become a monk as soon as he desired, for he took 
care first that all should be well with her and those who 
depended upon her. When he had come triumphant from 
the West, as the Swami Vivekananda, at the climax of his 
public reception, he had a vision in which he saw his mother 
dangerously ill. His grief knew no bounds, and hose who 
are his disciples in Madras still remember how great was 
his anxiety at that time, and how he would not be comforted. 
until the telegraphic answer to his inquiry told him that all 
was well with her. 

So wonderful is the love for mother in the land of Ind 
that, as an instance, it is told of a certain Hindu High Court 
judge in the presidency of Madras how, when he lay on his 
death-bed, his mother, entering into the room, struck her 
foot and fell to the floor. Thereupon, it is said, that, sick 
unto death as he was, he rose from his bed upon the floor 
and fell prostrate at her feet, cursing fate that his illness. 
should have been the cause of such great pain to her. 

“Mother” is the invocation that rises from the soul of 
every son and every daughter of Hindusthan to every 
mother ; it is also the invocation that rises, morning and 
evening, unto Her Who is beyond the dream of life. 

Every mother is intensely hopeful of the future of her 
son, With Bhuvaneswari,Dutta it was not only a hope but 
an earnest prayer. She watched her boy’s development of 
soul, and when the days of his childhood were over and 
youth carhe on, and youth glided on into manhood, she as« 


PARENTAL GUIDANCE—A MOTHER. Of 


‘dream of the Lord on that memorable night must come to 
pass. Were the signs forthcoming? She watched and wished 
and prayed. Were the passing days bringing any revelation 2 
She watched, waiting, hoping. And it came to pass, even 
as she had dreamt on that memerable night and as she had 
expected, but not without sorrow and suffering. For to 
renounce her son that he might realise, in the monastic life, 
the consciousness of That which he was, meant much ; indeed, 
at that time, it meant everything to her. Noren had just 
reached that age when the hopes of the family were high and 
the world beckoned him on and on with fairest promise. 

His father had passed away when Noren was in his 
twentieth year, and the consequent distress of the family had 
caused him to defer his desire to enter the monastic life until 
a later Gay. Steadfastly he stood until the time came when 
he was no longer needed at home. Then he soared into the 
freedom of the monk, for years lost to name and the know- 
ledge of others as to his whereabouts, until he emerged 
as a world-figure and had become the embodiment of the 
“Zeitgeist” of his age. His mother had seen his days of 
intellectual struggle, and she prayed. She had seen the days 
when he sat at the Feet of his Master, and she prayed still 
more fervently. Her very prayers meant her sorrow, for they 
were answered in the way that spelled renunciation to her 
own soul as well as his. 

She saw the whole career of Noren burst into the fulness 
of the illumination of the Swami Vivekananda 3 aye, and 
saw his body left as a veil behind, when his soul had pierced 
the shadow of death into the Everlasting Consciousness of 
God. She stood beside the burning pyre and prayed in that 
tremblingness of thought which is the meeting-place of 
highest consciousness of*truth and deepest woe and _everlast- 
ing bliss, yet none of these. She stood unmoved, knowing 
full well that there had been no death, but victory and joy 
supreme of soul. The woe was of the humanity of her ; “but 


the bliss was deeper, and pf the Deathlessness of God 
whither hathad enna fo a 


92 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA., 


And she herself knew peace nine years later than her son, 
passing fram the illness that followed on a pilgrimage she had 
made to the Temple of Juggunnath, the Lord of the Universe, 
at Puri, into the Silence and the Calm and Bliss wherein He 
dwells, the Living Reality Divine. The mortal date of her 
freedom from all dreams came on the twenty-fifth day of the 
month of July in the year nineteen hundred and eleven. 

The burning-ghat was the place of illumination, and the 
soul of Bhuvaneswari Dutta went forth on the wings of 
approaching eve to meet her son in the Presence of the Lord 
and be crowned by Him in the Radiance of Eternal Peace 
forever—The Mother. 


i 


XV 


FURTHER GLIMPSES OF BOYHOOD. 


In his early boyhood, Noren showed a very active na~ 
ture, whether in study or in play, and one of the main charac~ 
teristics of play was the wild pranks which he enjoyed mak- 
ing upon his fellows. That in no way lessened their love for 
him ; on the contrary it endeared him to them all the more, 
As for study he manifested remarkable alacrity. in preparing 
his lessons, one hour being sufficient for him to master his. 
tasks. Apart from study, he would spend the whole time in 
devising“Some new soft of enjoyment. Whatever pocket- 
money he was allowed in those early days at the Metropoli- 
tan Institution would ‘inevitably go for lozenges, marbles, a. 
new bat or ball, In his earliest youth he took up cricket 
and became proficient therein. At this time Noren spent 
nine months of the year in sheer fun and applied himself: 
strenuously to his studies only for two or three months before 
the examinations. He showed proficiency in English, his- 
tory, and in Sanskrit, but had great distaste, at least at this 
time, for mathematics, and in this he was like his father who. 
was wont to speak of mathematics asa grocer’s craft. For 
some years during his time at the Metropolitan Institution he 
suffered from chronic dyspepsia and became very thin in ap- 
pearance, experiencing a strong appetite for certain foods which 
were specially harmful. This, however, in no way depressed his 
nature. He was as active as ever and manifested characteris- 
tics which revealed him as possessed of sterling qualities, 

One day, when about six years of age, he went in the 
company of a younger relative to a Charhak fair at which 
Mahadeva is worshipped, and saved the life of his companion 
by a sudden and bold move. Me purchased some doll-images 
of Shiva at the fair. As they were returning and it had grown © 


PACS Se eee ee 


94 . THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


“at that moment a carriage came dashing along. Noren who 
believed his companion to be immediately behind him, turned 
at the noise and to his utter dismay saw, that it was a ques- 
tion of life and death for the little lad, who stood terrified in 
the middle of the road. Putting his Mahadeva dolls under- 
neath his left arm he ran quickly to his help, heedless of his 
own safety, and grabbing the lad with his right hand pulled 
him almost from under the horses’ hoofs, Those who stood 
about them or were walking along were wonder-struck, The 
incident had taken place so rapidly that there was little 
chance for another to have run to his assistance. Some patted 
him on the back while others blessed him ; and when he re- 
turned home and his mother heard the story she wept for 
happiness and said, “Always be a man, my son ! "Even in 
these days Noren exhibited foreshadowings of that” remark- 
able presence of mind he always possessed when, as the 
Swami Vivekananda, he gave out the contents of the 
Modern Gospel, 

Another incident which occurred when he was nine or ten 
years old, proved him to be a “little man.” One day, having 
made up a party for a boating excursion, he and his school- 
mates hired a small boat on the Ganges and went to the 
Botanical Gardens, On the way there they enjoyed: them- 
‘selves making merry and singing at the top of their voices. 
At the Gardens they saw all the sights, enjoyed the walks in 
the park, and then, being hungry, they had luncheon, after- 
wards returning to the boat. One of the lads was desperately 
ill and, before he could rise from his seat to get the freshness 
of the air, became sick. The boatmen were annoyed and in- 
sisted that the lads should immediately cleanse the boat. 
They in their turn as strenuously insisted that they would 
not do so, offering instead to pay almost as much again as had 
been charged originally. . This did not satisfy the men. It 
would have been only right, in the nature of things, to have. 
pardoned or rather overlooked] the incident, because any- 
where along the ghats, some low-caste man could be procured 


ee ae 


FURTHER GLIMPSES OF BOYHOOD. 95 


whilst the boatmen themselves were common people of low 
caste. And in India the liberty which these men took with 
the ‘lads was nothing short of insolence ; it was an unpar- 
donable offence. They were becoming more and more rude . 
in the presence of the guardians of the lads: they would not 
have dared to address them in a tone of disrespect. @n reach-. © 
ing the ghat the men refused to let the boys land, and were 
making threatening gestures. Just then Noren espied two 
European soldiers walking leisurely along the river banks, 
Both were rather “under the weather” as the saying goes, but 
Noren nevertheless made up his mind to call these stalwart, 
kind-looking soldiers to his aid. Suddenly in the heat of the 
discussion, the boat made a turn, and Noren thought that he 
would take the risk of jumping ashore, With a dangerous leap > 
he was or land. Immediately he ran to the soldiers, and in 
broken English he communicated to them his tale of woe, 
meanwhile putting his small hands into theirs and guiding 
their unsteady steps towards the scene of trouble. “All right, 
my boy! All right, my boy! Don’t you worry !” said the 
soldiers. And then calling out to the boatmen in stentorian 
voices and with a mixture of English and Hindusthani, which 
made the language all the more formidable, they threatened 
the men and their boat and their lives if they did not imme- 
diately put to shore and release the lads. The men to whom 
the very sight of a European was in itself a sufficient cause 
for terror, said with panic-stricken voices, “Ackchha Sahib ! 
Bohut achchha Sahib! Abh¢ Sahib!” which means, “Very 
good, Sir! By all means, Sir! Immediately Sir!" With-one 
or two sweeps of the oars the men pulled the boat to the ghat, 
whilst the soldiers glared at them ferociously and spoke their 
minds in telling epithets. The lads seeing who had saved 
them had their souls stirred alternately with glee and awe, 
None of them dared even to look out of the corners of their 
eyes at the European soldiers, and after having made their 
salaams they retreated as fast as they dbuld to a safe distance, 
When they left the scene of trouble, they looked upon Noren 


wees Maples CAPA “shies. Vikeccn We ns oe ee Ce 






96 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


’ amazement. Noren asked, “Whatis the matter with you, 
fellows ?” After some moments one gained his self-conscious- 
ness sufficiently to say, “Why, how could you talk to two 
Sahibs and both of them drunken soldiers, at that! Who. 
would ever have thought of doing such a thing! Perhaps. 
they would have glared at us and something terrible would 
have happened to us.” Anybody who has been in the Orient 
and understands the fear and requgnance of an unsophistica- 
ted Oriental in looking upon a “white face,” will appreciate 
the story and also the dare-devilry and boyish courage of 
Noren. It was no wonder that his playmates looked upon 
him as a hero. 

Besides his interest in animals in these days and in his. 
pigeons, and white mice with their tiny bells, and his 
parrots with their constant cawing, Noren amused himself” 
in making toy gas works and aerated waters, which were 
then newly introduced in Calcutta. He even interested 
himself in manufacturing toy railways and all sorts of 
machinery. In the words of his younger brother, «With 
old zinc tubes, earthen cooking-pots and straw he made his. 
gas-house in the outer courtyard of the house ; the straw 
when lighted gave out a peculiar smoke, but it was in his. 
mind a miniature gas-house which lighted the whole city of 
Calcutta, It was amusing to see his gas works and himself 
as he stood with arms akimbo and gravely looked at his 
contrivance as the smoke issued forth, Sometimes, however, 
he expressed his disapproval by turning up his nose—a 
family peculiarity—and impatiently ordering his playmates. 
to put more fuel on the fire, or to blow more hercely # whenever 
the smoke rose up too lazily. 

“Though he was full of wild hobbies and always devi- 
sing some new sort of games into which he threw himself” 
with much gusto, he was the favourite ofall, With every 
family in the locality, whether of high or of low caste, wheth-. 
er rich or poor, he éstablisked some. sort of relationship. 
It is generally the custom that grown-up boys. of fourteen or 


FURTHER GLIMPSES OF BOYHOOD, 97 


Hindu household where the ladies reign, but in his case this 
Custom was waived asidé. Somehow Noren made his way 
into the hearts of all; and various families in the neighbour. 


‘hood looked upon him as belonging to 


themselves, Did any 


of the boys of the household near by suffer any bereavement ’ 
he was always ready to console, Otherwise, he kept every- 
body amused with his ready wit and with much merry- 


elders into roars of laughter.” Indeed 


' making, sometimes, indeed, sending even the grave-minded 


his handsome appear. 


ance, his musical voice, his jolly temperament and his good 
taste and manners made Noren a kinsman to all with whom 


speaks of him, “He was a favourite 
zenana whom he addressed as ‘auntie’ 

. . 

ing to their dge. He was never shy 
himself at home with any family ; aye, 
woman he addressed as ‘my dear aun 


he came into intimate contact, As his brother further 


with the ladies of the 

or ‘big sister’ -accord~ 
anywhere, and made”, 
€ven a poor low-caste a 
tie’ which gladdened « 


her heart. He was a sort of life-giving spirit with everyone 


of the locality—and the elders loved hi 
loved their own children.” 
Referring to another characteristic 


im as dearly as they 
¥ 


his brother says, “At 


this time he got the idea that he would excel all others in 
cookery, and so he induced his playmates to subscribe some- 
. thing according to their means, himself, however, generally 
bearing the total expense,’ Het became the chief cook and 
the others were his assistants, He cooked different sorts of 


Khichri and mbat-curries and other 


good things. Whilst - 


the dishes were ‘good jn, taste, he seasoned them with too 


much cayenne Pepper—his ‘fgvourite 


spice, Nevertheless, 


this group of gastronomers remained together fora good . 


long time and they enjayed it tight tho 


roughly” a 


Even in’ these young days he showed his’ intellectuats,, 


tendencies, ~ Wen the family had m 


oved to Raipur in the? 


Central Provinces; in Noren’s fourteenth year, “many hoted: 
scholars visited his father. Noren wodld listen to their dis- 
cussions, and occasionally he would introduce his personal 
. Ps ad Ap : 

views, Sometimes the elders, astonished at his cleverness, 


9 A 


98 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


would treat him on an equal footing. The sight of this 
gladdened his father’s heart, With one friend of his father, 
a great authority in Bengali literature, Noren joined in con- 
versation and took the man by storm by quoting verses after 
verses and paragraphs upon paragraphs from standard works, 
so much so that the man said, “My lad, we shall hear of you 
some day.” And the prediction has become verified, for 
Norendra Nath Dutta,as the Swami Vivekanafda, became 
one of the greatest authors in the Bengali language ; and 
not in Bengali alone, however, for his English writings have 
been praised, as well, both in the East and in the West as 
nothing short of perfect. Noren, even in his youth, sought, 
nay he demanded, “intellectual equality and recognition” for 
himself with everyone. He was exceedingly ambitious in 
this regard, and wher any one older than himse:f made light 
of his intellect, he would break through all sense of social 
difference and distinction and fly into a temper, not spar- 
ing even his father’s friends. For there was one time 
when he found himself sneered at by one much older than 
himself and a long-standing friend of his father. This 
enraged him, He thought, “How dare this man make fun 
of me when my own father thinks highly of me and deems 
me worthy of holding conversations and entering into 
arguments with him !” And with that his fiery temperament 
burst out, and he told the man what he thought of him 
and of such who believed that youth necessarily lacked 
intellectuality and mature judgment, He refused even 
to recognise the offender until he had apologised to him. 
There was another time when Noren, dressed in European’ 
fashion, was suddenly accosted and that rather abruptly, 
by a Mahratta pundit. This so irritated him that he: 
pounced upon the man, metaphorically speaking. Of courses 
the father. could not sanction such outbursts against elderly: 
persons,-—even though they proceeded from a sense of! 
self-respect,—for inf India, such conduct is considered as a! 
‘grave offence ; ‘and ‘so Noren was each time severely:; 
reprimanded, . but inf his’ heart the father was glad that, 


© 


FURTHER GLIMPSES OF BOYHOOD, 99 


this boy was a man, Noren never intended to be unkind, 
He somehow felt that during conversations carried on by 
clever men he also hada right to introduce his own spec- 
ulations about fife, For by this time he was well read 
in many ways for a boy, and he felt, in contradistinction 
to the lads about him, that intellectually he was growing 
ast into manhood, even if physically he was still of tender 
years, His father, likewise, shared this Opinion, 

During this period he acquired a sense of personal 
dignity, and when he returned to Calcutta from Raipur 
he was a changed boy. He always had a large-heartedness 
and a great generosity, so that however his temperament 
might conflict with circumstances and with people, he was 
always loved, 

There were two incidents in his youth which flattered 
him immensely. These were the receiving of honours 
and prizes, the first for physical prowess, and the second 
for intellectual attainments, Earlier in his youth he atten-’ 
‘ded a fair at which he carried off the first Prize in boxing,—a _ 
handsome silvet butterfly. It was a strange coincidence that 
-at this same fair his sister drew the first prize for needle-work 
on velvet. The second prize was the one he received from his 
own father for having successfully passed the Entrance 
Examination,—he being the only student of the Metropolitan 
Institution passing in the first division. The family was 
‘delighted at his success, and his father gave him what all 
boys treasure so much—a watch, 

Another occasion which revealed the boy as the man 
inthe making was, when -about fourteen years of age he 
saved a theatrical performance by compelling the bailiff, 
who had come to arrest one of the leading actors on some 
charge, to wait until the end of the play. -Noren had . 
managed to slip into the theatre, as some of his relatives 
who were inflyential in the matter made it possible for him 
to have a chance to see. In the midst of the performance - 
the ,bailiff appeared on the stage with a warrant and ad- 
vanced to the actor saying, “I &rrest you in the name of the 

. 


. 


100 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


law.” That very moment a voice called out, “Get off 

the stage | Wait until the end of the performance !| What 

do you mean by disturbing the whole audience like this !" _ 
It was a shrill voice with an unmistakable tone of command 

in it,—and it was the voice of Noren. Immediately a score 

of voices burst out, “Get off the stage! Get off the stage!” 
And the bailiff retreated in bewilderment. Those about 

Noren patted him on the back saying, “Well done ! Well 

done ! We would have lost our money’s worth had it not 

been for you!” It was this sort of action and this sort 

of ‘spirit which made Noren the leader amongst all the 
lads whom he knew, a leader passionately fond of fun 

and mischief, in all things a boy, and in all boyish ways: 

a man, XN 

Noren was always on the alert in these days. He had 
learned in Raipur that old Indian game of chess, and often 
came out victorious in many hard contests. At this time 
the theatre was introduced into the social life of Bengal. 
‘And Noren immediately opened up an imitation theatrical 
establishment, charging one-anna entrance fee from his. 
family and neighbours in order to pay expenses. Of course 
it was only an amateurish affair. He w9s, interested in all 
manner of sports, knew how to operate a magic lantern, 
and could row and fence excellently for one of his age. 

But of all his earlier attainments, music must be counted 
as one of the most unusual, He was taught and trained. 
until he became widely known as a sweet singer, and. he 
himself became infatuated with music and with song. He. 
had a friend whose house he often visited and here, to the 
accompaniment of musical instruments, he practised singing. 
The two would take the musical instruments and make 
themselves merry, especially when the guardians of the boy 
were absent. Noren’s* own family was greatly charmed 
writh his voice and he often sang to his fathe:, now seriously, 
now happily as the mood guided him.. His musical attain- 
ments at this time wpre cather striking, because he even 


~ eae ae he eee. ee 


FURTHER GLIMPSES OF BOYHOOD. ror 


He excelled in story-telling all through his life, and even 
.at this time he would hold his audiences of play-fellows in 
, excited suspense, whilst he narrated to them some thrilling 
portion of the tale of “Ali Baba and His Forty Thieves,” ‘or 
some equally exciting story. Indeed, Noren was throughout 
aboy,—hearty, joyous, kind, spirited, possessed of a fiery 
temperament, intellectually ambitious, fond of song and 
feasts, and anxious to see or hear or experience anything new, 
or to master anything in the way of obstacles. He was a boy. 
filled with the Western spirit of restlessness, in which he 
differed so markedly from the temperament and easy-going 
habits of his fellows, and proved himself to be the father of 
the man who was the restless, eager, fiery, intellectual, true 
and genuine mfak,—the Teacher Vivekananda. 


XVI 


COLLEGIATE DAYS. 


The play-days of childhood with their momentary joys 
and sorrows were over for Noren, and anew lifedawned 
for him with a more serious outlook when he passed the 
matriculation examination at the age of sixteen and entered 
a collegiate course. 

Happy, happy memories were with him now of those 
years he had passed at the Metropolitan Institution. His 
mind often reverted to the incidents of that period. He 
was always the first in his class. He remembeSed the many 
times that he was left in temporary charge of his clas 
during the absence of his teacher, for ten or fifteen minutes. 
He recalled the fun he and his fellows had, how he pretended 
to be severe with them and, then, how he would reverse 
that attitude into one of much merriment. He rememberec 
the playmates of this period—and mostly by the nicknames 
he had given them. It was not altogether a matter o! 
unmixed joy to him that he had succeeded in the examina- 
tion, for while it meant a new prospect, it meant also the 
“parting with many associations of which he had grown ‘fond 
ahd some of those companions he Kiyed much were to b 
Aeft behind. He could no longer play as schoolboys do 
He could no longer play at soldiers and march as the 
regiments march. He could no longer.scamper about. He 
felt all the seriousness of college-life and all the pre 
meditated dignity with which it is surrounded. But he 
soon forgot the old fife in the ontlook of the new 
and planned thenceforth for himself the serious task o 
real learning. 

That he had passed the Entrance examination for th 
university course was in Some ways characteristic, First 


because he was the only student who succeeded in passing i 
ox tie rae ae x Pee eC Beery Pee | CE RPE an: Peers eee 


COLLEGIATE DAYS. 103 


practically saving the reputation of the school. Then, 
also,. he succeeded so well in spite of atwo years’ absence 
from the school, when he went to Raipur in the Central 
Provinces in the year 1877. His father had gone there 
some months before; then, the family thought it best to 
follow. And it was along journey partly by bullock-cart. . 
through dense forests and jungly ways, for the railroad. 
in those days had been constructed only to Nagpur, by: 
way of Allahabad and Jubbulpur; and so the remainder 
of the distance had to be covered in this primitive way, by 
day and night. 

There are several noteworthy stories told of him at this 
time, but particularly one that happened on the road 
to Raipur in he had another of those deeper states of 
spiritual insight which foreshadowed the degree and the 
intensity of the spiritual power he exercised later as a 
teacher. True, he had gone into stages of meditation. He 
had seen visions and had been visited by many moods of the 
spiritual consciousness ; but on this occasion it seemed ds 
if the whole spirit of nature bore in upon him, 

The party of travellers had been journeying in their 
bullock-carts for several days, ‘ It chanced to be perfect 
weather. Noren felt in uncommon ways the glorious, 
joyous freedom of life as it is lived out in the open, The 
hours of the day were passed in spiritual exercises and 
spiritual conversation ; for in India every journey is, in one 
way or another, an act of pilgrimage. And the mind of 
the boy was occupied with religious things. Now it would 
be the exalted greatness of Shiva ; now it would be the 
doings of Krishna the Child, the Spell-binder of Souls. Or 
it would be the tales of saints and saintly heroes ; and so 
on and on. On the particular day of his insight, the whole 
time had been engaged in such ways. And the evening was 
being given up to song and meditation, as was the case 
with every evening. It was the hushed hour of twilight, 
after the setting of the sun. There was a wonderful silence, 
broken only, by the last nate of*some home-coming bird, 


a s 


104 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


the murmuring of the near-by stream, or the songs of 
devotees, The travellers were differently occupied ; some 
in song, others in silent meditation. The whole peace of 
life, all the silence, the stillness, the wonderful beauty and 
all the blessedness of nature seemed present there in the 
wilderness, and a certain divinity, withal, of quiescent 
omnipotence. . Noren commenced to sing, He had forgotten 
the presence of the others, His voice rose with the burden 
Of a song in praise of the Lord of the Universe. As the last 
word was uttered in the singing, Noren, strange to say, fell 
into.a state,,resembling the nature of deep sleep, but joy, 
' inexpressible joy, was written on his countenance. And 
when’ he returned,—blessed, as it were, and blissful,—to the 
normal state of things, the night had ay come, the 
stars were above, and surrounding the camp that had been 
pitched for the night was a silent and wonderfal peace. 

At Raipur there was no school, So Noren passed the 
time with his father, when the latter was free from the busi- 
ness of the law, It was during this time, as has been stated 
previously, that Noren mixed so intimately with him and 
caught the whole meaning of his father’s intellectual con- 
sciousness, Here was an education for Noren, the privi- 
lege of intimacy with a noble mind. And it is told of Noreri 
that in these days he would set himself to the task of deep 
exchange of thought between himselfand others who chanced 
to visit his father’s house. He was physically perfect at this 
time and had, to some extent, already acquired that splendid 
manner of bearing himself which amounted to a royal physic- 
al dignity, and which made him, in after years, a notable 
figure everywhere and on every occasion. It was during the 
two years’ stay at Raipur, also, that he was initiated by his 
father into the secrets and mysteries of culinary arts. For, if 
anything, the Swami Vivekananda was, like his father, a very 
excellent cook. 

The family returifed to Calcutta; and Noren was all 
the stronger and the better for the experience of a strange 

or —_ he > ee Pa fs 


COLLEGIATE DAYS. 105 


him into the Entrance class, as he had been absent from 
school for two years. Finally, by special perdtission he was 
admitted. Then it was that, he gave himself up to study, 
mastering three years’ work in the space of one, and. finally 
passing the examination, triumphantly and with tions 6 
the Institution. , 

When he had passed the Entrance examidation, - cel 1 
had made much advance in knowledge. He knew atithme- 
tic and something of higher mathematics. He was well 
versed in Sanskrit for his age. He had studied with much: € 
success the history of his own land, Now he.was to’'take 
up higher branches of learning. The curriculum he had be- 
fore him was an extension of the same subjects, together 
with the studgfof astronomy, of general history, of English 
literature and of the Western systems of philosophy. He 
had chosen these studies because he believed that they, best 
of all others, conduced to the development df the mind and 
to the highest refinement of the faculties of sdnse. His 
father encouraged him in this and assisted him in atriving at 
this conclusion, 

In the beginning he attended the Presidency College, 
which is the government college, but “he soon postponed 
his studies at this Institution, joining the General 
Assembly’s Institution at the next session, It is not 
unlikely that he had suffered a nervous breakdown because 
of the strain during the time in which he prepared 
himself for the Entrance examination. Then, too, he . 
had contracted malarial fever from which he suffered for 
one year. The.General Assembly's Institution was found- ; 
ed by the Scottish General Missionary Board. It is now 
known as the Scottish Churches College. When Noren re~ 
tarned in triumph from the West, as the famous spiritual 
teacher, it was the students of this college who stopped the 
carriage of state in which he was driving with some of his. 
European and Indian admirers- unharhessed the horses and 
drew the carriage themselves. The memory of Noren, the 
éoHege boy, ig elt with the Institution. 


« 


106 . THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


For the first two years of his college life Noren concerned 
himself mainly with his studies. He was devoted to litera- 
ture and made great headway in the arts of composition 
and rhetoric. He manifested a keen interest in philosophy 
and logic and in some forms of the higher mathematics, 
He grew more reserved while following these studies, dis- 
covering that his development lay along the lines of intense 
learning, He made great efforts in the direction of the English 


* language and more especially in the arts of conversation and 


1 
} 
i 


| 
\ 


debating in which he excelled, becoming virtually the leader 
of the college in this regard. 

At the Metropolitan Institution, he had ambitions along 
this very line. On a certain occasion when peizes were dis- 
tributed among the deserving, and one of the %pachers was 
about to retire, the class, of which Noren was a member, 
desired to give an address of thanks and appreciation for 
the many and loving services the teacher had rendered them. 
Mr. Surendra Nath Bannerjee, probably the foremost Indian 
of the day, was the chairman. He was known as the greatest 
orator, and so the students felt a righteous shyness as to 
speaking before such a distinguished man. They came to 
Noren in the emergency. He promised them that he would 
speak. He rose in the gathering and spoke for almost half- 
an-hour, telling the retiring professor how the boys felt 
towards him and how they regretted his departure from the 
Institution, When he sat down, Mr. Surendra Nath 
Bannerjee rose and spoke in a most praiseworthy manner of 
the young speaker. Later in his life this gentleman, although 
his reputation as an orator had grown into amazing fame, 
referred to the Swami Vivekananda as the greatest public 
speaker India had ever known. It was the tribute of one 
Indian genius to another. . ‘ 

Those who were among Noren’s friends and acquaint- 
ances at college, remember him as he was, impgrious and as 
rightly self-conscious ‘as thofigh royally born. He gained 
the admiration and good;will,of both the Indian and English 

professors, and they réferre@ to him as an ambitious mind 


COLLEGIATE DAYS. 107° 


and a personality with much latent power. At the end of 
the first two years, he passed the first Examination in 
Arts. Thereafter he developed a remarkable ériginality in 
his intellectual pursuits. He would test everything “by 
argument. Even in the hours of recreation .he continued 
discussions that had commenced in the college hotits:+ He: : 
would argue with those who challenged his point of. view, 
and invariably with success. He was a lion among the-stu- 
dents and was defiant in thought. He was vehement, . 
vigorous, of untiring energy, and his topics of thought and 
conversation were endless. His mind became intensely 
analytical, and it was in this becoming that he subordinated 
iepemnanen, © the demands of the intellectual self. At 
this period b#’ related himself, also, to the needs and.spirit 
of his time. He subjected Hinduism to a severity of analysis 
and it will be seen later on to what this led. He demanded 
from everyone his individual right to belief, whatever the: 
character of that belief ; and he was literally voracious of 
any information. 

Let it not be imagined, however, that he was not as a 
lad in other things. He was as spirited for adventure as 
ever; and there was another side to him that relieved the 
seriousness of his intellectual temperament. He was the 
wit among the students and the first to see the amusing side. 
of a situation. They were a jolly lot that centred about 
Noren in his college life ; and when out, for an excursion 
for fun and frolic, there was no jollier ‘one among them 
than he. Many were the times when they would pack 
themselves into a garrz and go singing through the streets. 
When it chanced to be a religious festival, they would repair 
to the sacred Ganges for a bath and a swim, making reli- ” 
gion and joy matters of one and the same moment. On 
other public festivals they would march at night through 
the lighted ,streets, in eager pursuit © of the most interesting: 
sights and of festival-making. ~ Noren was always the leader. 
He always saw to it that they had the full measure of fun 
and the full benefit of thes occasion. They were ntanly- 


a 











108 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


recreations in which they indulged, and in all the days of 
these spirited times Noren unconsciously wove about him- 
self the threads of many warm friendships which remained 
with him to the end. 

One of his characteristics during the college life, was a 
hatred of foppishness. He could not tolerate the dandy, and 
would speak quite openly to the fellow who made it his sole 
business to dress well. He disliked any tendency to effem- 
inacy‘ either in manners or in apparel, Another characteris- 
tic was, his thoughtfulness for others. It was customary in 
those days for the General Assembly’s Institution to help 
those who, for lack of funds, could not pay the required fees, 
but the case of the applicant had to be substantiated before 
he could be put on the “free” list. A friend of Noren found 
himself in great difficulty. He could not pay the arrears 
that had accumulated, nor the fee for appearing at the B. A. 
examination. Noren said he would see what could’ be done, 
and spoke to the secretary of the college, but without avail, 
He besought him again and again, but still without any hope 
for his friend. However, he cheered him up by saying, “Leave 
it tome. I assure you I shall succeed ; you go and prepare 
yourself for the examination.” Noren thought of getting 
a better opportunity of pushing his request, and resolved 
to wait in the street where he knew that the secretary 
was sure to pass at a certain hour in the evening. As it 
happened he met him, and spoke to him with such a depth of 

. feeling and such a threatening attitude that his request was 
readily granted, and the friend of Noren found himself with 
the opportunity of passing the university examination. 

Examination days are a trial to all students in every 
country, In India, the trial is especially severe and unusual 
energy is put forth by the students, -because tM degree bears 
a financial as well as honorary advantage. The student who 
passes the university examinations, enjoys the probability of 
securing a position undér the Government. A Government! 
-degrée enables him also to have the advantage over applicaats 
for other positions in the Commercial world. .. L. 


COLLEGIATE DAYS. 109 


When the days of examination for the degree of Bachelor 
of Arts drew nigh, Noren retired to his maternal grand- 
mother’s home near by, because of the noise of children 
and other disturbances in his own house. There he confined 
himself for days at a time studying day and night, He 
took a vow to the effect that he would not leave the room 
until he had mastered the daily task which he had chalked 
out ‘for himself. It was interesting to hear him speak 
toa friend, in later life, about the trials of preparation for 
examination, “I sat in the room,” he said, “book in hand, with 
a pot of strong tea gr coffee by my side to keep the brain 
from geétting over-tired. When I felt inclined to sleep 
at night, I wopld tie a rope to my foot. Then, did I fall 
asleep and siove to make myself more comfortable, the 
rope would jerk me, and I would awake with a start.” 
At all events, the struggle ended in victory. Noren secured 
his degree. He next took up the course for Bachelorship. 
in Law, but it will be seen how he was led to give up the - 
honours of that degree just when they were within 
easy reach, because of the meeting with Sri Ramakrishna, 
his spiritual master, and his decision of becoming a monk. 

Noren had become well-versed in music by this time. 
Not alone that, but he had even written an elaborate 
preface on the science and philosophy of Indian music, 
to a big book of Bengali songs. And this he did, solely to 
help a poor, struggling publisher, Later on in life he composed 
several famous songs and hymns that are now used’ in 
religious worship by the monks of the monasteries which 
he founded. An incident is narrated of his faculties 
in song. 

It is a rare audience that is as appreciative of music 
as one composed of Bengalis. They thrill with enthusiastic 
response. To an Occidental who for the first time is present 
on an occasion of this character, the audience itself is as 
much of an entertainment as the ‘singer and his songs, 


[Frequently the students at the General Assembly's Insti~ 


tution gathered about Noreg to hear him sing. There were 


£10 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


two hundred boys in a class on a certain day when the 
English professor chanced to be some minutes late, Fhe 
young men asked Noren to while away the time witha 
‘song. He gladly responded. There was perfect silence 
except for the singer’s voice. The professor came and 
hearing the song, listened before entering the room. When 
the song ceased, he opened the door with pleasure written 
on his countenance. He praised the voice of the singer, 
although he was not made aware of the singer’s name. 

* There was another one, howevery in later months, who 
‘became transported beyond himself into religious ecstasy 
‘by the sweetness of Noren’s voice. This was Sri Rama- 
krishna Paramahamsa, with whom Noren soared upon 
‘the wings of song, many and many a time, Thig the Region 
-and the Peace of God. 


OO -——___- 


XVII. ‘e 


THE DRIFT OF TENDENCY: A DEATH. . 


Presence of the Lord! So Noren felt; so he did on the 
morning before his B. A. examination. The deeper self in 
him had arisen, had asserted itself. What is all learning’if 
one compares it with that certainty of feeling for Reality 
which is born of the Love for God ! 

“Sitting on Thy Great Throne, O Lord of the Universe, 

Thou art bZaring the great song of the world 

As it rises unto Thee in the cadences composed by Thee !” 
Noren stood outside the rooms of some of his college-mates 
singing the song, absorbed in it, almost ecstatic. Happiness 
shone over him as agreat radiance. The lads were still 
asleep. Hearing him they awoke and opened their doors, 
Noren had a book in his hand. All day, however, it re- 
mained unopened. All day he sang; all day they listened, 
even until nine o’clock in the evening. Only one day was 
left before the examination, yet this day he spent in song, 
And he began singing that wonderful song whose opening 
verse reads,—“We are like children, with little understanding. 
Shall we not rely upon Him, the Ocean of Wisdom!” On 
and on the singing continued. Now it was a song of praise,— 

“Sing ye, O mountains, O clouds, O great wilds! 

Sing ye, sing ye His Glory ! 

Sing with joy all ye, the suns, and moons and stars ! 

Sing ye His Glory ! 
Conversation intervened. The young men spoke to Noren, 
“ Have you finished your reading for the examination?” “Of 
course,” he replied, and then joyously burst into e tne text of 
another song}— . 

“O words of great hope! I have heard them with joy! 

They are of Thee, O Lord "0 ti entrancing Words !” 


Fling away all books, for what shall learning be in the | 
' 
‘ 


. 


112 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, | 


“Why not settle down to definite plans, Noren? You 
have a great career before you if you will only look more 
towards the prospects which the world holds out,” said a. 
friend. Noren met this remark with a shrug of the shoulders, 
and then told them all what he thought of.life. He com- 
mented upon the desirability he had often felt for the great- 
ness of worldly position, the power of wealth and the influence 
over men. He said that he had often desired to possess a. 
reputation, position and a popularity such ‘as was enjoyéd, 
for example, by Mr. W. C. Bannerjee, the most distinguished 
advocate of that period. He added, however, that after long: 
reflection he could not see the worth-whileness of the worldly . 
‘side of life. Death comes and engulfs all. Why should one 
build up greatness to be destroyed by death 

“T have thought much of the life of the monk,” Noren © 
remarked after some time. “His is a real greatness, for he 
seeks to push aside the power of death. He seeks a change- 
less reality, while the world deals with and falls with the 
conditions of change.” His friends listened spell-bound. 
-Mwever they might think otherwise, they could not resist 
‘$he power of his personality, and they loved the greatness of 
his thought, although they could not quite understand. 
When he ceased, the spell broke, and one more intimate with 
him than the rest opened a tirade of discussion about the 
uselessness of the monastic life, and told Noren that he 
would be of no use either to himself or to others if he took 
upon himself the vocation of the monk. Noren smiled. He 
knew that the young man did not speak from conviction. It 
was only fear that if he adopted the wandering life of the 
monk, he would be lost to his friends. The speaker became 
more and more heated in his argument. “The trouble is,” . 
said the friend, “that Noren has met an old man who goes 
into trances and_ lives. a monk’s life at Dakshineswar in the 
grounds of the Kali-temple on the Ganges side. He is 
always meditating arfd talking about God and knows noth- 
ing about the world. This man is upsetting all of Noren’s . 
ambitions and turning fis tnjnd from worldly affairs and 


s 


7 
THE DRIFT OF TENDENCY : A DEATH. 1I3 


maining his future. The name of this old man is Rama. 
krishna. Noren, if you Have any sense, give up going to see 
him !' It is hampering your. studies, and .it will ruin your 
whole future if you continue You have great talents, You 
can attain anything if you set your will to it 4nd # you give 
up going to Dakshineswar !” eon 

Noren remained silent. He had become grave, very 
grave, It had not been long since he had met this saint, Sri 
Ramakrishna, The Story of this meeting will he told later, 
At present it is but a glimpse one gains, Mours of conversa- 
tion followed. Finally Noren arose. It was night by this 
time. The whole day had been spent in song and discus- 
sion, It had beepea day of joy for the college-friends of : 
Noren, becausehe had been with them. They were grieved, 
because Noren seemed so strangely silent as he arose to take 
leave of them. The one who spoke so tempestuously 
addressed Noren, “What is the matter, Noren 2” Nbfen 
responded in a hurt way, “ You see, you do not undetitard, 
I myself do not understand. No; eved I do not “ulpiersteiced; 
but I love that old man, that saint, Sti Ramakrishna, “He 
walked from the room to his own solitary quarters Mt is 
maternal grandmother’s house. His ‘roont was bare of fuss 
ture. Only a /énpurd, a musical instrument, could Be seén, * 
and a number of college books, Noren threWhimself ‘por: 
the floor and wept. After a‘while he sang softly. Theri he’ 
sang louder and louder, until he sang himself into joy once 
more and into hope. 

In this room Noren used to sing often between his study, 
There was a young widow in the house Opposite to it across 
the lane. She oftentimes came and stood by her window, 
unbeknown to him, and heard him sing. On one occasion she 
crossed over from her own house and from Ker zenana quar- 
ters. In the dim light Noren saw her standing in thé’ door- 
way of his room. She was young and she had come, 
She had seen him often without his knowledge, and bore 
Breat love for him. She had heard his singing this night,” 
It was all romance to her, Nor3n was amazed. He had 

8 a 


. 


114 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


never seen the girl before.” Me fell at her feet. “Mother! 
Mother!" he exclaimed, emphasizing the word. mother, 
“Why have you come? Let me regard you as I would my 
own mother.” The girl understood. A moment later, 
and Noren was alone. The next day he changed his quarters 
and was never seen again in that room, « 

A friend of Noren refers to him in a. manner that gives 
one an insight into-the nature @f the feelings that all of his 
friends bore to Noren at this time. “It was delightful to 
listen to him. His voice, of itself, was as music to us,” said 
this friend and admirer speaking fo? himself and the others. 
“We used often to open a subject for discussion just for the 
pleasure of hearing him, He was so int&xesting and above 
all, so original, We learned so much from listening to him. 
Did anyone oppose him, however, he fell upon him with all 
the power of thought and language, and would vanquish the. 
opponent in no time, He was kindness itself to us. I 
remember one striking instance of this, Having heard that 
he was ill with fever, 1 repaired to his grandmother's house. 
1 found him almost helpless, yet he insisted upon serving me. 
I was his guest, he said, and he was the host. I remonstra- 
ted but he persisted. He arose from the floor and busied 
himself preparing the Aooké for me with his own hands. A 
servant of the family entered the room and was horrified to 
see Noren at this, The servant looked upon his master asa 
devotee looks upon a saint. To him Noren was everything, 
and he scolded his charge, forcing him to rest.” To any but 
an Indian it seems surprising that a servant should be so 
familiar with his master, but India is strange in many 
more ways than one, For example, a son must took upon 
the servants of his parents in the same relation as he regards 
his elder brothers and’ his sisters. This servant of Noren 
loved him to such ari extent that he forgot everything and 
even his position ana servant in his intense love. 

Noren’s light- -heartedness and boyishness of spirit re 
ceived a rude shock séme days after the examination. Ha 
had gone about two miles from the city ¢ of Calcutta to visit 


THE DRIFT OF TENDENCY : A DEATH, ms 


“the home of a personal friend. It was night and there - was 
much merriment. Suddenly a messenger appeared ort the 
‘scene, He had run all the way from Noren’s home in Simla 
to carry the news that fell like a clap of thunder in the 
‘midst of the friendly gathering. Noren’s father had died 
suddenly of heart disease, Thernews overwhelmed Noren, 

Could it be true? he asked} He hastened at once to 
Calcutta, The body of his fathes lay in the room ready to be 
taken to the burning-gdé on a funeral cot. The mother, the 
sisters, the two boy brothers of Noren were wailing and 
weeping. They were cfvaiting his coming. He was the 
eldest, and the eldest born of the sons must perform the 
‘ceremonies accompanying the burning of the body of the 
father, in the liturgy of Hinduism. The procession wended 
‘its way to the ghdz, relatives of Noren carrying the burden 
of the dead form. And in the early morning air the shout 
went up, “Bolo Hari! Hari bol !” which means, “Call upon 
the Lord ! Call upon the Lord!” Noren was dazed, He equld 
neither speak nor weep. And as the rice and the pice were 
scattered in the procession’s course, he moved along, 
plunged in a state of utter miystification, His father dead ! 
Could it be true? How he had loved him ! He looked up. 
It was the burning-giét, There was no doubt. Then he 
burst into tears, 

The logs of wood were piled over the ground that 
had been scraped away to let the ashes fall below. 
Whilst this was being done those present raised their 
hearts in prayer. But ever and again came those 
words of death and reality, “Bolo Hari! Hari Bol Then 
‘came the ceremonies. The Brahman priest dictated to 

’ Noren, and Noren repeated, that prayer which bids the soul 
go unto the place of the blissful forefathers and unto the 
‘abodes of blessedness and reality. Then Noren took hold 
of a bundle of lighted straw and set flames to the pyre, 
Others followed him in this. Soon the whole was a mass 
“of flames, and in the intensity ofthose flames Noren read, 
“This is but the body that burns. “Its nature is death.” But 


16 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


he was made aware in some unusual mood of vision which. 
dawned upon his heart, that the soul which had sped from 
the form was as ever the person and character Noren knew as. 
his father. As the flames subsided in the late morning 
hours, water was thrown on the coals which were leff, Then 
these were taken and cast into the river Ganges’ 

Now came the days of suffering. The father had left his. 
family very little money. From comfort Noren was suddenly 
thrown into the direst poverty, facing now and again, in the 
course of the years, even actual starvation. Later he made 
efforts to cover those terrible daysr It was all dark to him. 
He alone was the support of the family now—a mother, and 
the rest, children, one a babe. Heavy®did the clouds of 
fate hang over his future. The days before him were 
as dark as the sorrow of his heart. Who knows the time 
or the hour! Yet he is the MAN who meets fate, as the 
captain of his own soul, fearless and with power. This. 
Noren did. 


XVHIL 


STRUGGLES AND HARDSHIPS. 


The day of tribulation comes to all men. The petiod 
‘of material difficulties and physieal discomfort comes, but it 
goes, in the case of great men, towards that welding of ex- 
perience which is the making of character. Into the valley 
of despair, aye, even inté the shadow of death do the great 
in soul have frequently to wander. But their greatness rises 
beyond the despatr, and beyond the shadow of death does 
it soar into an illuminated character. te 

When Noren returned to his home after the ceremony at 
the burning-ghdt, he found it the house of desolation. His 
father’s room was just as he had left it,—but Ze was gone, 
never to be seen again within the enclosure of. those walls, 
At first Noren gave way to grief, In the midst of his séttow, 
however, the thought of his mother, his sisters, his boy- 
brother and the baby-boy came to him. Immediately he 
arose and went to his mother’s room. The younger brother 
was asleep, exhausted from the night’s wakening and from 
sadness, The mother and her daughters were silent with 
grief. They had wept themselves into stillness, Noren 
spoke to his mother. This aroused her from her reverie of 
woe, He spoke tenderly of the present ; he spoke hopefully 
of the future. The mother smiled between her tears, Yes, 
all they had now in the world was Noren, Noren promised 
that all should be well. The mother looked upon her son 
with pride. Yes, they would start life over again. What 
mattered it if they were poor, they had each other! That 
was a great comfort. It consoled the-mother and she arose 
determined to see life in a hopeful way, hut as the result she 
bore unto her dying day the marks of that dignity that comes 
of pain and suffering concealed wihin., She was now the 

_ widow ; hers was from this day the ascetic life of vows and 


. 


118 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


renunciation ; and like all other widows, Bhuvaneswari Mat& 
succeeded in following the grand injunction of the Shastras 
which bids the bereft wife to dwell, by penance and by 
austerity and by greater and greater resignation, in that 
region of blessednese unto which, it is the hope of her heart, 
her husband raust have gone. , 

Everything went well enough for some weeks in the 
household of the Duttas. But then the means of sustenance 
became exceedingly low. Then came the day when there 
was none, and Bhuvaneswari M4t& said to Noren, “My son, 
what is to be done? There is no food ” Ah! It had come, 
and terribly so—the utmost poverty. No one knows how 
those days passed or how food was obtained, because the 
secret of it all is locked up within the memories of the 
mother and her son, 

Noren was still studying for the degree of Bachelorship 
of Law, but he appeared in the college as the poorest of the 
poor. Did he go a long, tiresome distance, he went afoot. 
Sometimes garriwallas who had on many an_ occasion 
pleasant memories, financial and otherwise, of Noren’s 
generosities, in other days, would insist that he must ride ; 
but he invariably made excuses. Those were terrible days, 
After some months, even shoes became a luxury to Noren ;, 
his garments were of the coarsest cloth, and he wandered to! 
his studies many a time without a morsel of food the whole’ 
‘day long. Often he became faint with hunger and weakness,. 
His friends endeavoured to be a consolation to Noren,; 
They invited him to their homes more frequently than be.! 
fore, and whenever an Indian invites one, departure is not 
allowed until the guest has partaken of refreshment. More 
than ever he was asked to have his meals elsewhere, but the’ 
irony of fate was worst at this time. He would go to visit 
his friends ; he would chat happily, but when food was offered 
to him, the spectacle of the desolation at home presented. 
itself to his mind. He ould not eat and left the house 
with the."excuse that he had a pressing engagement else- 
where. He returned fiome ond would eat the barest portion 


e Za 


STRUGGLES AND.HARDSHIPS. 119g 


of food prepared, saving the larger quantity for the others. 
Since his passing away from life Bhuvanegwari Mata told to 
a chosen few the story of the sacrifices her son had made 
for her. Times were when he came to the kapse, refusing 
to eat on the plea that he had alreqdy eaten at the house of 
afriend. The fact was, he had eaten nothing, and did not 
-want to eat at home for fear of depriving others from having 
a full meal, Such was the greatness and such the fineness of 
the man ! 

Nevertheless, Noren did not falter in his spirit. He 
tried to be his boyish, joyous self and made light of his trials 
to those who made inquiries, The Dutta family were proud, 
in a lordly way, aad concealed, under the cloak of external 
appearances, the misery which was theirs, His friends, 
often sons of the wealthier families of Calcutta, drove up in 
magnificent carriages to Noren’s home to take him for drives 
and pleasure-trips. They never suspected, however, that 
his wasting away, physically, was due to any other cause 
than an exaggerated grief at the loss of his father. 

To make matters worse, a dispute arose with a branch of 
the family over the very house in which Noren and his 
mother lived. On some far-fetched basis a case was made out 
and the affair was brought into the courts, The contestants 
demanded that the house be partitioned, they receiving the 
larger and better portion of the property. This was a blow to 
Noren. His mother sank under it. They were to have their 
affairs exposed to the public. Noren braced himself for. this 
new trial. It seemed to make him fierce with fate. He no 
longer commiserated with himself, Previously he had felt like 
awounded animal that wants only a crevice in which to 
remain until the hurt abates. Now he was as a wild animal’ 
at bay. He determined to.see this new evil through. , He 
himself would settle this matter. A celebrated Barrister, 
Mr, W. C. Bannerjee, volunteered to see after his affairs 
out of the Idve he bore to Ws fathtr. The case dragged 
on and on. During the trial several incidents occurred 
which revealed the temper, the “character and the wit 


120 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


of Noren. The counsel for the other side referred to 
him asa cheld, trying to insinuate thereby that he was 2 
fanatic and that his testimony ought to be judged, by this 
fact. “ Chelé” in India is the word signifying a disciple of 
a holy man ; but evidently the Barrister did not understand 
the term. He was a. European: “Do you know, Sir, what 
a chelé is?” queried Noren. “Of course Iam a cheld,” he 
said, referring to his being a disciple of Sri Ramakrishna. 
The judge when he knew that the young witness wasa 
student in the law course and heard his clear and bold 
replies in eross-examination, said, “ Young man, you will 
make a very good lawyer!” The case was decided greatly 
in favour of Noren’s family, He left Qe court jubilant 
and was eager to go to his home at once. But he was 
stopped by the attprney on the opponent’s side, who shook 
his hand warmly, saying, “I agree with the judge ; the law is 
most certainly your profession. You ave my best wishes.” 

Noren, once in the lane leading to his home, ran as fast as 
he could, and opened the heavy doors that led into the court- 
yard. They closed witha bang. Heran across the open 
space. He scampered up the stairs that led to the inner 
apartments as he did in the days when he played hide-and- 
seek, He sprang with a bound into the room. “Mother! 
Mother !” he cried. “ The house is saved ; the house is 
saved !’ Bhuvaneswari Mata was overpowered with joy. 
She put her hand on her son’s head and blessed him as she 
did in the days of his childhood; and the two were’ ex- 
ceedingly happy. 

After that, the days passed into a slightly better fortune, 
but it was by no means comfortable. All along for several 
years it was a painful struggle. The coarsest food and the 
coarsest clothing were all that the family had, yet they were 
happy, withal, when they remembered that the home was 
their very own. Noren made every effort to make ends 
meet. He became a Ffeemasen, hoping that thé social advan- 
tages thereby to be ‘gained, would also spell a financial 


STRUGGLES AND HARDSHIPS. 12 


‘sagar’s institutions, but gave that up in a month's time for 
‘better opportunities, It was all a struggle -fora hand-to- 
‘mouth existence. Never did Noren forget those terrible 
days, They were with him to the end, and those who are 
‘oldin the family remember them to this day. It wase 
blow from which the family never fully recovered, for even 
now it is. poor, There were moments when Noren had 
despaired, but he was too brave.to show what he felt, 
There were moments when he felt everything coming to the 
saddest pass, but then he was half-starved, and one wonders 
that he did not throw all hope overboard in the sea of 
misfortune that had” bewildered him, and in which he found 
himself and his fefhily sinking deeper and deeper, thinking 
himself and those he loved lost. All his life long did Noren 
revert in memory to those days in the tens¢ moments. of his 
career when struggles and other hardships pressed upon him. 
It gave him strength when he remembered that he had gone 
successfully through other periods of stress. The bonds of 
relationship between mother and son were deepened a hun- 
dredfold through these tempestuous experiences. The mother’ 
herself was proud of her son and began to realise that in him, 
also, was that trait of character she so especially admired in 
his father—never, never to acknowledge defeat. 

He had already met Sri Ramakrishna, his spiritual mas- 
ter, From this meeting, there gradually developed in his 
thought the desire to renounce the world, but how could he? 
Was ever a soul purposing to itself the monastic life so be- 
ridden with adverse circumstances! It seemed as if all the 
gates of opportunity were closed for him in the outlook. 
Not even a loophole showed itself to his penetrating and 
anxious search, Pressed both by that internal longing to 
give up the world and by the days of that legal confusion, 
his heart sank into despair. When matters were worst he 
fled from it all, hastening to the Garden of Dakshineswar, 
where Sri Ramakrishna sat in meditation. He had run all the 
way. In his excitement he had dropped from his feet one 


7 
cae | Ee WC PN SO By 


122 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


noticed the loss, He came before his Master with his gar- 
ments torn by the jungle brush through which he had push- 
ed his way, cutting short the main road so as to reach there. 
quicker. He appeared before his Master, exhausted and 
overcome. Throwing himself before Sri Ramakrishna, he 
asked, “ What shall Ido! What shallI do! If you have 
power then save me from this awful fate! It seems there is. 
no hope.” Sri Ramakrishna understood it all. He had 
heard the story, before this, not only from Noren, but from 
Noren’s relatives and friends as well. 

“Go, my boy,” answered the saint. “Go to the Temple 
there and pray to Mother! She will grant you whatsoever 
you ask,” Noren went into the Temple. When he came out 
he was transfigured. But the full import of that which 
occurred then to him must be told later—in relation to 
those days which he spent as the disciple. He had first to 
pass through a world of mental anguish before that truth 
came to him in the Mother’s Form which, thereafter, made 
his life what it was and made him the Swami Vivekananda. 
There must be first taken into account those months of 
struggle of mind through doubt. For, the mind that was. 
his, went through the full growth which inevitably implies 
that pain has been known which penetrates beyond the 
sphere of thought into the torture of the heart. Even his 
Master he would have to challenge, and even with him would 
he have to battle. 

Sorrows of mind and sorrows of body were Noren’s lot in 
the future for several years. From the time of the death of 
his father to that of the passing of Sri Ramakrishna and 
even after for some months, his life was of such fortune and 
circumstance that any other would have perished under it. 
Thereafter, when he eventually gave up the world, he 
adopted the life of poverty and renunciation. Following 
his significant experience in praying to the Mother of 
the Universe, at the- instance of Sri Ramakrishna, though 
the fate of the Duttas was severe, it was never overwhelming, 


TE ck aed ee ee Bees Ck Bea te st ey ie fee, DS i= oe 





STRUGGLES AND HARDSHIPS. 123 


of Swami Vivekananda had between themselves and want. 
Ashe could he helped his people, and helped them more, 
by far, than if he had remained in the world, earning a 
pittance for food. Aye, his family shared unconsciously 
in his renunciation. It partook with him of the glory and 
radiance he cast as a spiritual influence over the presence: 
and the heart of the world. Two brothers of the family 
remain, but as they are unmarried, living for the vision of” 
agreat ideal, the line of the ancestors is threatened with 
extinction. Over the whole, however, is the illumination 
of an immortality that nothing can extinguish and that will 
outlive the dying of‘all worldly things. Though the family 
become extinct/yet through the realisation of the Swami 
Vivekananda great ‘spiritual communities have been born. 
Through the purity of his monastic life thousands have 
been re-born in soul; and this is of a birth that knows. 
no death. 


» XIX 


THE TRANSITIONAL PERIOD. 


_ Days of youth, are days of excitement, and boys are 
‘boys, and boys are always attracted by boyish things. It 
is natural, for a man must not grow old before his time. 
And yet thtre are those exceptional cases where the man 
and the boy are one and the same; blending, to all appear- 
‘ances, indistinguishably. Of course, *#° ‘g ig the qualities 
” of mind whetein this is foretold. After 31, real manhood’ 
is not in the number of physical years which, have been 
lived, but in the expanse! of the fatulties of percéption, 
particularly in the directidn of what is true. For that, 
after all, is the business of man. In this light, are there 
not children bf eighty and men of fifteen years! Sankar- 
-acharya, the founder of the Advaita Vedanta philosophy, had 
reached climaxes of insight before he was twelve; and 
before he passéd on to final illuminatiori at the early age 
of thirty-twe, he had caused his influence to be scattered 
‘broadcast from the north to the south, and from the eastern 
to the westerri extremities of the Indian continent. It is 
true of all those who iare great—the line’ of greatness is 
foretold in the consciousness of youth. Abraham Lincoin, 
the great Americatt President, was a man in character and 
in his outlook upon life, in the early years of youth. 
Napoléon was in the making as the serious-minded student 
‘at Brienne, The mettle of Alexande? the Great is seen 
in his youth. Noren, whe was to preach his message at* 
itwenty-nine years ‘of age’and pass from the world before’ 
attaining his fortieth year, was of this precocious type. * 
It is not strange, in. this understanding, to discover in him 
‘a mature thinker in his twenty-fourth year, © 47 7s 3. = 
_ The: history of Noren’s personality from his eighteen 
to his twenty-fourth year, is % history of the development 


THE TRANSITIONAL PERIOD. - 125. 


ofa gigantic intellect, Already hé exhibited a remarkable 
thirst for knowledge, and a knowledge, deeper by far than 
that to be attained by the collegiate curriculum, of necessity: 
With his collegiate ‘sthdies he was perfunctory. In fact, 
_ he did not ‘think “seriously of study, and only at the time. 
of his examination for his degree did he busy himself in 
strict reading, and then only to pass. His spare time was. 
engaged in other studies, in attending lectures and in 
mastering the thoughts | of the thinkers of his time, Of 
course, in some respects, his collegiate studies were the same 
as_ those he personally | undertook. One purpose he had — 
essentially in mind, sad ” ‘this was the acquiring of a synthetic 
‘ education, the velopment of the faculties of mind for an. 
original intellectual life., 
““Cramming the ‘memory 1s the wrong way,” said Noren. 
_ toa college-mate who questioned him as to the reasog he. 
was not worried’ at the time of examination’ “I study, 
only to pass. Degrees are necessary, otherwise there is no. 
financial’ opportunity. It is not learning which is the ideal, 
for I find that with many of the boys, study ceases after 
the degree has been secured, We ought to form some clear, 
understanding of the theory and meaning and moral usesy 
of knowledge.” He was true to this belief to the end, and 
drew out a personal curriculum for himself which he followed 
daily as a self-imposed duty. This tendency, developed 
Noren’s mind and made him a fountain of information in real 
knowledge and.-on those subjects in which ° he delighted 
and specialised, Pan 
He beeame an omnivorous reader of newspapers, 
magazines, novels and contemporary writings, and was 
eager for the latest revelation. It was in these channels 
that. he unconsciously directed the enthusiasm and ex- 
eitement of the young man that he was. A new. idea was as, 
provocative of pleasure to him as a new trick in the gymna- 
sium. At this time, also, the theatre “was brought into the 
social life of Bengal, and Noren, in amateur performances, 
weuld instil the theatrical conecioushess among his feliows, 


726 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 
‘ : 


It would always be some uplifting theme around which the 
performance would be played, Indeed, he played the role ot 
the Yog? in the Nava-Brindévan of Babu Keshub Chandra 
‘Sen, the great social reformer. Noren saw in the theatre a 
medium for the propaganda of national, moral, religious and 
civic ideals. In this he anticipated, in India, the dawn.of 
that liberal sense $f progression which has characterised 
the spirit of the Western nations, that have seen in the 
‘stage and in music and in the drama, great opportunities fer 
the expression, even of the highest spiritual ideals. Noren’s 
* idea was, that the stage should voice the policy nd spirit 
of a Rejuvenated Hinduism. True it “Yg,. that, because of 
‘the peculiar condition in which womanhoct finds itself in 
India, only a certain class of women have entrée to the 
theatrical profession, But was it not even so some three 
decades of years since in the West ? Let it be remembered 
that it was only in most recent years that Indian woman- 
thood was accorded full educational privileges. Such was 
the thought of Noren, 
Noren counteracted the intensity of his thought and that 
~overseriousness and aloofness which came with it, by energet- 
ic play, and, of all his sports, he was most partial to athletic 
exercises, He took part in all those games that made for 
‘the freedom of the body and the vigour and joyous physical 
consciousness of youth. He had started a gymnasium in his. 
school days, and introduced all the latest methods in the 
‘training of muscle and limb, He was daring in the strenuous- 
ness of it all. Zathi-play was a favourite pastime. The 
fathi is peculiar to India, It is a long staff, strong and firm, 
-and is used, much as a sword in fencing is in the West. 
Those who are experts have developed the same faculties 
of attention, the same swiftness of motion and the same 
‘coolness of nerve as are necessary to the Western sword- 
fencer. There is as much danger in the play, as much ex- 
Scitement and the same maséuline consciousness. Indeed, 
‘the dathz is also the weapon of defence, and he who can spin 


Se Rd a 


THE TRANSITIONAL PERIOD. 127 


itis said. It is used as a protection in the jungle, and the 
fosce which is put back of it, accelerated and intensified by 
the swiftness of motion, causes it to revolve at such surpris- 
ing speed that an attacking animal is frightened off. The 
noise that is made is a loud buzzing. Noren was- proficient 
with the datki from boyhood. He learned the art from 
Mussalmans with whom he had become friends. While ~ 
attending the Metropolitan Institution hé was invited, as a 
spectator, to a gymnastic exhibition in connection with a 
fair, There were many young contestants in /a¢h:-playing. 
Excitement was lagging when Noren, then.a boy of ten, 
sprung into the rinp-4nd challenged any one of them, The 
‘strongest accepted his challenge. The /athi-fencing reached 
ahigh pitch. The spectators became nervous, Then Noren, 
with a special knowledge of the /athi he had acquired 
from the Mussalmans, swung about, and struck his opponent's 
Jathé in such a way that it fell buzzing from his hand and 
‘ broken in the centre. The spectators were thrilled. Neéren’s 
opponent was far older than he, and larger in build, also. 
Noren won the first prize as victor, and thereafter became 
and remained the hero of the Metropolitan Institution. 
Running and jumping matches were also a part of the 
‘gymnastic exercises. Then, too, there were long marches 
into the open country, excursions on the river, the rowing of 
boats in races-on the Ganges, wrestling and other forms of 
strenuous exercise. He made efforts to excel in each branch, 
and in several he was reckoned the champion with honours, 
as for example, in wrestling. “The consequent vigour of 
body made the mind alert. The senses in Noren be- 
came keenly awake and he had a love for the beautiful, In 
this he was romantic, and the romance never degenerated 
into anything that bordered on a less than exalted ethical 
or poetical. conception. He had, grown to full physical 
estate. He was muscular, agile and inclined to stoutness, 
All his enthusiasm flowed into a love of nature and a love 
for learning. Play and study were the absorbing elements i 


128 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


however, he was more earnest in study. Towards the close- 
of his seventeenth year, he had quite renounced play for 
play’s sake and given most of his attention to seriops things. 
It was serious things, interspersed with play. Hereafter, 
one sees him as the stadent. His entire outlook became- 
intensely intellectual. He tried.to enter a larger world 
where personal austerity ‘and faithfulness to an ideal com- 
posed the groundwork of a loftier life. It was natural with 
him.. He affected nothing intellectually, as students often- 
times do, He was born to this life of study. 

Underneath the conscious surface of his mind were the 
swift-turrents of deeper realities, Immitdiately before him 
were periods of stress and doubt and a bréaking away from 
many cherished dreams and many early beliefs. But deeper 
than all was that which preserved him throughout,—a charac- 
ter. It is not only experience that makes character. Innate- 
ly there may be a heightened moral perception, working 
as an indomitable instinct for righteousness and pushing the. 
personality, through trials, tribulations and temptations, and 
the liabilities to waywardness, into the safe haven of an 
established vision, where morality is always an unconscious. 
Process, where there is no struggle, and where holiness is 
instinct. Instinctively, some see the right or the wrong of 
circumstance, They follow the instinct, Later they come to 
understand “ Why.” It was so with Noren. It was the full 
tendency to a complete character that, in a large sense, made 
him what he was, Otherwise, he would have become a. 
brilliant intellect, but not the spiritual teacher of men. -And 
his character, purified as it was, became the support of his 
intellect, spiritualising it. It also became the infallible proof’ 
of his teaching. 

The chief element in his character was purity. He was 
inexorable in his vision of the ideal in this respect. In the 
time of his youth, a lad is often open to many influences of” 
a dubious character. The Spportunities for questionable- 
adventures are many, but the mother of Noren made his. 


THE TRANSITIONAL PERIOD, 129 


self and to the family. Then, too, something always “held” 
him back as he himself later remarked. Though a boy to 
the core of his heart, delighting in ali that called forth the 
spirit of manliness, he stood as one of another world when 
it was suggested to him that he should enter upon devious 
paths. One who had spent his youth, without a particular 
fineness as to the ideals of the moral life and who, later on, 
became converted in his ways, and a disciple of the Swami 
Vivekananda, spoke of young Noren in this light of purity. 
He knew him as a flame of spirituality. Though he frequent- 
ly made sport of his college-mate as being over-puritanical, 
yet, he said there ve times when he felt depressed beyond 
words in the presence of Noren. He seemed to see his own 
deficiency in this respect in the fiercest meaning and in all its 
degrading reality. He said of Noren that spirituality literal- 
ly radiated from him as an overwhelming influence. He 
was not alone in this. The other friends of Noren perceived 
the same radiance of purity. All through life this virtue 
continued to be the guiding impulse in Noren’s‘career, He 
saw all ideals and all visions of the soul and of God through 
this instinct. It was the background to all his thought and 
feeling. He had accustomed himself to call, and literally 
regard every woman, as all monks should, as “MOTHER.” 

It was this purity that shone about him as the religious 
atmosphere about a saint; and he had always considered and 
made this the cardinal virtue. He believed as he came to 
know the principles of the Vedanta philosophy that, without 
chastity, or better said, without purity the spiritual life is 
impossible. To him, in his manhood, purity was not a state 
of resistance to evil, but an overwhelming passion for good, 
in each and every aspect. It was a burning, radiant, spirit- 
ual force. It related itself to all forms of life. It became 
the keynote of his message. It outgrew for him its special 
definitions, developing far beyond the idea of sex into the 
actual vision of divinity and truth. He realised, instinctively, 
the great teaching of Jesus, thg Christ, “Blessed are the 
pure in heart, for they sia//~see God! " Yes he knew 


130 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


it was only they, it was only the pure in heart who see 
God ! 2 

The spirit of manliness,—or was it something vaster, 
higher; more profound ?—ran through all the experiences 
of his youth, One becomes conscious of him as a power, 
It was. not weakness that he was good, but strength, 
strength, GREAT STRENGTH. It was Brahmacharya 
which was. his ideal of studentship,—Brahmacharya, which 
is hard intellectual labour, combined with and governed 
by a great personal purity. This is the stage of pre- 
paration in mind and heart for the Vision which shall 
come, as the Scriptures say, to those wn lead that life. 

The boy, Noren, had become a Brahmacharin in spirit, 
His purpose was fixed, so far as intention and character 
went. He had entered into the serious mood of life. He 
did not quite understand as yet the full purport of life, and 
his enthusiasm, deep and resolved, had not as yet been 
tested by other periods of a difficult nature that were to 
come, when doubt should be rife and the very foundations 
of belief shaken. He had not yet known, nor could begin 
to know, that struggle of soul which inevitably comes of a 
tempest of thought. He was all idealist. His spirit nouri- 
shed itself upon idealism and ideal things, He had not, 
even for a moment, known the pang of disillusion, The 
horizon was roseate for him. Youth sees only the ideal as 
in a dream, It requires much pressure of circumstance, 
much thought and much overcoming of the sense of defeat 
to make the vision of the ideal an actuality in the domain 
of the real. 

Fortunate is youth, but more fortunate is the man who 
has come out of the byways of youth into the highroad of 
later years, still possessed of enthusiasm ; though its flame 
be not as intense, it will, burn steadier, and is self-consciously 
and triumphantly syre that it will not be extinguished by 
the many and angry winds of life. Such an one becomes 
a master of men, a |eadgr, a prophet. The days of the 


THE TRANSITIONAL PERIOD. a: 3r 


and the days, also, of intellectual temptation. Blessed is 
the man whose heart remains unclouded, while the clouds of 
doubt’ possess ascendancy over the mind. In the spiritual 
purposes of life, these trials are particularly necessary. 
They give character and conviction ; they give surety and 
fixity of vision and of purpose. Does the soul stand this 
ordeal, then victory is sure. And the victory is the actual 
seeing of God, the sounding of the depth of the Soul! 


XX 


* THE WONDER OF THE LORD'S SONG. 


“In that time I was accustomed to read the Gita and | 
certain thoughts contained therein would go throbbing 
through my brain for days and nights,”’—thus spoke the 
Swami Vivekananda to his followers referring to the days of 
his youth. The Gita is the prime gospel of Hinduism. It is 
the spirit, the all in all, of the Hindu @xoeriences of the soul. 
Itis the enunciation, under a most dramatic and inspiring 
setting, of the ideals of the philosophy of Vedanta, the end 
of all wisdom. He read chapter after chapter of this wonder- 
ful book, which has been versified, from the Sanskrit into 
the English language, by Sir Edwin Arnold in “The Song 
Celestial.” He read the Gita, and chapter after chapter burn- 
ed into his soul and the impression was indelible. It is the 
prayer-book of Hinduism, especially of this modern time, 
and that it is so, is not a little due to the interpretation 
of it by the Swami Vivekananda. 

How thrilling and how rich with meaning is the Bha- 
gavad-Gita, or the Lord’s Song! It is part of the Indian 
epic, the Mahabharata, wherein is told, in sublime pen- 
pictures, the story of that early Hinduism when the Aryan 
civilisation was at its height, and when the five Pandava 
brothers fought against a hundred unrighteous cousins for 
their rightful share of the kingdom. The rush of battle, 
the clang of weapons, the noise of speeding chariots, vast 
assemblies of armed mn, the flow of intense passions are 
the opening notes of the Gita. Arrows fly, powerful arrows, 
made intensely powerful by the blessing and the force of” 
enchanted prayers. Huge missiles buzz through the atmos- 
phere, sure messengers of ¢eath and wholesale destruction, 
The battle was scattered in those times, certain companies 
warring with other companies, and the combat continued 


THE WONDER OF THE.LORD’S SONG. 333 


for long, wearisome days. The heroic kings rode out into 
the midst of the battle-field, awaiting roya}-foes, 

Through the wide avenue of contending.tgen one sees a 
great chariot, drawn by swift, spirited steeds clad: in.acmour. 
Within the chariot is seated the hero Arjuna and before: hia 


stands Sri Krishna Vasudeva, the Divine Charioteef. Both | 


hero and Charioteer are of the royal race, and both aré girded 
‘and robed and turbaned as become the kings of men, And in 
the hand of Arjuna, the prince of all archers, is the heavy bow, 
Gandiva, and the quiver of mighty arrows hangs at his side. 
He is the giant and the hero, yet one cannot fail to perceive 
the sadness, almost far, that-is shadowed on‘his counte- 
nance, The chariot has been driven into the centre of the 
field. The Charioteer is anxious to spur the steeds on to the 
fray, But Arjuna has fallen to the floor of the chariot, letting 
his mighty bow drop from his hand, The quiver of arrows lies 
idle, Utmost depression has overcome him and he gives 
vent to grief in passionate utterances, The Charioteer is 
surprised. He addresses the hero in strong terms, asking 
him not to yield to un-Aryalike weakness. And Arjuna 
replies that it is not weakness that has overtaken him. He 
has fallen a prey to the thought that he stands in battle, 
armed against all the friends of his childhood and youth, his 
relatives and many of his teachers of old, Then the Charioteer 
is transfigured. Over His face has come the radiance of a 
great illumination. The moment is tense. Arjuna gazes 
at the countenance of the Charioteer, He has forgotten 
his grief. Sri Krishna’s face is so rapt in spiritual light 
that Arjuna forgets all, the steeds, the chariots, the roar of 
battle, and his soul communes with the divine soul of the 


_ Charioteer-Incarnation of the Lord. # 


To read the Gita is a matter of hours. To understand, . 


the “Gita is the work of repeated lives, But the words were 
not mere words to Arjuna ; they were illumination to 
him. The effért of a lifetime was intensified into a moment. 
It flashed upon Arjuna, as lightning flashes across the sky— 
the illumination which is the, Bhagavad-Gita. Then he 


134 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA,. 


went into battle with intensity of purpose. He fought; 
he slew; he conquered—but yet he realised that he neither: 
fought, nor slew, nor conquered any, for Sri Krishna had 
told him.— 

“If the red slayer thinks he slays, 

Or if the slain thinks he is slain, 

They know not well the subtle ways 

I keep and pass and turn again.” 


“Never the Spirit is born ; the Spirit shall cease 
to be—never. 

Never was time It was not ; eag and beginning 
are dreams. 

Birthless and deathless and changeless remaineth 
the Spirit forever. 

Death has not touched It at all, dead though the 
house of It seems.” e 


The Lord had told him also that there was no doer but 
Himself, the Lord of the Universe,and that when realisa- 
tion would come to Arjuna, all dreams of the manifold and 
many should pass and only the One Existence, the Existence 
of the Lord, should BE. He was told to fight because it was 
the duty of his royal position, his Swadharma, and because it 
was right. 

On and on the story goes, resonant with an Infinite 
Voice that declares, “This My Maya is divine, made up of 
blessed qualities, and very difficult to cross. Yet those that 
come unto Me, cross the river of life.” Maya is the dream 
of life, and this dream is transcended by Arjuna who soars, 
past the universe, into the Soul of the Lord, The Conscious- 
ness of God had taken the name and form which was the 
personality of Sri Krishna, but tae Lord knew Himself and 
was ever awake, as Himself, behind the personality He had 
assumed. So that He threw off all veils and all the falseness 
and limitation of personality, and stood Self-fevealed before- 
the hero asthe Fountain-flow of Life and yet beyond its 


Be olaceee YET ecevens Lae iL cae Bes OT el a OR 


THE WONDER OF THE LORD'S SONG. 135 


and the truth that only He alone existed, became verity and 
reality to Arjuna, For when He is all in all, whom is. there 
to slay and who, indeed, is the slayer ! The Lord says to 
all men in the Gita that, if they come to Him, they are sure 
to awaken from the world-dream, They will see the Divine 
Self beyond all personality, that One Individual to Whom all: 
personality is,only an approach. 

What a vision of the soul was the privilege of Arjuna ! 
He realised that the soul could neither be destroyed by fire, 
nor dried by the wind, nor wetted by water, nor pierced by 
the sword, Allillusion had died out for him. He saw the 
Self within him as that same Divine Self, incarnate as the 
Lord in the personality of his Charioteer. 

What a conception of work is embodied in the Gita rf 
“To work one has the right, but not to the fruits thereaf” 
Why should one care for results? It was here that Noren: 
caught a glimpse of that important truth that the individual , 
does not do good to others but to himself, and that one ‘ 
should be grateful to the beggar for the opportunity given * 
of helping himself. The work sanctifies the worker, apart) 
from the fruits of work, The true worker is the selfless} 
worker who cares only for the privilege of work, a 
the results to the wisdom and the disposition of Providence. * 

What amass of culture, what heights of illumination, 
what grandeur of race experience, what insight and what 
vision are made incarnate by the Gita! Truly, Noren in his 
youth had become as devoted to the Gita as though it were 
a personality. He loved it with a great love as one loves 
a friend among friends. To him it was a priceless treasure 
and the Scripture of all scriptures, the core of spiritual truth. 
He loved it because it was.a document of soul, that had 
been written in the silence of the soul even in the midst of 
the great tumult of a battle-field. Not only was it written 
into the heart of Arjuna in thé silence of the soul, but 
within the halo of that sublimity which is conceivable fo man 
only, in the language of limited thought, as the Divine Life. 
It was, to Noren, the call to work Qn the battle-field of life in 


136 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


the innermost shrine of self-consciousness, when one knows 
that duty for duty’s sake is the only path and when one 
is not governed either by fear or by desire. It was, to Noren, 
the call to rest firmly on the consciousness that the soul 
is indestructible and changeless in a world of destruction and 
change, and that shining as the true consolation amid the 
terror of life is the Presence that always calls, “Those that 
come unto Me, cross the river of life.” 

This was the undertone of Noren’s life in the days of 
shadow that were to come. The intellect would waver, but 
the heart of him was certain to know in ways mysterious to 
the intellect. This was the consolation is the dark hours of 
Noren’s life over which the clouds of doubt would pass, that 
part of his life, in particular, which was to be in the passing 
of the next few years. 

This was the spirit of the Gita for Noren and through it 
he saw, as through a perspective, the structure of the Hindu 
consciousness. For this reason he remained faithful to the 
heart of Hinduism, though it seemed, to all outward appear- 
ance, that he had parted, for a time later on, with many of 
its forms, The Gita made him manly in the cause of Hindu- 
ism. It brought fire into his heart and he felt for Hinduism 
as a son for his mother. Though he might have seen, even 
at this time, flaws and defects in it, he made an effort to 
conceal these as one would conceal a mother’s faults,—while 
within himself he laboured for the correction of all the mis- 
takes, and all the corruptions that had crept into Hinduism. 
From a higher point of view and through the larger historic 
perspective, he saw the faults and failings of Hinduism as 
coming from without the pale of the Hindu consciousness, 
per se, and to have been inevitably taken on through foreign 
contact with peoples and invaders of an inferior civilisation 
coming into Hindusthan. But he was also and always 
conscious of the glories of Hinduism and of the spiritual su~ 
periority of the Hindu outlook-on life. . 

It was the Gita spirit be hae, when he answered a Chris- 





THE WONDER OF THE LORD'S SONG 137° 


idol-worship. The missionary was saying, “If I give a blow - 
to your idol with my walking-stick, what can it do?’ The 

audience remained silent, It was composed, for the most ' 
part, of lads and men who were too ignorant, even with . 
regard to Hinduism, to make a telling reply. Noren'was i 
passing by with a number of his college-mates on his way 4 
home, He listened eagerly. Then came the above blas- 
phemous remark from the missionary and Noren retaliated | 
immediately by saying, “If I abuse your god what can he | 
do?” The speaker, not expecting such a questioning spirit, : 


erste 


replied hastily and with some temper, “You would be punish-*; 


ed in eternal hell-fire when you die.” Noren was equal to‘ 
the occasion. “So my idol will punish you when you die,” 
he said. This broke the meeting. The preacher was beside 
himself, with anger while the audience joined Noren’s com- 
panions in a peal of laughter. : 
At this time he had also pondered much on the social as- 
pects of the Vedanta teaching of the equality of all souls, He © 
asked himself, “If all souls are of God and in God, why is 
there not the same social freedom accorded to every man ? 
Why should there be caste 2” An occasion brought out his 
silent belief into actual statement when a friend of his was 
asked by his father to salute a Brahman. The Brahman caste 
is the highest and the boy was of the caste next to it. Here- 
tofore, he had only saluted the gods. So he asked his father, 
“Why must one salute the Brahmans?” He received as 
answer, “My boy, Brahmans have come out from the mouth 
of Brahma, the Creator.” This seemed a flimsy explana- 
tion, and so the boy went to Noren and asked him why 
God should have created such great social differences and 
distinctions. Noren, who did not then take into account 
the ancient, but now relaxed, uses of caste, said, “It is 
all foolishness. The thing is, you see,a method by which” 
one class tyrannises over the others and profits thereby in 
all ways.” He’ realised, however; that many of the members ' 
of the higher caste were succumbins to modern influences . 


138 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA,. 


worthy of the traditions of the Brahmans of ancient times, 
who held the position of both priest and educator. In 
Vedic days when Aryans were still building up the civilisa- 
tion of Hinduism, it was a pure culture, but in the present. 
age, he is the true Brahman, thought Noren, who is most 
worthy, most learned, most steadfast in virtue and highest 
in the realisation of the Hindu outlook on life, whatever be 
his caste. So Buddha had preached, and so the Swami 
Vivekananda preached it anew. Was it because he had 
heard that Voice declare in that memorable hymn of 
Shankaracharya, “I never had death nor fear, I never had 
father, nor mother, nor birth, nor death, nor friend, nor foe, 
nor,caste, nor creed. I am‘ Existence, Knowledge, Bliss. 
Absolute! Iam the Blissful One! [am the Blissful One!” 
and had rendered this spiritual reality into the terms of a new 
social consciousness ! 


XXI 
THE VISION OF THE EXALTED LIFE. 


Strange, indeed, are the experiences of certain sduls,, 
They seem, almost, above the ordinary in human life in the 
thoughts they think and in the vision which is theirs, because 
of the intensity of their thought. The ideal is seen through 
the perspective of thought. Intensified, the thought loses 
its-separate aspect and becomes the ideal itself. This jis the 
secret of meditation. The luminous thought is the-pargat of 
the luminous vision ; it is the roadway thereunto, 

The modern science of psychology is bringing to light 
remarkable wonders, thereby corroborating and illustrating 
the revelations of the ancient Rishis. It speaks of sleep as. 
the state of awareness by the mind, in ways other than those. 
of normal consciousness, The mind works, though the body 
is silent and at rest. The body is in repose, but the mind. 
works on. What light this throws on the phenomena of 
sleep ! Somnambulism is one of the instances. See how the 
mind leads the body safely along unknown paths, though the 
faculty of sight has no physical medium! Who has not © 
heard of the many cases of the working-out of difficult mathe- 
matical or other problems, while the body is stilled in sleep ?: 
Sometimes the solution is written down, unbeknown to the 
conscious mind, and lo and behold the surprise in the morning ! 
And who has not heard of the author seeing the full develop- 
ment of a future narrative or poem in the mysterious work- 
ings and revelations of the dream-consciousness! | Little is 
known of the mind, hardly anything, comparatively, of its 
potentialities, and the psychologist has tested phenomena. 
that are nothing short of marvellous. 

The mind is most receptivesin the drowsy state before the 


brain succumbs to the stimulus of sleep,- and also, before it is 
Pe eee ES RE TORE Nee RER Se a gl aOR Pre GR Oe 


140 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


“takes on ideas with deepest impression. As an instance, 
known to many, the awakening in the morning at a given | 
time is the suggestion, carried out by the mind, which it has 
received the night before. The mind is conscious, in its own 
realm, though the body lies unconscious. Unconsciousness is, 
after all, only of the body. The deepest unconsciousness of 
the body is death. But even the mind can become uncons- 
cious ; when this occurs, then consciousness has ascended, in 
the state of exalted illumination, beyond the mental self into 
the Self-reality of Soul and God, This is the test of the 
spiritual verity that the Self in man is ever awake. 

What is science in the knowledge of these matters with 
the West, is instinct with the Hindu. It was an aroused 
instinct in the personality of such an one as Noren. How he 
knew the secret one cannot tell, or even imagine. It is 
unaccountable At all events, it was his custom at this time 
in his life to present vividly before his mind two strikingly 
dissimilar pictures,~—one the life of comfort, ease, luxury, the 
life of the senses, the enjoyment of wealth, power and the 
love of a devoted wife and family, in short, the worldly life,— 
while the other picture was of the Sanny4sin, a wanderer 
having no possessions, fixed in the consciousness of Divine 
Reality, living as fortune causes him to drift, eating only 
such food as chance might bring, and lying at night under 
the roofless sky in the jungle or on the mountain-side. The 
pictures would glow alternately in the colouring, and as there 
were two pictures, there were, also, within himself, two pain- 
ters, one the spirit of desire, the other, the spirit of renuncia- 
tion. By this time, the semi-conscious act of Noren's mind, 
presenting itself with these two pictures, drifted, beyond the 
field of volition into a self-regulating and self-moving vision. 
Behind the work and the separate personalities of these 
painters, referred to as within himself, was the Higher Self of 
Noren, the discriminating self, the Viveka self, as the witness. 
The self of him, as it withdrew into its innérmost, drew 
with it, as by force, the painting of renunciation, The other 
would fade and fade unt® Gnally it wae lact 


THE VISION OF THE EXALTED LIFE. rqi 


The painting of sense was tinted in varied hues. The 


purposes of the painter, desire, were numerous as the sands of’ 


the sea. The spirit of desire was self-multiplying én a myriad 
ways. The outlines of the picture were in the beauty of form 
and flesh, and there were phantoms that the painter had 
brought into the background of the canvas ; and they looked. 
great and powerful. But then, their appearance was left 
largely to the desire-fired imagination. The forms of these 
phantoms were ethereal and undefined, but in the immediate 
perspective were all the glories of the world richly coloured 
and attractive. The phantoms were those of ambition and 
of possession, and above what seemed to be the enveloping 
atmosphere containing the entire setting of sense was, on 
closer examination, found to be the all-absorbing and all- 


grasping spirit of the painter himself. He had coloured the. 


whole canvas with his personality. But to Noren, moving in 
a higher sphere of life, the apparent beauty was all ugliness, 
because the spirit of truth and reality was missing. He saw 
things on the canvas that were, evidently, not intended to be 
seen. Lurking behind the personality of the spirit of ambi- 
tion, he saw the spectre of oblivion and death. Behind the 
spirit of possession, he beheld the spectre of loss and ill- 
gottenness, and the enveloping atmosphere, which was desire, 
he saw, in some transfigured way, as the spectre of illusion, of 
change and of sorrow. Even so, there are many colourings 
and forms and shades, imprinted on the canvas, that 
are not intended by the painter to be seen, but .the 
judicious and discriminating critic observes these uninten- 
tional impressions. The untrained observer does not see 
them. To Noren it was all a will-o’-the-wisp; to another, 
it would have appeared as a desirable reality, so strong and so 
fateful is the power of illusion. But this comprehension 
came to Noren as his self withdrew,.upon the wings of sleep, 


into the deep, deep stages off that ene which was the 


Innermost of him. 
On the other hand, he sawthepirit of renunciation as 


142, THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


‘revealed wonders, awe-inspiring wonders, terrible wonders. 
The colouring was grey, for the most part. In the fore- 
ground Noren saw the figure of a man, naked but for a loin- 
‘cloth. His nakedness was covered with ashes which he 
had put upon himself, as the prophets of old had done in 
Judza. The ashes had been taken from a fire that burned 
before him and into which he gazed intently. Behind him 
rose a wilderness of forest. In the distance towered a 
stretch of mountain peaks, covered with eternal snows, 
Noren’s mind became centred upon the picture, It drifted, 
without effort and with power, into the purpose of the artist, 
the spirit of renunciation. He became master of the thought 
the ‘artist attempted to portray, thought which rushed as a 
swift torrent into one line of intense concentration and direc- 
tion. The thought was in the painting and yet out of it, 
for those who are not of the spirit of renunciation can never 
have the vision of such thought. Even as the saint’s vision 
is not deceived by the fraud of sense, howsoever gloriously 
painted, so, also, the man of worldly consciousness, gazing 
at the painting of renunciation, sees not the greatness of 
the soul, but only the representations of ascetic life, which 
are always repulsive to a mind immersed in sense. 

The thought of the meditating sage, in the painting of 
renunciation, was fixed as are the fixed stars. It was focussed 
upon the Self, of Divine Nature, behind the assemblage of 
thought and desire and personal consciousness. The world 
stormed against it. Desire swept by it in forceful currents, 
but the meditation of the sage could not be shaken. Cold 
and hunger were written in the gaunt figure of the man, 
but he had soared, beyond humanity, into the Divine Reality, 
where all physical extremes and all extremes of thought . 
were lost.. His countenance was grey with renunciation, but 
his eyes were as suns-of illumination. Before those eyes 
all the glory of the world had passed, but all its glory could 
not exhaust or lessen their super-sensuous radiance. He had 
become the soul,--the Spul4 . 


THE VISION OF THE EXALTED LIFE. — 143 


Noren was only name of the personality." His soul had fled, 
beyond all the limitations of the personal consciousness, on 
the wings of insight, into the spirit of the meditating sage, 
who rested all-absorbed in God and the Eternal Supreme 
‘Consciousness. And was this,—could this be sleep! Was 
it,—could it have been but a dream! Ah no! For Noren 
it was a vision ; it was the vision of the exalted life! 

The genius for such a vision comes only after much 
conscious and intense concentration in the state of spiritual 
thought. The mind must be imbued with the ideal of 
reality, day after day, and then it comes,—the vision. Bless- 
ed is the lad who has had sucha vision. Is not his, the 
true insight into life? Were it not for those glimpses of 
the verity beyond life, is it possible that Noren could have 
stood fixed and firm in the hour when the mind turned upon 
itself in all the agony of doubt ? 

The great mind goes, consciously, beyond the stupefying 
effect of the brain-consciousness in sleep. It leaves the 
body, conscious and at will, because it has accustomed itself 
to leave, at will, the very idea of the body and know, both 
in thought and in desire, the grand idea of the soul. The 
body is, at bottom, an idea, and in the transcendence over 
this idea by the inner consciousness does the reality of 
spiritual life dawn forth. There is no state of forgetfulness 
or unawareness in the spiritual life. The body is uncon- 
scious ; but then it is only an instrument, The heart of the 
Self, ‘is never unconscious, It is the subject of these bodies 
of thought and of form. Within is forever and ever, the 
Silent, Ever-watchful Witness. 

: On retiring, Noren would lie prostrate on the floor in 
the Oriental fashion of profound salutation. Was it that he 
believed that this posture -was the befitting attitude of the 
body while the mind, through the avenues of sleep, entered 
into the silence of the iieditating,soul! And meditation is 
the thought, constant and inspifing, of the soul upon the 
nature of the Lord. .In India there is the ideal that lif. 


144 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


function of personality should be translated into the service 
and the thought of God. If one is eating, that is offering unto 
the Lord, the Self within. Does one walk, it is pradakshina, 
circumambulating the temple of the Lord. Does one see, 
it is all the Presence of the Lord. Does one think, let it 
be a meditation upon the Lord. Does one sleep, let the 
act of resting be a prolonged posture of adoration before 
the Lord, and so on until every phase of life becomes deified 
and divine, The conscious mind, thinking and living such 
thoughts, naturally, in the time of sleep unconsciously takes 
up the same thread of spiritual meditation. And Noren’s 
sleep was, as it were, meditation on the Lord. Such sleep, such 
meditation was the vision of the exalted life. All the world 
sees what the senses represent. All the world lives on the 
knowledge that the senses reveal. The exalted life is seen 
by the fewest of the few who know that life is but a dream. 
Noren was alive with joy and aspiration. He would be 
a monk! Was marriage suggested to him by his parents, 
at this time, he spurned the idea and demanded freedom in 
the matter as aright. He could conceive of marriage only 
as a bondage, so high had the ideal of” life become to 
him. Wonderful states of mind visited him. Again and 
again, his body would seem to him as aform seen ina 
dream ; it was vague and undefined in those moments of 
tremendous insight when, it seemed, as if the spiritual 
consciousness would force its way upon the conscious mind. 
It is said that Wordsworth and Tennyson had similar states 
of vision in certain of their exalted moods, All these things. 
come to highly refined and highly developed spirituat 
natures. Now and then, this state of thought was so , 
heightened in Noren that, in the solitude of his soul, while. 
walking in the public park, he would strike his head against 
atree in order that the pain of this experience would assure 
him of the body’s existence and bring him forcibly back to 
the plane of physical consciousness ! Who will say of such 
x a manctration that it was 2 strange action on his opartt 


THE VISION OF THE EXALTED LIFE, 145 
A b 


of its immortdlity and consequent independence of physical 
form and environment, produce in some souls, a like forgetful- 
ness of the so-called realities of sense? Death and change, of 
themselves, bring to the mind the relative existence of the 
body. And he who is conscious of the soul as the Real Self, 
forgets even the relative existence of the physical man. He 
knows himself as the spiritual ego, dwelling within the radiance 
of the Most High. The very aim of religion is the transcen- 
dence, by the inner man, over all physical ‘ideas, 

If it be true that the mind repeats the experiences of life . 
until complete emancipation is at hand, then it is conceivable 
that, here and there, souls would bring over the intensely pro- 
nounced features of former conscious lives, into the present 
incarnation. The transition would be revealed in some form 
of instinct which, heightened in some natures, the scientist 
calls genius, The knowledge and effort of the past have been 
twined into the tendency of to-day. The scientist becomes “ 
the greater scientist. Finally, the vision breaks into the + 
greater vision, through the effort of répeated lives, and thé 
seeker sees the divine reality as unmistakable truth, whatever 
may have been the special line of tendency and development, 
In that stage the scientist throws aside the scientific instra. 
ment, the artist throws aside his brush, the poet drops his 
pen, the sage his thought, the saint his aspiration, and all of 
them, being emancipated souls, enter into that Silence and 
Peace and that Realisation which is God ;~—and this, because 
the Highest Knowledge has been attained in the adding of 
experience after experience in the living of many lives, 

There are some thoughts, though one has never heard 
them expressed before, that seem quite natural to the hearer, 
There are states of thought and consciousness to which one 
instinctively responds, causing surprise at the fact even to 
one’s self. There are some relationships of persoris and of 
places with which it seems one has been associated before, 
Noren found himself oftentimesein this paradoxical position, 
When he met certain people, or visited a certain house, of 
heard certain ideas expressed, gr theught certain ideas, for 

10 


146 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


the first time, he would pause as if to recollect when he had 
known them, as they seemed to have been already familiar to 
him. The recollection was vague in most cases ; but some- 
times he was certain, and the personality or the thought thus 
cognised would thereafter always be a close and deep matter 
of his mind and heart. In later life this was still more evi- 
dent with him in the relationship of himself as teacher to 
some of his disciples and others. 

Allis within. Multiple is personality. Was it that the 
two spirits, manifest in his vision as desire and renunciation 
respectively, were two separate streams of thought that had 
been personified, as it were, in the pressure of their concen- 
tration upon consciousness ? Be that as it may, it was glo- 
riously certain that the Spiritual Self of Noren held master- 
ship, choosing the tendency to renunciation, because of the 
discrimination he had gathered in the living of many lives, 
by which he knew that desire was illusion, and that renuncia- 
tion of desires was the only path for the soul to gain the 
Consciousness of God. 

Some lives are beyond understanding. They are enshroud- 
edin mystery because of the ignorance that rests with the 
average man concerning the great in soul. It is difficult to 
grasp the contents of a personality, great in the worldly con- 
ception.of greatness. How much more difficult is it then to 
understand a man of God, a spiritual genius! But the illu- 
mination is with men, though they do not perceive the source. 
Loftier and loftier the vision becomes, In the end it is the 
Beatific Vision of God. 


XXII. 


THE DAWN OF THE INTELLECTUAL LIFE, * 


The period of the intellectual awakening is with everyone. 
The fetters of a disciplinary education are thrown off and the 
mind roams in its awn peculiar way, along special paths of 
intellectual penetration. The college curriculum, of necessity, 
must be mastered, but it proves the greatness of the mind if 
the individual transcends the bounds of the learning afforded 
by the collegiate course and pursues the particular phase or 
phases that call out the original activity of the intellect. 

Noren’s thought was taken up with many. branches of 
learning. There were mathematics and astronomy. In the 
latter branch he met with unusual success, mastering, in the 
fourth year of his college life, the whole, of “Godfrey’s 
Astronomy.” He delighted in higher mathematics. .Sans- ~ 
krit had been a. favourite study with him from boyhood. 
Before he had attained his twelfth year he had stored in 
memory the text of the Mugdhabeodha Vydkavana, the Sans- 
krit grammar, and at the age of seventeen he could compose 
in Sanskrit. To his mother-tongue, the Bengali, he was most 
devoted, and in his study and enthusiasm he developed such 
a proficiency in it that, he has left several remarkable works 
in that language, which entitle him to take rank amongst the 
makers of modern Bengali literature. 

His memory was exceptional, and this faculty, it may be 
said, he inherited largely from his mother, of whom it is stated 
that, a poem once recited before her she could ever afterwards 
sepeat verbatim. Noren used this faculty to a wonderful 
degree of development. He had the power of concentration, 
of steadying the mind sq that it could store up in the cham- 
bers of memory whatever he desired. One does not wonder. 
For in India, for innumerable ages, culture and learning 
and tradition were handed dowa by eae of mouth and stored 


’ 


148 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. | 


in the memory. Memory isa racial phenomenon. with the 
Hindus, In the ancient days, the killing of a Brahman was’ 
the most heinous of sins, for it meant the ‘cutting off of one 
of the main channels through which the raoiaf’ learning and 
experience flowed, For this reason, as well, was a Brahman 
so highly venerated in olden times ; he was the personification 
of the Aryan civilisation. Even now ong sees in the temples 
at Benares the orthodox Brahman boy memorising at the 
very dawn of day, passage upen passage of sacred texts: 

With Noxen, development of memory was exceptional, and., 
his mirid was a freat treasuré-place of information, As the. 
Swami Vivekatianda he aroused in others a great reverence 
for himself in'this regard, Indeed, at times, it seemed" mMyS>, 
terious, Even at the end of his life he eapiaet whole 
passages that had been once read to hii; to the- tonish., 
ment of his Western followers, Verily, psycitblogy, #3 ich is, 
only lately coming’ to’ be recogsrised as a science fiten the 
West, is ages old as a practical consciousness “with .the 

_ educated and thoroughly Hinduised Indian mind. “Phe West 
still maryéls"at the revelations of medera psychology, but in 

‘ India the psycholobical experience hag ‘been classified, and 
methods for fs dévelopinent have been understood, ednturies 

' before thé @hristian era. Consequently, wonderful ate those 
"peculiar traits in the Indian maké- “up of inivid,—the* culty 
of attention, the faculty of retention and the facul ty of. 
analysis. ° s 

Philosophy is the "groundwork of the Tndiart culture ; 
even. in the customs of the Hindu peoples one can read the 
signs and shadowings of philosophical truth:, The Hindu 
outlook on life. is throughout steeped ith _philogophical . 
idealism. -Behind each single custom rests a. _ laitge idea, - 
having spiritual bearings of a philosophical character. Thus, 
innately the Hindu is a philosopher. From clijidhood his 
mind is trained, through the symbolism of cultura and reli- 
gious tradition, to regard and discuss, in youth and in man- 
hood, the most daring speculations concerning the nature e of 


ify 


ge aE tose AAW AY, See, conn Was Meteo ee So ae SS 


THE DAWN OF THE INTELLECTUAL LIFE. 149 


istic whith has largely stood “in the way of the success of 
Christian missionaries, In the realm of metaphsics, parti- 
cularly such metaphysics as possess theological or spiritual 
aspects, the Hindu is quite at héme, ntuch to the discon. 
fitere of those tho strive td convert 4lim to Western religions 
or Westeril systems of ‘thought. Noren’s heme was; as it 
weré, a training-sch bl in this respect. Each custom and 
tradition his parents explained to him in its spisitual and 
philosophical signfficance. Th@daily worship, the, acts of 
meditation, the erdinary comings and goings in* the house- 
hold, all of these involved certain semi-spiritual and semi- 
philosophical convictions. Then, too,. his father’s passing 
away had, in no smal | legree, strengthened this instinct, 
directing it, more antl more, to the understanding of those 
mysteries “of life and death about whith all pifilo8ophical, 
speculation’ has i. built up. Noren’s temperament was, 
in this respect, not onl} normally Hi; du, pfit natural in- 
tense. It ig easy, then, td understdnd why he turned a’ 
passionate attention to the study of philasophy. in his 
sollepiite days, and'wpy he'$pecialised in Western philosophy. 
He desired to Gndétstafd Sf what the. V estern . offtlook on 
life’ consisted. ens ‘ at 
The abstruse philosophy of” Herbert Spencer interested 
him.particularly. He specialise@tin this system, and became 
well-versed ‘in Spencerianism, and later on he made it serve 
the purposes of argumentative support to the more abstrusé 
doctrines of the philosophtet! consciousness of the Updni- ~ 
shads, the Vedanta,—muchi as Lafcadio Hearn, although 
in a ‘less spiritual -way, brought this same philosophy to 
bear so successfully upon the Buddhism of Japan, Herein | 
Noreri gathered that power of thought, that penetrating 
discrimination and that spirit of seeking for a scientific, 
basis, which stood him in good stead in delivering his 
message in later life. Herein he schooled himself in a 
tremendous. intellectual self-discipline. Together... with 
Spencerianism he studied the systems of the German philos- 
ophers, particularly Kant and Schopenhauer, and also ‘those 


150 THE LIFE OF TIE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


of John Stuart Mill and of August Comte, He delved into. - 
the mystical and analytical speculations of the ancient 
Aristotelian school, as well. Therefore he was so successfully 
enabled in his manhood to turn the tables of philosophical 
certitude upon the limitations he found in the Western 
systems, to the advantage of the Hindu outlook on life. 
Therefore he was, also, so successful in winning over, at 
least in a way of personal admiration if not of an actual: 
following’ of his doctrine, a graduating class‘in philosophy 
of one of the largest universities of America. ei 
He always exchanged the thought of the Indian schools. 
with those of other ages and descriptions. He pondered 
and paused much before. he would accept or reject any’ 
particular philosophical statement. In the end he became 
the champion of the Indian philosophical method and system. 
Even in later years he was never final in his vision except 
in so far as the Vedanta was the highest outlook he ever 
came to know. He was'ever on the alert for truth “what- 
ever the cost,” as he himself was wont to say. If there was 
a newer and greater revelation—he must make it his. But 
the manner and the means whereby he came to accept the: 
Vedanta, instead of any Western system of thought, as the 
most satisfying philosophy, were not altogether intellectual, 
nor yet, altogether due to himself, It was at the Feet 
of his spiritual master, Sri Ramakrishna, that he was literally 


‘forced to understand and accept the Vedanta. But of* 
’ this later on. 


At this age he was also endeavouring to ‘interpret 
the stratified and ancient commentaries upon “Indian 
philosophy in a new and modern light. The commentaries 
were accurate, but the reading must be in accordance with. 
the modern outlook and requitements. When he had first 
read the philosophy of his own culture he trembled at what 
he then thought were the china-foundations upon which it 
rested. He doubted, and the period of doubt was a period 
of agony with him, Then he mastered the Western method 
and the Western ideas, discovering, at last, that their: 


. 


4 


THE DAWN OF THE INTELLECTUAL LIFE. 15 


essential elements were only approximations to that which 
his own race had already held as truth for many ages. In 
this manner, and by intense application he gradually became 
a seer of the spiritual and intellectual vision of his 
ancestors, the Rishis and the sages of the ancient Vedic times. 
{But as philosophy and religion in India are inseparable and, 
‘also, as the Western methods of thought were inundating 
i Hinduism at this time, and because Noren was master of 
| Western thought, the fact that he came to accept Hindu- 
‘ism, asa philosophical religion, was due in every respect 
{to Sri Ramakrishna, who spurred on the sceptical intellect 
i of Noren, the young man, until it became the element 
i; Of revelation in the luminous personality of the Swami 
| Vivekananda. This will be seen when the story of the 
influence exércised over Noren by his Guru is told, One 
isnot now concerned with the methods and the spiritual 
process involved ig Noren’s acceptance of the Vedanta. 
The intention is, at present, simply to mention it as amongst 
the intellectual possessions he gained in the present chapter 
of his life. 

Not alone in philosophy was the special line of his in- 
tellectual development connoted. He had the passion for 
history, and. it was the moral study, which history affords 
of the conditions under which human character and human 
events are unfolded, in which he found his chief interest. 
The heroic epoch he saw as the epoch of renaissance and 
of strength. He had brought into the focus of his attention ’ 
the whole panorama of struggle and statesmanship and 
nation-building that was presented in that voluminous’ work, 
Green’s “History of the English People.” He had learned, in’ 
detail, Alison’s “History of Europe.” He had mastered 
the history of the French Revolution and thé politics of 
the period, with its long retinue of intense personalities and 
momentous events. Gibbon’s “History of the Decline and 
Fall of the Roman Empire,” however, was.the historical study . 


with which he became most acquainted ; and those who were . 
‘ements Recigea Lied wees ies can aes, cde catia de Wee Nceeed de: os Se Ee a 


152 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


there time after time, the memories and spirit which lingered 
about the ruined glories of that ancient world. Emperors 
and their doings and the days of the Roman Republic, they 
Say, appeared before them in all their human and historic 
relations,—so powerful with reality was the flow of his 
insight in his utterances in this regard. History was to 
Noren, in his seventeenth as well as in his thirtieth year, 
the heart-throbbing of the centuries, animated with fntensi- 
fied life and replete with the aspiration and realisation 
of the nations, 

Napqleon was a hero in his eyes because of the strength 
of the man; and of Napoleon's generals he spoke often of 
Marshal Ney. Noren detested weakness all through his 
life and especially when he dwelt on the _ historical 
consciousness, with the leaders and the prirfces of men. 
Strength became the motto of his life; and, as the Swami 
Vivekananda, he infused the consciousness of the strength 
of the soul into the substance of the philosophy he taught, 
because from youth he realised that strength is the gateway 
to great things. It must not be thought, however, that he 
left in the background, in his consideration of the histories of 
various countries, the story of the making of his own nation. 
Indeed India was the study nearest to his heart. He knew 
Indian history at this time as he knew his own longing for 
truth, He knew the Indian historic characters as though 
he had lived contemporaneously with each of them. To-his 
Western disciples, who followed him to the Orient, he told the 
tales of the line of the Mogul Emperors or of the great 
Gupta dynasty of kings, so that they rose as living presences 
before them and they themselves dwelt in those by-gone ages. 
He spoke of the women famed in the progress of his nation’s 
history with the same intensity as a lover of English history 
would speak of Elizabeth the queen. And when he came 
to stand in the places shrouded with the historic memories 
of his land, he felt the holiness and the greatness of the past, 
a past predicting, because of its greatness, a glorious future 


THE DAWN OF THE INTELLECTUAL LIFE 353 


of the latter years of youth when history was to him as the Lives 
of. Plutarch have been to many a soul which carved its way 
‘to greatness, by reason of the inspiration drawn therefrom., 
Poetry appeals to some in youth because it is the lan- 
guage of ideals, What prose aims to tell, that poetry vivifies 
and enriches into realistic vision. The currents of the poetic 
consciousness compose the stream of the ideal; and 
youth is attracted thereunto because the mind sees 
clearest and truest in those days when life is young. 
Wordsworth was the fixed star for Noren in the poetic 
firmament. The thought of this poet was as much to him 
as the exquisiteness of language of his poetic work, He 
mastered by heart many of those sweet and great 
passages in which the poet soars, on wings of lofty vision, 
towards the consciousness of higher things, Poetry was to 
Noren what it often is to some rare souls,—the painting in 
word-pictures of the inmost vision, the incarnation, in so far 
as that is possible, of the ideal into the real. To him the 
inmost vision was the groundwork of all life,for all life, he 
believed, was founded on ideals and that failure was due to 
the lack of vision of the ideal. The ideal was ever dominant 
with Noren, whatever the line of study, whatever the subject 
of thought. He lived in the world of ideals, where history 
and philosophy and poetry and all the sciences were recog- 
nised as vast visions of something which was real,—because 
ideal. He possessed a prophetic vision of learning, wherein 
thought was seen as subservient to the great purposes of life. 
He knew thought as the fuel on which the soul fed and 


‘which the soul burned in the great effort at Self-revelation, 


going ultimately beyond all thought. ‘Unconsciously, his 
quest was ever in the direction of the timeless and the form- 
less in which all ideals live as eternal realities, wherein all 
aspiration dwells as realisation. 

How different are the aims of learaing! How varied are 
the purposes of mind! Some serve learning in order to make 
knowledge useful to the necessities of commerce, others to 


154 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


again, like Plato, serve learning as though it were a divine 
luminousness ; and they plunge thought into the realms of 
the Unknown with that serenity and strength of soul which 
is equal to prayer, for to the great in thought the Unknown 
is God, the Ideal. Noren found in learning the opportunities. 
for that self-expression which was necessary for the mind 
before it could be wrapt in silent awe in the presence of the 
illuminated soul. He ascended the stairs of thought because- 
he desired to realise truth, spiritual and divine, beyond the 
flight of thought. Unconsciously, it may be, but nevertheless 
this was the drift of his tendency as time has shown, for he 
was to awaken to a larger dawn of life in the immediate- 
vision of the Soul. 

The note is caught in the assembly of his thought, and 
the key to the understanding was for him, among other 
things, that passage in Wordsworth’s “Excursion” where he 
describes the state of trance. Whilst reading this, his English 
professor turned his thought from the text for atime to ex- 
plain the word, and in that explanation he mentioned the: 
name which to Noren became the holiest of the holy, 
the name of his future spiritual teacher, Sri Ramakrishna, 
the Paramahamsa, or the Great Swan of Soul. Such is the 
title given to those,—and fewest of the few are they,—-who 
sail like swans upon the sea of life, themselves free from the 
bondage and the darkness of the world, ever gazing above: 
at the Rising of the Sun of God. The word trance also 
spelled to him, in the explanation, that which his own soul 
knew in the deeps of meditation and knew later on and 
invincibly, as the Self, which is indestructible though the 
body dies and the mind is a prey to change, the Self which 
is above all dreams, Whose Vision and Whose Consciousness. 
is God. 


XXIIE. 
THE TEMPEST OF THOUGHT. 


Sometime or another in the history of great personalities. 
there arises the critical tendency when they survey the beliefs. 
of early life with its unconscious assimilation of tradition 
and culture. Then there is, very frequently if not always, a 
rebellion against old standards, or if not such a radical change, 
at least a great modification of views, Or, though indeed 
very rarely, it may take the form, first of a rebellion against 
the inherited faith, then a return to the truth it embodies, 
having seen it, through much _ intellectual struggle and 
wandering, with newer understanding and true spiritual illu- 
mination, To all persons this state does not come, The 
majority are born and live and die in the self-same groove of” 
thought, These are the orthodoxists in any line who decry 
the others as reformers, rebels and outcasts, But the re- 
formers and the rebels are the makers of epochs or the. 
advanced guards of progress, as history attests, 

Education is often the means. With it comes the con- 
scious determination of thought. Originality is the hand- 
maiden of education. Education itself is the making of new 
universes of outlook. Associated with originality of thought 
is always a tempest of thought. The new vision is always 
born in tempest. Frequently, the current of such a time of° 
tempest is the parting of the ways, a marking of the dis- 
tinction between the old culture and the new purpose. Un- 
consciously, it is always an effort at freedom, a development 
of originality in will which accompanies the awakening of 
thought. The beliefs of childhood are the superimposttions 
with which the rebel in thought must struggle, generally to 
overcome them, With the new attitude born of the struggle, 
arise new resolves which inevitably imply a battle for the 
recognition of a new vision. Andon the other hand, to the- 


Pt nee ae , aes eae fe oe ee 


156 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


becomes a struggle for very existence. For this reason’ 
‘orthodoxy has always been vehement ‘against reform; be- 
tween the reformer and the orthodoxist it is always a donfiict 
between life and death. With regard. to social matters this 
is true; with regard to the individual it is truer, The same 
struggle, which occurs in society as a renaissance or reform, 
occurs within the domain of personal consciousness as well, 
taking form as a conflict between old beliefs and new view- 
points of reality, whatever the department of thought, or 
whatever the character of the outlook. 

The period of awakening is always with the new genera- 
tion, or with the generation gifted with the mobile conscious- 
ness of vigorous youth. All know this period. Ali have 
passed through it, either consciously, as makers of the new 
‘era, or unconsciously, as blind and whipped followers, Many 
are the elemengs Which contribute to the awakening in each 
individual, With some it may be the events of the domestic 
life ; with some it may be the perennial flow of energy and 
tendency, with which they were born, seeking expression 
‘through the victory over obstacles. With others it may be 
the manners and methods of education, developing originality 
of willand discrimination ; with others again it may be the 
‘consciousness which comes with the sorrows or the per- 
plexities of the economic struggle. Again, with others it may 
be a friendship, or a discipleship, Generally, the course of 
-awakening involves the extinction of the child-mind ; and the 
future man, the developed and equipped personality, makes his 
appearance behind the scenes of doubt. For doubt and dis- 
illusion are the accompanying agents of the wreckage of child- 
creeds. This, however, is in the making of progress. The 
mind must move, even though it be in pain and under the 
dark shadows of disillusion. The new vision must be born ; 
and birth is always pain. In the process of that unfoldment, 
which is,.education, what wholesale. sacrifice of tradition is 
oftén necessarily made} What breaking away from ancestral 
‘customs and: the ancestral outlook on life ! ! Those who 


Yves eS ee” a ee Ps eo < 





THE TEMPEST OF THOUGHT. 57 


in horror, “ Blasphemy ! Blasphemy! This is not as our’ 
fathers thought! This is not as our fathers did!’ But 
the evolutionary tendency is without remorse. It looks 
forward, never backward. . 

Noren’s mind had been busy all these years of collegiate 
life in more ways than even he was conscious of. His was 
the burning intellect, which arouses every element in the 
merciless scrutiny of its search for that mental equilibrium 
which is truth, leaving, for the time being, a great waste of 
uncertainty and doubt. The philosophy of Spencer is apt to 
be a dangerous blow to the traditional theological conception 
of the origin of things. The science of the “First Principles” 
is liable to prove seriously inimical, if not fatal, to the long- 
standing theological outlook, Indeed, it pulverizes the very 
foundations of belief. It gives birth to that seething mental 
disturbance which is the death-blow to all idealism tradition- 
ally founded. Only the strength of an innate idealism, born 
of the individual soul as an inheritance from a great Spiritual 
Past, only the power of the poetic and imaginative tempera- 
ment, can save the larger part of the old personality which is 
established and governed, through birth and environment, in 
the traditional consciousness. It will be seen that it was the. 
inherent capacities for the deeper vision that saved young 
Noren from becoming an unconvertible fatalist and atheist, 
In him was latent the mystic that-was-to-be, and his spirited 
soul would not stop its questionings at the agnostic’s half- 
way-house in thought. It dared to plunge into the wilder- 
ness in search for Something positive and satisfying beyond. 
At last, as will be evident in the reading of this life, he came 
to the realm of imperishable and divine reality and to that 
which, for lack of better thought and more adequate language, 
has been called God. The soul of him came to an established 
consciousness of Something Real and to a consequent peace, 
But the way was long, though, indeed, the end was sure, 

Noren becdme imbued with Spencerianism. Not alone 
that. He was an original thinker, bringing the general con- 
ception of philosophical inquiry¢o bear upon’ the vital, ele- 


I 58 “THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


‘ments in the culture of his own race. And he thought deeply. 
This inevitably meant pain. In these days he was subject 
‘to many moods. He saw the groundwork of the traditional 
consciousness in which he was reared trembling beneath him. 
He felt that all was going. Yet he demanded light even at 
the cost of darkness. Such, frequently, is the paradoxical 
‘condition of the awakening mind. Those who loved him 
‘most saw the change. He was far removed in these days 
from the atmosphere in which the family moved. He opened 
his eyes to the bondage into which the whole nation had been 
‘subordinated, as he thought, by the autocracy of the priestly 
caste ; and in solitude when he conferred with his own nature, 
he vehemently denounced the culture with which he belived 
the priestly autocracy was able to suppress any spirit of rena- 
iggance or selfawakening or reform in the stifled and dumb 
consciougness of the national life, Such was his thought at 
this time. In short, he became an out-and-out agnostic. 

He who grows into such moods of perception, in India, be- 
comes, at once, a rebel to the Hindu social system, The net- 
work of caste and creed becomes intolerable. He be- 
comes a thing apart from his own surroundings, With most 
persons, this is a dangerous, indeed, a fatal state, for it fre- 
quently dulls the moral sense. Particularly is this the case 
with the romantic temperament. With the gods and religious 
duties and the series of ascetic and spiritual ideals wiped off 
the mind, what power is left behind to curb the demands of 
the turbulent senses? When the ascetic ideal of religion goes, 
it is not unlikely that the Greek version of life steps in with 
its stimulus to self-love in the joyous experience of the liv- 

. ing of life as it comes, Supporting Noren, however, in these 
‘days was the sense of personal dignity that kept alive 
the moral consciousness and the determination to remain 
aloof from things that dwelt in the shadow. Truly was. this 
period a tempest of “nought, and not alone of thought, but of 
‘the whole personality ; and wonderful was the Strength of the 
ianer self of Noren which bore him through. There was, 


pene a. ee es | ee ee 


THE TEMPEST OF THOUGHT, . . 159 


rounding of personal dignity which stilled the senses into 
quietude when their awakening would have meant a prostitu- 
tion of a higher self-consciousness, involving a breach of the 
sense of personal refinement, Then, too, his mind was carried, 
by its own impetus for truth, beyond the sense avenues of ex- 
Pression into a life of pure intellectualism, Deeper than all 
was the subconscious determination to find a way out of the 
network of ignorance to the reality of his own nature, if such 
reality there were, to find a way to God, if God existed. “The 
problem must be solved !” With him that was the imperative 
need. Toa mind of his mould agnosticism spelled only a 
mood. He must go beyond that. To him agnosticism im- 

plied an intellectual standing-still, a stifling of the powers of 
the mind which must, in this state, admit failure and defeat, 
remaining forever under the shadow of doubt, dreadfully 
conscious of the innate limitations of man. The mystical 
temperament cannot stop at, “I do not know.” The prob- 
lem of life, the quest for truth is irresistible, and the mind 
of the true mystic is swept by its own currents, past the 
borders and boundaries of agnosticism, into sure realisation, 
O the desire to know! O the longing for more truth! O the 
search for reality! Noren stood in the maze of agnosticism 
which he had entered unconsciously in his overwhelming 
search for truth. But he was as equally determined “to find 
the way out of this darkness and ignorance,” 

Another element must be taken into consideration in 
studying the ethical progress of Noren, He had mastered the +: 
intricacies of Comte’s Positivistic philosophy which embraces: - 
the widest ethical outlook. In this he lived for shelter, and! 
herein he found his solace and also the proper definition and | 
scope of ethics. It might have been, also, that herein he. 
found that wide perspective’ which is the sympathetic human a 
understanding and the stimulus to service for one’s fellow- : 
men. For in later life this was the touchstone of. his ¢ 
thought, and’ it coloured the entire comprehension of his 
message, which, strange to say, was*the very Hinduism he 
had at this period outgrown? It was by no means a 


160 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


blockading of the outlets of the’ imaginative and artistic 
consciousness which occurred,—as it often does in other 
cases-—simultaneously with the development of Noren’s 
analytical faculties. This consciousness “he always bore 
with him for it did not depend on any outside or acquired 
education, but because’ he was the born artist, the born poet, 
It was the poet, the mystic in him which led him forth into 
the light he later saw. 

His determination, at this time, was to sound all philo- 
sophical systems and master the underlying purport, if there 
were any. Most systemgare only intellectual diagrams that 
mean nothing to the emotional man. It requires as great an 
act of faith to believe in speculative systems of thought, as 
it does in theological dogmas presented “to a belief without 
understanding” under the threat of eternal damnation. 
Being mere mental diagrams, most systems stifle the 
creative and responsive faculties of personality. This Noren 
discovered and was, therefore, always on the look-out for the 
broader view, the view breathing a dignity of purpose. He 
did not care for diagrams of truth, however cleverly arranged, 
He wanted truth as truth. Philosophy, if true, is not meta- 
physics, in the ordinary definition of that term, It is a pre- 
sentation of reality and the language thereof ; it should be the 
means, the stimulus to an actual consciousness of reality. True 
philosophy is the mother of spiritual action, the fountain- 
flow of creative energy, the highest ennobling stimulus to the 
will. Hegel, Schopenhauer and Mill were the guides of Noren, 
but only guides. Spencer he had regarded as infallible ; it 
was because he regarded him, unconsciously, in this light 
that he struggled through the tempest of thought. Even the 
greatest philosophers, however, should not be regarded 
as infallible, They should be looked upon only as guides. 
Later on he had accustomed himself to put aside ‘the spirit 
of discipleship with regard to the Western philosophers, and 

_ then he triumphed and came out of the tempest of thought 


into the self-reliant search for and consciousness of truth. 
a re Sa i — .- =a - Pt See 


THE TEMPEST OF THOUGHT. 161 


thought to which he had subjected his earlier beliefs and 
traditions, Then he found that in the philosophies of the 
West lie missed the revelation of the actual, true and positive 
Spirit of man, which is ever idealistic and yet the builder of the 
glories of human life. Nevertheless he could quote, by heart, 
pages upon pages of the foreign thought-systems, He asked, 
“In how far can the system be a divine and spiritual inspira. 
tion? In how far can it be the Self-revelation of man ?” 
Even in this stage of studious intellectual inquiry and pain- 
ful doubt one finds the character of the mystic in his modes 
of thought. Unless philosophy was the doorway to vision, 
he felt it must be discarded as an“imperfect summary of 
things, an abstraction, beautiful it might be, but not worth 
one’s while. Othe demand of the soul to know truth ! 
What is a pleasing series of thought, a prim system of 
ideas? It may be gratifying to intellectual conceit, but it 
can never satisfy the hunger for reality ! 

Noren’s was the seer’s self in the youth’s make-up of 
mind. To him the voice of the spirit of agnosticism was 
the voice of anguish, causing him much mental tribulation 
and stress of soul, A feeling of emptiness of soul and 
sadness obsessed him. Why, he could not explain. He 
entered that world in which every glance and every step is 
suffering, because it is the world of doubt. in which man 
says, “I do not know.” The ordinary philosopher utters 
this with indifference; the saint that-is-to-be says it with a 
suffering-laden heart. The worldly man pays no heed. 
What is it to him if the whole world of idealism and tradition 
falls! What if everything of early belief fails! He is oblivious 
to the suffering which disillusion involves. For he is dead 
in soul, caring only for the world and the business of the 
senses and living in the social structeres built thereupon. 
While the idealist, who is the mystic in the making, soars 
into the empyrean of intelligence, searching with a great 
hunger of soul for everlasting truth. 

India has remained the same and Hinduism is, essentially, 


Fe 


162 THE LIFE GF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


exush of things that Western education brought in its wake. 
This is because some great souls born within ,the bounds of 
Hinduism suffered, bearing the brunt of the tidal wave of 
foreign thought which threatened to flood the historic struc- 
ture of Hinduism with foreign creed and foreign culture, 
And of those who suffered, passing through a veritable 
tempest of thought, was Noren, who became the Swami 
Vivekananda, the Apostle of a Revivified Hinduism, and the 
Redeemer of the Hindu world. His intellectual pain and 
imperious demand for living truth were equal to the most 
terrible asceticism of the mystical life. For, in his case, the 
search was a crying-out in the darkness, a losing of the way, 
a struggling with unknown conditions which sometimes over- 
power the mind and will to believe. It is crucifixion and 
sorrow. Through Noren’s tempest of thought, the Hindu 
consciousness let forth, as it were, all its doubting and agony 
of search into and beyond the group of agnostic beliefs,— 
for even the agnostic position is a position of belief. Through 
the individual experience of Noren the Hindu conscious- 
ness examined, as it were, its own presentation of beliefs 
and phases of reality; it studied, with scrutinising and 
scrupulous analysis, its inherent potentialities and truth as 
matched and compared with other foreign systems of faith 
and knowledge. 

Noren suffered the agonies of doubt and the torture of . 
search in the dark, when all hope seemed to have fled and 
utmost despair was at hand—not alone for the redemption of 
the Hindu world, but for the resurrection of religion in the 
Western world as well. It was because he had suffered, and sub- 
sequently understood that world of reality which is the Divine 
Nature, that he could stand, rooted in spiritual convictions 
"asa mian of realisation and as a teacher among all teachers, 
before that august assembly, the Parliament of Religions at 
Chicago in America in the autumn of the year 1893. And 
because of this surety of comprehension he ‘possessed, it was 
not strange that ten thousand persons should do him honour 


THE TEMPEST OF THOUGHT. . 163 


when he addressed thém as “Sisters and Brothers of 
America,” and had not as yet uttered one single word of his 
luminous message.” For he had gone beneath their philoso- 
phies, having seen, through the mists of much thougktand the 
veils of human learning and much suffering of soul, verily, 
into the Eyes of God. And then, also, he had sensed the 
Peace that passeth all understanding, and was fixed in that 
{immovable and Unchangeable Insight,—thd Beatific Vision 
of the Soul. 


es 


XXIV 


IN VARIOUS MOODS. 


Ever since Noren studied in the Entrance class, he regu- 
larly applied himself to music under the able tutelage of 
Ahammad Khan, a Mohammedan, and Beni Gupta, two cele- 
trated teachers in both vocal and instrumental music. It 
was at the earnest suggestion of his father that Noren set 
himself to the task of mastering the science. He desired 
that Noren should become learned in the technique and 
detail of Indian ‘music, for he realised that the musical 
genius without thorough training, never attained proficiency. 
Therefore during the long time of four or five years Noren 
gave himself up to music, devoting more time to this than 
to his collegiate studies. He excelled in song, though 
he could play musical instruments as well, Wherever he 
went he was asked to sing, everybody appreciating him in 
the light of a professional singer. He was recognised as an 
authority, and his ideas upon Indian music as he developed 
them by contsast with the music of the West, have made 
him prominent as a musical critic. His teachers recognising 
in him a musical genius, gave him not only formal lessons. 
but their entire devotion. From the Mohammedan he learned 
many Hindusthani, Urdu and Persian songs, some of the 
latter being those which are sung by Mohammedans, with 
dancing and religious abandonment, on their great festival 
days. 

Noren, like other singers, learned also how to dance with 
surprising grace, In this the Orientals resemble the Greeks 
in that they consider dancing as a manly art and use it for 
religious purposes. And Noren, it must be said, was 
possessed of the artistic mood whenever he danced, giving 
des ta the eniritnunal emotions which held him at 





IN VARIOUS MOODS, 165 


whole spirit, so far as the emotional nature was concerned, 
was saturated with the Greek love for beauty and symbol- 
ism. Expression, with him, during this period of growth, 
came gradually to mean the representation of the thought- 
worlds and moods of feeling in perfect and beautiful 
physical counterparts, and as his nature became gradually 
spiritualised, his whole expression was that of the body cx 
the service of the soul, Indeed, he was the Greek ; and when 
he later on came under the influence of his religious master, 
‘he was surrounded at all times, as it were, by an atmosphere 
such as might have graced the personality of the Priests of 
the Oracles, He adored Beauty even from his boyhood ; but 
as he grew older and understood the relationship between the 
Beauty of Nature and the Divinity of the Soul which inter- 
prets it, he gave himself up to its Higher Call, going beyond 
the senses, as did Uma when She became the Beloved One of 
Shiva who refused even to notice Her until She had subor- 
dinated the Beauty of Form to the Beauty of the Spirit, And 
subsequently he came to understand Beauty even in the Terri- 
ble; and in this later light he saw the Sameness of Personality 
between the beautiful Uma-Gouri-Haimavati and the Terrible 
Forms of MA Kali. He was indeed the Greek, but he even at 
this time unconsciously took in a wider definition of Beauty 
than that of sense or pleasure. He was more than Greek also, 
in the sense that so far as_he himself was concerned he never 
dragged the Ideal into the form. To his mind the Ideal was 
always the Spirit of forms, and music was the first dnd in 
cipient method. It was for him the doorway to the - Temple 
of the Goddess Sarasvati, and the anteroom, indeed, to the 


Presente of the Highest. 

Personally, he was an Apollo in appearance, and Greek 
in this. And when he sang, his personality and voice became 
united in a strange oneness of vibratfon and'in a fineness of 
spiritual beauty and unity. Whenever a merry party formed 
itself in these days amongst those who knew him, it was 
invariably thought incomplete wjthout him as the chief enter- 


166 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


And he had a fine collection of songs which befitted such 
occasions as these when, freeing himself from all seriousness” 
and all the cares through which he was passing, he would 
sojourn in the Land of Delights, soaring thither on the wings. 
of song. He became a favourite with everybody. Even men 
partial to a thorough masculine nature, appreciated the 
delicacy and grace of his personality, and the beauty and the 
sweetness of his voice which had a wide range, When a party 
had been tnade up and Noren had not put in his appearance 
in time, the others waiting for him would ask those with whom 
he had planned to come, “O! Where is Noren! Why didn’t 
you bring Noren with you?” And until he came the 
party would be dull; and if he failed to come at all, often- 
times it would be brokeg up and the project of fun 
abandoned. Indeed, Noren was the savoury element in all - 
innocent merry-making. It is wrong to imagine that he had 
n& love for pleasure. He was thoroughly human and delight- 
‘ed in the ways of human life and in all the pleasure he 
could wring from life. All through his college career, “He 
was a good old soul,” in the language of his companions, 
“and he delighted us with his long, long stories, wit and 
fun-making. ‘He always went in for all kinds of exercise 
and hobbies.” 

Noren was’ loved even for his physical personality alone. 
‘Tiere was a certain leonine splendour about him, a ‘certain 
light-heartedness and a certain nonchalance of spirit. He 
had the faculty of completely abandoning himself. And he 
allowed himself all freedom for fun. His family encouraged 
him in his energetic play and exercises. For during his college 
life he showed the first symptoms of that disease. which, 
checked now and again, ultimately spread its ravages through 
his entire form and brought about his carly demise. This 
disease—a malignant form of diabetes—was the cursé of the 
family, several members having died of if Nevertheless, 
he was full of physical vitality and hoped to “work” the 


a 


ge ee neater e and he encceeded in doing so to a large extent, 


IN VARIOUS MOODS. 167 


temperament the disease would have made irreparable head- 
way in the earliest years of his manhood. 

Even to look at him gave his friends joy, and when he 
amused them with tales, or spoke to them of Occidental philos- 
ophies, differentiating one from the other, they were interest- 
ed ; and when he chaffed them, making witty remarks, they 
were not offended; and when he sang, they were beside them- 
selves with joy, and the whole audience would join him ina 
chorus. For he was possessed not alone of fing technique 
but of exquisite modulation of tone, and the devotee of Beauty 
within him inspired him to ecstasy in singing, irrespective of 
the character of song, as he was in love with song for its own 
sake.’ And with gestures and smiles and with light in his 
eyes, or at other times with a wonderful stillness of body 
and a great gravity of personality, he would follow the text 
of the song. His teachers congratulated themselves with 
having a student of his genius who displayed such readi- 
ness and aptitude ; and they also knew that, best of call he 
was possessed in a remarkable manner of that particular ele- 
ment in the composition of all musical geniuses—a striking 
personality. Noren always entertained his friends with 
song ; and their encouragement and constant call for an 
“encore,” would raise him to the highest pitch of expression 
of his genius. Hours would be consumed in this way. And 
it is told how even when alone, he frequently gave 
himself up to the mood of singing with such passion and 
ecstasy that he would forget the passing of time and even his 
“. food. . Sometimes before he bathed, he would begin singing 
' when rubbing himself with oil in the fashion of the Greeks 
‘and all Orientals. He might be in a great hurry, but having 
once commenced, he would lose himself in the singing, becom- 
ing more and more mindkess of his bath, forgetting that the 
time for his food was drawing nearef and nearer. This showed ~ 
‘a wonderful innate power of concentration ° of. personality 

which he later used dynamically, in the days of his relation- 
ship with his spiritual master, ,for attaining far-reaching 
realisation « 


168 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


It was, indeed, in these days that Noren gained the funda- 
mental training and first expression of a quality which proved 
to be one of the most pleasing and useful characteristics of his 
personality, in later life—a beautifully well-toned, finely- 
balanced and harmonious voice, not only in singing, but in 
common speech as well. For as the Swami Vivekananda, his 
message rang out all the clearer and all the more impressive 
because of his voice, Many came to his lectures in the West, 
attracted only by the power and the beauty of* his voice and 
delivery. During this period he likewise practised declama- 
tion ; but by his very nature he was an orator. He was, as 
it were, born a son of Sarasvati, the Goddess of speech and 


learning. 
When Noren was serious, he seemed a philosopher, 


shrouded in the solitude and the inscrutable grandeur of 
intellectual life ; but when he gave himself up to amusement, 
he did so in no half-hearted way, One of his favourite pas- 
times was to ride a white pony every evening during the time 
it was left by a relative in his care, He hada great love for 
horses. As for his studies, were it not for the testimony of 
many of those whostill live to bear witness, the readiness, 
tenacity and range of his memory seem almost incredible. 
It is said of him that having once read a book, he could 
quote at length from it during the rest of his life. Often 
during his college career, after spending the whole 
day in amusement with his friends, he would plunge late 
at night into reading forty or fifty pages in an hour of 
complex historical or philosophical treatises and emerge 
from his midnight labour, having made them a permanent 
possession of his mind. In this intense and spontane- 
ous intellectual effort he drank much tea and coffee, to which 
beverages he became greatly addicted, finding them, as 
many scholars have, a stimulus to severe mental labour. 
All through his life he found his brain clear, even when 
.his health was impaired and he was physfcally weak. 


This was wonderful when one considers the. terrible 
Pe a ER OFS Sn, a ee, A hn ee oe eee, cy ree A. oe eee ae a Tee oe 


IN VARIOUS MOODS. 169 


but had he not been possessed of a remarkable, well-balanced 
brain and steady nerve, he could never have become the 
Teacher, Vivekananda. In the latter days of his life he used 
‘to say, “Though my body is worn out, my brain is as clear 
as ever !” 

At this time of his life he was going through one of the 
most trying episodes of his mental experience in seeking an 
adjustment between his mind and Truth, and between his 
emotional nature tending to belief and his intellectual 
nature which tended constantly to disbelief His Parents 
were most anxious for his health. Several times during his 
early life he showed signs of a breakdown, due to malarial 
fever, specially when he had passed the Entrance Examina- 
tion of the Calcutta University. At this juncture his father 
and his uncle took him to Gaya for a change which proved 
salutary to him. The symptoms of diabetes becoming now 
apparent, his parents attempted to dissuade him from his 
serious moods into light amusements. They had planned 
marriage for him. They told Noren that he should go to 
England and prepare himself for a course in law and also 
for admission into the Indian Civil Service. This was a 
cherished ambition with Noren in those days. But 
when Sri Ramakrishna heard of his parent’s proposals, he 
was severely against them. He prayed to the Mother of the 
Universe to avoid what he considered a dread calamity to his 
chief disciple’s spiritual career. Noren suddenly changed his 
attitude, and though threats were made of expulsion from his 
home, they produced no effect, Sri Ramakrishna had then 
captured Noren’s whole field of consciousness and had 
saturated it with living spirituality by a process yet to be 
heard of. Noren’s own brother truly says, “He had ‘a 
onstitutional dislike for the’ married life, so far as he himself 
was concerned,” Z 

. He led an ascetic life during the time in which he made 
Preparations fSr the examination for the degree of Bachelor- * 
ship of Arts, and meditated half the night. And many times 

: he invited wardering Sannyasits to come and sing and talk 


170 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


to him. At this time he was living in his grandmother's 
house near by, in order that he might pursue his studies with- 
out being disturbed by the noise of the younger children in 
his own home. Here also he would discuss problems of 
social evolution as these applied to Indian life, until his 
face was ablaze with enthusiasm, and the young men who 
were with him cried out, “Why, Noren! You are wonder- 
ful! You certainly have a great future before you p 
Noren’s natural tendency to the ascetic life was clearly 
marked out. He was possessed of a strange conscious- 
ness, functioning dually, it might be said ; conterminously he 
was the monk in the making and the jubilant lover of life. 
He had the physical temperament of a free child with the 
intellectual temperament of a gigantic soul in the revelation. 
Though surrounded almost constantly by a retinue of ser- 
vants at his father’s house, and having his slightest wishes ful- 
filled at a moment's notice, he would often spend days at the 
house of some poor friend where, amidst simplicity and dire 
poverty, he felt himself really more at home. 


It was about this time that he had thrown himself heart 

and soul into the Spencerian philosophy, and wrote to Herbert 
«Spencer himself, criticising certain points in his philosophy. 
‘The great man replied, praising and encouraging him, even 
teoing so far as to write that he would modify the ideas in 
question in a future edition of his work. This gave Noren a 
great stimulus, making him intellectually _ self-possessed. 
Professor W. W. Hastie, the most learned among the Eng- 
lish scholars in India at the time, who was Noren’s tutor 
in philosophy and, also, the Principal of the General Assem- 
bly’s Institution, spoke of him in flattering terms, saying to 
others, “Norendra Nath Dutta is really a genius! I have 
travelled far and wide, but I have never yet come across a 
lad of his talents and possibilities, even in the German 
universities, amongst philosophical students. He is ‘bound to 
make a mark in life!” Noren himself believéd that be was 
retina d far.creat thinet, Ee was convinced in his heart that 


IN VARIOUS MOODS, 17! 


Often his soul went up in prayer and his thought in 
meditation ;and he added, in these days, the “Imitation ‘of 
Christ,” by Thomas A Kempis, to the list of those religious 
writings in which he was then specially interested. Verily, 
his was a strange personality made up of varying moods and 
various qualities, but at heart there was a well-spring of 
sincerity, whose constant flow was bound to bring his soul 
out from darkness into Light. 

In mischievous fun a boy, in song an artist, in intellec- . 
tual pursuits a scholar, and in his outlook on life a 
philosopher, Noren was unique amongst the young men f 
of his time. 


XXV 


A FELLOW-STUDENT'S REMINISCENCES. 


To gain a still clearer perspective of Noren’s personality 
and the early stage of his mental development, it would be 
well to quote the observations of one of his fellow-students, 
Beajendra Nath Seal, who has since become one of the leading 
intellects of India. He says in an article written for the 
Prabuddha Bharata in 1907 : 

. “When I first met Vivekananda in 1881 we were fellow- 

students of Principal William Hastie, scholar, metaphysician, 
and poet, at the General Assembly’s College. He was my 
senior in age, though I was his senior in the College by one 
year. Undeniably a gifted youth, sociable, free and unconven- 
tional in manners, a sweet singer, the soul of social circles, a 
‘ brilliant conversationalist, somewhat bitter and caustic, 
‘ piercing with the shafts of a keen wit the shows and 
; mummeries of the world, sitting in the scorner’s chair but 
‘hiding the tenderest of hearts under that garb of cynicism; 
| altogether an inspired Bohemian but possessing what Bohe- 
| mians lack, an iron will ; somewhat peremptory and absolute, 
| speaking with accents of authority and withal possessing a 
; Strange power of the eye which could hold his listeners in 
> thrall. 

“ This was patent to all, But what was known to few 
‘was the inner man and his struggles,—the stiri und drang 
‘of soul which expressed itself in his restless and Bohemian 
_wanderings. 

“ This was the beginning of a critical period in his mental 
history, during which he awoke to self-consciousness, and 
laid the foundations ‘of his future personality.’ ¢ John Stuart 

Mill’s ‘Three Essays on Religion’ had upset his first boyish 
thats. And eAk&E OaAtiminm which he had imbibed dram the: 


A FELLOW-STUDENT'S REMINISCENCES, — 173. 


causality and design were for him broken reeds to lean upon, 
and he was haunted by the problem of the Evil in Nature and - 
Man which he, by no means, could reconcile with the good- 
ness of an All-wise and All-powerful Creator. A friend intro- 
duced him to the study of Hume’s Scepficism and Herbert 
Spencer’s doctrine of the Unknowable, and his unbelief 
gradually assumed the form of a settled Philosophical 
scepticism. 

“ His first emotional freshness and aivete were worn out. 

A certain dryness and incapacity for the old prayerful devo- 
tions, an exnu? which he concealed under a nonchalant air of 
habitual mocking and scoffing, troubled his spirit. But 
music still stirred him as nothing else could, and gave him.a 
weird unearthly sense of unseen realities which brought tears. 
to his eyes, 

“It was at this time that he came to me being brought by 
a common friend, the same who had introduced him to the 
study of Hume and Herbert Spencer. I had had a ‘nodding 
acquaintance with him before, but now he opéned himself to 
me and spoke of his harassing doubts and his despair of 
teaching certitude about the Ultimate Reality. He asked 
fora course of Theistic philosophic reading suited to a 
beginner in his situation. I named some authorities, but the 
stock arguments of the Intuitionists and the Scotch common- 
sense school only confirmed him in his unbelief, Besides, 
he did not appear to me to have sufficient patience for hum- 
drum reading,—his faculty was to imbibe not so much from 
books as from living communion and personal experience. 
With him it was ‘life kindling life and thought kindling | 
thought,’ 

_ “T felt deepty drawn towards him, for I now knew that . 
he would grapple with difficulties in earnest. 

“I gave him a course of readings in Shelley. Shelley’s 
Hymn to the Spigit of Intelleageal Beauty, his pantheism of 
impersonal lova’ and his vision of a glorified millennial 

“humanity moved him as the arguments of the philosophers, 
jhad failed to move him. The ugiverse was no longer a mere 


174 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


lifeless, loveless mechanism. It contained a spiritual principle 
of unity. xt ca 
«y spoke to him now of a higher unity than Shelley had 
conceived, the unity of the Para Brahman as the Universal 
Reason. My own position at that time sought to fuse into 
one, three " essential elements, the pure monism of the 
Vedanta, the dialectics of the Absolute idea of Hegel and the 
‘Gospel of Equality, Liberty and Fraternity of the French 
Revolution. The principle of individuation was with me the 
principle of Evil. The Universat Reason was all in all, 
Nature, life, history being the progressive unfolding of the 
Absolute idea.. Allethical, social and political creeds and « 
principles wereto be tested by their conformity to Pure 
Reason. The element of feeling appeared to me merely 
pathological, a disturbance of sanity and order, How to over- 
come the resistance of matter, of individuality and of unreason, 
to the manifestatian of the Pure Reason was the great prob- 
lem of life and society, of education and legislation. I also 
held with the ardour of a young inexperienced visionary that 
the deliverance of the Race from the bondage of unreason 
would come about through a new revolutionary polity of 
which the watchwords were Equality, Liberty and Fraternity, 
“ The sovereignty of Universal Reason, and the negation 
of the individyal as the principle of morals, were ideas that 
soon came to satisfy Vivekananda’s intellect and gave him.an 
assured conquest over scepticism and materialism. What 
was more, they furnished him with the card and compass of 
life, as it were. But this brought him no‘peace. The conflict 
now entered deeper into his soul, for the creed of Universal 
Reason called on him to suppress the yearnings and suscep- 
tibilities of his artist nature and Bohemian temperament. 
His senses were keen and acute, his natural cravings and 
passions strong and imperious, his youthful susceptibilities - 
tender, his conviviality free and merry. To suppress ‘these 
was to kill his natural spontaneity,—almost tc. suppress his 


self, The straggle soon. took a seriously ethical turn,—reason 
‘es sy a ‘ee ats we ee 





A FELLOW-STUDENT’S REMINISCENCES. y 175 


tions of the sense and the cravings of a youthful nature now 

appeared to him as impure, as gross and carnal, This was 
the hour of darkest trial for him. His missical ‘gifts brought 
him associates for whose manners and morals he had bitter. 
and undisguised contempt. ‘But his convivial temperament | 
Proved too strong for him. It was, therefore, sonte relief to 
him when [ occasionally kept him company of an evening : 
when he went out for a musical soirée ny 

“T saw and recognised in him a high, ardent and pure 
nature vibrant and resonant with impassioned sensibilities, 
He was certainly no sour or cross-grained puritan, no moral 
hypochondriac ;—he would indulge cynically in unconven- 
tional language except when he would spare my innocence, 
He took an almost morbid delight in shocking conven- 
tionality in its tabernacles, respectability in its booths ; and 
in the pursuit of his sport would appear other than he was, 
puzzling and mystifying those outside his inner circle of 
friends, But in the recesses of his soul he wrestled with the 
fierce and fell spirit of Desire, the subtle and illusive spirit of 
Fancy.” - 

“To his repeated quest for some power which eculd de- 
liver him from bondage and unavailing struggle, I could only 
point to the sovereignty of Pure Reason and the ineffable 
peace that comes of identifying the self with the Reason in 
the Universe. Those were for me days of a victorious Platonic 
transcendentalism, The experience of a refractory flesh or 
rebellious temperament had not come to me. I had not 
sufficient patience for the mood or attitude of mind which 
surrenders the sovereign right of self-government to artificial 
Props or outside help, such as grace or mediation, I felt no 
need of conciliating feeling and nature in the cult of Reason, 
nor had had any experience.of a will divided in its allegiance to 
the Self. The experience of a discord between the Ideal and 
the Real, between nature and Spirit, had indeed come to me 
already in amobjective way as an ‘outstanding reality and was 
to come afterwards in subjective fashion, though in forms 

.. uite other than what obtained in Vivekananda’s case, But 


176 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


at the time, his problems were not, mine, nor were. my 
difficulties his, . 

“ He confessed that though his intellect was conquered by 
the universal, his heart owried the allegiance of the individual 
Ego and complained that a pale, bloodless reason, sovereign 
de jure bat not de facto, could not‘hold out arms to save him 
in the hour of temptation. He wanted to know if my philos- 
ophy could satisfy his senses, could mediate bodily, as it were, 
for the soul’s deliverance; in short, he wanted a flesh and 
blood reality visible in form and glory ; above all he cried 
out for a hand to save, to uplift, to protect, a sekid or power: 
outside himself which could cure him of his impotence and 
cover hfs nothingness with glory,—a gura or master who by 
‘embodying perfection in the flesh would still the commotion 
in his soul, 

“At the time, this appeared to me a weakness born of 
unreason, this demand for perfection in the flesh and for a 
power out of ourselves to save,—this sacrifice of reason 
to sense. My young inexperienced self, confronted with 
this demand of 4 soul striving with itself, knew not where-. 
with to satisfy it, and Vivekatanda soon after betook 
himself ‘to the ministers and missionaries of the Brahmo 
Samaj, asking Brahmos with an unconscious Socratic Irony, 
for an ideal made real to sense, for truth made visible, 
for a power unto deliverance. Here he had enough, he 
bitterly complained, of moral disquisitions, principles, in- 
tuitions fgr pabulum which to him appeared tasteless and 
insipid. He tried diverse teachers, creeds and cults, and it 
was this quest that brought him, though at first in a doubting 
spirit, to the Paramahamsa of Dakshineshwar, who-spoke to 
him with an authority as none bad spoken before,,and by 
his saktz brought peace into his soul and healed the wounds 
of his spirit. But his rebellious intellect searcely yet owned 
the Master. His mind misgave him and he doubted if 
the peace which would possess his soul’ in she presence 
of the Master was not, illusory. It was only gradually 
that the doubts of that keen intellect were vanoguished 


A FELLOW-STUDENT’S REMINISCENCES. 177 


by the calm assitance that belongs te otular demons. 
tration. : Ey ‘ . 

'. “T watched with intense interest the “transformatidn that 
went on urider my eyes, The attitude of 4 young. and ram- 
pant Vedantist—cum-Hegelian-cum-Revolutionary like’ my. 
self towards the cult of* religidus ecstasy and Kaltworship, 
may be easily imagined; arid the spectacle ofa born icono- 
clast and freethinker Hike Vivekananda, a creative and domi- 
nating intelligence, a tamer of souls, himself caught in the 
mestes of what appeared to me an uncouth, supernatural 
Mysticism, was a riddle which my philosophy of the Pure 
Reason could scarcely read at the time. But Vivekananda, 
“the loved and lost” was loved and mourned most in what I 
could not but then regard as his defection;’and it was 
Personal feeling, after all, the hated pathological element of 
individual preference and individual relationship, which most 
impelled me, when at last I went on what to a home-keeping 
recluse like myself was an adventurous journey to Dakshine- 
shwar, to see and hear Vivekananda’s Mastef, and spant the 
greater part of a long summer day in the s aid ace. 
ful solitudes of the Temple-garden, returning asthe sf set 
amidst the whirl afer ron and roar and the awful gloont of a 
blinding thunder-storm, with a sense of bewilderment ag ‘well 
moral as physical, and a lurking perception’ of the truth that 
the majesty of Law orders the apparently irregular and éro- 
tesque, that there may be self-mastery in apparent self-alieng- 
tion, that sense even in its errors is only incipient Reason 
and that faith ina Saving Power aé extra is but the dim re- 
flex of an original act of self-determination. Anda Signific- 
ant confirmation of all this came in the subsequent life- 
history of Vivekananda who, after he had found the firm 
assurance he sought in the saving Grace and Power of his 
Master, went about preaching and teaching the creed of the 
Universal Man, and the absolute and inalienable sovereignty. 
of the Self.” 


XXVI. 
THE MAN IN THE MAKING. 


Slow, at first, are the pulsations of the heart that is being 
awakened ; and the mind pauses in the work of its own 
development, for understanding is faint and the heart is not 
yet unfolded. The death of the play-days must first come 
to pass. Then the intellectual life comes with their passing. 
A new world is in the making, the world of youth—a world 
of aspirations, a world of glorious intentions, a world of the 
beginning of things which later make the personal trans- 
figuration. With everyone there is the perennial tendency 
to greater things. The perspective may be the farmhouse 
or the battle-field; it may be the throne or the student's 
life, but it comes ; and according as the tendency is directed 
into the currents of expression does the life become unfolded 

* in the degree of intensity and realisation. With some the 
tendency may perish and they are dead, as it were, though 
living in the body. With some the tendency blossoms forth 
into the highest fruition and the life becomes the beacon- 
call to supremie greatness. Even so is it with religion and 
the religious temperament. 

The day dawns in youth when the mind throws off the 
discipline of necessity and wanders in original paths, either 
for good or evil, The discipline of necessity must be 
transcended for that self-discipline which comes because the 
soul aspires to a loftier realisation, For the discipline of 
necessity, acquired through the rigorous supervision of others 
over one’s morality, if not surmounted by. the understanding 
and following of the personal perception “of the uses and 

_ ‘needs of morality, is broken by the will which is. possessed 

of no personal initiative. Unless the moral struggle becomes 


a matter of the: individual conscience, the personality 
Ai LY eee, ReReeI, wore eT es 





THE MAN IN THE MAKING. 179 


Noren learned, at home, the need of having the larger 
view, that is, to do whatever is to be done because the 
wind sees and understands the fitness of the doing. He ~ 
‘saw, in his early years, that what the mind is compelled to - 
do from external pressure ceases when that pressure is: 
telaxed or removed and there is no whip of discipline and 
no prison of circumstances that can make life safe, The 
freedom of the will, he was taught, is the bottom-rock of all 
true self-development,—but that freedom of the will must be 
added to and supported by a righteous and developed discri- 
mination. With these two cardinal factors as qualifications 
above all others, progress is sure because, though a man may 
err he does not err from a perverseness of will but from a short- 
ness of insight. Such erring is corrected through experience, 
For this reason the Swami Vivekananda said in that unusual. 
manner of conviction he had with him, that he was proud 
of his own mistakes, because his vision had expanded 
through them. He spoke of sinners as teachers in disguise, 
because he felt that he had learned much from them. He 
saw that only in experience lies the correctiou of instinct 
and not in fine theories or much given advice. Thug he sas 
conscious of the sinner as the saint in the making. ‘These 
convictions of the last days of his youth became the splendid 
insight of the years of his manhood. He recognised that 
the sincerity of the sinner in his sins and the intensity 
and depth of his emotional nature, directed into spiritual 
channels, became swift guides to higher realisation. 

His training at home and a certain originality of fore- 
thought made him, of himself, see the fitness of the moral 
life. Thus he was emancipated from serving the moral 
Jaw as a slave serves. Above all, he possessed that wonder- 
ful and rare qualification -for the attainment and complete 
mastership of the spiritual consciousness,—a positive passion 
fer good. He felt that though the mind might have plunged 
into the depths of agnosticism, there _was no need of 
translating that intellectual state inte emotional materialism 


ee: a on cot Lice” hae 


180 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


persons would, making a little learning an excuse for much 
sinning. It was better to stem the tide-flows of the senses 
and at least be like a god i in that effort and thereby realisti- 
cally assert the superiority ‘of the heart's vision over that of 
the mind, making the inner man of spiritual potentialities 
triumph over the limitations of the ‘physical. 
For this reason he became the ascetic for a time, denying 
himself much that he could have ri ghtfully possessed. He 
‘ slept upon the floor with a dee Sloth “for covering and: 
wore the. borderless dhoot? which i the sign of simplicity, 
of age, of, widowhood and of renunciation. This asceticism 
“tras all the more significant because then he was not yet 
sure of, he did not quite know, intellectually, the truth of 
the verities of the soul. Though agnostic, he was as ascetic 
as the most zealous monk. With him, as with certain other 
eat men, the heart took the lead of the intellect, and ‘he 
followed the former instinctively. As the result, the spirit- 
ualisation of the intellect came all the sooner and all the 
more intensely. The family urged upon Noren worldly con- 
siderations, even going to the length of planning for his 
marriage ; but strange to say, each time the matter was 
arranged, some unforeseen difficulty cropped up or some 
turn of events would occur which completely stopped all 
further proceedings. And the very last time the family 
proposed marriage for him and had made final arrangements 
in this respect, the father died suddenly, as has been seen, 
The inward spiritual impetus was strong in Noren. It is not 
strange, therefore, to find him rising from his study, when 
he was preparing for the B.L. examination, and say tya 
friend in a way that caused much anxious surprise, “ Yes, 
I must abandon the idea of appearing for the examination. 
What does it all mean! I must be free{” With this remark 
he passed into a reverie and then hastened from his home 
to the Garden at Cossipore where his spiritual teacher lay 
ill, and returned to his home only after many days. . Early 
in youth he thought of «marriage as a barrier. to the oppor- 
cctee af tene selfexploration and self-cousc*ousness, spirit- 


THE MAN IN THE MAKING. 181 


ually speaking. He was overpowered by the reaster-impulse 
to sound the prafundity of being that dwells incarnate in 
the deeps of personatity. He was possessed by the spirit 
of all the ages and all-the aspiration of religions,—unknow- 
ingly to himself perhaps. THerefore he sail to this safhe 
friend, “You are married. You are under thé Hondage of 
the householder’s life. I am free. Mine will be the m nastic 
life, 1am sure.” Of cotirse to understand Noren’s ‘wotds, 
one must forego the worldly and social understanding of 
Marriage, one must enter into that world of feeljrig- which 
was his, one must see through his perspective of life. He 
knew life to be a dream. His very agnosticism had impressed 
him with the meaninglessness of all things, Therefore he 
jooked upon the monastic life as the only method of protest 


against the falseness of it all. At least he would not permit « 


the intellectual elements of the agnostic spirit to be translated 
into the emotional terms of a life lived for the mere sake. 
of living. He would let personality die out, as it were, 
striving only for truth, living for truth, even though its 
revelations be solely intellectual, bearing no stimulus to the 
emotional consciousness, He would be the monk, even 
though the fountain of inspiration from which he drew the 
stimulus to renunciation was, to all intents and purposes, 
dried up, Unconsciously, even in the stage of severe agnos- 
ticism, Noren was the monk; he was always,—always the 
monk ! 

The great curb to final realisation, at this epoch in his 
career, was the unintermittent questioning of the intellect, 
And yet the intellect must be silenced before the mystical 
State can dawn upon such a mind as Noren possessed, “It 
thust be silenced, however, not by stunting its growth by ac- 

“ cepting any casual belief or any stage of knowledge, not by 
‘suppressing it as one would an evil thought or an evi! desire, 
but by one’s having reached the highest fulfilment of its 

, Capacity and faculty. It must have dealt successfully 

"With all-phases of doubt and of uncertainty and come to 

ys @adefstand the perception of ‘reality as a function of the 


w 


182 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


soul, using the emotional power, educated and ‘perfected, as 
the means whereby the goal is to be reached. Then the 
intellect joins with the soul in the living of the spiritual life. 
The intellect has then become the footstool of the soul, the 
worthy servant in the pilgrimage to God. 

Belief is tyranny unless it is that larger vision in which 
the mind stands on the pinnacle of its most advanced com- 
prehension, intellectually speaking, and in which it glimpses, 
through the perspective of faith, the wider, range of realities 
which it will sometime come to know.” The soul must be 
free ; the mind must be free. This was Noren's position. 
Spirituality must result, not from the discipline of necessity, 
not from any extraneous coercion, or the unconscious and 
unquestioning assimilation of traditional faith, but froma 
vigorous questioning and a righteous doubting as to the 
reasons and the demands for belief, on the part of the intel- 
lectual self. He fought every inch of the way, accepting 
nothing until it was proved conclusively, to his mind, as true, 
When he gained any point it was, consequently, an irrevocable 
comprehension. It was insight. Verily, it was illumination. 

Somehow he was a seer of his own destiny and future. 
He would say amazing things of himself, not as the visionary, 
but as the prophet. He foretold his greatness in the modest 
language of a recollected soul, For while he thus spoke of 
himself, he was also working out in his own nature the prob- 
lems which are always a world’s concern, the solution of which. 
he later embodied in his message, aye, and about thé solu- 
tion of which mighty religious systems gather. He struggled, 
he suffered in thought and in his heart, but he instinctively 
foresaw the victory underlying all his intellectual pain and 
questioning. He seemed, instinctively, to know that the 
way out would be found, and that he would cross this ocean 
of darkness of thought safely and reach to the other shore where- 
wisdom rests and pace abides. It might be said that even 
in these days he was the monk, a doubting dionk he might. 
be, but one who callef intensely and persistently on That 
Which wae Reality to reveal Itselfto him. And he knew that 


THE MAN IN THE MAKING. 183 


the latent monastic self would some day burst on his agnostic 
mind and he would be the victorious monk, dwelling in that 
Reality which he later on found as God. He was pure in heart, 
and of such Jesus the Christ said, that they shai? see God. 
Underlying all the, conscious efforts of Noren was the heart 
which knew, in some strange method of foretelling, that real, 
beatific knowledge would come as the triumphant climax to 
all that striving through which his intellectual self had 
struggled and suffered. The seership was to be his! 

He demanded: the right of freedom in the education he 
was undergoing, the self-education of the soul through all 
the mazes of varied struggle and vigorous analysis, How 
different this, from those orthodox systems of religion which 
demand faith at the cost of intellectual and personal free- 
dom, thereby breeding superstition, and its offspring, fanati- 
cism! Noren wanted the great vision and the deep under- 
standing, in the mental self as well as in the emotional and 
spiritual selves, The heart, however, is always the fore- 
runner, and sometimes it is impatient at the long cycles of 
doubt and scrutiny through which the intellectual man must 
pass ; and this makes the essence of suffering and struggle. 
But when the ground has been gained in both directions, 
what strength of realisation.comes! The world cannot hold 
back the soul with a message thus founded. It is good to 
undergo both phases, and particularly that of the intellect, 
because the age makes the demand that the foundation of 
thought, from which the soul will ascend into the divine life 
and consciousness of the Self shall be sound. 

Man-making is a matter of experience, which is the only 
true teacher. The soul that longs cannot be content with 
the pleasure of feeling proximate to the object of its quest. 
It must possess, Noren insisted that knowledge,—sure, real, 
permanent, satisfactory knowledge—must eventually be :the 
goal, when doubt would no. longer seign, and resplendent 
truth would ghine forth in all the divinity of Reality. Belief 
must give way to realisation. Eves intellectual illumination 
must vo befo#e the radiance ofethe clenrect vicinn Rat thie 


184 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


method of determined seeking for truth made vision all the 
clearer and all the surer ; and because of all this intellectual 
tribulation did the note of his message ring all the truer 
and with more convinaitg force, for he had réalised with- 
in the enclosure of his own experience, that the soul 
can triumph over all the stress of circumstance and all the 
barriers of ignorance and darkness that stand between the 
divine truth and the struggle thereunto. Even now, even in all 
this confusion of intellect and agnosticism Noren practised, 
as of old before the image of the Lord of monks, that’ 
training of the spiritual self, which is meditation. -For some 
reason, known ©nly to himself, he continued titts spiritwal 
exercise. Perhaps it was because of the grfat mental peace 
which came upon him as he tried to quiet the mind» in thas: 
form of worship which meditation embodie. Rerbaps it 
was arest to his brain which seethed with ideas, Perhaps, 
in the state of meditation, his heart reached out apprehend-. 
ing, through the power of emotion, that certainty of the spirit-. 
ual consciousness into which his mind refused to enter datil. 
irrevocably and incontrovertibly assured. ynd fn that state, ‘ 
when great silence and great stillness came, he would some- 
times pass into the innermostness of his nature. There ‘the. 
doubting wind could not appreach, and there we Gnd the 
visions of old arising before hint from the depths 
of the spiritual self, perhaps not so defined or regular; 
but, here and there, would come to him a. amass of 


- light, fofming itself, as in other days, into the strange 


triangle of light, so frequent in religieus symbolism 
and which is of such immensé theologigél meaning. 
Ther. Noren was jubilant. This was not thought; it- 
was experience. Me. saw these gloritus foreshadowings 
of abstract truth in the silence of meditation and in its illu- 
minated consciousness, which is of the life of God,—the 
life, self-sustained, self-sufficient, undyimg,iundecayable and 
indestructible, In the personality of Noren the state of an 
agnostic mind and of a s*iritual emotional-self were strange- 


THE MAN IN THE MAKING, 185 


discern the seer under the garb of ‘that agnostic mind. For 
agnosticism: stops in the midst of darkness, unable to make 
further explorations into the realms of truth 3 it adknewl- — 
edges self-defeat thinking it futile, to proceed further. Be- 
yond its present outlook it sees only darkness swallowed up by 
darkness, But in Noren was the determination to seek and 
find, and of such said the Teacher of old, blessed are they, 
for they shall find. 

Time passed, and the days became landmarks of varied 
higher experiences, Thoughts upon thoughts visited Noren 
becoming vivid realities, and thinking was transformed into 
a process off féeling. And there stand out in his nature at 
this time, above ‘all other things, the persistent longing for 
the realfsation of freedom and the determination to find truth 
at all casts, even at the cost of pain and disillusion. 

The man is seen in the making, inflexible with regard to 
himself in the search for reality, All the passionate longing 
and all the passionate depth, which, with ordinary persons, 
are 4 matter ef the senses, were in the case of Noren directed 
to the understandtitg of life in connection with the problems 
it presented. ‘Thus in the distance of the years of his early 
manhood one catches the echo of that refrain which was the 
prayer of his life, “ O Lord, that same intensity of leave which 
one’has for the fleeting objects of the senses, may that same 
intensity of lowe be directed on my part to Thee!” Such 
was his prayeryanad such, also, had been the prayer of the king 
of devotees, Prablad. a ; 

Noren, at this time, was largely by himself and with his 
own thought, developing that solitude ef mind which made 
him stand upon his own strength in: deciphering the purposes 
of the mysteries of life. It made him independent in his ways 
of thinking. Even physigally his life was being spiritualised, 
so one might say. Ali the purport and all the energies of 
his personality were streaming with ‘rresistible speed into 
the river of gfeater and greater knowledge, making ultimate- 
ly for that realisation which he was ts know and which has 
since sped intc" the pcean of thesDivine consciousness. And 


186 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


all these things went into the fulness of his message, which 
has since become as nectar to many who have found reality 
in its contents and a nobler vision of truth and life. 

Man-making is the transfiguration of the innate tendency 
into the purpose for which the soul takes human birth ; it is. 
also in the final expression of this purpose that man stands 
revealed with his message. With Noren the period of man- 
making was the period of transition when the play- thoughts of” 
boyhood and the aspirations and joyous efforts of youth were 
being moulded into the sublime and defined lines of a per- 
fected character. The ideal aspiration had become the real 
struggle for seeing ; and already there were shadows of what 
were to appear, in all their radiance, as the effulgent forms of 
spiritual awareness. At bottom was the indomitable basis of 
sincerity. And where there is sincerity and where there is 
effort, there must come realisation. Noren was founding the 
structure of his spiritual consciousness upon the solid bed- 
rock of sincerity and honesty of search, And when the: 
structure of the soul is 0 placed, the winds of misfortune 
may blow and the storms of life may beat against it, but it is 
stronger than the winds and the storms, and nothing can 
shake or destroy it. 

The vision passes before the miad, and one is caught up. 
with the spirit of Noren in a world where all is sweetly and 
spiritually serious and where the soul is endeavouring to see, 
however faintly, the Beatific Vision of the Self. Already the 
notes of Realisation are heard and the Word of Revelation 
is at hand. 


XXVITI. 


THE COMING OF THE LIGHT. 


The weaving of the web of a great personality is a wonder- 
ful and unique process. The days are the weavers and each 
experience a thread in the weaving. Intellect and heart, 
together with their variations, are the warp and the woof. 
{n order, however, that the personality woven be grand in 
the spiritual stature and transfigured into the highest, there 
must be, behind the intellect and heart, the impetus of the 
awakening soul. Thought and emotion are the steeds, the 
chariot is the personality and the charioteer is the soul, The- 
old mandate rings clear as coming from the mouth of the 
Sage who walked, like a wandering monk, amongst the hills 
and vales and the deserts of Judaa, “ What shall it profit a. 
man, if he gain the whole world and lose (the vision of) his 
own (immortal) soul.” This is the parable-manner of declar- 
ing that same truth, spoken of by other sages in the ancient 
days of India, “ All this is Maya, the Unreal. That alone is 
worth while which is Real !” 

Sojourning in the desert of thought, where rise the im- 
ages of doubt and uncertainty which promise but to betray, 
Noren knew in his heart that what the world called knowl- 
edge was only speculation, as it were, ofa more extensive 
kind and that, overshadowing the whole of life was the. 
cloud of the unknowable, aye, and ‘that everywhere were the 
forms and shadows of ignorance. He thought as did Jesus 
the Christ, “What can all the world of learning give unto 
man in lieu of his own self,- his own soul!” Thus Noren’s 

' mind had been swept by a tempest of desolation, whose 
origin was the search for reality. But te assembled all the 
forces of his thought, continuing to plunge deeper and deeper 
into the books embodying the wisdem of man, only to find 
that it was with himself even ae it was with Solomon. the. 


188 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


king, who found all worldly knowledge and experience to 
be but “a vanity and vexation of spirit.” A shadow of 
gloom rested over Noren. His mind was chilled after that 
veritable tempest through which he had passed, The’ mind 
had torn down the wide roads of thought at a maddened 
speed, exhausting itself in the effort. Then the personality 
paused in deep reflection and in solemn sifence. What 
was to be? Now that the excitement of thouglit had 
ceased, what was to engage the personality of Noren? 
Underneath the surface consciousness—and ¢ven here and 
there, through several conscious elements of intention and 
character—the monastic spirit was visible, That sesmed the’ 
deep, though faint, note in the dawn of a Great Becoming, 

Far, far in the distance shines, as the light eternal, the 
light of the spiritually illumined consciousness. It domes, 
in sincere searching, when the night of the mind is darkest ; ' 
it comes as the sure and certain dawn, the breaking of 
another day of life,—-the day eternal, when peace is born of 
surest knowledge and knowledge comes, of itself, as the 
waters well up from a fountain. 

Slowly, slowly, but surely came the expansion of thought. 
from the critical attitude of mind, Noren drifted into thé 
searching attitude, He had turned over the tables of belief and 
tradition, The critical faculty had had its full sway, deaving 
the mind dark ; and in that darkness the inmost self reached 
‘out for positive and constructive thought. He commenced 
the search for purpose and reality in the structure of life; 
and thus, in the process, the period of the deificationi of life 
dawned for him. He thought, how can life be sentient and 
That from which life comes be non-sentient} Call That the 
Unknowable, still the mystery is not lessened in sublimity 
and meaning and inserutability. So deep fs the meaning of 
That from which life springs, that the human mind gathering, 
into one single whole, all its ideals of the greatness and’ 
goodness and truth of manifested thing$, has* always con- 
centred them about thfs Mystery, deifying it above all the 


THE COMING OF THE LIGHT. 189 


about him. The philosopher calls this invisible of which the 
visible is an emanation, the Unknowabla The saint calls it the 
Divine. As substance is tall visible forms, even so is the Divine 
Unknowable to the substance of thought and form. What is 
physiologically the Unknowable is zsthetically the Infinitely 
Perfect; psychologically, it is the Bottom-structure of Per- 
sonality, the Spirit. The gods might be false, thought Noren, 
but not God. And God, to his mind, meant an Eternal. 
Being, ‘ Whose, Consciousness is limitless in inwardness, 
Who is the Substance of Consciousness without any of the 
conformations ° or modifications which make up the phenom- 
enon of personality, and Who is beyond the limitations 
of thqught and form. To Noren, the idea of such a state of 
existence, the desire of the spiritually-educated soul to attain 
to such a consciousness,—was, in itself, proof that the ages had 
not lied “in ‘the religious experience and philosophy. The 
utmost aspiration of the human soul, when realised, is God. 
The intellectual method by which Noren came to this 
position was largely unconsciots. The religious instinct, 
though latent while the tempest of thought raged, reasserted 
itself as a stimulus to the intellectual consciousness when the 
taind could proceed no further than the bounds of the agnostic 
affirmation, “I do not know.” At first this deification of life 
was vague and faint. When it first arose in his mind, the 
agnostic spirit in him turned away from it as from an in- 
tellectual error, but it persisted in asserting itself, Little 
by little it pressed in upon consciousness, And then 
Noren sought for arguments to support it; and the latent 
consciousness of truth in him was stirring, and a breath of a 
deeper life was wafted over the slumbering monastic con- 
sciousness in him, the consciousness which was to make itself 
known as the Swami Vivekananda ; and it stirred almost into 
awakening. He thought that the perfection of personality 
could not be the by-product of mere physical purposes and. 
- processes in ature, True, the aim of character and life 
might be the transcendence of thes soul over the inherent 
‘purposes for which life is. True, life itself micht have before 


190 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 
® 


it, as a goal, a grand extinction of all its relative forms, But 
might not the moment of extinction also be the finding of a 
state of changelessness, an emancipation of the soul from all the 
forms and bondages of the senses and the, mind, whose 
nature is change? But such an extinction would certainly 
be the point where expansion was no longer possible, where 
time should have merged in eternity, The state of be- 
coming, which is the condition of all personality, however 
advanced, might have as its goal, the realisation of the state 
-of Pure Being. Then progress itself would have been merged 
in perfection ; then the conditions of relative bondage and 
freedom of will would have been transcended by a condition 
‘of being without any'relations, There, will would no longer 
be, for personality, which is only a semblance of true Individ- 
uality, would have found that Individuality. Will is only 
a function, a phenomenon of personality, But when Individ- 
uality has been reached, all will and all pergonality will 
have vanished, and only Truth and Reality stand out. 
Sensation has died out, and only Beatitude remains ; pleasure 
and pain will have faded out, and Peace remains. 

In this manner Noren scaled the mountain of argument in 
gis thought until he reached a summit where he believed in 
God, though as yet he had not seen Him, as the Sum-total of 
personality ; and he believed in Creation as an approach to 
that state of complete destruction which, in its turn, involved 
the truth that the purposes of Creation had been fulfilled. 
Creation, after all, is only a process, a means to an end, even 
as life itself, and the end may be the death even of life 
itself in the revelation of a Changeless Existence and a 
Supreme Reality. 

But it must always be remembered that there were other 
factors equally important in Noren’s finding of this in- 
tellectual, or rather spiritual, position besides his own innate 
power of discrimination and thought. There was, parti- 
cularly, his spiritual master and the life which his master 
revealed to him through a-perfected spiritual consciousness 


THE COMING OF THE LIGHT. _ I9gt 


2 


intellectual manner in which Noren attained to such an elevated 
outlook, He was now convinced. And he began to build, 
though slowly at first, the fabric of an enlightened religious 
life upon this hroad basis of insight and definition. It was 
along way, however, between the state of agnosticism and 
the state of prayer But prayer and contemplation were 
gradually awakened in Noren, for he had commenced to lead 


‘that life which was renunciation of the world and freedom 


from the net-work of desires and also, the quieting of the 
senses, He began to centre the strength and intensity of 
his thought upon these model ideals. And was not such con- 
centration of thought, in itself, prayer? 

Is not thought real? And is not tha to which thought 
points, that which thought serves, more 2 fee Aye, the yision 
‘of eternity is real because Man has seen it through the lens 
of thought, even within the boundaries of time. Aye, God 
is real, because of the constant stream in man both of 
thought and desire, that runs like a great Hood, beyond 
its ordiriary limits into the boundless ocean of eternity, 
pressing en to. an ever higher and more spiritual realisa- 
tion of life. When the thought of eternity becomes the 
feeling of eternity, then time is extinguished, and the 
soul goes beyond all personality into the Individuality of 
God-Consciousness. Noren knew this; he thought of 
it; aye, he desired it. And because of this, he found that 
his own very consciousness was a link in the’ chain that 
stretched from time into eternity, from becoming and prog-* 
ress into the state of perfection, and from bondage and quali- 
fied freedom into the boundless freedom of an Eternal Exist- : 
ence. “In the expansion of this conscious self” said Noren 
in the solitude he was wont to seek, “God is to be attained, 


' When personality becomes transfigured, then God-is. Selfish, 


imperfect personality, personality full of the fever of desire 
and the ague of sorrow, of misery, and, of unhappiness be- 
‘cause of the failure of attaining desire,—such personality must 
‘be extinguished.” For this reason,,Noren believed that the 
dighest truth intellectually perggived must become the perfect 


192 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


character in the manifestation. Character is the test of vision. 
Or, regarded from another point, Noren thought that 
in the very expansion of-desire could God be attained. 
“The soul must desire eternal realities; it must seek 
truth with the same avidity and passionate desire with 
which it now longs for the life and pleasures of the senses 
and for the possession of the obyécts of the senses.” At first 
consciousness deals with the senses ; then it rises to higher 
levels and deals with the world of thought and clearer vision. 
And then—and then—is there no Beyond? The mystics, 
the saints aver, “There Is.” Their insight is the proof. 
The mystical consciousness is the test. 

And there came a longing over the soul of Noren for the 
mystical consciousness. There came a longing to. make 
thought a process of feeling. The idea, God, must become’ 
the feeling that God is, And when one has that feeling, that 
glorified consciousness, who shall say unto him, “This is true, 
and this is not true’? Beyond the dual shadows of thought 
he has gone into certitude and into peace. Intellectual truth 
is always debatable ; spiritual truth is beyond. 

To feel such a longing, even to dream of such an exalted 
state of consciousness, verily, in itself, is spirituality ; it 

"is beatitude. It is the dream that will be the awakened: 
reality, when thought becomes feeling in the spiritual trans- 
figevation. It is the desire that must be born intd realisa- 
tion, But these things are of the solitude and of one’s own 
innermostness, For this reason did Noren deeply ponder and 
ponder over thoughts regarding God. He would dream day’ 
after day as to the contents of the Infinite Consciousness. The 
act of meditation had become a habit with him. The desire 
to solve, to see, to know the truth, became a torrent of inten- 
sity, and already one sees how.the walls of his intellectual 
mind were being undermined and washed away, and how the 
intuitive mind, the ,direct servant of the soul, was being 
thrown open to the effulgence of the purified, consciousness 
and that immediate reyzlation which is the Word of God. 


THE COMING OF THE LIGHT. 193 


depths. Inthe dream consciousness he would see dimly, 
things which were beyond all mortal dreaming or, in the 
morning he would awaken with a feeling of exaltation that 
could only be explained on the ground that sleep was not 
sleep, not, at least, that which one might imagine. Particu- 
larly is this true in the case of those who are extra- 
ordinarily enlightened. Does not the scientist, here and 
there, find the solution, in the dream, that the conscious 
mind tried to discover, but could not! And of the spiritual 
mind, what transition of longing into vision may transpire 
in that mystic consciousness into which sleep ushers each and 
every human soul. 

Noren’s mind was a constant stream of thought, and the 
constant thinking made an avenue for the mind to pass to 
higher things, in the state of dreams. One who has ever 
been aware of the intensity of thought, glimpses somewhat 
of the state into which the mind of Noren was now living and 
aspiring. Only he upon whom discovery has dawned, or 
truth has flashed suddenly, can gather the idea of Noren’s 

‘personal experience. Feelings of exaltation, temporary 

} glimpses of the reality, moments in which the intellectual. 
‘certitude became a moral certitude and more, all these were 
“daily with Noren. It was at this time, also, that his body 

| would frequently seem to him asa thing apart. When feel- 
ing covers the entire extent of thought, then thought which 
is otherwise insensate and unconvincing, which, as the sages 
hold, is otherwise material, becomes alive by responding to 
the spiritual vibration. It becomes a power. The spirit has 
entered into the mind, and thought and feeling, thought and 
vision become indistinguishably one and the same in nature 
and in the process of manifestation. Noren had this ex- 
perience constantly. His mind was of that type which soared 
_teadily into the highest sphere of thinking. His thought would 
be coloured by the warmth of his feeling and by the desire 
‘for reality and truth. Thus to him the forming of thought, 
the entertaining of ideas was, likewfse, the spelling of the 
names and dennitions of reality. 


13 


104 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


It was at this time that he eagerly desired that some one 
should be his constant companion, who could understand his 
tendencies of temperament and understand, also, what he 
understood. He desired companionship in the intensity and 
in the novelty of his living in his new world. To him it was 
an intellectual revelation brought about by the reading of 
the life of the Soul. He had stumbled on the well-springs 
of inspiration, and come across the source of all scriptural 
truth, He lingered for days in this consciousness, He looked 
inspired. His family, above all, his mother, saw and won- 
dered. The agnostic had become transfigured, and upon his 
countenance shone the light of revelation. They wondered, 
but he said little of what he felt. But there were those 
amongst his companions who were intimate with him. They 
respected his attitude of mind and heart. They looked upon 
him with that same regard as one has for an aspiring 
personality on its way to saintship. And in the Puja-hall of 
his home, where once he played at being a king, he now be- 
came a tutor in things spiritual to the playmates of a younger 
day. At this time the spirit of what might be called an ex- 
cessive Puritanism descended upon him, and he often walked 
in a world where all was goodness and where the harsh 
sounds of sense were not heard. He was as a young priest 
to his companions. And they, too, breathed with him a new 
life and a new inspiration. They were in a world of thought 
and feeling of such spiritual intensity that upon some of them 
moments fell when they lost sight of their surroundings, so 
rapt were they in close attention to the words that fell from the 
lips of Noren, He himself felt freedom, infinite freedom from 
the tempest of thought he had passed through. He felt peace 
within and knew himself as a child of the Most High, a child 
of Reality. Within him, he thought, dwelt that same Reality 
which men call God. The Reality dwells in every soul, but 
some are more conscious than others of its sublime existence. 
He who has realised fully, is verily the Lore Himself, the 
Supreme Reality Embdiied. 





re en. adi dee anak the 


THE COMING OF THE LIGHT. 195 


surface consciousness of Noren,—wonderful sparks of the 
Divine’ Fire which slumbered in the abyss of his real nature, 
He carried himself in these days with a regal air, He would 
talk to the group of lads who were his friends and college- 
‘mates, and it would be for hours that the discourse continued, 
The inspiration of the speaker would often break forth into 
song and the enthusiasm of his listeners would swell higher - 
and higher until they were transported with joy. 

Their leader, however, was struggling for deeper verities, 
‘Still that special companion, that bosom-affinity of soul for 
whose coming he had hoped and prayed had not come ; but, 
if he had only known, that a short distance from his own 
home, lived one on the banks of the Ganges, who was crying 
for his spiritual children to come, and particularly for 
one who proved to be Noren, to be his spiritual mate ! 
Noren determined that he must see God. For this reason 
he decided that he must know one who had himself seen God 
and thus be helped by him. Of himself, he did not feel 
the great divine power by which vision would come to him, 
But he must know the spirit of things, He must go beyond 
the groping mind. He must become invincibly certain, The 
conviction which was his, born of intense thought upon the 
Spirit, must now be translated, literally, into the consciousness 
of the Imperishable. Then, alone, bliss would dawn, ever- 
lastingly. The dream of searching would be broken in the 
glorious finding. He longed for a taste of the nectar of 
immortality, by which he might be translated into the 
Beyond. The “Unknowable” of his philosophical studies 
had become something actual to him, and all knowledge of 
man seemed only so much graduated ignorance. So had 
‘the sages of the ancient Judwic world found, and they had 
said of man’s knowledge, “Lo! It is foolishness with God 

Such was the making of the man one.now beholds, For 
him even the great awakening was coming to pass, It may 
te that the fhtellect of Noren will be spoken of as brilliant. 
It may be that, some will say of lis bart, “It is wonderful.” 
But this is of the man. Nov it was to be the revelation of , 


196 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


the Soul. Noren’s life flowed as the ebb of the tide from 
the river of personality into the ocean of spiritual life. All 
his queries were now spiritual queries. He was yearning 
after exalted states of being. He was aware of timeless. 
truth. He felt the surge of an infinite joyousness, because 
all his doubts were being solved. He was approaching that 
intense period of which the Upanishads say, “ Then all the 
desires of the heart are broken; all doubts vanish ; that 
which is mortal fades, and that which is immortal shines forth”. 

Yet Noren was not altogether what he was tobe, He 
knew only one longing—the longing to see God. This grew 
with him until it became fierce with meaning. He demanded 
from life a companion, aye, more than a companion, a guide 
to his thought, aye, even more than an ordinary guide. He 
desired the companionship of one who had actually and 
really seen God. Henceforth one sees him in search of 
that companion in soul, Henceforth he wandered from door 
to door of those whom the world reckoned, at that time, as. 
the spiritually great. He wandered long. He wandered to 
many. At last he found that which he sought, and that 
which he sought when found, became ever afterwards the 
ideal of his life, the other part of his self. At last Noren 
met this guide, this teacher, this companion, but strange 
to say, his mind paused, his intellect doubted,—but only 
for a time. Later he came to realise, and then his joy 
was overwhelming. He had found him; but at first there: 
was some difficulty in recognising the Saint. Because of 
this, however, the joy and the assurance when they came were 
all the greater, all the surer, all the more intense, 

And he, who for Noren had become the incarnation of 
all his longing to see and realise God, is known, through the 
fame and the eloquence and ‘spirituality of the Swami 
Vivekananda, as the ideal man, the blending of the human 
and the divine. TAis was Sri Ramakrishna Deva, the 
Master of Noren, the Pen of Mankind,‘one whe had 


seen God! fF. 


© 


XXVIII 
THE BRAHMO SAMAJ. 


To understand the process of progressive development 
of Noren’s personality, it becomes necessary to survey the 
nature and purpose of a great movement which had already 
originated and which was causing considerable attention at 
this time,—the Brahmo Samaj. 

When an age awakens to a new period in its historical 
unfolding, there are always movements of reform, making 
themselves manifest as the struggle between a new vision 
which seeks expression, and the old established vision which 
desires self-conservation. From out these two differing 
visions the reformers and reactionaries arise. The involved 
misunderstanding deepens. Fanaticism is born in both 
directions ; but behind both phases of fanaticism is the 
‘common effort at purity of ideal vision and purity of ideal 
expression. Had this been constantly and consistently taken 
into consideration, how much bitterness between man and 
man would have been averted during the course of the ages ! 
Both parties are labouring for truth, for reality, for what is 
best. If they perceived this, undoubtedly they would unite ; 
and the ideal would the sooner be made manifest. Ever 
present in every age and with all mankind is, whether con- 
sciously or unconsciously, the purity of motive and the purity 
of effort in the rendering of ideals into social forms. This 
fact should be recognised by the student of human ex- 
perience, particularly in the study of all movements of 
seform. In a nation’s life, as in the life of each and every 
individual soul, a new and helpful vision is bound to come, 
For the time being there may be serious differences, or even 
a violent clash, between the two outlook’, but the end is sure 
illumination, if*the search be sincere and if its, ypbject be 
truth, And is it not true that, ‘but for the upgrowth, from 
time fo time. * of CbeaIN. Panvdiiehleo. all a dittecttact chums 


198 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


within the national life, the very ensemble and general 
character of the structure of its culture would be undermined 
by the incoming of radical and totally destructive elements 
of a foreign nature? Better to have differences within the 
national consciousness than that any foreign superimposition 
of thought and culture should transpire! And in all things, 
the end and aim in the evolutionary transformation, which 
reform movements may bring about, should always be and 
generally is the preservation of the spirit of national culture. 
The form of the culture, perchance, may suffer for the time, 
but still it benefits by the purification ; and, when all facts 
are taken into consideration, purification from within is 
assuredly more desirable than disruption from without, 
Bearing these thoughts in mind, the-observer of the pro- 
gress of Hinduism, from a Hindu point of view, in the nine- 
teénth century, sees foremost, amongst other forces, the rise 
and consolidation of the institution known as the Brahmo 
Samaj. Its coming into existence was conterminous. 
with the awakening of the intellect and heart of that well- 
known reformer, Raja Ram Mohun Roy. Its leaders in later 
days were the Maharshi Debendra Nath Tagore and Keshub 
Chandra Sen. These men are known throughout the West 
as amongst the greatest of Hindus. And their learning has 
astonished the West, even as it has aroused the potentialities 
of Hinduism. When Christianity and a foreign culture with 
their educational methods were becoming extremely wide- 
spread, and the danger of a national conversion’ to the 
orthodox learning and moral and social standards and _ reli- 
gions of the West threatened the very existence of Hinduism, 
these men arose, as great moral forces, stemming the foreign 
tide of inundation by reviving the old Hindu monotheistic 
conception, modified somewhat by Western theological ideas, 
as the basis of a national religion, otherwise retaining the- 
main constituents ofthe national Scriptures, those philosoph- 
ical and spiritual treatises known as the Upanishads. After 
all, however influenced’ the-movement might have been in 
other ways by Western social and moral staidards, as it un- 


THE BRAHMO SAMAJ. 199 


questionably was in its religious character, it was fundamen- 
tally Aryan ; essentially it was Hindu. The Brahmo Samaj 
was an attempt, and a very successful attempt, as the Swami 
Vivekananda used to say, at preserving Hinduism, at the 
cost of many of its social forms. This might not have been 
a conscious intention with the originators of the Samaj ; but 
it was an inevitable result. As matters now stand, after the 
passing of several decades of years, Brahmoism is coming to 
be counted by many of its adherents as a sect of Hinduism, 
And now both Brahmoism and the spirit within Modern 
‘Hinduism are stemming the tide of foreign religious ideas 
and the further invasion and successful propaganda of the 
Christian missionaries. oa 
Heretofore, the difficulty has been that Githioion Hindu- 
ism could not understand the uses of the new organisation. 
It was excusable. There must always be the spagit. of an 
intense conservatism. On the other hand, the Brahmgistic 
movement was not definitely conscious of its own idealggin ree; 
lation to the unforeseen and detrimental changes it might 
bring about in the Hindu society. These were foreseen by 
the orthodox Hindus, and therefore the Samaj seemed 
violently radical and was accused of a fanatical spirit. But 
the truth becomes evident from a close and comparative 
study of other historic instances, 
The Brahmo Samaj was to orthodox Hinduism what Pro. 
; testantism was, as a theological difference, to Roman Catholic- 
ism, in the middle of the sixteenth century. It wasa protestant 
“movement throughout. Amongst other things it protested 
against certain forms, social as well as religious, which had 
‘crept into Hinduism in the course of time, as foreign press- 
ure was brought to bear upon it by the incoming of many 
strange and Non-Aryan peoples, who became absorbed into 
its body. In the process of absorption, foreign elements of 
creed and myth and custom were sure to have been assimil- 
ated. But the Brahmo community had only a vague idea at 
that time that those elements agairst which it rebelled were 
foreion elethente Thic knawledse came only recently aca 


200 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


result of the research of Indian historians and archzologists. 
But since the time of this historic discovery the character of 
the attitude on the part of Hindus to Brahmos and of Brahmos 
to Hindus has varied considerably. It appears now that both 
Hindus and Brahmos are working for the self-same end which 
is the restoration of Maha Bharata, or Heroic India. Both 
parties desire the purification and resurrection of the national 
spirit. Both Hindus and Brahmos are working for the advent 
of a great national life. The Brahmo Samaj now understands 
and emphasizes the idea of maintaining the national individ- 
uality at any cost, though its attitude is still largely Western 

. in character and spirit. The Hindu, bent on preserving the 
integrity of the national consciousness, is now willing to accept 
whatever is worthy of acceptance in the foreign culture of the 
West, adapting it, however, to suit the exigencies of the 
Hindu temperament and spirit. 

But to return to the comparison. The Protestant move- 
ment in Europe, though seemingly only religfous in intent, 
inevitably brought on much social havoc and reform in the 
course of its development and influence, It was, also, how- 
ever, the Modern Spirit growing incarnate in the progress of 
its becoming ; it was the spirit of broader ideas and of deeper 
learning, The Protestant movement introduced the spirit of 
liberalism into the West. It was similar in the instance of the 
Brahmo Samaj. In its religious aspect, the Brahmo Samaj 
greatly resembles the Theistic and the Unitarian movements, 
with which the Western reader is familiar. It is monotheistic, 
thereby disbelieving in many important tenets of faith of the 
orthodox Hindu religion, such as the Divine Incarnation, the 
need of the Guru. Most of all, it protests against the belief 
in a multiplicity of divine forms and, consequently, against 
polytheistic and image worship. It can be readily understood 
how contact with the religion of the dominant power greatly 
affected the theories ofthe Brahmo leaders. That they could 
have in the least retained a Hindu spirit and haye made the 
texts of the Upanishads, which are the core of Hinduism, their 
scriptures, is the wonder. The movement grew dmongst that 


THE BRAHMO SAMAJ. 201 


-section of the Hindus who had been educated ‘in the Western 
method and who were favourable to a general awaken- 
ing of the Hindu masses, Naturally, some choge the new 
path of belief as their own so as to be identified as nearly as 
possible with the religious creed of the foreign power, and so 
that social privilege and freedom would be sure to result 


‘thereby, But the majority were persons intent on the visu- 


alisation of a great ideal. Hinduism, however, is not inimical 


‘to radically new religious beliefs. In the past there were 


many previous movements quite as sweeping in their religi- 
ous character. Hinduism is all-tolerant in religion, giving 
the widest freedom to conscience and intellect. 

The social changes which were proposed by the Brahmo 
Samaj were numerous and sweeping. It was due to these 
that the difficulty arose. It was these which aroused the 
self-defence of Hinduism. Hinduism welcomes all religions, 
It tolerates anything save insincerity. India is the land 
where religious persecution is historically unknown, Even 
the Charvakas, the Materialists, preached unharmed " upon the 
temple steps and vehemently abused religion and the priest- 
hood. But socially, Hinduism is bound and stratified. Now, 
however, there is a change, and a suppleness for readjustment 
with a renewed vigour has come into existence since the days 
of the Swami Vivekananda, within Hinduism itself. 

The Brahmoistic movement demanded social reform. Among 
its demands were the breaking-up of the caste system and 
consciousness, and the introduction of the doctrine of the social 


equality of man, Then there were the demands that Hindu 


womanhood should be educated and emancipated, that the 
marriageable age should be raised for the girl and that she 
should have full freedom in the choice of a husband ; the 
latter clause, also, affected- young men. These demands 
naturally involved the radical modification of orthodox 
society, could they have been fulfilled. « 

The West ehas achieved social emancipation. Its masses 


have been raised and individualism Kas been developed to 


ry 


lee cieactit et aL a = en ins Pee = <a ¥ece! “ac. Sek wat 2k a 


202 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


increased facilities for its development and ampler expression. 
But in religion the West has been bound and stratified, even 
as India is bound to-day, sociologically speaking. Now 
the West and the East are seeing things in a different 
light because of the working power of a new spirit. The 
West is growing liberal in a religious sense, and India is. 
remodelling its society taking a new view of its social prob-~ 
lems. In both instances, one observes, in East and West, 
the spirit of humanity struggling for and realising various 
aspects of the idea of freedom. Ultimately, of course, free- 
dom is personal, being neither social, nor religious, nor 
industrial, nor political. It is ultimately psychological, in- 
volving freedom from all limitations and limited desires, in 
which sense it is purely spiritual. 

It would have been very strange had Noren not been 
deeply and seriously affected by the Brahmoistic movement. 
As it was, it aroused a tumult of thought and feeling within 
him, He was a constant attendant at thé addresses and 
sermons of the Brahmo leaders, He had familiarised himself 
with the writings and the spirit of Raja Ram Mohun Roy. 
Keshub Chandra Sen was the idol of Calcutta at the time, 
particularly of the younger generation. He was the orator 
of the day. His following was immense. Secretly Norern 
hoped that such strength of thought, such depth of feeling, 
such spirited enthusiasm, such personal magnetism would 
some day be his, He frankly admired the leader. Later in 
his career Noren became, like Keshub, the arch-orator of 
India, the spiritual genius of his time, the magnetic and the- 
impassioned teacher, the teacher of a new order; but there 
was this distinction, however, that with Noren the introspec- 
tion was deeper, and the new order, whose message he voiced, 
was a fulfilment, and not a denial of the old Hindu cons- 
ciousness and culture. 

Noren was imbued with the same thoughts as concerned: 
the Brahmo thinkers. «He felt the burden andethe paralysing 
effect of the rigidity df caste. He felt that the womanhood 
af hie nation must be freed. must be educated : and in his 


THE BRAHMO SAMAJ. 203. 


home circle he became the ardent champion of the new 
order. His mother listened quietly and patiently, and having 
a great faith in her son’s sincerity and longing for truth, 
believed that he would, in time and after much reflection, 
surely see all things in their true perspective. Noren was 
the apostle of the new order, He joined the movement. 
His name was registered in the books of membership. 
When he became the Swami Vivekananda his name still 
stood on the list although he had then assumed the champion- 
ship of a loftier ideal, which was to be in the end a reform 
broader and not less radical than that which the Brahmo 
Samaj contemplated and was then endeavouring to irttroduce. 
But he then differed seriously with them, as to the means and 
methods of reform. Reform, he held in later life, must come. 
from within through an awakened public intelligence. There 
should be no denunciation of traditional beliefs and customs, 
as was customary with the Brahmo Samaj in its methods of ’ 
reform. The process should be a building-up with the 
materials whith were at hand to the best possible advantage. 
The horizon must not be foreign, nor yet antagonistic to the 
view of those for whom reform is proposed; it must be a 


‘national, a Hindu point of view; it must not be Western. 
‘ Conservative methods must be used to bring about radical 


reform. Assimilation, he always held, was just, but imita- 


‘tion, never. And many Brahmos to-day are inclining to this 


same mind, because of the spirit and progress of that 
nationalism which he preached and which has since de- 
scended as an aspiration upon the people, urging them into 


: the spirit of unity, self-sacrifice, organisation and work in the 


name of an enlightened and broadened Hinduism, a Hindu 
ism including all sects and denominations and castes and 
creeds and races. 2 

Noren thought deeply at this time. His thought paused 
upon the Indian Problem. It busied itself with the recon- 
struction of the national consciousness within the bounds and 
the spirit of a liberal Hinduism., Eten now he was imbued. 
with the necessity of conservation in dealing with reform. 


204 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA., 


Reform he desired, but not at the expense or by the wholesale 
destruction of the Hinduism which was the civilisation of 
his forefathers. He was, of course, not as clear at this time 
as he was in later life, of the needs and methods of reform, 
But* he was constantly and earnestly labouring in his mind 
concerning these things. 

It must always be held in mind, however, that there were 
three elements in the make-up of Noren’s personality and 
outlook, as a Hindu genius,—first of all, his discipleship to 
his spiritual master, secondly, his own power of observation 
and insight, thirdly, his own personal realisation, But, as 
it is so exceedingly difficult to speak of these elements in 
that contemporaneous relation in which they existed, it is 
best to speak of the second element first, because insight he 
had by his own personal genius. But the other two elements 
were most conspicuous at a later time, when he had really 
accepted his spiritual guide as such, and when he had 
travelled the length and breadth of his own land and had 
studied the customs and culture of other nations during his 
sojourn in the West. His was always a growing mind ; he 
had fixed opinions, in a relative sense only, because he was 
ready at any moment to throw overboard any theory in 
place of which he had discovered a higher aspect of reality 
and truth, Then, too, these three elements, spoken of as 
composing his personality, were constantly in development. 
His insight was a growing faculty ; his realisation was always 
new; his understanding of his Master ever becoming deeper 
and deeper. They were contemporaneous throughout, ex- 
changing and interchanging, one influencing the other, and 
all, conjointly, making for the complete transformation 
through which he was continually passing from year to year 
;and from one period to another in‘his life. Already he had 
met his Master, though now the influence exerted over him 
by his guru was indistinct ; already his insight was greatly 
developed, and his advanced thoughts and experiences far 
exceeded those of the young-men of his own age, 


THE BRAHMO SAMAJ. 205 


the Brahmo movement was that of Herozc India; he had 
vision of Maka Bharata, of the glorious days of the 
epics when life was new and free, and woman the social 
equal of man, and men were sages and free as kings, 
and when the Aryan civilisation was not yet tainted 
with elements of foreign admixture. He saw that 
old India and desired a similar India for the futute—ever 
glorious, elastic in form, individual in spirit, supported by 
the growing of the inward, national genius and free of all 
stiltedness and burdens of forms from which the spirit had 
departed. At this time, he believed in an India and ina 
Hinduism which should be faithful to the genius and the 
great visions of the past, transforming all contact with modern 
life and Western influence into the individuality of a personi- 
fied Self of Race, adding unto the historic consciousness of 
the past the spirit of the modern world, without however in- 
curring that contamination and loss of national self-respect 
‘which comes of an ape-like imitation, an imitation which 
ends, ultimately, in the death of the racial and national life. 
During these days he had joined a movement of the young: 
men of Bengal who desired the unity and education of the. 
great Indian masses, irrespective of caste, or race, or creed, 
His vision of reform was an inner, spiritual one. At least, 
it was such in the making, for eventually he came to under- 
stand the solution of the people’s problems through an 
ennobling and ampler vision of its inherent greatness, which 
was the possession of the highest spiritual consciousness 
the world could perceive. In understanding wherein lies its 
superiority over the other nations, would India rise to a re- _ 
newal of her ancient greatness. As a member of the Brahmo 
Samaj, Noren was a flame of eloquence to his equals, storm- 
ing with the desire to rectify the disorders and the degrada- 
tion he believed to have come into the structure of Hinduism. 
But he never totally renounced Hinduism, in his heart. He 
was always the Hindu, but in a liberal way, a Hindu in the 
emancipated definition of the idea He believed, together- 
" with those of advanced ideas, that real reform should mean 


206 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


progress, and not idle imitation carrying extinction in its 
wake. In all his zeal at eradicating social evils, he never 
wavered from his conception of and devotion to the cause 
of Hinduism. Some members of the new movement, in 
fact, it may be said, most of them, felt a great gulf of dis- 
tinction between themselves and the orthodox Hindus. 
They looked askance at the culture and the past of their 
own historic ancestry ; and amangst them were those who 
denounced Hinduism, as not even the Christian missionaries 
or the foreign embittered critics, with all their prejudiced 
will and conscious blindness, have ever been able to do, But 
still a difference must be made between the former and 
the latter. The former were actuated by a deep-founded 
sincerity, a true spirit of disinterested love for the land and 
a genuine intention of service to the depressed ‘and the” 
outcast, and of introducing what they understood to be 
much-needed reforms. As to the spirit of the latter, 
however, the less said the better. They were differentl: 
actuated. Noren had learnt to respect and revere fy 
culture, the wisdom and the glory of the Aryan ancestors, 
and this kept him from becoming a destructive radical with 
limited views and denouncing methods, There was alsc 
with him at all times the personal capacity for the largest 
vision and the synthetic perception. 

Much had gone into the formation of the present con- 
sciousness of Noren through his own personal efforts. The 
elements thereof were his personal education, his search- 
ing observations of life, and his innate sense of the necessity 
of all reform that made for freedom from obsolete methods, 
and the opportunities of a fuller national self-awareness 
and self-expression. Added to all this were his philosoph- 

_ ical instincts, and, above all, his réligious feeling and spiritual 
aspiration. He was eager ; he was sincere ; he was honest 
in his own perception*of ideas, and honest and unprejudiced 
in endeavouring to know the views of othérs. He was 
looking for truth ; he was ‘willing to transcend ‘anything he 


THE BRAHMO SAMAJ. 207 


domain of zsthetics, or sociology, or even theology. The 
elements of his character were many, and becoming. safely 
and - perpetually established. He was true; he was deep, 
Above all he loved greatness of heart ; and he despised 
meanness as the first sin in the catalogue of unrighteous 
doings, It was this peculiar and remarkable make-up of 
personality which led him, at last, into the newer conscious- 
ness of what he thenceforth called “Enlightened Hinduism” 
as compared with the definition and purposes of the 
Brahmo Samaj, which seemed too radical to him in the 
later period of his life. But to-day, the unifying spirit is 
at work within the Brahmo Samaj, and this distinction is 
slowly dwindling away. One may reasonably hope and 
pray that both the Brahmos and the enlightened Hindus in 
their sincere longing for a greater To-Morrow, will ultimately 
combine in throwing off all the warring differences in name 
and method, and threading through the mazes of the Present 
come into the rich fulfilment of the future with an accomplish- 
ed: realisation as to the full meaning and the full potential- 
ities of the One impergbable Spirit of Hinduism, whether 
past, present or future. 

Such a spirit has already descended, and the enlightened 
Brahmo styles himself in pride “A Hindu,” and the enligh- 
‘tened orthodox Hindu feels with Swami Vivekananda the uses 
and the unison of all the pulsations of the Mother-Heart. 
He feels and reveals also that spirit which the Swami 
Vivekananda showed when asked, “Sire, do you denounce the 
Brahmos?” by replying decisively, “By no means!” Brahmoism 
had become to him as a high caste in Hinduism. The idea 
‘of sect had died out in him for that of a higher vision, — 
the vision of a religiously-redeemed and socially-redeemed 
Hinduism —a Hinduism unified, eclectic and glorious, in- 
cluding all,” denying, denouncing none. But this was 
because he had sat at the Feet of Sri Ramakrishna Parama- 
hamsa, the man of Supreme Realisation, 


. « 
n % a 


XXIX 
“MAHASHAYA, HAVE YOU SEEN GOD?" 


_ The struggle must end in. victory when the heart is 
sincere. Noren thought he had found peace in the circle of” 
the Brahmo Samaj. He had dreams of becoming a great. 
preacher like Keshub Chandra Sen. He thought he had 
found a suitable theology consistent with philosophical truth. 
He had joined the choir of the Samaj and gave forth all the 
religious enthusiasm he had in song. He was a man now. 
He gradually made the acquaintance of the intellectual 
leaders of the society. He saw that they were men of un- 

, impeachable character. He believed in them implicitly. He- 
loved and admired them. For a time he was deeply satisfied, 
Then it dawned upon him that he had not as yet seen God. 
He felt the surge of the divine light whenever he sang, when- 
ever he lifted up his heart in prayer, appenever he listened to 
the eloquence of the ministers of the Samaj; but if God is 
real, thought Noren, then He must be realised. Religion 
carries with it much tranquillity and much exaltation of the 
mind and senses, but one must know the pain of the year- 
ning after God before he actually enters into the Divine 
Consciousness. There are, as it were, three periods in the 
mystical consciousness, first, that of exalted enthusiasm, 
second, that of “dryness” and spiritual uncertainty, and last, 
that of realisation. Noren experienced these three states. 
He felt the flow of a great enthusiasm ; then he passed 
through the stage of a seeming farness from the ideal ;. 
finally, he came into the safe haven of positive realisation 
and the true seeing of God through the intense longing for 
God-vision. * : 

Earnestly did Noren pray for enlightenment. Earnestly 
he struggled to live that life of righteousness which he knew 


“MAHASHAYA, HAVE YOU SEEN Gop ?” 209 


days. He had not become conscious of God. In his longing 
to. know the truth he made his way to the Maharshi Debendra 
Nath Tagore, regarded by many of that time as among the 
most prominent of spiritual teachers, Though a man of 
enormous wealth, he had taken to ‘the religious life in his 
search for peace and truth. He lived retired from the world 
in a retreat where he gave himself up to meditation and the 
study of spiritual truth. It was this man who drew out the 
Powers of and gave an inspiration to Keshub Chandra Sen. 
To him Noren, likewise, came. The Maharshi told him to 
practise meditation with great intensity. A class was formed 
with the Maharshi as the preceptor, in which the members 
meditated for a given period and then spoke,.one to the 
other, of those experiences each had in the course of his 
concentration of the mind upon God. 

Noren’s experience was of the nature of light. He sawa 
point of light revolving and finally becoming steadied and 
fixed, It appeared between the eye-brows where, according 
to the doctrines of the Scriptures, the eye of the mind, the 
spiritual sight, is locag®d. This is that sight of which the 
Scriptures say, “It comprehends all things.” From the poirit 
of light which Noren saw, various colours issued forth in splen- 
dour. Then his consciousness would expand as ifto encompass 
fields of attention unknown to the normal functioriin® of the 
mind, It seemed as if it desired to expand beyorld the 
awareness of the usual impressions of sense and embrace 
areas of. vision and feeling unknown to the ordinary man, 
At this point, however, his meditation would break. Its 
contents would be dispersed. The effulgence of light vanished 
and Noren would find himself in his normal state of atten- 
tion, These are exalted states of power, often to be felt in 
meditation, a power, passive yet almighty; when realised 
fully it gees to the further and more perfect unfolding of 
consciousness, 

The Maharshi recognised in Noren.a genius in the spirit- 
ual sense, He “encouraged him. "He helped him as much 


as he cnonid3 We cnncbe of us 


210 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


man of remarkable potentialities. Noren continued his 
visits to the Maharshi until the time was ripe when he would 
really know a teacher, one who would develop and perfect 
in him the awakening of the spiritual self, until it burst into 
the radiance of the spiritual consciousness and into the 
Light.of God. 

It was the Sabbath day for the Brahmo Samaj when its 
members became aware, for the first time, of him who was 
to draw Noren from their circle. The Samaj counted in its 
following many persons of wealth and high social position, 
Some of these were present on the occasion, The choir had 


" . just finished with the song that reads in the first line, “I have 


made Thee the pole-star of my life.” In the rear of the hall 
stood the figure of one, with only a garment about his loins 
for clothing. Pain was on his countenance ; and he seemed 
to be conscious only of one thought. This thought expressed 
itself, suddenly in an exclamation. “Noren! Noren !” he 
cried. The gathering was astounded. Who was this man? 
Noren heard the call. His voice had just died out as the 
final note above the gathering of singers. He turned from 
the choir-place, He hastened down the aisle, It was Sri 
Ramakrishna! It was Sri Ramakrishna ! On seeing Noren 
the face of the old man became radiant with joy. “My boy! 
My boy !” he exclaimed, “Why have you mot come to se¢ 
me? 1 have been waiting in anguish for your coming.” The 
choir had begun to sing another song. It was wonderful -in 
the text, speaking rapturously of the glory of the Lord. Sri 
Ramakrishna, on hearing it, lost all consciousness of hfs body, 
which stood rigid in ecstasy. His eyes, fixed intently on 
something known to himself alone, were aflame with the 
spiritual light that shone from them. When he returned to 
- consciousness he was murmuring the Name of the Lord. 
Seeing Noren, he said to him with infinite tender- 
ness, “Come, my boy, come! I have been longing to see 
you.” Noren left thg meeting. He felt béwildered at the 
great stir and attention which had been caused by. this inci- 
i ae eee 6 ee | a ee eee OF eee ee ae 





a aN pet aN we te 





“MAHASHAYA, HAVE YOU, SEEN GOD ?” 211 


self. He had met him a month or two ago, and ever since 
Sri Ramakrishna had desired the presence of Noren with an 
intensity akin to that with which he spoke of God. But 
Noren asked himself, ‘Why has he come into the Samaj and 
‘caused such a disturbance! Everybody will take him for a 
madman.” Noren did not understand Sri Ramakrishna, At 
times he thought of him as a brain-sick old man. At other 
moments he wondered at his spiritual intensity, at his sur- 
prising sincerity, and at the spiritual consciousness he un- 
doubtedly seemed to possess. 

Some short time before this, Noren had gone to the 
Ganges side where the house-boat of the Maharshi Debendra 
Nath Tagore was anchored. He was burning with the desire 
to see God. “Is God real? Ifso, I must, I must see Him!” 
The thought had burned into his brain like fire. He was 
almost feverish in the excitement with which he hastened to 
the river. He went in great haste up the steps that led to 
the Maharshi’s private quarters. He opened the door. The 
Maharshi was seated on the floor in meditation posture in 
‘deep contemplation on God. The sudden entrance of Noren 
brought him with a start from his state of absorption. Beforé 
he could collect himself, Noren had burst out excitedly with 
@ question that stunned the startled Maharshi, Noren’s, face 
was tense with meaning. His lips were parted ; his eyes 
were like coals of fire. The question rang out with a strange 
tenseness in the ring, “Mahashaya! Have you seex God ?” 
The words were most emphatic in the utterance. The soul 
of the Maharshi was thrown back upon itself, as it were, like 
unto the ocean which is churned by the momentum of the 
waves in the time of tempest. He attempted to answer, He 
attempted twice ; he attempted a third time ; but each time 
he could not, Words failed him. Then, gazing deeply into 


. Noren’s eyes, as a man looks into the very abyss of his own 


soul, he said, “Boy, you have the Yogi's eyes! A Yogi is 
one who has Seen God, or else is in such an intensity of 
search that the yery Presence of God is seen in the fire of his 


212 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


Only afew days after this experience, Noren became 
almost mad with painful longing. No, the Maharshi, at least 
for Noren, had not seex God. He had not said so. Where 
should he find God then? He knew that all the philosophies 
of the world were trash, What were they but an attempt to. 
describe the Indescribable One. He despised learning in 
that hour, and taking all the religious books that he had with 
him in his room he threw them aside. No, God could not be 
found in a book ; no, not even in a holy book ! Where then ? 
O yes, there was Sri Ramakrishna. He would go to him. 
He would ask him that same question he had asked of the 
pious Maharshi. But what if he, should be disappointed again ! 
What if he received no answer, no definite answer ! Yet, he 
must go. He left his room and his home. His mother 
asked him whither he was bound. He said, “To Sri 
Ramakrishna!” Bhuvaneswari Mata looked thoughtful. He 
had spoken of this man to her, not altogether without doubt, 
however. Ideas alarming in their nature went through her 
mind. Suppose this man should win over her son to the 
monastic life. No, that must not be! She would stand ° 
firmly against that. But unconsciously she was compelled 
later on to make the sacrifice. 

Noren hastened to Dakshineswar, the abiding-place of 
Sri Ramakrishna, situated some distance from Calcutta, on 
the Ganges side. The Master was seated alone. Noren 
approached him with divine joy and fear alternately written 
upon his countenance. He wanted to ask that question ; 
what if “he should receive no answer! Was there to be 
anothe® jsillusion ! He could not bear the idea of it; there- 
fore, conflicting emotions possessed him. But he was deter- 
mined. He saluted the Master; then at once he_ uttered 
those same words which he had spoken with all the fire of his. 
soul to the venerable Maharshi. “Sire ! Sire !” he said, “Have 
you seen God ?”. Sri Ramakrishna looked at him with spirit- 
ual ecstasy. Then, the wonder of it! Theswonder of it! 
Tmeediately. unhesitatingly he replied, “Wes, my son! I 


“MAHASHAYA, HAVE YOU SEEN GOD ?” 213 


Only I see the Lord in a much More intense sense. And I 
can show Him to you!” What was this! What was this! 
Here was a man who had seen God! The words rang deep- 
ly ; they lingered with a tremendous intensity ; then they 
died out in the region of Noren’s own soul as faint whispers, 
whispers of imperishable truth and of undying reality, 
Noren was overcome with joy. Othe bliss of itall! The 
bliss of the unbounded assurance of knowing one who had 
seen God! What blessedness ! What inexpressible blessed- 
ness! For a moment Noren felt the torrent of all this 3 it 
was too much for him; he felt he was entering another 
sphere of consciousness, Months of anxious search, months 
of much mental anguish, and here was the healing of all his 
wounds. In this single moment the anxieties of hundreds of 
weary, weary hours were all removed. The thirst of Noren’s 
soul for the waters of life was being quenched, 

And yet—O the night of ignorance and the bondage of 
darkness! All the Joy left hing of a sudden, Yes, he was to 
find God. But it must still be a struggle ; and a struggle at 
that, with this very God-intoxicated man. He was to doubt 
even Sri Ramakrishna. He was to challenge all the spiritual 
convictions of this prophet, until the time of struggle would 
suddenly pass into one mighty and divine state of realistic 
consciousness, and he would know the Highest Mlumination, 
and in very fact see God. The struggle with his master, 
however, made the spiritual illumination he became possessed 
of all the more established, all the surer, all the more~ 
teal. 

So when Sri Ramakrishna came crying, as a child, into 
the Sabbath circle of the Brahmo Samaj, conscious only of 
his love for Noren and the Presence of the Lord, it was ng 
wonder that Noren felt slightly abashed, being the centre 
‘of all eyes, Sri Ramakrishna had told him only séverat 
days before that he had seen God. Yet *Noren was put to 
‘embarrassment yt the appearance of the saint in so public a 

_ place and with such a disregard in his manner of dress for 


ce, 


214 THE LIFE OF TIIE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


® 
And, yet verily, Sri Ramakrishna had seen God ; aye, he was 


a Man of God. Even so did Noren later come to know. 

Again and again, Noren remained away from the saint. 

There was one day, however, after which Noren always. 
continued to frequent the Gardens at Dakshfneswar, where- 
the Master lived. He had not been for some days to visit 
Sri Ramakrishna who constantly desired to seéhim. For 
this reason the Master had come to see his disciple at 
Calcutta. Noren was seated with that same group of boys. 
’ witli'whom he was seen on the morning previous to the 
university examination. It was some days after that inci- 
dent. The same boy who had previously endeavoured to 
turn Noren’s thought from the monastic ideals and the 
monastic life, spoke again criticising Sri Ramakrishna. Noren 
bore it quietly. He himself did not yet understand ; but 
within his heart he had a deep love anda great faith, that 
faith which in time removes even mountains. 

Just when the conversation reached the highest pitch, a 
voice called out, “Noren! Noren!” All started to their feet. 
Whose voice was this? Ah! It was the voice of Sri Rama- 
krishna himself, Noren hastened down the stairs, leaving the 
group of lads astounded. They were standing, in rapt ex- 
pectancy, silent, wondering. As Noren was descending, Sri 
Ramakrishna was ascending the stairs. His eyes were filled ., 
with tears of joy. “Noren, why have you not come to me 
these last days ?” he asked. He was as simple as a child. 
He had brought with him some sweetmeats with which he 
fed Noren with his own hands, Ah! Indeed! Wonderful 
is the way the Lord searches out the paths of illumination 
for the struggling and sincere devotee. The Lord Himself 
comes to one who searches; the Teacher himself comes to 
the disciple when the latter is prepared. 

“Come! Sri Ramakrishna urged. “Sing me one of your 
songs.” They had reached the room. All made profound 
salutation to him as it is customary in India ¢o make to all 
holy men. Noren took ‘his musical instrurgent, the éexpura. 


_ er ae a, eee meen Capen manne hnpen ie m 


“MAHASHAYA, HAVE YOU SEEN GOD ?” 215 


a song to the Divine Mother. The others sat still. A 
wonderful silence and peace prevailed. In a few moments 
: Sri Ramakrishna was senseless to all outer things, having 
gone beyond himself to the Divine Mother, in the response 
of his soul to that.song. At that moment the room became 
filled with a Presence, The friends of Noren felt as if they 
had entered a new world where all was bliss, Noren himself 
was at the feet of the Master. Slowly Sri Ramakrishna resumed 
the consciousness of sense. The room had become a femple. 
It was evening now; and from the near-by temples and. 
dwelling-places arose the song of devotees amidst temple- 
gongs and incense to the Lord. © 


ne ee, 


XXX 
“IDEALS IN HINDUISM. 


In going deeper into the development and developing 
process of Noren’s personality, and in order to understand 
that iatimate relationship he had with Sri Ramakrishna in 
the way of discipleship, it is essentially necessary to be fully 
acquainted with the ideals in Hinduism. This is important 
in order to comprehend the mystical consciousness to which 
Hinduism is the stimulus. It is likewise necessary in order 
to understand the mystical temperament and experiences of 
Sri Ramakrishna, and of Noren in particular. 

The Hindu religious consciousness resembles, so to say, 
the map of India which is studded with many divisions, 
inhabited by many diverse peoples of diverse tongues, and 
yet united by one territorial entirety. Even so the Hindu 
religious consciousness, divided as it is into numerous diver- 
sifications of idea and worship, is likewise eclectically related 
and united by the philosophy of the Vedanta, “the end 
of wisdom.” 

The conception of divinity held by the expounders of 
this philosophy is that of an Impersonal Existence, not the 
denial, but the utmost fulfilment of personality. It is a 
great positive life, whose nature is reality and truth, realising 
itself as boundless in its consciousness and inexpressibly 
free, transcending the qualifications of thought and form and 
the limitations which these necessarily involve. The divine 
nature is the great positive and unit reality, compared with 
which the pluralistic universe, though existent, is unreal, poss- 
essing only a phenomenal existence, The Subject of this limit- 
less divine life is Paramatman or Brahman. The philosophers 
of the Vedanta, however, admit that a Personal God exists so 
long as the human mjnd perceives duality. But even He 
ic enhiect to chance. even as*His work. made nanifest in the 


IDEALS IN HINDUISM. 217 


‘gradual evolution of the cosmos, is subject to change. He 
is real because Brahman is real. And Brahman is neither 
He nor She, Brahman can only be referréd to as’ It, None 
of the predicates of relative existence, such as extent and 
‘duration, can be applied to Brahman. “It* ty beyond the 
‘Creative Aspects of Reality.” 

The great exhortation of the Vedanta is that each and 
‘every soul, in whatsoever sphere of the universe, shall rise 
above all mortality to the realisation of Brahman? That is to 
say, that the personal soul shall come to realise that It alone is 
Reality, the process being a gradual] expansion of conscious: 
ness, All relative ideas and relationships about which con- 
sciousness builds itself in the weaving of desire must be 
transcended, The states of progress and becoming, which 
are the soul’s constant experience, must attain their gimax, 
culminating in Pure Being and Absolute Perfection. Then 
all ideas of birth and death will have ceased to be; time 
will have sunk into eternity ; sensation will have forever 
passed into beatitude ; all progress will have died out, for 
That to which progress tends will have been realised. Then 
all the fraud of personality will have vanished, with its 
relative freedom and bondage of will. For Infinite Freedom 
has then been attained, beyond all struggle, beyond all desire, 
beyond all bondage. When the personal soul realises the 
Self, then, verily, itis Brahman. “Tat Tvam Asi,’ meaning 
“Thou Art That,” is the spirit of all Vedanta teaching, Thaz 
being the Om Tat Sad or the state of immeasurable knowledge, 
‘eternal existence and unfathomable bliss. 

The Hindu conceives of truth in the categories of the 
Real and the unreal. Thus something may exist, being 
however at the same time unreal in the highest understand- 
ing of reality. Whatever. is relatively real or possesses 
aspects of reality is of the essence of Brahman. Man exists 
as personality. Higher than man aresthe Gods, the Devas, 
and other quperior beings. The reality of all is Brahman. 
With this as the background, the ntind immediately recog- 


* 
nisee the cunthecic nf Hinduiem Pe, a ee I, 4 AR Rd 


218 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


Monism, all are one in the vision of the Highest. The Gods. 
are Personal Forms or aspects of Brahman and, because 
Brahman is real, even so are they real, They are /dea-Forms 
of Brahman. More real are they than man, relatively speak- 
ing, because they are more immediate forms and emanations of" 
the Infinite Reality and more conscious of reality than men. 
The humblest Hindu peasant knows this, 

According to the needs of time and place and according 
to the varying necessities of the human mind, these spiritual 
imagings of Brahman vary. Sometimes Brahman is conceived: 
of as the Divine Father, or the Divine Mother, or as the 


. Eternal One, wrapt in Meditation, or as the Terrible One, the 


Personification of Infinite Force, or as the Preserver, or the 
Destroyer, or the Creator, or as a Divine Incarnation. The 


_ Incarnation is the God-Man who realises and preaches the 


state or consciousness of Brahman; He is God born as Man. 
There are in Hinduism innumerable Gods, or visualisations 
of Brahman which the human mind has made unto itself, 
but underlying the apparent polytheism is.a great monothe- 
ism, and ultimately a spiritual monism. In the end, as 


' every Hindu knows, all these seemingly different Deities are 
. one, first because they are manifestations of the One and Same 


Reality, and secondly because they represent the conscious- 


’ ness of Brahman in different aspects. So there is, ultimately, 
even only One Personal God. All the Gods are One Person in 


that they have the same Divine Consciousness and because 
all ave Brahman. But there is stilla higher purpose. The 
majority of men recognise the Personal God in their own parti~ 
cular objectification of Brahman. It may be Krishna, or 
Buddha, or Rama, or Chaitanya, even as with the Christians. 
it is Jesus the Christ. There is no clash in religion in India, 
however varied the religious belief or worship. Instinctively 
every Hindu worships all the Gods, bowing to the Great Ideal 
of which each one is the separate embodiment. He sees the 
underlying oneness and unity of all the Gods, recognising 
Brahman in them all. It is a racial characteristic, a racial in- 
heritance. The eclectic vision is peculiarly Hindu i in the 


IDEALS IN HINDUISM. 219. 


‘understanding of religion. Thus every God jn Hinduism. 
“represents aspects and symbols of the One Eternal 
Reality. 

Therefore, in India, polytheism is the highest monism in the 
essence, The many forms of henotheism, or the deification of 
any one representation of Brahman as the Supreme Personal 
God, is also, as a consequence, monism in the essence. And 
monotheism itself becomes a spiritual monism, for eventually 
the individual soul finds that its own reality is the same- 
as that of the God worshipped. Whom, then, to worship ?— 
asks the Hindu. He says that the worshipper and the 
worshipped and the Ideal of worship, and all the Gods and all 
souls are One. It is because of this unifying and supreme 
outlook of the Vedanta that the devotee can sincerely worship 
all the Gods, or take any one God as his chosen Ideal, or 
worship the Impersonal Brahman within his own soul, with: 
equal assurance that all religions and all religious philosophies 
lead to the self-same goal, Thus India, seemingly so diver- 
ified in religious belief, tradition and custom, is one in this: 
great thought. Even a stone, the Hindu says, has the 
Divine Substance. 

The final conclusion of the Vedanta is that all these Gods 
are visions and personifications, created by the soul itself, of 
Brahman. All stand for various torch-light ideas of the human 
mind, As man develops, his conceptions of the Gods grow. 
The Gods do not change. Brahman is ever the same, It is man 
who changes, it is man who grows, Finally the soul, in its most 
luminous insight, discovers that even as all great ideas are- 
aspects of oneall-including truth,even so are the Personal Gods 
manifestations of the same Divine Nature and Consciousness. 


All external forms of divinity are superimpositions by the- 


inner divinity of the soul upon the special vision it entertains 
at any given time. Ultimately all superimpositions die out. 
Ultimately all the Gods merge in their trae nature, the ‘One. 
and Indixisible. Only Brahman, only Reality remains. 
And the G\ds are Brahman, and ‘the soul is Brahman and 
tenth ic Reahman. Verily. the universe is Brahman. And 


220 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


all paths, however diversified in the religious idea and wor- 
ship, lead to the same goal,—Brahman, 

Noren, as the Swami Vivekananda, realised this and on 
one occasion when asked if the Gods were real, said, “I be- 
lieve in Brahman and the Gods”! As tothe relative reality 
of the Gods, he said that these were real because Brahman is 
real, and that they could be seen, even as the saints 
have seen them. But this must be treated later on in 
a psychological manner, explaining how a great idea, 
intensely held in mind, gradually visualises and objectifies 
itself to the thinker, even as the discovery of the 
scientist is the theory embodied in actual vision, through the 
instrumentality of his test-tubes and measurements. 

The Gods are real, also, because they are spiritual images, 
or “Logoi” of Brahman. The Pure Idea, the Word, 
of Brahman which they represent, is real in the deepest 
sense, The Pure Idea becomes objectified to the devotee in 
ecstatic vision, or becomes incarnate amongst men, as Saviour 
and Redeemer. The Logos or Word appears as Flesh. That 
is, it assumes ideal or actual embodiment. And according 
to the development of the spiritual ideas and vision possessed 
by each soul, does it approach the dignity and divinity of be- 
coming itself a Logos or Word of that Godhead which is 
Brahman. The method of realisation is through a process 
of becoming, through a constant enlargement of vision, until 
the moment dawns when the individual soul realises itself as 
an Image or Logos or Word or Pure Idea of Brahman. The 
next step is that of the Zogos merging in Brahman. 

The objective characteristics of earthly life, the words and 
thoughts and deeds, in the transition between birth and death, 
—are translated into the tendency of personality for the re- 
projection of consciousness in future incarnation, whether on 
this earth or elsewhere. As man approaches the conscious: 
ness of reality through @ constant purification of thought, 
desire and action, he approximates the condition * a Logos. 
When the goal has been attained, as the Buddha an# the Christ 
attained it, the individual sou) {s itself che Word sade Flesh. 





IDEALS IN HINDUISM. 22 


-It stands before mankind as the Incarnation. There is an 
Ideal Unit Individuality which each soul is trying to express. 
Having expressed it, it becomes Divinity. In the constant 
transfiguration of personality through repeated existences is 
the end reached. The conscious act of the past is transmu- 
ted into the instinct of the future. After all, instinct is sub- 
conscious memory. Through the purification of instinct by 
the efforts of the conscious mind the goal is attained. Such is. 
the process of the soul’s realising itself as a Logos or Aspect: 
of Reality,_verily, as Brahman. 

In this sense all religions are equally methods for the attain- 
ment of Suprme Realisation. Religion is to be judged, not from 
a point of view of organisation, or of any outward symbols, 
ceremonials or forms, or established theology. Religion is a 
condition of consciousness, a state of spiritual awareness on 
the part of personality. It is purely subjective. It is inner 
illumination. So it is understood in India. The religious. 
organisation is only a social phenomenon ; it isa method, a 
means to anend. And, as a social phenomenon, it is subject 
to change and to betterment, Regarded in this light, the 
religion of each nation is best suited to its peculiar racial 
temperament and inheritance. Such is the liberality of the 
Hindu point of view wherein no intolerance or persecution 
is to be found. 

Kamakrishna was the first human soul to detect this eclec- 
tic value in his own personal spiritual insight. He under- 
stood it, not as theory , but as vision and realisation. Noren, 
the foremost of his disciples, preached this message of his 
master when he became the Swami Vivekananda. He told 
Christians that Christianity was their path, and that Jesus 
the Christ was actually God incarnate, being of the reality 
of Brahman. The present interpretation is wrong. Christ 
was not only the Son of God, but verily He 1s-God Himself. 

‘In worshipping Him one worships the Brahman. In 

: Brahman, “he One Self of all things, all personality soars 

into Real “ndividuality, Assa visualisation of Brahman, 


Py ee a ee ae Pe Te ae ee TS ‘Are 





222 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


per. He zs the Father and whosoever realises Him, verily 
becomes the Father. Verily he becomes Brahman. And so 
is it true of Rama and Sri Krishna, of Chaitanya and of 
Buddha and Zarathustra, and of Mohammed and Saint Francis 
of Assisi and of all the other glorious spiritual personalities 
which have been made manifest unto man. There may bea 
confusion of tongues with regard to the details and accu- 
racy of their lives from an historic point of view. But as 
visions of truth their existence is not to be questioned. In the 
human mind they still dwell, more intensely than any historic 
personality. They have become identified, above all per- 
sonality, with the ideal that has been built up about their 
names. Each person must be spoken to in his own religious 
language, as it were. Jesus for the Christians, Rama, 
Krishna and the glorious many other Hindu Incarnations 
for the Hindus, Mohammed for the Mohammedans, This was 
the conviction of the Swami Vivekananda, It was likewise his 
message, and that it happened to be so was because he had 
sat at the Feet of Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, the Syn- 
thesis of all religious and mystical consciousness. How 
this liberal spirit was transmitted to Noren will be heard of 
in his wonderful relationship with the Master. 

This ideal of the Vedanta must spread. Such was Sri 
Ramakrishna’s message to the world as fireached by the 
Swami Vivekananda. The oneness of all religions would 
then be recognised, Then all religions of the world would 
live side by side even as they do in India; all would wel- 
come the ideals of the others. All would be understood as 
separate methods for seeing the same vision. In this syn- 
thesis all religions would be one, all worshippers, worshippers 
of the same Divine Reality, and true brotherhood would 
come to pass, Sectarianism would die out. All the Sons 
of Man would be seen equally, in the same religious and 
spiritual illumination, as Radiant Visions of Brahman. 
“Who attains to this consciousness «is erate than the 
greatest,” say the Upanishads. 


it fee iteste. Fi Nees 


IDEALS IN HINDUISM. 223 


‘experience and custom and thought. Freedom is the goal, 
freedom from all limitations, even from the limitation of 
life itself In Hinduism the goal of both religion and 
society is one. With the Hindus life itself is religion. The 
social customs are guided by religious injunctions, and are 
ceminders of spiritual verities. Behind each custom, like 
the meaning behind a word, is the religious intention, either 
conscious or instinctive. And the intention is always the 
realisation of higher aspects and stages of reality, all point- 
ing, ultimately, to That which is Brahman. 

Vedantism has been spoken of by those of surface ways 
of thinking as pessimism. In reality what higher motive 
of life can there be for work and for the making of personal 
character and realisation than the thought that all this is 
Brahman, that the world, though unreal, is the temporary 
play-ground for the expressions of the ideals and purposes 
of the Most High? In this attitude of mind and heart, 
life and death lose their separate and terrible distinctions 
and become luminous radiations of that effulgence which is the 
Highest Divinity. One works then without personal attachment, 
because the work and the motive for work, and the worker are 
all the same Brahman, One sees the increasing progress of 
all human’ aspiration and human realisation as a constant 
‘approximation to that exalted state,—which is Brahman,— 
where all dreams end, where all desire is lost in the ocean of 
realisation, and where Subject and Object are one. 

From this it will be seen that all the apparent diversity in 
Hinduism is united into one complex and yet harmonious 
whole by this sublime ideal of Brahman. That throughout is 
the unity of Hinduism. As a spiritual organism Hinduism 
possesses the most perfect sense of oneness and unity the 
world has ever seen. The spiritual organism which is 
Hinduism, is the background of the Hindu national life, 
Therefore, though seemingly such a” vast heterogeneous 
phenomenoty Hinduism is socially and religiously a unity 
throughout tls Indian peninsula, % 


sf a ee i, | ee a ee Se ee 


224 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


much thought and much experience. It comes with the 
spirit of unprejudicedness and a real sincerity in the effort 
- to understand. One needs. enter in this matter into the’ 
very core of Hinduism, by making the life of the people a. 
study and a realisation, For, as has been said, the philos- 
ophy of the Hindus is the utterance of their social exis- 
tence, One must see it in this light, otherwise one misses 
the point of view. Seen through a wrong or provincial 
perspective, Hinduism is likely to appear as a mass of in- 
coherent polytheism and as a disorganised social body. It 
was through a distorted angle that Noren saw Hinduism 
when he. had become a Brahmo and when his mind had 
become Westernised by the exclusive study of the Western 
social and educational methods. 

Byt the perspective of Noren’s vision changed when he- 
came into contact with his Guru, Sri Ramakrishna. Natu- 
rally, it took some time and much loving patience on the part 
of the Master to train his disciple out of all his preconceived - 
views into the true, real understanding. It was a struggle 
‘between the two souls, that of the Master and that of the 
disciple. The intellect of Noren had to be convinced, It 
became convinced; and that is why Swami Vivekananda 
respected Sri Ramakrishna as the greatest intellect he had 
ever seen. For the Master had vanquished in him his Western 
egotistical consciousness of superiority over Hihdu civilisa- 
tion. He had shown to him that Hinduism had not 
sprung up all of a sudden, but that it was a great river 
of human and historic experience and reality, having its. 
source in the very dawn of civilisation, and that its culture” 
could match as equal, if not vastly superior, to any other. 
He made Noren realise that the very antiquity and the very 
mistakes of Hinduism guaranteed its historic expression and 
human accuracy and value. And as to the future, there is sure 

to be a renewal of ‘ancient glories. Noren, after much 
mental conflict with hig master, finally cane to accept. 
Hinduism as a glorious human reality, wheti.:r considered 


IDEALS IN HINDUISM. 225 


to himself. And ever afterwards, though he made repeated 
tests of the inherent values of Hinduism, and though he 
had travelled in most parts of the world and had studied the 
culture of many nations, he remained convinced, to the very 
end, that Hinduism had a message and a mission and that 
it represented certain invaluable and indispensable ideals for 
the improvement and Progress of the whole human race. 

But it was a great struggle to understand this, It was 
a matter of many strenuous days and months. It was an 
education through which Noren was compelled to pass at 
the Feet of his Master until the latter cast off the body and 
entered the Highest Reality. Even after that it was a 
constant personal study with him, a constant widening of 
vision, and a deeper and deeper insight. The spiritual 
realisation which is Hinduism Noren saw realistically 
personified in the life and character of Sti Ramakrishna, 
But he saw it only in gradual forms and in a graduating 
manner, At first he laughed at his spiritual teacher, Though 
he came to love him, it was only after years that he came 
to understand him. And the process of understanding his 
master became his own constant spiritual realisation and the 
birth of Neo-Hinduism in his thought. In order that this 
spiritual outlook be preserved, the Swami Vivekananda called 
for the reconstruction of Hinduism, as a society, the process 
being not from without, but from organic changes and 
gradual enlightenment from within. All reform must come, 
he felt assured, from an enlightened perception, a gradual 
education from the old and holy and once useful modes to 
the still holier forms to suit the modern requirements, It 
was because the spirit of Hinduism, which is its religion, and 
the body of Hinduism, which is its society, are so inseparably 
interwoven, and because of his contact with Sri Ramakrishna 
and his new view of Hinduism as a religion, that Noren 
became the champion of Hindu society as well, not, how- 
ever, as a reactionary, but as a master-architect who builds 
on a great scalétysing the best materials available, 

Ramakrishna and Vivekananda one in she: 





226 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


in their purport, it might be said, one even in their personal- 
ities, were the makers of the Hinduism of to-day,—a Hinduism 
without any apology, an aggressive, gloriously self-conscious 
Hinduism, whose Spirit is the Brahman of the Vedas and 
the Vedanta, and whose form is the nexus of growing 
Hindu life. The vision of Hinduism is fixed unalterably 
and invincibly in That Eternal which is Brahman. Each 
nation has contributed to the cause of human enlightenment. 
So long as it continues to do so it will stand, and when it 
fails to do so it will fall, And the Spirit of Hinduism fives 
immortal, because BRAHMAN is ETERNAL. 


XXXI 
THE MYSTICAL CONSCIOUSNESS, 


. Having understood and accepted the ideals in Hinduism, 
‘Noren began that weaving and colouring of spiritual self- 
‘consciousness about them, the heightening of which consti- 
‘tutes the mystical consciousness of Hinduism. Each moment 
in his spiritual training with his master, when he had under- 
‘stood or accepted any new aspect of Hinduism or the teach- 
ing of Sri Ramakrishna, it was at one and the same time an 
intellectual and spiritual illumination. With Noren the intellect- 
ual awareness of truth brought the religious and spiritual cons- 
ciousness of truth in its wake, His intellectual sincerity and 
his spiritual sincerity were one; therefore, his intellectual 
illumination and his spiritual illumination were contempora- 
neous growths in the making of that personality which was 
to be the Swami Vivekananda. : 

Before entering upon the subject of the mystical con- 
sciousness of Hinduism, as Possessed and interpreted by Sri 
Ramakrishna and his chief disciple, it is peremptorily 
essential to understand the term mysticism itself, And no 
better definition can be presented as regards both what it is 
and what it is not than to quote from the preface of 
“Mysticism,” a work mentioned in an earlier chapter, 

“One of the most abused words in the English language, 
it has been used in different and often mutually exclusive 
senses by religion, poetry, and philosophy : has been claimed 
as an excuse for every kind of occultism, for dilute transcen- 
dentalism, vapid symbolism, religious or aesthetic senti- 
mentality, and bad metaphysics, On the other hand, it has 
been freely employed as a term of contempt by those who 
have criticized these things... 

“... thoseXwho use the term ‘Mysticism’ are bound in 
self-defence to "explain what they mean by it, Broadly 
speaking, I understand it to be the expression of the innate 


228 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


tendency of the human ‘spirit towards complete harmony 
with the transcendental order; whatever be the theological 
formula under which that order is understood. This ten- 
dency, in great mystics, gradually captures the whole field 
of consciousness; it dominates their life: and, in the ex-. 
perience called ‘mystic union,’ attains its end. Whether: 
that end be called the God of Christianity, the World-soul 
of Pantheism, the Absolute of Philosophy, the desire to 
attain it and the movement towards it—so long as this is a 
genuine life-process and not an intellectual speculation—is. 
the proper subject of mysticism. I believe this movement 
to represent the true line of development of the highest form. 
of human consciousness.” 

Mysticism is, indeed, a life-process whereby what is purely 
theological or philosophical to the ordinary man, is trans-. 
muted into a glowing spiritual reality with one who is. 
possessed of the mystical consciousness. Ordinarily, philos- 
ophy is a speculation made'up of remarkably well-ordered 
guesses at truth,—for only so can they be called. They are 
cleverly balanced theories, subject, however, to dispute as to. 
their accuracy, and at all times open to debate. They are 
well-appointed and well-calculated diagrams of truth and 
reality. But more than that, they are nothing. To the 
mystic, philosophy becomes a statement of facts actually 
perceived through and subordinate to the medium of an 
illuminated consciousness, wherein pure abstract definitions. 
of truth are transformed into living, throbbing realities, 
fierce with meaning. To the mystic, philosophy becomes a 
great motive power for the awakening of the spiritual 
consciousness. To others, it is, for fhe most part, purely 
academic, having no power of stimulus in the arousing and 
response of consciousness, Unquestionably, the end of alk 
philosophical study should be a transfiguration of personality, 
the convictions of the mind becoming emotional possessions 
of consciousness. That is to say, to the mystic. the purpose 
emhodied in all philosophical enguiry ané finding, is that 


THE MYSTICAL CONSCIOUSNESS, 229 


‘transcend a purely intellectual understanding and become a 
State of awareness. Mysticism is a seeing, a hearing, a 
touching, a tasting, a complete consciousness of reality and 
truth, The whole personality takes part in the process, not 
only the mind, but the senses also. The sense faculties 
become developed beyond their normal functions in the 
Capacity to receive and interpret impressions, Truth appears 
to the mystic, not in the subjectivity of a highly developed 
intellectualism only ; it objectifies itself in his intense search 
for truth ; it reveals itself to the complete consciousness, The 
senses are no longer merely physical, but have become spiritual, 
in their functions, and serve in the spiritual transfiguration, be- 
‘coming the media for the realistic perception of truth. That 
which is truth and reality, in the world or beyond it, presses 
in upon personality in the same manner as the physical 
universe reveals its existence to the senses in the constant 
impact of vibration, and the whole personality is stimulated 
‘to response in this pressure. Truth and reality are as actual, 
one might say, as the physical world, even ‘more so, because of ' 
their very subjectivity, for, they compose the Divine Nature, 
They arouse and heighten the human faculties into an even: 
more than ordinary activity, and produce even greater and 
more intense excitations of consciousness, This condition of 
personality is known as the mystical consciousness, , 
Let it be remembered, however, that the final revelations 
of truth and reality are beyond any external perception ; they 
are finally not objective ; finally they do not express them- 
selves through the senses, even when these are most highly 
spiritualised. The average mystics perceive truth as the ordi- 
nary saints have done; that is, they behold their ideal as 
manifested outside their personality, as another entity or 
object, But the greatest, the: most exalted mystic passes over 
‘and transcends this objective form of perception, and in the 
Process of transcending, very frequently?aye, if not always, 
he doubts hisown mystical experience, but not in the agnos- 
tic sense. Histyery doubt is in itself"a sublimity of faith, for 
he believes that there is still a higher. a more subjective and 


230 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


spiritual perception of reality and truth. Then he gradually- 
attains the ultimate goal which is the summit of all personab 
realisation. Those manifold revelations which he previously 
perceived as outside himself, he finally comes to know in the: 
unit and highest spiritual experience as, verily, wzthzn himself 
as the substance of personality, and even beyond this, even as. 
the substance of Divine Life. From this exalted height he 
now understands the more objective revelations of truth to 
have been true and real, but only in degree. He sees that 
the visions which were his, of God and truth and reality, in. 
personified or manifold forms, were true, but in the climax of 
the spiritual consciousness all these objective manifestations 
merge in an all-overreaching and divine subjectivity. He who 
formerly, as the saint, saw God, verily now has become one 
with God. This is the Hindu interpretation of the mystical 
consciousness, and this the Hindu saints have spoken of as 
the Nirvikalpa-Samadhi, the highest of all spiritual realisations. 
The man has transcended the boundaries of human person- 
ality, which was only a phenomenon in the reaching of the 
goal. Real Individuality was the Divine Life for which he was. 
striving and which he has attained, and now he has merged - 
in the spiritual substance of all personality, This is the 
climax to whichall personality must reach in the fulfilment of 
the spiritual aspiration and in the attainment of that True 
Individuality which the Upanishads call Brahman, 

This lengthy explanation of the mystical consciousness, 
though in the nature of a digression, is nevertheless. essential 
in order to understand the coming stages in the evolution of 
Noren’s mystical experience. One will find him possessed 
of great revelations of truth in its objective forms, but then, 
strange to say, one finds him later on in a state of doubt with 
regard to these very experiences. For example, he doubts 
his own vision of Kali the Mother and of other Divine Forms. 
As has been said, hotvever, it was not the doubt of an agnos- 

‘tic, but that doubt whichis a sublimity of faith by which the 
soul reaches out for Final Things. Then, te, through the 


aw No Fore Pua Ts SPL EP hae. ay Se, Oe ee leas Ue 


THE MYSTICAL CONSCIOUSNESS. 231 


Realisation when but a youth. Thereafter, it was quite natural 
that he should hesitate to accept any objective revelations as 
ultimate definitions and perceptions of reality. That Realisa- 
tion lingered in the deeps of his consciousness ; and therefore, 
his mind always paused in accepting lesser revelations. Thus 
whenever he attained the summit of the spiritual consciousness, 
he surveyed all the past mystical experience which was his, 
from that great vantage-ground. Then he knew that af his 
personal realisations, whether of the least or the mightiest in 
point of character and description, were ¢yue. But in these 
moments of insight he commenced, in the deeper stages of 
meditation, to throw off all bonds. The last step was the 
triumphant re-awareness of his innermost nature and the 
divine reality of Nirvana which he entered, throwing off the 
body and all other objective characteristics of which his soul 
had been possessed. 

Without understanding this, the student of the life of the 
Swami Vivekananda and the ardent, unquestioning disciple 
might not comprehend how it came to pass that a man of 
such religious realisation as the Swami could ever doubt his 
own states of spiritual awareness, He doubted them, not as 
regards their own relative intrinsic value, but as ultimate per- 
ceptions of reality. In the same way, even Sri Ramakrishna 
doubted his own states of realisation. He mercilessly sur- 
veyed allof them. It was a divine dissatisfaction with him, 
for he demanded the Highest Truth ; he made great efforts 
to realise it ; aye, he bit the dust in his agony. Finally he 
attained it and was one with God. But on the road to this 
great attainmént, and when in the midst of his great. doubt- 
ing and struggle for higher realisation, he said to some rich 
Marwaris who held him in great respect and to whom his 
nephew Hridoy was praising him, “Sirs, pay no attention 
to what this man tells you. He wishes to impress you with 
my spirituality so that you will favour me with riches ; in 
truth Iam, @s you see, a madman.” Was ever a religious 
teacher so Shigere with himself! Was ever a human being 


peeweered le ae” Based dt “Tina tka utile ec. bbe coke decal See ae be: 


232 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


analyser of his own states of mind! It was because of this keen 
struggle and the realisation which it brought forth that his 
words were as priceless treasures, They rang with a 
triumphant spirit. One was sure that he could’tell no -lies, 
that he exaggerated nothing, that he was possessed of no 
spiritual egotism, and that he cared nothing for the position 
of a great spiritual teacher. And thus one hears him say 
with marvellous insight and with tremendous sincerity, that 
when the lotus of the spiritual consciousness is in full blossom 
the bees, that is, souls who are eager and sincere seekers of 
Spiritual truth, will come of themselves, And in his case this 
proved to be overwhelmingly and gloriously true. Now Sri 
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa is recognised as an Avatara, or 
Incarnation of the Most High, by hundreds of thousands ; 
and millions have heard of him and bow down to him as 
the Saviour of souls. 

The same doubts, the same persistency in the effort to 
realise the Highest Consciousness, in its purely subjective 
essence beyond all relative visions and objective forms of 
revelation, are to be found in all great religious experience, 
They are witnessed in the narrative of Jesus the Christ and 
that of Gautama the Buddha, Even they had their moments 
when they threw overboard, as it were, all lesser stages of 
realisation, passing through the Valley of Doubt upwards and 
upwards to the Mountain Heights of God. The story of 
Mara, the tempter of Buddha, and that of the Evil One, the 
tempter of Christ, tells, under a popular symbolism, the 
struggles of every soul in the vanquishing of all doubt and 
spiritual obstacles on its way to Highest Realisation. 

Every soul has a.tendency towards the mystical conscious- 
ness. It may be expressed in one mood or another, but it is 
always there. It may be clouded over by the matter-of-fact 
education the mind undergoes in childhood or in youth, or by 
the matter-of-fact outlook on life to which one has come, by 
way of experience and environment. This tendency is dor- 
mant in the most unimaginative, It is semi-cgriscious in the 


THE MYSTICAL CONSCIOUSNESS. 233 


‘comes manifest even to these of ordinary type, in all those 
‘super-normal outbursts of feeling or insight that come in 
unusual moments of their life. It is faintly discernible in the 
‘deeps of every man’s life; but it is developed fully in the 
personality of the saint and seer. Even knowledge is only a 
process in feeling. The discovery of truth is never purely 
intellectual ; in the end, it is always the triumph of the /ee/- 
ing for reality ; in the end, it is not the outcome of thought, 
‘but of vision, The intellectual consciousness is only a re- 
fraction of a deeper awareness, and when it attains its high- 
‘est function it bursts forth as the sure vision, the unmistak- 
able consciousness and feeling of reality. When the philos- 
‘opher’s vision is deepest, he no longer ¢hinks, He sees, Raphael 
meditating day after day on the glory of the Blessed Virgin, 
sees, in the state of dream, that radiant vision which he inter- 
prets on canvas as the Sistine Madonna. The meditation 
‘sank into the deeps of consciousness as vision, re-emerging as 
‘creative faculty in art. But then, so it is said, Raphael always 
painted on his knees, 
All this must be borne in mind in the study of Noren’s 
career, following his joining the Brahmo Samaj. Henceforth 
_ he is the mystic-in-the-making. Clearly examining his 
‘mental struggle through this long period, one finds that it is, 
after all, only the rumbling on the surface of the sea of his 
personality. It was the tempest of thought thrown to the sur- 
face by the strong undercurrents of his yearning for truth, It 
‘was because this state of the soul agitated him so impetuously 
that he broke loose from the moorings of early belief. He 
was without any guide to give him the direction, and yet 
somehow he was a born sailor on the ocean of that struggle 
for reality. Though he had now lost the compass of belief, 
and though the struggle to know became literal anguish, yet 
he felt sure that all would be well. That impetuous onrush 
within him of the sailor's instinct for thé port, prevented him 
from going astray and brought him to the shore of knowl- 
edge whose landing-place is everlasting reality. 


Se ae af 


234 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


silence the questionings of his mind. He did not whip off 
the promptings of a righteous doubt with the lash of a 
fanatic creed. Open, open was his soul to all that might come 
in. In it first came darkness, appalling darkness, inten~ 
sified by anguish. But unlike most men, Noren did not 
light the lamps of desire and rest content in a worldly con- 
ception of life. He attempted to see even in the darkness ; 
and at last when it was darkest, he began to see truth as one 
vaguely sees some undefined object in the dark. He was 
hopeful, But that did not satisfy him; he demanded that 
actual vision must come. 

Thus all along the mystical consciousness obsessed Noren. 
The more he struggled against it, the more insistently it 
arose within the silence of his soul, and even at that very 
time when the mind appeared to have succeeded in over- 
throwing the religious tendency, Added to the struggle of 
the mind he received the blows of much worldly misfortune, 
which falling upon one generally blunt, if not fatally stun, 
the intuitional sense. The student of the Swami Viveka- 
nanda’s life thus catches a glimpse of the depth of the 
mystical tendency in his nature and, also, of its struggle for 
expression. If tendency is the reflection of former efforts, 
how great were the efforts which his soul must have made in 
the past. When ultimately he came out of the darkness in- 
to the glory of the divine light, then That which he had 
alternately thought upon with such anguish and such ecstasy, 
became for him the spiritual vision, The mystical conscious- 
ness is always born of the greatest struggle. He who recog- 
nises the fast of the personality of the emotional saint, 
fathoms the intellectual struggle that the soul of such must 
have known anterior to its present conformation of conscious~ 
ness, . 

To the mystic-who-is-to-be, the longing for truth is a bur- 
ning desire, a consuming passion. It is the certain foreshadow- 
ing, as well, of the realisation and the vision which are-to come. 
It is not unreasonable, then, that the thouglets 5 of the mystic 


THE MYSTICAL CONSCIOUSNESS. 235 


forms perceived by the sage. That thought becomes visu- 
alised to the thinker is no longer considered strange. It is 
now a well-known phenomenon for the study of the ad- 
vanced psychologist, who no longer wonders at the so-called 
marvels of telepathy, thought-projection, hyperzsthesia,. 
hyperkinesis, auto-suggestion, self-cure, and so forth. In 
the realm of science, the discovery made by the intellect 
fashions itself into the scientific test, the sure proof. Is it any 
stranger, then, that the longing for truth, the intellectual 
discovery of truth, felt and realised by the saint, should 
express itself in some wonderful mode of spiritual or height- 
ened human perception than that the test instrument and 
discovery of the scientist be the result of his penetrating 
search into the heart of the material universe ? 

This makes it comprehensible why Noren, the intellec- 
tual genius, should have become the mystic, and why the 
intellectual states of his mind should pass into states. 
of intense feeling. This explains why he became a spiritual 
genius and a seer of the forms of truth. Aye, the whole 
substance of truth, which man dreams of as God, or as the 
Highest Reality, pressing through the channels of an en- 
lightened intelligence as philosophical verity, may burst 
suddenly upon the soul, in those heightened and quickened 
states of consciousness called ecstasy, as the very Vision of 
God, or as the Awareness of the Highest Self. 

The mystical consciousness constantly pressed upon Noren 
for expression, As a member of the Brahmo Samaj he felt 
himself comparatively free and relieved from that turmoil. of 
thought he had undergone. Still, the gospel proclaimed by 
its leaders though monotheistic and profoundly intellectual, 
did not fully satisfy that burning thirst he possessed for the 
actual awareness of Reality. 

Hereafter, Noren’s life is that of the saint-in-the-making: 
It is no longer his mind to which one pays unfaltering atten- 
tion, though: it becomes more and more luminous as the- 
years grow ; itis his heart, hig very soul, his vision that 


S¢e0. eee ee | ee: ae, 





236 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


‘towards the fullness of its expression. Previously its radiance 
was as that of the crescent moon, the dark side standing in 
relief, This was the doubting period of his intellectual self. 
But a time was coming when the whole orb of his soul was 
to shine forth with the radiance and glory of the full moon, 
He was to attain unto the very highest possibilities of the 
mystical consciousness, wherein the soul and the Supreme 
Reality were revealed ‘as a perfect and indistinguishable unity. 
In that imperious question of his soul, “Mahashaya, have 
-you seen God ?” spoken by Noren to the Maharshi Debendra 
Nath, there is noticed the dawn of the mystical consciousness. 
Before that event it was the night of the soul in which 
the intellect ruled and doubt was supreme; but even then 
were heard, though faintly so, the footsteps of an approach- 
ing dawn. And that dawn grew into the day of glorious 
‘vision in a garden some distance from Calcutta in the efful- 
gent presence of Sri Ramakrishna, the Sun of Truth. 
Hereafter, one witnesses a curious admixture of the saint 
who desires uttermost abandonment to his ideal, and the 
philosopher desiring to test each vision with the analytical 
power of an awakened mind. Now is heard the voice of 
ecstasy, and then the voice of the severe intellectual analysis. 
Even until the end Noren scrutinised, but this made him.all 
the surer, all the deeper, all the more convinced. Sinking the 
plummet of analysis deep into the ocean of his soul, he found 
‘that realisation was ever beyond the boundaries of the mind. 
In this fashion he likewise tested Sri Ramakrishna himself, 
and in the end came to revere him all the more for that. 
Noren became more and more satisfied with, his spiritual 
growth, That his mind came to this rich maturity was un- 
doubtedly due to that period of stress and pain he had gone 
through, in which the gold of his soul was cleansed from all 
-dross of superstition and fanatical blindness of faith in ‘the 
hottest fires of tribulation and unrest. Ever in search for 
reality, Noren’s intellectual quest for truth alwayg kept pace 
with the magnitude of his spiritual realisation. a Realising the 


THE MYSTICAL CONSCIOUSNESS. 237 


process, he always allowed the loophole of intellectual 
freedom for himself and later on for his disciples, saying that. 
whatever he realised as truth to-day he would change if he 
was blessed with a higher vision on the morrow. He was. 
the saint and devotee,—but the saintly temperament which 
sometimes grows fanatic, he controlled by the power of dis- 
crimination. For his was not only the illuminated heart,. 
but the illuminated intelligence as well. 

He saw all that the saint sees, and knew all that the saint 
knows. He had the saint’s visions, and as such he heard 
voices coming from afar. He sang with the singer in 
praise of the Lord and danced with the devotees in religious 
joy. He revelled in the ecstasies of the saint, and yet, in the 
firmament of his personal World, was the sun of a luminous. 
intelligence that made the saint in him, aye, the seer as well. 
He had not only the Dualist’s vision of God and the soul as 
wonderful but separate realities. He was also possessed of’ 
the Advaita Vedantin’s vision of the Supreme Self, the 
Brahman, in each and every soul. He saw Divinity as both 
Personal and Impersonal, and this was because as the back- 
ground of his realisation was the monistic idea of the 
Vedanta that all is God. The Vedanta maintains that the. 
sense of “I” is an error, that the world is a dream, that only 
the real Self, which is Absolute Knowledge, Blessedness, 
Existence.and Peace, reigns, and that only God is. Pondering 
for years in the presence of Sri Ramakrishna and thereafter, 
throughout his lifetime meditating within the solitude of* 
himself, the monistic dea became with Noren the vivid and 
veritable consciousness of the monistic Reality. 

And yet he knew the Dualist’s beatitude, the beatitude of’ 
the worshipper in his God. He denied no spiritual ex- 
perience, for he embodied’ in himself the synthesis of the 
mystical consciousness, even as his Master, rising into exalta- . 
tion at the very Name of God, and yet, rising higher and 
still higher,sinto that Silence which is God, where the Self is. 
seen in God, where the Self is vealised as God, the Sole- 


-238 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


Formless and Eternal, where intelligence soars beyond 
thought, the region of Nirvana into which the soul enters in 
the climax of attainment. This is Mukti, the essence of all 
freedom, into the peace and endless beatitude of which the 
soul, liberated from all fetters, soars at last. Then the body- 
idea has gone; then even the mind-idea has gone, The soul 
is seen as the Soul, Verily, then only Reality zs 


XXXII 
RAMAKRISHNA—KALI—BRAHMAN. 


As the one sun, though reflected in innumerable pools of 
‘water, is still the same sun, even so is Brahman, though rep- 
resented under innumerable and widely varied forms which 
are the Gods, still the one and Same Brahman. Thus all the 
‘Gods are complmentary, the idea of one inferring the idea of 

vanother, the worship of one involving the worship of the 
others, 

In the early dawn of the spiritual life, the philosophical 
temperament becomes conscious of the Gods, as the embodi- 
ments of great ideas. At least in the instance of Noren this 
was true, According to philosophical Hinduism, the Gods 
are representations of eternal realities, and they dwell in the 
‘consciousness of mankind as spiritual entities, The mind 
transcending its ordinary functioning through the power of 
intense concentration, sees these idea] existences as the forms 
of truth, And each genuine life-process is a method in seeing, 
for the intellect is possessed of the faculty of subjective 
vision, Otherwise, how could any truth be discovered ? 
The mind perceives certain aspects of a body of reality, 
which are as objective to the‘subjective vision as physical 
objects are to physical sight. In the language of Hinduism 
the forms and aspects of truth ave the Gods. Through the 
expansion of the philosophical vision, the Hindu philosopher 
becomes the saint; through the perspective of a fully 
‘developed intellect, the Hindu devotee sees the Gods as great 
motive powers for the spiritual awakening and the deification 
of human nature. He perceives them as inciting forces to a 
development of the moral sense and the cherishing of 
spiritual ideals. He sees them as the spiritual forces which 
stimulate personality to a reaching out beyond itself. In 
short, to thé philosophic mystic, thé Gods are, in one sense, 


Pe aes Poe ee yt Sane Aer er Very 


240 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


In India where the general understanding fa. matters of 
religion is by no means of an inferior character, the large 
majority of the people instinctively accept the Gods as they 
are understood philosophically, that is to say, as mani- 
festations of Brahman. The Puranas, the Hindu treatises 
concerning the Gods, are replete with grand conceptions of” 
deity.. The Gods are herein described as manifestations of” 
truth, verily as truth itself. From their very infancy the 
Hindus are brought up on this Pouranic culture. Thus they 
breathe in, as it were, the highest notions of divinity at that: 
age when the mind is most formative and receptive to im- 
pressions. They look upon the Gods as the saving powers, 
assisting the devotee out of the prison-house of the world 
into the great beatitude and freedom of the Divine Conscious- 
ness. The Hindus understand that, even as there are numer- _ 
ous great ideas and numerous phases and representations of 
reality and truth, even so there are numerous Gods ; aye, and 
that every human soul is a God-in-the-making. The un- 
observant critic cries, “Polytheism,” not comprehending the 
assembly of ideas which are back of the images and symbols. 
To the Hindu mind all great ideas exist, before their dis- 

’ covery, as Living Parts of the Real, and are thus eternal. 
For this reason the Hindu sp@aks of his Scriptures and of the 
Gods as eternal. They are a great grouping-together of” 
eternal verities, to be realised in definite and concrete forms. 

In worshipping the Gods, it may: be that the ideas and. 
spiritual verities of which they are names and forms, are best 
brought home to the understanding of the masses. As stated 
elsewhere each God becomes gradually endowed, in the 
popular mind, with the highest conception of divinity ; that 
is, it is recognised as Brahman. In this manner the Gods are 
seen to be the aspects of the illuminated spiritual conscious-. 
ness, and thus embody the core and substance of realisation. 
which arises in the intensity of meditation. The method 
may be either emotional or intellectual. It is all the same. 
Intensified, either in thought or in feeling, the idea of which 
the Cod ic the ideal entity is actual to spiritual perception. 


"“RAMAKRISHNA—KALI—BRAHMAN. 241 


taking formin’ the creative power of the deVotee’s aspiration. 
Verily, truth is only truth’ as it is seen, felt, realised, ex- 
perienced and known. In the , transfigured consciousnéss, 
reality is no longer of an intellectual nature; it is wey itis 
experiénce ; it is a seeing ; it is visible embodiment.” ae 

Thusjit becomes apparent why Sri Ramakrishna told:Noren ° 
that he had sex God. His consciousness had soared’. aloft: 


in a wonderfiil resjionse to the fdea, until his intensified - 


vision saw, beyond the Igea, the Divine Reality Itself, The: 
various facilties through which personality is’ specialised, - 
such as séeing, hearing, touching, had in his cas& takért ‘part 
in a divine transmutation of idea into consciousneés, .. He 
truly'saw God. * 
“” Thus was Sri Ramakrishna the living embodiment of the 
miysti¢al’ consciousness, The Hindu methods of visualising 
Brahman or Absolute Truth are many and varied. Sri Rama- 
krishna had set himself to the task of realising all of them. 
He succeeded, but only after prodigious effort. Because of 
his own difficulties in the way of realisation, the Master was 
patient with his disciple. He was even more loving to 
Noren when he found him challenging his realisations as 
hallucinations, Sri Ramakrishna lived in the world of divine 
forms, and he had trained his mind in the immediate; per- 
ception, of spiritual verities. He was a theist, polythéist “ 
and amonist. He had realised the Gods as manifestations of 
Brahman, He had seen them merge in a higher condition of 
reality, where perception is one and the vision is of Brahman, 
He had come to know his own soul in the light of ‘the 
Supreme Existence and had forgotten his own pefSonality. 
He was always conscious of Brahman, either in Its Divine 
Manifestations, or within Its Own Nature, of through the 
Radiance and Glorified Nothingness of his own personality, | 
What tempest and transports of ecstasy, what exalted 
States were with him constantly ! ‘Yo him Samadhi was a 
natural state. He was more than the ordinary Hindu saint, 
He had taken supon himself the whole task of realisation, 
He had transcended personality, so that *he regarded himself 
16 


’ 


242 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


as the Sori of God, the Child of the Mother, the Image of 
Brahman. He saw Brahman in all those personal forms 
under which the Divinity fs conceived ef and worshipped by 
the Hindus. Not alone that. In the rapturous exeltation of 
vision, his spiritual sight took in creeds and Gods foreign 
to the consciousness Of the Hindu. He bécame the Moham- 
medan to realise Allah, and he became the Christian to 
realise Christ. “ 

Srf Ramakrishna was a Seer. He had also like 
Noren passed through a tempest of thought, but not of 
that intellectual type which had characterised his disciple’s 
growth, Sri Ramakrishna’s was a tempest of soul, In his 
agony to see God’he brought upon himself serious physical 
affliction. He. was the ascetic among ascetics, Hé bit the 
very dust of théearth in his inspeakable angdish td see God! 
His véalisation was the outcome of unknown and incommu- 
nicable worlds of pain. Therefore he understood arid loved 
Nortn the deeper. He saw that Noren’s intellect would 
always doubt, because of his very impetuesity for truth. 
But he‘afso saw that Noren’s soul would conquep ithe end. 
It would transform the intellect into the illumirtation which 
comes avhen the Self knows the Self, as the Vedas say. 
Sri Ramakrishna knew that Noren would transcend all 
limitations and throw overboard all the elements of worldly 
consciousness. He would become a spiritual giant, a master 
of the spiritual consciousness. This, however, was to come 
only in time and after great struggle. Then, indeed, all 
doubts "would be solved, and the realms and powers of the 
heart would open to view. Noren would then be aware 
that God és, not only in an intellectual sense, but spiritually, 
as well ; for he was literally to see God, and this ig infinitely 
more than knowledge. It is the insight in which all knowl- 
edge culminates. 

Sri Ramakrishria was a realist in the world of ideals. The 
ideal had become to him the real, in a transfigured sense. 


Truth and reality had literally possessed Him.” Even as man 
nae i a iS we ge ATs ata gifs kal tak the-casiene emusal 


RAMAKRISHNA—KALI—BRAHMAN, 243 


in concrete form, even so did Sri Ramakrishna reéalise in 
substance and in luminous actuality the whole body and 
spirit of’supreme reality. Had he not said to Noren, “I see 
God even in an intensely more real sense than I see you !” 
The speciality in the mystical consciousness of Sri Rama- 
krishna was what he called Kali, the Goddess whose emblem 
is death and destruction. To the Hindu She is the incar- 
nation of Time which engulfs all things. She is the form of 
Death which destroys all. Therefore, Her garlands area 
necklace of skulls, and the garment about Her loins is com- 
posed of severed arms, while in Her hand She holds a bleed- 
ing head. Her dance is the dance of destruction and Her 
shrine, the burning-ground, For the background of Her 
personality She has the night and the chaos of things. How 
weal ts the idea! Even so veal is She! How shocking the 
symbols which adorn Her! Vet, how true! As Noren -was 
later accustomed to say of Her, “They put garlands of flowers 
about Thee, O Thou Terrible One, and call Thee, @ my 
Mother, the Merciful!” He meant thereby that the majority 
dare not see,Kali as the Goddess of destruction, the Goddess 
of death, and so try to soften their idea of Her. The idea 
of Kali is one of the inevitable elements in the make-up of 
the mystical’consciousness. In one way or another the idea 
‘comes to the foreground in every religious system. And 
yet Kali is Brahman. For does not the idea of the Eternal 
tise in the mind when all ideas of the temporal and the 
mortal have. been crushed out! The hollowness and the 


terrible emptiness of things strike like a thunderbolt upon-” 


consciousness, and eternity rises above the destruction of 
time. When the Mother has danced the dance- of destruc- 
tion in the heart of Her devotee, Jo, only the consciousness 
of the Soul as. the Infinite Subject remains, That which is 
Brahman only remains. Thus Kali zs Brahman, By con- 
trast. She points to the reality of the Supreme Consciousness, 

Sri Ramgkrishna worshipped Kali as the Mother, and as 
Brahman. ‘He realised Her in Her terrible forms and also 


as the Blessedness and Bliss of Brahman, The Personal. | 


244 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


Kali became merged, in his realisation, in the Impersonal. 
To hin She was the Giver of Samadhi or superconscious. 
insight. 
To Sri Ramakrishna Kali, the Herald of Death, was also. 
- the Giver of Immortality. Aye, the Mbother gives death to 
the man of desires. She hurls the man of fame into the 
abyss of oblivion and exalts the humble and the meek. She- 
is the manifestation of the Eternal to Her devotee and is. 
called the Consort of the Lord of Yogins. Having seen Her 
in Her terrible forms, the mind longs for the Indestructible 
Consciousness of the Lord, who knows no dreams, who is. 
above ail pain and all the mirage of living, and who is beyond 
all thought and form. “Kali—Shiva ! Shiva—Kali ’ These- 
are one in the meaning of the Ideal which They represent. 
For this reason They are popularly regarded as husband and 
wife ; but to the philosophical devotee they are the embodi~ 
ment of the most exalted ideas to which the human mind can 
ever aspire. Shiva is the Pure Consciousness, free from alk 
ideas of body and from all bondage, and Kali, by Her: 
inscrutable terrors shows the changefulness and limita- 
tions of all dreams. She becomes Uma- Gouri-Haima- 
vati, All-tenderness and Divinity of Love personified to. 
him who throws overboard the warp and woof of sense 
and plunges through the seeming chaos and terrible- 
destruction which Her forms bear, into the Beatific Con; 
sciousness of Pure Divinity. Then the Mother reveals Her- 
self ag the Ocean of Reality, ‘whose Heart ig the throbbing 
of the Infinite Soul. In Her the saint sees the Expanse 
of the Infinite, the Akhanda Sat- Chit;Ananda, Existence- 
Absolute, Knowledge Absolute and Bliss Absolute... In 
Her the saint sees Shiva, the Eternal and Imperishable. 
The images reveal Her as most terrible, dancing on the body 
of Her Consort, Shiva. So She is to Her devotee until that 
moment when he i no longer in the bogdage of sense. 
Then She is the Beneficent One, the -Radiant Vision of’. 
Infinite Beauty and Beatitude y—and She, and Shiva are- 


RAMAKRISHNA——KALI—BRAHMAN. 245. 


Verily every human being is the son of the Mother. 
Verily is the whole universe come out of Her womb,- All 
‘are sons of Change, Time and Destruction. Blessed is he 
that realises Her who is the Weaver of Dreams, Then, 
dancing with the Mother, he dances through time into 
eternity, through death into immortality. 

This is the Grand Vision of Hinduism, Aye, it is the 
‘most glorious and unique possession of the Hindu religious 
consciousness. 

To Sri Ramakrishna all these were wonderful realities, 
He saw the Reality as the Infinite Mother. For him, Kali 
held the scales of life and death, and the keys of wisdom and 
ignoranée, At Her bidding the world begins the whirl of 
Creation, and at Her bidding it ends in destruction. Yet She 
is, also, Incommunicable Peace, Sri Ramakrishna saw the 
Mother in all things, He likewise realised Hef as the’ In- 
dwelling Divinity of all souls. The Spirit of the Mother 2s 
the Spirit of Shiva, Though Her aspects be change and 
time and death and destruction, She is the, Everlasting 
Reality of Shiva-Brahman, Sri Ramakrishna often became 
possessed by the Mother. His ideas of Her grew into such 
proportions of reality that the conscious mind gave way, 
and his soul shone forth as the Mother Herself. T.ost in 
Samadhi, his whole body stiff, his arms unconsciously took 
the form of Varabhaya, Sri Ramakrishna was one in whom 
vi spiritual powers of response were overwhelmingly sensi- 
ti¥e, Once: seeing a caged lion stalking up and down in 
the Zoological Gardens he entered into Samadhi, being 
carried away by» the thought thdt he had seen the king of 
animals on which the Mother rides, He realised the Ganges 
as a Form of the Mother, as Brakma-Véri, To him the 
living: waters bécame a vast and mighty Being, _ whose 
Self arose af the Feet of Shiva in the celestial regions 
of the Himalayan heights in eternal snows and merged 
in ‘the inffiite expanse of the sea. It was to kim a 
vision of the Mother playing Her part as a mighty power 
throughout the universe and then* plunging into the 


246 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


Great Sea of Eternity. The vastness of nature which 
man interprets in the wonders of speech and thought, 
became re-translated to Sri Ramakrishna as the Living 
Reality of Mother. To him the Mother was everywhere. 
Of what is embodied, She is the embodiment. Of what is 
ensouled, She is the ensoulment. She is the body ; She, 
the. mind, the thought, the soul. Of all, She is the 
Self! Beyond all and as all She dwells incarnate as the 
Active Power of Supreme Reality. “Brahman and Shakti 
are one,” as the Master would say, even as fire and its 
heat, even as the milk and its white liquidness, The One 
Reality when static is the Brahman, when active itis the 
Shakti, the Mother” Verily She is absolutely beyond all 
speech and thought. Verily She is the Brahman of the 
Vedas and the Vedanta. She is the Immanence of things, 
the perfume of the flower, the splendours of Orion, the Sout 
of the Gods, the Terror of the Asuras, the Essence of Peace, 
and the Supreme Bliss and Silence which is Brahman. 

At first Noren took this consciousness in Sri Ramakrishna 
to be hallucination ; then he found it to be illumination, 
Embodied in the ecstatic state, this realisation transformed 
Sri Ramakrishna into the Mother Herself—the dea, Kalt, and 
Consciousness, growing as a trinity into one single Truth. So 
great was the love of Sri Ramakrishna for Noren, so great 
his respect, also, for that innate insight which he perceived 
in him, that when the disciple doubted his realisations the 
Master, out of his simple and childlike nature, even went so 
far as to seriously question them and turned helplessly to 
the Mother Herself. And She showed himin a state of 
superconscious insight that all his realisations were true. 
Then did he turn to Noren, saying, “My Mother has shown 
me that your doubting is all foolishness and ignorance! My 
Mother has shown me the truth !” 

It was his experience with Sri Ramakrishna that made- 
Noren believe in Brahman and the Gods. And Frahman and 
the Gods, seen through the perspective of a pirified mind, are 


RAMAKRISHNA—KALI—BRAHMAN. 247 


Indeed, truth and all true ideas are but shadows of Brahman 
and the Gods, And as shadowS are lesser realities, even so 
are al} intellectual truths. Within the embodiment which 
throws these shadows of thought do Brahman and the Gods 
exist. And Sri Ramakrishna, who perceived these as men 
perceive the world of the senses about them, grew into their 
image and likeness. Above all, he became the Spirit which 
they are, the One, the Real. He himself became one with 
Kali the Mother—the Kali-Brahman. 

But Noren did not at first see this. So with al! the 
power of his intellectual self he combated the realisation 
of the Master until he was literally made to see. Then he 
became ve-Hinduised ; he became the disciple ; he became 
‘one with his Master’s ideals. Aye, he saw That which the 
Master saw. He saw the Brahman Itself, becoming himself 
the Seer, the Sage, the Saint, the Man of God. 


XXXHI 
THE DAKSHINESWAR KALI-BARHI. 


Rani Rashmoni was the munificent founder of the great 
Temple at Dakshineswar. She was the first lady of her 
caste. “Rani” signifies a queen, Her father gave her that 
name ; and rightly did he give it to her. She was not only 
a queen amongst her own people, but also a queen amongst 
women, Her heart was always open to the desires of her 
caste-people, amongst the poorest and the lowliest in the 
ranks of Hindu society. She was enormously rich, however ; 
and in this respect her lot differed much from the, people 
from whom she arose. But she always remembered them, 
She was very kind also to the poor. people at large, nbtably 
to those belonging to the fisherman caste, That certain parts 
of the river Ganges, in Calcutta, are open to them free of 
taxation is because she purchased these privileges at a great 
cost from the Government. She was throughly Hindu and 
Indian, filled with a great spirit and devoted to the aause of 
religion and the motherland. Her life shows to what - heights 
of character and spirit a woman of India can rise, even 
though she be hampered by social restrictions in a thousand . 
and one ways, 

Rani Rashmoni was also a great worshipper of Kali, the 
Divine Mother. To this day her love and devotion to ‘the 
Mother stand embodied in the famous, beautiful and splen- 
did Temple of Kali, some four miles distant from Calcutta, 
in the Gardens of Dakshineswar. The house stands near. by 
where she often lived so as to be near the Mother and see 
that the services to Her were rightly performed. Shé caused 
to be erected great kitchens in order that the Sadhus pad hun- 
dreds of the poor who Would come to worship might be pro- 
perly fed. After the consecyation of the Temples sz endowed 
them with a substantial. annual,income, Ary beur of the day ; 
the poor mav come anti be fed. Anv hdéur of the dav the 


THE DAKSHINESWAR. KALI-BARHI, 249 


devotee may come and worship and blessed, because she 
caused to be erected to the Divine Mother this wonderful 
Temple at Dakshineswar, 
A fortune was spent in the construction. Another for- 
“tune was used to purchase the large acreage which is now 
‘the spacious gardens. Another fortune was employed in 
building the long, solid embankment to keep the waters of 
‘the Ganges from washing away the grounds and even perhaps 
‘the Temple itself, as has so often happened in the sacred city 
of Benares, For some reason this embankment was swept 
away when it had hardly been finished. A still larger for- 
tune went towards its reconstruction. - 
Here, after the seat of the Mother had been beautified in 
every detail, came the Son of the Mother, Her devotee, Her : 
child, Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, whose personality was ' 
to fill the whole scene and even the Temple itself with won- 
derful and soul-stirring events. The KAli-barhi of Dakshin- 
eswar cannot now be dissociated from the personality of 
Sri Ramakrishna himself, even though his bodily pregence has 
vanished from mortal view. Here he preached when he had 
long since forgotten that there was ever such a person born 
and:knowrt as Ramakrishna and when he knew himself as 
living only as‘the instrument of the Mother. Farther than 
that he had gone in the soaring of his realisation, in which 
state he was one with the Mother, the Brahman. Heré he 
lived for a third of a century ; and marvellous’ is the tale 
of those days he spent in Dakshineswar. Here Noren came. 
Here:Noren attained illumination, and here he lost sight of 
‘that which each man considers so important—himself. Verily, 
Dakshineswar is a Tirtha, a place of pilgrimage, for here two 
souls have sten God revealed as the Mother 3 not alone in 
‘that. form, however, but in many other forms, as well; and, 
above afl,in and as their own souls, For at bottom only 
‘God zs,, When the individual soul” has merged in the~ 
Highest, ogly the Lord remains 4 The drop of water has 
‘gone back to it. nature ; it has abecogse thei ocean. To His 


250 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


needs and according to their understanding. Do they wor-.. 
ship Him as the Mother-Providence of the Universe, lo, even 

so does He appear unto them! Do they worship Him as- 

the Heavenly Father, verily, in that very manner does He 

come to them ! Do they worship Him as the Silent, Eternal 

Reality, dwelling within the secret places of the heart, aye, 

He appears to them therein as the Infinite Reality ! 

The tiny boats in which one must sit cross-legged on the- 
floor, take the devotees by sunlight or by moonlight and at 
any time to the landing-ghats at Dakshineswar. Sometimes 
the boat drifts with the incoming tide, Sometimes the- 
winds carry it thither when the sails are set, At other 
times, against the tides and winds, the boat speeds to 
Dakshineswar by the strong arms of the joyous boatmen. 
Otherwise, one takes a gavr? from the crowded bazaars of 
the big city, leaving behind him the tumultuous noise of mul- 
titudes of men, and approaches by the highway the peace of 
this sacred retreat, 

There the Temple stands, a massive edifice of oriental 
design, the centre rising into a tower of splendour with strange, 
symbolic spires pointing to the sky. It is grey with age and a 
dignity surrounds it with an atmosphere akin to a Venerable 
Presence before which one finds peace. To the right and left 
tise two structures of lesser proportions, one a temple of 
Vishnu, while the other is a Matya-mandir. The dwelling- 
house of Rani Rashmoni stands in the midst of the groves of 
Dakshineswar. The enclosed courtyard surrounding the 
Temple is, of itself, of enormous proportions. Here the great 
assemblies of devotees gather. On the western side of this: 
enclosure are the twelve shrines of Shiva, six to the one side. 
and six to the other of the great arched, tower-like portico 
entrance leading into the courtyard. And flanking and front 
ing the Shiva shrines is the broad footpath which runs from 
the landing-ghat into numerous avenues and side retreats, 
One walks for an hour aleng the river’s side and ip the mazes. 
of these. thoroughfares. : . ” : 


ie tie we ca 


THE DAKSHINESWAR KALI-BARHI. 25r 


India, Its gardens are admired by all who visit this celebra- 
ted place. They are not gardens so much as open Spaces in 
a great grove, for Dakshineswar is a grove, grown wild in. 
many places and filled with much romance in all its shaded 
retreats. For here some saint may have worshipped ; here- 
another may have had a great vision; here many disciples 
of Sri Ramakrishna have practised meditation and auster- 
ities. The whole place vibrates with a mystical and Spiritual 
fire. At the back of the Temple compound is a pool, sur- 
rounded by an avenue of trees which skirt the square into. 
which shape the pool is fashioned. 

Dakshineswar is known nowadays more as the place: 
where Sri Ramakrishna lived than because of its temples, 
Thousands make pilgrimage to the spot because of their love 
for him. Millions believe him to bean Avatara or an Incarna- 
tion of God. Many believe his personality to have been. 
worked-up by the Divine Mother for the special Purpose of 
giving forth a message of spirituality to a world grown old in 
a materialistic consciousness ; and, also, for the purpose of pre- 
serving Hinduism froma complete undermining by the- 
ingrowth of the so-called modern spirit. 

If the visiting pilgrims are watched, one sees them, after 
they have made their Prostrations before Mother Kaii, pass 
down the roadway that skirts the Ganges-side to a grand old 
tree, round which there is a broad seat raised in tiers for: 
meditation purposes. Here, under the spreading branches, 
Sri Ramakrishna, and later on Noren, thought of God until 
He became a Realisation to them. The tree is called the- 
“Panchavati,” that is, a cluster of five kinds of trees grown 
together. Here and there such clusters of trees held as 
sacred are to be found in India. In the Garden of Dakshin- 
eswar, the “Panchavati” numbers a great banyan-tree- 
among its group. After Sri Ramakrishna had finished his 
Sadhanas a large branch fell, covering that very spot on 
which he had sat in meditation and attained Ilvtaination, 


as if to Shelter 2 from all possible profanation. The seat of- 
a. ee er ee 7 


252 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


resting-place. Only two others were able to concentrate 
their minds under that same tree, one an Advaita Vedantin, 
Tota Puri by name,’ the guru of Sri Ramakrishna in the 
Advaita Vedanta, and the other,he who became known as 
the Swami Vivekananda. Tradition has it that the tree is 
protected, as it were, by a Bhairava, or a powerful spirit, who 
prevents any one who is not pure from meditating there. 
Even Tota Puri and Noren experienced great difficulty, so 
it is said, in concentrating of their minds on Reality there. 
Some powerful force seemed bent on driving them forth. 
In the case of Tota Puri Sri Ramakrishna intervened, for 
he had become the guru of his own guru in teaching him 
‘the true spirit of the Advaita which knows no fear or hatred. 
In the instance of Noren, however, it was different. Finding 
that something opposed him in his desire to centre his mind 
upon God, he took a flaming brand from the meditation-fire 
before him and struck the ground with such violence and 
with such intensity of emotion that he swooned. When 
he emerged from that state, however, he found that he 
could meditate with ease. Sri Ramakrishna, when he heard 
of the incident, smiled knowingly. 

A little distance from the Panchavati is another tree, 
a Bilva-tree, sacred to Shiva, which is now circumscribed 
by a seat. Buried underneath the seat of this tree; in the days 
of the saints, were five skulls, three of which were those of a 
monkey, a suicide and a notorious criminal. Skulls have 
often been objects upon which monks fixed their meditation, 
both in the East and in the West. In a particular form of 
worship in Hinduism, however, special skulls ate selected 
for the purpose of focussing such a power of thought that the 
mind rises upon it, beyond all the horrors of life, into the 
fearlessness which is the soul’s own essence. Sri Ramg- 
krishna meditated here also; so did Noren. Later, another 
man endeavoured to do that which the saints had done, and 
he became mad. He cowld not endure the forms‘which came 
in the course of the meditation upon the Tesible One, Who 





THE DAKSHINESWAR KALI-BARHI. 253. 


meditations also, for example, that performed by monks in 
the burning-grounds where the destroying flames burn the- 
body to ashes. Or, again, it may be that ten-timesterrible 
meditation when the monk, seated upon a “body newly dead, 
meditates upon Reality, in the darkest night of the dark fort- 
night, in a lonely spot,in an effort to vanquish all the forces of 
death and all the horrors and bondages both of life and death. 
The monk meditates on Death. Then he knows the Truth. 

These two trees are now venerated; and under their 
branches a great peace reigns. Along the river’s side one 
hears the murmur of the waters. Overhead is the canopy of 
trees, and through them at night the stars gleam in 
mysterious ways, And the mind recalls the poetry of that 
Hindu saying, “The stars are great souls, The effulgence is 
the light of their glorious meditation.” 

The silence and peace of God dwell at the Dakshineswar 
Temple-garden. The room is still to be seen there in which 
Sri Ramkrishna lived those long, long years. On the walls are- 
pictures of various Hindu Incarnations and also of Jesus the 
Christ. The atmosphere is still there. The days ‘are silent 
there. The nights dwell in peace there. And when the moon 
rises, one seems to see glorious forms that the day does not 
reveal, [n the temple is the Divine Mother, above both the. 
pleasant and the terrible aspects of life. The saint sees in 
Her an Ocean of Love which he calls the Mother, though 
the tumult of the surface be death and though across it 
blow the winds of the terrible. Terrible is life, terrible 
is joy to the saint. More real is death. More real, above 
all, is the Vision of the Mother, beyond both birth and 
death, That which is alone real is God, By the light of 
the moon one sees some devont monk telling his beads, 
or another plunged in meditation in a sequestered spot. 
One may hear, in the evening stillness, the echo of some 
holy séng as it is carried by the breezes over the river 
from the tiny boats in which the singers chant their lays, | 
On the opposite bank of the Gankes, a mile or so away 
to the‘south, is the Ramakrishnd monastery. 


XXXIV 


AT THE TOUCH OF THE MASTER. 


At that first meeting, when Noren met Sri Ramakrishna, 
more than two personalities were concerned. The complex 
life of India itself began to flow, as it were, in two definite 
streams of tendency,—the Old and the New, Of these there 
were many subordinate tributaries. Some had arisen in 
modern times, so far as the New was concerned, such as the 
Brabmo Samaj, the Arya Samaj and such other movements, 
while some had flowed from of Old, such as the orthodox 
faiths. But all these divergent and tributary currents were 
merging in those two great streams, as the history of the 
period attests. And when Sri Ramakrishna met Noren, 
these two, the Old and the New, found their confluence, and 
were thereafter to fow into an Historic Stream, as it were, — 
the Mighty Ganges of the Indian Future. 

Sri Ramakrishna was the Heart of Old India with its 
spiritual perspective, with its asceticism and with its reali- 
sation. Noren, who became the Swami Vivekananda, had 
that personality in the process of development which was 
to be the Heart of New India with the ancient spiritual pers- 
pective heightened, widened and strengthened to include the 
modern learning without any danger to itself; and the 
asceticism of the future was to be made manifest in sacrifice 
for the service of others. Its realisations . were to include 
social as well as religious ideals. From these two currents of 
influence was to spring Neo-Hinduism, the Faith of a 
Glorious To-morrow, in which ali should be fulfilment and 
nothing denial. 

From a personal point of view the meeting was likewise 
extraordinary. A devotee of Sri Ramakrishna had been the 


means. He hed said to Noren, calling him by Fis pet name, 


Pa eae ee ee, ot. ne SO Pe, ee ee ere hee 





Para, es 





AT THE TOUCH OF THE MASTER, 255 


-and there, to the Brahmo Samaj and other places, in search 
of religion. If you have a real intention of practising 
religion, I advise you to go to Dakshineswar. Mere wander- 
ing about as you are doing at Present will do you no good,” 
And so Noren had come to the beautiful retreat of Sri Rama- 
krishna. To Sri Ramakrishna himself the meeting was as a 
lightning flash of memory and recognition. He treated 
Noren as if he had always known and loved him. In some 
strange way, unknown io himself and inexplicable, Noren 
felt drawn towards him. He did not know what to 
make of the matter. He could not understand the Master's 
sudden joy at seeing him. And then he was asked to sing ; 
-and he sang that song which reads,— 
“O my mind let us go to our own abode, 
In the foreign land of this world of change 
Why roam uselessly in the garb of a foreigner !” 
The song went on to the words,— 
“And for support, keep this treasure 
In the secret of the heart,—the treasure, purity !” 
That was the song, but it acted like magic upon Sri Rama- 
‘krishna. He cried out with tears in his eyes and with 
overwhelming joy upon his face, “My boy ! My boy! Lo! 
T have been anxiously waiting for you for years! At‘last 
you have come!” And then he passed into the ecstatic 
‘consciousness, And when he emerged from that state he 
said, “My boy, I was waiting for you all this time. Why 
‘did you make such a delay in coming! My lips are burnt 
by talking with worldly-minded people! Now, however, I 
shall soothe them by talking with you !" 
There were others about Sri Ramakrishna, some old men, 
some middle-aged and some lads to the number of twenty 
‘or more of Noren’s own age. They were believers in the 
-holiness of this sage. Noren met these. Some he had 
already known; some he had not known before. Others he 
had heard of. This was a new world to him. He immediate 
Jy settled tt in his own mind thit Sri Ramkrishna was a 
Madman and tnat hie filecceee tcc. ott 


256 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 
* 


im superstition. In spite of this, however, Noren could: 
not account for the strange Dblessedness that came over him 
as he sang the song. To Sri Ramakrishna, the song was as 
a divine flame, on hearing which he grew rigid in body, the- 
while his soul soared aloft to God. This was strange to. 
Noren. It was all strange,—the numbers of adoring devotees, 
the unaccountable religious ecstasy of the Master, the state: 
of the bodily unconsciousness, the return of the soul of Sri 
Ramakrishna from ecstasy, the atmosphere of intense blessed- 

ness, the words of the Master, the uplifting of his own soul 

~—all these were bewildering to Noren. He left the presence 

of Sri Ramakrishna, feeling as one who was just withdrawing 

from.:some sanctuary; and yet his mind thought, “It is 

strange ; it is curiously strange !” 

Referring to this the Swami Vivekananda used to tell his 
disciples and his gurubhazs, “I thought at the time, ‘What a 
madman is this! Is ita madman to whom Ramdada has. 
brought me, after all! Reason tells me that he is mad, but 
the heart is attracted to him! Wonderful is this madman— 
wonderful is his attraction—wonderful is his love ! I took 
him to be mad, but I was dumbfounded with admiration at 
the same time! This was a wonderful experience !” 

As he was leaving, he gave his promise to Sri Rama- 
krishna that he would come to Dakshineswar frequently, 
The Master entreated him to come. Sohe went at a later 
day in the company of some of his Brahmo friends. Again 
Sri Ramakrishna begged Noren to sing. He did so, and 
while the song was in progress, and the audience was stilled, 
and he himself, quite unconscious of his surroundings, sang- 
in the full freedom of his soul, Sri Ramakrishna exclaimed, 
“Behold! See how the light of Saraswati, the Goddess of’ 
learning, beams out from him!’ And those who heard him 
say this, looked upon Noren with wonder. It was strange 
that the Master should speak so; or rather, it was more 
strange that he should have seen such eminent, spirituality 


in this boy. “Do you see a great light before, falling asleep 2” 
eto (OS Det Rekben “Nacsa: Ante coher Baw how 


AT THE TOUCH OF THE MASTER, 257 


experienced every night from his childhood, how the, dight 
came and how he would enter into it,’ and then fal} fast 
asleep. The Master said eagerly, “Ah! It is true. This one 
is a Dhydna-siddha, His sleep is as the Meditation upon God,” 
Diyana is the state of intense meditation, A siddig is,one. 
in whom the Powers of the spiritual insight are perfectly 
developed, } 
“How Strange !” thought Noren, The boys who had 
come with him smiled at his puzzled manner as they left 
Dakshineswar on that day. But Noren was Most serions, 
He remembered what the Maharshi Debendra Nath Tagore 
had said, “Boy, you have the Yogi's eyes.” He pondered 
Over it all. What did these two Persons mean ! Was it frue 


man and the Maharshi self-deluded ! 
Following upon his first visit, he had asked ¢ }. devotee 
who had brought him to the Master, what manner of man 
Sc Ramakrishna was, and he was told, “Heis 4 wonderful, 
man. He is highly spiritual, There is not a trace of lust in 
him ; and he despises gold and looks upon all women as. 
Mother. He is a true Yogi ; indeed, he is one who has seen 


in all the anguish of a soul in doubt, asking, “Sire, have you 
seen God >” Already the answer is known, But he could 
not then solve the Problem, His mind said, “He is a lunatic 
His heart said, “I am drawn to him; and his love is 
wonderful !” 

To be Sure, the old man loved him. Such love Noren 
had never seen, Not even his own mother professed such 


dream and tfe sense of “I” to be an Sllusién, spoke of him 
in awe, * r : 
Born in 1834 A, D. on the twentieth of February, and 


17 


258 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


of the highest caste, but in the utmost poverty, Sri Rama- 
krishna had from his boyhood, in the out-of-the-way village 
in which he was born, exhibited signs of the mystical con- 
sciousness. At eleven, as he told his disciples later, he had 
the Glorious Vision, when he saw everything as of the Glory 
of God. In his boyhood, after having seen a drama played 
once, he used to enact it in his boyish way, depicting the 
careers of the Saints and Divine Incarnations ; and the simple 
villagers stood amazed at the religious transports into which 
he passed. At eighteen he was made a temple-priest. at 
Dakshineswar ; but as he worshipped, he confused the ritual 
in the depth of his religious meditation and devotion. He 
could no longer officiate. Mathoor, the son-in-law of Rani 
Rasmoni, the builder of the Temple, believed the young man 
to be a Siddha soul. So he was allowed to remain, A 
room was given to him and there he sat for days in medita- 
tion, forgetting to take food. Times were when great floods 
of anguish came over him because he had not seen the 
Mother, under which aspect he had conceived Brahman. He 
rolled on the ground in the intensity of his anguish, Then 
he would retreat again into his inner-self, losing all conscious- 
ness of outer things. When he returned to his normal condi- 
tion, it would be with an untiring outburst of praise to God, 
Often the mystical state would leave him semiconscious. 
Then he frequently spoke, seemingly addressing presences: 
higher than human. Often a joy unspeakable overshadowed 
him, and for hours he would sit in his room or wander on the 
Ganges side, chanting the names of God in a high pitch of - 
blessedness. When the temple gongs resounded he was no . 
longer of earth. He soared in spirit to the Mother. He placed 
himself in all manners of relationship to God, now as the servant, 
now as the lofer, now as the child of the Most High. Again, 
he would attain the divine state of consciousness, when he 
saw God 2s all in all, beyond thought, beyond form, beyond 
personality, forgetting himself, and- was conscicys only of that 
Daaltter which is the Most.High. e 


AT THE TOUCH OF THE MASTER. 259 


with but a wish he made others conscious of what he was 
conscious, The thoughts of others he contd see as one sees 
an object. By his will he could find the chief tendéncy, the 
leading purpose, the prevailing characteristic of any per- 
sonality.. The. lads whom Noren came to know, and who 
later became his brother-monks in the Order of Sri Rama. 
krishna which he founded, were chosen by Syi Ramakrishna 
because he dmew them. He had complete control over his 
own consciousness, so that whenever he desired, ‘he could 
enter the condition of blessedness, A song, a word, the sight 
of one whom he loved, would often render him sO conscious 
of another order of being that he became, as it were, un- 
conscious to this plane of life. 

His relations, hoping to thwart his religious career, in- 
fluenced him to marry. He complied with their request 
knowing not what marriage meant, and thinking only that it 
was one of the injunctions of the Shdstras which had to be 
obeyed. In India, marriage is in the nature of a betrothal . 
for a few years, because the wife is but a child, Yet the re- 
latives believed that this marriage would turn his mind to 
worldly things, When grown up, his wife, Sarada Devi, hear- 
ing that her husband had gone mad, journeyed afoot for days 
with her relatives until she reached the Temple-garden in 
which he lived. He addressed her at sight as “Mother !” 
She understood from that very moment. And, thereafter, 
she joined him as his spiritual help-meet and disciple in the 
religious life. And he worshipped her with flowers and with 
lights as the Mother Incarnate. 

When Noren met Sri Ramakrishna, the Master was, to 
use his own simile of what a religious teacher should be, the 
full-blown lotus of spirituality. And many were the bees that 
had come tohim, But in his earlier years the Master had 
ascended the house-tops of his dwelling-place and cried out, 
weeping, “O Mother, where are my devotees ? Bring them 
tome!’ Andqmnow they had come ; axe, and Noren, too, the 
most beloved, the ahief of disciples., And all entered a world 


Se Gait hy pti Pein el eos hme cote. bel ee ee ee oo ee 


260 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


ual illumination. And he initiated them into the ways of 
truth, He was to them the living flame of the divine life. 
As goodness is embodied, so even is divinity embodied ; and 
when the clouds of , worldly’ life were dispersed by much 
thinking upon God, or when the mind was lifted from earth~ 
ly things on the wings of ecstatic song, the devotees and the 
Master grew one in the thapsodies of the Beatific Vision. 
And the gerden of Dakshineswar became even as the heaven 
of Brahm4. And they sang and they danced in overwhel- 
ming joy in the name of the Lord ; and they took the dust of 
the ground on which they stood, It had become holy ; for 
upon it the nantes of the Lord had been taken with tre- 
mendous ecstasy of soul. 

And yet Noren stood somewhat aloof. He did not quite 
understand all this. The intellectual self doubted, while the 
mystical self rejoiced in this new world in which he found: 
himself. He thought, “Ali this is nonsense. Some day the old 
man will come to know that his Kali is a myth ; and then he: 
will transcend his present consciousness. He will get toa higher 
state of insight.” And yet, he was caught up in the ecstasy 
of those moments with the Master. Was it because he loved 
song for the sake of song ? For sometimes it was his custom 
to sing and sing the whole day long, so lost in the rapture of 
it that he would even forget to eat. 

It came to pass that, when Noren visited the Temple- 
grounds and grove of Dakshineswar for the third time and 
had sunga song before the Master, an event took place: 
which touched the very foundation of his personality. When 
he had finished his singing, a great seriousness came over the 
face of the Master. The other disciples wondered what was. 
to come. The Master was looking fixedly at Noren. He 
arose ; and then taking him quite apart into the more distant 
retreats of the Temple-gardens he confided to him a moment- 
ous truth. He said, “Behold in you is Shiva! And in me is 
the Sakti! And these-two are One !” Shiva “is the positive 
divine Self, positive in His knowledge which is blessedness. 

gay ae et AEthae tha Gakti is the feminine divine. Self, 


AT THE TOUCH OF THE MASTER. . 261 


positive in Her dance of destruction which makes the illusion 
of life. But to Her devotee She gives the ‘consciousness 
of Reality. 

Noren smiled. Certainly this was downright madness, if 
‘ever there was madness, He said nothing ; but he pursued a 
train of thought the contents of which were that the spiritual 
‘experiences of his Master were in the nature of an epileptic 
ft and that his brain was deranged. But the Master likewise 
pursued a train of thought. He thought that the time had - 
already come to modify the great scepticism of the disciple 
whom he loved the most of ali from the very first moment of 
seeing him. And he decided on a certain course. 

They returned to the living-room of Sri Ramakrishna 
where he was wont to see his disciples, For a time there was 
song and conversation. Then, as the evening came on, an 
awesome moment of tremendous import descended upon the 
group of devotees, A terrible stillness seemed to'come over 
their hearts. Sri Ramakrishna was bordering on the co- 
sciousness of supreme insight. In that state he came down 
from his seat and, walking across the room came to Noren 
who was sitting close at hand and placed his right hand upon 
the boy’s heart and then, drawing himself up, put his foot 
upon the shoulder of the boy, as if to break his body-con-. 
sciousness which is the nest of dreams, : 

And Noren! Noren !—for him the room, the verandahs, 
the Temple, the garden of Dakshineswar, the faces and forms 
of the devotees and of the Master seemed all of a sudden to 
fade out, He felt himself sinking as if in a deep faint. At the 
‘touch of the Master, his consciousness was dissolving. And in 
that state he cried out in anguished dismay, “OQ! What is 
happening ! © what are you doing to me! I have a father 
and a mother at home!” And then, having uttered these words, 

he fell into unconsciousness, Thus he remained for a short 
time until the Master again touched his heart, and then slow- 
ly he came bgtk to consciousness. When he was himself 
again he felt a cestain freshness ofthe body and a certain in- 


Po ne ee oe ee eee ye ear “ 


262 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


slumber, . But so far as to what were the contents of his con- 
sciousness during the time of the trance he could fot recall. 
It was not his 4arma or fate as yet vo have the conscious mind 
thus impressed. It was perhaps the will of the Master that his 
disciple should not be aware of the highest state so soon, He 
was not as yet prepared for it ; otherwise the dissolution of 
consciousness he experienced would not have terrified him. 
Then, too, he*would have remembered. It was because Sri 
Ramakrishna desired to prove to him by the convincing 
force of actual personal experience that his was a spirit- 
ual power and a spiritual consciousness, that he put Noren 
into that condition of Samddh?. And so intensely genuine 
were his Samddhis that he not only lost his own personality 
in an overwhelming ecstasy therein, but could also make 
another become possessed of them. However it might have 
been, Sri Ramakrishna had, in that moment possessed 
himself of’ the personality of Noren, He had turned the 
subconscious currents of Noren’s tendency, by force as it 
were, into the superconscious channel. The conscious mind 
would waver forthe time. That was well, It should be so ; 
it would have to work out its own possibilities in the direc- 
tion of the perception of reality. 

Later on, when Noren developed spiritually and grew be- 
yond the region of intellgctual doubt, and when he came to 
understand his Master and practise a series of ascetic exer- 
cises which were in the nature of a training of the conscious 
mind, he himself reached the highest plane of consciousness. 
He became possessed of the faculty of dissolving or intensi- 
fying his states of mind and fixing the entire attention and 
consciousness upon any ideal or object desired. And then 
the experience of trance was not that of a sinking condition 
while entering into it, nor was'it a complete forgetfulness of 
what had transpired. It was a joyous expansjon beyond the 
consciousness of the body ; it was a sensing of Unlimited 
Beatitude beyond. And the conscious mind, that drop in 
the deep ocean of the souj, was permeated, with insight and 

7  ghat ctnte - and thoangch he exes 





AT THE TOUCH OF THE MASTER, 263 


perienced the highest Samédhz only thrice or so in his life, 
and lastly at the moment of death, he had numerous 
approximations to it. All of them bore witness to the fact 
that Sri Ramakrishna was not a madman, but verily, a sane 
man among the myriad lunatics of the world, who dwell in 
the asylum of selfishness and desire, and who are bound 
down in the prison-house of lust and gold. Noren realised 
that Sri Ramakrishna was a man who could turn his own soul 
from human consciousness into the shoreless sea of the con- 
sciousness of God, at wil. 

But this awareness on his part with regard to the Master 
came only at a later time. Here, he had an inkling of the 
matter. He was terrified, but where he was terrified to go 
there Sri Ramakrishna rejoiced to be, for it was passing 
through the dwindling darkness of personality into the 
Effulgence of God. Yes, the illuminated consciousness is, 
the light on the path. But from that time when‘the Master 
touched the heart of his disciple he owned and possessed 
him. It was a possession, however, which meant the highest 
freedom for Noren’s own soul. And though the conscious 
mind would hesitate for a time and go through developing 
‘experiences, the Soul of him had been ewakened fully and 
dosereh through the agency of his Master. 


XXXV 
THE DISCIPLE’S MEDITATION, 


Who is he that moves with such heedless steps along the 
river's sidé at Dakshineswar, clapping his hands .and crying 
aloud the‘name of God? He looks as one bereft of his - 
senses, and a joy hovers over him as incense about a shrine. 
Evening has glided along into the first shadows of the night, 
and there is peace in the gardens. In the distance the sounds 

’ Of bells and drums and songs pour forth from the temples 
where Kali the Mother and Vishnu are being worshipped. 
It is Sri Ramakrishna, mad with the name of the Mother, 
who wanders on the Ganges’ bank, shrouded in the-oncoming 
night. Louder and louder becomes the chanting of the 
songs. Lights are being waved in the temple before the 
images,’ Bells are ringing, and above the joyous sound, the 
Sacred chant is heard. as the main theme in the chorus of 
worship. 

' * Near the Panchavati tree, in the shadows thrown by the 
moon-light, stands a lad of twenty years with mixed feelings 
‘stirring the depths of his soul. Yearning and doubt are 
shadowed on his face. The music of the temples has aroused 
the devotional self within him, but his intellect follows the 
joyous Sri Ramakrishna in an effort at analysis. “Who is 
this man? Whois this man?” It is Noren who asks him- 
self this question. He had heard some people speak of Sri 
Ramakrishna as an Incarnation of God. Others referred to 
himi as a great sage. He had heard Keshub Chandra ‘Sen 
speak of him with bated breath. His English professor 
‘while explaining the condition of zrance described by Words- 
worth in his poem, “The Excursion,’ had spoken of Sri 
Ramakrishna as a living instance of one who often entered 
into this superconscious state. “A wonderful man! A God- 
Man !” said Noren to himself. “A madman !” “ae thought 
wetth ¢tha mavt heanth “Ana vet what wonderful cower he 


THE DISCIPLE'S MEDITATION. 265 


must have to have thrown me at will into the state of that 
trance which I had deemed madness in him !” 

Meanwhile Sri Ramakrishna: had stopped his walking. 
He stood still, tense, and as Noren could see by the moon- 
light, he was in that superconscious state, known in India 
as Samadhi dnd in the West as ecstasy, A few moments 
jater and he.was ‘approaching the Temple and foun@ himself 
following Sri Ramakrishna, They entered it ; ahd Noren ; 
seemed to hear the ‘voice of Sri Ramakrishna rise into-a, . 
louder glory in the chanting of the Mother’s Name; for the’ 
voice of the Master was musical and strong. Some said, 
that when they approached his dwelling-room at Dakshines- 
wat they heard, as it were, a chorus of voices singing. But 
when they came, it was only he who was singing. 

Leaving the temple Noren returned to the meditation- 
seat at Panchavati, and entered a reverie of thought. He 
reviewed, as hé- knew it, the life of the Master. And his 
meditation was of the following nature : oP 

“Yes, the father and the mother of this man were venerated : 
as living saints by the simple villagers. He was named Gada-, : 
dhar by his parents, as he was born after they had Mad 4- 
dream in which the Lord Vishnu appeared before them and. . 
said that He would be born as their son, -He was given the © 
name of Ramakrishna by his guru, Tota Puri, at the time 
of his initiation into sahnyasa by him.” Rama and Krishna 
are the names of the two most beloved and greatest Incarna- 
tions of the Lord. He was known as Ramakrishna ; but 
the pet name of his childhood was Gadai. 

‘ Noren mused in thought over the youth of ‘Sri Rama- 
krishna: “He had learned little of this world’s knowledge. — 
-True, he had received some lessons in reading and writing; 
but- they were only elementary. He grew up amidst the . 
isimplieities of a village, the cows, the fields. and the simple 
village life, yet he manifested even in his youth a peculiar 
tendency to the religious consciousness.” Noren recalled 
any. incidents in the life of the Master as a boy, sweet 


266 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


wave of love sprang up in his soul for the hero of his 
thought. 

“Yes,” said Noren to himself, “Each morning the boy 
bathed and then worshipped the Lord, first as Brahman, 
and then as Rama, the great King-Incarnation, to whom he 
was especially attached. How often he would gather the 
village-lads about him and play with them the life-histories 
of great Incarnations !? And Noren thought, “O to have 
been of that group!” Then he continued in his meditation, 
“How the villagers, were amazed at him, as he took these 
parts! How the tears of joy would flow down their cheeks 
and they would laugh and cry at the same moment from 
sheer ecstasy ! What transports of blessedness those were ! 
The people gathered round just to hear him sing. And then 
Sadhus and learned pundits would often visit the village, He 
would serve them. Sometimes there was little food. They 
were poor,—the parents of Sri Ramakrishna, But be that 
as it may, be there ever so little food at home, that must be 
given to the guest.’ For such is the custom amongst the 
Hindus. Though he himself starve, the Hindu must feed the 
guest, for a guest is the messenger of God. 

When the temple service was over, Sri Ramakrishna 
came out of the house of the Mother. Walking along the 
roadway, he saw someone seated on the meditation-seat. 
He came closer to discover who this might be. It was 
Noren! Joy was with Sri Ramakrishna instantaneously. 
But he would not disturb the boy, who was too deeply im- 
mersed in thought to notice him. So he stood silent and in 
rapture, biding the time of Noren’s coming forth from that 
state, 

And Noren’s mind wandered on and on in the deep 
channel of the intensity of his thought: “Sri Ramakrishna’s 
father passed away, The sons came to Calcutta. About 
this time the Temple of Kali the Mother at Dakshineswar was 
completed, and his elder brother was appointed. ; as temple- 
priest, with Sti Ramakrishna as his assistant, Afterwards he 


PA ees ee PRS ae ee fe wen: were 


THE DISCIPLE’S MEDITATION. 267 


change in that young life. The boy became the devotee ; the 

_ devotee became the ascetic ; the ascetic became the saint ; the 
gaint became the man of realisation. The man of realisation 
became the prophet ; the prophet became merged in the 
Divine Nature which was God.” And Néren bowed his head 
as if in deep worship. Sri Ramakrishna was in deep medi- 
tation himself standing in ecstasy. 

And Noren said in his thought, “What a wonder was his 
devotion ! Did he endeavour to worship the Mother, lo, his 
mind would be lost at the first moment of contemplating 
Her greatness, His relatives grew frightened. Would he go 
mad? Sothey married him. But marriage was only an 
incident. Not for a moment did it distract him. On the 
contrary he had forgotten that he had ever married and had a 
wife. He plunged into deeper and deeper austerities, for he 
had begun to practise austerities ; in fact, the natural state 
of his devotion was, of itself, an enormous strain on his 
person. To an ordinary individual his devotion would have 
been the ideal to be realised after years, if not after repeated 
lifetimes, of practice. 

“He could not serve in the Temple. His very devotion in- 
capacitated him. So he went to the Ganges side one evening 
and his heart was in anguish at the thought of not having 
‘seen his mother. The separation he felt was terrible. As. 
he was standing there, he yearned to practise religious 
sddhands in the solitude of the Panchavati grove, and wished 
that he could build a tiny hut there for meditation. Even as 
he thought this, he saw the tide bring up to his very feet the 
materials wherewith to build a hut for himself! And so he 
gathered the wood and built a hut in that secluded spot of 
the Temple-grounds. Here he was lost to the outside world. 
Here he fasted and prayed. For six months he lived in a 
condition of constant Samadhi. Food was forced into his 
mouth by his loving nephew and constant attendant, Hridoy. 
The contents of his mind were discernible only in certain 
agonised prayers to the Mother ; and at other times he would 


nS RUA, Les Sip fee SOG 





268 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VINEKANANDA. 


in communion with the ideal. His countenance was radiant 
‘even in that asceticism. His hair had grown until it was 
matted. His face was thin and drawn, and yet a wonderful 
presence lingered about him. His -eyes shone like fire. 
Many wandering monks came to see him. They paid their 
homage to him and then journeyed onwards, considering 
themselves blessed. 

“ And at this time a terrible fever took possession of him. 
None could diagnose it, The condition of his body became 
‘dangerous. Befote his asceticism his form was robust. ‘His 
face was strikingly handsome. But now the body had be- 
come broken ; the face had become emaciated until it was 
painfal to look upon. But yet there was divinity in his eyes.” 
The meditation of Noren ceased fora moment. He sighed 
‘deeply. Tears of commiseration and of ecstasy fell from his 
eyes, And he continued,— 

“O wonder of wonders! At this critical period camé a 
Brahmani Sannyasini, or wandering nun. Her garments 
were red in colour, and she was beautiful to look upon. But 
‘she had given up all ideas of beauty and of love. There was 
an austerity about her ; and a blessedness came forth from 
her person as a perfume, She saw the saint. She under- 
stood his condition, and she constituted herself his attendant 
under'the direction of Mathoor Babu, the son-in-law of Rani 
Rasmoni. Brékmani, the name by which she was known, 
‘told them who thought Sri Ramakrishna mad, that the 
malady from which the saint was suffering was the great love 
of God which possessed him. It was so intense that it had 
brought on that peculiar form of fever. Like an elephant which 
tramples downa hut which is too small for its body, the fire 
-of the divine consciousness was proving too strong in its burn- 
ing power, It was destroying the body. She gave him some 
herbs which are prescribed in the sacred writings for such 
who are thus afflicted. Gradually he regained his conscious- 
ness of sense. And it was pitiful to behold hisemanner on 
recovery. He had been separated, so he felt, fgom his Realisa- 


THE DISCIPLE’S MEDITATION. 269 


was in ecstasy. But the nun consoled him saying that the- 
Mother would be always with him, and proved to him and 
others by quoting appropriate verses from the sacred Scrip- 
tures that similar states of ecstasy had been manifested only. 
in Radha and in Chaitanya, the greatest embodiments of the 
madness of Divine Love. She gave him instrtction in her 
own religious realisation, which was 4 special form in the 
worship of the Mother. Having fulfilled her mission, she 
departed.” 7 

All this time Sri Ramakrishna kept his mind fixed on 
Noren who sat there, deep in meditation. He did not disturb 
him, He waited patiently. The mind of Noren went on, 
taking in the remaining features of that glorious life, until that 
time when he himself had found it. 

“When Brahmani had departed, Sri Ramakrishna was as. 
much as ever given up to tremendous religious intensity and 
practice. He initiated his consciousness into the glorious. 
awareness of manv forms of religious conception and ideals, 
Then Tota Puri came. Now Sri Ramakrishna was fo pass 
into the highest state, that state of which the Scriptures say, 
‘If one remains in it continuously for twenty-one days, the 
body will fall into death and the soul forever remain in the 
utmost beatitude and in the essence of God.’ Tota Puri was 
Nydngid, the Naked One, as Sri Ramakrishna spoke of him. 
He was a wanderer on the face of the earth, believing that the 
universe itself was a dream. Rain or shine was alike to him. 
The sky was his roof; the grass his bed; his food what 
chance might bring. Hecame to Sri Ramakrishna, a Voice 
having told him, ‘Go down to Bengal. There is work for 
yoy. You will help a certain soul.’ And, following that: 
bidding, he had arrived at Dakshineswar. He admired Sri 
Ramakrishna. And, though he had remaineg-no longer than 
three days at a time at any place in all his monastic life, he 
took up his abode at Dakshineswar for many months, teach- 
jog and initiating his self-chosen disciple into the conscious- 
‘ness. of the highest Vedanta philosophy. It had taken him 


Bg ak et es gi eat ET ie ee Sew ea eS 


270 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


krishna, hafing received the consent of the Mother to be 
taught this highest wisdom, gained this same consciousness 
in three days of effort, aye, in three days after his taking 
initiation from his teacher! Tota Puri could not account for 
this and doubted his own senses, Believing Sri Ramakrishna to 
be feigning the highest or the Nirvikalpa Samadhi, he beat him 
severely to test-its truth. It was to no purpose, however. 
“Sri Ramakrishna contjrfued in that condition, emerging 
there from onty ‘after the experience had been consummated 
in sublimest vision. Then the teacher in turn betame the 
disciple. Tota-Puri in course.of time was initiated into the 
awareness of the Personal aspect of Divinity in which he had 
previously no faith, Many miraculous happenings are told 
of the depth and the intensity.of Sri Ramakrishna’s realisation 
at this time. Tota Puri was astounded, ‘The greatest gurus, 
or teachers, of the various religious: sects, Mohammedan and 
Hindw' alike, came to the Master and departed, acknowledg- 
ing him to be their Ideal. Yes, he had -bécbme a Mohammed- 
an to raplise Allah ; and later on, he became a Christian to 
realise ‘Christ. Tota Puri, having fulfilled his mission and 
recognising Sri Raniakrienia ‘to be the greatest spiritual 
genius of the age,. departed. Then there were years of 
silént meditation and realisation during which the lotus of 
the soul of Sri Ramakrishna was on the full way to ripe bloss- 
oming. Then the bees came. Gauri Pandit, Padmalochan, 
Vaishnavachasan, Sasadhar Tarkachuramani anda host of 
other great Pandits and Sadhakas came, Keshub Chandra 
Sen and Pratap Chandra, Mozoomdar came; Bijoy Krishna 
Goswami and Swami Dayananda Saraswati came; the great 
Nag Mahashaya came; Christians came; Mohammedans 
came; Sikhs came; and. Hindus, by the hundreds upon 
hundreds? Great poets and thinkers came; eminent 
preachers and theologians came; professors and‘ leaders of 
public opinion came. Men and women came ; the rich and the 
poor came. Disciples came.” ‘And last of all Norén himself 
came, he and that group | of young men of his own’ age who 


THE DISCIPLE’S MEDITATION. ~ 273 


Noren felta touch upon his hands, folded as they were one 
upon the other in the way of meditation. "His thought had 
become deep, intense. It was therefore with a start that he 
turned. There stoéd Sri Ramakrishna, smiling tendarly upon 
him. Beatitude was in his eyes. A divine light shone upon 


his face. And Noren felt strangely happy © and wonderfully : 


at peace. Yes, here was this spiritual man whose love for 
him was so pure, so deep, so intense. He fell at his feet. Sri 
Ramakrishna raised him up. Then the two were-alone in the 
night. Alf sound ‘was hushed save the lapping of the 


waters of the near-by Ganges as they touched the shore of | 


Dakshineswar. The stars were above. .Ft- was the deep 


Indian night. A holy presence seemed cast over the face of |‘ 


‘the earth, and over the »Dakshingswar Temple- garden ; and 
in the dwelling-room of the Master several Aevotees were eal: 
asleep. ; ms 


Sri Ramakrishna said, “Come, Noren !” And the two went . 


off into the distance atid the shadows of the trees, until they 
reached that other tree of meditation, under which Sri ama- 
krishna had performed, in former times, terrible SAdhands, 
There the two sat in meditation. And the Master initiated 
Noren into the deep ways of wisdom, and into the methods 
of following certain of the more difficult paths of ascetic 
practice by which all the forms of fear and death and all 
restlessness and turbulence of mind are vanquished. 
Thereafter many were the times when the Master and the 
disciple were alone and in the silence, : pondering upon life 
and what lies beyond its reach, realising the Light of the 
Soul amidst the darkness of the world," 


ate. 


XXXVI 
: as a7 
AS OTHERS SAW THE MASTER, 


That the most awakened men of the Brahmo Samaj were- 
great admirers of the Man of. Dakshineswdr is a wonderful 
tribute to his. greatness, for the Brahmo Samaj had, to alb 
appearances, no rélationship with the orthoddxy, of Hinduism, 
It was however the overwhelming realisation of Sri Rama- 
krishna which made them bow their heads at*hig feet. Next 
to Keshub Chandra Sen, no man in the circle of the Brahmo. 
Samaj wag as learned and as prominent as_ tie, famous. 
Protap Chandta Mazoomdar, What he says, though some- 
what lengthy, merits full repetition, because of the luminoys. 
vision it embodies. The following extract reads from the. 
Theistic Quarterly Review, October, 1879 :— 

“My mind is still floating in the luminous atmosphere- 
which that wonderful man diffuses around him whenever and: 
wherever he goes. My mind is not yet disenchanted of the. 
mysterjots and indefinable pathos which he pours. into it 
whenever he meets me, What is there in common between, 
him and me? I,a Europeanised, civilised, self-centred, semi-. 
sceptical so-called educated reasoner, and hea poor, illiterate, 
unpolished, half-idolatrous, friendless Hindu devotee ? Why 
stould I sit long hours to attend to him, I who have listened 
to Disraeli and Fawcett, Stanley and Max ‘Muller, and a 
whole host,of European scholars and divines ? I who am an | 
ardent disciple and follower of Christ, a friend and admirer of" 
‘liberal-minded @ristian missionaries and preachers, a 
devoted adherent .and worker of the rationalistic Brahmo-. 
Samaj-+why should I be spell-bound to hear him ? And it 
is not-I only, but dozens like me who do the same, He has - 
beén interviewed and examined by many ; crowds pour in to. 
visit and talk with him. Some of our clever intellectuat 
foole have fan ae Rees Bite en ONES 


AS OTHERS SAW THE MASTER. 273 


Christian missionaries would call him an injpostor, ora self- 
deluded’ enthusiast. 5 have. weighed their objections well, 
and what I write slow I write-feliberately, — 

“The Hindu saint isva qian tnder forty, He fg a Brahman 
by caste he is wellfogmed fn body naturally, But the dread- 
ful austgrities. through which his character has developed 
appear to have disordered his system. Yet, in the ntidst of. 
this emaciation;, his face reins a fullness, a child-like ten- 
derntss, 4 prefound visible hambleness, an unspeakable 
Sweetness of expression anda smile that 1 have seen on no 
other face that I can remember. A Hindu saint is always 
particular aboyt_ his externals. He wears the gerrua cloth, 
eats accofdjng:to strict forms, refuses to have intercourse 
with men, and is a rigid observer of caste. He is always 
proud and professes secret wisdom. .He is alwals Suruji,a 
universal counsellor and a dispenser of charms, This man is 
singularly devoid of such claims, His dress and diet do not 
differ from those of other men except in the general negligence" 
he shows towards both, and as to caste, he openI breaks it 
every day. He most vehemently repudiates the title of guru, 

.or teacher, he shows impatient displeasure at any exceptional 
honour Which people try to pay to him, and emphatjcally dis: ' 
‘Claims tht knowledge of secrets aud mysteries, He protests - 
against'being lionized, and openly shows his strong dislike to 
‘be visited’and praised by the curious. » The society of the 
worldly-minded and carnally-inclined he carefully shuns, 
He has nothing extraordinary about him. His religion is 
his only recommendation. And what is his religion?’ It is 
otthodbx Hinduism, but, Hinduism of a strange type. 
.Ramakrishna Paramahamsa ( for that is the'’namie of this 
saint ) is the worshipper of no particular Hindu god. He is 
not a Shaiva, he is not a Shakta, he is not 4 Vaishnava, he is 
not a Vedantist. Yet he is a/l these. He worships Shiva, 
he worships Kali, he worships Rama, he worships Krishna, 
‘and is a confirmed advocate of Vedanta doctrines.” He 
accepts alb"the dottrines, all the embodiments, usages, and 
devotional practices of every religious cult. Each in turn is 


* 


wv 18 7% 


274 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


infallible to him. He is an idolater, yet is a faithful and most 
devoted meditator of the perfections of the one formless, in- 
finite Deity whom he terms “Akhanda Sachchidananda” 
(Indivisible Existence-Knowledge-Bliss), His religion, un- 
like’ the religion of ordinary Hindu sadhus, does not mean 
too much dogma, or controversial proficiency, or the out- 
ward worship with flowers and sandal-wood, incense and 
offering. His religion means ecstasy, his worship means 
transcendental insight, his whole nature burns day and night 
with the permanent fire and fever of a strange faith and feeling, 
His conversation is a ceaseless breaking forth of this inward 
fire and lasts long hours. While his interlocutors are weary, 
he, though otitwardly feeble, is as fresh as ever. He merges 
into rapturous ecstasy and outward unconsciousness often 
during the day, oftenest in conversation when he speaks of 
his favourite spiritual experiences, or hears any striking re- 
sponse to them, But how is it possible that he has such a 
fervent regard for all the Hindu deities together? What is 
the secret of his singular eclecticism ? To him each of these 
deities is a force, an incarnated principle tending to reveal 
the supreme relation of the soul to that eternal and formless 
Being who is unchangeable in His blessedness and the 
‘Light of Wisdom. 

“Take for instance Shiva. The saint views and realises 
Shiva as the incarnation of contemplativeness and Yoga. 
Forgetful of all worldly care and concern, merged and ab- 
sorbed in Samadhi, in the meditation of the ineffable perfec- 
tions of the supreme Brahman, insensible to pain and priva- 
tion, toil and loneliness, ever joyful in tH® blessedness of 
Divine communion, calm, silent, serene, immovable like the 
Himalayas where his abode is, Mahadeva is the ideal of all 
contemplative and self-absorbed men. The venomous ser- 
pents of evil and worldliness coil around his beatified form 
but cannot hurt him. The presence of death surrounds him 
in various forms of dread and danger, but cannot daunt him. 
Shiva takes upon himself the burdens and cares of all the 
wertd and swallows the deadliest poison to confer immor- 


AS OTHERS SAW THE MASTER. 275 


tality upon others, Shiva renounces all wealth and enjoy- 
ment for the benefit of others, makes his faithful wife the 
companion of his austerities and solitude, and takes the ashes 
and the tiger-skin as his only ornaments. Shiva is the god 
of the Yogis, And this good man, while expatiating on the 
attributes of ‘Shiva, would be immersed in the sublimity of 
his ideal, and become entranced, and remain unconscious for 
a long time, 

“Then, perhaps, he would talk of Krishna whom he realises 
as the incarnation of love. ‘Behold, he Says, ‘the coun: 
tenance of Krishna as represented popularly. Does it re- 
semble a man’s face, or a woman's? Is there a shadow of 
sensuality in it ; is there a hair of masculine coarseness? It 
is a tender female face that Krishna has ; in it is the fullness 
: Of boyish delicacy and girlish grace, By his affectionateness, 
many-sided and multiform, he won the hearts of men -and 
women to the religion of Bhakiz (Devotion)’ That Divine 
Jove can take the form of every sanctified human relation is 
the great mission of Krishna to prove. Asa loving child 
monopolising all the fondness of the hearts of aged parents ; 
as a loving companion and friend attracting the profoundest 
loyalty’ and affection of men and brethren ; as an admired 
and adored master, the sweetness and tenderness of whose 
teaching and whose affectionate persuasions converted girls 
and women to the self-consecration of a heartfelt piety, 
Krishna, the beauty and depth of whose character remain stil 
beyond the reach of men’s appreciation, introduced the religion 
of love into Hindusthan. Then the good man would say how 
for long years he dressed himself as a cowherd, or a milk- 
maid, to be able to realise the experiences of that form of 
piety in which the human soul was like a faithful wife, and a 
loyal friend to the loving Spirit who is our Lord and only 
friend. Krishna is the incarnation of Bhakti. Then in the 
intensity of that burning love of God which is in his simple 
heart, the devotee’s form and features suddenly grow stiff 
and motionless, ynconsciousness overtakes him, his eyes lose 
their sieht. and tears tuickie dnc hin 6.03 200.040202°~SCO 


276 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


face, There is a transcendent sense and meaning in that 
unconsciousness. What he perceives and enjoys in his soul. 
when he has lost all outward perception who can say? Who 
will fathom the depth of that insensibility which the love of 
God produces ? But that he sees something, hears, and enjoys. 
when heisdead to all the outward world there is no doubt. 
If. not, why should he, in the midst of that unconsciousness, 
burst into floods of tears and break out into prayers, songs 
and utterances, the force and pathos of which pierce through 
the Hardest heart, and - bring tears to eyes that never before 
wept under the influence of religion ? 

“Anon he would begin to talk of Kali, whom he addresses 
as his mother. She is the incarnation of the Shakdi, or power 
of God as displayed in the character and influence of woman, 
Kali is the female principle in the nature of the Deity. She 
tyrannises over all tyrants. She brings down her -ausband 
low upon the ground, and places her foot upon his tsom. 
She charms and conquers all beings, Yet she is the mether 
of creation, Her tremendous power is a guarantee thatshe can 
save and protect her children, those that come to her as their 
mother, and ask the shelter of her feet. Her motherly solici- 
tude excites the tenderest filial affection in the hearts of 
her devotees, and the inspiration of Ramprosad Sen which 
expressed itself in the most wonderful songs of filial piety 
ever sung, bears strange testimony to the reality and effective- 
ness of the worship of Kali. The adoration of Shakti (which 
literally means Force) is, according to our saint, a child-like, 
whole-souled, rapturous self-consecration to the motherhood 
of God as represented by the power and influence of woman. 
Woman, therefore, has long been renounced by our friend in 
every matefial and carnal relation. He has a wife but has 
never associated with her. Woman, he says, is uncon- 
querable by man except by hiny who leoks up to her as. a 
son. Woman fascinates and keeps the whole world from the 
love of God. The highest and holiest saint}, have been 
brought back to carnality and sin by the nameless power of 
woman, The absohate conquest of lst has been his lifelong 


AS OTHERS SAW THE MASTER, 277 


s 

ambition. For long years, therefore, he says, he made the 
utmost efforts to be delivered from the influence of woman, 
His heart-rending supplications and prayers for such deliver. 
ance, sometimes uttered aloud in his retreat on the river- 
side, brought crowds of people who bitterly cried when he 
cried, and could not help blessing him and wishing him suc- 
cess with their whole hearts, 

“He has successfully escaped the evil of carnality which 
he dreaded. His Mother to whom he prayed, that is the 
goddess Kali, made him recognise every woman as her ine 
carnation, so that he now honours each member of the other © 
sex as his mother. He bows his head to the gxpund ‘before 
women, and before little girls ; he has insisted upon, worship. 
ping not a few of them as a son might worship his mother, 
The purity of his thoughts and relations towards women is 
Most unique and instructive, It is the opposite of the Euro- 
pean idea, It is an attitude essentially, traditionally, glorious. 
ly national. Yes, a Hindu can honour woman, 

“My father, says the Paramahamsa, ‘was a worshipper of 
Rama I, too, have accepted the Ramayat covenant: When 
I think of the piety of my father, the flowers with which he 
used to worship his favourite god bloom again in my heart 
and fill it with Divine fragrance, Rama, the truthful and 
dutiful son, the good and faithful husband, the just and father- 
iy king, the staunch and affectionate friend, is regarded by 
him with the love and profound loyalty of a devoted servant, 
As a master the privilege of whose service is sufficient reward 
to the favoured, faithful servant, as a master in whose dear 
and matchless service the laying down of life isa delightful 
duty, as a master who has wholly enslaved the body and soul 
of his adoring slave, the contemplation of whose Holy and 
glorious worth transcends every thought of remuneration and 
return, is Rama viewed by: Ramakrishna, Hanuman, the re- 
nowned follower-of Rama, is to him a model of a faithful ser. 
vitor, a beigg who was devoted to his master’s cause, inspired 
by such unworlly love and honour, such superhuman faith- 


. 
FON Oe eae eee AA ney - eene oaaare hae 


278 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


So the other sin which he spent his life to be free from, is the 
love of money. The sight of money fills him with strange 
dread, His avoidance of women and wealth is the whole se- 
cret of his matchless moral character. For a long time he 
practised a singular discipline. He took in one hand a piece 
of gold and in the other a lump of earth, He would then 
look at both, repeatedly calling the gold earth, and the earth 
gold, and then shuffling the contents of one hand into the 
other, he would keep up the process until he lost all sense of 
the difference between the gold and the earth, His ideal of 
service is absolute unworldliness and freedom from the desire 
of gain. He loves and serves Rama because Rama is the best 
and most loving master. The service of the true saint is the- 
service of the purest affection and most unselfish loyalty. 
Some of the songs he sings expressive of this touching de- 
votedness are exceedingly pathetic, and show how very 
negligent we often are. 

“Nor is this reverence confined within Hinduism. For 
long days he subjected himself to various disciplines to 
realise the Mahammedan idea of an all-powerful Allah, He 
let his beard grow, he fed himselfon Moslem diet, he contin- 
ually repeated sentences from the Koran. His reverence 
for Christ is deep and genuine. He bows his head at the 
name of Jesus, honours the doctrine of his sonship, and we 
believe he once or twice attended Christian places of worship. 
These ideas at all events show the catholic religious culture 
of this great Hindu saint, 

Each form of worship that we have tried to indicate 
above is to the Paramahamsa a living and most enthusiastic 
principle of personal religion, and the accounts of discipline 
and exercise through which he has arrived at his present 
state of devotional eclecticism are most wonderful, although 
they cannot be published. He never writes anything, 
seldom argues, he never attempts to instruct, he is continu- 
ally pouring out his soul in a rhapsody of spiritial utteran- 
ces, he sings wonderfully, and makes observations of singular 


AS OTHERS SAW THE MASTER. 279 


light upon the obscurest passages of the Pauranic Shastras, 
and ‘brings out the fundamental! principles of the popular 
Hindu faith with a philosophical clearness which strangely 
contrasts itself with his simple and illiterate life. These 
incarnations, he says, are but the forces ( Shak#i ) and dis- 
pensations (Zia) of the eternally wise and blessed Akhanda 
Sachchidananda who never can be changed or formulated, 
who is one endless and everlasting ocean of light, truth 
and joy, 

“If all his utterances could be recorded they would form 
a volume of strange and wonderful wisdom, If all his obser- 
vations on men and things could be reproduced, people 
“might think that the days of prophecy, of primeval, unlearned 
wisdom had returned. But it is most difficult to render his 
sayings in English. 

“A living evidence of the depth and sweetness of Hindu 
religion is this good and holy man. He has wholly controlled 
his flesh. It is full of soul, full of the reality of religion, 
full of joy, full of blessed purity. As a Siddha Hindu ascetic 
he is a witness of the falsehood and emptiness of the world, 
His witness appeals to the profoundest heart of every 
Hindu. He has no other thought, no other occupation, no 
other relation, no other friend in his humble life than his 
God. That God is more than sufficient for him. His spot- 
less holiness, his deep unspeakable blessedness, his unstudied, - 
endless wisdom, his child-like peacefulness and affection to- 
wards all men, his consuming, all-absorbing love for God are 
his only reward. And may he long continue to enjoy that 
reward! Our own ideal of religious life is different, but so 
long as he is spared to us, gladly shall we sit at his feet to 
learn from him the sublime. precepts of purity, unworldliness, 
spirituality and inebriation in the love of God,” 

Quoting from The Life of Keshub Chandra Sen, published 
in 1887 by thissame great writer, one reads,—“In the Parama~ 
hamsa’s teaching there was another remarkable characteristic. 
This sweet-soul@d devotee has gathered the essential concep- 


280 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


spirituality, This strange eclecticism suggested to Keshub’s 
appreciative mind the thought of broadening the spiritual 
structure of his ( Keshub’s ) own movement. The national 
conception of the Divine attributes spontaneously recommen- 
ded themselves as beautiful and true and also as the surest 
means of making his faith intelligible and acceptable to the 
land. Of course, he kept the simple universal basis of 
Theism intact. But from a theistic point of view he gave 
the most brilliant expositions of the teachings of mythology. 
These reformed expositions have been utilised by orthodox 
champions to bring about a reaction on behalf of popular 
idolatry. The philosophy of the whole question was summa- 
rised by him (Keshub ) in the Sunday Mirror thus,—‘* * 
Hindu idolatry is nothing but the worship of a divine attri- 
bute materialised. If the material shape is given up, what 
remains is a beautiful allegory or picture of Heaven's dis- 
pensation. The Theist rejects the image, but he cannot 
dispense with the spirit of which the image is the form. The 
revival of the spirit, the destruction of the form, is the work 
of the New Dispensation, *** Never were we so much 
struck with the divinity of the eclectic method as when we 
explored the gloomy regions of mythological India, ** * « 
We haves found out that every idol worshipped by the Hindu 
represents an attribute of God, and that each attribute is 
called by a peculiar name, The believer in the New Dispen- 
sation is required to worship God as the possessor of all 
those attributes*represented by the Hindu as innumerable 
as 330 millions, To believe in an undivided deity, without 
reference to the aspects of his nature, isto believe in an 
abstract God, and it would lead us to practical rationalism 
and infidelity. If we are to worship Him in all His, manifesta~ 
tions we shall name one attribute Lakskmi, another Sarasvati, 
another Mahadev &c, # # # * #” 

It would be well to quote still two other authorities of 
the Brahmo Samaj concerning the relationship of Sri Rama- 
krishna to Keshub Chandra Sen and the influences which the 


AS OTHERS SAW THE MASTER, . | 281 


"It was from the example of the Paramahamsa’s life that 
the idea of the Motherhood of God arose in the Brahmo 
Samaj. It was from him in particular that our Acharya 
( Keshub Chandra Sen } got the idea of invoking God with 
the sweet name of “Mother” after the simplicity of a child 
and of praying to Him and of beseeching Him for every 
indulgence as achild. The Brahmo religiontwas a religion 
of knowledge and dry disputations before. The shadow of 
Paramahamsa’s life falling on it made the Brahmo religion 
more agreeable by removing its dry or arid features,”—77ans- 
fated from the Life and Teachings of Paramahamsa Rama- 
krishna, contributed by Babu Girish Chandva Sen, a missionary 
of the New Dispensation Church, to the Dharmatatwa of ist. 
Ashwin 1809 Saka, p. 195. 

“Through an exchange of the religious feelings of these 
two high-souled persons the Brahmo Samaj has advanced 
much in the region of Devotion, #e# The child-like nature, 
at once simple and sweet, of the Paramahamsa coloured 
Keshub’s Yoga, his renunciation, his morality, his devotion, 
and hi¢ spotless conception of religion. The charming play of 
Devation and the idea of God’s Motherhood now displayed 
in the Brahmo Samaj are principally derived from Parama- 
hamsa Ramakrishna. *«*** That the worship of *God as 
Mother, and adorations and prayers in those homely common 
words in which Keshub was seen to indulge in his later days, 
were due to the high-souled Paramahamsa is known to 
many.”—Translated from the Life of Keshub Chandra Sen 
PP. 132 and 133, first Edition by Chiranjib Sarma, 

These excerpts from the writings of the foremost of 
Brahmo writers and authorities have been quoted freely, for 
they reveal the Master as others saw him. 


ry ‘olbesdiatanashguendiagscn 9 ibitidad te meester agile 


XXXVII 


THE SON OF HIS MOTHER. 


From the time when he met Sri Ramakrishna until 
that time when he became the Sannydsin, a period of 
almost five years, the life of Noren apart from his relation- 
ship with his Master, was of little interest and much suffer- 
ing. His father’s death, as has been seen, brought on utmost 
poverty. Previous to that tragic event the family had lived 
in much comfort, and even in luxury, for money came freely 
and it was spent freely. 

The father was still living when Noren met Sri Rama- 
krishna, but he paid little attention to the relationship of 
his son with the Saint. Then, too, Noren had not as yet. 
consciously or fully become the disciple of his Master. He was 
still in the doubting mood. Had the father really feared that 
his son would turn to the life of the monk, it was quite 
likely that, though he allowed him perfect freedom in every 
other matter, he would have exerted every means in his 
power, even force, if needed, to make his son enter the 
professional and worldly life. For Visvanath Dutta was a 
man of the world before he was a man of spiritual tendency. 
He was self-possessed in work and concerned with his own 
business ; whenever he had hopes for his eldest son, it was 
always that he should follow the legal profession. He was 
ambitious for him in this regard. He believed that he would 
adopt thif life and would excel therein, since he had already 
exhibited marked characteristics and aptitude of becoming a. 
thinker with great analytical power and a man of eloquence. 
But before he could even have the satisfaction of seeing his 
son finish the Law course the father passed away. That he 
thought of a worldly career for his son is evident fem the fact 
that on ceveral occasions. in accordance wita the custom of 


THE SON OF HiS MOTHER. 283 


some reason or other, however, the arrangements would be- 
broken off. Just before his death, practically on the very 
day of his passing away, he had finally settled upon his son's 
marriage, It was a very favourable opportunity, the father 
thought. His death, however, upset these proceedings. 

Sri Ramakrishna, whom Noren had now known for some 
time, was greatly opposed to his marriage. He prayed that 
it should never occur, It is said that he had set his wid’ 
against it when he heard that the arrangements were being 
finally settled. When events so shaped themselves that it 
became impossible, he was greatly relieved, for he held, and 
rightly so, that Noren was not born for the love of any” 
single person, or for the rearing of a family, but for the 
saving of souls. After his father’s death, Noren became his 
own master ; and it was quite certain that, so far as he was 
concerned, he would never marry. So long as his father 
lived, there was always the possibility that he would make 
conditions so intolerable for Noren that he would either have 
sto marry or leave his home. He had, however, opposed the 
various proposals his father had made with great vigour, one 
might say even with obstinacy, But one does not know but 
that he would have yielded had too strong a pressure been 
brought to bear upon him. His obstinate opposition was a 
great factor in the constant delay, for otherwise a Hindu lad 
is married at an early age and before he has much individ- 
uality or will of his own, But Noren had developed indi- 
viduality, and he manifested it at every turn in his life at 
that time. ; 

It is said, however, that he finally did consent to marry, 
when his father had secured an alliance with a powerful and 
wealthy Calcutta family who were ready to pay a magnifi- 
cent sum as dowry to Noren’s people and to send him to 
England for education. Noren was in an ambitious mood 
aty this time, and it might have been that the flattering op- 
portunity asfd the desire to please his father, also to see the 


world and to provide himself with a finished education, 
were too creat a tanintatinn avean farhim UWhatacae tha 


284 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 

. ‘ 
situation was, before the marriage could occur the father 
passed away. It was certainly a critical moment in Noren’s 
career ; it may be said that it was ¢he critical momerit from ; 
one point of view. ae 

With his father’s death Noren became the head of his 
house. Heavy responsibilities fell upon his shoulders. An 
onerous task was before.him ; and did any stray thoughts 
or feelings of becoming a monk enter his mind,‘he would be 
in despair because of the enormous obstacles which stood in 
the way. The affairs of the household were, in reality, too 
much for a lad of twenty summers, The story of the legal 
entanglement from which he extricated his family and him- 
self has already been told. His hardships and his self- 
sacrifice and utter selflessness with regard to his people have 
already been noted. Added to all this, were the rigour of his 
Law studies and the tempest of his thought and the struggle 
of his soul to find truth. Troubles heaped themselves upon 
him, until he did not know where to turn or what to do, But 
during this period he knew a place where he could unburden 
all his woes. That was at Dakshineswar and later at the 
Cossipur Garden at the Feet of his Master. Meanwhile at 
home it was struggle, struggle, struggle! And to have met 
this struggle as manfully as he did, was assuredly as much to 
his credit as though he had performed the most difficult 
ascetic practices, For his life during all this period was a 
living from hand to mouth ; indeed, it might be said that it 
was one continual proximity to starvation. And his pride 
was constantly on the alert, concealing the condition of the 
family. He secured several positions as schoolmaster and 
as articled clék to an attorney. By this means he managed 
to secure a sufficient income to insure a bare livelihood. 
The family was assisted, also, by near relatives, 

Noren pursued his studies eagerly during this time. He 
was also busied with much reading of all kinds of books, 
and it was mostly serious literature. His intellectual life 
was his chief diversion. At this time he had well nigh . 


THE SON OF HIS MOTHER. 285 


and .his greatest joy was to sit at the Feet of his Master. 
But there were times when many occurrences, disquieting to 
his mind, happened in the domestic circle. When times are 
hard, many awkward anxieties are bora whicli are passed 
over pleasantly.or with indifference in less difficult times. * 
The mother grew anxious as time went on, lest her son 
should Jgave thesfamily in order to take upon .himself the 
vows of the, monastic life. She would often broach the 
subject to him, and he would reply in a casual or . indifferent 
manner.. Something told her, however, that she need not 
worry, for her son would not desert her. His manner spoke 
louder than words, But it was a great shock to his natural 
tendency for idealisation and spiritual romance to be remind- 
ed, every now and then, of the prosaic elements and of the 
bondage of worldly life. He shouldered his responsibility 
in silence, forgetting all his worries in the Garden of 
Dakshineswar and in company with his friends and college- 
mates. Then, too, there was a certain light-keartedness 
about him, one might say, a certain elasticity of temperament 
which stood him in good stead at all times. He was naturally 
kind ; and he could not bear to see suffering in others with- 
out trying to alleviate it. Thus, he would speak to his 
mother, promising her all his loyalty and cheering“ her up as 
well as he could. 

However, Noren’s determination to remain unmarried was 
inflexible. The ideal of celibacy became a principle with 
him. He became more and more filled with the passion 
Sor purity, Even following upon his father’s death, his 
marriage would have netted the family a goodly sum, 
in fact, the possibilities of luxury as compared with 
their condition at that time. His family were well-connected, 
and many were the families who would have been glad to . 
count him as their son-in-law. His mother would press him 
with entreaties in this regard, but he would implore her not 
to insist in Shis matter. And when the members of the family 
would join in pressing him to lead the householder’s life and 
repeatedly and vehemently insisted upon. his marriage. he said 


286 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


to them with overwhelming force, “What! Are you going 
to get me drowned! For once married, it will all be over 
with me!” It was found later on to be of the greatest good 
to the family that he had thus insisted. For had he 
“married and settled down” as the saying goes, and had be- 
‘come a successful lawyer, he certainly would not have cast 
a radiance upon ‘the family, as he aid in the capacity of 
amonk. " 

He waited patiently for almost three years. Then the 
time came when he felt that the family could dispense with 
him. There were other sources of income; though meagre, 
they nevertheless, according to the proverb, “kept the wolf 
from the door.” The family remained silent on these 
matters and Noren most ofall, so that how they managed 
to get along has always been a matter of speculation. Little 
by little Noren drifted from his family. He would spend 
days at Dakshineswar. Latterly he spent & great deal of 
his time at the Cossipur Garden-house, whither Sri Rama- 
krishna was removed when his illness grew worse, and he 
lovingly looked after him, In the last days of the Master's 
life he was practically almost always at his side, Thus, 
when he actually severed his connection with the family 
after the passing of his Master, the shock of separation was 


comparatively slight. 
Then, too, he never completely broke off relationship with 


his people, in the sense that so many other monks do, both in 
the East and in the West. He always kept in touch with 
his mother. He would sometimes visit his home, when in 
Calcutta, to console her. His home Noren always thought of 
as holy with tender memories and sweet human sentiment, for, 
above all, his mother was there. And when he heard that two 
of his sisters had died in great unhappiness, and he was far 
away, he was overcome with grief for weeks and fled into. the 
deeper wilds, as at that time he was a wandering monk, like 
Buddha of old. His experiences with his family made him a 
patriot and a social reformer ; for he felt for the’ woes of the 


THE SON OF HIS MOTHER. 287, 


and knew what stavation meant ; and he thought of and 
longed for the education and advancement of Indian woman 
hood, because his own sisters whom he loved dearly, had had 
so many bitter experiences in life, and had come thereby to 
a tragic and untimely death. 

Noren really loved his mother. _He was always steadfast 
in his devotion to her. And his mother always took great 
pride in him. To a young Western disciple, who had come to 
India, long after the death of her son, she said with triumph 
and great dignity, “#Zy boy became a Sannydsin at twenty- 
four!” But she might have said that he wasa Sannyasin 
from a much earlier age, in fact, from the time of his first 
meeting with Sri Ramakrishna. Aye, he was, in his Master’s 
opinion, a “Born Brahmajndéni, that is, a born Knower of 
God, And there had been many noted incidents of great- 
ness in his boyhood and youth which his mother remembered 
and cherished, Certainly, she often wondered as to who 
her boy was, Even in his boyhood he was intense, In his 
later youth he was intense as an agnostic, then as a seeker 
after God, and then as a saint and, last of all, as a patriot 
and prophet. 

The Divine Mother took charge both of Noren and his 
people, Sri Ramakrishna had prayed to Her for him and 
She had answered his prayer. The family was never in want 
during the whole time of Noren’s monastic life. And when 
he finally became the monk, he did so in the glad conscious- 
ness that all was well with his people. 

But, of course, mothers are always mothers, and there 
were different moods which came upon Bhuvaneswari Mata. 
Sometimes she was glad he had become a saint and a bene- 
factor of the people. But at other times the woman in her 
was uppermost, and she would enter reveries wherein she 
peopled her home with other inmates, amongst them being 
a beautiful daughter-in-law and loving grandchildren, the 
children of Noren. But fate is inexorable, and certain souls 
are born fer a Purpose. Sentiment must give way before 
necessity, and necessity is the mother of greatness. In later 


. 


-288 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


life, though Bhuvaneswari Mata hoped that her two other 
sons would marry, she. could not succeed in persuading them 
to do so. : a 

From now one can survey the life of Noren as a monk. 
For so he was virtually, in the training received at the Feet 
of his Master. His life hereafter becomes a record of spirit- 
ual progress and spiritual realisations which made him the 
Spirit, incarnate of Hinduism. With the story of his family 
completed, one can now. give full attention to the growth of 
The spiritual consciousness within him ; one can join with him 
in the vision which was his and in the glory of his Master. 
the Paramahamsa Sri Ramakrishna, whose spiritual child he 
became, whose very Self he became. 


XXXVIII 


GURU AND DISCIPLE, 


During his training with Sri Ramakrishna, Noreh’s life 
is to be told, not so much as a record of events, as of ideas 
and realisations, 

Wonderful are the ties which bind souls, Wonderful, 
indeed, was the relationship between Sti Ramakrishna and 
’ Noren, The full Story of it can never be told. Only they 
knew the spirit of it, It was deep, deep, immeasurably and 
unutterably deep. The emotional and spiritual power of 
it is told somewhat in the wonderful words of love, loyalty, 
understanding, devotion and self-abandonment which the 
Swami Vivekananda in his writings has left with poster. 
ity, in regard to his Master. So close, so deep, so divinely 
mutual was their love and regard, one for the other, that the 
disciples of Sri Ramakrishna and those of the Swami 
Vivekananda always think of these two souls in one and 
the same moment of thought as Ramakrishna-Vivekananda. 
For the thought of the one implies an awareness of the other, 

From the very first moment in which Sri Ramakrishna had 
looked upon the face of N oren he was caught up in the net of 
a deep love for him. From the first moment of acquaintance 
it became a spiritual relationship, For the words of Sri 
Ramakrishna to his disciple were all in as piritual setting of 
thought and vision. Noren had come to him in the tempest 
of the spiritual impulse, asking him “ Sire, have you seen 
God?” - and the Master, answering in the affirmative, had 
almost in that moment lifted Noren into the sphere of ecstatic 
vision. The progress of the relationship was a constant, closer 
knitting of the bonds and, also, a constant growth in illumina. 
tion for the-Soul of the disciple. The climax was reached 
when the spirit of the Master, before his departure, descended 
Upon the disciple, Now it is seen that the relationship of . 


19 


- 290 JHE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


the ‘two served & great impersonal purpose, namely, the 
Revival of Hinduisni-and the preaching of the Modern Gospel 
to the peoples of the eerth. The close ties of this spiritual 
relationship became the bonds wherewith were bound the 
doctrines and the teachings which the Master imparted and 
the disciple in time spread, and which’ Have already become 
salvation to innumerable souls. 

But even as Noren’s education into the spiritual conscious- 
ness of Sri Ramakrishna was along process of understanding, 
and at first even a conflict with his Master as to the genuine- 
ness of his realisations, even so did he find difficulty in un- 
derstanding the greatness of the heart of the sage. At first, 
Noren had spoken of Sri Ramakrishna as a brain-sick old 
man, subject to hallucinations ; so also he thought him-éower- 
sentimental, and thus could not reconcile him with his ideal of 
saintship or seership. Thus it was an education here, as well. 
In both instances, it appeared as if Noren’s interpretation 
was correct ; but in both instances it proved to be fatse, for he 
came to accept Sri Ramakrishna as a man of a well‘batanced 
intellect and a well-balanced heart, fas ; 

Sri Ramakrishna’s love for Noren was such that if Noren 
failed to come for some days to visit him he would become 
inconsolable. He would sit, weeping alone. He would pray 
and pray to the Divine Mother ‘with a sorrow-laden heart, 
begging that She would make it possible for him to come, 
And whenever he cried and prayed like this, his beloved 
Noren would come to him, as if drawn by an unaccountable 
attraction. Those disciples who bad known Sri Ramakrishna 


. gnd had become his devotees long before his “meeting with 


Noren were astounded at this. It was out of the usual-order 
of things, They could not understand, Some criticised, but 
the Master remained silent. He knew only one desire, and 
that was that Noren should come, It was remarkable. And 
Noren, who was the object of this exceeding love, likewise, 
could not understand. He was only a lad-of some twenty 
years, It was a puzzle to him. He regarded Sri Ramakrishna 

Pes ee ee LM ie elinelanes 


GURU AND DISCIPLE, 291 


to the frequency with which he Visited Dakshirieswar; .Some- 
times he feated him, thinkigg. that Alte power of the man 
might affect him in some Strange yays, influeticing hig will, 
Then he would say to himself, “O well Y He is only a senti- 
mental old man.” But at other times he, would feel overcome 
by the Master’s affection for him and would lovingly respond 
to it. He would think to himself that, after a¥, no one loved 
him as did Sri Ramakrishna. It was at this time, also, that he 
was hard pressed by misfortune ; and he often felt worried 
and distracted. In these moments he would leave everything 
and repair to the Garden of Dakshineswar, Looking deep 
into his Master’s eyes, he would study and wonder; some. © 
times he would hesitate 3 at other times he would give him- 
self.over to the flood of religious feeling. He would give his 
own soul, as it were, to the Master in certain moments when 
he was carried away by the greatness of the Saint’s personality, 
' But then, again, he would hesitate. Finally, however, he gave 
himself,over to him completely. And then there would be 
questions and. answers and conversations and jollity ; and 
Noren would, ggturn home counting such days as the happiest 
he had ever known, It was really these moods of sweet. 
ness of relationship and of love which tided Noren over the 
times during which he did not understand his Master intek 


jectually. Were it not for his love for the Master he would) | 


have given him up at the first meeting. But Something’ 
“held” him. As Noren himself said at that time, « It is 
his love for me that binds me to him.” 
But the character and Spirituality of his Master’s love ,for 
him, Noren. came to realise on a certain occasion early in 
. their relationship, Noren came to Dakshineswar, Other 
disciples were present. Noren himself was in a light mood. 
He was happy and felt very free. It was characteristic of 
him, amongst all the disciples of the Master, that he alone 
approached him with familiarity. It was a familiarity, how. 
ever, born of a consciousness of the depth of love which his 
Master boré for him. It was this instinctive sense $f oneness 
and. sweet and inseparable relationship with his Master thar 


292 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


made it possible for him to criticise him even in his very pres- 
ence and'to ask him bold questions as to the authenticity of 
his realisations. Noren’s search for truth was respected by Sri 
Ramakrishna, and he not only allowed him to catechise him 
but felt pleased within himself at his doing so. Otherwise, 
how would Noren have dared to! For in India a discrepancy 
in years is a discrepancy in relationship. The young must ad~ 
dress the elders in terms of most profound respect. So this 
alone would have prevented Noren from speaking critically 
to Sri Ramakrishna, had it not been for his Master’s attitude 
to him and his own personal understanding of their relation- 
ship. Otherwise, there were many incidents which would 
have made Noren seem guilty of impertinence. 

It so happened that Noren had come this day after many 
days. The Master had sent one disciple after another to him 
entreating him to come, if only for once, So Noren came 
and the Master’s joy knew 20 bounds. After the usual 
salutation and formal inquiries, Sri Ramakrishna told Noren 
how anxious he had been to see him. Noren in reply said to 
him, “ Why do you think of me so much at all times 2" Then, 
adding softly by way of a sweet jest, “ You will become like 
me, if you constantly think of me. The Raja Bharat, thinking 
of his pet deer, forgot his ascetic practices, and in his next life 
he was born a deer.” Sri Ramakrishna said nothing ; but he 
was evidently moved. Did he think that his attachment to 
Noren would become a spiritual bondage in the paths of re- 
alisation ? Certainly his love for Noren seemed almost equal 
to his longing for God, in its spiritual character and intensity. 
He was silent. The other disciples were astounded and 
wondered, Noren also wondered. Surely he. would never 
have pained his Master intentionally. What then? 

Hours passed. Evening came on. The temple-bells com- 
menced to ring. Singing and chanting were heard. Sri 
Ramakrishna entering the temple fell into a deep state of 
Samadhi before the Divine Presence, when the fast waving of 
the lights was flashed before the Mother. ‘Phe time of service 


ee Tr... 


GURU AND DISCIPLE. _ 293 


bells had ceased to ring and Sri Ramakrishna returned to 
this plane of consciousness with the name of the ‘Mother upon 
‘his lips. He went back to his room. Noren was still there ; 
SO were some others, The Master seated himself upon the 
floor, The others sat around him. He then addressed Noren 
saying, “Noren ! Noren! Mother has told me all. She says, 
‘Noren is but a boy, not as yet mature. Why should you 
mind his words? It is because you see Narayana in him 
that you feel so drawn to him’, And so I-do not care a straw 
for the words you spoke to me. They are nothing to me 
From the day when I shall no longer see Narayana 
in you, I shall not look upon your face.” A hushed 
silence prevailed. All now understood. The problem 
was now solved, Noren sat silent, somewhat abashed, with 
eyes cast upon the Feet of the Master, with his hearing 
fixed upon the words just uttered. Sri Ramakrishna 
had dignified their relationship beyond any human ~ 
and personal sentiment. He had spoken to the effect 
that his love for him amounted to a perceiving of divinity, 
and a devotion thereunto, This altered matters, The other 
disciples now realised that the Master had made Noren the 
idol of his heart because he had seen, in some manner beyond 
their understanding, the divinity and the potentialities of his 
saul, True, he saw the divinity and spiritual character in 
these others who were also his disciples, but in Noren’s case 
it was an intense seeing, Consequently it was an intense long- 
ing for the presence of Noren. It wasalso this seeing of divin- 
ity'in Noren, of which the Mother Herself had spoken, and 
of which the Master was luminously aware, ; 
At another time while speaking to some of the elder dis- 
ciples in explaining his relationship with Noren and other 
young boys, Sri Ramakrishna said: “Hazra takes me to 
task for my being anxious to see the boys. He says, ‘When 
will you think of God ? # * * @ I felt uneasy in my mind and 
I said to Mother, ‘Hazra asks why should ‘I think so much, of 
Norendra*and other boys.” And Mother at-once showed 


Pe) ee ee | ee. ee |e See nee 


294 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


Herself in pure bodies, When I came out of this Samadhi, 
after seeing that Form, I became angry with Hazra and said, 
‘Oh, the fool! How he unsettled my mind? But again I 
thought, ‘Why to blame the poor fellow! How should 
he know !” . 

Continuing, the Master said : “1"know these boys as 
Embodied Narayana. When I saw Norendra for the first 
time I found that he had no body-idea. As soon as I touched 
him at the heart he lost outward consciousness, # * * * 
Gradually intense longing came upon me to see him again 
aad again, and it made my heart wring with pain, Then I told 
Bholanath, ‘How is it that I feel thus,—and that for a boy, a 
Kayastha by caste ? Then Bholanath said, ‘Sire, this is all 
right. It is explained in the Mahabharata that. when. the mind 
of aman of Samadhi comes down to the normal plane, it 
recreates itself in the company of men of sa#tva quality. 
That man rejoices only in meeting with men of the highest 
spirituality.’ Hearing this I got peace of mind, but sometimes 
I used to sit down and cry in my agony to see Norendra.” 

In this light it becomes easy to understand why Sri Rama- 
krishna was constantly saying great things concerning Noren, 
both to him personally and to others. At times his remarks 
upon Noren’s spiritual character and worth were startling. 
Noren himself often felt out of place in the presence of 
others when these remarks were being made. His Master 
spoke quite frankly, freely and simply, even as a child speaks. 
He seemed to realise that whatever he might say would cause 
no conceit or sense of self-importance in the mind of his dis- 
ciple. Though he frequently felt that Sri Ramakrishna rather 
over-emphasised his deserts, Norea surely gathered great 
strength of will and inspiration from these remarks, And 
they were assuredly a helpful memory with him in later years 
‘when, as the Swami Vivekananda, he took upon himself the 
responsibility of preaching a great message. They were a 
stimulus and an encouragement to him. Withal, Sri Rama- 
krishna was possessed of an aacurate understar@ling of person- 


GURU AND DISCIPLE. 295 


and there were certain methods by which he tested them. 

He would sometimes put ‘them, with’a touch, into a form of 
deep trance ‘and in that state the mind would speak, of itself, 
as was the case with advanced disciples, or he would ask certain 
questions and it would respond. 

But as to Noren he seemed to know him :rom the very 
beginning as a great soul embodied. At one time he said to 
those who had gathered about him, “Well, if Keshttb is 
possessed of one mark of greatness, Noren has nineteen such 
marks !” At another time he said: “In Keshub I found (in'a 
Vision) /Jnuanam lighted in the form of a candle; and 
in Norendra I saw /nanam shining as the Sun itself!” 
Such were the comparisons which Sri Ramakrishna drew 
between his disciple and the great Brahmo leader, 
Keshub Chandra Sen, whom also he greatly loved, Keshub, 
too, was a disciple, though, it may be said, secretly so; and 
unquestionably many of the theological ideas he preached 
towards the latter part of his great career were traceable to 
the diredt influence of Sri Ramakrishna, 

In the relationship between the Master and his disciple it 
is singular to note that Noren was allowed to offer no singl¢ 
act of personal service to him. Fanning and other attentiong, 
which the disciple must render to his spiritual guide in the 
way of service and training, were offered to Sri Ramakrishna 
by other disciples. Was it because of his seeing the Divine, 
the Shiva, so intensely in Noren, that he held him too sacred 
to do any sevé, or service, to him? For sevd is only for the 
purification of heart ; what need has he for sevd whose heart 
is already purified! Let it not be thought, however, that 
Noren did not feel thisasa great deprivation. He would 
insist in offering service in some way or other, out. of his love 
for the Master and his own sense of humility ; but the latter 
would on no account allow this, and dissuaded him by saying, - 
Your path is different !” ; 

Tougping, beyond words, was the love between Noren 
and Sri Ramakrishna when it had attained the culminatioh 

eg ae ot pet af the diccinle Often. often. 


296 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


on simply seeing Noren, the Master would pass into a state of 
ecstatic Samadhi. The other disciples remember well how, 
Ona certain occasion, when he had not seea him for some 
time, he advanced to Noren when the latter reached the 
landing-ghat at Dakshineswar, and touching his disciple’s 
face, began to chant the most holy word of the Vedas and 
went into an ecstatic Sam4dhi, And at his meeting Noren 
the third time at Dakshineswar he had lost himself in 
Samadhi and in that state addressed him saying, “Narayan, 
you have taken the body for my sake! Before taking this 
human form I said to Mother, ‘How can I go alone, O 
Mother! How can I live on earth if I have not a pure- 
midded Bhakta uncontaminated by Lust and Gold to talk 
toy” Continuing he said, “you came and woke: me up last 
night and told me, ‘Here I have come now !’” 4,’ 
At all times when in the presence of Sri Ramakrishna 
‘ Noren felt taken out of himself, as it were, Many, many 
times, while the song of the disciples rose high upon the 
evening air or when the Master, speaking of the highest 
Verities, entered the highest state of the spiritual con- 
sciousness,a great flood of feeling would come across Noren’s 
soul. He would seem to think and feel himself in another world, 
He would come into communion with stirring powers within 
the depth of his being, Aye, the flood-gates of vision were 
to open, The windows of his soul were to be thrown wide 
open, He was to have glimpses of the divine life, Aye, 
more than this, he was to have the full vision of that life. 
Indeed, he was to enter it in that moment when he attained 
unto the highest consciousness. Indeed, he was to become 
one with That, 5 


XXXIX 


THE MONASTIC CONSCIOUSNESS : 
RENUNCIATION—PURITY. 


Strong are the fetters of this world, Sharpas the edge 
of a sword is the path out of illusion. Dense is the darkness 
of the world. Terrible is desire, Like unto an all-consum- 
ing fire does desire burn across the world. Terrible is the - 
madness of passion. Terrible is the madness of greed) 
These are rampant in the world, making its bondage, causing 
its dense darkness and all its woe. Like adamant must Bet 
the determination of the soul to cut its way through the 
jungle of bondage; and like adamant was the spiritypl-- f a 
strength of Sri Ramakrishna, and even like adamant was 
that strength which he imparted to his disciples and, particu- 

’ larly, to Noren. Realisation comes only after enormoys 
effort ; and character is the test of all realisation.. 

Sri Ramakrishna did not only impart rich spifitual teach- 
ing unto hie disciples, he imparted, likewise, a stimulus 
and strength to follow that teaching. His own life, the 
force of his utteranees, the readiness with which he experi- 
enced the highest state of consciousness, his communion with 
divine realities, his overwhelming sense of the obstacles to 
the spiritual life—all these were as a great light to the 
disciples, and in that light they gained strength and a glori- 
ous spiritual consciousness, 

The triamph-_of religion is the finding of God. It is the 
transcendence over the limitations of the physical conscious- 
ness, But the triumph is the result of struggle, and it comes 
of having seen the reality beyond those which make up the 
purely sensuous life. Certainly the task is tremendous. The 
fog of instint blinds the vision. Heavy clouds of sense keep 
the soul fixed en things below, The radiance of reality is 


298 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


dimmed, Shadows of reality are cast, in. spite of the dim- 
ness, upon the intellectual consciousness,—and man speaks 
of philosophy. But what as to the substance of these 
shadows! What as to the rending of the veils! What as to 
developing the spiritual vision so as to pierce through the 
darkness} This is the successful effort of the saint, The 
way is one forallsaints. It has been preached from time 
immemorial, Long ago in the dawn of time, the clarion 
note of triumph rang out. One had found the Way. He 
said, “Behold! I have found the Ancient One beyond all 
darkness and all illusion!” And the path was through ex- 
treme, all-embracing renunciation and through a passion for 
purity. Terrible is the journey; long isthe way, but the 
end is sure. And the end is—God, the Absolute. 

For twelve long years had Sri Ramakrishna performed 
unremittingly the Sadhanas and penances of the ascetic life. 
For twelve long years he had sojourned on the paths of 
tapasyd, or the rigorous training of the mind into the think- 
ing of God. Ordinarily, the mind is restless. It is a wander- 
er whose highway is the broad path of instinct, whose vision 
is of never-ending desire. And yet, though passion speads 
itself in despair, and though desire proves fraudulent again 
and again, still does the mind follow the paths of illusion. 

And what is at the bottom of the folly and the misery 
of the world? What is the fuel on which desire feeds? 
What are the instruments of bondage? What causes the 
darkness of the world? Sri Ramakrishna. said, “It is Kdma- 
Kénchana” or Lust and Gold, or he would say, “It is Kaminz- 
Kénchana” or Woman and Gold! This covers the whole 
of the import, “Lust and Gold ! Woman and Gold!" The 
desire to let the physical instincts run riot ; the desire for 
the means wherewith to gratify instinct and let the animal 
nature run wild! These make up the entanglements of 
the world. Can fnan break through these snares! Can the 
soul ever develop such strength of vision, as tejsee values 
beyond the objects of the senses! Aye, indeed! Se have 


ee ee Oe Te ae, Pee NA, es Ci ete eh 


THE MONASTIC CONSCIOUSNESS. 299 


Swami Vivekananda. Aye, such is the strength of the soul, 
that it can even remove mountains, aye, that it can eveti’ 
blot out the universe itself! Sugh was the inspiration which’ 
the blessed Master gave unto his ‘disciples. “et 4 

To understand the strength of Noren, one must-under- , 
stand the strength of Sri Ramakrishna. How had the; 
Master overcome the great barriers of “Lust and Gold !” For- 
years he had been arriving at the understanding of this 
synthesis of the units of bondage. Then, having traced all 
the obstacles to the spiritual life to their source, he manifested: 
divine energy in vanquishing them. To overcome the idea 
of distinction in sex, he turned to a practical method. Aye, 
he himself would become a woman, to acquire the feminine 
consciousness! Therefore, he put on the sért, which is the 
garthent of the Hindu woman. He dwelt with the women 
members of Mathoor Babu’s family, even as one of them, afd 
they regarded him in the same light, It was wonderful. It 
was a triumphant demonstration of how the mind can be. 
made subordinate to wil, It revealed the glory of the soul, 
He chose this intense method because he was determined 
to acquire an ixfense sense of sexlessness. Verily, the quest 
for purity had become a passion with him. His mind could 
no longer regard womanhood in any setting of sex. He 
looked upon all women as Mother. And even so did he 
address them. There was no half-way method with Sri 
Ramakrishna. He knew the deceptions of the senses and he 
knew, also, how fleeting is that consciousness of strength 
which comes of the pride, “I am already pure.” He admit- 
ted that the soul in its essence was ‘pure ; but he asserted, 
likewise, that the manifestation of that purity in a grand 
stability of character, was a task demanding unflinching 
determination of will and a constant seeing of the Ideal. 
Well may one follow in his path and even rollin the dust 
ashe did, in an agony of longing to sée God. There was 
no trifling M% these matters with Sri Ramakrishna. He knew 
that the only way was'the immediate cutting-off of all bonds. 


i ei ae i ie oo a a ee OE a eed ene a 


300 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


and if it consists in the manifestation of spiritual life, then 
the reason for the monastic spirit is seen at once. Verily, 


» “Only the pure in heart shall see God !” 


And as to his conquest over “Gold.” The vision is in- 
‘effaceable of Sri Ramakrishna sitting beside the Ganges-bank 
with gold in one hand and earth in the other. He would say 
aloud, as if addressing the gold itself, that gold can buy many 
things in the way of luxuries and comfort, but it has not the 
power to make the soul see God. Thereafter he would denounce 
it. What was it but dirt, if it could not take one to God! And 
the would mix and shuffle the earth and the pieces of gold 
together, holding the thought that gold itself was-dust and 
that nothing but useless dust was in his hands. The climax 
would come. He would vea/ise the gold as dirt. Then, stand- 
ing up, triumphant, he would throw both the gold and the 
‘dust into the flowing waters of the Ganges. Extraordinary 
‘was that realisation. The divine consciousness had come 
upon the Master. He was no longer the personality struggl- 
ing to realise the worthlessness of gold and of all worldly 
spossessions which gold can buy. He was Sri Ramakrishna, 
the Divine Man, the Man-God, the God-Man ! 

On these two objects of renunciation Sri Ramakrishna 
was inexorable, Insistent offers came that he should accept 
the great Temple of Dakshineswar with its enormous in- 
come ; other offers came to him involving great sums of 
‘money. He refused them all, as such offers were repugnant 
to him. When he was pressed to accept, he literally drove 
the well-meaning donors away, crying out, “What shall I do 
with your money? What shall I do with it? Why does 
‘Mother bring such mento me!” When he was ill and_his 
boy disciples were nursing him, and the householder dis- 
ciples were providing all the necessary expenses, one of the 
Jatter a man of some means, contributed a certain sum of 
money towards the maintenance of the household, Being 
‘much older than the boy-disciples he wanted to boss them, 
and shortly after he grumbled at the expenditure, though ‘the 
‘disciples were most economical. They were in’a quandary, Sri 


THE MONASTIC CONSCIOUSNESS. 3Or 


Ramakrishna heard of it. “What! said he. “This is no 
place for us ! Let us go !” And addressing Noren he added, 
“I will go and stay anywhere you take me!” And taking up. 
his one possession, a cloth, he was ready to depart then and 
there from the house, preferring to live under a tree if need be, 
with Noren and the other boy-disciples, depending upon the 
Lord alone. 
It was this divine spirit in Sri Ramakrishna, this utter 
; contempt for money and the things of the world, which gave 
; weight to his teachings. Womanhood, to him, was synony- 
; mous with motherhood. He had the highest vision of woman- 
:hood, This was the spirit of the man,—indomitably spiritual, 
! invincibly divine, 

The disciples of Sri Ramakrishna were men, in many 
instances, grown old in worldly ways. The others were boys 
who later on became members of the Ramakrishna Order of 
monks, And ail of them knew him for years. There were 
several, bolder than the others, who tested the Master. One, 
a householder, took him to a house, where it had been arranged 
that dancing-girls should endeavour to turn his mind from 
the highest truth. The Master walked into the house, not 
knowing who were the inmates. He ascended the stairs and 
was left in the drawing-room all by himself. And then came 
in the dancing marionettes of sin, beautiful and seductive, 
and exhibited their charms to him. “O Mother ! O Mother ! 
Where have you brought me !” An agonising cry, as of a child 
in trouble, rent the air. And then the body of Sri Ramakrishna 
became rigid as though dead. His soul had gone into 
Samadhi, The scene changed. The women were amazed. 
Holiness filled the room. The women, full of remorse, fell at 
the feet of the Master. And, turning to him who had 
brought the saint into the presence of sinners with their sins, 
the women exclaimed, “Why did you bring a saint here? He 
is a Sukadeva. Heisa Manof God. We can only look upon 

“him as aethild” And Sri Ramakrishna, coming to earthly 
- consciousness, stretched out his hands and blessed the women. 


Pree ie es ae ee RR eT Tay 7 


02 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


Such was the roaring fire of purity and renunciation be- 
fore which Noren sat in rapt wonderment. Who would not 
become radiant in purity with such an one for Master? And 
a like test: occurred with Noren as had occurred with Sri 
Ramakrishna, though the situation was somewhat different 
because of the difference in temperament. Some of his 
wealthy friends asked Noren to come fora drive to their 
garden. He consented joyfully. Suddenly the carriage en- 
tered a narrow lane, and after a short distance it stopped in 
front of ‘a house. All alighted, and entered the grounds 
where a garden-party was being held. Noren knew nothing 
of what had been arranged. Merrymakers were there, and 
Noren enjoyed their singing and pressed by them sang him- 
self, After a time he grew tired, and was told that he might 
rest comfortably in an adjoining room, His friends, seeing him 
‘alone, sent a dancing-girl to amuse him. He was as simple 
asachild with her. She told him many interesting things 
about her life, and he asked her many questions with a frank- 
ness that quite puzzled her. He behaved just as a brother 
with her. Then she confided in him, telling him the sorrows 
and the misfortunes of the life she led. And then seeing 
how she had engaged all his interest and sympathy, 
she misinterpreted his attitude and-took a fancy to him. She 
begged him to come and see her, saying, “We will make famous 
friends.” And then the moment came when she made him 
know what she felt. Instantly he remembered Sri Rama- 
krishna. He thought of God, All sense of amusement 
left him. He became serious and started to his feet. The 
thought of his being a disciple of Sri Ramakrishna and yet © 
joining in such a frivolous party, brought tears to his eyés. 
And he said to the girl, “Excuse me, I must be going now, 
I have a genuine sympathy for you and wish you well. If 
you know in your heart that it is a weakness to lead such a 
life, you will get ove it some day” They parted, _When 
the girl came from Noren’s company, she was in a state of 
bewilderment. This sudden termination of a fritndly con- 


yee 9, a Pe eh cee EE De OTR AE, ARE! hl ER RT RR. Oe fe hee ee lee 


THE MONASTIC CONSCIOUSNESS. 303 


said to Noren’s friends sarcastically, “ It is a nice trick you 
have played upon me, sending me to tempt a Sadhu !”. 

* .And at this time, also, there were those who came to Sri 
Ramakrishna, telling him that Noren was in.danger- of losing 
his sense of purity, because of the doubtful character of some 
of his friends, Sri Ramakrishna knew that Noren’s soul-was 
attuned to the very highest spirituality ; therefore he seemed 
unaffected by their words, and felt that their puritanical solici- 
tude was somewhat out of place, He answered them, “ You 
need not have any fear of that,” and he added, “Noren can 
not fall into evil ways. The Mother Herself will guard him !” 

Such was the training in the monastic consciousness which 
Noren received ; such were his inherent qualities of purity 
and renuhciation, Noren was instinctively pure. And the 
flame of his innocence was fanned by the inspiration and 
teaching of Sri Ramakrishna into the roaring fire of spirituality. 
He became conscious of purity as a priceless treasure to be 
attained affd cherished at all costs, Far removed from the 
evils of this world were that group at Dakshineswar. Their 
only pleasure was devotion to the Lord. They were all 
spiritual lions, testing their strength in the presence of this 
Lion amongst Men, this Conqueror of Kémini-Kdnchana this 
Man who saw God, this Man who became one with God— 
Bhagavan Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa Deva, 


XL 


DAYS OF ECSTASY AT DAKSHINESWAR, 


It may be truthfully stated that only Noren, amongst the 
disciples, fully understood the greatness of Sri Ramakrishna. 
He alone went into the heart of the Master's thought, He 
alone weighed the words of the Master in the balance. He 
alone dared to doubt. But, then, he alone had the glorified 
conviction and consciousness with regard to the Master, 
which comes of having transcended doubt: “QO Mother !" had - 
cried Sri Ramakrishna from the temple-stairs and with eyes. 
fixed upon the Image of the Mother in the distance, “ Give 
me one who will even challenge my realisations.” And that 
man had now come, And from the very begirining the 
Master understood that his prayer to the Mother had been 
answered. Sri Ramakrishna admired courage and indepen- 
dence in thought and conduct. He loved intensity and sin- 
cerity of character. The other disciples hung with rapt at- 
tention upon each word he uttered. Their greatness was. 
that of the heart. They were bhaktas, that is, they loved the 
Master. Theirs was the vision which comes of love, They 
knew Sri Ramakrishna only through their burning love 
for him. But Noren would question him. Noren would 
smile at his statements and criticise them. Noren, too, had 
love for the Master such as no other disciple had, and it was. 
this love for him which caused him to respect, to revere and 
to adore him. But he would not be satisfied until he had 
made his convictions of the truth of Sri Ramakrishna’s teach. 
ing absolutely infallible, in so far as the analytical intellect - 
was capacitated to sanction the utterafices-of a saint and seer. 

Noren was in the savitarka state of mirid. That is, he 
was,in the argumentative state of consciousness.in order to. 
arrive at truth, He aroused a tempest of thought with re- 


eeeeek. On Wie? sen Senn Ae ae 


DAYS OF ECSTASY AT DAKSHINESWAR. 305 


imparted to him. All the disciples spoke of Noren at this 
time as a roaring lion in argumentation. He woukd storm 
the minds of those who entered into discussion on. religions 

matters with him in the presence of the Master. ‘He wonld. 
startle them with the profundity of his knowledge, citing 
Western and Oriental philosophers, verbatim, to questions 
which arose, And in the midst of such discussion, Sri Rama- 
krishna would sit wondering, sometimes losing himself in 
Saméadhi at the learning of Noren, It was more than mere 
learning which Noren revealed, It was the spirit of learning, 
which he made incarnate in himself. His was a terrible storm 
of intellectual sincerity. It was a sincerity which transcended 
all intellectual definition and description ; it could only be 
called spiritual. It was this power of searching for truth, 
this triumphant, partly intellectual and partly spiritual, fin- 
ding of truth which filled Sri Ramakrishna with a feeling bor- 
dering on rgspect for Noren, Yes, this was the “Shiva-nature* 
or the “Shiva-power” in Noren, as Sri Ramakrishna used to say, 
In some transcendent method of seeing, Sri Ramakrishna*aw 
this as a manifestation of that divine power and consciousness, 
whose grand climax soars beyond all illusion—the supermun- 
dane power of Shiva! On a certain occasion this insight at- 
tained a climax, breathing itself forth in a remarkable’ ut- 

terance of Sri Ramakrishna concerning his disciple, Noren 

was advancing in the distance, coming towards the great 
meditation-tree under which the Master and disciples were 
seated with thought concentrated upon God. Suddenly, the 
eyes of the Master opened, He-spoke out. The disciples were 
aroused from thought, “Behold! Here is Noren. See, see! 
O what power of insight he has! It is like a shoreless sea of 
radiance! The Mother, Mahamaya Herself, cannot approach 
more than within ten feet of him! She is bound by the very 

glory which She has imparted to him !” ; 

‘Then, turning from outward consciousness, he prayed 
alotd in ecstasy that the Mother might dim that radiance in 
order that Norean might be able to work. iO Mother,” 
he prayed “ Put‘a little of Thy Maya into Norendra ! Rne 


306 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


otherwise, he would be concerned, by the impulse of the 
natural tendency of his soul, only with the highest reaches of 
the personal realisation ;—otherwise he would be immersed in 
eternal meditation and would be mindful only of the Supreme 
Reality and thus be lost to the world, 

Yes, it was strange, Sri Ramakrishna knew what he was 
praying for. The other disciples were amazed ; but they ac- 
cepted Sri Ramakrishna’s valuation of Noren as indisputable, 
Had he not gauged the depths of their own natures also! 
Had he not had the vision of the special divinity to which 
each mind tended when they had come to him for the first 
time | Had he not told each one of them his secret tendencies ! 
By merely touching them he had imparted powers and re- 
alisations unto them! Who were they to doubt when he 
said of Noren, “He has nineteen of the powers of Shiva !” or, 
“He is a burning, roaring fire consuming all impurities to 
ashes,” and added, “Even should Noren live-on beef and 
pork, it could not harm in the least the great power of 
spirituality within him !” How well chosen were the words of 
revelation which the Master spoke in relation to Noren’s 
character! They bore meaning years later. When some 
over-zealous Christian missionaries, with a view to shock the 
Hindu social and religious sensibilities in India regarding the 
Swami Vivekananda, who was the idol of the hour to the 
Hindus, spread the news that he was living in American 
hotels, the words of the Master came to the gurubhais or 
brother-disciples. What mattered it, they thought, even if he 
had had to violate a Hindu social custom of later growth in 
giving out his message to the West ! Was he not a roaring fire 
of spirituality burning all impurities to ashes! He was Free, 
Free, Free! He was the monk, the Man witha Message. 
He had gone beyond all custom and all nationality ! 

Thus it was that when certain. admirers who came to 
Dakshineswar offered fruits and sweetmeats for the Master 
to partake of, he would set them aside. He would not eat 
them himself save when he was sure as to’ the character and 


aan ee ae Ne meee 


‘DAYS OF ECSTASY AT DAKSHINESWAR. 307 


wise, give them to his other disciples, But. Noren could 
take them, Nothing could affect him, He was the foaring 
fire of purity. No stain could come upon him, so the Master 
thought. He would reserve these delicacies only for Noren, 
and if he did not come to him the Master would, whenever 
the opportunity presented itself, even send them to Noren’s 
house, Noren wondered at this peculiar discrimination his 
Master exercised as to food and the receiving of presents from 
certain persons, He thought that it was perhaps an eccentri- 
city due to superstition or toa puritanical squeamishness, 
But Sri Ramakrishna insisted that, in these cases, when he 
refused to accept offered food or other things for himself the 
giver was a man of questionable character. This interested 
Noren, Was it true? He would find out for himself, So, when 
the first occasion offered itself he studied the character of the 
Person in question. He did this again and again as oppor- 
tunity permitted. In every instance he found that Sri 
Ramakrishna had acted rightly. Then he thought, “What 
a wonderful man is this! It is past understanding! How 
is he empowered with the reading of the minds of others! 
Certainly, t® say the least, he is a saint! He is, indeed, 
a perfected Yogi!” 

Only those who have sat at the Feet of the Master, can 
know the ocean of sweet intimacy and oneness with Sri 
Ramakrishna in which the disciples were bathed. It was a 
sweet, tender, natural, human, easy and free relationship, 
free from any affectation and free from the repelling spirit 
of that egoism and aloofness which so often characterises 
the atmosphere which surrounds the Guru. The spirit was, 
indeed, divine ; the gist of the teaching was inspiring beyond 
all inspiration ; the ecstasy was overpowering ; the Presence 
of God was always felt. And yet, there was much laughter 
and fun beneath the spreading trees of Dakshineswar and 
in the Master's room, which stood adjacent to the Temple. 
The Master and the disciples would often sit. under the 
boughs of*the trees talking intimately and sweetly, And 
every now and then the course of human joy would be inter- 


308 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


rupted by some overreaching spiritual remark of the Master. 
And then, human joy would soar into divine blessedness. 

There under the moonlight beside the flowing waters 
they would sit, or perhaps, in some secluded corner of the 
great grove of Dakshineswar; and those who passed in the 
distance would feel strangely drawn towards that spot. They 
would anchor their boats at the Temple-gai, or they would 
leave the main road and wander through the peace and 
stillness of the trees and evening air, until reaching the 
joyous assembly of the devotees they would take the dust 
ofthe Master's feet and join in the chorus of song, or else 
with ecstasy of soul drink in the nectar of immortality which 
flowed, as words, from the lips of the blessed saint, It may 
be that~twenty or thirty ofthe disciples were there, and 
Noren among them. 

Some of the disciples would stop for the night to be with 
the Master. Some slept in the Verandah at the south-east 
corner of the Master’s living-room, andtsome in the room 
itself. At twelve o’clock all would be fast asleep. Sri Rama- 
krishna alone remained awake in meditation, or*in ecstasy. 
And the rest which the body enjoys during *the state of 
ecstasy or Samadhi, is more thorough even thén that which 

’ is produced by natural sleep. Ther, it may be, that at two or 
three o'clock he would chant, in the dead stillness, the 
names of the Lord, accompanied by prayers, and call out, 
“Arise! Awake! The hour of meditation is at hand !” And 
the Master would begin to sing ; and across the sweet silence 
of those early hours the names of the Lord would rise and 
fail in the echo and the ecstasy of song. Then the disciples 
would scramble up from sleep. Everyone would be all 
attention, Everyone would sit in meditation. Peace reigned ; 
sweet, sweet peace, and God. 

Indeed, to be with Sri Ramakrishna was, in itself, a 
tapasya and a sadhana, It was in itself a rising beyond all 
bodily ideas and limitations of sense. But it was, also, a 
joyous. condition of things, not a sighing and crucifixion. 
It required concentration of the highest ordef and innermost 


DAYS OF ECSTASY AT DAKSHINESWAR, 309 


character to follow the Master in bis thought. It stirred. 
the. whole soul of the devotee to realisation. apd ecstatic 
fervour to enter the field of diyine emotion with: which Sri 
Ramakrishna painted his words and in which. he soared, 
beyond all werds, to.God, The company of Sri Ramakrishna. 
was, in itself, a most compelling stimulus. to spirituality, 
Thought literally seethed at the Dakshineswar Garden, 
Emotion literally blazed there. There the soal of things 
literally shone forth, 

And Noren felt in his element there, All his boyish 
enthusiasm was let loose there, He was like a young lion 
sporting joyously in the presence of a strong but indulgent 
parent. All that pent-up energy of mind and heart, which 
revealing itself piecemeal in former times, as it were, had 
brought on a great anguish of mind and tempest of heart, 
now let itself loose. It manifested itself as a torrent of 
spiritual energy, Sri Ramakrishna understood and was 
delighted beyond speech. As has been said, ,the flights 
of Noren’s soul were visible to him ; and the great emotional 
power of it all would send the Master into numerous and 
repeated ecstasies and stages of Samadhi, This was fire 
eating fire. The whole atmosphere at the Dakshineswar 
Garden would become a mass of spiritual flames. It was 
wonderful ; it was overwhelming; it was divine. Like a 
Majestic king, venerable in the long years of his Spiritual 
experience, was the old man; and Noren was like the young 
prince and heir, full of the fire and energy and vigour of his 
Spiritual inheritance. Sri Ramakrishna understood. He 
let the spiritual impetus of Noren’s mind rise, by the force 
of its own pressure. He allowed the mind of Noren to 
become its own guyz, For so the Hindus believe, They 
hold that sincerity of heart brings on, of itsglf, the gradual 
illumination of the mind. The mind presses of itself into the 
channels of the vision and the consciousness of reality. Sri 
Ramakrishn& realised this. He allowed Noren to doubt him, 
to sound him, Mesaid, “Do not accept anything because 

e ane a _ 


Vai “mata. eas. Sbarw os kes oe eee oe ws 


310 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


in assent or in dissent that the goal is to be attained, but ia 
actual and concrete realisation.” And this Noren did as 
it was his nature to do. 

Verily, as the sun is vastly above the earth, so was this gurz 
above all other gurus ; verily, as the sun is vastly above the 
earth, so was this disciple above all other disciples. They 
transcended all the traditional ideas of guru and disciple. And 
was it’ wonderful that Noren should have counted, towards. 
the close of his active life, those days of ecstasy at Dakshin- 
eswar, as days of eternal blessedness, and his nature as the 
beloved ‘boy-disciple at that time, his only true and reab 
nature 


XLI 


t 


THE METHOD OF THE MASTER’S TEACHING. 


A tumult of thought and a tempest of argument had 
arisen.. “Was God Personal or Impersonal? Did God be- 
come incarnate, or was Divine Incarnation a myth ?” On and 
on the conversation grew, untilit touched all the points 
of theological inquiry. It was early morning. A mist was 
everywhere, And the forms of the devotees seemed like 
shadows in the distance. But the storm of voices was carried 
along the quiet atmosphere, Sri Ramakrishna had just come 
out of his meditation. He was alone; the: others were at 
some distance, resting under the mist-laden trees, Sri Rama- 
krishna stepped from out his room, He heard the chorus of 
excited voices; and, above the loud words of all the others, 
he heard the commanding notes of his chief disciple. He 
listened for some time, The voices of the others gradually 
grew fainter and fainter. Finally they were hushed, Only 
Noren’s voice rang out clear and excited. He had gained 
the argument. He had overwhelmed all their theories, 

Sri Ramakrishna approached the gathering. His face was 
luminous ; his very presence was radiant, Nearer and nearer 
he came ; and then the opening notes of a song’tame from 
his lips. His voice was known to all the devotees of Dakshin- 
eswar as musical beyond all description. He sang wonder- 
fully. The morning mists were being dispersed as a great 
curtain is lifted, disclosing a beautiful scene, For it was a 
beautiful scene that revealed itself as the sun arose, The 
trees were beautifully green because of the dampness, A de- 
licious freshness pervaded the whole place, The morning 
sun shone upon the figure of the saint; and the text of his 
song rang out thus,— a 

“O my ming ! What avail thy efforts to realise that Being! 


Y as ee ee ee ee Ce a. a Oe a, er See: 


312 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


The song continued : “Go into the six schools of philos- 
ophy. ‘Phere that Being thou shall not find! Neither in 
the Tantras, nor in the Vedas! That Being is fond of the 
sweet essence of Love!” * 

The disputing disciples sat silent and etstatic. Yes, here 
was. the great answer to all their questionings and dubious 
réplies, Sri Ramakrishna never entered into their argaments, 
With a word gr a glance or a song he would teach ; and the 
teaching was always, “Realisation is the only goal. * When 
realisation comes into the heart all arguments cease. The 
state of divine knowledge shines forth.” 

Indeed, Sri Ramakrishna was a teacher who spoke only 
the language of realisation, He was not metaphysical. ; He 
had seen ;-he had literally seen the Truth. So, what need of 
discussing to a hair's point questions that remain forever 
debatable to the human mind? Like Buddha ‘of old, Sri 

_ Ramakrishna had little use for logic, Spirituality is not the 
attainment of a great development of the faculty for setting 
fine theories into fine language. It is realisation. It is 
character. Itis the conquest of “Kdsmini-Kanchana.” Sri 
Ramakrishna took the burden of realisation from the plane of 
discussion into the sphere of persona] striving, into the Sphere 
of austerities, and of a realistic effort at vision. 

There was another time when argument waxed loud and 
high, And Noren was again taking the lead as so often 
happened. “Were the Shastras true? Were the Vedas 
inspired? What was God ?” Such questions took up the time 
and formed the subjects of discussion. Sri Ramakrishna 
listened quietly. For some time he listened to the intellectual 
wrangling. He smiled tenderly upon the group of the dis- 
ciples whom he loved so dearly, Then he appeared as if 
impatierit with “much talk.” He walked leisurely towards 
the landing-ghat of the Temple. Suddenly his eyes fixed 
themselves intently, now on one side of the ghat and then 
on the other. Then he smiled knowingly. . 

The disciples arose. _ The argument had been worn to 


THE METHOD OF THE MASTER'S TEACHING. 313 


were tired and exhausted. They went to the: landing-ghat 
where the Master stood. He looked at them as if, about 
to speak. Then, he pointed his hand towards the ghat, 
And there on either side were dogs, One group was howF- 
ing and. barking. The othe? was busy crunching the bones 
of a corpse that had floated down with the tide from 
some distance above. A terrible simile ! Shocking, it might 
be, but true! Yes, argument remains until the body of 
truth has been seen and partaken of. Philosophy is not the 
point ; realisation zs, 

During those times when discussion rose high, Sri Rama- 
krishna would never demand silence, Let them talk, they 
would learn better, he would say. Sometimes, however, . he 
enjoyed it, By it he sensed the spiritual consciousness of his 
‘disciples. When the conversation rose toa great pitch of 
spirituality, the qualities and tendencies of the various 
‘speakers revealed themselves. Sri Ramakrishna would see 
the spiritual side of the intellectual tempest and this would 
cause him great joy. When Noren, realising the highest 
flights of philosophical consciousness, would pour out his 
very soul through the molten forms of thought in song or in 
beautiful words, Sri Ramakrishna would pass into Samadhi. 
Noren’s conversation was often the utterance, the expression, 
‘of that which the Master himself felt. Verily was the 
Master’s company a great school in the training of the soul, 
There were no dogmatic announcements or teachings. It 
«was all in the nature of a stimulus to personal growth. Each 
was free to utilise his own powers in discovering and realising 
the personal potentialities. 

There were certain special occasions, however, when Sri 
Ramakrishna would intervene. These were, for example, 
when Noren’s towering thought endangered the limited vision 
of another. There was that instance when Noren attacked 
faith as a means to salvation. - He spoke of “blind faith.” 
Sri Ramakrishna finding that his other disciple was ,being 
overwhelmed, gaid, “Noren, what do you mean by ‘blind faith’? 


314 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA., 


‘blind faith’? Either say simply ‘faith’ or say ‘Jnana’, Know- 
ledge. What do you mean by classifying faith as one kind 
having an eye, and the other being blind 2” By these words 
Sti Ramakrishna meant to convey that even the highest 
human knowledge, even all Philosophy is “blind faith,” as 
compared with one atom of that realisation which comes not 
from credence or credulity but from an actual perception of 
reality. Such Perception infallibly leads to spiritual vision 
and to actual realisation, Whereas, all puffed-up and vain 
knowledge is, as the Christian Bible announces, so much 
“foolishness with God.” The more Noren ransacked the 
whole store of his learning and intellectual faculty the more. 
convinced he became that he had only used a meaningless 
word, Thus the educated Vivekananda came to feel himself 
vanquished before the illiterate Ramakrishna, and never again 
in his life did he use the word, blind faith, 

Slowly but surely Noren came to understand that, it is. 
not knowledge but realisation which is true religion. The 
heart must be developed. Man must see God. Thinking of 
teality is good; but better is the vision of the same. It 
took time and much loving patience. But in the end Noren. 
discovered that Sri Ramakrishna’s teaching was the eloquent 
silence of insight, Thereupon he determined that he, too, 
should first of all possess insight. Having that, verily, he 
could then ¢hunder truth to the peoples of the earth, He 
could then become the eloquent utterance of that grand 
silence of insight whieh was of the soul of the Master, 

Often, often, during conversation when the disciples were 
sitting round him, Sri Ramakrishna would burst into some 
heart-stirring utterance. Then the devotees would soar, be- 
yond the commonplaceness of mere thought, into that silence 
which is the sensing of reality. At other times he would 
leave the disciples to themselves and to their argumentative 
moods, The discussion ended, they would find him in the 7 
deepest Samadhi. This, they came to know after a time, was 
a silent and yet eloquent protest to their heated discussion. 
Sri Ramakrishna was a maé whenle.a..370040. SC 


THE METHOD OF THE MASTER'S TEACHING. 315. 


core of things, He was not content with eloquent words, 
- le demanded, “What do you fsow? What have you 
realised?” At times he would place his foot upon one. 
who was arguing with Noren. From that moment, for 
some reason or other, the intellect of Noren would wane 
before the sudden increase in the intellectual radiance of the- 
other disciple. 

All through his life Noren held in mind this attitude 
of his Master asa guru in dealing with those who became 
his own personal disciples. He made realisation the sole 
burden of his message. He accorded personal freedom to. 
all. He never dogmatised. Indeed, he never even organised, 
Even ashe saw in his own guru that realisation was the real 
transfiguration of personality, even so did his own disciples 
see in their time the selfsame greatness in him. And this. 
was because he had sat at the Feet of Sri Ramakrishna. 

The most eloquent and convincing power in all the: 
methods of Sri Ramakrishna’s teachings was the spiritual 
radiance of his personal life. His character was the power 
behind his teaching. The man who preached universal love, 
proved it jn conduct, Once, in the earlier days of his sddha- 
nas having gone into Samadhi through some intense over- 
flow of feeling, his body fell upon some live charcoal. 
Smelling the odour of burning flesh, some people ran to his 
aid. But one who envied the greatness of Sri Ramakrishna 
and his influence over Mathoor Babu and the Rani Rasmoni,. 
had come first upon the scene. Seeing the opportunity, he- 
kicked the prostrate saint with violence a repeated num- 
ber of times. The force of concentration having been 
partially exhausted, the Master had returned to sense con- 
sciousness for atime to become aware of this action. He- 
could have told Mathoor Babu, the son-in-law of Rani Ras- 
moni, the founder of the Temple. Both were his disciples. 
Both believed him possessed of divine powers ; and had they 
known ¢his or heard of it, they would have dealt terrikly with 
the offender.e Not until the death of his great benefactors 


316 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


He never preached against caste. He was a Brdhmana, 
yet he showed his great love for the outcast millions whe 
were lowest in: the social scale ; and he also revealed bis 
sense of utmost humility before his Mother by performing 
the most menial of all services, which even the lowest of the 
‘outcasts, the chandalas and pariahs, would shrink from doing. 
To take away the last semblance of the pride of Brihmana 
birth, and to gain a sense of oneness with the lowest of the 
low, he cleansed the filthiest places with the long hair of his . 
head, sometime during those old days when he was practis- 
ing hard austerities to get rid of the idea of A#am or egoism. 
Some may say, “It was madness.” But those who have 
ever felt the great pressure of the Spirit upon human person- 
ality, know what a burning passion to realise the highest truth 
can drive one in order to subject one’s self to the extremest 
form of discipline. He came out triumphant ; all caste distinc- 
tion vanished from him. An overwhelming sense of the all-per- 
vading Reality and presence of the Most High came upon the 
Master. The universe became “heaven” to him, There was 
no longer any sense of defilement ; there was neither high 
nor low, It was all Brahman. What was caste to him 
when he had seen God! He was as the forest-fire which 
burns to ashes even the mightiest trees before it, He did not 
‘disregard caste as an institution, but he soared, beyond ‘all 
institutions, into the very presence and beatitude of the 
Divine Mother. Aye, he became the Mother. As the self-same 
moon is visible everywhere, even so was the self-same divinity 
of all visible to this arch-Rishi. ; 

What were Sri Ramakrishna’s answers to questions 
pertaining to God-vision and methods of realisation ? How 
to pray ? “Pray in any form,” he would say, “for the Lord 
hears the foot-fall even of an ant.” How to find God? “By 
the conquest of Kémini-Kénchana.” What is vision and 
what is character? “They are the obverse and the reverse of 
the sanve coin.” Sincerity was the main theme in his teaching. 
Without sincerity nothing is possible ; with sincerity all is 


THE METHOD OF THE MASTER'S TEACHING. 317 


order to illustrate the intensity of sincerity.a man should 
have to see. God, took his disciple to the river and then, 
‘holding him besienth the waters until he begged to be re- 
sed for his very life, said, “When you desire ‘spirituality and 
God as much as a drowning man desires tg be saved from 
certain death, you will attain the goal.” God is the goa] ; even 
the least sincerity will bring results. And he would say to. 
Noren and the rest that if they but followed one sixteenth 
of the full complement of the teaching he had given them, 
they would surely reach the goal. 

Is God Personal or Impersonal? “He is both," said Sri 
Ramakrishna, “and yet He is beyond.” He is manifold per- 
sonality ; He is the Gods. He is Brahman. But, beyond 
any intellectual or theological dogmas, He is manifest in the. 
soul’s own inmost realisation. He is the soul Self-revealed. 
He is the Soul; He is Infinite. He is all Realisation. He is 
All in All inthe vision of the devotee. He assumes any form 
for the pleasure of His devotee. For God is the manifestation 
of the Soul to itself, and the forms of that mariifestation may 
be as infinite in number as there are degrees in the sinceri- 
ty with which the goalis desired and the ideal cherished 
and knowr. He is beyond speech and beyond thought ;, 
for when the devotee enters the realm of realisation, what 
words are there to describe that condition of Being! The 
mind is incapable of conceiving that glorious Existence, 
Only the soul can know. He is the Inexpressible ; and 
inexpressible is the vision of Him, Silence is His name. 
He is not to be put between the covers of a book, as the 
Master had told Noren, and as Noren told thousands of 
persons when he became the Swami Vivekananda. God , 
cannot be defined by words; He is to be realised, When 
the tongue speaks let it always speak the language of reality 
and realisation. Is Image-worship right or not right? Sri 
Ramakrishna said that all such were idle questions, Worship of 
anything is true which helps one to see God, “Intense 
longing is the one thing needful.” : 

Such was‘ the method of -the teaching and also its sub- 


318 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


stance. Realisation and sincerity, sincerity and realisation, 
-struggle and spiritual exercises,—these are the means, What 
isin a name or what ina form! All religions are one; all 
paths are paths to the same goal, Earnestness is the basis 
of all religious consciousness and realisation—earnestness and 
the conquest over Kémini-Kanchana. Sri Ramakrishna’s 
teaching was set in the convincing language of insight; and 
this teaching and his method of teaching and his realisation 
were one, because he as a teacher was a man of realisation, 
because his methods were full of spiritual fire, simplicity, and 
practicality. And because his teachings were the enunciation 
of actual vision did Noren, as the Swami Vivekananda, become 
‘an irrepressible torrent of spiritual inspiration, the embodi- 
ament of realisation, and the Prophet of the Modern Gospel. 


XLII 


INITIATION INTG ADVAITA VEDANTA. 


The general teaching which Sri Ramakrishna imparted to 
his disciples, Noren assimilated in a particular way. He was 
the readiest amongst them all in arriving at the true spirit, 
His soul was most attuned to those spiritual vibrations which 
the Master’s words his spiritual characteristics gave out. 
Thus. he read volumes where others read only pages of that 
Revelation unto men which was the Life and Gospel of Sri 
Ramakrishna, He paused to study and observe the qualities 
of the Master. He did not simply accept whatever the Mas- 
ter gave forth in teaching ; he made it his very own. The 
thoughts and words of Sri Ramakrishna spread like spiritual fire 
through Noren’s whole personality, While he ate, while he 
studied, in conversing, in going through spiritual exercises, 
and even in dreams the larger personality of his Master was 
dominant. 

For it was a study that was set before him, a very com- 
plex study, one which occupied his whole mind. It was 
nothing less than the science of the spiritual consciousness, 
of which his Master’s life and teaching were the incon- 
trovertible elements of reality and test. It must be constant- 
ly kept in consideration that the whole gist of the Master’s 
personality and teaching was the very Hinduism of Hinduism, 
it. was not a sectarian Hinduism, but that wide and eclectic 
attitude of the soul which has been, ina marked degree, a 
Hindu racial possession at all times. On the surface it 
appears as a rigidity of ceremonial form and as a congeries of 
unbelievable myths, But with the background of the Advaita 

" Vedanta philosophy, the whole setting and the details are 
seen in an altogether different light. The mythological 
character @mbodiesc the ideale and the mathade fre the cRies 


320 ‘THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


seen as the manifestation of a sublime ideal reality. The 
ceremonial forms are recognised as methods for the concentra- 
tion of the mind upon-tke Most High. 

Noren, when he had become a Brahmo, denounced wor- 
ship and the gods, He was estranged from Hinduism, but 
then, he had never.made a scientific study of it, nor of the: 
philosophical ideals upon which it was based. He was too 
young ; and Hinduism is venerable with age and deepest 
realisations. The first awakening of his mind was based on 
superficial generalisations, He was struck with the appear- 
ance of Western culture and with the plausible suitableness 
of Brahmo theology, tinctured, as it was, with Western theo- 
logical ideals, When he had come to Sri Ramakrishna he 
was, therefore, a believer in a Personal God. He was a 
Theist or Deist. He had, consequently, not in his possession 
that master-key and passport to the understanding of Hindu- 
ism, which is, the personal realisation of the conception of" 
the all-inclusive and superpersonal existence which the 
Vedas have called Brahman. He thought of God as possessed 
of all the pleasing qualities only, and that all the evil 
in this world was due to the inscrutable wisdom of 
Providence. ~ 

When he came to Sri Ramakrishna, however, he found an 
altogether new theology. True, it was the same theology 
which he had been taught from his infancy, but he was now 
approaching it with understanding, whereas, as a child, he 
had imbibed it without veason, simply as a matter of custom 
and heridity. Formerly when the intellect aroused itself, 
doubt also arose ; but now a new order of thought, a new 
outlook was being born. And Noren, entering a world of 
deeper perceptions, found the very highest truth within the 
boundaries of his early belief. And how ? The very life of Sti 
Ramakrishna revealed to him potentialities and realities in 
Hinduism he had never dreamed of. The Hinduism of Sti 
Ramakrishna was a positive, practical, and living realisation. 
However Noren might question the actuality of tne spiritual 
fdeale and sods with which Hinduism abouiids, he could not 


INITIATION INTO ADVAITA VEDANTA: - 325 


doubt the earnestness of his Master. Sri Ramakrishna in- 
jected a living spirit into Hinduism’ It,might be supersti- 
tion, thought Noren at first ; the Master himself might be a 
madman, but it must be a remarkable superstition by which 
this madman transmitted spirituality even by one touch | 
It breathed forth flamesof sealfty Hrd great visions of truth, 
It was alive ; it moulded life 3 it spelled realisation, at least 
to Sri Ramakrishna himself. And, in this, how superior was it, 
thought Noren, to the theologically healthy but spiritually 
lifeless body of Brahmoism! At least, for him, Brahmoism 
did not emanate a burning and contagious spirituality. Yes, 
it was more of a social reform movement, even though the 
members, considered individually, might be possessed of 
great spiritual aspiration. And then, what struck Noren as 
to the superiority of the Hinduism of the Master was, that 
Keshub Chandra Sen, the leading spirit in the Brahmo move- 
ment, himself came and sat at the Feet of Sri Ramakrishna, 
aye, not alone that, but actually worshipped him with wor- 
ship bordering on the divine. 

During his relationship with Sri Ramakrishna Noren 
gradually came to believe in Kali, though after a long and 
severe struggle,as the personification ofa spiritual Power imper- 
sonalin its function, and impervious as well to the joy or pain it 
arouses. He grew aware of the Mother in Her various Forms 
as the personification of the Power which works through the 
darkness of all relative good and evil and all relative joy and 
pain to draw out the light, strength, blessedness and self- 
stability of the soul. Kali is the Power which pushes the 
mind through all forms of distraction, desire and doubt, in 
order that the soul may transcend the ideal of the body and 
that, going beyond the blinking lights of sense and thought, 
it may enter into the effulgence of that Reality which is 
Shiva, whose Self-impelled manifestation is the Mother. She 
is the Shakt2, the Power which destroys all illusion and leads 
the soul, through all vanity and variety. of experience, into 
the Shiva*censciousness of Pure Divinity. This urtder- 
standing was @ process. Norep came by it in watching bie 


322 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. a. 


Master in religious worship, in religious teaching and in 
religious ecstasy, The spirit of this understanding was 
communicated to Noren in spite of himself. Whenever the 
Master spoke or felt hé invariably made Noren the audience, 
though many others might be present. He cujected his own 
consciousness, his own personal realisation of the Mother 
and of Hinduism into the soul of Noren, How he did this 
isnot fully known, The process was purely spiritual, and 
too subtle to be explained. Noren would frequently feel 
shocks of spiritual consciousness, if such a term may be used. 
Times were, when in the presence of the Master, his soul 
would witness great floods of feeling well up within him and 
carry him into spheres of ecstasy. He could not contain 
himself. Such would be the power and the d/essedness he 
felt. Then he would sing, sing, sing, and pour out his whole 
soul in the singing. His voice would thrill those who heard, 
Tremendous spiritual vibrations would be set up, The Mas- 
ter’s room would be alive with Presence. The Master himself 
would experience repeated Samadhi, Or it would be the 
silence and peace of meditation in which Noren would make 


long and deep plunges. 
It was this fire of soul, and not mere thinking, that liter- 


ally lifted Noren into Hinduism, At times, he felt as if 
Dakshineswar was the spiritual centre of the universe. He 
would have such great reachings-out of his soul that the 
Master became as the embodiment of God to him. It must 
always be remembered that thought was only incidental in 
Noren’s realisation. It was feeling, greatness of spiritual 
feeling and great swellings in intensity of the spiritual con- 
sciousness which compelled him to accept Hinduism and Sri 
Ramakrishna. His intellectual consciousness of Hinduism 
arose by sheer power of the soul within him. He would find 
himself uttering the words “Kali! Kali !” with all his heart. 
Then the mind would suddenly start, “What is this ? Who 
is Kali? Rubbish!” But a moment later the heart of him 
would regain its self-possession, and it would bé, “Jay Ma 


INITIATION INTO ADVAITA VEDANTA, 323 


‘comings of various personal tendencies, The doubting 
Noren was passing away ; the devotional Noren, the spiritual 
Noren, —Noren, the Hindu,—was being born, Every now 
and then, however, the last outbursts of the doubting mind 
would rise, as if in final effort to assert itself. But in‘the end 
the heart would triumph ; the heart would always triumph. 

In this transitional period, however, Noren once thought 
of giving up the religious life. He suffered physically and 
mentally from want of food and from much domestic worry. 
A severe pain in the head became chronic with him. It was 
getting worse and worse. Noren remained away from Dak- 
shineswar for some days. Sri Ramakrishna soon visited 
Calcutta. Coming to the house of a disciple, the Master sent 
for Noren, as was his wont. Hecame. His condition. was 
very distracted. His head reeled with pain. Sri Ramakrishna 
saw the situation immediately, Whatever the ‘trouble was, 
it was instantly relieved. For Sri Ramakrishna stretching 
out his hand, touched the head of his favourite disciple and, 
——the wonder of it—Noren was cured then and there ! 

At this time the domestic afflictions from which Noren 
suffered were overwhelming. His father’s death, the terrible 
poverty of the family, a grief-laden mother, helpless brothers 
and sisters,—all these were too much forhim. He again 
thought of fleeing from it all, But something called him to 
Dakshineswar. He ran thither, He fell at the Feet of the 
Master ; and the Master sent him to the Temple of the 
Mother to pray for subsistence, He went. Only his own soul 
knows what transpired there, He came back to the Master. 
“What did you pray for?” asked the Master. And Noten, 
overcome with a trembling joy and a holy fear, said, “I could 
only pray for Bhakti and Jnanam, Love and Knowledge,” 
The Master said, “Go again, my son!” And Noren again 
went, He returned as before and with the same answer to 
his Master’s query. And then Sri Ramakrishna for the third 
time sent ,Noren saying, “Go ! Pray to Mother !” For,the 
third time Noreg went. And in the presence of the Mother 
he again asked for Taveand Wnawledes althecnl biog 


324 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


come to pray for relief from domestic affliction. And then 
—who knows what actually transpired {| Noren never spoke 
of it except in a vague way. But certain it was that he had 
the Vision of the Mother, and She literally made him Her 
own Child, Her Slave. So, at least he said in a passing way, 
in later years, to one of his disciples, “She made me Her slave.” 
When he emerged from the Temple he was inspiring to look 
upon ; he was the saint. And the Master told others that 
Mother would provide for the bare necessities of the family 
thenceforth,—and so it came to pass. 

His constant experience with Sri Ramakrishna was that 
of a soul cominiining with another soul, Flashes of divinity 
were revealed throughout. There were whisperings of reality 
at every step ; and,-here and there, the whisperings became 
strong voices, the burden of whose message was, “Re- 
nounce ! Remounce !” 

The crown of all experience was his initiation into the 
Advaita Vedanta, the synthesis and background of all. 
Hinduism. And this was brought about in subtle ways, 
showing how wenderful as a teacher was Bhagavan Sri Rama- 
krishna, showing, also, how gentle and how loving and, withal, 
how patient he was. Noren said, “It is blasphemy !” when 
Sri Ramakrishna first spoke to him of the doctrine of 
“Shivoham ! Shivoham f “I am God ! I am God !" realised. 
in the most exalted state of transcendent kgowledge, called. 
the Nirvikalpa-Samadhi. As a Brahmo, Noren had thought 
of God as one reality and the soul as another, To say that 
these were one and the same was blasphemy, he thought. 
He dwelt at that time in a limited theological world, 
having vague ideas of physical relationship with a formless 
spiritual reality, When Sri Ramakrishna told him of the 
Supreme Wisdom of the Vedanta, that the soul itself was God, 
he was horrified. He would not see ; he would not try to 
see. “It isuntrue; it is a terrible blasphemy !” he would say 
with bated breath. 

It was the living experience he had with nis Master that 
ae ean Meee a per nee VE eke Sorte y Sep Ye 





INITIATION INTO ADVAITA VEDABITA. 325 


those world-transcending feelings of reality, when he knew 
his own soul as of the same waters as the Ocean of God- 
Consciousness ; and in rapture he would give expression to 
the thought of “Brakmdsmi! Brahmdsmi f “I am Brahman! 
1am Brahman !” and would enter such an exalted state of 
being that all sense of personality was utterly lost, and the 
divinity alone shone forth. 

Sri Ramakrishna would ask Noren to read those Scrip- 
tures which treat solely of Brahman the Absolute. He did 
not ask the other disciples to do this. Theirs was a differ- 
ent path. Theirs was the path of Bhakti or, Love for God. 
But Sri Ramakrishna saw that his was the path of Jnana, or 
Transcendental Insight. His main message was to be that of 
the incomparable glory of the Vedanta, Noren, however, 
would refuse to read them. The Master would say, “Well, 
Noren ! Then do just read a little of them tome. I desire 
to hear them, You need not pay any attention to the text.” 
Yes, in that sense he would read them to the Master. Many 
were the times when the Master pleaded thas ; many,were 
the times when the disciple read ; and in the reading, the 
ideas would burn into his soul. He lost hiniself in the read- 
ing. Thu the Yogavasishtha, the Adhyatma Ramayana, 
and some of the important Upanishads were read by Noren 

‘either in the presence of the Master or by himself, » 

“All this is Brahman ; what is perceived and what is not 
perceived ; what is known, and what is not known ; these 
heaven-worlds, this mortal life, the Vedas and what are not 
the Vedas, the beginning and what is not the beginning, all this 
is Brahman ! The soul is Brahman ; the Gods are Brahman ; 
the universe is Brahman ; truth is Brahman, and all is 
Brahman! There is nothing but Brahman. Whoso realises 
this, verily attains unto the Highest. He is freed from the 
deceptions of the senses and the intellect. He sees nothing 
but Brahman. To him Brahman has become all in all, As 
a snake throws off its old skin, so does he throw off all Ijmita- 
tions and himself herome the Shining One! Le himeelt 


326 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


Upanishads, and as Noren read sublime ideas like these, his. 
soul would soar and soar like a great eagle above the petti- 
ness and the commonplaceness of this world. And the soul of 
Sri Ramakrishna would soar higher and higher, beyond the 
confines of even the highest spiritual limitations. It would go . 
beyond and beyond and Beyond, until his body would become 
rigid in spiritual ecstasy, and all thought was left behind and 
all sense-consciousness dimmed by the glory of that indescrib- 
able Effulgence of the Absolute Brahman, which only they 
can know who have been utterly drowned to all objective 
life, and from whom all form, thought and personality have 
dropped off. And Sri Ramakrishna entering this condition 
of being became a living God, became one with Brahman, 
What were the Upanishads but the utterance of that con- 
sciousness into. which he had soared. Such was Noren’s 
training at the Feet of the Master, And Noren’ breathed in 
the pureness of that air, feeling the Freedom of the Infinite 
in the great depths of spiritual emotion. “Shzvoham! 
Shivoham Y’ “Brahman is real ; Brahman alone is real ; the 
world isa myth. And verily the soul itself is Brahman !"— 
thus rang the note in his soul. 

Noren saw in the life of Sri Ramakrishna the fell meaning 
and .the ripe blossoming-forth of all that the Upanishads 
taught. The example of the Master, his own eagerness as a 
disciple, his own great power in the spiritual faculty of 
understanding,—these were the factors in that making up of 
thought and insight which later burst forth, for him, into the: 
biessedness of the highest Advaita realisation. Aye, he 
attained that state himself where all is Brahman. And 
this was the greatest event in all his life. All other realisa- 
tions and events led up to and were afterwards tributary to 
this. He came to accept all the Gods, and “I believe in 
Brahman ang the Gods” was his luminous declaration. 

In him who became the Crown of the Vedanta, who 
became the Spirit Incarnate of the Advaita Vedanta and the 
Living Utterance of the Upanishads, whose message was to 


INITIATION INTO ADVAITA VEDANTA. 327 


he saw the Effulgence of Brahman. Verily, he saw it as his 
own Soul, Verily he saw this in the Nirvikalpa Samadhi, 
which is the Awareness of the Infinite Consciousness and 
the Seeing of the Infinite Vision. 

Such was the training of Noren. Little by little he was 
lifted out of doubt into beatitude, out of darkness into 
effulgence, out of anguish of mind and heart into blessedness 
and bliss, out of the seething vortex of the world into the 
Grand Expanse of the World of Realisation. He was taken, 
little by little, and by the power of Sri Ramakrishna, out 
of bondage into Infinite Freedom. He was taken from out 
the pale of a little learning into that Omniscience which is 
the Consciousness of Brahman. He was lifted out of all 
objective conceptions of the Godhead into the glorious 
awareness of the subjective nature of True Being, above form, 
above thought, above sense, above all relative good and evil, 
into the Sameness and Reality and the Absolute-Beyondness 
of Brahman, And the scene of such transposition of his per- 
sonality was the Garden of Cossipur, and the time of the 
occurrence, the immediate future. 


XLHI 


ON THE LOOM OF DISCIPLESHIP. 


Indeed, to Sri Ramakrishna Noren was indebted for his 
entire education into Hinduism ; and oftentimes it was a 
question of infinite patience and long-suffering on the part 
of the Master because of his chief disciple often openly rebel- 
ling against him, On every point there was dissension, the 
Master always loving, the disciple always gloriqusly militant. 
Noren was as if deliberately blind, and the Master literally 
made him see. That his intense personality ever became 
subordinated to the vision of Sri Ramakrishna, showed in a 
thousandfold manner the incomparable greatness of the Man 
of God. Indeed, the Master was an Aristotle of Hinduism 
concealed under the guise of an emotional Bhakta. He was 
Chaitanya and Sankaracharya in one ; and Noren gradually 
came to recognise this more and more. Verily, his whole life 
was a constant education into this consciousness. In every 
detail of their.relationship N oren was as the thrabbing dark- 
ness, and ‘the Bhagavan the Light’ scattering the darkness, 
Noren, representing the spirit of Modern India, sat at the 
Feet of his Master to learn the greatness of the Indian Past. 
The Old India of the Master was straightening out in his 
disciple the rebellious and precocious intellect of Modern 
India, All the spiritual unrest and religious tumult and 
all the doubt and intellectual license of the age, were as if 
concentrated in Noren before the Man of Dakshineswar. -In 
the end the Master was triumphant. And in the last days 
of his inc&rnation, with his body dying, the Master felt that 
his purpose had been accomplished. And thus on one of 
these d4y’s, being too ill to speak he made signs by which to 
say, “Noren now understands everything. He has_ accepted 
all, “Now he is ‘the Son of the Mother, a Bhakta ‘of Radha- 


eh Bo eg rate” dete, 9 OO te ae, Eee 


ON THE LOOM OF DISCIPLESHIP. 329 


Advaitin, a meditator on the Formless Brahman.” In_ short, 
the young man who had come to him asa Brahmo had 
been converted into a Hindu, thus illustrating the epoch- 
making and vastly intellectual influence of a life of Supreme 
Realisation, for the bay whomshe was training was in time 
to carry the Gospel of Hinduism to the farthest shores of 
‘the world and preach it with a mightye voice in the land of 
Hindusthan itself. ; ‘ 

There were éertain moments, however, when Noren had 
revealed a tendency to fanaticism in his intellectual convic~ 
tions, Sometimes he became bigoted in his remarks, Sri 
Ramakrishna would then admonish him, saying, “My'boy, 
see Truth from all angles and through every perspective. 
My whole life has been a training in all-sidedness. Gain 
this same consciousness, Bea Jnani and a Bhakta in one.” 
‘This trait in Noren was eventually obliterated by his realisa- 
tion of the oneness of all spiritual endeavour and all righte- 
ous belief ; but for a time there is no doubt that he irritated 
Sri Ramakrishna with his ignorant criticisms of Kali and 
with his stubborn doubting of the authority. of such es 
had seen the Mother. The Master felt it not so mucha 
personal attack upon himself as upon the whole body of 
truth, for where he himsélf was concerned he invited criticism. 
But there tvere occasions when Sri Ramakrishna would be- 
come impatient at the “reasoning in a circle”? which Noten 
‘sometimes did before him. One day the Master could bear 
the sharp criticisms of his disciple no longer. The strain was 
too much. He said, “Get out ! Don’t come here arty more! 
What is all your prattling in the face of men who have seen 
‘God.!” Noren walked out silently from the room. For some 
minutes he did not return ; he felt ashamed, Then suddenly 
love and remorse took possession of his heart and he came 
to the Master in an act of service. The Master seeing this 
embraced him and forgave him at once ; in his heart he knew 
that Noren was only outspoken and that sincerity, which he 
loved so tnuch, was the very essence of his nature. Moren 


330 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


far, and had thrown aspersion upon the spiritual realisation 
of the Master and his devotees. But the love between him- 
selfand his Master was overwhelming, for no matter what 
Noren said or what Noren did, Sri Ramakrishna loved him. 

But how long was the training and how exceptional the 
method! It has already been seen how Noren fought the 
Mother ; verily, there was no single Hindu ideal which he 
did not violently antagonise. \Whensoever Sri Ramakrishna 
would speak of Radha and Krishna in those days, Noren's 
whole personality would turn ; he thought the whole rela- 
tionship of.the Avatara to Radha immoral and objectionable. 
Did Sri Ramakrishna speak of Them he would leave the- 
room at once. Then the Master, interrupting his conversa- 
tion with the others, would go in pursuit of his disciple, 
catching him’ by the arm and entreating him to come and 
sit down, with the words, “Why not fix your mind only on 
the great and intense yearning of Radha and the Gopis for 
That which is the Supreme ? Why dwell on the expression ? 
After all that may appear human to you, but you must take 
the yearning and the vision as divine.” And Noren, rather 
unwillingly, would sit down and his brain would gather the 
ideas, even in spite of himself. Sri Ramakrishnasknew that 
his ideas would finally alter the whole personality of his 
chief disciple. He was glad in his heart that Noren was a 
rebel, for without the intellectual strain and struggle and 
without the illumination which comes thereof, he instinctively 
knew that his Norendra would not be able later on to do 
his work of helping the souls of others by solving their diffi- 
culties in the spiritual path and inthe understanding and 
acceptance of Hinduism. Thus the complete revolution of 
thought which Noren underwent, revealed the luminous great- 
ness of the Master. Indeed, from all points of view, the diffi- 
culties of Noren, his whole struggle and gradual realisation, 
prove more than any other fact the supra-Pandit learning of 
Sri Ramakrishna, revealing him as the living incarnation of 
Hinduism. 


ay 


ON THE LOOM OF DISCIPLESHIP. 331 


ly made tests of his realisation, Sri Ramakrishna had said: 
to him, “Test me as the money-changers test their silver 
coins. Your path is not to accept me until you have tested 
me.” And accordingly one day whilst the Master was absent 
from Dakshineswar, having gone to the city of Calcutta, 
Noren caine to the Temple-gardens and found the living-room 
of Sri Ramakrishna empty. Not even one person was 
present, Noren had with him a silver rupee. The thought of 
the Master's ‘apasyd concerning money came suddenly to his 
mind. “Let me test him,” thought the disciple, and taking 
the coin he put it in the bed of the Master, befeath the 
mattress, Then he went to meditate inthe shadow of the- 
Panchavati, Soon Sri Ramakrishna returned. Coming into 
his room he went to sit upon the bed; directly his feet 
approached it he felt suddenly a contracting pain fn his body 
and his feet were thrown backwards as if having come into 
contact with fire! ! The Master called out in a surprised tone, . 
“What is the “latter! What is the matter!” Noren had 
come into the room when the Master returned from Calcutta. 
Various emotions came over him when he saw the Master’s 
body thus violently contracted—tenderness and love for him, 
pain at his physical agony, and a joyous blessedness that the- 
test had come true. An attendant at once searched the bed, 
pulling off the coverings in his great haste, fearing that per- 
haps a viper had concealed itself therein. Then as the bed- 
ding dropped to the floor the muffled ring of a coin was 
heard, “A rupee! How could it have got there!” cried the 
attendant. “What!” said the Master. Noren had walked 
away from the room. In his heart Sri Ramakrishna knew 
by -reading the face of Noren all that had passed through his. 
mind, and his sou! was glad, and his love showed itself all the-- 
more towards him, 

Verily, Sri Ramakrishna was a most remarkable per- 
sonality. In certain high stages of his insight into the- 
Advaita, and following upon repeated oncomings of the high- 
er spiritual consciousness, his body became, to his mind 


Pe ee ee So oe Ce. TS, nS AO Theme. fy a oe 


332 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


potter’s hands. Indeed, he often spoke of Himself to the 
effect that the natural state of his being was that of super- 
consciousness and that-‘he had frequently to force himself 
‘down to the state of normal consciousness in order that he 
might be able to teach others how to live a godly life. Ad- 
dressing his disciples, he would say, “Your natural state is 
that’ of human consciousness ; ‘mine tends constantly to that 
of Satnidhi. I have hard work to keep my mind in this 
plane.” His sympathetic nervous system had become so 
charged with impressions of the Advaita consciousness that 
it acted, one might say, even as a separate personality, with 
instincts of a marvellous order, showing his body to have be- 
come one with his soul, For on many occasions, going to 
the Ganges side, he would take water in his hands wherewith 
to offer worship to the Gods, when, lo, the hands would be 
wrung instantly out of shape, and the water fall into the 
stream,—and this was when he was normally eonscious! Or, 
going to the temple of Shiva he would be about to worship, 
when a like thing would happen, and the flower would’ fall 
to the pavement of the shrine. These phenomena made an 
indelible impression on the minds of all the devotees; for 
here they saw the living illustration of the trutk declared in 
. the Gita that, when a man has reached the highest state, the 
God-state, all his Karma ends in knowledge. He can no 
longer worship. In the case* of Sri Ramakrishna this was 
literally true. Even when he was the temple-priest he was 
often found in the deepest Samadhi, with the worship utensils 
about him and the flowers wherewith to worship the Divinity 
upon his own head! Never was therea man. who could 
throw himself, as the Master could, inté any stage or field 
of consciousness or into any embodiment of ideas. In the 
course of a day he would become Mohammedan or Vaishna- 
vite, Shaivaite or a ShAkta, a Buddhist or a Christian, or an 
Advaitin as the case might be. But how intense was the 
traiping ! Had he not gone to extremes to realise the spiritual 
consciousness of each of them. To him all. religions were 


et oe ee Pi, Ay sl uty | Aa Nake Or ee 


ON THE LOOM OF DISCIPLESHIP, 333. 


realisation. Aye, so long had he meditated on‘each ideal that, 
he had the vision of Christ and other Avatéras as entering 
into himself. And the: Advaita consciousness came constant- 
ly upon him, both ‘in the objective sense that all religions are- 
one and ia the subjective sense that all this is Brahman. And 
so filled with the idea of taking no thought for the morrow- 
was he that, when someone hearing that he was suffering 
great pain gave him three pills of opium, each the fourth part 
of a mustard seed, to take three days consecutively for cure, 
his personality became seriously confused and he lost his. 
way, walking into thorns and brushes, on the road from Jadu 
Mullick’s garden to the Temple at Dakshineswar. He was 
conscious, but he seemed to have lost command over his 
limbs and sight. He called as a child to Hridoy, saying, 
“What is the trouble, Hridoy, what is the trouble! Why can- 
not I find the path!" And then remembering that he had the- 
opium pills tied in a knot in the corner of his dhoofi, he cried 
out, “O yes! O yes! Here afe the pills for three days which 
Jadu Mullick gave me.” And opening the knot in his cloth 
che threw the medicine to the ground.. Instantly his feet. 
found the way! So charged with spiritual ideas was the sub- 
conscious neind that, even against the knowledge of his 


normal consciousness, they had control over the sensory and - 


motor nerves, Indeed, the very depth of his consciousness 
was God ; and the surface consciousness was a manifestation 
of the glories of the soul for the good ofthe world, 

Living in this constant atmosphere of blessedness and 
realisation it was natural that Noren should develop the 
spiritual faculties with marvellous rapidity. His training was 
ten thousand times that of the ordinary shishya. He rapidly 
assimilated the states of his Master's consciousness, at least 
in their spiritual definition, and grew a giant in soul. And 
his regard for Sri Ramakrishna knew no bounds. He himself 
might fight with the Master, but to others he spoke always 
with the deepest respect for him, and if anyone questioned 
the divine realisations of the Bhagavan he would challenge him 


Ce, a REE, Kite Se FM GREE n nee, ens ee a fee 


- 


334 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


had been removed from Dakshineswar to the Shyampukur 
house in Calcutta before being finally taken to the Garden at 
Cossipur, acertain physician of fame often came to attend him. 
He did not accept Sri Ramakrishna in the same sense as the 
devotees, and one day entering into a discussion with them, 
he insisted even before the Master, that as all men were equal 
they should not take the dust of Sri Ramakrishna’s feet and 
make of him a God ; and therewith to force his point home 
he took the dust of the feet, not only of Sri Ramakrishna 
but of the others as well, Noren defending their position 
said, “Sir, we look upon the Master as a Person who is dhe 


i -God. Let me make my idea clear to you. There isa point 


somewhere between the vegetable and animal creation where 
it is difficult torsay whether a particular thing is an animal 
or a plant, Much in the same way there is a point some- 
where between the man-world and the God-world where one 


‘ cannot say with certainty whether a person is human or 


divine.” He ended by saying, “We look upon him not as God 
but as a God-like person, And hence we offer him worship 
bordering on Divine worship.” Of course, later on as the Swami 
Vivekananda, he went even further in his declarations con- 
cerning. the personality of Sri Ramakrishna, ‘when he had 
come to understand him all the deeper. 

The exchange of understanding between the Master and 
his chief disciple was gradudlly growing deeper, and the 
Master had already made repeated assertions as to Noren’s 
inherent greatness. Speaking at Balaram Babu’s house 
which he often visited, he said to his Bhaktas, “Go and in- 
vite Norendra and Rakhal, and the others,’—mentioning the 
names of a few other young disciples. “Offering food to 
them is the same thing as offering food to Narayana Him- 
self, These are-not ordinary men, They arg parts of the 
Divine Nature manifest in the flesh.” And of these parts of the 

Divine Nature he regarded Norendra as the head. On 
another occasion the Master said concerning Norendra, “He 
is one of the Sapiarshis.” And the Saptarshis are the seven 
greatest Mahkdpurushas, immortalised in Hindu mythology 


ON THE LOOM OF DISCIPLESHIP. 335 


as the Seven Stars of the uvsa mayor constellation. Again 
he would say, “Aye, Norendra is the Nara of the Twin 
Rishis, Nara-Narayana.” ‘ 

In those days Noren in common with many Brahmos feared 
for the psychical consequences of intense meditation, and 
too much inebriation in the love of God. Sri Ramakrishna 
‘quieted him on this point, saying, “God is like a sea of liquid 
sweet, Would you not dive into this sea ? Suppose, my boy, 
there is a vessel with a wide mouth containing thé syrup of 
sugar, and suppose you are a fly anxious to drink of the sweet 
fluid. How would you like to drink of it?” Norendra said to 
him in reply, that he would like to sit and drink from the edge 
of the vessel, addjng that if he chanced to fall to a point be- 
yond his depth he was sure to be drowned and thus, lose ‘his 
life, Thereupon the Master said to him, “You forget, my boy, 
that if you dive deep into the Divine Sea, you will not be 
afraid of death or of any danger. Remember,—the Divine 
Sea is the Sea of Immortality, It never causes death, .but 
gives Life Everlasting. Be not afraid like some foolish 
persons that you may run to excess in your love for God.” 
And Noren followed this advice in his life. His intellect 
may have qgestioned, but his heart went straight to the goal, 

At this time, strange ‘experiences came to him. Several 
times he saw Sri Ramakrishna in the vision of his medita- 
tion when he himself was at home and the Master in distant 
Dakshineswar. But he said nothing of this until one day 
when one of the other devotees said in the Presence of the 
Master, “I saw Sri Ramakrishna when I was at Dacca, 
touching him.” Noren said in astonishment, “I have also seen 
him many times in that way. So how can I doubt your 
words |” 

One day when things were at their worst at home Noren 
came to the Master for relief. He was at the time trying his 
best to have his home affairs settled somehow once for all, so. 
that he might be free to lead the life of renunciation, aori 
Ramakrishna knew all this and was anxious for him, He 


336 TUE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


marks to his chief disciple, in particular. Noren broke down 
under.the piercing words of the Master who urged him to 
final renunciation, at all costs, without thought for the 
morrow. For some moments Noren was lost in grief ; then 
suddenly sitting up erect, he sang wondrous songs breathing 
the spirit of renunciation, so that even the Master was 
touched. Soon after Noren had made in his mind a vow of 
complete non-attachment, living detagéhed in matters of the 
world, performing his duties, but with his heart devoted to 
one ideal—Realisation through Renunciation. 

Tn the days of Cossipur-Garden Noren was fulf of yearn- 
ing for the Realisation of Truth. Intense Vairdgyam was 
blaaing in his heart, making him fee feverish with restlessness. 
He expressedto Sri Ramakrishna his resolution of practis- 
ing Saghanas under the Panchayati and the Vilva tree in 
the Dakshineswar Garden. Thé Master was delighted at 
heart and looking at him with overpowering affection asked, 
“Won't you continue your college studies ?” Noren replied with 
visible emotion, “Sir, I shall feel relieved if I can get a medi- 
cine by taking which I may forget, for all time, all that I 
have learnt.” He practised many austerities and much 
meditatien at this time, spending often many mights ‘away 
from the Cossipur house, before a Dhunt under the Pancha- 
vati or the Vilva tree in Dakshineswar Garden, On 
many occasions he saw a triangular effulgence of light, 
Jyoti, which Sri Ramakrishna interpreted to him as the 
Seat of the Seed of Brahman. He had also visions of the 
Forms of Gods and Goddesses. He gradually came to outgrow 
-fear aid mental restlessness as the result of his religious. 
austerities, for his realisations wefe of such a nature that 
they exalted him. He learned how to keep his mind 
well poised, himself becoming the witness to alf ‘states, 
remaining unaffected by them. Bars 

Norendra once longed to be lost in bhdva, or’ the ecstatic 
state of Dualistic vision of the Divinity, forgetful of outer 
things. He saw how thé devotees of the Master, such as 
Gore) and Monmohan. would -fall seemingly lifeless to 


ON THE LOOM OF DISCIPLESHIP. 337 


the ground at the chanting together of the Names of God 
in the enthusiasm of the sanirtana and would seem to be 
‘seeing and enjoying God. He was much depressed that he 
was unable to enter these same states of blessedness in a 
like manner, and he complained to Sri Ramakrishna, saying, 
“Master, all] these are blessed with these supersensuous 
states. At the Name of God they are overwhelmed with 
feeling and pass into dhdva, while | remain comparatively 
unaffected. I have gained nothing ; though I have practised. 
so much Sadhana still these states remain always foreign, 
tome! The Master regarding him with great tenderness 
replied, “My child, be not disturbed. What does it matter ? 
When a huge elephant runs into a pond, it sets up a great 
commotion in it; but if it goes into the waters of the 
Ganges, little commotign is set up. These devotees are, as it 
were, small ponds. A little of this Great Power of Divine 
Love coming into the enclosure of these small pools. 
lashes the waters into a fury. You area huge river, The 
Elephant of Divine Love makes only a small ripple on 
the vast waters of your soul.” And he bade his chief disciple 
to be patient, for the time would come when his whole per-. 
sonality would burst all limitations and plunge into That 
Which is Infinite Beatitude. 

On one of these days in Balaram Babu’s house, Sri Rama- 
krishna asked Norendra to put his hand into hisown. He: 
did so. Strange to say, after a few moments he felt as if some- 
thing from the person of the Master were entering into him, 
and he experienced a thrill of divine ecstasy pass through his 
entire body ; it was as ifa great blessing and power had descend- 
ed upon him. Some time after, he was relating this incident 
to a friend in English. Sri Ramakrishna hearing him speak 
said, “O you are talking of that incident ! Thank you! Thank 
you !” mentioning the affair. He knew only half a dozen words 
or so in English, such as “Thank you,” which he would say 
in such a sweet and endearing way, that every one would bé 
charmed, * But his soul knew the contents of the mind ef alt 


338 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


In the early days of his coming to Dakshineswar Noren 
often brought with him certain of his friends whom he begged 
the Master to accept as his disciples, But he would not even 
speak to them. Norén remonstrated, “If you are a great 
saint and teacher, surely you should help them even if they 
are wicked.” But he only replied, “O my boy, Mother shows 
me that they are immersed in worldliness, They want the 
pleasures and joys of the life of the senses, Their time is 
not come yet. Let them grow. They must work their way 
out ! And they have a long way to go !” Noren only became 
convinced of the wisdom of the Master’s words, long, long 
after, i 

During these days there was an occasion when the 
Advaita consciousness rose to its full height, and Noren said 
in the hearing of the devotees and even of the Master him- 
self, “The scheme of the universe is devilish, I myself could 
have cteated a better world. I am giving no scheme of the 
universe, but simply my opinion of the present scheme. But 
if we have the faith that ALLIS GoD, that I MYSELF am 
doing everything, that I MYSELF am responsible for my own 
fate and my own condition of being and for my birth and my 
death, then all is right. There is only one way out of all. 
this misery, there is only one refuge and that is to superim- 
pose GOD upon the universe and upon all things, or better 
still, to become conscious only. of God. Thé only way is to 
realise GOD as the SOUL ITSELF. Iam Thou, and Thou 
art J” And then as a sublime and beautiful protest against 
the scheme of things and against the whole universe of 
manifoldness and appearance, his soul burst forth in the 
chanting of that grand hymn known as the “Six Stanzas 
on Nirvana” by the Acharya Sankara, each of which ends 
with the inspiring words and the Brahman-stirring conscious- 
ness, “I am Existence Absolute, Knowledge Absolute, Bliss 
Absolute! I am Shiva! I am Shiva !” 

“Sri Ramakrishna would often relate his reminiscences 
of Torendra to the disciples, Speaking of the first occasion 
when he saw him, he would say, “When Noréndra first came 


ON THE LOOM OF DISCIPLESHIP, 339 


here, he had on a dirty-looking chaddar and’a pair of old 
slippers, but seeing his face and eyes I knew at once that he 
had something within.” The Master had realised immediately 
that Noren Was a lad of invaluable spiritual fire which was i 
ready to burst forth by a mere touch, as it were. Continuing 
he said, “I knew that whatever occupation Norendra would 
take up, he would surely shine in it.” . 

At first as has been seen, Noren did not frequént Dakshi- 
neswar as often as the Master would havé liked. Sri Rama- 
krishna speaking of those days said that he consoled him- 
self with the thought, “Norendra does not ¢ome to me very 
often these days. It is good, for I always have a great 
commotion of feeling and enter into Samadhi when I see 
him, And whensdever he comes he brings with him, as it 
were, a great event, aye, he makes a great event here.” And 
he would continue, turning to the disciples, “He is wonderful, 
this boy. He never shows to me that he knows anything. 
If I praise him before men he leaves the room. He has no 
trace of Maya. His very appearance shows him to be free 
from bondage. Aye, he and Rakhal,—these are Nityasiddhas, 
perfect even from their birth, What training they go through, 
they do not % reality need for themselves ; it is for the good 
of the world.” Indeed, the Master regarded Noren so highly 
that if anybody spoke of him disparagingly, he would accuse 
the speaker with the words,“‘What are you saying! By 
speaking in this fashion, you have committed Shvanindd Y 
meaning thereby that to speak slightingly of Norendra was 
as sinful as committing blasphemy. He would also say, 
“Let no one judge Norendra. For no one will ever be able 
to undetstand him fully !” So high was the Master’s appre- 


1 


ciation of his worthy disciple ! 


XLIV. 
IN THE WEAVING OF THE WEB. 


To get a real glimpse of what Noren was conscious of, one 
must lose oneself to the present and sit with him at the Feet 
of the Master in Dakshineswer. He must dwell in that 
circle of ecstasy and in the flame of that radiant conscious- 
ness. Noren was changing daily. His attitude towards the 
Master was now whole-hearted. He Kiterally gave himself 
up to Sri Ramakrishna, and nothing illustrates this better 
than an incident which occurred at this time. Noren was 
seated before the Master. Sri Ramakrishna was speaking 
upon some great spiritual matter. Noren seemed abstracted. 
The Master said, “Do listen to me, my boy!” He spoke with 
great affection and entreaty. Noren replied, “I have not 
come here to hear you éa/k.” 


“Then why have you come at all?” the Master asked, as 
though aggrieved. And Noren made answer with visible 
emotion, “It is because 1 am drawn towards you, because I 
dove you, that I have come to see you.” This altered the 
situation, The Master arose from his seat in an ecstasy of 
bliss, verging on Samédhi, “and approaching his disciple 
embraced him, It seemed as if in that moment the last links 
were forged in that glorious relationship of spiritual love 
which knows no reason, that devotion which goes deepest 
into the soul and awakens it to thé consciousness of divine 
truth and blessedness. To Noren, Sri Ramakrishna had 
become the living embodiment of that radiant life which is. 
the Constant Vision of the Most High. To Noren, Sri 
Ramakrishna had become the Insight Incarnate and the 
-Living Utterance of that Silence which is God. What need of 
worshipping divine representations of the Most High, even if 
they be most exalted! Here was one before his very eyes 
whan litevalle hreathed divéenity Tinokine wunon the face of 


IN THE WEAVING OF THE WEB. 34t 


his Master, Noren would read worlds of reality therein. To 
him the Master himself was the Book of Reality: He saw 
the Name of God spelled into the personality of Sri Rama- 
krishna with the Everlasting Letters of Actual Realisation. 
Indeed, Noren felt this was the Divine Man. What need to 
goto temples! Here was a Speaking Image of the Mother ! 
Here was the Presence of Divine Life in the living realisation 
of the Master himself! Noren had gone into the innermost 
of the matter. Yes, he would see the soul of his Guru. But 
whether he would or would sot, he could not help being 
transported into ecstasy in the presence of the Master. 
Only a day or so previous he had spoken to one of his 
brother-disciples, “If ‘you ask my opinion, I should say, 
“he is the incarnation of LOVE.” And yet he knew Sri 
Ramakrishna as a man of prodigious intellect, as well. How 
he was convinced of this was singular, as the reader might 
have noticed in the discussion he had with the Master on the 
subject of “blind faith,” mentioned in a previous chapter. By 
a simple illustration the Master would set at naught all the 
great learning of his chief disciple, and would put an end to 
discussion by saying, “Well, my boy, have you seen; have 
you seen /” Wes, seeing was all in all! What was mere think- 
ing? It might be a process of seeing, a method of subjective 
sight, but it was not that direct coming into contact which is 
the true function of sight so that one could say, “Yes, it is 
so; it is there ; I see it. Only a blind man cannot see it.” 
And not dong after, it so happened, as it so often did, that 
the Master inspired his devotees into singing a Sankirtan. 
They all joined hands, Noren in the midst of them, with a 
Mridanga, a drum, hanging about his neck. They sang and 
danced ; and the names of the Lord rent the air, At the end 
of the singing Sri Ramakrishna had gone into Samadhi. 
Noren went into the ‘verandah. Returning to sense-con- 
sciousness the Master asked for his disciple. Finding him 
absent he gaid, “It matters not ; he has lighted the fire. It 
does not matter whether he remains in the room or fot!” 
Rut. of a endden he arnce and went tn the verandah where 


342 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


Noren was, as usual, deeply engaged in religious argument.. 
Sri Ramakrishna, seeing him, asked, “Noren, what are you 
talking about ?” Noren gaily replied, “O! We are discussing 
things too high for ordinary mortals.” Sri Ramakrishna 
smiled with much amusement. “Never mind!” he said. 
“However you may talk, remember, that pure, selfless Bhakti 
or Love, and pure, selfless Jnana or Knowledge are both one 
and the same, The goal is the same. Smooth and easy is 
the path of Bhakti.” The Master meant that the path of in- 
sight, of illumination, and that of spiritual love and devotion 
were two highways to the same spiritual consciousness, In- 
sight, however, is difficult to attain, because it implies that 
one ‘must learn to step cautiously in the field of this world 
and must attain a searching discrimination as to what is real 
amidst all the unreality to which desire leads. Insight is the 
absolute conquest of instinct. It implies the triumph of 
sheer power of will. The man of insight has to destroy all 
barriers and deny all limitations, each in their turn. But love- 
speeds with accelerated intensity. It is the short path because, 
before man is a being of thought, he is a being of feeling. When 
all his feeling soars to God, when he thinks Him as dearer 
than the dearest, as his own life and soul, all sttachments. 
and limitations which bind him fall away from him of them- 
selves, as it were, The man on the path of Bhakti has not 
to destroy his feelings, has not to go against his instinct at 
every step; he has only to direct his feelings to a new 
channel,--to God, the Soul of his soul. And Him he feels and 
tastes, as it were, through familiar forms of relationship, such 
as, father, mother, friend and so on. 

Sri Ramakrishna had struck the true note, and ‘Noren 
responded at once. He sang, half in prayer to the Mother, 
and half in reply to the Master, “Ves, there is no use reason- 
ing after the philosopher. Make me mad with Thy Love, 
Q Mother!” Then, turning to a disciple of the Master, he 
said, oe have been reading Hamilton and he writes, ‘A learned 


_ ignofance is the end of philosophy and the beginning of 


‘relicion !" Tove had conauered. Noren Savane of the. 


IN THE WEAVING OF THE WEB, 343 


Divine at this time in the aspiration and deep longing of 
intense love. What was philosophy! The presence and the 
realisation of Sri, Ramakrishna were more to him than all 
reasoning and philosophy. 

A transfiguration had been taking place in the personality 
of Noren. The mighty intellect, the overpowering mind, 
which had at one time dominated him, was gradually giving 
way before the onrushing greatness of his heart. Where the 
intellect fails to go, thither the heart quickly speeds. The 
intellect was now to be the spokesman and the servant of the 
spiritual realisation. And those who have heard the voice 
of the Swami Vivekananda in the utterance of his message, 
or who have read the words of gospel truth, which he has left 
behind him, cannot help being conscious of the live fire of the 
soul and heart which stand as the background of the splendid 
array of his thought. It was life; it was living reality it 
was Presence which Noren now struggled to see. In a 
manner which he coyld not explain he found himself drawn 
more and more to the Feet of the Master. His heart throbbed 
for him. He saw that Sri Ramakrishna was a Spiritual 
Power of the first magnitude, endeavouring to give expression 
tothe supréme knowledge and realisation he had accumulated 
throughout his entire life. A sweet sympathy arose within 
him. He seemed to fathom all the pain and struggle which 
Sri Ramakrishna felt in trying to find an outlet in this world 
for the great message of his heart. He saw Sri Ramakrishna 
as a spiritual genius who must be understood, or else the 
world would be the loser, ‘Thus Noren unconsciously made 
himself fit to become that very outlet. The love which he 
felt for the Master put his mind inta the requisite receptivity 
of mood. And this attitude was right, for he was the chosen 
one amongst all his fellow-disciples, even as Sri Ramakrishna 
had marked him out to be, The Master in one way or other 
always inspired him with a.genuine sense of responsibility. 
Instinctively Noren seemed to realise that the spreadipg of 
the life-givingespirit and divine insight of his Master was put 


344 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. + 


the matter. Indeed, men like Sri Ramakrishna are not born 
every day, he thought, and to think of the privilege of sitting 
at the Feet of such a Master translated him from his own time 
into similar days of the world’s spiritual history. His mind 
thought of Gautama the Buddha and of the disciples of 
Buddha, and of Jesus the Christ and of the disciples of 
Christ. 

For this reason he was ever on the look-out for the un- 
mistakable signs of divinity and prophecy in his Master's 
life. In most other respects he was a boy. He was a boy 
in many ways and in very spirit. But he was a sage in his 
thought ; and in his aspiration he was a saint. It goes with- 
out saying that, at this time, there had already descended ~ 
upon him his Master’s spirit and that he felt his was to. be 
the life of renunciation. And this was in keeping with the 
prophecy, made of him, in his boyhood days, by an elderly 
hermit-astrologer, who on seeing the signs about him pro- 
nounced that he would never lead the life of a householder 
and who, on seeing his horoscope, confirmed the statements 
of other members of that science by stating, “Verily, the 
horoscope of this boy is even like that of the Lord Buddha. 
Aye, he will be a great Sannydsin !” Noren also"took it for 
certain that he was to become a monk. If anyone had 
suggested any other course to him, he would have been 
astonished, believing that a!l others had taken this, likewise, 
for granted. And it was only in his home that he found 
opposition, but this was not of a nature over which he could 
not rightfully and convincingly assert himself. Sri Rama- 
krishna said Ifttle one way or the other. He did not person- 
ally influence any of his disciples to adopt the monastic life. 
He was not one to force anyone to doa thing, He gave the 
spirit. He held the ideal before them; he preached the 
ways and means. It was left for them to develop the spirit 
cenferred, and to follow the ideal and the teaching. It was 
for them to employ the methods. ° 


The Master demanded only sincerity. “He demanded 
w ve ers = ne ere a! ye At 


IN THE WEAVING OF THE WEB. 345 


Yove for the ideal, He demanded selflessness and purity. In 
‘other words, he demanded character, for character, to him, 
Spelled spirituality. He did not say this in as many words, 
To be with Sri Ramakrishna implied this, and yet there was 
to be no strenuousness of asceticism. The quest to find God 
should be a joyous quest. Childlike sincerity and childlike 
‘simplicity and deep faith and deep love were the abiding 
characteristics of Sri Ramakrishna; and these were made 
manifest in all his disciples and, particularly, in Noren. The 
intellectual consciousness was transcended. The seriousness 
of thought was superseded by the joyousness of the spirit. 
Sri Ramakrishna was a Child of the Divine Mother. His 
disciples also were as simple and earnest as children are; 
and of such types of heart it has been said, “Verily, unless a 
man becomes even like unto one of these, he shall not enter 
the Kingdom of Heaven,” which is the spiritual realisation 
and the finding of God... 

Noren wag full of enthusiasm; his heart was full of 
emotion ; his mind bubbled over with, energetic Joy » his soul 
was innocent and pure. He was the child, the real disciple, 
the spiritual child of Sri Ramakrishna, the joyous child of the 
Mother. And in this were the invincible strength, the 
spiritual exaltation, the “mastery over men, the message and. 
the luminous realisation of the Swami Vivekananda. 


XLV 


GLIMPSES OF PERSONALITY. 


Noren acquired power and personality, and a glorious. 
spiritual consciousness, at the Feet of Sri Ramakrishna. 
One cannot bask in’ the radiance of a great personality 
without having the inner powers and potentialities aroused. 
And Noren literally absorbed the whole meaning of his great 
relationship as the disciple of Sri Ramakrishna. The words 
of hope and perception which the. Master spoke concerning 
him invigorated him. He felt power ; and he felt in the inner: 
most recesses of his heart, that he was the “chosen one”. He 
believed in himself ; he realised that he stood on solid ground, 
spiritually speaking. All that energy which he had previous- 
ly employed in the solution of doubts and in agonised search, 
now went forth in the fuller consolidation of his spiritual con- 
sciousness, He spoke with great positiveness of heart and 
thought. His mind being at rest, his will began to build 
itself about the fabric of a settled consciousness, +The inten- 
sity he formerly expressed outwardly and with such violence 
and impetuosity of spirit was now being transmuted into 
an inwardness of longing and aspiration. He was still the 
enthusiast, but his enthusiasm was now taking a definite 
direction. In other words, he was forming a character in 
the spiritual sense. He was growing settled ; convictions 
were being established in his mind. Deep feelings were 
stirring in his heart. He was becoming mature in spiritual 
thought and in spiritual perception. The boy was be- 
coming the man. The impetuous enthusiasm of youth was. 
transforming itself into the power of deep individualism. 


¢ Asthe disciple of his Master he would tread the streets 


of the city with such a bearing, that men would step to look 
and wonder. He had the native and graeeful. and free 


GLIMPSES OF PERSONALITY. 347 


He would walk along, now slowly and then with speed, his 
mind all absorbed upon thoughts which literally swept his 
soul. And yet, he had a certain boyishness of spirit about 
him and a certain spontaneity of manner which were a. 
delight to ali who knew him and, particularly, to his Master. 
Sri Ramakrishna had the happy faculty of gathering round 
him handsome and magnificent as well as spiritual disciples. 
In fact, the most spiritual were regal in their stature and: 
bearing. He looked with pride especially upon Noren. 

{t would be well to see Noren as he was at this time. 
His appearance was that of a young man, full of vigour and 
vitality, with a frame slightly above middle height and some- 
what thickset in the shoulders. His chest was expansive. 
His head was broad towards the front, indicative of high 
mental power and development. It was well-shaped through- 
out. There was much grace in the manner he had of turning: 
his head. Indeed, he was one of the few men of whom it: 
may be said, without intimating any femininity of type, that 
he was graceful. His eyes were the most charaateristig of his. 
features. They were often likened to a lotus leaf. They were 
rather prominent, though not protruding, and greatly varying. 
in their colqur, according to the feelings that swayed him at: 
the time. There was a delicate softness, one might ‘say, a 
feminine tenderness about them. They revealed a keen, 
alert mind. Sometimes théy would be luminous in their 
depth and steadfastness of gaze ; at other times they would 
sparkle with pleasure and excitement, according to the 
nature of the interest which held him. They revealed that 
peculiar characteristic which was his, namely, that he could 
lose himself either in sheer fun or in sheer thought. It was. 
his eyes that fascinated and held the attention of anyone 
who met him for the first time ; and he had a way with him 
of looking at one which made one feel that he was endeavour- 
ing to see into his very inmost soul. They lighted up his whole 
countenance, showing him to be eager and possessed of the 
power for deep thought and creat feeling. When hf was. 


348 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


them. When he wished to express his sense of pleasure or 
obligation, or desired that a certain favour be granted him, 
it was this innocent manner and childlike simplicity which 
would be mirrored in his eyes, When he spoke, it was as 
if, for the time being, only the world and he existed for the 
person spoken to. When he spoke giving forth his whole soul 
in the speaking, one could not but feel flattered within himself. 
Some accused -him of intellectual avariciousness, if such a 
term can be used, and said that his great interest in any one 
ceased when “he had wrung him dry,” to use their own 
expression, But it was always true of him that he gave 
more than he received. It was an intellectual exchange ; 
cand what he gave was vastly more valuable, for, as a teacher 
and as a man, he gave the highest wisdom in the terms of actual 
personal realisation. Even now, in his young manhood, his 
enthusiasm and his great utterances were always a recompense 
for those who engaged in conversation with him or came 
into any personal relationship with him. He had a great 
personal loyalty to, and genuine love for those whom 
he had once made his own and to whom he had once given 
his confidence,—characteristics which were unfailing with 
him to the very end of his life. Indeed, at a later time this 
sense of loyalty went so far as to include, in a real human 
love, even such as subsequently proved inimical to his cause 
and tohis message, though they had previously accepted both 
with great enthusiasm. 

But to return to a description of his physical personality. 
As a whole, at this time, his person inclined to a stoutness 
which added dignity to his bearing. He was muscular and 
athletic in build and always carried himself to his full height. 
But one lost sight altogether of the body, being all-absorbed 
in the interest of studying the facial lineaments. His face 
was always a study. One never tired of that countenance 
which was his, for it was never the same, Every emotion 
which his soul felt was recorded upon it. He had a strong 
jaw, proving him at once to be possessed of an iron will and 


GLIMPSES OF PERSONALITY. 349 


ness about him throughout. He seemed to some as a joyous. 
dreamer, to others as an intense thinker, to others again, as. 
one who lives in a world rich with ideal love and beauty ; but 
to all he seemed as a scion of an aristocratic house. His. 
smile was full and broad. He was a master in fun and jollity. 
But when he grew serious, his face would strikeawe ‘even in, 
the hearts of his companions. There was a certain childlike- 
ness about him and a simplicity and inrocence of manner . 
which endeared him to all. There were times when many of 
the disciples regarded him as a child; and they loved him 
all the more even if he was irritated or exacting or impetu- 
ous, because in his case, these human phases were loveable,, 
having no sting in them. Moreover, the added sweetness. 
which he always evinced, after his ebullitions of wrath, towards. 
anyone of them, would make the latter all the more drawn 
to him. When he became excited in discussion, or was rapt 
in thought, each single emotion would throw its shadow on 
his face and bearing. His eyes would be afire ; and those who 
looked on would actually see upon his face the tremendous. 
power of his personality. Was he hurt, he would draw him- 
self up to his full height with an air of dignity, and would 
turn his hegd to one side, casting his eyes upon the ground. 
Was he absorbed in his 6wn thought, he could send out such. 
a force of repelling reserve that one would not dare to ap- 
proach him. In moments of personal reserve he had a manner 
of intense aloofness, which was one of the singular properties 
of his personality. And was he ever enraged, his face would 
grow suddenly flushed, like a consuming fire. His eyes would 
shine forthin all the intensity of his emotion. For let it be known 
that Noren, both as a young man and as the Swami Viveka- 
nanda, was not easy-going or indifferent to his surround- 
ings. He was literally carried away with his emotions when 
he found his ideals misrepresented or misunderstood by those 
to whom he had given full confidence, or when he found that 
his plans,were upset by the culpable stupidity of those to 
whom he had entrusted responsibility: His was the tempera- 





-350 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


now of a strange impatience with his environment, and again 
of a sweet and loving patience pf‘one of those mild types of 
‘character and mind, who is indifferent as to results of plans 
and enthusiastic desires and who possesses a sense of having 
eternity at-his back. Was he ever seriously impatient with 
his fellow-disciples, he would be as loving as ever the mo- 
ment after his emotion had subsided. And it might be said 
that, considering the difficulties under which he laboured and 
suffered and also the little appreciation that he received 
from those for whom he laboured and suffered, it was a won- 
“der that his heart did not become steeled. Love and the 
‘spirit of gentle forbearing remained with him throughout. He 
‘would often think, “Why should one expect to be understood ! 
It is sufficient that they love me! After all who am I! The 
Mother knows best. She can do Her work. Whoam I to think 
myself indispensable!” At heart, the Swami Vivekananda 
was more the saint than the prophet. 

His discipleship with Sri Ramakrishna gave added dignity 
4o him. When the full consciousness of his Master’s words 
dawned upon him, he was regal ; he was literally godly. He 
seemed a being apart. And all these were his characteristics 
unto the end, This is a word-painting of Noren, the disciple, 
and also of Noren as the Swami Vivekananda, Indeed, his 
‘was a radiant personality, a gracious personality and, withal, a 
‘powerful personality. . 

In these days Noren was a burning fire of inspiration to 
‘those who knew him; and so his college companions and 
other friends admired and loved him. They were spell-bound 
with his eloquence and spell-bound with his personality. 
He communicated spirituality to them. His + own 
inspiration became contagious. At that time there was a 
club in the General Assembly's Institution. Noren became 
the most famous member of this club, and his eloquence 
waxed glorious amongst the large number of lads. It was his 
eloquence in discussing metaphysical questions before this 
‘club that prompted his English Professor, the Principal of the 


GLIMPSES OF PERSONALITY. 351 


student. In all the German.and English Universities there 
is not one student so brilliant as he.” Later Noren acquired 


a following, separate and independent of the club and ‘held ° 


prayer-meetings regularly. Sri Ramakrishna heard of this ; 
and fearing that Noren’s powers might be frittered away be- 
fore they were fully developed and matured, and that he 
might become the founder of a sect, brilliant but without the 
simplicity of the saintly atmosphere, he put a stop to it. 
Noren was conscious of his future greatness in. these 
days, To his college friends he used to say, “What! At 
best you will be lawyers or doctors, or judges. Wait! I shall 
chalk out a path for myself!” And he emphasised his 
remarks with tremendous force. Aye! Had he not become 
the Swami Vivekananda he would certainly have been a 
figure as inspiring as Keshub Chandra Sen himself; as it 
was, he became even greater as an influence upon Indian 


Society and the world at large. He had many well-wishers : 


in the Brahmo community, and he used to take part in the 
dramatic performances which were given, at this time, of 
Keshub Chandra Sen’s well-known “Nava Brindaban.” It 
sO happened that Sri Ramakrishna attended one of these 
performances, as he was anxious to see how Noren played 
his part. In?the midst of the drama Noren appeared, clad as 
Shiva. His part was that of a Yogi. Sti, Ramakrishna was 
charmed ; he was beside himself with joy and, quite uncon- 
scious of his surroundings, he exclaimed, “Come down to 
me, Noren, in that garb, just as you are !” 

It may be said that his dire poverty was the making of 
Noren. It made him responsible, It developed his character, 
It made a man of him. It made him considerate, sympathetic 
and sweetly kind. And so Sri Ramakrishna believed ; 
but there were times when the strain became intense. On 
one such occasion he decided to leave matters in the hands 
of Providence and fly from the misery of it all. He left the 
house with only a blanket and a /odé. Then some one in- 
formed hin? that Sri Ramakrishna had come to Calcuttagand 


Poe <a, OE Se ee a. 


BA aii econ 


’ 


352 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


“ Well, this man, at least, loves me a little after all! Since E 
am in this terrible plight, let me go and see him for the last 
time.” He went. Sri Ramakrishna knew his thought and 
took him with him to Dakshineswar. And that night he 
initiated him into certain Sadhanas or spiritual practices, as. 
has been told in the concluding portion of the chapter en- 
titled, “The Disciple’s Meditation.” Thereafter, all mental 
restlessness left him. 

Noren was being rounded out. Personally he was devel- 
oping because of the expansion of his own faculties. Then, 
also, the love which Sri Ramakrishna bore for him, struck the 
balance in equilibrium between his intellect and heart. 
By instinct Noren was a philosopher. That he became 
a Bhakta or devotee was the working of Sri Ramakrishna. 
But, lest it be thought that the Master developed only 
so much religious and emotional sentimentality in his 
disciple, let it be remembered that the highest philosophicab 
consciousness which Noren ever came to know was, like~ 
wise, instilled by Sri Ramakrishna. Insight, tempered and 
softened by spiritual love, was the foundation of his  spirit- 
ual consciousness. And the spiritual exercises he learned 
and practised at the Feet of his Master accorded the finak 
touch to the spiritual finishing. of his persénality For 
in these he realised thought. Thought became visualised 
and actualised to him. : 

Here, however, it might be said that Noren was the phi- 
losopher in an unique sense. At least Sri Ramakrishna had 
said so. Though, to all appearances, he was primarily a philos« 
opher, the Master used to say that only a Bhakta, or devotee 
of God, could have such amiable and beautiful - features, 
“Jnanis are generally dry in their appearance; but Bhaktas 
are sweet to look upon.” However this might have been, 
the words of Noren himself are best illustrative of his true 
nature, Asthe Swami Vivekananda he once said to a disciple 
Of his, making a comparison between himself and his Master : 
“Hewas all Bhakti without, but within he was al Jnana; I 
am all Tnane without but within mv heart = fe all Bhakti” 


' GLIMPSES OF PERSONALITY. 353 


He meant by this that a great. mantle of love hid the spirit. 
ual intellect of the Master, ‘and a mantle of. intelligence 
covered, aS a cloak, the devotional nature which was inmost 
in him, 

’ Day by day, week by week, the personality of.Noren was. 
being shaped. His afflictions and poverty drew out one side 
of his character, his associations another. Sri Ramakrishna 
perfected these two sides of his character and moulded them 
according to the ideal he had in mind,—the ideal which 
became living and incarnate as the Swami Vivekananda, 
Sri Ramakrishna said that, had Noren been born in luxury: 
and comfort he would certainly have drifted in some other 
line of tendency. He might have become a great statesman, 
. agreat lawyer, a great public orator or a great social re-. 
former. It may truthfully be said that, had he not known 
Sri Ramakrishna, he might have become an eloquent preacher 
with a fashionable following, and might have gathered 
immense wealth and power about him. 4s it was, he became. 
the champion of the Poor; his message was a call to the 
assuming of responsibilities on the part of those who were: 
rich, for those who were poor and distressed. As it was, he 
did not become a fashionable prophet. He became the 
mouthpiece of a great, throbbing and soul-uplifting message: 
of reality,- with utmost renunciation and elf-sacrifice as its 
ideals, and whose burden was the relief of the pain and ang- 
uish of the poor. And it was also the dissemination of the 
light and glory of the Vedas, 

Poverty had made the haughty Noren the sympathiser of 
the poor. The divine character of his Master had taught 
him that ‘simplicity of heart with its accompanying quality 
of sincerity brought one quickest to the vision of reality and,, 
also, that the greatest worldly learning, couched in the finest 
phrases, was only trash as compared with the insight born of 
the realisation of God, He now realised that there was 2 
difference between great intellectuality and true spirituality, 
and that however grand the accumulation of learning might 
become, still ?t Was all foolishnessecompared with that omai- 


354 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


} science which was the literal seeing of God. Philosophy thus 
} became to him a handmaiden for spiritual realisation. It verified 
¢ the spiritual experience. It supported, as a foundation, the 
* structure of soul which he was in process of erecting. He did 
\ jot denounce the intellect ; he acclaimed it. But hereafter he 
lmade reason subordinate to spiritual illumination. Reason 
Vaasa the path-finder, as it were, but the heart became to him 
4 the real traveller whose vision takes in the glory of the whole 
“scene, 

Prayer and meditation were the wings upon which Noren 
rose to the spiritual consciousness. In the life of Sri Rama- 
krishna he had witnessed spirituality as a life-process beyond 
the high-soundigg beauty of intellectual theories. It was the 
heart of things which Sri Ramakrishna had touched and 
which Noren was new beginning to feel. All personal pride 
had vanished in the larger and righteous self-conscious- 
ness of being a disciple of a Divine Master. He 
was still the brilliant intellect ; he was still the young 
man of great personal dignity and power; he was, 
also, the splendid dialectician and metaphysician. Yes, his 
was; also, the happy, fun-loving spirit of a boy, and yet the 
spirit of the sage encircled his personality with lumin- 
ousness, as well,——but, above all, he was also the Saint-in- 
the-Making. a 


XLVI 
AS THE MASTER SAW NORENDRA, 


Sti Ramakrishna had made his estimate of Noren’s 
character and possibilities from the very beginning’ and he 
never changed the first opinion he had made of him. And 
his first opinion was that Noren was no ordinary human being, 
that he was a soul of exalted spiritual powers, Sri Rama- 
krishna invariably saw the soul of things, The’ physical and 
even the intellectual elements of personality were only facts, as 
it were, from which he deduced the character and intensity of 
spiritual worth. In the early days of his acquaintance with 
Noren and with others of Noren’s age who came to him at 
that time, he told Hazra, a devotee, that he had had a vision 
in which the Mother revealed to him that She was playing in 
Her various aspects, to a greater or a lesser degree, in all 
those pure forms, which he perceived physically before him 
as his disciples, Noren was the chief of these forms. Sri Rama- 
krishna had constantly before his mind the innate greatnéss 
of his chief distiple. Unconsciously he did so, because it was 
divinity which he saw in Noren, He saw him in no other 
light and manner. And he desired to train Noren particular- 
ly, because he knew that the hour would confe when he would 
have to do work in the cause of spreading the teachings of 
the Modern Gospel, which was also, in its spirit and contents, 
the Eternal Religion of the Vedas, 

When Noren had attained to perfect discipleship, Sri 
Ramakrishna was wont to say of him, “Norendra’s ideal 
is the Formless Divinity. He is of the type of the hero, the 
MAN. So many devotees come, but there is none like unto 
him. Sometimes I calculate and make comparison in my 
mind, I find that one is like a lotus with ten petals, another 
like a lotus with sixteen petals, another with one hundiged 
gnetatlcat tha miceki Lena 2... a 


} 


* 


356 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


“Qthers may be earthen tumblers, small jars and so forth; 
Norendra, however, is a 74/4, a huge water-jar which may hold 
one hundred gallons of water. Among tanks, Norendra is a 
huge dighi, an enormous and deep receptacle of water—like 
the Haldarpukur. Among fishes, Norendra is the red-eyed 
rooi; others are small fry. He is a huge receptacle which 
holds a good deal and many, many things.” 

“ Norendra is not dependent on anything. He is not sub- 
ject to attachment and to sensual pleasures., Norendra, is a 
MAN. When Norendra is amongst the audience, a great 
wave of strength and courage comes upon me.” 

He would often say that the very sight of Noren would 
send him to the contemplation of Brahman, the Absolute. 
Indeed, it would make him absorbed in Brahman. , Once, 
speaking to Girish Babu, he said, “ Norendra is a young man 
of a very high ordes. He is a master in many things,—in sing- 
ing and playing on musical instruments, on the one hand, and 
in various branches of learning on the other. He possesses the 
virtues of temperance and truthfulness ; and what is more, he 
is already beginning to know that God is real, that things of 
the world are of a fleeting nature and that one should not be 
attached to them. Many and various are tKe qualities he 
has.” ‘ : 

On another occasion, speaking to a group of disciples, 


the Master said, “You all see this boy. He is so gentle and 


unassuming. A boy like him belongs tp the class of’ Mitya- 
siddhas, the Ever-Perfect. They are Brahma-jnénis from 
their very birth. These are never bound by the fetters of 
this world. Even from their early youth they feel an awaken- 
ing within their heart and they walk God-wards at once, 
They beldng to the class of the Ishkvarkotis or Acharyakotis, 
They come down to the world as teachers of mankind. They 
have no love for the things of this world, You see, Norendra 
excels in everything. The other day he had a discussion with 
Wedar. But Kedar’s arguments were chopped‘up, as it were, 
by him as soon as they were spoken.” ae 





AS THE MASTER SAW NORENDRA, 357 


the Vedas. How far it dwells above thie tumult of this world ! 
It lives so high that its egg, falling for days and days, is 
hatched by the very action of the heat which its swift move- 
ment engenders. And the bird is released from the shell 
long before it comes within the atmosphere of earth and at 
once soars upwards. Even so is Noren. He somes from the 
Heights beyond all mortal and all human consciousness, His 
coming to earth in no way makes him of the earth,—earthly. 
Before the veils of Maya can enfold him he has learned to 
soar beyond all boridage into Freedom, and Speeds like the 
spiritual Homa bird, jest hatched, to the realm of the Parerit, 
the Eternal Consciousness. Such, indeed, is Norendra.” 

Were it not for the remarkable and verified prophecies of 
Sri Ramakrishna concerning Noren as well as others, and . 
also for his absolute frankness in speaking his opinions, his _ 
unusual estimation of Noren’s character and personality, as 
so vastly superior to all others, would, to say the least, seem 
overwhelmingly exaggerated. Sri Ramakrishna, however, 
was not one to flatter or to pamper anyone, He criticised in’ 
a scathing manner those who were powerful and wealthy, did 
he think they were hypocrites: and Pharisees deserving criti- 
cism. So whgn he spoke in this manner of Noren it was 
because he had perceived, felt and realised that which he 
spoke concerning him: perhaps it was also because he sought 
to stimulate to the utmost a powerful self-consciousness with- 
in his chief disciple, the self-consciousness of a spiritual 
genius, who would be free and independent, believing in him- 
self and his great mission of Spiritualising others by his own 
life and teaching. 

At andther time, the Master said concerning his disciple, 
“In Keshub and in Bejoy (Goswaini}—I found in a vision,— 
that Jnana was burning in the form of a candle ; arid in 
Norendra I saw Jnana shining as the sun itself!’ Noren, 
even before the Mah4-samadhi of his Master would oftea 
ponder over, and digest that which the Master had said of 
him. He remembered that at the first meeting Sri Rafna- 


358 THE LIFE OF THE SWAME VIVEKANANDA, 


“You have come!” He thought at the time, “How strange! 
It is as if he has known me long, long before, and has been 
expecting me!” During one of the very early meetings of 
the Master and the disciple, the former, in the condition of 
supreme insight, sang many sacred songs. He was lost to 
all ordinary personal awareness. At the’ end of the singing, 
he suddenly spoke out, “ Narayana! Tho& “hast taken this 
body for my sake!” speaking of the personality of Noren 
seated before him. Naturally, Noren did not understand 
then. There were many other strange remarks which the 
Master ‘passed concerning Noren, beth to him and to others. 
One morning he said to his disciple, “ My boy, you came and 
woke me ug last night when I was sleeping and you told me, 
‘Here I am come now !’” Noren was astounded. What did 
the Master mean! For he had spent the night in the cfty of 
Calcutta. But then, who knows what may transpire in that 
strange condition of consciousness and personality to which 
sleep is the avenue ! 

How wonderful was the Master’s love! When the father 
of Noren passed away, Sri Ramakrishna told a wealthy friend 
of his disciple, “ Norendra’s fathér is dead. They- are starv- 
ing at home. Now it will be good if his friends help him.” 
When the rich man had taken his departure, Noren said, 
rather. aggrieved, “Sire! Why did” you ‘tell that to him 2” 
Sri Ramakrishna, seeing that he had hurt his disciple’s sense 
of family pride in having thus made. mention of their misfor- 
tunes, exclaimed with tears in his eyes, “O my Noren! My 
dear Noren, do you not know that I can do anything’for you ; 
aye, for you'I can go about’ begging ftom door to door !* 
Noren was overpowered, and fell at his Master’s feet. This 
was lave in very truth. It” was dverwhelming ° ‘and selfless 
love. “It wag true,”.as Noren said of himself in relation. to 
his Master at a much later period, “he made me his slave 
By his great love for me !” 

‘As has been seen, Sri Ramakrishna grew fearfully alarmed 
when the family of Noren were planning for his marriage. 


ee eee ar eee 


AS THE MASTER SAW NORENDRA. 359 


Soul, made the Master literally prostrate himself before the’ 
Feet of the Mother. Holding the Feet of the Image and 
placing his head thereon, he prayed numbers upon numbers 
of times and with tears streaming from his eyes, “O Mother ! 
Do break up all those plans! May Norendra not sink !” 
When Visvanath Dutta was no longer and Noren was thrown 
into a world of maisfortune, Sri Ramakrishna, keenly feeling 
with his disciple, as though he himself were in the direst 
straits, went to the Temple of the Mother. And he, who 
hated even the mention of gold,—so great wa’s his love for his 
chief disciple—himself prayed to the Mother that She would : 
give him money! Shortly after, a vision dawned upon the 
Master in which the Mother Herself addressing him, said, 
“Tt will be well with them. Thay shall have thé‘ necessities 
for their bare maintenance,—coarse rice, coarse lehtils, coarse 
cloth will come.” : 
But, however great might be the love of the Master for 
Noren, he would be strict with him ifhe at any time. ‘asso- 
ciated with evil companions, even if only by the way. Da 
the slightest shadow of an impure thought cross Noren’s 
mind, Sri Ramakrishna at once detected it. When Noren 
came to him, after having ‘associated with any questiénable 
person, he could not look him in the face, as he said, or 
could net eat from his hand, Even when he had heard no- 
thing of such occurrences, ‘if Noren offered hint food, the hand 
of Sri Ramakrishna could not reach to his mouth ; and once 
during the time of his ilfness, though the hand fad touched 
his mouth, he could not eat ! : 
This insight whjch Sri Ramakrishna possessed was mar- 
vellous, almost incredible, were it not for thé authenticity 
of his statements, which have beef made prophecy verified 
in the life of the Swami Vivekananda. They were all super- 
conscious visions, inexplicable, as yet though recognised as 
possible by the foremost psychologists: Siumbering in the 
deeps of gersonality are innumerable poteittialitiés, thartifesting 


Pee: ea AR Pe RE AER OM PE, Ae DE | Oe ery a's SOUR reper - ns ee 


360 © THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


of a personal character is no more strange, as an instance of 
the extent of the funétions of human personality, than the 
faculty ‘of predicting astronomical and geological happen- 
ings long before their actual occurrence. Perhaps some future 
discovery in the science of psychology will throw a light 
upon such seemingly extraordinary and trans-personal powers 
and experiences, and more fully reveal the powers and po-' 
tentialities of man as a psychical being. 

One of the most remarkable visions of Sri Ramakrishna, 
with reference to Noren, manifested itself through a glorified 
awarenéss of the Personal-Impersonal Essence of Brahman. 
Lost-to all outer consciousness, the Master sawythis ‘Unn- 
divided Essence, divided as it were. On the one side he saw 
those of his disciples who. were devotees ; nd lovers of the 
Personal God ; gn the other side, he saw a great sage 
immersed in Samadhi and in a mass ofgradiant, scarlet 
coloured substance. He was astounded, but then, Ke had his: 
own thought concerning who this sage was, and he called’ 
out, “Noren | Noren!” The sage opened his eyes. Then 
the Master recognised that this, indeed, was the samme | 
individuality which had been born ina Ka4yastha family in 
the city of Calcutta as Norendra, his disciple. . 

And there was another vision, before the birth: af Noren, 
which the Master had wherein he saw a Great Light flash like 
an enormous meteor, from the direction of the sacred city of 
Benares, across the early morning sky to,the city of Calcutta. 
And he felt, “ Now my man is born !” 

There was still a third vision which the Master had con- 
cerning the Spiritual nature of his chief disciple and the as- 
sumption of bufiran personality by his soul. In Samadhi 
the persohality’ of Sri Ramakrishna, in the form of a Luminous 
Child, travelled “further and further into higher spheres of 
effulgence (jydtt), peopled with myriad * ‘souls :Of various 
states of perfection, such . as Devas and -Devis, saints and - 
Siddhas, and worshippers of the Personal God, He first passed 
through these spheres, which were of blue effulgence ‘and then 


AS THE MASTER SAW NORENDRA. 361 


brilliant white effulgence, the sphere of the Akhanda- 
Sachchidananda,or the Undivided Existence-Knowledge-Bliss. 
He plunged into the ocean of that Undivided. Effulgence and 
revelled in its transcendent glory, and returned’ to the shore 
without losing his self in it, “by the Grace of the Mother” 
as he himself put it. . Then he saw Seven Rishis (Saptarsis) 
lost, in the blessedness of deep SamAdhi. He passed them 
one by one till he came to one whom he carressed affection« 
ately, with all his powers wishing to draw him out. The 
sage opened his eyes but once and for a moment, and again 
sank into deep Samadhi. He would not break his abstract 
meditation and dissipate his mind to outer consciousness. 
Sri Ramakrishna by the power of his Will dragged him out. 
The sage opened his eyes again and a ray (_/yot’) from his body 
projected and descended into the world. Sri Ramakrishna 
is said to have remarked, “The world is not yet fit to bear 
the whole of that light. Even this portion of it will be suffi- 
cient forthe present needs of the world and will work 
wonders,” . These things are not for us to explain. Enough, 
if it be said that the Master saw in super-conscious Vision a 
streak of light flash across the sky and fall on Calcutta, and 
leaped with joy, crying out, “My prayer has been granted 
and my man, will some day come to me!” The contents of 
this vision are beautifully stated in a poem written by the 
Swami Saradananda. It is translated from the Bengali by 
another follower of the Bhagavan, and reads,— 


y 


“Unruffled is the mighty ocean of Cosmic Mind. 
Lo¢ A Light flasheth forth, riseth, taketh shape. 
Maya's play is seen ; the Undivided—divided. 
‘Who can itnderstad ! 
A Child! All brightness, all loveliness } ~ 
How many millions of suns have been taken to shape 
His Form f 


Aucaaitgs He entereth into thos¢ sublime regions 


362 THE LIFE OF THE SWAME VIVEKANANDA. 


Folding One in His Arms most tenderly, 
Holding Him close with love divine, 
Sweetly He speaks : 
“Oh ! Hero, open Thou Thine Eyes, cease now from 
meditation ! 
The whole world is lost in shadow, 
Depart Thou there with me !” 


Filled, body and mind with ecstasy by that gentlest touch - 
The Yogi opens His Eyes, with silent Tears of Joy. 
And the hairs of His Body stand-on end ! 


There flasheth forth a Star ! 

Traversing the milky way it reaches earth. 

Once more descends the Man-God on the holy land. 
Behold !” 


XLVII. 
THE GREATNESS OF THE MASTER. 


O to have been of that blessed company at the Feet of 
the Master! © to have been with Noren, to have thought 
his thoughts and to have lived ih the well-spring of feeling 
which flowed from and about him. Here was a retreat at 
Dakshineswar where only the soul shone forth, Everything 
was made subordinate to tle consciousness of the soul, 
Every act wasa stimulus to the awakening of the heart. 
And, with the Master breathing wonderful words of insight 
and illumination, no wonder that even the worst characters 
were transfigured when they saw him. 

Sri Ramakrishna was truly the lover of those souls who. 
sinned. For even sinners came to him. He loved strength, 
even in sin, for he knew that such strength could be diverted 
into channels of great usefulness. For the sinner was, to _ 
him, the potential saint. Noren was surprised at this all- 
embracing love of his Master. Each person who asso- 
ciated with Sri Ramakrishna was transfigured in one way or 
another. There weré men of all types and character. 
Noren wondered at it all, The transfiguration which occurred’ 
, to him, personally, was that of the intellect, which became 
luminously. spiritualised. 

There were women, also, who frequented Dakshineswar- 
and who worshipped the Feet of the Master. They all re- 
garded him as their child. There was one woman, so it is 
said *by some of the older disciples, who came to the Master 
and who was regal in appearance. No one knew her name 
or the particulars of ‘her family. She came to Dakshineswar 
and bowed before the Master.. For some reason Sri Rama- 
krishna perceived the Divine Presence of the Mother in this 
womag, in a much more special sense than he did in the case 

seek oS en 2 dae. en eee See ees ee et, he 


364 _ THB LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


into a deep Sam4dhi, For a long time she remained in that 
State. When she emerged therefrom she fell before the 
Master, with the name of the Mother upon her lips. And 
fhe Master said of her, “She is of the Bedonoahoc of the 
World !” 
Gopaler-M& was a saint who lived for years in a hermits 
age on the Ganges side. She.had become a saint in the telling 
" of her beads, Hers was the spiritual Ideal of the Adorable 
Child, Bala- Krishna, In many visions she had seen her 
Ideal coming in the form of Child-Krishna Himself, She 
heard of the saint at Dakshineswar. ‘Seeing him from afar 
‘she saw not a man, but a child. She addressed him as, 
“Gopal! Gopal f which is a pet name of the Lord as Boy- 
Krishna. And he called her, “M4!” And so: she was 
always known as “Gopaler-M4,” the. mother of Gopal, be- 
cause it was as a mother that she had made her itlationship 
» with God. She thought of Him as her child ; ; and in this 
manner she, likewise, thought of Sri Ramakrishna... 

There were Mohammedan saint who came to the Master, 
and followers of Jesus the Christ, and of Guru Nanak, the 
founder of the Sikh religion, There wée others who were 
worshippers of Rdma, and some who were devotees of the 
Mother. In some ‘way or other al! of them would gee in 
him their own Ideal. in each case divinity manifested. .itself 
in their relation with this Man of God. Each would see his 
own Ideal incarnate in the Master, and would be spiritually’ 
uplifted and transported With joy. Because of their having 
seen him sthey would be fortified in their own spiritual strength 
and in their own particular vision of the Divine Life. 

And there were some who came, such asthe famous Girish 
Babu, at once the Shakespeare and Garrick of the Indian 
stage, a man of worldly views and of broad worldly ex- 
perience, a man Who had lived life.as he found it and as 
impulse dictated. Meeting the Master in Calcutta and 
thinking it would be interesting to visit him, he went to 
Dakshingswar ; ; and in the Temple of | Ma Kali he heard him 


THE GREATNESS OF THE MASTER. ~ 365 


such startling terms of familiarity and intimate feeling, 
that he said within himself, “This nran is either a blasphe- 
mous knave or a saint.” How he came to accept him as‘a 
saint and Becme-a great devotee of his is a long story. 
Suffice. it to say'here that Sri Ramakristna found him a man 
of prodigious faith and sincerity under the exterior covering of 
what the world calls a sinner, and showered his great bless-_ 
ings upon his ‘soul. Girish Babu once asking Sri Ramakrishna, 
s Sire, what shall Ido to be saved?” received as answer, 
“ Repeat my name thrice a day ! He said, “ Sire, you know 
very well that Iam a mian of the world. Iam a great sinner. 
How can I hope to think of you three times a day >” And 
Sri Ramakrishna replied, “Repeat my name twice a day: 
then !” But even that Girish Babu feared-he could not pro- 
mise todo, And when the Master said that it would be welt 
with him if he repeated his name but once a day,—O for the 
sincerity of the man !y-he said, “ Sire, I do not know that I 
can even da that much.” , Very well,” said the Master. 
“Resign yourself fully'to me and be at peace. Your salva- 
tion: rests. in my hands!" And he who could not promise to 
take the name of his Master even once a day, repeated the: 
name “Ramakrishna” many, many times daily all through his. 
life and passed away with the Name of his Guru, his Ishtam 
on his lips. And in the days before his death he was cons- 


’ tantly uttering fine spiritual sayings. He had become a 


sage and had fulfilled the prophetic words of the Master 
spaken to him years before, “ Girish, a time will come when 
people will marvel at you.” 

Sri Ramakrishna never placed human conduct in the 
natrow and puritanical category of virtue and vice, but of 
strength and of weakness. And he knew that each man will 
overcome and in time outgrow all weakness according as the 
light’ of the soul grows upon him. He must become strong. 
‘It is not in overcoming only, but in outgrowing that the goal 
is to be reached. Such is the destiny of the spiritual life. 

Noren saw famous men, physicians, authors, lagyers, pro- 


mee. ale: at oe Pan 


366 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


bow before him, taking the dust of his feet. He became 
convinced that Sri Ramakrishna was a wonderful character 
to be able to bring so many persons of such varying tempera- 
ments into one great spiritual grouping together. Physicians 
would test the Master. Did he go into Samadhi, they 
would bring a coin into contact with his body. That very 
moment his whole frame would writhe, as though in pain, 
showing in what a remarkable manner the higher conscious- 
ness of the Master had left its impress upon the body, and 
how the sympathetic nervous system had become so charged 
with spiritual impressions that, even when outward conscious- 
ness had receded, the body would, in response to the highest 
‘thought, repel the least contact with gold or any other metal. 
They noted down his sayings and found them to be the ut- 
‘terances of the Highest Realisation. They found, too, that 
there was a sound, sane and inexplicably wonderful relation- 
ship between the conscious will of Sri Ramakrishna and this 
unconscious state of the body. Then, many times, the ex- 
perience would leave him semi-aware of his surroundings, And 
at all times, they found that each experience was a trans-human 
phenomenon of personality. All were in one way or another 
convinced of the spiritual magnitude of this man and of the 
wonderful command he exercised over the functions of hu- 
‘man personality. 

Noren saw and marvelled. And to think that his Master. 
‘had made him the centre of his affections! Had he been of 
an ordinary calibre, had he been any other than Noren, he 
would have been conceited. As it was, he was deeply 
humble. Only in his inmost soul was he glad. He felt sure 
of himself because the Master was so sure of him. Yes* he 
was, indeed, marked out for the spiritual consciousness. In this 
mess of a world he was to see the divine nature made manifest 
and incarnate, at least for him. Amidst all its fraud he was 
to find reality. He thought, “Who am I without my 
Master ?” All his earlier ambition to excel as an orater and 
public n man now w became transformed into higher aspiration. 


THE GREATNESS OF THE MASTER. 367 


The entire atmosphere about Sri Ramakrishna was the 
presence of the Divinity itself to Noren, He thought that he 
was nothing, froma worldly point of view, in comparison to 
the numbers of others, known to fame and occupying high 
positions, who came to Sri Ramakrishna! The Master had 
passed over all of them for him. But then, he was not influenced 
in his choice by men who occupied high worldly positions. He 
could not bear conceit. Toone who was enormously rich 
and who thought himself to be highly spiritual, he said, “You 
are a worm-eaten, old, earth-bound householder.” To another, 
famed as a public man who made an ill-judged remark, he 
said frankly, “ People call you great, but I cannot reckon you 
as that! You are a small-minded man, low-born as you are !” 
But such remarks would give no offence to the persons ad- 
dressed, and they would admit in their hearts and to the 
Master himself that he had spoken truly, and would become 
his admirers. So far as Sri Ramakrishna was concerned, 
worldly-minded men, however great their position, and 
Pandits with mere.book-learning and no realisation were as 
dust, 

It was these characteristics of the Master which imprinted 
themselves deeply on the chief disciple. His great compas- 
sion for those who erred, his deep understanding of the 
frailties.and the possibilities of mankind, his earnestness and 
straightforwardness, his absolute fearlessness and his frank- 
ness, became to Noren ideals for the forming of his‘own 
character, And it was these very characteristics of his 
Master which, in time, transferred themselves into his own 
personality, His views broadened daily in the presence of 
Sri Ramakrishna, He had ample opportunity for observa- 
tion and study of human nature, which he utilised to the ut- 
most. It was the great charity of Sri Ramakrishna which 
made the deepest impression upon him. 

He often called to mind that spontaneous utterance which 
he made when Sri Ramakrishna said to him, “ Listen? my 
boy ! Worldly people speak all manner of things against 
ondiy nena@le bit they chonld act Hke the S&lenhant 


368 THE WIFE OF THE SWAMI YIVEKANANDA. 


who passes through the public road, indifferent to the dogs 
running after him and barking. The elephant turns a deaf: 
ear to them and goes on his way. ‘Suppose, my boy, people 
should speak ill of you behind your back, what would you 
think of them?” The disciple at once replied, “I should 
look upon them as a lat of barking dogs?” The Master 
laughed sweetly and said, “No, no, you need not go so far: 
as that. You may not mind them, but you should look on 
everyone as Narayana. God dwells in all beings, and plays 
in them in various ways. One may be a saint-N. arayana and 
another a villain-Narayana !” 

Noren, as the Swami Vivekananda, had many occasions. 
to put his Master’s charitable teaching into actual Practice. 
For, when he was maligned and slandered, and when those 
who feared that his teaching would injure the Christian 
missionary purse for India, heaped calumny upon him, he | 
said nothing. He smiled at their childish attempts and for. 
gave all. Was not the divinity in thent! Aye, he blessed them t 

Another time he was discussing different feligious beliefs 
with his Master. He waxed eloquent in his denunciation of | 
certain sects and of devil-worship, He became a torrent of 
wrath. The Master looked with much love at him and said,’ 
“ My boy, there is a back door to every house; Why should 
not one have the liberty to enter into a house by that if one. 
chooses to? But, of course, I agree with you that the front 
entrance is the best.” It was this manner of teaching 
which charmed Noren. It modified his puritanical view of 
life which he as a Brahmo had. Sri Ramakrishna could not 
bear the word, “sin” ; and he taught Noren how to regard 
mankind in the more generous and truer light of weakness. 
and of strength. What matters it if a man falls; for that 
reason is he to be trampled under foot or shunned! Sri 
Ramakrishna had no such terms in his spiritual vocabulary as 
“born-in sin,” and“ a child of wrath.” He had no sympathy 
witk the exaggerated theological conceptions of sin. He 
admitted that man was born with limitations ; bit where 
others fxed their attention only upon limitations bo foresaw 


THE GREATNESS. OF THE MASTER. 369 


that the destiny of each soul was the triumphant conquest of 
all limitations. Man is a child of the Divine Consciousness, a 
member of the Divine Body of Reality. Sin is a nightmare 
from which the experience of pain and sorrow awakens him, 
and he proceeds, with constant prayer and discrimination, 
on the Path whose goal is beyond all darkness and illusion, 
then comes to know himself as the Child of God, as the 
Pure One. 

On one occasion when Noren was denouncing the de- 
generating influence of certain weaknesses of schoolboys, be- 
lieving them to be undermining their character, Sri Rama- 
krishna chanced to pass by. Hearing Noren speaking ex- 
citedly, he asked him concerning what he was so eager and, 
when he heard, he said, “Why talk of these matters! Talk 
of the Lord and nothing else !” 

This was the teaching. To keep the mind inflexibly 
fixed upon the Ideal was the aim of life. Why talk of 
other things|/ The incident brings to mind the wonder of 
the Master’s realisation. Sometimes he literally wept, when 
people were discussing worldly affairs before him, crying out, 
“O Mother, why have you brought these men to this place ?” 
One recalls how sincere he was in this, and how he insisted 
that his didciples keep their thoughts always fixed upon 
God, One recalls how he slapped an elderly Brahmana and 
even Rani Rasmani when he, found them seated in medi- 
tation but with their minds fixed on other things. Such was 
his power of reading thought. Sri Ramakrishna was oute 
and-out a man of spiritual honesty and integrity, He could 
be severe in his capacity as a spiritual teacher. All his 
experignees were the result of test. And these character- 
istics were also prominently noticeable in Noren, the dis- 
ciple. Sri Ramakrishna, be it remembered, was a man who 
had also doubted his realisations, saying, “If this be true, 
O Mother, and not simple imagination, let so-and-so come 
to me”, and the person he would mention would come on 
that very ‘day when there was every reason to believe that 
this would efmost improbable. : In other ways also he tested 

24 ’ . 


370 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


his experiences, as for example, when he wanted to be 
assured that the Divine Mother Whom he worshipped in the 
Image of the Temple at Dakshineswar was a Living Reality 
Who heard his prayers, and not a stone image, he puta 
piece of cotton-wool near the nose of the Image. And io, to 
his vision the cotton actually moved by the breath! He 
even went so far as to demand that, ifa certain realisation 
he had was really true, then “let this enormous stone jump 
on the ground asa frog leaps.” And, though it seems out 
of all proportion to daily experience and savours of the 
mystical and mythological, in the words of the Master, 
“the stone presently bounced several times as a frog leaps !” 
To Sri Ramakrishna it proved incontrovertibly that his 
realisation was true. Thus he always said, “Whatever I 
teach, I have seen.” : 

Truly, never were natures so much alike and yet so 
seemingly opposite in so many shades and aspects of charac- | 
ter as those of Sri Ramakrishna and him who became the 
Swami Vivekananda. And to those of spiritual vision, it is 
seen that Ramakrishna and Vivekananda are names of the 
same reality, and that they are one individuality, diverted 
into two separate streams of personal consciousness, because 
of the needs of the time which they came to fulfill. 


And the disciple daily grew into the likeness of his 
Master. Even it may be said that Ramakrishna became 
Vivekananda, having breathed his own soul into Noren; 
and Vivekananda became Ramakrishna in having completely 
transformed himself into the spirit of the Master, and in 
having interpreted that spirit in its true essence and sig- 


nificance before the world. * 


XLVIII 
TOWARDS THE GOAL. 


During the first four years of their relationship, such was 
the teaching Sri Ramakrishna gave unto Noren, and such 
was the environment in which Noren grew beyond the con- 
fines of his utmost hope With regard to the spiritual life, 
Four years back he had come to Sri Ramakrishna asking, 
“Sire, have you seen God?” And for these four years the 
Master had trained his disciple into that condition of person- 
ality where it became possible for the latter to give to 
others the same reply which the Master had given to him, 
“Yes! ] have seen God !” 

It is difficult to state accurately, froma chronological 
point of view, just when Noren became the disciple of the 
Master. From a mystical view-point he had become the 
disciple in that moment when Sri Ramakrishna had touched 
his heart. It was then that he took literal possession of 
his personality. But c.1.sciously Noren became the disciple 
only when his intellect had been convinced, which was a 
process of s8me months. + Thus when he became the dis- 
ciple, it was irrevocably that he did so. Then, too, had he 
tried, he could not have broken from the powerful realisation 
of Sri Ramakrishna. So it suffices to regard Noren as the 
disciple from the very commencement. The experience of 
discipleship in which his mind lingered before his full 
acceptance of the Master, was only in the way of training, 
Had hg accepted him from the very beginning, without under- 
standing, he would not have become the powerful personality 
of the Swami Vivekananda, who was possessed of the 
power of convincing others because he himself had 
gone through a personal process of being convinced. 
There was purpose,—all the more glorious because of 
its being” unconscious,—in every phase of relationship 


372 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


was the making and the preaching of the Modern 
Gospel of Hinduism. 

Noren came frequently to Dakshineswar during the first 
two years. During the third year he came still more fre- 
quently. During the fourth year he came constantly. During 
the fifth and last year he practically lived with the Master 
until his passing away. As there were no stirring events in 
the life of Sri Ramakrishna from a worldly point of view, 
there were consequently no such stirring events for Noren. 
There were no hasty comings and goings, in a worldly sense, 
no excited rise and fall of personal ambition and fortune, 
It was all silent realisation and silent teaching and silent as- 
similation of teaching. There were events, to be sure, even 
stirring events, but these had relation, not to time, but to 
eternity, being spiritual in character. For each time Noren 
visited Dakshineswar it was a stirring event, both to him- 
self and to his Master. It was an event marking the pro- 
gress in the intensification of their relationship and in the 
absorption of ideas and ideals on the part of the disciple. 
He was becoming saturated with a certain spirit. 

It was this spirit which Sri Ramakrishna finally im- 
parted to Noren in the fullest sense. During the fifth and 
last year of his discipleship, Noren attained “the highest 
spiritual consciousness. The Master gave him all that was 
to be given, all that he had. Sri Ramakrishna compared 
himself to one who had struggled hard amidst almost insuper- 
able difficulties to acquire a great treasure and Noren was 
the son and heir to reap the benefits and enjoyments of this 
treasure, Sri Ramakrishna had built up a great Spiritual 
Empire, conquering the invading elements of lust and gold, 
dangerous to the religious realisation and to the expansion of 
the spiritual consciousness of humanity. Noren was to rule 
over and extend this Empire broadcast over the earth. Sri 
Ramakrishna had dived deep down into the spiritual ocean. 
Noren was to show to the world the treasures which the: 


Master had found. Sri Ramakrishna was the realisation and 
ape ee a a SE Ie MGR ER SAY PR ERENE e 


TOWARDS THE GOAL. 373 


Thus, for nearly five long years the Master trained the 
disciple, initiating him into each single realisation which he had 
made his very own in those twelve years of his ascetic life. 
He revealed to him, not in so many words, but in the revela- 
tion of an illuminated consciousness, the Complete Synthesis 
of Hinduism which Noren later preached. For nearly five 
Jong years Sri Ramakrishna lived as the Spiritual Fact be- 
fore Noren’s very eyes, and Noren’s task was the understand- 
ing of that Fact. It was necessary, for he was to spread the 
Revelation of it to the world. 

Intellect and heart were both fully educated in this 
spiritual discipline of five years. Noren the philosopher, 
became gradually transformed into Noren the saint and 
seer. Upon the grand and indestructible foundation of 
his intellectual consciousness he built the fabric of a great 
faith and of a deep spiritual insight. The words of the 
Master made their living impress upon him. The Master's 
spiritual assurance became his own; and the disciple had 
heard the highest spiritual truth explained in the simplest 
terms. The simplest object or occurrence would serve Sri 
Ramakrishna in the elucidation of his teaching. In Sri 
Ramakrishna Noren had found, in- these years, the living 
exemplificatlon of that which he later on uttered to audiences 
in Europe and in America, “ The highest truth is always the 
simplest.” He had seen in Sri Ramakrishna great spiritual 
reason ; but, more than reason, he had witnessed in him a 
readiness and an intimacy of the spiritual perception. 

He understood Sri Ramakrishna. He had come to look 
upon the “brain-sick old man” of former times as a God- 
Jike Mam verily, as Divinity Incarnate and a Saviour of souls, 
For had not his own soul been saved by the Master! He 
thought of him frequently as the Light of the World; for was 
he not so to Noren’s own soul and to the souls of 
numerous devotees? He looked upon him as a Revelation 
Incarnate, for had not Sri Ramakrishna revealed divinity 
-anto him and unto them all? He believed so; he knew sO. 


374 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


not only conferred it upon Noren himself, but upon many 
others, He had put many others besides Noren into a sleep. 
of the body and an awakening of soul by merely touching 
them. Noren had seen sinners made saints before his eyes by 
the spiritual power of Sri Ramakrishna. Verily, the over- 
whelming power of his realisation dispelled the darkness 
of their souls and washed away their sins. And he had seen 
those whom people regarded as spiritual unmasked of their 
seeming sanctity by his penetrating power of insight. For many 
are the stories told of the Master as to how he could not take 
water from the hands of evil-minded persons or sit upon a mat 
they had spread out for him, or accept offerings which they 
had laid at his feet. And Sri Ramakrishna had read Noren’s. 
own thought and those of his friends, and also of others whom 
he knew. Indeed, he was the Seer of seers, 

What a delicate spiritual sensitiveness the Master had! 
On a certain occasion it occurred to him that the earth it- 
self was the body of the Lord and that all flowers were already 
offered unto Him. So, what need to pluck them and offer 
them to any special Image! Or, in some exalted mood he 
would refuse to tread upon the grass for fear that he might 
hurt it and the life it represented. Or, in still another mood, 
he would literally feel a slap, given to another by one en- 
raged, and bear the mark on himself as if he had received the 
blow. Or, he would feel intensely the pangs and misery of the 
poor and then ask that they should be helped, even as he had 
asked of Mathoor Babu, as they passed through a certain 
poverty-stricken village, to feed and clothe the famished 
villagers, Or, again, it might be that he would feel a human 
step upon the earth as a step upon his own breast when,dn the 
higher stages of perception, he felt the Self of him to be one 
with that All-pervading Universal Self present everywhere. 

And he could w?/ himself into the condition of supreme 
blessedness at any time whatsoever. From the very com- 
mencement of the twelve years of his ascetic practices he 
could put his own consciousness into such transcendental 


Ge |e. ae fe oa 


TOWARDS THE GOAL. 375 


could be roused at any moment by the slightest suggestion. 
He was always the possessor of his own mind. It would be 
better to say that he was always the possessor of his own soul. 
Noren having sat at the Feet of Sri Ramakrishna, had 
had his eyes opened to these facts of true spirituality, Intellect 
was the least part of it. It was all heart. It was life itself. 
This gave him enormous strength. It sharpened his desire 
to realise truth, It brought upon him a great burning aspira- 
tion, Sri Ramakrishna watched the progress of his disciple’s 
mind and heart. He must have realised that the time was 
drawing near when he would find it wise to impart the high- 
est consciousness to Noren,—that consciousness of which the 
touch at the heart had been only an inkling. He had given 
Noren his love and his knowledge. The time was now fast 
coming on when he must give him his realisation also. For 
Sri Ramakrishna could impart spirituality even as one can 
give a flower or bestow a gift. Noren had been imploring 
him for realisation. He had murmured at what he believed to 
be only meagre results of his spiritual practices. True, he 
felt that God was; he had moments of heightened feeling 
when it seemed that the inmost soul of him was becoming 
conscious of itself. The name of the Mother caused a great 
joy withinthim. The presence of his Master had become to 
- hima constant realisation, Indeed, he had even had, on 
several occasions during these years, incontestable and un- 
assailable proofs. In the deeps of meditation he had largely 
grown out of the body-consciousness. The state of medita- 
tion was forming itself for him into a fixed habit, which 
manifested itself outwardly in later years as the power of the 
consgiqus mind to plunge into the deepest concentration 
upon any subject. This, in itself, was vision and luminous 
realisation. He was now sensing spiritual powers within him. 
He had gone beyond the mere ecstasy of devotional worship ; 
he had even gone beyond the mere intellectual consciousness 
of reality. He had known moments when he literally touched 


divinity*and was made physically conscious of Reality in the 
eniritnal Qlagelonment of hic cancec hu thaie teanchanSotian nf 


376 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


function and faculty. His thought became a sweeping power, 
And on one occasion he exemplified this, 

In the garden of Cossipur whilst he was sitting witha 
brother-disciple after a deep meditation, in an interval of the 
Shiva-rdtri Pujé, he touched him, desiring to test if he could 
give him by instantaneous transmission a certain high con- 
sciousness of the Advaita Vedanta which he himself possessed. 
This brother-disciple alluding to this act afterwards said, 
“ As Noren touched me, I felt a strong sensation pass through 
my entire body. It was like an electric current. When I 
had received this, I passed into a deep state of meditation 
and lost all consciousness of the body and the ego in an un- 
speakable feeling of blessedness.” Indeed it was seen that 
when he emerged therefrom, he was an out-and-out Advaitin, 
whereas before he had been a Bhakta, or a lover of God. 
Noren literally gave him this spirit. But the Master on hear- 
ing this reproved Noren, telling him that he had spent his 
powers too prematurely, and that he had also diverted the 
tendency of the soul of a brother-disciple whom he had been 
training on other lines, The disciple referred to, became 
the eminent Vedantic scholar, the Swami Abhedananda, 

Noren had literally become a man in the spiritual sense. 
He felt enormous power. He was new the saint, ‘the Son of 
the Mother, unto Whom he had given himself up, body, mind 
and soul. Sri Ramakrishna watched him carefully as one 
watches a priceless treasure. From the beginning of his 
fifth year with Noren he had started in motion certain powers 
which were leaving his own personality, as it were, and trans- 
planting themselves into the body and mind and personality 
of Noren, And, at this time, the cancer in the throat from 
which he was suffering became worse. Towards the close of 
the fourth year he had to be removed to the Cossipur Garden- 
house, for the sake of treatment, it being nearer to Calcutta. 
Some one said to the Master, “Lo! You area great yogi! 
You‘can cure yourself if you but exert your will! ” And he 
replied, “My mind is given up to the Mother. Why should I 
Dut staan thie nicleac: bindu shia seianloe a> ckemcde Bex 


TOWARDS THE GOAL. 377 


And Noren kept insistently begging his Master for the 
very highest Samadhi. The Master said nothing. He only 
blessed him and loved him all the more tenderly. Truly, 
the ties were being bound deeper and faster. The Master 
would give him the highest Sam4dhi. He had it in mind, 
but he said nothing. lt was in the nature of the law of 
things that Noren should first go through a certain training, 
And after that, it came for him, the highest, even the 
Nirvikalpa SamAdhi. Sri Ramakrishna lived only a short 
while after that event, himself soon entering for the last 
time this Highest Consciousness of Brahman. 


XLIX. 
THE GREAT UNDERSTANDING. 


Shall Divinity be circumscribed by a name! Does the 
idea of the personal god-head conflict with the conception of 
impersonal divinity! “Personal and Impersonal!” These 
are but names. The Reality is the Divine Essence ; and the 
longing of the human soul cannot be compressed into either 
“Personal” or “Impersonal.” Thus, “Mother” and “Brahman” 
are names for the same Fact. What matters the vista through 
which that Fact is seen, whether it be Personal or Impersonal, 
or something even beyond both, This was the teaching of 
Sri Ramakrishna. This was the teaching of the Swami 
Vivekananda also. And as to the spiritual experience, what 
difference can there be, in this luminous grasping of things, 
between the Beatific Vision of the Mother and the Nirvikalpa 
. Samadhi, or the Consciousness of Brahman? Men are fooled 
by names, Ideas confuse the mind. But the Divine Nature 
is One. The longing of the human soul for Truth is one, 
whatever the name of that longing ; its object is one ; and 
the realisation to which this longing: leads is always one,— 
the transfiguration of human personality, the awareness of 
the Divine Essence. P 

Thus, one’s mind enters with Noren the group of devotees 
at Dakshineswar, and later on at Cossipur, and witnesses the 
spiritual experience of the Master. One finds Sri Ramakrishna 
speaking many things, but they are all utterances of the One 
Truth. He addresses the Most High under various. names, 
and yet it is but one atmosphere of divinity in which he 
dwells. To him there is no difference between the personak 
realisation, or the seeing of God as Person, and the realisation 
which is the Consciousness of Brahman, or God the Abso- 
lute. Both convey the same spiritual significance and illumi- 
nation. Both bring the same results—the abnegation 
of personality and the birth of .the consnidusness of 


THE GREAT UNDERSTANDING, 379 


divinity. Both lead to the same end,—bliss and blessed- 
ness, 

The whole essence of Noren’s training as a disciple is. 
witnessed herein, It was an all-inclusive training wherein 
everything was fulfilment and nothing denial. It was the 
gradual intellectual and spiritual illumination with regard to 

.the whole burden of Sri Ramakrishna’s life and teaching,. 
namely, that all paths of religion are paths to God and that all. 
religions are one in the essence. Thus, it is readily understood. 
how Noren, both as the disciple and as the Swami Vivek- 
ananda, was able to throw his whole personality with equal 
enthusiasm into any ideal and into any form of worship, It is. 
also seen how he was able to detach the ideal from its cere- 
monial and liturgical atmosphere and perceive it as a spiritual. 
reality in the abstract, as an aspect of truth, as a symbol and 
phase of the Divine Nature and, also, as an actual personal 
manifestation thereof. It is also readily understood how he 
was able to see beyond any separate intellectual or spiritual 
distinction in the religious ideal, and perceive the same. 
essence and divinity throughout as the one thought of all 
religious languages. 

But in his heart Noren was given over to his Master. His. 
present spRitual ideal and the spiritual presence which he. 
constantly held before him was the personality of Sri Rama- 
krishna. Noren had now gone into the depth of things. 
Human longing and vision, whenever and wherever real, 

'-sincere and actual, he felt; must end in realisation. So all, 
teligious ideals are true. The personality of Sri Ramakrishna, 

, surcharged, as it was, with a wonderful admixture of human 
reality and divine realisation, was more to him as a stimulus 
to the awareness of the truth in religion than all the other- 
ideal visions of man. He saw before him the loving, strug- 
gling, suffering, human personality transformed the next 
moment into a divine personality, in the religious experience. 
Samadhi and God were the culmination of genuine human. 
longing. “The human and the divine, he began to see, were 


380 _ THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


-out of the human heart. Thus, by degrees, he came to know 
religion as a genuine human fact. It was no longer meta- 
* physical to him as it had been when he was a member of the 
Brahmo Samaj. It was no longer intellectual or philosophi- 
cal. Its elements were composed of the living experience of 
the human soul. Its achievements lay in realistic efforts and 
in the actual conquest of human limitations. He saw this 
before him in the daily life of Sri Ramakrishna. It was the 
visible revelation of the soul over the animal-human nature, 
It was the triumph of the spirit over the bondage of person- 
‘ality, confined in the net of food and sleep and sex and fear. 
He saw in the living, speaking, moving figure of the Master 
the veritable incarnation of the spiritual consciousness, com- 
posed as it was of striving and realisation, of elements both 
human and divine. This was real religion. He came to 
understand the whole struggle of the ages in the light of the 
soul-revealing personality before him. Religion to him now 
meant the revelation of the soul, the gradual manifestation 
of divinity through the triumph over limited personality. 

He began to perceive religion as the path to the finding of 
the Real Self in man, through the crucifixion of selfishness 
into selflessness, Sri Ramakrishna was the living text-book 
from which he read the meaning of ‘the Scripture} and the 
motto of all philosophy, “Man, know thy Self!”- So he 
could never become a religious. fanatic. He had-seen the 
human side of the struggle for the finding of God. What 
mattered theories or fine phrases! It was the throbbing 
‘sincerity, the real longing to transcend all limitations, which 
he discovered and now knew to be the sole meaning of the 
religious life. What matters in this light how one perceives 
the Ideal, or what path one treads to reach the goal, so long 
as the Ideal, so long as the goal, is really desired. Religion 
was completely taken out of its theological setting for him, 
-and_ became transformed into the setting of human life and 
human struggle. s 

And what matters as to belief! Realisation is all in all. 
Oot Ravtabrichna wacthe Man of Reatication. Mpftn aspired 


THE GREAT UNDERSTANDING. 38% 


to be even like him. And his desire was fulfilled. It was because 
he had lived in the garden of Dakshineswar and in that of” 
Cossipur with the Master that he was later on able to stand 
before large audiences and utter the words of a gospel which 
stirred the human heart to its very depths. In the presence- 
of his Guru Noren dwelt in a spiritual world, the inhabitants. 
of which were the simple-minded and the simple-hearted 
devotees of Sri Ramakrishna, the light of which was the 
beautifully human and humanly divine personality of the 
Master. Noren came to stand on firm ground because he 
was touching the human foundation of all religious systems. 
The voice of his Master, the tears and smiles during his 
spiritual experiences, the manner in which he walked and ate 
and performed the thousand and one things of human life, 
became gospels and apocalyptic revelations unto him. And 
how shall divinity ever be revealed if not in all the sweetness 
and in spite of all the limitations of human personality ! 
Noren sat at the Feet of the Master and in his eyes he read 
the whole meaning of the Vedas and the Upanishads, 
Spirituality was therefore no longer garbed for him in fine 
but impractical metaphysics, It presented itself in all the 
simplicity and in all the divinity of human life. 

It was #he human element in religion which became the 
infallible guarantee of its reality to Noren. God became to 
him not far removed from pfuman longing. Through the 
personality of his Divine Master, he saw even the grand height 
the consciousness of Brahman, as linked to the human desire to. 
of expand and expand until the moment of the transfiguration 
of the soul is near at hand ;—indeed he saw that Brahman is. 
real hecause human sincerity and human anguish to break all 
bonds are real. The proofs of Brahman are in the human 
desire to attain to that state and in the human vision thereof. 

And what are the elements of the spiritual consciousness ? 
The very faculties of sense themselves. These are not limita- 
tions. It is the misuse of their functions and the manner in 
which the will allows them to act that constitute the bondage. 


382 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


translation of human into divine perception. They themselves 
‘may become the instruments through which the impersonal 
divine nature is personally perceived and realised. So long 
as human consciousness has not been completely transcended, 
divinity will always reveal itself through the personal mani- 
festation. It may be a spiritual individual, or it may bea 
spiritual ideal, which becomes the perspective through which 
divinity is personified. And the personal vision is none the 
less real because human. On the contrary, it is incontrover- 
tibly sure. Of course Noren realised that the goal is the 
attaining of the Divine Consciousness Itself, the reaching out 
to and the finding of infinity, eternity, deathlessness and 
reality even here and now in this world of limitations and of 
time, mortality and change. And Sri Ramakrishna was the 
human consciousness transfigured into divinity by the realisa- 
tion of divine ideals ; and thus Noren saw the divine incar- 
nation before his very eyes in this man who had long since 
forgotten and completely transcended his humanity in a 
sublime search for and discovery of the divine nature. 
Whether he was literally an Incarnation of God did not 
occupy the attention of Noren’s thought. He saw the 
character of the Master. That told a more complete tale in 
the way of revelation than all the most well-balaiced meta- 
physical theories put together. Noren’s views at this time 
were broad, in fact too broad for the average understanding, 
He accepted Sri Ramakrishna in a larger sense than most 6f 
those about him. He often grew impatient over their ten- 
dency towards fanatical, limited, and prejudicial acceptance of 
the Master. He held him in too high reverence to place his 
personality into the narrow measure of the ordinary «nder- 
standing of the Incarnation theory. Noren was too much 
matter-of-fact spiritually to be self-deluded. He unconsciously 
accepted Sri Ramakrishna’s life as the demonstration of the 
means towards all spiritual ends, He saw the spiritual path- 
“finder in him, He heard his words as utterances of human 
verity in regard to the highest possibilities of the Spiritual 


Pry ae Sig We. ST. CRS Lak Ser ce ee é 


THE GREAT UNDERSTANDING. 38 3 


j he later understood in the light of the science of a spiritual 
- psychology, namely, that human personality can transcend 
‘its own boundaries by sheer effort at the intensification of 
consciousness upon trans-personal ideals, He commenced to 
perceive religion as an organised system for the stimulation 
of such transfiguration of consciousness, All the efforts of the 
saints had been this, And in Sri Ramakrishna Noren saw 
these efforts brought into the highest possible practice and 
realisation. He tried to express this, but succeeded only 
in uttering Philosophical platitudes. Later on he was able 
to express itin a thoroughly human and thoroughly real 
way because, in the widening vision of manhood, he saw his 
‘own Master in a historical light as the embodiment of 
certain transcendental ideas and asa great human power in 
their conservation, He saw him in an intensely human 
light as the re-maker and preserver of the Hindu Dharma ; 
and in this light he saw in Sri Ramakrishna a new 
Chaitanya, a new SankarAcharya, a new Buddha ; aye, and 
even more, for the difficulties which stood in the way of the 
reinvigoration of the Hindu consciousness were far more 
numerous and serious in the present age than at any pre- 
vious time, Instinctively Noran realised all this as a fact; 
and instinctively he saw the greatness of Sir Ramakrishna. 
Here again it must be understood that Noren’s non- 
acceptance of Sri Ramakrishna as an Incarnation of God, 
as ordinarily understood, was not a state of bitter agnosti- 
cism. He wanted a larger definition. Even as he had 
passed through a tempest of agnostic thought in other times 
emerging therefrom into the desire for God, so now he, 
likewise, instinctively groped in the darkness of his limited 
illumination for a more worthy understanding of the idea 
of Incarnation, so far as he himself was concerned. To the 
ordinary theological understanding, the idea of the infinity 
of God is confounded with the idea of Physical vastness 
which cannot be compressed into the small compass of a 
human form, But later on Noren in his searching realised 
that God’? mifinitude meant the unlimeca... fe 


384 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


spiritual entity, and as such it did not suffer in the least by 
expressing itself in human form and manifesting in it the- 
Divine nature in all its exalted character. Nay, he went 
further ; he realised that a Man in the striving even becomes 
God, In this sense he succeeded in the end in accepting 
Sri Ramakrishna as the Divinity Incarnate ; and in this sense 
he saw in him whatever Divinity there ts. Thus by accepting 
this more human and this more really divine outlook he 
did not deny the possibilities of Divine Incarnation. The 
idea of God becoming Man is a theological possibility, 
though speculative in its nature ; whereas Man becoming 
God is a human reality, witnessed before in the illuminated 
life of Lord Buddha who “worked” his way to divinity, 
That is why Buddha~to Vivekananda’s mind,—was so sure 
an example of the possibilities of Man becoming God, And 
moreover he held that all beings may become divine, and 
that divinity resides in every being, even in a worm, in a 
potential form, the difference being in the degree of mani- 
festation only. 
Even as the agnosticism of his earlier days was in reality 
a looking amidst darkness for a light, even so his constant 
doubting of the Master was in reality a constant_search for 
,a conception which he finally embodied in fhe words 
{EACH SOULIS POTENTIALLY DIVINE. THE GOAL IS TO 
| MANIFEST THIS DIVINE WITHIN.” 


L 
IN THE GROUP OF DISCIPLES. 


Though there were many, many devotees about the 
Master, there were some who were amongst the chosen, 
There were some who were, specially marked out by his 
favour and by his love, because he felt that the Narayana or 
divine nature was more developed in these than in the 
others, He treated them with special affection and _ particu- 
larly initiated them into the higher Stages of realisation 
and spiritual awareness. And they, in their turn, were 
more bound to him by their love and devotion than the’ 
others. These chosen devotees and disciples were. of two 
classes,—the one of householders, and the other, a group of 
some eighteen lads who became the Sanny4sins 6f the 
Order of Ramakrishna, as it was founded, later’ on, by the 
Swami Vivekananda. Both the householder and the SannyAsin 
followers of the Master were deeply loved by Norendra. They 
were a part of ‘his life, and they loved him Passionately. 
When Sri Ramakrishna had gone, they made him the centre 
of their hoige, love and loyalty, . “ 

Among those who were householders was Rama Chandra 
Dutta. He was the chief of many of them, a great devotee, 
and also a relative of Noren. “Tt was he who towards the 


ideal householder. . Following upon the passing of 
the Master, he founded a retreat named Yogodydn near 
Calcutta, and made disciples. Then tame Surendra Nath 
Mitra, a great soul and a lover of the Master, who supported 
the Ramakrishna monastery at’ Baranagore, when the band 
of young men, under-the leadership of Noren, formed them- 
selves into a monastic order. -Then there were the saintly 
characters? such as Nag Mahashaya and Balaram Bose, men 
of great detgtion and Spirituality. It was Nag MahéShaya 
, 2500 . 


386 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


who bowed at the Feet of Noren when he had heard Sri 
Ramakrishna’s words, “Norendra is a sword unsheathed,! 
These words are all right in his mouth”. Nag Mah4shaya had 
been discussing with Noren concerning the Grace of God, 
and he had received as answer, “Who is He? I myself am 
God ! I am the Paramatman! The infinite is my own nature. 
Tam He! Iam He!” Noren at that time was imbued with 
the highest Advarta spirit. N&g Mahdshaya regarded the 
Swami Vivekananda verily as. Shiva Himself incarnate. Nag 
Mahashaya himself possessed’ spiritual power of the highest 
order; he was the very personification of humility and of a 
burning love for God?.. He saw God in every being, even in 
asnake, and at one time, in the Ramakrishna monastery at 
Baranagore, he said to a venomoys snake which had appeared 
and was ‘terrifying the commiunity,” “Come Mother! Go 
to your own” home!” He spoke these words with great 
tenderness, and the snake departed, Stories and anecdotes 
of like nature concerning him are numerous, and they reveal 
him as a real Makdtman or perfected soul. 
Balaram Babu had thrown open his house to the Master. 

He was a wealthy zemindar or landlord, and a man of ex- 
tensive charities. ,Sri Ramakrishna’. thought very 
highly of him.« He had many days of ecstagy and talks 
at his house with his’devotees, Even now, practically, a 
certain portion of his spacious house in ‘Baghbazar, Calcutta, 
is a sort of monastery. Some members, of the Order ‘are 
always there. And.at Puri, the hotse of. the son of Balaram 
_ Babu ‘is also a monastery of the Order, to all intents and 

purposes. The whole family are, hereditarily, Bhaktas, and 
- venerate the ‘spiritual sons of the Master. ° ; 

Of Girish Chandra Ghose the tale is already toid. He 
was the glorious sinner whose faith liad made him - whole, 
and who-became the sage and seer in his latter days. ft was 
of him that the Master said, “Well ! If others, shave a certain 
per cent. of intellect, the intellect of Girish is one hundred 
and fifty per cent. in degree.” . Girish Babu was‘the author 


a We cee ee Se RENE ee mee Cy, Se ee ee, ee, | Re, A er, | fae 





IN THE GROUP OF DISCIPLES, ~ 387 


is regarded as one of the great masters in the literature of 
_ Hinduism, : 

Mathoor Babu, thé -son-in-law of the famous Rani 
Rasmoni was the earliest of the householder’ disciples, He 
was a princely man; but he was more princely in his rela. 
tion to the Master as a devotee, . 

Kalipada Ghosh was a reat devotee, There were three 
‘devotees who were called the “Dans” of Shiva by Sri 
Ramakrishna. He was one. Suresh Babu and Girish Babu 
were the two otHers, They were men of powerful frames 
and of tremendous wills. They were given to drink and were 
what the world calls sinners, They. came to ‘the Master 
‘challenging him as it were. Indeed, one of them’ threatened 
him if he did not make him reform. The Mastet taught them 
how to attain spirituality by the gradual transformation of their 
desires and tendencies, Their sins fell off froth them quite as 
naturally as they had been tak¢n on,' Ail of them became 
saintly in nature. Sri Ramakrishna had the faculty of speaking 
to each in his own language of thought. He spoke to sinner$ ~ 
through their sins, He allowed all persons fo approach him, 
even the most notorioug men and women, For this reason, 
‘even as Christ was’ critfelsed, so was he. Verily, his grace 
and his massage were specially for those-whom a hypocriti- 
cal world calls “sinners,” . : : 

Then there is Mohendra Nath Gupta, who has made his 
‘name undying by having written “The Gospel df Sri Rama- 
krishna” in English -and’ in Bengali, His modesty and his 
desire. to concede the writing of the book to the grace of 
the Master, did not allow him to ‘sign his own name; The 
book is sknown as written by “M., +A Son and Disciple of © 
the Lord.” He Js in the front rank of Hindu society as an 
‘educator. He conducts a large school of a “model type, 
known as “The Morton Institution”, “ML,” as he is known to 
thousands of readers, was the faithful observer of the life .of 
his Master. But for him, some of the most celebrated utter. 
ances of Sri Ramakrishna and wonderful glimpses of his 
Role eres be Bi ee as 


388 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


other householder disciples beloved of the Master, a few of 
whose names may be mentioned at random here. They 
were Monomohan, Kedar, Chuni, Kishori, Debendra, Akshaya, 
Nabo Gopal, Atul, Naba Chaitanya, Mohendra Mukherjee, 
Priya Mukherjee, Haris Mustafi, Bepin, Nitya Gopal Go- 
swami, Adhar, Baikuntha Sannyal, Upendra, Haramohan and 
others, Noren knew them intimately and loved them with 
his whole heart, regarding them as his own brothers, He 
sometimes may have had differences with one or other of 
them, but he was always loyal to them unto the end, regarding 
them with the deepest love, because of their belonging to 
the spiritual household of his Lord. 

Amongst the younger disciples who became or had been 
householders, the most beloved of the Master was Purna 
Chandra Ghose. Of him the Master said that, if 
Noren was the pick of the mangoes, then this devotee was 
the next. Of this class of young disciples mention may be 
made at random of Norendra Nath Mitra whom the 
Master called “Chota Noren,” Tarak of Belghoria, Bhavanath, 
Pramatha Nath Kar, Narayan, Nitya Gopal and others. 

The deep links of relationship, between Noren and the 
disciples of his Guru, were forged into a ‘chain of which he 
was the main link, and alt the other disciples indluding those 
who became’ monks of the Order of Ramakrishna, were the 
neighbouring and connecting links. And the names of 
these boys,—for they were only boys then, with the exception 
of Gopal-D4,—count as follows :— 

There was Rakhal, the spiritual son of Sri Ramakrishna, 
in a special sense, who became the Swami Brahmananda and 
the first abbot of the Order of Ramakrishna. There was 
Baburam, who became the Swami Premananda, There was 
Yogin, who became the Swami Yogananda. There was 
Nitya Niranjan, who became the Swami Niranjanananda, 
There was Sarat, who became the Swami Saradananda and 
who preached in America, He is the Secretary of the 
Ramakrishna Mission. There was Soshi, who wrote a trea- 


IN THE GROUP OF DISCIPLES. 389 


“attendant on the Master during his last illness, and whom the 
‘disciples of Sri Ramakrishna regarded as the embodiment of 
Hanuman Mahavira, the great servant of Rama. He became 
the Swami Ramakrishnananda and founder of the monastery 
and mission in Madras, There was Hari, who betame the 
Swami Turiyananda and preached in America. There was 
old Gopal-D4, who became the Swami Advaitananda. There 
was Kali, who became the Swami Abhedananda and preached 
and organised a Vedanta Mission in America, There was 
Tarak, who became the Swami Shivananda and the President 
of the Ramakrishna Monastery in Benares.. There was 
‘Gangadhar, who became the Swami Akhandananda and 
founded an Orphanage and an Industrial School for boys in 
Murshidabad District. There was Sarada, who became the 
Swami Trigunatita and preached and founded the First 
Hindu’ Temple in America. There was Latoo, who became 
the Swami Adbhutananda. There was Tulsi, who became 
the Swami Nirmalananda and the President of the Ramas 
krishna Monastery in Bangalore and who, likewise, worked in 
America, There was, also, Subodh, who became the Swami 
Subodhananda. : ‘ : 

These were the chief Sanny4sin: disciples of the Master, 
They venera€e him as an Incarnation of the Diviné Conscious- 
ness, for he had attained that. They have made over their 
lives to his cause because of their great love for him. 

But there was one, who was the main disciple of the 
Master, even more so than Noren, in one sense, This was 
Sarada Devi, the Virgin-Wife of Sri Ramakrishna, the Holy 
Mother of the Order. She had long since forgotten that she 
was “wife” She thought of Sri Ramakrishna as “Guru-Deva,” 
the “Divine Teacher.” And he had responded by making 
her his own Mother in the spiritual sense. Speaking of her 
he would lose himself in humility, crying out, “Who am I! 
She is the Incarnation of Motherhood. She is the Mother 
Herself!” | He never deserted her, nor did she desert him. 
She often lived at Dakshineswar, in the company of women- 


390 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


" This brings'to mind those other great spiritual relationships 
devoid of the sex-idea as those of Jesus and Mary, the sister of 
Martha ; Buddhaand his wife-disciple, Yasodhara ; St. Bernard 
and Santa Scholastica ; and Santa Clara and St. Francis 
of Assisi. 

One of the disciples doubted the relationship of the 
Master with the Holy Mother. On one occasion it so 
happened that at the dead of night this disciple saw her serv- 
ing Sri Ramakrishna. Unbeknown to them he watched them 
and was struck with feverence at what he saw, for, lo, the 
Bhagavan was addressing her in the ecstasy of Bhdba, as 
“Mother! Mother!” Overcome with shame,.the disciple did 
not visit the Master for some days. Then the Master sent 
for him and said, “It was well that you doubted. Unless 
you test me, how can you have faith in me!” The astonished 
disciple, who had not spoken of his experience torily one, 
was overcome when the Master read his mind, Thereafter, he 
became unalterably fixed in Steadfast loyalty to the Master. 

Daily Sri Ramakrishna instructed his Virgin-Wife in 
religious teaching ; and he made her the “Mother” of all his 
spiritual sons. And all of them’are devoted to her as sons to 
a mother. If the Master revealed divinity tq them, the 
“Mother” awakened, in many of tlie devotees, fhe personal 
consciousness of the divine ‘nature: She has ordained and 
initiated many of the younger generation as lay and monastic 
disciples, Even some of the disciples of the Master, at his own 
personal advice, took initiation from her. Sri Ramakrishna 
made his disciples regard all women as Mother. Naturally, 
they looked upon Sarada Devi as the Divine Mother, even as. 
the Master himself was accustomed to regard her. * - 

Did anyone in the slightest manner offend her sense of 
delicacy and honour he was immediately outcasted from her 
presence. Sri Ramakrishna would say that the woman in her 
had been injured, adding that that is always dangerous. At one 
time when a remark of his had touched Sarada Devi and she 
left. weening. he sent one of his young disciples after her, telling 


IN THE GROUP OF DISCIPLES, 391 


wings if she wept. For how could he who believed in divinity 
manifest everywhere, feel, without instant repentance, that he 
had vexed, even in the slightest way, one of the higher 
manifestations of the Divine Nature. 

It was this rich human sentiment, this intense humanity 
in the Master’s nature, reflected in his disciples, which made 
up the contents of that spiritual atmosphere in which they 
dwelt. Tenderness, sweetness, holiness, purity, religious 
devotion and spiritual exaltation were the background of 
colour against which the lives and characters of. the Master 
and his disciples stood out as a masterpiece of spiritual reve- 
lation made incarnate, and of which some of the forms are 
still embodied. Humanity was transfigured into divinity by 
the transmission of the earnest search and great realisation of 
the Master to the disciples. Spiritual ecstasy took the place 
of théensual pleasures of the world. And within the halo of 
their livés she, whom they venerated as the Mother, dwelt 
amongstthem. She served thém. She helped them in their 
spiritual practices. She sorrowed for any misfortune that 
might befall them. She was Joyous when they had cause for 
joy. Though grown up, all the sons of the Master were as 
boys. Even Sri Ramakrishna «possessed the unsophisticated 
and sweet wature of a boy. The disciples were all children in 
spirit, and she was the Mother in the temple of their heart. 
They refused to regard her otherwise than the incarnation of 
the Divine Mother Herself. In this manner she was unto all 
of them the spiritual complement tothe Master. And in 
India, the wife of the guru is regarded, verily, as the guru 
himself. It arouses spiritual ecstasy to see venerable old men 
and these who are now famous as the SannyAsins of the 
Order of Ramakrishna, prostrate themselves before her pres- 
ence and seek her guidance in all matters of the Spirit in 
which she is an adept. Noren always sought her guidance 
and blessings. He bowed down before her in adoration. Her 
presence was an inspiration and a blessing to all of them’ It 
would. lift them all out of worldliness into that Radiant 


392 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


themselves ‘the spiritual children of the Master. Noren’s 
ideal. of sublimated Manhood and Womanhood was the 
Master and the Mother, He venerated the Holy Mother 
even as he venerated his Master. Noren made them his real 
home, his sole refuge. And the disciples of the Master were 
his real friends, his relations, his brothers, his fellow-monks in 
that world of reality which was the Constant and Undying 
Presence of their Master and of their Mother-—-a Presence 
that endures—for it is of God and in God. Verily, it is 
Divine! 


LI 3 


IN THE GARDEN-HOUSE AT COSSIPUR. 


Noren grew in power and spiritual vigour from day to 
day, while Sri Ramakrishna grew daily worse in health, 
although his mind and heart were the same divine flame, if 
anything greater in its luminousness and intensity. The 
disciples nursed him faithfully ; their devotion exceeded all 
human aspiration, They made their service to their Guru, 
literally, an act of divine worship. But nothing could stay 
the progress of his disease. The Master was commanded by 
the physicians not to try his voice in any way, He could not 
help, however, uttering words of the highest wisdom to the 
large‘number of religious aspirants who flocked to him at all 
hours, One is reminded of the dying Buddha, about to 
enter Nirvana, who, though suffering intense pain, insisted 
that the seeker for truth who had come to be shown the 
Noble Way in that last hour of the Lord, be not sent 
empty away. In His very dying moments the Tathagata 
imparted the teaching both unto him and to the assembled 
disciples, tglling them to.work out their salvation with dili- 
gence and that decay was inherent in all component things. 
‘One is reminded of Jesus at the Last Supper teaching His 
doctrine in the hour when the anguish of the Days of the 
Passion had already entered His mind. Sri Ramakrishna 
instructed all who came to him, even when he was warned by 
the physicians that to utter one single word might bring on a 
sudden collapse, and even when it caused him pain to speak. 

Day after day the body of the Master grew weaker and 
weaker. It was wasting away. ‘It became like a skeleton. 
The lad Soshi, who became the Swami Ramakrishnananda 
served him most, though he alternately wept and felt bliss in 
the serving. The others were also present, and shared in the 
nursing. * Sri Ramakrishna was practically alone with these 


394 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


and about Noren as their leader. At the urge of Noren all of 
them abandoned their homes for the time, and gave them- 
selves up in loving and devoted service to Sti Ramakrishna. 
Such devotion! Such service! The most famous physicians. 
were called in and recognised Sri Ramakrishna’s case as 
hopeless. They came again and again, and so charmed were 
they by his personality and his words that they remained for 
hours with him forgetting all else. At one time a certain 
physician, desiring to examine the affected spot in Sri Rama- 
krishna’s throat which was then intensely tender, was dumb- 
founded when he saw how the Master could take away his 
own consciousness from the body at will, so as to leave him 
free to do his work. 

At this time, the householder. disciples came regularly, 
and there was constant conversation on religious subjects 
and sometimes singing. At this time, also, Sri Ramak»shna 
initiated his young disciples as monks, He ‘gave them the 
gerrud or seamless ochre robe to wear. He called Noren and 
four others to his side, asking them whether they could take a 
begging-bow] and beg their food. They consented immediately 
with enthusiasm ; and with the name of the Lord upon their lips. 
they arose.and went forth to beg in the neighbourhood ; and 
having collected raw materials they cooked the food and 
offered it to the Master. He was overjoyed to see these 
boys, the sons of gentlemen and of high caste, put on the 
ochre robe, the symbol of poverty and renunciation, and 
beg from door to door as did Lord Buddha in the days of 
old. This was the true spirit of monasticism, the renuncia- 
tion of all pride of birth and pride of position, and the readi- 
ness to eat the coarsest food, if need be, and sleep whereso- 
ever the'on-coming night revealed a shelter. Aye, Sri Rama- 
krishna was the flame, and they were as the spiral, leaping 
tongues of that flame. He was a perfect Sannyasin ; and 
his disciples were full of the spirit of renunciation. 

fn the last days of the Master's life the disciples were 


Cee: ee ee ee SEN Ser See. MPT OME... "ogame reg 





IN THE GARDEN-HOUSE AT COSSIPUR. 395. 


violence into meditation, sddkands and ascetic practices in 
order to drown their great grief and their terrible anxiety 
in the spiritual consciousness. When the Master” suffered 
most, they too suffered intensely. Was the Master better,. 
they too felt better. Noren often went wild with despair to 
think that he could do nothing to alleviate the physical pain 
of his loved one, One night, his emotional storm reached a 
maddened point. He took a vow to find jf there was a Being 
to come to the aid of his suffering Master. Towards evening,. 
he commenced to circumambulate the house, repeating the 
name of the Lord, “Rama! Ram&!” in a high and excited 
voice. His outward consciousness had apparently deserted 
him and he was full of ecstatic fire. Toward the latter part 
of the night the Master heard his voice, as it became louder 
and louder in the silent hours. He said to one near him, 
“Go. Bring Noren here!” But Noren could not be stopped. 
For sométime he continued, until he was practically forced 
into the Master’s presence. Sri Ramakrishna said to him 
lovingly, “My Noren! It will avail you nothing‘ todo this a 
He knew that his time was coming near and that the Voice 
was calling him. He added, “ Twelve years of my life were 
spent as you have been spending this night. ‘They have 
gone by lgke a whirlwind. What can you, my boy, do in one: 
night’s effort ?” 

The Cossipur Garden-house had become a Temple and a 
University Hall, in one. Pandits came. , Philosophy was. 
thrashed to shreds in the talking. Devotion rose high. 
Singing and chanting occupied the time, and Noren would 
say to the Master, “Sire! Give me a median that will cure 
all fhe illness of my mind and heart.” And the Master 
would send him to meditate, and Noren in the intensity of 
his mental vision had many realisations. Or the Master 
would ask him to sing, which he would do and rise to moun- 
tain heights of rapturous love for God. He had strange: 
realisations even of the Master himself. Some time Before, 


396 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


long as I do not know it for myself, I will not say so.” The 
Master rejoiced. Yes, here he hada disciple who had the 
strength and courage of his own convictions. To doubt in 
this manner was to have the greatest faith. Noren would 
often say, “I do not even want God. I want peace. I want 
Satyam, Jnanam, Anantam,’ that is, Absolute Truth and 
Knowledge and Infinitude, Aye, and when he attained this 
supreme state in the full expansion of the spiritual conscious- 
ness, he verily understood Sri Ramakrishna, not only as a 
‘God-Man, but as the Man-God. 

The heart of Noren, however, was wiser than his intellect. 
Both were made earnest and intense by the sincerity of his 
‘soul. Noren was a strange, complex, seemingly contradictory 
and yet, perfectly composite, simple and harmonious person- 
ality. He was a man of many moods, all equally spiritual in’ 
their intensity, alternating between the highest knowedge 
‘and the highest love, but always with one purpos¢in their 
character,—vealisation. In one mood he desired Brahman ; 
in another mood he desired to have the realisation of the 
Personal God. In the latter stage of feeling he would sing 
devotional songs for hours, and would throw himself into love 
for God and his Master. In one of these moods he said to Sri 
Ramakrishna, “Your wil] has become one with therLord’s !” 
This utterance came as answer to Sri Ramakrishna’s state- 
ment when Rakhal, the future Swami Brahmananda, had 
prayed to him saying, “Do speak to the Lord, Sire, so that your 
body may abide in this world some time longer.” Sri Rama- 
krishna had said, “The Lord shall do His Will!” Then 
‘Noren said as above, implying that the personality of the 
Master had become literally merged in the Divine Nature. 

The Master explained himself a few days later, saying, 
“T now see that I and my Mother have become one, once for 
all. Here within myself are two persons, one is the Divine 
Mother, the other is the devotee. It is the second person 
who Has been taken ill.” 

Noren struggled with himself. Little by little, he threw. 


IN THE GARDEN-HOUSE AT COSSIPUR. 397 


tised much meditation and redoubled his austerities. He- 
centred all his thought upon God, demanding to see the 
Object of all love. And great waves of feeling stole over 
him, transferring him to regions of pure ecstasy. The time 
was to come when the soul of Noren would triumph, when he. 
would have the culminating spiritual experience in the Nirvi- 
kalpa Samadhi, when he would see all truths in their separate- 
relationship to That which is the Absolute Truth and the. 
essence of Brahman, And coming down from that state, he 
would see divinity in every person—and, particularly, in 
him who was Sri Ramakrishna. 

In one of these moods, he entered the Master’s room. 
The disciples were conversing in low tones. Then the. 
Master, arousing himself from deep meditation, said suddenly 
to Noren, “What do you think of me?” Noren responded, 
“Why, Sire, you are everything, verily, a hero, who has cut 
his way Yo the Reality with the sharp sword of discrimination 
and with a strength which the world cannot give!” Hearing 
this, the Master verging on Samddhi, touched his own heart,. 
and then turning to Noren and the others said with divine 
blessedness of soul, “I’ see,—I realise that all that is—every 
conceivable thing—comes out of this!” And Noren with 
overwhelgaing emotion said, “Yes, I see that all things come 
‘ out of. Thee.” In his intense emotion he ,had suddenly 
thought of the personality of Sri Ramakrishna and the. 
Heart of Things as controvertible terms. Then he sang a 
song, the burden of which was that human life is transitory 
and that one should keep the mind steadfastly fixed upon 
the Lord alone. 

Akout this time, one night Noren dreamt that Sri Rama- 
krishna came to him and said, “Come! I will show you the 
Gopi Radha!” Noren followed him. After having gone some 
distance, the Master turned to him and said, “ Where else 
will you go?” Saying this, Sri Ramakrishna transformed 
himself into the beautiful personality and exquisite form of 
Radha herself. This so affected the conscious mind of Noren 


398 THB LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


Samaj relating to the Formless Brahman, he now ‘sang songs 
relating to the great spiritual love of Radha, the individual 
soul, for’Sri Krishna, the Indwelling Beloved One. When 
he narrated this dream to his brother-disciples, they were 
amazed. One asked him, “Do you believe in the signifi- 
‘cance of this?” And Noren answered, “Surely I do.” 

Such were the days at Cossipur. The divine flame was 
burning brighter and brighter, The spirit of renunciation 
was growing more and more intense. During this period, 
Noren would see his “double” as it were, following upon the 
state of meditation. It would appear as one just like himself, 
-of the same shape and form, and he wondered, “Who is this?” 
It would remain with him on some occasions for more than 
an hour. He would speak to it, and while he was in the very 
act of speaking, it also would speak to him. It would do 
‘exactly as he did. He would mock at it, and it would do 
likewise to him. When this first occurred, he told Sti Rama- 
krishna of it, and the Master passed it over lightly, saying, 
“It is only an incident in the higher stages of meditation,” 

It is interesting to notice the gradual strengthening of the 
bonds of relationship between Noren and his brother-disciples, 
They naturally looked up to him because of Sri Rama- 
krishna’s high estimate of his spiritual. worth. Then, too, he was 
the most intellectual of them all. He had combined reason 
-and secular knowledge with his devotional nature; and thus 
he was more strongly fortified in the religious consciousness, 
Therefore whenever anyone challenged his Master's teaching 
-and the monastic tendency of himself and his fellow-disciples 
Noren could support their position with irresistible force. And 
in speaking for himself, he also spoke for his fellow-disciples. 
It was he who fired them with a certain magnetism and 
power which emanated from his remarkable personality. Did 
any differences or difficulties arise they would come to him. 
Sri Ramakrishna had encouraged this. In fact, he had 
emphasised it in innumerable ways and on innumerable occa- 

‘sions, He told them all that Noren was their leader, and 


IN THE GARDEN HOUSE AT COSSIPUR. 399 


disciple should be their infallible spiritual guide in the days 
that were to come, And it is true that many of the 
disciples of the Master have understood him all the better 
through Noren, He explained that great life to them. 
Theirs was the path of Love. He would give them reasons 
for the intensification of their Love. His understanding of 
the Master was their understanding and strength, And 
Noren, it can be said with accuracy, regarded Sri Rama- 
krishna as the embodiment, the Incarnation of human stri« 
ving and human realisation concerning the Divine Nature, and 
as a God-Man, and therefore as the Man-God. 


LI 
AT BUDDHA-GAYA AND GHAZIPUR. 


The company of Sri Ramakrishna was a constant recitak 
of the greatnesses of Hinduism. Day after day, the glory of 
religion and the goal of human life would be explained in the 
simplest way, and assimilated through a speedy education 
and true understanding of the heart. And there would be the- 
constant narrative of the saints and saviours of Hinduism. 
Now perhaps it would be the greatness of Rama, the glory of 
Krishna, the intellect of Sankaracharya, the devotion of 
Chaitanya, the heart of Kabir or Ramaprasad, or the power of | 
Guru Nanak, and it would thrill the hearers in the telling of 
the tale by the devotees or by the Master himself. Then, 
perhaps, it would be the recital of the deeds of the epic heroes, 
such as Yudhishthira, Arjuna, Bhishma, Ravana, Hanuman 
Mahavira and others, which would hold the listeners spell- 
bound. The devotees would sit, surrounding the Master. 
Then, one’ would commence a story which would grow more 
and more interesting as the speaker proceeded ; and the Master: 
would add, now and again, some illuminating remarks which 
stirred all into raptures. The end would always be the chan- 
ting of the praises of God or some Divine Incarnation, the 
Master taking the lead in the song and ecstasy. a 

In the Dakshineswar Garden it was always so. In the 
house and garden at Cossipur also the same themes swung 
hither and thither many times, touching the hearts of devotees. 
In this place all devotion seemed to accumulate, for with the 
Master lying deathly ill, the disciples doubled and “trebled 
their’ austerities and their meditation on the highest things. 
Little time was now left before the closing of that book of 
inspiration which they had been constantly reading—the Life 
of Sri Ramakrishna. Thus, they literally devoured that spirft~ 
uality which was the aspiration to and the realisatien of the 


AT BUDDHA-GAYA AND GHAZIPUR. . 401 


And at one time, shortly after the removal of the Master 
from: Dakshineswar to Cossipur, the sole topic of meditation 
and of inspiration was the career and the gospel of the Lord 
Buddha, the Enlightened One. And the main speaker dnd 
inspirer was Noren, He had saturated himself with Buddhis- 
tic lore. He had mastered the words of the Compassionate 
One. He had read the Lalita Vistara. He had familiarised 
himself with all the insight of the Tripitakas, For the time 
he was a Buddhist in spirit.. The towering intellect of the En- 
lightened One, the eminent sanity of his views, his uncompro~ 
mising demand for truth, his burning renunciation, his infinite 
heart, his wonderful compassion, his sweet and deep and lumi- 
nous personality, his sublime morality, his power of getting at 
the heart: of things and the manner in which he struck the 
balance between metaphysics and human character—all these’ 
had caught Noren up into a world of tremendous spiritual life, 
He forgot everything else for the time being. He would 
speak of. nothing but the Lord Buddha. He would wander 
in mind through the days of the Buddhist eras, from the time 
when the divine beggar-monk had renounced his royalty to 
find the Truth, down to the glorious period of the Emperor 
Asoka and the hewing of rock-cave monasteries ande the 
" founding of great universities and seats of learning. 

He ofted’ said that Lord Buddha had truly renounced, 
Surrounded by wealth and grandeur and with kingly pomp and 
power, and blessed with the devotion of a fond parent and the 
love of his young wife, the beautiful Yashodhara, his was a 
position which to forego was an act of divine renunciation, 
It was his compassion for mankind, his wonderful determina- 
tion to find the Truth which was not to be shaken by death 
or fear Sr sorrow, that had forced him to become a wandering 
Bhikshw. -He whose residence was of the most costly marble 
inlaid with jewels, whose apparel was imperial, whose food 
was that of kings, whose couch was of ivory and whose coffers 
were filled to overflowing with riches and treasures,—it was 
“he whom Noren saw, in the vivid presentation of his ‘thought, 
wandering with staff and begging-bowl, with the whole sworld 

26... i ‘ 


a “ 


402 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


as his home, and with all human and all other struggling 
lives as the inhabitants of the empire of his compassion and 
his co-sharers-of the truth, which was the quest of his life. 
And then the fire of the conversation would run on, and 
Noren would become radiant in his description of that life 
which the Lord had led as an ascetic, practising the most 
terrible of austerities, And Noren and his brother-disciples 
and all the devotees would repeat to themselves and aloud as 
well, those words of firm resolve which Gautama, the Buddha, 
had uttered in his intense longing to find the Truth at any 
cost: “Let my body dry up, as it were, on this seat; let the 
flesh thereof and the bones sink into dissolution,—without 
realising that enlightenment which is difficult to attain, even 
in aeons, this body shall not rise from its seat!” Absorbed 
in the spirit of this narrative, the speaker and the group of 
listening fellow-disciples dwelt in thought in Buddha-Gaya, 
the place of the Illumination of the Lord. There, amidst the 
tumult of thought and sense which assailed the Lord, as if to 
tempt him toa return to the ease and luxury and power of 
kingly life ; amidst all the clouds and the fog of doubt, which 
finally gathered in a climax of effort to throw over the 
determination of the Lord,—the Light shone and he, the 
Lord, arose, having become the Light of the World. O to 
visit Buddha-Gaya, to sit in that same place whé{e this King 
of Men had found the Light amidst the darkness of the 
world! The disciples were fired with enthusiasm ; and they 
would chant with a soul-stirring voice the salutation to the 
Lord, “Om Namo Bhagavate Buddhaya!” and the Buddhist 
formula of taking refuge in the Buddha, the Dharmaand the 
Sangha, that is, the Personality of the Blessed One, the Wheel 
of the Law, and the Congregation or the Buddhist* Order. 
They would throw themselves at the Feet of their own 
Master, worshipping the Buddha-consciousness in him ; for, 
at the hearing of the spiritual excellence of the Tathagata, he 
wéuld himself enter the condition of Samadhi to which it 
related, thereby becoming the Incarnate Consciousness of the 
Spirit of the Lord. . ‘- 


” 


AT BUDDHA-GAYA AND GHAZIPUR. 403 


But Noren was not satisfied. Aye, he must visit Buddha- 
Gaya! He must sit under the Bodhi-Tree, the Great Tree 
of Illumination! He resolved to go; but how could he! 
He was the leader of the disciples, the chief of those whom 
the Master loved, They would think many anxious thoughts, 
Many fears would come upon them. They would ask in the 
city, of all their friends, “Where is Noren?” But he must 
go! Did he tell them, they, in turn, would tell the Master. 
All were nursing Sri Ramakrishna, and looked up to Noren 
for advice and instruction, He told them nothing of his 
tesotve. The Spirit of Lord Buddha had come upon him, 
Must he deny that Spirit! He was not able to, even had he 
desired most ardently to do so. The pilgrimage idea became 
fixed and irresistible. He must, he would go! He would 
leave for a time the beloved group of the Master and his own 
fellow-disciples, without their knowledge. He. overcame all 
scruples. He could not help leaving ; and he became conscious 
in a luminous way that the Master did not stand in need 
ofhim, He thought, “WhoamI! He is God Incarnate! 
If he so desires he can create a thousand disciples like 
myself!” Yes, he would have to go. It was in the nature of 
destiny that he should ; aye, and in the nature of an educa- 
tion as well. He was to, find out that, disconnected from the 
main flqwWof the currents of power and enthusiasm and 
illumination, he would more deeply recognise and appreciate 
Sri” Ramakrishna, that personification of spiritual power and 

' vision. Again, it was, unconsciously, a test Noren was making, 

Only two of the disciples knew of his determination, 
Indeed, he had inspired them to accompany him. These were 
Tarak,and Kali, who became the Swamis Shivananda and 
Abhedananda, In keeping with their resolution they left the 
Garden at Cossipur without anyone having seen them, 

It was even as Noren had feared. The disciples were 
mo3t anxious, Had he gone to Dakshineswar to worship the 
Mother? Had he gone to Calcutta? Or,—forbid ever the 
thought of it!—had he taken to the life of the wandering 
monk ? Aix] where were Tarak and Kali? The disciples kept 


: * 


2 7 


$04 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


their anxiety from the Master ; but finally the news had to be 
told, What was their surprise when they found the Master 
quite calm in the matter! He smiled. Yes, had Noren 
gone? It mattered not! He would be back soon, the 
Master said. And then he related to them the parable of the 
man and the peacock. The bird came daily to the garden of 
a certain man and he, glad to have it remain with him, gave 
a particle of opium to the peacock, mixing it with some food. 

Gradually, it formed an opium habit and felt very much out 
of sorts til it had the usual dose at a certain time of the day. 
Naturally, the bird came every day. And Sri Ramakrishna 
made a comparison, saying, “So it is with Noren, He has 
got a taste of something here which he will not find elsewhere 
and that will #aze him retura. Where else shall he go?” The 
Master was glad, for he felt in the depth of his insight that 
Noren would understand him and his worth all the more” by 
the reason of the experiences he might gain. Like that restless 
bird of his parable which flew back to its nest on the mast of 
aship after having roamed for miles and miles desirous of 
finding a better resting-place but getting none, Sri Rama- 
krishna knew that Noren would return to him. But the 
disciples feared that the burning renunciation which had come 
upon Noren in these days might have cast him and the two 
other disciples forth into the open road as wanderit'g. Sannya- 
sins. Perhaps they had. gone to the Upper Provinces or to 
the Himalayas. No one knew. 

And so about the beginning of the month of “April in the 
year 1886, Noren, with the two brother-disciples, crossed. the 
Ganges and reached the railway station at Bali. Here they 
remained, sleeping thraugh the night where best they could. 
Now they were Sanny4sins in the real sense of wanderers, 
In the morning they took the train and were bound for 
Buddha-Gaya, All the way long Noren was steeped in 
thought concerning that great life which became illuminated 
for the good of the world at Buddha-Gaya. All the way 
long tHfey were eager with anticipation ; and when'the train 
came Co a stop at Gaya, they were-exultant. Byfiddha-Gaya 


. © 
- . 


AT BUDDHA-GAYA AND GHAZIPUR. 405 


was some eight or nine miles distant, but that mattered not. 
They enjoyed the journey afoot. The train does not go to 
Buddha-Gaya, and it is well that it does not ; otherwise, the 
ancient peace and sweet stillness which linger in that place 
of pilgrimage would be disturbed by the noisy tumult of: 
modern innovations. 

Alighting from the train at Gaya, Noren suggested a bath 
in the sacred Falgu river. That done, and having’ rested 
after their d4ckshd, they journeyed on, until at dusk they 
reached the place of Hlumination of the World-honoured 
Orie. They spent the night there in an open hut built by 
some pious soul for the shelter of the passing pilgrims. A 
great part of the night was devoted to religious discourse 
apon the life and teachings of the Blessed One, In the 
morning they satisfied the great quest for which they had 
come. They visited the Temple of the Bodhisattva, They 
approached%t with reverence and ecstasy. They fell pros- 
trate before the Presence of the Lord. Aye, there He was 
as of old, the Compassionate Oné, the Master and Maker of 
Infinite Peace, He who spoke of Nirvana and the Silence, 
The three young pilgrims sat cross-legged, in the posture of 
Padmésana, in meditation before Lord Buddha, all-absorbed. 

For twghours they sat thus in meditation. Then they 
arose and Visited the monastery, The Mohunte was delighted 
with Noren and invited him and his gurubhais to remain as 
long as it pleased them. When it was evening and all was 
silent and hushed, ard when the quiet makes Buddha-Gaya 
shrouded in awesome solitude, Noren, taking his brother- 
disciples, repaired to the stone-séat under the most sacred 
BodhiéFree. There Noren entered the more concentrated and 
higher stages of meditation. The silence of the evening 
hour and the solemnity of his thought stirred the depths of 
his gmotional nature. Suddenly, he burst into tears, and 
putting his arm about the gurubdkai seated next to him, he 
embraced, him with wonderful tenderness, Startled, the 
Jatter was ,about to ask the reason of this when he found 
Noren agai? plunged info deep meditation, Was it’ that, 


” e 


406 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


meditating upon the career of the Tathagata, he was lost ix 
love at the thought of His compassion and his body res- 
ponded, unconsciously, as if to clasp the Feet of the Lord in 
sacred overwhelming feeling! Or, did his mind suddenly 
turn in anguish and in fear, and in greatest love as well, to. 
the Garden-house at Cossipur and to his Master there ! One 
does not know, and Noren remained always silent as to the 
contents of that meditation. Be-that as it may, surely, a 
Joyous REVELATION was granted to him. He might 
have touched the Presence of the Lord in the region of 
Nirvana, soaring thither on the wings of deepest thonght ! 
For three days longer Noren remained at Buddha-Gaya. 
He had seen all the places sanctified by the touch of the Feet 
of the Lord. His intention soared, of a sudden, into a great 
resolve to continue his wanderings ; but the two other dis- 
ciples were impatient to return, fearful of the sudden passing 
away of the Master. And their hearts were home-sfck for him. 
Noren, too, had often visited, mentally, the Garden-house at 
Cossipur near the distant city of Calcutta, and felt himself in 
the presence of his Master, bowing at his Feet with great 
depth of heart. The other disciples who were in attendance 
upon the Master, likewise, yearned for the return of him 
whom they most loved. They became moret.and more 
anxious. Finally, they went to Sri Ramakrishna; praying 
that Noren might return. Drawing a circle upon- the 
ground he said, “Farther than this Noren shall not go.” He 
symbolised thereby, to the disciples, that his will would 
influence the events and thoughts of Noren’s mind and that 
he would immediately return from the place where he might be 
at that time. Soon after Noren returned to Calcutta Sncon- 
sciously following the current of the Master’s will and the 
great desire of his brother-disciples. When he came back 
to Cossipur, the. Master’s joy was boundless, Noren vas 
made to tell all that he had seen, heard, felt and thought. 
The other disciples fell upon his neck and embrqced him ; 
and they gave themselves up to singing and danging in the 
name of the Lord, in the great joy which was thélrs, 
. ia 


* 


AT BUDDHA-GAYA AND GHAZIPUR. 407 


There was only one other time when Noren had gone 
out on pilgrimage, but that was a mere incident, for then the 
group of disciples were not bound by such close ties of love, 
and Noren himself was not so fully conscious of his relation- 
ship to Sri Ramakrishna nor of his divine humanity ; and 
there. was, also, no such great pain of separation, no such 
fearful anxiety that Noren would be lost in the divine wilder- 
ness of the wandering monastic life. He was still on the 
look-out fora Man of God. True, Sri Ramakrishna was a 
revelation to him, but still he must see for himself if there 
were saints greater than he. Besides, though he knew it not, 
this earlier pilgrimage was to be in the nature of a strange and 
remarkable test. He had heard of the famous saint Pavhari 
Baba, of Ghazipur, This saint was called “Pavhari” which 
signifies “eater of air,” because of the extremely small quan- 
tity of food’he allowed himself in his rigorous ascetic disci- 
pline. Aad monks in India are called “Baba” which means, 
“Father!” To Ghazipur, therefore, Noren gvent on pilgrim- 
age. PAvh4ri Bab’ had’ been lost to the world for many 
years, He had grown old in the ways of devotion unto 
God. He shut himself up in a cave and spent all his time in 
meditation. Noren prostrated himse]f and addressed him in 
terms of gxalted respect. The saint said little, But when he 
heard tMat the young man before him was a disciple of the 
Mahatma of Dakshineswar, he was transported with joy and 
treated him with great affection. Speaking of Sri Rama- 
krishna as an Avatdra his voice thrilled with feeling, He 

“showed Noren a photograph of him which, he said, was a 
treasured possession of his, and that he had been worshipping 
it fatesome time. Noren bowed before it, lost in bewilder- 
ment. What was this! It was strange beyond reason! 

This remarkable experience became a shadow of what he 
later knew, namely, that the Spirit of Sri Ramakrishna accom- 
panied him everywhere. Aye, the Master dwelt in his heart. 
And always throughout his life wherever he went, he felt 
the is, Ha of his Master, the Bhagavan Sri Rathakrishna. 


° 


LHI 


IN THE NIRVIKALPA SAMADHI. 


Like a terrific peal of thunder, deafening the hearing to 
all other sound and startling the consciousness of sense‘into . 
a strange and tense stiliness ; like a great burning thought 
fierce with meaning which, entering the mind, paralyses all 
other thinking, even so is the opening experience, of the 
terrible glory of the Nirvikalpa SamAdhi, the absolute trans- 
fixing of human personality into Divinity. It is th¢ falling 
to pieces of the foundations of personality, the tremendous 
bursting of effulgence which annihilates all the dgrkness of 
sense and thought. It is the drowning of personality in the ° 
ocean of that True Individuality which is Gad. _/ 

And like the awesome silence which follgws-upon the 
violence of the tropical storm, like the almost-audible silence 
which reigns in the glorious solitude of mountain fastnesses, 
like the great stillness of the sea after the mad dash of waves 
has broken in thundering noise upon the shore, like the silence 
of the stars, and like unto the peace of all these, is the inexpres- 
sible condition of the Nirvikalpa SamAdhi, The bi dy is lifes 
less, More lifeless is the mind. It is all stillness, Ith all won- 
derful stillness, this side of -Maya. The structure of thought 
and sense, built through the time and effort of innumerable 
lives, has tumbled to pieces, and is now only a heap of ruins, 
This is how Lord Buddha spoke of it,—as the breaking down: 
of the ridge-pole of that tabernacle of thought and form in 
which the soul has made its abode for uncountable agess But 
on the other side of Maya it is Effulgence,. Sublime Efful- 
gence, the Infinite Effulgence of Divinity. The phenomenon 
of personality, having become extinct, only divinity remains. 
Only reality rethains. Then only Brahman IS, 

The Vedas say that only those who are born for the wel- 
fare of Humankind can return from the highest SamAdhi. 
Otherwiee, the soul entering the Ocean of Divinity, leaves 


- € 


IN THE NIRVIKALPA SAMADHI. 409 


the body behind—a mere corpse: And for those who work, 
going beyond the limitations of the memory ‘of .the ex-: 
perience of the Nirvikalpa Samadhi, it translates itself into 
a complete saturation of personality with dmnipotent power, 
leaving a glow of divinity across the human consciousness of 
the saint, That is why the message of one who has been in 
the highest state is overpowering. When the wheel of the 
Law has turned round for the last time; in the final spending 
of the force wherewith it was whirling, that which is death to 
the body becomes, to the personality, a renewal of the Infinite 
‘Consciousneés, aye, and a permanent abiding therein. 

In the Nirvikalpa Samadhi, the essence, the Brahman in 
~all things reveals itself. Coming out from this experience, 
Beauty, Art, Science, and all that which is divine as the essence 
ofhuman knowing and striving, appear as rays of various 
light in the rainbow of that Divine Transcendent Conscious- 
ness, Ceming out from this experience, the saint sees 
Brahman, in a super-exalted manner of feeling, in everything, 
saying, “Verily Art is Brahman ; verily Science is Brahman ; 

. verily all Glory, all Magnificence, all Greatness is Brahman,” 
Sri Ramakrishna was the arch-possessor of this experi- 
‘ence and of the consciousness to which it isthe key. His 
Samadhi yas of many forms. Sometimes it would be semi- 
consciou¥ at others, quite conscious, at others, again, super- 
conscious. Sometimes he would <v#// himself into them. At 
"other times, the strong currents of his spiritual and emotional 
‘nature would sweep his personality into them in spite of 
himself. At amoment’s will he could rend the veils which 
sepatate the various spheres of consciousness and enter a 
condition of “Pure Mono-ideism”, wherein all the activities 
‘of thought and feeling, all the sense of “I” and of space and 
time.and of the relative world at large were suspended, and 
in that‘exalted state of perception he became merged in 
the Absolute, There were times also when heentered “a 
world of power,” or “a world of beauty”, or “a world of spiritual 
grandeur,” according as the nature of the suggestion from 
the exter] world might be. Or there were time’ when 


= . 


410 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


he would Speak with invisible beings, with such as he 
accosted as Gods, or with those who were regarded 
as the Divine Incarnations of the past. He would 
literally commune, in these times, with Christ and. with 
Sri Krishna and with the various Forms of the Mother. The 
awe-struck disciples would be translated into ecstasy ; and 
he would verify his experiences to them in innumerable ways 
of unimpeachable test. He was a saint of the highest 
Spiritual order. The word saint does not convey the full 
meaning of the measure of his personality. He was a seer 
who spoke with the Object of all seeing, and who entered into 
the infinite contents of that Object, aye, who literally became 
the Subject of that Object when his Sam&dhi consciousness 
rose to its highest level. 

Noren also was awe-struck. He wondered at Sri Rama- 
krishna. Yes, this was the goal—the actual seeing, the 
knowing which 7s vision, the seeing and the knowing which 
are the actual decoming and, finally, the actual Jeng. He 
must attain this goal. He felt that the actual personal experi- 
ence would be the infallible solution ; and so he must have it. 
To become possessed of those same moods of spiritual insight 
and consciousness as were his Master’s—this was his ideal and 
resolve. Naturally, though he could not hope tp have the 
same, number or the same intensity of experienced, ;~—for that 
had come to Sri Ramakrishna only after immeasurable efforts 
and tapasyé—yet his whole soul panted to taste the waters 
of that living consciousness and remain absorbed in it. He 
desired the Nirvikalpa Samadhi, the crowning height of Sri 
Ramakrishna’s personal and super-personal consciousness, 

Indeed, this was what Noren sought of Sri Ramaksishna, 
the very crest and glory of his spiritual realisations, It was 
by no means a paltry quest. What must he have thought of 
Sri Ramakrishna to make him feel that the Master could 
give him this state of super-consciousness! He was literally 
begging,Sri Ramakrishna for this, ever since the Master had 
initiated him into the intellectual and spiritual awareness. 
of the “Advaita Vedanta. “To feel divinity ; t Gad the \ 


e 


IN THE NIRVIKALPA SAMADHI. 41¥f 


whole of nature erased from the tablets of perception ; to, 
have the ‘little—I’ which created all the bondage of the sout 

robbed of any and every objective characteristic and attitude- 

of being, to plunge into the Region of True Being even beyond 

thought”—such was the prayer of Noren to Sri Ramakrishna. 

And what a prayer it was! 

The experience of the Nirvikalpa SamAdhi can he called 
a terrible glory, because it is spiritually and humanly speaking- 
the most awe-inspiring and sublime of experiences, In that 
state the soul has dropped off the carcass of thought and of 
form. Who knows that state! Only he who has entered it! 
This is the Divinity beyond divinity. No wonder that the 
saint who experiences this condition of Being is declared by 
the Vedas to be greater than even Brahma, the Creator 
of the Universe, and that all the gods adore such an one. 

What are all minor realisations but drops of water to the 
soul whiclz thirsts for the Living Waters of the Ocean of 
Realisation | { Noren had seen forms, in the state of medita- 
tion, notably one of a Yog7 clothed in gerrua. He opened 
his eyes, but still the image remained. Such realisation was 
still in and of form. He wanted to go beyond all objective 
realisation. He wanted to strike the bottom of the sea of 
Consciousness and make its hidden treasure his own. What 
were thd” foaming revelations on the surface but a child’s 
pastime to him! He wanted to realise for. himself the very 
Spirit of the Upanishads. He wanted to be able to say, in 
very truth, that which is the last utterance.of the human soul 
and the first note of the thundering consciousness of Divinity, 
“Aham Brahmésmi!”"—“Tlam Brahman!” “ Shrvoham !" 
“Shmveham\|"—"I am Shiva!” “I am the Absolute !” 

The other disciples were awe-struck at this daring and 
insistent demand of Norendra. They could not soar into. 
that great region of divine emotion in which he breathed. In 
these Cossipur days he was more than a giant, spiritually. 
He was_a living flame of spirituality. His very appearance 
proved itto beso. Aye, he walked like a lion; and his. 

/ strength Was that he was the spiritual son of Sri Ram&krishna 


. 
a - = 


G12 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 


the child of the Mother. The Master himself, in the spiritual 
vision he had of Norendra, saw and spoke of him thus : 
“Even the Maya of the Divine Mother Herself cannot 
approach him!” There was the Shiva-nature in him! 
“And when Shiva comes, the gods tear the world in shreds, 
The Night of Brahmé is at hand. The Mahépralaya draws 
near. The universe enters the state of equilibrium. The 
Great Nothingness of Divinity alone -is!”—so say the 
scriptures. Shiva-Brahman dwells as the Spiritual Essence 
in all; and Noren was wondrously -manifesting it. At this 
time, when Noren rested in sleep, the Master would tell the 
other disciples that his sleep was only in seeming, that in 
reality, it was a state of meditation ; and he would speak of 
the growing degree of insight the mind of Noren attained, 
while the body reposed thus in unconscioushess. 2 
Intense renunciation came to him at this time. Being 
instructed by Sri Ramakrishna, he went through various 
-sddhands, or ascetic spiritual practices. He spent whole 
nights before a dhun? or fire, under a tree in the garden. 
The Cossipur garden became a 7?rtha or place of pilgrimage. 
With Sri Ramakrishna. lying ill in the upper story, the 
house itself seemed a temple and he, the Presence. Noren 
went one day to the Master and said what he had epeatedly 
said before, “Sire ! Do give me the Nirvikalpa madi 1g 
Sri Ramakrishna, broken -in health, but more than ever 
radiant in soul, replied, “When Lam well, I shall give you 
‘everything you ask of me.” Noren insisted, “But if you 
pass away, what can I get!” Sri Ramakrishna made 
‘answer, as if in a soliloquy, “What is he speaking 2” Was he. 
hurt by the littleness of the faith of his disciple, as éh life 
or death mattered anything in the way of helping his 


‘disciple ? Did not Noren know that it did not depend upon. 


his physical presence? Then he said quietly, “Well, my 
boy, what do “you want?” Noren replied, “Sire, I wish 
‘to remajn immersed in Samadhi like Sukadeva, for five 
or six days at a time, and then to return to the sense-plane 
for a short while if only to maintain the bodf, and then 


. 


% 


IN THE NIRVIKALPA SAMADHI. 413 


revert to that state of blessedness.” Sri Ramakrishna grew : 
impatient, saying, “Fie! For shame! You are such a big: ; 
receptacle. , Does it befit you to speak like that! I thought ; 
that you were like a huge banyan-tree and would give shelter j 
to thousands of weary souls. Instead of that you are seek- | 
ing for your own muhti, your own salvation ! Do not: 
think of such small things, my boy! How can you be satis. ! 
fied with such a onessided ideal ? My /orte is all-sidedness, . 
I should like to enjoy, fish, for instance, in a variety of ways. - 
—such as, fried, boiled, made into soup and pickled. [I enjoy . 
the Lord not only in His unconditioned state of Oneness as. 
Absolute Brahman, in Samadhi, but also in His various 
Blessed Forms through sweet human relationships, So do 
thou likewise. Be a Jndni and a Bhakta in one!” 

At this reprimand of the Master, Noren burst into tears, 
He’ understood at once. It was not that the Master desired 
that he shoyld not have the highest spiritual consciousness 
and experience. It was because he did not want him to. 
remain infffersed in that state, when millions of human 
beings were sunk in ignofance of the Highest Religion. . Sri 
Ramakrishna knew that Naren was a soul to feel for others, 
to think for others and to labour for the salvation of mankind, 
The Master would give him the highest realisation, but the. 
disciple owas not to bury within the confines of his personality 
the treasures it revealed. He was to go forth into the world 
and teach the Gospel which is the Spiritual Word of that 
Radiant Life. He was to become a banyan-tree, giving 
shelter to many souls, He was to be the fountain from which 
many, many souls would draw the waters of life, 

Agcording to Sri Ramakrishna there are two kinds of 
Mahkdpurushas, or Great Souls, There are those who remain 
infgovably fixed in Brahman and whose illumination silently 
permeates the whole world of thought and aspiration. Then, 
there are those who, having attained the consciousness 
of Brahman, live in the world, translating the Highest 
Knowledge into the Highest Service. The Beatitude of the 
f Divine Céasciousness in-their cases, is transformed tito the 


i . 5 


a 


414 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


Saving Compassion to aid in the Redemption of the World, 
These are the World-Teachers, Noren’s drift and tendency 
as Sri Ramakrishna saw, was of the former description, but 
his real nature was that of the latter. So Sri Ramakrishna 
was right in holding that he should become a veritable 
danyan-tree under whose spreading branches the weary and 
sheavy-laden in soul might rest. He should ‘be like a sun, 
revealing the glory of that consciousness in which he desited 
toenter. Sri Ramakrishna was, therefore, impatient when 
this disciple had expressed the desire to make of the highest 
state of Being a purely personal achievement and realisa- 
‘tion, not counting the value of his illumination in the help- 
ing of “others. So he said, “I thought that you were born 
for better things than to remain for five or six days at a 
‘time in Samddhi.” This was one of the few times when 
Sri Ramakrishna was severe with his disciple. Though “he 
loved him as he loved his own realisation, he felt it necessary 
to rebuke him and make him feel the worthlessness and 
selfishness of such realisation which is kept pent-up. within 
‘as personal salvation. Such personal salvation, he held, was 
all right in the case of others as the highest goal of human 
aspiration ; but for a soul like Noren whom he called a 
Nitya-Siddha and an Acharyakott,, such idea of personal 
salvation was beneath his dignity to centrefthis heart 
upon. Does a king’s son care to earn by the sweat of his 
brow a few hundred rupees which may be a fortune and the 
highest ambition for a day-labourer to achieve? He can 
only do so if he is ignorant of his _ real position 
and the higher mission of his life. So Sti Ramakrishna.” 
did not want Noren to be ensnared by that form of 
Mayda. 

But, even as Noren had asked, even so was he to have the 
Nirvikalpa Samadhi. It was to transfigure and transfix his 
personality, and to throw him back upon the shores of 
human life, as a Great Soul, a Master of Compassion, one in 
whom the slightest shade of even spiritual selfishness was to 
be absalutely blotted out, and he to.come forth agwone of the \ 


’ ty 


IN THE NIRVIKALPA SAMADHI. 415 


Effulgent Ones who are aware of their true nature and their 
great mission in life. 
"» Tt came one evening unexpectedly and with divine power! 
Noren was meditating in a lying posture. Suddenly he felt 
that there was a great light at the back of his head. It-be- 
came effulgent. His mind merged init. What then trans- 
pired in his consciousness was beyond words. Verily, 
the stars were blotted out, the heavens were flung back, the 
universe rolled away, revealing to him the Supreme Glory of 
God. . Everything began to dissolve, as it were, and to twist 
out of shape. The highest consciousness had come upon 
him, quite unawares. Whenever he saw the light, he paid 
little attention to it, He had often seen it. But when the 
effulgence came this time, it came with omnipotence. It 
- stunned the consciousness of personality ; and the “I” of him 
betame merged in Divinity, There are no words to describe 
that state! To those only who possess the mystical cons- 
ciousness, the condition of Noren will be comprehensible, He 
himself, sometime after this realisation, composed a poem 
called “The Hymn of Samadhi,” which best illustrates the 
exalted condition of trans-personality into which he had 
entered, It reads in the translation,— : 


Lo! The sun is not, -nor‘the comely moon. 
- all light extinct ; in the great void of space 
- Floats, shadow-like, the image universe, 


In the void of mind, involate, there floats 
The fleeting universe, rises and floats, 
Sinks again, ceaseless, in the current “I,” 


Slowly, slowly, the shadow multitude 
Entered the primal womb, and flowed ceaseless, 
The only current, the “] am,” “I am.” : 


e Lo! ’Tis stopped, ev’'n that current flows no more, 
Void merged into void,—beyond speech and mind ! 
Whose heart understands, he verily does, ; 


Ayepin that consciousness, time had faded out ; form had 


416 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


vanished ; eternity was ; infinity alone was. Consciousness. 
had ascended likea flame Which swept in and out, and out 
and in, ‘ali ideas and states the mind had ever known. 
It burned up every atom of objectivity and then plunged 
into an ocean of  subjectivity,—where sensation became 
beatitude. Noren was in blessedness. As the light came 
to. him, he seemed to pass through many spheres of being ; 
but then, soon all was blotted out. Only Brahman was. 
This was the grand destruction of Personality which he 
had desired so long, the destruction of Personality which is 
the Finding of God. 
Noren has ascended the mountain-top of realisation. 
Indeed, in this sublime soaring beyond, the name Noren 
sounds false; even the name is lost. If one might make such 
a comparison, the soul ascended as a perfect, symmetrical 
figure of spiritual inwardness, touching the divinity: at alt 
angles and points of consciousness, until it soared high above . 
all objective characteristics, into the pure and free region 
of utmost subjectivity. s 
"When Noren entered the Nirvikalpa SamAdhi, his mind 
was startled by that Terrible Glory. His body trembled as 
though it had sustained an agonising shock of joy. His soul 
passed into a state of Vibrant and Tempestuous Rapture, 
from which it passed into a state of Divine Bewiiderment, 
when it seemed as if all ideas, impressions and images were 
falling out of the vessel of his mind. From this state of" 
Divine Bewilderment his soul passed into that of the Utmost 
, Ecstasy, when it seemed that his whole personality was. 
being saturated with Divinity and the Divine Consciousness, 
until personality vanished and Divinity remained, Finally, as 
‘the climax of all these awesome reachings-out of personality 
‘his soul passed, as a Great Light, from the state of Utmost 
Ecstasy into the Infinite Stillness of Peace. 
“Whose heart understands, verily he peas 
7 Om Tat Sat! \ 
Everything had been quiet on that night of the Nirvikalpa. 
Samadhi, The other disciples were in, meditation ; s6me were \ 


. 


& 

4 . 
’ 
et 


© 


IN THE NIRVIKALPA SAMADHI. 417 


with the Master, nursing him. It was all still and quiet, Ina 
distant corner of the garden some were singing in soft tones. 
The elderly Gopal-Da was seated in meditation in the same 
room with Noren. Suddenly he sprang to his feet. His mind 
had been thrown from the heights of thought bya strange, 
anxious cry which he knew, instantly, to be the voice of Noren, 
And then there struck upon his ears, the words, “O Gopal- 
D&, O Gopal-Da, where is my body? Where is my body?” 
Gopal-Da was as if suddenly terror-struck and screamed out, 
“* Why, Noren, there it is! It is there!” He hastened to him 
and found him lying prostrate. His body was rigid. He might 
have just died judging from his lifeless appearance, 
Gopal-Da did not know what to make of this! Was it 
death ! Whatever it might be, a holy awe seized him, He called 
out.to the others, crying, “Come! Come quickly! Some- 
thing has happened to Noren !” Immediately some dozen 
voices answered him, “What has happened? What has 
happened toNoren?” When they came up, Gopal-Da pointed 
' to the seemingly lifeless body before him, saying, “See!” It 
was incomprehensible to them. A Sublime Positive No- 
thingness was written on the countenance of the chief disciple, 
His eyes were turned inwardly. The disciples were anxious 
beyond words, They shouted Noren’s name. They shook 
| the body; they found the breath had stopped. Then they 
massaged his limbs and endeavoured by artificial means to 
induce respiration, but without success, “What! Was Noren 
dead then?” The thought struck each mind with sudden 
violence; but none dared to speak that which he thought, 
They waited and worked, The minutes seemed hours, 
Indeetlethe moorings of the consciousness of sense must have 
drifted far away for the body of Noren to have been pluriged 
‘into such apparent lifelessness, 
al he-suspense grew terrible. It was no longer endurable. 
One whispered, “Is he dead!” Then all said, as if in the same 
tense state of mind, and with one voice, “Come, let us go to 
pthe Master!” Only two or three remained with the body. 
~The others ‘hastened to tHe upper story. , 
- 27 e : : a 
_ : < 


418 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


When the disciples entered the room of the Master he 
was ina state of intense calm and his countenance was deeply 
serious. He seemed to have had foreknowledge of what had 
happened. They spoke hurriedly and excitedly at one and the 
same time, Then Sri Ramakrishna smiled. And turning to 
Gopal-DA who had come as the leader, he said, “Let him be! 
Let him be! He has teased me long to reach that state.” 
The Master appeared in that moment as the Incarnation of 
Power Itself. Assured by the words and the attitude of the 
Bhagavan, the disciples returned and watched over the body 
of Noren, confident that all would be well with him. « 

Until nine o’clock at night he lay in that sublime state. 
After that time he showed faint signs of returning to con- 
sciousness. The disciples were overjoyed, One hastened to 
Sri Ramakrishna with the news. The others laboured in 
loving service over the body, stimulating it into quicker re- 
suscitation by constant massage. They called him by name; 
their voices sounded in his ears now as if coming from a long 
distance. Louder and clearer the voices became to his 
awakening physical personality. He was as if drifting from 
some far, far-off sphere on a flood of ecstasy, the currents of 
which were returning him gently to the consciousness of 
sense and to the awareness of the bodily form. He did not 
seem inclined to rouse himself. He was at peace. ‘The voices 
about him seemed to jar somewhat upon his great calm. - _ 

It is certain that but for the excitement and effort of those 
about him to bring him back, Noren would have remained 
much longer in that abstracted, subjective state, However, he 
came to consciousness suddenly, as if a strong force had pushed 
him forth. But still he was dazed for a time. Then he geve out 
an‘ exclamation of rapturous joy, crying out, “O, What has 
happened!” The brother-disciples spoke hurriedly and 
loudly as if tg hold his mind from reverting to that state out 
of which he had just come. Though physical consciousness 
had returned, the soul of him still had glimpses in the 
memory of this experience. Had the onrush of memory OK 
been checked by their Over zeatous efforts, he ‘would have 


€ © . e 


* 
IN THE NIRVIKALPA SAMADHI. 419 


gone back to that super-conscious condition again, Thus the 
stream of memory was diverted, becoming transformed into a 
radiance of emotion and beatitude. His heart was full to over- 
flow with ecstasy. His eyes shone with super-human glory. 
There was a Divine Meaning in them. _ His fellow-disciples 
were caught up in the swing of his ecstatic consciousness, 
His body was tremulant with sensations of blessedness, He 
was literally radiant. ; 

His heart was too full to speak. His mind was saturated, 
as it were, with light. He felt a lightness of the body as well, 
The heart knows; the mind can only guess ; and the lips 
stammer in the attempt at expression. A sense of great mental 
and physical invigoration came over him. In this beati- 
fic consciousness he arose ; his feet naturally took the direc- 
tion towards the upper story and to the room of the Master, 
He did not know whether he was ascending the stairs or not. 
He entered the room. The Master understood immediately, 
Looking deeply into the eyes of his disciple, Sri Rama- 
krishna said, “Now, then, Mother has shown you everything. 
Just as the treasure is locked up in the box, so will this reali- 
sation you have just had be kept under lock, and the key re- 
‘mains with me, Now you have work todo, When you have 
finished my work, the treasure-box will be again unlocked > 
-and you wid know everything even as you have just known.” 
He then admonished him to be caréful of his body for some 
time and to exercise the utmost discrimination in his choice 
of food and companions, accepting only the purest. 

Speaking to the other disciples Sri Ramakrishna said that 33 
it was fortunate that Noren should have emerged so quickly / 
from thestate of the Nirvikalpa Samadhi. Indeed, there isa — 
great danger involved, for the body not being able to contain 
such intensity of emotion and concentration of personality 
‘during the suspension of normal consciousness may be over- 
come and final emancipation through death may ensue. In fact, 
when many of the saints reach the highest condition of the 
Nirvikalpa, Samadhi, the body dies, and this is Nirvana, The 
tieinory of Sri Ramakrishna went back across the years to - 


~ =. 
a 


420 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


the time of his own Nirvikalpa Samadhi in the presence of 
Nangt&, the naked one, the sage Tota Puri, He understood. 
Aye, only he and only Noren understood. 

That night there was much song, and until early morning 
the disciples sat in meditation. A peculiar spiritua} atmos- 
phere of power and ecstasy remained throughout the night, 
and there was much interchange of thought between the 
disciples as to the experience of Noren. Some spoke with 
bated breath, while others spoke aloud and joyously. During 
the night Sri Ramakrishna told his disciples, “Noren will pass. 
away only of his own will. The moment Noren realises who: 
he is, he will refuse to stay a moment longer in the body. 
The time will come when he will shake the world to its 
foundations through the strength of his intellectual and 
spiritual powers!” And then turning into the depth of 
his own soul, the Master prayed to the Divine Mother, 
“Q Mother! Keep this realisation of Advaita-Jnama covered up. 
in Noren! I have much work to be done by him!” Indeed, for 
all the other disciples Sri Ramakrishna prayed to his Mother 
that they might be completely emancipated. Their duty was 
to meditate and to conserve the spiritual power transmitted to 
them so that they might be out of Maya’s sway. But for 

“Noren he prayed that he might have some Maya in him so as 
to be able to do work for others, which was posstole only if 
he had the “I,” the illumined “I,” not merged in the Absolute. 
Noren’s experience of Samadhi that night, bound his 
gurubhais irrevocably to him. Noren was to them, from 
that night, the possessor of the spiritual consciousness of 
Sri Ramakrishna himself. This had been the culminating 
experience for Noren, but the contents were shrouded in the 
Sublime Silence,—for, no mortal hearing can fathom that 
Unvibrated Sound which is the Silence of Nirvana. 

What had brought on the determination of Sri Rama- 
krishna to allow his disciple to become conscious of the State 
of Brahman was, as has been seen, the overwhelming desire 
of Noren to realise It. The intention of the Master was 
throw the personality of his disciple from the pifnacle of the: 

* € 


* IN THE NIRVIKALPA SAMADHI. 421 


Nirvikalpa Samadhi into the exalted sphere of Compassion 
and Work. Noren had begged the Master for the blessedness 
of Supreme Samadhi, and the Master had said, “I thought you 
were longing for better things,” meaning thereby that he be- 
lieved Noren would forego even the highest personal blessed- 
ness in order to help mankind, In the remark one hears 
anew, though under the covering of a different language, the 
desire Sri Ramakrishna himself possessed to help the world. 
Often when he would be carried away into Samadhi he would 
create some forced desire, most simple and childlike in its na- 
ture, ‘and repeat it insistently sothat there might be a chance 
left for him to return to normal consciousness, without being 
merged in the Absolute Brahman, and help mankind. Thus, 
he would say,—“I——I—I shall smoke,” “I—I shall have potato 
fry!’ And again, descending from the state of superconscious 
insight he would often utter the words, “Mother, take away 
this conscigusness from me! It hinders me from helping 
mankind, Keep me in the normal state so that I may be more 
_ actively usefidl to the world. And once when told that he 
should not be so anxious to bring others to God, he turned 
. upon the speaker and said, “ Let me be born again and again, 
even as a dog, if only I can be of help to one single soul!” 
‘It was through his realisation of the divine value of self, 
“tess, compassionate work that Noren earnestly took upon him- 
“self the desire to be of service to men. Echoing froma distant 
historicceday come the words of one of the Arhat-Buddhas, 
who also forewent the state of Nirvana, saying, “I shail not 
enter the region of Nirvana until each single being reaches 
the. Buddhahood !" One is thus reminded of the Great Com- 
passiog.of the Buddha, whose search for Final Truth was in 
no way personal, but prompted by an infinite desire, a divine 
feeling to help mankind. And one finds this verified again 
and again in the lives of these Princes of Men, who see the 
Divine Unity in the manifoldness of life and try to throw 
across. the consciousness of the manifold the Substance of 
_Sameness which is the Divine Nature realised. They serve 
“and see Gad in the downtrodden and the afflicted-in the 


~ 


422 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANEA., 


ignorant and in the poverty-stricken, in the needy and in the 
sick. They translate the subjective vision into objective 
service. They see God with their hearts as well as with their 
enlightened intellect. They see Him under the covering 
of limited and afflicted human personality as well as in the 
Abstract Revelation of the Infinite Subjective Conscious- 
ness, which is Para-Brahman. 


And of all this the echo comes from the shores of the 
Lake of Galilee in the language of Jesus the Christ, “Come 
unto Me all ye that labour and are heavy-laden and I will 
give you rest!” It is heard centuries before on the 
battle-field of Kurukshetra in the thundering utterance of 
Sri Krishna, “This world, My May, is Divine, made up of all 
qualities and very difficult to cross, Yet those that come 
unto Me, verily, they cross the river of life!” That same 
Voice re-echoes in the present day in the sublime longing of 
Sri Ramakrishna to serve and to teach men, which he did 
even when it became intense pain for him to speak and even 
when he knew that it endangered his life. It re-echoes, 
again and again, in the service and the message of the 
Swami Vivekananda, 


Sri Ramakrishna saw deep beneath the personality of 
Noren, And because he saw that the ‘tendency of his disciple 
was to soar aloft through meditation into the Wirvikalpa 
Samadhi, he prayed to the Mother to throw a veil df a 
different ‘consciousness over him, so that he might work, 
But he said of that veil, “It is so thin, so very thin. At any 
moment it may be rent!” 


LIV 
NIRVANA. 


The days passed from month to month in devotion, in 
service, in sorrow, in ecstasy, Noren leading and the others 
~ following even as disciples. Only several days were left— 
and then the soul of Sri Ramakrishna would pass into 
Nirvana, the Infinite Realisation. The time was coming when 
the light of this great life was to become extinct, humanly 
speaking, and the cage of the body was to be broken. The 
disciples were untiring in their attention in spite of sleepless 
nights and busy days. The Master was departing. What 
mattered it if their own bodies went in service. In August 
of the year 1886, people came and went by scores, It seemed 
as if all who had ever known the Master felt instinctively 
that the end was drawing near, and. amongst them Noren 
most of all, He understood the illness of Sri Ramakrishna in a 
very deep sense. He thought—and the thought overwhelmed 
him—could it, could it be, as the Master said, that his 
body had been passing through such great pain and was now 
verging even upon extinction because of his taking upon 
himself the sins of those whom he had made his disciples. 
One is reminded, in this connection, of that other Oriental 
Teacher, Jesus the Christ, who felt that virtue had passed 
out from him into one of the multitude who had touched the 
hem of His garment. Floods of feeling drowned Noren’s 
whole personality in unutterable sorrow but also in an ineff- 
able Spiritual consciousness,—sorrow because of the sense of 
approaching separation, and a spiritual consciousness be- 
cause of the knowledge that he had been made the particular 
heir to that spiritual inheritance. In the, latter mood he 
would feel an inexhaustible sense of power, realisirg in a 
luminous way that the Master could never die, eveh though 
” the body passed into death, 


424 . THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


He remembered that two years and six months back the 
Master had made him over to the Mother. Sri Ramakrishna,, 
like the great Guru Nanak, had been waiting years and 
years for that disciple to come unto whom he could give the 
whole treasure of his realisation and then depart. The 
Swami Vivekananda used to say, “From the time in which 
he made me over to the Mother, he retained his vigour of 
health for only six months. The rest of the time he suffered,” 
Indeed, the power of the Master was being diverted into a 
new channel. His own Personality was becoming gradually 
re-incarnated, as it were, in the growing illumination of -his 
chief disciple. And for such a re-incarnation the body and’ 
mind of Noren had been prepared through more than four 
years of spiritual training. He was, above all others, the fit 
vehicle for the full manifestation of that which was his 
Master’s realisation. The Soul of the Master was soon to 
become merged in the Ideal about which his personality had 
constantly centred,—Tke Afother J . 

Towards the close of the month of July, Sri Ramakrishna 
could hardly converse. He would speak in a whisper, or 
else would designate by signs that which he desired to com- 
municate. The disciples were grief-stricken when not engaged 
in_religious exercise and discourse, They spoke of the 
Master with bated breath, fearing lest that which” they 
thought might come to pass. He, their father, their guide, 
he who loved them all as a mother loves her own children; 
he who bore patiently with them, he who would have given 
up his own life for them, was sinking daily beyond all hope 
of recovery. Already they felt the sorrow which was to be 
theirs—all too soon. All the disciples, but particularly 
Noren, had been dear and affectionately intimate with the 
Mastér, They loved every shade of his personality. They 
looked upon his body as chinmaya, or all Spirit. The Swami 
Vivekananda speaking of him in his later life said vefy 
frequently, “Why speak of refinement ! I have not yet 
found anyone more refined in soulthan my Master. His 
manners pf walking, of talking, restipg, sitting, sécing his 

7 e 


¢ 


8 


s NIRVANA. 425 


arrangement of things in his room, his practical common 
sense—all were beautiful and perfect !" The disciples had 
really made him their own. He had really made them his 
own. They prayed that he might dwell longer with them, 
but he would say, “ The Lord shall do His Will !” 

Noren, at this time, was the power of meditation incarnate. 
‘One day, Girish Babu had asked him to sit with him 
in meditation. He consenting, they repaired to a tree where 
‘they seated themselves. There were mosquitoes without 
number and they disturbed the lay-disciple of Sri Rama- 
krishna to such an extent that he became restless, He 
“opened his eyes and to his speechless amazement saw that 
Noren’s body was covered as with a dark blanket, so vast 
was the number of mosquitoes upon him! He called and 
called him, but without getting any response. Finally he 
jerked him, and yet there was not the slightest conscious- 
ness. In his consternation he dragged him off the seat, but 
he fell to the ground with a thud, His body had become 
stiff as in.déath, in that meditation posture, without any 
signs of outward consciousness. When the force of the 
meditation relaxed, Noren returned to his normal state. 

Often, often the Master would call the young disciples 
‘to his side, carressing them lovingly, speaking eloquently 
ty signs of that which he felt for them. He often thought 
what would become of them without him. But then, 
there .was Noren! And two days before his passing, 
Sri Ramakrishna called him to his side and addressing him 
‘concerning those other disciples who were to become the 
monks of the Order of Sri Ramakrishna, said, as best as 
his voice allowed him, “See! Noren! I leave all these, 
my “Children, in your care. You are the wisest and 
the ablest of them all. Guide them with love, and “work 
for me!” One recalls another Son of God giving the care 
o&his spiritual flock into the keeping of Peter, the disciple, 
‘the rock upon whom He was to found His Church. Verily, 
Noren was the rock and the Master had singled him out as 

” the oneyupon whom to build the structure of the , Modern 


m 
es 


426 if THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDS, 


Gospel of the Religion Eternal, as he himself had realised 
it and as he knew it was to be interpreted and preached by 
his chief disciple. Noren was overcome with emotion. 
A feeling of the utmost humility came over him. Tears. 
were in his eyes. He could not speak. Yes, this was a 
tacit assurance even from the Master’s own lips that the time 
for the Great Deliverance was near at hand. Noren left the 
room, his throat choked with feeling, and when alone he: 
gave himself up to grief. 

There they were—the young disciples. He looked at 
them lovingly and with a sense of utmost oneness with them. 


and their future destiny. He felt a great responsibility ~ 


settling itself upon him. Ina few hours he was weighed. 
down, as it were, by the burden laid upon his shoulders by 
the Master and with his own great grief. He recalled alk 
the words that the Master had ever spoken concerning them, 
and himself. And there—under the shadow of the house at 
Cggsipur and in one of the most soul-stirring moments of his. 
life—he resolved to carry out the Master's comnfand to him. 
He would live for them ; he would beg for them; he would 
go to any length for any one of them, even to this that he 
would lay down his life for them. “And greater love hath 
no man than this.” His life was the fulfilment of that great 
resolve. He remained loyal to them to the end. Never was 
there such love as he had for them; and they r&sponded: 
with a similar intensity of affection and regard. Verily, they 
came to look upon Noren as the mouthpiece of the Master. 
It so happened that Noren had been called to the side 
of the Master some days earlier. At that time the suffering 
of Sri Ramakrishna was intense. He could hardly speak. 
He was getting weaker and weaker. But now that thé’ last 
days were approaching he set himself with greater energy 
than ever to mould the religious life of his boy-devotees, 
particularly that,of Noren, in a calm and silent way. Norm 
was the chief. Therefore, he did more for him; indeed, he 
literally tfansmitted his own powers to him. Every evening 
he called Noren to his room and asking the others tg Ao out, 


a 


NIRVANA. ; 427 


he would impart final instructions to him on various spirituab 
Practices for two or three hours at a time, and advise him. 
how to keep together his brother-disciples, how to train and 
guide them in the future, so that they could live the life of” 
renunciation, and soon. When Noren had entered the room 
on this particular evening and sat with his gurubhais, the 
Master wrote on a piece of paper, “Norendra will teach 
others.” The disciple, however, hesitated and said, “I 
won't do that!” Then Sri Ramakrishna summoning his. 
strength ina great effort to speak insisted, saying, “ You have 
to do it! Your very bones will make you do it!” Sometime 
“before he had told Noren, “My Szddhds (Yoga powers) will 
be manifested through you in time !” meaning thereby that 
Noren in later years as a teacher, would in a miraculous way 
turn many of the most worldly-minded to the spiritual life. 

It was now only three or four days before the Master’s 
mahé-samadhi. Everything was at the highest emotional 
pitch ; as has been said, the young disciples were practising: 
religious austerities and were in constant attendance upon 
the Master. The thought of the Master's probable departure. 
unnerved Noren. Sometimes he would bury his grief in 
song, Then he would enter the Master's room and, looking 
upon the drawn face of Sri Ramakrishna his heart wauld 
break. . On this day the Master seeing him alone and in deep. 
thought, called him to his side.. Asking him to close the 
doorsrof the room, Sri Ramakrishna bade his disciple to be 
seated near him and to meditate. They were alone. The other. 
disciples wondered as to what was passing between them, 

There was only one other time when Noren was thus. 
along with his Master ; and that was when, as the Swami 
Vivekananda, he entered the meditation-room of the Belur- . 
Math, shutting all the windows and doors, and in the stillness. 
and the dimmed light sat before the altar of the Master, plunged 
in deep meditation. It was the day on which he, also, passed 
through death into the Nirvikalpa SamAdhi, never to return, = 

To continue the story however: When Noren had 
meditated some length of time he entered into Samadhi and 


e 


428 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


was lost to all outer consciousness. A deep dream-like peace 
stole over him. He was now in the same state of trans- 
cendent blessedness as that which had come to him on Sri 
Ramakrishna’s touching his heart, in Jadu Mullick’s garden, 
and also in the room at Dakshineswar, in the earlier days of 
his meetirig the Master. On the second occasion he had not 
feared as he did in his first experience, and for one month 
after he was full of ecstasy. But then the Master was in 
firm health; now he was on the eve of death. When Noren 
rotor eie sense consciousness he saw Sri Ramakrishna in 
tears. 

-as to what was the reason of this great and sudden sadness, 
Sri Ramakrishna gave as answer, “O my Noren! My Noren! 
Now I am really a Fakir, a penniless beggar, having given 
“away my very all and everything to you! By the force of 
this power, this Saézz, transmitted by me to you great things 
will be done by you in this world; and after that only will 
you go back!” Noren burst into tears. He was overcome 
with emotion, He wept asa child. What had the Master 
done! From what he had said it was certain now that he 
had given away everything,—all his power, all his realisation, 
all his insight, all his personality,—to him! Aye, the moment 
had-come when the personality the Bhagavdén had worn asa 
_garment for the teaching of the spiritual life would be com- 
pletely merged in the Infinite Reality of Brahma-Nirvana, 
and the spzrit of the Modern Gospel of the Sanatan Dharma, 
be made manifest through his chief disciple. 

O for knowing the full meaning and the full happenings of 
that momentous event when the Master became a beggar and 
Noren the sudden’ possessor of all the wealth of the personal- 
ity of his Guru, acquired by him during years upon years 
of super-human effort and at the cost of terrible austerities ! 
That which had been the Power in him, he wilfully deprived 
himself of in order that Noren might be endowed with spirif- 

~ual ominipotence, That which he had called “Kali? or 

“Mother” now left the body of Sri Ramakrishna in the depths 

of that meditation, and transferred Itself into the Apsciple’s 
° 


f - 


‘ seemed utterly broken. Noren queried anxiotisly 


‘ 


NIRVANA. 420 


personality, which had been trained for this great occurrence 
by innumerable hours of spiritual devotion and spiritual 
exercise. In reality, however, the Master knew from the 
great sense of emptiness and poverty which had come upon 
him, that it meant the uttermost giving-up of his own body 
and personality. What was now left of his suffering human 
consciousness would soon be blown out by the Winds of the 
Consciousness of Brahman. To all other intents and pur- 
poses, Ramakrishna became therged in That which was to 
be made manifest as the Power of the future Swami V'veka-. 
-nanda ; the Guru became the disciple, when that which was 
Ramakrishna had completed its task in its human incarna- 
tion and manifestation. It abandoned itself wholly and en- 
tirely for the good of the world. It gave itself, as one gives 
a flower or bestows a gift, to Noren for the good of the 
world. This was the Height and Depth of Love, the very 
Divinity of Compassion. 

. The last,two days had passed with the increase of sorrow. 
on the part of the disciples. They lived in a presentiment that 
all would soon be over and they would be left fatherless in the 
darkness of the world. The Light which lighted their souls 
would, humanly speaking, be extinguished. They prayed and 
wept,and wept and prayed. Meanwhile moments of exaltation 
came which they could not explain. They felt a Presence and 
Power about them. They would be translated into the very 
height of an unaccountable superhuman ecstasy, and plunged 
the next moment into violent grief. The last day passed 
heavily over their hearts. The night came on. The body 
of Sri Ramakrishna was in the throes of death, suffering 
intense pain. The disciples were gathered about him., forlorn 
and anxious. Towards the middle portion of the .night, P 
however, a great, great Peace descended upon all, numbing 
their ‘anguish of mind, but preparing them also for the 
moment when they would give way to utmést grief. 

And in the night, while they stood about the form of the~-— - 

+ Master with their countenances wrapt in death-like stillness 
and sh sousness, as revealed by the flickering Iamp-light, 


a 


c 


+430 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


the thought flashed across the mind of Noren, “He has said 
he is Divinity-Incarnate. If he now says in the midst of the 
throes of death, in this terrrible moment of human anguish 
and physical pain, ‘I AM the God Incarnate’, then I will 
believe !” It was but a dare he had ventured to make in the 
inmost recesses of his own mind, without thinking for one 
Single moment as to the results, Suddenly the Master turned 
‘towards him and summoning all his energy, said, “O my 
Noren, are you not yet convinced! He who was Rama and 
| Krishna, zs now Ramakrishna in this body,—not, however, 
from the standpoint of your Vedanta, but literally so !” Thus _ 
Sri Ramakrishna conveyed to the disciples in a most moment- 
ous hour the great truth that the personalities of all those In- 
‘carnations who have given out the highest Divine Conscious- 
‘ness to humanity are the same Personality, revealing Itself 
variously, under different names and different human’ forms 
according to the needs of the time, nay more, that He Him- 
self was the same Personality, If lightning had suddenly . 
flashed into the room Noren could not have béen more 
‘dumbfounded in his wonder at this last utterance of the 
Master. Qualms of remorse wrung his heart for having 
‘doubted even for one moment hig, Master, and tears coursed 
down his cheeks, z = 
It was a wonderful night, in very truth. It passed in 
varying moods of sorrow and exultation, The Master's eyes 
spoke volumes, though his lips were silent. And at the’ 
turning of night, at the very first hour of the breaking of a 
new day,—Sunday, August the sixteenth, eighteen hundred 
and eighty-six,—the Master, breathing the most sacred Word 
‘of the Vedas, entered Brahma-Nirvanam, passing intq,the 
~ + Uttermost .Peace. That Word was OM—and he became 
Tat Sat—the Boundless Existence of Divinity. 
At that moment when the Master Passed away, the 
disciples were overcome with grief, weeping aloud in uttér 
> ~~ forlorniess, The news spread broadcast. Numbers of devotees 
hhurried to the Garden-house at Cossipur. A sense of ineff- a 
able and irreparable loss fell upon all those who cam fNoren 


m 


” NIRVANA. ° 43 


was stupified. The Master had now gone! O the love 
that he had breathed for him, for which the body had been 
the manifesting instrument! Noren could not now look 
upon that dear face without weeping bitterly, .Those eyes, 
which had looked upon him innumerable times with such an 
incomparable love, were now closed for the last time. Those 
lips which had spoken innumerable words of love and proph- 
ecy for him were now sealed in death. He felt it was 
more than he could bear. Verily, now he was alone! A 
hundred thoughts rushed through his brain. O that he had 
Joved and appreciated him more! O that he had literally 
hung upon every word which the Master had ever uttered ! 

' The cot upon which the Master lay was brought down 
and the body was wrapt in new linen and silk and adorned 
with flowers, For some time it stood in the grounds of the 
house at Cossipur. Then it was taken in a long procession to 
the burning-ghat at Baranagore, some distance away. All the 

- disciples and devotees were in tears; all shouldered in turn the 
beloved burden of the Master’s form. Many of the spectators 
touched the cot with their hands and then touched the hands 
to their heads, as it passed along. Throughout the whole 
length of the procession, the names of the Lord rent the air. 

At.the ga¢ when the pyre had been prepared, the bady 
of the- Master was tenderly laid upon it, Finally, the pyre 
was lighted, the disciples themselves touching it each with a 
handfal of lighted reeds, The garments of the Master were 
aflame, Incense and spices and clarified butter were poured 
upon the pyre. Soon the whole was a great mass of fire, 
shooting forth tongues of white, red, yellow, blue and vari- 
colonred flames, It seemed a Great Radiance Incarnate. 
And as the disciples stood about in prayer and sorrow- 
laden meditation, some fell to the ground, prostrate with 
grief. while others kneeling touched the ground with p 
their heads ‘in salutation. * 
As the flames burned brighter and brighter a holy, vast 
sand calming spirit of resignation descended into the utter 
void of Caeir hearts, Some who had come as spectators, 


e , Ca 
432 THE LIFE OF THE SWAMI VIVEKANANDA. 


not having seen the Master during life, were caught up by 
the vibrant note of radiance of the place. The disciples. 
themselves were suddenly transported from grief. Some, as 
it were, saw the smiling face of the Master. Others felt his. 
Presence, aye, even his thrilling touch. Others again, in- 
tensely absorbed, saw their Beloved in the lotus of their 
heart, illumining the inmost recesses of their soul, A great 
illumination descended upon all, Bereavement became ecs- 
tasy. Was not he, their Lord, the Soul of their souls, even 
the same, in life or on the other side of the Veil? The dis- 
ciples rose on the wings of a great celestial power into the, 
Same condition of blessedness which they had so often expe- 
rienced in the presence of the Master while he was in the body.. 
When the flames reached the highest pitch of intensity, and 
the burning-gda/ was a great sheet of raging light, the souls. 
of all the disciples were swept, as it were, by floods of reli- 
gious exaltation, because of the thought that they had been 
blessed with the unworldly love of their Lord, which had 
made their souls free even in the midst of the world, Power 
and glory came to them, and the Light and the Spirit of the 
Highest Consciousness. And the air was rent with the name 
of the Bhagavan, whose form had now been consumed by the 
dewouring flames, and whose Spirit had soared into the Omni- 
presence of the Divine Nature. x : 
Noren stood in their midst, his mind filled with varying 
thoughts, He was silent ; his hearing caught the great-notes 
of triumph that resounded around him, “Jay Ramakrishna !” 
“Jay Ramakrishna !” “Jay Gurudevaki Jay!” Aye, he, too, 
was caught up in the Great Vision of Power and Glory and 
in the same Sublime Exaltation of sense and thought. and 
soul, -until a spiritual climax was reached and a Great 
Pentecostal Power and Fire descended upon all—which was. 
the Spirit of the Master! 
° Hari! Om Tat Sat? 


”- 


THE END OF THE FIRST VORUEE, 


co . 


2 


« 


Pace LINE 


v4 21 
1o 1 
2r 20 
38 18 
50 9 
58 19 
6 7 1 
66 31 
80 3 
80 * 435 
95 36 

107 2 
124 30 
137 15 
158 13 
158. 5° 
159 4 
189 8 
221 B 
222 TS 
239. a5 
24t 7 2g 
248-15 
25%, © 23 
253 3 
253 31 
263 14 
287 a ok 
“BIT ak 
319 5 
381 27 
381 28 
383— © 23 
384 4 
417 5 
48 30 
432 * 


aw? 


PRINTER’S ERRORS. 


For 
deep 
of the river, the water, 
spiritural 
crowining 
closed 
cresecent 
wonderfull 
woe 
certain 
and less 
upon 
first 
eighteen 
himself, with anger 
belived 
selfawakening 
senseof 
Eternal. 
Suprme 
glorious many other 
compimentary 
amonist 
throughly 
Kaii < 
ten-timesterrible 
devont 
passing 
stavation 


~sed 


words 

the consciousness 
of expand 

Sir 

a Man 

bya 

Then 

even 


READ 
deep, 

the water of the river, 
spiritual 
crowning 

and had closed 

crescent 

the wonderful 

woe 

to certain 

regardless 

at 

First 

eighteenth 

himself with anger, 

believed 

self-awakening 

sense of - 
Eternal 

Supreme 

many other glorious 
complementary =~ 

a monist 

thoroughly 
Kali 

ten-times terrible 

devout 

a passing 
starvation 
leased 
words and a 
of the consciousneys 
expand 
Sri 

Man 
bya 
However 
ever 


